--- PAGE 1 ---
as of 26 Nov. 
UNESCO INTERNATIONAL MEMORY OF THE WORLD REGISTER 
 
NOMINATION FORM 
 
1.0 Title of item or collection being proposed 
 
"National Collection of Palm-Leaf Manuscripts of Phra That Phanom Chronicle" 
 
2.0 Summary (Total 200 words) 
 
 
"National Collection of Palm-leaf Manuscripts of Phrathat Phanom Chronicle" 
comprises 10 different versions.  They are of different length, inscribed for different purposes 
by different personalities, at different time in history, covering different timespans. They 
narrate the tale of the Buddha's breast bones brought from India for enshrinement at Phrathat 
Phanom, vibrantly recognized since antiquity until today as most sacred Buddhist centre in 
Mekong Region.  
 
 
This Collection is representative of the countless diverse palm-leaf manuscripts 
depicting the same story, kept in varying conditions at multiple villages, towns, and temples 
in many parts of the Northeast of Thailand and in Mid-Mekong region. Popularly copied and 
widely transmitted for merit-making, they are cherished as sacred Buddhist literature, 
forming a strong basis for the collective multi-generational memories about the coming of 
Buddhism into the Mekong Basins, amalgamating with local beliefs, and flourished over 
millennia. 
 
 
Irreplaceable as collective source of Buddhist historiography written in local Dharm 
language, describing in mythical styles the ancient Mekong geography, social and political 
developments, and successive constructions, restorations and revitalizations of Phrathat 
Phnom by generations of regional chiefs, they cast light on the intellectual and moral history 
of the region and its interrelationship with the universe, through local Buddhists' lens. 
 
 
    

--- PAGE 2 ---
2 
 
3.0 Nominator contact details 
 
3.1  Name of nominator (person or organisation): 
  
- Mr. Kittiphan Phansuwan 
Director-General, the Fine Arts Department, Ministry of Culture 
         and Chair of the Thai National Memory of the World Committee 
- Mr. Dipwat Watjarasiriamon 
 Director, Manuscripts and Inscriptions Group, 
 The National Library of Thailand 
 
3.2  Relationship to the nominated material 
 The Director of Manuscripts and Inscriptions Group, the National Library of Thailand 
is the direct custodian of the collection being nominated. 
 The Director-General of the Fine Arts Department is the highest chief of administration 
overseeing all tangible cultural heritage, including Museums, National Libraries and National 
Archives in all parts of Thailand. 
 
3.3  Address 
 
The National Library of Thailand 
Samsen Road, Dusit 
Bangkok 10300 
THAILAND 
 
3.4  Telephone: (66) 2281 0263 
 
Fax: (66) 2280 7543                                         
 
Email: director@nlt.go.th 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---

--- PAGE 4 ---
4 
 
5.0 Legal information 
 
5.1  Name of owner (person or organisation) 
 
The National Library of Thailand (Custodian of the nominated document) 
 
5.2  Address: 
The National library of Thailand 
Samsen Road, Dusit 
Bangkok 10300 
THAILAND 
5.3  Telephone: (662) 281 0263 
 
5.4  Name and contact details of custodian IF DIFFERENT from the owner  
-  
 
5.5  Legal status of the National Library of Thailand. 
 
The National Library of Thailand, established in 1905, is under the Fine Arts 
Department. In 2011, the Minister of Culture announced a new set of administrative rules 
concerning the administrative units under the Fine Arts Department. The Rules stipulated that 
the National library of Thailand is one of the Bureaux under the Fine Arts Department. The 
first responsibility of the National Library of Thailand, as stipulated, concerns the 
investigation, retrieval, collection, storage and preservation of the cultural documentary 
heritages of the nation, as seen in the scanned text of paragraph 15 in Thai. (see Attachment 
No.1) 
 
The ancient traditional books and manuscript collections of the National Library of 
Thailand are part of the national documentary heritage, protected as a national cultural 
heritage. 
     The document is the property of Thailand under the custodianship of the National 
Library of Thailand and under the supervision of the Fine Arts Department, Ministry of 
Culture. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
5 
 
5.6  Copyright status 
 
There is no copyright status of the nominated documentary heritage. But credit must be 
given to the owner and custodian. 
 
Images: 
Images supplied with the Nomination Document has been provided by the National Library 
of Thailand who agrees to grant Non-Exclusive Rights to UNESCO for use in UNESCO 
Memory of the World Project. 
 
Please see attached signed 'Agreement Granting Non-Exclusive Rights' forms, taken from the 
UNESCO Memory of the World website, and signed by Mr. Kittiphan Phansuwan 
Director-General, Department of Fine Arts, supervising the National Library. (see 
Attachment No.2) 
 
5.7  Accessibility  
 
There is no accessibility restriction. However, permissions must be sought from and 
granted by the Director of Manuscripts and Inscriptions Group, the National Library of 
Thailand, prior to accessing the microfilms of the nominated document. Digitization of 
ancient books and manuscripts are undertaken to promote easy access to and wider use of 
these cultural documentary resources while preserving the carriers. Handling of the original 
document must be done by the officers in charge of the document only. Furthermore, official 
opening and closing hours must be observed. 
 
Virtual accessibility to the nominated document is free online, at: <finearts.go.th> and 
<digital.nlt.go.th>. 
 
6.0 Identity and description of the documentary heritage 
 
6.1  Name and identification details of the items/collection being nominated 
 
6.1.1. Name: National Collection of Palm-leaf Manuscripts of Phra That Phanom Chronicle 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
6 
 
6.1.2.  Nominating institutions: 
  - Mr. Kittiphan Phansuwan 
  Director-General, the Fine Arts Department, Ministry of Culture 
          and Chair of the Thai National Memory of the World Committee 
- Mr. Dipwat Watjarasiriamon 
  
Director of Manuscripts and Inscriptions Group, 
 
 
The National Library of Thailand 
 
6.1.3. Identification details:  
1.  Urangathat Chronicle (Phra That Phanom Chronicle):  
 
-  Registration number 462/1-7, totally 7 bundles, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages 
on 52cm x 5cm palm leaves, Chad Version, Plain Wood Cover, with lacquer on one 
side 
2. Urangathat Chronicle 
 
-  Registration number 727/1-6, totally 6 bundles, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages 
on 57cm x 4cm palm leaves, Chad Version, No Plain Wood Cover 
3.  Phra That Phanom Chronicle:  
     -  Registration number 3/4, totally 1 bundle, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages on 
58cm x 5cm palm leaves, Dark Chad Version, Plain Wood Cover 
4.  Phra That Phanom Chronicle: 
-  Registration number 79/1:1A-1D, 2:2A, 3-5, totally 11 bundles, inscribed in Esan  
Thai-Pali languages on 57cm x 5cm palm leaves, Dark Lacquer-Chad-Dark/Gold 
Lacquer Version, No Plain Wood Cover 
5.  Phra That Phanom Chronicle: 
-  Registration number 203/1:1A-1N, totally 16 bundles, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali 
languages on 51cm x 5cm palm leaves, Dark Gold-Chad-Plain Version, No Plain Wood 
Cover 
6. Phra That Phanom Chronicle: 
    -  Registration number 414/3, totally 1 bundle, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages on 
55cm x 4cm palm leaves, Chad Version, Plain Wood Painted with Chad and engraved 
with gold pattern 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
7 
 
7.  Phra That Phanom Chronicle (Urangathat Chronicle): 
     -  Registration number 454/1, totally 1 bundle, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages on 
52cm x 4cm palm leaves, Chad Version, No plain Wood Cover 
8.  Phra That Phanom Chronicle: 
     -  Registration number 460/1-3:3A, 5-6 totally 6 bundles, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali 
languages on 57cm x 5cm palm leaves, Dark Chad-Plain Version, Plain Wood Cover 
9.  Phra That Phanom Chronicle:  
     -  Registration number 491/1:1A, 2:2A, 3-4:4A, 5:5A, totally 9 bundles, inscribed in Esan 
Thai-Pali languages on 55cm x 3-5cm palm leaves, Dark Gold-Dark/Gold Lacquer-
Plain Version, No Plain Wood Cover 
10. Phra That Phanom Chronicle 
      -  Registration number 565/1, totally 1 bundle, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages on 
56cm x 5cm palm leaves, Plain Version, No Plain Wood Cover 
 
6.2  Type of document 
 
- A Collection of Buddhist Palm-leaf Manuscripts, totalling 10 different versions 
- Ancient Esan Dharm scripts. 
- Subject matter: Phra That Phanom Chronicle (Uranghathat Tale)  
 
6.3  Catalogue or registration details 
 
(1) Urangathat Chronicle (Phra That Phanom Chronicle)    
- Registration number 462/1-7,    
- Total: 7 bundles,     
- Inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages     
- Size: 52cm x 5cm palm leaves, Chad Version, Plain Wood Cover, with lacquer on one side    
 
(2) Urangathat Chronicle 
- Registration number 727/1-6, 
- Total: 6 bundles,   
- Inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages     
- Size: 57cm x 4cm palm leaves, Chad Version, No Plain Wood Cover 
(3) Phra That Phanom Chronicle     

--- PAGE 8 ---
8 
 
- Registration number 3/4,     
- Total: 1 bundle,     
- Inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages,     
- Size: 58cm x 5cm palm leaves, Dark Chad Version, Plain Wood Cover 
    
(4) Phra That Phnom Chronicle     
- Registration number 79/1:1A-1D, 2:2A, 3-5,  
- Total: 11 bundles,    
-  Inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages,  
- Size: 57cm x 5cm palm leaves, Dark Lacquer Version-Chad-Dark/Gold Lacquer Version, 
No Plain Wood Cover  
 
(5) Phra That Phnom Chronicle     
- Registration number 203/1:1A-1N, 
- Totally 16 bundles,  
- Inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages,  
- Size: 51cm x 5cm palm leaves, Dark Gold-Chad-Plain Version, No 
 Plain Wood    
 
(6) Phra That Phnom Chronicle     
- Registration number 414/3,  
- Total 1 bundle,  
- Inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages,  
- Size: 55cm x 4cm palm leaves, Chad Version, Plain Wood Cover painted with Chad and 
engraved with gold pattern    
    
(7) Phra That Phnom Chronicle (Urangathat Chronicle)    
- Registration number 454/1, 
- Total 1 bundle,  
- Inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages,  
- Size: 52cm x 4 cm palm leaves, Chad Version, No Plain Wood Cover   
    
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
9 
 
(8) Phra That Phnom Chronicle     
- Registration number 460/1-3:3A, 5-6 
- Total 6 bundles,  
- Inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages,  
- Size: 57cm x 5cm palm leaves, Dark Chad-Plain Version, Plain Wood Cover   
    
(9) Phra That Phnom Chronicle      
- Registration number 491/1:1A, 2:2A, 3-4: 4 A, 5:5A, 
- Total 9 bundles,  
- Inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages,  
- Size: 55cm x 3-5cm palm leaves, Dark Gold/Dark Gold Lacquer-Plain Version, No Plain 
Wood Cover   
    
(10) Phra That Phnom Chronicle      
- Registration number 565/1,  
- Total: 1 bundle,     
- Inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages, 
- Size: 56cm x 5cm palm leaves, Plain Version, No Plain Wood Cover 
 
6.4  Visual documentation (if available and appropriate) 
 
Visual documentation of the Nominated document is attached includes: -- 
11 photographic images attached photos as jpg. files are submitted with this Nominated 
Form. (see Attachment No. 3) 
 
6.5  History/Provenance 
 
       6.5.1. Overview of the history of the Phra That Phanom Chronicle,     
     The history of Phra That Phanom Chronicle probably began as an oral tradition 
transmitted by words of mouth.  Later it was written on palm leaves in local mythical styles 
narrating the events as perceived by the local people in connection with the coming of 
Buddhism into the middle Mekong River Basins. This region which subsequently developed 
into historical social and political Buddhist city states and kingdoms, located on both banks 

--- PAGE 10 ---
10 
 
of the river, considered Phra That Phanom as their centre of worship and pilgrimage, a 
tradition vibrantly upheld until the present time.     
       With the introduction of Esan Dharm scripts used mostly in Buddhist scripture writing, 
this orally transmitted Tale of Buddha's breast bone was inscribed on palm leaves, copied into 
numerous copies for safe-keeping and auspiciousness at Buddhist temples in Northeast of 
Thailand, in Lao PDR, and further beyond.     
    
 
6.5.2. Recent studies of palm-leaf manuscripts of Phra That Phanom     
       A recent broad-base study of palm-leaf manuscripts of Phra That Phanom reveal that a 
multitude of copies exist in a variety of versions and in varying conditions, and are being kept 
at various village temples, national libraries, university libraries, located in the different 
districts of cities both in Thailand, such as Chiang Mai, Nan, Prae, Loei, Khon Kaen, Maha 
Sarakham, Nakhon Phanom, Roi Et and Ubon Ratchathani and Lao PDR, such as Luang 
Prabang, Savannakhet, Khammouane, Vientiane, Bolikhamsai, and Champasak, scattering 
along the Mid Mekong River Basin.  
 
Examples of these versions which have been published are broadly categorized by 
modern scholars into 4 groups, as follows:     
1) Multi-bundle versions which range from 4-16 bundles describing the ancient primitive 
land inhabited by the Naga species, the journey into the area by the historical Buddha during 
his lifetime, his prophecy about the future prosperity of Buddhism in this area and the 
enshrinement of his relics at Phu Kampra, the construction of Phra That Phanom shrined by 
Maha Kassapa Monk, assisted by 5 regional kings, and chronicling the development of the 
Buddhist kingdoms in Srikotaboon and Lanchang and the successive restoration of Phra That 
Phanom.    
2) Single-bundle versions describing the events surrounding the transporting of the 
Buddha's breast bone to Phu Kampra and the construction of Phra That Phanom assisted by 
5 regional kings who were subsequently reborn as kings of several local city states to protect 
Phra That Phanom.     
3) Split-bundles versions which tell the same story but are lost and incomplete in certain 
parts.    
4) Combined versions in which several different versions of the palm-leaf manuscripts 
are put together to tell the same story.    
    
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
11 
 
 6.5.3) The National Collection of 10 versions     
      The Palm-leaf Manuscripts of Phra That Phnom in the National Library of Thailand's 
Collection represent all the 4 categories above.     
      Each however arrived with its own provenance as recorded in the registration note as 
follows.    
    (1) Urangathat Chronicle (Phra That Phanom Chronicle)     
 
Registration number 462/1-7 totally 7 bundles, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages on 
52cm x 5cm palm leaves, Chad Version, plain wood cover with lacquer on one side. 
According to the National Library of Thailand, this version was transliterated by the 
committee chaired by Kromluang Prajaksilpakom. It was published for the royal-sponsored 
funeral of Luang Prachumbarnakarn (Pin Dechakupta) on 21 April 1940 (B.E. 2483) at Wat 
Makutkasatriyaram. The Foreword by the Fine Arts Department reads, "The That Phanom 
Chronicle was once published in the form of synopsis. This version referred to an Esan 
provincial Prince Regent, his wife and son, who ordered to make a copy of the palm-leaf 
manuscripts written in ancient Dharm Scripts used in Northern Thailand in 1861 (B.E. 
2404).  It was later presented to Kromluang Prajaksilpakom who donated the copy to the 
National Library in 1921 (B.E. 2464). Mr. Sood Srisomwongse and Mr. Thongdee 
Chaiyachat were entrusted by the Fine Arts Department to study and translate the scripts in 
an outstanding and detailed manner. This unique version was named Uranghathat or That 
Phanom Chronicle".    
  
(2) Uranghathat Chronicle     
 
Registration number 727/1-6 totally 6 bundles, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages on 
57cm x 4cm palm leaves, Chad Version, plain wood cover. This version originally belonged 
to the National Library of Thailand. At the beginning, it referred to Chao Hua Buachan who 
composed Uranghathat Chronicle for the sake of sustaining Buddhism to last long for the full 
5,000 years. May the wishes come true. Sadhu Sadhu Sadhu Anumodami.     
(3) Phra That Phanom Chronicle     
 
Registration number 3/4 totally 1 bundle, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages on  
58cm x 5cm palm leaves, Dark Chad Version, plain wood cover. This version originally 
belonged to the National Library.     
 
(4) Phra That Phnom Chronicle     
 
Registration number 79/1:1A-1D, 2:2A,3-5 totally 11 bundles, inscribed in Esan  
Thai-Pali languages on 57cm x 5cm palm leaves, Dark Lacquer-Chad-Dark/Gold Lacquer 

--- PAGE 12 ---
12 
 
Version, no plain wood cover. Donated by Wat Nong Vang, Muang District, Kon Kaen 
Province in 1975 (B.E. 2518).    
(5) Phra That Phnom Chronicle     
 
Registration number 203/1:1A-1N totally 16 bundles, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali 
languages on 51cm x 5cm palm leaves, Dark Gold-Chad Version, plain wood cover. Donated 
by Wat Bo Non Tan, Muang District, Khon Kaen Province, Wat That, Muang District, Khon 
Kaen Province, Wat Sri Pham, Dansai District, Loei Province (with a bundle of palm-leaf 
manuscript entitled Little Bird) and Wat Bosri, Dansai District, Loei Province respectively in 
1975 (B.E. 2518).    
(6) Phra That Phnom Chronicle     
 
Registration number 414/3 totally 1 bundle, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages on 
55cm x 4cm palm leaves, Chad Version, plain wood cover painted with Chad and engraved 
with gold pattern. Donated by Mr. Hut Sudhiprapa, Ban Nong Sim, Ta Muang Sub District, 
Selaphum District, Roi Et province.    
(7) Phra That Phnom Chronicle (Urangathat Chronicle)    
Registration number 454/1 totally 1 bundle, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages on 
52cm x 4cm palm leaves, Chad Version, no plain wood cover. Purchased from Ray W. 
Bugtang in 1921 (B.E. 2464). The composer was Chao Hua Somdej Rung.    
(8) Phra That Phnom Chronicle     
 
Registration number 460/1-3:3A, 5-6 totally 6 bundles, inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali 
languages on 57cm x 5cm palm leaves, Dark Chad-Plain Version, plain wood cover. Donated 
by Luang Senapakdee in 1916 (B.E. 2459) 
 
(9) Phra That Phnom Chronicle     
 
Registration number 491/1:1A, 2: 2A, 3-4:4A, 5:5A totally 9 bundles, inscribed in Esan 
Thai-Pali languages on 55cm x 3-5 cm palm leaves, Chad-Dark Gold-Dark/Gold Lacquer and 
Plain Version, no plain wood.    
 
The first, the first A, the first B, the second A, the third, the fourth and the fifth bundles 
were donated by the Office of Cabinet Secretariat in 1936 (B.E. 2479). The second,  
the fourth A and the fifth A originally belonged to the National Library of Thailand.    
(10) Phra That Phnom Chronicle     
Registration number 565/1 totally 1bundle inscribed in Esan Thai-Pali languages on 
56cm x 5cm palm leaves, Plain Version, no plain wood. This version originally belonged to 
the National Library of Thailand. 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
13 
 
6.6 Bibliography  
 
Apisakmontree, S.  (2020).  History of the Bhra Dhad Bha Nom in its legend should start at B.E. 1 or 
B.E. 8.  Journal of Fine Arts, 11(2), 156-176.  
https://so02.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/fineartsJournal/article/view/174606/166350  
Apisakmontree, S.  (2020).  Urangkhathat Legend: The Naga Exists in Suvarnabhumi Not in Phra 
That Phnom.  Panidhana Journal 16(2), 149-183.   
 
https://so05.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/panidhana/article/view/246735 
Bunrit, S.  (2016).  Phayanak with Footprint in The Urangathatu Legend.  Mahachula Academic 
Journal, 3(2), 43-60. https://so04.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/JMA/article/view/141824/105056 
Chaichin, P.  (2014).  A Study on the Naga King in Urangkhathatnitan 
(Phrathatpanom Legend).  [Master Thesis, Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University] 
http://loei.mcu.ac.th/site/thesiscontent_desc.php?ct=1&t_id=3140 
Chaichuay, V.  (2014).  The Creative Production of Dramatic Light and Sound Play Entitled “The 
Legend of Phrathatphanom. Journal of Fine and Applied Arts Khon Kaen University, 6(1),  
130-155.  https://so02.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/fakku/article/view/26951 
Chandavan, U.  (2004).  A Critical Study of The Urangadhatunidana: It's Religious Language and 
Social Influence.  [Doctoral dissertation, Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University] 
http://oldweb.mcu.ac.th/site/thesiscontent_desc.php?ct=1&t_id=284 
Chandavan, U.  (2004). Urangadhatunidana (Lao Version).  Bangkok: 
Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University.   
Daorueang, N.  (2014).  The Historical Study of the Belief towards Prathat Sikaew (Relic of the 
Buddha) in order to Strengthen Participatory Learning Process of Sikaew’s Juvenile.  Area Based 
Development Research Journal, 6(6), 86-98.   
https://so01.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/abcjournal/article/view/96058 
Jampadaeng, S., Vongkanha, V., Sriphet, K., & Masphan, S. (2021). Phra That Lan Chang of Arts: 
Relevance to Literature, Belief and Local Isan Arts. Journal of MCU Peace Studies, 9(5), 1840-
1856. https://so03.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/journal-peace/article/view/245801 
Jiajanpong, P.  (1994).  Urangathat. 3rd Edition.  Bangkok: The Fine Arts Department.  
Khotchamit S.  (2003).  The development of naga beliefs along the Mekong from the Urangkatad 
period to the contemporary period. [Master’s Thesis, Chulalongkorn University]. Chulalongkorn 
University Intellectual Repository. http://cuir.car.chula.ac.th/handle/123456789/65980 
Krutasaen, W.  (2014).  Naga Fireballs Phenomenon: Innovation to Promote Cultural Tourism in 
Nong Khai Province, Vientiane Capital and Bolikhamxai Province.  Veridian E-Journal, 7(2), 
1611-1626.  https://he02.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/Veridian-E-Journal/article/view/16789/23562 

--- PAGE 14 ---
14 
 
Ledphonsatit, W.  (2016).  The Unity in Diversity of the rite to relics worship of the two Banks of 
Mae Khong River.  Journal of Fine and Applied Arts Khon Kaen University, 8(2), 22-43. 
https://so02.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/fakku/article/view/85056 
Na Champasak, P. (2021). Nithanthat: Urangathatnithan (The Tale of Urangathat Champasak 
version). Chiang Mai: Wanida Printing. 
Nakhon Phanom University. (1978).  Urangathat the Legend of Pra That.  Bangkok: Nakhon Phanom 
University.   
Nankhantee, A. (2014).  Spirits Worship of Thai-Nyo: Relations of Beliefs and Cultural Ecology.  
[Doctoral dissertation, Burapha University] 
http://digital_collect.lib.buu.ac.th/dcms/files/53810218.pdf 
Nankhantee, A. (2020).  Uranganithanthat: The Legend of Pra That Phanom Creation and Restoration,  
 
totally 1 bundle.  Nakhon Phanom: Queen Sirikit Commemorative National Library, Nakhon Phanom 
Nankhantee, A. & Dibprakhon, C.  (2020). Urangathatnithan: The Legend of Pra That Phanom 
Creation and Restoration, totally 1 bundle.  Chiang Mai: Wanida Printing. 
Nankhantee, A., Prasopchingchana, S. & Nilwanapha, A. (2016).  Spirits Worship of Thai-Nyo P: 
Relations of Beliefs and Cultural Ecology. Chophayom journal, 27(1), 15-24.  
https://so01.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/ejChophayom/article/view/72688/58457 
Pakdeedumrongrit, J.  (2016).  The Models of Buddhist – Based Tourism, the Buddha’s  
Relics in Urangadhatu Legend.  [Doctoral dissertation, Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University] 
http://sb.mcu.ac.th/site/thesiscontent_desc.php?ct=1&t_id=2304 
Patarasuk, U.  (2011).  The Study of the Influence of Phra That Phanom in Beliefs and Rituals of 
Mekong Basin Community.  [Master Thesis, Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University] 
http://gds.mcu.ac.th/site/thesiscontent_desc.php?ct=1&t_id=751 
Phētkham, S.  The Myth of Urangadhatu and the Socio-Economic Interrelated Network of the People 
in the Greater Mekong Sub-region.   (2011).  NRU Journal of Science and Technology, 3(5), 1-18.  
https://ph01.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/snru_journal/article/view/9995 
Prachanok, A. & Nankhantee, A.  (2018). Urangathat the Legend of Pra That Phanom inscribed in 
Isan Thai_Pali languages.  Nakhon Phanom: Srikhottraboon Research Institute of Nakhon 
Phanom University. 
Prapandvidya, C. (1994).  Urangathat.  Bangkok: Ruenkaew Printing. 
Prapandvidya, C. (2016).  Uraṅganidāna: The Lineage of Buddhist Shrines in Far Northeastern 
Thailand.  Dhammadhara Journal of Buddhist Studies, 2(1), 189-206.  
https://so01.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/dhammadhara/article/view/160741 
Pumpongphaet, V.  (1975).  Khomun mai thi dai chak charuek nai phra that phanom”. [New 
information obtained from the inscriptions in Phra That Phanom]. Silpakorn Journal 20(1), 1-2. 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
15 
 
Rakngen, A.  (2012). Naga: The social consciousness of the Mekong region.  Academic Journal of 
Humanities and Social Sciences Buriram Rajabhat University, 4(2), 20-29.   
https://so02.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/bruj/article/view/75653/60925 
Rawarin, N.& Weesapen, W. (2020).  Ancient Vocabulary in Urangadhatu: The Reflection of the Lan 
Chang Culture.  Journal of Man and Society, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, 
Mahasarakham, 6(1), 7-25.   
https://so06.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/husocjournal/article/view/238643/167382 
Rawarin, N. (2018).  Urangathat Chula Sakarat 1167 (B.E. 2348).  Mahasarakham: The Research 
Institute of Northeastern Art and Culture (RINAC) Mahasarakham University.  
Royal Institute.  (1931).  The Legend of Phra That Phanom Nakhon Phanom Province.  Bangkok: 
Phrachan Printing.  
________.   (1934).  The Legend of Phra That Phanom Nakhon Phanom Province.  Bangkok: 
Phrachan Printing. 
Sonjan, C. & Nilawanapa, R.  (2019).  Urangadhatu: Ways to Think About Religion and Beliefs.  
Damrong Journal of the Faculty of Archaeology Silpakorn University, 18(2), 95-130.  
https://so01.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/damrong/article/view/178080/160069. 
Srisomwong, S. & Chaichart, T.  (1940).  Urangathat (The Legend of Phra That Phanom).  Bangkok: 
Thaikasem Printing.  
Srisomwong, S. & Chaichart, T.  (1994).  Urangathat (The Legend of Phra That Phanom).  Bangkok: 
Ruenkaew Printing.  
Tambiah, S. J.  (1970).  Myth and rite: and the Naga symbol and the rocket Festival in Buddishism 
and Sprit Cults in North - East Thailand.  Cambridege University Press. 
Thanasompunno (Yubonlerd), P. P., Thitapanyo, P. M., & PhraSophonphatthanabandit.  (2021).  An 
analysis of beliefs and rituals on the serpent in Theravada Buddhism Related to Phra That 
Phanom.  Journal of Arts Management, 5(2), 340-352.  
https://so02.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/jam/article/view/247513. 
The Fine Arts Department.  (1942). Prachum Tamnan Phra That Phak Thi 1. [Including the legend of 
relics vol.1]. Printed in funeral of Mrs. Khae Fusak. Bangkok: Phanitsuphaphon,  
________.  (1967).  Prachum Tamnan Phra That Phak Thi 2. [Including the legend of relics vol.2]. 
Printed in funeral of police lieutenant colonel Salap Kiatsu. Bangkok: Phrachan. 
________.  (1994).  Urangkha that tamnan phra that phanom. [Urangkhthat, the legend of Phra That 
Phanom]. Printed in the Mekong Symposium academic seminar. Bangkok: Ruenkaew. 
Wadsanasong, P. (1975). Thāt Phanom: Khat Chak Bang Ton Khong Khokhian Doi Re Chi Nan Loe 
Me. [That Phanom: Excerpted from some parts of the writings by Reginand Lemay]. Mueang 
Boran Journal Special Edition That Phanom 
Wannaudorn, S. (2004).  The History of Aksorn Thai Noi.  Preservation of palmleaf in North-eastern 
Thailand Project.  http://www.bl.msu.ac.th/bailan/P_thai1.htm 

--- PAGE 16 ---
16 
 
6.7  Names, qualifications and contact details of up to three independent people or 
organisations with expert knowledge about values and provenance of the nominated 
material. 
 
Below are the names, qualifications and contact details of three independent 
organisations/individual with expert knowledge about values and provenance of the 
nominated material. 
 
1) Name of Organisation: Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Mahasarakham 
University 
Address:  Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Mahasarakham University,  
Kham Rieng Sub-District, Kantarawichai District, Maha Sarakham Province 44150 
THAILAND 
Tel/Fax: (66) 4375 4369 
Email: iroffice@msu.ac.th 
 
Contact person: 
Assistant Professor Dr. Rachan Ninlawannapha 
Department of Thai and Oriental Languages  
B.A. Mahasarakham University (Thai Education) 
MA. Silpakorn University (Oriental Epigraphy) 
Ph.D. Naresuan University (Thai Language) 
Tel: (668) 9277 5045 
Email: nilawanapa@yahoo.com 
                               
2) Name of organisation: Department of Oriental Language, Faculty of Archaeology, 
Silpakorn University 
Address: 31 Na Phra Lan Road, Phra Borom Maha Ratchawang, Phra Nakhon, Bangkok 
10200, Thailand 
Tel.: (66) 2221 7777 
Fax: (66) 2226 5355 
https://archae.su.ac.th/en/ 
Contact person:  
 
Assistant Dr. Sombat Mangmeesuksiri 
          Tel. (668) 9526 8470  
 
Email: sombat69@hotmail.com 

--- PAGE 17 ---
17 
 
3. Name of Independent Person: Suttinee Yavaprapas, Former Director, Office of Cultural 
Promotion and Dissemination, Ministry of Culture 
Email: suttiyav@gmail.com 
 
7.0 Assessment against the selection criteria 
 
7.1. Significance 
       7.1.1. Social or spiritual movements 
       7.1.1-A Introduction 
        Manuscripts made of palm leaves were a most popular medium of writing in Asia and 
Southeast Asia. Palm leaves were the cheapest and most easily available material, and if well 
treated are strong and quite durable.    
       Writing on palm leaves was believed to have spread into Southeast Asia from South 
India along with Hinduism and Buddhism, and were used as material for manuscripts before 
the widespread of paper and before the introduction of printing in this region. They cover 
subjects considered as sacred, such as the religious scriptures, medicine, music, astrology, 
music, and Buddhist scriptures and Buddhist Tales. Their most important historical and 
cultural contribution is the great development and widespread of Buddhism in this region 
from ancient time until the present.  
       Throughout Southeast Asia, and along the middle Mekong River Basins, the landscape is 
dotted with monuments enshrining some corporeal relic of the Buddha, known as "Relic 
Stupas" or "Phra That Chedi". Every such stupa, in Myanma, Thailand, Lao PDR, or 
Cambodia, is provided with a literary historical tradition narrating how that relic came to be 
cherished in that place, who transported it here and which personalities were responsible for 
constructing the stupa for enshrining the relic. The genre of historical writing represented by 
such traditions has long exerted an important influence on Southeast Asian historiography. 
       Generations of devotees of Phra That Phanom consider the Stupa to be sacred because it 
is a place where the Buddha himself is believed to have made a visit during his lifetime when 
he prophesized that his religion would greatly prosper in this area and that his breast-bone 
relics, Uranghathat) be brought here for enshrinement after his Parinibban. The source of this 
inter-generational belief is the Uranghathat Tale, or the Chronicle of Phra That Phanom, a 
regional religious tale narrating the events from the historical Buddha's time until the Stupa 
has been established and restored.   

--- PAGE 18 ---
18 
 
 
In addition, some versions of Phra That Phanom Chronicle give interesting and specific 
accounts concerning the "communities of Kha Ogas" who were the regular and permanent 
"carers and protectors" of Phra That Phanom.  These communities were donated by the 
Lanchang political leaders who came worship and restore the Phra That Phanom Stupa.  
These communities settled around the Phra That Phanom about 500 years ago.  They were 
committed, throughout generations until today, with the responsibility for maintaining the 
pilgrimage site and the historical buildings within the site, watch out for any possible harm or 
danger that might occur, and serve the monks in residence at Phra That Phanom Temple, and 
service the pilgrims and worshippers at Phra That especially during the annual festivals. 
 
   
7.1.1-B. The importance of the Dharm Script 
       The scripts used in the writing of the Uranghathat Tale, or the Chronicle of Phra That 
Phanom are known as "Aksorn Dharm". They developed from the Indic Palava scripts from 
South India and had been adapted for use in the Pali and Buddhist inscriptions by the Mon 
people in Bagan in the 17th Century B.E. (11th Century C.E.). The scripts later spread into 
Hariphunchai and Lanna Kingdoms, now Northern region of Thailand, and subsequently 
influenced the Buddhist writings of the ancient kingdoms in Esan of Thailand and in the 
Lanchang Kingdom of Lao, as evidenced in the Phra That Phanom Chronicle manuscripts.  
The use of "Aksorn Dharm" can be found at many historical sites near Phra That Phanom area, 
such as the inscription at the base of the main Buddha image in the Ubosot of Phra That 
Phanom Temple, Nakhon Phanom Province, and the inscription at Suwannakuha Cave Temple 
in Nong Bua Lamphu Province. Moreover, the Dharm Scripts are mainly used in the numerous 
palm-leaf Buddhist manuscripts and Khoi-paper sacred manuscripts found scattered at many 
village temples along both banks of the Mekong River. Dharm Scripts were also inscribed for 
religious stories in Thai and Pali languages in the Ayutthaya period in 1572 (B.E. 2115). 
 
       7.1.1-C.  The unique importance of the National Collection 
       The National Collection, comprising of 10 different versions of the Palm-leaf 
Manuscripts dealing with "Uranghathat Tale" or "Phra That Phanom Chronicle", were 
preserved at the Royal Pra Vajirayan Library, established in the reign of King Chulalongkorn.  
Later, they were transferred to the National Library of Thailand, where they are being 
safeguarded as part of the national cultural heritage. They form a most significant as valuable 
collection as historical and cultural sources for a broad-based comparative study of the 
Chronicle of Phra That Phanom, particularly for intertextual investigations.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
19 
 
     Modern academics have recently become more interested in comparative study of 
different versions of these manuscripts in order to understand the historical consciousness of 
the Esan and the multi-ethnic people now living in the Northeastern Region of Thailand, as 
well as in inhabitants of the neighboring countries in the Middle Mekong River basins. These 
people’s collective sense of Buddhist cultural identity is embodied in the Tale of 
Uranghathat, the Buddha's Breast-bone Relic, enshrined at Phra That Phanom.  A recent 
comparative study made on the published contents of several versions reveal that though they 
are similar in terms of contents, giving information how the That Phnom Stupa came into 
being, they can borrow from one another, reduce or extend the contents of the texts to suit 
their style and in purpose.  
     Indeed, there are numerous versions of Phra That Phanom palm-leaf manuscripts which 
are being kept at many villages, temples, libraries and museums, scattered on both banks of 
the Mekong River. In that sense, the 10 versions in the National Library Collection may not 
be considered as rare.  But collectively, they uniquely represent all the uncountable number 
of the same or similar manuscripts found in the region. The existence of a rich variety of the 
Uranghathat Chronicle Palm-leaf Manuscripts, found widely scattered, reflect the great 
importance that the people of Esan, Lao, and the neighboring countries attach to this mythical 
and sacred literature about the coming of Buddhism into this region. This literature in 
countless versions and variations have somehow formed the common basis of the regional 
memory concerning the sacredness and the potency of Phra That Phanom, a centre of 
Buddhist pilgrimage since ancient time. This memory is still alive among the present 
generations of the Thai-Lao communities in this region.   
 
Because of the significance of Krom Luang Prachak Silpakom's version of Phra That 
Phanom Chronicle Manuscript as described above, this version has therefore been placed on 
the National Register of Thailand Memory of the World Project, in 2018, receiving a 
certificate jointly issued by the Thai National Commission of UNESCO and the Ministry of 
Culture. 
 
     7.1.1-D. Krom Luang Prachak Silpakom's Version 
      Of all the 10 different versions in this unique collection, one particular version, the 
Urangathat Chronicle or Phra That Phanom Chronicle (registration number 462/1-7, in 7 
bundles) is of particularly outstanding value, in terms of physical condition, provenance, the 
completion of the textual contents, and impact on modern research and study. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
20 
 
      This seven-bundle version previously belonged to Krom Luang Prachak Silpakom who 
was King Chulalongkorn's half-brother and the King's Representative to the Monthon Lao Puan 
based at Udon Thani, covering 6 cities namely Udon Thani, Khon Kaen, Nakhon Phanom, 
Sakon Nakhon, Leoi and Nong Khai. The manuscript, wrapped in a good quality cloth, came to 
the National Library in 1921 (B.E. 2464) for preservation. The National Library subsequently 
engaged the services of two experts: -- Mr. Sood Srisomwongse and Mr. Thongdee 
Chaiyachat who was most knowledgeable in Buddhism and in ancient Esan Dharm Scripts at 
that time, to study and transcribed the entire texts of the manuscripts into central Thai 
Language. The transcribed texts were published thrice in book form.  
     The epilogue of the manuscripts indicated that Achaya--the Uprat, and his family 
sponsored the production of this version by copying from an older version of palm leaves 
dated 1861 (B.E 2404) 
     Modern comparative researches of the different versions of Phra That Phanom Chronicle 
manuscripts reveal significant interrelationships among the multiple versions studied. They 
appear to borrow from one another as they develop their different style of narratives.  
Different versions may cover different timespan, some may go back into antiquity before the 
time of the historical Buddha and describe related geography and the primitive beings in the 
Mekong area while other may begin with the historical Buddha journeying into the Middle 
Mekong River Basins and mentioning the places and the personalities whom he taught and 
who were reborn in several lives to build, protect and restore Phra That Phanom.   
       The version, as translated by Mr. Sood Srisomwongse and Mr. Thongdee Chaiyachat, 
was first published as an abridged version, but was printed in full by the Fine Arts 
Department in 1940 (B.E. 2483). It was reprinted in 1994 (B.E. 2537) with permission of the 
Fine Arts Department by Matichon Press, on the occasion of a regional academic seminar on 
the Literature of the Two Banks of Mekong River. It has been periodically used as one of the 
source texts for comparative and intertextual studies in many subsequent studies until the 
present time. A recent comparative study with other versions suggested that this version 
might have been written in 1638 (B.E. 2181) in the reign of King Suriyawongsathammikaracha 
(A.D. 1629-1656 / B.E. 2172-2199) of Lanchang in Lao which falls into the reign of King 
Prasart Thong of Ayutthaya (A.D. 1630-1656 / BE. 2173-2199) overlapping with the reign of 
King Narai (A.D. 1656-1689 / BE. 2199-2232). 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
21 
 
       7.1.2 Form and style 
       Palm-leaf manuscripts of Phra That Phanom are considered books of regional sacred 
literature, widely disperse in the Northeast (Esan) region of Thailand and in Lao PDR as well 
as other parts of the Mekong Basins.   
       They were traditionally and popularly produced out of local devotions, by copying, in 
parts or in totality, the contents of the previously written manuscripts. The copying and 
multiplying the contents of such manuscripts are considered a form of merit making since the 
contents deal with the coming of Buddhism into the area, and at the same time they serve as a 
means of preservation and wider transmission of the chronicle in the popular Buddhist 
tradition.  
        These manuscripts are typically written in the ancient "Esan Dharm Scripts" incised on 
palm leaves, and tied into a variety of bundles, ranging from one single bundle to 16 bundles, 
to make the traditional form of palm-leaf manuscripts, depending on the length of the 
manuscript and the timespan covered in each version.   
      They are generally lengthy and free-flowing in style, recounting a substantial amount of 
information about the coming of Buddhism directly from India to the Mekong region, 
describing ancient geography, places and personalities related to the spread of Buddhism 
since the time of antiquity, and providing a timeline of events as perceived or understood to 
be real  or imagined by the chronicler, often in a rather mythical and fictional manner, but 
fundamentally in an objective and nonfictional fashion, inserting the Pali text of Dharma here 
and there, where relevant.  
     The Palm-leaf Manuscript of Phra That Phanom Chronicle is deeply associated with the 
regional beliefs that: -- 
(a) the historical Buddha paid a visit to the sacred site of "Phu Kampra";   
(b) the Buddha sowed the first seeds of Buddhism here by teaching the local primitive people, 
yaks, and nagas who offered food and drink to the Buddha and listened to his Dharma 
enabling him to be born as a higher level being in the next life;  
(c) the Buddha prophesized that his religion would greatly prosper in this area of the middle 
Mekong area, and that his relics would be brought over by Maha Kassapa Monk from India 
to be enshrined at this "Phu Kampra"-- the site where the relics of the three previous 
Buddhas had already been enshrined;  
(d) 5 years after the Buddha's Parinibban, the Maha Kassapa Monk, one of the chief disciples 
of the Buddha who was inclined to roam the forest in solitude, carried the breast-bone relics of 
the Buddha to be enshrined at "Phu Kampra" the present site of the Phra That Phanom Stupa;  

--- PAGE 22 ---
22 
 
(e) five regional kings from different kingdoms in the Mekong Region joined Maha Kassapa 
Monk and his accompanied 500 arahant monks in constructing the first square base of the 
stupa where the Buddha's relics were first enshrined;  
(f) that those who participated in the construction of the first Phra That Phanom Stupa were 
reborn to protect and to make merit further at Phra That Phanom for the promotion of peace 
and safety of the region.  
       The Chronicle also describes the geography of the ancient Mekong River basin, naming 
certain places specifically visited by the Buddha, the social relations and cooperation of the 
kings and peoples located in different directions of this river basin. It also gives detailed 
accounts of certain personalities who after having encountered the Buddha and made merit to 
him, are subsequently re-born as the Buddhist rulers of certain pre-modern states in order to 
venerate the Phra That Phanom and restore the stupa and the temple.  
     The Chronicle is a unique example of historiography of the middle Mekong region and 
the spread of Buddhism into this part of the world. 
  
 
7.1.3. Social, community or spiritual significance.  
      As mentioned earlier, the palm-leaf manuscripts of Phra That Phanom Chronicle 
(Uranghathat Tale) now exist in a multitude of versions scattered in many parts of the 
Mekong Basins. These indicate the immensely numerous social and spiritual communities 
attached to the belief in Phra That Phanom.   
      The communities and individuals who are socially and spiritually attached to the beliefs 
in the sacredness of Phra That Phanom can be categorized as follows:  
(a) The communities of Kha Ogas (the families of devotees, assigned by the political and 
social leaders who restored the Phra That Phanom Stupa and Phra That Phanom Temple in 
the past, to settle in the vicinity of the Temple of Phra That Phanom in order to care, 
maintain, protect and service Phra That Phanom and the Temple. 
(b) The communities of Look Phra That (those whose parents were unable to have children 
and came to worship Phra That Phanom asking for a child and service Phra That after the 
success)  
(c) The academic communities who study the historiography of Phra That Phnom through 
the Chronicle Manuscripts and through the architectural investigation of Phra That Phanom 
Stupa. 
 
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
23 
 
(d) Buddhists who generally believe in the sacredness of Phra That.  
(e) Members of the families whose ancestors contributed to the restoration of Phra That 
Phanom or made a copy of Phra That Phanom Chronicle in the past. 
      The Temple of Phra That Phanom annually organizes several Buddhist festivals at the 
temple, the most important of which falls in the third month of Lunar Calendar. These 
festivals are fully attended by several thousands of devotees coming from all parts of the 
Mekong River Basins, especially the Third Month Festival when hundreds of thousands of 
people packed the Phra That Phanom Area for 7 days and 7 nights. 
       These devotees represent the spiritual communities whose collective memory about their 
ancestors' involvement in the construction of Phra That Phanom in one way or the other, as 
recorded in any of the versions of Phra That Phanom Chronicle manuscripts.  Therefore, 
wherever they live now, they never fail to attend the festival, especially in the third lunar 
month, and they will contribute by performing any of the several acts of worship to Phra 
That Phanom, such as offering special flower arrangements, performing music and dances,  
as well as practicing Dharma and meditation at the Temple area.  
 
7.2 Comparative criteria.  
 
7.2.1 Rarity 
      The National Library's Collection of Phra That Phanom Chronicle Manuscripts is rare in 
the sense that they form a sizable comparative collection of 10 different versions from 
different sources, produced in a different period, varying in length and extent of the contents, 
and have been preserved in a well-established institution at the national level for examination 
and study for more than a century.  
 
 
7.2.2 Integrity, completeness, condition 
       The Collection in its variety is complete, authentic, and in excellent condition. They are 
photographed and the contents are made accessible to the public in printed versions.  
 
7.3. Statement of significance 
 
The National Collection of Palm-leaf Manuscripts of Phra That Phanom Chronicle, 
comprising 10 different versions, provides a unique ensemble of physical evidence of the 
Uranghathat Tale, written in Esan Dharm Scripts, chronicling the events pertaining to the 
coming of Buddhism into the Middle Mekong Basins since ancient time. The chronicle sheds 

--- PAGE 24 ---
24 
 
light on the cultural, intellectual and moral history of the multi-ethnic populations of the 
region, as perceived by the first narrator, or the original chronicler who remains unknown to us.  
     The Tale, transmitted through generations via the widespread of a multitude of versions 
of the Manuscripts, copied, elaborated, reduced, to suit different purposes, and transmitted 
throughout the region, has formed a collective memory of the multi-ethnic inhabitants of the 
Northeast of Thailand and in the Middle Mekong area whose ancestors had embraced 
Buddhism and the belief in the intangible presence of the Buddha, symbolized by Phra That 
Phanom where the breast-bone relics of the Buddha is believed to be enshrined, as told and 
retold in the Chronicle.  
     The entire National Collection is of particularly outstanding value, in terms of physical 
condition, provenance, the completion of the textual contents, and impact on modern research 
and study. The version given to the National Library by Krom Luang Prachaksilpakhom 
(registration number 462/1-7, in 7 bundles) is particularly important and has been 
transliterated by experts into modern Thai language, and published for wider appreciation. 
This published version has been used as a point of reference in later comparative intertextual 
studies conducted by academic researchers until the recent time. It has been listed on the 
National Register of Thailand's Memory of the World by the Ministry of Culture and 
Thailand National Commission for UNESCO. 
 
The existence of countless number of versions richly diverse in contents, currently being 
kept in varying conditions at many villages, temples, and educational and cultural institutes in 
Thailand and in Lao PDR, as well as in the neighboring countries, make this diverse 
Collection of the manuscripts more valuable and necessary. It is now widely recognized that 
to understand the full subject contents of the Phra That Phanom Chronicle and to appreciate 
the underlying conception or imagination of the Phra That Phanom Chroniclers, it is not 
enough to study one or two versions of the Manuscripts, but a broad-based comparative 
examination of the texts and intertextual content analysis of such texts are recommended.  
The availability of multiple and a wide variety of versions preserved in the National Library 
of Thailand therefore provide a rare and uniquely important set of examples for such 
intertextuality approach. 
 
The history of Southeast Asia and particularly of the Mekong Region, as generally 
known to the world, has been largely written by Western historians from their perspectives. 
Here, in the palm-leaf manuscripts of Phra That Phanom Chronicle, we are provided with a 
rich and complex "cultural history" as perceived, understood, and recognized by the 
"insiders" of the Mekong Region themselves. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
25 
 
8.0 Consultation with stakeholders 
 
       8.1 Provide details of consultation with relevant stakeholders about this nomination 
Relevant stakeholders include: 
 
(1) Owners/custodians of the documentary heritage 
The Fine Arts Department, Samsen Road, Dusit, Bangkok 
Names and positions of officials and experts 
- Ms. Kongkaew Weeraprachak, expert and member of the National MOW Committee 
- Ms. Pimpan Paiboonwangchareon, special expert, 
- Ms. Orawan Sapploy, Arts Official Specialist, the Office of Literature and History 
Samsen Road, Dusit, Bangkok 
- Ms. Em-orn Chawsuan, Ancient Language Specialist, the National Library of Thailand 
 
 
(2) Organisations with involvement in the promotion of Palm-leaf Manuscript, Phra 
That Phanom Chronicle and Esan Dharm Script  
 
2.1 Name of Organisation: The Research Institute of Northeaster Art and Culture (RINAC), 
Mahasarakham University 
Address: The Research Institute of Northeaster Art and Culture (RINAC), Mahasarakham 
University, Talad Sub-District, Kantarawichai District, 
Maha Sarakham 44000 THAILAND 
Tel/Fax.: (66) 437 1686 
Email: rinac@msu.ac.th 
https://rinac.msu.ac.th/en/  
 
(3) Communities with involvement in the documentary heritage 
3.1 Phra That Phanom Temple, Chayang Kun Road, That Phanom District, Nakhon 
Phanom Province, 48110 THAILAND 
Contact person: Pra Debhvaramuni   Tel. (66) 4254 1050                                              
                                           Prakru Sribhanomvaraguna   Tel. (668) 3360 7170 
 
 

--- PAGE 26 ---
26 
 
3.2 Mahachai Temple, Mahachaidumri Road, Muang District, Maha Sahakham Province, 
44000 THAILAND 
Contact person: Pra Debhsiddhacan (พระเทพสิทธาจารย์) 
                             Pramaha Athaphong Sirisobhano (พระมหาอรรถพงษ์ สิริโสภโณ)  
                             Tel. (668) 9278 7851 
 
4) Scholars who research the documentary heritage 
4.1 Dr. Chanyuth Sonjan                                            
      Faculty of Education                                          
      Roi Et Rajabhat University,                      
      Selaphum District, Roi Et Province, 45120 
      THAILAND  
      Tel. (669) 8585 4423 
 
4.2 Dr. Yootthapong Martviset                                      
      Devabhibal Rord 5, Naimuang Subdistrict, 
      Muang District, Roi Et Province, 45120  
      THAILAND  
      Tel. (668) 1600 8504 
 
4.3 Asst. Prof. Dr. Athirach Nankhantee 
      Faculty of Education, Nakhon Phanom University 
      167 No. 8 Naratkwai Subdistrict 
      Muang District, Nakhon Phanom Province 
      Email: Nankhantee.a@gmail.com  
      Tel. (661) 1024 9190 
 
9.0 Risk assessment 
 
 
Usually, the palm-leaf manuscripts kept in private repositories are fragile, dusty, brittle, 
and are under the daily threat of damage, such as humidity, termites, and decay, due to lack 
of knowledge for preservation. 
     The two palm-leaf manuscripts kept in the National Library of Thailand, contrary to 
those kept in most private repositories such village centres and temples, are free from many 

--- PAGE 27 ---
27 
 
commonly found risks affecting palm-leaf manuscripts in Thailand. They are being preserved 
in a 24 hours temperature-controlled room, and are constantly inspected, cleaned and treated 
by trained officials.  
     The risk of directly handling of the two manuscripts is largely minimized. They have 
been photographed, thoroughly investigated and documented by experts of the National 
Library of Thailand, and their contents have also been translated into modern Thai for 
modern transmission. Direct handling of the fragile documentary heritages is prohibited, and 
only trained staff of the National Library of Thailand has direct access to the documents. 
     However, in the traditional context of palm-leaf manuscripts kept in the local villages 
and temples, rewriting and copying by monks, novices, and other scholars have, over the past 
centuries, helped to multiply and preserve the palm-leaf manuscript traditions and their 
contents, in their original or related religious contexts, and hence have kept the palm-leaf 
manuscript traditions vital and alive. 
 
According to the Thai tradition, palm-leaf manuscripts were protected from physical 
damage with wooden boards. Aside from that, they were generally wrapped in high-quality 
cloth such as silk or silk brocade. The wrapping palm leaf manuscripts then were tied with 5 
pieces of string representing the Five Precepts in Buddhism or the five elements that sum up 
the whole of an individual’s mental and physical existence. A piece of string was entwined 
around the bundle for 3 times representing the threefold refuge in Buddhism comprising the 
Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha. Both ends of the string were tucked underneath. They 
were not tied together representing freedom and independence. In such a manner, one can 
easily attain Nirvana. 
       To prevent the risk of losing the tradition of palm-leaf manuscript writing, the National 
Library of Thailand in collaboration with National Libraries in the provinces have organized 
activities to promote the traditional knowledge of palm-leaf manuscript making and 
preservation. 
 
10.0 Preservation and access management plan 
 
10.1. Preservation. 
        
The collection of palm-leaf manuscripts in the National Library of Thailand was 
previously preserved in the Vajirayanana Library for the Capital City, founded by King 
Chulalongkorn by amalgamating three libraries together in 1905: -- the Mandira Dharma 
Library, the Vajirayanana Library, and the Buddhasasana Sangaha Library. In 1933, after 

--- PAGE 28 ---
28 
 
democratic reforms, the Fine Arts Department was established and assumed the supervision 
role of the Capital City Library whose name was subsequently changed to “National 
Library". 
      
Preservation has always been at the heart of the policy of the National Library's palm 
leaves collections, since palm-leaf manuscripts are ancient documents related mostly to 
Buddhism, and are made from organic materials vulnerable to natural and manmade 
conditions. 
   
 
The first step of preservation of the palm-leaf manuscripts is examination of the 
documents, cataloguing them and classification them by experts for preservation and 
management. Good treatment, safe storage, and regular maintenance are a rule so that they 
can have a reasonable long life and durability. 
   
 
The humidity and temperature of the storage room for the National Library's palm 
leaves collections are 24 hours controlled at 22-24-degree Celsius temperature, and 50-65% 
humidity, lighting is also controlled, and only iron compactus (horizontal filing cabinet on 
rails) are used for their storage instead of wood or other materials. 
 
 
As for future preservation plan, the National Library of Thailand will digitize the 
entire collection for accessibility comparative studies without physical burdening of the 
palm-leaf manuscripts. 
 
10.2. Access    
        
Ancient palm-leaf manuscripts are not suitable for constant handling. Therefore, 
human contact with the manuscripts will be minimized and will be done by trained officials 
wearing gloves only. 
   
 
In the Manuscript and Inscription Sector Zone, cleanliness and security are strictly 
observed to control garbage, food, insects, dust, and especially to have early warning for 
floods and fires. 
   
 
Access to photographs, digital photos, copies, and printed versions of the palm-leaf 
manuscripts are promoted. Prior permission must be sought and granted by the Director of 
the Section. The Rules for accessibility and public services of the manuscripts must be 
strictly observed by all parties. (see scanned Rules in Attachment No. 4) 
   
 
Constant check-ups and regular good house-keeping are a good preservation measure.  
Any damage found will be immediately reported to the Conservation Section immediately. 
 
 

--- PAGE 29 ---
29 
 
11.0 Any other information that may support the nomination 
 
11.1 The nomination of this Collection of documentary heritage has received the strong 
support and commitment from the following organisation: 
 
11.1.1 Name of Organisations:  Faculty of Arts, Silapakorn University, and Mom Luang 
Boonlua Tepayasuwan Fund, Sanam Chandra Campus, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand. 
 
11.1.2 Name of Organisations:  Bureau of Post Graduate Studies, in collaboration with the 
Student Body of the Faculty of Humanities, Ramkhamhaeng University, Bangkok, Thailand 
 
11.1.3 Name of Organisations: Department of Eastern Languages, Faculty of Archaeology, 
Silpakorn University, 31 Na Pra Lan Road, Bangkok 10200.  
Contact Person: Instructor Porpol Sooksai 
Email: Khem_ranadek@hotmail.com 
 
11.1.4 Name of Organisations: Royal Society of Thailand, Sanam Sua Pa, Suan Chitlada 
Sub-district, Dusit District, Bangkok, 10300  
Tel. (66) 2356 0466-70, (66) 2356 0477 
Email: ripub@orst.go.th 
 
11.1.5 Name of Organisations: Wat Phra That Phanom, 183/13 Chayangkun Road, That 
Phanom District, Nakhon Phanom 48110 
Tel. (669) 4543 5888 
 
 
11.2. The plans of promotional activities to be organized for the nominated 
documentary heritage 
 
1. ASEAN Language and Culture Center 
Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Mahasarakham University. 
- International Seminar on the Ancient Document 
 
2.The Project of Palm Leaf Manuscript Preservation in Northeastern, 
Mahasarakham University. 
- Transliteration of the Ancient Document “Uranghathat or That Phanom Chronicle” and Its 
Textual Content Study 
 
3. Phra That Phanom Woramahawihan temple. 
- Establishment of the Learning Center on Phra That Phanom Chronicle and Uranghathat 
Tale 
 

--- PAGE 30 ---
30 
 
4. Faculty of Education, Nakhon Phanom University. 
- Transliteration of the Ancient Document “Uranghathat or That Phanom Chronicle” and 
Exhibition on Phra That Phanom Chronicle 
 
5. KKU Art&Culture Center, Khon Kaen University. 
- Seminar and Exhibition on the Ancient Document in Mekong River Basin 
 
12.0 CHECKLIST 
 
Summary completed (section 2);  
Nomination and contact details completed (section 3);  
Declaration of Authority signed and dated (section 4);  
If this is a joint nomination, section 4 is appropriately modified, and all Declarations of 
Authority obtained;  
Legal information (section 5);  
Details of custodian if different from owner (section 5);  
Details of legal status completed (section 5);  
Details of accessibility completed (section 5);  
Copyright permission for images completed (section 5);  
Catalogue and registration information (section 6);  
History/provenance completed (section 6);  
Bibliography completed (section 6);  
Independent referees identified (section 6);  
Significance – primary criteria (section 7);  
Significance – comparative criteria (section 7);  
Statement of significance (section 7);  
Details of consultation with stakeholders completed where relevant (section 8);  
Assessment of risk completed (section 9);  
Summary of Preservation and Access Management Plan completed or strategy proposed 
(section 10);  
Any other information provided – if applicable (section 11);  
Additional scanned documents, including suitable reproduction quality photographs 
identified to illustrate the documentary heritage (300dpi, jpg format, full-colour preferred);  
 
