--- PAGE 1 ---
UNESCO INTERNATIONAL MEMORY OF THE WORLD REGISTER 
NOMINATION FORM 
1.0 Title of item or collection being proposed 
Mahavamsa, the Great Chronicle of Sri Lanka (covering the period 6th century BCE to 1815 
CE)  
2.0 Summary (max 200 words) 
One of the world's longest unbroken historical accounts, the Mahavamsa is the first of its kind 
in South Asia, initiating a mature historiographic tradition, presenting Sri Lanka’s history in a 
chronological order from the 6th century BCE. The authenticity of the facts provided in the 
document has been confirmed through archaeological research conducted in Sri Lanka and 
India. It is an important historical source in South Asia containing crucial information about 
lifetime of the Buddha, the Emperor Asoka and the rise of Buddhism as a world religion. The 
document played a significant role in popularizing Buddhism in South East Asia and 
contributed singularly to the identity of Emperor Asoka in the Indian history. The narrations 
of Mahavamsa has profoundly inspired the chroniclers, painters and sculptors in Asia to 
produce literal, painting and sculptural compositions of immense value. Existence of number 
of manuscripts of Mahavamsa in several countries as well as the transliteration and translation 
of the text to several South-east Asian and European languages stand testimony to its 
immense historical, cultural, literal, linguistic and scholarly values. The living significance of 
the Mahavamsa is reflected by the fact that the Sri Lankans, often look upon it as a proof of 
their origin, evolution and cultural identity. 
3.0 Nominator contact details 
3.1  Name of nominator (person or organization) 
National Library & Documentation Services Board, Sri Lanka 
3.2  Relationship to the nominated material 
Focal Point of UNESCO MOW Program in Sri Lanka 
Secretary to the UNESCO MOW National Committee, Sri Lanka 

--- PAGE 2 ---
3.3  Address 
No.14,Independence Avenue,Colombo-7,Sri Lanka 
3.4  Telephone- 
 Email- 
+94 1123056244
ucabral@ymail.com 
4.0 Declaration of Authority 
I certify that I have the authority to nominate the item, or items, described in this document to 
the Memory of the World Register. 
Signature 
Full name and position 
Date 
5.0 Legal information 
5.1  Name of owner (person or organization) 
University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka 
5.2  Address 
University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya, Sri Lanka 
5.3  Telephone +94 0812392300 
Email-vc@pdn.ac.lk 
5.4  Name and contact details of custodian IF DIFFERENT from the owner 
R.Maheswaran, Librarian, University of Peradeniya
librarian@pdn.ac.lk, Tel-  +9481-2392470 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
 
 
5.5 Legal status 
 
The University of Peradeniya, the legal owner of the nominated documentary heritage has the 
legal and administrative authority, and responsibility for its protection and preservation 
through the University’s administrative head, the Vice Chancellor. Due to the fact that 
University of Peradeniya is a state university under the Ministry of Higher Education of the 
Government of Sri Lanka, it is under obligation to protect and preserve the nominated 
documentary heritage on behalf of the Government.     
 
5.6 Copyright status 
 
Since the nominated documentary heritage is of historical origin, as per the law of the 
country, there is no reservation with regard to the copyright.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.7 Accessibility (note any restrictions, including cultural restrictions) 
 
The nominated document is accessible to the students, researchers, and the general public 
with the permission granted by the Librarian of University Peradeniya, who is the custodian 
upon request. 
 
 
 
 
6.0 Identity and description of the documentary heritage 
 
 
6.1 Name and identification details of the items/collection being nominated 
Mahavamsa, the Great Chronicle of Sri Lanka (covering the period 6th century BCE to 1815 
CE)  
 
6.2 Type of document  
Palm Leaf Manuscript 
 
6.3 Catalogue or registration details 
 
The document is catalogued in the Library of University of Peradeniya under the Accession 
Number 277587 
 
 
 
6.4 Visual documentation (if available and appropriate) 
 
Please refer attachment for the photographs of the front and back covers and some sample pages of 
the manuscript 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
6.5 History/provenance 
The Mahavamsa  (the ‘Great Chronicle’) is an unbroken historical narrative of Sri Lanka, 
presented in a chronological order from the 6th century BCE. It predominantly consists of 
genealogies and lineages of Sri Lankan kings, sometimes with stories about their succession, 
notable incidents during their reigns, history of Theravada Buddhism, the deeds and 
contributions of the kings to sustain the religion and the relationship between the state and 
the Sangha and the development and evolution of the culture of the Island nation. It also 
contains significant accounts of the development of Buddhism in the Indian mainland and 
other countries in Asia (including China, Thailand and Myanmar). 
Composition of the Mahavamsa as an epic poem in Pali language was initiated in the 5th 
century CE by Mahānāma Thera, a Buddhist monk who was residing at the Mahavihara 
Monastery at Anuradhapura (the first principle political center in Sri Lanka) during the reign 
of king Dhatusena (459 – 477 CE). Its first part (chapters 1 to 37 and first 50 verses of 
chapter 37) written in the 5th century ACE covers the period from 6th century BCE up to the 
4th century CE. The second part (starting with the verse 51 of chapter 37  to chapter 101), 
continues its narration from the 4th century CE right up to 1815, the year in which the Island 
nation lost its political and cultural independence due to the establishment of British 
Colonial rule. Unlike the first, its second part consists of three sections composed by several 
authors during different periods. The first section of the second part of the Mahavamsa 
from the 51st verse of chapter 37 to 79, begins from the 4th century CE up to 12th century CE. 
Although it was written in the 13th century, the authorship of this section is debated by 
scholars. The second section of the same part (from chapters 80 to 90), the authorship of 
which is ascribed to Ven. Dhammakirti Thero of Dambadeniya during 13th century, covers 
the period from 12th to 14th centuries. The third and final section of the second part (from 
chapters 91 to 100 and first 29 verses of chapter 101), which is ascribed to Ven. 
Tibbotuwave Sri Siddharta Buddharakkita Thero in 18th century and Ven. Hikkaduwe 
Sumangala Thero in the late 19th century, covers the period from 14th century to the year 
1815. 
Despite the colonial rule, the tradition of writing Sri Lanka’s history continued. The third part 
of the Mahavamsa, compiled by Ven. Yagirala Pagnananda Thero covers the period from 
1815 to 1936. Although individual scholars were responsible in compiling the first three 
parts of the Mahavamsa, the next three parts covering the period from 1815 up to 2010 
were compiled by a board of compilers with state sponsorship. However, first two parts of 
the Mahavamsa covering the period from 6th century BCE to the year 1815 up to chapter 
101, is nominated for inscription on the MOW register. Therefore the first two parts 
bounded as a single volume is collectively referred to as the ‘Mahavamsa’ from herein after 
in this document. 
Since it is a palm leaf manuscript, the tradition of producing multiple copies was the faithful 
. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
copying of the original text. Due to the fact that the palm leaf is a perishable plant material, 
as per the tradition, the text was re-copied on new palm leaves during different periods of 
the history to ensure the continuity of the contents. The scholar monks in particular, during 
different periods of the history were responsible for the continuity of this tradition in Sri 
Lanka.  As such, several copies of the Mahavamsa, the writing of which initiated during the 
5th century CE, are still survived and preserved at Buddhist temples, museums, universities 
and other institutions in Sri Lanka and abroad. The document suggested under this 
nomination represents one of the best preserved palm leaf manuscripts complete with all 
chapters and verses of the Mahavamsa, which has survived through a continuous tradition 
of copying and re-copying the text throughout one and half millennia. This manuscript was 
acquired by the Library of University of Peradeniya as part of the program of acquiring 
historical manuscripts for research and archival purposes during the period (1964 - 1970) 
when Mr. K. D. Somadasa, served as its Librarian.   
6.6 Bibliography 
•
Allen, Charles (2002). The Buddha and the Sahibs. John Murray
•
Ballou, M. 1894. Eight Years Wondering in Ceylon. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippinicott
•
Bechert, H. 1978. The Beginning of Buddhist Historiography: Mahavamsa and Political
Thinking. In B. C. Smith (ed.) Religion and Legitimacy of Power in Sri Lanka: 1-12.
Chambersburg: Anima
•
Carpenter, E. 1892. From Adams Peak to Elephanta: Sketches in Ceylon and India.
London: Swan Sonnenchien & Co.
•
Coedes, G. 1966. The Making of South East Asia. H. M. Wright (tr.). London
•
Conningham, R. A. E. 1995. Monks, Caves and Kings: A Reassessment of the Nature of
Early Buddhism in Sri Lanka. In World Archaeology 27: 266-281.
•
Conningham, R. A. E. & Lewers, W. 2000. The Vijayan Colonisation and the
Archaeology of Identity in Sri Lanka. In Antiquity 74: 707-712
•
Cumming, C. F. G. 1901. Two Happy years in Ceylon (new ed.). London: Chatto and
Windus
•
Daniel, V. E. 1997. Three Dispositions towards the Past: One Sinhala, Two Tamil. In H.
L. Seneviratne (ed.) Identity, Consciousness and the Past: Forging of Caste and
Community in India and Sri Lanka: 42-69. Delhi: Oxford University Press
•
De Butts, L. 1841. Rambles of Ceylon. London: Win H. Allen Co.
•
Fleet, J. F. 1912. Review. In Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and
Ireland
•
Fergusson, J. 1876. History of Indian and Eastern Architecture. London: John Murray
•
Geiger, W., Bode, M. H. (tr.) 1912. H. Frowde (ed.): The Mahavamsa  or, the great
chronicle of Ceylon, London : Pali Text Society
•
Geiger, W. (tr. & ed.) 1912 [2003]. The Mahavamsa  or the Great Chronicle of Ceylon.
New Delhi: Asian Educational Services
•
Geiger, W. (tr. & ed.) 1929 [1992]. Chulavamsa, being the more recent part of the
Mahavamsa . Oxford: Pali Text Society

--- PAGE 6 ---
•
Geiger, W. 1960. Culture of Ceylon in Mediaeval Times. Weisbaden: Otto Harrasowitz
•
Guruge, A. W. P. 1993. Asoka: A Definitive Biography. Colombo: Central Cultural Fund
•
Goonatilake, H. 2018. The Mahavamsa Illustrated: Paintings from a 12th Century
Myanmar Temple. Colombo: S. Godage and Brothers
•
Guruge, Ananda W. P. 1989. Mahavamsa : The Great Chronicle of Sri Lanka, A New
Annotated Translation with Prolegomena, ANCL Colombo
•
Guruge, Ananda W.P. 1990. Mahavamsa, Calcutta: M. P. Birla Foundation (Classics of
the East)
•
Guruge, Ananda W. P. (1993) Asoka: A Definitive Biography. Colombo, Central Cultural
Fund
•
Harischandra, B. W. 1908 [1985]. The Sacred City of Anuradhapura. New Delhi: Asian
Educational Services
•
Karunaratne, W. S. 1990. History of Department: 1890 – 1910. In N. Wijesekera (ed.)
Archaeological Department Centenary (1890 – 1090) Commemorative Series. Vol. I:
History of the Department of Archaeology: 3-41. Colombo: State Printing Corporation
•
Luce, G. H. and Ba Shin (1961) Pagan Myinkaba Kubyauk-Gyi Temple of Rajakumar
(1113 A.D.). In: Bulletin of the Burma Historical Commission, Vo. 2: pp. 277-416.
•
Norman, H. C. (1908) Defence of the Chronicles of the Southern Buddhists. Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society
•
Parker, H. 1909. Ancient Ceylon. London: Luzac and Co.
•
Rahula, W. 1956. History of Buddhism in Ceylon: The Anuradhapura Period, 3rd century
B.C. – 10th century AC. Colombo: M. D. Gunasena and Co.
•
Rhys Davids, T. W. 1962. The History and Literature of Buddhism. Culcutta.
•
Senart, E. 1881[1886]. Les Inscriptions de Piyadasi II. Paris
•
Sumangala, H. & de Silva Batuwantudawa, D. A. 1887. The Mahawansha from first to
thirty-sixth Chapter. Colombo.
•
Tennent, J. E. 1859. Ceylon: An Account of the Island, Physical, Historical,
Topographical, Vol. 1 & 2. London: Longman, Green, Longman and Roberts.
•
Turnour, G. 1837. The Mahawanso in Roman Characters with the Translation Sub-joined,
and an Introductory Essay on Pali Buddhistical Literature. Vol. I containing the first
thirty eight Chapters. Cotta: Church Mission Press
•
Upham, E. (ed.) 1833. The Mahavansi, the Raja-ratnacari, and the Raja-vali : forming the
sacred and historical books of Ceylon; also, a collection of tracts illustrative of the
doctrines and literature of Buddhism: Translated from the Singhalese, Vol. 1, 2 & 3.
London : Parbury, Allen, and Co.

--- PAGE 7 ---
 
 
6.7 Names, qualifications and contact details of up to three independent people or 
organizations with expert knowledge about values and provenance of the nominated material. 
 
 
 
Name 
 
 
Dr.K.Arul Mary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Nandana 
Chutiwongs 
Qualifications 
 
B.A. ,M.A., M.Phil,  
Ph.D, Bharathiar 
University, Coimbatore, 
Tamil Nadu. 
 
 
 
 
B.A. Archaeology, Bangkok, 
nandana. Master degree cum 
laude , Amsterdam, Ph.D., 
Leiden; Retired Senior 
lecturer,  Institute of South 
and Southeast Asian 
Archaeology, University of 
Amsterdam and retired 
Curator, Department of South 
and Mainland Southeast Asia, 
National Museum of 
Ethnology, Leiden, The 
Netherlands 
Contact details (email) 
Associate Professor and Head, 
PSGR Krishnammal College for 
Women, 
Peelamedu, 
Coimbatore- 641004 
Tamil Nadu, 
India. 
srisuganthi1997@gmail.com  
College number - 04224295959 
 
 
 
 
chutiwongs@hetnet.nl 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr.A.Munuswamy  
 
B.A. 
 
 
 
M.A., M.Phil., Ph.D.  
 
 
 
 
 
University of Madras   
 
Assistant professor, 
 
Department of History,  
 
Loganatha Narayanasamy 
 
Government College, 
 
Ponneri,Thiruvallur 
 
District,601204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.no  9444270777, 
 
munuswamy284@gmail.com 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
7.0 Assessment against the selection criteria 
7.1 Primary criteria - significance value to the world. Comment on one or more of the following 
significance criteria.  
7.1.1 Historic significance 
The Mahavamsa is an epic poem written in Pali language using Sinhala script as a palm leaf 
manuscript. The first volume of the Mahavamsa which was composed by Mahanama Thera 
contains 2,915 verses in 37 chapters. Its narration begins with the visit of Gauthama Buddha 
to Sri Lanka in the 6th century BCE up to the reign of king Mahasen (277–304 CE). The 
author takes great pains to explain that his work was intended for religious edification. At the 
beginning of his work the author states that he wishes to rouse “serene joy and emotions” in 
the mind of his reader, and continues to end each chapter with the statement “Here ends the 
chapter …….. of the Mahavamsa written for the serene joy of the pious”. Although the 
second part of the Mahavamsa, which begins with the 51st verse of chapter 37 was 
erroneously identified as the Culavamsa by Gieger, who translated the two parts to German 
and English and rendered great service by popularizing the Mahavamsa internationally, it is 
now an established fact that the second part is not a separate document, but the continuation 
of the same Mahavamsa. The last chapter of the first part (chapter 37, which has 50 verses) 
does not end with the usual statement of the author (“Here ends the chapter 37 of Mahavamsa 
written for the serene joy of the pious ends”), but instead, it contains “Siddhi Rasthu” 
(meaning ‘the best wishes’) thus leaving room for the continuation of the chapter. The second 
part of the Mahavamsa which begins from 4th century CE to the year 1815 begins with the 
51st verse of the chapter 37  as a continuation of the first part and the authors of the second 
part also, end its each chapter with the same statement “Here ends the chapter …….. of the 
Mahavamsa written for the serene joy of the pious”, providing adequate evidence to show that 
Gieger’s  second volume is a continuation of the same Mahavamsa.          
The modern scholarly interests on the Mahavamsa aroused during the British colonial 
occupation, when it first came to the attention of Western scholars and readers at the 
beginning of the 19th century. George Turnour, an historian and officer of the Ceylon Civil 
Service of the British Colonial rule discovered a palm leaf manuscript of the Mahavamsa 
(first part) from a Buddhist temple at Mulgirigala in Southern Sri Lanka and Sir Alexander 
Johnston, the then Chief Justice of Sri Lanka’s British Colonial Administration, sent the 
manuscript to Europe for publication. Eugène Burnouf initially produced a Romanized 
transliteration and then translated it into Latin in 1826, but these garnered relatively little 
attention. Working from the original manuscripts, Edward Upham published an English 
translation in 1833, but it was marked by a number of errors in translation and interpretation. 
The first printed edition and widely read English translation was published in 1837 by George 
Turnour. A German translation of the Mahavamsa was completed by Wilhelm Geiger in 
1912. This was later translated into English by Mabel Haynes Bode, and revised by Geiger 
himself. The first notable translation of the Mahavamsa from the Pali manuscript to Sinhala 
language was in 1877 by Pandith Batuwanthudawe Sri Devarakkhita and Ven. Hikkaduwe Sri 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 
 
Sumangala Thero.  
 
Although some scholars view the pre-Asokan period (pre- 3rd century BC) of Mahavamsa 
with certain amount of scepticism, most of the scholars are in agreement with rest of the 
content as reliable from historical point of view. Several international scholars had defended 
the Mahavamsa with complete justice against unreserved distress and exaggerated skepticism 
(Norman 1908). Geiger (1960: xxi), who translated both volumes of the Mahavamsa, declares 
that although the facts represent the one-sided mentality of the Buddhist monks, on the whole, 
it is a trustworthy source.   
 
Over the last 150 years, archaeological research in Sri Lanka and India has confirmed the 
historical authenticity of the Mahavamsa. The facts and accounts given in the Mahavamsa are 
also amply supported by numerous inscriptions, found in Sri Lanka as well as in India. The 
excavations at Sanchi and other historical sites in India, for instance, confirm the Mahavamsa 
account of the empire of Asoka. The numerous inscriptions found in Sri Lanka correlate the 
dates of the Sri Lankan kings and the structures built and patronized by these rulers 
(Coningham 1995:226, Coningham and Lewer 2000:707).  
 
7.1.1(a) 
Uniqueness of the Mahavamsa  as a timeless and universal document  
Historiographic sources are rare in much of South Asia. Although historical records of ancient 
Greece, Rome and China have also been preserved, they cover specific periods of their 
history. Initiated in the 5th century CE, the Mahavamsa stand testimony to an unbroken 
historiographic tradition of a country based on a strong chronological framework, well over 
one and half millennia (please see section 7.1.1(e) for more details). Being the first two parts 
of this unique living tradition, written as a palm leaf manuscript in lucid Pali (the “lingua 
franca” of the orthodox Buddhist world) in erudite verse, covering a period from 6th century 
BCE to 19th century, this document also eloquently reflects the acute sense of history and 
literary skills of the ancient Sri Lankans and a continuous desire of several generations of Sri 
Lankan scholars in preserving its contents by faithfully copying and re-copying the text. The 
transliteration and translation of the contents of the Mahavamsa to several languages in the 
world during historical as well as modern times and the existence of several manuscripts as a 
textual object in several worlds’ leading museums, universities and cultural institutions, 
eloquently reflects its immense historical, cultural, literal, linguistic and scholarly values and 
thereby bear testimony to its timeless universal significance.  
7.1.1(b) The lasting impact of Mahavamsa  in popularizing Theravada Buddhism in South East Asia    
Due to the political and cultural ties existed between Sri Lanka and the countries in South 
Asia, particularly during the 12th century, Theravada Buddhism as practiced in Sri Lanka was 
adopted in such countries as Thailand, Myanmar and Cambodia as the orthodox form of 
Buddhism (Coedes 1966: 225-229).  The Sri Lankan Buddhist monks played a crucial role in 
this regard and in the process, the Mahavamsa along with other historical chronicles were also 

--- PAGE 10 ---
 
 
formally introduced to these countries in South Asia (Guruge 1993: 423-424). The 
Mahavamsa in particular, provided facts about the life time of the Buddha, the development 
of Buddhism in India during the succeeding centuries, patronage of Indian Emperor Asoka on 
development of Buddhism, the success story of Buddhism becoming the state religion of Sri 
Lanka, the role played by the Sri Lankan rulers as patrons of Buddhism etc. Due to such 
aspects of the Mahavamsa, which is written originally in Sinhala script, was soon 
transliterated/edited to Burmese and Cambodian scripts. The existence of numerous best 
preserved manuscripts in Burmese and Cambodian scripts in particular (Guruge 1993: 441), 
eloquently reflects the popularity of the Mahavamsa in South East Asia during historical 
times. In fact, Geiger in editing the Mahavamsa, has used two manuscripts each in Burmese 
and Cambodian scripts to supplement six manuscripts in Sinhala script. Therefore, the 
Mahavamsa had a lasting impact in making the Theravada Buddhism a popular religion in 
Thailand, Myanmar and Cambodia, with Sri Lanka becoming ‘the religious metropolis’ of 
South East Asia at one time (Coedes 1966: 140).   
 
7.1.1(c)  Great impact created by the Mahavamsa over time on the creation of numerous 
chronicles, pictorial and sculptural compositions within the Indian Mainland and South East 
Asia    
 
Once the Mahavamsa was introduced to South East Asia, it became a popular reference 
material, particularly in the monastic circles in such countries as Thailand, Myanmar and 
Cambodia. Inspired by the technique of literary composition and the Sri Lankan historical 
tradition which is aptly demonstrated in the Mahavamsa, the chroniclers of these countries 
went on to compose a number of historical manuals and chronicles modeled on that of the 
Mahavamsa. The Extended Mahavamsa or Cambodian Mahavamsa, composed between 9th 
and 12th centuries in Cambodian script is one such epic poem. It stands out as a classic 
example which is developed in identical historical sequence to that of the Mahavamsa. 
Composed in early 16th century by Ratnapanna Thera of Rattavana Vihara of Chieng Mai in 
Thailand, the chronicle Jinakalamali, follows in detail and sequence, the narration of the 
Mahavamsa. The text begins with the life of Buddha and proceeds to describe the three 
Buddhist Councils, introduction of Buddhism to Sri Lanka etc. Some of the verses in the 
Mahavamsa are also directly quoted. The account on the Indian Emperor Asoka terminates 
with the same information as provided in the Mahavamsa.  The other examples of chronicles 
in this regard are Mahasammatavamsa), Yazawinkyaw or Rajavamsa (16th centuray), 
Mahayazawingyi (18th century), Hmannan Yazawin (19th century) and Sasanavamsa (19th 
century) of Myanmar. Therefore, these chronicles of South and South East Asia eloquently 
display that the impact of the Mahavamsa has not only limited to the doctrinal aspects of 
Buddhism, but also had a profound influence in composing numerous chronicles in line with 

--- PAGE 11 ---
the historical tradition that was initiated by the Mahavamsa, which is based on a sound 
chronological framework.  
Not only the chroniclers, the painters and probably the sculptors in other countries were also 
inspired by the vivid descriptions provided in the Mahavamsa. In particular, the mural 
painters of Buddhist shrines at Bagan in Myanmar were inspired by the narratives of the 
Mahavamsa, to project the personalities of their own rulers in line with the hero kings of 
ancient Sri Lanka. For instance, the King Anawratha, who made Bagan his capital in the 11th 
century, and his four ‘supermen’ were reminiscence of King Dutthagamini Abhaya, the epic 
hero king of Sri Lanka, the most celebrated personality of the Mahavamsa and his great ten 
warriors. The Mahavamsa  on the other hand had not only inspired the painters in Myanmar 
to compose sceneries related to the Buddhist themes, commonly shared by the Buddhist 
world, but also to depict incidents specifically related to Sri Lanka’s history as per the 
narrations and commentaries provided in the Mahavamsa. As witnessed at the 11th century 
Buddhist shrines at Bagan in Myanmar, some of the pictorial compositions adorning their 
interior walls specifically related to important historical events, episodes and personalities of 
Sri Lanka. The paintings depicted  on the interior walls of Myinkaba Kubyaukgyi temple at 
Bagan, Myanmar include the Buddha’s visit to Sri Lanka, meeting of King Devanampiyatissa 
(the Sri Lankan ruler of the 3rd century BCE) with Mahinda Thera, the son of the Indian 
Emperor Asoka, who led a mission to formally introduce Buddhism to Sri Lanka and the 
meeting of the same king with Sanghamitta Bhikkhuni, the daughter of Emperor Asoka, who 
brought the sacred Bodhi Tree to Sri Lanka, King Elara (ruler of South Indian Origin, who 
reigned during the 2nd century BCE at Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka), and his ‘bell of justice’, life 
and contribution of the Sri Lankan King Dutthagamini, the hero of the Mahavamsa, and end 
with the Sri Lankan King Great Vijayababu, the contemporary Kings Anawrahta and 
Kyanzittha Rajakumar of the 12th century in Bagan, Myanmar. Particularly at Myinkaba 
Kubyaukgyi temple, all the paintings are identified with the captions in Mon language, which 
are usually brief summaries of the original Pali text.  
Grunwedel (1901:70) is of the opinion that the sculptural composition of the bottom 
architrave of the eastern gateway of the Great Stupa at Sanchi in India depicting the Indian 
Emperor Asoka’s visit to Bodhgaya in India was influenced by the vivid descriptions 
provided in the Mahavamsa of the Emperor’s major pilgrimage in his 19th regnal year to 
obtain a sapling of the Sacred Bodhi Tree to be sent to Sri Lanka (Guruge 1993: 147).  
Therefore, the Mahavamsa had a great impact, not only on the development of historical and 
artistic traditions in Sri Lanka, but also on other parts of Asia, particularly in South East Asia 
and the Indian mainland.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
7.1.1(d)Impact of the Mahavamsa  over time on literary and pictorial traditions in Sri 
Lanka    
In addition to sub-commentaries and glossaries written to the Mahavamsa such as 
Vamsatthapprakasini (or Mahavamsa-Tika), the model set by the Mahavamsa, particularly its 
first part, has inspired several chroniclers over time to compose several chronicles in Sri 
Lanka of high historical, literal and poetical values, in which the history of sacred objects and 
places were re-counted. As witnessed by such examples as the Attanagalu Viharavamsa, 
Dhatuvamsa, Elu Attnagaluvamsa, Elu Bodhivamsa, Maha Bodhivamsa and the Thupavamsa, 
these chronicles progressively widened their historiographical objectives. Equally impressive 
are the manuals such as the Rajavaliya and Rajaratnakara that were inspired by the 
Mahavamsa to cater to the popular demand.  
Similarly the mural painters of subsequent historical periods in Sri Lanka were greatly 
inspired by the vivid narrations provided in the Mahavamsa  of the life of Buddha, 
particularly after the Enlightenment, of the history of Buddhism in Sri Lanka (such as the 
advent of Buddhism, bringing of the Sacred Bodhi sapling and the Sacred Tooth Relic of the 
Buddha to Sri Lanka from India, and demarcating the boundaries of Mahavihara or the Great 
Monastery at Anuradhapura) and of historical incidents of national importance (such as the 
arrival of Prince Vijaya and his men from India and the great battle between Kings 
Dutthagamini Abhaya and Elara) to effect outstanding mural paintings. As seen on the rock 
and wall paintings within the Buddhist cave shrine complex at Dambulla, mainly executed 
during the 18th century, the pictorial compositions of such themes are of immense historical 
and artistic value, and hence recognized internationally as the attributes carrying the 
Outstanding Universal Value in inscribing the Dambulla Cave Temple Complex as one of the 
UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Some of the other sites that depict themes as narrated in the 
Mahavamsa are Hindagala (c. 7th century), Thivanka Image House at Polonnaruva (12th 
century), Degaldoruva, (18th century) and Karagampitiya (19th century). 
7.1.1(e)The Mahavamsa  as the first of its kind in South Asia, initiating a mature 
historiographic tradition based on a well-established chronological framework     
The earliest works of history in Sri Lanka were the historical introductions to the Sinhala 
commentaries on the Buddhist Cannons, namely Sihala Atthakatha Mahavamsa. These works 
were periodically updated with the amalgamation of history of Buddhism in Sri Lanka and 
that of the Island nation. However, the earliest known attempt in Sri Lanka to present its 
historical record in the form of chronicles dates back to the 4th century CE with the 
composition of the Dipavamsa, which was undoubtedly a tentative effort to present a concise 
history of nearly 800 years from the 6th century BCE to 4th century CE in Pali verse, and 

--- PAGE 13 ---
could therefore, be regarded as the ‘prototype’. However, it contains the blemishes of 
linguistic solecisms, lack of organization, contradictions and repetitions. Remedying the 
defects of the Dipavamsa, the first part of the Mahavamsa was composed in the 5th century 
CE covering the same time period, but in more elegant Pali verse with greater success from 
both literal and historical stand points. It is therefore, in the Mahavamsa that one finds a 
conscious attempt to set events within a chronological framework of a wider political and 
religious context, beyond the territory of Sri Lanka to illustrate the historicity of the events 
presented. As the early history of Buddhism was closely associated with the kingdom of 
Magadha in ancient India, the dates of the early Sri Lankan rulers and important religious 
events are synchronized with those of the Buddha and the rulers of Magadha. For instance, 
the arrival of Prince Vijaya to the Island, its first formal ruler, was in the year of the Buddha’s 
passing away. The date of the Indian Emperor Asoka’s consecration is fixed in the Buddhist 
era, i.e., 218 years after the passing away of the Buddha and the subsequent events in Sri 
Lanka are made to fall into place in the light of the Indian chronology. The planting of the 
Sacred Bodhi Tree in Anuradhapura, the then capital of the Island, is dated to the 18th year of 
Asoka. Once the initial chronological pattern is set, regnal years of the rulers form the basis 
for the dating of events.  
Perhaps, due to the rise and fall of empires and ruling dynasties, the ever changing political 
territories of the states, even India did not produce a national history from the historical times. 
Although there are early Indian historical literature in the form of Puranas (4th century CE), 
the epics or Mahakavya (1st century BCE), embodying the tales relating to India’s past with a 
large admixture of legend; such works therefore, cannot be treated as the historiographic 
sources comparable with the Mahavamsa. On the other hand, although provincial chronicles 
were compiled in Assam, Gujerat and Nepal, none of these can be dated to a period predating 
that of the Mahavamsa. The Rajatarangini (the Kashmir Chronicle), which is the only text 
comparable to the Mahavamsa was composed in the 12th century CE. Bechert (1978:1) 
comments that the Mahavamsa has left Sri Lanka in the unique position of the only South 
Asian country where the historiographic tradition started in a very early period, and continued 
to the modern times without interruption, providing a narrative from the 6th century BCE. 
Many international scholars are convinced that Mahavamsa  as a historical record, placing 
events within a well-established framework of dates (Fleet 1912: 1111), which are on the 
whole, sufficiently consistent to justify historical conclusions being deduced from their 
evidence (Norman 1908: 1). Therefore, the Mahavamsa is remarkable as the first of its kind in 
South Asia, initiating a historiographic tradition with great maturity, based on a strong 
chronological framework of wider political and religious context. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
7.1.1(f) Contents of the Mahavamsa contributed to the identity of the Indian Emperor 
Asoka and interpretation of archaeological objects unearthed in India 
Since the Mahavamsa has preserved the memory of the Indian Emperor Asoka in such 
remarkable detail and accuracy, it provided enough evidence to identify the epithet 
Devanapiya Piyadasi of the Indian inscriptions with this great Emperor. No Indian record, 
epigraphically or literary, could provide the slightest clue to the epigraphist James Princep, 
who decoded the Brahmi script, but needed confirmation that what he read as Devanapiya 
Piyadasi had a meaning and relevance. It was the Mahavamsa that has singularly contributed 
to the identity of the Indian Emperor Asoka in the inscriptions and thereby, the researchers in 
India could disclose to the rest of the world what was the place of Devanapiya Piyadasi in the 
Indian history, whose impact is unique politically and religiously, particularly in patronizing 
and spreading Buddhism in India and other parts of Asia in the 3rd century BCE. Without the 
Mahavamsa, the identification of Emperor Asoka with Devanapiya Piyadasi of numerous 
inscriptions in India would have been delayed by nearly another century. Moreover, the 
French scholar Senart (1881: 231) considers that the Mahavamsa to be an invaluable aid to 
the interpretation of Asokan inscriptions. The Mahavamsa has also provided the meaning to 
the names found on the reliquaries unearthed at such archaeological sites as Sanchi and 
Sonari in India.   
7.1.1(g)The Mahavamsa  as a document containing crucial information about the Indian 
history, one of the great centers of world civilization, and the political landscape of the 
vanished kingdom of Magadha in North India 
Historiographic sources are rare in much of South Asia. In such a context, in addition to the 
historical data connected with Sri Lanka, the Mahavamsa shed significant light about the 
political and religious history of India, one of the great centers of world civilizations, 
particularly during the second half of the first millennium BCE. The Mahavamsa presents a 
comprehensive list of kings of the vanished kingdom of Magadha of North India commencing 
with Bimbisara, the contemporary of the Buddha in the 6th century BCE. A significant 
characteristic of the Mahavamsa account is that it records dynastic changes of the vanished 
Indian kingdom of Magadha and the Mauryan Empire. Therefore, the reconstruction of a 
considerable phase of Indian history has been greatly facilitated by the Mahavamsa.  
7.1.1(h)The Mahavamsa  as a document containing crucial information about Sri 
Lanka, a country that was important from the standpoint of long-distance world 
maritime trade history 
Long-distance trans-oceanic maritime trade between the East (China and South East Asia) 
and West (Near East and the Mediterranean region) was one of the significant commercial 
activities of the world history. Strategically located in the Indian Ocean along the trans-

--- PAGE 15 ---
oceanic maritime trade routes connecting the East and the West, Sri Lanka was a popular 
destination among ancient international traders and navigators. Sri Lanka was called by 
numerous names in different world languages, and its sea ports are mentioned in several 
historical records of international navigators and traders (ex: the port at Mahatittha was 
recognized by Cosmas Indicopluestes as the great emporium (mediatrix), serving as the 
entrepot for Western and Chinese ships. Although, these international historical sources 
mention Sri Lanka from a foreigner’s perspective, they do not in any way provide crucial 
information about the country that was so important in the world maritime trade history. The 
British colonial researchers and officials who worked in Sri Lanka from the late 18th century 
noticed that the country possessed a rich cultural past, as reflected by numerous ruined 
monuments and sites, scattered throughout the country. Despite its history was preserved as 
oral legends, until the discovery of the Mahavamsa and its subsequent translations, it was 
consensus among the British scholars that Sri Lanka had no documented history to provide 
authentic information about this important country in the world history. James Tennent (1859: 
312), British Colonial Secretary to Ceylon (Sri Lanka) stated that with the translation of the 
Mahavamsa, ‘Ceylon was in possession of continuous written chronicles, rich in authentic 
facts’.  Therefore, the Mahavamsa, has been pivotal since 1830’s to understand and interpret 
Sri Lanka’s history and culture as the document containing crucial information about Sri 
Lanka, a country that was important from the standpoint of world’s trans-oceanic maritime 
trade history. 
7.1.1(i) The Mahavamsa  as a document containing crucial information about Sri 
Lanka’s ancient cities that are important in world history and culture 
The Mahavamsa contains numerous historical data and information on Anuradhapura, the 
principle political centre of the country from the 4th century BCE to 10th century CE and a 
world city during the period. (UNESCO has inscribed Anuradhapura on the World Heritage 
List as a World Cultural Heritage due to its Outstanding Universal Value). The information 
on the ruined monasteries, monuments, irrigation works etc. provided in the Mahavamsa was 
so accurate that during the interpretation of the ruined city and its numerous sites and 
monuments by the colonial researchers and writers, the crucial information such as the 
identification (name and function), the original size and the founder, etc. of such ruins were 
taken straight from the pages of the Mahavamsa  (De Butts 1841: 241-245, Tennent 1859: 
609-624, Carpenter 1892: 99-115, Ballou 1894: 67-68, Cumming 1901: 268-271, Parker
1909: 262-315). The Mahavamsa possesses information, so detailed and authentic, that the
dates and the purpose of the ruined sites and monuments can be ascertained with tolerable
precision (Fergusson 1876: 185-186, Karunaratne 1990: 3). Similarly, the Mahavamsa
provides crucial information about the interpretation of Polonnaruva, the capital of the
country from 12th to 13th centuries, which is also a UNESCO declared World Cultural
Heritage Site.

--- PAGE 16 ---
7.1.1(j) The Mahavamsa  describes in great detail the Buddhist Councils held in ancient 
India, the rise of Buddhism as a world religion, territories of the cities and states of Sri 
Lanka,  India, Pakistan, Myanmar etc.  
The Mahavamsa also provides ample evidence about the gradual advancement in governing 
the country with the advent of Buddhism in the 3rd century BCE to Sri Lanka. It describes in 
detail about the adoption of the Dasaraja Dharma (ten noble principles of governance) as the 
major concept pertaining to the kingship and code of ethics in governing ancient Sri Lanka. 
Popularly referred to as the Asokan model, (named after the Indian Emperor Asoka), this 
concept elucidates that the king should be just, righteous, pious, caring and attentive to the 
needs of the citizens, as well as devoted to the fostering of Buddhism and to the welfare of the 
people. Backed by the descriptions in the Mahavamsa, the Sri Lankan kings were encouraged 
by tradition, to construct gigantic religious edifices such as stupas, image houses, 
monasteries, and devoted themselves to construct massive man-made reservoirs as public 
works to irrigate land to sustain agriculture, rather than building grand palaces and other 
structures to glorify the kings. Therefore the contents of the Mahavamsa have contributed 
immensely to the creation and maintenance of a concept pertaining to the kingship for the 
betterment of a society in ancient Sri Lanka.     
7.1.1(l) The Mahavamsa  captures the essence of architectural, engineering and 
technological advancements of the Sri Lankans that are comparable to other great 
civilizations of the world   
The Mahavamsa records in great details about the construction of the Mahathupa or 
Ruvanveli-seya (a Buddhist stupa enshrining the sacred relics of the Buddha) at 
Anuradhapura (the principle political centre of Sri Lanka) in the 2nd century BCE, which is 
one of the great brick built constructions in the ancient world (height 90 meters), rivalling the 
great pyramids of ancient Egypt. It describes in remarkable detail about the professional and 
technical information associated with the design and construction processes of this great 
stupa, one of the mega projects executed in the ancient world. The information provided in 
the Mahavamsa about this great architectural, engineering and technological feats of the 
humankind includes the professional site selection, communication of the final design by the 
architect to the king through a visual model, construction of deep foundation sitting on the 
bed rock, consolidation of the undulations, cavities and gullies of the bed rock by compacting 
with gravel, production of several millions of large sized bricks, preparation and using of the 
mud-based mortar for the brickwork, use of paid labour for the construction, quality 
controlling of the building material and workmanship, etc. The archaeological evidence 
revealed from the Mahathupa and other great stupas at Anuradhapura in Sri Lanka 
constructed during the historical period, confirm the accuracy of the accounts given in the 
Mahavamsa. Therefore, the account in the Mahavamsa eloquently captures the essence of 
great advances in architectural, engineering and technological fronts of the ancient Sri 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Lankans during the first millennium BCE.  
7.1.1(m)The Mahavamsa  eloquently illustrates the lives of the Indian Emperor Asoka 
and Sri Lankan kings Dutthagamini Abhaya and Parakramabahu the Great  as prominent 
political personalities  
The Mahavamsa also records a comprehensive list of the kings of Magadha and the dynastic 
changes in the Indian mainland, commencing with Bimbisara, the contemporary of the 
Buddha. It records in great detail, the life and career of the Indian Emperor Asoka such as his 
previous lives, successful military campaign to become the sole ruler of Jambudipa, 
consecration, circumstances leading to the conversion as a Buddhist, his lasting contribution 
to Buddhism, the construction of numerous monasteries, munificence to the Sangha, 
facilitating the third Buddhist Council, despatches of Buddhist missions to various countries 
and territories in Asia, and finally his last years of his reign. The Mahavamsa is the only 
literary source among the inscriptions and many other sources available in India and 
elsewhere, which gives a chronological account of the last ten years of the Emperor (Guruge 
1993: 297). Therefore, the Mahavamsa eloquently illustrates in great detail the life of Asoka, 
one of the great emperors and prominent political personalities in South Asia.     
Similarly, out of the 37 chapters of the first part of the Mahavamsa, 11 chapters are devoted 
to illustrate in great detail the personality of King Dutthagamini Abhaya of Sri Lanka 
(regarded as the epic hero king of Sri Lanka), whose political objective was the creation of a 
unitary state in Sri Lanka, a novel political concept devised by him and successfully achieved 
in the 1st millennium BCE, as a means of withstanding the external political invasions, 
particularly from Southern India. In a similar way, the personality of King Parakramabahu the 
Great is also projected as a hero king.    
7.1.1(n)The subject matter of the Mahavamsa had a profound impact on the intellectual 
development in social sciences in the form of history and archaeology   
The discovery and translation of the Mahavamsa facilitated the development of oriental 
scholarship on Sri Lanka, not only in Sri Lanka, but also in many centers of learning in the 
world. It led to an increase of studies in social sciences, particularly in history and 
archaeology from mid 19th century. Its subject matter became intrinsically linked with history 
and archaeology of the country, and therefore, it had a profound impact on the trajectory of 
studies in history and archaeology in Sri Lanka. The disciplines of history and archaeology in 
Sri Lanka’s colonial period were dominated by the Mahavamsa perspective (Daniel 1997: 
49). The Mahavamsa provided the historians the most indispensible tool, while to the 
archaeologist, it was an essential field manual in locating, identifying and interpreting the 
heritage sites and monuments. The availability of the subject matter of the Mahavamsa  led to 
a general consensus among the colonial intellectuals that the history of Sri Lanka was quite 
unique, in that it had ‘authentic records verified by enduring monuments’ (Ballou 1894: 50), 

--- PAGE 18 ---
and this led to an approach and process of matching historical topography to existing ruined 
structures of the Island. Geiger (1960), who translated the Mahavamsa wrote a Cultural 
History of Medieval Sri Lanka, solely based on the subject matter of the Mahavamsa. For the 
Sri Lankan scholars during the colonial occupation, the Mahavamsa was also a source of 
inspiration to re-build their lost social and cultural identity. Rahula (1956: xxiii) remarks that 
‘if the Mahavamsa is not a history of Ceylon (Sri Lanka), it is decidedly the history of 
Buddhism in Ceylon, and history of Buddhism in Ceylon covers a major part of the Island’s 
history’. Harischandra (1908: 69), a Buddhist revivalist during the colonial period asserts that 
‘in all matters connected with the archaeology of Anuradhapura (the first principal political 
centre of ancient Sri Lanka), the Mahavamsa has been the guide, and in this also it should be, 
if not the sole, at least the principal guide’. Therefore, the impact of the Mahavamsa was such 
that a thorough knowledge of its subject matter was a pre-requisite to study Sri Lanka’s 
history and archaeology.   
7.1.2 Form and style 
The Mahavamsa having an outstanding stylistic and linguistic value composed in Pali 
language  
The Mahavamsa is an outstanding epic poem written in rhythmic Kavya style in lucid Pali 
language. The stories of day-to-day life of people, polity of the royalty and the elite, the 
constructions of colossal stupas and water reservoirs, establishment of religious and monastic 
institutions, were written in elegant and erudite verse suitable for reading and memorization. 
Therefore, due to its high stylistic value, it caught the imagination of the Buddhist and 
scholarly worlds at different periods of the time. Besides being an important historical source 
in South and South East Asia, the Mahavamsa was copied, translated, retold, and absorbed 
into other languages and cultures of the region during the historical period.  
7.1.3 Social, community or spiritual significance 
During the colonial occupation, despite its role as a primary source of historical and 
archaeological studies, the Mahavamsa provided the much needed source of inspiration for 
the Sri Lankans, not only to re-build their lost social and cultural identity, but also to 
command respect as a great nation having a written history going back to the 6th century BCE. 
The Mahavamsa, especially in modern Sri Lanka, has acquired a great living significance as a 
document with a timeless religious, cultural and political message. The Sri Lankans, often 
look upon the Mahavamsa as a proof of their origin, evolution and cultural identity. 
Therefore, the document has an emotional hold on those who do not only live at present, but 
also those who are yet to be born, making the Mahavamsa, a document with a timeless living 
significance. The strong attachment to the Mahavamsa continues to be the cornerstone of 
popular Sri Lankan history. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Despite the colonial occupation, due to the strong cultural attachment to the Mahavamsa, the 
tradition of writing Sri Lanka’s history continued during the period. The tradition continued 
under the State sponsorship of independent Sri Lanka, and the last update of the Mahavamsa 
was in 2018 to cover the history up to the year 2010. The combined work, collectively 
referred to as the Mahavamsa, provides a continuous historical record of well over two and a 
half millennia, and this tradition has resulted in producing one of the world's longest unbroken 
historical accounts. It has therefore, become the national epic, and has rightly been regarded 
as Sri Lanka’s non-stop epic. 
The modern-day politicians, in particular, take immense inspiration from the accounts of the 
Mahavamsa, of the deeds and other contributions of the great kings, as described in the text, 
and want to emulate such personalities as those of King Dutthagamini Abhaya of the 2nd 
century BCE and King Parakramabahu the Great of the 12th century CE by patronizing 
Buddhism, constructing irrigation works etc.     
7.2 Comparative criteria. Comment on one or more of the following comparative criteria: 
7.2.1  Rarity 
The Mahavamsa is composed in Pali, a language not used in current day-to-day 
communication, although Pali is still being used as the international language of Theravada 
Buddhist scholarship. However, the succeeding parts of the Mahavamsa after the year 1815, 
do not use Pali, but Sinhala as its language to compose the original document, and the Sinhala 
text is later translated into Pali language. Also the succeeding parts of Mahavamsa are printed 
on paper, and therefore, not written on palm leaf. In this context, the nominated documentary 
heritage is an example of a chronicle displaying a language that is not in current day-to-day 
use and on palm leaf, which is already a disappeared medium.   
7.2.2  Integrity, completeness, condition 
The Mahavamsa at University of Peradeniya, selected for nomination is complete with all the 
chapters and verses covering the period 6th century BCE up to the 4th century CE without any 
sections or pages missing. Kept under the safe custody of the University’s library, its palm 
leaves are well preserved and the Pali text written in Sinhala script are quite legible. 
7.3 Statement of significance 
The Mahavamsa (the ‘Great Chronicle’) is remarkable as the first of its kind in South Asia, 
initiating a historiographic tradition with great maturity, based on a strong chronological 
framework of wider political and religious context, beyond its territories. The authenticity of 

--- PAGE 20 ---
the facts provided in the Mahavamsa has been confirmed through archaeological and 
epigraphical research conducted in Sri Lanka and India over the last 150 years. Despite being 
an unbroken historical narrative of Sri Lanka initiated in the 5th century CE and presented in a 
chronological order from the 6th century BCE, one of the universal significances is that it is a 
remarkable historical source in Asia containing crucial information about lifetime of the 
Buddha, the Emperor Asoka and it describes in great detail the Buddhist Councils held in 
ancient India, the development of Buddhism in the Indian mainland and the rise of Buddhism 
as a world religion. Such aspects are reflected by the fact that its contents were copied, 
translated, retold, and absorbed into other Asian languages and cultures during the historical 
period. The existence of number of manuscripts of Mahavamsa as a textual object in several 
South East Asian countries and several worlds’ leading museums, universities and cultural 
institutions stand testimony to its immense historical, cultural, literal, linguistic and scholarly 
values. The transliteration and translation of the Mahavamsa in to several South-east Asian 
languages in historical period and European languages in recent times bear testimony to the 
Mahavamsa as a reference material of timeless universal value to study the history of Sri 
Lanka and of the Indian mainland. The outstanding stylistic and linguistic value of the 
Mahavamsa is further testifies by the fact that it caught the imagination of the Buddhist and 
scholarly worlds at different periods of the time. The impact of the document is such that it 
played a significant role in popularizing Theravada Buddhism in Thailand, Myanmar and 
Cambodia, particularly during the 12th century. The narrations provided in the Mahavamsa 
has given immense inspiration to the chroniclers, painters and sculptors in Asia as reflected 
by numerous literary works composed by chroniclers in Thailand, Cambodia and Myanmar, 
and the painted and sculptural compositions found at Buddhist shrines in Myanmar and at 
Sanchi in India during different periods of the history. As a historical source, it contains 
crucial information about Sri Lanka, a country that was important from the standpoint of 
long-distance world maritime trade history as well as India, one of the great centers of world 
civilization, the political landscape of the vanished kingdom of Magadha in North India and 
other historic territories and states of India, Pakistan, Myanmar etc. Most importantly, the 
document has contributed to the identity of the Indian Emperor Asoka, and interpretation of 
archaeological objects unearthed in India. The Mahavamsa also eloquently captures the 
essence of great advances in architectural, engineering and technological fronts of the ancient 
Sri Lankans during the first millennium BCE as reflected by the descriptions in remarkable 
detail about the professional and technical information associated with the design and 
construction processes of a great Ruvanveli stupa, one of the mega projects executed in the 
ancient world. The document also had a profound impact on the intellectual development in 
social sciences, particularly in history and archaeology in Sri Lanka and India. The living 
significance of the Mahavamsa is reflected by the fact that the Sri Lankans, often look upon it 
as a proof of their origin, evolution and cultural identity and by the strong attachment to the 
Mahavamsa as the cornerstone of popular Sri Lankan history. The tradition of writing Sri 
Lanka’s history as initiated by the Mahavamsa in the 6th century CE continues to the present 

--- PAGE 21 ---
day as Sri Lanka’s non-stop national epic and has resulted in producing one of the world's 
longest unbroken historical accounts. 
8.0 Consultation with stakeholders 
8.1 Provide details of consultation with relevant stakeholders about this nomination 
Several consultative meetings and discussions were held with the Vice-Chancellor, the 
librarian and the academics of University of Peradeniya with regard to the selection of the 
manuscript as the best representation of the Mahavamsa for the nomination for the Memory 
of the World Register. These stakeholders were so proud to know that the Mahavamsa in their 
custody as the most representative specimen. They assured that the University of Peradeniya 
will cooperate with the relevant stake holders not only during the process of nomination, but 
for its protection, management and accessibility to the wider public of this documentary 
heritage.      
9.0 Risk assessment 
9.1 Detail the nature and scope of threats to the nominated material 
Since the document selected for nomination is kept under a secured special collection called 
‘palm leaf collection’, directly under the safe custody of the Librarian itself, there is no risk in 
steeling the property. It is kept in a controlled environment with air-conditioning and 
therefore humidity do not have an effect on the manuscript. A fire detection and retarding 
system is also in place at the Library to minimized risks against fire.     
10.0 Preservation and access management plan 
10.1 Describe, or attach as a scanned document, any existing plans. If no plans exist, provide 
details about proposed conservation, storage and access strategies. 
Since the ‘Palm Leaf Collection’, under which the Mahavamsa is kept at the Library of 
University of Peradeniya, consist of documents written on a perishable plant material, special 
care is taken to maintain the documents on a regular basis. A regular monitoring of the palm 
leaf manuscripts is also in place to check against the dampness, growth of fungus, etc. The 
maintenance staff attached to the ‘Palm Leaf Collection’ are trained at national Library and 
Documetation Services Borad in maintenance, monitoring, protection and conservation of all 
palm leaf manuscripts. The blackening of the letters in the palm leaves of the Mahavamsa, a 
periodic conservation work was last carried out in 2019   

--- PAGE 22 ---
As the palm leaf manuscript of Mahavamsa is in a special collection, the students, staff, 
researchers or the general public do not have free access to it for reference. The students, staff 
and researchers need to show documentary proof (such as a letter of recommendation of the 
academic supervisor, head of the respective academic department of the University) to the 
Libraian for him to authorize the use the Mahavamsa for reference. Similarly the general 
public could also access the manuscript after convincing the reason for reference to the 
Librarian. Even during using the manuscript, it has to be done under the direct supervision of 
one of the staff members of the “Palm Laeaf Collection’ to ensure that no damage is caused to 
the palm leaves or the contents of the Mahavamsa.     
11.0 Any other information that may support the nomination 
11.1 Note below or attach scanned documents as appropriate. 
Although the laymen know about the Mahavamsa, they have only heard or seen the 
translations of the original document in to Sinhala, English or other languages. Except the few 
scholars who conduct research using the original palm leaf manuscript written in Pali, 
majority of the people have less ideas of its original document. The inscription of Mahavamsa 
in the MoW will arouse the interest of the general public about the ancient documenting 
technique, and about the Pali language.     
