Source PDF File: C:\Users\Vesin\AppData\Local\Temp\opencode\palmleaf\birch.pdf
Total Pages: 425
Health Check: PASS (avg 2756.7 chars/page)
Statistics: Chars=1179136, ThaiWords=235827.2, EnglishWords=212873

--- Page 1 of 425 ---
FROM BIRCH BARK TO DIGITAL DATA:
RECENT ADVANCES IN BUDDHIST MANUSCRIPT RESEARCH
Papers Presented at the Conference
Indic Buddhist Manuscripts: The State of the Field
Stanford, June 15–19 2009
Edited by Paul Harrison and Jens-Uwe Hartmann

--- Page 2 of 425 ---
ÖSTERREICHISCHE AKADEMIE DER WIS SEN SCHAF TEN
PHILOSOPHISCH-HISTORISCHE KLASSE
DENKSCHRIFTEN, 460. BAND
Beiträge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens
Nr. 80
Herausgegeben von Helmut Krasser

--- Page 3 of 425 ---
ÖSTERREICHISCHE AKADEMIE DER WIS SEN SCHAF TEN
PHILOSOPHISCH-HISTORISCHE KLASSE
DENKSCHRIFTEN, 460. BAND
From Birch Bark to Digital Data:
Recent Advances in Buddhist Manuscript Research
Papers Presented at the Conference
Indic Buddhist Manuscripts: The State of the Field
Stanford, June 15–19 2009
Edited by
Paul Harrison and Jens-Uwe Hartmann

--- Page 4 of 425 ---
Vorgelegt von w. M. ERNST STEINKELLNER in der Sitzung am 18. Oktober 2013
Die verwendeten Papiersorten sind aus chlorfrei gebleichtem Zellstoff hergestellt,
frei von säurebildenden Bestandteilen und alterungsbeständig.
Diese Publikation wurde einem anonymen, internationalen
Peer-Review-Verfahren unterzogen.
This publication has undergone the process of anonymous, international 
peer review.
Alle Rechte vorbehalten.
ISBN 978-3-7001-7581-0
Copyright © 2014 by
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften
Wien
Druck und Bindung: Druckerei Ferdinand Berger & Söhne GesmbH, Horn
Printed and bound in the EU
http://hw.oeaw.ac.at/7581-0
http://verlag.oeaw.ac.at

--- Page 5 of 425 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAUL HARRISON AND JENS-UWE HARTMANN, Introduction
vii
RICHARD SALOMON, Gāndhārī Manuscripts in the British Library, Schøyen and Other 
Collections
1
MARK ALLON, The Senior Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
19
COLLETT COX, Gāndhārī Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts: Exegetical Texts
35
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH, The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts within the Context of Buddhist Gāndhārī Literature
51
OSKAR VON HINÜBER, The Gilgit Manuscripts: An Ancient Buddhist Library in Modern 
Research
79
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE, The Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama and the 
Private Collection in Virginia
137
JENS BRAARVIG, The Schøyen Collection
157
KAZUNOBU MATSUDA, Japanese Collections of Buddhist Manuscript Fragments from
the Same Region as the Schøyen Collection
165
LORE SANDER, Dating and Localizing Undated Manuscripts
171
KLAUS WILLE, Survey of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
187
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE, The Central Asian Sanskrit Fragments in
the Pelliot Collection (Paris)
213
KLAUS WILLE, Survey of the Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Hoernle, Stein, 
and Skrine Collections of the British Library (London)
223
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE, Further Collections of Sanskrit Manuscripts
from Central Asia
247
SHIN’ICHIRŌ HORI, From the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin
257
DUAN QING, Indic and Khotanese Manuscripts: Some New Finds and Findings 
from Xinjiang
269
PAUL HARRISON, Earlier Inventories of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Tibet: A Synoptic List
 of Titles
279
SAERJI, Indic Buddhist Manuscripts in the People’s Republic of China: The Peking 
University Project
291
HELMUT KRASSER, Indic Buddhist Manuscripts in Vienna: A Sino-Austrian Co-operative Project, with Methodological Remarks on Śāstric “Urtexts”
301
LUO HONG, Sanskrit Manuscript Projects in the China Tibetology Research Center
315
YOSHIYASU YONEZAWA AND JUNDŌ NAGASHIMA, The Sanskrit Manuscript Research 
Project at Taisho University
323
MICHAEL HAHN, Various Aspects of Dealing with Buddhist codices unici
333
PETER SKILLING, Reflections on the Pali Literature of Siam
347
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA, Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
367
...............................................
.................................................................................................
.........................................................
.................................
..........................
..................................................................................................
...................................................................
....................................................................
..............................................
........................................
.....
....................................................................
..............................
....................................................................................
..............................
.........................................................................................
.................................................................................................
...................................................................................
...............
.....
.....................................................................
.....................
.........................................
.................................................

--- Page 6 of 425 ---
Participants in the conference
“Indic Buddhist Manuscripts: The State of the Field”
held at Stanford University, June 15–19, 2009
Front row (from left to right): DUAN Qing (Beijing), Richard Salomon (Seattle), Irene LIN (Stanford), Collett 
Cox (Seattle), Michael Hahn (Marburg), Helmut Krasser (Vienna), Harunaga Isaacson (Hamburg), Oskar 
von Hinüber (Freiburg), Kazunobu Matsuda (Kyoto), LUO Hong (Beijing), Saerji (Beijing).
Second row: Jundō Nagashima (Tokyo), Peter Skilling (Bangkok), Shin’ichiro Hori (Tokyo), Jens Braarvig 
(Oslo), Lore Sander (Berlin), Jens-Uwe Hartmann (Munich), Ingo Strauch (Berlin), Klaus Wille 
(Göttingen), Yoshiyasu Yonezawa (Tokyo).
Third row: Mark Allon (Sydney), Paul Harrison (Stanford). In absentia: Harry Falk (Berlin).

--- Page 7 of 425 ---
Introduction
PAUL HARRISON (STANFORD) AND JENS-UWE HARTMANN (MUNICH)
1
Writing Buddhism and Buddhist writing
For most of its history, the academic study of Buddhism has been dominated by the study 
of the written word, i.e., of texts, books and manuscripts. This holds especially true for the 
encounter with the Indian forms of Buddhism, often understood as the originals of those 
derived phenomena that later in the course of the religion’s spread manifested as “Chinese 
Buddhism,” “Tibetan Buddhism” and the like. The Indian forms were seen as representing 
a more pristine stage, undistorted by cultural and linguistic differences and much closer to 
the founder himself. The Western academic propensity to search for origins naturally 
directed the interest of scholars towards older forms, and older inevitably meant Indian. 
When Eugène Burnouf (1801–1852), one of the founding fathers of Buddhology, began to 
study Buddhism, he based his studies on written sources, among them the Sanskrit manuscripts which had been sent by Brian Houghton Hodgson (1800–1894) from Nepal to the 
Société Asiatique in 1837.1 The Kathmandu Valley formed the last pocket on the whole 
subcontinent in which a form of Sanskrit Buddhism had survived into the modern age. It 
was transmitted exclusively within the ethnic group of the Newars, and although its constant interaction with Hinduism had led to very specific adaptations, it offered a singular 
window on late Indian Tantric Buddhism. Yet the eyes of scholars were caught less by its 
colourful rituals than by the manuscripts the Newars had faithfully preserved for a thousand years after the decline of Buddhism in India had set in. Those manuscripts became the 
focus of the scholars’ gaze, and it took more than a century before the living Buddhism of 
the Newars eventually came into their field of vision — although even today it is sometimes overlooked.2
In more recent times it has been argued that the dominance of this preoccupation with 
literary sources has led to various misrepresentations in the reconstruction of Indian Buddhism.3 This is certainly true, and for several reasons, one of them being that the sources 
themselves are by no means easy to interpret. As a natural consequence, interpretations 
vary greatly and tend to reflect the predilections or preoccupations of the interpreters.4 
Most of the literature preserved is normative in character, and it is nearly impossible to 
contextualize in time and place. Much of it is also anonymous, and there is no way of 
knowing when and where it was conceived or written down. It is equally impossible to 
know who conceived or wrote it, and nothing is known about those to whom it was 
addressed, its audience and the groups among which it continued to circulate. This state of 
1 Cf. J[an] W[illem] de Jong, A Brief History of Buddhist Studies in Europe and America, Delhi: Sri 
Satguru Publications, 21987: 19; Akira Yuyama, Eugène Burnouf. The Background to his Research into 
the Lotus Sutra, Tokyo: The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology, Soka University, 
2000 (Bibliotheca Philologica et Philosophica Buddhica, 3); Christian K. Wedemeyer, “Tropes, Typologies and Turnarounds: A Brief Genealogy of the Historiography of Tantric Buddhism,” History of Religions 40 (2001): 223–259, esp. pp. 235–242.
2 See, e.g., David Gellner, “Himalayan Conundrum? A Puzzling Absence in Ronald M. Davidson’s 
Indian Esoteric Buddhism,” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 27 (2004): 411–
417.
3 A notable statement of this argument is Gregory Schopen, “Archaeology and Protestant Presuppositions in the Study of Indian Buddhism,” History of Religions 31 (1991): 1–23; cf. also the discussion in 
Richard F. Nance, Speaking for Buddhas: Scriptural Commentary in Indian Buddhism, New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2012: 7–12, and, very recently, Michael Willis’s review of Johannes Bronkhorst’s book Buddhism in the Shadow of Brahmanism in the Bulletin of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies 76 (2013): 330–332.
4 For a survey of ten distinct systemic assessments of early Indian Buddhism illustrating this point, cf. 
George Chatalian, “Early Indian Buddhism and the Nature of Philosophy: A Philosophical Investigation,” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 11 (1983): 167–222.

--- Page 8 of 425 ---
viii
PAUL HARRISON AND JENS-UWE HARTMANN
affairs hardly improves when it comes to literature by named authors, such as commentaries or poetical works. Here it becomes easier to get at least a glimpse of the addressees 
and audiences, since these works often interact with others of the same genre, but the 
problem of time and place largely remains: the overwhelming majority of these works 
cannot be precisely dated and the place of their origin is unknown. Even famous authors 
like Nāgārjuna and Vasubandhu or Aśvaghoṣa and Āryaśūra are hardly more than names: 
they remain shadowy figures of whom nothing is left but their works, and often enough 
even the actual authorship of these is disputed. All this said, and despite the many other 
difficulties they pose, the texts remain indispensable, even as Buddhist Studies moves to 
include archaeology, epigraphy, art history and anthropology in its disciplinary toolbox.
From whatever perspective they approach the religion, one of the greatest challenges 
confronting scholars of Buddhism is the sheer magnitude of its literature; for much of their 
history Buddhists were no strangers to the written word, and employed it prolifically, even 
though the means for encoding and transmitting the teachings of the Buddha went through 
several paradigmatic turns. For at least three centuries, we assume, the transmission was 
exclusively oral, and it was the brains and the memories of Gautama’s followers which 
served as the repository and as the medium of reproduction. Writing appears to have been a 
rather late invention in India, and there is no solid proof that an indigenous script was in 
use before the rise of the Mauryan empire, or even before Aśoka, its most celebrated ruler, 
in the third century BCE. Very likely the new technique was introduced for worldy 
purposes like administration and business, and it is unknown when, and why, “religious” 
texts were written down for the first time. However, there are two indications from opposite ends of the Indian subcontinent that Buddhists were at least among the first — if they 
were not the very first — to initiate a fundamental turn to the new medium for transmitting 
and preserving their religious lore. A Ceylonese chronicle, the Dīpavaṃsa (“Chronicle of 
the Island”), compiled in the 4th century CE from older records, reports that in the 1st 
century BCE the monks in Sri Lanka assembled and, “in order that the religion might endure for a long time” (ciraṭṭhitatthaṃ dhammassa), wrote down the Tipiṭaka, the scriptures, and the Aṭṭhakathā, the commentaries.5 This passage comprises only two verses; it 
does not mention any details of the form and contents of that Tipiṭaka, and it is difficult to 
establish the information as historical fact.6 However, corroborative evidence has recently 
been supplied by the sensational manuscript finds of the last fifteen years in Pakistan and 
Afghanistan. Palaeographical considerations and some radiocarbon datings place the 
overwhelming majority of these finds in the first three centuries of the Common Era, but 
for two manuscripts a radiocarbon dating is reported which, if correct, would put them at 
least as far back as the first century BCE (cf. pp. 9 and 54). This would make them the 
oldest Buddhist — and at the same time oldest Indian — manuscripts known so far, and 
their antiquity lends credibility to the report of the Ceylonese chronicle.
Writing never superseded memorization and orality in the Buddhist world. Although it 
proved a more stable medium and allowed of many new possibilities, it also created new 
problems. The organic material of the manuscripts, be it birch bark or palm leaf, was not 
immune to deterioration, and especially under climatic conditions such as prevailed in 
most of India, manuscripts had to be copied again and again in order to preserve their contents. Copying had to be done manually by scribes, a process which was not only costly 
and time-consuming but also invited all sorts of mistakes, from simple misspellings to 
haplographies and dittographies, to name only the most common ones, which endanger 
5 Cf. Heinz Bechert, “The Writing Down of the Tripiṭaka in Pāli,” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde 
Südasiens 36 (1992): 45–53.
6 But cf. now Anālayo, “The Historical Value of the Pāli Discourses,” Indo-Iranian Journal 55 (2012): 
223–253.

--- Page 9 of 425 ---
Introduction
ix
accurate transmission and which now keep modern philologists busy in the attempt to reconstruct the originals.
After the acquisition of writing, Buddhists in India contented themselves with memory 
and manuscripts. It was only in East Asia that Buddhists proved once more to be the 
pioneers when it came to adopting a new technology for their specific needs of copying 
and multiplying texts: it appears that they were the first to use the new invention of 
printing with wooden blocks for preparing huge quantities of identical copies. The oldest 
preserved examples are dhāraṇī texts prepared in Japan in the 7th century CE, and the 
oldest dated printed book in the world is a Chinese scroll of the year 868 containing the 
Vajracchedikā-prajñāpāramitā. It was found in the famous library cave at Dunhuang and 
is now exhibited in the British Museum, London. Although Buddhists in Central Asia 
learned the technique of printing from China and adapted it to their own purposes,7 it did 
not reach India, probably because the Silk Road had already lost its function of keeping 
Central Asian Buddhism connected to its Indian origins. Whatever technology they used, 
however, there is no doubt that Buddhists themselves were from quite early on enthusiastic 
and prodigious generators of written texts, producing an ocean of literature so vast that no 
modern scholar could ever hope to explore its full expanse.
2
Recent Developments
Nevertheless, scholars have risen to the challenge, and continue to do so. Indeed, the last 
two decades have witnessed an upsurge of research, in particular on Buddhist manuscripts 
in Indian languages. This has been partly to do with renewed efforts to make accessible the 
huge amount of manuscript fragments recovered from Central Asia by various expeditions 
at the beginning of the last century. More important, however, have been the sensational 
manuscript finds, sometimes called the “Dead Sea Scrolls of Buddhism,” in Afghanistan 
and Pakistan during the nineties of the last century. They have attracted — and continue to 
attract — an unusually high level of public attention, which at least indirectly helped the 
scholars concerned in conveying the impression that they were involved in something very 
important. At roughly the same time, longstanding efforts to gain access to Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in Tibet yielded the first major results. All these developments provided 
scholars with fascinating new material and inspired a fresh interest in work on manuscripts, despite the tendency to be observed throughout the academic world to put a lower 
value on solid philological work.
The present volume attempts to provide a comprehensive overview of these recent 
developments and to bring together all the results achieved so far. It is the outcome of a 
conference held at Stanford in June 2009 — “Indic Buddhist Manuscripts: The State of the 
Field” — but as the work of identifying and publishing manuscripts goes on continuously, 
great care was taken to have the contributors include new information up until June 2013. 
The original inspiration of the Stanford meeting had been to bring together all projects 
dealing with Buddhist manuscripts in Indian languages (except Pali) and present the 
current state of research, but due to the sheer amount of material it proved impossible to 
achieve the same degree of thoroughness and completeness in all areas of the field. Beyond that, our contributors chose different approaches, and we thought it neither necessary 
nor profitable to insist on structural similarities. The papers address the field from a variety 
of perspectives: in some, a certain collection is described, while others combine collections 
7 Strangely enough, in view of the extremely small percentage of prints among the Indic material, the 
first publication of a Sanskrit text brought back to Berlin by the first Prussian Turfan expedition in March 
1903 was devoted to fragments of a printed version of the Samyuktāgama; cf. Richard Pischel, “Bruchstücke des Sanskritkanons der Buddhisten aus Idykutšari, Chinesisch-Turkestān,” Sitzungsberichte der 
Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin 1904: 807–827.

--- Page 10 of 425 ---
x
PAUL HARRISON AND JENS-UWE HARTMANN
with script or language (e.g., Kharoṣṭhī and Gāndhārī). Again others take their starting 
point from the place where work on manuscripts from various find-spots is coordinated. 
The papers reflect different organizational structures, some the work of individuals, others 
the joint endeavours of a body of scholars (e.g., on the Schøyen Collection) or even the 
work of a study group meeting regularly to edit a specific manuscript (cf. especially the 
projects at Taisho University and the remarks on p. 329). In fact, it is this very diversity of 
material and of approaches which is characteristic of the field, and we did not wish to 
camouflage this or reduce it to a bland uniformity.
After the early European encounter with the manuscripts from Nepal, a succession of 
various finds advanced our knowledge of Indian Buddhist literature and helped in recovering an ever growing part of it, even though each new find also demonstrated — with 
equally growing clarity — how much of this incredibly rich and voluminous literature has 
been lost. The most recent finds from Pakistan and Afghanistan in particular indicate that 
the texts preserved in Chinese and Tibetan translations most likely represent only a fraction 
of what was once available in India. In the following, the major finds of the last hundred 
years or so are briefly surveyed in chronological order and related to current research 
projects and the papers which deal with them.
3
Sanskrit Manuscripts from Central Asia (Xinjiang)
When Western scholars started to recover the original texts of Indian Buddhism they had to 
rely on what was preserved in the two surviving traditions, the literature of the followers of 
the Vajrayāna in Nepal on the one hand and the scriptures of the Theravāda Buddhists of 
Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia on the other. The literary heritages of these two traditions 
could not have been more diverse; they had originated in very different times and held 
hardly anything in common. However, they pointed to the tremendous range of developments within Buddhist thought and literature, and gave a sense of what had been lost when 
Buddhism declined in India. 
The situation changed dramatically when the first reports surfaced of Buddhist cultures 
once flourishing along the ancient Silk Road in Central Asia, cultures which had vanished 
after the intrusions of Islamic invaders. This news initiated the famous race to Eastern 
Turkestan for artifacts and manuscripts which started in the final years of the 19th century, 
lasted until just before the First World War, and yielded sensational findings. Although 
manuscripts in Indian languages were found in a large number of places which are widely 
separated — from Tumšuq in the west to Dunhuang in the east, and from Turfan in the 
north to Khotan in the south — it makes sense to treat them together, since they all belonged to the same cultural milieu, i.e., Central Asian Buddhism in its various manifestations, and they were all, with one exception, written in Buddhist Sanskrit and in forms of 
Indian and Central Asian Brāhmī. The exception was the famous Dharmapada manuscript, 
written on a very long birch-bark scroll in the Gāndhārī language and the Kharoṣṭhī script. 
It was apparently found in Khotan and in 1892 sold in two parts, one to N. F. Petrovskij, 
then the Russian Consul-General in Kashgar, and the other to the French traveler JulesLéon Dutreuil du Rhins. Both parts were introduced to the scholarly world at the 11th 
International Congress of Orientalists in Paris in 1897, an event which contributed to the 
sudden interest in the archaeological remains hidden in the Tarim Basin.
The palaeographically oldest manuscripts must have been imported from India, since 
they are written on palm leaf, which was not available in Central Asia. Apart from the 
Khotanese Dharmapada there are a few other manuscripts on birch bark, but all in folio 
format; some of them were probably imported, but others were definitely written in Central 
Asia itself, since a later Central Asian variety of Brāhmī was used. The overwhelming 
majority, considerably more than 95%, are written on paper, a material invented in China

--- Page 11 of 425 ---
Introduction
xi
and exceedingly popular in Eastern Turkestan too. The state of preservation is generally 
deplorable: fragments are the rule, undamaged folios the rare exception. Among the tens of 
thousands of fragments only one complete book, a composite manuscript of 54 folios, is 
preserved in the German collection.8 There is a clear distinction between manuscripts 
found along the northern branch of the Silk Road and those from the southern branch: most 
of the Mahāyāna sūtras were found in the south, while nearly all of the texts coming from 
the north belong to the type of Buddhism we call “Mainstream” or “Śrāvakayāna.”9 It 
appears that the monks (and nuns?) of the monasteries along the northern branch followed 
the scriptures of the school of the (Mūla-)Sarvāstivādins, once an important branch of 
Indian Buddhism, since most of the Vinaya and Āgama texts found there are of Sarvāstivāda and Mūlasarvāstivāda provenance. Fragments of the scriptures of the Dharmaguptakas 
are very rare exceptions. Besides works of canonical origin, a wide variety of topics and 
literary genres is attested, from commentaries to works of poetry and treatises on such 
topics as grammar and medicine (cf. the thematically arranged index in Klaus Wille’s 
contribution on the Turfan Collection in Berlin, pp. 193–209). Apart from such “scientific” 
works, non-Buddhist texts are extremely rare: there is a fragment of the Laghucāṇakyarājanītiśāstra in the Turfan Collection (cf. p. 209) and a fragment of the Mahābhārata in 
the Berezovsky Collection (cf. p. 247). This rarity seems to reflect a view preserved in a 
rule of the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya, namely that such books should be sold by the monks 
(cf. the contribution by Oskar von Hinüber, p. 82, where he quotes this rule in his discussion of a fragment of the Tantrākhyāyika in the Gilgit find).
The Central Asian manuscripts were recovered by individuals and expeditions from 
several European countries and from Japan, and today they are spread over a number of 
collections. More than a hundred years have passed since the manuscripts came to the 
attention of scholars, but the editorial work has not yet been completed. Recent years have 
seen a renewed endeavour to identify the fragments and make them available for further 
research, but it has become increasingly difficult to keep track of all the identifications, 
editions and re-editions. Therefore an attempt is made in this volume to bring together at 
least all the identifications in order to present for the first time a survey of the Sanskrit 
Buddhist literature of Central Asia and to allow scholars interested in a specific text to 
locate and scrutinize the manuscript evidence. The very rich German collection in Berlin is 
presented by Klaus Wille (pp. 187–211), the French collection in Paris by Jens-Uwe Hartmann and Klaus Wille (pp. 213–222), the British collection in London again by Wille (pp. 
8 It was found in Qizil on the northern branch of the Silk Road, and for reconstructing the cultural 
history and the local practice of Tocharian Buddhism it is of considerable importance. Inexcusably, the 
first scholars working on the find separated the single texts of this book and integrated them into their 
own system of classification according to contents. We owe its reconstruction to Lore Sander, who also 
gave an overview of the texts it contains: Lore Sander, “Tocharische Dokumente im Museum für Indische 
Kunst, Berlin,” in Bernfried Schlerath, ed., Tocharisch: Akten der Fachtagung der Indogermanischen 
Gesellschaft, Berlin, September 1990, Reykjavík: Málvísindastofnun Háskóla Íslands, 1994: 93–104d. 
Folio 53, described as blank and missing in Sander, was found by Klaus Wille: it is included in the 
Tocharian collection as no. THT 295 and contains two more poems (published as no. 295 in Emil Sieg, 
Wolfgang Siegling, Tocharische Sprachreste, Sprache B, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1953).
9 At the Stanford meeting there was sustained discussion of the various terms currently used for nonMahāyāna varieties of Buddhism, and while — not surprisingly — no consensus was reached, it was 
generally agreed that all these terms have their problems, some more than others. Here we use “Mainstream Buddhism” with no particular confidence that it is significantly better than any of the other 
candidates. More importantly, however, it was also agreed that the application of such terms, and also of 
nikāya labels (Sarvāstivādin, Mahāsāṃghika, etc.), calls for extreme caution, as we may too readily 
assume that they actually correspond to things “on the ground,” be they groups of people, institutions, 
clearly defined bodies of texts and so on, that is, we may be engaging in tendentious reification. 
Furthermore, nikāya affiliation and Mahāyāna orientation are not mutually exclusive: a member of the 
Saṅgha could, e.g., be ordained according to the Sarvāstivāda vinaya and also be a follower of the 
bodhisattva path, and thus the presence of Sarvāstivādin literature at a site is not in itself evidence for the 
absence of Mahāyāna.

--- Page 12 of 425 ---
xii
PAUL HARRISON AND JENS-UWE HARTMANN
223–246), parts of the Russian, the Japanese and the British collections by Shin’ichirō 
Hori (pp. 257–267), the fragments discovered in the area of ancient Khotan in recent years 
by DUAN Qing (pp. 269–278), and an overview of all collections and single fragments by 
Hartmann and Wille (pp. 247–255). When editing these papers, most of them furnished 
with separate and sometimes very long indexes, it became obvious that a digital tool which 
brings all these indexes together, facilitates searching and can easily be updated is an 
urgent desideratum.
The Central Asian manuscripts come from a region which was once under strong Buddhist influence, but they are archaeological finds. They represent historical documents, and 
they are no longer connected with any living tradition. The manuscripts from Eastern Turkestan were very poorly preserved, and what had survived was in an extremely fragmentary state, but they brought to light the Indian versions of works hitherto completely 
unknown or known only from translations into Chinese and Tibetan. These manuscripts 
came from a huge area and had been written during a long period of time, roughly between 
the 2nd and the 11th, if not even the 13th and 14th centuries.
4
The Gilgit Find
The situation was rather different with the next major manuscript find: it happened in one 
place, and it revealed a literature which was used in a much smaller area and in a shorter 
period of time. This was the famous Gilgit find in 1931 and 1938. All the manuscripts are 
written in Sanskrit and in two variants of the Brāhmī script, and, with one exception, all of 
them are written on birch bark, but on folios, not on scrolls; the one exception is written on 
palm leaf (the Sarvadharmaguṇavyūharājasūtra, cf. p. 114). On palaeographical grounds 
the manuscripts may be dated from the sixth to the eighth or even the ninth centuries. The 
state of preservation varies, but in general it is much better than that of the manuscripts 
from Central Asia: although most of the texts are not complete, there are many complete 
folios, and a number of texts can be reconstructed either fully or in large part. As far as 
they can be assigned to one of the nikāyas, they belong exclusively to the school of the 
Mūlasarvāstivādins. Besides “Mainstream Buddhist” works of this school, a fair number of 
Mahāyāna sūtras is represented. Works of the tantric tradition are rare, and so far only one 
small fragment of a work of the Buddhist epistemological school, namely of Dharmakīrti’s 
Hetubindu, has been identified (cf. p. 113). The Gilgit find is treated in great detail in 
Oskar von Hinüber’s contribution (pp. 79–135), which fully supersedes his previous 
ground-breaking study of 1979. Jens-Uwe Hartmann and Klaus Wille present related material which came to light only in the nineties of the last century, but may also go back to the 
Gilgit find (pp. 137–155).
5
Sanskrit Manuscripts in Tibet
During the same decade that the Gilgit cache came to light, another very important find 
happened. Again it was located outside the Indian subcontinent, but this time there was no 
need for archaeological support, since the manuscripts were properly stored in accessible 
libraries. Moreover, these libraries belonged to monasteries of a living Buddhist tradition, a 
tradition, however, which had lost its original ability to make use of Sanskrit and Middle 
Indic books and to read the various Indian scripts. Therefore the manuscripts had become 
little more than age-old objects of veneration going back to the glory days of Buddhism’s 
introduction into Tibet. For outsiders, however, they were to prove a powerful magnet. The 
Indian scholar and Buddhist Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana (1893–1963) had learned about the 
existence of Indian palm-leaf manuscripts in Tibetan monasteries, and this had roused his 
interest. Between 1934 and 1938 he undertook altogether four trips to Southern Tibet and

--- Page 13 of 425 ---
Introduction
xiii
visited several of the famous old monasteries in the province of gTsang, among them Saskya, Zhva-lu and Ngor, all of them former seats of Sanskrit learning and translation 
activity. During his trips Sāṅkṛtyāyana catalogued all the manuscripts he was able to see, 
copied some by hand, and photographed many others. He realized that this collection was 
priceless, and not simply because most of the manuscripts were complete and many of 
them were in rather good condition. Presumably they had been brought to Tibet by pious 
Tibetan pilgrims or by Indian refugee monks and scholars during a time when the second 
period of translating Indian literature into Tibetan had not yet come to an end and there 
was still continuous interaction between the Buddhists of India and those of Tibet. According to colophons and palaeography most of the manuscripts may be dated from the 
11th to the 14th centuries, i.e., to the final phase of Buddhism in India. Sāṅkṛtyāyana saw 
more than 350 manuscripts altogether. Apparently most of them had not served as the exemplars for the corresponding Tibetan translations; at present, there is only one manuscript 
which can be proven to have been used by the translators.10 Some of the texts listed by 
Sāṅkṛtyāyana had not been translated into Tibetan at all, and thus more works of Indian 
Buddhist literature surfaced whose existence had been forgotten for many centuries.
Most notable among them are texts of the vinaya of the Lokottaravādins, a sub-school of 
the Mahāsāṃghikas. An early Tibetan king had decreed that only works of the Mūlasarvāstivāda school be translated, and therefore the texts of the Lokottaravādins had been left 
untranslated, but at least the manuscripts were carefully preserved. No less sensational are 
the many texts of the epistemological school, practically unattested in all the other finds, 
but prominently represented among the Sanskrit manuscripts in Tibet. Apart from them 
there are Mahāyāna sūtras, a large number of Tantric texts, commentaries, several Mainstream Buddhist works of one or more schools, and some poetical texts. These are all 
written in Sanskrit, with the exception of the texts of the Lokottaravādins and a Dharmapada the school affiliation of which is not yet finally settled. These latter works are 
characterized by a considerably more Prakritic language, Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit in the 
narrower sense of the term.
Since in subsequent decades the originals remained inaccessible, scholars had to work 
with Sāṅkṛtyāyana’s photographs, or those taken soon after by Giuseppe Tucci, both of 
which in many cases are far from perfect and in some simply resist every attempt at 
deciphering them. Any hope of an eventual improvement in the situation vanished when 
the Cultural Revolution went into full swing and Tibetan monasteries were razed to the 
ground in the thousands, and it was feared that all the manuscripts had been destroyed as 
well. However, it turned out that they had fared much better than most of their owners. 
This became known in the eighties of last century when a secret list started to circulate 
among Western scholars. It was a rather simple list, drafted by WANG Sen, of 259 Sanskrit 
manuscripts which had been brought around 1960–61 from Tibet to the Cultural Palace of 
Minorities in Beijing, and on closer inspection it was found to contain many titles already 
described by Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana.11 The list confirmed what had already been known 
from Sāṅkṛtyāyana’s reports: the Tibetans had preserved non-Buddhist texts as well. There 
10 Cf. FAN Muyou, “Some Remarks on the Relationship between a Sanskrit Manuscript of the Advayasamatāvijaya from Tibet and its Tibetan Translation,” Annual Report of the International Research 
Institute for Advanced Buddhology 11 (2008): 375–380. For another possible case, the Vinayasūtravṛttyabhidhānasvavyākhyāna, see below, p. 298, note 25.
11 WANG Sen’s list is now published by Haiyan HU-von Hinüber as Appendix 1 of her paper “Some 
Remarks on the Sanskrit Manuscript of the Mūlasarvāstivāda-Prātimokṣasūtra Found in Tibet.” In Ute 
Hüsken, Petra Kieffer-Pülz and Anne Peters, eds., Jaina-itihāsa-ratna, Festschrift für Gustav Roth zum 
90. Geburtstag (Indica et Tibetica, 47), Marburg: Indica et Tibetica, 2006: 283–337. For further details 
see the remarks in Paul Harrison’s contribution to this volume, pp. 279–290, which presents in one 
alphabetized list all the Sanskrit titles in WANG Sen’s catalogue, as well as those inventoried by 
Sāṇkṛtyāyana and Tucci.

--- Page 14 of 425 ---
xiv
PAUL HARRISON AND JENS-UWE HARTMANN
were works on medicine and grammar, which were normally used in Buddhist circles, but 
there were also copies of the Bhagavadgītā, non-Buddhist poetry and examples of 
narrative literature like the Hitopadeśa.12
Upon the news of the preservation of all this material, scholars breathed a sigh of relief 
and then set out on another manuscript hunt.13 For various reasons it was not always 
entirely successful, but within the last two decades a steadily growing number of manuscripts has been studied and published, often as a result of collaboration between Chinese 
scholars and their Western or Japanese counterparts. To date there still exists no generally 
accessible catalogue of all the Sanskrit manuscripts in Tibet — hence Paul Harrison’s synoptic inventory on pp. 279–290 — but it has become very clear that neither Sāṅkṛtyāyana’s 
nor WANG Sen’s lists are exhaustive. A number of texts have been published which were 
not previously known from the available lists, as, e.g., the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa, to mention 
only the best-known example. The present state of affairs is dealt with in several papers: 
Saerji describes in detail, first, the history of the cataloguing of the Sanskrit manuscripts in 
Tibet and, second, the study of those manuscripts which are available as microfilms at 
Peking University (pp. 291–300); Helmut Krasser delineates the Sino-Austrian cooperation 
and its results (pp. 301–313); LUO Hong informs us about the history of the study of 
Sanskrit manuscripts in Tibet and, from a more general perspective, about the various cooperative projects presently going on (pp. 315–321); Yoshiyasu Yonezawa and Jundō 
Nagashima sketch the trajectory of the Sanskrit Manuscript Research Project at Taisho 
University in Tokyo and review its results (pp. 323–332). By a slow process akin to dripfeeding, Buddhist manuscripts from Tibet have continued to be released, and these papers 
show the degree of progress made by international scholarship on research into them at the 
time of the Stanford conference and in the years immediately following.
Recently, however, a very surprising development was made public. Towards the end of 
2012 several news programmes on Chinese television featured reports of a major project to 
locate and preserve Sanskrit manuscripts in the Tibetan Autonomous Region.14 Backed by 
the local authorities, involving a large team of researchers, and running for six years 
(beginning in 2006), the project had culminated that year in the lavish printing of a 61volume compendium of Sanskrit manuscripts in full-colour facsimile,15 accompanied by 
four large catalogue volumes.16 The technical quality of the reproductions appears to be 
extremely high. The reports spoke of the gathering of approximately 60,000 “pieces” (pre12 The extremely interesting colophon of the Tibetan translation of the Amarakośaṭīkā-kāmadhenu 
mentions even the Mahābhārata, the Harivaṃśa and the Rāmāyaṇa among the works collected in sNegdong monastery, cf. below, p. 299, note 28.
13 Some aspects of this quest, and what preceded it, are described in a very readable fashion in Ernst 
Steinkellner, A Tale of Leaves: On Sanskrit Manuscripts in Tibet, their Past and their Future, 
Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, 2004.
14 At the time of writing, the reports were still accessible on the internet at the following urls: http://
english.cntv.cn/program/china24/20120925/104046.shtml & http://english.cntv.cn/program/
china24/20120925/107278.shtml (for segments of the CCTV English-language news programme “China 
24,” 25 September 2012); http://english.cntv.cn/program/cultureexpress/20120924/106890.shtml, http://
english.cntv.cn/program/cultureexpress/20120925/106946.shtml & http://english.cntv.cn/program/
cultureexpress/20120926/106462.shtml (for three reports on the CCTV English-language programme 
“Culture Express,” 24, 25 & 26 September 2012), and http://tv.cntv.cn/video/C13425/0002ea84f1943ddc209587de0a4e5c44 & http://tv.cntv.cn/video/C13425/99e0d3d4f7143ddc209587de0a4e5c44 (for two 
parts of a longer feature in Chinese, broadcast in the XZTV “Zai Xizang” (“In Tibet”) series). We thank 
Kazunobu Matsuda for first drawing our attention to these reports.
15 Bod rang ljongs su nyar tshags byas pa’i ta la’i lo ma’i dpe cha kun btus par ma / Xizang zizhiqu 
zhencang beiyejing yingyin daquan 西藏自治区珍藏叶影印大全 (Chinese title: “Complete 
Collection of Photographic Reproductions of Palm-leaf Scriptures Preserved in the Tibet Autonomous 
Region”).
16 Bod rang ljongs su nyar tshags byas pa’i ta la’i lo ma’i dpe cha bris ma’i dkar chag / Xizang 
zizhiqu zhencang beiyejing xieben zong mulu 西藏自治区珍藏叶写本<目 (Chinese title: 
“General Catalogue of Palm-leaf Scripture Manuscripts Preserved in the Tibet Autonomous Region”).

--- Page 15 of 425 ---
Introduction
xv
sumably 60,000 folios or folio fragments), inscribed with works relating to many branches 
of knowledge, both religious and secular, including astronomy, poetics, and grammar.17 
The manuscripts are said to cover the period from the 7th to the 17th centuries, and they 
are written in many different scripts. The international significance of the project is repeatedly emphasized in the reports, which state that the catalogue is meant to demonstrate to 
the world the contents of the collections, in order to enhance scholarship in the future.
The production of these handsome, large-format volumes represents a major step forward in research on Tibet’s repositories of Indian manuscripts, a step we would hail more 
enthusiastically if it had been taken in broad daylight. Unfortunately, despite the abovementioned rhetoric, this publication is hardly one in any real sense of the word, since it is 
not public: at present the volumes are a closely-guarded secret, with access to them strictly 
limited. We have unconfirmed reports that the print-run was very small, and that few 
people are allowed to see them. Although some copies are held by institutions in Beijing, 
including the China Tibetology Research Center, to our knowledge no foreign scholar has 
yet been accorded the privilege of looking at them, let alone using them. This is obviously 
not a satisfactory state of affairs for all interested parties. While recognizing the rights of 
countries to control their own cultural property, at the same time we hope that eventually 
the fruits of all this industry will be shared with scholars outside the Peoples’ Republic of 
China, in line with the open and free exchange of information that ought to be the norm in 
academia. This would be all the more appropriate, given that the manuscripts in question, 
produced in India and, by the vicissitudes of history, preserved in Tibet, are part of the 
heritage of the whole world.
6
The birch-bark scrolls in Kharoṣṭhī script from Greater Gandhāra
The thirties of the last century witnessed not only the Gilgit find and the rediscovery of 
Sanskrit manuscripts in Tibet, but they also saw the foreshadowing of the next major finds, 
which were once again to happen in the utmost northwestern corner of the Indian subcontinent and in a region with climatic conditions similarly favourable to the preservation of 
manuscripts as those in the Central Asian Tarim Basin. In 1932 Sylvain Lévi published a 
paper on fragments found by Joseph Hackin in 1930 in a cave in the Bamiyan Valley near 
the smaller of the two monumental Buddha statues.18 The material was birch bark, and 
most of the fragments were written in various forms of Brāhmī ranging from the 3rd to the 
8th centuries, with a few also in Kharoṣṭhī. This was a first hint at sizable remnants of 
Indian Buddhist literature in Afghanistan, a hint which was confirmed, unexpectedly and 
impressively, by the next finds about sixty years later.
In 1995 the British Library acquired several birch-bark scrolls reportedly discovered in 
eastern Afghanistan, in the area of Greater Gandhāra, as the region soon came to be referred to by scholars. These scrolls were found to contain texts written in Kharoṣṭhī script 
and in a little-known language, Gāndhārī, and it soon became evident that they not only 
formed part of a literature considered completely lost, but also represented the oldest Buddhist (and indeed Indian) manuscripts preserved so far. Very soon they were being called 
the “Dead Sea Scrolls of Buddhism” in the media, and although the claim implicit in this 
designation seemed exaggerated, at least in the beginning, it nevertheless aroused public 
interest and guaranteed high prices in the market. Both factors may have contributed to 
17 From the reports one can catch only partial indications of the contents when the spines of the 
volumes are shown, e.g. vols. 9–12 contain Prajñāpāramitā mss (Sher phyin), 49–53 Language (sGra), 55 
Poetics (sNyan ngag), 56 Lexicography (mNgon brjod), 58–60 Vedas (?) (Rig byed), and 61 Fragments 
(Thor bu).
18 Sylvain Lévi, “Note sur des manuscrits sanscrits provenant de Bamiyan (Afghanistan), et de Gilgit 
(Cachemire),” Journal asiatique 220 (1932): 1–45. The first part of the paper deals with the fragments 
from Bamiyan (pp. 1–13) and includes photographs of four fragments.

--- Page 16 of 425 ---
xvi
PAUL HARRISON AND JENS-UWE HARTMANN
further scrolls being preserved after their discovery by local people in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan. To date, approximately 77 scrolls are known, and their age and contents fully 
justify the importance for the history of Buddhism implied by their comparison to the 
Qumran find. As was to be expected, they contain canonical texts, but also a rich exegetical literature. Probably the biggest surprise they gave scholars was the existence of several 
Mahāyāna sūtras, one of them a version of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā, often 
thought to be one of the earliest Mahāyāna sūtras of all.19 So far, there are only two nonBuddhist texts, a legal document and a work of the Rājanīti/Arthaśāstra type which is 
written not in Gāndhārī, but in Sanskrit. The scrolls are distributed over various collections, described in the contributions by Richard Salomon (pp. 1–17), Mark Allon (pp. 
19–33), and Harry Falk and Ingo Strauch (pp. 51–78). Collett Cox introduces a specific 
genre, the exegetical texts, which were an important development within Gandhāran Buddhism (pp. 35–49).
7
The Brāhmī manuscripts from Bamiyan
Hackin’s find in 1930 had already indicated the existence of Brāhmī manuscripts in 
Bamiyan, and this, too, was reconfirmed in the nineties. In 1996 the Norwegian manuscript 
collector Martin Schøyen acquired 108 fragments which reportedly came from a cave in 
Bamiyan, and this auspicious number formed the nucleus of a rapidly growing collection 
of such items, which finally contained several thousand sizable fragments and many more 
microfragments.20 Although it is claimed that the manuscripts come from one place, the 
collection is extremely diverse; the material comprises palm leaf, leather and birch bark, 
but there are no scrolls. Judging from the palaeography, the fragments range from the 2nd 
to the 8th or even 9th centuries; the overwhelming majority are written in Brāhmī, but 
there are also several hundred Gāndhārī fragments in Kharoṣṭhī, and — what is very 
unusual — all of these are written on palm leaf. Among the Brāhmī fragments, many are in 
Sanskrit, but there are a fair number of manuscripts written in a language best described as 
Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit in the narrower sense of the term. Most of the manuscripts were 
sold in London, but some passed through the hands of dealers in Japan; therefore they are 
now distributed over at least four collections, three of them known — the Schøyen 
Collection in Norway, and the Hirayama and Hayashidera Collections in Japan — and one 
belonging to an anonymous collector in Europe.21 Their common source is proven by the 
fact that fragments in the different collections can be shown to belong to the same 
manuscript or even the same folio.
Quite unlike the neighbouring Gilgit find, the Bamiyan manuscripts contain a surprisingly high number of fragments which have so far resisted any attempt at identification, 
although frequently enough text is preserved to allow a search for parallels in the existing 
19 Until recently we had Kharoṣṭhī fragments of six Mahāyāna sūtras: Aṣṭasāhasrikā, Bhadrakalpika 
(although the assignment of this text to the Mahāyāna is contested), Bodhisattvapiṭaka, Sucitti, Sarvapuṇyasamuccayasamādhi, and the Bajaur Mahāyāna sūtra described in this volume by Ingo Strauch. However, as we go to press, two more have been added to the number: an as yet unidentified text discovered 
by Kazunobu Matsuda and the Pratyutpannabuddhasaṃmukhāvasthitasamādhi, identified by Paul 
Harrison, Timothy Lenz and Richard Salomon. The total, now eight, is bound to increase.
20 Buddhist manuscripts of this type constitute only one part of the Schøyen Collection as a whole.
21 Provisionally termed “Collection of Private Ownership.” It comprises six fragments, one of them 
probably from a Bhikṣuprātimokṣavibhaṅga, another one from a version of the Dīrghilasūtra (corresponding to the Upakkilesasutta in the Majjhimanikāya or to the relevant passage in the Kosambakkhandhaka of the Mahāvagga). A third fragment belongs to the Sukhāvatīvyūha manuscript published in 
Jens Braarvig et al., eds., Buddhist Manuscripts, Vol. I (Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection I). 
Hermes Publishing: Oslo, 179–214, and preserves not only the end of this sūtra, but also the beginning of 
another, so far unknown, Mahāyāna sūtra, which opens with a dialogue between the Buddha and the 
bodhisattva Maitreya on the merit of producing a Buddha image. This fragment will be published in the 
next volume of the series Buddhist Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection.

--- Page 17 of 425 ---
Introduction
xvii
Sanskrit, Pali, Chinese and Tibetan corpora. Most probably none of these works is attested 
elsewhere, and this observation lends strong support to the image of the iceberg, of which 
we see only the topmost tip, i.e., we infer that only a tiny fraction of the Buddhist literature 
once existing in India has come down to us. Those manuscripts which have been identified 
contain works of Mainstream Buddhism, possibly of various schools; but among the 
vinaya texts those of the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādins prevail, which is consistent with 
Xuanzang’s reports on the Bamiyan Saṅgha. There are a number of Mahāyāna sūtras, some 
of which were previously known — apart from short citations in other works — only from 
their Chinese and Tibetan translations, e.g., the Bodhisattvapiṭaka, the Larger Sukhāvatīvyūha, the Ajātaśatrukaukṛtyavinodanā, and the Śrīmālādevīsiṃhanādanirdeśa. Fragments 
of commentaries are attested among the earlier manuscripts, but with very few exceptions 
it is difficult to identify them. Conspicuous is a folio of a work apparently written from a 
Mīmāṃsā standpoint, the only example so far of a non-Buddhist philosophical text from 
Bamiyan.
The Schøyen Collection is described by Jens Braarvig (pp. 157–164), the Hirayama and 
Hayashidera Collections by Kazunobu Matsuda (pp. 165–169). Lore Sander studies questions of palaeography from Greater Gandhāra to Central Asia and, in the second part of her 
paper, takes a closer look at the fragments found by Joseph Hackin in Bamiyan in 1930 
and then preserved in the Kabul Museum until its sack by the Taliban (pp. 171–186).
8
Manuscripts from Nepal
By far the largest numbers of Buddhist Sanskrit manuscripts are preserved in Nepal. Today 
they are distributed over public and private collections in the Kathmandu Valley and in 
collections all over the world which obtained manuscripts from Nepal since the days of 
Brian Houghton Hodgson at the beginning of the 19th century. Among them a considerable 
number of palm-leaf manuscripts are preserved, which have been studied for their 
contents, for the historical data which their colophons contain,22 for their illustrations,23 and 
for many other purposes. The older among those which provide historical information 
generally date to the 11th and 12th centuries, but there is the famous manuscript of the 
Skandapurāṇa, possibly the oldest dated Nepalese manuscript, which goes back to 810 CE 
and indicates that libraries in Nepal, unlike those on the Indian subcontinent, offered 
conditions which allowed books to survive at least twelve hundred years.
In line with the religious practice of the Newars, the overwhelming majority of the manuscripts contain texts relating to Tantric Buddhism. With very few exceptions, Mainstream 
canonical works of the various schools are absent,24 and the absence of Vinaya texts is 
conspicuous.25 A number of Mahāyāna sūtras have been preserved in Nepal, especially the 
22 Cf. Luciano Petech, Mediaeval history of Nepal (c. 750–1480), Roma: Is.M.E.O., 1958 (Serie 
orientale Roma, 10.3): 10f.
23 Cf. Pratapaditya Pal and Julia Meech-Pekarik , Buddhist Book Illuminations, Hong Kong etc.: Ravi 
Kumar Publ., 1988, and, more recently and with extensive bibliographical references, Karen Weissenborn, Buchkunst aus Nālandā: Die Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā-Handschrift in der Royal Asiatic 
Society/London (Ms. Hodgson 1) und ihre Stellung in der Pāla-Buchmalerei des 11./12. Jahrhunderts, 
Wien: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien, Univ. Wien, 2012 (Wiener Studien zur 
Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde, 77). See also Jinah Kim, Receptacle of the Sacred: Illustrated 
Manuscripts and the Buddhist Book Cult in South Asia, Berkeley: University of California Press, 2013.
24 Notable exceptions include the famous Mahāvastu of the school of the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādins and a manuscript possibly from a Madhyamāgama containing part of the Upālisūtra edited already by Sylvain Lévi (“Notes indiennes,” Journal asiatique 206 (1925): 26–35) and of the *Śikhālaka-/
*Sujātaka-sūtra and the *Apramāda-/*Upamā edited by Kazunobu Matsuda, “New Sanskrit Fragments 
of the Madhyama-āgama from the Cecil Bendall Manuscripts in the National Archives Collection, Kathmandu” (in Japanese), Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū 44.2 (1996): 868–862. 
25 Two rare exceptions are the oldest surviving Pali manuscript (cf. Oskar von Hinüber, The Oldest 
Pāli Manuscript: Four Folios of the Vinaya-Piṭaka from the National Archives, Kathmandu (Unter-

--- Page 18 of 425 ---
xviii
PAUL HARRISON AND JENS-UWE HARTMANN
so-called nava dharmāḥ, a famous group of nine sūtras, among them the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra already studied and translated by Eugène Burnouf. In the collections of 
manuscripts from Nepal there are texts of the epistemological school, there are commentaries, there are story collections of the Jātaka/Avadāna class, there are hymns (stotra) and 
there are poetical works of famous authors like Aśvaghoṣa and Haribhaṭṭa.
With the founding of the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project (NGMPP) in 
1970 research on and documentation of the written heritage of the Kathmandu Valley entered a new phase. Within forty years more than 110,000 manuscripts in Sanskrit, Newari, 
Nepali and other Indian languages — Buddhist, Hindu and secular — in public and private 
collections were microfilmed, and thus a priceless treasure became accessible to scholars 
worldwide. In 2002, despite the fact that there were apparently still thousands of Sanskrit 
manuscripts in Nepal which had not been filmed, the NGMPP came to an end and was 
replaced by a new project, the Nepalese-German Manuscript Cataloguing Project (NGMCP), with the aim of preparing a detailed and comprehensive descriptive catalogue of all 
the Nepalese manuscripts which the NGMPP had recorded. Previously it had only been 
possible to prepare a filing card for each manuscript after a rather cursory study, but in 
recent years, due to the much more detailed cataloguing work, a number of important texts 
have unexpectedly come to light.
Although Harunaga Isaacson, the present director of the NGMCP, participated in the 
conference in Stanford, he was regrettably unable to contribute a paper on the present state 
of research on the Buddhist manuscripts in Nepal. However, there are various digital ways 
of informing oneself about the project as such, about the catalogue and about recent finds 
and studies.26 Especially impressive is the list of publications based on manuscripts made 
available by the NGMPP/NGMCP.27 To a certain extent the importance of the Nepalese 
manuscripts is also highlighted in Shin’ichirō Hori’s discussion of their colophons (pp. 257
–258) and also in Michael Hahn’s contribution to this volume (pp. 333–346), which deals 
with a number of manuscripts from Nepal, mostly of poetical works, and illustrates how 
they contribute to establishing a philologically convincing text.
9
Pali Manuscripts
The study of Pali manuscripts goes back at least as far as that of Buddhist Sanskrit texts, 
and in 1826 the same Eugène Burnouf who studied the first Mahāyāna sūtra in an Indian 
language wrote also an important Pali grammar.28 Since then the knowledge of Pali manuscripts has vastly expanded, and it is far beyond the scope of the present volume to cover 
this important subject. Since Pali Buddhism has survived until today even more vigorously 
than the Buddhism of the Newars, manuscript production continued well into the 20th 
century, and there is a tremendous amount of valuable palm-leaf manuscripts preserved in 
countless monasteries, temples, libraries and private residences throughout Sri Lanka and 
suchungen zur Sprachgeschichte und Handschriftenkunde des Pāli II), Mainz: Franz Steiner Verlag, 
1991) and the so-called Bhikṣuṇīkarmavācanā manuscript of disputed school affiliation, edited already in 
1920 by C. M. Ridding and L. de La Vallée Poussin and again in 1993 by Michael Schmidt (“BhikṣuṇīKarmavācanā. Die Handschrift Sansk. c.25(R) der Bodleian Library Oxford.” In Studien zur Indologie 
und Buddhismuskunde: Festgabe des Seminars für Indologie und Buddhismuskunde für Professor Dr. 
Heinz Bechert, ed. R. Grünendahl, J.-U. Hartmann, P. Kieffer-Pülz, Bonn: Indica et Tibetica, 1993: 239–
288; for remarks on the school affiliation cf. M. Schmidt, “Zur Schulzugehörigkeit einer nepalesischen 
Handschrift der Bhikṣu-Karmavācanā,” Untersuchungen zur buddhistischen Literatur, bearbeitet von F. 
Bandurski e. a., Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1994: 155–164).
26 For a general overview see http://www.uni-hamburg.de/ngmcp/index_e.html; for the catalogue see 
http://catalogue.ngmcp.uni-hamburg.de/; for the Newsletter of the NGMCP see http://www.unihamburg.de/ngmcp/newsletter_e.html#nl6 (only nos. 3, 5 and 6 are available). (All pages last accessed on 
May 30, 2013).
27 See http://www.uni-hamburg.de/ngmcp/publications_e.html (last accessed on May 30, 2013).
28 Cf. de Jong 1987: 13f. (see above, note 1).

--- Page 19 of 425 ---
Introduction
xix
the Southeast Asian strongholds of Theravāda Buddhism. These texts urgently need to be 
listed and documented in order to prevent them from falling victim to the vicissitudes of 
climate, neglect and economic exploitation and to make them accessible for study and research. Better known and better preserved are the collections of Pali manuscripts in 
Western academic libraries,29 but even here a lot still needs to be done.
Peter Skilling in his contribution (pp. 347–366) presents exemplary thoughts on the Pali 
literature of Thailand and on its materiality, and he suggested to us that we include another 
paper, by Bhikkhu Ñāṇatusita, on Pali manuscripts in Sri Lanka with a specific focus on 
the manuscripts imported to Ceylon from Buddhist centres in Southeast Asia (pp. 367–
403). Both papers serve in a way as examples for what would be needed to do justice to the 
whole area of Pali Buddhism, and they highlight existing gaps rather than cover the field. 
Having to do with living traditions, they address present problems, for instance the oftentimes rather deplorable state of manuscript collections in Sri Lanka (pp. 370ff.) and the 
loss documented by comparison of present data with earlier surveys (p. 378). They also 
raise a number of interesting points worth reflecting on with regard to much earlier developments, such as the introduction of new scripts (p. 352), the change in meaning of the 
term Tripiṭaka (p. 361), and the ongoing impact of the imported literature in its new environment (p. 362). Skilling calls the Pali literature of Siam “doubly damned as a late literature preserved in even later manuscripts” (p. 364) and raises the intriguing — if not, to 
some, irritating — question (ibidem): “Which is more interesting or important, a seventeenth-century manuscript composed in Ayutthaya, or a second-century Gandhari fragment?” While the antiquities market has a ready and unambiguous economic answer to this 
question, scholars will take rather diverse views on questions of interest and importance. 
Looking at the papers of the present volume, readers may get the impression that their 
distribution tends to reflect the answer of the market. However, we would like to emphasize that this has not at all been our intention. The selection rather follows aspects of 
manageability, with a view to present the latest research and to stress collections which 
preserve singular material. For the understanding of a specific development at a given 
place and time, a late Pali manuscript may easily furnish more important information than 
a two-thousand-year-old manuscript fragment from Afghanistan.
10 Finding Texts
From the above survey it becomes obvious that by no means all collections of Buddhist 
Sanskrit manuscripts have been covered. There are simply too many private and public 
collections distributed all over the world and too many scholars studying them in order to 
list all the collections and describe all the recent contributions which have helped to 
advance our knowledge; thus, there must be important gaps besides the Pali manuscripts. 
One example would be the famous collection of Giuseppe Tucci in Italy, which was 
difficult to access until recent years, but is now, thanks to the efforts of Francesco Sferra, 
being made available to scholars in editions and excellent photographic reproductions.30 
29 Cf., e.g., for German collections Singhalesische Handschriften, part 1 and 2, Wiesbaden 1969 and 
Stuttgart 1997 (Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland XXII, 1 and 2) and Burmese 
Manuscripts, parts 1–7 (from part 5 with the title Birmanische Handschriften), Wiesbaden/Stuttgart 
1979–2010 (Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland XXIII, 1–7); for French 
collections Catalogue des manuscrits palis des collections françaises fonds des bibliothèques publiques 
et privées, établi par Jacqueline Filliozat, EFEO, Paris, et révisé par Jinadasa Liyanaratne et William 
Pruitt, Pali Text Society, Oxford (CD-Rom; 1972–2003); for English collections Tilman Frasch, “A 
Preliminary Survey of Burmese Manuscripts in Great Britain and Ireland,” SOAS Bulletin of Burma 
Research, Vol. 2, No. 1, Spring 2004; for Danish collections C. E. Godakumbura, assisted by U Tin Lwin, 
Catalogue of Cambodian and Burmese Pali Manuscripts, Copenhagen 1983 (Catalogue of Oriental 
Manuscripts, Xylographs etc. in Danish collections, II, 1).
30 Francesco Sferra (ed.), Sanskrit Texts from Giuseppe Tucci’s Collection, Part I, Roma; Is.I.A.O.,

--- Page 20 of 425 ---
xx
PAUL HARRISON AND JENS-UWE HARTMANN
Descriptions, title lists or catalogues exist for many collections, and by now there are 
various resources for accessing them. Already in 1992 Akira Yuyama presented a very 
useful overview,31 meanwhile updated in the bibliography prepared by Yasuhiro Sueki,32 of 
which a further updated pdf file is available for download.33
For the collections that are dealt with in this volume, the contributions below present the 
latest state of research. For the material from Gandhara, Central Asia and Gilgit in particular, all the identifications of texts and all the manuscripts and, more often, manuscript 
fragments in which these texts are preserved are listed. These lists of identifications provide excellent research material, for instance for a history, still to be written, of Indian 
Buddhist literature in Central Asia. They also demonstrate how consistent the collections 
of manuscripts from the Northern Route of the Silk Road are with each other, a point made 
already twenty years ago with regard to the Hoernle and Turfan Collections (cf. below, p. 
223). However, they also lead, especially in the case of the Central Asian collections, to 
several rather long and partly overlapping lists of texts which can be found in several collections. There is only one exception, namely the list of “Mahāyāna, Vajrayāna and related 
texts” on pp. 226–229, which unites Mahāyāna texts found in Khotan from all Central 
Asian collections. Some readers may find this tiresome, but we decided against collecting 
all the information into a general index or a general title list at the end of the volume, 
because the degree of completeness varies widely among the contributions, and because it 
is difficult to conceive how a reader could possibly benefit from an index which combines, 
e.g., Mahāyāna texts in the Stein Collection with the Pali texts listed by Bhikkhu Ñāṇatusita. Therefore, a scholar who is interested in a specific work and wants to establish whether 
its Indic text is extant will have to check the individual lists in each of the relevant contributions.
A certain degree of redundancy in this volume will be observed with the Sanskrit manuscripts from Tibet. Several scholars describe the history of and the research on this material 
from their specific viewpoints. Since the number of accessible texts is still rather limited, it 
is unavoidable that the same texts and the same editions are referred to in various places. 
However, in the light of recent developments (cf. above, pp. xiv–xv), we preferred to leave 
the contributions unaltered despite these overlaps, since, in a certain way, they illustrate 
not only the history, but also the politics of research and accessibility, which seemed to us 
no less interesting.
11 Closing Remarks
Although the papers in this volume are mainly concerned with describing the various 
manuscript collections and the research devoted to them, they often raise interesting issues 
of broader relevance. For example, Helmut Krasser discusses the notion of an Urtext with 
regard to the commentarial genre he is concerned with, and he reaches the conclusion that 
the peculiarities of some commentaries are much better explained once these commentaries are understood as a kind of student’s notes (pp. 305ff.). In such a case, one can still 
use this material to reconstruct a Sanskrit text, but reconstructing the Urtext of the work 
commented upon will become impossible. On p. 144 Jens-Uwe Hartmann mentions 
another important observation by Gudrun Melzer affording us for the first time a closer 
look at the actual practice of a scriptorium: modern technical means of reproduction and 
2008 (Manuscripta Buddhica, 1).
31 Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscript Collections. A Bibliographical Guide for the Use of Students in 
Buddhist Philology, Tokyo: The International Institute for Buddhist Studies, 1992 (Bibliographia Indica 
et Buddhica, Pamphlet, No. 2).
32 Bibliographical Sources for Buddhist Studies from the Viewpoint of Buddhist Philology, Tokyo: The 
International Institute for Buddhist Studies, 22008 (Bibliographia Indica et Buddhica, 3): 4–17.
33 At http://www.icabs.ac.jp/english/library_e/bibliography_e.htm (last update April, 2013).

--- Page 21 of 425 ---
Introduction
xxi
image manipulation provide much better images than earlier black and white copies and 
permit us to see marks which previously went unnoticed. This has led to the detection of a 
twofold pagination system in some manuscripts, revealing a copying process in which 
several scribes participated. Similarly, Michael Hahn draws attention to his discovery of a 
singular marking system in a manuscript of the Kapphiṇābhyudaya (p. 340).
A serious problem connected with the manuscripts’ status as antiquities is addressed by 
Jens Braarvig (pp. 162–163). Old manuscripts frequently found and still find their way into 
foreign collections as a result of activity considered illegal under present international 
agreements. Indic manuscripts are no exception here, and this raises ethical issues in dealing with them. Roughly ten years ago, Martin Schøyen, the owner of the Schøyen Collection, and Jens Braarvig, as the leading researcher of the group of scholars studying the 
Bamiyan manuscripts in the collection, became the main targets of a heated campaign in 
Norway against the acquisition and study of such material. As a result, several bodies, 
among them the Board of the International Association for Buddhist Studies, affirmed the 
right of scholars to study such manuscripts and to document the results to the best of their 
abilities. Yet, the illegal trade — and the money earned through it — is probably both a 
blessing and a curse. On the one hand, illegal raiders will be less inclined to throw away a 
manuscript or use it to fuel their camp fires once its monetary value is known, but on the 
other hand the knowledge of that value may provoke further searching, and such clandestine digging invariably destroys all the information about the find-spot and thus about the 
context of a manuscript, which for a scholar may be even more important than the manuscript itself. A similar tension between idealism and realism can be seen at the end of the 
chain which starts with the illegal excavation or the chance find in Afghanistan or Pakistan: once the manuscripts reach the dealers in London, Tokyo and elsewhere, they command such high prices that generally only wealthy collectors can afford to buy them, but 
for the most part, as far as we know, the manuscripts have not disappeared from view altogether, as they could well do. Many of these same collectors have shown themselves very 
sympathetic to scholarly concerns, and have been generous in allowing access to their collections and facilitating research on the items they have acquired. Thus knowledge advances, but not without cost. In a perfect world, perhaps, every such manuscript would be 
unearthed in the context of a scientific, properly documented archaeological excavation 
and then entrusted to the expert curatorial care of a public institution, preferably in the 
same country, offering open access to scholars — but alas we do not live in that world.34
To end on a less ambivalent and more positive note, one of the most encouraging 
features of work on Buddhist manuscripts over the last two decades has been its international and collaborative character. Although the aim of the Stanford conference was to 
bring together the principals of all the major manuscript projects currently underway, 
wherever in the world they might be located, these projects have tended in any case to run 
across national boundaries, with many researchers actively engaged in two or more of 
them. Although no discipline could be more closely identified with the humanities than 
classical philology, the modus operandi of Buddhist manuscript studies has come more and 
more to approximate that of the sciences. The solitary scholar poring over his or her manuscript in the lamplight has become a thing of the past, to be replaced by groups of researchers from many different countries working shoulder to shoulder, and, what is more, 
employing the latest technology. More often than not we find large numbers of people 
34 For some recent reflections on these issues see, e.g., James Curo, ed., Whose Culture? The Promise 
of Museums and the Debate over Antiquities, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009, and, with 
particular reference to Afghanistan, Juliette van Krieken-Peters, ed., Art and Archaeology of Afghanistan: 
Its Fall and Survival, Leiden: Brill, 2006, especially the article by Atle Omland, “Claiming Gandhara: 
Legitimizing Ownership of Buddhist Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection, Norway,” pp. 227–264, 
which takes a very critical perspective on some of the material dealt with in this volume.

--- Page 22 of 425 ---
xxii
PAUL HARRISON AND JENS-UWE HARTMANN
sitting around a table looking at screens together, as they manipulate and examine digital 
images of the manuscripts, and the results of their high-tech investigations and the 
vigorous discussions that accompany them are published in books and papers in which 
joint authorship is becoming commonplace.35 In this way the digital revolution has also 
revolutionized the study of manuscripts, and what those unnamed scribes wrote so 
painstakingly on birch bark and palm leaf, in some cases over two thousand years ago, in 
some cases also with no intention that it ever be read, is now being rapidly translated into 
code, for scholars the world over to access at the click of a mouse. Although we are not 
quite there yet, we look forward to the time when all this material, along with the research 
devoted to it, is freely available on the internet, and the barriers to the advancement of our 
knowledge of the rich literary heritage of Buddhism are cleared away.
In closing, we would like to acknowledge all those who made the 2009 conference 
which led to this volume possible. We are grateful to Dr Irene LIN and the Robert H. N. HO 
Family Foundation Center for Buddhist Studies at Stanford for organizing what proved to 
be a most stimulating and productive meeting. The enthusiastic participation of graduate 
student helpers Rafal Felbur, Chiew Hui HO and Nicholas Witkowski also helped things to 
run smoothly. As we prepared this volume for publication, we benefitted from the encouragement of Professor Ernst Steinkellner, and we thank the Verlag der Österreichischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften for accepting it into their distinguished series. Finally, we 
must record our gratitude to the conference participants and contributors for their patience 
over the last few years, as unforeseen technical difficulties and the pressure of other 
commitments combined to slow down the editorial process, and we also thank them for the 
care with which they updated their contributions to reflect further developments and 
publications since 2009. Three times the Jacaranda mimosifolia which can be seen in full 
bloom in the conference group photograph has shed its purple blossoms over the paving of 
Stanford’s Main Quad, and now, as it sheds them a fourth time, it is gratifying to see the 
conference at last bear fruit in this volume. 
Paul Harrison (Stanford)
Jens-Uwe Hartmann (Munich)
35 For younger and less well-established scholars in the humanities, however, multiple authorship can 
still be a risky career gambit, and one fears that promotion and tenure committees are likely to be slow to 
adjust their criteria to the new situation.

--- Page 23 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Manuscripts in the British Library, 
Schøyen and Other Collections
RICHARD SALOMON (SEATTLE)
1. Introduction: Buddhist manuscripts in Gāndhārī
Until recently, Buddhist literary texts in Kharoṣṭhī script and Gāndhārī language were 
virtually limited to a single famous manuscript,1 usually known as the “Gāndhārī Dharmapada”2 after the title of John Brough’s authoritative edition (Brough 1962). But the discovery of a group of twenty-nine fragmentary birch-bark scrolls containing various Buddhist texts in Gāndhārī, acquired by the British Library in 1995, revealed what had long 
been suspected by some Buddhist scholars, namely that an extensive body of Buddhist 
literature in Gāndhārī had existed in and around the early centuries of the Common Era.
This conclusion was subsequently confirmed by the discovery of many other manuscripts of the same or similar type, which are surveyed in this and in three other articles in 
this volume (by M. Allon, C. Cox, and H. Falk and I. Strauch). As a result, it is now clear 
that in the period in question the Gandhāra region and the adjoining areas of “Greater Gandhāra” nurtured a vast literature in the local language, including both translations of wellknown Buddhist texts from other languages and original local compositions. Indeed, it is 
now clear that Gāndhārī was at this time one of the principal literary languages of Indian 
Buddhism, and that the disappearance of this literature for nearly two millennia, until its 
recent partial rediscovery, was merely an accident of history. In its day, Gāndhārī probably 
played as important a role as Pāli, Sanskrit, and other more familiar languages of Buddhist 
traditions, and even had a special role of its own in that it was the language of the first 
Buddhist texts which were introduced into Central Asia and thence into China, thereby becoming the source of some of the earliest Chinese translations of Buddhist texts. Thus, 
although the Gāndhārī literary tradition died out in its homeland by about the fourth century CE, it lived on, in a sense, through its legacy as the earliest vehicle for the spread of 
Buddhism into East Asia. The rediscovery of a substantial corpus of samples of this lost 
literary tradition, though no doubt a tiny fraction of what once must have existed, opens up 
an entirely new dimension of the early history of Buddhist literature and doctrine which is 
still only beginning to be explored. 
The principal collections and individual manuscripts in Gāndhārī which have been 
recently discovered and made available to scholars are:3
1. The British Library collection: discussed in this article and in that of C. Cox in this 
volume.
2. The Robert Senior collection: discussed in the article by M. Allon in this volume.
3. The Bajaur collection: discussed in the article by H. Falk and I. Strauch in this volume. 
4. The “Split” collection: discussed in the article by H. Falk and I. Strauch in this volume.
5. A large group of fragments from Bamiyan, now divided among the Schøyen, Hayashidera, 
and Hirayama collections: discussed in this article.
6. A group of manuscripts in the Paul Pelliot collection in the Bibliothèque nationale de 
France: discussed in this article.
1 For information on other Gāndhārī manuscripts discovered before 1995, see Salomon 1999: 59–68.
2 Since two other manuscripts of the Dharmapada in Gāndhārī have subsequently been discovered 
(see Lenz 2003: part I, and H. Falk and I. Strauch’s article in this volume, pp. 60ff.), it is now preferable 
to refer to the first one as the “Khotan Dharmapada.”
3 For other recent surveys and overviews of Gāndhārī manuscripts, see Allon 2007a, 2008, Salomon 
2006a, 2006b, and Strauch 2008: 112–113. For a complete listing of the manuscripts, see the “Catalog of 
Gāndhārī Texts” by S. Baums and A. Glass (http://gandhari.org/catalog/).

--- Page 24 of 425 ---
2
RICHARD SALOMON
7. A single manuscript at the University of Washington: discussed in the article by C. Cox in 
this volume.
8. A single manuscript in the Library of Congress, Washington DC: discussed in this article.
9. A private collection of miscellaneous scrolls, temporarily referred to as the “new” 
collection: discussed in this article.
Unfortunately, the provenance, archaeological context, and circumstances of discovery of 
most of these manuscripts are uncertain or entirely unknown. Many of them first came to 
light in the antiquities market, where reliable reports are hard to come by. But it can be 
assumed with reasonable certainty that most of them come from the Afghanistan-Pakistan 
border area, and it is believed that some of the largest groups, such as the British Library 
and Senior collections, came from the region of Haḍḍa in Nangarhar Province of Afghanistan, in part on the basis of reliable testimony of past discoveries there of similar materials 
in similar circumstances (Salomon 1999: 20–21, 59–65). However, these and other such 
materials could also have come from other sites in border areas such as Bajaur, which is 
reportedly the provenance of the Bajaur collection.
Two of the largest groups of manuscripts, the British Library and Senior collections, 
were found in inscribed clay pots which had probably been interred in stūpas or elsewhere 
on the grounds of Buddhist monasteries. Another large group, the Bajaur collection, was 
reportedly found inside a “stone chamber,” which may have been a relic chamber inside a 
stūpa (Strauch 2008: 104–105). These data, uncertain and imprecise as they may be, 
suggest that in Gandhāra manuscripts were ritually interred in ways analogous to bodily 
relics of the Buddha or of revered teachers, being considered as a kind of dharma-relic 
(Salomon 1999: 69–86). In some cases, such as the British Library Collection, it appears 
that the manuscripts were considered to be “dead,” that is, they were worn-out old manuscripts which had been marked for ritual disposal after fresh copies had been made from 
them.4 But in at least one other case, namely the Senior scrolls, the manuscripts were 
evidently not only new when interred but were apparently written up as a “commissioned 
collection” (Allon 2008: 163; see also Allon 2007b: 4) with the express intention of being 
interred. In any case, it is clear that the manuscripts were conceived as relics which had to 
be ritually buried, and it is due to this practice that they have survived to the present.5 
Due to the fragmentary condition of most of the Gandhāran manuscripts and the extreme 
fragility of the birch-bark scrolls on which they are written, it is impossible to give precise 
figures as to the original number of manuscripts and separate texts involved.6 However, the 
total number of scrolls with Kharoṣṭhī/Gāndhārī texts now known is approaching one hundred, most of which are available for scholarly study, and the number of distinct texts contained within them is considerably greater than that. There are also close to three hundred 
4 This interpretation, however, has been questioned in Lenz 2003: 108–110, and the question remains 
open in the absence of firm archaeological data which might have clarified the issue.
5 For a general discussion of the issue, see Salomon 2009. On the treatment of “dead” scriptures in 
Buddhism and other religions, see now Myrvold 2010.
6 For example, separated portions of a single scroll may not have been recognized as such in the initial 
stages of conservation and cataloguing, so that the same text may be divided under two or more numbers 
in a catalogue. Despite the complications and confusion which this can cause, experience in this and 
other similar projects has shown that attempting to reorganize the original numeration of manuscript 
fragments often only makes the situation even more difficult. For this reason, original cataloguing numbers (most notably in the case of the very complex British Library Collection) have been retained in this 
and other relevant publications, so that, for example, some manuscripts are published under titles such as 
Gāndhārī Ekottarikāgama-type Sūtras: British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 12 and 14 (Allon 2001).
The number of “texts” is also difficult to specify because a single scroll or manuscript often contains 
more than one text, and conversely, a text may be divided among two or more scrolls. It is only in the 
process of detailed study that the situation with regard to these variables becomes clear, so that in many 
cases, particularly among the numerous very small fragments from the Bamiyan area, we still have no 
clear idea how many original texts and manuscripts are involved. For these reasons, the figures mentioned here are very approximate and tentative.

--- Page 25 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Manuscripts in the British Library, Schøyen and Other Collections
3
fragments, most of them very small, of Kharoṣṭhī/Gāndhārī texts on palm leaf, the majority 
from the Bamiyan area. The number of original manuscripts and texts which they represent 
is at this point impossible to determine, but there are probably at least several dozen. 
Imprecise as these figures may be, they do suffice to confirm — especially in combination 
with reports of the discovery in modern times of other such manuscripts, now lost — that 
there was in antiquity a vast Buddhist literature in Gāndhārī, of which what we have so far 
seen is no doubt only a tiny fraction.
The intention of this article is to present an up-to-date report on recent discoveries of 
Gāndhārī manuscripts and a survey of the progress made toward their study and publication, as well as a brief and preliminary summary of the results and insights derived therefrom. Although this overall survey will inevitably repeat much of what has been stated in 
previous general discussions and specialized studies by myself and others on Gandhāran 
manuscripts, it is meant to compile the relevant data in a single convenient location as well 
as to provide new information on the latest discoveries and developments in this fastmoving field. This article will concentrate on those collections or genres which are not 
discussed in the other articles on Gāndhārī materials in this volume, namely the nonscholastic texts of the British Library Collection, the Kharoṣṭhī/Gāndhārī manuscripts in 
the Bibliothèque nationale de France, the Bamiyan Kharoṣṭhī/Gāndhārī fragments, a single 
manuscript in the Library of Congress, and the “new” collection. As for the remaining 
groups, the Senior collection is presented by M. Allon, the scholastic, commentarial, and 
exegetical texts in the British Library collection and University of Washington manuscript 
by C. Cox, and the “Split” and Bajaur collections by H. Falk and I. Strauch. 
Shortly after the British Library’s acquisition of its collection of Kharoṣṭhī scrolls, an 
agreement was drawn up in 1996 between it and the University of Washington to promote 
their study and publication under the auspices of the British Library/University of 
Washington Early Buddhist Manuscripts Project (EBMP; now renamed University of 
Washington Early Buddhist Manuscripts Project).7 Subsequently, the EBMP contracted 
with the University of Washington Press to publish scholarly editions of texts from the 
British Library Kharoṣṭhī collection in a series entitled Gandhāran Buddhist Texts (GBT), 
of which six volumes have been published to date and several more are in various stages of 
preparation. 
In the meantime, several other groups of Gāndhārī manuscripts of similar types, most 
notably the Senior collection, came to light and were made available to the EBMP for 
study and publication. These further collections are also being published in the GBT series, 
with the exception of the Kharoṣṭhī/Gāndhārī fragments from Bamiyan, which are 
published in the Buddhist Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection (BMSC) series (Braarvig 
et al. 2000, 2002, 2006, forthcoming). The GBT is intended to present detailed scholarly 
editions and studies of the new texts in a convenient and consistent format, in order to 
avoid the disorganized and inadequate publication programs that have plagued some other 
major manuscript discoveries in India (for example the Gilgit manuscripts) and elsewhere.
7 See the EBMP’s website at www.ebmp.org/.

--- Page 26 of 425 ---
4
RICHARD SALOMON
2. The British Library collection
2.1 Research to date and future agenda
Of the twenty-nine “fragments”8 listed in the original catalogue of the British Library 
Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts presented in Salomon 1999: 42–55, nine have been published in full 
or in part9 in the Gandhāran Buddhist Texts series, as follows:
Fragment 1 (first text), Anavatapta-gāthā: GBT 5 (Salomon 2008b), part II.
Fragment 1 (second text), Avadāna collection: GBT 6 (Lenz 2010), chapter 5.
Fragment 2, Avadāna collection: GBT 6 (Lenz 2010), chapter 6.
Fragment 3, Avadāna and Pūrvayoga collection (fragment 3A) plus miscellaneous 
fragments (3B–L): GBT 6 (Lenz 2010), chapter 7 and appendix 4. 
Fragment 5A, miscellaneous verses: GBT 1 (Salomon 2000), appendix 4.
Fragment 5B, “Rhinoceros Sūtra” (Khargaviṣana-sūtra): GBT 1 (Salomon 2000).
Fragments 12 and 14 (first text), Ekottarikāgama-type sūtras: GBT 2 (Allon 2001).
Fragments 16 and 25 (first text), Dharmapada: GBT 3 (Lenz 2003), part I. 
Fragments 16 and 25 (second text), Pūrvayoga collection: GBT 3 (Lenz 2003), part II.
Fragment 21 (first text), unidentified text: GBT 6 (Lenz 2010), appendix 5.
Fragment 21 (second text), Avadāna collection: GBT 6 (Lenz 2010), chapter 8.
In addition, fragments 7, 9, 13, and 18, which proved to constitute a single text, have been 
edited by S. Baums in his PhD dissertation (2009) and will be published as a future volume 
of the GBT series. These fragments comprise a particularly long and interesting text, an 
exegetical commentary on a series of well-known verses with interesting structural and 
methodological parallels to the Peṭakopadesa and Nettipakaraṇa on the one hand and the 
Niddesa on the other.10
Thus within the foreseeable future nearly one half of the British Library manuscripts 
will have been published, including many of the longest, best-preserved, and important 
among them. In addition, two further editions of British Library texts are currently in 
preparation and are expected to be published in the near future:
1. A polemical Abhidharma text in fragment 28, being prepared for publication by C. 
Cox. 
2. Two Avadāna collections on fragment 4 (second text) and fragments 12 + 14 (second 
text), being edited by T. Lenz and J. Neelis. The publication of these texts will complete the Avadāna/Pūrvayoga corpus, which is among the most original and important material among the British Library scrolls.
Other texts which are designated as priorities for future publication include:
1. An expository Abhidharma treatise in fragment 10.
2. An exegetical commentary on a series of verses in fragment 4 (first text), similar in 
format and contents to the text of fragments 7, 9, 13, and 18 already edited by S. 
Baums.
3. A commentary on the Saṅgīti-sūtra in fragment 15. This text is of particular interest 
as representing a previously unknown type of commentary on a foundational sūtra,11 
and is being studied as a group project by the EBMP research staff at the University 
of Washington. In view of the considerable time which will be required to prepare a 
8 The term “fragment” was used in the initial cataloguing of the British Library collection with 
reference to what were then deemed to be the remnants of separate manuscripts. However, as explained 
in note 6, these fragment numbers do not always actually correspond to individual scrolls or texts. 
9 “In part” refers to those cases where a single manuscript contains two or more unrelated texts which 
are being published separately. 
10 See the description of this text in the article by C. Cox in this volume, pp. 39–40.
11 See the discussion in the article by C. Cox, pp. 36–39.

--- Page 27 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Manuscripts in the British Library, Schøyen and Other Collections
5
complete edition due to the length and difficulty of the text, the EBMP plans to 
successively publish partial editions comprising separate sections of the numerically 
arranged text.
Beyond these priorities, the EBMP intends eventually to publish further editions of some 
though not necessarily of all of the remaining texts. Some of the small and/or poorly preserved and partially illegible fragments such as nos. 11, 19, 22, 24, and 27 will not be 
amenable to publication as full editions, and may eventually be published in the form of 
annotated facsimiles instead of detailed editions with full documentation and commentary 
as in GBT volumes to date. The format of the full-text editions will also be adjusted in 
future in light of the ever-growing body of data. For example, the exhaustive compilation 
of palaeographic, phonological, and morphological data presented in the first six volumes 
of GBT will be gradually reduced in future volumes to summary and representative information as these topics become better documented and more generally accessible.12 
2.2 Evaluation
The early phase of the EBMP’s work on the British Library collection focused on texts of 
the Sūtra and related genres, of which the major representatives,13 namely the Dharmapada 
fragment, the Ekottarikāgama-type sūtras, the “Rhinoceros Sūtra,” and the Anavataptagāthā,14 have been edited and published. These texts were prioritized, first, for their interest 
as representing previously unknown versions of familiar texts or genres, with as many as 
four parallels in different languages,15 and second, because the existence of these parallels 
in better-known languages made them relatively tractable on the philological level. 
The study of these documents has led to a greatly enhanced knowledge of the Kharoṣṭhī 
script and Gāndhārī language,16 and this new information in turn provided the groundwork 
for the considerably more challenging study of the many texts in the British Library and 
other collections for which no direct parallels are known. The first steps in this direction 
were taken by Timothy Lenz, whose studies of several Avadāna and Pūrvayoga compilations in GBT 3 and 6 involved particularly difficult material consisting of extremely brief 
skeleton outlines of stories, usually fragmentary or partially illegible, and mostly without 
parallels elsewhere in Buddhist literature. Despite these difficulties, Lenz has succeeded in 
elucidating the characteristic features of Gandhāran Avadāna/Pūrvayoga literature, showing, for example, that in the Gandhāran tradition, in contrast to other Buddhist literatures, 
the genre label “Avadāna” refers to stories which relate events in the present (narrative) 
time whereas “Pūrvayoga” refers to stories of actions performed in previous lifetimes 
(Lenz 2003: 92). In their colloquial and extremely laconic style, the British Library 
avadānas seem to be the earliest surviving germ of what was to develop later into the 
formal literary genre of Avadāna and Avadāna collections.
Also of particular interest in the Gandhāran avadānas are the sporadic local geographical and historical references, including characters such as the “Great Satrap” (mahakṣatrapa) Jihonika and the “Commander” (stratega) Aśpavarma, both of whom were previously 
known from inscriptions and coins but not in Buddhist literature. Such topical references 
confirm the local origin of many of the Gāndhārī avadānas and illustrate how regional 
Buddhist literatures in antiquity incorporated historical circumstances into their texts. 
12 See also the discussion of this point in the article by M. Allon in this volume, pp. 28–29.
13 Some of the still unidentified fragments, such as fragment 26 + 29, may also contain sūtras, but this 
remains to be confirmed.
14 For the rationale of considering the Anavatapta-gāthā as a sūtra, even though it is not typically 
classed as such in modern scholarly literature, see Salomon 2008b: 14–18.
15 The results of the comparisons of such versions will be summarized below in §7.2.
16 See the discussion in §7.4.

--- Page 28 of 425 ---
6
RICHARD SALOMON
A third genre which is prominently represented in the British Library collection involves 
texts which can be broadly grouped as scholastic literature. Texts placed under this rubric 
have proven particularly difficult due to the almost complete absence of textual parallels or 
even of equivalent genres, their highly technical character, and of course the usual problems of fragmentary and poorly preserved texts. Nonetheless, considerable progress has 
been made, particularly by S. Baums in connection with the commentaries on groups of 
verses and by C. Cox on the Abhidharma treatises.17 
Overall, the British Library Collection appears to represent a random cross-section of 
the types of texts which were preserved in the library of a Gandhāran Buddhist monastery, 
or perhaps in the personal collection of a scholar-monk. In either case, it gives us some 
inkling of the texts and genres which were deemed worthy of preservation and study by the 
residents of such a monastery. The other manuscripts and collections discovered subsequently have both broadened and clarified this picture, as will be discussed in subsequent 
parts of this article.
3. The Bamiyan Gāndhārī fragments
3.1 Progress toward identification and publication
Among the thousands of Buddhist manuscript fragments found in the Bamiyan area (see 
the contributions by J. Braarvig and K. Matsuda in this volume), now divided among the 
Schøyen, Hirayama, and Hayashidera collections, there were several hundred fragments, 
mostly very small, of palm-leaf folios in Kharoṣṭhī and Gāndhārī. In most of them, the 
script and language reflect later stages of development (Salomon 2001), and a relatively 
late date has been confirmed by radiocarbon testing of three fragments (Allon et al. 2006). 
Although none of these techniques yields precise dates, it would appear that most if not all 
of the Bamiyan Kharoṣṭhī fragments date from around the late second century and the 
early or mid-third century CE. As such, they constitute the earliest component of the 
Bamiyan manuscript material as a whole, which dates from approximately the second to 
seventh centuries CE.
Many of these small fragments can be grouped together in terms of their contents and 
handwriting, there being some forty-seven discernible individual hands among the 
fragments. However, it is by no means always clear that all of the fragments in the same 
hand are part of the same text, so that at this point it is impossible to determine how many 
separate texts or manuscripts are represented. The number of distinct hands nevertheless 
indicates that at least several dozen manuscripts must have been involved. 
These factors have hindered the identification of the texts involved, but in the last few 
years significant progress has been achieved in this regard. The first text to be identified 
was the Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra, six small fragments of which were published in Allon and 
Salomon 2000. More recently, twenty-five of the Bamiyan Kharoṣṭhī fragments have been 
identified as part of a numerically arranged sūtra collection. The sūtras mostly correspond 
to ones in the last three sections of the Pāli Aṅguttaranikāya (the navaka-, dasaka-, and 
ekādasaka-nipātas), so that these fragments seem to belong to the later part of what was 
probably a complete manuscript of a Gāndhārī sūtra compilation equivalent to the Pali 
Aṅguttaranikāya and the Sanskrit Ekottarikāgama. These fragments are currently being 
prepared for publication in BMSC iv (Braarvig et al. forthcoming) by Chanida Jantrasrisalai, Timothy Lenz, LIN Qian, and Richard Salomon.
The text of the Bhadrakalpika-sūtra is represented by fifty-two small fragments of a 
single manuscript which together comprise some 15% of the entire corpus of the Bamiyan 
Kharoṣṭhī materials. These fragments have been edited for publication by Stefan Baums, 
17 See the further discussion in §7.2.

--- Page 29 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Manuscripts in the British Library, Schøyen and Other Collections
7
Andrew Glass, and Kazunobu Matsuda in BMSC iv. Although the Bhadrakalpika was 
immensely popular in Northern Buddhist traditions, being available in Tibetan, Chinese, 
Uyghur, Khotanese, and Mongolian translations, these fragments were at the time18 the first 
known text of the sūtra in an Indian language. 
The Bhadrakalpika fragments were also of special interest as the first specimen in 
Gāndhārī of a Mahāyāna text, or at least of a text which came to be associated with the 
Mahāyāna. Subsequently, single small fragments of two more Mahāyāna sūtras in Gāndhārī were identified among the Bamiyan Kharoṣṭhī fragments, and in this case, unlike the 
Bhadrakalpika, both are unquestionably pure Mahāyāna texts (Allon and Salomon 2010: 
7–9), thus proving beyond a doubt that Mahāyāna texts were present in Gāndhārī literature.19 The first of these contained a portion of the ninth chapter, the Vīryapāramitā, of the 
Bodhisattvapiṭaka-sūtra. The fragment has been edited and will also be published in 
BMSC iv (Baums, Braarvig and Salomon forthcoming).20 
The other Mahāyāna text is a small fragment from the Sarvapuṇyasamuccaya-samādhisūtra, which was previously known only from Tibetan and Chinese (T nos. 381 and 382) 
translations, and was not preserved in any Indian language, apart from brief citations in 
other texts. The fragment preserves a small portion of a dialogue between a sage named 
Uttara and the buddha named Vimalakīrtirāja, approximately corresponding to Taishō no. 
381, 979b12–28 and no. 382, 996a16–27. This text will also be published in BMSC iv 
(Harrison, Lenz, LIN and Salomon forthcoming). 
The fourth volume of BMSC will also contain an edition (Salomon forthcoming) of 
thirty-two fragments written by a single scribe (Bamiyan Kharoṣṭhī scribe 7) with a 
particularly distinct hand. The contents of these fragments are quite diverse, including a 
series of utterances by the Buddha immediately before his parinirvāṇa with partial parallels in several Mahāyāna sūtras, groups of verses of the Dharmapada/Udānavarga type, 
and narratives of the Avadāna or similar genre. Although direct or approximate correspondences were found for several individual verses and phrases, no parallel for the text as a 
whole has been determined. Thus it remains unclear whether these fragments represent a 
single text, perhaps a Mahāyāna sūtra containing Avadāna passages and quotations from 
Dharmapada collections, or whether they come from two or more separate and unrelated 
manuscripts written by the same scribe, or are parts of a single Sammelhandschrift containing several separate texts. It is hoped that their publication will enable experts to 
identify further parallels in other Buddhist literatures, if in fact they exist.
3.2 Preliminary evaluation
Like the British Library Collection, the Bamiyan Kharoṣṭhī/Gāndhārī fragments provide a 
random cross-section of manuscripts which were read and copied in a monastic institution 
in the far northwestern fringe of the Indian Buddhist world. And again like the British 
Library fragments, we find in them a mixture of familiar texts which are common to some 
or all Buddhist traditions and local materials which have not been preserved elsewhere. 
But an important difference is that whereas the British Library scrolls provide a snapshot 
of Buddhist literature at a relatively early phase of its development in Gandhāra, around 
the first century CE, the Bamiyan fragments reveal a considerably later stage, probably 
about the late second to the third centuries CE. Thus they bring to light the last phase of 
18 Recently a small fragment of the Bhadrakalpika-sūtra in Buddhist Sanskrit, apparently from the 
Khotan region, has been identified; see the article by DUAN Qing in this volume, pp. 270ff.
19 See the further discussion in §7.2.
20 Fragments of a later Sanskrit manuscript of the Bodhisattvapiṭaka-sūtra were also found among the 
Bamiyan fragments (Braarvig and Pagel 2006), and another complete Sanskrit manuscript has recently 
been found in Beijing. These new discoveries confirm the popularity of this text in early Indian 
Mahāyāna.

--- Page 30 of 425 ---
8
RICHARD SALOMON
Gāndhārī literature, in which Gāndhārī and Kharoṣṭhī were coming more and more under 
the shadow of Sanskrit and Brāhmī-derived scripts until they merged with them and disappeared entirely during the third century CE or not long thereafter (Salomon 2008c).
In view of the relatively late date of the Bamiyan fragments, it is not surprising that it 
was among them that the first specimens of Mahāyāna sūtras in Gāndhārī were found. 
However, single Mahāyāna texts have now been identified in three earlier groups of 
Gāndhārī manuscripts, as will be discussed below. Thus, pending the further identification 
of texts in the Bamiyan Kharoṣṭhī material and perhaps also in other collections, it remains 
to be seen whether Mahāyāna texts are in fact relatively more prevalent there. 
4. The Pelliot fragments in the Bibliothèque nationale de France, and other Central Asian 
manuscripts
The Paul Pelliot collection in the Bibliothèque nationale de France includes eight small 
fragments in Kharoṣṭhī script written on palm leaf which were found near Kucha on the 
northern rim of the Tarim Basim in the Xinjiang-Uyghur autonomous region of the 
People’s Republic of China. They were published in full in Salomon 1998, but no parallel 
texts have been found for any of them. The eight fragments, some of which contain only a 
few letters, belong to at least four and possibly as many as seven different original manuscripts. Among the ones which contain enough text to permit any approximate determination of their contents, the majority seem to be narrative, perhaps belonging to the Avadāna 
or a similar genre. Only one fragment (no. 8) contains a scholastic text, perhaps a commentary or Abhidharma treatise. A particularly interesting item is the best preserved fragment 
(no. 1), which is composed, not in Gāndhārī, but rather in more or less standard Sanskrit 
written in Kharoṣṭhī script. In general, the palaeographic and linguistic features of the 
Pelliot fragments suggest that they belong to the middle period of Gāndhārī literature, 
roughly around the second century, although in view of their very meager remains this is 
far from certain.
In addition to the Pelliot fragments, and of course the well-known Khotan Dharmapada, 
several other small fragments of Gāndhārī manuscripts have been found at various places 
in Xinjiang (Salomon 1999: 59). The combined evidence of these finds suffices to establish 
that a significant body of Buddhist literature in Gāndhārī existed in the oases of the Tarim 
Basim as well as in Gandhāra and adjoining regions in the early centuries of the common 
era. The presence among them of a manuscript in Sanskrit written in Kharoṣṭhī script is 
consistent with the testimony of a few other such specimens in manuscripts and inscriptions from Gandhāra and Central Asia, including a manuscript containing Rājanīti/Arthaśāstra-type verses in the Bajaur collection (Strauch 2008: 125–127; see also pp. 71–72 in 
this volume). This new material thus confirms that there existed an established tradition of 
writing Sanskrit texts in Kharoṣṭhī in the regions where it was the predominant script, and 
it may be hoped that further specimens of such texts will turn up in the future.
5. Library of Congress scroll
A single scroll of unknown provenance was acquired by the Library of Congress in 
Washington DC in 2006. It contains a single incomplete text which has been tentatively 
designated as the *Bahubuddha-sūtra on the basis of close parallels to a Buddhist Sanskrit 
sūtra of that name which is incorporated in the Mahāvastu (III.242.5–248.2). The text, 
composed in alternating verse and prose, presents a biographical summary of the fifteen 
Buddhas from Dīpaṅkara to Maitreya, describing their courses of training (caria = Sanskrit 
caryā), lifespans, the eons in which they lived, social class (brahman or kṣatriya), assemblies, and duration of their dharma-teaching. Thus it belongs to a well-attested genre of

--- Page 31 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Manuscripts in the British Library, Schøyen and Other Collections
9
collective Buddha biographies such as the Mahāvadāna-sūtra/Mahāpadāna-sutta and 
Bhadrakalpika-sūtra. Although the closest textual parallels are found in passages which 
are incorporated into larger collections such as the Mahāvastu and the Fó bĕnxíng jí jīng 
佛本行集經 (“Sūtra of the Previous Lives of the Buddha,” Taishō no. 190), the format of 
the *Bahubuddha-sūtra scroll suggests that it was being presented there as a separate text.
The Library of Congress scroll was subjected to radiocarbon testing in 2007 which 
yielded a range of dates (97.5% probability) between 206 BCE and 59 CE.21 The early part 
of this span seems implausibly early, but this test establishes beyond a reasonable doubt 
that the scroll was written, at the latest, in or around the first half of the first century CE, 
and that it therefore belongs to the early phase of the Gandhāran manuscript tradition. This, 
along with the even earlier range yielded by a test of one of the scrolls in the “Split” 
collection (184–46 BCE; see the article by H. Falk and I. Strauch in this volume, p. 54), indicates that this tradition goes back at least to the first century BCE.22
6. The “new” collection
Another collection of Gāndhārī manuscripts on birch-bark scrolls is currently in private 
hands but has been made available for inspection. The provenance is unknown other than 
that it was reported to have been found somewhere in Afghanistan and to have been kept 
for some years in a private collection in Kabul. Because most of the scrolls have not yet 
been unrolled and conserved and because many of them are in very fragmentary condition, 
it is not even possible to determine the number of separate scrolls, although there appear to 
be at least a dozen and possibly considerably more than that. 
Among the scrolls that have been conserved and read in a preliminary fashion, three are 
of particular interest. One of them contains a set of numbered verses, mostly in an unidentified non-standard metre with fifteen syllables per quarter. This text may be a stotra to various Buddhas, perhaps referring to the encounters with them of the Bodhisattva (i.e., the 
future Śākyamuni), since two of the three concluding verses mention the Buddhas Vipaśyin, Śikhin, Viśvabhū, and Konākamuni. 
Another fragment contains five verses parallel to those of the Mahāviyūha-sutta, one of 
the sūtras of the Pāli Aṭṭhakavagga (incorporated into the Suttanipāta, verses 905–908). 
The “Split” collection also includes a scroll with verses corresponding to those of the 
Aṭṭhakavagga (verses 841–844 on the recto and 966–968 on the verso), which appears to 
be written in a very similar hand.23 Thus these two fragments are evidently parts of the 
same manuscript of a Gāndhārī version of the Aṭṭhakavagga/Aṣṭakavarga. This implies that 
the manuscripts in this collection actually belong to the same group as the “Split” collection, which has apparently been divided into two or more parts24 in modern times.
A third text in the new collection consists of some scattered fragments of a Mahāyāna 
sūtra which corresponds to a text, hitherto known only in Chinese and Tibetan, describing 
the miraculous encounter of the infant son of the lay-follower Vimalakīrti with the Buddha. 
This child’s name is given in one of the Chinese translations of the sūtra (Taishō no. 479 
Shànsī tóngzĭ jīng 善思童子經) as Shànsī 善思 = *Sucitta, which agrees with the name 
suciti applied to him in the new manuscript. Thus this is yet another definite example of a 
Mahāyāna sūtra in Gāndhārī, but unlike the several later examples in the Bamiyan 
fragments, the palaeographic and linguistic features of this manuscript indicate that it 
belongs to the early or middle phases of Gāndhārī literature. The “Split” collection, which 
seems to be part of the same group as this one, contained another Mahāyāna sūtra, a 
21 All radiocarbon (14C) dates cited in this article are 2σ calibrated ranges.
22 See the further discussion of the dates of the Gāndhārī manuscripts in §7.1.
23 See the article by H. Falk and I. Strauch in this volume, p. 61.
24 See again the article by H. Falk and I. Strauch, p. 54.

--- Page 32 of 425 ---
10
RICHARD SALOMON
Prajñāpāramitā text which has been radiocarbon-dated to 25–43 CE (14.3% probability) 
or 47–147 CE (81.1% probability), so that the *Sucitti-sūtra could be roughly contemporaneous with the Prajñāpāramitā manuscript, dating to some time in the first or early second 
century. It could conceivably be even older, in view of the surprisingly early result, noted 
above, of 184–46 BCE for another manuscript in the “Split” collection. In any case, it is 
certain that the *Sucitti-sūtra belongs among the earliest manifestations of Mahāyāna texts 
in Gandhāra known to date.
7. A new perspective on Buddhist literature in Gāndhārī
7.1 Dating the Gāndhārī manuscripts
I originally proposed a date for the British Library collection in the first half of the first 
century CE (Salomon 1999: 141–155) on the basis of a combination of textual, historical 
and epigraphic evidence. Some of the links in the chain of argument were admittedly 
tenuous, and I therefore did not rule out a later date in the second century.25 Since then, the 
discovery of many other Gāndhārī mss and the radiocarbon tests carried out on some of 
them have clarified and broadened their historical context. These tests, combined with 
palaeographic and linguistic indications, suggest a date for the Senior manuscripts around 
the first half of the second century CE, while the Bamiyan Gāndhārī fragments are clearly 
later, probably not earlier than the latter part of the second century. One of the Bhadrakalpika-sūtra fragments from Bamiyan produced the latest date range, 210–417 CE (Allon 
et al. 2006: 290), which seems to indicate that Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts were being produced 
until at least the early third century.
More recent radiocarbon tests, however, have yielded more surprising results at the 
other end: a range from the second to the first half of the first century BCE for a scroll in 
the “Split” collection, and from the second century BCE to the first half of the first century 
CE for the Library of Congress scroll. It is thus firmly established that the Gāndhārī manuscript tradition goes back at least to the late first century BCE. The date of the scrolls in the 
British Library collection remains uncertain, since it has not been possible to perform 
radiocarbon tests on them, but the previously proposed date in the early first century CE is 
supported, though not proven, by the new evidence of similar Gāndhārī manuscripts from 
this period. All in all, the overall span of dates for the known Gāndhārī manuscripts 
extends for at least three centuries, from the latter half of the first century BCE to the early 
third century CE, and quite possibly further in either direction.
7.2 Genres and canons of Gāndhārī literature
Not unexpectedly, many of the generalizations and preliminary conclusions presented in 
Salomon 1999 about Buddhist literature in Gāndhārī on the basis of the British Library 
collection only have turned out to be premature if not completely wrong. For example, the 
absence of Vinaya texts from the British Library collection (Salomon 1999: 163–164) does 
not mean that Vinaya texts were not preserved in written form at the time, as was hypothesized there. For a Prātimokṣa-sūtra manuscript and a karmavācanā text of approximately 
similar date has now come to light in the Bajaur collection (Strauch 2008: 116–118), and 
the Senior collection contains five narrative texts concerning the life of the Buddha whose 
closest parallels are to be found in Vinayavastu texts.26 Nonetheless, Vinaya texts are still 
very much in the minority among the currently known Gandhāran manuscripts, in which 
texts and genres associated with the Sūtra- and Abhidharma-piṭakas, along with various 
types of non-canonical or paracanonical texts, strongly predominate.
25 This later date was preferred by Falk (2000: 211).
26 See the article by M. Allon in this volume, pp. 25–26.

--- Page 33 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Manuscripts in the British Library, Schøyen and Other Collections
11
Similarly, with reference to the absence of Mahāyāna texts among the British Library 
manuscripts I opined (Salomon 1999: 178) that “[i]t remains to be seen in what way, if any, 
the new manuscripts may contribute to this issue [viz., the theory of an early Mahāyāna 
presence in Gandhāra], but it now seems most likely that any such contribution will be a 
negative, or at best an indirect, one. Of course, further analysis and possible future discoveries could well change the picture, but as matters stand at this point, the British 
Library scrolls do not offer any support for the hypothesis of a relatively early origin for 
Mahāyāna Buddhism.”27 Obviously, subsequent discoveries have changed the picture, 
since at least five indisputably Mahāyāna texts (not including the Bhadrakalpika-sūtra 
from Bamiyan, which in the opinion of some scholars is not a true Mahāyāna sūtra) have 
now turned up, not only among the later Bamiyan Kharoṣṭhī fragments but also in the 
relatively early materials from Bajaur, the “Split” collection, and the “new” collection. 
Thus the silence of the British Library materials on this point turns out to have proven, as 
usual, nothing. 
But as in the case of the Vinaya material, Mahāyāna texts are still a distinct minority in 
the extant Gāndhārī literary corpus as a whole, and all of the specimens were found 
together with larger numbers of “Mainstream” texts. Thus they do not give the impression 
that the Mahāyāna was then functioning as an independent institution. Rather, it would 
seem that Mahāyāna texts were being studied along with Mainstream texts in Gandhāran 
monasteries, and were not yet perceived to be in conflict with them or marginalized by 
them. Therefore we seem to be getting glimpses of an early formative period which 
preceded the later development of the Mahāyāna into distinct institutional identities and 
doctrinal positions.28 
As for the better represented genres of Buddhist literature in Gāndhārī, the Mainstream 
or Āgama sūtras are generally the most consistent with parallel texts in other Buddhist 
literatures, as would be expected. The majority of the sūtras now known in Gāndhārī have 
more or less direct parallels in one, or more often in several other canons in Pāli, Sanskrit, 
Chinese, and (less frequently) Tibetan, and even those which lack exact parallels usually 
have a partial similarity to sūtras preserved elsewhere. For example, the situation with 
regard to the three “Ekottarikāgama-type sūtras” in the British Library Collection is typical: two of the sūtras have parallels in Pāli, Chinese, and/or Sanskrit, while one lacks a 
direct parallel (Allon 2001: 224). Similarly, of the four Saṃyuktāgama-sūtras on Senior 
scroll 5, three have direct parallels in other Saṃyuktāgama collections in Pāli, Chinese, 
and/or Tibetan, while the fourth has only partial parallels (Glass 2007: 51; M. Allon in 
Glass 2007: 9–10).29
However, it has not proven possible, at least so far, to determine any consistent pattern 
with regard to the text-historical relationship of the Gāndhārī sūtras to their parallels in 
other canons and languages. A given Gāndhārī sūtra will typically resemble one of the 
parallel texts in some regards but a different parallel in others; see, for example, the discussions of the relationship between the Gāndhārī version of the “Rhinoceros Sūtra” and 
its Pāli and Sanskrit parallels in Salomon 2000: 38–48, and of the Ekottarikāgama-type 
sūtras and their various parallels in Allon 2001: 26–40.30 Thus it is usually not possible to 
say that a particular Gāndhārī sūtra is consistently closer to, for example, its Chinese 
correspondent than to the Pāli one. In other words, there is no distinct special relationship 
27 This position was still reflected in the brief survey of Buddhist literature in Gāndhārī in Salomon 
2004.
28 See Allon and Salomon 2010: 11–18 for a fuller discussion of these issues.
29 This explains why the great majority of the texts in the Senior collection, which consists mostly of 
sūtras, have been identified. This contrasts with the other large collections with more diverse contents, for 
which parallels have not yet been located for many or even most of the texts. 
30 Similar discussions may be found in the relevant chapters of the other volumes in the GBT series.

--- Page 34 of 425 ---
12
RICHARD SALOMON
between the Gāndhārī Sūtra corpus, or even for the most part of the specific sūtras within 
it, and any of the other Sūtra-piṭakas. Rather, the connections are complex, interwoven, 
and seemingly unpredictable. All in all, one gets the impression that we are operating at a 
stage before Sūtra canons were definitively fixed and authoritatively edited, so that a 
considerable degree of fluidity and flexibility still prevailed with regard to the structure 
and wording of particular sūtras,31 as well as to their inclusion and arrangement within 
corpora such as the Ekottarikāgama/Aṅguttaranikāya or Saṃyuktāgama.
This is not to say, however, that such compilations did not exist in Gandhāra and elsewhere at this period. For example, the arrangement of the Saṃyuktāgama sūtras in the 
Senior collection shows that they were drawn from underlying collections whose structures 
had significant similarities to those of other Saṃyuktāgamas (Glass 2007: 42–50). Parallels 
to texts belonging to all of the five standard Nikāya divisions of the Pāli Sutta-piṭaka are 
represented in the various Gāndhārī collections.32 Sūtras corresponding to ones classed in 
the Khuddakanikāya in Pāli are particularly well-represented in Gāndhārī, especially in the 
British Library collection (Salomon 1999: 159–161) but also in the “Split” and “new” 
collections. Particularly prominent among this group are the three Gāndhārī manuscripts of 
the Dharmapada now known.33 The Anavatapta-gāthā, which was probably also classified 
as a Khuddakanikāya/Kṣudrakāgama sūtra (Salomon 2008: 18), is also extant in manuscripts from two separate collections (British Library and Senior).
Thus it is clear that comprehensive collections of Āgama sūtras existed in Gāndhārī, at 
least in oral form; the question is when they began to be written out in full. The recent 
discovery among the Bamiyan fragments of portions of what was probably a complete 
manuscript of a Sūtra compilation parallel to the Ekottarikāgama/Aṅguttaranikāya provides the first direct evidence that such larger compilations were extant in complete written 
texts. But it must be noted that these fragments, like the Bamiyan material in general, date 
from the later phase of Gāndhārī manuscripts, probably from the late second century CE at 
the earliest. Earlier Gāndhārī manuscripts, that is, those dating from the first half of the 
second century CE or earlier, do include single Sūtra texts and Sūtra anthologies, but 
nothing that can be definitely identified as a complete canonical Āgama. Such complete 
written collections may have existed at that time, but if so, they have not yet come to light. 
But in any case, we do now know that at least by the later period of Gāndhārī literature 
complete canonical Sūtra collections had come to be preserved in written form.
The situation with regard to parallel texts and canons is very different in connection with 
texts outside the Sūtra genre. Among Abhidharma texts and non-canonical scholastic 
literature, parallels are simply not to be found, though this is hardly surprising since the 
Abhidharma-piṭaka is the one which typically shows the greatest variation, by far, among 
different Buddhist canons. The situation with the Saṅgīti-sūtra commentary in the British 
Library collection is typical. With regard to its overall structure, method, and contents34 it 
has virtually nothing in common with the two other extant commentaries on the Saṅgīti, 
namely the Theravādin Pāli commentary on the Dīghanikāya, the Sumaṅgalavilāsinī, and 
the Sarvāstivādin Sanskrit commentary Saṅgīti-paryāya. Materials in this category thus 
constitute a particularly important aspect of the ongoing rediscovery of the Buddhist 
literature of Gandhāra, providing glimpses into an early stage of development of a pre31 Compare the comments in Strauch 2008: 115.
32 See the convenient summary chart in Strauch 2008: 113, fig. 9.
33 The Khotan Dharmapada (Brough 1962), the British Library Dharmapada (Lenz 2003: part I), and 
the newly discovered Dharmapada manuscript in the “Split” collection (see the article by H. Falk and I. 
Strauch in this volume, p. 60).
34 Here I refer to the form of the commentary itself, not to the root text of the sūtra underlying it, 
which is very close to that of the Dharmaguptaka Dīrghāgama preserved in Chinese translation (see 
§7.3). The contrast between the independent textual status of the commentary and the close parallel for 
the sūtra text is illustrative of the contrast being made here.

--- Page 35 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Manuscripts in the British Library, Schøyen and Other Collections
13
viously almost unknown scholastic tradition. For example, the structural and conceptual 
resemblances of Gandhāran commentaries to the semi-canonical Pāli exegetical texts Nettippakaraṇa and Peṭakopadesa suggest that these texts, whose presence in the Pāli canon 
has long been suspected of being intrusive (von Hinüber 1996: 80, 82), may have derived 
from Gandhāran commentarial traditions, and might even have been translated into Pāli 
from Gāndhārī archetypes.35
Besides the genres discussed above, several other familiar ones are represented among 
the Gandhāran texts, although like the major genres they are typically unevenly distributed 
among the various groups of manuscripts.36 For example, the related Avadāna and Pūrvayoga genres are richly represented among the British Library scrolls, but elsewhere have 
only been found to date in the “Split” collection and apparently among the Pelliot fragments. Stotras are represented in the British Library, Bajaur, and possibly also the “new” 
collection, suggesting that this genre was already popular in early Gandhāra. The Bajaur 
collection also includes single examples of several genres which were not previously 
attested among Gāndhārī manuscripts: rakṣā, rājanīti, a mnemonic poem based on the 
Arapacana syllabary, and a secular document.37 
7.3 School affiliations
In general, it is difficult to establish firm affiliations of Gāndhārī manuscripts with 
particular schools, among other reasons because of the aforementioned instability of the 
forms of individual texts in the early canons or proto-canons. This being said, the clearest 
indications by far of a distinct school affiliation for any of the collections of Gāndhārī 
manuscripts involves the British Library Collection, where we have strong indications that 
at least some of the scrolls belonged to the Dharmaguptaka tradition. They were found 
inside a clay pot which had originally been donated to “the Dharmaguptakas” (dhamaüteaṇa) 
for use as a vessel for water, but which was subsequently reused as a container for the 
interment of the manuscripts (Salomon 1999: 80, 243–247). Moreover, the commentary on 
the Saṅgīti-sūtra is based on a root text which is very closely related to that of the Chinese 
translation of the Dīrghāgama, generally believed to belong to the Dharmaguptaka school, 
but which is very distinct from other surviving versions of the Saṅgīti-sūtra (Salomon 
1999: 171–174).38 Thus it is reasonable to conclude that at least some of the manuscripts in 
the British Library Collection reflect the texts and traditions of the Dharmaguptaka school, 
and that the collection as a whole reflects the holdings of a Dharmaguptaka monastery or a 
resident thereof.39
35 The discovery by Zacchetti (2002) that An Shigao’s Yīn chí rù jīng  (T 603) corresponds to 
the sixth chapter of the Peṭakopadesa supports the possibility of a Gāndhārī origin, or at least a Gāndhārī 
manifestation, for this class of texts. Although he does not refer specifically to Gāndhārī, Zacchetti 
concludes that “The fact that chapter 6 was translated by An Shigao, who presumably reached China via 
the Silk Road, seems to corroborate the hypothesis that the Peṭakopadesa was originally composed in 
Northern India” (p. 92).
36 For summaries of genres attested in Gāndhārī literature in general, see Salomon 2004 (though no 
longer up to date) and the chart in Strauch 2008: 113, fig. 9. For the particularly wide variety of genres in 
the Bajaur collection, see Strauch 2008: 113–127.
37 Secular documents in a local variety of Gāndhārī are attested in very large numbers from Central 
Asia, but this is the first example from Gandhāra itself. 
38 See also the article by C. Cox in this volume, pp. 36–39.
39 In this connection, it may be significant that the doctrinal positions reflected in the polemical 
Abhidharma treatise in British Library fragment 28 are stated in explicit opposition to those of a branch 
of the Sarvāstivāda school (see the article by C. Cox in this volume, pp. 43–46). Since the Sarvāstivādins 
and the Dharmaguptakas appear on the basis of inscriptional data to have been among the most dominant 
schools in Gandhāra at the time in question (Salomon 1999: 175–176), it is possible, though far from 
certain, that the positions espoused in British Library fragment 10 represent those of the Dharmaguptaka 
residents of the monastery from which it came.

--- Page 36 of 425 ---
14
RICHARD SALOMON
Such indications are however much harder to come by among the other Gāndhārī texts 
and collections. In the Senior collection there are some indications of possible Dharmaguptaka affiliation, particularly among the Vinaya narratives.40 Some other Sūtra texts, 
such as the Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra from Bamiyan (Allon and Salomon 2000: 271–273) 
and the Śrāmaṇyaphala-sūtra in the Senior collection,41 seem to be more similar to the 
Chinese Dīrghāgama version attributed to the Dharmaguptakas than to other parallels, but 
the relationships are not consistent and distinctive enough to provide proof of their school 
affiliation.
It is among Vinaya texts generally, and especially in the Prātimokṣa-sūtras, that one 
normally expects to find the clearest and most reliable indications of school affiliation. Yet, 
the so-far unique Prātimokṣa manuscript which was identified by Strauch in the Bajaur 
collection has yielded unexpectedly ambiguous results. According to Strauch’s interpretation, this manuscript contains two versions of the same set of rules, neither of which agrees 
exactly with other Prātimokṣa-sūtras preserved in Pāli, Sanskrit, and Chinese. The first 
text, on the recto of the scroll, is “closely related to the Dharmaguptaka/Kāśyapīya versions” (2008: 117), while the verso text more resembles the Sarvāstivādin and Mūlasarvāstivādin text. Strauch thus concludes with regard to the Gāndhārī texts in general, 
“there is a strong affinity towards the Dharmaguptakas” (p. 115). However, he adds appropriate words of caution against assuming that textual variation was directly linked to 
school affiliation at the period in question, and concludes that “in the early age of Buddhist 
literature which we are dealing with the boundaries of recensions must not [i.e., “need 
not”] coincide with sectarian boundaries.” 
So, all that can be said for the time being is that one of the major groups of Gāndhārī 
manuscripts, the British Library collection, is certainly affiliated with the Dharmaguptaka 
school (or perhaps one should rather say, with a Dharmaguptaka monastery), and that there 
are indications, albeit much less certain, that some of the other collections, such as the 
Senior scrolls, are also connected with the same tradition. Beyond that, we can only hope 
that future study or future discoveries will clarify not only the school affiliations of the 
manuscripts themselves but also the question of what exactly school affiliation meant at 
this stage of development of Buddhist doctrines and institutions. 
7.4 The philological significance of Gāndhārī manuscripts
Besides their value for the study of Buddhist literature, history and doctrine, the Gāndhārī 
manuscripts have an equal importance for the philological study of the Gāndhārī language 
and, more broadly, for Indo-Aryan philology as a whole. Until recently, Gāndhārī was 
known for the most part only from inscriptions, coin legends, and secular documents from 
Central Asia, which presented a limited range of style and vocabulary.42 The recently 
discovered manuscripts have now brought to light a wide variety of literary forms which 
have vastly expanded our understanding of the orthography, phonology, morphology, syntax, and especially the lexicon of Gāndhārī.43 This new material is summarized in comprehensive fashion in the relevant chapters of the individual text studies in the GBT series, 
and part of the long-range plan of the EBMP is to publish a reference grammar of literary 
Gāndhārī as well as pedagogical materials for students of the language. 
In the meantime, an on-line Gāndhārī dictionary has been compiled by Stefan Baums 
and Andrew Glass under the auspices of the Early Buddhist Manuscripts Project (http://
40 See the article by M. Allon in this volume, p. 23.
41 See again the article by M. Allon, p. 25.
42 See Salomon 2008a for a summary of the textual sources and linguistic features of Gāndhārī in 
general.
43 For a general description of the various levels and styles of literary Gāndhārī, see Salomon 2002.

--- Page 37 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Manuscripts in the British Library, Schøyen and Other Collections
15
gandhari.org/a_dictionary.php). Until now, there has been no dictionary of Gāndhārī, and 
lexical resources have been limited to word lists and brief glossaries in studies of particular 
texts or corpora.44 The on-line Gāndhārī dictionary now contains over 125,000 entries from 
epigraphic, numismatic, and documentary sources as well as from the new manuscript 
discoveries, arranged in a fully searchable format. 
The new documents have also contributed a great deal to our knowledge of Kharoṣṭhī 
palaeography, revealing many previously unrecorded styles, character forms, and combinations. These data are presented in detail in the palaeography chapters of the individual 
volumes of the GBT series, and have been summarized in a preliminary but authoritative 
fashion in Glass 2000. A comprehensive and definitive palaeographical study of literary 
Gāndhārī is part of the long-range plans for EBMP publications.
Works Cited
Allon, Mark. 2001. Three Gāndhārī Ekottarikāgama-type Sūtras: British Library Kharoṣṭhī 
Fragments 12 and 14. Gandhāran Buddhist Texts 2. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
2007a. “Recent Discoveries of Buddhist Manuscripts from Afghanistan and Pakistan: The 
Heritage of the Greeks in the North-West.” In Himanshu Prabha Ray and Daniel T. Potts, 
eds., Memory as History: The Legacy of Alexander in Asia: 131–141. New Delhi: Aryan 
Books International.
2007b. “The Senior Manuscripts.” In Glass 2007: 3–25. 
2008. “Recent Discoveries of Buddhist Manuscripts from Afghanistan and Pakistan and their 
Significance.” In Ken Parry, ed., Art, Architecture and Religion along the Silk Roads (Silk 
Road Studies 12): 153–178. Turnhout: Brepols.
Allon, Mark, and Richard Salomon. 2000. “Kharoṣṭhī Fragments of a Gāndhārī Version of the 
Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra.” In Braarvig et al. 2000: 243–273. 
Allon, Mark, and Richard Salomon. 2010. “New Evidence for Mahāyāna in Early Gandhāra.” The 
Eastern Buddhist 41: 1–22.
Allon, Mark, Richard Salomon, Geraldine Jacobsen, and Ugo Zoppi. 2006. “Radiocarbon Dating of 
Kharoṣṭhī Fragments from the Schøyen and Senior Manuscript Collections.” In Braarvig et 
al. 2006: 279–291. 
Baums, Stefan. 2009. A Gāndhārī Commentary on Early Buddhist Verses: British Library Kharoṣṭhī 
Fragments 7, 9, 13 and 18. Dissertation, Department of Asian Languages and Literature, 
University of Washington. 
Braarvig, Jens, et al., eds. 2000. Buddhist Manuscripts, Volume I. (Manuscripts in the Schøyen 
Collection I). Oslo: Hermes Publishing. 
2002. Buddhist Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection, Volume II. Manuscripts in the 
Schøyen Collection, III. Oslo: Hermes Publishing.
2006. Buddhist Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection, Volume III. Manuscripts in the 
Schøyen Collection. Oslo: Hermes Publishing.
Forthcoming. Buddhist Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection, Volume IV. Manuscripts in the 
Schøyen Collection. Oslo: Hermes Publishing.
Braarvig, Jens, and Ulrich Pagel. 2006. “Fragments of the Bodhisattvapiṭakasūtra.” In Braarvig 
2006: 11–88.
Braarvig, Jens, and Richard Salomon. Forthcoming. “Schøyen Kharoṣṭhī Fragment MS 2179.17: 
The Bodhisattvapiṭaka-sūtra in Gāndhārī.” In Braarvig et al., forthcoming.
44 The principal examples are Brough 1962: 294–315 for the Khotan Dharmapada, Konow 1929: 181–
185 for the inscriptions known at the time, and Rapson and Noble 1929: 329–379 and Burrow 1937: 71–
134 for the Central Asian secular documents.

--- Page 38 of 425 ---
16
RICHARD SALOMON
Brough, John. 1962. The Gāndhārī Dharmapada. London Oriental Series 7. London: Oxford 
University Press.
Burrow, T. 1937. The Language of the Kharoṣṭhi Documents from Chinese Turkestan. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Falk, Harry. 2000. Review of Salomon 1999. Journal of Asian Studies 59: 210–211.
Glass, Andrew. 2000. “A Preliminary Study of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscript Paleography.” MA thesis. 
Department of Asian Languages and Literature, University of Washington.
2007. Four Gāndhārī Saṃyuktāgama Sūtras: Senior Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 5. Gandhāran 
Buddhist Texts 4. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Harrison, Paul, Timothy Lenz, Qian LIN and Richard Salomon. Forthcoming. “Gāndhārī Fragment 
of the Sarvapuṇyasamuccayasamādhisūtra.” In Braarvig et al. forthcoming.
Hinüber, Oskar von. 1996. A Handbook of Pāli Literature. Indian Philology and South Asian 
Studies 2. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Konow, Sten. 1929. Kharoshṭhī Inscriptions with the Exception of Those of Aśoka. Corpus 
Inscriptionum Indicarum II.1. Calcutta: Government of India, Central Publication Branch.
Lenz, Timothy. 2003. A New Version of the Gāndhārī Dharmapada and a Collection of PreviousBirth Stories: British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 16 + 25. Gandhāran Buddhist Texts 3. 
Seattle: University of Washington Press.
2010. Gandhāran Avadānas: British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 1–3 and 21 and Supplementary Fragments A–C. Gandhāran Buddhist Texts 6. Seattle: University of Washington 
Press.
Myrvold, Kristina (ed.). 2010. The Death of Sacred Texts: Ritual Disposal and Renovation of Texts 
in World Religions. Farnham: Ashgate.
Rapson, E. J., and P. Noble. 1929. Kharoṣṭhī Inscriptions Discovered by Sir Aurel Stein in Chinese 
Turkestan. Part III: Text of Inscriptions discovered at the Niya and Lou-lan Sites 1913–14. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Salomon, Richard. 1998. “Kharoṣṭhī Manuscript Fragments in the Pelliot Collection, Bibliothèque 
Nationale de France.” Bulletin d’études indiennes 16: 123–160.
1999. Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhāra. The British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments. 
Seattle: University of Washington Press/London: The British Library.
2000. A Gāndhārī Version of the Rhinoceros Sūtra: British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 5B. 
Gandhāran Buddhist Texts 1. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
2001. “‘Gāndhārī Hybrid Sanskrit’: New Sources for the Study of the Sanskritization of 
Buddhist Literature.” Indo-Iranian Journal 44: 241–252.
2002. “Gāndhārī and the Other Indo-Aryan Languages in the Light of Newly-discovered 
Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts.” In Nicholas Sims-Williams, ed., Indo-Iranian Languages and 
Peoples (Proceedings of the British Academy 116): 119–134. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
2004. “Gāndhārī, Buddhist Literature in.” In Robert E. Buswell, Jr., ed., Encyclopedia of 
Buddhism: 1.299–301. New York: Macmillan Reference USA.
2006a. “New Manuscript Sources for the Study of Gandhāran Buddhism.” In Pia Brancaccio 
and Kurt Behrendt, eds., Gandhāran Buddhism: Archaeology, Art, Texts (Asian Religions and 
Society Series): 135–147. Vancouver: UBC Press.
2006b. “Recent Discoveries of Early Buddhist Manuscripts and Their Implications for the 
History of Buddhist Texts and Canons.” In Patrick Olivelle, ed., Between the Empires: Society 
in India 300 BCE to 400 CE: 349–382. New York: Oxford University Press.
2008a. “Gāndhārī Language.” Encyclopedia Iranica Online (www.iranicaonline.org/articles/
gandhari-language).

--- Page 39 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Manuscripts in the British Library, Schøyen and Other Collections
17
2008b. Two Gāndhārī Manuscripts of the Songs of Lake Anavatapta (Anavatapta-gāthā): 
British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 1 and Senior Scroll 14. Gandhāran Buddhist Texts 5. 
Seattle: University of Washington. 
2008c. “Whatever Happened to Kharoṣṭhī? The Fate of a Forgotten Indic Script.” In John 
Baines, John Bennet, and Stephen Houston, eds., The Disappearance of Writing Systems: 
Perspectives on Literacy and Communication: 139–155. London: Equinox.
2009. “Why Did the Gandhāran Buddhists Bury their Manuscripts?” In Stephen C. Berkwitz, 
Juliane Schober and Claudia Brown, eds., Buddhist Manuscript Cultures: Knowledge, Ritual, 
and Art (Routledge Critical Studies in Buddhism): 19–34. Milton Park: Routledge.
Forthcoming. “Two Fragments Written by Bamiyan Kharoṣṭhī Scribe 7.” In Braarvig et al. 
forthcoming.
Strauch, Ingo. 2008. “The Bajaur Collection of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts – A Preliminary Survey.” 
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 25: 103–136.
Zacchetti, Stefano. 2002. “An early Chinese translation corresponding to Chapter 6 of the Peṭakopadesa. An Shigao’s Yin chi ru jing T 603 and its Indian original: a preliminary survey.” Bulletin 
of the School of Oriental and African Studies 65: 74–98.
List of texts and genres cited
Aṅguttaranikāya
Aṭṭhakavagga
Anavatapta-gāthā
Abhidharma-piṭaka
Aṣṭakavarga
Udānavarga
Ekottarikāgama
Karmavācanā
Khargaviṣana-sūtra
Khuddakanikāya
Kṣudrakāgama
Dīghanikāya
Dīrghāgama 
Dharmapada
Niddesa
Nettipakarana
Peṭakopadesa
Prajñāpāramitā
Prātimokṣa-sūtra
Bahubuddha-sūtra
Bodhisattvapiṭaka-sūtra
Bhadrakalpika-sūtra
Mahāpadāna-sutta
Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra
Mahāvadāna-sūtra
Mahāvastu
Mahāviyūha-sutta
Vīryapāramitā (section of Bodhisattvapiṭakasūtra)
Śrāmaṇyaphala-sūtra
Saṃyuktāgama
Saṅgīti-paryāya
Saṅgīti-sūtra
Sarvapuṇyasamuccayasamādhi-sūtra
*Sucitti-sūtra
Suttanipāta
Sutta-piṭaka
Sūtra-piṭaka
Sumaṅgalavilāsinī
Fó bĕnxíng jí jīng 佛本行集經
Shànsī tóngzĭ jīng 善思童子經

--- Page 40 of 425 ---


--- Page 41 of 425 ---
The Senior Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
MARK ALLON (SYDNEY)
The Senior Collection of birch-bark scrolls containing Buddhist texts written in the 
Gāndhārī language and Kharoṣṭhī script is by now relatively well known to those who have 
kept abreast of the discoveries of ancient Buddhist manuscripts that have been made in the 
last two decades in Afghanistan and Pakistan.1 Since detailed information about the 
collection and its texts has been published elsewhere, most notably in Allon 2007b, Glass 
2007a, and Salomon 2003b and 2009, I will here provide an account of what research has 
been undertaken to date on these manuscripts, give an updated overview of the collection 
in the light of this research, and discuss some of the problems we face in interpreting these 
and similar manuscript finds.
1. Research and publications
To date, a number of publications and PhD theses dealing with the Senior manuscripts 
have been completed or are in progress.
Two reports or overviews of the collection have been published. The first was a preliminary notice published in 2003 by Richard Salomon as “The Senior Manuscripts: Another 
Collection of Gandhāran Buddhist Scrolls” (Journal of the American Oriental Society 123: 
73–92). This included an edition, translation, and word by word analysis of a section of the 
second sūtra on scroll 20 (see below) and of the inscription on the pot in which the 
manuscripts were found, which is repeated with some variation on its lid. A second overview of the collection was published in 2007 by Allon in the form of the introductory 
chapter to Andrew Glass’s Four Gāndhārī Saṃyuktāgama Sūtras (Allon 2007b). This 
included a brief catalogue of the texts in the collection and a discussion of the date of the 
manuscripts in the light of radiocarbon tests, of the nikāya affiliation of the texts, the 
character of the collection, the genres represented, and the possible reasons for their production. A more detailed catalogue and study of the collection is currently being completed 
by Allon and will appear as Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhāra II: The Senior Kharoṣṭhī Fragments (Gandhāran Buddhist Texts. Seattle: University of Washington Press). 
The texts on the following scrolls have been published to date (the siglum RS stands for 
Robert Senior, the owner of the collection):
RS 5: Andrew Glass, Four Gāndhārī Saṃyuktāgama Sūtras: Senior Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 5 
(Gandhāran Buddhist Texts 4. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2007). This is 
based on the author’s PhD thesis Connected Discourses in Gandhāra: a Study, Edition, 
and Translation of Four Saṃyuktāgama-Type Sūtras from the Senior Collection (University of Washington, 2006). It publishes the four sūtras on scroll 5, three of which have their 
primary parallels in the Pali and Chinese Saṃyuttanikāya/Saṃyuktāgamas (SN/SĀ). As 
with all volumes of the Gandhāran Buddhist Texts (GBT) series published to date, this 
includes an edition, translation, and section-by-section analysis of each sūtra, a comparison 
of each text with its parallels in other languages, a physical description of the manuscript, 
and chapters dealing with palaeography and orthography, phonology, and morphology. 
Glass also includes a valuable study of the arrangement of all surviving SN/SĀs and of the 
relationship between them and the SN/SĀ sūtras in the Senior Collection (chapters 1 and 
2). For reviews, see Boucher 2004/2008, Norman 2008, Lĭ 2011, and Fussman 2012.
RS 14: Richard Salomon, Two Gāndhārī Manuscripts of the Songs of Lake Anavatapta 
(Anavatapta-gāthā): British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 1 and Senior Scroll 14 (Gandhā1 For an overview of these manuscript finds, see Allon 2008.

--- Page 42 of 425 ---
20
MARK ALLON
ran Buddhist Texts 5. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2008). This publishes the 
Anavatapta-gāthā (AG) fragment on Senior scroll 14 (see especially pp. 327–403) along 
with the much larger portion of the text preserved in the British Library Kharoṣṭhī 
manuscript collection. Besides the usual chapters found in each volume of the GBT series 
(just mentioned), Salomon includes a major study of all known versions of the AG or AGtype texts and of the relationship between them. For reviews, see von Hinüber 2010 and 
Cousins 2011.
RS 20, text no. 2: In his initial report on the collection mentioned above, Salomon 
(2003b: 87–90) included an edition, translation, and commentary on the first seven lines of 
the second sūtra on scroll 20, a Gāndhārī version of the Pali Mahāpariḷāha-sutta, “Sutta on 
the great burning” (SN no. 56.43; V 450–2).2 The two sūtras on this scroll will be edited by 
Joseph Marino for his doctoral dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle.
RS 22, text no. 3: The third sūtra on scroll 22 is a Gāndhārī version of the Pali Dutiyacchiggaḷayuga-sutta, “Second sutta on [the simile of] the hole in the yoke” (SN no. 56.48; 
V 456–7). An edition, translation, and commentary on the ten lines of the text which 
contain a well-known simile were published as Mark Allon, “A Gāndhārī Version of the 
Simile of the Turtle and the Hole in the Yoke” (in O. von Hinüber, R. M. L. Gethin, and 
Mark Allon, eds., Journal of the Pali Text Society 29, 2007: 229–62). This section of the 
sūtra was chosen for publication since it contained several interesting features, the most 
notable being the use of an archaic word for the hole in a yoke.
Besides the doctoral thesis of Glass (2006) mentioned above, two further PhD theses 
entail studies of texts in the collection; one completed, the other in progress. They are
RS 19: Mei-huang Lee (Tien-chang Shi), A Study of the Gāndhārī Dārukkhandhopamasutta (“Discourse on the Simile of the Log”) (University of Washington, 2009). This 
presents an edition, translation, study, etc. of the sūtra preserved on scroll 19, which is a 
Gāndhārī version of the Pali Dārukkhandha-sutta (1), “The [first] sutta on [the simile of] 
the [floating] log” (SN no. 35.241 [35.200 according to the European edition]; IV 179–81). 
The author is currently preparing the work for publication in the GBT series.
RS 12 (and possibly RS 1 + 3, 4, 10): These scrolls contain the four Majjhimanikāya/
Madhyamāgama (MN/MĀ) sūtras in the collection. They are being edited by Blair 
Silverlock as part of his doctoral research at the University of Sydney, beginning with RS 
12 which is a Gāndhārī version of the Pali Cūḷagosiṅga-sutta, “Shorter sutta [set] in the 
Gosiṅga [forest],” no. 31 of the MN (I 205–11).
The results of the radiocarbon dating of two samples of birch bark from the Senior 
manuscripts and a discussion of their significance were published as “Radiocarbon Dating 
of Kharoṣṭhī Fragments from the Schøyen and Senior Manuscript Collections” (Allon, 
Salomon, Jacobsen, Zoppi 2006). In conjunction with the date given in the inscription on 
the pot, these results make a significant contribution to the debate concerning the date of 
the Kushan emperor Kaniṣka. 
The Senior Collection has been discussed by members of the Early Buddhist Manuscripts Project (EBMP) and related manuscript projects in several articles dealing with the 
new manuscript finds from Afghanistan and Pakistan and related topics. Examples are 
Allon 2007c (esp. pp. 135ff.), 2008 (esp. pp. 163–7); Glass 2004 (esp. p. 140), 2007b; 
Salomon 2003a (esp. p. 388), 2006a (esp. pp. 140–1), 2006b, 2009; and Strauch 2009. 
Further, the collection as a whole, or individual texts in the collection, have been the 
subject of numerous conference papers, most notably by Allon, Glass, Lee (Tien-chang 
Shi), and Salomon.3 
2 Chinese and Sanskrit parallels to this and the following sūtras can be found in Allon 2007b.
3 Details of conference papers will not be given here.

--- Page 43 of 425 ---
The Senior Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
21
The Senior Collection has also been discussed or referred to by several authors who 
themselves are not working with Gāndhārī manuscripts. Examples are Caillat 2003 (esp. p. 
458); Dietz 2007: 65–66; Oberlies 2003: 44, n. 40; Skilling 2009: 64; and Yuyama 2004: 
29, n. 86.
Predominantly on account of the announcement of the results of the radiocarbon dating 
and of their significance for the date of Kaniṣka, the Senior manuscripts have attracted 
considerable media attention, both in the form of articles in print and online media and in 
radio broadcasts and interviews (as have the British Library Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts and the 
Bamiyan manuscripts). Examples are 
(1) “Birch-bark Manuscripts Could Reveal When Buddhism Moved to China” by Peter 
Monaghan, The Chronicle of Higher Education, Research and Publishing, March 
31st, 2006; vol. 53, issue 30, p. A22;
(2) “Buddhist Scrolls Proved Ancient,” The Sydney Morning Herald, General News, 
March 9th, 2006, p. 6;
(3) “‘Dead Sea Scrolls of Buddhism’- The Missing Link.” Velocity (Australian Nuclear 
Science and Technology Organization online bulletin), March 6th, 2006.
(4) Australian Broadcasting Commission (ABC), Radio National, Breakfast, March 9th, 
2006; Mark Allon interviewed by Fran Kelly;
(5) Australian Broadcasting Commission, Radio National, The Ark, Part 1: March 26th, 
2006 (15 min.); part 2: April 2nd, 2006 (15 min.); Mark Allon interviewed by 
Rachael Kohn.
Finally, the Senior manuscripts have been mentioned in print and online articles and in 
at least one radio program dealing with the ethical dimension of these manuscript finds, 
most of which have primarily been concerned with the British Library Kharoṣṭhī and/or the 
Schøyen (Bamiyan) manuscripts.4 Examples are 
(1) Neil Brodie. “The Circumstances and Consequences of the British Library’s 1994 
Acquisition of Some Kharosthi Manuscript Fragments.” Culture Without Context 17, 
2005 (online journal).
(2) Australian Broadcasting Commission, Radio National, The Ark, Part 2: April 2nd, 
2006; Mark Allon interviewed by Rachael Kohn.
2. General overview of the collection in the light of the above research
The Senior Collection of Gandhāran manuscripts is named after its owner, Mr. Robert 
Senior of Butleigh, Glastonbury (U.K), who has generously put these manuscripts at the 
disposal of the Early Buddhist Manuscripts Project for the purposes of study and publication. The collection consists of twenty-four birch-bark scrolls or scroll fragments containing at least forty-one Buddhist texts written in the Gāndhārī language and Kharoṣṭhī script. 
They were found in an earthenware pot (height 35 cm, diameter 30 cm)5 that was reportedly discovered “in an underground chamber.”6 Given that the inscriptions on the pot and its 
lid (see below) refer to it (presumably the pot with manuscripts inside) being “established” (pratithavi(*-ḏa) = Skt. pratiṣṭhāpita-) “in a stūpa” (thubami = P thūpamhi/Skt. 
stūpe),7 it is highly likely that this “underground chamber” was within a stūpa. This chamber may well have been similar to the stone chambers discussed by Salomon (2009) that 
have been found in Gandhāra in which relics, funerary pots, or pots containing manuscripts 
had been placed.
4 For references relevant to the Schøyen and British Library collections, see http://folk.uio.no/atleom/
manuscripts.htm. Besides Brodie 2005 mentioned here, see also Omland 2006.
5 Salomon 2003b: 74; 2009: 26.
6 Robert Senior (personal communication). 
7 Salomon 2003b: 76.

--- Page 44 of 425 ---
22
MARK ALLON
While some manuscripts are in reasonably good condition, with the text or texts on them 
being almost complete, in most cases only a portion of the original scroll has survived. 
Examples are RS 12, which is the left half of a manuscript, the upper section of which is 
missing, and RS 21, which represents a small portion of the right hand section of a scroll 
preserving the remnants of only a few lines of writing. Unfortunately, it is likely that some 
manuscripts from the original deposit perished during the course of being buried for almost 
two millennia or, due to their fragile nature, were destroyed in recent times in the process 
of being recovered or subsequently handled (Allon 2007b: 20, 23).
As with most of the new Buddhist manuscript discoveries from Pakistan and Afghanistan, the exact provenance of the Senior Collection is unknown. Salomon (2003b: 74) 
proposed that these manuscripts most likely came from the same region as the British 
Library Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts, that is, Haḍḍa, near Jalalabad in eastern Afghanistan.8 The 
only information that would contradict this assessment is a report in an article by Khan and 
Khan (2004: 9) which suggests that the British Library manuscripts came from Swat, 
Pakistan. Given that the new Bajaur and Split Gāndhārī/Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts (see the 
article in this volume by Falk and Strauch) come from Northwest Pakistan, this raises the 
possibility that the British Library and Senior manuscripts also come from this region. 
Unfortunately, we are unlikely to learn the exact provenance of the Senior manuscripts, nor 
probably that of the British Library manuscripts. 
As noted, the pot and its lid both have dated inscriptions stating more or less the same 
thing (translation by Salomon 2003b: 74–8): 
[pot] “In the year [twelve], in the month Avadunaka, after (*five) days; at this time [this] 
was established in honor of [his] father and mother, in honor of all beings; [the donation] 
of Rohaṇa, son of Maumatra.”
[lid] “Year 12, month Avadu[naka], after 5 days, (*established?) by Rohaṇa, son of 
Maumatra, in the stūpa, in honor of all beings.”
On the basis of the characteristics of these inscriptions, Salomon9 argued that the era 
referred to can be securely identified as that of Kaniṣka I, with the year 12 mentioned in 
these inscriptions therefore corresponding to ca. 140 CE if one adopts Harry Falk’s dating 
of 127/8 CE for Kaniṣka. Since the radiocarbon dating of the manuscripts produced a 2 
sigma date range of 130–250 CE, it is therefore likely that the manuscripts were produced 
between 130 and 140 CE (Allon 2007b: 5).
Of the donor, Rohaṇa Maumatra, “Rohaṇa, son of Maumatra,” we have no further information. His name does not appear among the surviving manuscripts, nor is he known 
from other inscriptional sources. All that can be said about him is that he was probably a 
wealthy layman who had enough resources to pay the considerable cost that must have 
been associated with the production of these manuscripts. Though speculative, it is not 
unreasonable to assume that he also paid for the construction of the stūpa in which the pot 
containing these manuscripts was interred, particularly if it was a subsidiary stūpa. 
In contrast to the British Library Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts which were found in a pot 
containing an inscription stating that it was the property of the Dharmaguptaka community 
(Salomon 1999: 166–78), no such reference to the nikāya affiliation of the monastic community who produced the Senior manuscripts is found in the inscription on the pot or on 
the associated manuscripts. However, based on the close similarities between several texts 
in the collection and their parallels in other languages, it is likely that this collection was 
similarly produced by a Dharmaguptaka community (Allon 2007b: 5–6).10 But this needs 
8 For the provenance of the British Library manuscripts, see Salomon 1999: 20–1 and the article in this 
volume by Salomon (pp. 1–17).
9 2003b: 76–8; 2009: 26; and in Allon et al. 2006: 286.
10 For criticism of some of the arguments used to arrive at this conclusion, see Boucher 2004/2008:

--- Page 45 of 425 ---
The Senior Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
23
some qualification. The very limited number of texts composed and transmitted by early 
Buddhist communities that have survived, combined with our still rudimentary knowledge 
of the history of early Buddhist communities, means that we have a poor understanding of 
the development of early Buddhist literature, which in turn greatly restricts our ability to 
understand the distinctive features of a text or collection of texts and to identify the likely 
nikāya affiliation of the community who produced it.11 For example, parallels to the bulk of 
the texts in the Senior Collection are found in the Pali Saṃyuttanikāya (SN), a product of 
the Mahāvihāra in Sri Lanka, in the Chinese Saṃyuktāgama (SĀ) and among fragments of 
Sanskrit SĀ sūtras from Central Asia, both of which are generally attributed to the 
Sarvāstivādins,12 and occasionally in vinaya literature or in miscellaneous texts such as the 
Mahāvastu. Consequently, most of these Gāndhārī sūtras have only two or three parallels 
for comparison, which generally differ enough from the Gāndhārī version to indicate that 
they belong to different lines of transmission. The rare exception is the second sūtra on 
scroll 22 (RS 22 no. 2), a Gāndhārī version of the Pali Anattalakkhaṇa-sutta/Skt. *Anātmalakṣaṇa-sūtra, for which there are many parallels: as a sutta/sūtra in the Pali SN and 
Chinese SĀ, as an independent sūtra in Chinese translation, and as a component of longer 
narratives in four vinayas (including the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya), the Sanskrit Catuṣpariṣat-sūtra, Mahāvastu and Avadānaśataka.13 Of these multiple versions the Gāndhārī 
text is closest to that found in the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya, but not identical with it; a 
pattern that is evident wherever a Dharmaguptaka version is available (found either in their 
vinaya or Dīrghāgama preserved in Chinese). But there are only a handful of texts of this 
category due to the paucity of Dharmaguptaka texts available to us.14 In order for us to 
fully understand the texts of the Senior Collection — their form and features, their place in 
the development of the literature, and why of all versions they are most similar to but not 
identical with their parallels found in Dharmaguptaka texts — we would need at our 
disposal multiple examples of each text dating from different periods and originating from 
different geographical locations that had been transmitted by a diversity of nikāyas. Given 
that we do not have such a corpus of texts, we should more strictly be speaking of textual 
lineages rather than nikāya affiliation. In other words, the texts in the Senior Collection 
clearly belong to the same or a closely related textual lineage as the Dharmaguptaka 
Vinaya and Dīrghāgama preserved in Chinese. 
The Senior manuscripts represent a collection of new manuscripts that were commissioned for ritual burial, most probably in a stūpa, for meritorious purposes, and as such 
must have been regarded as being similar to or the same as bodily relics of the Buddha. 
The evidence for this is the following:
(1) the inscription on the pot is similar in character to those used for deposits of bodily 
relics, in that it states that it was “established” or interred “in a stūpa” “in honor of 
[his] father and mother, in honor of all beings” (Salomon 2009: 26);
(2) the pot with these manuscripts inside was reportedly found “in an underground 
chamber,” which suggests the type of burial chamber typically used for relics 
(Salomon 2009);
189–191. For Boucher’s recommendations regarding the use of the terms “sectarian,” “nikāya,” etc., see 
n. 1 of his article.
11 Regarding our poor understanding of the development of early Buddhist literature, we do not, for 
example, have a clear idea of the extent to which communities of different nikāya lineages borrowed 
texts from each other or adopted innovations in plot, wording, imagery and the like found in individual 
texts, or whether such developments were more a regional rather than “sectarian” phenomenon.
12 For references, see Glass 2007a: 28–9; 2008: 185.
13 For references, see Allon 2007b: 15.
14 For details, see Allon 2007b: 5–6.

--- Page 46 of 425 ---
24
MARK ALLON
(3) the manuscripts were written by one scribe, most probably within a short period of 
time, and appear to have been new when buried;
(4) it is evident from other similar collections that manuscripts were buried, and there is 
evidence that manuscripts were included in funerary pots along with ashes, bones, 
and other items (Salomon 2009);
(6) these manuscripts probably would not have survived if they had not been buried 
(though not necessarily ritually and in a stūpa);
(7) many of the manuscripts were rolled up and then folded in half before being 
deposited in the pot. This shows that they were not manuscripts that were in regular 
use that happened to be kept in a pot, since it would have been unacceptable to fold 
birch bark manuscripts in this way that were in regular use because of the damage 
that results from this action.15 
In contrast to bodily relics (or the physical remains of the Buddha) and contact relics 
(objects used by him, such as a bowl or robe) whose power is based on their physical 
association with the Buddha, these Dharma relics (texts that encapsulate the teaching of the 
Buddha) draw their power from the principle that whoever sees the Dharma sees the 
Buddha, an idea that is attributed to the Buddha himself.16 Although these Dharma relics 
may not have had the same power that is generally associated with the physical remains of 
the Buddha, they nonetheless would have made present the Buddha and transformed the 
stūpa which housed them into an object of veneration.17
The forty-one texts that comprise the collection are all of the canonical Śrāvakayāna (or 
Mainstream) classification, a classification that is based on their characteristics and on 
their parallels in other languages. The majority of the texts in the collection, twenty-nine in 
total, are short sūtras whose primary parallels18 are found in the Pali Saṃyuttanikāya and/or 
Chinese or Sanskrit Saṃyuktāgama (26 sūtras) or which, though they lack parallels in 
other languages, are likely to have been drawn from the SĀ of the community who created 
this collection (3 sūtras), since their subject matter and length is similar to the SĀ sūtras in 
the collection.19 Glass (2007: 49–50) has shown that the sūtras in this collection with 
parallels in the SN/SĀ must have been selected from a SĀ (although the use of this title is 
15 In a private communication Andrew Glass expressed the following opinion: “I think rolling and 
folding was normal. We see this practice (i.e., the same patterns of damage) with short manuscripts in the 
British Library collection … and in other collections with birch bark manuscripts …. I have rolled and 
folded birch bark and find it still flexible and intact after almost 10 years.” However, there would have 
been no reason to fold rolled up manuscripts that were in regular use. It is much more likely that they 
were folded to fit in the pots in which they were buried. 
16 yo … dhammaṃ passati so maṃ passati; yo maṃ passati so dhammaṃ passati (SN III 120.28–31; 
cf. It 91; Mil 71).
17 For this practice in Gandhāra, see Salomon 1999: 58–68; 2009.
18 Regarding the designation “primary parallel,” several sūtras in this collection have parallels in more 
than one Nikāya/Āgama or division of the various canons. Although identifying the primary parallel is 
occasionally problematic, since even within the canon of one school texts are occasionally found in more 
than one Nikāya/Āgama or Piṭaka, in most cases it is not. For example, parallels to the sūtra preserved on 
RS 19, a Gāndhārī version of the Pāli Dārukkhandha-sutta, are found in the Pali SN, Chinese SĀ, 
Chinese EĀ, and in the Bhaiṣajyavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādin Vinaya (MSV) preserved in Sanskrit, 
Tibetan, and Chinese (see Allon 2007b: 14 for references). However, when the Chinese EĀ and MSV are 
compared with their parallels in other languages, it is evident that a large number of sūtras and other 
textual materials have been added to them, resulting in these works being rather “encyclopaedic” in 
nature. Given that so many sūtras in the Senior Collection have parallels in the SN/SĀs, it is therefore 
highly likely that this Gāndhārī Dārukkhandha-sutta was drawn from the SĀ of the community who 
created this collection. A similar example is the sūtra preserved on scroll 2 (RS 2), a Gāndhārī version of 
the Pali Sāmaññaphala-sutta (Skt. Śrāmaṇyaphala-sūtra). Parallels to this sūtra are found in the Pali DN, 
Chinese DĀ, Sanskrit DĀ (both Gilgit and Central Asian), as an independent Chinese translation, and in 
the Chinese EĀ and MSV (Allon 2007b: 8). Clearly, this sūtra has a primary association with the DN/
DĀ, it subsequently being included in the MSV, but in no other Vinaya, and in the EĀ which was 
translated into Chinese.
19 See Allon 2007b: 21.

--- Page 47 of 425 ---
The Senior Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
25
not proven) whose sūtras were organized into saṃyuktas according to the same principles 
as those employed for the arrangement of suttas/sūtras in the SN/SĀs that we know in Pali, 
Sanskrit, and Chinese. Perhaps this is not surprising, since Buddhist communities would 
have had stable if not fixed Āgamas well before the 2nd century CE, the date of these 
manuscripts (Allon 2007b: 21–2). Compelling evidence for the principle of arranging material noted by Glass and for the stable nature of Āgamas at this period is provided by the 
fourteen sūtras on RS 11, since these fourteen suttas form the Vana-saṃyutta of the Pali SN 
and a similar division within the two Chinese SĀs (T no. 99 and 100), although the order 
of the sūtras is different in each case.
A further four sūtras in the collection have their primary parallels in the Pali Majjhimanikāya and/or Chinese or Sanskrit Madhyamāgama. At the time of writing my earlier 
overview of this collection (Allon 2007b: 21), only three had been identified: RS 1 + 3, a 
Gāndhārī version of the Pali Dhammacetiya-sutta (MN no. 89), whose Chinese parallel is 
MĀ no. 213; RS 10, a Gāndhārī version of the Pali Saṅkhārupapatti-sutta, MN no. 120, 
whose Chinese parallel is MĀ no. 168; and RS 12, a Gāndhārī version of the Pali Cūḷagosiṅga-sutta, MN no. 31, whose Chinese parallel is MĀ no. 185.20 The MĀ parallel to a 
fourth sūtra in the collection, that on the very fragmentary RS 4A, which I had taken to be 
a composite text on the basis of its contents and apparent lack of parallels (Allon 2007b: 8–
9), was recently identified by Jin-il Chung (Göttingen, private communication, 13.09.09). 
This most likely represents a Gāndhārī version of the Shìzhě jīng 侍者經, “Sūtra on an 
attendant,” no. 33 of the Chinese Madhyamāgama (T 1 no. 26 pp. 471c–475a).
 Of course, we cannot be certain that these four sūtras were found in the MĀ of the 
community who created this collection, rather than in another Āgama. As is well known, 
there is considerable overlap between the MN/MĀs and DN/DĀs, with suttas/sūtras found 
in the MN/MĀ of one school found in the DN/DĀ of another, and vice versa. However, 
given that the Senior Collection is likely to have been produced by a Dharmaguptaka 
community and that these four MĀ sūtras lack parallels in the Chinese DĀ which is 
attributed to the Dharmaguptakas, it is likely that they were found in the MĀ of this 
community (cf. Allon 2007b: 22). 
One sūtra in the collection has a primary association with the DN/DĀ. This is the text on 
scroll 2 (RS 2), a Gāndhārī version of the Pali Sāmaññaphala-sutta (Skt. Śrāmaṇyaphalasūtra), whose parallels are found in the Pali DN, Chinese DĀ, Sanskrit DĀ, Chinese EĀ, 
MSV, and as an independent Chinese translation.21 Of all versions, the one found in the 
Chinese Dīrghāgama is closest to it.22
Five further texts, which are narrative in nature, depict episodes from the life of the 
Buddha or of his monks, with most parallel versions in other languages being found in 
vinaya literature.23 They are the conversion of Sujātā and her family shortly after the 
Buddha’s awakening in Bodhgaya (RS 18; or possibly 15 + 18); Moggallāna/Maudgalyāyana (G Mogalaṇa) telling the Buddha that a deity had informed him of Devadatta’s wish 
to lead the Sangha, followed by the Buddha enumerating the five kinds of teachers (RS 16 
+ 23A no. 1); the going forth of Anuruddha/Aniruddha (G Aṇarudha) (RS 16 + 23A no. 2); 
the visit of the brahman youth Nāla(ka) (G Ṇala) and the nāga serpent Erakapatta/Elāpattra 
(G Elapatra) to the Buddha (RS 24 no. 1); and the account of the merchants Tapussa/
Tripuṣa (G Trivus̱a) and Bhallika (G Valiya) giving the Buddha his first meal after his 
20 Some of these sūtras have further parallels in the Chinese EĀ and/or MSV (see Allon 2007b for 
details).
21 Allon 2007b: 8; see also footnote 18 above.
22 Allon 2007b: 5, 22, n. 34.
23 For details, see Allon 2007b.

--- Page 48 of 425 ---
26
MARK ALLON
awakening and the Buddha acquiring a bowl in which to receive this food through the 
efforts of the gods of the four directions (RS 24 no. 2). 
One text, a Gāndhārī version of the Anavatapta-gāthā (RS 14), or more specifically the 
Anavatapta verses of Mahākāśyapa, which was recently published by Salomon (2008), 
appears to have been classed as a sūtra by the compilers of this collection, since it appears 
in the list of the fifty-five texts preserved on scrolls 7 and 8 (RS 7 + 8) that are referred to 
as sūtras (G sutra) by the final line of the text (see below). 
Finally, text no. 5 on scroll 22 (RS 22) remains unidentified, though some of its wording 
is familiar.24 The texts on RS 4B, 9, 21, and 23B have not yet been identified due to the 
difficulty in reading them. 
Of a different category to the above are scrolls 7 and 8 (RS 7 + 8). Although they are 
separate pieces of bark of different dimensions, these two manuscripts contain a single list 
of texts which is followed by the statement (line 26) “in all fifty-five, 55, sūtras” (sarvapiḍa sutra pacapacaïśa 20 20 10 4 1).25 Indeed, fifty-five texts do appear to be listed, with 
entries corresponding to titles known in other sources, a key word, the subject matter of the 
sūtra being referred to, or the first significant sentence or sentences of it (Allon 2007b: 18–
19). Although one would expect this to be a list of the texts included in this collection, this 
turns out not to be the case. There is, in fact, a major mismatch between the texts listed on 
RS 7 + 8 and the texts that have actually survived: many texts that have survived do not 
appear to have entries in this list, while many entries in this list refer to texts that have not 
survived. 
Of the surviving texts only twelve have a clear reference on RS 7 + 8, while the 
matching of another seven with a reference on RS 7+8 is possible, but far from certain.26 
Thus, at best, nineteen of the surviving texts are listed on RS 7 + 8. The remaining twentytwo of the forty-one surviving texts appear to have no corresponding reference on RS 7 + 
8. Consequently, thirty-six of the fifty-five texts listed on RS 7 + 8 do not refer to any of 
the surviving texts. In some cases the word or phrase that constitutes the entry is too general in meaning or too common in occurrence to allow for the text being referenced to be 
identified with certainty. Two such examples are found on line 3: aṇicasana = P aniccasaññā/Skt. anitya-saṃjñā, “perception of impermanence,” which could refer to any number of sūtras dealing with this topic; and veśali = P Vesālī/Skt. Vaiśālī, the name of a town 
frequently visited by the Buddha. But in many other cases the identification of the text 
being referenced is more certain, though the text has not survived. In these cases the 
identification is based on the similarity of the entry with titles preserved in other languages 
or on the similarity between the Gāndhārī phrase or sentence with that found in a text 
preserved in another language, in conjunction with contextual information. An example is 
ag̱akṣaṇa, “wish” (line 1), which corresponds to the Pali word ākaṅkhanā “desire, wish.” 
This is likely to be a reference to a sūtra that in Pali is called the Ākaṅkheyya-sutta, “Sutta 
on ‘if [a monk] should wish,’” no. 6 of the Majjhimanikāya (I 33–6) and in Chinese the 
Yuàn jīng 願經, “Sūtra on wishing,” no. 105 of the Madhyamāgama (T 1 no. 26 pp. 
595c11–596b8).27 In this case the identification is based on the similarity of titles and the 
fact that all, or virtually all, the entries that precede and follow this entry on the first two 
lines of RS 7 + 8 appear to be references to sūtras that are found in the Pali MN and/or 
Chinese or Sanskrit MĀ.
As can be seen, a large proportion of the texts that have survived are not referenced in 
the list of fifty-five sūtras on RS 7 + 8, while a large proportion of texts listed on RS 7 + 8 
24 Allon 2007b: 16.
25 Translation by Richard Salomon (2003b: 83).
26 For details for this and the following discussion, see Allon 2007b: 19.
27 See Allon 2007b: 19 for details and a further example.

--- Page 49 of 425 ---
The Senior Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
27
have not survived. The reasons for the discrepancy, the function of this list, and the 
relationship of it to the texts that have actually survived are complex and the reader is 
therefore referred to Allon 2007b: 19–20, 23 for this discussion. But suffice it to say here 
that all proposals remain speculative for reasons discussed below.
The genre and likely association with a particular division of the canon of the texts listed 
on RS 7 + 8 whose identification has been established with some degree of certainty 
appear to be approximately the same as the genre and classification of the texts that have 
survived. The main difference is that the list on RS 7 + 8 lacks references to narrative texts 
dealing with episodes from the Buddha’s life that are generally associated with vinaya literature.28 Thus both the surviving manuscripts (and therefore the collection of texts that 
were deposited in this pot and interred in a stūpa) and the collection of texts listed on RS 7 
+ 8 represent a selection or anthology of Śrāvakayāna (or Mainstream) canonical texts.
It is probably impossible to identify the person or persons who determined the makeup 
of these anthologies and why these particular texts were chosen. Those who may have 
determined or influenced what texts were listed on RS 7 + 8 and what texts were placed in 
the pot for burial include the donor, Rohaṇa, the scribe, and a senior monastic who oversaw the project, although other individuals are possible candidates. Of course, more than 
one of these individuals may have had a say. Identifying the factors that determined the 
choice of texts is likewise problematic since a text may have been chosen in such a context 
for any number of reasons: its theme or themes, i.e. its central teaching or teachings; the 
individuals portrayed in the text, including the main character or characters in the 
narrative, the one giving the discourse, and the audience and whether they are monastics or 
laymen; the importance of that text to the community who produced this collection of 
manuscripts; or some personal association, for example, that the text was a favourite of a 
venerated teacher.
Of these we are only able to say something of the first two, that is, the theme or themes 
and the individuals portrayed. In the case of the latter, no patterns are discernible since a 
great diversity of characters is involved. For example, in the texts that have survived we 
find the following: the Buddha; monks in general; the original group of five monks; 
specific monks such as Ānanda, Anuruddha/Aniruddha, Mahākassapa/Mahākāśyapa, Moggallāna/Maudgalyāyana; kings such as Pasenadi/Prasenajit and Ajātasattu/Ajātaśatru; the 
merchants Tapussa/Tripuṣa and Bhallika; laymen; brahmans; the inhabitants of a village; 
deities; and the nāga serpent Erakapatta/Elāpattra. 
The identification of the theme or themes of these texts that may have influenced their 
inclusion is similarly problematic. First, we have an incomplete set of data for both 
collections of texts. In the case of the list on RS 7 + 8 a significant proportion of the texts 
referenced (15 out of 55) have yet to be identified, while in several other cases the identification of the text being referenced is possible but not certain. In the case of the texts that 
were placed in the pot for burial, it is highly likely that not all have survived. Secondly, 
texts commonly have multiple themes or teachings, any one of which could have influenced the choice of those texts for inclusion in the collection. 
Parallel to the diversity of characters depicted in these texts, a great diversity of themes 
is discernible both in the texts listed on RS 7 + 8 and in the texts of the surviving 
collection. The latter, for example, include the following themes and teachings:29 the superiority of the Buddha over other ascetics or teachers; the person and status of the Tathāgata; 
the superiority of the Buddha’s monks; the benefit good monks bring to the people and 
country; correct practice for monks and right path; teachings such as the five aggregates, 
the six sense-bases, the Four Noble Truths, aiming for nibbāna rather than the realms of the 
28 Allon 2007b: 22.
29 For a more detailed discussion, including other themes and references, see Allon 2007b: 23–25.

--- Page 50 of 425 ---
28
MARK ALLON
gods, the benefit of living in harmony and of practicing the meditative absorptions, and 
errors in a monk’s practice. Several texts have an association with the founding of the 
fourfold community: the Buddha’s second discourse (Anattalakkhaṇa-sutta); the merchants 
Tapussa/Tripuṣa and Bhallika becoming the first laymen; Sujātā becoming the first 
laywoman; and the nāga serpent Erakapatta/Elāpattra becoming the first non-human 
convert. At least two texts have a special association with Gandhāra and the North-West: 
the accounts of the merchants and the nāga serpent just mentioned. From this diversity, one 
can draw few concrete inferences. In Allon 2007b: 25 I speculated that the collection of 
surviving texts could have been a tribute to the Triple Gem: the Buddha, Dharma, and 
Sangha. However, it is probably the case that any random selection of canonical sūtras and 
vinaya narrative passages would lead to the same conclusion. Consequently, the reason or 
reasons why this particular set of texts was chosen for inclusion in a pot that was interred 
in a stūpa in ancient Gandhāra currently eludes us.
3. Problems encountered in dealing with Gāndhārī/Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts
There are many difficulties associated with studying, interpreting, and publishing Gāndhārī/Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts. First and foremost are problems associated with reconstructing each manuscript and with reading, editing, translating, and interpreting the text. These 
are due to several factors, the first of them being the often poor physical state of the 
manuscript. Although some are complete, the majority of these manuscripts are fragmentary, with whole sections missing and with fragments out of place in the glass frames in 
which they are preserved. In some cases a manuscript is reduced to a mere collection of 
fragments. Other physical features that have an impact on the reading of the text include 
splitting and distortion of the bark, text obscured by overlaying fragments or folds, and the 
surface of the bark being badly worn, resulting in the text being difficult to read even with 
the aid of infrared imaging.
Another set of difficulties is related to the peculiar characteristics of the Gāndhārī 
language and the limitations of the Kharoṣṭhī script. This includes the lack of standardized 
orthography which results in a great diversity of spellings for individual words, with 
variation encountered even within a manuscript written by one scribe; the tendency for 
various forms of a word with different phonological developments to be preserved side by 
side, e.g. the attested spellings for the common Sanskrit and Pali particle ca “and” “but” 
are ca, ci, ja, ji, ya, yaṃ, e, i, hi, and a; the lack of distinction between certain grammatical 
cases, especially between the nominative, accusative, locative and vocative singular of -a 
stems30; the limitations of the Kharoṣṭhī script as it is utilized by the scribes of these 
documents, particularly that long vowels and certain consonant clusters such as geminates 
are not marked, as well as the inability of the script to accurately relay the phonology of 
the language; and the general lack of punctuation throughout these documents which 
means that the text usually consists of one continuous string of writing with boundaries 
between individual words or phrases not marked. Thus dealing with these Gāndhārī/
Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts is fundamentally different from dealing with Sanskrit/Brāhmī 
manuscripts, even fragmentary ones: the latter are generally in better condition; they date 
from a later period when there is less variation in the form of letters within a given script 
type; the orthography has been standardized and more accurately reflects the phonology; 
and, in contrast to Gāndhārī, the language is well understood. 
One of the major consequences of such difficulties is that to date the publication of each 
Gāndhārī text or manuscript has resulted in a monograph of a comparatively large size, due 
mostly to the sheer quantity of the accompanying interpretative material: not infrequently 
30 For interesting comments on this phenomenon, see Norman 2008: 311.

--- Page 51 of 425 ---
The Senior Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
29
single words or phrases require several pages of commentary. The size of the publications 
of the EBMP in relation to the quantity of text published has been the object of criticism by 
at least one reviewer of the EBMP series.31 With reference to Andrew Glass’s 2007 publication Four Gāndhārī Saṃyuktāgama Sūtras: Senior Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 5, which runs 
to 252 pages, the reviewer remarked:
While we have to marvel at the careful reconstruction of RS 5 presented here, 
the reader should be aware that he is reading a monograph-length study of a 
mere 42 lines of text. This is a lot of attention for a very small part of the 
collection, especially since the larger questions this works raises—the very ones 
which are likely to draw the interest of Buddhologists—must remain tentative 
and inconclusive. (Boucher 2004/2008: 191)
This is an interesting point. It is the case that in future volumes in the Gandhāran Buddhist 
Texts (GBT) series the chapters on palaeography, orthography, phonology, and morphology will be reduced in size as these features come to be better understood; the reader then 
being referred to discussions in previous publications. It may also be the case that the 
chapter on the physical description of the manuscript could be reduced in size through images of the manuscripts and related information being made available on the EBMP website (www.ebmp.org). However, I do not believe that editors of these texts can get away 
with less comment on the text itself and still fulfil their duty to ensure that this difficult 
material is properly interpreted. It is also unlikely that anyone else will undertake this 
primary interpretive work at a later date. Further, there are compelling reasons for keeping 
all information related to a particular manuscript or text bound in a single volume, including the most unreadable of chapters such as that dealing with physical description of 
the manuscript, rather than dividing information between print and electronic media. It is 
the case that a book is a more secure medium than electronic storage. Besides, publications 
of this class are of a completely different category to most other monographs in Buddhist 
studies. They are reference works rather than something one reads cover to cover.
Another negative consequence of the difficulties presented by this material is the time it 
takes to bring a text to publication, though I think that those working on the Gāndhārī 
material through the EBMP have not been too tardy to date.32 And given that we are now so 
much more skilled at dealing with Gāndhārī manuscripts, the rate at which texts are 
published will only increase.
Besides the problems associated with reconstructing, reading, editing, translating, and 
interpreting individual texts, a major challenge facing those who deal with the multi-text 
collections—the British Library, Senior, Bajaur, Split, and Schøyen collections—is 
interpreting them as collections; in particular, determining the reason for their production 
and understanding why in each case this particular set of texts was formed into a collection. This, of course, is also of vital importance to understanding the individual texts 
within each collection. In order to understand a collection, we need to know whether it is a 
random accumulation of old, worn out manuscripts, a collection of new manuscripts 
created as a commission, the private property of a monk, or a section of a monastic library, 
because each of these possible scenarios has implications for our understanding of the texts 
involved. We also need to know whether the collection was ritually buried or not, whether 
the collection as we have it is complete and, if not, whether the loss occurred in antiquity 
or subsequent to its discovery in modern times. And most importantly, we need to know 
the region from which the manuscripts originate, the exact location of the find, the type of 
structure involved, its location within the monastery compound, the manner in which the 
31 Boucher 2005 (review of Allon 2001) and 2004/2008 (review of Glass 2007).
32 See the contributions by Salomon and Cox in this volume for an overview of works published to 
date by the EBMP.

--- Page 52 of 425 ---
30
MARK ALLON
manuscripts were buried, whether other items accompanied the burial, the size and likely 
status of that monastery, the nature of the community that produced the manuscripts, and 
so on.
In this regard, the loss of contextual information for these manuscript finds and the lack 
of proper documentation of their discovery resulting from not being recovered through 
proper archaeological research, are tremendously significant. In the case of the Senior 
manuscripts, this has serious ramifications. For example, despite the inscription on the pot 
stating that it was established in a stūpa, we cannot be absolutely certain that the pot 
containing the manuscripts was in fact interred in a stūpa or was rather buried within the 
stūpa compound or in another location. And of particular significance is the likely loss of 
manuscripts from the original deposit. The incomplete status of the surviving manuscript 
collection means that it is not possible to solve several major problems we have in 
interpreting it. The first is the mismatch between the surviving texts and those listed on RS 
7 + 8 discussed above. Given the lack of proper documentation of the discovery of these 
manuscripts we currently cannot determine which of several scenarios explaining the discrepancy is the correct one, or at least most likely one:33 namely, (i) whether the scribe 
compiled the list on RS 7 + 8 as a guide to the texts he was going to write for the commission, but then changed his mind, excluding some while writing others he had not listed; (ii) 
whether all the texts listed on RS 7+8 were included in the original deposit along with 
others he had not listed, with a large proportion of these not surviving; or (iii) whether the 
collection of texts listed on RS 7+8 was not written as a guide to or record of the texts that 
were included in this commission, but was initially drawn up for another purpose, this list 
and a proportion of the texts referenced in it then being included in the collection of texts 
that were placed in the pot for ritual burial.
Again, since the Senior manuscripts are a commission, they involve intention and 
choice: someone has chosen these texts rather than others. But as we saw in the above 
discussion, this intention and choice remains hidden because the loss of material means 
that it is not possible to accurately identify the themes and subject matter of the texts of the 
original collection.
Now, although we lack contextual and related information for the Senior manuscripts 
and for similar finds that would enable us to fully, or at least better understand them, it is 
still surely amazing and wonderful that we have these texts. We have recovered a small, 
but significant portion of that vast ocean of literature produced and transmitted by Buddhist communities during the long history of this religion: versions of texts attested in 
other sources that throw light on the development and transmission of those texts; texts 
without exact parallels that attest particularly early forms of certain genres and which are 
therefore important witnesses to the development of these genres (e.g. commentarial and 
Abhidharma texts); texts belonging to monastic lineages we had scant knowledge of, and 
so on.34 Although this is, of course, true, the lack of contextual information actually has 
ramifications for our understanding of the individual texts as well. For example, the 
version of a text that was written out to be included in a ritual burial may be different from 
that found in the monastic library that was produced for study and teaching purposes. In 
the case of a text destined for ritual burial, for example, it is quite possible that a scribe 
could have omitted sections of the text because for him the resulting text was sufficiently 
representative of the standard version (if there was a standard version), or perhaps he 
might have modified the wording of a text in order to fit it on a particular piece of birch 
bark.
33 As listed in Allon 2007b: 20. 
34 For the significance of these new manuscript finds, see Allon 2008: 173–178.

--- Page 53 of 425 ---
The Senior Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
31
Ultimately, given the choice between having these manuscripts as we do without contextual information, without proper documentation of their discovery, and in most cases 
being damaged since their discovery, and acquiring them in the future as the result of 
proper archaeological discovery and documentation, there is no doubt that we would 
choose the latter. Texts can only be properly understood in context.35
Now the lack of contextual and related information for these manuscripts means that our 
conclusions for the most part can only ever be tentative; our conclusions have to be of the 
“maybe,” “possibly,” “it appears” kind or at best of the “it is highly likely that” form. Yet 
the tentative status of our conclusions and speculations is so often overlooked by those 
who use our work: when it is necessary to tell a story it is very tempting to ignore the 
tentative language of the original conclusions, with the hypothetical becoming fact; “maybe” and “possibly” do not make a good story. One example will suffice. In 2001 I published a manuscript from the British Library collection containing three Gāndhārī sūtras 
under the title Three Gāndhārī Ekottarikāgama-Type Sūtras for a good reason: on the 
available evidence, I could not determine whether this manuscript represented a section of 
an Ekottarikāgama or an anthology of such sūtras. Yet despite this, this manuscript has 
frequently been referred to as an example of a Gāndhārī Ekottarikāgama in subsequent 
publications. And this takes us back to the review of Andrew Glass’s recent publication 
mentioned earlier in which it was remarked that “This is a lot of attention for a very small 
part of the collection, especially since the larger questions this works raises — the very 
ones which are likely to draw the attention of Buddhologists — must remain tentative and 
inconclusive.” Unfortunately, the tentative and inconclusive are the norm with this material. In fact, if we are careful, this is characteristic of our discipline, particularly when 
dealing with history. We occupy a discipline where the tentative is the norm and certainty 
is indeed rare.
Works Cited
Allon, Mark. 2001. (With a contribution by Andrew Glass) Three Gāndhārī Ekottarikāgama-Type 
Sūtras: British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 12 and 14. Gandhāran Buddhist Texts 2. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press.
2007a. “A Gāndhārī Version of the Simile of the Turtle and the Hole in the Yoke.” In O. von 
Hinüber, R. M. L. Gethin, and Mark Allon, eds., Journal of the Pali Text Society (Festschrift 
in Honour of the 80th Birthday of K. R. Norman in 2005 and the 125th Anniversary in 2006 
of the founding of the Pali Text Society) 29: 229–62.
2007b. “Introduction: The Senior Manuscripts.” In Glass 2007a: 3–25. 
2007c. “Recent Discoveries of Buddhist Manuscripts from Afghanistan and Pakistan: The 
Heritage of the Greeks in the North-west.” In Himanshu Prabha Ray and Daniel T. Potts, eds., 
Memory as History: The Legacy of Alexander in Asia: 131–41. New Delhi: Aryan Books 
International.
2008. “Recent Discoveries of Buddhist Manuscripts from Afghanistan and Pakistan and their 
Significance.” In Ken Parry, ed., Art, Architecture and Religion Along the Silk Roads (Silk 
Road Studies 12; Proceedings from the Fifth Conference of the Australian Society for Inner 
Asian Studies [A.S.I.A.S.], Macquarie University, November 27th to 28th, 2004): 153–178. 
Turnhout: Brepols.
35 Of course, I am fully aware of the complexity of this issue. For all of these manuscripts we do not 
have the luxury of such a choice: they have been discovered either by accident or during the course of 
clandestine searches for other antiquities in regions where government control of archaeological sites is 
impossible. It is also highly likely that they would have been destroyed had they not been seen to have a 
monetary value.

--- Page 54 of 425 ---
32
MARK ALLON
In progress. Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhāra II: The Senior Kharoṣṭhī Fragments. 
Gandhāran Buddhist Texts. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Allon, Mark, Richard Salomon, Geraldine Jacobsen, Ugo Zoppi. 2006. “Radiocarbon Dating of 
Kharoṣṭhī Fragments from the Schøyen and Senior Manuscript Collections.” In Jens Braarvig 
et al., eds., Buddhist Manuscripts III. Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection 4: 279–91. Oslo: 
Hermes Publishing.
Berkwitz, Stephen C., Juliane Schober and Claudia Brown, eds. 2009. Buddhist Manuscript 
Cultures: Knowledge, Ritual, and Art. London, New York: Routledge.
Boucher, Daniel. 2005. Review of Allon 2001. Indo-Iranian Journal 48: 289–295.
2004 [actual date 2008]. Review of Glass 2007a. Bulletin of the Asia Institute 18: 189–93.
Brodie, Neil. 2005. “The Circumstances and Consequences of the British Library’s 1994 Acquisition of Some Kharosthi Manuscript Fragments.” Culture Without Context 17.
Caillat, Colette. 2003. “Manuscrits bouddhiques du Gandhāra.” Académie des inscriptions & belleslettres 147.1: 453–60.
Cousins, Lance. 2011. Review of Salomon 2008. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies 74: 494–496.
Dietz, Siglinde. 2007. “Buddhism in Gandhara.” In Ann Heirman and Stephan Peter Bumbacher, 
eds., The Spread of Buddhism. Handbook of Oriental Studies, Sect. 8: Central Asia 16: 49–74. 
Leiden: Brill.
Fussman, Gérard. 2012. Review of Glass 2007a. Indo-Iranian Journal 55: 189–200.
Glass, Andrew. 2004. “Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts: A Window on Gandhāran Buddhism.” Nagoya 
Studies in Indian Culture and Buddhism 24: 129–52.
2006. Connected Discourses in Gandhāra: a Study, Edition, and Translation of Four Saṃyuktāgama-Type Sūtras from the Senior Collection. PhD Dissertation. University of Washington.
2007a. Four Gāndhārī Saṃyuktāgama Sūtras: Senior Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 5. Gandhāran 
Buddhist Texts 4. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
2007b. “The Chronology of the Kharoṣṭhī Inscriptions: a Reassessment in Light of Recent 
Discoveries.” Gandhāran Studies 1: 61–76.
2008. “Guṇabhadra, Bǎoyún, and the Saṃyuktāgama.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 31: 185–203.
Hinüber, Oskar von. 2010. Review of Salomon 2008. Journal of the American Oriental Society 130: 
90–94.
Khan, M. N., and M. S. Khan. 2004. “Buddhist Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts from Gandhāra: A New 
Discovery.” The Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences 12.1–2: 9.
LEE, Mei-huang (Tien-chang Shi). 2009. A Study of the Gāndhārī Dārukkhandhopamasutta 
(“Discourse on the Simile of the Log”). PhD Dissertation. University of Washington.
LǏ, Yǐng (李穎). 2011. Review of Glass 2007. ““Sìbù Jiāntuólí yǔ Zà āhán jīng” chūtàn 《四部犍陀
罹語雜阿含經》初探.” Dúnhuāng Tǔlǔfān yánjiū 敦煌吐魯番研究 12: 109–121.
Monaghan, Peter. 2004. “Birch-bark Manuscripts Could Reveal when Buddhism Moved to China.” 
The Chronicle of Higher Education, Research and Publishing, March 31st, vol. 53, issue 30, 
p. A22.
Norman, K. R. 2008. Review of Glass 2007a. Acta Orientalia 69: 306–12.
Oberlies, Thomas. 2003. “Ein bibliographischer Überblick über die kanonischen Texte der Śrāvakayāna-Schulen des Buddhismus (ausgenommen der des Mahāvihāra-Theravāda).” Wiener 
Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 47: 37–84.
Omland, Atle. 2006. “Claiming Gandhara: Legitimizing Ownership of Buddhist Manuscripts in the 
Schøyen Collection, Norway.” In Juliette van Krieken-Pieters, ed., Art and Archaeology of 
Afghanistan: its Fall and Survival: a Multi-disciplinary Approach. Handbook of Oriental 
Studies 8, Central Asia 14: 227–64. Boston: Brill.

--- Page 55 of 425 ---
The Senior Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
33
Salomon, Richard. 1999. Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhāra: the British Library Kharoṣṭhī 
Fragments. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
2003a. “Manuscrits bouddhiques du Gandhāra.” In Osmund Bopearachchi, Christian Landes 
and Christine Sachs, eds., De l’Indus à l’Oxus: archéologie de l’Asie Centrale: 387–9. Lattes: 
Association IMAGO – Musée de Lattes.
2003b. “The Senior Manuscripts: Another Collection of Gandhāran Buddhist Scrolls.” 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 123: 73–92.
2006a. “New Manuscript Sources for the Study of Gandhāran Buddhism.” In Pia Brancaccio 
and Kurt Behrendt, eds., Gandhāran Buddhism: Archaeology, Art, Texts. Asian Religions and 
Society series: 135–47. Vancouver: UBC Press.
2006b. “Recent Discoveries of Early Buddhist Manuscripts and their Implications for the 
History of Buddhist Texts and Canons.” In Patrick Olivelle, ed., Between the Empires: Society 
in India 300 BCE to 400 CE: 349–82. New York: Oxford University Press.
2008. Two Gāndhārī Manuscripts of the Songs of Lake Anavatapta (Anavatapta-gāthā): 
British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 1 and Senior Scroll 14. Gandhāran Buddhist Texts 5. 
Seattle: University of Washington Press.
2009. “Why did the Gandhāran Buddhists Bury their Manuscripts?” In Berkwitz et al., eds. 
2009: 19–34.
Skilling, Peter. 2009. “Redaction, Recitation, and Writing: Transmission of the Buddha’s Teaching 
in India in the Early Period.” In Berkwitz et al., eds. 2009: 53–75.
Strauch, Ingo. 2009. “The Bajaur Collection of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts: a Preliminary Survey.” 
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 25: 103–136.
Yuyama, Akira. 2004. “The Golden Light in Central Asia.” Annual Report of the International 
Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University 7: 3–32.

--- Page 56 of 425 ---


--- Page 57 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts: Exegetical Texts 
COLLETT COX (SEATTLE)
1. The exegetical genre
The exegetical genre, including both commentaries and scholastic treatises, is particularly 
well represented among Gāndhārī Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts, comprising nine within the 
British Library (BL) collection, nine within the Bajaur collection (Strauch 2008; see article 
by Harry Falk and Ingo Strauch in this volume, pp. 51ff.), as well as the University of 
Washington scroll. Among the longest Gāndhārī manuscripts discovered to date, the exegetical texts provide ample evidence of a variety of text formats, interpretive techniques, 
and explicatory strategies that enable their classification within several general categories. 
When arranged according to relationship to a root text and increasing complexity of 
structure, these general categories in turn suggest a provisional chronology for the emergence of interpretive techniques within the exegetical genre. The discussion of Gāndhārī 
commentaries and scholastic treatises presented here proposes such a tentative textual 
classification that will be useful for an overview of the historical development of the exegetical genre. However, interpretive techniques and explicatory strategies cannot be correlated exclusively with specific text types (e.g., Sūtra, commentary, Abhidharma), and 
simpler, more straightforward exegetical methods continued to be used even after the 
emergence of more complex approaches. As a result, the presence or absence of specific 
interpretive techniques or explicatory strategies does not unequivocally indicate relative 
chronology among texts of a particular type nor does it permit the dating of individual 
texts.
2. Texts
Although differing in style and contents, the Gāndhārī commentaries and scholastic 
treatises within the BL collection as well as the UW scroll can be provisionally classified 
on the basis of three overlapping criteria: (1) their explicit commentarial function, which is 
indicated by their relationship to or independence from a root text; (2) their stylistic 
features, which display an increasingly regimented structure; and (3) their interpretive 
techniques, which are marked by growing complexity in the methods of categorization, 
discursive examination, and polemical argumentation. 
These three criteria permit the classification of Gāndhārī exegetical texts into two broad 
groups, which, given their shared interpretive techniques, clearly represent a continuous 
lineage of exegesis: (1) straightforward commentaries; and (2) independent scholastic 
treatises. Straightforward commentaries, at their most basic level, attempt to render a root 
text more accessible or comprehensible and thus structure their comments in accordance 
with phrase citations, or lemmata, from the root text. The simplest interpretive techniques 
used are glossing and grammatical or etymological explanation, whereby compounds are 
analyzed and individual words are furnished with synonyms or clarified through etymological explanations. Glossing and compound analysis are frequently presented within a 
restatement that reveals the syntactic structure of the root text passage, often followed by a 
summary paraphrase of the passage as a whole. Finally, passages are further elaborated by 
applying extraneous doctrinal categories or scriptural passages, similes, and a simple listing of alternative interpretations. Finally, two Gāndhārī commentaries also employ more 
advanced techniques of “categorial mapping” or “categorial reduction,” which will be 
discussed below.

--- Page 58 of 425 ---
36
COLLETT COX
By contrast, independent scholastic treatises are not directly linked to a root text nor are 
they structured by lemmata. Instead, they adopt a more formalistic and externally grounded 
structure that attempts to reorganize doctrinal topics in an abstract way and, in the most 
advanced example, to examine the implications of different doctrinal interpretations 
through the critical evaluation of contending viewpoints. They employ all of the interpretive techniques found in straightforward commentaries but also include independent 
catechesis, text-internal cross-referencing, discursive examination, and finally the active 
criticism of alternative interpretations and polemical argumentation. As a result, these texts 
display development from the simpler straightforward commentaries and approach a stage 
similar to that of the independent scholastic treatises of the middle- to late-Abhidharma 
period of the second to fifth centuries CE.
2.1 Straightforward commentaries
The group of straightforward commentaries includes three Gāndhārī texts or text groups: 
(1) a previously unknown commentary on the Saṅgītisūtra; (2) the University of Washington scroll; and (3) three commentaries on previously unknown collections of verses.
2.1.1 Saṅgītisūtra commentary 
The Gāndhārī commentary on the Saṅgītisūtra within the British Library collection (BL 
15) constitutes one of the longest of the Gāndhārī manuscripts and exhibits the simplest 
commentarial style. The manuscript comprises approximately 450 lines of text, including 
340 well-preserved lines that represent the middle 75% of the original text, beginning from 
the mid-three- through the mid-seven-membered sets of doctrinal categories. The remaining 110 poorly preserved lines are found at the very fragmentary beginning and end of the 
manuscript and represent approximately 25% of the original text. Presumably, this poorly 
preserved portion of the manuscript originally contained the introductory and concluding 
frame story as well as the remaining initial and final doctrinal category sets.
The Saṅgītisūtra was an extremely widespread and important sūtra with one version 
extant in Pāli (Dīghanikāya: no. 33, 3.207–271), two in Chinese translation (T 1 no. 1 [9], 
T 1 no. 12), and a Sanskrit version or versions represented by various fragments discovered in Afghanistan and Central Asia (Tripāṭhī 1985; Lévi 1932: 9–11; Hoernle 1916: 16–
24; Stache-Rosen 1968). Its importance is also demonstrated by its inclusion within a 
widely attested early grouping of six sūtras (Skt. ṣaṭsūtraka), three of which, the Daśottarasūtra, Arthavistarasūtra, and Saṅgītisūtra, are doctrinal in content (Hartmann 1994). 
The Saṅgītisūtra consists of an extended list of doctrinally significant categories arranged 
progressively from sets of one member through sets of ten members. The frame story 
relates that this communal recitation of the doctrine organized into numerical category sets 
was initiated by Śāriputra in order to create a structured, consensually sanctioned summary 
of the teaching that would prevent discord of the type that had erupted within the Jaina 
community upon the death of its leader.
Doctrinal enumerations of the type found in the Saṅgītisūtra were undoubtedly used not 
only as summaries of the teaching but also as mnemonic aids for its oral preservation and 
transmission; hence, they became an obvious object for the practice of commentary. In 
addition to the Pāli commentary on the version of the Saṅgītisutta in the Dīghanikāya 
(Dīghanikāya-aṭṭakathā: 3.971–1052), which is included among the collections of Pāli 
commentaries redacted by Buddhaghosa, one other independent commentary on the 
Saṅgītisūtra is extant: the Saṅgītiparyāya (T 26 no. 1536) preserved in Chinese translation, 
which came to be included among the seven canonical Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma texts. 
With the exception of the commentaries preserved in Pāli, commentaries on sūtras are rare 
among extant Indic Buddhist texts. Therefore, the existence of two independent commen-

--- Page 59 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts: Exegetical Texts
37
taries on the Saṅgītisūtra — the Gāndhārī commentary and the Saṅgītiparyāya — becomes 
significant and might be interpreted in two ways. First, these two Saṅgītisūtra commentaries might represent the only surviving examples of more widespread traditions of sūtra 
commentary, perhaps even of divergent and localized commentarial traditions. Or second, 
they might indicate the particular importance of the Saṅgītisūtra itself as a summary of 
early Buddhist teaching warranting extended commentarial exegesis. In the latter case, 
these two commentaries might then be interpreted as proto-scholastic works or transitional 
texts on a path moving from commentary on particular sūtras such as the Saṅgīti toward 
independent scholastic or Abhidharma treatises.
Comparisons among the extant versions of the Saṅgītisūtra indicate that the order of 
doctrinal category sets structuring the Gāndhārī commentary is virtually identical to that in 
the version of the Saṅgītisūtra preserved in the Chinese translation of the Dīrghāgama (T 1 
no. 1 [9]) and is markedly different from that in all other versions. This similarity in 
structure between the Gāndhārī commentary and the Dīrghāgama version suggests textual 
and very possibly school connections. Linguistic, contextual, and text-internal evidence 
connects the Chinese translation of the Dīrghāgama with Gandhāra and with the Dharmaguptaka school (Salomon 1999: 173–174). A Dharmaguptaka connection is suggested 
also for the Gāndhārī Saṅgītisūtra commentary through its structural similarity to the 
version of the Saṅgītisūtra preserved in the Dīrghāgama as well as through the inscription 
on the clay pot in which the British Library collection of Gāndhārī manuscripts was found, 
which explicitly links the clay pot, if not also its contents, to the Dharmaguptaka school 
(Salomon 1999: 21). Although it is still premature to claim conclusively a simple school 
affiliation for either the Chinese Dīrghāgama or for the Gāndhārī manuscripts as a whole, 
the close connection between the Gāndhārī and Dīrghāgama versions of the Saṅgītisūtra 
does provide emphatic evidence at the very least of related textual lineages and traditions 
of textual transmission within the northwest region. Likewise, a common exegetical tradition within the northwest is suggested by similarities between the Gāndhārī Saṅgītisūtra 
commentary and the Peṭakopadesa and Nettippakaraṇa in their shared terminology, commentarial explanations, and supporting scriptural passages, as well as in their interpretive 
technique of categorial reduction.
The Gāndhārī Saṅgītisūtra commentary adopts a relatively simple commentarial pattern 
in which lemmata from the root text containing the headwords within each doctrinal 
category set or category sub-item are explained first by etymologies and then by definitions through glossing that often specify their “distinguishing characteristic” (G lakhaṇa, 
Skt. lakṣaṇa): for example, “The six sets of sensations: sensations have the characteristic 
of ‘experiencing’” (G ṣa veḏaṇaḵaa aṇubhavaṇalakhaṇa veḏaṇa). The commentary continues with explanatory expansion or paraphrase, similes, metaphors, and the citation of 
alternative interpretations, but lacks any attempt to argue a position or to adjudicate among 
the interpretations cited. Throughout, the commentary employs typical functional markers 
or commentarial operators. For example, words and phrases are marked for comment with 
the quotative particle G ḏi (Skt. iti), and glosses or equivalencies are signaled with the 
participle “is referred to” (G vuto, Skt. ukta). Occasionally, the abbreviation formulae “it is 
to be carried out in detail” (G vistareṇa katavo, Skt. vistareṇa kartavyam) or “as has been 
put down in detail” (G yas̱a vistareṇa ṇikṣivita, Skt. yathā vistareṇa nikṣiptam) signal the 
intended expansion within the commentary of a well-known list, definition, or narrative 
account. Different viewpoints or alternative interpretations are marked by the phrases 
“another alternative” (G avaro payao, Skt. aparaḥ paryāyaḥ) or “certain ones state” (G 
keyi aha/ahaṃsu, Skt. kecid āhuḥ), but without criticism or sanction of any particular 
alternative.

--- Page 60 of 425 ---
38
COLLETT COX
In addition to these standard, relatively straightforward exegetical methods, in the case 
of virtually every doctrinal category set, the Gāndhārī Saṅgītisūtra commentary utilizes a 
more complex interpretive technique of “categorial mapping” or “categorial reduction,” a 
technique also frequently encountered in the Peṭakopadesa and Nettippakaraṇa. Here the 
commentary “maps” or identifies the individual items of each doctrinal category set with 
those in other, standard category sets, often those cited elsewhere in the Saṅgītisūtra itself. 
On the simplest level, categorial mapping clarifies the meaning and function of one set of 
doctrinal categories through association with the meaning and function of another category 
set. It also simplifies doctrinal complexity by means of a process of reduction through 
mutual identification. When previously unrelated doctrinal category sets are identified 
through commentary, one set can then be understood to signify others, and the total number of sets with different meanings and functions is thereby reduced. Through this process 
of identification, previously unrelated category sets are fused to create an integrated 
doctrinal edifice that gives prominence to selected categories and concepts, and other categories that are subsumed within them fall out of use. The horizontally arrayed mass of 
doctrinal category sets present in the sūtras is thus assembled to form a hierarchical 
structure that reveals the doctrinal agenda of the commentator. This creative work of the 
commentator evident in this technique of categorial mapping will eventually lead to the 
more overt doctrinal reorganization carried out in Abhidharma, which culminates in its 
characteristic, later focus of ontological reduction in terms of dharmas.
The commentary on the category set of the five controlling faculties (G/Skt. indriya) 
serves as a good example of this variety of interpretive techniques. After a schematic list of 
the faculties and a definition of “controlling faculty” as “sovereignty” (G as̱ivaḏea, Skt. 
ādhipatya), the commentary explains the controlling faculties as arising through a process 
of serial dependence and then specifies the activities of all five controlling faculties 
through the combined similes of the members of a household and an army. Next, the commentary carries out categorial reduction by identifying the set of five controlling faculties 
first with the twofold classification of factors as “support” (G ahara, Skt. āhāra) and 
“supporter” (G aharaḵo, Skt. āhāraka) and then with the praxis-related categories of the 
five “aggregates of practice” (G kaṃdha, Skt. skandha), the eightfold noble “path” (G 
maga, Skt. mārga), and finally with stages of realization along the path.
A second, more comprehensive application of categorial reduction is carried out on the 
structure of the Saṅgītisūtra as a whole through the specialized application of “content 
lists” (Skt. uddāna) found at regular intervals throughout the Gāndhārī commentary. 
Groups of approximately ten doctrinal category sets or individual category sub-items are 
incorporated within content lists that are reorganized and subsumed under the category set 
of the four noble truths. Straightforward content lists occur in the various Sanskrit Central 
Asian fragments of the Saṅgīti and are a regular feature of the Peṭakopadesa as well as 
Abhidharma texts such as the Saṅgītiparyāya. However, since the word uddāna does not 
appear in the Gāndhārī Saṅgītisūtra commentary, it is impossible to determine whether 
such content lists were present in the Gāndhārī version of the Saṅgītisūtra itself. Nonetheless, it is clear that the content lists used within the Gāndhārī Saṅgītisūtra commentary do 
not function as a simple table of contents but rather involve an additional layer of exegetical activity that restructures or reduces the various doctrinal category sets appearing in the 
sūtra under one overarching single category set, namely, the four noble truths.
The use of the four noble truths as a heuristic device can be observed in early Abhidharma texts such as the *Śāriputrābhidharmaśāstra (T 28 no. 1548), as well as in the 
Peṭakopadesa. The function of the four noble truths as a meta-level organizational feature, 
as evident in the Gāndhārī Saṅgītisūtra commentary, has also been noted in the *Abhidharmahṛdayaśāstra (T 28 no. 1550, T 28 no. 1551) and related texts, as well as in such

--- Page 61 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts: Exegetical Texts
39
later texts as the *Catuḥsatyaśāstra (T 32 no. 1647), the *Tattvasiddhiśāstra (T 32 no. 
1646), and the Abhidharmakośa (Pradhan 1975). Given the probable connection of all of 
these texts with the northwest region, it is possible that their shared interpretive techniques 
and the particular importance of the four noble truths indicate a regionally defined lineage 
of commentarial practice and exegesis centered in Gandhāra. 
2.1.2 The University of Washington scroll 
The UW scroll consists of twelve separate manuscript strips containing approximately 
forty-six lines of largely continuous text. Although structured as a straightforward commentary on a sūtra, it might also have been part of an independent scholastic treatise in 
which a sūtra passage is cited and discussed. The root sūtra passage parallels sections in 
the Dhātuvibhaṅgasutta (Majjhimanikāya: no. 140, 3.237–247) that examine the topic of 
sensations (P vedanā) and the process by which sensations “become cool” (P sītībhavissanti) through religious praxis. 
While the Gāndhārī text cites lemmata from the root text, the commentary as a whole is 
structured as a continuous narrative. Each lemma is introduced or concluded by the phrase 
“therefore, he states” (G tenaha, Skt. tenā ’ha), in which “he” is identified as the “Bhagavat” (G bhagava, Skt. bhagavat) or as the “teacher” (G acarya, Skt. ācārya). Simple interpretive techniques include etymological glosses, compound analysis, and the expansion of 
similes. For example, the commentary offers an etymological gloss on the term “sensation”: “What is the meaning of sensation? [The term] ‘sensation’ [means] sensed” (G 
vedaïdam=idi ko artho vididaṃ vedaïdaṃ ). These simple glosses or grammatical explanations are followed by more detailed doctrinal elaboration: for example, “sensation (G 
vedaïda) [refers to] the experience of objects in accordance with their characteristics” (G 
arthanubhavanani nimitayogeṇa vedaïda ◦ eva vedaïdani). The commentary maintains 
structural continuity through a pattern of simple questions and answers as well as through 
transitional commentarial operators such as “therefore” (G tasma, Skt. tasmāt), “in that 
case” (G/Skt. tatra), “in this way” (G eva, Skt. evam), and “furthermore, how?” (G avi gho 
puṇa, Skt. api khalu punar). Finally, the commentary diverges from the root text through 
summary paraphrase signaled by the distinctive commentarial operator “the elucidation [is]
…” (G paridivaṇa, Skt. paridīpana) and through alternative interpretations marked by the 
phrase “another states” (G avaraḣa, Skt. apara āha). However, no arguments are presented 
and no particular viewpoint is sanctioned. 
2.1.3 The verse commentaries
The British Library collection includes three commentaries on previously unknown 
collections of verses (I: BL 4; II: BL 13; III: BL 7, 9, 13, 18). Verse commentary II, the 
longest of the three, contains over 400 lines of text in thirty-nine numbered sections 
commenting on forty-three verses.1 The commentary is also structured by content lists on 
sets of ten verses. Parallels for the verses have been located in a variety of sources 
including the Arthapada (Skt. Arthavargīya, P Aṭṭhakavagga), Pārāyaṇa (P Pārāyanavagga), Dharmapada (P Dhammapada), Udāna, and Ityuktaka (P Itivuttaka). 
The commentary on each verse is signaled by a lemma, usually consisting of the entire 
first quarter of the verse, which is followed by the statement: “[Preceding is] the text; the 
explanation on it [follows]” (G sutro tatra ṇideśo, Skt. sūtraṃ tatra nirdeśaḥ). The 
commentary frequently presents several complementary explanations for an entire verse, 
the first of which usually includes etymologies or glosses for individual words as well as a 
paraphrase of the verse as a whole. This initial general commentary is followed by one or 
1 This discussion of verse commentary II is based upon Baums 2009.

--- Page 62 of 425 ---
40
COLLETT COX
more additional explanations of the entire verse introduced by the commentarial operator 
“in brief” (G sakṣeve, Skt. saṃkṣepe) with further subdivisions often marked by “or 
else” (G asa va, Skt. athavā). Alternative interpretations are signaled by “some claim” (G 
keyi aha, Skt. kecid āhuḥ) or “another” (G avara, Skt. apara), but once again no attempt is 
made to argue a position or to adjudicate among the interpretations given. 
The additional explanations of an entire verse usually follow two exegetical patterns. 
The first, shared with the Gāndhārī Saṅgītisūtra commentary, is that of categorial mapping, 
whereby sections of the root verse are identified with individual members of an extraneous 
set of doctrinal categories. Although no single or overarching doctrinal topic can be 
discerned for the selection of these extraneous category sets, certain sets appear repeatedly, 
in particular, those related to the four noble truths and aspects of religious practice. The 
application of one doctrinal set to a given verse will occasionally precipitate its own 
further explication in terms of other category sets, yielding the reinterpretation of a 
relatively straightforward verse through a series of embedded reductions that result in an 
increasingly complex doctrinal structure. The second exegetical pattern employed within 
the additional explanations in the verse commentaries also utilizes a technique of explanation through identification by interweaving sections of the root verse with a separate scriptural passage. In this case, each successive portion of the verse is explained through identification with a section of the scriptural passage, thereby evoking its original context and 
extended meaning. 
As in the case of the Gāndhārī Saṅgītisūtra commentary, comparison with other early 
Buddhist exegetical texts suggests a close relationship between the verse commentaries 
and the Niddesa and other Pāli commentaries on the basis of their shared explanations for 
individual terms and their appeal to the same scriptural passages. However, the method of 
categorial reduction and the particular importance of the four noble truths as an overarching heuristic device appear to be characteristic of exegetical material associated specifically with the region of Gandhāra, in particular, such texts as the verse commentaries, the 
Gāndhārī Saṅgītisūtra commentary, the Peṭakopadesa, and the Nettippakaraṇa. 
2.2 Independent scholastic treatises
In contrast to the straightforward commentaries, independent scholastic treatises are not 
directly linked to a root text but constitute autonomous treatments of doctrinal topics that 
are structured by their own distinctive formats and guided by separate explicatory 
strategies. Independent scholastic treatises employ all of the simpler interpretive techniques typical of the straightforward commentaries but also utilize more complex methods 
of catechesis, text-internal cross-referencing, and finally, the active criticism of alternative 
interpretations and polemical argumentation. In accordance with these distinctive formats 
and interpretive techniques, the independent scholastic treatises among the Gāndhārī 
manuscripts can be provisionally classified into three groups: (1) expository treatises 
including BL 10 and BL 17; (2) catechetical treatises, BL 20+23; and (3) polemical 
treatises, BL 28.
2.2.1 Expository treatises
2.2.1.1 Expository treatise: BL 17 
British Library fragment 17 has been classified as a simple expository treatise because it 
does not follow the commentarial structure of lemmata and explanation but appears to be 
structured loosely in accordance with independent doctrinal topics. The manuscript consists of forty-two partial lines of text, and damage to the manuscript precludes a clear sense 
of either its contents or its structure. Stray terms throughout the text suggest a topic con-

--- Page 63 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts: Exegetical Texts
41
cerning aspects of religious practice and attainments: for example, “dependent origination” (G paḍicasamupada, Skt. pratītyasamutpāda), one “stationed in the teaching” (G 
dhamaṭhida, Skt. dharmasthita), the “eye of the teaching” (G dhamacakhu, Skt. dharmacakṣus), and “attaining enlightenment” (G avisabujadi, Skt. abhisambudhyate). Other 
terms could function in a variety of doctrinal contexts including religious practice: for 
example, “virtuous” (G/Skt. kuśala), “perceptual consciousness” (G viñaṇa, Skt. vijñāna), 
“concentration” (G samasi, Skt. samādhi), and “person” (G pugala, Skt. pudgala). In style, 
BL 17 appears to consist of straightforward exposition, and, although some questions and 
comparisons are employed, there is no evidence of structured catechesis, polemical argumentation, or other characteristics of the explicatory strategies typical of the more 
developed Gāndhārī scholastic treatises.
2.2.1.2 Expository treatise: BL 10
British Library fragment 10 contains approximately ninety-four lines of text divided by 
major punctuation marks into three sections. Although the structure of the original text is 
not yet clear, the preserved portion consists of a continuous exposition of praxis-related 
topics possibly unified by the term “insight” (G praña, Skt. prajñā). The first section 
discusses the “noble eightfold path” (G aryaṭhagiyo maga, Skt. āryāṣṭāṅgiko mārgaḥ) in 
relation to being “dissociated from defilements” (G kileśehi viprayuto, Skt. kleśair viprayuktaḥ), the three praxis-related “aggregates” (G dhamakadha, Skt. dharmaskandha), the 
thirty-seven factors favorable to enlightenment, and “states of liberation” (G vimuti, Skt. 
vimukti). The second section contrasts “worthy” and “unworthy persons” (G s̱apuruṣ̱a/
as̱apuruṣ̱a, Skt. satpuruṣa/asatpuruṣa) noting their accompaniment by virtuous or defiled 
factors as well as the worthy person’s practice of the ten “virtuous courses of action” (G 
kuśalakamapatha, Skt. kuśalakarmapatha) and his prospect for a “good rebirth state in a 
heaven” (G sugatisvargaloke upapajati, Skt. sugatisvargaloka upapadyate). The final 
section focuses on “voidness” (G śuñada, Skt. śūnyatā), refers to states such as the “cessation of conception and sensation” (G s̱añavedaïdanirodha, Skt. saṃjñāvedayitanirodha/
saṃjñāveditanirodha), and contrasts the “Buddha abode” (G budhaviharo, Skt. buddhavihāra) with the “abode of the hearers” (G śrapakaviharo, Skt. śrāvakavihāra). 
In style, BL 10 adopts a loosely structured, catechetical format and signals either 
abbreviated or expanded explanation with the commentarial operators “brief” (G s̱akṣeva, 
Skt. saṃkṣepa) and “extensive” (G/Skt. vistara), respectively. It also uses both everyday 
and doctrinal similes, critically examines alternative interpretations indicated by the 
gerundive “it is to be asked” (G prochidava, Skt. praṣṭavya), cites supporting scriptural 
passages, and includes text-internal cross-references marked by such operators as “it has 
been demonstrated previously” (G purvo darśido, Skt. pūrvaṃ darśitam) or “the meaning 
is demonstrated extensively by this” (G artho eteṇa vistarita darśido, Skt. artha etena 
vistāritaṃ darśitaḥ).
2.2.2 Catechetical treatise
The single manuscript represented by BL fragments 20 and 23 contains over 400 lines of 
text, which might be reduced by as much as 25% after partial lines on smaller, broken 
manuscript fragments are combined. Although the middle portion of the manuscript is in 
generally fair condition, secure readings for extended passages as well as a coherent 
picture of the text as a whole are precluded by lacunae, overlying chips, and other manuscript damage. Nonetheless, the legible portions of the manuscript clearly indicate that the 
text treats a variety of doctrinal topics and adopts a more discursive, explicatory style than 
is typical of the straightforward commentaries or simple expository treatises examined thus

--- Page 64 of 425 ---
42
COLLETT COX
far. The terminology of the text is not limited to a single topic but rather spans the two 
major issues of religious practice and epistemology. A range of praxis-related terms are 
used beginning with “mental orientation” (G manasikara, Skt. manasikāra), which forms 
the basis of religious practice, progressing through “calming” (G/Skt. śamatha), “discernment” (G vipaśana, Skt. vipaśyanā) and the “virtuous roots” (G kuśalamula, Skt. kuśalamūla), which lead to “purification through concentration” (G samadhipariśudhi, Skt. 
samādhipariśuddhi). Although also employed in discussions of religious practice, terms 
such as “perceptual consciousness” (G viñana, Skt. vijñāna) and “object-supports” (G 
araṃbana, Skt. ālambana) could also signal epistemological topics. In addition to a more 
discursive style, BL 20+23 differs from the simpler Gāndhārī commentaries and expository 
treatises in its relatively advanced terminology, which suggests familiarity with the more 
developed scholastic schemata and doctrinal arguments found in middle-period Abhidharma texts: for example, “particular inherent characteristic” (G/Skt. svalakṣaṇa), “associated 
conditioned forces” (G saprayutasakhara, Skt. samprayuktasaṃskāra), “knowledge of 
suffering” (G dukhañana, Skt. duḥkhajñāna), “thought and thought concomitants” (G citacetasika, Skt. cittacaitasika), and the “group of six types of perceptual consciousness” (G 
ṣaviñanakaya, Skt. ṣaḍvijñānakāya).
The manuscript preserved in BL 20+23 presents an interesting study in contrasts that 
defies any straightforward attempt at dating whether on the basis of palaeography, 
phonology, format, or contents. Despite certain early palaeographic features such as the 
more angular form for the Kharoṣṭhī syllable ya, BL 20+23 is written in a quick, spidery, at 
times almost cursive hand. It contains features of Old Indo-Aryan phonology: for example, 
both retroflex and dental nasals are used corresponding to the Old Indo-Aryan equivalents 
(G/Skt. svalakṣaṇe; G janami, Skt. jānāmi); tha is retained in intervocalic position rather 
than being changed to the sibilant sa or a as in later Gāndhārī texts (G kathaṃ, Skt. 
katham; G/Skt. atha; G tatha/yatha, Skt. tathā/yathā; G/Skt. śamatha); and anusvāra or 
conjuncts are usually preserved where expected on the basis of Old Indo-Aryan equivalents (G evaṃ, Skt. evam; G kiṃci, Skt. kiṃcid; G prayujaṃti, Skt. prayuñjanti; G teṣaṃ, 
Skt. teṣām; G skaṃdha, Skt. skandha; G aṃtara, Skt. antara; G anatma, Skt. anātman). 
However, certain Middle Indo-Aryan forms also appear: for example, G bhikhu (Skt. 
bhikṣu), G kileśa (Skt. kleśa), G saṃkhara (Skt. saṃskāra), G anica (Skt. anitya), and G 
araṃbana (Skt. ālambana). 
In format, BL 20+23 follows a pattern of strict catechesis used in certain early- or 
middle-period Abhidharma texts such as the *Śāriputrābhidharmaśāstra (T 28 no. 1548), 
Prakaraṇapāda (T 26 no. 1541, T 26 no. 1542), and Dhātukāya (T 26 no. 1540). Each 
section is clearly demarcated by punctuation marks and begins with a question that is 
answered in the subsequent examination. However, in contrast to the lists of synonyms and 
simple definitions elicited by the formulaic questions in these other catechetical Abhidharma texts, the questions raised in BL 20+23 often entail a doctrinal problem or contradiction 
that precipitates an extended discursive examination. The questions with which each section begins are usually introduced by the general interrogatives “what” (G/Skt. katama) or 
“how” (G kathaṃ, Skt. katham): for example, “How is there the complete maturation of 
insight? Mental orientation…” (G kathaṃ praña paripako bhavaṃti manasigara …). And 
the subsequent discursive examination often concludes with the commentarial operator the 
“opposite” or “in the opposite case” (G viparyaya/viparyayeṇa, Skt. viparyāya/viparyāyeṇa), which is commonly used in later Abhidharma texts to indicate a contrasting doctrinal position that further specifies the topic under discussion. Fragment BL 20+23 also 
employs rhetorical questions marked by “furthermore how?” (G api kho puṇa, Skt. api 
khalu punar), cites alternative interpretations introduced by the phrase “or else” (G atha 
va, Skt. athavā), and includes supporting scriptural citations signaled by the phrase “with

--- Page 65 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts: Exegetical Texts
43
regard to this, it has been said by the Bhagavat” (G atra vuta bhagavada, Skt. atro ’ktaṃ 
bhagavatā).
2.2.3 Polemical treatise
The most complex of the Gāndhārī scholastic treatises in both style and content is BL 28, 
which contains 150 virtually complete lines and approximately forty partial lines of text. In 
format, BL 28 is not a commentary nor does it follow the pattern of structured catechesis 
typical of the early- or middle-period Abhidharma texts. Instead, it is polemical and 
records integrated arguments between the text proponent and at least two different opponents on a coherently structured set of doctrinal issues. Although the preserved text is 
divided into four sections by major punctuation marks, their exact function is unclear, and 
the text lacks any other explicit organizational indicators whether in the form of explicit 
section markings, content lists (Skt. uddāna), or an implicit topical matrix (Skt. mātṛkā). 
As a result, the overall structure of the preserved manuscript and its possible relationship 
to the original text from which it came are uncertain. 
Throughout its various arguments, BL 28 appears to be focused on the larger topic of the 
existence of past and future factors. The initial and concluding fragmentary portions of the 
text suggest that this topic may have been embedded in a discussion of religious practice, 
specifically, in relation to the issue of past and future objects as conditions for the arising 
of contaminants (G/Skt. anuśaya). If this is the case, the structure of the portion of the 
original text preserved in BL 28 resembles the discussion of the existence of past and 
future factors found in the Abhidharmakośabhāṣya, which is precipitated by the issue of 
conditions for the arising of contaminants.2
The very fragmentary initial portion of BL 28 contains praxis-related terms such as 
“mindfulness of the body” (G kayasadi, Skt. kāyasmṛti), “clear comprehension” (G/Skt. 
abhisamaya), and the “knowledge of suffering” (G dukhañana, Skt. duḥkhajñāna). The 
underlying question appears to be whether knowledge gained in religious practice can 
apprehend objects of all three time periods of the past, present, and future. In the next 
portion of the manuscript, the text turns to the topic that will be discussed throughout the 
first three sections: the existence of past and future factors specifically in relation to the 
operation of action (G kama, Skt. karman). The first section, including the initial fragments 
and the first three lines of continuous text, presents a general criticism of one opponent’s 
view that certain past and future factors exist, namely, those past actions “whose matured 
effects have not yet matured” (G avivakavivaga, Skt. avipakvavipāka) and their future 
matured effects (G vivaga, Skt. vipāka) that are “subject to arising” (G upaḏadhama, Skt. 
utpādidharma). 
The second section of the text continues this criticism by examining the efficacy of past 
action in karmic functioning and the implications of that efficacy for the existence of past 
factors. The opponent first claims that past actions exist precisely because they are still 
“possessed of a fruit,” thereby implicitly appealing to the principle that causal efficacy 
indicates existence. In response, the text proponent argues that if existent past actions are 
said to possess a fruit or matured effects, those matured effects must also be said to exist 
and should therefore arise or occur at all times. To understand this argument, it is important 
to note that the text proponent identifies the “existence” of a factor with the “occurrence” 
of its activity, which takes place only in the present time period. Thus, for the text proponent, if something exists, it must also be active and therefore present. In response to the 
opponent’s claim of existence only for certain past actions, primarily those “whose ma2 See Abhidharmakośabhāṣya (Pradhan 1975) 5.23–24, pp. 294.4–295.2, which introduces the discussion of the existence of past and future factors found in 5.25–28, pp. 295.2–301.18.

--- Page 66 of 425 ---
44
COLLETT COX
tured effects have not yet matured,” the text proponent rejects the opponent’s attempt to 
draw a distinction within the general category of past factors and instead claims that all 
past factors, as members of the same category, must share the same characteristics. As a 
result, either all past factors exist as capable of producing effects or no past factors exist. 
The text proponent concludes that the opponent’s model not only leaves the efficacy of 
action unexplained but also undermines any attempt to distinguish past from present 
factors. 
In the third section, the text proponent extends analogous arguments to counter the 
opponent’s claim that certain future factors exist. First, the text proponent rejects the 
opponent’s attempt to distinguish future factors that exist as “subject to arising” (G 
upaḏadhama, Skt. utpādidharma) from those that are “not subject to arising” (G anupaḏadhama, Skt. anutpādidharma) and hence do not exist. Next, he criticizes the opponent’s appeal to a “collocation of requisite conditions” (G samagri, Skt. sāmagrī) as instrumental in determining a factor’s status as subject to arising and thereby facilitating its 
production in the present.
Although the opponent in these first three sections is never explicitly identified, his 
views resemble those attributed to the Kāśyapīyas in the commentary to the Kathāvatthu, 
the *Tattvasiddhiśāstra (T 32 no. 1646), and two of the Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma scholastic compendia or Vibhāṣā (T 27 no. 1545, T 28 no. 1546).3 Whereas the Kathāvatthu and 
*Tattvasiddhiśāstra reject this Kāśyapīya viewpoint because it asserts the existence of any 
past or future factors, the Sarvāstivāda Vibhāṣā compendia reject it because it does not 
admit the existence of all past and future factors. The text proponent of this Gāndhārī 
scholastic treatise agrees with the criticism offered by the Kathāvatthu and *Tattvasiddhiśāstra in rejecting the existence of any past or future factors. Thus, the opponent in 
these first three sections appears to be aligned in some way with the Kāśyapīyas, and the 
text proponent presumably holds a position that differs from that of the Sarvāstivādins. 
The fourth and longest section shifts to a topic that in other Abhidharma texts is closely 
connected to the existence of past and future factors: the proposition that “everything 
exists” (G/Skt. sarvam asti). The section begins by citing the views of an opponent 
identified later in the section by the term (G) Mahasarvastivada (Skt. Mahāsarvāstivāda). 
First, the opponent expands upon the basic proposition with a series of declarations: for 
example, “Everything exists at all times. Everything exists everywhere. Everything exists 
with every aspect. …” and so forth (G sarvakala sarvam=asti ◦ sarvatra sarvam=asti ◦ 
sarvagarena sarvam=asti…). Next, the opponent identifies the criterion for existence as 
inclusion within the twelve sense-spheres (G ayaḏana, Skt. āyatana) and offers two 
definitions of existence: (1) existence is the factors of the three time periods that are not 
confused; and (2) existence is the three time periods themselves. The opponent then 
stresses the need to distinguish existence from nonexistence and explains that the proposition “everything exists” does not mean that everything exists from every possible perspective. Finally, the opponent explains that existent factors or time periods are established and 
hence discriminated from one another on the basis of their intrinsic nature (G svabhava, 
Skt. svabhāva). The remainder of the manuscript returns to the perspective of the text 
proponent who offers a point-by-point criticism of the opponent’s position. 
This fourth section provides unequivocal evidence that the text proponent and hence this 
Gāndhārī scholastic treatise as a whole represents a perspective other than that of the 
Sarvāstivādins. Hence, the text proponent in BL 28 is clearly neither a Kāśyapīya nor a 
Sarvāstivādin. Although the text proponent is not explicitly identified at any point in BL 
3 Kathāvatthu 151ff.; Kathāvatthuppakaraṇa-aṭṭhakathā 51; *Tattvasiddhiśāstra (T 32 no. 1646) 3 p. 
258c10ff.; *Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣāśāstra (T 27 no. 1545) 19 p. 96b6ff., 51 263c25ff., 144 741b13ff; 
*Abhidharmavibhāṣāśāstra (T 28 no. 1546) 28 p. 204c14ff.

--- Page 67 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts: Exegetical Texts
45
28, one passage provides a clue. In his criticism of the Sarvāstivāda position that “everything exists,” the text proponent claims that it is precisely his opponents, the Mahāsarvāstivādins, and not the text proponent himself, who should be referred to by the term (G) 
Vivarjavada. This Gāndhārī term, Vivarjavada, can be equated with the Sanskrit Vibhajyavāda or Vibhajyavādin, “those who maintain a distinction.” The precise meaning and 
referent of this term are still uncertain, and it might be used here not to signify a school 
division but rather simply to indicate a mode of doctrinal presentation through the application of distinctions. However, it is also possible that it alludes to an old division among 
early Buddhist practitioners, or Sthaviras, between the Sarvāstivādins as one broad group 
and the others, namely, the Vibhajyavādins. These Vibhajyavādins may have included the 
Mahīśāsakas, Kāśyapīyas, or Dharmaguptakas, among others. The text proponent might 
then reflect a particular perspective within this Vibhajyavāda or non-Sarvāstivāda group, 
presumably one that is also critical of the Kāśyapīyas. This would then leave open the 
possibility, but of course would not prove, that the perspective of BL 28 is that of the 
Dharmaguptakas.
Concerning the school identity of the opponents in BL 28, it has been noted previously 
that the issue of the existence of certain past actions and future effects discussed in the first 
three sections has been associated with the Kāśyapīyas. And in the fourth section, the 
opponent is explicitly identified as a Mahāsarvāstivādin. However, certain of the opponent’s views are inconsistent with those sanctioned by the later Sarvāstivāda-Vaibhāṣikas 
in Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma sources. In particular, the opponent’s second definition of 
existence as the time periods themselves contradicts the orthodox Sarvāstivāda-Vaibhāṣika 
position that the time periods do not exist as entities separate from the factors of which 
they consist. In fact, this view that the time periods themselves exist is attributed to the 
Dārṣṭāntikas and Vibhajyavādins in the Sarvāstivāda Vibhāṣā compendia.4 Significantly, 
BL 28 does not connect this second definition of existence with another group or school, 
but presumably understands it to represent a Sarvāstivāda position. Thus, the two contrasting definitions of existence recorded in BL 28 suggest variety in the positions of actual 
Sarvāstivāda groups at the time of the composition of BL 28, which may have predated the 
recognition of the Dārṣṭāntikas as representing a distinct doctrinal position. Accordingly, 
proponents of the position that the time periods themselves exist were still able to be 
included under the broad label of the Sarvāstivāda, especially when viewed from the outside by competing groups such as the text proponent of BL 28. Thus, at the early date 
represented by BL 28, the Sarvāstivāda label covered multiple ontological viewpoints and 
had not yet become restricted to the positions associated with the later SarvāstivādaVaibhāṣika orthodoxy.
In style, BL 28 resembles dialectical or polemical expository treatises such as the Kathāvatthu, *Āryavasumitrabodhisattvasaṅgītiśāstra (T 28 no. 1549), and certain sections of 
the Vibhāṣā compendia (T 27 no. 1545, T 28 no. 1546, T 28 no. 1547). Entirely focused 
upon argument, it utilizes only a few other interpretive techniques such as text-internal 
cross-referencing, scriptural citations, and similes. The most common argument structure is 
that of Skt. prasaṅga, or “implication of an untoward consequence,” in which an opponent 
is refuted by being forced into either an internal inconsistency or a violation of a commonly accepted doctrinal position or scriptural passage. However, the text proponent’s own 
position remains unstated throughout. Arguments follow a regular polemical pattern that 
begins with the contested position, from which both implications and the untoward 
consequences of these implications are drawn. The typical argument cites the contested 
position in one of three ways: (1) through a simple statement marked by the verb “one 
4 *Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣāśāstra (T 27 no. 1545) 76 p. 393a10ff., 135 p. 700a26ff.; *Abhidharmavibhāṣāśāstra (T 28 no. 1546) 40 p. 293c21ff.

--- Page 68 of 425 ---
46
COLLETT COX
states” (G aha/ahadi, Skt. āha); (2) a question marked by the gerundive “it is to be 
asked” (G prochiḏava, Skt. praṣṭavya); or (3) a conditional clause typically beginning with 
“if” (G yadi/yidi, Skt. yadi) and concluding with the quotative particle G di (Skt. iti). Next, 
the text proponent offers his own criticism, often beginning with the phrase “with regard to 
that, it is to be said” (G tatra vatava, Skt. tatra vaktavyam). This phrase introduces either 
interrogative or further conditional statements that outline the implications of the contested 
position. Usually, the implications are divided into two logical alternatives separated by the 
term “or else” (G aa va, Skt. athavā), and the inclusion of the final portion of an argument 
or of additional supporting material is signaled by the operator “and so on” (G peyala, Skt. 
peyāla/paryāya). Each of these alternatives is then demonstrated to result in an untoward 
consequence, which is usually introduced by the word “then” (G/Skt. tena). The refutation 
entails a demand for internal consistency, the strict application of definitions and distinctions, and various types of metonymy. 
Although the same argument pattern and methods of refutation are used in other middle- 
or late-period Abhidharma texts, the arguments in BL 28 are more simple and formulaic. 
Perhaps the closest analogue in both content and method is the Pāli Abhidhamma text, the 
Kathāvatthu, which raises the possibility that BL 28 constitutes another example of a much 
more common type of exegetical text, namely, a rudimentary polemical text that records 
doctrinal disagreements but without the detail and complexity typical of the highly developed Abhidharma treatises of the second to fifth centuries CE.
3. Significance: historical and contextual issues
For Buddhist scholarship, these Gāndhārī exegetical texts will prove to be highly significant for several reasons. First, the Gāndhārī manuscripts date from the first to second centuries CE and hence constitute important evidence predating the regularizing redaction that 
yielded the later canonical texts and exegetical works. For the text history of the exegetical 
genre in particular, the first century CE was a pivotal moment in the progression from the 
straightforward commentary to the relatively more complicated scholastic treatise. 
Second, the Gāndhārī manuscripts provide invaluable evidence of a Buddhist manuscript tradition within the region of Gandhāra and of a regionally localized, exegetical 
tradition different from those represented by the other known commentaries and scholastic 
treatises of the Pāli and northern Indian traditions. Since no text parallels among any of the 
extant Buddhist collections have yet been identified for these Gāndhārī exegetical texts, 
they constitute unique textual witnesses that attest to as-yet-unknown, early Buddhist exegetical lineages. The Gandhāran evidence also logically supports the presence of local 
manuscript production and hence exegetical lineages in other regions of India at this early 
date. Further, given similarities in style and interpretive techniques as well as specific 
examples and arguments shared with other early Indian Buddhist commentaries and 
scholastic treatises, the Gāndhārī texts indicate connections among the extant early Buddhist exegetical works and suggest, if not specific text-historical connections, at least an 
emerging set of significant doctrinal issues and a shared body of conventionalized positions, examples, and arguments on these issues. Finally, the differing doctrinal interpretations and apparent school labels recorded in the Gāndhārī exegetical texts permit a more 
complex view of the variety of school self-identification employed in the doctrinal disputes 
of this period and the fluid and dynamic nature of these early debates in contrast to the 
ossified doctrinal positions as recorded in the later scholastic treatises or doxographies. 
Third, the relatively large number and variety of exegetical texts preserved in Gāndhārī 
provides evidence for the development of the exegetical genre and specifically for the 
function and context of use of both commentaries and scholastic treatises. As the previous 
overview and classification of Gāndhārī exegetical texts suggests, the use of similar but

--- Page 69 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts: Exegetical Texts
47
increasingly complex exegetical methods throughout these various texts encourages us to 
extend the boundaries of commentary beyond the simple straightforward commentaries to 
include the independent scholastic treatises. Certainly, independent scholastic treatises represent a later and more complex stage of development that reflects their new context of 
inter-school debate and competition from other traditions. They also clearly attest to selfreferential activity, in which an attempt is made to systematize previous teaching in a cohesive whole around certain significant doctrinal issues. However, these independent scholastic treatises arose within a lineage of interpretation that is continuous with the earlier 
simple commentaries. They were motivated by the same purposes of preserving and 
adapting an authoritative textual tradition and utilized the same interpretive techniques. 
Thus, from an historical perspective, the commentarial genre develops along a continuous 
path, beginning in fact with the sūtras themselves and culminating in the independent 
scholastic treatises of the Abhidharma. 
In the sūtras, the Buddha’s preferred teaching method is portrayed as one of selfquestioning and explanation, itself a commentarial strategy. Increasingly more advanced 
commentarial activity is evident in the sūtras in their attempt to structure the teaching 
through a number of analytical or organizational techniques: for example, the formulation 
of sets of doctrinal categories and the second-level organization of these category sets in 
numerically structured sūtras such as the Saṅgīti and Daśottara (Dasuttarasutta, Dīghanikāya: no. 34, 3.272–292); the secondary arrangement of entire sūtras either numerically 
in accordance with category sets as in the Aṅguttara (Skt. Ekottarika) or topically as in the 
Saṃyutta (Skt. Saṃyukta) collections; and finally the application of topical matrices (Skt. 
mātṛkā) as observed in some sūtras. In addition to these structural attempts to organize the 
teaching systematically, certain sūtras such as those in the Vibhaṅgavagga of the Majjhimanikāya (Majjhimanikāya: 3.187–257) constitute unmistakable examples of the integration of exegetical methods within the very fabric of individual sūtras. 
The fundamental commentarial impulse to make the implicit explicit and the specific 
exegetical methods employed in these sūtras are continued without interruption through 
the commentaries and into the texts classified by the tradition as Abhidharma. The earliest 
Abhidharma texts such as the Pāli Vibhaṅga and, among the northern texts, the *Śāriputrābhidharma and Dharmaskandha are obviously commentaries in both structure and 
method. They proceed as true commentaries, extending the topical matrices first presented 
in passages from the sūtras and adopting sūtra passages as the very basis for their discussion of each doctrinal topic. Later Abhidharma scholastic treatises forego the simple 
commentary format and attempt to systematize the teaching according to external criteria. 
Nevertheless, they never lose touch with the exegetical methods that indicate their origins 
within the fundamental commentarial tradition.
Thus, this unbroken lineage of exegesis gradually comes to be expressed in distinct 
commentaries and finally in independent scholastic treatises, which should not therefore be 
seen as the ancillary by-products of an elite institutionalized or monastic culture. Instead, 
they represent the natural result of oral transmission and function as the indispensable 
context that mediated continued access to the teaching. The textual tradition from sūtra to 
Abhidharma is continuously transformed by the recursive operations of commentary, in 
which each small act of textual exegesis is fed back into the tradition to exert its own often 
unpredictable effects. Thus, the authoritative transmission of the teaching is carried out 
through this continuous transformative activity of commentary, which is reflexively 
enacted upon itself.
Commentaries serve many functions including the simple explanation of words and 
phrases, the resolution of contradictions, the construction of ideological systems, and the 
establishment of authoritative “text communities.” However, given the oral method of

--- Page 70 of 425 ---
48
COLLETT COX
composition, preservation, explanatory elaboration, and transmission of the early Buddhist 
teachings, the social and pedagogical functions of commentary as the medium for learning 
and preservation of the teaching became paramount. The presence of commentary-like 
sūtras suggests that commentaries do not function merely as attempts to resolve contradictions or select among contending interpretations, functions that only become necessary 
with the appearance of multiple textual sources or with the attempt to determine an 
authoritative collection of texts that arises with canon-closure. Instead, commentaries have 
always existed together with the fundamental teachings that they elaborate; they represent 
the inevitable concomitants of oral methods of teaching and transmission present within 
the Buddhist tradition from its beginnings. Thus, the exegetical texts preserved in Gāndhārī 
provide an unprecedented view of the variety of early Buddhist exegesis, which reinforces 
this model of the essential pedagogical function of commentary and captures the development of the exegetical genre at a crucial stage.
Abbreviations
BL 
British Library
G 
Gāndhārī 
P 
Pāli
Skt. Sanskrit
T 
Taishō shinshū daizōkyō (Takakusu and Watanabe 1924–1934)
Works Cited
Baums, Stefan. 2009. “A Gāndhārī Commentary on Early Buddhist Verses: British Library 
Kharoṣṭhī fragments 7, 9, 13 and 18.” PhD diss., University of Washington.
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe. 1994. “Der Ṣaṭsūtraka-Abschnitt des in Ostturkistan überlieferten Dīrghāgama.” XXV Deutscher Orientalistentag, Vorträge, Cornelia Wunsch, ed., Zeitschrift der 
Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft. Supplementband 10. Stuttgart: 324–34.
Hoernle, A. F. Rudolf. 1916. Manuscript Remains of Buddhist Literature Found in Eastern Turkestan. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Lévi, Sylvain. 1932. “Note sur des manuscrits sanscrites provenant de Bamiyan (Afghanistan) et de 
Gilgit (Cachemire).” Journal Asiatique 220: 1–45.
Salomon, Richard. 1999. Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhāra: the British Library Kharoṣṭhī 
Fragments. Seattle: University of Washington Press. 
Stache-Rosen, Valentina. 1968. Dogmatische Begriffsreihen im älteren Buddhismus II; Das 
Saṅgitisūtra und sein Kommentar Saṅgītiparyāya. Berlin: Akademie Verlag. 
Strauch, Ingo. 2008. “The Bajaur Collection of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts – A Preliminary Survey.” 
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 25: 103–136.
Takakusu Junjirō and Watanabe Kaigyoku, with Ono Genmyō. 1924–34. Taishō shinshū daizōkyō. 
Tōkyō: Taishō issaikyō kankōkai.
Tripāṭhī, Chandrabhāl. 1985. “Saṅgīti-sūtra, Nipāta II, und Ekottarāgama-Parallelen.” In Heinz 
Bechert, ed. Zur Schulzugehörigkeit von Werken der Hīnayāna-Literatur. 2 vols. Symposien 
zur Buddhismusforschung 3.1. Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen, Philologisch-historische Klasse, ser. 3, no. 149. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht: 
Vol. I, 191–199.

--- Page 71 of 425 ---
Gāndhārī Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts: Exegetical Texts
49
Texts
Chinese translations: 
T 1 no. 1 [9] Cháng āhán jīng 長阿含經 (Dīrghāgama).
T 1 no. 12 Dà jífămén jīng 大集法門經 (*Saṅgītidharmaparyāyasūtra).
T 26 no. 1536 Āpídámó jíyìmén zú lún 阿毘達磨集異門足論 (Saṅgītiparyāya).
T 26 no. 1540 Āpídámó jièshēn zú lùn 阿毘達磨界身足論 (Dhātukāya).
T 26 no. 1541 Zhòngshìfēn āpítán lún 眾事分阿毘曇論 (Prakaraṇapāda).
T 26 no. 1542 Āpídámó pĭnlèi zú lùn 阿毘達磨品類足論 (Prakaraṇapāda).
T 27 no. 1545 Āpídámó dàpípóshā lún 阿毘達磨大毘婆沙論 (*Abhidharmamahāvibhāṣāśāstra).
T 28 no. 1546 Āpítán pípóshā lún 阿毘曇毘婆沙論 (*Abhidharmavibhāṣāśāstra).
T 28 no. 1547 Bĭngpóshā lún 鞞婆沙論 (*Vibhāṣāśāstra).
T 28 no. 1548 Shèlìfú āpítán lún 舍利弗阿毘曇論 (*Śāriputrābhidharmaśāstra).
T 28 no. 1549 Zūn póxūmì púsà suŏ jí lún 尊婆須蜜菩薩所集論 (*Āryavasumitrabodhisattvasaṅgītiśāstra).
T 28 no. 1550 Āpítán xīn lún 阿毘曇心論 (*Abhidharmahṛdayaśāstra).
T 28 no. 1551 Āpítán xīn lún jīng 阿毘曇心論經 (*Abhidharmahṛdayaśāstra).
T 32 no. 1647 Sìdì lún 四諦論 (*Catuḥsatyaśāstra).
T 32 no. 1646 Chéngshí lún 成實論 (*Tattvasiddhiśāstra).
Pāli and Sanskrit:
Abhidharmakośa and Bhāṣya: Pradhan, P. 1975. Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam of Vasubandhu. Tibetan 
Sanskrit works series, 8. Patna: K. P. Jayaswal Research Institute. 
Aṅguttaranikāya: Morris, Richard, E. Hardy and Mabel Hunt. 1885–1910. The Aṅguttara-Nikāya. 
London: Pali Text Society.
Dīghanikāya: Rhys Davids, T. W., and J. Estlin Carpenter. 1890–1911. The Dīgha Nikāya. London: 
Pali Text Society.
Dīghanikāya-aṭṭhakathā: Rhys Davids, T. W., J. Estlin Carpenter, and W. Stede. 1886–1932. The 
Sumaṅgala-Vilāsinī: Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on the Dīgha-Nikāya. London: Pali Text 
Society.
Kathāvatthu: Taylor, Arnold C. 1894–97. Kathāvatthu. London: Pali Text Society.
Kathāvatthuppakaraṇa-aṭṭhakathā: Jayawickrama, N. A. 1979. Kathāvatthuppakaraṇa-aṭṭhakathā 
(Paramatthadīpanī). London: Pali Text Society. 
Majjhimanikāya: Trenckner, V., Robert Chalmers, and C. A. F. Rhys Davids. 1888–1925. The 
Majjhima-Nikāya. London: Pali Text Society.
Nettippakaraṇa: Hardy, E. 1902. The Netti-pakaraṇa with Extracts from Dhammapāla’s Commentary. London: Pali Text Society.
Niddesa (I): La Vallée Poussin, L. de, and E. J. Thomas. 1916–1917. Niddesa I: Mahāniddesa. 
London: Oxford University Press.
Niddesa (II): Stede, W. 1918. Niddesa II: Cullaniddesa. London: Oxford University Press.
Peṭakopadesa: Barua, Arabinda, 1982. The Peṭakopadesa. Revised edition. London: Pali Text 
Society. 
Saṃyuttanikāya: Feer, Léon. 1884–1904. The Saṃyutta-nikāya of the Sutta-piṭaka. London: Pali 
Text Society.

--- Page 72 of 425 ---


--- Page 73 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
within the Context of Buddhist Gāndhārī Literature
HARRY FALK (BERLIN) AND INGO STRAUCH (LAUSANNE)
1. Introduction
During the last decade the collections of Gāndhārī manuscripts being studied by the Early 
Buddhist Manuscripts Project in Seattle have been supplemented by two new manuscript 
finds which are said to originate from the northwest of Pakistan, or — more precisely — 
from the Bajaur district in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (former Northwest Frontier Province). 
The Bajaur Collection is named after the find-spot on the northern edge of the region 
Bajaur on the border with Afghanistan, while the Split Collection has no attested place of 
origin. Since some more parts coming from the same source have surfaced in the antiquities market, pointing at a segmentation or split-up of the original lot, the term “Split 
Collection” is used to allow further acquisitions to find a home under the same roof. Both 
new collections contain important additions to the hitherto known corpus of Gāndhārī 
literature, among them two texts which clearly belong to the Mahāyāna branch of Buddhism. The Bajaur Collection houses what is to this date the largest manuscript of a 
Mahāyāna sūtra in the Gāndhārī language. Although it resembles in many regards various 
genres of early Mahāyāna — including Prajñāpāramitā texts and Pure Land Buddhist texts 
like the Akṣobhyavyūha — it is not identical with any known sūtra. The Split Collection 
contains the earliest known manuscript of a Prajñāpāramitā text. The contents of both collections can consequently be used to get some new data for one of the most controversially 
debated questions in the history of Buddhism, namely the doctrinal and institutional 
contexts in which early Mahāyāna arose. This question is of course closely connected with 
the problem of the specific character of Gandhāran Buddhism and its literary production. 
It is only possible to evaluate the evidence of a given text or text collection by appropriately considering this extended background of Gāndhārī Buddhist literature and defining 
the position of the respective textual material therein. However, despite the enormous 
progress made in Gandhāran studies in the last decade — mainly thanks to the work done 
by the members of the Early Buddhist Manuscripts Project under the guidance of Richard 
Salomon — such a survey of Gāndhārī literature which subsumes the main available data 
from the perspective of literary genres is still a desideratum. 
Our paper will therefore introduce the new collections studied in Berlin — i.e. the 
Bajaur and Split Collections — by contrasting their inventory of texts with the currently 
available corpus of Gāndhārī literature. Thus it will also provide a base for further research 
by organizing the rather disparate information about this corpus according to the available 
publications in a concise and systematic form. Due to the ongoing or sometimes even not 
yet initiated research on many of the texts cited in this survey the information must be 
regarded as preliminary, to be superseded by a future comprehensive history of Gāndhārī 
literature which remains to be written.
Before coming to this overview of literary genres it is, however, necessary to give a 
short introduction to the main physical features of the Bajaur and Split Collections and the 
history of their discovery and research. 
2. Gāndhārī Studies in Berlin
2.1 The Bajaur Collection of Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts
The Bajaur Collection of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts was discovered in 1999 in the ruins of a 
Buddhist monastery near the village of Mian Kili in the Dir district. The monastery itself is

--- Page 74 of 425 ---
52
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
situated on the opposite bank of the river Rud which marks the boundary of the modern 
districts Dir and Bajaur. Hence it was decided to name the collection “Bajaur Collection.” 
The monastery has not been excavated nor is it described in secondary literature. Its 
position can be best explained by the existence of a trade route connecting the Swat valley 
via two passes towards the Kunar valley and thence towards Nangahar or Citral.
In the year of their discovery the manuscripts were handed over to M. Nasim Khan, at 
that time Assistant Professor in (now Professor and Head of) the Department of Archaeology of the University of Peshawar. 
In March–April 2004 the authors of this article spent a couple of days at the Peshawar 
University for a series of lectures. During this period a large set of birch-bark fragments 
were shown to them by M. Nasim Khan who had secured them, unrolled them and put 
them into glass frames according to the method which had been described by Richard 
Salomon in his ground-breaking monograph on the British Library birch-bark scrolls 
(1999). Soon the idea came up to establish a special manuscript project under a more 
comprehensive umbrella named “Pak-German projects,” which were supposed to comprise 
also archaeological, ethnological and geographical components. As a first step towards 
cataloguing the manuscripts they were given preliminary signatures in April 2004 by Ingo 
Strauch, with a view to clarifying the number of manuscripts and scribes and the interrelationship of the fragments. After a preparatory phase of 18 months, the Bajaur Collection 
Project — financed by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) — started its work in 
October 2005 at the Freie Universität Berlin with Harry Falk as its supervisor, Ingo 
Strauch as Scientific Collaborator and Andrea Schlosser as Student Collaborator. On the 
Pakistani side, M. Nasim Khan and Sohail Khan received equipment and financial support 
and represented the project in Peshawar. 
During the initial phase from October 2005 to May 2007 high-resolution digital images 
of the frames were prepared by the Pakistani partners which still serve as the basis for our 
reconstruction and editing work.
On this basis a first preliminary catalogue with sample extracts and translations was 
completed and published online on the homepage of our project, which went public in 
August 2007. This online article was revisited and slightly reworked in May 2008 according to a series of valuable comments, particularly from the side of our colleagues from 
Seattle, with whom a rather close cooperation developed (Strauch 2007/8). The main 
results of this preliminary survey were published in Strauch 2008. 
Due to several reasons the intended collaboration with the Pakistani side failed. Since 
2007 the Bajaur Collection Project has therefore been acting independently from the 
Department of Archaeology of the Peshawar University.
The focus of the project’s present work is directed towards the final edition of four 
manuscripts from a Śrāvakayāna canonical or paracanonical background (BajC 1, 3, 5,13) 
and towards the first exploration of the contents and characteristics of the collection’s most 
important text, the Mahāyāna sūtra BajC 2 (Strauch 2010).
The Bajaur Collection comprises altogether fragments from about 191 different birch-bark 
scrolls, containing around 22 different texts written by at least 18 different scribes. They are 
now preserved in 35 frames. Their extent is rather different — ranging from a small manuscript measuring only 6 cm in length (BajC 5) up to a large scroll over 2 m long (BajC 2).
1 It cannot be ruled out that further research will reveal that some of the fragments and scribes treated 
here separately are in fact identical. The numbers are therefore provisional.

--- Page 75 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
53
Figure 1: Part of the Bajaur birch-bark manuscript 2 containing an early Gāndhārī Mahāyāna 
sūtra with the junctures indicated, partially reconstructed. Courtesy: The Bajaur Collection 
Project, Freie Universität Berlin.
The formats represented in the Bajaur Collection correspond to the varieties known so far. 
Out of the 19 scrolls eleven belong to the so-called “long and narrow” type of scroll meas-

--- Page 76 of 425 ---
54
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
uring 11–18 cm in width. Their length can vary considerably. Up to 45 cm they are formed 
by a single sheet of birch bark. Scrolls exceeding this length are glued together forming 
thereby the so-called composite scrolls (see Figure 1 preceding page).
The remaining manuscripts belong to the “wide and short” format type, which is usually 
wider than 20 cm. Often they have been folded in the middle after having been rolled up, 
and consequently have been broken vertically. This damage has often resulted in the loss of 
considerable portions of one of the manuscript’s sides. 
In most cases the scrolls are inscribed on both sides with a single text. There are, 
however, a few manuscripts where the reverse was originally left uninscribed. Some of 
these uninscribed reverses were later on used secondarily for other texts. 
2.2 The Split Collection
In 2005 Harry Falk was shown a few rolls of birch bark by a collector in Pakistan. They 
had allegedly been inspected earlier by a manuscript dealer from Europe and pronounced 
fakes. Little was said about their provenance, with hints towards Mohmand or Bajaur. It 
soon turned out that the original find was much larger than the few rolls presented. 
Certainly, the writing visible on the rolls did not support the idea of a forgery. The 
proprietor consented to have the scrolls opened for a thorough inspection.
 This revealed that the material contained parts of five different texts, consisting of four 
scrolls and one single flat sheet. The rolls were opened and the fragments put into doublesided glass frames. All the rolls are no wider than 14 cm. Rolls which were originally 
wider than this have lost the excess material. Their length ranges from 2 cm to 90 cm. 
None of them is joined to a second sheet.
The quality of the birch bark is not uniform. The single sheet is of the sort of well-aged 
and thick bark which is, comparatively, unusually well-preserved without flaws in its 
texture. The four scrolls, however, were made from rather young bark, which tends to 
delaminate. 
The single sheet and all of the scrolls are inscribed at least partially on both sides.
All scrolls were inscribed in different hands. The handwriting is not uniform. Every 
hand has its own particularities in respect of forms of letters as well as modes of “orthography.” 
Small fragments from two rolls were subjected to 14C tests. One result encompassed 
almost the whole range of the last two centuries BC, with a peak in ca. 84 BC (Two sigma 
range, cal., 184–46 BC with a probability of 95%).
The second test yielded 74 AD as the central date in a Two sigma range from 47 to 127 
AD with a probability of 81%. While the first result does not concur with what we believe 
we know about the stages of Kharoṣṭhī and their chronology, the second is well in accord 
with present-day views on the development of this script. 
3. The Bajaur and Split Collections within the context of Gāndhārī literature
3.1 The corpus of Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts
The Bajaur and Split Collections continue a series of discoveries which were sparked off in 
1994 by the large manuscript find which was later acquired by the British Library. It is 
now commonly known as the British Library Collection. The following years witnessed 
further discoveries, which can help us gain a comprehensive picture of the literature which 
was current in Gandhāra between the first century BC and the fourth century AD. By now 
the following manuscript collections and single manuscripts are available2:
2 The following articles contain useful surveys of some of these collections: Glass 2004, Salomon

--- Page 77 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
55
Beside these major collections and manuscripts there is small number of rather fragmentary remnants of Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts (cf. Glass 2004: 142, Salomon 1999: 58–68). 
According to their provenance they can be divided into two groups. 
The first of them comprises manuscripts from Central Asia, as e.g. a very small paper 
fragment discovered by Sven Hedin in Loulan which does not, however, allow for any 
meaningful reading (Conrady 1920: 113, 191, pl. 38, no. 36). The texts on two other paper 
fragments from the Otani Collection (Hasuike 2004: 95f., no. 6101) show a strong 
tendency towards Sanskritization and probably belong to the late phase of Kharoṣṭhī 
writing in the 3rd–4th c. AD.3 
The second group is represented by Kharoṣṭhī fragments from Afghanistan like the 
fragment on palm-leaf discovered in 1834 by Charles Masson beside numerous other 
fragmentary pieces in one of the sites at Haḍḍa near Jalalabad (Wilson 1841: between pp. 
53 and 54, pl. III, no. 11). The presence of Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts in this region is also 
confirmed by the excavations of J. Barthoux in 1926–28 and Mustamandi in 1966–1973, 
which brought to light many small Kharoṣṭhī fragments which remained, however, 
unpublished (Salomon 1999: 63–65). 
The other Afghanistan “center of Kharoṣṭhī writing” is Bamiyan, where the manuscripts 
of the Schøyen Collection are said to have their origin. From the same region are four 
small Kharoṣṭhī fragments on palm leaf discovered from Shahr-i Zuhak, twelve kilometres 
away from Bamiyan (Pauly 1967: pl. 4, nos. E–H). Another hitherto unpublished palm-leaf 
folio which was part of the collection of the Kabul Museum can probably be identified 
with the manuscript remains discovered by Joseph Hackin “in a cave thirty-five meters 
east of the great Buddha of Bamiyan” (Salomon 1999: 66). Thanks to a photograph made 
by Herbert Härtel in the 1970s (cf. Sander, infra) it is possible to determine the language of 
 Name
 Manuscript collections
British Library Collection
Senior Collection
Bamiyan fragments of the 
Schøyen and other private collections
Central Asian fragments (Pelliot 
Collection, Oldenburg Collection)
Bajaur Collection
Split Collection
Unpublished private collection
 Single Manuscripts
Khotan Dharmapada
Library of Congress Scroll
University of Washington Scroll
 Siglum
 BL
 RS
 MS
 PC,
 OC
 BajC
 SplitC
 –
 KhDhp
 LC
 UW
 Manuscripts/
 scribes
 28/21
 24/1
 > 50 / > 50
 5–8/5–8
 19/18
 5/5
 1+x/1+x
 1/1
 1/2
 1/1
 Date
(c. AD)
 1
 1–2
 2–4
 2–4
 1–2
 -1–2
 1–2
 1–2
 1–2
 1–2
 Main source of information
 Salomon 1999
 Salomon 2003, Allon 2007b
 Allon and Salomon 2000, 
Allon et al. 2006
 Salomon 1998, Vorob’evaDesi͡atovskai͡a 2006
 Strauch 2007/8, Strauch 2008
 Falk 2011
 Allon and Salomon 2010: 11
 Brough 1962
 Salomon and Baums 2007
 Glass 2004: 141f.
2006b, Allon 2007b and 2008. 
3 We will not consider here the few documents written in the later “Formal Kharoṣṭhī” from the Kuca 
and Turfan oases in Xinjiang which seems to have been in use till the 7th c. AD. For a preliminary survey 
of these documents see Sander 1999: 69–73. Two of them have been read and translated by LIN Meicun 
(2004).

--- Page 78 of 425 ---
56
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
this text as Buddhist Sanskrit and to fix its date to the late phase of Kharoṣṭhī, i.e. the 3rd–
4th c. AD.4 
During his stay in Peshawar in 2008 Ingo Strauch was shown another small palm-leaf 
fragment. Its exact provenance is not known, but according to its appearance and the 
information available from the owner it probably belongs to the group of Kharoṣṭhī 
manuscripts from Afghanistan. It is published here for the first time (Figure 2). 
2A
2B
Figure 2: A new fragment of a Kharoṣṭhī palm-leaf manuscript, seen in Peshawar in 2008 
(Photograph: Ingo Strauch)
It reads: 
Side A: /// ? [śatha] sakṣe prati ? ///
/// [śa]tha kri ṣ[a pa] ? ///
Side B: /// (*śa)thu prahana samodha ///
/// ? śa ma go 4-1-1 [śath]. ///
The text cannot be identified on the basis of the preserved portion. Preliminary study 
reveals that it repeatedly refers to the Buddha, called here by his epithet Skt. śāstā (G. 
śatha/śathu (“teacher”).5 Other identifiable lexemes include sakṣe, Skt. sākṣī (“witness”), 
prahana, Skt. prahāṇa (“abandoning”), and samodha(*na), Skt. samavadhāna, P. samodhāna (“collocation, combination”). According to the inserted numeral “6,” the text 
consists of at least seven segments.
It is certain that there are many more as yet unpublished fragments of Kharoṣṭhī 
manuscripts in private collections.6 Most of them are rather too small and fragmentary to 
allow any further conclusions about their character or contents. Therefore they will not be 
considered in this survey. 
Despite the growing amount of texts it has to be surmised that they represent only the tip 
of the iceberg of a much larger literary tradition. It is presently impossible to determine 
whether they are representative of Gāndhārī literature as a whole. Moreover, the present 
preliminary state of research, with many texts still unedited and unstudied, prevents us 
from drawing definitive conclusions. Nonetheless, it is already possible to use the available 
information for a survey of the presence and distribution of literary genres within Gāndhārī 
Buddhist literature.
4 The Buddhist Sanskrit character is e.g. indicated by forms like kāreṃti (Skt. kārayanti) (3B, line 2) 
and catvāri aryasatyāni (3A, line 3).
5 For śathu as nom. sg. m. cf. Lenz 2010: 42. Alternative Gāndhārī variants include śastu and śasta. 
6 Some of these fragments and the available evidence on “lost” manuscripts are discussed by Salomon 
(1999: 59–65).

--- Page 79 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
57
3.2 The genres of Gāndhārī literature
The table below summarizes the evidence which will be discussed in more detail in the 
subsequent paragraphs. The figure in the respective field indicates the number of texts 
belonging to this genre.
Key to ms collections and single mss: BL = British Library; RS = Senior Collection; MS = Bamiyan fragments 
of the Schøyen and other collections; PC/OC = Central Asian fragments of the Pelliot and Oldenburg 
Collections; BajC = Bajaur Collection; SplitC = Split Collection; UC = Unpublished Collection; KDhp = 
Khotan Dharmapada; LC = Library of Congress; UW = University of Washington
Since some manuscripts contain more than one text — sometimes even texts belonging 
to different genres — the number of manuscripts is not identical with the number of texts. 
Many of these manuscripts are as yet unedited and unstudied — it is therefore not always 
possible to determine the exact number of texts contained in them with a sufficient degree 
of certainty. In these cases the figure refers to the number of manuscripts where the 
 Ms collection/single ms
 Suggested date (c. AD)
 Number of manuscripts
 Śrāvakayāna Canonical Texts
 Paracanonical (Śrāvakayāna) texts
 Mahāyāna texts
 Non-Buddhist texts
 Vinaya
 Āgama sūtra/verse texts
 Abhidharma (see below)
 Scholastic texts/commentaries
 Rakṣā sūtras/Dhāraṇī
 Avadāna/pūrvayoga (collections)
 Buddha praises/stotra
 Miscellaneous/undetermined texts
 Sūtras
 Scholastic texts
 Nīti texts
 Secular documents
 Prātimokṣasūtra
 Karmavācanā
 Vinaya related narrative prose
 Dīrghāgama
 Madhyamāgama
 Saṃyuktāgama
 Ekottarikāgama
 Kṣudrakāgama
 Unidentified/unspecified
 Scholastic treatises
 Commentaries
 Unspecified texts
 Verse texts
 Prose texts
 Unspecified texts/fragments
BL
1–2
28
1CM
3
3M+7CM
1
5
4
7
1
1
6
RS
1–2
24
*5
1
4
29
1M
MS
2–4
> 50
1
1
3
PC/
OC
2–4
5–8
1
4
1
3
BajC
1–2
19
2
2
1
9
2
2
2
1
*3
1
1
SplitC
-1–2
5
2M
1
1
1
UC
1–2
1+x
1
KDhp
1–2
1
1M
LC
1–2
1
1
UW
1–2
1
1
Total
> 135
2
2
*5
3
5
29
3
13
2
14
5
2
2
12
4
3
8
3
6
*3
1
1

--- Page 80 of 425 ---
58
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
respective textual genre is attested. The actual number of texts might consequently be 
somewhat higher.
Superscript “C” indicates that a certain text is attested as part of a commentary. Superscript “M” points to the metrical character of a text. Uncertain attributions are indicated by 
an asterisk *.
With regard to their inventories the collections show distinctive differences. The Senior 
Collection contains only sūtras or closely related narrative texts from an assumed Vinaya 
background, written by a single scribe. It is therefore possible to designate this collection 
as an intentional compilation of canonical texts, probably intended from the outset for 
ritual burial inside a stūpa. On the other hand, the British Library, Bajaur and Split 
Collections — and most probably also the less well-preserved collections from Bamiyan 
and Central Asia — are rather heterogeneous compilations which comprise a multitude of 
Buddhist literary genres. The manuscripts’ varying states of preservation as well as their 
arbitrary inventory seem to indicate other purposes. Although it is possible that the 
manuscripts as we got them had been ritually buried after use,7 their primary purpose was 
certainly different and seems to point to an active use, either as part of a monastery library 
or in the personal possession of an individual monk. 
The data presented in the table above will now be expounded in more detail by concisely introducing the hitherto known texts according to their genre affiliation. Special attention is given here to the Bajaur and Split Collections, which are being studied by the 
authors of this article. More information about the other manuscripts and manuscript 
collections can be found in the articles by Mark Allon, Collett Cox and Richard Salomon 
in the present volume. 
Each introductory paragraph is followed by a synoptic list containing all hitherto known 
texts or manuscripts of the respective genre. As indicated above, texts which are preserved 
only within a commentary are marked by superscript “C”. They actually belong to the 
category of “Scholastic texts and commentaries,” but, of course, provide positive evidence 
for the circulation of the texts which they are commenting on. Sometimes, however, texts 
appear as well as parts of a commentary as they do as uncommented independent units. For 
distinguishing between these two varieties, these texts (e.g. the Dharmapada and the 
Arthapada) are cited twice: once as parts of a commentary and once as independent texts.
The titles of the sūtras are generally indicated in the form of their Pāli (P.) or Sanskrit 
(Skt.) parallels. If no parallels are available, a hypothetical Skt. title is given (*), followed 
by its presumable Gāndhārī equivalent, if the editors or researchers of the text decided to 
introduce such a designation. All titles are listed in the order of the Latin alphabet. The 
sign  preceding a bibliographical reference means that the work in question contains a 
complete edition of the manuscript or text.
3.2.1 Canonical Śrāvakayāna literature
The term “canonical” is used here without any implication for the assumed shape of the 
Gāndhārī Buddhist canon. This category indicates that direct parallels of the respective 
texts are parts of canonical collections of other Buddhist traditions. Consequently, the table 
above as well as this annotated survey are not meant to suggest that the texts included here 
once formed such a coherent body of texts, which could be identified as a canon or protocanon. Moreover, it cannot be taken for granted that all the texts can be attributed to a 
single and clearly identifiable Buddhist school (cf. Strauch 2008: 114f.). Although there is 
a certain amount of evidence which points to the Dharmaguptakas as originators of these 
texts, we can hardly exclude the participation of other schools. As far as the epigraphical 
7 See the discussion in Salomon 2009, Strauch 2008: 104f., and Strauch, forthcoming, a.

--- Page 81 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
59
evidence indicates, apart from the Dharmaguptakas there was a strong presence of 
Sarvāstivādins in “Greater Gandhāra,” including the region of Haḍḍa from where at least 
the British Library Collection is said to have come.8
3.2.1.1 Vinaya texts 
Until very recently it has repeatedly been suggested that the writing down of this textual 
genre started in a much later period of Buddhist history, i.e. from the 4th c. AD onwards. 
Neither the first known collections of Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts nor the Kuṣāṇa period manuscripts from Eastern Turkestan contained any texts from a Vinaya. Although it cannot be 
excluded that some of the narrative texts from the Senior Collection are reflective of a 
Vinaya background (cf. Allon 2007a: 22), the first indisputable evidence for written texts 
from a Vinaya could be identified among the manuscripts of the Bajaur Collection, which 
contains two different versions of a part of the Prātimokṣasūtra and two Karmavācanā 
formulae. Both texts are not transmitted as parts of a Vibhaṅga or Skandhaka, but as independent texts. They are not only the oldest Vinaya manuscripts known so far — their importance for the textual history of this genre is augmented by the fact that they are even 
older than the earliest Chinese translations of Vinaya literature, which go back to the 4th c. 
AD. 
3.2.1.1.1 Prātimokṣasūtra
The Bajaur fragment 13 contains two different versions of the beginning of the Naiḥsargika Pācittiya section of the Prātimokṣasūtra. Both versions are written by the same scribe 
on the obverse and reverse of the scroll. According to a comparative analysis conducted on 
the basis of the Prātimokṣasūtra texts preserved in Indian languages and in Chinese and 
Tibetan translations the Gāndhārī versions are not identical with any of these parallels. 
Nonetheless it is possible to attribute them to two clearly distinct branches in the transmission of the Prātimokṣasūtra. The version on the obverse relates to the Dharmaguptaka/
Kāśyapīya Prātimokṣasūtras, while the text on the reverse seems to be more closely 
affiliated with the Sarvāstivādin/Mūlasarvāstivādin tradition (Strauch 2008: 116f.). The 
differences between both versions and their canonical parallels allow us to characterize the 
Gāndhārī tradition as a witness to a formative state in the textual genesis of the various 
nikāya versions of the Prātimokṣasūtra which had not yet reached their fully developed 
and later canonized shape.
The reason for this side-by-side existence of two different versions is hard to explain, 
but points to the fact that within a monastic community more than one version of this basic 
text could be known. They could influence each other and thus result in the emergence of 
new and contaminated textual forms.9
3.2.1.1.2 Karmavācanā
The second Vinaya text of the Bajaur Collection is represented by a very small manuscript 
containing the Karmavācanā formulae for the appointment of the “distributor of lodgingplaces” (śayanāsanagrāhaka) on the obverse and that for the ceremony of “taking up the 
retreat of the rainy season” (varṣopagamana) on the reverse. Again the comparison of both 
Gāndhārī versions with their parallels in Karmavācanā collections and Vinayavibhaṅgas of 
various schools cannot help to establish a definite school identity. Combining this evidence 
8 For the Dharmaguptakas see the evidence discussed by Salomon 1999: 167–171 and Strauch 2007 
with a more recent reference to this school. The Sarvāstivādins are e.g. mentioned on a pot from Haḍḍa 
(Fussman 1969). See also the survey of epigraphical sources given by Lamotte (1988: 523–529).
9 The evidence of this manuscript is now more extensively discussed in Strauch forthcoming, a.

--- Page 82 of 425 ---
60
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
with the observations made on the Prātimokṣasūtra we have to assume that the composition of the Gāndhārī Vinaya texts attested in the Bajaur Collection is prior to the emergence of standardized canonical texts which became exclusively authoritative within the 
boundaries of a certain school (Strauch 2008: 117f.)
Prātimokṣasūtra
•
Naiḥsargika Pācittiya 1–9 (BajC 13 recto, Strauch 2008: 116f. and Strauch, forthcoming, a)
•
Naiḥsargika Pācittiya 1–8 (BajC 13 verso, Strauch 2008: 116f. and Strauch, forthcoming, a)
Karmavācanā 
•
śayanāsanagrāhaka formula (BajC 5 recto, Strauch 2008: 117f.) 
•
varṣopagamana formula (BajC 5 verso, Strauch 2008: 117f.) 
Vinaya-related prose texts 
•
conversion of Sujātā and her family (RS 15 + 18, Allon 2007a: 13)
•
Moggalāna tells the Buddha about Devadatta’s wish to lead the Saṅgha, enumeration of five 
kinds of teachers (RS 16 + 23A.1, Allon 2007a: 16–17)
•
Anuruddha’s wish for ordination (RS 16 + 23A.2. Allon 2007a: 17)
•
story of Nāla (Skt. Nālada/Nālaka) and Erakapatta (Skt. Elāpattra) (RS 24.1, Allon 2007a:17)
•
story of Tapussa (Skt. Tripuṣa/Tripusa) and Bhallika and the Buddha’s bowl (RS 24.2, Allon 
2007a: 17–18)
3.2.1.2 Canonical Āgama Texts
3.2.1.2.1 Verse texts and the Kṣudrakāgama
Verse texts like the Dharmapada — now found in three different Gāndhārī versions — 
(KhDhp: Brough 1962, BL: Lenz 2003, SplitC: Falk 2011), the Rhinoceros sūtra (BL: 
Salomon 2000) or the Anavataptagāthā — preserved in two versions — (BL, RS: Salomon 
2009) represent a popular genre of Buddhist literature which is part of at least three major 
collections of Gāndhārī manuscripts (BL, RS, SplitC). Its popularity is also confirmed by 
the fact that some of the texts are found in more than one version while others formed the 
basis of an extensive commentarial literature. 
In particular the different versions of the Dharmapada show the rather flexible nature of 
Buddhist Gāndhārī literature, which is far from being a static textual tradition. While Lenz 
(2003: 13) was tempted to regard the few fragments of the Dharmapada from the BL 
collection as “most likely being a second version of essentially the same [i.e. Khotan DhP] 
text,” the much more extensive remains of the Dharmapada in the Split collection (SplitC 
3, Falk 2011) rather point to the opposite, being comparable with the Khotan Dharmapada 
in sequence and content only in rare cases. This new manuscript offers ample scope for 
comparison with the version from Khotan. It contains 87 stanzas from at least seven 
vargas. The “orthography” differs considerably from the one used at Khotan and where 
both versions are extant, the diction is often slightly different. With regard to the sequence 
of chapters and stanzas, the version from Subashi and the Udānavarga are closer than any 
other parallel, without being identical. The inclusion of several stanzas known otherwise 
only from the Aṅguttaranikāya, the Saṃyuttanikāya and particularly the Majjhimanikāya 
shows how freely the compilers worked.
Verses from the Dharmapada are also among the “root verses” of Gāndhārī commentaries.10 Other commented verse texts include the Arthapada/Arthavarga (P. Aṭṭhaka10 A survey of commented verses found in the BL commentaries is provided by Baums (2009: 50).

--- Page 83 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
61
vagga),11 the Pārāyaṇavarga, the Udāna and the Itivṛttaka (P. Itivuttaka) which are 
commented on in several of the commentaries of the British Library Collection (see below, 
survey). That these texts were not only used for commentarial purposes is shown by the 
independent manuscripts of this genre. Beside the Dharmapada manuscripts discussed 
above we now have at our disposal another independent text of this class, namely a verse 
collection among the fragments of the Split Collection which corresponds to a part of the 
Arthapada (P. Aṭṭhakavagga) (SplitC 1). This text is available presently in just one strip of 
birch bark. A recent offer in the manuscript market seems to have contained more fragments of this manuscript, thus raising the hope that some parts of the “Split” Collection 
will be reunited sooner or later. The fragment measures 1.8 × 11 cm, being almost 
completely preserved in its width. Both sides show the full content or traces of four lines, 
containing the full or partial text corresponding to stanzas 841–844 and 966–968 of the 
Aṭṭhakavagga division of the Pāli Suttanipāta. The “orthography” used is different from 
other hands, some letters have variant forms as if some older versions contributed to this 
mixture of shapes. This fragment appears to be the oldest in the collection. A 14C date is so 
far not yet available. The readings are given in Falk 2011. 
The Āgama affiliation of some of these verse texts is a matter of continuous discussion. 
The majority of them, however, were subsumed under the category of the so-called “Minor 
Texts.” The status of this category within the canons of the different schools is not quite 
clear. Whereas in some traditions it is perceived as part of the Sūtrapiṭaka — called either 
nikāya/āgama or piṭaka12 — other traditions classify it as a separate piṭaka beside the 
Sūtra- and Vinayapiṭaka.13 Since the number and length of the texts which are found in the 
various lists of “Minor Texts” vary markedly, it can be suggested that many of the schools 
never completed an authoritative collection of this category (Lamotte 1988: 162f.). For the 
Dharmaguptakas, however — the most probable candidates for our canonical Gāndhārī 
literature — we surely know from their Vinaya (T. 1428, ch. 54, p. 968b) that they 
possessed a special collection of “Minor Texts,” called Kṣudrakapiṭaka and forming part of 
the Sūtrapiṭaka, which included inter alia the Dharmapada, the Arthapada and the Pārāyaṇa, “which do seem, in fact, to have formed the original core of the minor texts” (Lamotte 1988: 160f.).
The more complicated issue of the Anavataptagāthā, which is not listed in any of the 
known canonical Āgama or Nikāya collections, was extensively discussed by Richard 
Salomon, who concludes that “we find a preponderance of evidence, though no single 
conclusive proof, that in the Gandhāran tradition of the early centuries of the Christian era 
the A[navatapta]-G[āthā] was construed as a canonical sūtra in the Kṣudrakāgama class 
(2008: 18).”
Thus the presence of independent verse texts like the Dharmapada, the Rhinoceros sūtra 
and the Arthapada as well as the extensive commentaries on verses from this text type 
indicate the existence of a Kṣudrakāgama/Kṣudrakapiṭaka-like compilation in Buddhist 
Gandhāran literature (Salomon 1999: 159–161).
3.2.1.2.2 Āgama sūtras
By far the largest amount of canonical sūtras in Gāndhārī literature is found in the Senior 
Collection. All its manuscripts were written by a single scribe, probably according to a 
11 The authentic Gāndhārī term which is apparently also used by the Dharmaguptakas can now be 
established as Arthapada. Cf. the extensive discussion in Baums (2009: 38–44).
12 According to Lamotte (1988: 151), the Mahāsāṃghikas, Haimavatas, Mahīśāsakas and Dharmaguptakas used the designation Kṣudrakapiṭaka, but included this collection in their Sūtrapiṭaka.
13 Such a division with a Sūtrapiṭaka consisting of four Āgamas and an additional Kṣudrakapiṭaka 
which is not part of the Sūtrapiṭaka is attested in various early traditions including that of the Sarvāstivādins which “never had more than four Āgamas” (Lamotte 1988: 151).

--- Page 84 of 425 ---
62
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
previously fixed plan (Allon 2007a: 3–25). Of the 41 surviving texts, 33 belong to the class 
of Āgama sūtras: 29 of them can be ascribed to the Saṃyuktāgama, four to the Madhyamāgama and only one to the Dīrghāgama. The character of the remaining eight texts is 
difficult to establish. Six of them are narrative texts with parallels in Vinaya literature, in 
one case in both Vinaya and Sūtra literature.14 
Especially the arrangement of the sūtras which can be attributed to a Saṃyuktāgama 
indicates the existence of a text compilation which is partially parallel to the Pāli Saṃyuttanikāya and the Chinese Saṃyuktāgama (T 99) without being identical with any of 
them (Glass 2007: 26–50).
This collection of canonical sūtras in the Senior Collection is supplemented by some 
isolated examples in other collections. Thus the British Library Collection contains three 
sūtras from an Ekottarikāgama (Allon 2001) and a further non-identified sūtra text (BL 
26+29, Salomon 1999: 24).
A piece of indirect evidence for a Dīrghagama text is provided by a British Library 
commentary on the Saṅgītisūtra. Its attribution to a Dīrghāgama is indicated not only by 
the Pāli canon, but also by the Chinese (Dharmaguptaka) Dīrghāgama (T 1), the Sarvāstivāda (Oberlies 2003, n. 83 with references) and the newly discovered Mūlasarvāstivāda 
Dīrghāgama from Gilgit (Oberlies 2003: 66, Hartmann 2004). A further Dīrghāgama text 
is represented by the Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra of the Schøyen Collection (Allon and 
Salomon 2000). 
The evidence for Madhyamāgama texts is supplemented by fragment 1 of the Bajaur 
Collection. It contains the Gāndhārī version of a sūtra which is parallel to the Pāli Dakkhiṇāvibhaṅgasutta given as No. 142 of its Majjhimanikāya (MN III 253–257). The Chinese 
translation of the Madhyamāgama (T 26) by Gautama Saṅghadeva (translated 397–398) 
lists this sūtra as No. 180 (p. 721c21) under the name Qutanmi jing 瞿曇彌經 = Skt. 
Gautamīsūtra. The comparison of this Gāndhārī version with its parallels, including two 
small fragments of Sanskrit versions in the Turfan and Schøyen Collections and Śamathadeva’s quotations from a probably Mūlasarvāstivādin Madhyamāgama, cannot help to 
settle the question of the school affiliation of this text. Since no Dharmaguptaka Madhyamāgama is known, it is, however, possible that the Gāndhārī text represents an extract 
from a Madhyamāgama of this school (Strauch 2008: 118–119; see now also Strauch 
forthcoming, b).
Dīrghāgama
•
Skt. Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra (MS 2179,  Allon and Salomon 2000) 
•
P. Sāmaññaphala-sutta (RS 2, Allon 2007a: 8)
•
Skt. Saṅgīti-sūtraC (BL 15, Salomon 1999: 24, 138, 171–173)
Madhyamāgama
•
P. Cūḷagosiṅga-sutta (RS 12, Allon 2007a: 11)
•
P. Dakkhiṇāvibhaṅga-sutta (BajC 1, Strauch 2008: 118f. and Strauch, forthcoming, b)
•
P. Dhammacetiya-sutta (RS 1 +3, Allon 2007a: 7)
•
P. Saṅkhārupapatti-sutta (RS 10, Allon 2007a: 11)
•
Ch. Shìzhě jīng 侍者經, “Sūtra on an attendant,” T 1 no. 26 pp. 471c–475a (RS 4A, see Allon 
supra) 
14 In the present survey we will not include the evidence of the so-called “index-scroll” of the 
collection (RS 7 + 8), which enumerates the titles of several sūtras, but does not completely correspond 
to the contents of the collection. It is extensively discussed in Allon (2007a: 18–21) and in his contribution to this volume.

--- Page 85 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
63
Saṃyuktāgama
•
P. Anattalakkhaṇa-sutta (RS 22.2, Allon 2007a: 15)
•
P. Dārukkhandha-sutta (RS 19, Lee 2009)
•
P. Dhanuggaha-sutta (?) (RS 22.1, Allon 2007a: 15)
•
P. Dutiyacchiggaḷayuga-sutta (RS 22.3, Allon 2007a: 15–16)
•
P. Gaddula-sutta (see Nadīsutta)
•
P. Kulaputtenadukkhā-sutta alias Nibbidābahula-sutta (= G. Ṣadha-sutra, Skt. Śraddhā-sūtra, 
RS 5.3,  Glass 2007)
•
P. Mahāpariḷāha-sutta (RS 20.2, Allon 2007a: 14)
•
P. Nadī-sutta cum Gaddula-sutta (RS 17.1, Allon 2007a: 13)
•
P. Natumhāka-sutta (G. Ṇatuṣpahu-sutra, RS 5.2,  Glass 2007)
•
P. Nibbidābahula-sutta (see P. Kulaputtenadukkhā-sutta)
•
P. Puppha-sutta (RS 22.6, Allon 2007a: 16)
•
Skt. *Ṣaḍāyatana-saṃyukta, probably a sūtra thereof about the causes of happiness and 
suffering (RS 20.1, Allon 2007a: 14)
•
G. Ṣadha-sutra (see Kulaputtenadukkhā-sutta)
•
Skt. *Saṃjñā-sūtra (G. aña-sutra, RS 5,  Glass 2007), perhaps from a Saṃyuktāgama like 
the other texts of this scroll
•
P. Tissa-sutta (RS 17.2, Allon 2007a: 13)
•
P. Uppāda-sutta (RS 22.4, Allon 2007a: 16)
•
P. Vana-saṃyutta (14 suttas thereof, 9.1–14) (RS 11, Allon 2007a: 11)
•
P. Vāsijaṭa-sutta (G. *Vasijaḍa-sutra, RS 5.4,  Glass 2007)
•
P. Veḷudvāreyya-sutta (RS 13, Allon 2007a: 12)
Ekottarikāgama
•
G. *Buddhabayaṇa-sutra (Skt. Buddhavacana°, BL 12 + 14,  Allon 2001)
•
P. Dona-sutta (G. Dhoṇasutra, BL 12 + 14,  Allon 2001)
•
P. Saṃvara-sutta (G. Prasaṇasutra, Skt. Pradhāna°, BL 12 + 14,  Allon 2001)
Kṣudrakāgama / Kṣudrakapiṭaka
•
Skt. Anavataptagāthā (BL 1/1, RS 14,  Salomon 2008)
•
Skt. Arthapada (P. Aṭṭhakavagga, SplitC 13, Falk 2011)
•
Skt. ArthapadaC (P. Aṭṭhavagga): BL verse commentary 2 (BL 7, 9, 18, 13 → line 90,  
Baums 2009)
•
Skt. Dharmapada (Khotan: Brough 1962, BL 16 + 25/1,  Lenz 2003: 11–76, SplitC 31, 
Falk 2011)
•
Skt. DharmapadaC: BL verse commentary 1 (BL 4/1, Salomon 1999: 27), BL verse commentary 2 (BL 7, 9, 18, 13 → line 90,  Baums 2009), BL verse commentary 3 (BL 13, line 91 
→,  Baums 2009: 606–608)
•
P. ItivuttakaC: BL verse commentary 2 (BL 7, 9, 18, 13 → line 90,  Baums 2009)
•
P. Khaggavisāṇa-sutta (G. *Khargaviṣaṇa-sutra, BL 5B,  Salomon 2000)
•
P. PārāyaṇaC: BL verse commentary 2 (BL 7, 9, 18, 13 → line 90,)  Baums 2009)
•
P. UdānaC: BL verse commentary 1 (BL 4/1, Salomon 1999: 27), BL verse commentary 2 (BL 
7, 9, 18, 13 → line 90,  Baums 2009)
Unidentified Āgama type texts
•
“Sūtra text concerning the four stages of meditative trance” (BL 26 + 29: Salomon 1999: 24)

--- Page 86 of 425 ---
64
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
•
verses (mixed with prose?) resembling Jātaka no. 480 (IV 240.1–2) (RS 22.5, Allon 2007a: 
16)
Both the Āgama sūtra and verse texts and the Vinaya texts represent literary genres which 
were created and developed outside Gandhāra — east and south of it. They are supplemented by a large number of texts which seem to have been created in Gandhāra itself. 
3.2.1.3 Abhidharma literature
One of these autochthonous literary genres is the scholastic and commentarial literature 
(see the contribution by Cox in this volume) which is represented by a large number of 
texts in the British Library and the Bajaur Collections. The canonical status of the scholastic and commentarial literature of this period is disputed. Due to the fact that the 
Abhidharmapiṭakas of the various schools are rather diverse and contain heterogeneous 
material — including commentarial texts like the Saṅgītiparyāya or the Dharmaskandha 
of the Sarvāstivādins — it cannot be excluded that texts of this type are indeed part of a 
(proto-)Abhidharmapiṭaka.15 On the other hand, the inclusion of these texts in the various 
Buddhist canons took place during a rather late phase in the history of Buddhist literature. 
There is strong evidence that the process of the formation of canonical Abhidharmapiṭakas 
was not yet completed at the time of our manuscripts.16 
That this literary genre represents a quite recent development is also supported by the 
fact that the specimens of both collections display a distinctively different character. This 
clearly speaks in favour of considering them as products of local scholastic traditions 
which had not yet been subject to a process of harmonizing and standardization.
Due to this somehow transitional character which places these texts in between canonical and paracanonical literature we will subsume them under the category of “Paracanonical texts,” while bearing in mind the fact that some of them might have formed part of an 
early, possibly proto-canonical Abhidharmapiṭaka-type collection.
3.2.2 Paracanonical texts
3.2.2.1 Scholastic texts and commentaries (Abhidharma)
In the BL Collection this category comprises a significant part of the classified texts. In 
general terms it can be divided into two major groups: independent scholastic treatises of 
various characters and commentarial texts. The actual state of research and the main 
features of the BL texts are covered by Collett Cox (supra).
These BL specimens of scholastic texts and commentaries are supplemented by altogether nine manuscripts from the Bajaur Collection which display, however, a distinctly 
different character, being mostly independent scholastic treatises rather than commentarial 
texts. Most of them are very fragmentary and short and hardly allow any far-reaching 
conclusions about their contents. 
One of these manuscripts, however, is very well preserved (BajC 9 verso). It is composed in the style of a polemical scholastic treatise citing different authorities, who are 
introduced by phrases like keci(d) aho / keyi aho (Skt. kecid āhuḥ) “some say” or apare 
aho (Skt. apara āhuḥ) “others say” (Strauch 2008: 119).
The remaining scholastic texts of the Bajaur Collection are in a much worse state of 
preservation. According to some shared phrases and terminological expressions six of them 
15 Cf. the detailed discussion of the Saṅgītisūtra commentary in the contribution by Cox, pp. 36–39.
16 A similar conclusion is also possible with regard to the Kuṣāṇa period Abhidharma-type texts from 
Turfan which can hardly be attributed to any of the Abhidharma works of the Sarvāstivādins known from 
later manuscripts or translations (Dietz 2007: 67, referring to Sander 1991: 133–134).

--- Page 87 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
65
can be attributed to two different text groups. Group A consists of three fragments (BajC 4, 
6, 11), of which two (BajC 4, 11) are possibly part of the same scroll. The text is mainly 
concerned with the discussion of different kinds of happiness (Gāndhārī suha, Skt. sukha). 
Expressions like bodhimaṇḍa, gagaṇadivaliaamal(o)ǵadhadu = Skt. gaṅgānadīvālukasama-lokadhātu and references to prañaparamida (4,2,v) (Skt. prajñāpāramitā) and the 
six pāramitās (edeṣa ṣahi paramidehi) (11,2,r) might indicate the Mahāyāna character of 
this text group (Strauch 2008: 119).
The second group B (BajC 14, 16, 18) is even less well-preserved. Here only single 
phrases like yadi jive bhaveadi “if he is meditating upon life” and yadi dhama bhaveadi “if 
he is meditating upon the dharma” and few terminological parallels indicate their association with the same text or text tradition. 
Due to their briefness and bad state of preservation it is at present difficult to give any 
reliable information about the contents of Bajaur fragments 12 and 19, which seem, 
however, to belong to the same genre of scholastic treatises.
Commentaries
•
verse commentary 1 (BL 4/1, Salomon 1999: 27)
•
verse commentary 2 (BL 7, 9, 18, 13 → line 90,  Baums 2009)
•
verse commentary 3 (BL 13, line 91→,  Baums 2009: 606–608)
•
Saṅgītisūtra commentary (BL 15, Salomon 1999: 24) 
•
“commentary on a text similar to the Dhātuvibhaṅga-sutta (MN III 237–47)” (UW, Glass 
2004: 141f.)
Independent scholastic treatises
•
Scholastic treatise (BL 10, Salomon 1999: 47)
•
Scholastic treatise (BL 17, Salomon 1999: 49f.)
•
Scholastic treatise (BL 20+23, Salomon 1999: 50f.)
•
Scholastic treatise (BL 28, Salomon 1999: 30)
•
Bajaur scholastic text 1 (BajC 9 verso, Strauch 2008: 119)
•
Bajaur scholastic text 2 (BajC 12, Strauch 2008: 119)
•
Bajaur scholastic text 3 (BajC 19, Strauch 2008: 119)
•
Bajaur scholastic texts group A (BajC 4, 6, 11, Strauch 2008: 119)
•
Bajaur scholastic texts group B (BajC 14, 16, 18, Strauch 2008: 119)
Unspecified scholastic texts
•
text “from some more technical genre, whether Sūtra, Abhidharma, or commentary” (PC 8, 
 Salomon 1998: 147–150)
•
“commentary on a sūtra or an abhidharma text that utilizes canonical quotes” (MS 2179/42 = 
MS 42, Allon et al. 2006: 288)
3.2.2.2 Avadāna/Pūrvayoga texts
Avadānas and Pūrvayogas seem to form another class of popular contemporary texts 
composed in Gāndhārī — in opposition to the canonical texts which must have been 
translated from a Middle Indian original. They are represented as well in the British 
Library as they are in the Split Collection, but are surprisingly absent from the otherwise 
rather comprehensive Bajaur Collection. In many cases the stories reported in these short 
texts are based on local traditions — containing local toponyms and personal names — 
with occasional parallels to Avadāna traditions from other parts of India. Timothy Lenz,

--- Page 88 of 425 ---
66
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
who recently published the second volume of his editions of the British Library Collection 
Avadāna texts, provides an excellent survey of Gāndhārī Avadāna literature which can be 
referred to here (2010: 3–17, especially tables 1+2, pp. 8–12). In describing the general 
features of this genre Lenz says:
The Gāndhārī avadānas contain only a single story, either one concerning past 
actions (self-styled as pūrvayogas) or one about present actions (self-styled as 
avadānas). On the other hand, the avadāna texts are summaries, each giving the 
outline of a story that its author or compiler assumed would be recognized by 
the reader and would be expanded quite easily into a narrative by that same 
person (Lenz 2010: 6).
Lenz plausibly argues for the existence of a group of specialists — “avadānists” — who 
were responsible for the composition of these texts which differ considerably from what 
we know from later Avadāna traditions. 
A Gandhāran avadānist’s palette was varied, including not only avadānas 
concerned with karmic inevitability (...) and giving (...), as one would expect, 
but also with impermanence (...), the Buddha’s power beyond nirvāṇa (...), 
women in dharma (...), and the history of the First Council (...) that were 
presented in various forms, including but not limited to a standard avadāna 
format comprising a tale of the present, a tale of the past, and a conclusion 
identifying story characters (Lenz 2010: 14).
The evidence evaluated by Lenz — based on the texts of a single scribe (2010: 6) — can 
now be supplemented by an Avadāna compilation from the Split Collection which can 
therefore help to provide a more representative picture of this particular literary genre of 
Gandhāran literature. 
The text (SplitC 4) consists of about 300 fragments, few of them larger than 6 cm, most 
of them much smaller. The genre is clearly discernible through phrases like “NN avadano 
japati.” In short sentences several stories are outlined, covering just a few lines, ending in 
a glyph resembling a wheel. The writing is remarkably archaic, with preconsonantal r 
represented by a hook, not a backward loop. Despite this archaism it is difficult to fully 
accept the outcome of a 14C check, which yielded a possible range from 184 to 46 BC, with 
a peak of about 70 BC. 
With regard to the contents, it is interesting to read about Buddhist schools; the Dharmaguptakas and the Mahāsāṃghikas are no surprise in Gandhāra, but the Seriyaputras are, 
as are the Ājīvikas, who exercise a strong and negative influence in one story on one king. 
The topic of another story is the well-known thief Aṅgulimāla.
The phrases avadano evo ṣuyadi or evo pariśravo found in other Avadāna or Pūrvayoga 
texts (Lenz 2003: 83) are completely absent, pointing to a different branch of story 
developers, if there is not simply a break in time, with the BL pieces mentioning kings and 
dynasties active in the middle of the first century AD, and our collection being possibly 
somewhat older. 
It is possible that three of the presumably narrative texts on some of the badly preserved 
fragments of the Pelliot Collection also belong to this genre (Salomon 1998, fragments PC 
1, 2, 3+6).
The majority of the Buddhist “Mainstream” traditions include Avadānas in the list of 
aṅgas, or “constituents of the Buddha’s words,” and thus accord canonical status to them 
(Lamotte 1988: 143–147). Due to their explicit local character and the absence of direct 
parallels in other canonical traditions we nevertheless decided to group the preserved 
Gāndhārī examples under the category of paracanonical texts, again being aware — as in 
the case of the Abhidharma texts — that they might have enjoyed canonical status in a 
given community.

--- Page 89 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
67
•
Avadāna collection (BL 1/2,  Lenz 2010)
•
Avadāna collection (BL 2,  Lenz 2010)
•
Avadāna collection (BL 3A/2,  Lenz 2010)
•
Avadāna collection (BL 4/2, Salomon 1999: 35f.)
•
Avadāna collection (BL 12+14/2, Salomon 1999: 36f.)
•
Pūrvayoga collection (BL 16+25/2,  Lenz 2003)
•
Avadāna collection (BL 21/2,  Lenz 2010)
•
Avadāna collection (SplitC 4, Falk 2011)
•
3 unspecified texts of Avadāna/Jātaka character (PC 1, 2, 3+6,  Salomon 1998: 124–145).
3.2.2.3 Rakṣāsūtras / Dhāraṇī
This literary genre, which gained quite a prominent status in the first centuries of our era, 
is represented by only two manuscripts from the Bajaur Collection. One of them (BajC 1v) 
is poorly preserved. It is written in large and carelessly outlined letters on the back side of 
fragment 1 which contains the Gāndhārī version of the *Dakṣiṇāvibhaṅga-sūtra on its 
obverse (see above). Only some characteristic words and phrases — like migili ◦ pitili — 
and references to yakṣas and nāgas allow this preliminary attribution.
More telling and much better preserved is the text of Bajaur fragment 3. It is composed 
in the conventional sūtra style and refers to the nāgarāja Manasvin, who is exclusively 
known from northern Buddhist sources. The mantra which this nāga king presents to the 
Buddha is called maṇasvi-ṇagaraya-vija (Skt. manasvi-nāgarāja-vidyā) and contains 
names of poisons. Nearly all of them are also part of a comprehensive list preserved in the 
Mahāmāyūrī (ed. Takubo 1972: 55, cf. ed. Oldenburg 1899: 257–258). Another close 
parallel to the mantra is provided by the short Tibetan text ’Phags pa klu’i rgyal po gzi can 
gyis žus pa žes bya ba’i gzuṅs whose original Skt. title has to be restored as Ārya-Manasvināgarāja-paripṛcchā-nāma-dhāraṇī.17 According to its literary style and structure the 
Gāndhārī text displays significant parallels with other post-canonical works of this genre, 
like the Pañcarakṣā texts Mahāmāyūrī and Mahāsāhasrapramardinī or the appendix (vyākaraṇa) of the Central Asian versions of the Nagaropamasūtra (cf. ed. Bongard-Levin et 
al. 1996: 30–37). Summing up this evidence, the Gāndhārī *Manasvināgarāja-sūtra can 
therefore be related to the post-canonical Pañcarakṣā collections, which according to Peter 
Skilling’s classification form one of the four major groups of rakṣā literature (1992: 113). 
At the same time it is the oldest manuscript of any rakṣā text. 
•
Skt. *Manasvināgarāja-sūtra (G. *Maṇasviṇagaraya-sutra, BajC 3, Strauch 2008: 120f.; 
Strauch, forthcoming, c)
•
unspecified dhāraṇī-like text (BajC 1verso, Strauch 2008: 120)
3.2.2.4 Buddha praises
One of the British Library fragments (BL 5C) contains verses praising the Buddha which 
resemble the stotras known from the Niya documents 510 and 511 (Boyer et al., 2: 184–
187). It is composed in various “poetic meters such as Vasantatilakā, describing him [the 
Buddha] with such epithets as gunehi guna-parami-prataṃ, ‘who has attained through his 
virtues the perfection of virtue’; soma-sadiśa-[va]dana, ‘whose face is like the moon’, and 
sarvasatvutamaṃ, ‘supreme among all beings’ ” (Salomon 1999: 39).
Other representatives of this genre are part of the Bajaur Collection: fragment 8 contains 
four structurally parallel verses composed in the Śārdūlavikrīḍita metre. 
17 For further details and references cf. Strauch 2008: 120f.

--- Page 90 of 425 ---
68
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
Bajaur fragment 10 is a non-metrical text about the “praiseworthy things” (Gāndhārī 
praaśahana, Skt. prāśaṃsyasthāna, P. pāsaṃsaṭhāna) of a Buddha (Strauch 2008: 121). 
The Buddha is praised here by conventional attributes like nilinakileśa (Skt. nilīnakleśa) 
“whose passions are destroyed,” viśudhiprato (Skt. viśuddhiprāpta) “who has attained 
purity,” or svadiaivadeasabuda (Skt. smṛtyādhipateyasaṃvṛta) “controlled through the 
power of mindfulness.”
The Split Collection preserves one more text of this genre (SplitC 2). It is still 16 cm 
wide, having lost about 5 cm on the right side where most stanzas started. It seems that the 
text deals with particular prominent events in the life of the Buddha. Conspicuous is the 
metre, being predominantly Vegavatī, a subvariety of the Vaitālīya well-known from Pāli 
texts, but found here for the first time in Gandhāra.
•
stotra in different metres (BL 5C, Salomon 1999: 39, 46)
•
stotra of four verses in Śārdūlavikrīḍita (BajC 8, Strauch 2008: 121)
•
non-metrical text praising the Buddha (BajC 10, Strauch 2008: 121)
•
praise of the Buddha in Vegavatī verses (SplitC 2, Falk 2011)
3.2.2.5 Miscellaneous/not determined texts
There is a small number of texts which cannot be safely put in any of the abovementioned 
categories. British Library fragments BL 8, 11, 21/1, 22, 24, 2718 as well as some of the 
very tiny Pelliot fragments resist identification or at least characterization, mainly due to 
their bad state of preservation or insufficient extent. 
Other texts can be characterized but do not match any of the known or accepted literary 
categories. Four of them are paracanonical verse texts of different types. The short metrical 
text on BL 5A consists of “possibly didactic verses” (Salomon 1999: 45, ed. Salomon 
2000: 218–222). Unclear is the character of the very poorly preserved verses of Bajaur 
fragment 17. This heavily damaged manuscript, which consists of only a few partially 
preserved lines of text, does not allow any reliable conclusions.
A much better preserved and particularly interesting and important text of this class is 
represented by Bajaur fragment 5, which contains a collection of Buddhist verses arranged 
according to the Arapacana alphabet. The right side of this scroll is almost completely 
preserved and thus allows for the first time the reconstruction of the entire inventory of the 
alphabet from its 2nd letter ra up to its last letter ḍha on the basis of a contemporary 
Kharoṣṭhī manuscript.19 
Other texts of this category are composed in prose. The Library of Congress Scroll 
“appears to consist of formulaic accounts of the lives of fifteen Buddhas, from Dīpaṅkara 
to Maitreya, enumerating for each Buddha the kalpa in which he lived, his life-span, his 
class (brāhmaṇa or kṣatriya) the size of his assembly (saṃnipāta), the duration of his 
dharma, etc.” (Salomon and Baums 2007: 202). According to Salomon and Baums, the 
text is particularly closely related to some portions of the Bahubuddha-sūtra, which is part 
of the Mahāvastu (2007: 202).
A further hitherto unidentified prose text is found on a single palm-leaf fragment 
collected by Sergey Oldenburg on his 1909–10 expedition to Eastern Turkestan and kept 
today in the collection of the St. Petersburg Academy of Sciences under the siglum SI O/
10. Although it has been identified by Vorob’eva-Desi͡atovskai͡a (2006: 148) as part of the 
18 Of these manuscript fragments 11, 21 and 24 are possibly written by the same hand and contain the 
same text which is cautiously characterized by Salomon as “possibly a verse text” (1999: 47). Similarly, 
fragments 22 and 27 are perhaps part of the same scroll (Salomon 1999: 51f.). Its contents as well as that 
of fragment 8 are, however, undetermined.
19 For further details and other sources for the sequence and contents of the Arapacana alphabet see 
Strauch 2008: 121–123 and particularly Strauch 2011.

--- Page 91 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
69
Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra, from the very same version as the text from the Schøyen Collection (Allon and Salomon 2000), there is no incontrovertible evidence to support this 
identification.20 We would therefore suggest that this text be tentatively considered as 
another, as yet unidentified paracanonical Buddhist text.
Verse texts
•
verse text arranged according to the Arapacana alphabet (Strauch 2008: 121–123, Strauch 
2011)
•
unidentified probably metrical text (BL 5A,  Salomon 2000: 218–222)
•
unidentified possibly metrical text (BajC 17)
Prose texts
•
unidentified text related to the Bahubuddha-sūtra of the Mahāvastu (LC, cf. Salomon and 
Baums 2007: 202)
•
unidentified text (Oldenburg Collection fragment,  Vorob’eva-Desi͡atovskai͡a 2006)
Unspecified fragments
•
undetermined texts (BL 8, 11, 21/1, 22, 24, 27, Salomon 1999: 39, 46–52)
•
remnants of small portions of text or letters (PC 4, 5, 7, Salomon 1998: 145f.)
3.2.3 Mahāyāna literature
Only recently could a growing number of Mahāyāna texts be identified among the 
Gāndhārī manuscripts. Three of them belong to the Bamiyan fragments and can consequently be ascribed to a slightly later period than the birch-bark manuscripts contained in 
the British Library, Senior, Bajaur and Split Collections. Radiocarbon dating as well as the 
rather advanced stage of the Sanskritization of language and script suggest a date in the 
3rd, perhaps even early 4th c. AD (Allon et al. 2006: 289f.). The Mahāyāna texts identified 
so far among the Bamiyan fragments can be attributed to Gāndhārī versions of the 
Bhadrakalpika-sūtra, the Sarvapuṇyasamuccayasamādhi-sūtra and the Bodhisattvapiṭakasūtra (Allon and Salomon 2010: 6–9).
While these manuscripts indicate the presence of Mahāyāna literature in the later phase 
of Gāndhārī, there is now clear evidence for the earlier period as well. Two of these “old” 
Mahāyāna texts are parts of the collections studied in Berlin.
The text easiest to evaluate calls itself Prajñāpāramitā in the colophon and has proved 
to be a version on which the classical Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā (ASPP) is based. The 
manuscript is part of the Split Collection (SplitC 5, Falk 2011). It is preserved to a length 
of about 90 cm, both sides have suffered from wear to an equal extent (Figure 3). 
Figure 3: Fragment from the Prajñāpāramitā manuscript of the Split Collection (Photograph: 
Harry Falk)
20 We would like to thank Klaus Wille, who took the trouble to search his database of Buddhist texts 
for possible parallels of this text and the unidentified new Kharoṣṭhī fragment from Peshawar presented 
above (p. 56).

--- Page 92 of 425 ---
70
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
The obverse contains the beginning and large parts of what is the first chapter of the 
ASPP, while the verso contains the parallels to the fifth chapter of the ASPP. The script is 
large and simple; the scribe mostly abstained from using footmarks. A 14C test led to a 
central date around 74 AD, which is quite in line with the palaeography. This date 
antedates the first Chinese translation by Lokakṣema by about a century. A first comparison with Lokakṣema’s text was presented at the Atlanta IABS conference in 2008. It was 
easy to demonstrate that the translator was working on a text which was slightly enlarged 
in comparison to the Gāndhārī text, but not yet as elaborate as the following Chinese 
translation of Kumārajīva or the classical Sanskrit version. This assessment derived from 
selected evidence was fully confirmed when in early 2010 the reassembly of the fragments 
was completed and a comparison of the fully transcribed text with Lokakṣema’s Chinese 
version was made possible by a collaboration with S. Karashima at the IRIAB in Hachioji. 
The text of parivartas 1 and 5 has been published by Falk and Karashima (2012 and 2013) 
in a synoptical arrangement together with the Sanskrit version and an English rendering of 
Lokakṣemaʼs Chinese translation.
The second early Mahāyāna text is part of the Bajaur Collection. It is the most extensive 
of these newly discovered texts and comprises about 600 lines written on the obverse and 
reverse of a large composite scroll more than 2 metres in length (see above fig. 1). Despite 
the joint efforts of several colleagues — including Paul Harrison, Matsuda Kazunobu, and 
Jan Nattier — it has not been possible to identify a parallel to this text among the extant 
Mahāyāna literature in Sanskrit or in translation. It is therefore highly probable that this 
Gāndhārī text represents a hitherto unknown sūtra which was not translated into Sanskrit, 
Chinese or Tibetan — or at least not further transmitted in manuscript or canonical 
traditions. 
The preliminary research done so far — including a complete transliteration and a 
partial digital reconstruction of the manuscript and the reconstruction of the main structure 
and contents of the text — showed that the central part of the Bajaur Mahāyāna sūtra is 
arranged according to the basic elements of a bodhisattva career including the “initial 
thought of awakening” (bodhicittotpāda), the “endurance towards the (non-originating) 
factors of existence” (dharmakṣānti), the “stage of non-retrogression” (avaivartya) and the 
prophecy of future buddhahood (vyākaraṇa). Especially this last feature is closely related 
to the Buddha Akṣobhya and his buddhaland Abhirati, which is conceived in this text as 
the paradigmatic buddhakṣetra. It serves not only as the model for the future buddhaland 
of the relevant bodhisattva, but is also the realm in which the adept is promised rebirth on 
his long way to buddhahood. This function of Abhirati recalls the position of Sukhāvatī in 
later Mahāyāna as described by Schopen in his important article on Sukhāvatī as a 
generalized religious goal (1977). Moreover, the prominent role of both Akṣobhya and 
Abhirati and the simultaneous silence about Amitābha and Sukhāvatī as found in the 
Bajaur Mahāyāna sūtra support Jan Nattier’s assumption that the cult of Akṣobhya and his 
buddhaland represents a transitional stage in the development of Pure Land Buddhism and 
precedes the later prevailing Amitābha-Sukhāvatī cult (Nattier 2000, 2003). The Bajaur 
text would consequently illuminate a phase in the development of Mahāyāna literature 
which is only weakly represented in the preserved texts. Whether this phase is identical 
with what Paul Harrison would call “Early Mahāyāna” or already belongs to the “Early 
Middle Mahāyāna” cannot be decided here, but the importance of this newly discovered 
text for the history of early Mahāyāna can hardly be overestimated.21
The most recent discovery in the sphere of Gāndhārī Mahāyāna texts seems to represent 
a comparable case of a work which did not gain any particular prominence in the subse21 A preliminary study of some of the features of this sūtra and its relation to Abhirati descriptions in 
other Mahāyāna texts is now available in Strauch 2010.

--- Page 93 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
71
quent development of Mahāyāna. According to Mark Allon and Richard Salomon (2010: 
11), this “very fragmentary Gāndhārī scroll in a private collection, as yet unpublished, 
contains fragments of a text corresponding to a Mahayana sutra preserved in three Chinese 
translations which describes the encounter between the Buddha and the young son of the 
famous layman Vimalakīrti.” In the text this son is called suciti (Skt. Sucitti) which 
corresponds to the Chinese name Shansi which is found in the title of T 479 (Allon and 
Salomon 2010: 11). I will therefore tentatively refer to this text in the subsequent survey as 
*Sucitti-sūtra. Despite certain coincidences the Gāndhārī text does not correspond to any 
of the Chinese translations (T 477, T 478, T 479) and seems to represent an independent 
version of this sūtra.
The assumed Mahāyāna character of the scholastic treatise(s) of Bajaur fragments 4, 6, 
and 11 remains to be investigated (see above).
•
“Bajaur Mahāyāna Sūtra” (BajC 2, Strauch 2010) 
•
Skt. Bhadrakalpika-sūtra (25 fragments, MS 116, Allon and Salomon 2010: 6f.)
•
Skt. Bodhisattvapiṭaka-sūtra (MS 17, Allon and Salomon 2010: 8)
•
Skt. Prajñāpāramitā-sūtra (G. prañaparamida, SplitC 5, Falk 2011)
•
Skt. Sarvapuṇyasamuccayasamādhi-sūtra (MS 89, Allon and Salomon 2010: 7f.)
•
Skt. *Sucitti-sūtra (unpublished private collection, Allon and Salomon 2010: 11)
3.2.4 Non-Buddhist texts
Only one of the Kharoṣṭhī collections — i.e. the Bajaur Collection — contains textual 
material which is not directly linked with Buddhism, but provides important data for the 
contexts of Gandhāran Buddhist literature and the intellectual and social environment of 
Gandhāran Buddhism. This non-Buddhist material is represented by one legal document 
written in Gāndhārī (BajC 15) and a metrical Rājanīti/Arthaśāstra text (BajC 9 recto) 
composed in Sanskrit. 
Despite their unique character among the Gandhāran literature it is possible to connect 
both texts with parallel phenomena from Central Asia. While the legal text can be compared to the numerous documents on wood or leather discovered at the beginning of the 
20th century along the southern branch of the East Turkestan Silk Road (Boyer et al. 
1920–29), the Rājanīti text finds an interesting parallel in some passages of the so-called 
“Spitzer manuscript.” Moreover, the later Mīmāṃsā text from the Schøyen Collection, 
which according to its palaeographical features was written in the 6th c. AD, indicates that 
the Buddhists continued to deal actively with non-Buddhist literary genres and to include 
such texts in their libraries (Franco 2002).
3.2.4.1 A Rājanīti/Arthaśāstra text 
The text written on the obverse of Bajaur fragment 9 occupies an outstanding position 
from several points of view. First, it belongs to a literary genre which indicates the special 
interest of Buddhists in affairs of state. Examples for such an interest are particularly 
prominent in later Southeast Asian traditions, where Sanskrit nīti texts were translated into 
Pāli, and in Ceylon where such texts were adapted in their original Sanskrit form.22 That 
this Buddhist attitude towards legal and political texts has much older roots and is not 
confined to these later Southern traditions can be shown by the famous “Spitzer 
manuscript” which not only refers to the Mahābhārata, but also to the Arthaśāstra and the 
22 For references for Pāli works see von Hinüber 1996: 195–96, §§420–23. A short survey of Sanskrit 
texts from Sri Lanka is given by Sternbach (1972). More comprehensive is Bechert 2005: 122–135.

--- Page 94 of 425 ---
72
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
juridical chapters of the Mānavadharmaśāstra.23 A similar interest seems to underly some 
of Nāgārjuna’s works, like e.g. the Ratnāvalī which is clearly based on topics from Artha- 
and Dharma-śāstra literature (Scherrer-Schaub 2007).
The second peculiarity of the text lies in its language. It belongs to the few instances of 
Sanskrit texts written in Kharoṣṭhī (Salomon 1998, 2001). The hitherto known examples 
demonstrate the process of Sanskritization of the formerly Middle Indian idiom of 
Buddhist texts and the introduction of graphical solutions which are based on the Brāhmī 
writing system. Generally they are to be dated into the late phase of Kharoṣṭhī, i.e. into the 
3rd or even 4th c. AD, when Kharoṣṭhī was gradually replaced by Brāhmī and adapted new 
orthographical features which can only be explained by the growing influence of Sanskrit 
phonology and Brāhmī orthography. 
The present text, however, clearly belongs to the mature phase of Kharoṣṭhī not yet 
influenced by the Brāhmī script. Instead, the scribe tried to use the orthographical capacities of the Kharoṣṭhī script to reproduce the phonological features of the Sanskrit text.24 
The preserved text is a compilation of about 40 Āryā verses about diverse topics 
characteristic of the genre of Rājanīti/Arthaśāstra literature, such as the components of the 
state, the sources of income, the parts of the royal treasury, etc. (Strauch 2008: 125f.). 
3.2.4.2 A legal document
The second non-Buddhist text from the Bajaur Collection (BajC 15) is a loan contract in 
Gāndhārī fixing the conditions of a transaction between a man called Bhudamitra (Skt. 
Bhūtamitra), son of Kahea (Skt. Kāṣṭhaka) from Mitrasthāna, and another person named 
Saṃghaśrava. Due to its fragmentary state it is presently not possible to report the exact 
conditions of this loan business. However, characteristic technical terms like hastalekha 
“handwritten document,” samūlaka “together with the capital” and savaḍhika (Skt. 
savr̥ddhika) “together with the interest” indicate that it followed the pattern of typical legal 
documents as described in the Indian Dharmaśāstras (cf. Strauch 2002: 19–52).
•
Rājanīti/Arthaśāstra verse collection in Āryā metre (BajC 9 recto, Strauch 2008: 125f., 
Strauch 2011)
•
loan contract (BajC 15, Strauch 2008: 127)
23 These passages are dealt with by Schlingloff (1969a, 1969b). Cf. also the complete edition of this 
manuscript by Eli Franco (2004), and especially the introduction referring to Schlingloff’s studies (8–10) 
where the current numbers of the respective manuscript fragments are given.
24 This method can be called “internal Sanskritization” — the opposite of the later “external Sanskritization” on the basis of Brāhmī orthography. The particular features of this method as witnessed by Bajaur 
fragment 9 are described and evaluated in Strauch 2011.

--- Page 95 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
73
4. Lists of the manuscripts of the Bajaur and Split Collections
4.1 The Bajaur Collection of Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts
The size is estimated on the basis of the reconstructed scroll. Bold figures indicate a completely preserved 
width. The numbers of lines are still subject to change due to ongoing reconstruction.
Fragment
1
2 
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frame 
1
16
12
2–8
31
34
35
17
9
10
18
11
29
30
13
14
Size
17.5 × 
70.5
18 × 
224
17 × 39
*(25 × 
36)
11 × 37
30.5 × 
9.5
13 × 6
21.5 × 
19
Format
Scroll 
type
long
composite
long
composite
long
composite
*wide 
singlesheet
long
singlesheet
wide
singlesheet
middle 
fold
wide
singlesheet
middle 
fold
wide 
singlesheet
middle 
fold
Margin
sewn
sewn
drawn
not 
sewn
drawn
not 
sewn
not 
sewn
not 
sewn
Side
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
Content
G. *Dakṣiṇavibhaṃga-sutra 
(Skt. Dakṣiṇā-vibhaṅgasūtra)
(Sūtra from the 
Madhyamāgama)
Dhāraṇī-type text
“Bajaur Mahāyāna sūtra”
=
G. *Maṇasviṇagaraya-sutra 
(Skt. *Manasvi-nāgarāja-sūtra) 
(rakṣā text)
=
Unidentified scholastic text 
(Mahāyāna ?)
(related to fragments 6 and 11)
=
Buddhist verse collection 
arranged according to the 
Arapacana syllabary
=
Unidentified scholastic text 
(Mahāyāna ?)
(related to fragments 4 and 11)
=
Karmavācanā formula 
(śayanāsanagrāhaka appointment)
Karmavācanā formula 
(varṣopagamana)
Buddhastotra (metrical)
∅
Script
Lines
80 +1v
26
342
246
39
12
*43
*22
40
41
11
9
7
5
4
∅
Akṣaras 
per line
42
20
49
39
30
30
*60 
*60
20
20
64
64
37
37
41
∅
Scribe
1
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
14
14
7
7
8
∅

--- Page 96 of 425 ---
74
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
9
10
11
12
13
14 
15
16
17
18
19
15
24
19
20
21
22
23
33
25 
26
27
28
25
26
32
32
16 × 55
16 × 23
15.5 × 
37.5
15.5 × 
14
16 × 23
10 × 7
21 × 25
24 × 10
23 × 6
17 × 19 
16.5 × 
9.5
long
composite
long
singlesheet
long
singlesheet?
long
singlesheet
long
singlesheet 
*wide
singlesheet 
wide
singlesheet
wide
singlesheet
middle 
fold
wide
singlesheet
middle 
fold
long
single 
sheet
*wide
singlesheet 
sewn
not 
sewn
not 
sewn
not 
sewn
not 
sewn
not 
sewn
not 
sewn
not 
sewn
not 
sewn
not 
sewn
not 
sewn
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
Nīti text (Sanskrit)
Unidentified scholastic text
Buddha praise (non-metrical)
∅
Unidentified scholastic text 
(Mahāyāna ?) 
(related to fragments 4 and 6)
=
Unidentified scholastic text
=
Prātimokṣasūtra
Naiḥsargika Pācittiya 1-9
Prātimokṣasūtra
Naiḥsargika Pācittiya 1-8
Unidentified scholastic text 
(related to fragments 16 and 
18)
=
Legal document (loan contract)
∅
Unidentified scholastic text
(related to fragments 14 and 
18)
=
Buddhist verses (?)
Buddhist verses (?)
Unidentified scholastic text (related to fragments 14 and 16)
=
Unidentified text
=
53
47
17
∅
61
37
16
14
25
23
10
6
15
∅
11
11
8
5
20
19
8
4
29
27
32
∅
40
40
29
29
34
31
28
22
60
∅
30
30
36
?
40
40
38
38
9
10
11
∅
5
5
12
12
13
13
18
18
15
∅
18
18
16
17
5
5
14
14

--- Page 97 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
75
4.2 The Split Collection of Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts
Bibliography
Allon, Mark. 2001. Three Gāndhārī Ekottarikāgama-Type Sūtras: British Library Kharoṣṭhī 
Fragments 12 and 14. Gandhāran Buddhist Texts, Volume 2. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
2007a. “The Senior Manuscripts.” In Andrew Glass, Four Gāndhārī Saṃyuktāgama Sūtras: 
Senior Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 5. Gandhāran Buddhist Texts, Volume 4. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press, 3–25.
2007b. “Recent Discoveries of Buddhist Manuscripts from Afghanistan and Pakistan: The 
Heritage of the Greeks in the North-West.” In Himanshu Prabha Ray and Daniel T. Potts, 
eds., Memory as History: The Legacy of Alexander in Asia. New Delhi: Aryan Books International, 131–141. 
2008. “Recent Discoveries of Buddhist Manuscripts from Afghanistan and Pakistan and Their 
Significance.” In Ken Parry, ed., Art, Architecture and Religion along the Silk Roads. Silk 
Road Studies, XII. Turnhout: Brepols, 153–178. 
Allon, Mark and Richard Salomon. 2000. “Kharoṣṭhī Fragments of a Gāndhārī Version of the 
Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra.” In Jens Braarvig et al., eds., Buddhist Manuscripts, Volume I. 
Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection, I. Oslo: Hermes Academic Publishing, 243–273. 
2010. “New Evidence for Mahayana in Early Gandhāra.” The Eastern Buddhist 41: 1–22. 
Allon, Mark, R. Salomon, G. Jacobsen, and U. Zoppi. 2006. “Radiocarbon Dating of Kharoṣṭhī 
Fragments from the Schøyen and Senior Manuscript Collections.” In Jens Braarvig et al., 
eds., Buddhist Manuscripts, Volume III. Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection. Oslo: Hermes 
Academic Publishing, 279–291.
Baums, Stefan. 2009. “A Gāndhārī Commentary on Early Buddhist Verses: British Library 
Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 7, 9, 13 and 18.” PhD Dissertation. University of Washington.
Fragment
1
2
3
4
5
Frame
1
2
3–4
5–7
8–12
Size
1.8 × 11 
26 × 16
54 × 14
25+x × 
15
90 × 15
1.8 × 11 
Format
Scroll
type
long
wide
long
long
long
long
Margin
not sewn
drawn
not sewn
not sewn
not sewn
not sewn
Side
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
v
r
Content
Arthapada
Arthapada
Metrical praise of the Buddha 
=
Dharmapada
∅
Avadāna collection
=
Prajñāpāramitā sūtra
=
Aṭṭhakavagga
Script
Lines
4
4
33
34
73
30
29
80
40
4
Akṣaras
per line
45
33
32
32
38
36
36
30
30
45
Scribe
1
1
2
2
3
∅
4
4
5
5+6
1

--- Page 98 of 425 ---
76
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
Bechert, Heinz. 2005. Eine regionale hochsprachliche Tradition in Südasien: Sanskrit-Literatur bei 
den buddhistischen Singhalesen. Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften. Philosophisch-Historische Klasse. Sitzungsberichte. 718. Band. Wien.
Bongard-Levin, G., D. Boucher, F. Takamichi and K. Wille, eds. 1996. “The Nagaropamasūtra: An 
apotropaic text from the Saṃyuktāgama. A transliteration, reconstruction, and translation of 
the Central Asian Sanskrit Manuscripts.” Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: 
Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen. Dritte Folge (Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen 
Texte aus den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 6). Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 7–131.
Boyer, A. M., E. J. Rapson, E. Senart, and J. Noble. 1920–29. Kharoṣṭhī Inscriptions Discovered by 
Sir Aurel Stein in Chinese Turkestan. Parts 1–3. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Brough, John. 1962. The Gāndhārī Dharmapada. London Oriental Series, Volume 7. London: 
Oxford University Press.
Conrady, August. 1920. Die chinesischen Handschriften und sonstigen Kleinfunde Sven Hedins in 
Lou-lan. Stockholm: Generalstabens Litografiska Anstalt.
Dietz, Siglinde. 2007. “Buddhism in Gandhāra.” In The Spread of Buddhism. Handbook of Oriental 
Studies, 16: 49–74.
Falk, Harry 2011. “The ‘Split’ collection of Kharoṣṭhī Texts.” Annual Report of the International 
Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University 14: 13–23.
Falk, Harry and Seishi Karashima. 2012. “A first century Prajñāpāramitā manuscript from Gandhāra 
— parivarta 1 (Texts from the Split Collection 1).” Annual Report of the International 
Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University 15: 19–61.
2013. “A first century Prajñāpāramitā manuscript from Gandhāra — parivarta 5 (Texts from 
the Split Collection 2).” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced 
Buddhology at Soka University 16: 97–169.
Franco, Eli. 2002. “A Mīmāṃsaka among the Buddhists: Three Fragments on the Relationship 
between Words and Objects.” In Jens Braarvig et al., eds., Buddhist Manuscripts, Volume II. 
Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection, III. Oslo: Hermes Academic Publishing, 269–285.
2004. The Spitzer Manuscript. The Oldest Philosophical Manuscript in Sanskrit. Volumes 1 
and 2. (Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften. Philosophisch-historische Klasse. 
Denkschriften, 323. Band. Beiträge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens, Nr. 43). Wien: 
Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Fussman, Gérard. 1969. “Une inscription kharoṣṭhī à Haḍḍa.” Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 56: 5–9.
Glass, Andrew. 2004. “Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts: A Window on Gandhāran Buddhism.” Nagoya 
Studies in Indian Culture and Buddhism: Saṃbhāṣā 24: 129–52.
2007. Four Gāndhārī Saṃyuktāgama Sūtras: Senior Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 5. Gandhāran 
Buddhist Texts, Volume 4. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe. 2004. “Contents and Structure of the Dīrghāgama of the (Mūla-)Sarvāstivādins.” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at 
Soka University 7: 119–137.
Hasuike, Toshitaka (蓮池 利隆). 2004. “Seiiki nandō to seiiki hokudō no karōshutī moji shiryō no 
hikaku 西域南道と西域北道のカローシュテイー文字資料の比較.” In 森安孝夫 
(Moriyasu Takao), ed., Chūō ajia shutsudo bunbutsu ronsō 中央アジア出土文物論叢, pp. 
93–109. Kyōto 京都: Hōyū shoten 朋友書店.
Hinüber, Oskar von. 1996. A Handbook of Pāli Literature (Indian Philology and South Asian 
Studies, 2). Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter.
Lamotte, Étienne. 1988. History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the Śaka Era. Publications 
de l’Institut orientaliste de Louvain, 36. Louvain-la-Neuve: Université catholique de Louvain, 
Institut orientaliste.
LEE, Mei-huang. 2009. “A Study of the Gāndhārī Dārukkhandhopamasutta (“Discourse on the 
Simile of the Log”).” PhD Dissertation. University of Washington.

--- Page 99 of 425 ---
The Bajaur and Split Collections of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts
77
Lenz, Timothy. 2003. A New Version of the Gāndhārī Dharmapada and a Collection of PreviousBirth Stories: British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 16 + 25. Gandhāran Buddhist Texts, Volume 3. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
2010. Gandhāran Avadānas: British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 1–3 and 21 and Supplementary Fragments A–C. Gandhāran Buddhist Texts, Volume 6. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press.
LÍN, Méicūn (林梅村). 2004. “Two Tokharo-Gāndhārī Bilingual Documents from Kizil in the Le 
Coq Collection.” 榮新江 (Róng Xīnjiāng) and 李孝 (LǏ Xiàocōng), eds., Zhongwài guānxì 
shǐ: xīn shǐliào yǔ xīn wèntí 中外关系史: 新史料与新-*. Běijīng 北京: Kēxué chūbǎnshè 
科学出版社, 79–97.
Nattier, Jan. 2000. “The Realm of Akṣobhya: A Missing Piece in the History of Pure Land 
Buddhism.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 23: 71–102.
2003. “The Indian Roots of Pure Land Buddhism: Insights from the Oldest Chinese Versions 
of the Larger Sukhāvatīvyūha.” Pacific World, 3rd ser., 5: 179–201.
Oberlies, Thomas. 2003. “Ein bibliographischer Überblick über die kanonischen Texte der 
Śrāvakayāna-Schulen des Buddhismus (ausgenommen der des Mahāvihāra-Theravāda).” 
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 47: 37–84.
Ol’denburg, S. 1899. (ed.) Otryvki kashgarskikh i sanskritskihh rukopiseĭ iz sobrani͡a N.F. 
Petrovskago. Zapiski Voctochnago otdeleni͡a Imperatorskago Russkago Arkheologicheskago 
Obshchestva. 11 (1897–1898). St. Petersburg: 207–264.
Pauly, Bernard. 1967. “Fragments sanskrits d’Afghanistan (Fouilles de la D.A.F.A.).” Journal 
asiatique 255: 273–83.
Salomon, Richard. 1998. “Kharoṣṭhī Manuscript Fragments in the Pelliot Collection, Bibliothèque 
nationale de France.” Bulletin d’études indiennes 16: 123–160. 
1999. Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhāra: The British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments. 
Seattle: University of Washington Press.
2000. A Gāndhārī Version of the Rhinoceros Sūtra: British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 5B. 
Gandhāran Buddhist Texts, Volume 1. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
2001.“‘Gāndhārī Hybrid Sanskrit’: New Sources for the Study of the Sanskritization of 
Buddhist Literature.” Indo-Iranian Journal 44: 241–252.
2003. “The Senior Manuscripts: Another Collection of Gandhāran Buddhist Scrolls.” Journal 
of the American Oriental Society 123: 73–92.
2008. Two Gāndhārī Manuscripts of the Songs of Lake Anavatapta (Anavatapta-gāthā): 
British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 1 and Senior Scroll 14. Gandhāran Buddhist Texts, 
Volume 5. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
2009. “Why Did the Gandhāran Buddhists Bury Their Manuscripts?” In Stephen C. Berkwitz, 
Juliane Schober and Claudia Brown, eds., Buddhist Manuscript Cultures: Knowledge, Ritual, 
and Art. Routledge Critical Studies in Buddhism. London: Routledge, 19–34.
Salomon, Richard and Stefan Baums. 2007. “Sanskrit Ikṣvāku, Pali Okkāka, and Gāndhārī Iṣmaho.” 
Journal of the Pali Text Society 29: 201–227.
Sander, Lore. 1991. “The earliest manuscripts from Central Asia and the Sarvāstivāda mission.” In 
Ronald E. Emmerick and Dieter Weber, eds., Corolla Iranica. Papers in honour of Prof. Dr. 
David Neil MacKenzie on the occasion of his 65th birthday on April 8th, 1991. Frankfurt am 
Main: Lang, 133–50.
1999. “Early Prakrit and Sanskrit Manuscripts from Xinjiang (Second to Fifth / Sixth 
Centuries C. E.): Paleography, Literary Evidence, and Their Relation to Buddhist Schools.” In 
Jan Nattier and John R. McRae, eds., Collection of Essays 1993: Buddhism across Boundaries: Chinese Buddhism and the Western Regions. Sanchung: Fo Guang Shan Foundation for 
Buddhist & Culture Education, 61–106.
Scherrer-Schaub, Cristina. 2007. “Immortality extolled with reason: Philosophy and politics in 
Nāgārjuna.” In Birgit Kellner, Helmut Krasser, Horst Lasic, Michael Torsten Much and

--- Page 100 of 425 ---
78
HARRY FALK AND INGO STRAUCH
Helmut Tauscher, eds., Pramāṇakīrtiḥ. Papers dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the 
occasion of this 70th birthday. Part 2. (Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde 
70.2). Wien: 757–793.
Schlingloff, Dieter. 1969a. “Fragmente einer Palmblatthandschrift philosophischen Inhalts aus 
Ostturkistan (Ms. Spitzer).” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 12/13: 323–328.
1969b. “The Oldest Extant Parvan-List of the Mahābhārata.” Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 89: 334–338.
Schopen, Gregory. 1977. “Sukhāvatī as a Generalized Religious Goal in Sanskrit Mahāyāna Sūtra 
Literature.” Indo-Iranian Journal 19: 177–210 (repr. Schopen, Gregory. Figments and 
Fragments of Mahāyāna Buddhism in India. More Collected Papers. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai’i Press 2005: 154–189).
Skilling, Peter. 1992. “The Rakṣā literature of the Śrāvakayāna.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 16: 
109–182.
Sternbach, Ludvik. 1972. “Sur la littérature didactique et gnomique laïque d’origine sanscrite à 
Ceylan.” Journal asiatique 260: 79–87.
Strauch, Ingo. 2002. Die Lekhapaddhati-Lekhapañcāśikā. Briefe und Urkunden im mittelalterlichen 
Gujarat. Text, Übersetzung, Kommentar, Glossar. Monographien zur Indischen Archäologie, 
Kunst und Philologie 1. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag.
2007. “Two Inscribed Pots from Afghanistan.” Gandhāran Studies 1: 77–88.
2007/08. The Bajaur collection: A new collection of Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts. A preliminary 
catalogue and survey (in progress). Online version 1.1 (http://www.geschkult.fu-berlin.de/e/
indologie/bajaur/publication/ strauch _ 2008 _1_1.pdf).
2008. “The Bajaur Collection of Kharoṣṭhī Manuscripts – A Preliminary Survey.” Studien zur 
Indologie und Iranistik 25: 103–136.
2010. “More missing pieces of Early Pure Land Buddhism: New evidence for Akṣobhya and 
Abhirati in an Early Mahayana Sutra from Gandhāra.” The Eastern Buddhist 41: 23–66.
2011. “The character of the Indian Kharoṣṭhī script and the ‘Sanskrit revolution’: a writing 
system between identity and assimilation.” In Alex de Voogt and Joachim Quack, eds., The 
Idea of Writing. Writing Across Borders. Leiden: Brill, 131–168.
forthcoming a. “Looking into water-pots and over a Buddhist scribe’s shoulder — On the 
deposition and the use of manuscripts in early Buddhism.” In Nalini Balbir and Maria 
Szuppe, eds., Proceedings of the Conference “Lecteurs et copistes dans les traditions 
manuscrites iraniennes, indiennes et centrasiatiques,” June 15–17, 2010. Paris. 
forthcoming b. “Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī and the Order of Nuns in a Gandhāran version of the 
Dakṣiṇāvibhaṅgasūtra.” In Collett, Alice, ed., Women in Early Indian Buddhism: Comparative Textual Studies. New York: Oxford University Press.
forthcoming c. “The evolution of the Buddhist rakṣā genre in the light of new evidence from 
Gandhāra: The *Manasvi-nāgarāja-sūtra from the Bajaur Collection of Kharoṣṭhī 
manuscripts.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies.
Takubo, S. 1972. (ed.) Ārya-Mahā-Māyūrī Vidyā-Rājñī. Tokyo.
Vorob’eva-Desi͡atovskai͡a, M. I. (М. И. Воробьева-Десятовская). 2006 “Fragment pis’mom 
kkharoshtkhi iz kollektsii S. F. Ol’denburga Фрагмент письмом кхароштхи из коллекции 
С. Ф. Ольденбурга.” Pis’mennye pami͡atniki Vostoka Письменные памятники Востока 4: 
145–149.
Wilson, H. H. 1841. Ariana antiqua: A Descriptive Account of the Antiquities and Coins of 
Afghanistan: With a Memoir on the Buildings Called Topes, by C. Masson, Esq. London: The 
Honourable the Court of Directors of the East India Company.

--- Page 101 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
An Ancient Buddhist Library in Modern Research
OSKAR VON HINÜBER (FREIBURG)
1. Introduction
It was about 30 years ago that the survey “Die Erforschung der Gilgithandschriften” was 
published.1 In the meantime, considerable progress has been made in different areas of 
research on these manuscripts: not only have successful identifications been made, but 
editions have also been prepared. Moreover the cultural background against which these 
manuscripts were once produced has become much clearer. Of course, the manuscripts 
have also been much used in research on Buddhism. This, however, will not be investigated here, because the focus will be strictly on the manuscripts themselves and on the library 
in which they were kept. 
The fact that we know that, with three exceptions,2 the Gilgit manuscripts — actually 
found in Naupur near Gilgit — once belonged to one and the same library, and the most 
lucky circumstance that this library occasionally contained more than a single copy of one 
and the same text, e.g., four copies of the Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra,3 about five copies of the 
Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī,4 or ten copies and one small fragment of the Saṃghāṭasūtra, 
most of them showing different recensions,5 allows unusual insights into the growth and 
development of Buddhist texts, particularly of the Saṃghāṭasūtra.
Consequently the Gilgit manuscripts are approached in this introduction in three steps: 
cultural history, the history of the text of the Saṃghāṭasūtra, and finally a brief look at 
some codicological issues. Editions and identifications6 are listed in the following “Guide 
to the Gilgit Manuscripts,” hereafter “Guide.” Necessarily, many details which have to be 
recalled here have already been discussed in other contexts. Nevertheless it may be useful 
to bring together the disiecta membra in trying to round off the picture of this library and 
its content without, however, repeating all and everything that has been said previously in 
von Hinüber 1979 or in the keynote address during the German oriental conference held at 
Berlin in 1980, “Die Bedeutung des Handschriftenfundes bei Gilgit.”7
A description of the circumstances under which the manuscripts were discovered, first 
by chance in 1931, again in 1938 during the brief excavations conducted by Madhu Sudan 
Kaul Shastri,8 and once more by chance in 1998, perhaps near the Kargah Buddha,9 is 
1 O. von Hinüber: Die Erforschung der Gilgit-Handschriften. (Funde buddhistischer Sanskrit-Handschriften, I). NAWG, Jg 1979, Nr. 12, 34 pp. [pp. 329–360]. S. Karashima drew my attention to a second 
survey which appeared in Taiwan: CAI Yaoming, “Jierjite (Gilgit) fanwen fodian xieben de chutu yu 
fojiao yanjiu (The Buddhist manuscripts found at Gilgit and the research on Buddhism),” in: Foxue 
yanjiu zazhi (Journal of Buddhist Studies; alternative English title: Satyābhisamaya. A Buddhist Studies 
Quarterly) 13. Taipei 2006, pp. 4–126.
2 The Dīrghāgama and the two “Los Angeles” manuscripts, that is Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscript I, and 
the Sarvagatipariśodhanoṣṇīṣavijay, cf. “Guide” IV. nos. 2K, 4K.
3 Nos. 10b, 31, 32, 34 (no. 57 does not contain this text).
4 Nos. 6, 15, 17, three folios from no. 14 and four folios from no. 56, besides fragments, cf. index.
5 The provenance of manuscript I (“Los Angeles manuscript”) and fragment K (folio 49) is doubtful, 
cf. “Guide,” note to IV. Miscellaneous Manuscripts. Manuscript I represents at the same time a new 
recension sometimes near to B as can be seen right at the beginning: bhaiṣajyarājena bodhisatvena, Sgh 
§3 in ACDEF, but bhaiṣajyasenena in BI. Concerning manuscript L (no. 5T) no information is available 
as yet.
6 Less than 1% of the ca. 1760 folios still await identification and are listed in the index s. v. “Unidentified.”
7 von Hinüber 1983: 47–66 = Kleine Schriften 2009: 668–687.
8 Koul 1935: 5–10; Kaul Shastri 1939: 1–12 and 15 plates. For further details see Fussman 2004 and 
on the find-spot of the manuscripts discovered in 1998 ibidem, 104 note 8.

--- Page 102 of 425 ---
80
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
provided in the rather recent and excellent article by Gérard Fussman “Dans quel type de 
bâtiment furent trouvés les manuscrits de Gilgit?” published in the Journal Asiatique 292 
(Fussman 2004), which also contains a very detailed and careful evaluation of older literature. As Fussman convincingly argues, the building which once housed the manuscripts 
was neither a stūpa, as mostly assumed previously, nor a monastery, but some sort of 
tower. Buildings such as the one reconstructed by Fussman on the basis of archaeological 
remains and by comparison with recent traditional buildings in the area are indeed known 
from ancient Buddhist images, as pointed out by Fussman in an addendum to his article, 
where he included some images of buildings of the relevant type. 
In all likelihood, however, there was not just one eremite living in that tower, as Fussman assumes, but perhaps a very small community of monks, who might have acted as 
some sort of priests to a local Buddhist community. If so, the Gilgit manuscripts from 
Naupur once formed the library10 of this community.
Fussman further tried to characterize the library and to unite, if only in a preliminary 
fashion, books once comprising more than one text. It is indeed still one of the most urgent 
tasks to put together original collections of different texts which are now separated.11 
However, this is possible only with access to the originals. For besides pagination the size 
of the individual folios must be used as a guide, and that is mostly unknown, with the 
exception of the facsimile edition of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra manuscripts published 
recently by Soka University (Lotus Sutra Manuscript Series 12), which indicates the measurements. However, even now the interesting observation can be made that there are indications that collections of texts might have been used for ritual purposes, such as a manuscript comprising, besides the Ratnaketuparivarta, also the Dvādaśadaṇḍakanāmāṣṭaśatavimalīkaraṇā and Mekhalādhāraṇī (no. 29), as pointed out by Fussman.12 One might 
add at least one parallel, the manuscript A of the Saṃghāṭasūtra (no. 2S), in which the text 
of the sūtra is followed by the Ratnacandraparipṛcchā and the Hiraṇyavatīdhāraṇī. 
Particularly the dhāraṇīs point to a ritual use of these texts. Many of them contain 
names of persons who sought protection, among them the local rulers.13 One single folio 
(folio no. 10) of a dhāraṇī was put into one Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscript by mistake. This is 
a text kept in reserve and not yet used in a ritual of protection, because there is a space left 
blank where a name would be filled in: … rakṣa rakṣa mama – blank – sarvasatvānāṃ … 
(see fig. 1).14
9 I.e. the manuscripts mentioned in note 2.
10 A library is called dhāraṇakoṣṭhikā, GM III 2, 143.6, cf. A Record of the Buddhist Religion as 
Practised in India and the Malay Archipelago by I-tsing, translated by J. Takakusu. London 1896, p. 192. 
— Recently, G. Schopen (2009: 189–219 [Rev.: P. S. Filliozat, CRAIBL 2009 [2011]: 1754–1760; S. 
Pollock, JAs 299: 423–442; O. von Hinüber, ZDMG 162. 2012: 499–502]) argued in his article “On the 
Absence of Urtexts and Otiose Ācāryas: Buildings, Books, and Lay Buddhist Ritual at Gilgit” that the 
building in which the Gilgit manuscripts were found was a scriptorium rather than a place for ritual and 
healing. Although it is certainly true that books were copied by the monks living there, this does not at all 
exclude all other activities as described by G. Fussman; for details cf. the review in ZDMG. Unfortunately, G. Schopen’s article came to my notice only after completing “The Gilgit Manuscripts.”
11 This is particularly true for the Avadāna collections despite the fact that some individual avadānas 
such as the Sucandra-Avadāna have been edited more than once, mostly in unpublished MA or PhD 
theses. Another desideratum is an edition of the complete Mūlasarvāstivāda-Vinaya as preserved at 
Gilgit.
12 This collection is described in detail by C.B. Tripathi, “Gilgit-Blätter der Mekhalā-dhāraṇī.” StII 7. 
1981, p. 161.
13 These are collected and edited in von Hinüber 2004: 12–27 with additions in von Hinüber 2007: 39–
43, plates 1–5; von Hinüber 2009a: 3–6, plates 1–6, and von Hinüber 2010: 3–8, plates 1, 2; von Hinüber 
2011: 3–6, plate 1, von Hinüber 2012a: 11 f., plate 3 and von Hinüber 2012b: XXXV–LXVIII = von 
Hinüber 2012c: 186–166 (19–39). — The number of protective spells written for Navasurendrādityanandi is considerably higher than the figure given in von Hinüber 2004: 15, because C. B. Tripathi mentions 
another 34 (that is altogether 53) small scrolls in his unpublished report of 1987.
14 The text is transcribed in the “Guide,” no. 38b. — Similar blanks occur in inscriptions: R. Salomon:

--- Page 103 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
81
Figure 1: Dhāraṇī folio no. 10 (Saṃghāṭasūtra Manuscript G, no. 38): … rakṣa rakṣa mama — 
blank — sarvasatvānāṃ ...
This again confirms Fussman’s assumption. Moreover, in two of the Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī manuscripts (nos. 6 and 15) the names were filled in by a hand clearly different from 
that of the scribe of the manuscript.15 Consequently, both these manuscripts were also prefabricated.
Furthermore, in the colophons of some texts, the long lists of names of persons living or 
dead may have served ritual purposes. It was good Mūlasarvāstivāda practice to recite the 
names of donors who had passed away, as it is said in the Śayanāsanavastu: uktaṃ bhagavatā: abhyatītakālagatānāṃ dānapatīnāṃ nāmnā dakṣiṇā ādeṣṭavyā iti; saṃghasthaviro 
’bhyatītakālagatānāṃ dānapatīnām arthāya gāthāṃ bhāṣate, Śayanāsanavastu, p. 37.6–8 
“The lord prescribed: The merit is to be ascribed by name to donors who have died and 
passed away. The eldest monk in the community recites a verse for the donors who have 
died and passed away.”16 Therefore, it is not impossible to imagine that the many names of 
persons alive or dead mentioned in colophons such as in the one found in the Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscript D (Śrīnagar Collection no. 1S) or in the Prajñāpāramitā (nos. 24, 25, 28) 
were read out in this way.
The library was, however, not collected exclusively for ritual purposes. First, there is a 
once complete manuscript of the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya, and three different Prātimokṣasūtra manuscripts, one of them with an attached Karmavācanā collection (nos. 3a and 3b). 
Whether or not all three Prātimokṣasūtras once contained a Karmavācanā appendix is impossible to tell, because the ends of two manuscripts are lost. These texts clearly point to a 
monastic context and perhaps to the presence of three monks, who possessed one Prātimokṣasūtra each.17 
On the other hand, one would certainly not expect a large community living in the 
reconstructed building, which was comparatively small. As no traces of a monastery have 
been found in the area around the tower, as Fussman emphasized,18 it seems that perhaps 
up to three monks lived here. The space would allow that. The inner diameter of the 
Indian Epigraphy. A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and Other Indo-Aryan 
Languages. New York and Oxford 1998 [Rev.: H. Falk, Written Language and Literacy 4. 2001: 96–101; 
O. von Hinüber, JAOS 121. 2001: 517–519; Daud Ali, BSOAS 64. 2004: 278ff.], p. 117, cf. also EI 40. 
1973/74: 131 (Kundeswar Copper Plate Grant, AD 1198, Madhyapradesh), where the names of the 
donees (lines 15 to 26) were most likely inserted into a space originally left blank, cf. p. 128.
15 No. 6 Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī, page 1082 = folio no. 13a, lines 4ff.; No. 15 Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī, page 1141 = folio no. 5, line 3.
16 The Gilgit Manuscript of the Śayanāsanavastu and the Adhikaraṇavastu edited by R. Gnoli. Serie 
Orientale Roma L. Rome 1978.
17 If there were three monks, they could not perform the uposatha ceremony, for which at least four 
monks are needed: HU-von Hinüber 1994: 385, §76.3ff., cf. Vin I 124.1–27.
18 It should be kept in mind, however, that approximately three centuries later the Saka itinerary 
mentions no less than eight saṃghārāmas in Gilgit, cf. von Hinüber 2004: 75, n. 13.

--- Page 104 of 425 ---
82
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
circular room of the building is 5.18m according to Fussman, p. 116, which results in about 
21m2, on certainly one storey and a basement, perhaps on two stories.
Moreover, besides typical monastic literature, we find worldly books with no specific 
relation to Buddhism, as observed already by Kaul Shastri in his report of 1939. Books of 
this kind are, at least in the understanding of the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya, out of place in a 
monastic library and should be sold if inherited: bahiḥśāstrapustakā bhikṣubhir vikrīya 
bhājetavyāḥ, GM III 2, 143.6. 
This is particularly true for the fragment of a narrative text that bears some similarities 
to Pañcatantra, Mitrabheda story 20, as recognized by Kaul Shastri. The verse quoted 
upāyaṃ cintayet prājñaḥ is indeed the first quarter of the introductory verse of that story, 
which is otherwise different from the Gilgit fragment.19 This folio once belonged to a 
rather large collection of stories as the folio no. 236 (plate 1442) shows. The style of the 
fragment rules out the possibility that this is an avadāna.20 The verse is introduced by ato 
haṃ bravīmi upāyaṃ cintayet prājña iti in the fragment, and by ato vayaṃ brūmaḥ upāyaṃ cintayed iti in the Pañcatantra.
Lastly, Kaul Shastri was able to identify fragments of two further texts, one grammatical 
and one medical. The medical text was easily identified, because by lucky circumstance a 
colophon is extant: khāraṇādanyāso kuṇḍikāgarbhāvakrāntiṃ śārīraṃ samāptam, plate 
1442, line 1. The fragment was discussed by P. K. Gode within the context of medical 
literature as early as 1939, and it is of course duly mentioned in Meulenbeld’s survey, 
where the name of the author is quoted in the form Kharanāda.21 Moreover, there is a 
second medical fragment comprising only three folios from the beginning of the text or of 
one of its chapters. The Annapānavidhi (no. 20) has not attracted any attention so far. 
Luckily, the title is mentioned in the beginning: # svasti || athāto nnapānavidhim adhyāyaṃ 
vyākhyāsyāmaḥ ||. In spite of the fact that Meulenbeld mentions the Annapānavidhi by 
Suṣeṇa, which may be a separate text or part of the larger Āyurvedamahodadhi, he does not 
refer to the Gilgit text, which, however, is mentioned in the New Catalogus Catalogorum.22
If both texts were identical, the dating given by Meulenbeld would need correction. 
Even though the beginning of the Annapānavidhi of Suṣeṇa is unfortunately lost, and the 
editors do not indicate whether it is possible to estimate the extent of the missing text, it is 
clear from the extant part of the Annapānaviddhi as edited by Venkatasubrahmanya Sastri 
(Ayurveda Mahodadhi – Annapanavidhi. Tanjore 1950)23 that this text begins with a discourse on water, not on different kinds of grain, as the Gilgit text does. Moreover, the formulation of paragraphs on śāli and māṃsa is quite different in both texts. Therefore, these 
are two different treatises on medicine bearing the same title.
19 This narrative text from Gilgit cannot be traced by the quotations of this verse listed in L. Sternbach: 
Mahāsubhāṣitasaṃgraha. Hoshiarpur 1974, Vol. I.
20 The text is transcribed by Kaul Shastri in his report of 1939. In a message of February 28 2013, J.-U. 
Hartmann drew my attention to the almost identical wording of this story as found in the Tantrākhyāyika, 
48.6–22 (ed. Hertel 1915), the old Kashmirian version. Consequently, this seems to be the oldest trace of 
the Pañcatantra in an Indian manuscript.
21 P. K. Gode: “Antiquity of the Lost Medical Treatise by Khāraṇādi in the Light of the Leaf of the 
Khāraṇāda-Nyāsa Newly Discovered at Gilgit.” ABORI 20 (1939): 97–102 = Studies in Indian Literary 
History Vol. I . Bombay 1953: 126–131, where Kaul Shastri’s transcript is reprinted. G. J. Meulenbeld: A 
History of Indian Medical Literature. Volume IA (Groningen Indological Studies Vol. XV). Groningen 
1999: 695 [Rev.: R. P. Das, Traditional South Indian Medicine 6. 2001: 145–158; K. Zysk, IIJ 45. 2002: 
358–361; K. Karttunen, Studia Orientalia. Societas Orientalis Fennica. 101. 2007: 531–536]. More 
manuscripts of medical texts, among a number of as yet unidentified texts, including the Carakasaṃhitā 
and Siddhasāra, were identified by K. Wille in the photo collection created by Ch. Tripathi (see the 
Additional Note on the Srinagar Collection by K. Wille, pp. 112–113 below).
22 Meulenbeld, as previous note, Vol. IIA. 2000: 479ff.
23 A xerox copy of this rare edition is kept in the “Emmerick Library” of The International Research 
Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University, Hachioji.

--- Page 105 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
83
This manuscript looks like an outsider in this collection: the opening svasti is rare, but 
occurs also at the beginning of manuscript D of the Saṃghāṭasūtra (Śrīnagar Collection 
no. 1S), and moreover the script of the Annapānavidhi, although it is a Śāradā variant, 
looks quite different in style, if the script usually found in the Gilgit manuscripts is compared.
The grammatical fragment, which treats the derivation of descendants and seems to 
quote Pāṇini 4.1.92 tasyāpatyam, is as yet unidentified.24 The script is the usual protoŚāradā type. One might wish that this manuscript had been used more by the Buddhist 
community at Gilgit than it probably was, if one considers the bad Sanskrit in the inscriptions on the Gilgit bronzes, which throws a very unfavourable light on the grammatical 
knowledge of the local Buddhist paṇḍits.25 Furthermore, the monk who prepared the 
version of the Saṃghāṭasūtra preserved in manuscript F was some sort of grammatical 
adventurer, who did not shrink back from forms such as prāduṣcakārṣīt, Sgh §71.26
These precious fragments show that the library was not used only for religious purposes.27 As Fussman points out, at least one text, Nāgārjuna’s Pratītyasamutpādahṛdayakārikā (no. 61a), demonstrates also some philosophical interest on the part of the 
owner(s) of the library. However, there is even more, such as a single folio of the Abhidharmāvatāra (no. 58), as well as fragments of the Lokaprajñapti, which itself is part of 
the Prajñaptiśāstra, and the Dharmaskandha, which are both parts of the Sarvāstivāda 
Abhidharma. Moreover, as the extant folio nos. indicate, the Dharmaskandha was originally part of a larger collection of texts, possibly even of the complete set of all canonical 
Abhidharma texts (cf. Ujjain Collection, nos. 1U, 3U).28
The grammatical text shows that the monks did not simply read, but really studied their 
texts, to which interlinear corrections and notes found here and there bear ample witness, 
as do, of course, the different versions of the Saṃghāṭasūtra created at Naupur. Moreover, 
the monks might have practiced medicine, not only from books on Āyurveda, but also by 
the help of dhāraṇīs. Thus the library from Gilgit, the only one extant from ancient India, 
confirms what is known from very few references in literature and in inscriptions, that 
libraries were not limited to books of one particular religion or śāstra. For a broad knowledge was necessary, e.g., in debates with members of other, sometimes hostile communities. Therefore, Asaṅga recommends that the bodhisatva should study hetuvidyā and śabdavidyā to refute those who do not appreciate Buddhism.29 Xuanzang clearly followed that 
advice and was well versed in different Brahmanical philosophies,30 as, conversely, was a 
king of Bengal in Buddhist literature.31 One of the prerequisites for acquiring that knowledge was obviously study in a good and comprehensive library.
Another singular feature of the Gilgit manuscripts is that they all come from one library 
and thus form some sort of a closed corpus. Before turning to the question where the books 
24 There is no indication that this is a Buddhist grammar, contrary to what Kaul Shastri says (1939: 7), 
who transcribed these three texts badly illustrated on his plate 1442.
25 von Hinüber 2004: 145.
26 O. von Hinüber: Origin and Varieties of Buddhist Sanskrit, in: Dialectes dans les littératures indoaryennes, éd. par C. Caillat. Paris 1989: 358 = Kleine Schriften. Wiesbaden 2009: 572. The scribe of F 
also once writes dharma-eṇa, Sgh §103 for dharmeṇa as in formulas, cf. von Hinüber 2004: 145, n. 195.
27 On libraries in Buddhist India cf. Fussman 2003–2004: 933–944; O. von Hinüber, IIJ 44. 2001: 359 
and WZKS 50. 2006: 220 (review of H. Scharfe: Ancient Indian Education. 2002).
28 Hardly any text from the Sūtrapiṭaka is preserved in this area, with the only exception of the 
Ekottarikāgama (nos. 4a, 2U) and the Dīrghāgama (no. 4K), but cf. also the index to the “Guide” s.v. 
sūtra for individual sūtra texts in different collections.
29 Asaṅga: Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra. Exposé de la doctrine du grand véhicule selon le système Yogācāra édité et traduit par S. Lévi. Paris 1907: 70.15ff. (after XI 60).
30 On Xuanzang’s knowledge of Brahmanical philosophical systems cf. von Hinüber 2009b: 158.
31 King Śatrubhañja (6th century) boasts that he read bhārata-purāṇetihāsa-vyākaraṇa-samīkṣāmīmāṃsā-cchandaḥ-śruti-bauddhaprakaraṇa-sāṅkhya, EI 40. 1973/4 (1986): 126, lines 11f.

--- Page 106 of 425 ---
84
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
in the library came from, it should be kept in mind that the library grew over a long period 
of perhaps about a century. This is easy to see: the colophons and the protective spells 
mention four of the Palola Ṣāhis: Vajrādityanandi (*585–*605), Vikramādityanandi (*605–
*625), Surendravikramādityanandi (*625–*644/*655), Navasurendrādityanandi (*644/
*655– died before 706/7). Although the dates inserted here tentatively are more or less fictitious and serve only to give a rough idea of a possible chronology, we do know that 
Navasurendrādityanandi was alive in 671, when the Hatūn inscription was written, but was 
dead in 706/7, because he is mentioned as kālagata in the long inscription on the bronze of 
Jayamaṅgalavikramādityanandi.32 Moreover, we can place the Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscript 
“D,” which is dated “in the third year” (saṃvatsare tṛitīye 3), in the year 627/8.33 
It is of some importance that these kings are connected in one way or another to the Gilgit manuscripts. Navasurendrādityanandi in particular sought the protection of the monks, 
as the Mahāmāyūrī and many short spells written for him demonstrate.34 The last four of 
the nine Palola Ṣāhis, however, beginning with Jayamaṅgalavikramādityanandi (*685–
710*), are known only from inscriptions on bronzes or from the annals of the Tang 
dynasty.
Consequently, the library had a long history before it finally came into the possession of 
those three monks who are presumed to have lived in that tower, or, what is more likely, it 
was used by more than one generation of monks. This is confirmed by a visible development of the palaeography.
These chronological considerations immediately raise a second question: where did 
these manuscripts come from? Or: are there indications as to the place where they were 
copied? Here, of course, the few extant colophons can help again. As pointed out by Fussman, the Ratnaketuparivarta and Mekhalādhāraṇī (nos. 7 and 29abc) united in one manuscript were copied for the protection of Metala Gorṇikṣiṇa, most likely a native of the 
Gilgit area as his name seems to indicate. Others, among them one copy of the Saṃghāṭasūtra, are connected to local nobles and mention clearly local names in the colophons. This 
shows that at least some of the manuscripts were most likely of local production, though 
perhaps not all. For, as pointed out long ago, one of the Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscripts (A = 
no. 2S), the master copy from which all other manuscripts are derived to a large extent, 
was most likely imported to the Gilgit area. 
This is indicated first of all by a frequently quoted word, discovered by Sir Harold 
Bailey, which occurs in Sanskrit only in the Saṃghāṭasūtra and is found only in the 
modern Indo-Aryan languages of that area, the Dardic languages: cīmarakāra “blacksmith,” thus clearly pointing to the northwest.35 This word is found in all but one 
manuscript: only A has ayaskāra, the standard Sanskrit word in the context: 
yan mānuṣyakam ātmabhāvaṃ pratigṛhṇanti tan na rupyakāreṇa kṛtaṃ. na 
cīmarakareṇa (A: ayaskāreṇa) kṛtaṃ. na kāṣṭhakāreṇa kṛtaṃ. na kulālena (A: 
kumbhakāreṇa) kṛtaṃ. na rājabhayenopadyate. strīpuruṣasamyogāt pāpena 
karmaṇā saṃyuktaṃ saṃbhavati, Sgh §227. 
Here, manuscripts ABCDEI are extant.36 Besides cīmarakāreṇa, kumbhakāreṇa is also 
32 von Hinüber 2004: 31, 36, Inscription no. 12.
33 von Hinüber 2004: 25, Colophon no. 10.
34 See also index to the “Guide” s.v. dhāraṇī.
35 Turner 1966: no. 14496 †cīmara-.
36 There is a gap in manuscript I and exactly the word cīmara is destroyed: … kṛtaṃ […]kareṇa kṛtaṃ 
kāṣṭha°. Strangely, slight traces visible in the gap on folio 28b3 at the very end seem to indicate a word 
different from both cīmarakāra and ayaskāra. However, in the verse bhuṃjante cīmaraṃ taptaṃ, Sgh 
§242, verse 132c, where manuscript I is extant, all three manuscripts (BDI) preserving this verse read so. 
— It would be very interesting to compare the inaccessible manuscript L (no. 5T), the only one not from 
the northwest and written in Proto-Bengali script, which should read ayaskāra, of course. This

--- Page 107 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
85
replaced, because kulālena is the northwestern, and kumbhakāreṇa the central Indian word, 
as the modern languages show.37 However, manuscript A was not brought from afar as it is 
written on birch bark, and as the northwestern form śravaṇo gotamaḥ for śramaṇo gotamaḥ, Sgh §182, seems to indicate.
A closer look also reveals traces of northwestern phonetics in many places, particularly 
in manuscript B, where the scribe occasionally writes bh for v and vice versa: mṛṣāvādāt 
prativiratā (B: pratibhiratā), Sgh §34, or: na bhūyo vayaṃ (B: bhayaṃ) bhagavann utsahāmahe jātiduḥkhaṃ anubhavituṃ, Sgh §52.38 To guarantee the correct pronunciation the 
scribe of B writes twice dharmabbhāṇakaḥ sarvaśūra tathāgatasamo jñātavyaḥ … katamo 
bhagavan dharmabbhāṇakaḥ, Sgh §45. Similarly, manuscript D writes roṣāvibhūtaḥ, Sgh 
§211, for roṣābhibhūtaḥ and brajen (1. pers. sing.) nirvāṇasātau hi, Sgh §213 (verse 67c), 
instead of °dhātau.
This evidence is matched by similar ways of writing found in the inscriptions along the 
Upper Indus,39 e.g.: Thalpan II no. 195:367: namo buddhāya namo ddharmāya, or Chilās 
Bridge 55:3 devaddharmo yaṃ vu + halasya40, cf. … sanniṣaṇṇā ddharmaśravaṇāya, Sgh 
§10 manuscript E.
Another northwestern feature of B is the frequent use of forms like śruṇoti for śṛṇoti 
(śruṇu : śṛṇu, Sgh §91, etc.). That this is really a peculiarity showing northwestern influence is underlined by manuscript D riddhibalenūrdhvād avatūrya, Sgh §237 instead of 
avatīrya in manuscripts ABF.41 Here too mṛhūrtaṃ, Sgh §99, verse 36d, for muhūrtaṃ or 
rather *murhūrtaṃ / *mruhūrtaṃ in manuscript F, pointing at the same time to a Dardic 
metathesis, can be mentioned. 
Only manuscript D has the enigmatic trevayaṃti, trevayitvā, Sgh §185, for vardhayati, 
vardhayitvā.42
After recalling this evidence, there can be hardly any doubt that at least some manuscripts were copied locally, that is in the northwest. Moreover, this evidence also shows 
that they were not simply copied. The text underwent consciously introduced changes, 
which is very obvious again in the case of the Saṃghāṭasūtra. As already stated, the 
starting point is manuscript A, most likely supplemented by an unknown manuscript. This 
is particularly evident where very corrupt verses in A were restored or where the wording 
was subject to alterations introduced purposely by one or more redactors.
Beginning from the text of the following verse in A: rājyaiśvāryeṇa me nārtho it is easy 
to see that this was corrupted in B to: rājyabhogaiśvarya me nārtho, but restored in CF: 
manuscript in particular points to a wide circulation of the Saṃghāṭasūtra also in India: saṃghāṭo … 
jambudvīpe pracariṣyati, Sgh 14 (ABCD, not in F), cf. Skilling 2004: 73[198]–87[184]. The wide 
circulation of this text is confirmed by the fact that even the Muslim author Rashīd ad-Dīn (died 1318) 
seems to have known the title Saṃghāṭa(sūtra), cf. O. von Hinüber, WZKS 31. 1987: 209 = Kleine 
Schriften 2009: 1038. Two further texts mentioned by Rashīd ad-Dīn and preserved in the Gilgit library 
were identified in Schopen 1982: 225–235 as Devatāsūtra (no. 13d,1) and Maitreyavyākaraṇa (no. 13c). 
Furthermore, there are references to the Aparimitāyuḥsūtra (no. 61b), to the Pañcarakṣā (cf. “Guide” 
index s. v. Vidyā) and to the Kāraṇḍavyūha (no. 12) in Jahn 1980: 102ff. Thus these altogether six texts 
in the list of books which Rashīd ad-Dīn received from his Kashmiri informant Kamālaśrī may have been 
standard in Buddhist libraries in greater Kashmir for several centuries. 
37 Turner 1966: no. 3310 kuṃbhakāra- and no. 3341 kúlāla-. Manuscript I has also kulālena.
38 von Hinüber 2001: §§173, 191; von Hinüber 1989c: 358 = Kleine Schriften 2009: 571.
39 The material is published in the respective volumes of “Materialien zur Archäologie der Nordgebiete 
Pakistans”: Bandini-König 2003 and 2005.
40 Cf. also: Hodar 32:4, Shatial 39:16, Gichi Nala 132.– Chilas V 80:1 namo sarvavudhavoddhisatvebhya clearly is a writing mistake. The Indian loanword written in Bactrian as δδηβδαρµο, Tang-i-Safedak 
inscription, line 6, cf. Sims-Williams/Lee 2003: 164, is, however, to be interpreted in a different way: 
Sims-Williams 1997/98: 197.
41 Cf. Khowār tūrth < skt. tīrtha, von Hinüber 2001: §10 and perhaps AV(P) V 31,3c aturṣṭa for atṛṣṭa, 
IIJ 47. 2004: 60.
42 von Hinüber 1989c: 358 = Kleine Schriften 2009: 571.

--- Page 108 of 425 ---
86
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
rājyabhogaiś ca me nārtho na dhānyena dhanena ca, Sgh §213, verse 66cd. Similarly, 
brajen nirvāṇadhātau hi śānte yatra tathāgataḥ, Sgh §213, verse 67bc, starts from A: 
śāntaṃ vrajeya nirvāṇaṃ yatra ya(d)ā tathāgatā and underwent obvious redactional 
changes. The end of the following verse pūrvaṃ mayā kṛtaṃ karma, Sgh §213, verse 69a 
of A is changed to kṛtaṃ pāpaṃ in BCDF, and consequently, karma disappears completely 
from the text here.
The same development can be observed in prose passages:
A: paṃcemāṃ sarvaśūra mahānadyāḥ ākāśe pracaranti ye prajāṃ prahlādayanti
F: paṃcemāḥ sarvaśūra mahānadyaḥ ākāśe pracaranti yāḥ prajāṃ pālayanti
I: paṃcemā sarvaśūra mahānadya ākāśe pracaraṃti yāḥ prajāṃ plāvaya[ṃ]ti
BCDE: sarvaśūra paṃcemā mahānadyaḥ ākāśe pravahanti yā satatasamitam udakavindubhiḥ prajāṃ plāvayanti, Sgh §113
It seems that the comparatively rare word prahlādayati was alien to the vocabulary of the 
Gilgit monks, who replaced it in different ways. The redactor of F did not have a lucky 
hand, because pālayanti does not make much sense. The vulgate chose plāvayanti and inserted “drops of water” to get a better text. 
In rare cases it seems possible to guess the motives behind an alteration of the text.43 
Once we find in manuscript A a wording that is kept unchanged also in F:
yena sa rājā vimalacandras tenopasaṃkrāntā upasaṃkramya taṃ … evam 
āhuḥ, Sgh §104
However, the vulgate BCD (and most likely also I) has: yena sa rājā tenopasaṃkrāntā 
upetya … The reason could be that this particular way of phrasing the description of the 
approach to a person, which was most likely used predominantly by Sarvāstivādins, was 
more familiar to the scribes or redactors in Gilgit.44 Similar reasons could be assumed 
when the common formula: ekāṃsam uttarāsaṅgaṃ kṛtvā … tenāñjaliṃ praṇāmya, Sgh § 
216 in manuscript A is changed into a wording which seems to be rare:45 BCDFI: ekāṃsaṃ 
cīvaraṃ prāvṛtya … tenāñjaliṃ praṇamayya, correspondingly Sgh §171.
In these and numerous other instances, it would be impossible to retrieve the original 
text of A or even to suspect any alteration of the transmitted text. Consequently we are able 
to perceive in Gilgit much more clearly than anywhere else that what we have in front of 
us are only particular phases in the developments of non-canonical texts, developments 
whose beginning and end we are unable to determine. Worse, in most other cases only the 
end of a long history of a Buddhist text is visible in just one or two surviving and often 
rather late manuscripts. In earlier times it is either a translation into Chinese or Tibetan 
which freezes a certain recension. Therefore it is by no means surprising if translations of 
43 For a similar instance see O. von Hinüber, review of R. Salomon: Two Gāndhārī Manuscripts of the 
Songs of Lake Anavatapta (Anavataptagāthā). 2008. JAOS 130 (2010): 90–94.
44 Further examples are discussed in von Hinüber 1989c: 356ff. = Kleine Schriften 2009: 559ff.
45 Although this non-canonical wording is listed neither in SWTF nor in BHSD, which has no entry 
uttarāsaṅga, it does occur occasionally at the beginning of a parivarta in the Suvarṇaprabhāsottamasūtra (ed. J. Nobel, 1937), e.g., mahādevī ekāṃśaṃ cīvaraṃ prāvṛtya, 102.13 = beginning of VII. 
Sarasvatīparivarta, and altogether six times in this text; further: Ratnaketuparivarta (ed. Y. Kurumiya 
1978) 12.4, cf. 137.10; Samādhirājasūtra (ed. P. L. Vaidya 1961) 237.10, cf. ekāṃsaṃ cīvaram āvṛtya, 
239.21 (cf. ekāṃsaṃ cīvaraṃ prāpayitvā, Mvu II 293.18); different Prajñāpāramitā texts: 5 references; 
Gaṇḍavyūha (ed. D. T. Suzuki and H. Idzumi, 1949) 345.25; Karuṇāpuṇḍarīkasūtra (ed. I. Yamada, 
1968) 219.18 besides ekāṃsam uttarāsaṅgaṃ kṛtvā, Karuṇāpuṇḍarīkasūtra 54.9ff. Similar expressions 
are: … na paryastikāya, parimaṇḍalaṃ cīvaraṃ prāvṛtya … na nāgaphaṇakaṃ … cīvaraṃ prāvṛtya, 
Śrāvakabhūmi (ed. K. Shukla 1973) 124.13 in a context referring to the Śaikṣa rules, and tathāgatacīvaraṃ prāvṛtya, 234.5 and caukṣaṃ … cīvara prāvaritvā, 283.8* in the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra (H. 
Kern 1908–1912). — Similarly, tenopasaṃkrāmad upasaṃkramya, 180.10 is used side by side with 
tenopajagāma upetya, 70.4 = 84.4 = 103.1 also in the Karuṇāpuṇḍarīkasūtra. — I am obliged to H. 
Krasser, Vienna, for providing these references.

--- Page 109 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
87
non-canonical texts are often made from a wording more or less different from what we 
read in a manuscript extant in the original language.
This seems to be the most interesting and of course deeply worrying conclusion from 
the fact that it is possible to perceive in only one of the innumerable libraries of Buddhist 
monasteries that once existed — and during a comparatively short period of perhaps a 
hundred years or even less — how the wording of a non-canonical text is constantly reshaped in such a way that the usual procedures of textual criticism cannot be applied. Of 
course similar observations can be and have been made elsewhere, e.g., by comparing 
different versions of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra. However, here we usually have manuscripts or fragments from different places and periods, while only in Gilgit the time and 
place of the work on the text can be defined almost exactly.46
Therefore, manuscript A is, as it were, our “original” text (“Urtext”) only by chance. For 
even this text is based on older versions. This can be observed easily as, e.g., in katamo 
dvitīyaḥ puruṣaḥ yasya vṛkṣaṃ na rūhati, Sgh §214, verse 74ab, where all manuscripts 
(ABCDF) have the unmetrical form puruṣaḥ, which can be easily emended to an original 
reading poṣo. Similarly, the verse in manuscript A bhaiṣajyasena sthavira tvam, Sgh §253, 
verse 222a scans only if bhaiṣajyasena thera tvam is read.47
Therefore, the Saṃghāṭasūtra is a precious example of the mechanisms of conscious 
and unconscious modification of a text. While the conscious changes are reflected in 
different wordings in different manuscripts or groups of manuscripts as demonstrated, the 
unconscious changes happened during the process of copying. This, of course, also shapes 
the text and ultimately results in a new wording. Certainly, there is no very clear-cut border 
line between these two ways of developing a text, consciously or unconsciously.
Strong indications of an unconscious change are the so-called sandhi consonants. For 
buddhajñānasyāntarāyaṃ kuryāt, Sgh §96 manuscript A has buddhajñānasya-m-antarāyaṃ kāraye[. Here the sandhi consonant points to an older and original syntactical 
construction buddhajñānam antarāyaṃ kārayati, where a compound verb was used,48 
which disappeared once a scribe copied carelessly and inserted the akṣara sya. Here, A is 
“modernized” by accident.
The metrically correct verse in manuscripts BD:
bhaiṣajyasena sthavira m asmākaṃ vacanaṃ śṛṇu, Sgh §253, verse 222ab,
is based on a corrected, unmetrical version in manuscript A:
bhaiṣajyasena sthavira tvam asmākar vacana śṛṇu. 
Clearly, the verse in A is also metrically correct, if bhaiṣajyasena *thera tvam is read as 
mentioned above. On the other hand, the vulgate, of which only BD are extant here, 
corrects the metre by dropping the akṣara tva, thus creating a sandhi consonant and 
moving the text farther away from the older, “original” version. 
The accidental loss of the word bhagavantam, preserved in ABCF but missing in manuscript D, results in a sandhi consonant: bhaiṣajyaseno bodhisatvo mahasatvo-m-etad 
avocat, Sgh §178.
A simple mistake of the scribe omitting the akṣaras teṣā created a sandhi consonant only 
in C: tena samayena-m-anyatīrthikānāṃ, where AF have the intended text: tena samayena 
teṣām anyatīrthikānāṃ, Sgh §57, while BD, possibly correcting C, have tena samayena 
anya-°.
46 von Hinüber 2000: 17–36 = Kleine Schriften 2009: 431–450, on the Saṃghāṭasūtra, p. 34 = 448 
with n. 68 for pertinent examples; Schopen (2009) investigates the textual history of the Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra along similar lines.
47 On this verse see also below.
48 von Hinüber 1968: §59, p. 72: cīvaralābhaṃ antarāyaṃ kareyya, Vin IV 283.27** “should prevent 
from getting a robe.”

--- Page 110 of 425 ---
88
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
In BCD caturṣur dvīpakṣetreṣu, Sgh §72 which is based on A: caturdvīpeṣu sarveṣu, the 
scribe of the vulgate inserts the akṣara rṣu, but again keeps rdvī unchanged. Only F 
emends the text to caturṣu dvīpakṣetreṣu. 
Similarly, the strange asmākar vacana in A in the verse discussed earlier seems to point 
to an original dual form: āvayor vacanaṃ. Whether or not this type of mistake ultimately is 
one of the roots of the much later predilection of Nepalese scribes of Buddhist manuscripts 
to use the superscript r as “a mere ornament of handwriting”49 cannot be determined. 
All these examples point to scribes who, at least from time to time, mechanically copied 
their originals akṣara by akṣara without giving any thought to the meaning of their texts.
Occasionally, mistakes are corrected and sandhi consonants disappear as in A: nāsti-diha trāṇaṃ, Sgh §51, verse 16a, which is easily restored as BCDF: nāsti kaścid iha 
trāṇaṃ.
There is almost no end of examples.
The sandhi consonants bring us to the scribes and their way of writing, that is to 
palaeography and corrections. Again the Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscripts provide a rewarding 
field of research in this respect also, primarily because the extant manuscripts are written 
in two different scripts. The older round “Gilgit script,” which is also called “Gilgit/
Bamiyan type I” or “local calligraphic ornate script” and perhaps best renamed50 “Gandhāran Brāhmī,” was replaced by the younger proto-Śāradā. This change, which also affected 
the use of numerals,51 occurred in the Gilgit region approximately during the reign of the 
earlier Palola Ṣāhis.
In manuscript D, the first nine pages are numbered in “modern” numerals. At the same 
time this system also introduces, along with new shapes for the numerals, decimal 
numbering, which supersedes the old way of writing, e.g. 10+1. However, from folio 10 
onward the scribe of manuscript D, which was obviously written at a time when script and 
numbering were just at the point of changing, relapses into the old system, which was most 
likely still used in the manuscript from which he copied. In the still later manuscript E the 
scribe used only the “modern” numerals. 
Moreover, even within the proto-Śāradā script a certain development can be observed, 
because the tripartite akṣara ya was slowly replaced by the younger form of this akṣara as 
was the older form of the akṣara ha.52
It is evident and well known, of course, that the manuscripts written in proto-Śāradā are 
younger. This can also be deduced from corrections: in manuscripts BCG the text in 
“Gandhāran Brāhmī” is occasionally corrected in proto-Śāradā. There is no example of a 
correction in the opposite direction. These corrections show that manuscripts in the older 
variant of the script continued to be read, because these mistakes were obviously detected 
only by later readers, not by the scribe himself, and, consequently, they also show that the 
readers were still familiar with both scripts.
Of course corrections by the scribes themselves also occur. In these instances the scribes 
left some space in the next line down in which they inserted missing akṣaras or forgotten 
words,53 and they also cancelled dittographies.54
49 Brough 1954 (Collected Papers. London 1996: 133), cf. also von Hinüber 1989c: 360 = 573 and the 
review of Salomon: Songs, as given in note 43.
50 The problems and pitfalls in naming ancient Indian scripts are discussed in Sander 2007: 121–139.
51 Frentz 1987: 127.
52 von Hinüber 2004: 30. — Examples for the older and younger ha and ya can be found, e.g., in 
manuscript E, folio 31a lines 1 and 2 and folio 31b, lines 4 and 5 respectively = FE pages 2308 and 2309.
53 An example is manuscript C, where adyaiva bhagavann ime satvā utpannāḥ is added in small 
characters on folio 63b, under line 5 = FE page 2231.
54 An example is manuscript C, where a dittography is put into parentheses on folio 22a, lines 3 and 4 
= FE page 2149.

--- Page 111 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
89
Lastly, manuscript B, written in the older “Gandhāran Brāhmī,” deserves special 
attention. Here we occasionally find unusual ways of writing akṣaras, such as varying 
forms of prā, jñā or ji, akṣaras bearing two vowel signs such as buoddheś, peculiar writing 
of the visarga in the form of a double daṇḍa, or unusual markers of the end of a sentence 
(fig. 2). 
Furthermore, what seems to be really unique are small “characters” of varying shapes 
irregularly inserted here and there in approximately fifty instances in B, often in the middle 
of a word, and of unknown meaning (fig. 3).55 
Finally, a scribe drew a small flower in C folio 89a3 (= FE page 2286), when he had 
almost reached the end of the text. Other drawings are found at the end of texts such as the 
Vinayavastu or others.56 These disks bear some similarity to drawings on the rocks in the 
Chilās area but are also found in much later manuscripts (fig. 4).57
ntei (51a, line 7)
punaḥ || (folio 12b, line 3)
Marker at the end of a sentence, folio 100a, line 3
Figure 2: Unusual forms in Manuscript B
buo (50b, line 4)
ka || punar (folio 6b, line 7)
28a, line 3: kumāro+mama
54a, line 8: + āha
Figure 3: Unusual small characters in Manuscript B
29b, line 2: pra+ṇāmyaiva
63b, line 8: mūrdha+ny antardhī
44a, line 10: mahāna+gare
55 Similar small characters seem to be found in Jaina manuscripts occasionally, cf. Weber 1883: 2; 31 
note 1 and for signs and abbreviations used in manuscripts cf. Einecke 2009 [Rev.: O. von Hinüber, IIJ 
(in press)].
56 On FE pages 580, 1050, 1452, 1567, 1706.
57 Bandini-König 1999: Tafeln Ib, IIab, V, XIa, XII, and the decorated stūpa Tafel Vb, cf. also the 
undated fragmentary manuscript of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, Cambridge Add 1682, folio 41b, at 
the end of the Adhimuktiparivarta, which is reproduced in Lotus-Sutra Manuscript Series 4. Sanskrit

--- Page 112 of 425 ---
90
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
Disks from the end of the Vinayavastu, folio 523 (cf. FE, p. 1050)
Disks from no. 19: Āyuḥparyantasūtra (cf. FE, p. 1706)
Disks from D. Bandini, Die Felsbildstation Hodar. Materialien zur Archäologie der Nordgebiete 
Pakistans, Band 3. Mainz, 1999, Tafeln Ib, IIa, Vb
Figure 4: Disks in the Gilgit manuscripts and in rock drawings
Lotus Sutra Manuscripts from Cambridge University Library (Add. 1682 and Add. 1683). Facsimile 
Edition, Soka Gakkai. Hachioji 2002.

--- Page 113 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
91
2. Bibliographical Guide to Identifications and Editions of the Gilgit Manuscripts
The texts called “the Gilgit Manuscripts” were actually found in Naupur near Gilgit and 
split up into three collections named after the places where the manuscripts are kept: I. The 
Delhi Collection (quoted by number), II. The Srinagar Collection (quoted by number+S), 
and III. The Ujjain Collection (quoted by number+U). Moreover, there are supposedly 
three manuscripts assumed to have been found near the Kargah Buddha, which are dealt 
with in IV. Miscellaneous Manuscripts (quoted by number+K). There are no fragments in 
Poona as erroneously surmised in von Hinüber 1979: 334[8], note 31, cf. Wille 1990: 25ff, 
where the relevant information also on the collections in the British Museum (cf. L. D. 
Barnett, “Manuscripts from India and Burma,” The British Museum Quarterly 16. 1951, p. 
68f.), the “Shah Collection,” etc. is discussed (“Erforschung,” pp. 332[6]–336 [10]).
The “Tucci Collection” of photographs of Gilgit manuscripts, among them the Saṃghabhedavastu, is catalogued now in F. Sferra, Sanskrit Texts from Giuseppe Tucci’s Collection Part I. Manuscripta Buddhica I. Rome 2008 [2010] (cf. §3.2.1, p. 48; §3.3.1, p. 52; 
§3.4B “Rawalpindi,” p. 53; §3.5.2, p. 54; Saṃghabhedavastu: MT 33, MT 34, p. 73).
The texts of various Gilgit manuscripts are available electronically in the “Göttingen 
Register of Electronic Texts in Indian Languages” (GRETIL); the relevant URL is 
www.sub.uni-goettingen.de/ebene_1/fiindolo/gret_utf.htm.
Almost all manuscripts are written on birch bark,58 only a single manuscript (no. 4S) on 
palm leaf. At least three manuscripts (nos. 36, 38b, 48) contain also folios written on “claycoated paper,” which was described and chemically analysed in Kishore 1963/64: 1–3.
The following survey tries to collect research done on the identification and editing of 
the Gilgit manuscripts as completely as possible. It is, however, not intended to provide a 
bibliography of research on the contents of these texts.
The survey is based on the following previous publications: von Hinüber 1979 together 
with two supplements: “Die Erforschung der Gilgit-Handschriften (Nachtrag).” ZDMG 
130. 1980, *25*ff. and: “Die Erforschung der Gilgit-Handschriften. Neue Ergebnisse.” 
ZDMG 131. 1981, *9*–*11*. Furthermore, the Chinese survey by Yaoming CAI (CAI 
2006) is taken into account.
Lastly, many personal communications received over many years from different colleagues have been extremely helpful. They are mostly mentioned under the respective 
manuscript. I am particularly obliged to K. Wille, Göttingen, for providing his own checklist of publications of the Gilgit manuscripts, which proved useful in detecting omissions 
and errors, and to O. von Criegern, Munich, who carefully read the manuscript and detected a couple of inaccuracies.
I. The Delhi Collection
The collection kept at the National Archives in Delhi is arranged here, as it was in the 
previous survey of 1979, according to the numbers introduced by Lokesh Chandra in his 
hand-list, which appeared as an appendix to his article “Unpublished Gilgit Fragment of 
58 Birch bark is used as a writing material also in other cultures: Elisabetta Chiodo, The Mongolian 
Manuscripts on Birch Bark from Xarbuxyn Balgas in the Collection of the Mongolian Academy of 
Sciences. Part I, II. Asiatische Forschungen 137, 1.2. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag 2000, 2008; 
Mongolian letters on birch bark were unearthed in Novgorod in 2004 according to “Neue Zürcher 
Zeitung“ 25th/26th September 2004: 49. Birch bark was used for writing even during the First World 
War, cf. Per Hoffmann, “Wie sind sie zu entrollen?,” RESTAUROforum: Zeitschrift für Kunsttechniken, 
Restaurierung und Museumsfragen 1998.4: 246–247.— On writing material in India cf. von Hinüber 
1989a [Rev.: R. Schmitt, Die Sprache 34. 1988–1990: 408ff.; F. Schwarz, OLZ 88. 1993: 559–563; K. R. 
Norman, JRAS NS 3. 1993: 277–281; P. Kieffer-Pülz, GGA 246. 1994: 207–224; M. Hara, IIJ 38.1995: 
71–76], p. 9 note 8 and Tripathi 1975 [Rev.: J. C. Wright, BSOAS 40. 1977: 219f.; O. von Hinüber, 
ZDMG 127. 1977: 220f.; E. Bender, JAOS 98. 1978: 199; C. Caillat, OLZ 75. 1980: 71–73], p. 15 note 2.

--- Page 114 of 425 ---
92
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
the Prātimokṣasūtra” (Lokesh Chandra 1960: 1–13). Although this numbering is rather 
erratic, it is kept here, because it was and is widely used as a reference system, e.g., in FE. 
Introducing a new, more systematic numbering would only have resulted in increased 
confusion.
The facsimile edition of the manuscripts (FE1) arranged by Lokesh Chandra, Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts (Facsimile Edition). Śata-Piṭaka Series Volume 10, 1–10. Delhi 1959–
1974 was reprinted as: Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts, revised and enlarged compact facsimile edition. Bibliotheca Indo-Buddhica Series 150, 151, 152, Delhi 1995 in three parts 
(FE2). An introduction to this reprint by Lokesh Chandra (pp. 1–53) in part 1 (dated to the 
year 1974 in spite of the fact that books published up to 1985 are included in the brief 
bibliography [p. 53]), gives a survey of the contents of manuscripts nos. 2–62, which was 
partly outdated already at the time of publication. Moreover, the reprint contains a supplement not mentioned in the introduction. The facsimiles in FE2 are sometimes more and 
sometimes less readable than in FE1. 
The numbers introduced in FE on the right margin (1–3368 + 3369–3514 in the supplement of 1995) are quoted here as “page” in contrast to the pagination on the original 
manuscripts quoted here as “folio no.” The “folio nos. extant” are counted by texts, e.g. 
“text A folio nos. 1–3(line 3),” “text B folio nos. 3(line 4)–5”: 3 folios extant of both texts.
The individual volumes of FE comprise the following pages:
1 (1959):
1–92
6 (1974):
676–1234
2 (1960):
93–174
7 (1974):
1235–1775
3 (1966):
175–254
8 (1974): 
1776–2325
4 (1966):
255–336
9 (1974):
2326–2908
5 (1970):
337–675
10 (1974):
2909–3368
Reprint:
1 (1995) 1–675
 2 (1995) 676–2812
3 (1995) 2813–3368 + 3369–3514
In addition, copies of a microfilm produced by the National Archives in Delhi are available 
in different places. The quality of these photos is occasionally superior to the plates in FE. 
The original photos from which FE was printed were generously donated by Lokesh 
Chandra to Soka Unversity in Hachioji, where they are preserved at present in The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology. They are accompanied by a brief 
(28 pages) unpublished manuscript entitled “Gilgit Script written by Raghu Vira in 1950,” 
which contains samples of the various akṣaras and of the ligatures of “Gandhāran 
Brāhmī.”
A set of four CD-ROMs prepared in 2003 under the title “Database of Valuable Lotus 
Sūtra Manuscripts. Microfilm Materials held in the Institute for Comprehensive Study of 
the Lotus Sutra, Rissho University” also contains the Gilgit manuscripts of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīka (nos. 44, 45, 47 only, but these nos. twice from two different microfilms) on 
CD-ROM Vol. II, nos. 9 and 10. Moreover, a small and unsystematic selection of Gilgit 
manuscripts which have no relation to the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra are included in CDROM Vol. III no. 21 more or less at random, it seems. I am obliged to K. Wille and S. 
Karashima, Hachioji, who drew my attention to this material, and to Professor Mitomo, 
who through the good offices of S. Karashima kindly presented me with a set of these CDROMs. This material is referred to by “Rissho, vol. and no.” in manuscripts of the 
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra. Recently, yet another facsimile edition of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra manuscripts was published: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtram. Gilgit Lotus Sutra 
Manuscripts from the National Archives of India. Facsimile Edition. Lotus Sutra 
Manuscript Series 12. National Archives of India, Soka Gakkai, Institute for Oriental 
Philosophy. Hachioji 2012. All manuscripts are reproduced as coloured photos and accom-

--- Page 115 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
93
panied by the measurements of the respective folios. This facsimile is referred to as “Lotus 
Sutra Manuscript Series 12.” A new facsimile edition of the complete Delhi collection 
following a similar pattern is planned by The International Research Institute for Advanced 
Buddhology at Soka University.
A first edition of a large part of the Gilgit manuscripts was provided by Nalinaksha Dutt 
(1893–1973) in: Gilgit Manuscripts (quoted as GM). Vol. I Srinagar 1939; Vol. II (.1) 
Srinagar 1941; Vol. II.2 Calcutta 1953; Vol. II.3 Calcutta 1954; Vol. III.1 Srinagar 1947; 
Vol. III.2 Srinagar 1942; Vol. III.3 Srinagar 1943; Vol. III.4 Calcutta 1950; Vol. IV Calcutta 
1959 (all reprinted in three volumes and six parts as Bibliotheca Indo-Buddhica Series no. 
14, Delhi 1984). The references to Dutt’s edition are repeated only for the sake of convenience.
No. 1: Vinayavastu-āgama
Pages 676–1050 and, without serial no., pages 1051–1079. — Remark: pages 686–707 are 
omitted in FE2 (information provided by Klaus Wille).
This text is edited in GM III and again in Bagchi 1967–1970. 
The Vinaya texts are listed in A. Yuyama, Vinaya-Texte. Systematische Übersicht über die 
buddhistische Sanskrit-Literatur. A Systematical Survey of Buddhist Sanskrit Literature. 
Erster Teil. Wiesbaden 1979 [Rev.: G. Buddruss, ZDMG 131. 1981: 216f.; O. von Hinüber, 
WZKS 26. 1982: 208].
A detailed and careful survey of the Vinayavastu-āgama is provided in Wille 1990 [Rev.: 
A. Degener, JAOS 111. 1991: 588f.; E. Nolot, BSOAS 54. 1991: 381f.; J. W. de Jong, IIJ 
36. 1993: 142f.; R. Gombrich, JRAS 3. 1993: 142f.; H. Hu-von Hinüber, ZDMG 145. 1995: 
197f.; O. von Hinüber, WZKS 39. 1995: 247f.]. This book supersedes all previous literature 
on the arrangement of the Vinayavastu-āgama. Furthermore, Wille lists the individual 
Vastus of the Vinaya and their editions up to 1990 on pp. 27–34. The identification of 
pages 1051–1079 is found on pp. 22ff. and a concordance between GM and FE on pp. 
154–165. Consequently, the following list could be limited to a supplement to Wille 1990, 
and the reader is referred to Wille’s survey for all editions prior to 1990. 
No. 1.1. Pravrajyāvastu: Ed.: GM III.4, pp. 3–68. — Re-ed.: Vogel/Wille 1992: 65–109; 
Näther/Vogel/Wille 1996: 241–296 (on the Saṃgharakaṣitāvadāna); Vogel/Wille 2002: 
11–76. — Cf. no. 4d; 51f.
No. 1.2. Poṣadhavastu: Ed.: GM III.4, pp. 71–116. — Re-ed.: Hu-von Hinüber 1994 
[Rev.: C. Caillat, BEI 13–14. 1995–1996: 536–538; J. W. de Jong, in: Dharmadūta. 
Mélanges offerts au Vénerable Thích Huyên-Vi à l’occasion de son soixante-dixième anniversaire. Paris 1997: 163–167; L. Rocher, JAOS 123. 2003: 262]. — Remark: Cai 2006 
refers to: Muwagama Gnanaseeha, “Poṣadha: A Study Based on the Vinayavastu of the 
Mūlasarvāstivādins,” in: Ānanda: Papers on Buddhism and Indology (A. W. P. Guruge 
Felicitation Volume). Colombo 1990, pp. 172–176.
No. 1.3. Pravāraṇāvastu: Ed.: GM III.4, pp. 119–130. — Re-ed.: Chung 1998 [Rev.: A. 
Heirman, BStR 16.2. 1999: 235–237; H. Eimer, ZAS 29. 1999: 216–218; J. W. de Jong, IIJ 
43. 2000: 63–66; W. Thomas, IF 106. 2001: 301–306; O. von Hinüber, JAOS 124. 2004: 
806–810].
No. 1.4. Varṣāvastu. Ed.: GM III.4, pp. 133–155. — Re-ed.: M. Shono, Bukkyō ni okeru 
uki no toryuseikatsu ni kansuru kisoteki kenkyū – Varṣāvastu no saikotei, oyobi dokkai 
kenkyū (A critical study on the rain retreat in Buddhism – A re-edition of the Varṣāvastu 
and an annotated translation). This Japanese thesis submitted to the University of Osaka in 
2007 is published as Shono 2010: 1–128. I am obliged to M. Shono for this information 
and for a copy of his thesis.

--- Page 116 of 425 ---
94
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
No. 1.5. Carmavastu: Ed.: GM III.4, pp. 159–210. — Re-ed.: —. The re-edition announced in von Hinüber 1979: 27 did not materialize.
No. 1.6. Bhaiṣajyavastu: Ed.: GM III.1, pp. I–XIV, 5–288, cf. FE2 1, pp. 18–23 transcript 
of pages 1051–1056. — Remark: Cf. Fumi Yao: “Konponsetsuissaiuburitsu ‘Yakuji’ no 
kenkyū: Kyōten ‘inyō’ wo chūshin ni (A Study on the Bhaiṣajyavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādavinaya with special reference to the “quotation” of sūtras). PhD thesis, University of 
Tokyo 2011; Fumi Yao: “Sūtras quoted in the Bhaiṣajyavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādavinaya.” Buddhist Studies / Bukkyō Kenkyū 38. 2010: 251–279, continued in 39. 2011: 
179–199 and 40. 2012: 291–318 (all in Japanese); Fumi Yao: Konponsetsuissaiuburitsu 
‘Yakuji’: An Annotated Translation. Tokyo 2013.
No. 1.7. Cīvaravastu: Ed.: GM III.2, pp. 3–148. — Re-ed.: —.
No. 1.8. Kaṭhinavastu: Ed.: GM III.2, pp. 151–170. Re-ed.: Matsumura 1996: 145–239.
No. 1.9. Kośāmbakavastu: Ed.: GM III.2, pp. 173–196. — Re-ed.: —.
No. 1.10. Karmavastu: Ed.: GM III.2, pp. 119–211. — Re-ed.: —.
No. 1.11. Pāṇḍulohitakavastu: Ed.: GM III.3, pp. 5–58. Re-ed.: Yamagiwa 2001 [Rev.: P. 
Kieffer-Pülz, OLZ 103. 2008, columns 106–113].
No. 1.12. Pudgalavastu: Ed.: GM III.3, pp. 61–88. — Re-ed.: —.
No. 1.13. Pārivāsikavastu: Ed.: GM III.3, pp. 93–103. — Re-ed.: —.
No. 1.14. Poṣadhasthāpanavastu: Ed.: GM III.3, pp. 107–117. — Re-ed.: —.
No. 1.15. Śayanāsanavastu: Ed.: GM III.3, pp. 121–144; 16. Adhikaraṇavastu; 17. 
Saṃghabhedavastu: nos. 15 and 16 re-edited in Gnoli 1978; no. 17 in Gnoli 1977/8 as 
indicated by Wille 1990.
Remark: The text of the Vinayavastu-āgama ends on folio 523 (= page 1050; FE “423” by 
mistake, cf. Wille 1990: 34) with a simple colophon: vinaye saṅghabhedavastu samāptaṃ : 
|| (vinayava)stvāgamaṃ (Wille 1990: 17). Moreover, there are three decorative disks drawn 
within the text of the last page and similar disks on page 1706 (no. 19) and page 1452 (no. 
13), cf. the disks found in petroglyphs along the Upper Indus, cf. Bandini-König 1999: 
Tafeln Ib, IIab, IIIb, XIa and the decorated stūpa Tafel Vb and see fig. 4, p. 90 above.
Fragmentary folios from different parts of the Vinaya are (re-)edited in Wille 1990: 38–
132. On the “Postscriptum of November 1989” by H. Bechert to this volume (pp. 173ff.) 
cf. Matsumura 1989–90 [1991]: 247 “Postscript 2.” — Matsumura 1992: 169–189 repeats 
Wille 1990: 19ff.
Jinānanda Bhikkhu, A Study of the Pāli Vinaya Mahāvagga in comparison with the Corresponding Sections of the Gilgit manuscripts (PhD thesis London 1953, SOAS Thesis 
192-94845) is inaccessible to me.
No. 2: Prātimokṣa
Pages 1–16; 8 folios; folio nos. extant: 17, 20, 22, 23; incomplete. — Ed.: Lokesh Chandra 
1960: 1–13. Description of the manuscript: von Hinüber 1969: 102 = Kleine Schriften 
2009: 1. — Remark: On this manuscript: Matsumura 1987/88: 147ff.
No. 3a: Prātimokṣa
Pages 17–60; 22 folios of two different manuscripts; folios extant: I. first ms. (pages 17–
54): folio nos. extant: [1], 2, 3a (= page 21), 4–7, 8a (= page 22), 12–23a (= page 53; page 
54 is blank, text lost); II. second ms. (pages 55–60): folio nos. extant: 36–38; both 
manuscripts are incomplete. End of the text on folio 38b at the end: prātimokṣas samāptaḥ; 
folio no. 39 is the first folio of no. 3b). — Ed.: Banerjee 1953: 169–174, 266–275, 363–
377; again separately Banerjee 1954 and in a slightly revised reprint Banerjee 1977; 
translation based on the text as given by Banerjee without checking the manuscripts in

--- Page 117 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
95
Prebish 1975 (reprinted Delhi 1996) [Rev.: H. Bechert, JAOS 98. 1978: 203ff.; J. W. de 
Jong, IIJ 19. 1977: 127–130 = Buddhist Studies. Berkeley 1979: 305–308].
Banerjee filled the gaps in the manuscripts by supplying the respective texts from Finot 
1913: 455–537 without clearly marking where the Gilgit text ends and the Sarvāstivāda 
text begins. The uddānas of the Gilgit manuscripts are omitted in Banerjee’s edition. It is 
not really clear which manuscript(s) were utilized by Banerjee, cf. Matsumura 1987/88: 
147ff.
No. 3b: Karmavācanā
Pages 61–92; 16 folios, folio nos. extant: 39–54; complete; the Prātimokṣa and the 
Karmavācanā are copied together in one manuscript, cf. no. 3a. — Ed.: von Hinüber 1969: 
102–132 = Kleine Schriften 2009: 1–31 (edition of folios 39–42); Banerjee 1949: 19–30 
(edition of folios 43–54), reprinted together with no. 3a, q.v. Description of the manuscript: 
von Hinüber 1969: 103 = Kleine Schriften 2009: 2.
No. 4a: Ekottarikāgama
Pages 93–128; 18 folios; folio nos. lost; incomplete. — Ed.: Tripathi 1995. The correct 
sequence of the folios is given by Tripathi on p. 46. This edition also comprises nine 
Ekottarikāgama folios extant in the Ujjain collection, cf. III. Ujjain Collection, no. 2U. A 
transcript of the fragments was published in Ōkubo 1982: 120–91 without any reference to 
the work of Tripathi. — Remark: The manuscript of a second volume planned by Tripathi 
to contain facsimiles, etc. (cf. vol. I, p. 12, note 8) was irretrievably lost in the publisher’s 
office. 
No. 4b: Prātimokṣa
Pages 141/142, 139/140, 143/144, 137/138, 149/150, 131/132, 133/134 (thus according to 
the correct sequence); 7 folios; folio nos. extant: 26 (= page 131), 28 (= page 133); 
incomplete. In FE2 the folios were rearranged and renumbered according to the correct 
sequence: FE2 129/130 (= FE1 141/142); 131/132 (= 139/140); 134/133 (sic) (= 144/143); 
136/135 (sic) (= 138/137); 137/138 (= 149/150); 139/140 (= 131/132); 141/142 (= 
133/134). — Remark: This manuscript is different from nos. 2 and 3a. It contains the text 
of Pāyantika IV to the Śaikṣā Dharmāḥ, cf. also Matsumura 1987/88: 147ff. Information on 
the rearrangement in FE2 was provided by K. Wille.
No. 4c: Prātimokṣa
Pages 135/136 (renumbered in FE2 143/144); 1 folio; folio no. extant: 26; incomplete. — 
Remark: This is folio no. 27 of manuscript no. 4b numbered as 26bis by a mistake of the 
scribe, cf. also Matsumura 1987/88: 147ff. Information on the renumbering of Nos. 4c and 
4d in FE2 was provided by K. Wille.
No. 4d: Karmavācanā
Pages 145/146, 148/147, 129/130 (renumbered in FE2 149/150) (thus according to the 
correct sequence); 3 folios; folio no. extant: 25 (= page 129). — Remark: These folios are 
identified as Karmavācanā (less likely Pravrajyāvastu) in Wille 1990: 129ff. and are edited 
ibidem as “Anhang 6,” 148–153. — Manuscripts 4a–4d are described in von Hinüber 
1969: 103 = Kleine Schriften 2009: 2.
No. 5: Dharmaskandha
Pages 152/151, 154/153, 156/155 (thus according to the correct sequence); 3 folios; folio 
nos. extant: 21:269, 22:270, 27:275 (the folios are numbered on recto and verso). — Ed.: 
Matsuda 1986 and again in Sankaranarayan/Matsuda/Yoritomi 2002 (communication by K.

--- Page 118 of 425 ---
96
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
Wille). — Remark: K. Matsuda identified the text and recognized the correct numbering 
and sequence of the folios, which are part of Ujjain Collection no. 1U. 
No. 6: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī
Pages 1080–1129; 50 fragmentary folios; folio nos. extant: 11–18 (= pages 1080–1087), 9 
(= page 1088), 10–11 (= pages 1089–1090), 10–17 [sic] (= pages 1091–1098). — Ed.: 
Hidas 2012, cf. Hidas 2003. — Remark : In spite of the strange numbering, the folios are 
arranged in the correct sequence according to the concordance in FE 6, p. 11 (repeated in 
the reprint FE2 1, p. 24). — The Pañcarakṣā is mentioned by Rashīd ad-Dīn, cf. n. 36 
above.
No. 7: Miscellaneous texts
Pages 1166–1297; 66 folios: 
No. 7a: Ratnaketuparivarta
Pages 1166–1283; 58 folios; folio nos. extant: 5–19, 22–43, 47, 48, 65–68, 70, 71, 88–93, 
98. Ed.: GM IV 1–138; — Re-ed.: Kurumiya 1978. — Remark: There are only 7 folios of a 
different text listed under this no., not 8 as erroneously indicated in Kurumiya 1978: xv, 
note 1. These seven folios are part of texts nos. 7b–d, cf. Schopen 1978b: 319; cf. nos. 14, 
29.
No 7b: Sumāgadhā-Avadāna
Pages 1285, 1284 (thus according to the correct sequence); 1 folio; identification: Ch. 
Tripathi, cf. no. 10c.
No. 7c: Sucandra-Avadāna (Vasudhārādhāraṇī)
Pages 1286, 1287; 1 folio; identification: Ch. Tripathi and Hiroshi Itoh (letter dated 22 
July 1982), cf. no. 10d. — Ed.: A transliteration by K. Wille is found on the GRETIL 
website (see p. 91 above).
No. 7d: Buddhabalādhānaprātihāryavikurvāṇanirdeśasūtra
Pages 1288–1297; 5 folios. — Ed.: GM IV 171–183. — Re-ed.: Schopen 1978b: 319–336.
No. 8: Viśvantara-Avadāna
Pages 157–174, 1332–1349, 3314/3315; 11 folios; folio nos. extant: 5 (= pages 157 = 
1347), 6 (= pages 159 = 1334), 7 (= pages 161 = 1336), 8 (= pages 163 = 1338) 10 (= 
pages 165 = 1340), 11 (= pages 167 = 1342), 12 (= pages 169 = 1344), 13 (= pages 171 = 
1346), 14 (= pages 173 = 1348). — Ed.: Das Gupta 1978. — Re-ed.: H. Matsumura 1980, 
cf. no. 52f. — Remark: The Viśvantara-Avadāna, which is reproduced twice in FE, begins 
on folio 5 (= page 157 = 1347), line 1. The preceding text ends: ]samāptaṃ kṛtir ācāryaśūrasya. It is not impossible that this name refers to Āryaśūra, cf. Stchoupak/Renou 1946: 
161 and Sternbach 1980: 542, no. 1672 Śūra I, and Sternbach 1985: 288, no. 1634 Śūra I 
on Śūra = Āryaśūra. — The Viśvantara-Avadāna ends on folio 14 (173 = 1348), line 3: 
viśvantarāvadānaṃ samāptam, cf. 52f. The following text is the beginning of the Kapphiṇa-Avadāna.
No. 9: Avadāna Collection
Pages 1350–1379; 15 folios; folio nos. extant: 80, 81, 86–89, 99, 119(?), 235(?), ]9. — 
According to a letter by H. Matsumura dated 21st January 1981 this collection comprises 
the following Avadānas:
No. 9a: Māndhātā-Avadāna
Page 1374 (text ends in line 11); 1 folio; folio no. extant: ]9; incomplete. — Ed.: Matsumura 1980.

--- Page 119 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
97
No. 9b: Dharmaruci-Avadāna
Pages 1374/1375, 1350(= folio 80)/1351, 1352(= folio 81)/1353, 1377/1376, 1354(= folio 
86)/1355, 1356(= folio 87)/1357, 1358(= folio 88); 7 folios, incomplete. Beginning of 
Dharmaruci-Avadāna: page 1374, line 11; end of Dharmaruci-Avadāna: page 1358 = folio 
88, line 8 dharmarucyavadānaṃ samāptam. — Ed.: Unpublished transliteration by Kabita 
Das Gupta (1984), cf. 13a.3.
No. 9c: Sahasodgata-Avadāna
Pages 1358(= folio 88)/1359, 1360(= folio 89)/1361, 1372/73; 3 folios; incomplete. 
Beginning of Sahasodgata-Avadāna: page 1358(= folio 88), line 8. — Ed.: –, cf. no. 13a.5.
No. 9d: Candraprabha-Avadāna
Page 1362(= folio 99)/1363; 1 folio; incomplete. — Ed. A. Mette, Appendix: Das Fragment des Candraprabha-Avadāna, in Mette 1985: 235–238.
No. 9e: Svāgata-Avadāna
Pages 1366/1367, 1378/1379; 2 folios; incomplete. — Ed.: –.
No. 9f: Meṇḍaka-Avadāna
Pages 1368/1369; 1 folio; incomplete. — Ed.: –.
No. 9g: Nagarāvalambikā-Avadāna
Page 1370(= folio 235)/1371; 1 folio, incomplete. — Ed.: –.
No. 9h: Padmāvatī-Avadāna
Page 1364(= folio 119)/1365; 1 folio; incomplete. — Ed.: Mette 1985: 225–235.
No. 10a: Vajracchedikā
Pages 1380–1393; 7 folios, folio nos. extant: 5, 7–12. — Ed.: GM IV 11–170. — Re-ed.: 
Chakravarti 1956 and Schopen 1989: 89–139. — Remark: The manuscript was also used, 
if only unsystematically and indirectly from Chakravarti’s edition (communication by G. 
Schopen dated 26 February 1980) in Conze 1957 and in Vaidya 1961: text no. 2. A new 
edition of the Vajracchedikā is planned by P. Harrison, electronic message of 9 November 
2006. For his translation of No. 10a see Jens Braarvig et al., eds., Buddhist Manuscripts in 
the Schøyen Collection III. Oslo, 2006, 133–159, esp. 148ff. These editions are also used in 
Shōgo Watanabe, A Collection of Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā. Tokyo 2009.
No. 10b: Bhaiṣajyaguru(vaiḍūryaprabhārāja)sūtra
Pages 1394–1413; 10 folios; folio nos. extant: 13, 15–23. — Ed.: GM I 1–32 (manuscript 
C), reprinted in Vaidya 1961 as no. 10a, text no. 16.; Hassnain/Sumi 1995 (the text is a 
reprint of GM); Schopen 1978a. Ed. of page 1404 lines 1–4 and (from serial no. 31) pages 
1851 line 5–1852 line 5 and (from serial no. 34) pages 1911 line 2–1913 line 3: Matsumura 
1984: 215–217; Matsumura 1985: 142. — Remark: The manuscripts of this text are 
described in Schopen 1977: 177–210: Appendix I (pp. 205–207), Appendix III (pp. 208–
210) = Figments and Fragments of Mahāyāna Buddhism in India. More Collected Papers. 
Honolulu 2005: 154–189 (without the appendices), and in Buddhist Text Information, ed. 
by R. A. Gard, No. 12 (September 1977): 1–4 (on the title of the text, ibidem p. 1); No. 14 
(March 1978): 1–3; cf. nos. 31, 32, 34, 51a, 57, cf. also G. Schopen 2009: 189–219. 
Fussman (2004: 132) notes that Nos. 10a and 10b belong to the same manuscript.
No. 10c: Sumāgadhā-Avadāna
Pages 1414–1425; 6 folios; folio nos. extant: 28, 30–34. — Ed.: Groth 1981 (unpublished 
MA thesis), partly published as Groth 1989: 84–91. Based on the work by U. Groth, the 
Sumāgadhā-Avadāna was re-edited in Görtz 1993 (unpublished MA thesis) (information

--- Page 120 of 425 ---
98
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
by M. Hahn). — Remark: Additional copies of this text are nos. 51c, 52c, 60c; cf. no. 7b, 
cf. also Handurukande 1972: 79–89, no. 14. 
No. 10d: Sucandra-Avadāna (Vasudhārādhāraṇī)
Pages 1426–1431; 3 folios; folio nos. extant: 35, 37, 38. — Ed.: A transliteration by K. 
Wille is found on the GRETIL website (see p. 91 above); cf. no. 10c. — Remark: According to a letter by P. Harrison dated 13 November 2006, this text is identical with the 
Vasudhārādhāraṇī (called occasionally Sucandra-Avadāna), which was studied and edited 
in Jaini 1968: 30–45, reprinted without the text in Collected Papers on Buddhist Studies. 
Delhi 2001: 527–533. P. S. Jaini does not refer to the Gilgit manuscript. The Sanskrit text 
is also edited in slightly different wordings in Āryavasudhārādhāraṇīsūtra, Dhīḥ. Journal 
of Rare Buddhist Texts Research Unit 44 (2007): 129–147, and by Ratna Handurukande: 
Vasudhārādhāraṇī(kathā), in: K. L. Dhammajoti, Y. Karunadasa (eds.): Buddhist and Pali 
Studies in Honour of The Venerable Professor Kakkapalliye Anuruddha. Hong Kong 2009: 
53–64. The last two references were provided by P. Skilling, Bangkok. — Cf. no. 7c.
No. 11a: Adbhutadharmaparyāya [Kūṭāgārasūtra]
Pages 1588–1592; 3 folios; folio nos. extant: 3–5. — Ed.: Bentor 1988: 21–52 (manuscript 
B), cf. no. 13d4, 18. Ed. of page 1588 line 5–1589 line 2: Matsumura 1985: 136. — 
Remark: The title Kūṭāgārasūtra, which is mentioned in the colophon (kūṭāgārasūttras 
samāptam, folio 5a4) is a misnomer according to Bentor 1988: 22, cf. Matsumura 1985: 
Appendix. A parallel text from the Potala in Lhasa is edited in Vinītā 2010: 11–95 (No. 2) 
with a discussion of the problematic title, 13–19. The sūtra itself gives its own title within 
and at the end of the text as Adbhutadharmaparyāya (or: Amṛtadundubhi), while the 
colophon is persistently Kūṭāgārasūtra.
No. 11b: Kṣāntivādi-Avadāna
Pages 1592–1593; 1 folio; folio no. extant: 5. — Ed.: Matsumura 1989–90 [1991]: 238ff. 
— Remark: Page 1592, lines 1–4 contain the end of no. 11a Adbhutadharmaparyāya.
No. 12: Kāraṇḍavyūha
Pages 1594–1667; 50 folios; folio nos. extant: 38–45, 47–53, 68–82. — Ed.: Mette 1997a 
[Rev.: J. W. de Jong, IIJ 42, 1999: 164–166; H. V. Guenther, JAOS 120. 2000: 153], cf. 
Mette 1997b: 145–169, cf. no. 36 (Remark), cf. 51b.1. — The Kāraṇḍavyūha is mentioned 
by Rashīd ad-Dīn, cf. n. 36 above.
No. 13a: Avadāna Collection
Pages 1432–1517; 43 folios. — The table of contents follows Hartmann 1977 (unpublished MA thesis), cf. FE2 1, pp. 28–31.
No. 13a.1: Māndhātā-Avadāna
Pages 1432–1451; 10 folios; incomplete. End of Māndhātā-Avadāna: page 1451 line 8; the 
following text is the Mahāsudarśana-Avadāna, cf. no. 13d,3. — Ed.: Matsumura 1980.
No. 13a.2: Aśoka-Avadāna
Page 1452, line 1–5; identification: Matsumura 1993: 141ff.
No. 13a.3: Dharmaruci-Avadāna
Pages 1452–1483; 16 folios; incomplete. — Ed.: Cf. Kabita Das Gupta, as no. 9b.
No. 13a.4: Jyotiṣka-Avadāna
Page 1484/1485; 1 folio; incomplete. — Ed.: –.
No. 13a.5: Sahasodgata-Avadāna
Pages 1486/1487; 1 folio; incomplete. Text ends on page 1487, line 4. — Ed.: –, cf. no. 9c.

--- Page 121 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
99
No. 13a.6: Candraprabha-Avadāna
Pages 1487–1507; 11 folios; complete. Text begins on page 1487, line 4. — Ed.: There are 
two unpublished editions: Hartmann 1977, see above no. 13a, Matsumura 1980. — 
Remark: The Adbhutadharmaparyāya, no. 13d4, begins at the end of page 1507 line 8, cf. 
Hartmann 1980: 251–266 and Matsumura 1980: 146. This avadāna is also known from the 
Avadānasārasamuccaya, cf. Handurukande 1972: 83 no. 7.
No. 13a.7: Pāṃśupradāna-Avadāna
Pages 1508–1517; 5 folios; incomplete. — Ed.: a transliteration by K. Wille is found on 
the GRETIL website (see p. 91 above).
No. 13b: Miscellaneous Fragments
Pages 1518–1535; 9 folios; folio nos. extant: 108, 290, 291, 284–289. — Remark: In von 
Hinüber 1979 the folio nos. are erroneously given as 110, etc. following FE instead of 290, 
etc. The correct sequence of the folios in no. 13b was recognized in Matsumura 1987/88: 
146. The reading of the folio nos. follows Frentz 1987: 100ff.
No. 13b.1: (Ekottarikāgama?)
Pages: 1518/1519; 1 folio; folio no. extant: 108. — Ed.: –. — Remark: The text runs 
parallel to AN III 227–229. Identification and information provided by G. Melzer.
No. 13b.2: (Ekottarikāgama?)
Pages: 1520–1523, 1533–1535; 4 folios; sequence of folios pages 1533 (folio no. 288b6), 
1534/1535 (folio no. 289), folio 1520/1521 (folio no. 290), 1522/1523 (folio no. 291). — 
Ed.: –. — Remark: The text runs parallel to AN I 205–212. Identification and information 
provided by G. Melzer.
No. 13b.3: Pradakṣiṇagāthā
Pages: 1524 (= folio 284)/1525, 1526 (= folio 285). End of text: page 1526, line 7 (pradakṣiṇagāthā [sa]māptā). — Ed.: J. Matsumura 1980 (unpublished MA thesis, University 
of Tokyo) after: Buddhist Text Information ed. by R. A. Gard. 31 (March 1982), No. 9e, p. 
2; Matsumura 1985: Appendix and Melzer 2010: 62–68. — Cf. nos. 13d.6; 59b; 60b. — 
Remark: The correct order of folios is pages 1585 (= folio 283b [cf. no.13d.6]), 1524 (= 
folio 284a), 1525 (= folio 284b), 1526 (= folio 285a) after J. Matsumura in Matsumura 
1985 where the folio nos. are erroneously given as 184 etc.; cf. also Matsumura 1987/88: 
146; no. 13d.6.
No. 13b.4: Caityagāthā
Pages 1527/1528; 1. folio; folio no. extant: 286. — Remark: End of text 1528 (= folio 
286a) line 3. Identification and suggestion of title: Matsumura 1987/88: 146 and Matsumura 1985: Appendix.
No. 13b.5: (Ekottarikāgama?)
Pages 1528–1533; 3 folios; folio nos. extant: 286–288. — Ed.: Matsumura 1989c: 368–
371. — Remark: Beginning of text page 1528 (= folio 286a) line 3; end of text page 1533 
(= folio 288b) line 6. The text deals with the conversion of the seven sons of Anāthapiṇḍada (“Anāthapiṇḍadasūtra”).
No. 13c: Maitreyavyākaraṇa
Pages 1536–1542; 4 folios; folio nos. extant: 306–309. End of text: page 1542 (= folio 
309) line 5 (maitreyavyākaraṇaṃ samāptam). — Ed.: GM IV 187–214, reprinted in 
Majumder 1955 (letter by G. Schopen dated 26 February 1980); re-edition of page 1539 
lines 2–6: Matsumura 1985: 134. The edition planned by G. Schopen, cf. ZDMG 130. 
1980, p. *25*, will not appear. — Remark: Continuation of text in 13d.1. The reading of 
the folio nos. follows Frentz 1987: 102. — The Maitreyavyākaraṇa is mentioned by 
Rashīd ad-Dīn, cf. n. 36 above.

--- Page 122 of 425 ---
100
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
No. 13d: Miscellaneous fragments
Pages 1543–1587; 23 folios; folio nos. extant: 283 (= page 1584), 309, 310 (= page 1544). 
The reading of the folio nos. follows Frentz 1987: 102. 
No. 13d.1: Devatāsūtra
Pages 1542–1545; complete. — Ed.: Mette 1981: 139–151, cf. H. Matsumura, “Devatāsūtra to Alpadevatāsūtra,” Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū / Journal of Indian and Buddhist 
Studies. XXX no. 2 [No. 59], 1981: 988–982 (= 54–60). On studies of these texts cf. 
Matsumura 1985: Appendix. — Remark: The Devatāsūtra is mentioned by Rashīd ad-Dīn, 
cf. n. 36 above. A parallel text from the Potala in Lhasa is edited in Vinītā 2010: 259–303 
(No. 7).
No. 13d.2: Alpadevatāsūtra
Page 1545; complete. — Ed.: see no. 13d.1.
No. 13d.3: Mahāsudarśana-Avadāna
Pages 1550–1567 line 8; complete. End of text: page 1567 line 8 (mahāsudarśanāvadānaḥ 
samāptaḥ) — Identification: A. Mette. — Ed.: Matsumura 1988. — Remark: The text 
begins on page 1451, cf. no. 13a.1.
No. 13d.4: Adbhutadharmaparyāya
Pages 1576–1581; 3 folios. Beginning of text: Page 1507, line 8 at the end, cf. no 13a.6; 
end of text: Page 1581 line 4. — Identification: G. Schopen, cf. Matsumura 1987/88: 146. 
— Ed: Y. Bentor 1988, cf. no. 11a (manuscript A) and no. 18. Edition of page 1578, lines 
5–8: Matsumura 1985: 135. 
No. 13d.5: Prasenajigāthā (sic!)
Pages 1581, 1582/1583, 1584(= folio [28]3)/1585; Beginning of text page 1581 line 4; 
end of text: 1585, line 1 (prasenajigāthā samāptā). — Identification: G. Schopen, cf. 
Matsumura 1987/88: 146. — Ed.: –. — Remark: A parallel text from the Potala in Lhasa is 
edited in Vinītā 2010: 207–258 (No. 6): Prasenajitparipṛcchāsūtra; cf. nos. 21, 59c.
No. 13d.6: Pradakṣiṇagāthā
Page 1585, lines 1–8. — Ed. cf. no. 13b.2. — Remark: The text of the Pradakṣiṇagāthā is 
completely preserved in nos. 13b and 13d.6: page 1585(= folio 183b), 1524/1525(= folio 
184), page 1526(= folio 185a). For a second manuscript of this text cf. no. 59b. Identification: A. Mette, cf. Matsumura 1987/88: 146.
No. 13d.7: Haribhaṭṭa: Jātakamālā
Pages 1586–1587. — Ed.: An edition by M. Hahn is under preparation. — Remark: This 
folio corresponds to Haribhaṭṭa: Jātakamālā XXXII 79–91 (information provided by M. 
Hahn). Identification: G. Melzer.
No. 13d.8: (Ekottarikāgama?)
Pages 1546/1547. — Remark: The text runs parallel to AN IV 43–45. Identification and 
information provided by G. Melzer.
No. 13d.9: (Dīrghāgama?)
Pages 1548–1549. — Remark: The text runs parallel to Dīrghāgama no. 44 Mahallasūtra. 
Identification and information provided by G. Melzer.
No. 13d.10: Unidentified
1568–1575. — Remark: This seems to be part of a collection of Avadānas. Page 1568 is 
erroneously identified as a non-existing “Puṇyamaheśa-avadāna” in FE1 7, p. 5. The text 
mentions a dārakaḥ puṇyamaheśākhyaḥ, “the boy Puṇyamaheśākhya (Distinguished by 
Merit),” whose mother died on the day of his birth, and who is able to frighten even 
piśācas, whereupon the gods recite the verse: viparīto hy ayaṃ loko, nāyaṃ loko yathā 
purā, yat piśācena karttavyaṃ, taṅ karotīha dārakaḥ.

--- Page 123 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
101
No. 14: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī
Pages 1130–1138; fragments of 9 folios. — Ed.: Cf. no. 6. — Remark: Y. Kurumiya 1978: 
xv, note 1 erroneously indicates that 6 folios corresponding to folio nos. 57–62 contain the 
text of the Ratnaketuparivarta. However, his transcript of folios 57–62 does not correspond to this facsimile, but to no. 23. Moreover, as the concordance to the Nepalese 
version in FE2 1, no. 14, p. 25 confirms, the text is the Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī. — The 
Pañcarakṣā is mentioned by Rashīd ad-Dīn, cf. n. 36 above.
No. 15: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī
Pages 1139–1156; 9 fragmentary folios; folio nos. extant: 4–12; incomplete. — Ed.: Cf. 
no. 6. — Remark: Concordance to the Nepalese version in FE2 1, no. 15, p. 25.
No. 16: Avikalpapraveśasūtra
Pages 1670/1671, 1668/1669, 1672–1683; 8 folios; folio nos. extant: 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 15, 
16, 18; incomplete. End of text: page 1681(= folio 16b) line 7 (avikalpapraveśaṃ nāma 
mahāyānasūtra). — Ed.: Matsuda 1996a: 89–113, cf. Matsuda 1996b: 363–369. — 
Remark: The title is also Nirvikalpapraveśadhāraṇī. Folio no. 7 was recognized by K. 
Matsuda, cf. Matsumura 1985: Appendix. Folio no. 18 (pages 1682/1683) belongs to no. 
36: Saṃghāṭasūtra, identification by Hiroshi Itoh, letter dated 22 July 1982.
No. 17: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī
Pages 1157–1165; 9 fragmentary folios; incomplete. — Ed.: Cf. no. 6. — Remark: Concordance to the Nepalese version in FE2 1, no. 17, p. 25.
No. 18: Tathāgatabimbakārāpaṇasūtra
Pages 1684–1691; 4 folios; folio nos. extant: 2–5. — Ed.: Mette 1981: 133–138. — 
Remark: Page 1691(= folio 4b), line 2f. contains the colophon tathāgatabimbakārāpaṇaṃ 
sūtraṃ samāpta[ṃ] and the beginning of the Adbhutadharmaparyāya (manuscript C), cf. 
no. 13d.4.
No. 19: Āyuḥparyantasūtra
Pages 1692–1707; 8 folios; folio no. extant: 100+X (= page 1706); incomplete. Beginning 
of text: page 1706 line 7. — Ed.: Matsumura 1989a: 69–100 (on the correct sequence of 
the folios see p. 74) and again as: Matsumura 1989b: 61–77. — Remark: The text found on 
page 1706, lines 1–6 is unidentified. There are two disks painted on page 1706, cf. p. 89 
and Fig. 4 above. — On a possible affiliation of this text to the Mūlasārvāstivāda school cf. 
Peter Skilling: “Scriptural Authenticity and the Śrāvaka Schools: An Essay towards an 
Indian Perspective.” The Eastern Buddhist NS 41, No. 2 (2010): 1–47, particularly p. 34, 
n. 111.
No. 20: Annapānavidhi
Pages 1708–1713; 3 folios; folio no. extant: 1(= page 1708); incomplete. Beginning of 
text: page 1708 line 1 (# svasti || athāto nnapānavidhim adhyāyaṃ vyākhyāsyāmaḥ). — 
Ed.: –. — Remark: See above, p. 82, for remarks on this text.
No. 21: (Prātihāryasūtra?)
Pages 1714–1723; 5 folios; folio nos. extant: 3(6), 37, 39, 41, 46; incomplete. — Ed.: –. — 
Remark: The text was erroneously called Pradakṣiṇagāthā previously. Identification and 
information provided by G. Melzer. The first line on page 1721, added by a different hand 
in very small akṣaras, is illegible in the facsimile and on the microfilm of the Gilgit 
manuscripts.

--- Page 124 of 425 ---
102
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
No. 22: Āryamahāmaṇivipulavimānaviśvasupratiṣṭhitaguhyaparamarahasyakalparājadhāraṇī
Pages 1724–1733; 5 folios; folio nos. extant: 53–57; incomplete. — Ed.: H. Matsumura, 
“A Text of Esoteric Iconography from the Gilgit Manuscripts.” Mikkyō Zuzō (Journal of 
Buddhist Iconography) 2 (1983): 71–79. Information provided by K. Wille. — Remark: 
The text was identified by H. Matsumura (letter dated 18 September 1982), cf. also Matsumura 1985: Appendix.
No. 23: Ratnaketuparivarta
Pages 1734–1745; 6 folios; incomplete. — Ed.: Kurumiya 1978. — Remark: Kurumiya 
1978: XV, note 1, erroneously refers to this manuscript as “no. 14.” 
No. 24, 25, 28: Prajñāpāramitā
The folios originally distributed in three serial nos. comprise one large manuscript of the 
Prajñāpāramitā. The original attribution to the serial nos. 24, 25, 28 was lost when the 
manuscript was rearranged.
Pages 175–254 (= Volume 3 in FE); 40 folios; folio nos. 1–40 (folios without number: 1, 3, 
4, 5). 
Pages 255–336 (= Volume 4 in FE); 41 folios; folio nos. 41–84; (folios 54, 75, 76 are lost; 
folios without number: 72–74).
Pages 337–675 (= Volume 5 in FE); 170 folios; folio nos. 85–308 (folios 208, 211–263 [on 
folios 218–263 see below “Remark”], 300 are missing; folios without numbers: 105, 195, 
206, 207, 267). — Remark: The position of pages 587/588 (without folio no.) is unclear. 
End of text: page 675 (= folio 308a) line 9 (prajñāpāramitāyām akopyadharmatānirdeśaparivartaḥ dvyāśītimaḥ samāptaḥ). — Ed.: Zacchetti 2005: 366–400 (folios 1–27); 
Choong 2006: 109–133 (folios 202–205 [pages 571.5–577.12]); Conze 1962 (folios 218–
263; the text of folios 215–217 is supplied from other sources); Conze 1974 (folios 265–
308).
Remark: Folios 28–201 and 206–17 still await edition. — According to E. Conze, folios 1–
187 (= pages 175–542; presumed end of the text folio 187b line 6 buddhadharmāṇāṃ 
tathatā ||37||) contain the Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā followed by folios 
187b–308 (= pages 542–675) containing the Aṣṭādaśasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā. This, 
however, has to be corrected following Zacchetti 2005: 19–26, who aptly calls the 
complete Gilgit text “Larger Prajñāpāramitā.” 
Folios 218–263 were in the possession of Agah Mohammad Ali Shah and handed over to 
Giuseppe Tucci. They have been edited by E. Conze (1962) together with some unspecified fragments. The left part of folio 245, which was not accessible to E. Conze, was edited 
in Bapat 1949: 241–253, plate IV (R), (S), cf. also no. 48. The text is translated in Conze 
1975 [Rev.: G. Schopen, IIJ 19. 1977: 135–152]. — The colophon (page 675 = folio 308b 
line 10–13) is edited in von Hinüber 2004: 17–21, no. 6. 
Concordances of this manuscript are given in FE2 1, nos. 24, 25, 28, pp. 10–15; cf. E. 
Conze, The Prajñāpāramitā Literature. Tokyo 21978 [Rev.: ZDMG 130. 1980: 622; IIJ 23. 
1981: 73f.; OLZ 80. 1985, column 594ff.], pp. 34, 40.
No. 25: Prajñāpāramitā 
see no. 24.
No. 26, 27, 50: Prajñāpāramitā
No. 26, 27: Pages 3369–3494; 63 folios; folio nos. extant: 119 (= page 3369), 164 (= page 
3375), 13[1] (= page 3377), 13x (= page 3381).

--- Page 125 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
103
No. 50: Pages 3495–3514; 10 folios; folio nos. extant: 173–177 (= pages 3399–3408), 180 
(= p. 3411) 180bis (= page 3413), 181–183 (= pages 3415–3420), 1xx (= page 3431), 1xx (= 
page 3433), 2[4]x (= page 3437), 241 (= page 3439), 24x (= page 3441), 240 (= p. 3443), 
244–246 (= pages 3445–3450), [249?]–253 (= pages 3455–3464), 25[4] (= page 3467), 
255 (= page 3469), 256 (= page 3471), 2[57?] (= page 3473), 258 (= page 3475), 276–279 
(= pages 3481–3488), 270 (= page 3489); 272 (= page 3491), 274 (= page 3493), 27x (= 
page 3503); incomplete. — Ed.: ?. — Remark: The fragments on pages 3369–3514, which 
were omitted from FE1, are added to FE2 3 at the end. They are not mentioned in the introduction to FE2 1. It seems that they are mostly unedited, but cf. no. 50. According to K. 
Wille the pages included in nos. 26, 27, 50 are part of two different manuscripts as indicated: the contents of pages 3501/3505; 3502/3506–3512 (correct sequence: 3505/3501, 
3506/3502, 3512, 3511, 3510, 3509, 3508, 3507) correspond to Zacchetti 2005: 376 (folio 
8v6)–385 (folio 15v5); pages 3503/3504; 3513/3514 correspond to Conze 1975: 105, 108, 
181ff., 178–180 respectively (Chapters 55 to 70). Pages 3496/3495 and 3499/3500 are part 
of a Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra manuscript, see no. 50.
No. 28: Prajñāpāramitā
See no. 24.
No. 29: Collection of texts
Pages 1298–1331; nos. 29a–c belong to one manuscript, cf. Fussman 2004: 132. A similar 
collection of texts is found in the Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscript A, no. 2S.
No. 29a: Ratnaketuparivarta
Pages 1298–1315; 9 folios; folio nos. extant: 100–108. — Ed.: Kurumiya 1978. — 
Remark: The colophon on folio 108 (= page 1315) lines 4–6 is edited in von Hinüber 2004: 
21ff., no. 7, cf. no. 29c and Fussman 2004: 132.
No. 29b: Dvādaśadaṇḍakanāmāṣṭaśatavimalīkaraṇāsūtra
Pages 1316–1327; 6 folios; folio nos. extant: 109–114; complete. End of text folio 114a6 
(= page 1326) line 6 (dvādaśa[da]ṇḍakanāmāṣṭaśatavimalīkaraṇā nāma mahāyānasūtraṃ 
samāptaṃ). — Ed.: GM I 93–100 under the title Āryaśrīdevīvyākaraṇa. The colophon on 
folio 114b (= page 1327), line 6 is edited in von Hinüber 2004: 77, Nr. 37B. — Remark: 
no. 29c Mekhalādhāraṇī begins on folio 114b (= page 1327) line 2.
No. 29c: Mekhalādhāraṇī
Pages 1327–1331; 3 folios; folio nos. extant: 114–116; incomplete. — Ed.: Tripathi 1980: 
153–161, cf. no. 54.
No. 30: Sarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhānasatvālokanabuddhakṣetrasandarśanavyūha
Pages 1746–1815; 35 folios; folio nos. extant: 124–158; complete. — Ed.: GM I 49–89; 
Cohen 2010: 199–251, cf. no. 35. Ed. of pages 1760 line 1 to 1761 line 5 (from serial no. 
35), 1822a line 7–1823b line 3 and pages 1780 line 2–1782 line 1 (from serial no. 35), 
1833b line 1–1834b line 5: Matsumura 1985: 139 and 141 respectively; on this manuscript: Dutt 1933: 227–236, 567–576. — On the names on pages 1759, 1764, 1787 (= folio 
130b, 133a, 144b): von Hinüber 1980a: 167 = Kleine Schriften 2009: 726.
No. 31: Bhaiṣajyaguru(vaiḍūryaprabhārāja)sūtra
Pages 1838–1865; 13 (14?) folios; folio nos. extant: 4, 8–11, 13–15, 17–19, 22. — Ed.: 
GM I 1–32 (manuscript A), cf. nos. 10b, 51a. — Remark: The colophon on page 1864 
(folio no. lost) lines 1–3 is edited in von Hinüber 2004: 77, Nr. 38B. — It is uncertain 
whether or not page 1864 belongs to this manuscript. 
No. 32: Bhaiṣajyaguru(vaiḍūryaprabhārāja)sūtra
Pages 1866/1867; 1 folio; folio no. extant: 5. — Ed. GM I 1–32, cf. no. 10b.

--- Page 126 of 425 ---
104
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
No. 33a: Ekādaśamukhahṛdaya
Pages 2417–2444; 14 folios; folio nos. extant: 1–14. End of text: page 2444 (= folio 14) 
line 3. — Ed.: GM I 35–40, preprint in Dutt 1936: 109–120 (together with no. 33b). — 
Remark: Nos. 33a and 33b belong to one manuscript.
No. 33b: Hayagrīvavidyā
Pages 2444–2460; 8 folios; folio nos. extant: 15–22. Beginning of text: page 2444 (= folio 
14) line 4. — Ed.: GM I 43–46, preprint in Dutt 1936: 109–120 (together with no. 33a); 
facsimile from FE and transcript in Cai 2006: 108–126. — Remark: Nos. 33a and 33b 
belong to one manuscript. Pages 2459/2460 (= folio 22) contain a short dhāraṇī text in 6 
lines called mahārakṣā and written by a different hand in a different script to fill the empty 
space of the folio. This text is not edited in GM: namo ratnatrāyāya: namaś caṇḍavajrapāṇaye mahāyakṣasenāpaye (!). tadyathā ugrāya svāhā || atiügrāya. svāhā || ugrapriyāya 
svāhā || [ati]ügrapriyāya svāhā || ugrakrodhanāya svāhā || atyugra[k]r[odhanāya svā]h[ā] 
|| caṇḍaroṣaṇāya: svāhā || roṣaṇapraśamanāya svāhā || praharaṇi vajrapraharaṇi. aṭye 
vaṭye maṇḍe. nihāse svāhā || mahārakṣā samāp[tā].
No. 34: Bhaiṣajyaguru(vaiḍūryaprabhārāja)sūtra
Pages 1868–1948; 41 folios; folio nos. extant: 1–20, 22–40. — Ed. GM I 1–32, cf. no. 
10b. — Remark: The colophon on page 1948 (folio no. lost) lines 1–2 is edited in von 
Hinüber 2004: 23, no. 8.
No. 35: Sarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhānasatvālokanabuddhakṣetrasandarśanavyūha
Pages 1816–1837; 22 folios; sequence of folios (according to G. Schopen: l = left part, r = 
right part of a folio): 1819l, 1819r, 1820l, 1820r, 1821l, 1821r, 1822l, 1822r, 1823l, 1823r, 
1824l, 1824r, 1826l, 1826r, 1827l, 1827r, 1828l, 1828r, 1829l, 1829r, 1816l, 1816r, 1817r, 
1817l, 1818r, 1818l, 1830l, 1830r, 1831l, 1831r, 1832l, 1832r, 1825l, 1825r, 1833r, 1833l, 
1834l, 1834r, 1835l, 1835r, 1836l, 1836r, 1837l, 1837r. — Ed.: GM I 49–89, where this 
manuscript was not used, cf. no. 30, and Matsumura 1985: 139–141.
No. 36: Saṃghāṭasūtra
Pages 1949–2107; 79 folios and one blank cover folio; 7 to 8 lines per folio, “Gandhāran 
Brāhmī” script; folio nos. extant: 2–83; missing folios 1, 51, 55, 59, 66, 84ff.; folio no. 9 
occurs twice by mistake; for folio no. 18 (= page 1682/3) see no. 16: Avikalpapraveśasūtra. — Measurements: 5.8 × 22.8 cm and 7.5 × 20.5 cm. — Ed.: (together with nos. 37, 
38, 39) Gunatilaka 1967 (unpublished PhD thesis); von Hinüber 1973 (unpublished thesis: 
“Habilitationsschrift” based on manuscripts ABCDEFGH) (no. 36 is manuscript F); Canevascini 1993. The Sanskrit text included in this book is based on the revised critical edition 
by O. von Hinüber (cf. Canevascini 1993: 1) without the critical apparatus; an electronic 
edition can be found on the GRETIL website (see p. 91 above).
An electronic version in Devanāgarī is available under www.sanghatasutra.net. and an 
English translation from the Tibetan version under: www.sanghatasutra.net/english_translation_final.pdf.
On the manuscripts cf. also Gunatilaka 1972: 71–77, cf. Srinagar Collection nos. 1S, 2S, 
3S. The Saṃghāṭasūtra is mentioned by Rashīd ad-Dīn, cf. n. 36 above. — Remark: 
Altogether 15 folios (nos. 38, 39, 43, 45, 47, 49, 53, 57, 61, 63, 65, 67, 69, 71, 73) are 
written on “clay-coated paper,” see Kishore 1963, and p. 91 above. The format is slightly 
smaller than that of the birch-bark folios. It is not impossible that no. 56f contains the colophon to this manuscript. — Pages 2105/2106; extant folio no. 81 belongs to the Kāraṇḍavyūha, cf. Mette 1997a: 11 “G2.”

--- Page 127 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
105
No. 37: Saṃghāṭasūtra
Pages 2108–2289; 91 folios; 7 lines per folio, “Gandhāran Brāhmī” script; folio nos. 
extant: 1–89 (= pages 2286/2287); missing folio no. 6; the folio nos. 72 and 75 occur twice 
by mistake; pages 2288/2289 correspond approximately to folio no. 100. Measurements: 
7.3 × 24.5 cm. — Ed.: see no. 36; manuscript C in von Hinüber 1973. — Remark: The 
facsimile of folio 39a is misplaced in FE and found on page 2144, and the right half of 
folio 26 (= pages 2157/2158) on page 3323, cf. no. 52g.
No. 38a: Saṃghāṭasūtra
Pages 2290–2303; 7 folios; 9 lines per folio, “Gandhāran Brāhmī” script; folio nos. extant: 
29–35. Measurement 10.0 × 26.0 cm. — Ed.: see no. 36; manuscript G in von Hinüber 
1973. 
No. 38b: Dhāraṇī
Pages 2304/2305 (= folio no. 10) contains the fragmentary text of a dhāraṇī: /a1/ ]taiṣiṇāṃ. turume. mumule. vajrapradīpanim acale phaḥ svāhā || āyupāl[i]ni cucu/2/re svāhā || 
jaye jaye jayasaṃbhave svāhā || jayottame svāhā || jayavarade svā/3/hā || jayamānasi 
svāhā || jayavajrāya svāhā || ajitavajrāya svāhā || /4/ mahāvajrahutāśanāya svāhā || 
amoghavajrahastāya svāhā || atha vaiśra/5/vaṇ(o) mahārājā yena bhagavāṃs tenopasaṃkramya bhagavataḥ pādau śirasābhivandya bhaga/6/vantam etad avocat aham (api) 
bhagavan tasmin dharmaparyāye rakṣāṃ dāsyāmi. paritraṃ pa/7/rigrahaṃ paripālanaṃ 
śāntisvastyayanaṃ daṇḍaparihāraṃ śatruparihāraṃ viṣadūṣa/b1/ṇaviṣastaṃbhanaṃ 
amitrapratiṣedhane sarvākālamṛtyupratiṣedhanaṃ sarvakalikalahavigraviṣa/2/dayuddhaḍamarasarvabhayapratiṣedhanaṃ kariṣyāmi. sīmābaddhaṃ kariṣyāmi. tadyathā. jaye ja/3/
ye jaye. mahājaye mili mānasi. pupume. suru suru. turu turu. mumule svā/4/hā || mārgavatī dhudhume. vege vegadhāriṇi. tejavati. rakṣa rakṣa mama [blank space for a name] 
sarva/5/satvānāṃ sarvabhayopadraveṣu sarvākālamṛtyubhayebhyaḥ svāhā || imāni 
bhagavan dhāra/6/ṇīmantrapadāni navānavatibhir buddhakoṭībhir bhāṣitāni cādhiṣṭhitāni 
ca. tadyathā buddhe /7/ buddhe. buddhavati. buddhāvabhāsani. dharmāvati. samāhite. 
samādhigarbhe. buddhādi[ — Remark: Cf. Fig. 1, p. 81 above. This manuscript is written 
on clay-coated paper, cf. no. 36: Remark, and p. 91 above.
No. 39: Saṃghāṭasūtra
Pages 2306–2335; 15 folios; 7 lines per folio, Proto-Śāradā script; folio nos. extant: 2, 31–
38, 40, 41, 44, 72, 75, 87. Measurement: 6.5 cm × 27.2 cm. — Ed.: see no. 36; manuscript 
E in von Hinüber 1973.
No. 40: Ajitasenavyākaraṇa
Pages 2336–2416; 41 folios, folio nos. extant: 1–40. — Ed.: GM: I 103–136; re-edition: 
Rasmussen 1995 (unpublished MA thesis); an electronic version of the Gilgit manuscript is 
available on the GRETIL website (see p. 91 above). — Remark: On this manuscript: Dutt 
1932: 93–110. The colophon (page 675 = folio 308b line 10–13) is edited in von Hinüber 
2004: 78–80, No. 39B. 
No. 41: Tantrasadbhāvasāra
Pages 3221–3222: 1 folio; folio no. extant: 1. — Ed.: FE2 1, p. 52: transcript of the first 
four lines; Sanderson 2009: 50, note 22 (oral communication by H. Isaacson, Hamburg, 16 
June 2009), cf. 56g.
No. 42: Unidentified
Pages 3223–3224: 1 folio; folio no. extant: 1 (? on the right margin!); beginning of a text. 
— Ed.: –.

--- Page 128 of 425 ---
106
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
No. 43: Praṇāmastava
Pages 3227/3228, 3225/3226 (this is the correct sequence): 2 folios; folio nos. extant: 17, 
18. — Ed.: Hartmann 1997a: 285–296.
No. 44: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra
Pages 2785–2812; 14 folios; folio nos. extant: 65, 91–95, 103; cf. no. 47a, 48 and 49. — 
Ed.: Watanabe 1972–1975. — Remark: This is “Group B” in Watanabe (cf. no. 47); on the 
correct sequence of the folios cf. Watanabe 1975: xiiff., cf. no. 52a and Matsumura 1993: 
131–134; for fragments of folios 65 and 98 cf. no. 50; for the left part of fols. 71 and 72 cf. 
no. 52d.2. — Facsimile: Rissho CD-ROM Vol. II no. 9/1 and 10/1 and in Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra 2012: Lotus Sutra Manuscript Series 12.
No. 45: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra
Pages 2813–3052; 120 folios; for extant folio nos. and for the correct sequence of the 
folios see the excellent facsimile in Watanabe’s edition; FE is largely unreadable. — Ed.: 
Watanabe 1972–1975. — Remark: This is “Group A” in Watanabe. Facsimile: Rissho CDROM Vol. II no. 9/2 and 10/2 and in Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra 2012: Lotus Sutra Manuscript Series 12. The colophon page 3051 (= Watanabe 1975: 294) is edited in von Hinüber 
2004: 80ff., No. 40B.
No. 46: Samādhirājasūtra
Pages 2461–2783; 162 folios (according to A. Skilton); folio nos. extant: ]7 (= page 2565), 
58 (= page 2567), ]2 (= page 2575), 65–152 (folio 76r is missing in FE), 156–170. — Ed.: 
GM II 1–3 and Vaidya 1961. — Remark: The manuscript of this text is described in 
Schopen 1977: Appendix II, pp. 207ff. The total number of folios originally was 177 
according to Skilton 2000: 67–86, cf. no. 50, FE2 1, pp. 34–37. The sequence of folio 72 
(pages 2593/2594) and folio 73 (pages 2595/2596) is correct in FE in spite of the concordance given by Skilton (information provided by O. von Criegern). For the last folio see 
no. 50, cf. 56j. 
No. 47a: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra
Pages 3053–3118; 33 folios; folio nos. extant: 5, 11, 14–23, 27–35. — Ed.: Watanabe 
1972–1975. — Remark: These folios belong to the manuscript no. 44, S. Watanabe’s 
“Group B.” A concordance to the edition by N. Dutt (1953, cf. no. 48) is given in FE2 1, pp. 
346–51. — Facsimile: Rissho CD-ROM Vol. II no. 9/24 and no. 10/3; Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra 2012: Lotus Sutra Manuscript Series 12.
No. 47b: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī
Pages 3119(verso)/3120(recto); 1 folio; folio no. extant: 114; — Ed.: Transcribed in FE2 1, 
pp. 45ff. — Remark: Identification: K. Wille. This fragment is not used by G. Hidas, cf. no. 
6.
No. 48: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra
Pages 3121–3216; 48 folios; folio nos. extant: 35, 36, 116–120, 124. — Ed.: Toda 1979: 
249–300. This transcript also contains the folio (folio no. 171) published in facsimile in 
Bapat 1949: 241–253, plate IIIA (between p. 250/251), cf. furthermore Yuyama/Toda 
1999: 8–10, where pages 3181/3182 are transcribed. — Additional folios of this manuscript are edited in Toda 1988. This transcript, which again also contains Bapat’s plate 
IIIA, is based on photographs preserved in Rome published in Gnoli 1987: 533 and plates 
I–XX. — Remark: The description of this manuscript in N. Dutt, Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtram, Calcutta 1953 is confused, cf. also on this manuscript Dutt 1953: 136ff. The folios

--- Page 129 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
107
of this manuscript were not used by S. Watanabe for his edition, cf. no. 44. — Facsimile: 
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra 2012: Lotus Sutra Manuscript Series 12.
No. 49: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra
Pages 3217–3220; 2 folios. — Ed.: H. Toda 1979: 300–303. — Remark: As recognized 
already in FE 10, p. 7, these folios belong to no. 44, S. Watanabe’s “Group B,” cf. no. 44. 
This is the missing folio no. 99, cf. Watanabe 1975: 276, note 20. Pages 3219/3220 is the 
only fragment of this manuscript containing a text from the XXth parivarta. These folios 
were not used by S. Watanabe. — Facsimile: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra 2012: Lotus Sutra 
Manuscript Series 12.
No. 50: Prajñāpāramitā
Pages 3495–3514; 10 folios. — Ed.: Pages 3496/3495; 3499/3500: Matsumura 1993: 131–
134. — Remark: On the Prajñāpāramitā fragments see no. 26, 27, 50. Pages 3496/3495 and 
3499/3500 are fragments of SP folios 65 and 98 respectively of S. Watanabe’s “Group B” 
as recognized by E. Kurumiya, cf. Toda 1979: 249. These fragments are unedited. — 
Facsimile: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra 2012: Lotus Sutra Manuscript Series 12. Pages 
3497/3498 were identified as the last folio of the Samādhirājasūtra in Matsumura 1993: 
134–137. The fragmentary colophon is edited in Skilton 2000: 78: 3498 line 6: ]ṃ 
vilekhyedaṃ / yan mayā puṇyuparjita / tenāhaṃ kuśa[lena … ] || O: ||
No. 51: Miscellaneous fragments
Pages 3261–3301; fragments of approximately 28 folios; folio nos. extant: 1 (= page 
3265); 6x (= page 3262), 63 (= page 3263), 21 (= page 3279), [76?] (= page 3283), 8 (= 
page 3291), 17 (= page 3297). 
No. 51a: Bhaiṣajyaguru(vaiḍūryaprabhārāja)sūtra
Page 3261; 1 folio. — Remark: The text of this fragment continues page 1863 (= folio 22) 
in no. 31 and consequently belongs to folio 23, according to Matsumura 1983 [1984]: 193, 
note 2 (“[32] f. 1963” is a misprint for “[31] f. 1863”). The information given in Matsumura 1985: Appendix is confused: For “No. 52 f. 3306” read “No. 51 f. 3261.”
No. 51b: Miscellaneous Fragments
Pages 3262–3267; 3269; 3276; 8 folios; folio no. extant: 63 (= page 3263).
No. 51b.1: Kāraṇḍavyūha
Pages 3262–3263; 2 folios; folio nos. extant: 62, 63. — Ed.: cf. no. 12. — Remark: These 
folios, which belong to manuscript no. 12, were not used in Mette 1997a. Folio 62b is not 
reproduced in FE; identification and information provided by K. Wille.
No. 51b.2: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī
Page 3264; 1 folio. — Remark: Identification and information provided by K. Wille. This 
fragment was not used by G. Hidas, cf. no. 6.
No. 51b.3: Mahāvairocanasūtra(?)
Page 3265; 1 folio. — Remark: The manuscript contains verses in the Vasantatilakā and 
Sragdharā metres. Verses 4–11 are parallel to verses reconstructed from a phonetic Chinese 
transcript found in a commentary on the Mahāvairocanasūtra, cf. Ashikaga 1955: 106–
121. Identification and information provided by K. Wille.
No. 51b.4: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī
Pages 3266–3267; 2 folios. — Remark: The fragmentary folios were identified by K. 
Wille. This fragment was not used by G. Hidas, cf. no. 6.
No. 51c: Sumāgadhā-Avadāna
Pages: 3268, 3270–3275, 3277/3278; 5 folios. — Ed.: see no. 10c. — Remark: This 
manuscript, which was identified by C. B. Tripathi, Berlin, also comprises folios listed

--- Page 130 of 425 ---
108
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
under nos. 52c and 60c. The correct sequence is: pages 3268 (right half), 3268 (left half), 
3271, 3270, 3272/3273, 3274/3275, 3277/3278, 3303/3304, 3305 (verso missing in FE, but 
photographed by Tripathi), 3310 (= folio 162; left side), 3310 (= folio 162; right side), 
3358/3359 (= folio 163). This manuscript is different from the one listed as no. 10c.
No. 51d: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī
Pages 3279/3280 (= folio 21). — Remark: This fragment was not used by G. Hidas, cf. no. 
6. The title occurs in the manuscript: mahādhāraṇī vidyārājñī mahāpratisarā nāma, 21b5.
No. 51e: Unidentified
Pages 3269, 3276, 3281–3295, 3297–3301; 12 folios; folio nos. extant: + + (= page 3283), 
8 (= page 3291), 17 (= page 3297). — Remark: Pages 3285/3286 contain dhāraṇīs, among 
them one from the Sarvadharmaguṇavyūharājasūtra. Identification and information provided by O. von Criegern.
No. 51f: Vinayavastu-āgama: Pravrajyāvastu
Page 3296. — Ed.: Vogel/Wille 1984: 308[12]ff.
No. 52: Miscellaneous fragments
Pages 3302–3325; 20 folios; folio nos. extant: 162 (= page 3310), 71 (= page 3311), 72 (= 
page 3312).
No. 52a: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra
Page 3306; 1 folio. — Ed.: – . — Remark: This is the right half of folio 102a,b of S. 
Watanabe’s “Group B,” cf. no. 44. — Facsimile: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra 2012: Lotus 
Sutra Manuscript Series 12.
No. 52b: Saṃghāṭasūtra
Pages: 3302, 3319, 3313b, 3313a; 1 folio. — Ed.: –. — Remark: These two fragments of 
one folio belong to an eighth manuscript (manuscript H) of this text, which is otherwise 
lost. The text corresponds to verses 129–135 = Canevascini 1993: 103, §243, verse 44–
§244 verse 4.
No. 52c: Sumāgadhā-Avadāna
Pages 3303/3304, 3305, 3310; 3 folios; identification: C. B. Tripathi, Berlin, cf. no 10c. — 
Ed.: –.
52d: Pages 3307, 3311–3312, 3316–3318, 3320–3322, 3324–3325; 15 folios.
No. 52d.1: Unidentified
Page 3307; 1 folio.
No. 52d.2: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra
Pages 3311–3312; 2 folios; folio nos. extant: 71, 72. — Ed. –. — Remark: These fragments, which are part of group B in Watanabe, as no. 44, are not included in his edition. 
The text corresponds to Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra (ed. Kern 1908–1912) pp. 263.4–
265.11. Identification and information provided by K. Wille. — Facsimile: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra 2012: Lotus Sutra Manuscript Series 12.
No. 52d.3: Prajñāpāramitā
Pages 3316–3317, 3324; 3 folios. — Ed. –. — Remark: The text is similar to Pañcaviṃśatikā Prajñāpāramitā (ed. T. Kimura 1990), Part IV, pp. 187.15–189.25, 192.28–195.18, 
190.3–192.13 respectively. Identification and information provided by K. Wille.
No. 52d.4: Prajñāpāramitā
Pages 3318, 3325; 2 folios; — Ed. –. — Remark: The identification of page 3318 is, 
however, uncertain. Page 3325 is identical with Zacchetti 2005: 277 (folio 9r6–9v7). 
Identification and information provided by K. Wille.
No. 52d.5: Unidentified
Pages 3320–3322; 3 folios.

--- Page 131 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
109
52e: Mekhalādhāraṇī (?)
Pages 3308–3309; 2 folios. — Ed.: –.
52f: Viśvantara-Avadāna
Pages 3314/3315; 1 folio; identification: K. Das Gupta. — Ed.: K. Das Gupta, as no. 8.
52g: Saṃghāṭasūtra
Page 3323; 1 folio; see no. 37.
No. 53: Dārikāgāthā
Pages 3229–3236; 4 folios; folio nos. extant: 5 (= page 3229), 10 (= page 3231), 11 (= 
page 3233), 13 (= page 3235). — Ed.: –.
No. 54: Mekhalādhāraṇī
Pages 3253/3254, 3255/3256; 2 folios. — Ed.: no. 29c.
No. 55: Miscellaneous fragments
No. 55a: Unidentified
Pages 3237/3238; 1 folio; folio no. extant: 51 (?). — Ed.: –. — Remark: The text of this 
folio is parallel to DN III 60ff., according to a communication by A. Mette.
No. 55b: Arthavistaradharmaparyāya
Pages 3239/3240; 1 folio. — Ed.: –. — Remark: The text on this folio corresponds to 
Kanjur (Peking ed.) no. 984, vol. 39, p. 83 (= folio 202v1–203r5) and to Taishō 97, Vol. I, 
p. 921c–922a11 (letter by J.-U. Hartmann dated 4 May 1988). This text forms part of the 
Dīrghāgama of the (Mūla-)Sarvāstivādins, cf. Hartmann 1989: 41ff.
No. 56: Miscellaneous fragments
Pages 3326–3351; 13 folios; folio nos. extant: 30 (= page 3326), 11 (= page 3328), 12 (= 
page 3330), 13 (= page 3332), 14 (= page 3334), 5 (= page 3336), 62 (= page 3338), 2 (= 
page 3340), 143 (= page 3342).
No. 56a: Mahāmāyūrīvidyārajñī
Pages 3326/3327; 1 folio; folio no. extant: 30. — Ed.: von Hinüber 1980a: 166 = Kleine 
Schriften 2009: 725. — Remark: This manuscript is different from the one published in 
Kaul Shastri 1939: 2–12, particularly pp. 11ff., cf. von Hinüber 1980a: 165 = 724.
No. 56b: Mahāpratisarāvidyārajñī
Pages 3328–3335; 4 folios; folio nos. extant: 11–14; identification in von Hinüber 1980a: 
163 = 722.
No. 56c: Ekottarikāgama: Sambādhāvakāśasūtra
Pages 3336–3337 ; 1folio; folio no. extant: 5. — Ed.: –. — Remark: The text corresponds 
to a fragment in the Schøyen Collection edited in Harrison 2006: 201–211. Although the 
Gilgit text contains the paragraph on śīla (cf. AN III 316.3–14), it allows us to close the 
gap in the parallel paragraph on the Tathāgata published by Harrison p. 204, line 2: 
samprajānavihā[rī ṛjumārganyāya sa]mārūḍho, page 3336, line 1 (at the very end). It 
seems that the Gilgit and the Schøyen texts are not identical in wording. According to Jin-il 
Chung, Göttingen, the text on pages 3336–3337 corresponds to Taishō 99, page 144a2–11. 
— Identification and information provided by K. Wille.
No. 56d: Daśabhūmikasūtra
Pages 3338–3339; 1 folio; folio no. extant: 62. — Ed.: –. — Remark: The text corresponds 
to Daśabhūmikasūtra (ed. R. Kondo 1936/repr. 1983) p. 41.1–41.12 = (ed. P. L. Vaidya 
1967), pp. 16.28–17.4. The preserved folio number indicates that the manuscript started 
with the beginning of the text. Consequently, the reading of the pagination as in FE is also 
confirmed by the length of the text, against Frentz 1987: 149, who reads erroneously “32.” 
Identification and information provided by K. Wille.

--- Page 132 of 425 ---
110
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
No. 56e: Vinayavastu-āgama: Saṅghabhedavastu
Page 3349/3348; 1 folio; identification: C. B. Tripathi, Berlin. — Ed.: Wille 1990: 131ff. 
— Remark: The text corresponds to Gnoli 1978: Vol. I, pp. 61.18–63.3.
No. 56f: Colophon
Page 3346; 1 folio. — Ed.: von Hinüber 2004: 24ff., No. 9; re-edited in von Hinüber 2011: 
3ff., Plate 1. — Remark: It is not impossible that this folio contains the colophon to 
Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscript F, no. 36.
No. 56g: Tantrasadbhāvasāra:
Pages 3340/3341. — Ed.: Sanderson 2009, as no. 41.
No. 56h: Prātihāryasūtra (?)
Pages 3342–3343; 1 folio; folio no. extant: 143. — Ed.: –. — Remark: The fragment is 
tentatively identified by K. Wille, who refers to Divyāvadāna, pp. 154f. However, except 
for the occurrence of the name Kāla there is hardly any parallelism between the two texts.
No. 56i: Unidentified
Page 3344, 1 folio. 
No. 56j: Samādhirājasūtra
Pages 3350/3351. — Ed.: –. — Remark: Identification communicated by K. Wille, cf. 46.
No. 57: Pāramitāsamāsa: Dānapāramitāsamāsa
Pages 3257/3258; 1 folio; folio no. extant: 2, according to FE2 1, p. 52; the number is 
recognizable neither in FE1 nor in FE2, but clearly visible on the photograph taken by Soka 
University. — Ed.: Kudo 2013. — Remark: As suspected by G. Schopen already in 1978, 
this folio does not contain the text of the Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra, as wrongly restated in FE2 
1995, but as recognized correctly by C. B. Tripathi, Berlin, a text on giving. — The text 
corresponds to Carol Meadows, Ārya-Śūra’s Compendium of the Perfections: Text, translation and analysis of the Pāramitāsamāsa. Indica et Tibetica 8. Bonn 1986: 3258 (a): p. 
158, verse 6–p. 162, verse 24a; 3257: p. 162, verse 24b–p. 168, verse 46c.
No. 58: Abhidharmāvatāra
Pages 3259/3260; 1 folio; folio no. extant: 56. — Ed.: Matsuda 1996c: 35–42.
No. 59: Miscellaneous fragments
Pages 3241–3252; 6 folios. 
No. 59a: Sumāgadhā-Avadāna
Pages 3241–3248; 4 folios; folio nos. extant: 164–167. — Ed.: –. — Remark: Identification by N. Kudo. According to G. Melzer page 3244 contains verses, e.g. in the Vasantatilakā metre, and a list of words similar to those found in Kauṭalya’s Arthaśāstra (ed. R. P. 
Kangle 1960) 1.12.6 or 6.2.18.
No. 59b: Nandikasūtra
Page 3249.1–3; 1 folio. — Remark: Identification and information provided by G. Melzer. 
A parallel text from the Potala in Lhasa is edited in Vinīta 2010: 100–140, especially 138–
140.
No. 59c: Pradakṣiṇagāthā
Page 3249.3–3250; 1 folio; folio no. extant: 243; identification: A. Mette. Beginning of the 
text, cf. nos. 13b2; 13d.6; 60b. — Ed.: cf. no. 13b.3. — Remark: The reading of the folio 
no. follows Frentz 1987: 151.
No. 59c: Prasenajidgāthā
Pages 3251/3252; 1 folio; folio no. extant: 25 (?). End of text: page 3252 (= folio 25?), line 
3 (prasenajidgāthās samāptāḥ). — Ed.: Vinītā 2010: 209–258.

--- Page 133 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
111
No. 60: Miscellaneous fragments
Pages 3352–3359; 4 folios.
No. 60a: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī
Pages 3352–3355; 2 folios; folio nos. extant: 18 (= page 3352), 56 (= page 3354). — 
Remark: Identification and information provided by K. Wille. This fragment was not used 
by G. Hidas, cf. no. 6.
No. 60b: Pradakṣiṇagāthā
Pages 3356/3357; folio no. extant: 19 (= page 3356), cf. nos. 13b; 13d.6; 59b. — Ed.: cf. 
no. 13b.2.
No. 60c: Sumāgadhā-Avadāna
Pages 3358/3359; 1 folio; folio no. extant: 163 (= page 3358); identification: C. B. Tripathi, Berlin. — Ed.: see no. 10c. 
No. 61: Miscellaneous fragments
Pages 3360–3366; 4 folios.
No. 61a: Nāgārjuna: Pratītyasamutpādahṛdayakārikā
Pages 3365, 3364, 3360–3363; 3 folios; folio nos. extant: 2 (= page 3360), 3 (= page 
3362); incomplete. — Ed.: Gokhale/Dhadphale 1978: 62–68 with a facsimile, cf. ScherrerSchaub 1987: 103–111, on the Gilgit manuscript pp. 108ff.
No. 61b: (Aparimitāyuḥsūtra?)
Page 3366: 1 fragmentary folio contains a text partly similar to the Aparimitāyuḥsūtra: 
/1/ ]+ jñāya tathāgatāya || tadyathā oṃ sarvasaṃskārapariśuddhadharma/2/[te gagaṇasamudga](te) abhāvasamudgate mahādharmahetunayasupratiṣṭhite /3/ [+ + + + 
apari]mitāyuṣe svā{hā}|| atha bhagavāṃs tasyāṃ velāyāṃ /4/ [imāṃ gāthām abhāṣa]ta• || 
dānavalena samudgatu vuddho dānavalā/5/[dhigatā narasiṃhāḥ d](ā)navalasya ca 
śruyati śavdo kāruṇikasya pure pravi/6/[śantaṃ || śīlavalena samudgata vuddhaḥ 
śīlavalādh]i[gatā nara](s)iṃ[hā] śīlavala[. — Remark: The reverse is blank, most likely 
because the upper layer of the birch bark peeled off. Obvious mistakes are abhāva° instead 
of subhāva° (line 2) and svā instead of svā{hā} (line 2). The gaps are filled according to 
the text provided in DUAN 1992: §11; 76–78. — O. von Criegern and G. Melzer drew 
attention to the similarity of this text to the Aparimitāyuḥsūtra. However, the text of the 
dhāraṇī differs, and much text is missing between the dhāraṇī and the verses. — The 
Aparimitāyuḥsūtra is mentioned by Rashīd ad-Dīn, cf. n. 36 above.
No. 62: Miscellaneous fragments
Pages 3367–3368; minute unidentified fragments.
*****
II. The Srinagar Collection
The exact location of this collection is unknown at present. In 1982 two of the Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscripts and the only palm-leaf manuscript in the Gilgit collection (no. 4S) were 
transferred from the S.P.S. Museum to the Central Asian Museum, University of Srinagar, 
according to unpublished reports on researches in Srinagar during 1982 and 1987 by C. B. 
Tripathi, Berlin (cf. also J.-U. Hartmann on no. 4S). C. B. Tripathi visited Srinagar in 
1980, and again in 1982 and in 1987, and took photographs of the complete Srinagar collection. These photos have been in the possession of K. Wille, Göttingen, since the death of 
C. B. Tripathi on 4 May 1996 [Obituary by K. Bruhn, ZDMG 147. 1997: 1–6] (see the 
Additional Note by Klaus Wille below, which contains a survey of this collection). Two

--- Page 134 of 425 ---
112
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
fragments, Tripathi no. A 102 and C 265, which are perhaps part of a Saṃghabhedavastu 
manuscript, are edited in Wille 1990: 127–130. Some dhārāṇīs of this collection are edited 
in von Hinüber 1980a and in von Hinüber 2004: 12–16, Nos. 1–4c. Copies of the photos of 
Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscripts B and D which duplicate photos of manuscripts A, B and D 
taken earlier are in the possession of the author. Moreover, K. Wille had the Saṃghāṭasūtra 
A, B, and D photographed in Srinagar in 1978. These copies are deposited in the Seminar 
für Indologie und Tibetologie in Göttingen.
Manuscripts in this collection are numbered by adding “S” (Srinagar, i. e. Śrīnagar).
Additional Note on the Srinagar Collection by Klaus Wille
The photographs of the Srinagar Collection taken by C. B. Tripathi in 1982 were divided 
into series A, B und C and then numbered within the series. In his report on his visit in 
1987 Tripathi observed that about 30 fragments of series A could no longer be found in the 
museum and therefore had to be considered lost. The fragments of series A were photographed again, and the fragments not recorded in 1982 were also photographed and 
numbered as “D-Serie.” The negatives of the photographs taken in 1987 have been in my 
possession since the death of C. B. Tripathi in 1996. In summer 2011 I obtained by chance 
the photographs taken in 1982, with the exception of the first file, the contents of which 
therefore remain unknown — the Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscripts are most probably part of it; 
they are now in the possession of Oskar von Hinüber (personal communication). I am 
working on this collection and am presently transliterating the fragments on the basis of 
the photographs taken in 1982. So far, the fragments of series A (1–144) and B16–24 have 
been transliterated. Transliterations of B1–15 have been prepared by G. Melzer. Once 
series B and C of 1982 are finished, the fragments of series D of 1987 will be worked on 
and the photographs of 1987 will be compared with the photographs taken in 1982. Even a 
preliminary comparison demonstrates that several fragments photographed in 1982 were 
broken into two pieces on the photographs in 1987 or revealed a loss of text in the margins.
In 2011 K. Matsuda drew attention to the collection of the Japanese monk Yada in 
Tokyo (cf. below, No. 8S: Udānavarga). In 1986 this monk had bought 22 larger fragments 
and many smaller fragments, most of them in Leh, the others in Srinagar. Moreover he 
took photographs of about 200 fragments in the museum in Srinagar. The recto side of the 
Uv fragment (below, No. 8S) is in the Yada Collection, and the verso was identified by 
Matsuda on the basis of the photographs taken by Yada in the museum. I identified both 
sides as “series” B48 of the photographs taken by Tripathi in 1982; in other words, the 
Yada collection consists of fragments which originally were kept in the museum in 
Srinagar. Apart from one piece I could show on the basis of the photographs taken in 1982 
that all the major fragments (except fragment 22, which is in Śāradā script) in the Yada 
Collection belonged to the museum, and it is very likely that the remaining piece will also 
be found. This agrees with Tripathi‘s observation in 1987 that about 30 fragments were 
missing.
Additionally, K. Matsuda reports that in 1979 the fragments in Srinagar were photographed by “researchers” from Ryukoku University. The negatives are apparently lost, 
but positive copies are preserved. Matsuda put copies of them and of the photographs 
taken by Yada at my disposal, and as a last step the transliterations will be compared with 
those copies. 
Microfilms of the Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscripts A, B, D and of the Sarvadharmaguṇavyūharājasūtra were acquired by me in 1978 in Srinagar (cf. K. Wille, “Die SanskritFragmente der Crosby-Sammlung (Washington D.C.),” Jaina-itihāsa-ratna, Festschrift für 
Gustav Roth zum 90. Geburtstag, ed. U. Hüsken, P. Kieffer-Pülz und A. Peters, Marburg

--- Page 135 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
113
2006 [Indica et Tibetica, 47]: 483). Copies of them are available in the Seminar für 
Indologie und Tibetologie at the University of Göttingen.
Besides the larger manuscripts, the following texts have been identified so far among the 
fragments of the Srinagar Collection: CT = Chandrabhal Tripathi; KM = Kazunobu 
Matsuda; KW = Klaus Wille; the identifications of Tripathi in B und C still have to be 
checked, and this may result in some changes.
Abhidharma: A16 (CT), A96 (CT), 123 (CT), 124 (CT), 127 (? CT)
Arthavistaradharmaparyāya (Dīrghāgama): A2, A20, A31a, b, A64 (all frgs. KW)
Carakasaṃhitā of Agniveśa: A59 (KW), A63 (? KW)
Dhāraṇī: A112 (KW), B23 (CT), B25 (CT), C192 (CT)
Divyabhojana-avadāna(?)/Candana-avadāna: A61 (KW)
Hetubindu of Dharmakīrti: A16 (KW)
Khāraṇādanyāsa: A67 (? CT), 85 (CT; khāraṇādinyāse kāsacikitsitaṃ (sa)[māpta]ṃ)
Larger Prajñāpāramitā: A142f (KW)
Mahāmāyūrīvidyārājñī: A3 (CT), A4 (KW), A6 (CT), A8 (CT), A36 (KW), A68 (CT), 
A138 (CT), A139.b (KW), B30 (CT), C5 (CT), C8 (CT), C9 (CT), C16 (CT), C23 
(CT), C24 (CT), C34 (CT), C42 (? CT), C60 (CT), C61 (CT), C72 (CT), C95 (CT), 
C134/1–10 (CT), C147 (CT), C189 (CT), C212 (CT), C268 (CT), C274 (CT), C283 
(CT)
Mahāmeghasūtra: A107 (KW)
Mahāpratisarāvidyā: A55 (? CT)
medical text: A5 (CT), A29 (CT), A37 (KW), A41 (KW), A43 (CT), A46 (CT), A47 (CT), 
A51 (CT), A53 (CT), A60 (KW), A72 (CT), A76 (CT), A108 (CT), A109 (CT), A115 
(CT), A119 (CT), A126 (CT), A129.1, 2, 3, 4 (CT), A130 (CT), A132a, b (KW), A141e 
(KW), A142j (KW), A144b (KW), B18 (CT = A29), B21 (CT), B26 (CT), B28 (KW), 
B34 (CT), B38 (CT), B43 (CT), B44 (CT), C18 (CT), C30 (CT), C33 (CT), C35 (CT), 
C41 (CT), C58 (CT), C77 (CT), C92 (CT), C116 (CT), C155 (CT), C215 (CT), C218 
(CT), C222 (CT), C245 (CT), C246 (CT), C247 (CT)
Prātimokṣasūtra: C131 (? CT)
Saṃghabhedavastu: A102 (CT; ed. Wille 1990: 128f.), C265 (KW; ed. Wille 1990: 129)
Siddhasāra of Ravigupta: A13 (KW)
Stotra: C2 (CT)
Sumāgadhā-avadāna: A86.1, 2, 3 (CT), C25 (CT), C152 (CT)
Udānavarga: A90+C202 (CT), B48 (KM; ed. Matsuda 2011)
Viśvantarāvadāna: A133.a, b, c (KW)
(Klaus Wille)
No. 1S: Saṃghāṭasūtra
All Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscripts are quoted by the sigla used in the edition indicated under 
no. 36, which supersede those used in “Erforschung.”
Manuscript A in von Hinüber 1979: New siglum D: 121 folios with folio no. 82 missing, 
because folio no. 81 occurs twice, complete text. — Measurements: 26.5 × 6.5/7.5 cm; 
hole for the thread holding the manuscript together: 9 cm from the left margin; 6 to 8 lines 
of writing per page, Proto-Śāradā script. — Remark: The manuscripts 1S–4S were found 
between the book covers, and even the thread holding book covers and folios together was 
preserved, cf. Kaul Shastri 1939: 2–12, particularly p. 3 (“manuscript No. 2”) and plate 
1424A (manuscript no. 3S). — Folios 1a, 119b, 120a, 121a are reproduced together with

--- Page 136 of 425 ---
114
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
the book covers in Kaul Shastri 1939: plates nos. 1433 and 1436, cf. p. 6.; these book 
covers are discussed in Klimburg-Salter 1992: 395–402, where older literature on the book 
covers is listed, and von Hinüber 1989b: 88 with plate 160 (coloured photo showing the 
book cover with two devotees and two bodhisatvas). Excellent reproductions of the other 
painted book covers found in Gilgit (cf. no. 4S) are available on the internet: Pratapaditya 
Pal, A Painted Book Cover from Ancient Kashmir, figures 8 and 9.59 The colophon (folios 
nos. 119b, 120a, 121a) is edited in von Hinüber 2004: 25 –27, no. 10.
No. 2S: Saṃghāṭasūtra
Manuscript B in von Hinüber 1979: New siglum A: 63 folios: 2–4, 6, 7, 9–18, 20, 22–25, 
27–30, 33–35, 38–40, 43–45, 48, 50–56, 58, 61, 63–67, 70, 72, 74, 84, 85, (86–88, 
pagination lost), 89–93, 96, 105. — Measurements: 28.5 × 7.5 cm; hole for the thread 
holding the manuscript together: 8 cm from the left margin; normally 6 or 7 lines of 
writing on a page, “Gandhāran Brahmī” script. Folios 30a and 39b are reproduced in Kaul 
Shastri 1939: plate no. 1439. — Folio 96 contains the Ratnacandraparipṛcchā and folio 
105 the Hiraṇyavatīdhāraṇī, cf. nos. 6S, 7S. Consequently, this is a collection of different 
texts similar to the Ratnaketuparivarta, no. 29, cf. p. 80 above.
No. 3S: Saṃghāṭasūtra
Manuscript C in von Hinüber 1979: New siglum B: 92 folios, folio nos. 1–102; folio 80 is 
also numbered as 79(bis) by mistake, further the scribe jumps by mistake from 85 to 96; 
folio no. 101 is also numbered as folio 91; the pagination of folio 92 [102] is lost; complete 
text. — Measurements: 23.0 × 8.5 cm; hole for the thread holding the manuscript together: 
7.0 to 7.5 cm from the left margin; 8 to 10 lines of writing on a page. — Remark: Matsumura 1985: Appendix, 150, draws attention to an (unfinished) transcript of manuscript D 
published in Japan. 
Consequently, the following manuscripts are available now and, with the exception of the 
Los Angeles manuscript I, K and L, were used to constitute the text as printed in 
Canevascini 1993 without accompanying critical apparatus:
A: Srinagar Collection, no. 2S (lacunae)
B: Srinagar Collection, no. 3S (complete)
C: Delhi Collection, no. 37 (end of text lost)
D: Srinagar Collection, no. 1S (complete)
E: Delhi Collection, no. 39 (fragment)
F: Delhi Collection, no. 36 (lacunae, end of text lost)
G: Delhi Collection, no. 38a (fragment)
H: Delhi Collection, no. 52b (fragment, 1 folio)
I: Miscellaneous Manuscripts, no. 1K (“Los Angeles manuscript”) (complete)
K: Miscellaneous Manuscripts, no. 4K (complete?) 
L: Miscellaneous Manuscripts, no. 5T (incomplete)
No. 4S: Sarvadharmaguṇavyūharājasūtra
45 palm-leaf folios according to the report by C. B. Tripathi in J.-U. Hartmann (see below). 
Previously, 55 folios were counted. According to O. von Criegern, 50 of originally 51 
folios survive. Measurements: 20 cm × 4.5 cm; hole for the thread holding the manuscript 
together: 7.0 cm and a second hole 15.5 cm from the left margin; 5 lines of writing on a 
page. — Ed.: von Criegern 2008 (upublished PhD thesis). — Remark: On this text, which 
was erroneously called “Āryadharma” by Kaul Shastri, cf. Hartmann 1997b: 135–140. 
Some folios with two holes; on the reproduction of the book covers cf. Kaul Shastri 1939: 
59 See http://www.asianart.com/articles/kashmir/index.html.

--- Page 137 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
115
plate no. 1438 (together with folios 22a, 41a, 2b) and P. Pal (see above, under 1S). — A 
dhāraṇī from this text is found in no. 51e.
No. 5S: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra
Fragments of 30 folios. Description and edition including a facsimile of all fragments: von 
Hinüber 1982 [Rev.: H. Bechert, Journal of Religious Studies (Patiala) 11 (1983): 118–
120; G. Fussman, BEFEO 73 (1984): 384ff.; H.-O. Feistel, ZDMG 134 (1984): 387; P. 
Williams, JRAS (1984): 156ff.; D. Seyfort-Ruegg, JAOS 106 (1986): 879; H. Eimer, OLZ 
81 (1986): columns 393ff.].
No. 6S: Ratnacandraparipṛcchā
1 folio from no. 2S: Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscript A; extant folio no. 96. — Measurements as 
for Saṃghāṭasūtra A, 6 or 7 lines of writing on a page, “Gandhāran Brāhmī” script; 
identification: P. Harrison, 16 June 2009. — The text runs as follows:
96a:
1. ntiḥ pratilabdhāḥ || asti kumāra dakṣiṇe digbhāge gaṅganadīvālukāsamāni buddhakṣetrakoṭīniyuta(śatasahasr)[āṇ]y at[i]-
2. kramya śamā nāma lokadhātuḥ tatrāntandaprabhāso nāma tathāgato rhā samyaksaṃbuddhas tiṣṭhati dhriyate yāpayati dharmañ ca deśa3. yati. śuddhānāṃ bodhisatvānāṃ || asti kumāra paścime digbhāge gaṅganadīvālukāsamāni buddhakṣetrakoṭīnayutaśatasa4. hasrāṇy atikramya nandā nāma lokadhātuḥ tatra (canda)naśrī nāma tathāgato rhā 
samyaksaṃbuddhas tiṣṭhati. dhriyate yā5. payati. dharmañ ca deśayati. sarvā sā kumāra lokadhātuś candanakūṭāgaraparisphuṭṭā || 
asti kumāra u6. ttare digbhāge gaṃganadīvālukāsamāni buddhakṣetrakoṭīnayutaśatasahasrāṇy atikramy(a) akṣubhitā nā96b:
1. ma lokadhā = = tuḥ tatra ketuśrī = = nāma tathāgato rhā saṃyaksaṃbuddhaḥ tiṣṭhati 
dhriyat[e] yāpayati:
2. dharmañ ca deśayati. || asti kumārā pūrvadakṣiṇe digbhāge gaṅganadīvālukāsamāni 
buddhakṣetrakoṭīnayutaśa3. tasahasrāṇy atikramya caritravatī nāma lokadhātuḥ tatrāśokaśrī nāma tathāgato rhā 
samyaksaṃbuddhaḥs(!) tiṣṭhati: 
4. dhriyate yāpayati. dharmañ ca deśayati. || asti kumāra. dakṣiṇapaścime digbhāge gaṃganadīvālukāsa-
5. māni buddhakṣetrakoṭīnayutaśatasahasrāṇy atikramya ketuśrī nāma lokadhātuḥ tatra 
ratnayaṣṭi(r) nāma tathāgato 
6. rhā samyaksaṃbuddhas tiṣṭhati. dhriyate yāpayati dharmañ ca deśayati: || asti kumārā 
paścimottare digbhāge gaṃgā[nadī] 
No. 7S: Hiraṇyavatīdhāraṇī
1 folio no. 96 from no. 2S: Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscript A.; extant folio no. 105 (not 65 as in 
von Hinüber 1979). — Measurements as for Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscript A, 6 lines of 
writing on a page. The text runs as follows:
105a:
1. ca puṇyaṃ prasūtaṃ bhavati yaścemāṃ hiraṇyavatī[ṃ] dhāraṇī[ṃ] y[e]na cittena dhārayiṣyati. (tasya) + + [bha](v)[iṣ]y[a]
2. ti prajñayā prajñārthina. dhāraṇyā dhāraṇyārthinaḥ hiraṇyena hiraṇyārthinaḥ śrutena 
śrutārthinaḥ || asyā

--- Page 138 of 425 ---
116
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
3. upacāraḥ śuklapakṣaṃ ś(ā)[l]yodana anudita āditye kireṇa bhoktavyaṃ. imāni ca 
buddhavaṃśīyāni buddhānāṃ
4. bhagavatāṃ vidyāntaranāmāni maṃtrapadāni abhīkṣṇa manasi kartavyāni. tataḥ eṣāṃ 
maṃtrapadānāṃ anu5. bhāvena ye gaṃgānadīvālukopamāsu lokadhātuṣu. asurā vā. garuḍā vā. kinnarā vā. 
mahoragā vā.
6. yakṣā vā. pretā vā. piśācā vā. kum[bh]āṇ[ḍ]ā vā, te na praduṣṭacittā bhavaṃti. nāntarāyakarā bhavaṃti. nityaṃ
105b:
1. [parigṛhī]t[ā]ś ca bhava[ṃ]ti. priyabhadr[e]ṇa bodhisatvena mahāsatvena. mahāviśālena. 
vajrapāṇinā saṃ(bhū)ṣi2. tena sāttāgiriṇā haimavatena nityam aparigṛhītaś ca bhavati. yāvad akaniṣṭhair bodhisatvais ta enaṃ bhaye kāntāre 
3. vā adhitiṣṭhaṃti. abhaya(m a)syānuprayacchanti. yad uta hiraṇyavatīṃ dharaṇīṃ 
dhārayamānam. idam avocad bha4. gavāṃs tuṣiteṣu viharamāṇa pāṇḍukambalaśilāyām āttamamanāḥ supratiṣṭho bodhisatvo 
mahāsatvaḥ tā5. [n]i [c]ā[n]e[kā]ni sarvabodhisatvasahasrāṇi bhagavato bhaṣitam abhyanandan || o || hiraṇyavatī dhāraṇī sa6. māptam || o ||
No. 8S: Udānavarga
1 folio (verso); extant folio no.: 177. — Ed.: Kazunobu Matsuda: Udānabaruga no 
Girugitto-shahon (A Gilgit fragment of the Udānavarga). Bukkyōgakubu Ronshu (Journal 
of School of Buddhist Studies, Bukkyo University) 95. March 2011: 17–32. — Remark: 
This folio from the collection of unspecified fragments in the Sri Pratap Singh Museum 
was identified by K. Matsuda. The corresponding folio (recto) was acquired by the Ven. 
Yada, a Japanese monk who visited Leh and Srinagar in 1986 (see Additional Note by K. 
Wille above). — The text corresponds to Uv XXVI 20–XXVI 28 in the Mūlasarvāstivāda 
recension (recension 2) of the text. This is one of the prose paragraphs characteristic for 
recension 2, cf. Schmithausen 1970: 47–124, on the prose corresponding to verses XXVI 
20ff. p. 76 §I.7.1.
*****
III. The Ujjain Collection
This collection comprises 34 folios of the manuscripts found at Gilgit in 1931, which are 
preserved as “Bauddhāgama no. 4737” in the Scindia Oriental Museum (Scindia Oriental 
Research Institute, Vikram University) in Ujjain. They were published for the first time in 
a rather inadequate form in Sengupta 1975: 137–208, cf. also von Hinüber 1979: 331[5]ff. 
No. 1U: Dharmaskandha
19 folios; identification J. Takasaki in 1965. — Re-ed.: Dietz 1984 [Rev.: ZDMG 136. 
1986: 221; Mundus 22. 1986: 273ff.; H. Sakurabe in Matsuda 1986: 37–43 [in Japanese]; 
OLZ 83. 1988: columns 466–468]. — Remark: A second fragment of this manuscript is no. 
5 of the Delhi Collection. Altogether there are now 22 extant folios of the Dharmaskandha: 3, 4, 5–20, (21, 22 Delhi Collection), 26, (27 Delhi Collection) [folios 14–18 are 
not listed in the survey of the manuscript by Dietz (p. 11), but used for her edition]. All 
folios are numbered in two different ways: recto “3” corresponds to verso “251” and “27” 
to “275.” According to Dietz, p. 10, the higher numbers are probably original. Consequent-

--- Page 139 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
117
ly, this text was separated from a once larger collection of perhaps even all seven Abhidharma works of the Mūlasarvāstivādins (?); on the school affiliation of all three manuscripts from Ujjain: Dietz 1985: 163–179.
No. 2U: Ekottarikāgama
9 folios. Re-ed.: C. B. Tripathi, see Delhi Collection no. 4a.
No. 3U: Lokaprajñapti
6 folios; folio nos. extant: 10, 18, 34, 35, 5[1], 52. — Ed.: S. Sengupta 1975: 195ff. (wrong 
sequence of folios). An unpublished (?) re-transcript was presented to the Regular Meeting 
of the Society of Buddhist Studies, Otani University, 29 June 1982 by Y. Okudo, A study of 
the Sanskrit fragments deposited with the Scindia Oriental Institute, Ujjain. A re-edition is 
planned by S. Dietz. — Remark: The text is described in Dietz 1989 and Dietz 2003: 207–
225.
*****
IV. Miscellaneous Manuscripts
(supposed to be found near the Kargah Buddha [K] or preserved in Tibet [T])
No. 1K: Saṃghāṭasūtra
37 folios; extant folio nos. 8–37, complete. — Remark: This Saṃghāṭasūtra manuscript 
was brought to the attention of G. Schopen in January 2000, who called it the “Los 
Angeles manuscript” and identified the text. Schopen’s concordance to the edition by G. 
Canevascini shows that this manuscript contains the complete text on 37 folios except for 
minor gaps due to damage. The siglum of this manuscript is I.
From a report on the preservation of this manuscript, which was found folded, it is evident 
that it contains a second text, “a seven page incantation” (i.e. no. 2K), cf. Susan Sayre 
Batton, “Separation anxiety. The conservation of a 5th century Buddhist Gandharan Manuscript,” (http://www.asianart.com/articles/batton/index.html).
At present manuscripts nos. 1K and 2K are kept in Japan in the Miho Museum Collection, 
Shiga Prefecture, cf. report by K. Matsuda in this volume.
I am obliged to G. Schopen for providing photos of manuscript I and for sharing his concordance with his usual liberality.
No. 2K: Sarvagatipariśodhanoṣṇīṣavijay
7 folios. — Ed.: Planned by G. Schopen (letter dated 28 May 2009) and by G. Melzer (oral 
communication by J.-U. Hartmann and L. Sander on 16 June 2009), cf. no. 1K.
No. 3K: Saṃghāṭasūtra
Folio no. 49. — Remark: A single leaf of a (complete?) birch-bark manuscript was brought 
to my attention on 15 December 2000 by J.-U. Hartmann, who had seen it in the Institute 
of Silk Road Studies, Kamakura. The manuscript is kept at present in Japan in the Hirayama Collection, see report by K. Matsuda in this volume.
The text of folio 49 corresponds to Canevascini 1993: §§188.5–192.4. The siglum of this 
manuscript is K.
I am obliged to J.–U. Hartmann for drawing my attention to this manuscript and for providing a photo of folio 49.
No. 4K: Dīrghāgama
See report by J.-U. Hartmann in this volume. — Remark: There are conflicting reports on 
the exact find spot of nos. 1K, 2K, 4K: According to Fussman 2004: 104, note 8, they were

--- Page 140 of 425 ---
118
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
found near the Kargah Buddha according to information passed on to him by H. Hauptmann, Heidelberg, who was shown the place of their discovery in 1998(?). Fussman 
mentions the titles of nos. 2K and 4K. Consequently, no. 1K should be the “liasse repliée 
en boule,” which suits the photo in the report by S. S. Batton, quoted above. According to 
Batton’s report, however, nos. 1K and 2K were found in Bamiyan. Although not found at 
Gilgit, the following manuscript is mentioned here in order to provide a complete list of all 
manuscripts of the Saṃghāṭasūtra known at present.
No. 5T: Saṃghāṭasūtra
Manuscript L: 10 folios; incomplete. — Measurements 56.5 × 5.0 cm. — Remark: This 
manuscript is written in “Proto-Bengali” script and preserved in Tibet (information 
provided by LUO Hong, Beijing). No further details are known at present.

--- Page 141 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
119
Index
Simple numbers = I. Delhi Collection; number + S = II. Srinagar Collection; number + U = III. 
Ujjain Collection; number + K or + T = IV. Miscellaneous Manuscripts (discovered near the Kargah 
Buddha; preserved in Tibet); intr. = titles and authors mentioned in the introduction. — Signs used: 
[] mistaken title; () modern title. — Literary categories are marked by capital letters. — The titles 
mentioned in K. Wille’s note are not included here.
Authors
Ārya-(Ācārya)-Śūra
8, 57
Khraṇāda
intr., p. 82
Nāgārjuna
61
Pāṇini
intr., p. 83
Śūra
8
Suṣeṇa
intr., p. 82
Haribhaṭṭa
13b.7
Text Titles and Text Categories
Ajitasenavyākaraṇa
40
Adbhutadharmaparyāya
11a; 13d.4; 18
Adhikaraṇavastu
1.16; 13a.5
(Anāthapiṇḍada-sūtra?)
13b.5
Annapānavidhi
20
(Aparimitāyuḥsūtra?)
61b
ABHIDHARMA
58; 5; 1U; 3U
Abhidharmāvatāra
58
Arthavistaradharmaparyāya
55b
Alpadevatāsūtra
13d.2
AVADĀNA
1.1; 7b; 7c; 7d; 8; 9; 10c; 10d; 11b; 13a; 13d.3; 
51c; 52c; 52f; 60c
Avikalpapraveśasūtra
16
Aśoka-Avadāna
13a.2
Aṣṭādaśasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā
24; 25; 28
ĀGAMA
4a; 56c; 2U; 4K
Āyuḥparyantasūtra
19
ĀYURVEDA
intr., p. 82
[Āryadharma]
4S
Āryamahāmaṇivipulavimānaviśva-
 supratiṣṭhitaguhyaparama-
 rahasyakalparājadhāraṇī
22
[Āryaśrīdevīvyākaraṇa]
29b
Udānavarga
8S
Ekādaśamukhahṛdaya
33a
Ekottarikāgama
4a; 56c; 13b.1; 13b.2; 13b.5; 13d.8; 2U
Kaṭhinavastu
1.8
Kapphiṇa-Avadāna
8
Karmavastu
1.10
Karmavācanā
3b; 4d
Kāraṇḍavyūha
12; 36; 51b,1
[Kūṭāgārasūtra]
11a
Kośāmbakavastu
1.9
Kṣāntivādi-Avadāna
11b
Khāraṇādanyāsa
intr., p. 82

--- Page 142 of 425 ---
120
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
Candraprabha-Avadāna
9d; 13a.6
Carakasaṃhitā
p. 82, n. 21
Carmavastu
1.5
Cīvaravastu
1.6
(Caityagāthā)
13b.4
Jātakamālā (Haribhaṭṭa)
13b.7
Jyotiṣka-Avadāna
13a.4
Tathāgatabimbakārāpaṇasūtra
18
Tantrasadbhāvasāra
41; 56g
Daśabhūmikasūtra
56d
(Dārikāgāthā)
53
Divyāvadāna (?)
56h
Dīrghāgama
13d.9; 4K
Devatāsūtra
13d.1
Dvādaśadaṇḍakanāmāṣṭaśata-
 vimalīkaraṇāsūtra
29b
Dharmaruci-Avadāna
9b; 13a.3
Dharmaskandha
5; 1U
DHĀRAṆĪ
6; 7c; 10d; 14; 15; 16; 17; 22; 29c; 33b; 38b; 51d; 
51e; 52f; 54; 56a; 56b; 61b; 7S; 2K
Nagarāvalambikā-Avadāna
9g
Nandikasūtra
59b
Nāgarakumāra-Avadāna
1.1
Nirvikalpapraveśadhāraṇī
see Avikalpapraveśasūtra
Pañcatantra
intr., p. 82
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā
24; 25; 28
Padmāvatī-Avadāna
9h
Pāṃśupradāna-Avadāna
13a.7
Pāṇḍulohitakavastu
1.11
Pāramitāsamāsa
57
Pārivāsikavastu
1.13
[(Puṇyamaheśa-avadāna)]
13d.8
Poṣadhavastu
1.2
Poṣadhasthāpanavastu
1.14
Pudgalavastu
1.12
PRAJÑĀPĀRAMITĀ
10a; 24; 25; 26; 27; 28; 50; 52d.4
Praṇāmastava
43
Pratītyasamutpādahṛdayakārikā
61a
Pradakṣiṇagāthā
13b.3; 13d.6; 59c; 60b
Pravāraṇāvastu
1.3
Pravrajyāvastu
1.1; 4d
Prasenajidgāthā
13d.5; 59d
Prātimokṣa
2; 3a; 4b; 4c
Prātihāryasūtra (Divyāvadāna) (?)
21; 56h
Buddhabalādhānaprātihārya-
 vikurvāṇanirdeśasūtra
7d
Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra
10b; 31; 32; 34; 51a
Bhaiṣajyavastu
1.6
Mahallasūtra?
13d.9

--- Page 143 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
121
Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī
6; 14; 15; 17; 47b; 51b.2; 51b.4; 51d; 56b; 60a
Mahāmaṇivipulavimānaviśvasupratiṣṭhita-
 guhyaparamarahasyakalparājadhāraṇī
22
Mahāmāyūrīvidyārājñī
56a
Mahārakṣā
33b
Mahāvairocanasūtra
51b3
Mahāsudarśana-Avadāna
13a.1; 13d.3
Māndhātā-Avadāna
9a; 13a.1
Mekhalādhāraṇī
29c; 54; 52f
Meṇḍaka-Avadāna
9f
Maitreyavyākaraṇa
13c
Ratnaketuparivarta
7a; 23; 29a
Ratnacandraparipṛcchā
2S; 6S
Lokaprajñapti
3U
Vajracchedikā
10a
Varṣāvastu
1.4
Vasudhārādhāraṇī
7c, 10d
VIDYĀ
6; 14; 15; 17; 33b; 51b.2; 51b.4; 51d; 56a; 56b; 60a
Vinayavastu-Āgama
1; 51f; 56e
Viśvantara-Avadāna
8; 52d
VYĀKARAṆA
13c; 40
VYŪHA
12; 30; 35; 36; 51b; 4S
Śayanāsanavastu
1.15
[Śrīdevīvyākaraṇa]
29b
Saṃghabhedavastu
1.16; 56c; Srinagar intr., p. 112
Saṃgharakṣita-Avadāna
1.1
Saṃghāṭasūtra
16; 36; 37; 38a; 39; 52b; 52g; 1S; 2S; 3S; 1K; 3K; 
5T
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra
44; 45; 47a; 48; 49; 50; 52a; 52d.2; 5S
Samādhirājasūtra
46; 50; 56j
(Saṃbhādāvakāśasūtra)
56c
Sarvagatipariśodhanoṣṇīṣavijay
2K
Sarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhānasatvālokana-
 buddhakṣetrasandarśanavyūha
30; 35
Sarvadharmaguṇavyūharājasūtra
51e; 4S
Sahasodgata-Avadāna
9c; 13a.5
Siddhasāra
p. 82, n. 21
Sucandra-Avadāna
7c; 10d
Sumāgadhā-Avadāna
7b; 10c; 51c; 52c; 59a; 60c
SŪTRA
7d; 10b; 11a; 13d,1; 13d.2; 13b,1; 16; 18; 19; 26; 
29b; 31; 32; 34; 36; 37; 38; 39; 44; 45; 46; 47; 48; 
49; 50; 51a; 51b.3; 52a; 52b; 56c; 56d; 56h; 59b; 
61b; 1S; 2S; 3S; 5S; 1K; 3K; 4K; 5T
STOTRA
43
Svāgata-Avadāna
9e
Hayagrīvavidyā
33b
Hīraṇyavatīdhāraṇī
7S
——————
Colophon
50; 56f
Unidentified
13d.10; 19; 42; 47; 51e; 52d.1; 52d.5; 55a; 56i; 62

--- Page 144 of 425 ---
122
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
Concordance
Pages in FE — Titles of Texts
1–92:
Prātimokṣa, Karmavācanā, nos. 2, 3 
93–128:
Ekottarikāgama, no. 4a
129–150:
Prātimokṣa, Karmavācanā, nos. 4b–4d
151–156:
Dharmaskandha, no. 5
157–174:
Viśvantara-Avadāna, no. 8
175–675:
Prajñāpāramitā, nos. 24,25,28
676–1079:
Vinayavastu-āgama
1080–1129: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī, no. 6
1130–1138: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī, no. 14
1139–1156: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī, no. 15
1157–1165: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī, no. 17
1166–1283: Ratnaketuparivarta, no. 7a
1284–1285: Sumāgadhā-Avadāna, no. 7b
1286–1287: Sucandra-Avadāna, no. 7c
1288–1297: Buddhabalādhānaprātihāryavikurvāṇanirdeśa, no. 7d
1298–1315: Ratnaketuparivarta etc., no. 29a
1316–1327: Dvādaśadaṇḍakanāmāṣṭaśatavimalīkaraṇāsūtra, no. 29b
1327–1331: Mekhalādhāraṇī, no. 29c
1332–1349: Viśvantara-Avadāna, no. 8
1350–1358: Dharmaruci-Avadāna, no 9b
1359–1361: Sahasodgata-Avadāna, no. 9c
1362–1363: Candraprabha-Avadāna, no. 9d
1364–1365: Padmāvatī-Avadāna, no. 9h
1366–1367: Svāgata-Avadāna, no 9e
1368–1369: Meṇḍaka-Avadāna, no. 9f
1370–1371: Nagarāvalambikā-Avadāna, no. 9g
1372–1373: Sahasodgata-Avadāna, no. 9c
1374:
Māndhātā-Avadāna, no. 9a
1374–1377: Dharmaruci-Avadāna, no. 9b
1378–1379: Svāgata-Avadāna, no. 9e
1380–1393: Vajracchedikā, no. 10a
1394–1413: Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra, no. 10b
1414–1425: Sumāgadhā-Avadāna, no. 10c
1426–1431: Sucandra-Avadāna, no. 10d
1432–1451: Māndhātā-Avadāna, no. 13a.1
1452, lines 1–5: Aśoka-Avadāna, no. 13a.2
1452–1483: Dharmaruci-Avadāna, no. 13a.3
1484–1485: Jyotiṣka-Avadāna, no. 13a.4
1486–1487: Sahasodgata-Avadāna, no. 13a.5
1488–1507: Candraprabha-Avadāna, no. 13a.6
1508–1517: Pāṃśupradāna-Avadāna, no. 13a.7
1518–1519: Ekottarikāgama?, no. 13b.1
1520–1523: Ekottarikāgama?, no. 13b.2
1524–1528: Pradakṣiṇa-/Caitya-gāthā, no.13b.3,4

--- Page 145 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
123
1528–1533: Ekottarikāgama?, no. 13b.5
1533–1535: Ekottarikāgama?, no. 13b.2
1536–1542: Maitreyavyākaraṇa, no. 13c
1542–1545: Devatāsūtra, no. 13d.1
1545:
Alpadevatāsūtra, no. 13d.2
1546–1547: Ekottarikāgama?, no. 13d.8
1548–1549: Dīrghāgama? no. 13d.9
1550–1567: Mahāsudarśana-Avadāna, no. 13d.3
1568–1575: Unidentified, no. 13d.10
1576–1581: Adbhutadharmaparyāya, no. 13d.4
1581–1585: Prasenajidgāthā, no. 13d.5
1586–1587: Haribhaṭṭa: Jātakamālā, no. 13d.7
1588–1591: Adbhutadharmaparyāya, no. 11a
1592–1593: Kṣāntivādi-Avadāna, no. 11b
1594–1667: Kāraṇḍavyūha, no. 12
1668–1681: Avikalpapraveśasūtra, no. 16
1682–1683: Saṃghāṭasūtra, no. 16
1684–1691: Tathāgatabimbakārāpaṇasūtra, no. 18
1692–1707: Āyuḥparyantasūtra, no. 19
1706, lines 1–6: Unidentified, no. 19
1708–1713: Annapānavidhi, no. 20
1714–1723: Prātihāryasūtra, no. 21
1724–1733: Āryamahāmaṇi°–°dhāraṇī, no. 22
1734–1745: Ratnaketuparivarta, no. 23
1746–1815: Sarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhāna°, no. 30
1816–1837: Sarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhāna°, no. 35
1838–1867: Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra, no. 31, 32
1868–1948: Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra, no. 34
1949–2104: Saṃghāṭasūtra, no. 36
2105–2106: Kāraṇḍavyūha, no. 36
2107:
blank
2108–2289: Saṃghāṭasūtra, no. 37
2290–2303: Saṃghāṭasūtra, no. 38a
2304–2305: Dhāraṇī, no. 38b
2306–2335: Saṃghāṭasūtra, no. 39
2336–2416: Ajitasenavyākaraṇa, no. 40
2417–2444: Ekādaśamukhadhāraṇī, no. 33a
2444–2459: Hayagrīvavidyā, no. 33b
2459–2460: Mahārakṣā, no. 33b
2461–2783: Samādhirājasūtra, no. 46
2784:
number not in FE
2785–2812: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, no. 44
2813–3052: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, no. 45
3053–3118: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, no. 47
3119–3120: Unidentified, no. 47
3021–3216: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, no. 48
3217–3220: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, no. 49

--- Page 146 of 425 ---
124
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
3221–3222: Tantrasadbhāvasāra, no. 41
3223–3224: Unidentified, no. 42
3225–3228: Praṇāmastava, no. 43
3229–3236: Dārikāgāthā, no. 53
3237–3238: Unidentified, no. 55a
3239–3240: Arthavistaradharmaparyāya, no. 55b
3241–3248: Sumāghadā-Avadāna, no. 59a
3249:
Nandikasūtra, no. 59b
3249–3250: Pradakṣiṇagāthā, no. 59c
3251–3252: Prasenajidgāthā, no. 59d
3253–3256: Mekhalādhāraṇī, no. 54
3257–3258: Ārya-Śūra: Pāramitāsamāsa
3259–3260: Abhidharmāvatāra, no. 58
3261:
Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra, no. 51a
3262–3263: Kāraṇḍavyūha, 51b.1
3264:
Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī, 51b.2
3265:
Mahāvairocanasūtra?, 51b.3
3266–3267: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī, 51b.4
3268:
Sumāgadhā-Avadāna, no. 51c
3269:
Unidentified, no. 51e
3270–3275: Sumāgadhā-Avadāna, no. 51c
3276:
Unidentified, no. 51e
3277–3278: Sumāgadhā-Avadāna, no. 51c
3279–3280: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī, no. 51d
3281–3284: Unidentified, no. 51e
3285–3286: Dhāraṇī, no. 51e
3287–3295: Unidentified, no. 51e
3296:
Vinayavastu-āgama: Pravrajyāvastu, no. 51f
3297–3301: Unidentified, no. 51e
3302:
Saṃghāṭasūtra, no. 52b
3303–3305: Sumāgadhā-Avadāna, no. 52c
3306:
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, no. 52a
3307:
Unidentified, no. 52d.1
3308–3309: Mekhalādhāraṇī?, no. 52e
3310:
Sumāgadhā-Avadāna, no. 52c
3311–3312: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, no. 52d.2
3313:
Saṃghāṭasūtra, no. 52b
3314–3315: Viśvantara-Avadāna, no. 52f
3316–3317: Prajñāpāramitā, no. 52d.3
3318:
Prajñāpāramitā, no. 52d.4
3319:
Saṃghāṭasūtra, no. 52b
3320–3322: Unidentified, no. 52d.6
3323:
Saṃghāṭasūtra, no. 37; 52g
3324:
Prajñāpāramitā, no. 52d.3
3325:
Prajñāpāramitā, no. 52d.4
3326–3327: Mahāmāyūrīvidyārājñī, no. 56a
3328–3335: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī, no. 56b

--- Page 147 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
125
3336–337:
(Saṃbādhāvakāśasūtra), 56c
3338–3339: Daśabhūmikasūtra, no. 56d
3340–3341: Tantrasadbhāvasāra, no. 56g
3342–3343 Prātihāryasūtra?, no.56h
3344:
Unidentified, no. 56i 
3345:
blank
3346:
Colophon, no. 56f
3347:
blank
3348–3349: Saṃghabhedavastu, no. 56e
3350–3351: Samādhirājasūtra, no. 56j
3352–3355: Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī, no. 60a
3356–3357: Pradakṣiṇagāthā, no. 60b
3358–3359: Sumāgadhā-Avadāna, no. 60c
3360–3365: Pratītyasamutpādahṛdayagāthā, no. 61a
3366:
(Aparimitāyuḥsūtra?), no. 61b
3367–3368: Unidentified minute fragments, no. 62
3369–3494: Prajñāpāramitā, no. 26, 27, 50
3495–3496: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, no. 50
3497–3498: Samādhirājasūtra, no. 50
3499–3500: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, no. 50
3501–3514: Prajñāpāramitā, no. 26, 27, 50
Abbreviations
AAWG
Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen. Philologischhistorische Klasse. Dritte Folge
ABORI
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Institute
AKM
Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes
ARIRIAB
Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at 
Soka University
AWL
Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur, Mainz. Abhandlungen der geistes- 
und sozialwissenschaftlichen Klasse
BEI
Bulletin d’Études Indiennes
BHSD
F. Edgerton: Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary: I. Grammar, II: 
Dictionary. New Haven 1953
BISt
Berliner Indologische Studien
BSOAS
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies
BStR
Buddhist Studies Review
CAJ
Central Asiatic Journal
CRAIBL
Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-lettres
EI
Epigraphia Indica
FE
Facsimile Edition
GGA
Göttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen
GM
Gilgit Manuscripts
Guide
Bibliographical Guide to the Identifications (Part 2 of this paper) 
IF
Indogermanische Forschungen
IHQ
Indian Historical Quarterly
IIJ
Indo-Iranian Journal
IT
Indologica Taurinensia

--- Page 148 of 425 ---
126
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
JAOS
Journal of the American Oriental Society
JAs 
Journal Asiatique
JIABS
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies
JIPh
Journal of Indian Philosophy
JOIB
Journal of the Oriental Institute, Baroda
JNRC
Journal of the Nepal Research Center
JRAS
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
NAWG
Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen. I. PhilologischHistorische Klasse
ÖAW 
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse
OLZ
Orientalistische Literaturzeitung
Sgh
Saṃghāṭasūtra
StII
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik
SWTF
Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan-Funden und der 
kanonischen Literatur der Sarvāstivāda-Schule. Göttingen 1974–2011
WZKS(O)
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Süd- (und Ost)asiens
ZAS
Zentralasiatische Studien
ZDMG
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft
Texts are abbreviated following the Epilegomena to the Critical Pāli Dictionary.
Bibliography
The reviews of books quoted in the “Guide” section are not included.
Asaṅga: Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra. Exposé de la doctrine du grand véhicule selon le système 
Yogācāra édité et traduit par Sylvain Lévi. Paris: Librairie Honoré Champion, 1907.
Ashikaga, Atsuuji. 1955. “A propos de certaines gāthās remontant au Mahāvairocanasūtra,” in: 
Studies in Indology and Buddhology (Susumu Yamaguchi Felicitation Volume). Kyoto: 
Hozokan, 106–121.
Bagchi, Sitansusekhar. 1967–1970. Mūlasarvāstivādavinayavastu. Vols. I–II. Buddhist Sanskrit 
Texts no. 16. Darbhanga: The Mithila Institute of Post-Graduate Studies and Research in 
Sanskrit Learning.
Bandini-König, Ditte. 1999. Die Felsbildstation Hodar. Materialien zur Archäologie der Nordgebiete Pakistans, Band 3. Mainz: Philipp von Zabern.
2003. Die Felsbildstation Thalpan I. Kataloge Chilas-Brücke und Thalpan (Steine 1–30). 
Band 6. Mainz: Philipp von Zabern.
2005. Die Felsbildstation Thalpan II. Katalog Thalpan (Steine 31–195). Band 7. Mainz: 
Philipp von Zabern.
Banerjee, Anukul Chandra.1949. “Bhikṣukarmavākya.” IHQ 25: 19–30.
1953. “The Prātimokṣasūtra.” IHQ 29: 169–174, 266–275, 363–377 .
1954. The Prātimokṣa-Sūtram (Mūlasarvāstivāda). Calcutta: J. C. Sarkhel.
1977. Two Buddhist Vinaya Texts in Sanskrit: Prātimokṣa Sūtra and Bhikṣukarmavākya. 
Calcutta: The World Press Private Limited..
Bapat, P. V. 1949. “Another valuable collection of Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts.” ABORI 30: 241–
253.
Barnett, L. D. 1951 “Manuscripts from India and Burma,” The British Museum Quarterly 16: 68–
69.
Bentor, Yael. 1988. “The redactions of the Adbhutadharmaparyāya from Gilgit.” JIABS 11/2: 21–
52.

--- Page 149 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
127
Brough, John. 1954. “The Language of the Buddhist Sanskrit Texts.” BSOAS 16: 351–375 = 
Collected Papers. London: School of Oriental and African Studies 1996: 130–154.
Cai, Yaoming. 2006. “Jierjite (Gilgit) fanwen fodian xieben de chutu yu fojiao yanjiu (The Buddhist 
manuscripts found at Gilgit and the research on Buddhism).” Foxue yanjiu zazhi (Journal of 
Buddhist Studies; alternative English title: Satyābhisamaya. A Buddhist Studies Quarterly) 
13. Taipei: 4–126.
Canevascini, Giotto. 1993. The Khotanese Saṅghāṭasūtra. A critical edition. Beiträge zur Iranistik 
Band 14. Wiesbaden: Dr. Ludwig Reichert Verlag.
Chakravarti, Niranjan Prasad. 1956. “The Gilgit Text of the Vajracchedikā.” In: Giuseppe Tucci: 
Minor Buddhist Texts Part I. Serie Orientale Roma IX. Appendix II. Rome: Istituto per il 
Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 173–192.
Chiodo, Elisabetta. 2000, 2008. The Mongolian Manuscripts on Birch Bark from Xarbuxyn Balgas 
in the Collection of the Mongolian Academy of Sciences. Parts I & II. Asiatische Forschungen 
137, 1 & 2. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Choong, Yoke Meei. 2006. Zum Problem der Leerheit (śūnyatā) in der Prajñāpāramitā. Europäische Hochschulschriften. Reihe XXVII: Asiatische und Afrikanische Studien Band 97. 
Frankfurt: Peter Lang: Europäischer Verlag der Wissenschaften.
Chung, Jin-il. 1998. Die Pravāraṇā in den kanonischen Vinaya-Texten der Mūlasarvāstivādin und 
der Sarvāstivādin. SWTF Beiheft 7. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht.
Cohen, Richard S. 2010. “The Sarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhāna-satvāvalokana-buddhakṣetrasandarśanavyūha: A Mahāyāna Sūtra from Gilgit.” The Indian International Journal of Buddhist Studies 
11, 199–251.
Conze, Edward. 1957. Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā. Serie Orientale Roma XIII. Rome: Istituto 
per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
1962. The Gilgit Manuscript of the Aṣṭādaśasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā Chapters 55–70 
corresponding to the 5th abhisamaya. Serie Orientale Roma XXVI. Rome: Istituto per il 
Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
1974. The Gilgit Manuscript of the Aṣṭādaśasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā Chapters 70–82 
corresponding to the 6th, 7th and 8th abhisamayas. Serie Orientale Roma XLVI. Rome: 
Istituto per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
1975. The Large Sūtra on Perfect Wisdom with the Divisions of the Abhisamayālaṃkāra. 
Berkeley: University of California Press (reprinted Delhi: Motilal Barnasidass, 1979).
21978. The Prajñāpāramitā Literature. Tokyo: The Reiyukai.
Criegern, Oliver von. 2008. Buch und Buchkult im indischen Mahāyāna-Buddhismus: Das Sarvadharmaguṇavyūharājasūtra. Unpublished PhD thesis Munich.
Das Gupta, Kabita. 1978. Viśvantarâvadāna. Eine buddhistische Legende. Edition eines Textes auf 
Sanskrit und auf Tibetisch, eingeleitet und übersetzt. PhD thesis, Freie Universität Berlin, 
1977. Berlin (“Dissertationsdruck”).
Dietz, Siglinde. 1984. Fragmente des Dharmaskandha. Ein Abhidharma-Text in Sanskrit aus Gilgit. 
AAWG Nr. 142. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
1985. “Untersuchungen zur Schulzugehörigkeit der in Ujjain liegenden Gilgit-Fragmente.” 
In: Zur Schulzugehörigkeit von Werken der Hīnayāna-Literatur hg. von Heinz Bechert. Erster 
Teil. AAWG Nr. 149. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 163–179.
1989. “A Brief Survey on the Sanskrit Fragments of the Lokaprajñapti.” In: Annual Memoirs 
of the Otani University Shin Buddhist Comprehensive Research Institute 7: 79–86.
2003. “Die Kosmologie nach den buddhistischen Sanskrit-Texten aus Zentralasien.” In: 
Indien und Zentralasien. Sprach- und Kulturkontakt. Vorträge des Göttinger Symposions vom 
7. bis 10. Mai 2001 hg. von Sven Bretfeld und Jens Wilkens. Veröffentlichungen der Societas 
Uralo-Altaica Band 61. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 207–225.
DUAN Qing. (No year: 1992). Das khotanische Aparimitāyuḥsūtra. StII. Dissertationen Band 3. 
Reinbek: Dr. Inge Wezler Verlag.

--- Page 150 of 425 ---
128
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
Dutt, Nalinaksha.1932. “The Buddhist Manuscripts at Gilgit.” IHQ 8: 93–110.
1933. “The Buddhist Manuscripts at Gilgit.” IHQ 9: 227–236, 567–576.
1936. “The Buddhist Manuscripts at Gilgit.” IHQ 12: 109–120.
1939–1959. Gilgit Manuscripts. Vol. I Srinagar: Calcutta Oriental Press, 1939; Vol. II (.1) 
Srinagar 1941; Vol. II.2 Calcutta: Calcutta Oriental Press, 1953; Vol. II.3 Calcutta, 1954; Vol. 
III.1 Srinagar, 1947; Vol. III.2 Srinagar, 1942; Vol. III.3 Srinagar, 1943; Vol. III.4 Calcutta, 
1950; Vol. IV Calcutta, 1959 (reprinted as Bibliotheca Indo-Buddhica Series no. 14, Delhi: 
Sri Satguru Publications, 1984).
1953. “Mss. of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīka Sūtra — their linguistic peculiarities.” IHQ 29: 
133–147.
Einecke, Katrin. 2009. Korrektur, Differenzierung und Abkürzung in indischen Inschriften und 
Handschriften. AKM Band 68. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Finot, Louis. 1913. “Le Prātimokṣasūtra des Sarvāstivādins.” JAs: 455–537.
Frentz, Hanns-Peter. 1987. Zahlenzeichen in den Gilgit-Handschriften. Unpublished MA thesis, 
Freie Universität Berlin.
Fussman, Gérard. 2003–2004. Séminaire: “Les bibliothèques des monastères bouddhiques indiens.” 
In: Cours et travaux du Collège de France. Résumés 2003–2004, Annuaire 104e année: 933–
944.
2004. “Dans quel type de bâtiment furent trouvés les manuscrits de Gilgit?” JAs 292: 101–
150.
Gnanaseeha, Muwagama. 1990. “Poṣadha. A Study Based on the Vinayavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins.” In: Ānanda: Papers on Buddhism and Indology (Ananda Weihena Palliya Guruge 
Felicitation Volume). Colombo: Felicitation Volume Editorial Committee, 172–176.
Gnoli, Raniero. 1977/8. Gilgit Manuscript of the Saṃghabhedavastu Being the 17th and Last 
Section of the Vinaya of the Mūlasarvāstivādin. Part I, II. Serie Orientale Roma XLIX, 1.2. 
Rome: Istituto per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
1978. Gilgit Manuscript of the Śayanāsanavastu and the Adhikaraṇavastu Being the 15th and 
16th Sections of the Vinaya of the Mūlasarvāstivādin. Serie Orientale Roma L. Rome: Istituto 
per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
1987. “The Gilgit Manuscript of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtram.” In: Orientalia Iosephi 
Tucci Memoriae Dicata. Vol. II. Serie Orientale Roma LVI, 2. Rome: Istituto per il Medio ed 
Estremo Oriente, 533 with plates I–XX.
Gode, Parashuram Krishna. 1939. “Antiquity of the Lost Medical Treatise by Khāraṇādi in the Light 
of the Leaf of the Khāraṇāda-Nyāsa Newly Discovered at Gilgit.” ABORI 20, 97–102 = 
Studies in Indian Literary History Vol. I. Bombay: Prof. P. K. Gode Collected Works 
Publication Committee, 1953, 126–131.
Gokhale, Vasudeo V. and Mohan Govind Dhadphale. 1978. “Encore: Pratītyasamutpāda-hṛdayakārikā of Nāgārjuna.” In: Principal Vaman Sivaram Apte Commemoration Volume ed. by 
Mohan Govind Dhadphale. Poona: Deccan Education Society, 62–68.
Görtz, Markus. 1993. Die Legende von Sumāgadhā. Bearbeitung und Übersetzung von zwei 
indischen und einer tibetischen Fassung. Unpublished MA thesis Marburg.
Groth, Uwe. 1981. Gilgit Fragmente der Sumāgadhā- und Sucandra-Avadāna. Sanskrit und 
Deutsch. Unpublished MA thesis Berlin.
1989. “‘Desjat’ snov carja Krikina’ Fragmenty neopublikovannoj rukopisi ‘SumagadhaAvadany’ iz Gil’gita.” in: Buddizm: istorija i kul’tura. Red. kollegija: Viktorija Viktorovna 
Vertogradova (otv. red.). Moscow: Nauka, 84–91.
Gunatilaka, R. A. 1967. An edition with translation of the Buddhist Sanskrit text “Saṃghāṭa-Sūtra.” 
Unpublished PhD thesis Cambridge.

--- Page 151 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
129
1972. “A short introduction to four incomplete manuscripts of the ‘Saṃghāṭa-Sūtra’.” In: 
Studies in Indo-Asian Art and Culture 1. Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture, 71–
77.
Handurukande, Ratna. 1972. “The Avadānasārasamuccaya.” In: Studies in Indo-Asian Art and 
Culture 1. Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture, 79–89.
 2009. “Vasudhārādhāraṇī(kathā).” In: K. L. Dhammajoti, Y. Karunadasa (eds.): Buddhist 
and Pali Studies in Honour of The Venerable Professor Kakkapalliye Anuruddha. Hong 
Kong: Centre for Buddhist Studies. The University of Hong Kong, 53–64.
Harrison, Paul. 2006. “A Fragment of the *Saṃbādhāvakāśasūtra from a Newly Identified 
Ekottarikāgama Manuscript in the Schøyen Collection.” ARIRIAB 10: 201–211.
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe. 1977. Das Candraprabha-Avadāna. Nach den Gilgit-Handschriften herausgegeben, übersetzt und kommentiert. Unpublished MA thesis München.
1980. “Notes on the Gilgit Manuscript of the Candraprabhāvadāna.” JNRC 4: 251–266.
1989. “Fragmente aus dem Dīrghāgama der Sarvāstivādins.” In: Sanskrit-Texte aus dem 
buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen bearbeitet von Fumio Enomoto, 
Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Hisashi Matsumura. SWTF Beiheft 2. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und 
Ruprecht, 37–67.
1997a. “Der Praṇāmastava. Ein Buddhastotra aus den Gilgit-Funden.” in: Bauddhavidyāsudhākaraḥ. Studies in Honour of Heinz Bechert on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday. Indica et 
Tibetica 30. Swisttal-Odendorf: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 285–296.
1997b. “Studies on the Gilgit texts: The Sarvadharmaguṇavyūharājasūtra.” In: Dharmadūta. 
Mélanges offerts au Vénerable Thích Huyên-Vi à l’occasion de son soixante-dixième 
anniversaire. Paris: Éditions You-Feng, 135–140.
Hassnain, Fida Muhammad, Token D. Sumi. 1995. Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra. Kashmir Buddhist 
Manuscript. Original Sanskrit Text with Introduction and Commentary. Delhi: Reliance 
Publication House.
Hertel, Johannes. 1915. The Panchatantra. A Collection Of Ancient Hindu Tales in Its Oldest Recension, the Kashmirian, Entitled Tantrakhyayika. The Original Sanskrit text, editio minor, Reprinted from the Critical editio major, which was made for the Königliche Gesellschaft der 
Wissenschaften zu Göttingen. Harvard Oriental Series Volume Fourteen. Cambridge Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Hidas, Gergely. 2003. “Preliminary Notes on the Mahāpratisarā Mahāvidyārājñī, a Buddhist 
Protective Text from the Pañcarakṣā-collection.” BISt 15–17, 263–284.
2012. Mahāpratisarā-Mahāvidyārājñī. The Great Amulet, Great Queen of Spells. 
Introduction, Critical Editions, and Annotated Translation. Śata-Piṭaka Series. Indo-Asian 
Literatures Volume 636. Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture.
Hinüber, Oskar von. 1968. Studien zur Kasussyntax des Pāli, besonders des Vinaya-Piṭaka. 
Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenschaft. Beihefte NF 2. München: J. Kitzinger.
1969. “Eine Karmavācanā-Sammlung aus Gilgit.” ZDMG 119: 102–132 = Kleine Schriften. 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 2009, 1–31 .
1973. Das Saṃghāṭasūtra. Ausgabe und kommentierte Übersetzung eines nordbuddhistischen 
Lehrtextes in Sanskrit und Sakisch. Unpublished thesis (“Habilitationsschrift” ) Mainz.
1979. “Die Erforschung der Gilgit-Handschriften.” (Funde buddhistischer Sanskrit-Handschriften, I). NAWG, Jg, Nr. 12: 329–360.
1980a. “Namen in Schutzzaubern aus Gilgit.” StII 7, 163–171 = Kleine Schriften. Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz Verlag, 2009, Band II: 722–730.
1980b. “Die Erforschung der Gilgit-Handschriften (Nachtrag).” ZDMG 130: *25*ff..
1981. “Die Erforschung der Gilgit-Handschriften. Neue Ergebnisse.” ZDMG 131: *9*–*11.*.
1982. A new fragmentary manuscript of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra. Tokyo: The Reiyukai.

--- Page 152 of 425 ---
130
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
1983. “Die Bedeutung des Handschriftenfundes bei Gilgit.” In: XXI. Deutscher Orientalistentag vom 24. bis 29. März 1980 in Berlin. Vorträge hg. von Fritz Steppat. ZDMG, Supplement V. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag GmbH, 47–66 = Kleine Schriften. Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz Verlag, 2009: Vol. II, 668–687.
1989a. Der Beginn der Schrift und frühe Schriftlichkeit in Indien. AWL Jg. 1989, Nr. 11.
1989b. “Buddhistische Inschriften aus dem Tal des oberen Indus.” In: Rock Inscriptions in the 
Indus Valley ed. by Karl Jettmar, Ditte König and Volker Thewalt. Antiquities of Northern 
Pakistan. Reports and Studies 1. Mainz: Philipp von Zabern, 73–106, with plates 136–195.
1989c. “Origin and Varieties of Buddhist Sanskrit.” In: Dialectes dans les littératures indoaryennes éd. par Colette Caillat. Paris: De Boccard, 341–367 = Kleine Schriften. Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz Verlag, 2009, 554–580.
2000. “Der vernachlässigte Wortlaut. Die Problematik der Herausgabe buddhistischer 
Sanskrit-Texte.” In: Zur Überlieferung, Kritik und Edition alter und neuerer Texte (Beiträge 
des Colloquiums zum 85. Geburtstag von Werner Schröder am 12. und 13. März 1999 in 
Mainz). AWL, Jg 2000, Nr. 2, 17–36 = Kleine Schriften. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 
2009, 431–450.
22001. Das ältere Mittelindisch im Überblick. ÖAW Sitzungsberichte, 467. Band. Wien: 
Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
2004. Die Palola Ṣāhis. Ihre Steininschriften, Inschriften auf Bronzen, Handschriftenkolophone und Schutzzauber. Antiquities of Northern Pakistan 5. Mainz: Philipp von Zabern.
2007. “Three New Bronzes from Gilgit.” ARIRIAB 10: 39–43, plates 1–5.
2009a. “More Gilgit Bronzes and Some Additions to ‘Die Palola Ṣāhis’.” ARIRIAB 12: 3–6, 
plates1–6.
2009b. “Verwischte Spuren. Der Gebrauch buddhistischer Texte nach dem Zeugnis von 
Literatur, Inschriften und Dokumenten.” In: Sakrale Texte. Hermeneutik und Lebenspraxis in 
den Schriftkulturen. Wolfgang Reinhard (ed.) München: Verlag C. H. Beck, 153–173 (notes: 
325–334).
2010. “An Inscribed Incense Burner from the MacLean Collection in Chicago.” ARIRIAB 13: 
3–8, plates 1, 2 .
2011. “Four Donations Made by Maṅgalahaṃsikā, Queen of Palola (Gilgit).” ARIRIAB 14: 3–
6, plate 1 .
2012a. “A Brief Note on the Tholaka Inscription.” ARIRIAB 15: 11f., plate 3.
2012b. “The Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra at Gilgit. Manuscripts, Worshippers and Artists,” in: 
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtram. Gilgit Lotus Sutra Manuscripts from the National Archives of 
India. Facsimile Edition [Lotus Sutra Manuscript Series 12]. Hachioji: National Archives of 
India, Soka Gakkai, Institute for Oriental Philosophy, xxxv–lxviii.
2012c. “Girugitto no bonbun hokekyō: Shanon to shinpōshatachi to kōshōtachi.” The Journal 
of Oriental Studies 51, no. 2: 186(19)–166(39).
HU-von Hinüber, Haiyan. 1994. Das Poṣadhavastu. Vorschriften für die buddhistische Beichtfeier 
im Vinaya der Mūlasarvāstivādins aufgrund des Sanskrit-Textes der Gilgit-Handschrift und 
der tibetischen Version sowie unter Berücksichtigung der Sanskrit-Fragmente des Poṣadhavastu aus zentralasiatischen Handschriftenfunden herausgegeben, mit den Parallelversionen 
verglichen, übersetzt und kommentiert. StII Monographie 13. Reinbek: Dr. Inge Wezler 
Verlag.
Jahn, Karl. 1980. Die Indiengeschichte des Rashīd ad-Dīn. ÖAW. Denkschriften, 144. Band. Wien: 
Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Jaini, Padmanabh Shreevarma. 1968. “Vasudhārādhāraṇī: A Buddhist work in use among the Jainas 
of Gujarat.” In: The Mahāvīra Jaina Vidyālaya Golden Jubilee Volume. Bombay: Shrī 
Mahāvīra Jaina Vidyālaya, 30–45 = Collected Papers on Buddhist Studies. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 2001, 527–533.

--- Page 153 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
131
Jinānanda Bhikkhu. 1953. A Study of the Pāli Vinaya Mahāvagga in comparison with the Corresponding Sections of the Gilgit manuscripts. Unpublished PhD Thesis [SOAS Thesis 
192-94845] London.
Jong, Jan Willem de. 1979. Buddhist Studies ed. by Gregory Schopen. Berkeley: Asian Humanities 
Press.
Kaul [= Koul] Shastri, Madhu Sudan. 1939. “Report on the Gilgit Excavation in 1938.” The 
Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society 30: 1–12 and 15 plates.
Kishore, Ranbir. 1963/64. “A Clay-coated manuscript in the Gilgit Collection.” The Indian 
Archives. New Delhi 15: 1–3.
Klimburg-Salter, Deborah. 1992. “The painted covers of the Saṃghāṭasūtra 627/8 and the votive 
objects from Gilgit.” In: South Asian Archaeology 1989. Monographs in World Archaeology 
No. 14. Madison: Prehistory Press, 395–402.
Koul [= Kaul], Madhusudan. 1935. “Report on the Manuscripts found at Navapura (Gilgit).” In: 
Transactions of the Seventh All-India Oriental Conference, Baroda December 1933. Baroda: 
5–10.
Kudo, Noriyuki. 2013. “A Newly Identified Manuscript of the Pāramitāsamāsa in the Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts.” ARIRIAB 16: 255–266.
Kumagai, Yasunao 1992. “A Study of the Māndhātāvadāna — The Gilgit Manuscript.” Journal of 
Indian and Buddhist Studies 41.1 [81]: 463–467 (in Japanese).
Kurumiya, Yenshu 1978. Ratnaketuparivarta. Sanskrit-Text. Kyoto: Heirakuji-shoten.
1980. “The Collection of Manuscripts of Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra Dug Out in Gilgit.” 
Hokkekyō Kenkyū (Studies on the Lotus Sūtra) 8: 323–334 (after IIJ 31. 1981: 328).
Lokesh Chandra. 1960. “Unpublished Gilgit Fragment of the Prātimokṣasūtra.” WZKSO 4: 1–13.
1959–1974. Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts (Facsimile Edition). Śata-Piṭaka Series Volume 10, 
1–10. Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture (reprinted as: Gilgit Buddhist 
Manuscripts, revised and enlarged compact facsimile edition. Bibliotheca Indo-Buddhica 
Series 150, 151, 152, Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications, 1995).
Majumder, P. C. 1955. Ārya Maitreya-Vyākaraṇam. Calcutta.
Matsuda, Kazunobu. 1986. Newly identified Sanskrit fragments of the Dharmaskandha in the Gilgit 
manuscripts (1) Sanskrit fragments transliterated. Kyoto: Bun’eido.
1996a. “Nirvikalpapraveśadhāraṇī. Sanskrit Text and Japanese Translation.” Bulletin of the 
Research Institute of Bukkyo University 3: 89–113.
1996b. “Dharmadharmatāvibhāga and Nirvikalpapraveśadhāraṇī.” Journal of Indian and 
Buddhist Studies 44 (1): 363–369 (in Japanese).
1996c. “Sanskrit Fragment of the Abhidharmāvatāra in the Gilgit Fragments.” The Bulletin of 
the Association of Buddhist Studies. Bukkyo University. 4: 35–42.
2011. “Udaanabaruga no Girugitto-shahon (A Gilgit fragment of the Udānavarga).” Bukkyōgakubu Ronshu (Journal of School of Buddhist Studies, Bukkyo University) 95: 17–32.
Matsumura, Hisashi. 1980. Four Avadānas from the Gilgit Manuscripts. Unpublished PhD thesis 
Canberra.
1981. “Devatāsūtra to Alpadevatāsūtra,” Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū / Journal of Indian 
and Buddhist Studies. XXX no. 2 [No. 59]: 988–982 (= 54–60) (in Japanese).
1983. “A Text of Esoteric Iconography from the Gilgit Manuscripts.” Mikkyō Zuzō (Journal 
of Buddhist Iconography) 2: 71–79 (in Japanese).
1983 [1984]. “Recensions of the Bhaiṣajyaguru-sūtra (3).” Review of the International 
University. Faculty of Letters No. 16: 175–196.
1984. “Remarks on the Gilgit Manuscripts: A Genealogy of the Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra 
Recensions in the Gilgit Manuscripts.” In: Proceedings of the 31st International Congress of 
Human Sciences in Asia and North Africa. Tokyo: The Tōhō Gakkai (The Institute of Eastern 
Studies), 215–217.

--- Page 154 of 425 ---
132
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
1985. “The stūpa worship in ancient Gilgit.” Journal of Central Asia VIII, 2: 133–151.
1987/88. “Two notes on the arrangement of the Gilgit manuscripts.” JOIB 36: 145–154.
1988. The Mahāsudarśanāvadāna and the Mahāsudarśanasūtra. Bibliotheca Indo-Buddhica 
No. 47. Delhi.
1989a. “Āyuḥparyantasūtra. Das Sūtra von der Lebensdauer in den verschiedenen Welten. 
Text in Sanskrit und Tibetisch.” In: Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen bearbeitet von Fumio Enomoto, Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Hisashi 
Matsumura. SWTF Beiheft 2. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 69–100 .
1989b. “The Āyuḥparyantasūtra.” In: Amalā Prajñā. Aspects of Buddhist Studies. Professor 
P. V. Bapat Felicitation Volume. Bibliotheca Indo-Buddhica No. 63. Delhi: Sri Satguru 
Publications, 61–77.
1989c. “One Sūtra of the Ekottarikāgama on Triśaraṇagama and Pañcaśīla.” Archív Orientální 
57: 359–371.
1989–90 [1991]. “Three notes on the Saṃghabhedavastu.” IT 15–16: 233–247.
1992. “On the transformation of the Vinayavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins.” In: Buddhist 
Heritage in India and Abroad. Delhi: Sundeep Prakashan, 169–189.
1993. “Marginalia to the Sanskrit Fragments of Some Buddhist Texts.” CAJ 37: 120–149.
1996. “The Kaṭhinavastu from the Vinayavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins.” In: Sanskrit-Texte 
aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen III bearbeitet von 
Gregory Bongard-Levin, Daniel Boucher, Fumio Enomoto, Takamichi Fukita, Hisashi 
Matsumura, Claus Vogel, Klaus Wille. SWTF Beiheft 6. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und 
Ruprecht, 145–239.
Matsumura, Junko. 1980. Bonbun Unyō-buttō-kudoku-kyō (Annotated Japanese translation of the 
Pradakṣiṇagāthā). Unpublished MA thesis, University of Tokyo.
Meadows, Carol. 1986. Ārya-Śūra’s Compendium of the Perfections: Text, translation and analysis 
of the Pāramitāsamāsa. Indica et Tibetica 8. Bonn: Indica et Tibetica Verlag.
Melzer, Gudrun. 2010. “Sanskrit sources corresponding to the Caityapradakṣiṇagāthā inscription in 
Alchi.” BISt 19: 54–70.
Mette, Adelheid. 1981. “Zwei Kleine Fragmente aus Gilgit. I. Tathāgatabimbakārāpaṇasūtra (aus 
Gilgit-Ms. No. 18). II. Devatāsūtra und Alpadevatāsūtra (aus Gilgit-Ms. No. 13).” StII 7: 
133–151.
1985. “Ein Gilgit-Fragment des Padmāvatī-Avadāna.” In: Zur Schulzugehörigkeit von Werken 
der Hīnayāna-Literatur. Teil I. AAWG. Nr. 149: 225–238.
1997a. Die Gilgit-Fragmente des Kāraṇḍavyūha. Indica et Tibetica 29. Swisttal-Odendorf: 
Indica et Tibetica Verlag.
1997b. “Die Stotras des Kāraṇḍavyūha.” BEI 15: 145–169.
Meulenbeld, Gerrit Jan. 1999. A History of Indian Medical Literature. Volume IA. Groningen 
Indological Studies Vol. XV. Groningen: Egbert Forsten.
Näther, Volker (ed.), Claus Vogel and Klaus Wille (revised and trsl.). 1996. “The final leaves of the 
Pravrajyāvastu portion of the Vinayavastu manuscript found near Gilgit. Part 1. Saṃgharakṣitāvadāna.” In: Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und 
Neueditionen III bearbeitet von Gregory Bongard-Levin, Daniel Boucher, Fumio Enomoto, 
Takamichi Fukita, Hisashi Matsumura, Claus Vogel, Klaus Wille. SWTF Beiheft 6. 
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 241–296.
Ōkubo, Yusen. 1982. “The Ekottara-āgama Fragments of the Gilgit Manuscripts — Romanized 
Text.” In: Buddhist Seminar. Otani University, Kyoto 35. May 1982: 120–91.
Prebish, Charles P. 1975. Monastic Discipline: The Sanskrit Prātimokṣasūtras of the Mahāsāṃghikas and Mūlasarvāstivādins. University Park and London: The Pennsylvania State 
University Press (reprinted Delhi, 1996).

--- Page 155 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
133
Rasmussen, W. B. 1995. An annotated transcription and translation of the Gilgit manuscript of the 
Ajitasenavyākaraṇanirdeśamahāyānasūtra. Unpublished MA thesis Austin/Texas.
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra. Sanskrit Lotus Sutra Manuscripts from Cambridge University Library 
(Add. 1682 and Add. 1683). Facsimile Edition [Lotus Sutra Manuscript Series 4]. Tokyo: 
Soka Gakkai, 2002.
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtram. Gilgit Lotus Sutra Manuscripts from the National Archives of India. 
Facsimile Edition [Lotus Sutra Manuscript Series 12]. Hachioji: National Archives of India, 
Soka Gakkai, Institute for Oriental Philosophy, 2012.
Salomon, Richard. 1998. Indian Epigraphy. A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, 
Prakrit, and Other Indo-Aryan Languages. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sander, Lore. 2007. “Confusion of Terms and Terms of Confusion in Indian Palaeography.” In: 
Expanding and Merging Horizons. Contributions to South Asian and Cross-Cultural Studies 
in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfaß. ÖAW Denkschriften, 351. Band. Wien: Verlag der 
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 121–139.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “The Śaiva Age: The rise and dominance of Śaivism during the early 
medieval period.” In: Shingo Einoo (ed.): Genesis and Development of Tantrism. Tokyo: The 
Institute for Oriental Culture. University of Tokyo, 41–349.
Sankaranarayan, Kalpakam, Kazunobu Matsuda, Motohiro Yoritomi. 2002. Lokaprajñapti. A 
Critical Exposition of Buddhist Cosmology. Bombay / Delhi: Somaiya Publications.
Scherrer-Schaub, Cristina. 1987. “D’un manuscrit tibétain des Pratītyasamutpādahṛdayakārikā de 
Nāgārjuna.” Cahiers d’Extrème-Asie 3: 103–111.
Schmithausen, Lambert. 1970. “Zu den Rezensionen des Udānavargaḥ.” WZKSO 14: 47–124.
Schopen, Gregory. 1977. “Sukhāvatī as a generalized religious goal in Sanskrit Mahāyāna Sūtra 
literature.” IIJ 19, 177–210 = Figments and fragments of Mahāyāna Buddhism in India. More 
Collected Papers. Honolulu: University of Hawa‘ii Press, 2005, 154–189.
1978a. The Bhaiṣajyaguru-Sūtra and the Buddhism in Gilgit. Unpublished PhD thesis 
Canberra.
1978b. “The five leaves of the Bhaiṣajyaguru-Sūtra found at Gilgit.” JIPh 5: 319–336.
1982. “Hīnayāna Texts in a 14th Century Persian Chronicle. Notes on Some of Rashīd adDīn’s Sources.” CAJ 26: 225–235.
1989. “The manuscript of the Vajracchedikā found at Gilgit. An annotated transcription and 
translation.” In: Luis O. Gòmez and Jonathan Silk: Studies in the Literature of the Great 
Vehicle. Three Mahāyāna Buddhist Texts. Ann Arbor: Collegiate Institute for the Study of 
Buddhist Literature and Center for South and Southeast Asian Studies. The University of 
Michigan, 89–139.
2009. “On the Absence of Urtexts and Otiose Ācāryas: Buildings, Books, and Lay Buddhist 
Ritual at Gilgit.” In: Écrire et transmettre en Inde classique, sous la direction de Gérard Colas 
et Gerdi Gerschheimer. Études thématiques 23. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient, 189–
219.
Sengupta, Sudha. 1975. “Fragments from Buddhist Texts.” In: Buddhist Studies in India ed. by 
Ramachandra Pandeya. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 137–208 .
Sferra, Francesco. 2008 [2010]. Sanskrit Texts from Giuseppe Tucci’s Collection Part I. Manuscripta Buddhica I. Rome: Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente.
Shōno, Masanori. 2010. “A Re-edited Text of the Varṣāvastu in the Vinayavastu and a Tentative Reedited Text of the Vārṣikavastu in the Vinayasūtra.” Acta Tibetica et Buddhica 3: 1–128.
Sims-Williams, Nicholas. 1997/98. “A Bactrian Deed of Manumission.” Silk Road Art and 
Archaeology 5: 191–211.
Sims-Williams, Nicholas and Jonathan Lee. 2003. “The antiquities and inscription of Tang-i 
Safedak.” Silk Road Art and Archaeology 9: 159–184 .

--- Page 156 of 425 ---
134
OSKAR VON HINÜBER
Skilling, Peter. 2004. “Jambudvīpe pracaramāṇaḥ: The Circulation of Mahāyāna Sūtras in India.” 
Journal of the International College for Advanced Buddhist Studies (Akira Hirakawa 
Memorial Volume) 7: 73 [198] – 87 [184].
2010. “Scriptural Authenticity and the Śrāvaka Schools: An Essay towards an Indian 
Perspective.” The Eastern Buddhist NS 41, No. 2: 1–47.
Skilton, Andrew. 2000. “The Gilgit Manuscript of the Samādhirāja Sūtra.” CAJ 44: 67–86.
Sternbach, Ludwik. 1974. Mahāsubhāṣitasaṃgraha. Vol. I. Hoshiarpur: Vishveshvaranand Vedic 
Research Institute.
1980. A Descriptive Catalogue of Poets Quoted in Sanskrit Anthologies and Inscriptions. 
Volume 2: Nakula-Hevidhanesora. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
1985. Poésie sanskrite conservée dans les anthologies et les inscriptions. Tome III de Yaṃpyāka à Hevidhanesora et annexe. Paris: E. De Boccard.
Stchoupak, Nadine, Louis Renou. 1946. Le Kāvyamīmāṃsā de Rājaśekhara. Paris: Imprimerie 
nationale.
Suṣeṇa: Ayurveda Mahodadhi — Annapanavidhi ed. by Venkatasubrahmanya Sastri: Tanjore: 
Administrative Committee, Thanjavūr Mahārāja Serfojī’s Sarasvatī Mahal Library, 1950.
Takakusu, Junjirō. 1896. A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practised in India and the Malay 
Archipelago by I-tsing. London: Clarendon Press.
Toda, Hirofumi. 1979. “Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra Gilgit Manuscripts (Groups B and C).” In: 
Tokushima Daigaku Kyōyōbu Kiyō (Jinbun-Shakai Kagaku) 14: 249–304.
1988. “Gilgit Manuscripts (Tucci’s Collection) Group C.” Tokushima Daigaku Kyōyōbu 
Rinrigakka kiyō 17: 1–19.
Tripāṭhī, Chandrabhāl. 1975. Catalogue of the Jaina Manuscripts at Strasbourg. Leiden: Brill.
1980. “Die Gilgit-Blätter der Mekhalā-dhāraṇī.” StII 7: 153–161.
1995. Ekottarāgama-Fragmente der Gilgit-Handschrift. StII Monographie 2. Reinbek: Dr. 
Inge Wezler Verlag.
Turner, Ralph Lilley. 1966. Comparative Dictionary of the Indo-Aryan Languages. London: Oxford 
University Press.
Vaidya, Parashuram Lakshman. 1961. Mahāyānasūtrasaṃgraha. Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 17. Darbhanga: The Mithila Institute of Post-Graduate Studies and Research in Sanskrit Learning.
Vinītā, Bhikṣuṇī (Vinita Tseng, 自運). 2010. A unique collection of twenty Sūtras in a Sanskrit 
manuscript from the Potala. Vols. I.1-2. Sanskrit Texts from the Tibetan Autonomous Region, 
7.1–2. Beijing/Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House / Austrian Academy of Sciences 
Press.
Vogel, Claus and Klaus Wille. 1984. “Some Hitherto Unidentified Fragments of the Pravrajyāvastu 
Portion of the Vinayavastu Manuscript Found at Gilgit.” NAWG Jg. 1984, Nr. 7.
1992. “Some more fragments of the Pravrajyāvastu portion of the Vinayavastu manuscript 
found near Gilgit.” In: Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und 
Neueditionen II bearbeitet von Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Klaus Wille, Claus Vogel, Günter 
Grönbold. SWTF Beiheft 4. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 65–109.
2002. “The Final Leaves of the Pravrajyāvastu Portion of the Vinayavastu Manuscript Found 
Near Gilgit. Part II: Nāgakumārāvadāna and Lévi Text.” In Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon. Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen IV. Herausgegeben von Jin-il Chung, 
Claus Vogel und Klaus Wille. SWTF Beiheft 9. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, 11–
76.
Watanabe, Shōgo. 2009. A Collection of Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā. 
Tokyo: Sankibō.
Watanabe, Shoko. 1972–1975. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka Manuscripts found in Gilgit. Parts I–II. Tokyo: 
The Reiyukai.

--- Page 157 of 425 ---
The Gilgit Manuscripts
135
Weber, Albrecht. 1883. “Buvanapâla’s Commentar zu Hâla’s Saptaçatakam.” Indische Studien 16. 
Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1–204.
Wille, Klaus. 1990. Die handschriftliche Überlieferung des Vinayavastu der Mūlasarvāstivādin. 
Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland. Supplementband 30. Stuttgart: 
Franz Steiner Verlag.
Yamagiwa, Nobuyuki. 2001. Das Pāṇḍulohitakavastu. Über die verschiedenen Verfahrensweisen 
der Bestrafung in der buddhistischen Gemeinde. Neuausgabe der Sanskrit-Handschrift aus 
Gilgit, tibetischer Text und deutsche Übersetzung. Indica et Tibetica 41. Marburg: Indica et 
Tibetica Verlag.
Yao, Fumi. 2010–11. “Sūtras quoted in the Bhaiṣajyavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādavinaya.” Buddhist Studies / Bukkyō Kenkyū 38: 251–279; 39, 179–199 (in Japanese).
2011. “Konponsetsuissaiuburitsu” ‘Yakuji’ no kenkyū: Kyōten ‘inyō’ wo chūshin ni (A Study 
on the Bhaiṣajyavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādavinaya with special reference to the “quotation“ of sūtras). Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Tokyo .
Yuyama, Akira. 1979. Vinaya-Texte. Systematische Übersicht über die buddhistische SanskritLiteratur. A Systematical Survey of Buddhist Sanskrit Literature. Erster Teil. Wiesbaden: 
Franz Steiner Verlag.
Yuyama, Akira and Hirofumi Toda. 1999. The Huntington Fragment F of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra. Tokyo: The Reiyukai Library.
Zacchetti, Stefano. 2005. In Praise of the Light. A Critical Synoptic Edition with an Annotated 
Translation of Chapters 1–3 of Dharmarakṣa’s Guang zan jing, Being the Earliest Chinese 
Translation of the Larger Prajñāpāramitā. Bibliotheca Philosophica Buddhica 8. Tokyo: Soka 
University.

--- Page 158 of 425 ---


--- Page 159 of 425 ---
The Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama
and the Private Collection in Virginia
JENS-UWE HARTMANN (MÜNCHEN) AND KLAUS WILLE (GÖTTINGEN)
1. The Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama (by Jens-Uwe Hartmann)
All the other contributions to this volume focus on specific collections, areas or scripts — 
or a combination of these — while the present paper starts from a single manuscript. This 
is explained partly by the sheer volume of the manuscript, which makes it unique among 
all the finds of the last twenty years in Pakistan and Afghanistan, but partly also by the fact 
that it came to be split up and is now unevenly distributed over several collections. The 
largest part was bought by a private collector in Virginia, who acquired, together with the 
folios of the Dīrghāgama, a number of folios and fragments from at least eight other texts 
which may or may not come from the same find-spot. Most of those folios have been 
identified by Klaus Wille, and he kindly agreed to have his important identifications added 
as a second part to this paper.
1.1 Present distribution 
The folios of the Dīrghāgama have already been the topic of three papers (Hartmann 2000, 
2002a and 2004). These papers reveal work in progress, and not only progress in research, 
but also progress in terms of acquisition: while working on the manuscript, more and more 
folios became available. As a result, our understanding of the contents and structure of the 
Dīrghāgama was constantly advanced, and this is reflected in the three papers. Since then, 
only single fragments of the Govindasūtra are known to have been offered on the market,1 
although the manuscript is still far from being accessible in its entirety. There is, however, 
a certain chance that eventually more may turn up, as will become clear in the section 
below on the present distribution of the folios.
Kazunobu Matsuda was probably the first to see the manuscript in March 1998 when he 
visited Sam Fogg’s antique book store in London in order to look for manuscripts from 
Afghanistan.2 Later in the same year Harry Falk (Berlin) received some photographs of the 
manuscript from Sam Fogg and made them available to the present author; working from 
these photographs Klaus Wille prepared the first transliterations in October 1998. The 
exact provenance of the manuscript continues to be unknown. Rumours have it that it 
comes from Gilgit, and it has been suspected that originally it formed part of the famous 
manuscript find of the thirties of the last century, a part that was removed by local people 
and sold only in the nineties.3 It is a large birch-bark manuscript — the size is approximately 50 × 10 cm — and it is written in the script called either Proto-Śāradā or Gilgit/
Bamiyan Type II. Material, script and the whole appearance of the book render it very 
likely that it comes from the same cultural background as, for instance, the famous 
manuscript of the Mūlasarvāstivāda-Vinayavastu from the Gilgit finds. Thus, it is safe to 
say that it comes from the area of Greater Gandhāra and that certain indications point in 
the direction of Gilgit. The script suggests a date after the sixth century, and a radiocarbon 
test initiated by one of the dealers in London resulted in a date between 764 and 1000 as 
the 2sigma range,4 confirming the palaeographical evidence.
1 Information provided by Gudrun Melzer, who saw photographs of probably five fragments during 
her visits to Japan in 2005 and 2007.
2 Cf. Choi 2012b: 11, note 2.
3 Cf. the contribution by Oskar von Hinüber, above p. 117, and Fussman 2004: 104 and 129.
4 Allon, Salomon, Jacobsen, Zoppi 2006: 279, note 3.

--- Page 160 of 425 ---
138
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
Regrettably, parts of the manuscript are not accessible. Its last folio number is 454, but it 
is likely that the last two folios are stuck together. Lines 5 to 6 of the verso side of the last 
folio preserve a short colophon (samāptaś ca dīrghāgamaḥ); the remaining part of the folio 
is empty. Approximately half of the folios are presently available, but many of them are in 
a rather fragmentary state. They were offered to dealers in London and in Japan in the 
second half of the nineties, but before selling them, the original owner(s) apparently split 
the manuscript into bundles of 55 to 70 folios apiece. This is suggested when looking at the 
present distribution. 
Folios 1–70 (only single fragments)
Schøyen Collection, Oslo (Norway) and
Private Collection Virginia (USA)
ca. 70–125 (ca. 55 fols.)
Private Collection Virginia (USA)
ca. 260–329 (ca. 70 fols.)
Private Collection Virginia (USA)
3 fragments of the Govindasūtra
Japan, present whereabouts unknown
330–384 (52 fols.)
Hirayama Collection, Kamakura (Japan)
364–366 (3 fols.)
Bukkyo University, Kyoto (Japan)
385–454 (70 fols.)
Private Collection Virginia (USA)
It is easy to deduce that the manuscript was divided into at least five, and probably six, 
parts. The first part is heavily damaged; the present whereabouts of folios 126–260, altogether nearly 140 leaves and therefore probably forming two bundles, is unknown, and we 
can only hope that they still exist.
The biggest part went into a private collection in Falls Church, Virginia. 53 folios were 
sold to the late Ikuo Hirayama, the famous Japanese painter; they are kept in his private 
collection in Kamakura.5 Three folios missing from the set acquired by Ikuo Hirayama 
were bought by Bukkyō University in Kyoto. An unknown number of smaller fragments 
were bought by the Norwegian collector Martin Schøyen, and they are stored in a place 
near Oslo. The state of preservation varies greatly; only the folios in the Hirayama 
Collection are perfectly restored and preserved, since they were handed over to a professional institute in Tokyo and restored by specialists. The folios in Virginia have been 
separated and put into plastic envelopes; according to my information this was done by 
specialists in the British Library. However, there are several problems: the envelopes are 
closed, but tend to burst open along the margins, and there is a constant danger that small 
pieces may fall out. In many cases two or even more folios are still stuck together; they 
would have to be separated in order to scan or photograph the currently obscured text. 
There are countless cases where small pieces belonging to the previous or the following 
folio remain stuck to the wrong leaf and hide text; these pieces would have to be detached 
— or peeled off — and remounted on their original folio, and it would need an expert to do 
it in order to avoid further damage and to recover the hidden text.
This highlights one of the major problems we are confronted with in the case of such 
manuscripts. The necessary restoration requires a certain investment, sometimes as much 
as or even more than the price already paid for the manuscript itself, and not all owners, be 
they public or private, are willing or able to shoulder such an additional burden. Moreover, 
not every private owner is necessarily interested in the details of the texts preserved in his 
manuscripts or in the intricate questions philologists are prone to ask, when even the last 
tiny bit of an akṣara may contribute the decisive clue for the desired answer. Thus, the 
interests of the owner and of the scholar do not necessarily converge. Attempts at encouraging the owner of the Virginia collection to have his manuscript restored did not succeed, 
while on the other hand he was extremely helpful in providing all the necessary facilities 
for scanning the whole manuscript. Thus we have excellent scans at our disposal, but not 
5 For this collection see the contribution by K. Matsuda below, pp. 165–166.

--- Page 161 of 425 ---
The Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama and the Private Collection in Virginia
139
of all parts, and there is not the slightest indication that this situation will change in the 
foreseeable future. Yet, it is better than the situation in Oslo. Of the fragments kept there 
we do not even have scans, and these fragments are badly agglutinated and would need 
restoration before anything can be done with them. There, too, we see little hope for an 
improvement in the near future.
1.2 Structure and contents of the Dīrghāgama
By now it is well-known that the manuscript contains a version of the Dīrghāgama, the 
“Canonical Collection of the Long (Discourses of the Buddha).” This specific version was 
collected and redacted by monks of the same school or schools that had adopted Vinaya 
texts labelled as Sarvāstivāda and Mūlasarvāstivāda. Although produced in the northwestern region of the Indian subcontinent, it is very close to the version preserved in the 
Sanskrit manuscripts from Central Asia, but it is very different from the Pali Dīghanikāya 
and from the Chang ahan, the Dīrghāgama preserved in Chinese translation (T 1), that 
probably belongs to the school of the Dharmaguptakas and most likely is derived from an 
original version in Gāndhārī. The differences concern contents, wording and arrangement; 
all three versions of the Long Discourses are divided into three sections, but only one of 
these is found in all of them. The number of sūtras is given in parentheses; the Chinese 
translation does not contain section names, but seems to be divided into three equal parts:
The Pali version commences with the Śīlaskandha section and the Brahmajālasutta, while 
the Sanskrit manuscript closes with this section and ends with the Brahmajālasūtra. It 
starts with a section called Ṣaṭsūtrakanipāta; this has no parallel in the other two versions, 
and only four of its six sūtras are also included in the Pali and the Chinese.6 The Sanskrit 
manuscript represents by far the longest version: it contains 47 texts, 13 more than the 
Dīghanikāya and 17 more than the Chinese text. Although significant parts of the manuscript are destroyed or still missing, all the texts it contained are known, because a sufficient number of uddānas is preserved. These uddānas list the titles or, rather, the keywords 
which do the duty of titles. It is difficult, if not impossible, to define the term “title” for 
texts in such collections; they may vary among different collections, and in the uddāna 
they often have to be slightly adjusted to metrical needs and therefore deviate from the 
titles preserved elsewhere.7 The following table presents an overview of all the texts contained in the Sanskrit Dīrghāgama, including folio numbers when they are preserved and 
references to parallel texts in the Pali and Chinese versions. Its purpose is to illustrate the 
sequence and the arrangement of the sūtras, and it supersedes the table given in Hartmann 
2004 as it includes a number of corrections provided by Gudrun Melzer in her dissertation 
(see below), most notably the observation that, contrary to my previous assertion,8 the 
Prasādanīyasūtra is preserved in the manuscript.
Dīrghāgama
1. Ṣaṭsūtraka-nipāta (6)
2. Yuga-nipāta (18)
3. Śīlaskandha-nipāta (23)
Dīghanikāya
1. Sīlakkhanda-vagga (13)
2. Mahā-vagga (10)
3. Pāṭika-vagga (11)
Chang ahan
1. no name (10) 
2. no name (10)
3. parallel to the Sīlakkhanda (10)
Dīrghāgama
I. Ṣaṭsūtrakanipāta
 01. Daśottara
Folios
?–? [6, 7, 11, 14]
DĀc
10
Dīghanikāya
 34. Dasuttara
Majjhimanikāya
6 For this section cf. Hartmann 1994.
7 For an edition and a discussion of the uddānas cf. Hartmann 2004: 123 ff.
8 Hartmann 2004: 126, note 18.

--- Page 162 of 425 ---
140
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
 02. Arthavistara
 03. Saṅgīti
 04. Catuṣpariṣad
 05. Mahāvadāna
 06. Mahāparinirvāṇa
II. Yuganipāta
 07. Apannaka
 08. Sarveka?
 09. Bhārgava
 10. Śalya
 11. Bhayabhairava
 12. Roma(harṣa)ṇa
 13. Jinayabha
 14. Govinda
 15. Prāsādika
 16. Prasādanīya
 17. Pañcatraya
 18. Māyājāla
 19. Kāmaṭhika
 20. Kāyabhāvanā
 21. Bodha
 22. Śaṃkaraka
 23. Āṭānāṭa
 24. Mahāsamāja
III. Śīlaskandhanipāta
 25. Tridaṇḍin
 26. Piṅgalātreya
 27. Lohitya I
 28. Lohitya II
 29. Kaivartin
 30. Maṇḍīśa I
 31. Maṇḍīśa II
 32. Mahallin
 33. Śroṇatāṇḍya
 34. Kūṭatāṇḍya
 35. Ambāṣṭha
 36. Pṛṣṭhapāla
 37. Kāraṇavādin
 38. Pudgala
 39. Śruta
 40. Mahalla
?–?
?–?
?–[72 etc.]–88r8
88r8–111v
111v–?
?–?
?–?
?–?
?–?
?–?
?–?
?–?
(266)–274v5
274v5–290r4
290r5–299v2
299v3–306r5
306r5–317v5
317v5–329r4
329r4–340r2
340r2–344v4
344v4–348r8
348v1–354r4
354r5–360v1
360v2–367r3
367r4–369r5
369r5–382r4
382r6–386v1
386v1–390v1 
390v1–391v6
391v6–8
391v8–395v6
395v6–401r1
401r2–409v8
410r2–416r3,
442–444
416r3–424r4
424r4–424v3
424v3–426v1
426v1–427v5
427v6–430r7
–
09
–
01
02
–
–
15
–
–
–
04
03
17
18
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
19
–
–
–
29
24
–
–
–
22
23
20
28
–
–
–
–
–
 33. Saṅgīti
–
 14. Mahāpadāna
 16. Mahāparinibbāna
–
 24. Pāṭika
 18. Janavasabha 
 19. Mahāgovinda
 29. Pāsādika
 28. Sampasādanīya
 32. Āṭānāṭiya
 20. Mahāsamaya
–
–
–
12. Lohicca
11. Kevaddha
07. Jāliya
–
06. Mahāli
04. Soṇadaṇḍa
 05. Kūṭadanta
 03. Ambaṭṭha 
 09. Poṭṭhapāda
–
–
–
 060. Apaṇṇaka?
 105. Sunakkhatta
 004. Bhayabherava 
 001. Mahāsīhanāda
102. Pañcattaya
095. Caṅkī 
003. Mahāsaccaka
085. Bodhirājakumāra
100. Saṅgārava
 051. Kandaraka

--- Page 163 of 425 ---
The Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama and the Private Collection in Virginia
141
The only section common to all three versions is the Śīlaskandha, and a comparative table 
of contents is instructive in that it shows the similarities as well as the differences even 
within this section.9 Those sūtras that are represented in all three are highlighted by italics.
All the sūtras collected in the Chang ahan version of this section are found in the other two 
versions. Combined with the fact that it is also the shortest, this would suggest that the 
Chinese translation preserves the oldest accessible form of the Śīlaskandha. Since the ten 
sūtras contained in the Chinese translation are all found among the 13 suttas of the Pali, 
and in turn all the Pali suttas are found among the 23 sūtras of the Sanskrit, a clear oneway development seems to be indicated by these figures. However, I am reluctant to 
immediately translate such content data into chronological data and to understand them as 
 41. Anyatama
 42. Śuka
 43. Jīvaka
 44. Rājan
 45. Vāsiṣṭha 
 46. Kāśyapa
 47. Brahmajāla
430r7
430r8–433r2
433r2-(435)r5
(435)r5–441,
446–447v2
447v2–451r1
451r2-v8
445, 452r1–454v2
–
–
–
27
26
25
21
–
 10. Subha
 02. Sāmaññaphala
 13. Tevijja
 08. Kassapasīhanāda
 01. Brahmajāla
 055. Jīvaka
Dīrghāgama
 01. Tridaṇḍin
 02. Piṅgalātreya
 03. Lohitya I
 04. Lohitya II
 05. Kaivartin
 06. Maṇḍīśa I
 07. Maṇḍīśa II
 08. Mahallin
 09. Śroṇatāṇḍya
 10. Kūṭatāṇḍya
 11. Ambāṣṭha
 12. Pṛṣṭhapāla
 13. Kāraṇavādin
 14. Pudgala
 15. Śruta
 16. Mahalla
 17. Anyatama
 18. Śuka
 19. Jīvaka
 20. Rāja (= Sāmaññaphala)
 21. Vāsiṣṭha (= Tevijja)
 22. Kāśyapa
 23. Brahmajāla
Dīghanikāya
 01. Brahmajāla
 02. Sāmaññaphala
 03. Ambaṭṭha
 04. Soṇadaṇḍa
 05. Kūtadanta
 06. Mahāli
 07. Jāliya 
 08. Kassapasīhanāda
 09. Poṭṭhapāda
 10. Subha
 11. Kevaddha
 12. Lohicca
 13. Tevijja
Chang ahan
 01. Ambaṭṭha
 02. Brahmajāla
 03. Soṇadaṇḍa
 04. Kūtadanta
 05. Kevaddha
 06. Kassapasīhanāda
 07. Tevijja
 08. Sāmaññaphala
 09. Poṭṭhapāda
 10. Lohicca
9 Cf. also Iwamatsu 2001 and Melzer 2010: 11ff.

--- Page 164 of 425 ---
142
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
reflecting a historical development, since we know next to nothing about the editorial 
processes resulting in the canonical collections as we now have them. 
The Pali Sīlakkhandha has three sūtras more than the Chinese, and the Sanskrit as many 
as thirteen more, a surprising difference, especially in view of the fact that sūtras 13–17 are 
rather short.10 It is impossible to reconstruct something like a structural archetype of the 
section; apparently the Śroṇatāṇḍya-, Kūṭatāṇḍya- and Ambāṣṭha-sūtras form one of its 
building blocks, since they are grouped closely together in all three versions (nos. 9–11 in 
the Sanskrit, nos. 3–5 in the Pali, nos. 1 and 3–4 in the Chinese), but their sequence is not 
fixed. Apart from that it is difficult to see any close relations with regard to sequence. 
There might be one more similarity between the Chinese translation and the Sanskrit: the 
Rāja- (= Sāmaññaphala), Vāsiṣṭha- (= Tevijja) and the Kāśyapa-sūtras appear together in 
both, although in reverse order, but in the Pali these three discourses are wide apart. 
The credit for having identified parts of the manuscript even before the colophon 
became available goes to Somdev Vasudeva and to Klaus Wille, working independently of 
each other. The latter studied photographs I had received from Harry Falk in Berlin, while 
Vasudeva worked as a consultant for Sam Fogg, one of the book dealers in London, when 
the manuscript—or rather, part of it—was initially offered for sale, and he was probably 
the first scholar to inspect the original; I owe it to him that xerox copies of the folios 
reached me. He had already started, together with Lance Cousins, to transliterate some of 
the sūtras, but due to his many other obligations he was unable to pursue this project, and 
finally the research group formed for the study of the Schøyen Collection took over, 
procured colour images of all the known folios and received unreserved permission from 
the various owners to study the material and to publish it. This resulted in a continuous 
effort to make the sūtras accessible.
1.3 Texts edited so far
By now 16 of the 47 sūtras (or, rather, of the 37 sūtras currently accessible) have been 
edited. This probably sounds more impressive than it really is, since the 16 also include 
some of the very short sūtras, short because they form either a duplication of the preceding 
one or because they contain the so-called śīlaskandha, a lengthy passage characteristic for 
all the sūtras in the Śīlaskandha section and amounting to nine and a half folios in the 
Sanskrit text, as an abbreviation reduced to one or two sentences. So far, only two of the 
editions have been published.11 Most of them were prepared as a thesis for an academic 
qualification; two are doctoral dissertations and five are Masters theses or something 
similar. This means that the manuscript has provided the raw material for a considerable 
number of young scholars to gain expertise in philological work on Buddhist texts, but it 
also means that the editions achieved so far need to be standardized for publication in a 
series. This will be one of the most important tasks for the near future. The following 
sūtras have already been edited or are presently being studied:
 05 Mahāvadānasūtra
 06 Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra
 15 Prāsādikasūtra
 16 Prasādanīyasūtra
 20 Kāyabhāvanāsūtra
 21 Bodhasūtra
 Fukita Takamichi (Kyoto, in progress)
 Klaus Wille (Göttingen, in progress)
 Charles DiSimone (München, dissertation project)
 same as no. 15
 LIU Zhen (München, dissertation, published)
 Blair Silverlock (Sydney, Bachelors thesis, finished)
10 See the discussion in Melzer 2010: 23f.
11 LIU 2010 and Melzer 2010, the latter in a preliminary form as a microfiche edition of a doctoral 
dissertation.

--- Page 165 of 425 ---
The Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama and the Private Collection in Virginia
143
Additionally, Akira Sadakata twice published fragments from the Govindasūtra (no. 14, 
Sadakata 1999 and 2006), Siglinde Dietz and Lore Sander reported on the Āṭānāṭasūtra 
(no. 23, Dietz 2011, Sander 2007), Kazunobu Matsuda introduced the Tridaṇḍisūtra (no. 
25, Matsuda 2006), Jinkyoung Choi analyzed the Tridaṇḍisūtra and the two Lohityasūtras 
(nos. 25 and 27–28, Choi 2012a and 2012b), and I published a section of the Daśottarasūtra (no. 1; Hartmann 2011) and of the Bodhasūtra (no. 21; Hartmann 2004), which is now 
incorporated in the work of Blair Silverlock.
Obviously, the main task in the future will be twofold, first, to have more texts edited, 
and second, to have the edited texts published in an accessible format. In one sense, the 
latter is more demanding than the former, since it will take a considerable amount of time 
and effort to bring all the editions to the same standard and to have them follow — of 
course within reason — the same conventions. Usually the editions consist of an introduction, a transliteration, a reconstruction and a translation. Conventions concerning the transliteration have to be fully consistent; here is no room at all for creativity. This is different 
in the reconstruction part: various editors have used different symbols in order to come to 
terms with the sometimes extremely faulty manuscript. This is one reason for divergences, 
the other being the differing number of parallel versions which the editors thought 
necessary to incorporate. Normally this includes the Pali version and, if they exist, the 
corresponding fragments of the Central Asian Sanskrit manuscripts. The most extreme case 
so far is Gudrun Melzer’s reconstruction of the Ambāṣṭhasūtra, which involves up to five 
columns on facing pages, even without quoting the Pali parallel; it includes the reconstruction of the manuscript, its translation, the fragments from Central Asia and two different 
Tibetan translations.
1.4 Results
At first sight the manuscript looks very good, but it does not hold what it seems to promise. Closer inspection quickly reveals that the textual transmission has already deteriorated 
to a degree that turns editing into a real challenge. There are countless mistakes, haplographies and dittographies, wrong akṣaras and mutilated words, omitted or wrongly added 
negations, and all this to a degree that often renders whole paragraphs incomprehensible.12 
Towards the end, long sūtras are reduced to a few folios, but the folio numbers continue to 
be consecutive. However, there are no corrections; it appears that the manuscript was never 
read and it surely was not meant to serve as a study book for someone interested in the 
contents of the texts. This raises interesting questions about the function and purpose of 
 22 Śaṅkarakasūtra
 23 Āṭānāṭasūtra
 25 Tridaṇḍisūtra
 26 Piṅgalātreyasūtra
 27–28 Lohityasūtra I/II
 29 Kaivartisūtra
 34 Kūṭatāṇḍyasūtra
 35–41 Ambāṣṭhasūtra to 
Anyatamasūtra
36 Pṛṣṭhapālasūtra
 ZHANG Lixiang (München, Masters thesis, finished)
 Lore Sander and Siglinde Dietz (Berlin/Göttingen, in 
progress)
 Jinkyoung Choi (München/Kyoto, dissertation project)
 Lita Peipina (Oslo, Masters thesis, finished)
 Jinkyoung Choi (München/Kyoto, dissertation project)
 ZHOU Chunyang (Göttingen, Masters thesis, finished)
 Oliver von Criegern (München, Masters thesis, finished)
 Gudrun Melzer (München, Dissertation, published)
Daniel Stuart (UC Berkeley, published)
12 Cf. Melzer in press, section on “Some typical examples of scribal errors in the manuscript.”

--- Page 166 of 425 ---
144
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
such a long and costly manuscript, but these questions will have to be addressed on another 
occasion.
The study of the manuscript has resulted in the recovery of the Sanskrit text of a number 
of sūtras which were hitherto known only from their Pali versions, and in a few cases 
previously unknown sūtras came to light, as for instance the Kāraṇavādisūtra (no. 37), 
edited by Gudrun Melzer. All this considerably advances our knowledge of the canonical 
sūtra literature of the (Mūla-)Sarvāstivādins, or, at least, of the canonical sūtra literature 
transmitted in Sanskrit, if one hesitates to ascribe this Sūtrapiṭaka to a specific school. In 
her excellent dissertation Melzer achieved yet another most interesting result. Some of her 
important observations concern the technique of copying, at least in that area and during 
that period, and they allow us for the first time to get a glimpse of the work in a scriptorium.
Melzer’s careful study of the scribal variants led to the observation of a change in 
scribes in the passage she edited.13 She was able to distinguish at least four, possibly even 
five different scribes in that section, which consists of only 20 folios. Taking the other 
parts of the manuscript into consideration, she formed the opinion that between five and 
seven scribes were involved in the copying. This means that there was a scriptorium with a 
number of scribes who continuously worked on the manuscript together. It also means that 
each folio had to be copied page-identical in order to connect seamlessly with the work of 
the next scribe. This may sound arbitrary and therefore difficult to follow, but Melzer 
found something which apparently proves the correctness of her observation. To my 
knowledge, this is the first time that this phenomenon has been observed in Indian manuscript production during the first millennium. On many folios there is a very tiny figure 
below the folio number, evidently another number, but written with the numerals of the 
new decimal system, while the folio numbers themselves still follow the older “additive” 
system.14 These additional numbers are consecutive, but do not agree at all with the folio 
numbers, and at present there is only one possible explanation: they are a device by the 
scribe to number the section that is assigned to him.15 Such portions vary in size; there is 
one of 28 folios, another of ten folios, several of six and one of only two folios. The same 
scribe may get several portions from different parts of the manuscript. The process of 
copying such a lengthy text is carried out simultaneously by several scribes, but the 
number of pages is not divided in advance by the number of scribes, assigning the same 
share to each of them. It rather appears to be done on something like a day-to-day basis, 
and it requires each page of the exemplar to be copied onto exactly one page of the new 
manuscript. In the section studied by Melzer the scribes change at least nine times,16 and 
this makes it very likely that the folio numbers were added only after the copying was finished. Such a secondary numbering is also suggested by the four folios that were misplaced and then consecutively numbered in their new context (three folios of the Ambāṣṭhasūtra and one of the Brahmajālasūtra inserted as folios 442–444 in the Rājasūtra, 
see the table above). 
Finally, four versions of a specific phrase found in one of the Dīrghāgama sūtras will be 
contrasted here in order to illustrate how difficult it is to explain the relationship between 
the versions of a sūtra as a process of expansion in one direction. The phrase has the 
advantage of not occurring often, but of being found in three versions of the same sūtra all 
preserved in Indic languages. It serves to describe the dharma taught by a teacher free of 
greed, hatred and delusion. In Sanskrit it is the Kāmaṭhikasūtra (Dīrghāgama no. 19), in 
13 Cf. Melzer in press, section on “The scribes of the manuscript.”
14 Cf. Melzer in press, section on “A second pagination system.”
15 Such numbers are found on other manuscripts, too; cf. n. 18 below.
16 Melzer 2010: 76.

--- Page 167 of 425 ---
The Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama and the Private Collection in Virginia
145
Pali the Caṅkīsutta (MN 95), while for the version in Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit found 
among the fragments of the Schøyen Collection no title is preserved; there the name of the 
brahmin appears as Caṅgī. Additionally, a similar phrase from the Mahāvastu is given 
which, although found in another context, is closely related to the BHS sūtra and therefore 
supports the idea that the Schøyen fragment belongs to a text from the literary tradition of 
the Mahāsāṃghikas.17
Most of the phrase is shared by all three versions, but in all cases two versions have 
something in common that is not shared by the third. This makes it impossible to construe 
it as a unilinear development; it is plausible, of course, that the Sanskrit version, being the 
longest and the most elaborate, is also the latest, but beyond that it is not easy to ascertain 
the development. There is no doubt that it is basically the same phrase in the same place in 
all three versions. There is also no doubt that it has been expanded in various ways, mostly 
by adding further items to an already existing series of words, a very common device in all 
versions of canonical Buddhist texts. It is not so clear, however, if one should simply start 
by taking those words highlighted in italics as the original nucleus of the phrase, because 
they are shared by all versions. Much more comparative study will be necessary in order to 
become better equipped for understanding and disentangling such developments, and this 
is another field where the Dīrghāgama manuscript provides us with a large amount of new 
and rich material.
2
Further identified manuscripts in the Private Collection, Virginia (by Klaus Wille)
A major part of the Dīrghāgama manuscript is kept in a private collection in Virginia. 
Together with this manuscript, the collector acquired folios and fragments of several other 
birch-bark manuscripts, eight of which could be identified so far. No find-spot is known 
for any of them, but it is likely, or at least probable, that they all come from the same place. 
Wherever they came from, it is evident that a small part of this find has gone into the 
Schøyen Collection in Norway (see below). They all have this in common, that at least 
until 2005, when Jens-Uwe Hartmann visited the collection and scanned the manuscripts, 
they had not been properly restored. Quite often two or more fragments are still stuck 
together and only one side or part of a side can be read. In the Schøyen Collection there are 
Pali Theravāda
Caṅkīsutta 
MN II 172.13–16
yaṃ kho pana ayam 
āyasmā dhammaṃ 
deseti, gambhīro so 
dhammo duddaso 
duranubodho santo 
paṇīto atakkāvacaro 
nipuṇo paṇḍitavedanīyo, na so dhammo 
sudesiyo luddhenāti
BHS Mahāsāṃghika?
*Caṅgīsūtra
MS 2376/5v4–5
yaṃ pi ca yam āyuṣmāṃ dharmmaṃ deśayati gāmbhīraṃ nipuṇaṃ sukhumaṃ duranubodhaṃ atarkkiyaṃ 
atarkkāvacaraṃ paṇḍitavedanīyaṃ sarvvalokapratyayanikaṃ 
ayaṃ dharmmaḥ ajāṇa 
lubdhena jānaṃ paśyaṃ 
viharati
BHS MahāsāṃghikaLokottaravāda
Mvu III 314.15–16
adhigato yad ayaṃ 
mayā dharmo gambhīro nipuṇo sūkṣmo duranubodho atarkito atarkāvacaro paṇḍitavedanīyo sarvalokavipratyanīko
Sanskrit (Mūla-)Sarvāstivāda Kāmaṭhikasūtra DĀ 327v5–6
yaṃ ca kiṃ cid ayam 
āyuṣmān dharmaṃ 
bhāṣate saṃkṣiptena 
vā vistareṇa vā śānto 
’sya sa dharmaḥ praṇīto gambhīro gambhīrāvabhāso durdṛśo durava bodho ’tarkyo 
’t a r k y ā v a c a r a ḥ 
sūkṣmo nipuṇaḥ paṇḍitavijñavedanīyaḥ sa 
cānenāyuṣmatā na 
suka-ram ājñātuṃ 
yathāpi tad ekāntalubdhena
17 The *Caṅgīsūtra is published in Hartmann 2002b. In the texts of the *Caṅgī- and the Kāmaṭhikasūtras all text-critical notation is omitted.

--- Page 168 of 425 ---
146
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
three photographs of bundles of manuscripts made by the antique dealer in London before 
selling the originals to the private collector in Virginia. When one compares the photographs of the bundles and the now restored fragments, it is clear that many fragments 
suffered the loss of up to four akṣaras per line.
1. Of the first manuscript 63 identified fragments contain the Vinayavibhaṅga of the Mūlasarvāstivādins. Sixty not yet identified fragments most probably contain the same text, but 
due to the very small size of these fragments their assignment to the Vinayavibhaṅga is not 
completely certain, since the script18 is very similar to that of the Dīrghāgama and Saṃyuktāgama manuscripts. Regarding their contents, the fragments preserve text of the Naiḥsargikapāyattika-, Pāyattika- and Pratideśanīya-dharmas. In October 2000 Claus Vogel and 
I started to edit Sanskrit fragments of Pāyattika-dharmas 6 and 7, along with an edition and 
translation of the Tibetan version. Unfortunately, we had to stop in 2003 for personal 
reasons. The Sanskrit text of folio 251 recto is given as an example in the appendix. It is 
planned that Masanori Shōno (Osaka), who could recently identify additional fragments, 
will edit the fragments. The folios are inscribed with ten lines on each side; the script is 
similar to the manuscripts of the Prātimokṣasūtra, Uttaragrantha (manuscript B), Saṃyuktāgama, and Udānavarga.
2. A second manuscript contained the Prātimokṣasūtra of the Mūlasarvāstivādins. Only 
four fragments from the end of the text are preserved. With regard to foliation and script it 
might belong to the same manuscript as the Vinayavibhaṅga text. The folios are again 
inscribed with ten lines on each side; the script is similar to the manuscripts of the Vinayavibhaṅga, Uttaragrantha (manuscript B), Saṃyuktāgama, and Udānavarga.
3. Approximately 90 identified and 21 as yet unidentified fragments belong to a manuscript 
of the Vinayavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins. For the most part they are of a rather small 
size. The text corresponds closely to the edition of the Gilgit manuscript of the Vinayavastu 
with only minor variae lectiones. However, there are several fragments which contain text 
so far considered as lost in the edited Vinayavastu manuscript. It is planned that Fumi Yao 
(Tokyo) will edit these fragments. At least nine fragments in the Schøyen collection 
(registered in MS 2627/1 and 3) belong to the same manuscript. The folios are written with 
eight lines per side; the script is similar to the manuscripts of the Uttaragrantha (manuscript A) and the Prajñāpāramitā.
More and more parts of the Vinayavastu are now attested in manuscripts. Recently I could 
identify at least two fragments from the Poṣathasthāpanavastu in the manuscript collection 
from Zang-tepe now housed in the State Museum of History of Uzbekistan, Tashkent. This 
means that we know by now of three different manuscripts of the Vinayavastu in Gilgit/
Bamiyan Type II or Proto-Śāradā. Another small fragment of the same collection most 
probably belongs to the Vinayasūtra of Guṇaprabha [my transliteration is given now in 
Hong LUO19]. The first report on this collection was published by Bongard-Levin, 
Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja, and Temkin in 1965.20
18 Three folios of the Vinayavibhaṅga and two folios of the Prātimokṣasūtra manuscript bear a tiny 
figure below the folio number and the lower left corner respectively. This points to the same scriptorium 
which produced the Dīrghāgama manuscript (see also above, p. 144).
19 Hong LUO, “The Recensions of Guṇaprabha’s Vinayasūtra — Towards an Editorial Policy for the 
Critical Edition of the Sanskrit Text,” Annali — Università degli Studi di Napoli l’Orientale 67 (2007): 
171–186, especially 172f.
20 G. M. Bongard-Levin, M. I. Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja, E. N. Temkin, “Fragmenty sanskritskie 
rukopisi iz Zang-Tepe,” Vestnik drevnej istorii, No. 1, Moskva 1965: 154–162. [“Fragments of the 
Sanskrit Manuscripts from Zang-Tepe: Preliminary Report,” Journal of the Ancient History 1 (1965):

--- Page 169 of 425 ---
The Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama and the Private Collection in Virginia
147
4. Of a fourth manuscript containing the Uttaragrantha of the Mūlasarvāstivādins two 
fragments could be identified only recently by Shayne Clarke [hereafter Uttaragrantha 
(manuscript A)]. In the Schøyen collection (serial number MS 2627/2) there are numerous 
fragments belonging to the same manuscript. Two of them were identified by Gregory 
Schopen (Los Angeles) and one by Shayne Clarke (Hamilton). The folios are inscribed 
with nine lines per side; the script is similar to the manuscripts of the Vinayavastu and the 
Prajñāpāramitā.
5. A fifth manuscript contains one fragment of a second copy of the Uttaragrantha of the 
Mūlasarvāstivādins [hereafter Uttaragrantha (manuscript B)]. It was identified recently by 
Masanori Shōno (Osaka). The folio is written with nine lines per side; the script is similar 
to the manuscripts of the Vinayavibhaṅga, Prātimokṣasūtra, Saṃyuktāgama, and Udānavarga. 
6. Of a sixth manuscript containing the Saṃyuktāgama about fifteen as yet unidentified 
fragments are preserved, as well as four fragments which could be identified by Jin-il 
Chung (Göttingen) and four fragments by Masanori Shōno (Osaka). Again, several fragments in MS 2627/1 in the Schøyen Collection belong to the same manuscript, and J. 
Chung could assign two pieces in the Schøyen collection to a fragmentary folio (at present 
numbered F22.2) in the Virginia Collection. The folios are written with ten lines on each 
side; the script is similar to the manuscripts of the Vinayavibhaṅga, Prātimokṣasūtra, 
Uttaragrantha (manuscript B), and Udānavarga.
7. A seventh manuscript, represented by three fragments, once contained the Udānavarga. 
The verses preserved in these fragments show considerable deviations from the text edited 
by Bernhard (Uv). The number of lines per side is not determinable because the fragments 
are too small; the script is similar to the manuscripts of the Vinayavibhaṅga, Prātimokṣasūtra, Uttaragrantha (manuscript B), and Saṃyuktāgama. 
8. Finally, of an eighth manuscript, a Prajñāpāramitā text, 22 identified fragments and only 
one as yet unidentified piece have survived. Once again, several folios of MS 2627/4 in the 
Schøyen Collection, not yet restored, belong to the same manuscript. The folios are written 
with ten lines per side; the script is similar to the manuscripts of the Vinayavastu and the 
Uttaragrantha (manuscript A).
The numbering system within the collection is somewhat difficult. All folios and fragments, including those of the Dīrghāgama, are put in plastic envelopes of the size of a 
folio. Generally, one envelope contains one folio; however, it may contain several folios if 
they have not been separated (cf. above, p. 138) and in the case of fragments, it may 
contain fragments of several different texts. The envelopes are divided into three sets I–III, 
and set III is subdivided again into the letters A–G. The sets consist of the following 
numbers of envelopes:
Set I: 
1–51
Set II:
1–38 and Fragments a, b, c
Set III: 
A1–15 and A Fragments
B1–26 and B Fragments
C1–16 and C Fragments a, b
154–162].

--- Page 170 of 425 ---
148
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
D1–21 and D Fragments
E1–34 and E Fragments
F1–25
G1–25
1. Vinayavibhaṅga (one ms.; Gilgit/Bamiyan Type II = Proto-Śāradā)21
Naiḥsargikapāyattika-dharma 2: F8.1 (identified by M. Shōno); F15.2B (2 folios stuck 
together)
Naiḥsargikapāyattika-dharma 4: F2.2+G21.7 (folio number 161); F16.4A (identified by M. 
Shōno); F7.1; F8.4; F16.1; G24.11
Naiḥsargikapāyattika-dharma 5: F15.2A (2 folios stuck together); G14.8 (folio number 
172); G19.7, 10; G24.8A (all frgs. identified by M. Shōno)
Naiḥsargikapāyattika-dharma 6: F7.3; F7.4; F12.1 (identified by M. Shōno), 6; G24.10, 13 
(both frgs. identified by M. Shōno)
Naiḥsargikapāyattika-dharma 14: G15.3(?)
Naiḥsargikapāyattika-dharma 18: F22.3A (identified by M. Shōno; several folios stuck 
together); G14.4B (identified by M. Shōno; several folios stuck together)
Pāyattika-dharma 1: F17.1 (folio number 200 ..; 2 folios stuck together)
Pāyattika-dharma 1–2: F14.2 (folio number 23[9]; 2 folios stuck together)
Pāyattika-dharma 2: F9.1 (folio number 240; 2 folios stuck together); F9.2+3 (identified by 
M. Shōno); F17.2+5 (folio number 2[4]2); F17.3, 4; F27.2 (identified by M. Shōno); 
II.5; II.25.3 (identified by M. Shōno); II.26.2; II.30.2 (identified by M. Shono); II.31.2 
(identified by M. Shōno)
Pāyattika-dharma 2–3: G15.7 (identified by M. Shōno/K. Wille); G16.6 (several folios 
stuck together); II.9.4
Pāyattika-dharma 3–4: G16.8 (identified by M. Shōno); II.2
Pāyattika-dharma 4: F6.1+II.4 (folio number 249r; identified by M. Shōno)
Pāyattika-dharma 4–5: G25.7 (identified by M. Shōno)
Pāyattika-dharma 5–6: F6.1+II.4 (folio number 250v)
Pāyattika-dharma 6–7: F4.1+II.7 (folio number 251)
Pāyattika-dharma 7: G14.1+II.6 (folio number 252); G25.1 (identified by M. Shōno)
Pāyattika-dharma 7–8: G14.2+II.3 (folio number 253)
Pāyattika-dharma 8: II.9.2, 5(?); II.22.1.2(?); II. 23.1(?)
Pāyattika-dharma 8–9: II.8.1 (identified by M. Shōno/K. Wille), 2; II.9.3 (identified by M. 
Shōno); II.26.3 (identified by M. Shōno)
Pāyattika-dharma 9–10: F3.4.1 (identified by M. Shōno)
Pāyattika-dharma 10: F3.4.2A (identified by M. Shōno); F14.4
Pāyattika-dharma 10–11: G16.3 (identified by M. Shōno; several folios stuck together)
Pāyattika-dharma 11: F14.3
Pratideśanīya-dharma 3–4: F25.5 (identified by M. Shōno)
Pāyattika-dharma, not yet identified: II.8.3, 4, II.9.1, 6
Not yet identified: F16.4B; F18.1 (folio number ///4), 2 (several folios stuck together), 3 
(several folios stuck together), 4 (several folios stuck together); F27.1; G22.17 (several 
folios stuck together); G24.2, 3
21 Presumably the manuscript of the Prātimokṣasūtra belongs to the same manuscript.

--- Page 171 of 425 ---
The Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama and the Private Collection in Virginia
149
Vinayavibhaṅga ms.(?): F8.2; G19.3,11; G20.5, 8 (several folios stuck together); G24.2 
(several folios stuck together), 12; II.18.2; II.20.3; II.21.1, 2; II.22.1.1; II.22.3; II.25.6; 
II.31.1, 4, 6, 7
2. Prātimokṣasūtra (one ms.; Gilgit/Bamiyan Type II = Proto-Śāradā)22
Śaikṣa-dharma 87–107: F25.4 (folio number 520)
Śaikṣa-dharma 89–Adhikaraṇaśamatha-dharma 3: G20.4 (several folios stuck together)
Adhikaraṇaśamatha-dharma: G22.11
concluding verses: F14.1 (folio number 522; identified by J.-U. Hartmann)
3. Bhaiṣajyavastu of the Vinayavastu (one ms.; Gilgit/Bamiyan Type II = Proto-Śāradā)23
Skt. text not extant in MSV: G16.1A+2A+4A (lines 1, 2: identified and ed. Yao 2013a: 
116, n. 3)
Skt. text not extant in MSV: G22.15A (lines c, d: identified and ed. Yao 2013a: 120, n. 1)
Skt. text not extant in MSV: F27.5A (lines w, x: identified and ed. Yao 2013a: 122, n. 1)
Skt. text not extant in MSV: F27.4.2A (lines 3–5: identified and ed. Yao 2013a: 126, n. 1)
Skt. text not extant in MSV: F19.3+4 (recto and v lines 1–4, 7, 8: identified and ed. Yao 
2013a: 129, n. 3; 131, n. 4; 133f., n. 5; 140, n. 3 and Yao 2013b)
Skt. text not extant in MSV [beginning of the Bhaiṣajyavastu (ṣaṣṭigrāmasahasrāṇi)?]: 
F19.7 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 67–69: G17.7 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 68f.: G17.3
MSV I 70–72: F23.3 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 70ff.: G17.8 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 72ff.: G17.9 (line r7; ed. Yao 2013a: 288, n. 3)
MSV I 75: F23.3 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 75–77: F23.5 (lines v1–6: ed. Yao 2013a: 290f., n. 6)
MSV I 78–80: F23.4
MSV I 79f.: F27.4.1 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 128: E25.1 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 129f.: E22.7 B (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 131.9–??: E25.1 (several folios stuck together: folio number 115)
MSV I 133: E22.7 A (2nd fragment; several folios stuck together)
MSV I 134: E25.1 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 135: E-fragments.4
MSV I 135f.: E22.7 A (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 138: E-fragments.2 
MSV I 139–145: E23–24.1 (folio number 118) 
MSV I 146f.: E25.2
MSV I 149f.: E22.3+4+9+11 (frg. 11: 2nd frg. on B; line b: ed. Yao 2013a: 361, n. 4)
MSV I 152ff.: E25.3 (1 122)
MSV I 154f.: E23–24.3B
MSV I 156f.: G17.4A (several folios stuck together; lines a–d: ed. Yao 2013a: 367, n. 1)
Skt. text not extant in MSV (after MSV I 159; cf. Panglung: 40f.: “Viśvantara (I)” or 
“Viśvantara (II)”; parallel SBV II 124): G19.4, 9; 22.16; 23.8 (several folios stuck 
together)
Skt. text not extant in MSV (after MSV I 159; cf. Panglung: 40f.: “Viśvantara (II)” or 
“Viśvantara III”; parallel SBV II 120f.): F5.2, 4
22 Presumably the manuscript of the Vinayavibhaṅga belongs to the same manuscript.
23 Some of the fragments were identified by J.-U. Hartmann and myself, some only by myself.

--- Page 172 of 425 ---
150
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
Skt. text not extant in MSV (cf. MSV I 159; Panglung: 41: “Viśvantara III”; parallel SBV 
II 130–132): F3.1
Skt. text not extant in MSV (after cf. MSV I 159; Panglung: 41: “Viśvantara III”; parallel 
SBV II 132f.): F3.2
Skt. text not extant in MSV (after MSV I 159; cf. Panglung: 41: “Viśvantara III” and 
“Hausherr bewirtet Pratyekabuddhas”): F5.3
Skt. text not extant in MSV (after MSV I 159; cf. Panglung: 41: “Hausherr bewirtet 
Pratyekabuddhas”): F4.4
Skt. text not extant in MSV (after MSV I 159; cf. Panglung: 42: “Ṛṣi” and “Siṃhakuñjara”): F6.2 (lines A1–3: ed. Yao 2013a: 391, n. 4)
Skt. text not extant in MSV (after MSV I 159; cf. Panglung: 42f.: “Vogel mit zwei Köpfen” 
and “Anführer von Wasserrebhühnern”): F6.4
Skt. text not extant in MSV (after MSV I 159; cf. Panglung: 43: “Papagei” and “König von 
Videha”): F5.1
Skt. text not extant in MSV [after MSV I 159; cf. Panglung: 44f.: “Der jüngere Bruder,” 
“Der kluge Karawanenführer,” and “Ṣaḍdanta”]: F4.2+G17.5 (lines A4–7: identified 
and ed. Yao 2013a: 401f., n. 5)
Skt. text not extant in MSV (after MSV I 159; for A4ff. cf. Panglung: 45f.: “Śyāma”; for 
B1ff. cf. Panglung: 49f.: “Prabhāsa”?): F4.3+F25.2 (lines r3–8, v1: identified and ed. 
Yao 2013a: 409, n. 2; 410f., n. 2; 414, n. 2; 421, n. 2)
Skt. text not extant in MSV (after MSV I 159(?); not yet found): F6.3; 7.2
Anavataptagāthā, verses 96(?)–105, 116–126: G23.2 (folio number 155; recto a–e ed. 
Salomon 2008: 262–275)
Anavataptagāthā, verses 191ff.: F20.7 (several folios stuck together)
Anavataptagāthā, verses 191–213: F23.6
Anavataptagāthā, verses 218ff.: G22.12 (several folios stuck together)
Anavataptagāthā, Yaśaḥ II/Jyotiṣka: G16.5
Anavataptagāthā, Jyotiṣka/Rāṣṭrapāla: G16.7
Anavataptagāthā, Rāṣṭrapāla/Svāti: G15.1
Anavataptagāthā, Lavaṇabhadrika: G14.5A (line 5: identified and ed. Yao 2013a: 500, n. 1)
Anavataptagāthā, Madhuvāsiṣṭha: G14.5A (several folios stuck together)
Anavataptagāthā, varga 35: G14.9B 
Anavataptagāthā, not yet identified: G22.6 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 212: F1.4A
MSV I 212f.: E25.4 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 214f.: E25.4 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 215: E25.4 (several folios stuck together)+G8.6
MSV I 217: E25.4 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 242ff. (= Wille 1990: 114ff.): F13.2 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 242ff. (= Wille 1990: 114, folio number 228v4ff.): G18.3r (folio number 191)
MSV I 242ff. (= Wille 1990: 114, folio number 228v7ff.): F20.2.1, 3
MSV I 253–254: F25.6 (folio number ///95)
MSV I 256–259: F25.3 [folio number ///96r and (///97v?); several folios stuck together]
MSV I 257: G22.5B (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 258f.: G15.2 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 261f.: G18.1 (folio number 198)
MSV I 262: G15.2 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 266f.: F22.1B (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 269: G15.2 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 271: F22.1B (several folios stuck together)

--- Page 173 of 425 ---
The Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama and the Private Collection in Virginia
151
MSV I 277: F22.1A (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 281: F20.9 (several folios stuck together)
MSV I 282: F22.1A (several folios stuck together)
Bhaiṣajyavastu (?): F1.4B (several folios stuck together); F3.6; G17.5 (several folios stuck 
together), 6 (several folios stuck together)
Vinayavastu ms.(?): F19.1; F20.2.2; F20.5; F23.1; F26.1, 2, 3, 4; F27.6; G14.7; G23.4, 5; 
G25.5; G25.9 (several folios stuck together), 10
Several fragments24 in the Schøyen Collection (MS 2627/1, 3) belong to the same manuscript of the Bhaiṣajyavastu:
1) cf. Wille 1990: 69
2) cf. Wille 1990: 71f.
3) cf. Wille 1990: 88
4) cf. Wille 1990: 98
5) cf. Wille 1990: 97f.
6) cf. Wille 1990: 100
7) cf. MSV I 161 and Wille 1990: 69
8) cf. MSV I 213f.
9) cf. MSV I 241ff. and Wille 1990: 111f.
4. Uttaragrantha (manuscript A; Gilgit/Bamiyan Type II = Proto-Śāradā)
F20.9B (identified by S. Clarke) 
F26.2A (identified by S. Clarke) 
Several fragments25 in the Schøyen Collection (MS 2627/2) belong to the same manuscript 
of the Uttaragrantha: to date two frgs. were identifed by G. Schopen and one frg. by 
S. Clarke.
5. Uttaragrantha (manuscript B; Gilgit/Bamiyan Type II = Proto-Śāradā)
F15.1+3 (identified by M. Shōno)
6. Saṃyuktāgama (one ms.; Gilgit/Bamiyan Type II = Proto-Śāradā)
T 99, sūtra 408 and 409 (Chung 2008: 33): G17.1
T 99, sūtra 413 (Chung 2008: 33): G17.2
T 99, sūtra 481 (identified by J. Chung): F22.2
T 99, sūtra 484 and 485 (Chung 2008: 33): F23.7
T 99, sūtra 551 (identified by M. Shōno): F8.3
T 99, sūtra 929 or T 100, sūtra 154 (identified by M. Shōno): F13.1, 4; G18.5
Not yet identified: F12.4 (2 folios stuck together); F20.3 (2 folios stuck together); 20.8; 
F22.2 (several folios stuck together); G14.3; G15.4, 5; G18.2, 4; G20.6, 9; G21.2, 5; 
G22.7; G24.6; 
Several fragments in the Schøyen Collection (MS 2627/1) belong to the same manuscript: 
two frgs. belong with F22.2 to one folio (sūtra 481; identified by J. Chung)
24 There are several bundles of folios which are stuck together; folio numbers 170ff.
25 There are several bundles of folios which are stuck together.

--- Page 174 of 425 ---
152
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
7. Udānavarga (one ms.; Gilgit/Bamiyan Type II = Proto-Śāradā)
Uv 27.39ff.: F20.4
Uv 32.48ff., 33.27ff.: F20.6 (several folios stuck together)
Uv 32.42ff., 33.47ff.: G15.6 (several folios stuck together)
8. Prajñāpāramitā text (one ms.; Gilgit/Bamiyan Type II = Proto-Śāradā)
AdsPG II 18.18–21.1: F12.5
AdsPG II 45–48: F16.3
AdsPG II 47f.: F12.3; G24.9
AdsPG II 48–50: F10.2, 3; F11.3, 4
AdsPG II 49f.: F2.1
AdsPG II 50f.: F10.1 (folio number 371)
AdsPG II 52.5–55.5: G24.4
AdsPG II 52f.: F11.1
AdsPG II 53f.: G24.7
AdsPG II 55f.: F11.2 (folio number [3]73)
AdsPG II 57f.: F16.2
PvsP IV 106: F24.6
PvsP IV 106f.: F24.7 (several folios stuck together)
PvsP IV 108–114: F24.3
PvsP IV 109–113: F24.2
PvsP IV 117–121: F24.1
PvsP IV 126f.: F24.5
PvsP IV 127f.: F24.4
not yet identified: F12.2
Several folios in the Schøyen Collection (MS 2627/4), not yet restored, belong to the same 
manuscript.

--- Page 175 of 425 ---
The Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama and the Private Collection in Virginia
153
Appendix
Vinayavibhaṅga: F4.1 (here in italics) + II.7: Pāyattikā 6–726
Pāyattikā 6 (ed. PrMoSū-Mū): 
yaḥ punar bhikṣur anupasaṃpannāya pudgalāya padaśo dharmaṃ vācayet pāyantikā |27
Pāyattikā 7 (ed. PrMoSū-Mū):
yaḥ punar bhikṣur anupasaṃpannāya pudgalāya duṣṭhulāpattim ārocayed anyatra saṃghasaṃmatyā (ms. °saṃvṛtyā) pāyantikā |
recto (folio number 251)
2
pāy(attikāṃ) + + + + + + (vāca)y(a)ty āpadyate pāyattikāṃ [bhik]ṣu[r] (a)[n]upa[s]
(a)[m]p(a)[n]n(aṃ) [p]u[d]g(a)[l](a)[m] (a)[n]u(pasaṃpannasaṃjñī) + + + + + + + + + 
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + ///
3
(sa)/mākṣaraṃ dharma[ṃ] vācayaty ā[p](a)d[y](a)te pāyattikāṃ || atyakṣaraṃ <dharmaṃ> vāca[ya]ty āpadyate pāyattikāṃ || bhikṣur upasampanna[ṃ] pudgala[ṃ an]upasaṃpanna[s](aṃj)[ñ](ī sama)[p](a)[d](aṃ) .. + + + + + + ///
4
(upasaṃpa)/nnaṃ pudgalaṃ vaima[t]i[k](a)[ḥ] (sama)[p](a)daṃ dharmaṃ vācayaty 
ā[pad](y)[et]e28 (d)[u]ṣkṛtāṃ || ◯ atipadaṃ dharma[ṃ] vācayaty āpadya[t]e 
d[u]ṣ[kṛ]tāṃ || bhikṣur upasampannaṃ pudga[l](am) . + + ///
5
vācayaty āpa[dy](ate) [du](ṣ)[kṛ](tāṃ ||) bhikṣur upasampannaṃ pu[dg](alaṃ vai)[m]
(a)tikaḥ ◯ samā[k]ṣaraṃ dharmaṃ vācayaty āpadya[t]e du[ṣkṛ]tāṃ [|]| atyakṣara(ṃ) 
[dh]armaṃ vāca[y](a)[ty ā](padyate) ///
6
(svādhyā)/yanikāṃ dadāti | anāpattir anuśrāvayitvoddiś(ati | a)nāpatti◯r ādikarmikasyeti pū[rv]avat* || || [ṣa]ṣ[ṭh](ī) p(āya)[ttikāṃ]29 • || [||] .. + + + + ///
7
(a)/prahīṇatvāt [kl]eśānāṃ bhikṣavaḥ saṃghāvaśeṣām āpa(tt)[i](m ā)[pady](an)[t](e) 
◯ (ke)[c](i)[d utpa]tha .ṭ. .dh. kā .. .. .[i] .. [y]. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. + + + + + + ///
8
(pārivāsikamā)/nāpyacā(rikā)ḥ sa(ṃ)ta[ḥ] (saṃ)[gh](e) pānīyaṃ cārayanti vī .. .. .[ti]30 
(śra)ddhā brāhmaṇagṛ[h](apatayaḥ katha)[y](a)[n](t)i ye [ratnapa](r)[īkṣakai](r) . + + + 
+ + + + + + + + + + + + ///
9
(cā)/rayanti puṇyas[y]a [s](aṃ)[c](a)[y](a)<ṃ> [ku]<r>[v](a)[n](t)i ime tu ṣaḍvargī(yāḥ sth)[ū](la)k[ā]ḥ khādantas ti[ṣṭh](an)[t](i te) ’vadh[y]ā[yantaḥ ṣaḍvarg]ī[yāḥ] 
śr[utā] .. .. + + + + + + + + + + + + + + ///
10 .i [v]. ..ṃ [|] .e .. .. .. ..ṃ .. .. .. .. .ī .. + +ṃ + + + + + .. .. te ’vadhyāyanti kṣip(a)[nti] 
vivācaya[nti ye] (t)[āv](at s)[th](av)[i](rasthavirā) + + + + + + + + + + + + + ///
26 Cf. TT 1032, vol. 43, p. 17.4.8–18.1.6 = ’Dul-ba rnam-par ’byed-pa section, vol. 97 (je), foll. 
241a8–242a6; Derge[Taipei], vol. 1, No. 3, p. 510.520.5–522.5 = vol. 6 (cha), foll. 260b5–261b5.
27 GBM 50.2: yaḫ punar bhikṣur anupasaṃ + .. [y]. [pud]g(a)[l]āya padaśo dharmmaṃ vācayet 
pāyattikā • ||
GBM 141.2 (= reprint 129.2): yaḥ punar bhikṣur anupasaṃpannaṃ (cor. °nnāya?) pudgalaṃ (corr. 
°lāya) padaśo dharmmaṃ vācayet pāyattikā ||
28 Read āpadyate.
29 Read pāyattikā.
30 Possibly restore to vījayanti.

--- Page 176 of 425 ---
154
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
Abbreviations
AdsPG II
E. Conze, The Gilgit Manuscript of the Aṣṭādaśasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, 
Chapters 70 to 82, Corresponding to the 6th, 7th and 8th abhisamayas, Roma 
1974 (Serie Orientale Roma, 46).
Derge [Taipei]
Tibetan Tripiṭaka, ed. A. Barber, Taipei Edition, 72 vols, Taipei 1991.
GBM
Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts (Facsimile Edition), ed. by Raghu Vira and Lokesh 
Chandra, 10 pts, New Delhi 1959–1974 (Śata-Piṭaka Series 10) (reprinted as 
Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts: revised and enlarged compact facsimile edition. 
Bibliotheca Indo-Buddhica Series, 150–152. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications 
1995).
MN
Majjhima-Nikāya, ed. V. Trenckner, Robert Chalmers, 3 vols, London: Oxford 
University Press 1888–1899 (PTS).
MS
press mark in the Martin Schøyen collection (Oslo).
MSV I
[Mūlasarvāstivādavinayavastu, Bhaiṣajyavastu] = Gilgit Manuscript, ed. N. 
Dutt, vol. III.1, Calcutta, Srinagar: Calcutta Oriental Press 1947.
Mvu 
Le Mahâvastu, ed. É. Senart, Paris 1892–1897 (Collection d’ouvrages orientaux; 
Seconde série).
PrMoSū-Mū
Prātimokṣa-sūtram (Mūlasarvāstivāda), ed. A. Ch. Banerjee, Calcutta: Calcutta 
Oriental Press 1954.
PvsP IV
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā IV, ed. T. Kimura, Tokyo: Sankibo 1986.
T
Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō or Taishō Issaikyō, 100 vols, ed. J. Takakusu and K. 
Watanabe, Tōkyō 1924ff.
TT
The Tibetan Tripiṭaka, Peking Edition (repr.), ed. Daisetz T. Suzuki, 168 vols, 
Tokyo/Kyoto 1955–1961.
Uv
Udānavarga, ed. F. Bernhard, 2 vols, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 1965 
and 1968 (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 10).
Works Cited
Allon, Mark, Richard Salomon, Geraldine Jacobson, Ugo Zoppi. 2006. “Radiocarbon Dating of 
Kharoṣṭhī Fragments from the Schøyen and Senior Manuscript Collections.” In Jens Braarvig 
et al., eds., Buddhist Manuscripts, Vol. III (Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection), Oslo: 
Hermes Publishing: 279–291.
Choi, Jin-kyoung. 2012a. “The Two Lohitya-sūtras in the Dīrghāgama Manuscript,” Journal of 
Indian and Buddhist Studies 60: 76–79.
2012b. “The Tridaṇḍi-sūtra and the two Lohitya-sūtras in the Gilgit Dīrghāgama manuscript,” Critical Review for Buddhist Studies 11: 9–36.
Chung, Jin-il. 2008. A Survey of the Sanskrit Fragments Corresponding to the Chinese Saṃyuktāgama, Tōkyō: Sankibo.
Dietz, Siglinde. 2011. “Toward a New Edition of the Āṭānāṭikasūtra,” Dhīḥ. Journal of Rare Buddhist Texts Research Department 51: 163–192.
Fussman, Gérard. 2004. “Dans quel type de bâtiment furent trouvés les manuscrits de Gilgit?,” 
Journal Asiatique 292: 101–150.
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe. 1994. “Der Ṣaṭsūtraka-Abschnitt des in Ostturkistan überlieferten Dīrghāgama.” In Cornelia Wunsch, ed. XXV. Deutscher Orientalistentag, Vorträge. Stuttgart: Steiner 
Verlag (Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, Supplement 10):324–334.
2000. “Bemerkungen zu einer neuen Handschrift des Dīrghāgama.“ In Christine Chojnacki, 
J.-U. Hartmann u. Volker M. Tschannerl, eds., Vividharatnakaraṇḍaka. Festgabe für Adelheid 
Mette. Swisttal-Odendorf (Indica et Tibetica, 37): 359–367.

--- Page 177 of 425 ---
The Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama and the Private Collection in Virginia
155
2002a. “Further Remarks on the New Manuscript of the Dīrghāgama.” Journal of the International College for Advanced Buddhist Studies 5: 133–150.
2002b. “More Fragments of the Caṅgīsūtra.” In Jens Braarvig et al., eds. Buddhist Manuscripts, Vol. II (Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection, 3), Oslo: Hermes Publishing: 1–16.
2004. “Contents and Structure of the Dīrghāgama of the (Mūla-)Sarvāstivādins.” Annual 
Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University 7: 
119–137.
2011. “Lost in the Daśottarasūtra, Found in the Kṣudrakavastu,” Journal of the Dunhuang 
and Turfan Studies 12: 85–98.
Iwamatsu, Asao. 2001. “On the Structure and Constituents of the Śīlaskandhika of the (Lost) 
[Mūla-]Sarvāstivādins’ Dīrghāgama,” Ejima Yasunori Hakase Tsuitō Ronshū: Kū to Jitsuzai 
[“Śūnyatā and Reality: Volume in Memory of the Late Professor Ejima Yasunori”], Tokyo: 
321–338.
LIU Zhen. 2010. Chanding yu kuxiu: dhyānāni tapaś ca. Guan yu fozhuan yuanchu fanben de faxian 
he yanjiu, Shanghai: Shanghai guji chubanshe.
Matsuda Kazunobu. 2006. “Bonbun jōagon no Tridaṇḍi-sūtra ni tsuite.” Journal of Indian and 
Buddhist Studies 54/2: 984–977 (129–136).
Melzer, Gudrun. 2010. Ein Abschnitt aus dem Dīrghāgama. Dissertation München.
In press. “A Paleographic Study of a Buddhist manuscript from the Gilgit region: A glimpse 
into the workshop of the scribes.” In Manuscript Cultures: Mapping the Field, ed. Jörg B. 
Quenzer, Jan-Ulrich Sobisch, Berlin: De Gruyter (announced for Sept. 2012).
Panglung, Jampa Losang. 1981. Die Erzählstoffe des Mūlasarvāstivāda-Vinaya analysiert auf 
Grund der tibetischen Übersetzung, Tokyo (Studia Philologica Buddhica, Monograph Series, 
3).
Sadakata Akira. 1999. “Girugitto shahon: Tensonkyō danpen no kaidoku” [The Gilgit Manuscript: 
Deciphering the Mahagovindasūtra Fragment]. Daihōrin, January: 30–35.
2006. “Girugitto shutsudo no tensonkyō shahon danpen.” Tōkai Daigaku Kiyō Bungakubu 84: 
1–28.
Salomon, Richard. 2008. Two Gāndhārī Manuscripts of the Songs of Lake Anavatapta (Anavataptagāthā): British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragment 1 and Senior Scroll 14. Gandhāran Buddhist 
Texts 5. Seattle & London: University of Washington Press.
Sander, Lore. 2007. “Preliminary remarks on two versions of the Āṭānāṭīya(Āṭānāṭika-)Sūtra in Sanskrit,” Journal of the International College for Postgraduate Buddhist Studies 11: 159–196.
Shōno, Masanori. 2012. “Vinayavibhaṅga no shinshutsu bonbun shahon dankan” (“A Newly 
Identified Sanskrit Fragment of the Vinayavibhaṅga in the Private Collection, Virginia”), 
Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū / Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 61.1, 328–324(191–
195).
Stuart, Daniel Malinowski. 2013. Thinking About Cessation: The Pṛṣṭhapālasūtra of the Dīrghāgama in Context. Wien: Arbeitskreis fü̈r Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien.
Wille, Klaus. 1990. Die handschriftliche Überlieferung des Vinayavastu der Mūlasarvāstivādin, 
Stuttgart: Steiner Verlag (Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, 
Suppl.-Bd. 30).
Yao, Fumi. 2013a. Konponsetsuissaiuburitsu ‘Yakuji’: An annotated translation. Tokyo: Rengō 
shuppan.
2013b. “A Brief Note on the Newly Found Sanskrit Fragments of the Bhaiṣajyavastu of the 
Mūlasarvāstivāda-vinaya,” Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū / Journal of Indian and Buddhist 
Studies 61.3, 1130–1135(72–77).

--- Page 178 of 425 ---


--- Page 179 of 425 ---
The Schøyen Collection
JENS BRAARVIG (OSLO)
One of the more significant bodies of manuscript finds surfacing around the recent turn of 
the millennium is now part of the Schøyen Collection in Norway. The study of this collection, most of which is thought to have originated in a cave in the Bāmiyān Valley near 
the colossal Buddha statues demolished by the Taliban authorities in March 2001, has 
brought us numerous new insights into the history of Buddhism, even though there are 
many issues relating to the collection which as yet have barely been touched upon or not 
addressed at all. A considerable number of identifications, transliterations and editions 
have been produced in the three volumes so far published in the series Buddhist Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection (BMSC), which will soon be followed by a fourth. However, even though many Buddhist scholars specializing in various subfields of the discipline have participated in the BMSC project, there is still a long way to go, not only in 
identifying fragments and editing them, but also in analyzing the material in its broader 
historical context.
One of the reasons for the slow progress of this undertaking is that the material is very 
voluminous: more than 10,000 fragments altogether, most of them admittedly very small, 
ranging from less than a square centimetre up to complete folios, but often able to be put 
together and reconstructed into more sizable chunks of text, work which inevitably progresses quite slowly. Another reason is the size of the collection in terms of number of texts: 
more than 40 identified titles, as can be seen from Appendix I, which lists the texts published in the first four volumes (BMSC i, ii, iii, iv: 2000, 2002, 2006, 2013). To this 
number one has to add the as yet unknown titles of the texts to which all the unidentified 
fragments belong, including texts difficult or impossible to identify due to the fact that no 
parallels are extant, either in Pāli or in Sanskrit, and there are no known translations into 
Tibetan or Chinese.
The texts that have been identified span practically all the genres of classical Buddhist 
literature, though the philosophical commentaries, which occupy such an important 
position in the Tibetan and to a lesser extent the Chinese canon, are practically nonexistent 
as compared with sūtras (and the Āgamas in general), Mahāyāna sūtras, Vinaya, Jātaka, 
Avadāna, and Abhidharma works. What conclusion should be drawn from this is uncertain, 
but it may be connected to the fact that such philosophical Śāstras by celebrated learned 
Buddhist scholars like Nāgārjuna, Vasubandhu and Dharmakīrti were cherished rather in 
the élite institutions of Central North India, and even further to the west in Kashmir and 
old Gandhāra. There is one notable exception, a complete and nicely preserved folio of a 
Mīmāṃsā work, which is also the only non-Buddhist work so far identified in the find 
(BMSC ii: 269ff.). There are, however, a number of Abhidharma works, but they are sometimes very difficult to identify with particular texts extant in other canons, because of their 
fragmentary state and because of the nature of their contents, consisting often mostly of 
Abhidharmic concept lists.
Thus the Schøyen Collection probably represents a more popular or even mainstream 
form of Buddhism, as practised by travellers along the Silk Road. Though of course 
famous travellers like Xuanzang went to India through Bāmiyān, and doubtless many 
Indian Buddhist missionaries well acquainted with Buddhist philosophy went to Central 
Asia and China by this route, the monks and laymen catering to the spiritual needs of 
travellers seem rather to have given priority to producing and reproducing manuscripts of 
the more famous sūtras, probably seen as good protection on the dangerous voyage. Thus 
we find many fragments of the Ratnakeṭudhāraṇī, the Saṃghāṭasūtra, the Bhaiṣajyaguru-

--- Page 180 of 425 ---
158
JENS BRAARVIG
sūtra, and the Vajracchedikā — the last three of which are the only texts in the collection 
existing in complete, or almost complete, versions. They are all fairly late, mostly from the 
7th–8th centuries, and written on birch bark, and one might surmise that mass production 
of such texts may have been the basis of votive gifts for luck, good fortune and meritorious 
acts –indeed the formulae referring to the accumulation of merit by remembering, reading 
and copying these texts are important parts of them. And the traveller might thus have felt 
protected by the so-called Buddha of medicinal healing, Bhaiṣajyaguru, and the magical 
instrument of the vajra may have been considered as useful as the protective dhāraṇī of 
the Ratnakeṭu.
But this does not explain the collection as a whole, since indeed the fragments date from 
a very long period, from the 1st or 2nd century CE until the 8th. The earliest fragments 
typically include more examples in Kharoṣṭhī writing, while with time the Brāhmī fragments become much more numerous, and the latest Kharoṣṭhī fragments are probably not 
later than the 4th century. The oldest examples of Brāhmī writing in the collection are from 
the 2nd century, and probably represent the oldest extant manuscript material written in 
Brāhmī, apart from inscriptions on stone, etc. The switch to Brāhmī writing coincides with 
attempts to formalize and canonize Buddhism in the first and second century CE, and may 
have been part of the Sanskritization of Buddhism, as the Brāhmī writing system may have 
been more suited to the complex ligatures of Sanskrit (see BMSC i: 285ff. for a treatment 
of some of the writing systems). During the time span which the collection covers we can 
in this manner follow a development from more Prakritic language to the more general 
“Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit” of the later texts. The older fragments are few compared with 
the later ones.
There is also a marked change in the use of writing material. The earliest fragments are 
written solely on palm leaves, while from the 6th century birch bark gradually takes over, 
and the palm leaves disappear from the collection. This is probably due to the fact that the 
oldest texts were produced further southeast, where palm leaves, found in abundance, were 
traditionally used for writing manuscripts, and that later birch bark, easily available in the 
northwest, was employed when manuscripts were produced there.
The changes in writing material and the great number of scripts — one might say that 
the collection somehow represents a course in the development of northwestern Brāhmī 
writing, containing examples from the 2nd to the 8th centuries — can be used as an 
argument that the collection was preserved for many centuries, and that therefore it must 
have belonged to a stable institution with continuous political support. We do not have any 
way of deciding what this institution was, but the Great Buddhas and the other archaeological remains at the site are evidence that Buddhism was well supported over a very long 
period. Indeed Xuanzang reports that Bāmiyān had more than ten monasteries and more 
than a thousand monks in the the third decade of the 7th century when he visited the place 
and described the Great Buddhas and their rich ornamentation. The terminus ad quem, as 
represented by the dating of the latest writing style to about 800 CE, coincides with the 
demise of Buddhism in the area, when the region which today is called Afghanistan 
gradually was Islamized. There is some reason to think that the collection was destroyed a 
long time ago, since fragments from widely separated time periods were found in the same 
lumps of clay which were taken apart during our preservation work, indicating that these 
clay lumps were formed at the destruction of the collection. Another indication of an early 
date of destruction is the very fragmentary remains of the Sukhāvatīvyūha, where the 
different fragments have a variety of shades due to being exposed to light differently over 
time (in the publication in BMSC ii, plates ix,1–3, the colours have been normalized).
The find-spot of the collection is, so far we as can ascertain, a cave 1.2 kilometres west 
of the Great Buddhas in the Bāmiyān valley. This information was given to us by Martin

--- Page 181 of 425 ---
The Schøyen Collection
159
Schøyen, who had it from those who sold him the fragments. The London antiquities 
dealer Sam Fogg was, according to our information, the principal purveyor of the fragments. How they were brought to this dealer is uncertain. The description of the find-spot 
was corroborated to a significant extent by the findings of the mission of Kazuya Yamauchi, who photographed the caves in the small locality called Zargaran, where he also 
interviewed local people who spoke about the manuscripts found ten years previously (see 
BMSC iii, plates i and ii). Proper archaeological investigation of the find-spot is definitely 
a desideratum.
But this brings us to the question of what this very sizable number of fragments, found 
in one place, in a cave, really is. One possibility is that the fragments are the remains of a 
much larger library, which collected a great variety of manuscripts during a long period of 
time, and which was moved to the cave from a nearby monastery at a time of crisis. The 
texts of a monastery are traditionally kept in an annex to the temple altar, and they may 
have been moved from such a setting. Many of the texts also seem to be affiliated with the 
Mahāsāṃghika school, as argued by several of the contributors in the BMSC series on the 
basis of comparisons with other materials and linguistic criteria. Even though this cannot 
be shown with certainty, we can say that our fragments may have belonged to what was the 
library of a Mahāsāṃghika institution, but that it was scarcely forbidden for a Buddhist 
institution of one school to own texts from other schools. The so-called “Mahāyāna Manuscript” (BMSC i) and the strong presence also of other Mahāyāna materials in the collection, including the numerous fragments documenting the popularity of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīka, may be connected to the statement in the doxographical treatises describing the 
traditional sects that the Mahāsāṃghikas accepted the Mahāyāna literature as part of their 
canonical collection, and this may also be an indication of a Mahāsāṃghika connection. 
But as touched upon above, Buddhist texts at most times have also been used as charms 
and protection against evil, thus a single leaf may be as potent as a whole text, and it may 
be that the placing of such a collection of leaves in a cave was an attempt to save the 
material for such purposes after the demise of the stable institution in which the texts were 
properly taken care of, as is indeed the tradition of Buddhism in most periods and localities. However, we know nothing about an ordered library, and if the texts belonged to such 
an institution, we also do not know anything about how a supposedly more ordered 
collection of books might have ended up in the cave — since in no case do we have more 
than a few complete leaves and fragments from lengthy manuscripts with many texts in 
them. One of these is the aforementioned “Mahāyāna Manuscript,” containing a number of 
Mahāyāna texts, a few leaves of which are extant and published in BMSC i, where the 
page numbers run into the hundreds. Also the fragments of the Bodhisattvapiṭaka must 
have belonged to a sizeable manuscript, this text being very voluminous.
This is more or less our very deficient state of knowledge about the context of the 
collection, and it must, unfortunately, be regarded as purely hypothetical. Hopefully further 
archaeological investigations in the Bāmiyān area may produce more solid evidence.
We have mentioned the changes in writing systems and styles, as well as the use of 
various writing materials, but it is in the continuities and discontinuities of Buddhist textual traditions that the collection gives us our most important insights, as to how in 
changing times and places the adherents of Buddhism constructed and reconstructed their 
spiritual heritage as text. It is clear to anybody who has spent some time studying Buddhist 
texts that they are constructed on the basis of a sort of “cut and paste” principle. This has 
often been explained by the fact that Buddhist teachings were in the beginning handed 
down by oral tradition and mnemonic repetition, before Buddhists started to fully exploit 
the powerful new medium of writing to promulgate their religion. However, even in 
writing, there is much borrowing of motifs, names and phrases which are continually

--- Page 182 of 425 ---
160
JENS BRAARVIG
remixed to fashion new texts, making the canonical literature of Buddhism enormous, but 
built upon a common stock of themes and expressions. As our knowledge of Buddhist 
history is fragmentary (as fragmentary indeed as the collection in question!) it is impossible to map the great multiplicity of sects and schools of Buddhism completely and correctly, but the Schøyen Collection has provided us with additional pieces of information to 
at least understand better the principles of these transformative historical processes, given 
that several versions of important texts have been found in the collection in their ancient 
Indic forms, and no longer simply in their Chinese translations. The Schøyen Collection 
also gave us our first glimpses into early Mahāyāna texts, such as the Aṣṭasāhasrikā, the 
Bhadrakalpika and the Bodhisattvapiṭaka, the latter two in Kharoṣṭhī script, also revealed 
as a medium of Mahāyāna promulgation. However, these finds have now been sensationally overshadowed by the Kharoṣṭhī Prajñāpāramitā from the first century CE (see the article 
by H. Falk and I. Strauch in this volume).
Writing materials in the collection are mostly palm leaf and birch bark, but there are also 
a few fragments written on leather, and these are even quite early texts. It is of course a 
durable material, and fit for use when travelling, a need one might expect was there along 
the Silk Road. We also find in the collection another writing material, namely copper, a 
writing material which was used for documents of great importance. For example, there is 
a tradition that the Mahāvibhāṣā was written on copper plates, containing the “correct 
Buddhism” of the Vaibhāṣika faction, supposedly victorious in the discussion during the 
Kaṇiṣka Council around 100 CE — at least according to Vaibhāṣika historiography. Thus 
there is every reason to believe that the copper scroll in the Schøyen Collection (BMSC iii) 
was regarded as an important document, and it even had to do with a king: Apart from 
containing the Śrīmatībrāhmaṇīparipṛcchā and the introduction to the Madhyamakakārikāḥ, it also contains a piece of kāvya praising the Alchon Hun King Toramāṇa, who 
dedicated a stūpa to Mahāyāna Buddhism in a town called Śāradīysa in Mehama, probably 
in northern Afghanistan, then Bactria. The Hūṇa king in question lived in the 5th or 6th 
century (see BMSC iii: 261–62), and evidently some of the Huns were not simply persecutors of Buddhism.
There is also an interesting leather fragment demonstrating the wide multilingual spread 
of Buddhism — the fragment (BMSC i) describes in Bactrian language and writing 
(derived from Greek prototypes) how the merit accrued should be shared by all the family 
members as a result of the homage paid to Śākyamuni, Dīpaṃkara, Lokeśvara, Sumerukūṭa, Candrabhānu, Ratnakottama, and many other Buddhas, with a clear flavour of “Sukhāvatī” style of beliefs.
As mentioned, the collection has provided us with a new version of the Vajracchedikā 
— even though this popular sūtra in this version is not particularly ancient compared with 
many of the other copies extant, it is still one of our oldest versions in Sanskrit — and with 
the Gilgit copy it represents what Paul Harrison aptly calls a “Greater Gandhāran version 
of the text,” from about the 7th century. The Schøyen version starts from the beginning of 
the text but the end is lost, while the end of the Gilgit version is preserved and not the 
beginning; thus the two manuscripts together make a complete text, particularly interesting 
since the two versions are very similar, and distinctly different from the Nepalese versions 
and those preserved in the later Sino-Tibetan blockprints (see BMSC iii). Another Sūtra 
important in respect of textual continuity is the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā, of which 
fragments from the Kuṣāṇa era are found in the collection (BMSC i: 1ff.). The fragments 
clearly contain more Prakrit forms than the later known versions of this text, mainly from 
Nepal, but the Kuṣāṇa version still appears to be much closer to the early Chinese versions, 
whether they are translated from another Indic textual tradition or are just a free translation. Also the heavily Prakritizised (or Gāndhārized!) Kharoṣṭhī fragments of the Bodhi-

--- Page 183 of 425 ---
The Schøyen Collection
161
sattvapiṭaka from probably the 2nd or 3rd century CE provide insight into textual continuity. The Lhasa version (i.e. the 11th-century northern Indian tradition) of the Bodhisattvapiṭaka presents the corresponding portions of the text in “normalized” Buddhist Hybrid 
Sanskrit, but still the texts are fairly similar in word order and concepts. The Bodhisattvapiṭaka fragments from around 500 as published in BMSC iii unfortunately do not correspond to the Kharoṣṭhī fragments, but compared with the Lhasa version, they belong to a 
distinct line of copyists or revisers, to judge from the differences in the extant material. 
From the perspective of continuity the quite well-preserved Kuṣāṇa fragments of the 
Caṅgīsūtra (BMSC i & ii) represent a text not too different in structure from the Pāli 
version, but clearly it is a very different version, and it demonstrates the diversity of Buddhist literature at such a relatively early point in time.
An example in the collection of discontinuity in the Buddhist literary tradition is the 
Satyakasūtra (BMSC iv). Now Satyaka is a heterodox teacher, probably to be identified 
historically with some Jaina personality, and as such he is one who is vanquished by the 
superior arguments of the Buddha, and also punished by divine agency with a vajra, in this 
context the lightning, personified as Vajrapāṇi. There is also an elephant involved in some 
of the versions. These motifs appear in many versions, but the version appearing in the 
Schøyen Collection is evidently not the same as any of the others — they are also very 
different. Thus the Pāli version is different from the Mahāyāna stories about Satyaka, but 
none of them seems to contain the few sentences found in the Schøyen fragment, which 
we, with some liberty, call a Satyakasūtra. So in this context one may well ask what the 
identity of a text is, in the way of problematizing whether texts are “the same” or not, when 
they share names, titles, motifs or narrative structures. This is definitely something to take 
into account when describing the history of Buddhist literature, even Buddhist history as a 
whole, since much of the study of Buddhist history is closely connected to events where 
the canon and its texts are constructed and reconstructed.
We have mentioned above some examples of continuities and discontinuities in the 
textual tradition related to the Schøyen Collection, but much research remains to be done 
to interpret the historical counterparts of these changes in the broader context of the 
general history of Buddhism, its ideologies and schools and their social conditions. Given 
the collection’s size, the time span of its production, and its multiplicity of genres and 
titles, it naturally also contains a sizable amount of unique materials not extant anywhere 
else in Sanskrit or any other Indic language. Large portions of the material are not yet 
identified, but there are definitely examples of fragmentary works which belong to 
traditions and schools which are neither known nor possible to describe by comparing 
them with later literature. An interesting example of this is the scholastic commentary from 
the 2nd century (BMSC ii).
The scholarly work on the Schøyen Collection was started in the late 1990s when Lore 
Sander made an initial review of 108 fragments acquired by the abovementioned Sam 
Fogg, producing a preliminary description of the materials and dating the fragments on the 
basis of palaeographical criteria. In December 1996, at the An Shigao conference in Leiden 
convened at the IIAS by Paul Harrison, a project editorial committee was formed consisting of Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Kazunobu Matsuda and myself. It was also decided at that 
meeting to ask Lore Sander to join the committee, and to put Richard Salomon in charge of 
editing the Kharoṣṭhī materials in the collection. Later Paul Harrison was also invited to 
join the committee. At the beginning of 1997 contact was made with Martin Schøyen, who 
generously made the material available to the group. In that same year, during which a 
large quantity of new fragments were also acquired by Mr. Schøyen, the process of sorting 
the fragments according to script-type and giving them a reference number was largely 
completed. Most of the work of identifying which texts the fragments belong to has been

--- Page 184 of 425 ---
162
JENS BRAARVIG
done by Kazunobu Matsuda and Klaus Wille, the former on the basis of his knowledge of 
the Chinese translations of the texts, the latter on the basis of his great command of 
Buddhist literature in Sanskrit.
Martin Schøyen has done his best to acquire all the materials from Bāmiyān systematically and completely, but some of the materials were also acquired by other collections, 
viz., the Hayashidera and Hirayama Collections in Japan. The participants in the publication process are naturally very grateful that the materials in the Schøyen Collection could 
be completed in this way (for more on the relationship between these collections and the 
Schøyen Collection, see the contribution of K. Matsuda in this volume.)
The editorial committee has also done its best to facilitate participation in the project by 
everybody with the ability to work with such materials, inviting them to publish in the 
series dedicated to the collection, Buddhist Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection 
(BMSC). In the academic year 2001–2002 the project work received a major financial 
grant which made it possible to work very efficiently on the collection in a collaborative 
fashion in the Centre for Advanced Study at the Norwegian Academy of Science and 
Letters in Oslo. Other financial supporters of the work have been Bukkyō Daigaku 
(Kyōto), where several editorial meetings have been conducted on the initiative of Kazunobu Matsuda, partly financed by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science. The 
Norwegian Research Council has contributed to the printing of the first three volumes of 
the BMSC series.
Another outcome of the BMSC project has been an initiative of The Supreme Patriarch 
of Thailand, the Venerable Phradhamsitthinayok, to make an exhibition of the most important materials from the collection, so as to make the Buddhist manuscript heritage available 
to a greater public in Thailand. With a grant from the Supreme Patriarch a replica exhibition was made on the basis on the publications in BMSC i–iii by Fredrik Liland, since to 
put the actual manuscript fragments on exhibition is not advisable. However, three original 
fragments, or rather almost complete leaves, viz., one from the Mahāyāna manuscript, one 
from the Caṅgīsūtra and one from a still unpublished “Story Collection,” were put on 
display in a stūpa-style construction in the exhibition hall. The exhibition was very 
beautifully arranged by the Thai collaborators, it drew a very large public, and received 
great attention from the Thai press. The original fragments mentioned were handed over to 
His Excellency Major General Sanan Kajornprasart, Deputy Prime Minister of the 
Kingdom of Thailand, in a ceremony at Oslo University Library on the 6th of November 
2010, and were brought to Thailand by him, where they were ceremonially placed in the 
exhibition with the participation of all involved in the project. A catalogue, Traces of 
Gandhāran Buddhism (Jens Braarvig and Fredrik Liland, Oslo and Bangkok 2011), has 
been published and contains the whole exhibition. It has been a particular pleasure to 
produce the exhibition, since this to some extent fulfils the wish of Martin Schøyen to 
display his manuscript materials to a greater public.
Still another, and unexpected, outcome of research on the Schøyen Collection has been 
that it has focussed interest on problems of academic freedom and expression. Several 
members of archaeological circles in Norway and Britain have, in the noble cause of trying 
to stop illegal trade in antiquities, criticized scholars editing, among other materials, the 
Buddhist manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection. This criticism reached its climax in 
September 2004, when the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation made a prime-time 
programme criticizing the acquisition of and research on the materials, with support from 
the abovementioned archaeology specialists, but also with the full cooperation of the 
research group, even though the resulting programme contained many gross errors and was 
not perceived as entirely fair either to Martin Schøyen or to the researchers. The stand of 
the editorial committee of the Schøyen Collection has been, and remains, that scholars

--- Page 185 of 425 ---
The Schøyen Collection
163
have the right and duty to study and document history in accordance with the principle of 
freedom of expression, in the same way as journalists have the right and duty to document 
the present to the best of their ability, truthfully, and also in accordance with the principle 
of freedom of expression. This is also the view of the Norwegian National Committee for 
Research Ethics in the Social Sciences and the Humanities (report, June 2005), the Board 
of the International Association for Buddhist Studies (resolution, September 2005) and 
other entities that have expressed views on the publication of the Schøyen Collection. The 
Afghan authorities, by their Ambassadors to Norway and to France, also declared their 
support for the research group in a declaration made in September 2005 (BMSC iii: xiii–
xiv). After this Martin Schøyen returned a representative selection of the manuscript 
materials to the Kabul Museum.
The editorial committee also contends that identifying, describing and editing such 
materials make them identifiable also in a broader setting — and more difficult to acquire 
and trade illegally, even though such descriptions may also have the side effect of increasing the value of the material. But such an increase in value also increases the interest in 
preservation, even though it may also create a danger of yet more tragic and deplorable 
thefts and plundering from unprotected archaeological sites, mostly in poor and unfortunate states and during wars and crises. Clearly it is best that established public institutions, 
ideally in the countries of origin of the heritage materials in question, should be the owners 
and custodians of such materials, the intrinsic value of which is really cultural and 
historical rather than monetary. Such ownership is most of all a political, legal and 
economic question, and should be dealt with by the relevant institutional entities, i.e., 
political, legal and economic bodies. Even so, the academic community should provide 
advice in these matters, and help create dialogue with states and localities where cultural 
heritage objects may have been illegally acquired, so that stable and generally accepted 
ownership arrangements may be systematically established, and so that cultural, public and 
academic interests can be served in and by the endeavour to understand the history and 
development of humanity. Rich nations also have a responsibility to help poorer nations to 
preserve their cultural heritage and to build protective systems to safeguard it in the 
country of its origin, on the understanding that the heritage of each nation is also part of 
the birthright of the whole world.
Appendix I: List of titles so far published, including BMSC iv, planned 2013
Brāhmī:
Ajātaśatrukaukṛtyavinodanāsūtra: BMSC i & ii
Andhasūtra: BMSC ii
Avadānaśataka: BMSC iii
Aśokāvadāna: BMSC i
Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā: BMSC i & ii
Uruvelasūtra: BMSC iv
Karmavācanā: BMSC ii & iii
Kavikumārāvadāna: BMSC ii
Kāvya: BMSC iii
Gauravasūtra: BMSC iv
Caṅgīsūtra: BMSC i & ii
Candrottarādārikāvyākaraṇa: BMSC ii
Jātakamālā, Āryaśūra: BMSC ii & iv
Jātakamālā, Haribhaṭṭa: BMSC ii
Jyotiṣkāvadāna: BMSCii & iv
Dānasūtra: BMSC iv

--- Page 186 of 425 ---
164
JENS BRAARVIG
Dharmapada (Mahāsāṃghika): BMSC iv
Nagaropamasūtra: BMSC iv
Prasādapratibhodbhava, Mātṛceṭa: BMSC ii
Prātimokṣa-Vibhaṅga (Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādin): BMSC i, ii, iii & iv
Bodhisattvapiṭakasūtra: BMSC iii
Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra: BMSC iv
Madhyamakakārikā (introductory verses only): BMSC iii
Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra: BMSC ii
Mahāvastu: BMSC iv
Mahāsamājasūtra: BMSC iii
Maitreyavyākaraṇa: BMSC iii
Ratnaketuparivarta: BMSC iv
Lalitavistara: BMSC iv
Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā: BMSC iii
Varṇārhavarṇa, Mātṛceṭa: BMSC ii
Viśeṣavatīdhāraṇī: BMSC iv
Śalyasūtra: BMSC iv
Śāriputrābhidharma: BMSC ii
Śikhālakasūtra: BMSC iii
Śrīmatībrāhmaṇīparipṛcchā: BMSC iii
Śrīmālādevīsiṃhanādanirdeśa: BMSC i
Saṃghāṭasūtra: BMSC iv
Satyakasūtra: BMSC iv
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra: BMSC ii
Samāgamasūtra : BMSC iv
Samādhirājasūtra: BMSC ii
Sarvadharmāpravṛttinirdeśa: BMSC i & iii
Sukhāvatīvyūhasūtra: BMSC ii
Kharoṣṭhī:
Bodhisatvapiṭakasūtra: BMSC iv
Bhadrakalpikasūtra: BMSC iv
Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra: BMSC i
Sarvapuṇyasamuccayasamādhisūtra: BMSC iv
Bactrian:
Buddhist Manuscript: BMSC i
Note: There are quite a number of fragments not yet identified or studied, some of them from 
Abhidharma texts, Avadānas and Āgama texts as well as Prajñāpāramitās and other Sūtras. 
Preliminary identifications of some the unpublished fragments place them in versions of the 
Udakopamāsūtra, Kodhanasūtra, Gandhasūtra, Daśabalasūtra, Daśottarasūtra, Pradakṣiṇagāthā, 
and Mahāsudarśanasūtra.
Appendix II: Contributors to the four volumes
M. Allon, S. Baums, J. W. Borgland, J. Braarvig, T. Brekke, Jin-il Chung, M. Demoto, S. 
Dietz, A. Glass, M. Hahn, P. Harrison, J.-U. Hartmann, A. Iwamatsu, S. Karashima, Bori 
Kim, E. Legittimo, F. Liland, T. Lenz, Qian LIN, K. Matsuda, G. Melzer, O. Qvarnström, 
R. Salomon, L. Sander, S. Sasaki, L. Schmithausen, M. Shono, J. Silk, P. Skilling, A. 
Skilton, H. Toda, V. Tournier, Chanwit Tudkaeo, S. Watanabe, K. Wille, N. Sims-Williams, 
N. Yamagiwa.

--- Page 187 of 425 ---
Japanese Collections of Buddhist Manuscript Fragments from the Same 
Region as the Schøyen Collection
KAZUNOBU MATSUDA (KYOTO)
Early in 1997 a project group was formed to study Mr. Martin Schøyen’s collection of 
Buddhist manuscripts from Afghanistan. The group, initially four people, was eventually 
enlarged to five: Jens Braarvig (Oslo), Paul Harrison (Christchurch, later Stanford), JensUwe Hartmann (Munich), Lore Sander (Berlin) and myself. In collaboration with many 
other scholars, these five have already published three volumes in the series Buddhist 
Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection (BMSC). As one of the core members of the group, 
and as the only one participating from Japan, it occurred to me that there might well be 
similar manuscript collections in Japan. Consequently I was able to locate related Buddhist 
manuscript fragments in the following five Japanese collections and one research project. 
These manuscript fragments originated mainly from Afghanistan, with a portion of them 
coming from Pakistan. On this occasion I would like to provide a brief introduction to 
these materials. 
1. Hirayama Collection
The first collection is that of the late Professor Ikuo Hirayama (1930–2009). Professor 
Hirayama was a prominent Japanese painter and had many other achievements such as 
holding the posts of President of Tokyo National University of Fine Arts and UNESCO 
Goodwill Ambassador. He was also well known as a collector of Gandhāran Buddhist 
statues. Professor Hirayama established the private Institute of Silk Road Art and Archaeology and the Silk Road Museum. He happened to obtain a number of manuscripts from 
the same region as those in the Schøyen Collection (SC), which he came across while 
looking for statuary with dealers in London and Pakistan. The manuscripts in the Hirayama 
Collection fall into two groups according to their sources, the Bāmiyān Valley in Afghanistan and the Gilgit region in Pakistan. 1.1 is a list of the items from Bāmiyān. These are all 
presumed to be of the same origin as the Schøyen Collection. They include 26 Kharoṣṭhī 
fragments and 9 Brāhmī fragments. 
1.1 Manuscripts from Bāmiyān, same origin as the Schøyen Collection
1.1.1 26 Kharoṣṭhī fragments on palm leaves
1 fragment: Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra published in Allon and Salomon 2000
1 fragment: A commentary to the Ekottarikāgama or Vinaya
6 fragments: Bhadrakalpikasūtra, same manuscript as the 34 fragments 
(including small pieces) in the SC to be published in BMSC iv by Andrew 
Glass, Stefan Baums and me
18 fragments: unidentified
1.1.2 Nine Brāhmī fragments on palm leaves
1.1.2.1 1 Northeastern Gupta Brāhmī fragment: unidentified
1.1.2.2 6 Northwestern Gupta Brāhmī fragments on palm leaves
1 fragment: a treatise by Ācārya Buddhamitra (see below)
1 fragment: a Mahāyāna Pravāraṇāsūtra, same manuscript as that in the SC, 
published in Matsuda 2000
4 fragments: unidentified

--- Page 188 of 425 ---
166
KAZUNOBU MATSUDA
1.1.2.3 Two Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I (G/B I) fragments on palm leaves, one of which is 
from the Samādhirājasūtra, published in Skilton 2002
1.2 Manuscripts possibly from Gilgit
1.2.1 A complete birch-bark bundle of the Saṃghāṭasūtra, Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I script
1.2.2 Northwestern Gupta Brāhmī on linen or cotton fabric (a long dhāraṇī text)
1.2.3 Dīrghāgama (52 folios, folio nos. 330–363 and 367–384)
Regarding 3 folios nos. 364–366, see Bukkyo University Collection (No. 5 
below). This manuscript is in Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type II (G/B II) script, and is 
another part of the same Dīrghāgama manuscript kept in a private collection in 
Virginia (see the contribution by Jens-Uwe Hartmann in this volume).
I would like to introduce one fragment (“A treatise by Ācārya Buddhamitra”) from the 
Hirayama Collection which I consider to be very important. This is a small fragment in a 
Northwestern Gupta Brāhmī script dating back to the fifth century. It contains the colophon 
of the text. Recto line 2 has the chapter or section title “chapter/section 17 on the king/on 
kings ends.” It continues, saying, “… by a person who is a reciter of the Madhyama-
(āgama?) (or in the middle land?), a holder of the Vinaya,” and then in verso 1, “Ācārya 
Buddhamitra’s Mokṣa-u(padeśa?).” The first word of the title is Mokṣa, and the second 
word is assumed to be upadeśa. There are several people named Buddhamitra in Buddhist 
history. Among them the most famous figure is the Sarvāstivādin philosopher who was a 
teacher of Pārśva. Pārśva was the well-known Sarvāstivādin compiler of the Mahāvibhāṣā. 
There is no treatise by Buddhamitra that has come down to us, other than this small fragment. A similar fragment (MS 2378/9) has been published in BMSC ii by Richard 
Salomon (Salomon 2002), which implies that King Huviṣka was a follower of the Mahāyāna. Both fragments are similar in script and line and shape, and it is highly likely that 
they belong to the same text. The transliteration and partial translation are as follows:
recto
1 /// ・jayant[i] ・ kumudasvarasuba? ・ ///
2 /// ・ || rājavargo samāpta 17 || [❂] ///
3 /// .. madhyima(sic)bhāṇakena{ṃ} ・ vina[ya](dhareṇa?) /// 
verso
1 /// .. lena ācarrya(sic)Buddhamitrasya mokṣo.. ///
2 /// .. na upādhyāyinānaṃ samya-pu[ṇya] ///
3 /// [t]ilābhatāyaṃ? bhavatu ・ || likhitaṃ [ā] ///
r2 … chapter/section 17 on the king/on kings ends.
r3 … by a person who is a reciter of the Madhyama(āgama?) (or in the middle land?), a 
holder of the Vinaya ...
v1 … Ācārya Buddhamitra’s (treatise) “Mokṣa-u(padeśa?)”… (ends).
2. Hayashidera Collection
This is a small collection, consisting of 17 Kharoṣṭhī fragments and 33 Brāhmī fragments, 
belonging to a Japanese priest, the Reverend Genshū Hayashidera of Toyama prefecture, 
Japan. Unfortunately the Reverend Hayashidera passed away some years ago. He was a 
graduate of Ryukoku University, Kyoto. According to his wife, his collection will be 
donated to Ryukoku University in the near future. Among the Kharoṣṭhī fragments in this 
collection there is a small piece of the Bhadrakalpikasūtra. This means that the late 
Reverend Hayashidera’s collection is of the same origin as the Schøyen and Hirayama Col-

--- Page 189 of 425 ---
Japanese Collections of Buddhist Manuscript Fragments
167
lections. Furthermore, in this collection the most interesting item is No. 024. One side is 
inscribed in Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I script and the other side is written in Gilgit/Bāmiyān 
Type II. The Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I side contains unknown Buddhist stories, among them 
the story of a cat and a mouse. The Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type II side contains Āryaśūra’s 
Jātakamālā. To understand this complication, we have to take into account the fact that 
this manuscript folio consists of several layers of birch bark. My assumption is that the 
original folio with the Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I was once discarded, and it was later recycled 
by being split open to reveal its blank side, which was written with Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type 
II. Another folio of the same manuscript with Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I and Gilgit/Bāmiyān 
Type II sides is contained in the Schøyen Collection. Its Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type II side has 
been published in BMSC ii by Jens-Uwe Hartmann (Hartmann 2002). This folio (No. 024) 
will be published in BMSC iv by Jens-Uwe Hartmann and me.
2.1 17 small Kharoṣṭhī fragments on palm leaves including two Bhadrakalpikasūtra fragments (Nos. 045 and 046), from the same manuscript as the Schøyen 
and the Hirayama collections
2.2 33 Brāhmī fragments
2.2.1 Two Brāhmī birch-bark folios: 
No. 024: Side A (G/B II) Jātakamālā, Kern ed., p.165, line 1 to p.166, line 4. 
Side B (G/B I) Unknown Buddhist narrative text (containing inter alia the 
story of the bald man and other stories); there is another folio of the same 
manuscript in SC (MS 2381/57) of which side A has been published in 
Hartmann 2002. 
No. 025: Prologue section of a sūtra, cursive G/B I, unidentified
2.2.2 31 small Brāhmī fragments (palm leaves or birch-bark folios):
1 Kuṣāṇa fragment of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā, published by 
Sander in BMSC ii (Sander 2002)
4 Northeastern Gupta Brāhmī fragments
4 Northwestern Gupta Brāhmī fragments
22 G/B I fragments including one fragment (No. 018) from Mātṛceṭa’s 
Varṇārhavarṇastotra, one fragment (No. 020) from the Anāthapiṇḍada- and 
Subhadra-avadāna belonging to the same manuscript in SC (MS 2382/204g), 
one fragment (No. 026) from the same manuscript as the Sukhāvatīvyūha in 
SC, and one fragment (No. 030) from the Gandhasūtra. These fragments 
except for No. 026 have been identified by Jens-Uwe Hartmann.
3. Miho Museum Collection
The third collection is that of Miho Museum, a private museum in Shiga prefecture. The 
museum was established by one of Japan’s “new religions.” There are only two items, two 
texts from one complete bundle containing the Saṃghāṭasūtra and the Sarvagatipariśodhanoṣṇīṣavijayādhāraṇī, written in Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I script. These had previously 
been preserved in the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (see Batton 2000). Some years 
ago Miho Museum acquired these two items through a Japanese dealer.
3.1 A complete bundle of the Saṃghāṭasūtra, G/B I, birch-bark folios.
Cf. the contribution by O. von Hinüber in this volume, No. 1K.

--- Page 190 of 425 ---
168
KAZUNOBU MATSUDA
3.2 Sarvagatipariśodhanoṣṇīṣavijayā, G/B I, 7 birch-bark folios.
A Mahāyāna sūtra in prose including the Uṣṇīṣavijayādhāraṇī, identified by 
Gregory Schopen (see Batton 2000) and by Gudrun Melzer, corresponding to 
the Tibetan translation (Peking ed. Nos. 198 and 199). Cf. the contribution by 
O. von Hinüber in this volume, No. 2K.
4. Naka Collection
The fourth collection of fragments is that of the Japanese photographer Mr Atsushi Naka, 
who published a photo-essay Bāmiyān Afghanistan 2002 (in Japanese, Osaka 2002). In 
early summer of that year, Mr Naka had visited Bāmiyān to take photographs for his book. 
At that time he bought a cache of microfragments in a bazaar in the town of Bāmiyān. 
Most of the fragments are very small, but there are six more sizable fragments. Among 
those six, I found a fragment which, on the basis of script and format, appears to be 
another small piece of the Mahāyāna sūtra collection published by us in BMSC i. If my 
assumption is correct, this would be further confirmation of the origin of the Schøyen 
Collection.
5. Bukkyo University Collection
Bukkyo University, Kyoto, acquired a portion of the Dīrghāgama manuscript which covers 
folios 364–366 missing from the manuscript bundle in the Hirayama Collection. These 
three folios contain part of the “Śīlaskandha passages” in the Tridaṇḍisūtra, the first sūtra 
of the Śīlaskandha section (see contribution by Jens-Uwe Hartmann in this volume).
6. Project of the Tokyo National Research Institute for Cultural Properties
Kazuya Yamauchi, a researcher from the Tokyo National Research Institute for Cultural 
Properties, discovered several dozen micro birch-bark fragments in Bāmiyān caves F(a), 
J(a), J(b), J(c), M, S(a), S(c), group S and Z1 in 2003–2005. This discovery is the unexpected outcome of the joint conservation project for the Bāmiyān caves undertaken by 
Yamauchi’s institute and the Ministry of Information and Culture of the Islamic Republic 
of Afghanistan. This discovery might be considered important for only one reason, which 
is that a professional scholar himself unearthed the manuscript fragments in the Bāmiyān 
caves.
Yamauchi also visited Zargaran village, at the east end of the Bāmiyān Valley, where 
there is a cave which collapsed as a result of an earthquake or landslide. He heard from the 
villagers in Zargaran that many manuscript fragments had been discovered in this collapsed cave in the early nineties and had been sold to local dealers. It is very likely that this 
collapsed cave is the origin of the Schøyen and Japanese collections (see also Jens 
Braarvig et al., 2006: Plates I–II). Yamauchi’s institute has recently published a book on 
the manuscript fragments they discovered. This book focuses mainly on conservation work 
on the fragments, not on the contents of the fragments themselves. See Preliminary Report 
on the Conservation of the Bamiyan Birch Bark Buddhist Manuscripts, Tokyo 2009. 
Works Consulted and Abbreviations
Allon, Mark and Richard Salomon. 2000. “Kharoṣṭhī fragments of a Gāndhārī version of the Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra.” In Jens Braarvig et al., eds. Buddhist Manuscripts, Vol. I (Manuscripts in 
the Schøyen Collection I). Hermes Publishing: Oslo, 243–273.

--- Page 191 of 425 ---
Japanese Collections of Buddhist Manuscript Fragments
169
Batton, Susan Sayre. 2000. “Separation Anxiety: The Conservation of a 5th century Buddhist 
Gandharan Manuscript.” Available online at: http://www.asianart.com/articles/batton/
index.html.
BMSC = Buddhist Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection
Braarvig, Jens et al., eds. 2006. Buddhist Manuscripts, Vol. III (Manuscripts in the Schøyen 
Collection). Hermes Publishing: Oslo.
G/B I = Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I
G/B II = Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type II
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe. 2002. “Āryaśūra’s Jātakamālā.” In Jens Braarvig et al., eds. Buddhist 
Manuscripts, Vol. II (Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection III). Hermes Publishing: Oslo, 
313–322.
Matsuda, Kazunobu. 2000. “A Mahāyāna version of the Pravāraṇāsūtra.” In Jens Braarvig et al., 
eds. Buddhist Manuscripts, Vol. I (Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection I). Hermes 
Publishing: Oslo, 77–80.
Salomon, Richard. 2002. “A Fragment of a Collection of Buddhist Legends, with a Reference to 
King Huviṣka as a Follower of the Mahāyāna.” In Jens Braarvig et al., eds. Buddhist 
Manuscripts, Vol. II (Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection III). Hermes Publishing: Oslo, 
255–267.
Sander, Lore. 2002. “New Fragments of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā of the Kuṣāṇa Period.” In 
Jens Braarvig et al., eds. Buddhist Manuscripts, Vol. II (Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection III). Hermes Publishing: Oslo, 37–44.
SC = Schøyen Collection
Skilton, Andrew. 2002. “Samādhirājasūtra.” In Jens Braarvig et al., eds. Buddhist Manuscripts, Vol. 
II (Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection III). Hermes Publishing: Oslo, 97–177.

--- Page 192 of 425 ---


--- Page 193 of 425 ---
Dating and Localizing Undated Manuscripts
LORE SANDER (BERLIN)
The collections of manuscripts introduced at this workshop originate from different areas 
and times. They give us an idea about the immense productivity of the scribes who wrote 
and copied Buddhist texts in Indian vernaculars and scripts over centuries. Some manuscripts come from libraries, others from private collections. Many of them are of uncertain 
origin. Seldom are colophons preserved, which give in the best cases information about 
date and place, and by whom the manuscript was ordered. They are especially rare in early 
manuscripts when the manuscripts are incomplete. When little or nothing is known about 
where and when the manuscripts were written or copied, it is important to get an idea of 
their approximate age and the homeland of their scribes. But not only for this, it is also of 
importance for the history of Buddhism and for that of the missionary activities at certain 
times and in certain regions. Even more, dating and locating manuscripts enables us to get 
a glimpse of which Buddhist ideas were favoured at what time in which places. Furthermore, copies — and most of the texts preserved are copies — are able to show which texts 
were favoured in which periods and which locations. To give an approximate answer to all 
these questions, palaeographical studies are the only means, however vague the results 
may be. In recent years radiocarbon dating is an additional help for dating undated manuscripts. 
Except for the comparatively rare but early and most interesting manuscripts written in 
Kharoṣṭhī script, all manuscripts under discussion are written in the many different 
varieties of Indian Brāhmī used in countries under the cultural influence of India. The 
Brāhmī writing system is quite different from that of other scripts used in the northwestern 
area of ancient India, e.g., the Bactrian script, which is of Greek origin, and the Kharoṣṭhī, 
which was developed from Aramaic script. Brāhmī is a syllabic script running from left to 
right with an inherent vowel -a. The alphabet is arranged in strict phonological order. 
Brāhmī did not develop in a linear fashion; many local branches diverge from the main 
trunk, each being the source for local developments.1 But the underlying system of the 
script never changed, even when Brāhmī was adapted to non-Indian languages.2 The speed 
of development varies, depending on different factors, which are often not known. The 
only means to ascribe undated manuscripts to an approximate time and location is comparison with dated material, mainly inscriptions written in the same or a very similar type 
of script. 
Palaeographic analyses of manuscripts are often added to text editions, while comparative palaeographies are rare.3 Many local scripts are not sufficiently studied compared with 
the mass of material available,4 even though the work is made much easier by the computer. It is no longer so time-consuming to create akṣara charts, which are the basis for 
palaeographic work. Other auxiliary aids are internet portals like “Indoscript” (www.http://
userpage.fu-berlin.de/~falk/), developed at the universities of Halle and Berlin, which are 
able to give a first orientation for dating and localizing manuscripts. But the material 
available has increased a lot compared with pre-computer times, especially manuscripts. 
Furthermore, a growing number of manuscripts are digitized, which is positive because 
many more scholars are encouraged to work on them. But for palaeographic studies the 
manuscripts seem to be too many to be bundled into certain groups for comparative study. 
1 For details see Sander 2007: 122–126.
2 For studies in writing systems see Daniels and Bright 1996.
3 E.g. Sharma 2001. For critical remarks see Sander 2010: 95.
4 E.g. the dating of early Nepalese manuscripts still depends mainly on Bendall’s catalogue from 1883 
and the palaeography by Hemarāj Śākya from 1973.

--- Page 194 of 425 ---
172
LORE SANDER
The more material we have, the more difficult it is to find the red thread. Such palaeographies as the “Bühler” and Ahmad Hasan Dani’s palaeography, both based mainly on 
inscriptions dating not later than the 8th to 9th centuries, would be hardly possible to 
produce nowadays, but they are still very useful for an initial orientation. 
An advantage of the computer is that it allows more refined palaeographic work; e.g., 
the enlargement of akṣaras makes it clear how the akṣaras were written, which sometimes 
helps to explain the change of certain akṣaras in certain periods. Also such subtle observations as those by Gudrun Melzer on the practice of copying manuscripts are hardly 
possible without its help.5 Even though such observations on single manuscripts are very 
helpful and interesting for dating and localizing purposes, additional comparative observations are indispensable, such as which formats were preferred at what time, which writing 
materials were used and from where they originated, how the script was arranged on the 
folios, and how the books were organized. 
In the following I will raise some questions related to my topic using examples from 
Brāhmī manuscripts originating from the northwestern region of ancient India, namely 
those from the Schøyen Collection and the recently found Dīrghāgama manuscript written 
on birch bark. Parts of the latter are now kept in different private collections, mainly in 
USA and Japan. A few folios belong to the Schøyen Collection in Oslo.6 
The Dīrghāgama manuscript is a good example for demonstrating the limits of palaeographic research. As already mentioned above, dating manuscripts by palaeographic means 
is vague when it is not supported by comparison with dated material, which is mainly 
preserved in epigraphs. It comes to its limits when manuscripts are written in standard 
scripts, as the Dīrghāgama manuscript is. It is written in a type of Brāhmī which was 
named by Oskar von Hinüber “Protośāradā” and by me “Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type II” (Fig. 1).7 
According to different oral information the manuscript likely originates from Gilgit.8 The 
script,9 the writing material (birch bark), and the arrangement of the script on the folio 
speak in favour of the area around Gilgit as the place of origin, even though all these 
criteria are also met by many manuscripts originating from Bāmiyān. 
The manuscript is written on birch bark cut in palm-leaf format. Birch bark is the local 
writing material in all the northwestern regions of ancient India, i.e. modern Kashmir, 
Pakistan and Afghanistan. It is also the preferred writing material for the early Kharoṣṭhī 
manuscripts, most of which date from the Kuṣāṇa period or even earlier (c. late 1st to 2nd 
cent. CE).10 But unlike the later birch-bark manuscripts, such as that of the Dīrghāgama, 
the birch bark is pasted into scrolls, likely influenced by Hellenistic patterns. This format 
was no longer used when the Graeco-Roman influence faded away. The Kharoṣṭhī scrolls 
mainly originate from the eastern parts of the region named “Greater Gandhāra” by 
Richard Salomon (Jalālābād,11 Bajaur). At about the same time, or only a little later, the 
earliest Brāhmī manuscripts written on palm leaf may have been produced around 
Bāmiyān. Palm leaf had to be imported from the Indian subcontinent because palms do not 
5 Melzer 2007: 59–77. For details see the contribution by Hartmann and Wille in this volume, pp. 144
ff.
6 For further information see the contributions of Hartmann and Wille (pp. 137ff.) and Matsuda (pp. 
165 and 168).
7 For convenience I will use my term, even though both are problematic. For a discussion of the terms 
see Sander 2007: 129–131.
8 See the contribution of von Hinüber in this volume, p. 117.
9 For the problems of dating this script, which became a standard, likely originating from Bihar, cf. 
Sander 2007: 131–132. 
10 For detailed information cf. e.g. Salomon 1999: 115–124. See also the contributions of Harry Falk 
and Ingo Strauch, Collett Cox, and Richard Salomon in this volume.
11 Cf. Salomon 1999: 101–104.

--- Page 195 of 425 ---
Dating and Localizing Undated Manuscripts
173
grow in this area.12 It is most unlikely that the many remains of palm-leaf manuscripts 
written by different hands in Brāhmī types used in northern India during the time of the 
Kuṣāṇa and Gupta dynasties (2nd to the 5th cent. CE) were gifts from visiting monks 
coming from northern India. The best proof for the importation of the raw material are the 
many palm-leaf manuscripts written in the characteristic Brāhmī of this region, the “Gilgit/
Bāmiyān Type I.” Palimpsests indicate a shortage of the raw material, which would not be 
the case with material sourced locally. However, it is still puzzling why in certain regions, 
such as Bāmiyān, palm leaf was preferred to the local birch bark.13 It may well be that there 
the Indian influence was stronger, and that therefore palm leaf was regarded as a sacred 
material from the homeland of Buddhism, the Indian subcontinent. This assumption is supported by the habit of cutting birch bark in palm-leaf format, when, for unknown reasons, 
in about the 7th century CE palm-leaf manuscripts were replaced by birch-bark ones in the 
same region. 
Even though one group of “Gilgit manuscripts” as well as manuscripts from the 
Bāmiyān area are written in the same type of script as the Dīrghāgama is, Gilgit/Bāmiyān 
Type II, the use of this script goes far beyond the northwestern provinces. It does not even 
originate from there, even though Al Bīrūnī claims that what is likely the same script, 
named by him “Siddhamātṛkā,” originated from there.14 The oldest dated inscriptions come 
from Bihar and even in late inscriptions from Bihar dating from the 9th century CE the 
style of the script is the same as that of the Gilgit manuscripts, likely introduced into the 
western provinces around the 7th century CE.15 It became a standard script, which was 
used with variations all over northern India, Kashmir, “Greater Gandhāra,” Nepal, and 
Xinjiang between the 6th and the 11th centuries. Even nowadays it is used as the holy 
“siddham” script in China and Japan. This type of script was the basis for many Brāhmī 
types used in Eastern India and Nepal. It is nearly impossible to date such standard scripts 
with palaeographic means. As Melzer has demonstrated,16 the only akṣaras which underwent a change were ya, from the rare early tripartite form to the later modern form with a 
modified in-between shape 
 
 
, and ha, from the earlier ha written in line, in hu 
 
and hi only, to the later form 
 slightly slanting down. In the Dīrghāgama manuscript all 
three forms occur in the same manuscript. One may argue that some scribes engaged in 
copying the manuscripts preferred the old style or that the old tripartite form was still used 
because the manuscript is a copy from an older manuscript and that therefore only the 
youngest form is relevant for assigning its age. When I saw this manuscript for the first 
time in January 2000, I was inclined to place it in the 8th century CE at the earliest. Why? 
It was the ductus, which means nothing more than the general impression of the script 
used, supported by the size of the folios and the arrangement of the script on the poṭhishaped birch-bark leaf with a neatly defined square round the string-hole. All these factors 
together looked so similar to later Gilgit manuscripts. However, the origin and the possible 
date were nothing more than a guess, because precise palaeographic means for dating it 
were not available.
In more recent times the hope of scholars for dating the undated rests on radiocarbon 
analysis. Radiocarbon dates exist also for the Dīrghāgama manuscript. They were published by Mark Allon, Richard Salomon et al. on the basis of a radiocarbon dating ordered 
12 Cf. Sander 1991: 138 and 2010: 102.
13 The rare Kharoṣṭhī fragments in the Schøyen Collection are also written on palm leaf; cf. Allon et al. 
2006: 282–285, and Salomon in this volume.
14 Cf. Sander 2007: 127.
15 For details cf. Sander 1968: 159-161, and especially 2007: 131f.
16 See the detailed analysis of the scripts and the scribes in Melzer 2006: 59–77, rev. PDF version 
2010: 61–80.

--- Page 196 of 425 ---
174
LORE SANDER
by the manuscript dealer Sam Fogg.17 Does radiocarbon analysis really help to make the 
dating of undated manuscripts more precise? For the Dīrghāgama manuscript this is not 
the case. The dates with a probability of 90% range between 764–1000 CE. The time scale 
is as broad as the dates gained by palaeographic methods. I could recently make the same 
observations comparing the 14C dates of Tokharian manuscripts18 written in the standard 
scripts “North Turkestan Brāhmī Type a” and “North Turkestan Brāhmī Type b,”19 when 
taking the dates with the highest probability. These two examples demonstrate that 
radiocarbon dating of ancient manuscripts is often a welcome support for dates gained by 
palaeographic studies, when they are not restricted to the comparison of letters only, but 
also consider the other criteria already mentioned. 
Another standard script current in the same region is a “calligraphic ornate script,” 
named by me “Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I.” As far as I know, no manuscript written in this type 
of Brāhmī has been radiocarbon-tested. It became a local standard script in “Greater 
Gandhāra” between the 5th and 6th centuries CE.20 Around the 7th century it was superseded by the quite different Gilgit/Bamiyan Type II.21 Most manuscripts in the Schøyen 
Collection belong to Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I. The likely earlier ones are written on palm 
leaf, the later on birch bark.
The development towards this ornate local type can be followed from the Kuṣāṇa period 
onwards mainly in manuscripts from the region of Bāmiyān, the graffiti from the Upper 
Indus Valley,22 and to some extend in manuscripts and inscriptions from Nepal.23 The 
Brāhmī manuscripts from the “Turfan Collection” in Berlin reflect the same development 
up to approximately the 5th century CE (see Fig. 2).24 From then on the Tokharians on the 
northern and the Khotanese25 people on the southern route of the Silk Road developed their 
own characteristic scripts. No manuscript written in Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I is present 
among the manuscripts from both Silk Road routes, except from Dunhuang.26 In Gilgit this 
ornate script was mainly used for writing down or copying Mahāyāna texts. Was there any 
connection between Mahāyāna circles and the use of this script? This observation is only 
partly affirmed by the manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection, which contain a mixture of 
likely Mahāsāṃghika-related sūtras and commentaries, and Mahāyāna sūtras written in 
this script. A detailed study is still outstanding. The situation seems to confirm what is 
already known from Chinese sources, namely that the Mahāsāṃghikas were active in 
spreading Mahāyāna ideas and ideals. But when did the earliest Mahāyāna sūtras occur in 
17 Cf. Allon et al. 2005: 280, esp. note 3.
18 Cf. Tamai 2011: 370–375. It has to be noted that the Leibniz Laboratory made a mistake designating 
the material of SHT 810 as paper. It is the famous philosophical “Spitzer manuscript” written in Kuṣāṇa 
Brāhmī on palm leaf and published by Franco 2004. The same mistake in Yaldiz 2010: 1031.
19 They will be published in the proceedings of the symposium “Die Erforschung des Tocharischen 
und die alttürkische Maitrisimit” organized by the Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften in 2008.
20 As already pointed out in Sander 1968: 124–130.
21 The reason or reasons for a sudden or gradual replacement are mere suggestions. O. von Hinüber, 
working on the Gilgit manuscripts, tried to find historical reasons for this change. For references and 
discussion see Sander 2007: 129–131.
22 See the series Jettmar 1989, 1993, 1994 and MANP.
23 Cf. e.g. Śākya 1973, Pl. 24. Between the 2nd to 5th centuries CE similar Brāhmī types occur in 
graffiti scratched on the walls of a holy cave on the island of Suquṭra in Yemen; see e.g. StrauchBukharin 2004: 133 [13]: T 32, which is an example with the characteristic fourth-century ma (dharmmo) 
of the northwest.
24 Only the first half (A) of the table (Sander 1968: 12–123) is reprinted here to give an example of the 
gradual development from the Kuṣāṇa (alphabet c) via the Gupta period (alphabets i and k) to the Gilgit/
Bāmiyān Type I (Gilgit Mss) in the area in question. For details see Sander 1968: 121–136 and 2010: 95–
106.
25 For the southern Silk Road see Sander 2005: 133–144.
26 Cf. e.g. Stein 1921 IV: Pl. CXLII.

--- Page 197 of 425 ---
Dating and Localizing Undated Manuscripts
175
the different collections? According to the recent manuscript finds, it is the 1st to 3rd 
centuries CE that fragments of Mahāyāna Sūtras occur among Kharoṣṭhī27 and Brāhmī 
fragments alike. Among the Brāhmī manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection, for example, 
we find the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā written on palm leaf in a later type of Kuṣāṇa 
Brāhmī, possibly dating from the 3rd century CE. Another interesting point is that many 
unidentified commentaries and Abhidharma texts seem to be among the oldest manuscripts 
from the Kuṣāṇa period.28 The same literary preference is known from early palm-leaf 
manuscripts from Qizil and Šorčuq,29 where this preference can be connected with the 
leading position of the Sarvāstivādins for Abhidharmic studies. Unlike the finds in the 
oases on the northern route of the Silk Road, most of the manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection are probably connected with the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādins. Because Vinaya 
manuscripts are basic for assigning texts to certain Buddhist schools, it is useful to look for 
the oldest occurrence of Vinaya fragments in the collection. It is a manuscript written in an 
early Gupta type likely dating from the 4th century CE. Two fragmentary folios of this 
manuscript were identified and published by Seishi Karashima.30 They comment on 
pācittika rules of the Prātimokṣa Vibhaṅga of the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādins. The 
question of which literary subjects were preferred at what time can hardly be answered 
before many more fragments in the collection are identified and published, therefore my 
observations on the earliest manuscripts can only point to a tendency. However, it is worth 
keeping the question of literary preferences in mind, because it is important for the spread 
of Buddhist ideas to the East.
Finally, I will turn to another topic, which is part of the history of the Schøyen Collection. The basis for localizing the manuscripts in the collection were photos which were 
kindly given to me by Professor Helmut Humbach and the late Professor Herbert Härtel, 
when I wrote my PhD thesis.31 They took these photos in the late 1950s in the Kabul 
Museum, long before it was plundered (see Figs. 3 and 12 for examples). In 2002 Professor Deborah Klimburg-Salter kindly gave me a third set, taken by her in the late 1970s. But 
this set did not differ from the first two, contrary to my expectations. When Professor 
Nicholas Sims-Williams sent me the first copies of the fragments which he saw in the shop 
of the manuscript dealer Sam Fogg in London in a letter dated 20th February 1995, I 
immediately remembered the photos from the Kabul museum. I suspected that the fragments were stolen from the Museum when it was destroyed by the Taliban. With great excitement, because a Prajñāpāramitā text in Kuṣāṇa Brāhmī was among the fragments,32 I 
compared the museum photographs with the copies Professor Nicholas Sims-Williams had 
sent me. The comparison of the Brāhmī types confirmed what I had already expected, 
namely that the manuscript samples originated from the area around Bāmiyān. I was 
relieved, but not really convinced, when I saw that these examples did not belong to the 
museum’s collection.33 As a matter of fact, we found damaged fragments from the Kabul 
Museum in Martin Schøyen’s much increased collection when we worked on it for the first 
time in 1998 (Figs. 4 and 5). Martin Schøyen immediately separated them from the other 
fragments, because he wanted to return them to the museum when the situation in 
Afghanistan became safer. By now, all fragments originating from the Kabul Museum have 
27 E.g. Strauch 2008: 123; cf. also the contributions by Richard Salomon and by Harry Falk and Ingo 
Strauch in this volume. 
28 Cf. Schmithausen 2002: 249–254.
29 Cf. Sander 1991: 141 and 1999: 79f.
30 2002: 215–228.
31 Sander 1968: IX and 124, note 211, and 2000b: 88.
32 It was later identified by Kazunobu Matsuda as belonging to the Aṣṭasāhasrikā. For details cf. 
Sander 2000b: 88–91 and 2002: 37–44.
33 Cf. Fogg 1996: 46, 47, 49.

--- Page 198 of 425 ---
176
LORE SANDER
been given back, and, as a sign of good will, Martin Schøyen has donated some more 
manuscripts from his collection to the museum. 
The fragments from the Kabul Museum were found in 1930 by Joseph Hackin in Grotto 
J (no. 6) east of the smaller of the two Great Buddhas at Bāmiyān.34 Nine fragments from 
the clod were published by Silvain Lévi already in 1932 in the Journal asiatique.35 In the 
following I will compare the fragments transliterated in Lévi’s article with the fragments 
on the photos. Because Gudrun Melzer has already worked on these fragments,36 I will 
only list what is known so far:
Lévi nos. 1–4 (Fig. 4 shows parts of side a of nos. 1–3; all fragments of side a are published 
by Lévi “Bamiyan.1”): Four unidentified Kuṣāṇa fragments possibly belonging to one 
and the same palm-leaf manuscript. No photograph in the Kabul Museum sets.
Lévi no. 5 (see Fig. 5, frag. 31, side b): Left part of a birch-bark folio containing an episode 
from the Vinaya of the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādins, according to Lévi in “Gupta 
characters.” Script: Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I.
Lévi no. 6 (Fig. 6, side b upper half): One fragmentary birch-bark leaf of the Saṅgītiparyāya 
written according to Lévi in “gupta tardif” dating from the 8th cent. CE; Script: Gilgit/
Bāmiyān Type II. No photograph in the Kabul Museum sets.
Lévi no. 7 (Fig. 12, frag. 34A): A small birch-bark fragment (Vinaya?) written in “Gupta 
characters.” It was identified by Oskar von Hinüber as the Bhikṣu-Vinaya of the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādins (BEI 4, 1986). Script: “Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I.”
Lévi no. 8: One small fragment, of which Lévi says that it belongs to the same manuscript as 
no. 9. Neither is identified. Lévi names the script “Slanting Gupta, Central Asian Type.” 
Script: likely Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I.
Lévi no. 9 ( Fig. 12, frag. 33A): One larger birch-bark fragment grouped by Lévi under 
“Slanting Gupta, Central Asian Type.” Script: Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I.
Comparing the fragments published by Lévi with the photo sets taken in the Kabul 
Museum, it is obvious that the following fragments are missing, which are Lévi nos. 1–4, 6 
and 8. They may have been placed together in one glass plate,37 which was not in the 
museum when the three sets of photos were taken. From the approximate dates when the 
earliest photo sets were shot, it is quite sure that this plate was already missing in the late 
1950s. Due to the joint efforts of Kazunobu Matsuda and Gudrun Melzer the debris from 
many missing fragments was found in the Schøyen Collection, except fragment 8.38 Only 
this much can be said with certainty: five of the formerly six plates with originals from the 
Hackin find were deposited in the Museum in Kabul after they were put between glass 
sheets, probably in Paris.
As already mentioned, the types of script in Hackin’s clod correspond with those of the 
manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection. Neither the glass plates from the Kabul Museum 
nor the fragments gathered between them were numbered. Therefore I gave the glass 
sheets the numbers 1 to 5, and the fragments enclosed the numbers 1 to 34 (e.g. Figs. 3 and 
12). In one place (Fig. 3, frag. 1) two fragments got only one number, because they 
34 Hackin 1959: 4.
35 Lévi 1932: 1–45.
36 She kindly sent me her transliterations and identifications. Quite a number of microfragments from 
the Schøyen Collection were identified by her as belonging to fragments on the photos; see note 38. 
37 Also assumed by Gudrun Melzer.
38 The following originals were found in the Schøyen Collection: Lévi, no. 4 = no. 2373/3; Lévi, no. 9 
could be reconstructed by Gudrun Melzer from the following fragments: nos. 2382/45/6+2382/45/2c
+2382/45/4b+2382/45/4c+2382/45/4a+ 2382/45/5c. Furthermore, as shown in Matsuda 2006, no. 
2383/116 belongs to the same Saṅgītiparyāya manuscript as Lévi no. 6 (see Fig. 6), which means that it 
is doubtful that Zargaran (BMSC iii: plates I–II) is the finding place of all the fragments in the Schøyen 
Collection.

--- Page 199 of 425 ---
Dating and Localizing Undated Manuscripts
177
obviously belong together. In the following I give a short description of the fragments, 
arranged according to the type of scripts in a tentative chronological order. Examples for 
each Brāhmī type are added (Figs. 7–13), mainly fragments cut from plate 1, with 
references to publications.
Fig. 7 (cf. Pl. 1, frag. 3): One Kharoṣṭhī fragment, 3 lines. The material may be leather.39
Fig. 8 (cf. Pl. 1, frag. 1): Eight fragments in Kuṣāṇa Brāhmī on palm leaf (Pl. 1, frags.1, 11, 
14; Pl. 2, frag. 1840), and the 4 fragments published by Lévi (nos.1–4 on the lost plate; 
see the remains in Fig. 4).
Figs. 9 and 10 (cf. Pl. 1, frags. 7A and 9A): Ten fragments in different types of the northwestern Gupta variety41 on palm leaf, viz. Pl. 1, frags. 4, 7 (= Enomoto 198942), 8, 9, 10,43 
12, 13, 15, 16, 17; nos. 9, 12 and 15 possibly written by one hand.
Fig. 11 (cf. Pl. 1, frag. 5): One fragment from the left margin, palm leaf in Eastern Gupta 
script (fol. 5).44
Fig. 12 (cf. Pl. 5A, frags. 32–34): Eight fragments and leaves written in the ornate local 
Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I on birch bark, viz. Pl. 1, frag. 2; Pl. 2, frags. 20, 21, 26 (fol. 22); 
Pl. 4, frag. 31 (= Lévi no. 5); Pl. 5, frags. 32 (= Matsumura 198845), 33 (= Lévi no. 934), 
34 (= Lévi no. 7, von Hinüber 198646, Matsumura 198845, Nolot 1988).
Fig. 13 (cf. Pls. 1 and 2, frags. 6 + 19): Eight fragments and fragmentary leaves written in 
Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type II on birch bark, viz. Pl. 1, frag. 6 (= Hartmann 200947); Pl. 2, frags. 
19 (= Hartmann 200947), 22, 23, 24, 25; Pl. 3, frags. 27, 28 (likely written by one hand).
The photos with the fragments from the Hackin clod found near the smaller of the two 
Great Buddhas at Bāmiyān were of great importance for localizing the fragmentary 
manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection with some certainty, because they are written in the 
same variety of Brāhmī types. That the area of Bāmiyān is probably the place from where 
the manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection originate is supported by the oldest Vinaya 
fragments published so far. They belong to the Mahāsāṃghikas who had a stronghold in 
this area.48 This Buddhist school is traditionally associated with the spread of Mahāyāna, 
which is reflected by the many early Mahāyāna sūtras in the Schøyen Collection. Even 
though one may argue that the remains from Buddhist libraries around Bāmiyān and from 
monasteries on the Silk Road are haphazard, and that therefore it is useless to look for text 
39 I sent the fragment to Richard Salomon for further study. One side was provisionally transliterated 
by Andrew Glass.
40 Identified by Gudrun Melzer as being a commentary on Udānavarga 28.2.
41 Most of the fragments belong to alphabets h–k in Sander 1968.
42 According to Enomoto (p. 14) the text is linked to the Chinese Saṃyuktāgama Nos. 322 and 332. It 
preserves quotations from the Abhidharmakośabhāṣya and -vyākhyā of the Mūlasārvāstivādins.
43 Identified by Gudrun Melzer as Gaṇḍavyūha.
44 Manuscripts written in “Eastern Gupta” are rare; cf. Sander 1968: 101–104 (alphabet g). The 
Schøyen Collection has about 200 mainly small fragments, most of which are not identified. According 
to the different hands and content many fragments may belong to three manuscripts only. Nevertheless, 
the comparably frequent occurrence of manuscripts written in this type of script in this collection points 
towards a close communication between the monasteries near Bāmiyān and those in northeastern India at 
the beginning of the 4th century CE. — Only one fragment (SC 2377/4/1a) containing the 32 lakṣaṇas of 
a mahāpuruṣa was published by Siglinde Dietz (2006: 153–162) from a manuscript containing “Lists of 
terms and names,” which may be related to an unidentified Vinayavibhaṅga text. She observed (p. 154) 
that the fragments likely belonging to this manuscript have different height and accordingly different 
numbers of lines. This confirms what Lüders already observed for the Kalpanāmaṇḍitikā manuscript, and 
Schlingloff for the so-called “Spitzer manuscript,” namely that early palm-leaf manuscripts had an oval 
shape with folios of different height with varying lines. The largest folios are placed in the middle of the 
manuscript. For details cf. Franco 2004: Vol. I, 26. The same may be true for this manuscript, because 
folio 5 has three lines only.
45 According to Matsumura, frags. 32+34 belong to one manuscript.
46 Together with a photo found in the Bibliothèque nationale in Paris with remarks from Lévi’s hand. 
47 See pp. 234–238.
48 According to Bareau (1955: 55) inscriptional evidence shows that they were present in Mathurā, 
Karle, and in the region of Kabul.

--- Page 200 of 425 ---
178
LORE SANDER
preferences in certain periods, the study of the fragmentary Sanskrit manuscripts from the 
northern route of the Silk Road tells a contrary story.49 For the Schøyen Collection it may 
be too early to come to reliable conclusions about its contribution to the literary history of 
Buddhist texts in the monasteries around Bāmiyān. Such matters have to recede into the 
background until more fragments are identified and published, but tendencies are already 
visible. While not neglecting the importance of identifying and editing texts, one should 
always have an eye to a more general view of the new manuscript collections and what 
they are able to tell us about Buddhism and its missionary activities, and the societies in 
which they unfolded.
Abbreviations
BMSC
Buddhist Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection. See Braarvig, Jens et al. (eds.). 
BAI
Bulletin of the Asia Institute, Bloomfield Hills (Michigan) U.S.A.
BEI
Bulletin d’ Études Indiennes, Paris
Fig/Figs
Figure/Figures
frag./frags. fragment/fragments
JA
Journal asiatique, Paris
MANP
Materialien zur Archäologie der Nordgebiete Pakistans, hrsg. von Harald Hauptmann
MSC
Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection
Pl./Pls.
Plate/Plates
VOHD
Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland
WZKS
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens
ZDMG
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft
Works Cited
Allon, Mark, Richard Salomon, Geraldine Jacobson, Ugo Zoppi 2005. “Radiocarbon Dating of 
Kharoṣṭhī Fragments from the Schøyen and Senior Manuscript Collections.” BMSC iii: 279–291.
Bandini-König, Ditte (ed.). 1999. Die Felsbildstation Hodar. Mainz (MANP 3).
Bandini-König, Ditte, and Oskar von Hinüber. 2001. Die Felsbildstationen Shing Nala und Gichi 
Nala. Mainz (MANP 4).
Bareau, André. 1955. Les Sectes bouddhiques du Petit Véhicule. Paris (Publications de L’École 
Française d’ Extrême-Orient, XXXVIII).
Bemmann, Martin, and Ditte König (eds.). 1994. Die Felsbildstation Oshibat. Mainz (MANP 1).
Bemmann, Martin (ed.). 2005. Die Felsbildstation Dadam Das. Mainz (MANP 5).
Braarvig, Jens et. al. (eds.). 2000, 2002, 2006. Buddhist Manuscripts. Vols. I–III Oslo (Manuscripts 
in the Schøyen Collection).
Bühler, Georg. 1896. Indische Palaeographie, von circa 350 A.Chr. – circa 1300 P. Chr. Strassburg 
(Grundriss der Indo-Arischen Philologie und Altertumskunde, hrsg. von G. Bühler, I. Bd., 
Heft 11).
Dani, Ahmad Hasan. 1986. Indian Palaeography. 2nd ed. New Delhi.
Daniels, Peter, and William Bright (eds.). 1996. The World’s Writing Systems. New York. 
Dietz, Siglinde. 2006. “Fragments containing lists of the 32 Mahāpuruṣalakṣaṇas.” In Ute Hüsken, 
Petra Kieffer-Pülz and Anne Peters, eds., Jaina-Itihāsa-Ratna, Festschrift für Gustav Roth 
zum 90. Geburtstag. (Indica et Tibetica Bd. 47) Marburg: 153–162.
Enomoto, Fumio. 1989. “Sanskrit Fragments from the Saṃyuktāgama. Discovered in Bamiyan and 
Eastern Turkistan.” Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und 
Neueditionen. Erste Folge (Sanskritwörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfanfunden, Beiheft 2) Göttingen: 7–16.
49 Sander 1999: 61–106.

--- Page 201 of 425 ---
Dating and Localizing Undated Manuscripts
179
Franco, Eli. 2004. The Spitzer Manuscript. The oldest philosophical manuscript in Sanskrit. 2 vols. 
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse. Denkschriften, 323. Bd. Wien.
Fogg, Sam. 1996. Manuscripts from the Himalayas and the Indian Subcontinent. Catalogue 17. 
London.
Fussman, Gérard, and Ditte König. 1997. Die Felsbildstation Shatial. Mainz (MANP 2).
Hackin, J., J. Carl, and J. Meunié. 1959. Diverses recherches archéologiques en Afghanistan. Paris.
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe. 2009. “Neues zum Varṇārhavarṇa.” Pāsādikadānaṁ, Festschrift für Bhikkhu 
Pāsādika (Indica et Tibetica 52). Marburg: 229–241.
Hinüber, Oskar von. 1982. “Die Bedeutung des Handschriftenfundes bei Gilgit.” ZDMG, Supplement V): 47–66.
1986. “A Fragment of the Mahāsāṅghika-Lokottaravāda-Vinaya from Bāmiyān,” BEI 4: 295–
303.
Jettmar, Karl (ed.). 1989, 1993, 1994. Vols 1–3. Rock Inscriptions in the Indus Valley, Reports and 
Studies. Mainz (Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften. Forschungsstelle “Felsbilder 
und Inschriften am Karakorum Highway”).
Karashima, Seishi. 2002. “Two more Folios of the Prātimokṣa-Vibhaṅga of the MahāsāṃghikaLokottaravādins.” BMSC ii: 215–228.
Lévi, Silvain. 1932. “Note sur des manuscrits provenant de Bamiyan (Afghanistan) et de Gilgit 
(Cachemire).” JA 220: 1–45.
Matsuda, Kazunobu. 2006. “Shuimonsokuron no Bamiyan shahon dankan ni kansuru oboegaki 
(Note on the Fragments of the Bamiyan Manuscripts of the Abhidharmasaṃgītiparyāyaśāstra).” Indotetsugaku bukkyōgaku (Hokkaido Journal of Indological and Buddhist Studies) 
21: 19–33.
Matsumura, Hisashi. 1988. “Encore à propos d’un fragment du Mahāsāṃghika-Vinaya.” BEI 6: 
343–350.
Melzer, Gudrun. 2006. Ein Abschnitt aus dem Dīrghāgama, Teil 1 & 2, Inaugural-Dissertation zur 
Erlangung des Doktorgrades der Philosophie an der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität 
München [revised PDF edition 2010].
Nolot, Edith. 1988. “Derechef à propos d’un fragment du Mahāsāṃghika-Vinaya.” BEI 6: 351–358.
Regmi, D.R. 1983. Inscriptions of Ancient Nepal. New Delhi.
Petech, Luciano. 1988. “The Chronology of the Early Inscriptions of Nepal.” Luciano Petech: 
Selected Papers on Ancient History (SOR 60), Roma: 149–159.
Śākya, Hemarāj. 1973. Nepālalipiprakāśa, Kāṭhamāḍauṃ [Kathmandu].
Salomon, Richard. 1999. Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhāra. The British Library Kharoṣṭhī 
Fragments. London.
Sander, Lore. 1968., Paläographisches zu den Sanskrithandschriften der Berliner Turfansammlung 
(VOHD, Supplement-Bd. 8), Wiesbaden.
1991. “The Earliest Manuscripts from Central Asia and the Sarvāstivāda Mission.” In Ronald 
E. Emmerick and Dieter Weber, eds., Corolla Iranica: Papers in honour of Prof. Dr. David 
Neil Mackenzie on the Occasion of his 65th Birthday on April 8th. Frankfurt: 133–150.
1999. “Early Prakrit and Sanskrit Manuscripts from Xinjiang (second to fifth/sixth Centuries 
C.E.): Paleography, Literary Evidence, and Their Relation to Buddhist Schools.” In Collection of Essays 1993, Buddhism Across Boundaries – Chinese Buddhism and the Western 
Regions. Taipei: 61–136.
2000a. “Fragments of an Aṣṭasāhasrikā-Prajñāpāramitā from the Kuṣāṇa period.” BMSC i: 1–51.
2000b. “Die “Schøyen Collection” und einige Bemerkungen zur ältesten Aṣṭasāhasrikā-Handschrift.” WZKS XLIV: 87–100.
2002. “New Fragments of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā of the Kuṣāṇa period.” BMSC ii: 
37–44.

--- Page 202 of 425 ---
180
LORE SANDER
2005. “Remarks on the Formal Brāhmī Script from the Southern Silk Route.” BAI 19: Iranian 
and Zoroastrian Studies in Honor of Prods Oktor Skjærvø: 133–134.
2007. “Confusion of Terms and Terms of Confusion in Indian Palaeography.” In Karin 
Preisendanz, ed., Expanding and Merging Horizons. Contributions to South Asian and CrossCultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass. (Österreichische Akademie der 
Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Denkschriften, 351. Band, Beiträge zur 
Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens, Nr. 53), Vienna: 121–139.
2010. “Brāhmī scripts in the Schøyen Collection and their Relation to those of the Silk 
Routes.” In Irisawa Takashi, ed., “The Way of the Buddha” 2003: The 100th Anniversary of 
the Otani Mission and the 50th of the Research Society for Central Asian Cultures. Kyoto 
(Ryukoku University): 95–106.
(forthcoming). “Was kann die Paläographie zur Datierung tocharischer Handschriften beitragen?” In Proceedings of the symposium “Die Erforschung des Tocharischen und die alttürkische Maitrisimit,” Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin 2008. 
Schmithausen, Lambert. 2002. “Fragments of an Early Commentary.” BMSC ii: 249–254.
Sharma, Ram. 2001. Brāhmī Script: Development in Northwestern India and Central Asia. 2 Vols. 
Delhi.
Stein, Aurel. 1921. Serindia: Detailed Report of Explorations in Central Asia and Westernmost 
China I–IV. Oxford.
Strauch, Ingo. 2008. “The Bajaur Collection of Kharoṣṭhī manuscripts – a preliminary survey.” 
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 25: 103–136.
Strauch, Ingo, and Michael D. Bukharin. 2004. “Indian Inscriptions from the Cave Ḥoq on Suquṭrā 
(Yemen).” Annali 64: 121–138.
Tamai, Tatsushi. 2011. Paläographische Untersuchungen zum B-Tocharischen. Innsbruck (Innsbrucker Beiträge zur Sprachwissenschaft, hrsg. v. W. Meid, Bd. 138).
Yaldiz, Marianne. 2010. “Evaluation of the Chronology of the Murals in Kizil, Kucha Oasis.” In Eli 
Franco and Monika Zin, eds., From Turfan to Ajanta, Festschrift for Dieter Schlingloff on the 
Occasion of his Eightieth Birthday, Vol. II. Kathmandu: 1028–1043.
Figures
Figure 1: Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type II (= Protośāradā)
Dīrghāgama manuscript, fol. 352 (Āṭānāṭīyasūtra)

--- Page 203 of 425 ---
Dating and Localizing Undated Manuscripts
181
Figure 2: Development towards the ornate Gilgit/Bamiyan Type I
Copy from Sander 1968: 122, Pl. IVA

--- Page 204 of 425 ---
182
LORE SANDER
Figure 3: Fragments from Kabul Museum
Photograph: Härtel, Plate 1A
Figure 4: Fragments from Kabul Museum in the Schøyen Collection (1)
Kuṣāṇa Brāhmī; publ. Lévi 1932: 3, nos. 1–3a

--- Page 205 of 425 ---
Dating and Localizing Undated Manuscripts
183
Figure 5: Fragment from the Kabul Museum
Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I, birch bark; photograph Härtel; publ. Lévi 1932: 8 no. 5b
Figure 6: Fragments from the Kabul Museum in the Schøyen Collection (2)
Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type II (= Protośāradā), birch bark; 
publ. Lévi 1932: 19–20 no. 6b, Matsuda 2006

--- Page 206 of 425 ---
184
LORE SANDER
Figure 7: Frag. 3 from the Kabul Museum (Frag. 3A shown in Fig. 3)
Kharoṣṭhī, leather; unpublished
Figure 8: Frag. 1 from the Kabul Museum (Frag. 1A shown in Fig. 3)
Kuṣāṇa Brāhmī (cf. Sander 1968, alphabet c), palm leaf; unpublished
Figure 9: Frag. 7 from the Kabul Museum (Frag. 7A/recto shown in Fig. 3)
Northwestern Gupta variety (cf. Sander 1968, alphabet k with variants), palm leaf; 
publ. Enomoto 1989: 9–10.
recto
verso

--- Page 207 of 425 ---
Dating and Localizing Undated Manuscripts
185
Figure 10: Frag. 9 from the Kabul Museum (Frag. 9A shown in Fig. 3)
Northwestern Gupta variety, palm leaf, unskilled hand; unpublished
Figure 11: Frag. 5 from the Kabul Museum (Frag. 5A shown in Fig. 3)
Eastern Gupta Script, palm leaf; unpublished
Figure 12: Ornate Gilgit/Bamiyan Type I, birch bark
Photograph: Härtel Pl. 5A; Frag. 34 publ. von Hinüber 1986: 296ff.
A
B
A
B

--- Page 208 of 425 ---
186
LORE SANDER
Figure 13: Frag. 6 from the Kabul Museum (recto of smaller frag. shown in Fig. 3)
Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type II (cf. Sander 1968, alphabet m), birch bark
Reconstructed from Härtel’s photographs, Pls. 1 & 2; publ. Hartmann 2009: 235
recto
verso

--- Page 209 of 425 ---
Survey of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
*
KLAUS WILLE (GÖTTINGEN)
The Sanskrit manuscripts from the Turfan Finds form a major part of the manuscripts and 
block prints of the Turfan collection brought back to Berlin by the four German expeditions to Eastern Turkestan (Xinjiang) between 1902 and 1914. By now, more than 7100 
catalogue numbers have been allocated, of which numbers 1–5799 are already described or 
published in parts 1–11 of the catalogue series Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turfanfunden 
(SHT), being part X of the “Union Catalogue of Oriental Manuscripts in German Collections” [“Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland” (VOHD)]. This is a 
research project of the Göttingen Academy of Sciences and is due to continue until 2015. 
In 1996, the Union Académique Internationale, Bruxelles, placed the Union Catalogue 
under its patronage as project C 53.
Apart from a few manuscripts which were acquired on the market, and several others the 
find-spot of which cannot be reconstructed, the manuscripts were found in the following 
places along the northern route of the Silk Road: Tumšuq near Maralbaši, the sites Qizil, 
Qumtura, Sim-sim(?), and Ačiγ-Iläk(?) in the Kučā region, Šorčuq, and the sites Turfan 
Foothills (= Qurutqa), Xočo, Yarχoto, Murtuq/Bäzäklik, Sängim, and Toyoq in the Turfan 
oasis.1
In his introduction to the first part of the catalogue series SHT, Ernst Waldschmidt presented a comprehensive survey of the work on these manuscripts carried out between 1904 
and 1964 and a list of all the relevant publications,2 a summary of which is given in the 
following.
Soon after the first expedition had returned in 1903, the first Sanskrit texts were published. Richard Pischel, who at that time held the chair of Indology in Berlin, edited in two 
publications fragments of three block prints (SHT 612, 613 and 614), two of which could 
later on be identified as belonging to the Saṃyuktāgama. Heinrich Stönner, who held a 
position in the Museum of Ethnology in Berlin, followed with two further publications, 
namely the short Dharmaśarīrasūtra (SHT 596) and three folios of a block print of the 
Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra (SHT 575). And finally in 1907 and 1908 three more publications 
of Sanskrit fragments came out: Emil Sieg edited fragments of a Sanskrit grammar (SHT 
489, 534, 633, 644) and Pischel again the first fragments of the Udānavarga (SHT 447–
449).
After Pischel’s early death in 1908 Heinrich Lüders succeeded to his chair at the 
university in Berlin. In 1911 his edition of Bruchstücke buddhistischer Dramen came out 
as the first part of five in the series “Kleinere Sanskrit-Texte.” This palmleaf manuscript is 
still one of the earliest manuscripts of Indian origin from Central Asia that we know. 
Around 1912 Lüders took over coordinating the work on the Sanskrit texts from Turfan. 
He also worked on Sanskrit texts from Khotan which had been sent to him by A. F. R. 
Hoernle from London. He dealt with four folios of the so-called Kashgar manuscript of the 
* This is an updated version of the paper I presented at the workshop Digitalisierung der chinesischen, 
tibetischen, syrischen und Sanskrit-Texte der Berliner Turfansammlung, Berlin, June 2, 2005.
1 There are some manuscripts which were found on the southern route of the Silk Road: some were 
presented as a gift by George Macartney to Albert von Le Coq when he was in Kashgar (SHT VI 1574, 
XI 4350, 4444, 4447, 4450, 4454, 4458, 4459, 4463), some were acquired by A. von Le Coq from 
Badruddīn Khān, the Aksakal of Khotan [SHT III 1012, X 4301, 4303, 4353, XI 4462(?)], some belong 
to the British Library (SHT XI 4362–4394 and 4466–4469) and were sent by A. F. R. Hoernle to H. 
Lüders in 1906 and 1911, and some belong to the Trinkler manuscript collection (SHT XI 4439 and 
4457) which Emil Trinkler himself presented to the Prussian Academy in 1930.
2 SHT I: XI–XXXII.

--- Page 210 of 425 ---
188
KLAUS WILLE
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, one folio of another manuscript of this text and a fragment of 
one folio, the text of which could be identified by Jin-il Chung only recently as a parallel 
to Chinese Madhyamāgama sūtra 123 or Chinese Saṃyuktāgama sūtra 254. These manuscripts were published in 1916 in Hoernle’s Manuscript Remains of Buddhist Literature 
Found in Eastern Turkestan.3
World War I meant an interruption of the work for many years. It was not until 1922 that 
further editions of Sanskrit manuscripts from the Turfan Finds began to appear.
Heinrich Lüders’ wife Else played an important part in the work on the manuscript 
material. For more than twenty years she transliterated countless fragments, reunited 
matching parts of manuscripts and identified several texts, possibly with the help of her 
husband. Everyone dealing with the material knows how difficult this work must have 
been. Else Lüders never edited any fragment herself, but scholars working on the material 
are still profiting from her labours today. Since some of the fragments were lost during the 
Second World War, her transliterations are extremely valuable as the only surviving documentation. Later some of the fragments could be found again, but others are still lost.
Else Lüders was also the first to arrange the manuscripts according to their contents by 
fixing groups of numbers for the various literary genres. Soon some of these numerical 
groups turned out to be insufficient and had to be enlarged. Therefore another paper label 
had to be attached to the glass plates. In the example shown here [SHT I 64 (K 1606)],4 the
site mark T III MQ 73, meaning “3rd Turfan expedition, Qizil, room with red dome of the 
Ming-öi,” is found on the left margin of the original; the label on the upper left with the 
number three indicates that it is the third plate of the catalogue number; on the upper right 
label the identification is given: Kātantra, Gramm., fol. 15 and the “old number” 945; on 
the lower left label one finds the “new number” 1606; the lower right label indicates the 
publication; the label below the label on the upper left indicates the catalogue number 
under which the original is now stored. Else Lüders’ system, however, has been more or 
less retained. Nos. 1–199, for example, were intended for Prātimokṣa manuscripts, for 
Vinaya manuscripts nos. 200–299 were reserved, for Karmavācanā manuscripts nos. 300–
399, for Sūtra manuscripts nos. 400–849, and so on. Moreover, a capital letter was put 
before the number to denote the find-spot, X meaning “unknown find-spot.” Later on this 
numbering system was termed the “Lüders number.”
Research on the Sanskrit manuscripts from the Turfan finds is difficult to imagine 
without the name of Ernst Waldschmidt. He came to Berlin in 1920 and four years later, as 
a pupil of Heinrich Lüders, he completed his doctorate with the edition of Sanskrit frag3 Hoernle 1916: 139–175.
4 All images in this paper © Depositum der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 
in der Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin, Preußischer Kulturbesitz.

--- Page 211 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
189
ments of the Bhikṣuṇīprātimokṣa from the Turfan finds. His postdoctoral thesis from 1930 
was again an edition of manuscript fragments, this time of a collection of Buddhist sūtras. 
In 1936 he succeeded Sieg in the chair of Indology in Göttingen, but still worked as a 
freelancer at the Oriental Commission (Orientalische Kommission) in Berlin, to which he 
was elected member in 1942. World War II again meant a considerable set-back for the 
work on the Sanskrit Turfan manuscripts. It had to be stopped almost completely. In 1943 
the manuscripts were moved from Berlin to different places to avoid damage from air 
raids, and it was not until 1947 that most of them were brought back to Berlin and stored in 
the newly founded Institut für Orientforschung at the Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin (Institute for Oriental Research at the German Academy of Sciences in 
Berlin) which replaced the Oriental Commission. Thus the major collection was finally 
stored in the German Democratic Republic. A small proportion of the manuscripts, about 
1000 glass plates supposed to be Tocharian texts, was not sent back to Berlin but was 
brought to Göttingen in the later Federal Republic of Germany, there to be dealt with by 
Emil Sieg. These fragments, however, turned out to be exclusively Sanskrit texts, some of 
which Waldschmidt had already worked on in Berlin.5 In the course of being transported 
about two thirds of the glass plates were cracked and some lost their labels with the 
numbers. They had to be rearranged and remounted between sheets of glass. The manuscripts which were brought back to Berlin suffered the same fate. By means of Waldschmidt’s good and intensive cooperation with the Institute for Oriental Research in East 
Berlin, the transliterations of Else Lüders became accessible in Göttingen and photographs 
of the Sanskrit manuscripts were sent there too. In this way, the conditions were established for Waldschmidt and his co-workers in Göttingen to list the manuscripts and provide 
a provisional catalogue.6
In the fifties and early sixties a large number of text editions appeared, prepared not only 
by Waldschmidt himself, but also by his pupils like Herbert Härtel, Kusum Mittal, 
Valentina Rosen, Dieter Schlingloff and Chandrabhāl Tripāṭhī, as well as by other scholars 
like Heinz Bechert, Franz Bernhard, Helmut Hoffmann and Friedrich Weller. The first 
publications came to be included in the “Abhandlungen der Deutschen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften zu Berlin” or in the series “Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden,” being a 
series of the Institute for Oriental Research of the German Academy of Sciences in Berlin. 
From 1965, they appeared in the “Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu 
Göttingen.”
In 1950 Waldschmidt was still optimistic and expected to provide a catalogue of the 
Sanskrit manuscripts in the foreseeable future. This plan had to be revised rather soon, 
since two years later several huge cardboard boxes with thousands of unmounted and 
unnumbered Sanskrit fragments surfaced, which had not yet been transliterated by Else 
Lüders. It was Dieter Schlingloff’s outstanding contribution, during his employment at the 
Institute for Oriental Research in Berlin between 1954–1961, to have these approximately 
6000 fragments mounted between sheets of glass and numbered with the so-called 
“vorläufige Numerierung (Vorl. Nr.)” — a “provisional number,” written in pencil in order 
to distinguish it from the Lüders number [see figure below, left; SHT VI 1226 (Vorl.Nr. 
1052)]. He also prepared first transliterations of the major part of them, which was and still 
is extremely useful for further work. Later on it turned out that a few of these fragments 
with a provisional number had already received a Lüders number before, which had then 
5 Among the small group of Turfan manuscripts with mainly Uyghur fragments sent to Mainz a further 
ten Sanskrit manuscript fragments were found.
6 Today all Sanskrit manuscripts of the Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften are 
deposited in the Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin, Preußischer Kulturbesitz, except for the few exhibits kept in 
the Museum für Asiatische Kunst. Cf. also Raschmann 1995.

--- Page 212 of 425 ---
190
KLAUS WILLE
been lost due to the removal during the war. They were now rearranged under their former 
number. 
A different arrangement was applied to the Udānavarga fragments later on in the edition 
by Franz Bernhard (Uv). He classified the fragments according to a system of letters [see 
figure above, right; SHT I 5 (Uv.LA)]. Moreover, an additional system of numbering is to 
be found on some of the glass plates, always written in pencil, therefore called “pencil 
numbers.” These numbers were applied shortly after World War II by a technical assistant 
in Berlin as current numbers during an inventory. The various systems of classification 
play a minor role nowadays, since all manuscript fragments are now exclusively arranged 
according to their catalogue numbers. Concordances enable the reader to relate the various 
numbers used in earlier editions to the present catalogue number.
In 1957 the Sanskrit manuscripts were included as series X in the project “Union 
Catalogue of Oriental Manuscripts in German Collections.” The palaeographical research 
on the Sanskrit manuscripts carried out by Lore Sander, a pupil of Waldschmidt, became of 
major importance for the cataloguing process. She classified the scripts into seven main 
and five special types, and that made it possible to arrange the fragments according to their 
script. The first three volumes of the Union Catalogue series “Sanskrithandschriften aus 
den Turfanfunden” (SHT) were edited by Ernst Waldschmidt, assisted by Walter Clawiter 
and Lore Sander and volumes 4 and 5 together by Waldschmidt and Sander. Heinz Bechert, 
in 1965 Waldschmidt’s successor in the chair for Indology in Göttingen, took over the 
direction of the series from him in 1984, at which time I was entrusted with the work on 
the manuscripts. After Bechert’s death in 2005 Dr. Hartmut-Ortwin Feistel of the State 
Library in Berlin took over this project.
Since the separate volumes of the series are rather inconsistent concerning their contents, structure, and principles of cataloguing, a short description of each of them is given 
in the following.
The first volume of SHT came out in 1965 containing catalogue numbers 1–801. The 
descriptions of the manuscripts are arranged according to the find-spots and within these 
groups first according to the type of script and then according to the contents. Nearly all of 
these manuscripts had already been edited, and therefore the catalogue consisted mostly of 
descriptions. Selected facsimiles were added in order to demonstrate the different types of 
script.
SHT volume 2 appeared in 1968. Besides the edition of some fragments already described in volume 1, this volume contains the facsimiles of Vinaya and Sūtra manuscripts of 
some of the catalogue numbers of No. 1. These facsimiles were initially meant to be published as part 2 of the series “Faksimile-Wiedergaben von Sanskrithandschriften aus den 
Turfanfunden.” The first and only part ever to appear was published in 1963 by Mouton & 
Co in The Hague (FakSHT).
SHT 3 was published in 1971 containing catalogue numbers 802–1014 and facsimiles of 
most of the manuscripts described in it. Contrary to No. 1, which lists many rather exten-

--- Page 213 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
191
sive manuscripts, a catalogue number in No. 3 often refers to fragments of only one or 
several folios of the same manuscript. Therefore, with few exceptions, the full text of the 
fragments is given to make the text material accessible to scholars and thus enable 
specialists in the respective genres to identify the texts.
SHT 4 came out in 1980 containing a large number of text editions of catalogue numbers previously described in volume 1. For the first time, a list of additions and corrections 
(to Nos. 1–3) and a word index (to Nos. 1–3 and 4) was added.
SHT 5 appeared in 1985 containing catalogue numbers 1015–1201 and another 63 numbers which had already been published in other places or identified by Waldschmidt, and 
were therefore published out of sequence. The text of the fragments is given in full, and 
this way of presentation is continued throughout the following volumes. Facsimiles of the 
catalogue numbers up to 1201 and of 1290 as well as a word index are added.
SHT 6 came out in 1989 with catalogue numbers 1202–1599. These texts belong mainly 
to the genres of Vinaya and Sūtra. Since the find-spots of most of them could not be traced 
there are no subdivisions. Unfortunately, for financial reasons the volume had to do without facsimiles, and that applies to the following volumes as well. A list of additions and 
corrections to all the previous volumes is given, but the word index follows only in No. 7.
SHT 7 came out in 1995 containing the catalogue numbers 1600–1799, once more 
arranged according to find-spot and type of script. The fragments mainly stem from 
Vinaya, Sūtra, and non-canonical Abhidharma manuscripts and from the text genre “lyric 
and didactic poetry.” A word index to Nos. 6 and 7 is provided, as well as a list of additions 
and corrections to all the previous volumes.
SHT 8 was published in 2000. Since the find-spots of catalogue numbers 1800–1999 
could not in most cases be located, there is again no classification in such terms. The texts 
mainly derive from Vinaya, Sūtra and non-canonical Abhidharma literature. A word index 
is added, along with a list of additions and corrections to all the previous volumes.
SHT 9, 10 and 11 came out in 2004, 2008 and 2012 and contain catalogue numbers 
2000–3199, 3200–4362 and 4363–5799 respectively. These are, except for about 100 numbers, all very small fragments. From No. 9 onwards again new principles had to be applied, 
since the Academic Committee responsible for this project had decided to expedite the 
cataloguing of the Oriental Manuscripts. Under these new guidelines only those fragments 
containing considerable text should be transliterated, otherwise only a description should 
be given. Some of the identified fragments had been previously considered as lost after 
their shifting on account of World War II, or they were small pieces which had possibly 
broken off from bigger ones before they were mounted between sheets of glass. These 
small pieces could be assigned to other already edited fragments. In some cases, this 
increase of text actually corrects the formerly assumed text restoration. A nice example is 
furnished by SHT I 539, fragm. c, see figure.
The left corner piece had already been dealt with by Waldschmidt in his Bhikṣuṇīprātimokṣasūtra edition, the right corner piece could be found later on. Both are edited in full in 
SHT part 1, but five to six akṣaras are missing in lines recto 1–2 [line 1 (lost akṣaras in

--- Page 214 of 425 ---
192
KLAUS WILLE
bold): .. ṣyaḥ evaṃ sā bhikṣuṇī tantravāyaṃ saṃjñā[p](ayed) vā saṃjñāp[ā]pa]. Obviously they broke off after Waldschmidt’s edition and were considered lost. SHT X 3215, 3216 
and 3500, however, I was able to identify as belonging to the very same folio. The restoration of the verb form saṃjñāp(ayed) in line 1 must, according to SHT 3215, be corrected 
to saṃj[ñā](pa)yitvā.
With one more volume of this catalogue series planned to appear by the year 2016, all 
Sanskrit manuscripts of the Turfan finds will have been described. Apart from the SHT 
volumes three major text editions have appeared during the last years, namely Mātṛceṭa’s 
Varṇārhavarṇastotra by J.-U. Hartmann (VAV; 1987), the Prātimokṣasūtra in two volumes 
by Georg von Simson (PrMoSū; 1986, 2000), and an unknown Abhidharma text, the socalled Spitzer Manuscript, by Eli Franco (2004). The first two editions include also the 
relevant manuscript fragments within the other collections in London, Paris, and St. 
Petersburg. The keen and continuous interest of scholars world-wide in the texts edited in 
the SHT volumes is reflected in numerous identifications and suggestions, which can be 
found in the addenda from part 4 onwards, and in the considerable number of publications 
— 199 until now — based on Turfan texts.
The Sanskrit manuscripts in the Turfan collection are, however, interesting not only for 
Sanskrit scholars but also for those working in neighbouring fields of study, since several 
of the manuscripts contain glosses in Tocharian and Uyghur. In SHT VII 1708, for example 
(see figure), one finds Tocharian7 glosses or comments under each line, and in the right 
margin of both sides Uyghur8 in Brāhmī script. The Uyghur on the recto describes how to 
handle the omitted text between the last line of the recto and the first line of the verso. The 
folio which contains this omitted text has now been identified by Vincent Tournier as SHT 
VII 1743.9
In December 2008 a project for the digitisation of the Sanskrit manuscripts of the Turfan 
Collection was launched by the Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 
and this was completed in 2013. Most of the images are already available on the database 
of the International Dunhuang Project (http://idp.bl.uk or http://idp.bbaw.de). Problems 
might arise in relation to those originals which still have to be restored before digitisation. 
The capacity of the conservation department in the Berlin State Library is rather limited. 
To replace broken glass sheets might not be so time-consuming, but the mounting between 
sheets of glass of the hundreds of fragile birch-bark fragments shrink-wrapped in cellophane, most of which belong to the Yogavidhi or to the Yogalehrbuch (SHT 150) manu7 Cf. Schmidt 1990: 475.
8 Cf. Maue 2009: 12ff.
9 Cf. SHT XI (additions and corrections) 1708.

--- Page 215 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
193
script, will be rather labour-intensive, as will be the handling of hundreds of poplar-wood 
fragments.
In order to present a comprehensive survey regarding the contents of the manuscripts,10 
in the following a title index of identified texts will be given which, although provisional, 
will provide an idea of the literary genres represented in the manuscripts, of the distribution of texts among these genres, and of the predilection for certain texts as indicated by 
the number of manuscripts in which they occur.
Index of texts in the SHT volume11
Pressmarks in bold have been edited completely or partially in the volumes cited. If an 
edited fragment comprises two catalogue numbers, only the first number is given (for 
example V 1064 for V 1064 + 1065).
A. Buddhist literature
1. Vinaya
Adhikaraṇavastu of the Sarvāstivādins VI 1401(?); VII 1686(?), 1739(?)
Bhaiṣajyavastu (stotra of the brahmin Nīlabhūti) I 629d, 629e + XI 4491 (rendering of both frgs. in 
XI), I 629gr; V 1321; VII 1764a; VIII 1804
Bhaiṣajyavastu of the Sarvāstivādins VI 1407a(?)
Bhikṣuṇīprātimokṣasūtra of the Sarvāstivādins I 44, 539a + V 1071 + X 3209, I 539b, 539c + X 
3215 + 3216 + 3500; VI 1560; X 3952(?)
Bhikṣuṇīprātimokṣavibhaṅga of the Sarvāstivādins I 394, 540, 541, 549; V 1047a, 1358; VIII 
1843(?); IX 2850(?)
Bhikṣuprātimokṣasūtra of the Sarvāstivādins: see Prātimokṣasūtra of the Sarvāstivādins
Bhikṣuprātimokṣavibhaṅga of the Sarvāstivādins: see Prātimokṣavibhaṅga of the Sarvāstivādins 
Caṇpāvastu of the Sarvāstivādins V 1049, 1121
Carmavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins I 598(?); IX 2281 + X 4103
Carmavastu of the Sarvāstivādins I 591
Cīvaravastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins I 551a + X 3295, I 551b + XII 6479 (rendering of both frgs. 
in XII), I 551c + IX 2232, I 551d + IX 2231 + X 3599 + XI 5163g (rendering of all frgs. in XI), I 
551e, f + VII 1724 + XII 5857, I 551g + VIII 1984 + IX 2222 + X 3518 + 3661 + 4202; V 1100 
+ X 3562; X 3293 + 4225 + XI 5183 (rendering of all frgs. in XI), X 3540, 3567 + XII 6486 
(rendering of both frgs. in XII)
Cīvaravastu of the Sarvāstivādins VI 1353b(?),c(?)
council (account of the first council): see Vinayanidāna
Devadattavastu of the Sarvāstivādins I 552; V 1376 + X 3922 (rendering of both frgs. in X); VI 
1295, 1369b, 1383 + 1481; VII 1741
Ekottaradharma/Vinayottarika of the Sarvāstivādins V 1057, 1108 + 1086a
Karmavācanā I 29, 45, 46, I 120 + II 120, I 121–123, 124(?), 125–128, 129(?), 130(?), 131, 132, 
133(?), 134(?), 135–138, 393, 395, 433, 435, 555, 570, 572, 651, 679 + III 854b + IX 2031(?) 
(rendering of all frgs. in IX), I 764; III 854(?), 858; V 1027, 1028(?), 1088a, 1215v2–6; VI 
1484(?); VII 1655r4–6; IX 2441(?), 2567(?), 3135; X 3223, 4128, 4140, 4153; X 3765(?), 
4152(?); XI 5777
Karmavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins(?) VI 1388; X 4279
Karmavastu of the Sarvāstivādins: see Caṇpāvastu of the Sarvāstivādins 
Kathāvastu of the Uttaragrantha of the Mūlasarvāstivādins V 1068
Kaṭhinavastu X 3449, 3916
10 Cf. also Sander 1979, 1983, and 1999.
11 Taken into account is also the as yet unpublished volume SHT XII (up to catalogue number 6614). 
For fragments from the Turfan Collection kept now in Istanbul cf. Wille 2004.

--- Page 216 of 425 ---
194
KLAUS WILLE
Kaṭhinavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins I 573 + VI 1437 (rendering of both frgs. in VI); IX 2973b; 
XI 4626a
Kaṭhinavastu of the Sarvāstivādins I 557a, 571
Kośāmbakavastu X 3306(?)
Kośāmbakavastu of the Sarvāstivādins V 1048b, 1051
Kṣudrakavastu of the Sarvāstivādins III 988(?); V 1036, 1079
Nīlabhūti (stotra of the brahmin) I 629d, 629e + XI 4491 (rendering of both frgs. in XI), I 629gr; V 
1321; VII 1764a; VIII 1804
Pāṇḍurohiyakavastu of the Sarvāstivādins III 988(?); V 1048a
Poṣadhavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins V 1033 + VII 1761 [new rendering of both frgs. in VIII 
(additions) 1033]; X 3603
Poṣatha calendar (?) VII 1656; XI 5727
Poṣathasthāpanavastu of the Sarvāstivādins V 1062, 1078
Poṣathavastu of the Sarvāstivādins V 1028(?), 1150
Prātimokṣasūtra I 39, 40; IX 2200, 3029 + X 3489 (rendering of all frgs. in X); X 3387, 4182cb
Prātimokṣasūtra of the Dharmaguptakas I 656
Prātimokṣasūtra of the Mūlasarvāstivādins I 2(?), 41, 100d, 355
Prātimokṣasūtra of the Sarvāstivādins I 28, 42, 43, 73–93, 94 + VII 1612, 95–119, 168r7,r8,w2,z3 
[cf. IX, X, and XII (additions)], 177k6 [cf. IX (additions)], 352–354, 360–361, 382–391, 392, 
400 [cf. IX (additions)], 473, 474, 475, 476, 477, 493, 494, 535–538, 650, 655, 657–658, 665–
678, 762; III 851; V 1074, 1084, 1215r–v1, 1285; VI 1282, 1443, 1490, 1538; VII 1651, 
1681B(2); VIII 1800; IX 2045, 2130, 2368, 2448, 2547c, 2641, 2954, 3047 + X 3484, IX 3049; 
X 3211, 3524, 3674, 4064, 4065, 4293, 4294, 4295; XI 4631a, b, 4724, 5474, 5476, 5479, 5480, 
5545, 5561, 5610, 5611, 5657, 5720; XII 5802, 5812, 5947e, 5955, 6006, 6154, 6344, 6405, 
6410, 6411, 6428, 6433, 6437, 6451
Prātimokṣasūtra of the Sarvāstivādins: see also Bhikṣuṇīprātimokṣasūtra of the Sarvāstivādins
Prātimokṣavibhaṅga of the Sarvāstivādins I 542 + II 542, I 543–550, 554, 557b, 559a, 560, 561, 
562a, I 563 + VI 1454 + IX 3004, 564, 565, 567–569, 763; III 988(?); V 1028(?), 1037, 1041(?), 
1043(?), 1046(?), 1052, 1061(?), 1066(?), 1072, 1080(?), 1085(?), 1090(?), 1094(?), 1097, 1098, 
1106, 1323, 1479(?); VI 1283, 1345(?), 1372(?), 1374, 1378(?), 1400, 1401(?), 1407a(?),b, 
1444(?), 1452(?), 1465, 1466(?), 1468, 1469, 1471, 1472, 1473(?), 1483, 1487, 1489, 1496, 
1501, 1518, 1529, 1530, 1536 + XI 4583 (rendering of both frgs. in XI), VI 1570; VII 1608a(?), 
1686(?), 1739(?); IX 2284(?), 2286, 2287(?), 2288(?), 2850(?), 3032(?), 3079(?); X 3515(?), 
3604, 3815(?), 3820, 3875, 3888, 3903, 3918(?), 3924, 4287(?); XI 4549, 4577, 4727(?), 
4771(?), 4781(?), 4799(?), 4868, 5247(?); XII 6259
Prātimokṣavibhaṅga of the Sarvāstivādins: see also Bhikṣuṇīprātimokṣavibhaṅga of the Sarvāstivādins
Pratisaṃyuktakhaṇḍaka section in the 10th Adhyāya of the Daśādhyāya-vinaya of the Sarvāstivādins V 1093; VIII 1943(?)
Pravāraṇāvastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins VI 1578; XI 4473
Pravāraṇāvastu of the Sarvāstivādins V 1091
Pravrajyāvastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins V 1030, 1045g; XII 6124(?)
Pravrajyāvastu of the Sarvāstivādins: see Upasaṃpadāvastu of the Sarvāstivādins 
Saṃghabhedavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins I 577(?) + 1163(?); V 1045d,f,h,i(?), 1075, 1083; VI 
1430 + X 4008 (rendering of both frgs. in X) + XI 4524b + XII 6470, VI 1431 + X 4199 
(rendering of both frgs. in X) + XI 4627c, VI 1539(?); VII 1719a, VII 1719b + IX 3115 + X 
3613 + 6016 [6016 ed. in VIII (additions) 1719], VII 1719c, VII 1719d + IX 3116 + X 4016 + 
XII 5853; IX 2220, 2317, 2341 + X 4338, IX 3103; X 3287, 3458, 3596, 3655, 3665, 4014, 
4019 + XI 4531a,c, X 4045, 4099, 4106, 4125(?), 4283(?); XI 4400, 4472, 4524d, 4529b, 4531c, 
4575; 4606b; 4607a,b, 4627b, 4628a, 4674b, 4768g, 5420, 5430 + XII 6257 (rendering of both 
frgs. in XII), XI 5592(?); XII 6061, 6065, 6179, 6431(?)
Saṃghabhedavastu of the Sarvāstivādins: see Devadattavastu of the Sarvāstivādins

--- Page 217 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
195
Saṃghāvaśeṣa section in the 10th Adhyāya of the Daśādhyāya-vinaya of the Sarvāstivādins V 
1056; VI 1364, 1382
Saṃghāvaśeṣapratikaraṇavastu of the Sarvāstivādins IX 2289; X 3949(?)
Śayanāsanavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins V 1045b + X 4062 + XII 5891, V 1045i(?); IX 3026 + 
X 3568 + XI 5186 + XII 6485 (rendering of all frgs. in XII)
Udayana story: see Bhikṣuprātimokṣavibhaṅga of the Sarvāstivādins (V 1097, 1098; X 3875)
Upāliparipṛcchā I 553; III 937; IV 566(?); V 1038, 1053, 1054 [fols. 9,13(?)], 1055(?), V+VI 1058 
+ 1412, V 1064, 1067a(?),b, 1160, 1438; X 4209
Upāliparipṛcchā of the Uttaragrantha of the Mūlasarvāstivādins III 937
Upasaṃpadākhaṇḍaka XI 4690
Upasaṃpadāvastu of the Sarvāstivādins I 124(?), 129(?), 130(?). 133(?), 134(?), 679 + III 854b + 
IX 2031(?) (rendering of all frgs. in IX); III 854a(?); V 1073, 1077; VI 1452(?); X 3575
Varṣāvastu of the Sarvāstivādins VI 1339
Vinaya (not yet identified) V 1040, 1042, 1046, 1047b, 1050, 1060, 1069, 1081, 1082, 1088b, 
1095b, 1116, 1130, 1147, 1155(?), 1157(?), 1165, 1185, 1187b,c, 1313; VI 1337, 1386, 1408, 
1419, 1482, 1484(?); VII 1688, 1742; VIII 1851, 1893, 1953; IX 2242, 2285, 2613, 2723, 3068; 
X 3337, 3346, 3452, 3498, 3521, 3525, 3582(?), 3629, 3639, 3693, 3732, 3734, 3763, 3765(?), 
3797, 3804, 3823, 3868, 3870, 3873(?), 3874, 3876, 3886(?), 3889, 3918, 3930, 3960, 3989, 
4047(?), 4076, 4152(?), 4280; XI 4440d, 4441 (frgs. 1, 3), 4474, 4476, 4480, 4483, 4486, 4510, 
4562, 4567, 4832, 4850, 4888, 4896, 4898, 4906, 4907, 5010, 5028, 5044, 5095, 5188, 5237, 
5264; XII 6228
Vinayamātṛkā V 1039, 1059, 1063; VI 1520(?); VIII 1940 + XI 4838
Vinayanidāna I 556
Vinaya-uddāna VI 1377
Vinayavibhaṅga of the Mūlasarvāstivādins I 574; V 1044 + VI 1510 + XI 4523a (rendering of all 
frgs. in XI), V 1092, 1124 + IX 2084 (rendering of both frgs. in IX) + XI 4570; VI 1319, 1398, 
1434; VIII 1864 + X 3574; X 3311; XI 4560(?), 4727(?), 4771(?), 4781(?), 4799(?), 5247(?)
Vinayavibhaṅga of the Sarvāstivādins: see Bhikṣuṇīprātimokṣavibhaṅga and Prātimokṣavibhaṅga 
of the Sarvāstivādins
Vinayottarika: see Ekottaradharma
2. Sūtra
a) Canonical sūtras
Acela-Kāśyapasūtra (version of a)(?) V 1133a
Agaññasutta (text corresponding to) V 1583
Āhārasutta (text corresponding to) III 1001
Āḷavakasutta (text corresponding to) V 1343r–v2(?)
Ambalaṭṭhika-Rāhulavādasutta: see Rāhulovādasūtra
Ambapālisutta (text corresponding to) IV 162d9 v(?)2f.
Ambāṣṭasūtra/Ambāṣṭhasūtra (Dīrghāgama) III 885, 978; IV 495b; V 1290c, 1351; VI 1288; IX 
2536; X 4230, 4314; XI 4697b
Anavatāgrasaṃyukta (text corresponding to a sūtra in) I 167
Aṅgulimālasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) I 160c
Aṅguttaranikāya (text corresponding to sūtras from) III 878(?), 977; VI 1326 fol. 212, 1341; IX 
2772
Apannakasūtra (Dīrghāgama) III 966; IV 165 (frgs. 32, 37); VI 1261(?), 1579
Apramādasūtra (Madhyamāgama) IV 412 frg. 30v5–6
Arakasutta (text corresponding to) VI 1324 + VII 1720 + XI 5151; VII 1770cA
Ariyapariyesanasutta (text corresponding to) I 769 + X 3920
Arthavistarasūtra/Arthavistaradharmaparyāya (Dīrghāgama) I 6a,b, 164d, 168 (frgs. l1+n2+n1+q7, 
m1+t3+s4+w4+u9+l2+m3+q2, m5+l3+v4+m6+u2+u7+u5+l5, p4+q6+v3, s2+s6+q3, u4) [cf. 
VII and IX (additions)], 177 (frgs. f6+l5+n4+k4+k2, m1+l3) [cf. VII (additions)], 186, 498 (frg.

--- Page 218 of 425 ---
196
KLAUS WILLE
4+19) [cf. VII (additions)], 505 (frg. 3); III 866b,c, 869; V 1136a; VII 1654, 1699; VIII 1875; IX 
2215r3–v5 + X 3427 + 3519, IX 2981, 3058, 3097; X 4098, 4212; XI 4533, 4576, 5189
Āryamārgasūtra (Madhyamāgama) V 1125; VIII 1919r
Āṭānāṭikasūtra (Dīrghāgama) I 10, 31, 33, 165 (frg. 26v), 173a,b, 174, 175, 177i1, 180, 371a,b, 
419, 444, I 621, I 681b + VI 1242bv4–6, I 792; III 959, 986; IV 32 (frg. 65), 33 (frgs. 11–18, 
30); V 1189; IX 2161, 2256, 2384, 2402, 2487(?), 2814; XI 4420; XII 6111, 6153
Avasrutānavasrutadharmaparyāya (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1416
Avetyaprasādasaṃyukta (text corresponding to a sūtra in) I 162
Ayakkāsutta (text corresponding to) VI 1586
Āyuḥparyantasūtra(?) X 4215
Bāṣpasūtra (Madhyamāgama) V 1348
Bhārgavasūtra (Dīrghāgama) I+IV 32 (frgs. 7–25), 165 (frg. 3–6,60), 500 (frgs. 1, 2); III 992
Bhayabhairavasūtra (Dīrghāgama) I 164c,g; IV 32 (frgs. 33–41), 165 (frgs. 15–16), 500 (frg. 4); IX 
2401(?)
Bimbasārasūtra (Madhyamāgama) I 577(?) + V 1163(?), I 580a(?), 581, 775(?); III 999(?); XI 
4504(?)
Bodharājakumārasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 33 (frgs. 17–28,35), 165 (frgs. 20–24), 180 (frgs. 1–2); 
III 997v; VI 1361, 1373a; IX 2063d; XI 4573
Bodhyaṅgasaṃyukta (text corresponding to a sūtra in) VI 533, IV 162
Brahmajālasūtra (Dīrghāgama) III 803, 882b(?); V 1571; VI 1248, 1356; X 4189
Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta (text corresponding to Suttanipāta) VI 1370; VIII 1994
Brahmāyu(ḥ)sūtra (Madhyamāgama) V 1148 + X 4094 + XI 4617d + 5650; X 3269, 3425, 3962; 
XI 4587
Cailasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) III 947
Cakravartisūtra (Madhyamāgama) V 1333, 1334
Campāsūtra (Madhyamāgama) IV 412 frgs. 1–5
Candra(maṇḍala)sūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) II 176 fol. 72v2ff.; III 876; V 1263, 1284; VI 1242a; X 
3203
Caṅgīsūtra/Caṅkīsūtra: see Kāmaṭhikasūtra
Catuṣpariṣatsūtra (Dīrghāgama) I 3, 9, 11, 149, 159, 168 [cf. also IX and XII (additions)], 177 [cf. 
also IX (additions)], 181, 182, 185, 367, 368, 399, 400 [cf. also IX and XII (additions)], 401, 
410, 411, 430, 478, 498 [cf. also SHT XII (additions)], 505, 512, 577(?) + V 1163(?), I 580a(?), 
584, 586, 605–607, 652 [cf. IX (additions)], 682, 683, 685, 770–775, 784; III 896, 967, 999; VI 
1446, 1568, 1572a(?); VII 1779b(?); VIII 1880; IX 2099, 2247, 2291, 2518, 2996; X 3483, 
3818, 4125(?), 4177a (belongs to I 399 fol. 110), 4283(?); XI 4396, 4431, 4504(?), 4553, 4566, 
5024, 5253, 5300, 5381, 5505, 5556, 6431(?)
Chachakkasutta (text corresponding to) VI 1226
“Chapāṇa” in the Saṃyuttanikāya (text corresponding to) V 1152
Cūlakammavibhaṅgasutta (text corresponding to) VI 1210
Cūḷasaccakasutta (text corresponding to): see Kāyabhāvanāsūtra
Dakkhiṇāvibhaṅgasutta (text corresponding to) III 979
Daśabalasūtra I I 166, 168, 173c, 362, 420, 426, 501, 502, 503, 507, 514, 581, 583, 765, 766; VI 
1543, 1564; IX 2018a,b,d1–3,e,f, 2066, 2162; X 3415, 4300 (frgs. 1–17); XI 5584
Daśabalasūtra II (Saṃyuktāgama) I 504; VI 1220r4–v, 1457rz–v
Daśottarasūtra (Dīrghāgama) I 161, 168 [cf. also VII–IX (additions)], 171, 172, 177 [cf. also IX 
(additions)], 365, 367, 398, 400, 407, 423, 426, 428, 505, 508, 509, 511, 512, 595, 652, 685, 
777, 779–782; III 863, 915; VII 1646A, 1682; IX 2101, 2215r1–3 + X 3427 + 3519, IX 2537, 
2538, 2681, 2785; X 3579, 4090, 4333; XI 4465c
Dharmacakrapravartanasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) I 149(?), 181(?), 363r1–6, 368(?), 430(?), 581; V 
1168r3ff. + 1305; VI 1220r1–3, 1572a(?); VII 1779b(?); 4125, 4283
Dharmamudrāsūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) I 160br–v5
Dhvajāgrasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) IV 30n5(?); I 176 fol. 70, 178ar–v2, 418r1–5, 496r, 499r58–89, 
504, 506, 581, 681a,b + VI 1242br1–4; VII 1687A; XI 4496, 4507bv3ff.,c

--- Page 219 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
197
Dīrghilasūtra (Madhyamāgama) VI 1384; X 3306(?)
Diṭṭhisaṃyutta (text corresponding to a section in) IV 30
Dṛḍhanemivyākaraṇa: see Cakravartisūtra
Duḥkhadharmasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1099
Ekottarikāgama (text corresponding to a section in) I 590(?); III 952(?), 974, 975, 990(?), 1000, 
1343(?); V 1445 (sūtra 26?); VI 1395(?); VIII 1829 + VI 1462 (rendering of both frgs. in VIII) + 
XI 4542, VIII 1876 + IX 2071, VIII 1957; X 3299 (sūtras 7–8), 3459
Gandhasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1183r5–v6, V 1396 + IX 3056
Gautamīsūtra (Madhyamāgama) III 979
Ghoṭamukhasutta (text corresponding to) V 1332b(?)
Gihisutta (text corresponding to) V 1101
Giñjakāvasthasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) I 162a
Gopālakasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) VI 1381 fols. 174v2–fol. 175v5
Gośṛṅgaśālavanasūtra (Madhyamāgama) V 1346
Hastaka-Āṭavakasūtra(?) V 1343r–v2
Hemavatasutta (? Text corresponding to) IV+V 50a,h+j+i
Indriyabhāvanāsutta (text corresponding to) VI 1226
Janarṣabhasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 32, 165; VIII 1872 + X 3301
Jīvakasūtra (Dīrghāgama) VI 1525r1–v2
Kāmaṭhikasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 165 (frgs. 29–31); I 177n5; III 883a; V 1025v4–7
Kāraṇḍavasutta (text corresponding to) IV 412 (frgs. 1–5)
Karmārasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) VI 1381 fol. 174r1–v2
Kāśyapasiṃhanādasūtra (Dīrghāgama) V 1119; VI 1296 + X 3656; VIII 1874
Kāyabhāvanāsūtra (Dīrghāgama) III 931a, 997r
Kevartisūtra (Dīrghāgama) V 1352d + X 3417 (rendering of both frgs. in X); VI 1491 + X 3805 
(rendering of both frgs. in X); IX 2085 + X 3926 (rendering of both frgs. in X); XI 4759a
Khandhasaṃyutta (text corresponding to a section in) IV 30
Kṣemakasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) IV 30c
Kūṭatāṇḍyasūtra/Kūṭatāṇṭhyasūtra (Dīrghāgama) III 894b(?), 978; V 1290b,c,g; VIII 1878(?); X 
3789, 3908; XI 4902
Lakkhaṇasaṃyutta (text corresponding to a section in) IV 30
Lokakāmaguṇasutta (text corresponding to) V 1442; VI 1404
Lokeccasūtra I (Dīrghāgama) III 806; V 1352a+b + X 3433 + XI 4879; VI 1413; X 3569 + 4254 + 
XI 4765b (rendering of all frgs. in XI)
Lokeccasūtra II (Dīrghāgama) IV 495c; VIII 1918; IX 2330; X 3829(?), 3830; XI 5038
Madhyamāgama (text corresponding to a sūtra in the Chinese Madhyamāgama;12 arranged 
according to SHT catalogue numbers) II 163b,d (sūtra 9), I 409 (sūtra 134), I+IV 412 (sūtras 
122–123,131–133,135,138,141), I 413 (sūtra 97), I+IV 558 + V 1162 (sūtra 60), I 562b (sūtra 
182), 580a (? sūtra 62), 581 [sūtras 62 (Bimbasārasūtra), 97 (Mahānidānasūtra), 134 (Śakrapraśnasūtra)], 769 + X 3920 (sūtra 204); III 804 (sūtras 132–133), 865 (sūtra 97), 868 (sūtra 
97), 872 (sūtra 133), 878(?) (sūtra 1), 979 (sūtra 180), 1007 (sūtra 133); V 1070 (sūtra 131), 
1101 (sūtra 128), 1114 (sūtra 201), 1117 (sūtra 14), 1118 (sūtra 3), 1125 (sūtra 189), 1148 + X 
4094 + XI 4617d + 5650 (sūtra 161), V 1151v2–5 + VI 1415 (sūtra 134), V 1166 (sūtra 201), V 
1279 + IX 2155 (sūtra 205), V 1332a + VI 1493 + X 3917 (sūtras 203–204), V 1333 (sūtra 70), 
1334 (sūtra 70), 1346 (sūtra 184), 1348 (sūtra 12), V 1402 + 1403a + IX 2082a (sūtra 20), V 
1421 (sūtra 134), V 1422 + X 3355 (sūtra 134), V 1424 (sūtra 131), 1583 (sūtra 154), 1896 
(sūtra 132); VI 1210 (sūtra 170), 1238 (sūtra 97), 1244 (sūtra 135), 1246 (sūtra 97), 1252a (sūtra 
163), 1267 (sūtra 8), 1272 (sūtra 97), 1291 (sūtra 133), 1294 (sūtra 97), 1302 (sūtra 133), 1304a 
(sūtra 107 or 108), VI 1324 + VII 1720+ XI 5151 (sūtra 160), VI 1322 (sūtras 6–7), 1329 (sūtra 
9), 1344 (? sūtra 8), 1360 (sūtras 46–48), 1370 (sūtra 156), 1379 (sūtras 24–25), 1384 (sūtra 72), 
1392 (sūtra 182), 1397 (sūtra 28), 1423 + X 4092 (sūtra 132; rendering of both frgs. in X), VI 
12 The text of a given catalogue number does not necessarily stem from a Madhyamāgama manuscript; 
cf. also Chung and Fukita 2011.

--- Page 220 of 425 ---
198
KLAUS WILLE
1522 (sūtra 133); VII 1678a (sūtra 8), 1687B (sūtra 134), 1701 (sūtra 4), 1721 (sūtra 130), 
1770cA, dA (sūtra 160); VIII 1802 (sūtra 133), 1913 (sūtra 133), 1914 (sūtra 135), 1919r (sūtra 
189), 1919v (sūtra 173), 1981 + X 4282 (sūtra 118), 1994 (sūtra 156); IX 2047 (sūtra 133), 2067 
(sūtra 97), 2932 (sūtra 133); X 3269 (sūtra 161), 3425 (sūtra 161), 3596 (sūtra 63), 3962 (sūtra 
161), 4022 (sūtra 131); XI 4504 (? sūtra 62), 4518 (sūtra 97), 4568 (sūtra 132), 4587 (sūtra 161), 
4603 (sūtra 97), 4606a (sūtra 97), 4607a (sūtra 63), 4753b (sūtra 158), 4768g (sūtra 63), 5373 (? 
sūtra 4), 5394 (? sūtra 4); XII 6033 (sūtra 131)
Madhyamāgama [text corresponding to a sūtra in the Chinese Madhyamāgama; arranged according 
to the sequence of the sūtras in the Zhong ahan jing (T 26)] sūtra 3: V 1118; sūtra 4: VII 1701, 
XI 5373 (?), 5394 (?); sūtras 6–7: VI 1322; sūtra 8: VI 1267, 1344(?), VII 1678a; sūtra 9: II 
163b,d, VI 1329; sūtra 12: 1348; sūtra 14: V 1117; sūtra 20: V 1402 + 1403a + IX 2082a; sūtras 
24–25: VI 1379; sūtra 28: VI 1397; sūtras 46–48: VI 1360; sūtra 60: I+IV 558 + V 1162; sūtra 
62: I 580a, 581 fols. 116–120 (Bimbasārasūtra), XI 4504(?); sūtra 63: X 3596, XI 4607a, 4768g; 
sūtra 70: V 1333, 1334; sūtra 72: VI 1384; sūtra 97: I 413, 581 (Mahānidānasūtra), III 865, 868, 
VI 1238, 1246, 1272, 1294, IX 2067, XI 4518, 4603, 4606a; sūtra 107 or 108: VI 1304a; sūtra 
118: VIII 1981 + X 4282; sūtras 122–123: IV 412; sūtra 128: V 1101; sūtra 130: VII 1721; sūtra 
131: IV 412, V 1070, 1424, X 4022, XII 6033; sūtra 132: IV 412, III 804, VI 1423 + X 4092 
(rendering of both frgs. in X), V 1896, X 4568; sūtra 133: IV 412, III 804, 872, 1007, VI 1291, 
1302, 1522, VIII 1802, 1913, IX 2047, 2932; sūtra 134: I 409, 581 (Śakrapraśnasūtra), V 
1151v2–5 + VI 1415, V 1421, 1422 + X 3355, VII 1687B; sūtra 135: IV 412, VI 1244, VIII 
1914; sūtra 138: IV 412; sūtra 141: IV 412; sūtra 154(?): V 1583; sūtra 156: VI 1370, VIII 1994 
sūtra 158: XI 4753b; sūtra 160: VI 1324 + VII 1720 + XI 5151, VII 1770cA, dA; sūtra 161: V 
1148 + X 4094 + XI 4617d + 5650, X 3269, 3425, 3962, 4587; sūtra 163: VI 1252a; sūtra 170: 
VI 1210; sūtra 173: VIII 1919v; sūtra 180: III 979; sūtra 182: I 562b, VI 1392; sūtra 184: V 
1346; sūtra 189: V 1125, VIII 1919r; sūtra 201: V 1114, 1166; sūtra 203: V 1332a + VI 1493 + X 
3917; sūtra 204: I 769 + X 3920, V 1332a + VI 1493 + X 3917; sūtra 205: V 1279 + IX 2155
Maggasaṃyutta (text corresponding to a section in) IV 162
Mahā-assapurasutta (text corresponding to) I+IV 562b; VI 1392
Mahācattarīsakasutta (text corresponding to) V 1125
Mahāgosiṅgasutta (text corresponding to) V 1346
Mahāgovindasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 32 (frgs. 61–64); I+IV 165 (frgs. 18, 19.1,2)
Mahallakasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 495dr4–v5
Mahallisūtra (Dīrghāgama) III 805
Mahānidānasūtra (Madhyamāgama) I 413, 581; III 865, 868; VI 1238, 1246, 1272, 1294; IX 2067; 
XI 4518, 4603, 4606a
Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra including Mahāsudarśanasūtra (Dīrghāgama) I 9, 151, 168, 169, 170, 177 
[cf. also X (additions)], 183, 367, 370, 377, 399 [cf. also II, VIII and IX (additions)], 400 [cf. 
also IX (additions)], 402–406, IV 412 (frg. 62), I 415, 417, 421, 425, 431, 478, 479, 495a, 498 
[cf. also IX (additions)], 510, 512, 513, 578, 579, 585, 587 + XII 5890, I 588, 592, 618, 619, 
684, 685, 694, 790, 791; II 685; III 967; VI 1271, 1508 + XI 4465d + XII 6761 (rendering of all 
frgs. in XI), VI 1512; VII 1650; IX 2305, 2491, 2508, 2616, 2976; X 3347, 3431(?), 3828(?), 
3936(?), 4145, 4175b–g, 4177b–c, 4319; XI 4465d, 4696, 5258, 5600, 5773, 5783; XII 6258, 
6304, 6575 (part of 512i), 6673
Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra of the Dharmaguptakas V 1024
Mahāsaccakasutta (text corresponding to): see Kāyabhāvanāsūtra
Mahāsamājasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 33 (frgs. 31–32), I 177n7, 424, 581, 680, 796 (= III 906a); III 
891, 892, 894a + V 1300a + XI 5501r2–v6 (rendering of all frgs. in XI), III 906a–b; V 1513, 
1540; IX 3134, 3152
Mahāsiṃhanādasūtra: see Romaharṣaṇasūtra
Mahāsudarśanasūtra: see Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra
Mahātaṇhāsaṃkhayasutta: see Svātisūtra
Mahāvadānasūtra (Dīrghāgama) I 3, 9, 164, 168y2 [cf. also VIII (additions)], 177 [cf. also VI and 
VII (additions)], 399 [cf. also IX (additions)], 400, 478, 498 [cf. also VI and IX (additions)], 
600–602, 652 [cf. also VI and VII (additions)], 686, 691 [rendering in XI (additions)]; II 685; III

--- Page 221 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
199
916; IV 165 (frg. 41), 412 (frg. 34); VI 1592; IX 2009, 2032–2034, 2172, 2446, 2995; X 4175a; 
XI 4550, 5559, 5592(?), 5605, 5629
Makkaṭasutta (text corresponding to) IV 162d8r(?)1–v(?)7
Mālakyasūtra (Madhyamāgama) V 1279 + IX 2155
Maṇḍīśasūtra I (Dīrghāgama) X 3451; XI 5698
Māṇicarasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1138
Māraduhitaraḥsūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1441
Māratarjanīyasūtra (Madhyamāgama) IV 412 (frgs. 8–11); V 1070, 1424; X 4022; XII 6033
Māyājālasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 33 (frgs. 4+6+7, 8+9+10+19+39, 11+12+15, 13, 14, 16, 36, 38, 
40–42) [s. VII (additions)], 165 (frgs. 1, 2, 28, 29) [s. VII (additions)]; III 883b; V 1025r–v3
Nagarasūtra: see Nagaropamasūtra I and Nidānasaṃyukta of the Saṃyuktāgama
Nagaravindeyyasutta (text corresponding to) VI 1226; X 3270, 3273 + XI 4759b
Nagaropamasūtra I I 153(?), 154a–c, 155(?), 156, 157, 167r1–v2, I+II 176 [fols. 9, 10, 12, 13(?)], I 
179r–v3, 211v, 366(?), 369(?), 381 fol. 3, 408, 616, 617, 659, I+II 690 [cf. VII (additions)], I 
692(?), 693, 787; IX 3025(?); X 3581(?); XI 4519(?), 4531b(?), 4565(?), 5190(?); XII 6124(?)
Nagaropamasūtra II I 3dA2–4, 154d,e, II 176 (fols. 20, 21, 30), 179v3ff.; III 875, 905, 906c, 909, 
971; V 1275 + IX 2482; VII 1675; IX 2605; XI 5527
Nagaropamasūtra (Madhyamāgama) V 1118
Nagaropamavyākaraṇa: see Nagaropamasūtra II
Nandakovādasūtra VI 1226; XI 4560(?)
Nandikasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) IV 162av5ff.
Nandīpālasūtra X 3596; XI 4607a, 4768g, 5121(?) 
Nidānasaṃyukta of the Saṃyuktāgama (sūtras from; ed. NidSa)
“Abhaya” (sūtra 25) I 381
“Acela” (sūtra 20) I 381
“Ādi” (correct “Vibhaṅga”; sūtra 16) I 381, 504 (fols. 124–125r5), 688, 696r–v2
“Bhikṣu” (sūtra 17) I 381
“Bhūmika” (sūtra 22) I 381
“Bhūtam idam” (sūtra 24) I 381
“Brāhmaṇa” (sūtra 18) I 381, 615
“Dīpa I” (sūtra 3) I 158, 381
“Dṛṣṭisaṃpanna” (sūtra 23) I 381
“Dvayaṃ kāṣṭhe” (sūtra 8) I 381
“Kāṃsī” (sūtra 9) I 381
“Kātyāyana” (sūtra 19) I 381, 615
“Kumbha” (sūtra 10) I+II 51, 381, 689, 695
“Markaṭa” (sūtra 7) I 381
“Naḍakalāpika” (sūtra 6) I 381, 725
“Nagara” (sūtra 5) I 153(?), 155(?), 156(?), 369(?), 381, 408(?), 616r1–v4, 617(?), 659(?), I+II 
690 [cf. VII (additions)], I 692(?), 693(?), 787(?)
“Na yuṣmākam” (sūtra 13) I 381, 616v5
“Nivṛta” (sūtra 12) I 381
“Pratītya” (sūtra 14) I 381, 785
“Śūnyatā” (sūtra 15) I 381
“Tiṃburuka” (sūtra 21) I 381
“Vibhaṅga” (NidSa: “Ādi”; sūtra 16) I 381, 504 (fols. 124–125r5), 688, 696r–v2
“Vṛkṣa I and II” (sūtras 1 and 2) I 51, 158, 381
“Yo vadet” (sūtra 11) I 381, I+II 680a, I 689
Nidānasaṃyutta [text corresponding to Mahāvaggo XII.64(4) atthirāgo] V 1089
Pacalāsutta (text corresponding to) IV 412 (frg. 32)
Pañcatrayasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 32 (frgs. 1–6), 33 (frgs. 1–7); III 882b(?)
Parivrājakasaṃyukta of the Saṃyuktāgama (text corresponding to a sūtra in)

--- Page 222 of 425 ---
200
KLAUS WILLE
Anāthapiṇḍada I 612
Brāhmaṇasatyāni I 612
Dīrghanakha I 612
Kokanada I 612
Parivrājaka Sthavira(?) I 612
Śarabha I 612
Pāṭalakasūtra (Madhyamāgama) V 1402 + 1403a + IX 2082a
Pāṭimātṛsūtra: see Bhārgavasūtra
Pātisutta (text corresponding to) X 3299
Piṅgalātreyasūtra (Dīrghāgama) X 3979rz–v4
Potalakasūtra (Madhyamāgama) V 1332a + VI 1493 + X 3917
Prahāṇasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1445(?)
Prasādanīyasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 32 (frg. 66)
Prāsādikasūtra (Dīrghagama) IV 32 (frg. 84), 165 (frg. 43); VIII 1870
Pratītyasamutpādavibhaṅgasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) I 504; XI 5477
Pravāraṇasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1193; VI 1598r–v3
Premasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1375b
Pudgalasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 165 (frg. 27); I 422; III 879, 996; V 1359; VI 1532; XI 5102
Puṇyasūtra (Madhyamāgama) IV 412 (frg. 32)
Purisagatisutta (text corresponding to) VI 1322
Rāhulovādasūtra (Madhyamāgama) V 1117
Rājasūtra: see Śrāmaṇyaphalasūtra
Rāmaputrasūtra (Madhyamāgama) I 769 + X 3920
Raṃbhakasūtra (Madhyamāgama) V 1332a + VI 1493 + X 3917
Rāṣṭrapālasūtra (Madhyamāgama) IV 412 (frgs. 11v5–16); III 804; V 1896; VI 1423 + X 4092 
(rendering of both frgs. in X); XI 4568; XII 6579(?)
Rathavinītasutta (text corresponding to) II 163b,d; VI 1329
Romaharṣaṇasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 32 (frgs. 41–57), 500 (frg. 5); V 1102(?)
Rūpiyapātisutta (text corresponding to) X 3299r1–5
Ṣaḍāyatanavibhaṅgasūtra (Madhyamāgama) VI 1252
Śakrapraśnasūtra (Madhyamāgama) I 409, 581; V 1151v2–5 + VI 1415, V 1421, 1422 + X 3355; 
VII 1687B
Śaktiśatasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) III 947
Saḷāyatanasaṃyutta (text corresponding to a section in) IV 30
Sallasutta (text corresponding to) IV 162d8v(?)8f.
Śalyasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 32 (frgs. 25–33), IV 165 (frg. 6) + IX 2578, IV 165 (frgs. 7–14), 500 
(frg. 3) + X 3274, IV 500 (frg. 4)
Saṃgrāmajitsūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1183r1–3
Śaṃkarakasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 33 (frg. 28–29,33); 165 (frg. 24–26r, 42,51+58); 180 (frg. 3–4,6 
[= IX 2063e])
Saṃyuktāgama [text corresponding to a sūtra in the Chinese Saṃyuktāgama, Za ahan jing (T 99)̣]13 
I+IV 30 (sūtras 3–9, 73–75, 103, 130–131, 163, 259–260, 335–339, 342, 508–510, 982?), I+IV
+V 50a, h+j+i (sūtra 1329), I+II+IV 51 (sūtras 283–284, 292, 344, 415–417, 422–424, 440–442, 
485–486), I 61 (sūtra 252), 149 (? sūtra 379), 153 (? sūtra 287), 154a–c (sūtra 287), 155 (? sūtra 
287), 156 (sūtra 287), 157 (sūtra 287), 158 (sūtras 283–285), 160br–v5 (sūtra 80), v6 (? sūtra 
81), c (sūtra 1077), I+IV 162a (sūtras 854–855), d8, 9 (sūtras 620–622), I 167 (sūtras 287, 938), 
I+II 176 fols. 9–13 (? sūtra 287), fol. 70 (sūtra 981), fol. 72v2–5 (sūtra 583), I 178ar–v2 (sūtra 
981), 179r–v3 (sūtra 287), 181 (? sūtra 379), 184 (sūtra 979), 241 (sūtra 252), 366b,c (? sūtra 
287), 368 (? sūtra 379), 369 (? sūtra 287), 376 (sūtras 81–83), 381 (sūtras 283–303, 343–346), 
408 (sūtra 287), 418r1–5 (sūtra 981), 430 (? sūtra 379), 496r (sūtra 981), 499 (sūtras 393?, 981), 
13 For arrangement according to the sequence of the sūtras cf. Chung 2008; the text of a given catalogue number does not necessarily stem from a Saṃyuktāgama manuscript.

--- Page 223 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
201
I+II 504 (fols. 124–125r5: sūtra 298, fols. 125r5–126v4: sūtra 348, fols. 126v4–127v1: sūtra 
349, fols. 127v1–129r1: sūtra 981, fol. 129r2–v5: sūtra 1257), I 506 (sūtra 981), I+VI 533 
(sūtras 723–729, 747), I 581 (sūtra 981), 582 (sūtras 369–371), 612 (sūtras 966–972), 613 
(sūtras 831–832), 615 (sūtras 300–301), 616 (sūtras 287–288), 617 (sūtra 287), 630 (? sūtra 
252), 659 (sūtra 287), I+II 680a (sūtras 293, 351), I 681 (sūtra 981), 688 (sūtra 298), 689 (sūtras 
292–293), 690 (? sūtra 287), 692 (? sūtra 287), 693 (sūtra 287), 695 (sūtra 292), 696r–v2 (sūtra 
298), 723 (? sūtra 252), 724 (sūtra 252), 725a (sūtra 288), 785 (sūtra 296), 787 (sūtra 287); III 
876 (sūtra 583), 881 (sūtra 349), 890a (sūtra 442), 947 (sūtras 400–401), 994 (? sūtra 276); 1001 
(sūtra 715); V 1031 (sūtras 983–984), 1089 (sūtras 374–377), 1099 (sūtras 1172–1173), 1101 [? 
Cf. X (additions)] (sūtra 95), 1107 (sūtra 1106), 1112 (sūtra 1146), 1113 (? sūtra 254), 1120 + 
1178 (sūtra 993), 1127 (sūtras 650–652), 1132 (? sūtra 302), 1138 (sūtras 1323–1324), 1140 
(sūtras 1213–1215), 1145 (sūtra 506), 1146 (sūtras 506–507), 1152 (sūtras 1169–1170), 1156 + 
VI 1499 + IX 3121 (sūtras 253, 254), V 1161 (sūtra 1117), 1168 + 1305 (sūtras 378–379), 1174 
(= I 612, fol. 157), 1183 (sūtras 1072–1073), 1193 (sūtra 1212), 1250ar2–v (sūtra 1282), 1250b 
(sūtra 995), 1263 (sūtra 583), 1284 (sūtra 583), 1311 + X 4097 (sūtras 312–313), V 1313 (? sūtra 
497), 1347 (sūtra 43), 1375 (sūtras 983–985), V 1396 + IX 3056 (sūtra 1073), V 1416 (sūtra 
1176), 1441 (sūtra 1092), 1442 (sūtra 234); 1445 (? sūtra 877 or 878); VI 1226 (sūtras 273–282, 
304), 1242b (sūtras 583, 981), 1381 (sūtras 1247–1248), 1393 (sūtras 454–455), 1394 (sūtra 
322), 1399 (sūtras 1207–1208), 1404 (sūtra 234), 1457 (sūtras 347–348), 1498 + VIII 1965 
(sūtras 393–395), VI 1534 (sūtra 1307), 1572a (? sūtra 379), 1586 (sūtra 1227), 1598 (sūtra 
1212); VII 1644 (sūtras 994–996), 1687A (sūtra 981); VIII 1839 (sūtra 565), 1863 + X 3576 
(sūtras 483, 485–489), VIII 1879 (sūtras 323–333), 1884 (sūtras 485–489, 483), 1950 (sūtras 
449–450); IX 2051 (sūtra 743), 2052 (sūtra 272), 2410b (? sūtra 252), 2436 [sūtra 344; part of I 
51g (NidSa Ms. 63/64)], 3025 (? sūtra 287); X 3263 (sūtra 110), 3270 (sūtra 280), 3272 (sūtras 
292–293), 3273 + XI 4759b (sūtra 280), X 3323 (sūtras 290–291), 3581 (? sūtra 287), 3838 
(sūtras 454–455), 3865 (sūtras 284–285), 3872 (sūtras 300–301), 3905 + XI 4904 (sūtras 830–
831; rendering of both frgs. in XI), X 3907 (sūtras 296–297), 3911 (sūtras 624–627), 3915 
(sūtras 369–371), 3932 (sūtras 298–300), 3956 (? sūtra 351), 4121 (sūtra 347), 4125 (? sūtra 
379), 4215 (? sūtra 1278), 4233 (sūtras 787–788), 4236 (sūtras 1207–1209), 4283 (? sūtra 379); 
XI 4395ir (? sūtra 252), 4437 (sūtra 185 or 591), 4442(?), 4470r–v3 (sūtra 344), 4471 (sūtras 
393–394), 4484 (sūtra 1146), 4496 (sūtra 980), 4507 (sūtras 979–980), 4519 (? sūtra 287), 
4531b (? sūtra 287), 4560 (? sūtra 276), 4565 (? sūtra 287), 4759b (sūtra 280), 4763a (sūtra 
622), 4891 (sūtras 403–404), 5029 (sūtra 966; belongs to I 612 fol. 157), 5190 (? sūtra 287), 
5262 (? sūtra 566), 5319 (sūtra 343), 5477 (sūtra 298), 5582 (? sūtra 252); XII 5940A (sūtra 832)
Saṃyuttanikāya (text corresponding to suttas from) X 3299
Sandakasutta (text corresponding to) III 886A5–B8, 942
Saṅgītisūtra (Dīrghāgama) I 3, 168 [cf. also VII and IX (additions)], 177 [cf. also VIII and IX 
(additions)], 367, 411, 416, 426, 427, 429, 498 [cf. also VII–IX (additions)], 505, 589, 594, 597, 
608–611, 652 [cf. also VIII and IX (additions)], 685, 687 + X 4305, I 776, 778, 783; III 895, 
991; IV 412 (frg. 33); V 1154; VI 1414, 1559, 1597; VII 1654; VIII 1922; IX 2214, 2273, 2362, 
2787; X 3684(?), 3738, 4175h, 4178, 4220; XI 4597, 5263, 5608; XII 5815, 6449, 6465
Saptasūryasūtra VI 1267, 1344(?); VIII 1678a
Satipaṭṭhānasaṃyutta (text corresponding to a section in) IV 162
Ṣaṭṣaṭkasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) VI 1226 (frgs. 24v–25)
Sātyakasūtra: see Kāyabhāvanāsūtra
Satyasaṃyukta (text corresponding to a sūtra in) II 51; III 890a, 947
Satyasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) I 499v65–82
Śikhālakasūtra (Madhyamāgama) IV 412 (frgs. 22–31); VI 1244; VIII 1914 + X 3354 (rendering of 
both frgs. in X); X 4195; XI 4589vc–e
Siṅgālovādasutta: see Śikhālakasūtra
Skandhasaṃyukta (text corresponding to a sūtra in) I 376; IV 30
Śoṇatāṇḍyasūtra/Śoṇatāṇṭhyasūtra (Dīrghāgama) III 894b(?); V 1251 + XII 6549 (rendering of 
both frgs. in XII), V 1352c; VIII 1878(?); X 3762(?), 3766(?)
Śrāmaṇyaphalasūtra (Dīrghāgama) V 1290a; VI 1525v3ff.

--- Page 224 of 425 ---
202
KLAUS WILLE
Śroṇakoṭiviṃśasūtra (Madhyamāgama) IV 412 (frgs. 6–7)
Śroṇakoṭiviṃśasūtra V 1113, V 1156bv5 + VI 1499
Śrutasūtra (Dīrghāgama) IV 495dr1–3,e
Sūcilomasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1138
Sujātaputrasūtra: see Śikhālakasūtra
Śukasūtra (Dīrghāgama) V 1290d–f
Śukasūtra (Madhyamāgama) VI 1210
Sunakṣatrasūtra: see Śalyasūtra
Suvaṇṇapātisutta (text corresponding to) X 3299r5–v
Svāgatasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) I 504; III+IV 881
Svātisūtra (Madhyamāgama) V 1114, 1166
Tridaṇḍisūtra (Dīrghāgama) X 3979rx–y
Tṛṣṇāvicaritasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1375a
Upādāyaparitasyanāsūtra (Saṃyuktāgma) V 1347
Upakkilesasutta (text corresponding to) VI 1384
Upālisūtra (Madhyamāgama) IV 412 (frgs. 17–21); III 804, 872, 1007; VI 1291, 1302, 1522; VIII 
1802, 1913; IX 2047, 2932; X 4193
Upasenasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) I 61, 241, 630(?), 723, 724; IX 2410b(?); XI 4395ir(?), 5582 (?)
Upastabdhasūtra: see Mahallisūtra
Vanapatthasutta (text corresponding to) VI 1304a
Vappasutta (text corresponding to) V 1348
Vedanāsaṃyukta (text corresponding to a sūtra in) II 51; IV 30g
Veṇukātyāyanagotrīsūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1156 + VI 1499 + IX 3121
Vidyāsthānopamasūtra I 160a, 366a, 497, 499r1–57; IX 2210A
“Vīṇā” in Saṃyuttanikāya (text corresponding to) V 1152
Vratapādasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) V 1107
sūtras (according to the content):
accomplishment (bhāvanā) of the fivefold meditation (paṃcāṅgikasamādhi) III 990
Buddha legend; gāthās addressed to Ājīvika Upaga V 1714r
conversion of Śroṇakoṭiviṃśa V 1029
descent of the Buddha from heaven III 835
exposition on sequences of Buddhist technical terms III 948
groups of three individuals each (pudgala) V 1142
merits of eating only once a day (ekāsanabhojana) II 559b
methods of self-torment V 1153
ordination of monks (ehibhikṣukā) V 1155(?); VI 1337
puṇyābhiṣyandas (passages from) II 163
Śakra as a weaver feeds Mahākāśyapa (text corresponding to Udāna III.7) V 1035
stanza of Aśvajit V 1173, 1190b3
sūtra on beings enjoying happiness on reaching high levels of meditation V 1149, 1325
sūtra of the brahmin girl Vairocanī I 496
sūtra with Hastaka-Āṭavaka as protagonist V 1128
sūtra with partial correspondence to the Araṇavibhaṅgasutta (~ sūtra 169 in the Chinese Madhyamāgama) II 163a
sūtra reminiscent of Catuṣpariṣatsūtra V 1184
sūtra reminiscent of Catuṣpariṣatsūtra and Daśabalasūtra V 1137, 1167, 1188
sūtra titles (enumeration of some) I 364
twenty things not desired III 888

--- Page 225 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
203
sūtras (not yet identified) I 24, 147r, II 163, I 178, 496v, 620, 789; III 807, 808, 816, 820, 834, 836, 
860, 862, 864, 866a, 867, 877(?), 880, 882, 886, 908(?), 913(?), 917, 927(?), 928, 931b, 932, 
935, 938–940, 948, 950, 955, 962(?), 963, 965, 968, 973, 980, 982(?), 995, 1004, 1010; V 
1026(?), 1032, 1111(?), 1116(?), 1127, 1129, 1133b, 1135, 1136b, 1139, 1143, 1144(?), 1151r1–
v1, 1157(?), 1159, 1164, 1169(?), 1172, 1180–1182, 1185(?), 1187b,c(?), 1313(?), 1332b, 
1343v3–6; VI 1216av2–6, 1415r1–v1; VII 1662, 1735, 1736; IX 3066; X 3313, 3319, 3487, 
3762, 3784, 3871, 3873(?), 3886(?), 3898, 3905, 4047(?)
b) Non-canonical sūtras
Dharmaśarīrasūtra I 596; III 893
Dharmaśarīrasūtra(?) (~ T 766) I+IV 623; VII 1689
Maitreyavyākaraṇa IX 2013 frgs. 30, 312,33
3. Anthologies of religious poems and narratives
a) Anthologies of religious poems
Anavataptagāthā I 48a+dr4–v,b,c,e,f,g, 49, 50c,d, 145cr6–7, 187 fol. (1)2r3–6, 662
Arthavargiyāṇi sūtrāṇi IV 662a2,c8
Attadaṇḍasutta (text corresponding to) V 662a2r1–v2
Karmapathagāthā I 48ar1–3
Pārāyaṇa I+IV 50b,e; V 1375ar1–2 (quotation from; cf. also V 1031ar5–v1, 1171v8–10); VI 1581 
+ IX 2423, VI 1582
Pretāvadāna I+IV 49
Sāriputtasutta (text corresponding to) V 662a2v3–8
Sthaviragāthā I 49
Tuvaṭakasutta (text corresponding to) V 662c8
Udānavarga I 1, 5, 8, 13 (fol. 1 + IX 2007 + XII 6586; fol. 2 + VIII 1993), 14, 38, 49, 65–72, 
169e6 [cf. SHT XII (additions)], 177m10 [cf. SHT XII (additions)], 247, 248 [additional frg. in 
IX (additions)], 249–351, 359, 373, 399 (frgs. 1 and 7) [cf. VIII and XII (additions)], 447–472, 
481, 490–492, 525–530; 634–637, 663, 664, 726–744, 745v + XI 4395iv, I 746–760, 797–799, 
800 (= X 4119), 801; III 958; IV 49; VI 1274, 1293 + IX 2078 [rendering of both frgs. in XI 
(additions)], VI 1470; VII 1631b, 1649, 1680, 1715, 1786, 1795; IX 2007, 2039, 2046, 2074v, 
2077, 2079r, 2116, 2129, 2198, 2328c+d, 2483, 2484, 2489, 2496, 2499, 2500, 2505, 2510, 
2528, 2547a,b, 2548, 2559, 2561, 2563, 2564, 2574, 2599, 2612, 2642, 2652, 2655, 2675, 2701, 
2791, 2796, 2842, 2849, 2851, 2855, 2859, 2863, 2873, 2963, 3013; X 4119 (= I 800), 4120, 
4127, 4149, 4320, 4357(?); XI 4395a,b, 4408, 5463 (missing frg. of I 258), 5483, 5494, 5500, 
5504, 5509h, 5516, 5518, 5530, 5541, 5558, 5562, 5564, 5567, 5576, 5591, 5599, 5612–5615, 
5632, 5639, 5658, 5714, 5716, 5723, 5732, 5794; XII 5820, 5829, 5885, 5946b,d,e,f, 5948c, 
6255, 6427
Uddesavibhaṅgasutta (text corresponding to) V 1141
Vimānāvadāna I+IV 49
b) Narratives
Cūḍapanthakāvadāna V 1349
Dharmapālāvadāna I 35ar
Dhūma(Dhūpa)-avadāna V 1318a
Haṃsa-jātaka: see Vinaya: Devadattavastu (V 1376 + X 3922; VII 1741)
Kṣemāvadāna V 1318b
Kunālāvadāna VII 1658; IX 2754, 2942; XI 4675b
Maitreyāvadāna (text corresponding to) V 1126
Māndhātāvadāna I+IV 558 + V 1162 (corresponds to sūtra 60 in the Chinese Madhyamāgama); III 
982a(?)
Mṛga-jātaka: see Vinaya: Devadattavastu (V 1376 + X 3922; VI 1383 + 1481)

--- Page 226 of 425 ---
204
KLAUS WILLE
Sahasodgatāvadāna V 1330 + VI 1335 + XI 4488 (rendering of all frgs. in XI), V 1524 + XII 
6237r1–vy (rendering of both frgs. in XII)
Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna VII 1750; IX 3104; X 3502
Śibi-avadāna I 35av,b
Siṃhalāvadāna V 1425
Śroṇakoṭikarṇāvadāna I 591 (Carmavastu of the Sarvāstivādins), 598 (Divyāvadāna or Carmavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins)
Subhadrāvadāna IX 2115a
Supriyāvadāna III 873
Sutasoma story I 26 [fols. 301v1–302,(306?),(309?)]
Svāgatāvadāna: see Vinayavibhaṅga of the Mūlasarvāstivādins [V 1124 + IX 2084 (rendering of 
both frgs. in IX) + XI 4570]
Valgusvarāvadāna V 1318c
Virūpāvadāna V 1186a + VI 1494 + X 3218 + XII 6164 [rendering of frg. V + VI in IX (additions) 
1186a], V 1186b, V 1186c + IX 2822, V 1186d–e
Avadāna texts (not yet identified) III 927(?), 982(?), 987; V 1111(?), 1144(?), 1165(?), 1169(?), 
1317, 1524 + XII 6237vz (rendering of both frgs. in XII); VII 1677, 1722; VIII 1935; X 3374, 
3582(?), 3693
4. Abhidharma, Buddhist technical terms, commentaries, Yoga
a) Abhidharma
Abhidharmadīpavibhāṣāprabhāvṛtti VII 1705a–d,f–l,n–p, e + X 3264, m + XII 6322; VIII 1973; 
XII 6325, 6327, 6370, 6374, 6378
Abhidharmakośa of Vasubandhu (kārikā) I 624; VII 1619, 1751; X 3280, 3420, 4262, 4289; XI 
5462
Abhidharmakośabhāṣya of Vasubandhu V 1109; VII 1704, 1708, 1709, 1733, 1738, 1743; VIII 
1823, 1824a; IX 2326; X 4136c; XI 4477, 4578, 4624c, 5646; XII 6614
Abhidharmakośaṭīkā Lakṣaṇānusāriṇī of Pūrṇavardhana VII 1683
Caturāgamopadeśa of Pārśva(?) I+IV 649 fol. 363
Dharmaskandha of Śāriputra V 1171 + VI 1458
Jñānaprasthāna of Kātyāyanīputra III 823; V 1131 + XI 5292, V 1187a; VII 1684, 1707 + X 3504 
+ 3969, VII 1744, 1752; VIII 1811, 1812 + XI 5374, VIII 1813, 1838, 1842, 1849, 1921, 1944, 
1982; IX 3107; X 3810, 3860
Kāraṇaprajñapti of the Prajñaptiśāstra of Maudgalyāyana V 1194 + VIII 1817; VI 1515
Karmaprajñapti of the Prajñaptiśāstra of Maudgalyāyana VII 1760
Lakṣaṇānusāriṇī: see Abhidharmakośaṭīkā Lakṣaṇānusāriṇī 
Lokaprajñapti of the Prajñaptiśāstra of Maudgalyāyana V 1134 (fol. 39) + 1177, 1134 (fol. 40) + X 
4214 (rendering of both frgs. in X); VI 1344(?), 1594b
Nyāyānusāra of Saṃghabhadra VII 1746 + X 3534; VIII 1885–1888, 1889 + X 4061, VIII 1890, 
1894, 1897(?), 1898, 1900, 1917; X 4191; XI 4556, 4750(?)
Pañcavastuka and Pañcavastukavibhāṣā V 1808
Prakaraṇa of Vasumitra I 27 [fols. 298, 302, 305, 306, frgs. e–g; rendering of all frgs. in XI 
(additions)], I+IV 599; III 925; V 1318d, 1808; VII 1697; VIII 1810, 1866, 1936, 1963, 1966, 
1990; IX 2965; X 3239; XII 6476
Prakaraṇabhāṣya of Vasumitra I+IV 19–20; V 1808b
Saṅgītiparyāya of Mahākauṣṭhila I 767
Vibhāṣā III 811; VI 1362; VII 1703; VIII 1830
Vijñānakāya of Devaśarman VIII 1869
Abhidharma texts (not yet identified commentary on the Abhidharmakośakārikās) VII 1698, 1747; 
VIII 1903, 1904, 1906, 1907, 1908; IX 3278; X 3278; XI 5150

--- Page 227 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
205
Abhidharma texts (not yet identified) I 15, 18, 653; III 809, 810, 920, 946, 961, 962(?), 989(?), 998; 
V 1176, 1309; VI 1307; VII 1600, 1604, 1660, 1685, 1702, 1706, 1710, 1728, 1729, 1732, 1734, 
1740a + IX 2225, VII 1740b + VIII 1844 + IX 2226, VII 1744, 1745 + VIII 1852, VII 1753(?), 
1763; VIII 1803, 1809, 1827(?), 1834–1837, 1840, 1845, 1847, 1848, 1853, 1854, 1862, 1871, 
1912, 1925, 1933, 1934, 1938, 1972; IX 2004, 2027, 2028, 2070(?), 2235, 2329, 2478, 2808, 
2882, 2917, 2968, 3024, 3027, 3030, 3070, 3084, 3102; X 3207, 3232, 3233, 3234, 3236, 3237, 
3240, 3242, 3243, 3248, 3254, 3259, 3271, 3285, 3288, 3316, 3352, 3359, 3398, 3400, 3402, 
3418, 3428, 3444, 3470, 3482, 3546, 3725, 3731, 3760, 3782, 3788, 3812, 3822, 3835, 3897, 
3912, 3927, 3950, 3995, 4017, 4025, 4059, 4216, 4231, 4232, 4244, 4247, 4266, 4340, 4344; XI 
4443, 4535, 4545, 4803, 4977, 5135, 5369, 5754; XII 5918
b) Buddhist technical terms
enumeration and explanation of different Buddhist terms I 363, 427, 614, I+IV 623, I+II 661, I+IV 
687a, I 778, 786; III 1003; V 1103, 1115, 1122, 1158, 1170, 1427; VI 1566; VII 1689; IX 3053
c) Commentary
commentary on āryasatyas III 802 (to the same Ms. IX 2015–2017)
commentary on samādhibhāvanā and kāya V 1171 + VI 1458
commentary on smṛtyupasthānas V 1104
commentary on Udānavarga III 922; IV 649 (frgs. c, d)
sūtra commentary (not yet identified) I 24, I 34 + IX 2013; V 1026(?), 1087(?); VIII 1828
d) Yoga
Yoga manual (= Yogalehrbuch) I 150, 164a, 183a, 407a
Yogavidhi I 150; III 918
(not yet identified) V 1175; VIII 1816
5. Cult
a) Donation formula I+IV 23, I 24, 47, 126, I+IV 140, I 141–144, I+IV 146, I 177i4 [cf. XII 
(additions)], 396; III 852, 853, 855–857, 859; V 1233; VI 1212, 1213(?), 1231, 1232, 1234–
1237, 1391(?); VII 1646B, 1781; VIII 1931(?), 1942(?); IX 2064(?), 2471(?), 2501; XI 4492
b) Prayers and confessions
blessing (sauvastika) II 176 fols. 54, 56
confessions V 1096 (Indrasena’s confession), 1105; VIII 1924 (Indrasena’s confession); X 4308 
(Indrasena’s confession)
prayers I 147v, 148; V 1668
c) Apotropaic texts (rakṣā) und other charms (dhāraṇī, vidyā, mantra)
apotropaic texts III 819, 826, 844, 913, 984–986
Asilomapratisara I+IV 60; III 843
Āṭānāṭi(ka)hṛdaya I 243, 372; III 894a + V 1300a + XI 5501r1–2 (rendering of all frgs. in XI); IX 
3164
bewitching charm (vaśīkaraṇa) I 640
blessings and mantras III 914; IX 3083
dhāraṇī (invocation) I 499v1–42
dhāraṇī (not yet identified) I 646; III 845, 847, 848, 899, 901, 912; IV 32 (frg. 66v); V 1198, 1199; 
VI 1207, 1253–1259, 1262, 1264–1266, 1269, 1270, 1277, 1278, 1310; VIII 1815, 1928; VIII 
1942; IX 2058, 2406, 2417, 2457, 2460; X 3627; XI 4445; XII 6147

--- Page 228 of 425 ---
206
KLAUS WILLE
Mahākaruṇāgra(?) I 499v1–42
Mahāmāyūrīhṛdaya I 499v43–74
namas text I 499v83–88, 516, 627; VII 1694
Sarvadharma-anantanayamukhā dhāraṇī(?) I 62
Sarvatathāgatoṣṇīṣavijayanāmadhāraṇī(kalpa) V 1191
Sitātapatrahṛdayamantra V 1190
snake charm I 242, 420, 723, 724?, 745r [rendering in XI (additions)] + XI 4395ir; V 1250aV1; IX 
2455; XI 5582
spells and charms III 816–818, 825, 846, 902, 906, 970, 972; VI 1288
Uṣṇīṣavijayādhāraṇī V 1191
Vaiśālīgāthā II 176 fol. 72r–v2
vidyā text III 842, III 861 + VII 1790 + IX 2458 (fol. 3; fol. 4: VI 1260), III 900, 903, 904, 906, 
907, 910, 1008; VI 1229, 1260; VII 1603, 1647, 1657, 1798; IX 2058, 2417, 2480; XI 4689
d) Names and epithets of the Buddha
Buddhas of the Bhadrakalpa III 840, 840a
epithets of the Buddha III 839, 1013
epithets of the Buddha at the beginning of a sūtra I+II 661
Varṇaśatam: see Upālisūtra
e) Oracle
consultation of the dice III 897, 898
6. Mahāyāna
a) Sūtra
Aṣṭādaśasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā III 933–934, 951, 956; V 1022
Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra XI 4393
Buddhanāmasūtra XI 4390, 4392, 4444
Daśabhūmikasūtra I 414 [rendering of all frgs. in XI (additions)]
Gaganacakṣuṣparivarta (Mahāsaṃnipātasūtra) V 1197a
Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra I 531; III 960
Karuṇāpuṇḍarīkasūtra III 976
Kāśyapaparivarta IV 374
Niyatāniyatāvatāramudrāsūtra/ Niyatāniyatagatimudrāvatārasūtra VIII 1997
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā III 884
Prajñāpāramitā text (longer) X 4301, 4353; XI 4364, 4454b–d
Prajñāpāramitā text (not yet identified) I 532; XI 4380, 4381, 4387, 4455, 4457
Prajñāpāramitāhṛdayasūtra VIII 1923
Ratnameghasūtra III 945
Ratnarāśisūtra (quotation from) III 860 fol. 42v
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra I 622 + X 3413; X 4303; XI 4374, 4394, 4439, 4447, 4454a, 4458, 
4462, 4463, 4466–4469
Samādhirājasūtra XI 4382, 4459
Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra III 923, 981
Sarvadharmaguṇavyūharājasūtra V 1196
Śatasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā I+IV 645; III 1012; VI 1587 (= V 1385); VII 1755(?), 1757(?); IX 
2327(?)
Śūraṃgamasamādhisūtra XI 4368
Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra I 575, 576; V 1034, 1132; VII 1693; IX 2006a,c; X 3300; XI 4388
Ugradattaparipṛcchā (quotation from) I+IV 36r5–v4; III 860 fol. 42r

--- Page 229 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
207
Vajracchedikā V 1195; VIII 1910, 1939 + XI 4579 (rendering of all frgs. in XI)
texts (not yet identified) I 647, 648; III 836(?), 949; V 1110; VI 1577
b) Philosophical schools
Bodhicaryāvatāra of Śāntideva (quotations from) XI 4460
Bodhisatvabhūmi III 964
7. Vajrayāna
Anantamukhanirhāradhāraṇīsūtra III 1014; XI 4370, 4378
Diśāsauvāstikasūtra I 660; XI 4376, 4391
Jñānolkadhāraṇī XI 4369
Mahāmāyūrīvidyārājñī (Pañcarakṣā text) I 63 [rendering of all frgs. in IX (additions)] , 375, 524; 
V 1459; IX 2030; X 4218 + XI 4561 (rendering of both frgs. in XI); XI 4537b, 4544, 4563, 
5299; XII 5927
Mahāsāhasrapramardinī (Pañcarakṣā text) III 983, 1011; X 4300 (frgs. 18–30); XI 4373
Sarvatathāgatoṣṇīṣasitātapatrā nāma aparājitāmahāpratyaṅgiravidyārājñī I+IV 631; V 1192; IX 
2336; X 3817, 4352; XI 4436, 4440a,h; XII 6918
Sumukhadhāraṇī/Sumukhasūtra XI 4365, 4372, 4377, 4379
8. Poetry
a) Drama
Buddhist dramas I 16
Śāriputraprakaraṇa of Aśvaghoṣa I 16, 57
b) Epic poetry
Buddhacarita of Aśvaghoṣa I 432; IX 2054; XII 7191
Buddhacarita (text corresponding to) I 24p,w,ii
kāvya anthology I+IV 378; VII 1628, 1669
Saundaranandakāvya of Aśvaghoṣa I 515; III 921
c) Hymns (stava, stotra)
Anaparāddhastotra of Mātṛceṭa I 197 [frgs. 15, 20(5)+20(6), 22(6), 23(3)], 198b1, 201a, 700; VI 
1638
Brāhmaṇakṛtastava I 54
Buddhastotra I 53, 56, 189, 191, 192, 193, 194, 196, 198, 199, 200, 202(?), 203, 204, 379, 435, 
626, 699, 702r1–v2, 703(?). 704; VII 1642, 1655v, 1789a(?); XII 5830
Guṇāparyantastotra of Triratnadāsa I 197a, frg. 19(1)+26(3), 705
invocations of the Buddha I 4, 626; IX 2069
Jambudvīpastava IX 2959
Munayastava I 188, 190, 195, 203, 205, 209, 434, 480, 517, 628, 697; VI 1216ar–v1; IX 2352; X 
3941; XI 4441 (frg. 2)
Praṇāmastava IX 2025f(?)
Prasādapratibhodbhava (= Śatapañcāśatka) of Mātṛceṭa I 4, 7, 12, 27 (fols. 273, 276, 280, 281), 
59, 208, 209, 211r–214, 216, 220, 221, 223, 224, 227, 230–232, 234–240r, 356, 357, 380, 436, 
438–442, 481, 482, 486, 487, 518, 519, 629 (frgs. a–c), 707–722, 761, 793; VI 1239a, 1241; VII 
1777; VIII 1805, 1807; IX 2118, 2119, 2221a, 2444, 2497, 2644, 2651, 2680, 2848, 2857, 2865, 
2866, 2951; X 3327, 4133a, 4297; XI 4569, 5537, 5633r, 5586; XII 5901, 6081, 6499
Rāhulastava I 177k8r1–3 [cf. XII (additions)], 197, 209, 481, 482, 517, 628, 701, 706
Saṃghastotra I 434, 628; IX 2069bvz

--- Page 230 of 425 ---
208
KLAUS WILLE
Śatapañcāśatka: see Prasādapratibhodbhava
song of praise for Aśvaghoṣa I 34
stotra (other) I 55, 191, 433, 698, 706; VIII 1998; IX 2464, 2541
Varṇārhavarṇa of Mātṛceṭa I 4d, 7, 12, 58, 177k8r4–vz [cf. XII (additions)], 192m, 197 [frgs. 
22(7), 23(1)+24(9), 24(2)], 206, 207, 210, 215, 217–219, 222, 223, 225 [cf. VI and XII 
(additions)], 226, 228, 229, 233, 358, 436, 437, 443, 481–485, 518–523, 638 (frgs. a–c, frg. 
2+3+4), 702v3–5; VI 1460; VII 1627 fol. 9, 1779a; VIII 1995; IX 2008, 2074r, 2115c, 2117B, 
2139, 2201, 2454, 2486, 2758, 2847, 2962, 2986, 3050; X 4126, 4139; XI 5487, 5588, 5662; XII 
5824, 6195, 6573
Varṇārhavarṇa of Mātṛceṭa (commentary on) VIII 1971
texts (not yet identified) I 4, 25, I+IV 52, I 138r6ff., 191, 193, 197, 201; III 812, 813, 837–839 
(lyrics and didactic poetry), 911 + IX 2527, III 919; IV 145 (lyrics and didactic poetry), 187 fol. 
(1)2v–16 (lyrics and didactic poetry); V 1624; VI 1625; IX 2109(?), 2449, 2677
d) Narratives
Jātakamālā of Āryaśūra I 625, 638; VIII 1867; X 3219B(?), 4226; XI 4506
Kalpanāmaṇḍitikā of Kumāralāta I 21, 638; V 1015(?); IX 2952
Sutasoma story I 26 [fols. 301v1–302, (306?), (309?)]
work of Saṃghasena I 26 [fols. 248–301v1]
texts (not yet identified) I 24, 26 (Jātaka?), I+IV 37, I 191; III 824, 835, 870; VI 1225; VII 1663, 
1673, 1674, 1676
9. Fragments not yet identified
fragments with expressions from:
5 abhavyasthāna V 1123
6 abhijñā I 533d + IX 2766b + XII 6034; IX 2766, 3059, 3080
agraprajñapti VII 1749; X 3423
ānāpānasmṛtibhāvanā IX 2065, 3091
4 āryasatya III 874
37 bodhipakṣikadharma V 1427; IX 2056 + X 3530 (rendering of both frgs. in X)
37 bodhipakṣikadharma and 32 mahāpuruṣalakṣaṇa I 604; VI 1453
daśanāmaka VII 1718
5 indriya V 1127
madhyamaśīla VI 1268
32 mahāpuruṣalakṣaṇa I 593+603, 604, 768; V 1045a; VI 1453; IX 2035, 2037, 2895
prajñāskandha X 4000; XI 5143
pratītyasamutpāda formula [see also Nagaropamasūtra I] I 24m, 152, 153, 154a,b,c, 155, 176 
(fols. 9, 10, 12, 13), 366b,c, 369, 420 [fols. (3), 5, 7r1–v2], I+II 690 [cf. VII (additions)], I 692; 
III 833; IX 3025; X 3581; XI 4519, 4531b, 4565, 5190(?), 5395, 5502, 5534; XII 6018
7 saddharma III 878
samādhiskandha XII 5906
samādhiskandha and prajñāskandha XI 5100
4 samyakprahāṇa XI 4897B, 5054B
4 samyakprahāṇa and 4 ṛddhipādā XI 4779r–vb
saptaratna VI 1387 + VIII 1857; XI 4481(?)
śīlaskandha X 3542, 3768, 4196
śīlaskandha and samādhiskandha VIII 1873
3 smṛtyupasthāna III 989(?); VI 1550; VII 1717; X 3884
4 smṛtyupasthāna IX 3039

--- Page 231 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
209
4 smṛtyupasthāna and 4 samyakprahāṇa I 614; III 1002
4 vaiśāradya VI 1504; IX 2323, 3006A; X 3200; XII 6380
4 vaiśāradya and 3 smṛtyupasthāna VI 1550; X 3202 + XI 4778 (rendering of both frgs. in XI)
5 vimuktyāyatana IX 2509; X 3745, 3755, 3934; XI 5092
maṅgala verses IX 2773
verses I 626; III 814, 841, 911 + IX 2527; V 1179; VII 1601, 1610, 1613–1615 (Sn? ), 1617r, 1618, 
1620–1623, 1625–1627, 1629–1631a, 1632–1637, 1639–1642a, 1661, 1667, 1670–1672, 1711–
1713, 1716A, 1765–1770a,b, 1775–1776, 1778, 1782–1783, 1785, 1787–1789; VIII 1801, 1831 
(A2: Suttanipāta and Theragāthā), 1927, 1932, 1979; IX 2005, 2012, 2038 (parallel to Uv 
7.11e–12d and PrMoSū, concluding verses 8e–9d respectively), 2059, 2062(?), 2083(?), 2109 
(parallel to III 838), 2314, 2769, 2966, 2967; X 3410, 3414; XI 4389, 4448, 4449, 5517, 5524, 
5535(?)
work of a Dharmatrāta IX 2026
list of gods VII 1791
B. Scientific literature
1. Letters and grammar
Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini VII 1606
declension exercises III 849 + X 4157
grammar related to Kātantra I 633
grammar (not yet identified) VII 1664; X 3221(?)
Kātantra of Śarvavarma I 64, 246, 489, 534, 644; V 1208
Kaumāralāta I 22
syllabary I 244, 245, 445, 446, 488, 632, 794, 795(?); VII 1681
2. Metrics
Chandoviciti I 654
3. Dictionary
synonyms in ślokas VI 1221; VII 1723(?)
4. Astronomy and Astrology
names from the signs of the zodiac used in Eastern Asia I 397
5. Iconography
Mahākāla(?) V 1200+1201
6. Nīti
Laghucāṇakyarājanītiśāstra V 1418
7. Medicine
Bheḍasaṃhitā I 641, 642
recipes I 24; III 910
Siddhasāra of Ravigupta VIII 1901; X 3422, 4358
medical texts (not yet identified) I 17, 643; III 827–831; VII 1645(?), 1655r1–3(?); VIII 1926, 
1929, 1996, 1999; IX 2379(?), 2461(?); X 4267

--- Page 232 of 425 ---
210
KLAUS WILLE
Abbreviations
FakSHT
Faksimile-Wiedergaben von Sanskrithandschriften aus den Berliner Turfanfunden I: 
Handschriften zu fünf Sūtras des Dīrghāgama, hg. von E. Waldschmidt unter Mitarbeit 
von W. Clawiter, D. Schlingloff und R. L. Waldschmidt, The Hague: Mouton & Co 1963 
(Indo-Iranian Facsimiles Series, 1).
NidSa
Ch. Tripāṭhī, Fünfundzwanzig Sūtras des Nidānasaṃyukta, Berlin: Akademie-Verlag 
1962 (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 8).
PrMoSū
Prātimokṣasūtra der Sarvāstivādins, nach Vorarbeiten von Else Lüders und Herbert 
Härtel hg. und übers. von G. von Simson, 2 vols, Göttingen 1986 und 2000: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 11).
SHT
Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turfanfunden; Teil 1: unter Mitarbeit von W. Clawiter und 
L. Holzmann herausgegeben von E. Waldschmidt; Teil 2: im Verein mit W. Clawiter und 
L. Sander-Holzmann herausgegeben von E. Waldschmidt; Teil 3: unter Mitarbeit von W. 
Clawiter und L. Sander-Holzmann herausgegeben von E. Waldschmidt; Teil 4–5: bearbeitet von L. Sander und E. Waldschmidt; Teil 6–9: beschrieben von K. Wille, herausgegeben von H. Bechert; Teil 10–11: beschrieben von K. Wille, Wiesbaden/Stuttgart: 
Franz Steiner Verlag 1965, 1968, 1971, 1980, 1985, 1989, 1995, 2000, 2004, 2008, 2012 
(Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, X,1–11).
T
Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō or Taishō Issaikyō, 100 vols, ed. J. Takakusu and K. Watanabe, 
Tōkyō 1924ff.
Uv
Udānavarga, hg. von F. Bernhard, 2 vols, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 1965 
und 1968 (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 10).
VAV
Das Varṇārhavarṇastotra des Mātṛceṭa, hg. und übers. von J.-U. Hartmann, Göttingen: 
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 1987 (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 12).
Works Cited
Chung, Jin-il
2008
A Survey of the Sanskrit Fragments Corresponding to the Chinese Saṃyuktāgama, Tōkyō: 
Sankibo.
Chung, Jin-il, and Takamichi Fukita
2011
A Survey of the Sanskrit Fragments Corresponding to the Chinese Madhyamāgama, Tōkyō: 
Sankibo.
Hoernle, A. F. Rudolf
1916
Manuscript Remains of Buddhist Literature, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Franco, Eli
2004
The Spitzer Manuscript, The Oldest Philosophical Manuscript in Sanskrit, 2 vols, Wien: 
Verlag der österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Beiträge zur Kultur- und 
Geistesgeschichte Asiens, 43).
Maue, Dieter
2009
“Uigurisches in Brāhmī in nicht-uigurischen Brāhmī-Handschriften,” Acta Orientalia 
Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 62: 1–36.
Raschmann, Simone-Christiane
1995
“Berlin’s Re-united Collections,” International Dunhuang Project News 3 (1995): 1–2.
Sander, Lore
1979
“Buddhist Literature in Central Asia,” Encyclopaedia of Buddhism 4: 52–75.
1983
“Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts from Chinese Turkestan: Eighty years of research work,” 
Prajñā-Bhāratī 3: 1–18.

--- Page 233 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan Collection (Berlin)
211
1999
“Early Prakrit and Sanskrit Manuscripts from Xinjiang (second to fifth/sixth centuries 
C.E.): Paleography, Literary Evidence, and Their Relation to Buddhist Schools,” Buddhism 
across boundaries — Chinese Buddhism and the western regions (collection of essays 
1993), Taipei: Foguang Cultural Enterprise, 61–106.
Schmidt, Klaus T.
1990
“Fragmente von Vasubandhus Abhidharmakośabhāṣya aus Chinesisch-Turkistan,” Ausgewählte Vorträge: XXIV. Deutscher Orientalistentag vom 26. bis 30. September 1988 in 
Köln, ed. W. Diem und A. Falaturi, Stuttgart: Steiner Verlag (ZDMG Suppl.-Bd., 8), 471–
477.
Wille, Klaus
2004
“Die zentralasiatischen Sanskrit-Fragmente in der Sammlung der Istanbuler Universitätsbibliothek,” Turfan Revisited — The First Century of Research into the Arts and Cultures of 
the Silk Road, ed. D. Durkin-Meisterernst, S.-Ch. Raschmann, J. Wilkens, M. Yaldiz, P. 
Zieme, Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag (Monographien zur Indischen Archäologie, Kunst 
und Philologie, 17), 380–392.

--- Page 234 of 425 ---


--- Page 235 of 425 ---
The Central Asian Sanskrit Fragments in the Pelliot Collection (Paris)
JENS-UWE HARTMANN (MUNICH) AND KLAUS WILLE (GÖTTINGEN)
In the race for Central Asian artifacts and manuscripts at the beginning of the last century 
Paul Pelliot (1878–1945)1 was one of the leading participants. Although at that time only 
twenty-seven he was chosen to lead a three-man expedition to Central Asia (1906–1909), 
starting in Kashgar in the west and following the northern route of the ancient Silk Road 
eastwards. First he spent some weeks in Tumšuq, then conducted archaeological excavations for several months in the area of Kučā, and finally in 1908 he reached Dunhuang 
where, like Marc Aurel Stein before him, he acquired large amounts of manuscripts from 
the famous walled-up library cave. The findings and acquisitions during his expedition 
form the Pelliot Collection of Central Asian manuscripts in the Bibliothèque nationale de 
France in Paris. Its Sanskrit section consists of manuscripts found mainly at Duldur-āqur, 
Subaši (both in the Kučā oasis) and Dunhuang.2
Pelliot’s Sanskrit finds suffered a fate very similar to that of the other Central Asian 
expeditions: after the initial euphoria the interest of scholars waned, especially when it 
became clear that the finds consisted mostly of tiresome fragments, and work on the manuscripts came more or less to a standstill. This state of affairs changed only in 1957 when 
Bernard Pauly began to work on the manuscripts from the northern route of the Silk Road 
and systematically started to edit them in a series of altogether ten papers published in the 
Journal Asiatique.3 He also gave a first survey of the collection,4 which was probably 
meant as preparatory work for a later catalogue. However, when he left after eleven years, 
work on the collection was still far from being completed.
A next step was the catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts published by Taijun Inokuchi 
in 1989.5 Characterized as “preliminary” in the subtitle, it was rather a simple list of the 
fragments according to their number on the microfilms prepared by the Bibliothèque 
nationale de France. The title of an identified text or the reference to an edition was 
mentioned only in such cases where this information was already available on the cover of 
the microfilmed manuscript. One part of the collection, altogether 1424 small paper fragments in Northern Turkestan Brāhmī, remained unknown to Inokuchi, because they were 
kept in three file boxes with the label “Pelliot, Petits fragments Sanskrits sur fiches.” 
Around the same time the authors of the present paper began to study the collection, 
mostly using the microfilms but also with visits to the originals in the Bibliothèque 
nationale, one of which led to Monique Cohen, the then Conservateur en chef in the 
Départment des manuscripts (division orientale), pointing us in the direction of the three 
file boxes. In 1997 our studies resulted in a description of the Sanskrit manuscripts in 
Northern Turkestan Brāhmī.6 This description listed all former identifications and added 
many new ones, especially among the “petits fragments,” and it collected all the previous 
editions; it forms the basis of the updated survey given here. For a detailed description of 
the various sections of the Sanskrit collection we refer to that 1997 paper.
Originally the manuscripts had been put between glass panes. After World War II the 
glass sheets were gradually replaced by cellulose acetate sheets, surely a less fortunate 
choice, as soon it became evident that these sheets degraded and endangered the manuscripts. Therefore the plastic sheets were removed and the manuscripts mounted in passe1 Cf. Pelliot 2008, Walravens 2001 and Hartmann and Wille 1997: 133, note 5.
2 For the manuscripts from Dunhuang cf. also Cohen 1996.
3 Pauly 1957 to 1967.
4 Pauly 1965a.
5 Inokuchi 1989.
6 Hartmann and Wille 1997.

--- Page 236 of 425 ---
214
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
partout like Western drawings.7 Meanwhile, images of the sections “Pelliot sanscrit Bleu,” 
“Pelliot sanscrit Rouge,” “Pelliot sanscrit Stotra,” “Pelliot sanscrit Sūtra,” “Pelliot sanscrit 
Pratimoksa,” “Pelliot sanscrit Udanavarga,” “Pelliot sanscrit Abhidharma,” “Pelliot 
sanscrit textes techniques,” and “Pelliot sanscrit don Godfrey” have been made available 
on the internet by the Bibliothèque nationale.8 However, there are certain problems: together with the sheets the labels have been removed, and it is not easy to find the correct press 
mark. Hopefully the original press marks will be added again — especially in all those 
cases where one press mark comprises several sub-numbers — and not replaced by a new 
system of running numbers, since this would immediately destroy any connection with the 
original numbers and necessitate a constant comparison between the old microfilms and 
the new digital images in order to confirm the old press mark.
Sometimes the removal of a fragment from the plastic sheets has led to serious damage. 
The worst cases appear to be found among the Udānavarga fragments; one example is the 
fragment 3.30 (P.Skt.Ud.3.30) which is now broken into several pieces, others are the 
fragments 3.35, 38, 39, 44. There are at least two cases where the internet contains more 
than the old microfilms: For P.Skt.Pr.8 the respective microfilm lists only two fragments 
(also in Inokuchi 1989), while the internet version presents another complete folio (folio 
no. 4[7] ~ PrMoSū NP.10 [= PrMoSū: 188.7–12]). This folio was not available for the 
edition of the Prātimokṣasūtra, but now confirms several reconstructions. The fragment 
P.Skt.Abhi.2 mentioned by Inokuchi 1989: 368 but missing on the microfilm is now 
included in the internet version.
List of identifications
Remark: the references to the sections (“bleu,” “noir,” “rouge,” etc.) 
follow the index in Hartmann/Wille 1997. 9
Abhidharma text (not yet identified) noir; Musée Guimet
Agraprajñapti petit 83; stotra III.7
Anapāraddhastotra of Mātṛceṭa petit 1271(?); stotra III.5
Apannakasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 190
Arthavistarasūtra/Arthavistaradharmaparyāya (Dīrghāgama) bleu 95, 292; petit 529, 1282
Āṭānāṭikasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 18.3, 195
Bhaiṣajyavastu of the Sarvāstivādins bleu 23; rouge 12.3–4
Bhārgavasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 18.5
Bhikṣuṇīprātimokṣasūtra bleu 46, 47
Bhikṣuṇīprātimokṣasūtra of the Sarvāstivādins rouge 8
Bimbasārasūtra (Madhyamāgama) bleu 352(?)
Brahmajālasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 35, 258; petit 19, 1400
Buddhastotra bleu 90 (Vasantatilakā), 229 (Vasantatilakā); stotra III.7 (Mattamayūrī), III.14(?)
Candrasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) bleu 384, 435 fol. 44v, 449A; petit 809
Carmavastu of the Sarvāstivādins bleu 11, 12, 336
Catuṣpariṣatsūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 16, 28, 60.1–4, 96, 140, 177, 238, 257, 259, 277, 304, 349, 
351, 352(?), 395, 407–408, 428; petit 800, 1389
7 Brandt 1996.
8 http://gallica.bnf.fr/Search?ArianeWireIndex=index&q=sanscrit&p=1&lang=fr.
9 Fragments identified after publication of this paper are marked in bold. Recently the following 
editions have been published: Chung/Wille 2002 (bleu 23; rouge 12.3–4); Vogel/Wille 2002 (re-edition: 
rouge 12.2); Fukita 2003 (re-edition: bleu 296–298, 344–345, 350; PKNS 182(A)); Chung 2004 (reedition: rouge 11.1–3, 12.2, 13.1–7); Yamabe 2006 (re-edition: rouge 9.1–6); Zin/Schlingloff 2007 (reedition: rouge 5.1–7); Hartmann 2008 (petit 1383; stotra III.13–14); Chung 2009 (bleu 444.4–7; rouge 
14.4v3–7v2); Tudkeao 2010 (vert 8); Chung 2010 (bleu 51); Hartmann 2011 (bleu 334r).

--- Page 237 of 425 ---
The Central Asian Sanskrit Fragments in the Pelliot Collection (Paris)
215
Darśanapañcāśa<tka>stava of Vasumitra bleu 125(?), 249(?); petit 1236(?), 1383; stotra III.13–14
Daśabalasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) bleu 189.1–2, 373, 437, 439, 441.1v5–2, 442–444, 447B, 448B; 
petit 1024, 1334; rouge 14.4–7
Daśottarasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 59, 144A, 182, 200, 334, 337; petit 161, 171; Sūtra DS 1, 3, 4
dhāraṇī (not yet identified) bleu 20, 21, 36, 39, 130(?), 131(?), 150(?), 163(?), 183, 216, 231, 239, 
240, 393, 435, 446; rouge 1, 3.3–5, 4.1
Dharmacakrapravartanasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) bleu 57, 76r, 414
Dharmaśarīrasūtra fragments divers D.A. G
Dhvajāgrasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) bleu 13r3–v, 61, 219, 434.2r2–v6; petit 913
Diśāsauvastikasūtra(?) rouge 4.1–2
donation formula bleu 376; petit 301, 547; fragments divers D.A. B(?)
Ekaśatakarman of the Mūlasarvāstivādins vert 20–22, 33
Guṇāparyantastotra of Triratnadāsa petit 737, 972, 1238, 1303, 1305; stotra III.4
Jñānaprasthāna of Kātyāyanīputra Abhidharma 1 and 2
Kāmaṭhikasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 18.2
Karmavācanā bleu 3, 9, 37, 40, 64, 69, 102, 108, 165, 192, 193.1, 214, 215, 233, 305, 355, 376, 
411, 426; petit 1, 881(?), 984(?); vert 20–21, 33; fragments divers D.A. A
Kāśyapasiṃhanādasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 98(?), 340, 377
Kātantra of Śarvavarman textes techniques II.1
Kāyabhāvanāsūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 18.4, 81
Kūṭatāṇḍyasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 341; bloc des feuillets 1(?), 2A(?)
Liṅgaviśeṣavidhi of Vararuci textes techniques II.1,1–1,2
Lokeccasūtra I (Dīrghāgama) bleu 65; petit 1337
Lokeccasūtra I–II (Dīrghāgama) PKNS 13+516 (Skt./Toch. bil. word list)10
Madhyamāgama bleu 22 (sūtra 140)
Mahāgovindasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 343
Mahāmāyūrīvidyārājñī petit 1311
Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra including Mahāsudarśanasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 54, 70, 83, 99, 162, 178, 
342, 389; petit 295, 347, 458, 987, 1180, 1192; Sūtra 1; PKNS (ed. Couvreur 1967b) 313, 
741(A), 914
Mahāsahasrapramardinī bleu 385
Mahāsamājasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 17, 156; petit 21–23, 169, 521, 1140
Mahāsudarśanasūtra: see Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra
Mahāśūnyatādharmaparyāya (Saṃyuktāgama) bleu 51
Mahāvadānasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 296–298, 344–345, 350; PKNS (ed. Couvreur 1967b) 182(A)
maṅgala verses rouge 4.2
medical texts (not yet identified) textes techniques I
Munayastava bleu 164, 268; petit 1159, 1370, 1386; stotra III.11–13; PKNS (ed. Couvreur 1966) 
587b3–4
Nagaropamasūtra I bleu 67, 71, 73–75, 76v, 77–80, 252, 276, 384r, 438, 440; petit 693, 1295, 
1297; rouge 14.7–12
Nagaropamasūtra II bleu 129, 434.1 and 434.3–4; petit 340, 606, 1365
Nidānasaṃyukta of the Saṃyuktāgama (sūtra from) bleu 51 (sūtra 297)
Nīlabhūti (stotra of the brahmin) bleu 105, 137, 390–392; petit 571, 860, 875, 890, 968, 1181
Piṅgalātreyasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 65; petit 1337
Pitāputrasamāgama (parallel to) rouge 2
Poṣathavastu of the Sarvāstivādins bleu 25
10 Ed. Couvreur 1967a: 154f.; W. Couvreur referred for line a1–2 to the Saṃghabhedavastu; for a1 cf. 
DĀG 380v4f.: puruṣo mahāśailaṃ parvatam abhiruhya (SBV II 248.6: mahāśailaparvatam); a2 = DĀG 
381r8: amukaṃ grāmam āgatas (SBV II 249.19: amuṃ grāmam āgataḥ); a3 = DĀG 381v1, 3, 4, 8: 
pariśuddhe or DĀG 381v5, 7: viśuddhenā°; a5 = DĀG 383v7, 384r7, v6 etc.: vibhajati vivṛṇotu; b1 = 
DĀG 384r4: tadyathā lohitya puruṣa anicchantīm apīcched; b4 = DĀG 385r7: adhigantās teṣā<ṃ> 
phalāntarāyaṃ; b5 = DĀG 385v1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8: niśritya.

--- Page 238 of 425 ---
216
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
Prajñāpāramitā text vert 4211, 43(?)
Prasādapratibhodbhava (= Śatapañcāśatka) of Mātṛceṭa bleu 107, 117, 168, 169, 287, 303, 378, 
422; petit 48, 56, 69, 95(?), 107, 113, 157, 165, 182, 428, 439, 468, 470, 483, 495, 513(?), 516, 
525, 527, 559, 604, 666, 720, 829, 831, 838, 843, 869, 877, 891, 960, 969, 1003, 1006, 1021, 
1044, 1046, 1103, 1119, 1154, 1173, 1175, 1183, 1205, 1215, 1226, 1286, 1347, 1373, 1415; stotra 
I (cf. the survey in Inokuchi 1989: 469–471), III.1; PKNS (ed. Couvreur 1966) 255, 587a-b2
Prāsādikasūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 18.1
Prātimokṣasūtra of the Mūlasarvāstivādins bleu 271; petit 134(?), 213, 649, 821(?), 1026(?), 1106, 
1113(?), 1137(?)
Prātimokṣasūtra of the Sarvāstivādins: cf. also Pelliot Sanskrit: Prātimokṣasūtra (survey in Inokuchi 
1989: 464–467)12
Intro. bleu 103; petit 630, 765, 905, 907, 939, 999, 1042, 1115, 1143, 1323
Intro.–Pār. petit 784
Pār. bleu 201; petit 6a
SA. bleu 8, 111, 261, 412, 413, 417, 420, 425; petit 26, 155, 402, 453, 454, 496, 546, 550, 578, 
602, 681, 823, 855, 871, 889, 894, 902, 923, 955, 1060, 1254, 1276, 1420
SA.–Aniy. petit 1073
Aniy. bleu 109
Aniy.–NP. petit 1194
NP. bleu 7, 115, 135, 191, 207, 210, 225, 306, 421; petit 2, 31, 89, 116, 136, 469, 501, 762, 767, 
835, 839, 935, 990, 1020, 1112, 1117, 1220, 1259, 1267(?), 1281, 1302, 1327, 1353–1355; 
vert 28
NP.Concl.–Pāt.? bleu 209
Pāt. bleu 29, 205, 223, 273, 307, 379, 380, 423; petit 162, 582, 609, 632, 826, 830, 865(?), 884, 
1027, 1089, 1090, 1224, 1247, 1269, 1315, 1344, 1346, 1397, 1418
Pāt.–Pratid. petit 1310
Pratid. petit 135, 1319
Pratid.–Śai. petit 1011; vert 60
Śai petit 114, 211, 490(?), 532, 615, 616, 861, 685, 1066, 1235, 1243, 1258, 1419
Śai–AŚ.Intro. petit 1292
Concl. bleu 53, 180; petit 1156
Concl. verses bleu 285, 427; petit 51, 881, 984, 1209, 1421
Concl. verses–colophon bleu 383
Prātimokṣasūtra (not yet identified) petit 1256
Prātimokṣasūtra(?) petit 76, 739, 755, 1000, 1105, 1296
Prātimokṣasūtra: see also Bhikṣuṇīprātimokṣasūtra
Prātimokṣavibhaṅga of the Sarvāstivādins bleu 43–45, 68(?), 116; petit 184; rouge 7, 10.1–6
Pravāraṇasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) bleu 13r1–2, 62, 119, 248; rouge 14.1–4
Pravāraṇāvastu of the Sarvāstivādins bleu 396, 398; rouge 12.1
Pravrajyāvastu of the Sarvāstivadins: see Upasaṃpadāvastu
Rāhulastava stotra III.12
rakṣā text (verses with dhāraṇī) bleu 435 fol. 41–43, 44r
rakṣā text with snake charm bleu 434.2r1–2
Ratnaketuparivarta vert 8
rolled amulet fragments divers D.A. I frg. b and c13
Śakrapraśnasūtra vert 51 rd–v(?)
11 Cf. ŚsP II-2 137f. or PvsP II–III 4f.
12 An additional complete folio of Pell.Skt.PrMoSū 8 (folio number 4[7] ~ PrMoSū NP.10 = PrMoSū 
p. 188.7–12) is given in http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b60002078/f21.image.r=sanscrit.langFR, 
which is not yet edited.
13 Frg. b: /// vimalaviśuddhe svāhā ///; frg. c: /// stṛddhve sarvaṃ tathā + + + + + + + jvala jvala 
garbha saṃndhara āyuṃ mama śrīnavasurendrasya saṃśodhaya pāpaṃ [sa]rvatathāgatoṣṇīṣavima ///; same text as in those ed. by von Hinüber 1981: 166f.

--- Page 239 of 425 ---
The Central Asian Sanskrit Fragments in the Pelliot Collection (Paris)
217
Śalyasūtra (Dīrghāgama) vert 26, 27
Samādhirājasūtra Mss. Godfrey A
Saṃghastava bleu 282; stotra III.9–11
Saṃyuktāgama bleu 1r1–5 (sūtra 1077), 13r1–2 (sūtra 1212), 13r3–v (sūtra 981), 38 (sūtras 1111–
1112), 51 (sūtra 297), 61 (sūtra 981), 62 (sūtra 1212), 67 (sūtra 287), 71 (sūtra 287), 73–75 
(sūtra 287), 76v (sūtra 287), 77–80 (sūtra 287), 119 (sūtra 1212), 189.1–2 (sūtra 684), 219 (sūtra 
981), 248 (sūtra 1212), 252 (sūtra 287), 276 (sūtra 287), 352 (sūtra 1074), 373 (sūtra 684), 384r 
(sūtra 287), 384v (sūtra 583), 434.2r2–v6 (sūtra 981), 435 (sūtra 583), 437 (sūtra 684), 438 
(sūtra 287), 439 (sūtra 684), 440 (sūtra 287), 441.1r1–v4 (sūtra 34), 441.1v5–2 (sūtra 701), 
444.4–7 (sūtra 703), 449A (sūtra 583); rouge 14.1–4v3 (sūtra 1212), 14.4v3-7v2 (sūtra 684), 
14.7–12 (sūtra 287); petit 693 (sūtra 287), 809 (sūtra 583), 913 (sūtra 981), 1024 (sūtra 701), 
1295 (sūtra 287), 1297 (sūtra 287), 1334 (sūtra 701)
Saṅgītisūtra (Dīrghāgama) bleu 170, 381; Sūtra DS 2, SS 1
Śatapañcāśatka: see Prasādapratibhodbhava
ṣaṭ saṃrañjanīyāḥ dharmāḥ (text with) bleu 339a, b (from v2 on unknown text)
Śīlaskandha (fragments with expressions from) vert 23
snake charm bleu 449B(?)
Śroṇakoṭikarṇāvadāna (Carmavastu of the Sarvāstivādins) bleu 11, 12, 336
stotra bleu 90 (Vasantatilakā), 229 (Vasantatilakā); stotra III.1 (Anuṣṭubh), III.2 (Vaṃśastha), III.3 
(Pṛthvī), III.6 (anthology)
stotra: see also Buddhastotra, Nīlabhūti
syllabary petit 1094, 1405–1414; textes techniques III
Tripusabhallikasūtra rouge 3.1
Udānavarga: see also Pelliot Sanskrit: Udānavarga and Udānavarga Fragments sur bois (survey in 
Inokuchi 1989: 453–463)
Udānavarga chapter 1
1.10–11 petit 710; 1.12–16 bleu 101; 1.14–21 petit 707; 1.21–29 bleu 453; 1.34–2.2 petit 122; 
1.36–40 petit 1261; 1.37–2.1 petit 966; 1.37–2.3 petit 1232, 1233; 1.38–42 petit 1262; 1.42–2.5 
petit 518
Udānavarga chapter 2
2.3–10 petit 551; 2.5–8 petit 447; 2.7–16 petit 452; 2.18–3.7 bleu 118; 2.20–3.10 petit 1086
Udānavarga chapter 3
3.2–12 petit 583; 3.12a–f petit 159(?)
Udānavarga chapter 4
4.4–12 petit 1372; 4.22–27 petit 11; 4.26–38 petit 344; 4.29–37 petit 1328
Udānavarga chapter 5
5.1–7 petit 1128; 5.5–22 petit 33; 5.9–17 petit 341; 5.10–14 petit 1265; 5.16–20 petit 188; 5.18–
24 petit 716; 5.18–6.6 petit 141; 5.19–6.6 petit 599; 5.20–25 petit 320; 5.21–6.3 petit 727; 5.23–
6.15 petit 187; 5.26–6.13 petit 713
Udānavarga chapter 6
6.1–9 petit 718; 6.5–12 bleu 157; 6.6–9 petit 1329; 6.6–10 petit 797; 6.12–18 petit 179; 6.15–7.5 
petit 1318; 6.16–7.4 petit 893; 6.18–7.9 petit 789
Udānavarga chapter 7
7.5–7 petit 1132; 7.8–8.3 petit 4; 7.11–12 petit 1104; 7.11–8.6 petit 1392; 7.12–8.11 bleu 368
Udānavarga chapter 8
8.3–6 petit 807
Udānavarga chapter 9
9.8–10.1 petit 1048; 9.8–12.3 bleu 203
Udānavarga chapter 10
10.3–8 bleu 284; 10.4–15 petit 1242; 10.14–uddāna petit 1075; 10.uddāna–11.11 petit 1198;

--- Page 240 of 425 ---
218
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
Udānavarga chapter 11
11.9–12.2 petit 1087, 1184, 1402; 11.13–12.7 bleu 418; 11.13–12.7 or 8 petit 58; 11.15–12.6 
petit 1019
Udānavarga chapter 12
12.6–16 bleu 241; 12.7–15 petit 1032; 12.8–16 petit 522; 12.14–16 petit 1136; 12.16–13.1 petit 
1240; 12.17–20 petit 1061; 12.18–13.7 petit 1031
Udānavarga chapter 13
13.10–18 bleu 243; 13.11–17 bleu 357
Udānavarga chapter 14
14.3–12 bleu 86, 167; 14.10–15.3 petit 705
Udānavarga chapter 15
15.3–13(?) petit 446; 15.4–13(?) petit 1131; 15.10–? petit 332
Udānavarga chapter 16
16.17–24 bleu 286
Udānavarga chapter 17
17.3–10 bleu 433; 17.5–8 bleu 266; 17.8–18.2 petit 656
Udānavarga chapter 19
19.14–20.3 petit 1416 (to the same Ms. belongs Pell.Skt.Ud.27)
Udānavarga chapter 20
20.3–16 petit 355; 20.9–19 petit 1317; 20.16–21.5 bleu 92; 20.19–21.2 petit 1245; 20.20–21.8 
petit 17; 20.21–21.4 petit 168; 20.22–21.5 petit 1308
Udānavarga chapter 21
21.13–22.7 petit 791, 805; 21.16–22.2 petit 1148; 21.17–22.5 petit 387; 21.17–22.7 petit 178;
Udānavarga chapter 22
22.10–23.2 petit 735; 22.11–18 PKNS 230 (Skt./Toch. bil.; ed. Pinault 1994); 22.19–23.6(?) 
petit 1403; 22.26–23.8 petit 116
Udānavarga chapter 23
23.3–12 petit 1064; 23.4–12(?) petit 1050, 1053; 23.8–10 petit 682; 23.11–26 petit 186; 23.16–
24.3 petit 1422
Udānavarga chapter 24
24.3–10 petit 1287; 24.3–11 petit 1366; 24.6–15 petit 701; 24.6–17 petit 367; 24.12–21 bleu 
270; 24.15–24 petit 1424; 24.17(?)–25(?) petit 1107; 24.19–24 bleu 132; 24.22–23 petit 733; 
24.30–25.6 bleu 295
Udānavarga chapter 26
26.2–13 petit 1374; 26.3–12 bleu 415; 26.10–18 petit 1277; 26.14–20 petit 717; 26.14–26 bleu 
187; 26.16–19 petit 1077; 26.21–27.3 bleu 124; 26.25–27.3 bleu 281, 283; 26.28–27.8 petit 
1108; 26.31–27.7 petit 1133; 26.col–27.11 petit 167
Udānavarga chapter 27
27.6–20 petit 1324; 27.10–21(?) petit 409; 27.11–20 petit 631; 27.14–19 petit 109; 27.20A–
21(?) petit 862; 27.28–32 petit 833
Udānavarga chapter 28
28.10–24 petit 123; 28.17–29 bleu 84; 28.19–26 petit 1249; 28.20–29 petit 1343; 28.23–26 petit 
786; 28.25–30 petit 1174; 28.26–30 petit 180; 28.35–38 bleu 185 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 28.40–29.12 
petit 752, 1284
Udānavarga chapter 29
29.8–13 petit 785; 29.9–19 bleu 335; 29.15C–16E(?) petit 1283; 29.16–16E petit 478; 29.16–
30(?) petit 1350; 29.21–30 petit 3; 29.23–29 bleu 234; 29.25(?)–40 petit 354; 29.47–30.3 petit 
610; 29.67–30.9 petit 1228
Udānavarga chapter 30
30.4–12 bleu 184; 30.6–9 petit 146; 30.6 or 7–24 petit 1234; 30.11–14 petit 1076; 30.20–30 petit 
207; 30.21–26 petit 1340; 30.21–34 petit 1230; 30.23–34 petit 152; 30.26–31 petit 1248; 30.26–
32 petit 149; 30.26–37 petit 129, 1018; 30.48–51 petit 607

--- Page 241 of 425 ---
The Central Asian Sanskrit Fragments in the Pelliot Collection (Paris)
219
Udānavarga chapter 31
31.6–19 petit 329, 1172; 31.17(?)–28 petit 1385; 31.33–44 petit 815; 31.38–49 petit 1109; 
31.43–47 petit 754; 31.44–52 petit 694; 31.50–57 petit 113; 
Udānavarga chapter 32
32.2–12 petit 10; 32.5–9 petit 444; 32.15–27 petit 978; 32.22–36 petit 677; 32.28–38 petit 588; 
32.32–36 petit 1369; 32.32–41 petit 1212; 32.34–38 petit 1398; 32.62(?)–68(?) petit 1207; 
32.64–73 petit 849; 32.65–72 petit 475; 32.66–68 bleu 288; 32.66–72 petit 817; 32.76–33.2 petit 
703; 32.76(?)–33.2 petit 846; 32.~70 petit 714; 32.81–33.13 petit 288
Udānavarga chapter 33
33.2–12 petit 67; 33.9–16(?) petit 1423; 33.28–37 or 38 petit 706; 33.53–60 petit 1404; 33.53–
61 bleu 254; 33.55–80 petit 68; 33.57–64 petit 193; 33.58–62 petit 538; 33.59–62 petit 1241; 
33.59–63 petit 1401; 33.60–72 petit 1294; 33.61–70 petit 37; 33.62–75 vert 7; 33.~65 bleu 452; 
33.71–74 petit 353; 33.76–end bleu 206, 278; 33.78(?)–uddāna petit 1316; 33.? bleu 431 
(comment “XXXIII. Brāhmaṇavarga”)
Upālisūtra Musée Guimet (ed. Nakatani 1986)
Upasaṃpadāvastu of the Sarvāstivādins rouge 11.1–3, 12.2, 13.1–7
Upasenasūtra bleu 449B(?)
Vairocanīsūtra rouge 3.3
Vaiśālīgāthāstava stotra III.8
Varṇārhavarṇa of Mātṛceṭa bleu 2, 120, 179, 193.2, 196, 237, 253, 255, 260, 263, 265, 269, 290, 
353, 382, 419, 424, 451; petit 71, 97, 127, 130, 139, 144, 154, 156, 181, 185, 218, 220, 286, 287, 
448, 449, 513(?), 520, 552, 554, 562, 570, 584, 589, 590, 591, 605, 647, 650, 653, 657, 669, 
673, 680, 740, 741, 748, 751, 753, 770, 779, 796, 803, 804, 814, 819, 828, 834, 842(?), 852, 
857, 859, 878, 892, 899, 903, 929, 934(?) 941, 947, 964, 977, 988, 992, 1010, 1016, 1070, 1120, 
1135, 1152, 1195, 1196, 1227, 1275, 1313, 1314, 1357, 1364, 1375; stotra II (survey in Inokuchi 
1989: 468f.); PKNS (ed. Couvreur 1966) 384, 787, 1039, 1127
Varṇārhavarṇa of Mātṛceṭa (commentary on) PKNS (ed. Couvreur 1966) 414 (Skt./Toch. bil.)
verses bleu 9 (Śikhariṇī), 17; petit 787
Vibhāṣā bleu 333
vidyā text bleu 48
Vidyāsthānopamasūtra bleu 375, 447A, 448A
Vinayavibhaṅga of the Dharmaguptakas bleu 49(?), 50, 66, 70(?), 198.2, 363–367, 410
Vinayavibhaṅga of the Sarvāstivādins: see Prātimokṣavibhaṅga
Yoga manual (= Yogalehrbuch) rouge 9
Yogaśataka Pelliot koutchéen 2A–C = old Pelliot 3510.46&48 (Skt./Toch. bil.; ed. Lévi 1911; ident. 
and re-ed. Filliozat 1948)
Abbreviations
DĀG
recently discovered manuscript of the Dīrghāgama (cf. Jens-Uwe Hartmann, 
“Contents and Structure of the Dīrghāgama of the (Mūla-)Sarvāstivādins,” Annual 
Report of The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka 
University for the Academic Year 2003 (2004): 119–137).
PKNSP
P(elliot) K(outchéen) N(ouvelle) S(érie).
PrMoSū
Prātimokṣasūtra der Sarvāstivādins, nach Vorarbeiten von Else Lüders und Herbert 
Härtel hg. und übers. von G. von Simson, 2 vols, Göttingen 1986, 2000: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 11).
PvsP II–III
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā II–III, ed. Takayasu Kimura, Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin 1986.
SBV
The Gilgit Manuscript of the Saṅghabhedavastu, 2 vols, ed. R. Gnoli, Roma 1977–
1978 (Serie Orientale Roma, 49).
ŚsP II-2
Śatasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā II-2, ed. Takayasu Kimura, Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin 2010.

--- Page 242 of 425 ---
220
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
Works Cited
Brandt, Astrid-Christiane
1996
“Development of new solutions for protective enclosures for the documents from the Pelliot 
collection of the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris,” Dunhuang and Turfan. Contents and Conservation of Ancient Documents from Central Asia, ed. by Susan Whitfield and Frances 
Wood, London: The British Library: 35–38.
Chung, Jin-il
2004
Das Upasaṃpadāvastu, Vorschriften für die buddhistische Mönchsordination im Vinaya der 
Sarvāstivāda-Tradition, Sanskrit-Version und chinesische Version, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck 
& Ruprecht (Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan-Funden, 
Beiheft 11).
2009
“Ein drittes und ein viertes Daśabala-Sūtra,” Sankō bunka kenkyūjo nenpō (Annual of the 
Sankō Research Institute for the Studies of Buddhism) 40: 1–32.
2010
“Mahāśūnyatā-dharmaparyāya des Saṃyuktāgama,” Sankō bunka kenkyūjo nenpō (Annual 
of the Sankō Research Institute for the Studies of Buddhism) 41: 1–19.
Chung, Jin-il and Klaus Wille
2002
“Fragmente aus dem Bhaiṣajyavastu der Sarvāstivādins,” Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen IV, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 
(Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 9): 105–
124.
Cohen, Monique
1996
“The conservation of Cave 17 material in the Bibliothèque Nationale, Dunhuang,” Dunhuang and Turfan. Contents and Conservation of Ancient Documents from Central Asia, ed. 
by Susan Whitfield and Frances Wood, London: The British Library: 32-34.
Couvreur, Walter
1966
“Sanskrit-Tochaarse Mātṛceṭafragmenten,” Orientalia Gandensia 3: 159–185.
1967a
“Sanskrit-Tochaarse en Sanskrit-Koetsjische Trefwoordenlijsten van de Dīrghāgama (Dīghanikāya),” Orientalia Gandensia 4: 151–165.
1967b
“Nieuwe Fragmenten van het Catuṣpariṣat-, Mahāparinirvāṇa-, Mahāsudarśana- en Mahāvadānasūtra,” Orientalia Gandensia 4: 167–173.
Filliozat, Jean 
1948
Fragments de textes koutchéens de médecine et de magie, Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve.
Fukita, Takamichi
2003
The Mahāvadānasūtra, A New Edition Based on Manuscripts Discovered in Northern Turkestan, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht (Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen 
Texte aus den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 10).
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe
2008
“Vasumitras Darśanapañcāśatstava — Ein Buddha-Hymnus aus Ostturkistan,” Bauddhasāhityastabakāvalī, Essays and Studies on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature Dedicated to Claus 
Vogel by Colleagues, Students, and Friends, ed. D. Dimitrov, M. Hahn, and R. Steiner, 
Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag (Indica et Tibetica, 36): 187–197.
2011
“Lost in the Daśottarasūtra, Found in the Kṣudrakavastu,” Journal of the Dunhuang and 
Turfan Studies 12: 85–98.
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe, and Klaus Wille
1997
“Die nordturkistanischen Sanskrit-Handschriften der Sammlung Pelliot (Funde buddhistischer Sanskrit-Handschriften, IV),” Untersuchungen zur buddhistischen Literatur II, 
Gustav Roth zum 80. Geburtstag gewidmet, hg. H. Bechert, S. Bretfeld and P. Kieffer-Pülz, 
Göttingen 1997: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht (Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte 
aus den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 8): 131–182.

--- Page 243 of 425 ---
The Central Asian Sanskrit Fragments in the Pelliot Collection (Paris)
221
Hinüber, Oskar von
1981
“Namen in Schutzzaubern aus Gilgit,” Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 7: 163–171.
Inokuchi, Taijun, Takashi Irisawa, Naozumi Azuma, Ekyou Uno, and Norisato Aohara
1989
A Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts Brought from Central Asia by Paul Pelliot 
Preserved in the Bibliothèque Nationale [Preliminary], Kyoto.
Lévi, Sylvain 
1911
“Étude des documents tokhariens de la mission Pelliot,” Journal Asiatique: 119–144.
Nakatani, Hideaki
1986
 “Un fragment xylographique de l'Upāli-sūtra conservé au Musée Guimet,” Bulletin 
d’Études Indiennes 4: 305–319.
Pauly, Bernard
1957
“Fragments Sanskrit de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 245: 281–307.
1959
“Fragments Sanskrit de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 247: 203–249.
1960a
“Fragments Sanskrit de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 248: 214–251.
1960b
“Fragments Sanskrit de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 248: 509–538.
1961
“Fragments Sanskrit de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 249: 333–410.
1962
“Fragments Sanskrit de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 250: 593–612.
1964
“Fragments Sanskrit de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 252: 197–271.
1965a
“Fragments Sanskrit de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 253: 83–121.
1965b
“Fragments Sanskrit de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 253: 183–187.
1966
“Fragments Sanskrit de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 254: 245–304.
1967
“Fragments Sanskrit de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 255: 231–241.
Pelliot, Paul
2008
Carnets de route 1906–1908. Paris: Les Indes Savantes.
Pinault, Georges-Jean
1994
“Formes verbales nouvelles dans les manuscrits inédits du fonds Pelliot Koutchéen,” 
Tocharisch, Akten der Fachtagung der Indogermanischen Gesellschaft, Berlin, Sept. 1990, 
ed. B. Schlerath, Reykjavík: Skákprent 1994 (Tocharian and Indo-European Studies, 
Supplementary Series, 4): 105–205.
Tudkeao, Chanwit
2010
Die zentralasiatische Version des Ratnaketuparivarta, München (Dissertation).
Vogel, Claus and Klaus Wille
2002
“The Final Leaves of the Pravrajyāvastu Portion of the Vinayavastu Manuscript Found 
Near Gilgit, Part 2, Nāgakumārāvadāna and Lévi Text,” ed. V. Näther, rev. and transl. C. 
Vogel and K. Wille, With Two Appendices Containing a Turfan Fragment of the Nāgakumārāvadāna and a Kučā Fragment of the Upasaṃpadā Section of the Sarvāstivādins, 
Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen IV, 
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht (Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus 
den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 9): 11–76.
Walravens, Hartmut
2001
Paul Pelliot (1878-1945): His Life and Works. A Bibliography, Bloomington: Research 
Institute for Inner Asian Studies (Indiana University Oriental Series, 9).
Yamabe, Nobuyoshi
2006
“Fragments of the “Yogalehrbuch” in the Pelliot Collection,” in: D. Schlingloff, Ein 
buddhistisches Yogalehrbuch. Unveränderter Nachdruck der Ausgabe von 1964 unter 
Beigabe aller seither bekannt gewordenen Fragmente, hg. J.-U. Hartmann und H.-J. 
Röllicke, München: Iudicium Verlag (Buddhismus-Studien, 5): 325–347.

--- Page 244 of 425 ---
222
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
Zin, Monika and Dieter Schlingloff
2007
Saṃsāracakra. Das Rad der Wiedergeburten in der indischen Überlieferung, Düsseldorf: 
EKŌ-Haus der Japanischen Kultur e.V. (Buddhismus-Studien, 6).

--- Page 245 of 425 ---
Survey of the Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts
in the Hoernle, Stein, and Skrine Collections of the British Library 
(London)
KLAUS WILLE (GÖTTINGEN)
Until 2005 only some hundred Sanskrit fragments had been digitised by the British Library 
and were available in the database of the International Dunhuang Project (http://idp.bl.uk). 
Then Seishi Karashima, Tokyo, initiated a project to edit the Sanskrit fragments — Buddhist Manuscripts from Central Asia: The British Library Sanskrit Fragments (BLSF) — 
and raised the funds for the digitisation of the remaining fragments.1 In 2005 the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University, Tokyo, and the 
British Library agreed to digitise the entire collection of Sanskrit manuscript fragments 
from Central Asia. The project resulted not only in the digitization of the images, but also 
in printed editions published in successive BLSF volumes. The first two appeared in 2006 
and 2009, the third is scheduled for 2013. So far, this project was mainly funded by the 
Open Research Centre Project 2004–2008, but according to Seishi Karashima, Soka University is willing to take over the funding, since the digitisation has not yet been completed. There are about 9100 manuscript fragments, of which about 6000 have already 
been digitised. The remaining fragments include very tiny pieces which contain only parts 
of akṣaras.2
The first general survey of the different collections in the British Library was given by 
Ursula Sims-Williams and Prods Oktor Skjærvø in Skjærvø 2002. The recent papers by 
Ursula Sims-Williams, “The papers of the Central Asian scholar and Sanskritist Rudolf 
Hoernle” (2006) and “The British Library Hoernle Collection, part 1” (2009), offer comprehensive information about the formation and investigation of the Hoernle collection in 
the British Library.3 The latter paper contains a survey of the pressmarks (pp. 12–18), also 
showing which parts have already been edited. One part of the collection, namely the 
consignment 149 (now the current pressmark Or.15009) consisting for the most part of 
Sanskrit fragments in Northern Turkestan Brāhmī, has been studied by Jens-Uwe Hartmann and Klaus Wille (Hartmann and Wille 1992) on the basis of a microfilm; this paper 
listed a considerable number of new identifications and demonstrated very clearly the 
extent to which that part of the collection coincides with the German Turfan collection.
Previously, the most comprehensive catalogues were concerned with the Stein collection. The Sanskrit manuscript finds of the first and second expeditions were described, 
occasionally identified and transliterated by A. F. Rudolf Hoernle in Ancient Khotan4 and 
Serindia5 and those of the third expedition by F. E. Pargiter in Innermost Asia,6 always 
arranged according the site marks. An old handlist by Lionel D. Barnett for the pressmarks 
Or.8212/1–195 can be found on the IDP web site under “catalogue search” [List of Manuscripts in Languages of Central Asia and Sanskrit (Barnett)].7
1 Cf. S. Karashima (BLSF I: 273).
2 Ursula Sims-Williams, personal communication.
3 Some of the Weber manuscripts which were found near Kučā and purchased by Hoernle himself are 
now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford (Sims-Williams 2006, note 11). This library houses the famous 
Bower manuscript as well (Bodleian MS. Sansk.c.17, no. 1090 in Catalogue of Sanskrit manuscripts in 
the Bodleian Library, vol. 2, Oxford 1905: 110f.).
4 AKh: 294–297, 438–440.
5 Ser III: 1432–1442.
6 InAs II: 1017–1028.
7 Lionel D. Barnett, British museum handlist only, London: Unpublished, No date [with the note: 
“This catalogue was compiled as a handlist for the manuscripts in languages of Central Asia and Sanskrit

--- Page 246 of 425 ---
224
KLAUS WILLE
Only recently has the Skrine collection become known.8 Clarmont Percival Skrine, 
British Consul General in Kashgar from 1922 to 1924, presented several Khotanese and 
Sanskrit manuscripts to the Department of Oriental Printed Books and Manuscripts of the 
British Museum in 1925.9 Among the Sanskrit manuscripts there are 40 folios and 
fragments of the famous so-called Kashgar manuscript of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, 
formerly assigned to the Stein collection.10
As a result of the recently recommenced intensive work on the Sanskrit material, so far 
two volumes of the new series BLSF have been published. Transliterations of the fragments published in BLSF I and II — even though with minor mistakes — are now also to 
be found in the IDP database side by side with the respective images. Due to the process of 
digitisation most of the fragments which were formerly known only by their site mark had 
to be renumbered, and every fragment got its own pressmark. For example the thirty-four 
folios of the Farhād-Bēg ms. of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra (Stein F.xii.7) got the 
pressmarks IOL San 482–515.11 Therefore it is planned to give a concordance of the site 
marks with the pressmarks.
Basically the manuscripts were arranged according to their (presumed) languages. This 
led to unavoidable mistakes, especially when the fragments were small and the scripts very 
similar. A case in point are the scripts used on the Northern Route of the Silk Road for 
Sanskrit and Tocharian, and therefore a fairly large number of Sanskrit fragments is found 
among the Tocharian manuscripts and vice versa. Transliterations of the IOL Tocharian 
fragments are now available in the IDP database, see under “catalogue search”: An edition 
of the Tocharian fragments IOL Toch 1 – IOL Toch 822 (Peyrot),12 and An edition of the 
Tocharian fragments IOL Toch 853 – IOL Toch 1247 (Tamai).13 Except for IOL Toch 285–
307 from the Stein collection, the fragments belong to different consignments of the 
Hoernle collection.
1. Identified Sanskrit fragments among the Tocharian
There are 65 identified Sanskrit fragments in the Tocharian section IOL Toch, of which 27 
have already been edited by me.14 Recently I was able to identify the following fragments: 
IOL Toch 59r1–3 (Saund 7.48b–49d), 249A (verses15 and donation formula), 283 [Śroṇakoṭīviṃśasūtra, cf. the parallel SBV II 144f.; for a parallel cf. the Chinese Saṃyuktāgama, 
sūtra 254 (T 99, II 63a2–19); ident. together with Jin-il Chung], 325 (Uv 3.7e–12e), 454 
(PrMoSū Pāt.14–15), 455 (PrMoSū SA.7–8 or 9), 645 (NagSū II.6), 683 (PrMoSū Pāt.33–
34), 688 (Guṇāparyantastotra of Triratnadāsa, verses 3d–8a), 736 (VAV 2.39–52; ident. J.-
U. Hartmann), 773 (donation formula, cf. SHT I 396r3), 784 (Kūṭatāṇḍyasūtra, cf. DĀG 
fol. 404r1–7), 818 (Prasādanīyasūtra, cf. DĀG fol. 296r6–v8), 834 (VAV 2.24-28; ident. 
in the British Museum (now in the British Library)”].
8 Cf. Skjærvø 2002: lxi–lxii, and, in more detail, Waugh and Sims-Williams 2010.
9 Now in the British Library, pressmarks Or.9609–9616. For a description see Waugh and SimsWilliams 2010: 82–87.
10 Cf. Saddhp(C): xiif.
11 Of fol. 39 there is only one small fragment extant which is unfortunately digitised together with fol. 
38 on IOL San 515.
12 Michaël Peyrot, An edition of the Tocharian fragments IOL Toch 1 – IOL Toch 822 in the India 
Office Library, London, London: IDP 2007. No transliterations are given of IOL Toch 309–352 and 355–
359.
13 Tatsushi Tamai, An edition of the Tocharian fragments IOL Toch 853 – IOL Toch 1247 in the India 
Office Library, London, London: IDP 2007. Digitised images of IOL Toch 823–852 are not yet available.
14 Wille 2005: 50–60: IOL Toch 309, 311–312, 321, 323, 329, 330–331, 333 (only ident.), 334, 341, 
343, 346(a), 352, 355 (only ident.), 356–358, 399–400, 419, 525, 588, 701, 741, 782, 816.
15 There are remains of three verses; the second (A2) is identical with the third verse in Pauly 1960: 
524–529, and the third (A3) preserves Jm 3.22.

--- Page 247 of 425 ---
Manuscripts in the Collections of the British Library (London)
225
J.-U. Hartmann), 859 (PPU 99a–102), 913 (PrMoSū Śai.C9–15), 929 (PPU 58c–64c), 966 
(PPU 84d–103c), 967 (ĀṭānSū 63–67), 971 (CPS 16.8–17.1), 973 (PPU 79c–93a), 989(a) 
(CPS 24o.1–p.5 or 12), 992 (Uv 28.15c–30c), 997 (PrMoSū SA.5–6), 1072 [Uv 33.15d–
59d(?)], 1126 (Uv 18.13b–21a), 1131 (Munayastava 3c–4c), 1134 (PrMoSū Pat.57–58), 
1185 (Uv 3.3b–6a), 1197 (KaVā 69, 83), 1203 (PrMoSū introduction IV), 1233 (Uv 4.18–
29b).
2. Not yet identified Sanskrit fragments in the Tocharian section
These are IOL Toch 284, 300, 310, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319 (verses), 320, 322, 
324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 332, 335, 336, 337, 339, 340, 342, 344, 345, 350, 351, 359, 420, 
432, 438, 510, 555(?), 556(?), 703 (verses), 817, 820, 875 (1 side), 886 (1 side), 894, 903 
(verses), 930 (1 side), 977, 1030, 1062, 1115(?), 1127, 1245.
3. Identified Sanskrit/Tocharian bilinguals in the Tocharian section
There are 54 identified bilinguals in the section IOL Toch.16 Recently I could identify 
fifteen additional fragments: 83 (KaVā 97ff.), 125A (KaVā 90f.), 196 (poṣatha calendar; 
cf. SHT VII 1656), 198 (poṣatha calendar), 364 (KaVā 32), 702 (Uv 26.29–27.3d), 774 
(VAV 2.66b–71a), 868 (poṣatha calendar),17 926 (Uv 32.48a–53d/32.54d–55cff.), 928 (Uv 
4.1d–5d), 931 [Uv 16.11a(?)–16c(?)], 979 (Uv 10.16b–11.2b), 981 (KaVā 97; cf. IOL Toch 
142), 988 (Uv 6.11b–14d), 1020 (Uv 30col.–31.2b).
4. Not yet identified Sanskrit/Tocharian bilinguals in the Tocharian section
IOL Toch 64, 87(?), 148, 175, 180v, 188, 191, 227, 229, 255, 338, 347, 360, 421, 427, 546, 
578, 587, 595, 596, 630, 689, 690 (verses), 694, 796, 782rc–v, 890, 927, 933, 945(?), 954, 
976, 984.
5. Tocharian fragments in Sanskrit sections
IOL San 1084; Or.15003/107, 306, 327; Or.15004/3, 4, 20, 21, 110, 113, 118, 119; Or. 
15009/662r.
***
In the following pages four overviews are given which list the manuscripts according to 
their find-spots. The first lists the identified texts from Khotan, including the manuscripts 
of other collections in order to show the whole range of Sanskrit literature attested so far 
on the Southern Route of the Silk Road.18 The second list comprises the manuscript fragments from the Northern Route, the third those from Dunhuang, and the fourth the manuscripts acquired by Stein in Gilgit19 in 1931. It includes Sanskrit Khotanese manuscripts 
found outside Khotan and also fragments from other collections. Fragments marked by * 
are not yet edited and, if not otherwise stated, they are identified by me; those marked by 
(?) are not yet verified. For additional identified fragments see Shin’ichiro Hori’s contribution in this volume, pp. 260ff. For the edited fragments with the pressmarks Or.15001–
15004, 15007–15010, and 15015 see Sims-Williams 2009 and the Abbreviations list below.
16 Several Udānavarga fragments have been identified and edited by Peyrot 2008 (the references are 
not yet in the IDP data base): IOL Toch. 926, 928, 931, 979, 988, and 1020.
17 Cf. also Malzahn 2007: 91.
18 Pressmarks are cited as far as they are known. This is an updated version of the list given in Wille 
2009: 31–33.
19 Cf. the report “Archæological Discoveries in the Hindukush” in Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of 
Great Britain and Ireland 1931: 863&865.

--- Page 248 of 425 ---
226
KLAUS WILLE
I. List of identified Sanskrit manuscripts from Khotan
Poetical works
Anaparāddhastotra of Mātṛceṭa IOL San 1388* (verses 13c–15d; cf. Wille 2005, frg. 73)
Buddhacarita of Aśvaghoṣa (verses resembling) IOL San 1233+1234 (ed. La Vallée Poussin 1911a:
770–772)
Guṇāparyantastotra of Triratnadāsa IOL San 1387 (ed. La Vallée Poussin 1911b: 1064–1067); 
Or.12637/41 (Skt./Khot.; ed. Skjærvø 2002)
Kalpanāmaṇḍitikā of Kumāralāta IOL San 761 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 68), 1242* (to the same folio 
belongs IOL San 761), 1256* (to the same ms. belongs IOL San 761); Or.15010/130 (to the 
same ms. belongs IOL San 761)
Rāhulastava IOL San 794 (one side; ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 169)
Medical works
Kha.i.319.c(3)?*; Or.8212/1858+1859*
Syllabary
Or.8212/8(1)*, 1647(B)*, 1651(B)*; Or.9616/27*; Or.15010/100, 147
Mahāyāna, Vajrayāna and related texts
Ajitasenavyākaraṇa IOL San 701*, 1202 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 69); SI P/63 (ed. BB 34: 157–184)
Anakṣarakaraṇḍakavairocanagarbhasūtra IOL San 423* (ident. P. Harrison, Sept. 2012)
Anantamukhanirhāradhāraṇī H.144 SA 1 (original missing; ed. Hoernle 1916a: 86f.); IOL San 
1015(?)*, 1460, 1461 [both frgs. ed. Matsuda 1988, frgs. A 18, 19; ident. S. Hori (cf. Habata 
2007, note 19)]; Or.15010/2, 183; SHT III 1014, XI 4370, 4378; SI l/16*; Otani Lüshun (? Ed. 
Karashima 2003, frg. 5)
Aṣṭabuddhakasūtra Or.15010/66, 110
Bhadrakalpikasūtra Or.8212/1696*, Chinese private collection [ed. DUAN 2009 (re-ed. as BH 
4-11); to the same folio belongs Or.8212/1696]
Bhadrapālasūtra: see Pratyutpannabuddhasaṃmukhāvasthitasamādhisūtra
Bhaiṣajyagurusūtra SHT XI 4393
Bodhisatvapiṭakasūtra IOL San 1072(?)*
Buddhanāmasūtra (T 447) BH 4-33
Buddhanāmasūtra (TT 928, T 443) cf. Wille 1996 (§ 6.2), 1999; IOL San 184*, 1088A+B (ed. 
Wille 2005, frg. 70); Or.12637/42 (ed. KT V: 327, No. 700; ident. Wille 2005, note 33); 
Or.15001/26; SHT XI 4444
Buddhoṣṇīṣavijayadhāraṇī IOL Khot S.46, lines 1–11 (ed. KT V: 368, No. 729)
Candragarbhasūtra Or.15011/20 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 103–108); SI P/90b.2,3,4 (ed. Hori 2011)
Dharmaśarīrasūtra SI P/69 (ed. BB 33: 65–76)
dhāraṇī (not yet identified) Or.15009/304
Diśāsauvāstikasūtra SHT XI 4376, 4391
Dvādaśadaṇḍakanāmāṣṭaśatavimalīkaraṇā: see Śrīmahādevīvyākaraṇa
Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra IOL San 1244*; Or.15010/74(?), 85, 93, 98, 119(?); SI P/83d*+IOL San 669*
+Or.15010/93+IOL San 113*+1154* (Hori 2011); SHT I 531
Hastikakṣyasūtra Or.15009/672*
Jñānolkadhāraṇī Or.15009/259; SHT XI 4369; BH 4-227
Karmāvaraṇaviśuddhisūtra SI P/67.4 (ed. Hori 2011)
Kāśyapaparivarta cf. Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 2002; Mannerheim 3 (ed. Karashima 2004, frg. 
1); IOL San 51* (ident. S. Karashima), 101*, 673*; Or.8212/1775(F)*; Or.15010/17, 18, 38; SI 
P/20.2 (ed. Karashima/Vorobyova 2007, frg. 2)
Lalitavistara Or.15010/48
Laṅkāvatārasūtra IOL San 191*, 787*
Mahādaṇḍanāmadhāraṇī Arthur M. Sackler Museum, Peking (ed. GUAN 2012, frg. 2)
Mahāmeghasūtra SI P/76 (ed. Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja/Temkin 2003; identified Hori 2011)

--- Page 249 of 425 ---
Manuscripts in the Collections of the British Library (London)
227
Mahāparinirvāṇamahāsūtra cf. Matsuda 1988 and Habata 2007, 2009; SI P/83b* (Hori 2011), P/
153* (Hori 2011)
Mahāsāhasrapramardanī SHT XI 4373
Mahāśitavatī: see Mahādaṇḍanāmadhāraṇī
Paramārthadharmavijayasūtra Or.15010/134
Prajñāpāramitā texts
Adhyardhaśatikā Or.8672B/8 [ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 181; there wrong pressmark Or. 
8672B(1)]; Crosby 114f.+18f.+194f. (ed. Wille 2006c, frg. 1); SI P/4 (Skt./Khot. bilingual; 
ed. SDT III: 24–34), P/123n* (Hori 2011)
Aṣṭādaśasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā IOL San 1156(?)*; Or.15012/6*; ed. Bidyabinod 1927 
(the whereabouts of the originals is unknown); ed. Konow 1942 (the whereabouts of the 
originals is unknown)
Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā BH 4-147
Kauśikaprajñāpāramitāsūtra IOL Khot S.3 (ed. KT V: 356–359, No. 727)
Larger Prajñāpāramitā IOL San 534 (ed. Kudo 2006a); Or.8212/174 (side A of one frg. ed. 
Bongard-Levin 1993a); Or.15001/3(?), 6, 9, 23, 24; Or.15009/5, 13, 28, 42(?), 233, 236, 
239(?), 243, 251, 253, 260, 278, 288, 290–292, 297, 299, 300, 301, 311; Or.15010/19, 23, 
26, 27, 31, 35, 37, 39, 41, 44v, 49, 50, 53a, 54, 55, 56, 57, 70, 75, 76, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 91, 
95, 97, 99, 101, 104, 108, 115, 120, 121, 123, 131(?), 144, 149, 160(?), 165, 169, 177, 189, 
190, 200; Or.15012/3*, 4* (both frgs. ident. Brāhmī Club, Tokyo); Or.15015/251; Crosby 
254/255*, 260/261* (cf. Wille 2006c); SI M/16.4* (Hori 2011); SI P/19.1 (ed. S. Watanabe 
1993), 3 (ed. Bongard-Levin/Hori 1996), P/72g1+2* (Hori 2011), P/83l*, m*, n* (Hori 
2011), P/84e* (Hori 2011), P/87a* (Hori 2011); SHT X 4301, 4353; XI 4364, 4454 frgs. b–
d
Pañcapāramitānirdeśasūtra Or.15010/61; SI P/146 (ed. Bongard-Levin/Watanabe 1997); 
Mannerheim 9 (ed. Karashima 2004, frg. 2)
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Or.8212/165* (ident. K. Watanabe 1912: D.iii.7); Or. 
15008/42; Or.15009/675, 678; Or.15012/1*, 2*, 7* (all frgs. ident. Brāhmī Club, Tokyo), 
21+25+30 (ed. K. Watanabe 1912), 23*, 24*, 28*, 38*–41*, 43*, 44* (all frgs. ident. K. 
Watanabe 1912); SI P/147a.1 (ed. Bongard-Levin 1993b), 2 (ed. Bongard-Levin/Kimura 
1995); Mannerheim 7, 8 (both frgs. ed. Karashima 2005); Chinese private collection (ed. 
YE 2010, frgs. 10–15; frg. 13 re-ed. as BH 4-15); BH 4-32, 4-143, 4-146, 4-161
Prajñāpāramitāstotra of Rahulabhadra IOL San 913 (ed. Suzuki 2006); Or.8212/1649(F)*
Suvikrāntavikrāmiparipṛcchā Or.8212/1665(C)*; Or.15009/1, 224, 232, 305, 317; Or.15010/ 
16, 87; Or.15012/5* (ident. Brāhmī Club, Tokyo); Chinese private collection (ed. YE 2010, 
frg. 16).
Vajracchedikā IOL San 382–387, 419–422, 424–427 (all fourteen frgs. ed. Hoernle 1916a: 
176–195), IOL San 2014*; Or.8212/18, 20 (both frgs. ed. Harrison 2009, frg. 1); 
Or.15009/247 (ed. Harrison 2009, frg. 3); Or.15010/4, 94, 113, 126 (all frgs. ed. Harrison 
2009, frgs. 4–7); Or.15012/26 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 77); SI P/81 (ed. Bongard-Levin 1988); 
Otani Lüshun (? Ed. MS IV: 73–76)
not yet identified (The Sadāprarudita story) Or.15009/312; Or.15010/84, 86, 124, 195; 
Chinese private collection (ed. YE 2010, frg.17; re-ed. as BH 4-19)
not yet identified Or.15001/2(?), 17(?), 32(?), 36(?); Or.15008/29(?), 32(?), 34(?); Or.15009/-
2(?), 3(?), 8(?), 24(?), 27(?), 30(?), 31(?), 33(?), 40(?), 225(?), 234(?), 303(?), 318(?), 
320(?); Or.15010/25(?), 140(?), 158, 163(?), 182(?), 199(?), 202(?); Or.15013/68(?)*; BH 
4-18, 4-24
Pratyutpannabuddhasaṃmukhāvasthitasamādhisūtra (= Bhadrapālasūtra) Or.15008/47; Or.15009/
257, 258; Or. 15010/15; Or.15011/16 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 88–93); Crosby 252/253 [ed. Wille 
2006c; ident. P. Harrison (Jan. 2007)].
Ratnagotravibhāga-Mahāyānottaratantraśāstra IOL Khot S.5 (ed. KT V: 237–239, No. 526); Pelliot 
2740 (ed. KT V: 241–242, No. 527)
Ratnaketuparivarta IOL San 535 (ed. Karashima 2006c), 664 (ed. Hartmann/Tudkeao 2009, frg. 2), 
729 (ed. Karashima 2006c), 819 (ed. Karashima 2006c), 820 (ed. Karashima 2006c), 934 (ed.

--- Page 250 of 425 ---
228
KLAUS WILLE
Tudkeao 2010), 936 (ed. Tudkeao 2010), 1099 (ed. Tudkeao 2010), 1223–1230 (ed. Tudkeao 
2010), 1235 (ed. Tudkeao 2010), 1236 (ed. Tudkeao 2010), 1464 (ed. Tudkeao 2010), 1478 (ed. 
Tudkeao 2010); Or.8212/1 (ed. Tudkeao 2010), 65(2) (ed. Tudkeao 2010), 1620(D)*, 1621(E)*, 
1644(C)*; Or.15009/306; Or.15010/33, 47 (ed. Hartmann and Tudkeao 2009, frg. 1), 59, 67, 68 
(ed. Hartmann and Tudkeao 2009, frg. 3), 103, 154, 210; Or.15011/19 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 100–
103); 3 complete folios without pressmark (Oriental and India Office Collection, British Library; 
ed. Tudkeao 2010); Otani (Ryukoku) 625 (ed. MS IV: 77; ident. Hori 2003, re-ed. Tudkeao 
2010); Pell.Skt. vert 8 (ed. Tudkeao 2010); Huntington J (ed. Tudkeao 2010); SI P/83k* (Hori 
2011), P/86 (Hori 2011); Chinese private collection [ed. Saerji 2008 (re-ed. as BH 4-50), 2010 
(re-ed. as BH 4-7 and 4-29) and 2011 (re-ed. without BH signature and BH 4-4, 4-5, 4-6, 4-8, 
4-17, 4-26+22, 4-28)]; BH 4-12, 4-21)
Ratnarāśisūtra Or.8212/24(2)* (ident. Ser III: 1439: Kha.i.304); Or.15011/22 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 
116–121); SI P/20.1 (ed. Karashima/Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 2007, frg. 1)
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra cf. Yuyama 1970; Saddhp(C); SMSR I: 14–25; Wille 2000, 2004a; IOL 
San 7*, 32*, 40*, 53*, 70*, 71*, 77*, 117*, 187*, 195*, 197*, 212 (ed. BLSF II 344–346), 
214*, 225*, 256*, 259*, 264*, 270*, 283*, 325*, 365*, 374*, 482–487 (re-ed. Karashima 
2006a), 488–515 [ed. Saddhp(C): 234–258], 516 [ed. Saddhp(C): 268], 546*, 548 (ed. Wille 
2005, frg. 72), 586*, 587*, 650 (ed. Karashima 2006b), 654*, 682 [ed. Saddhp(C): 281: I fol. 
51], 720 [ed. Saddhp(C): 273f.: Kha.i.102], 723 (ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 167; there wrongly 
Kha.i.105 instead of 103), 730*, 813 [ed. Saddhp(C): 274: Kha.i.174], 818 (ed. BLSF II: 118f.), 
837 [ed. Saddhp(C): 275], 839 [ed. Saddhp(C): 274f.], 853 [ed. Saddhp(C): 276: Kha.i.185.c], 
859 [ed. Saddhp(C): 276: Kha.i.186], 898*, 933 [ed. Saddhp(C): 269f.: Kha.i.214], 939 [ed. 
Saddhp(C): 291: XXII fol. 66], 948*, 952 [ed. Saddhp(C): 295: XXVII fol. 67], 957 [ed. 
Saddhp(C): 295: XXI,XXV fol. 67], 962 [ed. Saddhp(C): 277f.: Kha.i.311.a], 969 [ed. 
Saddhp(C): 290: XX fol. 69 (H 267/268)], 972 [ed. Saddhp(C): 290: XX, fol. 69 (H 265/266)], 
1004 [ed. Saddhp(C): 285: VIII–IX fol. 71], 1019 [ed. Saddhp(C): 296: XX fol. 75,80 (left 
frg.)], 1020 [ed. Saddhp(C): 298: VI fol. 75], 1021 [ed. Saddhp(C): 277: Kha.ix.18 (left frg.)], 
1023 [ed. Saddhp(C): 277: Kha.ix.18 (right frg.)], 1024 [ed. Saddhp(C): 281: I fol. 75], 1025 
[ed. Saddhp(C): 287: XVII fol. 76], 1026 [Saddhp(C): 283: III fol. 76], 1027 [ed. Saddhp(C): 
284: VI fol. 76], 1028 [ed. Saddhp(C): 285: VIII fol. 76], 1031 [ed. Saddhp(C): 284: V fol. 76], 
1032 [ed. Saddhp(C): 298: VI fol. 76], 1033 [ed. Saddhp(C): 294: 1 frg. of XXVI fols. 77,83)], 
1034*, 1040 [ed. Saddhp(C): 280: I fol. 77], 1045 [ed. Saddhp(C): 283: right frg. of III fol. 78], 
1046–1047 [ed. Saddhp(C): 281f.: I fol. 78 (to the same folio belongs Kha.ix.27 (all frgs. ed. 
Wille 2006a, frg. 178)], 1049 [ed. Saddhp(C): 282f.: III fol. 78], 1050 [ed. Saddhp(C): 288: left 
frg. of XVIII fols. 78–77], 1051 [ed. Saddhp(C): 283: left frg. of III fol. 78], 1055*, 1058 [ed. 
Saddhp(C): 297: 1 frg. of XX fols. 81,84,81], 1059 [ed. Saddhp(C): 297: 1 frg. of XX fols. 
81,84,81], 1060 [ed. Saddhp(C): 296: 1 frg. of XX fols. 83,81], 1062 [ed. Saddhp(C): 296: 1 frg. 
of XX fols. 83,81], 1063 [ed. Saddhp(C): 289f.: 1 frg. of XX fols. 83–82], 1064 [ed. Saddhp(C): 
291f.: 1 frg. of XXII fols. 80,83], 1065 [ed. Saddhp(C): 294: 1 frg. of XXVI fols. 77,83], 1067 
[ed. Saddhp(C): 280: 1 frg. of I fol. 83 (Ka 24a6ff.; line 1–3)], 1069 [ed. Saddhp(C): 280: 1 frg. 
of I fol. 83 (Ka 24a6ff.; line 3–6)], 1070 [ed. Saddhp(C): 280: I fol. 83 (Ka 19b3ff.)], 1081 [ed. 
Saddhp(C): 293: XXIV fol. 84], 1082 [ed. Saddhp(C): 289: XIX fol. 84 (H 255/256)], 1097*, 
1138 [ed. BLSF II: 273], 1151*, 1191 [ed. Saddhp(C): 292f.: XXIV fol. 72], 1232 [ed. 
Saddhp(C): 279], 1243*, 1353*, 1401 [ed. Saddhp(C): 278: Kha.0013], 1421–28 [ed. Wille 
2006a, frg. 178], 1429 [ed. Wille 2006a, frgm. 177], 1430–31 [ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 178], 1505*; 
Or.8212/6(14)+25(3)+(4) [ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 163; there wrong pressmark 25(1)+(3)], 26(2) 
[ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 171], 33(3) [ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 175], 63(6) [ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 168], 
1622(A)*, 1650(A)*, (B)*, 1653(B)*, (C)*, 1703*, 1705*, 1734(G)*; Or.8672B/5 [ed. Wille 
2006a, frg. 182; there wrong pressmark Or.8672B(2)], 6 [ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 183; there wrong 
pressmark Or.8672B(3)], C/3 [ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 184]; Or.9610/1, 2 (both frgs. ed. Wille 
1997, frg. 1, 2); Or.15000/555(1) [ed. Saddhp(C): 270: Kha.i.134], 556(1, 2) [both frgs. ed. 
Saddhp(C): 272: Kha.ix.16a], 557(1, 2) [both frgs. ed. Saddhp(C): 276 (H 179/180) and p. 289 
(H 185/186)], 559(1) [ed. Saddhp(C): 269: Kha.ix.23]; Or.15001/4, 11–14, 16, 22, 25, 29(?), 31, 
35(?); Or.15006/4*, 5*, 6*, 7*, 9*, 19*, 65*, 66 [ed. Wille 2005, frg. 79], 71*, 73*, 75*, 76*, 
81*, 82*, 86*; Or.15008/30, 39, 48, 49, 51; Or.15009/6, 9, 23, 25, 34, 39, 219, 220, 223, 226–

--- Page 251 of 425 ---
Manuscripts in the Collections of the British Library (London)
229
228, 231, 237, 240, 245, 249, 250, 264, 266–270, 272, 274, 277, 281, 293–295, 302, 307, 308, 
316, 322; Or.15010/12, 14, 22, 36, 45, 52, 58, 64, 73, 78, 83, 88, 96, 107, 111, 116, 122, 129, 
132, 133, 135, 138, 143, 153, 157, 166, 173(?), 187, 203, 208; Or.15011/28–31 (ed. Hoernle 
1916a: 139–152); Or.15012/18*, 19*, 27 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 76); Crosby 38f. (ed. Wille 2006c, 
frg. 4); Otani (Ryukoku) 623 (ed. Karashima 2003, frg. 3); Otani (Lüshun) 20.1554/26–4*, 5*, 
6*, 7*, 8*; Mannerheim 5 (ed. Wille 2001); HUANG 8 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 80); SI L/14* (ident. 
Wille 1998, note 6); P/67.2 (ed. Karashima/Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 2008), 3a*, b*, v*, g*, d* 
(Hori 2011), 8a+b* (Hori 2011), 10b* (Hori 2011), P/68 (ed. Kudo/Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 
2007), P/126a* (Hori 2011), P/151* (Hori 2011); SHT XI 4374, 4454 frg. a; Chinese private 
collection (ed. YE 2010, frgs. 2–7; frg. 2 re-ed. as BH 4-10, frg. 7 as BH 4-34); Arthur M. 
Sackler Museum, Peking (ed. GUAN 2012, frg. 1); BH 1-28, 4-20, 4-220
Samādhirājasūtra 
 Or.8212/7(1)+Or.6403/B2(2; Hoernle M.3) (ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 162), 
1649(B)*; Or.15010/32; Pell.Skt. Mss. Godfrey A*; SI P/67.11 (ed. BB 34: 265; re-ed. Matsumura 1993: 137–141), P/85 (ed. BB 34: 265), P/116d1+2* (Hori 2011), d5+6+3+4* (Hori 2011), 
P/124a+b+v* (Hori 2011); SHT XI 4382, 4459
Saṃghāṭasūtra SI P/67.5* (Hori 2011)
Sarvabuddhaviṣayāvatārajñānālokālaṃkārasūtra IOL San 428–481 (ed. Karashima/Wille 2006); 
Or.8212/47(A–C) (ed. Karashima/Wille 2006, foll. 10, 12, 11)
Sarvapuṇyasamuccayasamādhisūtra Or.15010/4220
Sarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhānavyūha Or.8212/1665(B)* (cf. GM I 69.16–70.9)
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha Or.15006/35* (beginning of sūtra, cf. STTS 1.2–13)
Sarvatathāgatoṣṇīṣasitātapatrānāma-aparājitā-mahāpratyaṅgirā-(mahāvidyārajñī) IOL Khot S.46, 
lines 12–195 (ed. KT V: 368–376, No. 729); Or.8210/S.2529 (ed. KT V: 359–367, No. 728); 
Or.8212/44(A–C) (ed. Wille 2004b: 387, Appendix); Or.15011/12 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 52–57)
Sarvavaitulyasaṃgrahasūtra/Sarvavaidalyasaṃgrahasūtra IOL San 1457 (ed. Matsuda 1988, frg. 
A 13); Or.15010/43
Śrīmahādevīvyākaraṇa Otāni Lüshun (? Ed. Karashima 2003, frg. 4)
Sukhāvatīvyūhasūtra (Smaller) Or.15009/41
Sumukhasūtra/Sumukhadhāraṇī cf. Wille 1996 (§ 6.4; not all known frgs. are edited yet), 2006c 
(note 10); IOL San 189*, 989*; Or.8212/5* [cf. Wille 1996, note 36: D.iv.1,2 (CA)], 44(D)* (cf. 
Wille 1996, note 36: Kha.1.97), 1409 (ed. InAs II: 1018f.: Domoko 0122; ident. Wille 1996, 
note 36), 1615*, 1652(C)*; Crosby 74f.+266f. (ed. Wille 2006c, frg. 2, fol. 4), 134f.+152f. (ed. 
Wille 2006c, frg. 2, fol. 11); SI P/71b* (Hori 2011), P/116z* (Hori 2011); SHT XI 4365
Śūraṃgamasamādhisūtra IOL San 130*, 529 (ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 179), 557 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 
71; there wrong pressmark 553), 915*; Or.8212/15(3) (ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 165), 33(2) (ed. 
Wille 2006a, frg. 174), 67.1, 4 (both frgs. ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 170.1, 2), 1653(A)*; Or.15001/1; 
Or.15009/284, 289; Or.15010/51, 60, 71, 102, 106, 207; Or.15011/24 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 125–
132); Crosby 262f. (ed. Wille 2006c, frg. 3); SI P/84d* (Hori 2011); SHT XI 4368; private 
collection* (ident. K. Matsuda, Dec. 2011)21
Sūryagarbhasūtra Or.15011/23 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 121–125)22
Sūtrasamuccaya ascribed to Nāgārjuna IOL San 964, 966 (ed. Karashima 2009)
Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra cf. Skjærvø 2004, 2009; IOL San 373*, 663*; Or.8212/34(2) (ed. Wille 
2006a, frg. 164), 1620(A)*, 1655(C)*, 1704*; Or.9610/3 (ed. Wille 1997, frg. 3); SI P/83a* 
(Hori 2011), P/91* (Hori 2011); SHT XI 4388; Otāni (Ryukoku) 622, 624 (both frgs. ed. 
Karashima 2003, frg. 1, 2); Chinese private collection (ed. YE 2010, frgs. 8, 9; re-ed. as BH 4-1, 
4-14); BH 4-27
Śrāvakayāna texts
Anirud(dh)asūtra SI P/80 (ed. Karashima/Vorobyova 2007, frg. 3)
Arthavargiyāṇi sūtrāṇi: see Suttanipāta 
20 Two more fragments belong to this folio; cf. S. Hori’s contribution in this volume, p. 262.
21 Photo http://jinajik.net/2010/09/9th-century-ms-fragments/ and http://bbs.sssc.cn/viewthread.php?
tid=899087; recto: 20100531_cdcb..., verso: 20090208_d… (last accessed August 2012).
22 Ident. Y. Kurumiya, Ratnaketuparivarta, Kyoto 1979: 179.

--- Page 252 of 425 ---
230
KLAUS WILLE
Avadānaśataka Chinese private collection (ed. YE 2010, frg. 1; re-ed. as BH 4-234)
Prātimokṣasūtra IOL San (all frgs. ed. Wille 2009a: 49–65) 1000, 1001, 1006, 1007, 1010, 1014; 
Crosby (all frgs. ed. Wille 2009a: 49–65) 30f., 64f., 70f., 124f., 130f., 132f., 142f., 168f., 222f., 
230f., 264f.+162f.
Pratītyasamutpādādivibhaṅganirdeśasūtra Arthur M. Sackler Museum, Peking (ed. Guan 2012, 
frg. 3)
Saṃyuktāgama Or.8212/103A (ed. La Vallée Poussin 1913a; Chung 2009a), B*, Or.8212/39* (to 
the same ms. belongs Or.8212/103; cf. Wille 2006a, frg. 176), Or.8212/1942* (to the same ms. 
belongs Or.8212/103)
Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna Or.8212/67.26* (ident. Brāhmī Club, Tokyo); Or.15010/6, 20
sūtra (parallel to Chinese Madhyamāgama sūtra 123 or Chinese Saṃyuktāgama sūtra 254)23 Or. 
15011/27 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 166–175)
Suttanipāta (Skt. version of) IOL San 517–521 (ed. Hoernle 1916b; 517: frg. V, 518: frg. IV, 519: 
frg. I, 520: frg. III, 521: frg. II)
Udānavarga Or.8212/6(7) (ed. Wille 2006a, frg. 172); Or.15009/265 [to the same manuscript belongs 
Or.8212/6(7)]
Upasampadājñapti(?) Or.15010/90
II. List of identified Sanskrit manuscripts from the Northern Route of the Silk Road
Abhayarājakumārasūtra Or.15009/100
Abhidharma(?) Or.15007/331, 366; Or.15009/92, 161, 193; Or.15012/31*
Agraprajñapti Or.15008/15; Or.15009/163
Ambāṣṭasūtra/Ambāṣṭhasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15007/83r; Or.15015/179
Anantamukhanirhāradhāraṇīsūtra Or.15009/46+275, 47, 50, 279, 282
Anaparāddhastotra of Mātṛceṭa Or.15009/44 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 149, 416, 428; IOL Toch 180r1-4 
(Skt./Toch. bil. = IOL Toch 1502), 782ra–b (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 32)
Aṅgulimālasūtra Or.15009/390+510r2ff.
Aṅguttaranikāya (parallel to) Or.15009/54 (AN III 363.5–20), 61 (AN V 322f.), 64 (AN IV 225–
228), 498* (AN III 25f. §§ 25–28)
anthology(?) Or.15002/33*
Apannakasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15003/44; Or.15007/267+369+505; Or.15009/624
Arthavistarasūtra/Arthavistaradharmaparyāya (Dīrghāgama) Or.8212/1667(D) (ed. InAs: 1025, 
frg. III; ident. Wille 2005, frg. 1), 1669(G)* (ident. Wille 2005, frg. 3); Or.15003/323; 
Or.15007/71, 211ra–va, 334v, 540, 570; Or.15009/152, 189, 391, 417, 494, 495, 552, 559; 
Or.15014/429; IOL Toch 77 (Skt./Toch. bil.)
Āśīviṣopamasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) Or.15009/252
Āṭānāṭi(ka)hṛdaya Or.15002/31*; Or.15008/24v; Or.15009/601+Or.15014/547v4–8
Āṭānāṭikasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15002/31*; Or.15004/100; Or.15007/527, 705; Or.15008/24r; 
Or.15009/562, 601+Or.15014/547rt–v3; Or.15011/7 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 24–27); IOL Toch 355 
(ident. Wille 2005, frg. 21), 967
Bhaiṣajyavastu (stotra of the brahmin Nīlabhūti) Or.15008/7; Or.15009/196
Bhārgavasūtra (Dīrghāgama) 
 Or.15003/230; Or.15007/328; Or.15009/363, 448, 518, 640; 
Or.15014/185
Bhikṣuprātimokṣavibhaṅga Or.15009/604
Bimbasārasūtra Or.15004/98; Or.15007/156; Or.15009/420(?), 632(?)
blessings Or.15003/191; Or.15009/119+131
Bodharājakumārasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15004/76; Or.15009/106, 187
Brahmajālasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15009/217; Or.15012/32 (ed. Hartmann 1989, frg. b)
Buddhacarita of Aśvaghoṣa Or.15009/45
Buddhastotra Or.15007/650(?)
Candropamasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) Or.15011/8r5–6 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 40–44)
23 Reference by Jin-il Chung.

--- Page 253 of 425 ---
Manuscripts in the Collections of the British Library (London)
231
Caṅgīsūtra/Caṅkīsūtra: see Kāmaṭhikasūtra
Catuṣpariṣatsūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15002/1*, 15*, 36*; Or.15003/7, 35, 47, 51, 69, 74, 88, 
101+227, 154+155, 194, 276, 279, 328; Or.15004/28, 98; Or.15007/28, 153, 217, 220+223, 243, 
249, 250, 260, 297, 332, 374, 562(?), 602, 617; Or.15009/75, 88, 154+155, 165, 171, 204, 
349+634, 351(?), 377, 418, 419+558, 420(?), 456, 511, 626, 632(?); Or.15014/65, 69, 86, 157, 
274, 315, 405(?), 410, 470, 501;Or.15015/171, 178, 188, 305; IOL Toch 243, 400 (ed. Wille 
2005, frg. 26), 971, 989(A)
commentary to a sūtra passage (anuttaro bhiṣac chalyāhartā) Or.15009/127
Daśabalasūtra Or.15004/68+77; Or.15007/64; Or.15009/378 (ed. Chung 2009b: 22), 421, 429; 
Or.15014/351
Daśottarasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15003/33, 46, 142, 195, 250, 254; Or.15004/61, 64+65+66; 
Or.15007/79+263, 312, 334r, 495.1, 619; Or.15009/89v, 164, 216, 379, 388, 430, 431, 432, 519, 
520, 542, 652; Or.15014/332, 485; Or.15015/96, 215; IOL Toch 770
dhāraṇī and vidyā against pains of the eyes Or.15009/471
dhāraṇī (not yet identified) Or.15007/234; Or.15009/198; Or.15014/121
Dharmacakrapravartanasūtra Or.15003/154+155, 279, 328; Or.15004/28; Or.15007/535vb–e, 
562(?); Or.15009/171, 405
Dharmaśarīrasūtra Or.15015/301
Dhvajāgrasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) Or.15003/171; Or.15004/79+80; Or.15007/288; Or.15009/352
Diśāsauvāstikasūtra Or.15009/34724
dogmatic terms Or.15003/18
donation formula Or.15002/29(?)*; Or.15007/88, 350; Or.15008/10; Or.15009/262, 435, 524, 595; 
Or.15014/160, 557(?); IOL Toch 249A, 773
Ekottarikāgama Or.15009/54 (AN III 363.5–20), Or.15009/498 (AN III 25f. §§ 25–28)
epithets of the Buddha Or.15009/139
Gośṛṅgaśālavanasūtra Or.15009/422
Guṇāparyantastotra of Triratnadāsa Or.15009/58, 122, 586, 659; IOL Toch 688
Kāmaṭhikasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15014/559
Kāraṇavādisūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15014/494r
Karmavācanā Or.15002/16*, 38(?)*; Or.15003/84, 121 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 258(? Skt./Toch. bil.); 
Or.15007/131, 347(?), 353, 557(?), 718; Or.15009/87, 141, 359, 392 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 465, 497, 
499, 655; Or.15014/154, 166, 346; Or. 15015/193; IOL Toch 81B (Skt./Toch. bil.), 83 (Skt./
Toch. bil.), 125 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 142 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 164 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 981 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 
1197
Kāśyapasiṃhanādasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15003/77(?); Or.15007/295+296; Or.15009/433, 612
Kātantra (commentary to) Or.15004/62
Kāvya anthology Or.15009/460
Kāyabhāvanāsūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15003/24
Kevartisūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15007/3+714; Or.15015/93
Kūṭatāṇḍyasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15007/20, 45, 85; Or.15009/580; IOL Toch 784
Lokeccasūtra I (Dīrghāgama) Or.15008/8+Or.15009/79+437
Madhyamāgama (text corresponding to a sūtra in the Chinese Madhyamāgama)25 Or.15003/23 
(sūtra 133); Or.15009/63v4–7 (sūtra 23), 64 (sūtra 124), 140 (sūtra 97), 375 (sūtra 191), 422 
(sūtra 184), 480 (sūtra 128), 549 (sūtra 134), 570 (sūtra 97); Or. 15011/6 (sūtra 133), 10 (sūtra 
170), 11 (sūtra 170) [all frgs. ed. Hoernle 1916a: 27–35, 46–52]
Mahāgovindasūtra (Dīrghāgama) 
 Or.15003/43+93; Or.15007/261; Or.15009/364, 568; 
Or.15014/577; Or.15015/ 168
Mahallasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15007/690; Or.15009/466
Mahānidānasūtra (Madhyamāgama) Or.15007/269, 620; Or.15009/140, 570
24 Ident. K. Wille; cf. A. Yakup, Dišastvustik: Eine altuigurische Bearbeitung einer Legende aus dem 
Catuṣpariṣat-sūtra, Wiesbaden 2006: 108–110 (ms. 22a–27b).
25 The text of a given catalogue number does not necessarily stem from a Madhyamāgama manuscript; 
cf. also Chung and Fukita 2011.

--- Page 254 of 425 ---
232
KLAUS WILLE
Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15002/2*, 34*, 39*; Or.15003/32, 42, 89, 127, 222, 236; 
Or.15004/50, 85, 115 ; Or.15007/24+IOL San 1162, Or.15007/33, 205, 212, 279+358, 463, 576; 
Or.15009/104+457, 129+365, 134, 159, 210, 353, 393, 394, 403, 461, 482, 521, 546, 550, 553, 
599, 628; Or.15014/112, 163, 169, 200, 280, 418, 500, 530, 576, 618; Or.15015/177; IOL San 
1085 (ed. La Vallée Poussin 1913b: 855 = MPS ms. 254/255); IOL Toch 71, 357 (ed. Wille 
2005, frg. 23), 769
Mahāsāhasrapramardinī Or.15009/107
Mahāsamājasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15009/350, 500*; Or.15014/99
Mahāsīhanādasutta (parallel to): see Romaharṣaṇasūtra
Mahāsuññatasutta (parallel to) Or.15009/375
Mahāvadānasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15002/14*; Or.15003/89, 100, 261; Or.15004/32; Or.15007/ 
141, 494, 574, 678, 734, 740, 743; Or.15008/1; Or.15009/81, 132, 138, 329, 339, 404, 452, 522, 
582, 641; Or.15014/377, 535; Or.15015/255
Mahāvibhāṣā Or.15009/161(?)
Mātṛkā: Pratisaṃyuktakhaṇḍaka in the Uttaragrantha of the Mūlasarvāstivādins26 Or.15003/178; 
Or.15009/195, 271
Mātṛkā: Vṛttakhaṇḍaka in the Uttaragrantha of the Mūlasarvāstivādins27 Or.15007/504; Or.15009/ 
48, 57, 443; Or.15011/1 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 4–8), 2 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 12–16)
Māyājālasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15009/573
Munayastava Or.15002/37ra–d*; Or.15004/31; Or.15007/298, 525; Or.15009/605; Or.15014/612; 
IOL Toch 1131(?)
Nagarasūtra: see Nagaropamasūtra I
Nagaropamasūtra I (Saṃyuktāgama) Or.15007/364(?), 499; Or.15009/85, 175(?), 191, 212, 405, 
637, 661, 670
Nagaropamasūtra I–II Or.15014/108
Nagaropamasūtra II Or.15003/147, 196; Or.15014/97, 192; IOL Toch 352 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 20), 
645
Nīlabhūti (stotra of the brahmin; Bhaiṣajyavastu) Or.15008/7; Or.15009/196
Pañcatrayasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15007/368; Or.15009/148, 321, 406, 573, 642
Pañcavastuka Or.15009/94(?)
Paramārthaśūnyatādharmaparyāya Or.15003/126A (ident. P. Skilling March 2010)
poṣatha calendar IOL Toch 196 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 198 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 868a+b (Skt./Toch. bil.)
Poṣathavastu of the Sarvāstivādins Or.15007/347(?); Or.15009/46528
Pradakṣiṇāgāthā Or.15008/6+Or.15009/354; Or.15009/380+646
Prakaraṇa of Vasumitra Or.15009/51, 170
Prasādanīyasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15007/235, 548; Or.15009/59, 137, 406, 408, 565; IOL Toch 
818
Prasādapratibhodbhava (= Śatapañcāśatka) of Mātṛceṭa Or.15002/23*; Or.15003/124, 143, 162, 
219, 256, 266, 274, 289, 300; Or.15004/29, 42, 81; Or.15007/92, 124, 164, 291, 292, 321, 340, 
356, 370r–vb, 376, 467, 487, 502, 512, 565, 567, 569.1, 618, 683, 689, 719, 736, 746; 
Or.15008/26+28; Or.15009/55, 60, 114, 116, 123, 162, 211, 215, 286, 331, 337+572, 395, 407, 
459, 469, 501, 541, 551, 560; Or.15011/13 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 60–64); Or.15014/54, 64, 164, 
174, 195, 311, 508; Or.15015/161, 318; IOL San 416 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 67f.), 417 (ed. Hoernle 
1916a: 66f.), 418 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 70–73), 1083 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 77–80); IOL Toch 16 
(Skt./Toch. bil.), 35, 187 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 311 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 8), 312 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 
9), 419 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 27), 741 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 31), 859, 929, 966; Stein Khora.005b 
(original not yet found; ed. Hoernle 1916a: 73–75)
26 Identification by Shayne Clarke (personal communication); cf. Chung 2002: 96, § X.1.2: H.149.252 
(= Or.15009/195).
27 Except for Or.15007/504 identification by Shayne Clarke (personal communication); cf. Chung 
2002: 97, § X.1.3.: H.149.x.16 (= Or.15011/1); H.149.267 (= Or.15009/48); H.149.add. unnumbered (= 
Or.15009/443).
28 This fragment does not stem from the Poṣadhavastu as stated in Hu-von Hinüber 1994 (pp. 78ff.) 
but from a Karmavācanā collection; cf. Chung 2002: 90, note 21.

--- Page 255 of 425 ---
Manuscripts in the Collections of the British Library (London)
233
Prāsādikasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15014/279
Prātimokṣasūtra of the Mūlasarvāstivādins Or.15003/296; Or.15007/539(?); Or.15009/645
Prātimokṣasūtra of the Sarvāstivādins Or.8212/1669(F) (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 2), 1670(B) (ed. Wille 
2005, frg. 4); Or.15000/559(4) (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 34); Or.15002/3*, 7*; Or.15003/3, 11, 22, 
26, 37, 52, 60, 62, 66, 95, 125, 150, 152, 229, 243, 249, 251, 262, 280, 281, 288, 303; 
Or.15004/16(?), 45, 47, 48(?), 55, 63, 92, 94, 96; Or.15007/41, 78, 82, 179, 184, 294, 311, 339, 
367, 464(?), 485, 506.1, 508, 533, 564, 609, 610, 614, 615, 622, 635, 643, 648, 681, 691, 694, 
720, 724, 739, 742+Or.15014/506; Or.15008/9, 13, 14, 21; Or.15009/66, 70, 74, 82, 96, 97, 102, 
113, 115, 124, 147, 172, 179, 181, 194, 203, 207, 332, 341, 396, 415, 423, 424, 434, 455, 473, 
488, 523, 535, 545, 567, 581, 584, 592, 614, 639, 645, 650, 653, 656; Or.15014/51, 52, 94, 95, 
98, 119, 136, 170, 172, 181, 270, 305, 343, 402, 408, 411, 418, 464, 469, 522, 531, 564; 
Or.15015/222, 259, 282; IOL Toch 309 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 7), 454, 683, 819, 913, 973, 997, 
1134, 1203
Pratisaṃyuktakhaṇḍaka (vinaya of the Sarvāstivādins) Or.15009/195
Pravāraṇasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) Or.15003/158r; Or.15004/1; Or.15009/191; Or.15011/9 (ed. 
Hoernle 1916a: 36–40); Or.15014/134, 511
Pṛṣṭapālasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15003/99; Or.15007/83v, 277, 299; Or.15009/512; IOL Toch 333 
(ed. Melzer 2010: 82)
Pudgalasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15003/221; Or.15009/315, 633; Or.15015/169
Rāhulastava Or.15002/37re–v*; Or.15003/168; Or.15004/87; Or.15009/501; Or.15014/424
Romaharṣaṇasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15009/65, 144, 409
Śakrapraśnasūtra (Madhyamāgama) Or.15009/549
Śaktisūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) Or.15011/8r1–5 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 40–46)
Śalyasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15002/19+32 (ed. Hartmann/Wille forthcoming); Or.15004/54(?); 
Or.15007/ 300
Samādhirājasūtra(?) Or.15003/134
Saṃghabhedavastu(?) IOL Toch 283
Saṃghastotrastava Or.15004/82; Or.15009/502
Saṃyuktāgama [text corresponding to a sūtra in the Chinese Saṃyuktāgama, Za ahan jing (T 99)̣]29 
Or.15002/13* (sūtras 3–6); Or.15003/1A (sūtra 1307), 126A (sūtra 335; ident. P. Skilling March 
2010), 154+155 (sūtra 379), 158r (sūtra 1212), 171 (sūtra 981), 279 (sūtra 379), 328 (sūtra 
379)*; Or.15004/1 (sūtra 1212), 28 (sūtra 379), 33+40 (sūtras 356–358), 68+77 (sūtra 684), 
79+80 (sūtra 981); Or.15007/69 (sūtra 346), 106 (sūtra 292), 288 (sūtra 981), 364 (sūtra 287), 
499 (sūtra 287), 507 (sūtra 254), 535 (sūtras 378–379); Or.15009/49 (sūtra 506), 61 (sūtras 925–
926), 63r–v3 (sūtra 345), 71 (sūtra 351), 77 (sūtra 552), 85 (sūtra 287), 166 (sūtra 287), 168 
(sūtra 308), 171 (sūtra 379), 175+212 (sūtra 287), 191 (sūtra 1212 and 287), 206 (sūtras 467–
469), 252 (sūtra 1172), 340 (sūtra 296), 351 (sūtra 34), 352 (sūtra 981), 378 (sūtra 703), 
390+510r2ff. (sūtra 1077), 397 (sūtra 455), 405 (sūtra 287), 420(?) (sūtra 1074), 421 (sūtra 684), 
429 (sūtra 684), 446 (sūtras 403–404), 450 (sūtras 864–871), 453 (sūtra 351), 493+Or.15003/204 
(sūtra 344), Or.15009/571 (sūtra 298), 637 (sūtra 287), 661 (sūtra 287), 662 (sūtra 252), 670 
(sūtra 287); Or.15011/8 (sūtra 1136, 1255) (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 40–46), 9 (sūtra 1212) (ed. 
Hoernle 1916a: 36–40); Or.15014/35 (sūtra 343), 134 (sūtra 1212), 405 (? sūtra 379); 
Or.15015/217 (sūtra 298); IOL Toch 283 (? sūtra 254), 816 (sūtra 302) (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 33)
Sandakasutta (parallel to S. in Majjhimanikāya) Or.15003/53; Or.15009/647
Saṅgītisūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15002/21*, 25*; Or.15003/34, 131, 135, 182, 198, 242, 260; Or. 
15004/86; Or.15007/87, 102, 211vb–e, 693+Or.15009/91; Or.15009/154, 342, 343, 391, 503; 
Or.15011/4, 5 (both frgs. ed. Hoernle 1916a: 16–24); Or.15015/256
Śaṅkarakasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15009/561
Śatapañcāśatka: see Prasādapratibhodbhava
Saundarananda of Aśvaghoṣa IOL Toch 59r1–3 (Saund 7.48–49)
Smṛtyupasthānasūtra Or.15009/451
29 For arrangement according to the sequence of the sūtras cf. Chung 2008; the text of a given 
catalogue number does not necessarily stem from a Saṃyuktāgama manuscript.

--- Page 256 of 425 ---
234
KLAUS WILLE
Śoṇatāṇḍyasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15009/73+126+Or.15007/335
Śrāmaṇyaphalasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15003/30
Śroṇakoṭīviṃśasūtra (Saṃyuktāgama) Or.15007/507; IOL Toch 283
Śrutasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15014/145, 494v
stotra Or.15003/282; Or.15008/2; Or.15009/95Ba–b, 608
Śukasūtra (Dīrghāgama) Or.15009/156
Śukasūtra (Madhyamāgama) Or.15011/10, 11 (both frgs. ed. Hoernle 1916a: 46–52)
Supriyāvadāna Or. 15002/6*
sūtra with passages from the pratītyasamutpāda formula Or.15007/747; Or.15008/27
sūtra with passages from the 9 satvāvāsas Or.15007/247
sūtra with passages from the samādhiskandha Or.15003/96
sūtra with passages from the śīlaskandha Or.15007/130; Or.15009/68; Or.15014/573
sūtra with passages from the 8 vimokṣas Or.15007/626
sūtra with passages from the 8 vīryārambhavastus Or.15007/572
sūtra (not yet identified) Or.15009/49
syllabary Or.8212/1681(C)Ab–B*; Or.15003/304, 305, 306+Or.15007/154; Or.15007/74A, 148, 
348, 534; Or.15009/504; Or.15014/1
Udānavarga chapter 1
1.1–5: Or.15014/515; Or.15015/181; 1.1–9: Or.15003/228; 1.2–6: IOL Toch 38 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 
1.2–9: Or.15014/130; 1.3–4: Or.15014/493; 1.3–7: Or.15014/523; 1.3–10: Or. 15009/182; 1.4–6: 
Or.15014/304; 1.6–16: Or.15003/238; 1.12–22: Or.15014/307; 1.12–26: Or.15009/629; 1.12–30: 
Or.15007/251; 1.12–32: Or.15003/217; 1.17–24: Or.15007/571; 1.18–28: Or.15003/82; 1.19–29: 
Or.15009/93; 1.21–2.6: Or.8212/1662; 1.23–27: Or.15014/272; 1.23–36: Or.15009/323; 1.25–
34: Or.15009/438; 1.27–37: IOL Toch 233+368 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 1.31–33: Or.15007/308 (Skt./
Toch. bil.); 1.35–42: Or.15015/118; 1.35–2.5: Or.15015/122; 1.37–2.7: Or.15009/458, 603; 
1.38–2.7: Or.15008/16; 1.39–2.8: Or.15007/38; 1.39–2.10: Or.15015/230; 1.41–2.5: 
Or.15003/213; 1.42–2.3: IOL Toch 862 (Skt./Toch. bil.)
Udānavarga chapter 2
2.2–9: IOL Toch 716 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 2.2–12 Or.15009/53; 2.4–7: IOL Toch 765 (Skt./Toch. 
bil.); 2.8–12: IOL Toch 554 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 2.8–18: Or.15014/567; 2.9–15: Or.15003/78; 2.9–
18: Or.15009/654; 2.10–14: Or.15003/277; 2.12–18: Or.15007/627; 2.12–20: IOL Toch 152 
(Skt./Toch. bil.); 2.12–3.2: Or.15009/591; 2.13–18: Or.15004/35; 2.14–18: IOL Toch 371 (Skt./
Toch. bil.); 2.14–20: Or.15002/35*; 2.15–3.6: Or.15007/233; 2.17–3.4: Or.15003/190; 2.18–20: 
IOL Toch 267 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 2.18–3.1: IOL Toch 1027 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 2.18–3.2: IOL Toch 
715 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 2.19–3.9: Or.15003/200; 2.20–3.5(?): Or.15003/207
Udānavarga chapter 3
3.3–6: IOL Toch 1185; 3.7–12: IOL Toch 325; 3.8–15: Or.15015/203; 3.8–17: Or.15007/161; 
3.13–4.6: Or.15009/398; 3.16–4.2: Or.15003/132
Udānavarga chapter 4
4.1–5: IOL Toch 221 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 928 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 4.2–4: Or.15007/214 (Skt./Toch. 
bil.); 4.4–8: Or.15015/219; 4.4(?)–9: Or.15007/406; 4.6–9: IOL Toch 479 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 4.10–
27: Or.15007/346; 4.18–29: IOL Toch 1233; 4.21–30: Or.15009/183; 4.22–31: Or.15007/556; 
4.23–27: Or.15003/112; 4.23–32: IOL Toch 525 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 29); 4.25–32(?): 
Or.15014/378; 4.30–5.3: Or.15014/250; 4.37–5.2: Or.15007/307
Udānavarga chapter 5
5.2–15: Or.15009/454; 5.4–14: Or.15009/344; 5.10–12: Or.15014/70 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 5.10–15: 
Or.15007/656; 5.13–20: Or.15009/525; 5.15–27: Or.15014/73; 5.16–6.2: IOL Toch 701 (ed. 
Wille 2005, frg. 30); 5.16–6.3: Or.15014/507; 5.18–6.2: Or.15007/209; 5.21–26: IOL Toch 341 
(ed. Wille 2005, frg. 17); 5.25–26: IOL Toch 560 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 5.27–6.9: Or.15010/5 (Skt./
Toch. bil.)
Udānavarga chapter 6
6.6–12: Or.15007/649; 6.9–20: Or.15009/333; 6.10–13: Or.15007/318 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 6.11–15: 
IOL Toch 988 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 6.13–7.3: Or.15010/9
Udānavarga chapter 7

--- Page 257 of 425 ---
Manuscripts in the Collections of the British Library (London)
235
7.1–12: Or.15015/304; 7.5–8.3: Or.15009/566; 7.7–8.1: Or.15014/548; 7.8–8.7: Or.15009/324; 
7.11–8.4: Or.15009/56
Udānavarga chapter 8
8.1–8: Or.15009/607; 8.5–11: Or.15009/218; 8.5–9.2: Or.15010/8; 8.7–9.3: Or.15007/302+365; 
8.11–9.5: Or.15007/630+IOL Toch 228 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 8.11–9.6: Or.15009/399; 8.15–9.7: 
Or.15004/37+Or. 15007/377
Udānavarga chapter 9
9.7–18: Or.15014/495; 9.8–15: Or.15009/665; 9.11–18: IOL Toch 457 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 9.15–
10.3: Or.15009/462; 9.16–10.10: Or.15009/155; 9.16–10.11: Or.15009/635; 9.19–10.1: 
Or.15015/124
Udānavarga chapter 10
10.1–7: Or.15007/580; 10.1–12: Or.15008/4; 10.1–14: Or.15009/160; 10.4–11: IOL Toch 572 
(Skt./Toch. bil.); 10.5–Kolophon: Or.15009/208; 10.11–11.5: Or.15007/386; 10.13–16: IOL 
Toch 26 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 10.15–11.2: IOL Toch 979 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 10.15–11.11: 
Or.15014/132
Udānavarga chapter 11
11.1–12.1: Or.15014/538; 11.8–13: IOL Toch 807 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 11.9–12.4: Or.15003/68; 
Or.15007/22; 11.11–15: IOL Toch 505 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 11.12–12.2: Or.15007/545
Udānavarga chapter 12
12.7–17: Or.15003/148; 12.8–13: IOL Toch 122 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 772 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 12.9(?)–
17: Or.15007/5; 12.10–19: Or.15009/439; 12.19–13.13: Or.15008/18+Or.15009/80
Udānavarga chapter 13
13.4–8: Or.15007/703; 13.6–14.1: Or.15007/68; 13.8–12: IOL Toch 579 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 13.8–
13: IOL Toch 1187 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 13.8–14.2: Or.15003/225; 13.8–17: Or.15007/341; 13.11–
17: Or.15003/184
Udānavarga chapter 14
14.9–15.3: Or.15014/89; 14.12–15.3: Or.15009/598
Udānavarga chapter 15
15.13–24: Or.15009/578; 15.16B–16.1: Or.15004/53; 15.23–16.5: Or.15014/558
Udānavarga chapter 16
16.3–16: Or.15002/11*; 16.4–9: IOL Toch 267 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 16.7 or 8–21: Or.15003/113; 
16.11(?)–16: IOL Toch 931 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 16.13–24: Or.15009/348+491; 16.15–24: Or. 
15002/42*; 16.16–24: Or.15003/137; 16.17–17.4: Or.15009/334; 16.20–17.1: Or.15009/296 
(Skt./Toch. bil.); 16.21–17.7: Or.15009/173; 16.21–17.7: Or.15014/261
Udānavarga chapter 17
17.1–10: Or.15003/170; 17.4–18.5: Or.15009/526; 17.6–18.2: Or. 15002/27*; 17.7–18.1: IOL 
Toch 52 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 17.11–18.11: Or.15009/449; 17.col.–18.3: Or.15015/108
Udānavarga chapter 18
18.1–17: IOL Toch 356 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 22); 18.3–15: Or.15009/668; 18.6–14: Or.15009/ 
472; 18.6–16: Or.15007/513; 18.13–21: IOL Toch 1126; 18.17–19.3: Or.15009/99+631; 18.20–
19.10: Or.15008/19
Udānavarga chapter 19
19.1–8: Or.15002/8*; 19.2–6: Or.15003/57
Udānavarga chapter 20
20.9–21.5: Or.15009/145; 20.12–uddāna: Or.15009/188; 20.13–21.1: Or.15010/10; 20.13–20: 
IOL Toch 809+1244 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 20.17–21.2: Or.15009/202; 20.19–21.12: Or.15007/699
Udānavarga chapter 21
21.5–7: Or.15007/31; 21.8–16: Or.15009/400; 21.8–22.6: Or.15015/125; 21.12–18: IOL Toch 
330 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 13); 21.15–22.7: Or.15014/257; 21.17–22.15: Or.15009/505; 21.18–
22.4: Or.15003/129
Udānavarga chapter 22
22.2–9: IOL Toch 70 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 22.2–14: IOL Toch 149 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 22.15–23.3: 
Or.15007/309

--- Page 258 of 425 ---
236
KLAUS WILLE
Udānavarga chapter 23
23.1–15: Or.15007/359; 23.6–26: Or.15009/381; 23.10–14: Or.15007/696; 23.10–22(?): 
Or.15007/362; 23.10–23: Or. 15009/86; 23.10–24.5: Or.15014/479; 23.11–26(?): Or.15015/228, 
299; 23.11(?)–24.1: Or.15007/271; 23.12–24: Or.8212/ 1673(A) (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 5); 23.13–
26(?): Or.15007/7; 23.17–24.2: Or.15009/150; 23.21–24.7: Or.15009/663; 23.25–24.15: 
Or.15007/717; 23.col–24.7 IOL Toch 308 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 23.col–24.8: Or.15014/74
Udānavarga chapter 24
24.1–16: Or.15009/169; 24.2(?)–15(?): Or.15007/59; 24.3–14: Or.15009/455; 24.8–17 Or.15003/ 
73; ~ 24.10: Or.15015/233; 24.15–27(?): Or.15014/321; 24.16–19: Or.15014/430; 24.20–29: 
Or.15009/128; 24.20D–30: Or.15009/325; 24.20E–26: Or.15007/688 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 24.21–29: 
Or. 15007/265; 24.27–25.7: Or.15009/382; 24.28–30: IOL Toch 329 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 12); 
24.30–25.6: IOL Toch 884 (Skt./Toch. bil.)
Udānavarga chapter 25
25.2–19: Or.15014/43; 25.4–17: Or.15009/527; 25.6–15: Or.15009/547; 25.7–18: Or.15007/733; 
25.8–14: IOL Toch 225 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 25.15–23: Or.15004/46; 25.23–26.5: Or.15009/576; 
25.24–26.7: Or.15015/49; 25.25–26.8: Or.15014/505
Udānavarga chapter 26
26.9–23: Or.15009/440; 26.17–30: Or.15008/25; 26.18–31: Or.15009/447; 26.29–27.3: IOL 
Toch 702 (Skt./Toch. bil.)
Udānavarga chapter 27
27.8–13: IOL Toch 103 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 27.9–20: Or.15009/587; 27.10–20: Or.15009/355; 
27.11d–?: Or.15003/16; 27.14–20: Or.15014/201+205; 27.14–22C: Or.15007/70; 27.15–22B: 
Or.15007/521; 27.17–22: Or.15009/153; 27.17(?)–26(?): Or.15007/680; 27.25–32: 
Or.15009/167; 27.25–35: Or.15007/144; 27.27–36: Or.15007/129; 27.28–40: 
Or.15007/276+338; 27.32–40: Or.15014/175; 27.33–28.4: Or.15009/657; 27.39–28.9: 
Or.15008/20+Or.15003/119
Udānavarga chapter 28
28.10–26: Or.15009/214+486; 28.11–26: Or. 15002/17*; 28.13–27: Or.15009/366+IOL Toch 
399 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 25); 28.15–30: IOL Toch 992; 28.18–24: Or.15007/529; 28.18(?)–28: 
Or.15004/26; 28.28–31: IOL Toch 331 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 14); 28.31–29.2: Or.15007/552; 
28.34–29.1: Or.15014/96; 28.37–29.11: Or.15009/356+506; 28.39–29.9: Or.15009/130
Udānavarga chapter 29
29.3–10: Or.15003/301; 29.4–10: Or.15007/143; 29.4–11: Or.15007/634; 29.6–13: 
Or.15003/263+Or.15007/333; 29.8–18: Or.15009/528; 29.12–21: IOL Toch 766 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 
~ 29.14: Or.15015/97 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 29.19–30: IOL Toch 588 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 29); 29.21–
27: Or.15003/259; 29.21–29: Or.15003/211; 29.27–42: Or.15009/664; 29.29–33: Or.15009/644; 
29.31–42: Or.15009/425; 29.39–45: Or.15007/349; 29.40–47: Or.15015/94; 29.44–50: 
Or.15003/185; 29.47–57: Or.15007/732; 29.52–30.2: Or. 15015/191; 29.54–57: IOL Toch 1243 
(Skt./Toch. bil.); 29.55–30.4: H.149.add.169 (missing; IOL 17A 189, 1st row, 2nd frg.); 29.57–
30.6: IOL Toch 367 (Skt./Toch. bil.)
Udānavarga chapter 30
30.5–12: Or.15007/252; 30.6–10: Or.15009/529 (possibly the same folio Or.15014/173); 30.6–
11: Or.15014/173; 30.6–11: Or.15003/97; 30.7–11: Or.15015/309; 30.12–19: Or.15003/139; 
30.10–21: Or.15009/564; 30.10–25: Or.15007/57; 30.20–26: IOL Toch 54 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 
30.22–25: Or.15003/94; 30.22–30: Or.15007/248; 30.22–31: Or.15009/474; 30.23–37: 
Or.15007/497; 30.32–41: H.149.211 (missing; IOL 17A 153; 1st row, middle; different frg. 
H.149.211 = IOL Toch 61); 30.36–40 or 41: Or.15003/180; 30.36–46: Or.15009/ 326; 30.36–49: 
Or.15014/81; 30.40–31.4: Or.15003/86+149; 30.40–31.7: Or.15014/390; 30.42–colophon: IOL 
Toch 323 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 11); 30.43(?)–51: Or.15003/226; 30.44–52: Or.15007/561; 30.52–
31.2: IOL Toch 1020 (Skt./Toch. bil.)
Udānavarga chapter 31
31.4–12: Or.15003/165; 31.13–27: Or.15009/180; 31.17–25: Or.15007/711; 31.20–27: 
Or.15009/72; 31.20–33: Or.15003/ 278; 31.20–35: Or.15009/192; 31.23–32: IOL Toch 75 (Skt./
Toch. bil.); 31.24–30: IOL Toch 346(a) (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 10); 31.25–32: IOL Toch 206 (Skt./

--- Page 259 of 425 ---
Manuscripts in the Collections of the British Library (London)
237
Toch. bil.); 31.29–33: Or. 15009/602; 31.29–35: Or.15009/569+574; 31.33–41: Or.15014/425; 
31.36–42: Or.15003/269; 31.39–54: Or.15010/7; 31.41–51: Or.15009/548; 31.46–59: 
Or.15014/575; 31.48–57: Or.15009/205; 31.49–56: IOL Toch 39 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 31.51–57: 
Or.15007/325; 31.51–32.1: Or.15007/522; 31.57–32.8: Or.15003/92; 31.60–32.4: IOL Toch 569 
(Skt./Toch. bil.)
Udānavarga chapter 32
32.1–6: Or.15007/293; 32.6–14: Or.15009/648; 32.7–21: Or.15007/357; 32.11–18: Or.15007/ 
160A; 32.12–15: Or.15003/81; 32.12–22: IOL Toch 164 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 32.13–23: Or.15002/ 
10*; 32.14–27: Or.15009/117; 32.17–27: Or.15003/240; 32.20–25: Or.15014/357; 32.23–35: 
Or.15009/621; 32.28–40: Or.15003/181; 32.29–43: Or.15009/530; 32.34–41: Or.15007/239; 
32.39–50: Or.15007/155; 32.48–57: Or.15009/98; 32.48(?)–61(?): Or.15007/218.1; 32.49–55: 
IOL Toch 926 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 32.54–63: Or.15009/413; 32.55–64: Or.15009/357; 32.55–70(?): 
Or.15003/294; 32.57–68: Or.15009/197; 32.58–69: Or.15009/669; 32.59–69: 
Or.15009/146+531; 32.60–69: Or.15008/5; 32.60–70: Or.15009/111; 32.60–71: Or.15009/609; 
32.61–64: Or.15003/246; 32.61–71: Or.15009/508+585; ~ 32.68: Or. 15015/229; 32.68–77: 
Or.15009/507, 660; 32.69–76: Or.15014/574; 32.72–81: Or.15009/483; 32.75–81: H.add.149.70 
(missing; IOL 17A 189, 2nd row, middle); 32.75–33.5: Or.15009/190; 32.81–33.7: Or.15003/41
Udānavarga chapter 33
33.1–10: Or.15003/64; 33.2–12: Or.15010/11; 33.5–16: Or.15007/29; 33.8–12: Or.15003/75; 
33.8–15: Or.15009/367; 33.10–17: Or.15009/186; 33.10–22: Or.15014/566; 33.14–24: 
Or.15007/523; 33.15–22: Or.15009/ 90; 33.15–59(?): IOL Toch 1072; ~ 33.17: Or.15015/133; 
33.17–25: Or.15003/212; 33.20–30: IOL Toch 45 (Skt./Toch. bil.); 33.22–26: Or.15014/631; 
33.23–28: Or.15007/644; 33.28–35: Or.15007/157; 33.31–42: Or.15007/303; 33.35–45: 
Or.15003/166; 33.38–46: Or.15003/330; 33.39–43: Or.15007/547; 33.41–69: Or.15009/62; 
33.43–57: Or.15007/32; 33.48–60: Or.15009/577; 33.~50: IOL Toch 358 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 
24); 33.50–65 Or.15014/509; 33.57–73(?): Or.15007/631; 33.59–67: Or.15009/69; 33.60–69: 
Or.15009/627; 33.64–75: Or.15007/232; Or.15009/597; 33.64–76: Or.15009/492; 33.65–76: 
Or.15009/178; 33.65–76: Or.15009/412; 33.67–78: Or.15015/253; 33.67–83(?): Or. 15007/194; 
33.74–82: Or.15009/667; 33.74–83(?): Or.15014/177; 33.74–uddāna: Or.15009/110; 33.76–83 
Or.15009/441; 33.uddāna: Or.15007/289r
Udgatāstotra Or.15009/666; IOL Toch 321 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 10)
Upāliparipṛcchā (vinaya of the Sarvāstivādins) Or.15009/330
Upālisūtra (Madhyamāgama) Or.15003/23; Or.15011/6 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 27–35)
Upasenasūtra Or.15009/662
Uttaragrantha of the Mūlasarvāstivādins: see Mātṛkā
Vajracchedikā Or.15009/46+275 (ed. Harrison 2009, frg. 2)
Varṇārhavarṇa of Mātṛceṭa Or.15002/26*; Or.15003/13, 17, 28, 29+38+215, 49, 67, 71, 98, 114, 
164, 193, 234, 283, 292; Or.15004/38, 39; Or.15007/25+268, 40, 99, 162, 189, 236r1, 278, 289v, 
316, 330, 343, 345, 530 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 532, 600, 698, 722; Or.15009/101, 108, 120, 136, 143, 
151, 201, 209, 215, 335 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 336, 345, 358, 368, 369, 370, 372, 376, 383, 442, 481, 
487, 490, 509, 532, 541, 543, 544, 556, 589, 593, 594, 596, 600, 605, 610, 617, 619, 643; 
Or.15011/14, 15 (both frgs. ed. Hoernle 1916a: 80–84; re-ed. VAV ms. L23 and 41); 
Or.15014/29, 46, 90, 116, 126, 165, 168+498, 194, 216, 303, 341, 554, 562, 608, 650; 
Or.15015/56, 62, 232, 306; IOL San 1083 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 77–80; re-ed. VAV ms. L1); IOL 
Toch 74 (Skt./Toch. bil.) 202 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 203 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 334 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 
16), 343 (ed. Wille 2005, frg. 18), 736, 774 (Skt./Toch. bil.), 834*
Vastrāvadāna Or.15004/102
verses Or.15007/236r2–v, 337; Or.15009/142, 373, 411, 425, 477, 615, 651, 671; Or.15015/296
Vidyāsthānopamasūtra Or.15007/336v; Or.15009/83
vidyā text Or.15009/630
Vinaya Or.15002/30*; Or.15009/52, 57, 109, 118, 174, 384, 410, 554, 555, 606;
Vinayamātṛkā (Vinaya of the Sarvāstivādins) Or.15009/328
Vinayavibhaṅga of the Mūlasarvāstivādins Or.15014/161, 338
Vinayavibhaṅga of the Sarvāstivādins: see Bhikṣuprātimokṣavibhaṅga

--- Page 260 of 425 ---
238
KLAUS WILLE
Yoga manual Or.15002/20+28 (ed. Hartmann 2006b, frg. 1); Or.15003/31(?), 257 (ed. Hartmann 
2006b, frg. 2); Or.15007/231 (to the same folio belongs Or.15009/374), 692; Or.15009/374, 485 
(both frgs. ed. Hartmann 2006a); Or.15014/156
III. List of identified Sanskrit manuscripts from Dunhuang 30
anthology IOL San 393–395 (ed. La Vallée Pousin 1913b: 848f.)
Aṣṭādaśasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā IOL San 1492.0–68*31
Caityacatuṣkasūtra IOL San 396 (re-ed. Kudo 2006b)
charm against snake-bites32 IOL San 378 (r6–v6 ed. La Vallée Pousin 1911a: 776f.)
Darśanapañcāśatstava of Vasumitra32 IOL San 363 (ed. Hartmann 2008, ms. 7/8)
Daśabalasūtra32 IOL San 364 (re-ed. Chung 2009b: 5f.)
dhāraṇī IOL San 397 (ed. Kudo 2006c)
Karmavācanā IOL San 398, 400, 404 (ed. La Vallée Pousin 1913b: 846f.)
Maitreyaparipṛcchā IOL San 391+392 (ed. La Vallée Poussin 1911b: 1077–1079)
Nagaropamasūtra II 32 IOL San 376–378r5 (re-ed. NagSū: 61–64)
Nīlakaṇṭhadhāraṇī Or.8212/175 (in Brāhmī and Sogdian script ; ed. La Vallée Poussin/Gauthiot 
1912: 629–645)
Prasādapratibhodbhava32 IOL San 416–418 (ed. Hoernle 1916a: 64–73)
Prātimokṣasūtra IOL San 399, 401–403, 405, 406 (re-ed. Pauly 1966: 268–270)
Tripusabhallikasūtra IOL San 396 (re-ed. Kudo 2006b)
Udānavarga32 IOL San 379–381, 407–415 (ed. La Vallée Pousin 1912: 355–373)
IV. List of identified Sanskrit manuscripts from Gilgit 33
Vinayavastu of the Mūlasarvāstivādins Or.11878A [Pravrajyāvastu, foll. 43–53r10: ed. Vogel/Wille 
1996 and 2002 (facsimiles in GBM 686–70734); Poṣadhavastu, fol. 53v: ed. HU-von Hinüber 
1994)
Saddharmapūṇdarīkasūtra Or.11878B (ed. Watanabe 1975, vol. 2, Group C)
Abbreviations
AKh
M. Aurel Stein, Ancient Khotan: Detailed Report of Archaeological Explorations in 
Chinese Turkestan, 2 vols., Oxford: Clarendon Press 1907 [repr. New York: Hacker 
Art Books 1975].
ĀṭānSū
Bruchstücke des Āṭānāṭikasūtra aus dem zentralasiatischen Sanskritkanon der 
Buddhisten, ed. H. Hoffmann, Leipzig: Deutsche Morgenländische Gesellschaft 
1939 (Kleinere Sanskrit-Texte, 5) [repr. Stuttgart: Steiner Verlag Wiesbaden 1987 
(Monographien zur indischen Archäologie, Kunst und Philologie, 3)].
BB 33
G. M. Bongard-Levin i M. I. Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja, Pamjatniki indijskoj 
pis’mennosti iz central’noj azii, Vypusk 1, Moskva: Izdat. Nauka 1985 (Pamjatniki 
pis’mennosti Vostoka 73.1; Bibliotheca Buddhica, 33).
BB 34
G. M. Bongard-Levin i M. I. Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja, Pamjatniki indijskoj 
pis’mennosti iz central’noj azii, Vypusk 2, Moskva: Izdat. Nauka 1990 (Pamjatniki 
pis’mennosti Vostoka 73.2; Bibliotheca Buddhica, 34).
30 Excluded are those in Southern Turkestan Brāhmī, for which see list I: Kauśikaprajñāpāramitāsūtra; 
Ratnagotravibhāga-Mahāyānottaratantraśāstra; Sarvatathāgatoṣṇīṣasitātapatrānāma-aparājitā-mahāpratyaṅgirā-(mahāvidyārajñī) IOL Khot S.46, lines 12–195; Or.8210/S.2529.
31 Written in Gilgit/Bāmiyān Type I and identified by E. Conze (1950).
32 It belongs to a composite manuscript which is divided among the collections in London and Paris; 
cf. NagSū: 19–21.
33 Cf. the description of the mss. by L. D. Barnett in The British Museum Quarterly 16.3 (1951): 68f.
34 These facsimiles are not reproduced in GBM(rev.).

--- Page 261 of 425 ---
Manuscripts in the Collections of the British Library (London)
239
BB 40
G. M. Bongard-Levin, M. I. Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja i E. N. Temkin, Pamjatniki 
indijskoj pis’mennosti iz central’noj azii, Vypusk 3, Moskva: Izdat. Vostochnaya 
Literatura RAN 2004 (Pamjatniki pis’mennosti Vostoka 73.3; Bibliotheca Buddhica, 
40).
BH
Sanskrit fragments edited in: Xinjiang Manuscripts Preserved in the National 
Library of China: Sanskrit Fragments and Kharoṣṭhī Documents, eds. DUAN Qing, 
ZHANG Zhiqing, Shanghai 2013 (Series of Sanskrit Manuscripts & Buddhist Literature, 3).
BLSF
Buddhist Manuscripts from Central Asia: The British Library Sanskrit Fragments, 2 
vols., ed. S. Karashima and K. Wille, Tokyo: Meiwa Printing Company 2006, 2009.
CPS
Das Catuṣpariṣatsūtra: Eine kanonische Lehrschrift über die Begründung der 
buddhistischen Gemeinde, ed. E. Waldschmidt, Teil 1–3, Berlin: Akademie-Verlag 
1952–62 (Abhandlungen der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 
Klasse für Sprachen, Literatur und Kunst, 1952.2, 1956.1, 1960.1).
DĀG
Recently discovered manuscript of the Dīrghāgama (cf. J.-U. Hartmann's contribution in this volume).
GBM
Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts (Facsimile Edition), ed. by Raghu Vira and Lokesh 
Chandra, 10 pts., New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture/Jayyed Press 
1959–1974 (Śata-Piṭaka Series, 10)
GBM(rev.)
Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts: revised and enlarged compact facsimile edition, ed. by 
Raghu Vira and Lokesh Chandra, 3 pts., Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications 1995 
(Bibliotheca Indo-Buddhica Series, 150–152).
GM
Gilgit Manuscripts, ed. Nalinaksha Dutt, 4 vols., Calcutta, Srinagar 1939–1959.
Huntington
Central Asian manuscripts in the Huntington Collection (New Haven).
IDP
International Dunhuang Project, British Library, London: http://idp.bl.uk
InAs
Sir Aurel Stein, Innermost Asia: Detailed Report of Explorations in Central Asia, 
Kan-su and Eastern Īrān, 5 vols., Oxford: Clarendon Press 1928.
IOL
India Office Library.
IOL 17A
Microfilm of the India Office Library “Sanskrit mss. Stein and Hoernle;” see 
Skjærvø 2002: xxxvi.
IOL Toch
See IDP “Search catalogue”: Michaël Peyrot, An edition of the Tocharian fragments 
IOL Toch 1 — IOL Toch 822 in the India Office Library, London, London: IDP 2007. 
Tatsushi Tamai, An edition of the Tocharian fragments IOL Toch 853 — IOL Toch 
1247 in the India Office Library, London, London: IDP 2007.
Jm
[Jātakamālā] = A. Hanisch, Āryaśūras Jātakamālā: Philologische Untersuchungen zu 
den Legenden 1 bis 15, 2 vols., Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag 2005 (Indica et 
Tibetica, 43).
KaVā
H. Härtel, Karmavācanā: Formulare für den Gebrauch im buddhistischen Gemeindeleben aus ostturkistanischen Sanskrit-Handschriften, Berlin: Akademie-Verlag 
1956 (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 3).
KT V
Indo-Scythian Studies being Khotanese Texts, vol. V, ed. by H. W. Bailey, Cambridge: University Press 1963.
MPS
Das Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra: Text in Sanskrit und Tibetisch, verglichen mit dem Pāli 
nebst einer Übersetzung der chinesischen Entsprechung im Vinaya der Mūlasarvāstivādins, auf Grund von Turfan-Handschriften hg. und bearbeitet E. Waldschmidt, 
Teil 1–3, Berlin: Akademie-Verlag 1950–1951 (Abhandlungen der Deutschen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Klasse für Sprachen, Literatur und Kunst 
[up to 1949: Phil.-Hist.Kl.] 1949.1, 1950.2,3).
MS IV
Monumenta Serindica (Saiiki-bunka-kenkyū), Vol. IV: Buddhist Manuscripts and 
Secular Documents of the Ancient Languages in Central Asia, Kyoto 1961.
NagSū
G. Bongard-Levin, D. Boucher, T. Fukita, K. Wille, “The Nagaropamasūtra: An 
Apotropaic Text from the Saṃyuktāgama,” A Transliteration, Reconstruction, and 
Translation of the Central Asian Sanskrit Manuscripts, Sanskrit-Texte aus dem 
buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen III, Göttingen: Vanden-

--- Page 262 of 425 ---
240
KLAUS WILLE
hoeck & Ruprecht 1996 (Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den 
Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 6): 7–131.
Or.15001
Fragments of Or.15001 are edited in Wille 2009a: 34–49.
Or.15002
Identifications of Or.15002 in Wille 2005: 61f.
Or.15003
Fragments of Or.15003/1–289 are edited in Wille 2006b; Or.15003/290–333 will be 
edited in BLSF III (forthcoming).
Or.15004
Fragments of Or.15004 are edited in Wille 2009b.
Or.15006
Fragments of Or.15006 will be edited in a future BLSF volume.
Or.15007
Fragments of Or.15007 will be edited in BLSF III (forthcoming).
Or.15008
Fragments of Or.15008 will be edited in BLSF III (forthcoming).
Or.15009
Fragments of Or.15009/1–350 are edited in BLSF II: 105–334, “The Sanskrit 
Fragments Or.15009 in the Hoernle Collection”: Or.15009/1–50 by YE Shaoyong, 
Or.15009/51–90 by Jundo Nagashima, Or.15009/91–100 by Jiro Hirabayashi, 
Or.15009/101–150 by Noriyuki Kudo, Or.15009/151–200 by Gudrun Melzer, 
Or.15009/201–250 by YE Shaoyong, Or.15009/251–290 by Jundo Nagashima, 
Or.15009/291–300 by Jiro Hirabayashi, Or.15009/301–350 by Takamichi Fukita, 
Or.15009/351–678 will be edited in BLSF III (forthcoming).
Or.15010
Fragments of Or.15010 are edited in Karashima 2009b.
Or.15014
Fragments of Or.15014 will be edited in a future BLSF volume
Or.15015
Fragments of Or.15015 will be edited in BLSF III (forthcoming).
Pāt.
Pātāyantika-dharma of the Prātimokṣasūtra.
Pell.Skt.
Central Asian manuscripts in the Pelliot Collection (Paris) with the pressmark 
Pelliot Sanskrit.
PPU
[Prasādapratibhodbhava] = The Śatapañcāśatka of Mātṛceṭa, ed. D. R. Shackleton 
Bailey, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1951.
PrMoSū
Prātimokṣasūtra der Sarvāstivādins, Nach Vorarbeiten von Else Lüders und Herbert 
Härtel hg. und übers. von G. von Simson, 2 vols., Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 1986 and 2000 (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 11).
SA.
Saṃghāvaśeṣa-dharma of the Prātimokṣasūtra.
Śai.
Śaikṣa-dharma of the Prātimokṣasūtra.
Saund
Aśvaghoṣa, Saundarananda, ed. and transl. by E. H. Johnston, London: Oxford 
University Press 1928.
SBV
The Gilgit Manuscript of the Saṅghabhedavastu, 2 vols., ed. R. Gnoli, Roma 1977–
1978 (Serie Orientale Roma, 49).
Saddhp(C)
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, Central Asian Manuscripts, Romanized Text, ed. 
Hirofumi Toda, Tokushima: Kyoiku Shuppan Center 21983.
SDT III
R. E. Emmerick and M. I. Vorob’ëva-Desjatovskaja, Saka Documents Text Volume 
III: The St. Petersburg collections, London: BAS Printers 1995 (Corpus Inscriptionum Iranicaum, Part II Inscriptions of the Seleucid and Parthian Periods and of 
Eastern Iran and Central Asia, vol. V Saka).
Ser
Aurel Stein, Serindia: Detailed Report of Explorations in Central Asia and Westernmost China, 5 vols., Oxford: Clarendon Press 1921.
SHT
Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turfanfunden, Teil 1–11, ed. E. Waldschmidt et al., 
Wiesbaden/Stuttgart: Steiner Verlag 1965, 1968, 1971, 1980, 1985, 1989, 1995, 
2000, 2004, 2008, 2012 (Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, X,1–11).
SI L
Central Asian manuscripts in the Lavrov Collection (St. Petersburg) with the 
pressmark Ser India Lavrov.
SI M
Central Asian manuscripts in the Malov Collection (St. Petersburg) with the 
pressmark Ser India Malov.
SI P
Central Asian manuscripts in the Petrovsky Collection (St. Petersburg) with the 
pressmark Ser India Petrovsky.

--- Page 263 of 425 ---
Manuscripts in the Collections of the British Library (London)
241
SLLMC
Sanskrit Lotus Sutra Fragments from the Lüshun Museum Collection: Facsimile 
Edition and Romanized Text, ed. Zh. Jiang, Dalian and Tokyo 1997.
SMSR
Sanskrit manuscripts of Saddharmapuṇḍarīka: Collected from Nepal, Kashmir and 
Central Asia. Romanized Text and Index, ed. K. Tsukamoto, R. Taga, R. Mitomo and 
M. Yamazaki, vols. I–II, Tokyo: Society for the Study of Saddharmapundarika 
Manuscripts 1986–1988.
STTS
Sarva-tathāgata-tattva-saṅgraha nāma Mahāyānasūtra, ed. I. Yamada, New Delhi: 
Jayyed Press 1981 (Śata-Piṭaka Series, 262).
T
Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō or Taishō Issaikyō, 100 vols., ed. J. Takakusu and K. 
Watanabe, Tōkyō 1924ff.
TT
The Tibetan Tripiṭaka: Peking Edition (repr.), ed. Daisetz T. Suzuki, 168 vols., 
Tokyo/Kyoto 1955–1961.
Uv
Udānavarga, ed. F. Bernhard, 2 vols., Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 1965 
and 1968 (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 10).
VAV
Das Varṇārhavarṇastotra des Mātṛceṭa, hg. und übers. von J.-U. Hartmann, 
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 1987 (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 12).
Works Cited
Bidyabinod, B.B.
1927
“Fragment of a Prajnaparamita Manuscript from Central Asia,” Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India 32: 1–11.
Bongard-Levin, Gregori M.
1988
“A fragment of the Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā from Central Asia,” Studies in Indology: 
Prof. Rasik Vihari Joshi Felicitation Volume, ed. A. Kumar, New Delhi: Shree Publishing 
House 1988–1989: 39–42 [cf. BB 34: 260–263].
1993a
“A fragment of the Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāsūtra from A. Stein Collection,” 
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (Amṛtamahotsava Volume) 72/73, 
1991/1992: 715–717 [cf. BB 40: 211ff. without facs.]
1993b
“A new fragment of the Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā from Eastern Turkestan,” 
The IXth World Sanskrit Conference (January 10-16 1994, Melbourne, Australia), Contributions of Russian Scholars, ed. S. D. Serebriany, Moscow 1993: 17–20 [cf. BongardLevin/Kimura 1995].
Bongard-Levin, Gregori M., and Shin’ichirō Hori
1996
“A Fragment of the Larger Prajñāpāramitā from Central Asia,” Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies 19: 19–60 [cf. BB 40: 221–243].
Bongard-Levin, Gregori M., and Takayasu Kimura
1995
“New fragments of the Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā from Eastern Turkestan,” 
East and West 45: 355–358 [cf. BB 40: 217–220].
Bongard-Levin, Gregori M., and Shōgo Watanabe
1997
“A fragment of the Sanskrit text of the Śīlapāramitā,” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde 
Südasiens 41: 93–98 [cf. BB 40: 244–246].
Chung, Jin-il
2002
“Sanskrit-Fragmente des sogenannten Daśādhyāya-vinaya aus Zentralasien – eine vorläufige Auflistung –,” Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und 
Neueditionen IV, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht (Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 9): 77–104.
2008
A Survey of the Sanskrit Fragments Corresponding to the Chinese Saṃyuktāgama, Tokyo: 
Sankibō.

--- Page 264 of 425 ---
242
KLAUS WILLE
2009a
“Eine Sanskrit-Version des Ānanda-Sutta (Saṃyuttanikāya 22.21) in der Sammlung Stein 
(British Library, London),” Pāsādikadānaṃ: Festschrift für Bhikkhu Pāsādika, ed. M. 
Straube et al., Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag (Indica et Tibetica, 52): 25–30.
2009b
“Ein drittes und ein viertes Daśabala-Sūtra,” Sankō Bunka Kenkyūjo Nenpō (Annual of the 
Sankō Research Institute for the Studies of Buddhism) 40: 1–32.
Chung, Jin-il, and Takamichi Fukita
2011
A Survey of the Sanskrit Fragments Corresponding to the Chinese Madhyamāgama, Tokyo: 
Sankibō.
Conze, Edward
1950
“Preliminary Note on a Prajñāpāramitā-Manuscript,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of 
Great Britain and Ireland: 32–36.
DUAN, Qing
2009
“A fragment of the Bhadrakalpasūtra in Buddhist Sanskrit from Xinjiang,” Sanskrit manuscripts in China: Proceedings of a panel at the 2008 Beijing Seminar on Tibetan Studies, 
October 13 to 17, ed. E. Steinkellner, Q. Duan, H. Krasser, Beijing: China Tibetology 
Publishing House: 15–39.
GUAN, Di
2012
“Three Sanskrit Fragments Found in Arthur M. Sackler Museum,” China Tibetology 19: 
26–38.
Habata, Hiromi
2007
Die zentralasiatischen Sanskrit-Fragmente des Mahāparinirvāṇa-mahāsūtra: Kritische 
Ausgabe des Sanskrittextes und seiner tibetischen Übertragung im Vergleich mit den 
chinesischen Übersetzungen, Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag (Indica et Tibetica, 51).
2009
“The Mahāparinirvāṇa-mahāsūtra Manuscripts in the Stein and Hoernle Collections (1),” 
BLSF II: 551–588.
Harrison, Paul
2009
“Sanskrit Fragments of the Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā in the British Library,” BLSF II: 
637–657.
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe
1989
“Fragmente aus dem Dīrghāgama der Sarvāstivādins,” Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen I, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 
(Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 2): 37–67.
2006a
“Neue Fragmente aus dem “Yogalehrbuch”,” in: D. Schlingloff, Ein buddhistisches Yogalehrbuch, Unveränderter Nachdruck der Ausgabe von 1964 unter Beigabe aller seither bekannt 
gewordenen Fragmente, hg. J.-U. Hartmann und H.-J. Röllicke, München: Iudicium Verlag 
(Buddhismus-Studien, 5): 309–318.
2006b
“Drei weitere Fragmente aus dem Yogalehrbuch,” in: D. Schlingloff, Ein buddhistisches 
Yogalehrbuch, Unveränderter Nachdruck der Ausgabe von 1964 unter Beigabe aller seither 
bekannt gewordenen Fragmente, hg. J.-U. Hartmann und H.-J. Röllicke, München: Iudicium 
Verlag (Buddhismus-Studien, 5): 319–324.
2008
“Vasumitras Darśanapañcāśatstava: Ein Buddha-Hymnus aus Ostturkistan,” Bauddhasāhityastabakāvalī: Essays and Studies on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature dedicated to Claus 
Vogel by Colleagues, Students, and Friends, ed. D. Dimitrov, M. Hahn, and R. Steiner, 
Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag (Indica et Tibetica, 36): 187–197.
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe, and Chanwit Tudkeao
2009
“Three Sanskrit Fragments of the Ratnaketuparivarta,” BLSF II: 589–596.
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe, and Klaus Wille
1992
“Die nordturkistanischen Sanskrit-Handschriften der Sammlung Hoernle (Funde buddhistischer Sanskrit-Handschriften, II),” Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen II, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht (SanskritWörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 4): 10–63.

--- Page 265 of 425 ---
Manuscripts in the Collections of the British Library (London)
243
forthcoming “A Folio of the Śalyasūtra/Sunakkhattasutta,” in Jens Braarvig et al., eds., Buddhist 
Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection, Vol. IV, Oslo: Hermes Publishing.
Hoernle, August Friedrich Rudolf
1916a
Manuscript Remains of Buddhist Literature, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
1916b
“The Sutta Nipata in a Sanskrit version from Eastern Turkestan,” Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society: 709–732.
Hori, Shin’ichirō
2003
“Notes on the Unidentified Sanskrit Fragments in the Ōtani Collection at Ryūkoku 
University Library,” Journal of the International College for Advanced Buddhist Studies 6: 
101–107[126–132].
2011
“Sanskrit Fragments from Central Asia at the Institute of Oriental Manuscripts of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg,” Bukkyōgaku (Journal of Buddhist Studies) 
53: 1–24.
Hu-von Hinüber, Haiyan
1994
Das Poṣadhavastu: Vorschriften für die buddhistische Beichtfeier im Vinaya der Mūlasarvāstivādins, Reinbek: Dr. Inge Wezler (Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik, Monographie 13).
Karashima, Seishi
2003
“Sanskrit Fragments of the Sutra of Golden Light, the Lotus Sutra, the Āryaśrīmahādevīvyākaraṇa and the Anantamukhanirhāradhāraṇī in the Otani Collection,” Annual Report of 
the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 6: 183–196.
2004
“Sanskrit Fragments of the Kāśyapaparivarta and the Pañcapāramitānirdeśasūtra in the 
Mannerheim Collection,” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for 
Advanced Buddhology 7: 105–118.
2005
“Two Sanskrit Fragments of the Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā in the Mannerheim Collection,” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced 
Buddhology 8: 81–104.
2006a
“The Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra Manuscript from Farhād-Bēg in the Stein Collection,” 
BLSF I: 155–172.
2006b
“A Sanskrit Fragment of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra in the Stein Collection,” BLSF I: 
173–175.
2006c
“Four Sanskrit Fragments of the Ratnaketuparivarta in the Stein Collection,” BLSF I: 177–
189.
2009
“A Sanskrit Fragment of the Sūtrasamuccaya from Central Asia,” Pāsādikadānaṃ: Festschrift für Bhikkhu Pāsādika, ed. M. Straube et al., Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag 
(Indica et Tibetica, 52): 263–273.
2009b
“The Sanskrit Fragments Or.15010 in the Hoernle Collection,” BLSF II: 335–550.
Karashima, Seishi, and M. I. Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya
2007
“Some Buddhist Sanskrit Fragments from the Collection of the St. Petersburg Branch of the 
Institute of Oriental Studies of the Russian Academy of Sciences (1),” Annual Report of the 
International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 10: 45–56.
2008
“Buddhist Sanskrit Fragments from the Collection of The Institute of Oriental Manuscripts 
(2),” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 11: 
91–94.
Karashima, Seishi, and Klaus Wille
2006
“The Sanskrit Manuscript of the Sarvabuddhaviṣayāvatārajñānālokālaṃkāra from Endere 
in the Stein Collection,” BLSF I: 191–254.
Konow, Sten
1942
Central Asian fragments of the Ashṭādaśasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā and of an unidentified 
text, Calcutta (Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India, 69).

--- Page 266 of 425 ---
244
KLAUS WILLE
Kudo, Noriyuki
2006a
“A Sanskrit Fragment of the Larger Prajñāpāramitā in the Stein Collection,” BLSF I: 255–
259.
2006b
“A Sanskrit Fragment of the Caityacatuṣka- and Tripusabhallikasūtra,” BLSF I: 263–264.
2006c
“A Sanskrit Fragment of Unknown Mahāyāna Charm,” BLSF I: 265.
Kudo, Noriyuki, and Margarita I. Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya
2007
“A Newly Identified Fragment of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra in the St. Petersburg 
Branch of the Institute of Oriental Studies,” Annual Report of the International Research 
Institute for Advanced Buddhology 10: 57–66.
La Vallée Poussin, Louis de
1911a
“Documents sanscrits de la seconde collection M. A. Stein,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society: 759–777.
1911b
“Documents sanscrits de la seconde collection M. A. Stein,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society: 1063–1079.
1912
“Documents sanscrits de la seconde collection M. A. Stein,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society: 355–377.
1913a
“Documents sanscrits de la seconde collection M.A. Stein,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society 1913: 569–580.
1913b
“Nouveaux fragments de la collection Stein,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society: 843–
855.
La Vallée Poussin, Louis de, and R. Gauthiot
1912
“Fragment final de la Nilakanthadharani en brahmi et en transcription sogdienne,” Journal 
of the Royal Asiatic Society: 629–645.
Malzahn, Melanie
2007
“Tocharian Texts and Where to Find Them,” Instrumenta Tocharica, ed. M. Malzahn, 
Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag Winter: 79–112.
Matsuda, Kazunobu
1988
Sanskrit Fragments of the Mahāyāna Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra. A Study of the Central Asian 
Documents in the Stein/Hoernle Collection of the India Office Library, London, Tokyo: 
Toyo Bunko (Studia Tibetica, 14).
Matsumura, Hisashi
1993
“Marginalia to the Sanskrit Fragments of Some Buddhist Texts,” Central Asiatic Journal 
37.1: 120–149.
Melzer, Gudrun
2010
Ein Abschnitt aus dem Dīrghāgama, München (Dissertation).
Pauly, Bernard
1960
“Fragments sanskrits de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 248: 509–538.
1966
“Fragments sanskrits de Haute Asie (Mission Pelliot),” Journal Asiatique 254: 245–304.
Peyrot, Michaël
2008
“More Sanskrit — Tocharian B bilingual Udānavarga fragments,” Indogermanische 
Forschungen 113: 83–125.
Saerji
2008
“A New Fragment of the Ratnaketuparivarta,” Annual Report of the International Research 
Institute for Advanced Buddhology 11: 95–103.
2010
“More Fragments of the Ratnaketuparivarta (1),” Annual Report of the International 
Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 13: 111–120.
2011
“More Fragments of the Ratnaketuparivarta (2),” Annual Report of the International 
Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 14: 35–57.

--- Page 267 of 425 ---
Manuscripts in the Collections of the British Library (London)
245
Sims-Williams, Ursula
2006
“The papers of the Central Asian scholar and Sanskritist Rudolf Hoernle,” BLSF I: 1–26.
2009
“The British Library Hoernle Collection, part 1,” BLSF II: 1–24.
Skjærvø, Prods Oktor
2002
Khotanese Manuscripts from Chinese Turkestan in the British Library: A Complete 
Catalogue with Texts and Translations, With Contributions by U. Sims-Williams, London: 
British Library (Corpus Inscriptionum Iranicarum, Part II Inscriptions of the Seleucid and 
Parthian Periods and of Eastern Iran and Central Asia, Vol. V: Saka, Texts VI).
2004
This Most Excellent Shine of Gold, King of Kings of Sutras: The Khotanese Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra, 2 vols., Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
2009
“Fragments of the Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra in Or.15009 and Or.15010,” BLSF II: 597–635.
Suzuki, Kenta
2006
“A Sanskrit Fragment of the Prajñāpāramitāstotra in the Stein Collection,” BLSF I: 261–
262.
Tudkeao, Chanwit
2010
Die zentralasiatische Version des Ratnaketuparivarta, München (Dissertation).
Vogel, Claus, and Klaus Wille
1996
“The Final Leaves of the Pravrajyāvastu Portion of the Vinayavastu Manuscript Found 
Near Gilgit, Part 1: Saṃgharakṣitāvadāna,” ed. by V. Näther, rev. and transl. by C. Vogel 
and K. Wille, Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen III, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht (Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 6): 241–296.
2002
“The Final Leaves of the Pravrajyāvastu Portion of the Vinayavastu Manuscript Found 
Near Gilgit, Part 2: Nāgakumārāvadāna and Lévi Text,” ed. by V. Näther, rev. and transl. by 
C. Vogel and K. Wille With Two Appendices Containing a Turfan Fragment of the Nāgakumārāvadāna and a Kučā Fragment of the Upasaṃpadā Section of the Sarvāstivādins, 
Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen IV, 
Göttingen 2002 (Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan-Funden, 
Beiheft 9): 11–76.
Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya, Margarita I.
2002
The Kāśyapaparivarta: Romanized Text and Facsimiles, in collaboration with S. Karashima 
and N. Kudo, Tokyo: Meiwa Printing (Bibliotheca Philologica et Philosophica Buddhica, 
5): 54–59 [Russian version in BB 40: 89–207].
Watanabe, Kaikyoku
1912
“Uten hakken no Daibon-Hannya danpen” [Fragments of the Larger Prajñāpāramitāsūtra 
from Khotan], Shūkyōkai 8.6 (1912); repr. in Kogetsu Zenshū, vol. 1 (Tokyo 1977): 539–554.
Watanabe, Shoko
1975
Saddharmapuṇḍarīka manuscripts found in Gilgit, vol. 2, Tokyo.
Watanabe, Shōgo
1993
“Mihitei no Hannyakyō shahon kenkyū II: Petrovsky Collection No. SI P/19a(1)” [A Study 
on the Hitherto Unidentified Fragments of the Prajñāpāramitā-sūtras (II): No. SI P/19a(1) 
from the Petrovsky Collection], Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū [Journal of Indian and 
Buddhist Studies] 41.2: 167–172[996–991]; the edition has been published again in several 
places: Shōgo Watanabe, “Chūō Ajia shutsudo no Hannyakyō bonbun dankan 1: PV dai 
roku genkan o megutte” [A Sanskrit Fragment of the “Prajñāpāramitā-sūtra from Central 
Asia I: On the 6th anupūrvābhisamaya of the PV],” Tōyōgaku Kenkyū [Toyo University 
Asian Studies] 30 (1993): 41–67 [Engl. version together with G. M. Bongard-Levin:] G. M. 
Bongard-Levin, “A fragment of the Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā-sūtra from 
Eastern Turkestan,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 114 (1994): 383–385 (reprint 
BB 40: 213–216); S. Watanabe; “A comparative study of the Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā 
Prajñāpāramitā,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 114 (1994): 386–396.

--- Page 268 of 425 ---
246
KLAUS WILLE
Waugh, Daniel C. and Ursula Sims-Williams
2010
“The Old Curiosity Shop in Khotan,” The Silk Road 8: 69–96.
Wille, Klaus
1996
“Die Hoernle-Fragmente in der Turfan-Sammlung (Berlin),” Turfan, Khotan und Dunhuang: Vorträge der Tagung “Annemarie v. Gabain und die Turfanforschung”, veranstaltet 
von der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Berlin (9.–12.12.1994), 
ed. R. E. Emmerick, W. Sundermann, I. Warnke and P. Zieme, Berlin (Berichte und Abhandlungen, Sonderband 1): 385–408.
1997
“Die Fragmente Or. 9610 in der British Library,” Bauddhavidyāsudhākaraḥ: Studies in 
Honour of Heinz Bechert on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday, ed. P. Kieffer-Pülz and J.-
U. Hartmann, Swisttal-Odendorf: Indica et Tibetica Verlag (Indica et Tibetica, 30): 717–
728.
1999
“New fragments of the Buddhanāmasūtra,” Indologica Taurinensia 23–24 (1997–98), Professor Gregory M. Bongard-Levin Felicitation Volume, Torino: 363–386.
1998
“Weitere kleine Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra-Fragmente aus der Sammlung Hoernle (London),” Sūryacandrāya: Essays in Honour of Akira Yuyama on the Occasion of His 65th 
Birthday, ed. P. Harrison and G. Schopen, Swisttal-Odendorf: Indica et Tibetica Verlag 
(Indica et Tibetica, 35): 241–256.
2000
Fragments of a Manuscript of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra from Khādaliq, Tokyo: 
Nissha Printing (Lotus Sutra Manuscript Series, 3).
2001
“The Sanskrit Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra fragment in the Mannerheim collection 
(Helsinki),” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 4: 43–52.
2004a
“Some recently identified Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra fragments in the British Library (London),” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 7: 
139–146.
2004b
“Die zentralasiatischen Sanskrit-Fragmente in der Sammlung der Istanbuler Universitätsbibliothek,” Turfan Revisited – The First Century of Research into the Arts and Cultures of 
the Silk Road, ed. D. Durkin-Meisterernst, S.-Ch. Raschmann, J. Wilkens, M. Yaldiz, P. 
Zieme, Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag (Monographien zur Indischen Archäologie, Kunst 
und Philologie, 17): 380–392.
2005
“Some recently identified Sanskrit fragments from the Stein and Hoernle collections in the 
British Library, London (1),” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for 
Advanced Buddhology 8: 47–79.
2006a
“Some recently identified Sanskrit fragments from the Stein and Hoernle collections in the 
British Library, London (2),” BLSF I: 27–64.
2006b
“The Sanskrit Fragments Or.15003 in the Hoernle Collection,” BLSF I: 65–153.
2006c
“Die Sanskrit-Fragmente der Crosby-Sammlung (Washington D.C.),” Jaina-itihāsa-ratna, 
Festschrift für Gustav Roth zum 90. Geburtstag, ed. U. Hüsken, P. Kieffer-Pülz und A. 
Peters, Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag (Indica et Tibetica, 47): 483–510.
2009a
“Buddhist Sanskrit Sources from Khotan,” BLSF II: 25–72.
2009b
“The Sanskrit Fragments Or.15004 in the Hoernle Collection,” BLSF II: 73–104.
YE, Shaoyong
2010
“Buddhist Sanskrit Fragments Recently Found in Xinjiang Province,” Annual Report of the 
International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 13: 87–110.
Yuyama, Akira
1970
A Bibliography of the Sanskrit Texts of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, Canberra: Austr. 
Nat. Univ. Pr. (Oriental Monograph Series, 5).

--- Page 269 of 425 ---
Further Collections of Sanskrit Manuscripts from Central Asia
JENS-UWE HARTMANN (MUNICH) AND KLAUS WILLE (GÖTTINGEN)
This paper attempts to provide information in three ways: first, by detailing collections and 
publications of manuscripts not mentioned in any of the other contributions to this volume, 
second, by adding information on those that are mentioned, and third, by making available 
the identification of some fragments which have not yet been published. There is not the 
slightest doubt that this attempt will remain incomplete, since it is extremely difficult to 
keep track of all the pertinent publications; nonetheless it may serve as an overview and as 
a preliminary orientation to the complex present-day distribution of relevant manuscripts 
from Central Asia.
The following list of collections and of single fragments is meant as a general survey. 
For each collection usually only one bibliographical reference is given, which will direct 
the interested reader to further sources on its history, contents and precise location.
1. Alphabetical list of collections
Berezovsky Collection in St. Petersburg (Russia)
See Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 2006: 63–64 and Wille 2006a: 27, note 1.
Abhidharma SI B/31
Bodharājakumārasūtra SI B/14
Mahābhārata SI B/24.14, 21 (for this fragment cf. now Mahābhārata 5.70.59ff.)
Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra SI B/14, 16.5
Mahāvadānasūtra SI B/14
Nandakovādasūtra(?) SI B/16.8
Prātimokṣasūtra SI B/12.1–11 (cf. the description in PrMoSū II: 43f., MSS MA–MK), 19, 20
Saṃghastotrastava SI B/16.3
Saṃyuktāgama SI B/13.1
Saṅgītisūtra SI B/16.11
Udānavarga SI B/13.4+5+6+7+8, 16.4 (Uv 4.10–15; Sanskrit-Tocharian bilingual), 117 
(Uv 29.45–51; Sanskrit-Tocharian bilingual)
Varṇārhavarṇastotra SI B/12.21, 16.1
Vinaya or Karmavācanā SI B/12.12–14 (ed BB 34: 201–203)
Collection of Literatures from the Western Regions in Beijing (China)
See in this volume DUAN Qing, “Indic and Khotanese Manuscripts: Some New Finds and 
Findings from Xinjiang,” pp. 269ff. 
Crosby Collection in Washington D.C.
See Wille 2006b: 483–510.
Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā Crosby 18f.+114f.+194f.
Buddhanāmasūtra Crosby 28f.+108f.+270f., 50f.+220f., 84f.+170f.
Larger Prajñāpāramitā Crosby 254f., 260f. (both fragments unpublished)
Prātimokṣasūtra 30f., 64f., 70f., 124f., 130f., 132f., 142f., 168f., 222f., 230f., 264f.+162f. 
(all fragments ed. in Wille 2009: 49–65)
Pratyutpannabuddhasaṃmukhāvasthitasamādhisūtra (= Bhadrapālasūtra) Crosby 252f. 
(identified by Paul Harrison Jan. 2007)
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra Crosby 38f.
Sumukhasūtra/Sumukhadhāraṇī Crosby 74f.+266f., 126f., 134f.+152f., 202f., 228f.

--- Page 270 of 425 ---
248
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
Śūraṃgamasamādhisūtra Crosby 262f.
Francke/Körber Collection in Munich (Germany)
For this collection see the remarks in Wille 2000: 2–6.
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra
Hoernle Collection in London (Great Britain)
See in this volume Klaus Wille, “Survey of the Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts in the 
Hoernle, Stein, and Skrine Collections of the British Library (London),” and Shin’ichirō 
Hori, “From the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin,” pp. 260ff., esp. pp. 262–263.
Huntington Collection in Yale (USA)
For this collection see Yuyama/Toda 1977, Sam van Schaik 2000/2001: 4, and Waugh/
Sims-Williams 2010: 81–82.
Ratnaketuparivarta J
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra F
Klements Collection in St. Petersburg (Russia)
See Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 2006: 66; two Sanskrit block prints.
In addition fragments of a fresco with inscription:
Saṃyuktāgama sūtra 98 (cf. T 99, II 27a22–24; reference by Jin-il Chung); ed. Oldenburg 
1907: 816.
Saṃyuktāgama sūtra 1161 (cf. T 99, II 309c26f; reference by Jin-il Chung.) ~ Uv 33.47; 
ed. Oldenburg 1907: 816.
Saṃyuktāgama KCB 30.2: sūtra 1186 (cf. T 99, II 321b25–27) or 1187 (cf. T 99, II 
321c8–11; reference by Jin-il Chung); facsimile in TTSR No. 401 
Saṃyuktāgama KCB 31: sūtra 1309 (cf. T 99, II 360b11–14; reference by Jin-il Chung) ~ 
Uv 20.3; facsimile in TTSR No. 412
Kokhanovsky Collection in St. Petersburg (Russia)
See Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 2006: 66; only one Sanskrit fragment.
Kolokolov Collection in St. Petersburg (Russia)
For this collection see Bongard-Levin/Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 1986: 11.
Mahāvadānasūtra SI Kol/2 (cf. Fukita 2003: 179, note 3)
Varṇārhavarṇastotra SI Kol/3.1+2 (cf. edition Hartmann 5.3c–17d; unpublished)
Krotkov Collection in St. Petersburg (Russia)
See Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 2006: 62–63 and, in this volume, Shin’ichirō Hori, “From 
the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin” pp. 259ff., esp. 262.
Nagaropamasūtra SI 2Kr/9.2, 82.1 (ed. BB 34: 250–254 and Bongard-Levin et al. 1996: 
50f.)
Prātimokṣasūtra SI 2Kr/82.2
Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna SI Kr.IV/343+Kr.IV/790
Lavrov Collection in St. Petersburg (Russia)
See Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 2006: 65–66.
1 || jaṭābharadvājo prāha || bahi(r)jaṭā jaṭā antarjaṭābhir jaṭitāḥ prajāḥ pṛṣṭo me gautama (brū)hi kas 
tāṃ vijaṭayej jaṭaṃ : · ||; cf. SN I 165.17–20: ekam antaṃ nisinno jaṭā-bhāradvājo brāhmaṇo Bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi || Antojaṭā bahijaṭā || jatāya jaṭitā pajā || taṃ taṃ Gotama pucchāmi || ko imam 
vijaṭaye jaṭan-ti ||.
2 (|)| krodhaṃ hatvā sukhaṃ śete krodhaṃ [h]atvā na śocante · kro[dha]sya vi[ṣa]mūlasya madhūraghnasya ///; cf. Uv 20.3: krodhaṃ ha(tvā sukhaṃ śe)te kr(o)dhaṃ h(a)tvā na śocati | krodhasya 
viṣamūlasya madhuraghnasya bhikṣavaḥ | vadham āryāḥ praśaṃsanti taṃ ca hatvā na śocati ||.

--- Page 271 of 425 ---
Further Collections of Sanskrit Manuscripts from Central Asia
249
Anantamukhanirhāradhāraṇī SI L/16 (chapter 9–10, cf. Tibetan text Inagaki 1987: 150–
154; unpublished;)
Buddhanāmasūtra SI L/2 (cf. remarks in von Hinüber 1987–88: 237, 247, 249)
Cakravartisūtra (T 26, no. 70) SI L/8 (unpublished except some lines by S. Oldenburg)
*Payasvīsūtra (T 26, no. 71) SI L/8 (unpublished except some lines by S. Oldenburg)
Prātimokṣasūtra L/93
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra SI L/1, 12, 14 (cf. edition Kern/Nanjio 50.5–52.3; unpublished)
Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra SI L/10, 11
Malov Collection in St. Petersburg (Russia)
See Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 1995: 29–39 and 2006: 67–68 and, in this volume, 
Shin’ichirō Hori, “From the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin,” pp. 259ff., esp. 262.
Prajñāpāramitā text(?) SI M/16.1, 2
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra SI M/16.3, 17
Mannerheim Collection in Helsinki (Finland)
See Karashima 2005: 81 with references to other publications on the collection in notes 2 
and 3.
Kāśyapaparivarta
Pañcapāramitānirdeśasūtra
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra
Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra
Oldenburg Collection in St. Petersburg (Russia)
See Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 2006: 64–65.
Ōtani Collection in the Ryūkoku University Library (RUL), Kyōto (Japan) and in the 
Lüshun Museum (LM), Dalian (China)
See in this volume Shin’ichirō Hori, “From the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin,” pp. 
258–259, and Wakahara 2012: 85.
Amaraughaśāsana by Gorakṣanātha RUL 628
Anantamukhanirhāradhāraṇī (original missing)
Daśabalasūtra LM 20.1566/6 (ed. Karashima and JIANG 2003: 356–358)
Daśottarasūtra RUL 626
Dharmaśarīrasūtra RUL 627
Ratnaketuparivarta RUL 625
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra LM 20.1554/29, 39–41, 44, 46, 48, 504, 51; 20.1556/15; 
20.1558/7; 20.1565/4; 20.1566/5; 20.1568/3; 20.1581/3–5 (all fragments MS A); LM 
20.1554/1, 11–15, 17–20; 20.1565/1; 20.1566/3, 4, 10; 20.1581/1, 2, 6; 20.1582/2 (all 
fragments MS B); LM 20.1562/1, 2; 20.1565/7 (all fragments MS C); LM 20.1567/1–
6; 20.1570/1 (all fragments MS D; MSS A–D ed. JIANG 1997); LM 20.1554.26.4–8 
(all fragments unpublished; identified by Karashima/JIANG 2003: 331, note 1); RUL 
621, 623
Saṃyuktāgama LM 20.1573 (ed. Nasu 2012; no parallels in T 99 or 100)
(Ārya-)Śrīmahādevīvyākaraṇa (original missing)
3 The transliteration of this fragment in BB 40: 339f. contains many typos; cf. therefore VorobyovaDesyatovskaya/Tyomkin 2000: 25f.; for a new transliteration of v2–7 cf. Wille 2009: 51–53.
4 To this fragment belong SHT 4447 + Or.15001/11,12,14,25 (ed. Wille 2009: 39–41).

--- Page 272 of 425 ---
250
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
Suvarṇabhāsottama LM 20.1554/8a, b, c, d; 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.1 & 3; 27.4–6; 23, 25, 27; 
1558/1; 1564/2 (all fragments ed. Karashima and JIANG 2003); RUL 622, 624
Vajracchedikā (original missing)
Pelliot Collection in Paris (France)
See in this volume Jens-Uwe Hartmann and Klaus Wille, “The Central Asian Sanskrit 
Fragments in the Pelliot Collection (Paris).”
Petrovsky Collection in St. Petersburg (Russia)
See Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 2006: 62 and 68–75 and, in this volume, Shin’ichirō Hori, 
“From the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin,” pp. 259ff., esp. 261–262.
Buddhanāmasūtra SI P/116e; to the same ms. SI P/71a; ed. Wille 1999, e1: frg. 2, e2: frg. 
10; SI P/116m; to the same ms. SI P/71a; ed. Wille 1999, frg. 9.
Skrine Collection in London (Great Britain)
See in this volume Klaus Wille, “Survey of the Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts in the 
Hoernle, Stein, and Skrine Collections of the British Library (London).”
Stein Collection in London (Great Britain)
See in this volume Klaus Wille, “Survey of the Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts in the 
Hoernle, Stein, and Skrine Collections of the British Library (London),” and Shin’ichirō 
Hori, “From the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin,” pp. 260ff., esp. 262–263.
Turfan Collection 
a) in Berlin (Germany)
See in this volume Klaus Wille, “Survey of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Turfan 
Collection (Berlin).”
b) in Istanbul (Turkey)
Cf. Wille 2004.
Mañjuśrīnāmasaṃgīti I.U. No. 23g
Prajñāpāramitā text I.U. No. 18 IIb, c
Sarvatathāgatoṣṇīṣasitātapatrānāma-aparājitā-mahāpratyaṅgirā-(mahāvidyārajñī) I.U. 
No. 15, 18 IId, e, 29d, 31 IIb
Tārā-ekaviṃśatistotra I.U. No. 29b, c, g, h
2.1 Single manuscripts preserved in Russia
Manuscript from Bairam-Ali (Merv) now in St. Petersburg
See Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 1999 and Karashima 2000: 214.
2.2 Single manuscripts preserved in Uzbekistan
Manuscripts from Zang-tepe now housed in the State Museum of History of Uzbekistan, 
Tashkent; a first report on this collection was published in Bongard-Levin, Vorob’evaDesjatovskaja and Temkin 1965.
Poṣathasthāpanavastu of the Vinayavastu (cf. above, p. 146)
Vinayasūtra of Guṇaprabha(?) (cf. above, p. 146)
2.3 Single manuscripts preserved in China
Bai (between Aq-su and Kučā): one fragment

--- Page 273 of 425 ---
Further Collections of Sanskrit Manuscripts from Central Asia
251
Wenwu caokao ziliao 1954.3 (Peking), on p. 52 a facsimile of one side only: a text enumerating the mahāpuruṣalakṣaṇa, cf. for example Mahāvadānasūtra (edition Fukita 2003: 
84.23ff.). 
Bezeklik (excavations in 1980): for this collection see Maue 2012
Amitāyuḥsūtra 80 TBI 596 (Sanskrit-Uygur bilingual; identified by Dieter Maue)
Bhaiṣajyavastu of the Sarvāstivādins 80 TBI 627 (identified by Hirotoshi Ogihara)
Dharmaśarīrasūtra 80 TBI 764+772 (Sanskrit-Uygur bilingual; identified by Dieter Maue)
Karmavācanā 80 TBI 770+38.3+765
fragment with the pratītyasamutpāda formula 80 TBI 613.1
Charkhlik (Shanshan): two fragments (Abhidharma and Stotra)
Richard Salomon and Collett Cox: “Two New Fragments of Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts 
from Central Asia,” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 11.1 
(1988), 141–153. The second fragment was independently edited and identified as a parallel to Mātṛceṭa’s Prasādapratibhodbhava in J.-U. Hartmann “Neue Aśvaghoṣa- und Mātṛceṭa-Fragmente aus Ostturkistan,” Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen, Phil.-Hist. Kl., Göttingen 1988, 88–92.
Dunhuang: Abhidharma fragment?
Qing DUAN and Jinzhang PENG: “A Newly Found Sanskrit Fragment from Dunhuang,” 
Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 6 (2003), 
197–206.
Qizil
Richard Salomon and Judith M. Boltz: “A new fragment of the Kaṭhinavastu of the 
Sarvāstivādavinaya,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 108 (1988): 539–544. Cf. 
Asao Iwamatsu: “Centering a Sanskrit fragment of the Kaṭhinavastu of the Sarvāstivādavinaya and its restoration,” Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies (Indogaku Bukkyōgaku 
Kenkyū) 33.2 (1998), 120–125(391–386).
Šorčuq
a) See HUANG 1958, plate 76, and Waldschmidt 1959: 239 (= 178), no. 8; identified and 
edited in Wille 2005: 73–74: Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra (chapter 27 = Ka 449b1–
450a7).
b) See HUANG 1958, plate 77; identified and edited Waldschmidt 1959: 240–242 (= 178–
179), no. 12: Saṃyuktāgama (T 99, no. 1107 = T 100, no. 36).
c) For another three unidentified small fragments see HUANG 1958, plates 76–77, and 
Waldschmidt 1959: 239 (= 178), nos. 9–11.
For fake manuscripts from Khotan cf. Waldschmidt 1959: 233–238 (= 175–177) and SimsWilliams 2000: 111–129.
Arthur M. Sackler Museum (Beijing): for this collection see Guan 2012
(Ārya-)Mahādaṇḍanāmadhāraṇī (= Mahāśitavatī)
Pratītyasamutpādādivibhaṅganirdeśasūtra
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra
National Library (Beijing)
Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā BH 4-147

--- Page 274 of 425 ---
252
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
Avadānaśataka BH 4-234
Bhadrakalpikasūtra BH 4-11
Buddhanāmasūtra (T 447) BH 4-33
Dharmaśarīrasūtra (ed. Dieter Maue and Peter Zieme. 2012. “Two More Leaves of the 
Dharmaśarīrasūtra in Sanskrit and Uigur,” Historical and Philological Studies of 
China’s Western Regions 5: 145–155).
Jñānolkadhāraṇī BH 4-227
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā BH 4-15, 4-32, 4-143, 4-146, 4-161
Prajñāpāramitā (not yet identified) BH 4-18, 4-19, 4-24
Ratnaketuparivarta BH 4-4, 4-5, 4-6, 4-7, 4-8, 4-12, 4-17, 4-21, 4-26+22, 4-28, 4-29, 
4-50, without BH signature
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra BH 1-28, 4-10, 4-20, 4-34, 4-220
Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra BH 4-1, 4-14, 4-27
Three tiny fragments in Brāhmī
RONG Xinjiang, LI Xiao, and MENG Xianshi (eds.), Xinhuo Tulufan chutu wenxian [Newly 
Discovered Turfan Documents], Beijing 2008 (Library of Turfan Studies, 1.2), 2 vols., p. 
257.
Cf. the review of WANG Ding in manuscript cultures 1 (2008): 24–27.
2.4 Single Manuscripts Preserved in Japan
Fuji Yūrinkan Museum (Kyoto)
Dharmaśarīrasūtra (Sanskrit-Uygur bilingual; ed. Dieter Maue. 2008. “The equanimity of 
the Tathāgata.” In P. Zieme, ed., Aspects of Research into Central Asian Buddhism: In 
memoriam Kōgi Kudara. Turnhout: Brepols 2008 (Silk Road Studies, 16): 179–190).
Kurita Isao (antique dealer, Tokyo; present whereabouts of the fragments unknown) 
Aṣṭādaśasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā (frgs. I.A, B, C; ed. Sadakata 1999)
Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā (frgs. I.Di, ii; ed. Sadakata 1999)
Prātimokṣasūtra of the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādins (ed. Seishi Karashima, “Fragments of a Manuscript of the Prātimokṣasūtra of the Mahāsāṃghika-(Lokottara)vādins 
(1),” Annual Report of The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 
11 (2008): 71–90 and Seishi Karashima, “Manuscript Fragments of the Prātimokṣasūtra of the Mahāsāṃghika(-Lokottaravādin)s (2),” Annual Report of The International 
Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 16 (2013): 47–90)
Saṃghāṭasūtra (frg. IV.A, Β; ed. Sadakata 1999)
Nakamura Collection (Tokyo)
One tiny fragment; see Akira Isobe, ed. 2005. Nakamura Fusetsu kyūzō Uiki bokusho 
shūsei: Taitōkuritsu Shodō hakubutsukan shozō, 3 vols., Tōkyō: Nigensha (Monbukagakushō kagaku-kenkyūhi tokutei ryōiki kenkyū: Higashi-Ajia shuppan bunka no kenkyū, 
sōkatsuhan; Higashi-Ajia zenpon sōkan 2), Vol. 3: 120, No. 3.
Abbreviations
BB 34
G. M. Bongard-Levin i M. I. Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja, Pamjatniki indijskoj pis’mennosti iz central’noj azii, Vypusk 2. Moskva: Izdat. Nauka 1990 (Pamjatniki pis’mennosti Vostoka 73.2; Bibliotheca Buddhica, 34).
BB 40
G. M. Bongard-Levin, M. I. Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja i E. N. Temkin, Pamjatniki 
indijskoj pis’mennosti iz central’noj azii, Vypusk 3. Moskva: Izdat. Vostochnaya

--- Page 275 of 425 ---
Further Collections of Sanskrit Manuscripts from Central Asia
253
Literatura RAN 2004 (Pamjatniki pis’mennosti Vostoka 73.3; Bibliotheca Buddhica, 
40).
BH
Sanskrit fragments edited in: Xinjiang Manuscripts Preserved in the National Library 
of China: Sanskrit Fragments and Kharoṣṭhī Documents, eds. DUAN Qing, ZHANG 
Zhiqing. Shanghai 2013 (Series of Sanskrit Manuscripts & Buddhist Literature, 3).
PrMoSū
Prātimokṣasūtra der Sarvāstivādins, Nach Vorarbeiten von Else Lüders und Herbert 
Härtel hg. und übers. von G. von Simson, 2 vols. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 
1986 and 2000 (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 11).
SN
Saṃyutta-Nikāya. Ed. L. Feer, 5 vols. London 1884–1898 (Pali Text Society).
TTSR
On the Trail of Texts along the Silk Road. Russian Expeditions Discoveries of 
Manuscripts in Central Asia. Special Exhibition of Kyoto National Museum. Kyoto 
2009.
Uv
Udānavarga, ed. F. Bernhard, 2 vols. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 1965 and 
1968 (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 10).
Works Cited
Bongard-Levin, G., D. Boucher, T. Fukita, K. Wille. 1996. “The Nagaropamasūtra: An Apotropaic 
Text from the Saṃyuktāgama, A Transliteration, Reconstruction, and Translation of the 
Central Asian Sanskrit Manuscripts.” Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen III. Göttingen (Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen Texte 
aus den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 6): 7–131.
Bongard-Levin, G. M. and M. I. Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya. 1986. Indian Texts from Central Asia. 
Tokyo (Bibliographia Philologica Buddhica. Series Minor 5).
Bongard-Levin, G. M., M. I. Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja, E. N. Temkin.1965. “Fragmenty sanskritskie 
rukopisi iz Zang-Tepe,” Vestnik drevnej istorii, No. 1, Moskva: 154–162 [“Fragments of the 
Sanskrit Manuscripts from Zang-Tepe: Preliminary Report,” Journal of the Ancient History 
1].
Fukita, Takamichi. 2003. The Mahāvadānasūtra, A New Edition Based on Manuscripts Disvovered 
in Northern Turkestan. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht (Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der 
buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 10).
GUAN, Di. 2012. “Three Sanskrit Fragments Found in Arthur M. Sackler Museum,” China 
Tibetology 19: 26–38.
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe. 1987. Das Varṇārhavarṇastotra des Mātṛceṭa. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & 
Ruprecht (Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 12).
Hinüber, Oskar von. 1987–88. “Dhāraṇīs aus Zentralasien,” Professor Colette Caillat Felicitation 
Volume. Indologica Taurinensia 14: 231–249.
HUANG Wenbi. 1958. Talimu pendi kaogu ji [“Archaeological Report on the Tarim Basin”]. Peking 
(Kaoguxue Zhuankan [Monographs of Chinese Archaeology], Series IV, No. 3).
Inagaki, Hisao. 1987. The Anantamukhanirhāra-dhāraṇī Sūtra and Jñānagarbha's Commentary. A 
Study and the Tibetan Text. Kyoto.
JIANG, Zhongxin. 1997. Sanskrit Lotus Sutra Fragments from the Lüshun Museum Collection, 
Facsimile Edition and Romanized Text. Dalian and Tokyo.
Karashima, Seishi. 2000. “Identification of Some Buddhist Sanskrit fragments from Central Asia,” 
Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 3: 213–214.
2005. “Two Sanskrit Fragments of the Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā in the Mannerheim Collection,” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced 
Buddhology 8: 81–104.
Karashima, Seishi, and JIANG Zhongxin. 2003. “Sanskrit Fragments of the Sutra of Golden Light 
from the Lüshun Museum Collection,” Hua Lin 3: 331–381.

--- Page 276 of 425 ---
254
JENS-UWE HARTMANN AND KLAUS WILLE
Kern, H., and B. Nanjio. 1912. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. St.-Pétersbourg [1908]–1912 (Bibliotheca 
Buddhica 10).
Maue, Dieter. 2012. “New Brāhmī Manuscripts from Bezeklik.” In The History Behind the 
Languages: Essays of Turfan Forum on Old Languages of the Silk Road. Shanghai: 41–47.
Nasu, Yoshihiko. 2012. “Ryojun hakubutsukan shozō no Sasukuritto butten — LM20_1573 o 
chūshin ni” (*Buddhist Sanskrit texts preserved in the Lushun Museum, with a special focus 
on LM20_1573). In Guo Fuchun and Mitani Masumi, eds., Chūō Ajia shutsudo no bukkyō 
shahon kokusai gakujutsu kaigi / International Conference of the Buddhist Manuscripts 
Excavated in Central Asia. Kyōto: 89–96.
Oldenburg, S.F. 1907. “Kratkaya opis sostavlennogo d-rom Kokhanovskim sobraniya drevnostey iz 
Turfan,” Bulletin de l'Académie Impériale des Sciences de St.-Pétersbourg, VI série, tome 1: 
805–818.
Sadakata, Akira. 1999. “Girugitto shutsudo oyobi Bāmiyan shutsudo no Bukkyō kankei no Moji 
shinyō (Buddhist Manuscripts and Inscriptions Found in Gilgit and in Bamiyan),” Tōkai 
Daigaku Kiyō Bungakubu 71: 55–74.
Schaik, Sam van. 2000/2001. “Ellsworth Huntington and the Central Asian Manuscripts at Yale,” 
IDP News 17: 4.
Sims-Williams, Ursula. 2000. “Forgeries from Chinese Turkestan in the British Library’s Hoernle 
and Stein Collections,” Bulletin of the Asia Institute New Series 14: 111–129.
Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya, Margarita I. 1995. “The S. E. Malov Collection of Manuscripts in the St. 
Petersburg Branch of the Institute of Oriental Studies,” Manuscripta Orientalia 1.2: 29–39.
1999. “A Sanskrit Manuscript on Birch-bark from Bairam-Ali: I. The Vinaya of the Sarvāstivādins,” Manuscripta Orientalia 5.2: 27–36.
2006. “The Central Asian Manuscript Collection of the St. Petersburg Branch of the Institute 
of Oriental Studies of the Russian Academy of Sciences,” Annual Report of the International 
Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 9: 61–78.
Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya, Margarita I., and E. N. Tyomkin. 2000. “A Fragment of the PrātimokṣaSūtra from the P. I. Lavrov collection at the St. Petersburg branch of the Institute of Oriental 
Studies,” Manuscripta Orientalia 6.4: 24–29 [Russian version: M. I. Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja and E. N. Temkin. 2000. “Fragment “Prātimokšasūtry” iz kollekcii P. I. Lavrova (Rukopisnyj fond S.-Peterburgskogo filiala instituta Vostokovedenija RAN),” The East, History and 
Culture, To Profesor Yu. A. Petrosyan on the occasion of his 70th birthday. Saint-Petersburg: 
175–184.
Wakahara, Y. 2012. “Introducing the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Otani Collection.” In Guo Fuchun 
and Mitani Masumi, eds., International Conference of the Buddhist Manuscripts Excavated in 
Central Asia. Kyōto: pp. 73–87. 
Waldschmidt, Ernst. 1959. “Chinesische archäologische Forschungen in Sin-Kiang (ChinesischTurkistan),” Orientalistische Literaturzeitung 54: 229–242 [reprinted in: Waldschmidt 1989: 
173–179].
1989. Ausgewählte kleine Schriften, ed. Heinz Bechert, Petra Kieffer-Pülz. Stuttgart: Franz 
Steiner (Glasenapp-Stiftung, 29).
Waugh, Daniel C., and Ursula Sims-Williams. 2010. “The Old Curiosity Shop in Khotan,” The Silk 
Road 8: 69–96.
Wille, Klaus. 1999. “New fragments of the Buddhanāmasūtra,” Indologica Taurinensia 23–24: 363–
386.
2000. Fragments of a Manuscript of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra from Khādaliq. Tokyo: 
Nissha Printing (Lotus Sutra Manuscript Series, 3).
2004. “Die zentralasiatischen Sanskrit-Fragmente in der Sammlung der Istanbuler Universitätsbibliothek.” In D. Durkin-Meisterernst, S.-Ch. Raschmann, J. Wilkens, M. Yaldiz, P. 
Zieme, eds., Turfan Revisited — The First Century of Research into the Arts and Cultures of

--- Page 277 of 425 ---
Further Collections of Sanskrit Manuscripts from Central Asia
255
the Silk Road, Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag (Monographien zur Indischen Archäologie, 
Kunst und Philologie, 17): 380–392.
2006a. “Some recently identified Sanskrit fragments from the Stein and Hoernle collections 
in the British Library, London (2).” In S. Karashima and K. Wille, eds., Buddhist Manuscripts 
from Central Asia: The British Library Sanskrit Fragments, vol. I. Tokyo: Meiwa Printing 
Company, 27–64.
2006b. “Die Sanskrit-Fragmente der Crosby-Sammlung (Washington D.C.).” In Ute Hüsken, 
Petra Kieffer-Pülz, Anne Peters, eds., Jaina-itihāsa-ratna, Festschrift für Gustav Roth zum 
90. Geburtstag: 483–510. Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag.
2008. “Some recently identified Sanskrit fragments from the Stein and Hoernle collections in 
the British Library, London (1),” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for 
Advanced Buddhology 8: 47–79.
2009. “Buddhist Sanskrit Sources from Khotan.” In S. Karashima and K. Wille, eds., 
Buddhist Manuscripts from Central Asia: The British Library Sanskrit Fragments, vol. II. 
Tokyo: Meiwa Printing Company, 25–72.
Yuyama, Akira, and Hirofumi Toda. 1977. The Huntington Fragment F of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra, Tokyo (Studia Philologica Buddhica, Occasional Paper Series, 2).

--- Page 278 of 425 ---


--- Page 279 of 425 ---
From the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin
SHIN’ICHIRŌ HORI (TOKYO)
In this paper I would like to deal with two topics. In the first part I am concerned with 
colophons of Nepalese manuscripts, while in the second part I address some collections of 
Sanskrit manuscripts from Central Asia and identified fragments among them, especially 
the Ōtani collection in Kyoto and the St. Petersburg collections.
1. Colophons of Nepalese manuscripts
It is by no means unusual to find a colophon written by the scribe at the end of a manuscript from Nepal, since many Nepalese manuscripts are complete ones. By contrast, most 
Central Asian Sanskrit manuscripts are fragmentary and have no colophons. As for the 
colophons of the Gilgit manuscripts, Oskar von Hinüber (1980) published an in-depth 
article. However, in the case of Nepalese colophons there are no comparable studies. I propose that we should take better advantage of these valuable materials, which we do not 
have in the case of fragmentary manuscripts.
Among the various items of information included in Nepalese colophons, the date 
always draws the greatest attention of users of Nepalese manuscripts. Many catalogues and 
editions mention the date of the manuscripts they deal with, when the year of the Newar 
Era1 is found in their colophons. In most cases the year of the Newar Era is converted to 
the Christian Era only by the addition of 879 or 880. But the date is very often described in 
more detailed form in Nepalese colophons: in addition to the year of the Newar Era, some 
other elements belonging to the date in the traditional Indian calendar such as lunar month, 
pakṣa (half lunar month), tithi (lunar day), day of the week, nakṣatra, karaṇa, and yoga are 
often referred to in colophons. Using these elements, it is possible to establish and verify 
the exact date of manuscripts. In the past we had to use the complicated tables of Hermann 
Jacobi, reprinted in his Kleine Schriften,2 in order to convert Indian dates to the Christian 
Era. Claus Vogel (1974) published a booklet in which he verified the dates of Saddharmapuṇḍarīka manuscripts from Nepal, using Jacobi’s tables. Nowadays we can more easily 
convert the Indian calendar to the Christian Era, using Michio Yano’s computer program 
pañcāṅga, which is based upon the Sūryasiddhānta. The program is also available on the 
internet.3 Since in this program the Indian date should be given as the Śaka or Vikrama 
Era, we must pay attention to the conversion of the Newar Era beginning with the month 
of Kārttika4 as compared with the Śaka or Vikrama Era beginning with the month of 
Caitra. At any rate it is easier to use this computer program than Jacobi’s tables.
Using this program, we can establish and verify the date of manuscripts or we might 
also question the date in colophons under certain circumstances. Furthermore I am not sure 
whether radiocarbon dating is necessary for Nepalese manuscripts. I hope that in most 
cases the results of radiocarbon dating would serve to confirm the correctness of the dates 
in the colophons. The question to be raised here is the possibility of a later scribe copying a 
post-colophon in his exemplar. I suppose that it is a very exceptional case in Nepalese 
manuscripts that a later scribe has copied a post-colophon written by a former scribe. 
Should a probable case of copying a post-colophon be met with, it would reveal the igno1 For the Newar Era, see Kielhorn 1888.
2 Jacobi 1970: 911–1074.
3 http://www.cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp/~yanom/pancanga/
4 We should also pay attention to the Āṣāḍha-or-Pauṣa intercalation employed in Nepal before circa 
600 in the Newar Era. See Petech 1984: 13–20.

--- Page 280 of 425 ---
258
SHIN’ICHIRŌ HORI
rance of the scribe concerning the manner of completing manuscripts, or an intentional 
fake. Radiocarbon dating can serve to solve such a problem.
There would be a great many Nepalese manuscripts whose absolute date can be established by the verification of the dates in their colophons. On the basis of dated manuscripts 
of various periods, it would be possible to describe the history of Nepalese palaeography in 
detail. As an attempt at a diachronic description of Nepalese palaeography we can refer to 
the introduction to Cecil Bendall’s Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts in the 
University Library, Cambridge, first published in 1883.5 His palaeographical description is 
based upon the Daniel Wright Collection of Nepalese manuscripts in Cambridge. With 
much more material available now we could study Nepalese palaeography in greater detail. 
Palaeographical studies based upon dated Nepalese manuscripts would be helpful for 
estimating the dates of undated manuscripts.
In Nepalese colophons we often find not only dates, but also other interesting information. Nepalese scribes sometimes refer to place or temple names in colophons. In most 
cases such information indicates directly the place where the manuscript was written. Place 
or temple names6 might possibly be useful in estimating the relationship among manuscripts of a certain text, since it is reasonable for a scribe to make a copy of a manuscript 
available at his side and not to borrow a manuscript from a distance.
Nepalese scribes often refer to their own names in addition to the names of donors. 
Since catalogues of Nepalese manuscripts very seldom refer to scribe names, it is so far 
very difficult to find other manuscripts written by a certain scribe. By comparing several 
manuscripts written by the same scribe, handwriting and mistakes peculiar to the scribe 
would be clear and such information would help to decipher the manuscripts.
While I have shown how information in Nepalese colophons might be able to contribute 
primarily to philological studies, it goes without saying that Nepalese colophons have 
constituted primary sources for Nepalese history. For historians royal names and titles 
referred to in colophons are very important in estimating the reign dates of kings. Luciano 
Petech (1984) and D. R. Regmi (1965 and 1966) used colophons in the Middle Ages as 
well as inscriptions and vaṃśāvalīs for their studies of the medieval history of Nepal. 
However, so far colophons of modern dated manuscripts, especially from the Gorkha 
period, have very seldom been used.
On this occasion I would like to propose that it is desirable to conduct a systematic and 
comprehensive survey of Nepalese colophons and to establish a database of the information included in them.7
2. Identified Sanskrit fragments from Central Asia
2.1 The Ōtani Collection in the Ryūkoku University Library
The Ōtani Collection in the Ryūkoku University Library contains Sanskrit manuscripts 
from Nepal and Central Asia.8 Here I refer only to the Central Asian manuscripts collected 
by the Ōtani expedition at the beginning of the 20th century.
Although the greater part of the Central Asian manuscripts collected by the Ōtani 
expedition seems to be now in China, especially at the Lüshun Museum, I know of only 
two published manuscripts, the Saddharmapuṇḍarīka fragments edited by Jiang (1997) 
and the Suvarṇabhāsottama fragments edited by Karashima and Jiang (2003).
5 Bendall 1992: xvii–liv.
6 Locke 1985 gives very useful information about the temples in the Kathmandu Valley.
7 As two models for such a database I can refer to the indexes in Lienhard 1988: 205–222 and Pingree 
2004: 405–472.
8 The Sanskrit manuscripts were digitized in Ryukoku CD-ROM 2001. See also Mikogami and Wakahara 2001 and Wakahara 2003.

--- Page 281 of 425 ---
From the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin
259
In the book titled Saiiki kōko zufu we find facsimiles of some Sanskrit fragments 
collected by the Ōtani expedition.9 These fragments are not in Kyoto and it is not clear 
where they are now. Among them Karashima (2003) identified and published fragments of 
the Āryaśrīmahādevīvyākaraṇa and the Anantamukhanirhāradhāraṇī.
In the Ryūkoku University Library there are eight Sanskrit fragments numbered 621 to 
628.10 Ariyoshi Sanada (1961: 66–71, 76–78, plates 1–3) published fragments nos. 621 to 
627. He identified no. 621 as belonging to the Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. But nos. 622 to 627 
were unidentified. Nos. 622 to 624 were identified as the Saddharmapuṇḍarīka and the 
Suvarṇabhāsottama and published by Karashima (2000 and 2003). Hori (2003 and 2005) 
has identified nos. 625 to 628 as follows.
No. 625: Ratnaketuparivarta
No. 626: Daśottarasūtra of the Dīrghāgama
No. 627: Dharmaśarīrasūtra
No. 628: Gorakṣanātha’s Amaraughaśāsana
Nos. 621 to 625 are written in Early Turkestan Brāhmī, type b, according to the 
classification by Sander11 and all belong to the Mahāyāna. Therefore it is reasonable to 
suppose that nos. 621 to 625 were collected on the Southern route, while nos. 626 and 627, 
written in Northern Turkestan Brāhmī, type b,12 were perhaps unearthed on the Northern 
route. Since no. 628, the only non-Buddhist Haṭhayoga text in the collection, is written in 
Śāradā script on birch bark, it is probable that the manuscript was made originally in 
Northwestern India. A report of the Ōtani expedition titled Shin saiiki ki gives a hint as to 
the find-spot of this fragment. The facsimile of two larger pieces was published in Shin 
saiiki ki II, plate facing p. 648 with a caption “樺皮に書かれたる異體文字の經典斷片（實
物原色版）(fragments of a scripture written on birch bark in variant script; photograph in 
original colors).” The same plate page includes two photos of the Subaši ruins near Kučā. 
In Shin saiiki ki II (pp. 557–722), diaries of Koichirō Yoshikawa 吉川小一郎 (1885–1978), 
a member of the Third Ōtani Expedition, were published. On pp. 647–658 he described his 
stay in Kučā and the excavation at Subaši, and on p. 657 reported a finding of something 
like a scripture volume with Sanskrit text written on fragmentary leaves (木葉片に梵文あ
る經冊の如きものを獲) at the Subaši ruins on May 15, 1913. It is not certain whether these 
fragments refer to the two pieces of no. 628 on the plate. Given that no. 628 is really a 
finding at Subaši, it is probable that the manuscript was written originally in Northwestern 
India and brought to Subaši. The fact might be important both for the history and spread of 
Haṭhayoga and for the religious history of Kučā.
2.2 The St. Petersburg collections
Central Asian Sanskrit manuscripts in the Institute of Oriental Manuscripts of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, belong to the various collections listed in BongardLevin and Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya (1986: 9–11). These collections were assembled by 
various diplomats and scholars before and after the turn of the twentieth century. S. F. 
Oldenburg began to study and publish Buddhist Sanskrit fragments from Central Asia in 
the 1890s. But he could not identify many fragments. In the time of the Soviet Union the 
St. Petersburg collections were accessible only to Soviet scholars except for the so-called 
9 Kagawa 1915. The digitized images of the book are published on the following site: http://
dsr.nii.ac.jp/toyobunko/I-1-E-18/.
10 All of the eight fragments were digitized in vol. XIV of Ryukoku CD-ROM 2001.
11 See Sander 1986: 167, plates 15, 16, 17. In Sander (1968: 181–182, Tafel 29–40), the same type is 
called “Frühe turkistanische Brāhmī (Schrifttypus IV), Alphabet s.”
12 See Sander 1986: 162f, plate 9. In Sander (1968: 182–183, Tafel 29–40), the same type is called 
“Nordturkistanische Brāhmī, Typ b (Schrifttypus VI), Alphabet u.”

--- Page 282 of 425 ---
260
SHIN’ICHIRŌ HORI
Kashgar manuscript of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīka.13 V. S. Vorobyov-Desyatovsky, M. I. 
Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya, G. M. Bongard-Levin and E. N. Tyomkin were engaged in 
studying Sanskrit fragments. Publications up to the first half of the 1980s are listed in 
Bongard-Levin and Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 1986. In 1985 many new Sanskrit fragments of the Mahāyāna-Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra and the Saddharmapuṇḍarīka were published with facsimiles in BB 33. The second volume BB 34, published in 1990, also 
contains many new materials, such as the Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna, the Prātimokṣasūtra, the 
Bodharājakumārasūtra, the Nagaropamasūtra, the Samādhirāja, the Vajracchedikā, and 
the Buddhanāmasūtra. Joint researches of Soviet and non-Soviet scholars began only after 
perestroika and some articles were published as joint researches. Many of the joint articles 
are reprinted in the third volume BB 40, published in 2004.14 The third volume contains the 
Kāśyapaparivarta, the Larger Prajñāpāramitā, the Śīlapāramitā, the Suvarṇabhāsottama, 
a Vinaya manuscript from Bairam-Ali and so on. Karashima and Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya (2007) published fragments of the Ratnarāśi (SI P/20/1), the Kāśyapaparivarta (SI 
P/20/2), and the Anirud(dh)asūtra (SI P/80). Kudo and Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya (2007) 
published a Saddharmapuṇḍarīka fragment (SI P/68). Karashima and Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya (2008) published two Saddharmapuṇḍarīka fragments (SI P/67(2)).
In 1995 the Toyo Bunko began the project for microfilming Central Asian manuscripts 
in various languages in St. Petersburg in collaboration with the St. Petersburg Branch of 
the Institute of Oriental Studies of the Russian Academy of Sciences.15 The microfilming 
was completed in 2002. As far as Sanskrit manuscripts are concerned, the microfilms do 
not contain all of the fragments in St. Petersburg. Some important collections such as the 
Berezovsky and Oldenburg Collections and the Merv manuscript were not microfilmed. 
But the microfilms contain many unpublished Sanskrit fragments, especially from the 
Petrovsky and Krotkov Collections.
For most of the Sanskrit fragments in the St. Petersburg collections there is no clear 
find-spot, since the diplomats, N. F. Petrovsky, N. N. Krotkov and so on, did not unearth 
the fragments, but bought them from local dealers. In the light of script type the majority 
of the Petrovsky Collection16 appears to have come from the Southern route, but it also 
contains fragments from Northern Turkestan. All of the fragments in the Malov Collection 
in the microfilm are written in Early Turkestan Brāhmī, type b, or Southern Turkestan 
Brāhmī. In contrast, the majority of the Krotkov Collection seems to come from the 
Northern route.
2.3 The British Library collections
Since 2002 I have been engaged in investigating the British Library Collections. My 
independent identifications overlap with BLSF 1 and 2. In the following table I have listed 
only the fragments not properly identified or dealt with in BLSF.
13 Lokesh Chandra 1976.
14 In Bongard-Levin et al. 1996, an edition of the Nagaropamasūtra, the fragments in St. Petersburg 
are used, but the edition is not reprinted in BB 40.
15 On this project, see Sato 1997.
16 For the Petrovsky Collection, see Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 1999.

--- Page 283 of 425 ---
From the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin
261
A List of Identified Sanskrit Fragments from Central Asia
The St. Petersburg Collections
The Petrovsky Collection
SI P/67, 3а: Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. KN 60.9–11, 60.12–61.1.
SI P/67, 3б: Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. KN 61.1–3, 61.4–9.
SI P/67, 3в: Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. KN 41.12–15, 41.16–19.
SI P/67, 3г: Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. KN 42.8–12, 42.12–15.
SI P/67, 3д: Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. KN 22.1–3, 22.4–7.
SI P/67, 4: Karmāvaraṇaviśuddhisūtra.17 T 1494: 24.1098b17–27.
SI P/67,5: Saṃghāṭasūtra. Canevascini 1993: §§2.9–4.9.
SI P/67, 8а+8б: Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. KN 354.1–4, 354.5–8.
SI P/67, 10б: Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. KN 197.11–198.6, 198.8–199.2.
SI P/68: Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. KN 49.5–14, 49.14–50.10.
SI P/71б: Sumukhadhāraṇī. T 1139: 20.585b22–585c3.
SI P/72г1+г2: Larger Prajñāpāramitā.18 Kimura 2009: 123.19–124.32.
SI P/75: Sumukhadhāraṇī.19 Fol. 5: T 1139: 20.585a29–b13; fol. 6: 585b13–29; fol. 7: 
585b29–c17; fol. 11: 586b10–29; fol. 12: 586b29–c20.
SI P/76: Mahāmeghasūtra. T 993: 19.509c22–510a13.
SI P/77: Sumukhadhāraṇī.20 Fol. 9: T 1139: 20.585c2–10, 585c11–16; fol. 16: T 1139: 
20.587a9–21, 587a21–b4; fol. 18: T 1139: 20. 587b22–c5.
SI P/83а: Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra. Nobel 1937: 151.8–151.23, 152.1–152.15.
SI P/83 б: Mahāparinirvāṇamahāsūtra.21 T 374: 12.396a7–b13; T 376: 12.875b3–27.
SI P/83д: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha). See below.
SI P/83к: Ratnaketuparivarta. Kurumiya 1978: 162.8–165.7.
SI P/83л: Larger Prajñāpāramitā. Kimura 1990: 146.18–147.21, 147.24–148.23.
SI P/83м: Larger Prajñāpāramitā. Kimura 1990: 25.27–26.31, 29.31–30.22
SI P/83н: Larger Prajñāpāramitā. Kimura 2006: 123.1–125.21.
SI P/84д: Śūraṅgamasamādhisūtra. T 642: 15.632b4–25.
SI P/84е: Larger Prajñāpāramitā. Kimura 2009: 149.8–26, 151.7–22.
SI P/86: Ratnaketuparivarta. Kurumiya 1978: 14.1–16.14.
SI P/87а: Larger Prajñāpāramitā. Kimura 1986: 183.19–31; Kimura 1990: 2.22–3.4.
SI P/90 б.2: Candragarbhasūtra.22 T 397: 13.334a4–b10.
SI P/90 б3: Candragarbhasūtra. T 397: 13.308a29–c6.
SI P/90 б4: Candragarbhasūtra. T 397: 13.354c16–355a21.
SI P/91: Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra. Nobel 1937: 78.3–79.12, 79.14–80.18.
SI P/116д1,2,3,4,5,6: Samādhirājasūtra. д1+д2: Vaidya 1961: 6.8–23; д5+д6+д3+д4: 
Vaidya 1961: 13.17–14.14, 14.16–15.11.
SI P/116з: Sumukhadhāraṇī. T 1139: 20.586a16–21, 23–27.
SI P/123 н: Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā. Tomabechi 2009: 3.7–4.10.
SI P/124а+б+в: Samādhirājasūtra. Vaidya 1961: 90.7–91.28.
17 The fragment was published in Hori 2011.
18 For this term, see Bongard-Levin and Hori 1996: 27.
19 Folio 5r was published in Bongard-Levin and Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 1986a. Folio 17 was 
published in Bongard-Levin 1984.
20 Folio 13 was published in Bongard-Levin 1994. Folio 17 was published in Bongard-Levin 1981.
21 Independently identified also by Kazunobu Matsuda. Hiromi Habata will publish this fragment.
22 The three fragments of the Candragarbhasūtra, SI P/90 б2, б3 and б4, were published in Hori 2011.

--- Page 284 of 425 ---
262
SHIN’ICHIRŌ HORI
SI P/126 а: Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. KN 12.8–15, 13.10–17.
SI P/151 (two fragments): Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. Fol. 225: KN 349.9–350.4; another 
fragment with the same call number: KN 370.10–370.13, 371.1–371.5.
SI P/152 1): Varṇārhavarṇastotra. Hartmann 1987: 7.17–7.22, colophon (pp. 227–231), 
8.1–8.8 (pp. 232–236).
SI P/152 2): Kalpanāmaṇḍitikā Dṛṣṭāntapaṅkti.23 T 201: 4.291a20–b20.
SI P/153: Mahāparinirvāṇamahāsūtra.24 T 374: 12.365c23–366a21.
The Malov Collection
SI M/16.4: Larger Prajñāpāramitā. Kimura 1990: 134.17–23 or 24–28(?), 135.22–30.
The Krotkov Collection
SI 2Kr/9 (3): Dharmaśarīrasūtra. T 766: 17.699b24–27.
SI 2Kr/9 (4): Kalpanāmaṇḍitikā Dṛṣṭāntapaṅkti. T 201: 4.289a24–b28.
SI Kr IV/787: Dharmaśarīrasūtra. T 766: 17.699b24–c1.
SI Kr IV/788: Dharmaśarīrasūtra. T 766: 17.699b24–28.
SI Kr IV/789 (three fragments from one folio): Hastaka-Āṭavakasūtra and Catuṣpariṣatsūtra. Line r1–v1: AN I 137.10–138.4, SHT V 1343 V3–R2; line v2–5: CPS II 198a3–
20.
SI Kr IV/791: Pravāraṇāsūtra.25
SI Kr IV/792: Āṭānāṭikasūtra. Hoffmann 1939: 69b21–73b7.
SI 4aKr/89: Nagaropamasūtra. Bongard-Levin et al. 1996: 78.28–79.14.
SI Kr XL/1(1) + SI Kr. XL/1: Jñānaprasthāna. T 1543: 26.813b21–c11; T 1544: 26.951 
c24–952a9.
The British Library collections
Box 34, Plate 2m: Vīryapāramitā. T 220: 7.1050a26–1052a17.
143. S.B. 57 (Or.15010/30?): Saddharmapuṇḍarīka. KN 307.12–309.1, 309.2–310.1.
143a. S.B. 50 (Or.15010/29?) + Or.15010/48: Lalitavistara.26 Hokazono 1994: 400.13–
404.23; T 186: 3.492a3–16; T 187: 3.550a12–b5; P 763: Ku 41b1–43a1 (27. 170.5.1–
171.3.1).
Or.15010/24 + Or.15010/42 + Or.15010/21: Sarvapuṇyasamuccayasamādhi.27 T 381: 
12.984c6–985a27; T 382: 12.1000c3–1001a11; P 802: mDo, Du 113b7–115a8 (vol. 
32).
Or.15010/119 + Or.15010/174 + Or.15010/191: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Chapter 2), folio no. 
26.28 T 278: 9.408a21(=rx)–b2(=rz), 408b6–7(=v1); T 279: 10.30b2–31a18, 31a23–
32a8; P 761: vol. 32, Phal chen, Yi 85b5–87b1, Yi 87b2–89a4.
23 I gave a paper on the identification of the fragments SI P/152 2) and SI 2Kr/9 (4) (see below) at the 
29th German Conference of Oriental Studies, Halle, 23 September 2004. These fragments were published 
in Hori 2011.
24 Identified by Kazunobu Matsuda. Hiromi Habata will publish this fragment.
25 Identified on the basis of Jens-Uwe Hartmann’s unpublished edition of this sūtra.
26 I presented the identification of the fragments at the 13th World Sanskrit Conference, Edinburgh, 10 
July 2006.
27 I presented the identification of the fragments at the 30th German Conference of Oriental Studies, 
Freiburg im Breisgau, 26 September 2007.
28 I presented the identification of the fragments of the Buddhāvataṃsaka at the 3rd Great Buddha 
Symposium at the Tōdaiji, Nara, 18 December 2004, at the 30th German Conference of Oriental Studies, 
Freiburg im Breisgau, 26 September 2007, and also at the Second International Huayan Symposium, 
Boutigny-sur-Essonne, France, 8 August 2008. Thirteen fragments from six folios of the Buddhāvataṃsaka were published in Hori 2012.

--- Page 285 of 425 ---
From the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin
263
142. S.B. 49 (Or.15010/28?) + Or.15010/197: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Chapters 2–3), folio 
no. 27. T 278: 9.408b11–12(=r14–15), 408b14–c8; T 279: 10.32a14–33a2, 33a4–
33b11; P 761: vol. 32, Phal chen, Yi 89a6–90b5, Yi 90b6–92b5.
Or.15010/74 + Or.15010/194: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Chapters 3–4), folio no. 28. T 278: 
9.409a14(=r4)–b5(=rz), 409b10(=v2)–15(=v3), 408c23(=vr)–409a8(=vz); T 279: 10. 
33b12–c29, 34a3–b22; P 761: vol. 32, Phal chen, Yi 92b7–94b3, Yi 94b3–96a4.
IOL San 539 + Or.15010/109: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Lokottaraparivarta). T 292: 10.658a 
18–b15; T 278: 9.674b8–c6; T 279: 10.318a20–b18; P 761: vol. 32, Phal chen, Si 
39b8–40b3.
IOL San 543: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Nidānaparivarta). SuI 4.15–21, 4.24–
5.5.
IOL San 542 + 545: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Nidānaparivarta). SuI 19.3–10, 
19.11–19.
IOL San 541B: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Nidānaparivarta, Samantabhadra). SuI 
32.14–24, 33.1–8.
Or.15010/92: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Mañjuśrī). SuI 52.18–53.1, 56.15–25.
IOL San 84: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Bhīṣmottaranirghoṣa, Jayoṣmāyatana). 
SuI 113.15–19, 115.13–16.
IOL San 670: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Jayoṣmāyatana). SuI 116.14–17.
SI P/83 д + IOL San 669 + Or.15010/93 + IOL San 113 + IOL San 1154: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Sudarśana, Indriyeśvara). SuI 128.16–26, 131.21–132.3, 129.5–
11, 131.6–14.
Or.15010/178: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Mahāprabha). SuI 161.3–7, 161.9–15.
IOL San 740: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Siṃhavijṛmbhitā). SuI 195.22–198.23.
IOL San 1120 + IOL San 94 + 100: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Māyā). SuI 436. 
22–437.5, 437.7–437.17, 436.11, 437.19–437.22, 436.15, 437.25–437.26.
Or.8212/1698f + IOL San 1108: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Maitreya). SuI 
471.19–472.2, 475.14–475.25, 471.22–472.4, 475.15–475.25.
Kha.i.32 in Plate SS 44 + Or.15010/98 + IOL San 1114: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Maitreya). SuI 500.25–501.6, 502.8–502.14, 501.2–501.19, 501.22–502.11, 
501.4–501.18, 501.21–502.6.
Or.15010/155: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Maitreya), folio no. 382. SuI 504.21–
505.4, 506.9–506.18.
Two fragments with the siglum Kha.i.32 in Plate SS 44: Buddhāvataṃsaka (Gaṇḍavyūha: Maitreya). SuI 508.25–509.9, 510.15–510.22.

--- Page 286 of 425 ---
264
SHIN’ICHIRŌ HORI
Works Cited and Abbreviations
AN I = Richard Morris, ed., The Aṅguttara-Nikâya. Part I: Ekanipâta, Dukanipâta, and Tikanipâta. 
Second Edition Revised by A. K. Warder. London: Pali Text Society, 1961.
BB 33 = Г. М. Бонгард-Левин, М. И. Воробьева-Десятовская. Памятники индийской 
письменности из Центральной Азии. Выпуск 1 (Памятники письменности Востока 73, 
1; Bibliotheca Buddhiса 33). Москва: Издательство “Наука,” 1985.
BB 34 = Г. М. Бонгард-Левин, М. И. Воробьева-Десятовская. Памятники индийской 
письменности из Центральной Азии. Выпуск 2 (Памятники письменности Востока 73, 
2; Bibliotheca Buddhiса 34). Москва: Наука, 1990.
BB 40 = Г. М. Бонгард-Левин, М. И. Воробьева-Десятовская, Э. H. Темкин. Памятники 
индийской письменности из Центральной Азии. Выпуск 3 (Памятники письменности 
Востока 73, 3; Bibliotheca Buddhiса 40). Москва: Издательская фирма “Восточная 
литература” РАН, 2004.
Bendall, Cecil. 1992. Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Library, 
Cambridge (Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, Supplementband 
33; Publications of the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project 2). Stuttgart: Franz 
Steiner.
BLSF 1 = Seishi Karashima and Klaus Wille, eds., The British Library Sanskrit Fragments: 
Buddhist Manuscripts from Central Asia. Vol. 1. Tokyo: International Research Institute for 
Advanced Buddhology, Soka University, 2006.
BLSF 2 = Seishi Karashima and Klaus Wille, eds., The British Library Sanskrit Fragments: Buddhist Manuscripts from Central Asia. Vols. 2.1, 2.2. Tokyo: International Research Institute 
for Advanced Buddhology, Soka University, 2009.
Bongard-Levin, G. M. 1981. “A New Fragment of the Sanskrit «Sumukhadhāraṇī» and Its Saka 
Version.” Indologica Taurinensia 8–9 (1980–1981) (Dr. Ludwik Sternbach Commemoration 
Volume): 45–49.
1984. “A New Fragment of the Sanskrit Sumukhadhāraṇī.” In: Louis Ligeti, ed., Tibetan and 
Buddhist Studies: Commemorating the 200th Anniversary of the Birth of Alexander Csoma de 
Kőrös. Vol. 1 (Bibliotheca Orientalis Hungarica, Vol. XXIX/1), 125–129. Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó.
1994 = Г. М. Бонгард-Левин, “Новый фрагмент санскритской «Сумукханамадхарани».” 
In: Восточное историческое источниковедение и специальные исторические 
дисциплины: Сборник статей. Выпуск 2, 43–47. Москва: «Наука» Издательская фирма 
«Восточная литература».
Bongard-Levin, G. M., and Shin’ichirō Hori. 1996. “A Fragment of the Larger Prajñāpāramitā from 
Central Asia.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 19.1: 19–60.
Bongard-Levin, G. M., and M. I. Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya. 1986. Indian Texts from Central Asia 
(Leningrad Manuscript Collection) (Bibliographia Philologica Buddhica, Series Minor V). 
Tokyo: International Institute for Buddhist Studies.
Bongard-Levin and Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya 1986a = Г. М. Бонгард-Левин, М. И. ВоробьеваДесятовская. ‘Новый текст фрагмента санскритской “Сумукхадхарани”.’ In: 
Переднеазиатский сборник IV, Древняя и средневековая история и филология стран 
Переднего и Среднего Востока, 156–159. Москва: Издательство «Наука».
Bongard-Levin, Gregory, et al. 1996. “The Nagaropamasūtra: An Apotropaic Text from the Saṃyuktāgama. A Transliteration, Reconstruction, and Translation of the Central Asian Sanskrit 
Manuscripts.” In: Gregory Bongard-Levin et al. Sanskrit-Texte aus dem buddhistischen 
Kanon: Neuentdeckungen und Neueditionen III (Sanskrit-Wörterbuch der buddhistischen 
Texte aus den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft 6), 7–131. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Canevascini, Giotto, ed. and tr. 1993. The Khotanese Saṅghāṭasūtra: A Critical Edition (Beiträge 
zur Iranistik, Bd. 14). Wiesbaden: Dr. Ludwig Reichert.

--- Page 287 of 425 ---
From the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin
265
CPS II = Ernst Waldschmidt, ed. Das Catuṣpariṣatsūtra: eine kanonische Lehrschrift über die 
Begründung der buddhistischen Gemeinde. Teil II: Textbearbeitung: Vorgang 1–21 (Abhandlungen der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Klasse für Sprachen, Literatur 
und Kunst, Jahrgang 1956, Nr. 1). Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1957.
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe, ed. and tr. 1987. Das Varṇārhavarṇastotra des Mātṛceṭa (Sanskrittexte aus 
den Turfanfunden XII). Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Hinüber, Oskar von. 1980. “Die Kolophone der Gilgit-Handschriften.” Studien zur Indologie und 
Iranistik 5/6: 49–82.
Hoffmann, Helmut, ed. 1939. Bruchstücke des Āṭānāṭikasūtra aus dem zentralasiatischen Sanskritkanon der Buddhisten (Kleinere Sanskrit-Texte, Heft V). Leipzig: Deutsche Morgenländische 
Gesellschaft.
Hokazono, Kōichi. 1994. 『ラリタヴィスタラの研究』上巻. Tokyo: Daitōshuppansha.
Hori, Shin’ichirō. 2003. “Notes on the Unidentified Sanskrit Fragments in the Ōtani Collection at 
Ryūkoku University Library.” 『国際仏教学大学院大学研究紀要』 Journal of the International College for Advanced Buddhist Studies 6: 101–107 (132–126).
2005. “Additional Notes on the Unidentified Sanskrit Fragments in the Ōtani Collection at 
Ryūkoku University Library.” 『国際仏教学大学院大学研究紀要』 Journal of the International College for Postgraduate Buddhist Studies 9: 91–97.
2011. 「ロシア科学アカデミー東洋写本研究所所蔵中央アジア出土サンスクリット断
片について」 “Sanskrit Fragments from Central Asia at the Institute of Oriental Manuscripts 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg.” 『佛敎學』 Bukkyōgaku (Journal of 
Buddhist Studies) 53: 1–24.
2012. “Sanskrit Fragments of the Buddhāvataṃsaka from Central Asia.” In: Robert Gimello, 
Frédéric Girard and Imre Hamar, eds. Avataṃsaka Buddhism in East Asia: Origins and 
Adaptation of a Visual Culture (Asiatische Forschungen: Monographienreihe zur Geschichte, 
Kultur und Sprache der Völker Ost- und Zentralasiens, Band 155), 15–35. Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz Verlag.
Jacobi, Hermann. 1970. Hermann Jacobi. Kleine Schriften. Ed. Bernhard Kölver. Teil 2 (GlasenappStiftung, Band 4, 2). Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.
JIANG, Zhongxin, ed. 1997. Sanskrit Lotus Sutra Fragments from the Lüshun Museum Collection: 
Facsimile Edition and Romanized Text. Dalian: Lüshun Museum; Tokyo: Soka Gakkai.
Kagawa, Mokushiki 香川默識, ed. 1915. Saiiki kōko zufu 『西域考古圖譜』. 2 vols. Tokyo: 
Kokkasha. Reprint, Tokyo: Hakubunsha, 1972. 
Karashima, Seishi. 2000. “Identification of Some Buddhist Sanskrit Fragments from Central 
Asia.” 『創価大学国際仏教学高等研究所年報』 Annual Report of The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University 3: 213–214.
 2003. “Sanskrit Fragments of the Sutra of Golden Light, the Lotus Sutra, the Āryaśrīmahādevīvyākaraṇa and the Anantamukhanirhāradhāraṇī in the Otani Collection.” 『創価大学国
際仏教学高等研究所年報』 Annual Report of The International Research Institute for 
Advanced Buddhology at Soka University 6: 183–196.
Karashima, Seishi, and Jiang Zhongxin. 2003. “Sanskrit Fragments of the Sutra of Golden Light 
from the Lüshun Museum Collection.” Hua Lin 華林 3: 331–381.
Karashima, Seishi, and Margarita I. Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya. 2007. “Some Buddhist Sanskrit 
Fragments from the Collection of the St. Petersburg Branch of the Institute of Oriental 
Studies of the Russian Academy of Sciences (1).” 『創価大学国際仏教学高等研究所年
報』 Annual Report of The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at 
Soka University 10: 45–56.
Karashima, Seishi, and Margarita I. Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya. 2008. “Buddhist Sanskrit Fragments from the Collection of the Institute of Oriental Manuscripts in St. Petersburg (2).” 『創
価大学国際仏教学高等研究所年報』 Annual Report of The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University 11: 91–94.

--- Page 288 of 425 ---
266
SHIN’ICHIRŌ HORI
Kielhorn, Franz. 1888. “The Epoch of the Newar Era.” The Indian Antiquary 17: 246–253. 
Reprinted in: Wilhelm Rau, ed., Franz Kielhorn. Kleine Schriften mit einer Auswahl der 
epigraphischen Aufsätze. Teil 1 (Glasenapp-Stiftung, Band 3, 1), 456–463. Wiesbaden: Franz 
Steiner Verlag, 1969.
Kimura, Takayasu, ed. 1986. Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā II~III. Tokyo: Sankibo 
Busshorin Publishing Co., Ltd.
1990. Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā IV. Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin Publishing Co., 
Ltd.
2006. Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā VI~VIII. Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin Publishing 
Co., Ltd.
2009. Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā I~2. Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin Publishing 
Co., Ltd.
KN = H. Kern and Bunyiu Nanjio, eds. Saddharmapuṇḍarīka (Bibliotheca Buddhica 10). St.-
Pétersbourg, 1912.
Kudo, Noriyuki, and Margarita I. Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya. 2007. “A Newly Identified Fragment 
of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra Kept in the St. Petersburg Branch of the Institute of 
Oriental Studies.” 『創価大学国際仏教学高等研究所年報』 Annual Report of The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University 10: 57–66.
Kurumiya, Yenshu, ed. 1978. Ratnaketuparivarta. Sanskrit Text. Kyoto: Heirakuji-shoten.
Lienhard, Siegfried. 1988. Nepalese Manuscripts. Part 1: Nevārī and Sanskrit, Staatsbibliothek 
Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, described by Siegfried Lienhard, with the collaboration of 
Thakur Lal Manandhar (Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, Band 
33.1). Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag Wiesbaden.
Locke, John K. 1985. Buddhist Monasteries of Nepal: A Survey of the Bāhās and Bahīs of the 
Kathmandu Valley. Kathmandu: Sahayogi Press.
Lokesh Chandra, ed. 1976. Saddharma-puṇḍarīka-sūtra: Kashgar Manuscript (Śata-Piṭaka Series, 
Vol. 229). New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture. Reprint, Tokyo: the 
Reiyukai, 1977.
Mikogami, Esho, and Yusho Wakahara. 2001. 「共同研究 サンスクリット仏教写本の文献学的
研究 ―日本私立学校振興・共済事業団学術研究振興資金対象事業―」 “Philological 
Study of Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts ― Collaborative Research Project Fund from the 
Promotion and Mutual Aid Corporation for Private Schools of Japan.” 『龍谷大学佛教文化
研究所紀要』 Bulletin of Institute of Buddhist Cultural Studies, Ryukoku University 40: 1–9.
Nobel, Johannes, ed. 1937. Suvarṇaprabhāsottamasūtra. Das Goldglanz-Sūtra. Ein Sanskrittext des 
Mahāyāna-Buddhismus. Leipzig: Otto Harrassowitz.
P = Daisetz T. Suzuki, ed. 『影印北京版西藏大藏經 ―大谷大學圖書館藏―』 The Tibetan 
Tripitaka: Peking Edition Kept in the Library of the Otani University, Kyoto. 168 vols. Tokyo: 
Tōkyō Gakujutsusha, 1955–1961.
Petech, Luciano. 1984. Mediaeval History of Nepal (c. 750–1482). Second, thoroughly revised 
edition (Serie Orientale Roma, Vol. 54). Roma: Istituto italiano per il Medio ed Estremo 
Oriente.
Pingree, David. 2004. Catalogue of Jyotiṣa Manuscripts in the Wellcome Library: Sanskrit Astral 
and Mathematical Literature (Sir Henry Wellcome Asian Studies, Vol. 2). Leiden, Boston: 
Brill.
Regmi, D. R. 1965. Medieval Nepal. Part 1: Early Medieval Period 750–1530 A. D. Calcutta: 
Firma K. L. Mukhopadhyay.
1966. Medieval Nepal. Part 2: A History of the Three Kingdoms 1520 A.D. to 1768 A.D. 
Calcutta: Firma K. L. Mukhopadhyay.
Ryukoku CD-ROM 2001 = 龍谷大学仏教文化研究所 Institute of Buddhist Cultural Studies at 
Ryukoku University, ed. 『龍谷大学図書館所蔵大谷探検隊収集梵文写本』 Sanskrit

--- Page 289 of 425 ---
From the Kathmandu Valley to the Tarim Basin
267
Manuscripts in the Otani Collection at Ryukoku University Library (CD-ROM). 14 vols. 
Kyoto: n.p.
Sanada, Ariyoshi 眞田有美. 1961. 「大谷探檢隊將來 梵文佛典資料」 “Descriptive Catalogue of 
the Sanskrit Buddhist Manuscripts brought by Ohtani Expedition.” In: 西域文化研究會 The 
Research Society of Central Asian Calture (sic), ed., 『西域文化研究第四 ―中央アジア古
代語文獻―』 Monumenta Serindica. Vol. IV: Buddhist Manuscripts and Secular Documents 
of the Ancient Languages in Central Asia, 49–118. Kyoto: Hozokan.
Sander, Lore. 1968. Paläographisches zu den Sanskrithandschriften der Berliner Turfansammlung 
(Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, Supplementband 8). Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.
1986. “Brāhmī Scripts on the Eastern Silk Roads.” Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 11/12: 
159–192.
Sato, Tsugitaka. 1997. “On the Microfilming and Cataloguing of Inner Asian Manuscripts Preserved 
at the St. Petersburg Branch of the Institute of Oriental Studies, Russian Academy of 
Sciences.” Memoirs of the Research Department of the Toyo Bunko (the Oriental Library) 55: 
111–112.
Shin saiiki ki II = Yoshitarō Uehara 上原芳太郎, ed. Shin saiiki ki. Vol. II 『新西域記』下巻. 
Tokyo: Yūkōsha, 1937. Reprint, Tokyo: Igusashuppan, 1984.
SHT V = Lore Sander and Ernst Waldschmidt. Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turfanfunden. Teil 5 
(Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, Band X, 5). Stuttgart: Franz 
Steiner Verlag, 1985.
SuI = Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki and Hokei Idzumi, eds. The Gandavyuha Sutra. New Revised Edition. 
Part I–IV. Kyoto: Sekai Seiten Kankō Kyōkai, 1949.
T = Junjiro Takakusu and Kaikyoku Watanabe, eds. Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō 『大正新脩大藏
經』. 100 vols. Tokyo: Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō Kankōkai, 1924–29.
Tomabechi, Toru, ed. 2009. Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā: Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts (Sanskrit 
Texts from the Tibetan Autonomous Region, No. 5). Beijing: China Tibetology Publishing 
House; Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press.
Vaidya, P. L., ed. 1961. Samādhirājasūtra (Buddhist Sanskrit Texts, No. 2). Darbhanga: Mithila 
Institute of Post-Graduate Studies and Research in Sanskrit Learning.
Vogel, Claus. 1974. The Dated Nepalese Manuscripts of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra (Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen. Philologisch-historische Klasse, 
Jahrgang 1974, Nr. 5). Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Vorobyova-Desyatovskaya, M. I. 1999. “Sanskrit Manuscripts from the N. F. Petrovsky Collection 
in the St. Petersburg Branch of the Institute of Oriental Studies.” Manuscripta Orientalia 5.4: 
36–39.
Wakahara, Yusho. 2003. “Remarks on Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Otani Collection ―Preliminaries 
to New Descriptive Catalogue―.” 『龍谷大学佛教文化研究所紀要』 Bulletin of Institute 
of Buddhist Cultural Studies, Ryukoku University 42: 29–37.
Yano, Michio and Makoto Fushimi. 2004. Pancanga. Vers. 3.13. Feb. 2004 (Downloadable from 
http://www.cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp/~yanom/pancanga/).

--- Page 290 of 425 ---


--- Page 291 of 425 ---
Indic and Khotanese Manuscripts:
Some New Finds and Findings from Xinjiang1
DUAN QING (BEIJING)
As is well known, Tibet and Xinjiang are the two regions in the People’s Republic of 
China in which we most expect to find ancient Indic Buddhist manuscripts. In this paper I 
will report on the state of research at Peking University on manuscripts recently discovered 
in the area of ancient Khotan, while in his contribution to this volume my colleague Dr 
Saerji will discuss the manuscripts originating from the Tibetan Autonomous Region 
(TAR). 
My paper will touch briefly on three topics: first, features of the findings from Xinjiang, 
or more precisely from Khotan; second, the Sanskrit fragments which have been delivered 
to us among other scriptures; and third, evidence of the palaeographic influence of Indic 
manuscripts on Khotanese documents and, conversely, the possibility of using the dated 
Khotanese documents as a basis for determining the date of some Sanskrit fragments.
1. Some features of the findings from Xinjiang 
It can be almost regarded as a rule that manuscripts discovered in the region of Xinjiang 
will usually surprise us with the variety of their languages and scripts. Once again this rule 
is attested through the new findings, which consist of texts written on paper and wood in a 
variety of scripts and languages.
Another noteworthy feature is that the most interesting materials are spread among 
private collectors, in contrast to the situation in the TAR where Sanskrit manuscripts are 
mainly located in museums or in monasteries. This feature means firstly that we do not 
have detailed information about the excavation or the provenance of the materials, and 
secondly that we do not know when new findings will surface or what type of material is 
likely to appear. A third point concerning ancient manuscripts in private collections worth 
raising here is their value and what a fair price would be for buying these manuscripts and 
fragments. 
However, up to now ancient manuscripts have been shown to us in a steady and more or 
less continuous flow even though every time the amount of manuscript material is not that 
much. Although the provenance of the manuscripts cannot be determined with any precision, they still possess some inherent connection insofar as they have been found together. 
On this occasion it may be worth pointing out in passing that in several new Khotanese 
documents the name of the spot where the royal palace of Khotan was located is mentioned. It is Birgaṃdara, a name familiar from published Khotanese documents from the 
collections held in the British Library. In one document now preserved in the museum of 
Xinjiang in Urumqi, Birgaṃdara is referred to as the town of kings.2 Although the site of 
Birgaṃdara, the centre of the ancient Khotanese kingdom, has yet to be confirmed through 
archaeological researches, it is generally known to belong to the ancient Six Towns3 which 
1 This article was written as part of the project “Research on newly discovered manuscripts in Sanskrit 
and Khotanese” of the Research Center of Eastern Literature at Peking University, Project number: 
2009JJD770004. I am grateful to Dr. Mark Allon of the University of Sydney, Australia, for not only 
taking the trouble to correct the English of this paper, but also providing suggestions for improving its 
content. To the editors of this volume, Paul Harrison and Jens-Uwe Hartmann, I am also indebted for 
suggestions as to style and content.
2 The document will be discussed by DUAN Qing in “薩波 Vaisa 之牒 [An Order of Spāta Vaisa],” 
forthcoming in A New Collection of Xinjiang Museum《新疆博物館新獲文獻》, Beijing: Zhonghua 
Shuju.
3 On the Six Towns of ancient Khotan, one may refer to ZHANG Guangda and RONG Xinjiang’s paper

--- Page 292 of 425 ---
270
DUAN QING
used to be situated in the wide area designated by local people as “Old Domoko,” which is 
now included in the territory of modern Cele, an administrative county between the 
Kunlun mountains and the Taklamakan Desert. According to information provided by the 
collectors, most of the materials had been just picked up in the abovementioned area, 
which seems to have been the centre of population of ancient Khotan. 
A rough statistical survey carried out by the National Library in Beijing indicates that up 
until 2009 over five hundred documents and manuscript fragments have come into the 
Collection of Literatures from the Western Regions. Khotanese manuscripts of Buddhist 
texts or secular documents constitute the bulk of the new collection. When ordering all the 
texts according to languages and number of fragments, we get the following sequence:
• Khotanese
• Chinese
• Sanskrit/Brāhmī
• Tibetan (secular documents only)
• Gāndhārī/Kharoṣṭhī (mainly written on wooden tablets)
• Tocharian
• Tumshuquese
• Judaeo-Persian (a paper letter from the end of the 9th century)
Among all these interesting ancient documents, two are of special interest. The first is a 
record of items purchased and the amount paid. The record itself is written in Khotanese, 
but sealed with a Sogdian signature. Through this document the role of Khotan as an 
integral link for the Sogdian caravans on their long and difficult road to China is vividly 
illustrated. 
The second is a beautiful letter written in Judaeo-Persian. We are informed through this 
letter that a battle occurred between a Tibetan and some other party. A former student of 
Peking University named ZHANG Zhan, now a PhD candidate at Harvard University under 
P. O. Skjærvø, has studied this letter and drawn the conclusion that the other side involved 
in the war consisted of Uyghurs. In his article ZHANG Zhan dated this Judaeo-Persian letter 
to the year 802. The word for Tibetan is written as twpyty’n/tūpētyān.4
2. Sanskrit fragments 
Among the new findings that have come to light since 2003, texts written in Buddhist 
Sanskrit are quite few, and they are merely fragments at that. Altogether about 50 fragments in different formats and scripts have been found. Among them, several texts have 
been identified. Below is a list of identified Sanskrit manuscripts in the new collection in 
Beijing5:
Avadānaśataka (only one fragment)
Bhadrakalpikasūtra (Bdk) (only one fragment)
Prajñāpāramitā texts
Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā
Larger Prajñāpāramitā
Suvikrāntavikrāmiparipṛcchā
in Chinese, “唐大曆三年三月典成銑牒跋 [Postscript to the ‘Tablet of the Archivist Chengxian dated to 
the third month of the third year in the Dali reign period of the Tang’],” in Collected Inquiries on the 
History of Khotan (new editon), Beijing: Renmin University of China Press, 2008, 108–9.
4 Cf. ZHANG Zhan and SHI Guan, “一件新發現猶太波斯語信劄的斷代與釋讀 [Philological studies 
on a newly discovered Judaeo-Persian Letter],” in: 敦煌吐魯番研究 Journal of the Dunhuang and 
Turfan Studies 11 (2008), Shanghai: 71–99. The discussion of the date is on p. 81, the word for Tibetan 
on p. 96.
5 In the meantime, several fragments have changed ownership. They have been moved from the 
National Library to the Xinjiang Museum in Urumqi.

--- Page 293 of 425 ---
Indic and Khotanese Manuscripts
271
Ratnaketuparivarta (Rkp) (from 2 different manuscripts)
Saddharmapuṇḍarīka (from different manuscripts)
Śūraṃgamasamādhisūtra (from 2 different manuscripts)
Suvarṇaprabhāsottamasūtra.
First of all, the single fragment of the Bhadrakalpikasūtra is noteworthy. To judge from 
the content, the paper format of the original manuscript must have been quite large, as it 
matches almost exactly 2 folios (4 pages) of the Tibetan text as printed in the Derge 
version.6 For several reasons the fragment deserves to be discussed in detail. I will come 
back to it later.
As far as the fragments of the Rkp are concerned, they apparently came from two 
manuscripts. Almost every chapter of this text is represented by fragments. Judging from 
what has survived, and after a preliminary checking of the text, the versions seem to be 
quite close to the Chinese version named Baoxing tuoluoni jing 寶星陀羅尼經, which was 
translated in the year 629.7 My colleague Dr. Saerji has worked on these fragments. He 
already published several fragments together with his Romanized transliteration and the 
parallel Tibetan and Chinese versions.8
Among other unidentified manuscripts is a collection of fragments which was delivered 
to us as a group. They must have been found together. After a preliminary transcription of 
the larger of these fragments, it was apparent that the text is composed in verse, and the 
content, although not identified yet, is to some extent clear: it seems to be a commentary 
and can be classified as belonging to Abhidharma literature. The appearance of this kind of 
fragment is of some interest: since the script of this fragment bears palaeographic characteristics quite typical for manuscripts found on the southern route of the Silk Road around 
ancient Khotan, where no fragments of Abhidharma literature have so far been found, to 
me it seems to imply that there was a possible existence of Śrāvakayāna Buddhism in this 
area. This reminds us of some events recorded in Tibetan sources which, though appearing 
legendary, might have referred to historical facts. As recorded in the Prophecy of the Li 
Country, the Sarvāstivāda school should have existed in ancient Khotan.9 
For a general review, the few manuscript fragments in Sanskrit which originate from 
Xinjiang bear resemblance in content and form to other hitherto known collections of 
Buddhist manuscripts from the southern route, as for instance the Hoernle collection 
preserved in the British Library. In ancient times Khotan was famous as a rich centre for 
Buddhist manuscripts. According to Chinese records, a monk called Devendraprajña 
brought more than one hundred volumes from Khotan when he was summoned to Luoyang 
by the Empress Wu Zetian in the year 688.10 The fact that the collection of Sanskrit 
6 Cf. DUAN Qing, “A fragment of the Bhadrakalpa-sūtra in Buddhist Sanskrit from Xinjiang,” Sanskrit 
Manuscripts in China, Proceedings of a Panel at the 2008 Beijing Seminar on Tibetan Studies, October 
13 to 17, Beijing 2009: 18–41.
7 According to the 大周刊定眾經目錄 [The Edited Catalogue of the Great Zhou], the Rkp was 
translated in the 3rd year of Zhenguan (貞觀) of the Tang Dynasty, which is equivalent to 629 CE. T 
2153, 55: 379a20.
8 At least 14 fragments of the Rkp have been identified. See Saerji, “A New Fragment of the Ratnaketuparivarta,” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka 
University 11, 2008: 95–103, and “More Fragments of the Ratnaketuparivarta (1)[2 fragments],” ibid., 
volume 13, 2010: 111–120.
9 R. E. Emmerick, Tibetan Texts concerning Khotan, Oxford 1967: 45.
10
 “There was a Tripiṭaka Master from Khotan named Tiyunbore — ‘Divine Wisdom’ in translation — 
who, having thoroughly studied the Tripiṭaka, was regarded as an extraordinary talent and enjoyed the 
highest reputation in his country. Then he made a journey to the capital in order to investigate cultural 
customs, brought with him over a hundred Sanskrit manuscripts and arrived in the Divine Capital in the 
Chuigong period [the Chuigong period corresponds to CE 685–689].” 有于闐國三藏法師提雲般若，此
云天慧。其人慧悟超倫，備窮三藏，在於本國，獨步一人。後為觀化上京，遂齎梵本百有餘部，於垂拱
年內，屆至神都. The Chinese text is quoted from Fazang 法藏, Dasheng fajie wuchabie lun shu 大乘法

--- Page 294 of 425 ---
272
DUAN QING
fragments recently established at the National Library in Beijing and as well as other 
collections of findings from Khotan represent a variety of script types and formats 
indicates that over a large span of time Buddhist manuscripts were maintained by the 
ancient Khotanese. All the fragments in the Beijing collection must have been written 
down in different historical periods. In the next section I will discuss some details which 
may be useful for determining the likely date of their production.
3. Khotanese documents and their possible role for dating Indic Buddhist manuscripts 
This volume is more concerned with Indic Buddhist manuscripts. However, the new 
collection of Khotanese manuscripts at the National Library in Beijing, though not wholly 
Indic, deserves to be paid attention to. When speaking about objects from Khotan, let us 
firstly recapitulate the general impression about Khotan itself. The ancient kingdom of 
Khotan has been designated a trading hub and an active stronghold of Mahāyāna Buddhism. Its doctrinal and practical orientation within the Buddhist world had to some degree 
determined its attitude to choosing and adopting Indic Buddhist manuscripts from outside. 
In other words, Khotan was not only a promoter but also a filter of Indian Buddhism as it 
was finding its way to China. Every fragment of Khotanese is important for documenting 
the history of Central Asia.11 From this aspect, the new manuscript discoveries from 
Khotan in Beijing are of great value for the study of cross-cultural influence as well as 
several other subjects, such as ethnic and cultural trends and features of Buddhist practice 
in Khotan and Central Asia. 
There is another reason why the new collection of Khotanese materials deserves to be 
mentioned on this occasion. Sometimes, by reading Buddhist Sanskrit fragments and 
Khotanese documents, I myself had a rough idea that some Khotanese documents may 
shed light on the dating of Indic manuscripts. It is beyond any doubt that the ancient 
Khotanese established their own writing system, though it is structured on the basis of 
Brāhmī characters.12 The ancient Khotanese scribes seemed to be conscientious about 
developing their own style of writing certain characters, as for instance in the case of the 
initial vowels i, u, e, and o. This fact can easily be seen with reference to a newly discovered Khotanese amulet which contains a dhāraṇī spell spoken by Avalokiteśvara in front of 
Śākyamuni Buddha for protecting pregnant women against 15 evil rākṣasīs.13 The spell 
itself is written in Sanskrit and the rest of the text is composed in Khotanese. In the 
accompanying plate we see first a passage in Khotanese, in which we find the initial ī is 
written as 
 ī.
界無差別論疏 [A Commentary on the *Vaipulyadharmadhātvabhedaśāstra], T 1838, 44: 63c22–25. 
11 R. E. Emmerick, “The Historical Importance of the Khotanese Manuscripts,” Prolegomena to 
the Sources on the History of Pre-Islamic Central Asia, ed. J. Harmatta, Budapest 1979: 175.
12 As early as 1916 Hoernle pointed out that Khotanese possesses its own peculiar style of writing, and 
the Khotanese script is in several ways distinguished from Sanskrit graphic signs. Cf. A. F. Rudolf 
Hoernle, Manuscript Remains of Buddhist Literature Found in Eastern Turkestan, second edition, Delhi 
1988: xiv–xvii.
13 This document is published in DUAN Qing, “于闐語對治十五鬼護身符 [A Khotanese amulet 
against the Fifteen Demons],” 敦煌吐魯番研究 Journal of the Dunhuang and Turfan Studies 11 (2008), 
Shanghai: 101–120.

--- Page 295 of 425 ---
Indic and Khotanese Manuscripts
273
In contrast, we found in a spell in corrupt Sanskrit an initial i written as 
. Here is a 
passage of the spell in Sanskrit from the same amulet against the 15 rākṣaṣīs:
With the above example I tried to emphasize the sense one gets from Khotanese manuscripts that the ancient Khotanese did care about their own writing system and consciously 
distinguished their writing from that of Sanskrit texts. However, in other respects they 
were also liable to be influenced by scripts used in Sanskrit manuscripts which obviously 
came from other regions closer to India. By comparing the Sanskrit fragments on the one 
hand with some Khotanese documents on the other, we can observe that certain akṣaras 
9. cu rri satvi ī cu maṃ nā10. ma hvāñī cu tvā rakṣa be11. da barī aysi bi12. śi bāḍa hīvyaṃñe di13. jsi rakṣai yanūṃ aśti
Translation:
Whoever the being might be, when he 
would speak my name, and when he 
would bring this spell with (him), I will at 
all times hold him under my aegis and 
afford him protection.
Translation:
“The Mahādeva having a thousand eyes spoke this speech: this well-spoken spell 
(vidyā) has been spoken by the Saintly Being (āryasatva). I also will give a sign 
(mudrā) for doing benefit to boys. It goes like this (tadyathā)...”
38. sahasrākṣa mahādeva
39. idaṃ vacanam ābrravī40. ti ahau subhāṣi’tā vi41. dyā āryasatvasya bhāṣi’-
42. tā ahaṃ pi mudrra dā43. syāmi dārakānāṃ
44. hittaṃkarī || tadyathā

--- Page 296 of 425 ---
274
DUAN QING
underwent similar changes. Such an observation might be of some interest for this volume: 
since Khotanese documents are dateable, some of them even accurately dateable, they may 
afford a ready point of reference for dating Indic Buddhist manuscripts.
Next, before starting to attempt to compare certain characters, we have to rule out 
several objective factors which may render such a comparison unfeasible, as for instance: 
Khotanese Buddhist manuscripts cannot be taken into consideration because Khotanese 
monasteries had their own tradition for training young monks for writing Buddhist texts, as 
demonstrated by alphabet sheets in the St. Petersburg collections,14 the monastic writing 
tradition therefore differing from that of the secular world. Through Khotanese documents 
we learn that each settlement of people used to keep their own scribe, who was called a 
ka’ra,15 whose function was to make records of the statements of all parties involved in 
cases. Usually the documents written by village scribes are presented in a cursive type and 
are in fact different from the formal “sūtra” script.16 
The other crucial factor which may yield a variation of written forms is contingent on 
different locations. As Lore Sander showed several years ago, despite a regional conformity the smaller locations used to have their own habits of writing certain akṣaras. Therefore, 
when speaking about palaeography, issues of sites and locations of the finds cannot be 
generalized or ignored. Bearing these two preconditions in mind, I have chosen several 
documents from the new Khotanese collection in China for investigation.
Example 1:
This is a document written on double wooden tablets which was published at the beginning 
of the 1990s. Such wooden tablets have a specific name in Khotanese — pāḍā-. A pāḍā- 
can be defined in two ways: by contents and by form. As far as contents are concerned, a 
pāḍā- is always a record of an important event involving ownership or sale of persons, 
whereas its form consists of two wooden tablets fastened together with a hemp string. 
Texts are written on the inside of the cover and the bottom. Such wooden tablets used for 
recording important events seem to have a long tradition in ancient Khotan. Also for 
Buddhist Studies such documents are of interest because in some instances Buddhist 
monks are involved in the events. They played the role of vendor, or of witnesses, or of 
agents of justice responsible for delivering a verdict on the deal. Example 1 is a contract 
for the sale of a young woman and her son.17 This event happened in the 4th year of the 
reign of a Khotanese king whose name cannot be read with certainty. However, the 
document has to do with a famous Khotanese monastery. On the cover of the wooden 
tablets we read 
samagṛ gumattīrai bilsaṃgna krriyādarä āśirya pyaṣṭāndä saṃgamuḍräṇa
“The ācāryas on duty of the entire assembly of monks of Gumattīrai signed with 
the seal of the assembly of monks.”
From the Tibetan literary source about Khotan, the Prophecy of the Li Country, we learn 
about a famous monastery named Gumattīra, Hgum-tir in Tibetan, which was the second 
oldest Buddhist monastery in Khotan.18 The monastery Gumattīra must have been the most 
famous Buddhist monastery of ancient Khotan and must have flourished for centuries, for 
14 Saka Documents VII: The St. Petersburg Collections, edited by R.E. Emmerick and Margarita I. 
Vorob’ëva-Desjatovskaja, London: School of Oriental and African Studies 1993, Plate 129.
15 Cf. the discussion about the word by R. E. Emmerick and P. O. Skjærvø, Studies in the Vocabulary 
of Khotanese III, Wien 1997: 39–40.
16 P. O. Skjærvø, Khotanese Manuscripts from Chinese Turkestan in the British Library: A Complete 
Catalogue with Texts and Translations, London 2002: lxxi.
17 DUAN Qing and WANG Binghua, “新疆出土于闐文木牘文書研究 [A newly discovered Khotanese 
wooden document from Xinjiang],” 敦煌吐魯番研究 Journal of the Dunhuang and Turfan Studies 2 
(1997): 1–12.
18 R. E. Emmerick, Tibetan Texts Concerning Khotan, London: Oxford University Press 1967: 31.

--- Page 297 of 425 ---
Indic and Khotanese Manuscripts
275
as early as the end of the 4th century the Chinese pilgrim Faxian, when passing through 
Khotan on his way to India, stayed in the monastery and left a description of it. According 
to Faxian, the monastery was large enough to hold 3,000 monks, who went together to the 
dining hall when hearing the gaṇḍī strike and then took their places in strict order. On the 
other hand, several centuries later, we find the name Gūmattīra mentioned many times in 
Khotanese manuscripts from the hidden cave of Dunhuang.19 It is further recorded in this 
Tibetan source that a Khotanese king named Virya became a patron of Buddhism and 
ordered the establishment of the Gumattīra monastery. Apart from the Tibetan legend we 
know nothing certain about the king. The location of the famous monastery is also uncertain. Since it was built under the patronage of the Khotanese royal family, we may infer 
that the monastery must have been located in the proximity of Birgaṃdara, where the royal 
palace was situated.
Before we continue to look further at this document of Gumattīra monastery, let us 
return to the fragmentary leaf of the Bhadrakalpikasūtra in Buddhist Sanskrit. This fragment is thought to bear some features of an earlier time, for instance, the ligature 
 ryya 
and 
 e can be traced back to the Kuṣāna period.20 Moreover, there are two pieces of 
evidence that indicate that the exemplar upon which the Sanskrit manuscript had been 
based was probably written in Kharoṣṭhī. In line 5 of the recto side it reads: 
[ya] ākīr[ṇṇa]-vihārida apārih(ā) “(Those) who suffer no loss (when) dwelling in crowds...”
Tibetan equivalent: ma ’dres par gnas pas (yongs su nyams pa med pa gang yin pa de ni 
bzod pa’i’o) “By staying without being mixed up, every unimpaired [person] (is regarded 
as [practicing] patience).”
Chinese version: 遊於擾憒眾閙之中而不迷誤 (you yu youkui zhong nao zhi zhong er bu 
miwu).
Translation according to the Chinese version: “(Those who) roam about among harassing 
and muddleheaded crowds, but are not lost (are regarded as (practising) patience.)”
The strange form vihārida also appears in the 3rd line of the verso side:
(apra)///māna-vihārida “remaining in the boundless (practices)”
In Tibetan: tshad med pas gnas pa (abiding with the boundless) 
The question is: what grammatical form does vihārida represent? My previous speculation was to take it as a mistake of the scribe who had misread °da instead of °na of the 
Kharoṣṭhī script in which the original exemplar would most probably have been written. 
Therefore, according to my previous suggestion, the correct form must be vihārinaḥ, a 
corrupt form of vihāriṇaḥ, the plural of vihārin-. However, since we have in this fragment 
several occurrences of na-kāra as well as ṇa-kāra, it is unlikely that the scribe made a 
mistake because he could not distinguish between °da and °na in the Kharoṣṭhī script. We 
19 As for instance: H. W. Bailey, Khotanese Texts I–III (second edition), Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press 1980, II: 121.
20 For ryya cf. Lore Sander, Paläographisches zu den Sanskrithandschriften der Berliner Turfansammlung (VOHD, Supplement-Bd. 8), Wiesbaden 1968, Tafel 6, line 3 from bottom; for e cf. Lore Sander, “A 
brief paleographical analysis of the Brāhmī manuscripts in volume I” in: Jens Braarvig et al., eds., 
Buddhist Manuscripts, Vol. I (Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection I), Hermes Publishing: Oslo, 2000: 
286.

--- Page 298 of 425 ---
276
DUAN QING
have to look for a better solution somewhere else. Vihārida could be also a Prakrit form for 
viharantaḥ, nominative plural masculine of the present participle of viharati “he dwells,” 
or for viharatā, instrumental singular masculine of the present participle of the same word 
since we have in one place in the Tibetan rendition gnas pas, indicating an instrumental in 
the original Sanskrit version. Anyway, viharada, being a Gāndhārī/Kharoṣṭhī form of 
viharant (pres. part.), is attested in Buddhist texts.21 It seems then to be a more plausible 
speculation that the vihārida under discussion should be a slightly changed form taken 
from Gāndhārī/Kharoṣṭhī. Bearing in mind that a Bdk version in Gāndhārī/Kharoṣṭhī in 
fact exists,22 the above speculation seems to be not unfounded. This and the other abovementioned features lead one further to assume that the Bdk fragment can be accounted as 
the oldest one among all the Sanskrit manuscripts from the region of ancient Khotan.
The akṣara la of Bdk has attracted my attention because it bears a resemblance to the 
same akṣara as written on the wooden tablets referring to Gumattīra. Compare, for 
instance, Bdk: la 
 (recto line 3) with Gumattīra (WBH01): la 
 (in the 2nd line of the 
inside of the under-tablet). However, since the king’s name on the wooden tablets is almost 
illegible, no further conclusion can be drawn than that there existed some resemblance of 
certain akṣaras.
Example 2:
The second example I have chosen for comparison is also a pāḍā- recording another slave 
deal. This one pertains to the new Khotanese collection in Beijing. What makes the 
document so special is that the vendor was an Ācārya who paid a very high price for the 
man to be sold. The slave now in his control had to serve not only monks but also craftsmen and their disciples.23 The whole case took place in Gaysāta, which is famous today as 
Dandan Oiliq.
This document bears a date: it is written on the 5th day of the first month in the 4th regnal year of the Khotanese king Viśya Väkraṃ. We know this king also from other sources, 
according to which he ruled from 692.24 That is to say the document bearing the date of his 
4th regnal year may have been written in year 695. This document is interesting for several 
reasons, firstly for how la is written. We compare below two instances of la. The first one 
is taken from the Khotanese document under discussion, the second from one fragment of 
the Rkp that was brought to the collection in the National Library in Beijing at the same 
time as the Khotanese wooden tablets of the year 695.
 la 
 lā (from Khotanese document) 
 la (from Ratnaketuparivarta) 
Here we see a clear change: what we have seen in Bdk as a straight vertical is now written 
as a curved one, and the change is to be observed in the Khotanese document as well.
Example 3:
However, Khotanese local scribes did not continue without change after being influenced 
by Sanskrit/Brāhmī for the written style of certain akṣaras. On the Khotanese side, a 
definite change of the form of la-kāra seems to have happened around the beginning of the 
8th century. The document I will discuss next is also a pāḍā- document and belongs to the 
21 Cf. Mark Allon, Three Gāndhārī Ekottarikāgama-Type Sūtras, British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 
12 and 14, with a contribution by Andrew Glass, Seattle and London, 2001. For an overview see the word 
index on p. 334. Andrew Glass, Four Gāndhārī Saṃyuktāgama Sūtras, Senior Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 5, 
Seattle and London, 2007. For an overview see the word index on p. 248.
22 I thank Andrew Glass for first alerting me to this. See now in this volume pp. 7, 69, 165. 
23 This document is published as DUAN Qing, “于闐語高僧買奴契約 [A newly found Khotanese 
Contract written on Wood],” 敦煌吐魯番研究 Journal of the Dunhuang and Turfan Studies 11 (2008), 
Shanghai: 11–27.
24 P. O. Skjærvø, “Kings of Khotan in the Eighth Century,” Histoire et cultes de l’Asie Centrale 
préislamique, Paris: CNRS 1991: 260.

--- Page 299 of 425 ---
Indic and Khotanese Manuscripts
277
collection of the National Library in Beijing. The story recorded in it happened in Birgaṃdara auva, “the town of Birgaṃdara,” which, as mentioned above, is designated in another 
document as the town of kings. The document actually bears two dates: one is written 
inside the cover tablet and gives the date as the 9th year of the Khotanese king Viśya 
Sīhyä. However, another date is found on the bottom side of the under-tablet, referring to 
year one followed by an explanation:
1. salī 1 ṣi’ kṣuṇä ttiña beḍa khu ṣi diṣṇacaṃdrä kṣīra-dāra āstä 
“Year 1. This is the reign, at the time when Diṣṇacaṃdrä is sitting as the supervisor of the country.”25
King Viśya Sīhyä is also a well-known name from other sources. As rightly suggested by 
Skjærvø, this king could be identified with Yuchi Tiao 尉遲眺 who, according to Chinese 
records in Tangshu, was decapitated in the 13th year of Kaiyuan (725) by the soldiers of 
Duxian 杜暹, Protector of Anxi.26 Now with the new document we can win back a part of 
the lost history of the kingdom of Khotan, viz., that king Viśya Sīhyä had in fact ruled for 
only 9 years, and that he came to the throne around 716. Although this may be interesting 
for the history of ancient Khotan, it is the form of la written in this document that is 
worthy of note in this context. By 
 lā we see that the stroke above has been lengthened 
and is more elegant. This form can be observed in many Khotanese documents apparently 
dated later than this one. 
Example 4:
For strengthening this impression I have looked at a document on paper which is not yet published. This paper document was also written at the place named Gaysāta, well-known as 
the present Dandan Oiliq. People mentioned in this document are familiar to us. The man 
bearing the name Xilue 悉略, in Khotanese Sīḍaka, is also attested in other Khotanese 
documents, and lived at the end of the 8th and beginning of the 9th century. Therefore this 
one is dated to a later date than the previous three Khotanese documents under investigation. 
At several points the form of la can be observed, as for instance by a personal name, 
Altāṃ. The vertical part of la has on top a rather long flourish to the right and then a curve 
downwards — this is an even more elegantly developed shape than the one we have seen 
on the previous pāḍā- documents.
Example 4 is of interest in the context of the present discussion because it can help 
clarify some discrepancies between the three pāḍā- documents just mentioned above. As 
said before, in order to see a palaeographic development one has to choose material that 
may come from the same location. However, as stated, the three pāḍā- documents come 
from different locations. With Example 4 we may overcome the problem since the document on paper was written in the same place, Gaysāta, as the document in Example 2. Thus 
this document provides support for the speculation that there was a palaeographic develop25 This document is transcribed, translated and commented on by me in a paper entitled “《舅 甥
女》案?所映射的于=史 [ = The Wooden Tablet Concerning Selling his Own Niece — A Historical 
Reflection of Ancient Khotan],” which is going to be published in《古&之路— 南0地区的跨文
化交流和文化3学$研)会文集》[ = Collection of Papers presented at the Symposium “Ancient 
Silk Trade Routes — Cross-cultural Exchange and Legacy in Southeast Asia”], 27–28 October 2011, 
Singapore, forthcoming in Singapore.
26 P. O. Skjærvø, “The End of Eighth-Century Khotan in Its Texts,” Journal of Inner Asian Art and 
Archaeology, vol. 3 (2009): 131.

--- Page 300 of 425 ---
278
DUAN QING
ment of the written shape of la which can be observed and followed in documents of 
different periods. A hundred years earlier the la was written only with a small curve on the 
right vertical as we have seen in the pāḍā- document mentioned above in Example 2 and 
the parallel in the Sanskrit manuscript of the Rkp. Fifty years later, around the year 746, the 
curve turned into a lengthened and elegant stroke, as can be viewed in the pāḍā- document 
of Example 3.
At this stage, let us return to the Khotanese amulet mentioned at the beginning of this 
section. It is quite certain that the completely intact amulet, which has a format approximately 2m long by 7cm wide, represents a certain local cult. In fact it was designed for a 
single woman named Säväkä so that she might beget sons and so her sons would not be 
hurt by the 15 rākṣasīs. As previously related, the text was assumed to be spoken by 
Avalokiteśvara. However, despite having a dhāraṇī in Sanskrit, the text cannot be claimed 
to be a rendition from Sanskrit. We found 
 le in the dhāraṇī in lines 46–48. It is obvious 
that the written shape of la bears already the elegant feature which may have come about at 
the beginning of the 8th century, as I tried to demonstrate before. Since the amulet was 
without doubt produced in a Buddhist monastery, it may be inferred that this palaeographic 
development occurred also in the sphere of Buddhist monasteries in Khotan. On the other 
hand, in contrast to the cursive tradition of the indigenous Khotanese script briefly touched 
on above, there was a tradition in Khotanese monasteries of writing Buddhist sūtras. As an 
example of this tradition I present below a line from one folio of the Khotanese Suvarṇaprabhāsottamasūtra which also belongs to the new collection of the National Library of 
China:27 
Folio 186, verso, 4th line
rmapālä mṛkala vāchä sucilomä·u sūryamiträ ratanakīyä mahāpraṇālä·nakulä u caṃnda-
“(Dha)rmapāla, Markaṭa, Vāli, Sūciroma and Sūryamitra, Ratnakeśa, Mahāpraṇālin, 
Nakula and Canda(na).”28
Here all the las are written in the formal ductus which is also referred to as “sūtra” script. 
Actually the tradition of the “sūtra” script itself refers to a range of distinctive types over 
an extensive period of time.29 There is certainly a lot of work to be done in order to achieve 
a clear and solid theory of Khotanese palaeographic development. 
For the moment, however, having observed the written shape of la in different time 
periods, and by way of conclusion to this short paper, I would make the following 
assumptions: (1) the elegant later shape of la is a result of an indigenous palaeographic 
development in Khotan; (2) the development started under the influence of a script used 
for Buddhist Sanskrit texts; (3) from the 8th century onwards it appears that Sanskrit 
manuscripts rarely come from the outside to Khotan, resulting in the lack of further 
influence; and (4) the Ratnaketuparivarta might belong to the latest Buddhist manuscripts 
of which the script influenced Khotanese palaeography. 
27 The folio is published by me in “Two New Folios of Khotanese Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra,” Annual 
Report of the International Research Institute of Advanced Buddhology at Soka University, Tokyo 2007: 
325–336.
28 Cf. R. E. Emmerick, The Sūtra of Golden Light, Pali Text Society, Oxford, 1992: 68.
29 P. O. Skjærvø, Khotanese Manuscripts from Chinese Turkestan in the British Library: A Complete 
Catalogue with Texts and Translations, London 2002: lxxi.

--- Page 301 of 425 ---
Earlier Inventories of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Tibet
A Synoptic List of Titles1
PAUL HARRISON (STANFORD)
The Indian traveller, scholar and writer Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana (1893–1963) was the first to 
make a systematic search for Sanskrit manuscripts in Tibet, and in the mid-1930s, in a 
series of papers in the The Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society ( = JBORS), 
he published the results of his investigations in a more or less consecutive listing of titles, 
along with very useful notes on the state of the manuscripts, readings of colophons and so 
on. These papers remain an indispensable historical resource, for various reasons, not the 
least of them being that some of the manuscripts which Sāṅkṛtyāyana saw have subsequently been moved from place to place. Much of the same material was also seen and 
photographed by Giuseppe Tucci (1894–1984) on his trips to Tibet in the 1930s and 1940s; 
his reports are similarly valuable for establishing provenance. Work has only recently 
begun on a systematic catalogue of Tucci’s collection of manuscripts and photographs. A 
preliminary inventory of these made by Francesco Sferra came out in 20002 and this was 
republished in 2008 in a revised and enlarged edition with the title “Sanskrit Manuscripts 
and Photographs of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Giuseppe Tucci’s Collection.” 
Some decades after the visits of Sāṅkṛtyāyana and Tucci, the task of cataloguing Sanskrit manuscripts in Tibet was taken up by the Chinese scholar WANG Sen 王森 (1912–
1991). WANG Sen’s work, also described in the contribution by Saerji to this volume (see 
pp. 294–295), was not the result of work in the field, but the inventory of a set of 259 
manuscripts gathered up and transported to Beijing in 1960/1961. It may have been compiled in the 1960s, although it bears the date 1985. The consignment sent to Beijing contained some of the same material seen and/or photographed by Sāṅkṛtyāyana and Tucci. 
Circulating unofficially in the West for many years in very poor photocopies, WANG Sen’s 
catalogue was eventually brought into the public domain in a more legible form when it 
was reproduced by Haiyan HU-von Hinüber in a 2006 publication. Despite its imperfections, it too remains an important historical resource. The catalogues of LUO Zhao 炤 
(see the contributions of Saerji and LUO Hong in this volume, pp. 292–293 and 315 
respectively) were made later than WANG Sen’s, in 1984 and 1985, on the basis of surveys 
of the collections held in the Norbulingka and the Potala in Lhasa (including the Beijing 
consignment, which had in the meantime been repatriated). Circulating unofficially in the 
same way as WANG Sen’s list, LUO Zhao’s handwritten lists are much more comprehensive, but unfortunately their information cannot be reproduced here.3 To get a full and 
accurate idea of what is preserved to this day in China and Tibet one must await the publication of the systematic catalogue of manuscript holdings in the TAR produced last year, 
which at the time of writing remains under tight official embargo in the PRC (see the 
introduction, pp. xiv–xv). Hopefully it will one day be made public, and eventually appear 
online, ideally to be accompanied by online publication of the digital images of the 
manuscripts themselves, so that scholars the world over may at last have the free and unobstructed access to these materials that is required for the advancement of scholarship in this 
field. 
1 I thank Rafal Felbur for his assistance with the input of the data from several of the catalogues used 
for this paper.
2 “Sanskrit Manuscripts and Photos of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Giuseppe Tucci’s Collection: A 
Preliminary Report,” in Piotr Balcerowicz and Marek Mejor, eds., On the Understanding of Other 
Cultures (Warsaw: Oriental Institute, Warsaw University, 2000): 397–413.
3 Permission was sought to incorporate the titles from the LUO Zhao lists in this paper, but this was 
declined.

--- Page 302 of 425 ---
280
PAUL HARRISON
The synoptic title list published here is merely intended to give a preliminary indication 
of the scope of the material documented by Sāṅkṛtyāyana, Tucci, and WANG Sen. It is a 
manifestly imperfect stopgap measure, which can only begin to convey a sense of what has 
yet to appear. Its incompleteness — which is to say, the incompleteness of the three lists on 
which it is based — is indicated by the fact that some very important texts which we know 
to have survived in Tibet do not appear on it, such as the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa (see in this 
volume), the Bodhisattvapiṭakasūtra, and the Saddharmasmṛtyupasthāna, to mention just a 
few sūtras, or many of the commentarial works already published in the series STTAR (see 
the contributions of LUO Hong and Helmut Krasser in this volume).
The list draws on the following sources, presented here according to the sigla used:
B =
Frank Bandurski, “Übersicht über die Göttinger Sammlungen der von Rāhula 
Sāṅkṛtyāyana in Tibet aufgefundenen buddhistischen Sanskrit-Texte,” in Frank 
Bandurski et al., eds., Untersuchungen zur buddhistischen Literatur (Göttingen: 
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1994): 9–126.
S =
Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana, “Sanskrit Palm-leaf MSS. in Tibet,” The Journal of the 
Bihar and Orissa Research Society, 21.1 (1935): 21–43; “Second Search of 
Sanskrit Palm-leaf MSS. in Tibet,” JBORS, 23.1 (1937): 1–57; “Search for 
Sanskrit MSS. in Tibet, ” JBORS, 24.4 (1938): 137–163.
T =
Francesco Sferra, “Sanskrit Manuscripts and Photographs of Sanskrit Manuscripts 
in Giuseppe Tucci’s Collection,” in Francesco Sferra, ed., Manuscripta Buddhica 
I: Sanskrit Texts from Giuseppe Tucci’s Collection Part I (Roma: Istituto Italiano 
per l’Africa e l’Oriente, 2008): 15–78 (annotated list, pp. 41ff.). Here reference is 
only to sections 3.1A–D, which inventories negatives taken in Sa skya, Ngor, Zha 
lu Ri phug, and sPos khang tshog pa, and to 3.2A–D, which lists photographs 
without negatives taken in Sa skya, Ngor, Zha lu, and an unspecified place in 
Tibet.
W =
WANG Sen, Minzu tushuguan cang fanwen beiye jing mulu (Beijing, 1985), as 
published as an appendix to Haiyan HU-von Hinüber, “Some Remarks on the 
Sanskrit Manuscript of the Mūlasarvāstivāda-Prātimokṣasūtra found in Tibet,” in 
Ute Hüsken et al., eds., Jaina-Itihāsa-Ratna: Festschrift fur Gustav Roth zum 90. 
Geburtstag (Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 2006): 283–337 (appendix on pp. 
297–334).
The text titles are listed in English alphabetical order, followed by their numbers in the 
relevant catalogues.4 The titles are given in their corrected or standard form, regardless of 
the spelling in the individual catalogues, unless they are too corrupt to restore with 
confidence. Variant spellings are given only in some cases. Author attributions are 
normally given as they appear in the lists, and often reflect traditional ascriptions: they are 
not necessarily correct. Where the same work, or the same manuscript of the work, can be 
identified in more than one list, the entries are connected by the equal sign (=). Here Bandurski’s meticulous work is especially helpful, in that it enables many entries to be lined up 
in this way, but often insufficient details are given in S or W to permit this to be done with 
titles that do not appear in B or T. Generally, however, when the folio numbers match, we 
assume that the same manuscript is in question, but for complete certainty there is, of 
course, no substitute for a careful inspection of the manuscript itself. Such close examination sometimes results, as we see in Bandurski’s catalogue, in a complete overturning of 
the initial identification, or the discovery that the manuscript contains more than one text.
4 Sāṅkṛtyāyana’s list runs over three articles, published in 1935 (Nos. 1–184), 1937 (Nos. 180–336) 
and 1938 (Nos. 337–363). It will be evident that some of the numbers at the beginning of the 1937 list 
overlap those at the end of the 1935 list, i.e. the numbers 180–184 appear twice. For these numbers, 
therefore, the relevant date is also given, e.g. S182 (1935). Furthermore, at the end of Sāṅkṛtyāyana’s 
1938 article he describes a small number of manuscripts from sPos khang, some of which are given 
running numbers previously assigned. These are marked in our list by date and page number, e.g. S 
(1938), p. 158.

--- Page 303 of 425 ---
Earlier Inventories of Sankrit Manuscripts in Tibet
281
Abhidharmadīpa with Vibhāṣāprabhāvṛtti B20 & B70c = S248 = T3.1C46 = W24
Abhidharmakośabhāṣya of Vasubandhu B22I, IIb = S335 = T3.1B.13
Abhidharmakośakārikā B22IIa, c, d = S105
Abhidharmapradīpa: see Abhidharmadīpa
Abhidharmasamuccaya of Asaṅga B23a = S312 = T3.2C10 = W23
Abhidharmasamuccayabhāṣya of Sthiramati (or Jinaputra?) B23b = S86; = T3.1B.1
Ābhiprāyikagāthānirdeśa S351
Abhisamācārikā (Mā-L.) B55b = S12 = W5
Abhsamācārikadharma T3.1C43
Abhisamayakrama B38.19 = S137
Abhisamayālaṃkāra S9 & S (1938), p. 163
Abhisamayālaṃkārakārikā W212
Abhisamayālaṃkārālokā of Haribhadra S46; W12
Abhisamayālaṃkāraprajñāpāramitopadeśaśāstra W14
Abhisamayālaṃkāraprajñ(āpāramit)opadeśaśāstra(vṛtti) (Durbodhālokanāmaṭīkā) of Dharmakīrti 
S45 = T3.2C14
Abhisamayālaṃkāraṭīkā W13
Abhisamayālaṃkāravivṛtti S20
Abhisamayasamuccayaṭīkā S117
Abhisambodhikrama(vivṛtti) of Āryadeva (?) S256 = W132
Acalakramadvaya B42e = S162
Acintyādvayakrama: see next
Acintyādvayakramopadeśa of Āryakuddāliyāda S34 = W144
Acittikā Bhūmi: see Yogācārabhūmi
Adhyardhaśataka of Mātṛceṭa S202 = T3.1A.6
Ādibuddha, etc. S270
Ādikarmāvatāra of Mañjukīrti B47.5 = S53
Ādikarmāvatārapratibaddha of Mañjukīrti B47.7 = S55
Advaitabinduprakaraṇa of Jñānaśrīmitra B24.10 = S347 = T3.1C40 = W49
Advayasamatākalparāja S354 = T3.2C12 (title given as Āryādvayasamatāvijayanāmamahākalparājatantra) = W76 (as Advayasamatāvijayakalpa)
Āgamaprāmāṇyakārikā: see Āgamasiddhikārikā
Āgamasiddhikārikā of Śaṅkaranandana B5b = S175 = T3.1B.175
Ajātaśatrvavadāna B41.Ib = S (1938), pp. 149ff. 
Amarakośaṭīkā (Kāmadhenu) of Subhūticandra B46 = S185; B74; S150; S180 (1935)
Amarakośaṭīkā (Kavikāmadhenu): see Amarakośaṭīkā (Kāmadhenu)
Amoghapāśakalpa(rāja) S291 = W69
Amoghapāśalokeśvaramaṇḍala S269 = W100
Aṅgulīdhāraṇīmahāvidyārājñī: see Āryāṅgulī (nāma) dhāraṇī (mahāvidyārājñī)
Aṅgulīkalpa: see Āryāṅgulīkalpa
Anupalabdhirahasya of Jñānaśrīmitra B24.4 = S340 = T3.1C40 = W42
Anuttarasaṃvara of Śākyamitra B29a3 = S96
Anuttarasatvavivṛtti S258 = W134
Anyāpohasiddhikārikā of Śaṅkaranandana S173–175 = T3.1B.17
Āpaduddhāraṇapaddhati W230
Aparapadāvṛtti W164
Aparimitāyuḥstotra B42d
5 For the confusing situation relating to the Sammelhandschrift in which this and other works of 
Śaṅkaranandana are found, see Vincent Eltschinger, “Śaṅkaranandana’s Sarvajñasiddhi: A Preliminary 
Report,” in Francesco Sferra, ed., Manuscripta Buddhica I: Sanskrit Texts from Giuseppe Tucci’s 
Collection Part I (Roma: Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente, 2008): 115–155.

--- Page 304 of 425 ---
282
PAUL HARRISON
Apohaprakaraṇa: see Apohasiddhi
Apohaprakaraṇa of Jñānaśrīmitra B24.6 = S342 = T3.1C40 = W44
Apohasiddhi of Ratnakīrti B25.3 = S22 = T3.2C9 = W53 (second part)
Apohasiddhiprakaraṇa: see Apohasiddhi
Arjunagītā W173
Arthaviniścayadharmaparyāya: see Arthaviniścayasūtra
Arthaviniścayasūtra B30b = S184 (1937); B31a = S87; B31d1 = S47; B32
Arthaviniścayasūtranibandhana of Vīryaśrīdatta B31b = S88; B31c = S48 = T3.1B.12; B31d1/d2 = 
S47
Āryadhvajāgrakeyūrā nāma dhāriṇī T3.2D16
Āryāṅgulī(nāma)dhāraṇī(mahāvidyārājñī) B73.3 = S190
Āryāṅgulīkalpa or Āryāṅgulyāḥ kalpa (Bhagavatyā hṛdayakalpa) B73.4 = S191
Āryasamādhirājasūtragāthā (?) T3.2D17
Aṣṭasāhasrikāpiṇḍārtha of Kambalācārya B75a = S187
Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā B71; B72; S1; S4 (also see Sūtradhāraṇīsaṃgraha); S19; S56; S57; 
S58; S59; S60; S61; S63; S64; S184 (1935); S214; S215; S226; S287; S288; W2; W3; W209
Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāpañjikā: see Sāratamā
Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāsūtra: see Aṣtasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā
Aṣṭasāhasrikaprajñāpāramitāsūtravṛtti W67
Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāṭīkā S206
Aṣṭaśmaśāna B73.2 = S189
Avayavinirākaraṇa of Paṇḍita Aśoka B25 = S28 = T3.2C9 = W58
Avyayārtha W236
Balicakravidhi B38.31 = S149
Balitattva of Ratnaśīla S357; W73
Balitattvādhikāra B29a6 = S99
Bhagavadgītā W182; W183; W184; W185
Bhagavatyā hṛdayakalpa: see Āryāṅgulīkalpa
Bhairavatantra W232
Bhāṣāvṛtti of Puruṣottamadeva S90
Bhaṭṭārakavajrāsanasādhanopadeśa S31
Bhāvanākrama: see Bodhisattvabhāvanākrama
Bhavaśuddhi of Karuṇābalavajra B38.11 = S129
Bhedābhedaparīkṣā of Jñānaśrīmitra B24.3 = S339 = T3.1C40 = W41
Bhikṣuṇīprakīrṇaka: see Bhikṣuṇīvinaya (Mā-L)
Bhikṣuṇīprātimokṣavibhaṅga: see Bhikṣuṇīvinaya (Mā-L)
Bhikṣuṇīvinaya (Mā-L) B55a = S12= T3.1C.39 = W6
Bhikṣuprakīrṇaka: see Bhikṣuṇīvinaya (Mā-L)
Bhikṣuprakīrṇakavinaya: see Bhikṣuṇīvinaya (Mā-L)
Bhikṣuprātimokṣasūtra: see Prātimokṣasūtra
Bhūtaḍāmarabhaṭṭārakasādhana B47.2 = S50
Bhūtaḍāmaramaṇḍalopāyikā of Subhūtipālita B47.3 = S51
Bhūtaḍāmaratantra B47.1 = S49; B49b
Bījahara (?) of Dharmadāsa W167 (title given as Vījahara)
Bodhicaryāvatāra of Śāntideva S110; S196; W124; W213
Bodhicittavajragāthāṭīkā S309 = W79 (?)
Bodhisattvabhāvanākrama (I) of Kamalaśīla S267 = T3.1C.37; W97
Bodhisattvabhūmi: see Yogācārabhūmi
Bodhisattvasaṃvaraviṃśakavṛtti of Śāntirakṣita W10
Brahmapurāṇa W235
Bṛhatprāmāṇyakārikā of Śaṅkaranandana S173–175 = T3.1B.17

--- Page 305 of 425 ---
Earlier Inventories of Sankrit Manuscripts in Tibet
283
Buddha...(pūjāvidhi) of Mañjukīrti B47.6 = S54
Buddhanamaskāra, etc. S273
Cakrasaṃvaravivṛtti B53 = S71; S290 = W82
Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇatantra B42a = S106
Cāndravyākaraṇa of Candragomin S204; S205; S286 = W153; W154; W163
Cāndravyākaraṇaṭīkā of Ratnamati B65 = S295 = W149
Cāndravyākaraṇaṭīkā S82
Cāndravyākaraṇaṭīkāpañjikā of Pūrṇacandra B65 = S296 = W149
Cāndravyākaraṇavṛtti of Candragomin S285; S294 = W150
Cāndravyākaraṇavṛtti of Dharmadāsa W222
Catuḥṣaṣtikalā B6b
Caturaṅgasādhanaṭīkā (Sāramañjarī) of Samantabhadra S297 = T3.1C.30 = W83
Caturyoginīsaṃpuṭatantrarāja S355 = T3.2C13 = W74
Chandoratnākara: see Chandoratnākarasvopajñavṛtti
Chandoratnākarasvopajñavṛtti of Ratnākaraśānti B44 & 45b = S89 = T3.1B22
Cintāmayī Bhūmi: see Yogācārabhūmi
Citrādvaitaprakāśavāda of Ratnakīrti B25.9 = S27 = T3.2C9 = W57
Cittādvaitaprakaraṇa: see Citrādvaitaprakāśavāda
Cittādvaitaprakaraṇavāda: see Citrādvaitaprakāśavāda
Cittānandapaṭī of Nāgārjuna T3.2D15
Cittaviśuddhi of Divākaracandra B38.5 = S123
Darśanagrantha: see Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra and Triṃśikāvijñaptibhāṣya
Darśanagrantha S69
Daśabhūmikasūtra S209
Dāsarasāyaṇa & ṭīkā S203 = T3.1A.3 = W38
Daśatattva W70
Dharmadharmatāpravibhāgasūtra S363 (on S (1938), p. 163)
*Dharmadharmatāvibhāgavivṛti of Vairocanarakṣita = T3.1B20
Dharmālaṅkārakārikā of Śaṅkaranandana S173–175 = T3.1B17
Dharmapada B42b, B43 = S159
Dharmasamvāda W169
Dharmottarapradīpa of Durvekamiśra B17, B18a = S74 = T3.1B11
Dhātupaṭha W225
Dohākośa(gīti) of Saraha B16 = S336 = T3.1B14
Dohākośaṭīkā S251
Dravyapadārthasaṃgraha W208
Durgasiṃhavṛtti (?) W223 (listed as Daurgasiṃjñāvṛtti)
Ekajaṭāstotra S163
Ekārathidāna of Ṛṣapaṇaka W188
Ekavṛkṣādiṭīkā S67
Evaṃmāyāpañjikā W142
Gaṇapatihṛdayadhāraṇī S164
Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra S210
Gaṅgāṣṭaka of Śaṅkarācārya W197
Goraṣasata (?) W194
Guhyasamāja S72; S314; W61
Guhyasamājamaṇḍalopāyikā: see Samājamaṇḍalopāyikā
Guhyasamājamaṇḍalopāyikā of Bhadrapāda S208
Guhyasamājapradīpoddyotanaṭīkā: see Pradīpoddyotanaṭīkā
Guhyasamājaṭīkā: see Pradīpoddyotanaṭīkā

--- Page 306 of 425 ---
284
PAUL HARRISON
Guhyasamājaṭīkā (Candraprabhā) of *Pramuditākaravarman T3.1C.35
Guhyendratilakakalparāja S330 = W117
Guṇāparyanta(stotraṭīkā) of Dignāga S329 = W119
Herukabhaṭṭārakasādhana of Ānandagarbhapāda B38.15 = S133
Herukābhidhānamantroddhāra, etc. S155
Herukasādhana W93
Herukasādhana of Alalavajra B38.14 = S132
Herukasādhana of Dārikapāda S265
Herukasādhana of Garbhapāda B38.13 = S131
Herukasādhanapañjikā B48 = S151
Herukastuti of Kaṇhapā B38.25 = S143
Hetubindvanuṭīkā: see Dharmottarapradīpa
Hetubinduṭīkāloka of Durvekamiśra B18b, B19 = S75 = T3.1B1
Hevajrabalividhi of Divākaracandra B38.6 = S124
Hevajrābhisamayatilaka of Śākyarakṣita B38.8 = S126
Hevajracakraviṃśikā of Saroruhavajra B38.24 = S142
Hevajraḍākinījālamahātantraṭīkā: see Trivajraratnāvalīmālikāpañjikā
Hevajrākhyayuganaddha of Advayavajra B38.2 = S120
(Hevajra)pūjāvidhi of Samādhivajra B38.18 = S136
Hevajrasādhana (Tattvāvatāra) S93
Hevajrasādhana of Anaṅgavajra B38.9 = S127; B38.10 = S128
Hevajrasādhana of Mahadapāda B38.16 = S134
Hevajrasādhana of Jñānavajra B38.17 = S135
Hevajrasādhana of Sahajavajra B38.20 = S138
Hevajrasādhana of Śāśvatavajra B38.21 = S139
Hevajrasādhana (Jñānapradīpa) of Divākaracandra B38.4 = S122
Hevajrasādhanopāyikā of Ratnākaraśānti B73.1 = S188
Hevajrasādhanopāyikā of Saroruhapāda B38.1 = S119
Hevajrasatvavikāśa of Divākaracandra B38.3 = S121
Hevajrastuti B38.22 = S140; B38.23 = S141
Hevajra(tantrapiṇḍārtha)ṭīkā of Vajragarbha B36 = S92 = T3.1B21
Hevajraṭippaṇa of Saroruvajra B37 = S91
Hevajraviśuddhinidhi: see Hevajraviśuddhisādhana
Hevajraviśuddhisādhana of Avadhūtipāda B38.7 = S125
Hevajrayoginīstuti B38.26 = S144
Hitopadeśa W 177; W178; W179; W180; W181; W229
Īśvaradūṣaṇa: see Īśvaravāda
Īśvarāpākaraṇa of Śaṅkaranandana S168 = T3.1B23
Īśvarāpākaraṇakārikā of Śaṅkaranandana S173–175 = T3.1B17
Īśvarasādhanadūṣaṇa of Ratnakīrti B25.2 = S21 = T3.2C9 = W53 (ff. 18b–32a, misidentified as 
Apohaprakaraṇa)
Īśvaravāda of Jñānaśrīmitra B24.7 = S343–344 = T3.1C40 = W45–46
Īśvaravādādhikāravyākhyā: see Īśvaravāda
Jīvanmuktastotra (?) W190
Jñānapradīpa: see Hevajrasādhana
Jñānasārasamuccaya of Āryadeva S37 = W146 
Jñānasiddhi B7b
Jñānaśrīmitranibandhāvali B24
Jyotiṣavaidyakakroḍapatra of Vibhūticandra S310
Kālacakratantra B12, B13a = S85; B14 = S307 = W77; W104
Kālacakraṭīkā (Vimalaprabhā) B13b = S113; B13c = S306 = W78; S236; S274

--- Page 307 of 425 ---
Earlier Inventories of Sankrit Manuscripts in Tibet
285
Kalāpapañjikā W159
Kalāpasūtra W224
Kalāpavṛtti of Durgasiṃha S83
Kalāpavyākaraṇaṭīkā S152
Kalyāṇakāmadhenu of Nāgārjuna S304 = T3.1C.31; W90
Kāmadhenu: see. Amarakośaṭīkā
Kāmaśāstra S279; W109
Karmāntavibhāgamelāvaṇa B29a7 = S100
Karmavibhāgaya (in Sinhalese) B66 = S234 (“Vessantarajātaka (?)”)
Kāryakāraṇabhāvasiddhi of Jñānaśrīmitra B24.8 = S345 = T3.1C40 = W47
Kāśikāpañcikā of Jinendrabuddhi S11
Kāśikāvivaraṇa W161; W162
Kāśikāvivaraṇapañjikā of Jinendrabuddhi S109
Kātantrapañjikā of Trilocanadāsa S261; S262; S353; W152; W158
Kātantravṛtti of Trilocanadāsa W160
Kātantravṛttipañjikā of Trilocanadāsa S293 = W151; W156; W157
Kāvya S 362 (S (1938), pp. 149–156)
Kāvyādarśa S114
Kāvyaprakāśa S263 = W166
Kriyāsamuccaya B39a = S84
Kṛṣṇayamāritantrapañjikā of Dharmadāsa S301 = W87 (gives author as Kumāracandra)
Kṣaṇabhaṅgādhyāya of Jñānaśrīmitra B24.1; S241; S337 = T3.1C40; W36; W39
Kṣaṇabhaṅgasiddhi (Anvayātmikā & Vyatirekātmikā) of Ratnakīrti B25.4 & 5 = S23 = T3.2C9 = 
W55
Kulālikāmnāya W221
Kurukullākalpa B47.4 = S52
Kurukullāsādhana S268 = W99 (title given as Kurukullīsādhana)
Laghupratibandhasiddhikārikā of Śaṅkaranandana S173–175 = T3.1B17
Laghutantraṭīkā of Vajrapāṇi T3.1C.34; T3.2C8
Lakṣaṇaṭīkā S321 = W66; W25; see also Vinayasūtra
Laṅkāvatārasūtra (?) S331
Madhyamakahṛdaya: see Tarkajvālā
Madhyāntavibhāgabhāṣya B6c = S160; B7a
Madhyāntavibhāgakārikā of Maitreyanātha S7 & S (1938), p. 162 (renumbered as 8)
Madhyāntavibhāgakatipayapadavivṛti of Vairocanarakṣita T3.1B20
Madhyāntavibhāgasūtra S8 (title given as Madhyāntavibhaṅgasūtra)
Madhyāntavibhaṅgabhāṣya: see Madhyāntavibhāgabhāṣya
Madhyāntavibhaṅgakārikā: see Madhyāntavibhāgakārikā
Madhyāntavibhaṅgakārikābhāṣya: see Madhyāntavibhāgabhāṣya
Madhyaprāmāṇyakārikā of Śaṅkaranandana S173–175 = T3.1B17
Mahāgopyatattvopadeśa of Dārikapāda S36 = W145
Mahākālacakra: see Kālacakratantra
Mahākālatantra B15 = S81
Mahāmantrānusāriṇīmahāvidyārājñī S76
Mahāmāyātantra S283 = W135
Mahāmāyātantraṭīkā S198 = W122
Mahāmāyūrīvidyārājñī S78 = W137; W217
Mahāpratisarāmahāvidyārājñī S80; W136; W219
Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñīkalpa, etc. (Pañcarakṣā) S14
Mahārājñīmahāmantrānusariṇī W220
Mahāsāhasrapramardinī S77; W216; W138

--- Page 308 of 425 ---
286
PAUL HARRISON
Mahāśītavatīmahāvidyārājñī: S79 (title given as Sītavatīmahāvidyārājñī); W139 (title given as 
Mahāśītavalī); W218 (title given as Mahāsītavanīmahāvidyārājñī)
Mahāvajrabhairavatantra(rāja) S277 = W107
Mahāvākyārtha W198
Mahāvākyavivaraṇa of Śaṅkarācārya W196; W237
Mahāyānalakṣaṇasamuccaya S275 = W105
Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra B54 = S66 (as “Darśanagrantha”); W15
Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkārapiṇḍārtha W16
Mahāyānaviṃśikā of Nāgārjuna S40
Mahāyānaviṃśikā (?) of Praśāntamitra S41
Mahāyanottaratantraśāstropadeśa B1c = S43
Mahāyānottaratantra(-ṭīkā): see Ratnagotravibhāga
Mahāyānottaratantraṭippaṇī of Vairocanarakṣita T3.1B20
Mahimnākhyastotra of Puṣpadanta W195 (title given as Mahimnākhyaṃstotra)
Mañjuśrīguhyacakra (?) B73 = S192 
Mañjuśrīnāmasaṅgīti S16; S323 = W115; W125; see also Nāmasaṃgīti
Mantramuktāvalī W192
Mārkaṇḍeyapurāṇa W233
Mūladevavākyaśāstra W108 = S278
Nairātmyasādhana B38.28 = S146
Nairātmyasādhana of Divākaracandra B38.30 = S148
Nairātmyasādhana of Ratnākaraśānti B38.29 = S147
Nairātmyasiddhi S158
Nairātmyastuti B38.27 = S145
Nāmaliṅgānuśāsana of Amarasiṃha W202
Nāmasaṃgīti S266 =? W92; see also Mañjuśrīnāmasaṅgīti
Navaślokaprajñāpāramitā: see Navaślokāṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā 
Navaślokāryāṣṭasāhasrikāyāḥ Prajñāpāramitāyāḥ Piṇḍārtha: see Aṣṭasāhasrikāpiṇḍārtha
Navaślokāṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā B75a = S186
Nyāyabindu of Dharmakīrti W211
Nyāyabindvanuṭīkā: see Dharmottarapradīpa
Nyāyabindupañjikā of Dharmottara S238 = W32
Nyāyabinduṭīkā: see Nyāyabindupañjikā
Nyāyasiddhi B6a; B8
Pañcakrama of Nāgārjuna B29a1 = S94
Pañcakramaṭippaṇī of Muniśrībhadra S358 = W96
Pañcakramavivṛtti S257 = W133; S259 = W129
Pañcarakṣā S183 (1935); S213
Pañcarakṣābali S165
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā S292
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitābhisamayālaṃkāravṛtti W11
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitopadeśa of Buddhadāsa S30
Pāṇinīsūtra W155 
Pāṇinisūtrapaṭha(ka) W201
Paramagambhīrottānakrama of Divākaracandra B38.12 = S130
Piṇḍārtha: see Aṣṭasāhasrikāpiṇḍārtha
Piṇḍikrama of Aṃguripāda B29a5 = S98
Poṣadhānuśaṃsā, etc. S228
Pradīpoddyotanaṭīkā of Candrakīrti B49a = S112= T3.1B27, T3.2B6
Prajñālaṃkārakārikā of Śaṅkaranandana [?] B4b = S173–175 = T3.1B17; B5a
Prajñāpāramitā (?) S15; S313

--- Page 309 of 425 ---
Earlier Inventories of Sankrit Manuscripts in Tibet
287
Prajñāparamitāhṛdayasūtra W210
Prajñāpāramitāpiṇḍārtha of Dignāga S327
Prajñāpāramitāsādhana (?) W128
Prajñāpāramitāṭīkā S322
Prakaraṇayogapīṭha S70
Pramāṇāntarbhāvaprakaraṇa of Ratnakīrti B25.6 = S24 = T3.2C9 = W55 (misidentified as Vyāptinirṇaya)
Pramāṇavārttika (Kroḍapatra) B70h = S240
Pramāṇavārttika of Dharmakīrti S239
Pramāṇavārttika commentary [?] B3, B4a, B33b
Pramāṇavārttikabhāṣya (Vārtttikālaṃkāra) of Prajñākaragupta B11 = S183 (1937) = T3.1A1
Pramāṇavārttikakārikā of Dharmakīrti W35
Pramāṇavarttikālaṃkāra W33
Pramāṇavārttikasvavṛtti of Dharmakīrti B2a = S180 (1937)
Pramāṇavārttika(sva)vṛttiṭīkā of Karṇakagomin B2b = S181 (1937) = T3.1A8, T3.2A5; B2c = S182 
(1937)
Pramāṇavārttikaṭīkā W34
Pramāṇavārttikavṛtti of Manorathanandin B70a = S237 = T3.1C41 = W31
Pratibandhasiddhikārikā of Śaṅkaranandana S173–175 = T3.1B17
Prātimokṣasūtra (Mā-L) B57 = S177 = T3.1B16
Prātimokṣasūtra W9
Prātimokṣasūtraṭīkā B58b = S194
Pratiṣṭhāvidhi, etc. S305 = W91
Pratyekabuddhabhūmi: see Yogācārabhūmi
Raghunāthāsita W193
Raghuvaṃśa of Kalidāsa W205
Rahaḥpradīpa (Sarvarahasyanibandha) of Ratnākaraśānti S299 = T3.1C.32 = W85
Raktayamāritantra S18 =? W127
Rasaprakāśamārtaṇḍa of Govindanātha S157
Ratirahasya of Kokapaṇḍita S172
Ratnagotravibhāga (Mahāyānottaratantraśāstra) of Maitreyanātha B1a = S68; B1b = S242 = W37; 
S43; T3.1C45
Ratnaguṇasañcayagāthāvyākhyā of Haribhadra S42; W18
Ratnakīrtinibandhāvalī B25
Rudrayāmala(tantra) W231; W234
Śabdabheda W126
Sacittikā Bhūmi: see Yogācārabhūmi
Ṣaḍaṅgayoga(ṭīkā) S280 = W110
Saddharmaparikathā B41.IIb = S 7 (1938), pp. 160–161 = T3.1D48
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra S2; S211 = W4; S212
Sādhanaśataka W140
Sādhanayoga S319
Sahopalambhaprakaraṇa of Jitāri S41 (no title, author given as Praśāntamitra) = T3.1B24
Sahopalambhasiddhi of Jitāri B10b
Sākārasaṅgrahasūtra B24.12 = S349 = T3.1C40 = W51
Sākārasiddhiśāstra of Jñānaśrīmitra B24.11 = S348 = T3.1C40 = W50
Samādhirājasūtra B30a = S184 (1937) (first part misidentified as Arthaviniścayadharmaparyāya) =? 
T3.2A4; S10; T3.1A7
Samājamaṇḍalopāyikā of Nāgabuddhi/Nāgabodhi S302 = T3.1C.33 = W88
Sāmānyadūṣaṇa of Paṇḍita Aśoka B25 = S29 = T3.2C9
Sāmānyanirākaraṇa: see Sāmānyadūṣaṇa

--- Page 310 of 425 ---
288
PAUL HARRISON
Samayamudrāpuruṣakāra of Nāgārjuna S35 = W143
Sāṃkathyaviniścaya from Abhidharmasamuccayabhāṣya of Yaśomitra S86
Sāṃkhyaśāstra W206
Saṅkṣipteśvarāpākaraṇakārikā of Śaṅkaranandana S173–175 = T3.1B17
Śāntiparvani mokṣadharmeṣv anusmṛtiḥ W172
Santānāntaradūṣaṇa of Ratnakīrti B25.10 = T3.2C9
Saptapadārtha W207
Sarasvatīstotra of Aśvalāyana W187
Sāratamā (Āryāṣṭasāhasrikāyāḥ prajñāpāramitāyāḥ Sāratamā nāma pañjikā) of Ratnākaraśānti B50a 
= S201; B50b = S200 = T3.1A9
Sarvabuddhasamayapratiṣṭhāmahātattva W72
Sarvadharmasvabhāva (?) W168
Sarvajñasiddhi of Ratnakīrti B25.1 = S21 = T3.2C9 = W52
Sarvajñasiddhi of Śaṅkaranandana S168 = T3.1B23
Sarvajñasiddhikārikā of Śaṅkaranandana B9, B10a = S174 = T3.1B17
Sarvajñasiddhisaṃkṣepa of Śaṅkaranandana S168 = T3.1B.23 (see also B10a, n. 120)
Sarvarahasyanibandharahasyapradīpā: see Rahaḥpradīpa
Sarvaśabdābhāvacarcā of Jñānaśrīmitra B24.5 = S341 = T3.1C40 = W43
Sarvaśuddhiviśuddhikrama (Anuttarasandhi) of Śākyamitra = T3.1B19
Śatapañcāśatka: see Adhyardhaśataka
Satasahasrahitāyāṃaśvamedhadharmayudhiṣṭirasaṃvādeyudhiṣṭirayajña (sic) W176
Śatasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā S73; S216–222; S289 = W1
Śatasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitasūtra: see Śatasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā
Śatasāhasryaṃsaṃhitāyāṃvaiyaṃsikyāṃśāntiparvvaṇiviṣṇornnamnaṃsahasraṃ (sic) W174
Śātiparvaṇiviṣṇudharmottareduḥsvapnanāśanaṃgajendramokṣaṇamstotraṃ (sic) W175
Ṣaṭkārakaprakriyā W189
Siddhaikavīratantra S324 = W116
Śikṣāsamuccaya S227
Sītavatīmahāvidyārājñī: see Mahāśītavatīmahāvidyārājñī
Sphuṭapīṭhādinirṇaya S250 = W28
Sphuṭārthā Śrīghanācārasaṅgrahaṭīkā of Jayarakṣita B59 = S102
Sragdharāstotra S272 = W102
Śrāmaṇerakārikāṭīkā of Jayarakṣita S102
Śrāvakabhūmi: see Yogācārabhūmi
Śrīkṛṣṇārjunasaṃvādaṃgītāsāra W186
Śrīpadmapurāṇeuttarakhaṇḍeumāmaheśvarasaṃvādeviṇdoḥsahasranāmastotraṃ (sic) W200
Śrīpadmapurāṇeuttarakhaṇḍeumāmaheśvarasaṃvādeviśmornnāmasahasraṃ (sic) W199
Śrīpāṇḍavagītā W170; W171
Śrīsaṃvarastotraṭīkā of Vajrapāṇi S38 = W141 (title given as Śrīsamvarastotrabhāṣya)
Śrutamayī Bhūmi: see Yogācārabhūmi
Sthirasiddhidūṣaṇa of Ratnakīrti B25.8 = S26 = T3.2C9 = W56
Subhāṣitaratnakoṣa of Vidyākara B40 = S178 = T3.1B29
Śuddhācāra of Vācaspatimiśra B 52, B64 = S223
Sūkṣmaprāmāṇyakārikā of Śaṅkaranandana S173–175 = T3.1B17
Sundarīmantrastotra W191
Sūtradhāraṇīsaṃgraha S (1938), p. 147
Sūtrālaṃkāra S116; see also Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra
Sūtralaṃkāra(vi)bhaṅga S44
*Sūtrālaṃkāravivṛti of Vairocanarakṣita = T3.1B.20
Svalpasarvajñasiddhikārikā of Śaṅkaranandana S173–175 = T3.1B17
Suvarṇavarṇāvadāna B45a = S154 (as “…(mahāyāna)sūtra”)

--- Page 311 of 425 ---
Earlier Inventories of Sankrit Manuscripts in Tibet
289
Svādhiṣṭhānakrama W114
Svādhiṣṭhānakramavivṛtti S255 = W131
Svādhiṣṭhānakramavṛtti S254 
Svapnādhyāya S260 = W130
Svārthanāntaścurādayodhātavaḥ (sic) W203
Taddhita (Pāṇini) S284
Tārāstutiṭīkā of Candradāsa S325 = W118
Tarkarahasya B21 = S170 = T3.1B25
Tarkajvālā (Madhyamakahṛdaya) of Bhāviveka S311 = T3.1C42 = W29
Tattvajñāna W103
Tridaṇḍamālā of Aśvaghoṣa B41.Ia, IIa = S6 & S (1938), pp. 157–159 = T3.1D47
Triliṅgaprakaraṇa S153
Triṃśatikā...kārikā of Asaṅga S328
Triṃśikā of Vasubandhu S326
Triṃśikākārikā W120
Triṃśikāṭīkāvivṛti of Vairocanarakṣita = T3.1B20
Triṃśikāvijñaptibhāṣya of Sthiramati B54 = S66 (as “Darśanagrantha”)
Trisamayapūrvasevāvidhi of Jayaprabha S318
Trisamayopāyikā S298 = W84
Triskandhadeśanā S197 = T3.1A4 = W123
Trivajraratnāvalīmālikāpañjikā of Kelikuliśa B35 = S118 (gives title as Hevajraḍākinījālamahātantraṭīkā (Vajraratnāvalī), author as Āryadeva) = T3.1B.285, T3.2B7
Tyādyantaprakriyā(kalāpa) of Sarvadhara S104
Udayananirākaraṇa: see Vādarahasya
Unidentified B1d, B1e; B3; B4a; B6a; B7b; B29b; B29c; B33b; B39b; B39c; B70b; B70d; B70e; 
B70f; B70g; B75b; S317; W112
Unidentified anusaṃsā text in Sinhalese S235
Unidentified astrological text S361
Unidentified commentary on some Sarvāstivāda sūtras S5 & S (1938), p. 148 (?)
Unidentified (kāvya-)ṭīkā S65
Unidentified Heruka text ṭīkā S320 = W65
Unidentified homavidhi W71
Unidentified Mahāyāna sūtra S39
Unidentified Nyāya text commentary B6a & B8 = S169 [?] = T3.1B18
Unidentified Pāli Buddhist text W250
Unidentified Pañjikā of Bhīmadeva S33
Unidentified Parikathā S6 & S (1938), pp. 160–161 (renumbered as 7)
Unidentified Sanskrit grammar, title not found S17; S62; S (1938), p. 148 (?); W226
Unidentified Sanskrit sūtra in Tibetan script W27
Unidentified sūtra S316; S332; S333
Unidentified sūtraṭīkā S315
Unidentified tantra S334
Unidentified texts in Tamil script B68 = S231; S232; S233; S167
Unidentified Vajrayāna text S108; B39b = S111; S264
Unidentified Vinaya commentary BIIe
Upasampadājñapti (Mū) B56 = S103
Utpattikramasādhana of Candrakīrti B29a4 = S97
Uttaratantra(ṭīkā): see Ratnagotravibhāga
Vādanyāya of Dharmakīrti S176
Vādanyāyaṭīkā: see Vādarahasya
Vādanyāyaṭīkā: see Vipañcitārtha

--- Page 312 of 425 ---
290
PAUL HARRISON
Vādarahasya B34 = S171 (“Vādanyāyaṭīkā (?)”); T3.1B26
Vajrabhairavatantrapañjikā of Kumāracandra S276 =W106; S300; W86
Vajraḍākatantraṭīkā S356 = W75
Vajrāmṛtatantra S32 =? W147
Vajrāmṛta(tantra)pañjikā S303 = W89
Vajraratnāvalī: see Hevajraḍākinījālamahātantraṭīkā
Vajrasattvasādhana of Candrakīrti B29a2 = S95
Vajrasattvasādhana of Līlāvajra S359; W94
Vajrasūcī of Aśvaghoṣa B51 = S166
Vajratārāstotra W113
Vāmakeśvaratantra W238
Vanaratnasthavirastotra: see Vanaratnastotra
Vanaratnastotra B42c = S161
Vārttikālaṃkāra of Prajñākaragupta S179; S252; S253
Vārttikālaṃkāra: see Pramāṇavārttikabhāṣya
Vasudhārādhāraṇī S281 = W111; W215
Vessantarajātaka: see Karmavibhāgaya
Vibhāṣāprabhāvṛtti: see Abhidharmadīpa
Vigrahavyāvarttanī(vṛtti) S249 = W30
Vījahara: see Bījahara
Vimalaprabhā: see Kālacakraṭīkā
Viṃśikāṭīkāvivṛti of Vairocanarakṣita = T3.1B20
Viṃśikāvivṛtti B33a = S115
Vinayakārikā of Viśākha B60 = S195 = T3.2A3
Vinayasūtra of Guṇaprabha B62a = S243 = W7
Vinayasūtra(lakṣaṇaṭīkā) S246; see also Lakṣaṇaṭīkā
Vinayasūtra(ṭīkā) of Guṇaprabha S245
Vinayasūtraṭīkā of Dharmamitra B62b = W8
Vinayasūtravṛtti of Guṇaprabha B58a = S193; B63 = S244 (?); T3.2A2
Vinayasūtravṛttyabhidhānasvavyākhyāna of Guṇaprabha B61 = S193 = T3.2A16
Vinayaṭīkā S182 (1935)
Vipañcitārtha nāma Vādanyāyaṭīkā of Śāntarakṣita B69 = S3
Vṛttamālāstuti of Jñānaśrīmitra W228
Vṛttamālāvṛtti W227
Vyākaraṇaṭīkā S181 (1935)
Vyākaraṇaṭīkā of Prajñāvarma S107
Vyāpticarcā(prakāraṇa) of Jñānaśrīmitra B24.2 = S338 = W40
Vyāptinirṇaya of Ratnakīrti B25.7 = S25 = T3.2C9 = W55 (second part only)
Yogācārabhūmi of Asaṅga B26 = S350 = T3.2C11 = W20–22 = T3.1C36; B27 = S199 = T3.1A2; 
B28 = S352 = T3.1C44 = W19
Yogāmbarasādhana (Mahāyogānubaddha) S308 = W80
Yogaratnamālāṭippaṇī of Bandhukīrti S360 = W95
Yogasārabhāṣya of Bhāṣkarācārya S271 = W98
Yoginirṇayaprakaraṇa of Jñānaśrīmitra B24.9 = S346 = T3.1C40 = W48
Yuktipradīpa S207 = T3.1A.5
6 The complex situation with the Vinayasūtra and its commentaries, as summarized by Bandurski 
(1994: 104), makes these assignments more than usually uncertain. The forthcoming work of LUO Hong 
should clarify the situation.

--- Page 313 of 425 ---
Indic Buddhist Manuscripts in the People’s Republic of China
The Peking University Project*
SAERJI (BEIJING)
1. Historical review
Buddhism arrived in East Asia approximately 2,000 years ago, and over this long period it 
not only developed into unique forms, such as Chinese and Tibetan Buddhism, but also 
generated a substantial corpus of sacred texts translated into Chinese, Tibetan, Mongolian, 
Manchu, Uyghur, and Tangut. Because of the long time-span, most of the Indic manuscripts the texts were translated from have been lost or scattered, but fortunately, thanks to 
the flourishing of Buddhist philological studies at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 
20th centuries, some of these Indic Buddhist manuscripts were brought to light. 
In Central China relatively few Indic Buddhist manuscripts were found: at the end of the 
19th century Western scholars found two Sanskrit manuscripts in Zhejiang Province (浙江
省), one in Gaoming Monastery, Tiantai County (天台/高明寺), and one in Puan Monastery, Sheng County (嵊/普安寺). These manuscripts, dealing with Tantric liturgy, were 
written in the 11th–13th centuries.1 Recently it has been discovered that Lingyin Monastery in Hangzhou (杭州灵6寺), Zhejiang Province, still preserves a manuscript, also on 
Tantric liturgy.2
In contrast to Central China, a large number of Indic Buddhist manuscripts came to light 
in the northwest as a result of the opening of the Library Cave 17 in 1900 in Dunhuang and 
the acquisitions by Western explorers in Gansu and Xinjiang in the late 19th and early 20th 
centuries. Although, for a number of reasons, these manuscripts have been scattered all 
over the world, in the abovementioned places there are still reports or discoveries of 
Buddhist manuscripts — for details see DUAN Qing’s paper in this volume.
As far as we know, the largest number of Indic Buddhist manuscripts in China was 
preserved in the Tibetan area, especially the Tibetan Autonomous Region (TAR). From 
1929 to 1938, the Indian monk Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana (1893–1963) entered Tibet four times 
in search of Sanskrit manuscripts. His catalogue records 363 entries; since the numbers 
from 180 to 184 were repeated, the total number of recorded manuscripts is 368. Their 
provenance is as follows: 3 come from Lhasa, Kun bde gling Monastery; 8 from the sPos 
khang Monastery in the rGyal rtse area; most come from gZhis ka rtse — 156 from Zha lu 
Monastery, 134 from Ngor Monastery, 63 from Sa skya; 4 come from Thub rtan rnam 
rgyal Monastery in rTa nag, northwest of gZhis ka rtse.3 The Tibetan scholar dGe ’dun 
chos ’phel, who accompanied Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana on his fourth trip to Tibet, has record-
* I have been fortunate to receive kind advice and suggestions from Professors WANG Bangwei (王邦
,) and DUAN Qing (段晴), who read an earlier version of this paper. In June 2009, I had a conversation 
with Professor LUO Zhao (炤), who provided more details about his work on the Sanskrit manuscripts 
of the TAR since the 1980s (see notes 9, 10, 12, 24, & 26 below). I am also indebted to Giuseppe Vignato 
and Pat Field, who made corrections to my English draft. 
1 Keisho Tsukamoto, Yukei Matsunaga, Hirofumi Isoda, eds., A Descriptive Bibliography of the 
Sanskrit Buddhist Literature, Vol. IV, The Buddhist Tantra, Kyoto, Heirakuji Shoten, 1989: 521–525.
2 FANG Guangchang, “A Pattra-leaf Sutra of the Song Dynasty Housed in the Lingyin Temple of 
Hangzhou,” Journal of Chinese Literature and History 1 (2007), 257–281. 方广>，“杭州灵6寺宋代
叶之考察”，《中文史》，2007年第1，第257–2811。
FANG Guangchang, “Findings about a Northern Song Dynasty Pattra Sutra Kept in the Lingyinsi 
Temple,” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka 
University 11 (2008): 303–325.
3 Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana, “Sanskrit Palm-leaf Mss. in Tibet,” Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research 
Society 21 (1935), pt. 1: 21–43; “Second Search of Sanskrit Palm-leaf Mss. in Tibet,” JBORS 23 (1937), 
pt. 1: 1–53; “Search for Sanskrit Mss. in Tibet,” JBORS 24 (1938), pt. 4: 137–63.

--- Page 314 of 425 ---
292
SAERJI
ed some of these manuscripts in his writings.4 Also, from 1933 to 1949 the famous Italian 
Tibetologist Giuseppe Tucci (1894–1984) searched all over Tibet for Sanskrit manuscripts, 
from Sa skya to Zha lu and Ngor monasteries, taking numerous photographs of manuscripts; a catalogue of these manuscripts has been published in recent years.5
In June 1959, the Tibetan Working Committee issued a document titled “Decision on 
Strengthening of the Administration of Cultural Relics and Archives,” and decided to 
establish the Cultural Relics, Historical Sites, Documents and Archives Management 
Committee of the Tibetan Working Committee, with the Cultural Relics Administration 
Group subordinate to it.6 At the same time, the Cultural Relics Survey Group of the TAR 
organized by the Ministry of Culture went to Tibet and over four months carried out a 
systematic survey of the cultural relics of Lhasa, lHo kha, gZhis ka rtse and other districts. 
In 1964 the Preparatory Group of the Cultural Relics Administration Committee of the 
TAR was established; on September 14, 1965 the Cultural Relics Administration Committee of the TAR was officially established, and ratified a “Bring Together and Preserve” 
policy for the work in the cultural relics area.7 Most likely it was in this period that 
manuscripts from different monasteries of Tibet were gathered in Lhasa.8 
In 1964, the Sanskrit Manuscripts Survey Group of the TAR compiled the “Catalogue of 
the Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in Ngor Monastery,” “Catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in Sa skya Monastery,” and “Catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in Zha lu Monastery”; unfortunately, at present the whereabouts of the Zha lu catalogue are uncertain.9
In May 1983 LUO Zhao, a scholar from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences 
(CASS), went to Tibet in order to compile a catalogue of Sanskrit manuscripts. First he 
compiled a catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts of lHo kha; from August 23 to September 
3 he surveyed the Sanskrit manuscripts of Sa skya, bKra shis lhun po, and dPal ’khor chos 
sde; on April 11, 1984 he compiled a catalogue of manuscripts collected at Nor bu gling 
kha; from November to June of the following year he catalogued those conserved in the 
Potala Palace. On July 1, 1985 he concluded the “Catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts 
preserved in TAR” (LUO Zhao’s Catalogue).
While compiling his catalogue in the 1980s LUO Zhao found that some manuscripts had 
already been given a number, either recorded on a strip of cloth fastening a bundle of 
manuscripts, or on slips of paper inserted among the folios. In some cases, besides the 
“present number” there was an indication of an earlier numbering. This double numbering 
indicates that before LUO Zhao these palm-leaf manuscripts were catalogued at least twice. 
In LUO Zhao’s catalogue there is mention of the 1964 cataloguing of Sanskrit manuscripts 
4 bLo bzang nor bu Shāstrī ed., mKhas dbang dge ’dun chos ’phel gyis mdzad pa’i gtam rgyud gser gyi 
thang ma, Sarnath, Varanasi, Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1986.
5 Francesco Sferra, “Sanskrit Manuscripts and Photos of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Giuseppe Tucci’s 
Collection, a Preliminary Report,” Studia Indologiczne VII (2000): 397–447. For a revised and enlarged 
version of the same paper, see Francesco Sferra, “Sanskrit Manuscripts and Photographs of Sanskrit 
Manuscripts in Giuseppe Tucci’s Collection,” in Francesco Sferra, ed., Sanskrit Texts from Giuseppe 
Tucci’s Collection. Part I, Roma 2008: 15–78 (Manuscripta Buddhica I).
6 See internet news: http://news.xinhuanet.com/focus/2005-03/26/content_2724229_3.htm.
7 Concerning the protection of cultural relics in Tibet, see Huo Wei (霍巍), “A Decisive Moment in 
Tibetan Cultural Relics and Archaeology Enterprises (西藏文物考古事2的史性;折),” internet 
edition: http://info.tibet.cn/periodical/zgzx/2005/03/200705/t20070517_237750.htm.
8 According to a speech by LUO Zhao at the Seminar on Sanskrit Manuscripts at Peking University, 
2008, in 1962 most of the Sanskrit manuscripts stored in various monasteries were brought together in 
Lhasa and preserved in the Potala Palace and Nor bu gling kha.
9 LUO Zhao, “Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts Preserved in TAR” (unpublished), last page. LUO 
Zhao said the catalogues of 1964 were like an account book, which just registered serial number, total 
folios, and size of manuscripts, and did not refer to the content of the texts (personal communication, 
June 2009).

--- Page 315 of 425 ---
The Peking University Project
293
by the Sanskrit Manuscripts Survey Group of the TAR and the “present number” seen by 
LUO Zhao probably referred to the catalogue number assigned at that time. It cannot be 
ruled out that during the 1959 survey a cataloguing of the manuscripts was carried out and 
the “original number” seen by LUO Zhao was the assigned catalogue number from this 
earlier survey. At present we do not have conclusive data concerning the two different 
cataloguing numbers.
In October 1985 the China Tibetology Research Centre (CTRC) was established in 
Beijing; LUO Zhao assisted the first director-general of the CTRC, rDo rje tshe brtan, with 
preparations for the organization and study of the Sanskrit manuscripts. Between June and 
September 1987, LUO Zhao was in charge of the microfilming of the Sanskrit manuscripts; 
he also compiled a catalogue of the microfilms at the same time, and noted the Chinese 
titles of the individual Sanskrit manuscripts on a separate slip for each microfilm. At the 
end of September 1987, this catalogue was submitted to the CTRC; subsequently, on the 
basis of the microfilms a new cataloguing was carried out by the CTRC.10 For various 
reasons, the research work since then has been very slow.11 
In 2006 the Chinese government launched what was to be the biggest survey to date of 
Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in the TAR. On September 25, 2012, the TAR government 
held a formal meeting to sum up and celebrate this Sanskrit manuscript conservation 
project. According to the official report, the two tasks of conservation and cataloguing had 
been successfully completed, with the project group having inventoried roughly one 
thousand bundles and sixty thousand folios of Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in the TAR, 
and compiled the Complete Collection of Photographic Reproductions of Palm-leaf 
Scriptures Preserved in the TAR (Bod rang ljongs su nyar tshags byas pa’i ta la’i lo ma’i 
dpe cha kun btus par ma / Xizang zizhiqu zhencang beiyejing yingyin daquan 西藏自治区
珍藏叶影印大全), in 61 volumes, the General Catalogue of Palm-leaf Scripture 
Manuscripts Preserved in the TAR (Bod rang ljongs su nyar tshags byas pa’i ta la’i lo ma’i 
dpe cha bris ma’i dkar chag / Xizang zizhiqu zhencang beiyejing xieben zong mulu 西藏自
治区珍藏叶写本<目), in four volumes, and the Brief Catalogue of Photographic 
Reproductions of Palm-leaf Scriptures Preserved in the TAR (Xizang zizhiqu zhencang 
beiyejing yingyin daquan jianmu 西藏自治区珍藏叶影印大全目), in one volume. 
Unfortunately, all of these materials were published as closed resources even in China, and 
very few personnel from academic institutions can access them at present.
2. Establishment of the Research Institute of Sanskrit Manuscripts and Buddhist Literature 
of Peking University and its mission
Peking University is the first university in China to offer a Sanskrit major, and presently is 
the only university in China training specialized personnel in Sanskrit studies through a 
complete program from undergraduate to Ph.D. level. Thanks to the efforts of Professors JI 
Xianlin (季羡林) and JIN Kemu (金克木), in 1960 and in 1984 undergraduates were enrolled in a Sanskrit major; after graduation some of them have been working in the 
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences and similar scientific institutions, continuing Sanskrit 
research studies, some doing specific research on Sanskrit manuscripts. Since 1979, 
postgraduates have been enrolled most years and trained in a Sanskrit major, and at present 
some of these continue the task of training new students while carrying out research work.
10 “Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts (Microfilms) Owned by the CTRC” (Krung go’i bod kyi 
shes rig zhib ’jug lte gnas su nyar ba’i ta la’i lo ma’i bstan bcos (spyin shog ’dril ma’i par) kyi dkar chag 
mdor gsal), a catalogue compiled in 1987, abbreviated as the Sang De Catalogue. At present, we do not 
know whether the catalogue of the microfilms compiled by LUO Zhao and the Sang De Catalogue are the 
same (LUO Zhao, personal communication, June 2009). 
11 More details in: Ernst Steinkellner, A Tale of Leaves: On Sanskrit Manuscripts in Tibet, their Past 
and their Future, Amsterdam, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, 2004.

--- Page 316 of 425 ---
294
SAERJI
Around 1960–1961, some of the Sanskrit manuscripts were moved from Tibet and 
preserved in the Palace of National Minorities in Beijing on loan from the TAR. Professor 
WANG Sen (王森) compiled a catalogue of these manuscripts which carries the date April 
1985;12 this catalogue recorded 259 entries and has been made available in facsimile format 
recently.13 Since 1978, a number of people, especially Japanese scholars, have photographed these manuscripts; facsimile editions and results of studies on some have been 
published.14 In 1988, the Institute of South Asia and Southeast Asia Studies of Peking 
University carried out systematic microfilming of these documents, which were eventually 
given to the Department of Oriental Languages and Culture of Peking University, but for 
various reasons they were not utilized or researched. In 1993 the original manuscripts were 
given back to the TAR and are now deposited in the Tibet Museum at Lhasa. According to 
the interview given to Haiyan HU-von Hinüber (胡海燕) by the Palace of National 
Minorities staff member ZHANG Xiufeng (8秀峰), the person directly in charge of these 
manuscripts in the 1960s, all the manuscripts conserved in the Palace of National Minorities came from the Northern Sa skya Monastery.15 If this is the case, since WANG Sen’s catalogue and the microfilms of Peking University coincide with Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana’s 
12 LUO Zhao advised that the date of WANG Sen’s cataloguing could have been 1961 or 1962 (personal 
communication, June 2009). 
13 Haiyan HU-von Hinüber, “Some Remarks on the Sanskrit manuscript of the Mūlasarvāstivāda- 
Prātimokṣasūtra found in Tibet,” in Ute Hüsken, Petra Kieffer-Pülz und Anne Peters, eds., Jaina-itihāsaratna, Festschrift für Gustav Roth zum 90. Geburtstag, Marburg 2006: 297–334 (Indica et Tibetica, 47).
14 JIANG Zhongxin ed., A Sanskrit Manuscript of Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra kept in the Library of the 
Cultural Palace of the Nationalities, Beijing. Romanized text, edited and annotated by Jiang Zhongxin 
with the preface by JI Xianlin, Beijing, China Social Sciences Publishing House, 1988, V, 16, 440 pp. 
(including a plate of the obverse sides of folios 133–137). 蒋忠新注，《民族文化+#藏梵文<
妙法>写本》 (拉丁字母;写本) ，北京：中国社会科学出版社，1988年.
JIANG Zhongxin, “Facsimile Edition of the Madhyamakahṛdaya Sanskrit Manuscript,” in: Papers in 
Honour of Prof. Dr. JI Xianlin on the Occasion of His 80th Birthday, Jiangxi renmin chubanshe [Jiangxi], 
vol. 1 (1991), pp. 111–117. 蒋忠新, “梵文《思7焰》抄本影印版”，李@、蒋忠新主，《季羡
林教授八十念文集》，南昌：江西人民出版社，1991年，上卷，第111–1171。
Zhongxin JIANG and Toru Tomabechi, The Pañcakramaṭippanī of Muniśrībhadra: Introduction and 
Romanized Sanskrit Text, Bern, Peter Lang, 1996.
JIANG Zhongxin, “A Sanskrit Fragment of the Prajñā-pāramitā-ratna-guṇa-saṃcaya-gāthā-vyākhyā 
of Haribhadra: A Romanized Text,” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced 
Buddhology at Soka University 3 (2000): 115–123.
WANG Bangwei, “Remarks on the Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Abhisamācārikā-Dharma-Vinaya 
of the Ārya Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādins,” Chinese Culture, 10, Sanlian Publishing House, 1994: 16–
12. 王邦,，“跋梵文叶%出世部比丘律 Abhisamācārikā,”《中国文化》，第10期，北京：三
#店，1994: 第116–1231。
WANG Bangwei, “First Section of the First Chapter of the Abhisamācārika-Dharma of the Mahāsaṃghika-Lokottaravādin,” Journal of Peking University (Oriental Culture Studies Monograph)，
1996: 21–24. 王邦,，“%出世部比丘律 Abhisamācārikā (《威4法》)第一品第一,”《北京大学
学》 ( 方文化研究:刊)，1996: 第21–241。
ZHANG Baosheng tr., Bhagavadgītā, Beijing, China Social Sciences Publishing House, 1989. In the 
preface the author declares that his translation is mainly based on the manuscript preserved in the Library 
of the Cultural Palace of the Nationalities (No. 182), and in the frontispiece also presents photographs of 
the first three folios of the manuscript. 8保!5，《薄伽梵歌》，北京：中国社会科学出版社，
1989年。
Gudrun Bühnemann, *Sādhanaśataka and *Sādhanaśatapañcāśikā. Two Buddhist Sādhana Collections in Sanskrit Manuscript. Wien 1994 (Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde, 32). 
Akira Yuyama, “Prajñā-pāramitā-ratna-guṇa-saṃcaya-gāthā Vyākhyā of Haribhadra: Preliminary 
Remarks,” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka 
University 4 (2001): 27–42.
Christian Lindtner ed., Madhyamakahṛdayam of Bhavya, Adyar Series no. 123, Chennai, The 
Theosophical Society, 2001.
LI Nan ed. and annotated, The Study of the Śrīherukābhidhānaṃ Cakrasaṃvaratantram with the 
Vivṛti commentary of Bhavabhaṭṭa. Romanized text, Beijing, China Social Sciences Publishing House, 
2005. 李南校勘5注，《<!>及其注疏解
》，北京：中国社会科学出版社，2005年。
15 Haiyan HU-von Hinüber, “Some Remarks on the Sanskrit manuscript of the MūlasarvāstivādaPrātimokṣasūtra found in Tibet” (as note 13): 284–285.

--- Page 317 of 425 ---
The Peking University Project
295
catalogue of Zha lu Monastery, we can infer that after the visit of Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana the 
Zha lu Monastery manuscripts were moved to the Northern Sa skya Monastery.16
In May 2001, Peking University professor DUAN Qing carried out “The Organization of 
the Sanskrit Manuscripts Formerly Preserved in the Palace of National Minorities in 
Beijing,” an activity sponsored by the Ministry of Education Human and Social Sciences 
Project, to which the School of Foreign Languages gave further support. Taking this 
opportunity, in 2003 we digitalized the microfilms, storing and organizing in a computer 
thousands of photographs of more than 200 Sanskrit manuscripts. Due to insufficient care, 
six rolls of these microfilms were lost and in a few cases the cataloguing number is 
unclear. Among the lost photographs were texts of importance in terms of logic, grammar, 
tantra, etc. The catalogue of WANG Sen recorded only 259 entries, but there are 266 microfilms, some of which at present cannot be assigned to a specific category: the discrepancies 
between WANG Sen’s catalogue and the microfilms deserve further investigation.
In order to launch the study of the Sanskrit manuscripts, at the beginning of November 
2004 we suggested to the Social Sciences Bureau of Peking University that a special 
institute be set up, and this was approved before the end of the same month. With the 
support of the Institute of Oriental Studies and the School of Foreign Languages of Peking 
University, the Research Institute of Sanskrit Manuscripts and Buddhist Literature was 
established. The microfilms of the Sanskrit manuscripts have become the primary material 
for our research. At present DUAN Qing is in charge of the institute, which includes 
scholars from the Sanskrit and Pali Section, Department of South Asia Studies, School of 
Foreign Languages.
3. Preliminary achievements
At the beginning of June 2004, thanks to the efforts of WANG Bangwei and DUAN Qing, 
Peking University and the TAR began a discussion concerning the preservation of Sanskrit 
manuscripts and the study and training of specialized personnel. Following this meeting, 
Peking University applied to the Ministry of Education for the setting up of a Special Tibet 
Aid Project jointly by its School of Foreign Languages and the Tibet Regional Cultural 
Relics Bureau. In July, the Ministry of Education issued a document instructing the School 
of Foreign Languages of Peking University to resume the enrollment of undergraduate 
students majoring in Sanskrit and Pali, aimed at strengthening the training of future 
generations. On the basis of this document, Peking University in 2005 enrolled eight 
undergraduate students, two of whom were Tibetans. During 2006–2007, five of these 
students went to India or Nepal as exchange students for one year, and upon graduation in 
2009 five of them continued their M.A. studies. In the fall of 2010, Peking University 
enrolled nine undergraduate students, three of them Tibetans.
As well as offering elective Sanskrit courses in order to attract outstanding students 
from other majors, hoping they will immerse themselves in the field of Sanskrit studies, 
16 However, according to LUO Zhao (personal communication, June 2009), this account and inference 
presents problems. First, the manuscripts from different monasteries in Tibet were gathered in Lhasa at 
one time, circa 1959; considering the conditions at that time, it would have been both difficult and 
unreasonable for the manuscripts to have been first transferred west from Zha lu Monastery to Sa skya 
Monastery, then east from Sa skya Monastery, via Zha lu Monastery, to Lhasa. Second, in February 1985, 
when LUO Zhao returned to Beijing for the Chinese Spring Festival, he saw WANG Sen’s catalogue in 
Beijing, and found an interesting phenomenon: in a number of cases manuscripts which belong to one 
text have been preserved in both Lhasa and Beijing, due to their being divided into different bundles. 
Probably these manuscripts from Zha lu Monastery were transferred to Lhasa circa 1959 (Steinkellner’s 
paper also mentioned this: Ernst Steinkellner, A Tale of Leaves: On Sanskrit Manuscripts in Tibet, their 
Past and their Future, 2004: 20), then were brought from Lhasa to Beijing. As some of the Tibetan 
manuscripts conserved in the Palace of National Minorities came from Sa skya Monastery, staff members 
may have confused Tibetan and Sanskrit manuscripts.

--- Page 318 of 425 ---
296
SAERJI
the staff at Peking University have been training masters and doctoral students enrolled 
through the national examination system. After graduation some could go abroad to pursue 
advanced studies, others could enter scientific institutions and continue to utilize their Sanskrit skills, still others are dedicating their energies to the study of palm-leaf manuscripts. 
Among the most outstanding students we should mention four whose attainments are already considerable. YE Shaoyong (叶少勇), who found fragments of the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā and Buddhapālita’s Commentary (WANG Sen’s Catalogue no. 17) among the microfilms of Peking University, is working on a detailed critical edition of these texts, and 
has participated in two international conferences on Buddhist studies,17 publishing a series 
of articles on the results of his research,18 obtaining international recognition and appreciation. Having now completed his doctoral dissertation,19 he has become my colleague, continuing his studies. LUO Hong (), another outstanding student, chose the Sanskrit 
manuscript of the Vinayasūtra and its commentaries (WANG Sen’s Catalogue nos. 7 and 8) 
as his doctoral dissertation topic;20 he now works at the CTRC, continuing his research. 
FAN Muyou (范慕尤) published a preliminary study on the Advayasamatāvijayākhyākalpamahārāja, a Sanskrit tantric manuscript (WANG Sen’s Catalogue no. 76);21 and completed her dissertation on this text, collating Sanskrit, Tibetan and Chinese versions.22 
Doctoral candidate Bill Mak (麦文彪), from Hong Kong, has completed his doctoral dissertation based on the Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā and the Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāvyākhyābhisamayālaṅkārāloka. We are also striving to create opportunities for students to 
pursue specialization abroad: YE Shaoyong studied in Japan for two years after obtaining 
the Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai Fellowship and a scholarship from the Chinese government; 
FAN Muyou has carried out research for half a year at Munich University upon obtaining 
financial support from the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst (DAAD); Bill Mak 
also has benefitted from short periods of research activity in Germany and Japan.
17 YE Shaoyong, “A Sanskrit Manuscript of Madhyamaka-kārikā and Buddhapālita’s Commentary 
from Tibet,” a paper presented at the International Association of Buddhist Studies conference in London, 
2005; “A Re-examination of the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā on the Basis of the Newly Identified Sanskrit 
Manuscripts from Tibet,” a paper presented at the International Association of Buddhist Studies 
conference in Atlanta, 2008.
18 YE Shaoyong, “The Mūlamadhyamakakārikā and Buddhapālita’s Commentary (1): Romanized 
Texts Based on the Newly Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts from Tibet,” Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University (ARIRIAB) 10 (2006): 117–148; “The 
Mūlamadhyamakakārikā and Buddhapālita’s Commentary (2): Romanized Texts Based on the Newly 
Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts from Tibet,” ARIRIAB 11 (2008): 105–152; “A Re-examination of the 
Mūlamadhyamakakārikā on the Basis of the Newly Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts from Tibet,” 
ARIRIAB 10 (2007): 149–170; “A Paleographical Study of the Manuscripts of the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā and Buddhapālita’s Commentary,” ARIRIAB 11 (2008): 153–176.
19 YE Shaoyong, Mūlamadhyamakakārikā and Buddhapālita’s commentary: A Philological Study on 
the Basis of the Newly Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts, doctoral dissertation, Peking University, 2009. 
Published in 2011 as: Ye Shaoyong, Mūlamadhyamakakārikā and Buddhapālita’s Commentary: A Philological Study on the Basis of Newly Identified Sanskrit Manuscripts, Shanghai, Zhongxi Book Company, 
2011 (Series of Sanskrit Manuscripts & Buddhist Literature 1). 叶少勇，《<中'>与<佛">——
基于新.梵文写本的文献学研究》，上海：中西#局，2011年（梵文叶与佛教文献系列
#①）。
20 LUO Hong, A Study of the Pravrajyāvastu of the Vinayasūtra, doctoral dissertation, Peking University, 2007.
21 FAN Muyou, “Some Remarks on the Relationship between a Sanskrit Manuscript of the Advayasamatāvijaya from Tibetan and its Tibetan Translation,” ARIRIAB 11 (2008): 375–380; “Some Notes on 
Editing the Sanskrit Manuscript of the Advayasamatāvijayamahākalparāja with Reference to the Chinese 
and Tibetan Translation,” Tantric Studies 1 (2008): 155–180. 
22 FAN Muyou, The Trilingual Version of the Manuscripts Advayasamatāvijayamahākalparājā previously preserved as Number 76 in the China Ethnic Library and Relevant Research, doctoral dissertation, Peking University, 2008. Published in 2011 as: FAN Muyou, Advayasamatāvijaya: A Study Based 
upon the Sanskrit Manuscript Found in Tibet, Shanghai, Zhongxi Book Company, 2011 (Series of 
Sanskrit manuscripts & Buddhist literature 2). 范慕尤，《梵文写本<无二平等>的勘与研究》，
上海：中西#局，2011年（梵文叶与佛教文献系列#②）。

--- Page 319 of 425 ---
The Peking University Project
297
Using the digital version of the microfilmed manuscripts and consulting the catalogues 
of Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana, we are revising WANG Sen’s catalogue, striving to transcribe the 
beginning folios and the colophons of the manuscripts and to decipher and transcribe some 
complete texts. For example, complete transcriptions and preliminary studies of the Bodhicittavajragāthāṭīkā (WANG Sen’s Catalogue no. 79) and the Vajrasattvasādhana (WANG 
Sen’s Catalogue no. 94) have been accomplished by DUAN Qing. In the process of revising 
the catalogue, we selected certain manuscripts with recorded date and standard calligraphy 
with the intention of classifying them according to Nepalese hook, Śāradā, Proto-Bengālī, 
Nāgarī and Rañjanā scripts, collating in digital format an alphabet and ligature table, 
adding passages from the manuscripts followed by their transcription and Chinese translation. This material will form a palaeographic tutorial text for students to familiarize 
themselves with different kinds of scripts and prepare them to read manuscripts. At present 
the preparation of this material is in its final stages.
Since the establishment of the Research Institute of Sanskrit Manuscripts and Buddhist 
Literature of Peking University, we have actively engaged in collaboration with Chinese 
and international organizations in order to make ourselves known. In September 2005, WU 
Zhipan (吴志攀), the vice-president of Peking University, professors WANG Bangwei, 
DUAN Qing, and Ph.D. candidate YE Shaoyong went to the TAR to establish mechanisms 
for carrying out joint training of specialized personnel and launching the study of Sanskrit 
manuscripts, arriving at a preliminary understanding of these and related topics. In April 
2006 DUAN Qing and I went to Korea to participate in Saṅgīti 2006: the Third Korean 
Conference on Buddhist Studies. I presented a preliminary study paper on the findings 
from the Sanskrit manuscript of Lingyin Monastery in Zhejiang Province, “The Twelve 
Earths in Lingyin Manuscript.” In November 2006 and February 2007 DUAN Qing and I 
went to the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University, 
Japan, for a cooperative research project. In October 2008, on the occasion of the 4th 
Beijing Seminar on Tibetan Studies and the Seminar on Sanskrit Manuscripts at Peking 
University, we presented to colleagues in the national and international community a comprehensive description of the results of our work in the areas of personnel training and 
research.23
Recently, the TAR government and the Ministry of Education signed a convention 
instructing Peking University to train specialized personnel for the TAR’s Sanskrit Manuscripts Working Group. According to this convention, the first two people were to be 
enrolled in the fall of 2009, but unfortunately, for various reasons, the plan has not yet been 
carried into execution. 
4. A tentative investigation of the scholarly milieu of Tibetan cultural élites in the 11th–
13th centuries through the Indic Buddhist manuscripts preserved in the TAR
Preliminary investigation shows that most of the Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in Tibet 
belong to a period encompassing the 11th to 13th centuries. Their content is varied: besides 
Buddhist texts, there are Hindu tantric texts, works of grammar, Sanskrit classical literature 
(poetry, drama, stories, etc.), a corpus which seems to reflect the interest of monks, 
whether Indian or Tibetan, which was not limited to Buddhism but extended to Indian 
culture in a broader sense.
Most of the manuscripts are in Indian script, but some are transliterations in Tibetan 
script, a few were directly written in Tibetan, some have Sanskrit colophons and Tibetan 
23 Ernst Steinkellner, DUAN Qing, Helmut Krasser eds., Sanskrit Manuscripts in China. Proceedings of 
a panel at the 2008 Beijing Seminar on Tibetan Studies, October 13 to 17, Beijing, China Tibetology 
Publishing House, 2009.

--- Page 320 of 425 ---
298
SAERJI
inscriptions,24 some present interlinear notes in both languages, indicating that these texts 
were read and studied over and over again through the years; some include notes of great 
Indian and Tibetan masters or belonged to their personal collections.25 As material 
evidence, they have fixed a moment of history for us, confirming, as recorded in Tibetan 
historical works, that with Buddhism as a medium, Tibetan culture flourished between the 
11th and 13th centuries. I believe that by examining related records and consulting the 
notes and colophons of the manuscripts, it may be possible to get a glimpse of the 
scholarly milieu of Tibetan cultural élites and thus gain a better understanding of the 
interrelation of Tibetan and Indian culture. These resources offer much to elucidate the 
meeting, exchange and merging of different peoples and different cultures.
It is important to note that, although most of the manuscripts were brought to Tibet at a 
relatively early period, not all were translated into Tibetan immediately; for some the 
translation was carried out in the 15th century, such as translations by Zha lu lo tsā ba Rin 
chen chos skyong bzang po (1441–1527); and in some cases the Tibetan colophons 
indicate that these palm-leaf manuscripts were still consulted at the end of the Ming and 
beginning of the Qing Dynasties. For example, the Tibetan inscription of the Advayasamatāvijayākhyākalpamahārāja states clearly that the missing part of this manuscript was 
completed with a translation from the Chinese by the Mongolian scholar mGon po skyabs 
during the Qing Dynasty. 
According to the catalogue of LUO Zhao, some of the palm-leaf manuscripts had paper 
slips inserted in them, reporting in Tibetan language a variety of details, such as their title, 
script, material, name of the monasteries and so on, and some damaged palm-leaf manuscripts presented traces of restoration. We know that the 13th Dalai Lama sent to the Czar 
of Russia some Sanskrit manuscripts, but at present we do not know if they were randomly 
chosen, or if they were selected with some principle in mind. A question surfaces: was 
there an earlier record and catalogue of these texts? Maybe in the future we will find proof 
of the cataloguing of these books among Tibetan ancient texts.26
5. Looking to the future
Because of the historical situation, in China the editing of Sanskrit Buddhist texts has just 
begun — it is less than ten years since we began training personnel and carrying out 
research in the field of palm-leaf manuscripts. Compared with the Western tradition of 
Indology and Buddhology, which spans more than a hundred years, we still have a wide 
gap to close, both in the number of experts and training of personnel, and in the gathering 
of resources and methodology. This is a reality we have to face. But from another point of 
view, the success achieved in these few years shows our strength and potential in the field 
of Sanskrit manuscript studies and is indicative of a confidence and commitment that 
promise speedy progress.
24 LUO Zhao states that the number of these Sanskrit colophons and Tibetan inscriptions is not small, 
and some Tibetan inscriptions are very long (personal communication, June 2009).
25 Our microfilm of the Vinayasūtra manuscript contains interlinear notes, whose content, according to 
LUO Hong, corresponds to the Vinayasūtravṛttyabhidhānasvavyākhyāna. Moreover, this same manuscript 
has a handwritten note on the first folio: “śīla-akaras bris pa,” which, according to dGe ’dun chos ’phel, 
refers to sTeng pa lo tsā ba Tshul khrims ’byung gnas (1107–1190) (dGe ’dun chos ’phel gyi gsung rtsom, 
Bod ljongs bod yig dpe rnying dpe skrun khang, Lhasa, 1990, vol. 1, 21). Since the Vinayasūtravṛttyabhidhānasvavyākhyāna was translated by sTeng pa lo tsā ba Tshul khrims ’byung gnas, it cannot be excluded that the manuscript of which we have the microfilm was the one used by him when he made that 
translation.
26 LUO Zhao argues that nobody systematically dealt with these manuscripts after the Fifth Dalai Lama 
until Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana’s investigation in the 1930s; most of the paper slips inserted in these 
manuscripts date from the survey in 1959–1964, while a few belong to the Yuan dynasty (personal 
communication, June 2009).

--- Page 321 of 425 ---
The Peking University Project
299
The strengthening of the economy in China has given a vigorous impetus to the cultural 
sector. Buddhist culture has a solid substratum in China, being an integral part of Chinese 
culture, and the growing strength of the country will continue to create opportunities in 
cultural studies, which will have positive repercussions in the field of Sanskrit manuscript 
studies. Since the formal launching by the Chinese government of the Preservation and 
Study of Palm-leaf Manuscripts project in 2006, a large investment has already been made 
in personnel and materials; heartening results are already apparent. For Chinese, the 
Sanskrit manuscripts are a precious legacy left to us by our ancestors, which we have the 
obligation to safeguard and the duty to study. In this research field we have a dual 
advantage: a substantial Buddhist background and the insight conferred by familiarity with 
Tibetan and Chinese languages. The contribution of Chinese scholars in future studies of 
Sanskrit manuscripts will be significant. 
In a global era, to isolate oneself is not desirable. Furthermore, the Sanskrit manuscripts 
preserved in Tibet are also a heritage belonging to all humanity. Therefore the preservation 
and study of the Sanskrit manuscripts presently in Tibet are the responsibility and duty of 
scholars and experts in the field from all over the world. At present we occupy a back-seat 
position in this field, but we hope to open up multilayered and multi-channel exchange and 
collaboration with national and especially international scientific institutions, and through 
joint research projects, short-term exchange visits, student exchanges and similar activities, 
cooperatively allow the study of Sanskrit manuscripts to flourish. 
According to earlier reports, there were already registered in the TAR 426 palm-leaf 
manuscripts, with a total of more than 4,300 folios, preserved mainly in the city of Lhasa, 
in the main monasteries, museums and research centers of lHo kha and gZhis ka rtse.27 As 
mentioned above, the latest report maintains that there are one thousand bundles and sixty 
thousand folios of Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in the TAR. The amount of Indic 
manuscripts brought into Tibet in hundreds of years of cultural exchange between India 
and Tibet must have been very large. Some of them were works of Indian literature,28 some 
27 People’s Daily, July, 25, 2006, page 11.
28 For example, the colophon of the translation of the Amarakoṣaṭīkākāmadhenu records that sNe 
gdong monastery, lHo kha, owned a large collection of Sanskrit manuscripts: Tôh. no. 4300, folio 317a4–
b2: tsandra pa’i ’grel pa slob dpon dharma dā sas mdzad pa dang/ de’i rgyas ’grel paṇḍi ta ratna ma tis 
mdzad pa dang/ de’i yang rgya cher ’grel pa paṇḍi ta sūrṇa(sic! pūrṇa) tsandra jitedra ste rgyal dbang 
zla ba gang bas mdzad pa stong phrag sum cu rtsa drug pa dang/ des mdzad pa’i byings kyi dpung gnyen 
dang/ ’jam dpal gyi vyā karaṇa’i ’grel pa ka lingga’i slob dpon rgyal po dpal gyis mdzad pa stong phrag 
brgyad pa dang/ rgyud nyung gi rnam bshad durgas mdzad pa ste/ kalāpa’i ’grel pa durga singha dang/ 
bram ze pāṇī’i sgra’i bstan bcos dang/ slob dpon mchog sred dang/ vyāḍi dang/ rabhasa dang/ vāma na 
dang/ drang srong rgyas pa sogs kyis ci rigs par mdzad pa’i ’chi med phreng ba dang/ rin chen mdzod 
dang/ sgeg pa gsal ba dang/ skabs gsum gyi lhag ma dang/ sngon byung lo rgyus kyi snyan dngags 
bhārata dang/ shamba’i sngon rabs dang/ rāmayaṇa dang/ margaṇḍeya dang/ dbyangs can gyi mgul 
rgyan dang/ sha bar svami/ ri khrod rje’am/ shivāsvami/ zhi ba’i rjes mdzad pa’i kaspina mngon par 
[317b] ’byung brtsa ’grel dang/ nag mo’i khol gyis mdzad pa’i gzhon nu ’byung ba dang/ daṇḍi’i tshig 
rgyan la sogs pa la brtan nas gzhung chen po’i tshigs su bcad pa’i grangs kyis btsal na stong phrag bcur 
longs pa tsam mdzad pa’i phyed lhag gi rgya dpe sna’u gdong rtse’i gtsug lag khang na bzhugs pa …
In the above colophon it is recorded that besides a large number of grammatical works, the monastery 
also collected works of Indian literature, such as the Mahābhārata, the Rāmāyaṇa, and the Kumārasambhava. It is important to note that some of the manuscripts mentioned in the colophon were translated by 
Zha lu lo tsā ba Rin chen chos skyong bzang po himself, such as the Aṣṭasāhasrikāmañjuśrīśabdavyākaraṇavṛtti. Texts corresponding to manuscripts mentioned in the colophon can be found in Tibet, 
such as Dharmadāsa’s commentary on the Candravyākaraṇa preserved at Nor bu gling kha (Sang De 
Catalogue, 15); while Ratnamati’s commentary and Pūrṇacandrajitendra’s commentary are recorded in 
Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana’s Catalogue (nos. 295, 296) and WANG Sen’s Catalogue (no. 149); according to the 
conjecture of overseas scholars, it is possible that the Kumārasambhava now preserved at Potala Palace 
(Sang De Catalogue, 195) belonged to Zha lu lo tsā ba Rin chen chos skyong bzang po; from this I am 
inclined to think that the manuscripts mentioned in the colophon were still preserved in the sNe gdong 
monastery at least until the 15th century.

--- Page 322 of 425 ---
300
SAERJI
of them important Buddhist texts which have not yet been found.29 Because of historical 
vicissitudes, the whereabouts of many manuscripts are unknown; I believe there are still 
manuscripts in the hands of Tibetan private citizens or in monasteries, possibly in large 
numbers. The author has seen two manuscripts in sDe dge County, dKar mdzes Tibetan 
Autonomous Prefecture, Sichuan, one a palm-leaf manuscript, a commentary on the 
Kāvyādarśa, and the other a tantric liturgy text written on paper. In the future, we hope to 
be able to carry out a complete national record and digitalization of the palm-leaf 
manuscripts preserved in monasteries, public and private collections; the Nepal-German 
Manuscript Preservation (and Cataloguing) Project (NGMP[/C]P) may provide a useful 
model for this enterprise.
There are good reasons to believe that following the systematic cataloguing, conservation and study of the Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in Tibet, and the possible discovery of 
fresh material, a new impetus will be given to the study of Buddhist philology and 
philosophy, allowing us to reach a deeper understanding of Buddhist culture, and through 
this contribute to the development of humanity.
29 For example, in the Blue Annals it is recorded that sTeng pa lo tsā ba Tshul khrims ’byung gnas 
collected many manuscripts in India, among which was the Mahāvibhāṣāśāstra, and that he translated 
two thirds of it into Tibetan. In the notes of his translation of the Blue Annals, Roerich mentioned that 
many manuscripts brought into Tibet by sTeng pa lo tsā ba Tshul khrims ’byung gnas were at the time 
preserved in the Ngor monastery. See George N. Roerich, et al., trs., The Blue Annals, Calcutta, Royal 
Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1949–1953: 1052–1054.

--- Page 323 of 425 ---
Indic Buddhist Manuscripts in Vienna:
A Sino-Austrian Co-operative Project,
with Methodological Remarks on Śāstric “Urtexts”
HELMUT KRASSER (VIENNA)
There are currently three projects being undertaken in Vienna that deal with Indic and Tibetan manuscripts. One is headed by Helmut Tauscher, with its main focus on the Western 
Tibetan manuscript tradition from the 11th to 15th centuries.1 The second, the so-called 
Woolner project, aims at making the Alfred Cooper Woolner2 collection of Sanskrit manuscripts kept in the Punjab University (PU) Library, Lahore, Pakistan, accessible to the 
scholarly world in digital form.3 It is headed by Karin Preisendanz. Both projects are being 
conducted in the Department of South Asian, Tibetan and Buddhist Studies of the University of Vienna, and both focus on cataloguing and digitizing manuscripts.
The third project dedicated to manuscripts, the topic of this paper, is part of a cooperation initiated in 2004 between the China Tibetology Research Center (CTRC), Beijing, and 
the Austrian Academy of Sciences (AAS). The collaboration is based on a “General Agreement on Cooperative Studies on the Copies of Sanskrit Texts and Joint Publication” and its 
main concern is the editing of Sanskrit texts that are then jointly published by the publishing houses of the two institutions. A series called Sanskrit Texts from the Tibetan Autonomous Region (STTAR) has been founded for this purpose. The agreement was the outcome 
of the untiring efforts of Lhagpa Phuntshogs, the Director-General of the CTRC, and Ernst 
Steinkellner, at the time of the agreement’s signing Director of the Institute for the Cultural 
and Intellectual History of Asia (IKGA) of the AAS. I would like to express my sincere 
gratitude to both. The project underway at the IKGA of the AAS involves quite a number 
of research fellows, including Vincent Eltschinger, Hisataka Ishida (since May 2006), 
Pascale Hugon, Horst Lasic, Anne MacDonald,4 Masamichi Sakai (since Oct. 2006), Ernst 
Steinkellner, who since his retirement has been a guest researcher at the institute, Toru 
Tomabechi,5 Vinita TSENG,6 Toshikazu Watanabe (since Oct. 2008) and myself.7 We are 
regularly joined by a number of guest researchers from our cooperating institution in 
Beijing, including LUO Hong, LI Xueshu and Dramdul. Colleagues from other institutions 
have also been cooperating in the project, including Jowita Kramer from the University of 
Munich as well as several Japanese colleagues, including Shoryu Katsura (Ryukoku 
Univ.), Nobuchiyo Odani (Otani Univ.), Kazunobu Matsuda (Bukkyo Univ.) and others.
The developments leading to the agreement have already been outlined by Steinkellner 
in his 2003 Gonda lecture8 and thus, there is no need to repeat them here. Instead I will 
1 See www.univie.ac.at/chwh/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=65&Itemid=75 for a 
short description of the project.
2 Alfred Cooper Woolner (1878–1936) was a British scholar of Sanskrit and Classics. In 1903 he was 
appointed Registrar of Punjab University, Principal of its Oriental College and Honorary Librarian at the 
university’s library.
3 See www.fwf.ac.at/de/abstracts/abstract.asp?L=D&PROJ=P20268 for a short description of the project.
4 Anne MacDonald has been working as a research fellow at the IKGA only since April 2010, but she 
has participated in the project from the beginning.
5 Toru Tomabechi was a research fellow at the IKGA from the beginning of the project in 2004 until 
the end of June 2010. He is now participating in the project as an external collaborator.
6 Vinita Tseng was a research fellow at the IKGA from the beginning of the project in 2004 until the 
end of December 2009.
7 From the beginning, work on the manuscripts has been generously sponsored by the Austrian Science 
Fund (FWF), for which we are very grateful. 
8 Ernst Steinkellner, A tale of leaves. On Sanskrit manuscripts in Tibet, their past and their future.

--- Page 324 of 425 ---
302
HELMUT KRASSER
focus on the present status of the project, the texts being worked on, and the researchers 
involved. Before doing so, it should be mentioned that we are not dealing with the original 
Sanskrit manuscripts — these are kept in the TAR and I have never seen any of them — 
but with photocopies of black and white photos of the manuscripts that were taken in 
Lhasa in 1987. These photocopies are kept in a collection at the CTRC. The following is a 
list, arranged alphabetically according to author, of the texts currently being worked on. 
Additional information pertains to the manuscripts, the editor(s), and the current status of 
the work being done.9 
Author
–
–
–
Abhayākaragupta
Candrakīrti
Candrakīrti
Dharmakīrti
Dharmakīrti
Dharmottara
Guṇaprabha
Jinendrabuddhi
Title and ms details
Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā 
Bodhisattvapiṭaka (complete – 142 
folios)
Twenty short sūtras
Pañcakramatātparyapañjikā (complete 
– 55 folios)
Madhyamakāvatāra (97 folios – 1 folio 
missing)
Vajrasattvasādhana (alias Vajrasattvaniṣpādanasūtra) 
Pramāṇaviniścaya
chapters 1+2
chapter 3
Hetubindu (complete – 25 folios)
Pramāṇaviniścayaṭīkā (chapter 1 is not 
available)
chapter 2 (incomplete – 71 folios) 
chapter 3 (incomplete – 120 folios out 
of 160)
a critical edition of chapter 3 on the 
hetucakra section of Pramāṇaviniścaya 3 (vv. 33–66) and on the hetvābhāsa 
section (vv. 67–83)
Vinayasūtra (complete – 120 folios [+ 
66 folios from the collection of 
Sāṅkṛtyāyana])
Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā (complete – 
285 folios)
chapter 1
Editors
Tomabechi
Jens Braarvig,
Ulrich Pagel
TSENG
Tomabechi
Krasser, Lasic, LI, 
MacDonald, 
Tomabechi
LUO, Tomabechi
Steinkellner
Hugon, Tomabechi
Krasser
Ishida, Krasser, 
Sakai 
various scholars, coordinated by Hugon, 
are preparing a 
diplomatic edition
Watanabe
LUO Hong
Krasser, Lasic, 
Steinkellner
Status
published 2010a
in progress
published 2010b
in progress
in progress
published 2009c
published 2007d
published 2010e
in progress
in progress
in progress
in progress
in progress
published 2005f
2003 Gonda Lecture. Amsterdam 2004 (see www.oeaw.ac.at/ias/Mat/steinkellner_leaves.pdf for a downloadable version). See also the general remarks in Steinkellner’s introduction to the critical edition of 
chapters one and two of the Pramāṇaviniścaya referred to in note d to the following table.
9 In addition to the texts mentioned in the notes to the following table, one text has been published in 
the STTAR series that is not a product of our cooperation, namely volume 3 (in three parts): JIANG 
Zhongxin, Palm-leaf manuscript of the Sanskrit Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtram. Collected in the Norbulingga of Tibet. Written in A.D. 1067. A romanized text. Beijing: CTPH/Institute of Asia-Pacific Studies/
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences 2006.

--- Page 325 of 425 ---
Indic Buddhist Manuscripts in Vienna
303
(a) Toru Tomabechi, Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā. Sanskrit and Tibetan texts. (STTAR 5) Beijing/
Vienna: CTPH/AASP 2009.
(b) Bhikṣuṇī Vinītā (Vinita TSENG, 自運), A unique collection of twenty Sūtras in a Sanskrit manuscript from 
the Potala. Vol. I, 1+2. (STTAR 7) Beijing/Vienna: CTPH/AASP 2010.
(c) LUO Hong and Toru Tomabechi, Candrakīrti’s Vajrasattvaniṣpādanasūtra (Vajrasattvasādhana). Sanskrit 
and Tibetan texts. (STTAR 6) Beijing/Vienna: CTPH/AASP 2009.
(d) Ernst Steinkellner, Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇaviniścaya, chapters 1 and 2. (STTAR 2) Beijing/Vienna: 
CTPH/AASP 2007.
(e) Pascale Hugon and Toru Tomabechi, Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇaviniścaya, chapter 3. With a preface by 
Tom J. F. Tillemans. (STTAR 8) Beijing/Vienna: CTPH/AASP 2010.
Nāgārjuna
Samayavajra
Śaṅkaranandana
Śaṅkaranandana
Śaṅkaranandana
Śāntarakṣita
Sthiramati 
Sthiramati
Vasubandhu
chapter 2
chapter 3
chapter 4
chapter 5
chapter 6
Dharmadhātustava (incomplete – the 
last of 5 folios is missing)
Pañcakramapañjikā (incomplete – 29 
folios)
13 treatises in versesg (complete – 31 
folios [+ mss from the collections of 
Sāṅkṛtyāyana and Tucci]) 
Anyāpohasiddhikārikā (incomplete – 
12 folios – 41 verses and commentary 
on vv. 22–41 [+ mss from the collections of Sāṅkṛtyāyana and Tucci])
Dharmālaṅkāra (3 chapters; chapter 1, 
*Kṣaṇabhaṅgasiddhi, is not available)
chapter 2, Nairātmyasiddhi (incomplete – 16 folios; 26 verses with commentary [+ mss from the collections of 
Sāṅkṛtyāyana and Tucci for the 
verses])
chapter 3, Kṣaṇikatvabādhābhāvasiddhi (complete – 10 folios; 18 verses 
with commentary [+ mss from the collections of Sāṅkṛtyāyana and Tucci for 
the verses])
Tattvasiddhi (complete – 19 folios [+ 5 
Nepalese mss])
Abhidharmakośavyākhyā Tattvārthā 
(incomplete – 137 folios)
Pañcaskandhakavibhāṣā (complete – 
73 folios)
Pañcaskandhaka
Krasser, Lasic, 
Steinkellner
Diwakar Acharya, 
Katsura, Yasuhiro 
Okazaki, Taisei Shida, Kiyokuni Shiga, 
Watanabe
Acharya, Katsura, 
Okazaki, Shida, Shiga,Watanabe
Krasser, Lasic
Acharya, Katsura, 
Okazaki, Shida, Shiga,Watanabe
LIU Zhen
Tomabechi
Eltschinger
Eltschinger
Eltschinger, Isabelle 
Ratié
Sakai
Tomabechi
Odani, Matsuda
Kramer
LI, Steinkellner
in progress
in progress
not yet begun
in progress
not yet begun
in progress
in progress
in progress
in progress
in progress
in progress
in progress
in progress
in progress
published 2008h

--- Page 326 of 425 ---
304
HELMUT KRASSER
(f) Ernst Steinkellner, Helmut Krasser, Horst Lasic, Jinendrabuddhi’s Viśālāmalavatī Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā, chapter 1. Part I: Critical edition; Part II: Diplomatic edition with a manuscript description by 
Anne MacDonald. (STTAR 1/I+II) Beijing/Vienna: CTPH/AASP 2005. 
KWIC-indices to the editions are being published in cooperation with Prof. Jun Takashima, Institute for 
the Study of Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, Tokyo University of Foreign Studies. A KWICindex for the first chapter of Jinendrabuddhi’s Ṭīkā and for Dharmakīrti’s works can be downloaded at 
http://www.aa.tufs.ac.jp/~tjun/data/kwic/.
(g) On Śaṅkaranandana and the available Sanskrit manuscripts, see Vincent Eltschinger, Śaṅkaranandana’s 
Sarvajñasiddhi – A preliminary report. In: Francesco Sferra (ed.), Sanskrit texts from Giuseppe Tucci’s 
collection. Part I. Roma 2008: 115–155, and id., Les oeuvres de Śaṅkaranandana: Nouvelles ressources 
manuscrites, chronologie relative et identité confessionnelle. Annali dell’Istituto Universitario Orientale 
di Napoli 66/1–4 (2006 [published 2010]): 83–122.
(h) Xuezhu LI and Ernst Steinkellner, Vasubandhu’s Pañcaskandhaka. Critical edition with a contribution by 
Toru Tomabechi. (STTAR 4) Beijing/Vienna: CTPH/AASP 2008.
As one can see under the rubric “editors,” some texts are being edited by a single person 
and some by a team. Although teamwork is certainly preferable, in practice it is not always 
possible. And unfortunately, a publication that has been worked on jointly with colleagues 
does not count for very much when applying for jobs. Thus, we work as teams on longer 
texts, and the shorter texts are edited by individuals. It also goes without saying that one 
needs very specialized expertise in the respective field to edit such a text satisfactorily. 
Thus, tantric texts are best worked on by Tantra specialists, as, for example, Tomabechi or 
Harunaga Isaacson (Hamburg). For this reason and also because of our institute’s limited 
capacities, we have enlisted the cooperation of the Abhidharma specialists Odani and 
Matsuda. Moreover, the sheer mass of Sanskrit texts that seem to have survived, not only 
in the Tibetan Autonomous Region (TAR), but also elsewhere such as in Nepal, is staggering. Even cataloguing, describing and digitizing these manuscripts is extremely timeconsuming, to say nothing of editing them. However, to be realistic, access to these texts 
from the TAR is still limited and most are still unavailable. The only texts from the TAR or 
adjacent areas that are currently available to the scholarly world are those listed above, the 
texts being edited at the University of Hamburg, also within the framework of a cooperation with the CTRC, and the texts that have been edited and published, some also as 
facsimiles, by the Taishō University Study Group. To be added to this list are the photos of 
Sanskrit manuscripts kept in the Research Institute of Sanskrit Manuscripts and Buddhist 
Literature, established at Peking University by DUAN Qing, of which a few can be seen online on the PKU homepage (http://sfl.pku.edu.cn/sanskrit).10
In the hopes of furthering a possible change in this situation and in order to consider the 
necessary steps such a change would entail, this matter was discussed at the panel “Sanskrit Manuscripts in China — State and Projects” held at the 2008 Beijing Seminar on 
Tibetan Studies convened at the CTRC. The panel was organized by DUAN Qing and Steinkellner, and a number of young researchers as well as expert scholars from both the PRC 
and abroad took part. The results of these discussions have been summarized by Steinkellner in a memorandum published in the panel proceedings.11 The topics addressed in this 
memorandum are 1) Sanskrit manuscripts as cultural relics, 2) copies of these in various 
forms, 3) regulation and supervision of access,12 4) costs and sponsorships, 5) training and 
10 Steinkellner (2004: 24, note 8) mentions two more manuscripts that have become available: “Individual Chinese scholars must also be mentioned, such as Prof. ZHANG Baosheng, a student of Prof. JI 
Xianlin, who published the *Sādhanaśataka facsimile in 1994 in Vienna, and the late Prof. JIANG 
Zhongxin (CHIANG Chung-hsin), who evidently was not only allowed to publish certain manuscripts in 
facsimile in the early 1990s, but even to bring specimens to the West, such as the Madhyamakahṛdaya 
manuscript, then kept in Beijing, to Copenhagen during his stay there in 1987 on the invitation of Dr. 
Christian Lindtner.”
11 Ernst Steinkellner, Strategies for modes of management and scholarly treatment of the Sanskrit 
manuscripts in the TAR. In: Steinkellner et al. 2009: 279–292.
12 On the importance of access to the manuscripts, even in case of already published texts, see the

--- Page 327 of 425 ---
Indic Buddhist Manuscripts in Vienna
305
international cooperation, and 6) further measures needed within the TAR and other areas 
of the PRC. The main point for us as scholars is, of course, that the contents of these 
manuscripts, the texts, become accessible via the internet in digitized form or as editions in 
facsimile. Also, it is important that the manuscripts are kept, with their respective owners, 
in a protected environment to ensure that they survive for future generations. Of the points 
listed above, numbers 5 and 6 are of particular importance, as the training of young 
scholars is in all of our interests. 
Currently a few scholars are trained by working together on text editions and discussing 
all the problems involved. For example, in the last years LUO Hong has come to Vienna 
yearly for three or four months, during which time he has worked on the Vajrasattvasādhana, a tantric text, with Steinkellner and Tomabechi. During LI Xueshu’s last stays in 
Vienna, also yearly stays of three or four months, the group mentioned above (p. 301) 
worked with him on the Madhyamakāvatāra. Previously, he had worked with Steinkellner 
on an edition of Vasubandhu’s Pañcaskandhaka. But by no means does the training of only 
two scholars suffice for all the texts available in the collection at the CTRC, not to mention 
a time when more manuscripts in the TAR become available. Even if the number of 
Sanskrit scholars at Peking University increases, which at present is the only place in the 
PRC where such training is available, it will be impossible for this enormous task to be 
carried out by them alone. The only means we see for this task would be first, the freedom 
for specialists outside of the PRC to work on these texts, and secondly, a considerable 
increase in the number of Sanskrit scholars working within the TAR and other areas of the 
PRC. Possibilities for doing this would be the establishment of a Sanskrit Studies program 
at Tibet University and an institute in Lhasa specializing in research on Sanskrit manuscripts, by increasing the number of professors, students and postgraduate researchers at 
Peking University, and by establishing Sanskrit institutes at other universities in the PRC. 
Such moves will not be possible without some sort of academic exchange program that 
allows students, post-graduate scholars and teachers to travel in both directions, from 
China abroad, but also from foreign countries to China, with the purpose of creating the 
team of necessary experts plentiful enough for the giant task at hand.
* * *
After this short description of the project, I would like to add a few preliminary remarks on 
the character of the manuscripts we are dealing with, confining myself to śāstric texts of 
the Buddhist religio-philosophical schools. With regard to certain Mahāyāna sūtras, 
Seyfort Ruegg (2004: 21–22) has stated that they 
have been transmitted in two (or more) distinct recensions which cannot, it 
appears, be regarded as deriving from mere (scribal or aural) variants or 
revisions of either a single unified oral composition (perhaps in Middle IndoAryan) or from a single written text (be it in Middle Indo-Aryan or in 
[Buddhist] Sanskrit). … And to postulate some Urtext from which distinct 
recensions derive, in the manner of a stemma codicum, would here appear to 
constitute a misapplication of otherwise sound philological method.13 
The problem addressed here by Seyfort Ruegg is not restricted to sūtras alone, but also 
pertains to certain śāstric texts. Thus, in the following I would like to briefly discuss the 
notion of an Urtext and the closely related “manner of a stemma codicum,” by which 
Seyfort Ruegg is referring to what is known as the “stemmatic method” or “Lachmannian 
method.”14
review by Isaacson referred to in note 14.
13 For the complicated situation of the transmission of sūtras, see the chapter “On versions and recensions of Mahāyāna Sūtras” (pp. 20–24) in Seyfort Ruegg 2004 and the literature referred to there.
14 On this method, see the brief but insightful remarks in Harunaga Isaacson’s review of Steinkellner’s

--- Page 328 of 425 ---
306
HELMUT KRASSER
At present, the manuscripts of texts belonging to the śāstric traditions we have studied 
have usually been considered copies of an autograph. At least it is not stated otherwise. 
Accordingly, Katre, in his classic Introduction to Indian textual criticism, states that this 
type of text might be “either autographs, or immediate copies of autographs, or copies of 
copies, and this in any degree,” and, qualifying this statement: “The chief province of 
Indian textual criticism deals in the main with copies of copies.”15 However, while it may 
be true that some copies have their source in an autograph, there is, to my knowledge, no 
actual evidence for this. Most of the manuscripts we are dealing with date, at the earliest, 
to around 1000 CE, and most of them are later (12th–13th c.). These manuscripts do not 
provide any information about whether they are copies of autographs or of another kind of 
Urtext. No autograph of an Indian Buddhist master has come down to us. Thus, the only 
source for this kind of information remains the text itself, if in fact it contains any clues at 
all for such a decision. 
Some of the texts I have dealt with give the impression that they have been edited. As an 
example of this kind, I might mention Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇavārttikasvavṛtti (PVSV).16 
Other texts suggest, at least in some cases, that we are dealing with notes taken by students 
based on oral explanations given by teachers during classes. Accordingly, such texts are 
prone to doctrinal, theoretical, syntactical and grammatical inconsistencies that cannot be 
explained as mistakes that crept in during the text’s transmission. Nothing is known about 
the genesis of this kind of text. Some may have been edited (but by whom?); others do not 
give this impression. Criteria that might help to establish whether a text was written by a 
student still have to be determined. One indication, as can be seen in Bhāviveka’s Madhyamakahṛdayakārikāvṛtti, also known as Tarkajvālā (TJ),17 seems to be the frequent and 
seemingly unnecessary identification of the individual elements of inferences as well as 
reference to the teacher as śāstrakāra/śāstrakṛt or ācārya.18 A passage like the one from the 
TJ on MHK 8.68 (see note 18) is certainly not addressed to a learned scholarly community, 
Buddhist or otherwise; it is unlikely that Bhāviveka would have impressed other scholars 
critical edition of chapters one and two of Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇaviniścaya (see above, note d to the 
table), “Of critical editions and manuscript reproductions: Remarks apropos of a critical edition of 
Pramāṇaviniścaya chapters 1 and 2,” manuscript cultures 2 (2009) [14–21]: 14 with note 1.
15 S. M. Katre, Introduction to Indian textual criticism. Poona 21954 [11941]: 19–20.
16 This judgment is only a guess and is not based on a thorough examination that includes all relevant 
materials, such as the available manuscripts, parallel material in other works by Dharmakīrti, the 
commentaries, quotations in other texts, as well as the Tibetan translations.
17 For convenience’s sake I follow the habit of previous scholars and refer to the commentary on the 
MHK, the Madhyamakahṛdayakārikāvṛtti, with the name Tarkajvālā as found in the colophon of the 
Tibetan translation (dbu ma’i sñiṅ po’i tshig le’ur byas pa’i ’grel pa rtog ge ’bar ba TJ 329b2). As the 
colophon of the Sanskrit manuscript of the MHK shows, the name Tarkajvālā was also used for the 
verses alone: tarkajvālā nāma sūtraṃ samāptam (Lindtner 2001: 110).
18 gźan yaṅ dṅos po rtag pa thams cad la khyab pa’i bdag dṅos po thams cad kyi rten du gyur pa nam 
mkha’ daṅ ’dra ba yin no źes smras pa de la / de las gźan du rtog ge’i gnod pa ñe bar dgod pa’i sgo nas 
slob dpon gyis smras pa / 
rgyu las ñe bar ma byuṅ ba // nam mkha’ dṅos por mi ’dod do // nāpi hetvanupādānād ākāśaṃ 
bhāva iṣyate /
de ni gcig kyaṅ ma yin te / mo gśam gyi ni bu bźin no // vandhyātanayavan nāpi tad ekam ata 
eva hi // MHK 8.68
nam mkha’ źes bya ba ni chos can no // de ni dṅos po ma yin te źes bya ba ni de’i chos so // rgyu las 
ñe bar ma byuṅ ba’i phyir źes bya ba ni gtan tshigs so // (TJ 266a1–3)
Moreover, as to the statement [of the opponent] that the Self (ātman) is a permanent (nitya) entity 
(bhāva) and is all-pervasive (sarvatraga) and is the support (ādhāra) of all entities (bhāva) like space — 
in order to adduce a disproof different from that, the ācārya [i.e. Bhāviveka] says the following:
Again, space cannot be regarded as an entity, since it does not stand in relation to a cause. It is, 
therefore, not one [but non-existent], just as [the unreal] son of a barren woman [is not one]. 
The subject (dharmin) is “space,” the property [which is to be proved] ([sādhya]dharma) of the [subject in the thesis] is “it is not an entity.” The logical reason (hetu) is “because it has not originated 
(anupapannāt : anupādānād) from a cause (hetu).” (Cf. Qvarnström 1989: 122f.; the text of TJ is edited 
in note 141, the Tibetan text of the kārikā on p. 146.)

--- Page 329 of 425 ---
Indic Buddhist Manuscripts in Vienna
307
by demonstrating in the Vṛtti his ability to identify the logical subject or the reason in his 
MHK verse. It is also hard to imagine that Bhāviveka prepared to teach a class on the 
MHK by composing such explanatory sentences in his room and subsequently distributing 
them to his students. It is more likely that the text represents students’ notes. This could 
also account for the fact that, with regard to MHK 6.28, the Bo doṅ Paṇ chen “states 
outright that the intent of the verse is explained differently in the TJ and that he did not see 
its comment to be a good one (legs pa ma mthong)” (van der Kuijp 2006: 186). Gokhale’s 
observation that the TJ “evinces a lack of understanding for long compounds at a few 
places” (1985: 77) is better understood if we assume that the TJ was recorded by a student 
and not by a later erudite individual of the same or a similar name, e.g. Bhavya, as some 
scholars have assumed.19
A criterion for distinguishing later additions may be phrases such as ity alaṃ prasaṅgena, which indicate the end of a digression or appendix (prasaṅga), given that some of 
these digressions contain material which only became available after the original composition of the text. Such is the case in Bhāviveka’s Prajñāpradīpa (PP).
As van der Kuijp has signaled, there are problems not only with Bhāviveka’s Tarkajvālā 
(TJ) but also with his PP, which is not available in Sanskrit but for which “we have two 
different translations: a Chinese version that was prepared by Prabhākaramitra in 630–2 
and a circa 800–20 Tibetan version by the ʻIndian Mahāyāna Mādhyamika’ Jñānagarbha 
and Cog / Lcog ro Klu’i rgyal mtshan … Comparing the two versions, we notice that they 
presuppose at times quite different readings of the original Sanskrit manuscripts on which 
they were based” (van der Kuijp 2006: 171).20 The problem is connected with passages or 
summaries from the TJ and elsewhere that are found in the PP. One of these, dealing with 
the refutation of Yogācāra tenets, has been edited by Lindtner (1984) and translated by 
Eckel (1985); as shown by van der Kuijp (p. 195, note 78), the excursus ends earlier than is 
found in the edition and translation of Lindtner and Eckel, namely, with the expression źar 
la bśad pas chog ste, or more precisely, with the sentence following the particle ste. 
Another excursus, which is the topic of the paper by van der Kuijp and which deals with 
the Mīmāṃsā arguments against the omniscience of the Buddha, begins in PP 214a3 with 
mu stegs can ṅan pa mig na bas ñi ma’i dkyil ’khor gyi ’od zer mi bzod pa bźin du / and 
ends again with the formulation źar la bśad pas chog go // (PP 216a7).21 The discrepancies 
between the Chinese and Tibetan versions of the PP, as reported by van der Kuijp (“the 
Chinese translation quotes a verse from an unidentified sutra [ru jing jie shuo], the PP’s 
Tibetan counterpart gives this passage in prose and does not at all indicate that it is a 
quotation, let alone from a sutra!” [2006: 194]),22 and the fact that the reference to the TJ, 
“dBu ma’i sñiṅ po’i de kho na ñid la ’jug pa’i skabs,” which is found in the Tibetan 
translation of the “Yogācāra appendix” but missing in its Chinese counterpart (p. 195), are 
best explained if we assume that the digressions were not written by Bhāviveka himself, 
19 For more evidence that the TJ was written by students, see Krasser 2011. 
20 For differences between the Chinese and Tibetan translations, see van der Kuijp 2006: 194f.
21 The next sentence probably also belongs to this digression, as it is still dealing with omniscience 
(de’i phyir de ltar thams cad mkhyen pa ni chos thams cad ṅo bo ñid med pa ñid phyin ci ma log par ston 
pa bka’ lha daṅ mi’i bla ma rnams kyis bkur ba de / de ñid bcom ldan ’das stobs bcu mṅa’ ba yin no // 
gtam ha caṅ ’phros pas chog gi / skabs ñid la ’jug par bya’o // PP 216a7–b1).
22 As this digression is too long to have been written in the margin of the PP manuscript, we may 
assume that it was written on a separate folio (or folios), which was then added to the PP manuscript. 
This might explain the fact that in the Tibetan translation this digression is added in the comments on 
Mūlamadhyamakakārikā (MMK) 22.10, while in the Chinese version it appears in the explanation of 
MMK 22.8; apparently the additional leaf was placed one leaf earlier in the PP bundle that made its way 
to China. As in the commentary on MMK 22.10 the ten powers of the Buddha to know everything (tha 
sñad daṅ rjes su mthun par bcom ldan ’das thams cad mkhyen pa stobs bcu daṅ PP 213b7) are discussed 
and as these are the topic of this digression, it seems to be placed more satisfactorily in the Tibetan 
translation.

--- Page 330 of 425 ---
308
HELMUT KRASSER
but by students on the basis of the teacher’s oral instructions while they were being trained 
to debate by relying on the PP.23
As has been shown in the paper referred to above in note 19, the aforementioned 
appendices or digressions clearly do not belong to the written text of the PP, but reflect 
additional materials that were used to train young Buddhist monks to debate with Mīmāṃsakas and others. They provide first-hand information on a particular aspect of monastic 
life and thus allow a fascinating glimpse into the educational system in Buddhist monasteries in India before 630 CE. Until now, we have been aware of debates between great 
Buddhist masters or between Buddhist and orthodox teachers only from reports of Chinese 
pilgrims or Tibetan historical sources.24 Thus, it is vital that these digressions be studied.25 
Such prasaṅgas will be the topic of a research project to be conducted at our institute by 
Ritsu Akahane, if the funds are granted. 
Another example that is better explained in terms of “students’ notes” than “copy of a 
copy of an autograph” is Dignāga’s (ca. 480–540) Pramāṇasamuccayavṛtti (PSV), available in two quite different Tibetan translations that are normally considered “poor” translations with transmission mistakes. While the corruptions that occurred during the transmission of these two Tibetan texts (la/las, kyi/kyis, etc.) can be easily explained, the 
differences in the translations cannot. Many of the problems, however, are solved and new 
perspectives opened if one considers the possibility that the two translations may have 
been made from two different versions of class notes, class notes that were not unproblematic.26
23 A text in which ācārya also occurs and which is replete with prasaṅgas is Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakośabhāṣya (yata ācāryo ’bhidharmakośaṃ vaktum ādriyata ity āha AKBh on AK 1.3; ucyata ity 
ācāryavacanaṃ darśayati AKBh 8,8–9; and, e.g., samāpta ānuṣaṅgikaprasaṅgaḥ AKBh 36,19–20 = źar 
la ʼoṅs paʼi skabs rdzogs so // D no. 4090, 52b2; for more passages see AKBh-Index s.v. źar la ʼoṅs pa). 
The first occurrence of ācārya is glossed by Yaśomitra as śāstrakāra (AKVy 10,23). This text certainly 
deserves a study which includes the Tibetan and Chinese translations. 
In the Pratītyasamutpādahṛdayavyākhyāna, a commentary on the Pratītyasamutpādahṛdayakārikā 
(both texts are attributed to Nāgārjuna), there is also a reference to the mūla as slob dpon, which has led 
Lindtner to doubt Nāgārjunaʼs authorship of the Vyākhyāna; cf. Seyfort Ruegg 1990: 70 note 21. Another 
example where the “author” in the commentary refers to “himself” as ācārya is, as mentioned in Seyfort 
Ruegg (1990: 64 and note 20), found in Haribhadrasūri’s Anekāntajayapatāka. See also the discussion on 
the authorship of the Vākyapadīyavṛtti (on Vākyapadīya 1) concerning the occurrence of ihabhavat/
tatrabhavat in the Vṛtti (Houben 1999 and 1999a). On Abhinavagupta’s view concerning the author of 
Vākyapadīyavṛtti 1, see Ratié forthcoming, note 61: “(although modern scholars have been wondering 
whether the VPV is Bhartṛhari’s, Abhinavagupta has no doubt concerning its authorship, as noticed in 
Iyer 1969, p. 22: thus in ĪPVV, vol. II, p. 226, he quotes VPV I, pp. 214–215, and introduces it with the 
words tad āha tatrabhavān bhartṛhariḥ, ‘this is what the master Bhartṛhari has said [in...]’): tasmāt 
pratyakṣam ārṣaṃ ca jñānaṃ saty api virodhe bādhakam anumānasya. ‘For this reason, perception and 
the knowledge of Seers invalidate inference even when there is a contradiction [between them].’” 
24 The main narratives of these debates have been collected and evaluated in a very informative and 
easily readable paper by José Cabezón (2008), who draws on Chinese and Tibetan historical and 
biographical writings about famous Indian debates. In the same volume, Georges Dreyfus (2008) deals 
with debates in Tibetan monasteries, where the situation was quite different, as the monks did not have to 
fight with real Mīmāṃsakas. For an extensive treatment of debates in Tibetan monasteries, see Dreyfus 
2003. 
25 There are more such digressions in the PP, and the end might be indicated with a formulation similar 
to the one we have already seen (źar la bśad pas chog ste/go); the beginnings are not yet clear. All of 
them have been commented upon by Avalokitavrata in his PPṬ: PP 92a6 (PPṬ Śa 74a4), PP 108a1 (PPṬ 
Śa 136a4), PP 122b1 (PPṬ Śa 186a3), PP 144a7 (PPṬ Śa 266a7), PP 148b6 (PPṬ Śa 283b3–4), PP 
184b4–5 (PPṬ Za 76a2–3), PP 224a1 (PPṬ Za 227a7–b2), PP 258b5 (PPṬ Za 336b2).
26 It should be added that the PSV exemplar used by Jinendrabuddhi to compose his commentary 
Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā contains material from the PSV that has no equivalent in either of the two 
translations (which was determined both during work on the second chapter of Jinendrabuddhi’s PSṬ, 
and independently by Katsura and his team with regard to the third chapter; see Katsura 2009: 160). 
Thus, we know there were at least three different PSV manuscripts. It goes without saying that parts of 
the reconstructions of Dignāga’s PSV based on this material and fragments available elsewhere constitute 
an artificial text that never existed in this form. Reconstructing the work is nevertheless a necessary step

--- Page 331 of 425 ---
Indic Buddhist Manuscripts in Vienna
309
If we were in a better position and had several Sanskrit manuscripts of the PVSV, the TJ, 
the PP and the PSV, for example, then, assuming that the scenarios outlined above are true, 
it would become quite clear that in each case “Urtext” means something quite different. In 
case of the PVSV, it might indeed refer to the text that Dharmakīrti himself wrote or 
edited. In case of the TJ, however, it might refer to the notes taken by one or even more 
students. In the case of more than one student, we would be dealing with different texts 
that with care may be used to correct each other, but one cannot make a single text from 
the notes of student A and student B. Moreover, the Urtext of the MHK verses embedded 
in the TJ might go back to the pen of Bhāviveka. Similarly, the prasaṅgas included in the 
Tibetan translation of the PP and those in the Chinese translation constitute two different 
texts, while the PP itself may originally have been written by Bhāviveka himself. But this 
still needs to be examined. In the case of the PSV, the two Tibetan translations reflect two 
different texts, presumably notes taken by two students A and B. For his commentary, 
however, Jinendrabuddhi seems to have used the notes of yet another student, student C. 
While for practical reasons we reconstruct only one Sanskrit text from these different 
materials, it goes without saying that the result of such efforts does not reflect the Urtext, 
the spoken version of the PSV, but a mixture of the notes of three different students, 
together with Jinendrabuddhi’s explanation of the third student’s notes. Even if we had 
Sanskrit manuscripts, a stemma in this case could at best only show a dependence on the 
notes of A, B and C, but this never would lead to an Urtext of the PSV as it was taught by 
Dignāga.
The translations of a text are also problematic in terms of stemma, albeit for other 
reasons. It is clear that when dealing with texts of the Buddhist tradition, the Tibetan and 
Chinese translations need to be considered whenever they are available. Many of the early 
Tibetan translations were later revised (źus dag), although information concerning the 
manuscripts that were consulted is rarely found in the colophons. An exception is the 
colophon of the Tibetan translation of Candrakīrti’s Madhyamakāvatāra, which informs us 
that the Indian paṇḍita Tilakakalaśa and the Tibetan Lotsāba Bande Pa tshab ñi ma grags 
translated a manuscript that looked Kashmiri (kha che ba’i dpe daṅ mthun pa ltar) in the 
Kashmir city of Anupamapura (groṅ khyer dpe med), possibly present-day Śrīnagar. It 
continues by stating that this translation was later improved (legs par bcos) by the Indian 
paṇḍita Kanakavarman and Pa tshab in Lhasa (ra sa) based on a manuscript from eastern 
Ñi ’og. This Tibetan translation thus reflects at least two Sanskrit manuscripts. In the case 
of the translation of Dharmottara’s Nyāyabinduṭīkā (NBṬ), the colophon supplies no 
information about the Sanskrit manuscripts that were used, stating only that the translation 
was prepared by Jñānagarbha and Dharmāloka (in about 800) and later was revised by 
Sumatikīrti and Blo ldan śes rab (1059–1109). On the basis of a fragment of an extracanonical Tibetan translation of the NBṬ found in Tabo Monastery, Lasic (2007) has been 
able to show that the later translator team relied on a manuscript that was different from 
that of the earlier team. Although evidence is lacking in the colophons, it seems reasonable 
to assume that circumspect translator teams tried to secure more than one manuscript before starting their work, for they, like present-day scholars, were aware of problems in 
transmission lines. In view of this, some of the Tibetan translations may represent a 
Sanskrit text that did not exist, at least not in the form implied by the translations. Given 
towards a proper understanding of Dignāga. The first chapter has been reconstructed by Steinkellner 
(available at http://ikga.oeaw.ac.at/Mat/dignaga_PS_1.pdf); chapter 2 is under preparation by Horst 
Lasic; chapter 3 is under preparation by Katsura, who has presented first results (PS 3.1–31) in Katsura 
2009: 157–159, 165; chapter 5 has been reconstructed in Ole Holten Pind, Dignāgaʼs philosophy of 
language. Dignāga on anyāpoha. Pramāṇasamuccaya V — texts, translation and annotation. PhD 
dissertation, University of Vienna 2009.

--- Page 332 of 425 ---
310
HELMUT KRASSER
these textual circumstances, it is difficult to place such translations properly into a stemma 
or use them to draw any concrete conclusions. 
To conclude, I would like to stress the importance when editing a text of working out 
whether it was written by the presumed author himself or by a student. In the latter case, it 
is difficult to determine whether redundant statements belong to the text, or whether they 
should be considered marginal notes that were erroneously incorporated into the text 
during the copying process. Two passages from the Hetubindu, which I am in the process 
of editing, may suffice to demonstrate this problem: 
tadaṃśavyāptyā dṛṣṭāntadharmiṇi sattvasiddher dharmidharmavacanāt sādhyadharmiparigrahaḥ. siddhe (’pi? Tib. kyaṅ)27 punarvacanaṃ niyamārtham āśaṅkyeta, sajātīya eva sattvam iti siddhe ’pi tadabhave vyatireke sādhyābhāve 
’sattvavacanavat. dharmidharmavacanaṃ siddhe ’pi dṛṣṭāntadharmiṇi bhāve 
tadaṃśavyāptivacanāt tatraiva bhāvaniyamārtham āśaṅkyeta. tatsāmarthyād ...28
... (Even?) if [the occurrence in the property bearer of the example] is established, it might be suspected that the mention [of the property bearer] again has 
the purpose of restricting [the logical reason to the example alone].29 [This is 
just the same] as in the case when, although the absence (vyatireka) [of the 
logical reason] in the absence of that [sādhya] has already been established on 
account [of the mention of] (iti) “presence in similar instances alone,” the 
mention of the [logical reason’s] absence (asattva) in the absence of the sādhya 
[by Dignāga has the purpose of a restriction]. Even if the occurrence in the 
property bearer of the example is established on account of tadaṃśavyāpti being 
mentioned, it might be suspected that the mention of the property of the property bearer has the purpose of a restriction that [the logical reason] occurs only 
there [in the example]. ...
As is quite clear, the sentence dharmidharmavacanaṃ siddhe ’pi ... āśaṅkyeta after the 
example (sajātīya eva ... ’sattvavacanavat) is merely a repetition of the sentence siddhe ... 
āśaṅkyeta before the example, supplying text that in the first sentence must be assumed 
from the context. The Tibetan construes the example with the repetition. If the original 
27 api is supported by the Tibetan translation (kyaṅ) and Vinītadeva’s commentary (grub pa’i mtha’ 
smra bas grub kyaṅ ṅes par bya ba’i phyir yaṅ smos su dogs par ’gyur te źes bya ba la sogs pa smos te | 
grub kyaṅ ṅes par bya ba’i phyir yaṅ smos pa yaṅ HBṬV D 104a2–3), but not by the parallel passage in 
the PVSV (see note 28) nor by Arcaṭa’s commentary (see note 29).
28 This text has been emended on the basis of the material presented by Steinkellner in his reconstruction of the Hetubindu, although I am not including all of the relevant arguments here. The manuscript of 
the Hetubindu (HBms 1b4–2a1) reads: tadaṃ1b5śavyāptyā | dṛṣṭāntadharmmiṇi satvesiddher ddharmidharma◯vacanāt sādhyadharmmiparigrahaḥ | siddhe punarvacanaṃ niyamārtham āśaṅkyeta | sajātīya 
eva sa¦1b6‥ ‥ ‥ ‥ ‥ ‥ ‥ ‥ ‥ ‥ ‥ ‥ ‥ ‥[sādhyābhāve ’sattvavacanavad dharmmidharmma]vacanam* | 
siddhe pi dṛṣṭāntadharmmiṇi bhāve tadaṃśavyāptivacanāt* | ‥ ‥ ‥ 2a1 bhāvaniyamārtham āśaṅkyeta | 
tatsāmarthyād ... 
◯ = string hole; ‥ = unreadable akṣara; [] = difficult to read/nearly illegible
The corresponding reconstruction by Steinkellner runs as follows (HB 1*.13–16): tadaṃśavyāptyā 
dṛṣṭāntadharmiṇi sattvasiddher dharmivacanāt sādhyadharmiparigrahaḥ, siddhe ’pi punarvacanaṃ 
niyamārtham āśaṅkyeta. sajātīya eva sattvam iti siddhe ’pi tadabhave vyatireke sādhyābhāve ’sattvavacanavat tadaṃśavyāptivacanāt siddhe ’pi dṛṣṭāntadharmiṇi sattve dharmivacanam tatraiva bhāvaniyamārtham āśaṅkyeta. tasmāt sāmarthyād ...
The text of Dharmakīrti’s Svavṛtti, the source of our formulation, reads (PVSV, ed. Gnoli 1960: 2.2–
6): tadaṃśavyāptyā dṛṣṭāntadharmiṇi sattvasiddher dharmivacanāt sādhyadharmiparigrahaḥ. siddhe 
punarvacanaṃ niyamārtham āśaṅkyeta, sajātīya eva sattvam iti siddhe ’pi vijātīyavyatireke sādhyābhāve 
’sattvavacanavat. sāmarthyād ...
29 My additions in [ ] are based on Arcaṭa’s explanation in HBṬ 13.14–17: tat kutaḥ pāriśeṣyāt 
dharmivacanāt sādhyadharmiparigraha iti manyamānaḥ siddhāntavādy āha – siddhe tadaṃśavyāptyā 
dṛṣṭāntadharmiṇi sattve punar dharmiṇo vacanaṃ dṛṣṭāntadharmiṇa eva yo dharmaḥ sa hetur iti 
niyamārtham āśaṅkyeta. tataś ca cākṣuṣatvādaya eva hetavaḥ syuḥ, na kṛtakatvādaya ity aniṣṭam eva 
syāt. tasmād upacāraḥ kartavya iti. Strangely enough, only the words in bold are pratīkas found in our 
manuscript, not the rest of the statement, although it is presented as a quotation (siddhe ... kartavya iti).

--- Page 333 of 425 ---
Indic Buddhist Manuscripts in Vienna
311
manuscript was written by Dharmakīrti and the second sentence was a marginal note in 
that manuscript, then it has been inserted into the text in the wrong place, and, moreover, 
should be removed as it is not original. If, on the other hand, the Hetubindu was only 
taught orally and the text we have here is based on notes taken by a student, then the 
second sentence might be Dharmakīrti’s answer to a student’s question regarding the exact 
meaning of the first, shorter sentence. If this is the case, there is no reason to remove the 
redundant portion. If the former scenario is accurate, the marginal note must have crept in 
quite early, as it is commented upon by Arcaṭa (HBṬ 13,24ff). Whether Vinītadeva’s 
comments were based on a text that contained this repetition is not clear.30 
The next example I would like to adduce is less complicated.
bījādivad anekānta iti cet.31 syād etat – bījādayo ’ṅkurāder jananasvabhāvāḥ 
santo ’pi na kevalā janayanti, salilādikāraṇāntarāpekṣatvāt. tadvad bhāvo ’pi 
vināśe syād iti.32
If [one objects] that [the logical reason] is ambiguous, like in the case of a seed 
and so on. The following could be [objected]: “Although seeds and so on are 
indeed of the nature to produce sprouts and so on, they do not produce [them] 
alone, because they depend on other causes such as water. As in this case, an 
entity also must be [dependent] for its decay.”
Again it is obvious that the statement introduced with syād etat explains the short pūrvapakṣa formulated in the previous half-sentence, but again, it is not clear whether this 
passage should be considered part of the original Hetubindu text. Both Vinītadeva and 
Arcaṭa knew the text in this form. As they both state the obvious, namely that the second 
statement explains the former,33 they are of no help in clarifying the problem. The curious 
explanations in the margin of the Hetubindu manuscript, which probably stem from a 
student who read the text with a teacher, are also of no help. They simply state that the 
former was formulated by the opponent (tatra paraḥ prāha) and the latter by Dharmakīrti 
(siddhāntavādī prāha).
Although I cannot yet decide how to proceed with the edition of the Hetubindu — I am 
still collecting such irregular cases — the problem has hopefully become clear. The 
question of the Urtext is relevant not only for sūtras, but also for śāstras, and I thus would 
like to ask my colleagues to keep their eyes and minds open for this type of hitherto 
ignored irregularity, so that we might finally be in a position to set some criteria for 
making decisions about the original texts, if indeed this is possible at all. 
30 After explaining the example, Vinītadeva only states that it is certain (gnas, *sthita) in this case the 
same way that by mentioning tadaṃśavyāpti the property of the example is metaphorically addressed. He 
then goes on to explain the next sentence, which begins with tatsāmarthyāt in our manuscript (HBṬV 
104a5–6: de bźin du ’dir yaṅ de’i chas khyab pa smos pas dpe’i chos ñe bar gdags par bya’o źes bya bar 
gnas so || ’di ñid la gtan tshigs de lta bas na śugs kyis źes bya ba la sos pa smos te |). Here it is not 
possible to decide whether de’i chas khyab pa smos pas is from the root text and corresponds to 
tadaṃśavyāptivacanāt, or whether it is just part of his explanation of the example.
31 The punctuation is problematic, of course.
32 The manuscript reads (7a5–6): bījādivad anekānta iti cet* | syād etat* | bījādayo ’ṅkurāder 
jananasva¦7a6bhāvāḥ santo pi na kevalā janayanti | śalilādikāraṇāntarāpekṣatvāt* | tadvad bhāvo pi 
vināśe syād iti |. Steinkellner’s reconstruction (HB 8*.16–18): bījādivad anekānta iti cet, syād etat: 
bījādīnām aṅkurādijananasvabhāvānām api salilādikāraṇāntarāpekṣaṇāt kevalā na janayanti, tadvad 
bhāvo ’pi vināśe syād iti.
33 Arcaṭa states (HBṬ 83.15): atra ca parasya vacanāvakāśam āśaṅkyāha – bījādivad ityādi. syād etat 
ityādinā etad eva vibhajate – kevalā na janayanti iti. Vinītadeva (HBṬV 124a2–3): gźan gyi ’khrul pa 
gleṅ pa’i dogs pa bsu bar | sa bon la sogs pa bźin du źes bya ba la sogs pa smos so || de ñid rnam par 
grol ba’i phyir | ’di sñam du źes bya ba la sogs pa smos te |.

--- Page 334 of 425 ---
312
HELMUT KRASSER
Abbreviations and Works Cited
AAS – Austrian Academy of Sciences (Vienna)
AASP – Austrian Academy of Sciences Press (Vienna)
AK – Abhidharmakośa, see AKBh
AKBh – P. Pradhan (ed.), Abhidharma-Koshabhāṣya of Vasubandhu. Patna 1967.
AKBh-Index – Akira Hirakawa et al., Index to the Abhidharmakośabhāṣya (Peking Edition). Part 
three – Tibetan-Sanskrit. Tokyo 1978.
AKVy – U. Wogihara (ed.), Sphuṭârtha Abhidharmakośavyākhyā. Tokyo 1932–36.
Cabezón 2008 – J.I. Cabezón, Buddhist narratives of the great debates. Argumentation 22: 71–92.
CTPH – China Tibetology Publishing House (Beijing)
CTRC – China Tibetology Research Center (Beijing)
Dreyfus 2003 – Georges B. Dreyfus, The sound of two hands clapping: the education of a Tibetan 
Buddhist monk. Berkeley.
Dreyfus 2008 – Id., What is debate for? The rationality of Tibetan debates and the role of humor. 
Argumentation 22: 43–58.
Eckel 1985 – M. David Eckel, Bhāvaviveka’s critique of Yogācāra philosophy in chapter XXV of 
the Prajñāpradīpa. In: Chr. Lindtner (ed.), Miscellanea Buddhica. Copenhagen 1985: 25–75.
Gokhale 1985 – V. V. Gokhale, Madhyamakahṛdayakārikā Tarkajvālā, Chapter I. In: Christian Lindtner 
(ed.), Miscellanea Buddhica. Copenhagen 1985: 76–107.
HB – Ernst Steinkellner, Dharmakīrti’s Hetubinduḥ. Teil 1 — Tibetischer Text und rekonstruierter 
Sanskrit-Text. Wien 1967.
HBṬ – Sukhlalji Sanghavi and Jinavijayaji (eds), Hetubinduṭīkā of Bhaṭṭa Arcaṭa with the subcommentary entitled Āloka of Durveka Miśra. Baroda 1949.
HBṬV – Vinītadevas Hetubinduṭīkā — Derge Tshad ma vol. 16, no. 4234, We 100b3–181a7 [= 
Peking vol. 137, no. 5733, 123b3–223b6].
Houben 1999 – Jan E. M. Houben, On syntactic and stylistic evidence regarding the authorship of 
the Vākyapadīya-Vṛtti (Bhartṛhari’s Vākyapadīya and the Ancient Vṛtti 3). Wiener Zeitschrift 
für die Kunde Südasiens 43: 167–197.
Houben 1999a – Id., The theoretical positions of Bhartṛhari and the respectable grammarian. Rivista 
degli studi orientali 72 (1998): 101–141 (published 1999).
IKGA – Institut für Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens/Institute for the Cultural and Intellectual 
History of Asia
Katsura 2009 – Shoryu Katsura, Rediscovering Dignāga through Jinendrabuddhi. In: Steinkellner et 
al. 2009: 153–166. 
Krasser 2011 – Helmut Krasser, How to teach a Buddhist monk to refute outsiders — Text-critical 
remarks on some works by Bhāviveka. Dhīḥ 51: 49–76.
Lasic 2007 – Horst Lasic, Fragments of pramāṇa texts preserved in Tabo monastery. In: Deborah 
Klimburg-Salter, Kurt Tropper, Christian Jahoda (eds), Text, image and song in transdisciplinary dialogue. Leiden/Boston 2007: 63–77. 
Lindtner 1984 – Christian Lindtner, Bhavya’s controversy with Yogācāra in the appendix of Prajñāpradīpa, chapter 25. In: Louis Ligeti (ed.), Tibetan and Buddhist studies. Budapest 1984: 77–
97.
Lindtner 2001 – Id., Bhavya on Mīmāṃsā — Mīmāṃsātattvanirṇayāvatāraḥ. With English translation. Adyar 2001.
MHK – Madhyamakahṛdayakārikā — Chr. Lindtner (ed.), Madhyamakahṛdayam of Bhavya. Adyar: 
The Adyar Library and Research Centre 2001. 
PP – Prajñāpradīpamūlamadhyamakavṛtti (Bhāviveka) — Derge dBu ma vol. 2, no. 3853, Tsha 
45b4–259b3 [= Peking vol. 95, no. 5253, Tsha 53b3–326a6].

--- Page 335 of 425 ---
Indic Buddhist Manuscripts in Vienna
313
PPṬ – Prajñāpradīpaṭīkā (Avalokitavrata) — Derge dBu ma vol. 4, no. 3859, Wa 1–287a7; vol. 5, Śa 
1–338a7; vol. 6, Za 1–341a7 [= Peking 5259 vol. 96, Wa 1–333a6; vol. 97, Śa 1–394a5; vol. 97, 
Za 1–406a8].
Qvarnström 1989 – Olle Qvarnström, Hindu philosophy in Buddhist perspective. The Vedāntatattvaviniścaya chapter of Bhavya’s Madhyamakahṛdayakārikā. Lund 1989.
Ratié forthcoming – Isabelle Ratié, On reason and scripture in the Pratyabhijñā. To be published in 
Vincent Eltschinger, Helmut Krasser (eds), Proceedings of the panel on scriptural authority 
and apologetics in the Indian religio-philosophical environment (14th World Sanskrit 
Conference, Kyoto, September 1–5, 2009).
Seyfort Ruegg 1990 – David Seyfort Ruegg, On the authorship of some works ascribed to Bhāvaviveka. In: David Seyfort Ruegg and Lambert Schmithausen (eds), Earliest Buddhism and 
Madhyamaka. Leiden etc. 1990: 59–71.
Seyfort Ruegg 2004 – Id., Aspects of the study of the (earlier) Indian Mahāyāna. Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies 27/1: 3–62.
Steinkellner et al. 2009 – Ernst Steinkellner, DUAN Qing, Helmut Krasser (eds), Sanskrit 
manuscripts in China. Proceedings of a panel at the 2008 Beijing Seminar on Tibetan 
Studies, October 13 to 17. Beijing 2009.
STTAR – Sanskrit Texts from the Tibetan Autonomous Region
TAR – Tibetan Autonomous Region
TJ – Tarkajvālā (Bhāviveka) — Derge (D) dBu ma vol. 3, no. 3856, Dza 40b7–329b4 [= Peking (P) 
vol. 96, no. 5256, Dza 43b7–380a7].
van der Kuijp 2006 – Leonard J.W. van der Kuijp, The earliest Indian reference to Muslims in a 
Buddhist philosophical text of circa 700. Journal of Indian Philosophy 34: 169–202.

--- Page 336 of 425 ---


--- Page 337 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscript Projects in the China Tibetology Research Center
LUO HONG (BEIJING)
As a member of the Institute of Religious Studies in the China Tibetology Research Center 
(CTRC), in the following paper I will present from the perspective of our institute a brief 
retrospect of previous projects, an introduction to projects in progress and several future 
plans under consideration in the China Tibetology Research Center. By doing so, we expect to gather comments and suggestions so as to improve our studies of the Sanskrit 
manuscripts from the Tibetan Autonomous Region (TAR) in China.
1. Previous projects
1.1 The photographing and cataloguing of the manuscripts
In the 1980s, Professor Dorje Cedan (多杰才旦), then the Director-General of the CTRC, 
organized the photographing and cataloguing of the Sanskrit manuscripts in Lhasa. Professor LUO Zhao (炤) was entrusted with the task of photographing and cataloguing the 
collection, and with the help of his Tibetan colleague Phun tshogs tshe brtan (平措次旦), 
he compiled four catalogues in total, two in 1984 and two in 1985:1
1. LUO Zhao 1984a 
Luo bu lin ka Bei ye jing Mu lu (Gan zhu er)《羅布林卡貝葉經目錄 （甘珠
爾）》 / A Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Nor bu gliṅ kha (bKa’ 
’gyur), unpublished;
2. LUO Zhao 1984b 
Luo bu lin ka Xin cang Bei ye jing Mu lu (Dan zhu er)《羅布林卡新藏貝葉經目錄 
（丹珠爾）》 / A Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts Newly Deposited in the 
Nor bu gliṅ kha (bsTan ’gyur), unpublished;
3. LUO Zhao 1985a 
Bu da la gong Suo cang Bei ye jing Mu lu (Gan zhu er) Di yi ben 《布達拉所藏
貝葉經目錄 （甘珠爾） 第一本》 / A Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the 
Potala Palace (bKa’ ’gyur), Vol. 1, unpublished;
4. LUO Zhao 1985b 
Bu da la gong Xin cang Bei ye jing Mu lu (Dan zhu er) Di yi ben 《布達拉新藏
貝葉經目錄 （丹珠爾） 第一本》 / A Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts Newly Deposited in the Potala Palace (bsTan ’gyur), Vol. 1, unpublished.
LUO Zhao’s efforts and contributions, to quote Ernst Steinkellner, were “a giant step forward, a step as valuable as the impressive endeavours in the first half of the last century of 
Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana and Giuseppe Tucci.”2
1.2 The editing of the manuscripts
Due to various reasons, these Sanskrit manuscripts in the CTRC collection had not been 
fully examined and studied, and only one manuscript of the Saddharmapuṇḍarīka was entrusted to JIANG Zhongxin (蒋忠新) to be edited. His transliteration of this manuscript was 
1 Cf. LUO Zhao 2009.
2 Cf. Steinkellner et al. 2009: 8. Later, these catalogues were condensed into one abridged version by 
Sandhak (桑德) in the late 1980s. Cf. Sandhak no date.

--- Page 338 of 425 ---
316
LUO HONG
published as the 3rd volume in the Sanskrit Texts from the Tibetan Autonomous Region 
(STTAR) series in 2006.3
2. Projects in progress
2.1 Cooperative projects with the Austrian Academy of Sciences
Since more detailed information about the past course and future prospects of this 
pioneering and fruitful cooperation established by Professor Ernst Steinkellner and Professor Lhagpa Phuntshogs (拉巴平措) is presented by Helmut Krasser in his contribution to 
this volume, here I would like to confine myself to a very brief description of the cooperation. 
Since 2004, the Institute for the Cultural and Intellectual History of Asia in the Austrian 
Academy of Sciences has cooperated with the Institute of Religious Studies in the CTRC 
in editing Sanskrit manuscripts from Tibet. This is the beginning of cooperation between 
the CTRC and academic organizations outside of China. In order to publish the fruits of 
the cooperation, the STTAR series was established. Up to now eleven volumes have been 
jointly published:4
1. STTAR 1
I Jinendrabuddhi: Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā 1, Critical Edition. (eds.) Ernst Steinkellner, 
Helmut Krasser, Horst Lasic. Beijing-Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House, 
Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 2005.
II Jinendrabuddhi: Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā 1, Diplomatic Edition. (eds.) Ernst Steinkellner, Helmut Krasser, Horst Lasic. Beijing-Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House, 
Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 2005.
2. STTAR 2 
Dharmakīrti: Pramāṇaviniścaya, Chapters 1 and 2. (ed.) Ernst Steinkellner. BeijingVienna: China Tibetology Publishing House, Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 2007.
3. STTAR 3 
Palm-leaf Manuscript of the Sanskrit Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtram. (3 vols) (ed.) JIANG 
Zhongxin. Beijing: China Tibetology Publishing House, Institute of Asia-Pacific Studies 
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, 2006.
4. STTAR 4 
Vasubandhu’s Pañcaskandhaka. (eds.) LI Xuezhu, Ernst Steinkellner, Toru Tomabechi. 
Beijing-Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House, Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 
2008.
5. STTAR 5 
Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts. (ed.) Toru Tomabechi. 
Beijing-Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House, Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 
2009.
6. STTAR 6 
Candrakīrti’s Vajrasattvaniṣpādanasūtra (Vajrasattvasādhana). (eds.) LUO Hong, Toru 
Tomabechi. Beijing-Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House, Austrian Academy of 
Sciences Press, 2009.
7. STTAR 7 
A Unique Collection of Twenty Sūtras in a Sanskrit Manuscript from the Potala. (ed.) 
Bhikṣuṇī Vinītā. Beijing-Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House, Austrian Academy 
of Sciences Press, 2010.
3 See below 2.1.
4 Several other texts are in preparation and will be published in the same series in the near future.

--- Page 339 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscript Projects in the China Tibetology Research Center
317
8. STTAR 8 
Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇaviniścaya, chapter 3. (eds.) Pascale Hugon, Toru Tomabechi. 
Beijing-Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House, Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 
2011.
9. STTAR 11
The Buddhakapālatantra, chapters 9 to 14. (ed.) LUO Hong. Beijing-Hamburg: China 
Tibetology Publishing House, 2010. 
10. STTAR 14 
Abhayākaragupta’s Abhayapaddhati, chapters 9 to 14. (ed.) LUO Hong. Beijing-Hamburg: 
China Tibetology Publishing House, 2010.
11. STTAR 15 
Jinendrabuddhi’s Viśālāmalavatī Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā, chapter 2. (eds.) Horst Lasic, 
Helmut Krasser, Ernst Steinkellner. Beijing-Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House, 
Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 2012. 
The following volumes are forthcoming:
STTAR 9 
The Buddhakāpalatantra, chapters 1 to 5. (ed.) YANG Mei. Beijing-Hamburg: China 
Tibetology Publishing House (forthcoming)
STTAR 10 
The Buddhakāpalatantra, chapters 6 to 8. (eds.) Harunaga Isaacson, LI Xuezhu. BeijingHamburg: China Tibetology Publishing House (forthcoming) 
STTAR 12 
Abhayākaragupta’s Abhayapaddhati, chapters 1 to 5. (ed.) YANG Mei. Beijing-Hamburg: 
China Tibetology Publishing House (forthcoming)
STTAR 13 
Abhayākaragupta’s Abhayapaddhati, chapters 6 to 8. (eds.) Harunaga Isaacson, LI Xuezhu. 
Beijing-Hamburg: China Tibetology Publishing House (forthcoming)
The successful cooperation has set a model for collaborative study of the Sanskrit manuscripts and has been accepted and highly praised by both scholars and authorities.
2.2 Cooperative projects with Hamburg University 
In 2007, a cooperation contract between the Department of Indian and Tibetan Studies at 
the University of Hamburg and the Institute of Religious Studies in the CTRC was signed. 
Since then one joint project has been carried out by scholars from both sides, and two other 
projects are under consideration.
2.2.1 Joint editing project
As the first cooperative project, scholars from both sides began to work on editing the Buddhakapālatantra (henceforth BKT) and its commentary by Abhayākaragupta, the Abhayapaddhati (henceforth AP). Until now studies of the BKT and the AP could only be based 
upon fragments in Sanskrit and the Tibetan translations,5 but by consulting the complete 
manuscripts preserved in the TAR, we aim to contribute a critical edition and annotated 
translation of both the AP and the BKT in the near future.
According to the agreement, Harunaga Isaacson is the supervisor of the projects and 
responsible for editing the 6th chapter of the BKT and the AP, Mei Isaacson is responsible 
for chapters 1–5, LI Xuezhu is responsible for the 6th and the 7th chapter and LUO Hong 
5 For example, in Davidson 2002.

--- Page 340 of 425 ---
318
LUO HONG
for chapters 9–14. So far the work on the AP has been effectively carried out, and the draft 
of the critical edition and annotated translation of the AP has been finished. Part of the 
BKT has also been tentatively edited and translated.
2.2.2 Projects under consideration
2.2.2.1 The Āmnāyamañjarī
As a second cooperative project, a critical edition of the Āmnāyamañjarī, Abhayākaragupta’s commentary on the Saṃpuṭatantra, is now under consideration.6 This text is 
planned to be edited by a group of specialists headed by Harunaga Isaacson. 
2.2.2.2 The Paramārthasevā
As a sub-project under the cooperation between the Department of Indian and Tibetan 
Studies at the University of Hamburg and the Institute of Religious Studies in the CTRC, 
the critical editing of the Paramārthasevā by Puṇḍarīka is also under consideration. This 
project is planned to be carried out by Francesco Sferra (Director of the Departimento di 
Studi Asiatici, Università degli Studi di Napoli “L’Orientale” and Board member of the 
Centre for Tantric Studies, Department of Indian and Tibetan Studies, University of 
Hamburg) and LUO Hong from the CTRC. We plan to prepare a complete critical edition of 
the Sanskrit text on the basis of all the extant manuscripts, whether kept in Nepal or in the 
PRC; a critical edition of the Tibetan translation done by the Kāśmīrian Somanātha (Zla 
ba’i mgon po) in the second half of the 11th century; and an annotated English translation. 
So far we have re-edited and translated the fragments studied and published by Francesco 
Sferra.7 This can serve as a solid basis for further work on this important text. 
2.2.3 Formal agreement of exchange of publications 
The CTRC and the Department of Indian and Tibetan Studies at Hamburg University have 
also reached an agreement to sign a formal contract of publication exchange, which would 
be very helpful for us to develop and enlarge our library so as to support present and future 
collaborative study of the manuscripts. 
2.3 Other projects
With the guidance and help of my teachers and colleagues inside and outside China,8 and 
with the generous support of the Institute of Religious Studies in the China Tibetology 
Research Center, especially that of Prof. Dramdul (9堆), the present author is editing the 
following texts. 
2.3.1 Guṇaprabha’s Vinayasūtra
2.3.1.1 A new manuscript of the Vinayasūtra
A complete 120-folio palm-leaf manuscript of the Vinayasūtra from the Potala written in 
Nepalese hook-topped script and dated 1270 CE was identified and reported by the present 
author in 2008.9 This manuscript sheds new light on the Vinayasūtra and its transmission 
history: 
6 Only one fragment in Sanskrit has been studied by scholars, see Tomabechi and Kano 2009.
7 Cf. Sferra 2007a, Sferra 2007b and Sferra 2008.
8 With apologies for not listing them one by one, to all of my teachers and colleagues I would like to 
express my heartfelt gratitude.
9 Cf. LUO Hong 2009.

--- Page 341 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscript Projects in the China Tibetology Research Center
319
a. The substantial divergences between the new manuscript and those known to us 
make it possible to draw tentatively the stemma codicum of the Vinayasūtra. 
b. The variants in the new manuscript support a less known Tibetan translation of the 
Vinayasūtra. 
c. With the help of the new manuscript, we can try to reconstruct the recensions of 
Guṇaprabha’s Vinayasūtra.
2.3.1.2 Critical edition of the Vinayasūtra
The aim of critically editing the Vinayasūtra, a compendium of the vinaya literature of the 
Mūlasarvāstivādins, is to reconstruct — on the basis of Sanskrit, Tibetan and Chinese textual witnesses — as far as possible Recension A and Recension B of the vulgate redacted 
by Guṇaprabha according to the Mathurā tradition. 
2.3.2 Saroruha’s Śrīhevajrabhaṭṭārakasya cakraviṃśatikāstotra 
The Tibetan translation of this text has been critically edited by Leonard W. J. van der 
Kuijp.10 This is the first attempt to critically edit the Sanskrit text of this short eulogy. 
There are two Sanskrit codices of the Hevajrastotra. One is among the collection of the 
Hevajrasādhanasaṃgraha11 photographed in Ṅor monastery by Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana. 
Photographic reproductions are kept in the Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek, Göttingen, shelfmark: Xc 14/39. The other manuscript is from the TAR; a photographic reproduction of this manuscript is available on pp. 37–38 in Box 110 of the CTRC 
collection. 
Both manuscripts are used to prepare a critical edition of this eulogy, which was 
probably composed by Saroruha for the use of practitioners cultivating the Utpattikrama. 
For in other closely related works by Saroruha, it is mentioned that at a certain phase of a 
ritual, the practitioner should recite this eulogy to please the deities. 
The critical edition and annotated translation have been finished and will be published in 
Tantric Studies II.12
3. Future plans
The Sanskrit panel convened by Professor Ernst Steinkellner and Profesor DUAN Qing and 
held by the CTRC in Beijing in 2008 was a successful meeting. Effective communication 
among scholars and authorities concerned has taken a step further towards mutual 
understanding. This can serve as a basis for future projects. The following is a list of the 
future plans which are considered as priorities in the CTRC. Comments and suggestions 
are most welcome to facilitate future cooperations and efforts in this direction.
3.1 The way to foster effectively a new generation of Sanskritists in China. 
We are considering the possibility of raising a special fund to support the training of young 
scholars in the CTRC. Matters of concern are the regulation of the application, supervision 
and evaluation of the fund, the responsibilities of the relevant authorities, the trainers and 
also the trainees. Besides, we consider that it is absolutely necessary to establish a 
systematic training course for the trainees, which should consist of training in languages 
and in the special demands of the field as well as in techniques used in cataloguing and 
editing manuscripts.
10 Cf. van der Kuijp 1987.
11 Cf. Isaacson 2009.
12 LUO Hong forthcoming.

--- Page 342 of 425 ---
320
LUO HONG
3.2 The possibility of establishing a system of visiting scholars in the China Tibetology 
Research Center. 
This is another way to realize cooperation between the CTRC and foreign institutes. We 
are considering raising a fund to invite renowned scholars to work together with scholars 
in the CTRC for a certain period of time. By doing so we expect to improve effectively the 
study of Sanskrit manuscripts in our institute and to contribute publications of high quality. 
The specialities concerned, the publication and the copyright of the results of the joint 
projects and the duration of each project will be considered and discussed on a case-bycase basis.
3.3 Regular and official exchange of information and publications. 
Constant and formal academic relationships are essential and mutually beneficial. We have 
already reached such an agreement with the Department of Indian and Tibetan Studies at 
Hamburg University, and we sincerely hope that constant communication and exchange 
between the CTRC and other foreign academic institutes can be initiated and established.
Finally, we would like to close this short paper with one sincere smon lam that the 
Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in the TAR can be consulted by scholars both inside and 
outside China and with their efforts be duly edited, distributed and shared by all mankind.
Works Cited
Davidson, Ronald M.
2002 
Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric Movement. New York: Columbia 
University Press. 
Isaacson, Harunaga
2009
“A collection of Hevajrasādhanas and related works in Sanskrit.” In: Sanskrit manuscripts 
in China, Proceedings of a panel at the 2008 Beijing Seminar on Tibetan Studies October 
13 to 17. (eds.) Ernst Steinkellner, DUAN Qing, Helmut Krasser. Beijing: China Tibetology 
Publishing House, 89–136.
LUO Hong
2009
“A preliminary report on a newly identified Sanskrit manuscript of the Vinayasūtra from 
Tibet.” In: Sanskrit manuscripts in China, Proceedings of a panel at the 2008 Beijing Seminar on Tibetan Studies October 13 to 17. (eds.) Ernst Steinkellner, DUAN Qing, Helmut 
Krasser. Beijing: China Tibetology Publishing House, 195–224.
forthcoming “Saroruha’s Hevajrastotra.” In: Tantric Studies II. Hamburg: Center for Tantric 
Studies. 
LUO Zhao
2009
“The cataloguing of Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in the TAR: A complicated process that 
has lasted more than twenty years.” In: Sanskrit manuscripts in China, Proceedings of a 
panel at the 2008 Beijing Seminar on Tibetan Studies October 13 to 17. (eds.) Ernst Steinkellner, DUAN Qing, Helmut Krasser. Beijing: China Tibetology Publishing House, 225–
233.
Sandhak
no date Kruṅ go’i bod kyi śes rig źib ’jug lte gnas su ñar ba’i ta la’i lo ma’i bstan bcos (spyin śog 
’dril ma’i par) kyi dkar chag mdor gsal bźugs so. /《中国藏学研究中心收藏的梵文叶
（(微卷）目》(unpublished).

--- Page 343 of 425 ---
Sanskrit Manuscript Projects in the China Tibetology Research Center
321
Sferra, Francesco
2007a
“Fragments of Puṇḍarīka’s Paramārthasevā.” In: Indica et Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael 
Hahn zum 65. Geburtstag von Freunden und Schülern überreicht, herausgegeben von 
Konrad Klaus und Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde, Heft 66, Wien: 459–476.
2007b “Newly Discovered Stanzas of the Paramārthasevā by Puṇḍarīka.” In: Newsletter of the 
NGMCP 5: 6–9.
2008
“The Last Stanzas of the Paramārthasevā.” In: Tantric Studies I. Hamburg: Center for 
Tantric Studies, 209–214. 
Steinkellner, Ernst, DUAN Qing, Helmut Krasser (eds.)
2009
Sanskrit manuscripts in China, Proceedings of a panel at the 2008 Beijing Seminar on 
Tibetan Studies October 13 to 17. Beijing: China Tibetology Publishing House. 
Tomabechi, Toru, and Kazuo Kano
2008
“A Critical Edition and Translation of a Text Fragment from Abhayākaragupta’s Āmnāyamañjarī: Göttingen, Cod.ms.sanscr.259b.” In: Tantric Studies I. Hamburg: Center for 
Tantric Studies, 22–44.
van der Kuijp, Leonard W. J. 
1987
“Ṅor-chen kun-dga’ bzaṅ po on the Posture of Hevajra: a Note on the Relationship between 
Text, Iconography and Spiritual Praxis.” In: Investigating Indian Art. Proceedings of a 
Symposium on the Development of Early Buddhist and Hindu Iconography held at the 
Museum of Indian Art Berlin in May 1986. (eds.) Marianne Yaldiz and Wibke Lobo. Berlin: 
Museum für Indische Kunst: Staatliche Museen Preussischer Kulturbesitz, 1987. Veröffentlichungen des Museums für Indische Kunst 8: 173–177.

--- Page 344 of 425 ---


--- Page 345 of 425 ---
The Sanskrit Manuscript Research Project at Taisho University*
YOSHIYASU YONEZAWA AND JUNDŌ NAGASHIMA (TOKYO)
The Institute for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism at Taisho University has published a 
series of authorized facsimile editions of Sanskrit manuscripts of Buddhist texts. They are 
as follows:
1.
“Śrāvakabhūmi” Sanskrit Palm-leaf Manuscript in 19941
2.
Amoghapāśakalparāja Sanskrit Palm-leaf Manuscript in 1997
3.
Abhisamācārika-Dharma of the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādin in 1998
4.
A Collection of Sanskrit Palm-leaf Manuscripts in Tibetan dBu med Script in 2001
5.
Palm-leaf Sanskrit Manuscripts of Vimalakīrtinirdeśa and Jñānālokālaṃkāra in 2004
1. Historical background
Taisho University was founded in April 1926. Its distinct feature as a Buddhist university is 
that four different Buddhist schools, i.e. the Tendaishū, Shingonshū Buzanha, Shingonshū 
Chisanha, and Jōdoshū, participated in the foundation and are still taking a leading part in 
the management of the university. In 1926, the Department of Sanskrit Studies was opened 
and its staff focused upon Sanskrit manuscripts. In this connection, two pioneers contributed to the establishment of a distinctive approach to academic research in Sanskrit studies at 
Taisho University. First, Rev. Kawaguchi Ekai (1866–1945), who taught Tibetan as a 
professor, is rather well known for his expeditions to Tibet at a time when all access was 
denied to outsiders. His purpose was, as a Buddhist, to search for the Dharma. As a result 
of his two journeys to Tibet, he brought back to Japan not only a Tibetan canon but also 
Sanskrit palm-leaf manuscripts. The Sanskrit manuscripts were included in the collection 
of the Tokyo University Library, which we can nowadays browse via the Internet (http://
utlsktms.ioc.u-tokyo.ac.jp/). Incidentally, Matsunami Seiren compiled the catalogue of this 
collection2 and his son Matsunami Yoshihiro participated in the research at the Potala 
Palace in Lhasa which will be mentioned below. Second, Wogihara Unrai (1869–1937) 
was another great scholar working at Taisho University during its early period. He studied 
and edited various Buddhist texts on the basis of Sanskrit manuscripts. Most of us probably appreciate his editions of the Bodhisattvabhūmi, Yaśomitra’s Abhidharmakośavyākhyā, Haribhadra’s Abhisamayālaṃkārālokā Prajñāpāramitāvyākhyā, etc. Graduates 
and students of Sanskrit studies at Taisho University still admire him for his establishment 
of a tradition, i.e., reading texts on the basis of Sanskrit manuscripts.
2. Contact with the China Library of Nationalities
In preparation for the commemoration of its 70th anniversary, Taisho University planned a 
special project following in the footsteps of the pioneers mentioned above. With the 
funding allocated to this project, the Institute for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism at 
Taisho University made an agreement with the Cultural Palace of Nationalities in Beijing 
to conduct joint research on Buddhist Sanskrit materials preserved at the China Library of 
Nationalities in the spring of 1990. This is the very beginning of our research project with 
several organizations in the People’s Republic of China (PRC).
* Special thanks go to Prof. Kimura Takayasu, who kindly provided us with useful information about 
this Research Project of the Taisho University from its beginning.
1 Śrāvakabhūmi within double quotation marks indicates the manuscript in which not only the 
Śrāvakabhūmi but also other texts are included.
2 A catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts in the Tokyo University Library, Suzuki Research Foundation, Tokyo, 1965.

--- Page 346 of 425 ---
324
YOSHIYASU YONEZAWA AND JUNDŌ NAGASHIMA
In July 1990, Mano Ryūkai (then president), the late Saitō Kōjun, Kimura Takayasu, 
Yaita Hideomi, and Kubota Shin’ichi conducted the first research tour to Beijing. They 
were welcomed at the airport not only by staff of the Cultural Palace of Nationalities and 
the China Library of Nationalities but also by the members of the State Ethnic Affairs 
Commission. On this occasion, they could check the original Sanskrit manuscript of the 
“Śrāvakabhūmi,” because this was the main object of interest for the members of the 
Śrāvakabhūmi Study Group, which had begun in April 1979 and still remains active, even 
though the membership has changed.3 Moreover, the Taisho University deputation visited 
the Cultural Relics Press, which has been responsible for the printing of the facsimile 
editions. At that time the printing of the Sanskrit manuscript of the “Śrāvakabhūmi” was in 
progress. The model for this print seems to have been the 1985 facsimile edition of the 
Saddharmapuṇḍarīka.
In December of 1990, our members (Saitō Kōjun, Kimura Takayasu, Yaita Hideomi, and 
Takahashi Hisao) visited the China Library of Nationalities again. At that time Takahashi 
checked the Sanskrit manuscript of the Amoghapāśakalparāja and immediately identified 
the Sanskrit text of the famous and important Kōmyō-shingon in Shingonshū and Jōdoshū, 
a dhāraṇī by whose repetition the brightness or glory of the Buddha may be obtained. 
Incidentally, he is the very person who discovered the original Sanskrit manuscripts of the 
Jñānālokālaṃkāra and the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa in the bundle he checked first at the Potala 
Palace. In 1992, our members (Endō Yūjun, the late Maeda Ryōdō, the late Matsunami 
Yasuo, Tanaka Bun’yū, Noguchi Keiya, the late Saitō Kōjun, Watarai Zuiken, Ōtsuka 
Nobuo, and Matsunami Yoshihiro) were allowed to conduct research on the materials not 
only in Sanskrit but also in Tibetan and Chinese. As is well known, the Sanskrit manuscripts kept at the China Library of Nationalities used to belong to Zha lu ri phug Monastery in Tibet, as reported by Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana in his journey to Tibet in 1936.4
3. Research in sKu ’bum Monastery and publications of facsimile editions
Contrary to our expectations, even in 1993 the publication of the “Śrāvakabhūmi” 
facsimile edition was not yet realized. In this year, Tada Kōbun became Taisho University’s main negotiator and began to take the initiative in arranging research tours to various 
places in the PRC. Following a proposal from the State Ethnic Affairs Commission and the 
China Library of Nationalities, our members decided to conduct research on Buddhist texts 
preserved at sKu ’bum Monastery in Qinghai province. In August, our members (the late 
Hayashi Ryōshō, then president, Tada Kōbun, Nishioka Ryōkō, Ichishima Shōshin, the late 
Saitō Kōjun, Hirokawa Gyōbin, and Kimura Takayasu) visited the China Library of 
Nationalities for negotiations and moved on to Xining in Qinghai province in order to conduct research on the textual materials at sKu ’bum Monastery together with other personnel from Taisho University (Tanaka Bun’yū, Ikeda Kōryū, and Fukuda Takanori). A total of 
three research tours to sKu ’bum Monastery were conducted (1993, 1994, and 1995). The 
late lecturer Maeda Ryōdō, who participated in the tours in 1994 and 1995, made a noteworthy contribution as chief compiler of the catalogue of Tibetan works preserved at sKu 
’bum monastery.5 In 1994, moreover, we were invited to Inner Mongolia. Tada described 
his negotiating method as follows:
I never insisted upon our request strongly but always waited for their proposals. 
What I did in the negotiation was introduce our members. For instance, many 
3 In detail, see below.
4 Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana,“Second Research of Sanskrit Palm-leaf Mss. in Tibet.” In: Journal of Bihar 
and Orissa Research Society 23–1, 1937: 11–57.
5 A Catalogue of Buddhist Texts Preserved at sKu ’bum Monastery in Qinghai Province, China, 
Enlarged and Revised Version, The Institute for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism, Taisho University, 
2000 (in Japanese).

--- Page 347 of 425 ---
The Sanskrit Manuscript Research Project at Taisho University
325
Buddhist scholars are available in our group and thereby it is possible for us to 
conduct any research on the materials preserved at Buddhist sites. If necessary, I 
provided information about how the cultural heritage should be preserved. 
Anyway I visited many places in the PRC.
His face-to-face talks with Chinese people must have developed a foundation for mutual 
trust between various organizations in the PRC and Taisho University. Without his activities, the series of facsimile editions would never have appeared.
It was in 1994, i.e. four years after the first agreement, that the facsimile edition of the 
“Śrāvakabhūmi” Sanskrit palm-leaf manuscript was published, in which not only the 
Śrāvakabhūmi but also other bhūmis, viz. the Cintāmayī bhūmi, the Pratyekabuddhabhūmi, 
the Asamāhitā bhūmi, the Śrutāmayī bhūmi, the Paramārthagāthā, the Ābhiprāyikārthagāthā, the Śarīrārthagāthā, etc. are included. Since then, our study group has attached an 
introductory booklet or book to the facsimile editions, in which a script table is always 
provided. Suzuki Kōshin, who also releases fonts for Sanskrit and Tibetan on his website, 
was responsible for the original idea of these script tables and their technical execution 
(using Adobe Photoshop).6
After publication of the facsimile edition of the “Śrāvakabhūmi” Sanskrit palm-leaf 
manuscript, two study groups began at the Institute in order to prepare the publication of 
the Amoghapāśakalparāja and the Abhisamācārika-Dharma respectively. Ōtsuka Nobuo 
wrote the introductory booklet attached to the facsimile edition of the Amoghapāśakalparāja. This study group is still active at the Institute. The main member of the Abhisamācārika-Dharma Study Group was the late lecturer Matsunami Yasuo.
4. Research at the Potala Palace
In the course of this project, our main negotiators, Tada Kōbun and Kimura Takayasu, had 
opportunities to meet Chinese officials of the Central Government and of the Tibet 
Autonomous Region (TAR). After negotiations with the Culture Department of the Central 
Government, the Administrative Department of Historical Relics of TAR and the Administrative Department of the Potala Palace, we obtained permission to gain access to Buddhist 
Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in the TAR. Our first visit to Lhasa took place in the 
summer of 1997. The members were as follows: Tada Kōshō (then vice-president), Matsunami Yoshihiro, Yoshida Kōseki, Tada Kōbun, the late Saitō Kōjun, Kimura Takayasu, the 
late Maeda Ryōdō, the late Matsunami Yasuo, Yaita Hideomi, Yonezawa Yoshiyasu, 
Hamada Chijun, Ikeda Kōryū, Kimura Shūjō, Shimomura Eishin, Fukuda Takanori, and 
NIU Litao. In this tour, however, the research at the Potala Palace was cancelled when we 
arrived in Lhasa. We visited the Nor bu gling ka Palace and found out that Sanskrit manuscripts preserved there had been returned from the China Library of Nationalities in 
Beijing. Among these, we examined the First Bhāvanākrama reported by Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana. It was interesting for us to know the relationship between Tucci’s edition of the First 
Bhāvanākrama and the manuscript.7
6 The fonts are downloadable from http://www.chofukuji.jp/takaragi/. Suzuki Kōshin, “The Script of 
the Śrāvakabhūmi Manuscript.” In: Studies on the Buddhist Sanskrit Literature, ed. by the Śrāvakabhūmi 
Study Group and the Buddhist Tantric Texts Study Group, The Sankibo Busshorin, Tokyo, 1995: 21–38.
7 Giuseppe Tucci, Minor Buddhist Texts Part II: First Bhāvanākrama of Kamalaśīla: Sanskrit and 
Tibetan Texts with Introduction and English Summary, ISMEO, Rome, 1958: Reprinted in Minor 
Buddhist Texts Parts I and II, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1986: (313)–(598). According to Tucci, the 
manuscript was preserved at the monastery of the sPos khang. Cf. Yaita et al., “On a Sanskrit Manuscript 
of the First Bhāvanākrama from Źa-lu,” AICSB 20, 1998: (106)–(116). In this article, Yaita suggests that 
the Sanskrit text in Tucci’s edition was based upon a different manuscript from that reported by 
Sāṅkṛtyāyana. However, Kimura and Yonezawa, who checked the microfilm at the China Library of the 
Nationalities during the preparation of this article, are of the opinion that the manuscript reported by 
Sāṅkṛtyāyana is the basis of the Sanskrit text in Tucci’s edition.

--- Page 348 of 425 ---
326
YOSHIYASU YONEZAWA AND JUNDŌ NAGASHIMA
In the tour of 1997, we had a mission to select a Sanskrit text for the fourth facsimile 
edition. Although the research at the Potala Palace was cancelled, we suggested to the staff 
of the TAR that they publish a facsimile edition of the original Sanskrit manuscripts 
preserved at the Nor bu gling ka Palace in Lhasa at that time. As the microfilms were kept 
at the China Library of Nationalities, Kimura Takayasu and Yonezawa Yoshiyasu went to 
Beijing in order to select a Sanskrit text for the fourth facsimile edition in March 1998. As 
a result, the publication of A Collection of Sanskrit Palm-leaf Manuscripts in Tibetan dBu 
med Script was planned and realized in 2001. It contains not one text but several: the 
Vinayasūtra, an extract version of the Vinayasūtravṛtti, the Vigrahavyāvartanī, and the 
*Lakṣaṇaṭīkā.
The long-awaited research into the Sanskrit manuscripts preserved at the Potala Palace 
was realized in the summer of 1999. The members who examined the original Sanskrit 
manuscripts there were Nishioka Ryōkō (then an executive board member), Matsunami 
Yoshihiro (then president), Takahashi Hisao, Tada Kōbun, Kimura Shūjō, Kimura Takayasu, the late Matsunami Yasuo, the late Maeda Ryōdō, Yonezawa Yoshiyasu, Ōtsuka Nobuo, 
NIU Litao, and Fukuda Takanori. On that occasion, the Administrative Department of the 
Potala Palace provided us with the original catalogue compiled by Phun tshogs tshe brtan. 
We heard that the catalogue of Sanskrit texts had not yet been completed, because he was 
the only staff member who had knowledge of Sanskrit at the Potala Palace and he was 
simultaneously making catalogues of Thanka paintings. The catalogue consisted of two 
parts, i.e. palm-leaf manuscripts and paper manuscripts. By that point, in 1999, the palmleaf manuscript catalogue had 235 text entries in 79 bundles, while the paper manuscript 
catalogue had 54 text entries in 23 bundles. Two years later, we received the supplement, 
in which 24 text entries in 7 bundles are listed. However, these numbers do not show all 
Sanskrit manuscripts preserved at the Potala Palace, and most probably there are more 
manuscripts not yet listed. Most of the Sanskrit titles, especially those listed in the palmleaf manuscript catalogue, seem to be based upon the Tibetan dBu-med transliteration on 
the cover (1a) of the manuscript and some of them, therefore, needed to be emended on the 
basis of the description of the colophon. Nonetheless, this catalogue enabled us to check 
many important Sanskrit texts whose existence had not hitherto been known. We noticed 
the existence of the original Sanskrit manuscripts of such works as, for instance, the Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣya of Candrakīrti, the Pramāṇaviniścaya of Dharmakīrti, the Munimatālaṃkāra of Abhayākaragupta, etc., among the palm-leaf manuscripts, and the Nyāyamukha of Dignāga, the Viniścayasaṃgrahanī as a part of the Yogācārabhūmi, the Madhyamakahṛdayakārikā of Bhāviveka, etc., among the paper manuscripts. What we selected for 
publication as a facsimile edition was the bundle containing the Jñānālokālaṃkāra and the 
Vimalakīrtinirdeśa. In order to prevent any undesirable disclosure of information, we decided to treat this publication plan as top secret even within Taisho University until the 
final stage of negotiations.
In the summer of 2001, we (Tada Kōbun, Kimura Takayasu, Kimura Shūjō, the late 
Matsunami Yasuo, Kimura Shūmei, Yonezawa Yoshiyasu, and NIU Litao) visited Lhasa 
again. Our purpose was not only to negotiate for the publication but also to conduct 
research on Sanskrit manuscripts. We visited not only the Potala Palace but also the Tibet 
Museum opened in October 1999 in front of the Nor bu gling ka Palace. During this tour, 
we were informed that the Sanskrit manuscripts at the Nor bu gling ka Palace were in the 
charge of the Tibet Museum. Apart from the materials returned from Beijing, we noticed 
the existence of the original Sanskrit manuscripts of the Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā, the 
Bodhisattvapiṭaka, etc. Except for them, however, we could not know what Sanskrit manuscripts were preserved there from the list provided by the Museum because it contains

--- Page 349 of 425 ---
The Sanskrit Manuscript Research Project at Taisho University
327
information about the material, viz., palm-leaf sutra (bstan ’gyur or bka’ ’gyur) and the 
size only, without text titles.
On December 14 2001 we announced our discovery of the Sanskrit manuscripts of the 
Jñānālokālaṃkāra and the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa, for we received printed copies of the facsimile edition. In 2004, we could finally release The Facsimile Edition of the Sanskrit 
palm-leaf manuscripts of the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa and the Jñānālokālaṃkāra, with the 
permission of the proper authorities in China, together with the 3-volume set Vimalakīrtinirdeśa and Jñānālokālaṃkāra: Transliterated Sanskrit Text Collated with Tibetan and 
Chinese Translations (I Introduction, II Transliterated Text of the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa, III 
Transliterated text of the Jñānālokālaṃkāra).
For the sixth facsimile edition, we selected the Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣya at the Potala 
Palace, or alternatively the Bodhisattvapiṭaka at the Tibet Museum. In 2003, we planned a 
further research tour to Lhasa. But the tour itself was cancelled due to the SARS outbreak 
in the PRC. In the meantime, we made a plan for an educational program of Sanskrit 
training for Tibetan students. However, it was never realized. Unfortunately, the joint 
research project of Taisho University has not made any progress since the fifth publication. 
This might be due to the political situation in the PRC. In October 2006, the late Maeda 
Ryōdō, the late Matsunami Yasuo, Yonezawa Yoshiyasu, and NIU Litao attended the China 
Tibetan Culture Forum at Beijing and travelled to Xining in Qinghai province and Lhasa in 
the TAR. Then we happened to know that the chairmen of both the Qinghai and TAR 
Governments were aware of the importance of Sanskrit manuscripts in the PRC. We hope 
from the bottom of our heart that these important source materials will become available to 
the academic world in the near future.
5. Features of Sanskrit manuscript research at Taisho University
Why were we able to get access to and investigate these important Sanskrit manuscripts? 
On this point, both Tada and Kimura have the same opinion. Kimura’s speech for the 
private session in his Buzanha ends with the following conclusion.
We believe that our sincere attitude as Buddhists is understood and trusted by 
Chinese people. Moreover, we work together not as individuals but as a group. 
Our group consists of not only researchers but also persons who, remaining 
behind the scenes, support the negotiations and the actual research tours. The 
success of the Sanskrit Manuscript Research Project could not be attained 
without such supporters. They worked not for themselves but for other people. 
It is nothing but a realization of the Bodhisattva spirit of Mahayana Buddhism.8
It is indeed true that many people from Taisho University contributed to the Sanskrit 
Manuscript Project to the best of their ability. The series of publications by Taisho University is nothing but the result of group work. We do not have enough information about 
what was going on on the PRC side. Nonetheless, we believe that our activities as a group 
were understood and became the basis for official permission by the proper authorities in 
the PRC.
The group work style is also a feature of academic research at Taisho University. When 
a certain text became available for publication, a study group began at the Institute. It 
means that not one person but a group of members engaged with textual studies.
6. Study groups at the Institute for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism
As was mentioned above, our institute has published the facsimile editions of manuscripts 
of the “Śrāvakabhūmi,” the Amoghapāśakalparāja, the Abhisamācārika-Dharma, the Vi8 “My Journey to Tibet,” delivered at Buzanha Lecturers’ Meeting of Ibaraki Prefecture, May 4 2003.

--- Page 350 of 425 ---
328
YOSHIYASU YONEZAWA AND JUNDŌ NAGASHIMA
nayasūtra, the Vinayasūtravṛtti, the Vigrahavyāvartanī, the *Lakṣaṇaṭīkā, the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa and the Jñānālokālaṃkāra. In most cases, we have undertaken research on these 
texts by organizing study groups at our institute. Exceptions are the transliterations of the 
Vigrahavyāvartanī and the *Lakṣaṇaṭīkā, which are the results of study undertaken by 
Yonezawa Yoshiyasu and Suzuki Kōshin as individuals.
Of these texts, the transliteration of the Abhisamācārika-Dharma, the Vinayasūtra, the 
Vigrahavyāvartanī, the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa and the Jñānālokālaṃkāra has at least been 
completed. On the other hand, others are still in progress. It is clear that our study groups 
are not necessarily making progress as quickly as expected, if we carefully look into each 
study group.
7. Śrāvakabhūmi study group
Of these, take the Śrāvakabhūmi study group for instance. It was started in 1979, fifteen 
years before the facsimile edition was published. The reason for starting the group was to 
read the edition of Karunesha Shukla9 by comparing it with the Chinese and Tibetan 
translations. It soon became apparent that the Śrāvakabhūmi needed re-editing. Shukla’s 
edition was based on the photographs of the manuscript taken by Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana at 
Zha lu monastery in Tibet in 1938. In 1981, the group obtained photocopies of the photographs, which were not particularly easy to read, and started to produce a Sanskrit edition 
and Japanese translation to publish in the Annual of our institute.
Because of the research conducted by the group over a decade, the Śrāvakabhūmi was 
chosen for publication out of many manuscripts when our institute established a relationship with the Cultural Palace of Nationalities in Beijing and made an agreement to conduct 
joint research on the Sanskrit manuscripts in 1990. The manuscript of the Śrāvakabhūmi 
preserved at the China Library of Nationalities in the Cultural Palace of Nationalities is, in 
fact, the one discovered and photographed by Sāṅkṛtyāyana at Zha lu monastery.
Since 1991, when we obtained the microfilm of the manuscript prior to the publication 
of the facsimile edition, we have worked on it and published Śrāvakabhūmi, Revised Sanskrit Text and Japanese Translation, The First Chapter (1998) and The Second Chapter 
(2007).10 We are planning to finish editing the third chapter in two years. Concerning the 
fourth chapter, a critical edition of the first half together with an English translation was 
published by Florin Deleanu of the International College for Postgraduate Buddhist 
Studies11 and the latter half is now being prepared for publication. Therefore, revision of all 
of the four chapters will hopefully be completed in the near future.
During the process of re-editing, we were able to correct errors made in Shukla’s edition 
thanks to the microfilm and facsimile edition of the manuscript, which are much clearer 
than the photographs taken by Sāṅkṛtyāyana, and point out many missing passages in the 
manuscript itself on the basis of the readings of the Tibetan and Chinese translations. In 
addition, we are able to read the parts of the manuscript unreadable on Sāṅkṛtyāyana’s 
photographs because they were hidden with pins or other folios. Nevertheless, Sāṅkṛtyāyana’s photographs have not lost their value in that the original manuscript has lost the 
edges of some folios after they were photographed in 1938, and these parts can be seen on 
his photographs.
9 Karunesha Shukla, Śrāvakabhūmi of Ācārya Asaṅga, Tibetan Sanskrit Work Series Vol. XIV, K. P. 
Jayaswal Research Institute, Patna, 1973.
10 These books are revised versions of the articles which have been published in AICSB.
11 Florin Deleanu, The Chapter on the Mundane Path (Laukikamārga) in the Śrāvakabhūmi: A 
Trilingual Edition (Sanskrit, Tibetan, Chinese), Annotated Translation, and Introductory Study, Studia 
Philologica Buddhica: Monograph Series XX, International Institute for Buddhist Studies, the International College for Postgraduate Buddhist Studies, Tokyo, 2006.

--- Page 351 of 425 ---
The Sanskrit Manuscript Research Project at Taisho University
329
On the other hand, we have come across cases in which the readings of the Sanskrit 
manuscript and the Tibetan and Chinese translations all disagree. In these cases, the study 
group was always thrown into confusion and was not able to decide what emendation we 
should make.
8. Advantages and disadvantages of group study
It is probably true that we are able to publish the transliteration of a manuscript rather 
quickly by dividing the work among the members of a group in order to make the text 
available to the public as soon as possible. Transliteration itself is a rather simple task and 
its duration can be shortened by sheer force of numbers as long as the script of the manuscript is clear. In addition, it is possible to eliminate mistakes by cross-checking among 
members. On the other hand, if we attempt to be more critical by comparing with some 
other manuscript or a translation, this may not always be the case. When the contents are 
incomprehensible or sentences are grammatically incorrect, the group’s discussion often 
stalls.
Concerning the Jñānālokālaṃkāra and the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa, for example, we first 
published the diplomatic transliterations of the Sanskrit texts two years after the manuscript had become available to us, taking the view that it was necessary to publicize these 
newly found texts as soon as possible. This was facilitated by the fact that the manuscript 
is written in clear characters, with few grammatical mistakes and no substantial damage to 
the support. We also attempted to produce editions of these two works in a relatively short 
time by keeping annotations to a minimum. In doing so, however, we sacrificed the opportunity to carry out a careful investigation of the readings in the four translations, especially 
the oldest available Chinese rendition by ZHI Qian,12 which is generally abstruse but contains a great number of interesting sentences. Our intention was to provide scholars with 
access to the texts so that they could engage in research on them, deepen their understanding and correct our mistakes in the end.
With regard to the Śrāvakabhūmi, on the other hand, the purpose of the study group was 
to revise Shukla’s edition and to produce a more reliable text by comparing the readings of 
the manuscript with those of the translations. The text is corrupt or missing in many parts 
and it is necessary to emend and reconstruct it. As a result, thirty years have already passed 
since we started the Śrāvakabhūmi study group, but we have not yet finished editing the 
text.
In this way, it is necessary to vary the way of publishing the text of a certain manuscript 
depending on whether the manuscript is new or re-edited, clear or not, and so on. As researchers, we tend to aim at elaborate study. In fact, we are not necessarily satisfied with 
the result of some of our projects, in terms of academic depth. We nevertheless have to 
avoid the two pitfalls of putting speed of publication before academic quality and of not 
publishing at all as a result of striving for perfection.
9. Problems in manuscript study
When undertaking a manuscript project, it is sometimes not possible for us to choose what 
text to read. This is true for the Vinayasūtra and its Vṛtti. They are included in A Collection 
of Sanskrit Palm-leaf Manuscripts in Tibetan dBu med Script. We soon realized that, in 
some parts, these texts were much more than we could handle. If their readings were 
clearly understood, actual harm might have been limited. In reality, the sūtras have 
abbreviations and the commentary does not accord with the sūtras in many cases. We do 
not think, in addition, that the Tibetan translator understood the contents well because the 
12 Foshuo weimojie jing, Taisho No. 474.

--- Page 352 of 425 ---
330
YOSHIYASU YONEZAWA AND JUNDŌ NAGASHIMA
Tibetan translation often disagrees with the Sanskrit and does not make sense. Consequently, the Sanskrit reconstruction in Bapat and Gokhale’s edition13 is often misleading. Under 
these circumstances, we are struggling with our limited knowledge of Vinaya to figure out 
the contents.
It is very important for us in such a case to be in communication with experts. We 
obtained useful advice from Chung Jin-il and Shayne Clarke with regard to Vinaya texts 
and felt the importance of expert instruction more than ever. In the same way, members of 
the Śrāvakabhūmi study group were greatly benefitted by advice from Lambert Schmithausen when he visited Japan in 2006 in order to give a series of lectures at the International College for Postgraduate Buddhist Studies. This happy opportunity materialized 
only after his retirement, thanks to the college, which is organized enough to invite professors from abroad.
10. Future prospects
An increasing number of manuscripts have been made available to us these days and it is 
our duty to publish them without unnecessary delay or loss of quality. In our opinion, it is 
necessary to form a team in one way or another in order to handle such a task. The 
participation of experts plays an indispensable part in maximizing results. However, the 
number of experts is limited and they are often unavailable or too expensive to invite for 
consultation in person. We hope some kind of matchmaking procedure will be established 
among researchers or between researchers and manuscripts.
Appendix: Selected Bibliography of Research
on the basis of the Facsimile Editions published by Taisho University
Abbreviations
AICSB: Annual of the Institute for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism, Taisho University, The 
Institute for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism, Taisho University.
JNIB: Journal of Naritasan Institute for Buddhist Studies, Naritasan Institute for Buddhist Studies.
Śrāvakabhūmi
Śrāvakabhūmi, The First Chapter, Revised Sanskrit Text and Japanese Translation, by Śrāvakabhūmi Study Group, Sankibo Busshorin, Tokyo, 1998.
Śrāvakabhūmi, The Second Chapter, with Asamāhitā bhūmiḥ, Śrutāmayī bhūmiḥ, Cintāmayī 
bhūmiḥ, Revised Sanskrit Text and Japanese Translation, by Śrāvakabhūmi Study Group, 
Sankibo Busshorin, Tokyo, 2007.
“The Śrāvakabhūmi, Part XXII Sanskrit Text, Analysis, and Translation of the Tṛtīyaṃ Yogasthānaṃ I” by Śrāvakabhūmi Study Group, AICSB 30, 2008: (1)–(79).
“The Śrāvakabhūmi, Part XXIII Sanskrit Text, Analysis, and Translation of the Tṛtīyaṃ Yogasthānaṃ II” by Śrāvakabhūmi Study Group, AICSB 31, 2009: (1)–(81).
“The Śrāvakabhūmi, Part XXIV Sanskrit Text, Analysis, and Translation of the Tṛtīyaṃ Yogasthānaṃ III” by Śrāvakabhūmi Study Group, AICSB 32, 2010: (1)–(47).
“The Śrāvakabhūmi, Part XXV Sanskrit Text, Analysis, and Translation of the Tṛtīyaṃ Yogasthānaṃ IV” by Śrāvakabhūmi Study Group, AICSB 33, 2011: (105)–(151).
13 P.V. Bapat and V.V. Gokhale eds., Vinayasūtra and Auto-Commentary on the same by Guṇaprabha 
Chapter I — Pravrajyā-vastu Compared with the Tibetan version, Tibetan Sanskrit Works Series No. 
XXII, Kashi Prasad Jayaswal Research Institute, Patna, 1982.

--- Page 353 of 425 ---
The Sanskrit Manuscript Research Project at Taisho University
331
Amoghapāśakalparāja
“Transcribed Sanskrit Text of the Amoghapāśakalparāja” by The Buddhist Tantric Study Group: 
Part I, AICSB 20, 1998: (1)–(54); Part II, AICSB 21, 1999: (81)–(128); Part III, AICSB 22, 
2000: (1)–(64); Part IV, AICSB 23, 2001: (1)–(76); Part V, AICSB 26, 2004: (120)–(183); Part 
VI, AICSB 32, 2010: (170)–(207); Part VII, AICSB 33, 2011: (32)–(64).
Abhisamācārika-Dharma
A Guide to the Facsimile Edition of the Abhisamācārika-Dharma of the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādin, by Abhisamācārika-Dharma Study Group, The Institute for Comprehensive Studies of 
Buddhism, Taisho University, 1998. (Transliteration of chapters I–IV)
“Transcription of the Abhisamācārika-Dharma, chap. V–VII,” by Abhisamācārika-Dharma Study 
Group, AICSB 21, 1999: (1)–(79), 234–156.
“Abhisamācārikā I • 1–3 : Japanese translation” by Nishimura Minori, Studies in Buddhist Education and Humanity: Essays in Honor of Professor Saitō Akitoshi on his Seventieth Birthday, 
Kobian Shobo, Tokyo, 2000: 221–236.
“Abhisamācārikā I • 4 : Japanese translation” by Nishimura Minori, The Base and Development of 
Buddhist Culture, Essays in Honor of Professor Zennō Ishigami on his Seventieth Birthday I, 
Sankibo Busshorin, Tokyo, 2001: (241)–(258).
“Abhisamācārikā I • 5–7 : Japanese translation” by Nishimura Minori, Memoirs of Taisho University. The School of Human Studies, the School of Literature 86, 2001: (117)–(129).
“Abhisamācārikā I • 8–10 Japanese translation” by Nishimura Minori, Early Buddhism and Abhidharma Thought: in honor of doctor Hajime Sakurabe on his seventy-seventh birthday, Heirakuji Shoten, Kyoto, 2002: (73)–(84).
“A Tentative Japanese Translation of the Abhisamācārika-Dharma of the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādin Chapter 2 (1–3)” by Yoshizawa Hidetoshi, Journal of the Graduate School, Taisho 
University 26, 2002: (239)–(250).
“A Tentative Japanese Translation of the Abhisamācārika-Dharma of the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādin Chapter 2 (4–7)” by Yoshizawa Hidetoshi, The Felicitation Volume for Professor 
Ryōjun Sato on the Occasion of His Seventieth Birthday I, Sankibo Busshorin, Tokyo, 2003:
(129)–(140).
“A Tentative Japanese Translation of the Abhisamācārika-Dharma of the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravādin Chapter 2 (8–9)” by Yoshizawa Hidetoshi, Journal of the Graduate School, Taisho 
University 28, 2004: (352)–(338). 
“Dantakāṣṭha in the Abhisamācārika-Dharma” by Yoshizawa Hidetoshi, Annual of the Sanko 
Research Institute for the Studies of Buddhism 35, 2004: (19)–(38). NB: Japanese translation 
of chapter 2 (10) is included.
“Abhisamācārika-Dharma (Chapter 3): Japanese Translation with Notes” by Kouda Ryōshū, 
Thoughts in Indian Studies and their distribution, Volume in Honour of Professor Hōjō Kenzō 
on his Seventieth Birthday, Sankibo Busshorin, Tokyo, 2004: (111)–(132).
“Abhisamācārika-Dharma Chapter 4: Japanese Translation and Notes” by Kouda Ryōshū, AICSB 
26, 2004: (14)–(35).
“A Tentative Japanese Translation of the Abhisamācārika-Dharma Chapter 6” by Matsunami Yasuo, 
The Base and Development of Buddhist Culture, Essays in Honor of Professor Zennō Ishigami on his Seventieth Birthday I, Sankibo Busshorin, Tokyo, 2001: (219)–(238).
“Abhisamācārika-Dharma Chapter 7: Japanese Translation and Notes” by Kouda Ryōshū, Annual 
of the Sanko Research Institute for the Studies of Buddhism 36, 2005: (15)–(43).
dBu med manuscript
Vinayasūtra and Vṛtti
Transliteration of the Vinayasūtra: http://www.tmx.tais.ac.jp/sobutsu/vinayasutra.html
“The Pravrajyāvastu of the Vinayasūtra and its Vṛtti” by Vinayasūtra’s Pravrajyāvastu Study 
Group: (1) AICSB 25, 2003: (44)–(93); (2) AICSB 26, 2004: (54)–(73); (3) AICSB 27, 2005:

--- Page 354 of 425 ---
332
YOSHIYASU YONEZAWA AND JUNDŌ NAGASHIMA
(50)–(76); (4) AICSB 29, 2007: (26)–(65); (5), AICSB 31, 2009: (83)–(125); (6) AICSB 32, 
2010: (48)–(84); (7) AICSB 33, 2011: (65)–(104).
Vigrahavyāvartanī 
“Vigrahavyāvartanī: Sanskrit transliteration and Tibetan translation” by Yonezawa Yoshiyasu, JNIB 
31, 2008: 209–333.
*Lakṣaṇaṭīkā 
“*Lakṣaṇaṭīkā Sanskrit notes on the Prasannapadā” by Yonezawa Yoshiyasu: (1) JNIB 27, 2004: 
115–154; (2) JNIB 28, 2005: 159–179; (3) JNIB 29, 2006: 135–163; (4) JNIB 30, 2007: 203–
235; (5) JNIB 32, 2009: 139–155; (6) JNIB 33, 2010: 125–154.
“*Lakṣaṇaṭīkā Tibetan Notes on the Prasannapadā Chapter I (LVP 5.1–36.2),” JNIB 34, 2011: 125–
158.
“*Lakṣaṇaṭīkā Sanskrit Notes on the Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣya Chapter 1 Revised” by Yonezawa 
Yoshiyasu, Essays on Sanskrit and Buddhist Culture, Professor Yoshihiro Matsunami’s Felicitation Volume, presented to him on his seventieth birthday, Professor Y. Matsunami’s Felicitation Committee, Taisho Books, Tokyo, 2007: 583–598.
“A transliteration of the Sanskrit notes on the Catuḥśatakaṭīkā in the *Lakṣaṇatīkā” by Suzuki 
Kōshin, Gedenkschrift J. W. de Jong, ed. by H.W. Bodewitz and M. Hara, Studia Philologica 
Buddhica Monograph Series XVII, The International Institute for Buddhist Studies, Tokyo, 
2004: 189–206.
Vimalakīrtinirdeśa
Vimalakīrtinirdeśa: Sanskrit texts collated with Tibetan and Chinese translations, by Study Group 
on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature, Taisho University Press, Tokyo, 2004.
Vimalakīrtinirdeśa: A Sanskrit Edition Based upon the Manuscript Newly Found at the Potala 
Palace, by Study Group on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature, Taisho University Press, Tokyo, 
2006.
Jñānālokālaṃkāra
Jñānālokālaṃkāra: Sanskrit texts collated with Tibetan and Chinese translations, by Study Group 
on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature, Taisho University Press, Tokyo, 2004.
“Sarvabuddhaviṣayāvatārajñānālokālaṃkāra nāma mahāyānasūtra Sanskrit Text” by Kimura Takayasu, Ōtsuka Nobuo, Kimura Hideaki and Takahashi Hisao, Kōbōdaishi Kūkai’s Thought and 
Culture: in honour of Litt. D. Kichō Onozuka on his seventieth birthday II, Nomble, Tokyo, 
2004: (2)–(89).

--- Page 355 of 425 ---
Various Aspects of Dealing with Buddhist codices unici
MICHAEL HAHN (MARBURG)
In the field of Buddhist philology and textual criticism, codices unici are not particularly 
rare or remarkable. Due to the well-known state of the transmission and preservation of 
Buddhist manuscripts in the countries adjacent to India, there are many famous works preserved in only one exemplar or fragment of an exemplar, as is the case with the Gilgit 
manuscripts, or with many texts discovered in Central Asia. The opposite case, a work preserved in a great number of copies, recensions, and translations, like the Udānavarga, is 
also met with, but will not be discussed, although highly interesting from a different 
theoretical point of view.
In the course of my study of the extant (and not so small) corpus of the Buddhist Sanskrit literature of Nepal, wherever in the world it is preserved, I have found that quite a few 
important works have survived in only one copy, either physically or at least from the point 
of view of textual criticism. Examples are:
Buddhacarita by Aśvaghoṣa (less than 50 per cent preserved)*
Ratnāvalī by Nāgārjuna (60 per cent only)*
Pāramitāsamāsa by Āryaśūra (complete)
Jātakamālāṭīkā (1–15) by an anonymous author
Jātakamālā by Haribhaṭṭa (30 per cent only)*
Śiṣyalekha by Candragomin (98 per cent)
Nāgānandanāṭaka by Harṣadeva (98 per cent)
Saptakumārikāvadāna by Gopadatta (complete)
*Ajātaśatrvavadāna by Gopadatta (incomplete)
Kapphiṇābhyudaya by Śivasvāmin (92 per cent)*
Vṛttamālāstuti by Jñānaśrīmitra 
 and Vṛttamālāvivṛti by Śākyarakṣita (99 per cent)*
Vidagdhavismāpana by Ratnākaraśānti (complete)
 and its commentary by Paṇḍita Aśoka (complete)
Maṇicūḍajātaka by Sarvarakṣita (complete)
These are only samples. A complete list would be much longer. While on the one hand this 
specific situation relieves editors of the mechanical duties of collating a certain number of 
manuscripts and establishing a stemma, it compels them, on the other hand, to develop 
other criteria and principles for dealing with his sole source. I will discuss some of these 
criteria and principles, the use of other testimonia or ancillary sources and the possible 
influence that the primary source may have on an ancillary source, e.g., a Tibetan translation. The recent editions of the Sanskrit texts of Candragomin’s Śiṣyalekha, Haribhaṭṭa’s 
Jātakamālā, Śivasvāmin’s Kapphiṇābhyudaya, and Jñānaśrīmitra’s Vṛttamālāstuti will 
illustrate this.
It has to be emphasized that the list of texts given above no longer reflects the actual 
state of affairs, but only the situation when I was working on them a decade ago. In the 
meantime, in the case of those texts marked by an asterisk, new sources have turned up or 
have at least been reported to exist (without being accessible). However, my paper will 
deal only with works that are in fact still represented only by a single witness.
As stated above, it is quite normal that editors of Buddhist texts have to work with only 
one primary witness of the text they are studying. Often, however, there are important and 
valuable secondary sources that greatly facilitate the editorial work, like Tibetan or 
Chinese translations, or close parallels from the Pāli Tripiṭaka. Parallels from other parts of

--- Page 356 of 425 ---
334
MICHAEL HAHN
the Sanskrit canon can also prove helpful, be they stock phrases or similar ideas expressed 
in similar words. These ancillary sources enable the editor to correct mistakes or fill gaps.
The situation is different in the case of the shastric and poetic literature. Good examples 
are the texts microfilmed or copied by Rahula Sankrityayana during his four exploratory 
missions to Tibet in the thirties of the last century. In most cases the editors had to work on 
the basis of single manuscripts, albeit rather good ones. In all these cases a great familiarity with the subject matter was the main precondition for establishing a by and large correct 
text, especially when there were no secondary sources of the abovementioned type. The 
typical problems and difficulties the editors of these texts faced are illustrated in the 
editions and re-editions of the philosophical works of Jñānaśrīmitra and Ratnakīrti.
As is well known, one of my main fields of research is the poetic and didactic literature 
of Indian Buddhism that, in my opinion, forms a most important complement to the extant 
classical Sanskrit literature. Unfortunately, only a small part of it has so far been edited, 
translated and studied, and found its way into the authoritative surveys of Indian literature. 
In general, the histories of Indian literature confine themselves to the two epics composed 
by Aśvaghoṣa, the Buddhacarita and the Saundarananda, Āryaśūra’s Jātakamālā, and 
Kṣemendra’s Bodhisattvāvadānakalpalatā. Only occasionally some of the minor works, 
such as the hymns composed by Mātṛceṭa or Candragomin’s “Letter to a disciple” (Śiṣyalekha), are also mentioned. Even the most comprehensive work in this field, A. K. Warder’s monumental Indian Kāvya Literature, cannot be regarded as up to date, because Warder’s manuscript was more or less completed when about 35 years ago a revived interest in 
this subject brought to light a considerable number of new and important works.
My own contribution has been a systematic survey of the remnants of the Sanskrit Buddhist literature of Nepal, wherever it has been preserved. Between 1975 and 1985 I visited 
the major libraries where Buddhist manuscripts from Nepal are kept and in most cases I 
was given permission to microfilm the manuscripts I was interested in. The result is a 
collection of microfilms of more than 1,000 manuscripts now kept in the library of the 
Institute of Indian Studies (Indologisches Seminar) at the University of Bonn. In 1988, I 
gave a brief report of my exploration tours in a volume celebrating the 30th anniversary of 
the Indologisches Seminar as an independent institute. It is followed by Helmut Eimer’s 
list of titles of this collection. On the basis of these manuscripts, several Buddhist works 
were edited or re-edited, either by myself or by my students at Bonn and Marburg. Some 
important works whose Sanskrit originals could not be traced were edited on the basis of 
their Tibetan translations.
While analyzing the manuscripts collected at Bonn, I was surprised to find how often a 
certain text has survived only in a single copy. E.g., it could be shown that the two paper 
manuscripts of Candragomin’s Śiṣyalekha from St. Petersburg and Tokyo are mere copies 
of the palm leaf manuscript dated 204 N.S. (~ 1084 CE), kept in the Cambridge University 
Library, or that five of the six extant manuscripts that contain nine or ten legends from 
Haribhaṭṭa’s Jātakamālā go back to one among them, the Bodhisattvajātakāvadānamālā. 
The latter manuscript is undated but one of its descendants was copied, according to its 
colophon, in 810 N.S. (~ 1690 CE) so that the archetype has to be earlier than that date. In 
the case of the Śiṣyalekha, the edition of the Sanskrit text was facilitated by the existence 
of a good or at least fairly good (but heavily corrupted) Tibetan translation of the root text 
and of two Sanskrit commentaries. With their help, more than 30 serious mistakes could be 
corrected and almost all the gaps caused by the physical damage of the manuscript could 
be closed. This manuscript also shows that the rule of thumb “The older the manuscript, 
the better its textual quality” is not always valid, because its 116 stanzas are marred by ca. 
200 minor and almost 50 major mistakes or gaps. An instructive case is stanza 112, whose 
first line contains the compound prakaṭavipulayakāgādhaḥ. It is a Dvandva compound,

--- Page 357 of 425 ---
Various aspects of dealing with Buddhist codices unici
335
whose four members, by way of śleṣa or double entendre, simultaneously refer to a pond 
and to the Buddha. The two syllables °yakā° (marked by bold face) are unintelligible. 
Their Tibetan equivalent is the hapax legomenon byin gzhol whose meaning becomes clear 
from Prajñākaramati’s Śiṣyalekhavṛtti. There it is stated that byin gyis gzhol ba — this is 
the full form — means dge ba la gzhol ba “devoted or inclined to what is wholesome.” 
There is only one Sanskrit term palaeographically close to yakā that yields the required 
meaning, namely prahva.
After the publication of the critical edition and English translation of the Śiṣyalekha in 
my book Invitation to Enlightenment, Diwakar Acharya discovered another copy of the 
palm leaf manuscript that was done when the latter was less mutilated than it was when the 
two other copies (St. Petersburg and Tokyo) were prepared. In 2007, he published a list of 
25 readings that either deviate from the readings reported by me or supplement it (see 
Diwakar 2007). In 15 cases, the new readings confirm my emendations or restorations of 
missing text. The remaining 10 new readings will be briefly discussed here. Parentheses ( ) 
are used for physically lost portions of the manuscripts, square brackets [ ] for mutilated or 
only partly legible letters, while pointed brackets < > designate letters omitted by the 
scribe. For the splendid emendations in lines 95c, 97b, and 100a I am indebted to Mitsuyo 
Demoto (Marburg).
1) Stanza 7 is mutilated. On the basis of its Tibetan translation —
chos kyi sprin de phan pa mdzad pa’i don du g.yos ||
chos kyi bdud rtsi mya ngan ’das pa mchog gi rgyu ||
ro gcig gdung ba sel ba char chu bzhin du phab ||
de ni snod la brten nas ro rnams du mar gyur ||
The cloud of the dharma that has been produced in order to become useful
has poured down the nectar of the dharma, the cause of the highest nirvāṇa,
that has (only) one taste and removes pain, as if it were rain water;
depending on the condition of the vessel, it takes various tastes.
— in my edition of 1999 I had restored its missing portions as follows:
dharmāmbuvāha iva yo ’bhyudito hitāya
dharmāmṛtaṃ jalam ivaikarasaṃ vavarṣa | 
tāpāpa(hāri pari)ni(r)v(ṛt)i(kāraṇaṃ ca
pātrā)ś(r)ayeṇa yad anekarasa[ṃ babhūva] || 7 ||
The new manuscript reads tāpāpanodanam iva .... in line c which makes my reconstruction 
of that line obsolete. The six still missing syllables have to fit the following metrical 
pattern: ⏑ ⏑ – ⏑ – ⏓. Moreover, the eighth syllable, beginning with va, has to be long. 
Hence the ninth syllable has to begin with a consonant cluster or the vowel of the eighth 
syllable is to be lengthened, e.g., by a dīrghamātra or an anusvāra. The last two syllables 
could be °hetuṃ, the equivalent of Tibetan rgyu. I am not able to propose a meaningful text 
for the other four syllables. As for the end of line d, I now prefer to read anekarasatvam 
āpa because °rasa seems to be followed by a conjunct letter and the last syllable looks 
more like pa than va.
2) Stanza 8d ends in ḥ, as does the palm leaf manuscript. This does not confirm my 
tentative reconstruction
(tasmai namaḥ puruṣarūpamahāhradāya)
based on the Tibetan translation
mtsho chen mi yi gzugs can de la phyag ’tshal lo ||
Hence my alternative reconstruction might be closer to the original text:
(tebhyo namaḥ puruṣarūpamahāhradebhya)ḥ

--- Page 358 of 425 ---
336
MICHAEL HAHN
3) In stanza 11a I had restored the three missing syllables as śikṣā(padeṣu), based on the 
Tibetan translation bslab gzhi. The new manuscript, however, reads śikṣābalena. °padeṣu 
is confirmed by the Śiṣyalekhaṭippaṇa (bslab pa’i gzhi rnams la) and the Śiṣyalekhavṛtti 
(bslab pa’i gzhi bcas pa). Hence there is no need to alter the restoration, although the 
alternative text is also meaningful.
4) In stanza 16b the new manuscript reads nirayā (!) sughorā (!) instead of nirayāś ca 
ghorāḥ. Apart from the two missing visargas, ca is required by the context (tiṣṭhantu tāvad 
iha sarvajanāpavādāḥ sarvāś ca pāpagatayo nirayāś ca ghorāḥ) and confirmed by the 
Tibetan: re zhig skye bo kun gyis dpyas dang sdig pa yi || ’gro ba kun dang dmyal ba mi 
bzod phar zhog gi ||. Therefore the new reading is to be rejected.
5) In stanza 41a the new manuscript repeats the scribal error of the palm-leaf manuscript: 
°caṃcacchaṭā(!)nikara° instead of °cañcajjaṭānikara°. The emendation *jaṭā,“locks,” is 
confirmed by the Tibetan ral pa’i tshogs mang and corroborated by the Śiṣyalekhaṭippaṇa 
that explains: ral pa’i tshogs mang ba ni skra’i tshogs bsgyings pa’o ||: “An ‘ample mass 
of locks’ means ‘a spreading mass of hair’.”
6) In stanza 54c the new manuscript repeats the spelling error of the palm-leaf manuscript: 
°sakalāvalī° instead of °śakalāvalī°, Tibetan dum phreng ba’i.
7) In stanza 57c the new manuscript reads ghaṭṭitaṃ for ghaṭitaṃ of the palm-leaf manuscript. From the metrical point of view ghaṭitaṃ is not possible since the first syllable has 
to be long. The stanza describes how the hell beings develop some hope when the entrance 
gate is opened for a short moment, but become utterly disappointed when the door panels 
of karma are closed again. In classical Sanskrit as recorded by the PW we would expect 
ghāṭitaṃ “closed,” and I emended accordingly. However, Schmidt in his Nachträge has the 
entry “[ghaṭṭ,] ghaṭṭita = ghaṭita, geschlossen, Divyāv, 29,7.12. ... Mit ud, °udghaṭṭate 
aufgehen (von der Tür gesagt), S I,99,11 Ko. (udghaṭṭamāna).” “S” is the abbreviation for 
Somadeva’s Yaśastilakacampū, ed. Kāvyamālā No. 70. Thus it seems that ghaṭṭitaṃ is 
indeed a possible alternative for ghāṭitaṃ. Nevertheless, we cannot be sure as to what 
Candragomin himself wrote because ghaṭṭitaṃ is perhaps no more than the emendation of 
an intelligent scribe. The wrong reading ghaṭitaṃ could as well have originated from 
*ghāṭitaṃ. Therefore the case remains undecided.
8) In stanza 63b my emendation āropayanti (for ācopayanti) is confirmed by the new 
manuscript, but not the following restoration *śivam uttama*bodhibījam (for the unintelligible sivanentasa), Tibetan byang chub mchog gi sa bon dge ba’ang. Here the new manuscript reads subham anantasubodhi°, which is unmetrical and not supported by the Tibetan 
in its second part. The restored text is to be kept.
9) In stanza 97, the new manuscript simply confirms the reading tanniṣphalaḥ of the palmleaf manuscript. Mitsuyo Demoto suggested emending tanniṣphalaḥ as *tā niṣphalāḥ with 
niṣphalā meaning “die Menses nicht mehr habend” (PW; attested only in the Amarakośa!), 
“a woman past child-bearing” in order to have a meaningful text:
aṅkasthitena śiśunā vivaśena yāsāṃ
pītaḥ payodhararasaḥ praṇayānuyātaḥ | 
*tā niṣphalāḥ* pracuradurlalitaikabhājaḥ
ko nāma dasyur api hātum ihotsaheta || 97 ||
Who on earth, even the lowest of the low,
could force themselves to abandon their mothers,
when they have passed the age of child-bearing,
whose milk, joined with their affectionate love,
they drank as helpless infants on their laps,

--- Page 359 of 425 ---
Various aspects of dealing with Buddhist codices unici
337
although they received in return
nothing but their many naughty pranks?
In the Tibetan translation, niṣphalāḥ seems to have been rendered rather freely:
byis pa pang na btsas pa ci yang mi nus pas ||
gang gi nu zho byams pa’i shugs kyis gzags ’thungs pa ||
ngal ba mang bsten byams pa bsten pa de dag ’dir ||
shin tu ma rabs zhig na’ang spong bar su zhig spro || 97 ||
Who on earth, even if born in a very low family,
would readily abandon her
who, having endured many toils [because of him],
[always] maintained her love [towards him],
and whose milk, trickling down under the force of her love, he drank
when he was helplessly resting (‘protected’) on her lap?
The two commentaries Śiṣyalekhaṭippaṇa (ngal ba [= durlalita] rtse ba la sogs pa’o || gcig 
pu bsten pa [= ekabhājaḥ] zhes bya ba ni rkyen sbyin no ||) and Śiṣyalekhavṛtti (bu’i ched 
du las kyi mtha’ sna tshogs la ’bad pas ngal ba mang po ston kyang bu la byams pa sten 
pa) clearly show that ngal ba mang bsten represents pracuradurlalitaikabhājaḥ. The word 
order of line b suggests that byams pa’i shugs kyis gzags is a free rendering of praṇayānuyātaḥ while byams pa bsten pa in line c corresponds to niṣphalāḥ. Since there is no semantic agreement, it might have been taken from the Śiṣyalekhavṛtti, replacing the lost original 
translation.
10) In stanza 100a; I had tried to restore the lost portion of the first line as
(na yānaiḥ) [śreṣṭhai](r) naiva ca nṛpatilakṣmīparikarair
on the basis of the Tibetan translation, which runs:
gzhon bdes mi thob mi dbang ’byor pa’i yo byad rnams kyis min ||
Not by comfortable vehicles it is attained,
and not by the luxury of royal status
In order to maintain the construction I had to alter saṃprāpya of the palm-leaf manuscript 
to sā prāpyā in line c. Now the new manuscript reads na mārasyodyāne na ca (?). Mitsuyo 
Demoto suggested the following text behind this corruption:
na *sā ramyair yānair* na ca nṛpatilakṣmīparikarair
na dārair nāpatyair na surabhavane nāsuragatau | 
kathaṃ cit *saṃprāpyā viṣayasukha<sa>ṃbhogaparamair
labhante yā(ṃ) prīti(ṃ) parahitasukhādhānaniratāḥ || 100 ||
Not by comfortable vehicles
and not by the luxury of royal status,
not by wives or children, not in the palace of the gods,
or in the state of existence as a demigod—
not by any of these means
can those for whom enjoyment of the objects of the senses
is the greatest good attain, even through their greatest efforts,
a happiness that parallels the joy of those
who devote themselves to creating happiness
and welfare for others.
To sum up: in one case the younger copy has preserved a better reading (tāpāpanodanam 
iva) and in a second case its still faulty reading helped to restore the original text (na sā 
ramyair yānair na ca). There is one more stanza where a better solution can be proposed 
than the one given in Invitation to Enlightenment, pp. 114–115, where I had also overlooked the fact that stanza 95 forms a grammatical unit with the following stanza 96:

--- Page 360 of 425 ---
338
MICHAEL HAHN
yaiḥ sārdham etya hasitaṃ lalitaṃ pragītam
ekatra pītam aśitaṃ kṛtāś ca goṣṭhyaḥ | 
kālakrameṇa *gamitāḥ kati ke ’pi* ramyā
nītāḥ samāś ca viṣamāś ca daśāḥ kathaṃ cit || 95 ||
Of those with whom we used to laugh, play, sing,
drink, eat, and converse in company with one another,
many who were dear to us have, over time, been forced to depart,
and were somehow led into good and bad conditions.
The palm-leaf manuscript actually reads gamitā kalike ’pi, and the Tibetan translation of 
the stanza runs as follows:
gang dang lhan cig ’dus nas bgad cing rtses pa dang ||
glu blangs dga’ ’dun byas shing gcig tu zos ’thungs dang ||
dus kyi rim pas me tog rna rgyan dengs byas dang ||
gnas skabs ci zhig ltar mnyam mi mnyam byas pa yi ||
(The relatives) with whom one has been associated, laughed,
played, sung, amicably conversed, eaten and drunk,
(who), in the course of time, have made the flowery ear-ornament wither,
have somehow created ‘even’ and ‘uneven’ occasions, ...
The crucial term in this stanza is kalikā. Here it does not mean “an unblown flower, a bud,” 
but has to be taken as diminutive of kalā, here signifying “a short span of time.” Mitsuyo 
Demoto suggested emending kalike ’pi as kalikāpi (where the dīrghamātra was perhaps 
misread as avagraha) and keep the reading gamitā of the palm leaf manuscript. This is the 
corrected translation of the Sanskrit text:
Of those with whom we used to laugh, play, sing,
drink, eat, and converse in company with one another,
with whom we have spent, over time, (many) happy moments,
and experienced good and bad situations, ...
It is clear that the Tibetan translators had not understood kalikāpi ramyā properly. Their 
rendering me tog rna rgyan, “ear-ornament of flower,” seems to be a mixture of kalikā, 
“bud,” and karṇikā, “ear-ornament.” The Śiṣyalekhaṭippaṇa has the following explanation: 
dus ni me tog dang ldan pa’o || which I understand as “As for ‘time,’ it is (circumscribed 
by a term that etymologically means) ‘endowed with a flower’.” This looks like a typical 
case of the juxtaposition of definiendum and definiens: “As for kalikā, (etymologically 
meaning) ‘endowed with a flower,’ it (here) designates (a short span of) time.”
In the case of Haribhaṭṭa’s Jātakamālā, the Tibetan translation proved to be of invaluable help, despite its generally poor quality, because its extremely mechanical character 
enables the editor to see whether the translators had the same text in front of them or not. 
However, its literalness can occasionally lead the editor astray by creating a wrong expectation of what the text should read. In my first edition of four legends from Haribhaṭṭa’s 
Jātakamālā (Hahn 1992) I misread two Sanskrit words because I was influenced by the 
Tibetan. Instead of tanutram, “armour (‘protector of the body’),” I read tanutvam with the 
Tibetan yang ba nyid, “lightness,” and in the second case I read uṣṭrāḥ, “camels,” instead 
of usrāḥ, “cows,” because the Tibetan has rnga ma rnams, “camels.” Hence, the editor has 
to reckon with such mistakes and should become suspicious whenever the meaning is in 
contradiction with the style of the author of the text at issue.
A very special case is Śivasvāmin’s poem Kapphiṇābhyudaya. This is a Buddhist mahākāvya composed in Kashmir in the second half of the ninth century. Its source is a legend 
from the Avadānaśataka, the Kapphiṇāvadāna. It is retold in such a manner that it fulfils 
all the requirements of a “great ornate epic.” Until recently, it has not been possible to 
properly assess the quality of the work, because the editio princeps by Gauri Shankar 
(Lahore 1937) is marred by countless mistakes that affect more than 50 per cent of its

--- Page 361 of 425 ---
Various aspects of dealing with Buddhist codices unici
339
roughly 1,100 stanzas. The main reason for the defects of this edition is the insufficient 
manuscript material: two incomplete manuscripts from Orissa (now kept in Madras) and 
the transcript of a good but unfortunately incomplete manuscript from Nepal; 22 of its 56 
leaves (one of them blank) are missing in the National Archives, Kathmandu. Under these 
circumstances the task committed to Gauri Shankar was hopeless. Thanks to the NepalGerman Manuscript Preservation Project, access to the leaves preserved in Kathmandu 
became possible, and by good luck I discovered 18 of the 22 missing folios in the library 
of Ryūkoku University, Kyōto. Very soon it became clear that this manuscript that is now 
split up in two library collections and that I abbreviate as “N” is the only one that permits 
us to reconstruct the original wording. It is extremely well written, practically free of mistakes, and characterized by a most sophisticated marking system that separates the words 
or even members of a compound whenever the text is difficult or contains a double 
entendre. This marking system can be regarded as a “commentary in a nutshell.” Both 
parts of this precious manuscript were used for the appendix to a reprint of Gauri Shankar’s editio princeps, in which almost 50 per cent of the text was presented in an improved 
edition (Gauri Shankar/Hahn 1989), and for a new edition of the whole text accompanied 
by a facsimile reproduction of the manuscript and its diplomatic transliteration (Hahn 
2007).
At the Stanford conference, the question was raised whether it is sensible to publish 
facsimile reproductions of manuscripts in book form, or whether they are better distributed 
electronically. As in many other cases, I would like to suggest a madhyamā pratipad, a 
“middle position.” For financial reasons paper publications can certainly not be done in all 
cases that might seem desirable. However, there are some cases in which a manuscript is 
both a source of information and a cultural document or piece of art. In such cases, the 
reproduction is justifiable, especially when the owner and protector of such a precious item 
is willing and in a position to financially support the publication. The reproduction of the 
Kapphiṇābhyudaya manuscript, for example, was made possible through the generous 
support of Ryūkoku University.
That a facsimile edition, in whatever form, should accompany the publication of an important codex unicus seems not to be in question. There are too many instances where a 
reader would like to check whether another reading is also possible, especially in those 
cases where the manuscript is not easy to decipher. In my second edition of the Kapphiṇābhyudaya there are several passages where repeated study of the manuscript and greater familiarity with Śivasvāmin’s style enabled me to improve the text. One example may 
suffice.
In the introduction to the reprint of 1989 I discussed a few passages in order to illustrate 
the superiority of the new manuscript. With regard to stanza iv.25 I wrote:
A particularly noteworthy case is stanza IV.25:
5) atibalavati śatrau tulyaśauryodaye vā
dadhati samucitatvaṃ nīticintāntarāyāḥ |
vada sunayavivakṣālakṣyatāṃ yānti tūlaplavalaghimasu rājan ke ’salāḥ kośaleṣu || IV.25 ||
The printed text read ati balavati instead of atibalavati (printing mistake?), 
tucchatūla- instead of yānti tūla-, and koṣalāḥ instead of ke ’salaḥ. I do not see 
any possibility of arriving at an intelligible interpretation of the second half of 
the stanza: even its construction seems hardly possible. The text of N, on the 
other hand, has a most suitable meaning in the context of the canto which is, for 
the major part, a fiery speech of Subāhu, in which he urges king Kapphiṇa to 
wage war against King Prasenajit of Kośala immediately:

--- Page 362 of 425 ---
340
MICHAEL HAHN
“If the enemy is too strong 
or shows the same degree of prowess, 
then it is most appropriate to raise the obstacle 
[to immediate action] ‘consideration about the right policy.’
O king, say, who are the fighters (asala) among the Kośalas, 
who are as light as a small ship made of cotton, 
and show the characteristics [that would justify] 
the wish to talk about the best policy?”
The only problem that remains is the so far unattested word asala whose 
meaning has to be something like “hero, fighter, warrior, opponent” (perhaps to 
be analysed as asa-la “bow-holder”). The origin of the mistake is conspicuous. 
The Avagraha before sa makes the letter ke look like ko and so ke ’salāḥ of N 
became kośalāḥ in N2 and the subsequent copies. Once this mistake had happened, the original reading could not be restored, as the sequence kośalāḥ kośaleṣu looks as if it was intended and nobody would expect the faulty passage 
here. The text of N is, however, absolutely unambiguous, as the Avagraha can 
be clearly distinguished from the dīrghamātra sign and in addition to that, there 
is a small stroke after ke which separates the word from the following ’salāḥ. 
(pp. xviii–xix of the postscript. A few mistakes are tacitly corrected.).
While preparing the new critical edition, I discovered that I had overlooked the anusvāra 
above the avagraha before °salāḥ. So the word in question reads (a)ṃsalāḥ, not (a)salāḥ. 
Since aṃsalāḥ means “the strong,” the interpretation becomes much easier, because we 
need not have recourse to the unattested formation asala-.
 tū la pla va la ghi ma su ' rā ja nke ' ’ṃsa lāḥ ' ko śa le ṣu '' ||
The reason for this oversight is most likely the quality of my source material. While preparing the appendix to the 1988 reprint I had to work with black and white prints of the 
manuscript as filmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project and in part 
only with photostat copies taken from these prints. In many places only high-quality photographs permit one to differentiate between mere spots of dirt and intentionally placed 
anusvāras or the sometimes very tiny or indistinct strokes or dots that are meant to separate 
whole words or members of a compound.
In the National Archives, Kathmandu, there exists a second palm-leaf manuscript of the 
Kapphiṇābhyudaya, dated 1528 AD and abbreviated as “N2,” which seems to be a copy of 
the older palm-leaf manuscript. It is complete, beautifully written, and its quality is much 
better than that of the two incomplete manuscripts from Orissa that were used by Gauri 
Shankar. At the same time its readings are inferior to those of “N,” and moreover the scribe 
entirely omitted the extremely helpful marking system. This is how line iv.25d appears in 
“N2”:
tū la pla va la ghi ma su rā ja nkeṃ śa lāḥ ko śa le ṣu
This might be the origin of the defective reading in the two later manuscripts.
For the facsimile edition of 2007 Prof. Yūshō Wakahara from Ryūkoku University took 
excellent colour photographs of both parts of the manuscript that are hardly distinguishable 
from the original. Even the folio that is damaged by water can be deciphered to a large

--- Page 363 of 425 ---
Various aspects of dealing with Buddhist codices unici
341
extent. Here experts might be able to regain some of the completely lost portions by 
applying advanced computer techniques.
So far I have discussed those cases where copies of the original manuscript or ancillary 
sources helped to improve a badly transmitted primary source. Now I would like to briefly 
mention a few cases where access to a primary source helps to mend mistakes that have 
crept into a secondary source in the course of transmission. They mostly concern Chinese 
and Tibetan translations of Indian texts. Both experience and common sense tell us that it 
is very unlikely that a great corpus of texts remains untainted when transmitted over a span 
of more than a millennium, as is the case with the texts belonging to the Chinese and 
Tibetan Tripiṭakas. Only those texts that are well translated and regularly studied in their 
new environment have any chance of remaining unaltered. The other works are liable to 
become corrupt in the course of being copied repeatedly. There are certain standard types 
of mistakes that occur again and again. In the Chinese translations certain characters 
become replaced by others that have a similar shape. In the Tibetan translations we find a 
mixture of graphic and acoustic mistakes.
Twenty-five years ago one of my Japanese PhD students, Dr. Yukihiro Okada, studied 
the Chinese translation of Nāgārjuna’s Ratnāvalī in close comparison with its Sanskrit 
original and its Tibetan translation. He could detect quite a few mistakes in the Taishō 
edition. Sometimes the correct reading could be found among the variant readings, sometimes it had to be restored by way of emendation. 
Another of my Japanese students, Dr. Naoki Saito, studied the Tibetan translation of 
Āryaśūra’s Pāramitāsamāsa or “Compendium of the Moral Perfections.” This is a very unusual work that stands out by its rather free rendering of the Sanskrit original and its high 
percentage of words and expressions belonging to the “old language” or rnying skad. 
Although it is obvious that Vairocanarakṣita, who translated the work without the assistance of an Indian paṇḍita, had a very good understanding of the text, many passages are 
difficult to understand without additional explanation or access to the Sanskrit original. Dr. 
Saito, who also re-edited the Sanskrit text of the Pāramitāsamāsa on the basis of a codex 
unicus, not only solved several corrupted passages of the original work with the help of its 
Tibetan translation, but was also able to restore the original wording of more than 90 
corrupt words in the Tibetan translation. About 60 of the 365 stanzas of the Tibetan 
Pāramitāsamāsa are quoted in Tsongkhapa’s Lam rim chen mo. In most cases where the 
canonical blockprints of the 18th century are corrupt, the correct reading can be found in 
the Lam rim chen mo. This is an indication that Tsongkhapa’s text was much more intensively studied than the canonical version.
An even greater number of mistakes than in the canonical version of the Tibetan 
Pāramitāsamāsa can be found in the Tibetan text of Jñānaśrīmitra’s “Praise in the Form of 
a Garland of Metres” or Vṛttamālāstuti, which is a hymn in praise of Mañjuśrī that 
illustrates 150 different Sanskrit metres. I edited and translated the Tibetan text in my PhD 
thesis (Marburg 1967) that was published in 1971. At that time, the Sanskrit original was 
thought to be irretrievably lost. In 1976, I got access to a palm-leaf manuscript containing 
the commentary by Śākyarakṣita, and one year later I learnt that the Vṛttamālāstuti had 
been published in Benares by the Nepalese Yogi Naraharinath on the occasion of the 
Buddha Jayantī in 1956. Recently I published a slightly improved version of the Sanskrit 
text along with a German translation. The comparison of the Tibetan translation with the 
Sanskrit original showed that the Tibetan text as preserved in the Tanjur contains more 
than 80 corruptions. Again without the Sanskrit original there was no possibility of 
detecting and correcting them. Here are just a few samples:

--- Page 364 of 425 ---
342
MICHAEL HAHN
As for the Sanskrit text of the Vṛttamālāstuti, it is based on Yogi Naraharinath’s edition of 
1956. Although it is an excellent piece of work, for which most presumably also the codex 
unicus of Śākyarakṣita’s commentary was used, I had to alter the edited text in more than 
50 places. The mistakes range from mere printing errors to more serious cases like 
bhaṅgatāṃ for (correct) bhavyatāṃ, °mukha° for °sukha°, °(sṛ)ṣṭiḥ for °dṛṣṭiḥ, tava vapuḥ 
for tava puraḥ, anaṅgacirasthitam for anaṅgavijṛmbhitam, eti for īśa, vidhi for divi, °lārciṣ 
ca (te) for °lārciścayo, sāndra° for sāntra°, tanīya° for tadīya°, bhāram for bhāvam, 
manasi for bhavasi, and so on. In almost all these cases the corrections are based both on 
the commentary (my main source) and the Tibetan translation, that was done with the help 
of the very same commentary. Stanza 62 of the Vṛttamālāstuti is lost in Yogi Naraharinath’s manuscript. However, the Tibetan translation and the commentary enabled me to 
present a reconstruction of the stanza, since its metre (bhujaṅgaprayāta) is known. It is a 
most remarkable feature of the Indian edition that the editor added to it photographs of the 
manuscript, a long time before the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project was 
launched. Due to the small size of the booklet and the insufficient quality of the plates, 
only some portions can be read. Nevertheless, the reproduction enabled me to verify that 
stanza 62 is indeed lost and not just omitted by inadvertency on the part of the editor.
The last point I would like to mention is the codex unicus of Sarvarakṣita’s Maṇicūḍajātaka. From two points of view, this is a very peculiar manuscript. First, it is the only 
complete manuscript that is written in the rare bhaikṣukī lipiḥ. The only other specimen of 
this script we have, apart from a few brief inscriptions in the eastern part of India, is a 
fragmentary sub-commentary on Candragomin’s Vyākaraṇasūtra called Candrālaṃkāra 
by an unknown author. Second, the text is written in a quite unusual Middle Indic dialect 
or mixture of Sanskrit and Middle Indic. The language shows similarities with that of the 
so-called Patna Dhammapada that Peter Skilling tentatively ascribes to the Sāṃmitīya 
school. Since the author of the Maṇicūḍajātaka definitely belongs to this school, as is 
evidenced by his cosmological treatise Mahāsaṃvartanīkathā (cf. Okano 1998), the 
language of the Maṇicūḍajātaka might be a reflex, albeit an artificial one, of the canonical 
language of the Sāṃmitīyas. The present whereabouts of this precious manuscript is 
shrouded in darkness. It is not quite clear whether Giuseppe Tucci, who saw it in a Tibetan 
Stanza
21b
22d
27d
29a
30b
31a
31d
34c
47c
54a
54b
55b
Text of the printed edition
rgyu chen blo ldan 
’char ro
rgyan ni spel (NP) bar byed
rigs ni ’char byed ri bo
’byor pa
tshig ni
med pa
sna tshogs rnam par ’phro 
ba’i ’od zer phreng ldan (CD) 
or sna tshogs rin chen ’od zer 
phreng ldan (NP)
sdug ldan
yon tan rab ’bar
bsngags par ’od ldan
(zhe sdang) ma dag
Corrected text
*rgya chen blo ldan
*mtshar ro
*rgya ni sel (CD) bar byed
rigs *kyi ’char byed ri bo
’byor *pas
*tshogs ni
*mkhar rnga* [!]
*rnam pa sna tshogs rin 
chen* ’od zer phreng ldan
*stug ldan
*rang bzhin* rab ’bar
bsngags par *’os pa*
(zhe sdang) *me dag
Sanskrit text / Notes
pṛthudhiyaḥ
citram
udasyati ... mudrām (rgyan 
ni is a dittography for rgya 
ni!)
°kulodayaśailaṃ
 bhūtyā
°nivahaḥ
°paṇavo
nānāratnamarīcimālinī. 
For the metrically restored 
rnam pa sna tshogs cf. 
rnam pa sna tshogs = vividha- 78d, 118c, 138 and = 
nānāvidha- 122c
sāndra°
svabhāvojjvalā
°ślāghinī 
dveṣāgnir

--- Page 365 of 425 ---
Various aspects of dealing with Buddhist codices unici
343
monastery in 1948, microfilmed or actually purchased it. The existence of the manuscript 
was known through various hints since the beginning of the sixties. Since 1976 I repeatedly tried to get hold of it because of my interest in the Maṇicūḍa legend. However, more 
than 20 years passed until by good luck a microfilm of the manuscript was discovered in a 
cupboard in the Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente in Rome. My Italian colleague 
Francesco Sferra, who was aware of my interest in the text, generously sent me prints and 
scans of the manuscript and permitted me to study and publish the text. I entrusted the task 
to my former student Albrecht Hanisch who completely deciphered the manuscript, supported by a grant of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. A first preliminary report on 
the two manuscripts in the bhaikṣukī lipiḥ can be found in Hahn 2005. Albrecht Hanisch 
gives much more detailed information in his two articles of 2006 (on the Maṇicūḍajātaka) 
and 2007 (on the Candrālaṃkāra).
Meanwhile the complete text of the Maṇicūḍajātaka has become accessible in a monograph by Albrecht Hanisch that contains a diplomatic transliteration of the text together 
with a facsimile edition of the manuscript, a comprehensive analysis of the script, and a 
long and learned introduction that deals with all aspects of the text, its language and script. 
At the end of 2008, it appeared in a newly founded series in Rome, Manuscripta Buddhica, 
where it forms a substantial part of vol. I. A second monograph that is currently being 
prepared by Albrecht Hanisch will consist of the edited version of the text, its English 
translation and a study containing a grammatical and literary analysis of the text. This 
second monograph, to appear in the series Indica et Tibetica, is not yet fully completed.
As for the approach to a text like the Maṇicūḍajātaka, Albrecht Hanisch followed the 
model of the best editions of the Gilgit manuscripts and the manuscripts found in Central 
Asia, carefully distinguishing between “Befund,” the text as it is preserved in the manuscript, and “Bearbeitung,” the edited version of the text, as he assumes it to have been conceived by the author. The ancillary materials are scarce. What we have are the parallel 
versions of the Maṇicūḍa legend and the only other extant work of Sarvarakṣita, his 
cosmological poem Mahāsaṃvartanīkathā, that has fortunately been edited in an exemplary manner by Kiyoshi Okano. While the literary parallels are of no great help, because 
Sarvarakṣita closely follows the classical recension of the legend as edited by Ratna 
Handurukande (1967), the Mahāsaṃvartanīkathā, although composed in Sanskrit, proved 
to be an invaluable tool, because it is written in virtually the same style, which is characterized by Sarvarakṣita’s predilection for the figure of speech called yamaka or paronomasia 
and the metre āryā. All the 376 stanzas of the Maṇicūḍajātaka are composed in the āryā 
metre, and the refined structure of this metre was the most reliable check of the correctness 
of the text. Whenever the first transliteration contained a violation of metre, it later turned 
out to be a misreading of the manuscript. The improved reading always produced the most 
sensible meaning and was also preferable from the point of view of style.
There is trustworthy information that among the Sanskrit manuscripts preserved in Tibet 
there are more specimens of texts written in the bhaikṣukī lipiḥ, even some that in language 
and style quite closely resemble the Maṇicūḍajātaka composed by Sarvarakṣita. Their 
future analysis will be greatly facilitated by the work done by Albrecht Hanisch.
In this paper I have discussed some of the cases where a Buddhist text is preserved only 
in one independent manuscript, a codex unicus. What I wanted to show is that the problems 
the editor is facing can be very different. The first and foremost factor is the quality of the 
codex unicus, physically as well as textually. Among the texts mentioned on p. 333, the 
manuscripts of the Kapphiṇābhyudaya, Vṛttamālāvivṛti, Vidagdhavismāpana and its commentary, and the Maṇicūḍajātaka stand out on account of their textual quality. Only the 
last three works are also physically undamaged; the first two are suffering from the loss of 
one or more folios, and moreover some parts of the extant leaves are broken off. At the

--- Page 366 of 425 ---
344
MICHAEL HAHN
other end of the scale are the manuscripts of the Saptakumārikāvadāna, its ṭīkā (not listed), 
Śiṣyalekha, and Ajātaśatrvavadāna. The codices of the Buddhacarita and the Jātakamālāṭīkā are of mediocre quality, the rest is of decent or good quality. The next and no less important factor is the size, nature, and quality of ancillary sources. These can consist of:
a) copies of the codex unicus that were done before it suffered from various forms of 
damage;
b) secondary recensions of the original work, such as later recasts, which preserve at 
least parts of the original work;
c) commentaries;
d) translations into other languages, e.g. Chinese or Tibetan;
e) translations of commentaries into other languages;
f) testimonia, i.e. quotations in other works.
The case of Candragomin’s Śiṣyalekha is particularly instructive, since many of the 
defects of the codex unicus could be mended with the help of ancillary sources, in this case 
belonging to the categories b, d, and e. This could also have been demonstrated by the 
edition of the Sanskrit text of Gopadatta’s Saptakumārikāvadāna, where ancillary sources 
of the categories b, c, and d helped to restore the original text where the (rather recent) 
codex unicus was utterly faulty.
The case of Haribhaṭṭa’s Jātakamālā was briefly mentioned because it demonstrates the 
possible pitfalls of the ancillary sources. Here we have, apart from a few stanzas preserved 
in medieval anthologies of Sanskrit verses, only one additional source, its Tibetan translation. Its great literalness lends it almost the weight of another manuscript, yet its 
mediocre quality may occasionally lead the editor astray when the Sanskrit manuscript is 
faulty or difficult to read. 
The cases of Śivasvāmin’s Kapphiṇābhyudaya and Sarvarakṣita’s Maṇicūḍajātaka were 
mentioned as examples of extremely demanding texts where the reproduction of the codex 
unicus became imperative, because of the absence of ancillary sources in both cases, the 
(literary) difficulties of the first work and the palaeographic and linguistic difficulties of 
the second.
The case of Jñānaśrīmitra’s Vṛttamālāstuti and its Vivṛti by Śākyarakṣita was mentioned 
as an illustration of how good manuscripts of a work and its commentary, even codices 
unici, can help to understand better the corruptions in an originally very good and reliable 
secondary source, the canonical Tibetan translation.
The trivial consequence of these observations is that conscientious editors have to 
secure and study all the known and accessible primary and secondary sources when 
embarking upon an editorial project, especially in the case of a codex unicus, and that they 
should nevertheless be aware that their task is not a mechanical one, that mistakes may lie 
on either side, and that nothing can replace a good and long philological training, a great 
familiarity with the subject matter, and common sense.
Works Cited and Abbreviations
Acharya, Diwakar
2007
“One more Manuscript of the Śiṣyalekha,” Newsletter of the NGMCP, No. 3 (JanuaryFebruary 2007): 25–26. (URL: http://www.uni-hamburg.de/ngmcp/ngmcpnl3light_e_e.pdf).
Eimer, Helmut 
1988
(assisted by Roland Paffen [alias Steiner]) “Microfilms, Microfiches and Other Reproductions of North Indian Manuscripts Kept in the Indological Institute of Bonn University,” in:

--- Page 367 of 425 ---
Various aspects of dealing with Buddhist codices unici
345
Indology and Indo-Tibetology. Thirty Years of Indian and Indo-Tibetan Studies in Bonn. Ed. 
by Helmut Eimer. Bonn (Indica et Tibetica, 13): 97–192.
Gauri Shankar
1937
Śivasvāmin’s Kapphiṇābhyudaya. The Exaltation of King Kapphiṇa. Ed. with an introduction. Lahore (Panjab University Oriental Publication. 26).
Gauri Shankar and Michael Hahn
1989
Śivasvāmin’s Kapphiṇābhyudaya. The Exaltation of King Kapphiṇa. Ed. with an introduction by Gauri Shankar. With an appendix and romanized version of cantos i–viii and xix 
by Michael Hahn. Delhi.
Hahn, Michael 
1971
Jñānaśrīmitras Vṛttamālāstuti. Ein Beispielsammlung zur altindischen Metrik. Nach dem 
tibetischen Tanjur zusammen mit der mongolischen Version herausgegeben, übersetzt und 
erläutert. Wiesbaden (Asiatische Forschungen. 33).
1988
“Indische und nepalesische Handschriften im Indologischen Seminar der Universität 
Bonn,” in Indology and Indo-Tibetology. Thirty Years of Indian and Indo-Tibetan Studies in 
Bonn, ed. by H. Eimer, Bonn (Indica et Tibetica, 14): 81–96.
1989
See Gauri Shankar and Michael Hahn 1989
1992
Haribhaṭṭa and Gopadatta. Two Authors in the Succession of Āryaśūra. On the Rediscovery 
of parts of their Jātakamālās. Second edition. Thoroughly revised and enlarged. Tokyo 
(Studia Philologica Buddhica. Occasional Paper Series. 1).
1999
Invitation to Enlightenment. Letter to the Great King Kaniṣka by Mātṛceṭa. Letter to a 
Disciple by Candragomin. Berkeley. 
2005
“Preliminary Remarks on Two Manuscripts Written in the So-called ‘Arrow-headed’ 
Script,” in Buddhism and Jainism, Essays in Honour of Dr. Hojun Nagasaki on His 
Seventieth Birthday, Kyoto: 712–701.
2007a
King Kapphiṇa’s Triumph. A Ninth Century Kashmiri Buddhist Poem. Ed. by Yusho Wakahara. Kyoto.
2007b
Haribhaṭṭa in Nepal. Ten Legends from His Jātakamālā and the Anonymous Śākyasiṃhajātaka. Editio minor. Tokyo (Studia Philologica Buddhica. Monograph Series, XXII).
2008a
“The Sanskrit Text of Jñānaśrīmitra’s Vṛttamālāstuti,” in Bauddhasāhityastabakāvalī. 
Essays and Studies on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature. Marburg (Indica et Tibetica 36): 93–
170.
2008b
(and Siglinde Dietz) Wege zur rechten Erkenntnis. Buddhistische Lehrbriefe, Frankfurt, 
Leipzig.
2011
Poetic Visions of the Buddha’s Former Lives. Seventeen Legends from Haribhaṭṭa’s Jātakamālā. Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Handurukande, Ratna
1967
Maṇicūḍāvadāna. Being a translation and edition. And Lokānanda. A transliteration and 
synopsis. London (Sacred Books of the Buddhists. 24).
Hanisch, Albrecht
2006
“Progress in Deciphering the So-Called ‘Arrow-head’ Script Allowing Access to Sarvarakṣita’s Maṇicūḍajātaka, a Text of the Buddhist Sāṃmitīya School,” Journal of Buddhist 
Studies 4: 109–161.
2007
“The Contents of the Extant Portions of the Candrālaṃkāra, an Unknown Commentary on 
the Cāndravyākaraṇa, As Preserved in a Manuscript Written in the ‘Arrow-Head’ Script,” 
Sambhāṣā 26: 127–161.
2008
“Sarvarakṣita’s Maṇicūḍajātaka. Reproduction of the Codex unicus with Diplomatic 
Transcript and Palaeographic Introduction to the Bhaikṣukī Script,” in Francesco Sferra, 
ed., Sanskrit Texts from Giuseppe Tucci’s Collection. Part I, Roma: 153–300.

--- Page 368 of 425 ---
346
MICHAEL HAHN
Okano, Kiyoshi 
1998
Sarvarakṣitas Mahāsaṃvartanīkathā. Ein Sanskrit-Kāvya über die Kosmologie der 
Sāṃmitīya-Schule des Hīnayāna-Buddhismus. Sendai (Tōhoku Indo Chibetto Kenkyūsho 
Kankōkai Monograph Series, 1).
PW
= Sanskritwörterbuch. Bearbeitet von Otto Böhtlingk und Rudolph Roth. St. Petersburg 
1855–1875.
Saito, Naoki 
2005
Das Kompendium der moralischen Vollkommenheiten. Vairocanarakṣitas tibetische Übertragung von Āryaśūras Pāramitāsamāsa samt Neuausgabe des Sanskrittextes. Marburg 
(Indica et Tibetica, 38).
Schmidt, Richard
1928
Nachträge zum Sanskrit-Wörterbuch in kürzerer Fassung von Otto Böhtlingk. Leipzig.
Warder, Arthur Kennedy
1970–2011 Indian Kāvya Literature. Vols. 1–8. Delhi.

--- Page 369 of 425 ---
Reflections on the Pali Literature of Siam1
PETER SKILLING (HUA HIN)
The Pali literature of Ceylon — the classical texts of the Tipiṭaka and the commentaries — 
is comparatively well known. G. P. Malalasekera (1899–1973) devoted a monograph to the 
subject in 1928, and what is commonly understood by “Pali Literature” today is essentially 
the “Pali Literature of Ceylon,” in the sense of having been transmitted by the Mahāvihāra 
tradition of the island. The Pali literature of Burma was described by Mabel Bode (?–1922) 
in a monograph published over one hundred years ago.2 But the Pali literature of Siam has 
not been adequately described, and it is scarcely recognized as an independent category or 
field of research.3 A large number of Pali texts, presumably composed in Siam, remain in 
manuscript, unstudied, unedited, and often uncatalogued.4 If we date these texts, tentatively, to the thirteenth to nineteenth centuries, we see that there is an enormous gap in our 
knowledge of the history of Pali literature and of Southeast Asian Buddhism. Many of the 
texts in question were important in the religious life of societies beyond Siam, including 
Laos and Cambodia. The “Pali literature of Siam” impacts on the religious history of mainland Southeast Asia or “Indochina” in many ways. I do not think that the importance of 
this literature can be gainsaid. 
Classical Pali literature is generally accepted as “ancient,” but how ancient is a point of 
contention. Dating uses the geological and archaeological metaphors of stratigraphy; the 
oldest strata are identified through the contextualized internal and corroborative external 
evidence of language and contents — and the evidence of archaeology itself. The “Pali 
canon” was preserved and transmitted in Ceylon, and eventually in Southeast Asia. Is it, 
then, an “Indian” collection? The argument for the antiquity and the Indian origin of the 
collection rests inter alia on the fact that the referential environment of the texts reflects a 
particular period of North Indian history, and that this environment is innocent of references to Ceylon as well as of Sinhala linguistic interference.5 This supports a conclusion 
1 I thank Ven. Phra Anil Sakya, Santi Pakdeekham, Jak Cholvijarn, Giuliana Martini, and others for 
their help with this article, and the Lumbini International Research Institute and the Khyentse Foundation 
for their support. In this contribution, I write “Pali” rather than “Pāli,” “Gandhari” rather than “Gāndhārī.” “Sanskrit” and “Prakrit” have long been naturalized; they are perfectly respectable terms, used 
rather than “Saṃskṛta” or “Prākṛta.” Why, then, should we write “Pāli” and “Gāndhārī”?
2 G. P. Malalasekera, The Pāli Literature of Ceylon, London: The Royal Asiatic Society of Great 
Britain and Ireland, 1928; Mabel Haynes Bode, The Pali Literature of Burma, London: The Royal Asiatic 
Society of Great Britain and Ireland, 1909. For the Ceylonese manuscript tradition, Pali and vernacular, 
there is the marvellous opus of K. D. Somadasa, Catalogue of the Hugh Nevill Collection of Sinhalese 
Manuscripts in the British Library, The Pali Text Society/The British Library, 7 vols., 1987–1995.
3 What is now called “Thailand” was known as “Siam” in the pre-modern period, the period with 
which this chapter is largely concerned. “Thailand” became the official name of the country in 1939, 
except from 1945 to May 11, 1949, when it was renamed Siam, after which it was again renamed 
Thailand. The official name is Kingdom of Thailand, Rāja-āṇācakra daiy (ราชอาณาจักรไทย). The Pali 
literature of Siam is scarcely mentioned in books on either Pali or Siam. One of the few specialists to 
give serious attention to the subject has been Oskar von Hinüber: see his A Handbook of Pāli Literature, 
Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1996 (Indian Philology and South Asian Studies Vol. 2), 
especially Chapter XII.
4 The most comprehensive studies of Pali literature composed in Thailand are those by Supaphan Na 
Bangchang: Wiwathanakan wanakhadibali sai phrasuttantapidok thitaeng nai prathetthai [The 
Development of Pali Literature related to the Suttantapiṭaka composed in Thailand], Bangkok, Samnakphim haeng Chulalongkornmahawithayalai [Chulalongkorn University Press], 2533 [1990]; 
Wiwathanakan ngankhian phasabali nai prathetthai: caruk tamnan phongsawadan san prakat [Development of the writing of Pali in Thailand: inscriptions, legendary histories, chronicles, letters, proclamations], Bangkok: Munlanithi Mahamakut Rachawithalayai nai Phraboromarachupatham [Mahamakut 
University Foundation under Royal Patronage], 2529 [1986].
5 See, most recently, Alexander Wynne, “The Historical Authenticity of Early Buddhist Literature: A 
Critical Evaluation,” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens, 49 (2005): 35–70; Anālayo, “The

--- Page 370 of 425 ---
348
PETER SKILLING
that the Pali canon — or rather, certain texts or sections of the Pali canon — was closed at 
a relatively early date, before the texts were introduced to Ceylon. Therefore, runs the 
argument, the early strata attest to early, even pre-Aśokan, phases of Buddhism.
Whatever the case (and the debate remains fruitful, regardless of whether or not it will 
or can ever be resolved), there is no early manuscript or epigraphical evidence whatsoever 
for Pali canonical texts, either in India or in Sri Lanka.6 However one might choose to 
interpret the much-abused term “early,”7 there are simply no Pali inscriptions, let alone 
manuscripts, from the Anurādhapura or Polonnaruwa periods of Ceylon, that is, for about 
1,500 years during which Buddhism was the dominant court ideology on the island, and 
the Buddhist saṃgha was one of its leading institutions. The oldest known Pali inscriptions, dating to circa the fifth to the eighth centuries, come not from Ceylon but from 
central Siam and from lower Burma. These are relatively short canonical and non-canonical citations (including many examples of the ye dhammā stanza) rather than original 
compositions. These epigraphs are our oldest Pali texts sensu stricto.8 What has been 
described as the “oldest Pali manuscript” comes, surprisingly, from Kathmandu, Nepal; it 
consists of four folios of the Vinaya Cullavagga written in a North Indian script and dated 
to circa the ninth century.9 The Southeast Asian Pali inscriptions are centuries older than 
this unique manuscript fragment, and they are one thousand years older than the palm-leaf 
manuscripts of Ceylon or Southeast Asia, of which the oldest surviving examples — and 
there are only a few of these — date from the fifteenth century.10
Siam has been especially significant in the European awareness of Buddhism and of 
Pali.11 The idea of Pali as a language of Buddhism seems to have first been encountered by 
Europeans in early seventeenth-century Ayutthaya,12 and some of the first Pali manuscripts 
to reach Europe were Khom-script texts, also from Ayutthaya, preserved today in the 
Bibliothèque nationale and the Missions Étrangères in Paris. Pali manuscripts in the 
Sinhala script were brought from Ceylon to Denmark by Rasmus Rask (1787–1832), and 
are kept in the Royal Library of Copenhagen. “The first critical editions of Pāli texts were 
Historical Value of the Pāli Discourses,” Indo-Iranian Journal 55 (2012): 223–253.
6 For the one early Indian epigraphical citation, on the four truths, which is close to Pali, but which 
differs syntactically from the received text, see Tsukamoto Keisho, A Comprehensive Study of the Indian 
Buddhist Inscriptions, Part I, Texts, Notes and Japanese Translation, Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten, 1996, IV 
Sarnāth 94, and K. R. Norman, “The Four Noble Truths,” in K. R. Norman, Collected Papers II, Oxford: 
The Pali Text Society, 1991: 210–223 (originally published in Indological and Buddhist Studies [Volume 
in honour of Professor J.W. de Jong], Canberra, 1982: 377–391). 
7 For some of the drawbacks of the “shibboleth” of “early” and “late” see Michael Willis, The Archaeology of Hindu Ritual: Temples and the Establishment of the Gods, Cambridge University Press, 2009: 
268, n. 148.
8 See P. Skilling, “The Advent of Theravāda Buddhism to Mainland South-east Asia,” JIABS 20/1 
(1997): 93–107; “Some Citation Inscriptions from South-East Asia,” JPTS XXVII (2002): 159–175; 
“Traces of the Dharma: Preliminary reports on some ye dhammā and ye dharmā inscriptions from 
Mainland South-East Asia,” BEFEO 90–91 (2003–2004): 273–287. For the problems of dating, see P. 
Skilling, review of Janice Stargardt, “Tracing Thought Through Things: The Oldest Pali Texts and the 
Buddhist Archaeology of India and Burma,” Asian Perspectives 44(2) (Fall 2005): 386–390.
9 Oskar von Hinüber, The Oldest Pali Manuscript. Four Folios of the Vinaya-Pitaka from the National 
Archives, Kathmandu (Untersuchungen zur Sprachgeschichte des Pali II), Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1999.
10 See table at Nalini Balbir, “Thoughts about ‘European editions’ of Pāli texts,” TIJBS, Volume I 2553 
[2009]: 6 (full article, pp. 1–19).
11 For the role of seventeenth-century French ambassador Louis de La Loubère in the knowledge of 
Buddhism, see Heinz Bechert, “The Earliest Reliable Information on the Central Conception of 
Buddhism in Western Writing: The Report by Simon de La Loubère (1691),” in Christine Chojnacki, 
Jens-Uwe Hartmann and Volker M. Tschannerl (eds.), Vividharatnakaraṇḍaka, Festgabe für Adelheid 
Mette, Swisttal-Odendorf, 2000 (Indica et Tibetica 37): 57–64.
12 See William Pruitt, “References to Pāli in the 17th Century French Books,” JPTS 11 (1987): 121–
131, and, more recently, Kate Crosby, “The Origin of Pali as a Language Name in Medieval Theravada 
Literature,” JCBSSL, 2 (2004): 70–116.

--- Page 371 of 425 ---
Reflections on the Pali Literature of Siam
349
based on manuscripts kept there.”13 European collections and the cataloguing activities of 
colonial-period scholars, both in the libraries of Europe and in the field in Asia, have figured prominently in the modern classification and understanding of Pali literature and 
manuscript traditions.14
Thailand today is conventionally divided into four regions — Centre, North (Lanna), 
Northeast, and South, all of which have their own manuscript traditions. My study is 
restricted to the manuscript traditions of Central Siam. There are several types of manuscripts and formats. There are two primary scripts for the writing of Buddhist texts: Khom 
bali ขอมบาลี and Khom thai ขอมไทย,15 and there is a clear division of labour between the 
two: Pali texts are written in Khom bali and Thai-language texts are written in Khom thai.16 
Secular texts were written in a third script, the Thai script (aksonthai อักษรไทย). When a 
primary text was written in the Thai script, for example in the great compendium of Thai 
law, the “Three Seals Law Code” (Kotmai trasamduang กฎหมายตราสามดวง), Pali citations were written in Khom bali.
Whether written in Pali or in the vernacular, Buddhist texts were most frequently inscribed with a stylus on palm leaves (bailan ใบลาน).17 The preparation of palm leaves was 
described by Montgomery Schuyler in a paper published in 1908:18
The leaves of the palm tree are brought in from the country in large bundles, 
each leaf being about eighteen inches long and doubled in the middle. These 
leaves are given to the priest by the peasants as a means of “making merit.” The 
first operation in converting the leaves into the finished manuscript is to divide 
them by cutting out the midrib, thus making two leaves of each leaf of the tree. 
These leaves are then made up into bundles of some hundred pieces each and 
are then placed between boards tightly tied up and wedged in a press. While still 
13 Balbir, op. cit., p. 1. Balbir’s article gives a concise introduction to the history of Pali studies in 
Europe and aspects of the evolution of the “European edition.”
14 For a survey see Oskar von Hinüber, “Two Jātaka Manuscripts in the National Library in Bangkok,” 
JPTS X (1985): 1–3 (complete article pp. 1–22). 
15 The temples around Bangkok and in Ratchaburi and other provinces with a Mon heritage (usually 
dating to the late Ayutthaya and early Bangkok periods) preserve large numbers of uncatalogued Mon 
manuscripts, written in the Mon script in Pali or Mon language. They are beyond the scope of this article.
16 For an explanation of Khom thai, see Kannika Wimonkasem, Tamrarian aksonthaiboran, aksonkhomthai aksonthamlanna aksonthamisan [Handbook for the study of ancient Thai scripts: Khom Thai, 
Tham Lanna, and Tham Isan], Bangkok: Rongphim Nititham Kanphim, 2552 [2009], Chapter 2. See also 
Thawat Punnothok, Aksonthaiboran: laiseuthai lae wiwathanakan aksonkhongchonchatthai [Ancient 
Thai scripts: Laisuethai and the development of writing systems of the Thai people], Bangkok: Samnakphim haeng Chulalongkornmahawithayalai [Chulalongkorn University Press], 2549 [2006], Chapter 4.
17 For the preparation of palm-leaf and paper manuscripts in Siam, see Kongkaew Weeraprachak, 
Kantham samutthai lae kantriam bailan [The production of paper manuscripts and the preparation of 
palm leaves], Hosamut Haengchat/Krom Sinlapakon [National Library/Fine Arts Department], 2530 
[1987]; Praphon Reuangnarong, “Nangsuebut” [Paper manuscripts], Saranukrom wathanatham phaktai 
phoso 2529 [Encyclopaedia of Southern Thai Culture BE 2529], Songkhla: Sathabantaksinkhadisueksa 
Mahawithayalai Sinakharinwirot Songkhla, 2529 [1986], Lem 10: 3941–3945; Kongkaew Weeraprachak, 
“Nangsue boran” [Ancient books], ibid.: 3945–3950 (reprinted in Saranukrom wathanathamthai Phaktai 
[Encyclopaedia of Thai Culture: Southern Region], Lem 17: 8328–8337 and 8337–8344, respectively). 
For the history of the Tripiṭaka and the evolution of libraries in Siam, see HRH Prince Damrong 
Rajanubhab, Tamnan hophrasamut ho phramontiantham ho wachirayan ho phutthasasanasangkhaha lae 
ho samut samrap phra nakhon [History of the Ho Phrasamut, Ho Phramontiantham, Ho Wachirayan, Ho 
Phutthasasanasangkhaha and Ho Samutsamrapphranakhon], first edition 2459 [1916], repr. Bangkok: 
Rongphim Aksonchaoernthat, 2512 [1969].
18 Montgomery Schuyler, Jr., “Notes on the making of palm-leaf manuscripts in Siam,” Journal of the 
American Oriental Society 29 (1908): 281–283, as cited in George Cœdès, The Vajirañāṇa National 
Library, Bangkok: Bangkok Times Press, 1924: 15–16. Schuyler (1877–1955) was U.S. Consul General 
in Bangkok, 1904–1906. He published Index verborum of the fragments of the Avesta, New York: The 
Columbia University Press, 1901 (Columbia University Indo-Iranian Series, Vol. 4), and A Bibliography 
of the Sanskrit Drama with an Introductory Sketch of the Dramatic Literature of India, New York: The 
Columbia University Press, 1906 (Columbia University Indo-Iranian series, Vol. 3).

--- Page 372 of 425 ---
350
PETER SKILLING
there, the edges of the leaves are trimmed smoothly with a semi-circular knife 
which is in a handle some two feet long. After sanding the leaves to give them a 
smooth surface for writing or rather inscribing, the bundles are then ready for 
the next stage in the book-making process.
After the surface of the leaves has been sanded and made in good condition for 
receiving the strokes of the scribe’s stylus, the actual copying of the books can 
begin. Each copyist has in front of him, as he squats on the floor of the temple, a 
frame about eighteen inches in height somewhat resembling an artist’s easel, on 
one ledge of which rests the manuscripts to be copied and on the other ledge the 
blank leaves for the new volume. The pen or rather the stylus is a needle-point, 
like a needle of a sewing-machine, inserted in a wooden handle resembling an 
enormous cigar about eight inches in length. Before doing any writing the scribe 
marks lines, usually five in number, on each leaf by means of strings which are 
placed in a frame with the ends tied and the rest loose. These strings are then 
blackened with soot from the bottom of a rice-pot, and the strings are placed in 
postion over the palm-leaf and then snapped. The result is a series of lightly 
marked black lines on the leaf which serves the writer as a guide for his stylus. 
The copyist then holds the blank leaf in his hand and with the needle point 
scratches the letters of the text on the prepared surface of the leaf. It is remarkable how the writer holds the leaf in his hand and does not rest it upon any 
surface for steadiness. The letters when scratched are, of course, almost invisible unless carefully examined, as no colouring substance is put on the pen point. 
In order to render the writing clearer the entire surface of the leaf is smeared 
with soot and then wiped off and scoured with clean sand. The black adheres to 
the scratches and is removed from the rest of the surface by the sand. When a 
sufficient number of pages are ready, they are placed in a press and the edges 
trimmed off and sometimes gilded. The leaves are formed into a volume by 
being tied together with a string running through holes in the middle of the leaf. 
Each leaf is usually written on both sides, so that there are two pages of five 
lines each on every palm-leaf. A book almost always consists of twelve, and a 
double book of twenty-four, leaves.
As Schuyler noted, the text is written on five lines per leaf; the letters are widely spaced 
and easy to read in comparison with Burmese- and Sinhala-script manuscripts, which regularly have ten or more lines per leaf. Each leaf bears a folio number centred in the left 
margin of the verso; the numbers are formed from the consonants of the Indic alphabet in 
combination with twelve vowels, using Khom bali or Khom thai as appropriate. The first 
sequence of twelve leaves is numbered ka to kaḥ, the second sequence kha to khaḥ, and so 
on:
1–12
ka kā ki kī ku kū ke kai ko kau kaṃ kaḥ
13–24 kha khā khi khī khu khū khe khai kho khau khaṃ khaḥ
The twenty-four leaves are strung together with a white cotton string through the left-hand 
hole of a pair of string-holes, making one bundle or phūk ผูก, which, ideally, amounts to 
forty-eight folio sides, not counting title pages and blank protective pages.19 Each bundle 
has a title page giving bibliographic details including the title and the bundle number, often 
on both the front and the back leaves.20 A short text may take up a single bundle or may 
have less than twenty-four leaves. Long texts are measured by number of bundles. A very 
19 The Thai word phūk (v.) means “to tie,” “to bind,” or, here, “to string together.” The same term is 
used in northern Thai (Lanna Thai) and Lao. Khmer uses khsae (n., “string”). The phūk system is widely 
used throughout Indochina; the Burmese tradition, like that of Lanka (and, apparently, northern India), 
uses much larger “stacks” although the principles of the pagination system are similar. Other terms for 
the pagination of manuscripts, such as aṅga, warrant comparative studies in regional manuscript 
traditions.
20 Manuscripts in the northern Lanna and cognate traditions (Tai Khün, Tai Lü) in the Shan-LaoSipsongpanna region are usually exceptionally well-categorized and labelled.

--- Page 373 of 425 ---
Reflections on the Pali Literature of Siam
351
long text — for example the Visuddhimagga — may be divided into two large sets of many 
bundles, each wrapped in a separate cloth, called “mat” (มัด); sometimes these “volumes” 
are labelled in Pali as “anterior part” and “posterior part” (paṭhama- and pacchima-bhāga). 
The distribution into phūk is entirely physical; that is, it does not correspond to chapters, 
sections, or natural text breaks (in this it resembles the Tibetan bam po and the Chinese 
juan 卷, “scroll”). For example, in the manuscripts consulted by the editors of the Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna (for which see below), the distribution of the narratives across the three 
phūk is not consistent, as may be seen from the following examples:21
(No. 1) phūk 1: Beginning to Narrative 30;
phūk 2: Narrative 30 (continued) to Narrative 65;
phūk 3: Narrative 65 (continued) to end.
(No. 2) phūk 1: Beginning to Narrative 29;
phūk 2: Narrative 29 (continued) to Narrative 63;
phūk 3: Narrative 63 (continued) to end.
(No. 3) phūk 1: Beginning to Narrative 26;
phūk 2: Narrative 26 (continued) to Narrative 60;
phūk 3: Narrative 60 (continued) to end.
The sides or edges of the leaves may be plain, lacquered, or gilt. Royal editions have 
sumptuous covers, made of carved wood or carved ivory, wood inlaid with glass, mother of 
pearl, or shell, or wood coated with gilt lacquer or painted with Thai or Chinese designs.22 
The regnal emblem may be embossed in gold on the inside cover page.23 Little known, the 
royal editions are masterpieces of the fine arts of the Bangkok or Ratanakosin period 
(1782–present). Each manuscript was protected by a wrapper made from fine textiles, 
often imported from India, and bound by a long woven ribbon or cord.24 Title markers were 
made of woven cloth, wood, ivory, or brass.
In addition to palm-leaf manuscripts, there are paper accordion or leporello books. 
These are not used for the transmission of Pali texts as such, but rather for Thai-language 
texts, commonly written in the Thai script, on law, medicine, astrology, fortune-telling, and 
other topics. A unique type of paper book is the so-called “Phra Malai” manuscript, which 
contains a (varying) set of Pali and Thai texts used in ritual chanting. The large manuscripts are beautifully calligraphed on thick, creamy paper in both Khom bali and Khom 
thai scripts, and are accompanied by colourful illustrations (which are not necessarily 
related to the texts).25 The manuscripts were used both as a support for chanting and for 
21 Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna, 31–32.
22 For examples in colour see Kongkaew and Weerat, Khamphi bailan chababluang nai samai 
ratanakosin [Royal editions of palm-leaf manuscripts in the Ratanakosin Period], Bangkok, Hosamut 
Haengchat/Krom Sinlapakon [National Library/Fine Arts Department], 2527 [1984]; for black and white 
see Cœdès, The Vajirañāṇa National Library.
23 See Kongkaew and Weerat, Khamphi bailan chababluang, for examples from the first five reigns.
24 For wrappers from the Bangkok-period Wat Makut, see Sinlapawatthu Wat Makutkasatriyaram [Art 
objects in Wat Makut Kasatriyaram], Bangkok: Borisat Rongphim Krungthep, 2553 [2010]: 222–241.
25 For English language studies of Thai manuscripts and painting, we are profoundly indebted to the 
late Henry Ginsburg (1940–2007), who was curator of Thai and Cambodian collections at the British 
Library for over thirty years: see his Thai Manuscript Painting, Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 
1989; Thai Art and Culture: Historic Manuscripts from Western Collections, London: The British 
Library, 2000; “A monk travels to heaven and hell,” in Nigel Allan (ed.), Pearls of the Orient: Asian 
Treasures from the Wellcome Library, London and Chicago: The Wellcome Trust/Serindia Publications, 
2003: 145–159; “Ayutthaya Painting,” in Forrest McGill (ed.), The Kingdom of Siam: The Art of Central 
Thailand, 1350–1800, San Francisco: The Asian Art Museum, 2005: 95–109; “Thai Painting in the 
Walters Art Museum,” The Journal of the Walters Art Museum, Vol. 64/65, 2006–2007 (A Curator’s 
Choice: Essays in Honor of Hiram W. Woodward, Jr.): 99–148, especially 134–147. Most recently see

--- Page 374 of 425 ---
352
PETER SKILLING
teaching the art of reading, and they had their own ritual presence, being kept in a special 
ornate box (hip phra malai หีบพระมาลัย) in front of the reciters. By the beginning of the 
twentieth century, the production of traditional paper had greatly declined, due to the import of cheap foreign paper and changes in use and demand.26 In the twentieth century, 
Phra Malai manuscripts began to be typeset and printed; one edition in use today is published by So. Thamphakdi, Bangkok.
Various types of paper books are also produced in regional cultures. They have different 
names and formats, and may be used for different genres. White paper manuscripts in the 
Tai Khün tradition include Pali monastic formularies (kammavācā) and recitation texts. 
Prominent among the latter is the Paṭiccasamuppāda-sutta, a text which has a long history 
of inscription in various versions or translations across India and Central Asia to China. 
Southern Thai paper manuscripts (nangsue but หนังสือบุด) contain inter alia rhythmic 
versions of local Buddhist narratives.27 And so on — literature of this type from the various 
regions of Siam remains to be systematically surveyed.
Everything connected with manuscripts was part of an ideology of benefits and blessings (ānisaṃsa). The main inducement to sponsor manuscripts came from texts and sermons on the “the merits of making a Tripiṭaka” or “the merits of making a Dhamma book”; 
ancillary texts extol the merits that accrue from gilding manuscripts, offering wrappers, 
offering cabinets, and so on.28 Many royal palm-leaf editions of the Tripiṭaka were produced during the first century of the Bangkok period, from the reign of King Rāma I 
(Phrabatsomdet Phraphutthayotfa Chulalok Chaoyuhua: r. 1782–1809) up to that of King 
Rāma V (Phrabatsomdet Phrachulachomklao Chaoyuhua, commonly known in the West as 
King Chulalongkorn: r. 1868–1910).29
The nineteenth century was a period of transition, innovation and change for the written 
word and the manuscript, not only in Siam but across Asia. In Siam, King Rāma IV 
(Phrabatsomdet Phrachomklao Chaoyuhua: 1804–1868, r. 1851–1868) broke the monopoly 
of the Khom script when, during his long career as a monk before he took the throne in 
1851, he invented the “Ariyaka script” for the writing of both Pali and Thai and implemented it within his circle of influence.30 Prince Mongkut invented two forms of Ariyaka 
for Pali, a cursive, handwritten form and a square form for typesetting. Modeled on the 
roman alphabet, Ariyaka has 41 letters (33 vowels and 8 consonants, plus 10 numerals). It 
is written on a single line, vowels following consonants — there are no superscripts, 
subscripts, or surrounding vowels, and no conjunct consonants. This was a bold project, “a 
significant feature of part of [the future] King Mongkut’s reformation of Thai Buddhism.”31 
Forrest McGill (ed.), Emerald Cities: Arts of Siam and Burma, 1775–1950, San Francisco: Asian Art 
Museum, 2009: 173–179.
26 For the use of paper in Siam, see C.E. Gerini, Siam and its Productions, Arts, and Manufactures 
(1911), [Hertford., Stephen Austin and Sons, Ltd., 1912] repr. Bangkok: White Lotus Press, 2000, 262–
267. For a description of the production of paper around the turn of the twentieth century, see the note by 
W.F. Lloyd in Gerini, op. cit., 266–267, and A. Cecil Carter (ed.), The Kingdom of Siam 1904, repr. 
Bangkok: The Siam Society, 1988: 270–271. The classical study is Dard Hunter, Papermaking in 
Southern Siam, Chillicothe, OH: Mountain House Press, 1936 (this book can be accessed in colour at 
http://content.lib.utah.edu/cdm4/document.php?CISOROOT=/DardHunter&CISOPTR).
27 Many of the texts published in Wannakamthaksin wannakamkhatsan [Southern Literature, Selected 
Literature], 13 vols., Bangkok: Amarin Printing and Publishing Ltd., 2548 [2005], are from nangsue but.
28 See Peter Skilling, “For merit and Nirvāṇa: The production of art in the Bangkok Period,” Arts 
Asiatiques 62 (2007): 76–94.
29 See HRH Prince Damrong Rajanubhab, Tamnan hophrasamut; Cœdès, The Vajirañāṇa National 
Library; Kongkaew and Weerat, Khamphi bailan chababluang.
30 For tables and examples see Churairat Laksanasiri, Chaklaiseuthai su aksonthai [From Laiseuthai to 
Aksonthai], Bangkok: Samnakphim haeng Chulalongkornmahawithayalai [Chulalongkorn University 
Press], 2551 [2008]: 246–273. The Ariyaka alphabet for the writing of Thai — which has 37 consonants 
and 28 vowels — is beyond the scope of this paper.
31 Quotations from Venerable Phra Anil Sakya, “King Mongkut’s Invention of a Universal Pali Script,”

--- Page 375 of 425 ---
Reflections on the Pali Literature of Siam
353
The royal monk-scholar sought not only to replace the Khom script with an entirely new 
script, but also to standardize Pali usage by supplanting traditional writing systems with a 
universal system, thereby facilitating communication among Buddhists, whatever their 
linguistic or national backgrounds: “He intended it to be used internationally to promote 
authentic Buddhism based on the Pali Canon, the heart of King Mongkut’s reformation of 
Thai Buddhism.” The new script was adopted for a period within the royal monk’s circle, 
in both the temple and the palace — it was not restricted to monks — and internationally 
for correspondence with monks in Ceylon and elsewhere. In the end it did not catch on, 
although there is evidence that Ariyaka was used into the 1880s, that is, into the reign of 
King Mongkut’s son and successor King Chulalongkorn, who was soon to introduce new 
and more lasting changes in the use of Pali.
Ariyaka brought with it at least two other innovations: texts in Ariyaka adopted some 
elements of Western punctuation and principles of formatting, and they were printed on 
paper as bound books.32 The use of Ariyaka immensely simplified the process of printing. 
According to a note in the Bangkok Calendar for 1848, “His Royal Highness has prepared 
a new character for the Pali which is called Ariyk [read Ariyaka]. The K’om [Khōm] or 
Cambojan character is generally used to write Pali in Siam. To make a font of K’om would 
require about one thousand matrices; but it requires only forty-one for a font of Ariyk.”33 
Apparently only a few titles were printed, such as the Pātimokkha, the Dhammapada, and 
a chanting book, and no complete Tripiṭaka was ever attempted. Still, these were major 
changes: a new script, punctuation, formatting, and printing on paper as bound books.
Another innovation inspired by the book in the latter part of the nineteenth century was 
that, while manuscripts were still inscribed in Khom letters on palm leaf, they were 
sometimes kept in large hardwood cases with hinged covers, the titles written on rounded 
spines which gave them the appearance of European books. No longer wrapped in cloth 
and laid horizontally in stacks in closed gilt cabinets, they were stored upright in special 
wooden cabinets, often with glass doors — the manuscripts became objects of display like 
books in a library. Examples are kept in the “Prasad Phra Traibidok” at Wat Makut in 
Bangkok,34 at Wat Niwet Thamprawat in Bang Phra In, and (in Mon script) at Wat 
Paramaiyikawat in Nonthaburi. The last two were sponsored by King Chulalongkorn.
The last royal editions on palm leaf were those made by King Chulalongkorn in the 
1890s. In 1895, King Chulalongkorn produced the first printed Tripiṭaka, using the 
Siamese letters rather than the Khom or Ariyaka scripts. The printed edition was a new 
step towards the dissemination of the Tripiṭaka in a modern format. Although the idea of a 
in Peter Skilling, Jason A. Carbine, Claudio Cicuzza, and Santi Pakdeekham, eds., How Theravāda is 
Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities, Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2012: 401–413.
32 Mongkut’s innovations were part of broader developments in the use of printing by missionaries and 
private firms, a process that had been initiated in the late seventeenth century. For the state of printing in 
Siam in the first decade of the twentieth century, see Gerini, Siam and its Productions, Group XXIII, The 
Art of Printing. For the history of printing in Siam, see Sayamphimpakan: prawatisatkanphim nai 
prathetthai [Sayamphiphakan: The history of printing in Thailand], Bangkok: Matichon, 2549 [2006] 
(Sinlapawathanatham chabapphiset). See also Michael Winship, “L’imprimerie thaïlandaise des origines 
à 1851,” in Jean-Pierre Drège, Mitchiko Ishigami-Iagolnitzer, and Monique Cohen (eds.), Le livre et 
l’imprimerie en Extrême-Orient et en Asie du Sud (Bordeaux: Société des Bibliophiles de Guyenne, 
1986): 265–280; Gérald Duverdier, “La transmisson de l’imprimerie en Thaïlande,” BEFEO 68 (1980): 
209–259.
33 Bangkok Calendar for 1848, cited in Gerini, Siam and its Productions: 257–258, fn. 4 (the bracketed 
matter and italicization are after Gerini, who notes that the notice was reprinted in the Siam Repository, 
1869: 329). It is not clear to me whether the figure “one thousand” refers to Khom bali with its conjunct 
consonants and vowel combinations, or to Khom thai. In addition to the characters needed for Pali, Khom 
thai would need conjunct consonants, Sanskrit consonants and vowels, Thai vowels not used in Indic 
alphabets, tone markers, and other symbols. I have not so far seen any evidence that matrices for Khom 
thai were ever manufactured. 
34 Sinlapawatthu Wat Makutkasatriyaram: 50.

--- Page 376 of 425 ---
354
PETER SKILLING
universal script had been abandoned, tables at the beginning of each volume illustrated the 
“transliteration of the Siamese alphabet and signs as used in the Pali text of this book” 
giving the key to the Siamese in Roman letters, which by this time had become the 
standard script for Pali in Europe (the Pali Text Society, of which King Chulalongkorn was 
a patron, had been founded in 1881). This was praised by Robert Chalmers (1858–1938, 
raised in 1919 to the peerage as Baron Chalmers, of Northiam in the County of Sussex):35
The King of Siam has abandoned the exotic Cambodian for the native Siamese 
character. To Europeans this may seem a small matter; to the average Siamese it 
is a revolution … To a Western eye it is a very great gain to find the text 
intelligently divided into punctuated sentences, with the component words of 
each sentence duly separated one from another. The difference in appearance is 
that between barbarism and civilization … … Another point is the excellent 
scheme of transliteration which, with a paged table of contents (kittipatta) 
precedes the text of each volume. With the aid of this very useful key to the 
Siamese characters, the Pali text can be read without difficulty by European 
scholars, who will be grateful for the consideration thus shown to their needs in 
Siam …
The intellectual challenges of the nineteenth century and the reforms initiated by the two 
monarchs, Mongkut and Chulalongkorn, irrevocably reduced the status of the Khom script: 
no longer was it the sole vehicle for the writing of Pali, and as the twentieth century progressed it was replaced by the Thai script for both Pali and Thai. Today the “sacred” Khom 
bali letters are used only for magical and cabalistic purposes, such as the inscription of 
yantras, mantras, and gāthā. 
In this paper I am unable to present manuscript statistics for Bangkok or for Thailand as 
a whole. The reason is simple — very few exist. I do not know of any publicly accessible 
complete scientific inventories of the holdings of temples and libraries of Siam. In Bangkok alone, there must be hundreds of thousands of manuscripts, at least if one takes the 
phūk as the primary unit. Some data is, however, available for Wat Bovoranives Vihara, 
which was built by the “Second King” in 1824–1832 during the reign of King Rāma III; 
the future King Mongkut (Rāma IV) was the first abbot there when he was a monk. Wat 
Bovoranives has a huge collection: 1,456 volumes comprising 15,351 phūk.36 King 
Mongkut was a great Pali scholar, and Wat Bovoranives became an active, international 
centre of Pali studies, with the result that the collection is a treasury of Pali texts. The 
oldest manuscript, Parivārapāli in Khom script, is dated CE 1620. This compares with the 
oldest manuscript in the National Library of Thailand, Samantapāsādikā vinaya-aṭṭhakathā 
(dutiya) pācittiyavaṇṇanā, a well-preserved Khom-script “red-lacquer” (chadthub) edition 
dated CE 1615.37 The collection of Wat Makut Kasatriyaram, founded by King Mongkut in 
1868 after he had assumed the throne, has nearly 20,000 bundles. Of these, only 35 
bundles containing 17 titles are royal manuscripts, most on metrics or grammar. The 
remaining 835 titles, distributed in 17,250 bundles, are ordinary (non-royal) editions in the 
35 Robert Chalmers, ”The King of Siam’s Edition of the Pali Tipiṭaka,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, 1898: 1–10.
36 Information from Ven. Anil Sakya, “Palm-Leaf Manuscripts: A Gateway to Buddhist Literature and 
Culture,” paper given at The First International Conference on Palm-Leaf Culture (co-organized by 
Yunnan University and People’s Government of the Sipshuangbanna Dai Autonomous Prefecture, 
Sipshuangbanna), Jinghong City, Yunnan Province, China, April 21–22, 2010. The Wat Bovoranives 
collection was catalogued by the National Library in 2009. I am grateful to Ven. Anil Sakya for providing 
a copy of his paper with permission to quote from it.
37 Ven. Anil Sakya, op. cit.

--- Page 377 of 425 ---
Reflections on the Pali Literature of Siam
355
Khom, Mon, Burmese, Sinhalese, Tham Lanna, Tham Isan, and Thai Noi scripts.38 There is 
also a collection of folding paper manuscripts.39 
Statistics are important if we want to assess what texts were popular — in the senses of 
popular for study, curriculum, preaching, recitation, ritual — at certain places and certain 
times. For the pre-modern period, this does not mean popular for consumption or reading 
— manuscripts did not circulate like books and private reading was limited. We lack 
adequate studies on the sociology and economy of manuscripts, of production and circulation, of libraries, literacy, and reading habits.40 There is little if any evidence for the commercial distribution of books or manuscripts in available social records. Palm-leaf and 
paper manuscripts were produced by monks and scribes in monasteries or monastic circles. 
Court editions were produced by scribes from the Department of Scribes (Krom ālak กรม
อาลักษณ์) and the fine arts were done by palace artisans of the “Ten classes of artisans” (Chang sip mū ช่างสิบหมู่). 
Statistics are not available, but lists of titles are; these give at least an idea of the scope 
of Thai Buddhist literature. The Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation (Bangkok), in cooperation with the Lumbini International Research Institute (Lumbini, Nepal), has published 
several works to promote a knowledge of the Pali literature of Siam based on early 
twentieth-century lists of manuscripts in the National Library, Bangkok.41 An early list of 
works composed in Siam was published by Prince Damrong Rajanubhab in 1923.42 This 
list, however, is limited to scholastic texts with known authors. The bulk of the Pali literature of Siam is anonymous, and cast in the sūtra and jātaka genres.43
In the following, I give some random examples of Pali texts that until recently have 
been neglected and are practically unknown in modern scholarship.
1. Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna: The Nibbāna of Bimbā Bhikkhunī
The Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna has been edited in Roman script by Sayam and Rungrot as a 
research project that has not so far been published.44 The text is three bundles long.45
38 “Tham Lanna” and “Tham Isan” are the “Dhamma script” of the North and the Northeast, respectively (effectively the same script, also known as “Lanna” or “northern Thai” script). “Thai Noi,” in Laos 
called simply Lao script, is related to the Sukhothai script, used for writing mainly non-religious texts on 
palm leaf in the Mekong basin. 
39 Sinlapawatthu Wat Makutkasatriyaram, 50. Chotmaihet Watmakutkasatriyaram [Record of Wat 
Makut Kasatriyaram], Bangkok: Borisat Amarin Printing and Publishing, Ltd., 2553 [2010]: 294–303.
40 For aspects of manuscript culture in the North, see Daniel M. Veidlinger, Spreading the Dhamma: 
writing, orality, and textual transmission in Buddhist Northern Thailand, Honolulu: University of 
Hawaiʻi Press, 2006; for Laos and Thailand, see Justin Thomas McDaniel, Gathering Leaves and Lifting 
Words: Histories of Buddhist Monastic Education in Laos and Thailand, Seattle: The University of 
Washington Press, 2008.
41 See Peter Skilling and Santi Pakdeekham, Pāli Literature Transmitted in Central Siam: A catalogue 
based on the Sap Songkhro, Bangkok: Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation/Lumbini International Research 
Institute (MST, Volume 1), 2002; Peter Skilling and Santi Pakdeekham, Pāli and Vernacular Literature 
Transmitted in Central and Northern Siam, Bangkok: Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation/Lumbini International Research Institute (MST, Volume 2), 2004. For an inventory of the related manuscript literature 
of Cambodia, see Olivier de Bernon, Kun Sopheap, Leng Kok-An, Inventaire provisoire des manuscrits 
du Cambodge, Première partie, École française d’Extrême-Orient (MST, Volume 3), Paris, 2004. For an 
annotated transcription of a northern Thai manuscript catalogue, see Santi Pakdeekham (ed.), Piṭakamālā: “The Garland of the Piṭaka”, Bangkok and Lumbini: Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation/Lumbini 
International Research Institute, 2011 (MST, Volume 8).
42 Fragile Palm Leaves for the preservation of Buddhist Literature, No. 7 (December 2545/2002): 19 
(from Prince Damrong’s introduction to Saṅgītiyavaṅśa).
43 For examples of selected texts in a range of genres, see the works of Supaphan Na Bangchang (note 
4 above).
44 Sayam Phataranuprawat and Rungrot Phiromanukun, Kantruatchamra lae kanseuksachoengwikhroh 
khamphi phimphaphikkhuninipphan chabap phasabali [An edition and analytical study of the Pali 
version of Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna], Bangkok: Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre, 2546 [2003]. The 
editors note that the manuscripts assign a variety of titles to the text — Bimbānibbānavatthukathā,

--- Page 378 of 425 ---
356
PETER SKILLING
The Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna takes its setting from the Yasodharātheriyāpadāna.46 The 
Buddha’s wife and the mother of his son Rāhula, here called Bimbā, approaches him and 
announces that she will soon pass away, that is, “enter nibbāna” — hence the title of the 
text, which places it in the Siamese genre of “nibbāna texts.”47 She briefly relates 72 
occasions during past lives when, in one way or another, she transgressed against the 
Buddha, her husband or mate through all these lives. Each story is introduced by iti vatvā 
aparam pi nidānaṃ āharan tī āha (“after saying this, bringing up another story/event, she 
said …”). At the end of each confession, Bimbā asks for the Buddha’s forgiveness. For 
example, with regard to an occasion when, as the Bodhisatta’s wife, she was consumed by 
jealousy and tore up his robe after he had become a monk under the Buddha Dhammadhara, she says:48
bhante jitamāra eso cīvarachindanadoso atthi taṃ sabbaṃ dosaṃ khamatha 
bhante.
Sir, The One who has Conquered Māra, there is this fault of tearing up the robe: 
forgive that whole fault, sir. 
After this, she relates one occasion pertaining to her son Rāhula (at this time a monk and 
an arahat) and asks his forgiveness. The Buddha then relates two stories and asks Bimbā’s 
forgiveness. After her cremation, the Buddha relates another five stories to illustrate 
Bimbā’s good qualities. This makes altogether eighty narratives in the version consulted. 
(Until the study by Sayam and Rungrot, the Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna was accessible only 
through a printed palm-leaf Thai sermon version printed in 2514 [1971] by So. Thamphakdi, Bangkok. This version, which is divided into 12 kan กัณฑ์ [kaṇḍ, or chapters], has 
twenty fewer stories.)
Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna was the basis for the Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna Khamchan, a 
poetic version from the late Ayutthaya or early Bangkok period,49 and for verse khamklong 
versions, which were particularly popular in the South.50 During the First Reign, the 
Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna was cited as authoritative in answer to a “Royal Enquiry” asking 
whether a lightning strike augured ill.51 
Bimbābhikkunīnibbāna, Phra Bimbāyasodharānibbāna, Bimbānibbānasūtra, and Yasodharātherībhikkhunīparinibbāna — but that to avoid confusion they keep to the title Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna. I 
follow suit.
45 The statement that it is four bundles long in the old catalogues (see for example PLTCS, § 2.138) is 
apparently a typing error: see BBhN, p. 30. 
46 See G.P. Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, [1937] Repr. New Delhi: Oriental Reprint/
Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd., II, 741–744, s.v. “Rāhulamātā.” As far as I know, the Pali 
version has not been translated into a European language; for a translation of the Sinhala Yasodharāpadānaya, see Ranjini Obeyesekere, Yasodharā, the Wife of the Bōdhisattva, Albany: State University of 
New York Press, 2009. Obeyesekere (pp. 10–11) describes the text as “a much expanded twelfth or 
thirteenth century version of the Pali Yasodharāpadāna … [O]f which there are many palm leaf 
manuscript versions still found in temple libraries in Sri Lanka.” For problems of identity and name, see 
André Bareau, “Un personnage bien mystérieux: l’épouse du Buddha,” Recherches sur la biographie du 
Buddha dans les Sūtrapiṭaka et les Vinayapiṭaka anciens, III. Articles complémentaires, Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient, 1995 (Monographies, no 178): 119–147. Neither Malalasekera nor Bareau 
were aware of the Siamese “Bimbā texts.”
47 See BBL, 58. The Sāvakanibbāna (PLTCS § 2.235) — a collection of 67 nibbāna stories — does not 
include a Bimbānibbāna.
48 BBhN, 132–133.
49 BBhN, Appendix Kho: edited for the first time from the sole known manuscript from the National 
Library.
50 BBhN, 367–369; for one edition of Phimphachaengchat khamkap [Bimbā reveals her (past) lives] 
from the South, see Wannakamthaksin wannakamkhatsan [Southern Literature, Selected Literature], Lem 
3, Bangkok: Amarin Printing and Publishing Ltd., 2548 [2005]: 295–406.
51 HRH Prince Damrong Rajanubhab (ed.), Phrarachaphongsawadan Krungratanakosin rajakanthi 1 
Phraya Thiphakorawong (Kham Bunnag) riapriang [Royal Chronicle of Ratanakosin, First Reign, compiled by Chaophraya Thiphakorawong (Kham Bunnag)], Bangkok, Kromsinlapakorn, 2531 [1988]: 60;

--- Page 379 of 425 ---
Reflections on the Pali Literature of Siam
357
… During a rainstorm lightning struck the gable end of one of the porticos of 
the Amarintharaphisek Hall [in the Royal Palace] and it caught fire. The King 
was concerned that the lightning that struck and caused the fire at the audience 
hall at that time might imply an unlucky omen for affairs of state. The Buddhist 
monks, headed by Somdet Phra Sangkharat and monks of the rachakhana rank 
[the Saṃgharāja and the royally ranked senior monks], all assured the king that 
they had searched in the ancient Pali scriptures, as well as in mundane knowledge52 and had found that according to traditional beliefs handed down since 
ancient times, a lightning strike was considered to mean good luck … According to the ancient scripture entitled Bimba Nibbana (khamphi phimphanipphan 
คัมภีร์พิมพานิพพาน), if any city’s walls were struck by lightning, even though 
enemies might come to invade that city, it would always defeat them … 
“Bimbā’s Nibbāna” was sometimes depicted in art. Particularly fine is a rectangular 
cloth painting bearing the caption “Bhimbāṇibhāna ภิมพาณิภาณ” in the Walters Art Museum, Baltimore. Ginsburg assigned a date 1880–1900 to the painting, which seems reasonable.53
2. Bimbābilāpa: Bimbā’s Lament54
The library of Wat Khao Yisan, Samut Songkhram province, has an interesting collection 
of manuscripts, some going back to the Ayutthaya period, including an ancient Rasavāhinī 
(PLTCS §2.153, 154), a Lokanayajātaka (PLTCS §2.192) dated BE 2298 [1755], and rare 
texts like Candasuriyadīpanī, of which the National Library possesses only a single copy. 
The Bimbābilāpa is represented at Wat Khao Yisan by a Thai version in five bundles in 
Khom script.55 Each bundle starts with verses of homage in Pali followed by the traditional 
sūtra opening, evaṃ me suttaṃ;56 the text narrates the life of the Buddha from his departure 
from the palace to his return to Kapilavatthu. The Pali version from the same collection is 
one bundle long, consisting of 29 folios inscribed with five lines of text in Khom script. 
for an English translation see Thadeus Flood and Chadin Flood (tr., ed.), The Dynastic Chronicles, 
Bangkok Era, The First Reign. Chaophraya Thiphakorawong Edition, Volume One: Text, Tokyo: The 
Centre for East Asian Cultural Studies, 1978: 164–167. The passage is not found in the original manuscript prepared by Chaophraya Thiphakorawong (Phrarachaphongsawadan Krungratanakosin rajakanthi 
1 chabap Chaophraya Thiphakorawong, Chabap tuakhian [Royal Chronicle of Ratanakosin, First Reign, 
Chaophraya Thiphakorawong edition, Manuscript version], Bangkok: Amarin, 2539 [1996]: 121–123). 
Prince Damrong’s addition to Chaophraya Thiphakorawong’s draft version is based on old sources like 
the “Royal Enquiries” (Phrarājapucchā: records of enquiries put by the king to the high-ranking monks, 
dating from the Ayutthaya to Bangkok periods). It is an example of Prince Damrong’s careful editorial 
intervention.
52 “Searched in the ancient Pali scriptures, as well as in mundane knowledge” translates daitruatkhondu nai phra bali lae khamphiphutthasat lae lokasat ได้ตรวจค้นดูในพระบาลีและคัมภีร์พุทธศาสตร์และโลก
ศาสตร์.
53 “Thai Painting in the Walters Art Museum,” 125. The well-preserved painting (63.5 x 48 cm) is a 
gift from the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation’s Southeast Asian Art Collection 2002 (35.385). A few 
letters of the caption, in a lozenge at the bottom of the painting, are not clear, but the inscription certainly 
refers to “Bimbānibbāna” with orthographic peculiarities of the age. Ginsburg was not aware of the 
“Bimbā Nibbāna” texts, with the result that his commentary is erroneous. The painting seems to belong 
to the same set as another one of “Bimbā’s Lament”: see below, n. 61.
54 The spelling is inconsistent; taking the Sinhala form into account, it appears that the title should be 
“Bimbā-bilāpa (= -vilāpa: cp. Sanskrit vi-lap, “wail, lament, bewail”).” In Thai we usually find bilāp(a). 
In Siamese it is normal to use “bh” (ภ) in place of “ba” (พ), and vice versa, there being no difference in 
pronunciation — the name is often spelt “Bhimbā,” or nibbāna often nibhāna. 
55 Rungrot Phiromanukul, “Phimphaphilapasut,” in Damrongwichakan: ruambotkhwam tang wichakan 
khanaboranakhadi [Damrong: Journal of the Faculty of Archaeology] pi 2545, Vol. 1, Part 2, Bangkok: 
Khana Boranakhadi, Mahawithalaisinlapakorn [Faculty of Archaeology, Silpakorn University], 2545 
[2002]: 177–213. Rungrot gives a thorough analysis of narrative and textual sources along with the 
complete Pali text, based on the single Wat Khao Yisan manuscript, presenting the text as in the manuscript without editorial interference.
56 “suttaṃ” for “sutaṃ” is common in Siamese Pali manuscripts, in which gemination and degemination are rife.

--- Page 380 of 425 ---
358
PETER SKILLING
The narrative does not correspond exactly to the Thai version; it also opens with evam me 
suttam but has no verses of homage. Three “Pāli-siamois” manuscripts in the Bibliothèque 
nationale, Paris, seem to be related;57 all are five bundles long and in Khom script, described as belonging to the eighteenth century. The titles are Bhimbābhilāya(!)sutta (§397) 
and Bhimbābilābbavaṇṇanā (§§398, 399).
The textual history of Bimbābilāpa is intricate and puzzling — the story opens with the 
last meal offered by Cunda, after which the Buddha returns to Kapilavatthu, as if for the 
first time. The narrative includes ten Narasīhagāthā58 and two jātakas spoken by the 
Buddha — the Mahādhammapālajātaka (Jātaka No. 447) and the Candakinnarajātaka 
(Jātaka No. 485). Bimbābilāpa-parivatta, Chapter 19 of the Paṭhamasambodhikathā 
edited by Prince Paramānujitajinorasa,59 is closely related to, and was probably based on, 
the Bimbābilāpasutta. There is a northern Thai prose version copied in CE 1799.60 
Bimbā’s return to Kapilavatthu and presentation of Rāhula to the Buddha are illustrated 
on a stone relief, a so-called sema or boundary stone dated to circa the tenth century, from 
Fadaet Songyang, Kalasin province, in Northeast Thailand. The event is illustrated in the 
mural paintings of Wat Khonkharam in Ratchaburi province in Central Thailand. A cloth 
painting in the collection of the Asian Art Museum, San Francisco, bears the caption 
“Bīmbhābīlāba พีมภาพีลาพ” in a lozenge at the bottom of the painting.61
3. Puṇṇovādasūtra: Instruction to Puṇṇa
During the reign of King Songtham (1610–1628), the Buddha’s footprint on a hill in 
Saraburi province became the pilgrimage centre for the court and people of the kingdom of 
Ayutthaya. The textual source for the legend of the footprint is popularly called Puṇṇovādasūtra; this is not a sūtra in the sense of a canonical Pali text, but rather an expanded 
text which combines the Puṇṇovādasutta of the Pali Majjhimanikāya (Sutta No. 145) with 
its commentary. The narrative of the latter, set in Sunāparanta, was localized in the 
landscape of Saraburi. Bunteuan Siwaraphot presents the relevant texts as an appendix to 
his Ratanamangkhon khamchan, a long khamchan poem on the legend of the footprint and 
the 108 signs on the feet of the Buddha composed by Bunteuan in honour of Queen Sirikit 
of Thailand on the occasion of her fifth birth cycle in BE 2547 [2004].62 This gives the text 
57 A. Cabaton, Catalogue sommaire des manuscrits sanscrits et pālis, 2e fascicule — manuscrits pālis, 
Paris: Ernest Leroux Éditeur (Bibliothèque Nationale, Département des Manuscrits), 1908: §§ 397–399.
58 For these see Heinz Bechert, “Narasīhagāthā and Śrī-Śākyasiṃhastotra,” Adyar Library Bulletin 
31/32 (1967/8): 567–579.
59 Somdet Phramahasamanachao Kromphraparamānujitajinorasa, Paṭhamasambodhi (phasa bali) chabapkhatlok chak khamphibailan aksonkhom, Bangkok: Sahathamik Chamkat, 2537 [1994]: 176–182. The 
chapter is not in the earlier recension of Paṭhamasambodhi, for example the Pali Text Society edition: 
George Cœdès (ed.), edition prepared by Jacqueline Filliozat, The Paṭhamasambodhi, Oxford: The Pali 
Text Society, 2003 (reviewed Petra Kieffer-Pülz, “Die Paṭhamasambodhi: Eine ‘indochinesische’ 
Buddhabiographie?” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, Band 160 (2010): 415–
434).
60 Donald K. Swearer (tr.), “Bimbā’s Lament,” §43 in Donald S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.), Buddhism in 
Practice, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1995 (Princeton Readings in Religion). The 
Sinhala “Yasodhara’s lament” relates to the Bodhisattva’s “great departure” rather than his return to 
Kapilavastu: see “Yasodharāvata (The Story of Yasodharā) also known as Yasodharā vilāpaya (Yasodhara’s Lament),” translated in Ranjini Obeyesekere, Yasodharā, the Wife of the Bōdhisattva, Chapter 1. 
For a translation of an excerpt on “The Buddha’s Arrival at Yasodhara’s Palace” from the Sinhala 
Pūjavāliya, composed by Māyūrapāda Buddhaputra in 1266, see C[hristopher] H.B. Reynolds (ed.), An 
Anthology of Sinhalese Literature up to 1815 selected by the UNESCO National Commission of Ceylon, 
London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1970: 182–186.
61 Emerald Cities, Cat. No. 58, p. 138: the small (63.5 × 47.0 cm) rectangular painting is assigned the 
date 1800–1900, gift from Doris Duke Charitable Foundation’s Southeast Asian Art Collection, 
2006.27.70. The painting seems to belong to the same set that of “Bimbā’s Nibbāna” mentioned above.
62 Bunteuan Siwaraphot, Ratanamangkhon khamchan chalermphrakiat Somdetphranangchao Sirikit 
Phraboromarachininath [Ratanamangkhon, a khamchan poem in honour of Queen Sirikit], Bangkok,

--- Page 381 of 425 ---
Reflections on the Pali Literature of Siam
359
of the Pali sutta, based on Khom-script manuscripts in the National Library, Bangkok. The 
oldest of these is undated, but is considered to be from the Ayutthaya period; this is the 
basis of the transcription, for which the original orthography is retained.63 Bunteuan’s 
Appendix also gives the Pali text of the commentary and modern Thai translations of both 
sutta and commentary. The Pali textual tradition is supplemented by an old Thai vernacular 
“Puṇṇovādasūtra” in the sermon style (deśanā).64 The sermon opens with the date given in 
Pali prose, mixed with some Thai, equivalent to BE 2353 [1810], that is, from the beginning of the Second Reign (1809–1824). It gives both the time that has elapsed since the 
Buddha’s Nibbāna and the time that remains until, in 5000, his Śāsanā ends:
parinibbānadivasato paṭṭhāya ajja eko dino sammato bāvīsatidinna bokwanluang 
บอกวันล่วง aṭṭhamāsa bokdeuanluang บอกเดือนล่วง tepaññāsasaṃvaccharatisatādhikāni dve saṃvaccharasahassāni atikkantāni ahesuṃ | imasmiṃ paccupannakāle assasaṃvacchare hemanta-utumhi pussamāse sukkhapakkho chaṭṭhamītithīyaṃ sukkavāre anāgate kāle tevīsatidinna temāsa chacattālīsasaṃvacchara 
chasatādhikāni dve saṃvaccharasahassāni avasesāni bhavissanti |
Today, from the day [of the Blessed One’s] passing, one day is conventionally 
agreed upon:65 twenty-two days — announcing the days that have passed — 
eight months — announcing the months that have passed — two thousand plus 
three hundred fifty-three years have passed. At this present time, in the year of 
the horse, in the winter season, in the month of Pussa, it is the bright fortnight, 
the sixth lunar day, a Friday: as regards the future time, there remain twentythree days, three months, two thousand plus six hundred and forty-six years.
The 1810 manuscript is the basis of the transcription; two other manuscripts were also 
consulted, both plain gold (thongthuep ทองทึบ) with ordinary wooden covers. The original 
orthography is respected.66 After these documents the poetic Khamchan version is presented, making altogether four documents which allow us to study the development of the 
legend from Pali sutta, to commentary, to sermon and to poetry.
4. Buddhapādamaṅgala: Auspicious Signs on the Feet of a Buddha
The Buddhapādamaṅgala starts with the conventional description of the wheel mark on 
the soles of the feet of a Buddha (buddhapāda); it then lists and explains one hundred and 
eight associated auspicious marks or signs (maṅgala). The Buddhapādamaṅgala does not 
fit easily into any of the usual genre categories. Ostensibly it is a commentary on the bare 
list of one hundred and eight marks and it indeed draws deeply and profusely on Pāli 
exegetical traditions. Although the Buddhapādamaṅgala is a technical work, at the same 
time it is repetitive and lyrical, almost liturgical — qualities it shares with the Thai and 
Khmer vernacular verse texts on the one hundred and eight auspicious signs. The list of 
signs is a compendium of metaphors, which becomes the occasion for an encomium, a 
Krom Sinlapakon [The Fine Arts Department], 2547 [2004], Appendix, pp. 169–213. For an English 
translation of the commentary from the Pali Puṇṇovādasuttavaṇṇanā, see Joel Tatelman, The Glorious 
Deeds of Pūrṇa: A Translation and Study of the Pūrṇāvadāna, Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 2000, 
Appendix One. H. H. Prince Bidyalaṅkarana summarizes the Thai sermon tradition in “The Buddha’s 
Footprints,” Siam Society Fiftieth Anniversary Commemorative Publication: Selected Articles from the 
Siam Society Journal, Volume II, 1929–1953, Bangkok, The Siam Society, 1954: 37–52, originally read 
by the Prince at a general meeting of the Society in December, 1934.
63 This is manuscript 6789/kho ข/1, gilt and red lacquer covers (longchat ล่องชาด). Two others (6943/
cho ฉ/1, secondary copy (rongsong รองทรง), with inlaid shell covers, and 4108/jha ฌ/1, secondary copy, 
with Chinese style designs in gold and colour (laykamalo ลายกํามะลอ) are from the First Reign. Three 
others are longchat with ordinary wooden covers.
64 Manuscript 4813/cho ฉ/1 in Khom script, longchat.
65 The meaning of eko dino sammato is not clear to me.
66 The details are from Ratanamangkhon khamchan, 176–177.

--- Page 382 of 425 ---
360
PETER SKILLING
tribute to the qualities of the Buddha and his Dharma. The marks are a codification of the 
ethical, theological, and cosmological landscape of Buddhist life.67
Although the Buddhapādamaṅgala draws on the canonical and classical Pāli literature 
of Ceylon, it also shares in a broader intertextuality of Southeast Asian, particularly Thai, 
Pali literature. This includes close paraphrases of the Mahādibbamanta and ideas about 
cetiyas and worship.
5. Uppātasanti: Pacification of Calamities
Uppātasanti is a protective text in 271 stanzas which invokes the protection of the past 
Buddhas, of Maitreya the future Buddha, of the great disciples, male and female, and of an 
array of deities. It is a learned text that makes allusions to qualities of the Buddhas and 
others that are scattered throughout the Pali texts, canonical and non-canonical.68 Uppātasanti may be a Northern Thai recension,69 transmitted also in Burma; a closely related but 
not identical text, the Mahāsanti, is found in Bangkok temple libraries, but the relation 
between the two recensions is not yet clear. It is characteristic of the Pali literature of Siam 
to transmit several versions of the same text — textual instability and innovation are the 
rule. Another example is the Mahāvaṃsa. There is the (apparently) original Lankan 
version, there is an “extended Mahāvaṃsa” which is presumed to be from Ayutthaya, and 
there is a recast version, Mahāvaṃsamālinī, which may come from North Thailand.70
6. Jambūpatisūtra: The Sūtra on King Jambūpati
This is an apocryphal sūtra, the dramatic story of how the Buddha tamed the arrogant, 
mighty King Jambūpati.71 It opens with evam me sutaṃ; the sūtra was well-known in 
Ayutthaya, and used to explain the “crowned” or “adorned” Buddha images (phraphuttharup songkhreuang พระพุทธรูปทรงเครื่อง) which proliferated at that time. In addition to 
the Pali version, which is in two bundles, there are vernacular, sermon, and verse versions. 
The narrative and plot relate to one of the stories in the “Sūtra of the Wise and the Foolish” 
and to the Kapphiṇa-avadāna of the Avadānaśataka (No. 88). There is, in fact, another 
related text in the Siamese manuscript tradition, Pali Mahākappinadhaja-sūtra (PLTCS 
§2.158).
7. Vidagdhamukhamaṇḍana: Ornament for the Speech of the Learned
Vidagdhamukhamaṇḍana is a Pali translation-cum-adaptation of a celebrated handbook of 
riddles composed in Sanskrit by Dharmadāsa. The Vidagdhamukhamaṇḍana was among 
67 This is a summary from P. Skilling, Preface to Claudio Cicuzza (ed.), A Mirror Reflecting the Entire 
World: The Pāli Buddhapādamaṅgala or “Auspicious Signs on the Buddha’s Feet”, Bangkok: Fragile 
Palm Leaves Foundation/Lumbini International Research Institute (MST, Volume 6), 2011.
68 Nalini Balbir and P. Skilling are preparing an annotated edition and French translation.
69 A palm-leaf Uppātasanti in Lanna script from Wat Phan-an, Chiang Mai, dated 1824, complete in 1 
phūk (88 pages), is described in Balee Buddharaksa, Wannakambali nai Lanna: raicheu ekasantuakhian 
89 chabap prakopsarasangkhep sathabanwichaisangkhom mahawithayalaychiangmai [Pali literature in 
Lanna: List of 89 manuscripts with summaries], Chiang Mai: Sathaban Wichai Sangkhom, Mahawithayalay Chiangmai [Social Research Institute, Chiang Mai University, 2543 [2000]: §87.
70 For a critical edition in Thai script, see Balee Buddharaksa (ed.), The Mahāvaṃsamālinī-vilāsinī: 
Critical Text Edition and Translation, Chiang Mai, Social Research Institute, Chiang Mai University, 
2544/2001. A romanized edition is forthcoming from Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation (Bangkok) and 
Lumbini International Research Institute (Lumbini, Nepal) in the Materials for the Study of the Tripiṭaka 
series.
71 See Skilling, BBL, 30–32. The Pali text has now been published: Santi Pakdeekham (ed.), Jambūpatisūtra: A Synoptic Romanized Edition, Bangkok and Lumbini 2009 (MST 5). For the reasons behind 
the choice of a synoptic edition, see P. Skilling, “An impossible task? The classical ‘edition’ and Thai Pali 
literature,” TIJBS I, 2553 [2009] (The International PhD Programme in Buddhist Studies, Mahidol 
University): 33–43.

--- Page 383 of 425 ---
Reflections on the Pali Literature of Siam
361
the titles offered to a monastery at Pagan in Burma in 1442, and manuscript copies are 
found in Burmese, Northern Thai, Lao, and Khmer collections. Siamese collections preserve not only the root text but also several ancillary texts — upadesa, ṭīkā, yojanā, 
nissaya.72 A complete inventory remains to be made, and only careful editions and sustained study will unravel the relations between the Pali and the Sanskrit, or the Pali root 
text and the ancillary texts.73
Most of the texts described above are not rare — they were included in the Tripiṭaka 
every time it was copied, and multiple copies exist in the National Library and in temple 
collections. In three cases (Nos. 5, 6, 7), I have consulted manuscripts from a royal palmleaf Tripiṭaka called the “Assembly of deities” (Thep chumnum, เทพชุมนุม) edition, which 
was donated by King Rāma III (Phra Nangklao Chaoyuhua: 1824–1851) to Wat Phra 
Chetuphon, one of the great centres of education in the Bangkok period, popularly known 
as Wat Pho. The Thep chumnum edition has beautiful gilt-lacquer covers and title pages 
depicting the “assembly of deities” gathered to listen to the Dharma, their hands raised in 
homage. The texts are neatly inscribed in the Khom bali script.
All of the texts discussed above (with the possible exception of Bimbābilāpa) were 
included in the royal manuscript Tripiṭakas of the first five reigns, but none of them are 
found in any of the Tripiṭakas printed in Siam since the end of the nineteenth century. This 
reflects a reinterpretation of the word Tripiṭaka at the close of the nineteenth century. 
Before that, when a Siamese king sponsored a Tripiṭaka, this entailed collecting and 
copying all available Pali texts (and even a few bilinguals) belonging to all categories, 
including not only the classical texts of the Mahāvihāra — the “Pali literature of Ceylon” 
— but also the commentaries, sub-commentaries, manuals, handbooks, and chronicles, 
along with an assortment of “apocryphal” — or what I have called “non-classical” — Pali 
texts known only in Siam.74 The Tripiṭaka meant the complete corpus of Pali literature, 
divided into four — not three — main categories: sūtra, vinaya, paramattha, and saddā 
(Sūtra, monastic rules, Abhidhamma, and grammar). It was in this acceptation that royal 
Tripiṭakas were produced, following a generous standard that promoted and preserved the 
full range of the Pali traditions of Ceylon, India, and Siam. This inclusivism resembles the 
Chinese conception of the Tripiṭaka. By the end of the nineteenth century, the ideal of the 
all-inclusive Tripiṭaka was eclipsed by the exclusive Tripiṭaka prescribed by the Lankan 
Pali exegetical tradition of Buddhaghosa and others. Perhaps this Tripiṭaka was more 
consonant with the modernist and historicist aspirations of the age. The exclusive Tripiṭaka 
became the norm, thereby consigning seven hundred years of Siamese Pali texts to near 
oblivion. 
The alternate Siamese conception of the Tripiṭaka is not well known today. Few premodern discussions of the principles of canonicity have been preserved (the exceptions 
might be recorded in the “Royal Enquiries” — Phrarājapucchā: see n. 51 — which have 
only been selectively published), and there are no records of the complete contents of any 
of the nineteenth-century royal editions. Not many of the texts composed in Siam have 
been adequately studied; those described briefly above represent themes and genres that 
are characteristic of Siamese literature. The first two revolve around the story of the 
Buddha’s wife Bimbā; they can be seen as part of a fascination with the family life of the 
Sakyas and the Buddha, evidenced also in the Vivahamaṅgalaparivatta, which relates the 
genealogy of Suddhodana and hence Sakyamuni from the beginning of the aeon, and then 
details Suddhodana’s elaborate marriage ceremonies. This grand event became Chapter 1 
72 See BBL, 37.
73 The Vidagdhamukha family of texts is under study by Nalini Balbir, who has published some 
preliminary remarks in “Three Pāli Works Revisited,” JPTS XXIX (2007): 331–364.
74 For the idea of “non-classical” with reference to Jātakas, see P. Skilling, “Jātaka and Paññāsa-jātaka 
in South-East Asia,” JPTS XXVIII (2006): 113–173.

--- Page 384 of 425 ---
362
PETER SKILLING
of the Prince Paramānujitajinorasa version of the Paṭhamasambodhi, setting the stage for 
the great story of Sakyamuni’s bodhisattva career, awakening, and life. The Puṇṇovādasutta also belongs to the life of the Buddha and the dissemination of the Dharma; it 
supplies a narrative background for the localization of the cult of the Buddha’s footprints. 
The footprint is more than a cult object, however; it is an encyclopaedic encoding of 
Buddhist ethics and practices in cosmological symbolism, which is the subject of Buddhapādamaṅgala. The feet and footprints of the Buddha confer security and blessings, answering to one of the main concerns of the individual wandering in cyclic existence, the 
round of Saṃsāra. The apotropaic verses of the Uppātasanti invoke the powers of the 
Buddhas, the spiritual beings, and the deities to protect the devotee against calamities and 
to bring good fortune.
None of these five texts owes much to non-Pali traditions. Instead they draw deeply on 
the Pali tradition, refashioning and embellishing it in order to create new texts with new 
functions. The Jambūpatisūtra, however, is a recasting of a story that was popular in 
Buddhist societies across Asia, framing the climax of the story in a magically-created royal 
city that evokes Ayutthaya, the Thai capital, with dramatic supernormal battles that might 
owe something to the Thai story of Rāma, the Rāmakian (รามเกียรติ์). The intellectually 
and linguistically challenging Vidagdhamukhamaṇḍana is a Pali version of a classical 
Indian handbook on riddles. The Mahākappinadhaja and the Uṇhissavijaya (BBL, pp. 32–
36, 42–45) are also related to northern Indian narratives. The Lokaneyyapakaraṇa (BBL, 
pp. 36–37) draws on Indian nīti traditions. How and where did these Pali texts come into 
being? What is their relation to other Indian and non-Indian versions? Is it useful or is it 
counterproductive to think in terms of “Indian originals”? How did the texts circulate? 
Who wrote them, who transmitted them? How did the proud king travel to Siam and end 
up as Jambūpati? How did Dharmadāsa’s celebrated collection of riddles become so popular, at least in terms of distribution, in Southeast Asia? These are some of the questions 
that await serious research.
Whatever the case, it is clear that Siamese Pali literature is not a piecemeal collection of 
discrete texts passively received from abroad and mechanically translated into vernaculars, 
or composed by monks in isolated retreats. The Pali literature of Siam has never been inert; 
active and interactive, it has developed in contact and collision. The texts share verses and 
text blocks, for example the Narasīhagāthā are given in the Bimbābilāpa, the Paṭhamasambodhi, and the Jinamahānidāna, and most probably other sources. Verses are shared by 
the Lokaneyyapakaraṇa and non-classical jātakas, and the latter and non-classical texts 
like the Jambūpati-sūtra. Similarities of phrasing and style run throughout the texts. This 
web of intertextuality shows that the non-classical Pali texts of Siam are socially and 
historically related. They constitute a community of Pali texts that share many features and 
express similar ideologies — of merit, of reward and benefits (ānisaṃsa), of hierarchies 
and obligations, of the adventures and perfections of the Bodhisattva, and of the indescribable power and glory of the Buddha — and which bring felicity, success, and victory. They 
embed similar value systems, elaborating family relationships as in Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna, Bimbābilāpa, or Vivahamaṅgalaparivatta, extolling giving (dāna: including the 
“gift of the body” or self-sacrifice),75 the fashioning and gilding of Buddha images, and the 
production of Tripiṭakas. These themes counted in the imaginative and moral life — family 
matters, merit, security, success, felicity. Many texts were invested with authority through 
the evam me sutaṃ formula; for those who transmitted them, they had been recited by 
Ānanda at the First Council and had full sūtra status.
75 For self-sacrifice in the Thai tradition, see Arthid Sheravanichkul, “Self-Sacrifice of the Bodhisatta 
in the Paññāsa Jātaka,” Religion Compass 2, 5 (August 2008): 769–787; “Self-Sacrifice of the Kings in 
the Simhāsana Dvātriṃśikā and Thai Buddhist Narratives,” Rian Thai: International Journal of Thai 
Studies 1 (2008): 1–25.

--- Page 385 of 425 ---
Reflections on the Pali Literature of Siam
363
Most Pali manuscripts are from the nineteenth century. Why this is so is not clear. Is it 
simply that earlier manuscripts have fallen victims to climate, war, and human negligence? 
Even if that is the case, we must ask what led to the massive production of manuscripts in 
the nineteenth century, not only in Siam, but also in Burma. To what degree was Pali a 
language of intellectual pursuit in the nineteenth century, to what degree was it a prestige 
language? It was certainly a prestige language; its study was obligatory, and it became 
embedded in ritual and hierarchical realities. Today Pali remains a language of memorization and recitation for both monastics and lay persons. 
Recent developments
The year 2012 saw a major historical event in Pali studies: the publication of a Thaiscript edition of the Pali Paññāsa-jātaka, based on central Siamese manuscripts in Khom 
script: Paññāsajātaka, Phak phasa thai bali, published to celebrate the seventh twelveyear cycle of King Bhumibol Adulyadej on 5 December 2011, sponsored by the Omsin 
peua sangkhom Foundation, printed by Plan Printing Chamkat, 2554.
Vol. 1. Jātaka nos. 1–24. 492 pp.
Vol. 2. Jātaka nos. 25–48. 548 pp.
Vol. 3. Jātaka nos. 49–50. Pacchimabhāga jātaka nos. 1–6. 532 pp.
Vol. 4. Pacchimabhāga jātaka nos. 7–11, plus Pañcabuddhabyākaraṇa. 512 pp.
Each jātaka is given first in Thai translation, then in Pali in Thai script. The translations are 
the classic ones of the first edition. At the beginning of each volume is a facsimile reprint 
of Prince Damrong’s short introduction. Each volume has a set of colour illustrations, one 
for each jātaka, made specially by Samnak Chang Sip Mu (Office of the Ten Crafts) of the 
Fine Arts Department.
Other new editions have made new Pali genres more widely accessible, such as 
monastic letters by King Rāma IV written as a monk: Petra Kieffer-Pülz (ed.), Sīmāvicāraṇa – A Pali letter on monastic boundaries by King Rāma IV of Siam, Bangkok and 
Lumbini: Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation/Lumbini International Research Institute, 2011 
(Materials for the Study of the Tripiṭaka Volume 7). Recent studies have examined aspects 
of the use of Pali in Southeast Asia, including Cambodia, adding the circulation of texts to 
the knowledge of functional aspects of Pali.76
After initial surveys of manuscript holdings at several temples in Chaiya District, Surat 
Thani province in central southern Thailand, the Office for Art and Culture (Surat Thani 
Rajabhat University) has initiated a project to catalogue, preserve, and digitize several of 
the collections, with Santi Pakdeekham and Peter Skilling as participants. Chaiya district is 
an ancient cultural centre on the trade routes of the past. 
The temple collection of Wat Bodharama includes some interesting titles, such as 
commentaries that are not generally known like Gaṇṭhīdasajātaka (that is, a commentary 
on the Ten Jātakas) and the Aṭṭhakathā-ṭīkā-bāhuṃ, a commentary on Bāhūṃ, a verse 
chant of the Buddha’s eight victories, one of the most common chants. There are many 
bundles from the Mūlakaccāyana, the bilingual Thai-Pali grammar most widely used in the 
pre-modern period, as well as bundles from the “Seven books of the Abhidhamma,” one of 
the most popular chanting texts. Other texts that belong to the liturgical tradition are Mahāsamaya-sutta, Āṭānāṭiya-sutta, and Mahāvessantarajātaka. Maṅgaladipanī-aṭṭhakathāmaṅgalasūtra, composed by Ācariya Sirimaṅgala in Chiang Mai in CE 1524, is an exegesis on the thirty-eight verses of the Maṅgala-sutta, widely used not only in Thailand but 
throughout the region.
76 See the essays in Peter Skilling, Jason A. Carbine, Claudio Cicuzza, and Santi Pakdeekham, eds., 
How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities, Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2012.

--- Page 386 of 425 ---
364
PETER SKILLING
Among the rare texts are Mūlakammaṭṭhāna and Mahāmūlakammaṭṭhāna, meditation 
texts in Pali which have not yet been edited or published. Bimbādevī-vilāpa-sūtta is about 
the lamentations of Bimbādevī, the Bodhisatta’s wife, who eventually becomes a nun (see 
above). At Wat Bodharama and Wat Samuhanimit there are several versions of Paṭhamasambodhi, a life of Gotama Buddha.
Anāgatavaṃsa is about the future Buddha Maitreya, and the Dasabodhisatta is about 
ten Bodhisattas, Maitreya and the nine that will follow him. Mahāvipāka and Buddhavipākasūtra-vaṇṇanā belong to the “vipāka” family of texts. Ratanabimbavaṃsa is a Pali 
“biography” of the Emerald Buddha. Phra Buddhaghosā and Phra Buddhaghosācārya are 
presumed to belong to the family of biographies of the great Pali scholar of the fifth 
century. Several manuscripts of the Milindapaṇhā (“Questions of Milinda”) are found in 
the region. These are important because recent study has showed that this famous work 
was not at all stable, and was transmitted in several quite differing recensions.77 
Problems and challenges
The literature outlined above has fallen victim to two conceits. One, not uncommon among 
Pali scholars, equates the Pali canon of Ceylon with early Buddhism: the only access to 
“original Buddhism” is through the “Pali canon.” Nothing else, whether in Gandhari, in 
Buddhist Sanskrit, in Chinese or Tibetan or Khotanese translation, is much worth looking 
at, including the late Pali texts of Siam and Southeast Asia. Another conceit is the “conceit 
of antiquity.” Most Pali manuscripts, even of the “earliest” texts, are late, a few centuries 
old at best. The Pali literature of Siam is doubly damned as a late literature preserved in 
even later manuscripts. Which is more interesting or important, a seventeenth-century 
manuscript composed in Ayutthaya, or a second-century Gandhari fragment? Why should 
the latter be more attractive to researchers? Is there any imbalance in methodologies that 
insist on “oldest manuscripts,” “early this,” and “original that”? These conceits are compounded by complacency — a pervasive conviction that Pali literature is already well 
known, that almost all the important texts have already been edited and translated, and that 
there is not much left to do except to translate Aṭṭhakathās or edit and translate Ṭīkās. 
Young scholars out to forge a career are unlikely to find these tasks or the prospect of reediting canonical texts like Majjhima Nikāya volumes II and III especially appealing. In 
fact, recent Presidents of the Pali Text Society have been emphatic and public in saying 
that almost everything needs to be done again — by which they seem to mean that what 
has been edited needs to be re-edited, and that what has been translated needs to be 
retranslated. There is good cause for this — I do not know if any of the PTS editions can 
be described as genuinely “scientific” or “critical,” and many of them fall well below the 
exacting standards exemplified by the editors of the Turfan manuscripts, the Schøyen 
Collection, or the Gāndhārī Buddhist Texts. PTS editions are too often conflations of the 
readings of an arbitrary and limited selection of manuscripts, or, more recently, of Asian 
printed editions which are themselves inadequate.
Even for those who are attracted to this literature there are many obstacles. Access to 
national collections is difficult, and most temple collections are uncatalogued. The fact that 
Khom is no longer widely read has contributed to the neglect of temple manuscript collections and their poor state of preservation. European collections may be easier to access, 
but to obtain copies is often expensive. The quality of the scribal tradition is poor — the 
manuscripts are rarely free of mistakes, lacunae, and other errors.78 Editing them is 
77 For a preliminary note, see Peter Skilling, “Problems with Milinda,” Journal of the Centre for 
Buddhist Studies, Sri Lanka, VIII (2010): 1–24.
78 Some of the problems of editing Siamese manuscripts are addressed in Toshiya Unebe, “Towards an 
edition of the Paññāsajātaka: Problems and solutions,” TIJBS, Volume I 2553 [2009]: 44–63 and P.

--- Page 387 of 425 ---
Reflections on the Pali Literature of Siam
365
challenging, and calls for patience and ingenuity. But are these complete Siamese manuscripts any more demanding than the fragmentary “new manuscripts,” which teams of 
devoted scholars have so painstakingly edited?
The study of the “new manuscripts” has transformed our understanding of the evolution 
of South Asian, Central Asian, and Southeast Asian Buddhism as well as of Buddhist 
languages, literature, and school affiliation. Our old textbooks have become drastically 
outdated, and we have to consider new approaches and new paradigms, and reflect on new 
questions. Surely the Pali literature of Siam should have a place in these paradigms. 
Appendix
Manuscript project of the École française d’Extrême-Orient (EFEO), Bangkok79
An important project of the EFEO Center in Bangkok is being carried out in cooperation 
with the Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre (SAC), a research institute under the Thai 
Ministry of Culture, as well as with the Siam Society. The project entails the preparation of 
inventories and digital records of manuscripts connected with the tradition of Northern 
Thai tamnan or traditional religious chronicles. 
Since 2005, Dr. François Lagirarde, the head of this project, has undertaken field trips in 
the provinces of northern Thailand (ancient Lanna), taking high-quality digital pictures and 
then coordinating the reading, translating and database processing of the original sources. 
Two young graduate researchers from Silapakorn University and one photographer have 
assisted Dr. Lagirarde. The primary aim of this project is straightforward: to give direct 
access to unpublished primary texts through digital records that can be read on any 
computer. 
To date, hundreds of bundles of palm-leaf manuscripts have been photographed and 
computerized, making a collection of more than 40,000 images. The pictures have all been 
taken in one library (the Siam Society in Bangkok) and forty-one different monastic 
libraries from Chiang Mai, Lamphun, Lampang, Phrae, Nan, Phayao and Chiang Rai 
provinces (as of May 2013). Access to the monastic collections and permission to photograph has been facilitated by the Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre as an organization of the 
Thai Ministry of Culture. A database of this digital collection is available on the EFEO 
website (http://www.efeo.fr/lanna_manuscripts/). It provides a detailed description of every 
manuscript digitalized by the tamnan project with access to its first and last page in high 
definition. The database stresses the need for identifying and distinguishing the texts and 
using proper titles. Therefore it always presents the original title(s) of the manuscript by 
displaying “citation” thumbnails from the original photographs.
As a research programme, the EFEO tamnan project aims firstly at providing an 
overview idea of the tamnan genre itself. What are the limits of the genre? What is its 
social and literary history? How has the tamnan genre interacted with other genres and 
corpora? How has it interacted with sites, local and regional geography, and religious 
practices? The bibliometric and biblio-economic data will contribute to an enriched and 
more accurate understanding of the genre. 
Skilling, “An impossible task? The classical ‘edition’ and Thai Pali literature,” TIJBS I, 2553 [2009]: 33–
43. 
79 I am grateful to François Lagirarde for the information that is the basis of this appendix. The 
description of the project is current as of December 2012. For the tamnan genre, see his “Temps et lieux 
d’histoires bouddhiques: à propos de quelques ‘chroniques’ inédites de Lanna,” BEFEO 94, 2007 [2010]: 
59–94.

--- Page 388 of 425 ---
366
PETER SKILLING
In its second phase, the EFEO tamnan project will engage in a more philological and 
historical approach to the corpus of texts henceforth available. Editions and translations of 
specific texts are planned, but the project will emphasize the need for comparative readings 
of different “streams” of texts in order to explain the function of the tamnan literature from 
Lanna, a tradition probably born in the early fourteenth century AD. Although the traditional production of tamnan waned as the twentieth century progressed, a “tamnan mentality” still animates the landscape of Lanna and functions in new forms such as the printed 
book and the temple website.
Abbreviations
BBhN
Bimbābhikkhunīnibbāna
BBL
Claudio Cicuzza (ed.), Buddhism and Buddhist Literature of South-East Asia, Selected 
Articles by Peter Skilling, Bangkok and Lumbini 2009 (MST 5).
BEFEO
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient
JCBSSL
Journal of the Centre for Buddhist Studies, Sri Lanka
JIABS
Journal of the International Association for Buddhist Studies
JPTS
Journal of the Pali Text Society
MST
Materials for the Study of the Tripiṭaka
PLTCS
Peter Skilling and Santi Pakdeekham, Pāli Literature Transmitted in Central Siam: A 
catalogue based on the Sap Songkhro, Bangkok: Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation/
Lumbini International Research Institute (MST, Volume 1), 2002
TIJBS
Thai International Journal for Buddhist Studies (Published by The International PhD 
Programme in Buddhist Studies, Mahidol University)
Conventions
Thai names are given in Thai order, under the first name. Japanese names are listed in Japanese 
order, under family name, which comes first.
For Thai references, the Buddhist Era is given first. When the publication itself gives the Christian 
Era, I give it following a stroke: BE/CE or CE/BE. When the publication does not give the Christian 
Era, it appears in square brackets at the end of the entry.
Translations of Thai titles in brackets are my own. They are provisional and not in any way official. 
Unless otherwise noted, translations from Pali or Thai are my own.

--- Page 389 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA (KANDY)
1. An Overview of Pali manuscripts in Sri Lanka
There are tens of thousands of palm-leaf manuscripts in Sri Lanka, many of them containing Pāḷi (hereafter: Pali) texts. The first part of this article will give a brief overview of the 
history of Pali palm-leaf manuscripts in Sri Lanka, the age of manuscripts, where they are 
located, the materials used, scripts, the general condition of collections, who takes care of 
them and how they are not taken care of, earlier research, the scientific and cultural value 
of manuscripts, how they could be made more accessible to the scholarly world and what 
issues would be faced in order to do so.
1.1 History
The earliest mention of written Pali texts in Sri Lanka is found in the Dīpavaṃsa and the 
Mahāvaṃsa, chronicles describing how the good and bad deeds of kings affected Mahāvihāra Theravāda Buddhism in Sri Lanka. According to these chronicles, the Pali Canon (tipiṭaka) and its commentaries (aṭṭhakathā) were first written down in the reign of King 
Vaṭṭagāmaṇi-Abhaya (Mhv 33.100–101, Dīp 20.20–21) in the 1st century BCE (Geiger 
1960: §65). Both chronicles state: “The text of the three piṭakas and the aṭṭhakathā thereon 
… in order that the true doctrine might endure, they wrote them down in books.” (Piṭakattayapāḷiñca, tassa aṭṭhakathampi ca; … ciraṭṭhitatthaṃ dhammassa potthakesu likhāpayuṃ) (Geiger 1912: 237). These “books,” potthaka, were usually made of talipot palm 
(Corypha umbraculifera) or “Ola” palm leaves.1
Later on, the Mahāvaṃsa records that kings were ordering the copying of manuscripts: 
King Kassapa had books copied (39.19), King Moggallāna II (537–556) had the Dhamma 
written down and then held a festival in honour of the books (41.62), King Vijayabāhu 
(1059–1114) had the Tipiṭaka copied and offered it to the community of monks (60.22), 
King Sena II (851–855) had the Ratana-sutta written down on a gold sheet (hema-paṭṭa) 
(51.79),2 and King Kassapa V (913–923) had the Abhidhamma Piṭaka written on gold 
sheets and had the Dhammasaṅgaṇī book adorned with various jewels and caused a yearly 
festival to be held in honour of it (52.50–57). Other, later kings also had Pali books copied 
(Mv 90.37–38, 91.27, 92.13). In the 18th century, King Kittisiri caused many suttas, such 
as the Dhammacakka, to be inscribed on a golden book, had the Dīghanikāya copied in 
one day by scribes, who were amply rewarded, and then had the text recited the whole 
night long; he also rewarded others who copied books (99.28–35; see Geiger 1960: §63, 
and Mirando 1985: 66).
Just as in Northern Thailand (see Veidlinger 2007: 130), large rewards were paid to 
those who copied books, usually monks. In 1509 King Vikramabāhu of Kandy bestowed 
lands on a monk who had copied the Saṃyuttanikāya to compensate him for his labours 
(Mirando 1985: 21). His successor King Rājādhirājasiṃha rewarded the lay scribe who 
had inscribed the Dhammacakka and other suttas on a book of gold leaves with a gift of 
lands (Mirando 1985: 69). Laypeople also rewarded monks with gifts of lands for copying 
texts such as the Majjhimanikāya (Mirando 1985: 74).
1 The elaborate process of preparing Ola palm leaves, writing on them, etc., is described in de Silva 
1938: xxi; Nell 1954: 38–40; Wickramaratne 1967: 16–21; Coomaraswamy 1979: 51–53; Godakumbura 
1980: xlix–lii; Gunawardhana 1997: 33–40; Gunaratne 2006.
2 At the Jetavanarama monastery complex in Anuradhapura a fragment of the Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā 
Prajñāpāramitā written on gold leaves was discovered in a buried pot; see von Hinüber 1983: 189–207.

--- Page 390 of 425 ---
368
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
The Mahāvaṃsa also mentions that manuscripts along with monasteries were destroyed 
by invaders, especially the Kāliṅgan invader Māgha in the early thirteenth century, and the 
Portuguese during the colonial period. After these acts of destruction and the chaos that 
followed, manuscripts were copied on a large scale to make up for the losses. King Vijayabāhu III (1232–1236), saddened by the loss of so many Dhamma books destroyed by the 
invader Māgha, gathered many lay scribes to copy the Tipiṭaka (Cullavaṃsa 81.40–45). In 
the 18th century, after the destruction caused by the Portuguese and Dutch, many manuscripts were copied in Kandy through the revivalist efforts of Saṅgharāja Saraṇaṅkara.
The copying of texts and their distribution and worship was regarded as a meritorious 
activity because it preserved the doctrine (Dhamma) of the Buddha. Giving the Dhamma to 
others is considered the highest gift in Buddhism.3 The texts were also caused to be copied 
by kings to bolster their prestige, just as modern Thai kings still do. Royal manuscripts 
were written by monks and professional scribes. Manuscripts with covers made of silver or 
ivory studded with gems are found in monasteries in the Malwatte (a complex of about 30 
semi-independent monasteries) and at the Temple of the Tooth in Kandy. Gold-embossed 
manuscript covers are also said to exist (Joseph 1901: ix). Normally, however, the wooden 
covers of Sinhalese manuscripts are painted with arabesque-like designs or are just plain 
wood. Some manuscripts have no covers at all.4
Sometimes manuscripts were enshrined in stupas. In the 19th century a Tipiṭaka set (of 
which the Vinayapiṭaka, Abhidhammapiṭaka, Dīghanikāya, and some other books were 
written on silver plates and others on ola palm leaves), Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta and other suttas 
inscribed on thirty-seven plates of gold, a Jātaka commentary written on nine hundred 
copper plates, two book boards, silver and gold studded with gems, etc., were enshrined in 
the stupa of Hanguranketa Vihāra as part of a “meritorious act of enshrining books” (pothnidhāne-pinkama); see Joseph 1901: xii-xiii. Ninety-one copper plates with the Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā written on them, dating from the 8th/9th century, were 
found in the Indikatusäya Stupa at Mihintale; see Epigraphia Zeylanica Vol. III: 199–212.
The main copyists of Pali texts in Sri Lanka were Buddhist monks. Like their Christian 
counterparts in medieval Europe, many monks spent a lot of time copying and studying 
texts. Before modern, printed books came into vogue in the late 19th century, all monasteries in Sri Lanka had libraries with Pali manuscripts (cf. Joseph 1901: x).
Small village monasteries (pansala) would have had small collections of texts especially 
suited to edifying the laity, while larger study monasteries (piriveṇa) had large collections 
of texts used for education. There would also have been monks who had their own collections of manuscripts for private study purposes. In the 19th century, and perhaps earlier, 
3 See A IV 364 (etadaggaṃ, bhikkhave, dānānaṃ yadidaṃ dhammadānaṃ) and Dhp 364 (sabbadānaṃ dhammadānaṃ jināti).
4 There are no titles given on the wooden covers of manuscripts. This can make it difficult to find a 
specific text in a monastery library if there are no modern tags or labels with titles and reference-numbers 
and a reference list. (Sometimes there are modern reference numbers on the covers but the reference list 
has been lost.) In this case one has to go through all the manuscripts, which can be quite time-consuming 
as one has to untie and retie the neatly tied strings holding the cover and palm leaves together. Then, if 
one is familiar with the text one is searching for, one can recognise it from its start (no title page or 
heading with the title of the text is given at the start of Sinhala manuscripts), or one has to look at the 
conclusion of the text where its name is normally given. Sometimes several texts are contained in one 
manuscript, so the whole manuscript has to be checked.
Supposedly, the monks who used the manuscripts in the past would recognise which manuscript was 
which through familiarity with the different wooden covers (painted or plain) and the location of the 
manuscripts in the library. Although some manuscripts, especially ones with fancy covers made of ivory, 
etc., might have had a showcase function rather than a practical function (cf. Veidlinger 2007: 114–115), 
most manuscripts (e.g. ones with the Pātimokkha or other Vinaya texts) would have had a practical 
function and would have been used for study and reference.

--- Page 391 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
369
monasteries were built which were (and are) called “pothgul vihāra” or “library monasteries.” Here monks took a special interest in collecting and studying texts.
Many monasteries built before the 20th century still have original collections of manuscripts. The manuscripts are not read anymore because modern printed books are easier to 
read and handle, and they are solely kept for ornamental and historical value. Sometimes 
the manuscripts are shown in monastery display rooms, together with other valuable and 
unusual objects, sometimes the manuscripts are still in their original monastery libraries or 
in new libraries, and sometimes the manuscripts are kept hidden in cupboards out of fear of 
thieves or out of neglect.
 
1.2 Oldest manuscripts
The four oldest known Sinhalese Pali manuscripts date from the Dambadeniya kingdom 
period and are described in some detail by P. E. E. Fernando (1982). The oldest manuscript, the Cullavagga in the possession of the library of the Colombo National Museum, 
dates from the reign of King Parākramabāhu II (1236–1237). The manuscript is in a reasonably good condition given its age. The cryptic colophon, as translated and explained by 
Fernando, states that the book was copied by Sumedha Mahāthera on the instructions of 
the Medhaṅkara Mahāsāmi as part of a donation of giving one book to each monk in Sri 
Lanka with the patronage of King Parākramabāhu. The cover of the book is wood painted 
with depictions of deities, in a style similar to ones from the Polonnaruva period. Another 
old manuscript dating from this period is a manuscript of the Paramatthamañjūsā, the 
Visuddhimagga commentary. The fragile and decayed manuscript is stored in the basement 
of the Peradeniya University Library. A clumsy attempt to restore it was made by gluing 
the leaves between paper tissues, which are now covered with mould due to the high 
humidity in the basement.
Another old manuscript, of the Sāratthadīpanī, a sub-commentary (ṭīkā) on the Samantapāsādikā Vinaya commentary, is in the British Museum in London. It was discovered by the British engineer Henry Parker at the Ridi Vihāra in Kurunegala District, where 
there is still an interesting collection. According to Fernando, this manuscript and the 
abovementioned Paramatthamañjūsā were copied by the same monk. According to 
Wickramaratne (1967: 21) another 13th-century manuscript, containing the Mahāvagga of 
the Vinaya Piṭaka, is at the Vidyalankara Pirivena in Kelaniya. Another source ascribes it to 
the 15th century, along with a Visuddhimagga manuscript at the Arattana Vihāra at Hangurankete.5 Another 15th-century manuscript of the Sāratthadīpanī is at the Bibliothèque 
Nationale in Paris. 
Custodians of manuscript collections often are puzzled why researchers are interested in 
Pali manuscripts, because most Pali texts have already been published in book form, as 
part of the Buddha Jayanti Tipiṭaka edition, etc. In the late 19th century and early 20th 
century there was a great enthusiasm to publish Pali texts in the then new printed book 
format and many editions were produced. In the last decades, however, few new editions 
of texts have been produced. One reason for this is that universities are underfunded, 
causing academics to leave the country to find better paid work abroad, resulting in a brain 
drain. The emphasis in monastic life has also changed: in the past learning, memorising 
and study of Pali texts were considered quite important, while nowadays many monks 
study secular sciences and work as school-teachers or politicians instead. Another reason 
why few new critical editions are made is that preparing critical editions of texts is a 
tedious and unprestigious task and because editions have already been made of most texts, 
5 Page 3, item 15, of an anonymous pamphlet called “Historical Manuscripts Commission, Exhibition, 
Art Gallery, Green Path, Colombo, 17th May 1952,” which briefly describes the contents of a manuscript 
exhibition.

--- Page 392 of 425 ---
370
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
so scholars are not inclined to engage in this type of work. However, most of the editions 
of Pali texts produced earlier, even the Buddha Jayanti edition, are based on only a few 
manuscripts, often originating from the same monastic tradition that the editor(s) belonged 
to, and therefore cannot be considered as critical editions (cf. Liyanaratne 1989: 126.) For 
example, the Sinhala printed edition of the important gaṇṭhi (a kind of subcommentary) to 
the commentary on Paṭisambhidāmagga (Paṭisambhidāmagga-gaṇṭhipadattha-vaṇṇanā) 
was not reliably edited according to A. K. Warder.6 There are still some unpublished subcommentaries (ṭīkās and gaṇṭhi) and old sannayas (word-for-word Pali-Sinhala translations or glossaries, often containing valuable explanations of words, sometimes quoting 
from the extinct Sīhala Aṭṭhakathā,7 e.g. the Jātaka-ṭīkā and Suttanipāta-sannaya (cf. 
Liyanaratne 1989: 123), and there might still be unknown texts or texts presumed extinct. 
Thus the value of manuscript research cannot be underestimated.
1.3 State of preservation
In general, the overall state of preservation of manuscripts in Sri Lanka leaves much to be 
desired. Although some monastery collections, especially the ones in special display 
rooms, are relatively well kept, there are also collections where the manuscripts are stored 
among tableware in cockroach-ridden cupboards or in badly kept libraries. In some collections manuscripts have disappeared. It regularly happens that although a manuscript is 
listed in a library’s manuscript list, it is not there anymore. Perhaps the manuscript was lent 
to someone and was not returned, or it might have been sold to an antique dealer to raise 
funds for doing repairs to the monastery. Manuscripts are also used as gifts. Some years 
ago a monk from a major monastery in Kandy wanted to take manuscripts from the display 
room as a gift to Taiwan but was prevented from doing so by other monks. When recently 
a delegation of scholars from Thailand visited a Sri Lankan university, they were given a 
manuscript by one of the monks receiving them.
One sad example of a collection where manuscripts have disappeared or cannot be 
found is the library of the Colombo National Museum, also called Sri Lanka National 
Museum. This collection is, or perhaps rather was, the most important in Sri Lanka. It was 
started in 1870 at the instigation of the British Governor of Ceylon as the Government 
Oriental Library with the aim of “rescuing the ancient literature of Ceylon to be found in 
ola manuscripts” (Joseph 1901: x). The collection was carefully catalogued by W. A. De 
Silva and published in Catalogue of Palm Leaf Manuscripts in the Library of the Colombo 
Museum, Volume I, 1938).8 This catalogue has an excellent introduction describing the 
history of the collection, Sinhalese writing, production of manuscripts, and much other 
valuable information.9 The collection was gradually built up by researchers through 
acquisition as well as copying on palm leaf by capable scribes. Now, however, it appears 
that many manuscripts are not there anymore. Several Sinhalese Pali manuscripts and a 
Burmese-script Pātimokkha manuscript another researcher and I asked to see could not be 
found, despite a lengthy search by the assistant librarian and me. A museum employee 
confided in me that a previous librarian had stolen books. Whether this is true or not I 
cannot say, but it is a fact that the manuscripts were not where they should have been. The 
museum’s artifacts are ill protected in general. In 2007 ancient murals were damaged when 
rainwater entered the building during a heavy rain shower while the roof was being 
6 Path of Discrimination (Patisambhidāmagga), London, 1982: lvii. The preface of the Sinhala edition 
states that it is a transcript of a Burmese printed edition.
7 See Carter and Palihawadana 1987: 4 & 442.
8 The catalogue can be acquired from the National Museum in Colombo, or, more easily, from the 
Buddhist Publication Society in Kandy (www.bps.lk).
9 Another good description is given in Godakumbura 1980: xlix–lii.

--- Page 393 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
371
repaired. Water also leaked into the library. Recently (March 2012) several valuable 
artifacts from the Kandyan period were stolen by burglars.
The collection of the Colombo National Museum contains, or contained, many valuable 
manuscripts such as the oldest Pali manuscript in Sri Lanka, a 13th-century manuscript of 
the Cullavagga, the second book of the Vinaya Piṭaka, which will be discussed later. It also 
contains a copy of a Saṃyuttanikāya manuscript with a colophon stating that the original 
copy was copied in 1412 CE by Maṅgala Thera of Sunētra Dēvi Pirivena of Pepiliyana.
The Gangārāma Vihāra monastery in Colombo is an example of a monastery with an 
extensive collection of manuscripts that are now kept solely for ornamental purposes. 
Hundreds of manuscripts are sloppily stacked upon each other behind a row of Buddha 
images in a glass case, in front of which tourists walk. A similar fate befell the book library 
which contains many rare editions of Pali books, dating from the late 19th and early 20th 
century. The library room was converted into a museum room, and the library cupboards 
are all cramped inaccessibly into a corner behind display cupboards with bric-a-brac.
The large collection of the Peradeniya University is mostly stored on open book racks in 
the non-air-conditioned basement, together with old magazines and newspapers. One of the 
oldest manuscripts in Sri Lanka, a manuscript of the Paramatthamañjūsā, the Visuddhimagga commentary, dating from the 13th century, is also stored in this basement and has 
become mouldy. On the second floor there is also a cupboard with some books. There is 
only a card index with the titles of the manuscripts. No manuscript catalogue has yet been 
made.
In the 1980s the National Archives of Sri Lanka, sponsored by the Ford Foundation in 
the USA, organized the microfilming of Pali and other manuscripts. A project manager and 
camera team went to many monasteries to photograph manuscripts. The microfilms were 
all stored at the National Archives headquarters in Colombo, for which the Ford Foundation provided microfilm viewing machines and air-conditioning. The project stopped after 
a couple of years, although some districts had not been covered yet. Apparently, after some 
time the air-conditioning broke down and due to lack of funding and interest it was not 
repaired. The microfilm machines got dusty and were not cleaned properly causing 
microfilms to be scratched by dust particles. Now, many, if not most, of the microfilms are 
damaged due to humidity and dust scratches and cannot be viewed anymore. Judging from 
the printouts of a few manuscripts which could still be viewed a few years ago, some of the 
pictures of the manuscripts were not of high quality, i.e. not clear enough due to being too 
small. The project manager, Mr. Manaperi, told me in a personal conversation that he made 
a detailed catalogue and handed it over to the National Archives for it to be published. 
However, it was never published and when I asked to see it at the National Archives, it 
could not be traced. Mr. Manaperi has no copy of his work. According to the National 
Archives and the Ford Foundation, no copies were made of the microfilms. The only useful thing which remains is the card index to the microfilms which briefly describes which 
manuscripts were photographed in which places. It is located in the research room.
For a researcher, whether foreign or local, it can be difficult to get access to collections. 
One is often met with surprise, shame, greed and distrust. This is not a new phenomenon: 
already in the 19th century the Sinhalese scholar Mudaliyār de Zoysa, who had been asked 
by the British Governor to inspect the collections of monasteries and prepare a catalogue, 
was refused access to some monastery libraries: “Sir William Gregory (late Governor of 
Ceylon), in his address … of 1875–76 indicated as a reason why Maha Mudaliyār’s work 
could not have been crowned with success, an obstruction which appears to have been met 
with repeatedly in the course of his inspection …. ‘As the Government is solely animated 
by the desire of preserving from destruction all that remains of Sinhalese literature, and has 
never wished to deprive the temple libraries of their manuscripts, but has only sought to

--- Page 394 of 425 ---
372
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
get them copied, I regret that Mudaliyār de Zoysa was met by an unworthy and jealous 
feeling at some temples, especially in the Southern Province near Mātara, and refused 
access to the books preserved in them’” (Joseph 1901: x).
The monks probably were afraid that their books would not be returned, as apparently 
had happened before, or did not want to cooperate with the British government out of 
nationalistic motives. Nowadays, some monks are afraid that publicity given to their monastery collections will attract thieves, and with reason, as thieves do target monasteries 
which have antiques. It also happens that the owners of collections expect to get a reward, 
especially in the case of foreign scholars. A Sinhalese monk who made an edition of an 
Abhidhamma text told me that he had to go to one faraway monastery several times before 
he got permission to see the manuscript he needed. The usual excuse for not getting access 
to a collection is that the key of the cupboard is missing or that the monk who has the key 
is away. Some monasteries are also ashamed to show their collections because they are 
kept in poor conditions. In one monastery I visited in Kandy, the manuscripts were kept at 
the bottom of a cockroach-infested cupboard together with unused tableware and old newspapers. A large manuscript library in a pothgul vihāra (library monastery) near Kandy that I 
visited had apparently not been opened for years and the whole room was full of dust and 
cobwebs. My visit to another monastery library with a large collection was very timely 
because I noticed that termites had made their way into a cupboard from the floor and had 
started to devour a large Jātaka manuscript.
The government authority which takes care of manuscripts in Sri Lanka is the National 
Archives. On invitation, conservation experts visit monasteries to examine their collections 
and conserve them for free. According to the expert I talked to in Kandy, this frequently 
happens and he knew of many monasteries with manuscript collections. The main way of 
preservation is the traditional method of treating the leaves with the oily resin called 
dummala which is derived from the resin of a fossilized root of a tree (Vateria capellifera) 
dug up from wet places.
K. D. Somadasa did the most extensive survey of the manuscripts in Sri Lankan monasteries and libraries. The survey was done by means of writing inquiries and the results 
were published in 1959 and 1964 in the two volumes of Laṅkāvē Puskoḷa Pot Nāmavaliya 
(“List of Palm Leaf Books in Sri Lanka”). Despite the survey being carried out in the late 
nineteen fifties, this is still a valuable overview of texts, the names given to texts, contents 
of collections, etc. Many manuscripts might not be anymore in the places where they were 
(cf. Liyanaratne 2006: 48, n. 15), or might not have been there in the first place because 
apparently a few printed books were mistakenly listed by some of the informants. 
Modern research of Pali manuscripts in Sri Lanka started in the early 19th century with 
the Dane Rasmus Rask who collected many Sinhala and Burmese Pali manuscripts which 
are now kept in the Copenhagen Museum (see Godakumbura 1980: xvii–xlv). Later in the 
19th century the British civil servant and collector Hugh Nevill collected many manuscripts which are now in the British Museum. A seven-volume catalogue of this large collection comprising Pali, Sinhala, and Tamil manuscripts, with Nevill’s valuable notes, was 
prepared by K. D. Somadasa (1987–1995). The British civil servant and archaeologist H. 
C. P. Bell also collected many manuscripts, which later were incorporated into the collection of the Colombo National Museum library. Among his valuable finds are the ancient 
Cullavagga manuscript and a copy of the old Vinaya-ṭīkā manuscript (see Bell and Bell 
1993).
1.4 How to judge the age of a manuscript
Researchers are often interested in very old manuscripts, but there are very few pre-mideighteenth century manuscripts left. The actual age of the manuscript is not that important,

--- Page 395 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
373
because an 18th-century manuscript can be an accurate copy of a 12th-century manuscript. 
For example the Saṃyuttanikāya manuscript in the Colombo National Museum Library 
has a colophon dating it to the Kelaniya period, the 15th century. The manuscript is not 
that old, 19th century, but the colophon indicates that it is a copy of an older manuscript. 
Moreover, an older manuscript can be a poorly copied, corrupt text, while a newer one can 
be of much better quality. The value of old Sinhalese manuscripts mainly lies in readings 
that got lost during the editing and standardizing that took place during councils and 
transmission in Burma and Thailand.
Criteria for judging the age of manuscripts are:
1. Appearance. Older manuscripts appear more brown, worn and old, but there are also 
newer manuscripts which look old due to neglect. So this is not an entirely reliable 
method.
2. Script. After the 15th century there has been no change to the Sinhala script (see de 
Silva 1938: xvii). The script of the 13th-century manuscripts is clearly different, more 
clumsy than modern Sinhala script, but these manuscripts, as mentioned above, are very 
rare. There would be intermediate script forms through which one could ascertain the age 
of later manuscripts. The best way of determining these interim script forms is to study 
copper plates with royal grants, called sannasa, or royal inscriptions on pillars or rocks. 
These inscriptions can be dated accurately due to the names of kings who gave the grants. 
There are Sinhala books with pictures of these sannasa. In any case, if a script clearly 
deviates from the modern Sinhala script then this is an indication that the manuscript is 
quite old, but it is unlikely that there are many such manuscripts.
3. Colophons. This is the most accurate and easiest way of dating a manuscript. The 
colophons of many manuscripts give the date when it was transcribed. Some include the 
colophons of the manuscripts they were copied from.
4. Location. If a monastery is quite old and has existed continuously for a long time 
there might be a higher chance that it has older manuscripts. There might be monasteries 
which have existed continuously since the 15th century or even longer and which survived 
the destruction by the Portuguese and other colonial forces. These are more likely to be in 
Kurunegala district, the Southwest, and parts of the highlands where the Portuguese did 
not reach. It appears from the index lists of monastery libraries that certain texts were more 
common in the Southwest than in the highlands and vice versa, so this regionality of texts 
could also be a factor in finding older texts.
5. Tradition/affiliation. The affiliation of a monastery can give an indication about its 
age, but this is uncertain because monasteries were/are sometimes taken over by monks 
from other traditions, and manuscripts were swapped between traditions. What is certain is 
that the Siyam Nikāya has many texts that are copies of manuscripts coming from 
Thailand, while the Amarapura Nikāya has many texts originating in Burma. I also noticed 
that in the libraries in Malwatta the Pātimokkha manuscripts are mostly identical. This is 
probably because they are all based on one manuscript brought over from Thailand which 
was accepted as authoritative and from which all copies were initially made.
1.5 The future of manuscript research in Sri Lanka
Given the widespread neglect of collections, the general lack of interest in the preservation 
of and research into palm-leaf manuscripts in Sri Lanka, and often the considerable 
difficulty in getting access to collections, it is important that an international project is 
undertaken to preserve manuscripts by way of digitally photographing or scanning. This 
should be done in cooperation with Sri Lankan institutes such as the National Archives, 
universities, and a well-known international institute such as UNESCO, which already

--- Page 396 of 425 ---
374
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
manages some important historical sites in Sri Lanka. The digital photographs should not 
be stored in just one institution, where they might be lost, as happened with the microfilms 
at the National Archives, but should be made freely available on the internet so that any 
scholar can access them. Also detailed information (description, history, photographs, list 
of manuscripts) should be given about the monasteries where the manuscripts were 
photographed. Giving prominence to the monasteries will facilitate access to their libraries 
and will be of value to researchers. In the case of large collections such as the one at the 
Colombo Museum or in the British Museum, etc., the exact provenance of the manuscripts 
is often not known, detracting from their scientific, historical and cultural value.
To get access to collections, the backing of the heads (mahānāyaka) of the local monastic communities (nikāya) is essential. The Sinhalese are very proud of their history and 
cultural heritage, and it will not be difficult to get backing from authorities if prominence 
is given to the preservers and custodians of the manuscripts. Emphasis would need to be 
put on the prestige that comes with making accessible the manuscript heritage of Sri Lanka 
rather than letting it rot away in locked cupboards. As the National Archives has experience in photographing and preserving manuscripts and is trusted by monastery abbots, who 
call on it for preserving their collections, the assistance of this institute in a manuscript 
digitization project would facilitate matters. 
 It would be best that all manuscripts of collections are photographed or digitally 
scanned. Scholars themselves can determine which ones are worthwhile for their work or 
not. The time that it takes to determine the value of a manuscript can be more than the time 
it takes to photograph it.10 The manuscripts of a wide range of monasteries belonging to 
different traditions and located in different regions of the country should be photographed. 
It would also be important to carry out a manuscript survey again to find out which 
manuscripts are located where. The survey made by Somadasa in the 1950s and 1960s is 
not that reliable because it was done by mail rather than by visiting the libraries in person. 
Many manuscripts might have moved or disappeared in the meantime.
2. Mainland South-East Asian manuscripts in Sri Lanka
2.1 Introduction
The second part of this article deals with non-Sinhala script Pali manuscripts in Sri Lankan 
manuscript collections. Many Thai and Burmese manuscripts were imported into Sri Lanka 
in the 18th and 19th centuries. They are of considerable interest because they might 
contain texts that are rare or lost on the mainland, or might contain historically valuable 
colophons, or might contain texts with important variant readings that have not been 
preserved in other textual lineages. They also shed light on the history of transmission of 
Pali texts.
The scripts of the foreign Pali manuscripts in Sri Lanka are Burmese, Siamese Khom 
(also called Mūl script), and modern Thai. There are also two Cambodian MSS with the 
Paññāsa-jātaka in Khom script that were given by the Bibliothèque Royale de Phnom 
Penh to the National Library in Colombo. Possibly there are also a few MSS in other SE 
Asian scripts, such as the Mon script.
At the time of the revival of the Sinhalese Sangha in the 18th and 19th century many 
Pali texts were brought to Sri Lanka from Burma and Siam. The texts were imported 
because many Pali works, especially the commentaries (aṭṭhakathā) and subcommentaries 
(ṭīkā), were no longer available in Sri Lanka due to being lost in the destruction caused by 
10 Of course, some very common texts found in manuscripts such as the Dhammacakka-sutta and 
Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta — of which there are 500 manuscripts in the library in the Octagon of the Temple of 
the Tooth — would not all need to be digitalized. The Octagon collection, however, is exceptional 
because the manuscripts were given to the temple for the sake of acquiring merit.

--- Page 397 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
375
the Portuguese and the subsequent lack of royal support needed to copy and study Pali 
texts in the remaining monasteries. Newer Pali works composed in Burma and Siam in the 
preceding centuries were also not available due to the absence of relations with these 
countries after the Portuguese took control over ports and sea trade in Asia in the 16th 
century.
Works composed in Mainland SE Asia that are found in Burmese or Thai scripts in Sri 
Lanka are the Yojanā-ṭīkā, Netti-ṭīkā, Vidagdhamukhamaṇḍana, Vinayaguḷhatthadīpanī, 
Vedavinicchaya, and the Maṅgalatthadīpanī. Perhaps there are other texts that were lost on 
the mainland or are very rare.
Many of the manuscripts imported from Burma and Siam were used as the “masters” for 
transcribing the texts they contained into Sinhala script.11 Quite a few, if not many, of the 
manuscripts brought during this period are still preserved in libraries in Sri Lanka. In order 
to find original Sinhalese texts, that is, texts not based on texts imported from South East 
Asia first it is to be ascertained which texts have been imported and which readings 
distinguish them from Sinhalese texts.
K.R. Norman (1983: 13–14) indicates the value of research into manuscript lineages: 
It is not inappropriate to talk of a Burmese or Siamese or Sinhalese tradition for 
the transmission of a particular text, and the differences which we find between 
the readings of the MSS belonging to the various traditions must go back to the 
councils which have been held from time to time in the different countries. The 
value of each tradition will depend upon the care with which evidence for 
variant readings was sifted, and the criteria which were adopted as the basis of 
the decisions which were made. We have, of course, no way of discovering this 
for the earlier councils. … The way in which the upasampadā was re-introduced 
from one Buddhist country into another, and books were brought by visiting 
monks, has led to a situation where the traditions of each country have become 
to some extent interwoven. It is sometimes possible to detect the effect which 
this has had. When, for example, variant readings in a Sinhalese MS depend 
upon the similarity in shape of two akṣaras which resemble each other in the 
Burmese script, but not in the Sinhalese syllabary, then we have a clear indication that at some time a Burmese MS has been transliterated into Sinhalese 
characters. … It is nevertheless possible that MSS are still extant in libraries in 
Ceylon, Burma, and Thailand which are based upon a tradition which pre-dates, 
and therefore perhaps preserves readings older than and rejected by, more recent 
councils and editions.
A list of texts which came to Sri Lanka with the second mission from Siam is given in 
von Hinüber 1988. The Saṃyuttanikāya and its commentary were not included in the list of 
books ordered from Siam and von Hinüber argues that this text was not needed as it was 
still found in Sri Lanka.12 Consequently, there are quite marked differences between the 
readings found in the Saṃyuttanikāya texts copied in Sri Lanka and the ones copied in 
Southeast Asia, indicating a continuous Sri Lankan Saṃyuttanikāya manuscript tradition 
11 For example, see the colophon of the Sinhala script Paṭṭhāna manuscript in the collection of the 
National Museum in Colombo (MS no. 670): “Kālantarena laṅkādīpe abhāvappattaṃ maramma-dese 
manthala-nagare visuddhārāmādhipatino ti…” “Having become extinct in the course of time in the 
Island of Laṅkā, of the abbot (adhipati) of the Visuddhārāma in the town of Manthala in the country of 
Myanmar …” Although the colophon is incomplete, presumably the abbot in Mandalay sent or, less 
likely, brought the Paṭṭhāna manuscript to Sri Lanka. (The division of Pali words and the English 
translation in de Silva 1938: 115 is incorrect. In the catalogue ellipses are provided after ti, indicating that 
the text broke off here. De Silva’s translation: “The book in the course of time had been lost in Ceylon, 
and was brought back from the Visuddhārāma of Manthala Nagara in Burma,” reading adhipati noti, 
instead of the genitive adhipatino + ti.)
12 This is supported by the colophon of the Saṃyuttanikāya manuscript (MS No. 71) in the library of 
the National Museum in Colombo, which was copied in 1412 CE by Maṅgala Thera of Sunētra Dēvi 
Pirivena of Pepiliyana built by Parākrama Bāhu VI. See de Silva 1938: 20.

--- Page 398 of 425 ---
376
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
uninfluenced by Southeast Asian traditions. The same applies for the Jātaka-aṭṭhakathā.13 
On the other hand, texts such as the Theragāthā-aṭṭhakathā originate from Southeast Asian 
text traditions. The colophon of the Theragāthā-aṭṭhakathā manuscript of the Royal 
Library in Copenhagen states that it was copied in 1768 from a Siamese original. Von 
Hinüber, however, appears to have been unaware of a 15th- or 16th-century manuscript 
with this text predating the re-introduction of the upasampadā. It is located in the Nevill 
Collection; see below.
It also appears that some texts were only partly available. According to the colophon of 
the Sinhalese Milindapañha text in a manuscript in the collection of the Cambridge 
University Library (Add. MS. 1251), it is partly a copy of a text in a manuscript brought 
from Siam: Siyamdesato ānitapotthako issatthassa pañhato paṭṭhāya pariyosānavacanāni 
gahetvā likhitan-ti jānitabbaṃ.14 The colophon of the Sinhalese Milindapañha manuscript 
in the Bibliothèque Nationale de France (BnF 359) states the same in different words: 
Siyaṃ desena ānītaṃ gahetvā potthakeṇa ca paṭṭhāya issatthassa pañhato avasānāni 
vacanāni idaṃ sabbaṃ likhitan ti mataṃ tathā ti. However, there is no Milindapañha MS 
in the list of texts send from Siam, only a Milinda-ṭīkā. There is also no mention of a 
Siamese Milindapañha MS in any of the indexes, etc., of manuscripts in Sri Lanka.
The manuscripts sent to Sri Lanka by the second mission were ordered by the King of 
Siam and it is therefore likely that they were of good quality. It is possible that some rare 
and important Siamese Khom-script texts have been preserved in Sri Lanka which have 
better readings than the ones preserved in Thailand, or perhaps they no longer even exist in 
Thailand. Many manuscripts, most importantly the Royal collection, were destroyed 
during the plundering and burning of Ayudhyā by the Burmese in 1768 — well after many 
Siamese manuscripts were sent to Sri Lanka in 1756 and the following years. Ayudhyā 
period manuscripts are therefore rare in Siam. So few manuscripts were left that the new 
Siamese king brought manuscripts back from his military campaigns against Nakhorn Sri 
Thammarat and Cambodia, etc. In 1788 a council was summoned by King Rāma I to 
purify the Tipiṭaka and produce a revised edition (called the “Edition of the Council”), 
since the existing edition, which had been made from unreliable texts after the more 
authentic texts had perished in Ayudhyā, was full of errors.15
The monastery in which a text is found usually gives an indication about its origin, e.g., 
if a Pātimokkha text is found in an Amarapura Nikāya monastery then it is based on the 
Burmese tradition (i.e., introduction, the chapter titles, readings, etc., of the Pātimokkha 
text is the same as the Burmese tradition), but if it is found in a Siyam Nikāya monastery it 
is based on the Siamese tradition. Occasionally one even finds typical Siamese readings 
like ukāsa instead of okāsa16 in the introductions of Pātimokkha manuscripts found in 
Siyam Nikāya monasteries. The same affiliation principle applies for printed editions of 
Pali texts: if the monk who edited a Pali printed edition was ordained in the Amarapura 
Nikāya tradition then it is likely that he would have used manuscripts available within that 
tradition and it is likely that these texts are copies of Burmese manuscripts. Given the 
threat the new Burmese ordained lower-caste monks posed to the supremacy of the highcaste Siyam Nikāya, it is likely that no or few Pali texts were passed from the Siyam 
Nikāya to the Amarapura Nikāya. This would be the reason why many manuscripts were 
imported by Amarapura Nikāya monks from Burma.
There is a higher chance that there are older and more original Sinhalese textual lineage 
MSS found in Siyam Nikāya monasteries because they are the inheritors of an older 
13 See von Hinüber 1983: 65–79.
14 See Liyanaratne 1993: 139–40.
15 See Saddhātissa 1993: 38.
16 See Bizot 1988.

--- Page 399 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
377
Sinhalese tradition. However, it is also possible that some older, Sinhalese textual tradition 
manuscripts are found in Amarapura Nikāya monasteries because the Amarapura Nikāya 
apparently took over some Siyam Nikāya as well as unaffiliated (i.e., with ganninānsela 
novices) monasteries, e.g., the Ambarukkhārāmaya near Balapiṭiya.
The fact that texts came to Sri Lanka with the Siamese missions does not necessarily 
mean that these texts were lost in Sri Lanka, rather, it could be that the texts were not 
available to the monks in Pupphārāma (Malvatta) in Kandy because they might have been 
in an unknown location such as monastery libraries in the distant Mātara district. They 
could also have been in monastery libraries whose owners were uncooperative as they 
were opposed to the re-establishment of the upasampadā.
For example, in the list of manuscripts which came from Siam the Cullavagga is 
mentioned, and yet in the National Museum in Colombo there is a 13th- or 14th-century 
Cullavagga manuscript (MS 2363).17 There is an old (17th-century?) fragmentary Majjhimanikāya manuscript in the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris (BnF 906)18 and an even older 
15th- or 16th-century Paramatthadīpanī-thera-therī-gāthā-aṭṭhakathā manuscript in the 
Nevill Collection in the British Museum (Or.6601[80].) The latter two manuscripts are 
incomplete and damaged. Perhaps these were the only known manuscripts and therefore 
new manuscripts needed to be imported. It is also possible that the monks in Kandy, if they 
were aware of them, were not satisfied with the quality of the texts because they were 
damaged or contained many scribal errors, etc., and therefore preferred the new Thai 
manuscripts.
There appears to be a difference in the texts preserved in the southwestern coastal low 
country around Mātara and Gālle and the ones in the highlands of Kandy. Although 
monasteries had been destroyed by the Portuguese, Buddhism was more tolerated under 
Dutch rule. Some monasteries in the southwest, such as Mulgirigala, flourished in the 
Dutch period and manuscripts would have been copied there. Certain texts appear to have 
survived or been common in the low country which did not exist in the highlands (and vice 
versa).
Nevill mentions in his note on the Siṃhala Bodhivaṃśaya (Or.6606[1]) that: “In the 
reign of Narendrasinha, about 1710, this work seems to have been rare or unknown to the 
priests about the court, as we find Saraṇaṅkara translating the Pāḷi work into Sinhalese, apparently in ignorance of the existence of this ancient version.” In his note on Or.6605(12) 
he mentions that many books found in the low country, such as the Amāvatura, are rare or 
little known in the Kandy area. The British archaeologist and manuscript collector Bell 
mentions that the palm-leaf manuscripts he got copied in 1895 for the National Museum 
Library in Colombo were very rare, if not unknown in the low country, and not often met 
in the Kandyan districts.19 Thus, there is a possibility that there are textual traditions in the 
South West which predate the reintroduction of the Siamese upasampadā.
An interesting historical detail regarding the second mission from Thailand is that the 
request for manuscripts from Ayudhyā apparently was a pretext to obtain a Buddhist prince 
from Siam to replace the Kandyan king. King Srī Kīrti Rājasiṃha was a man of South 
Indian origin (nāyakkar) of Śaivite upbringing and was not considered supportive enough 
of Buddhism. A younger brother of the king of Siam came along with the mission as one of 
the monks and was to become the new king of Kandy. However, the sinister plot to kill the 
king in the Pupphārāma Vihāra monastery (Malvatta) failed and the Siamese prince and the 
other Siamese monks were banished.20
17 For more details on this manuscript see Fernando 1982: 146–157, and Gunawardhana 1997: 41–43.
18 See Perera 1935: 53.
19 See Bell and Bell 1993: 264.
20 See Mirando 1985: 58–59 (n. 74) and 138–40. The story of the plot is narrated in the Sāsanāvatīrṇa-

--- Page 400 of 425 ---
378
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
2.2 The list of texts in Somadasa’s Lankāve Puskoḷa Pot Nāmavaliya and in Mudiyanse’s 
“A Catalogue of Palm Leaf Manuscripts Written in Burmese, Cambodian and Siamese 
Script”
The most comprehensive survey made so far of manuscripts in Sri Lanka was carried out 
by Somadasa in the 1950s and 1960s, and published in the first two volumes of Lankāve 
Puskoḷa Pot Nāmavaliya 20 (LPPN).21 This survey was done by mail — not in person — 
and is therefore not always accurate. Some collections have deteriorated or disappeared 
(i.e., sold to antique shops, stolen, or taken to other monasteries) since the survey was 
made. Another survey, by Nandasena Mudiyanse (1972–1974), was done in person and is 
much more accurate and detailed, but it only covers a limited number of monasteries. It 
appears that there are many more texts in libraries which could not be accessed, etc., and 
which are therefore not given in Somadasa’s and Mudiyanse’s surveys. Both surveys do 
not provide any details about the affiliations and history of the monasteries where the 
manuscripts are found.
When comparing the list of Somadasa with the list of Mudiyanse, it appears that almost 
all of the Siam (Si) script manuscripts listed in LPPN are actually Khom-script manuscripts, e.g., one Khom-script manuscript mistakenly being listed as a Siam-script manuscript in LPPN is the Saddasāratthajālinī manuscript of Sunandārāmaya in Uṇavatuna. In 
LPPN the Siamese Khom script is mistakenly called Kāmboja, i.e., “Cambodian,” and also 
Mudiyanse mistakenly calls it “Cambodian script.” There are also quite a few manuscripts 
identified by Mudiyanse that are not listed in LPPN although sometimes other manuscripts 
of the same monasteries are listed in LPPN; probably this is because the monks providing 
the indexes to Somadasa did not know the scripts. A comparison of a part of the library 
index of the Ambarukkhārāma with LPPN shows that the library contains several 
manuscripts that are not listed in LPPN or are not attributed as foreign script manuscripts 
in LPPN; see 2.13 below. There are also monasteries with Mainland Southeast Asian 
manuscripts — such as the Subhūti Vihāra in Waskaduwa — that are not listed in LPPN, 
probably because they did not send the requested data to Somadasa (perhaps out of noncooperation, fear of thieves, etc.).
As can be easily noticed, by far the majority of manuscripts are in the Burmese script. 
These manuscripts came from Burma to Sri Lanka in the 19th century during the formation 
of the Amarapura Nikāya. Many Sinhalese monks went — and some still do go — to study 
Abhidhamma and Pali at the large monastic universities in Burma and they naturally would 
have brought the manuscripts back to Sri Lanka. Burmese monks also came to Sri Lanka to 
teach and visit and would have brought manuscripts as gifts and study material.22 Burmese 
or Thai lay pilgrims could also have donated manuscripts to monasteries and temples, such 
as the Temple of the Tooth, where a few Khom-script manuscripts are found.
The Khom-script manuscripts came to Sri Lanka in the last half of the 18th and in the 
first half of the 19th century during the formation of the Siyam Nikāya. Some of the 
manuscripts would have come with the abovementioned official missions, and some with 
Sinhalese monks returning from visits to Siam or with Siamese monks visiting Sri Lanka.
Most of the Khom-script manuscripts are found in Rājamahāvihāras (“great royal 
monasteries”), especially in and around Kandy, the founding place and headquarters of the 
Siyam Nikāya, which has a Siamese upasampadā lineage. Most of the Burmese manuscripts are found in Amarapura Nikāya monasteries in the cinnamon plantation areas along 
the Southwestern coastal road and railway line, e.g., the Ambarukkhārāmaya near Balapivarṇanāvā (Nevill Collection: Or.6606[12]) and the Hārispattu-rājāvaliya. A more detailed description is 
given by Vachissara 1961: 322–327.
21 The third volume deals only with Sinhalese manuscripts in the British Museum.
22 There are still Burmese vihāras in Colombo, Galle, and Kandy with resident Burmese monks.

--- Page 401 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
379
ṭiya. The Amarapura Nikāya — which is divided into more than twenty subsects of different Burmese upasampadā lineages — was initially founded and supported by members of 
the cinnamon peelers caste (chaliya) of the Southwestern coastal area, who could not be 
ordained in the Siyam Nikāya which was (and is) exclusive to members of the highest 
Goviyo caste.
Occasionally one or two Burmese manuscripts are found in “Siamese tradition” monasteries23 and sometimes Siamese manuscripts are found in “Burmese tradition” monasteries.24 As Blackburn (2002: 29, n. 138) suggests,25 there is a possibility that these Burmese 
manuscripts in Siamese tradition monasteries were brought from Arakan in the 17th 
century; however, this possibility is rather remote and it is more likely that they came with 
Siyam Nikāya monks visiting or studying in Burma or with Burmese monks visiting Sri 
Lanka.
2.2.1.1 Texts in Lankāve Puskoḷa Pot Nāmavaliya I26
Aṅguttaranikāya: 305 3 Bu, 349 Bu* (part), 357 Bu, 359 Bu, 364 Si, 630 Bu & 3 part Bu, 636 Bu
Aṅguttaranikāya-aṭṭhakathā: 305 Bu, 630 2 Bu
Apadāna Pāḷi: 402 Bu, 630 Bu
Apadāna-aṭṭhakathā: 58 Bu (= 586?), 305 2 Bu
Apheggusāradīpanī Buruma Sannaya27: 587 2 Bu
Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī-vaṇṇanā, Anuṭīkā-saṅgaha, Anusaṅgaha-ṭīkā, Paramatthasāramañjūsā, 
(Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha dutiya mahā-ṭīkāya dutiya anuṭīkā): 239 2 (or 3) Kh, 665 Si*
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha, Abhidhamma-saṅgaha: 283 Bu, 305 Kh & Bu, 314 Bu, 359 Bu, 398 Bu*, 
519 2 Bu, 622 Bu*, 630 Bu, 665 Si*
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha-anuṭīkā: 630 Bu
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha-tatiya-ṭīkā, Saṅkhepa-vaṇṇanā, Culla-ṭīkā: 235 Bu*, 305 Bu, 357 Bu, 398 
Bu
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha-dīpanī: 355 Bu
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha dutiya mahā-ṭīkā, Abhidhammattha-vibhāvinī, Vibhāvinī-ṭīkā, Ṭīkā Jo: 
235 Bu*, 305 2 Bu, 398 Bu*, 437 Kh, 519 Bu
(Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha dutiya mahā-ṭīkāya anuṭīkā,) Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha-anuṭīkā, Maṇisāra-mañjūsā: 630 Bu
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha-nissaya (Buruma Sannaya28): 369
Abhidhammapiṭaka, Vijam-piṭaka, Satta-ppakaraṇa: 239 Kh
Abhidhammapiṭaka-ṭīkā, Abhidhamma-mūlaṭīkā, Mūla-ṭīkā, Satta-ppakaraṇa-ṭīkā, Paramatthappakāsinī: 349 Bu*, 630 Bu
Abhidhammamātikā-aṭṭhakathā, Mohavicchedanī: 665 Si*
Abhidhammāvatāra: 630 Bu
Abhidhammāvatāra-nava-ṭīkā, Abhidhammattha-vikāsinī: 305 Bu
Abhidhammāvatāra-purāṇa-ṭīkā: 601 Bu
Abhidhānappadīpikā, Pāḷinighaṇḍu: 239 Bu, 355 Bu, 357 Bu
Abhidhānappadīpikā-ṭīkā: 305 Bu
Āvāsa-dānānisaṃsa, Pasādajananī: 817 Kh
Itivuttaka: 326 2 Bu, 359 Bu, 519 Bu
Udāna: 359 Bu, 519 Bu
Uposatha-vinicchaya: 305 Bu
23 E.g., one in the Vijayasundara Rājamahāvihāra in Asgiriya, Kandy; see Filliozat 1995: 135–191.
24 E.g., several at the Ambarukkhārāmaya at Ambagahapiṭiya near Balapiṭiya.
25 The 40 Buruma Tunpiṭaka pot in the Saṅgharāja Museum in Malvatta that Blackburn refers to are 
printed books (pot), not MSS.
26 Works also listed by Mudiyanse are marked with an asterisk (*).
27 Buruma sannaya presumably means a Burmese nissaya.
28 Probably a Burmese nissaya.

--- Page 402 of 425 ---
380
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
Kaccāyana, Sandhikappa: 305 Bu part, 335 Bu, 359 Bu part, 398 2 Bu, 630 Bu
Kaccāyana-ṭīkā (tatiya), Kaccāyana suttaniddesa: 305 Bu
Kaccāyana-ṭīkā (dutiya), Kaccāyana-vaṇṇanā: 305 Bu, 630 Bu
Kaccāyana-ṭīkā (purāṇa), Mukhamatta-dīpanī, Nyāsa: 630 2 Bu
Kaccāyana-ṭīkā (purāṇa), Dutiya Mahā Anuṭīkā, Nirutti-sāra-mañjūsā: 305 2 Bu, 369 Bu
Kaccāyana-vaṇṇanā, Kaccāyana-ṭīkā (dutiya): 305 Bu, 630 Bu
Kaccāyana-sāra: 630 Bu
Kammavācā: 84 Kh, 235 Bu*, 249 Bu, 305 Bu, 331 Bu, 331 Bu & Si, 332 Bu, 335 2 Bu, 357 Bu, 
368 Kh, 375 Bu, 392 Bu, 396 Bu, 398 Bu, 437 Kh, 472 Bu, 511 Si, 518 Bu, 595 Bu, 630 3 Kh, 
807 Kh, 813 Bu, 858 Bu
Kāraka Vistaraya: 305 Bu
Khuddaka-pāṭha: 305 Bu, 359 Bu, 522 Bu, 630 Bu
Khuddasikkhā: 305 Bu, 357 Bu, 386 Bu, 437 Kh, 518 Bu
Khuddasikkhā-nissaya (Buruma Sannaya29): 348 (? Bu), 586 Bu
Gandhāharaṇa, Nipātatthavibhāvinī: 396 Bu
Cakka-pūjanālaṅkāraya: 437 Kh
Cariyāpiṭaka: 305 Bu
Cullavagga-pāḷi: 305 Bu, 335 Bu, 359 Bu, 398 2 Bu*, 402 Kh*
Cullavagga-aṭṭhakathā (Samantapāsādikā part): 239 Kh
Cullasuddhanta30: 621 Bu
Chakesa-dhātuvaṃsa: 305 Bu
Jātaka-aṭṭhakathā, Paramattha-jotikā: 239 Kh, 305 2 Bu & 2 part Bu, 513 2 Kh part
Jātaka kathā (kīpayak)31: 305 Kh
Tun Sūtraya, Pirit Tun Sūtraya32: 703 Bu
Terasa-khaṇḍa-ṭīkā: 630 Bu
Thera-gāthā: 630 Bu
Dasa-dānavatthu-ppakaraṇa: 335 Bu
Dīghanikāya: 151 2 Bu part, 305 2 Bu and 2 Bu part, 359 Bu, 398 2 Bu, 630 Bu
Dīghanikāya-aṭṭhakathā: 326 Bu, 472 Kh*
Dīpālaṅkāra-sandeśa: 437 Kh
Dhammapada: 305 Bu
Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā: 235 Kh, 392 Kh, 629 Bu
Dhammasaṅgani-ppakaraṇa: 154 Bu*, 305 4 Bu, 374 Bu, 522 Bu, 630 Bu
Dhammasaṅgani-ppakaraṇa-aṭṭhakathā: 305 Bu, 601 Bu, 630 Bu
Dhammasaṅgani-ppakaraṇa-saṅkhepa-ṭīkā: 349 Bu*
Dharma-pustakaya (Saṅgraha-baṇa-potada, Banadaham Potada): 335 Bu
Dhātukathā-ppakaraṇa: 151 Bu, 305 3 Bu, 359 Bu, 398 Bu, 522 Bu, 630 Bu
Dhātukathā-ppakaraṇa-gaṇṭhi: 349 Bu*
Dhātukathā-ppakaraṇa-ṭīkā: 305 Bu
Nāmarūpa-paricchedaya: 437 Kh
Niddesa-pāḷi33: 359 Bu
Nirutti-vibhāvanī-ṭīkā: 586 Bu
Netti-ṭīkā, Netti-vibhāvanī: 364 Si
Pañca-ppakaraṇa-aṭṭhakathā, Paramattha-dīpanī: 305 Bu, 630 Bu
Paṭicca-samuppāda: 425 Bu, 519 Bu
Paṭisanthāra-kathā: 402 Bu
Paṭisambhidā-magga: 374 Bu
29 Probably a Burmese nissaya.
30 A Saṅghādisesa procedure.
31 Some Jātaka stories.
32 Three Paritta Suttas.
33 Uncertain whether Culla- or Mahā-niddesa.

--- Page 403 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
381
Paṭṭhāna-pāḷi, Paṭṭhāna-ppakaraṇa: 151 Bu & 4 part Bu, 305 4 Bu & 4 part Bu, 359 Bu, 630 part Bu
Paramattha-mañjūsā Buruma Sannaya34: 305 Bu
Parivāra-pāḷi: 335 Bu, 398 Bu
Parivāra-aṭṭhakathā (Samantapāsādikā part): 437 Kh
Parivāsa-kammavācā35: 305 Bu
Pācittiya-pāḷi: 26 Bu*, 151 Bu, 239 Kh, 305 6 Bu, 398 Bu
Pācittiya-pāḷi-aṭṭhakathā (Samantapāsādikā part): 601 Bu, 630 Bu
Pāṭika-sutta: 305 Bu
Pātimokkha, Ubhaya-mātikā: 305 Kh & 2 Bu, 369 Bu, 437 Kh, 517 Bu, 518 Bu, 519 Bu, 807 Bu
Pātimokkha-aṭṭhakathā, Kaṅkhāvitaraṇī, Mātikā-aṭṭḥakathā: 146 Bu, 155 B, 305 3 Bu, 516 Bu, 519 
Bu, 630 Bu
Pātimokkha-ṭīkā36: 630 2 Bu
Pātimokkha-nissaya: (348 Bu?) 586 Bu
Pātimokkha-padārtha-varṇanā37: 237 Bu
Pārājikā-pāḷi, Pārājikā-khaṇḍha: 151 Bu, 232 Kh, 235 Kh, 392 part Kh, 398 Bu, 437 Kh, 630 Bu
Pārājikā-pāḷi-aṭṭhakathā (Samantapāsādikā part): 357 Bu, 359 Bu
Pāḷimuttaka-vinayavinicchaya-saṅgaha, Mahāvinaya-saṅgaha, Vinaya-saṅgaha: 305 Bu, 392 Kh
Pāḷimuttaka-vinayavinicchaya-saṅgaha-nava-mahāṭīkā, Vinayālaṅkāra-ṭīkā: 305 Bu & part Bu, 335 
Bu, 357 Bu, 592 Bu
Puggalapaññatti: 305 Bu
Petavatthu: 359 Bu
Petavatthu-aṭṭhakathā, Paramattha-dīpanī: 396 Si
Bālāvatāra-liyana-sannaya, Okandapola-sannaya: 326 Bu38
Buddhavaṃsa: 359 Bu
Bodhivaṃsa-ṭīkā: 630 Bu
Bhikkhunī-pātimokkha: 235 Kh*
Bhikkhu-pātimokkha: 305 Kh, 368 Bu, 398 Bu, 437 2 Kh, 630 Bu
Bhedacittā-dīpanī: 586 Bu
Majjhimanikāya: 351 Bu, 630 3 part Bu
Majjhimanikāya-aṭṭhakathā: 630 2 part Bu
Majjhimanikāya-nava-ṭīkā, Dutiya-līnatthappakāsinī, Līnatthappakāsinī, Līnatthavaṇṇanā: 326 Bu
Mantra-potak: 211 (Sinhala-Burmese, incomplete)
Mahāniddesa-aṭṭhakathā, Saddhamma-ppajotikā: 630 Bu
Mahāpadāna-sutta-aṭṭhakathā: 335 Bu
Mahāvaṃsa: 630 Bu
Mahāvaṃsa-ṭīkā, Pajjapadoruvaṃsa vaṇṇanā, Vaṃsatthapakāsinī: 305 Bu
Mahāvagga-pāḷi: 151 2 Bu, 239 Kh, 305 4 Bu & 2 part Bu, 359 Bu, 398 2 Bu*, 630 Bu, 807 Bu
Mahāvagga-saṃyuttaya39: 665 Si
Mahā-suddhanta40 (sampūrṇa kālayama vatpirīma): 621
Mātikā-dīpanī: 398 Si*
Mārammaka41 Sīhala Sandeśa: 437 Bu
Milindapañha42: 402 Bu
Mūlakaccāyanaya: 239 Kh
34 Probably a Burmese nissaya.
35 A saṅghādisesa procedure.
36 Somadasa notes that it is uncertain whether this is the purāṇa- or nava-ṭīkā.
37 Perhaps a Burmese Nissaya or perhaps the Pātimokkha-gaṇṭhidīpanī by Ñāṇakitti.
38 This seems to be a mistake, as this is a Sinhalese sannaya.
39 Presumably the last book of the Saṃyuttanikāya.
40 A saṅghādisesa procedure.
41 Māramma = Myanmar/Burma.
42 Uncertain, as it is listed under the heading of the Sinhala Milindapraśnaya.

--- Page 404 of 425 ---
382
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
Mūlasikkhā: 305 2 Bu, 357 2 Bu, 437 2 Kh, 610 Bu
Maitrī-varṇanāva: 666 Bu
Moggalāyana, Moggalānayana-vutti: 402 Bu
Yamaka-ppakaraṇa: 151 3 part Bu, 305 2 Bu & 2 part Bu, 359 Bu, 398 Bu
Yojana-ṭīkā: 239 Kh [cf. note 56]
Rāja-mārtaṇadhaya (-pāḷi): 305 Bu
Vaṃsālaṅkāra-dīpanī: 359 Bu
Vattakkhandhaya43: 305 Bu
Vācakopadesa-ṭīkā44: 586 Bu
Vāccavācaka-ṭīkā, Vāccavācaka-vaṇṇanā: 359 Bu, 586 Bu
Vidagdha-mukhamaṇḍanaya (pāḷi): 665 Si*
Vinaya-guḷhatthadīpanī: 357 Bu
Vinayamañjūsā: 305 Bu
Vinayavinicchaya, Vanavinisa: 437 Kh, 513 Kh
Vinayavinicchaya-navaṭīkā: 437 Kh
Vibhaṅgappakaraṇa: 151 Bu, 305 Bu & part Bu, 335 Bu, 398 Bu*, 630 Bu, 665 Si
Vibhaṅgappakaraṇa-aṭṭhakathā, Sammohavinodanī: 305 Bu, 335 Bu, 378 Bu, 398 Bu, 630 3 Bu
Vibhattibheda: 239 Kh
Vibhatyatthappakaraṇa (-gāthā): 586 Kh
Vimānavatthu-ppakaraṇa: 359 Bu
Visuddhimagga: 305 2 Bu & part Bu, 398 Bu, 519 Bu
Visuddhimagga-gaṇṭhipadaya: 369 Bu
Visuddhimagga-ṭīkā45: 392 Bu & 2 Kh, 630 2 Bu, 665 Si*
Vuttodaya: 305 Bu (also at Island Hermitage)
Vuttodaya-ṭīkā46: 630 Bu
Vessantara-jātakaya-pāḷi: 335 Bu
Veda-vinicchaya (Naekaet47): 335 Bu
Saṃyuttanikāya: 305 Bu, 359 Bu, 630 3 Bu
Saṃyuttanikāya-aṭṭhakathā, Sāratthappakāsinī: 305 4 Bu, 335 Bu, 398 Bu
Saṃyuttanikāya-ṭīkā48: 305 Bu
Saṃyuttanikāya-nidāna: 305 Bu
Sacca-saṅkhepa-ṭīkā: 437 Kh
Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta, Mahā-satipaṭṭhāna-sutta: 622 Bu
Sattasuriyuggamana-sutta: 326 Bu
Saddatthabhedacintā: 305 Bu, 586 Bu
Saddatthabhedacintā-ṭīkā: 586 Bu
Saddanīti: 235 Kh, 305 Bu, 630 Bu
Saddavutti, Saddavuttippakāsaka: 30249 Bu, 630 Bu
Saddavutti-ṭīkā: 305 Bu
Sandeśa (pāḷi): 630 7 Bu
Samantapāsādikā: 239 Kh, 305 2 Bu & 4 part Bu, 310 Bu, 335 Bu, 630 Bu & part Bu,
Samantapāsādikā-atthayojanā: 665 part Si
43 The part of the Khandhakas/Mahāvagga dealing with vatta?
44 Sinhalese MSS of the Vācakopadesa (part of the Peṭakopadesa or a synonym for it?) are listed in the 
preceding entry in LPPN.
45 Somadasa notes that there might be a mix-up here of different ṭīkās.
46 Somadasa notes that there might be a mix-up here of different ṭīkās.
47 Naekaet = astrology.
48 Somadasa notes that these might be purāṇa- or nava-ṭīkās.
49 This probably is a mistake for 305 as there is a Burmese Saddavutti MS found in 305 according to 
the current index.

--- Page 405 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
383
Dutiya-vinaya-ṭīkā, Sāratthadīpanī (Samantapāsādikā-dutiya-ṭīkā): 305 3 Bu, 357 part Bu, 521 Bu, 
630 Bu, 817 part Bu
Samantapāsādikā-navaṭīkā, Tatiya-vinaya-ṭīkā, Vimativinodanī: 305 Bu, 357 part Bu, 630 Bu, 665 Si*
Samantapāsādikā-purāṇa-ṭīkā, Paṭhama Vinaya-ṭīkā, Vajirabuddhi-ṭīkā: 7 Bu, 326 Bu, 630 Bu, 665 Si*
Sampiṇḍita-mahā-nidāna: 239 Kh
Sambandha-cintā: 305 Bu, 630 Bu
Sādhujana-pabodhinī: 437 Kh
Sārasaṅgaha: 239 Kh, 305 Si, 335 Bu
Sāsanavaṃsa: 357 Bu
Sitaṭṭhavatthu: 359 Bu
Sīmāvisodhanī: 305 Bu
Sīlakkhandavagga-aṭṭhakathā: 335 Bu, 630 Bu
Sīhalavatthu-ppakaraṇa: 305 Bu
Sīhalasandesa-kathā: 586 Bu
Sugatavidatthi: 437 Kh
Sucittālaṅkāra: 437 Kh
Suttanipāta: 359 Bu, 630 2 Bu
Suttanipāta-aṭṭhakathā, Paramatthajotikā: 630 2 Bu
Suttasaṅgaha: 630 Bu
Subodhālaṅkāra: 305 Bu
Sūtra sanna (or satta?): 639 Bu
2.2.1.2 Manuscripts which might be in Khom script or are connected to Siyam
Kāmboja hodiya50: 692 (=)
Siyam akurupota: 59, 61 (4), 342, 374, 407, 437, 688, 756
Siyam upasampadāva gaena vistarayak hā vinya karunu: 650
Siyam deśīya varunaegilla51: 31
Siyam nikāya Pilibanda vāda lipiyak: 598
Siyam nikāye upasampadā karmaya (Siṃhala): 663
Siyam Buruma ādi sandeśa: 365
Siyam Mahanikāye Malvatu pārśvase katikāvattak hā sandeśayak (Siṃhala): 650
Siyam rajuge sandeśa piṭapat (Pāḷi): 305
Siyam raṭin upasampadāva gena ime puvata: 513
Siyam sandeśa, Śyāma sandeśa: 310, 407, 437, 620, 692 (3)
2.2.1.3 Texts which might be in Burmese script or are connected to Burma
Burumayaṭa yuvū Sandeśaya (Pāḷi): 429
Burumayaṭa yuvū Sīmāvāda sandeśaya (Vimalasāratissa Mahānāyaka): 305
Buruma Śāsanavaṃsa, Sāsanavaṃsa-dīpikā: 305, 310, 311, 338, 369, 398, 433, 519, 577, 621, 638
Buruma Sandeśa: 357(11), 437 Bu, 586, 692
Buruma Siyam Sandeśa: 437
Buruma Hodhiya52: 476 Bu, 692 Bu
2.2.1.4 Libraries in which the above texts are found according to LPPN I
26: Jayasekarārāmaya, Kinigama, Butpiṭiya (Colombo Dist.)
31: Yaṭavatte Rājamahāvihāra, Kosvinna, Gaṇemulla (Colombo Dist.)
58: Karuṇātilakārāmaya, Koṭahena (Colombo Dist.)
50 A Khom script syllabary.
51 A Siamese dictionary.
52 A Burmese script syllabary.

--- Page 406 of 425 ---
384
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
59: Kolonnāve Vihāraya, Colombo
61: Gaṅgārāma Vihāraya, Hunupiṭiya, Colombo
146: Pūjārāmaya, Totupiṭiya, Vāduva (Kālutara Dist.)
151: Vālakārāma Mahā-vihārasthānaya, Potupiṭiya, Vāduva (Kālutara Dist.)
154: Saddharmārāma Vihāraya, Nallūruva, Pāṇadura (Kālutara Dist.)
211: Aśvattārāmaya, Gomagodha, Kengalla (Mahānuvara Dist.)
232: Asgiri Vihāraye Vaelluva Pansala, Asgiri Vihāraya, Mahānuvara
235: Sri Daḷada Māligāva Puskolapot Pustakālaya Sri Daḷada Māligāva, Mahānuvara
237: Suduhumpola RMV, Mahānuvara
239: Bhayagiri Vijayasundarāma Purāṇavihāraya, Asgiriya, Mahānuvara
302: Abhinavārāmaya, Hiddaruva, Kosgoda (Gālle Dist.)
305: Mahāmūlavihāra/Ambarukkhārāmaya, Ambagahapiṭiya, Waelitoṭa, Balapiṭiya (Gālle Dist.)
310: Gaṇegodaella RMV, Kosgoda (Gālle Dist.)
326: Vanavāsa RMV, Paṇḍitaratna Yātrāmulla, Bentara, Bentoṭa Pirivena (Gālle Dist.)
335: Sirivijaya Bodhirāmārāmaya, Boggopiṭiya, Galvehera, Ahunugalla (Gālle Dist.)
342: Sunandārāmaya, Mullegodha, Induruva (Bentota Area)
348: Tapodhanārāma Purāṇa Mahāvihāraya, Kaetapalagodha, Karandeṇiya, Vatugedara, Ambalangoda
349: Tāpasārāmaya, Dodanduva (Gālle Dist.) (= The Polgasduva Island Hermitage)
351: Nigrodhārāmaya, Randombe, Ambalangoda
357: Puṣpārāmaya, Godagena, Ambalangoda
359: Mahākappiṇa Mudalindārāmaya, Rajpakṣa Vaelitara, Balapiṭiya Pirivena, Balapiṭiya
364: Śikṣālaṅkāra Pirivena, Randombe, Ambalangoda
365: Śailābimbārāmaya, Dodanduva (Gālle Dist.)
368: Siri Sohanārāmaya, Kahava, Telvatta (Gālu Dist. Waellabadha Pattuva)
369: Sudarśanārāmaya, Bussa, Waellabadha, Gintoṭa (Gālle Dist.)
374: Subhaddarāma Mahāvihāraya, Baṭapoḷa (Gālu Dist. Waellabadha Pattuva)
378: Ānandārāmaya / Ānanda Pirivena, Kitulampiṭiya, Gālla
386: Jayavardhanārāmaya, Piṭivaella, Bussa, Gintoṭa (Gālle Dist.)
392: Paramānanda Mahāvihāraya, Miṇvatgoda, Gālla
396 Vālakārāma Purāṇa Vihāraya, Daḍalla, Gintoṭa (Gālle Dist.)
398: Vijayānanda Vihāraya, Waelivatta, Gālla (in Mudiyanse: Vijayānanda Pirivena, Galle)
402: Śvetabimbārāmaya, Bope, Gālla (Mudiyanse gives it as Kalegana, Galle)
407: Sudharmārāma Mahāvihāraya, Devāture, Māgālla, Gālla
425: Ganegoda Purāṇa Vihāra Kodāgodha, Imaduva (Gālle Dist. Talpe Pattuva)
437: Ranvaelle Vihāraya, Kataluva, Ahaṃgama (Gālu Dist. Talpe Pattuva)
472: Kaebiliyapola Purāṇa Mahāvihāraya, Hakmana
476: Ganegodha Purāṇa Vihāraya, Mūlaṭiyana (Mātara Dist. Kandbadha Pattuva)
511: Vidyāniketa Pirivena, Sapugodha, Kamburupiṭiya (Mātara Dist. Gangabadha Pattuva)
513: Śrī Nivāsārāmaya, Aturaliya (Mātara Dist. Gangabadha Pattuva)
516: Siri Pavaranivesārāmaya, Karapuṭugala (Mātara Dist. Gangabadha Pattuva)
517: Sujanakanta Vihāraya, Karagodha, Uyangodha (Mātara Dist. Gangabadha Pattuva)
518: Sudarśana Mahāvihāraya, Indakkaetiya, Akuraessa (Mātara Dist.)
519: Sudarśanārāmaya (Siri Sudassanārāmaya), Godapitiya, Akuressa
521: Sudharmārāma Purāṇa Pirivena Potgul, Nāndugala, Mātara
522: Sudharmārāmaya, Petangahavatta, Nihagoda (Mātara Dist. Gangabadha Pattuva)
586: Ariyārāmaya, Kapugama, Devundara (Mātara Dist. Waellabadha Pattuva)
592: Galgaṇe Vihāraya, Uturudevutdara, Devutdara (Mātara Dist. Waellabadha Pattuva)
601: Jayavardhārāmaya, Yaṭayana, Mātara
610: Padumārāmaya (Padmārāmaya), Mātara Pīkvaella, Mātara (in Mudiyanse the address is 
Dhammaratana Mawatha, Polhena, Mātara)

--- Page 407 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
385
620: Bombure Purāṇa Pirivena, Kapugama, Devundara
621: Mahamantinda Pirivena, Waelliveriya, Mātara
622: Māligātaenne RMV, Dodampagala, Kemagodha, Dikvaella (Mātara Dist.)
629: Vaevarukkannala Mahā Vihāraya, Dikvaella (Mātara Dist.)
630: Vijayabimbārāmaya (Sirivijayapustakālaya), Piliduva, Mātara
639: Siripavara-vijayārāmaya, Ihalawela, Kukanadure (Mātara Dist.)
665: Jayatilakārāmaya, Vaellavatta, Nakulagamuva (Hambantota Dist. Baṭahira Giruvā Pattuva)
688: Mūlgiri-rājamahā vihāraya, Mūlgirigala, Vīrakaetiya (Hambantota Dist. Baṭahira Giruvā 
Pattuva)
666: Jayamahāvihāraya, Rukava, Teṭolpiṭiya (Hambantota Dist. Baṭahira Giruvā Pattuva)
692: Vanavāsakudhā Vihāraya (Śrī Dhammadinna Pustakālaya), Polonnāruva, Tangalla
703: Saddharmakośakārāmāya, Galahiṭiya, Valasmulla (Hambantota Dist.)
756: Naeluva Potgul Vihāraya, Periyakadu, Naeluva (Kurunaegala Dist.)
807: Jinajotikārāmaya, Maedavala, Udukinda, Fort Maekdonalds (Badulla Dist.)
817: Sumaṅgalārāmaya (Ratanajoti Pustakālaya), Vidurupola, Kaepitipola (Badulla Dist..)
2.2.2.1 Texts in Lankāve Puskoḷa Pot Nāmavaliya II
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha: 41 Bu*, 118 Si, 506 Bu, 516 2 Bu
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha-tatiya-ṭīkā, º-mūla-ṭīkā: 665 Bu
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha-dīpanī: 506 Bu
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha-majjhima-ṭīkā, Paṭhamānuṭīkā: 424 Bu 2
Abhidhammāvatāra: 424 Bu, 516 Si
Aenuvam-pirita, Nava-sutta-paritta: 338 Bu
Uttarivinicchaya: 506 Bu
Kaccāyana-ṭīkā Paṭhama, Kaccāyana-vutti-vaṇṇanā, Nyāsa: 424 Bu* 2
Kaccāyana-ṭīkā Dutiya: 424 Bu*, 506 Bu
Kaccāyana-ṭīkā Tatiya: 424 Bu*
Kaccāyana-ṭīkā Paṭhama, Dutiya-mahā-anuṭīkā, Niruttisāramañjūsā: 506 Bu
Kaccāyana-bheda: 75 Bu*
Kaccāyana-bheda-purāṇa-ṭīkā: 47 Bu*
Kaccāyana-sāra-nava-ṭīkā: 506 Bu
Kammavācā: 37 Bu, 47 Bu, 100 Bu, 325 Kh, 356 Bu, 424 5 Bu*, 440 Si*, 474 Bu
Khandha-vibhaṅga: 506 Bu
Khuddasikkhā: 536 Bu*, 665 Bu
Khuddasikkhā-navaṭīkā: 665 Bu
Cullavagga: 670 Kh
Temiya-jātaka: 506 Bu
Dhammasaṅganī: 424 Bu, 506 Bu
Dhammasaṅganī-aṭṭhakathā: 424 Bu 670 Kh
Dhātukathā: 424 Bu
Nāmacāradīpanī: 506 Bu
Paccayarasikathā: 506 Bu
Paṭṭhāna: 424 2 Bu* incompl
Pañcappakaraṇa-aṭṭhakathā: 424 Bu
Paramatthavinicchaya-ṭīkā?: 41 Bu
Parivāra: 512 Bu
Parivāra-ṭīkā: 670 Kh
Pācittiya-pāḷi: 424 Si 506 Bu 670 Kh
Pātimokkha, Ubhaya-pātimokkha: 656 Si
Pārājika-pāḷi: 41, 424 Bu
Pāḷimuttaka-vinaya-vinicchaya: 669 Bu

--- Page 408 of 425 ---
386
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
Buddhavaṃsa-aṭṭhakathā: 512 Bu
Bhikkhunī-pātimokkha: 665 Bu
Majjhimanikāya-aṭṭhakathā: 512 Bu 3
Mahāvaṃsa: 424 Bu
Mahāvagga: 670 Kh
Mūlasikkhā-ṭīkā?: 506, 665 Bu
Mūlasikkhā-nava-ṭīkā, Vinaya-vimaticchedanī: 506 Bu
Yamaka: 424 Bu*
Rūpasiddhi, Pada-rūpasiddhi: 506 Bu
Vinayattha-dīpanī?: 506 Bu
Vinayavinicchaya: 506 Bu
Vibhaṅga: 424 Bu*
Sammohavinodanī, Vibhaṅga-aṭṭhakathā: 42453 Bu*
Vimānavatthu: 440 Si
Visuddhimagga: 424 Bu*, 516 Si*
Saṅkhyāpakāsaka-ṭīkā: 506 Bu
Saddatthabhedacintā: 506 Bu
Saddanīti: 506 Bu
Saddasāratthajālinī: 22 Si* 54
Samantapāsādikā: 516 Si*
Samantapāsādikā-bhikkhunī-vibhaṅga-vaṇṇanā: 665 Bu
Samantapāsādikā-majjhima-ṭīkā: 506 Bu
Sambandhacintā-navaṭīkā: 47 Bu*
Sādhu-janappamodanī: 506 Bu
Sucittālaṅkāra: 506, 665 Bu
Sutta-saṅgaha: 424 Bu
2.2.2.2 Manuscripts in LPPN II which might be in Khom script or are connected to Siam
Kāmboja pot?: 522, 633, 634, 647, 649, 669 (2)
Kāmboja hodiya55: 522
Siyam Akurupot: 424
Siyamtānāpati vistaraya: 522 (No: 277350)
Siyamdeśayen laṃkāvaṭa upasampadāva genāvistaraya: 389
Siyamnikāya samaṅga vādaliyumak: 506
Siyamrajuge pinpota: 304
Siyamrajuge puṇyānumodanāva: 670
Siyamraṭena evuṇu liyumak: 670
Siyamratnamālaya (Sinhala, Kavi, Kaṭupiṭiye Maetindu): 632
Siyam Liyum: 517
Siyam vinaya pot56: 522
Siyam sandeśaya: 424, 672
Siyāmdesa gamaṇam prakaraṇaya: 512
Siyāme Dhārmika Rajatumāge Puṇyakaraṇa pravrutti: 670
Siyāme Dhārmika Raju Kīrti Srī rājasiṃha rajuṭa Pin anumodankoṭa evanalada sandeśaya: 670.
53 In the Nāmavaliya it is under 405, but the editor must have mixed it up, as 424 immediately follows 
405 and a Burmese script Sammohavinodanī is found in the current library index of 424.
54 According to Mudiyanse this manuscript is in Khom script.
55 Khom script syllabary.
56 This not a Vinaya work, but rather the Yojana-ṭīkā-saṅgaha. It is no. 277258 in the manuscript cardindex of the Perādeniya University Library.

--- Page 409 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
387
2.2.2.3 Manuscripts in LPPN II which might be in Burmese script or are connected to 
Burma
Buruma-pota?: 331, 534, 665, 668, 670, 671, 672.
Buruma-sāsanāvasa jātaka: 669.
2.2.2.4 Places where the LPPN II manuscripts are found
[B = Basnāhira (West); D = Dakuṇu (South); M = Maeda (Central); S = Saparangamu (Southwestcentral); U = Uttara (North); V = Vayamba (Northwest-central); P = palāta (province)]
22:
Sunandārāma Vihāraya, Mutaramba, Unavatuna, Gālle Dist. (D.P.)
37:
Sirinivesārāmaya, Mīgahagodha, Ahaṅgama (D.P.)
41:
Siri Vijayārāmaya, Ahungalla (D.P.)
47:
Sunandārāmaya, Paragahatoṭa, Vatugedara (D.P.)
75:
Vijita-mahā-vihāraya: Koṇakaḷagala, Alavatugodha (M.P.)
100: Sandagirilena Vihāraya, Sandagirilena, Maedamahānuvara (M.P.)
118: Rāmavihāraya, Udavatte, Mahānuvara (the fairly large collection of this monastery is now at 
Sagama Rājamahāvihāra, Sagama, Talatuoya, 10 km southeast of Kandy) (M.P.)
304: Sudharmārāmaya, Narandeṇiya, Gaṇetaenna, Kamburupiṭiya (D.P.)
325: Rājārāma Vihāraya, Rajgama, Dodanduva (D.P.)
331: Śāstrālaṅkāra Pirivena, Haeramiṭigala, Arambagama, Piḷimatalāva (M.P.)
338: Suddassanārāmaya, Murutava, Ibbāgamuva (V.P.)
356: Ratanajotyārāmaya, Raddalāna, Kuṇumadhe, Velpalla (V.P.)
389: Purāṇa Dharmaśālā Vihāraya, Bhūṭāvatta, Talātuoya (M.P.)
424: Vidyodaya Pirivena, Māligākanda pāra, Koḷombo 10 (B.P.)
440: Sunandārāmaya, Sandalaṅkāva (V.P.) (Mudiyanse: Sastrodaya Pirivena)
474: Gangārāmaya, Morakoḷa, Dodanduva (D.P.)
506: Mūlamahāvihāraya/Dharmagupta-pirivena, Payiyāgala, Dakuṇu Payiyāgala (B.P.)
512: Vidyālaṅkāra Pirivena, Kaelaṇiya (B.P.)
516: Daramitipola Pansala, Malwatta, Mahānuvara (M.P.)
517: Maeda Pansala, Moraṭota-nāyaka-pansala: Malvatte, Mahanuvara (M.P.)
522: Śri Lankā Viśva Vidyāliye Pustakālaya, Perādeṇiya (M.P.)
534: Jayavardhanārāmaya, Kandadaevala, Pāṇaduraya (B.P.)
536: Cakkindārāmaya, Ratmalāna, Galkissa (B.P.)
632: Siridevamitta Pustakālaya, Malwatte, Mahanuvara (M.P.)
633: Liyanagastenne purāṇavihāra. Guhāgoda, Kaṭugastoṭa (M.P.)
634: Koṇḍadeniye Rājamahāvihāraya I. Kaṭugastoṭa (M.P.)
647: Attaragama Rājamahāvihāraya Potgul Maligaya, Maedavala (M.P.)
649: Hapugodha Rājamahāvihāraya, Kaṭugasṭota (M.P.)
656: Issurumuni Rājamahāvihāraya, Pūjanīya Padesa, Anurādhapuraya (U.P.)
665: Sri Saddharmagupta Pirivena, Pedhipoḷa-Kospillaeva, Udugampola (B.P.)
668: Mīgahagoda Purāṇavihāraya, Paelmadulla (S.P.)
669: Śāstrodaya Pirivena, Mārapana (S.P.)
670: Paelmadulla Purāṇa Vihāraya, Paelmadulla (S.P.)
671: Sri Lankā Vidyālaya, Maradāna (B.P.)
672: Taraeṇa Bauddha Samitiya, Bolāna, Payāla (B.P.)
2.2.3 Manuscripts listed in A Catalogue of Palm Leaf Manuscripts Written in Burmese, 
Cambodian and Siamese Script by Nandasena Mudiyanse
This alphabetical catalogue was compiled by Dr. Nandasena Mudiyanse and published in 
three articles in the journal The Buddhist. The data given in this catalogue is not compre-

--- Page 410 of 425 ---
388
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
hensive, as Mudiyanse visited only a limited number of places; however, it lists some 
works and places not given in LPPN and gives details about the MSS.
Works also listed in LPPN are marked with an asterisk (*) here, as in the LPPN list 
above. The works are in English alphabetical order, starting over again with each article. 
When the addresses of monasteries are given in LPPN they are not given in full, but a 
reference to LPPN is given.
Article 1
1.
Bhikkhu-pātimokkha in Burmese script at Vanavasa-vihāra, Vanavasala, Kelaniya
2.
Chanda-nissaya57 in Burmese script at Vanavasa-vihāra, Vanavasala, Kelaniya
3.
Kaccāyana-bheda-pāḷi* in Burmese script at Śrī Vijita-mahāvihāra, Konatalagala, Alawatugoda: LPPN II no. 75
4.
(Upasampadā-)Kammavācā in Burmese script at Jayasumanārāmaya, Yalegama, Induruwa
5.
Kibbidhanakappa58 in Burmese script at Vanavasa-vihāra, Vanavasala, Kelaniya
6.
Mūlasikkhā* in Burmese script at Padumārāmaya, Mātara: LPPN I no. 610.
7.
Pārājikā-pāḷi incomplete (29 folios) in Khom script at the Jayatilaka Memorial Library, 
YMBA, Borella, Colombo 8 (Ms. no. 072–2888.)
8.
Saddasāratthajālinī* in Khom script at Sunandārāma, Unavatuna: LPPN II no. 22 (9 chapters; 
complete?)
9.
Samakki-kathā59 in Siamese (Thai) script at the Dīpaduttārāmaya in Kotahena, Colombo 13.60 
Bound along with no. 11 below.
Article 2
10.
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha* in Burmese script at Siri Vijayārāmaya, Ahungalla: LPPN II no. 41
11.
Ānisam-savana-kit in Siamese (Thai) script, bound along with no. 9 Samakki-kathā above
12.
Bhikkhuni-pātimokkha-vaṇṇanā in Burmese script at Cullālaṅkāra vihāraya, Paramulla, 
Mātara
13.
Dīghanikāyaṭṭhakathā* in Khom script at Kaebiliyapola vihāraya, Hakmana: LPPN I no. 472
14.
Kaccāyana-bheda-ṭīkā* in Burmese script at Sunandārāmaya, Vatugedara: LPPN II no. 47
15.
(Upasampadā-)Kammavācā in Burmese script at Wehellaka Mudalindārāmaya, Makandura, 
Atakalanpanna
16.
(Upasampadā-)Kammavācā in Burmese script at Vanavasa vihāraya, Hapugaspitiya, Kadugannava Road, Gampola
17.
(Upasampadā-)Kammavācā in Burmese script at Subhadrārāmaya, Totagamuva, Hikkaduva
18.
(Upasampadā-)Kammavācā* in Khom script at Śāstrodaya Viśva Vidyāliye Pirivena 
Saṅdalankāva: LPPN II no. 440
19.
Kaṅkhāvitaraṇī in Burmese script at Siri Nivāsārāmaya, Wattalpola, Pāṇadura
20.
Khuddasikkhā* in Burmese script at Cakkindārāmaya, Ratmalāna: LPPN II no. 536
21.
Muttaka-vinaya-vinicchaya-saṅgaha (= Pāḷi-muttaka-vinaya-vinicchaya) in Khom script at 
Poyage Library,61 Malvatte, Kandy
22.
Paramatthabhidhammattha-saṅkhepa-kathā in Khom script bound along with no. 8 Saddasāratthajālini
57 A nissaya on a work on prosody. Probably it is the nissaya on the Vuttodaya by Cakkindābhisāri.
58 A grammatical work related to the Kaccāyana-sandhi-kappa.
59 Presumably Sāmaggī-kathā.
60 The Thai prince Prisdang Jumsai, who became a bhikkhu called Jinavaravaṃsa in Sri Lanka in 1890, 
was the abbot of Dīpaduttārāmaya from 1905 to 1910. See Nyanatusita and Hecker 2008: 200–201, 207.
61 This is the cupboard in the Uposatha Hall of which the Nāyaka thera is in charge.

--- Page 411 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
389
23.
Paramatthadīpanī-aṭṭhakathā (large ms. on Abhidhamma) in Khom script at Saṅgharājārāmaya 
(Vaelivita Pansala), Malwatte, Kandy
24.
Petavatthu in Khom script at Saṅgharājārāmaya (Vaelivita Pansala), Malwatte, Kandy
25.
Samantapāsādikā* (Prayojana-paṭhama-samantapāsādikā) in Khom script at Daramitipola 
Pansala, Malwatta: LPPN II no. 516
26.
Sambandha-cintā-ṭīkā* in Burmese script at LPPN II 47 bound along with no. 14 above
27.
Vimānavatthu* in Khom script at Śāstrodaya Pirivena: LPPN II no. 440
28.
Visuddhimagga* in Khom script at Daramitipola Pansala, Malwatta: LPPN II no. 516
Article 3
29.
Abhidhammāvatāra-ṭīkā in Burmese script at Śrī Subhūti Vihāraya, Waskaduwa. Reg. no. 228
30.
Abhidhammattha-līnattha-vaṇṇanā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29. Reg. no. 254
31.
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha* (incomplete) in Burmese script at Vijayānanda Pirivena, 
Waelivatta, Galle: LPPN I no. 398
32.
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha* (incomplete) in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya, Nakulagamuva: 
LPPN I no. 665
33.
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha* (incomplete) in Burmese script at Māligātaenne RMV, Kemgoda, 
Dikvaella: LPPN I no. 622
34.
Aṅguttaranikāya Catuttha-nipāta-vasana in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29. Reg. no. 
178
35.
Aṅguttara-ṭīkā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29 (Mudiyanse mistakenly put it as no. 
22); reg. no. 223
36.
Aṅguttaranikāya in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 226
37.
Anusaṅgaha-ṭīkā* in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya, Nakulagamuva: LPPN I no. 665 (same 
as the Abhidhammattha-vibhāvini-vaṇṇanā)
38.
Apadāna in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 232
39.
Bhikkhunī-vibhaṅga* in Burmese script at Jayasekarārāmaya, Butpiṭiya: LPPN I no. 26 (given 
there as Pācittiya-pāḷi.)
40.
Cullavagga* (part I) in Burmese script at Vijayānanda V., Waelivatta: LPPN I no. 398
41.
Cullavagga* (part II) in Burmese script at Vijayānanda V., Waelivatta: LPPN I no. 398
42.
Cullavagga* in Khom script at Śvetabimbārāmaya, Kalegana, Galle: LPPN I no. 402
43.
Cullavagga in Khom script at Jayasumanārāmaya, Yalegama, Induruwa
44.
Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 238
45.
Dhammasaṅgaṇi-ppakaraṇa* in Burmese script at Saddharmārāma V., Pāṇadura: LPPN I no. 
154
46.
Dhammasaṅgaṇi-ppakaraṇa in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 239
47.
Dhātukathā-puggala-pakkaraṇa in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 259
48.
Dhātukathā-yamaka in Burmese script at Vijayānanda V., Waelivatta: LPPN I no. 398
49.
Dīghanikāya in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya, Nakulagamuva: LPPN I no. 665
50.
Dīghanikāya (Sīlakkhandhavagga & Aṭṭhakathā) in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; 
reg. no. 218
51.
Dīghanikāya-ṭīkā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 198
52.
Dīghanikāya-ṭīkā (Sāratthadīpanī)62 in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 219
53.
Ekakkhara-kosa-ṭīkā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 181
54–55. Jātaka-aṭṭhakathā part 1 and 2 in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 224–5
56.
Līnattha-jātakaṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 240
57.
Jātaka-pāḷi in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 221
58.
Jātaka-pāḷi* in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya: LPPN I no. 665
62 The Sāratthadīpanī is the subcommentary on the Samantapāsādikā. Perhaps the confusion is 
because both the Dīghanikāya and Vinaya Piṭaka contain a book called Mahāvagga.

--- Page 412 of 425 ---
390
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
59.
Kaccāyana in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 183
60.
Kaccāyana-bheda-ṭīkā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 185
61.
Kaccāyana-ṭīkā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 250
62.
Kaṅkhāvitaraṇī* in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya, Nakulagamuva: LPPN I no. 665
63.
Kathāvatthu-ppakaraṇa in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 233
64.
Khuddakanikāya-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 182
65.
Khuddasikkhā-ṭīkā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 195
66.
Madhusārattha-dīpanī-ṭīkā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 211
67–68. Mahākkhandhaka* parts 1 and 2 in Burmese script at Vijayānanda V., Waelivatta: LPPN I 
no. 398 (= Mahāvagga and [Cullavagga?])
69.
Mahāniddesa-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 212
70.
Mahāniddesa-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 270
71.
Mahāvagga* in Burmese script at Vijayānanda V., Waelivatta: LPPN I no. 398
72.
Majjhimanikāya Mūla-paṇṇāsaka in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 196
73.
Manorathapūraṇī in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 213
74.
Mātikādīpanī* in Khom script at Vijayānanda V., Waelivatta: LPPN I no. 398. Incomplete 
MS63
75.
Moggalāyana-sutta-niddesa in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 229
76.
Mohacchedani-aṭṭhakathā* in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya: LPPN I no. 665
77.
Muttaka-vinaya (= Pāḷi-muttaka-vinicchaya) in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. 
no. 210
78.
Niddesa in Burmese script at Śvetabimbārāmaya, Kalegana, Galle: LPPN I no. 402
79.
Ovādapātimokkha in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 256
80.
Pācittiya-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 194
81.
Pācittiya-pāḷi in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya: LPPN I no. 665
82.
Padasādhanī in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 184 (half of first leaf 
missing)
83.
Papañcasūdanī-līnattha-vaṇṇanā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 230
84.
Papañcasūdanī-līnattha-ppakāsinī in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 197
85.
Pārājika-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 220
86.
Paṭhama-sambodhi-vitthāra-kathā* in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya: LPPN I no. 665
87.
Paṭṭhāna-ppakaraṇa in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 2964; reg. no. 264
88.
Pātimokkha-ṭīkā in Burmese script at Pūjārāmaya, Potupiṭiya, Wadduwa
89.
Paṭisambhidamagga in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 268
90.
Petavatthu-aṭṭhakathā* in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya, Nakulagamuva: LPPN I no. 665
91.
Puggalappaññatti-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 255
92.
Rūpasiddhi in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 234
93.
Samantapāsādikā-aṭṭhakathā* (Catuttho Bhāgo) in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya: LPPN I 
no. 665
94.
Samantapāsādikā-vinayaṭṭhakathā* in Burmese script at Vijayānanda V.: LPPN I no. 398
95.
Samantapāsādikā* in Khom script at Śvetabimbārāmaya, Kalegana, Galle: LPPN I no. 402
96.
Saṃyuttanikāya-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 200
97.
Saṃyuttanikāya-ṭīkā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 199
98.
Saṃyuttanikāya in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 214
99.
Saṃyuttanikāya-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 261
63 On Abhidhamma by Chapaṭa of Arimaddana. According to von Hinüber (1988: 177) the Kaṅkhāvitaraṇī is listed twice in the inventory of books sent from Siam to Ceylon in the 18th century, i.e., no. 42 
and 36. The latter, however, is called aṭṭhakathā-mātikā-ppakaraṇa and might rather refer to the Mātikādīpanī by Saddhammajotipāla or to the Abhidhamma-mātikā-aṭṭhakathā, also called the Mohavicchedanī, 
by Kassapa, which is found in a Khom manuscript at Jayatilakārāmaya (No. 665 of LPPN I, see above). 
There are also other Siamese commentaries on the mātikā, i.e., Mātikā-sarūpa-vibhāvinī, Sahassanayagaṇḍa, Chāyārāma-pakaraṇa, Ṭīkā-lvaṅ.
64 Mistakenly given as 9 in Mudiyanse.

--- Page 413 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
391
100. Sāratthadīpanī-mahāvagga-ṭīkā* in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya: LPPN I no. 665
101. Sāratthadīpanī-vinaya-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 201
102. Sīmālaṅkāra in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 231
103. Subodhālaṅkāra in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 186
104. Suttanipāta-pāḷi and Suttanipāta-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. 
no. 179
105. Suttanipāta-jotikā in Khom script at Śrī Siddhatthārāmaya, Nawala, Rājagiriya (Colombo)
106. Theragāthā-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 212. Bound along 
with Mahā-niddesa, no. 69
107. Theragāthā-pāḷi and Theragāthā-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. 
no. 217
108. Udāna-pāḷi and Udāna-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 216
109. Vajirabuddhi-ṭīkā* in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya, Nakulagamuva: LPPN I no. 665
110. Vibhaṅga-pāḷi* in Burmese script at Vijayānanda V., Waelivatta: LPPN I no. 398
111. Vibhāvinī-ṭīkā* in Burmese script at Vijayānanda V., Waelivatta: LPPN I no. 398
112. Vibhāvinī-ṭīkā* in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya: LPPN I no. 665 (identical with no. 37)
113. Vidagdhamukhamaṇḍanaya (-atthayojana)* in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya: LPPN I no. 
665
114. Vimānavatthu-pāḷi and Vimānavatthu-aṭṭhakathā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; 
reg. no. 193
115. Vimativinodanī in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 227
116. Vimativinodanī* in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya, Nakulagamuva: LPPN I no. 665
117. Vinayaṭṭhakathā-pada-yojana in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 263
118. Vinaya-saṅkhepa in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 267
119. Vinayavinicchaya-ṭīkā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 269
120. Visuddhimagga in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 192
121–24. Visuddhimagga-ṭīkā* parts I—IV in Khom script at LPPN I no. 665
125. Vuttodaya-ṭīkā in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 256 (bound along with no. 
79)
126. Yamakappakaraṇa-yojana* in Khom script at Jayatilakārāmaya: LPPN I no. 665
127. Yamakappakaraṇa in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 200 (bound along with 
no. 96)
128. Yamakappakaraṇa in Burmese script at Subhūti V., see no. 29; reg. no. 41
2.3 Khom-script manuscripts from Sri Lanka in the Hugh Nevill Collection at the British 
Museum, London, UK
In the late 19th century Hugh Nevill collected a large number of Sinhala-script manuscripts 
which were acquired by the British Museum after his death. The collection also contains 
manuscripts in Khom script which Nevill would have acquired along with Sinhala-script 
manuscripts.65 Nevill mistakenly calls them ‘Cambodian manuscripts’. The following data 
are from the Catalogue of the Hugh Nevill Collection, volume I (see Somadasa 1987).
1.
Dhammacakkappavattana-sutta: Or.6599(9)
2.
Aṅguttaranikāya (Duka-nipāta): Or.6599(32)
3.
Samantapāsādikā (Pañcama-nipāta): Or.6599(32)
4.
Samantapāsādikā (Tatiya-nipāta): Or.6601(104)
65 According to Dr. Jacqueline Filliozat (personal correspondence, 16 March 2005) there are many 
more Khom-script manuscripts acquired by Nevill. Perhaps she is referring to the ones given in LPPN III. 
But are all these texts from Sri Lanka?

--- Page 414 of 425 ---
392
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
2.4 A Khom-script manuscript from Sri Lanka in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, England
In the Bodleian Library there is one illustrated Khom-script folding paper book manuscript 
acquired in Kandy, Sri Lanka, in 1819. See Filliozat 1998: 38.
It has the catalogue number BODL. MS. Pali a. 27(R) and it contains the following texts:
1.
Suttavibhaṅga and Parivāra extract
2.
Brahmajālasutta (Dīghanikāya) extract
3.
Abhidhamma-mātikā: Dhammasaṅgaṇī, Vibhaṅga, Dhātukathā, Puggalapaññatti, Kathāvatthu, 
Yamaka, Mahāpaṭṭhāna
4.
Sahassaneyya
5.
Mahābuddhaguṇā
6.
Mahābuddhaguṇā-vaṇṇanā
7.
Uṇhisavijaya
2.5 Burmese manuscripts from Sri Lanka in the Royal Library of Copenhagen
Godakumbura (1980: xliii–xliv) mentions that Rasmus Rask bought a Burmese manuscript 
from a Sinhalese ex-Buddhist monk who had converted to Christianity: “In Colombo he 
(i.e. Rask) began the study of Pali with Modelliear George Nadoris de Silva who had been 
a Buddhist monk at Daḍalla-vihāra under the name of Rājaguru Dhammakkhandha and 
who had gone to Burma and brought many Pali books to his temple. While in Burma he 
had received the title Rājaguru from the Burmese king Mahādharmarāja. … Rask describes 
two Buddhist temple libraries in the South. … The other is at Daḍalla, the temple where 
George Nadoris de Silva was a monk. There were about 500 books there and among them 
were many Pali books in Burmese script brought from Ava by George Nadoris de Silva.”66
The presence of Burmese manuscripts at Daḍalla is confirmed by Somadasa’s lists, in 
which a few Burmese manuscripts are said to be at Vālakārāma Purāṇa Vihāraya, Daḍalla, 
Gintoṭa, in Gālle District (no. 396 of the list; see above).
2.6 A Khom-Sinhala syllabary in the Bibliothèque Nationale de France
There is an 18th-century manuscript with a syllabary in which Sinhala and Khom characters are placed next to each other: BNF Pali 541 in the collection as given in Catalogue des 
manuscrits Pālis des collections françaises by Jacqueline Filliozat, Jinadasa Liyanaratne, 
William Pruitt.67 In brackets is added Tolfrey no. 10.68
2.7 Burmese-script and Khom-script manuscripts in the National Library in Colombo
There are some Burmese-script manuscripts in the Library of the National Museum in 
Colombo.69 In the descriptions of the sixty manuscripts in the Catalogue of Manuscripts in 
the Colombo Museum (pp. 267–271), de Silva only mentions that these manuscripts (MSS 
1744–56, 1759–76, 1779–82, 1784–85, 1788–1803, 1851, 1909, 1914, 2146) were given 
by the King of Burma. Hugh Nevill mentions that the Peṭakopadesa manuscript he had 
(Or.6601(38)) was a copy of the Burmese script manuscript given by the father of Thebaw, 
the last king of Burma, to the Colombo Museum. Supposedly the other Burmese manuscripts in the collection were also given by Thebaw.
66 A footnote to Godakumbura’s text reads “Rask bought the Majjhimanikāya-ṭīkā (Cod. Pal. VIII–X) 
from Nadoris on 1st May 1822. Other Pali books in Burmese script in Rask’s collection also may have 
come from the same source.”
67 In the EFEO database. Also in the outdated Catalogue sommaire des manuscrits Sanscrits et Pālis 
II, A. Cabaton ed., Paris, 1908.
68 W. Tolfrey (1778?–1817) was the translator-in-chief for the Resident in Kandy in 1816.
69 Previously called the Colombo Museum.

--- Page 415 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
393
The sixty manuscripts given by the king mostly contain the texts of the Tipiṭaka. Noncanonical texts in the manuscripts are: Ms 1851 Dīpavaṃsa, MS 1909 Mahāvaṃsa, MS 
1914 Mahāvaṃsaṭīkā, and MS 2146 Saddanīti.
Besides the manuscripts given by the father of Thebaw, there are also a few other 
Burmese script manuscripts in this collection: two Kammavācā manuscripts (MS 1757–8), 
a Suttasaṅgaha manuscript (MS 1787) of unknown origin, and a Apadāna-aṭṭhakathā (MS 
1783) given by Bulatgama Siri Sumanatissa Terunnanse of Paramānanda Vihāra in Gālle 
(= LPPN I no. 392. More Burmese MSS are found in this monastery; see above).
There is only one Khom-script manuscript (MS 1786) in this collection. Two chapters of 
it are in Sinhala script. It is the Maṅgaladīpanī-aṭṭhakathā and its origin is unknown.
The two Khmer-script manuscripts containing the Paññāsa-jātaka (MS 1777–78) come 
from Cambodia and were given by the Bibliothèque Royale de Phnom Penh in the first 
half of the 20th century.
2.8 Burmese manuscripts at the Polgasduva Island Hermitage, Dodanduva, Gālle District
This monastery was founded by the German monk Ñāṇatiloka Bhikkhu in 1911. The 
manuscripts in this collection were probably brought from Burma by Ñāṇatiloka, who was 
ordained in Burma in 1903 and who visited Burma several times in the first half of the 
20th century. He also visited Burma in 1951–52 and 1954 in connection with the Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana (Sixth Council); see Nyanatusita and Hecker 2008. The manuscripts and the 
covering cloths look fairly new. The entry no. 349 in LPPN I: Tapasārāma, Dodanduva, 
corresponds to Polgasduva because MSS 1, 3, 7a, and 8 at Polgasduva are listed in LPPN 
as Burmese MSS.
1.
Aṅguttaranikāya pañcaka-nipāta* (in crimson velvet cloth)
2.
Pārājika-pāḷi-aṭṭhakathā (in pink cloth with white spots)
3.
Atthasālinī-saṅkhepa-vaṇṇanā-ṭīkā* (in red silk with green flowers)
4.
Visuddhimagga-aṭṭhakathā (in yellow flowered cloth)
5.
Unidentified ṭīkā (in red cloth with wavy lines)
6.
Parivāra (in violet velvet)
7.
a. Dhātukathā* (in mottled blanket); b. Vuttodaya; c. Abhidhānappadīpikā; d. Sammohavinodanī
8.
Mūla-ṭīkā* (i.e., Abhidhamma-mūla-ṭīkā; in pink cloth with yellow stripes)
9.
Sammohavinodanī (in white cloth with pink stripes)
10.
Kammavācā (in green velvet)
11.
Kammavācā, Vākhya (made of gilt and lac; in green velvet)
2.9 Khom-script manuscripts in the library of the Chandananda Nāyakathera Vihāra at 
Asgiriya, Kandy
1.
Majjhimanikāya, dated 1719 CE (Buddhasakarāja 2262, Cullasakarāja 1091) The manuscript 
is in very good condition. It is not certain whether the manuscript is the complete Majjhimanikāya, but it includes the Brāhmaṇa-vagga.
2.
Pācittiya-pāḷi, less than good condition.
3.
Bundle with some badly deteriorated folios with fragments of different unidentified texts.
2.10 Khom-script manuscripts in the library of the Vijayasundara Purāṇavihāra at Asgiriya, Kandy
At least twelve Khom-script manuscripts containing several texts and one Burmese manuscript are found in this monastery library. See Filliozat 1995: 135–191.

--- Page 416 of 425 ---
394
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
The manuscripts are well preserved. Dr. Filliozat neatly wrapped the Mainland Southeast Asian MSS she found in cloth covers. All manuscripts except one are undated. The 
MS that has been catalogued by Dr. Filliozat as Asgiriya Siamese (AS) 9 is dated 1835 CE 
and this implies that at least some of the MSS came to this vihāra in or after 1835.
A manuscript Filliozat did not describe is the Khom-script Bālāvatāra manuscript 
without cover that I noticed on a corner shelf where some loose leaves and other odds and 
ends were kept. The MS is probably incomplete. It has for the time being been put with the 
Pātimokkha MS, Asgiriya Siamese 9. There are probably more manuscripts Filliozat did 
not see because of restricted access due to communication problems. In LPPN I several 
Siamese MSS are listed which are not in the catalogue of Filliozat. The vihāra is location 
239 in LPPN I. AS stands for Asgiriya Siamese, while AB stands for Asgiriya Burmese.
1.
Atthasālinī-Dhammasaṅgaṇī-aṭṭhakathā: AS 3, 12
2.
Abhidhammattha-vibhāvanī-ṭīkā: AS 11
3.
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha: AS 11
4.
Abhidhānappadīpikā-pāḷinighaṇṭu: AS B 1
5.
Kathāvatthu-aṭṭhakathā: AS 3, 12
6.
Jātakas: Paññāsa-j. part, Candakumāra-j. part, Nimi-j., Temiya-j. part, Bhūridatta-j., 
Ummagga-j., Mahājanaka-j., Mahānārada-j., Vidhura-j. part, Suvaṇṇasāma-j.: AS 4
7.
Jātaka fragments: (Ummagga-j?), Nandivisāla-j., Tittira-j.: AS 2
8.
Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā: AS 7
9.
Dhātukathā-aṭṭhakathā: AS 3, 12
10.
Paritta: Aṭavisi-p., Aṅgulimāla-p., Abhaya-p., Ariyadhana-gāthā, Āṭānāṭiya-sutta, Jaya-p., 
Devatārādhanā, Dvādasa-p., Nakkhatta-yakkha-bhūtānaṃ, Buddha-jayamaṅgala, Bojjhaṅgap., Maṅgala-cakkavāḷa, Satta-p., Sabbītiyo.: AS 1
11.
Pācittiya-pāḷi: AS 8
12.
Puggalapaññatti-aṭṭhakathā: AS 3, 12
13.
Bālāvatāra part: AS 1370
14.
Buddhavaṃsa-pātha: AS 6
15.
Bhikkhu-pātimokkha: AS 9
16.
Madhuratthavilāsinī-Buddhavaṃsaṭṭhakathā: AS 6
17.
Mahāpaṭṭhānaṭṭhakathā: AS 3, 12
18.
Mūlakaccāyana: AS 10
19.
Yamakaṭṭhakathā: AS 3, 12
20.
Sammohavinodanī-Vibhaṅgaṭṭhakathā: AS 3, 12
21.
Sārasaṅgaha: AS 5
Mainland South-East Asian MSS in Vijayasundara according to LPPN I
1.
(Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha dutiya mahā-ṭīkāya dutiya anuṭīkā) *: 2 (or 3) Kh
2.
Abhidhamma-piṭaka: Kh
3.
Abhidhānappadīpikā*: Bu
4.
Cullavagga-aṭṭhakathā (Samantapāsādikā part): Kh
5.
Jātaka-aṭṭhakathā*: Kh
6.
Pācittiya-pāḷi*: Kh
7.
Mahāvagga-pāḷi: Kh
8.
Mūla-kaccāyanaya*: Kh
9.
Yojana-ṭīkā: Kh
10.
Vibhatti-bheda71: Kh
11.
Samantapāsādikā: Kh
70 This item is not in the catalogue of Filliozat. 
71 = Vibhatti-pabheda-vivaraṇa listed at PLCS 4.113?

--- Page 417 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
395
12.
Sampiṇḍita-mahā-nidāna: Kh
13.
Sāra-saṅgaha*: Kh
2.11 Burmese- and Khom-script manuscripts in the Library of the Temple of the Tooth: Sri 
Daḷadā Māligāva Puskolapot Pustakālaya
The manuscript catalogues (one of the Kandy National Archives and the other and older 
one in chapter 31 of Gunawardhana 1997) of this library — or rather two libraries as it is 
divided in two — list the following manuscripts:
1.
Abhidharma-saṅgraha-ṭīkā* (MS no. 582) (Burmese script)
2.
Karmavākyaya* (MS nos. 404, 406) (Burmese script)
3.
Janasoma-sūtraya (Jānussoni-s?) (Only in G [G 523] Burmese script)
4.
Dhammachakkaya (G notes: Tibet Aksara Valin [G 311])
5.
Buruma Potak (MS no. 556) = Pācittiya Pāḷi72
6.
Bhikkhunī-pātimokkha* (MS no. 1460) (Khom script)73
According to Somadasa’s LPPN I (see above) the following non-Sinhala script 
manuscripts are supposed to be in the Sri Daḷadā Library74 (Temple no. 235)
1.
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha-tatiya-ṭīkā, Saṅkhepa-vaṇṇanā, Culla-ṭīkā: Burmese script
2.
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha-dutiya-mahā-ṭīkā, Abhidhammattha-vibhāvinī: Burmese script
3.
Kammavācā: Burmese script
4.
Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā: Khom script
5.
Pārājikā-pāḷi: Khom script
6.
Bhikkhunī-pātimokkha: Khom script
7.
Saddanīti: Khom script
2.12 Unidentified Khom-script manuscripts in other monasteries
There are unidentified Siamese manuscripts in the following monasteries:
Śrī Narendrasiṅha Rājamahāvihāra, Kundasāla, Teldeniya, Kandy. A few large Siamese 
manuscripts can be seen in the glass cupboards in the library-cum-museum. They appear to 
be well preserved. A large gilded and painted Siamese manuscript box can also be seen in 
one of the cupboards. This vihāra was an important royal monastery in the 18th century 
and was the vihāra of the late nāyaka thera of the Malvatta chapter of the Siam Nikāya 
who passed away in 2004.
Pādeniya Rājamahāvihāra, Pādeniya, Kurunegala District. There is at least one unidentified Khom-script manuscript according to the index given by Blackburn (2002: 41), but 
possibly more according to information provided in the accompanying introduction (p. 33).
Hanguranketa Rajamahāvihāraya, Hanguranketa, Kandy District. At least eight Khomscript manuscripts75 and a Burmese manuscript according to the survey done by Blackburn 
(2002: 45, 50, 51, 54).
According to LPPN I, see above, there are also unidentified Siyam character (i.e., most 
probably Khom script) MSS at:
72 The author personally checked this MS and it is the Pācittiya-pāḷi part of the Suttavibhaṅga in Khom 
script.
73 The author checked this MS and it seems to be in the same handwriting style as the preceding one 
and the Khom-script Bālāvatāra MS in the Asgiriya Vijayasundara Vihāraya. 
74 The permission of the Director of the National Archives in Kandy used to be required to get access 
to this well maintained library. But now access can be gotten through the management of the temple 
itself.
75 One Khom-script MS in first glass cabinet; one MS in second glass cabinet; five Khom-script MSS 
and a Burmese-script MS in second cabinet with wooden drawers; one Khom-script in fourth cabinet. For 
more information about this important collection, see Bowden 2004: 227.

--- Page 418 of 425 ---
396
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
59:
Kolonnāve Vihāraya, Colombo
61: Gaṅgārāma Vihāraya, Hunupiṭiya, Colombo76
342: Sunandārāmaya, Mullegodha, Induruva (Bentota Area)
374: Subhaddarāma Mahā Vihāraya, Baṭapoḷa (Gālla Dist. Waellabadha Pattuva)
407: Sudharmārāma Mahāvihāraya, Devāture, Māgālla, Gālla
688: Mūlgiri-rājamahā vihāraya, Mūlgirigala, Vīrakaetiya (Hambantota Dist.)
756: Naeluva Potgul Vihāraya, Periyakadu, Naeluva (Kurunaegala Dist.)
According to LPPN II, see above, there are also unidentified Kāmboja (i.e., Khomscript) MSS at:
474: Gaṅgārāmaya, Morakoḷa, Dodanduva (D.P.)
633: Liyanagastenne purāṇavihāra. Guhāgoda, Kaṭugastoṭa (M.P.)
634: Koṇdadeniye Rajamahāvihāraya I, Kaṭugastoṭa (M.P.)
647: Attaragama Rajamahāvihāraya Potgul Maligaya, Maedavala (M.P.)
649: Hapugodha Rajamahāvihāraya, Kaṭugasṭota (M.P.)
669: Śāstrodaya Pirivena, Mārapana (S.P.)
2.13 Sugata Sāsanodaya Library, Ambarukkhārāma, Ambagahapiṭiya, Ahungala, 
Balapiṭiya
This large and important collection of 568 manuscripts — of which 148 are of Mainland 
Southeast Asian origin — is kept in the library of an old pirivena monastery called 
Ambarukkhārāma (called Mahāmūlavihāra in LPPN).
At this monastery the founder of the Amarapura nikāya, Venerable Ambagahapiṭiyē 
Ñāṇavimala, started his mission. Not being able to obtain upasampadā in the high-caste 
Siyam Nikāya, Ñāṇavimala and five other novices went to Burma in 1799 to receive upasampadā. In 1802 he and his companions returned to Sri Lanka with several Burmese 
theras from Amarapura, Northern Burma, to found the original Amarapura Nikāya (Mahāmūla Amarapura Nikāya). Later on the Amarapura Nikāya divided and grew into about 
thirty subsects, and the branch founded by Ñāṇavimala thera is now called Mūlavaṃsika 
Amarapura Nikāya (see Arunatilaka 1998: 308–312; K. D. de Silva 2009; Malalgoda 1976: 
134–161). The library might contain the manuscript collection of a lay priest77 who earlier 
managed it, and perhaps there are some original or older Sinhalese text lineage manuscripts found in the collection.78 The monastery was a famous centre of learning in the past, 
but now has lost its former glory.
There are 139 Buruma, 4 Kāmboja, and 5 Siyam manuscripts. The exact number of texts 
in the 148 Mainland Southeast Asian manuscripts still needs to be determined.
I could not see the library, although I visited the monastery twice (the reason given was 
that the key was not there). Fortunately, I was provided with the index list from which the 
data below has been taken. The collection is divided into the three sections of the Tipiṭaka 
and a miscellaneous section with grammatical works, etc. The numbers are the reference 
numbers in the collection. In LPPN I the library has been given the location reference 
number 305.
A comparison of the first 40 items (i.e. the Sutta section)79 with the LPPN shows that the 
Theragāthaṭṭhakathā is not attributed to this library in LPPN, either in Burmese or Sinhala 
76 Four Kāmboja MSS. There is a very large collection of MSS, probably well over a thousand, in this 
well-known monastery in the centre of Colombo, but the index list is lost.
77 A gaṇinnānsē is a lay priest who managed and lived off monastery estates during the period when 
there were no, or very few, bhikkhus and sāmaṇeras; see Malalgoda 1976: 54–58; Mirando 1985: 116–
117.
78 See Arunatilaka1998: 320–321.
79 Some texts, such as the Saddanīti (a grammatical work, but listed in the Sutta section), are not given 
in the right section in the index list.

--- Page 419 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
397
script. The Sumaṅgala-vilāsinī and Sumaṅgala-vilāsanī-līnatthavaṇṇanā (= Dīghanikāya 
commentary and subcommentary) are also not attributed to it.
The Apadāna, Buddhavaṃsaṭṭhakathā and Maṅgalatthadīpanī are attributed as Sinhala 
script, not as Burmese script.
Sutta
1.
Buruma 
1
Cariyā Piṭakaya, ehi aṭuvāva80; Khuddaka-pāṭhaya, ehi 
aṭuvāva
2.
…
2
Jātakaṭṭhakathā-koṭasak81
3.
…
3
Apadānaṭṭhakathā
4.
…
5
Saṃyuttanikāyaṭṭhakathā
5.
…
6
Theragāthaṭṭhakathā
6.
… 
7
Sumaṅgala-vilāsanī-līnattha-vaṇṇanā82
7.
…
8
Saṃyuttanikāya. Nidāna-khandha-vāra
8.
…
9
Manorathapūraṇī. Duka-nipātaya-paṭana-vasanaṭa
9.
…
10
Saṃyutta-ṭīkā. Mahā-vagga
10.
…
11
Sumaṅgala-vilāsinī nāma Dīghanikāyaṭṭhakathā
11.
…
12
Saṃyuttanikāya. Nidāna. Khandhavāra. Sagātha-vagga
12.
…
14
Rāja-mārtaḍaya
13.
…
15
Visuddhi-magga
14.
…
16
Saṃyutta-ṭīkā
15.
Kāmboja
17
Jātakakathāvak. Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha. Sūtrayak
16.
Buruma
18
Maṅgalatthadīpanī
17.
…
19
Visuddhi-magga
18.
…
21
Aṅguttaranikāya. Nipātas 5–7
19.
…
22
Saṃyuttanikāyaṭṭhakathā—Sagātha-vagga
20.
…
22
Saṃyuttanikāya
21.
…
23
Visuddhi-magga
22.
…
24
Dīghanikāya-kāṇḍa-kīpayak
23.
…
25
Apadāna-pāḷi
24.
…
26
Majjhimanikāya-sūtra-kīpayak. Gaeṭapada-vivaraṇayak
25.
…
27
Pot Koṭas Kīpayak
26.
…
34
Saddanīti
27.
Siṃhala-Buruma83
41
Dhammapada 2
28.
….
42
Vimāna-vatthu. Peta-vatthu. Aṭṭhakathā
29.
Buruma
47
Buddha-vaṃsaṭṭhakathā
30.
…
48
Saṃyuttanikāya-Sagātha-vagga
31.
Siyam
49
Sārasaṅgaha
32.
Buruma
51
Mahāpadāna-pe-Pāyāsī. Saṃyuttaka-sūtra 10
33.
…
59
Aṅguttaranikāya 1 bhāgaya
34.
…
59
Aṅguttaranikāya 2 bhāgaya
35.
…
 
68
Samantapāsādikā-vinayaṭṭhakathā
36.
…
69
Samantapāsādikā-koṭasak
37.
…
70
Jātakaṭṭhakathā-koṭasak
38.
…
71
Ambaṭṭha-sūtraya-paṭan Jālinī Sūtraya-avasan Koṭasak
80 Aṭuvāva = aṭṭhakathā. Ehi aṭuvāva = “(and) its commentary.”
81 Koṭasa(k) = “a part,” i.e. an incomplete text.
82 Presumably the old Dīghanikāya subcommentary called Līnatthapakāsinī(-purāṇaṭīkā) or Dighanikāya-ṭīkā.
83 Perhaps these are texts partly in Sinhala script and partly in Burmese script.

--- Page 420 of 425 ---
398
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
39.
…
72
Dik Saṅgiya84-Udumbara-sūtraya
40.
…
73
Saṃyuttanikāyaṭṭhakathā. Sagātha-vagga-aṭuvāva
Abhidhamma
1.
Buruma
74
Paṭṭhāna-ppakaraṇaya. Dukapaṭṭhānaya
2.
…
75
Sammoha-vinodanī
3.
…
76
Yamaka-ppakaraṇaya
4.
…
77
Pañcappakaraṇa-aṭuvāva
5.
…
80
Dhammasaṅgani-ppakaraṇa
6.
…
81
Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī
7.
…
82
Paramārttha-mañjūsā. Buruma-bhāṣā Sannaya
8.
…
83
Paramārttha-viniścaya-ṭīkāva
9.
…
85
Saṅkhepa-vaṇṇanā
10.
…
86
Paṭṭhāna-ppakaraṇaya
11.
…
87
Sammohavinodanī
12.
…
88
Vibhaṅga-ppakaraṇaya
13.
…
89
Dhammasaṅgani-ppakaraṇaya
14.
…
91
Saṅkhepa-vaṇṇanā
15.
…
93
Dhammasaṅgani-ppakaraṇaya
16.
…
94
Dhammapadaya-vibhaṅga
17.
…
95
Paramārtha-viniścaya-ṭīkāva
18.
Siyam
96
Nāmarūpa-samāsaya. Abhidharmārttha-saṅgraha
19.
…
97
Abhidharmāvatārādī Pot85 6
20.
…
98
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha
21.
Buruma
99
Paṭṭhāna-ppakaraṇaya
22.
…
100
Pañcaprakaraṇa-aṭuvāva
23.
…
103
Paṭṭhāna-ppakaraṇaya
24.
…
105
Jātaka-aṭuvāvē ṭīkā-nipātaya
25.
…
106
Abhidhammattha-vibhāvinī
26.
…
107
Dhātuṭīkā-kathāva
27.
…
108
Kathāvastu-prakaraṇaya
28.
…
109
Paṭṭhāna-ppakaraṇaya
29.
…
114
Niruttisāra-mañjūsā
30.
…
115
Yamaka-prakaraṇaya
31.
…
116
Puggala-paññatti-ppakaraṇaya
32.
…
120
Netti-līnatthavaṇṇanā
33.
…
121
Dhātukathā 3
34.
…
122
Puggala-paññatti
35.
…
123
Dhammasaṅgini-mātikā-uddesa
36.
…
125
B.86 Atthasālinī, Dhammasaṅginī. Aṭṭhakathā
Vinaya
1.
Buruma
126
Bhikkhuṇī-vibhaṅgaya
2.
…
127
Mahāvagga-pāḷi
3.
…
128
Mahāvagga-pāḷi
4.
…
129
Mahāvagga-pāḷi
5.
…
130
Kaṅkhāvitaraṇī-mātikaṭṭhakathā
84 = Dīghanikāya.
85 Pot is “book,” i.e., “6 books.” It could refer to Siamese paper manuscripts or to palm-leaf MSS.
86 “B” means that it is the second text in the manuscript.

--- Page 421 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
399
6.
…
131
Bhikkhu-pācittiya 2
7.
…
132
Sīmāvisodhana, Sāgarathera-viracita
8.
…
134
Mulusika. Kudusika. Prātimokṣa 2
9.
…
137
Vinayālaṅkāra-vaṇṇanā
10.
…
138
Nettivibhāvinī
11.
…
139
Samantapāsādikā. Bhikkhuvibhaṅga-vaṇṇanā
12.
…
140
Sāratthadīpanī-ṭīkā. Terasa-kāṇḍaya
13.
…
142
Mūlasikkhā 2
14.
…
144
Pācittiya-pāḷi
15.
Kāmboja
146
Bhikkhu-pātimokkha
16.
Buruma
147
Vinaya-aṭuvāvē Sārārttha-dīpanī Mūla-varga-varṇanāva
17.
…
148
Samantapāsādikāvē Tissaka-vaṇṇanā
18.
…
149
Cullavaggaya
19.
…
150
Pārājikā-pāḷi
20.
…
156
Vinayalakkhitarāsī
21.
…
157
Bhikkhuṇī-vibhaṅgaya
22.
…
158
Cullavagga-pāḷi
23.
…
160
Pāḷi-muttaka-vinaya-vinisa
24.
…
161
Bhikkhu-pātimokkha-gaṇṭha-padaya
25.
…
162
Sikkhāpada-valañjanī
26.
…
169
Bhikkhupācitti
27.
…
171
Kaṅkhāvitaraṇī87 2
28.
…
172
Sārattha-dīpanī
29.
…
173
Vinaya-sannaya
30.
…
174
Vinayālaṃkāra-aga-koṭasa
31.
…
177
Mahāvagga-pāḷi
32.
…
178
Buruma-pot koṭas kīpayak88
33.
…
181
Karmavākya ādī koṭas 2 kīpayak
34.
Siṃhala-Buruma
184
Sāsanasāra-saṅgaha
35.
…
185
Pātimokkha 2 or 3 (list unclear)
36.
Buruma
186
Pācittiya-pāḷi
37.
…
189
Vimativinodanī
38.
…
190
Pārājikā-pāḷi
39.
…
192
Samantapāsādikā Mul Koṭasa
40.
…
194
Pārājikā-pāḷi 3
Miscellaneous (Grammar, etc.)
1.
Siyam
283
Mūla-kaccāyana-vyākaraṇaya
2.
Kāmboja
291
Mūlakaccāyanaya
3.
Buruma
300
Sīlavatthu-ppakaraṇa
4.
…
301
Mūlakaccāyanaya (Bhāvahi?) ṭīkāva
5.
…
302
Saddanīti deka
6.
…
317
Sandhikappayē koṭasak
7.
…
325
Kaccāyana-vaṇṇanā
8.
…
326
Sadda-vuttiya hā ṭīkāva. Gandhābharaṇa-ṭīkāva. Sadda
bindu. Kārikā. Saddavuttippakāsinī. Kaccāyana-sārayanirutti. Sambandhacintā-vibhatti–vibhāga. Vibhaktyartthaya-nayalakṣaṇavibhāvinī
9.
…
337
Kaccāyana-sūtra-nirdeśaya
87 In the list there are three dots and I assume that it is the same text as the preceding entry.
88 Kīpayak means “some.” Koṭas kīpayak = “some parts.”

--- Page 422 of 425 ---
400
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
10.
…
339
Saddavuttiya hā ṭīkāva; Gandhābharaṇaya; Kārakavistara. Subodhālaṃkāraya;Vuttodaya
11.
…
340
Gandhābharaṇa-ṭīkāva; Kartṛu—Subaṇṇara
12.
…
344
Mahāvaṃsa-ṭīkāva
13.
…
459
Buruma-potak89
14.
…
461
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha
15.
…
462
Mahavagga-koṭasak
16.
…
463
Pāṭhika-sutta
17.
…
464
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha
18.
…
465
Chakesadhātuvaṃsaya
19.
…
466
Kaccāyana-koṭasak
20.
…
467
Visuddhimagga-koṭasak
21.
…
468
Samanta-pāsādikā-kāṇḍayak
22.
…
469
?90
23.
…
470
Jātakaṭṭhakathā-koṭasak
24.
…
475
?91
25.
…
476
Pācittiya-bhikkhunī-vibhaṅgaya
26.
Kāmboja 
482
Sandēsa-kathā
27.
Buruma
486
?92
28.
…
488
Jātakaṭṭhakathā-koṭasak
29.
…
490
Mulusika
30.
…
491
Mahā-satipaṭṭhāna-sutta
31.
…
492
?93
2.24 Burmese manuscripts in the Vidyodaya Pirivena Library
This is a large and famous monastic university located at Māligākanda pāra, Maradāna, 
Colombo 10. It is affiliated with the Siam Nikāya and was founded by the scholar monk 
Hikkaduvē Sri Sumaṅgala in 1873 (see Blackburn 2010: 34–68; Malalgoda 1976: 188, 
236–237).
The palm-leaf manuscript collection, located in the main library, is fairly well kept in 
cupboards with doors with glass windows. The index was provided by the librarian. Although the numbering of the manuscripts goes to 233, there are only 134 manuscripts in 
the current index, 14 of which are Burmese. This suggests that either some manuscripts 
have been moved elsewhere or, more likely, that the current index is incomplete. This 
explains why more Mainland Southeast Asian manuscripts (27), including some Siamese 
MSS, are listed in LPPN than are found in the current index. The monastery has been 
assigned the location number 424 in LPPN II.
The first numbering is our numbering, the second is the library catalogue numbering, 
and the third is the older manuscript numbering.
The data below is only preliminary. It has not been properly checked and edited yet. 
There are 3 commentaries on the Kaccāyana according to the current list, but 4 according 
to LPPN. Some texts are not given exactly the same title, but they might well be the same 
works.
1.
30:
(232)
Visuddhimagga*
2.
31:
(209)
Yamakappakaraṇa-pāḷi*
89 A Buruma-potak = “a Burmese book.”
90 In the list there is a blank space. Perhaps it is the same text as the preceding entry.
91 In the list there is a blank space. Perhaps it is the same text as the preceding entry — the Suttanipāta.
92 In the list there is a blank space. The preceding entry contains several texts and cannot be identical.
93 In the list there is a blank space. Perhaps it is the same text as the preceding entry.

--- Page 423 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
401
3.
32:
(226)
Kaccāyana-vaṇṇanā* (= Sandhikappa-ṭīkā)
4.
33:
(210)
Duka-paṭṭhāna*
5.
34:
(206)
Vibhaṅga-ppakaraṇa-pāḷi*
6.
36:
(228)
Mukhamattadīpanī* (= Ñāsa, Kaccāyana-purāṇa-ṭīkā)
7.
37:
(227)
Kaccāyana-sutta-niddēsa*
8.
38:
(221)
Kamma-vācā*
9.
39:
(222)
 ”
10.
40:
(220)
 ”
11.
41:
(219)
 ”
12.
42:
(223)
 ”
13.
43:
(217)
Sārattha-dīpanī (= Sp-ṭ)
14.
44:
(216)
Sammoha-vinodanī*
2.25 MSS in Vidyodaya Library according to LPPN II
1.
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha-majjhima-ṭīkā, Paṭhamānuṭīkā: Bu 2
2.
Abhidhammāvatāra: Bu
3.
Kaccāyana-ṭīkā Paṭhama, Kaccāyanavutti–vaṇṇanā, Nyāsa: Bu 2
4.
Kaccāyana-ṭīkā Dutiya: Bu (= Mukhamattadīpanī)
5.
Kaccāyana-ṭīkā Tatiya: Bu
6.
Kammavācā: 5 Bu
7.
Dhammasaṅganī-aṭṭhakathā: Bu
8.
Dhātukathā: Bu
9.
Pañcappakaraṇa-aṭṭhakathā: Bu
10.
Pācittiya-pāḷi: Si
11.
Paṭṭhāna: 2 Bu incompl
12.
Pārājika-pāḷi: Bu
13.
Mahāvaṃsa: Bu
14.
Yamaka: Bu
15.
Vibhaṅga: Bu
16.
Sammohavinodanī, Vibhaṅga-aṭṭhakathā: Bu
17.
Visuddhimagga: Bu
18.
Sutta-saṅgaha: Bu
19.
Siyam Akurupot: Si
20.
Siyam sandeśaya

--- Page 424 of 425 ---
402
BHIKKHU ÑĀṆATUSITA
Abbreviations
Bu: 
Burmese script
Kh: 
Khom script. Also called “old Siamese script”94
LPPN:
Laṅkāvē Puskoḷa Pot Nāmavaliya (Somadasa 1959–64)
Si: 
Modern Thai script
part: 
partial or incomplete text
MS: 
manuscript
MSS: 
manuscripts
V.:
Vihāraya
Bibliography
Arunatilaka, Ahungalle. 1998. “The Most Venerable Ahungalle Vimalananditissa Mahānayaka 
Thero,” in Suvidita Paṭisambhidā, Ahungalle Vimalananditissa Felication Volume, Balapiṭiya: 
308–335.
Bell, B. N., and H. M. Bell. 1993. H. C. P. Bell — Archaeologist of Ceylon and the Maldives, London.
Bizot, F. 1988. Les traditions de la pabbajjā en Asie du Sud-Est, (Recherches sur le bouddhisme 
khmer IV), Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen, Göttingen.
Blackburn, Anne M. 2002. “Notes on Sri Lankan Temple Manuscript Collections,” Journal of the 
Pali Text Society XXVII: 1–59.
2010. Locations of Buddhism: Colonialism and Modernity in Sri Lanka, Colombo.
Bowden, Russell. 2004. “Access to Resources for Buddhist Studies in Sri Lanka,” Journal of the 
Centre for Buddhist Studies, Sri Lanka II: 198–239.
Carter, John Ross, and Mahinda Palihawadana. 1987. The Dhammapada, Oxford.
Coomaraswamy, A. K. 1979. Mediaeval Sinhalese Art, New York.
Fernando, P. E. E. 1982. “A Note on Three Old Sinhalese Palm Leaf manuscripts,” The Sri Lanka 
Journal of the Humanities 8, no. 1/2: 146–157.
Filliozat, Jacqueline. 1995. “Catalogue of the Pāli Manuscript Collection in Burmese and Siamese 
Characters Kept in the Library of Vijayasundararamaya Asgiriya,” Journal of the Pali Text 
Society XXI: 135–191.
1998. “Survey of the Pāli manuscript collection in the Bodleian Library,” Journal of the Pali 
Text Society XXIV: 1–80.
Geiger, Wilhelm. 1912. The Mahavamsa or The Great Chronicle of Ceylon, English translation 
assisted by Mabel Haynes Bode, London.
1960. Culture of Ceylon in Mediaeval Times, Heinz Bechert, ed., Wiesbaden.
Godakumbura, C. E. 1955. Sinhalese Literature, Colombo.
1980. Catalogue of Ceylonese Manuscripts, Copenhagen.
Gunaratne, Mahendra. 2006. “Manuscript Writing on Palm-leaves,” at http://www.lankalibrary.com/
phpBB/viewtopic.php?f=68&t=2873 (retrieved on 5.12.2009)
Gunasekera, H. M. 1901. Catalogue of Pali, Sinhala, and Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Colombo 
Museum Library, Colombo.
Gunawardhana, Siransee. 1997. Palm Leaf Manuscripts of Sri Lanka, Colombo.
94 The rounded script variant — in opposition to the straighter Khom script — is called “Mūl script.”

--- Page 425 of 425 ---
Pali Manuscripts of Sri Lanka
403
Hinüber, Oskar von. 1983. Sieben Goldblätter einer Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā aus 
Anurādhapura. Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Goettingen. I Phil./hist. Kl., 
Jg. 1983, No. 7: 189–207.
1983. Notes on the Pāli Tradition in Burma, Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in 
Göttingen, Nr. 3, Göttingen: 65–79.
1988. “Remarks on a List of Books Sent to Ceylon from Siam in the 18th Century,” Journal 
of the Pali Text Society XII: 175–183.
Joseph, G. A. 1901. “Ola Manuscripts, and the Government Oriental Library of Ceylon,” in Gunasekera 1901: ix–xiv.
Liyanaratne, Jinadasa. 1989. “The Literary Heritage of Sri Lanka: A case for the preservation of 
Palm-leaf manuscripts,” Studien zur Indologie and Iranistik 15: 119–127.
1993. “Pāli Manuscripts of Sri Lanka in the Cambridge University Library,” Journal of the 
Pali Text Society XVIII: 139–40.
2006. “Sri Lankan Manuscriptology,” Journal of the Pali Text Society XXVIII: 39–48.
Malalgoda, Kitsiri. 1976. Buddhism in Sinhalese Society, 1750–1900: A Study of Religious Revival 
and Change, Berkeley.
Mirando, A. H. 1985. Buddhism in Sri Lanka in the 17th and 18th centuries, Dehiwala. 
Mudiyanse, Nandasena. 1972–74. “A Catalogue of Palm Leaf Manuscripts Written in Burmese, 
Cambodian and Siamese Script,” The Buddhist 43 (1972–73), nos. 2–5: 145–147; nos. 6–8: 
42–44; and 44 (1973–74): 1–9. 
Nell, A. 1954. “Palm-leaf Manuscripts or Ola-books,” Ceylon Today 3, Nos. 3/4, Colombo: 38–40.
Norman, K. R. 1983. Pāli Literature: Including the Canonical Literature in Prakrit and Sanskrit of 
all the Hīnayāna Schools of Buddhism, Wiesbaden.
Nyanatusita, Bhikkhu, and Hellmuth Hecker. 2008. The Life of Nyanatiloka Thera: The Biography 
of a Western Buddhist Pioneer, Kandy. 
Perera, S. G. 1935. “Report by Father S. G. Perera, S. J., on various documents in European 
Archives” in Second Report of the Ceylon Historical Manuscripts Commission, Colombo.
Saddhātissa, H. 1993. Pāli Literature of South-east Asia, Singapore.
de Silva, K. D. 2009. “Founder of Amarapura Nikaya Gnanavimala Maha Nayaka Thera: A devout 
defender of Buddhism.” Daily News 7.5.2009. http://www.dailynews.lk/2001/pix/
PrintPage.asp?REF=/2009/05/07/fea01.asp (retrieved on 23.9.2012).
de Silva, W. A. 1938. Catalogue of Palm Leaf Manuscripts in the Library of the Colombo Museum, 
Volume I, Colombo.
Sirisoma, H. M., “Preparation of an Ola-leaf book,” Observer Pictorial: 15–17.
Somadasa, K. D. 1959–64. Laṅkāvē Puskoḷa Pot Nāmavaliya, Vols. I and II, Colombo.
1987–95. Catalogue of the Hugh Nevill Collection of Sinhalese Manuscripts in the British 
Library, 7 Vols, London.
Vachissara, Koṭagama. 1961. Vaeliviṭa Saraṇaṅkara and the Revival of Buddhism in Ceylon. PhD 
thesis at the University of London.
Veidlinger, Daniel M. 2007. Spreading the Dhamma: Writing, Orality, and Textual Transmission in 
Buddhist Northern Thailand, Honolulu.
Wickramaratne, K. D. L. 1967. “Palm Leaf Manuscripts of Ceylon,” Ceylon Today 16, no. 1: 16–21.
Wickremasinghe, Don Martino De Zilva, Humphrey William Codrington, and Senarat Paranavitana 
(authors/editors). 1904–1933. Epigraphia Zeylanica Vols. I–IV, London.