Source PDF File: D:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\PDF\project_muse_856949.pdf
Total Pages: 27

--- Page 1 of 27 ---
Aspiring to Be a Buddha and Life Before Liberation: The 
Colophons of the Siamese Questions of King Milinda
Eng Jin Ooi
Manuscript Studies: A Journal of the Schoenberg Institute for
Manuscript Studies, Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2022, pp. 104-129
(Article)
Published by University of Pennsylvania Press
DOI:
For additional information about this article
https://doi.org/10.1353/mns.2022.0002
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/856949
[27.130.226.161]   Project MUSE (2026-08-31 18:42 GMT)

--- Page 2 of 27 ---
Aspiring to Be a Buddha and Life  
Before Liberation: The Colophons  
of the Siamese Questions of King Milinda
Eng Jin Ooi
Mahidol University
T
he Questions of King Milinda (Pāli: the Milindapañha) is a 
Buddhist text presented in the form of questions and answers 
between a Bactrian Greek ruler, King Milinda (Menander I, r. 
155/165–130 BCE) and a Buddhist monk, Nāgasena. It is believed to have 
been written down around the first century CE in northwestern India, most 
probably in Gāndhārī.1 However, at present, the text is only extant in Pāli 
This article is part of my doctoral work done at the Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities, 
Mahidol University. I am particularly grateful to Peter Skilling for his ever- precious guidance 
during my course of studying the various aspects of the Milindapañha. I would also like to 
thank Trent Walker for translating the Thai and Khmer texts found in the manuscripts and 
inscriptions. My gratitude also goes to Yuwaret Wuttheerapon, Pratsaneeporn Phlaykumnerd, 
Santi Wongcharoonlak, Poonyawee Songserm, Chung Dipprakhone, Ratanaphorn Saadoat, 
and Sawinee Khonkhan of the Department of Manuscript, National Library of Thailand; 
Santi Pakdeekham, Somneuk Hongprayoo, and their team from the Fragile Palm Leaves 
Foundation and the Henry Ginsburg Fund for copies of the manuscripts; Giuliano Giustarini 
and the two reviewers for their valuable input and suggestions; Rosemarie Oong, Sherene 
Liew, and Vijaya Samarawickrama for their assistance.
1 
Richard Salomon, The Buddhist Literature of Ancient Gandhāra (Somerville, MA: Wisdom 
Publications, 2018), 26.
[27.130.226.161]   Project MUSE (2026-08-31 18:42 GMT)

--- Page 3 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 105
and Chinese.2 The founder of the Pali Text Society, Thomas W. Rhys 
Davids, considered this piece of work as “undoubtedly the master- piece of 
Indian prose, and indeed is the best book of its class, from a literary point 
of view, that had then been produced in any country.”3 Indeed it is. The 
text is quite popular, especially among the communities of the Theravāda 
tradition. Both its Pāli and Chinese recensions have been translated into 
multiple modern languages.4 
The questions posed by King Milinda cover a wide variety of doctrinal 
topics. They range from simple questions, like “what are the distinguishing 
marks of mental phenomena?” to dilemmas in the Buddhist system, such as 
“why pay homage to the Buddha when he has already been fully liberated 
and is not around to accept the homage?”5 Nāgasena answers each of these 
questions skillfully, at times quoting the unimpeachable word of the Bud-
dha (buddhavacana) and providing multiple similes to aid understanding of 
complex philosophical positions. For example, consider the simile of the 
“chariot” in which he emphasizes that a person’s name is merely a designa-
tion of aggregates (khandha), namely, body parts and mental activities com-
ing together, as “no person is found,” comparing it to when the parts of a 
chariot are rightly assembled, the word “chariot” is spoken.6
2 
On the text and its Pāli editions, see Oskar von Hinüber, A Handbook of Pāli Literature 
(Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1996), 82–86; Vilhelm Trenckner, ed., Milindapañho: Being Dia-
logues Between King Milinda and Buddhist Sage Nāgasena (Edinburgh: William and Norgate, 1880; 
hereafter Mil). For the Siamese Pāli edition, see Cattasalla Thera and Dhammapāmokkha, 
Milindapañhā (Bangkok: Mahāmakuṭarājavidyālaya, 1923). Pāli is the classical language of the 
Theravāda Buddhist canon. The texts in the canon are collectively referred to as the Tripiṭaka, and 
they are revered as “the word of the Buddha.” For more information on Pāli, see Wilhelm Geiger, 
A Pāli Grammar, trans. Batakrishna Ghosh, ed. Kenneth R. Norman (Bristol: Pali Text Society, 
2013 [1994], XXIII–XXX); 那先比丘經 (Nāgasena Bhikṣu Sūtra), T1670B.
3 
Thomas W. Rhys Davids, trans., The Questions of King Milinda: Translation from Pāli 
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1890), xlviii.
4 
For a provisional list of translations into modern languages, see Peter Skilling, “Problems 
with Milinda (I): The Opening Verses and Prose of the Printed Siamese Milindapañhā,” 
Journal of Centre for Buddhist Studies (Sri Lanka) 8 (2010): 1–24 at 14–18.
5 
Mil: 95–102; Isaline B. Horner, Milinda’s Questions, vol. I (London: Luzac & Co., 1963; 
hereafter Milinda’s Questions 1), 132–42.
6 
Na puggalo upalabbhati (no person is found/got at or no permanent individuality [no soul]). 
See Milinda’s Questions 1, 34–38 and n. 2 at 34; Rhys Davids, Questions of King Milinda, 40; 

--- Page 4 of 27 ---
106 | Manuscript Studies
The exceptional skill and ability of Nāgasena in answering these ques-
tions has been regarded as the embodiment of intelligence among the Bud-
dhist communities. One should aspire to be as eloquent and wise as 
Nāgasena. In Southeast Asia, the aspiration (patthanā) to be like Nāgasena 
goes back at least as early as the twelfth century CE in the form of an 
inscription on a votive tablet in Pagan, Upper Burma.7 In Cambodia, they 
also appear in two Khmer inscriptions of the Grande Inscription d’Angkor, 
IMA 32 (1687 CE) and IMA 38 (1701 CE).8 The latter reads:
I humbly ask for intelligence, the skill to respond to riddles and 
resolve them in debate, just like Nāgasena who answered all the rid-
dles before King Mālin [Milinda], resolving them without a hitch.9
In Thailand, these kinds of aspirations are found in the colophons of the 
Questions of King Milinda manuscripts. The tradition of Milinda- Nāgasena 
in Thailand is very much alive. The first printed Thai translation of the text 
was published in 1919 CE, by the Vajirañāṇa Library, and was met with 
great enthusiasm both in the capital and up- country, with the result that 
the print output did not meet the demand.10 Later, the library published 
an updated edition.11 Since then, other Thai translations by different 
authors have been issued. Traditionally, the Questions of King Milinda texts, 
just like other Pāli literature, were preserved in palm- leaf manuscripts, as 
were their Thai adaptations; occasionally they were preserved in samut khoi, 
or accordion- style paper folding books. 
Mil: 25–28; compare Léon Feer, ed., Saṃyuttanikāya, part 1 (London: Pali Text Society, 1991 
[1884]), 135.20–21.
7 
Gordon H. Luce, Old Burma: Early Pagan, vol. 1: Texts (New York: Artibus Asiae and 
Institute of Fine Arts, 1969), 76.
8 
Lewitz Saveros, “IX. Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33,” 
Bulletin de l’Ecole française d’Extrême- Orient 60 (1973): 205–42 at 228; Pou- Lewitz, Saveros, 
“VII. Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 34 et 38,” Bulletin de l’Ecole française d’Extrême- Orient 
(1975): 283–353 at 304.
9 
Translated from the Khmer language by Trent Walker, email 9 July 2020.
10 Skilling, “Problems with Milinda (I),” 2. 
11 Milindapañhā chabap phim khrang thi song, in three parts (Bangkok: National Library of 
Thailand, 2006 [1925]).

--- Page 5 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 107
Interestingly, the textual traditions of the Siamese Pāli Milindapañhā, 
edited by Cattasalla Thera and Dhammapāmokkha, and the Pali Text Soci-
ety’s Milindapañho, edited by Vilhelm Trenckner, the latter of which is 
based primarily on manuscripts from Ceylon, differ considerably.12 There 
are Milinda- Nāgasena dialogues found in the Siamese edition that are 
absent in Trenckner’s. For instance, the king asks: when a person dies, does 
he go to the next world as a radiance or as an apparition of an elephant, a 
horse, or a chariot?13 Undoubtedly, this dialogue seeks to address an impor-
tant yet delicate issue in Buddhist philosophy—what passes from one life to 
another. Nāgasena gives an elaborative answer by using some similes that 
are not found elsewhere in the text. One wonders why such a dialogue is 
absent in other recensions.
Little is known as to how and why the two Pāli editions evolved accord-
ing to different trajectories. In order to understand this better, I have stud-
ied the transmission history of this text, focusing on its Siamese recensions 
by examining what is embedded in the manuscripts. Over the course of two 
years of research, I managed to gain access to more than seventy manu-
scripts of the Questions of King Milinda in the Pāli language, which circu-
lated mainly in central Thailand. The majority of them are found at the 
National Library of Thailand; some are in temples (wat) in the central and 
southern parts of the country.14 The National Library is the richest reposi-
tory and custodian of manuscripts in Thailand. With a staggering 225,733 
palm- leaf manuscripts alone, it dwarfs any temple collection.15 These Ques-
tions of King Milinda manuscripts are not all copies of each other or speci-
mens in the same line of transmission but are made up of different recensions 
12 See Kogen Mizuno, “ミリンダ問経類について” (On the Recensions of the Mil-
indapañha), Komazawa Daigaku kenkyu kiyo 17 (1959): 17–55 at 37–40; Thich Minh Chau, 
Milindapañha and Nāgasenabhikshusūtra: A Comparative Study (Through Pāḷi and Chinese 
sources) (Calcutta: Firma KL Mukhopadhyay, 1964), 226–27; Skilling, “Problems with 
Milinda (I),” 1–24.
13 Cattasalla Thera et al., Milindapañhā, 117–20.
14 Wat Paramaiyikawat in Nonthaburi and Wat Samuh Nimit in Surat Thani province. 
15 Suwakhon Siriwongworawat, ed., The National Library of Thailand (Bangkok: The Fine 
Art Department, 2000). On accessing the National Library manuscripts, see E. J. Ooi, “Survey 
of the Pāli Milindapañha Manuscripts Kept at the National Library of Thailand: A Brief Cata-
logue,” Journal of the Siam Society 109, part 1 (2021): 169–210 at 175.

--- Page 6 of 27 ---
108 | Manuscript Studies
and were copied in different periods of Thai history. Evidence in the colo-
phon is particularly revealing. This article will consider several examples of 
colophons that reveal aspects of the manuscripts’ production.16
Colophons
A colophon carries information about the manuscript. Colophons usually 
appear at the end of the text on the last folio. They can be also be found on 
the first, or title, folio at the beginning of a text. The language of the colo-
phons under review here is either Pāli or Thai. Sometimes it is a mixture, 
with Pāli words embedded in a Thai- language colophon. 
In central Thailand, colophons were generally written in two scripts, 
Khom (ขอม) and Thai. “Khom Pāli,” sometimes transliterated as “Khom 
Bāli” (ขอมบาลี), is used to write the Pāli language, and “Khom Thai” (ขอม
ไทย) is used to write the Thai language.17 The Khom script is a cognate of 
Khmer script; at times it is also called Akson Kamphucha (fig. 1) in the 
manuscript. Another script used in central Thailand is the Mon script 
(อักษรมอญ). So far, I have only accessed two copies of Pāli Milindapañha 
written in Mon script; one is kept at the National Library, and the other 
one is preserved at Wat Paramaiyikawat in Nonthaburi, part of the Bangkok 
metropolitan area. 
Dating System
Another important piece of information in the study of the transmission 
history of a manuscript is the date it was copied. The date of the manuscript 
16 For a complete listing of the Milindapañha manuscript colophons preserved at the 
National Library of Thailand, see Appendix I in Ooi, “Survey of the Pāli Milindapañha 
Manuscripts,” 169–210 at 187–207. For more examples of Thai colophons, see Harald Hun-
dius, “The Colophons of 30 Pāli Manuscripts from Northern Thailand,” Journal of the Pali 
Text Society 14 (1990): 1–173.
17 For more information on scripts used in Thai manuscripts, see Peter Skilling and Santi 
Pakdeekham, “Manuscripts in Central Thailand—Samut Khoi from Phetchaburi Province,” 
Manuscript Studies 2, no. 1 (2017): 125–50 at 126–29.
[27.130.226.161]   Project MUSE (2026-08-31 18:42 GMT)

--- Page 7 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 109
helps not only to build a chronology of the text’s transmission but also to 
track the evolution of its textual tradition. The date can be found either 
embedded in the colophon (fig. 3, highlighted in a box) or written sepa-
rately at the side of the title folio. The dating follows the Buddhist Era 
(พุทธศักราช, BE) system, appearing in the manuscript as Phuttha- sakkarat. 
It also uses the sexagenary system, which is a combination of the Siamese 
duodecimal animal cycle and the numeric decimal series, or the Sok (ศก) 
system indicating the year, from the first to the tenth year of the decade.18 
The Sok system number points to the last digit of the year in Chula- sakkarat 
(จุลศักราช, Lesser Śaka Era [CS]).19 Each number in the Sok system has a 
name derived from the Pāli language.20 For example, the date of manuscript 
NL1781 is given as follows (fig. 2):
18 The twelve animals are: rat, ox, tiger, rabbit, dragon, snake, horse, goat, monkey, rooster, 
dog, and pig. Barend J. Terwiel, “Tai Peoples and the Computation of Time, a Comparative 
Perspective,” Oriens Extremus 28, no. 1 (1981): 62–106 at 67 and 98.
19 BE – 1181 = CS. See Wisut Busayakun, “Calendars and Eras Used in Thailand / วิสุทธ์ 
บุษยกุล. ปฏิทินและศักราชที่ใช้ในประเทศไทย,” Journal of the Royal Institute of Thailand 29, no. 
2 (2004): 468–78 at 477.
20 The years of the decades are: first, Ekasok; second, Thosok; third, Trisok; fourth, Chat-
tawasok; fifth, Benchasok; sixth, Chorsok; seventh, Saptasok; eighth, Atthasok; ninth, Noppha-
sok; tenth, Samritthisok. See Terwiel, “Tai Peoples and the Computation of Time,” 67.
Figure 1. The title of NL2018, written in Khom Pāli: Phra Milin[da]pan. hā-vitthāra-
kambūjjaks.arachvāt phūk ๖ (The extensive version of the Questions of King Milinda written 
in Kamphucha script, fascicle no. six). Courtesy of the National Library of Thailand, 
manuscript code 2018, fascicle 6.

--- Page 8 of 27 ---
110 | Manuscript Studies
Pī Cho Chattawasok Phra Phuttha- sakkarat dai 2345 Phra Phansa (The aus-
picious year is 2345 BE (1802 CE), the Year of the Dog, era Chattawasok, 
[the fourth year of the decade])
The ordinal number “fourth” here means in the year of Chula- sakkarat 
that ends in four (2231 BE minus 1181 = 1164 CS). Therefore, one sexage-
nary cycle will have the duodecimal series repeated five times and the deci-
mal series six times. 
The aspirations (patthanā) mentioned in the colophon generally express 
wishes that the donor seeks to fulfill for helping to preserve and spread the 
dharma. Contributing to the copying of manuscripts is considered a meri-
torious deed capable of yielding good karmic fruits in the future. This 
ideology of merit promises a favorable rebirth for the scribe and donor, 
culminating in his or her eventual realization of Nirvana. Some manuscripts 
have a simple formula, nibbāna- paccayo hotu, which means “may it be a 
contributing cause for Nirvana.”21 However, some aspirants are more ambi-
tious and aspire to become what they see as the epitome of humanity and 
knowledge: the Buddha. 
Aspiring to Be a Buddha
In the Word of the Doctrines (Dhammapada), verse 354 indicates that the gift 
of Dharma exceeds all gifts and that a manuscript is considered the physical 
21 For more examples, see Peter Skilling, “For Merit and Nirvana: The Production of Art in 
the Bangkok Period,” Arts Asiatiques 62 (2007): 76–94. Nirvana, a state of perfect bliss and hap-
piness, in the Theravāda tradition, can be attained either by following the path to become a full 
buddha, or the path of arhat where one achieves personal realisation of Nirvana under another 
buddha. The third way is to become a paccekabuddha (a lone Buddha), who attains enlighten-
ment without the guidance of a teacher but is unable to guide others to enlightenment.
Figure 2. Date of the manuscript NL1781 at the title folio. 
Image drawn by the author from a National Library of 
Thailand manuscript, code 1781, fascicle 16.

--- Page 9 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 111
embodiment of the Dharma.22 As I discuss below, the merit earned from 
this kind of contribution is considered vast enough to allow even an aspirant 
to become a Buddha. Moreover, in this survey, the goal to become a Buddha 
is not limited to rulers or the nobility but also extended to lay contributors 
and the scribes themselves. However, it is noteworthy that most of the colo-
phons record the meritorious deeds of the elite, including rulers and high- 
status individuals, because only they had the means to sponsor manuscripts 
(or images, or reliquaries, for that matter). This does not mean that only 
they aspired to be full Buddhas. Ordinary people would also seek merit, in 
other less ostentatious ways, but would rarely record their actions.23
A common phrase in the colophons of those manuscripts classified as 
the royal edition, copied from the First to the Fourth Reigns of the Bang-
kok period (1782–1868 CE), reads as follows:24
iminā puññatejena milindapaṇhālikkhitvāna pāramiyo paripuṇṇo bud-
dho homi anāgate 
Having copied down the Questions of King Milinda, with the power 
of this merit, in the future, may I fulfill the Perfections and become 
a Buddha.
Thai monarchs have customarily sponsored the copying of the Buddhist 
scriptures as a means to sustain the Dispensation of the Buddha.25 Thai rulers 
have been presented as Bodhisattvas (Pāli: Bodhisattas, Buddhas- to- be) since 
22 The Dhammapada is a well- known collection of sayings of the Buddha in verses and it is 
a part of the Pāli canon of Theravāda Buddhism. On the gift of Dharma, see Oskar von 
Hinüber and Kenneth R. Norman, eds., Dhammapada (Oxford: Pali Text Society, 1995), 99, 
verse 354.
23 Peter Skilling, in a note dated 19 November 2020.
24 For examples of manuscripts, see NL327, NL331, NL332, NL333, and NL335. Unfor-
tunately, only the first half of the “royal” Milindapañha manuscript copied in the Fifth Reign 
is available; therefore, I am unable to assess its colophon.
25 The Dispensation of the Buddha (Pāli: sāsana) generally refers to the teaching or the 
doctrine of the Buddha. For more information on why the Thai monarchs sponsor the pro-
duction of Buddhist texts, see the explanation given by King Rama V in the English transla-
tion of the preface of the first printed royal edition of the Tripiṭaka by the King of Siam 
published in 1894–95 CE, in Robert Chalmers, “The King of Siam’s Edition of the Pāli 
Tipiṭaka,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland (January 1898): 1–10.

--- Page 10 of 27 ---
112 | Manuscript Studies
the Ayutthaya era (1351–1767 CE). This notion is foregrounded in the pre-
amble to a law dated in 1433 CE: “His Highness has set his heart on the 
performance of the Perfection of Giving [dānapāramī] with the aspiration 
[patthanā] for realization of awakening [bodhiñāṇa], to lead all beings to 
freedom from the fears of cyclic existence [saṃsāra] and the suffering of the 
woeful realm.”26
The Perfection of Giving is one of the ten principal virtues cultivated by 
a Bodhisattva.27 The ten virtues described in the Theravāda tradition are: 
giving (dāna), morality (sīla), renunciation (nekkhamma), wisdom (paññā), 
energy (viriya), patience (khanti), truth- speaking (sacca), resolute determina-
tion (adhiṭṭhāna), loving- kindness (mettā), and equanimity (upekkhā).28 In 
order to become a Buddha, these ten virtues need to be developed to the 
highest degree. The Perfection of Giving aims to eliminate attachment to 
one’s own possessions, and therefore, part of the training includes giving 
away what is dearest and most difficult to give. This kind of giving is beyond 
the capacity of ordinary people. A famous example of this act is the Ves-
santara Jātaka in the Birth Stories (Jātaka), where King Vessantara gives 
away his wife and children to a Brahmin when the latter asks for them.29 It 
is said that the earth trembled seven times when this happened.30 This act 
has become the personification of giving at the highest level. In exemplify-
ing this, the colophon of NL4595 carries part of the Vessantara Jātaka story, 
which begins with the section where King Vessantara is about to encounter 
26 Peter Skilling, “King, Sangha and Brahmans: Ideology, Ritual and Power in Pre- modern 
Siam,” in Buddhism, Power and Political Order, ed. Ian Harris (London: Routledge, 2007), 
182–215 at 188.
27 Viggo Fausbøll, ed., The Jātaka together with its commentary: being tales of the anterior births 
of Gotama Buddha, vol. 1 (London: Pali Text Society, 1962 [1877]; hereafter Ja I), 73; Henry 
C. Norman, ed., The Commentary on the Dhammapada I (London: Pali Text Society, 1970 
[1906]), 84.9. For the ten virtues, see N. A. Jayawickrama, ed., Buddhavaṃsa and Cariyāpiṭaka 
(London: Pali Text Society, 1974; hereafter Bv), 6, verses 76 and 77.
28 Chapter I: verses 76 and 77, in Bv, 6; Isaline B. Horner, trans., Chronicle of Buddhas: 
Buddhavaṃsa and Basket of Conduct: Cariyāpiṭaka (London: Pali Text Society, 1975), xiii–
xv, 8.
29 Tale No. 547, Ja IV, 479–593. For the dilemma of giving away his wife and children, see 
Mil, 274–84; Isaline B. Horner, trans., Milinda’s Questions, vol. 2 (London: Luzac & Co., 
1969; hereafter Milinda’s Questions 2), 95–109.
30 Mil, 113; Milinda’s Questions 1, 158.
[27.130.226.161]   Project MUSE (2026-08-31 18:42 GMT)

--- Page 11 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 113
the Brahmin and knows that his Perfection of Giving is to be fulfilled on 
that day.31 The following colophon records what he said to his son Jāli on 
this occasion:
anāgate ׀
uṭṭhehi jāli patiṭṭha poraṇaṃ viya dissati 
brāhmaṇaṃ viya passāmi nandiyo mābhikirare ti 
ahaṃ pi tāta passāmi yo so brāhmāva dissati 
atthiko viya āyāti32 [atithī no bhavissati]33
In the future:
Get up now, Jāli, and be a support: it is as if something from the 
past is in view.
I might just see a brahmin, and delight overwhelms me.
[Hearing this, the boy said]:
I see him too, dear one. He certainly seems to be a brahmin. Perhaps 
he is a suppliant, [and will be our guest].34
Unfortunately, the verse ends at the penultimate line, and the following 
folios of the manuscript are missing. Nevertheless, the donor or scribe must 
have been aware that, in aspiring to become a Buddha, the ultimate act of 
giving, as in Vessantara’s case, has to be fulfilled in the future. 
The quest by members of the nobility to become a Buddha is reflected in 
manuscript NL2921. Phaya Phisan was the sponsor. It was copied by the 
monk Phra Sa in the Year of the Snake, era Ekasok or the first year of the 
decade, when 2,411 years of the Dispensation of the Buddha had elapsed 
(1868 CE). This manuscript carries the same stock phrase concerning the 
fulfillment of Perfections and the becoming of a Buddha as the royal editions. 
In another colophon, whose text expresses the same aspiration to become a 
31 Viggo Fausbøll, ed., The Jātaka together with its commentary: being tales of the anterior births 
of Gotama Buddha, VI (London: Pali Text Society, 1964 [1896]; hereafter Ja VI), 541.6–7.
32 The manuscript ends here.
33 Cf. verses 2117 and 2118, Ja VI, 541–42.
34 Translation adopted from Naomi Appleton and Sarah Shaw, trans., The Ten Great Birth 
Stories of the Buddha: The Mahānipāta of the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā, vol. 2 (Chiang Mai: Silkworm 
Books, 2015), 595.

--- Page 12 of 27 ---
114 | Manuscript Studies
Buddha, the scribe is a member of the monastic order. Manuscript NL11730 
records the monk’s contribution:
มหเสงอุษาหะเพิยรพญายามเขิยรมิลินธะปฤษหนาให้ใด้ทันสราง.35
[Venerable] Mahāseung made an effort to write the Questions of King 
Milinda to finish [it in time].
The colophon also records that early in the Bangkok period, a group of five 
lay devotees (ประสก) came together in the Year of the Rabbit (1783 CE), era 
Benchasok or the fifth year of the decade, to make the Questions of King 
Milinda manuscript (หนังสือ), possibly in the context of sustaining the Dis-
pensation (สร้างไว้ในศาสนา). They are:
Lay devotee Sālikā [ประสกสาลิกา]
Lay devotee Than In [ท่านสีกาอิน]
Than Nā [ท่านหนา]
Lay devotee Than Dī and female lay devotee Chan [ท่านประสกคี
สีกาจัน]
Coming together to perform a good deed and creating group merit is a 
common practice. Despite the names appearing separately on different palm- 
leaf fascicles, each mention shares the same stock colophon at its conclu-
sion—“In the future, may I fulfill the Perfections and become a Buddha.”
The word “Dispensation” or Śāsanā (ศาสนา), mentioned earlier, signifies 
not only the teaching of the Buddha but rather a specific period when the 
Buddha’s teaching will endure before it is obscured by the ignorance of 
humanity. According to the Theravāda tradition, this period, which is gener-
ally regarded as the Dispensation of the Buddha (Pāli: buddhasāsana), will last 
for only five thousand years after the demise of the Blessed One.36 Therefore, 
it is believed that performing good deeds, such as sponsoring the production 
35 The sentence is not complete. 
36 Thomas W. Rhys Davids and J. Estlin Carpenter, eds., The Sumaṅgala- vilāsinī, Buddhag-
hosa’s Commentary on the Dīgha Nikāya, part I (London: Pali Text Society, 1968), 25.16–17; 
Wilhem Geiger, ed., The Mahāvaṃsa (London: Pali Text Society, 1908), 19, verse 38. See also 

--- Page 13 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 115
of manuscripts and dedicating them to the promulgation of the Dispensation, 
will bring great merit. This idea is reflected in the colophon of NL5008, 
copied in 1686 CE, which is also the oldest dated manuscript in this selection 
(fig. 3):
พระญามิลินท ผูก ๑ ข้าพเจ้าผู้ชืออุบาสกธมฺมโชต ได้เอาใจลงในพระ
ศาสนา ณ วัดกลวย [กงวย] แลได้สร้างพระยามิลินทปัญหาปริศนาคัมภีร์ ๑ 
จบบริบูรณ์ ๑๖ ผูก ไว้สŃาหรับ พระศาสนาให้บริบูรณ์ถ้วน ๕๐๐๐ พระวัสสา 
เมื่อสร้างนั้น พุทธศักราช ๒๒๒๙ พระวัสสา เศษสังขยาได้ ๑๐ เดือน กับ 
๑๒ วัน สŃาเร็จในวันศุกร์ เดือน ๕ ขึ้น ๒ คŃ่าปีขาล อฐศก แล้ว ข้าพเจ้าขอ
เป็นปัจจัยแก่นิพพาน ในอนาคตกาลภายภาคหน้า นั้นเถิด แลข้าพเจ้าผู้ได้
เขียนหนังสือนี้เล่าไซร้ ขอเป็น อัครสาวกพระเจ้าเบื้องหน้านั้นเล่าเถิด.
Fascicle one of King Milinda (Phaya Milinda). I, a layman by the 
name of Dhammajota, devoted myself to the Dispensation of the 
Buddha at Wat Kluai, sponsored this manuscript of the Questions of 
King Milinda, complete in sixteen fascicles, to be established in the 
Dispensation of the Buddha for the full five thousand years. As for 
the time I sponsored it, it was in 2229 of the Buddhist era, plus ten 
months and twelve days, completed on a Friday, the fifth month on 
the second waxing day, the Year of the Tiger, era Atthasok or the 
eighth year of the decade. I humbly aspire for the conditions for 
Nirvana in the future. May I, the person who copied this manu-
script, be a foremost disciple of a Buddha in the future.37
Étienne Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism: From the Origins to the Śaka Era, trans. Sara 
Webb- Boin (Louvain: Institut Orientaliste, 1988), 196.
37 Input by Trent Walker, personal communication, 14 February 2020.
Figure 3. Colophon of NL5008 dated 1686 CE (in box) written in the Thai language in 
Khom Thai script. The colophon is written on an independent palm-leaf folio, placed at the 
end of the fascicle. Courtesy of the National Library of Thailand, manuscript code 5008, 
fascicle 1.

--- Page 14 of 27 ---
116 | Manuscript Studies
Two individuals are present in this colophon. One is the sponsor, Dham-
majota, who aspires for Nirvana, and the other is the scribe, who wishes to 
be the foremost disciple of a future Buddha.
The desire to be born in the time of a future Buddha, especially the next 
fully awakened Buddha (sammāsambuddha), Maitreya, is displayed in 
another colophon, NL4594:38
ขอไหขาทันพรสีอาริยเมตไตรไนอนาวร[ณ]ญาณโนนแล
May I be reborn in time for Sri Arya Maitreya, who has unob-
structed [omniscient] knowledge, in that distanced future.
There are two sentences preceding this line in the colophon. The first is the 
Pāli stock phrase on the aspiration to become a Buddha. The second is 
nibbāna- paccayo homi (may I be the contributing cause for Nirvana).39 The 
aspiration to be the contributing cause for Nirvana is also seen embodied, 
with some differences, in Sumedha, the Bodhisattva in the time of 
Dīpankara Buddha. Just before taking the vow to become a Buddha, 
Sumedha thought: “There is no use of crossing over [the ocean of cyclic 
existence] alone, and having awareness of my own strength, I resolve to 
reach omniscience and cause the world together with its gods to cross over 
[santāressaṃ sadevake].”40 This resolution was made in front of Dīpankara 
Buddha, who then foretold that Sumedha would become Gotama Buddha. 
Similarly, a fourteenth- century inscription found in the early Thai kingdom 
38 According to the tradition, the current Dispensation will only last five thousand years, 
followed by a long period where the Buddha’s teaching will be completely obscured until the 
appearance of the next Buddha, Maitreya. See Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, 191–98. 
Maitreya (Pāli: Metteyya) is mentioned in the Pāli canon. See J. Estlin Carpenter, ed., The 
Dīgha Nikāya III (London: Pali Text Society, 1976 [1911]), 75–77; Maurice Walshe, trans., 
The Long Discourses of the Buddha: Translation from the Dīgha Nikāya (Boston: Wisdom 
Publications, 1995 [1987]), 403–4; Bv, 101 (chapter XXVII, verse 19); Horner, Chronicle of 
Buddhas, 97.
39 Curiously, the verb to be (bhū) in the second sentence has changed from the usual stock 
may this be (hotu) to may I be (homi).
40 Ja I, 14; Bv, 12 (chapter II, verses 55–57); Horner, Chronicle of Buddhas, 14–15.
[27.130.226.161]   Project MUSE (2026-08-31 18:42 GMT)

--- Page 15 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 117
of Sukhothai indicates that the chief monk (saṅgharāja), who was also the 
preceptor of King Mahādharmarājā I (r. 1347–1368/1374), set down his 
aspirations in the colophon of a cosmological text, the Lokappadīpasāra, 
which he composed: “By the merit that has been well stored, may I, until 
the attainment of the excellent Buddhahood in the process of becoming, be 
always the one who causes the welfare of the world and full of refuge [to 
others].”41
Furthermore, according to the Chronicle of Buddhas (Buddhavaṃsa), meet-
ing a living, fully awakened Buddha (satthāradassanaṃ) is one of the eight 
conditions an aspirant must fulfill for the resolve (buddhabhāvāya abhinīhāra) 
to be successful.42 Therefore, meeting Maitreya becomes imperative in this 
quest.
This selection of colophons demonstrates that a particular path to 
attaining final bliss by way of becoming a Buddha seems to have been a 
favored choice among donors and scribes. Even though this path is more 
demanding and time consuming than that of the arhat, there are neverthe-
less individuals who, out of altruistic intent and the desire to give their best, 
would take up these challenges.43 The quest to become a Buddha is also 
taught by certain monks, as reflected in NL4596, copied in 2230 of the 
Buddhist Era (1687 CE), the Year of the Rabbit, era Nopphasok, or the 
ninth year of the decade: 
อินทปัญญายภิกขุนาสัพพัญญูพุทธภาวŃปฎฐนฺเตนอิมŃสิกฺขาเปตŃ  ׀อุบาสิกา
งายเปนอุปการ ׀
41 Translation adapted from Alexander B. Griswold and Prasert ṇa Nagara, “The Epigraphy 
of Mahādharmarājā I of Sukhodaya, Epigraphic and Historical Studies, No. 11, Part II,” 
Journal of the Siam Society 61, part 2 (1973): 91–128 at 93–94. anena puññena susambhatena 
sayambhutaṃ yāva ca pāpuṇe varaṃ nirantaraṃ lokahitassa kārako. Later, the same monk also 
repeats his wish to become a Buddha in a gold- leaf inscription using the words buddho 
bhavissāmi anāgate bhave (may I become a Buddha in a future existence) (128 and n. 10).
42 Bv, 12 (chapter II, verse 58); Horner, Chronicle of Buddhas, 15; Ja I, 14.5.
43 Gotama Buddha went through an intensive training of four incalculable (asaṅkheyya) eons 
(kappa) and a hundred thousand world cycles from the day he made the resolve in front of 
Dīpankara Buddha to his Awakening. See Ja I, 15; Mil, 232; Horner, Milinda’s Questions 2, 34.

--- Page 16 of 27 ---
118 | Manuscript Studies
[Pāli: Indapaññāya bhikkhunā sabbaññū buddhabhāvaṃ paṭṭhentena 
imaṃ sikkhāpetaṃ. Upasikā Ngai pen upakāra] 
This was taught by the monk Indapaññā, who aspires to be an 
omniscient Buddha. A female lay devotee Ngai sponsored [this 
manuscript].
The aspiration to become a Buddha in the future has existed since the early 
period of Thai history, as shown by the statement made by the chief monk 
of Sukhothai mentioned above. It is not only the chief monk who has such 
a goal. The king himself also resolves to become a Buddha.44 Furthermore, 
in a stone slab inscription found in Wat Si Chum, another high- ranking 
Sukhothai monk, Si Sattha, is said to aspire to become a Buddha.45 Even 
though in the Pāli canon the mention of a future Buddha occurs only once, 
with regard to Maitreya, later (apocryphal) Theravādin texts such as the 
Sotatthakī Mahānidāna identify many more bodhisattvas who will become 
buddhas in the future; in the Dasabodhisattupatti- kathā, the Buddha is 
quoted as saying that the number of beings who will become Buddhas in 
the future is countless.46 As such, the aspiration to become a buddha 
becomes possible when the number of future buddhas is left open.47 
Overall, despite certain colophons being composed of stock phrases, and 
despite there being donors who might not be aware of their contents due to 
lack of knowledge of the Pāli language or disregard for details, we do see 
some phrases being tweaked to suit certain individuals’ needs in this regard, 
44 Inscription 5; see Alexander B. Griswold and Praset ṇa Nagara, “The Epigraphy of 
Mahādharmarājā I of Sukhodaya, Epigraphic and Historical Studies No. 11,” Journal of the 
Siam Society 61, part 1 (1973): 71–182 at 142–43. 
45 Inscription II; see Alexander B. Griswold and Prasert ṇa Nagara, “King Lödaiya of Suk-
hodaya and His Contemporaries, Epigraphic and Historical Studies, No. 10,” Journal of the 
Siam Society 60, part 1 (1972): 21–152 at 122.
46 Sōtatthakī Mahānithān [Sotatthakī–mahānidāna] by Cūlabuddhaghosa, a cremation vol-
ume for Somdet Phra Phutthachan (Bangkok, 2526 [1983]), v. 629 at 96; Dasabodhisa-
ttuppattikathā (The Birth Stories of the Ten Bodhisattas), ed. and trans. Ven. H. Saddhatissa 
(London: Pali Text Society, 1975), 54 (trans.) and 119 (text). 
47 For more information on future Buddhas and the Theravāda, see Peter Skilling, “The 
Sambuddhe Verses and Later Theravādin Buddhology,” Journal of the Pali Text Society 22 
(1996): 150–83 at 173–75.

--- Page 17 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 119
as I discuss below. Nevertheless, the ambition to become a Buddha and the 
desire to lead all beings to escape from the continuous, suffering- laden 
cyclicality of existence is regarded as a noble quest and the wish of many 
across all layers of society.
Life Before Liberation
The path to Nirvana, by way of either the arhats or the Buddhas, is long and 
protracted. Unless one becomes an arhat or attains the paths or fruits in 
this very life, which would then reduce the number of rebirths, one is 
expected to go through many more cycles of existence before the eventual 
achievement of perfect bliss.48 Accordingly, it would not be unwise to take 
the merit generated as an opportunity to transform oneself into a capable, 
virtuous, and fortunate being. Below are two examples, one in a palm- leaf 
manuscript, the other in a samut khoi, that demonstrate this aspiration:
The following colophon appears in four manuscripts, namely, NL4600 
(undated), NL5500 (undated), NL11815 (1782 CE) (fig. 4), and NL5435 
(1793 CE). Below is the edited Pāli text from these four witnesses:49
iminā lekkhapuññena tikkhapaññena visārado ahaṃ pi jātisatasahassāni 
dhārento tipitakaṃ kittīyaṃ ahaṃ pi jātisatasahassāni tipitakaṃ 
labhissāmi ahaṃ pi yāva nibbānaṃ na gamissāmi saṃsāraṃ saṃsaranto 
mahābhogo labhissāmi ahaṃ pi suddhakeso suddhadanto suddhanāso 
suddhamukho suddhasoto suddhalalāṭo suddhacakkhu suddhajivho 
suddhabhāsito piyavaddho suddhanakkho suddhapādo suddha- uro 
48 The paths (Pāli, magga) and fruits (Pāli, phala) are stages to the attainment leading to 
arhat- ship; If one attains the first fruit (sotāpanna or stream- enterer) toward arhat- ship, one 
would not take the eighth rebirth before realizing Nirvana. See Dines Andersen and Helmer 
Smith, ed., Sutta- Nipāta (London: Pali Text Society, 1994 [1913]; hereafter Sn), 40, verse 
230; Bhikku Bodhi, The Suttanipāta: An Ancient Collection of the Buddha’s Discourses Together 
with Its Commentaries (Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications, 2017), 194, verse 230, and its 
commentary at 697–98.
49 For the critical apparatus of this edited text, see Ooi, “Survey of the Pāli Milindapañha 
Manuscripts,” 207.

--- Page 18 of 27 ---
120 | Manuscript Studies
suddhabāhu suddhahattho suddhavāco suddha- akodhano cettha 
mettābhāvano punappunaṃ anāgate yassa buddho paccayo lokanāyako 
ahaṃ labhāmi sāvako buddho puna จงได้ตรัสรู้เป็นพระ50 ׀ ׀
With this merit of writing down [the text], may I be accomplished 
in sharp wisdom, may I memorize and teach the Tripiṭaka for a 
hundred thousand lives. I will also be one who receives the Tripiṭaka 
for a hundred thousand lives. As long as I am yet to attain Nirvana, 
I will get to be one who possesses great wealth, pure hair, pure 
teeth, pure nose, pure mouth, pure ears, pure forehead, pure eyes 
and pure tongue; one who is pure in speech and who is dear to the 
elders; one who has pure nails, pure feet, pure chest, pure arms and 
pure hands; one who is pure in words and perfectly free of anger; 
and one who cultivates loving kindness here and in the future, 
again and again. . . . [and] to awaken as a Phra [Buddha].51
It is interesting to see the aspirants in these manuscripts going into such 
detail about a perfect physical embodiment of a human form. They leave no 
parts of the body to chance. It is noteworthy that among the four manu-
scripts, only in one of them, NL5500, do we see someone (either the scribe 
or the donor, it is unclear) declare a determination to awaken as a Buddha. 
Therefore, while the other part of the colophon may seem to be formulaic, 
aspiring to be a fully enlightened being is a personal choice. 
Another manuscript that expresses somewhat similar aspirations but 
covers a broader scope is the Milindapañha, in an edition made by Chao Pān 
and Chao Pom during the period of the Kingdom of Sri Ayutthaya (มิลินท
ปัญหาฉบับเจ้าปานเจ้าป้อมครั้งกรุงศรีอยุธยา), promulgated by the court nobil-
ity. This work is a samut khoi on the section of Questions on Talk of Similes 
(Opammakathāpañha) of the Questions of King Milinda.52 This two- volume 
50 จงได้ตรัสรู้เป็นพระ (Thai: to awaken as a Phra [Buddha]) only in NL5500.
51 The syntax of the last Pāli passage, “yassa . . . puna,” is not clear.
52 The title of the samut khoi is given as milindapañhā- yogikathā (talks on yogi). The word 
yogikathā refers here to the talk on what qualities a yogi should be endowed with in order to 
become an arhat, which is discussed in the section of the Questions on Talk of Similes. It should 
not be mistaken as the section of the Questions on Talks About Yogins (Yogikathāpañha).
[27.130.226.161]   Project MUSE (2026-08-31 18:42 GMT)

--- Page 19 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 121
samut khoi currently belongs to Wat Champa in Thonburi District. It was 
copied during the (late) Ayutthaya era by an unknown scribe. The content 
was transliterated into a printed edition in 1924, on the occasion of the royal 
cremation ceremony of Phra Suwan Muni Narasitham.53 At present, the 
manuscript is in the custody of the National Library. The text’s original 
sponsors were the noble royal ladies (pavaranārī), Pān and Pom, who are 
depicted as donors in the manuscript itself (fig. 5), which is a rather rare 
feature in the Buddhist art of Thailand.54
The two donors acknowledge that they have many more lives to go 
through before the final attainment, and therefore wish to be reborn in a 
noble house again, blessed with wealth and retinues, and the chance to 
practice the Perfections. The rhythmic exordium (fig. 5) reads:
ฉบับนี้ ของบวรนาริยองศ์ขัตติยะทรงนาม ปานป้อมสองพระพี่น้องอัน
ประกอบด้วยศรัทธา สร้างไว้หวังจะให้เป็นกุศลสืบไปในอนาคตกาล ขอ
ปณิธานปรารถนา ถ้าพระบารมียังมิแกล้า จะสังสนาการ ทอง เที่ยวอยู่
ตราบใดจะเกิดในภพใดก็ให้ลŃ้าเลิศ ประเสริฐด้วยสกุลวงศ์ อันทรงหานุภาพ
แลเลื่อมใส ในบวรพุทธศาสนา ขอมีปัญญาตรัสรู้ธรรมาพิสมัย แล้วให้
53 National Library of Thailand, Milindapañhā of Chao Pān, Chao Pom, Krung Sri Ayut-
thaya (Phra Nakhon [Bankgok]: Thiphayarat, 1924). On the occasion of the Royal Cremation 
Ceremony of Phra Suwan Muni Narasitham, the heir of Sanghapāmok (Chui Suk Bhikkhu), 
Gangaram Chao Temple, Phetchaburi Province. / มิลินทปัญหาฉบับเจ้าปานเจ้าป้อมครั้งกรุง
ศรีอยุธยา. พระนคร: ทิพยรัตน์, 2467 (พิมพ์ในงานพระราชทานเพลิงศพพระสุวรรณมุนีนรสีห์ธรรม
ทายาทสังฆปาโมกข์ (ฉุย สุขภิกฺขุ) วัดคงคาราม เจ้าคณะจังหวัดเพชรบุรี เมื่อปีชวด พ.ศ. 2467).
54 Cf. Peter Skilling, For Merit and Nirvana, 79–80 and figs. 3 and 4; email 16 July 2020. 
Figure 4. The colophon of NL11815 starts at the top folio, line three, after the 
punctuations (ฯ). Courtesy of the National Library of Thailand, manuscript code 11815, 
fascicle 16.

--- Page 20 of 27 ---
122 | Manuscript Studies
ไพบูลย์ด้วยรูปแลลักษณ์อันงามด้วยวรรณสัณฐาน ประกอบด้วยบริวารและ
สมบัติอันมาก ขอให้ปราศจากโรคา พยาธิแลภัยอันตราย ให้จŃาเริญกายแล
จิตเป็นสุขทุกประการ ขอได้บŃาเพ็ญศีลแลทานบารมีเป็นนิจ ถ้าจะคิดสิ่งไร
ขอให้สŃาเร็จความปรารถนา ให้มีพระชันษาอยุยืนโดยควร แก่กาลทุกชาติ
ไปกว่าจะได้พระนิพพาน ในอนาคตกาลนั้นเถิด55
This edition [of the Questions of King Milinda] belongs to the noble 
royal ladies, named Pān [and] Pom, sisters endowed with faith, who 
sponsored [this manuscript] as an act of merit to continue into the 
future. We make the following aspirations, lest our Perfections 
[pāramī] be insufficiently strong, and we end up transmigrating for 
however many lives: in whatever existence we are born into, may we 
55 This transliteration is an attempt to adapt the old Thai writing in the manuscript to 
modern Thai.
Figure 5. The opening pages or exordium of the samut khoi on the section Questions on 
Talk of Similes (Opammakathāpañha) in the Thai language and script. The two ladies in the 
image are the sponsors, Chao Pān and Chao Pom. Courtesy of the National Library of 
Thailand, manuscript Panha Tham No. 7, Milindapanha No. 10.

--- Page 21 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 123
be born in an exalted lineage, blessed with power and radiant [with 
faith] in the Dispensation of the Buddha. May we have the wisdom 
to awaken to the realization of the Dharma, and be endowed with 
an abundance of physical beauty, both in complexion and form. 
[May we] possess a [vast] retinue and vast wealth. May we be free 
from disease and danger, and may our bodies and minds prosper 
with all manner of bliss. May we constantly fulfill the Perfections 
of Morality [sīla] and Giving [dāna]. Whatever we may wish, may 
we achieve our aspirations. [May we] have great longevity, suitable 
for the times, in each and every life, until we reach Nirvana in the 
future!56
At the end of the second volume, there is also a colophon (fig. 6) expressing 
somewhat similar sentiments: 
พระมิลินทปันหา บวรนาริยวงษขัตติยะทรงนาม ปานป้อมสองพระพี่น้อง ผู้
ประกอบไปด้วยกุศลศรัทธาเจตนา สร้างไว้หวังให้เป็นธรรมสวณานิสงส์ ใน
ปัจจุบันแลอนาคตกาล ขอปณิธานปรารถนา ถ้าจะเกิดมาในภพเบื้องหน้า 
ขอมีปัญญาเลิศลŃ้า ตรัสรู้ธรรมวิเศษ ให้มีเดชเดช ประเสริฐด้วยสกุลวงศ์
ทรงสรรพลักขณาเป็นสวัสดิ์ ไพบูลย์ด้วยโภไคยสมบัติแลยศบริวารเป็นอัน
มาก ให้ปราศจากภัยอันตราย ศัตรูพ่ายแพ้อŃานาจ อย่าให้มีโรคาพยาธิมา
เบียดเบียน เป็นบรมสุขชมชื่น ให้มีพระชันษาอายุยืนนาน ขอได้บŃาเพ็ญ
ทานบารมีแลศีลบารมีเป็นนิจกาล มิได้ขาดถ้าจะปรารถนาสิ่งใดขอให้สŃาเร็จ
โดยมโนภิรมย์จงทุกชาติไป กว่าจะได้ถึงมหานครนิพพานในอนาคตกาลนั้น
เถิด. อายุ วัณโณ สุขัง พลัง
This book of the Questions of King Milinda belongs to the foremost 
royal ladies named Pān and Pom, sisters endowed with meritorious 
56 In the Discourse of The Lion’s Roar on the Turning of the Wheel, it is explained that the 
lifespan of human beings correlates to their behaviors. Unskilled behaviors lead to shorter 
lifespan. In the Discourse, a normal lifespan ranges from eighty thousand years (when unskill-
ful behavior is unknown to humanity), deteriorating over time to ten years. Cf. Carpenter, 
Dīgha Nikāya, 58–79; Walshe, The Long Discourses of the Buddha, 395–405. Translated from 
the manuscript by Trent Walker with minor changes (i.e., certain terms changed for consis-
tency throughout this article), email dated 5 November 2020. 

--- Page 22 of 27 ---
124 | Manuscript Studies
intentions, sponsored [this manuscript] in order to [reap] the bene-
fits of listening to the Dharma, both in the present and in the 
future. We make the following aspirations. Should we be born again 
in a future existence, may we have exalted wisdom to awaken to the 
exquisite Dharma. [May we] be endowed with supreme might, lofty 
in our lineage, and possessed of all marks of [prosperity],57 abun-
dantly equipped with luxuries and wealth, and a vast pomp and reti-
nue. [May we] be free from danger. [May] enemies be vanquished by 
our power. May we be free of the molestations of disease and illness, 
and be filled with pleasant bliss. May we have great longevity. May 
we fulfill the perfection of charity and moral conduct in every life to 
come until we reach the great city of Nirvana in the future.58 Lon-
gevity, beauty, happiness, and strength.
The four benefits in the last sentence (Pāli: āyu, vaṇṇa, sukha, bala) are also 
found together in the Word of the Doctrines, verse 109, which says: to those 
who always show respect and honor to people who are older and more virtu-
ous, these four benefits of longevity, beauty, happiness, and strength will 
57 Not clear in the manuscript.
58 For the Nirvana imagery in Thai tradition, see Barend J. Terwiel, “The City of Nibbāna 
in Thai Picture Books of the Three Worlds,” Contemporary Buddhism 20 (2019), Issue 1- 2: 
184–99. Translation by Trent Walker, email 5 November 2020.
Figure 6. The colophon of the Milindapañha, the Edition of Chao Pān and Chao Pom. 
Courtesy of the National Library of Thailand, manuscript Panha Tham No. 7, Milindapanha 
No. 11.
[27.130.226.161]   Project MUSE (2026-08-31 18:42 GMT)

--- Page 23 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 125
increase.59 This verse may have functioned as a moral foundation upon 
which one might learn humility and respect for the elders. The Perfections 
of Giving, or the practice of generosity through charitable work, is empha-
sized in these two paragraphs in particular. The kingdoms of Southeast 
Asia were in near continual strife with neighbors and vassals.60 Everyone 
wished to be victorious against all threats; naturally enough, jaya, “victory,” 
“success,” and the wish to vanquish enemies were part and parcel of the 
court ideology. Overall, this exordium and this colophon give us a glimpse 
of what was considered good and righteous, in lifestyle and conduct, among 
people living in Ayutthaya- era court.
Returning to the above- mentioned aspiration of donors and scribes who 
wish to be as wise as Nāgasena, the next colophon, carrying this hope, 
appears in three manuscripts, namely NL4596, NL6133, and NL4606. The 
aspirant asks not only for a heavenly rebirth, but to be wise as well:
Edited Pāli text:61
iminā puññākammena sagge sugati gāmiko tāvatiṃse nibbatteyyaṃ 
sudhammāyaṃ sanantane gato pūto bhave yattha divibhū vibhave bhave 
uppanno paññavahessaṃ cheko pucchāvisajjane yathā rājā nāgaseno yujj-
hanti yujjhabhūmiyaṃ aññamaññaṃ vivecanoti  ׀׀nibbāna paccayo hoti 
 ׀buddhaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi62 ׀
Translation:
Through this act of merit, may I be the one who goes to the happy 
realm [sugati]. May I be reborn in the heaven of the Thirty- Three 
[Tāvatiṃsa] and spend a long time in the Sudhammā hall. May I be 
59 Dhammapada, 31, verse 109.
60 According to Prince Damrong Rajanubhab, twenty- four wars were fought between Siam 
and Burma, from 1539 CE until the destruction of Ayutthaya in 1767 CE. See Damrong 
Rajanubhab, The Chronicle of Our Wars with the Burmese: Hostilities Between Siamese and Bur-
mese When Ayutthaya Was the Capital of Siam, trans. Phra Phraison Salarak Thein Subindu 
a.k.a. U Aung Thein, ed. Christopher Baker (Bangkok: White Lotus, 2001), xxii–xxiii, 3–9.
61 The syntax in this colophon is unusual. For the critical apparatus of this edited text, see 
Ooi, “Survey of the Pāli Milindapañha Manuscripts,” 169–210 at 206.
62 The last two phrases only in NL4596.

--- Page 24 of 27 ---
126 | Manuscript Studies
there, in the majesty of the divine state. May I be wise and skilled 
in answering questions in the same way the king and Nāgasena 
contested on the forum of debate, each of them sharply discerning. 
May this be the contributing cause for Nirvana. I go to the Buddha 
for refuge.
In Buddhist cosmology, the abode of the Thirty- Three (Pāli: Tāvatiṃsa) is 
the second of the six worlds of gods, the first being the abode of Four 
Heavenly Kings (Pāli: cātummahārājika).63 The chief of the gods in the 
Thirty- Three is Śakra (Pāli: Sakka).64 The Hall of Sudhammā is a distin-
guished location where gods of the Thirty- Three regularly hold their 
meetings, or go when the Dharma is preached.65 It is said that while 
Gotama Buddha was living among the gods of the Thirty- Three, he taught 
the Abhidharma, as did other previous buddhas.66 Thus, the Hall of 
Sudhammā in the abode of Thirty- Three has a special and exalted position 
in the Buddhist imagination. It is often depicted in Thai art. For example, 
it appears in the royal temple of Wat Phra Chetuphon (Wat Pho) in Bang-
kok.67 Consequently, possessing the wisdom and skill to debate in the 
63 See G. P. Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pāli Proper Names, vol. 1 (London: John Murray for 
the Government of India, 1937), 1002–4, for details of Tāvatiṃsa. 
64 For Sakka as the chief of gods [devānaṃ inda], see G. P. Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pāli 
Proper Names, vol. 2 (London: John Murray for the Government of India, 1938), 957–65.
65 For what was taught in Tāvatiṃsa, see Peter Skilling, “Dharma, Dhāraṇī, Abhidharma, 
Avadāna: What Was Taught in Trayastriṃśa?,” Annual Report of the International Research 
Institute for Advanced Buddhology 9 (2008): 37–60.
66 In the Theravāda tradition, the Abhidharma (or Higher Doctrine) is one of the divisions 
of its Pāli canon that deals with the philosophical psychology of Buddhism presented in a 
highly technical systemization of the doctrine. See Bhikkhu Bodhi, Abhidhammattha Sangaha, 
a Comprehensive Manual of Abhidhamma: Pāli Text, Translation, and Explanatory Guide (1993; 
rpt. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society, 2013), 1–20. Edward Müller, ed., The Atthasālinī: 
Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on the Dhammasaṅgaṇi (London: Pali Text Society, 1979), 
31.13–15; Bv, 92 (chapter XXV, verse 6); Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pāli Proper Names, 
2:1203–4, for details of Sudhammā.
67 See Peter Skilling, “King Rāma I and Wat Phra Chetuphon: The Buddha–Śāsanā in Early 
Bangkok,” in How Theravāda Is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities, ed. Peter Skilling, 
Jason A. Carbine, Claudio Circuzza, and Santi Pakdeekham (Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 

--- Page 25 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 127
assembly of gods inside the famed hall adds prestige to the aspiration 
expressed in the above colophon. 
However, for those who wish to be well- versed and conversant in the 
Dharma, the icon is Śāriputra, one of the Chief Disciples of Gotama Bud-
dha. The Blessed One proclaimed him to be foremost in wisdom 
(mahāpaññānaṃ yadidaṃ sāriputto), and in the Questions of King Milinda, 
Nāgasena calls him the General of the Dharma (dhammasenāpati) whenever 
he quotes the Chief Disciple.68 This aspiration can be found in these two 
colophons in a manuscript copied in 1802 CE, kept at Wat Samuh Nimit in 
Surat Thani province in southern Thailand (fig. 7). They have similar con-
tents, but the aspirations are articulated slightly differently. Below is the 
translation based on the two colophons:
Friday, the fourteenth waxing day of the tenth month, year of the 
dog, the fourth year of the decade, when 2345 years had elapsed in 
the Buddhist Era, We, servants of the Lord, the former monk 
Chuen and Mr Nak, the scribe, were replete with faith and created 
these four manuscripts of the Milinda[pañhā] to be established in 
the excellent religion of the Buddha. We, servants of the Lord, pray 
to reach the state of buddhahood in the future. In the period before 
we reach buddhahood, may we be endowed with Śāriputra’s 
2012), 297–354; Chatri Prakitnonthakaṇ, “Symbolism in the Design of Wat Phra Chetuphon 
Wimonmangkhalaraṃ (Wat Pho),” Journal of the Siam Society 102 (2014): 1–39.
68 Richard Morris, ed., The Aṅguttara- Nikāya I, 2nd ed., ed. Anthony K. Warder (London: 
Pali Text Society, 1961), 23.18; Mil, 170.
Figure 7. Colophons of the Questions of King Milinda manuscript kept at Wat Samuh 
Nimit in Chaiya District, Surat Thani Province, southern Thailand, dated 1802 CE. 
Photographs courtesy of the Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation and the Henry Ginsburg Fund.

--- Page 26 of 27 ---
128 | Manuscript Studies
intelligence. Moreover, we ask for eight boons to be granted to Phra 
Maha Nak Chao, the monk who studied and preached these four 
manuscripts of the Milinda[pañhā]. May all we imagine be achieved 
in accordance with our wishes.69
In this colophon, we see that the merit was distributed to the monk too. 
Sharing of merit after a good deed is an important aspect of Buddhist prac-
tice. The merit is generally shared with departed relatives, protective deities, 
and all sentient beings, so that they too can rejoice together. In the section 
of the Dilemmas (Meṇḍakapañha), Nāgasena explains that what is skillful 
(kusala)—a good deed, for example—is abundant (bahuka), and can thus be 
shared with many other beings. Using simile, he states that a good deed is 
like the water of the great and mighty cloud: if it were to pour down rain, 
this would satisfy the earth’s surface, and the water from the great cloud 
would spread out all around.70
Conclusion
The tradition of aspiring to become a Buddha has been present in Thailand 
since the formation of the Siamese state around the fourteenth century, as 
evidenced by epigraphic inscriptions. This survey has shown that such aspi-
ration continued to be a popular option for donors and scribes from the 
seventeenth to nineteenth centuries. The colophons examined also reveal 
that the desire to become an omniscient Buddha was expressed by all layers 
of society, not just by the nobility or by high- ranking monks.
While the donors emphasized the final goal of Nirvana, they also wished 
that the merit generated by their contributions toward the production of 
manuscripts would help them become more capable, intelligent, and fortu-
nate beings in their future lives. Their colophons also reaffirm their com-
mitment to lead a life of righteousness and to practice loving- kindness and 
69 Translated from the manuscripts by Trent Walker, email 10 November 2020.
70 Mil, 294–97; Horner, Milinda’s Questions 2, 123–28.

--- Page 27 of 27 ---
Ooi, Aspiring to Be a Buddha | 129
generosity. The idea that merits (puñña) benefit not only the donor but 
others as well can be seen as a powerful driver for the production and 
preservation of manuscripts.71
Although the Questions of King Milinda is not considered to be the word 
of the Buddha, it is regarded as Dharma and thus enjoyed a certain degree 
of popularity in Siam. Its colophons not only capture information about the 
manuscripts’ circumstances of production, but also reveal the social and 
psychological aspects of the Siamese community that preserved and trans-
mitted the text.
71 For examples of Sri Lanka manuscripts, see Stephen C. Berkwitz, “Materiality and Merit 
in Sri Lankan Buddhist Manuscripts,” in Buddhist Manuscript Cultures: Knowledge, Ritual and 
Art, ed. Stephen C. Berkwitz, Juliane Schober, and Claudia Brown (London: Routledge, 
2009), 35–49 at 43–47. 
