Source PDF File: D:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\PDF\Aspects of manuscript culture in South India [this volume is an outcome of the Workshop Production, Distribution and… (2012) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
Total Pages: 338
Health Check: PASS (avg 1726.6 chars/page)
Statistics: Chars=589581, ThaiWords=117916.2, EnglishWords=110137

--- Page 1 of 338 ---
Aspects of Manuscript Culture in South India

--- Page 2 of 338 ---
Brill’s Indological Library
Edited by
Johannes Bronkhorst
In co-operation with
Richard Gombrich, Oskar von Hinüber, 
Katsumi Mimaki, Arvind Sharma
VOLUME 40
The titles published in this series are listed at brill.nl/bil

--- Page 3 of 338 ---
Aspects of Manuscript 
Culture in South India
Edited by
Saraju Rath
LEIDEN • BOSTON
2012

--- Page 4 of 338 ---
Published with support of the International Institute for Asian Studies
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Aspects of manuscript culture in South India / edited by Saraju Rath.
    pages cm. — (Brill’s Indological library ; volume 40)
“This volume is an outcome of the workshop ‘Production, distribution and collection of 
Sanskrit manuscripts in Ancient South India’ which was organized at the International Institute 
for Asian Studies, Leiden, on 20-21 April 2007”—Preface.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-90-04-21900-7
  1. Manuscripts, Indic—India, South—History—Congresses. 2. Manuscripts, Sanskrit—
India, South—History—Congresses. 3. Palm-leaf manuscripts—India, South—Congresses. 
4. Manuscripts, Indic—Collectors and collecting—Congresses. 5. Indic literature—
Manuscripts—Congresses. I. Rath, Saraju, editor of compilation. II. Production, Distribution 
and Collection of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Ancient South India (Workshop) (2007 : Leiden, 
Netherlands) III. International Institute for Asian Studies, sponsoring body. 
 
Z106.5.I4A86 2011
091.0954’8—dc23
 
2011043268
ISSN 0925-2916
ISBN 978 90 04 21900 7 (hardback)
ISBN 978 90 04 22347 9 (e-book)
Copyright 2012 by Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Koninklijke Brill NV incorporates the imprints Brill, Global Oriental, Hotei Publishing,
IDC Publishers and Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, translated, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written permission from the publisher. 
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use is granted by Koninklijke Brill NV
provided that the appropriate fees are paid directly to The Copyright Clearance Center,
222 Rosewood Drive, Suite 910, Danvers, MA 01923, USA.
Fees are subject to change.

--- Page 5 of 338 ---
contents
v
Dedicated to
the Dutch Orientalist
Johan van Manen
(1877-1943)

--- Page 6 of 338 ---
contents
vi

--- Page 7 of 338 ---
contents
vii
 
 
Contents
Preface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ix
List of Contributors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  xiii
Chapter One.  Introduction: Manuscript Culture and Its Impact 
 
in “India”: Contours and Parameters
Jan E.M. Houben and Saraju Rath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
 
Chapter Two.  On the Johan van Manen Collection: Its Origin 
 
and Background
Saraju Rath. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   55
 
Chapter Three.  A Cultural Encounter in the Early 18th Century: 
 
The Collection of South Indian Manuscripts by the French 
 
Jesuit Fathers of the Carnatic Mission
Gérard Colas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   69
 
Chapter Four.  The South Indian Drama Manuscripts
Anna Aurelia Esposito. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   81
 
Chapter Five.  The Jaiminīya Sāmaveda Traditions and Manu- 
 
scripts in South India
Masato Fujii. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   99
 
Chapter Six.  Texts and Communities: The Manuscripts of the 
 
Lost Yāmalāṣṭakatantra
Cezary Galewicz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   119
 
Chapter Seven.  From Palmleaves to a Multimedia Databank: 
 
A Note on the ‘Bhāsa-Project’
Heike Moser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   139
 
Chapter Eight.  The Sanskrit Manuscripts in Tamilnadu
P. Perumal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   157

--- Page 8 of 338 ---
contents
viii
Chapter Nine.  Indian Exact Sciences in Sanskrit Manuscripts 
 
and Their Colophons
Kim Plofker. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   173
 
Chapter Ten.  Varieties of Grantha Script: The Date and Place of 
 
Origin of Manuscripts
Saraju Rath. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   187
 
Chapter Eleven.  From my Grandfather’s Chest of Palmleaf 
 
Books
Sreeramula Rajeswara Sarma. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   207
 
Chapter Twelve.  Rāmasubrahmaṇya’s Manuscripts: Intellectual 
 
Networks in the Kaveri Delta, 1693-1922
Dominik Wujastyk. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   235
 
Chapter Thirteen.  The Use of Manuscript Catalogues as Sources 
 
of Regional Intellectual History in India’s Early Modern 
 
Period
Kenneth G. Zysk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   253
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   289
Plates

--- Page 9 of 338 ---
preface
ix
 
 
PREFACE
Ancient India and modern South Asia are famous for the richness of 
their traditions of knowledge and culture, which, for around two millennia, were predominantly transmitted through manuscripts. Within 
this area, South India is remarkably rich in remnants and reminiscences of its former intensive participation in manuscript culture. Our 
access to ancient Indian texts, many of which have thus a history of 
over a millennium and some of over two millennia, is based on manuscripts whose lifespan is nevertheless rarely more than a few centuries. 
These manuscripts have been preserved in families of priests and traditional scholars, in monasteries, temples and libraries. Ancient texts 
in domains such as poetry, medicine, grammar etc. we study nowadays through some printed edition, but for a profound study of a 
selected text it is important to know the history and pedigree of the 
manuscripts on which a text is based. Not only the manuscripts themselves as text sources are to be studied, but also their mutual relationship, their production, distribution and collection, their participation 
in a wider oral or ritual culture. From the 19th century onwards, when 
print culture started to take over from manuscript culture, manuscripts were massively abandoned and efforts were started to collect, 
store and preserve them. In the second half of the 19th century the 
then Government of India supported these efforts and allocated funds 
for the search and collection of manuscripts, which were often privately owned in a family that had no successor for a learned father or 
grandfather. 
This volume is an outcome of the workshop “Production, distribution and collection of Sanskrit manuscripts in Ancient South India” 
which was organized at the International Institute for Asian Studies, 
Leiden, on 20-21 April 2007. The aim of the workshop was threefold: 
1. to study the production, distribution and collection of palm leaf 
manuscripts from early to modern times; 
2. to get a better picture of the ancient, pre-modern, and recent history of currently available manuscripts of the smaller and larger, 
public and private collections inside and outside India;

--- Page 10 of 338 ---
preface
x
3. to place the Johan van Manen collection of ca. 400 South Indian 
palm leaf manuscripts in a larger context. 
The current volume contains most of the papers of this workshop 
which have been updated in the light of the discussions, and an extensive introduction which places these papers in a larger context. The 
volume deals with aspects of manuscript culture in ancient and premodern South India, especially in connection with the production, 
distribution and collection of manuscripts mainly of Sanskrit texts, 
and taking into account the South Asian and Asian contexts. 
There are twelve contributions and an introductory essay. Most 
contributions have been presented, in a preliminary form, at the 
workshop, but two, the one by A. Esposito and the one by H. Moser, 
have been invited after the seminar. Also the introductory essay, by 
my husband Jan E.M. Houben (EPHE, Paris) and myself, has been 
written later in order to deal with larger theoretical and historical 
issues. The twelve contributions that follow the introductory essay 
deal mainly with concrete (South Indian) manuscript collections and 
concrete problems such as the script, the dating of manuscripts, the 
search for manuscripts in order to establish an unedited text, setting 
up an electronic data base with regard to a group of manuscripts, etc. 
The editor expresses her thanks to the institutions and persons that 
have supported the organisation of the workshop which was at the 
basis of this book, the J. Gonda foundation (KNAW, Amsterdam), the 
Leids Universiteitsfonds (LUF, Leiden), the School of Asian, African 
and Amerindian Studies (CNWS, Leiden), and, last but not least, the 
International Institute for Asian Studies (IIAS, Leiden). Special thanks 
are due to the ever helpful staff of the IIAS and its successive Directors, 
Prof. Dr. Wim Stokhof, Prof. Dr. Max Sparreboom, and Dr. Philippe 
Peycam, as well as to Deputy Director Dr. Manon Osseweijer and Drs. 
Anna Yeadell who supported not only the workshop but also the elaboration of its papers into a volume on manuscript culture in South 
India. She expresses her thanks to Professor Chistopher Minkowski, 
Boden Professor of Sanskrit, University of Oxford, for giving a 
thought-provoking introductory lecture on The lives of Manuscripts 
and the defects of Scribes. The opening recitation and melodious chant 
from the Ṛgveda and Sāmaveda by Pdt. Shri Chaitanya Kale, Maha
rashtra (India), made the occasion graceful and deserve a special 
thankful mention. Sincere thanks goes to Dr. Dory Heilijgers, Librar

--- Page 11 of 338 ---
preface
xi
ian, and Drs. Raju Bakker, staff of the then Kern Institute, for their 
continuous assistance. The editorial advice of an anonymous reviewer 
of Brill publishers is gratefully acknowledged. Finally, the editor 
records her gratitude to Brill publishers for accepting the volume in 
their series. 
Dr. Saraju Rath
International Institute for Asian Studies
Leiden

--- Page 12 of 338 ---
preface
xii

--- Page 13 of 338 ---
list of contributors
xiii
 
 
List of Contributors
Dr. Gérard Colas 
Directeur de recherche CNRS 
Centre d’Études de l’Inde et de l’Asie du Sud 
école des Hautes études en Sciences Sociales 
54, boulevard Raspail 
75006 Paris 
France
Dr. Anna Aurelia Esposito 
Universität Würzburg 
Lehrstuhl für Indologie / Südasienkunde 
Philosophiegebäude, Zi. 8U6 
Am Hubland 
97074 Würzburg 
Germany
Prof. Dr. Masato Fujii 
Institute for Research in Humanities, 
Kyoto University 
Ushinomiya, Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, 
Kyoto 606-8501
Japan
Dr. Cezary Galewicz 
Adjunct Professor
Department of Indology 
Institute of Oriental Philology
Jagiellonian University 
Al. Mickiewicza 9/11 
31-120 Krakow
Poland

--- Page 14 of 338 ---
list of contributors
xiv
Prof. Dr. Jan E.M. Houben
Directeur d’études “Sources et Histoire de la Tradition Sanskrite” 
école Pratique des Hautes études, SHP 
À la Sorbonne, 45-47, rue des écoles, 
75005 Paris
France
Dr. Heike Moser 
Universität Tübingen 
Seminar für Indologie 
Gartenstr. 19 
72074 Tübingen 
Germany
Dr. P. Perumal
Conservator and Librarian 
Sarasvati Mahal Library, 
Thanjavur-613009 
Tamilnadu
India
Dr. Kim Plofker
Visiting Assistant Professor 
Department of Mathematics
Union College, 807 Union St.
Schenectady NY 12308
USA
Dr. Saraju Rath
International Institute for Asian Studies (IIAS)
Post Box No. 9500
2300 RA Leiden
The Netherlands
Prof. Dr. Sreeramula Rajeswar Sarma 
Professor Emeritus, Aligarh University 
Höhenstrasse 28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40227 Düsseldorf 
Germany

--- Page 15 of 338 ---
list of contributors
xv
Dr. Dominik Wujastyk
Institut für Südasien-, Tibet- und Buddhismuskunde 
Universität Wien 
Spitalgasse 2-4, Hof 2, Eingang 2.1 
A-1090 Vienna 
Austria
Dr. Kenneth G. Zysk
Associate Professor
Department of Cross-Cultural and Regional Studies
University of Copenhagen
Asian Studies Section
Artillerivej 86
DK-2300 Copenhagen S
Denmark

--- Page 16 of 338 ---
list of contributors
xvi

--- Page 17 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
1
 
 
CHAPTER ONE
Introduction 
Manuscript Culture and its impact in “India”: 
Contours and Parameters
Jan E.M. Houben and Saraju Rath
1.  Introducing Indian, Including South Indian, 
Manuscript Culture
1.1  For around two millennia, India transmitted its knowledge and 
culture through manuscripts. This is not just a marginal and isolated 
curiosity in the history of Indian science and culture, but a determining factor in the rich heritage of India’s traditions. Modern scholarship is well aware of the profound and multifaceted impact of print 
culture on intellectual traditions, on the arts and sciences, and on the 
construction of social and political communities. On the basis of various studies it is also well known that in an oral environment where no 
writing is used, traditions of knowledge and culture have distinctive 
features that change significantly once these oral traditions become 
literary traditions. There is no similar body of research on manuscript 
culture. 
Moreover, our understanding of print culture and its impact, for 
which Elizabeth Eisenstein’s The Printing Press as an Agent of Change 
(1979) is the classical study, is predominantly based on research of 
western and more specifically European history.1 Oral culture, in 
1  Eisenstein 1979: 9 note 18: “As noted in my preface, the term ‘print culture’ is 
used to refer only to post-Gutenberg developments in the West. How printing 
affected pre-Gutenberg Asia must be left to others to investigate.” Two decades after 
its publication the importance of Eisenstein’s work in print culture scholarship is 
confirmed by a number of studies “challenging Eisenstein” (Hudson 2002); but even 
the study which “makes the boldest claims to be defying the orthodoxies of previous 
scholarship,” Adrian Johns The Nature of the Book (1998), agrees that “studying the 
physical book provides one significant, even essential, key to unlocking the intellectual progress of Western thought” (Hudson 2002: 84). In Johns’ own words (1998: 
10-19), his problem with Eisenstein is that among three features of print culture—
standardization, dissemination and fixity—she focuses on fixity, which, however, as

--- Page 18 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
2
either a pre-literary or a non-literary context, we understand on the 
basis of the works of Eric A. Havelock (1903-1988), Walter J. Ong 
(1912-2003), and Jack Goody. 
Eric A. Havelock, a British classicist, discovered that there is a sharp 
divide between Greek literature from the 4th century bce onward, 
influenced by the gradually more and more intensive use of writing, 
and Greek literature before the 4th century bce, which was still exclusively or predominantly oral (and hence in a style appropriate for 
orality).2 Father Walter J. Ong, S.J., who was professor of English and 
later of Humanities at St. Louis University, Missouri, from 1955 to 
1991, published major studies in cultural history with a focus on oral 
culture in contrast with literacy. Jack Goody is retired professor at 
Cambridge University interested in the impact on society of agriculture, urbanization and technologies of communication. He did fieldwork in Africa, especially in northern Ghana. Without much 
familiarity with basic results of more than a century of intensive 
research on India, he has tried to extrapolate his theoretical results to 
Asia including India.3 
1.2  For “India,” in the classical sense of the word,4 primary sources 
on manuscript culture are more than abundant, although very 
unevenly distributed over the relevant periods. Because of their limited lifespan in India’s tropical climate, manuscripts older than three 
to four hundred years are rare. This applies especially to South India, 
since manuscripts in the north of the Indian subcontinent and even 
more manuscripts (with Indic language texts) in Central Asia have a 
better chance to survive long due to the dryness of the climate. Indeed, 
the oldest preserved manuscripts on birch bark and palm leaf are 
those discovered around a century ago in Turfan and other places in 
Johns tries to show, was not so easily achieved but required centuries of effort and 
negotiation and is even at present more “a matter of convention and of trust, of culture and practice” (Johns 1998: 633). The words Eisenstein used to characterize print 
culture were, however, not the trio “standardization, dissemination and fixity,” but 
the following list: “dissemination, standardization, reorganization, data collection, 
preservation, and amplification and reinforcement” (Eisenstein 1979: 43-129), 
among which “preservation” comes closest to, but is definitely not identical with, 
Johns’ “fixity.” 
2  Havelock’s most important publication in this field is The Muse Learns to Write 
(1986), but his ideas started to develop earlier (e.g., 1957 and 1963). 
3  See Staal 1986; Falk 1990, 1993: 324-327. 
4  Cf. Renou & Filliozat 1949-1953; geographically, classical India would correspond roughly to the Indian subcontinent or to South Asia including Afghanistan.

--- Page 19 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
3
and around the Tarim Basin (currently in the Chinese province 
Xinjiang), and in Northern Pakistan (Gilgit). Discoveries over the last 
fifteen years of remnants of even older Indic manuscripts on birch 
bark in the ancient region of Gandhāra (modern Pakistan and 
Afghanistan) have recently led to a new upsurge of interest in the early 
Buddhist and other texts and of the early history of writing in this 
area.5 Perhaps this has in turn contributed to a relative neglect of other 
regions important for South Asian manuscript culture, such as South 
India where early manuscript writing must have started not or not 
much later than in Gandhāra, though there is little hope that equally 
ancient remnants will ever be found. It is remarkable that the palm 
leaf for Central Asian manuscripts, dated to around the 3rd to the 7th 
century ce, must have originated in the South where the palm from 
which it is produced (Corypha umbraculifera Linn.) grows in abundance. The writing on them was nevertheless done in North India or 
in Central Asia.6 In sculpture, the earliest representations of writing 
depict wooden planks which were coated with wax for this pur- 
pose.7 
5  See, for instance, Salomon 1999; Baums forthc. 
6  Palm leaves of documents found in Central Asia were apparently imported 
from the South where the raw material, the leaves of the Corypha palm, was abundantly available. It is likely that these palm leaves were imported from South India 
(over land) or Sri Lanka (involving transport over sea), although no direct evidence 
is available for such transports. As palm leaves need to undergo extensive treatment 
before they become suitable for writing they must have been rather precious in the 
North, as can be deduced from the presence of numerous re-used manuscripts (palimpsests), cf. L. Sander 1968: 25-27. It is to be noted that the conclusions of A.F.R. 
Hoernle (1900) regarding the relationship between the Corypha palm or Śrītāla 
(Corypha umbraculifera L., syn. “wilde lontar boom”, Hinzler 1993: 469) and the 
Palmyra palm or Tāla (Borassus flabellifer L., syn. Lontarus domesticus Gaertn., Balinese rontal or lontar), often referred to as established facts, are to be reviewed in the 
light of Moore & Dransfield (1979) and Jahn (2006). Although the palm leaf writing 
material came from the South, no southern scripts or (Buddhist) texts were found in 
the Turfan collections studied by Sander. Can we conclude that southern Buddhist 
schools, if they had any independent existence, were not authoritative in the North? 
Nevertheless, the use of palm leaf from the South as writing material in the North 
strongly suggests that palm leaves were also intensively used for writing in the South 
(South India and/or Sri Lanka), probably a little earlier than the oldest palm leaf 
manuscripts found in the North, although no early specimens of palm leaf manuscripts have been preserved in South India. Useful observations on palm leaf manuscripts in various Indian languages can be found in the volume edited by Hikosaka 
et al., 1995. 
7  Since wax-coated wooden planks were also the main writing material for 
ephemeral writing in “the West” since antiquity (an early literary reference is Homer’s Iliad VI.169), “India” was on this point and in this early period remarkably sim-

--- Page 20 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
4
Among currently available collections of manuscripts, many originated as late as in the 19th century and some, such as the Sarasvati 
Mahal library in Thanjavur (Tanjore), considerably earlier. Libraries 
did exist in India much earlier, as is clear on the basis of inscriptional 
evidence. A copper plate grant of king Trailokyamalla (Nāgai, Karna
taka, 1058 ce) is often mentioned to illustrate this. It specifies the distribution of land to the staff of a temple college as follows: 
35 mattar of land under the dam at Aratura and Diggavige (lower Cave) 
at Nāgavāvi to the expounder of Bhaṭṭadarśana, 30 mattar of land to 
the expounder of Nyāya, 45 mattar to the expounder of Prabhākara 
and 30 mattar to each librarian.8 
From this we understand that the librarians (six in number, as stated 
elsewhere in the grant) were on a similar remuneration scale as the 
teachers. Many other inscriptions throughout India testify to the regular funding of educational centres, small and big, with restricted or 
wide access, etc., where texts are usually learned by heart by reciting 
them until they are fully mastered.9 
ilar to “the West” (cf. Sreeramula R. Sarma 1985). A scribe with wax-coated writing 
planks and next to him a scribe with a leather scroll are probably represented in a 
Mesopotamian sculpture of the 7th cent. bce (“Stone panel from the South-West 
Palace of Sennacherib (Room 28, Panel 9)” at www.britishmuseum.org under 
explore highlights). An early Indian representation of a scribe with a writing plank is 
found in a Buddhist sculpture in Nagarjunakonda (Colour Plate 1a, 1b, 1c). A general overview of writing materials used in Ancient India is given in Sircar 1965: 61ff 
“Chapter III: Writing materials.” Literary evidence for various other writing materials is discussed in Sarma 1986; also scientific instruments such as the astrolabe provided a basis for writing: Sarma 2008: 240ff. and 257ff. The importance of the scribe 
in the court in early India is briefly indicated in the section on decrees 
(śāsanādhikāra), Arthaśāstra 2.10 (Kangle 1986, I: 48; II: 92; III: 88ff). The scribe is 
expected “to have the qualities of a minister (amātya-saṁpadopetaḥ), he should be 
conversant with all conventions (sarva-samaya-vid), be quick in composing (āśugranthaḥ), have agreeable handwriting (cārv-akṣaraḥ), and be capable of reading 
aloud a document (lekha-vācana-samarthaḥ).” The scribe remains important at the 
court in subsequent centuries as is clear from a text such as the Lekhapaddhati of 
pre-sultanate Gujarat (Strauch 2002, Prasad 2007). 
8  Datta 1970 : 42; Nair 1998: 143; Scharfe 2002: 184; Scharfe takes 1 mattar as 4 
acres. 30 mattar would then correspond to almost 500 m2. 
9  Scharfe 2002: 183ff gives several examples from South India. We found several 
examples from the north as well, for instance the following two from Orissa: (1) the 
Asankhali plates (Mayurbhañj dist. Orissa), dated 1225 Śaka = 1302/03 ce, document king Narasimha II’s donation of land for the construction of two colleges 
(maṭha) for Veda and Vyākaraṇa: (plate 5, line 201) vedamaṭhārthaṁ sapta vāṭikā 
[ḥ], vyākaraṇamaṭhārthaṁ daśa vātikā[ḥ] ; titles attached to the names of the donees 
such as pāṭhin, tripāṭhin suggest that the teachers had fully interiorized the texts 
(D.C. Sircar, EI 31 (1955-56): 109-128); (2) the Sakhigopal copper plates (Puri dist.,

--- Page 21 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
5
At present, manuscripts are kept in South Asia’s libraries and 
musea10 and in libraries throughout the world. For many of these collections there are catalogues, and as early as in 1891 a “catalogue of 
catalogues” appeared from the hand of Theodor Aufrecht, soon followed by a second volume by the same author in 1896 in order to take 
into account catalogues that could not be included in volume one. A 
New Catalogus Catalogorum project started in 1935 at the University 
of Madras and gained momentum in the 1950s, under the guidance of 
V. Raghavan. Nineteen volumes have appeared since 1949 covering 
Sanskrit titles from A up to, at the end of volume nineteen, Mahyā
didānaprayoga.11 Studies of specific manuscripts of specific texts and 
manuscript collections are available, 12 and some studies dealing with 
Orissa), dated 1151-52 śaka = 1229-30 ce, record the donation of land for a vedamaṭha, a vyākaraṇa-maṭha and a purāṇa-maṭha (9 vāṭī, 3 to each) and also to a 
bhad-vddha-maṭha (?), (EI 37 (1967-68): 317-332). See further Rath 2011. 
10  According to Sheldon Pollock 2006: 558 “over thirty million manuscripts are 
still extant (eight million in Rajasthan alone)”; in a note he refers to “the Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts” without further specification. According to a paper 
recently presented at the International Conference on Academic Libraries (ICAL2009), the total number of mss in India is 5.000.000 (Gaur & Chakraborty 2009); to 
this number, estimates for Indian mss. abroad and those not yet catalogued are to be 
added. 
11  According to its title this is a guide to the ceremonial donation of objects such 
as the earth.
12  Katre 1954, Appendix III “On some important manuscripts and critical editions” gives a list of fifteen domains of textual criticism and briefly discusses the 
manuscripts important in them. Most studies of Indian and Central Asian are undertaken in the context of textual criticism and their main aim is to establish historically 
correct texts. Textual criticism of Indian and Indic texts has been able to advance on 
the methodological basis of centuries of classical textual criticism which concerns, 
however, only one typical situation: that in which the production of the text is separated from the critical study of the text through several historical ruptures (Houben 
2009b: 82-83). A large number of the Indian and Indic texts transmitted in manuscripts participate, or participated for a considerable time, in some lively oral or scientific or ritual tradition, so that the strongly preferred situation in classical textual 
criticism, that of an “uncontaminated” lineage of manuscripts, is quite rare in India. 
By the same token, the ritual, cultural, scientific context of a text, apart from commentaries and parallel texts, often provide a predictability of incomplete or problematic passages which allow “higher textual criticism” and even convincing 
reconstruction on a quite limited manuscript basis (cf. Colas 2009, Houben 2009b; 
M. Witzel, 1972, 2004, reconstructs the Kaṭha-Āraṇyaka on the basis of the 
“Zwangsläufichkeit” of the text; on the special literary conditions of scientific texts 
cp. Sarma 2008, Plofker 2008). One may accordingly wonder to what extent methods 
and terminology of classical textual criticism can provide a fruitful basis in the 
domain of Indian and Indic texts which is often entirely neglected in recent publications (Maniaci 2005; Muzerelle 1985, extended and updated at http://vocabulaire.
irht.cnrs.fr/pages/vocab2.htm). A symptomatic case is Muzerelle’s overspecialized

--- Page 22 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
6
the material basis of manuscripts and their production.13 There is a 
smaller number of studies dealing with manuscript culture in the 
sense of the immediate context of the production and use of manuscripts.14 
With all these collections, catalogues and studies of manuscripts 
and of the texts they contain, a study focused on manuscript culture 
and its cultural impact in India—a study in which this enormous area 
and its original developments are not forcefully fitted into pre-conceived theorical frameworks based on external data—is still absent.15 
There are at the most dispersed observations in indological and especially in buddhological studies that point to an impact of writing on 
culture in the widest sense. For manuscript culture in India, or South 
and South-East Asia, there is nothing that can even distantly be compared with what Eisenstein’s 1979 study has been for print in the 
West. There is hence no proper basis to understand the extent and 
impact of some two thousand years of intensive manuscript culture in 
India, nor of what preceded and what gradually superceded it: orality—including highly sophisticated forms of oral transmission which 
partly survive till the present day—and, especially from the 19th century onwards, print culture. 
1.3  The present volume contains twelve original studies (chapters 
2-13) of important and remarkable elements and aspects of this still 
definition of the codex as “Livre formé de feuilles pliées en deux et assemblées en un 
ou plusieurs cahiers cousus par un fil le long de la pliure” (1985: 59) thus excluding 
the majority of Indian manuscript bundles although early catalogues did not hesitate 
to refer to these as “codices”. Nor would the etymological meaning of Latin codex as 
“block” suit a limitation of this term to European manuscript-books and an exclusion of the Indian palm leaf manuscript bundle bound between two planks. 
13  See above, notes 6 and 7. Janert 1995 gives a bibliography and discussion with 
reference to publications till 1955 under the following three main headings: I. Bibliography; II. On oral and written text-transmission in India; III. On writing materials 
in India. Prajapati 2004 lists bibliographic references under six headings: Scripts, 
Writing materials, Preservation, Manuscripts/Catalogues, Era-Data, Textual criticism. A recent study on correction-signs and other subsidiary signs employed in 
inscriptions and in manuscripts, see Einicke 2009. 
14  Pollock 2007; Berkwitz, Schober & Brown 2009; a special form of “improper” 
use of (manuscript-)books is found in the cult of books in Buddhism: Gregory Schopen 1975 (= 2005: 25-61); on Purāṇas and the meritorious work of copying them: 
Mackenzie Brown 1986. 
15  Cf. Pollock 2007: “It has astonished me to realize, as I have come to realize 
during the course of research on science and scholarship in India 1500-1800, how 
few sustained analyses are available of the core dimensions of manuscript culture in 
the subcontinent, aside from old-style text criticism.”

--- Page 23 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
7
very insufficiently known and understood cultural phenomenon, 
manuscript culture, with a focus on Sanskrit manuscripts in South 
India.16 In this introductory essay we will briefly sketch the contours 
and parameters of Indian manuscript culture. In this context, South 
India forms an inseparable but distinguishable part of the Indian 
world,17 where specific cultural and (socio-) linguistic conditions 
apply18 (for instance, the prevalence of Dravidian languages and the 
separate development of Southern Brāhmī script after an initially 
quite homogeous, “pan-Indian” Aśokan Brāhmī). These contours, in 
particular for the period of the first transition from orality to (manuscript) writing in various religious and cultural domains, have not 
remained undisputed. We will also briefly deal with parameters of the 
interaction between manuscript writing and intellectual traditions, 
arts and sciences, and social and political communities, or, to put it 
briefly, with the context and the wide-ranging impact of manuscript 
culture on India’s intellectual and cultural history. A Timeline will be 
given to summarize our conclusions (paragraph 4.2), before we introduce the twelve studies of this volume (paragraph 4.3).
16  G. Colas, present volume, deals with a collection of Indian manuscripts that 
were among the earliest ones acquired in Europe and among those in the Sanskrit, 
Tamil and Telugu language especially on the latter. Fujii, present volume, deals with 
manuscripts of Vedic texts and accompanying ritual manuals in Sanskrit and Malayalam. 
17  Pollock 2006 is an impressive comparative study on classical literary history, 
including aspects of manuscript culture, focusing on South India, in particular Karnataka to which the main data pertain. The generalisations and extrapolations to the 
entire Indian world are not always justified. For instance, the proposed term “hyperglossia” (2006: 65 etc.) which is not well demarcated vis à vis the established terms 
“diglossia” and “bilingualism,” evokes a situation in the south which does not apply 
when Sanskrit is juxtaposed not to Dravidian but to Prakritic or MIA/NIA languages.
18  After having been instrumental in establishing Sanskrit as “cosmopolitan” language in science, literature and religion in the first millennium, manuscript culture 
formed also the domain where a remarkable turn towards vernaculars could find 
recognition in the early second millennium: Pollock 2007. “Tamil country,” Pollock 
observed one year earlier (Pollock 2006: 100), “presents a more complex and contested history of literary culture than anywhere else in South Asia. Yet here, too, 
there is little doubt that major transformations of literary culture occurred in the 
centuries just before and after the beginning of the second millennium.”

--- Page 24 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
8
2.  Manuscript Culture in India: When and How Did It 
Start and Develop?
2.1  Even if the profound impact of manuscript culture in India, just 
as the profound impact of print culture in contemporary Europe, was 
only very dimly understood by the eighteenth and nineteenth century 
western explorers of India’s rich literary heritage in the domains of 
art, philosophy, science and religion, these early pioneers of the scientific study of India were much interested in the first beginnings of 
writing, which was generally considered as a sign of “civilization.” The 
nature and date of these first beginnings and especially their relationship with writing traditions outside India have been intensely disputed. Western scholars who had a chance to stay in India reported 
impressive feats of memorization by traditionally educated Indians,19 
but what this implied for the transmission of knowledge and literature 
in India they and especially their colleagues who could not come to 
India were either unable or unwilling to understand.20 As long as literacy was considered as a necessary precondition of civilization, both 
Indian and western scholars who were convinced of a long history of 
India’s literary culture have frantically searched for direct or indirect 
evidence of early writing in South Asia. To some it became gradually 
clear, however, that sophisticated civilization was possible also with19  Harry Falk’s work on writing in ancient India (1993) contains several references to western scholars who could not or cannot imagine that enormous texts such 
as the Ṛgveda were committed to memory and faithfully transmitted orally. On 
p. 321-324 Falk refers not only to a very late case of a western indological scholar 
(W. Kirfel) who cannot imagine the faithful memorization and oral transmission of 
large texts, but also to a number of testimonies of western scholars, from Colebrooke 
(1837) onwards, who went to India and observed how students learned texts and 
pandits reproduced them from memory. 
20  Falk 1993: 321 refers to W. Kirfel who insisted that a long period of oral transmission without writing is impossible so that, whatever the data and testimonies or 
their absence, we must assume there was a written tradition parallel with that oral 
tradition also for the oldest periods. Also Johannes Bronkhorst assumes very early 
written forms of the Veda when he proposes that the word-by-word version (Padapāṭha) was written down “from its beginning” (Bronkhorst 1982: 184). In his latest 
contribution to the discussion (2002) he focuses on the traditions of grammar and 
philosophy. Although aware of Scharfe’s Education in Ancient India, which appeared 
in the same year and to which he refers once, he does not reply to Scharfe’s arguments to reject the “originally written Padapāṭha” theory (2002: 10f) nor does he 
reply to Scharfe’s explanations of early orality in India (2002, chapters 2, 12, 13). On 
this theme see now also Scharfe 2009 and Houben 2009b.

--- Page 25 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
9
out writing. Or, in the negative formulation of Jean Filliozat (1963): 
“In a country of oral education, illiterates are not all ignorants.”21 
2.2  A very early, so far not convincingly deciphered and possibly 
largely pictographic system of writing found in the area of the Indus 
civilization in the north-west of the South Indian subcontinent, ca. 
2600-1900 bce,22 has no demonstrable link with Kharoṣṭhī and 
Brāhmī, the two earliest “syllabic alphabetic” scripts for Indian languages.23 The earliest tangible and indisputable evidence of a significant use of writing in South Asia is found in the pillar and rock edicts 
of king Aśoka, ca. 250 bce24 Are the Aśokan inscriptions then also the 
first writings in South Asian scripts after the disappearance of the 
Indus script? 
With this question we enter into a difficult problem area. The main 
issue is that the content and nature of ancient Indian texts point to an 
elaborate phase of Vedic literary production which must have largely 
preceded early Buddhism, which in turn preceded the writings of king 
21  J. Filliozat 1963: 156 “Dans un pays à pédagogie orale, les analphabètes ne sont 
pas tous des ignorants.” 
22  Parpola 1994 gives a comprehensive overview of the signs and analyzes them 
in the light of the hypothesis that it is a script of a Dravidian language. Whether the 
Indus symbols encode any language at all—on phonemic, syllabic or word level—has 
been questioned: Farmer et al. 2004. 
23  As it was observed by Salomon (1998: 15): “The Indic system of writing is difficult to classify in terms of traditional typology of writing systems which recognizes 
three main script types, namely, logographic, syllabic, and alphabetic.” Scripts of the 
type of Brāhmī, Grantha and Devanāgarī, which give—ideally—a one to one representation of each phoneme, consonant and vowel, are typologically far removed 
from other (non-alphabetic) syllabaries, where characters do not show any particular 
resemblance to each other if the syllable referred to shares certain phonemes (vowels 
or consonants). That is why the term “alphasyllabary” (Bright 1999), which is perhaps suitable for old-Persian cuneiform and Aramaic, is not a very felicitous one for 
Brāhmī and derived scripts, as it would suggest the script is basically a syllabary that 
shares some characteristics with the alphabet. In the encyclopedic Daniels & Bright 
1996 we find, somewhat confusingly, both “alphasyllabary” and “abugida” used to 
refer to writing systems of the Brāhmī-type and the Ethiopian Ge’ez script. From a 
functional point of view, however, Brāhmī etc. are better characterized as “syllabically organized alphabetic writing systems,” or, more compactly, as “syllabic alphabets” (for the term, proposed with a different argumentation, cp. Coulmas 1996: 483; 
2003: 131f). The main point for now is that Kharoṣṭhī and Brāhmī are apparently 
typologically far removed from the still undeciphered Indus script or symbol system. 
24  The first extensive authoritative description is found in CII, vol. I, ed. by A. 
Cunningham, 1877, revised ed. by E. Hultzsch, 1925, reprint 1990. Introductory 
overviews accessible to students are Bloch 1950 and Sircar 1957. Falk 2006 is important as a fresh study of Aśokan sites and artefacts.

--- Page 26 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
10
Aśoka. Not only Vedic literature, also Buddhist literature and the literature of another major ancient religious tradition of the South 
Indian continent, Jainism, are full of indications of oral conditions of 
the early composition and transmission of their precious ancient texts. 
In spite of these indications, investigators since the nineteenth century of the transmitted texts and associated knowledge systems such 
as grammar have found it difficult to imagine that they really originated in a purely oral environment. 
The Aśokan inscriptions throughout the Indian subcontinent are 
mostly in an early Magadhan Prakritic (MIA or Middle Indo-Aryan) 
language or dialect and written in Brāhmī, those in the north-west are 
in a language closer to Sanskrit and written in the Kharoṣṭhī script, 
two are in scripts and languages that did not originate in South Asia: 
one in Greek, and one, bilingual, in Greek and Aramaic. With regard 
to one of the two ancient scripts for Indian languages, Kharoṣṭhī, its 
dependence on Aramaic is generally accepted. It is hence natural to 
assume that earlier stages of Kharoṣṭhī, preceding the attested form of 
the Aśokan inscriptions and perhaps written on perishable material, 
are lost. From the Aśokan inscriptions onward till the, recently discovered, earliest attested manuscripts of the first century bce—first 
centuries ce, Kharoṣṭhī appears as an administrative and commercial 
script, which was also employed for writing Buddhist texts. 
It is, however, Brāhmī that would at first sight be a more likely candidate for being the script in which Vedic and Sanskritic texts would 
have been written down, to make up, at least hypothetically, for the 
absence of written testimonies of the elaborate early Vedic and 
Sanskrit texts. And indeed, a detailed theory of a gradual development 
of Brāhmī, on the basis of a “northsemitic” example, and of an early, 
pre-Aśokan form suitable for Sanskrit, was proposed by the indologist 
and paleographist Georg Bühler (1837-1898). This theory was widely 
accepted, for instance by Monier-Williams in his introduction to his 
Sanskrit-English dictionary (1899) where it has found, till today, wide 
and prominent exposure. In this theory, all Brāhmī characters are 
derived from Phoenician letters, either directly or through turning, 
inverting, opening or closing. According to Bühler, Sanskrit grammarians contributed significantly to the early development of the 
script. It is argued that the Aśokan inscriptions, which show variations in script-styles, presuppose a long development of pre-Aśokan 
Brāhmī writing. In the formulation of Monier-Williams (1899: xxvi), 
the Brāhmī script “must have been the first kind of writing used when

--- Page 27 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
11
Sanskrit literature began to be written down (perhaps six centuries 
bc)”. This pre-Aśokan Brāhmī would have been used for writing 
Sanskrit and Vedic texts, although no traces of such early Sanskrit 
writing have been found. The—unattested—pre-Aśokan use of 
Brāhmī would explain how there apparently was an extensive reading 
public in the time of Aśoka when he set up a program of inscriptions 
throughout his extensive empire. 
In a comprehensive review of the available evidence and all major 
contributions to the discussion till the 1990s, Harry Falk (1993) demonstrated that, in fact, accepting the existence of Vedic texts long 
before Aśoka does not necessitate the acceptance of equally early writing. Falk argued, moreover, that the homogeneity and regularity of 
Aśoka’s Brāhmī are such that it must have been an invention under 
his rule, after the example of the royal inscriptions of Iran. In this he is 
in line with the conclusion reached by Goyal in 1979. 
Falk demonstrates that the earliest Brāhmī, from Aśoka onwards, 
was designed, just as Kharoṣṭhī, only for the Prakritic dialects current 
in that time, but not for Sanskrit. Here, as on a few other points, Falk 
developed (and significantly modified) the position which the French 
Assyriologist Joseph Halévy (1827-1917) had adopted and later on 
vehemently defended against Bühler. It was Halévy’s significant observation on the basis of inscriptional evidence that from Aśoka onwards 
it took several centuries before the script was adapted to the requirements of Sankrit through various tentative amendments (esp. with 
regard to word concluding consonants, double consonants and ligatures, the representation of , ,  and ḥ, which do not occur in Prakrits 
or MIA dialects). If Sanskrit grammarians had contributed seriously 
to the development of a script in Aśoka’s time or, as Bühler had proposed, before Aśoka, they could have solved easily (Falk: within a 
week) all the problems for which we have the testimony of trials for 
two to four centuries.25 The original creation of Brāhmī (and of 
25  Falk 1993: 134-135: “Da man eigentlich voraussetzen sollte, daß ein Grammatiker des Sanskrit, der sich daran macht, eine Schrift zu erfinden, auch an seine 
eigene Sprache denkt, dann gibt es keinerlei Erklärung dafür, warum weder 
Kharoṣṭhī noch Brāhmī schließende Konsonanten darstellen können. ... Die Entwicklung des Sanskrit-Schreibens selbst spricht jedoch die deutlichste Sprache: volle 
zwei Jahrhunderte mußten nach Aśoka vergehen, bevor man zaghaft und voller Fehl
versuche sich an die Hochsprache wagte. Mehr als vier Jahrhunderte dauerte es gar, 
bis Sanskrit so geschrieben werden konnte, wie wir es gewohnt sind. Jeder an das 
Systematisieren gewohnte Grammatiker hätte, bei auch nur lauem Interesse, die 
Probleme in einer Woche aus der Welt geschafft.”

--- Page 28 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
12
Kharoṣṭhī) for an early Prakritic language and its slow adaptation to 
Sanskrit afterwards allow us to infer, “with an almost mathematical 
certainty,”26 that Vedic and Sanskrit texts were not written down 
before Aśoka and must therefore have been fixed in an alternative way 
through oral transmission and memory culture. 
Expanding and adapting the argument of Bühler’s opponent 
Halévy, Falk (1993: 337ff) accepted that Brāhmī did not exist before 
Aśoka: it must have been designed by specialists under the rule of 
Aśoka, who were already familiar with Kharoṣṭhī which was derived 
from Aramaic. This had been proposed by Goyal (1979), it was the 
conclusion reached by von Hinüber in his investigations of the beginnings of script in ancient India (1989) and it was still more or less 
confirmed in Salomon’s review “On the Origin of the Early Indian 
Scripts” (1995). We can call it the “invention theory” of the origin of 
Brāhmī. Falk (1993: 165) argues for acceptance of this theory by refuting or subverting the arguments Bühler used for accepting a considerable period of development of Brāhmī before Aśoka. For Bühler the 
variation and fast development seen in the Brāhmī of Aśokan inscriptions point to a considerable period of development preceding Aśoka. 
For Falk, however, the same facts—variation and fast development—
indicate that it is a very young script, just created on the request of 
Aśoka. For Falk it is precisely the pace of developments within the less 
than 20 years of Aśoka’s inscriptions which shows how fast a script 
can progress, and which hence takes away the necessity of assuming a 
long period of preceding development. Falk further points out that it 
is significant that the texts of royal inscriptions do not employ terms 
pointing to the literacy of the public for whom they are intended. On 
the contrary, they refer to vacanika “proclaimers” who have to read a 
message aloud for an apparently analphabetic public. 
Falk’s meticulous argumentation, and, in general, the “invention 
theory,” would have remained perfectly convincing if indeeed there 
would have been no scratch of objective evidence of the use of Brāhmī 
script before Aśoka. Such evidence was indeed absent in the time of 
26  From these premisses also Halévy concluded “avec une certitude presque 
mathématique” (Halévy referred to after Falk 1993: 129) that Vedic and Sanskrit 
texts were not written down before Aśoka. Since faithful transmission without writing—through orality and memory culture—was not a theoretical option for Halévy, 
this automatically led him to accept a subsequent conclusion: that the Vedic hymns 
were composed after Alexander the Great. With this second conclusion, untenable in 
the light of extensive comparative linguistic, ritual and cultural-historical evidence, 
he made it easy to indologists to reject at once his entire view on Indian scripts.

--- Page 29 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
13
Bühler and still at the time Falk was writing his book. Soon after or 
rather during its publication, however, archeological research results 
were published which point unequivocally to the use of Brāhmī script 
before Aśoka.27 The findings of pottery with graffiti inscriptions in 
Brāhmī script from strata securely dated to the fourth century bce or 
a little earlier give a fatal blow to the “invention theory.”28 In this light 
the statements of Megasthenes may have to be reconsidered. The current consensus is that this Greek envoy of Seleukos to the court of 
Candragupta Maurya in Magadha’s capital Pāṭaliputra testifies to the 
complete absence of writing in India at his time, ca. 300 bce Mega
sthenes makes his statement with regard to legal cases where he is surprised by the fact that they are dealt with without reference to written 
documents but with only verbal testimonies and memorized rules that 
are orally produced at the occasion. Apparently, this is in contrast 
with the practice of the Greek in his king Seleukos’ Greco-Bactrian 
kingdom and in Greece. Megasthenes’ statement on the absence of 
writing may, however, be specific for legal business and need not cover 
other domains such as trade (Salomon 1998: 11). It is further to be 
noted that an aversion to writing in legal matters may have been in 
contrast with contemporary Greek practice, with Mesopotamian 
practice since the second millennium bce (Hammurabi’s Code), and 
even with later Indian practice as attested, for instance, in the Nāradasmti, but it was in line with a tendency among Indo-European tribes.29
With the collapse of the argumentation in favour of the “invention 
theory” we do not return automatically at the entire old scenario of 
early Brāhmī as developed and presented by Bühler at the end of the 
27  I conclude that Deraniyagala’s article on radiocarbon dates of potsherds with 
Brāhmī script (1990a) and the report of Coningham & Allchin (1992) belong to 
those works that Falk could list in his bibliography but which came too late to be 
taken into account in his argument (1993: 210-211). Salomon, in his otherwise very 
well-informed review article of 1995, is still unaware of the significant research findings of Deraniyagala and the follow-up discussion of Coningham and Allchin. 
28  Deraniyagala 1990a and b. There is no justification for Salomon’s hesitation 
(1998: 12) to accept the implication which these potsherds with Brāhmī writing—
securely dated according to normal standards—have for the development of Brāhmī 
script. 
29  Cf. Dumézil 1981; Pinchard (2009: 307): “... le législateur dorien Lycurgus, ... 
faisait de l’éducation des citoyens la seule gardienne des choses importantes pour le 
bonheur commun mais refusait de confier à la rigidité de la loi écrite le détail des 
litiges. De même, en Irlande, les poètes-juges se confiaient davantage à leur inspiration divine pour régler les litiges qu’à un système de droit écrit, afin que ‘le mort’ ne 
témoigne pas contre ‘le vivant’.”

--- Page 30 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
14
nineteenth century. Brāhmī did exist at least a century or two before 
Aśoka and that too in distant Sri Lanka, but for Vedic and Sanskritic 
texts we still have to accept that they were composed and transmitted 
in an environment of orality: the development of Brāhmī from Aśoka 
onwards shows its gradual adaptation for Sanskrit as demonstrated by 
Falk following earlier observations by Halévy.30 Pre-Aśokan Brāhmī 
literacy was apparently linguistically limited to Prakritic (Middle 
Indo-Aryan) dialects, and it was probably in use for specific domains 
only, esp. that of commerce. Because the option of writing must have 
remained no secret, we may speak, in this period, of a “conscious” or 
“determined” orality for Vedic and Sanskritic texts, an orality that 
could make use of a sound alternative to some of the functions of writing in the form of a textual memory culture. 
2.3  On the basis of his extensive fieldwork among non-literate societies in West Africa, Jack Goody developed a theoretical framework 
for dealing with what has been regarded as differences in “mentality” 
between societies. Goody’s earliest formulation is found in the article 
he wrote together with Ian Watt on “the consequences of literacy” 
(1963): 
In oral societies the cultural tradition is transmitted almost entirely by 
face-to-face communication; and changes in its content are accompanied by the homeostasic process of forgetting or transforming those 
parts of the tradition that cease to be either necessary or relevant. Literate societies, on the other hand, cannot discard, absorb, or transmute 
the past in the same way. Instead, their members are faced with permanently recorded versions of the past and its beliefs; and because the 
past is thus set apart from the present, historical enquiry becomes possible. This in turn encourages scepticism; and scepticism, not only 
about the legendary past, but about received ideas about the universe 
as a whole. From here the next step is to see how to build up and to 
test alternative explanations: and out of this there arose the kind of 
logical, specialized, and cumulative intellectual tradition of sixth-century Ionia. The kinds of analysis involved in the syllogism, and in the 
30  When new findings were reported in Sri Lanka, Allchin (1995: 209f) is happy 
to return to the old “plausible hypothesis” of Bühler with, however, one important 
change: he thinks we may “expect” that the Vedas and other sacred books are transmitted to writing at a significantly later time. Allchin’s position still needs one modification in order to become an appropriate account: we need not just “expect” that 
Vedic texts are transmitted to writing later: this is also necessary in the light of the 
evidence for the initial incapacity and later slow adaptation of the early script to 
represent Sanskrit and Vedic.

--- Page 31 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
15
other forms of logical procedure, are clearly dependent upon writing. 
(Goody & Watt 1963: 344-345)
Among the two authors it was Jack Goody who in subsequent studies 
elaborated this “Goody-Watt” thesis, which can be summarized as: 
“science and even rationality originate from literacy.”31 While doing 
so Goody remained basically loyal to its original formulation. In the 
analysis of Goody’s critic John Halverson, however, the original thesis 
was subject to much rethinking and revision and it became “so attenuated that it virtually collapsed on itself” (1992b: 302). After reviewing 
Goody & Watt’s article and two works of Goody (1977, 1987), Halver
son concludes that a “genetic relationship between writing and rationality” which was alternatively posited and suggested from the 
beginning receives at the end no adequate argumentative underpinning. A positive point Halverson mentions about Goody is that he 
(according to Halverson: unlike Havelock32) responds to criticism 
from other scholars which makes it possible to improve his theory. 
In subsequent publications Goody gradually seeks to expand the 
basis of his argument33: in his next monograph The Domestication of 
the Savage Mind (1977) the ancient Near East receives much attention; ten years later, his Interface Between the Written and the Oral 
(1987), contains a chapter—originally a contribution to a conference 
on orality in 1985—on what is apparently the most recalcitrant case 
for his theory, the orally composed and transmitted Vedas. Goody 
studies this case on the basis of observations by non-specialists in 
Vedic studies and concludes, just as earlier generations of indologists 
did but in the absence of any evidence for Vedic writing before the 
first millennium ce, that it “seems clear that not only is the organization of the Vedas influenced by writing, but also the mnemonic 
devices used by those who teach and learn them” (1987: 122). 
2.4  Two important criticisms appeared of Goody’s application of his 
theory to India and to the Veda. Frits Staal (1986) tried to show the 
nature of the Vedic oral tradition in India and its role in the emergence of grammar and other sciences and remarks that the existence 
31  Cf. Staal 1986 : 25-27. 
32  Havelock 1992b: 301; cp. Havelock 1992a. 
33  In the article written with Ian Watt, Goody bases his argument mainly on nonliterate societies in Ghana where he did fieldwork, on oral and literate phases of 
ancient Greece and on orality and literacy in the Bible.

--- Page 32 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
16
of this Vedic oral tradition “demonstrates in passing that the GoodyWatt thesis is not without important exceptions and therefore not 
generally tenable” (1986: 27). Staal distinguished, in fact, “two traditions of transmission” in India “that are formal and more or less reliable in their preserving function.” One of these two traditions, the one 
of “oral epics” is first orally transmitted and shows a certain “instability and change, at least on that verbatim level that is significantly called 
‘literal’,” before it is written down and achieves “much greater stability” (1986: 26). The other tradition of transmission concerns especially 
the Ṛgveda (and to varying degrees other Vedic texts). The Ṛgveda, 
too, “may have gone through a period of change that is not entirely 
dissimilar to the oral vagaries of the epics: but if it ever took place, it 
happened before its codification around 1200 bce After that it was not 
written down, but entered the period of oral transmission ... which 
fixed it for more than 3000 years in the course of which it preserved as 
stable and solid a state as any textual ‘archetype’ ever has.” Moreover, 
there is good reason “to doubt that it underwent major changes even 
on the formal level prior to its codification: for unlike epics, with their 
simple and identical meters, ‘gnomic phrases and commonplaces’, the 
Ṛgveda exhibited from the beginning a high level of poetic sophistication comprising a variety of meters—about fifteen in all—that sets it 
apart also in formal terms from the later epic literature of India, and 
prevents the facile application of concepts that have elsewhere been 
successfully applied to more popular oral epics.” Another difference 
“that goes a long way to explain the contrast between the loose orality 
of the epic and the fixed orality of the Vedas: the former were transmitted by bards, addressing villagers in open settings; but the latter 
were transmitted from father to son and from teacher to pupil, in 
strict and often secret isolation” (1986: 27). 
Falk (1990; 1993: 326) analyses Goody’s suggestions with regard to 
the Vedas in more detail and demonstrates their untenability in the 
light of the available evidence: the first (syllabic alphabetic) Indian 
scripts which appear in Aśoka’s inscriptions still required a considerable period of adaptation before they became suitable for Vedic and 
Sanskrit. With reference to BaudhDhS 3.9.8-9, Falk (1993: 255) further demonstrates that Vedic ritual culture gives unambiguous indications of an originally exclusively oral transmission and use of Vedic 
texts. 
In order to be able to appreciate Falk’s example and his argument, 
we will have a brief look at the judgements of Louis Renou four to five

--- Page 33 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
17
decades earlier. In his comprehensive study of the Vedic schools, 
Louis Renou (1947 : 33-34, note 3) observed that “oral transmission is 
silently admitted for the entire or the major part of Vedic literature, 
because the Indian tradition says this, and because various indications, mostly negative ones, invite us to believe so.” In the Addenda 
(1947 : 222-223), however, Renou shows much hesitation and gives 
several references which in his view could point to “writing in the 
Vedic texts” ; the most important among these would be his reference 
to a Śrauta-sūtra of the Sāmavedins, LŚS 5.12.16 yathādhītam (gāyet), 
which Renou translates as “(he should chant) according to what is 
read” (“conformément à ce qui est lu”). However, this expression 
rather indicates that the priest has to chant the text as he learned it 
(when he was a student), without modification. By no means does the 
choice of words or the context necessitate an interpretation in terms 
of reading a written text. On the other hand, if we understand the 
sūtra as a reference to the period of study of the priest, the statement is 
in accordance with the practice of the Sāmavedic priest during the 
Vājapeya (in a ritual episode where he first has to sing SV 435 with 
modifications such as leaving out ā at the beginning of the Udgīthapart and then “as studied” before chanting it) and it also suits the 
commentary that explains yathādhītam as aviktam “not modified 
(without leaving out ā, etc.).” Another example from which Renou 
tries to derive an indication for writing is LŚS 1.1.25 yajur-antaraye 
’nvāhāran dhānañjayaḥ, according to which, in the view of the ritual 
authority Dhānañjaya, a formula is to be uttered subsequently in case 
it has been (inadvertently) skipped; according to the next sūtra LŚS 
the ritual authority Śāṇḍilya is of the opinion that in such case the 
omission is to be neglected. Renou somehow wants to conclude from 
this the existence of a written help as a kind of backup. However, the 
performer forgot to employ a formula at the required moment in the 
ritual, but he did not forget its text altogether and forever. If everything goes from memory, as is still the ideal in modern Vedic performances, there is nothing that would point to such a written text, 
whether or not anything is immediately recited at the proper occasion 
or remembered afterwards and then recited subsequently (according 
to Dhānañjaya) or neglected (Śāṇḍilya). 
In contrast with Renou’s desperate attempts to find indications for 
writing in the early Vedic tradition, Falk (1993 : 255, 284, 321-327) 
argues convincingly in favour of the orality and non-familiarity with 
writing in ancient Indian texts. Rules concerned with possible omis-

--- Page 34 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
18
sions of a Vedic priest are, indeed, of particular interest for the 
question of the availability or absence of a written text of the Veda. 
Falk refers (1993 : 255) to Baudhāyana’s Dharma-sūtra BDhS 3.9.8 
apratibhāyāṃ yāvatā kālena na veda tāvantaṃ kālaṃ tad adhīyīta sa 
yadā jānīyād ṛkto yajuṣṭaḥ sāmata iti / 3.9.9 tad-brāhmaṇaṃ tacchāndasaṃ tad-daivatam adhīyīta “If he has forgotten (a passage), he 
shall recite for as long a time as he does not recollect it, what (he may 
know, k-verses) for k-verses, (yajus-formulae) for yajus-formulae, 
(sāmans) for sāmans. He may (also) recite the Brāhmaṇa of that (forgotten passage) or (the passage in the Anukramaṇī regarding) its 
metre and deity” (transl. follows Bühler, with adaptations). Here, 
apratibhāyām really expresses that a passage does not come to mind, 
and the performer does not search for a written text to help his memory but continues with a text which is similar in nature (as verse, formula or chant) or which is a Brāhmaṇa (explanatory prose-passage) 
corresponding to it or which concerns the metre or deity of the forgotten text. 
2.5  Buddhist texts provide several clear statements and indications 
that their tradition was at first entirely oral and that the written fixation of the oral tradition required conscious and extensive efforts a 
considerable time after the Buddha (cf. Falk 1993: 284-289). Among 
the relevant passages there is one that shows that this tradition was 
occasionally confronted with a problem similar to the one discussed 
for Vedic culture. A community of monks could forget a section or 
part of the several texts it was expected to recite at specific regular 
occasions. A single out of several examples discussed by Scharfe (2002: 
23-24) should do. 
“In the Mahāvagga II 17.3f (PTS p. 116) the Buddha responds to the 
question what a community of monks is to do when none of them are 
competent to recite the pātimokkha at their uposatha-ceremony at the 
evenings of the full and new moon. ‘These monks, o monks, are 
instantly to send one monk to the neighboring residence [of monks] 
(with the words): Go, friend, and come back when you have learned 
the pātimokkha abridged or in full extent’.”
The preceding story is set in a time which was most probably indeed 
predominantly oral, a few centuries before Aśoka, but the history of 
the Chinese Buddhist monk Fa Xian (Fa-Hsien), around 400 ce, 
belongs to a time when written documents played an important role 
in the transmission of Buddhist doctrine. From his home country in

--- Page 35 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
19
China, which had its own long tradition of (non-alphabetical) writing, 
Fa Xian set out to search manuscripts of the Vinaya in India but found 
that they are transmitted orally wherever he went in Northern India. 
Among Buddhist texts the Vinaya, dealing with the internal order in 
monasteries, is considered to be a relatively intimate and secret part in 
the Piṭaka. Finally, Fa Xian could obtain a written text in Central 
India, in a Mahāyāna monastery in Pāṭaliputra patronized by lay followers (Demiéville 1951: 246 note 1). 
Two centuries later the Chinese Buddhist monk Yì jìng (I-Tsing) 
had a similar purpose when he undertook a travel to India and neighbouring countries. In the report of his travel he has the following to 
say on the Brāhmans (Brahmins) and their Vedas. “The scriptures 
[which] they [the Brahmins] revere are the four Vedas, containing 
about 100,000 verses; ... the meaning of the word [Veda] is ‘clear 
understanding’ or ‘knowledge’. The Vedas have been handed down 
from mouth to mouth, not transcribed on paper or leaves. In every 
generation there exist some intelligent Brāhmans who can recite the 
100,000 verses. In India there are two traditional ways by which one 
can attain to great intellectual power. Firstly, by repeatedly committing to memory the intellect is developed; secondly, the alphabet fixes 
one’s ideas.34 By this way, after a practice of ten days or a month, a 
student feels his thoughts rise like a fountain, and can commit to 
memory whatever he has once heard [not requiring to be told twice]. 
This is far from being a myth, for I myself have met such men.”35 
From China itself the following report is of interest. “When in 410 
Buddhayaśas, the Kashmiri, master of Kumārajīva, who in China was 
nicknamed ‘the great Vibhāṣā’ and ‘the Vibhāṣā with red moustache’, 
claimed to start a translation of the Vinaya of Dharmagupta from 
memory, some suspicion arose in the Chinese clergy. To put him to a 
test, the Emperor Yao Hing of the Ts’in gave him three days to learn 
by heart two text-scrolls (kiuan) of medicinal recipes and of records of 
feudal rent payments (he knew Chinese, having long lived at Kashgar 
and Kucha): in all, according to various sources, some forty or eighty 
leaflets, or 50,000 Chinese characters. Buddhayaśas recited [the texts 
of these scrolls] without making a mistake in the weight of an ingredi34  H.-Y. Hu-von Hinüber quoted by Falk (1993: 289) checked the Chinese original and proposes a different translation for the passage dealing with the second way, 
which would not involve any reference to the alphabet but to fixing the mind or 
calming the nerves. 
35  Translation of J. Takakusu 1896:182-183.

--- Page 36 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
20
ent [in the medicinal recipe] nor in a figure of the inventory of rent 
payments.”36 
The last three stories point to the existence of a strong memory culture, but they are to be placed in a long transitional period in which 
writing was at first not at all used for philosophical, religious and scientific texts (at least till Aśoka, mid-third century bce) and later on 
gradually developed for this purpose over several centuries. This was 
parallel to a turn from Prakritic dialects to Sanskrit.37 Whatever 
remained of the ancient memory culture in the early centuries ce does 
point to a preceding strong memory culture in a period of primary 
orality in all fields of textual transmission except perhaps the ephemeral domain of commercial administration. 
After Aśoka a period of several centuries starts in which written 
texts competed with an oral tradition that remained relatively strong 
in the central land of Buddhism, in northern India. Whatever this 
combination of oral and written transmission could preserve, it also 
allowed for considerable variation and change. This is clear from the 
various Chinese translations of fundamental Buddhist texts which 
have the same title but are nevertheless every one or two centuries 
again different (Vetter 1994: 138-139, 159). Even if the Buddhists 
might have borrowed techniques of memory culture from the traditional transmitters of the Ṛgveda, they did not insist in all respects on 
the same literally identical transmission as in the case of the Ṛgveda.38 
Especially in Buddhism we see the validity of the general statement of 
Ong (1982: 15), approvingly quoted by Scharfe (2002: 20), that “literacy ... consumes its own oral antecedents and, unless it is carefully 
monitored, even destroys their memory.” As we saw above, Fa Xian, 
after extensive searches, could finally obtain a manuscript of the 
36  Following Demiéville 1951 : 245 note 1 who refers to for this account to Taishō 
2145, iii, 20b-c,xiv, 102c; and 2059, ii, 333c-334b. 
37  On this important transitional period in the history of Sanskrit see Sircar 
(1965: 39-40): “Originally the epigraphical language of the whole of India was mainly 
Prakrit and Sanskrit is first noticed in the inscriptions of North India from about the 
second half of the 1st century bc Sanskrit gradually ousted Prakrit from the field of 
Indian epigraphy in all parts of the country. In North India, the establishment of 
Sanskrit in the place of Prakrit in inscriptions was nearly complete by the end of the 
3rd century ad”; for more details: Salomon 1998: 72-86. 
38  For the creative variation allowed when certain peripheral points were not 
remembered at the moment of recitation, for instance where and to whom the Buddha had preached a lesson, see discussion and references in Scharfe 2002: 25 note 93.

--- Page 37 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
21
Vinaya in a Mahāyāna monastery patronized by lay followers. There 
he was apparently told that it dated from the time of the Buddha.39
With regard to textual transmission the situation in India around 
the beginning of the Common Era, from a few centuries before till a 
few centuries after the year zero, can now be summarized as follows. 
Three types of textual transmission can be distinguished. Around two 
centuries after the Buddha, the transmission of Buddhist texts was still 
predominantly oral in the heartland (northern part of the Indian subcontinent) but the transmission through manuscripts was on the 
increase. It initially may have developed not only in northwestern 
border areas (Gandhāra) and areas outside India (Central Asia) where 
ancient writing systems (old-Persian cuneiform, Aramaic) were 
already current, but also in South India, including the area around 
Nagarjunakonda where an important early artistic representation of a 
scribe is found in connection with a scene on the life of the Buddha 
(see colour Plate 1a, 1b, 1c). Buddhist monks displayed remarkable 
skills in memorization, but the transmission left scope for usually only 
marginal and formulaic variation. The quality of transmission was 
therefore comparable to that of the oral epic tradition. The Indian 
epics, Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa, are estimated to have started their 
careers as written texts (after an initial oral period of undeterminable 
extent) in this period, from a few centuries before till a few centuries 
after the beginning of Common Era. The Jainas organized their canon 
and wrote it down in around the same period, in the 5th century ce 
“Devarddhi Gaṇin, says the tradition, perceiving the Siddhānta in 
danger of becoming extinct, caused it to be written in books. Before 
that time teachers made no use of written books when teaching the 
Siddhānta to novices, but after that time they did use books.”40 
39  “Fa-hien poussa jusque dans l’Inde Centrale (à cette epoque, les pélerins 
chinois s’arrêtaient généralement au Cachemire). Et c'est seulement à Pāṭaliputra, et 
dans un monastère mahāyāniste patronné par des adeptes laïcs, qui possédaient des 
bibliothèques, qu'il reussit à obtenir un exemplaire du Vinaya des Mahāsāṅghika: cet 
exemplaire passait pour remonter au temps du Buddha et s’être conservé au Jetavana!” (Demiéville 1951: 246 note 1). This anecdote does not necessarily proof that 
those who recommended the manuscript actually believed what they told to the foreign monk, but it does show how rumours could have been created that contributed 
to forgetting the transition from orality to written transmission of Buddhist scriptures. 
40  Jacobi 1884: xxxvii-xxxviii. Jacobi next tries to evade acceptance of this statement as he cannot imagine transmission over a long time without writing: “it is 
hardly credible that the Jaina monks should never before have attempted to write 
down what they had to commit to memory.”

--- Page 38 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
22
An oral textual tradition of a different nature is the one concerned 
with the Ṛgveda and other Vedic texts. It does, in fact, not suffice to 
characterize it as “oral” since it also depends significantly on a memory culture. In the words of Staal (1986: 27), this tradition “is by far 
the more remarkable, not merely because it is characteristically Indian 
and unlike anything we find elsewhere, but also because it has led to 
scientific discoveries that are of enduring interest …”
Which evidence is there to show that the Ṛgveda was indeed transmitted orally in a fixed way since at least 1200 bce? That they must 
precede the early Buddhists41 and Pāṇini (4th cent. bce42) is evident 
because both presuppose a developed system of Vedic rituals and 
texts, but that still leaves a large margin. Staal, as we have seen, gave an 
impressionistic argument why the Ṛgveda must be so old even if it was 
transmitted orally: it “exhibited from the beginning a high level of 
poetic sophistication comprising a variety of meters—about fifteen in 
all—that sets it apart also in formal terms from the later epic literature 
of India.” In reply to a remark by G. Possehl (1998: 121) that the long 
period of oral transmission of the Ṛgveda would leave so much scope 
for substantial change, Scharfe pointed out (2002: 27-28 note 102) 
that the very early stability of the text of the Ṛgveda is confirmed by 
the “quotations in the traditions of other Vedic schools” such as the 
Sāmaveda and in the ancient Brāhmaṇas, “with minimal deviations—
and most of these deviations can be shown to be secondary.” The net41  Because of the “epic oral” character of the transmission in early centuries after 
the Buddha it is not always possible to clearly distinguish a contribution of the Buddha and one of early Buddhists. The date of the Buddha’s mahāparinibbāna is now 
considered to be around 400 BCE: Bechert 1991-1997; Cousins 1996.
42  Both von Hinüber 1989: 34 and Falk 1993: 304, refer to AA 5.2.120 and currently available reasonably secure datings in numismatics (Cribb 1985; cf. now 2005) 
to arrive at a date for Pāṇini around 350 bce (von Hinüber: “kaum lange vor etwa 
350 v. Chr.”; Falk: “in den Jahrzehnten nach 350 v. Chr.”). Since Pāṇini belonged to 
the north-west of the Indian subcontinent—Śalātura, north of the Kabul river 
(kúbhā) and west of the Indus, is mentioned as his native place—he must have been 
well aware of the political and economic importance of Persia (even if he does not 
“mention most satrapies of the Achaemenid Empire within which [he] lived or even 
the empire itself,” Schwartzberg 1992: 168 col. 2). It therefore cannot be entirely 
excluded that his rūpya (formed according to AA 5.2.120) referred to Persian or 
Greek coins as Scharfe (2009: 28) pointed out. In view of Pāṇini’s linguistic and cultural orientation towards the north of the Indian subcontinent (Schwartzberg 1992: 
16, 167-168) it would nevertheless be more likely that reference is made to an Indian 
coin, perhaps still locally issued but with “pan-Indian” circulation (cf. Cribb 2005: 
69). Pāṇini brought to perfection a vast body of existing knowledge as his grammar 
refers to various preceding authorities, including the author of the Padapāṭha of the 
Ṛg-veda, Śākalya, and the author of the Padapāṭha of the Sāma-veda, Gārgya.

--- Page 39 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
23
work of quotations and minor variations that substantiates Scharfe’s 
remark is analyzed in voluminous works by the American indologist 
Maurice Bloomfield, the Vedic Concordance (1906), Ṛgveda Repetitions 
(1916), and Vedic Variants (1930-1934). Most Vedic textual variants 
such as the quotations of the Ṛgveda in the Yajurvedic and Sāmavedic 
Saṁhitās predate Pāṇini, whose grammar shows evidence of a preceding tradition of grammatical and linguistic concerns with details in 
these texts—details in accent and phonetic variation which are so 
minute that the overarching, long-term stability of the main texts is all 
the stronger confirmed. 
The third major mode of textual transmission in this period, apart 
from the “oral epic” transmission and the Vedic one, is the transmission through written materials, especially manuscripts. Bordering to 
the Chinese cultural sphere in the north-east and to Greater Iran and 
indirectly to the Near East in the west where different systems of writing had been intensively used (some since several millennia bce), the 
Indian subcontinent is remarkably late in turning to writing for the 
transmission of its texts. The continuous presence of a strong oral 
tradition and textual memory culture (manifest in its “oral epic” 
mode—also employed for Buddhism etc.—and in its “Vedic” mode) 
determines the attitude towards written sources over a long transitional period. 
2.6  Having reviewed Staal’s and Falk’s important criticisms of 
Goody’s theory and its application to the Veda—first, science and 
even rationality originate from literacy, and, second, the meticulous 
transmission of Vedic texts must be due to the use of writing—and 
some of the relevant evidence at the basis of these criticisms,43 we may 
briefly return to Goody. 
Goody, who was praised by Halverson for responding to criticisms, 
subsequently neglected not only the criticism of Halverson, but also 
that of Staal and Falk. In his next important publication on the theme 
of orality and writing, The Power of the Written Tradition (2000), he 
43  Supplements to these criticisms are found in the chapter on Oral Tradition in 
Scharfe 2002: 8-37, who observes (2002: 23) : “Ong’s and Goody’s denial of the orality of much of the Indian tradition contradicts evidence from a multitude of 
sources.” Relevant is also Scharfe’s chapter on Memorizing the Veda (2002: 240-251) 
and the chapter in a more recent work of Scharfe on Pāṇini’s grammar (2009: 66-84) 
where the author explains why this grammar could not have been written (and must 
have been orally composed and transmitted).

--- Page 40 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
24
shifts his discussion to a new area, that of the social implications of 
writing—the power which the written word gives to “cultures that 
possess writing over purely oral ones” and the power it gives to those 
who possess it to those who do not within the same society (Goody 
2000: 1)—without responding either to earlier general objections to, 
what Halverson (1992b: 301) called, the “‘cognitive’ claims of the literacy thesis,” or to the specific refutations (by Staal and Falk) regarding his attempts to apply the general theory to South Asia. A detailed 
analysis of the various arguments of Goody in his various books and 
those of his (partial) critics is here not possible. Here we only ask: 
what does it mean if Goody in 2000 can give several more or less convincing examples of parallels between the possession of writing and 
the occupation of a socially and politically powerful position, of a literate society versus an oral society or of a literate segment of a society 
versus an oral one, without having properly established the cognitive 
claims of the literacy thesis—with regard to which it is suggested that 
it can replace earlier attempts to explain cultural differences by invoking properties of a “primitive mind” (Lévy-Bruhl)? This can only 
mean that Goody’s “social power” claims regarding literacy are hanging in the air as they can have no logical connection with the nonestablished “cognitive claims.” It leaves open the possibility that 
Goody did not identify the appropriate parameter in the “cognitive” 
level. 
Indeed, it is likely that this is what happened with regard to orality 
and writing in India: Goody’s general theory is to be reconsidered in 
the light of the evidence provided by India, just as the theory that all 
swans are white is to be reconsidered if we see even a single black 
swan. In ancient India, in the light of available evidence (as reviewed 
above), it is not the writing per se which provides special access to 
stable knowledge and a cognitively dominant position to some groups 
versus others who would be deprived of it, but rather the use of techniques for an explicit transmission of knowledge from generation to 
generation. Such techniques may consist in writing, if those who possess it are opposed to those who have neither writing nor an alternative technique. But these techniques for the explicit transmission of 
knowledge may also consist in techniques of oral transmission and 
memory culture, if these techniques oppose those who possess them 
to those who possess neither these nor writing. Even if writing is 
adopted, the possession of techniques of oral transmission and memory culture may provide the group possessing them a definite edge

--- Page 41 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
25
over those that have no access to it. If the parameter of “writing” is to 
be given up in favour of “technique for reliable transmission” which 
comprises, among other things, writing, then orality and memory culture in ancient India—and their scarce and pale remnants in a handful 
of traditional schools, pāṭha-śālās, in present-day India—may also be 
able to prove Derrida right versus Goody, when Goody (2000: 109118) is unwilling to accept even the logical possibility of “difference” 
without physical “writing,” i.e., the logical possibility that the orally 
transmitted word would possess some of the properties otherwise 
observed with the written word.44 
Were techniques of oral transmission and memory culture sufficiently advanced to give ancient India a significant—culturally, 
socially, scientifically significant—edge over neighbouring areas, and 
to make it, at least for a considerable period, immune to attempts to 
increase the domain of writing? The outsiders’ perspective provided 
by Chinese Buddhist monks, the sincere surprise they evince with the 
memorization skills of the Indian monks, suggests we should reply to 
this question positively. This leads us to a subsequent question: how 
“unique” are the Indian oral tradition and Indian textual memory culture? We should ask this question especially with regard to the Vedic 
tradition, as the other mode of oral tradition, the one of the “oral 
epics” and of Buddhism etc., is more similar to epic traditions world 
wide. 
2.7  A text that is in several respects similar to the Ṛgveda, the Avesta, 
has been transmitted over numerous centuries by the Zoroastrians, 
those of Iran and those whose forefathers had come to India. The 
Avesta, the older parts of which have been dated to around a millennium bce,45 is similar to the Ṛgveda linguistically, in the use of formulas and epithets, in religious and mythological conceptions, and in the 
ritual presupposed. The manuscripts at the basis of the text currently 
available in print go back to a Sassanid archetype of ca. 400 ce or one 
to two centuries later (Hoffmann & Narten 1989: 90-91). This written 
44  Similarly, Bronkhorst (2002) insists on the necessary presence of writing to 
explain certain features of the transmission of Vedic texts through Saṁhitā and 
Padapāṭha, where assuming a wider parameter, “technique for reliable transmission,” would suffice. 
45  Hoffmann & Forssman 1996: “Die altavestischen Texte sind wohl in Nordostiran (Herat, Balch) entstanden, etwa im 10./9. Jahrhundert v. Chr.; nach anderer 
Ansicht erst im 7./6. Jahrhundert v. Chr.”

--- Page 42 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
26
archetypal text itself stood at the end of a long development on the 
basis of early liturgical texts in Old Avestan which were orally transmitted by priests who already spoke Young Avestan in various stages 
of development. The transmission of texts which were linguistically 
older than the current language of the transmittors involved a redaction, an orthoepic diaskeuasis, resulting in a fixation of the text, perhaps first orally but eventually in writing, in a form that is closer to the 
word-by-word version (Pada-pāṭha) than to the continuous version 
(Saṁhitā-pāṭha) of the Ṛgveda.46 Can the Padapāṭha-like form of the 
Avesta be taken as an indication of a memory culture similar to that 
current in ancient India? Does one tradition derive from the other—if 
so, which one from which—or both from an earlier, Indo-Iranian 
one? It has been suggested, for instance by Michael Witzel, that the 
Padapāṭha-like character of the Avesta, together with a few other indications, would point to an “old Indo-Iranian tradition of dealing with 
texts” (Witzel 1996: 323). 
Recently, Hartmut Scharfe (2009: 80-83) had a closer look at the 
evidence and asked: How do Vedic Padapāṭhas and the Avestan 
manuscripts compare in detail? First of all, the Ṛgveda Padapāṭha 
consistently gives words in their non-sandhi form, but the Avesta is 
quite inconsistent. Nominal compounds are separated in the Veda 
with only one separation in case of compounds with multiple members; in the Avesta a compound may be separated twice resulting into 
a division into three members. The ṚV Padapāṭha consistently separates certain nominal endings such as -bhis, but the Avesta sometimes 
does this and often not. The ṚV Padapāṭha never separates verbal 
endings, but the Avesta does it a few times. From these observations 
Scharfe inferred that a sophisticated Indian tradition has given rise to 
an imperfect application in Iran. Other indications he brought forward to show that “Indian grammatical science was available in 
Sassanid Iran” (Scharfe 2009: 84).47 
Perhaps the Avesta scholars of the Sassanid period were indeed 
influenced by Indian grammatical science and techniques for textual 
transmission. The text to which Scharfe referred to support his point, 
46  Cf. also Malandra (2002: 223): “To a certain extent the received text or Vulgate 
is analogous to the Padapāṭha of the ṚgVeda rather than to the Saṁhitā.” 
47  Scharfe (2009: 84) points out that the Dēnkart (Dēnkard), “a Zoroastrian text 
based on material from the Sassanid period,” contains, at IV 99-100, the Sanskrit 
terms “‘βy’krn, i.e. vyākaraṇa ‘grammar’,” together with kōšāk (i.e., Sanskrit kośa 
‘lexicography’) and references to Indian astrology, etc.”

--- Page 43 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
27
the Dēnkart (Dēnkard), is regarded as an “encyclopedia of the religious sciences as known in the 9th-10th centuries”; it “is not ... a systematic treatment” but rather “a compilation of preserved materials” 
(Gignoux 1994). The work contains an “enumeration of scientific 
works from Greece and India,” which probably includes the references to Indian grammatical science, and which is considered to reveal 
“foreign influence from the 3rd century onward” (Gignoux 1994). The 
third century would be the time when Avesta ritualists would be starting to commit their text to writing. But at that time the older parts of 
the collection, those in Old Avestan, had already been transmitted, 
apparently orally, for more than a millennium (Hoffmann & Narten 
1989: 88ff.). 
2.8  We may therefore approach the question regarding textual 
memory culture from a different angle. Whatever the specific technique or techniques that were followed to memorize the text and to 
transmit it faithfully, there was in the Avestan milieu in Iran, as in the 
Vedic environment in India, an enormous interest—a passion, perhaps even an obsession—to transmit the sacred text in a phonetically 
exact way and next to pronounce it completely correct at required 
occasions such as regular rituals. Moreover, if, as it seems to be the 
case, the Avesta ritualists started to commit their texts to writing only 
in the fifth or sixth century ce, they were earlier than in India, but they 
had apparently been exposed more intensively and for a much longer 
time to writing, as writing was intensively used in the Near East and in 
ancient Iran much earlier than in India. Both in ancient Iran and in 
India from the beginning of ce the Avestan milieu and the Vedic 
milieu were for a long time quite immune to pressures or temptations 
to put their precious texts to writing. From this circumstantial evidence we would infer that some techniques for faithful oral transmission and memorization were probably in use among Zoroastrian 
priests in Iran from an ancient period onwards. 
That this enormous interest to transmit a text in a phonetically 
exact way and next to recite it at special occasions—in other words, a 
culture of textual memorization and recitation—dates indeed back to 
an earlier date than what is usually regarded as the earliest Vedic 
period, ca. 1200-1750 bce, is also suggested from a different perspective, by comparing esp. Greek and Indian traditions and conceptualizations of sacred texts. Whereas it is more or less a universal 
phenomenon that ancient cultures employ prayers in rituals and take

--- Page 44 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
28
special care of the most sacred and powerful texts which are collected 
and transmitted, it is not a matter of course that the preserved texts try 
to capture divine speech rather than human speech addressed to the 
gods, and that these texts containing divine speech should be memorized and should be recited at specific ritual or regular occasions, with 
subsequent generations ending up spending a large part of their time 
in memorizing, repeating and reciting the speech of their ancestors. 
In a recent brilliant philosophical-historical study, Alexis Pinchard 
(2009) has shown that Plato was not only standing at the beginning of 
the tradition we celebrate as “western philosophy and science” but 
also at the end of a preceding one which distinguishes between names 
in the language of men and names in the language of the gods, a difference that was originally established by poets and that was present in 
most Indo-European literary traditions, especially also in the one that 
finds expression in the Ṛgveda. Among several “family-resemblances” 
between Indo-European poetic traditions there is, indeed, the profound mistrust of writing that is apparently the other side of the coin 
of textual memory culture which we have encountered in the Vedic 
and early Avestan traditions. 
“We find in Plato, indeed, a restriction in the use of writing. Such 
restriction, in force in the oldest Indo-European poetic traditions, has 
a purpose: to preserve, from one individual to the other, the vitality of 
knowledge, that is, wisdom. For Plato, writing puts this vitality in danger because, as a material support, it provides information from the 
outside, through the senses, and thus it risks to divert the soul from its 
inner quest.”
“... writing taken too seriously tends to hinder the personal reminiscence of realities perceived before birth ...” 48
“Writing does not go well with the primitive language of the gods : as 
it crystallizes a message once and for all instead of leaving it open to 
the variation of a “hermetic” tradition, it prevents its anchorage in the 
spontaneity of the speaker.”49
48  “Nous trouvons chez Platon, en effet, une limitation dans l’usage de l’écrit, 
dont la finalité demeure congruente à celle en vigueur dans les plus anciennes traditions poétiques indo-européennes : préserver, d’un individu à l’autre, la vitalité du 
savoir, autrement dit la sagesse. Chez Platon, l’écriture met cette vitalité en danger 
parce que, en tant que support matériel, elle apporte des informations depuis le 
dehors, par l’intermédiaire des sens, et risque ainsi de détourner l’âme de sa quête 
intérieure. ... l’écriture prise trop au sérieux tend à faire obstacle à la réminiscence 
personnelle des réalités perçues avant la naissance ...” (Pinchard 2009 : 305). 
49  “L’écriture ne saurait faire bon ménage avec la langue des dieux primitive car, 
en figeant un message une fois pour toutes au lieu de le laisser ouvert à la variation

--- Page 45 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
29
“It should by no means surprise us, therefore, that the evidence of a 
refusal of writing by members of the priestly or divinatory class in 
Indo-European civilizations is so abundant, even when writing was 
often known and used in other contexts. Such a refusal is merely a 
matter of recognizing the natural impossibility of wisdom to be passed 
on as a book. Wisdom is what it is only as long as it establishes by itself 
its distance from writing.”50 
“It is therefore a fatal misinterpretation to see in the refusal of writing 
by the wise the will to keep from the public some mythological or 
ritual information; ... the problem is rather to maintain the memory as 
an intellectual faculty to regain access at the ancient by always new 
paths ...”51
If the Indian Vedic priests had in common with the “priestly or divinatory class in Indo-European civilizations” not only a related language and poetic devices, but also a profound aversion to writing, this 
would indeed contribute significantly to an explanation of their 
remarkable investments in a textual memory culture that was unique 
in its perfection and efficiency even if it has survived in modern India 
only as an entirely marginalised institution. This would suffice to show 
not only that Goody’s (and Ong’s) theories are not universally valid—
that they have failed to properly identify the parameters at play in 
India—but also why they are not valid. 
Incidentally, recognizing Indo-European parallels and patterns 
does not imply the acceptance of massive invasions of Aryan tribes, or 
in some other way massive displacements of genetic material. The 
basis of the perceived parallels and patterns is rather to be sought in 
“memetic” relations, rendered possible by the attested forms of “memory culture” and their antecedents. The links may have been established by numerically marginal but culturally significant bands or 
hermétique, elle empêche son ancrage dans la spontanéité du locuteur.” (Pinchard 
2009 : 305)
50  “Point ne doit nous surprendre, donc, que les témoignages d’un refus de 
l’écriture par les membres de la classe sacerdotale ou divinatoire dans les civilisations 
indo-européennes soient si nombreux, alors même que l’écriture y était souvent connue et utilisée dans d’autres contextes. Un tel refus ne fait que prendre acte d’une 
impossibilité congénitale, pour la sagesse, de se transmettre comme on transmet un 
livre. La sagesse n’est ce qu’elle est qu’autant qu’elle instaure elle-même son écart face 
à l’écriture.” (Pinchard 2009 : 306)
51  “C’est donc un contresens fatal que de voir dans le refus de l’écrit par les sages 
la volonté de préserver du public un certain nombre d’informations mythologiques 
ou rituelles ... le problème est bien plutôt de garder la mémoire en tant que faculté 
intellectuelle de réaccéder à l’ancien par des chemins toujours nouveaux ...” (Pinchard 2009 : 306)

--- Page 46 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
30
“guilds” of itinerant priests of the type of Vasiṣṭha’s descendants of 
ṚV 7.33.1-3, with their “whitish cloths” (śvityáñco) and a hair knot to 
the right (dakṣiṇatáskapardāḥ, similar to the Suebian knot of Ger
manic tribes described by Tacitus?). 
It is to be noted, moreover, that Greece and ancient India, the two 
civilizations which provide the best illustrations for Pinchard’s philosophical Indo-European thesis, also with regard to their aversion to 
writing, are at the boundary of the Indo-European expansive “wave” 
where they were in contact with various highly developed non-IndoEuropean civilizations which possess ancient traditions of (some form 
of) writing (in Egypt, in Mesopotamia, perhaps in the Indus-civili
zation). Even if the aversion to writing has Indo-European parallels, 
the specific form of the oral technique of memorization and transmission, the splitting of sentences into words, has no clear parallel among 
other Indo-European peoples. Is it not rather a mnemotechnic device 
within orality that tries to compete with and even to outdo a form of 
writing which represents speech first of all in a form that separates 
words and obvious members of compounds? The proximity of the 
intensive use of (forms of) writing may indeed have inspired or incited 
the Iranians and Indians responsible for the Avestan and Vedic texts 
to pay extraordinary attention to their faithful, oral transmission. The 
form of writing would be one in which words are emphatically separated, either a (largely) logographic form of writing, or a syllabic 
alphabetic form, in use in a community with which the Indo-Iranians 
would have been in close contact, geographically and/or culturally. 
Because the interest in a word-for-word version is evident both in the 
Avestan and in the Vedic tradition, one could think of a very early 
influence at the time the two were geographically close or partly overlapping: this would require the influence of a very early script in the 
second millennium bce However, ancient Vedic poets, even if they 
are remarkably reflective about the creative processes at the basis of 
their own poetry, show nowhere any interest in a distinction between 
a word-for-word version and a continuous version, so that the former 
seems to be a later invention imposed on the latter. Pāṇini is aware of 
an author of the word-for-word version, Śākalya, who must have preceded Pāṇini, but not too much.52 We could then think of the influ52  The mature work of Śākalya must have had predecessors. Pāṇini himself refers 
to grammatical views of Gārgya, who is otherwise known as the author of a 
padapāṭha of the Sāmaveda, which, according to Louis Renou, would have been

--- Page 47 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
31
ence of old-Persian cuneiform writing (which uses a special sign to 
separate words and which is known from around the 6th cent. bce53) 
or of Aramaic, which was the administrative script and language for 
the Persian empire that included, at the time of Cyrus the Great (6th 
cent. bce), Bactria and Gandhāra. Could it then be that the idea for 
the creation of an oral word-for-word version of the Ṛg-veda in order 
to appropriate some features of writing and to improve the quality of 
the transmission of the Ṛg-veda was born in 6th cent. bce Gandhāra,54 
two centuries before Pāṇini would write his grammar in the same 
region? Could the “Padapāṭha-like form of the Avesta” be due, not to 
the influence of Indian grammatical thought as Scharfe 2009 suggested, but to the influence of the same script (or scripts, old-Persian 
cuneiform and/or Aramaic) on the transmittors of the Avesta, who 
did not transmit this version together with a parallel continuous 
(Saṁhitā) version, and who would shift to a fully written transmission 
a few centuries later (Hoffmann & Narten 1989)? 
It is in any case remarkable that, as the Vedic Padapāṭha marks the 
division into words and analyzes the mutual phonetic influence of 
these words, it does in this exactly what is to be done if speech or a 
continuous text is to be written down in a script that marks word 
boundaries and gives phonetic details of these words. The Padapāṭha, 
then, would appear to be a competitive alternative, within a strictly 
oral memory culture, that exhibits important qualities inherent in the 
text transmission in cultures of writing in syllabic or near-alphabetic 
scripts. In the case of the Avesta, on the other hand, since it is so close 
to the realm of early near-alphabetic writing, it would be easier to 
imagine that attempts had already been made to actually write it down 
before the production of the “Sassanid archetype,” and that it is these 
early attempts which have given the Avesta a partially “Padapāṭhalike” look.
older than that of Śākalya: Renou 1957 : 118, “ Le padap. le plus primitif, donc sans 
doute le plus ancien, est celui du SV. “
53  It is now widely believed that Persian cuneiform was invented during the reign 
of Darius I (522-486). Others think it dates back to the time of his predecessor Cyrus 
II (539-530), although there is no unambiguous evidence in support of this: 
D. Testen in Daniels & Bright 1996: 134.
54  This last step in our reflections turns out to be a step in the direction of the 
positions of Bronkhorst and Goody, which still maintains a distance from the “science and rationality originate from literacy” thesis in the formulation of Goody and 
Watt, as it does not require the Gandhāran Vedic priests to have given up their strict 
rejection of (not yet fully alphabetic or syllabic alphabetic) writing.

--- Page 48 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
32
Within a few centuries and starting in Magadha, an area ca. 1000 
km to the east, young Brahmins trained in the Vedic system of oral 
education must have taken along their intellectual baggage and especially their mnemotechnic skills when they converted to Buddhism or 
Jainism55—a not infrequent event in the early centuries before and 
after the beginning of ce—so that these religions too continued to 
value oral transmission and textual memory culture, and shifted comparatively late and slowly to a written transmission of their sacred 
texts. The first to shift to writing was no doubt the religion with the 
most intensive and extensive international ties, Buddhism, and it 
slowly but surely drew along the epics, various sciences such as medicine and grammar, Jainism, auxiliary disciplines of the Vedic tradition, and finally, but only by way of back up, the central Vedic texts of 
mantra and brāhmaṇa. The extent of the use of writing for text transmission can therefore be regarded as inversely proportional to the 
strength of techniques of oral transmission and textual memory culture. With this we have at once the earliest contour of manuscript culture—the initial period after which it became well established—and a 
parameter for manuscript culture when it is already well established, a 
parameter that in India remained valid as long as oral text transmission and memory culture were in vogue, which means minimally till 
the last century (Kerala, Godavari delta, Maharashtra) if we consider 
present day relics, vestiges and revitalizations of the Vedic tradition 
too marginal or too artificial. 
In the light of the preceding we propose the following scenario for 
the emergence and development of manuscript culture on the Indian 
subcontinent: 
A. If there is an Indo-European dimension to the attested forms of 
aversion to writing in India and perhaps in ancient Zoroastrianism, this aversion led to the development of an exceptionally 
strong memory culture here (but not in other areas of Indo-European expansion) because of the proximity of cultures of writing 
which nevertheless, for a certain period in Iran and for a longer 
55  Moreover, as Gombrich (1988: 31) observed: “it would never have occurred to 
the Buddhists that such a feat of preservation was even possible had they not had 
before them the example of the brahmins.”

--- Page 49 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
33
period in India, did not succeed in overwhelming the oral memory 
culture.56 
B. In any case, Indian manuscript culture started to develop not earlier than the 3rd cent. bce (Aśokan inscriptions) against the background of an extraordinarily strong, purely oral memory culture 
for “sacred” texts, Vedic and initially also Buddhist and Jaina, 
which for some undetermined period went parallel with writing 
for ephemeral contexts.
C. Once writing is accepted to transmit “sacred” texts, first those of 
Buddhism and perhaps first in the north-west and in “marginal” 
areas such as the south, a masssive transition took place which 
gradually also involved secular disciplines such as medicine and 
grammar, philosophical Brahmanism and Jainism and other religious currents, and finally, but still as if unwillingly, central Vedic 
texts. The shift from oral to written text involved also a shift from 
Prakritic (MIA) to Sanskrit. 
2.9  The contour of the earliest beginnings of manuscript culture can 
therefore be placed at around the time of Aśoka’s inscriptions, middle 
of the third century bce, assuming that it was a landmark after which 
textual transmission in writing and on manuscripts appeared at the 
horizon of possibilities also for larger texts than the royal announcements of Aśoka. Soon afterwards the currently available oldest 
manuscripts in Kharoṣṭhī appear to the North West of the Indian sub
continent. It is tempting to conclude that they are not by chance the 
oldest ones found but indeed the remains of the first commitments to 
writing. The association of this emerging manuscript culture with a 
still strong culture of oral textual transmission make it likely that no 
great impact is perceived initially, that the written texts, for instance 
in Buddhism, are nothing more than an additional tool, felt to be 
somewhat superfluous, for the oral transmission and memory culture. 
56  The Iranian and Indian ancestors of the authors of the Avesta and the authors 
of the Ṛgveda, who shared an interest in exact oral transmission with other IndoEuropean communities but who were unique in the level of technical sophistication 
they reached herein, were sufficiently close to and familiar with current writing systems to be incited to create a competitive alternative in the form of oral techniques 
for faithful transmission, but they were far enough removed geographically (esp. the 
authors of the Veda after the collapse of the Indus civilization who were expanding 
towards the east in the northern part of the Indian subcontinent), to develop their 
literature and linguistic disciplines significantly without being overwhelmed by writing.

--- Page 50 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
34
Did the change in medium of text transmission lead to a change in 
thought, as it was argued for ancient Greece at the juncture of orality 
(pre-Socratics, Socrates) and literacy (Plato, Aristotle)? In order to 
judge this, we should know what can be regarded as results or implications of the oral transmission of texts. A few points have been enumerated by Scharfe (2002). 
First, “oral tradition has no pity for outdated material, since it 
would be a waste of effort and memory for students to memorize 
obsolete instructions. Pāṇini’s grammar made all previous grammatical analyses of Sanskrit obsolete, and not much more than some 
names remain of his predecessors.” A consequence of this is that “In 
India, perfected systems seem to appear ex nihilo, which led in time to 
the assumption of supernatural revelation” Scharfe (2002: 20f). 
Another characteristic of oral literature—and Scharfe thinks here 
apparently of “oral epic” orality, not of the orality of the Vedic tradition nor of the one of a knowledge system such as grammar—is “frequent repetition, found most prominently in the Buddhist canonical 
texts. ... Furthermore, there is frequent patchwork ... Since corrections 
would be awkward, any improvements are added on like so many 
patches. ... In oral literature there is no sense of copyright” Scharfe 
(2002: 30f). Elaborating on the last point Scharfe shifts to a discussion 
of the absence of “copyright” in the case of manuscripts as well, which, 
moreover, do not have “indices (in our sense of the word), since each 
manuscript of a text would have a different pagination making a page 
index almost useless” (2002: 32). To Scharfe’s observations we may 
add that there is a tendency that expressions of orality remain in vogue 
even when literacy has already spread and has become widely accepted.57 Indeed, several of the properties of purely orally transmitted 
texts are continued in the case of transmission through manuscripts, 
57  For instance, when Bharthari (4th-5th cent.) refers to other authors his references still reflect a mainly oral environment (just as old Greek prose of, for instance, 
Plato still strongly reflects an oral style, Havelock 1986) whereas, more than a millennium later, the references of Bhaṭṭoji Dīkṣita reveal that he is making extensive use 
of written sources. There does not seem to be an absolute difference between the two 
but rather a shift in the balance between orality and literacy. In the MahābhāṣyaDīpikā passages studied in Houben 1999 expressions such as ity etad ācakṣate, ihabhavantas tv āhuḥ which suggest speaking, and varṇayanti which is neutral to the 
contrast speaking/writing, may be compared with passages in Bhaṭṭoji Dīkṣita’s 
Prauḍha-Manoramā, where we find expressions clearly reflecting a scholar making 
an extensive study of written sources, such as yady apīdaṁ kaiyaṭapustakeṣu ... 
dśyate and idānīntanapustakeṣu ... dśyate (cf. Houben 2002:).

--- Page 51 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
35
especially if the manuscript transmission is part of a still reasonably 
strong oral culture. More importantly, there has been hardly any 
reflection on properties of manuscript transmission vis à vis purely 
oral transmission. 
2.10  We would nevertheless like to give some reflections regarding a 
knowledge system that was originally not depending on the transmission of large volumes of text, but in which conceptual criticism of traditional, Brahminical ideas and rituals was central: Sāṁkhya.58 
Especially in its classical and post-classical forms, but also pre-classically, Sāṁkhya has appeared to several Western observers as an 
Indian knowledge system in which “rationality”—distinguished by 
“the presence of reasoned argument for preferring one alternative to 
others”59—plays a remarkable role. To make this definition operational we think of systems in which one of the means to gain knowledge (pramāṇa), namely inference (anumāna), is regarded as more 
important than other means such as verbal testimony (śabda) and 
direct perception (pratyakṣa). Sāṁkhya shared circumstances favoring critical reflection and reconsiderations of established beliefs with 
other early movements and schools, including Buddhism and Jainism. 
A closer study of the available evidence shows that rationality was 
indeed thriving in Sāṁkhya—that anumāna was indeed, nominally 
and de facto, on a primary position—in the earlier stages of its development, the stages that are reflected in the Mahābhārata, for instance. 
In the classical and post-classical time, however, we see that Sāṁkhya 
transforms from a brilliant and critical knowledge system into a somewhat dullish, entirely dogmatic system. 
It can now be argued that one factor contributing to the disappearance of the ancient Sāṁkhya-text the Ṣaṣṭitantra, which apparently 
displayed a high degree of “rationality”, was the method of knowledge 
transmission: this was an extremely laborious process, and investing 
in a laborious process of manuscript transmission presupposes devotion to a tradition. In the course of time, the method of knowledge 
transmission through manuscripts quite generally strengthened and 
reinforced traditionality. It marginalized rational criticism on traditional truths, by a sort of “natural selection”: who wants to invest 
much time in transmitting criticisms which undermine the system to 
58  For a more expanded form of the argument see Houben 1999 and 2001. 
59  Furley 1973: 43.

--- Page 52 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
36
which one is devoted, precisely the system for which one is investing 
time in transmitting? A marginalization of rational criticism also took 
place in Sāṁkhya which gradually transformed from a relatively heterogeneous rational movement (reflected e.g. in passages in the 
Mahābhārata, the epic which is thought to have arisen roughly from 
2nd bce—4th ce) into the doctrinal system represented in the 
Sāṁkhya-kārikās (ca. 4th ce) for which a very late Sāṁkhya-sūtra 
appeared in the fifteenth century, with as most important commentary the one by Vijñānabhikṣu (16th century). 
A change in the mode of knowledge transmission was apparently, 
and with some temporal delay to let natural selection do its work, correlated with a change in the balance between the pramāṇas, viz. perception, inference and tradition, the sources of reliable knowledge as 
accepted in most of the Indian philosophical schools. The change in 
mode of knowledge transmission was also correlated with a change in 
social relations and access to knowledge. When philosophical schools 
were switching from a purely oral mode of knowledge transmission to 
the mode of the written, that is, hand-written, text, traditionality was 
reinforced in Sāṁkhya, at the cost of rationality which was its hallmark at earlier times.60
2.11  Here we considered Sāṁkhya of a later period in which the 
transmission went through manuscripts with Sāṁkhya of an earlier 
period when it functioned in an oral environment. Another case concerns Indian Āyurvedic texts, especially passages in these texts that 
deal with the classification of animals. In a study on animals in Indian 
ecology and medicine, Francis Zimmermann (1982, 1987) studied 
and analysed the “styles of thought” in the Indian and the Western, 
Greco-Latin tradition, in order to find an answer to this question. 
More concretely, Zimmermann studied, on the one hand, the “scales 
of beings” found in Indian texts, especially in Āyurveda, the Indian 
system of health and longevity, and, on the other hand, the origins of 
Western botany and zoology for which he used especially H. Daudin’s 
study on the methods of classification in botany and zoology, from 
Linnaeus to Lamarck. In his book, Zimmermann argued for two positions. First, following the suggestions of Daudin, Zimmermann finds 
60  A somewhat similar “natural selection” argument has been employed with 
regard to the Kashmirian Udbhaṭa, the undogmatic grammarian and Cārvāka, whose 
positions have not been transmitted to modern times except through references for 
refutation: Bronkhorst 2008.

--- Page 53 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
37
that two aristotelian ideas have opened the way that led European 
thought from theology to the natural sciences: (a) the idea of a hierarchy of beings (on the basis of a hierarchy of their mental functions); 
and (b) the idea of continuity. Second, on the basis of a survey of 
ancient Indian sources, Zimmermann concludes that in India the 
classification was always ethical, juridical and religious. 
However, passages from texts of the philosophical schools of Vai
śeṣika and Sāṁkhya,61 clearly show that the latter position is untenable, and that India, too, shows a rigour of thought in its dealing with 
the classification of animals. A review of the conditions of the development of botany and zoology in the 17th and 18th century further 
reveals that there is an important difference between the West and 
India not taken into account by Zimmermann. The work and thought 
of Linnaeus presuppose an international community of scholars that 
cannot exist without a means of communication, namely printing, 
that was absent in brahmanical and Hindu India whose texts Zimmer
mann studied. It is further analysed how the difference between India 
and the West is not absolute but a matter of the balance between different ways of fixing and transmitting texts, each of which has profound implications for the organisation of knowledge in the text. 
These different ways include: various ways of oral fixation (e.g. in 
poetry), handwritten texts, and, since the 15th century in Europe, 
printing. The “style of thought” regarding living beings—plants and 
animals, including man—thus appears as heavily conditioned by the 
means of knowledge transmission, which makes the explanatory 
device of a postulated “Indian mind” or “Indian mentality” entirely 
inappropriate, even if we may recognise, impressionistically, a special 
“way of thinking” in the ancient Indian works at our disposal. 
We may here also refer to the theory proposed by Richard Gombrich 
(1988: 29), that “the rise of the Mahāyāna is due to the use of writing.” 
This he clarifies as follows: “the early Mahāyāna texts owe their survival to the fact that they were written down; any earlier texts which 
deviated from or criticized the canonical norms (by which I mean 
approximately the contents of the Vinaya Khandhaka and Sutta 
Vibhaṅga and the Four Nikāya of the Sutta Piṭaka) could not survive 
because they were not included among the texts which the Saṅgha 
61  For instance Padārthadharmasaṁgraha 1.1.30-31. These passages have been 
discussed in Houben 2009a par. 3.1-2.

--- Page 54 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
38
preserved orally.”62 With this explanation, if we accept it, we should 
rather say that the emergence of Mahāyāna has been facilitated by 
writing. But even this much would be an important achievement of 
“writing” which means, contextually, mainly manuscript writing. 
In a quite different period and context, a perhaps somewhat similar 
pattern can be discerned. On the basis of an extensive study of textual 
evidence and of the religious background and context of Madhva 
(13th cent.), Roque Mesquita (1997, 2000; review: Houben 2000) concludes that the passages that are cited from “unknown sources,” usually in order to establish points that deviate from the Brahminical 
tradition and from doctrines adhered to by Śaṅkara and other 
Vedāntic teachers, are mainly composed by no-one else than Madhva 
himself. According to Mesquita this does not necessarily mean that 
Madhva was a fraud and forger, as was claimed by roughly contemporaneous opponents and later by Appayya Dīkṣita. In the light of his 
religious background and on the basis of his own statements it can be 
inferred that Madhva sincerely believed that he wrote the passages in 
question under direct inspiration of Viṣṇu, as he regarded himself as 
an incarnation of Vāyu, Viṣṇu’s son.
From the work of Madhva and its reception it is clear that in his 
time (13th century) the study of texts of great cultural and religious 
importance, such as the Mahābhārata, could imply the search and 
study of manuscripts. Contemporary critics were not convinced that 
Madhva had followed proper and generally accepted methods in his 
dealing with the sources. Cf. Mesquita 1997 and Houben 2000: 467. It 
would thus seem that Madhva could innovate in the domain of 
Mahābhārata interpretation (and in the domain of the interpretation 
of the Brahma-sūtra) through references to (real or virtual) written 
sources. 
62  Falk 1993: 327 on this thesis of Gombrich: “Neu ist seine Erklärung für das 
Aufkommen der ältesten erhaltenen Mahāyāna-Texte ... Schriftlich fixierte Texte 
jedoch konnten von einem einzigen Autor verfasst werden, ohne dass eine Ablehnung durch den Saṅgha ihnen hätte schaden können.” Gombrich’s view has been 
criticized as inadequate: Bronkhorst 2000: 129 note 10 and references given there. 
The content of recently discovered very early Buddhist manuscripts in the northwest has not shown any presence of particular Mahāyānist ideas (Salomon 1999). 
This leaves the southern part of the Indian subcontinent, where we find early testimonies of writing and where we find places associated with the name of Buddhist 
teachers such as Nāgārjuna who were important for Mahāyāna, as a possible or even 
likely area of origin of these ideas.

--- Page 55 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
39
With regard to “features” of the Indian intellectual world, are there 
some that can be attributed to manuscript culture in its peculiar association with orality and memory culture? Have India and its manuscript culture been more favourable to the maintenance of an 
ideo-diversity and doxographic plurality that disappeared in Europe 
due to the early adoption of printing? Would a cooperation between 
the state and the church as witnessed in Europe after the adoption of 
printing, a cooperation which presupposes, on the one hand, the possibility to distribute and impose “correct” translations of the Bible, 
and, on the other hand, the possibility to track down and burn heretical works together with their authors, not have been entirely impossible in a society communicating only through manuscripts?63
The linguistic, rhetorical and philological techniques and devices 
which were developed to enable the thinkers of South Asian philosophical systems to represent their knowledge in a compact, objectified and (also orally) reproducible way (making use, for instance, of 
the sūtra style), for the sake of polemical discussion and for the sake of 
transmission, did they not contribute to a considerably objectified or 
“exosomatic” tradition of knowledge (cf. Popper’s use of the term64), 
which, at least in some periods, allowed for dynamic progress through 
continuing dialectics and refinements, and the work of which was 
hence to some extent equivalent to the work done by “printing” in 
Europe? Was Indian manuscript culture on the other hand conducive 
to endless scholasticism from which Europe could liberate itself in the 
Renaissance while employing the printing press (cf. Eisenstein)? 
Turning to literature and art rather than science, we can, however, 
agree with Sheldon Pollock, that the Indian world is “most probably 
the longest-lived continuous multi-language literary culture” on earth, 
63  There was already an Inquisition in Europe before printing, but it was far 
removed from the efficiency of the later Inquisition. Cf. Lea 1889 in general, and vol. 
3 p. 551ff on Bacon. 
64  Popper, A pluralist approach to the philosophy of history, revised version with 
some additional remarks in Popper 1994:130-153, esp. 134, 149-150: “For me, 
knowledge consists essentially of exosomatic artefacts, or products, or institutions. (It 
is their exosomatic character that makes them rationally criticizable.) There is 
knowledge without a knowing subject—that knowledge, for instance, which is stored 
in our libraries. Thus there can be growth of knowledge without any growth of 
awareness in the knower.” South Asia and its millennia-old oral and written traditions provides large amounts of data with a deep historical dimension to test these 
ideas which were formulated without any reference to this part of the world. On the 
importance of methods of representation and transmission of knowledge incl. the 
development of an artificial language for the growth of knowledge cf. also Staal 1995.

--- Page 56 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
40
and that literary culture in pre-modern South Asia “was actually constituted by a manuscript culture that in its material and economic 
aspect was also specific to the subcontinent” and large parts of Asia.65 
3.  Manuscript Culture in India: When and How Did It End? 
3.1  One contour, a temporal boundary, of the huge domain of manuscript culture in India has been determined: it is the time of the first 
emergence of manuscript writing, which started a long transitional 
period in which manuscript culture established itself partly by taking 
over some of the space occupied till then by orality and memory culture. Another contour is the time in which manuscript writing started 
to lose terrain to printing. In Europe this started at the end of the fifteenth century, when Johannes Gutenberg was the first to print Bibles 
instead of having them copied by hand. 
When did India adopt printing? As we have seen in our brief discussion of categorizations of animals in Āyurvedic texts and in the 
emerging zoology in pre-modern Europe, India remained remarkably 
immune to temptations to adopt printing for the transmission of its 
sacred texts, knowledge systems and literatures, just as it had remained 
remarkably immune to temptations to adopt writing for the transmission of its sacred texts, knowledge systems and literatures one and a 
half to two millennia earlier. As at the time of the adoption of writing 
a few centuries before ce, India, with mainly oral text transmission, 
was surrounded by countries in which writing was important, India 
was now, in the last quarter of the second millennium ce, surrounded 
and even invaded by countries and powers where printing was important. 
65  Both quotes from Pollock 2007: 77-78. By no means, however, can we agree 
with Pollock’s assimilation of manuscript use and print. The extreme and exceptional 
example (Pollock 2006: 558) of king Siddharāja Jayasiṁha’s investment of 300.000 
coins to spread Hemacandra’s grammar (and his own fame) “in all lands” cannot 
hide the fact that reproducing a large number of manuscripts is cumbersome and 
implies variation and uncertainty (scribal mistakes) to a far greater extent than in 
printing. There may have been a rudimentary form of script-mercantilism in premodern India as Pollock points out, but where were the manuscript/book shops, 
where the equivalents to print-workshops, where the Grub street hacks of the emerging print-culture in Renaissance and pre-modern Europe? In India “pre-Gutenberg 
Asia” (Eisenstein 1979: 9 note 18 quoted above) continued till 1800 when printing 
houses established in Calcutta had started to fulfil functions in the interest both of 
the colonial powers and of foreign and Indian authors and public.

--- Page 57 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
41
Quite early in the history of western printing a printing press which 
the Portuguese wanted to send to Abyssinia (Ethiopia) arrived by 
accident in Goa, in 1556, where it was put into use by the Jesuits for 
the printing of missionary publications. The press functioned till 1684. 
Other printing presses started to function seriously only in the eighteenth century, especially in Madras, Bombay and Calcutta. On the 
whole, however, “early attempts proved short-lived and did not lead 
to a development of the press on a nation-wide scale” (Priolkar 1958: 
129). They remained mostly in the hands of missionaries who printed 
Bibles, catechisms, dictionaries, and, towards of the end of the pre1800 period, indigenous books of historical, political and scientific 
interest. Two major obstacles have been mentioned to the development of printing in India. “One was the range and diversity of Indian 
languages and alphabets. The other was political restraint imposed by 
colonial administrations” (Winger 1959: 274). To this we may add 
that text transmission through manuscripts and the sparse remaining 
oral traditions were apparently quite satisfactory to the users, so that 
there was no interest or eagerness to make the heavy investments 
needed to start a printing press. To deflect the mind of those involved 
in transmitting texts would not have been an easy thing. It could have 
been accomplished by a strong administrator. Indeed, it has been proposed that the Maratha king Shivaji got much interested in printing. 
He apparently did make a serious attempt to start a printing press 
when in 1664, during the second sack of Surat, he captured a wooden 
press. Probably he had already understood about the use of the press 
from the Italian traveller Manuchi. With the help of a certain Bhimjee 
Parakh, Shivaji tried to get the required operating knowledge from the 
English, who, however, kept the Indians hanging for years without 
saying no. Apparently, Shivaji got edited books on Rāja-vyavahāraKośa (administrative code), a religious poem Śiva-bhārata by Para
mānanda etc. But they remained in manuscript form only (“Aagastya” 
1984).
3.2  The printing press effectively remained in the hands of missionaries and colonial powers. The printing press was de facto adopted for 
the transmission of Indian texts in Sanskrit and other languages only 
in the early nineteenth century. We are aware of two early cases. 
Serfoji II of Thanjavur, whose political power within colonial India 
was virtually zero, set up a printing press in 1805 and printed some 
Sanskrit and Marathi books. In the mean time several presses in the

--- Page 58 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
42
hands of British entrepreneurs were in function in Calcutta since a 
few decades. When the freedom of the Press in India became an issue, 
Englishmen were threatened with deportion in case they would not 
comply with instructions. In spring 1823, in the course of another 
conflict between printers of journals and periodicals and the Governor, 
no Englishman dared to protest a recent encroachment on the freedom of press out of fear of being transshipped. 
At that moment Rammohan Roy and five other Indians stepped 
forward to promote an objection petition in the Supreme Court. This 
was the beginning of the conscious appropriation of the printing press 
by Indians for the diffusion of writings in various languages, from 
newspaper articles to traditional texts. This, in turn, was an important 
factor in the creation of a new “Sanskrit and Hindu” national identity, 
including a printed canon of national texts, in nineteenth century 
Bengal (van Bijlert 1996). The powers of the printing press were 
quickly discovered throughout India. The political successes of Bal 
Gangadhar Tilak were greatly promoted by two newspapers, one in 
English and one in Marathi, co-founded by him in the early 1880s. 
With the whole-hearted adoption of the printing press for all types 
of texts, traditional, educational, political, etc., and with some of the 
Europeans taking more interest in ancient literature than the Indians 
themselves, the production of manuscripts was quickly abandoned—
more quickly and more completely than orality was abandoned at the 
time of the adoption of manuscript writing two millennia earlier. 
Instead of the drive to transmit texts through manuscripts which 
seemed impossible to deflect a century earlier, we now see a relatively 
fast transition to a different trend which gains momentum towards 
the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth: 
the collection of manuscripts in private libraries and government 
institutions. The printing press also enables attempts to give shape, for 
the first time, to a nation-wide canon of edited texts. Among the first 
texts Rammohan Roy brought to the press for publication—between 
1815 and 1819, even before he stepped forward to defend the freedom 
of press—were the five Upaniṣads and the Brahma Sūtra in Sanskrit 
and with Bengali translations (van Bijlert 1996: 353). The problem of 
the production and distribution of manuscripts starts to give way to 
the problem of the collection and conservation of manuscripts and of 
the creation of critical editions on their basis. Manuscript culture 
gives way to print culture. Instead of a King such as Jayasiṁha 
Siddharāja in 12th century Gujarat giving order to 300 copyists to dis-

--- Page 59 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
43
tribute manuscripts of Hemacandra’s Sanskrit grammar, there is a 
Government of Bombay, or Government of India that sets up manuscript search expeditions and oriental libraries. 
The contour which concludes an Indian manuscript culture is 
therefore to be placed, without much hesitation, at 1800 or at the 
beginning of the nineteenth century, when the conscious adoption 
and institution of print culture starts which brings to a definitive conclusion, in less than a century, the manuscript culture that had been 
blossoming for two millennia. Important dates in this period of emergence of a new Indian print culture and abandonment of manuscript 
culture are 1805 (Serfoji II, Thanjavur, starts a printing press, the 
Navavidya Kalanidhi); 1815-1819 Rammohan Roy prints Upaniṣads 
and Brahma Sūtra with, according to his correspondence, the explicit 
purpose to re-educate the “Hindoos” as nation; and 1823: Rammohan 
Roy and five other Indians step forward to defend freedom of press in 
Bengal. 
4.  (South) Indian Manuscript Culture and 
the Contributions in this Book
4.1  From this brief overview we derive two temporal contours of 
Indian manuscript culture: an earlier one, around the second or third 
century before ce; and a concluding one, more than two millennia 
later, in the first decades of the nineteenth century. We encountered 
some crucial parameters, which have till now hardly been taken into 
consideration. An important and decisive parameter is the balance 
between (a) manuscript culture and (b) orality and memory culture. A 
significant difference with shifts towards alphabetic writing in ancient 
Greece and in other cultures is the availability of extraordinarily efficient techniques of memory culture, not only in a somewhat loose 
“oral epic” mode, but also in an extraordinarily precise “Vedic” mode, 
that precedes literacy and that accompanies a slow transition towards 
writing. Other parameters of Indian manuscript culture are decisive 
for its internal history, but have not surfaced in our preceding brief 
overview: the interaction between different regional languages, different scripts adapted to these languages and to Sanskrit. Moreover, in 
addition to the temporal contours discussed above there are geographic contours to India’s manuscript culture. On the one hand, 
Indian and Indic scripts have transcended the boundaries of the area

--- Page 60 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
44
where they developed and have been used far beyond the political 
boundaries of Indian kingdoms and empires, especially in Central 
Asia, South East Asia and the Far East. On the other hand, within 
India boundaries are distinguishable, especially the one between 
“north” and “south” which shows itself in several domains, not only in 
script but also in linguistic and sociolinguistic conditions and in textual transmission. 
 
4.2  The temporal contours and the major parameters of competing 
means of textual transmission are here presented in a diagram. The 
pre-Aśokan use of Indic writing for ephemeral purposes of which 
there is no trace except for the very scanty evidence of Sri Lanka has 
here been neglected. Early “Padapāṭha” orality has also been left out 
from the diagram. It is to be noted that at the end of India’s period 
of manuscript culture its disappearance seems almost immediate and 
more or less total in comparison with the marginal continuation of oral 
memory culture over centuries, in a hybrid form till the pāṭhaśālās of 
modern India. 
Relative volume of textual transmission 
 
 
from at least 
1750 BCE 
 
Orality and Textual Memory Culture 
 
 
3rd BCE 
 
0 
 
 
 
Writing and 
 
 
 
Manuscript Culture 
 
1000 
 
 
 
1800 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Print Culture 
1990 
 
 
 
2010 
 
 
Internet (www), 
 
 
 
Electronic Texts 
 
Figure 1.1  Timeline Manuscript Culture in “India”

--- Page 61 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
45
4.3  With the preceding discussion and the concluding Timeline we 
have a backdrop against which the papers of this book can be presented. A considerable number of the chapters that follow do not deal 
with nicely wrapped and stored manuscripts but with manuscripts 
which were recently, or which still are, part of a living culture, in an 
environment where manuscript culture is intertwined with oral transmission and a cultural or religious tradition. The manuscript culture 
directly or indirectly referred to in the following chapters is usually 
coexisting with strong oral and ritual traditions. 
The second chapter, by Saraju Rath, deals with the origin of the van 
Manen collection. It is the collection prepared by Johan van Manen in 
the 1920s on the basis of small-scale searches in South India, and it is 
this collection which provided the occasion to organize the workshop 
and to collect the papers in a volume. In time the manuscripts may go 
back to the sixteenth or seventeenth century, hence to a time when 
manuscript culture was still in full blossom. 
The third chapter, by Gérard Colas, deals with a collection of Indian 
manuscripts that were among the earliest ones acquired in Europe 
after having been collected in South India (by Le Gac, Gargam and 
others) and in Bengal (by Pons) and that were sent to the King’s 
Library by French Jesuits at the beginning of 18th century (1729 to 
1735). This is one of the earliest collections of Indian manuscripts outside India, which was later on of the greatest importance for the development of Indology in Europe. Among the manuscripts in Sanskrit, 
Tamil and Telugu language Colas deals here especially with the latter. 
In the fourth chapter, Anna Esposito deals with South Indian 
drama manuscripts which represent a quite uniform tradition. The 
famous “Trivandrum plays” attributed to Bhāsa belong to this category. A detailed description is given of the material and the script. 
They possess minute specific features that have a clear distribution 
over time so that they can help in dating a manuscript if no date is 
indicated, which is usually the case. 
Masato Fujii, in the fifth chapter, deals with Jaiminīya Sāmaveda 
traditions and the use they made and still make of manuscripts. The 
rare Sāmaveda of the Jaiminīyas is found only in South India, in 
Kerala and Tamil Nadu. The author gives a historical and geographical survey of the Jaiminīya traditions and manuscripts which he and 
Asko Parpola have documented in a joint research enterprise with 
extensive field investigations. The private libraries in Kerala are of 
considerable interest in their own right as they contain various other

--- Page 62 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
46
works such as grammar apart from the technical literature of the 
Sāmaveda and thus provide precious insights into Brahminical erudition and manuscript culture at the level of South Indian villages. 
Cezary Galewicz, in chapter six, deals with the search for and collection of manuscripts of a specific text of which initially only a title 
was known, the Yamalāṣṭakatantra. This text is transmitted in a milieu 
of Ṛgvedic paṇḍits in which the orally produced text has the highest 
status. This is consequential for the problems of identifying a specific 
text in manuscripts under this title.
Chapter seven, by Heike Moser, explains the “Bhāsa research 
project,” which started in Tübingen and shifted in 2001 to Würzburg. 
In this project a multi-media data bank is in preparation. The project 
participants got by now acquainted with a large number of pages of 
handwritings and have become experts in reading Sanskrit and Prakrit 
in Malayalam script. The manuscript transmission is intimately intertwined with a still living cultural transmission. 
P. Perumal is senior conservator and librarian at one of the largest 
libraries in India, the Thanjavur Maharaja Serfoji’s Sarasvati Mahal 
Library. In his chapter, no. eight, he gives an overview of procedures 
for the production, distribution and collection of manuscript and 
explains details on writing instruments and writing materials. 
In chapter nine, Kim Plofker deals with the contribution of Indian 
mathematics and calendrical time-calculation to the study of manuscripts (whether belonging to mathematics or any other domain). 
Making full use of the Indian exact sciences one is often able to attribute a more precise date to a manuscript through the analysis of a 
horoscope or calendric computations. Important information can 
also be derived from numeric and calendric systems that are abundantly represented in dates found in scribal colophons of astronomical and astrological texts (on which see now also Plofker 2008).
Saraju Rath explores, in chapter ten, distinct styles of Grantha script 
in manuscripts which have so far not been properly described in currently available studies and handbooks. With the help of test-characters it can be shown that these distinct styles are linked with different 
periods and regions. This correlation can be used as one of the crucial 
factors for the determination of the date and place of origin of a manu
script.
In chapter eleven, Sreeramula R. Sarma, demonstrates the importance of the innumerable individual collections of priestly or other 
Brahmin householders that became a major constituent of most

--- Page 63 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
47
manuscript depositories. On the basis of the palm leaf manuscripts of 
his own family he provides the reader a rare insight into the conditions of collecting and preserving these documents, and shows how 
they narrate the family tradition. The detailed information on the 
maintenance and transmission of small private collections over many 
centuries of (South) Indian manuscript culture, make Sarma’s description all the more precious. Appendix I contains the edition of a small 
text, Daśāvatāra-arghyālu, Appendix II describes another text, the 
Varṣaphala. 
In chapter twelve, Dominik Wujastyk reports on a research visit to 
the village on the banks of the river Kaveri near Kumbakonam which 
was founded by King Shahaji of Thanjavur as academic community, 
in or just before 1693. Special attention is paid to the work and manuscript library of Ramasubba Sastrigal, an active scholar from about 
1900 whose family members today still energetically maintain the 
intellectual tradition started by members of King Shahaji’s academy, 
now more than 300 years ago.
In chapter thirteen, finally, Kenneth G. Zysk takes a modest collection of Sanskrit manuscripts from Mithila as starting point to create a 
map of Indian intellectual history for that geographical area. This is 
then used as a working model to be applied to similar central repositories of manuscript collections in South India, which should maintain 
as much information as possible on provenance and date of acceptance. The collection of Sanskrit manuscript and their centralized 
storage is, however, not one that reflects Indian intellectual history, 
which was, for the most part based on individual thinkers in different 
parts of the country, where manuscripts are tools for to a large part 
still oral teaching. 
References and Abbreviations
“Aagastya.” 1984. “Shivaji and Printing.” CALTIS-85: Special issue on calligraphy, lettering & typography of Indian scripts (ed. L.S. Wakankar): 33-34. Pune: Organising 
Committee CALTIS. 
Allchin, F.R. 1995. The Archaeology of Early Historic South Asia: The Emergence of 
Cities and States. Cambridge: Cambridge University. 
Aufrecht, Theodor. 1891. Catalogus Catalogorum. An Alphabetical Register of Sanskrit 
Works and Authors. Leipzig: A. Brockhaus. 
———. 1896. Catalogus Catalogorum. An Alphabetical Register of Sanskrit Works and 
Authors, Part II. Leipzig: A. Brockhaus.
Baums, Stephan. forthc. “The Production of Manuscripts in Early Gandhāra: oral and 
written elements of transmission.” Presentation at “Lecteurs et copistes dans les

--- Page 64 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
48
traditions manuscrites iraniennes, indiennes et centrasiatiques.” Paris, 15-16 June 
2010. 
Bechert, Heinz (ed.). 1991-1992-1997. The Dating of the Historical Buddha—Die 
Datierung des Historischen Buddhas. Vols. 1-3. Göttingen, Vandenhoeck & 
Ruprecht.
Berkwitz, Stephen C., Juliane Schober and Claudia Brown. 2009. Buddhist Manuscript 
Cultures: Knowledge, ritual and art. New York: Routledge. 
Bloch, Jules. 1950. Les Inscriptions d’Aśoka, traduites et commentées. Paris: Société 
d’édition “les belles lettres.”
Bright, William. 1999. “A Matter of Typology: Alphasyllabaries and Abugidas.” 
Written Language and Literacy 2: 45-56. 
Bronkhorst, Johannes. 1982. “Some observations on the Padapāṭha of the Ṛgveda.” 
Indo-Iranian Journal 24: 181-189. 
———. 2000. “II.1 Die buddhistische Lehre.” In: Der Buddhismus I: Der indische 
Buddhismus und seine Verzweigungen (Heinz Bechert, Johannes Bronkhorst, 
Jacob Ensink, Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Petra Kieffer-Pülz, Hans-Joachim Klimkeit, 
Siegfried Lienhard, Ian William Mabbett): 23-212. 
———. 2002. “Literacy and Rationality.” Asiatische Studien / Études Asiatiques 56.1: 
797-831. 
———. 2007. Greater Māgadha. Leiden: E.J. Brill. 
———. 2008. “Udbhaṭa, a Grammarian and a Cārvāka.” In: Linguistic Traditions of 
Kashmir (ed. M. Kaul & A. Aklujkar): 281-299. 
Burnell, A.C. 1876. Ārsheyabrāhmaṇa, being the Fourth Brāhmaṇa of the Sāma Veda. 
Mangalore: Stolz & Hirner, Basel Mission Press. 
———. 1878. Elements of South-Indian palaeography from the 4th to the 17th century. 
Second enl. and improved edition. London: Trübner. 
Bijlert, Victor van. 1996. “Sanskrit and Hindu national identity in nineteenth century 
Bengal.” Ideology and Status of Sanskrit (ed. Jan E.M. Houben): 347-366. Leiden: 
Brill. 
CII = Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, Calcutta / Oxford, 1877 -. 
Colas, Gérard. 2009. “Des rites de temple aux commentaires : les différentes transmissions du Pāramātmika.” Ecrire et Transmettre en Inde Classique (Colas, Gérard, 
and Gerdi Gerschheimer): 221-239. Paris: Ecole Française d’Extrême Orient. 
Colebrooke, Henry T. 1937. Miscellaneous Essays. London. reprint New Delhi 1977. 
Coningham, Robin and F.R. Allchin. 1992. “Anuradhapura Citadel Archaeological 
Project: Preliminary Report of the Third Season of Sri Lanka-British Excavations 
at Salgaha Watt, July-September 1991.” South Asia Studies (Cambridge)
Coulmas, Florian. 1996. The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Writing Systems. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
———. 2003. Writing Systems: An Introduction to their Linguistic Analysis. Cambridge: 
Cambridge Univ. Press. 
Cousins, L.S. 1996. “The Dating of the Historical Buddha: A Review Article.” Journal 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, Series 3, 6.1: 57-63. (Review of Bechert 1991-1992.)
Cribb, Joe. 1985. “Dating India’s Earliest Coins.” South Asian Archeology—1983 (eds. 
M. Taddei and J. Schotsmans): 535-554. Napoli: Istituto Universitario Orientale, 
Dipartimento di Studi Asiatici. 
———. 2005. The Indian Coinage Tradition: Origins, Continuity & Change. Nashik: 
IIRNS Publications.
Daniels, Peter and William Bright. 1996. The World’s Writing Systems. New York: 
Oxford Univ. Press. 
Datta, Bimal Kumar. 1970. Libraries and Librarianship of ancient and medieval India. 
Delhi: Atma Ram and Sons.

--- Page 65 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
49
Demiéville, Paul. 1951. “A propos du concile de Vaiśālī.” T’oung Pao 40: 239-296. 
Deraniyagala, S.U. 1990a. “Radiocarbon dating of Early Brahmi script in Sri Lanka: 
600-500 bc” Ancient Ceylon 11: 149-168. 
———. 1990b. “The proto and early historic radiocarbon chronology of Sri Lanka. 
Ancient Ceylon 12: 211-250. 
Dumézil, Georges 1981. “La tradition druidique et l’écriture: le vivant et le mort.” In 
Georges Dumézil. Cahiers pour un temps (ed. F. Desbordes): 325-338. Paris: 
Pandora. 
EI = Epigraphia Indica, New Delhi, 1888- . 
Einicke, Katrin. 2009. Korrektur, Differenzierung und Abkürzung in indischen 
Inschriften und Handschriften. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 
Eisenstein, Elizabeth L. 1979. The Printing Press as an Agent of Change: communications and cultural transformations in early modern Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Falk, Harry. 1990. “Goodies for India—Literacy, Orality, and Vedic Culture.” In: 
Erscheinungsformen kultureller Prozesse (ed. by W. Raible): 103-120. Tübingen: 
Gunter Narr Verlag. 
———. 1993. Schrift im alten Indien. Ein Forschungsbericht mit Anmerkungen. 
Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag. 
———. 2001. “The Galitas in the Ṛgveda Padapāṭha: on the origin of the Saṁhitāpāṭha 
and the Padapāṭha.” In: The Pandit: Traditional Scholarship in India (ed. Axel 
Michaels): 181-202. New Delhi: Manohar. 
———. 2006. Aśokan Sites and Artefacts: a Source-book with Bibliography. Mainz: 
Philipp von Zabern. 
Farmer, S. Sproat, Witzel, Michael. 2004. “The Collapse of the Indus-Script Thesis.” 
Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies, 11.2: 19-57. 
Filliozat, Jean. 1963. “Les écritures indiennes—le monde indien et son système graphique.” L’écriture et la psychologie des peuples (ed. M.R. Cohen et J.S.F. Garnot): 
147-166. Paris: Centre international. 
Furley, David. 1973. “Rationality among the Greeks and Romans.” Dictionary of the 
History of Ideas: Studies of selected pivotal ideas, vol. IV (ed. Ph. P. Wiener): 46-51. 
New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons. 
Gaur, Ramesh and Mrinmoy Chakraborty. 2009. “Preservation and Access to Indian 
Manuscripts: A Knowledge Base of Indian Cultural Heritage Resources for 
Academic Libraries. Paper presented at the International Conference on Academic 
Libraries.” (ICAL-2009). 
Gignoux, Philippe. 1994. “Dēnkard.” In: Encyclopædia Iranica. http://www.iranica.
com/articles/denkard. Accessed 12 August 2009. 
Gombrich, Richard. 1988. “How the Mahāyāna began.” Journal of Pali and Buddhist 
Studies: 1: 29-46. 
Goody, Jack (ed.). 1968. Literacy in traditional societies. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Goody, Jack. 1977. The Domestication of the Savage Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
———. 1985. “Oral composition and oral transmission: the case of the Vedas.” In: 
Oralità: Cultura, Letteratura, Discorso (ed. by B. Gentilli and G. Paioni): 7-17. 
Roma: Edizioni dell’Ateneo. 
———. 1987. The Interface Between the Written and the Oral. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
———. 2000. The Power of the Written Tradition. Washington: Smithsonian 
Institution Press.

--- Page 66 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
50
Goody, Jack and Ian Watt. 1963. “The Consequences of Literacy.” Comparative 
Studies in Society and History 5.3: 304-345. Repr. in Goody (ed.) 1968: 27-68. 
Goyal, S.R. 1979. “Brāhmī—An Invention of the Early Mauryan Period.” The Origin 
of the Brāhmī Script (ed. S.P. Gupta and K.S. Ramachandran): 1-52. Delhi: D.K. 
Publishers. 
Halverson, John. 1992a. “Havelock on Greek Orality and Literacy.” Journal of the 
History of Ideas: 53.1: 148-163. 
———. 1992b. “Goody and the Implosion of the Literacy Thesis.” Man (New Series): 
27.2: 301-317. 
Havelock, Eric A. 1957. The Liberal Temper in Greek Politics. New Haven: Yale 
University. 
———. 1963. Preface to Plato. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University. 
———. 1986. The Muse Learns to Write : Reflections on Orality and Literacy from 
Antiquity to the Present. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Heesterman, J.C. 1993. The Broken World of Sacrifice: An Essay in Ancient Indian 
Ritual. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Hikosaka, Shu, John Samuel, A. Pandurangan, P. Maruthanayagam (eds.). 1995. 
Palm-leaf and other manuscripts in Indian languages (proceedings of the national 
seminar). Madras: Institute of Asian Studies.
Hinüber, Oskar von. 1989. Der Beginn der Schrift und frühe Schriftlichkeit in Indien. 
Stuttgart: Franz Steiner. 
Hinzler, H. 1993. “Balinese Palm Leaf Manuscripts.” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde 149: 438-473. 
Hoernle, A.F. Rudolf. 1900. “An Epigraphical Note on Palm-leaf, Paper and Birchbark.” Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 69: 93-134. 
Hoffmann, Karl, and Johanna Narten. 1989. Der Sassanidische Archetypus: Unter
suchungen zu Schreibung und Lautgestalt des Avestischen. Wiesbaden: Dr. Ludwig 
Reichert Verlag. 
Hoffmann, Karl, and Bernhard Forssman. 1996. Avestische Laut- und Flexionslehre. 
Innsbruck: Innsbrucker Beiträge zur Sprachwissenschaft. 
Houben, Jan E.M. 1999. “Why did rationality thrive, but hardly survive in Kapila’s 
‘System’? On the pramāṇas, rationality and irrationality in Sāṁkhya (Part I).” 
Asiatische Studien / Études Asiatiques 53.3: 491-512.
———. 2000. Review of Mesquita 1997. Asiatische Studien / Études Asiatiques 54.2: 
463-468. 
———. 2001. “ ‘Verschriftlichung’ and the relation between the pramāṇas in the history of Sāṁkhya.” Études de Lettres 2001.3: La rationalité en Asie / Rationality in 
Asia: 165-194.
———. 2002. “The Brahmin Intellectual : History, Ritual and 'Time Out of Time' .” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 30.5: 463-479.
———. 2009a. “Penser les êtres—plantes et animaux—'à l’indienne'.” Penser, dire et 
représenter l’animal dans le monde indien (sous la dir. de N. Balbir et de G.-J. 
Pinault; Bibliothèque de l’Ecole des Hautes Etudes, t. 345): 21-45. Paris: Champion.
———. 2009b. “Transmission Sans Ecriture dans l’Inde Ancienne: Enigme et Structure 
Rituelle.” Ecrire et Transmettre en Inde Classique (Colas, Gérard, and Gerdi 
Gerschheimer): 81-105. Paris: Ecole Française d’Extrême Orient. 
Hudson, Nicholas. 2002. “Challenging Eisenstein: Recent Studies in Print Culture.” 
Eigteenth-Century Life, Volume 26, no. 2: 83-95. 
Jacobi, Hermann. 1884. Jaina Sūtras. Vol. 1. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Jahn, Samia Al Azharia. 2006. “Comparative studies on different concepts about the 
origin of writing on palm leaf: botany—traditional technologies—divine teachers.” Asiatische Studien / Etudes Asiatiques 60.4: 921-961.

--- Page 67 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
51
Janert, Klaus Ludwig. 1995. Bibliographie mit den Berichten über die mündliche und 
schriftliche Textweitergabe sowie die Schreibmaterialien in Indien. Teil 1: Berichts
zeit bis 1955). Bonn: VGH Wissenschaftsverlag. 
Johns, Adrian. 1998. The Nature of the Book: Print and Knowledge in the Making. 
Chicago: University of Chicago. 
Kangle, R.P. 1986. The Kauṭilīya Arthaśāstra, vols. I-III. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
First Edition: Bombay University 1965. 
Katre, S.M. 1954. Introduction to Indian Textual Criticism, with Appendix III by P.K. 
Gode. Poona: Deccan College. 
Lea, Henry Charles. 1889. A History of the Inquisition of the Middle Ages. 3 vols. New 
ed. New York: The Harbor Press.
LŚS = Lāṭyāyaṇa-śrauta-sūtra, edited and translated by H.G. Ranade, vol. I 
(Prapāṭhakas I-V), Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Mackenzie Brown, C. 1986. “Purāṇa as Scripture: From Sound to Image of the Holy 
Word in the Hindu Tradition.” History of Religion 26: 68-86. 
Malandra, William. 2002. “Notes on the Avestan Grammatical Tradition.” Indian 
Linguistic Studies: Festschrift in Honor of George Cardona (Madhav M. Deshpande 
and Peter E. Hook): 223-233. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Maniaci, Marilena. 2005. Archeologia del manoscritto. Metodi, problemi, bibliografia 
recente. Roma: Viella. 
Matsumura, Hisashi. 1986. “On Editing Indian Codices Multi.” Aligarh Journal of 
Oriental Studies, vol. III.2: 93-100. 
Mesquita, Roque. 1997. Madhva und seinen unbekannten literarischen Quellen: einige 
Beobachtungen. Wien: Institut für Indologie der Univ. Wien. 
———. 2000. Madhva’s Unknown Literary Sources: some observations. [English edition of Mesquita 1997 with minor modifications and several indices.] Delhi: 
Aditya. 
Monier-Williams, Sir Monier. 1899. A Sanskrit-English Dictionary. Oxford: Claren
don Press. 
Moore, Harold E. and John Dransfield. 1979. “The Typification of Linnaean Palms.” 
Taxon 28: 59-70. 
Muzerelle, Denis. 1985. Vocabulaire Codicologique: Répertoire méthodique des termes 
français relatifs aux manuscrits. Paris: Editions CEMI. (Extended and updated version at http://vocabulaire.irht.cnrs.fr/pages/vocab2.htm) 
Nair, K. Maheswaran. 1998. Manuscriptology. Thiruvanantapuram: Swantham Books. 
NCC = New Catalogus Catalogorum. 1965- . Volumes 1-19 (2007). University of 
Madras. 
Ong, Walter J. 1982. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. London: 
Methuen.
Parpola, Asko. 1994. Deciphering the Indus Script. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. 
Press. 
Pinchard, Alexis. 2009. Les langues de sagesse dans la Grèce et l’Inde anciennes. (École 
Pratique des Hautes Éudes, sciences historiaues et philologiques, III: Hautes Éudes 
du monde Gréco-Romain, 43.) Genève: Droz. 
Plofker, Kim. 2008. Mathematics in India. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press. 
Pollock, Sheldon. 2006. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, 
Culture, and Power in Premodern India. Berkeley: Univ. of California. 
———. 2007. “Literary culture and manuscript culture in precolonial India.” In: 
Literary culture and the material book (ed. by Simon Eliot, Andrew ²Hash and Ian 
Willison): 77-94. London: The British Library. 
Popper, Karl R. 1994. The myth of the Framework. In defence of science and rationality. 
Ed. by M.A. Notturno. London: Routledge.

--- Page 68 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
52
Possehl, Gregory. 1998. Review of The Indo-Aryans of Ancient South Asia (ed. Erdosy 
1995), Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. Journal of the American Oriental Society 118: 
120-121. 
Prajapati, Sweta. 2004. A Bibliography of Palaeography and Manuscriptology. Delhi: 
Bharatiya Kala Prakashan.
Prasad, Pushpa. 2007. Lekhapaddhati: Documents of State and Everyday Life from 
Ancient and Early Medieval Gujarat. New Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
Priolkar, A.K. 1958. The printing press in India: Its Beginnings and Early Development, 
Being a Quaternary Commemoration Study of the Advent of Printing in India (in 
1556). Bombay: Marathi Samshodhana Mandala. 
Rath, Saraju. 2011. “Vedic Education in early medieaval India according to North 
Indian charters.” Travaux de Symposium International: Le Livre. La Roumanie. 
L’Europe. Troisième édition—20-24 Septembre 2010. Section IIIA: Le VedaVedāṅga et l’Avesta entre oralité et écriture (ed. by J.E.M. Houben and J. Rotaru): 
393-424. Bucarest: Éditeur Bibliothèque de Bucarest. 
Ray, Tapti. 1995. “Disciplining the Printed Text: Colonial and Nationalist Surveillance 
of Bengali Literature.” In: Texts of Power: emerging disciplines of colonial Bengal 
(ed. Partha Chatterjee): . Minnesota: Univ. of Minnesota. 
Renou, Louis. 1947. Les écoles védiques et la formation du Veda. Paris: Imprimerie 
Nationale. 
Renou, Louis and Jean Filliozat. 1949-1953. L’Inde Classique. Vol. I (avec le concours 
de Pierre Meile, Anne-Marie Esnoul et Liliane Silburn)—Vol. II (avec le concours 
de Paul Demiéville, Olivier Lacombe et Pierre Meile). Paris: Payot /Hanoi: École 
française d'Extrême-orient. 
Salomon, Richard. 1995. “On the Origin of the Indian Scripts (review article).” 
Journal of the American Oriental Society, 115.2: 271-279. 
———. 1998. Indian Epigraphy: A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, 
Prakrit, and the other Indo-Aryan Languages. New York: Oxford University. 
———. 1999. Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhāra: The British Library Kharoṣṭhī 
Fragments. Seattle: Univ. of Washington Press. 
Sander, Lore. 1968. Paläographisches zu den Sanskrit-Handschriften der Berliner 
Turfansammlung. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner. 
Sarma, Sreeramula Rajeswara. 1985. Writing Material in Ancient India. Aligarh: 
Viveka Publications. 
———. 1986. “Palaeographic Notes.” Aligarh Journal of Oriental Studies, 2: 125-140. 
———. 2008. The Archaic and the Exotic: Studies in the History of Indian Astronomical 
Instruments. Delhi: Manohar. 
Scharfe, Hartmut. 2002. Education in Ancient India. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
———. 2009. A New Perspective on Pāṇini. (Reprinted from Indologica Taurinensia, 
vol. XXXV (2009).) Torino: Comitato AIT. 
Schopen, Gregory. 1975. “The phrase ‘sa pthivīpradeśaś caityabhūto bhavet’ in the 
Vajracchedikā: Notes on the Cult of the Book in Mahāyāna.” Indo-Iranian Journal 
17: 147-181. 
———. 2005. Figments and Fragments of Mahāyāna Buddhism in India: More Collected 
Papers. Hawai’i: Univ. of Hawai’i Press. 
Schwartzberg, Joseph E. (ed.) 1992. A Historical Atlas of South Asia. (Second impression with additional material.) New York: Oxford University Press. 
Sircar, D.C. 1957. Inscriptions of Aśoka. Delhi: Government of India, Publications 
division. 
———. 1965. Indian Epigraphy. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Staal, F. 1986. The Fidelity of Oral Tradition and the Origins of Science. Amsterdam: 
North-Holland Publishing Company.

--- Page 69 of 338 ---
manuscript culture: contours and parameters
53
———. 1995. “The Sanskrit of Science.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 23: 73-127. 
Strauch, Ingo. 2002. Die Lekhapaddhati-Lekhapañcaśikā: Briefe und Urkunden im 
mittelalterlichen Gujarat. Text, Übersetzung, Kommentar. Glossar (Sanskrit—
Deutsch—English). Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag. 
Sukthankar, V.S. 1933. “Prolegomena.” The Mahābhārata, vol. I: The Ādiparvan: 
being the first book of the Mahābhārata, the great epic of India (ed. by V.S. Sukthan
kar). Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. [Repr. in Sukthankar 1944: 
10-140.] 
———. 1944. Critical Studies in the Mahābhārata (ed. by P.K. Gode). Bombay: 
Karnatak Publishing House. 
Takakusu, J. 1896. The Buddhist Religion as practiced in India and the Malay archipelago, by I-Tsing (ad 671-695). Transl. by J. Takakusu. Oxford. (Reprint Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1966, 1982). 
Vetter, T. 1994. “Zwei schwierige Stellen im Mahānidānasutta : zur Qualität der 
Überlieferung im Pāli-Kanon.” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 38: 137160. 
Wackernagel, Jakob W. 1957². Altindische Grammatik. Band I. Lautlehre. [1896.] 
New edition, with new “Introduction générale” by L. Renou. Göttingen: Vanden
hoeck.
Winger, 1959. Review of Priolkar 1958. The Library Quarterly 29: 274-275. 
Witzel, Michael. 1972. Das Kaṭha Āraṇyaka: textkritische Edition mit Übersetzung 
und Kommentar (Teildruck). Dissertation Erlangen-Nürnberg. 
———. 1997. “The Development of the Vedic Canon and its Schools: The Social and 
Political Milieu. (Materials on Vedic Śākhas, 8)” In: Inside the Texts—Beyond the 
Texts: New Approaches to the Study of the Vedas (ed. by M. Witzel): 257-345. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University. 
———. 2004. Kaṭha Āraṇyaka: Critical edition with a translation into German and an 
introduction. (= Witzel 1972 with a new Preface, Introduction and Appendix.) 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. 
Zimmermann, Francis. 1982. La jungle et le fumet des viandes: Un thème écologique 
dans la médecine hindoue. Paris: Gallimard, Le Seuil. 
Zimmermann, Francis. 1987. The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats: An Ecological Theme 
in Hindu Medicine. [translation of Zimmermann 1982, with updates and additions.] Berkeley: University of California Press.

--- Page 70 of 338 ---
jan e.m. houben and saraju rath
54

--- Page 71 of 338 ---
on the johan van manen collection
55
 
 
CHAPTER TWO
On the Johan van Manen collection: 
Its origin and background
Saraju Rath
1.  Two crates of sanskrit palm-leaf manuscripts arrived in Leiden at the Kern Institute 
in 1929. Seventy five years later, in January 
2004, a project started that had as aim to prepare a Catalogue of these manuscripts which 
Johan van Manen and a helper of his collected 
in India. The workshop on the “production, 
distribution and collection of manuscripts in 
ancient South India” (International Institute 
for Asian Studies, Leiden, 20-21 April 2007) 
was organized in connection with this project. The studies in this volume were first presented and discussed at this workshop. 
The problems addressed in this workshop 
apply very much to the manuscripts of the 
van Manen collection.1 Thanks to the good care taken of the manuscripts over the decades, they are physically preserved quite well. 
However, the collection is relatively poorly documented and we have 
practically no direct information on the time and circumstances of the 
production of these manuscripts, nor do we know in sufficient detail 
how they were distributed and collected perhaps first in pre-modern 
times and next, at the request of Prof. J.Ph. Vogel, by the manuscript 
collector employed by van Manen. Finally, after their arrival in Leiden 
they have received limited scholarly attention as they are in majority 
1  I will focus here on an overview of the origin and the Dutch and European 
context of the Johan van Manen collection. 395 texts were known to be included in 
the collection. In the cataloguing project 193 additional texts (almost 50% of the 
initial number) have been discovered in the manuscripts. A complete list of titles of 
these texts (588 in total) is available at http://www.iias.nl/profile/saraju-rath. A Catalogue providing more details on the manuscripts and the texts they contain is under 
preparation. 
The Dutch Orientalist 
Johan van Manen in 1932. 
Courtesy: Kern library

--- Page 72 of 338 ---
saraju rath
56
in some of the less accessible, and currently obsolete, South Indian 
scripts. 
2.1  For a discussion of the origins of van Manen’s collection of Sans
krit manuscripts a few biographical remarks on Johan van Manen are 
required. Johan van Manen was born on 16 April 1877 in Nijmegen 
and died in Calcutta on 17 March 1943, almost a month before his 
sixty-sixth birthday. At the age of eighteen, Johan van Manen got 
interested in theosophy and enthusiastically joined the Theosophical 
Society which was founded in New York in 1875 and which had a 
branch in the Netherlands since 1881.2 In 1908 van Manen left for 
India where he arrived in February 1909 at the Theosophical Society’s 
International Headquarters in Adyar near Madras, India.3 He became 
the joint-librarian of the Adyar Library which at that time contained 
already a large number of books on theosophy and philosophy, and a 
collection of 16.000 manuscripts.4 Van Manen adds another thousand 
manuscripts with the help of an Indian collector whose assistance he 
will invoke again fifteen years later. In 1916, after a conflict with the 
then president of the Theosophical Society, Mrs. Annie Besant, he 
leaves Adyar. He moves to Darjeeling in order to familiarize himself 
with the Tibetan language and with Tibetan Buddhism on the basis of 
a direct study of the sources. In 1918 he became Ordinary Member of 
the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and at the end of 1918 he started to 
replace the acting Librarian of the Imperial Library in Calcutta. In this 
period he co-organized the collection of a large number of Tibetan 
2  In 1903 van Manen had the opportunity to go to the Dutch East Indies where 
he participated actively in newly founded lodges of the Theosophical Society. After 
his return to Europe in 1904 he was involved in the organisation of the annual congress of the federation of the Theosophical Society’s European Sections in 1904 in 
Amsterdam, in 1905 in London, and in 1906 in Paris. At the latter occasion, Dr. 
Steiner, the later founder of Anthroposophy, expressed on behalf of everyone his 
satisfaction with the hard work of van Manen. 
3  He must have witnessed the discovery in 1909 of the young Krishna who was 
selected to become the new world teacher by C.W. Leadbeater but who, as Krishnamurti, rejected not only the role of world teacher but also the Theosophical Society 
in 1929.
4  In this function he helped many scholars in their research; the German Sans
kritist and main librarian at Adyar, F. Otto Schrader, writes in his work on Minor 
Upaniṣads (1912, p. liv): “ I am further under deep obligation to my assistant and 
friend Mr Johan van Manen for his useful typographical suggestions and the pains 
he has taken in reading the proofs of the larger part of this volume.”

--- Page 73 of 338 ---
on the johan van manen collection
57
blockprints and manuscripts, partly for the Imperial Library, partly 
for the University of Calcutta and partly for himself. 
In 1923 he was elected General Secretary of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal in which function he would invest most of his time and energy 
for sixteen years. Ten years later, in 1933, it is written in the Annual 
Report of the Society for 1932 that van Manen “continued to perform 
the amalgamated duties of Secretary and Assistant Secretary and was 
not absent on leave during the year” (Richardus 1989: 48). It is also 
noted that the “General Secretary has written in his decennial period 
of office nearly 30,000 letters and dealt with an equal number of 
incoming ones, the bulk representing almost that of an Encyclopaedia 
Brittanica” (ibid.). In the mean time he maintained excellent relations 
with international scholars visiting or staying in Calcutta, assisting 
them in their research, for instance when they make use of the rich 
collections of the Society.5 The Romanian scholar Mircea Eliade, who 
came to study in Calcutta in 1928, made van Manen one of the characters in his short story Nopţi la Serampore (“Nights at Serampore”6) 
which contains partially fictional locations and events, but must have 
been partly based on Eliade’s experiences in Calcutta. In this story, 
van Manen is portrayed as a middle-aged Dutch who had devoted 
some twenty-five years to the study of Tibetan languages which he 
understood better than anyone else. He studied and increased his 
knowledge solely for his own satisfaction, and had not the slightest 
respect for academic titles. He was easy-going and enjoyed a good living.7 
5  Apart from Mircea Eliade, Richardus (1989: 45ff) refers to the French scholar 
Sylvain Lévi, and the Dutch scholar R.H. van Gulik. The latter dedicated his book 
Siddham: An Essay on the History of Sanskrit Studies in China and Japan (1956) to 
van Manen. Honors and titles bestowed on him are indicative of his fame. In 1933 
van Manen became Honorary Member of the Royal Batavian Society of Arts and 
Sciences in Batavia, and the next year the French Government conferred on him the 
title of Officier de l’Instruction Publique. In 1937 Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands conferred on him the rank of Officer of Oranje-Nassau.
6  Nopţi la Serampore (Eliade s.d. [1940]) appears later on in English as one of the 
two stories in Two Tales of the Occult (Eliade 1970). In this story, three Europeans, 
Eliade, van Manen and a Russian orientalist and ex-diplomat, Bogdanof, have a collective extraordinary experience which includes a shift in time. The experience is 
later on interpreted in two divergent ways, from the point of view of tantric practice 
and from the point of view of an ascetic from the Himālaya, Swami Shivananda. Van 
Manen here apparently represents “knowledge for the sake of knowledge” or “vast 
erudition” which, however, is incapable of dealing with the extraordinary experience. 
7  Eliade 1970 : 4. The English translation has ‘lazy’ for Ro. leneş which in the 
immediate and larger context of the story, however, rather means ‘easy-going’.

--- Page 74 of 338 ---
saraju rath
58
In the course of the years, health problems troubled him more and 
more frequently, and forced him to take breaks from his heavy function, from which he finally resigned on the 1st of July, 1939. In 1943 
van Manen planned to leave Calcutta and its unhealthy climate. He 
wanted to move to Kalimpong, and to continue his study and writing 
there at the feet of the Himalayas. Before this plan could be realized he 
died from a stroke on 17 March 1943. 
In the first part of his life, the publications of van Manen concern 
mostly reviews of theosophical works and articles on theosophical 
concepts. From 1918 his articles, unfortunately not very large in 
number, mainly concern Tibetan texts and culture. His collections of 
Tibetan texts and ethnographical objects, of Lepcha manuscripts and 
of Sanskrit palm-leaf manuscripts are major contributions to oriental 
scholarship in their own right. 
2.2  How and why were the Sanskrit palm-leaf manuscripts of van 
Manen collected from around 1928 onwards? Two existing biographies of Johan van Manen, one in the form of an appendix to P.H. 
Pott’s Introduction to the Tibetan collection of the National Museum of 
Ethnology, Leiden, and the other in Peter Richardus’s description of 
the life and works of van Manen, provide much valuable information 
about Johan van Manen’s life, but unfortunately both remain almost 
entirely silent about the collection of Sanskrit palmleaf manuscripts 
for the Kern Institute. From events recorded in his biographies and 
from letters conserved at the Kern Institute8 we can nevertheless 
reconstruct in main outlines how this specific collection arose and 
with which, rather modest, expectations it was made. 
Apparently Prof. J. Ph. Vogel got interested in acquiring a collection of Sanskrit manuscripts soon after he founded, on 4 April 1925, 
the Indological Institute Kern. This institute was called after Prof. 
Hendrik Kern, who became the first Dutch Professor of Sanskrit in 
1865, when the Netherlands obtained a chair in Sanskrit several 
decades after France, Great Britain, Germany, Austria, Denmark, 
Russia, had established chairs at one or more of their universities for 
this field of studies which at that time was widely regarded as a most 
promising one. Prof. Vogel and van Manen must have met when 
8  Most of the letters written by van Manen, who is at that time General Secretary 
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, are in English; cf. in his letter of 8 November 1928: 
“Excuse my writing in English, in order to keep a copy for my file”; and on 21 February 1929: “In ’t Engelsch geschreven terwille van den klerk.”

--- Page 75 of 338 ---
on the johan van manen collection
59
Vogel came to deliver a lecture on “Buddhist remains on Java” at a 
meeting of the Asiatic Society of Bengal in Calcutta on 7 December 
1925. Perhaps at that occasion Prof. Vogel spoke with van Manen 
about his wish to have a collection of Sanskrit manuscripts for his 
newly founded institute, at a time that other European centers of 
Sanskrit learning, Paris, London, Oxford, Munich, Berlin, and Vienna, 
had already important collections of Sanskrit manuscripts for around 
a century or more. 
2.3  A brief account of the European situation9 can here be inserted 
as it provides a historical European perspective for the van Manen 
collection. The earliest available collection of Sanskrit manuscripts in 
Europe was the one in the Imperial Library in Paris. Contributions to 
this collection dated from the first half of the 18th century (Colas in 
this volume). A (partial) Catalogue appeared in 1807 (by A. Hamilton 
and L. Langlès); it was used by Friedrich Schlegel and Franz Bopp for 
their Sanskrit studies. The studies of Colebrooke were partly based on 
his own collection of manuscripts, which he donated in 1819 to the 
East India Company where it formed the basis of the India Office 
Library that was further enriched by the collection of Lieut. Colonel 
Colin Mackenzie of which H.H. Wilson prepared a catalogue in 1828, 
published in Calcutta. The Bodleian Library in Oxford arose in 1837 
but it received the older collections of H.H. Wilson, W.H. Mill and A. 
Walker. The Royal Library in Berlin acquired the collection of Sir 
Robert Chambers (1737-1803) which was famous for its Vedic manuscripts and which took an important place in A. Weber’s Catalogue of 
Sanskrit manuscripts, 1853 (Verzeichniss der Sanskrithandschriften, 
Berlin, 1853). Many more catalogues appeared and by the time J.Ph. 
Vogel founded the Kern Institute at Leiden University in 1925, ca. 125 
catalogues of Sanskrit and Indian manuscripts had appeared out of 
which more than 20 concerned collections in various cities in Europe. 
9  Cp. Windisch 1917: 53. An overview, in the form of a table and a bibliography, 
of major catalogues of Sanskrit and Indian manuscripts starting with a list compiled 
by the editor of Sir William Jones’ works which appeared in London in 1807 (omitting the catalogue by A. Hamilton and L. Langlès of Indian manuscripts in the Imperial Library in Paris, which appeared in the same year) is found in Katre 1954: 
104-129. Pandurangi (1978) gives an overview of catalogued and uncatalogued Sanskrit manuscript collections inside and outside India. More recently, collections of 
Indian manuscripts have been inventoried and made accessible where possible in the 
National Mission of Manuscripts, an organization under the Ministry of Culture, 
Government of India, established in 2003 (www.namami.org).

--- Page 76 of 338 ---
saraju rath
60
2.4  In a letter dated 28 January 1927, the curators of the State 
University Leiden gave permission to the librarian to spend 600 Dutch 
guilders for the acquisition of Sanskrit manuscripts. The librarian 
informed Prof. Vogel of this permission in a letter of 8 October 1928. 
In the meantime, van Manen had already started collecting with the 
help of the person to whom he refers in 1928 as “a manuscript hunter 
who collected for me 15 years ago in Madras.” 15 years ago means: 
during van Manen’s time at the Theosophical Society in Adyar. After 
the first sending of manuscripts have arrived, van Manen writes (30 
May 1929) that new possibilities for manuscripts are there but that he 
regrets that “finance is so great a difficulty.” He adds: “If I had been 
able to go on buying, this special man who is a curious mixture of a 
mystic and business man, would have gone on getting a really good 
collection. He is a kind of Yogi who has made a vow to collect and 
rescue MSS. and does this as a religious piety.” 
Unfortunately, this is all we know at present about the collector in 
South India. There are no records of the exact source of his manuscripts, or about the families, private owners or perhaps temples in 
whose possession they were. In one letter he writes that one small lot 
of seven manuscripts from Trichinapoli has not reached him. From a 
note which seems to represent a wired message of van Manen’s 
“manuscript hunter” it can be inferred that he himself got the manuscripts from other agents with whom he negotiated for the best price. 
He writes about these agents: “They wanted Rs. 10/- per thousand 
Shlokas for rare manuscripts considering the copying fee etc., and surrendering the original to us; after much discussion I brought them to 
Rs. 7/-. The mss. are very old and well preserved in good condition. 
I like to send them by post if accepted registered. Besides, [the] 
Madras—Calcutta line is drowned [due to inundations]. In case you 
like to increase the rate to Rs. 8 or so the Sastry will thankfully receive. 
We have not as yet such a good collection in original mss. secured in 
one sweep. It is a chance and luck. If you like to have them please wire 
to me to the above address as usual and oblige. My next move to Salem 
district after hearing from you.” In a handwritten note on this apparently wired message another message appears in cursive writing and 
signed by van Manen: “I have accepted, and wired him 250 rupees; 
promising an extra 20 rupees after the manuscripts prove satisfactory.” 
From the correspondence between Vogel and van Manen we 
understand that van Manen feels that he acquires the manuscripts for

--- Page 77 of 338 ---
on the johan van manen collection
61
“very moderate prices” (letter of 30 August 1928). They are “mostly in 
Tamil10 and Telugu script, and almost exclusively on palm-leaf” 
(ibid.). van Manen adds that “Much of it has been published, but I 
understand you want to form a collection on a representative basis 
with a view to get varieties of script and date, and various recensions. 
There are also a number of quite valuable and rare works, especially 
on medicine, and two Drahyayanas of which MSS are very rare” 
(ibid.). 
It appears that the first consignment that arrived in 1929 contained 
five lots, for which van Manen had joined five typed lists numbered 
roman I—roman V. On 30 May 1929 he wrote that he has received 
Prof. Vogel’s confirmation of receipt of the manuscripts, and that he 
adds typed lists of the further lots, roman VI, VII, VIII, X and XI.11 
From the available letters we can conclude that at least 600 plus 500 
guilders and possibly one or a few hundred guilders more were placed 
at the disposal of Prof. Vogel for the acquisition of Sanskrit manuscripts through Dr. van Manen and his Indian agents. From van 
Manen’s letter of 10 June 1929 we understand that many more valuable manuscripts could have been acquired but this could not be realised due to lack of funds. 
10  Probably, Grantha is meant here, which is the script of the majority of manuscripts in the current van Manen collection. Occasionally, a manuscript in this collection contains a passage or a line in Tamil characters. 
11  Roman IX is missing in this enumeration, although it is present in the collection as currently available. About two months earlier Vogel received a letter from the 
librarian (26 March 1929) that again 500 guilders can be used for the acquisition of 
Sanskrit manuscripts. In a letter from the librarian to Prof. Vogel, dated 13 February 
1931, we read that once again 600 Dutch guilders have been requested for the acquisition of Sanskrit manuscripts over the year 1931, and also for the year 1932. In a 
letter of 18 March the librarian writes that 600 guilders have been made available for 
works for the entire Faculty of Letters. It is not clear how much finally could be used 
for the Sanskrit manuscripts. From handwritten letters or back copies of letters it is 
clear that Prof. Vogel requested for a second investment of 600 guilders in 1930 and 
in 1931. In a letter of 1st July 1931 the librarian informs Prof. Vogel that the declaration of van Manen for the first 600 guilders promised in a letter of 28 January 1927 
has been accepted by the curators of the university. In a letter dated 10 June 1931 
Johan van Manen writes from Calcutta that he now realizes that the first 600 guilders 
did not cover the costs he actually made to acquire them. In this letter he quotes the 
rate of 90 guilder cents for one rupee, which corresponds with the rate mentioned in 
a letter of 4 October 1928: 4 rupees, the average price of a manuscript, equals 3,60 
guilders. In another note we saw that a price was reached of 7 rupees for 1000 ‘shlokas’.

--- Page 78 of 338 ---
saraju rath
62
2.5  Not long after their arrival in Leiden, Prof. Willem Caland, 
Sanskritist and Vedic scholar at the University in the neighbouring 
city of Utrecht (where a chair for Sanskrit had been established in 
1917), requests Prof. Vogel in a letter dated 17 February 193212 to 
send him a list of the newly acquired Sanskrit palm leaf manuscripts.13 
Due to poor health, Caland had not not been able to go out of his 
house for the winter months of 1931-1932, but his strong interest in 
research work had not diminished. It was agreed that Vogel would 
send batches of manuscripts to Utrecht. Caland wanted to see which 
of these manuscripts would be of interest to him and at the same time 
he wanted to volunteer to make a small catalogue of the selected manuscripts, which would later on help in the catalogisation of the entire 
collection. On the basis of the list which he had received, Caland wrote 
on 25 February which manuscripts he wanted to investigate. On 5 
March he wrote a postcard to Vogel that the manuscripts had arrived 
well. On J.Ph. Vogel’s question whether the fact that the manuscripts 
were in South Indian scripts would not create any problems, he replied 
that he was able to read Grantha and Telugu easily. His wish to begin 
the study of the manuscripts that had arrived could not be fulfilled as 
he died within two and a half weeks, on 23 March. 
After this event which Prof. Vogel recalled in his obituary of Prof. 
Caland, Vogel remained remarkably silent about the palm leaf manuscripts. In a rather detailed report of “the work done at the Institute 
Kern, 1925-1935” (Vogel 1935), he discusses the achievements of the 
institute and the books and collections in its care. Nowhere any mention is made of the palm leaf manuscripts which van Manen had been 
able to collect with considerable effort after Vogel had succeeded to 
get funding for it from the University Library. Also in his farewell lecture in which he recalls remarkable moments of his career as Professor 
of Sanskrit, there is no word of the collection of palm leaf manuscripts, 
or of its study or of plans to catalogise it. 
12  In this paragraph, details on the correspondence between J.Ph. Vogel and 
W. Caland and details on Caland’s last days derive from the “Levensbericht” (obituary) of Willem Caland by Vogel (1933). For references to Caland, his manuscripts 
and his interest for the palm leaf manuscripts collected by van Manen, see Witzel 
1990. 
13  A few years earlier, van Manen had mediated between Caland and an Indian 
traditional scholar, Pandit Pārthasārathi Aiyangar, in connection with an edition of 
the Śrauta-sūtra belonging to the Vedic school of Vaikhānasa (Rahder 1933: 75; 
Vogel 1933: 155).

--- Page 79 of 338 ---
on the johan van manen collection
63
2.6  It is clear that Vogel had always been much attracted by archaeology, art history and Sanskrit literature, which are the areas of his 
greatest achievements.14 As he had started his scientific career as 
“superintendant” of the Archeological Survey of India (1902-1914), 
first in the Punjab and later in the United Provinces and in the 
Northern Circle, he was well familiar with ancient and current scripts 
in the north but may not have been equally acquainted with those of 
the south. If Vogel did not master South Indian scripts, why did he 
invest so much effort to gather funds for a collection of South Indian 
manuscripts? 
Obviously, at the moment of the establishment of the Institute Kern 
in 1925, Vogel had a broader perspective than only his own research 
interests. As Vogel was familiar with the journal Indian Antiquary 
which contained important contributions on archeology and art history, he must have been aware of the opinion which Ernst Leumann 
once expressed there in connection with the work of Georg Bühler 
(1837-1898) as collector of manuscripts, namely, that the presence of 
manuscript collections is decisive for the direction of research in a 
certain country (Leumann 1898: 368-369): 
It is generally not known or scarcely noticed to what an extent history 
is dependent on the local distribution of materials. When a country 
shows some predilection for this or that branch of research we are, at 
first, inclined to find the reasons in some national instinct, or in the 
efficacy of the teaching and writing of some scholar. This does not, 
however, explain how it is that—to turn to Indian research—Denmark 
has only produced Pali scholars (Westergaard, Fausböll, Trenckner, 
Andersen), that Northern Buddhism is chiefly cultivated in Paris 
(Burnouf, Feer, Senart, Lévi, Guimet), and that other branches of 
Indian studies are more or less equally confined to particular seats of 
learning. The real explanation lies in the dispersion of the materials. 
Rask furnished Copenhagen with a splendid collection of Pali manuscripts which roused the interest of Danish scholars, just as Hodgson 
sent to Paris an excellent collection of the writings of the Northern 
Buddhists as preserved in Nepal. So the famous general Sanskrit Library 
of Chambers went to Berlin and found there an indefatigable inter14  As it was observed in the obituary of J. Ph. Vogel by F.D.K. Bosch (1959: 356), 
“It was as an archaeologist that [Prof. Vogel] was meeting Indian culture, and an 
archaeologist he remained, even after the caesura in his life which coincided with his 
departure from India and his assuming the duties of professor at Leiden.” (“Het was 
als archeoloog dat hij de Indische cultuur tegemoet was getreden en archeoloog is hij 
gebleven, ook na de cesuur in zijn leven samenvallend met zijn vertrek uit India en 
de aanvaarding van zijn hoogleraarsambt te Leiden.”)

--- Page 80 of 338 ---
saraju rath
64
preter in Weber, while, the India Office and the Bodleian have become 
seats of Indian philology through the manuscript libraries of Colebrooke and Wilson. In later years also Cambridge received a series of 
manuscript treasures from the enlightened activity of Daniel Wright, 
with the consequence that two Cambridge scholars (Cowell and Bendall) have made their special study.
It seems, then, that the starting point of the van Manen collection was 
J.Ph. Vogel’s wish to have “a collection on a representative basis” for 
his new Institute which he founded in 1925 and guided for decades 
with much care and devotion. The criteria on which van Manen and 
his assistant had to base their choice of manuscripts did not go beyond 
this general wish. The choice to go for a collection of South Indian 
manuscripts was then no doubt dictated by the circumstances and 
shaped by van Manen, who had extensive experience with the search 
of Sanskrit manuscripts in the South. This was an area where manuscripts at that time were perhaps more easily accessible, or felt to be 
more accesible, than in the north.15 In any case, for this area he could 
dispose of the help of the “manuscript hunter” who helped him when 
he was still at the Adyar Library. However, when he was requested to 
make a collection for the University of Leiden, van Manen was most 
actively involved in Tibetan studies rather than in Sanskrit studies. 
2.7  After their arrival in the Netherlands the manuscripts of the collection known as “van Manen collection of Sanskrit palm leaf manuscripts” have been well taken care of, but from a scientific point of 
view they received, from the beginning, a stepmotherly treatment due 
to several circumstances. First from van Manen, whose interest had 
already shifted towards Tibetan at the moment he started to collect 
the manuscripts for J.Ph. Vogel. Next from the side of J.Ph. Vogel who 
was more interested in archeology and art history than in manuscript 
studies. And Vogel’s successor, F.B.J. Kuiper (1907-2003, professor of 
Sanskrit at the Kern Institute from 1939-1975), was again more interested in Sanskrit and comparative linguistics. The one who took an 
15  Even if manuscripts are present in some area it is not always easy to obtain 
them or to get access to them. About manuscriptologist Prof. K.T. Pandurangi it has 
been said that, as a “young Sanskrit scholar” he “used to wait patiently on the banks 
of a river on solar and lunar eclipse days or on festive days hoping that somebody 
would throw into the river rare and ancient Sanskrit manuscripts. ... If anybody 
threw any manuscripts the young scholar had men ready to dive into the river and 
pick up the manuscripts.” This would have been in 1946. (Pandurangi 1978: 39-42, 
with reference to an interview in The Hindu, 22 April 1971)

--- Page 81 of 338 ---
on the johan van manen collection
65
active interest in the collection, W. Caland, did plan to have a closer 
look at some of the manuscripts, but died without having been able to 
do so. The manuscripts are again seriously studied when Prof. V. 
Raghavan visits Europe to prepare for a New Catalogus Catalogorum 
(NCC) to be published in Madras. He verifies the old lists of titles. 
Some of the handwritten corrections and additions in these lists are 
probably his.16 In the two weeks which he reserved for these manuscripts in Leiden he was not able to study the manuscript bundles in 
very great detail, so that many texts in these bundles remained un
identified till the van Manen cataloguing project of 2004-2009. After 
V. Raghavan only M. Witzel (1990) and H. ’t Hart (1992) had a closer 
look at the collection. 
3.  Although this will be the subject of a different publication, I would 
like to conclude with a a few remarks on the substance of the collection. The manuscripts contain mainly texts on Vedic ritual (Sūtras 
and commentaries, prayoga texts), Upaniṣads among which several 
rare ones,17 philosophical texts, epics (Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa) 
and commentaries, purāṇas, kāvyas and campūs, stotras, māhātmyas 
on religious places, a few medical texts.18 The collection is organised 
in eleven lots, numbered I-XI, for which the archive has eleven typed 
lists which are probably those prepared by Johan van Manen in 
Calcutta on the basis of the information provided by his South Indian 
assistant. The typed lists contain a number of handwritten notes, corrections and additions which may (partly) derive from the study of the 
manuscripts by V. Raghavan in the 1950s. The manuscripts are almost 
all on palmleaf, and the scripts employed are southern ones: Grantha 
(478 out of the 588 identified texts), Telugu (33), Nandināgarī (72); 
Malayalam (2) and Vaṭṭeluttu (passages in one manuscript that is 
mainly in Grantha). Two paper manuscripts in Devanāgarī19 and one 
16  ’t Hart (1992, preface) thinks that the lists themselves were made by V. Raghavan, which is unlikely. From the correspondence between van Manen and Vogel (see 
above) we know that van Manen did prepare lists to accompany the various lots of 
manuscripts. 
17  For instance, a Vāsudevopaniṣad that is different from an Upaniṣad published 
under that name.
18  See footnote 1 for the recent complete list of titles of the 588 texts contained in 
this collection. 
19  These concern the Brahmasūtrabhāṣyaṭīkā of Jayatīrtha and the Mahābhārata 
Tātparyanirṇaya with commentary Padārthadīpikā.

--- Page 82 of 338 ---
saraju rath
66
in Nāgarī20 are also included. The collection contains several works 
that have been published only in rare editions in Grantha script, and 
others of which it is not certain whether they have ever been published 
or not. An important unpublished work available in the collection is 
Keśavasvāmin’s Paddhati on the Baudhāyana Śrauta Sūtra. The importance of this text was highlighted by Caland and Kashikar. The collection also contains a manuscript dealing with part of the Baudhāyana 
Ghya Sūtra, an important text that is so far available in an edition for 
which only very limited manuscript material has been used. Of the 
Cidambaramāhātmya no proper edition seems to be available in spite 
of its historical importance (as pointed out in a study by Hermann 
Kulke, 1970). Together with a considerable number of the Nandināgarī 
manuscripts, the two exceptional manuscripts in Devanāgarī (see 
above) can be expected to be of special importance for the textual 
study of Madhva’s school of Dvaita Vedānta.
Bibliography
Bosch, F.D.K. 1959. “Jean Philippe Vogel (9 januari 1871—10 april 1958).” De Gids I: 
348-359. 
Eliade, Mircea. s.d. [1940]. Nopţi la Serampore. s.l.: V.V. Press. Reprint, n.d. 
———. 1970. Two Tales of the Occult. [Consists of “Nights at Serampore,” translation 
of Nopţi la Serampore (1940); and “The secret of Dr. Honigberger,” translation of 
Secretul Doctorului Honigberger (1940).] New York: Herder and Herder. 
Gulik, R.H. van. 1956. Siddham: An Essay on the History of Sanskrit Studies in China 
and Japan. Nagpur: International Academy of Indian Culture. 
Hart, Hanna ‘t. 1992. A List of the South-Indian Palmleaf Manuscripts (Sanskrit) in the 
Kern Institute, Leiden (The van Manen Collection). Leiden: The Kern Institute. 
Johnson, Donald Clay. 1988. “On the Origins of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute Library, Part I: The Initiation of the Searches for Sanskrit Manuscripts in 
Bombay.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 69: 111-124. 
Katre, S.M. 1954. Introduction to Indian Textual Criticism, with Appendix III by 
P.K. Gode. Poona: Deccan College.
Kulke, Hermann. 1970. Cidambaramāhātmya: eine Untersuchung der religions
geschichtlichen und historischen Hintergründe für die Entstehung der Tradition 
einer südindischen Tempelstadt. Wiesbaden: Harrossowitz.
Leumann, Ernst. 1898. “Bühler as a Collector of MSS.” Indian Antiquary, 1898: 368369. 
NCC = New Catalogus Catalogorum. 1965-. Volumes 1-19 (2007). University of 
Madras.
Pandurangi, K.T. 1978. The Wealth of Sanskrit Manuscripts in India and Abroad. 
Bangalore: Prabha Printing House. 
Plaisier, Heleen. 2003. A Catalogue of Lepcha Manuscripts. Leiden: The Kern Institute. 
20  A section of the Gādādharī (Nyāya).

--- Page 83 of 338 ---
on the johan van manen collection
67
Pott, P.H. 1951. Introduction to the Tibetan Collection of the National Museum of 
Ethnology, Leiden. Leiden: E.J. Brill. 
Rahder, J. 1933. “Levensbericht van Prof. Dr Willem Caland, 27 Aug. 1859-23 Maart 
1932.” Handelingen en Levensberichten van de Maatschappij der Nederlandsche 
Letterkunde te Leiden, 1932-1933: 73-82. 
Richardus, Peter. 1989. The Dutch Orientalist Johan van Manen: His Life and Work. 
Leiden: The Kern Institute. 
Schrader, F.O. 1912. The minor Upaniṣads critically edited. Madras: Adyar Library. 
Vogel, J.Ph. 1933. “Levensbericht van Willem Caland.” Jaarboek der Koninklijke Aka
demie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam, 1932-1933: 9-160. 
———. 1935. De Arbeid van het Instituut Kern, 1925-1935. Rede uitgesproken door den 
Voorzitter Prof. Dr. J.Ph. Vogel, bij de herdenking van het tienjarig bestaan van het 
Instituut op 6 April 1935. Leiden: E.J. Brill. 
Windisch, Ernst. 1917-1920. Geschichte der Sanskrit-Philologie und indischen Alter
tumskunde, vols. I-II. Berlin: De Gruyter. 
Witzel, Michael. 1990. “Vorwort.” Willem Caland: Kleine Schriften (ed. by M. Witzel): 
V-XVI. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner.

--- Page 84 of 338 ---
saraju rath
68

--- Page 85 of 338 ---
south indian manuscripts of french jesuit fathers
69
 
 
CHAPTER THREE
A cultural encounter in the early 
18th century: the collection of South Indian 
manuscripts by the French Jesuit fathers  
of the Carnatic Mission
Gérard Colas
The nature of the interest for manuscripts varies according to the 
milieu in which they are written, read, transmitted and used. 
Considered as historical documentation by academics, as aesthetic or 
cultural objects by antiquarians in 21st-century Western societies, 
Indian manuscripts had entirely different functions in the country 
where they were written. The historical circumstances surrounding 
the search for Indian manuscripts by French Jesuit fathers in the early 
18th century also reflect the heterogeneous intellectual and religious 
interests of the social and institutional milieus associated with it. This 
search for the manuscripts also highlights in a singular way the 
encounter between two cultures, Indian and European, around an 
object—the manuscript—for as we will see, the conception and use of 
books among Hindus were very different from those of Europeans. 
The French Jesuit fathers of the Carnatic Mission in India sent 
around one hundred and sixty volumes to the King’s library in Paris 
between 1729 and 1735. Most of them were manuscripts written in 
the Sanskrit, Telugu and Tamil languages, which nobody in France 
could read at that time. These documents formed the nucleus of what 
are now called the Sanscrit and Indien collections in the Bibliothèque 
nationale de France (BnF). This paper will examine the historical and 
cultural factors accompanying the acquisition of Indian manuscripts 
by the King’s library. 
I examined two kinds of documents to understand the various 
Indian and European dimensions of the Jesuit search for manuscripts: 
the correspondence of the Jesuits of the Carnatic Mission (preserved 
in the Jesuit archives [JA] in Vanves, near Paris, under the name of the

--- Page 86 of 338 ---
gérard colas
70
Fonds Brotier)1 and the manuscripts they sent from India. My investigation is confined to those manuscripts written in Telugu.2 
The Carnatic Mission was founded in 1695 by Louis XIV, King of 
France, who fixed its two aims: to propagate the Catholic faith and to 
promote a better understanding of Indian civilization. It was almost 
exclusively composed of French Jesuit fathers and thus differed from 
the older Jesuit Maduré Mission, composed of Europeans. The mission started to develop in 1699, when the French were able to return 
to Pondicherry (after the Dutch had expelled them in 1693), as an 
application of the Ryswick treatise (1697). It extended its area of apostolate from Pondicherry to a few other places in the Tamil speaking 
area, but much more in the Telugu-speaking area towards the north of 
Pondicherry.3 It also set up a branch in Chandernagore in Bengal. The 
Jesuit fathers hoped one day to join up the Bengal and the Southern 
ends of the Mission to form a single network, a dream which never 
came true. Their strategy to convert Indians to Christianity consisted 
in the method of accomodatio “adaptation” used earlier by Roberto 
De Nobili (1577-1656). The idea was that if the educated strata were 
converted to Christianity, the rest of Indian society would follow. 
Jesuits adopted the dress and behaviour of Hindu ascetics and learnt 
the languages, sciences and literatures of the higher castes in order to 
interact with them and finally to convert the representatives of these 
milieus.4 Although all the Jesuit fathers of the Carnatic Mission 
endorsed the accomodatio method, some were not convinced of the 
intellectual value of indigenous literature. But some others showed a 
1  The published collection of the Lettres édifiantes et curieuses contains only 
revised and abridged versions of a selection of letters from the French Jesuits.
2  Other South Indian manuscripts are in Tamil and Sanskrit. An important 
number of manuscripts in Bengali script were also sent by the Mission. They had 
been gathered from the Chandernagore branch of the Mission by Father Jean 
François Pons (1713-1752 or 1753), a well-known figure in the history of French 
Indology, who wrote a Sanskrit grammar (see Filliozat, J. 1937; Muller, J.-Cl. 1985: 
134-139). For the dates of the French Jesuit missionaries of the Carnatic Mission in 
the 18th century, see Besse, L. 1918.
3  A map prepared by Father Duchamp (1692-1739 or 1740) in 1730 gives an idea 
of the extent of the mission at that time: see AJ, Brotier 88, f. 158 (reproduced in 
Colas, G. 1997b, plate 1).
4  In this respect, the French Jesuits were inheritors of the baroque practice of 
acting and illusion (Colas, G. 1997a). For similar attitudes among their predecessors 
in China, see Gernet, J. 1991.

--- Page 87 of 338 ---
south indian manuscripts of french jesuit fathers
71
genuine personal interest in philosophical, belletristic and scientific 
works by Indians.5 
Before going further, we should briefly recall certain aspects of the 
cultural context of that period in both France and South India. Interest 
in Eastern civilizations and literatures flourished in an early 18th-century France in search of knowledge and novelty. The visit of Mehmet 
Effendi, ambassador of the Ottoman emperor, in 1721, aroused enormous enthusiasm both among the higher classes of society and among 
the ordinary people, who thronged the passage of the diplomat accompanied by his exotic retinue. The interest of the intellectual circles for 
the East stemmed from genuine curiosity, cultural snobbery6 and a 
search for non-Western models which they could use to criticize 
French social and political institutions without displaying overt opposition to them.7 In 1721, eight years before the French Jesuits sent 
their first parcel of Indian books to the King’s library, Montesquieu 
published his Lettres persanes, a collection of letters attributed to an 
imaginary Persian which satirized French society and subtly criticized 
the French regime of absolute monarchy. In those days, the possession of rare and exotic books was a symbol of intellectual or political 
superiority and personal prestige. This was in keeping with the thenprevalent European fashion for cabinets de curiosités and Wunder
kammern, which started during the Renaissance and is the origin of 
our museums.8 
Two important libraries in Paris competed to acquire Indian manu
scripts, particularly between 1725 and 1735. One was the Jesuit library 
of the Louis-le-Grand College. The Abbé Etienne Souciet (1671-1745), 
a scholar who published the second edition (1721) of the encyclopaedic Dictionnaire de Trévoux with his brother and who wrote a book on 
Chinese and Indian astronomical and mathematical traditions,9 
5  See Colas, G. 1997b: 350, notes 7 (Le Gac’s attitude) and 8 (Calmette’s attitude).
6  Such cultural snobbery had been satirized by Molière in his Bourgeois gentilhomme (1670), which portrays a bourgeois man, Monsieur Jourdain, ennobled by 
“the son of the Grand Turk”, a caricature of a Turkish potentate. Molière wrote the 
Bourgeois gentilhomme soon after the visit of Suleyman Aga Mustapha Raca (an 
emissary of Mehmet IV, sultan of the Ottoman Empire) to France in 1669.
7  See P. Hazard (1963, 1968 [1st ed. 1961]) (quotations in Colas, G. 1997a: 211).
8  See von Schlosser’s study (1908). See also Pomian, K. 2003: 333-355. 
9  Observations mathématiques, astronomiques, géographiques, chronologiques et 
physiques, tirées des anciens livres chinois, ou faites nouvellement aux Indes et à la 
Chine, par les Pères de la compagnie de Jésus. Rédigées et publiées par le P. E. Souciet, 
Paris: Rollin, 1729.

--- Page 88 of 338 ---
gérard colas
72
represented this library. The other was the King’s Library, whose 
librarian was the Abbé Jean-Paul Bignon (1662-1743). An erudite in a 
wide range of subjects, Bignon actively participated in the Journal des 
Sçavans. He showed a particular interest in Eastern cultures and met 
Mehmet Effendi in 1721. He also wrote (under a pseudonym) a novel 
describing the adventures of Abdalla, “sent by the Sultan of the Indies 
to discover the island of Borico.”10 Soon after his appointment as 
librarian to the King’s library in 1718, he asked Étienne Fourmont, 
professor of Arabic at the Collège Royal, to draw up a list of Chinese, 
Tartaric, Indian and Siamese books to be procured for the library. 
In 1719 Fourmont provided a list in which Indian titles such as 
“Panjangam”, “Vedam”, “Ramayenam” and the works of “Bartrou
herri” appeared.11
To obtain Indian manuscripts, the Jesuit library contacted the 
Jesuits of the Carnatic Mission directly; the King’s library contacted 
them indirectly.12 The reaction of Étienne Le Gac (1671-1738), at that 
time Superior of the Carnatic Mission, was different in each case. He 
tried to dissuade Souciet, his fellow Jesuit, from this search. He did not 
see the utility of keeping Indian manuscripts in Paris, for according to 
him, this could serve only a vain ostentation and not the advancement 
of knowledge, since nobody in Paris could read them.13 But Le Gac’s 
advice went unheeded: Souciet, motivated either by genuine curiosity 
or by a concern for appearances (his own or those of his religious 
order), persisted and finally obtained (perhaps at the beginning of 
1733) three volumes which contained the “Rougvedam”.14 While Le 
Gac could respond negatively to a fellow Jesuit, he could not refuse 
the Royal Librarian. This would have had serious consequences for the 
working of the Carnatic Mission. Bignon’s request was sent through 
the intermediary of the Abbé Gilles-Bernard Raguet (1668-1748), one 
of the directors of the French Company of the Indies whose favours 
were important to the Jesuits in India, especially because he allowed 
10  This novel is presented as the French translation of an Arabic manuscript: Les 
Avantures d'Abdalla fils d'Hanif, envoyé par le sultan des Indes à la découverte de l’ile 
de Borico, où est la fontaine merveilleuse dont l’eau fait rajeunir. Avec la Relation du 
voyage de Rouschen, dame persane, dans l’ile détournée, qui a été inconnue jusqu'à 
present, et plusieurs autres histoires curieuses. Traduites en français sur le manuscrit 
arabe trouvé à Batavia par M. de Sandisson, Paris: Pierre Witte, 1712-1714.
11  See Filliozat, J. 1941: I.
12  Dahmen, P. 1934: 125, note 1 seems to confuse these two requests. 
13  This was probably also Fourmont’s opinion, according to Filliozat, J. 1941: II.
14  See AJ, Brotier 89, fol. 49 and Colas, G. 1997b: 350, note 8.

--- Page 89 of 338 ---
south indian manuscripts of french jesuit fathers
73
them to travel to and from the subcontinent in Company ships. 
Moreover, Le Gac was trying to set up a printing press in Pondicherry 
(to counter the Lutheran missionary printing activity in Tranquebar), 
a project for which he needed support in Paris.15 Under these circumstances, he had no other choice than to comply with the request from 
the King’s library for manuscripts.
Several pre-modern South Indian conceptions about texts and their 
copies may be mentioned, which contributed to the Jesuit successes 
and failures in getting manuscripts. Firstly, access to manuscripts was 
limited in India, not only because of the limited spread of education, 
but also because of the notion of religious competency. Only a person 
identified as competent could receive a religious text. The competency 
factor not only excluded many sections of the society, but also operated across the sectarian Hindu world: for instance, a Hindu from a 
certain sect could not have access to the texts of another sect. The second point which needs to be emphasized is related to the style of composition of classical Indian works. They were composed in erudite and 
scholarly language accessible only to the educated class, and never in 
the colloquial language spoken by the common man. The third aspect 
concerns the nature of the material on which the manuscripts were 
written. Traditional Hindu scholars and scribes in several regions 
were reluctant to write on paper, perhaps because it was traditionally 
produced by Muslims16 or because palm-leaves were cheaper, durable 
and easily available. In general, these scholars and scribes would have 
been opposed to any kind of material which they considered as nontraditional. It is important to bear these three aspects in mind because 
they greatly influenced the collection of manuscripts by the Jesuits.
In November 1727, Bignon sent a new list from Fourmont to the 
French Company of the Indies in Pondicherry. This list requested to 
have only works in Persian, dictionaries and grammars of Indian languages explained in Persian.17 To begin with, the Company searched 
for manuscripts on its own and obtained several Christian works from 
the White Friars (Carmelites). But it soon turned to the French Jesuits. 
Before the end of September 1728, Le Noir, the “commandant général” 
15  See Colas, G. 1997b: 351 and Colas, G. and Colas-Chauhan, U. 1995: 15, note 
68. About printing in Tranquebar at the beginning of the 18th century, see 
Mangamma, J. 1975: 26-37.
16  This is a hypothesis. Soteriou’s book suggests that these craftsmen were mostly 
Muslims, except in the Himalayan areas: see Soteriou, A. 1999: 21-97, 185-203. 
17  See Filliozat, J. 1941: II.

--- Page 90 of 338 ---
gérard colas
74
of the French Company in Pondicherry, gave them a copy of 
Fourmont’s list.18 Between January 1729 and 1735, the Jesuits sent six 
parcels of books, mostly manuscripts.19 We can distinguish between 
two periods. The first consists of two consignments, those of 1729 and 
1730, where the manuscripts were exclusively on paper, except one 
written on palm-leaves, added on the order of Le Noir.20 The second 
period consists of the yearly consignments from 1732 to 1735, which 
mostly contained palm-leaf manuscripts. A gap of two years separates 
these two periods. 
The explanation for the change in the material of the manuscripts 
between the first period and the second can be found in the correspondence between Bignon and Le Gac. In 1729, Le Gac asked Bignon 
whether he would be interested in palm-leaf manuscripts, but in the 
same letter he also tried to discourage the librarian, arguing that palmleaf manuscripts were prone to worm attacks. Bignon, probably fascinated by the palm-leaf manuscript he had already received, expressed 
his preference for manuscripts written on palm-leaf and suggested 
that the missionaries could easily get more of them from their converts at a lower cost than paper copies.21 Bignon did not explain the 
reason for his choice, but his wording suggests that he preferred 
“authentic” manuscripts;22 perhaps he suspected that paper manuscripts could only contain Christian, in other words not typically 
Indian, works. 
A study of the palaeographical characteristics of several paper manuscripts of the first period provided significant results. The following 
observations bear only on the nine Telugu manuscripts (including 
two dictionaries and a grammar) in the total of twenty-four documents sent in 1729 and 1730. Analysis of the handwriting of these 
paper manuscripts enabled us23 to conclude that they had been copied 
18  For more details, see Colas, G. and Colas-Chauhan, U. 1995: 7-8.
19  For a complete list of the manuscripts sent, see Omont, H. 1902: 1188-1192.
20  See Colas, G. 1997b: 355, note 21. The palm-leaf manuscript is “Le Vicramarken Kadey, en olles ou feuilles de palmier”, probably a Tamil work, which is 
mentioned in the list of manuscripts sent in 1729. See Omont, H. 1902 : 1188.
21  See Colas, G. 1997b: 355, notes 21 and 22. 
22  He writes: “Les originaux, en feuilles de palmier, sur les histoires et les sciences 
du pays, seront ce que nous aimerons le mieux” (“The originals, on palm-leaf, about 
the stories and sciences of the country, are what we would most appreciate”).
23  See Colas, G. and Colas-Chauhan, U. 1995: 14-15.

--- Page 91 of 338 ---
south indian manuscripts of french jesuit fathers
75
by the French Jesuits.24 This is supported by a statement by Le Noir 
suggesting that the Jesuits were the first to write Telugu manuscripts 
on paper.25 This is also confirmed by the fact that the inexperienced 
handwriting of the manuscripts matches the handwriting of two 
Jesuits, Memmius René Gargam (1686-1754) and Pierre FrançoisXavier Duchamp (1692-ca.1739),26 in their correspondence. More
over, these consignments contained a grammar and two dictionaries 
written in both French and Telugu. Furthermore, these manuscripts 
contain specifically Christian designs, such as crosses. But above all, 
most of these works (except the Vēmanaśatakamu, Indien 1730) are 
composed in colloquial Telugu, that is, in a style which was never used 
for literature and probably never before put down in writing.27 We 
will return to this point below. 
The second period of consignments corresponds to another type of 
document. Two manuscripts written on paper show a Jesuit hand.28 
The other six manuscripts are on palm-leaf29 and could not have been 
written by Jesuits, because they are written by experienced scribal 
hands. Father Jean Calmette (1692-1739 or 1740) had been given the 
task of collecting palm-leaf manuscripts, and he threw himself into 
the project with great enthusiasm, but it proved to be difficult to 
employ Hindu scribes. Being non-Hindus, the French Jesuit fathers 
could not have direct access to Hindu (including non-religious) 
manuscripts or to the knowledge contained in Hindu texts. They 
24  Indien 634 (Grammaire pour apprendre la langue talenga by Father de la Lane, 
sent in 1729), Indien 627 (Satyōpadēśamu, probably sent in 1729), Indien 631 (Iruvai 
prasaṃgālu, sent in 1730), Indien 630 (Daivaparīkṣa, sent in 1730), Indien 620 
(Rukmāṃgadacaritra, sent in 1730) , Indien 619 (Vikramārkacaritra kathalu, sent in 
1730), Indien 589 (Vēmanaśatakamu, sent in 1730), Indien 597 ([Telugu-Sanskrit 
Dictionary], sent in 1730 or 1729), and Indian 600 (Dictionnaire telougou-françois, 
sent in 1730 or 1729).
25  See Colas, G. 1997b: 356.
26  On Duchamp’s first name, see Colas, G. and Colas-Chauhan, U. 1995: 10, note 
23.
27  For more details, see Colas, G. and Colas-Chauhan, U. 1995: 14-15 and plates 
I-VI; Colas, G. 1997b: 356-357.
28  Dharmarājacaritra (Indien 617 in two volumes and Indien 618).
29  One Christian text: Indien 582 (Punarjanmavivēkamu with Punarjan
mākṣēpamu, sent in 1734); five non-Christian texts: Indien 609 (Bhagavadgītalu, a 
translation of the Bhagavadgītā, sent in 1734), Sanscrit 504 (Śivasahasranāma
vyākhyānamu and Viṣṇusahasranāmavyākhyānamu, both being translations of Sanskrit stotras, probably sent in 1732), Sanscrit 617 (Bālānaṃdakara, Gaṇāṣṭakaṭīkā 
and Bālarāmāyaṇaṭīkā, probably sent in 1732), Sanscrit 876 (Jīvātmapara
mātmasaṃvādamu with Jīvaprabōdhamu, sent in 1735), and Sanscrit 1038 (Bhartṛ
harivyākhyānamu, a translation of Bhartṛhari’s śatakas, probably sent in 1732).

--- Page 92 of 338 ---
gérard colas
76
found two sources of Hindu manuscripts: Christian converts and 
Hindu scholars, but through intermediaries.30 
Christian converts could provide two kinds of palm-leaf manuscript: those which they already possessed before their conversion to 
Christianity, which they could donate or sell to the Jesuits, and those 
they copied after their conversion. In one of his letters, Le Noir mentions that the Jesuits obtained manuscripts from the personal libraries 
of the converts.31 Although we found no definite proof, it is possible 
that several such manuscripts found their way into the parcels sent to 
the King’s library. Three facts support the hypothesis that a certain 
number of manuscripts sent to France were copied by converts. 
Firstly, two manuscripts (Indien 582 and Sanscrit 876) contain 
Christian works. Secondly, several manuscripts of classical Hindu literature contain initial and final formulas which are either specifically 
Christian or favoured by Christians.32 Thirdly, in their letters, the 
Jesuits relate that they had Christian texts translated from non-Sanskrit languages to Sanskrit.33 The Indian literate scribes could only be 
Christian converts, for Hindu Brahmins would not have translated 
Christian texts. Since the Jesuits asked converts to translate, one may 
imagine that they also asked converts to copy Hindu texts on palmleaves.
In addition to the converts who gave their manuscripts to the 
Jesuits or copied texts after their conversion to Christianity, Hindu 
Brahmins were another source of manuscripts. As we mentioned earlier, the French Jesuits had little hope of procuring manuscripts 
directly from Hindu scholars. However, there is evidence that they 
obtained manuscripts through secret intermediaries. This was a complex process. Jesuits used the services of Brahmin converts who had 
30  For more details, see Colas, G. 1997b: 358-362.
31  See Colas, G. 1997b: 359, note 33.
32  The invocation sarveśvarāya namaḥ (at the beginning of Indien 609, 
Bhagavadgītalu, and at the end of the Gaṇāṣṭakaṭīkā of Sanscrit 617) could also be 
written by Hindu scribes, but it is regularly found in Christian manuscripts (see the 
end of Punarjanmavivēkamu and Punarjanmākṣēpamu in Indien 582; beginning of 
Indien 627; end of prasaṃga 20 in Indien 631). The invocation jagadīśvarāya namaḥ 
may not be specifically Christian, but could also have been favoured by Jesuits; it is 
found at the end of the Bālānaṃdakara of Sanscrit 617 and at the beginning of the 
Gaṇāṣṭakaṭīkā in the same manuscript. The crosses written on the first two leaves of 
Sanscrit 504 (Śiva- and Viṣṇu-sahasranāmavyākhyānamu) suggest that this manuscript is of Christian origin. For crosses and invocations in Christian paper manuscripts, see Colas, G. and Colas-Chauhan, U. 1995: 14. 
33  See Colas, G. 1997b: 361, note 42.

--- Page 93 of 338 ---
south indian manuscripts of french jesuit fathers
77
not revealed their conversion to their Hindu brethren. Such converts 
could easily obtain Hindu texts and could also have them copied. 
Calmette applied this stratagem from the year 1731 onwards. However, 
it had its shortcomings. It happened that one intermediary hired 
Indian scribes for Calmette, but when Calmette was identified as the 
ultimate patron of the copying, the Indian scribes immediately 
stopped their work and it was impossible to recruit any others. The 
stratagem also occasionally failed due to sectarian divides within the 
Hindu world. A crypto-Christian Brahmin, who maintained the outward appearances of a Hindu, probably Śaiva, tried to procure manuscripts from another Brahmin who was a Vaiṣṇava. But the Vaiṣṇava 
Brahmin refused at any price. The crypto-Christian Brahmin then 
turned to the brother of this Vaiṣṇava, who was corruptible and from 
whom manuscripts could be obtained.34 
It would be interesting to see if the above observations also apply to 
manuscripts in languages other than Telugu. The Sanskrit and Tamil 
manuscripts gathered by the French Jesuits of the Carnatic Mission 
also require palaeographical and codicological study. Those sent by 
Father Pons from Bengal35 also need to be examined. The social and 
intellectual conditions which he faced in Bengal could have been of a 
different nature.
 
The search for Indian manuscripts by French Jesuits in the early 18th 
century thus illustrates the meeting of two cultures, but also of two 
conceptions of the Indian book: as an exotic curio to be displayed and 
as an object to be protected from the “unfit”. It also testifies to the 
complex relationship between text and its copy in traditional India 
that persisted in 18th-century South India.36 Above all, the French 
Jesuits inadvertently created an exceptional situation and made a singular contribution to the field of Telugu literature37, for their efforts to 
collect Indian texts caused the emergence of a new kind of Telugu literature. Unable to obtain the manuscripts of classical works from 
34  For more details, see Colas, G. 1997b: 359-360.
35  See note 2 above.
36  Danish missionaries in 1737 also reported that a South Indian Brahmin was 
prepared to copy śāstric works, but not Vedic texts. He would only occasionally draw 
some Vedic words with his finger or write them on a material which he then immediately destroyed. See Graham, W.A. 1987: 73-74.
37  See Rajamanickam, S. 1972, for the contribution of De Nobili and other early 
missionaries to Tamil and Sanskrit literature.

--- Page 94 of 338 ---
gérard colas
78
Hindu scholars, they themselves recorded them in writing, probably 
from converts who transmitted the contents of these works in a colloquial style. Thus the Dharmarājacaritra (Indien 617-618), Ruk
māṃgadacaritra (Indien 620) and Vikramārkacaritra kathalu (Indien 
619) are vernacular digests of Telugu classics, the Āṃdhramahābhā
ratamu (by Nannaya, Tikkana and Eṟṟāpregaḍa, 11th-14th century), 
Mallana’s Rukmāṃgadacaritra (15th century) and Koravi Gōparāju’s 
Siṃhāsanadvātriṃśika (15th century) respectively. While the classics 
are composed in an elaborate and Sanskritized style, these digests contain the mere story and are written in conversational language, free of 
all literary ornaments. These early 18th-century manuscripts are probably the first extant works written in colloquial Telugu. They contain a 
wealth of vocabulary and idiom of the popular classes of early 18thcentury Telugu society. They are the outcome of the French Jesuit 
strategy of gathering cultural, religious and linguistic information for 
the advancement of knowledge and for proselytizing. The Telugu dictionaries (Indien 597 and Indien 600) composed by the French Jesuits38 
also testify to these efforts. In this respect, these compositions do not 
correspond to the declared intellectual aims of the Carnatic mission 
(to convert highly educated Brahmin scholars), but were tools for 
acquiring further knowledge of Telugu language and culture and for 
facilitating transactions between the missionaries and the uneducated 
classes.39 Thus, while the search for Indian manuscripts by the King’s 
library could be judged premature and futile in early 18th-century 
France, these manuscripts prove to be a precious material for academic research centuries later, since they contain data not yet fully 
exploited.
38  For other manuscripts and versions of these dictionaries in London, Copenhagen and Chennai, see Colas, G. and Colas-Chauhan, U. 1992: 390-391 and Colas, G. 
and Colas-Chauhan, U. 1995: 20, notes 99 and 100. 
39  A.D. Campbell, the author of A Dictionary of the Teloogoo Language (published in 1821), used dictionaries of the French missionaries. C.P. Brown (17981884), the founder of modern Telugu lexicography, admitted to have made great use 
of the Telugu-French dictionaries of the French missionaries for his Telugu-English 
dictionary (1852, Madras: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge), even though 
he rejected their colloquial forms and reformed their orthography. See Colas, G. and 
Colas-Chauhan, U. 1992: 390; 1995: 20.

--- Page 95 of 338 ---
south indian manuscripts of french jesuit fathers
79
Abbreviations
AJ 
 Archives Jésuites (Jesuit Archives—Archives de la Province de 
France de la Compagnie de Jésus) 
BnF 
Bibliothèque nationale de France
Brotier (followed by number) the Brotier collection in AJ 
Bibliography
Besse, L. 1918. Liste alphabétique des missionnaires du Carnatic de la Compagnie de 
Jésus au XVIIIe siècle. Pondicherry: Société de l’Histoire de l’Inde Française 
(Extrait de la Revue Historique de l’Inde Française, Second volume, 1918). 
Colas, G. 1997a. “ Vie légumineuse et pensée travestie. À propos de l’adaptation des 
jésuites en Inde aux XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles.” In: J. Assayag et G. Tarabout (eds), 
Altérité et identité. Islam et christianisme en Inde. Puruṣārtha, 19: 199-220. Paris: 
Éditions de l’École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales.
———. 1997b. “ Les manuscrits envoyés de l’Inde par les jésuites français entre 1729 et 
1735.” In: Fr. Déroche and Fr. Richard (eds), Scribes et manuscrits du MoyenOrient, 345-362. (Bibliothèque nationale de France, Études et Recherches.) Paris: 
Bibliothèque nationale de France. 
Colas, G. and Colas-Chauhan, U. 1992. “Five dictionaries in the Telugu manuscript 
collection of the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris.” The Journal of Oriental Research, 
Madras LVI-LXII: 379-392.
———. 1995. Manuscrits telugu. Catalogue raisonné. Paris: Bibliothèque Nationale de 
France.
Dahmen, P. 1934. “Extraits de lettres inédites du P. Jean Calmette, S.J., missionnaire 
dans l’Inde.” Revue de l’Histoire des Missions, 11e année, n° 1: 109-125.
Filliozat, J. 1937. “Une grammaire sanscrite du XVIIIe siècle et les débuts de l’indianisme en France.” Journal Asiatique CCXXIX: 275-284.
———. 1941. Bibliothèque Nationale. Département des manuscrits. Catalogue du fonds 
sanscrit. Fascicule 1—Nos 1-165. Paris : Librairie d’Amérique et d’Orient AdrienMaisonneuve.
Gernet, J. 1991. Chine et christianisme. La première confrontation. Paris: Gallimard, 
Bibliothèque des Histoires (édition revue et corrigée; 1st ed. 1982).
Graham, William A. 1987. Beyond the Written Word. Oral Aspects of Scripture in the 
History of Religion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hazard, P. 1963. La pensée européenne au XVIIIe siècle de Montesquieu а Lessing. 
Paris: Fayard.
———. 1968. La crise de la conscience européenne, 1680-1715. Paris: Gallimard, Idées 
(1st ed. 1961).
Mangamma, J. 1975. Book Printing in India with Special Reference to the Contribution 
of European Scholars to Telugu (1746-1857). Nellore: Bangorey Books. 
Muller, J.-Cl. 1985. “Recherches sur les premières grammaires manuscrites du sanskrit.” Bulletin d’Études Indiennes 3: 125-144.
Omont, H. 1902. Missions archéologiques françaises en Orient aux XVIIe et XVIIIe 
siècles. Seconde partie. Paris: Imprimerie nationale, Collection de documents in
édits sur l’histoire de France.
Pomian, K. 2003. Des saintes reliques à l’art moderne. Venise-Chicago XIIIe-XXe siècle. 
Paris: Gallimard, Bibliothèque des Histoires.

--- Page 96 of 338 ---
gérard colas
80
Rajamanickam, S. 1972. The First Oriental Scholar. Tirunelveli: De Nobili Research 
Institute.
von Schlosser, J. 1908. Die Kunst- und Wunderkammern der Spätrenaissance: ein 
Beitrag zur Geschichte des Sammelwesens. (Monographien des Kunstgewerbes, 
11.) Leipzig: Klinkhardt & Biermann.
Soteriou, A. 1999. Gift of Conquerors. Hand Papermaking in India. Ahmedabad: 
Mapin Publishing Pvt. Ltd./ Middletown: Grantha Corporation.

--- Page 97 of 338 ---
south indian drama manuscripts
81
 
 
CHAPTER FOUR
The South Indian Drama Manuscripts*
Anna Aurelia Esposito
The South Indian drama manuscripts are well known owing to 
Gaṇapati Śāstrī’s editions, published from 1911 onward in the Trivan
drum Sanskrit Series (TSS). Among the texts edited by Gaṇapati Śāstrī 
are the thirteen “Trivandrum plays” attributed to Bhāsa, Mahendravi
kramavarman’s Mattavilāsa, the two dramas of Kulaśekharavarman, 
Tapatīsaṃvaraṇa and Subhadrādhanañjaya, and Harṣadeva’s Nāgā
nanda.1 Other dramas that are often represented in the South Indian 
manuscript tradition are Śaktibhadra’s Āścaryacūḍāmaṇi, Nīla
kaṇṭha’s Kalyāṇasaugandhika and Bodhāyana’s Bhagavadajjukīya. 
Today most of the South Indian drama manuscripts are preserved in 
the Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts Library, University 
of Kerala, Trivandrum (hereafter TR). A good collection is located in 
the Sanskrit College Manuscript Library Tripunithura, Cochin (TP). 
Other manuscripts can be found in the Adyar Library and Research 
Institute, Adyar, Madras, in the Government Oriental Manuscripts 
Library, Madras (Chennai), at Calicut University (CAL), in the Lal
chand Research Library (Lahore) D. A. V. College, Chandigarh (CG),2 
in the Punjab University Library, Lahore (Lahore), and in various private collections.3 Even in UK and Europe some individual South 
* This is a revised and expanded version of Esposito, 2004, chapter III.1.3, “Die 
Eigenheiten der Malayāḷam-Manuskripte.” I would like to thank Dr. Heike Moser 
and Dr. Yasutaka Muroya for valuable commentary and bibliographical information 
as well as Dr. Lucinda Martin for correcting the English in this article.
1  In the TSS the following dramas were published: 1911 Tapatīsaṃvaraṇa (TSS 
11); 1912 Subhadrādhanañjaya (TSS 13), Svapnavāsavadatta (TSS 15), Pratijñāyau
gandharāyaṇa (TSS 16), Pañcarātra (TSS 17), Avimāraka (TSS 20), Bālacarita (TSS 
21), Madhyamavyāyoga, Dūtavākya, Dūtaghaṭotkaca, Karṇabhāra and Ūrubhaṅga 
(TSS 22); 1913 Abhiṣekanāṭaka (TSS 26); 1914 Cārudatta (TSS 39); 1915 Prati
mānāṭaka (TSS 42); 1917 Mattavilāsa (TSS 55) and Nāgānanda (TSS 59).
2  In 1947 the manuscripts of the Vishvesvaranand Vedic Research Institute Collection, Sadhu Ashram Hoshiarpur, Punjab, were transferred to Chandigarh (see 
Sharma & Rao, 2000).
3  Many drama manuscripts, stage manuals etc. are in possession of families 
belonging to the traditional actors of the Sankrit theatre Kūṭiyāṭṭam. For more

--- Page 98 of 338 ---
anna aurelia esposito
82
Indian drama manuscripts are extant—e.g. in the School of Oriental 
and African Studies, London (SOAS), and in the Bayerische Staats
bibliothek, München (Munich).4
General Remarks
The South Indian drama manuscripts are written on palm leaf,5 usually in Malayāḷam script, but occasionally in Grantha.6 Writers incised 
the letters with a stylus. To make the incised letters visible, a paste was 
smeared over the leaf and then wiped off. The paste settled into the 
grooves, making the letters visible.7 In case the dye faded away, this 
procedure was repeated.
To bind the ms., two round holes were punched in the middle of 
each half of a leaf. A wooden board of approximately the same size as 
the leaves and with similar holes was placed on either side of a set of 
leaves. A cotton cord was drawn through the string holes. The bundle 
was then bound by the same cord (see also Murthy, 1996: 28). In this 
way single dramas or sets of dramas are kept together in a batch. Since 
single leaves can easily be removed or added, sometimes whole dramas are missing from a set. At times, texts written by different scribes 
and concerning unrelated topics are bound together.8
details concerning these private collections see the article of Heike Moser in the 
present volume.
4  In particular the manuscripts belonging to the “Trivandrum plays” attributed 
to Bhāsa are well documented: Unni, 1978 lists most of the manuscripts belonging to 
this group; further material is itemized in Brückner, 2000. Regrettably Unni does not 
include Brückner’s results in his revised edition of 2001, although he does mention 
her article. See also Brückner, 2007 and Heike Moser’s article in the present volume 
on the “Würzburg Multimedia Databank on Sanskrit Drama and Theatre,” based on 
the manuscripts of the “Trivandrum plays.”
5  For details concerning the species of palm leaf, its preparation, conservation, 
etc. see Murthy, 1996: 27-31 and Vijayan, 1996. Some recent paper copies of palm 
leaf manuscripts also exist (mostly in Devanāgarī script), e.g. mss. R 3810 (written in 
1921/22), R 5148 (written in 1925/26) and SD 1024 (written in 1906) of the Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras, or ms. T 48 of the Oriental Research 
Institute and Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum.
6  The only South Indian drama manuscript written in Grantha script of which I 
am aware is ms. CAL 1488. It contains Abhiṣekanāṭaka, Bālacarita and Avimāraka. 
While Bālacarita is complete, only one folio of Abhiṣekanāṭaka is preserved (prose 
passage after v. 34 of the 7th act, up to the end); in Avimāraka the last folios (after 
verse 10 of the 4th act) are missing.
7  See also Murthy, 1996: 52-54.
8  E.g. ms. Lahore 6243 not only contains Abhiṣekanāṭaka and Pratimānāṭaka 
(written in Malayāḷam script) but also an Aśvalāyanasmṛti written in Grantha. The

--- Page 99 of 338 ---
south indian drama manuscripts
83
Figure 4.1.  Ms. TP 835. See colour section, Plate II.
The South Indian drama manuscripts represent a quite uniform tradition. The oldest manuscripts are about 500 years old; the most recent 
were written at the beginning of the twentieth century. Since, as far as 
I know, only one out of about one-hundred manuscripts is written in 
Grantha, I will concentrate hereafter on the manuscripts written in 
Malayāḷam script. Many of the characteristics described below are by 
no means restricted to this group alone and can be found also in other 
manuscript traditions.
Figure 4.2.  Above: Ms. TR 22848 A (Svapnavāsavadatta, ca. 1500 ad) [in Malayāḷam 
script]
In the middle: Ms. TR 12356 A (Svapnavāsavadatta, ca. 1896 ad) 
[in Malayāḷam script]
Below: Ms. CAL 1488 A (Bālacarita) [in Grantha script]. See colour section, Plate III.
reason for the binding together of texts written by different scribes and concerning 
unrelated topics might be due to the use of these texts by a single individual or family.

--- Page 100 of 338 ---
anna aurelia esposito
84
Characteristics of the South Indian Drama Manuscripts
Foliation: The leaves of a manuscript are normally paginated. The 
numbers appear on the left margin of each recto side,9 usually midway down. Two different forms of numeration can be observed in 
manuscripts written in Malayāḷam script: Some manuscripts display 
the decimal numeration system (aṅkapalli) while others display syllabic numerals (akṣarapalli).10 The latter system is by far more frequent 
in the drama manuscripts. Since it starts with na=1 and nna=2, it is 
called sometimes the “nannādi” system. As indicated by Muroya 
(2006: 26), the first leaf is often marked with śrī and only on the second leaf does the actual Foliation with na=1 begin.11 Contrary to 
Malayāḷam, Grünendahl (2001: 55-57) lists for Grantha12 only numerals of the decimal system; apparently there is no incidence of syllabic 
numerals. Curiously enough, the only drama manuscript written in 
Grantha script known to me, ms. 1488 of the Calicut University, is not 
paginated with Grantha numerals as might be expected, but rather 
with Malayāḷam numerals.
Text flow: Normally both sides of the palm-leaves contain text. A 
margin remains on either end of the leaf. Around the string holes a 
rectangular space is also left blank. Otherwise, writing is continuous 
from the left hand top margin corner to the right hand margin corner 
below, with both left and right margins aligning perfectly. Words and 
punctuation marks are strung together with no spacing in between. 
Similarly, there are no breaks between single text passages or acts, not 
even between the end of one drama and the beginning of the next in a 
set of dramas. The end of an act is indicated through the words 
prathamo’ṅkaḥ, dvitīyo’ṅkaḥ etc. Yet phrases such as atha dvitīyo 
9  In other words, the folios are numbered and not the pages, a system that 
appears to be common in all Indian manuscripts, see Murthy, 1996: 106.
10  For an overview of numeration in Malayāḷam script, see Grünendahl, 2001: 
93 f. Cf. also Bendall, 1896. Ikari (1996: 150, fn. 10) calls the syllabic numerals “the 
older type of Malayalam numerals.” Only very few drama manuscripts are paginated 
with numerals of the decimal system. Surprisingly those manuscripts belong neither 
to the oldest nor to the youngest group of manuscripts.
11  Concerning the South Indian drama manuscript tradition, this is the case, for 
example, in ms. CAL 948, in mss. CG 3521 and 3741, in ms. Lahore 7308, as well as 
in mss. TR C 2101, 5838, 10720, 10750 and 20514. For other examples of this type of 
foliation see Ikari, 1995: 10, fn. 30 and Ikari, 1996: 150, fn. 10.
12  Grünendahl adopts the designations “Grantha Tamil” and “Grantha Malaya
lam,” while I prefer “Grantha” and “Malayāḷam.”

--- Page 101 of 338 ---
south indian drama manuscripts
85
’ṅkaḥ etc.13 are never used at the beginning of an act. Sometimes after 
the end of a drama, one finds invocations to various deities14 or ornaments15 drawn to fill the remaining space. If in the original from 
which the manuscript was copied, some syllables were illegible or 
damaged, the copyist normally left a gap corresponding to the length 
of the illegible or damaged syllables. In a few cases the palm-leaf itself 
exhibits a damaged portion where no syllables could be incised. In 
such cases the text flow is interrupted and only restarted after the 
damaged part. The intermediate gap is normally filled with dashes or 
flourishes.
    
Figure 4.3.  Damaged part in ms. 
TR 834 G, folio 147r.
Figure 4.4.  Damaged part in ms. 
TR 5150 A, folio 37v.
The auspicious words hariḥ |śrīgaṇapataye namaḥ| avighnam astu 
usually appear at the beginning of a manuscript or a single drama in a 
set of dramas. Some manuscripts do not contain all of the elements I 
have described here: instead of śrīgaṇapataye, mahāgaṇapataye, 
śrīmahāgaṇapataye or only gaṇapataye appears sometimes. In some 
cases, the writer places the syllable śrī at the left margin, either as a 
kind of “first numeral” as described above, or else above the actual 
Foliation.
Punctuation: The daṇḍa is usually a vertical, but occasionally a horizontal line sometimes the size of a dot. The daṇḍa appears in any case 
at the end of a prose passage, after verses and stage directions.16 Within 
a prose passage, the distribution of daṇḍas sometimes seems to be a 
bit arbitrary. The end of a sentence is at times indicated by the dissolution of the sandhi, by the preservation of the visarga or by a final m 
13  In the dramas of the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series edited by Gaṇapati Śāstrī, 
those words are invariably found at the beginning of every act (apart from the first 
act).
14  For example hariharahiraṇyagarbhebhyo namaḥ śrīvāsudevāya namaḥ 
śrīkṛṣṇā[ya] namaḥ| śiva[further 15 times]śivam astu [t]e at the end of Cārudatta in 
ms. Madras SR 1714 G.
15  These ornaments also mark the end of an act (see below under “Punctuation”).
16  One exception is ms. Munich Cod. Malay. 5, which contains Dūtavākya. Here 
the dissolution of the sandhi often seems sufficient to indicate the end of a verse, a 
prose passage or even stage directions.

--- Page 102 of 338 ---
anna aurelia esposito
86
with virāma instead of the anusvāra.17 After the end of longer text 
passages belonging together, like the prelude (sthāpanā), single acts or 
the colophon, there is a special mark before and after the act in the 
form of a round flourish.18
     
           
Figure 4.5. 
Ms. TR 22848 C, 
folio 24r. (ca. 1500 ad)
Figure 4.6. 
Ms.TR 10720 A, 
folio 30v. (1650 ad)
Figure 4.7. 
Ms. TR 12356 A, 
folio 31v. (1896 ad)
Verses: Verses are not numbered. The end of the first half of the verse 
is indicated by the dissolution of the sandhi, never by a daṇḍa.19 At the 
end of the verse we usually find a single daṇḍa. In some manuscripts, 
however, the end of the verse is also indicated by dissolution of the 
sandhi.20
Avagraha: Grünendahl (2001: 92) states that the avagraha is not 
documented in manuscripts written in Malayāḷam script.21 He is right 
concerning the South Indian drama manuscripts. However, avagrahas were discovered in manuscripts of other literary genres: Muroya 
(2006: 27) attests for his ms. T22 “the very rare usage of the avagraha, 
which occurs thrice in the first book of the N[yāya] Bh[āṣya].” Parpola 
17  The anusvāra is indicated by a small centred circle (ം), the m with virāma 
looks like a small copy of the character ma (മ) with the diagonal line protruding at 
the top (
).
18  Muroya (2006: 27, fn. 13) quotes different interpretations of this flourish: 
while Burnell (1878: 82) and Isaacson (1995: 44) regard it as a form of the word śrī, 
Maas (2006: lxxxii) considers it to be the word oṃ (referring to Grünendahl 2001: 52, 
92). Also Ikari (1995: 17) remarks that this sign in his ms. N2 looks like a script of oṃ 
in Malayāḷam, although generally it appears to be just a sign without any meaning. 
Muroya decides not to designate this sign as either śrī or oṃ since the scribe uses 
different akṣaras to denote śrī and oṃ in his ms. T. As can be seen by the illustrations 
above, the flourish of ms. TR 22848 (ca. 1500 ad) appears to be a sign without meaning, while the flourishes of mss. TR 10720 (1650 ad) and TR 12356 (1896 ad) resemble slightly the akṣaras for śrī and oṃ respectively. In my opinion the flourishes of 
the Malayāḷam manuscripts should be regarded neither as śrī, nor as oṃ, but just as 
signs marking the end of an act, a chapter, a drama, etc.
19  Occasionally the sandhi can be also dissolved between the first and the second 
or the third and the fourth pāda respectively.
20  This is especially the case in Dūtavākya of ms. Munich Cod. Malay. 5.
21  Modern editions of Sanskrit texts in Malayāḷam script use what is known as 
the florin symbol in typography (f).
22  Ms. TR 14980 A.

--- Page 103 of 338 ---
south indian drama manuscripts
87
mentions a rectangular, S-shaped sign for avagraha in one manuscript 
of Bhavatrāta’s Jaiminīya-Śrautasūtra-Bhāṣya.23 Harimoto has published in the internet three jpg -files24 with examples of the avagraha 
in one manuscript of the Pātañjalayogaśāstravivaraṇa.25
Doubling of words or sentences: The doubling of words or short sentences is indicated through two figures for na, one put on top of the 
other (
) after the word or sentence to be doubled. Only in some very 
recent manuscripts is the ligature nna (ന്ന) to be found. 
Stage directions: All stage directions are in Sanskrit, even those concerning Prakrit speakers.26 naipa(t)thye is used constantly instead of 
nepathye.27 Names of characters as well as frequent stage directions 
like prakāśam or ātmagatam are normally abbreviated after the first 
two syllables, rarely after the first syllable; sometimes they are (quite 
arbitrarily) written in their full length. Just in the Turfan Fragments 
(Lüders 1911: 26), some dramas like Cārudatta never designate the 
hero of the play in the stage directions through his name, but through 
the word nāyaka. Since in Cārudatta the heroine is a courtesan, we 
find gaṇikā instead of nāyikā (not so, for example, in Nāgānanda). 
Concerning domestics, their names (when given) often alternate in 
the stage directions with the designation of their profession.28
Chāyā: In no manuscript is a chāyā for the Prakrit passages to be 
found. In the printed editions the editor added the chāyā.
23  “I have come across the avagraha sign at least once in Malayalam manuscripts. 
The NellikkaaTTu Mana manuscript of Bhavatraata’s Jaiminiiya-S'rautasuutraBhaaSya, which is a very large-sized and brittle old manuscript, has the avagraha 
(rather similar to the devanagari avagraha, i.e. like S but angular with two bends) on 
the reverse of folio 38, line 7, corresponding to page 84, end of line 3 in Premnidhi 
Shastri’s edition (1966): athavaaSstotra… The avagraha which I have marked here 
with capital S clarifies the a privativum in sandhi: atha vaa astotra…” (e-mail of 
02.09.07).
24  http://homepage.mac.com/kengoharimoto/avagraha1.jpg, ‑avagraha2.jpg and 
‑avagraha3.jpg (e-mail of 03.10.07).
25  Folio 4 of ms.TR L 662.
26  Not so in the Turfan Fragments, see Lüders, 1911: 33 f.
27  Lüders (1941: 258) and Lévi ([1894] 1963: 374) have also described this peculiarity of South Indian drama manuscripts.
28  In Cārudatta, for example, instead of the role designation Cetaḥ, the character 
name Varddhamānaḥ appears in III.3.9 ms. TR 17622 D, instead of Ceṭī, we find 
Radanikā in I.21.14 mss. TP 834 L, TR 17622 D, TR 22848 D, I.21.19 mss. TP 834 L, 
TR 22848 D, I.21.31 ms. TR 17622 D. Peculiar is also the random change between 
Madanikā and Ceṭī in the conversation between the servant maid and Sajjalaka in 
the fourth act in the mss. Madras SR 1714 G and TR 17622 D.

--- Page 104 of 338 ---
anna aurelia esposito
88
Scribal errors and variant readings: Scribal errors are normally 
marked by a line or dot above the wrong syllable. In some manuscripts 
wrong syllables are crossed out or marked with round brackets at the 
beginning and end, especially if they belong to a longer passage. 
Missing syllables or words are generally written beneath the corresponding location; sometimes a small cross above the line marks the 
location where the syllables should be inserted.
        
         
Figure 4.8.  Ms. TR 22848 B, 
folio 14r.: do ദKൊ is 
cancelled with lines above 
the respective signs and sub
stituted with following o ഒ
 Figure 4.9.  Ms. Potiyil 
 11 G,29 folio 161r.: ti തി 
 is corrected to ta ത
Figure 4.10.  Ms. TP 834 M, 
folio 254r.: insertion of 
sya സയ് between na ന \ and 
sa സ
29
Regarding the various readings of a manuscript, we have to take into 
account the similarities between the syllables of the Malayāḷam and 
Grantha alphabets, not the Devanāgarī script. The penultimate section 
of this article will give thus a short overview of similar letters and frequent scribal errors.
Abbreviation of sentences: If longer sentences are repeated in an 
adjacent passage, the writer often abridges the repeated sentence after 
the initial words through the formular iti (Prakrit tti) paṭhati.30
Writing of e and o: In contemporary Dravidian scripts there is—
contrary to the Devanāgarī—a distinction between short and long e 
and o. According to Andronov (1996: 19) the letters ē ഏ and ō ഓ 
were adopted into the Malayāḷam script only in the mid nineteeth 
century and for this reason do not appear before the 1870s in books 
and manuscripts. In older manuscripts and Malayāḷam inscriptions 
(see Retnamma, 1994: 103), only those signs appear that designate 
short e and o in today’s script.
Transmission: We can assume from some mistakes, such as the 
omission of whole lines or the interchange of similar letters, that the 
manuscripts were mostly transcribed, not dictated. In very few manu- 
29  Manuscript belonging to the Potiyil Chakyar family, containing Tapatīsaṃ
varaṇa, Subhadrādhanañjaya, Nāgānanda, Āścaryacūḍāmaṇi, Pratimānāṭaka, Abhi
ṣekanāṭaka and Dūtavākya.
30  For example in Cārudatta III.14.12 ms. TP 834 L rukkhapāḍia tti paṭhati, “she 
[the servant maid] repeats ‘In the side door,’ etc.”, where the servant maid is repeating sentence III.14.9.

--- Page 105 of 338 ---
south indian drama manuscripts
89
scripts, however, do mistakes occur which reveal that the scribe took 
oral dictation.31 Normally the verses are transmitted quite uniformly 
in the manuscripts,32 while larger variations can be found in the prose 
passages and in the stage directions. Some manuscripts clearly display 
contaminations from different traditions.33 For this reason, establishing a stemma for a critical edition can prove quite difficult.
Some Peculiarities in the Sanskrit of the Manuscripts
r before consonants: Contrary to sibilants or h, plosives, nasals and semivowels are usually doubled after r (e.g. karmma, pūrvva, dīrggha). This 
peculiarity also manifests itself in the Turfan Fragments (see Lüders, 
1911: 32).
Aspirated dentals + y, v: Lüders (1911: 32) has noted the gemination of plosives, nasals and l before y as well as the gemination of plosives before v.34 In the Malayāḷam manuscripts, this gemination is 
limited to aspirated dentals before y and v.35 This peculiarity, although 
frequent, is not constant throughout.
Nasals in combination with consonants: A nasal, in combination 
with a palatal, cerebral, dental or r, is written with ligature. In combination with a guttural, however, a nasal is usually replaced by the 
anusvāra (ം) in order to avoid difficult ligatures. For the same reason, 
either the anusvāra or the special sign for m with virāma ( ) appears 
before labials. Additionally, the m with virāma can sometimes be 
found before v.
Anusvāra: For final anusvāra in Sanskrit passages, the same rules as 
described for nasals in combination with consonants hold true. At the 
31  That is especially the case in ms. TR 20514 (Dūtavākya). This manuscript contains in the Sanskrit passages forms like mai instead of mayi or śabdaiva instead of 
śabda iva, which suggest a hearing mistake. Such errors also show that some mistakes derive from a Dravidian pronunciation. For instance, y- sometimes appears 
before initial i and e if it is preceded by a vowel, like in ka yeṣa, nāstu yiti etc.
32  Variants mostly affect whole pādas and can be found in several manuscripts.
33  This is, for example, the case in ms. Munich Cod. Malay. 5 (Dūtavākya), which 
combines two different manuscript traditions. For the textual problems arising from 
this fact see Esposito 2000, 2008a and 2009a.
34  A gemination of plosives, v and s before r as described by Lüders (1911: 32) for 
the Turfan Fragments does not appear in the South Indian drama manuscripts.
35  Some examples from Cārudatta: naipatthya I.0.61 (all mss.) and III.14.1 (mss. 
TP 834 L, TR 17622 D, TR 22848 D), ddhvaṃsa I.15.14 (mss. Madras SR 1714 G, TR 
17622 D), maddhya I.29c (all mss.), sānniddhya IV.1.8 (all mss.) and -āsānniddhya 
IV.6.12 (all mss.).

--- Page 106 of 338 ---
anna aurelia esposito
90
end of a sentence or verse—as well as after the first half of a verse –the 
sign for m with virāma usually appears.36
Triple consonant clusters: In ligatures with three consonants of 
which two are identical, one of the two identical consonants is sometimes dropped.37
Visarga: Before sibilants, the visarga is normally assimilated.38 If 
the sibilant is already connected with another consonant, a triple consonant cluster is generated, which is often simplified by dropping one 
of the two sibilants.39 In this situation the question sometimes arises, 
whether we have an assimilation of the visarga (with a dropping of 
one of the two sibilants) or a form ending in -a, like the vocative 
instead of the nominative of masculine a-stems or even the formation 
of a compound with the following word.
ḷ in Sanskrit: In particular Sanskrit words intervocalic l is replaced 
by ḷ. This usage persevers not only in all manuscripts, but also in the 
editions printed in Malayāḷam script (see e.g. the edition of the 
“Trivandrum Plays” of Bhāskaran, 1987). The reason for this remains 
a mystery to me.40
Alteration between v and b: As in other manuscript traditions, v 
and b are interchanged in some words.41 The change seems quite arbi36  Contrary to the Turfan Fragments (Lüders, 1911: 33) there is no anunāsika in 
the South Indian drama manuscripts.
37  This is quite regularly the case with voiceless dental + labial semivowel, like 
satva instead of sattva in Cārudatta I.4d, I.6b, I.7c, III.12.7 or datva instead of dattva 
in Cārudatta III.3a, III.3.41, III.13.17, III.14.2. In all other consonant clusters the 
dropping of one of the two identical consonants is less frequent and occurs usually 
only in single manuscripts, for example in Dūtavākya 49c āsī dviṣato instead of āsīd 
dviṣato in mss. TP 835 B, TR 10720 A, or in Avimāraka II.10a gacche dvitīyena 
instead of gacched dvitīyena in mss. ADY 68522 B, TP834 I, TR 5150 A, TR 15850 A.
38  This assimilation of a visarga before sibilants is not peculiar to the Sanskrit of 
South Indian manuscripts, it occurs also in Kashmirian manuscripts written in 
śāradā.
39  E.g. suhṛda sphītā instead of suhṛdas sphītā or suhṛdaḥ sphītā respectively in 
Cārudatta I.6c mss. Madras SR 1714 G, TR 17622 D.
40  In Cārudatta we find for example ḷ in I.2a dehaḷīnām, I.13b bahaḷa-, I.13b 
-kāḷā-, I.26.38 viḷambase, III.8b karāḷo, III.10b -kākaḷīṣu, III.12d nīḷa-, in Dūtavākya 
-kaḷaṅka- 35.1, -praḷaya- 47c and *49c, -laḷitā- *47a.
41  E.g. in Cārudatta in biḷambase I.26.38 ms. TR 22848 D or in the character 
name Saṃbāhakaḥ in the 2nd act, ms. Madras SR 1714 G. In Dūtavākya we find, for 
example, bibhūṣaṇa- 3c ms. Munich Cod. Malay. 5; vārhadratha- 5.7 mss. TR 3161, 
TR 18516 D; -bāhinībha- 14a ms. CAL 793 D; vṛṃhanti 15c mss. Munich Cod. 
Malay. 5, Potiyil 11 G; vāliśatvāt 18b ms. Munich Cod. Malay. 5; bā 30b, 45a ms. 
Munich Cod. Malay. 5; -vāṇa- 41a ms. Munich Cod. Malay. 5; vādarāyaṇa 5.4 mss. 
CAL 793 D, Munich Cod. Malay. 5, as well as 6.5 mss. CAL 793 D, Munich Cod.

--- Page 107 of 338 ---
south indian drama manuscripts
91
trary. Contrary to the Devanāgarī script, a graphic confusion between 
the two letters is in Malayāḷam hardly possible (ബ = ba, വ = va).
Alteration between t and l: Since in the Malayāḷam manuscripts त् 
and ल् are both written as ൽ and pronounced as l, the sounds are 
sometimes confused in consonant clusters. Instead of the character ൽ 
for t with virāma before the following consonant, in such cases the 
character ല for la is placed above the following consonant. Conversely, 
instead of l in combination with a consonant the character ൽ for t 
with virāma is written before the following consonant.42
Sandhi: Contrary to standards, sandhis are often dissolved, especially between pādas.
Some Peculiarities in the Prakrit of the Manuscripts43
Anusvāra: Concerning the Prakrit passages, there are two spelling systems: In the first system, medial and final anusvāra are treated in the 
Prakrit passages exactly as in Sanskrit (for the rules, see above). As in 
Sanskrit, the m with virāma can also indicate the end of a sentence. In 
the second system the assimilation of the medial or final anusvāra is 
very rare; usually it is written as a small circle above the preceding 
consonant or vowel.44
Geminate consonants: The two systems differ in the treatment of 
geminate consonants as well. In the first system, geminate consonants 
are written as in Sanskrit with ligatures45 (tta = , ddha = ). In the 
Malay. 5, Potiyil 11 G, and 12.9 mss. CAL 793 D, Potiyil 11 G, TP 834 M, TR 3161, 
TR 18516 D, further 16.1 ms. Munich Cod. Malay. 5, and 18.2 mss. CAL 793 D, 
Munich Cod. Malay. 5.
42  In Cārudatta we find e.g. ulphulla (IV.3b ms. TP 834 L) or ulkaṇṭhita (III.1a 
ms. TP 834 L). Some examples of Dūtavākya are ulpanne (2a mss. CAL 793 D, CAL 
948 B, TP 835 B, TP 842 B, TR 192 C, TR 5838 B, TR 10696 B, TR 17306 C, TR 
20514), -olphulla- (7a mss. CL 948 B, TP 842 B, TR 192 C, TR 10720 A, TR 10750 A, 
TR 18516 D, TR 20514), āsanāl patitaḥ (16.13 ms. CL 948 B), tal kartum (23d ms. 
TP 834 M) or etāval paryāptaṃ (30c ms. CL 948 B), furthermore katpaiḥ instead of 
kalpaiḥ (5b ms. CG 2056 C) or phatguna instead of phalguna (33d ms. Munich Cod. 
Malay. 5). For this phenomenon see also Gundert, 1867: 19 f. § 34, Frohnmeyer, 
1913: 9 § 23, Aiyar, 1937: 279-286, Sekhar, 1953: 25, Staal, 1961: 38 and Raghavan 
Pillai, 1996: 64.
43  For a discussion of the drama Prakrit as found in the manuscripts see 
Esposito, 2004: 31-83.
44  So kiṃ dāṇi is written in the first type of manuscript കിാഞി, in the second 
type 
.
45  In order to avoid complicated ligatures, the first consonant is sometimes written in both Sanskrit and Prakrit with virāma.

--- Page 108 of 338 ---
anna aurelia esposito
92
second system, however, the doubling of consonants is indicated by a 
small circle preceding the consonant to be doubled (tta = ം ത, ddha = 
ം ധ); ligatures such as in the Sanskrit spelling are rare. െ for e in combination with consonants—in the Malayāḷam script this sign precedes 
the affiliated character—is written in this system between the circle 
indicating the doubling of the consonant and the consonant: the syllable cche appears in Sanskrit as well as in the first type of manuscript 
as െ, but is written in the second system as ം െ. Peculiar to this 
system is the writing of yya as, for example, in ayya (ārya), written 
a—circle—a (അംഅ). In the first system it is always written as double-ya as in the Sanskrit (അ).
Nasals in combination with consonants: In the first system nasals in 
combination with consonants are treated as in Sanskrit (see above). In 
some cases a doubling of aspirated consonants can be found.46 In the 
second system, a nasal in combination with a consonant is written—
like an anusvāra—as a small circle above the preceding consonant or 
vowel; ligatures occur, but are rare. In this system, confusion is no rarity between the circle denoting the gemination of consonants on the 
one hand and medial or final anusvāra as well as nasal in combination 
with consonants on the other hand.
Frequent Scribal Errors in Malayāḷam Manuscripts
In examining the various readings of South Indian drama manuscripts 
we have to take into account the similarities between the syllables of 
the Malayāḷam alphabet as well as some peculiarities of this tradition. 
In the following I would like to highlight the most frequent scribal 
errors that should be kept in mind while judging the variant readings 
of the manuscripts.
o in combination with a consonant is formed by writing the symbol 
െ before, and the symbol ാ after the respective consonant (e.g. ക�ൊ = 
ko). If either of these symbols is missing, the readings kā (കാ) or ke 
(കെ) are produced. au in combination with a consonant is formed by 
writing the symbol െ before, the symbol ൗ after the respective consonant (e.g. െ കൗ = kau). If the symbol ൗ is dropped, we again obtain 
the reading ke (കെ). ai in combination with a consonant is formed by 
46  For example, puphpha (Skr. puṣpa) in Cārudatta I.0.36 mss. Madras SR 1714 
G, TP 834 L and TR 22848 D.

--- Page 109 of 338 ---
south indian drama manuscripts
93
writing the symbol െ twice before the respective consonant (e.g. കൈ 
= kai). If one െ is left out, again we have the reading ke (െക).
Confusion is especially likely in Malayāḷam script between ca (ച), 
pa (പ), va (വ) and kha (ഖ), between ga (ഗ) and śa (ശ), between da 
(ദ) and bha (ഭ), between o and au in combination with a consonant 
(ko = ക�ൊ, kau = െകൗ), but also between i (ഇ), u (ഉ) and ḷa (ള), as 
well as between the symbol for ā in combination with a consonant (ാ) 
and the visarga (ഃ). In older manuscripts, there is still a great resemblance between ka (ക) and ta (ത).47 In some hastily written manuscripts the visarga can easily be confused with a daṇḍa.
As already described above, the visarga is normally assimilated 
before sibilants. If the sibilant is already connected with another consonant, theoretically a triple consonant cluster is generated; but in 
actual practice one of the two sibilants is often dropped.
Anusvāra and visarga are often dropped, especially at the end of a 
sentence. Sometimes a medial or final anusvāra is added. Furthermore 
a final visarga has often been inserted, especially when the scribe confused it with a daṇḍa. 
Often syllables or single consonants in ligatures have been dropped, occasionally wrong syllables or consonants have been inserted.
At times the scribe has forgotten the vowel symbols for ā, i, ī, u, ū, ṛ 
or e in combination with a consonant, resulting in a reading with a 
(e.g. ക = ka instead of കാ kā, കി ki,  ku, കെ ke etc.). Conversely, 
occasionally a vowel symbol is wrongly written where the reading 
should contain a simple a.
Sometimes short vowels are mistakenly lengthened. Yet we also 
find cases in which the elongation of vowels has been neglected.
As described above, some manuscripts exhibit a special spelling 
system in the Prakrit passages in which an anusvāra as well as a nasal 
in combination with a consonant is written as a small circle above the 
preceding consonant or vowel, and geminate consonants are indicated by a small circle preceding the consonant to be doubled. Naturally, 
the confusion of these circles is a frequent mistake in the Prakrit passages of those manuscripts.48
47  For the development of some significant symbols in Malayāḷam script and the 
possibility of a relative dating of Malayāḷam manuscripts, see below; cf. also Esposito, 
2010a.
48  E.g. in Cārudatta ms. TR 17622 D we find I.0.14 diṇṭhiā instead of diṭṭhiā 
(diṣṭyā) or I.17.4 bhaśśidavvā instead of bhaṃśidavvā (bhraṃśitavyā).

--- Page 110 of 338 ---
anna aurelia esposito
94
The Dating of the Manuscripts
Few of the drama manuscripts written in Malayāḷam script are dated. 
The year is given in all of them in kollam. As Burnell (1878: 55) 
records, the so-called “Koḷambam (or Quilon) Era” began in 
September 824 ad and is supposed to commemorate the founding of 
Kollam (Quilon).49 Based on the script in those manuscripts which do 
contain a reliable date, an approximate relative chronology can be 
established for the undated manuscripts. Certain characters and ligatures show a striking development which seems to have its origin in 
the Grantha alphabet and which culminates in today’s print. In the 
Malayāḷam script, especially initial a, the letter ka as well as the ligatures kka and kra can be used as “index fossils” to establish a relative 
chronology of manuscripts. I would like to illustrate here the development of these characters on the basis of three manuscripts. The first is 
ms. TR 22848, together with ms. TR 3168 the oldest example of the 
“Trivandrum plays.” Unfortunately this manuscript is undated, but it 
is supposedly 450-500 years old.50 The mss. TR 10720 and TR 12356 
were finished 825 kollam / 1650 ad and 1071 kollam / 1896 ad respectively.
49  As far as I know, the scribes mentioned the year during which they had copied 
the respective text only in the following manuscripts of the “Trivandrum plays”: TR 
10720 in 825 kollam / 1650 ad, TR 20469 in 841 kollam / 1666 ad, TR 557 in 998 
kollam / 1823 ad, and TR 12356 in 1071 kollam / 1896 ad.
50  This manuscript is identical with Gaṇapati Śāstrī’s ms. ka (see Esposito, 2000: 
551, fn. 1), which he declared in his first edition of Svapnavāsavadatta to be “more 
than three hundred years old” (1912: i).

--- Page 111 of 338 ---
south indian drama manuscripts
95
Table 4.1.  51 52
Manuscript:
Ms. TR 22848
Ms.TR 10720
Ms. TR 12356
Today’s font
Age:
ca. 1500 ad
1650 ad
1896 ad
2008 ad
a
അ
ka
ക
kka
–51
52

kra
ക
By comparing these (and also other) characters and ligatures, we 
can establish at least a relative chronology, perhaps even an approximate date, for undated manuscripts.
Abbreviations
ADY 
Adyar Library and Research Institute, Adyar, Madras
CAL 
Calicut University, Calicut
CG 
Lalchand Research Library(Lahore) D.A.V.College, Chandigarh
Lahore 
Punjab University Library, Lahore
Madras 
Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras
Munich 
Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, München
Potiyil 
Manuscript collection of the Potiyil Cākyār family, Potiyil 
Maṭham, P. O. Māṅṅānam, Kōṭṭayam
SOAS 
School of Oriental and African Studies, London
TP 
Sanskrit College Manuscript Library Tripunithura, Cochin
TR 
Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts Library, Univer
sity of Kerala, Trivandrum
TSS 
Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 
51  Ms. TR 10720 comprises the drama Dūtavākya as well as a stage manual for 
the drama. As both texts are written exclusively in Sanskrit, the ligature kk occurs 
only once—in samyak kṛtam, sentence 4.4. Unfortunately ms. TR 10720 abandons 
the consonant gemination and mistakenly writes samyakṛtam.
52  As ms. TR 12356 belongs to the second type of manuscripts which avoid ligatures in Prakrit (see above), the ligature kk does not occur. The ligature reproduced 
here is taken from ms. 17306 C, which is also of quite recent date.

--- Page 112 of 338 ---
anna aurelia esposito
96
Bibliography
Aiyar, L. V. Ramaswami. 1937. “A South Indian (Malayālam) Evaluation of Sanskrit. 
t, (d) and ṭ, (ḍ).” Indian Historical Quarterly, 13/2: 279-288.
Andronov, Michail S[ergeevich]. 1996. A grammar of the Malayalam language in historical treatment. (Beiträge zur Kenntnis südasiatischer Sprachen und Literaturen, 
1.) Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Bendall, Cecil. 1896. “On a system of Letter-numerals used in South India.” Journal of 
the Royal Asiatic Society [for 1896]: 789-792.
Bhāskaran, Ṭi. 1987. Bhāsanāṭakacakram. Bhāsanṟe patimūnnu nāṭakaṅṅaḷ. (Tiruva
nantapuram Malayāḷa Granthāvali, 162.) Tiruvanantapuram: Kēraḷa Sarvakalāśāla.
Brückner, Heidrun. 2000. “Manuscripts and performance traditions of the so-called 
“Trivandrum Plays” ascribed to Bhāsa—A report on work in progress.” Bulletin 
d’Etudes Indiennes, 17-18: 501-550.
———. 2007. “New Light on ‘Bhāsa’? The Würzburg Multimedia Databank on Sans
krit Drama and Theatre.” In: Monika Nowakowska, Jacek Woźniak (eds.), Thea
trum Mirabiliorum Indiae Orientalis. A Volume to Celebrate the 70th Birthday of 
Professor Maria Krzysztof Byrski, 380-393. (Rocznik Orientalistyczny, 60.) Wars
zawa: Dom Wydawiniczy.
Burnell, A[rthur] C[oke]. 1878. Elements of South-Indian palaeography. From the 
fourth to the seventeenth century ad, being an introduction to the study of SouthIndian inscriptions and mss. Mangalore: Basel Mission Press. (Reprint 1994, New 
Delhi: Asian Educational Services.)
Esposito, Anna Aurelia. 2000. “The two versions of Dūtavākya and their sources.” 
Bulletin d’Etudes Indiennes, 17-18: 551-562.
———. 2004. Cārudatta. Ein indisches Schauspiel. Kritische Edition und Übersetzung 
mit einer Studie des Prakrits der “Trivandrum-Dramen.” (Drama und Theater in 
Südasien, 4.) Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. [Phil. Diss.]
———. 2010a. “Bemerkungen zu den Schreibkonventionen der in Malayāḷam-Schrift 
verfaßten Dramenmanuskripte sowie ihrer relativen Chronologie.” In: Karin 
Steiner & Heidrun Brückner (eds.), Indisches Theater: Text, Theorie, Praxis, 141154. (Drama und Theater in Südasien, 8.) Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
———. 2010b. Dūtavākya. Die Worte des Boten. Ein Einakter aus den “Trivandrum 
Dramen.” Kritische Edition mit Anmerkungen und kommentierter Übersetzung. 
(Drama und Theater in Südasien, 10.) Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
———. 2010c. “Some Aspects of Textual Criticism Concerning the Keralite Drama 
Manuscripts.” In: Jürgen Hanneder & Philipp André Maas (eds.), Text Genealogy, 
Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique in Indology and South Asian Studies (= 
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 52-53): 269-283.
Frohnmeyer, L. J[ohannes]. 21913. A progressive grammar of the Malayalam language 
for Europeans. Mangalore: Basel Mission Book and Tract Depository.
Gaṇapati Śāstrī, T[aruvai]. 1912. The Svapnavāsavadatta of Bhāsa. Edited with notes. 
(Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, 15.) Trivandrum: Travancore Government Press.
Grünendahl, Reinhold. 2001. South Indian scripts in Sanskrit manuscripts and 
prints. Grantha Tamil—Malayalam—Telugu—Kannada—Nandinagari. Wiesba
den: Harrassowitz.
Gundert, H[ermann]. 1867. A catechism of Malayalam grammar. Revised, re-ar
ranged, enlarged and translated by L. Garthwaite. Mangalore: Basel Mission Press.
Harimoto, Kengo <kengo.harimoto@uni-hamburg.de>. 03.10.07. “Re: avagraha in 
Malayalam Manuscript.”<INDOLOGY@liverpool.ac.uk> (04.10.07).

--- Page 113 of 338 ---
south indian drama manuscripts
97
Ikari, Yasuke. 1995. “Vādhūla Śrautasūtra 1.1-1.4 [Agnyādheya, Punarādheya]—A 
new critical edition of the Vādhūla Śrautasūtra, I ‑ .” Zinbun, 30: 1-127.
———. 1996. “Towards a “critical” edition of the Vādhūla Śrautasūtra—A report on 
the new manuscripts –.” In: Hans-Peter Schmidt & Albrecht Wezler (eds.), Vedavyākaraṇa-vyākhyāna. Festschrift Paul Thieme zum 90. Geburtstag am 18. März 
1995, dargebracht von Schülern, Freunden und Kollegen (= Studien zur Indologie 
und Iranistik, 20): 145-168.
Isaacson, Harunaga. 1995. Materials for the study of the Vaiśeṣika system. Leiden: 
Rijksuniversiteit [Phil. Diss.].
Lévi, Sylvain. [1894] 1963. Le Théatre Indien. (Bibliothèque de l’Ecole des Hautes 
Etudes, 4e section—Sciences Historiques et Philosophiques 83.) Paris: Collège de 
France. 
Lüders, Heinrich. 1911. Bruchstücke Buddhistischer Dramen. (Königlich Preussische 
Turfan-Expeditionen. Kleinere Sanskrit-Texte Heft, 1.) Berlin: Georg Reimer. 
[Reprint 1979 in the serial Monographien zur Indischen Archäologie, Kunst und 
Philologie 1, Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.]
———. 1941. “Nepathya. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte des indischen Theaters.” Zeit
schrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, 95: 258-267 (= Kleine 
Schriften, 120-129).
———. 1973. Kleine Schriften. Ed. by Oskar von Hinüber. (Glasenapp-Stiftung, 7.) 
Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.
Maas, Philipp André. 2006. Samādhipāda. Das erste Kapitel des Pātañjalayogaśāstra 
zum ersten Mal kritisch ediert. The First Chapter of the Pātañjalayogaśāstra for the 
First Time Critically Edited. (Geisteskultur Indiens. Texte und Studien 9; Indo
logica Hallensis) [Phil. Diss.] Aachen: Shaker Verlag. 
Muroya, Yasutaka. 2006. “Some observations on the manuscript transmission of the 
Nyāyabhāṣya.” Journal of Indological Studies, 18: 23-62.
Murthy, R. S. Shivaganesha. 1996. Introduction to manuscriptology. Delhi: Sharada 
Publishing House.
Parpola, Asko <asko.parpola@helsinki.fi>. 02.09.07. “avagraha in Malayalam manu
scripts.”<INDOLOGY@liverpool.ac.uk> (04.10.07).
Raghavan Pillai, K. 1996. Caldwell and A. R. Rajaraja Varma on Malayalam grammar. Trivandrum: International School of Dravidian Linguistics.
Retnamma, K. 1994. Early inscriptional Malayalam. Thiruvananthapuram: DLA 
Publications.
Sekhar, Anantaramayyar Chandra. 1953. Evolution of Malayalam. (Deccan College 
Dissertation Series 10.) Poona: Deccan College.
Sharma, Mahesh; P. V. Rao. 2000. “Salvaging manuscripts from 1947 Lahore: The 
making of an indology library.” Bulletin d’Etudes Indiennes, 17-18: 491-498.
Staal, J[ohan] F[rits]. 1961. Nambudiri Veda recitation. (Disputationes RhenoTrajectinae, 5.) ’s-Gravenhage: Mouton & Co.
Unni, N[arayanan] P[arameswaran]. 1978. New problems in Bhasa plays. Trivandrum: 
College Book House.
———. 2001. Bhasa afresh. New problems in Bhasa plays. Delhi : Nag Publishers.
Vijayan, K. 1996. “Palm-leaf manuscripts in Malayalam.” In: A. Pandurangan, 
P. Maruthanayagam (eds.), Palm-leaf and other manuscripts in Indian languages, 
164-168. Madras: Institute of Asian Studies.

--- Page 114 of 338 ---
anna aurelia esposito
98

--- Page 115 of 338 ---
jaiminīya sāmaveda manuscripts
99
 
 
CHAPTER FIVE
The Jaiminīya Sāmaveda Traditions and 
Manuscripts in South India1
Masato Fujii
Since A. C. Burnell acquired unknown manuscripts of the Jaiminīya 
Sāmaveda in South India in the second half of the 19th century, textual studies on the Jaiminīya literature have been pursued by 
H. Oertel, W. Caland, and others.2 Field researches on the present 
Jaiminīya traditions were started, a little later, by Arnold A. Bake, and 
continued by Frits Staal, E. R. Sreekrishna Sarma, Asko Parpola, 
Wayne Howard, Masato Fujii, and others. On the basis of the data 
accumulated through our previous textual and field studies on the 
Jaiminīya Sāmaveda, Asko Parpola and I have started a joint research 
project for documenting all the existent Jaiminīya traditions and 
manuscripts in the different regions where local families have kept 
their own traditions. For this project, we have carried out field research 
in India six times so far from 2002 onward.3 As a report of our research 
results, this paper will briefly survey the Jaiminīya traditions and 
manuscripts which we have located and documented in South India.
1  This interim report is a fruit of the field research for the documentation of the 
present Jaiminīya traditions and manuscripts conducted by Asko Parpola and me as 
a part of the joint project on the existent Vedic texts and traditions in South Asia 
sponsored by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science 2005-2007 (Project 
No. 17320015). We are most thankful to Sri M.N. Nārāyaṇan Nampūtiri for his 
generous and skillful assistance during our field work in Kerala, Tamil Nadu, and 
Karnataka. I would like to express my gratitude to International Institute for Asian 
Studies (IIAS) for giving me a subsidy for expenses for my attending and presenting 
this paper at the IIAS Workshop: Production, distribution and collection of Sanskrit 
manuscripts in Ancient South India (Leiden, 20-21 April 2007, organized by Dr. 
Saraju Rath). In connection with the present article, a catalogue of the Jaiminīya 
manuscripts which we have traced in our field work will be published in the proceedings of the 12th World Sanskrit Conference, Helsinki 2003. 
2  For the history and present state of the studies on the Jaiminīya texts, see 
Parpola, A. 1973. 
3  22.2-12.3.2002 (Kerala and Tamil Nadu), 14-28.2.2003 (Kerala, Tamil Nadu), 
17.1-14.2.2004 (Kerala, Tamil Nadu), 13-27.2.2006 (Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka), 
18-26.11.2006 (Baroda, Chandigarh), 16-25.2.2008 (Varanasi).

--- Page 116 of 338 ---
masato fujii
100
1.  The Jaiminīya Sāmaveda Traditions 
As far as the living traditions, oral and written, are concerned, there 
exist three Sāmavedic schools at present, i.e., Kauthuma, Rāṇāyanīya, 
and Jaiminīya schools.4 As a minority of Sāmavedins, the Jaiminīyas are 
found now in limited areas of South India, in the southernmost states, 
Tamil Nadu and Kerala.5 According to their geographical distribution 
and the differences in their traditions, they form the following three 
regional groups:6
– Tamil Jaiminīyas in Tamil Nadu
– Tamil Jaiminīyas in Kerala
– Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas in Kerala
The Jaiminīyas of the first and second groups speak Tamil, and have 
almost the same Tamil tradition of the Jaiminīya Sāmaveda. The difference is that the Tamil Jaiminīyas in Kerala, who live near the border with Tamil Nadu, use Malayalam script not only for their ordinary 
writing but also for Sāmavedic manuscripts.7 
4  For the geographical distribution of the Vedic schools in the Vedic times, see 
Witzel 1987; 1989: passim. For the migration of the Vedic schools after the Vedic 
period, see Renou 1950; Witzel 1985; 1993. For the Jaiminīyas’ coming to South 
India, see Parpola, A. 1984: 447-449 (21-23). For the lists of Sāmavedic schools in the 
Caraṇavyūha, see Weber 1850: 60f.; 1855: 272-277; Simon 1889: 26-31; Siegling 1906: 
25-27; Tsuji 1981 [1948]: 319-323.
5  Mahidāsa, a commentator of the Caraṇavyūha, living in the middle of the 16th 
century, teaches the locations of the three existent Sāmavedic schools as follows: 
āsāṃ ṣoḍaśaśākhānāṃ madhye tisraḥ śākhā vidyante. tāś ca gurjaradeśe kauthumī 
prasiddhā, karṇāṭake jaiminī prasiddhā, mahārāṣṭradeśe rāṇāyanī prasiddheti (v.l. 
rāṇāyanīyā ceti ; Siegling 1906: 27: rāṇāyanīyā iti) “Of these sixteen schools, three 
schools are found. And those [schools are established in the following lands], the 
Kauthuma [school] is established in the land of Gurjara (= Gujarat), the Jaimini 
[school] is established in Karṇātaka, and the Rāṇāyana [school] is established in the 
land of Mahārāṣṭra'' (cf. Renou 1947: 127; Tsuji 1981 [1948]: 323). Raghavan (1957: 
59) and Staal (1961: 73) inform us of Sāmavedins near Uḍupi (Udipi) in Karnataka 
who call themselves Jaiminīyas. In 2006 at Melkote near Mysore, Karnataka, we met 
Jaiminīya people living as priests or officials at a famous Vaiṣṇava temple, Tirunā
rāyaṇa Temple. According to their tradition, their ancestors came from Śrīraṅgam, 
following Rāmānuja who was expelled by a Śaiva king. If this is historically true, 
they originally belonged to the Jaiminīya tradition in Central Tamil Nadu.
6  Cf. Raghavan 1957: 55-59; Staal 1961: 64-75; Parpola, A. 1973: 22-24; 1984: 444447 (18-21); Howard 1977: 153-249. 
7  From the fact that some old manuscripts derived from this tradition are in 
Grantha script, it is inferred that they adopted Malayalam script relatively late.

--- Page 117 of 338 ---
jaiminīya sāmaveda manuscripts
101
2.1  Tamil Jaiminīyas in Tamil Nadu
In the middle of the 1950s, V. Raghavan reported the places where 
Jaiminīyas were found in Tamil Nadu as follows:
It was noted already that old Tamil inscriptions referred to TalavakāraSāman as current in Tamilnad. Talavakāra was only the older or alternative name for the Jaiminīya. . . . the Talavakāra Śākhā of the Sāma 
Veda was still current in some parts of Tamilnad. They had it thus at 
Kiḍāmangalam, Iḷayāttangudi, Śeṣmūlai, Śendalai, Nāṅgūr, etc., in Tanjore district. ... In Tirucci district, Talavakāras were found in Uttamacēri 
and Anbil; in Tirunelvēli at Āḻvār Tirunagari, Tentiruppērai (Tenkalai 
Vaiṣṇavas) and Watrap; and at Karamanai and Tiruvēṭṭār near Trivandrum, and at Nagarkoyil and Śucīndram also.8
Raghavan’s information more or less accords with the information 
which we have acquired from the Jaiminīya people in Tamil Nadu.9 
Following the information from Raghavan and local people, we visited the villages mentioned therein one by one, and in most of them 
we found Jaiminīya families living still there, but mostly having lost 
their Sāmavedic traditions. As far as we have traced so far, Sāmavedic 
traditions including chanting and manuscripts have been attested in 
the following places in Tamil Nadu:
a)  Tiṭṭakkuṭi (Tittagudi)
Tiṭṭakkuṭi is a small town at the southwestern corner of Kaṭalūr 
(Cuddalore) District. It is this place which was mentioned as Vasiṣṭha
kuṭi in the introductory verses of Bhavatrāta’s commentary on the 
Jaiminīya-Śrautasūtra. According to the verses, Bhavatrāta’s grandfather, Hastiśarman by name, belonging to a Jaiminīya lineage of the 
8  Raghavan 1957: 56f.
9  The Jaiminīya people in Central Tamil Nadu have a local legend about the 
Jaiminīya villages interspersed along the Kāviri (Cauvery) Basin. According to it, 
a king, Sundarapāṇḍiyan by name, gave them the following eight villages north of 
the Kāviri River and ten villages south of the river: [north of the Kāviri] 1. Tiṭṭakkuṭi, 
2. Aṉpil, 3. Tiruniṟaiyūr, 4. Ātaṉūr, 5. Maṭṭaviḻpūn Tōkūr, 6. Vayalāli, 7. Ciṭṭar 
Tirukkunṟa Marutūr, 8. Kuṟaitīrttār Appaṉūr; [south of the Kāviri] 1. Iṭaiyāt
tiṉaṅkuṭi (Iṭaiyāttaṅkuṭi), 2. Cīr eppōtum Vāḻūr, 3. Maṇalūr, 4. Īraintām Vēli 
(Pattām Vēli), 5. Taṇmaimiku aintām Vēli, 6. Iṭai Marutūr, 7. Nāṇa Maṅkai (Nāraṇa 
Maṅkalam), 8. Piḷḷai Maṅkai (Piḷḷai Maṅkalam), 9. Perumāḷ Maṅkai (Perumāḷ 
Maṅkalam), 10. Pāṇa Maṅkai (Pāṇa Maṅkalam). Besides this legend, we have been 
informed that there are following Jaiminīya villages in this area: 1. Tirumaḻapāṭi, 
2. Centalai, 3. Aṉpil, 4. Śeṣamūlai, 5. Iṭaiyāttaṅkuṭi, 6. Kiṭāmaṅkalam, 7. Śrīraṅgam, 
8. Tōkūr, 9. Uttamacēri.

--- Page 118 of 338 ---
masato fujii
102
Kāśyapa gotra, came to Kerala from Vasiṣṭhakuṭi in the Cola country.10 
There are still Jaiminīya families living in Tiṭṭakkuṭi. They keep some 
of the Jaiminīya traditions, but only those related to the domestic 
Ghya rites.11 
b)  Kiṭāmaṅkalam (Kidamangalam) 
Kiṭāmaṅkalam is a small village in Nākappaṭṭiṉam (Nagapattinam) 
District near Kāraikkāl (Karaikal). In Tamil Nadu, there are four 
Purohitas (chaplains) for the Jaiminīya families at present. It is those 
Purohitas who are expected to keep the Sāmaveda traditions. In 
Kiṭāmaṅgalam, one of the four Purohitas, C. Satyamūrti Aiyaṅkār by 
name, lives, keeping chanting tradition and some manuscripts.12 
c)  Tōkūr (Thogur)
Tōkūr is situated on the north bank of the Kāviri (Cauvery) River in 
Tañcāvūr (Thanjavur) District on the border with Tiruccirāppaḷḷi 
(Tiruchirappalli, Trichy) District. In this village, there is a recitation 
school (pāṭhaśālā) of the Jaiminīya Sāmaveda,13 headed by the late 
T. Rājagopāla Aiyaṅkār14 and his pupil and successor, T. N. Makara 
10  sa vasiṣṭhakuṭiṃ nāma grāmaṃ coleṣv avekṣitam / 
   vaṃśo ’dhivasati śrīmān haṃsaśreṇīva mānasam //
   āsīd guṇanidhis tatra hastiśarmeti vedabht /
   sa keralākhyaṃ sadrāṣṭram agān nāga ivārṇavam // 
   (ed. Parpola 1984: 445 [19])
“That noble lineage inhabits a respected village in the Cola country, Vasiṣṭhakuṭi by 
name, as a flock of swans [inhabits] the Mānasa lake. There lived a repository of 
virtues, a holder of the Sacred Knowledge, named Hastiśarman. He went to the beautiful kingdom called Kerala, as an elephant [goes] into the sea.” Cf. Raghavan 1957: 
50; Parpola 1967: 185ff.; 1984: 445f. (19f.); 1986: 83, 85. For the Jaiminīya houses 
connected with Bhavatrāta in Kerala, see below. A. Parpola ascribes the 7th century 
as his date to him on account of Daṇḍin’s statement in his Avantisundarīkathā that 
he met a scholar from Kerala called Mātdatta, a son of Bhavarāta (sic) who he said 
was the famous author of a commentary on a Vedic ritual text (Parpola, A. 1986: 83).
11  In Tiṭṭakkuṭi, A. Parpola procured a palm-leaf manuscript of a Prayoga of 
their domestic rites, entitled Jaimuni(sic)-sāma-prayoga (see Parpola, A. 1986: 85). 
This text has been studied by K. Karttunen (1989-1990 [1991], 2001, 2003, 2005). 
R. Narasiṃhan, who belongs to a Jaiminīya family there of the Kāśyapa gotra 
(= Bhavatrāta’s gotra), published a small manual of their domestic rites (Narasiṃhan 
1970).
12  Howard visited there and met the same person in 1971 (Howard 1977: 154, 
n. 1).
13  See Staal 1975: 170; Parpola, A. 1973: 6; Howard 1977: 163.
14  Howard analyzes twenty-nine sāmans chanted by T. Rājagopāla Aiyaṅkār 
together with written texts copied from his palm-leaf manuscripts (Howard 1977: 
163-199).

--- Page 119 of 338 ---
jaiminīya sāmaveda manuscripts
103
Bhūṣaṇam (Makara Bhushanam, Makarapūṣaṇam). Makara Bhūṣa
ṇam is now a leading Purohita for the Tamil Jaiminīyas and a master 
of the Tamil Jaiminīya Sāmavedic chants, keeping a collection of 
manuscripts and notebooks handed down to him from his teacher.15 
d)  Tentiruppērai 
Besides the Kāviri (Cauvery) Basin, the Tamil Jaiminīya Sāmaveda has 
another center in South Tamil Nadu. There is an inscription of the 
16th century mentioning the Jaiminīyas in Tirunelvēli.16 Tentiruppērai 
is a Vaiṣṇava temple village near Āḻvār Tirunakari (Alvar Tirunagari), 
formerly in Tirunelvēli District, now in Tūttukkuṭi (Tuticorin) 
District, which consists of a large number of Jaiminīya families. It was 
this village which Bake referred to as one of the places where there was 
a strong living tradition of the Jaiminīya Sāmaveda in his time.17 When 
Howard visited there in 1971, there were a few Jaiminīyas who kept 
the Sāmavedic chanting tradition.18
We have become acquainted with a young Jaiminīya person from 
this village, K. Kaṇṇan by name. He is living now in Kalpakkam near 
Ceṉṉai (Chennai) as an engineer, and at the same time he is officiating 
as Purohita in Tentiruppērai. He learned part of the Jaiminīya chants 
under his father, the late Keśavan Aiyaṅkār.19 With the help of the 
manuscripts and notebooks that he inherited from his father, he is 
trying to keep the Tentiruppērai Jaiminīya tradition, which he said is 
slightly different from the chanting way in Tōkūr.
15  Makara Bhūṣaṇam was one of the pupils who came from Tentiruppērai (see 
below) to Tōkūr when Rājagopāla Aiyaṅkār established the school and gathered 
pupils from various places, and only he completed the whole learning. According to 
himself, he has learned the following texts in the following order: Jaiminīya-Saṃhitā 
Pūrvabhāga (= Pūrva-Ārcika), Uttara-bhāga (= Uttara-Ārcika), Sāmabhāga [Prakti 
(= Grāmageya-Gāna), Āraṇam (= Āraṇyaka-Gāna), Ūham (= Ūha-Gāna), Ūṣāṇi 
(= Ūhya-Gāna)], JGS, Taruṇāgnihotrikārikā, Vainateyakārikā, JĀrB, JUB (he used 
Sharma 1967), Kena-Up., JB (he used Raghu Vira & Lokesh Chandra 1954; he studied only its 1st kāṇḍa because his teacher died). He published the text and a translation in Tamil and English of the Dhāraṇalakṣaṇa, a treatise explaining the Jaiminīya 
notations and corresponding hand movements (Makara Bhushanam n.d. [1998]), 
the text of the Jaiminīya-Āraṇyaka-Gāna (n.d. [2000]), the text of the Taruṇāgni
hotrikārikā (2001), and two ritual booklets (Makarapūṣaṇam n.d.). 
16  See Renou 1950: 218.
17  Bake 1935: 145.
18  Howard 1987: 163f.
19  Cf. Howard 1987: 163 (with a photograph and profile of Keśavan and his elder 
brother Veṅkaṭācalam).

--- Page 120 of 338 ---
masato fujii
104
e)  Aḻakiyapāṇṭipuram (Alagyapandipuram) / 
Pūtapāṇṭi (Bhutapandi)
In the passage quoted above, Raghavan refers to ‘Nagarkoyil’ and 
‘Śucīndram’ in Kaṉṉiyākumari (Kanyakumari) District, the southernmost district of Tamil Nadu, in the list of the Jaiminīya places. We 
have searched these areas for Jaiminīya families, and finally located 
them in Aḻakiyapāṇṭipuram and Pūtapāṇṭi, neighbouring villages 
north of Nākarkōvil (Nagercoil). We have acquired two manuscripts 
there. We were told that the ancestors of the Jaiminīya families there 
came from the above-mentioned Tentiruppērai, but at present they 
have Makara Bhūṣaṇam in Tōkūr as their Purohita instead of Kaṇṇan, 
the Purohita of Tentiruppērai.
This region is situated near the border with Kerala, and has close 
connections with Tiruvanantapuraṃ (Trivandrum). Neṭumpiḷḷi 
Mana, one of the two main Vādhūla houses in Iriññālakkuṭa (Irinjala
kuda), Kerala,20 keeps several Sāmavedic manuscripts which were 
found in Padmanābha Svāmi Temple in Tiruvanantapuraṃ, for which 
the members of this house have been serving as the chief priest 
(tantrin). We were asked by the present master of the house to examine the manuscripts. Against our expectations, they are not Nampūtiri 
Jaiminīya manuscripts but Tamil Jaiminīya manuscripts of the Ārcika 
and Pūrva-Gāna. In all likelihood, those manuscripts came from this 
region.21 
2.2  Tamil Jaiminīyas in Kerala
f)  Koṭuntiṟappuḷḷi (Kodunthirapully)22
Similar contact between Tamil Nadu and Kerala is seen in the Tamil 
Jaiminīyas in Kerala. There are many Cōḻiya brahmins, i.e., Tamil 
brahmins whose ancestors moved from the Cōḻa country, the present 
20  Recently Y. Ikari has procured new manuscripts of the Vādhūla-Śrautasūtra, 
Ghyasūtra, and Anvākhyāna from the two main Vādhūla houses (see, e.g., Ikari 
1998 [1999]).
21  The Jaiminīyas people in Aḻakiyapāṇṭipuram have been managing a farm 
owned by Neṭumpiḷḷi Mana. According to the master of Neṭumpiḷḷi Mana, the Sāma
vedic manuscripts were found in a room inside the temple, and the people in 
Aḻakiyapāṇṭipuram can also use the room.
22  Cf. Raghavan 1957: 55; Staal 1961: 68-72; Howard 1977: 155-162; Parpola, A. 
1984: 444f. (18f.). In addition to Koṭuntiṟappuḷḷi, Raghavan refers to “Anjumūr
timangalam near Ālattūr” in connection with Tamil Jaiminīyas in Kerala (1957: 57).

--- Page 121 of 338 ---
jaiminīya sāmaveda manuscripts
105
Central Tamil Nadu, to Kerala in the remote past. They form agra
hāras, typical settlements of Tamil brahmins, which consist of brahmins’ houses built side by side along streets.23 Koṭuntiṟappuḷḷi is a 
village of this type near Pālakkāṭŭ (Palakkad, Palghat) on Kerala’s border with Tamil Nadu. The inhabitants of this village are Jaiminīyas 
who speak Tamil but write in the Malayalam script. According to their 
tradition, the ancestors of Koṭuntiṟappuḷḷi came from Aṉpil (Anbil) in 
Tamil Nadu (see n. 9).24 We heard the same thing in the latter village. 
Koṭuntiṟappuḷḷi has also a matrimonial relationship with the region of 
Aḻakiyapāṇṭipuram and Pūtapāṇṭi (according to oral information at 
Aḻakiyapāṇṭipuram), and with Tentiruppērai.25 This village has kept a 
Tamil Jaiminīya chanting tradition as well as palm-leaf and paper 
manuscripts of Jaiminīya texts.26
2.3  The manuscripts of the Tamil Jaiminīya Sāmaveda
The Jaiminīya manuscript collection acquired by A. C. Burnell in the 
19th century in South India has been a principal source for Jaiminīya 
studies. Almost all the editiones principes of the Jaiminīya texts including the JS, JB, JĀrB, JUB, JŚS, and JGS are based on Burnell’s manuscripts.27 It is to be noted that all the Burnell’s manuscripts belong to 
the Tamil Jaiminīya traditions and do not contain any manuscripts 
from the Nampūtiri Jaiminīya tradition which will be explained below. 
According to Burnell’s notes, quoted or summarized in the catalogue 
by Keith (1935), they came from the following three places mentioned 
above:
– From the vicinities of Tōkūr 
 
Grāmageya-Gāna (Burnell 497a), Āraṇyaka-Gāna(497b), 
 
Dhāraṇalakṣaṇa (497c), JB (500a), JĀrB(497e), JŚS (506c)
23  Cf. Mencher1966a: 147-152; Staal 1961: 32; Parpola, A. 1984: 447 (21).
24  Cf. Parpola, A. 1984: 444f. (18f.).
25  See Staal 1961: 68.
26  According to the Accession Register of the Oriental Institute, Baroda, some of 
the Jaiminīya manuscripts there came from Koṭuntiṟappuḷḷi. In addition to palm-leaf 
manuscripts, this village has kept an important paper manuscript with musical notations of the Jaiminīya-Grāmageya-and Āraṇyaka Gānas in Malayalam script.
27  Burnell’s manuscripts were, together with other manuscripts, presented by 
him to India Office Library, London, and cataloged by himself (1869) and A. B. Keith 
(1935).

--- Page 122 of 338 ---
masato fujii
106
– From Tentiruppērai
 
Ārcika (506a), JB (421 & 500a), JĀrB (408b), JUB (408a), JŚS 
(506c), JGS (464a)
– From Koṭuntiṟappuḷḷi
 
JĀrB (408b), JUB(408a)
 
More than one century has passed since Burnell acquired the Jaiminīya 
manuscripts. As far as we have investigated so far, the manuscripts 
kept by the present Tamil Jaiminīyas are mostly limited to those of 
Jaiminīya Sāmavedic chants, i.e., the Ārcika and the Gāna. In the 
above-mentioned regions, we have ascertained the existence of many 
manuscripts of the Ārcika (at the places b, c, d, e, f, N[eṭumpiḷḷi]), and 
some manuscripts of the Grāmageya-Gāna and Āraṇyaka-Gāna with 
musical notations (c, d, e, f, N), and one very rare manuscript of the 
Uttara-Gāna (i.e. Ūha-Gāna and Ūhya-Gāna) with musical notations 
(c). Since the Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas have not handed down any manuscript of the Gāna with musical notations (see below), the Tamil 
Jaiminīya manuscripts of the complete set of the Gāna texts (Grāma
geya-Gāna, Āraṇyaka-Gāna, Ūha-Gāna, Ūhya-Gāna) with musical 
notations are very important materials for the study of the Jaiminīya 
Sāmavedic chants. 
3.1  Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas in Kerala28
Among Nampūtiri (Nambudiri, Namboodiri, Namboothiri) Brah
mins, Malayalam-speaking native Brahmins in Kerala, all the Sāma
vedins are Jaiminīyas. In contrast to the Tamil Jaiminīyas, who 
practice only the Ghya rituals now, the Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas keep 
also the Śrauta ritual traditions in which the Sāmavedic chanting is 
performed. Today, the following twenty Nampūtiri houses belong to 
the Jaiminīya school:29
28  Cf. Raghavan 1957: 57-59; Staal 1961: 64-86; Howard 1977: 200-233; Parpola, 
A. 1984: 430-435 (4-9). For the Nampūtiri Vedic traditions in general, see Staal 1961; 
1983: I, 167-189; Sreekrishna Sarma 1999; Govindan Namboodiri 2002. For the history and society of the Nampūtiri community, see, e.g. Mencher 1966a; 1966b; Mencher & Goldberg 1967; Narayanan & Veluthat 1983; Parpola, M. 2000: 13-33. 
29  The following list of the Jaiminīya houses is based on Staal 1961: 86 and Parpola, A. 1984: 432 (6) with a few minor corrections and up-to-date modifications. 
According to oral information from M. Subrahmaṇyan Nampūtiri, the present master of 1. Muṭṭattukkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ Mana, there exists one more Nampūtiri Jaiminīya 
house, Kāmpraṃ by name, in Panniyūr, Pālakkāṭŭ District, being a pupil house of 
Muṭṭattukkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ Mana.

--- Page 123 of 338 ---
jaiminīya sāmaveda manuscripts
107
Table 5.1.  The Present Nampūtiri Jaiminīya Houses
House (mana)30 
Village 
District
1. Muṭṭattukkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ Pāññāḷ 
Tśśūr
2. Nellikkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ 
Pāññāḷ 
Tśśūr
3. Perumaṅṅāṭŭ 
Pāññāḷ 
Tśśūr
4. Tōṭṭam 
Pāññāḷ 
Tśśūr
5. Koraṭṭikkara 
Pāññāḷ 
Tśśūr
6. Maṃgalattēri 
Mūkkutala 
Malappuṟaṃ
7. Pakarāvūr 
Mūkkutala 
Malappuṟaṃ
8. Mūttiriṅṅōṭŭ 
Maṇṇēṅṅōṭŭ 
Pālakkāṭŭ
9. Narippaṟṟa 
Koṭṭumuṅku 
Pālakkāṭŭ
10. Muṇṭāya 
Oṟṟappālaṃ 
Pālakkāṭŭ
 
(orig. Puñcappāṭaṃ 
Pālakkāṭŭ)
11. Vaṭakkāñcēri Valiya 
Ayyappan Kāvă 
Tśśūr
 
(orig. Eṅkakkāṭŭ 
Tśśūr) 
12. Malamēl 
Cempiḷāvŭ 
Kōṭṭayaṃ 
13. Muriyōttu Malamēl 
Cempiḷāvŭ 
Kōṭṭayaṃ
14. Muḷavēlippuṟam 
Cempiḷāvŭ 
Kōṭṭayaṃ
15. Pāṟṟiyāla 
Cempiḷāvŭ 
Kōṭṭayaṃ
16. Kallampiḷḷli31 
Kummaṇṇūr 
Kōṭṭayaṃ
17. Nellippuḻa Kallampiḷḷi 
Kiṭaṅṅūr 
Kōṭṭayaṃ
18. Vaṭāna 
Kiṭaṅṅūr 
Kōṭṭayaṃ
19. Ōṇanturutti Pāṟṟiyāla 
Ōṇanturutti 
Kōṭṭayaṃ
20. Pōṭūr 
Ōṇanturutti 
Kōṭṭayaṃ
These Jaiminīya houses have the following special educational relationships between them as teacher (ācārya) and pupil (śiṣya) houses:32
Table 5.2.
Teacher 
Pupils
1. Muṭṭattukkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ 
4-7, 12-20
2. Nellikkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ 
3, 10, 11 
3. Perumaṅṅāṭŭ 
1, 2, 8, 9 
These teacher-pupil relationships have been functioning not only as 
training circles of the Sāmaveda in the Jaiminīya community, but also 
as channels of the transmission of the Sāmavedic heritages including 
30  The word mana refers to a Nampūtiri patrilineal descent group as well as its 
abode. Generally several families, living together or separately, belong to one mana. 
Cf. Parpola, M. 2000: 75, n. 25. 
31  The Gӧttingen manuscripts of the JB, JĀrB, JUB and the Hoshiarpur manu
scripts of the JĀrB are connected with this house. See n. 51.
32  See Parpola, A. 1984: 434f. (8f.).

--- Page 124 of 338 ---
masato fujii
108
chants and manuscripts, which have been handed down and copied 
from each other within those circles. The first two teacher houses, 
Muṭṭattukkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ Mana and Nellikkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ Mana, 
have a hereditary relationship with each other, for one Māmaṇṇŭ 
Mana was split into the two Māmaṇṇŭ Manas more than ten generations ago.33 All the three teacher houses are in the same village Pāññāḷ 
(Panjal) near Ceṟuturutti (Cheruthuruthi) in Tśśūr (Thrissur, 
Trichur) District in Central Kerala.34 It was in this village that the 
Agnicayana (or Atirātra-Agnicayana, i.e., the Soma sacrifice of the 
Atirātra type with the bird-shaped fire altar constructed with bricks) 
was performed in 1975 under the observation of outsiders including 
Indian and foreign scholars for the first time.35
The Nampūtiris are divided into two status groups: āḍhyan and 
āsyan. The āḍhyans, who have the distinctive name Nampūtirippāṭŭ 
(Nambudiripad), are ranked higher and generally wealthier than the 
āsyans. In spite of their high rank and wealthiness, the āḍhyans are 
not entitled to perform the Vedic Śrauta rites not only as the priests 
but also as the Yajamānas (sacrificers).36 Among the Jaiminīya houses, 
8. Mūttiriṅṅōṭŭ, 9. Narippaṟṟa, 10. Muṇṭāya, 11. Vaṭakkāñcēri Valiya 
are āḍhyan houses, which all belong to the Kāśyapa gotra and are connected with Bhavatrāta, the famous commentator on both the 
Jaiminīya-Śrautasūtra and Ghyasūtra.37
Another distinction among the Nampūtiri Jaiminīya houses is 
about their two ancestral villages, Śukapuraṃ (Sukapuram, Shuka
puram) and Panniyūr (Panniyoor). These two villages were the most 
prominent Nampūtiri settlements in the past, and had a long rivalry 
and conflicts with each other. Nowadays, the Nampūtiri Jaiminīya 
33  See Parpola, A. 1984: 434 (8). Both houses still share birth pollution with each 
other (oral information from M. Subrahmaṇyan Nampūtiri of Muṭṭattukkāṭṭu 
Māmaṇṇŭ Mana). For birth pollution among the Nampūtiris, see Parpola, M. 2000: 
237-240.
34  For Pāññāḷ village, see Parpola, M. 1995; 2000: 72-92.
35  The whole ritual performance was recorded with films and audiotapes, and 
fully documented by F. Staal (1983). The films were edited into a 45-minute film 
(Gardner & Staal 1976).
36  For āḍhyan and āsyan, see Mencher & Goldberg 1967: 90; Parpola, M. 2000: 
passim (esp. 150). Cf. Namboodiripad, E. M. S. (a former prime minister of Kerala, 
belonging to a Ṛgvedic Nampūtiri house) 1976: 15. For the subdivision of the āsyans 
on the basis of the right to perform the Vedic Śrauta rites and to study and recite the 
Vedas, see Mencher & Goldberg 1967: 90; 104, n. 3; Parpola, M. 2000: 150f. 
37  See Parpola, A. 1984: 432 (6), 435 (9). For the ancestral village of Bhavatrāta’s 
family in Tamil Nadu, see 2.1 a) above.

--- Page 125 of 338 ---
jaiminīya sāmaveda manuscripts
109
houses have Śukapuraṃ as their common ancestral village, but 
3. Perumaṅṅāṭŭ, 4. Tōṭṭam, 5. Koraṭṭikkara, and 6. Maṃgalattēri 
joined in Śukapuraṃ later; originally they had belonged to Panniyūr. 
This distinction has produced the difference of the Ṛgvedic traditions 
with which they collaborate in the Vedic rites. In Panniyūr, the 
Āśvalāyana tradition has been followed for the office of the Hot priest 
(hautra), while only the Kauṣītaki tradition had been followed in 
Śukapuraṃ before the immigration of Āśvalāyana houses from 
Panniyūr.38 The fact that the manuscript of the JUB belonging to 3. 
Perumaṅṅāṭŭ Mana contains the Āśvalāyana-Śrautasūtra at the end 
may reflect this historical background.
3.2  Nampūtiri Jaiminīya Sāmaveda traditions
After the Agnicayana in 1975 at Pāññāḷ, the Agnicayana was performed three times until now (2011), in 1990 at Kuṇṭūr (Kundur), 
2006 at Mūlaṃkōṭǔ (Moolamcode), 2011 again at Pāññāḷ, and the 
Agniṣṭoma nine times in 1984, 2003, 2005, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2007, 
2007, 2009 at different places in Kerala.39 For these ritual performances, the Jaiminīyas from Pāññāḷ played the roles of the Sāmavedic 
chanter priests. In addition to the activities as the chanter priests, 
householders or members of the three teacher houses (1,2,3) and 
other two houses (4,5), all in Pāññāḷ, have also performed the 
Agniṣṭoma and the Agnicayana as the Yajamānas repeatedly until 
recently.40 
38  See Parpola 1984: 433f. (7f.); cf. Staal 1983: I, 173. Śukapuram is situated 1 km 
east of Eṭappāḷ (Edappal) in Malappuṟaṃ (Malappuram) District, and Panniyūr is 
17 km west of Paṭṭāmpi (Pattambi) in Pālakkāṭǔ District. A Nampūtiri website has a 
list of the Nampūtiri houses belonging to Śukapuraṃ (http://www.namboothiri.
com/articles/sukapuram-graamam.htm), in which the Jaiminīya houses in Kōṭṭayaṃ 
(12 to 20) are not included.
39  For the Agnicayana in 1975, see n. 35; for Agnicayana 1990, Staal 1992; for the 
Agniṣṭoma in 2003, Mahadevan & Staal 2005. 
40  According to the list by C. V. Somayajipad etc. (1983), Muṭṭattukkāṭṭu 
Māmaṇṇŭ: Agniṣṭoma 1880, 1911, 1929, and once more (year unkown), Agnicayana 
1844; Nellikkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ: Agniṣṭoma 1916, 1941, and once more, Agnicayana 
1901, 1918, 1956; Perumaṅṅāṭŭ: Agniṣṭoma 1904, and once more; Tōṭṭam: Agni
ṣṭoma 1912, 1925, and once more; Koraṭṭikkara: Agniṣṭoma 1915, and twice more. 
A Nampūtiri who has performed the Agnyādheya (Ādhānam in local terminology), 
the Agniṣṭoma (Sōmayāgam), and the Agnicayana (Agni) as the Yajamāna is honorifically called Aṭitiri[ppāṭŭ], Sōmayāji[ppāṭŭ], and Akkittiri[ppāṭŭ] respectively. A 
Nampūtiri can perform the Agnicayana only after he performs the Agniṣṭoma in his

--- Page 126 of 338 ---
masato fujii
110
The chanting tradition itself has been handed down from teachers 
to pupils privately in the Jaiminīya houses.41 Recently, the Nampūtiri 
Jaiminīyas have lost two great teachers: Iṭṭi Ravi Nampūtiri (19041989) of Muṭṭattukkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ Mana and Nīlakaṇṭhan Akkittirip
pāṭŭ (1905?-1997) of Nellikkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ Mana. Iṭṭi Ravi Nampūtiri 
was one of the greatest masters of the Nampūtiri Jaiminīya Sāmaveda. 
According to his personal history,42 he received Vedic education from 
his father, and in his turn taught twenty-five pupils during his lifetime. He was the first person who gave authentic information on the 
Nampūtiri Jaiminīya Sāmaveda to Vedic scholars from abroad already 
in the 1930s.43 Nīlakaṇṭhan Akkittirippāṭŭ was born in a very orthodox Nampūtiri house, and learned the whole of the Jaiminīya 
Sāmaveda in the traditional way.44 Ever since he married and established the Śrauta fires, he had observed strictly the daily duties of a 
Vedic Nampūtiri, i.e., the morning and evening Agnihotras until the 
death of his wife, and the morning services including the Saṃdhyāvan
lifetime. For the Agnihotra to be performed every morning and evening after the 
Agnyādheya, see n. 45. 
41  The Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas call the texts of the Sāmaveda-Saṃhitā in the following special way: “Ṛk” for the Ārcika, “Sāmaṃ” for the Grāmageya-Gāna, “Candrā
syāmaṃ” for the Āraṇyaka-Gāna, “Ūhaṃ'' for the Ūha-Gāna, and “Ūṣāṇi” for the 
Ūhya-Gāna. In the traditional curriculum, the Sāmaveda are taught in this order of 
the texts.
42  I consult his personal history attached to the official programme of the investiture ceremony of the Certificate of Honour, which he received from the President 
of India in New Delhi in 1980, and an article about him in the newspaper, The Sunday Standard, August 26, 1979.
43  The newspaper, The Sunday Standard, August 26, 1979, reads: “It all started 
with a request by the western scholar A. A. Bako (sic) for guidance while writing ‘The 
practice of Sama Veda’. He found Mamunnu a virtual reference book. Others followed. Mamunnu gave valuable assistance and information” (Mamunnu= Māmaṇṇŭ, 
i.e. Iṭṭi Ravi). For A. A. Bake’s pioneering field research on the Sāmaveda, see Bake 
1935; Brough 1964: 250; Jairazbhoy 1991: 6.
44  His memoirs to be published explain his life during the learning period as follows: “For Sāmavedi Brahmins, after Upanayanam before Samāvartanam, there are 
four Vratas which last one year each. In addition to them, there is another Vrata 
lasting one month. At the close of certain Vratas the Brahmacharin becomes entitled 
to study certain special portions of the Veda Saṃhitā. At the time of closing the 
Vrata, Acharya pronounces these portions to the disciple who is seated in front of 
him. The first 12 chapters of Chandrāsyāma (=Āraṇyaka-Gāna) which are otherwise 
called Vratāni, some chapters of Jaiminīya-Upaniṣad and Mahānāmnya portion of 
Chandrāsyāma are included in this category. After properly completing all these 
Vratas and Muttal Mura (=first complete recitation of Sāmaveda) at the age of 14, 
my Samāvartanam was conducted with a feast and dakṣiṇā to Brahmins. Thus I 
became an ‘Unni Namboodiri’” (Karmamārga: Memoirs of Brahmaśrī Nellikkāṭṭu N. 
Nīlakaṇṇthan Akkittirippāṭŭ). These memoirs will be published both in Malayalam 
and in English (ed. by A. Parpola).

--- Page 127 of 338 ---
jaiminīya sāmaveda manuscripts
111
dana, the Svādhyāya (the recitation of some parts of the Vedic texts), 
the Sūryanamaskāra, etc. until the end of his life.45
The Nampūtiri Sāmavedic chanting tradition has been declining 
quite rapidly, and has died out in most of the houses. The rapid declination of the chanting tradition, which is now on the verge of complete extinction, has been caused chiefly by the social changes that 
have been taking place in Kerala in general and in the Nampūtiri 
society in particular, including the changes of educational, occupational, matrimonial, and inheritance systems. Especially, the breakdown of the traditional primogeniture has led to repeated partition of 
the original spacious compounds and lands, which had enabled 
Nampūtiris to maintain their Vedic traditions.46 Now, there are only a 
couple of persons who have mastered a chief part (not the whole) of 
the Sāmaveda and can chant sāmans in the traditional way of the 
Nampūtiri Jaiminīya Sāmaveda.47
3.3  The manuscripts of the Nampūtiri Jaiminīya Sāmaveda
Besides the oral tradition of the Sāmavedic chants, the Nampūtiri 
Jaiminīyas have kept wealthy literal tradition in the form of palm-leaf 
manuscripts covering from Śruti and Smti texts written in Sanskrit to 
ritual manuals in Malayalam. Large numbers of manuscripts are kept 
45  According to the Nampūtiri tradition, one performs the Aupāsana (the worship of the domestic fire called aupāsana-agni) every day after his marriage. Since he 
has established the three Śrauta fires at the Agnyādheya, he performs the Agnihotra 
instead until the death of his wife. Generally the Aupāsana fire and the Śrauta fires are 
established at the place called vaḍakkini in the north of a Nampūtiri house. Probably 
there is now no Nampūtiri who performs the Aupāsana. (Oral information from M. 
Subrahmaṇyan Nampūtiri). The Agnihotra is still performed by some Nampūtiris 
every morning and evening. In 1996 and 1997, I witnessed the performances of the 
Agnihotra by two Nampūtiris, Cerumukkŭ Vallabhan Sōmayājippāṭŭ and Kavapra 
Māṟattŭ Śaṅkaranārāyaṇan Sōmayājippāṭŭ (now Akkittirippāṭŭ), both belonging to 
the Kauṣītaki Ṛgveda, at Kiḷḷimaṃgalaṃ (Killimangalam) in Tśśūr District and at 
Mūtūr (Mudur) in Malappuṟaṃ (Malappuram) District respectively, 
46  For the changes in the Nampūtiri society, see Mencher 1966b; Namboodiripad 
1976; Parpola, M. 1998: 49-51; 2000: 26-33. M. Parpola describes ethnographically 
the decline of the Vedic ritual and educational tradition in one Jaiminīya family 
through several generations up to the present (2000: 160-171).
47  Nowadays, when Sāmavedic chanting is needed among the Nampūtiris, it is 
performed by the same persons: Nīlakaṇṭhan and Vāsudēvan of Nellikkāṭṭu 
Māmaṇṇŭ Mana, Vāsudēvan of Perumaṅṅāṭŭ Mana (who has died recently), and 
Āryan, Kṣṇan and Śivakaran of Tōṭṭam Mana. They were pupils of the late 
Nīlakaṇṭhan Akkittirippāṭŭ except the last two persons, who learned the chants from 
their father, the late Subrahmaṇyan Nampūtiri.

--- Page 128 of 338 ---
masato fujii
112
in the three teacher houses of the Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas: 83 at Muṭṭat
tukkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ Mana, 86 at Nellikkāṭṭu Māmaṇṇŭ Mana, 73 at 
Perumaṅṅāṭŭ Mana. And one āḍhyan Jaiminīya house, Mūttiriṅṅōṭŭ 
Mana, possesses more than fifty manuscripts.48 We have examined all 
the manuscripts available in the Jaiminīya houses. The comprehensive 
documentation of the manuscripts demonstrates that the Nampūtiri 
Jaiminīyas have handed down not only Vedic texts but also a rich heritage of literature including literary, philosophical, grammatical, 
juridical, astrological texts.49
Concerning the Sāmavedic manuscripts, the Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas 
have handed down no manuscript of the Saṃhitā texts including the 
Ārcika and the Gāna in clear contrast to the Tamil Jaiminīyas who are 
in possession of a large number of palm-leaf manuscripts of both the 
Ārcika and the Gāna. It is probably because the Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas 
have kept a strong oral tradition, and have not depended on manuscripts of the chants. There are not a few ‘paper manuscripts’ of the 
Saṃhitā texts among the Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas, but they are nothing 
but notebooks written from memory to be used as learning aids without such musical notations as the manuscripts of the Tamil Jaiminīya 
Gānas have. As far as those ‘paper manuscripts’ are concerned, the 
Nampūtiri Jaiminīya Ārcika consists of the Pūrva-Ārcika (= JS1), the 
first half of the Uttara-Ārcika (= JS 3), Āraṇyaka-Saṃhitā (= JS 2), and 
the second half of the Uttara-Ārcika (= JS 4) in this order, which is different from the order in the editions of the JS (Caland 1907 and Raghu 
Vira 1938) based on a single Tamil Jaiminīya manuscript (Burnell 
506a). 
A different textual order is also seen in the manuscripts of the 
Jaiminīya-Brāhmaṇa. The present editions of the JB (Caland 1919, 
Raghu Vira & Lokesh Chandra 1954) have the following textual order: 
Book I: Agnihotra etc., Jyotiṣṭoma; II: Gavāmayana (part), Ekāha, 
Ahīna, Sattra, Gavāmayana (part); III: Dvādaśāha. Two teacher houses 
(1,2) are in possession of several manuscripts of the JB. Muṭṭattukkāṭṭu 
Māmaṇṇŭ Mana has two old partial manuscripts, and Nellikkāṭṭu 
48  Most of the manuscripts belonging to Mūttiriṅṅōṭŭ Mana have been deposited 
in the Pañcāṃgaṃ Pustakaśālā (Panchangam Press), Kāṇippayyūr Mana, Kunnaṃ
kuḷaṃ (Kunnamkulam), Tśśūr District, where a large number of manuscripts have 
been gathered from Nampūtiri houses for preservation. 
49  For the manuscripts belonging to these four houses, see the forthcoming catalogue of the Jaiminīya manuscripts by A. Parpola and me, which will be published in 
the proceedings of the 12th World Sanskrit Conference, Helsinki 2003.

--- Page 129 of 338 ---
jaiminīya sāmaveda manuscripts
113
Māmaṇṇŭ Mana has two partial manuscripts and one new complete 
manuscript in 3 parts. One manuscript belonging to the former house 
which covers part of the second book (2,372-442; 2,1-262) shows a different and certainly original textual order as follows: Gavāmayana (JB 
2,371-442; 2,1-80), Ekāha (2, 81-234), Ahīna (2,235-333[ms. up to 
268]). Sattra (2,334-370) would come after Ahīna as the last one in the 
lost portion of the manuscript.50 
No manuscripts of the Jaiminīya-Ārṣeya-Brāhmaṇa (a list of sāman 
names) are found in the present Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas. A. Parpola 
points out that the absence of this text is connected with the following 
fact: the Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas use ordinal numbers instead of sāman 
names when they refer to sāmans, while the Tamil Jaiminīyas use 
sāman names in the JĀrB. 51
In contrast to the other Sanskrit texts of the Sāmaveda including 
the JB, JŚS and JGS, whose manuscripts are relatively rare even in the 
teacher houses, manuscripts of the Jaiminīya-Upaniṣad-Brāhmaṇa 
prevail among almost all the houses that have kept (some part of) their 
Sāmavedic tradition (1,2,3,4,5,8,10).52 It is most probable that the 
50  For the high valuation of this manuscript, see Ehlers 2004. The textual order in 
this manuscript is also attested in the Baroda manuscript in Grantha script of the JB: 
fol. 1-65: Mahābrāhmaṇa (JB 1,1-364), fol. 66-133: Dvādaśāha (3,1-386), fol. 134160: Mahāvrata (= Gavāmayana) (2,371-442; 2,1-80), fol. 161-184: Ekāha (2,81-234), 
fol. 185-202: Ahīna (2,235-333), fol. 202-209: Sattra (2,334-370) (Shrigondekar & 
Siromani 1925: 1-17; 130). Cf. Parpola, A. 1968-69: I:1, 48; Murakawa 2000; Ehlers 
2000. The other manuscripts in Grantha script, and one new manuscript in Malayalam script belonging to Nellikkāṭṭŭ Māmaṇṇŭ Mana have the same textual order as 
that in the printed edition. 
51  By e-mail of 14 May, 2000. The Göttingen manuscripts of the JB, JĀrB, JUB, 
which form a set of manuscripts (Cod.Ms.Sanscr.3bc), and one Hoshiarpur manu
script of the JĀrB express before the texts one and the same obeisance to the scribe’s 
teacher, Rāmacandra by name. According to it, the teacher belonged to the 
Kallaṃpaḷḷi house and lived in the village Kiṭaṃkūr (= Kiṭaṅṅūr) (see the list of the 
present Nampūtiri Jaiminīya houses above) (Janert & Poti 1970: 39; Sharma 1967: 7, 
n. 4; cf. Parpola, A. 1984: 430f. [4f.]). At the end of another Hoshiarpur manuscript 
of the JĀrB (VVRI No. 6844), Rāmacandra is mentioned as the scribe himself 
(Vishva Bandhu 1959: II, 15). It is unlikely that those manuscripts originally 
belonged to the Nampūtiri Jaiminīya tradition. Since the village is relatively near to 
Tamil Nadu, they may have come from some Tamil Jaiminīya region. 
52  In the Nampūtiri Jaiminīya tradition, the JUB is treated as an independent text 
called “Jaiminīya-Upaniṣad” (jaiminīyopaniṣat). According to the Baroda manuscripts belonging to the Tamil Jaiminīya tradition, however, it is the last section of the 
large Brāhmaṇa which consists of eight sections: 1. Mahābrāhmaṇa, 2. Dvādaśāha, 
3. Mahāvrata, 4. Ekāha, 5. Ahīna, 6. Sattra, 7. Ārṣeya, 8. Upaniṣad (cf. the colophon 
at the end of the manuscript of the JB quoted in Shrigondekar & Siromani 1925: 130; 
cf. also 105; Parpola, A. 1968-69: I:1, 48). For the title “Jaiminīya-Upaniṣad-

--- Page 130 of 338 ---
masato fujii
114
prevalence of the manuscripts of the JUB reflects the educational system of the Nampūtiri Jaiminīya tradition. The Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas 
do not study the JB, JŚS, nor JGS when they learn the Sāmaveda, but 
they study (actually only recite a part of) the JUB during the period of 
the aupaniṣada-vrata in their Sāmavedic curriculum.53 The situation 
of the Tamil Jaiminīyas is totally different. In the case of Makara 
Bhūṣaṇam in Tōkūr, the curriculum he followed was not based on the 
vrata system. He learned the Jaiminīya texts one by one under the 
guidance of his teacher (see n. 15). As a result of the waning of the 
vrata system among the Tamil Jaiminīyas, the JUB seems to have lost 
its importance as the text to be learned in connection with the 
aupaniṣada-vrata. Nowadays, the Upaniṣad respected by the Tamil 
Jaiminīyas is not the JUB but the Kena-Up., which is only a small part 
(4,18-21) of the JUB. Probably, the Tamil Jaiminīyas have changed 
their Upaniṣad under the influence of the Vedānta philosophy, in 
which only the Kena-Up. portion has been recognized as an authentic 
Upaniṣad.54 
Brāhmaṇa”, which has been commonly used after the title “The Jaiminīya or 
Talavakāra Upaniṣad Brāhmaṇa” given by H. Oertel to his editio princeps of this text 
(1894), see Fujii 1997: 96, n. 36.
53  For the curriculum of Nīlakaṇṭhan Akkittirippāṭŭ, see n. 44. The curriculum 
of Vāsudēvan Nampūtiri of Perumaṅṅāṭŭ Mana is as follows: he performed the 
Upanayana at the age of six, and made the start of the Vedic learning (Upākarma) 
after two months; his Brahmacārin period lasted six years, during which he learned 
the Ṛk (= Ārcika), the Sāmaṃ (= Grāmageya-Gāna), the Candrāsyāmaṃ (= 
Āraṇyaka-Gāna), and most of the Ūhaṃ (= Ūha-Gāna), but did not learn the Ūṣāṇi 
(= Ūhya-Gāna); during the aupaniṣada-vrata which lasted one year, he learned by 
ear the JUB for one day (according to my interview with him in 1990). Nīlakaṇṭhan 
Akkittirippāṭŭ had recited the shortest chapter (4,3) of the JUB every day as one of 
the texts for his Svādhyāya. For the relationship of the JUB with the aupaniṣadavrata in the Vedic period, see Fujii 1997: 91. 
54  Śaṅkara made a clear distinction between the Kena-Up. and the other part of 
the JUB in his Bhāṣya on Brahmasūtra 3,3,25. See Fujii 1996: 835f. (114f.); 1997: 96; cf. 
Witzel 1977: 145. According to the above-mentioned K. Kaṇṇan from Tentiruppērai, 
the Kena-Up. and the Nārāyaṇa-Up. have been highly respected by the Jaiminīyas 
there. For the text and position of the Kena-Up. portion in the JUB, see Fujii 1996.

--- Page 131 of 338 ---
jaiminīya sāmaveda manuscripts
115
Abbreviations
JĀrB 
 
Jaiminīya-Ārṣeya-Brāhmaṇa 
JB 
 
Jaiminīya-Brāhmaṇa 
JGS 
 
Jaiminīya-Ghyasūtra 
 
JŚS 
 
Jaiminīya-Śrautasūtra
JS 
 
Jaiminīya-Saṃhitā 
 
 
JUB 
 
Jaiminīya-Upaniṣad-Brāhmaṇa
Up. 
 
Upaniṣad 
Bibliography
Bake, A. A. 1935. “The Practice of Sāmaveda.” Proceedings and Transactions of the 
Seventh All-India Oriental Conference, Baroda, December 1933: 143-155. Baroda: 
Oriental Institute.
Bhaṭṭācārya, Vibhūtibhūṣaṇa. 1976. Jaiminīya Sāmagāna. (Sarasvatī-Bhavana-Gran
thamālā 109.) Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya.
Brough, J. 1964. “Obituary: Arnold Adriaan Bake.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental 
and African Studies, 27: 246-264 = J. Brough, Collected Papers: 244-259 [BSOAS 
27: 262-264 (bibliography) omitted]. London, 1996.
Burnell, A. C. 1869. Catalogue of a Collection of Sanskrit Manuscripts, Part I: Vedic 
Manuscripts. London.
Caland, W. 1907. Die Jaiminīya-Saṃhitā mit einer Einleitung über die Sāmavedalite
ratur. (Indische Forschungen, 2. Heft.) Breslau.
———. 1919. Das Jaiminīya-Brāhmaṇa in Auswahl: Text, Übersetzung, Indices. 
(Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam, 
Afdeeling Letterkunde, Deel I, Nieuwe Reeks, Deel XIX, No. 4.) Amsterdam.
Ehlers, G. 2000. “Auf dem Weg zu einer neuen Edition des Jaiminīya-Brāhmaṇa.” 
Berliner Indologische Studien, 13/14: 1-28. 
———. 2004. “Old and New Manuscripts of the Jaiminīya-Brāhmaṇa.” The Vedas: 
Texts, Language & Ritual, Proceedings of the Third International Vedic Workshop, 
Leiden 2002, ed. A. Griffiths and J.E.M. Houben: 29-33. (Groningen Oriental 
Studies, 20.) Groningen: Egbert Forsten.
Fujii, M. 1996. “Kena-Upaniṣad (= Jaiminīya-Upaniṣad-Brāhmaṇa 4,10 [4,18-21]).” 
Indian Thoughts and Buddhist Culture: Essays in Honour of Professor Junkichi 
Imanishi on His Sixtieth Birthday: 842-821 (107-128) (in Japanese). Tokyo: 
Shunju-sha. 
———. 1997. “On the Formation and Transmission of the Jaiminīya-UpaniṣadBrāhmaṇa.” Inside the Texts, Beyond the Texts: New Approaches to the Study of the 
Vedas, ed. M. Witzel: 89-102. (Harvard Oriental Series, Opera Minora, 2.) 
Cambridge.
Gardner, R. & Staal, F. 1976. Altar of Fire. The Film Study Center, Harvard University. 
(45-minute 16-mm film/video)
Govindan Namboodiri, V. 2002. Śrauta Sacrifices in Kerala. (Calicut University 
Sanskrit Series, 13.) Calicut: University of Calicut.
Howard, W. 1977. Sāmavedic Chant. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
———. 1987. “The Body of the Bodiless Gāyatra.” Indo-Iranian Journal, 30: 161-173.

--- Page 132 of 338 ---
masato fujii
116
Ikari, Y. 1998 [1999]. “A Survey of the New Manuscripts of the Vādhūla School —
MSS. of K1 and K4 –.” Zinbun: Annals of the Institute for Research in Humanities, 
Kyoto University, 33: 1-30.
Jairazbhoy, N. A. 1991. The Bake Restudy in India 1938-1984: The Preservation and 
Transformation of Performance in Tamilnadu, Kerala and Karnataka. Van Nuys, 
California: Apsara Media for Intercultural Education.
 Janert, K. L. & Poti, N. N. 1970. Indische und Nepalische Handschriften, Teil 2. (Ver
zeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, Band II, 2.) Wiesbaden: 
Steiner.
Karttunen, K. 1989-1990 [1991]. “Medieval texts on the Ghya ritual of the Jaiminīya 
Śākhā.” Bulletin d'Etudes Indiennes, 7-8: 141-156.
———. 2001. “Studies in the Ghya Prayogas of the Jaiminīya Sāmaveda: 2. Sthālīpāka.” 
Vidyārṇavavandanam: Essays in Honour of Asko Parpola, ed. K. Karttunen and 
P. Koskikallio: 317-341. (Studia Orientalia, 94.). Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society.
———. 2003. “Studies in the Ghya Prayogas of the Jaiminīya Sāmaveda: 3. Pre
liminaries.” Studia Orientalia, 95: 263-273.
———. 2005. “Studies in the Ghya Prayogas of the Jaiminīya Sāmaveda: 4. Nān
dīmukhābhyudayaśrāddha.” Indische Kultur im Kontext: Rituale, Texte und Ideen 
aus Indien und der Welt. Festschrift für Klaus Mylius, hrsg. von L. Göhler: 305-311. 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Keith, A. B. 1935. Catalogue of the Sanskrit and Prākrit Manuscripts in the Library of 
the India Office, Volume II: Brahmanical and Jaina Manuscripts. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Mahadevan, T. P. & Staal, F. 2005. “The Turning Point in a Living Tradition. 
Somayāgam 2003.” Indische Kultur im Kontext: Rituale, Texte und Ideen aus 
Indien und der Welt. Festschrift für Klaus Mylius, hrsg. von L. Göhler: 365-389. 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Makara Bhushanam, T. N. n.d. [1998]. Jaimini Sama Dharana Lakshana by Shri 
Sabhapathi. Chennai: Veda Rakshana Nidhi Trust. 
———. n.d. [2000]. Ārana Gānam of Talavakara Sakha of Jaiminiya Samam. Chennai: 
Veda Rakshana Nidhi Trust.
———. 2001. Sri Jaimineya Sama Veda Tarunagni Hotri Karika. Chennai: Veda 
Rakshana Nidhi Trust.
Makarapūṣaṇam, T. N. n.d., Jaiminisāma (Talavakāraśākhināṃ) Sandhyāvandanaprayogaḥ. Tōkūr.
———. n.d., Kōtraṅkaḷum Pravaraṅkaḷum. Tōkūr.
Mencher, J. P. 1966a. “Kerala and Madras: A Comparative Study of Ecology and 
Social Structure.” Ethnology: An International Journal of Cultural and Social 
Anthropology, University of Pittsburgh, 5.2: 135-171.
———. 1966b. “Namboodiri Brahmins: An Analysis of a Traditional Elite in Kerala.” 
Journal of Asian and African Studies, 1.3: 183-196. 
Mencher, J. P. & Goldberg, H. 1967. “Kinship and Marriage Regulations among the 
Namboodiri Brahmans of Kerala.” Man, N.S., 2: 87-106. 
Murakawa, Akiko 2000. “The Gavāmayana Portion(s) of the Jaiminīya-Brāhmaṇa: A 
Preliminary Study.” Journal of the Japanese Association for South Asian Studies, 12: 
110-134.
Namboodiripad, E. M. S. 1976. How I Became a Communist. Translated from 
Malayalam by P. K. Nair. Trivandrum. 
Narasiṃhan, R. 1970. Śrī Jaimini Sāmaveda Amāvāsyādi Tarpaṇa Vidhi. Śrīraṃgam: 
Śrī Sudarśana Jyotiṣa Maṃtrālayā.

--- Page 133 of 338 ---
jaiminīya sāmaveda manuscripts
117
Narayanan, M. G. S. and Veluthat, K. 1983. “A History of the Nambudiri Community 
in Kerala.” Agni: The Vedic Ritual of the Fire Altar, II: 256-278. Berkeley: Asian 
Humanities Press.
Oertel, H. 1894. “The Jaiminīya or Talavakāra Upaniṣad Brāhmaṇa: Text, Translation, 
and Notes.” JAOS, 16: 79-260.
Parpola, A. 1967. “On the Jaiminīyaśrautasūtra and Its Annexes.” Orientalia Suecana, 
16: 181-214. 
———. 1968-69. The Śrautasūtras of Lāṭyāyana and Drāhyāyaṇa and their commentaries: An English translation and study, Vol. I: 1 & 2, (Commentationes Huma
narum Litterarum, Societas Scientiarum Fennica, 42.2 & 43.2.) Helsinki. 
———. 1973. The Literature and Study of the Jaiminīya Sāmaveda in Retrospect and 
Prospect. (Studia Orientalia, 43.6.) Helsinki.
———. 1984. “On the Jaiminīya and Vādhūla Traditions of South India and the 
Pāṇḍu/Pāṇḍava Problem.” Studia Orientalia, 55: 429-468 (3-42).
———. 1986. “Jaiminīya Texts and the First Feeding of Solid Food.” South Asian 
Religion and Society, ed. A. Parpola and B. S. Hansen: 68-96. (Studies on Asian 
Topics No. 11.) Copenhagen: Scandinavian Institute of Asian Studies.
Parpola, M. 1995. Intialainen kylä: Suomen kansallismuseon näyttelyluettelo / A 
Village in India: The National Museum of Finland, exhibition catalogue. Helsinki: 
Museovirasto / National Board of Antiquities.
———. 1998. “Kerala Brahmins and Śaṅkara’s Laws.” Glimpses of the Indian Village in 
Anthropology and Literature: 39-64. (Istituto Universitario Orientale, Dipar
timento di Studi Asiatici, Series Minor, LVI.) Napoli. 
———. 2000. Kerala Brahmins in Transition. A Study of a Nampūtiri Family. (Studia 
Orientalia, 91.) Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society.
Raghavan, V. 1957. “Present Position of Vedic Chanting and Its Future.” Bulletin of 
the Institute of Traditional Cultures (Madras University): 48-69.
Raghu Vira 1938. Sāmaveda of the Jaiminīyas: Text and Mantra Index. (Sarasvati 
Vihara Series, 3.) Lahore: The International Academy of Indian Culture.
Raghu Vira & Lokesh Chandra (ed.) 1954. Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa of the Sāmaveda. 
(Sarasvati-Vihara Series, 31.) Nagpur: International Academy of Indian Culture.
Renou, L. 1947. Les écoles védiques et la formation du Veda. Paris: Imprimerie 
Nationale.
———. 1950. “The Vedic Schools and the Epigraphy.” Siddha-Bhāratī or the Rosary of 
Indology, being the Dr. Siddheswar Varma Presentation Volume, Part 2: 214-221. 
Hoshiarpur: Vishveshvaranand Vedic Research Institute.
Sharma, B. R. 1967. Jaiminīyārṣeya-Jaiminīyopaniṣad-Brāhmaṇas. (Kendriya Sanskrit 
Vidyapeetha Series, Nos. 5-6.) Tirupati: Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha.
Shrigondekar, G. K. & Siromani, K. S. R. S. 1925. A Descriptive Catalogue of Man
uscripts in the Central Library, Baroda, Vol. 1: Vedic. (Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, 
27.) Baroda.
Siegling, W. 1906. Die Rezensionen des Caraṇavyūha. Leipzig.
Simon, R. 1889. Beiträge zur Kenntnis der vedischen Schulen. Kiel = Kleine Schriften: 
3-117. Stuttgart, 1979.
Somayajipad, C. V., Itti Ravi Nambudiri, M., and Erkkara Raman Nambudiri. 1983. 
“Recent Nambudiri Performances of Agniṣṭoma and Agnicayana.” Agni: The 
Vedic Ritual of the Fire Altar, II: 252-255. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press.
Sreekrishna Sarma, E. R. 1999. Vedic Tradition in Kerala. (Calicut University Sanskrit 
Series 8.) Calicut: University of Calicut. 
Staal, J. F. 1961. Nambudiri Veda Recitation. ‘s-Gravenhage: Mouton.

--- Page 134 of 338 ---
masato fujii
118
———. 1975. “Some Vedic Survivals: Report on Research Done in India Dec. 1970March 1971.” Journal of the Ganganatha Jha Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, 31: 
167-180.
———. 1983. Agni: The Vedic Ritual of the Fire Altar. 2 vols. Berkeley: Asian Huma
nities Press.
———. 1992. “Agni 1990.” Ritual, State, and History in South Asia: Essays in Honour 
of J. C. Heesterman, ed. A. W. van den Hoek et al.: 650-676. (Memoirs of the Kern 
Institute, 5.) Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Tsuji, N. 1981 [1948]. “Genzon Sāmaveda-bunken no gaikan (Saṃhitā-hen).” Tsuji 
Naoshiro Chosakushu, I: Veda-gaku 1: 317-344 (in Japanese). Kyoto: Hozokan.
 Vishva Bandhu. 1959. Catalogue of VVRI. Manuscript Collection in Two Parts. 
(Vishveshvaranand Indological Series, 10; 11.) Hoshiarpur: Vishveshvaranand 
Vedic Research Institute.
Weber, A. 1850. “Ueber die Literatur des Sāmaveda.” Indische Studien, I (Berlin): 
25-67.
———. 1855. “Caraṇavyūha. Uebersicht über die Schulen der Veda.” Indische Studien, 
III (Berlin): 247-283.
Witzel, M. 1977. “An Unknown Upaniṣad of the Kṣṇa Yajurveda: The Kaṭha-ŚikṣāUpaniṣad.” Journal of the Nepal Research Centre (Humanities), 1: 139-153.
———. 1985. “Regionale und überregionale Faktoren in der Entwicklung vedischer 
Brahmanengruppen im Mittelalter (Materialien zu den vedischen Schulen, 5).” 
Regionale Tradition in Südasien, hrsg. von H. Kulke und D. Rothermund: 37-76. 
(Beiträge zur Südasienforschung, Südasien-Institut, Universität Heidelberg, 104.) 
Heidelberg. 
———. 1987. “On the Localisation of Vedic Texts and Schools (Materials on Vedic 
Śakhas, 7).” India and the Ancient World: History, Trade and Culture before ad 
650, ed. G. Pollet: 173-213. (Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta, 25.) Leuven.
———. 1989. “Tracing the Vedic Dialects.” Dialectes dans les Littératures IndoAryennes, ed. C. Caillat: 97-265. (Publications de l’Institut de Civilisation Indienne, 
Série in-8, Fasc. 55.) Paris. 
———. 1993. “Toward a History of the Brahmins.” JAOS, 113.2: 264-268.

--- Page 135 of 338 ---
the lost yāmalāṣṭakatantra
119
 
 
CHAPTER SIX
Texts and communities: 
the manuscripts of the lost 
YāmalāṢṬakatantra
Cezary Galewicz
The rich legacy of extant Indian manuscripts and historical manuscript cultures of India are gradually attracting attention from beyond 
the narrow circles of collectors, librarians and text-critical editors. 
There are several reasons for this, one of which is a growing interest in 
the multitude of distinct forms and modalities of producing knowledge and circulating texts, and in the possible implications of those 
forms for the circulation of ideas and for the shaping of cultural areas 
and civilisations. The various modalities of producing, copying, diffusing and handling manuscripts in particular socio-historical circum
stances offer a rewarding field of study that forms a rich complement 
to the study of texts and ideas. This new interest on the part of South 
Asia specialists appears to parallel, and perhaps interact with, a more 
general discussion across the humanities, and especially between 
adherents of two seemingly separate sub-disciplines of history, namely 
(a) book history and (b) intellectual history. According to some, the 
methodological separation of the two schools resulted in the partisans 
of book history preferring the history of diffusion; while the adherents 
of intellectual history instead emphasised discourse analysis.1 The 
question of whether and how it is possible to bring the two strands 
together, in such a way that the one could reinforce the other, remains 
important for the intellectual history of Indian and South Asian studies.2 In contradistinction to most other cultural milieus, what in many 
cases is still possible in the Indian framework is the confrontation, or 
at least supplementation, of text-historical evidence with the evidence 
1  A formulation by Robert Darnton [Darnton 2005: 21]. For arguments opposing 
Darnton, see, among others, Skinner 2005.
2  According to a recent study, “compared to number of excellent empirical and 
theoretical studies of the history of the book in the West, book history in South Asia 
is still in its formative phase.” [Stark 2007: 6].

--- Page 136 of 338 ---
cezary galewicz
120
of living communities of traditional text users, the actors of learned 
textual traditions.3 I will use this dichotomy—one which will probably 
never be fully bridged—as the context for a few remarks on a case 
study concerning a fragmentary history of a text and a seemingly 
absent tradition of its reading. This is going to be a brief history made 
up of bits and pieces belonging to the separate worlds of (a) material 
artefacts, library collections, historical circumstances of circulation, 
and (b) living textual communities. Piecing together these different 
elements into one picture requires the development of the historical 
perspective towards the material culture of the ways of circulation of 
written artefacts, as well as a field study of the modalities in which living textual communities expose the same texts to different strategies 
of use and interpretation.
 Before embarking on my specific case study I feel obliged to make 
a brief remark: not being a manuscriptologist in the true sense of the 
term, I decided to touch on a few problems related to this discipline in 
my contribution to the present volume, because of my utmost reverence for those who are professionals in this field, along with my enthusiasm for Indian manuscripts in general, and for the Indian manuscript 
culture in its various historical and regional avatāras in particular. In 
my view, the discipline awaits a new articulation of several problems 
on the part of those of us inclined to the questions formulated either 
within the history of books or discourse analysis, or at the intersection 
of the two. In the Indian context, both sub-disciplines of history can 
cut through manuscriptology and the set of questions specific to its 
field of interest—and they (the sub-disciplines) can hardly do without 
manuscriptology.
The discipline which boasts the right to conceptually deal with 
manuscripts is known, at least to some, as codicology. I recall being 
corrected, if not scolded, on several occasions by elder colleagues from 
other areas of study if I referred to the field as manuscriptology.4 Is it 
actually fruitful—I kept asking myself—to think about the culture of 
manuscripts from the Indian Peninsula in an Indian historical context, and to speak about this in terms and categories developed within 
the discipline of classically understood codicology? Is a medieval 
Indian manuscript the same type of artefact in its socio-historical and 
3  Cf. Jacob 2007: 13-41.
4  The title of David Diringer’s The Book Before Printing—one of the classics in 
the field—seems to still hold best for the formulation acceptable for handwritten 
artefacts from different cultures.

--- Page 137 of 338 ---
the lost yāmalāṣṭakatantra
121
cultural functions as its early European counterpart, the codex? The 
easy answer is that it is not. However, this does very little to explain 
the problem and risks neglecting the characteristic dimensions of 
Indian manuscript cultures. The study of Indian manuscripts along 
with the social practices of their handling, as well as the type of reading expectations and interpretation strategies their circulation would 
stimulate among different historical communities of interpretation, 
should combine or share characteristics of both classical codicology 
and paleography.5 Furthermore, there is a third element which would 
complement these other two. This third component relates to the 
mass of Indian manuscripts in circulation, and their relatively slow 
and reluctant giving way in history to printed matter, suggesting rich 
social and cultural transactions stimulated by their diffusion. It is perhaps related also to the developments within South Asian studies and 
the growing presence of manuscripts as objects of cultural and political transactions in the eyes of contemporary Indologists.6 In other 
words, what makes the difference in the first place is that the Indian 
world of manuscripts proved to be operational or sufficient to cater 
for the needs of its agents, administrators, intellectuals, religious people, scientists, students, believers, literary connoisseurs and casual 
readers at a time when, in Europe, the printed book exerted almost 
undivided rule (perhaps with the exception of some forms of legal 
acts) and contributed through ‘print capitalism’ to the formation of 
nations and nationalisms.7 And maybe this is enough to justify our 
use of the term ‘manuscriptology’ in the eyes of colleagues from other 
disciplines within the broad area of Indian studies.8 It has been estimated that the use of manuscripts continued for a century following 
the introduction of print in Europe, circa 1450, while in India it continued, in many respects, in tandem with print until the beginning of 
the 20th century. It remains open to discussion whether this points to 
India lagging behind in accepting the challenge of modernity, which 
5  Codicology is usually understood as “the scholarly study of manuscripts from 
the point of view of the bookmaking craft”, while paleography deals with the study 
of the practice of deciphering and reading ancient and medieval manuscripts. 
6  According to some estimates the number of extant Indian manuscripts may 
amount to “over thirty million” [Pollock 2006: 558]. This, however, has not always 
been acknowledged by scholars outside Indology—cf. Diringer 1982: 358: “many 
thousands of Indian inscriptions ... have come down to us. [...] On the other hand, 
relatively few documents written on perishable materials, such as palm leaves or 
birch bark, have been preserved.”
7  Anderson 1983: 36-46
8  For instance, Visalakshy 2003, The Fundamentals of Manuscriptology.

--- Page 138 of 338 ---
cezary galewicz
122
Europe faced much earlier, or rather that India’s different developments in social and political contexts not only shaped but were themselves also actively shaped by its manuscript culture. A remarkable 
efficiency in publishing and widely circulating a large number of copies of a text has never been foreign to this culture. In this respect we 
may refer to literary sources which register the important social function of multiple manuscript copies. For example, an 18th century 
chronicle of the small, post-Vijayanagara Nāyaka kingdom of Keladi 
describes a mass distribution of a manuscript text in multiple copies 
which rivaled anything known from the world of print.9 
My specific case concerns the supposedly lost work entitled Yāma
lāṣṭakatantra (YAT) in its relation to a compendium of texts known 
as Ṛgvedadaśagrantha (RVDG) and its contemporary users—brahmin groups of, mostly, Western Maharashtra. The case of YAT 
presents several problems for both book historians and intellectual 
historians. One of these problems concerns the socio-cultural context 
and historical circumstances for a decision to include YAT in an altogether foreign collection of texts used by a community far removed 
from the geographical area where the YAT could have originated 
(where most of its MSS survived). Another problem concerns the 
nature of the relationship between this brahmin textual community 
and the compendium of RVDG which its members see as foundational to their identity. A proper articulation of these problems, however, calls for crossing the boundaries between different disciplines of 
study and their proper methodologies.
A few years ago, during the XIIth World Sanskrit Conference in 
Helsinki, I related the case of an unorthodox list of the Ṛgvedic khilas 
which I had come across in a short text in use among members of a 
local brāhmaṇa community of Āśvalāyana Ṛgveda in the Konkan 
area. The text, somewhat enigmatically introduced as the Yāmalāṣṭaka
tantrekhilopaniṣatmantrasaṃhitāsvarūpam (YATKU), had been in- 
serted into a traditional compendium of more orthodox looking 
brahmanic ‘scriptures.’ This compendium, taking the shape of a traditional edition in the form of a bundle of loose leaflets, contained a 
collection of primary and secondary Ṛgvedic texts belonging to the 
Āśvalāyana school. It was printed in Poona by Ghaisasa Vedapāṭhaśālā 
and entitled Ṛgvedadaśagrantha (RVDG). As I was subsequently to 
discover, the compendium appeared to be closely related to a 1930 
9  See Murthy 1981.

--- Page 139 of 338 ---
the lost yāmalāṣṭakatantra
123
Nirnaya Sagara Press edition of Ṛksaṁhitā by Vasudeva Laxman 
Shastri Panshikar, with the title Sasvāhākāraprayoganirṇayasamantra
kośā ca Ṛksaṁhitā.10 This edition, however, did not feature the name 
of Daśagrantha and appeared more limited in its scope. And yet the 
compendium, named Ṛgvedadaśagrantha, contained the same recension in its first part and clearly repeated the graphic layout of Panshi
kar’s edition. This was visible also in the title page of the saṁhitāgrantha 
section of the RVDG which bore a small type caption featuring the 
name Sasvāhākāraprayoganirṇaya etc.11 I could not trace any textual 
hint for the motive behind the editorial decision to include the short—
supposedly Tantric—text of YATKU within the RVDG, a compendium of otherwise mostly orthodox Ŗgvedic and related subject 
matter. Neither could the members of the Joglekar clan of Gokarna, 
among whom I found the RVDG in use, offer any plausible explanation for this inclusion.
Neither in the RVDG, nor in the earlier editions of Panshikar, was 
the YATKU, claiming to have taken its origin from the Yāmalāṣṭa
katantra, listed in their respective tables of contents.12 Both these publications positioned the YATKU immediately after the text of 
Ṛgvidhāna which, in both cases, was cited as the very last member of 
the list of Ṛgvedic pariśiṣṭas (Ṛksaṁhitāsthapariśiṣṭaviṣayānukramaṇ
ikā). To the best of my knowledge, there is no direct textual link 
between the text of Ṛgvidhāna and that of the YATKU. Both editions 
contained what was apparently the same text claiming the essence 
(svarūpam) of khilas, upaniṣads and mantrasaṃhitās. Both pointed to 
its incomplete, mutilated or abridged form that ended abruptly at a 
certain point which also both of them admitted while reading an 
appropriate end mark before the colophon as apūrṇaṃ, ityādisaṁ
kṣepaḥ.. 
10  Panshikar 1930. Nirnaya Sagar Press is believed by some traditional Indian 
scholars to have published the first printed edition of the Daśagrantha collection 
(Nana Kale, personal correspondence). However, it does not feature the title of 
Ṛgvedīyadaśagrantha and appears to contain only the Ṛksaṁhitā with additional 
texts named Ṛksaṁhitāpariśiṣṭāni. Among these additional texts one can find the text 
of Ṛgvidhāna and the YATKU, although YATKU is not listed in the attached Table 
of Contents (Ṛksaṁhitāsthapariśiṣṭa-viṣayānukramaṇikā).
11  See, RVDG: title page.
12  However the running header, positioned at the upper right margin, is written 
in the abridged form Yāmalasaṁ. [RVDG: 66] which probably parallels the left margin running header for a bigger text unit reading Ṛksaṁ.

--- Page 140 of 338 ---
cezary galewicz
124
The compendium RVDG which I chanced upon for the first time 
during my field study in the Konkan area in 2002 is, according to its 
table of contents, composed of the following group of texts which, it is 
stated, form ten granthas (Ṛgvedīyadaśagranthāḥ) or ‘books’: 
1. 
Ṛksaṁhitā with sarvānukrama and svāhākārahomanirṇaya
prayoga, etc. [1]
2. 
Aitareyabrāhmaṇa with occasional bhāṣya readings (bhāṣya
pāṭhais tatratatrānuvadita) [2]
3. 
Aitareyāraṇyaka (upaniṣad) with occasional bhāṣya readings 
(bhāṣyapāṭhaiḥ) [3]
4. 
Gṛhyasūtra—Āśvalāyanīya [4]
5. 
Śikṣādivedaṣaḍaṅgāni—the standard six auxiliary ‘sciences’ 
[5-10]
6. 
Śikṣādicatuṣṭaya (śīkṣā, jyotiṣa, chhanda, nighaṇṭu) [apparently 
redundant and not counted]
Somewhat surprisingly, and contrary to the table of contents, a few 
more minor texts are found among the parts of this constructed collection. For instance, after the uttaraṣaṭka of Yāska’s Nirukta and a 
subsequent pariśiṣṭa portion—which is slightly longer than that in the 
Sarup edition13—there is a short addition containing what is said to be 
the 37 nirukta-śāstra-cintā-viṣaya introduced with athāsya-nirukta
syākhilapuruṣārthopakāra-vṛtta-samarthasya saṁgrahaḥ and contain
ing 37 elements starting with nāmākhyātopasarga-nipāta-lakṣaṇaṁ 
and ending with mantrārtha-nirvacana-dvāreṇa devatābhidhāna-nir
vacana-phalaṁ devatā-tādbhāvyam. As previously stated, there is no 
mention of YATKU to be found in the enumeration of the ten books. 
With regards to the contents of the YATKU, let me briefly recapitulate what I have stated elsewhere:14 the text of YATKU in both editions is very short, covering only two out of the four faces of a folded 
leaflet. It is for the most part a hierarchical enumeration of certain 
would-be Vedic khilas, upakhilas and upaniṣads declared to be representative of the essence of the Veda. The YATKU takes on the structure of a dialogue between Pārvatī and Śiva. In this dialogue, Pārvatī 
requests Śiva to reveal the secret of the most essential part of the Veda 
13  Which follows the so called “longer recension” of Nirukta—see Sarup: 1967: 
244, fn.18.
14  Galewicz: forthcoming.

--- Page 141 of 338 ---
the lost yāmalāṣṭakatantra
125
in the form of khilas and upakhilas as well as mahopaniṣads and “other 
collections of mantras,” all of which, says Pārvatī, form the essence, or 
the most excellent part, of the Veda (vedānām sārabhūta).15 According 
to the text, Lord Śiva, filled with compassion, responds to Pārvatī’s 
request and announces the names of the khilas, upakhilas and 
upaniṣads attached to each of the four Vedas. Śiva explains that it is 
the supposed inner qualities of upaniṣadic texts that will effectively 
help to dispel the “darkness of ignorance” and lead to liberation 
(mukti). The upaniṣads listed as thirty two in number are declared to 
be the “mothers”of all the four Vedas. Some of the enumerated texts, 
however, do not suit the character of the Āśvalāyana Ṛgveda which 
the RVDG claims to belong to. A case in point is the title of the text in 
question, namely the Yāmalāṣṭakatantre Khilopaniṣad. The title 
includes the word khila which suggests the idea of an appendix to a 
canonical collection, such as the Ṛgvedakhila, or khilas to other Vedic 
saṁhitās which are, incidently, also enumerated in the text in question. Looking at the names solemnly declared by Śiva to be khilas and 
upakhilas of RV, we find the following: nine khilas are presented, 
namely, vālakhilya (a group of), rājanya, lakṣmīsūkta, gāruḍa, svās
tika, bhautika, bhauma, āyuṣya, and graham; and four upakhilas, 
namely, paiśāca, rātrikāṇḍa, traiveṇya, and svapna. While the names 
of vālakhilya and lakṣmīsūkta are those usually enumerated as RV 
khailika sūktāni, the remainder are not so easily identified and do not 
find support in the classic studies in the field, such as that of 
Scheftelowitz. Due to the lack of direct references we can only state 
here that their names probably testify to an act of purposeful accommodation within additional textual units of the RVDG. 
One possible reason for this textual intrusion into the realm of the 
RVDG may have been a need at one time for including, under the 
name of khilas and upakhilas, a certain number of minor mantric 
texts probably used in the daily practices of Citpāvan group of brahmins in the domain of healing, exorcism, counteracting possession, 
magic or divination. While this may appear unorthodox for the local 
community of Gokarṇa Āśvalāyana Ṛgvedins, who form one of the 
groups of contemporary users of the RVDG compendium, we must 
consider its close proximity to the Śiva cult of the nearby Mahābaleśvara 
temple. We should also take into account their kuladevatā in the form 
of Vedapuruṣa, and other specific elements of their daily customs, 
15  RVDG: 65.

--- Page 142 of 338 ---
cezary galewicz
126
such as a special reverence for the book of the Veda which they honour with the title of Bhagavān Veda and treat almost as a sacred object. 
It is not insignificant that the same group of Citpāvan brahmins has 
been using the RVDG collection comprising the text of the Ṛgvidhāna 
with prescriptions concerning magical use of Ṛgvedic mantras. 
Keeping this in mind, and remembering that the text of YATKU follows immediately after that of the Ṛgvidhāna in the RVDG collection, 
one could surmise that, in the undefined past, the YATKU must have 
been inserted into the compendium with a view to introducing or 
legitimising certain rites and mantra-texts concerned with practices of 
magical, atharvanic or tantric character practiced by an earlier community of Daśagranthins. Using this assumption, I have tentatively 
identified certain terms met with in this text in the spirit of magical 
and healing practices.16 Further confirmation of these assumptions 
came with the results of a manuscript hunt for the YAT.
After a rather long search I was able to prove that the elusive 
YATKU does indeed have its source in the form of a quite lengthy text 
entitled Yāmalāṣṭakatantra (YAT). Although not listed in the pertinent catalogue, the Saraswati Mahal Library possesses a set of four 
manuscripts featuring the name of Yāmalāṣṭakatantra. Furthermore, 
a copy of the YAT is found in the classified list of manuscripts drawn 
up by Burnell.17 Today the long palm leaf manuscripts which make up 
the YAT have the numbers B-9335—37 and B-122322. Three of the 
four manuscripts are grouped under successive catalogue numbers 
and appear to be copies of the same older one. All are in Telugu script 
and, unfortunately, not in the best condition. Only one of the group, 
namely MS B-9336, is relatively better preserved, although some parts 
are badly damaged. It has 119 doubly inscribed folios, mostly worm 
eaten at the ends. Fortunately, the part of the manuscript which was 
my primary interest was successfully identified as being included in 
folios 21B-23B. I will refer to it below as TanjYATKU. After a number 
of readings, it proved to contain the same text as the YATKU of 
RVDG, although with several additional lines at the end.
My search for YAT manuscripts yielded one more result18: the discovery of a transcript from another manuscript of the Yāmalāṣṭaka 
16  See, Galewicz: forthcoming.
17  See Burnell 1880: 205.
18  After the present essay has been completed a few more pieces of interesting 
evidence surfaced that, however, could not be included in this volume, among else 
two more Devanāgarī transcripts of YAT (one from Baroda), and an important men-

--- Page 143 of 338 ---
the lost yāmalāṣṭakatantra
127
located in the Tirupati Oriental Research Institute. It is believed to 
have been transcribed from a manuscript also written in Telugu script 
and containing 235 paper folios. I shall refer to this text as TiruYAT. 
Both TanjYAT and TiruYAT seem to be related in at least one conspicuous characteristic: both claim to contain 110 paṭalas while actually only 107 paṭalas can be found within them, three of the total 
number of paṭalas are missing either through an error by an earlier 
copyist, an incomplete source manuscript or a purposeful omission. 
Whatever the case, this feature indicates that the two manuscripts are 
linked. Both of them contain the above mentioned YATKU which 
forms paṭala 13 of the YAT. In both TanjYAT and TiruYAT, the text 
of the upaniṣad is slightly longer than that in the printed version of the 
RVDG. Furthermore, both manuscripts show a characteristic feature 
regarding the supposed title of the YATKU in question: while the 
printed version of the compendium of the RVDG records the name of 
the upaniṣad in its colophon as khilopaniṣanmantrasaṁhitāsvarū
pam,19 both the Tanjore and Tirupati manuscripts read it as khilo
pakhilopaniṣanmantrasaṁhitā-svarūpam.20 Moreover, a short note 
on the Tirupati transcript published by K. Srinivasavaradan features, 
in the viṣayāṇāṁ sūcikā, a quite different form of the same name—
akhilopaniṣanmantrasaṁhitāsvarūpam.21 I am not quite sure how to 
evaluate this difference except for suggesting that Panshikar might 
have used a different manuscript. Neither are the motifs for shortening the text of YATKU in Panshikar’s edition and in the RVDG clear 
enough.
There are several alternative readings in the texts of TanjYATKU 
and TiruYATKU and the printed version of the RVDG. The 
TanjYATKU and the TiruYATKU generally offer better readings. 
This is certainly the case for the list of YV upakhilas with baudhīyam 
in the TiruYATKU version, which seems more plausible than audtion of YAT in a seventeenth century list of MSS belonging to a private collection of 
Kāvīndrācārya who probably hailed from Pune region.
19  The colophon closing a section of the RVDG entitled Yāmalasaṁ-[hitā?] reads 
[Ŗgvedīyadaśagrantha 66]: iti śrīmadyāmalāṣṭakatantre khilopaniṣmantrasaṁhitā
svarūpa-kathanaṁ nāmatrayodaśaḥ paṭalaḥ.
20  The colophon of paṭala 13 in the Tirupati transcript reads (Tirupati YAT: 70): 
iti śrīmatyāmalāṣṭakatantre khilopakhilopaniṣanmantrasaṁhitāsvarūpakathanaṁ 
nāmatrayodaśaḥ paṭalaḥ..
21  Srinivasavaradan 1976: 54.

--- Page 144 of 338 ---
cezary galewicz
128
heyam in the Poona RVDG version (YAT 13.10, or RVDG 66:10).22 
On the whole, the TanjYATKU and TiruYATKU appear to represent 
better copies of the upaniṣad in question. The fact that the printed version of the RVDG stops suddenly after the passage numbered as line 
25, with the words: apūrṇaṁ, ityādisaṁkṣepaḥ seems to confirm this 
view. Fortunately, both the Tanjavur and Tirupati Mss contain additional lines (fourteen in the case of the Tirupati transcript). 
The complete paṭala 13 of the YAT, as it appears in TanjYAT and 
TiruYAT, ends with the following words: iti śrīmadyāmalāṣṭakatantre 
khilopakhilopaniṣan-mantra-saṃhitā-svarūpa-kathanaṁ-nāma 
trayodaśaḥ paṭalaḥ, which due to the additional element of upakhila23 
differs slightly from both Panshikar and RVDG edition. 
The entire Yāmalāṣṭakatantra has the look of an encyclopaedic 
work: 110 paṭalas —in view of the three missing ones this amounts to 
107 paṭalas—covering a variety of different subjects including an elaborate grantha-avatāra section, a history of creation, a classification of 
traditional systems of authoritative knowledge, and even strīsaun
daryakāraṇaṁ (paṭala 108). A clear intention to bridge the dividing 
lines between Śaiva, Vaiṣṇava and Śākta worlds comes to the fore, 
with an overall unifying structure and separate paṭalas devoted to 
important aspects of their respective traditions. All are cast in the 
form of a saṁvāda-dialogue between Śiva and Pārvatī. Different 
paṭalas seem to oscillate between the poles of overtly non-orthodox 
matter (avaidikatantrāṇi of paṭala 24 or paṭala 105 on the home-lizard) and those which claim the brahmanic orthodox perspective 
(vedasvarūpam of paṭala 10). Perhaps the chapter which best expresses 
the idea of marrying opposite perspectives is paṭala 23, entitled 
vaidikatantrasvarūpam. The overall strategy of bridging the divisions 
between Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava traditions, with a bias towards a hierarchy in favour of the Śaiva, can also be seen in the opening maṅgala 
verses of the whole collection [YAT: 1.1-2]:
śuklāṁbaradharaṁ viṣṇuṁ śaśivarṇaṁ caturbhujam |
prasannavadanaṁ dhyāyet sarvavighnopaśāntaye ||
22  The numbering of lines comes from the RVDG printed edition; the manuscripts do not number their lines.
23  The formula—svarūpakathanam nāma— ending the paṭala name which recurs 
in a number of paṭalas: thus the end of paṭala 1 reads: iti yāmalāṣṭakatantre mahāsa
dāśivadhyānakathanam nāma prathamaḥ paṭalaḥ.

--- Page 145 of 338 ---
the lost yāmalāṣṭakatantra
129
For the removal of all the obstacles let one meditate on Lord Viṣṇu 
(who is) adorned with white robes, moon-colored, four-armed and has 
a benevolent face. 
śivaṁ śivāṁ gaṇapatiṁ śrīpatiṁ vāsareśvaram |
praṇamya jñānasiddhyarthaṁ gūḍhārthajñaṁ guruṁ bhaje ||24
Having bowed to Śiva and His Female form, to the Lord of Gaṇas, to 
the Lord of prosperity and to the Lord of the Dawn, I adore the guru, 
who knows the hidden meanings, for the perfection of knowledge. 
Within the architecture of the YAT, a glance at the immediate neighbourhood of paṭala 13 gives the following result: the preceding paṭalas 
9-12 deal with the classification of authoritative branches of learning 
or sciences; something also evidenced by the names of the respective 
paṭalas. Thus, paṭala 9 concerns the nature of a six-fold division 
scheme of the śāstras (ṣaḍvidhaśāstranirūpaṇaṁ). Paṭala 10 reveals 
the nature of the inner division of the Vedas (vedasvarūpaṁ), paṭala 
11 concerns the subdivision of the upavedas, and paṭala 12, which 
immediately precedes YATKU, concerns the nature of the aṅgavedas, 
which are summarised at the very end of the paṭala while introducing 
the subject of paṭala 13: evaṁ vedopavedāṅgavedāḥ sopaniṣadaṅgāḥ / 
khilopakhilam antāyāḥ kīrtyante sarvasādhanāḥ. Paṭala 14, which follows after the YATKU of paṭala 13, appears to deal with the nature of 
the relationship between the six darśana systems. It contains a reference to paṭala 13 inserted at the very beginning and taking the form of 
a recurring formula by which Pārvatī addresses Śiva the Mṛtyuñjaya, 
or the Conqueror of Death. The formula refers back to the topic of 
Śiva’s teaching contained in paṭala 13 in answer to an earlier request 
by Pārvatī. In the pertinent passage, a paraphrased name of paṭala 13 
is given by Pārvatī in the following words: vedasvarūpam akhilaṁ 
śrutaṁ tvadvadanān mayā.25 This wording may have been the origin 
of the name of paṭala 13 given in Śrinivasavaradan’s reconstructed 
index viṣayāṇāṁ sūcikā as akhilopaniṣan-mantrasaṁhitāsvarūpam.
Whatever the intended meaning of the paṭalas and their topics having such a concatenated structure, it stands to reason that paṭala 13 
only makes sense within the broader context of neighbouring chapters 
24  In different traditions of Śaivism the person of one’s guru may be, and often is, 
represented as merging with that of Śiva though actual concepts of this consubstantiality may look different. 
25  TiruYAT: 71.

--- Page 146 of 338 ---
cezary galewicz
130
whose ambition is to classify the received and established traditional 
knowledge. The only peculiar thing, however, appears to be the reversal of the relation between the mūla text, seemingly the source of all 
knowledge in the form of the Veda, and its subsequent “emanations.” 
Here, the elements of the compound khilopakhilopaniṣan-mantrasaṁhitā—the last sequence—appear to be infused with the highest 
authority, embodying the very essence of its precedents. The scheme 
to which such a pattern probably aspires to make a connection to, is 
that of the Vedānta and its idea of “lower” (apara) and “higher” (para) 
knowledge contained in the upaniṣadic mahāvākyas said to crown the 
Veda. Here, however, what we have is a particular Vedic tradition, 
namely Āśvalāyana Ṛgveda, and yet no text like YATKU is known to 
the Ṛgvedic tradition as such. Within the context of the whole of YAT 
the hints towards the classification of knowledge voiced at the end of 
paṭala 13 (YATKU) refer back to paṭala 9—ṣaḍvidhaśāstranirūpaṇa—
which specifically deals with the topic of the ordered sequence and 
hierarchy of all knowledge. This topic seems to be developed specifically in paṭalas 9 through 13, though much earlier, at the start of 
paṭala 1, it is suggested that the context of stratifying and ordering 
knowledge is to be one of the main topics of the YAT as a whole.
At this preliminary stage of the evaluation of the results, some paratextual characteristics of the YAT manuscripts should be mentioned 
in passing. Thus, paṭala 3 opens with a recurring formula of introduction in which Pārvatī is praising Śiva Parameśvara and his wisdom 
before asking him to yield to her curiosity and answer another question by revealing his divine knowledge. One of the names with which 
Pārvatī addresses lord Śiva is virūpākṣa (“Lord with extraordinary 
eyes”). Mentioning this name may well be intentional, and it may hint 
at a local cult of Śiva as Virūpākṣa which could be useful in searching 
for a possible religious and intellectual identity of the YAT. A rather 
well known example of the Virūpākṣa cult relates to the connection of 
political power and religious authority that is offered to the royal deity 
of the early Vijayanagara rulers. The cult of Virūpākṣa in Hampi goes 
back to an older, pre-Vijayanagara cult. An important reference to 
Virūpākṣa is indicated in the architecture of another region not far 
away from that where the contemporary users of RVDG and YATKU 
actually live: An 8th century temple of Virūpākṣa (dated between ca. 
733-746 ad and the rule of Vātāpi Cālukya Vikramāditya II;26 its rem26  The Western Cālukyas ruled from 543–757 ad and then from 975–1189 ad 
See, Rowland 1954 (contains an architectural plan of the Virūpākṣa temple). Cf. also

--- Page 147 of 338 ---
the lost yāmalāṣṭakatantra
131
nants can still be seen in Pattadakal) said to be founded by queen 
Lokamahādevī to commemorate the victories of her husband over the 
Pallavas of Kāñci. A few centuries later, no later than the 12th century, 
a deity of that name became the focus of a local cult in Hampi by the 
Tungabhadra River.27 A deity named Virūpākṣa was then taken over 
and accommodated as a royal tutelary deity and it became a royal 
mark of the imperial power of Vijayanagara, whose dynasties started 
using the Virūpākṣa sign manual for authorising their royal inscriptions from the mid 14th century onwards, and continued to do so for 
almost two hundred years, until the 16th century. The fact that the 
name of Virūpākṣa is mentioned in the opening verses of a few books 
of YAT may, of course, be without great significance but it may also 
suggest a purposeful act of making a connection with a temple tradition of some acknowledged authority. 
With reference to what is known of the history of Tantric literature, 
I admit to have failed to plausibly locate the YAT on the map of textual traditions usually accepted for classifying Tantric works. No classification on offer seems to acknowledge a separate Tantra text of that 
name. The recurring principle for classification is that of eight different works making a group of the so called Yāmala Tantras. The eight 
components of such a group differ from one source to another, and no 
one seems to know a distinct work named Yāmalāṣṭakatantra. 
According to one of the traditional enumerations,28 Yāmala is the 
name of an eight-member group of Tantras among 64 Bhairava 
āgamas of the śākta tradition, all classed under the category of aṣṭaka 
(“the eight”). The second aṣṭaka in the sequence of eight is called 
yāmalāṣṭaka and is said to comprise Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Atharvan, 
Ruru, Vetāla, Indra and Svacchanda āgamas. A similar list is said to be 
given29 in Śrīkaṇṭhīsaṁhitā30 which, however, appears to state only 
seven out of eight elements, deeming the eighth one to be lost. In this 
enumeration the Yāmalāṣṭaka also appears as the second one in the 
sequence. No mention, however, seems to be made anywhere of an 
independent work like the Yāmalāṣṭakatantra. Nor of an independent 
text like the YATKU that might belong to it. Perhaps what we have 
here is indeed an instance of “an artificial locus of attribution.” Yet, if 
Prasad 1972 and Hardy 2001.
27  On the Virūpākṣa cult in Vijayanagara, see Verghese 1995: 17-22.
28  Bhattacharya 1982: 77.
29  Personal communication by Somayājī Nana Kale of Barsi, 2003. 
30  Cf. Hanneder 1998 with the appendix of a fragment of the text of śrīkaṇṭhī.

--- Page 148 of 338 ---
cezary galewicz
132
this is the case, what reason would the editors of a compendium like 
the RVDG have for referring to a tradition of Yāmalas that appear to 
have little authority among Tantra followers, not to mention in a general Brahmanic Hindu context. The status of the so called Yāmala 
priests appears to have been not very high and Yāmala scriptures are 
said to be used by non-brahmin temple priests of South India, such as 
those known by the name of uvaccan or pāraśava.31 Perhaps this 
might have something to do with a peculiar status of the above mentioned Citpāvan Brahmins, among whom the collection of RVDG 
remains, at least, in theoretical use. 
It is too early at this stage to risk any general assessment on the 
nature and relation of this encyclopedic-like compendium to any of 
the schools within the context of original or secondary Tantric literature. Certain formulations within the YAT suggest the perspective of 
the Southern (Vaidika) Saiddhāntika current: thus, the title of paṭala 
23 reads: vaidikatantrasvarūpam, and the name of paṭala 24 is given 
as yoginītyādi-dvāttriṁśad-avaidikatantrāṇi. 
A point of both practical and, more generally, methodological 
interest presents itself with the possibility of complementing philological textual study with manuscript diffusion assessment and field 
study concerning the living tradition of learned communities among 
whose members the text has been subject of transmission and/or use. 
Given that the only extant manuscripts to have been preserved are in 
Telugu script, a cautious suggestion might be made with regards to 
the power-culture relations and literary customs of post Vijayanagara 
Nāyaka kingdoms, like that of Tanjavur, and their emulating of the 
type of imperial cultural space in which Telugu remained one of the 
privileged literary media. This would, to some extent, explain the 
apparently wide circulation of the YAT text and it reaching the 
Western Maharashtra from the cultural centres of previous Vijayana
gara kingdoms, perhaps during the Maratha rule under which such a 
circulation was at least more probable. This however remains conjecture and must wait for a thorough study in the future.
Returning to the question of a textual community who use the 
RVDG containing the upaniṣad of YATKU, my enquiry has delivered 
partial results, at least for the time being, and will need to be supplemented by additional field study. The compendium of the RVDG 
appears to be in use among members of Brāhmaṇa groups of Konkan 
31  See Sanderson 1986.

--- Page 149 of 338 ---
the lost yāmalāṣṭakatantra
133
and West Maharashtra regions, mostly those known by the names of 
Konkanstha (Citpāvan) Brahmins. According to a series of interviews 
carried out in 2003 and 2005-6, a Daśagranthin is usually said to be a 
Ṛgvedin brāhmaṇa who undertook (among other vows, including a 
strict dietary regime, certain elements of bodily discipline, etc.) a vow 
of reciting and studying Ṛgvedadaśagrantha. That is to say, the ten 
books contained in the compendium with this name.32 Some of the 
Daśagranthis of the Western Maharashtra (Pune, Alandi, Ratnagiri) 
and Konkan area (Gokarna), admit that the YATKU used to be recited 
in a relatively recent but unspecified past in a simple but ceremonial 
pārāyaṇa consisting of a simple single reading throughout of its text. 
Some seem to preserve a vague memory of a ritual connected with the 
use of the YATKU but their memory does not offer anything more 
specific. Members of other brāhmaṇa groups of Maharashtra tend to 
dismiss any real connection of the YATKU to the Ṛksaṁhitā or any 
other text of the true Ṛgvedic tradition. Interestingly, although members of the group say that the YATKU has been rightly included in the 
compendium of the RVDG, they cannot offer any explanations for 
why this is the case. In fact, many appear bewildered when asked to 
explain. Some of the contemporary brahmin informants are of the 
opinion that among some Vaidikas of Maharashtra there remains a 
memory of a custom according to which both the Ṛgvidhāna and the 
YATKU used to be contained in a sort of ceremonial reading (veda
pārāyaṇa) by being “recited just once.”33 The same informants add 
that nowadays personal Vedic recitation in the form of a vedapārā
yaṇa, by those Vaidikas in Maharashtra who keep the RVDG, is 
restricted to recitation of the saṁhitā only, while both the YATKU 
and Ṛgvidhāna are left aside, as are the other nine of the ten books of 
the RVDG. If these claims are substantive and represent more than a 
personal view, they might lead to the conclusion that, nowadays, the 
YATKU may have fallen out of use while, according to the same 
informants, certain formulas of Ṛgvidhāna are still practiced.
One more minor aspect with respect to the whole collection of the 
RVDG deserves attention: the RVDG repeatedly commences almost 
32  Personal communication by Mr. Anand Parkhe of Pune, himself a Daśagran
thī, 2006. One of the prayoga texts attached to the RVDG and included in the list of 
pariśiṣṭāṇi [RVDG: 20], namely the Vedapārāyaṇaprayoga, does not contain any hint 
about any practical use of the YATKU. However, it does prescribe some portions of 
Ṛgvidhāna text.
33  Personal communication by Somayajī Nana Kale of Barsi, 2003.

--- Page 150 of 338 ---
cezary galewicz
134
every constituent text of its “ten books” with an homage to Veda
puruṣa—a deity representing the embodiment of the “holy scripture” 
of the Veda. Images of this deity happen to decorate walls of a house 
belonging to an important family among the contemporary users of 
the RVDG—the Joglekar’s Gurukul house in Gokarna. Members of 
their household proudly point out the images when they are asked 
about a deity presiding over family. Incidentally, the same deity is 
mentioned in Sāyaṇa’s introduction to the commentary on RS 1.1.1 as 
the one who actually uttered the first Ṛgvedic sūkta and who presides 
over the first stanza which begins the first hymn of the Ṛksaṁhitā.34 
This coincidence may bear some relation to the imperial legend of 
Vijayanagara noted above—the name of Virūpākṣa, the royal deity of 
the early Vijayanagara rulers mentioned in the preface to paṭala 3 of 
the YAT.
In conclusion, the manuscript finds concerning the YAT have proved 
the existence of the source text for the YATKU which is included in a 
traditionally recognised Ṛgvedic compendium called the RVDG. 
Perhaps because of a need to legitimise some non-Vedic practices by 
the Ṛgvedic Brahmins, of a specific group and locality, a text of a seemingly Tantric origin had, at one point in time, been attached to the 
authoritative collection of the RVDG. This seems to suggest that the 
Ṛgvedic Brāhmaṇa priest must have sought authorisation for these 
Tantric rites. It might be that certain (khila) texts were in use among 
Ṛgvidhāna priests while competing with their Atharvaṇic counterparts. Including these texts within the collection of RVDG may have 
been thought of as a way of endowing the Ṛgvidhāna priests with 
additional authority. This, however, remains a hypothesis and does 
not explain the historical circumstances in which a Brāhmaṇa group 
from Western Maharashtra could come into contact with the text and 
ideas of the YAT. To the best of my knowledge, there is no evidence to 
a continuation of a presumably original (if it ever was one) tradition 
of reading, interpreting or ritual use of the whole or a part of the YAT 
corpus in the broad geographical region where, historically, Telugu 
script has been used. The fact is, a part of the YAT, in the form of the 
YATKU, is to be found within a traditionally recognised35 corpus of 
34  Müller I: 22.
35  The interviews with the members of pertinent Brahmanic communities (Western Maharashtra Konkanastha and Deśastha Brahmins from which Daśagranthins 
derive) show that most of the Daśagranthins are aware of the fact that the canonical

--- Page 151 of 338 ---
the lost yāmalāṣṭakatantra
135
the “Ten Books of the Ṛgveda” (RVDG) and is circulating among the 
members of a community describing themselves as Daśagranthin. 
Scriptural canons and their guardian communities are characterised 
by “fixed limits” that happen to be transcended, and “textual bodies” 
that happen to be extended, for reasons that tend to be forgotten while 
new shapes of canons become recognised.
The nature of the relationship between the source text of the YAT 
and the compilation of the RVDG is still to be explored. Given the 
fragmentary knowledge of the history of both textual corpora, further 
study is needed combining methods pertinent to book history, discourse analysis and the study of intellectual practices of the learned 
community within which the whole or a part of the two remained in 
use. It has to touch upon the social and intellectual practices of the 
learned communities of the users of the texts and their competing 
claims towards their own cultural identities and professional competence vis-à-vis the issues of power and authority.
Figure 6.1.  Folios from one of the identified manuscripts of the Yāmalāṣṭakatantra 
containing the YATKU. Photo by the author. See colour section, Plate IV.
compendium of texts in their use contains the YATKU. Other traditional scholars of 
the region when shown the RVDG compendium tend to express an opinion that “all 
the well known present Vaidikas and even Ghanapaṭhins do not know why this 
Yamalashtaka Tantra chapter is given after Rigvidhana and why it is published.” 
and “Yamalashtaka is not in anyway connected with Rigveda Recitation tradition.” 
(Nana Kale of Barsi, personal communication, 2003). The same traditional authority, 
however, recognises the fact that “From long time ago, [along] with [the texts of the] 
Daśagrantha, Vaidika Brahmins were simply only reading Rigvidhan once and this 
Yamalashtak Tantra chapter.” At least one of the interviewees, a Daśagranthins from 
Pune, admitted to vaguely remembering a custom of ceremonial reading of the 
YATKU, the last occurrence of which may have had place, in his opinion, “some 
thirty years ago” (personal communication, 2006).

--- Page 152 of 338 ---
cezary galewicz
136
Figure 6.2.  Students reading RVDG in Rajapur, India. Photo by the author. 
See colour section, Plate V.
Abbreviations
ĀGS 
Āśvalāyanagṛhyasūtra
ĀŚS 
Āśvalāyanaśrautasūtra
Mss 
Manuscript(s)
RVDG 
Ṛgvedadaśagrantha
RV 
Ṛgveda
RVKh 
Ṛgvedakhila
SV 
Sāmaveda
TanjYAT 
Tanjore manuscript of Yāmalāṣṭakatantra (MS No 9336)
TiruYAT 
Tirupati transcript of Yāmalāṣṭakatantra (MS No 6843)
YAT 
Yāmalāṣṭakatantra
YATKU 
Yāmalāṣṭakatantrekhilopaniṣat
YV 
Yajurveda

--- Page 153 of 338 ---
the lost yāmalāṣṭakatantra
137
Bibliography
Aithal, Paramesvara, K. 1969. “RV khilas and the Sūtras of Āśvalāyana.” Adyar 
Library Bulletin, vol. 33.
———. ed. 1991. Veda-lakṣaṇa. Vedic Ancillary Literature. Heidelberg.
Anderson, Benedict. 1983. Imagined Communities: reflections on the origin and spread 
of nationalism. London: Verso Editions. 
Bhat, M. S. 1987. Vedic Tantrism. A Study of Ŗgvidhāna of Śaunaka with Text and 
Translation. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas. 
Bhattacharya, N. N. 1982. History of the Tantric Religion: a historical, ritualistic and 
philosophical study. New Delhi: Manohar. 
Burnell, A. C. ed. 1880. A Classified Index to the Sanskrit MSS in the Palace at Tanjore. 
London. 
Darnton, R. 2005. “Discourse and Diffusion.” In: Contributions to the History of 
Concepts 1(1): 21-28. 
Dikshit, G. S. ed. 1981. Studies in Keladi History. Bangalore.
Diringer, D. 1982 (1953). The Book Before Printing. New York.
Galewicz, C. (forthcoming). “The khilas and upakhilas of RV according to the 
Yāmalāṣṭakatantre-khilopaniṣad.” In: Proceedings of the XII World Sanskrit Con
ference, Helsinki 2003.
Hanneder, J. 1998. Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation (with an appendix of 
śrīkaṇṭhī). Groningen.
Hardy, A. 2001. “Tradition and Transformation: Continuity and Ingenuity in the 
Temples of Karnataka.” In: Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 
(June): 180-199.
Jacob, Christian. ed. 2007. Lieux de Savoir. Espaces et Communatés. Paris: Albin 
Michel.
Murthy, Chidananda. M. 1981. “ ‘Keladinripavijayam’—a Historical Poem.” In: 
Dikshit 1981: 119-123.
Panshikar, Vasudeva L. ed. 1930. Sasvāhākāraprayoganirṇaya samantra-kośāca 
Ṛksaṁhitā. Bombay: Nirnaya-sagar Press.
Pollock, S. 2006. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men. Sanskrit, Culture, and 
Power in Pre-modern India. Berkeley: The University of California Press.
Singh, K. S. ed. 2004. People of Maharashtra, vol. XXX, part. I-III. Mumbai: Arya 
Books Int.
Prasad, Rajendra. B. 1972. “Rastrakuta temples at Bhavanasi Sangham.” Artibus Asiae, 
34: 211-224.
Renou, L. 1947. Les écoles védiques et la formation du Veda. Paris: Imprimerie 
Nationale. 
Ṛgvedadaśagrantha, ed. by Ghaisasa Veda Patha Sala. 1986. Pune: Vasanta Press. 
Rowland, B. 1954. The Art and Architecture of India. London. 
Sanderson, A. 1986. “Purity & Power among the Brahmans of Kashmir.” In: The 
Category of Person, ed. by M. Carrithers, S. Collins, S. Lukes. Cambridge. 
Sarup, Lakshman. ed. 1967 (1920-27). The Nighaṇṭu and the Nirukta. The Oldest 
Indian Treatise on Etymology, Philology and Semantics. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas.
Scheftelowitz, J. 1906. Die Rigveda Apokryphen. Breslau.
Skinner, Q. 2005. “On Intellectual History and the History of Books.” Contributions 
to the History of Concepts 1(1): 29-36.
Srinivasavaradan, K. 1976. “Śrīyāmalāṣṭakatantram (Manuscript notice).” Venka
teswara University Oriental Journal XIX (1976), Sanskrit Section: 49-57.
Stark, U. 2007. An Empire of Books. New Delhi: Permanent Black.

--- Page 154 of 338 ---
cezary galewicz
138
Stock, Brian. 1996 (1990). Listening for the Text. On the Uses of the Past. Baltimore: 
The Johns Hopkins University Press. 
———. 1986. The Implications of Literacy. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Verghese, Anita. 1995. Religious Traditions of Vijayanagara as Revealed through its 
Monuments. New Delhi. 
Visalakshy, P. 2003. The Fundamentals of Manuscriptology. Thiruvananthapuram.

--- Page 155 of 338 ---
palmleaves to databank
139
 
 
CHAPTER SEVEN
From palmleaves to a multimedia databank: 
a note on the ‘Bhāsa-project’
Heike Moser
 The ‘Bhāsa Research Group’
The ‘Bhāsa-Project’ is investigating the thirteen so-called ‘TrivandrumPlays’ ascribed to Bhāsa, namely Svapnavāsavadatta, Pratijñāyaugan
dharāyaṇa, Avimāraka, Cārudatta, Pratimānāṭaka, Abhiṣēkanāṭaka, 
Pañcarātra, Madhyamavyāyōga, Dūtavākya, Dūtaghaṭōtkaca, Karṇa
bhāra, Ūrubhaṅga and Bālacarita.1 It was initiated in the early 1990’s, 
when Heidrun Brückner, then professor of Indology at Tübingen 
University, became interested in the subject: being an admirer of the 
Mahābhārata plays ascribed to Bhāsa, she was able to witness a 
Kūṭiyāṭṭam-performance in 1993. Kūṭiyāṭṭam, recently awarded the 
title of “Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity” 
by the UNESCO, is the sole surviving Sanskrit theatre tradition on the 
Indian subcontinent. It is solely preserved by very few performers in 
Kerala. Some parts of the plays ascribed to Bhāsa are still in the repertoire of this theatre. With the help of a grant by the Deutsche For
schungsgemeinschaft (DFG; German Research Foundation), Brückner 
got the opportunity to see and document more Kūṭiyāṭṭam-per
formances, mainly those of the Mārgi-troupe in Thiruvananthapuram.2
She was also able to examine some of the palmleaf- manuscripts 
containing the text of the ‘Bhāsa-Plays’ kept at the Oriental Research 
Institute and Manuscripts Library (ORIML) of the University of 
Kerala at Thiruvananthapuram and at the Sanskrit College Manu
scripts Library at Tripunithura. 
1  In this article throughout short and long e and o are marked in transliteration, 
because in Dravidian languages this distinction is made. Dealing with texts in Sanskrit, Prakrit and Malayalam it is helpful for the reader to do so. See also Esposito in 
this volume.
2  The members of the project wish to thank late Appukuttan Nair, Ram Iyer, 
Ammannur Kocchukkuttan Chakyar and Margi Madhu for their immense help and 
cooperation.

--- Page 156 of 338 ---
heike moser
140
With the continued support by the DFG a campaign to locate and 
photograph handwritings on palmleaf and to document Kūṭiyāṭṭam 
performances was conducted in the years thereafter.3 This was made 
possible thanks to the close cooperation with Indian colleagues and 
scholars like N.P. Unni, K.G. Paulose, C. Rajendran, L.S. Rajagopalan, 
and K. Vasudevan Namputiripad. N.P. Unni’s important publication 
“New Problems in Bhāsa Plays” (Unni 1978) guided us to the main 
collections.4 In addition, we went through the published manuscriptcatalogues like the “New Catalogus Catalogorum” (Raghavan 1968). 
We also had access to unpublished lists by K. Vasudevan Namputiripad 
and Ashok Aklujkar providing us with unique information about several private collections.5 Unni’s records were complemented by our 
own new findings (see Figure 7.1). 
We collected and reproduced all the manuscripts by way of leaf- 
by-leaf photography from the Oriental Research Institute and 
Manuscripts Library of the University of Kerala at Kariyavattom/ 
Thiruvananthapuram, the Sanskrit College Manuscripts Library at 
Tripunithura, the Manuscript Library of the Department of Malayalam 
of Calicut University (see Figure 7.1), the Adyar Library and Re- 
search Institute as well as the Government Oriental Manuscripts 
Library at Chennai, the DAV College at Chandigarh,6 the Punjab Uni
versity Library at Lahore (Pakistan), the School of Oriental and 
African Studies at London (U.K.), the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek 
3  A large part of the documentation has been carried out by P.L. Shaji (photographing manuscripts and recording Kūṭiyāṭṭam on video mainly performed by 
members of the Mārgitroupe). Additionally, about 60 tapes were recorded and more 
than one thousand slides and photos were taken by Heike Moser during her studies 
and research at the academy Kēraḷa Kalāmaṇḍalam from 1995 to 1997 and the subsequent years as member of the project. 
4  Unni’s book presents all the details which were known to him about manuscripts containing the plays ascribed to Bhāsa; it was our main reference work during 
the first years. A hardly revised and enlarged edition was published in 2000 under 
the title “Bhāsa afresh“, surprisingly without including the new findings by our 
research group which were well known to the author. 
5  A list dating July 6th and 7th, 1974, written by K. Vasudevan Namputiripad, 
gives the details of about 80 palmleaf-manuscripts at Kiṭaṅṅūr Kuṟimaṯṯatte Cākyār
maṭham (see Appendix II). Moreover, Namputiripad provided us with records of his 
own family’s palmleaf-collection (dating 1982/06/23) before transfering them to 
Calicut University. In February 1999, Ashok Aklujkar kindly sent us the records he 
had prepared with the help of C.M. Neelakandhan in 1977 and 1981, listing numerous palmleaf-collections in Kerala. 
6  The manuscripts formerly kept as part of the Lal Chand collection, Lahore / 
Pakistan, have been shifted from Hoshiarpur to Chandigarh in 1995; for more details 
see Sharma / Rao 2000 and Brückner 2000: 513.

--- Page 157 of 338 ---
palmleaves to databank
141
Figure 7.1.  Oiling and photographing the manuscripts on the rooftop of Calicut 
University. From left to right: P.L. Shaji, Heidrun Brückner and Heike Moser. 
(Calicut, 2000/01/17; source: Bożena Śliwczyńska / Heike Moser).
München (Munich, Germany), and, finally, the private collections of 
Kitangur Raman (Kuttappan) Chakyar and the Potiyil Chakyar family.7 
Some of Brückner’s students and colleagues took an interest in the 
plays, the texts, manuscripts and the performance tradition of Kūṭi
yāṭṭam: Anna Aurelia Esposito wrote her MA-thesis about Dūtavākya 
(preparing a critical edition, revealing two versions of the play; 
Esposito 2000 and 2010b) and devoted her dissertation to Cārudatta 
(critical edition, translation and Prakrit-studies; Esposito 2004), furthermore she worked on the Prakrits and the development of the 
Malayalam script used in these texts (Esposito 2010a, 2010c and her 
essay in this volume); Matthias Ahlborn in his dissertation took up 
Pratijñāyaugandharāyaṇa (digital critical edition, translation, anno
tations; Ahlborn 2007), currently he further specialises in the field of 
7  I wish to thank all the Chakyars (Cākyār), Nambiars (Nampyār) and Nangiars 
(Naṅṅyār), being the treasure-keepers of the texts connected with the Kūtiyāṭṭam 
theatre tradition, for their kind help. They allowed me to photograph not only drama 
texts but also several manuscripts containing the stage manuals āṭṭaprakāram and 
kramadīpika, which are of great importance for my own work about staging dramas 
in the Kūṭiyāṭṭam-tradition (Moser 2008). Further information regarding the performers’ private collections are summarised in Appendix I.

--- Page 158 of 338 ---
heike moser
142
digital publication of Sanskrit dramas (Ahlborn 2010); Bożena 
Śliwczyńska has written an essay about the initiation of a Kūṭiyāṭṭamactor (Śliwczyńska 2007); Karin Steiner has published a paper about 
rituals in Pañcarātra (Steiner 2010); my own publications focus on the 
performative complex called ‘Kūṭiyāṭṭam’ which I have been studying, 
performing, and teaching since 1995 (Moser 2000, 2001, 2002, 2007a, 
2007c, 2008, 2009, 2011a, 2011b; see Figure 7.2); Heidrun Brückner 
herself published critical editions, translations, and studies of the two 
one-act plays Madhyamavyāyōga and Karṇabhāra (Brückner 1996, 
2000, 2002 and 2010).8
Figure 7.2.  Heike Moser presenting Laḷita in Śūrpaṇakhāṅkam, 2nd act Āścaryacū
ḍāmaṇi (Killimangalam, 1996/01/01; source: Heike Moser).
 
When H. Brückner was appointed to the chair of Indology at Würz
burg University in 2001, the ‘Bhāsa-Project’ was shifted from Tübingen 
to Würzburg. Because of this shift and in order to describe the contents of the project more accurately, it was renamed in 2003 as “The 
Würzburg Multimedia Databank on Sanskrit Drama and Theatre”. Its 
collections today consist not only of some 300 hours of video recordings and about 2000 slides and photographs displaying Kūṭiyāṭṭam 
performances, but also includes several thousands of photographs of 
79 manuscript bundles containing the ‘Trivandrum-plays’ and other 
dramas. During the last few years, all the manuscript photographs and 
8  For full bibliographical references, see Appendix II.

--- Page 159 of 338 ---
palmleaves to databank
143
many of the Kūṭiyāṭṭam pictures and videos have been digitised with 
the help of another DFG-grant (2004-2007). Since the late 1990’s, a 
databank has been built up and is now freely accessible to a larger 
public on the Internet at <http://www.indologie.uni-wuerzburg.de/
bhasa/rahmen.html>. At present, the databank contains the texts of 
all thirteen plays ascribed to Bhāsa as well as the dramas Abhijñāna
śākuntala of Kālidāsa and Mudrārākṣasa of Viśākhadatta. It further 
provides comprehensive indices of all Sanskrit and Prakrit words. 
Exemplary scans of manuscripts are linked to some of the texts. The 
databank has been conceptualised by Matthias Ahlborn based on 
Figure 7.3.  Screenshot of <http://www.indologie.uniwuerzburg.de/bhasa/rahmen.
html> (2007/09/19). Cārudatta is a good example for trying out all the features of the 
databank: compound words are separated, vowel sandhis dissolved; when clicking on 
“sūtradhāra” the corresponding entry in the Sanskrit-index is visible in the right column, referring to the use of this word in the other plays with the help of interactive 
links. In the same way the Prakrit-index will appear when clicking on one of the 
Prakrit-words. The links marked blue, for instance, under 0.1,[22848.61.a.4] etc., refer 
line-by-line to the digitised palmleaf-manuscripts. Here the beginning of manuscript 
no. 4, folio 74 recto (“foto 97”; Madras SR 1714 G, former R 3585 G) is selected. See 
colour section, Plate VI.

--- Page 160 of 338 ---
heike moser
144
Extensible Markup Language (XML) and Unicode.9 By using frames it 
is possible to see text, index, and manuscript in a single window (see 
Figure 7.3). Furthermore, visual material was added and linked: to 
explain the basic performance techniques of Kūṭiyāṭṭam, a description 
with pictures and a subtitled videoclip was prepared by Heike Moser.10 
Other clips visualise specific portions of the text in a Kūṭiyāṭṭamperformance.11 Detailed information on using all the features of the 
databank is given in Brückner 2007.12
What is the Outcome of the ‘Bhāsa-Project’? 
The debate concerning the authorship of the so-called ‘Trivandrumplays’ is going on for nearly seven decades. Even this work of several 
scholars, spanning more than 10 years and using old and new technologies, did not suffice to solve the problem: neither Bhāsa nor any 
other author is mentioned in any of the manuscripts.13 More research 
is required comparing lexicon, style, syntax, Prakrit etc. The databank 
provides a starting point for such studies. It is a new tool and a reliable 
textual basis that can gradually be further extended. Utilizing its 
material, new critical editions and translations with annotations 
of Cārudatta, Dūtavākya, Karṇabhāra, Madhyamavyāyōga and Pra
tijñāyaugandharāyaṇa have already been prepared and published (see 
Appendix II). The database contains an almost complete digitised collection of all manuscripts of the plays ascribed to Bhāsa available. 
Besides, for the first time it tries to connect dramatic texts of Kerala 
with their performing tradition, Kūṭiyāṭṭam, by using the potentials of 
modern techniques, such as videoclips. We plan to publish detailed 
lists of our collections (manuscripts, videorecordings) as well as an 
annotated bibliography concerning the ‘Bhāsa-problem’. Finally, the 
work with hundreds of pages of handwritings made us experts in 
reading Sanskrit and Prakrit in Malayalam script. We learned plenty 
9  For details, see Ahlborn 2007 and 2010.
10  “Das Sanskrittheater Kūṭiyāṭṭam—eine kurze Einführung” (<http://www. 
indologie.uni-wuerzburg.de/bhasa/kuti/kuti-utf8.html>). 
11  For example Dūtavākya, verse 4.
12  For more details concerning the history of the project, see Brückner 2000.
13  There is one exception in Avimāraka, manuscript no. 5150, ORIML (Thiruvananthapuram): “ētat purākavivarapravarēṇa tēna kā[tyā?]yanēna racitañ caritaṃ 
rasēna sauvīrarājacaritaṃ harisēna nāmnō nāmnāvimārakam idaṃ likhitaṃ 
samāptaṃ”.

--- Page 161 of 338 ---
palmleaves to databank
145
about different mistakes typical of Sanskrit and Prakrit texts written 
with Malayalam letters either when copying a text from another palmleaf manuscript or listening to a reader and writing down the wording.14 Another focus of our work is concerned with the stage tradition: 
How were the ‘Bhāsa-plays’ performed? Which plays are still enacted? 
In which way are they staged today? How do text and performance 
interact? Except for one manuscript (Calicut 1488, written with 
Grantha letters), all palmleaf-manuscripts of the ‘Trivandrum-plays’ 
are written in Malayalam script. The close relationship of these dramas to Kerala and its traditional Sanskrit theatre Kūṭiyāṭṭam is obvious. In 1996, the two one-act plays Dūtavākya and Dūtaghaṭōtkaca 
were performed for the project after a gap of three decades based on 
the recollection of Kitangur Kuttappan Chakyar (see Figure 7.4 and 
7.5). In the years 1996 and 1997, with the assistance of our Indian 
team, I documented for the project the whole 41-day cycle of a per
formance of Mantrāṅkam (act 3 of Pratijñāyaugandharāyaṇa) on 
audio and video (see Moser 2000 and [2011b] and Figure 7.6). L.S. 
Rajagopalan and others completely transcribed and partly translated 
the textual material. 
14  See Esposito 2010a, 2010c and her essay in this volume. I myself prepared several manuscripts of the collection for the Indoskript-project (see Einicke 2009 and 
<http://userpage.fu-berlin.de/~falk/>). I also assisted Reinhold Grünendahl with the 
chapter about Malayalam handwritings in his publication “South Indian scripts in 
Sanskrit manuscripts and prints: Grantha Tamil-Malayalam-Telugu-Kannada- 
Nandinagari” (Grünendahl 2001) and tried to pass my knowledge about particular 
problems and features of handwritings in Malayalam script to students and colleagues in several manuscriptology-workshops conducted at the Universities of 
Tübingen and Würzburg. See also Moser 2007b.

--- Page 162 of 338 ---
heike moser
146
Figure 7.4.  Duryōdhana (Kalamandalam Raman Chakyar) and Kāñcukīya (Kitangur 
Kuttappan Chakyar) in Dūtavākya (Killimangalam, 1996/09/29; source: Heidrun 
Brückner). See colour section, Plate VII.
Figure 7.5.  Ghaṭōtkaca (Kitangur Kuttappan Chakyar) in Dūtaghaṭōtkaca (Killiman
galam, 1996/09/29; source: Heidrun Brückner).

--- Page 163 of 338 ---
palmleaves to databank
147
Figure 7.6.  Yaugandharāyaṇa (Kalamandalam Raman Chakyar) and Vasantaka 
(Kitangur Kuttappan Chakyar) in Mantrāṅkam (Killimangalam, 1996/05/26; source: 
Heike Moser). See colour section, Plate VIII.
Production, Distribution and Collection of Sanskrit 
Manuscripts in Ancient South India and the Work of the 
‘Bhāsa Research Group’ 
While searching for manuscripts containing the so-called ‘Bhāsaplays’ we obtained information about a couple of manuscripts not 
listed by N.P. Unni:15 thus, a text containing Dūtavākya was located in 
the Bavarian State Library;16 another bundle of palmleaf-manuscripts 
containing Pratimānāṭaka, Abhiṣēkanāṭaka, Svapnavāsavadatta and 
Pratijñāyaugandharāyaṇa was identified at the School of Oriental and
African Studies (SOAS), University of London.17 With the kind help 
of Dr. C. Rajendran of Calicut University we obtained the opportunity 
15  As already mentioned above, the publication of a detailed list of all the manuscripts photographed in the course of the project is under preparation. 
16  “Cod. Malay. 5” (Janert 1985). 
17  Manuscript 42203/b.

--- Page 164 of 338 ---
heike moser
148
to photograph several manuscripts containing plays ascribed to Bhāsa 
kept in the Malayalam-department there itself.18 Different versions of 
Pratimānāṭaka, Abhiṣēkanāṭaka, Dūtavākya and Mantrāṅkam were 
traced in private collections of traditional Kūṭiyāṭṭam performing 
families.19 Being a Kūṭiyāṭṭam performer myself, the Chakyars, Nam
biars and Nangiars not only showed their family manuscripts to us, 
they also allowed us to make lists and to take photographs of the manuscripts we were interested in (see Figure 7.7).20
Figure 7. 7.  Listing the manuscripts of the Potiyil Cākyār Family. From left to right: 
Potiyil Paramesvaran Chakyar, Killimangalam Vasudevan Namputiripad, Kitangur 
Kuttappan Chakyar, Heidrun Brückner, P.L. Shaji. (Potiyil, 1996/10/02; source: 
Heike Moser). See colour section, Plate IX.
We learned how the manuscripts were traditionally kept, how they are 
preserved today in private households (covered in cloth and stored 
either in a wooden box, a cupboard or still in the kitchen over the fireplace) and in public manuscript libraries (stored in open shelves with 
air-conditioners, which unfortunately in some places are often out of 
order). We observed old people and manuscript assistants being aware 
18  For details see Brückner 2000: 510-511.
19  See Appendix I “Private collections of palmleaf-manuscripts owned by 
Kūṭiyāṭṭam performing families”. 
20  In the course of my research I collected photographs and copies of handwritings on palmleaf and on paper dealing with the female solo sequence in Kūṭiyāṭṭam 
called Naṅṅyār Kūttu (see Moser 2008:119ff). These texts contain the verses and 
stage manuals (āṭṭaprakāram, kramadīpika, āṭṭakramam) for the flashback of the Cēṭī 
at the beginning of the second act of the play Subhadrādhanañjaya (“Śrīkṛṣṇaca
ritam”). At the same time I was able to make lists of other important texts preserved 
by these families.

--- Page 165 of 338 ---
palmleaves to databank
149
of the treasure they are guarding by handling the palmleaves with 
care, putting them at least once a year out in the sunlight to avoid fungus etc. And we came to know about librarians unaware of the value 
of the brittle handwritten materials for which they are responsible. 
We learned that the transmission of texts has not changed that much: 
in the tradition of guru-śiṣya-paramparā, students are still either transcribing texts from their teacher’s notebooks or write from his / her 
dictation. The major change is that palmleaf as writing material has 
been replaced by paper.21 The next step was to publish and print not 
only the text of the plays, but also their stage manuals (e.g. Nārāyaṇan 
Nampyār 1980 and 1984, Venu 1989 or Vēnugōpālan 2009). Nowadays 
the performers themselves started to computerise these texts for their 
everyday use. Researches like our “Bhāsa Group” edit and process 
texts in databanks and distribute them online.
All the techniques mentioned here share common problems: 
Different kinds of “worms” attack not only palmleaves and paper but 
also computer software. Scribes can make mistakes—regardless the 
technology they are using. In the depths of the Internet even large 
databases can get lost easily—still one has to know the “address” 
where the texts of interest are housed. And finally not only leaves and 
paper have fixed spans of life, the ones of computer hardware and 
software get shorter and shorter. So the work of transmission has to go 
on carefully: also a databank on the Internet has to be maintained and 
updated and has to be made “visible”.
 
To close this short note on the ‘Bhāsa-Project’ I wish to cite the colophon of the Abhiṣēkanāṭaka manuscript no. 20469 from ORIML, 
Thiruvananthapuram. This closing passage is a vivid example of how a 
palm-leaf manuscript was produced in strong association with the 
performing tradition of Kūṭiyāṭṭam in the year 1666 AD:22
21  Even at the beginning of the 20th century palmleaves were still in common use. 
For example, in my possession are photographies of a palmleaf-handwriting dating 
only to 1911.
22  Most scribal colophons in Indian manuscripts give the (more or less precise) 
date, the occasion and the place of writing of the manuscript. Still this colophon is a 
very unusual finding in the manuscripts we are dealing with here: Many of them 
have no colophon at all; in our work we did not come across any manuscript with 
such detailed specifications about place and time. And by mentioning the theatrehall kūttampalam we get an unique example of the strong association of these plays 
with the performing tradition of Kūṭiyāṭṭam in the 17th century: The scribe has com-

--- Page 166 of 338 ---
heike moser
150
[…] kollaṃ 841 ta karkkaṭakañāyiṟa patineṭṭā budhanāḻiccayuṃ apara
pakṣattil dvādaśiyuṃ makayiravuṃ anna uccakka pūjā neratta 
tiruvārppil kūttampalattiṃkalinna eḻati tīrnna cūḷāmaṇināṭakam | 
samāptam | rāmalikhitam | śivam astu |
[…] [In the year] kollam 841 (1666 AD) in the month of karkkiṭakam 
(july / august) on the 18th [day], a wednesday and dvādaśi-day (12th 
day of the lunar month) in aparapakṣam (decreasing moon) with the 
star makayiram (mārgaśirṣam), on this day at noon time during pūjā 
(service) in the kūttampalam (temple theatre, exclusively used for 
Kūṭiyāṭṭam performances) of Tiruvārppu (Kṛṣṇa-temple near Kōṭṭayam) 
this writing [of] the play Cūḍāmaṇi(sic?)23 has been completed | It has 
been written by Rāma | (may it be auspicious) | 
Appendix I  Private Collections of Palmleaf-Manuscripts 
Owned by Kūṭiyāṭṭam Performing Families
To give all the lists in detail would go beyond the scope of this publication. Whoever is interested in further details may contact me personally. 
1. Family of Māṇi-Cākyārs / Koccāmpiḷḷi-Nampyārs and -Naṅṅyārs 
Address: 
Paṭiññāṟe Koccāmpiḷḷi Maṭham 
 
Kiḷḷikkuṟiśśimaṅgalam 
 
P. O. Lakkiṭi Pālakkāṭu—679301 
At least two manuscripts of Mantrāṅkam (3rd act Pratijñāyaugandha
rāyaṇa), a version of Aṅguḷīyāṅkam (act 6, Āścaryacūḍāmaṇi) as well 
as several Śrīkṛṣṇacaritam-manuscripts originating from different 
families are preserved by P.K. Narayanan Nambiar. He himself edited 
and annotated portions of Mantrāṅkam (Nārāyaṇan Nampyār 1980) 
pleted his work in a building exclusively reserved for performances in the Kūṭiyāṭ
ṭam-style.
23  Here the writer most probably made a (final) mistake: this is the end of 
Abhiṣēkanāṭaka and not of ‘Cūḍāmaṇi’ (Āścaryacūḍāmaṇi). The manuscript-bundle 
contains today no other texts, but we have one bundle in our collection containing 
both plays. So there is at least the possibility that the colophon could well have been 
copied from an antigraph containing both the Abhiṣēkanāṭaka and the Cūḍāmaṇi, 
but in which the scribal colophon was supplied only at the end of the Cūḍāmaṇi. The 
scribe may have copied only the Abhiṣēkanāṭaka—for which the colophon was missing—and then provided the manuscript with the colophon of the Cūḍāmaṇi after it. 
But at the same time it can just be a sign of carelessness after completing a long 
work.

--- Page 167 of 338 ---
palmleaves to databank
151
and reconstructed a complete text of Śrīkṛṣṇacaritam (Nārāyaṇan 
Nampyār 1984). His daughter C.K. Jayanti wrote her M.Phil.-thesis 
about Mantrāṅkam (1993, Calicut University; unpublished); her PhDthesis dealt with Aṅgulīyāṅkam (1999, Sree Sankaracharya University 
of Sanskrit, Kalady; unpublished). I myself photographed and analysed the Śrīkṛṣṇacaritam-manuscripts of this collection as part of my 
dissertation (Moser 2008:119ff). 
2. Cākyār-family of Potiyil 
Address: 
Potiyil Maṭham 
 
P. O. Māṅṅānam 
 
Kōṭṭayam—686018 
On October 2nd, 1996, the following list of manuscripts was compiled 
by H. Brückner, Kitangur Kuttappan Chakyar, K. Vasudevan Nam
putiripad, H. Moser, Potiyil Paramesvaran Chakyar and P. L. Shaji 
(see Figure 7.7): 
1. Vyākaraṇam 
2. Puruṣārttham 
3. Rājasūyam 
4. A: Āśaucam 
   B: Stōtraratnāvali 
5. Naiṣadham (damaged) 
6. Tōraṇayuddham-āṭṭaprakāram (without drama) 
7. Harivaṃśam 
8. Sētubandhanam 
9. Mantrāṅkam (Sanskrit-āṭṭaprakāram) 
10. Dēvimāhātmyam 
11. A: Tapatīsaṃvaraṇam (first part missing) 
 
B: Dhanañjayam 
 
C: Nāgānandam 
 
D: Cūḍāmaṇi 
 
E: Pratimā 
 
F: Abhiṣēka 
 
G: Dūtavākyam 
12. Cūḍāmaṇi 
13. A: Pūjāvidhi 
 
B: Jyōtiṣam 
 
C: Syāntakam

--- Page 168 of 338 ---
heike moser
152
Manuscript 11 was photographed for the project; Anna Esposito used 
its Dūtavākya text in Esposito 2000 and 2010b. 
3. Cākyār-family of Ammannūr 
Address: 
Ammannūr Cākyār Maṭham 
 
Iriṅṅālakkuṭa—680121 
 
Tṛśśūr-Jilla 
Together with P.L. Shaji and with the help of Usha Nangiar, I was able 
to identify and list 37 of about 70 manuscript bundles of this collection, 
including versions of Mantrāṅkam (3rd act Pratijñāyaugandharāyaṇa) 
and Bālivadham (1st act Abhiṣēkanāṭaka) in January 2000. The pub
lication of G. Venu “Production of a play in Kūṭiyāṭṭam. Text and 
translation of the first act of Abhiṣekha Nāṭaka of Bhāsa with the 
Kramadīpikā (production manual) and the Āṭṭaprakāraṃ (acting 
manual) from the sanskrit drama tradition of Kerala” (Venu 1989) is 
supposedly based on the manuscript bearing the title “Bālivadhāṅkam”. 
4. Cākyār-family of Kiṭaṅṅūr [= Ceṟiya Pariṣa] 
Address: 
Kiṭaṅṅūr Kuṭṭappan Cākyār (=C. N. Rāman Cākyār) 
 
Cākyār Bhavan, 
 
P. O. Vallacciṟa—680562 
 
Tṛśśūr—Jilla 
A list dated July 6th and 7th, 1974, written by K. Vasudevan Nampu
tiripad together with Kunjunni Raja, late Painkulam Raman Chakyar 
and Clifford R. Jones describes about 80 palmleaf-manuscripts 
at Kiṭaṅṅūr Kuṟimaṯṯatte Cākyārmaṭham. On October 2nd, 1996, 
H. Brückner, Kuttappan Chakyar, K. Vasudevan Namputiripad, 
P.L. Shaji, and myself checked the private collection that meanwhile 
had been shifted to the aforementioned address. In 1996, about 50 
manuscript bundles were still preserved by Kuttappan Chakyar, 
including several plays ascribed to ‘Bhāsa’. 
5. Cākyār-family of Paiṅkuḷam [= Koypa] and Kēraḷa Kalāmaṇḍalam 
Address: 
Cākyār Maṭham 
 
P.O. Paiṅkuḷam, 
 
Ceṟuturutti—679531 
 
Tṛśśūr-Jilla

--- Page 169 of 338 ---
palmleaves to databank
153
 
Kēraḷa Kalāmaṇḍalam 
 
Vaḷḷattōḷ Nagar, 
 
Ceṟuturutti—679531 
 
Tṛśśūr-Jilla 
Unfortunately the wooden box containing the palmleaf-manuscripts 
of the Paiṅkuḷam-family was stolen in 1981. The whole collection was 
destroyed by the thief, being unsatified with the outcome of his robbery. Some manuscripts had been transferred to the academy Kēraḷa 
Kalāmaṇḍalam before 1980 and are preserved there together with several other palmleaf handwritings (a handwritten list was prepared by 
P.L. Shaji in 1996). 
Appendix II  Publications by the ‘Bhāsa Research Group’ 
Concerning the So-Called ‘Trivandrum-Plays’ Ascribed 
to Bhāsa, the Performance-Tradition of Kūṭiyāṭṭam and 
Palmleaf-Manuscripts Written in Malayalam-Script
Ahlborn, Matthias. 2007. Das Pratijñāyaugandharāyaṇa. Digitalisierte Textkonsti
tution, Übersetzung und Annotierung, Würzburg: Universität Würzburg, Universi
tätsbibliothek OPUS (online-publication: URN: urn:nbn:de:bvb:20opus-24082, 
URL: http://www.opus-bayern.de/-uniwuerzburg/volltexte/2007/2408/). 
——— 2010. “Über die elektronische Publikation von Sanskrit-Schauspielen.” In: 
Indisches Theater: Text, Theorie, Praxis, ed. by Karin Steiner and Heidrun Brück
ner, 129-140. (Drama und Theater in Südasien.) Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 
Brückner, Heidrun. 1994. “Opfer als Helden—Neue Perspektiven in den ‘Bhāsa’-
Dramen.” Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 19: 33-60. 
——— 1996. “Der dem ‘Bhāsa’ zugeschriebene Einakter Madhyamavyāyoga—Über
setzung unter Berücksichtigung zweier neu aufgefundener Manuskripte.” In: 
Nānāvidhaikatā. Festschrift für Hermann Berger, ed. by Dieter Kapp, 8-28. (Bei
träge zur Kenntnis südasiatischer Sprachen und Literaturen.) Wiesbaden: Har
rassowitz. 
——— 2000. “Manuscripts and Performance Traditions of the so-called Trivandrum 
Plays ascribed to Bhāsa—A Report on Work in Progress. With an Appendix: New 
Edition of the One Act Play Madhyamavyāyoga.” Bulletin d’Études Indiennes, 
17-18: 501-550. 
——— 2002. [publ. 2004.] “Karṇabhāra—An edition of the one-act play ascribed to 
Bhāsa based on three manuscripts.” Indologica Taurinensia, XXVIII: 598-624. 
——— 2006. “Weller und das Sanskrit-Schauspiel.” In: Weite Horizonte. Hermann 
Weller 1878-1956. Klassischer Indologe, Lateinischer Dichter, Christlicher Huma
nist, ed. by Heidrun Brückner, Uwe Dubielzig and Konrad Plieninger, 121-137. 
Schwäbisch Gmünd: Einhorn. 
——— 2007. “New Light on ‘Bhāsa’? The Würzburg Multimedia Databank on Sanskrit 
Drama and Theatre.” In: Theatrum Mirabiliorum Indiae Orientalis. A Volume to 
Celebrate the 70th Birthday of Professor Maria Krzysztof Byrski (ed. by Monika 
Nowakowska and Jacek Woźniak) = Rocznik Orientalistyczny LX.2: 382-396.

--- Page 170 of 338 ---
heike moser
154
——— 2010. “Der dem “Bhāsa” zugeschriebene Mahābhārata-Einakter “Karṇa
bhāra”—Deutsche Übersetzung und Textedition nach den Manuskripten.” In: 
Indisches Theater: Text, Theorie, Praxis, ed. by Karin Steiner and Heidrun Brück
ner, 171-194. (Drama und Theater in Südasien.) Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Esposito, Anna Aurelia. 2000. “The Two Versions of Dūtavākya and their Sources.” 
Bulletin d’Études Indiennes, 17-18: 551-562. 
——— 2004. Cārudatta. Ein indisches Schauspiel. Kritische Edition und Übersetzung 
mit einer Studie des Prakrits der ‘Trivandrum-Dramen’. (Drama und Theater in 
Südasien.) Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 
——— 2010a. “Bemerkung zu den Schreibkonventionen der in Malayalamschrift verfassten Dramenmanuskripte sowie zu ihrer relativen Chronologie.” In: Indisches 
Theater: Text, Theorie, Praxis, ed. by Karin Steiner and Heidrun Brückner, 141154. (Drama und Theater in Südasien.) Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
——— 2010b. Dūtavākya—Die Worte des Boten. Kritische Edition und Übersetzung 
eines Einakters aus den ‘Trivandrum-Dramen’. (Drama und Theater in Südasien.) 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
______ 2010c. “Some Aspects of Textual Criticism Concerning the Keralite Drama 
Manuscripts.” In: Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens / Vienna Journal of 
South Asian Studies, Vol. LII–LIII/2009-2010: 269-283.
Moser, Heike. 2000. “Mantrāṅkam. The Third Act of Pratijñāyaugandharāyaṇam in 
Kūṭiyāṭṭam, Sanskrit Theatre of Kerala / South India.” Bulletin d’Études Indiennes, 
17-18: 563-584. 
——— 2001. “Kūṭiyāṭṭam.” In: Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart. Handwörterbuch 
für Theologie und Religionswissenschaft. Vierte, völlig neu bearbeitete Auflage, ed. 
by Hans Dieter Betz et al., Bd. 4 [I- K]: 1910. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck. 
——— 2002. “Versrezitation im Sanskrit-Theater Kūṭiyāṭṭam (Kerala / Südindien).” 
In: Metrum, Rhythmus, Performanz, ed. by Christoph Küper, 457-467. (Linguistic 
International) Frankfurt/M.: Peter Lang. 
——— 2007a. “Und es gibt sie doch: Schauspielerinnen im klassischen Theater 
Südindiens.” In: Positionen: Maria Gräfin von Linden-Preis 2005 (Rundbrief 28), 
63-76. Freiburg: Verband Baden-Württembergischer Wissenschaftlerinnen. 
——— 2007b. “Palmblatthandschriften beschrieben von Heike Moser (Cod. 813/1 
und 813/3) und Sven Bretfeld (Cod. 813/2).” In: Die orientalischen Handschriften 
der Burgerbibliothek Bern. Katalog unter Verwendung der Vorarbeiten von Sven 
Bretfeld, Glen Dudbridge, Andreas Kaplony, Suishû Tomoko Klopfenstein-Arii, 
Heike Moser, Gudrun Schubert und Veronika Six, ed. by Renate Würsch, 147-152. 
(Burgerbibliothek Bern.) Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 
——— 2007c. “To enjoy playing with play.” In: The Power of Performance. Actors, 
Audiences and Observers of Cultural Performances in India, ed. by Heidrun Brück
ner and Elisabeth Schömbucher, 209-234. Delhi: Manohar.
——— 2008. Naṅṅyār-Kūttu—ein Teilaspekt des Sanskrittheaterkomplexes Kūṭiyāṭ
ṭam. Historische Entwicklung und performative Textumsetzung. (Drama und 
Theater in Südasien.) Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 
——— 2009. “Naṅṅyār–Schauspielerinnen im klassischen Theater Südindiens.” In: 
Kulturwissenschaften und Frauenstudien. Aktuelle Arbeiten und Vorträge an der 
Fakultät für Kulturwissenschaften der Universität Tübingen, Vol. 3, ed. by Heidi 
Buck-Albulet and Viktoria Eschbach-Szabo, 11-30. Tübingen: Eberhard Karls 
Universität Tübingen.
——— 2011a. “How Kūṭiyāṭṭam became kūti-āṭṭam: The changing role of women in 
the Kūṭiyāṭṭam tradition of Kerala.” In: Between Fame and Shame: Performing 
Women—Women Performers in India, ed. by Heidrun Brückner, Hanne de Bruin, 
Heike Moser. (Drama und Theater in Südasien.) Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.

--- Page 171 of 338 ---
palmleaves to databank
155
——— [2011b, in press]. “Emotions and rituals in the Sanskrit-theatre Kūṭiyāṭṭam.” 
In: Rituals and Emotions in South Asia and Europe, ed. by Axel Michaels and 
Christoph Wulf. New Delhi: Routledge.
Śliwczyńska, Bożena. 2007. “The Initiation of an Actor in the Kūṭiyāṭṭam Theatre 
Tradition.” In: The Power of Performance. Actors, Audiences and Observers of Cul
tural Performances in India, ed. by Heidrun Brückner and Elisabeth Schömbucher, 
105-118. Delhi: Manohar. 
Steiner, Karin. 2010. “Ritual(e) im Drama: Spurensuche im Sanskrit-Schauspiel 
Pañcarātra.” In: Indisches Theater: Text, Theorie, Praxis, ed. by Karin Steiner and 
Heidrun Brückner, 155-194. (Drama und Theater in Südasien.) Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz.
Other Works Cited
Einicke, Katrin. 2009. Korrektur, Differenzierung und Abkürzung in indischen Inschrif
ten und Handschriften. (Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes.) Wies
baden: Harrassowitz.
Grünendahl, Reinhold. 2001. South Indian scripts in Sanskrit manuscripts and 
prints: Grantha Tamil—Malayalam—Telugu—Kannada—Nandinagari. Wiesba
den: Harrassowitz. 
Janert, Klaus Ludwig. (ed.). 1985. Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in 
Deutschland, Bd. II, 7: Indische Handschriften, Teil 7, [Stuttgart: Steiner], p. 923, 
no. 2706. 
Nārāyaṇan Nampyār, P.K. (ed.). 1980. Mantrāṅkam. Tṛśśūr: Kēraḷasāhitya Akkādami. 
——— (ed.). 1984. Śrīkṛṣṇacaritam naṅṅyārammakkūttu. Kōṭṭayam: Nāśanal 
Bukksṯṯāḷ. 
Raghavan, V. 1968. pp., New catalogus catalogorum. An alphabetical register of 
Sanskrit and allied works and authors. Madras: Madras University Sanskrit series. 
Sharma, Mahesh and P.V. Rao. 2000. “Salvaging Manuscripts from 1947 Lahore: The 
Making of an Indology Library.” Bulletin d’Études Indiennes, 17-18: 491-498. 
Unni, N.P. 1978. New Problems in Bhāsa Plays. Trivandrum: College Book House. 
——— 2000. Bhāsa afresh. Delhi: Nag Publishers. 
Venu, G. 1989. Production of a play in Kūṭiyāṭṭam. Text and translation of the first act 
of Abhiṣekha Nāṭaka of Bhāsa with the Kramadīpika (production manual) and the 
Āṭṭaprakāraṃ (acting manual) from the sanskrit drama tradition of Kerala. Irinja
lakuda: Natanakairali (Documentation of Kūṭiyāṭṭam). 
Vēnugōpālan, P. 2009. Āścaryacūḍāmaṇi. Sampūrṇṇamāya āṭṭaprakāravuṃ krama
dīpikayum. Tiruvanantapuram: Mārgi.

--- Page 172 of 338 ---
heike moser
156

--- Page 173 of 338 ---
sanskrit manuscripts in tamilnadu
157
 
 
CHAPTER EIGHT
The sanskrit manuscripts in tamilnadu*
P. Perumal
Introduction
India is rich in literatures in various languages and representing various cultures.1 Since the Vedic period the pattern of learning has followed a guru-śiṣya tradition and the process has been continued 
through oral transmission until the Buddhist period. There is no evidence of writing from the Vedic era. Aśokan rock edicts2 are considered to be the first preserved proof of script and writing. Over the 
course of time, many old documents belonging to different centuries 
have been found in different parts of India. These are in the form of 
stone inscriptions, copper plates and manuscripts (mss) of birch-bark, 
palm-leaf and paper. The language is Sanskrit and other Indian languages, written in various scripts, several of which are now obsolete. 
This paper focuses on the production, distribution and collection of 
South Indian sanskrit palm-leaf mss with special reference to the collection of the Sarasvati Mahal Library, Thanjavur (Tanjore, Tamil
nadu) patronised and expanded by Maharaja Serfoji (1777-1832).
Ancient kings of South India were patrons of the art and literature 
of Sanskrit and other (regional) languages. Jain culture spread rapidly 
from the 2nd century ad onwards and literatures in Sanskrit and 
other languages flourished. Hindu religious centres (mutts) were 
formed to undo or to prohibit the conversion to Jainism and to secure 
the development of Hinduism. To establish their religious and spiritual strength, the Śaiva and Jain saints and scholars entered into a 
debate by putting the mss in water and fire to show their authenticity. 
*  With special reference to the Sarasvati Mahal Library.
1  For recent studies of South Asia’s “literary cultures in history” see Pollock (ed.) 
2003 and Pollock 2006. 
2  The writing of seven major and thirteen minor rock edicts reveal the sociocultural life of the period of Aśoka. They are mostly written in brāhmī script and the 
language is in various Prakrits, one in Greek and Aramaic.

--- Page 174 of 338 ---
p. perumal
158
With these rivalities and scholars moving from place to place, the 
destruction of large numbers of manuscripts was inevitable. In north 
India several incidences of foreign invasion caused the destruction of 
mss and cultural artefacts. South India had the good fortune that great 
indigenous kingdoms such as those of the Chola, Pandya, Chera and 
Pallavas had existed since ancient times. Even after these, other indigenous kingdoms rose and flourished. The Vijayanagara Empire rose to 
power after the Hoysala dynasty and welded practically the whole of 
south India into one great empire. All these dynasties patronised and 
strongly supported religious literature and philosophy, allowing 
scholars and philosophers, such as Śrī Śaṅkarācārya, Śrī Rāmānu
jācārya, Śrī Madhvācārya and other brilliant thinkers, to prosper in 
their respective fields.
Tamil Nadu, situated in the south-east of India, has a rich literary 
tradition. Since several centuries bc, Tamil and Sanskrit have prevailed as the ancient languages of South India. While Tamil was used 
as the common language for regular communication and the formation of regional literature, brahmins used the Sanskrit language for 
teaching and learning the Veda and other religious texts. Over the 
course of time many Sanskrit mss written in scripts such as Grantha, 
Nandināgarī, Telugu, Malayālam, Vaṭṭeluttu etc. were collected from 
the areas close to the banks of the rivers Kaveri, Vaigai and Tamraparni, 
indicating the settlement of Sanskrit intellectuals in these areas. 
In past times adhyayana (study), adhyāpana (teaching) and lekhana 
(writing)3 were considered as honourable professions, especially for 
Brahmins. Large numbers of mss were written, copied, multiplied and 
preserved mostly in the religious centres (mutts) and temples, and 
were kept in the safe custody of monks, priests and scholars. 
Writing Materials
The materials used in South India for writing were mostly stone, metal 
sheets, wooden-boards, cloths, palm-leaves and paper. Before the 
advent of paper, palm-leaves were predominantly used. They were 
abundantly produced in the coastal belt and north-eastern part of 
India, where they were easily available and cheap. India’s hot and 
humid, tropical climate has an adverse effect on palm-leaves. However, 
3  lekhana means writing in general and in this context, it is copying down of mss.

--- Page 175 of 338 ---
sanskrit manuscripts in tamilnadu
159
if well maintained and carefully preserved, palm-leaves can be highly 
durable and have a reasonably long life. Under ‘normal’ conditions, 
palm-leaf manuscripts can be preserved for ca. 400 to 500 years. With 
controlled heat and humidity, we can extend this life-span to more 
than 1000 years.
Most of the available palm-leaf mss were written on one of the following three varieties of leaf4:
1.  Corypha umbraculifera 
2.  Borassus flabellifer 
3.  Corypha utan
The palm tree Corypha umbraculifera is known as śrītāla or tālipot5 
and it grows in comparatively dry climates like those of Gujarat, Sindh 
and Rajasthan. The leaves are broad and lengthy, with a thin and 
smooth surface and they tend to be quite fragile by nature. The second 
variety, Borassus flabellifer, is known as Palmyra. They are thick and 
lengthy but the leaves never grow to more than two feet. The size and 
thickness varies according to the fertility and water sources of the 
area. The third variety, Corypha utan, is more commonly known as 
Lontar. It grows in humid coastal areas, particularly on the west coast 
of India, in Burma and Thailand. The leaves have a combination of the 
characteristics of the tālipot and Palmyra palm leaves. The Lontar 
leaves are lengthy, broad and thick. The majority of Burmese mss are 
written on these leaves. 
(A)  Processing Palm-Leaf
Usually five- to six month-old leaves were collected for writing. They 
were separated, the edge ribs removed and then left in the shade to 
dry. After drying, the edges of the leaves were cut into convenient 
length for writing and the surfaces were burnished. Two small holes 
were made for passing through a thread to tie the mss. The holes were 
made in such a way that they divided the leaves more or less into three 
equal parts. In order to make them suitable for writing, the leaves were 
seasoned or softened. Although the process of seasoning varies from 
place to place, I describe a common method below:
4  See Shivaganesha Murthy 1996: 27f.
5  It is called as Tālapana, Coondapana or Talippanai in Tamil.

--- Page 176 of 338 ---
p. perumal
160
i. First, fresh leaves were dried in the shade.
ii. Then they were boiled in water or milk.
iii. After boiling they were buried in wet sand in order to give them 
softness.
iv. After being in a sand ‘bath’ for approximately three months, they 
obtained considerable softness.
v. After having been dried once again in the shade, the leaves were 
frequently applied with gingelly oil in order to improve smoothness. 
vi. In South India the leaves were kept alongside with wet rice straw 
for seasoning.
vii. The seasoning process produces a soft surface for writing and 
extracts the lignin. After seasoning, the soft surface was burnished 
using conch shells or polished stone to further polish and smooth 
the leaves.
(B)  Writing on Palm-Leaf
Writing on palm-leaves was done in two ways: one was to incise the 
leaves with a stylus—ink is applied afterwards; and the other way was 
to write with ink on leaves using a bamboo pen or brush. The stylus, or 
śalākā, had a pointed tip and was made from iron, steel, brass, bone or 
ivory. Some of the metal styluses had a pointed tip at one end and a 
sharp knife on the other. To write on the seasoned leaves according to 
this method, a support would be held in the left hand and the stylus is 
held in the right hand. While writing, the left-hand thumb would support the pointed tip of stylus allowing for movement. This type of 
writing is possible wherever the script is in circular form. Mostly south 
Indian scripts, up to the level of Orissa, were written using this engraving technique. Writing devanāgarī or the scripts with a headline would 
spoil and tear the leaves. The incised leaves were treated in two ways in 
order to give clarity to the letters: i. the letters were anointed with turmeric paste; or, ii. a mixture of vegetable or plant juice (Cocina indica) 
and lamp soot (prepared using castor oil) was applied over the letters. 
Nowadays lamp soot mixed with some volatile vegetable oils like citronella oil is used for this purpose. After writing, the leaves were 
arranged and strung together between two wooden planks, usually of 
soft wood like mango or bamboo. Sometimes, teak wood was also 
used to prevent insect damage. One end of the thread used for stringing the leaves was tied with the rib of a palm leaf in the shape of a par-

--- Page 177 of 338 ---
sanskrit manuscripts in tamilnadu
161
rot beak. If the ms has more than ca. 200 leaves, the thread cannot 
hold the leaves, or it will cause damage to the holes in the leaves. In 
this case a small copper rod or a bamboo strip was pierced into the 
other hole of the ms. Once completed the mss were kept in a special 
place, for instance near an offering table or image of God.6
(C)  Preservation of Palm-Leaf Mss
In ancient days, as a part of the preservation process, the palm-leaf 
mss were covered with red or yellow cloth and kept in wooden boxes, 
which could not easily be attacked by worms and insects. In some 
regions the mss boxes were kept in a dark chamber above the fire place 
(hearth) in order to avoid dampness or fungus. It is believed that red 
cloth and wooden boxes keep away worms and insects. Some indigenous vegetable materials, namely, dried leaves of the Neem tree 
(Azadirachta indica), dried Neem seed powder, tobacco, camphor, 
black cumin and sweet flag, also keep insects away. Today, most of the 
ms libraries treat the leaves with natural essential oils such as citronella oil, lemongrass oil, camphor oil etc. to act as an insect repellent. In the Sarasvati Mahal Library a mixture of some specific spices7 
in powder form are wrapped in a small cloth and are kept in the storage cupboards. This keeps away the insects for about six months. 
From the 18th century onwards, handmade paper slowly replaced 
palm-leaf. Most of the south Indian paper mss are written with Indian 
ink, prepared with a mixture of lamp soot, Acacia gum and rain water. 
The pen used for writing these mss was made from wood, reed plant 
and bamboo, and vulture or goose quills. Some of the paper mss have 
illustrations reflecting the ideas or themes of that work. They are decorated with ornamental floral and geometrical designs. Some mss have 
bright letters characteristic of illuminated mss. 
The literary treasures of ancient India were preserved in temples, 
palaces of kings who were patrons of art and literature, religious centres (mutts) and houses of learned scholars, gurukulas etc. Generally 
the libraries were called Sarasvati Bhandar or Sarasvati Mahal, which 
means ‘treasure house of knowledge’ or ‘abode of the goddess of learning’. These mss transmit knowledge in the domains of history, mythol6  Mostly the mss of Rāmayaṇa, Mahābhārata and religious texts were kept near 
God for pūjā.
7  The preparation of the spices is as follows: black cumin 4 parts, sweet flag 4 
parts, bark of cinnamon 4 parts, cloves 1 part, pepper 1 part, 10 grams of camphor.

--- Page 178 of 338 ---
p. perumal
162
ogy, medicine, astrology, art and culture. Sir Robert Chambers 
(1737-1803) was the first person to disseminate the knowledge of 
Sanskrit mss in western countries. Scholars such as Colin Mackenzie, 
William Taylor, C.P. Brown, John Leyden etc. collected mss from villages in south India which are preserved in the Oriental ms libraries in 
Chennai, Mysore, Trivanduram and Hyderabad. In 1862, following a 
request by Pandit Radhakrishna Sastry, the then Governor General Sir 
Lawrence instructed his secretary to take suitable action for the preservation of mss from the villages of India. Accordingly, the Govern
ment sanctioned a sum of Rs. 24,000 per year for the collection and 
the preservation of Sanskrit mss in the Calcutta, Bombay and Madras 
presidencies. Mss were collected and catalogued by scholars in the 
Calcutta and Bombay regions. Due to the use of regional scripts for 
writing Sanskrit mss, the ms survey was not very effective in the 
Madras Presidency, thus a separate survey was carried out for this 
region. As per the government order, dated 14 December 1868 (no. 
42), containing the resolution of the Governor General in council 
dated Simla, 3rd November 1868, (no. 4348), Gustav Oppert, a 
Sanskrit Professor and then Curator of Government Oriental Ms 
Library, Chennai, conducted a survey and published the report in two 
volumes entitled “A List of Sanskrit manuscripts in private libraries of 
Southern India.” These books give the names and addresses of individuals holding mss and the number of Sanskrit mss in various districts in the Madras Presidency. The report states the number of mss 
available in different districts such as North Arcot (446), South Arcot 
(148), Chengleput (2358), Coimba[u]tore (1445), Madras (428), 
Madurai (218), Salem (49), Thanjavur (6336), Tinnelveli (943) and 
Trichy (814). Oppert remarks in the Preface of his book (1880: iv) that 
a “methodologically conducted Government survey is the only means, 
which would bring to light the vast literary treasures.” The preservation of the existing ms collections in India and abroad is imperative.
Major Collections of Palm-Leaf Mss in Tamil Nadu
In Tamil Nadu Sanskrit mss are preserved in the following libraries 
and educational institutions: 
1. The Thanjavur Maharaja Serfoji’s Sarasvati Mahal Library, Thanjavur.

--- Page 179 of 338 ---
sanskrit manuscripts in tamilnadu
163
2. The Government Oriental Ms Library, Chennai.
3. The Adyar Theosophical Society Library, Chennai.
4. The Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute, Mylapore, Chennai.
5. French Institute of Indology, Pondicherry.
6. Thiruvavaduthurai Mutt, Thiruvavaduthurai, Nagapatinam district.
7. Dharmapura Adheenam, Mayiladuthurai.
8. The Madras University, Chennai.
9. The Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai.
10. The Tamil University, Thanjavur.
11. The Sankaracharya University, Kanchipuram.
12. Central Siddha and Ayurveda Research Institute, Chennai.
13. Sri Vaikhanasa Bhagavat Sastra Research Institute, Thanjavur.
14. Ahobila mutt Sanskrit College, Madhuranthakam.
15. Rameswaram Devasthana Pathashala, Madurai. [etc.]
These are the main libraries and institutions; other collections are 
maintained by individuals. 
Thanjavur: Its Historical Phase
The land of Thanjavur lies on the south east coast of Tamil Nadu 
between lat. 10˚.42´ N and long. 79˚.11´E and covers an area of 
3259 sq. miles. Thanjavur is 66 km east of Trichy and 310 km south of 
Chennai. It is about 159 km north from Madurai. It is east of the middle of Tamil Nadu and well connected with all the important tourist 
centres in south India. Thanjavur has been renowned as a great centre 
of art, culture and literature for more than ten centuries. It can be considered the heart of Tamil Nadu with a civilisation that had achieved 
great eminence under the successive dynasties of the Chola, Nayak 
and Maratha kingdoms. 
Thanjavur was the capital of the Imperial Cholas. Historical references to Thanjavur are available from the 7th Century ad onwards. 
Epigraphical references to Thanjavur are available in the rock fort 
edicts of Trichirapalli. The first literary reference to Thanjavur is 
found in the hymns of Saint Appar of the 7th Century. 
In 846 ad the first imperial Chola king, Vijayalaya Chola, captured 
Thanjavur territory from a Mutharayya king and established his capital at Thanjavur. Since the reign of Vijayalaya Chola, Thanjavur

--- Page 180 of 338 ---
p. perumal
164
remained the capital of the subsequent Chola rulers. Starting from 
Vijayalaya, the successive rulers of the Chola dynasty led invasions to 
Ceylon and during the days of Raja Raja Chola, far-off territories such 
as Kerala, Coorg, parts of Mysore and Kalinga (Orissa) were subjugated. His successor, Rajendra Chola, organized a north Indian campaign which led him up to the Ganges. Even though there were various 
regional languages, Sanskrit was the language used for communication. The conquests of Cholas were responsible for the long and continued stability and prosperity of the kingdom and for the resultant 
encouragement and development of cultural pursuits. 
The Pandyas and Hoysala kings ruled the Chola area for a few years 
and in the 14th century the Vijayanagara Empire took over. During 
this reign, Thanjavur regained its lost glory. In 1535 ad, Vijayanagara 
emperor Achyuta Devaraya established the Thanjavur Nayak rule. 
Sevappa Nayak was the first ruler of the Thanjavur kingdom, and the 
Nayak rule continued until 1675 ad. During the Nayak period Than
javur witnessed the flourishing of art, architecture, literature and 
other allied activities. After the Nayak, the Marathas captured and 
ruled Thanjavur from 1675 until 1855 ad. From the 9th century until 
the end of the rule of the Maratha kings in 1855, different dynasties of 
Thanjavur kings nourished and enriched Thanjavur with art, literature and architecture, including the construction of beautiful buildings, temples etc. It increasingly became known as a centre for the 
patronage of arts and literatures. Especially the periods of Raghunatha 
Nayak (1600 to 1633 ad), Shahaji II (1684-1710 ad) and of Serfoji II 
(1798-1832) are considered the golden age of the development of art 
and literature. 
The reign of the Maratha king Shahaji (1684-1710)—called ‘Abhi
nava Bhoja’ after the great king Bhoja famous for his contributions to 
culture and literature—was rightly considered a golden era. Shahaji, a 
composer of great literary merit, encouraged and patronized musicians and literary giants, who made significant contributions to 
Sanskrit and Marathi literature. He founded a village of scholars in 
Thiruvisainallor, later renamed as Shāhājirāja-puram, near Kumbako
ṇam on the banks of the river Kaveri. Scholars living in this village 
included Śrīdhara Veṅkateśa Ayyaval, Rāmacandra Dīkṣitar, Bhāska
rarāya, Trayaṁbarāya Makhin, Sadāśiva Brahmendra and Girirāja 
Kavi. During Shahaji’s reign, Tamil prosody such as kattalai, venba 
and padam was used for Sanskrit. The king himself wrote padas and 
kīrtanas on Lord Śiva of the Thiruvarur temple. On the basis of the

--- Page 181 of 338 ---
sanskrit manuscripts in tamilnadu
165
available mss, the Thanjavor library has published a book entitled 
“Sahaji Mannar Keerthanaikal.” 
Serfoji II enriched this library collection with his literary contributions. He was the author of a number of works in Sanskrit and Marathi 
languages. Notable works written by him include Kumārasaṁbhavacampu, Mohinīmaheśa-pariṇaya, and Rādhākṣṇavilāsa-nāṭaka etc. 
Pandits well versed in Dharmaśāstra, were appointed as judges in his 
court of Justice. They compiled Vyavahāra-prakāśa from various 
smti texts for day-to-day use in the conduct of administration and 
justice.
Thanjavur is rightly acclaimed as the cultural citadel of Tamil Nadu. 
It is situated amidst the vast deltaic tract of the river Kaveri, an area 
known as the ‘Granary of south India.’ Similarly, the culture and art 
produced in the area may be called the gift of the Kaveri river. Great 
poets, skilled builders and master craftsmen, savants and scholars and 
enlightened kings combined to create a very sophisticated and 
advanced civilization whose influence was felt not only in the Indian 
peninsula, but also abroad. Temples of grand designs and majestic 
proportions, embellished with the works of skilled sculptures, are the 
visible manifestations of the spirit and culture, priorities and principles, cherished values and beliefs of the people who lived in those 
days. During the period of the Nayaks up until the final phase of the 
Maratha dynasty, scholars and artists migrated from Andhra and settled in the Agrahāras in the Kaveri delta, contributing to the development of the high classical style. Over generations, pandits preserved 
and transmitted the Vedas using traditional methods.
Sarasvati Mahal Library
The Thanjavur Maharaja Serfoji’s Sarasvati Mahal (TMSSM) Library 
is one of only a few medieval libraries that exist in the world. It is a 
treasure house of knowledge built up by the successive dynasties of 
the Nayaks and Marathas of Thanjavur. It contains very rare and valuable collections of mss, books, maps and paintings on all aspects of 
arts, culture and literature. In its survey of ‘libraries of the world’, the 
Encyclopaedia Britannica mentions it as “the most remarkable library 
in India.” The library was also described by Dr. A. C. Burnell as perhaps the largest and most important in the world. Dr. Bühler said it 
“contains a great many useful, and a number of very rare or nearly

--- Page 182 of 338 ---
p. perumal
166
unique books many of which are quite unknown or procurable only 
with great trouble and expense.”
The origins of the library were probably about the end of the 16th 
century when Thanjavur was under the rule of Telugu Nayaks who 
collected Sanskrit mss written in Telugu characters. In the 18th century, the library was called Sarasvati Bhandar. The Marathas captured 
Thanjavur and conquered the country in 1675 and patronized the culture. Among the Maratha kings, Maharaja Serfoji II (1798-1832) was 
an eminent scholar in many branches of learning. In his youth, he 
studied under Rev. Schwartz, a Danish missionary priest who was his 
father’s friend and guide. In this way, he learned English, French, 
Italian, Latin etc., and also developed interests in the arts, science, and 
literature. With great enthusiasm he took special steps to enrich the 
library. On a pilgrimage to Banares, he employed many pandits to collect, buy and copy a vast number of works from all renowned centres 
of Sanskrit learning in the North and other areas. It is a fitting tribute 
to the great collector Serfoji that the Library is named after him. 
During the Maratha reign the disciples of the Saint Ramdas Swami, 
Guru of Shivaji (1627-1680), established eighteen mutts for the development of religious activities. Most of the heads of these mutts had 
knowledge of Sanskrit and Marathi, and many of the mss written by 
them were added to this library.
Collection of Mss and Books
The library has more than 49,000 mss (titles) in Sanskrit, Tamil, 
Marathi and Telugu, reflecting the history and ancient culture of 
south India. In addition to the existing stacks of mss, this library also 
acquired the private libraries of pandits in the region. Even today, this 
library is still receiving generous donations of mss, and books. This 
library also has more than 65,000 books in Indian and European languages. King Serfoji II personally collected more than 4500 books in 
English, French, German, Danish, Dutch, and Italian. These books 
were printed before 1832 ad; the earliest printed book in this library is 
dated back to 1694 ad.
Sanskrit Ms Collection
The majority of the mss in the library—more than 39,000 titles—are in 
the Sanskrit language. They can be categorized as follows:

--- Page 183 of 338 ---
sanskrit manuscripts in tamilnadu
167
i. Original collection of the kings who ruled Thanjavur.
ii. Collection by their successors till 1912.
iii. Collection from private sources, such as from some families and 
private libraries, from 1918 onwards. 
Some of the important private collections are,
a.  Jambunathabhat Landage Collection (J. L. Collection). In 1921 the 
library received this collection from a descendent of the Jumbunatha family. He was the eldest son of Manambhatta who was an 
expert in Ṛgveda and was in the Maratha kings’ court. This collection contains more than 2000 paper mss.
b.  L. Sethu Ramrao Kagalkar Collection (S. K. Collection). In 1922, 
this 250 year old collection was given to the Thanjavur library by 
the Kagalkar family (who were Sanskrit scholars). The set mostly 
contains mss on Sanskrit grammar. There are also autographed 
copies made by family members and some works composed by 
others. 
c.  Patanga Avadhuta Collection (P. A. Collection). This collection is 
more than 200 years old. Avadhuta was settled at Tiruvidaimarudur in Thanjavur district. In 1921, his descendant Ramayi Ammal 
donated this mss collection, which contains a large number of 
works in Vedānta and Bhakti, to the library. 
d.  Shri Krishnaji Mehta Collection (K. M. Collection). Krishnaji 
Mehta lived in Thanjavur and worked in the Palace administration. He was interested in mantra śāstra. His collection contains 
100 paper and five palm-leaf mss, which were added to the library 
in 1924.
e.  Gopalakrishna Dawalekar Collection (G. K. D. Collection). 
Gopalakrishna Dawalekar hailed from a Maratha brahmin family 
and was an expert in Smārta Prayogas. Hence most of the mss in 
this collection contain Prayoga texts. This was added to this library 
at three different times, in 1925, 1930 and 1934. 
f.  V. B. Nataraja Sastri Collection. (V. B. N. Collection). Ayurve
dacharya V. B. Nataraja Sastri was a reputed vaidya from Tiruchirapalli, as well as a great Sanskrit scholar who had learned 
ancestors. His collection contains 254 bundles of 426 works covering many branches of Sanskrit literature. The mss are about 
Āyurveda medicine and written in Grantha script.

--- Page 184 of 338 ---
p. perumal
168
g.  Tyagaraja Swami Collection (T. S. Collection). Tyagaraja swami 
was head of a Maratha mutt founded by a disciple of Ramdas 
Swami. The collection, which contains more than 1400 mss, was 
added to this library in 1975.
Apart from these major collections, there are more than 200 small collections which were added to the library from 1921 onwards. In 1990 
the library began a special initiative to collect Sanskrit mss in the 
Thanjavur district. Even now the library still appeals to the public to 
donate their mss for preservation.
The mss preserved in the collection are both in palm-leaf and in 
paper form and written in different scripts such as Grantha, Devanā
garī, Telugu, Nandināgarī, Malayalam, Oriya, Bengali and Tigalari 
(Tulu script). Some mss in the Tamil section are written in the 
Maṇipravāla style, that is, in a mixture of Grantha and Tamil scripts. 
The Sanskrit collection of the library contains Vedic mss and literature and copies of the works which were produced directly under the 
patronage of the Telugu and Marathi kings of Thanjavur. They have 
been classified under 18 broad subject headings as: Vedas, Saṁhitās, 
Brāhmaṇas and Upaniṣads, Śrauta sūtras, Kāvya, Nāṭyaśāstra, Kāma
sūtra, Vaidyaka, Jyotiṣa, Āgamas and Tantra, Kośa, Nāṭaka, Alaṁ
kāra, Vyākaraṇa, Dharmaśāstra, Purāṇa, Darśana, Prayogas, Mantras 
and Stotras. The special collection also includes the ancient Saṁhitās 
of Ṛṣi Kāśyapa, Bhāradvāja, Vararuci, Bhela, and Vyāsa, rare commentaries of classical literature; works on Rasaprakriyā; complete 
treatises on medicine such as the Dhanvantarīvilāsa by Tulajarāja; 
Strīdharma Paddhati by Tryaṁbaka Rāya Makhin, exclusive works on 
the duties of women; a rare nāṭya works such as Nttaratnāvali, 
Saṅgīta Muktāvalī by Devendra. It is also worth mentioning a few 
outstanding, unique works such as the rare and short lexicons, the 
grammar of the rare dialect called Bhandira bhāṣā, the play Jambavatīpariṇaya by King Kṛṣṇadevarāya, Vivaraṇadarpaṇa by Raṅgarāja, 
father of the great Appaya Dīkṣita, Kṛṣṇacarita by Agastya Paṇḍit, 
Tattvacintāmaṇi Vyākhyā by Dharmarājādhvarin, a large number of 
short Advaita Prakaraṇas, Sakalādhikāram and Vimānārcanakalpam, 
a work of temple architecture and Viśvakarmīya Śāstra respectively. 
There are also a large number of mss on music and dance, Āyurveda 
medicine, architecture, purāṇas consisting of the legends attached to 
great shrines and sacred villages and towns found in the Kaveri delta. 
Some of the rarest mss include two Sanskrit works by Chidambarakavi 
from the court of Shahaji II. His work Kathātrayī is arranged in a way

--- Page 185 of 338 ---
sanskrit manuscripts in tamilnadu
169
that it can be read as an account of the Rāmāyaṇa, the Mahābhārata 
and the Bhāgavata. Yet another work Niroṣṭya Rāmāyaṇa deals with 
the Sītā Kalyāṇam without ever using labial phonemes like pa, ba, and 
ma. Another mss titled Prapañca Ratnākara is written in microscopic 
Sanskrit letters made up of the words ‘Śiva Śiva’. The oldest palm-leaf 
mss in the collection, entitled Phalavathi, a commentry on the 
Jaiminisūtra, dates back to the 11th century. Another equally important Sanskrit work is known as Bhāmati (No. 7081) a commentary on 
the Śaṅkarabhāṣya written by Vācaspati Miśra, which was copied in 
Banaras in 1468 ad. Among other unique works, are two treatises, 
namely Gajaśāstra and Aśvaśāstra, both with brilliant illustrations, 
depicting the anatomy and characteristics of the elephant and the 
horse. Also Vaidyacintāmaṇi, a Sanskrit treatise with Tamil commentary on Āyurvedic medicines and Saptarishi’s Mohinīvilāsa Kuravanji 
are some of the rare works. The Bhela saṁhitā mss of this library is a 
rare unpublished Āyurvedic mss from 1650 ad. Bhela, one of the six 
disciples of Ātreya Maharṣi, wrote this work that is considered to be 
an Upaveda of the Ṛgveda Saṁhitā. It is made up of 350-year old 
Sanskrit paper mss, which are divided into 85 parts. Each part has an 
illustration, an illuminated gold border and the illustrations are 
depicted in fast colours.
Cataloguing of the Palm-Leaf Mss
Even though the library originated in the 16th century, the earliest 
catalogue available in the library belongs to the period of Raja Serfoji 
II. The catalogues are in both palm-leaf and in paper forms. The palmleaf catalogue was prepared in 1801, following an order from Serfoji, 
by Gaṅgādhara Bhaṭṭalu, alias Sadāśivabhaṭṭalu. The palm-leaf catalogue is written in Telugu script and arranged per subject. The paper 
mss catalogue was prepared for the first time in 1807 ad and then 
again in 1840 by order of the king. After the demise of the last king, 
Shivaji II, the administration of the Palace and the Sarasvati Mahal 
library fell into the hands of the British. The then Thanjavur Collector 
Mr. Forbes ordered the preparation of a catalogue for the library’s 
mss.
In the latter half of the 19th century the library attracted the 
attention of eminent Indologists and great Scholars. In 1868, the gov
ernment of Madras appointed Mr. Pickford, Sanskrit Professor of 
Presidency College, to prepare a catalogue for the Sanskrit mss of this

--- Page 186 of 338 ---
p. perumal
170
library. Unfortunately, due to ill health he was unable to complete the 
work. Then, in 1871, Dr. A.C. Burnell, a Sanskrit scholar and also a 
sessions judge in Thanjavur was appointed to continue the cataloguing. Following his devoted labour the catalogue was finally published 
in 1878-1880 under the title “Classified Index to the Sanskrit Mss in 
the Palace at Tanjore”. It was in three parts with subject headings such 
as Vedic Literature, Modern Sanskrit Literature and Dissertations on 
special topics. In his introduction, Burnell states that “The library, of 
which this catalogue is now made public, was brought to the notice of 
European scholars by H.S.H. Count Noer, Prince Frederic of Schleswig 
Holstein, who brought an account of it to the late professor Gold
stücker. But its full importance was not known till I was deputed, in 
March 1871, to examine it by the then Governor of Madras, Lord 
Napier and Ettrick, whose scholarly and lively interest in the past of 
India will always render his name a cherished souvenir in the minds of 
those who appreciate research. This is now the chief key to the huge 
Sanskrit collection in this library.” 
He adds that “the mss described here are the result of perhaps 300 
years of collecting: firstly, the Nayaks of Tanjore; secondly, after that 
about 1675 nos. by the Maratha Princes. The mss are of different value 
and come from various sources. Some of the palm leaf mss belongs to 
earlier period; but the greater part was collected in the last and recent 
centuries. All the Nāgarī mss belong to the Maratha time and the Raja 
Serfoji collected a large number of these mss at Benares, about fifty 
years ago. The rest are recent Nāgarī copies of mss to south Indian 
characters, and as a rule are badly made; a large staff of copyists were 
formerly entertained.” 
While preparing the catalogue, Dr. Burnell wrote to the Chief 
Secretary, to the Government of Madras on 6th August 1873 as follows: “It may perhaps be asked if the Library is worth the labour spent 
on it. I can answer unhesitatingly that it is. It is now a recognized fact 
that nearly all Sanskrit works of importance exist in different recensions. The Tanjore Library is unrivalled in this respect: it contains several good mss of all the most important ones known as yet, including 
a few that are new … the Tanjore Library, however, contains additional mss of most of the works which I had discovered elsewhere and 
this is a matter of great importance. I believe that this library must, 
sooner or later escheat to the Government. The preparation of this 
catalogue will therefore protect property of enormous value. Sanskrit 
mss have long been very dear and the cost of making proper tran-

--- Page 187 of 338 ---
sanskrit manuscripts in tamilnadu
171
scripts is now very heavy. As far as I can judge, it would not be possible to form a collection like that at Tanjore at a less cost than £ 50, 000 
but many mss are unquestionably unique.”
In 1927 Descriptive Catalogues were prepared by pandits under the 
leadership of P.P. Subramania Sastry (P.P. Sastry). The mss were classified into 18 main headings with subheadings; 19 volumes of 
Descriptive catalogues were prepared and published during 1927- 
1932. Later this library’s pandits brought out four volumes of Descrip
tive Catalogue, a separate Descriptive Catalogue for Jain mss and an 
alphabetical catalogue of Tigalari mss belonging to the library. In 
2006, the library published its 25th volume, an alphabetical index, 
consisting of 4175 paper mss belonging to recent collections and an 
alphabetical list of approximately 7000 palm-leaf mss is also in progress. According to P.P.S. Sastry’s 19th volume of the Descriptive catalogue, the Sanskrit mss of this library, date back to 1430 at the earliest 
and 1902 A.D at the latest. The library publishes the unpublished mss 
in book form and the minor works are published in the form of 
Journal articles. All in all, this library has published nearly 200 books.
The Government of India has initiated the National Mission for 
Manuscripts (NAMAMI) project. This programme will facilitate the 
identification, documentation and preservation of mss, and the rare 
ones are to be digitized. This library is one of the nodal agencies of the 
southern district of Tamil Nadu for this project and more than 10,000 
mss have been documented during the last three years.

--- Page 188 of 338 ---
p. perumal
172
Bibliography
A.  [Journals]
Descriptive catalogue of the T.M.S.S.M. Library. Thanjavur: Thanjavur Maharaja 
Serfoji’s Sarasvati Mahal. 1928. 
The Journal of the T.M.S.S.M. Library. 1945. 
B.  [Books]
Krishna, Nanditha. 1994. Painted manuscripts of the Sarasvati Mahal Library. Photo
graphy by V.K. Rajamani. Thanjavur: Director, Thanjavur Maharaja Serfoji’s 
Sarasvati Mahal.
Oppert, Gustav. 1880-85. Lists of Sanskrit manuscripts in private libraries of Southern 
India. 2 Vols. Madras: Madras Government Press. 
Perumal, P. 2006. “The Thanjavur Maharaja Serfoji’s Sarasvati Mahal Library.” Kriti 
Rakshana: a bi-monthly publication of the National Mission for Manuscripts 1.4: 
9-11. 
Pollock, Sheldon. (ed.). 2003. Literary Cultures in History: reconstructions from South 
Asia. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press. 
———. 2006. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and 
Power in Premodern India. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press. 
Shivaganesha Murthy, R.S. 1996. Introduction to Manuscriptology. Delhi: Sharada 
Publishing House. 
Wujastyk, Dominik. 2006. “Thanjavur Library as a Realm of Knowledge.” Kriti 
Rakshana: a bi-monthly publication of the National Mission for Manuscripts 1.4: 
13-15.

--- Page 189 of 338 ---
indian exact sciences in sanskrit manuscripts
173
 
 
CHAPTER nine
Indian exact sciences in Sanskrit manuscripts 
and their colophons
Kim Plofker
Introduction
The exact sciences—particularly jyotiṣa, or mathematical astronomy/
astrology—are a very important part of the Sanskrit scholarly tradition. It has been estimated that perhaps one-tenth of all extant Sanskrit 
manuscripts deal with jyotiṣa or some other aspect of Indian exact sciences, and their contents often reveal useful information about the 
scholarly connections and personal backgrounds of their owners. 
Moreover, the exact sciences in India also supplied the numeric and 
calendric systems that are used to express the dates found in scribal 
post-colophons. Despite these significant contributions, the academic 
study of Sanskrit literature and manuscripts in Indology programs 
hardly ever includes subjects in the mathematical sciences. As a result, 
jyotiṣa items in collections of Sanskrit manuscripts are often neglected 
or sketchily described. This paper attempts to give a preliminary indication of the influence of astronomy, mathematics and astrology on 
the production and description of Sanskrit manuscripts.1
1  The canonical though still incomplete survey of jyotiṣa material in Sanskrit 
manuscripts worldwide .is the late David Pingree’s Census of the Exact Sciences in 
Sanskrit [Pingree 1970-94]; the same author also produced descriptive catalogues of 
many individual collections of jyotiṣa manuscripts, such as [Pingree 1968] and [Pingree 2003]. A survey of South Indian scientiﬁc manuscripts in particular was compiled by the late K. V. Sarma in [Sarma 2002]. For a general introduction to the study 
of Sanskrit manuscripts, see [Murthy 1996]. Historical overviews of Indian mathematics and astronomy have appeared recently in, for example, [Rao 2004] and 
[Plofker 2009].

--- Page 190 of 338 ---
kim plofker
174
Indian Astronomy and the Calendar: Colophon Dates
The paramount contribution of jyotiṣa to Sanskrit literature is the 
complex astronomical legacy of the Indian calendar that allows 
authors and scribes to record dates of composition and copying, as in 
the final line of the ending folio shown below:
Figure 9.1.  Yantrarājakalpa, Benares (Sarasvati Bhavan Library, Sampurnanand 
Sanskrit University) 35245.
The scribe concludes “saṃvatsarāḥ 1877 āśāḍhakṛṣṇa 4 bhārgavāsa
rau”, or “Thursday the fourth tithi (lunar day) in the dark fortnight of 
[month] Āṣāḍha in [Saṃvat] year 1877”.2 This date is an example of 
the sort of detail that has been described by Christopher Minkowski as 
an issue “too obvious to be considered”:3 we take the inclusion of dates 
in colophons or post-colophons for granted as a standard bibliographic feature, without troubling to think about its implications for the 
relationship of scientific systems and scholarship. But in fact, this 
standard feature is rich in technical detail and interpretative complexity, as the following description will show.
Traditional Sanskrit vs. Gregorian Calendars
Comparing the traditional Indian calendars with today’s universal 
Gregorian calendar reveals many important differences. The most 
obvious one is the offset between the arbitrary starting-points of the 
different eras. More significantly, as shown in the table below, they dif2  This dating system is explained in works on traditional Indian calendrics such 
as [Sewell/Dikshit 1896]; see also [S. Pillai 1922-23].
3  Christopher Z. Minkowski, Introductory Lecture, IIAS Workshop on Production, Distribution and Collection of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Ancient South India, 
Leiden, 20 April 2007.

--- Page 191 of 338 ---
indian exact sciences in sanskrit manuscripts
175
fer greatly in their technical sophistication. For the sake of logistical 
convenience, the Gregorian calendar has been simplified until it is 
hardly an astronomical timekeeping system at all any longer. All connections with actual lunar months have been severed, so that the 
Gregorian “month” is merely a schematic unit of approximately 30 
days, completely irrelevant to the phases or positions of the moon. 
The days themselves are divided at the arbitrary point of midnight 
rather than a more astronomically meaningful moment such as sunset 
or sunrise, and the length of the year is approximated by an integer 
number of days (either 365 or 366).
Indian calendars, on the other hand, have preserved their fundamentally astronomical chronometric features throughout their history. In particular, they retained the complicated and challenging 
synchronization of solar and lunar motion, employing an intercalary 
or “leap” month for this purpose rather than a quadrennial leap day. 
The only significant characteristic it shares with the Gregorian system 
is the seven-day week that was inherited by both calendric systems 
from Hellenistic astrology.4 The other timekeeping elements require 
much more computational facility in Indian calendars than in the 
Gregorian.
Gregorian 
Sanskrit
Common Era 
Vikrama, Śaka, etc.
Elapsed years 
Elapsed or current years
Solar reckoning 
Luni-solar reckoning
Year: 365 days 
Year: 12 lunar months
1 “leap” day 
1 “leap” month
Schematic time-units 
Astronomical time-units
Dates: month/day 
Dates: month/tithi
Midnight day-end 
Sunrise day-end
7-day week 
7-day week
As a result, Indian astronomical texts recognize the possibility of 
inconsistent results in date computations, and prescribe solutions for 
dealing with them. A jyotiṣa author will typically acknowledge, for 
4  Greek astrology assigned the names of the seven visible planets (counting the 
sun and moon among them) to the seven days of the ancient Near Eastern week, in 
the now familiar order Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn. This 
seven-day week was assimilated into other cultures’ calendric systems in India, the 
Islamic world, and elsewhere, along with other features of Hellenistic astrology. See 
[Neugebauer 1969, pp. 169–172].

--- Page 192 of 338 ---
kim plofker
176
example, that the computation of a given date from a given epoch or 
starting-point may produce an error of ±1 in the weekday or intercalary months when compared to the current reckoning provided by the 
user’s local calendar. While such a discrepancy in a Gregorian date 
would signal the presence of an outright error, the situation is more 
complicated with Sanskrit calendars. There is no simple standard 
reconstruction of the exact chronological sequence of any Indian calendar reckoning, and thus no easy way to label one of two inconsistent dates “correct” or “incorrect”.
Ambiguities in Date Conversion
Indological researchers working with Sanskrit manuscripts are often 
not aware of this potential for variability in date computations, but it 
deserves to be more widely understood. We can see its effects in many 
attempts to convert Indian to Gregorian dates, which can produce a 
spurious impression of exactitude and certainty if the idiosyncrasies 
of different conversion algorithms are ignored. Consider, for instance, 
the following three examples of post-colophon dates converted to 
Gregorian equivalents, first according to the Indian Ephemeris of 
S. Pillai [S. Pillai 1922-23], and then according to the “Pañcāṅga” software of Yano and Fushimi [Yano/Fushimi 2004], which is based on 
Sewell and Dikshit’s Indian Calendar [Sewell/Dikshit 1896]:
Monday 10 kṛṣṇapakṣa of Phālguna, Saṃ. 1840:
  Monday 15 March 1784 (Pillai, Indian Ephemeris)
  Tuesday 16 March 1784 (Yano & Fushimi, “Pañcāṅga”)
Tuesday 8 kṛṣṇapakṣa of Jyeṣṭha, Saṃ. 1815:
  Tuesday 30 May 1758 (Pillai)
  Thursday 29 June 1758, or Tuesday 30 May pūrṇimānta (Yano & Fushimi)
Sunday 6 kṛṣṇapakṣa of Caitra, Śaka 1653:
  Friday 16 April 1731 Julian (Pillai and Yano & Fushimi)
While both conversion systems agree on the date of the third example, 
the answers they give for the first one differ by a day, and the second 
example involves a possible discrepancy of nearly an entire month 
(depending on whether the calendar used is assumed to be pūrṇimānta, 
reckoning months from the full moon, or āmāvāsya, reckoning from 
new moon—a crucial detail hardly ever explicitly specified in a 
Sanskrit colophon date). These results illustrate the important point 
that there is no entirely reliable and precise mapping from dates

--- Page 193 of 338 ---
indian exact sciences in sanskrit manuscripts
177
appearing in Indian manuscripts to their counterparts in modern 
chronology, a fact too often glossed over by researchers and even 
by manuscript cataloguers.5
“Concrete Numerals” or Bhūtasaṃkhyā Numbers in Dates
Scribes of manuscripts (and of epigraphic inscriptions) sometimes 
borrowed from technical authors a convention for representing 
numerals verbally. This was the bhūtasaṃkhyā or “concrete numeral” 
system, where strings of decimal digits from the least to the most significant are represented by dvandva compounds of words that conventionally stand for particular numbers. The manuscript example 
shown below illustrates this practice with the mix of standard numeral 
and bhūtasaṃkhyā notations in the year-number in its last line: “18 
veda-v[e]dā” [?]. The bhūtasaṃkhyā word veda represents 4, implying 
a date of 1844.
Figure 9.2.  Candrārkī, LDI (L. D. Institute, Ahmadabad) 6759 (4331).
The next example uses both notations separately to express the number 1551, in the third line from the bottom: “ku-viśikha-tithi 1551” or 
“earth-arrow-tithi”. “Earth” signifies 1 and “arrow” 5 (i.e., the five 
arrows of the love-god Kāma or five senses). The word tithi or lunar 
5  Cases such as the one mentioned by Christopher Minkowski in the lecture referenced in note 2 above, where the scribe Tularāma completed the copying of two 
manuscripts within three days and used the same calendar system to date them, are 
a diﬀerent matter. Two dates written by the same scribe using the same local calendar can usually be reliably compared, but the simultaneity of apparently identical 
dates found in diﬀerent sources should not be taken for granted.

--- Page 194 of 338 ---
kim plofker
178
day, here used somewhat confusingly to designate a year-number with 
no reference to actual tithis, stands for 15 because there are fifteen of 
them in a fortnight.
Figure 9.3.  Karaṇakaṇṭhīrava, RORI (Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute) 
(Alwar) 2652.
It remains unclear why manuscript scribes sometimes adopted bhūta
saṃkhyā notation for postcolophon dates. This notation was apparently originally devised by authors of verse treatises to facilitate 
expressing number words in different poetic meters, and to preserve 
their true values through the generations of transmission. But date 
information added by scribes at the end of manuscripts is generally 
not versified, nor is it routinely copied from one manuscript to 
another.
So what is the point of using the poetic flourish of concrete numerals to express it? Perhaps it is an imitation of epigraphic bhūtasaṃkhyā 
notation in inscriptions (which is itself a somewhat puzzling phenomenon, for the same reasons)?
Types of Jyotiṣa Manuscripts: Astronomy
Given the ubiquity of jyotiṣa manuscripts in Sanskrit collections, a 
discussion like this one would be incomplete without a brief descrip-

--- Page 195 of 338 ---
indian exact sciences in sanskrit manuscripts
179
tion of their main categories and characteristics. We begin with the 
works on mathematical astronomy, classified as the siddhānta, karaṇa, 
and koṣṭhaka genres. The first of these is the weightiest and most 
authoritative type of text in the exact sciences: it typically presents in 
hundreds of verses the entire theory and computational methods of 
an astronomical system, based on immense parameters which are 
applicable for any past or future point in time.
The example of a siddhānta folio shown below contains several of 
these impressively large parameter values representing planetary 
motions during the entire lifetime of the universe, ranging up to the 
tens of billions. 
Figure 9.4.  Siddhāntasundara, BORI (Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute) 
860 of 1887/91.
The karaṇa or handbook genre, illustrated in the following image, is 
simpler in operation and more limited in application. It is a series of 
versified algorithms relying on a given starting-point or epoch date, 
usually occurring within the author’s own lifetime, and reduced versions of astronomical parameters to make computation easier. The 
positions of celestial bodies at the moment of the given epoch are 
listed in tables such as the one shown here, which specifies the positions of the twenty-eight lunar mansions.

--- Page 196 of 338 ---
kim plofker
180
Figure 9.5.  Grahalāghava, Jaipur, 2004. See colour section, Plate X.
The most convenient and most common of all the types of text in 
mathematical astronomy is the koṣṭhaka or table text, a typical example of which is shown below. As the name suggests, this sort of work 
reduces the process of astronomical computation to operating with 
numerical tables worked out for several decades or centuries around 
the time of the text’s composition. The first of the tables on the sample 
folio gives parameter values for the years (in the Śaka era) 1664, 1688, 
1712, 1736, 1760, 1784, 1808, and 1832: that is, at intervals of 24 years 
from 1742 to 1910 ce.
Figure 9.6.  Makaranda, Jaipur, 2004.

--- Page 197 of 338 ---
indian exact sciences in sanskrit manuscripts
181
Astrological Jyotiṣa Texts and Chronology
Even more frequently encountered than table texts in manuscript collections are the innumerable works representing the various branches 
of Sanskrit astrology. These are often invaluable to the manuscript 
researcher owing to their inclusion of horoscopes cast for particular 
dates. The example on the left in the folio below (transcribed in the 
image following it) is a standard simple janmakuṇḍalī or birth horoscope. It divides a square into twelve parts representing the twelve 
signs of the zodiac, numbered from 1 (Aries) to 12 (Pisces), and shows 
in each part a syllabic abbreviation for the name(s) of any planet(s) 
occupying that sign at the moment of birth. In this example, the Sun, 
Venus and Mercury are in Taurus, the Moon, Saturn and the ascending lunar node (Rāhu) are in Cancer, the descending node (Ketu) in 
Capricorn, Jupiter in Aquarius, and Mars in Pisces.
Figure 9.7.  IO (India Office Library) 2541c.

--- Page 198 of 338 ---
kim plofker
182
Figure 9.8.  Janmakuṇḍalī.
This planetary diagram is too crude to use for making detailed 
horoscopic predictions in accordance with an astrological system, but 
it is unexpectedly effective in establishing or verifying dates. This is 
due to the wide variation in the speed of the planets as they progress 
through the sky. The fastest of them, the Moon, stays in the same zodiacal sign on average only a little over two days, whereas the slowest, 
Saturn, lingers in a sign for between two and three years. Consequently, 
any given configuration of planets and signs is not likely to repeat 
itself exactly in a short period of time, and within a given time interval 
it can be pinpointed chronologically with reasonable precision. 
Thus if the age of a text or manuscript containing such a horoscope 
can be estimated within a century or so, the horoscope itself can usually be dated to within one or two days. If a date is given in the manuscript, as in the case of the example shown whose specified date is 
approximately equivalent to 7 May 1535, the date conversion can be 
verified by back-calculating the planetary positions for that time and 
comparing them to the positions in the horoscope. Such recomputed 
positions for 7 May 1535 appear in the following table:6 it is easy to see 
that they agree very well with the crude specifications in the horoscope shown above.
6  These positions were calculated by the late David Pingree in an unpublished 
note now part of the David Pingree Papers, American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia.

--- Page 199 of 338 ---
indian exact sciences in sanskrit manuscripts
183
Planet 
Longitude 
Planet 
Longitude
Saturn 
Cancer 20° 
Jupiter 
Aquar. 21°
Mars 
Pisces 28° 
Sun 
Taurus 12°
Venus 
Taurus 26° 
Mercury 
Taurus 22°
Moon 
Cancer 11° 
Rāhu 
Cancer
  The value of horoscopes as a source of prosopographical data lies in 
the fact that they almost invariably concern particular individuals
(although horoscopes can also be cast for events or institutions), usually an individual of immediate interest to the person who is writing 
the horoscope down. Consequently, even a completely undated manuscript, if it contains a janmakuṇḍalī of this sort, can usually be confidently assigned to a specific period at most a few decades long.
Conclusion: Manuscript Mysteries in the Exact Sciences
The foregoing brief introduction to the applications of jyotiṣa in 
manuscript research should not be taken to imply that the exact 
sciences as manifested Sanskrit manuscripts are productive only of 
enlightenment. Frequently they appear in strange and unexpected 
forms that generate confusion rather than eliminating it. The two 
examples shown below (each a single leaf, apparently written in the 
nineteenth or early twentieth century, acquired in Jaipur in 2004 and 
subsequently donated to a manuscript collection there) illustrate the 
potential for mystery. The first of the two manuscripts shows what 
might be a diagram of a semicircular scale for some observational or 
timekeeping instrument, graded on each side from 1 to 12. The sole 
explanatory information provided is the cryptic utterance “krāntivṛtta 
4 bhāga”, or “declination-circle 4 degree”. Could this have been part 
of a work relating to the instruments of the famed eighteenth-century 
observatory of Jai Singh II in Jaipur? Without additional information 
from sources hitherto unknown, it is hard to see how that question 
could ever be answered.

--- Page 200 of 338 ---
kim plofker
184
Figure 9.9.  Jaipur, 2004.
The second example is even more puzzling and inscrutable: it is simply a table of sequences of numbers with no obviously meaningful 
mathematical pattern, and no obvious relationship to astronomical or 
calendric data. Clearly it represented significant information to the 
scribe who wrote it, but modern researchers may never know why.
Figure 9.10.  Jaipur, 2004.

--- Page 201 of 338 ---
indian exact sciences in sanskrit manuscripts
185
On the whole, however, the exploration of exact sciences is likely to be 
rewarding and enlightening for the student of Sanskrit manuscripts. 
Besides the explicit dates specified in post-colophons and in the epoch 
data of many astronomical texts, they often provide indirect chronological information via horoscopes and calendric techniques. The 
ubiquity of Sanskrit astrology, and the elaborate details of Sanskrit 
calendric computations, meant that even authors and scribes with no 
professional background in jyotiṣa had a far more sophisticated 
awareness of the science of timekeeping than our rigidly simplified 
and abstract modern chronometry generally permits us to acquire. 
Ultimately, this awareness constitutes a vital link in our understanding of the production and history of Sanskrit manuscripts in India.
References
Murthy, R. S. Shivaganesha. Introduction to Manuscriptology. New Delhi: Sundeep 
Prakashan, 1996.
Neugebauer, O. The Exact Sciences in Antiquity. Repr. New York: Dover, 1969.
Pingree, David. Census of the Exact Sciences in Sanskrit, series A, vols. 1–5. Phila
delphia: American Philosophical Society, 1970-1994.
———  A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit Astronomical Manuscripts Preserved at 
the Maharaja Man Singh II Museum in Jaipur, India. Philadelphia: American 
Philosophical Society, 2003.
———  Sanskrit Astronomical Tables in the United States (Transactions of the 
American Philosophical Society New Series 58.3). Philadelphia: American Philo
sophical Society, 1968.
Plofker, Kim. Mathematics in India. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009.
Rao, S. Balachandra. Indian Mathematics and Astronomy: Some Landmarks. Revised 
3rd ed., Bangalore: Bhavan’s Gandhi Centre, 2004.
Sarma, K. V. Science Texts in Sanskrit in the Manuscripts Repositories of Kerala and 
Tamilnadu. New Delhi: Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan, 2002.
Sewell, Robert, and Dikshit, S. B. The Indian Calendar. London: Swan Sonnenschein, 
1896.
Swamikannu Pillai, L. D. An Indian Ephemeris, ad 700 to ad 1799, 7 vols. in 8 parts. 
Madras: Government Press, 1922-23.
———  Panchang and Horoscope. Repr. New Delhi: Asian Educational Services, 1985.
Yano, M., and Fushimi, M. Pañcāṅga, version 3. http://www.cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp/ 
~yanom/pancanga/message313.html, 2004.

--- Page 202 of 338 ---
kim plofker
186

--- Page 203 of 338 ---
varieties of grantha script
187
 
 
CHAPTER TEN
Varieties of Grantha Script: the date and 
place of origin of manuscripts
Saraju Rath
1.  Introduction
1.1  The development and, eventually, wide-spread use of grantha1 
script in the southern part of the Indian subcontinent form a constitutive part of the extensive manuscript culture in the Indian world and 
in Asia, especially South and South-East Asia. The beginnings of 
grantha script around one and a half millennium ago are no more 
directly accessible but impressive fragments of its material basis and 
traces of its vibrant life history are still visible. Although the available 
material, in the form of inscriptions and even more in the form of 
manuscripts, is abundant, its detailed examination has hardly begun. 
Early works on Indian scripts such as the one by Burnell (1878) provide the basics only on grantha next to several other scripts of South 
India. Recent publications specifically devoted to grantha2 do not 
intend to be more than introductions and study aids for beginners. In 
this article it is my aim to clarify, in the framework of a synthetic overview, distinctive characteristics of varieties and stages of development 
of the grantha script that have so far not been noted or that have 
remained vague and ambiguous. For this I will not rely on tables of 
hand-drawn characters (as is mostly done in recent publications on 
grantha) but on characters that are directly taken from manuscripts 
from different periods. 
1.2  Texts in the Sanskrit language, transmitted and often also produced in South India, appear in different scripts such as telugu, kan
naḍa, grantha, nandināgarī and malayalam. Among these scripts, 
1  Because I have to refer to a few scripts that have the same names as the language to which they primarily belong, script names in this article will start in small 
case and language names in capital : telugu script—Telugu language. 
2  Grünendahl 2001, Visalakshy 2003.

--- Page 204 of 338 ---
saraju rath
188
grantha occupies a major position as this is the only script specially 
designed to write Sanskrit (and Vedic) texts, including royal records 
and documents in the southern states of the Indian subcontinent. 
Here, grantha is the transregional script employed for texts in the 
Sanskrit language next to other scripts which are preferably used for 
other languages and vernaculars: tamil for Tamil, telugu for Telugu, 
etc. Some of these scripts, for instance telugu, are suitable for writing 
Sanskrit and have actually been employed for that purpose next to the 
writing of the corresponding regional language. Other scripts such as 
tamil, are incapable of distinctively representing all sounds of Sanskrit3 
and are hence in need of grantha for the adequate representation of 
these sounds. Just as Sanskrit as language of several sciences, of literature and of brahmanical and buddhist religious texts is normally part 
of a bilingual situation—speakers in south India thus typically combine knowledge of Sanskrit with an intimate familiarity with Tamil, 
Telugu, etc.—like that the grantha script in south India is normally 
part of a biscriptual situation in which grantha combines with tamil, 
telugu scripts etc.4 It should hence not be a matter of surprise that 
grantha shows regional differences parallel with the distinct nature of 
the other scripts with which it stands in a biscriptual relation. More
over, grantha has gone through a number of relatively clearly identifiable stages of development, from the first half of the first millennium 
ce till early modern times.5 Among the multifaceted changes in style 
and calligraphy of the characters of the different varieties of the script, 
which are the ones that may serve to determine the relative date of a 
grantha manuscript ? 
 
1.3  Since especially South Indian manuscripts normally lack any 
precise statement about the date of their production, indications that 
can be derived from subsequent changes in the style and calligraphy 
of the script-varieties are very much needed for a chronological 
determination of available manuscripts. Even in the very limited 
number of cases their colophon does contain a date, the system of 
dating usually gives the Saṁvatsara year which follows a 60-year cycle6 
3  For example, tamil alphabet ka represents Sanskrit kha, ga and gha. 
4  For the moment we will here not take into account the later use of devanāgarī 
in South India, which will make the situation multi-scriptual. 
5  Its origins are therefore contemporary with those of siddhamātkā and early 
nāgarī in the middle and northern part of the Indian subcontinent (Rath 2006). 
6  See for telugu manuscripts, Sarma’s article on “From my Grandfather’s chest of 
palmleaf Books” in the present volume.

--- Page 205 of 338 ---
varieties of grantha script
189
of Bhaspati (Jupiter), so that a year given as, for instance, virodhakṛt 
saṁvatsara, may correspond to ce 1551 or to 1551 + 60 = 1611, or to 
1671, to 1731 etc. or also to 1551—60 = 1491 etc. In recent decades 
laboratory techniques have been developed to determine the dates of 
an object on the basis of the ratio of a radioactive isotope (C14) in the 
material texture. In practice this technique leaves a considerable margin 
and often remains incapable of adding a significant chronological 
indication beyond the rough estimates that can be made on other 
grounds. 
2.  Varieties of Grantha Script
2.1  In his discussion of the South-Indian alphabets and their devel
opment, A.C. Burnell (1878: 14) gives a chronological chart of the 
southern scripts in order to show the derivation of some of these 
scripts (including grantha) from southern brāhmī, as well as their link 
with other scripts from southern origin. I give here this chronological 
chart with minor modifications.
Chart 10.1.  A Chronological Chart of Southern Scripts.

--- Page 206 of 338 ---
saraju rath
190
A closer study of grantha from early stone-inscriptions, copper-plates 
and palm-leaf manuscripts shows that a few clearly distinct varieties 
developed in the course of time. Their style shows the reflection and 
influence of local scripts, as we notice below.
 
Chart 10.2.  Varieties of grantha script found in manuscripts.
Table 10.1. Varieties and chronology of Grantha script in inscriptions, mss, etc.
Varieties
Period
(century CE)
Dynasty
Areas
Main 
materials
grantha with
tel. &kan. 
----
late grantha with 
tel. & kan.
4th-7th 
----
15th +
Calukya, 
Kadamba & 
Pallava
----
----
Vijayanagara, 
Bijapur, Guntur 
Inscriptions,
copper-pl. 
----
mss.
grantha with
vaṭṭeluttu
6th +
Pallava, Cera,
Cola, Pandya
Madurai dt. 
S, S-W TNadu, 
& S, S-E Kerala
Inscriptions, 
copper-pl. & 
mss.
grantha with
tamil
7th +
Cola, Pandya, 
Pallava,
Arcot, Pulicat
Inscriptions,
copper-pl. & 
mss.
grantha with
malayālam
(& ārya-eluttu)
from11th, esp. 
from 14th
Cola, Cera, 
Pandya
South Kerala,
Travancore
Inscriptions, 
copper-pl. & 
mss.
grantha with
tulu-mal.
(& kol-eluttu)
from 10th, esp. 
from 14th
Kasargad dt. 
Malabar,NKerala, 
Tulu country
Inscriptions
& mss.

--- Page 207 of 338 ---
varieties of grantha script
191
2.2  As indicated in Chart 2 and Table 1, the varieties we find are, 
i. grantha with telugu-kannaḍa
ii. grantha with vaṭṭeluttu
iii. grantha with tamil
iv. grantha with malayalam (ārya-eluttu)
v. grantha with tulu-malayalam (kol-eluttu)
i.  Stone inscriptions and copper-plates which are found from the 
4th–5th century onwards show an archaic form of grantha characters 
(representing Sanskrit) that has a close affinity to archaic telugu-kan
naḍa7 characters (representing early Telugu and Kannaḍa) of the same 
period. Especially the grantha characters which, in spite of their monumental context, have a cursive form show this affinity. This suggests 
a development of early grantha in connection with early telugukannaḍa writing and in parallel monumental and cursive styles (the 
latter probably on perishable materials now lost). The grantha characters were developed in a full-fledged way to a common variety in 
course of time through a number of developmental phases. The particular early specimens of this writing found in inscriptions and plates 
belonged to the period of the Pallava, the Chalukya and the Kadamba 
rulers, who reigned till the mid 7th century. From then onwards we 
see a gradual speciation till the early southern scripts acquire an individual status and an independent identity.
In addition to the early sources available in Indian epigraphy, 
inscriptions and plates outside India show the archaic cursive and 
monumental styles of early grantha that is close to telugu/kannaḍa. 
K. A. Nilakanta Sastri (1949 [2003]: 79-82) refers to both the monumental and the cursive style of this early grantha in some early inscriptions discovered in Java, e.g. one at Ci-Aruton. Also Diringer refers to 
7  Inscription found in Halmidi, dated ca. 450 ce and Badami rock Inscription 
(5th-6th ad) which was found in Bijapur, Karnataka. Also see Sivaramamurti 1952, 
p. 222.
Also see Epigraphia Indica I, VIII, pp. 159–163, Pikira plates of Pallava king 
Siṁhavarman, dated 5th ad, found in Nelatur, Ongole taluk, Guntur District, 
Andhra Pradesh.

--- Page 208 of 338 ---
saraju rath
192
this inscription.8 Another relevant specimen is formed by the two thin 
gold plates known as Maunggun plates discovered in Burma.9 
In available manuscripts the archaic monumental and archaic cursive styles of grantha have so far not been found. However, we do find 
Sanskrit manuscripts of a later period written in a round variety of 
grantha where telugu or kannaḍa characters are inserted in between; 
for example, the word gṛhapati where gṛ appears in telugu [or/and 
kannaḍa] and hapati in grantha.
ii.  According to Burnell (1878: 49), tamil script is the direct descendant from vaṭṭeluttu. Both are closely similar, except that in vaṭṭeluttu 
the character slants from down-left to up-right.10 The observations of 
C. Sivaramamurti (1966: 235) are basically in harmony with this: 
“Grantha and Vaṭṭeluttu were used in the extreme south of the 
Peninsula. Vaṭṭeluttu is a form of cursory Tamil written in a peculiar 
slanting way ... ” He further explains, more interestingly, how these 
two scripts nevertheless developed to a large extent independently 
and maintained their distinctive features: “as [vaṭṭeluttu] had an independent development, the letters differ to a certain extent in their general features with greater resemblance in such letters as ā, au, e, ka, pa, 
ra, la and va, but [with less resemblance] in letters like ṭa and ma, and 
in some cases [the resemblance is even less] by their peculiarly different shape as for instance in i, [ṇ]a, ta, na and ya, though the ultimate 
common origin can easily be traced.” Vaṭṭeluttu is thus to be regarded 
as an old and cursive form of southern script which was important 
from the 5th century onwards,11 under Pallava, Cera, Pandya and 
Cola rulers. Grantha characters occurring with vaṭṭeluttu were mostly 
used in inscriptions and later in palm-leaf manuscripts in areas such 
as South Malabar, Coimbatore etc.. In his report on the palace records 
(grandhavaris) in Malabar and Kerala, Dr. Nampoothiry mentions 
8  See 1996, David Diringer, The Alphabet: A key to the History of Mankind, 
Fig. 174, p. 383.
9  K. A. Nilakanta Sastri (1949, reprinted in 2003: 14) writes, “The inscription 
comprises quotations from Pāli Buddhist scriptures written in a clearly South Indian 
alphabet of the fifth or sixth century ad” Furthermore, he clarifies (on p. 15), “a line 
of inscription in Pyū and Pāli, in an early Telugu-Canarese script of South India, 
very closely allied to that of the Kadambas of Vanavāsi and that of the Pallavas of 
Kāñcīpura. The character is practically the same as the script of the Maunggun 
plates....” 
10  It gives me an impression of running handwriting.
11  Mahadevan 2003: 211-215.

--- Page 209 of 338 ---
varieties of grantha script
193
the existence of palmleaf manuscripts of the 16th century in vaṭṭeluttu 
and koleluttu script.12 With regard to epigraphical evidence of the 8th 
century, Sivaramamurti (1966: 229) observed the following: “Grantha 
letters occurring with vaṭṭeluttu or by themselves, in pure Sanskrit 
texts ... [represent] a cursory form [of grantha] which in many respects 
differs from [tamil scripts] though [it is] based on [those tamil] 
scripts.” However, Mahadevan (2003: 212)13 reports that “the Royal 
Chancellery of the State of Travancore in South Kerala continued to 
use Vaṭṭeluttu even in the 19th century....” While going through 
manuscripts in vaṭṭeḻuttu I noted that the archaic variety and the later 
development of the combination grantha plus vaṭṭeluttu in palmleaf 
manuscripts show very little proximity with tamil characters. An illustration of a palmleaf written in the grantha-vaṭṭeluttu variety is given 
in Figure 10.1. 
Figure 10.1.  A palmleaf ms. showing grantha-vaṭṭeḻuttu variety. 
Courtesy:Vaidika Samshodhana Mandal, Pune, India. 
Picture by the author. See colour section, Plate XI.
iii.  The development of characters in grantha-tamil is seen in Pallava, 
Cola and Pandya inscriptions. In his book on Indian epigraphy and 
South Indian scripts, Sivaramamurti (1966: 222-234) shows in detail 
the stages of development through illustrations of the mixed granthatamil variety in inscriptions. In the manuscript tradition, however, 
both the scripts got prominence with an independent, individual status. The following points deserve notice:
a. In a manuscript text in Sanskrit, the text is written in grantha 
which is sometimes mixed with a few letters (the ones most resembling their tamil counterparts) in tamil style, for example, ī, e, o, ra, l 
and l. This happens often if the scribe is from Tamil origin. 
12  Dr. N.M. Nampoothiry in his “Report submitted to ICSSR, New Delhi” (1983): 
“Palm leaf manuscripts are collected in seventy bundles. The earliest of them is dated 
1538 ad. Most of them are written in old scripts. A few of them are in ko[le]luttu/
vaṭṭeluttu”.  
13  Mahadevan 2003: 212: “Gradually, however, the Malayalam script completely 
replaced the phonologically deficient and palaeographically degenerate Vaṭṭeluttu by 
the end of 18th century ad”.

--- Page 210 of 338 ---
saraju rath
194
b. In this case we also find the Sanskrit text purely in grantha script 
but with wrong readings—for instance, pātapatma in place of pāda
padma—which can be explained from the phonetic structure of the 
Tamil language and the tamil script.14
c.  In a Sanskrit text with Tamil commentary, the Sanskrit version 
is written purely in grantha and the commentary mainly in tamil 
script and Tamil language. Literature of the maṇipravāla15 type shows 
this variety.
Figure 10.2.  A palmleaf ms. in grantha-tamil script. Johan van Manen collection; 
courtesy: Kern Library, Leiden. Picture by the author. See colour section, Plate XII.
iv.  Among scripts for Dravidian languages, malayalam script is closest 
to grantha as it shows numerous similarities in many individual 
characters. This was well noticed already by Burnell, who referred to 
malayalam script as a catagory of modern grantha16 (western grantha); 
however, the appropriateness of the name which he used for this, tulumalayalam, can be disputed. 17 The grantha-malayalam18 mss studied 
14  Such reading may confuse non-Tamil Sanskrit scholars but may be automatically corrected in reading and understanding by bilingual and biscriptual Tamil 
Sanskrit scholars. 
15  I take the term maṇipravāla “gem and coral” here in its broader sense of a 
combination of a regional Dravidian language and Sanskrit, not in the sense of the 
schoolmaster approach of the Līlātilakam (on which cf. now Freeman 2003: 446-450) 
which tries to narrow down the term to apply only to a highly regulated “union” 
(yoga) between Keralabhāṣā and Sanskrit. The term maṇipravāla has even been 
employed with reference to a projected “commingling of Brajbhasa and Khari Boli” 
(Trivedi 2003: 1016). 
16  See Burnell 1878: 41-43. Burnell catagorises modern Grantha as eastern 
Grantha and Tulu-Malayalam as western Grantha.
17  Burnell gives the name “transitional grantha” to the script I would call tulumalayalam.
18  Seeing the combined style, I prefer to name it as grantha-malayalam and see 
no point of naming it as tulu-malayalam. In earlier days, kannaḍa script was domi-

--- Page 211 of 338 ---
varieties of grantha script
195
by me make me agree with Mahalingam’s view on the influence of the 
old vaṭṭeluttu style (‘round-hand’ calligraphy) on malayalam characters 
which are otherwise close to (and apparently derived mainly from) 
Ārya-eluttu. Regarding the place of Ārya-eluttu in the evolution of 
Vaṭṭeluttu, Mahadevan (2003:212) writes, 
“Ultimately, however, it became necessary for Malayalam to have a 
script of its own, which was formed from the Grantha script. The new 
script which came into existence towards the end of the 14th century 
ad was called Ārya-eluttu to distinguish it from Tekkaṉ Malayalam, 
the local name for Vaṭṭeluttu in South Kerala and Kōleluttu, another 
variant of Vaṭṭeluttu in North Kerala. Even after the introduction of 
Ārya-eluttu for Malayalam, Vaṭṭeluttu lingered on as it was popular 
among the sections of the population whose dialects were not so heavily Sanskritised as that of the Nambūdiri Brāhmans.”
v.  The tulu-malayalam script is a variety of grantha dating from the 
8th or 9th century ce. It is the variety which Burnell called transitional 
grantha. From about 1300 ce we see the script in the form which it has 
basically maintained till modern times. Currently two varieties of 
tulu-malayalam are in use: Brahmanic, or square, and Jain, or round. 
The development of malayalam script and its varieties (esp. Kōleluttu) 
deserves further research on the basis of mss in mixed scripts. 
Figure 10.3.  A palmleaf ms. in grantha-malayalam. 
Courtesy:Vaidika Samshodhana Mandal, Pune, India. 
Picture by the author. See colour section, Plate XIII.
3.  Geographical Differentiation and Developments 
over Time
3.1  The locations of inscriptions and of collections of manuscripts 
etc. point to distinct areas where the different varieties of grantha 
nantly used in Tulu country; full-fledged malayalam variety came here in use later 
on.

--- Page 212 of 338 ---
saraju rath
196
were popular and dominant. A map which specifies the geographical 
areas where the respective varieties developed and flourished in early 
centuries is provided below. 
Figure 10.4.  Map of South India showing the areas of the varieties of grantha.
Map by author. See colour section, Plate XV. 
3.2  Apart from geographical differentiation there are developments 
over time. We find notable changes in some aspects of grantha script 
applying to some or all varieties which can be used in the determination of a date of the manuscript. In addition, each scribe has his own 
style but in the present study I abstract from such variations and focus 
on features that change over time. These notable changes can be summarized under the following headings:
[ A ] Specific characters (vowels and consonants)
[ B ] Conjunct consonants & placements
[ C ] Punctuation marks
[ D ] Numerals: alphabetic, syllabic, or digital
3.3 With regard to [A], [B] and [C], the comparative chart (table 2) 
illustrates some major changes over time. The earliest stage is repre-

--- Page 213 of 338 ---
varieties of grantha script
197
sented by grantha characters not on palmleaf but on copper plates; 
they derive from the so-called Leiden Copper-plates which belong to 
the period of Rajaraja Cola I. Later stages are represented by characters from palm-leaf manuscripts belonging to different periods (16th–
19th).
Table 10.2.  Changes over time in grantha.
Column1
Column2
Column3
Chola cp.
11th ad
Palmleaf mss
16-18th ad
Palmleaf mss
19th ad
vowel/mātrā
A
, 
, 
]
Ā
, 
 
U/Ū
/ 
/ 
/ 
AI
> same continued
VISARGA
 
, 
, 
, 
, 
AVAGRAHA
-
consonants
KA
RA
, 
 
conjuncts
KṢA
 / 
VYA
, 
 
ŚRĪ
RṆṆA/RPPA/
RPA/RJJA
 /

--- Page 214 of 338 ---
saraju rath
198
3.4  In the comparative chart (table 2) only a small number of characters and conjuncts are discussed in order to illustrate changes in style 
and calligraphy which have occurred from time to time. Among available sources I give examples from manuscripts of the van Manen collection and from the so-called Leiden copper-plates which belong to 
the 11th cent. ad of Chola King Rajaraja Chola I.
Vowel A and Ā
a. Column 1 (copper-plate) gives an ancient vowel A which is simple, 
having a single loop at the left side below, and has few ornamental 
features except for the connected vertical line. An early form of ms. 
variety in column 2 shows double loops, a feature that is not common 
in later periods. The A in a 19th cent. ms. (last column) is simpler in 
form.
b. In long Ā, the ancient version in column one has an extending line at 
the right (of the character) which remains proportional when it comes 
out from the middle in a curving shape (a bit like roman numeral three) 
and encircles it from below till the lower front part of the character 
is reached; the ms. style shows considerable freedom regarding the 
extending line which sometimes starts from the top, sometimes from 
below, and which continues even till the top of the frontside of the 
character. 
Mātrā U and Ū
c.   The mātrās u and ū after consonant in copper-plate are put in two 
vertical lines with the lower ends joined in the case of all characters 
such as su 
, bu 
, du 
 etc. In few cases, earlier mss show a 
partly similar style with the mātrās exclusively put below the characters 
in the middle part such as pu 
, and in other cases they are put at 
the side, for example, sū 
. Mss of the 19th century do not show 
uniformity: this mātrā sometimes starts from the corner below or at the 
side, in pu 
, not from the middle. Even with the same character 
in the same ms. of this period the style of this mātrā can each time 
be different (starting from the corner below, at the side or from the 
middle); this was not the case in earlier centuries.
Diphthongs
d.  The mātrā ai (similarly au not shown here) in inscriptions and 
copper-plates in Chola grantha consists of two spiraling curls one above

--- Page 215 of 338 ---
varieties of grantha script
199
another preceding to the consonant character to which it belongs and 
this style is known as pṛṣṭhamātrā, occasionally also one curl in front of 
the other and both preceding to the consonant; in manuscripts (16th—
18th and 19th cent.) only the latter style is found. 
Visarga
e.  The style of visarga shows some variation in manuscripts between 
the 16th and 18th century, the similarity between the various styles 
being that two dots are never placed separately. The second column 
shows a running style which differs both from what is found in earlier 
and from what is found in later centuries.
Consonants
f.  Among consonants I have taken the first one, ka, as test character, 
and ra as an additional one. A complete overview of all characters is 
to be provided in a forthcoming publication. To be noted is the subtle 
distinction between the ka in the early ms. variety and the later one: the 
right-hand loop is only curved but not joined. 
g.  Two long vertical lines joined both on the top and the bottom 
represents ra in copper-plate and inscription writing. In later writing 
ra is more open and has an addtional line. In the early mss. the special 
features are: (i) the beginning line often joins the second one whereas 
the first line remains always separate in 19th century ms. and in some 
earlier transitional forms; (ii) the topline is lengthened which is mostly 
not the case in 19th cent. ones.
Conjuncts
h.  In case of conjuncts, both characters in full form are put either one 
above the other or side by side: this is what we find both in inscriptions 
and copper-plates and in early mss. However, later mss. show ligatures 
in which the first character is abbreviated and the second one full. Even 
in later mss. we may also find the old system. 
i.  Inscriptions and copper-plates are consistent in the use of a brief 
conjunct form of ya slanting from left-down to right-up which is added 
to consonants; in early mss. a new style comes up which is more vertical 
and more rounded; this is the only form normally found in later mss. 
Duplication in characters
j.  Characters can be doubled in all periods (from early Sanskrit

--- Page 216 of 338 ---
saraju rath
200
inscriptions till recent manuscripts19), especially in conjuncts with 
r and h (Pāṇini’s rule 8.4.46 aco rahābhyāṁ dve) but also in other 
environments.20 For instance, śrī is found written as śśrī (with ś below 
śr). These doubled consonants, as in rppa, rcca, rjja, rṇṇa, are in the 
earlier centuries written one above the other, later on mostly side by 
side (with the repha in between). 
3.5  With regard to numerals [D], the use of specific symbols and systems of representation in grantha script have not yet been sufficiently 
studied and needs a separate treatment. Scholars such as Ojha, 
Gokhale, Pandey, Diringer, Dani, Mahalingam, Shivaganesha Murthy 
do not discuss the problems of the representation of the numerals and 
variations in the system. Bühler’s, Ojha’s, Grünendahl’s, Visalakshy’s 
works contain useful material but they provide only brief charts which 
are quite insufficient for determining the value of the numerals as 
found in the manuscripts.
3.6  The following ms. is a good example of the use of both alphabetic 
numerals (one of the varieties of Akṣarapalli) and digital numerals in 
the margin. The manuscript apparently belongs to a transitional 
period where both types are used. 
Figure 10.5.  Alphabetic and digital numerals. 
Johan van Manen collection, courtesy: Kern Library, Leiden. 
Picture by the author. See colour secion, Plate XIV.
19  In Aśoka’s inscriptions and other Prakrit inscriptions, however, double and 
doubled consonants are usually represented by single ones. 
20  Practices in inscriptions and manuscripts partly match with the prescriptions 
of ancient grammatical authorities who differ with each other in several details: 
Wackernagel 1896: 110-114, Renou 1961: 6-8.

--- Page 217 of 338 ---
varieties of grantha script
201
The various types of numerals used in grantha mss.21 are briefly shown 
below in table 3. The period attributed to the syllabic and digital 
numerals (columns Grantha [A] and Grantha [B]) is primarily based 
on calligraphical and palaeographical characteristics.22
Table 10.3 
ROMAN
TAMIL
Grantha[A]
SYLLABIC
16-18th ce
Grantha[B]
ALPHABETIC
Bārākhaḍi or
dvādaśākṣarī
Grantha[C]
DIGIT
19th ce
1
A / KA
2
Ā / KĀ
3
I / KI
4
Ī / KĪ
5
U / KU
6
Ū / KŪ
7
Ṛ / KṚ
8
Ṝ / KṜ
9
Ḷ / KḶ
10/0
Ḹ / KḸ 22 
21  A descriptive study with all southern numeral systems in general and specific 
varieties, used in grantha mss., is in preparation (Rath, forthcoming b).
22  In Bārākhaḍi or dvādaśākṣarī style, grantha Ḹ / KḸ is only used to represent 10, 
not Zero.

--- Page 218 of 338 ---
saraju rath
202
4.  Indices for Attributing a Date and Region of Origin 
to a Manuscript
4.1  Referring to our previous discussion and adding a few points, we 
give in this section an overview of peculiarities in calligraphy and style 
that can be particularly helpful in dating a manuscript (which I will 
discuss here first, in 4.2) and in localising it (4.3). 
4.2  The characteristics found in inscriptions, for instance copperplate inscriptions (from the 11th) and (rare) early manuscripts till the 
15th century ce are as follows.23
i. 
absence of daṇḍa;
ii. 
absence of kākapada mark (as insertion marker);
iii. absence of other punctuation marks;
iv. 
absence of avagraha mark;
v. 
absence of halantyam;
vi. 
conjunct consonants: one below the other, both in full form;
vii. for diphthongs ai and au, two e mātrās are placed one above the 
other 
; 
viii. archaic forms of grantha is found;
ix. 
only syllabic numerals are used.
The characteristics of manuscripts of the 16th-18th century ce: 
i. 
single daṇḍa, sometimes we find it very small in size;
ii. 
halantyam (consonant without vowel) is shown by placing the 
full characters ma, ta, na, ka, ṭa very small in size at the end;
iii. conjuncts: one below other for specific characters like ppa, cca, 
ccha, lla, ṭṭa, jja, tta; also side by side for combinations such as 
gga, jja, jjha, lla, tta, ṭṭa, both characters appearing in a full form;
iv. 
rare use of the avagraha mark: 
 ;
v. 
kākapada mark is used above a line, two types: 
;
vi. 
sometimes anusvāra mark is given on the top, for instance, 
, 
 and also at the side of the character 
 ;
23  These and the following sets of characteristics are mostly overarching ones that 
apply to all regional varieties (4.3) to the extent they are attested in a period. We will 
consider here strictly the chronological indications to be derived from the script 
itself, disregarding indications that may be derived from explicit statements in the 
colophons, the developmental stage of characters of other scripts occasionally 
inserted, the quality of the palm leaf that is used as writing material, etc.

--- Page 219 of 338 ---
varieties of grantha script
203
vii. repha (small vertical stroke representing r in conjuncts) on the 
top (for all) 
/ (rka), sometimes the consonants are doubled 
placed side by side, sometimes one above other, for 
instance, 
;
viii. accent marks,24 for instance, udātta: 
 
;
ix. 
alphabetic and syllabic numerals are simultaneously found on 
the left side margin of mss.
The characteristics of manuscripts of the 19th century ce:
i. 
single daṇḍa for end of one line of the verse: / and double at the 
end of the verse: //;
ii. 
halantyam is shown by turning the last part of the characters t, 
n, m, k, ṭ up in a slight curved vertical line. For example, 
 t, 
 
n ;
iii. avagraha mark is rarely used; 
iv. 
kākapada mark below the line, between characters: 
, 
;
v. 
anusvāra mostly placed at the side;
vi. 
repha, as a vertical stroke similar to a (short) single daṇḍa, is 
placed in between the characters (doubled): rma, rca, rja, rpa 
 ;
; 
; 
;
vii. appearance of vedic anunāsika (gum) and candrabindu: 
;
viii. accent marks25 (for anudātta and svarita) 
;
ix. 
the full daṇḍa appears as two vertical lines joined with a small 
horizontal bar on the top 
;
x. 
numerals are presented mostly in digits, occasionally alphabetic.
4.3  With regard to the determination of the region of origin of a mss. 
or its scribe, I can give here a few simple small hints. 
a.  Sanskrit texts written mainly in grantha characters but mixed 
with tamil, malayalam, tulu, telugu and kannada characters wherever 
possible (on account of phonetic identity or similarity), especially in 
earlier times, show the influence of the scribe’s mother script on his 
writing.
b.  So-called writing mistakes (in the ms where the language is 
Sanskrit and script is grantha or other) often betray properties of the 
scribe’s first language and script: for instance, kaṅkātareṇa for gaṅ
gādhareṇa, patma for padma. Bilingual and biscriptual readers may 
24  More details in Rath (forthcoming, a). 
25  More details in Rath (forthcoming, a).

--- Page 220 of 338 ---
saraju rath
204
automatically correct such reading and understand the sentence 
appropriately, even without experiencing a mistake in writing. While 
working on a manuscript, one therefore needs to have a good knowledge of local languages and scripts and their linguistic representation 
in a particular region.
c.  The principle of pagination style fluctuates in every region. For 
example, the folio-number stands left-side on the front page (recto) of 
each leaf in the dravidian regions26; in other parts of India on the back 
side (verso) known as sāṅkapṛṣṭhā (in eastern region on the right-side 
top, in the north-western region on the left-side middle or top);
d.  South Indian scribes often start their manuscript with śrī and/or 
svasti, where scribes of other parts of India start with om (and just as 
siddham/svasti is used in the beginning of inscriptions).
5. Conclusion
In the southern states of premodern South India, grantha was the specialised script for writing Sanskrit (and Vedic) texts, including royal 
records and documents. Grantha shows regional differences parallel 
with the distinct nature of the other scripts (telugu, etc.) with which it 
was standing in a biscriptual relation; moreover, it shows a number of 
relatively clearly identifiable stages of development, from the first half 
of the first millennium ce till early modern times. In the preceding 
paragraphs we have focused on those among the multifaceted changes 
in style and calligraphy of the characters of the different varieties of 
the script, which may serve to determine the relative date of a grantha 
manuscript, and which have mostly not been analyzed in available 
studies and handbooks. A few major parameters have been reviewed 
in this paper which together can help to narrow down the age of a 
manuscript within a few centuries. If a Saṁvatsara date is given, the 
determination can become more precise and point to a specific year 
(within a 60-year cycle). 
26  See, for instance, Rath 2005: 55.

--- Page 221 of 338 ---
varieties of grantha script
205
Bibliography
Bühler, G. 1961. Indian Palaeography. New Delhi.
Burnell, A.C. 1878. Elements of South-Indian palaeography from the fourth to the 
seventeenth century ad,. Second enl. and improved edition. London: Trübner. 
Dani, A. H. 2nd edition 1963. Indian Palaeography. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. 
Diringer, David. 1953. The Alphabet: A Key to the History of Mankind. New York: The 
Philosophical Library. (Reprint: New Delhi, Munshiram Manoharlal, 1996.)
Freeman, Richard. 2003. “Genre and Society: The Literary Culture of Premodern 
Kerala.” In: Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South Asia (ed. 
S. Pollock): 437-500. Berkeley: Univ. of California. 
Gokhale, Shobhana L. 1966. Indian Numerals. Pune: Deccan College Post-graduate 
and Research Institute. 
Grünendahl, Reinhold. 2001. South Indian Scripts in Sanskrit Manuscripts and Prints: 
Grantha Tamil–Malayalam–Telugu–Kannada–Nandinagari. Wiesbaden: Harras
sowitz. 
Mahadevan, Iravatham. 2003. Early Tamil Epigraphy (From the earliest times to the 
Sixth century A. D.). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University. 
Mahalingam, T. V. 1967. Early South Indian Palaeography. Madras.
Nampoothiry, N. M. 1983. “A report on Malabar and Kerala Studies, Submitted to 
ICSSR, New Delhi.” New Delhi. www.malabarandkeralastudies.net, accessed on 
September 2010. 
Ojha, G. H. 1959. The Palaeography of India (Hindi edition). Delhi: Munshiram 
Manoharlal.
Pandey, Raj Bali. 2nd edition 1957. Indian Palaeography. Varanasi.
Pollock, Sheldon. 2007. “Literary culture and manuscript culture in precolonial 
India.” In: Literary culture and the material book (ed. by Simon Eliot, Andrew 
Hash and Ian Willison): 77-94. London: The British Library. 
Rath, Saraju. 2005. “A Note on the Taittirīya Manuscripts Belonging to the Van 
Manen Collection.” Acta Orientalia Vilnensia, 6.2: 52–62. 
———. 2006. “Scripts of Ancient India: Siddhamātkā.” In: Nyāya-Vasiṣṭha: Felici
tation volume Prof. V.N. Jha (ed. by M. Banerjee): 717–728. Kolkata: Sanskrit 
Pustak Bhandar.
———. forthcoming, (a). “Observations on Vedic Accents in Grantha Palmleaf 
Manuscripts.” (To appear in the Proceedings of the Fourth International Vedic 
Workshop, Austin, Texas, May 24-27, 2007; ed. J. Brereton). 
———. forthcoming, (b). “Numerals in Grantha Manuscripts.” (Expanded version of 
a paper presented at the 13th WSC, Edinburgh, 2006.) 
Renou, Louis. 1961. Grammaire sanscrite. Tomes I et II réunis. Phonétique—composition—dérivation—le nom—le verbe—la phrase. Deuxième édition revue, corrigé et 
augmenté. Paris : Adrien Maisonneuve.
Sastri, Nilakanta K. A. 2003. [1949, reprinted in 2003.] South Indian Influences in the 
far East. Chennai: Tamil Arts Academy. 
Shivaganesha Murthy, R.S. 1996. Introduction to Manuscriptology. Delhi: Sharada 
Publishing House. 
Sivaramamurti, C. 1966. Indian Epigraphy and South Indian Scripts. Bulletin of the 
Madras Government Museum, New Series, General Section, vol. 3, no. 4. Madras: 
Government of Madras. [Second edition, with minor improvements, previous ed. 
1948, 1952.]

--- Page 222 of 338 ---
saraju rath
206
Trivedi, Harish. 2003. “The Progress of Hindi, Part 2: Hindi and the Nation.” In: 
Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South Asia (ed. S. Pollock): 9581022. Berkeley: Univ. of California.
Visalakshy, P. 2003. The Grantha Script. Thiruvanathapuram: Dravidian Linguistic 
Association. 
Wackernagel, Jakob. 1896. Altindische Grammatik. Band I: Lautlehre. Göttingen: 
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

--- Page 223 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
207
 
 
CHAPTER ELEVEN
From my Grandfather’s Chest 
of Palm Leaf Books
Sreeramula Rajeswara Sarma
0.1 When manuscripts began to be systematically collected in the 
three presidencies of British India in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the majority of manuscripts so collected were from 
the individual collections of priestly or other Brahmin households. In 
order to understand the manner of production and distribution of 
manuscripts in pre-modern South India, it would be useful to know 
about the nature of such individual collections. 
In this paper, I shall discuss a set of palm leaf manuscripts which I 
saved from my grandfather’s chest of palm leaf books, dwell on the 
manner how they were preserved, speculate how they may have been 
collected and narrate the family tradition regarding these palm leaf 
books. 
0.2  The nature of the subject makes it necessary that I say a few words 
about my family. It was a family of śrotriya or vaidikī Brahmins, who 
followed the Āpastamba Sūtra of the Taittirīya Śākhā of the KṛṣṇaYajurveda. According to a legend perpetuated in the Kanyakāpurāṇa,1 
an ancestor named Bhāskarācārya provided leadership to a community of Vaiśyas in their conflict with the local king several centuries 
ago. Since then the members of the family became the hereditary 
gurus of this community of Vaiśyas and held the title Bhāskarācārya. 
Then about twelve generations ago, an ancestor performed a Rāmayajña and dedicated himself and his future descendants to Śrīrāma. 
Through this dedication, he replaced the then current surname or 
1  Printed often; see also V. Narayana Rao, “Purāṇa as Brahminic Ideology” in: 
Wendy Doniger (ed), Purana Perennis: Reciprocity and Transformation in Hindu 
and Jaina Texts, SUNY Press, New York, 1994, pp. 85-110.

--- Page 224 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
208
family name Toṭapalli by Śrīrāmula, which is genitive plural of 
Śrīrāma in Telugu, meaning “of / belonging to Śrīrāma.” 2 
The family avidly cultivated this twofold tradition. The first was 
that of Bhāskarācārya, the preceptor-ship of certain clans of Vaiśyas. 
As the Vaiśya clans gradually spread across south India, the Bhās
karācārya travelled all over his “territory” to regularly visit his followers and offer spiritual counsel. In the family parlance, this travel is 
termed saṃcāram. The second tradition was the annual performance 
of the Rāma-yajña, which included the recitation of the complete 
Ārṣa-Rāmāyaṇa, i.e. the Sanskrit Rāmāyaṇa by Vālmīkin. Since this 
was an expensive affair, the Bhāskarācārya utilized his extensive travels to collect contributions from his Vaiśya disciples. 
I often thought that the family must have had highly interesting 
archives, containing the itineraries of the various Bhāskarācāryas, 
documents about the method of performing the Rāma-yajña, and of 
course several manuscript copies of the Kanyakāpurāṇa and of the 
Rāmāyaṇa. Unfortunately, none of these survives save a single copy 
book in which my grandfather recorded the subscriptions he collected 
and the expenses he incurred for what I presume to be his last Rāmayajña. All other documents were lost because the family left the ancestral village and moved to another village. 
A year before I was born in 1937, my father abandoned the ancestral house in the village Achchammapeta (16° 38´ N; 80° 7´ E) in 
Guntur District in what is today the state of Andhra Pradesh and 
moved to south-east along with his mother and wife to a much smaller 
village called Ulichi (15° 33´ N; 80° 9´ E)—situated in the same district, but on the cyclone-prone coast of the Bay of Bengal—to look 
after a childless old couple who were closely related to my grandmother. With this move my father gave up his paternal inheritance 
and gained the inheritance of his mother’s family, or—to speak from 
the perspective of this workshop—he lost one set of palm leaf manuscripts to acquire another. This second set is the subject of this paper. 
In this new village, my father succeeded his grand uncle as purohita; he had half a share of paurohitya in this village. At some point in 
2  Telugu family names (iṃṭiperu, lit. “house name”) are generally derived from 
the village from where the family originated. In Telugu culture, the family name 
constitutes the first element of one’s name. Thus the first initial “S” in my name 
expands to Sreeramula. Today, however, many Telugu people, as they migrate to 
other parts of the world, are placing the family names after the given name, in order 
to conform to the general practice in the US and Europe.

--- Page 225 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
209
the past, the purohitas were given agricultural land for performing 
this essential task. They did not cultivate the land themselves but 
leased it to farmers who paid rent in kind or cash. Besides this modest 
income, the purohita received, whenever he performed a domestic 
ritual in a client’s house, some remuneration in kind: a measure of 
rice, a handful of pulses, some dried coconut, a vegetable or two, a few 
leaves of tāmbūla, two or three betel nuts—barely enough for one 
square meal— and some copper coins. 
My mother used to store some of the non-perishable items so 
received in a large wooden chest which went by the designation of the 
“grandfather’s chest of palm leaf books” (tāta-gāri tāṭāku-pustakālabhoṣāṇam). In my childhood, whenever my mother opened this chest, 
I would try to peep into the chest to see and smell the diverse kinds of 
objects stored there: dried coconut halves, turmeric roots, betel nuts, 
silver trinkets, packets of incense sticks, tablets of camphor, piles of 
old letters, rolls of paper documents, and bundles of palm leaf books 
wrapped in cloth. Sometimes, to amuse me, my father would take out 
a palm leaf book, undo the rope, and show me how the letters were 
incised on the surface of the leaves. Once, as a special treat, he showed 
me a secret drawer in the chest which contained some old coins and 
rolls of palm leaves. Many decades later, when we had to empty the 
house and sell it, I retrieved some palm leaf books and rolls from the 
grandfather’s chest. My mother gave away the empty chest to the temple of Veṇugopāla; now it has the privilege of storing—no more palm 
leaf books, but— God’s festival clothes (Fig. 11.1). 
Figure 11.1.  Grandfather’s Chest is being carried to the temple of Veṇu-gopāla, 
which is inside the walls with the vertical stripes to the left. See colour section, 
Plate XVI.

--- Page 226 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
210
The palm leaf manuscripts that I saved from the grandfather’s chest 
(Fig. 11.2) have been with me for some time, but they were not of my 
immediate academic interest (which is served mainly by north Indian 
paper manuscripts and museum artifacts). Saraju Rath’s proposal of 
the workshop gave me the opportunity to spend some hours with the 
family manuscripts (and to indulge in excursions into the past). 
Figure 11.2.  Palm leaf manuscripts and rolls retrieved from the grandfather’s chest. 
See colour section, Plate XVII.
1.1  Material 
All the manuscripts are incised on the processed leaves of the Palmyra 
palm (Borassus flabellifer Linn., Sanskrit: tāla / khara-tāla) which 
grows abundantly in our area on the sea coast. The manuscripts have 
very neatly bored holes; I do not know how this was achieved. In one 
manuscript, the corners of the leaves are rounded very nicely; I do not 
know how this was done either. The covers of the manuscripts were 
made up of the leaf stalks (petiole) of what appear to be larger Talipot 
palms (Corypha umbraculifera; Sanskrit, śrītāla); these leaf stalks were 
cut to the exact size, smoothened and varnished. Some covers were 
made of bamboo; some others of wooden planks; in some manuscripts, the palm leaves themselves were made to serve as the covers. 
On these leaves, the letters were incised with an iron stylus (Telugu, 
gaṃṭamu from Sanskrit, loha-kaṇṭaka), as is the custom in South

--- Page 227 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
211
India and all along the eastern coast.3 The manuscripts appear to have 
been used frequently. In one manuscript, a slightly broken edge of a 
leaf was carefully repaired by stitching it with thread. 
1.2  Age of the Manuscripts
The manuscripts are generally dated in the years of the southern style 
Jovian cycle. Since these repeat every 60 years, it is difficult to determine 
the age of a manuscript. Luckily, in one manuscript the Jovian year is 
accompanied by its equivalents in Kali and Śaka eras (Śubhakṛt / Kali 
4943 / Śaka 1764) so that the year can be fixed at ad 1842-43. In another 
case, the date is given in the Christian era also as 23 September 1856. 
I am inclined to think that the remaining documents also belong to this 
period, namely the middle of the nineteenth century of the Christian 
era. Although paper was available at this period—the chest contained 
many government documents with Queen Victoria’s seal embossed 
on them—it had to be purchased against ready cash whereas palm leaf 
was free and plenty. There must have been people in every village who 
processed the palm leaf and made it ready for writing. I cannot say 
whether there were special classes of people whose profession it was to 
process the leaves or whether every literate person (i.e. every Brahmin) 
prepared his own writing material. Perhaps both cases were true. For 
making the covers one took naturally the village carpenter’s help. This 
state of affairs continued up to the beginning of the twentieth century; 
in the first decade my father still used the palm leaf and stylus for his 
first writing lessons. 
1.3  Orthography
These manuscripts are predominantly of Sanskrit texts but written in 
Telugu characters. The Telugu alphabet is capable of reproducing all 
the Sanskrit sounds. Yet there are certain peculiarities in the transcription of Sanskrit words. Since these peculiarities are common to 
all the manuscripts in this collection, it appears that all these manuscripts (with one exception, see 2.4 below) were produced broadly in 
the same geographical area and in the same period. These peculiarities 
are as follows:
3  On the materials for writing, see, inter alia, Sreeramula Rajeswara Sarma, 
“Writing Material in Ancient India,” Aligarh Journal of Oriental Studies, 2 (1985), 
pp. 175-196.

--- Page 228 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
212
1.  Telugu has long and short e and o, while Sanskrit has only long e 
and o. However, the Telugu scribes rarely pay attention to long e and 
o in Sanskrit, transcribing them often as short. Thus devānām becomes 
dĕvānām. But in actual pronunciation, Telugu Brahmins never 
shorten the Sanskrit e and o. 
2.  But they do indulge in what is known as ya-śruti; i.e. insertion of 
ya in front of vowels i, e, and of v in front of u, o. For example, eka 
becomes yeka; idaṃ becomes yidaṃ and so on. 
3.  As in Middle Indic, the anusvāra is used consistently in the place 
of parasavarṇa, e.g. anta > aṃta, indu > iṃdu, indra > iṃdra. 
4.  But more interestingly, anusvāra is inserted before a nasal consonant when it is in conjunction with another consonant. Examples: 
brahmā > braṃhma; anna > aṃnna; puṇya < puṃnya; yajña 
< yaṃjña.4
5.  The consonant following an anusvāra is reduplicated, e.g. 
santati > saṃtati > saṃttati
 
śṛṅgāra > śṛṃgāra > śṛṃggāra
 
vande > vaṃde > vaṃdde 
So much so, the verse from the Puruṣa-sūkta is transcribed as follows
 
బ్రాం
హ్మణొస్య ముఖమాసీత్ ‍ 
బాహూ రాజంంన్యః కృతః 
వూరౄ తదస్య యద్వైశ్యః 
పద్భ్యాం
గ్ శూద్రొ అజాయత 
 
brāṃhmaṇŏsya mukham āsīt / 
bāhū rājaṃnyaḥ kṛtaḥ /
vūrū tad asya yad vaiśyaḥ / 
padbhyāṃg śūdrŏ ajāyata //
2.0  Description of the Manuscripts
The manuscripts can be divided into three groups: Veda, ritual and 
kāvya. There are three Vedic manuscripts, belonging to the Taittirīya 
branch of the black Yajurveda. Two of the largest manuscripts in the 
4  A similar feature I noticed in Punjabi, or at least in a Punjabi astrolabe where 
an anusvāra is inserted in kanyā (kaṁnyā) and vahni (vaṁnhi).

--- Page 229 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
213
collection contain respectively the second and third aṣṭakas of the 
Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa. It is likely that the first aṣṭaka was also there 
once. 
2.1 The manuscript of the second aṣṭaka contains all the eight pra
pāṭhakas.5 Each prapāṭhaka begins on a new page with an auspicious 
formula like hariḥ oṃ or hariḥ oṃ śrīgurubhyo namaḥ, but at the conclusion, the serial number of the prapāṭhaka is not given, nor is there 
a mention anywhere of the Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa. The final colophon, 
however, states reṃḍḍo āṭha parāyitaṃ. This expression will be discussed below. Fortunately there is the scribe’s colophon at the end 
which states as follows:
Vikāri-nāma-saṃvvatsara-bhādra-bahuḷa-dvādaśi-lu Telidevulapalli 
Tātaṃ-bhoṭla-gāri parāyitaṃ postakaṃ. Dattaṃbhoṭlu vrāsina posta
kaṃ. Dattātreya namaḥ. 
“In the Jovian year named Vikārin, in the dark half of the month 
Bhādrapada, on the 12th day [is completed] the book (postakam) of 
the Parāyitam belonging to Telidevulapalli Tātaṃbhoṭlu. The book is 
written by Dattaṃbhoṭlu. Homage to Dattātreya.” Vikārin is the 33rd 
year in the Jovian cycle and can correspond to 1779-80, or 1839-40, or 
1899-1900. Perhaps 1839-40 would be the right year. 
The scribe Dattaṃbhoṭlu is not the owner of the manuscript; the 
owner is mentioned as Telidevulapalli Tātaṃbhoṭlu followed by an 
honorific gāru. The scribe does not mention his family name probably 
because it is the same as that of the owner. It is possible that Dattaṃ
bhoṭlu is a younger member of the family of Tātaṃbhoṭlu and therefore refers to the latter with the honorific gāru. It may be noted that 
both these names, and many others which will occur in the course of 
this narrative, end in the suffix bhoṭlu, which is derived from Sanskrit 
bhaṭṭa to which a Telugu plural particle is added honoris causa. It is 
therefore certain that Dattaṃbhoṭlu is not a professional scribe from a 
lower caste but a Brahmin of the same family.
2.2  The manuscript of the third aṣṭaka6 was copied by another person, for the writing is much superior to that of the previous manu5  Length 39.5 cm, breadth 3 cm, thickness 5 cm, thickness with covers 7.8 cm; 
covers made of palm leaf stalks.
6  Length 43.5 cm, breadth 3 cm, thickness 5.5 cm, thickness with covers 8 cm. 
Covers are made of palm leaf stalks. There is no pagination; the string got broken

--- Page 230 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
214
script. However, there is no colophon stating who copied it and when. 
On the penultimate leaf is written in a different hand 
Pullaṃbhoṭla postakam / mūḍo aṭhaṃ / panneṃḍu ppaṃnnālu 
saṃppūrṇaṃ //
“Book of Pullaṃbhoṭlu. Third aṭha. Twelve pannās [are] complete.” 
On the final leaf is written, again in another hand, within ornate 
borders,
Yimaṇilli Pullaṃbhoṭla mūḍo aṭha parāyitaṃ saṃppūrṇam. 
“Of Yimaṇilli Pullaṃbhoṭlu , third aṭha parāyitam [is] complete.” 
So clearly this book belongs to Pullaṃbhoṭlu with the family name 
Yimaṇilli. But more important are the expressions reṃḍo aṭha parāya
taṃ in the manuscript of the second aṣṭaka and mūḍo aṭha parāyataṃ 
in the manuscript of the third aṣṭaka. In Telugu reṃḍo means “the 
second” and mūḍo “the third”. Thus the second aṣṭaka of the Taittirīya 
Brāhmaṇa is designated as the “second aṭha parāyitam” and the third 
aṣṭaka as the “third aṭha parāyitaṃ.” Therefore, it is reasonable to 
assume that in the Telugu priestly circles the expression aṭha refers to 
aṣṭaka; there is at least the superficial resemblance between the two 
expressions aṣṭaka and aṭha. Does parāyitaṃ then refer to the 
Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa? 
There is yet a third expression panna/ā. The third prapāṭhaka of the 
second aṣṭaka is described as the third (mūḍo) pannā and the eighth 
prapāṭhaka as the eighth pannā. Again at the conclusion of the third 
aṣṭaka, it is said that twelve pannās are complete. So panna/ā appears 
to be a local term for prapāṭhaka or a sub-section. 
 
2.3  The third manuscript in this collection pertains also to the Tait
tirīya branch.7 It contains the prapāṭhakas 3, 5 and 6 of the Taittirīya 
Āraṇyaka. These three prapāṭhakas are copied on two sets of leaves 
numbered separately from 1 to 33 and again from 1 to 31, with colophons at the end of each set. The third prapāṭhaka which deals with 
the Brahmamedha and includes the famous Puruṣasūkta is not identified in the manuscript as such. It is followed by the fifth prapāṭhaka 
which constitutes the Taittirīyopaniṣad. The three subsections of this 
and the leaves got disorganized. Apparently it was used frequently; the broken edge 
of a leaf was joined by stitching. The script is very clear and easy to decipher. 
7  Length 26.7 cm, breadth 2.8 cm, thickness 3.3 cm. There are no separate covers, 
the outer leaves being treated as the covers.

--- Page 231 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
215
Upaniṣad, called vallīs, are clearly separated with the śānti-pāṭha 
occurring at the beginning and the end of each vallī, but the vallīs are 
not named, nor was the Upaniṣad itself. Within each vallī, the 
anuvākas are not distinguished. This is followed by the sixth 
prapāṭhaka which constitutes the Nārāyaṇopaniṣad, also known as 
the Mahānārāyaṇopaniṣad, or Yājñikopaniṣad. This is identified in 
the margin as Nārāyaṇam. 
I mentioned that the leaves are numbered as two separate sets. At 
the conclusion of the first set, which contains the text of the 
prapāṭhakas 3 and 5, there is a colophon by the scribe which reads 
thus: Iṃdra-kaṃṭhaṃ Raghupatinā yidaṃ likhitaṃ “This was written 
by Indra-kaṃṭhaṃ Raghupati.”
In the second and final colophon, the edge of the leaf is broken 
where the scribe’s name occurs; but it must be the same scribe Indra
kaṃṭhaṃ Raghupati. This colophon reads as follows:
śubhakṛt nāma saṃvvatsara kārtika śu 11 śukravāraṃnnāḍu —
upaniṣattulu 5 paṃnnālu svahastaṃgā vrāsi yītamukkalalo 
telidevulapalli vumāmaheśvaruḍiki dānapūrvaṃgā yi[ccinadi]/ 
umāmaheśvarārpaṇam astū/
“In the year named Śubhakṛt, in the bright half of Kārttika, on 
the 11th day which is a Friday, having written with his own hand 
the five paṃnnās of Upaniṣads, given as dāna to Telidevulapalli 
Umāmaheśvaruḍu in the village Ītamukkala. May this be an 
offering to Maheśvara [accompanied by] Umā.” 
This colophon is interesting for several reasons. First “Telidevulapalli” 
is the family name of my grandmother’s father (see 4.0 below). The 
recipient of the dāna, Telidevulappalli Umāmaheśvara must be a 
member of this family and it explains the presence of this manuscript 
in the “grandfather’s chest.”
The year Śubhakṛt, the 36th year of the Jovian cycle, corresponds to 
ad 1782-3 , 1842-43, or 1902-3. If we accept the middle one, kārtika 
śukla 11 translates to Friday 3 November 1843 when the dāna was 
performed.8 
The scribe describes the contents of the manuscript as upaniṣattulu 
5 paṃnnālu, lit. “five pannās of Upaniṣads”. The manuscript contains 
the third, fifth, and sixth prapāṭhakas of the Taittirīya Āraṇyaka. 
8  For the conversion of dates here and in the following pages, I used the pancanga programme designed by Yano and Fushimi, http://www.cc.kyoto-su.ac.
jp/~yanom/pancanga/index.html

--- Page 232 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
216
According to tradition the fifth prapāṭhaka constitutes the Taittirīyo
paniṣad and the sixth the Nārāyaṇopaniṣad. But in the scribe’s view, 
the third prapāṭhaka which deals with the Brahmamedha and includes 
the famous Puruṣasūkta is also an Upaniṣad. 
Now we come to the expression panna/ā, which we encountered 
earlier in the sense of prapāṭhaka. The present manuscript contains 
only three prapāṭhakas. How do they become five pannas? I believe 
that the scribe counted the third prapāṭhaka as 1 panna, the three 
vallīs in the fifth prapāṭhaka as 3 pannas, and the sixth prapāṭhaka 
again 1 panna; together these make (1+3+1=) 5 pannas. Charles Philip 
Brown’s A Telugu-English Dictionary, which is available online, gives 
the meanings of pannam in English and Telugu.9 Here the English 
meaning “One Verse in a chapter of the Vedas” is quite off the mark; 
but the meaning given in Telugu is better: vedamulo aṣṭakamuloni 
bhāgamu, “a part of an aṣṭaka in the Vedas”. As I think back to my 
childhood, I remember to have heard of Brahmins who knew so many 
pannas of Veda by heart. Panna then must be a unit of recitation or 
memorization, that is as much as is denoted by the expression 
prapāṭhaka. Brown’s dictionary, however, does not know the expressions aṭha and parāyatam; probably all the words had a limited currency in śrotriya circles. 
But the most important item of the colophon is the purpose for 
which the manuscript was copied, namely for giving it away as dāna. 
Sanskrit texts on Dharmaśāstra, such as the Caturvargacintāmaṇi, 
speak of vidyādāna which consists of copying a manuscript, or getting 
it copied, and then giving it away as dāna to a learned person. Among 
the Jainas, this type of dāna is given a high importance; there are large 
numbers of manuscripts which were caused to be made for this purpose.10 But among the Brahmanic manuscripts, the present one must 
be one of the few which were copied for the sake of dāna. 
9  “pannamu (p. 0712) [ pannamu ] pannamu. [Tel.] n. One verse in a chapter of 
the Vedas. vedamulo astakamuloni bhagamu.”
10  Cf. Hampa Nagarajaih, “The Concept of Shastra-dana in Jainism,” Jain Journal, 33.3 (Jan 1999), pp. 81-85. The colophons of Jaina manuscripts often mention 
that the manuscripts were copied for the purpose of vidyādāna or śāstradāna. For a 
collection of such colophons, see Jaina Pustaka Praśasti Saṁgraha (A Collection of 
Praśastis and Colophons of Ancient Manuscripts preserved in the Jain Bhandars at 
Patan, Cambay, Jaisalmer, and other Places), first part, ed. Jina Vijaya Muni, Bharatitya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay, 1943 (Singhi Jain Series, No. 18). See also 
Jainagrantha-Praśasti-Saṁgraha, part 1, ed. Jugal Kishor Mukhtar, Vira Seva Man-

--- Page 233 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
217
Finally, the texts copied on these manuscripts are generally those 
which the members of the family were expected to know by heart. The 
manuscripts merely served as aids while memorizing the text. Since 
the Vedic accent is learnt directly from the teacher and not from the 
books, the Vedic manuscripts here do not carry accent marks. The 
Vedic anusvāra, however, is denoted by a special symbol. The manuscripts avoid the other frills like the colophons identifying the text, 
author, the chapter number and the like, probably because these are 
never recited in the ritual.
2.4  The next group consists of texts which are connected with the 
profession of the purohita, namely texts on Gṛhya ritual, vratas, pūjās, 
and stotras. Here each manuscript contains several texts, not always 
clearly separated from one another. There are rarely any end colophons11; sometimes the individual texts are identified in the margin. 
The fourth manuscript in this connection deals mainly with the 
Gṛhya and Purāṇic ritual.12 Here the various sections are identified in 
the margin with their titles such as: Cūrṇike, Daśāvatārāla arghyālu, 
Sthālīpāka, Dahanāgnividhiḥ, Vṛṣotsargaḥ, Dūrvāṣṭamī, Śrāvaṇadvādaśī-nirṇayaḥ, Anantavrata-nirṇayaḥ, Narakacaturdaśī, Dīpāvalī, 
Skanda-ṣaṣṭiḥ, Puṇyāha-lakṣaṇam, Agni-praṇayanam, Yajñapuruṣalakṣaṇam, Tāṃbūlacarvaṇānumatiḥ, Vivāhamadhye kanyakā rajas
valā. 
Among these, the first two items are particularly interesting. The 
first one, entitled cūrṇike is a long ornate passage in Sanskrit which 
the householder is to recite when he gives away his daughter in marriage. It begins with 
svasty aṣṭāsītisahasrāṇām dvijagurudevatyānāṃ /
pākaśāsana-hutāśana-daṇḍadhara-niṛruti-varuṇa-samīraṇavaiśravaṇa-śaśiśekharāṇāṃm āyuṣataḥ kamalāsanasya /
dir, Delhi, 1954; part II: Apabhraṁśa Jainagrantha Praśasti-Saṁgraha, ed. Paramanand Jain Shastri, Vira Seva Mandir Society, Delhi, 1963. 
11  Colophons also occur in the middle of the text, such as, at the conclusion of a 
section or at the conclusion of a chapter, besides at the end of the book or manuscripts. 
12  Length 34.5 cm, breadth 3.5 cm, thickness 4 cm, thickness with covers 5.3. 
Covers are made of wooden boards slightly larger than the leaves. The leaves are 
numbered from 18 to 92; the first 17 leaves are missing.

--- Page 234 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
218
sakaladevatāśiromaṇer āśritaciṃtāmaṇer anavaratasaṃpat 
pradāyakasya /
gaurīramaṇasya śaṃkarasya /
sakalaviśeṣaniṣṭhā-gariṣṭhasya aruṃdhatī-sametasya vaśiṣṭha- 
sya / 
caṇḍaprajñāguroḥ suraguror mṛkaṇḍor muninayanapuṇḍarīkamārtāṇḍa-mārkaṇḍeyasya /
satyabhāṣāvibhūṣaṇasya hariścadrasya /
kumbhasambhavasya /
sītamanaścañcarīka-nīlendīvarārāmasya rāmasya /
rāmavicakṣaṇa-kaṭākṣa-jātāyāyāḥ sītāyāḥ / ...
and concludes, after several leaves, with the words 
daśa pūrveṣāṃ daśāpareṣāṃ madvaṃśyānāṃ mayā saha narakād 
uttīrya brahmaloke nivāsa-siddhyarthaṃ /
yāvadrātri-guṇīkṛtāgniṣṭomātirātra-aptūryama-santapana-vā
japeya-puṃḍarīkāśvamedhādi-śatakratuphalāvāpti-siddhya
rthaṃ /
ihaloke anekabhogasiddhyarthaṃ /
tataḥ viṣṇuloke ācaṃdratārārkaparyaṃtaṃ [lacuna]
svagṛhe [vi]dhyuktaprakāreṇa sahiraṇyodaka-sālaṃkṛta-kanyā
dānam ahaṃ kariṣye /
Here we seem to have a relic of an earlier practice where the bride’s 
father gave such a long discourse. 
This is followed by what are stated to be offerings (arghya) for the 
ten incarnations of Viṣṇu (daśāvatārāla arghyālu). In this interesting 
version of the Daśāvatāra-pūjā (for the full text, see Appendix I), the 
lunar tithi and the time of the day of the manifestation of each avatāra 
is mentioned. The incarnations are praised accordingly in association 
with the relevant tithi. Thus for instance the fish incarnation is extolled 
in the following words: 
caitrakṛṣṇe tu pañcamyāṃ mahāmatsyāvatārabhāk /
gṛhāṇārghyaṃ mayā dattaṃ mahālakṣmyā hare saha //
There is no colophon, nor a date in the manuscript. On the wooden 
cover is incised Śanagavarapu Koṃḍḍayya vrāsukoṃnna … “written 
by Śanagavarapu Koṃḍayya for his own sake ...” The orthography is 
rather peculiar: ka is written as in Kannada script. The first text is 
termed cūrṇike, which is a Kannada form of Sanskrit cūrṇikā. These 
two facts suggest that this manuscript may have been copied in or 
near Karṇāṭaka by Śanagavarapu Koṃḍayya.

--- Page 235 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
219
2.5  The contents of the next manuscript13 are also of similar nature; 
these are Varalakṣmīvratavidhāna, Navagrahapūjā, Pāṇigrahaṇasaṃskāra-vidhāna and so on. In the Varalakṣmīvratavidhāna, the 
vrata is in Sanskrit and the kathā in Telugu. The rest of the manuscript is in Sanskrit.
2.6  The sixth manuscript of the collection is rather small in size.14 The 
leaves have not only very neatly bored holes, but also round corners. 
The well polished covers are made of some soft timber. However, the 
writing is rather indifferent; there are several hands and several texts, 
not clearly differentiated. These are mainly prayers addressed to different deities, sometimes these are named as kavaca-s in the margin. 
Some of the titles are Tripurasuṃdarī-kavaca, Hanumaṃta-kavaca, 
Subrahmaṇya-kavaca. There are also some ślokas in praise of Venka
ṭeśvara with the refrain veṃkaṭeśaṃ bhaje, some on the river Kāverī 
and yet others on the bridge (setu) to Laṅkā built by Rāma. 
2.7  Then there is a completely Telugu text, albeit with a large sprinkling of Sanskrit terms.15 It is a śatakam with the refrain rāmaprabho. 
There are just 11 leaves, containing some 191 verses; then the manuscript breaks off. Here the first verse reads thus: 
pāhi ramaprabho pāhi rāmaprabho 
pāhi bhadrādri16-vaidehi-rāmaprabhabho /
pāhi māṃ pādapadme hitaṃ mohitaṃ 
dehi bhadrādri-vaidehi-rāmaprabhabho //1//
2.8  The texts described so far pertain to the repertoire of a purohita; 
so do the pañcāṅgas. These are elaborate astronomical tables providing for each day of the year the five aṅgas, namely tithi, vāra, nakṣatra, 
yoga and karaṇa. These pañcāṅgas were used by the purohitas while 
fixing the auspicious moments for performing the various rituals, and 
also for various types of astrological forecasts. There were many 
pañcāṅgas in the grandfather’s chest, but one deserves special mention.
13  Length 38.7 cm, breadth 3 cm, thickness 2.4 cm; there are no covers. 
14  Length 21 cm, breadth 3.6 cm, thickness 4 cm, thickness with covers 4.8 cm. 
Covers are made of wooden boards. Some leaves are worm eaten.
15  Length ca. 23 cm, width 3 cm. The right edge is worn off and broken. There are 
11 leaves, incomplete.
16  Bhadrādri in Andhra Pradesh has a famous Rāma temple.

--- Page 236 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
220
Figure 11.3.  Manuscript of the Varṣaphala. See colour section, Plate XIX.
It is a neatly written manuscript with some marginal decorations (Fig. 
11.3).17 It was compiled for Śubhakṛt, which is the 36th year in Jovian 
cycle; the compiler also records the year in other eras, among others, 
Kali 4943 and Śālivāhana Śaka 1764. With these we can identify the 
year as the one beginning on Monday 11 April 1842 and ending on 
Thursday 30 March 1843. The author is Purāṇam Liṃganna, son of 
Liṃgayya, of Kaśyapa-gotra, and resident of Kalvakūru, which is 80 
km from my village Ulichi. Although it is described as Śubhakṛtnāma-saṃvatsara-pañcāṅgamu, it is not the pañcāṅga proper, but 
varṣaphala, lit. “fruit of the year,” i.e. a forecast of the possibilities for 
the coming year, such as the rain fall, crop yield, well-being or otherwise of different castes, prices of various items and so on (see Appendix 
II for extracts). The possibilities are given in terms of certain number 
of parts, perhaps in a scale of 20 because the parts vary between 4 to 
20. Thus it is stated that the rainfall will be 11 parts, crop yield 19 
parts, happiness 13 parts, sorrow 9 parts, truth 13 parts, untruth also 
13 parts, increase in locusts 8 parts, elimination of locusts 7 parts, …. 
increase in the price of emeralds 4 parts, loss 5 parts, … increase in the 
yield of coconuts 17 parts, of bananas 11 parts, of mangoes 17 parts, 
… etc. etc. 
17  Length 41.2cm, breadth 3.3 cm in the middle, at the ends to 2.7; 6 folia.

--- Page 237 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
221
It is customary that on the New Year’s Day (ugādi in Telugu from 
Sanskrit yugādi), which is observed on the first day of the bright half 
of the lunar month Caitra by the Telugus, the purohita reads out this 
varṣaphala to the assembled villagers in the local temple. The text concludes with a phalaśruti: the reward for hearing to the varṣaphala: 
kanyāvanikāñcanadiggajānāṃ gavāṃ sahasraṃ satataṃ 
dvijebhyaḥ /
datvā phalaṃ yal labhate manuṣyaḥ tattatphalāny abdaphalaṃ 
śṛṇotu//
“Whatever merit a man obtains by gifting constantly a thousand 
maidens, [pieces of] land, gold, elephants and cows to the Brahmins, the same merits [he would obtain by hearing] the 
varṣaphala. [Therefore] may you hear [it].” 
2.9  The manuscripts so far pertain to the requisites of śrotriya 
Brahmins who also act as purohitas, dealing as they do with the 
Yajurveda, Gṛhya and other rituals, vratas, pūjās, and stotras. One 
whose intellectual range does not go beyond these is called derisively 
chāndasa. I am pleased that the grandfather’s palm leaf book collection 
did not just cater to the chāndasa demands; it had some kāvya too. 
Actually the best preserved and oft-used manuscript deals with 
kāvya.18 This manuscript contains three separate texts. The first, in 39 
folia, is the second adhyāya of the Kṛṣṇakarṇāmṛta, with a Telugu ṭīkā 
with extracts from the commentary Svarṇacaṣaka by Pasumarti 
Pāpayya Sūri. In contradistinction to the manuscripts which we have 
discussed so far, there is a proper colophon at the end identifying the 
text, the commentary and the adhyāya. The colophon informs further 
that the manuscript was copied by Pālaparti Kṛṣṇamma up to 
Vaiśākha śu 14 in the year Vyaya,19 which can be either Saturday 20 
May 1826, or Monday 17 May 1886. I opt for the former for reasons to 
be explained later (in 4.0 below). 
18  Length 34 cm, breadth 3.2 cm, thickness 3.8 cm, thickness with covers 5.5 cm. 
Covers are made of polished palm leaf stalks. 
19  yidi vedavākyapramāṇa-pārāvāra-pārīṇa-Pasumarti-Tirumalabhaṭṭopādhyā- 
yaputreṇa Koṁḍḍamāṁbbā-garbhaśuktimuktāmaṇinā / Yallasūri-viracitāyāṁ Kar
ṇāmṛtavyākhyāyāṁ Suvarṇa-caṣakākhyāyāṁ dvitīyo’dhyāyaḥ / Maṁgalaṁ mahat / 
śrī śrīṁ jeyunū / śrīkṛṣṇārpaṇam astu / śrīmadanagopālāya namaḥ / śrī śrī śrī śrī śrī / 
Vyayanāma-sam vvatsara-vaiśākha-śu-14-la varaku Pālapartti Kṛṣṇaṁmma karn 
āmr ta-vyākhyānam rem d o āśvāsam vrāsukonenu. Śrīrāmulu nīve kalavu/ śrī śrī 
śrī /

--- Page 238 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
222
The second text, copied in 10 leaves, is a dvipada-kāvya in Telugu 
entitled Ātmaikabodha, a vedantic tract, by Naṭa-mahā-yogānaṃddaavadhūta-svāmi. There is no copyist’s name, but it is certain that it was 
the same Pālaparti Kṛṣṇaṃmma. It was copied three years later in the 
year Virodhin, on Jyeṣṭha bahula 7 (= Tuesday 23 June 1829). The 
beginning and the end of this text are reproduced below. 
Beginning: 
 
śrī[ma]nmahābhāgya-śṛṅgāram agucu /
 
nāmarūpulakella nāṭapaṭṭagucu /
 
bhānukoṭiprabhā-bhāsituḍ agucu /
 
nānā-kriyala-kella nādhāram agucu /
 
vedāntaśāstramula vivaraṃpa baḍucu /…
End:
 
cakkagā yī ayikya cavi gonarayya /
 
yī lokamuna janulu yī dvipada vinna /
 
pāliṃcicūcina paṭṭi vrāsinānu /
 
buddhi kudurai lessa budhajanula cevi /
 
siddhulai yihapara sukhamu goruduru/
The third text (in 21 leaves) is the first sarga of the Rāmāyaṇa, with 
a Telugu ṭīkā. This text is also accompanied by a regular colophon, 
identifying the text, the author and the section; it also informs that the 
manuscript was copied by Pālaparti Kṛṣṇamma up to Phālguṇa śu 10 
in the year Khara 20 (= Monday 12 March 1832).21 
As mentioned earlier, the two Sanskrit texts, viz. the second 
adhyāya of the Kṛṣṇakarṇāmṛta and the first sarga of the Rāmāyaṇa 
are accompanied by a ṭīkā which provides word by word meaning in 
Telugu. Stylistically the two ṭīkās are identical and must have been 
composed by the same person, probably by the scribe Pālaparti 
Kṛṣṇamma himself. I am not in a position to answer why Kṛṣṇamma 
composed the ṭīkā only on the second adhyāya of the Kṛṣṇakarṇāmṛta 
and only on the first sarga of the Rāmāyaṇa, nor can I say when this 
practice of writing ṭīkās in Telugu on Sanskrit texts commenced. 
However, the kind of Telugu used in the ṭīkās is interesting: here the 
retroflex dental ṭa is replaced at certain places by the retroflex sibilant 
20  ity ārṣe śrīmadrāmāyaṇe ādikāvye nāradavākye vālmika(!)prokte saṁ—pra- 
thamasargaḥ / Kharanāma-saṁvvatsara-phālguṇa-śu 10 la-varaku Pālapartti 
kṛṣṇaṁmma vrāśināḍu /
21  There is a gap of about three years between the dates of copying of these three 
texts. But it may not mean that Pālaparti Kṛṣṇamma took three years to copy each of 
the three texts; chances are that he did not copy every day continuously, but did so 
only whenever he had time or inclination.

--- Page 239 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
223
ṣa.22 My great-grand aunt used to tell me that Somayājīs, i.e. those 
who performed the Soma sacrifice, affected this kind of Telugu, which 
she called Somayājula Telugu. Further research is needed to find out 
whether this Somayājula Telugu is recorded in any other text. 
3.0.  Palm Leaf Rolls
Now I come to the palm leaf rolls which were stored in the secret 
drawer of the grandfather’s chest. Here I could retrieve six rolls which 
were fully intact. These are single processed palm leaves, which were 
inscribed and then rolled up into small rolls of about three to four cm 
diameter. Three of these rolls are enclosed inside slightly larger rings 
of blank palm leaves which function like envelopes. In these envelopes 
incisions were made at two places and the incised portions were 
pushed into one another so that the leaf does not roll back (Fig. 11.4). 
Figure 11.4.  Inscribed palm leaf roll and the protective envelope. See colour section, 
Plate XX.
22  For example, this is how the ṭīkā on Kṛṣṇakarṇāmṛta 2.1 runs: abhinavana
vanītasnigdhaṁ āpītadugdhaṁ —abhinava / nūtanamainaṣuvaṁṭṭi / navanīta / 
venna cātanu / snigdhaṁ / svacchamainaṣuvaṁṭṭi / dugdhaṁ / pālugalinaṣuvaṁṭ- 
ṭi/ ….

--- Page 240 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
224
In his South Indian Palaeography, A. C. Burnell makes a brief mention 
of letters written on single palm leaves which were then rolled up and 
tied with a string, but he does not mention legal documents incised on 
single leaves and then preserved inside envelope rolls.23 Nor am I 
aware of any other description of such documents in South India written after Burnell’s time.24 
Therefore, I was eager to know the content of the rolls, but was 
faced with technical problem of unrolling these leaves without damaging them. I filled a bowl with hot water and dropped one palm leaf 
roll into the hot water. It uncoiled itself instantly and also got cleansed 
in the process. Then I dried the leaf between two sheets of newspaper. 
Thus the technical problem of unrolling the palm leaf was solved easily enough, but the problem of deciphering the leaf was rather daunting. 
For, unlike the other palm leaf manuscripts, this one is a legal document and was written by a professional who is usually the village clerk 
(karaṇam) in what appears like a chain writing. While the ideal of 
Telugu script is that each letter should be distinct and separate like a 
pearl, here each letter was linked to the next one in a long chain. One 
has the impression that the scribe incised the entire line without once 
lifting the stylus from the surface of the leaf. I could not decipher 
much from the leaf. I soaked one more roll with the same result. 
23  A. C. Burnell, Elements of South-Indian Palaeography from the fourth to the 
seventh Century ad, being an Introduction to the Study of South-Indian Inscriptions 
and Mss, Trubner & Co., London 1978, 2nd edition “enlarged and improved” [1st 
edn, Mangalore 1874], pp. 89-90: “… in S. India and Ceylon … palm-leaves have 
always been used for this (= letter writing) purpose up to recent times. For this purpose a strip of palm-leaf is cut in the usual form, and smeared with turmeric or some 
similar colour for ornament. The ends are split a little way to secure the whole which 
is folded in a ring, and then fastened by a thread. The earliest complete description 
of such a letter that I know of is in the middle of the 16th century in De Battos’ 
‘Asia’; he says: ‘As outras coussas, que serve ao modo de nossas cartas mesiuas e 
escriptura comum, basta ser a folha escripta e enrolada em si e por chancella atase 
com qualquer linha, ou neruo da mesma palma.’”
24  In a paper entitled “Zwei nepalische Dokumente zur Schuldknechtschaft,” 
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlӓndischen Gesellschaft,136.2 (1986), pp. 434-449, 
Bernhard Kölver reported about similar palm leaf documents from Nepal. Here only 
a portion of the leaf containing the operative part of the document is rolled up and 
sealed with an official seal. These Nepal documents belong to the second half of the 
eleventh century. See also Naoko Takagi, Yorike Chudo & Reiko Maeda, “Conservation and Digitisation of Rolled Palm Leaf Manuscripts in Nepal,” Asian Arts: the 
on-line Journal for the Study and Exhibition of the Arts of Asia, November 14, 2005 
(www.asianart.com).

--- Page 241 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
225
I uncoiled yet a third roll; here I could read some but not at all. What 
I gathered from the three rolls is the following.
3.1  Palm Leaf Roll 1
This is rather a small document, with a length of 22.8 cm and a width 
of 2.5 cm (see Fig. 11.5). There are 4 lines of writing on the recto side 
and one and half lines on the verso. I could decipher just a little at the 
beginning and at the end. The beginning states that this is a document 
issued in the year Vibhava on Śrāvaṇa śuddha 1. The document is 
addressed to Telidevulapalli—bhoṭlu, ditto25 Guvvaṃbhoṭlu, and 
ditto Pullaṃbhoṭlu. At the end of the document is the signature of the 
scribe: “This is the handwriting (dastūri) of Mantri Veṃkayya.” It is 
followed by the signature of the person on whose name the document 
is issued. The signature reads “Koṭappa vrālu”. In Telugu legal documents, it is customary to write “vrālu” after the signature. 
Figure 11.5a.  Palm leaf Roll 1, Recto. See colour section, Plate XVIIIa.
Figure 11.5b.  Palm Leaf Roll 1, Verso. See colour section, Plate XVIIIb.
3.2  Palm Leaf Roll 2
The second document is 43.0 cm long and 2.3 cm wide and carries 
3 lines of writing on each side. I could decipher a little more in this 
document, which was issued in the year Pramādin (1819-20 or 
1879-80) on Jyeṣṭha bahula 12. It was addressed to Telidevulapalli 
Rāmakṛṣṇamma, ditto Gurumūrti, ditto Piccayya. Probably these three 
are brothers and joint holders of some agricultural land. The document 
is issued by a farmer named Cuṃcu Koṭappa.26 He took from the three 
25  The Telugu expression is “ā”; I understand this to mean that Guvvaṁbhoṭlu 
also has the same family name “Telidevulapalli.” 
26  Several families still bear this name in my village. These are rich landholders, 
belonging to the Kamma caste.

--- Page 242 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
226
persons mentioned above a piece of land on lease (kavulu); he owes 
(ruṇam) them the lease money which he cannot pay now; he promises 
to pay it by Mārgiśīrṣa ba 30 of the same year… [which is about 6 
months hence]. The document concludes with the signatures of the 
farmer, the scribe and the witnesses. 
3.3  Palm Leaf Roll 3
The third roll is much larger with a length of 33.2 cm and width of 2.4 
cm. There are 6 lines of writing on the recto and 5 lines on the verso. 
I was able to read much of this document if not the whole and feel 
that the document records a very important event in the history of the 
family. Fortunately it is dated both in the year of the Jovian cycle and 
in the Christian era. 
The document begins by stating that “This is an agreement (kharā
runāmā) caused to be written in the year Nala, on the 11th day of the 
dark half of Bhādrapada, that is, in 1856 September, on the date (tedī) 
23, by the purohitas of the Vulichi village Māmiḷḷapalli Buccaṃbhoṭlu, 
ditto Kanakaṃbhoṭlu, ditto Koṭappa.” Buccaṃbhoṭlu and Kanakaṃ
bhoṭlu are probably brothers. The third one apparently was Kanakaṃ
bhoṭlu’s son; at the end of the document, he signs on his father’s 
behalf. 
The agreement deals with the partition of the agricultural lands 
(mānyaṃ) which were endowed to the family by the village for performing the paurohitya. Therefore it is emphasised that the partition 
is done in accordance with the adjudication made by the village clerk 
(karaṇam) and the senior land-holders (pedda kāpulu). The fields are 
situated in three different locations, to the west of the village, to the 
east, and on the banks of a water reservoir. These are now divided 
between the two brothers, both sharing the liabilities and incomes. 
The document concludes by stating that “This is the agreement 
caused to be written with our approval.” Then follow the signature of 
Buccaṃbhoṭlu, signature of Koṭappa on behalf of his father Kanakaṃ
bhoṭlu; signature of the scribe (vulichi koṃḍalarāyuḍu dastūrī), and 
the signatures of four witnesses. 
I recall from my childhood that we had holdings in these three locations; and at each place there were two equal halves, one belonging to 
us and the other to our immediate neighbours who likewise shared 
the paurohitya of the village. Now I know that the partition was done 
on 23 September 1856.

--- Page 243 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
227
4.0  Production and Collection of Manuscripts
As shown above, these palm leaf manuscripts were produced by individual Brahmins for their own use or for the use of their family members. In one rare instance, the manuscript was produced for the 
purpose of dāna. 
It must be added that the nine manuscripts and six palm leaf rolls 
that I retrieved do not constitute the whole collection of the chest. As 
this chest was known in the family as “the chest of palm leaf books”, I 
assume that it contained mainly documents made of palm leaves; later 
paper documents were also added. In my childhood, there used to be 
many more manuscripts in the chest and the family tried to preserve 
these documents as best as they could, but several were damaged 
through the generally humid climate of the sea coast and the frequent 
cyclones. But the few that remain suggest the nature of the collection 
in this śrotriya family: primarily Sanskrit texts connected with the 
family’s Vedic śākhā and with the family’s profession of paurohitya, 
some poetry of the devotional kind, some Telugu texts of similar 
nature. 
The chest is referred to as “grandfather’s chest”. It was never specified who this grandfather was, nor did I ask this question until now. 
The personal names inscribed in the manuscripts point mainly to two 
families: Telidevulapalli27 and Mamiḷḷapalli.28 The first is the family of 
my grandmother’s father; the second is the family into which my 
grandmother’s father’s sister was married. These two families are thus 
mutually related, and the manuscripts of both families are in this collection. One of these manuscripts contained a clue to the possible 
owner of the chest. In the manuscript containing the Kṛṣṇakarṇāmṛta 
(see 2.9 above), on the verso side of the last folio of this section, there 
is the signature of my grandmother’s father “Telidevulapalli Ātreyulu” 
and the date “vṛṣa-nāma-saṃvatsara-phālguṇa-śuddha 5.” Vṛṣa is the 
15th year of the Jovian cycle and corresponds to ad 1821-22 or 188182. In the case of my grandmother’s father, 1881-82 would be more 
appropriate, and Phālguṇa śuddha 5 would then translate to Wednes
day 22 February 1882.29 Is this the date on which he acquired the 
manuscript or the date when he read the Kṛṣṇakarṇāmṛta? Whatever 
27  See sections 2.1, 2.3, 3.1 and 3.2. 
28  See section 3.3. 
29  Therefore the manuscript in question must have been copied prior to this date, 
namely in 1826, 1829, 1832.

--- Page 244 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
228
be the case, he appears to be “the” grandfather who owned the chest 
and who collected the manuscripts that were preserved in the chest.30 
The manuscripts preserved in the chest were mainly produced in the 
family, but the grandfather appears to have also collected those produced elsewhere. Three manuscripts clearly came from outside the 
family. The Varṣaphala of 1842-43 (see 2.8 above) was composed and 
scribed by Purāṇaṃ Linganna at a place called Kalvakūru which is 
some 80 km distant from my village. The manuscript containing texts 
on Gṛhya and Purāṇic ritual (see 2.4) was copied still farther away in 
or near Karṇāṭaka. It is not known where Pālaparti Kṛṣṇamma copied 
the Kṛṣṇakarṇāmṛta and other texts during the years from 1826 to 
1832 (see 2.9), but he does not seem to belong to the circle of our relatives. 
5.0  Epilogue 
This account shows that palm leaf manuscripts were actively produced 
and collected till the end of the nineteenth century in my area in the 
coastal Andhra Pradesh. I regret my narrative is rather incoherent, 
partly because I cannot identify the personal names found in the 
manuscripts, partly because of my inability to fully decipher the legal 
documents in the palm leaf rolls. I wish, had this workshop organised 
some ten years earlier; then I could have at least consulted my father’s 
best friend who could read the legal documents and perhaps also 
identify many of the persons mentioned there. My father, of course, 
would have asked: why perform gata-jala-setu-bandhanam? Why 
build a bridge across waters which are no more there? But then isn’t 
that what we Indologists do much of the time? 
Postscript: On a visit to Vadodara in October 2008, I donated the 
palm leaf books and rolls to the Oriental Institute of the Maharaja 
Sayajirao University of Baroda, retaining for myself the two manuscripts of the Varṣaphala and Kṣṇakarṇāmta, and one of the palm 
leaf rolls.
30  His son who lived into the twentieth century did not collect palm leaf manuscripts any more but only printed books, on each of which he signed in English with 
a flourish “This book belongs to …”

--- Page 245 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
229
Appendix I: Daśāvatāra-arghyālu 
This small text is constituted by four different strands: i. enumeration 
of the incarnations (verse 1), ii. time of the day of descent of each 
avatāra (verse 2), (iii) the lunar tithi of each descent (verses 3-8), and 
(iv) the praise of each avatāra in association of with the tithi (verses 
9-30). These four strands do not agree on the identity of the eighth 
and ninth avatāras. In the first strand, they are [Bala]rāma and 
Buddha; in the second they are Buddha and Kṛṣṇa; in the third and 
fourth Balabhadra (i.e. Balarāma) and Kṛṣṇa. Consequently, the time 
of Balarāma’s descent is missing, so too the tithi of Buddha’s manifestation. Again within each strand there are inconsistencies or at least 
lacunae. In the fourth strand, the praise concludes with the refrain 
gṛhāṇārghyaṃ mayā dattam which is missing in the case of Vāmana. 
Likewise, the tithi of Narasiṃha’s manifestation is missing in this 
strand. Verse 7 correctly places Kṛṣṇa’s birthday on Śrāvaṇa kṛ 8, but 
verse 27 has it on śukla 8. Finally, while verse 2 states that Kalkin will 
manifest himself in the evening (sāyaṃ), verse 29 mentions the time 
as that of sunrise (sūryodayavelāyām). Even so, it is an interesting text. 
I have silently corrected the orthography and numbered the verses; 
metrical and syntactical anomalies are reproduced as they are, but 
these are underlined. 
matsyaḥ kūrmo varāhaś ca narasiṃhaś ca vāmanaḥ /
rāmo rāmaś ca rāmaś ca bauddhaḥ kalkim eva ca31 //1// 
ahnor madhye vāmanā rāmacandro kroḍāditye cāparāhṇe vibhāge /
matsyaḥ kūrmo buddha-kalkyau ca sāyaṃ kṛṣṇo rātrau kālasandhyā 
nṛsiṃhaḥ //2//
caitre tu kṛṣṇapañcamyāṃ bhagavān matsyarūpabhṛt / 
jyeṣṭhakṛṣṇa-caturdaśyāṃ kūrmarūpo bhavedd hariḥ //3// 
caitrakṛṣṇa-trayodaśyāṃ harir vārāharūpabhṛt / 
 
narasiṃhaś caturdaśyāṃ vaiśākhe śuklapakṣake //4// 
māse bhādrapade śukle dvādaśyāṃ vāmano hariḥ / 
 
mārgakṛṣṇadvitīyāyāṃ rāmaḥ paraśurūpabhṛt32 //5// 
caitraśuddhanavamyāṃ tu rāmo daśarathātmajaḥ / 
śukle tṛtīyāvaiśākhe balabhadro bhavedd hariḥ //6// 
kṛṣṇāṣṭamyāṃ nabhomāse kṛṣṇo bhūlokarakṣakaḥ / 
 
nabhasye ca dvitīyāyām śukle kalkir bhaviṣyati //7// 
 
31  A more popular and metrically correct reading is buddhaḥ kalkī ca te daśa //
32  MS ºdṛk.

--- Page 246 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
230
viṣṇor daśāvatārāṇām tithayor atyantapuṇyayoḥ /
upoṣyaitān narair etān tithayo muktidāyakāḥ //8//
vedānām apahartuś ca saumukhākhyasya rakṣasaḥ / 
vināśanāya ca bhūmau vai vedānāṃ sthāpanāya ca //9//
caitrakṛṣṇe tu pañcamyāṃ mahāmatsyāvatārabhāk /
gṛhāṇārghyaṃ mayā dattaṃ mahālakṣmyā hare saha //10// 
jyeṣṭhe kṛṣṇa-caturdaśyāṃ kūrmarūpadharāya ca /
bhūbhāravahanārthāya gṛhāṇārghyaṃ namo’stu te //11// 
bhuvi sahadbhi nirmagnāṃ kroḍarūpa janārdana/
daṃṣṭrayor dharate tubhyam arghyaṃ dāsyāmy upoṣitah //12//
caitrakṛṣṇa-trayodaśyāṃ harir vārāharūpabhṛt33 /
gṛhāṇārghyaṃ mayā dattaṃ vrataṃ suvratam astu te //13// 
hiraṇyakavadhārdhāya prahlādānugrahāya ca /
sarvalokahitārthāya stambhe jāto nṛkesariḥ //14//
duṣṭadaityapraśamanaṃ sadā sajjanapālakaṃ / 34
gṛhāṇārghyaṃ mayā dattaṃ stambhajāto svayaṃ hariḥ //15//
taptahāṭakakeśānta jvalatpāvakalocana /
vajrāyudhanabhasparśam divyasiṃha namo ’tu te //16// 
vāmanāpharyeṇa ? site nabhasya saśroṇe ? ma(ṃ)dhyāhnadvādaśi- 
dine /
bandhanāya baler jāto vāmanārghyaṃ namo’stu te //17//
vāmana(ā)ya vaṭo tubhyaṃ daṇḍine chatradhāriṇe /
kamaṃḍaludharaṃ devaṃ kājinaṃ labhate namaḥ //18//
surarājyaṃ pratiṣṭhāpya aditer garbhavāridhau /
vāmano’yam samabhyarca kasyapo brāhmaṇo varān //19// 
mārgaśīrṣe kṛṣnapakṣe dvitīyāyāṃ bhṛgoḥ sutaḥ /
śrīmatparaśurāmo’tra jātaḥ somānvayakṣaye //20// 
gṛhāṇārghyaṃ mayā dattaṃ brahmacarye vidhīyate /
daśānanavadhārthāya bhūbhārottaraṇāya ca //21//
paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṃ jāto rāmaḥ svayaṃ hariḥ //
caitramāse site pakṣe navamyāṃ ca punarvasau //22//
madhyāhne karkaṭe lagne jāto rāmaḥ svayaṃ hariḥ /
kausalyāgarbhasaṃbhūta rāvaṇāntaka rāghava //23//
gṛhāṇārghyaṃ mayā dattaṃ sītayā saha rāghava /
tretādyakṣatṛtīyāyāṃ vaiśākhe yaduvaṃśajāḥ //24//
balabhadrāvatāreṇa gṛhāṇārghyaṃ namo’stu te /
33  MS ºdṛk.
34  The sentence is incomplete. Perhaps a line is missing here, which contains the 
verb related to the words in the accusative, and also the tithi of Narasimha’s descent.

--- Page 247 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
231
jātaḥ kaṃsavadhārthāya bhūbhārottaraṇāya ca //25//
dānavānāṃ vināśāya vasudevakulodbhava /
pāṃḍavānāṃ hitārthāya dharmasaṃsthāpanāya ca //26//
kauravānāṃ vināśāya vasudevakulodbhava /
śrāvaṇyām śuklapakṣe tu aṣṭamyāṃ niśi rohiṇau //27//
gṛhāṇārghyaṃ mayā dattaṃ devakyā sahito hariḥ /
śukle bhādrapade viṣṇur dvitīyāyāṃ ca kalkyaye //28//
gṛhāṇārghyaṃ mayā dattaṃ sākṣāj jāto hariḥ svayaṃ //
sūryodayavelāyāṃ trijagajjyotir ātmane //29//
gṛhāṇārghyaṃ mayā dattaṃ sākṣāj jāto hariḥ svayaṃ //30//
śrīkṛṣṇārpaṇam astu / śrīveṃkaṭeśāya namaḥ /
Accordingly, the ten incarnations manifested themselves on the fol
lowing lunar tithis at the given segments of the day: 
1 
Matsya 
Caitra 
kṛ 5 
sāyam
2 
Kūrma 
Jyeṣṭha 
kṛ 14 
sāyaṃ 
3 
Varāha 
Caitra 
kr 13 
aparāhṇe
4 
Narasiṃha 
Vaiśākha 
śu 14 
sandhyāyām 
5 
Vāmana 
Bhādrapada 
śu 12 
madhyāhṇe
6 
Paraśurāma 
Mārgaśira 
kṛ 2 
aparāhṇe
7 
Rāma 
Caitra 
śu 9 
aparāhṇe
8 
Balarāma 
Vaiśākha 
śu 3 
…
 
Buddha 
 …. 
… 
sāyam
9 
Kṛṣṇa 
Śrāvaṇa 
kṛ/śu 8 
rātrau 
10 Kalkin 
Āṣāḍha 
śu 2 
sāyam /sūryodayavelāyām

--- Page 248 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
232
Appendix II: Varṣaphala
by Purāṇaṃ Liṃganna, son of Liṃgayya, of Kaśyapa-gotra, and 
resident of Kalvakūru for the year Śubhakṛt / Kali 4943 / Śālivāhana 
Śaka 1764 (ad 1842-43).
Beginning: 
śrīrāma // śubham astu // avighnam astu // śubhakṛt-nāma-saṃvat
sara-pañcāṅgam //
 śrīmad-vāgīśa-lakṣmīśa-gaurīśādy-akhilāmaraiḥ /
 yaḥ pūjyate mudā nityam taṃ vande dviradānanam //
 acintyāvyaktarūpāya nirguṇāya guṇātmane /
 samasta-jagadādhāra-mūrttaye brahmaṇe namaḥ //
 vāgīśādyāḥ sumanasaḥ sarvārthānām upakrame /
 yaṃ natvā kṛtakṛtyāḥ syus taṃ namāmi gajānanam //
 nirvighnārtham upāsmahe śivam ajaṃ viṣṇuṃ śivāṃ bhāratīm /
 lakṣmī viṣṇum atha guruṃ gaṇapatiṃ nandīśvaraṃ ṣaṇmu
kham //
 ādityendu-mahīja-saumya-guru-śukrārkātmajāḥ hidvajān /
 indrājñarkasutā surābdhi eva maruchid viśvarām dvikpatīm //
 vedaśāstrārtha-tattvajñam siddhāntāpagapāragam /
 guruṃ namāmi śirasā sarvalokahite ratam // 
 śrīmac-cheṣadharādharādhivasitaṃ śrīveṃkaṭeśaṃ smarann 
 ādau bhaktajanepsitārtha-phaladaṃ brahmādidevastutam /
 paścān matkuladaivataṃ śaśidharaṃ śrīkalvakūrīpurī-
 vāsaṃ śailasutāmanoharam ahaṃ śrīrāmalingaṃ bhaje // 
svasti samasta-kalyāṇa-bhājananasya śrauta-smārta-nitya-naimit
tika-kāmya-karmānuṣṭhāna-kriyāparatantra-vyavahāra-jñānabhūtasya asya saṃvatsarasya kaliyu[ge] gatābdāḥ 4943 eṣyābdāḥ 
427[0]57 asmin vikramārka-yudhiṣṭhira-kaliyuge śakagatā yudhiṣ
ṭhira-śaka-pramāṇa-saurābdāḥ 344 vikramārka-śaka-pramāṇasaurābdāḥ 135 vartamāna-śālivāhana-śaka-gata-saurābdāḥ 1764 
ṣaṣṭivarṣāṇāṃ madhye prabhavādigatābdāḥ 35 asmin vartamāne 
vyavahārika-cāndramānena śubhakṛt-nāma-saṃvatsarasya rājā can- 
draḥ mantrī candraḥ senāpatiś candraḥ saśyādhipatir guruḥ dhā
nyādhipatiś candraḥ rasādhipatiḥ śaniḥ nirasādhipatir budhaḥ …
f 3a śrīmatkaśyapa-gotra-vani yo śrīmān purāṇānvayaḥ /
 
 kṣīrāmbhonidhipūrṇimāhimakaraḥ siddhāntaśāstrārthavit /
 liṃgāryātmatanūbhavo budhahitaḥ śrīliṃganāryāgraṇiḥ /
 paṃccāṃggaṃ kritivatsaraṃ sa kṛte śrīkalvakūrī purī //

--- Page 249 of 338 ---
grandfather’s palm leaf books
233
End 
vindhysyottaradeśe bārhaspatyamānābdo grāhyaḥ / bārhaspatyamānena Parīdhāvī saṃvatsaraḥ vaiśākha ba 9 paryantam ata ūrdhvaṃ 
pramādīca nāma saṃvatsaraḥ / taddakṣiṇadeśe cāndramānābdo 
grāhyaḥ / cāndramānena śubhakṛt nāma saṃvatsaraḥ / śeṣācalasya 
dakṣiṇadeśe sauramānābdo grāhyaḥ / sauramānena caitra śu 1 
prabhṛty ataḥ paraṃ śubhakṛt nāma saṃvatsaraḥ / Pañcāṅgaśravaṇa-phalam āha /
kanyāvanikāñcanadiggajānāṃ gavāṃ sahasraṃ satataṃ dvijebhyaḥ /
datvā phalaṃ yallabhate manuṣyaḥ tattat-phalāny abdaphalaṃ 
śṛṇotu //
śrīkṛṣṇārpaṇam astu / śrī śrī śrī …
Bibliography
Burnell, A. C. 1978. Elements of South-Indian Palaeography from the fourth to the 
seventh Century ad, being an Introduction to the Study of South-Indian Inscriptions 
and Mss. London: Trübner & Co., 2nd edition “enlarged and improved.” [1st edn, 
Mangalore 1874].
Kölver, Bernhard. 1986. “Zwei nepalische Dokumente zur Schuldknechtschaft.” 
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlӓndischen Gesellschaft, 136.2.
Muni, Jina Vijaya (ed). 1943. Jaina Pustaka Praśasti Saṁgraha, first part, (Singhi Jain 
Series, No. 18). Bombay: Bharatitya Vidya Bhavan. 
Mukhtar, Jugal Kishor (ed). 1954. Jainagrantha-Praśasti-Saṁgraha, part 1. Delhi: 
Vira Seva Mandir.
Shastri, Paramanand Jain (ed). 1963. Apabhraṁśa Jainagrantha Praśasti-Saṁgraha, 
part II. Delhi: Vira Seva Mandir Society. 
Nagarajaih, Hampa. 1999. “The Concept of Shastra-dana in Jainism.” Jain Journal, 
33.3 (Jan).
Rao, V. Narayana. 1994. “Purāṇa as Brahminic Ideology.” In: Purana Perennis: Reci
procity and Transformation in Hindu and Jaina Texts (ed. by Wendy Doniger). 
New York: SUNY Press.
Sarma, Sreeramula Rajeswara. 1985. Writing Material in Ancient India. (Aligarh 
Oriental Series, No. 5.) Aligarh: Viveka Publications. 
Takagi, Naoko, Yorike Chudo & Reiko Maeda, 2005. “Conservation and Digitisation 
of Rolled Palm Leaf Manuscripts in Nepal,” Asian Arts: the on-line Journal for the 
Study and Exhibition of the Arts of Asia, (www.asianart.com).

--- Page 250 of 338 ---
sreeramula rajeswara sarma
234

--- Page 251 of 338 ---
rāmasubrahmaṇya’s manuscripts
235
 
 
chapter twelve
Rāmasubrahmaṇya’s Manuscripts: 
Intellectual Networks in the Kaveri Delta, 
1693-1922
Dominik Wujastyk
In the last decade of the seventeenth century, in South India, King 
Śāhaji of Thanjavur founded an academic community at the village of 
Tiruviśainallūr, on the banks of the river Kāverī near Kumbakonam. 
In what follows, I report on a visit to the village in 2005, and describe 
the work and manuscript library of Rāmasubba Śāstrin, an active 
scholar from about 1900 whose descendants today energetically maintain some of the traditions founded by King Śāhaji’s academy.
Rāmasubba’s Family
I took the photograph in Fig. 12.1 in 2005. We see a gentleman, 
Mr V. S***, his uncle and the head of the family, Mr R***, and his 
son. In front of them is a pile of written works in Sanskrit that they 
wished to be displayed when I photographed them. On our right are 
printed books, on the left are palm-leaf manuscripts. What cultural 
and historical understandings can we bring to bear on this image?
Tiruviśainallūr Today
The photograph was taken during a visit to a village in the Thanjavur 
district of South India. Tiruviśainallūr is a village close to the betterknown temple city of Kumbakonam, in the fertile valley of the Kaveri 
River, and north of the great temple city of Thanjavur (Fig. 12.2). It is 
a tiny village, scarcely more than a row of houses.

--- Page 252 of 338 ---
dominik wujastyk
236
Figure 12.1.  Rāmasubba’s Descendants, 2005. See colour section, Plate XXI.
Śāhaji and the Foundation of a New College
In or just before 1693, an academic community was founded at this 
village of Tiruviśainallūr,1 near Kumbakonam on the banks of the 
river Kāverī, by King Śāhaji of Thanjavur (regn. 1684-d. 28 Sept 1711, 
see Fig. 12.4).2 To be more precise, he arranged for homes and land in 
the village to be donated tax-free and in perpetuity to a group of 46 
scholars and their descendants.3
Some of these scholars settled in the village itself, while others made 
Thanjavur itself their base. But they formed a single intellectual community, networked not only through their academic work but in many 
cases also through ties of family and origin. In the years to come, the 
scholars of this college would produce a flood of literature on all 
aspects of the arts and sciences, including linguistics, theology, philosophy, law and ethics, drama and medicine. The manuscripts of 
much of this work are today housed in the great Thanjavur library. 
1  A.k.a. Tiruviśalūr, and variously called “Thiruvishaloor” or “Tiruvisalur” by the 
present residents of the village and also in inscriptions (e.g., “Tiruviśalûr” in 
Hultzsch et al. 1895-1913: passim). 
2  For Śāhaji’s date, see Subrahmanyam 2001: 150. The following account draws 
on the seminal article by Kuppuswamy Sastri (1904). 
3  Idem, 128, 179, 130, 134. This type of land grant was called sarvamānyam.

--- Page 253 of 338 ---
rāmasubrahmaṇya’s manuscripts
237
Many of these works have been printed; an even greater number are 
still in manuscript form, unpublished, and are yet to be integrated 
into contemporary scholarship.
Figure 12.2.  The Kaveri delta rice bowl. Image courtesy of Google Earth. 
See colour section, Plate XXIV.
Rāmabhadradīkṣita
One of the first scholars to arrive in Tiruviśainallūr in 1693 was the 
great Rāmabhadra Dīkṣita (fl. 1638-), who moved to this new centre 
from his home village of Kaṇḍaramāṇikyam, a unique village that 
produced several of the most impressive intellectuals of seventeenth 
and eighteenth century South India.4 The Marathi land-grant which 
recorded the college endowment noted that Rāmabhadra was to 
receive four shares of the gift, a higher proportion than other scholars, 
presumably in recognition of his already substantial reputation.5 His 
presence alone bestowed on the new college an academic probity that 
would ensure that it acted as a magnet to fellow scholars as well as 
students seeking education.
Rāmabhadra was a pivotal intellectual figure of the period. Through 
his education, he was in receipt of scholarly influences from some 
4  Kuppuswamy Sastri (1904:126–7) lists the works of eight other leading scholars 
born in Kaṇḍaramāṇikyam. He notes that it was, in 1904, “almost in ruins.” On 
Rāmabhadra’s work, see also Krishnamachariar 1937:§160, who notes that Rāmabha
dra’s brother Rāmacandra (a. of Keralābharaṇa) was a “humorous poet.”
5  Ibid., 128. Kuppuswami Sastri does not give precise reference to this land grant, 
and at the time of writing it is no longer traceable in the TMSSM Library, Thanjavur.

--- Page 254 of 338 ---
dominik wujastyk
238
Figure 12.3.  Tiruviśalūr main street.
of the greatest teachers of the age, including Nīlakaṇṭhadīkṣita of 
Madurai, the pupil of Appayya Dīkṣita.6 Through his students and his 
own writings, he amplified and passed on the learning to a huge number of later scholars. He is just one example of the founding professors 
of Śāhaji’s college.
One of Rāmabhadra’s colleagues in the original foundation by 
Śāhaji was a scholar named Śrīdharaveṅkaṭeśa. Śrīdharaveṅkaṭeśa 
wrote an account of the history of Śāhaji and his Thanjavur court, the 
Śāhendravilāsa, that has long been an important source for historians 
of Early Modern South India.7 However, as we shall see below, it was 
Śrīdharaveṅkaṭeśa’s example of religious tolerance and generosity as 
well as his legacy of powerful songs of religious devotion that have 
kept his memory alive for most South Indians until today.
6  On these intellectual connections, see further Wujastyk 2007: passim.
7  Raghavan 1952.

--- Page 255 of 338 ---
rāmasubrahmaṇya’s manuscripts
239
Viṭṭhoji
Śarabhoji II’s
descent established
from Viṭṭhoji
Māloji
Śāhaji m. Tukai
(also m. Jijai →Śivāji)
Ekojī m. Dīpāmbikā
r. 1676– abdicated 1683, d. 1687?
Tryambakayajvan
Śāhajī
r. 1684–
d. 28 Sept. 1711
Ānandarāyamakhī
Sarabhojī I
r. 1711–
d. 1730
Tulajā I (=Tukkojī)
r. 1730–d. 1735
Contested interregnum:
Ekojī II (1 year),
His Queen Sujanā Bāī (r. 2 yrs),
Pretender Shāhujī
(= Kattu Rājā) r. 1738–1739
Pratāpasiṃha
r. 1739– d. 1763
Contested
interregnum:
Amarasiṃha
r. 1787–1798
Tulajī II
r. 1763–1787
Schwartz
d. 1797/8
Śarabhojī II
r. 1798–1833
Adopted by Tulajī II
Gerick
Śivājī
r. 1833–d. 1855
Lapse
Figure 12.4.  The Marāṭha Kings of Thanjavur and their key advisors .
 
Rāmasubba’s Family
The gentleman on the left of the picture in Fig. 12.1 is Mr S***, a kind, 
pious and articulate man. We met at the cultural centre that he runs in 
Tiruviśalūr that celebrates the saintly life of Śrīdharaveṅkaṭeśa, who is 
popularly known as Ayyāvaḷ. Ayyāvaḷ is today remembered as a 
smārta brahman who composed Sanskrit devotional hymns (bhajans) 
of great fervour and enduring appeal (Fig. 12.5). In the 1930s, Krishna

--- Page 256 of 338 ---
dominik wujastyk
240
machariar noted that he was “celebrated in South India for his piety 
and devotion”.8 Milton Singer remarked in the 1950s that Ayyāvaḷ’s 
bhajans were an important feature of the religious life of Madras,9 and 
an article in The Hindu newspaper as recently as 2003 described his 
memory as follows:
Ayyaval, an erudite Karnataka smartha Brahmin, having spurned the 
ministerial offer made to him by the then ruler of Mysore, embarked 
upon a kshetradanam (pilgrimage) of the south along with his wife, 
Sundari Ammal, and settled down in the village of Tiruvisainallur. The 
place was then known as Shajirajapuram since it was gifted by Shaji II 
to 45 pandits well versed in the Vedas (AD 1685–AD 1712). In fact, 
the sign board carrying the name of the village as Shajirajapuram was 
seen at the entrance to the village on the Veppathur-Kumbakonam 
road till 1950, and it was an ‘inam’ village up to 1952.10
8  Krishnamachariar 1937:§162.
9  Singer 1963.
10  Krishnamurthy 2003.
Figure 12.5.  Śrīdhara Veṅkaṭeśvara, a.k.a. Ayyāvaḷ (Contemporary devotional 
rendering). See colour section, Plate XXII.

--- Page 257 of 338 ---
rāmasubrahmaṇya’s manuscripts
241
An annual ten-day festival in November in the village still draws huge 
crowds for a visit to the miraculous well in the compound of Ayyāvaḷ’s 
former home, and for the singing of devotional songs.
Mr S***’s family retained strong traditions of their family history. 
In fact, it was Mr S***’s uncle’s wife, who preferred to remain outside 
the photo frame of Fig. 12.1, who seemed to be the main holder of the 
family memory, and many of the details were recounted by her. In the 
attic of Mr S***’s home there was a large pile of disintegrating documents. Mr S*** and his uncle insisted on giving me several books and 
a manuscript from this collection. The family were adamant, and 
insisted that they could no longer read and understand these documents, and that they would be in better hands with a scholar of 
Sanskrit. Their generosity and trust makes it particularly pleasing to 
be able to report on some of these documents in the present paper.
So what can be discovered about the heritage of this family and its 
place in this village?
Rāmasubba’s Descendants
The ancestor that Mr S*** considered to be the most important member of his family was called Rāmasubba, and the family retained his 
portrait as show in Fig. 12.6. The family tree is, to my best understanding, as given in Fig. 12.7.
As I subsequently learned, Rāmasubba was the familiar name of 
Rāmasubrahmaṇya Śāstrī, a learned scholar, who lived in Tiruviśainal
lūr from about 1840 until his death in 1922. Rāmasubba was well 
known enough that some of his works are mentioned with approval in 
Krishnamachariar’s History of Classical Sanskrit Literature:
Ramasubrahmanya Sastrin was son of Rāmaśankara and grandson of 
Asvatthanārāyaṇa and disciple of Śivarāma. He was an authority on 
Śāstras and lived at Ṭiruvasanallur, Tanjore Dt. He was born in the last 
thirties and died in 1922 AD.11
11  Krishnamachariar 1937:§917.

--- Page 258 of 338 ---
dominik wujastyk
242
Figure 12.6.  Rāmasubba Śāstrī. See colour section, Plate XXIII.
Krishnamachariar noted that Rāmasubba Śāstri was particularly 
respected for his commentaries on the Upaniṣads, and that in his 
Alaṅkāraśāstravilāsa he criticised Vidyānātha’s definition of poetry12, 
and that he wrote the devotional work Bhaktyānandaprakāśa.13 But 
Rāmasubba wrote many other scholarly works on topics including 
chandas, alaṅkāra, dharma, mīmāṃsā and especially vedānta.14
It is interesting to note too that Rāmasubba’s manuscript library 
was known to Eugene Hultzsch, who listed most of the titles in his 
Reports on Sanskrit Manuscripts of Southern India of 1895-1905.15 
Hultzsch noted that,
A large number of works in the list were composed by Râmasubrahmaṇya 
Śâstri or Râmasubba Śâstri, the son of Râmaśaṁkara and grandson of 
Aśvatthanârâyaṇa.16
12  Ibid., citing TC [Kuppuswami Sastri et al. 1916-] II, 2528, 2532, 2541.
13  Ibid., citing TC II, 2520.
14  Hultzsch 1895-1905:v.2, 69, 71.
15  Hultzsch 1895-1905:v.2, xiii, §15, 67–71, et passim.
16  Hultzsch 1895-1905:v.2, xiii.

--- Page 259 of 338 ---
rāmasubrahmaṇya’s manuscripts
243
Figure 12.7.  Rāmasubrahmaṇyaśāstrin’s descendants, described by his family, 
Tiruviśainallūr, 2005.
Hultzsch’s Reports listed sixty-five manuscripts in Rāmasubba’s 
library, and suggested that this was not the whole collection. The list 
was dominated by palm-leaf manuscripts (49 items) mainly on 
Dharmaśāstra, and paper manuscripts (17 items) mainly on Vedānta. 
The manuscripts were predominantly in the Grantha script. Most of 
Rāmasubba’s own compositions were written on paper manuscripts 
in Grantha script.
The Reports included over twenty manuscripts of works authored 
by Rāmasubba himself.17 These were:
1. Matatattvarahasya (Vedānta)
2. Śaivavaiṣṇavavāda (Vedānta)
3. Brahmavidyāmuktāphala (Vedānta)
4. Saguṇanirguṇavādārtha (Vedānta)
5. Bhāṭṭakalpataru (Mīmāṃsā), ibid. c. on Bhāṭṭadīpikā
17  Ibid., index, p.157a: 1104, 1469 (extract, p.139), 1473, 1488, 1530, 1537, 
1542(extr., p.148), 1546 (extr., p.149), 1548, 1550, 1553-1563.

--- Page 260 of 338 ---
dominik wujastyk
244
6. Candrikākhaṇḍana (Vedānta)
7. Tattvārthavibodhana (Vedānta), c. on Vedāntamuktāvalī by 
Brahmānanda Sarasvatī
8. Bhāṣyatātparyasaṃgraha (Vedānta)
9. Dattāśaucavyavastāpanavāda (Dharma)
10. Brahmasūtratattvavilāsa (Vedānta)
11. Haribhaktirasaprajñā (Vedānta), c. on Bhagavadgītā
12. Bhāratatattvārthavilāsa (Vedānta)
13. Atharvaśiropaniṣadvilāsa (Vedānta)
14. Kaivalyopaniṣadvilāsa (Vedānta)
15. Jagatkāraṇatvavilāsa (Vedānta)
16. Śvetāśvataropaniṣadvilāsa (Vedānta)
17. Raghuvīravṛttastava (Chandas)
18. Dharmavivecana (Dharma)
19. Alaṅkāraśastrasaṃgraha (Alaṅkāra)
20. Sarvavedāntasarvamatatattvārthavilāsa (Vedānta)
From Hultzsch’s remarks, it appears that he may have met Rāmasubba 
personally.
Amongst the books and manuscripts given to me by the family 
were several publications from around 1913 of original Sanskrit treatises by Rāmasubba himself.18 These Sanskrit treatises are mainly 
Vaiṣṇava theological works. Mrs R*** was able to give some of the 
social background to one of the works, the Viṣṇudveṣakara-Mahā
śaivamatamardanam. She recounted how Rāmasubba participated in 
an intellectual conflict with a scholar who lived in Maṉṉārguḍi (see 
Fig. 12.8). Although Rāmasubba was a devoted Vaiṣṇava, he had no 
serious argument with Śaivas, and had even been into a Śaiva temple 
on some occasions, though he prayed to Rāma. When the scholar 
Mahāmahopādhyāya Rāju Śāstri, alias Tyāgarājamakhin, of Maṉṉār
guḍi, a descendant of Appayadīkṣita, wrote a pro-Śaiva tract, Rāma
subba wrote a counter-blast. A counter-counter-blast came from 
Maṉṉārguḍi, and so forth for about four exchanges, of which the 
Viṣṇudveṣakara-Mahāśaivamatamardanam is one.
The family’s present-day memory is exactly corroborated Hultzsch’s 
firsthand report from a century ago:
[Râmasubba Śâstri] is a Smârta Brâhmaṇa who advocates in his writings the Vaishṇava faith and opposes the Śaiva writings of Mahâma
18  Asvattha Ramasubbhasastrin 1916, Rāmasubrahmaṇyaśāstrin 1912a,b, 1915.

--- Page 261 of 338 ---
rāmasubrahmaṇya’s manuscripts
245
hôpâdhyâya Râju Śâstri alias Tyâgarâjamakhin, who lives at Maṉṉârguḍi 
near Tanjore and is a descendant of Appayadîkshita. His Chandrikâ
khaṇḍana (No. 1537) is directed against Vyâsarâyayati’s Chandrikâ 
(No. 1533).19
Figure 12.8.  Some cultural centres in the Kaveri river delta. 
See colour section, Plate XXV.
Rāmasubba’s Ancestors
In one of these disputatious works, called the Viṣṇudveṣakaramahāśai
vamatamardanam, Rāmasubba gives the following interesting account 
of his ancestors:20
sāmorpaṭṭūrgrāmaḥ khyātaḥ kāñcyāḥ paścād deśe ramye|
tadgrāmasthā viprā vatsās tv audīcyākhyās teṣāṃ madhye||1||
raghunāthākhyabhūdevas tv āsīc chāstrārthatattvavit|
In a charming place near Kanchi there is a village called 
Sāmorpaṭṭūr.21 The brahmans who live in that village are descendants of Vatsa, called Northerners (audīcya). Amongst them 
there was a brahman called Raghunātha, who knew the true 
meaning of the shastras.
putras tasya catustantrī rāmabhadrākhyapaṇḍitaḥ||2||
19  Hultzsch 1895-1905: v. 2, xiii.
20  Rāmasubrahmaṇyaśāstrin 1912b: 68–9.
21  At the time of writing I have been unable to identify this village.

--- Page 262 of 338 ---
dominik wujastyk
246
He had a son who was a pandit called Rāmabhadra, who followed the four Tantras.22
tasya putradvayaṃ khyātaṃ tatraiko ’yyākhyabhūsuraḥ|
sa tu vidvān sarvaśāstre tulajīndrapure ’vasat||3||
He was said to have had a pair of sons, one of them a brahman 
called Ayyā. He was wise in all the shastras, and he lived in the 
city of Prince Tulaji.
tasya putratrayaṃ jātaṃ madhyamo ’ṇṇākhyapaṇḍitaḥ|
yasya śiṣyapraśiṣyais tu bhūṣitaṃ maṇḍalaṃ bhuvaḥ||4||
To him were born three sons, the middle one being the pandit 
called Aṇṇā. His pupils and sub-pupils decorated the whole land.
tasya putro harer aṃśaḥ sākṣān nārāyaṇāhvayaḥ|
aśvatthapūrvapadakaḥ prasiddhaḥ pṛthivītale||5||
His son called Nārāyaṇa was like a part of Hari before one’s eyes. 
He was well known on earth with the pre-name Aśvattha.
pituḥ sakāśāt saṃlabdhasarvaśāstrārthatattvavit|
svapitur nikaṭe śāstram advaitaṃ jñātum āgatāt||6||
ahobilākhyaviduṣo mahābhāṣyaṃ gṛhītavān|
He had learned the true meaning of all the shastras from his 
father. From the scholar Ahobila who had come to learn the 
Advaita shastra at his own father’s side, he grasped the 
Mahābhāṣya.23
svayaṃprakāśapramukhā yativaryā api svayam||7||
yasmād adhītavedāntatritayāḥ khyātapaṇḍitāḥ|
mādhvā rāmānujīyāś ca śrīśāṃkaramatānugāḥ||8||
22  Or “Who knew the four vedas”?
23  Ahobila is the location of the Śrīvaiṣṇava Ahobila Maṭha in Kurnool district, 
Andhra Pradesh, founded in about AD 1400 (cf. http://www.ahobilamutt.org/). It is a 
Śrīvaiṣṇava centre following the tradition of Vedānta Deśika (cf. also Rajagopalan 
2005, Talbot 1995: 717). Presumably the present verse refers to a scholar from the 
Ahobila maṭha visiting Aśvatthanārāyaṇa. Table 3 of Zysk’s paper in the present 
volume shows manuscripts on vedānta owned by the Ahobila tradition present in collections in Kāñcī and in Tiruvallūr. If Ahobila can be taken as a variant of the personal 
name Ahobala, then he may have been one of the scholars listed by Raghavan et al. 
(1949-: 1: 487–91).

--- Page 263 of 338 ---
rāmasubrahmaṇya’s manuscripts
247
The most excellent ascetics (yatis), headed by Svayaṃprakāśa,24 
famous pandits, the followers of Madhva, Rāmānuja, and the 
followers of the philosophy of Śaṅkara, studied the three Vedāntas 
from him himself.
svasvasiddhāntasaṃsiddhagranthatattvabubhutsayā|
yasya cchāstratvam āpadya pāṇḍitye prathitā babhuḥ||9||
They approached his scholarliness with the desire to understand 
the truth of the books of those who were fully versed each in 
their own philosophies, and then they became famous for their 
scholarship.
pātañjale mahābhāṣye gādādharyāṃ ca vārttike|
bhaṭṭapādakṛte bhāṣye śabarasvāminā kṛte||10||
[He was expert in (v.14)] Patañjali’s Mahābhāṣya and in the 
Vārttika of Gadādhara,25 in the Bhāṣya by Bhaṭṭapāda on the work 
of Śabarasvāmin,26
khaṇḍadevakṛtau bhātṭadīpikāyāṃ ca kaustubhe|
brahmānandasarasvatyā racitā candrikābhidhā||11||
in Khaṇḍadeva’s work the Bhāṭṭadīpikā and the Kaustubha, on 
that work [kṛtis tasyāṃ, v. 12] written by Brahmānandasarasvatī27
called Candrikā,
kṛtis tasyāṃ madhvatantracandrikāvanamālayoḥ|
vedāntācāryaracitā śatadūṣaṇisaṃjñikā||12||
on the Candrikā on Madhva’s system and on Vanamāli,28 on that 
work, the Śatadūṣaṇi composed by Vedāntācārya,29
24  Svayaṃprakāśayati (or -muni, or -yatīndra) (fl. 1640) wrote the Rasābhivya
ñjikā commentary on the 28 verses of Lakṣmīdharakavi’s Advaitamakaranda, and 13 
other works. Several MSS of his works are found in the Tanjore Sarasvati Mahal 
library (TMSSML), and the TMSSML journal published his Svātmādīpana in 1952 
(Potter 2005).
25  Gadādhara’s commentary on Raghunātha Śiromaṇi’s Tattvacintāmaṇidīdhiti.
26  Kumārilabhaṭṭa’s Ślokavārttika on Śabara’s Mīmāṃsāsūtrabhāṣya.
27  Fl. 1645/1700, wrote a Candrikā on Madhusudana Sarasvatī’s Advaitasiddhi. He 
also wrote a Vedāntasūtramuktāvalī, of which a manuscript copied in 1908 was kept 
in the family of Subrahmaṇyaśāstrin. In the colophon of that MS he says that his teacher was Paramānandasarasvatī. There is another MS of the work in the TMSSML 
library.
28  Fl. 1650-1700, pupil of Bhaṭṭojī Dīkṣita, and wrote about a dozen works on 
vedānta, nyāya, vyākaraṇa etc.
29  I.e., Vedānta Deśika

--- Page 264 of 338 ---
dominik wujastyk
248
kṛtis tasyāṃ doḍḍayāryaracite caṇḍamārute|
tattanmatasthabhāṣyeṣu tathā vidyāntareṣu ca||13||
on the Caṇḍamāruta composed by Doḍḍayārya30 and on the 
commentaries on each of these philosophies and on other sciences.
jñānaṃ yasya mahānto ’pi śāstriṇas tryambakādayaḥ|
jñātvāścaryaṃ mudaṃ caiva prāptā iti hi śuśrumuḥ||14||
The knowledge [in these texts] of that great person [Aśvattha] 
was such that great professors such as Tryambaka etc., having 
learned of it, became astonished and delighted, so we have 
heard.31
sītāpateḥ pādapadme yanmano’liḥ sadā sthitaḥ|
iti śrutaṃ mayā tasya putraḥ śrīrāmaśaṅkaraḥ||15||
His son was Śrīrāmaśaṅkara, of whom it was said, so I heard, 
that, “his mind was a bee always staying at the lotus feet of Sītā’s 
lord.”
dharmaśāstre tathā pūrvatantre buddhim avāpa saḥ|
tasya putratrayaṃ tatra jyeṣṭho nārāyaṇāhvayaḥ||16||
He applied his intellect to Dharmaśāstra and to the Prior System 
(pūrvatantra). He had three sons, the eldest of whom was called 
Nārāyaṇa.
śrutismṛtitadartheṣu samyakchraddhāsamanvitaḥ|
kodaṇḍapūrvakair varṇair nāmnā rāmeti viśrutaḥ||17||
kaniṣṭho madhyamas tatra rāmasubbviti viśrutaḥ|
He was full of complete faith in the scriptures, traditions, and 
their meanings. The younger was famous by the name Kodaṇḍa 
Rāma, the middle one was famous as Rāmasubbu.
śivarāmāryasaṃjñānāṃ deśikānāṃ mahātmanām||18||
prasādāt sarvaśāstrajño rāmadāsyarasānubhūḥ|
tenāyaṃ racito grantho lokānugrahakāmyayā||19||
30  Fl. 1590 wrote about 14 works on vedānta etc., including Caṇḍamāruta on 
Vedānta Deśika’s Śatadūṣaṇī.
31  Hultzsch (1895-1905: v. 2, 55, #1343) records a manuscript of a Vedānta work 
by a Tryambaka, the Siddhāntavaijayantī, in the collection of Sundaravājapeyi in 
Tiruviḍaimarudūr.

--- Page 265 of 338 ---
rāmasubrahmaṇya’s manuscripts
249
Figure 12.9.  Rāmasubba’s ancestors.
By the grace of the great-souled teacher called Śivarāmārya, he 
experienced devotion to Rāma, learned all the shastras. He wrote 
this book, wishing to benefit the world.
iti viṣṇudveṣakaramahāśaivamatamardanaṃ saṃpūrṇam|
The Viṣṇudveṣakaramahāśaivamatamardana, “the Crushing of 
the Great Śaiva Doctrine that Creates Enmity to Viṣṇu” is finished.

--- Page 266 of 338 ---
dominik wujastyk
250
This family history provides much interesting material, some of it 
clear, some of it tantalizingly unclear. It is valuable to have an account 
by a learned paṇḍita, Rāmasubba, in 1912 of the scholarly expertise 
and intellectual networking of his grandfather Aśvattha in the first 
half of the nineteenth century.
The reference to Ayya as a resident in Tulajī’s City (v. 3) connects 
the family with eighteenth-century Thanjavur (cf. Fig. 12.4). If the 
reference is to Tulajī the first (r. 1730-d. 1735), then we may speculate 
that either Ayya or his father Rāmabhadra may have lived in Thanjavur 
in the 1730s.32 The family tree of Rāmasubba’s ancestors is shown in 
Fig. 12.9.
Several of the philosophical works known by Aśvattha Nārāyaṇa 
were still represented in the libraries of Rāmasubba and his brother 
Kodaṇḍa, as catalogued by Hultzsch in 1905.33 For example, Kodaṇḍa 
owned copies of works by Śaṅkarācārya34, Gadādhara35, Svayaṃpra
kāśayati36, and Khaṇḍadeva37 while Rāmasubba owned manuscripts of 
works by Doḍḍācārya38, and Vanamālimiśra.39 Aśvattha’s works were 
also read elsewhere in the region, for example in the village of Tiruvi
ḍaimarudūr.40
Some of these specific links are also confirmed by the patterns of 
manuscript ownership and scholarship documented in the chapter by 
Kenneth Zysk in the present volume. Zysk’s tables 2 & 3 show, for 
example, that nine manuscripts on Nyāya owned by Aśvattha 
Nārāyaṇa were present in the library collection at Kanchipuram. This 
proves that Aśvattha’s manuscripts from Tiruviśainallūr were studied 
in Kanchi, one of the great centres of scholarship in South India from 
medieval times.
This literary and scholarly persistence demonstrates the family’s 
lasting intellectual engagement in serious scholarship and its participation in a philosophical discussion over centuries that stretched from 
Tiruviśainallūr to Thanjavur and Kanchipuram.
32  This rules out the possibility of this Rāmabhadra being the seventeenth-century Rāmabhadra Dīkṣita.
33  Hultzsch (1895-1905: v. 2) lists Kodaṇḍa’s library in § 14 (pp. 64–7) and 
Rāmasubba’s in § 15 (pp. 67–71).
34  #1456: Śārīrakamīmāṃsābhāṣya, #1480: Vivekacūḍāmaṇisaṃgraha and #1481: 
Jagadutpattiprakaraṇa.
35  #1465: Hetvābhāsasāmānyalakṣaṇa
36  #1484: c. on Dakṣiṇāmūrtyaṣṭaka.
37  #1490: Bhaṭṭadīpikā.
38  #1532: Caṇḍamāruta.
39  #1540: Nyāyaratnākara; #1541: Nyāyāmṛtasaugandhya.
40  #1287 c. on (Gādādhara’s?) Vādārtha.

--- Page 267 of 338 ---
rāmasubrahmaṇya’s manuscripts
251
Furthermore, both Kodaṇḍa and Rāmasubba owned manuscripts 
of works written by members of Śahaji’s original endowment in the 
village, colleagues and contemporaries of Ayyāvaḷ. Thus, Kodaṇḍa 
owned a work by Bhāskaradīkṣita,41 one of the original recipients of 
Śāhaji’s grant, and Rāmasubba owned a work by Mahādeva[vāja
peyin],42 another of the original recipients, as well as Mahādeva’s second son Vāsudevadīkṣita (fl. 1729-1736)43. The presence of these 
manuscripts in the brothers’ libraries demonstrates that although evidence is lacking to connect this family’s lineage directly to the recipients of Śāhaji’s endowment, the family nevertheless engaged with the 
work of those original scholars and their successors. Whether or not 
Rāmasubba’s ancestor was one of the founding scholars of King 
Śāhaji’s college, dates point to his arrival at Tiruviśainallūr at the time 
of this foundation. This family tree connects Rāmasubba and his family into a wide network of scholarship in the Kāverī delta that can still 
be closely documented over several centuries.
Today, the village of Tiruviśainallūr is perhaps a 90 minute drive 
from Thanjavur on good roads. It is no longer a place of intellectual 
work, but thanks to Ayyaval’s spiritual legacy, it is an active centre of 
devotion and pilgrimage.
King Śāhaji’s gift to 46 leading scholars in 1693 is still remembered 
well by the Brahman families in the village, and several of the houses 
of the original scholars are still identified by the inhabitants. The villagers tell enthusiastically of how great intellectuals used to meet and 
debate abstruse topics together, and to sing devotional hymns, and 
how their ancestors were actors in a great intellectual and religious 
drama. The documentary evidence abundantly supports this community memory, as well as the extensive networks of Sanskrit scholarship 
and intellectual exchange that resulted from Śāhaji’s endowment and 
that were still alive and active in the early decades of the twentieth 
century.
References
Asvattha Ramasubbhasastrin 1916, Nyāyenduśekharadoṣayogaghaṭanagrantha, Chi
dambaram. The author is probably in fact Rāmasubrahmaṇyaśāstrin of Tiru
viśainallur, aka Rāma Subba Sastrigal. His grandfather was called Aśvattha 
Nārāyaṇa. 
41  #1466: Ratnatūlikā, c. on Siddhāntasiddhāñjana.
42  #1505: Āśaucatattva.
43  #1525: Mīmāṃsākutūhalavṛtti.

--- Page 268 of 338 ---
dominik wujastyk
252
Hultzsch, E. 1895-1905, Reports on Sanskrit Manuscripts of Southern India, London 
and Leipzig: Superintendent, Government Press. 3v. 
Hultzsch, E., V. Venkayya, and H. K. Sastri 1895-1913, South-Indian Inscriptions. 
Tamil Inscriptions of Rajaraja, Rajendra-Chola, and Others in the Rajarajesvara 
Temple at Tanjavur, vol. 2, Madras: Archaeological Survey of India. Reprinted 
New Delhi: Navrang, 1984. 
Krishnamachariar, M. 1937, History of Classical Sanskrit Literature: Being an 
Elaborate Account of All Branches of Classical Sanskrit Literature, with Full Epi
graphical and Archaeological Notes and References, an Introduction Dealing with 
Language, Philology and Chronology and Index of Authors, Madras: Tirumalaitirupati Devasthanamus Press
Krishnamurthy, R. 2003, “Ayyaval—embodiment of humaneness”, The Hindu, 
21/11/2003. URL http://www.thehindu.com/thehindu/fr/ 2003/11/21/stories/ 
2003112101340600.htm
Kuppuswami Sastri, S. et al. 1916-, A Triennial Catalogue of Manuscripts Collected 
During the Triennium … to … for the Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, 
Madras. Part 1, Sanskrit, Madras: Government Press
Kuppuswamy Sastri, T. S. 1904, “Ramabhadra Dikshita and the southern poets of his 
time”, Indian Antiquary, 33: 126–42, 176–96
Potter, K. 2005, Bibliography Of Indian Philosophies, Seattle: University of Washing
ton. Online version at: http://faculty.washington.edu/kpotter/
Raghavan, V. (ed.) 1952, Śāhendra Vilāsa, a Poem on the Life of King Śāhaji of Tanjore 
(1684-1710), of Śrīdhara Veṅkaṭeśa (Ayyāvāl), Tanjore Sarasvati Mahal Series, vol. 
54, Tiruchi: The Kalyan Press for the TMSSM Library, Tanjore
Raghavan, V., K. Kunjunni Raja, C. S. Sundaram, N. Veezhinathan, N. Gangadharan, 
1949-, New Catalogus Catalogorum, an Alphabetical Register of Sanskrit and Allied 
Works and Authors, Madras University Sanskrit Series, Madras: University of 
Madras. References to v.1 are to the revised 1968 edition
Rajagopalan, T. A. 2005, The Origin and Growth of Ahobila Mutt. A Study Based on 
Inscriptions, Srirangam, Trichy: Divya Desa Parampariya Padhukappu Peravai. 
URL http://www.scribd.com/doc/1083957/Origin-growth-ahobila-mutt
Rāmasubrahmaṇyaśāstrin 1912a, Anubhāṣyagāmbhīryagranthaḥ, Bhagavatpādabhāṣ
yarasasārarūpo’yaṃ, Cennapuri: Koḍiyālaṃ Rāmasvāmyayyaṅgār at the Ānanda
mudranālaya
———  1912b, Mahāśaivamatamardanam, Tañjānagara: Śrīmat-Piccu-Ayyar-ĀkhyaPrabhubhiḥ Śrīkṛṣṇavilāsamudranālaye
———  1915, Bhāṭṭakalpataruḥ nāma Nivītāntā Bhāṭṭadīpikāvyākhyā, Tañjānagara: 
Śrīkṛṣṇavilāsamudranālaya
Singer, M. 1963, “The radha-krishna “bhajans” of Madras city”, History of Religions, 2: 
183–226
Subrahmanyam, S. 2001, Penumbral Visions: The Making of Polities in Early Modern 
South India, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press
Talbot, C. 1995, “Inscribing the other, inscribing the self: Hindu-Muslim identities in 
pre-colonial India”, Comparative Studies in Society and History, 37: 692–722
Wujastyk, D. 2007, “La bibliothèque de thanjavur”, in “Espaces et Communautés”, 
edited by C. Jacob, Lieux de Savoir, vol. 1, chap. 8, Paris: Michel Albin, 616–36
Zysk, K. G. present volume, “The use of manuscript catalogues as sources of regional 
intellectual history in India’s Early Modern period.”

--- Page 269 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
253
 
 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The use of manuscript catalogues as sources 
of regional intellectual history in India’s 
early modern period
Kenneth G. Zysk
Catalogues of Sanskrit manuscripts have been principal sources of 
valuable textual information and major tools for students and scholars of Indology. They provide basic information about a particular 
text for study, including the locations where that text is available and 
any special features of the individual manuscripts. The catalogues’ 
purpose has served scholars well throughout the decades; and new 
government-sponsored endeavours such as the National Mission for 
Manuscripts will facilitate the study of these important historical documents. A perusal of the printed catalogues quickly reveals a good 
deal of variation in the information they provide, despite more recent 
efforts at standardising them. One of the most important differences is 
the classification of literature. It is not uncommon to find a text classified under one genre in one catalogue and under a different genre in 
another catalogue. Standard categories of manuscript-description 
may exist, but a standard list of literary genres has yet to be established. Despite this shortcoming, this paper aims to explore a select 
number of Sanskrit manuscript-catalogues in an effort to show that 
they can provide a good deal more information than the basic description and location of a literary artefact. 
A crucial piece of information connected to any manuscript as with 
any archaeological find, is its provenance, for it provides valuable historical data about the item, including its owner and its place of discovery or “find-spot”. By means of this information, owners and users of 
different types of literature can be identified. From that a picture of 
the intellectual life for a particular region can begin to emerge, leading 
eventually to a more comprehensive understanding of India’s intellectual history in the early modern period and to the identification of 
potential centres of learning in different subjects.

--- Page 270 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
254
Unfortunately, the recording of a manuscript’s provenance and 
find-spot was not a standard practice by all surveyors, collectors, and 
cataloguers of Sanskrit manuscripts. Moreover, more recent catalogues, which constitute the majority of such catalogues, have simply 
ignored a manuscript’s provenance. Fortunately, this important information has been provided in several of the early reports and catalogues, which will be the source materials for this study. Even though 
provenance is given for a certain manuscript, the extraction of data 
and their presentation in a useful form require a methodology that 
involves literally undoing the work of the early cataloguers and reporters so that the original owner and his location stand in direct relationship to the piece of literature. It requires a two step process. First, each 
manuscript report is examined and its owner, location, subject-classification recorded. Secondly, the titles and their subjects are grouped 
rather under their original owners with their locations, if such data are 
provided than under the title of the work. This information, then, provides the raw data for an analysis that reveals a fairly accurate picture 
of the intellectuals and their principal centres of location in various 
parts of India, at a distinct point in time, i.e., when most of the early 
surveying and cataloguing took place in the nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries. Since most of the intellectual life was centred in 
the family, it is not unreasonable to assume that the individual’s intellectual interests reflect a family tradition and in some cases that its 
members may indeed have travelled from one region to another, such 
as the numerous Mahārāṣṭrian Brahmins that have relocated in Kāśī 
over the years. Moreover, if a certain intellectual specialised in a particular intellectual tradition or traditions, based on the relative proportion of manuscripts in his collection, a further determination 
about his special intellectual interests may be presumed. These data 
can then be used with other information from various sources in order 
to contextualise the intellectual life of scholarly Brahmins in the wider 
frame of Indian history.
The paper begins with a brief history of the manuscript collection, 
survey, and cataloguing in India and abroad, for this provides the necessary context for understanding the principal source materials used 
in this study. This will be followed by a description of the different 
types of manuscript catalogues that are available for examination. 
Finally, I have chosen a couple of examples which show how catalogues can be used as sources of intellectual history: one comes from 
the north and the other from the south of India.

--- Page 271 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
255
Brief Survey of Manuscript Cataloguing in India
Interest in and collection of Sanskrit manuscripts began with different 
individuals attached chiefly to the colonial government in India, but 
also included others who travelled to India in search of early Sanskrit 
literary remains. Among the early collectors whose collections ended 
up in various European libraries were Sir Robert Chambers, Sir 
William Jones, Robert Orme, Major Colin Mackenzie, Henry Thomas 
Colebrooke, John Leyden, Georg Bühler, Martin Haug, Sir Aurel 
Stein, Albrecht Weber and Rasmus Rask. The catalogues of these early 
collections were very much individual efforts by men who had knowledge of the relevant languages. For the most part, their catalogues are 
comprehensive and detailed, reflective not only of the linguistic acumen of the early civil servants, missionaries, and other scholars 
engaged in the study of Indian languages, but also of the “insider’s 
knowledge” of the native savants commissioned to help them and on 
whom the western scholars greatly depended to complete their catalogues. Many of the manuscripts from these individual collectors are 
listed in the catalogues of manuscripts housed in various university 
and institutional libraries in Europe and in the India Office which is 
now part of the British Library. 
One such catalogue is the three volume Catalogue Raisonné of 
Oriental Manuscripts by William Taylor, a missionary attached to 
Fort St. George in Madras. The catalogue entails a detailed description 
of all the manuscripts kept in the library of Fort Saint George as well 
as part of the so-called Mackenzie collection1. Most of the texts were 
in the form of palm-leaf manuscripts composed in languages such as 
Sanskrit, Telugu, Tamil, Kannada (Canarese), Malayalam and Oriya, 
written in the respective scripts and included Grantha and Devanāgarī. 
Moreover, many of them were in the form of multiple-text manuscript, containing several individual texts. They may or may not have 
had a common subject-matter and were often in different languages. 
The detail by which each text was described necessitated that Taylor 
read each and every leaf of every manuscript. Such an undertaking 
would require more a labour of love than a librarian’s chore. However, 
when set against the backdrop of his outright disdain for Indians and 
1  On the importance of Mackenzie, his collection of epigraphic materials, and 
especially his collaborators in the development of Indian epigraphy in the nineteenth 
century (see Wagoner, 2003).

--- Page 272 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
256
their literature,2 serious doubts arise about Taylor’s involvement in 
the cataloguing work. We shall never know how much Taylor relied 
on the native paṇḍits’ linguistic knowledge and cultural familiarity for 
he failed to acknowledge how much they had helped him other than 
the fact that a sum of 250 rupees per month was allotted for “a special 
staff of paṇḍits and copyists” (Taylor, Vol. 1, 1857, xvi). 
The use of native paṇḍits and scholars was a common part of the 
early cataloguing efforts. However, as in the case of Taylor, just as 
common, was the lack of acknowledgement of their enormous help. 
This was a practice that was carried on for most of the early period of 
discovery and cataloguing of Indian manuscripts.3 
In 1868 the Indian Government began to take an active role in 
securing and cataloguing Sanskrit manuscripts. This new enterprise 
was prompted, it seems, from the growing demand from European 
scholars of Indian languages and literatures for better and more comprehensive tools with which to pursue their scholarship.
Acting on the suggestion of Paṇḍit Radhakrishna of Lahore, who 
urged the Government to compile a catalogue of all Sanskrit manu2  His views on Indians and their literature cannot be more clearly expressed than 
in his description of Indian poetry:
From the prevalence of poetry in Hindu composition, the simplicity of truth 
is almost always disguised. The painful result is that the Hindu mind has 
become familiarized with lying. Truth is insipid. Evidence loses its force. A 
brilliant comparison is deemed proof. It must not be forgotten that the phrenological construction of the Hindu skull is of the lower order of the Celts, 
and very inferior to the broad Saxon. Besides it would seem that there is more 
development of the cerebellum, and greater sensuality, than in the AngloSaxon. The poetry of the Hindus runs rampant on sexualities….The Hindu 
mind cannot go beyond itself…it is probably defective as to higher degrees of 
intellectual power (Taylor Vol. 1, 1857, Intro, iv).
What is perhaps even more interesting in this quotation is Taylor’s complete acceptance of the pseudo-science of phrenology, which was popular during the time.
3  Cf. Peter Peterson’s unrestrained remarks on the subject from his first report on 
search for Sanskrit manuscripts in the Bombay Circle:
I have before me now a Report, which is to my mind chiefly remarkable from 
the fact that, neither on the covers, nor anywhere within the covers, does the 
European scholar, whose name appears on the title-page,…, make any reference at all to the other native collaborateur without whose special knowledge 
of Māgadhī, and the Jain literature, that part of the Report, I make bold to say, 
could not have been written. Such a proceeding—and it does not, I regret to 
think, stand alone—may tend to confirm that relative estimate of native and 
European learning; but it is at the expense, I submit, of something more valuable than even a character for learning. (Peterson, 1883: 3-4n)

--- Page 273 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
257
scripts in Indian and European libraries, Mr Whitley Stokes, the 
Secretary to the Council of the Governor-General for making Laws 
and Regulations drew up a four-part scheme for collecting and cataloguing Indian manuscripts, which would: 1. “print uniformly all 
procurable unprinted lists of Sanskrit MSS. in Indian libraries;” 
2. “institute searches for MSS.;” 3. “proceed to copy those [MSS.] 
which are unique or otherwise desirable, but which the possessors 
refuse to part with;” and 4. “increase the grant made to the Asiatic 
Society at Calcutta for the publication of the Bibliotheca Indica,” and 
“for the publication of Sanskrit works hitherto unprinted.” The proposal was approved by the Government of India by order numbers 
4338-48, followed by order numbers 4349-55, dated, Simla, 3 
November 1868. A sum of 24,000 Rupees per annum was allotted to 
the initiative for the whole of India (Gough 1878, 1-13; Belvalkar 1916, 
xii-xiv; Gode, 1969, 50n1; Janert, 1965, 11).
 A significant part of Stokes’ plan maintained that the actual catalogue of the manuscripts was to be done in Europe by European scholars and the catalogue should be produced in England, because he said 
that he knew of “no native scholar possessed of the requisite learning, 
accuracy and persistent energy,” and “no European scholar in India 
possessed of the requisite time, or who might not be more usefully 
employed in making original researches” (Gough 1878, 2; Belvalkar 
1916, xiv). The persistent vilification of the Indian intellect, so obviously apparent in Stokes’ public statement, prompted Peter Peterson, 
Professor of Sanskrit at Elphinstone College, Bombay, to formulate 
the following rebuttal in his first report on the search for Sanskrit 
manuscripts in the Bombay circle from 1883:
I will only add here, that my experience at Jeypore, and throughout 
this tour, confirmed me in the belief that while there is much which 
the native scholar may learn from the European scholar, there is more, 
in that which is of common interest to the two, that the European can 
learn from the native. No one who is not himself a student of Sanskrit 
letters can fully realise how dense and far-spreading the cloud is that, 
to our eyes, still hangs over the history of the literature. But no candid 
mind can engage in the study of that history in India without recognising that much, which remains for the European to discover, had never 
been hid from the native learned community.4 
4  Peterson, 1883: 3. For an illuminating discussion of the paṇḍits in colonial Bengal, see Hatcher (1996, 2005).

--- Page 274 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
258
In the months that followed, Mr Stokes’ scheme was put into action in 
the following regions: Bengal, Bombay, Madras and Mysore, NorthWest Provinces, Punjab, Oudh, Central Provinces, and Rajputana. 
Teams of Indian scholars and assistants, headed by a professor of 
Sanskrit in the particular region, undertook expeditions in search of 
manuscripts. They were principally interested in acquiring by purchase or by copy important and rare treatises written in Sanskrit but 
also in other Indian languages. While in the field they gathered information on each manuscript resulting in a preliminary catalogue of the 
collections. This primary information, along with the manuscript 
itself, if obtained, was then to be dispatched to England and eventually 
to the other parts of Europe, where European scholars would work on 
different texts according to their specialisation and interest in order to 
complete the descriptive work for a catalogue in English, modelled on 
Aufrecht’s catalogue of Oxford’s Bodleian collection (Belvalkar 1916, 
xiv, xxvii-xxix).
For the next three decades expeditions in search of Sanskrit manuscripts went on at a feverish pitch all over the subcontinent, the results 
of which were published in the form of “reports”.5 Collections were 
identified and their contents described, and thousands of manuscripts, 
along with their preliminary descriptions, purchased. 
Reporting only on interesting, rare and important manuscripts was 
the purpose that united almost all the efforts of early manuscript surveyors, with few notable exceptions including Bābu Rājendralāl Mitra 
and Mahāmahopādhyāya Haraprasāda Śāstrī (1871-1911), Gustav 
Oppert (1880-85), and Eugen Hultzsch (1895-1905),6 whose lists were 
comprehensive and included the provenance of each manuscript. In 
the case of Mitra and Śāstrī, there were also detailed descriptions, 
which included beginning and ending lines or verses. 
Even though there was great willingness to loan manuscripts to 
qualified European scholars, the Europeans were less than enthusiastic about completing the work begun in India.7 Consequently, much 
of the work of producing the catalogues of manuscripts fell back on 
5  For a list of many of the reports for the “Bombay circle,” which included the 
Presidency of Bombay, Rajputana, Central India, and Central Provinces, see Belvalkar (1916, xliii-xlv) and for a list of published reports and catalogues covering all of 
India from 1807-1940, see PK Gode (1969: 56-70). 
6  Cf. Janert, 1965: 11.
7  Government of India 1958, 177n1. Belvalkar provides a list of guidelines for 
the loan of manuscripts from the Government Manuscripts Library, Deccan College, 
Pune (later transferred to the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute) (1916, xli-

--- Page 275 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
259
the native scholars who were merely assistants under Stokes’ plan. 
Their efforts have resulted in catalogues of manuscripts acquired and 
deposited in the Government’s oriental manuscript collections in 
most of the regions of India and of collections in smaller institutions, 
temples and the like. These catalogues vary in quality and in the 
amount of information they provide: some were merely hand-lists, 
others were presented in tabular form, but the better ones followed 
more or less the model of a descriptive catalogue, like that of the 
Oxford catalogue.8
Over time, the interest in acquiring and cataloguing Sanskrit manu
scripts began to assume less and less importance by the Government 
of India, which had to confront such global problems as two world 
wars and economic depression, and, on the local front, India’s fight 
for independence. The money eventually dried up for the cultural programmes. Even though manuscripts continued to be collected, albeit 
at a greatly reduced rate, the lack of funds resulted in bundles of 
manuscripts left to deteriorate in harsh climate conditions on the subcontinent. The situation of manuscript preservation and cataloguing 
remained pretty much stagnant until the Sanskrit Commission, 
appointed by the Government of India in October 1956, brought the 
deplorable state of Indian manuscripts to the attention of the Ministry 
for Education in a published report of 1958.9 With respect to manuscripts the Committee found the state of manuscript work to be less 
than adequate and advocated that action should be undertaken to collect, preserve, and catalogue manuscripts in two spheres, the central 
and state governments. In terms of cataloguing of manuscripts it 
xlii). On the origins of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute and its collection 
of Sanskrit manuscripts, see Johnson 1988, 1990, and 1993).
8  Janert(1965) points to the following causes for the differences between Indian 
and European catalogues: in India, different collections were catalogued by a team 
organised by one or two principal editors, while in Europe, there was normally more 
than one editor, and so the succeeding editor did not have the knowledge of his 
predecessor and therefore had to start afresh. Furthermore, inconsistencies in the 
early catalogues were due to the social, economic and political conditions in each 
part of the world at the time and by the current state of Indological knowledge 
(9-10).
9  Government of India 1958. Report of the Sanskrit Commission 1956-1957. The 
following Sanskritists were members of the commission: Dr. Suniti Kumar Chatterji 
(chairman), Shri J.H. Dave, Prof. S.K. De, Prof. T.R.V. Murti, Prof. V. Raghavan, 
Asthana-Vidwan Panditaraja V.S. Ramachandra Sastry, Prof. Vishva Bandhu Shastri, 
Prof. R.N. Dandekar (Member-Secretary), and Shri K. Sundara Rama Sarma (as 
Assistant Secretary).

--- Page 276 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
260
noticed that there was “no uniform method followed” and insisted 
that “[p]roper care should, therefore, be taken to see that the catalogue is informative as well as accurate.”10 Furthermore, it recommended that future catalogues should follow the classical method of 
the descriptive catalogue, but recognised that some have the simpler 
and easier tabular form of cataloguing with more detailed information 
on particular texts reserved for an appendix.11 Acting on the Sanskrit 
Committee’s report and the report of the Manuscript Committee, 
appointed by the University Grants Commission in 1959,12 a tabular 
form for cataloguing was adopted by the Ministry of Scientific 
Research and Cultural Affairs with the following eleven categories : 
1. serial number, with “E” indicating it will have extra information in 
an appendix, 2. accession number or collection number, 3. title either 
Romanized or in Devanāgarī-script, with an asterisk (∗) indicating the 
text has been published, 4. author, 5. name of commentator, 6. material (paper, palm-leaf, etc.), 7. script according to a prescribed list 
of abbreviations, 8a. the size in centimetres, 8b. number of folia, 
8c. number of lines on a page, 8d. number of akṣaras in a line, 9. extent 
(complete or incomplete), 10. condition and date, 11. additional particulars. This tabular form of cataloguing Indian manuscripts has been 
used for almost all the Sanskrit catalogues in India since the early 
1960s. As can be noticed, unfortunately, there was no category for 
provenance.
The Types of Sanskrit Manuscript Catalogues
As indicated in the Sanskrit Commission Report of 1958, catalogues 
of Sanskrit manuscripts generally fall into two distinct types: a tabular 
and a descriptive form of catalogue. The former was formally adopted 
by the Ministry of Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs and provides the essential information under the different headings mentioned above in tabular form. The catalogues varied only slightly one 
from the other, such as in the number of items included in the list or 
the order in which the manuscripts were presented. Sometimes entries 
10  Government of India, 1958: 180.
11  Ibid.
12  Raghavan, 1963: 97-108; Deshmukh, 1996: 2-7. The members of this committee were Dr. V. Raghavan, Dr. S. Nurul Hasan, Mr. K.D. Bhargava, and Dr. S. Bhattacharya.

--- Page 277 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
261
simply follow the order of the Sanskrit alphabetical order; while at 
other times, they are organised according to subject-matter. They may 
or may not contain a separate section which provides a fuller description of certain manuscripts deemed by the editor or compiler to be 
important, and an index of titles and authors. It is unfortunate that 
the multi-volume catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts at the 
Sampurnanand Sanskrit University in Varanasi, the largest single collection in the world, falls into this category of catalogues and lacks 
sections with fuller descriptions of certain manuscripts.
The descriptive catalogues likewise tend to follow a distinct model 
that provides not only the essential information, but also contain 
extracts from the manuscripts themselves. This gives the means for 
better identification of the text in question; and they are often organised according to subject-matter. Each manuscript is dealt with in 
roughly the same manner. A work’s title is given usually in Devanāgarī 
or the local script and in roman script, along with its author or authors. 
This is followed by information about the manuscript’s material, 
script, size, extent, number of folia, number of lines, number of 
akṣaras or syllables per line, completeness, date, condition, and occasionally its owner and scribe, if available. This may be followed by a 
brief statement about the content and subject-matter of the manuscript, but always there is given extracts that usually include the first 
and last couple of verses or lines of the manuscript, and if available, its 
colophon and post-colophon which contains information about 
when, by whom, and occasionally for whom and where the manuscript was copied.
In addition to the two types of manuscript catalogues, there are 
sometimes published or unpublished hand-lists of manuscripts and 
“reports” and “notices” of manuscripts based on searches that took 
place in different regions of India in the latter part of the nineteenth 
and early part of the twentieth centuries. The “reports” tend to vary in 
content and presentation. Some are travel-narratives in search of 
manuscripts with extracts from important and “rare” works or academic discussions about works and authors discovered while on tour, 
while others are narratives with a simple description of acquired 
manuscripts usually in tabular form and detailed listings of collections 
and their locations. The “notices” generally provide a full descrip- 
tion of each manuscript along with quotations from the text and enumeration of its content, and, therefore, are invaluable for scholars of 
Sanskrit.

--- Page 278 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
262
Because most of the catalogues lack the criteria of find-spot and 
ownership of each manuscript, they are useless for identifying individual scholars, their locations, and their intellectual interests. We are, 
however, not completely at a loss when it comes to obtaining this vital 
information from the existing catalogues. Several of the sources examined do contain the desired information. Among these sources, one 
catalogue, two reports and one notice give names of owners and their 
locations for parts of north and south India. A regional rather than a 
comprehensive picture of Indian intellectual life during the period 
can, therefore, begin to emerge.13 The catalogue and notice come from 
north India and the two reports from south India. One north Indian 
source is Notices of Sanskrit Mss. First and Second Series, by Rājendralāl 
Mitra and Mahāmahopādhyāya Haraprasād Śāstrī. The first series 
consists of volumes 1-11 (nos. 1-26), of which volumes 1-9 were compiled and edited by Mitra and the rest by Śāstrī and describes 4365 
manuscripts. The second series of volumes 1-4 (nos. 27-34), compiled 
and edited by Śāstrī, and describes 1413 manuscripts.14 The other 
north Indian source is A Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in 
Mithilā, 4 volumes, edited by Kashiprasad Jayaswal and Anantaprasad 
Banerji-Śāstrī. The south Indian sources are Lists of Sanskrit manuscripts in private libraries of southern India, 3 volumes by Gustav 
Oppert and Reports on Sanskrit manuscripts [deposited in private 
libraries] in southern India, 3 volumes by Eugen Hultzsch. In addition 
to these, wherever possible, the catalogues of collections from different Europeans stationed in India and now housed in European libraries contain information about owners and their locations. There is 
also evidence that the provenance of a manuscript was often recorded 
in the preliminary list of a manuscript’s information during the early 
expeditions in search of manuscripts; however, this important bit of 
data rarely, if ever, made it into print.15
13  Some catalogues provide part of the information, while others lack it altogether. Some provide the “find-spot” but not the owner: R.S. Panchamukhi, et al., 
eds. 1953-70. A descriptive catalogue of manuscripts in the Kannada Research Institute. 9 volumes. Dharwar: Kannada Research Institute. This catalogue includes both 
Sanskrit and Kannada manuscripts. 
14  The entire series has been reprinted in 15 volumes by Sharada Prakashan in 
Delhi in 1990-91.
15  See in particular the different extracts from reports in Gough 1878.

--- Page 279 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
263
Examples of Useful Sources 
Of the different sources that provide the provenance of each manuscript, I have chosen one from the north and one from the south to 
serve as examples for this study of the regional intellectual life in the 
early modern period. The north Indian example comes from Mithilā, 
which from the eleventh century was a major centre for Brahmanic 
learning in all subjects, but especially in logic (Mookerji 1951 [2003]: 
596-98). In south India, the example comes from modern-day 
Tamilnādu and parts of Andhra Pradesh, where from the eleventh 
century grants were given for the establishment of Brahmanic institutions of learning (Mookerji 1951 [2003]: 367-72).
Each of the samples relies on one or more collections of catalogued 
manuscripts, which, however, are arranged in different ways. In 
Mithilā the manuscripts were catalogued according to subject-matter, 
while in the south according to location. Therefore, the former provides owners and locations of manuscripts only on the basis of subject-matter, while the latter gives the content of their complete 
collections, covering a variety of subjects and genres of Sanskrit literature. The one is specific and the other is general. 
The methods for extracting and studying a manuscript’s provenance are essentially the same for both and require the reconstitution 
of the contents of the owners’ original libraries. The results obtained 
from each catalogue, however, are different. Mithilā’s manuscripts 
give information on a restricted subject, while Tamilnādu’s manuscripts provide a more comprehensive understanding of the owners’ 
overall intellectual interests. Both sets of data are informative about 
local intellectual life in their respective regions. 
1.  North India: The Manuscripts of Mithilā
Originally planned in eleven volumes, A Descriptive Catalogue of 
Manuscripts in Mithilā only reached four volumes and was published 
by The Bihar and Orissa Research Society, Patna from 1927 to 1940. 
Volume one covers the Smti manuscripts (1927); volume two, the literature, prosody and rhetoric manuscripts, (1933); volume three, the 
Jyotiḥśāstra manuscripts (1937); and volume four, the Vedic manuscripts (1940).

--- Page 280 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
264
Had it been completed, this collection would have been especially 
interesting because Mithilā was a place renowned for scholarship and 
intellectual life. Mithilā is the antique name for the region that was 
known as Tirhut under the Mughals. From 1875, under the British, 
the same area was divided into three Districts: Champāran to the west 
and Darbhangā to the east of Muzaffarpur. Darbhangā was the headquarters of Mithilā’s Brahmanism and, therefore, crucial for understanding the distribution of Sanskrit manuscripts (Imperial Gazetteer 
of India, Vol. XI, 153-54).
The catalogues of manuscripts represent the results of the search 
for rare Sanskrit and Prakrit manuscripts in Bihār and Orissa, under 
the auspices of the Government of Bihār and Orissa and the President 
of the Bihār and Orissa Research Society. Publication was underwritten by the Mahārājādhirāja of Darbhangā.16 Among the cataloguing 
data included for each manuscript is found the ‘place of deposit’ or 
provenance, which includes the name of the owner and the town 
where he resided. Therefore, by a process of data-extraction and analysis, one can theoretically reconstruct the original owners of different 
types of manuscripts and the extent of their holdings in a particular 
intellectual subject. However, since only part of the collected manuscripts has been catalogued, the full range of an owner’s collection is 
not known. A controlled analysis of the provenance of manuscripts in 
a particular branch of learning can, therefore, provide a fairly accurate 
picture of specialists in that field and where in the region of greater 
Mithilā they were located.
For the example from Mithilā, I have selected the catalogue of Smti 
manuscripts, which represents the traditional subject-matter of Dhar
maśāstra or Hindu Law. Historically, Dharmaśāstra has held a long 
and distinguished history in Mithilā, since it is “the only surviving 
centre in the whole of northern India where the whole of Smti may be 
studied in all its successive stages from earliest times to present day.”17 
The catalogue of Smti-manuscripts will, therefore, allow us to identify the owners and their locations of this intellectual tradition in the 
region and thus provide a more detailed picture of the intellectual life 
surrounding Hindu Law in Mithilā in the early modern period.
16  Jayaswal and Śāstrī 1927, i-ii.
17  Jayaswal and Śāstrī 1927, xiv.

--- Page 281 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
265
A number of 455 manuscripts is identified in the catalogue, but the 
actual number is over twice this amount, because the editor simply 
lists works with the same name under one title. The classification of 
Smti includes literature from the Dharmaśāstras as well as literature 
which is normally found under a category called Karmakāṇḍa, which 
deals with ritual procedures for Brahmanic religious observances. 
Most of the manuscripts are written on paper in Maithilī script, and 
many of the manuscripts have direct bearing on the legal and religious 
issues pertaining to the areas from which they derived and are written 
by local paṇḍits.
A total of 116 paṇḍits from the Darbhangā area of Bihār contributed 1026 individual manuscripts to the catalogue (see table-118). The 
Rāj Library in Darbhangā with 187 manuscripts was the largest single 
collection. The Chitradhar Library in Tabhaka, Dalsiṅgh Sarai, with 
thirteen manuscripts is a smaller collection. However, since they represent repositories rather than individual owners’ collections, they are 
excluded from the survey, leaving a total number of Smti-manuscripts 
in individual collections at 826. Only owners with ten or more manuscripts in their collections are included, because fewer than ten can 
hardly be seen as constituting an intellectual concentration. Twentysix individuals fit into the criterion of ten or more manuscripts. 
Together they yield 515 manuscripts which represent about 62% of 
the Smti-manuscripts from individual collections. Although the 
majority of owners bear the name Miśra or Jhā, it is impossible to 
know from this source alone whether any of the Miśras or Jhās is 
related. Such information could be obtained from census reports or 
other data from the region. However, the owners’ distribution based 
on location is as follows: seven in Jhañjhārpur; four in Maṇīgāchī; 
three in Madhubanī; two each in Andhrāṭhārhī, Dalsiṅgh Sarai, Sakrī, 
and Salampur (Ghatāho); and one each in Mādhavpur, Tamuriā, 
Pandauli, Deodhā, and Benīpati (see map - I).
18  In compiling this list of names and places, it was noticed that the spellings 
were not consistent, so I have made an effort to standardise them throughout.

--- Page 282 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
266
Map-I shows the locations in Darbhangā, Bihār, North India as follows: 
1. Jhañjhārpur 2. Madhubanī 3. Darbhangā 4. Mādhavpur 5. Andhrāṭhārhī 
6. Salampur (Ghatāho). 
Map after Imperial Gazetteer of India, 1909 ed. 
Courtesy: Chicago Univ. collection. See colour section, Plate XXVI.
It may be pointed out that the pattern of locations of the collections 
with fewer than ten Smti-manuscripts conforms to that of the collections with more than ten manuscripts shown in Map-I. 
The information about owners and their locations provided in the 
catalogue of Smti-manuscripts from Mithilā, therefore, permits us 
accurately to identify the principal preservers of the intellectual tradition of Dharmaśāstra along with their locations in the region known 
as Darbhangā. In this way, we are able to add specific names and 
places to the intellectual life of Dharmaśāstra in Mithilā during the 
early modern period, and, therefore, contribute important information to the intellectual history of the region. 
2.  South India: The Manuscripts of Tamilnādu
The southern Indian example relies on two reports of manuscripts 
in private libraries in Tamilnādu and part of modern-day Andhra 
Pradesh: Gustav Oppert’s Lists of Sanskrit manuscripts in private

--- Page 283 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
267
libraries of South India, vols. 1 and 2, and Eugen Hultzsch’s Reports 
of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Southern India, no.1 of 3. Both cataloguers 
acknowledge the use of native authorities to visit the different col
lections and to gather information on each manuscript. In the case 
of Hultzsch’s reports, extracts of manuscripts were also made and are 
found in the appendices. The final edited compilation, which included 
the identification of each manuscript’s subject-matter, was undertaken 
by Oppert and Hultzsch. In general, the latter covers collections 
omitted by the former, so that both can be considered as forming one 
single listing of the private manuscripts in the region. In a couple of 
instances in Oppert’s catalogue, a collection is mentioned twice with 
no explanation. Hultzsch noticed the same occurrence, where Oppert 
had already mentioned a collection by the same owner, but the titles 
of manuscripts were different. He suggested that it could be the result 
of showing parts of a single collection at different times (note 2, p. iii). 
Oppert’s two-volume catalogue a total of 18,797 manuscripts (vol. 
1: 8,376, vol. 2: 10,421) from the following districts: North and South 
Arcot, Bellary, Chingleput, Coimbatore, Kadapa, Karnul, Krishna, 
Madura, Malabar, Mysore, Salem, Tanjore, Tinnevelly, Trichinopoly, 
and Vizagapatam. Hultzsch’s first two numbers catalogue about 1,600 
manuscripts from Nellore, Tiruvailyāru, Tiruviḍaimarudūr, and Tira
visanallūr. His last number is a catalogue of a single collection of about 
700 manuscripts, belonging to Jambunāthabhaṭṭa, a Marāṭhā Brahmin 
in Tanjore, who was the eldest son of Mannambhaṭṭa. It contains 
largely Devanāgarī copies of north Indian manuscripts and is very 
rich in Vedic literature. 
Unlike the catalogue from Mithilā, these two catalogues present the 
information in tabular form by means of owner and location, both in 
terms of district and town, along with other relevant information, 
including title, author, subject, script, material, extent, average lines 
per page, and pertinent remarks. For the purpose of illustration, I 
have selected only a part of the districts covered in both catalogues.
The methodology used to obtain data from these catalogues is very 
similar to that employed in the case of the Smti-catalogue from 
Mithilā with an additional step aimed at identifying the primary and 
secondary literary interests of a given collection. This step was unnecessary with the manuscripts from Mithilā because the cataloguing 
already took into consideration the primary interest in Dharmaśāstra. 
The first step necessitates the extraction of information which yields a

--- Page 284 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
268
list of owners, districts, total number of manuscripts each owner possessed, and number of manuscripts in each subject (see table-2). This 
is done in order to give a clear view of the range and number of manuscripts in any given collection. For the sake of consistency the number 
of at least ten (10) manuscripts in a single collection is used, because it 
is deemed that a collection with fewer manuscripts would not permit 
an accurate assessment of both primary and secondary intellectual 
focus, except where a single subject constitutes the entire collection. 
These “acceptable” collections are indicated in bold typeface in table 2. 
In listing the manuscripts from each collection, only subjects with the 
highest number of manuscripts are mentioned, and subjects with only 
one manuscript are cited only in collections with less than ten manuscripts. In a few cases, individual collections appear to belong to family members from the same gotra, based on the similarities of their 
names. Only collections with thirty or more manuscripts are included, 
regardless of the number of manuscripts owned by individual family 
members.
After identifying the “acceptable” collections for this study, the second step involves a further refinement of the information to determine the principal owners, their locations, and their primary and 
secondary intellectual interests. This information is found in table 2, 
where it is organised according to owner, district, town, and subjectmatter. An arbitrary number of at least 25% of the total collection was 
deemed sufficient for a primary specialisation and at least 20% for a 
secondary specialisation. In certain cases, the percentages did not 
reach the designated minimums; however, the overall size of the collection was sufficient to offer a primary and/or secondary specialisation. These data are provided in table 3.
The information found in table 3 identifies the owners, their towns, 
and their primary and occasionally secondary subjects of specialisation in the three South Indian districts of Chingleput, Coimbatore, 
and Nellore (see map-II for Chingleput and Nellore, and map-III for 
Coimbatore).

--- Page 285 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
269
Map II shows the locations in Tamilnādu, South India as follows: 
1. Inamanamaḷḷūr 2. Kareḍu 3. Brāhmaṇakrāka (Agrahāra) 4. Bucchireḍḍipālayam 
5. Lebūr 6. Kañcīpuram=Conjeevaram 7. Taṇḍari 8. Ammaṇapālam =Amma
nāmbākkam (?) 9. Elanakar = Eranavur (?) 10. Marutvānpāti = Marudavāttipuram 
(?) 11. Koṇḍaṅgi = Kondanier (?) 12. Pillapākka = Panapakkam. 
Map after Imperial Gazetteer of India, 1909 ed. 
Courtesy: Chicago Univ. collection. See colour section, Plate XXVII.

--- Page 286 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
270
Map-III shows the locations in Tamilnādu, South India as follows: 
1. Kaḍattūr = Kadathur (?), 2. Bhavān, 3. Kāṇīyūr, 4. Pallaḍam, 5. Kārūr, 
6. Kumāraliṅgam. 
Map after Imperial Gazetteer of India, 1909 ed. 
Courtesy: Chicago Univ. collection. See colour section, Plate XXVIII.
As in the case of the owners from Mithilā, a kindred relationship 
between them cannot be determined from these data, but the fol
lowing names bear closer examination. In Chingleput, there is 
Narasiṁhācāryār from Ammaṇapālam and Elanakar; Varadācāryār 
and Vijagarācāryār from Ammaṇapālam and Kañcīpuram; Rāmānujā
cāryār from Elanakar, Kañcīpuram, Marutvānpāḍi, and Taḍakamaṅg
lam; Tātācāryār and Rāghavācāryār from Kañcīpuram and Uttara- 
mallūr; Raṅgācāryār from Kañcīpuram, Pillapakkam, and Velamur; 
and Śāstriyār from Kañcīpuram and Kārūr in Coimbatore; and in 
Coimbatore, there is Śrauti from Kāṇiyūr and Bhavāni; Rāmās
vāmiśāstrī from Kojuman and Kumāraliṅgam; and Aiyar from 
Pallaḍam.
In terms of subjects covered in different regions of Tamilnādu, 
Chingleput is dominated by philosophy, principally Vedānta and 
Nyāya. Second comes Kāvya, followed by Dharma, Veda, and Stotra.

--- Page 287 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
271
The town of Kañcīpuram has the largest number of specialists in 
Philosophy, Kāvya, Dharma, and one in Vedāṅga. The other towns 
have considerably fewer specialists and reflect the specialisations of 
Kañcīpuram. Since Kañcīpuram has been a major religious centre for 
Hindus for centuries, it is natural that it would also be a central place 
for Brahmanic learning. It can also be noticed that it would appear 
that its influence, especially in the subjects of philosophy and literature, spread throughout the district to most of the other towns of 
Chingleput. 
There are relatively few secondary intellectual interests among the 
collections from Chingleput. Most come from Kañcīpuram and reflect 
the overall dominance on philosophy, i.e., Vedānta and Nyāya. Others 
include Dharma and Veda.
Coimbatore is dominated by owners who had interest in literature, 
which includes both Kāvya and Itihāsa/Purāṇa. This is followed by 
philosophy (i.e., Vedānta and Nyāya). The town of Bhavāni has the 
most number of specialists, who, from their family names, may belong 
to the same gotra. Aside from these major subjects in the district, 
Kaḍattūr has a paṇḍit who specialised in Vyākaraṇa, Bhavāni has one 
in Veda, and Kārūr one in Dharma. 
The secondary interests mirror the primary ones and also exhibit a 
good deal of diversity, including Veda, Dharma and Vyākaraṇa.
Finally, the district of Nellore has the fewest number of collections 
that fit the minimum criterion of thirty manuscripts. Overall, 
Philosophy, principally Vedānta, predominates. This could reflect the 
influence from the neighbouring Chingleput district. After Philosophy, 
comes Dharma, Kāvya, and Śrauta. In terms of secondary interests, 
two have Vyākaraṇa, and one has Dharma, one Śrauta, and one 
Vedāṅga.
The districts thus far examined in Tamilnādu and Andhra Pradesh 
indicate that in the early modern period individual manuscript collections were dominated by philosophy, primarily Vedānta and Nyāya, 
and literature, with secondary interests in a variety of subjects including Dharma, Veda and Vedic ritual, as well as grammar. In general 
these primary and secondary subjects correspond rather closely to the 
Brahmanic literature mentioned in the eleventh century inscriptions, 
which tell about grants given for the establishment of centres for 
Brahmanic learning (Mookerji, 1951 [2003]: 367-72). A closer and 
more detailed examination of the inscriptions could reveal connections between owners of manuscripts, their locations, and their special

--- Page 288 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
272
interests from which one might well point to continuity in Indian 
intellectual history from the eleventh through the nineteenth centuries for parts of Tamilnādu and modern-day Andhra Pradesh. 
Discussion and Conclusions
In this study, I have attempted to show how catalogues of Sanskrit 
manuscripts can provide information useful for understanding Indian 
intellectual history. I have focussed on the datum of provenance which 
gives the manuscripts’ owner and their location. This information 
could then be used to reconstruct a specific area’s intellectual history 
in the early modern period when most of the surveys of collections of 
manuscripts took place in India. Moreover, since the specialisation in 
an intellectual tradition is inextricably connected to the intellectual’s 
family, the individual and his location may well reflect a longer intellectual history for the area.19
Several difficulties had to be addressed before a successful result 
could be achieved. Since relatively few catalogues and reports contained the manuscript’s provenance, the areas examined were necessarily very circumscribed, resulting in incomplete coverage. Not all 
the sources that contained the datum of provenance were arranged in 
the same manner. Some listed the manuscripts by subject, some by 
location, and some simply by the order in which the manuscript was 
received and catalogued. In all cases, however, the methodology 
required the reconstruction of the owners’ original collections by 
looking at every entry and extracting its owner and location. These 
data provided the basic information for further analysis. 
In this paper, I have not examined all of the available reports and 
catalogues that provide a manuscript’s provenance, but have limited 
myself to two such sources, one from north India and one from south 
India. The former catalogued the manuscripts by subject and the latter 
by location.
 From the north, the first volume of the catalogue of Mithilā manuscripts was used, because it provided the ‘find spot’ for each of the 
Smti-manuscripts listed in the catalogue. First, a complete list of 
owners, their locations, and the quantity of manuscripts in their col19  In a way, this study complements and builds upon David Pingree’s groundbreaking study of the Anūp Library in Bīkāner as an important intellectual centre 
through the use of its catalogue of Sanskrit manuscripts (Pingree, 1997).

--- Page 289 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
273
lections was made. Since the entire extent of an owner’s collection is 
not known, it was impossible to determine the percentage of the total 
collection represented by the Smti-manuscripts, and thereby to know 
if Dharmaśāstra reflected a primary or secondary concentration. 
Therefore, an arbitrary number of a total of ten manuscripts20 served 
as the basis for establishing an intellectual’s interest. The results of the 
survey provided a list of owners of collections of Smti-manuscripts, 
who were also the principal maintainers of the intellectual tradition of 
Dharmaśāstra in Mithilā. The names and places contribute to a better 
understanding of the intellectual life of the region during the early 
modern period. 
From the south, two reports of collections of manuscripts in 
Tamilnādu and parts of modern-day Andhra Pradesh were used, with 
a focus on districts of Chingleput, Coimbatore, and Nellore. Unlike 
the Mithilā catalogue, these reports listed manuscripts by district, city 
and owner, and include the subject-matter of each manuscript. With 
this information, a more comprehensive understanding of an owner’s 
collection could be determined. First, the collections were grouped 
according to district, owner, and town, and the number and subjects 
of manuscripts in each collection. Secondly, this list was reduced using 
as criterion ten or more manuscripts in a particular subject. Moreover, 
because the sources provided an owner’s complete collection, a primary and secondary interest could be determined on the basis of relative percentages: 25% for primary and 20% for secondary interests. 
Small collections with manuscripts in only one subject would also be 
included. Secondary specialisation mirrored that of the primary.
From these data a complete overview of the preservers, their locations, and their primary and secondary intellectual interests could be 
obtained for the three South Indian districts in the early modern 
period. Moreover, the primary intellectual traditions reflected in their 
collections correspond to those which are mentioned in the South 
Indian inscriptions from the eleventh century, reflecting perhaps continuity over time. 
20  The number ten was chosen on the basis of my personal visual inspection of 
the manuscript collections, where it appeared that ten or more manuscripts in a 
particular subject reflected the owner’s interest, if not specialisation, in that subjectmatter. Other suggestions on a more accurate establishment of an owner’s con
centration based on the number of manuscript in a particular subject are most 
welcomed.

--- Page 290 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
274
The two sources used as examples in this study, therefore, provided 
information about each manuscript’s provenance. One focussed on a 
particular tradition of Sanskrit learning, and the other on complete 
collections, their locations, and the different systems of Sanskrit 
knowledge they contained. The first yielded specific information about 
the locations of the single intellectual tradition, while the second gave 
more extensive knowledge about the distribution of different traditional form of Sanskrit literature in a particular region. Both are useful, but the results are slightly different in each case.
Although this study used only two examples, it offered at least two 
useful results. One shows how catalogues of Sanskrit manuscripts can 
be used to understand better India’s general intellectual history; and 
two, it points specifically to certain trends in intellectual history of a 
special region or area of India during the early modern period if not 
before. Therefore, based on the information provided in this paper, a 
more comprehensive project can be undertaken in which all of the 
catalogues and reports are surveyed using a methodology similar to 
that described in this essay in order to increase our understanding of 
both the regional and general intellectual history of India.
Bibliography
Aufrecht, Th. 1859-1864. Catalogus codicum manuscriptorum sanscriticorum post
vedicorum: quotquot in Bibliotheca Bodleiana adservantur [2 parts]. Oxonii: e 
Typographeo Academico.
Belvalkar, S.K. 1916. “Foreword” to Descriptive Catalogue of the Government 
Collections of Manuscripts deposited at the Deccan College, Poona. Vol. 1, Part 1, 
xi-xlvi. Compiled by the Assistant to the Professor of Sanskrit, Deccan College, 
Poona. Bombay: The Government of Bombay. 
Bhandarkar, Shridhar R. 1907. Report of the second tour in search of Sanskrit manuscripts in Rajputana and Central India in 1904-5 and 1905-6. Bombay: Government 
Press.
Biswas, Subhas C. and M.K. Prajapati. 1998. Bibliographic Survey of Indian Manuscript 
Catalogues: Being a Union List of Manuscript Catalogues. Delhi: Eastern Book 
Linkers.
Deshmukh, Revati P. 1996. A study of the descriptive catalogues of Sanskrit manuscripts. Jaipur: Printwell.
Gode, P. K. 1969. “A brief note on the history and progress of cataloguing of Sanskrit 
and other MSS in India and outside (between A.D. 1800 & 1941.” In P.K. Gode, 
Studies in Indian cultural history. Vol. 3: 48-70. Poona: B.O.R. Institute.
Gough, Archibald Edward. ed. 1878. Papers Related to the Collection and Preservations 
of the Records of Ancient Sanskrit Literature in India. Calcutta: Office of Super
intendent of Government Printing.
Government of India, 1958. Report of the Sanskrit Commission 1956-1957. Delhi: 
Manager, Govt. of India Press.

--- Page 291 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
275
Haraprasād Śāstrī, Mahāmahopādhyāya. 1900-11. Notices of Sanskrit Mss. Second 
Series. 4 Vols. Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press. [Reprint: Delhi: Sharada Prakashan, 
1990]
Hatcher, Brian A. 1996. “Indigent Brahmans, Industrious Pandits: Bourgeois Ideology 
and Sanskrit Pandits in Colonial Calcutta.” Comparative Studies of South Asia, 
Africa and the Middle East, 16(1): 15-26 [Special Issue: Divergent Modernities].
———  2005. “What’s Become of the Pandit? Rethinking the History of Sanskrit 
Scholars in Colonial Bengal.” Modern Asian Studies, 39(3): 683-724.
Hultzsch, Eugen. 1895-1905. Reports of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Southern India. 
Nos.1- 3. Madras: The Superintendent, Government Press.
The Imperial Gazetteer of India, 1908. 25 Vols. New Edition, published under the 
authority of His Majesty’s Secretary of State for India in Council. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Janert, Klaus Ludwig. 1965. An annotated bibliography of the catalogues of Indian 
manuscripts. Part 1. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.
Jayaswal, Kashiprasad and Anantaprasad Banerji Śāstrī [comp.]. 1927. A descriptive 
catalogue of the manuscripts in Mithilā. Vol. 1. Smti Manuscripts. Patna: The 
Bihar and Orissa Research Society.
Johnson, Donald Clay. 1988. “On the Origins of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute Library. Part I. The Initiation of the Searches for Sanskrit Manuscripts in 
Bombay.” Annals, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 69: 111-124.
———  1990. “On the Origins of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute Library. 
Part II. The work of Ramkrishna Gopal Bhandarkar and Peter Peterson.” Annals, 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 71: 71-82.
———  1993. “On the Origins of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute Library. 
Part III. From Public to Private Administration.” Annals, Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute, 74: 169-179.
Pingree, David. 1997. “Astronomy at the Court of Anūpasiṁha.” In: From Astral 
Omens to Astrology: from Babylon to Bīkāner. (Serie Orientale Roma, LXXVII.) 
Roma: Istituto Italiano per L’Africa e L’Oriente.
Mitra, Rājendralāl and Mahāmahopādhyāya Haraprasād Śāstrī. 1871-95. Notices of 
Sanskrit MSS. First Series. Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press. [Reprint: Delhi: Sharada 
Prakashan, 1990-91] 
Mookerji, Radha Kumud. 1951 [2003]. Ancient Indian Education. Brahmanical and 
Buddhist. 1951 rpt. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Oppert, Gustav. 1880-85. Lists of Sanskrit manuscripts in private libraries of Southern 
India. 2 Vols. Madras: Madras Government Press.
Panchamukhi, R.S. et al., eds. 1953-70. A descriptive catalogue of manuscripts in the 
Kannada Research Institute. 9 volumes. Dharwar: Kannada Research Institute.
Peterson, Peter. 1883. Detailed report of the operations in search of Sanskrit MSS in the 
Bombay Circle, August 1882-March 1883. Extra number of the Journal of the 
Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. Bombay: Society’s Library, Town Hall.
———  1884. A second report of the operations in search of Sanskrit MSS in the Bombay 
Circle, April 1883-March 1884. Extra number of the Journal of the Bombay Branch 
of the Royal Asiatic Society. Bombay: Society’s Library, Town Hall.
Raghavan, V. 1963. Manuscripts, Catalogues, Editions. Steps taken for the collection, 
preservation and utilisation of manuscripts, prepared for the Seminar on 
Manuscripts & Textual Criticism conducted by the Ministry of Scientific Research & 
Cultural Affairs at Bangalore 3rd–12th November 1963. Madras. 
Taylor, William. 1857-62. Catalogue raisonné of Oriental manuscripts in the Library of 
the (late) College, Fort Saint George, now in charge of the Board of Examiners. 
3 vols. Madras: The Fort St. George Gazette Press.
Wagoner, Phillip B. 2003. “Precolonial Intellectuals and the Production of Colonial 
Knowledge.” Comparative Studies in Society and History, 45(4): 783-814.

--- Page 292 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
276
Table 13.1.  Owners and Locations of Dharmaśāstra Manuscripts in Mithilā.
Sl. 
Owners 
Location 
        No. of Manuscripts
1. 
Rāj Library 
Darbhangā 
 
187
2. 
M. M. Rājināth Miśra 
Saurāth, Madhubanī 
59
3. 
Dāmodar Jhā 
Ṭhārhī, Andhraṭhārhī 
44
4. 
Gonū Miśra 
Lālagañj, Jhañjhārpur 
39
5. 
Rabināth Jhā 
Andhraṭhārthī 
 
(Professor at the M.R. Vidyālaya) 
 
38
6. 
Śiveśvara Jhā 
Lālagañj, Jhañjhārpur 
31
7. 
Rāghava Jhā 
Andaulī, Mādhavapur 
31
8. 
Sureśa Miśra 
Saurāth, Madhubanī 
23
9. 
Śrīkānta Miśra 
Salampur, Ghatāho 
19
10. 
Tārānāth Jhā, 
Dharmapur, Jhañjhārpur 
19
11. 
Vasudeva Miśra 
Salampur, Ghatāho 
19
12. 
Manohar Ṭhākur 
Tabhaka, Dalsiṅgh Sarai 
18
13. 
Śrīkānta Jhā 
Naḍuār, Jhañjhārpur 
18
14. 
Maṇīśvara Jhā 
Lālagañj, Jhañjhārpur 
16
15. 
Ādyānātha Miśra 
Pāhītol, Maṇīgāchī 
14
16. 
Gokulanātha Jhā, 
Nanaur, Tamuriā 
 
(now in possession of Jayadeva Ṭhākur, brother-in-law) 
14
17. 
Dīnabandhu Jhā 
Isahapur, Maṇīgāchī 
14
18. 
Dāmodara Jhā 
Sāhapur, Pandauli 
13
19. 
Chandradhārī Siṅgh 
Rauti, Deaurhī, Madhubanī 
13
20. 
Kapileśvara Jhā 
Sakhabāda, Maṇīgāchī 
13
21. 
Chitradhara Library 
Tabhaka, Dalsiṅgh Sarai 
13
22. 
Viśvanātha Jhā 
Mahīnāthapur, Deodhā 
12
23. 
Nīlakaṇṭha Siṅgh Jhā 
Chanaur, Maṇīgāchī 
12
24. 
Bīkala Jhā 
Lālagañj, Jhañjhārpur 
11
25. 
Phuddī Jhā 
Avāma, Jhañjhārpur 
11
26. 
M.M. Parameśvara Jhā 
Taraunī, Sakrī 
 
10
27. 
Vāsudeva Miśra 
Champā, Benīpati 
 
10
28. 
Gaṅgānātha Miśra 
Taraunī, Sakrī 
 
10
29. 
Baladeva Jhā 
Rayām, Lohāt 
 
9
30. 
Śrīnandana Miśra 
Kanhauli, Sakrī 
 
9
31. 
Śukadeva Jhā, 
Pachāṣṭhī, Pandauli 
8
32. 
Chetanātha Jhā 
Nabatolā, Maṇīgāchī 
8
33. 
Gopāla Miśra 
Tabhaka, Dalsiṅgh Sarai 
8
34. 
Gopīnātha Jhā 
Naḍuār, Jhañjhārpur 
8
35. 
Śaktinātha Jhā 
Ujānā, Jhañjhārpur 
7
36. 
Gaurīkānta Jhā 
Devahī, Tamuriā 
 
7
37. 
Dhareśvara Jhā 
Lālañj, Jhañjhārpur 
7
38. 
Yadunandana Ṭhākur 
Sarvasīmā, Jhañjhārpur 
7
39. 
Bālakṛṣṇa Jhā 
Nanaur, Tamuriā 
 
6
40. 
Kedaranātha Jhā 
Rūpanalī, Jhañjhārpur 
6
41. 
Chirañjīva Ṭhākur 
Lagamā, Bīraul 
 
6
42. 
Baccā Jhā 
Hanumān Nagar, Lohāt 
6
43. 
Premadhara Jhā 
Ujānā, Jhañjhārpur 
6
44. 
Sadānanada Jhā 
Ṭhārhī, Andhrāṭhārhī 
6
45. 
Khuśara Jhā 
Saurāth, Madhubanī 
5

--- Page 293 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
277
46. 
Gaṇānanda Jhā 
Lohnā, Jhañjhārpur 
5
47. 
Śaśinātha Miśra 
Taraunī, Sakrī 
 
5
48. 
Bālabhadra Jhā 
Pachāṣṭhī, Pandauli 
5
49. 
Umākānta Jhā 
Taraunī, Sakrī 
 
5
50. 
Śrīkṛṣṇa Ṭhākur 
Sarvasīmā, Jhañjhārpur 
5
51. 
Prabhunātha Miśra 
Lagamā, Bīraul 
 
5
52. 
Yaduvīra Miśra 
Khopā, Phulaparās 
5
53. 
Tārakeśvara Miśra 
Taraunī, Sakrī 
 
5
54. 
Chaturānanda Jhā 
Baḍasām, Madhīpur 
5
55. 
Gaṇanātha Jhā 
Pāhītol, Maṇīgāchī 
5
56. 
Khaṣṭhīnātha Miśra 
Lālañj, Jhañjhārpur 
5
57. 
Āryādatta Miśra 
Nanaur, Tamuriā 
 
5
58. 
Gaṅgādhara Jhā 
Jankimahināthapur, Deodhā 
4
59. 
Baccā Jhā 
Nanaur, Tamuriā 
 
4
60. 
Bālabhadra Jhā 
Jogiārā 
 
4
61. 
Jayadeva Pāṭhaka 
Naḍuār, Jhañjhārpur 
4
62. 
Jayaramaṇa Jhā 
Ujānā, Jhañjhārpur 
4
63. 
Mahīdhara Miśra 
Lālabāg 
 
4
64. 
Chandradeva Jhā 
Mahīnāthapur, Jhañjhārpur Bāzār 
4
65. 
Khuddi Jhā 
Koilakha, Lohāt 
 
4
66. 
Kṛṣṇadatta Miśra 
Salampur, Ghatāho 
4
67. 
Govardhana Jhā 
Naḍuār, Jhañjhārpur 
3
68. 
Govardhana Jhā 
Baliā, Sakrī 
 
3
69. 
Mukunda Siṅgh Jhā 
Chanaur, Maṇīgāchī 
3
70. 
Kamlākānta Miśra 
Salampur, Ghatāho 
3
71. 
Maheśvara Jhā 
Lālañj, Jhañjhārpur 
3
72. 
Sādhu Jhā 
Yamañhārī, Jhañjhārpur 
3
73. 
Babujana Jhā 
Śaśipur, Jogiārā 
 
3
74. 
Harṣadatta Jhā 
Ujānā, Jhañjhārpur 
3
75. 
Purandara Miśra 
Salampur, Myārī, Ghatāho 
3
76. 
Jīvanātha Jhā 
Lagamā, Bīrauli 
 
3
77. 
Nenamaṇi Jhā 
Bāṅkī, Madhīpur 
 
3
78. 
Rudrānanda Miśra 
Nanaur, Tamuriā 
 
3
79. 
Mārkaṇḍeya Miśra 
Chanaur, Maṇīgāchī 
3
80. 
Umeśa Miśra 
Viṣṇupur, Benīpati 
3
81. 
Bachan Jhā 
Naḍuār, Jhañjhārpur 
 
(son of Kaṇṭu Jhā) 
 
 
3 
82. 
Śivaśaṅkara Jhā 
Andhrāṭhārhī
 
(Principal at the Lohnā Vidyāpīṭha) 
 
3
83. 
Radhunātha Jhā 
Sanakorthi, Maṇīgāchī 
2
84. 
Devakṛṣṇa Jhā 
Chanaur, Maṇīgāchī 
2
85. 
Muralidhara Jhā 
Madhīpur 
 
2
86. 
Govinda Miśra 
Gaṅgauli, Maṇīgāchī 
2
87. 
Brajamohan Jhā 
Nanaur, Tamuriā 
 
2
88. 
Dīnakānta Jhā 
Salampur, Ghatāho 
2
89. 
Umādatta Miśra 
Salampur, Ghatāho 
2
90. 
Amarendra Siṅgh 
Choṭātaraf, Madhubanī 
2
Table 13.1.  Cont.
Sl. 
Owners 
Location 
        No. of Manuscripts

--- Page 294 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
278
91. 
Śrīnārāyaṇa Miśra 
Kothiyā, Jhañjhārpur Bāzār 
2
92. 
Yogīśvara Jhā 
Hanumānnagar, Lohāt 
2
93. 
Manamohan Jhā 
Maṅgarauni, Madhubanī 
2
94. 
Keśava Jhā 
Dharmapur, Jhañjhārpur 
2
95. 
Madhusūdana Miśra 
Jalasain, Jhañjhārpur 
2
96. 
Umānātha Jhā 
Andhrāṭhārhī 
 
2
97. 
Jagadiśa Jhā 
Ṭhārhī, Andhraṭhārhī 
1
98. 
Rudramaṇi Jhā 
Mahīnāthapur, Deodhā 
1
99. 
Dāmodar Siṅgh 
Ṭhākur, Bhaur, Maṇīgāchī 
1
100. Rāmanātha Ṭhākur 
Dharmapur, Jhañjhārpur 
1
101. Jayakṛṣṇa Jhā 
Champā, Benīpati 
 
1
102. Janārdana Miśra 
Chanaur, Maṇīgāchī 
1
103. Bālagopāla Jhā 
Taraunī, Sakrī 
 
1
104. Jīva Miśra 
Nanaur, Tamuriā 
 
1
105. Gaṅgādhar Miśra 
Taraunī, Sakrī 
 
1
106. Raghunandana Dāsa 
Sakhabād, Maṇīgāchī 
1
107. Aniruddha Jhā 
Koihakha, Lohāt 
 
1
108. Rāmānanda Jhā,Vaidya 
Pāhītol, Maṇīgāchī 
1
109. Padmanābha Miśra 
Lālbāg 
 
1
110. Śaśinātha Jhā 
Chanaur, Maṇīgāchī 
1
111. Bāmdeva Miśra 
Balampur, Ghatāho 
1
112. Nirasana Jhā 
Mahīnāthapur, Deodhā 
1
113. Śibu Dhibū Ṭhākur 
Khojapur, Katauna 
1
114. Vasudeva Miśra 
Chanaur, Maṇīgāchī 
1
115. Karpūr Jhā 
Andhrāṭhārhī 
 
1
116. Vrajamohan Jhā 
Nanaur, Tamuriā 
 
1
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    Total mss. 1026 
Table 13.1.  Cont.
Sl. 
Owners 
Location 
        No. of Manuscripts

--- Page 295 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
279
Table 13.2.  Owners and their collections from Tamilnādu.
1. Owner 
2. District 
3. Number 
4. Subjects
Lakṣmīnarasiṃhācāryār of Aḷaśūr 
Chingleput 
45 
30 Phil. (25 Ved., 5 Mīm.),
 
 
 
7 Dh., 7 Vyā.
Raghunāthācāryār of Aḷaśūr 
Chingleput 
7 
3 K., 2 Dh., 1 each Vyā.,Ved.
Ghanapāṭhi Śiṅgarācāryār of Aḷaśūr 
Chingleput 
66 
55 Veda, 5 Vyā., 2 Al.
Caṇḍamārutam Śrīnivāsarāghavācāryār of Aḷaśūr 
Chingleput 
60 
29 Phil. (25 Ved., 3 Mīm., 
 
 
 
3 Ny.), 21 K., 9 Vyā., 7 Veda
Narasiṃhācāryār of Ammaṇapālam 
Chingleput 
124 
44 Stotra, 34 Dh., 13 K., 
 
 
 
11 Jy.,10 Veda, 7 I./P.
Triuveṅkaṭācāryār of Ammaṇapālam 
Chingleput 
10 
4 K., 2 Cāṭu, 1each of I., 
 
 
 
Mīm., Nīti, Kāma, Stotra
Varadācāryār of Ammaṇapālam 
Chingleput 
7 
All Jy.
Vijayarāghavācāryār of Ammaṇapālam 
Chingleput 
7 
All Stotra
Narasiṃhācāryār of Elanakar 
Chingleput 
57 
54 Phil. (27 Ved., 27 Ny.), 
 
 
 
2 Al.
Rāmānujācāryār of Elanakar 
Chingleput 
12 
4 I./P., 4 Dh., 3 Phil. (2 Ny.,
 
 
 
1 Ved.), 1 Gṛ.
Gaḍḍam Narasiṃhatātācāryār of Elanahar 
Chingleput 
8 
All Ny.
Ahobilajīya of Kañcīpuram 
Chingleput 
16 
12 Ved.
Peruṅguṭṭūr Aiya Vedānta Rāmānuja Tātācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
97 
65 Dh., 11 Ved., 6 I./P., 
 
 
 
6 Gṛ., 3 Jy.
Koṇḍaṅgi Anantācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
34 
17 Phil. (16 Ny., 6 Ved.), 
 
 
 
6 Jy., 6 K., 4 I./P.
Anantācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
5 
2 Jy., 2 K.,1 Al.
Tiruppuṭkulikṛṣṇa Tātācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
123 
109 Phil. (77 Ny., 21 Ved., 
 
 
 
11 Mīm.), 7 Stotra, 5 Dh.

--- Page 296 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
280
Table 13.2.  Cont.
1. Owner 
2. District 
3. Number 
4. Subjects
* This and previous might be the same person; however, the entries are different for each. Perhaps they were examined on two separate occasions.
Tirupuṭkuli Śrīkṛṣṇa Tātācāryār of Kāñcīpuram* 
 Chingleput 
209 
94 Phil. (49 Ved., 36 Ny., 
 
 
 
8 Mīm.), 36 K., 12 Vyā., 
 
 
 
12 Al.
Aśvattha Nārāyaṇa Śāstriyār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
9 
All Ny.
Parakāla Maṭham of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
7 
All Ved.
Rāmacandrācār’s Sanskrit School of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
103 
44 K., 25 Phil. (11 Ny., 
 
 
 
8 Ved., 5 Mīm., 1 Sāṃkhya), 
 
 
 
13 Stotra
Śaṭhakopācāryār’s Sanskrit School of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
46 
23 K., 15 Phil. (9 Ny., 4 Ved., 
 
 
 
2 Mīm.), 6 Vyā.
Araśāṇipāle Śrīnivāsa Rāghavācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
70 
34 Phil.(14 Ny., 11Ved., 
 
 
 
9 Mīm.), 14 Vyā., 8 Dh. 
Attipaṭṭu Cakravartī Śrīnivāsa Rāghavācāryār, 
  Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
16 
15 Phil. (13 Ny., 2 Ved.)
Śrīśaila Tātācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
22 
12 K., 3 Al., 3 Jy., 2 Vyā.
Nivṛtti Subrahmaṇyaśāstrī of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
30 
15 Dh., 3 Śr., 3 I./P., 2 Jy., 
 
 
 
2 Veda, 2 Gṛ.
Upaniṣadbrahma Maṭham of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
7 
6 Ved., 1 Vyā.
Karupūr Varadācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
18 
All Vyā.
Vedānta Rāmānujācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
27 
14 K., 8 Dh., 5 Al.
Veṅkaṭavarada Tātācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
62 
27 Phil. (18 Ved., 
 
 
 
8 Ny.,1 Mīm.), 11 Dh., 9 K.
Vijayarāghavācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
11 
11 Phil.(9 Ny., 2 Ved.)
Vīrarāghava Tātācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
121 
36 Ved., 16 Vyā., 14 Phil. 
 
 
 
(10 Ved., 3 Yoga, 1 Mīm.), 
 
 
 
13 Al.
Bālabāhunainār (Police Inspector of Kāñcīpuram) 
Chingleput 
4 
2 each Tattva, Carita
Kṛṣṇaśāstrī of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
8 
All Ny.
Vegavati of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
14 
12 Ved., 1 each Al.,Vyā.

--- Page 297 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
281
Jaḍapatūr Raṅgācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
110 
25 K., 19 Stotra, 13 Vyā.,11 Jy., 
 
 
10 Phil., (3 Ny., 7 Ved.)
Subrahmaṇyayājulu of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
11 
5 Phil. (3 Ved., 2 Ny.), 3 K., 
 
 
2 Dh.
Madhva Veṇugopālācāryār of Kāñcīpuram 
Chingleput 
39 
28 Phil. (24 Ved., 4 Ny.), 
10 Veda
Rājagopālācāryār of Koṇḍaṅgi 
Chingleput 
12 
9 K.
Kastūr Aiyaṅgār of Marutvānpāḍi 
Chingleput 
3 
9 K., 2 I./P.,1 Al.
Rāmānujācāryār Aiyaṅgār of Marutvānpāḍi 
Chingleput 
28 
11 Stotra, 7 I./P., 5 Dh., 2 Ved.
Śrīnivāsācāryār Aiyaṅgār of Marutvānpāḍi 
Chingleput 
3 
2 Stotra,1 Dh.
Vakulābharaṇa Aiyaṅgār of Marutvānpāḍi 
Chingleput 
4 
2 Dh., 1 Stotra, 1 Ved.
Veṅkaṭācāryār of Marutvānpāḍi 
Chingleput 
32 
14 K., 9 Ved., 3 Dh., 2 Stotra, 
2 Al.,
Veṅkaṭācāryār of Marutvānpāḍi* 
Chingleput 
17 
7 Ved., 5 Dh., 4 K.
Gopālācāryār of Pillapākkam 
Chingleput 
111 
31 Veda, 25 Phil. (14 Ny., 
11 Ved., 1 Mīm.), 20 K., 14 Vyā.
Appaya Kṛṣṇamācāryār of Pillapākkam 
Chingleput 
15 
6 K., 4 Veda, 3 I./P.
Pattaṅgi Raṅgācāryār of Pillapākkam 
Chingleput 
66 
49 Phil. (30 Ny., 18 Ved., 
1 Mīm.), 7 K., 3 Dh., 3 Jy.
Bahukuṭumbi Śaṭhakopācāryār of Pillapākkam 
Chingleput 
18 
8 Veda, 4 I./P., 4 Dh.,2 K.
Rāmānujācāryār of Taḍakamaṅgalam 
Chingleput 
13 
8 Sāmaveda,2 Ved.,2 K.
Ailuvaidya of Taṇḍarai 
Chingleput 
10 
5 Vaidya, 2 I./P., 1 each K., 
Stotra, Saṅgīta
Table 13.2.  Cont.
1. Owner 
2. District 
3. Number 
4. Subjects
* This and previous might be the same person; however, the entries are different for each. Perhaps they were examined on two separate occasions.

--- Page 298 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
282
Table 13.2.  Cont.
1. Owner 
2. District 
3. Number 
4. Subjects
Madhuramaṅgalam Jīyar of Śrīperumbūdūr 
Chingleput 
54 
46 Phil. (34 Ved., 8 Mīm., 2 Ny., 
2 Sāṅkhya/Yoga), 3 I./P.
Śrī Ahobila Jīyar of Tiruvallūr (Trivellore) 
Chingleput 
17 
12 Ved., 4 Stotra
Vaṅkīpuram Śrīnivāsācāryār of Tiruvallūr (Trivellore) 
Chingleput 
165 
101 Phil. (66 Ny., 31 Ved., 
4 Mīm.), 32 Jy., 11 K.
Ahobilamaṭham of Tiruvallūr (Trivellore) 
Chingleput 
34 
28 Phil. (20 Ved., 7 Mīm., 
1 Ny.), 3 Veda
Śrīnivāsa Rāghavācāryār of Uttaramallūr 
Chingleput 
16 
6 Vaidya
Śrīraṅgācāryār of Velāmūr 
Chingleput 
83 
36 Phil. (19 Ved., 14 Ny., 
3 Mīm.), 14 Veda, 9 K., 6 Jy.
Anantarāmaśāstrī of Kaḍattūr 
Coimbatore 
15 
7 K., 3 I./P., 2 Dh., 2 Vyā.
Gaṅgādharaśāstrī of Kaḍattūr 
Coimbatore 
9 
7 I./P.,1 Dh.,1 Nighaṇṭu
Gopālakṛṣṇayya of Kaḍattūr 
Coimbatore 
53 
18 Vyā., 15 Phil. (9 Ny., 4 Ved., 
2Mīm.), 12 K.
Rāmakṛṣṇayya of Kaḍattūr 
Coimbatore 
4 
2 Veda, 1 Dh., 1 I./P.
Śaṅkararāma Ayya of Kaḍattūr 
Coimbatore 
12 
4 I./P., 3 Veda, 2 K., 2 Vyā.
Anantakṛṣṇaśrautī of Kāṇiyūr 
Coimbatore 
62 
16 K.,14 Dh.,13 I./P., 8 Veda, 
8 Kalpa, 3 Jy.
Kṛṣṇaśrautī of Kāṇiyūr 
Coimbatore 
7 
3 Ny., 2 I./P., 1 Veda, 1 Dh.
Cinnapāśāstrī of Kāraittojuvu 
Coimbatore 
43 
17 Phil. (9 Ny., 8 Ved.), 15 K., 
8 Vyā., 2 Al.
K. Aṇṇāsvāmiśāstrī of Kojumam 
Coimbatore 
5 
2 Dh., 2 I./P., 1 Ny.
Kaṇiyūr Kṛṣṇayyar of Kojumam 
Coimbatore 
88 
39 Phil. (23 Ved., 15 Ny., 
1 Mīm.), 22 Veda, 11 I./P., 9 K.
Piccuśāstrī of Kojumam 
Coimbatore 
15 
8 Ved., 4 I./P.
Rāmasvāmiśāstrī of Kojumam 
Coimbatore 
28 
10 K., 10 I./P., 4 Veda, 3 Dh.

--- Page 299 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
283
Table 13.2.  Cont.
1. Owner 
2. District 
3. Number 
4. Subjects
Rāmappayya of Kumāraliṅgam 
Coimbatore 
44 
14 K., 14 I./P., 3 Stotra, 3 Phil. 
(2 Ved., 1 Ny.) 
Maṇḍalam Rāmasvāmiśāstrī of Kumāraliṅgam 
Coimbatore 
16 
11 K.
Śaṅkaraśāstrī of Kumāraliṅgam 
Coimbatore 
31 
8 K., 8 Dh., 5 I./P., 4 Vyā., 2 Jy.
Śivasubrahmaṇya Aiyar of Kumāraliṅgam 
Coimbatore 
5 
4 I./P., 1 K.
Yajñam Aiyar of Kumāraliṅgam 
Coimbatore 
3 
2 I./P., 1 K.
Aṇṇāsvāmi Aiyar of Pallaḍam 
Coimbatore 
29 
8 I./P., 6Veda, 4 K., 2Dh., 2Al., 
2Nighaṇṭu
Ś. Śaṅkararāma Aiyar of Pallaḍam 
Coimbatore 
48 
27 K., 4 Stotra, 3 Vyā., 3 Al.
Aṇṇāsvāmī Śrauti of Bhavāni 
Coimbatore 
284 
111 Phil. (47 Ved., 46 Ny., 
17 Mīm., 1 Sāṅkhya), 49 K., 
37 Vyā.
Kṛṣṇabhaṭṭa Śrauti of Bhavāni 
Coimbatore 
70 
20 I./P.,15 Veda, 8 Stotra, 7 K., 
6 Dh., 6 Jy.,
Śivasūri Śāstri of Bhavāni 
Coimbatore 
394 
151 Phil. (64 Ny., 63 Ved., 
24 Mīm.), 45 K., 42 Vyā., 33 Śr.
Yajña Śrauti of Bhavāni 
Coimbatore 
35 
9 I./P., 7 Dh., 6 Śr., 3 Vedāṅga, 
3 K.
Śrīkaṇṭha Śrauti of Bhavāni 
Coimbatore 
62 
12 Veda, 9 Dh., 9 I./P., 5 Śr., 
5 K., 4 Gṛ.
Tirumāliraṃśolai Cinnasāmi Śāstriyār of Kārūr 
Coimbatore 
42 
12 Dh., 8 Vyā., 8 K.,7 I./P., 
2 each Stotra,Ved., Al.
Durbhā Subrahmaüyam of Nellore 
Nellore 
24 
11 K., 4 Ved., 4 Ny.
Rāviprolu Kāmayya Śāstri of Nellore 
Nellore 
24 
10 Dh., 4 I./P., 3 Śr., 2 Jy.
Gāḍepalli Veṅṅkaṭarāma Śāstri of Nellore 
Nellore 
58 
23 Ved., 22 Dh., 4 P., 2 each 
Vyā.,Veda, Śr.
Yeruvuḍupāṭi Varadayya Pantulu of Nellore 
Nellore 
24 
16 Ved., 3 I./P., 2 K.

--- Page 300 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
284
Koṭra Rāmaliṅga Śāstri of Nellore 
Nellore 
26 
5 K., 5 Stotra, 4 each I./P.,Ved., 
Tantra, 2 each Dh., Jy.
Durbhā Cheñchu Subrahmaṇya Dīkṣita of Lebūr 
Nellore 
46 
22 Dh., 18 Śr., 3 Ved., 2 Veda
Koṇḍaguṇṭa Chinna Veṅkaṭeśvara Śāstri of 
  Āmidālpāḍu 
Nellore 
91 
35 Ved., 29 Vyā., 11 K., 7 I./P., 
5 Al., 2 Dh.
Sūryanārāyaṇayya of Āmidālpāḍu 
Nellore 
95 
19 K., 18 Vyā., 15 Ved., 9 Stotra, 
9 Dh., 8 Al., 5 Veda
Rāmaliṅga Śāstri of Āmidālpāḍu 
Nellore 
20 
5 Ved., 5 K., 3 Stotra, 2 Dh. 
Veṅkaṭarāghavayya of Āmidālpāḍu 
Nellore 
9 
3 Ny., 2 Tantra, 2 Stotra
Chakravarti Raṅgācārya of Bucchireḍḍipāḷayam 
Nellore 
26 
9 Phil. (7 Ved., 2 Ny.), 4 Dh., 
3 K., 3 each P., Jy.
Kundūr Raṅgacārya of Bucchireḍḍipāḷayam 
Nellore 
17 
5 Phil. (3Ved., 2Ny.), 5 K., 4P., 
2Vyā.
Mayūram Gopālācārya of Bucchireḍḍipāḷayam 
Nellore 
12 
3 Ny., 3 Dh., 2 K.,
Doḍla Veṅkaṭarāma of Bucchireḍḍipāḷayam 
Nellore 
3 
2 K., 1 Ved.
Kesari Yajñayya of Brāhmaṇakrāka (Agrahāra) 
Nellore 
28 
5 Vedāṅga, 5 Śr., 5 Dh., 3 Ny., 
3 Veda, 2 each Jy., Vyā.
Kesari Subbaya of Brāhmaṇakrāka (Agrahāra) 
Nellore 
7 
3 Dh., 2 Śr.
Goṭṭimukkula Vīrarāghava Somayāji 
of Brāhmaṇakrāka (Agrahāra) 
Nellore 
18 
8 Dh., 5 Śr., 3 Vedāṅga
Vikkirāla Bhāshyācārya of Kālikivāyi (Agrahāra) 
Nellore 
15 
5 K., 3 Vyā., 2 P., 2 Ved.
Durgam Subbarāmayya of Jaladaṅki 
Nellore 
3 
1 Stotra, 1 Ved., 1 Vyā.
Devayajana Narasiṃhācārlu of Jaladaṅki 
Nellore 
2 
1 Dh., 1 K.,
Iṅguva Paṭṭābhirāma Śāstri of Ongole 
Nellore 
14 
9 Phil. (6 Ved., 2 Ny., 1 Mīm.), 
4 Dh.
Table 13.2.  Cont.
1. Owner 
2. District 
3. Number 
4. Subjects

--- Page 301 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
285
Table 13.2.  Cont.
1. Owner 
2. District 
3. Number 
4. Subjects
K. 
= Kāvya
Mīm. = Mīmāṃsā
Ny. = Nyāya 
P. 
= Purāṇa
Phil. = Philosophy
Chivukula Subrahmaṇya Śāstri of Ongole 
Nellore 
31 
26 Phil. (12 Ved.,11 Ny., 
3 Mīm.), 5 Vyā.
Dhārā Mārkaṇḍeya Śāstri of Ongole 
Nellore 
18 
9 Phil. (5 Ny., 2 Ved., 2 Mīm.), 
3 I./P., 3 K., 2 Dh.
Purāṇam Sītāpati Śāstri of Ongole 
Nellore 
11 
3 Dh., 2 Ved., 2 K.
Annavarupu Rāghava Śāstri of Kottapaṭṭaṇam 
Nellore 
6 
3 Dh.
Kuravi Mallayya Śāstri of Inamanameḷḷūr 
Nellore 
27 
7 Al., 6 Phil. (3Ved., 2 Ny., 
1 Mīm.), 3 Stotra
Buddhavarapu Śāyanna of Inamanameḷḷūr 
Nellore 
9 
2 each Al., Ved., K., Vyā.
Laghiṇi Hanumantācār of Chadaluvāḍa 
Nellore 
21 
10 K., 7 Phil. (5 Ved., 2 Ny.), 
2 Dh.
Vedam Veṅkaṭasubrahmaṇya Somayāji of Allūr 
 
Nellore 
57 
16 Śr., 12 Vedāṅga, 12 Dh., 
7 Phil. (3 Ved., 2 Yoga, 1 Mīm., 
1 Ny.)
 
 
Iṅguva Vīrarāghava Somayāji of Kareḍu 
 
Nellore 
 
10 
4 Ved., 3 Śr., 2 Dh.
Vālamūru Veṅkaṭasubbayya of Kareḍu 
 
Nellore 
 
2 
2 Dh.
Vālamūru Sītārāmayya of Kareḍu 
 
Nellore 
 
7 
6 Jy.
List of Abbreviations for this table
Al. 
= Alaṅkāra
Dh. = Dharma
Gṛ. = Gṛhya
I. 
= Itihāsa 
I. /P. = Itihāsa/Pūrāṇa
Jy. 
= Jyotiṣa
Śr. 
= Śrauta
Ved. = Vedānta
Vyā. = Vyākaraṇa

--- Page 302 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
286
Table 13.3.  Primary and secondary intellectual interests according to district, town and owner in Tamilnadu.
1. District 
2. Town 
3. Owner 
4. Principal Literature (primary,
 
 
 
secondary)
Chingleput Aḷaśūr 
Lakṣmīnarasiṃhācāryār 
1° Philosophy
 
 
Ghanapaṭhi Śiṅgarācāryar 
1° Veda
 
Ammaṇapālam 
Narasiṃhācāryār 
1° Stotra, 2° Dharma
 
 
Triruveṅkaṭācāryār 
1° Kāvya
 
 
Varadācāryār 
1° Jyotiṣa
 
 
Vijayarāghavācārya 
1° Stotra
 
Elanakar 
Narasiṃhācāryār 
1° Philosophy
 
 
Rāmānujācāryār 
1° Itihāsa/Purāṇa, 2° Philosophy
 
 
Gaḍḍam Narasiṃhācāryār 
1° Philosophy (Nyāya)
 
Kañcīpuram 
Ahobilajīya 
1° Philosophy (Vedānta)
 
 
P.A.V.R. Tātācāryār 
1° Dharma
 
 
Koṇḍaṅgi Anantācāryār 
1° Philosophy
 
 
Tiruppuṭkulikṛṣṇa Tātācāryār 
1° Philosophy
 
 
Tiruppuṭkulikṛṣṇa Tātācāryār(2) 1° Philosophy
 
 
Aśvattha Nārāyaṇa Śāstriyār 
1° Philosophy (Nyāya)
 
 
Parakāla Maṭham 
1° Philosophy (Vedānta)
 
 
Rāmacandrācār’s Skt. School 
1° Kāvya, 2° Philosophy
 
 
Śaṭhakopācāryār’s Skt. School 
1° Kāvya, 2° Philosophy
 
 
A. Śrīnivāsa Rāghavācāryār 
1° Kāvya, 2° Vyākaraṇa
 
 
A.C. Śrīnivāsa Rāghavācāryār 
1° Philosophy
 
 
Śrīśaila Tātācāryār 
1° Kāvya
 
 
Nivṛtti Subrahmaṇyaśāstrī 
1° Dharma
 
 
Karupūr Varadācāryār 
1° Philosophy (Vedānta)
 
 
Vedānta Rāmānujācāryār 
1° Kāvya, 2° Dharma
 
 
Veṅkaṭavarada Tātācāryār 
1° Philosophy
 
 
Vijayarāghavācāryār 
1° Philosophy
 
 
Vīrarāghava Tātācāryār 
1° Vedāṅga
 
 
Kṛṣṇaśāstrī 
1° Philosophy (Nyāya)
 
 
Vegavati 
1° Philosophy (Vedānta)
 
 
Jaḍapatūr Raṅgācāryār 
1° Kāvya
 
 
Subrahmaṇyayājula 
1° Philosophy (Vedānta, Nyāya)
 
 
Madhva Veṇugopālācāryār 
1° Philosophy, 2° Veda
 
Koṇḍaṅgi 
Rājagopālācāryār 
1° Kāvya
 
Marutvānpāḍi 
Rāmānujācāryār 
1° Stotra, 2° Itihāsa/Purāṇa
 
 
Veṅkaṭācāryār 
1° Kāvya, 2° Philosophy (Vedānta)
 
 
Veṅkaṭācāryār (2) 
1° Philosophy (Vedānta), 
 
 
 
2° Dharma
 
Pillapākkam 
Gopālācāryār 
1° Veda, 2° Philosophy
 
 
Appaya Kṛṣṇamācāryār 
1° Kāvya
 
 
Pattaṅgi Raṅgācāryār 
1° Philosophy
 
 
Bahukuṭumbi Śaṭhakopācāryār 
1° Veda

--- Page 303 of 338 ---
use of manuscript catalogues
287
 
Taḍakamaṅgalam Rāmānujācāryār 
1° Veda (Sāmaveda)
 
Taṇḍarai 
Ailuvaidya 
1° Vaidya
 
Śrīperumbūdūr 
Madhuramaṅgalam Jīyar 
1° Philosophy
 
Tiruvallūr 
Śrī Ahobilajīyar 
1° Philosophy (Vedānta)
 
 
Vaṅkīpuram Śrīnāsācāryār 
1° Philosophy, 2° Jyotiṣa
 
 
Ahobilamaṭham 
1° Philosophy
 
Uttaramallūr 
Śrīnivāsa Rāghavācāryār 
1° Vaidya
 
Velāmūr 
Śrī Raṅgācāryār 
1° Philosophy
Coimbatore Kaḍattūr 
Anantarāmaśāstrī 
1° Kāvya
 
 
Gopālakṛṣṇayya 
1° Vyākaraṇa, 2° Philosophy
 
 
Śaṅkararāma 
1° Itihāsa/Purāṇa, 2° Veda
 
Kāṇiyūr 
Anantakṛṣṇaśrautī 
1° Kāvya, 2° Dharma
 
Kāraittojuvu 
Cinnapāśāstrī 
1° Philosophy, 2° Kāvya
 
Kojumam 
Kāṇiyūr Kṛṣṇaśrautī 
1° Philosophy, 2° Veda
 
 
Piccuśāstrī 
1° Philosophy (Vedānta)
 
 
Rāmāsvāmiśāstrī 
1° Kāvya and Itihāsa/Purāṇa
 
Kumāraliṅgam 
Rāmappayya 
1° Kāvya and Itihāsa/Purāṇa
 
 
Maṇḍalam Rāmāsvāmiśāstrī 
1° Kāvya
 
 
Śaṅkaraśāstrī 
1° Kāvya and Dharma
 
Pallaḍam 
Aṇṇāsvāmi Aiyar 
1° Itihāsa/Purāṇa, 2° Veda
 
 
Ś. Śaṅkararāma Aiyar 
1° Kāvya
 
Bhavāni 
Aṇṇāsvāmī Śrauti 
1° Philosophy, 2° Kāvya
 
 
Kṛṣṇabhaṭṭa Śrauti 
1° Itihāsa/Purāṇa, 2° Veda
 
 
Śivasūri Śāstrī 
1° Philosophy
 
 
Yajña Śrauti 
1° Itihāsa/Purāṇa, 2° Dharma
 
 
Śrīkaṇṭha Śrauti 
1° Veda
 
Kārūr 
T. Cinnasāmi Śāstriyār 
1° Dharma, 2° Vyākaraṇa
Nellore 
Nellore 
G. Veṅkaṭarāma Śāstri 
1° Philosophy (Vedānta), 2° Dharma
 
Lebūr 
D. Ch. Subrahmaṇya Dīkṣita 
1° Dharma, 2° Śrauta
 
Ānudālpāḍu 
K.Ch. Veṅkaṭeśvara Śāstri 
1° Philosophy (Vedānta), 2° Vyākaraṇa
 
 
Sūryanārāyaṇayya 
1° Kāvya, 2° Vyākaraṇa
 
Ongole 
Chivukula Subrahmaṇya Śāstri 
1° Philosophy
 
Allūr 
V. V. Somayāji 
1° Śrauta, 2° Vedāṅga
Table 13.3.  Cont.
1. District 
2. Town 
3. Owner 
4. Principal Literature (primary,
 
 
 
secondary)

--- Page 304 of 338 ---
kenneth g. zysk
288

--- Page 305 of 338 ---
author index
289
Brückner, H.  82, 96, 139-142, 144, 146, 
148, 151-155 
Bühler, G.  10-14, 18, 63, 66, 165, 200, 
205, 255
Burnell, A.C.  48, 86, 94, 96, 99, 105-106, 
112, 115, 126, 137, 165, 170, 187, 189, 
192, 194-195, 205, 224, 233
Burnouf, E.  63
Caland, W.  62, 65-67, 99, 112, 115
Campbell, A.D.  78
Chakraborty, M.  5, 49
Chambers, Sir R.  59, 63, 162, 255 
Chidambarakavi  168
Colas, G.  5, 7, 45, 48, 50, 59, 70-79
Colas-Chauhan, U.  73-76, 78-79
Colebrooke, H.T.  8, 48, 59, 64, 255
Coningham, R.  13, 48
Coulmas, F.  9, 48
Cousins, L.S.  22, 48
Cowell, E.B.  64
Cribb, J.  22, 48
Dahmen, P.  72, 79
Dani, A.H.  200, 205
Daniels, P.  9, 31, 48
Darnton, R.  119, 137
Datta, B.K.  4, 48
Daudin, H.  36
Demiéville, P.  19-21, 49, 52
Deraniyagala, S.U.  13, 49
Derrida, J.  25
Deshmukh, R.P.  260, 274
Devarddhi Gaṇin  21
Devendra  168
Dhānañjaya  17
Dharmarājādhvarin  168
Dikshit, G.S.  137
Dikshit, S.B.  174, 176, 185
Diringer, D.  120-121, 137, 191-192, 200, 
205
Doniger, W.  207, 233
Duchamp, Father P.F.  70, 75
Dumézil, G.  13, 49
Ehlers, G.  113, 115
“Aagastya”  41, 47
Agastya Paṇḍit  168
Ahlborn, M.  141-144, 153
Aithal, P.K.  137
Aiyar, L.V.R.  91, 96
Aklujkar, A.  48, 140
Allchin, F.R.  13-14, 47-48
Anderson, B.  121, 137
Andronov, M.S.  88, 96
Appay(y)a Dīkṣita  38, 168, 238, 244-245
Aufrecht, T.  5, 47, 258, 274
Bake, A.A.  99, 103, 110, 115-116
Banerji-Śāstrī, A.  262, 275
Baums, S.  3, 47
Bechert, H.  22, 48
Belvalkar, S.K.  257-258, 274
Bendall, C.  64, 84, 96
Berkwitz, S.  6, 48
Besse, L.  70, 79
Bhandarkar, S.R.  274
Bhāradvāja  168
Bhartṛhari  34, 75
Bhāsa  45-46, 81-82, 96-97, 139-140, 142145, 147-149, 152-155
Bhāskaran, T.  90, 96
Bhāskarācārya  207-208
Bhat, M.S.  137
Bhattacharya, N.N.  131, 137
Bhaṭṭācārya, V.  115
Bhaṭṭoji Dīkṣita  34, 247
Bhavatrāta  87, 101-102, 108
Bhela  168-169
Bignon, Abbé J.P.  72-74
Bijlert, V. van  42, 48
Biswas, S.C.  274
Bloch, J.  9, 48
Bloomfield, M.  23
Bodhāyana  81
Bopp, F.  59
Bosch, F.D.K.  63, 66
Bright, W.  9, 31, 48
Bronkhorst, J.  8, 25, 31, 36, 38, 48
Brotier, A.J.  70, 72, 79
Brough, J.  110, 115
Brown, C.P.  78, 162, 216
 
 
Author Index

--- Page 306 of 338 ---
author index
290
Heesterman, J.C.  50, 118
Hemacandra  40, 43
Hikosaka, S.  3, 50
Hinüber, O. van  12, 19, 22, 50, 97
Hinzler, H.  3, 50
Hoernle, A.F.R.  3, 50
Hoffmann, K.  25, 27, 31, 50
Homer  3, 52
Houben, J.E.M.  5, 8, 34-35, 37-38, 48, 
50, 52, 115
Howard, W.  99-100, 102-104, 106, 115
Hudson, N.  1, 50
Hultzsch, E.  9, 236, 242-245, 248, 250, 
252, 258, 262, 267, 275
Ikari, Y.  84, 86, 97, 104, 116
Isaacson, H.  86, 97
I-Tsing (Yì jìng)  19, 53
Jacob, C.  120, 137, 252
Jacobi, H.  21, 50
Jahn, S.A.A.  3, 51
Jairazbhoy, N.A.  110, 116
Janert, K.L.  6, 51, 113, 116, 147, 155, 
257-259, 275
Jayaswal, K.  262, 264, 275
Jayanti, C.K.  151
Johns, A.  1-2, 51 
Johnson, D.C.  66, 259, 275
Jones, Sir W.  59, 255
Kangle, R.P.  4, 51
Karttunen, K.  102, 116
Kāśyapa  168
Katre, S.M.  5, 51, 59, 66 
Keith, A.B.  105, 116
Kern, H.  58
Keśavasvāmin  66
Kirfel, W.  8
Kölver, B.  224, 233
Krishna, N.  172
Krishnamachariar, M.  237, 240-242, 252
Krishnamurthy, R.  240, 252
Kṛṣṇadevarāya  168
Kuiper, F.B.J.  64
Kulaśekharavarman  81
Kulke, H.  66, 118
Lane, Father de la  75
Langlès, L.  59
Lea, H.C.  39, 51
Le Gac, É.  45, 71-74
Einicke, K.  6, 49, 145, 155
Eisenstein, E.  1-2, 6, 39-40, 49-50
Eliade, M.  57, 66
Esposito, A.A.  45, 81, 89, 91, 93-94, 96, 
139, 141, 145, 152, 154
Falk, H.  2, 8-9, 11-14, 16-19, 22-24, 38, 
49
Farmer, S.  9, 49
Fausböll, V.  63
Fa Xian (Fa-Hsien)  18-20
Feer, L.  63
Filliozat, J.  2, 9, 49, 52, 70, 72-73, 79
Fourmont, É.  72-74
Freeman, R.  194, 205
Frohnmeyer, L.J.  91, 96
Fujii, M.  7, 45, 99, 114-115
Furley, D.  35, 49
Galewicz, C.  46, 124, 126, 137
Gardner, R.  108, 115
Gargam, M.R.  45, 75
Gārgya  22, 30
Gaur, R.  5, 49
Gernet, J.  70, 79
Gignoux, P.  27, 49
Gode, P.K.  51, 53, 66, 257-258, 274
Gokhale, S.L.  200, 205
Gombrich, R.  32, 37-38, 49
Goody, J.  2, 14-16, 23-25, 29, 31, 49-50
Gough, A.E.  257, 262, 274
Goyal, S.R.  11-12, 50
Graham, W.A.  77, 79
Grünendahl, R.  84, 86, 96, 145, 155, 187, 
200, 205
Guimet, É.  63
Gulik, R.H. van  57, 66
Gundert, H.  91, 96
Gutenberg, J.  1, 40
Halévy, J.  11-12, 14
Halverson, J.  15, 23-24, 50
Hamilton, A.  59
Hampa, N.  216, 233
Hanneder, J.  96, 131, 137
Hardy, A.  131, 137
Harimoto, K.  87, 96
Harṣadeva  81
Hatcher, B.A.  257, 275
Haug, M.  255 
Havelock, E.A.  2, 15, 34, 50
Hazard, P.  71, 79

--- Page 307 of 338 ---
author index
291
Neugebauer, O.  175, 185
Nīlakaṇṭha  81
Nobili, R. de  70, 77, 80
Oertel, H.  99, 114, 117
Ojha, G.H.  200, 205
Omont, H.  74, 79
Ong, W.J.  2, 20, 23, 29, 51
Oppert, G.  162, 172, 258, 262, 266-267, 
275
Orme, R.  255
Panchamukhi, R.S.  262, 275
Pandey, R.B.  200, 205
Pandurangi, K.T.  59, 64, 66 
Pāṇini  22-23, 30-31, 34, 52, 200
Panshikar, V.L.  123, 127-128, 137
Parpola, A.  9, 45, 51, 86, 97, 99-100, 102, 
104-113, 116-117
Parpola, M.  106-108, 111, 117
Paulose, K.G.  140
Perumal, P.  46, 172
Peterson, P.  256-257, 275
Pillai, K. Raghavan  91, 97 
Pillai, S.  174, 176, 185
Pinchard, A.  13, 28-30, 51
Pingree, D.  173, 182, 185, 272, 275
Plaisier, H.  66
Plato  28, 34, 50
Plofker, K.  5, 46, 51, 173, 185
Pollock, S.  5-7, 39-40, 51, 121, 137, 157, 
172, 205-206
Pomian, K.  71, 79
Pons, Father J.F.  45, 70, 77
Popper, K.R.  39, 52
Possehl, G.  22, 52
Pott, P.H.  58, 67 
Potter, K.  247, 252 
Prajapati, S.  6, 52
Prasad, P.  4, 52
Prasad, R.  131, 137
Priolkar, A.K.  41, 52-53
Purāṇam Liṃganna  220, 228, 232
Raghavan, V.  5, 65, 100-102, 104, 106, 
117, 140, 155, 238, 246, 252, 259-260, 
275
Raghu Vira  103, 112, 117
Raguet, Abbé G.B.  72
Rahder, J.  62, 67
Rajagopalan, L.S.  140, 145
Rajagopalan, T.A.  246, 252
Leumann, E.  63, 66
Lévi, S.  57, 63, 87, 97
Leyden, J.  162, 255
Lüders, H.  87, 89-90, 97
Maas, P.A.  86, 96, 97
Mackenzie, C.  59, 162, 255
Mackenzie Brown, C.  6, 51
Madhva  38, 51, 66, 158, 247
Mahadevan, I.  192-193, 195, 205
Mahadevan, T.P.  109, 116
Mahalingam, T.V.  195, 200, 205
Mahendravikramavarman 81
Mahidāsa  100
Makara Bhūṣaṇam, T.N. 102-104, 114, 
116
Malandra, W.  26, 51
Mallana  78
Maniaci, M.  5, 51
Mangamma, J.  73, 79
Mencher, J.P.  105-106, 108, 111, 116
Mesquita, R.  38, 50-51
Mill, W.H.  59
Minkowski, C.  174, 177
Mitra, R.  258, 262, 275
Monier-Williams, Sir M. 10, 51
Montesquieu  71, 79
Mookerji, R.K.  263, 271, 275
Moore, H.E.  3, 51
Moser, H.  46, 81-82, 140-142, 144-145, 
147-148, 151, 154
Mukhtar, J.K.  216, 233
Muller, J.-CI.  70, 79
Muni, Jina V.  216, 233
Murakawa, A.  113, 116
Murthy, C.M.  122, 137 
Murthy, Sh. (see Shivaganesha Murthy, 
R.S.)
Muroya, Y.  81, 84, 86, 97
Muzerelle, D.  5, 51
Nāgārjuna  38 
Nair, K.M.  4, 51
Namboodiri, G.  106, 115
Namboodiripad, E.M.S.108, 111, 116
Nampoothiry, N.M.  192-193, 205
Namputiripad, K.V.  140, 148, 151-152
Nannaya  78
Narayanan, M.G.S.  106, 117
Nārāyaṇan Nampyār, P.K. 150
Naṭa-mahā-yogānaṃdda-avadhūtasvāmi  222

--- Page 308 of 338 ---
author index
292
Sewell, R.  174, 176, 185
Sharma, B.R.  103, 113, 117
Sharma, M.  81, 97, 140, 155
Shastri, P.J.  217, 233 
Shivaganesha Murthy, R.S. 82, 84, 97, 
159, 172-173, 185, 200, 205
Shrigondekar, G.K.  113, 117
Siegling, W.  100, 117
Simon, R.  100, 117
Singer, M.  240, 252
Singh, K.S.  137
Sircar, D.C.  4, 9, 20, 53
Sivaramamurti, C.  191-193, 205
Skinner, Q.  119, 137
Śliwczyńska, B.  141-142, 155
Somayajipad, C.V.  109, 117
Soteriou, A.  73, 80
Sreekrishna Sarma, E.R. 99, 106, 117
Srinivasavaradan, K.  127, 129, 137
Staal, F.  2, 15-16, 22-24, 39, 53, 91, 97, 
99-100, 102, 104-106, 108-109, 115117 
Stark, U.  119, 137
Stein, Sir A.  255
Steiner, K.  96, 142, 153-155
Stock, B.  138
Stokes, Mr W.  257-259
Strauch, I.  4, 53
Subrahmanyam, S.  236, 252
Sukthankar, V.S.  53
Sūri, P. P.  221
’t Hart, H.  65-66
Takagi, N.  224, 233
Takakusu, J.  19, 53
Talbot, C.  246, 252
Taylor, W.  162, 255-256, 275
Trenckner  63
Trivedi, H.  194, 206
Tryambaka (Trayaṁbarāya)  164, 168, 
239, 248
Tsuji, N.  100, 118
Tulajarāja  168
Udbhaṭa  36, 48
Unni, N.P.  82, 97, 140, 147, 155
Vācaspati Miśra  169
Vararuci  168
Venu, G.  149, 152, 155
Vēnugōpālan, P.  149, 155
Verghese, A.  131, 138
Rājagopāla Aiyaṅkār, T. 102-103
Rajamanickam, S.  77, 80
Rajendran, C.  140, 147
Rāmabhadra Dīkṣita  237-238, 246, 250, 
252
Ramasubba Śāstrin  47, 235-236, 239, 
241-245, 249-251
Ramasubrahmaṇya Śāstrin 241-245, 251252
Raṅgarāja  168
Rao, P.V.  81, 97, 140, 155
Rao, S.B.  173, 185
Rao, V.N.  207, 233
Rask, R.  63, 255
Rath, S.  5, 45-46, 52, 55, 99, 188, 201, 
203-205, 210
Ray, T.  52
Renou, L.  2, 16-17, 30-31, 52-53, 100, 
103, 117, 137, 200, 205
Retnamma, K.  88, 97
Richardus, P.  57-58, 67
Rowland, B.  130, 137 
Śākalya  22, 30-31
Śaktibhadra  81
Salomon, R.  3, 9, 12-13, 20, 38, 52
Sander, L.  3, 52
Sanderson, A.  132, 137
Śāṇḍilya  17
Śaṅkara  38, 114, 117, 158, 169, 247-248, 
250
Sarma, K.V.  173, 185
Sarma, S.R.  4-5, 46-47, 52, 188, 211, 233
Sarup L.  124, 137
Śāstrī, G.  81, 85, 87, 94, 96
Sastri, Kuppuswami T.S. 237, 242, 252
Sastri, Kuppuswamy S. 236, 237, 252
Śāstrī, Mahāmahopādhyāya H. 258, 262, 
275
Sastri, N.K.A.  191-192, 205
Sastry, P.P.S.  171 
Sāyaṇa  134
Scharfe, H.  4, 8, 18, 20, 22-23, 26, 31, 34, 
52
Scheftelowitz, J.  125, 137
Schlosser, J. von  71, 80
Schopen, G.  6, 52
Schrader, F.O.  56, 67
Schwartzberg, J.  22, 53
Sekhar, A.C.  91, 97 
Senart, E.  63
Serfoji II  41, 43, 46, 157, 162, 164-166, 
169-170, 172

--- Page 309 of 338 ---
author index
293
Wilson, H.H.  59, 64
Windisch, E.  59, 67
Winger, H.W.  41, 53
Witzel, M.  5, 26, 49, 53, 62, 65, 67, 100, 
114-115, 118
Wright, D.  64
Wujastyk, D.  47, 172, 238, 252
Yano, M.  176, 185, 215
Zimmermann, F.  36-37, 53
Zysk, K.G.  47, 246, 250, 252
Vetter, T.  20, 53
Vijayan, K.  82, 97
Visalakshy, P.  121, 138, 187, 200, 206
Vishva Bandhu  113, 118, 259
Vogel, J.Ph.  55, 58-67
Vyāsa  168
Wackernagel, J.W.  53, 200, 206
Wagoner, P.B.  255, 275
Walker, A.  59
Weber, A.  59, 64, 100, 118, 255
Westergaard, N.L.  63

--- Page 310 of 338 ---


--- Page 311 of 338 ---
general index
295
Aśvattha Nārāyaṇa  241-242, 246, 250251
āsyan  (Nampūtiri)  108
aṣṭaka  131, 213-214, 216
astronomy, astronomical  46, 52, 71, 
173-175, 178-180, 184-185, 219, 
275 
Ātmaikabodha  222
aupaniṣada-vrata  114
Aupāsana  111
avagraha  86-87, 96-97, 197, 202-203
Āyurveda  36, 163, 167-168
Avesta, Avestan  25-28, 30-31, 33, 51-52
Avimāraka  81-82, 90, 139, 144
Ayyaval  164, 239-241, 250-251
Bactria  31
Badami  191
Bālacarita  81-83, 139
Bal Gangadhar Tilak  42
bamboo (see writing materials)
bārākhaḍi  201
Batavia  57, 72
Baudhāyana Dharma Sūtra  16, 18
Baudhāyana Ghya Sūtra  66
Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, München 
(Bavarian State Library, Munich)  82, 95, 
140, 147
Bengal  42-43, 45, 56-59, 70, 77, 208, 
257-258
Bengali (see scripts)
Bhavāni  270-271, 283, 287
Bhimjee Parakh (Parekh)  41
bhūtasaṃkhyā  177-178
Bible  15, 39-41
Bibliotheca Indica  257
Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF) 
69, 79
Bihar  263-266
bilingual, bilingualism  7, 10, 188, 194, 
203
biscriptual  188, 194, 203-204
birch-bark (see writing materials)
Bodleian Library, collection  59, 64, 258
Bogdanof  57
Bombay  41, 43, 162, 216, 256-258
abbreviation of sentences  88
Abhijñānaśākuntala  143
Abhiṣēkanāṭaka  81-82, 88, 139, 147-150, 
152, 155
Abyssinia (Ethiopia)  41
āḍhyan (Nampūtiri)  108, 112
Adyar Library and Research 
 
Institute, Chennai  56, 64, 81, 140, 
163
Africa  2, 14
Agnicayana  108-109, 117
Agnihotra  110-112
Agniṣṭoma  109, 117
Agrahāra, agrahāra  105, 165, 269, 284
akṣarapalli  84, 200
Aḻakiyapāṇṭipuram (Alagyapandipuram) 
104-105
alphabetic, alphabets  9, 16, 19, 30-31, 
41, 43, 88, 92, 94, 171, 188-189, 
192, 196, 200-201, 203, 211, 261
Alexander the Great  12
Ammaṇapālam  269-270, 279, 286
analphabetic  9, 12 
Ānandarāya Makhin  239
Andhra Pradesh  165, 191, 208, 219, 228, 
246, 263, 266, 271-273
Annie Besant  56
aṅkapalli  84
anukramaṇī, sarvānukrama  18, 124
anumāna  35
anusvāra  86, 89, 91-93, 202-203, 212, 
217
Aramaic (see scripts) 
Āraṇyaka-Gāna  103, 105-106, 110, 114
Āraṇyaka-Saṃhitā  112
Archeology  63-64
Archeological Survey of India  63
archaic characters, style  191-193, 202
Ārcika  103-104, 106, 110, 112, 114
aristotelian ideas  37
Arcot  162, 190, 267
arghya  218, 229-231
Arthaśāstra  4, 51 
Asiatic Society  56-59, 257
Aśoka, Aśokan  7, 9-14, 16, 18, 20, 33, 44, 
48-49, 53, 157, 200 
 
 
General Index

--- Page 312 of 338 ---
general index
296
chain writing  224
Chakyar (Cākyār)  88, 141, 148, 151
Chakyar, Ammannur Kocchukkuttan 
139
Chakyar, Kitangur Raman (Kuttappan) 
141, 145-148, 151-152
Chakyar, Margi Madhu  139
Chandernagore, Bengal  70
characters (akṣaras)  9-10, 19, 46, 61, 86, 
91-92, 94, 166, 170, 187-188, 191199, 202-204, 211
chāyā  87
Ci-Aruton  191
Cidambaramāhātmya  66
circulating texts  119, 122, 132
civilization  8-9, 29-30, 33, 70-71, 119, 
163, 165
Chengleput (Chingleput)  162, 267-268, 
270-271, 273, 279-282, 286
Chennai (Madras)  5, 41, 56, 60, 65, 78, 
81-82, 85, 87, 89-90, 92, 103, 140, 
143, 162-163, 169-170, 240, 255, 
258
Chera (Cera)  158, 190, 192
China, Chinese  3, 18-20, 23, 25, 57, 
70-72, 79
Chitradhar Library  265, 276
Chola (Cola)  102, 158, 163-164, 190, 
192-193, 197-198 
Christian, Christianity  70, 73-78, 211, 
226
chronology  49, 71, 94, 96, 154, 176-177, 
181, 185, 188-190, 202
classification (in botany, zoology)  36-37
climate  2, 58, 158-159, 227, 259
codicology  51, 77, 120-121
Coimbatore (Coimba[u]tore)  162, 192, 
267-268, 270-271, 273, 282-283, 
287
Cōḻiya brahmins  104
collectors  55-56, 60, 63, 66, 119, 166, 
169, 254-255
collections of manuscripts  3-7, 27, 42, 
45-47, 55-67, 69-71, 73, 79, 81-82, 
95, 99, 103, 105, 115, 118, 120, 
122-124, 126, 132-134, 140-141, 
144-145, 147-148, 150-153, 157, 
162-163, 165-171, 173-174, 178, 
181, 183, 194-195, 198, 200, 205, 
207, 211, 213-214, 216, 219, 221, 
227, 241, 243, 246-248, 250, 254255, 258-275
book history  119, 135
Borassus flabellifer (see writing mate
rials)
botany  36-37
Brahma Sūtra  38, 42-43, 65, 114, 244
brahmin, brahminical, brāhmaṇa, etc.19, 
32, 35, 37-38, 46, 50, 76-78, 104106, 110, 116-118, 122, 125-126, 
128, 132-135, 158, 167, 188, 195, 
207, 211-213, 216, 221, 227, 233, 
239-240, 244-246, 251, 254, 263, 
265, 267, 271
Brāhmaṇa (texts)  18, 22, 32, 112-115, 
124, 168, 213-214
brahmanism  33, 264
Brāhmī (see scripts)
British Library  255
Buddha  18, 20-22, 48, 229, 231
Buddhayaśas  19
Buddhist, Buddhism  3-4, 6, 9-10, 18-23, 
25, 32-35, 38, 48, 52-53, 56, 59, 63, 
157, 188, 192
Burma  159, 192
cabinets de curiosités  71
Calcutta  40-42, 56-61, 65, 162, 257
calendar, calendric computations  46, 
174-177, 185
calendrical time-calculation  46
Calicut  81, 84, 140-141, 145, 147, 151
calligraphy  188, 195, 198, 201-202, 204
Calmette, Father J.  71, 75, 77
Cālukya, Chalukya  130, 190-191
Cambridge  2, 64
campu  65, 165
candrabindu  203
Candrāsyāmaṃ  110, 114
canon, canonical  21, 34, 37, 42, 125, 134135, 173
Caraṇavyūha  100, 117-118
Carnatic Mission  69-70, 72, 77-78
Carmelites (White Friars)  73
Cārudatta  81, 85, 87-93, 96, 139, 141, 
143-144
catalogue, cataloguers, cataloguing 5-6, 
47, 51, 55, 59, 62, 65-66, 79, 99, 
105, 112, 115-118, 126, 140, 162, 
169-173, 177, 185, 250, 252-267, 
272-275
Central Asia  2-3, 5, 21, 44
Central Provinces  258

--- Page 313 of 338 ---
general index
297
double, duplicated (geminate) 
consonants  11, 89, 91-93, 95, 
199-200, 203, 212
doubling of words / short sentences  87
doxographic plurality  39
Drāhyāyaṇa  61, 117
Dravidian  7, 9, 88-89, 139, 194, 204 
Dūtaghaṭōtkaca  81, 139-140, 145-146 
Dūtavākya  81, 85-86, 88-91, 95-96, 139, 
141, 144-148, 151-152 
Dutch  55-58, 67, 70, 166
dvādaśākṣarī  201
East India Company  59
education, educational  4, 9, 13, 32, 42, 
52, 73, 107, 110-111, 114, 162, 237, 
259, 275 
Egypt  30
EI = (Epigraphia Indica)  4-5, 49 
Elanakar  269-270, 279, 286
ephemeral  3, 20, 33, 44
Europe, European  1, 6-8, 37, 39-40, 42, 
45, 55-57, 59, 65, 69-71, 81, 121122, 166, 170, 208, 255-259, 262 
exact science  46, 173, 179, 183, 185
family name  208, 213-215, 225, 271
find-spot  253-254, 262 
foliation (see also numerals)  84-85
Fort St. George, Madras  255
France, French  11, 45, 57-58, 69-78, 163, 
166
Gādādharī  66, 247, 250
Gāna  106, 112 
Gandhāra  3, 21, 31, 47, 52
geminate consonants (see under double 
consonants)
geographic contours  43
Ghana  2, 15 
Gilgit  3
Goa  41
Gokarṇa  123, 125, 133-134 
Government Oriental Manuscripts 
Library, Chennai  81-82, 140, 
162-163, 252 
graffiti inscriptions  13
grammar, grammarians  8, 10-11, 15, 
22-23, 26, 31-34, 36, 40, 43, 46, 70, 
73-75, 167-168, 271 
Grāmageya-Gāna  103, 105-106, 110, 114 
Grantha script (see scripts)
colonial administrations  41
colophon  46, 86, 113, 123, 127, 149-150, 
173-174, 176, 178, 185, 188, 202, 
213-218, 221-222, 247, 261
commentaries  5, 17, 36, 65, 81, 101-102, 
117, 134, 168-169, 194, 221, 242, 
247-248
consonant clusters  90-91, 93
conversion  76-77, 157, 176, 182, 215
Copenhagen  63, 78
copper plates (see writing materials)
copying  6, 60, 77, 119, 145, 158, 174, 
177, 216, 222
copyright  34
copyist  42, 85, 127, 170, 222, 256
Corypha palm (see writing materials)
Corypha umbraculifera Linn. (see writing materials)
crypto-Christian  77
critical edition  5, 42, 89, 141-142, 144
cuneiform  9, 21, 31 
cursive  60, 191-192
cūrṇike  217-218
Cyrus II  31
Dalsiṅgh Sarai  265, 276
daṇḍa  85-86, 93, 202-203 
Danish  63, 77, 166
Darbhangā  264-266, 276
Darjeeling  56
daśagranthis  126, 133-135 
Daśāvatāra-arghyālu  47, 217-218, 229
databank  82, 96, 139, 142-144, 149, 153 
date conversion  176, 182, 215
date of manuscripts  45-46, 94, 149, 173179, 181, 184, 187-189, 193, 196, 
202, 204, 211, 218, 222, 226-227, 
261 
DAV College, Chandigarh  81, 140
Dēnkart (Dēnkard)  26-27 
Denmark  58, 63
descriptive catalogue  171-173, 258-262, 
274-275
devanāgarī (see scripts)
dharma, dharmaśāstra  165, 168, 216, 
242-244, 248, 264-267, 271, 273, 
276-277, 285-287
Dhāraṇalakṣaṇa  103, 116
digitization  143-144, 171
diglossia  7
divine speech  28

--- Page 314 of 338 ---
general index
298
Java  59, 191
Jesuit fathers  41, 45, 69-78 
Jesuit library  71-72
Jesuit Maduré Mission  70
jyotiṣa  124, 151, 168, 173-175, 178, 181, 
183, 185, 285-287
 
kadamba  190-192
Kaḍattūr  270-271, 282, 287
kākapada  202-203
Kalimpong  58
Kañcīpuram  269-271, 279-281, 286
Kāṇḍaramāṇikyam  237
Kāṇiyūr  270, 282, 287
Kannaḍa = Canarese ( see scripts)
Kanyakāpurāṇa  207-208
karaṇa  179
Karṇabhāra  81, 139, 142, 144, 153-154
Karnul  267
Kārūr  270-271, 283, 287
kavaca  219
Kaveri  47, 158, 164-165, 168, 219, 235237, 245, 251
kāvya  65, 168, 212, 221, 271, 285-287
Kena-Upaniṣad  103, 114-115
Kerala  32, 45, 81, 99-100, 102-106, 108109, 111, 139-140, 144-145, 152, 
164, 190, 192-195
Kharoṣṭhī (see scripts)
khilas  122-125, 129, 134, 137
King’s library, Paris  45, 69, 71-73, 76, 78
King Ekojī  239
King Śāhaji  47, 164-165, 168, 235-236, 
238, 251-252
Kiṭāmaṅkalam (Kidamangalam)  102
knowledge system  10, 34-35, 40
Kodaṇḍa Rāma  248-251
Kojuman  270
kollam = Koḷambam (or Quilon) Era 94, 
150
koṣṭhaka  179-180
Koṭuntiṟappuḷḷi (Kodunthirapully)  104106
Kṣṇakarṇāmta  221-223, 227-228
Kumāraliṅgam  270, 283, 287
Kumbakonam  47, 164, 235-236, 240
kuṇḍalī  181-183
Kūṭiyāṭṭam (Sanskrit theatre of Kerala) 
81, 139-145, 148-150, 152, 154-155
Lahore  81-82, 84, 140, 256
language of the gods  28, 51, 137, 172
Greco-Bactrian  13
Greco-Latin  36
Greece  13, 15, 27, 30, 34, 43 
Greek (see scripts)
Greek literature  2, 34
Gregorian  174-176
Grub street hacks  40
Gujarat  4, 42, 100, 159
gurukula  134, 161 
guru-śiṣya  149, 157
halantyam  202-203
Halmidi  191
hand-lists  259, 261 
horoscope  46, 181-183, 185
Hoysala dynasty  158, 164
Hyderabad  162
hyperglossia  7
ideo-diversity  39
Iliad  3
Imperial Library, Calcutta  56-57 
Imperial Library, Paris  59
India Office Library  59, 64, 105, 181, 255
Indian exact sciences (see under exact 
sciences)
Indo-European  13, 28-30, 32-33 
Indo-Iranian  26, 30
Indoskript-project   145
Indus civilization  9, 30, 33
inscriptions  (see writing materials: rock 
(stone))
intellectual history  7, 47, 119, 253-254, 
266, 272, 274
intellectual traditions, practices, networks 
1, 7, 14, 47, 136, 235-236, 250, 254, 
264, 266, 272-274
invention theory  12-13
Iran, Iranian  11, 23, 25-27, 30, 32-33
Iṭṭi Ravi Nampūtiri  110
Jaiminīya  45, 87, 99-115
Jaiminīya-Ārṣeya-Brāhmaṇa  113
Jaiminīya-Brāhmaṇa  112 
Jaiminīya-Ghyasūtra  108
Jaiminīya-Saṃhitā  103
Jaiminīya-Śrautasūtra  87, 101, 108
Jaiminīya-Upaniṣad-Brāhmaṇa  113-114
Jain, Jaina, Jainism  10, 21, 32-33, 35, 
157, 171, 195, 207, 216-217, 256
Jaipur  180, 183-185
Jambunāthabhaṭṭa  167, 267

--- Page 315 of 338 ---
general index
299
Manuscriptology  51, 97, 120-121, 138, 
145, 172
Manuscripts
 
catalogues (see under catalogue)
 
collections (see under collections)
 
conservation, preservation  2, 6, 32, 
42, 49, 82, 112, 116, 161-162, 168, 
171, 233, 259, 275
 
copying (see under copying)
 
culture  1-3, 6-8, 32-33, 39-40, 42-52, 
119-122, 187, 205
 
dating (see under date of manuscripts)
 
depositories  47
 
distribution  42, 45-46, 55, 63, 99, 122, 
147, 157,174, 207, 264-265
 
handling  119, 121, 149
 
production  5-6, 42, 46-47, 55, 99, 
147, 157, 173-174, 184, 188, 207, 
227
 
search  19-20, 38, 43, 45-46, 64, 66, 
69, 73, 77-78, 126, 147, 256-258, 
261-262, 264
 
use and print  40
Manuscript Committee  259-260
Marathi  41-42, 164-166, 168, 237
Marutvānpāḍi  269-270, 281, 286
mattar  4
Mathematics  12, 46, 51, 71, 173, 179- 
180, 184
Maunggun plate  192
Maurya  13, 50
medicine  32-33, 36, 61, 162, 167-169, 
236
Megasthenes  13
Mehmet IV  71
Mehmet Effendi  71-72
Melkote  100
memorization  8, 13, 21, 23, 25, 27-28, 
30, 34, 216-217
memory culture  12, 14, 20, 22-29, 31-33, 
39-40, 43-44
Mesopotamian sculpture  4
metal sheets (see writing materials)
MIA dialects  7, 10-11, 33
Ministry for Education  259
Mithila  47, 262-264, 266-267, 270, 272273, 276
missionary publications  41, 73
mnemonic devices  15
mnemotechnic  30,‑ 32
monasteries  19, 21
Leadbeater, C.W.  56
leap (day, month)  175
learned communities  132, 135, 257
leather (see writing materials)
Leiden copper-plates  197-198
Lekhapaddhati  4, 52-53
Le Noir  73-76
Lepcha manuscripts  58, 66
Lévy-Bruhl  24
librarian  4, 46, 56, 60-61, 72, 74, 119, 
149, 255
libraries  4-5, 39, 42-43, 45-46, 64, 71, 76, 
148, 161-163, 165-167, 250-251, 
255, 257, 262-263, 266-267
ligatures  11, 87, 89-95, 199
linguistic  7, 12, 22-23, 33, 39, 44, 48, 64, 
78, 97, 204, 236, 255-256
literacy  2, 8, 12, 14-15, 20, 23-24, 31, 34, 
43, 138
literary history  7
literary traditions  1, 28
literate societies  14-15, 24
loha-kaṇṭaka (see writing materials)
Lontar (see writing materials)
Louis XIV  70
Lutheran missionary  73
Madhyamavyāyōga  81, 139, 142, 144, 
153
Madras (see under Chennai)
Madurai  162-163, 190, 238
Magadha  13, 32, 48
Magadhan Prakrit  10
Mahābhārata  21, 35-36, 38, 53, 65, 139, 
154, 161, 169
Mahābhāṣya Dīpikā  34
Maharashtra  32, 122, 132-134, 137
māhātmya  65-66, 151
Mahāvagga  18
Mahāyāna  19, 21, 37-38, 49
Malabar  190, 192, 205, 267
Malayāḷam (see scripts)
mana  107
Manen, J. van   45, 55-67, 194, 198, 200, 
205
Maṇipravāla  168, 194
maṅgala verses  128
Maṉṉārguḍi  244-245
Mannambhaṭṭa  267
Mantrāṅkam  145, 147-148, 150-152, 
154-155
Manuchi (Italian traveller)  41

--- Page 316 of 338 ---
general index
300
Oriental Institute of the Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda  105, 
228
Orissa  4-5, 160, 164, 263-264
Oriya (see scripts)
ornaments (at the end of an act or 
drama)  85
orthoepic diaskeuasis  26
Ottoman emperor  71
Oudh  258
owner, ownership  60, 173, 213, 227, 250, 
253-254, 261-273, 276-287
pada-pāṭha  8, 22, 25-26, 30-31, 44, 48- 
49
Padārthadharmasaṁgraha  37
Padārthadīpikā  65
pagination  34, 204, 213
palaeography  121, 205, 224
Pali  63, 192
Pallaḍam  270, 283, 287
Pallavas  131, 158, 190-193
palm leaf (see writing materials)
palm leaf rolls (see writing materials)
Palmyra palm (see writing materials)
pañcāṅgam, panjangam  72, 112, 176, 
185, 215, 219-220, 232-233
Pañcarātra  81, 139, 142, 155
Pandya  158, 164, 190, 192-193
Pāññāḷ (Panjal)  107-109
Panniyūr (Panniyoor)  106, 108-109
paper-manuscript  65, 74-76, 105, 112, 
127, 161, 167-169, 171, 210, 243, 
265
parameters  7, 24-25, 29, 32, 43-44, 179180, 204
pāraśava  132
Pāṭaliputra  13, 19, 21
Pāṭhaśālās  25, 44
Pātimokkha  18
Persian  9, 21-22, 31, 71, 73
philosophy  8, 28, 39, 50, 56, 114, 158, 
236, 247, 270-271, 285-287
Pikira plate  191
place of discovery  253
poetic traditions  28
polemical discussion  39
Pondicherry  70, 73-74, 163
post colophon  173-174, 176, 184, 261
pottery  13
monks  18-19, 21, 25, 158
monumental  191-192
mutts  157-158, 161, 166
Mudrārākṣasa  143
multi-language  39
multi-media data bank  46
Mysore  100, 162, 164, 240, 258, 267
Nāgarī (see scripts)
Nagarjunakonda  4, 21
Nāgai, Karnataka  4
Nair, Appukuttan  139
Nambiar / Nangiar (Nampyār / Naṅṅ
yār)  141, 148-152, 154
Nampūtiri Jaiminīyas  100, 104-108, 
110-114
Nandināgarī (see scripts)
nannādi system  84
Narasiṁhācāryār  270, 279, 284, 286
National Mission of Manuscripts, India 
59, 171-172, 253 
native savants  255 
natural sciences  37
Near East  15, 23, 27, 175
Nellore  267-268, 271, 273, 283-285, 287
Netherlands  56-58, 64
New York  56, 207
Nijmegen  56
Nīlakaṇṭhan Akkittirippāṭŭ  110-111, 
114
Nīlakaṇṭha Dīkṣita  238
Nopţi la Serampore (Nights at Serampore)  57, 66 
North India  3, 20, 52, 158, 164, 210, 
262-263, 266-267, 272
North-West Provinces  258
Northern Pakistan  3
numeral  84-85, 96, 177-178, 196, 198, 
200-203, 205
numeric and calendric systems  46, 173
Nyāya  4, 66, 247, 250, 271, 285-286
Officer of Oranje-Nassau  57
Officier de l’Instruction Publique  57
Oral, Orality  1-2, 5-27, 30-49, 89, 100, 
111-112, 157
 
epic  16, 21-23, 25, 34, 43
Oriental Research Institute, Tirupati 127
Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum  81- 
82, 139-140

--- Page 317 of 338 ---
general index
301
Renaissance  40, 71
repha  200, 203
reports  13, 19, 47-48, 57, 62, 99, 118, 
162, 192-193, 242-244, 254, 256262, 265-267, 272-274
Ṛksaṁhitā  123-124, 133-134, 137, 169 
Ṛgveda  8, 16, 20, 22-23, 25-26, 28, 33, 
48-49, 72, 111, 122, 125, 130, 135, 
167, 169
Ṛgvedadaśagrantha  122-124, 127, 133, 
137
Ṛgvedic paṇḍits  46
religious competency  73
regional languages  43, 157, 164, 188, 194
re-used manuscripts  3
ritual  5, 7, 12, 16-17, 22, 25, 27-29, 35, 
45, 50, 65, 102-103, 106, 108-109, 
111, 115, 118, 133-134, 142, 209, 
212, 217, 219, 221, 228, 265, 271
rock (stone) (see writing materials)
Royal Batavian Society of Arts and 
Sciences  57 
royal inscriptions  11-12, 131
Royal Library, Berlin  59
Ryswick treatise  70
Śaiva  77, 100, 128, 157, 243-244, 249
śalākā (see writing materials)
sacred texts  27, 32-33, 40
Salem (district)  60, 162, 267
saṁhitā  23, 25-26, 31, 110, 112, 123, 125, 
127-130, 133, 168
sāmans  18, 101-102, 111, 113
Sāmavedins  17, 100, 106
Sampurnanand Sanskrit University, 
Varanasi  174, 261
sandhi  26, 85-87, 91, 143
Sanskrit College, Tripunithura  81, 139140
Sanskrit grammarians  10-11
Sanskrit manuscripts  7, 47, 56, 58-61, 
64, 99, 145, 147, 162, 172-174, 176, 
183, 185, 192, 242, 253-262, 264, 
266-267, 272, 274
Sāṁkhya  35-37, 50, 280, 282-283
sāṅkapṛṣṭhā  204
śāntipāṭha  215
Sarasvati Mahal Library, Tanjore (Than
javur)  4, 46, 126, 157, 161-162, 
165, 169, 247
Śāradā (see scripts)
śāstra  129-130, 216, 241, 245-246, 249
prakrit, prakritic  7, 10-12, 14, 20, 33, 46, 
52, 87-88, 91, 93, 95-96, 116, 139, 
141, 143-145, 157, 200, 264
pramāṇa  35-36, 50, 221, 232
prapāṭhaka  51, 213-216
Pratijñāyaugandharāyaṇa  81, 139, 141, 
144-145, 150, 152-154
Pratimānāṭaka  81-82, 139, 147-148
pratyakṣa  35
prayoga texts  65, 133, 167
pre-Aśokan  10-14, 44
precondition of civilization  8
priests  17-18, 26-27, 29-31, 100, 104, 
108-109, 132, 134, 158, 166, 207, 
214
printing  37-41, 47, 52, 73, 79, 120-123
print culture  1-2, 6, 8, 40, 42-43, 50
printing press  1, 39, 41-43, 49, 52, 73
print workshop  40
private libraries  42, 45, 162, 166-167, 
172, 262, 266, 275
proclaimers  12
pṛṣṭhamātrā  199
punctuation marks  84-85, 196, 202
Punjab  63, 81, 258
Punjab University Library, Lahore  81, 
140
purāṇa  5-6, 51, 65, 168, 207-208, 233, 
271, 286-287
purohita  102-104, 208-209, 217, 219, 
221, 226
Puruṣasūkta  212, 214, 216
Pūrva-Ārcika  103, 112
Pūtapāṇṭi (Bhutapandi)  104-105
Pyu and Pāli  192
Queen Dīpāmbikā  239
Rāghavācāryār  270, 280, 282, 286-287
Rāj Library  265, 276
Rajasthan  5, 159, 178
Rajputana  258, 274
Rāju Śāstrin  244-245
Rāmānujācāryār  270, 279-281, 286-287
Ramasubba Sastrigal  47, 251
Rāmāsvāmiśāstrī  270, 282-283, 287
Rāma-yajña  207-208
Rāmāyaṇa  21, 65, 75, 161, 169, 208, 222
Raṅgācāryār  270, 281-282, 286-287
rationality  15, 23, 31, 35-36, 48-50, 52
recensions  61, 123-124, 170
religion  7-8, 32

--- Page 318 of 338 ---
general index
302
Shajirajapuram  240
Shivaji (Maratha King)  41, 47, 166, 169
Siddharāja Jayasiṁha  40, 42
Siddhānta, siddhānta  21, 179, 232, 248, 
251
signature  225-227
Simla  162, 257
Sindh  159
Sir Lawrence  162
Śiva and Pārvatī  128
Smti  111, 263-267, 272-273 
South Asia  2, 5, 7-10, 24, 39-40, 99, 119, 
157
South-East Asia  6, 44, 187
South Arcot  162, 267
South India  2-4, 7, 21, 45, 47, 55, 60, 71, 
77, 99-100, 105, 132, 147, 157-158, 
160, 162-163, 165-166, 174, 187188, 192, 196, 204, 207-208, 224, 
235, 237-238, 240, 250, 262-263, 
266-267, 269-270, 272
southern scripts  3, 65, 189, 191-192
Śrauti  270, 282-283, 287
Śrīdharaveṅkaṭeśa  238-239
Sri Lanka  3, 14, 44, 48-49
Śrī Śaṅkarācārya
(see also Author-index: Śaṅkara)  158, 
250
Śrī Rāmānujācārya  100, 158, 247
Śrī Madhvācārya 
(see also Author-index: Madhva)  158
śrītāla (see writing materials)
Śrotriya  207, 216, 221, 227
stage directions  85, 87, 89
stotra  65, 75, 168, 217, 221, 271, 279-286
subject-classification  254
Suebian knot  30
Śukapuraṃ (Sukapuram, Shukapuram) 
108-109
Suleyman Aga Mustapha Raca  71
Surat  41 
survey  37, 45, 63, 99, 162, 165, 173, 254255, 265, 272-273
surveyors  254, 258
sūtra  17-18, 36, 38-39, 42-43, 50-51, 62, 
65-66, 87, 101, 104, 108-109, 114, 
124, 143, 168-169, 207, 244, 247
Svādhyāya  111, 114 
Svapnavāsavadatta  81, 83, 94, 96, 139, 
147
Swami Shivananda  57
Śāstriyār  270, 280, 283, 286-287
Ṣaṣṭitantra  35
śataka  75, 219
scales of beings  36
scholasticism  39
School of Oriental and African 
 
Studies, London  82, 140, 147 
scribe  4, 21, 73, 75-77, 79, 82-83, 86, 89, 
93-94, 113, 149-150, 174, 177-178, 
184-185, 193, 196, 203-204, 212213, 215-216, 222, 224-226, 261
scribal errors, mistakes  40, 88, 92 
Scripts
 
Aramaic  9-10, 12, 21, 31, 157
 
Bengali  70, 168
 
Brāhmī  7, 9-14, 49-50, 157, 189 
 
Devanāgarī  9, 65-66, 82, 87-88, 91, 
126, 160, 168, 188, 255, 260-261, 
267
 
Grantha  4, 9, 46, 61-62, 65-66, 80, 
82-84, 88, 94, 96, 100, 113, 145, 
155, 158, 167-168, 187-198, 200206, 243, 255
 
Greek  10, 13, 22, 157
 
Kannaḍa  96, 145, 187, 191-192, 194, 
203, 218, 255, 262
 
Kharoṣṭhī  9-12, 33, 52
 
Malayāḷam (Malayālam)  7, 46, 65, 81- 
94, 100, 105, 113, 141, 144-145, 
147, 153, 158, 168, 187, 190-191, 
193-195, 203, 255
 
Nāgarī  66, 170, 188
 
Nandināgarī  65-66, 145, 158, 168, 
187
 
Oriya  168, 255
 
Śāradā  90
 
Tamil  61, 84, 145, 168, 188, 190-194, 
201, 203, 255
 
Telugu  61-62, 65, 70, 74-75, 79, 126127, 132, 134, 145, 158, 166, 168169, 187-188, 191-192, 203-204, 
211, 224, 255
 
Tigalari (Tulu)  168, 171, 190-191, 
194-195, 203
 
Vaṭṭeḻuttu  65, 158, 190-193, 195
 
Ārya-eḻuttu  190-191, 195 
 
Kōleḻuttu  190-191, 193, 195
script-mercantilism  40
scriptures  19, 21, 122, 132, 134, 192, 248
scroll (see writing materials)
Seleukos  13
Shaji, P.L.  140-141, 148, 151-153

--- Page 319 of 338 ---
general index
303
Trichinapoli (Trichinopoly)  60, 267
Trichy  102, 162-163
Trivandrum-plays  45, 81-82, 90, 94, 96, 
139, 142, 144-145, 153
Tübingen  46, 139, 142, 145
Tulu (see scripts, Tigalari)
Turfan collections, fragments  2-3, 52, 
87, 89-90
Udgītha  17 
Uḍupi (Udipi)  100
Ūha-Gāna  103, 106, 110, 114
Ūhya-Gāna  103, 106, 110, 114
United Provinces  63
University Grants Commission  260
upakhilas  124-125, 127-128, 137
Ūrubhaṅga  81, 139
Ūṣāṇi  103, 110, 114
Uttara-Ārcika  103, 112
Uttara-Gāna  106
Uttaramallūr  282, 287
vacanika  12
Vaigai  158
Vaiṣṇava  77, 100-101, 103, 128, 244, 246
Vanves  69
Varadācāryār  270, 279-280, 286
variant readings  88, 92 
varṣaphala  47, 220-221, 228, 232
Vasiṣṭha  30
Vasiṣṭhakuṭi  101-102
Vaṭṭeluttu (see scripts)
Vāyu  38
Veda  4, 8, 14-16, 18-19, 23, 26, 33, 72, 
101, 108, 110, 122, 124-126, 129130, 133-134, 158, 165, 168, 212, 
216, 240, 246, 271, 279-285
Vedānta  66, 114, 130, 167, 242-244, 246248, 270-271, 285-287
Vedapuruṣa  125, 134
Vedic tradition  15-17, 25, 28, 30, 32, 34, 
106, 111, 116, 130
Velamur  270, 282, 287
Vēmanaśatakamu  75
Verzeichniss der Sanskrithandschriften, 
Berlin 59
Vibhāṣā  19
vidyādāna  216
Vijagarācāryār  270
Vijayanagara  122, 130-132, 134, 158, 
164, 190
syllabic  9, 16, 30-31, 84, 181, 196, 201203
Tabhaka  265, 276
Taḍakamaṅglam  281, 287
Taittirīya Āraṇyaka  214-215
Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa  213-214
Taittirīya Upaniṣad  214, 216
Tāla (see writing materials)
Talipot palm (see writing materials, 
under tālipot)
Tamil (see scripts)
Tāmil Nadu (Tamilnādu)  45, 99-105, 
108, 113, 157-158, 162-163, 165, 
171, 190, 263, 266, 269-273, 279, 
286
Tamraparni  158
Tantra  131-132, 168, 246, 284
Tarim Basin  3
Tartaric  72
Tātparyanirṇaya  65
Tātācāryār  270, 279-280, 286
Telugu (see scripts)
Telugu orthography  211-212
temporal contours  43-44
Tentiruppērai  101, 103-106, 114
textual communities  120, 122, 132
Thanjavur (Tanjore)  4, 41, 43, 46-47, 
101-102, 127, 157, 162-172, 235239, 241, 245, 247, 250-252, 267
theology  37, 236
Theosophical Society, Adyar  56, 60, 163
Tibetan blockprint  56-57
Tibetan Buddhism  56
Tibetan language  56-57
Tigalari (see scripts)
Tinnelveli (Tinnevelly)  162, 267
Tiruvailyāru  267
Tiruviḍaimarudūr  167, 248, 250, 267
Tiṭṭakkuṭi (Tittagudi)  101-102
Tiruviśainallūr, Thiruvishaloor, Tiruvi
śalūr, Tiruvisalur, Tiruviśainallūr 
164, 235-241, 243, 250-251, 267
Tōkūr (Thogur)  101-105, 114
Tranquebar  73
transition, transitional  7, 20-21, 23, 33, 
40, 42-43, 194-195, 199-200
transmission  6, 8, 10, 12, 16-18, 20-27, 
30-37, 39-41, 44-50, 88, 97, 107, 
115, 132, 149, 157, 178
transregional  188
Travancore  190, 193

--- Page 320 of 338 ---
general index
304
 
palm leaf  2-3, 6, 47, 50-51, 55, 58, 
61-62, 64-66, 73-76, 82, 84-85, 97, 
102, 105, 111-112, 121, 126, 139140, 143, 145, 147-154, 157-162, 
167-171, 188, 190, 192-195, 197, 
202, 207-211, 213, 221, 223-225, 
228, 235, 243, 255, 260
 
palm leaf rolls  209-210, 223-228
 
Palmyra  3, 159, 210
 
paper  19, 50, 65, 73-76, 82, 105, 112, 
127, 148-149, 157-158, 161, 167169, 171, 209-211, 227, 243, 260, 
265
 
rock (stone)  4, 9, 157-158, 163, 190191
 
śalākā  160
 
scroll  4, 19, 52
 
śrītāla (tālipot)  3, 159, 210
 
Tāla  3, 210
 
wooden planks, boards  3, 82, 158, 
160, 210, 217, 219
writing of Prakrit, peculiarities  91
writing of Sanskrit, peculiarities  89
Würzburg  46, 82, 142-145, 153
Xinjiang  3
yajus-formulae  18
Yāmalāṣṭakatantra  46, 122-123, 125128, 131, 135-137 
Yao Hing  19
ya-śruti  212
zoology  36-37, 40
Zoroastrians, Zoroastrianism  25-27, 32
villages  46-47, 101-105, 107-109, 113, 
162, 164, 168, 208, 211, 215, 220, 
224-226, 228, 235-237, 240-241, 
245, 250-251
village clerk  224, 226
Vinaya  19, 21, 37, 
virāma  86, 89-91
Virūpākṣa  130-131, 134
visarga  85, 90, 93, 197, 199
Viṣṇu  38, 76, 78, 129, 131, 218, 244-245, 
249
Vizagapatam  267
vrata  110, 114, 217, 219, 221, 230
Vyākaraṇa  4-5, 26, 151, 168, 247, 271, 
285-287
Writing
 
aversion to  13, 29-30, 32
 
beginnings of  8, 12
 
system  9, 21, 23, 33, 48, 92
Writing material(s)
 
bamboo  160-161, 210
 
birch-bark  2-3, 50, 121, 157
 
Borassus flabellifer  3, 159, 210
 
cloth  148, 158, 161, 209
 
copper plates  4, 157, 190-191, 197199, 202, 209
 
Corypha palm  3
 
Corypha utan  159
 
Corypha umbraculifera  3, 159, 210
 
leather  4
 
loha-kaṇṭaka  210
 
lontar  3, 159
 
metal sheets  158
 
oil  141, 160-161

--- Page 321 of 338 ---
ILLUSTRATION SECTION

--- Page 322 of 338 ---


--- Page 323 of 338 ---
[Chapter 1]
Plate Ia: Scene at the Court of King Suddhodana (father of Siddhartha) with Indian scribe, 
3rd cent. CE, Andhra Pradesh, Nagarjunikonda. Photo by S.R. Sarma.
Plate Ib: Detail of Ia: Th ree soothsayers and a 
scribe on the occasion of the birth of Siddhartha, 
the future Buddha. Photo by S.R. Sarma.
Plate Ic: Detail of Ia: Scribe writing down the 
predictions. Photo by S.R. Sarma.

--- Page 324 of 338 ---
[Chapter 4]
Plate II: Manuscript TP 835.
Plate III: Above: Ms. TR 22848 A (Svapnavāsavadatta, ca. 1500 A.D.) [Malayā
am script]; In the middle: Ms. TR 12356 A 
(Svapnavāsavadatta, ca. 1896 A.D.) [Malayā
am script]; Below: Ms. CAL 1488 A (Bālacarita) [Grantha script].

--- Page 325 of 338 ---
[Chapter 6]
Plate IV: Folios from a manuscript of the Yāmalāakatantra containing the YATKU. Photo by the author.

--- Page 326 of 338 ---
[Chapter 6]
Plate V: Students reading gveda-daśagrantha in Rajapur, India. Photo by the author.
Plate VI: Screenshot of <http://www.indologie.uniwuerzburg.de/bhasa/rahmen.html> 
(2007/09/19).
[Chapter 7]

--- Page 327 of 338 ---
[Chapter 7]
Plate VII: Duryōdhana (Kalamandalam Raman Chakyar) and Kāñcukīya (Kitangur 
Kuttappan Chakyar) in Dūtavākya (Killimangalam, 1996/09/29; source: Heidrun Brückner) 
Plate VIII: Yaugandharāyaa (Kalamandalam Raman Chakyar) and Vasantaka (Kitangur 
Kuttappan Chakyar) in Mantrākam (Killimangalam, 1996/05/26; source: Heike Moser)

--- Page 328 of 338 ---
[Chapter 7]
Plate X: Manuscript Grahalāghava, Jaipur, 2004.
Plate IX: Listing the manuscripts of the Potiyil Cākyār Family. From left to right: Potiyil 
Paramesvaran Chakyar, Killimangalam Vasudevan Namputiripad, Kitangur Kuttappan Chakyar, 
Heidrun Brückner, P.L. Shaji. (Potiyil, 1996/10/02; source: Heike Moser) 
[Chapter 9]

--- Page 329 of 338 ---
[Chapter 10]
Plate XI: Ms. showing grantha-vaeluttu variety. Courtesy: Vaidika Samshodhana Mandal, Pune. Picture by the author.
Plate XII: Ms. showing grantha-tamil variety. Courtesy: Kern Library, Leiden. Picture by the author.

--- Page 330 of 338 ---
[Chapter 10]
Plate XIV: Ms. showing alphabetic and digital numeral. Courtesy: Kern Library, Leiden. Picture by the author.
Plate XIII: Ms. showing grantha-malayalam variety. Courtesy: Vaidika Samshodhana Mandal, Pune. Picture by the author.

--- Page 331 of 338 ---
[Chapter 10]
Plate XV: Map of South India showing the areas of the varieties of grantha script. Map by author. 
Plate XVI: Grandfather’s Chest is being carried to the temple of Veu-gopāla, which is inside the 
walls with the vertical stripes to the left .
[Chapter 11]

--- Page 332 of 338 ---
[Chapter 11]
Plate XVIIIa. Palm leaf Roll 1, Recto.
Plate XVIIIb. Palm Leaf Roll 1, Verso.
Plate XVII. Palm leaf manuscripts and rolls retrieved from the grandfather’s chest.

--- Page 333 of 338 ---
[Chapter 11]
Plate XIX: Manuscript of the Varaphala.

--- Page 334 of 338 ---
[Chapter 11]
Plate XXI: Rāmasubba’s descendants, 2005.
Plate XX. Inscribed palm leaf roll and the protective envelope.
[Chapter 12]

--- Page 335 of 338 ---
[Chapter 12]
Plate XXII: Śrīdhara Vekaeśvara, a.k.a. Ayyāva
. 
(Contemporary devotional rendering).
Plate XXIII. Rāmasubba Śāstrī.

--- Page 336 of 338 ---
[Chapter 12]
Plate XXV: Some cultural centres in the Kaveri river delta.
Plate XXIV: Th e Kaveri delta rice bowl. Image courtesy of Google Earth.

--- Page 337 of 338 ---
[Chapter 13]
Plate XXVI: Map I shows the locations in Darbhangā, Bihār, North India. 
Courtesy: Imperial Gazetteer of India, Chicago Univ. collection.
Plate XXVII: Map II shows the locations in Tamilnādu, South India.
Courtesy: Imperial Gazetteer of India, Chicago Univ. collection.

--- Page 338 of 338 ---
[Chapter 13]
Plate XXVIII: Map-III shows the locations in Tamilnādu, South India. 
Courtesy: Imperial Gazetteer of India, Chicago Univ. collection.