 
 
 
 
Comparative Studies of 
	
	
		
South Asia, Africa and  
	
		
the Middle East 
 
 
 
 
   Vol. 31, No. 2, 2011
         doi 10.1215/1089201x-1264388  
 
 © 2011 by Duke University Press 
5 0 6
v a r i o r u m
The Mughal Book of War:  
A Persian Translation of the  
Sanskrit Mahabharata
Audrey Truschke
n 1582 the Mughal emperor Akbar underwrote a Persian translation of the Sanskrit 
Mahabharata, thus transforming the great Indian epic into a Mughal courtly text. The 
court poured many resources into producing the translation, and the resulting text, 
called the Razmnamah (Book of War), remained a seminal literary work in Mughal circles for 
decades. While scholars have long been aware of the Razmnamah and its centrality to Mughal 
literary culture, few have seriously treated the textual content of this translation. Indologists 
have spilled much ink in repeatedly listing the dozen or so Sanskrit-­Persian translations pro-
duced in Akbar’s court, including the Razmnamah.1 Some have tried to account for Akbar’s 
translation project as a whole and framed his endeavor as an enlightened religious policy or 
an act of political legitimation.2 The Razmnamah in particular has drawn attention from schol-
ars who have studied the illustrations of the text and Abu al-­Fazl ibn Mubarak’s preface to 
the work.3 Yet all this scholarship lacks what must be the central pillar for understanding the 
Razmnamah or any translation: an analysis of the text itself. In this article, I begin to correct 
I am grateful to Sheldon Pollock, Hamsa Stainton, and partici-
pants in the 2008 Persian Literature in Multilingual India Con-
ference at the University of Cambridge for their feedback on 
earlier drafts of this work. I also gratefully acknowledge the fol-
lowing institutions for allowing me access to their manuscript 
archives: Aligarh Muslim University, Asiatic Society of Bombay, 
Bibliothèque Nationale, Birla Academy of Arts and Culture, 
Bodleian Library, British Library, Cama Institute of Bombay, In-
dira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, Khuda Bakhsh Library, 
L.D. Institute of Indology, and Oriental Manuscript Library in 
Hyderabad. This research was supported by a Fulbright Hays 
doctoral dissertation research abroad fellowship.
1. See, e.g., M. Athar Ali, “Translations of Sanskrit Works at Ak-
bar’s Court,” Social Scientist 20 (1992): 38 – 45; A. B. M. Habibul-
lah, “Medieval Indo-­Persian Literature relating to Hindu Science 
and Philosophy, 1000 – 1800 A.D.,” Indian Historical Quarterly 14 
(1938): 167 – 81; S. Rashid Husain, “Some Notable Translations 
Rendered into Persian during Akbar’s Time,” Islamic Culture 55 
(1981): 219 – 39; Muhammad Bashir Husayn, “Mughaliyah daur 
meih Sanskrit aur ‘Arabi ki Farsi tarajum” (“Persian Translations 
of Sanskrit and Arabic during the Mughal Period”), in Tarikh-­i 
adabiyat-­i Musalmanan-­i Pakistan va Hind (History of the Liter-
ature of Pakistani and Indian Muslims), vol. 4, part 2, Farsı adab 
(1526 – 1707), ed. Maqbul Badakhshani (Lahore: Punjab University, 
1971), 774 – 804; Jivanji Jamshedji Modi, “King Akbar and the Per-
sian Translations of Sanskrit Books,” Annals of the Bhandarkar 
Institute 6 (1925): 83 – 107; Fathullah Mujtaba’i, “Muntakhab-­i 
Jug-­Basasht, or Selections from the Yoga-­Vasistha attributed to 
Mīr Abu’l-Qāsim Findiriskī” (PhD diss., Harvard University, 1976); 
S. A. Reza Jalali Naini, “Persian Translations of Sanskrit Works,” 
in “Special Issue on the Occasion of 50 Years of the Agreement 
of Indo-­Iranian Cultural Relation,” Journal of the Indo-­Iran 
(2008): 68 – 86; M. A. Rahim, “Akbar and Translation Works,” 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Pakistan 10, no. 1 (1965): 101 – 19; 
and N. S. Shukla, “Persian Translations of Sanskrit Works,” Indo-
logical Studies 3, nos. 1 – 2 (1974): 175 – 91.
2. On the former view, see Roderic Vassie, “Persian Interpreta-
tions of the Bhagavadgītā in the Mughal Period: With Special 
Reference to the Sufi Version of ‘Abd Al-­Rahmān Chishtī” (PhD 
diss., School of Oriental and African Studies [SOAS], University 
of London, 1988), 16 – 18; and Catherine B. Asher and Cynthia 
Talbot, India before Europe (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2006), 140, 146. On the latter point, see Carl W. Ernst, 
“Muslim Studies of Hinduism? A Reconsideration of Arabic and 
Persian Translations from Indian Languages,” Iranian Studies 36 
(2003): 179 – 83.
3. On the illustration of the Razmnamah, see Milo Cleveland 
Beach, Mughal and Rajput Painting (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1992), 23 – 35; Asok Kumar Das, Paintings of 
the Razmnama: The Book of War (Ahmedabad: Mapin, 2005); 
and John Seyller, “Model and Copy: The Illustration of Three 
5 0 7
Audrey Truschke 
The Mughal Book of War:  
A Persian Translation of the Sanskrit Mahabharata
this omission by offering a first attempt at an 
in-­depth study of the Razmnamah in comparison 
with its Sanskrit sources. In so doing I aim to 
more precisely understand why Akbar’s court 
was interested in the Mahabharata and how the 
translators created a new Mughal epic of deep 
relevance to the imperial court and polity.
I pursue my analysis of the Razmnamah 
in two sections, focusing first on the Sanskrit 
sources of the Razmnamah and then on the 
translation practices one finds evidenced in 
the Persian text. In the first section, I describe 
how the translators accessed Sanskrit materi-
als and identify the source texts that were used 
to produce the Persian translation. This larger 
framework provides both conceptual and liter-
ary tools to further investigate the nature of the 
Mahabharata as the Mughals knew it, and iden-
tifying the original Sanskrit texts also enables 
us to proceed with comparative textual analy-
sis. In the second section, I examine the text of 
the Razmnamah in comparison with its Sanskrit 
sources to highlight some of the Mughal trans-
lators’ key strategies in reimagining the epic in 
Persian. This close reading traces several liter-
ary paradigms that provide insight into the 
crucial role the Razmnamah played in the pro-
duction and reproduction of a Mughal imperial 
culture. Taken as a whole, my analysis aims to 
show the central place of the Razmnamah in the 
politico-­cultural fashioning of Akbar’s court, 
whereby the Mughals developed a new type of 
Indo-­Persian imperial aesthetic.
Textual Sources
From the beginning, the Razmnamah was a 
collaborative effort that required interactions 
across linguistic boundaries, drawing Sanskrit 
and Persian intellectuals into a common task. 
The Sanskrit side is silent about its role, but 
the Mughals emphasized their cross-­cultural 
partnership in the text of their new translation. 
Nobody involved in the project knew both lan-
guages (such bilingualism would not, it seems, 
be widespread for another generation or two), 
and as a result two teams of translators were 
assembled.4 On the Persian side, Naqib Khan 
led the effort and was assisted by Mulla Shiri, 
Abd al-­Qadir Bada’uni, and Sultan Thanisari.5 
These men served Akbar’s court in a variety of 
other capacities; Naqib Khan was known as a 
historian, Bada’uni a secretary, and Mulla Shiri 
a poet.6 Multiple histories from Akbar’s reign 
mention the Persian translators but tell less 
about the participants on the Sanskrit side of 
this exchange. A colophon of a 1599 Razmna-
mah, now housed in the British Library, serves 
as the main source of information on these 
Brahmans: “Naqib Khan, son of Abd al-­Latif 
al-­Husayni, translated [this work] from Sanskrit 
into Persian in one and a half years. Several of 
the learned Brahmans, such as Deva Misra, Sat-
avadhana, Madhusudhana Misra, Caturbhuja, 
and Shaykh Bhavan . . . read this book and ex-
plained it in Hindi to me, a poor wretched man, 
who wrote it in Persian.” 7 The Mughals offer no 
information about the specific roles assigned 
to each translator, but the social framework of 
transmitting the text orally between two groups 
has several noteworthy implications.
As Naqib Khan’s colophon specifies, the 
Mughal and Brahman translators communi-
cated orally via their shared tongue of Hindi. 
Practically, this oral transmission is reflected 
in phonetic changes in transliterated Sanskrit 
words throughout the Razmnamah, as well as a 
Razmnāma Manuscripts,” Archives of Asian Art 38 
(1985): 37 – 66. On Abu al-Fazl’s preface, see Saiyid 
Athar Abbas Rizvi, Religious and Intellectual History 
of the Muslims in Akbar’s Reign: With Special Refer-
ence to Abu’l Fazl (New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal 
Publishers, 1975), 209 – 14; and Ernst, “Muslim Studies 
of Hinduism?” 180 – 83.
4. On the lack of Sanskrit-­Persian bilingualism in 
Akbar’s court, see Abu al-­Fazl’s comments in A’in-­i 
Akbari, ed. Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan (Delhi: Matba‘ 
Isma‘ili, 1855 – 56; Aligarh, India: Sir Sayyid Academy, 
2005), 360. 
5. Abu al-­Fazl mentions three of the translators, 
excluding Mulla Shiri, whereas Bada’uni mentions 
all four. Abu al-­Fazl, A’in-­i Akbari, 96; Abd al-­Qadir 
Bada’uni, Muntakhab al-­tavarikh, ed. Captain W. N. 
Lees (Calcutta: College Press, 1865), 2:319 – 21.
6. Naqib Khan contributed to Tarikh-­i alfi. Nabi Hadi, 
Dictionary of Indo-­Persian Literature (New Delhi: Ab-
hinav Publications, 1995), 451. He is also described by 
Saint Xavier, a visitor to Akbar’s court, as one “whose 
office is to read [the King] histories.” Quoted in Mu-
zaffar Alam and Sanjay Subrahmanyam, “Frank Dis-
putations: Catholics and Muslims in the Court of Jah-
angir (1608 – 1611),” Indian Economic and Social History 
Review 46 (2009): 482. See also Nizam al-­Din Ahmad’s 
comments in Tabaqat-­i Akbari, quoted in Shireen 
Moosvi, ed. and trans., Episodes in the Life of Akbar: 
Contemporary Records and Reminiscences (New Delhi: 
National Book Trust, 1994), 44. Bada’uni calls Mulla 
Shiri a Hindi poet, which may mean that he either was 
born in India or wrote in a north Indian vernacular 
(sha’ir-­i hindi; Bada’uni, Muntakhab al-­tavarikh, 2:55). 
Bada’uni is best known as the author of Muntakhab 
al-­tavarikh, an unofficial history of Akbar’s reign.
7. British Library (BL) Persian Additional (Add.) 5642, 
f.481b and BL Oriental (Or.) 12076, f.138b; also trans-
lated in Ali, “Translations of Sanskrit Works at Akbar’s 
Court,” 41. I have corrected the names to reflect the 
original Sanskrit forms. This colophon is available in 
later manuscripts as well, although often lacking “bih 
hindi”(in Hindi) (e.g., BL India Office [IO] 1702, Aligarh 
Muslim University, University Collection No. Persian/
Ikhbar 2, Delhi National Museum 63.47). All transla-
tions are my own unless otherwise indicated.
5 0 8
                             Comparative  
                       Studies of  
                 South Asia,  
           Africa and the  
      Middle East
quoted line of Old Hindi in the fourteenth book 
of the epic.8 Moreover, the Mughal translators 
actually write the Brahman narrators into the 
Razmnamah itself and thereby frame the entire 
Persian Mahabharata in terms of a story being 
told across cultural lines. The Razmnamah con-
sistently repeats slight variations on the expres-
sions “then the narrators of the story said” and 
“then the Indian storytellers relayed.” Such for-
mulations occur at the beginning of most of the 
epic’s eighteen books and many times through-
out each section. The Razmnamah also preserves 
the various other narrative frameworks of the 
Mahabharata, in which a bard tells the story as 
he heard it at the snake sacrifice of Janame-
jaya and so forth. Therefore, the Indian story-
tellers who are omnipresent throughout the 
Razmnamah are certainly the additional layer of 
Sanskrit pandits who narrated the story to the 
late-­sixteenth-­century Mughal court. Here the 
translators begin a process that they continue 
to pursue through various translation strate-
gies: namely, reframing the Mahabharata as a 
work that belongs in a contemporary ­Mughal 
context.
Despite the attention paid to hearing the 
Mahabharata tale, Mughal records contain no 
mention of what Sanskrit texts they used as the 
basis for their translation. We are left to infer 
the source Sanskrit materials from the numer-
ous clues and references within the Persian 
translation itself. By the late sixteenth century, 
the Sanskrit Mahabharata textual tradition con-
sisted of at least a dozen different versions that 
are typically defined by discrete scripts and asso-
ciated with particular regions.9 Thus the Kash-
miri Mahabharata is written in Sarada, the Tamil 
version in Grantha, and so forth. The versions 
can be loosely grouped into two grand recen-
sions, the northern and the southern, that differ 
from one another primarily in their inclusion or 
exclusion of particular episodes and ordering of 
the stories. Within the northern and southern 
recensions, each regional version is further de-
fined by its own additions to the text and variant 
readings.10 If we can identify the version of the 
Sanskrit Mahabharata within this corpus used to 
produce the Razmnamah, then it becomes pos-
sible to analyze Mughal translation strategies by 
reading the original and the translation side by 
side.11 Determining the Sanskrit source texts for 
the Book of War also reveals some key features of 
the Mughal interest in this Indian epic.
Overall the Sanskrit informants com-
municated the text accurately and in detail to 
the Mughal translators. The Persian text is not 
a line-­by-­line rendering of the Sanskrit origi-
nal, but the Razmnamah contains all eighteen 
books of the Sanskrit Mahabharata, plus the 
Harivamsa appendix, and the storyline is largely 
unchanged, complete with most of the smaller 
side stories and digressions.12 The ordering of 
the stories and inclusion or exclusion of certain 
sections attests quite clearly that the majority 
of the Razmnamah follows the northern recen-
sion of the Mahabharata.13 Beyond its broad sto-
ryline, the Razmnamah contains further inter-
nal evidence that indicates the source regional 
version, primarily by faithfully reproducing the 
Mahabharata’s long genealogical lists and names 
of various gods. Such lists have substantial vari-
ants among regional Mahabharatas, and thus 
we can use the Razmnamah’s transliterations of 
these sections to see which version must have 
been in front of the Sanskrit pandits who read 
the names to the Mughal translators. This mode 
of analysis, however, presents some difﬁculties 
since the Mughals did not adopt any standard-
8. Mahabharat: Buzurgtarin Manzumah-­i Kuhnah-­i 
Mawjud-­i Jahan bih Zaban-­i Sanskrit [Razmnamah] 
(Mahabharata: The Oldest and Longest Sanskrit Epic), 
ed. S. M. Reza Jalali Naini and N. S. Shukla (Tehran: 
Kitabkhanah-­i Tahuri, 1979 – 1981), 4:389. 
9. For a discussion of Mahabharata recensions, see V. 
S. Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” in The Mahabharata 
for the First Time Critically Edited [Mahabharata], 
ed. V. S. Sukthankar, S. K. Belvalkar, and P. L. Vaidya 
(Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 
1933), 1:v – cx. 
10. For a discussion of the nonregional nature of the 
different recensions, see Sheldon Pollock, The Lan-
guage of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Cul-
ture, and Power in Premodern India (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 2006), 223 – 37. 
11. While it is beyond my purposes here, the Razm-
namah may also hold important implications for the 
critical edition of the Sanskrit Mahabharata (Suk-
thankar, “Prolegomena,” 1:xxviii).
12. The Harivamsa is recognized as an integral part 
of the text by the Mughal translators (Abu al-­Fazl, 
“Muqaddamah,” 40). Akbar’s Harivamsa has not been 
printed, but a copy from his court is available in the 
Lucknow State Museum (A.N. 57,106).
13. I have checked key components of all eighteen 
books of the translation against the critical edition 
of the Sanskrit text in making this determination as 
well as Abu al-­Fazl’s preface, in which he summarizes 
the epic based on the parvasangraha (the table of 
contents given in the opening of the Mahabharata). 
Note that since the books of the Mahabharata often 
circulated separately, checking each book individu-
ally is important. I have not determined the Hari-
vamsa recension because the text has not been 
printed. Book 14 is the exception in not following the 
northern recension, as I elaborate on below. For Abu 
al-­Fazl’s summary, compare “Muqaddamah,” 37 – 40, 
and Mahabharata, 1.2.
5 09
Audrey Truschke 
The Mughal Book of War:  
A Persian Translation of the Sanskrit Mahabharata
ized transliteration system and the names often 
vary among Razmnamah manuscripts. Moreover, 
the master copy of the translation produced for 
Akbar’s court, while extant, is now held in the 
collection of the Maharaja of Jaipur and is inac-
cessible to scholars. Finally, the Sanskrit manu-
scripts of the northern recension are themselves 
rarely as old as the Mughal translation, and 
therefore a certain amount of temporal disloca-
tion taints any reliance on the critical edition of 
the Sanskrit Mahabharata for such precise analy-
sis. Despite these obstacles, a comparison of sev-
eral lists of names in the Sanskrit text with both 
the printed Razmnamah and select sixteenth- 
and early-­seventeenth-­century manuscript cop-
ies reveals that the Razmnamah consistently 
corresponds most closely with the Devanagari 
version of the Mahabharata.14
On its own, the Devanagari version yields 
little insight into the Mughal encounter with 
the Mahabharata since it was the most eclectic 
and widespread of all the versions of the epic, 
often drawing extensively on other regional tra-
ditions. Also the Devanagari version had gained 
widespread currency across north and central 
India by the late sixteenth century, and so it ap-
pears that the Mughals did precisely what one 
would have expected and found the most eas-
ily available, popular redaction of the story to 
render into Persian.15 However, the Razmnamah 
deviates from its overall reliance on the Devana-
gari version in one case that provides deeper 
insight into the particular Mughal interests in 
this Sanskrit epic: the fourteenth book is drawn 
from a separate text altogether.
This book, the Asvamedha Parvan (Horse 
Sacrifice Book), is based on the Jaiminiyasvamedha, 
an alternative and starkly different Sanskrit 
retelling of this section of the epic.16 The Jai-
miniyasvamedha is an anonymous work, likely 
composed in the twelfth century, that proved 
popular both in Sanskrit and in vernacular 
translations.17 Most crucially for the Mughals, 
the Jaiminiyasvamedha is a much more exciting 
and vivid tale than its canonical counterpart. In 
its fourteenth book, the Mahabharata tells the 
story of Yudhisthira’s decision to perform the 
horse sacrifice to solidify his kingship. However, 
the sacrifice quickly gets put on hold as Krishna 
digresses into a long discourse on philosophical 
ideas, often characterized as a rehashing of the 
Bhagavad Gita. In short, it’s a lot of talk and no 
action. In contrast, the Jaiminiyasvamedha omits 
Krishna’s speech altogether and instead relates 
Arjuna’s adventures as he travels around India 
following the sacrificial horse. He stumbles upon 
a kingdom where only women live, visits a place 
where all men are born and die within the same 
day, and has his head cut off and reattached 
by Krishna. Arjuna also fights his own son in 
a dramatic battle, and the middle of the book 
contains a digression into the wars and dramas 
of the Ramayana.18 In Persian, these lively and 
bizarre narratives fall easily into the category of 
dastan (narrative literature) that was often full 
of ‘aja’ib (fantastical elements).
‘Aja’ib qualities frequently featured promi-
nently as a mode of interpreting the other in 
Islamicate encounters with Indian culture both 
before and after the Mughal era.19 The pen-
14. In addition to a variety of shorter checks, I have 
analyzed three lists of names in detail, selected for 
their length, variants, and distribution: the snake 
names in book 1 (Mahabharata, 1.52.5 – 17; Razmna-
mah, 1:52 – 53), the names of Siva that are not present 
in the critical edition but appear in book 12 of much of 
the Devanagari corpus (Mahabharata, vol. 16, app. 1, 
no. 28, ll. 160 – 346a; Razmnamah, 3:394 – 408), and a 
list in book 13 (Mahabharata, 13.151.2 – 50; Razmna-
mah, 4:211 – 13). Chief among the early manuscripts I 
have consulted are BL Persian Add. 5641/5642 (dated 
1598 – 99), Aligarh Muslim University, University 
Collection No. Persian/Ikhbar 2 (1604 – 5), and Birla 
Razmnamah (1616 – 17). In addition BL Or. 12076, which 
contains books 14 – 18, is dated 1598 – 99, and the Luc-
know Harivamsa A.N. 57,106 likely dates to the 1590s 
(Robert Skelton, “Mughal Paintings from Harivam. s´a 
Manuscript,” Yearbook — Victoria and Albert Museum, 
South Kensington 2 [1970]: 52).
15. Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” 1:lxii – lxiii; Pollock, 
Language of the Gods, 229.
16. Art historians have long known that the four-
teenth book of the Razmnamah follows the Jaimini-
yasvamedha but have not commented on the implica-
tions of this beyond the illustrations. Thomas Holbein 
Hendley, Memorials of the Jeypore Exhibition (London, 
1883), 4:29; more recently, see Seyller, “Model and 
Copy,” 46.
17. On the date, see J. D. M. Derrett, “Greece and 
India Again: The Jaimini-­As´vamedha, the Alexander-
­Romance and the Gospels,” Zeitschrift für Religions 
und Geistesgeschichte 22 (1970): 22 – 27. On the Jaimini-
yasvamedha’s popularity, see Petteri Koskikallio and 
Christophe Vielle, “Epic and Puranic Texts Attributed 
to Jaimini,” Indologica Taurinensia 27 (2001): 71 – 74. 
18. W. L. Smith describes some examples in “Strīrājya: 
Indian Accounts of Kingdoms of Women,” in Vidyārn.
avavandanam: Essays in Honour of Asko Parpola, ed. 
Klaus Karttunen and Petteri Koskikallio (Helsinki: 
Finnish Oriental Society, 2001), 471 – 75. See also the 
summary of Jaiminiyasvamedha in the introduction 
to Mahabharata, 18:xxiv – xliv. The Persian references 
for the stories I mention above are the kingdom of 
women (Razmnamah, 4:292 – 94), the men who live a 
single day (295 – 96), Arjuna’s head problems (365 – 66), 
Arjuna’s battle with his son (299 – 309 and 350 – 56), 
and adventures from the Ramayana (309 – 50).
19. Finbarr B. Flood, Objects of Translation: Mate-
rial Culture and Medieval “Hindu-­Muslim” Encounter 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009), 19; 
Aditya Behl, “The Magic Doe: Desire and Narrative in 
a Hindavi Sufi Romance, circa 1503,” in India’s Islamic 
Traditions, 711 – 1750, ed. Richard Eaton (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2003), 197 – 99.
51 0
                             Comparative  
                       Studies of  
                 South Asia,  
           Africa and the  
      Middle East
chant of the Mughals in particular for fantasti-
cal stories is demonstrated by the labor Akbar’s 
court devoted to illustrating the Hamzanamah 
(Tales of Amir Hamza) for several years preced-
ing the Razmnamah illustrations.20 Abu al-­Fazl 
even compares the Razmnamah to the Ham-
zanamah and exclaims how the former is even 
more astonishing than the latter, bordering on 
the unbelievable.21 Moreover, Akbar’s transla-
tors seem to have encountered Sanskrit texts 
through the framework of ‘aja’ib elements from 
the very beginning. When the Mughals initially 
decided to engage with the Sanskrit tradition, 
they selected the Atharva Veda as the ﬁrst text 
to be translated, a work that contained largely 
spells and charms as the Mughals understood 
it. Bada’uni, the first translator to tackle the 
text, describes the Atharva Veda in his history of 
Akbar’s reign primarily by noting some oddities 
of the work.22 Dabistan-­i mazahib (School of Reli-
gions), a mid-­seventeenth-­century Persian text, 
explicitly articulates the Indo-­Persian opinion 
that “spells, incantations, magic, devices, and 
tricks are contained in the [Atharva Veda].” 23 
After exhausting three translators, the Mughals 
ultimately declared the Atharva Veda too diffi-
cult to understand and abandoned their inau-
gural translation project. But they continued to 
emphasize an ‘aja’ib framework in their encoun-
ter with the Mahabharata.
Abu al-­Fazl summarizes in his preface to 
the Razmnamah the contents of the epic and 
frequently remarks on the wondrous nature 
of the stories contained in it. He often lapses 
into hyperbole to express his astonishment, ex-
claiming, “I see such agitation in myself from 
hearing such stories that what can I write?” and 
“In this book, such extraordinary things are 
on every page, every section, and every chap-
ter.” 24 As I set out in detail in the next section, 
the Razmnamah often exhibits ‘aja’ib features 
that frequently appear in dastan tales, such as 
magical spells (afsun). The Mughal court seems 
to have celebrated the marvelous quality of the 
Asvamedha Parvan in particular by dispropor-
tionately illustrating this section in the first illu-
minated manuscript.25 In light of this emphasis 
overall, ‘aja’ib features are likely what drew the 
Mughals to the Jaiminiyasvamedha and even, in 
some ways, to the Mahabharata as a whole.
However, this argument is complicated 
by the possibility that the Mughal translators 
may not have been aware of the multiplicity of 
Mahabharatas and thus may not have made a 
conscious choice to translate one version over 
another in the fourteenth book.26 The transla-
tion flows seamlessly from the earlier thirteen 
books based on the Devanagari version into 
the fourteenth book based on the Jaiminiyas-
vamedha, and no Mughal work ever frames the 
fourteenth book as different from the rest of the 
epic as a single, strange tale. Nonetheless, if not 
the Mughals themselves, then most likely the 
Sanskrit informants, who surely provided cop-
ies of the Mahabharata to Akbar’s court, decided 
to use the Jaiminiyasvamedha by preference to 
any other version of this book. As participants 
in Sanskrit literary culture, these individuals 
would have been aware of the different versions 
available and likely presented the Jaiminiyas-
vamedha for translation because they thought 
the Mughals would appreciate its captivating, 
lively narrative. Regardless of who selected the 
Jaiminiyasvamedha, the decision highlights ‘aja’ib 
elements as an important characteristic in Mu-
ghal courtly translations, by either their own 
choice or the perception of their Sanskrit infor-
mants. The Mughals outline their interests and 
understandings of the Mahabharata much more 
precisely in the translation itself, to which we 
can now turn armed with the ability to compare 
the Persian and Sanskrit texts.
20. Rizvi, Religious and Intellectual History, 205 – 7; 
Milo Cleveland Beach, The Imperial Image: Paintings 
for the Mughal Court (Washington, DC: Freer Gallery 
of Art, 1981), 58 – 59.
21. Abu al-­Fazl, “Muqaddamah,” 34.
22. Bada’uni, Muntakhab al-­tavarikh, 2:212 – 13.
23. Dabistan-­i mazahib, ed. Rahim Rizazadah Malik 
(Tehran: Kitabkhanah-­i Tahuri, 1983), 139. 
24. Abu al-­Fazl, “Muqaddamah,” 24, 24 – 25.
25. Despite not being the longest, book 14 is the most 
heavily illustrated parvan of the Jaipur Razmnamah 
(Seyller, “Model and Copy,” 46).
26. However, later readers of the Razmnamah seem 
to have been aware of this shift in book 14. See the 
colophon in a Razmnamah copied in 1729 (Aligarh 
Muslim University, Sir Suleman 35/22), also repro-
duced in Shailesh Zaidi, Hinduism in Aligarh Manu-
scripts: Descriptive Catalogue of Persian Mss. of Maul-
ana Azad Library, A.M.U., Aligarh on Hindu Legends, 
Philosophy and Faith (Patna, India: Khuda Bakhsh Ori-
ental Public Library, 1994), 22. 
511
Audrey Truschke 
The Mughal Book of War:  
A Persian Translation of the Sanskrit Mahabharata
Translation Practices
The Mughals employ multiple translation strate-
gies throughout the Razmnamah to produce an 
imperially relevant text. Three types of literary 
practices offer particularly valuable insight into 
how the Mughals fashioned their Mahabharata: 
the preservation of Sanskrit words in transla-
tion, the overlay of different religious traditions, 
and the insertion into the text of Persian poetry. 
First, the transliteration instead of translation of 
Sanskrit words enabled the Mughals to develop 
a Sanskrit-­inflected linguistic register through-
out the Razmnamah that highlights the foreign, 
Indic nature of the Mahabharata. Second, in at-
tempting to make sense of the religious aspects 
of the Mahabharata, the translators incorporate 
their own Islamic notions and a monotheistic 
God while simultaneously retaining Indic gods 
and spiritual elements. However, despite the 
crowded divine landscape, the Mughals also stu-
diously avoid any deep theological reflections in 
the text. Overall, they seem to draw on religious 
sentiments as a means of loose acculturation for 
a new audience while definitively precluding any 
religious reading of the epic. Last, the transla-
tors sprinkle hundreds of verses of Persian po-
etry throughout the Razmnamah. These articu-
late the sentiments of the Mahabharata in a way 
culturally relevant to a Persian-­speaking elite 
and also particularly develop areas of the epic 
that address kingship and politics. Together 
these three translation practices participate in 
the creation of a Mughal imperial aesthetic and 
designate the Razmnamah as a seminal Indo-
­Persian epic.
An Indic Register
The Mughal translators employ Sanskrit words 
and phrases in several different ways in the 
Razmnamah that develop a web of associations 
between the epic and Indo-­Persian forms of 
knowledge. First, the Razmnamah preserves a 
wide range of transliterated Sanskrit words 
that lend a heavy Indic register to the Persian 
text. Many such terms denote culturally specific 
concepts, such as gandharb (gandharva), a class 
of mythical beings; narak (naraka), the under-
world; and puran (purana), a genre of Sanskrit 
literature. Other times, the translators invoke 
Sanskrit words even when there are readily 
available Persian equivalents, such as cakra, 
naksatra, and pitr, meaning “discus,” “constel-
lation,” and “father,” respectively. Through the 
consistent and liberal use of Sanskrit vocabulary 
on nearly every page of the Razmnamah, the Mu-
ghal translators actively cultivate a body of Indic 
knowledge in the text’s readers. Moreover, the 
texture such foreign words add to the language 
of this work defines the Razmnamah as a cross-
­cultural epic.27 Certain words, such as Veda (bid 
in Persian), might strike us as untranslatable, 
but the Mughals make an important choice in 
not employing approximate terms more fre-
quently. Naraka could be thought of as duzakh 
(hell), a rsi (sage) referred to as a dana (wise 
man), and puran transformed into tarikh (his-
tory). Such loose translations would change the 
meaning and resonances of the Mahabharata, 
but no less than transliterating and thereby 
transforming the original Sanskrit words into a 
crucial component of the cultural idiom of the 
Razmnamah.
In some instances, this process of outlin-
ing new vocabulary prompts the Mughals to 
replace or translate Sanskrit words with other 
Sanskrit words that had long ago entered Indo-
­Persian parlance. Here the Mughals both draw 
on and simultaneously redefine the contours of 
Indo-­Persian culture through their encounter 
with the Mahabharata. For example, Agastya, a 
sage in the epic whose name denotes the star 
Canopus, is appropriately renamed Suhayl, the 
Persian term for the same star, in the Razmna-
mah, an equivalence that had been established 
as early as the fourteenth century.28 More in-
teresting, in book 5 of the text, a purohita in 
Sanskrit, a Brahman family priest, becomes a 
Persian Brahman.29 Brahman had been used in 
Indo-­Persian poetry for several centuries pre-
ceding the Mughal Empire in the Persianate 
sense of an individual devoted to idol worship. 
The Razmnamah redefines this term once more 
27. On Indic literary registers, see Allison Busch, “Rīti 
and Register: Lexical Variation in Courtly Braj Bha-
sha Texts,” in Before the Divide: Hindi and Urdu Liter-
ary Culture, ed. Francesca Orsini (New Delhi: Orient 
Blackswan, 2010).
28. The words are listed in synonyms in Salaksa’s 
fourteenth-­century lexicon of Sanskrit and Persian, 
titled Sabdavilasa (Ahmedabad, L. D. Institute of Indol-
ogy 8311, f.1a, v. 14). 
29. Razmnamah, 1:470; Mahabharata, 5.20.1. See also 
Razmnamah, 3:59, where purohita is defined as a 
Brahman.
512
                             Comparative  
                       Studies of  
                 South Asia,  
           Africa and the  
      Middle East
by resituating it within an Indic context and ex-
plores Brahmans not as a typology or a Persian 
literary trope but as individuals within elaborate 
narratives. In this sense, the Mughal translators 
both tap into an existing framework of Islami-
cate views of the Indic other and add new cul-
tural specificity to an Indo-­Persian register.
In most cases, the Mughal translators 
clearly intend for readers to learn the Sanskrit 
vocabulary used in the Persian text in order to 
understand the story. However, the Razmnamah 
also contains a few more extended quotations of 
Sanskrit that seem to operate as literary signals 
rather than linguistically meaningful text. The 
most noteworthy case occurs in the Adi Parvan 
(Book of Beginnings), where the translators in-
sert several full Sanskrit verses during a strong 
‘aja’ib moment. In this section, the sage Astika 
saves the snakes from demise during the snake 
sacrifice of Janamejaya. The snakes offer Astika 
a boon in thanks, and he requests a spell that 
would protect the speaker against venomous 
bites. The grateful snakes, then, “agreed that 
no snake will come to the home of anyone who 
says this spell and that wherever he says it, every 
snake that is there will flee. The magic is this.” 30 
Then the Razmnamah produces several full San-
skrit verses transliterated into Persian.31 The 
linguistic meaning of these lines is irrelevant 
to the Persian translators, who offer no further 
explanation or gloss but are interested only in 
the magical powers contained in the Sanskrit 
sounds themselves. The verses quickly became 
corrupt in later manuscripts of the Razmnamah, 
but the Sanskrit was never lost or translated. In 
fact, three later copies of the text contain sepa-
rate reconstructions of these verses in Devana-
gari script in the margins by later readers but 
still no translation, as some Sanskrit expressions 
cannot be put into Persian words.32
Finally, the Razmnamah contains a num-
ber of lengthy lists of Sanskrit names and titles, 
often in genealogies. Most books of the Persian 
translation contain several such lists, whether 
epithets of Surya, names of learned sages, 
or the hundred sons of Dhritarastra.33 Such 
catalog-­style information accurately reflects the 
Sanskrit Mahabharata, but it had also long been 
crucial to the Islamicate tradition’s encounter 
with India. Babur, founder of the Mughal dy-
nasty, is celebrated for the close attention he 
pays to native flora and fauna in his memoirs, 
often detailing the names of specific species in 
local dialects.34 Going back further, al-­Biruni 
is careful to preserve lists of place names from 
the puranas in his eleventh-­century account of 
India.35 The Razmnamah expands on this trend 
in the sheer number of Sanskrit lists it retains 
in its retelling of the epic story. Early on, manu-
script copies of the text were often careful to 
write out diacritic marks for these names so that 
their pronunciation was retained in the Persian 
script that does not normally show all vowels.36 
Later manuscripts, usually copied by Persian 
scribes without input from Sanskrit intellec-
tuals, often forget the diacritics and bungle 
the words, but all retain the lists nonetheless. 
Some even continue to emphasize their impor-
tance by overlining the names and numbering 
them.37 Even when intelligibility ceases, the idea 
remains current that cataloging Sanskrit names 
and retaining foreign, often ‘aja’ib qualities in 
the text are essential aspects of the Mughal 
Mahabharata.
A Crowded Divine Landscape
Whereas the Mughals treat Sanskrit terms 
largely within an Islamicate tradition of how to 
understand an Indic other, they act more liber-
ally in respect to religious elements of the epic. 
The Razmnamah translators keep much of the 
Mahabharata’s religious framework intact but 
also frequently overlay it with Islamic concepts.38 
The Mughal translators employ many Sanskrit 
30. Razmnamah, 1:53 – 54.
31. Naini and Shukla print four verses (Razmnamah, 
1:54), although most manuscripts I have consulted 
only offer the final two.
32. Patna, Khuda Bakhsh 2714, f.29b; Srinagar, Oriental 
Research Library 1294, f.31b; Oxford Bodleian Ouseley 
239, f.55b. 
33. Respectively, Razmnamah, 1:269 – 72; 4:211 – 13; 
1:122 – 25.
34. The Baburnama: Memoirs of Babur, Prince and 
Emperor, trans. Wheeler M. Thackston (Washington, 
DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1996; New York: Modern 
Library, 2002), 335 – 50. Page reference is to the 2002 
edition. 
35. Alberuni’s India, trans. Edward C. Sachau, 2 vols. 
(London: Trübner, 1888; repr. London: Elibron Classics, 
2005), 1:299 – 303. 
36. See, e.g., Birla Razmnamah, 2:f.481a – 82a. 
37. See, e.g., Khuda Bakhsh 2718, f.49a – 51a; dated 1768.
38. Here I avoid the thorny question of what religious 
view or views the Mahabharata may actually express. 
Regardless, the Mughals understood the text as rep-
resenting a more or less cohesive tradition.
51 3
Audrey Truschke 
The Mughal Book of War:  
A Persian Translation of the Sanskrit Mahabharata
terms for divine beings, including div (deva), 
divat (devata), narayan (narayana), and bhagavan. 
They also articulate the Sanskrit concept of ava-
taras (incarnations of gods) and mention many 
specific deities. Yet at other points the Mughal 
translators interpolate Islamic phrases, often in 
Koranic Arabic, in praise of a monotheistic deity 
that is no other than the Islamic Allah. For ex-
ample, the opening of the Mahabharata tells of 
its own recitation, which begins with the narra-
tor praising the Hindu god Brahma. The Razm-
namah retains this metaframework but recasts 
Brahma as khudavand (God): “When the Suta-
puranik [narrator] knew that Shunak and the 
others desired to hear this story, he began the 
tale. He started first in the name of God, Great 
be his Glory and Magnificent his Bounty [jalla 
jalaluhu wa ‘amma nawaluhu].” 39 This monothe-
istic God who prompts Arabic praises appears 
frequently throughout the Razmnamah but not 
always at the expense of Hindu gods.
Allah seems to comfortably coexist with 
his polytheistic counterparts in much of the 
Persian Mahabharata, complete with the Hindu 
deities’ involvements in earthly affairs and de-
vious behaviors. For example, in the story of 
Nala and Damayanti, Nala attends Damayanti’s 
svayamvara, where she will choose her husband. 
Damayanti desires Nala, but four devatas dis-
guise themselves as Nala in an attempt to trick 
her into choosing one of them as her husband. 
In the Sanskrit text, Damayanti appeals to the 
plethora of gods causing trouble to desist from 
their deceit.40 But in Persian, in the midst of de-
vatas who all look like Nala, Damayanti prays 
to God, “God, May He be Exalted and Glori-
fied!” (khuda-­yi ‘azz wa jall ).41 Damayanti then 
addresses God, beginning: “O Solver of Ob-
stacles and Leader of the Lost [ay gushayandah-­i 
karha-­yi bastah va ay rahnama-­yi gumshudigan].” 42 
Here the Koranic reference is unmistakable as 
Opener (gushayandah) and Leader (rahnama) 
correspond to two of the Koranic names for 
God.43 The Islamic notion of a single God apart 
from the world stands in stark contrast to the 
multitude of physically present deities in the 
Mahabharata. Yet for the most part, these two 
worlds seem to meld together happily in the 
Razmnamah.
On occasion, however, the Razmnamah 
more drastically rewrites the religious frame-
work of the Mahabharata, such as when the work 
truncates the Bhagavad Gita and alters the na-
ture of Krishna and his message therein. Here, 
too, cultural intelligibility seems to trump any 
interest in ideology, and the treatment of the 
Bhagavad Gita signals a strong Mughal inter-
est in avoiding theology in their retelling of the 
epic. In the Mahabharata, the Bhagavad Gita of-
fers the final attempt to address the deep moral 
ambiguities of war before the slaughter ensues. 
Time seems to stand still, with armies arrayed 
on both sides of the battlefield, as Krishna 
teaches Arjuna that he must fight by way of a 
philosophically dense discourse about the na-
ture of the universe, dharma, and human ac-
tion. In comparison to seven hundred or so 
verses in Sanskrit, the Bhagavad Gita occupies 
a mere few pages of the Razmnamah.44 The Per-
sian translation provides a bare-­bones sketch of 
the conversation between Krishna and Arjuna, 
including the basic teaching that Arjuna is not 
morally culpable for killing his kinsmen and 
should participate in the impending war. How-
ever, the Razmnamah eliminates any further ab-
stract reflections on the different types of yoga 
and other concepts so that the focus remains on 
the battle itself rather than providing an ethical 
climax of the epic.
In other contemporary works the Mughals 
show substantial interest in explicating Indian 
religious ideas, but they seemed to feel that 
such topics did not belong in the Razmnamah. 
In his A’in-­i Akbari (Akbar’s Institutes), Abu al-
39. Razmnamah, 1:2. Note that some later manu-
scripts, generally written by Hindu scribes, replace 
mentions of khudavand with bhagavan (e.g., Hydera-
bad, Oriental Manuscript Library, Tarikh 266).
40. Mahabharata, 3.54.
41. Razmnamah, 1:300.
42. Ibid.
43. Al-­fatah and al-­hadi, respectively. I am grateful to 
Hossein Kamaly for this insight.
44. In their edition, Naini and Shukla replace the 
Razmnamah’s meager Bhagavad Gita with the fuller 
version attributed to Dara Shikuh (introduction to 
Razmnamah, 2:3). The Razmnamah text is available 
in Vassie, “Persian Interpretations,” 265 – 68, corre-
sponding to Mahabharata, 6.23 – 40. Also see Ma-
habharat-­i Farsi: Bhisma (Lakhnau: Naval Kishore, 
1880 – 1910), 7 – 10.
51 4
                             Comparative  
                       Studies of  
                 South Asia,  
           Africa and the  
      Middle East
­Fazl provides an extensive account of Sanskrit 
knowledge systems, detailing the positions of 
nine Indian philosophical schools and vari-
ous religious beliefs and practices.45 Moreover, 
the Bhagavad Gita was translated into Persian 
several times during Mughal rule, and the first 
translation may have been in Akbar’s court.46 
However, these independent Bhagavad Gitas tell 
us little about how the Mughals conceptualized 
the Mahabharata, except that they understood 
the Mahabharata and the Bhagavad Gita as sepa-
rate texts. Some modern scholars have asserted 
that Naqib Khan omitted the Bhagavad Gita out 
of respect for Akbar’s poet laureate, Fayzi, who 
had previously translated the work.47 However, 
there is no evidence for this reasoning, nor is 
it certain that Fayzi ever translated the Bhaga-
vad Gita, much less before the completion of 
the Razmnamah.48 Rather, the reduction of the 
Bhagavad Gita in the Razmnamah is more sim-
ply explained as an indication that the Mughals 
did not want to halt the story for a religious re-
flection.49 In other sections, most notably in the 
Santi Parvan (Book of Peace), the twelfth book, 
the translators step back from the narrative to 
offer lengthy political advice, as I discuss below. 
Thus it seems that the Mughals wished to avoid 
the theological content of the Bhagavad Gita in 
particular.
This understanding of the Bhagavad Gita 
as theologically awkward in the Mughal reading 
of the epic is confirmed by how the translators 
rewrite the content of the shortened Bhagavad 
Gita to reflect a much stronger Islamic frame-
work than is present in the Razmnamah as a 
whole. The Razmnamah Bhagavad Gita opens 
like the Sanskrit with Arjuna positioning his 
chariot between the two armies ready for war.50 
When Arjuna has his crisis of confidence, the 
Sanskrit Krishna speaks to him not only as a 
teacher but also as an incarnation of the god 
Vishnu, and articulates a series of ideas about 
dharma, karma (action), and other Indian 
philosophical concepts. In contrast, the Razm-
namah Krishna is the teacher of truth but not 
a divine figure, and he speaks of God’s will as 
external to himself throughout his discourse. 
In the Razmnamah, Krishna articulates the dis-
tinction between himself as a messenger and 
God quite clearly at the close of the Bhagavad 
Gita in explaining why he became involved in 
the war at all: “So long as I am ignorant of what 
God Exalted has ordained, I do not interfere. 
If I had not known the state of the Kauravas 
and the wrath of God Exalted towards them, 
I would not have come to the battleﬁeld and 
pressed you on this matter. But I know that they 
all must be killed and that therein lays the hap-
piness of God Exalted.” 51 The strong religious 
content of the Bhagavad Gita may have com-
pelled the Mughals to rework this section of the 
epic in particular, but they were not consistent 
in their vision of an Islamic, almost prophet-­like 
Krishna. Elsewhere in the Razmnamah Krishna 
is portrayed as an Indian deva and even equated 
to khuda, the Islamic God.52 Thus rather than 
accurately representing Indic beliefs or over-
writing them with Islamic ideas, the Mughals 
aim at a middle ground approach that accom-
modates multiple positions while erasing any 
deep Hindu theology.
In light of this varied approach, we can 
most fruitfully understand the treatment of re-
ligious elements in the Razmnamah as part of a 
cultural accommodation rather than tied to any 
specifically theological objectives. This read-
ing stands in contrast to the work of scholars 
who have argued, mistakenly in my view, that 
the Mughals understood the Mahabharata as a 
religious text and that Akbar commissioned its 
translation primarily to promote mutual under-
standing between Hindus and Muslims.53 In its 
strongest form, this religious reading is based 
on a comment made by Abu al-­Fazl in his pref-
45. Abu al-­Fazl, A’in-­i Akbari, 433 – 556. 
46. There are multiple early modern translations of 
the Bhagavad Gita into Persian, four of which are at-
tributed to either Fayzi or Abu al-­Fazl. More manu-
script work is needed to sort out the dates and correct 
authors of these texts. Y. D. Ahuja, “Some Aspects of 
the Persian Prose Translation of the Gita Ascribed to 
Abu’l-­Fazl,” Indo-­Iranica 138, no. 3 (1960): 20 – 27. 
47. See, e.g., introduction to Razmnamah, 3:32.
48. Also the Mughals seem to have no qualms with 
retranslating texts, and Akbar commissioned mul-
tiple translations of the Mahabharata, Simhasan-
advatrimsika (Thirty-­Two Tales of the Throne), and 
Pancatantra. 
49. Akbar’s translators also truncate a section on pil-
grimage locations and their associated stories in the 
ninth book of the Mahabharata (9.29 – 53).
50. Vassie, “Persian Interpretations,” 265; Mahabha-
rata, 6.23.20 – 22.
51. Vassie, “Persian Interpretations,” 268.
52. See, e.g., Razmnamah, 1:240.
53. Most recently, Asher and Talbot, India before Eu-
rope, 140 and 146. See also Ernst’s critique of this view 
(“Muslim Studies of Hinduism?” 178 – 83).
51 5
Audrey Truschke 
The Mughal Book of War:  
A Persian Translation of the Sanskrit Mahabharata
ace to the Razmnamah: “When with his [Akbar’s] 
perfect comprehension he found that the squab-
bling of the sects of the Muslim community 
[millat-­i Muhammadī ] and the quarreling of the 
Hindus increased, and their refutation of each 
other grew beyond bounds, his subtle mind 
resolved that the famous books of each group 
should be translated into diverse tongues. . . . 
Having become aware of each other’s virtues 
and vices, they should make laudable efforts 
to rectify their own states.” 54 There are serious 
hermeneutical problems in positing an under-
standing of a Persian work of two-thousand-
plus pages on the basis of a single statement in 
a preface rather than analyzing the text itself. 
Moreover, the above passage does not clearly 
label the Razmnamah as a religious work, and 
in fact, the Mughals appear to have understood 
the Mahabharata much as the epic had gener-
ally been interpreted within the Sanskrit tradi-
tion: as a text that is not primarily religious but 
nonetheless involves many gods and addresses 
religious concerns.55
Abu al-­Fazl echoes this assessment later in 
his preface when he speaks more directly about 
the nature of the Mahabharata and describes it as 
a text of “advice, guidance, stories, and descrip-
tions of war and feasting,” or, more concisely, 
kingship.56 Indeed, the majority of Abu al-­Fazl’s 
preface concerns Akbar’s rulership as he praises 
the emperor with a myriad of different formu-
las.57 When pressed to describe the Razmnamah 
according to Persian genre classifications, Abu 
al-­Fazl applies the Persian term tarikh, although 
he goes on to immediately set the Razmnamah 
apart from this wider genre: 
Speech of this extent and breadth, with these 
strange things and wonders, is not present in the 
other various histories [tavarikh ] of the world. 
There is no trace of this amazing speech in the 
accounts [tabaqat ] of the world. . . . Although 
the lords of the circle of truth do not hesitate to 
refute the details of this story, nonetheless it is 
right that the mind of an intelligent person with 
discerning vision should reflect and place the es-
sence of these reported things in the realm of 
possibility.58
This characterization of the Razmnamah as 
hearsay, or perhaps more precisely as fantastical 
history, is consistent with the various elements 
discussed above. In their continual mention-
ing of the Indian storytellers who relay the epic, 
the Mughal translators typically use avardan, 
nivishtan, and akhbar kardan (to relay, to write, 
and to tell) to signal this type of distance be-
tween themselves and full-­fledged believers in 
the historicity of the Mahabharata.59 Abu al-­Fazl 
also places the Razmnamah within the category 
of disputed tarikh or purported history, whereas 
he does not compare it to the Koran or other 
religious works.
The Razmnamah likewise presents itself not 
as a theological work but rather as a story where 
religious elements afford an opportunity for 
the Mughals to acculturate the Mahabharata for 
a predominantly Islamic audience. The transla-
tors themselves may have had no other way of 
understanding religious aspects of the text than 
by some rough equivalence with their own tradi-
tion.60 Thus they developed a dynamic equiva-
lence that renders an overly Hindu Bhagavad 
Gita within a monotheistic framework while 
truncating the text to avoid devoting too much 
time to anybody’s theology. Where possible the 
translators also strived toward some conception 
of faithfulness to the text, and so in other sec-
tions, such as Damayanti’s svayamvara, God and 
the gods share the stage.
Despite the fact that the Razmnamah ex-
presses many basic Islamic ideas, the Mughals 
were aware of the danger of writing their own 
theology into the Mahabharata and sought to 
avoid such practices. One of the few recorded 
incidents concerning the actual translation 
process addresses precisely this concern of im-
posing Islamic notions on the Indian epic and 
54. Quoted in Ernst, “Muslim Studies of Hinduism?” 
180 – 181; his translation.
55. Concerning traditional understandings of the 
Mahabharata, see Pollock, Language of the Gods, 
224 – 25.
56. Abu al-­Fazl, “Muqaddamah,” 40.
57. Ibid., 4 – 19.
58. Ibid., 34.
59. Abu al-­Fazl in his history of Akbar’s reign simi-
larly uses guyand (they say) when he is repeating 
potentially unreliable information. Muzaffar Alam, 
“The Mughals, the Sufi Shaikhs, and the Formation 
of the Akbari Dispensation,” Modern Asian Studies 43 
(2009): 164.
60. For a detailed analysis of equivalence theory in 
a South Asian context, see Tony Stewart, “In Search 
of Equivalence: Conceiving Muslim-­Hindu Encounter 
through Translation Theory,” History of Religions 40 
(2001): 260 – 87.
51 6
                             Comparative  
                       Studies of  
                 South Asia,  
           Africa and the  
      Middle East
demonstrates the Mughals’ troubled relation-
ship with the notion of a faithful translation. 
Bada’uni, one of the translators of the text 
and an independent historian, describes Ak-
bar’s vehement accusation against him in this 
vein: “[Akbar] called me into the public and 
private audience hall and said to Shaykh Abu 
al-­Fazl, ‘We imagined that this person [namely, 
Bada’uni] was a young, unworldly adherent of 
Sufism, but he has turned out to be such a big-
oted follower of Islamic law that no sword can 
slice the jugular vein of his bigotry.’” 61 Bada’uni 
then relays the particular line that had stirred 
up so much trouble, a verse located in the fifth 
book of the Razmnamah and authored by Hafiz: 
“Every action has its reward and every deed its 
recompense.” 62 The addition of Persian poetry 
to the Razmnamah was an established, accepted 
practice, as detailed below, but this verse was 
singled out as problematic for its alleged co-
vert reference to Islamic beliefs. According to 
Bada’uni, Akbar understood the line to refer 
to the Islamic Day of Judgment, complete with 
Munkar and Nakir, two angels who judge the 
newly dead. To defend himself, Bada’uni ar-
gued that the ideas of reward and punishment 
are also present in the Sanskrit Mahabharata, 
since everybody spends time in both heaven and 
hell at the conclusion of the epic.63 In the end, 
Bada’uni’ successfully convinced the emperor 
that the verse stands in accordance with Indic 
ideas, and the line remains in the Razmnamah.
This episode demonstrates the deep prob-
lems of cultural comprehension that the Mu-
ghal translators faced, particularly regarding 
religion, and also the strong imperial involve-
ment in the translation project and insistence 
on avoiding the theology in the Mahabharata 
where possible. As mentioned above, direct Is-
lamic references to Allah run throughout the 
Razmnamah. If one considers the translation 
along with Abu al-­Fazl’s preface to the text, the 
Islamic context becomes even more apparent, 
since his introduction is replete with Islamic 
language and praise of God. Given this, Akbar 
is unlikely to have been upset over an indirect 
Islamic reference in a single line of poetry. 
Rather, the emperor seems to have been con-
cerned about the possibility that specific Islamic 
theological ideas, such as the Day of Judgment 
and its accompanying angels, might have en-
tered what was supposed to be an Indo-­Persian 
story. Thus, the varying treatments of religious 
elements throughout the Razmnamah seem to 
be a series of highly interesting (if only mod-
erately successful) attempts to make sense of a 
complex, different world while keeping any sub-
stantial discussion of Indic or Islamic religions 
out of the text as much as possible.
Poetry and Politics
While the Mughal translators and their patron 
may have been concerned about writing reli-
gious beliefs into the Razmnamah, they show 
no hesitation in adding a decidedly Persianate, 
courtly context to the Mahabharata by incorpo-
rating quotations of Persian poetry. The major-
ity of the Razmnamah is written in prose, but 
the translators insert occasional poetic verses 
throughout the text.64 These verses recast the 
literary framework of the Mahabharata for an 
Indo-­Persian audience in three distinct ways. 
First, such quotations inlay the Razmnamah 
with a rich set of intertextual literary associa-
tions within the Persian tradition. Moreover, 
the verses frame crucial moments in the Ma-
habharata in a quintessentially Persian aesthetic, 
drawing on Persianate poetic tropes and par-
ticular modes of expression. Finally, the poetic 
quotations specify another aspect of the Mughal 
interest in the Mahabharata, namely, its political 
commentary, by highlighting certain passages 
on kingship.
The Razmnamah contains hundreds of 
lines of Persian poetry, largely quoted from 
the great masters of Persian literature, such as 
Nizami, Haﬁz, Sa‘di, Sana’i, Anvari, Rudaki, 
and Mu‘izzi. They almost certainly quote from 
61. Bada’uni, Muntakhab al-­tavarikh, 2:399. Bada’uni 
seems to have also incurred this type of questioning 
regarding other texts (Rizvi, Religious and Intellectual 
History, 256).
62. Bada’uni, Muntakhab al-­tavarikh, 2:399. See also 
Razmnamah, 1:478; Safinah-­i Hafiz, ed. Mas‘ud Janati 
‘Ata‘i (Tehran: Chapkhanah-­i Haydari, 1968), 192. 
63. Bada’uni, Muntakhab al-­tavarikh, 2:400.
64. These poetic lines are original to the Razmnamah 
translation and not the result of later marginal notes 
being drawn into the text. Bada’uni’s incident of 
being called to Akbar’s court for his choice of a partic-
ular line demonstrates that the poems were included 
in the original translation, and the verses are included 
in the earliest manuscripts of the work from the late 
sixteenth century.
517
Audrey Truschke 
The Mughal Book of War:  
A Persian Translation of the Sanskrit Mahabharata
Indo-­Persian and lesser-­known poets as well, 
but identifying all the sources of poetry in the 
Razmnamah remains an unfinished project. The 
poems are not attributed in the translation, but 
an educated reader would have been expected 
to recognize such verses and their authors.65 
In quoting from their rich literary heritage, 
the Mughal translators participate in a long-
­standing Persianate method of using quoted 
poetry to enhance the weight and appeal of a 
new prose work.66 This strategy is also seen in 
other Sanskrit-­Persian translations patronized 
by Akbar, such as the Panchakhyanah, a trans-
lation of the Sanskrit Pancatantra (Five Tales), 
which quotes from Hafiz and Sa‘di.67 Addition-
ally, the interpolation of intertextual references 
was not uncommon in premodern translation 
projects more broadly.68 Such a strategy lends 
a newly translated text authority by embedding 
the work within its target culture, in this case 
the Persian literary canon.
In the Razmnamah, these poetic quota-
tions also often serve to epitomize the core 
of particularly emotional scenes according to 
Persian aesthetic sensibilities. In many cases, 
the translators incorporate the verses into the 
actual narrative of the Mahabharata and insert 
them into the mouths of the epic heroes in ad-
dition to the more conventional Persian method 
of using verses to summarize the main moral 
lesson of a story.69 A powerful example of the 
former, in which the Sanskrit epic’s characters 
speak in the language of Persian poetics, occurs 
at the start of the fourteenth book. Vyasa goes 
to see King Yudhisthira after the war is over, 
and Yudhisthira laments the death of his elder 
brother, Karna, and other relatives:
Now I have regained the places that my ances-
tors held. But one thing that deeply saddens 
and distresses me is that Bhisma, our lord and 
benefactor, Dronacarya, everyone’s teacher, 
and Karna, our elder brother, have passed away. 
Without them I will gain no peace or pleasure 
in this kingdom and rulership. I see Karna’s 
houses — where learned men always used to 
recite the Vedas and where religious men and 
scholars always used to gather and where great 
alms used to be found — now those houses are 
empty. The place where if a needy person came, 
he found so many alms that he would cry out of 
pure happiness.70
To capture the true emptiness of Karna’s house 
and his own grief, the Razmnamah Yudhisthira 
next utters the following lines from a famous 
qasidah by Mu‘izzi: 
I see a land devoid of the face of my beloved.
I see a meadow empty of the stature of that 
­upright cypress.
That place where the beloved used to wander 
in the garden with friends
Is now the dwelling of the wolf and fox, the 
­domain of wild asses and vultures.71
These four lines invoke the Persian image of a 
lost beloved, expressed through a description 
of the now deserted camp. Persian literature 
possesses a rich imagery associated with the 
beloved and abandoned places that has no con-
nection to Sanskrit. Yet these lines constitute 
the most poignant expression of the Razmna-
mah Yudhisthira’s pain, which has become an 
aestheticized emotion that emerges out of the 
Persian literary tradition.72
Beyond invoking a Persian aesthetic, the 
Mughals further redefine their version of the 
Mahabharata as an imperial text by singling 
65. On reader expectations regarding interpolated 
poetry, see Julie Scott Meisami, “The Historian and 
the Poet: Rāvandī, Nizami, and the Rhetoric of His-
tory,” in The Poetry of Nizami Ganjavi: Knowledge, 
Love, and Rhetoric, ed. Kamran Talattof and Jerome 
W. Clinton (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2000), 
119. That readers met such expectations is demon-
strated when they add further lines onto the quoted 
verses (e.g., Razmnamah, 4:220).
66. On the weight of verse in Persian literature and 
how it functions when mixed with prose, see Julie 
Scott Meisami, “Mixed Prose and Verse in Medieval 
Persian Literature,” in Prosimetrum: Cross-­cultural 
Perspectives on Narrative in Prose and Verse, ed. Jo-
seph Harris and Karl Reichl (Cambridge: D. S. Brewer, 
1997), 295–319.
67. ‘Abbasi Mustafa Khaliqdad, Panchakhyanah, ed. 
Tara Chand, Hasan Abidi, and Jalali Naini (Tehran: 
Iqbal, 1984); for Hafiz, see 24, 107, and Sa‘di, 19.
68. For example, see Chinese translations of San-
skrit texts from the third century CE. Daniel  
Boucher, “Gāndhārī and the Early Chinese Buddhist  
Translations Reconsidered: The Case of the Saddhar­
mapundarīkasūtra,” Journal of the American Oriental 
Society 118 (1998): 497 – 98.
69. Meisami, “The Historian and the Poet,” 99. Also 
note the example of Bada’uni’s verse discussed earlier.
70. Razmnamah, 4:219 – 20.
71. Ibid., 220; Mu‘izzi, Divan, ed. ‘Abbas Iqbal (Tehran: 
Kitabfurushi-­yi Islamiyah, 1940), 597. BL Or. 12076 
adds two further lines (f.2b).
72. Also note the lamentation of Bhisma’s injury 
(Razmnamah, 2:172).
51 8
                             Comparative  
                       Studies of  
                 South Asia,  
           Africa and the  
      Middle East
out the Udyoga and Santi Parvans, the fifth and 
twelfth books, respectively, to heavily adorn 
with poetry. Both books address at length the 
topics of rajya (political power) and rajadharma 
(proper kingly conduct). The Udyoga Parvan 
(Book of Effort ) focuses on negotiations to avoid 
civil war, and the Santi Parvan presents ex-
tended teachings on how to reconstruct an em-
pire after a bloody conflict. Both books show a 
heavy density of poetic quotations in compari-
son to the rest of the Razmnamah, where entire 
books often lack any such citations.73 The local-
ization of classical Persian poetry in the Razm-
namah highlights these two passages and their 
commentaries on kingly rule as central to the 
Mughal transformation of the Mahabharata and 
the concerns of the royal court. Elsewhere the 
Mughals also describe both books as concern-
ing kingly advice and rulership in particular.74 
Persian literati had a deep interest in the nature 
of kingship that stretched back to the incep-
tion of their literary tradition and often drew 
from Indic texts for political advice. Persian 
writers explored this theme through a variety 
of textual genres ranging from masnavis such as 
the Shahnamah (Book of Kings) to prose treatises 
akin to European mirrors for princes.75 These 
texts reached new heights of visibility in Akbar’s 
court as the emperor had Persian classics on 
kingship read out to him nightly, and the major 
court-­sponsored history of his reign draws on 
these literary works to frame Akbar as a just 
ruler.76 The Razmnamah likewise participates 
extensively in developing Akbar’s kingship, par-
ticularly through its poetry-­laden sections.
The Mughal translators further frame the 
Razmnamah as a book about kingship in general 
and Akbar’s rulership in particular by drawing 
heavily from Persianate and Islamicate world-
views in translating the actual contents of the 
Udyoga and Santi parvans. Thus where the San-
skrit Santi Parvan praises a king who ensures 
that each subject follows his svadharma (his own 
ethical code), the Razmnamah speaks of a king 
who brings to earth rahmat-­i ilahi (the grace of 
God).77 In the Sanskrit Udyoga Parvan, a Pandava 
messenger criticizes Duryodhana for depriving 
his cousin-­brothers of their proper inheritance 
(paitrka), but in the Razmnamah, Duryodhana 
has violated divine fate (taqdir-­i khuda).78 This 
second example prompts speculation about 
the Mughals’ speciﬁc interest in producing a 
Maha­bharata that commented favorably on the 
contemporary Mughal political situation. In 
the case of Duryodhana’s crime, Akbar’s pro-
cess of empire building and the frequent lack 
of a clearly established successor for the Mu-
ghal throne may have prompted the rejection 
of inheritance as a sacrosanct foundation for 
rulership.
Akbar’s kingship looms in the background 
throughout the Razmnamah translation project 
but is rarely directly addressed. While Abu al-
­Fazl’s repeated praise of Akbar in his preface 
to the translation seems to have little direct 
connection with an ancient Sanskrit epic, he 
may merely be externalizing the commentary 
on the emperor that is embedded in the care-
ful Mughal treatment of politics in the Razm-
namah. The Mughals not only adorn certain 
sections on rajya with poetry but also tend to 
translate these portions of the Mahabharata at 
length, even expanding at times on the San-
skrit text.79 Even beyond the fifth and twelfth 
books, the Mughal translators seize opportu-
nities to rewrite the epic to reflect the story of 
Akbar and the Mughal dynasty. One notable 
example of such an alteration is found in the 
story of the birth of Karna, the son of Kunti 
and Surya, the sun god. While still unmarried, 
73. Razmnamah, 1:462 – 547; 3:45 – 203. The section of 
book 12 with heavy poetry quotations roughly corre-
sponds to the rajadharma section.
74. Rauzat al-­tahirin of Tahir Muhammad Sabzavari, 
Oxford Bodleian Elliot 314, f.447b; see also Aligarh 
Muslim University, Sir Suleman 15/2(b), f.147b, f.182a.
75. William Hanaway discusses the wide range of 
genres covered by andarz (advice) literature in “Amīr 
Arsalān and the Question of Genre,” Iranian Studies 
24 (1991): 57 – 58. On advice literature conceptualized 
as a genre unto itself see Bo Utas, “ ‘Genres’ In Persian 
Literature 900 – 1900,” in Literary Genres: An Intercul-
tural Approach, vol. 2 in Literary History: Towards a 
Global Perspective, 4 vols., ed. Gunilla Lindberg-­Wada 
(Berlin: Walter De Gruyter, 2006), 238.
76. Linda Darling, “‘Do Justice, Do Justice, For That Is 
Paradise’: Middle Eastern Advice for Indian Muslim 
Rulers,” Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and 
the Middle East 22 (2002): 8 – 9.
77. Mahabharata, 12.67.30; Razmnamah, 3:45.
78.  Mahabharata, 5.20.4 – 6; Razmnamah, 1:470, 
based on the oldest variant in n. 2.
79. For example, in book 5 compare Razmnamah, 
1:470 – 72, to Mahabharata, 5.20 – 21. Overall, the trans-
lators render the twelfth book at such length that it 
comprises roughly one-­quarter of the entire Persian 
text. Perhaps unsurprisingly, later readers seem not 
to have shared the disproportionate interest of Ak-
bar’s court in these two books. This may explain why, 
in later manuscripts copies, Udyoga Parvan is some-
times abridged with the poetry largely excised (e.g., 
Bombay, Cama Institute 52; Bombay, Asiatic Society 
143693). In other manuscripts, Santi Parvan is fre-
quently cut off toward the beginning (e.g., BL Persian 
Add. 5639, BL IO 3013).
519
Audrey Truschke 
The Mughal Book of War:  
A Persian Translation of the Sanskrit Mahabharata
Kunti receives a spell (mantra in Sanskrit; afsun 
in Persian) from a sage that enables her to call 
on any god to impregnate her. Out of curiosity, 
she calls on Surya and their union results in the 
birth of Karna, whom she promptly abandons 
to conceal her shame. The Mahabharata explic-
itly notes that before Surya returns to heaven 
he reinstates Kunti’s virginity.80 The Razmnamah 
alters the tale so that Kunti conceives via a ray 
of light. As a result, as the text simply says, “She 
did not lose her virginity.” 81 A conception via 
divine light featured prominently in the story 
of Akbar’s ancestors and has been identified by 
modern scholars as a crucial component of Mu-
ghal imperial identity.82 In Akbarnamah, the of-
ficial court history of Akbar’s reign, Abu al-­Fazl 
tells the story of how Alanquwa, a Mongol prin-
cess and ancestor of Genghis Khan, conceived 
triplet sons via a ray of divine light. According 
to Abu al-­Fazl, the divine light was passed on in 
a concealed form through the generations until 
it again manifested itself visibly in Akbar upon 
his ascension.83 The Razmnamah overtly refer-
ences this Mughal legend in the modified story 
of Karna’s birth, which links Akbar’s political 
identity with the Sanskrit epic story.
In a passage in the Santi Parvan, the Razm-
namah even steps outside of its own narrative to 
explicitly address Akbar in a story about King 
Manu. In this portion of the text, Bhisma is in-
structing Yudhisthira on how to be a good ruler 
and introduces Manu as a positive exemplar. 
The Razmnamah translates the story with its 
own Perso-­Islamicate slant, which ends with a 
positive evaluation of Manu that is closely tied 
to good wishes for Akbar:
[Manu] showed compassion and mercy to the 
entire world and spoke to everyone with visible 
joy. Day by day, his majesty and pomp increased, 
and many years passed on earth in his rule and 
good fortune. Because of his virtuous conduct, 
God Exalted granted him a long, generous life. 
It is hoped, according to the magnificence of 
God, Praised and Exalted, that the shadow of 
justice and the compassion of his most exalted 
majesty, king Akbar — under whose justice, 
compassion, and grace all people in the world 
rest — would be perpetual and ever-­lasting so 
long as the world exists.84
Here the translators draw on an earlier teaching 
in Manu’s story that “the first responsibility of 
the subjects is that they must pray for the king” 
and apply it directly to their own political situa-
tion.85 The passage finishes with the verses:
O God! This king, a friend to those in need,
In whose shadow lies the refuge of the world,
May you grant him long life on this earth,
May you enliven his heart through obedience 
to God.
So long as there is day and night, may the king 
be on the throne,
And may prosperity reach the zenith of the 
sky.86
The voice that articulates these good wishes 
remains unclear. The speaker is either Bhisma, 
who addresses Akbar across the reaches of time 
after finishing the story of Manu, or the Mughal 
translators, who step outside of the narrative 
framework of the text to offer a few kind words 
to their patron. Either way, temporal and narra-
tive boundaries are broken to directly celebrate 
the great kingship of Akbar and to immortal-
ize him by including him in one of India’s great 
epics. This passage furthermore puts Manu and 
Akbar in close proximity and frames Akbar as a 
just, praiseworthy Indian king.
Conclusion
Akbar’s translators approach the Mahabharata 
as a mixture of imaginative history, political ad-
vice, and a great story that deeply interacts with 
the Indo-­Persian literary tradition while pro-
80. Mahabharata, 1.104.
81. Razmnamah, 1:117 – 18.
82. Ruby Lal, Domesticity and Power in the Early Mu-
ghal World (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2005), 146 – 49.
83. Catherine B. Asher, “A Ray from the Sun: Mughal 
Ideology and the Visual Construction of the Divine,” 
in The Presence of Light: Divine Radiance and Religious 
Experience, ed. Matthew Kapstein (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 2004), 170.
84. Razmnamah, 3:45. To date, I have found only a 
single manuscript that replaces Akbar’s name with 
Manu’s here (Bibliothèque Nationale France Supplé-
ment Persan 1038, f.420a – 420b).
85. Razmnamah, 3:44.
86. Ibid., 3:45; the first four lines are from Bustan-­i 
Sa‘di, ed. Nur Allah Iranparast (Tehran: Danish, 1973), 
18, lines 4 – 5. I am unclear about the origin of the last 
two lines. Note that lines 3 and 4 are missing in many 
manuscripts of the Razmnamah. Nonetheless, I do 
not think that their addition or subtraction signifi-
cantly alters the meaning or tone of the text here.
520
                             Comparative  
                       Studies of  
                 South Asia,  
           Africa and the  
      Middle East
moting an imperial ideology. They highlight the 
Indic nature of the text by preserving Sanskrit 
words and emphasizing ‘aja’ib elements while 
simultaneously placing it in a contemporary 
context as a tale narrated by Brahmans to the 
Mughal court. The translators approach reli-
gion pragmatically in the Razmnamah and avoid 
both Hindu and Islamic theology. Nonetheless 
they produce interesting mixtures of the two 
systems of belief in a series of uneven attempts 
to remain faithful to the Mahabharata while pro-
ducing a culturally intelligible story for an Is-
lamicate audience. Finally, the Mughals invoke 
Persian aesthetics throughout the Razmnamah 
and also use verse to mark particular sections of 
imperial advice and political commentaries.
In light of the overall emphasis on king-
ship in the Razmnamah and particularly given 
Akbar’s appearance in the ancient Indian 
world, it is tempting to agree with scholars who 
have suggested that this translation was primar-
ily designed to promote Mughal political objec-
tives.87 In many ways, my analysis bears out the 
thesis that the Mughals found common ground 
between their courtly needs and the Mahabhara-
ta’s story in the text’s commentary on political 
power. The translators further enhanced this 
affinity with subtle but meaningful alterations 
to the text’s narrative and content. However, 
it remains unclear how the empty language of 
legitimation theory would enable one to more 
precisely articulate the relationship between 
Emperor Akbar and the Mahabharata.88 If we say 
that the Razmnamah was intended to legitimate 
Akbar as a king, then we assume a need for the 
Mughals to justify their rule through the lan-
guage of Sanskrit (and Persian) aesthetics, and 
it is unclear how, why, or for whom such justi-
fication would actually work. In addition, we 
would bar ourselves from pursuing more inter-
esting lines of inquiry: why the Mughals consid-
ered Sanskrit to be a valuable political resource 
in the first place, how they negotiated fusing its 
cultural tradition with their own, and precisely 
what such a union looked like in its finished tex-
tual form. Moreover, legitimation theory leaves 
little room for other considerations that were 
also at play in the translation, such as the redef-
inition and cultivation of Sanskrit knowledge 
in Persian, the blending of religious traditions, 
and the intertextual literary associations drawn 
from the Persian tradition. Instead, it seems 
more fruitful and honest to the translation to 
postulate that precisely the mix of political and 
aesthetic modes of discourse is what made the 
Razmnamah an imperially meaningful project in 
Akbar’s court.
The diverse translation strategies em-
ployed in the Razmnamah also suggest that inter-
twining multiple understandings of the epic in 
complex ways was crucial to the Mughal encoun-
ter with the Mahabharata. Akbar’s court further 
confirmed its interest in fashioning imperial 
epics full of different readings and possibilities 
by producing at least two more translations of 
the Mahabharata. In the twenty years after the 
completion of the original Razmnamah, Akbar 
commissioned two additional versions of the 
text in Persian, one by Fayzi and another by 
Tahir Muhammad Sabzavari.89 Both authors 
used the Razmnamah as the basis for their re-
workings of the epic, but they produced radi-
cally different versions, with Fayzi inserting his 
own poetic verses at liberty and Sabzavari heav-
ily abridging the epic story. Neither text has yet 
been published, but their existence nonetheless 
attests to the centrality of the Razmnamah to 
Akbar’s court culture and raises the question of 
what further steps such works may have taken 
in developing a new Indo-­Persian Mughal idiom 
through tellings and retellings of the Maha­
bharata.
87. Most important, Rizvi and Ernst.
88. See critique in Pollock, Language of the Gods, 
511 – 24. 
89.  Fayzi was asked to rework the entire Maha­
bharata into verse but only ﬁnished the ﬁrst two 
parvans, whereas Tahir Muhammad Sabzavari com-
pleted his abridged version of the epic (Shukla, “Per-
sian Translations of Sanskrit Works,” 180). Copies of 
both texts are extant in the Aligarh and the British 
Library collections, and Fayzi’s work is often found in 
manuscript copies of the Razmnamah, simply replac-
ing the first two books.
