Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_09\documents\1972-AlAttas-CorrectDateTerengganuInscription.pdf
Total Pages: 16
Statistics: Chars=54466, ThaiWords=10893.2, EnglishWords=10136

--- Page 1 of 16 ---
Journal of Al-Tamaddun, Vol. 21 (1), 2026, 1-16 
https://doi.org/10.22452/JAT.vol21no1.1 
 
Syed Muhammad Naquib Al-Attas’s Perspective on the Interpretation of Islamic 
Historical Sources in the Malay World 
 
Siti Nor Aisyah binti Ngadirana & Khalina Mohammed Khalilib 
 
Abstract 
 
The study of Islamic history in the Malay world is closely related to the study of its historical 
sources. Nevertheless, researchers must deepen their understanding of the study of historical 
sources, particularly in their interpretation . It is a matter of concern because most Jawi (ie. 
Malay-Islamic) texts and ma nuscripts contain knowledge that requires profound religious 
comprehension, particularly knowledge of divinity, tasawwuf, fiqh, and other Islamic 
knowledge. This textual analysis will, therefore, concentrate on the historical study of Syed 
Muhammad Naquib al-Attas based on his selected works. His perspective on the significance 
of Islamic knowledge and thought , with arguments related to the matter, will be explained. 
Also, his mastery of various fields of knowledge, including tasawwuf and Western philosophy, 
has enabled him to identify any confusion or errors in orientalists' interpretations of Islamic 
history, as well as to dispel criticism of his authority as a leading contemporary Islamic scholar. 
 
Keywords: Perspective of Syed Muhammad Naquib al -Attas, i nterpretation of Islamic 
historical sources, Malay world 
 
Introduction 
 
Similar to the general study of history, Islamic historiography is fundamentally an 
interpretation of its historical sources. Every piece of historiographical work calls for a correct 
interpretation so that other researchers deem the most accurate findings authoritative. Thus, an 
appropriate methodology is necessary to ensure the correct interpretation when analysing a 
historical source. In fact, many lacunae emerged when history became a discipline, separating 
the religious sciences, such as the science of hadith, from the more comprehensive study 
method of history as a universal science.1 
 
Historians commonly employ the following three aspects in their study o r writing of history: 
historical sources, verification of facts, and historical interpretation. Without adequate sources 
with verifiable authenticity, a narrative that occurred in the past will not be categorized as a 
historical work. Likewise, in verifyin g facts and interpreting history, a comparative approach 
to the methods employed in another field of knowledge is deemed valuable to the study of 
history.2 This approach also helps to facilitate understanding of issues or problems while 
highlighting the essential differences and similarities between the historical method and those 
 
a Siti Nor Aisyah Ngadiran (Ph.D) (corresponding author), Senior Lecturer, Department of History, Faculty of 
Arts and Social Sciences, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Email: aisyahngadiran@um.edu.my. 
b Khalina Mohammed Khalili (Ph.D), Post-doctoral Fellow , International Institute of Islamic Thought and 
Civilization (ISTAC), International Islamic University Malaysia. Email: khalinakhalili@gmail.com. 
1 The study of history is regarded as one of the religious sciences (‘ulūm al-naqliyyah) in the Islamic knowledge 
tradition, which was related to the science of ḥadīth from its beginnings. However, as the writing tradition 
developed and the science of history was established, the authoritative narration was re -evaluated as part of 
religion and was no longer considered sufficient to convey historical facts because it was unable to present all 
sides of the facts in their entirety due to human memorization limitations. As a result, a new discipline in historical 
writing emerged, as this subject began to separate from the science of ḥadīth. Yusri Abdul Ghani Abdullah, 
Historiografi Islam dari Klasik hingga Moden (Islamic Historiography from Classic to Modern ) (PT Raja 
Grafindo Persada, 2004), 3. 
2 Qasim Ahmad, “Sumber, Pengesahan Fakta dan Pentafsiran Sejarah (Sources, Verification of Facts, and 
Historical Interpretation) ,” in Abu Talib Ahmad and Cheah Boon Kheng ( editors), Isu-isu Pensejarahan (The 
Issues of Historiography) (Penerbit Universiti Sains Malaysia, 1995), 57.

--- Page 2 of 16 ---
Journal of Al-Tamaddun, Vol. 21 (1), 2026, 1-16 
 2 
of other scientific disciplines. However, interpreting historical sources is t he most important 
focus. It is because the interpretation will determine the conclusions drawn or the facts 
presented. 
 
According to Syed Muhammad Naquib al -Attas, various issues have emerged from the 
interpretation of Islamic historical sources by researchers and scholars, particularly orientalists. 
There are claims that Western scholars do not fully comprehend the lives and culture of the 
Malay Muslim community. They tended to interpret a historical event or occurrence stated in 
the text by relating it to foreign cultural elements3 that are considered to be closely related to 
Malay culture. Most of them extolled the culture and civilization of Ancient Java and Hindu -
Buddhism as an ideal criterion for evaluating Malay culture and civilization. Indeed, many 
scholars believe that the Malay-Indonesian civilization is a syncretic society that involves the 
merging or assimilation of different beliefs and various schools of thought , primarily 
Hinduism, Buddhism, and Islam. The clearest instance is a passage from R. O. Winstedt ’s 
(1878 - 1966) assertions as follows:4 
 
Malay culture includes a fear of nature spirits, an instinctive perception of the ‘unbecoming’ 
rather than of the sinful and the criminal, the séance of the shaman, the Hindu ritual of a royal 
installation, the celebration of the Muhammadan New Year, the sermon in the mosque, the 
pilgrimage to Mecca, Sufi mysticism, the Hamlet of the Malay opera, t he curry, and the 
mistranslations of the vernacular press. It includes, indeed, much more, but compared with 
(comparatively few) great cultures of the world it has been derivative, owing ideas and 
practices to prehistoric influences of central Asia, to the kinship and architecture of Assyria 
and Babylon, to bronze-workers and weavers from Indo-China, to the religion and arts of India 
to the religion and literature of Persia and Arabia, to the material civilizations of Portugal, 
Holland and Great Britain and to the remote but compelling fantasies of Hollywood. 
 
Syncretism, as explained by Western scholars 5 such as Coedes 6 can be understood as the 
absorption of the concept of loyalty from the Shaivite branch of Hinduism by Southeast Asian 
sovereigns, including Srivijaya. This loyalty goes hand in hand with devotional Buddhism by 
emphasizing the observance of the ‘Brahman-Ksatria’ caste system, in which the Ruler class, 
who are Shiva devotees, assume lordship over the kingdom. Anthony Milner7 emphasizes the 
fact that such leadership, despite its adherence to the Shaivite -Hindu concept, does not entail 
an abandonment of Buddhism, for they have effectively integrated both religions (Hindu and 
Buddhism) in forming an exclusive belief system. Nonetheless, in this context, al-Attas agreed 
with W. Rassers (1877 -1973) and T. G. T. Pigeaud ’s (1899 -1988) view, “ The concept of 
syncretism should be understood not as the absorption of one religion with another religion, 
but as a parallelism or alignment of religious positions - the religion, which is apparent in the 
stories of Gagang Aking and Bubukshah.”8 Moreover, al-Attas also asserted that the empirical 
approach to interpreting social and economic facts through human experience cannot be 
equated with evaluating historical evidence. This is because historical data describes events or 
 
3 The same issue also arises in the interpretation of the biography of the Prophet Muhammad, particularly those 
written in the West, which are constructed through modern Western historiography. See Tauseef Ahmad Parray 
and Owais Manzoor Dar, “Framing the Sī rah: Representations of Prophet Mu ḥammad in Introductory Texts on 
Islam by Contemporary Western Islamicists,” Islamic Studies 64, no. 4 (2025): 511 –48, 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/27444674 
4 R. O. Winstedt, The Malays: A Cultural History (Graham Bash, 1981), 1. 
5 The term ‘syncretism’ is also used by many orientalists to describe the encounter between Islamic civilization 
and other civilizations, where there is an exchange of culture and knowledge. See Shahzada Rahim Abbas, “Is 
Colonization Possible During the Encounter Between Two Civilizations?” Policy Perspectives 22, no. 2 (2025): 
47, https://www.jstor.org/stable/48857426 
6 G. Coedes, The Indianized States of Southeast Asia (Australian National University Press, 1975). 
7 A. C. Milner, The Malays (Wiley-Blackwell, 2008). 
8 Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas, Islam dalam Sejarah dan Kebudayaan Melayu (Islam in the Malay History 
and Culture) (Penerbit Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 1972), 17.

--- Page 3 of 16 ---
Syed Muhammad Naquib Al-Attas’s Perspective on the Interpretation of Islamic Historical Sources 
 3 
occurrences that cannot be evaluated through current conditions and experiences. However, it 
must be valued through the culture and civilization of its contemporaries, which should be 
examined and comprehended. 
 
Therefore, it is crucial to emphasize mastering knowledge in various fields, including Islamic 
thought, to obtain the right interpretation. 9 Such ability is vital in the study of Islamic history 
in the Malay world, as the research process often involves navigating Malay, Javanese, and 
Arabic manuscripts that feature high-level discourse across various fields of knowledge, with 
a particular focus on metaphysics (tasawwuf). There have been previous studies that discuss 
the concept10 and philosophy of history11 of Syed Muhammad Naquib al -Attas (b. 1931), but 
they are unlike this paper, which offers a specific treatment concerning the importance of 
mastering Islamic knowledge and thought as a prerequisite to interpreting Islamic historical 
sources in the Malay world. Based on al-Attas’s selected works of historical studies, this study 
employed textual content analysis as its research methodology. Therefore, al-Attas’s textual 
sources that were used for this historiographical research are as follows: 
 
i. Rānīrī and the Wujūdiyyah of 17th Century Acheh , Monograph of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, Cabang Malaysia, No. 111, Singapura, 1966. 
ii. The Origin of the Malay Sha ’ir, Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka (DBP), Kuala Lumpur, 
1968. 
iii. The Mysticism of Ḥamzah Fanṣūrī, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 1970. 
iv. Concluding Postscript to the Origin of the Malay Sha’ir, DBP, Kuala Lumpur, 1971. 
v. The Correct Date of the Terengganu Inscription , Mu seum Department States of 
Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 1984. 
vi. Islam dalam Sejarah dan Kebudayaan Melayu, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala 
Lumpur, 1972. 
vii. Comments on the Re -examination of al -Rānīrī ‘s Hujjat al -Siddiq: A Refutation , 
Museum Department States of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 1975. 
viii. A Commentary on the Hujjat al -Siddiq of Nūr al -Dīn al-Rānīrī, Ministry of Culture , 
Kuala Lumpur, 1986. 
ix. The Oldest Known Malay Manuscript: A 16th Century Malay Translation of the ‘Aqa’id 
of al-Nasafi, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 1988. 
x. Historical Fact and Fiction, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, 2011. 
xi. On Justice and the Nature of Man: A Commentary on Surah al-Nisa’ (4):58 and Surah 
al-Mu’minun (23):12-14, Islamic Banking and Finance Institute Malaysia (IBFIM) and 
Akademi Kebangsaan, Kuala Lumpur, 2015. 
 
The Importance of Mastery of Knowledge and I slamic Thought in the Interpretation of 
Islamic Historical Sources According to Al-Attas’s Perspective 
 
In discussing the importance of mastering Islamic knowledge and thought for the interpretation 
of Islamic historical sources in the Malay world, certain imperatives must be implemented in a 
specific order. Firstly, the Quran is epistemologically positioned as the primary source of 
 
9 Moh In’ami, Bambang, and Ismail Suardi Wekke , “Contextualising Adab in Islamic Education from the 
Perspective of Al -Attas,” Journal of Al -Tamaddun 20, no. 1 (2025): 145 -58. 
https://doi.org/10.22452/JAT.vol20no1.11 
10 Siti Nor Aisyah Ngadiran, Konsep Sejarah menurut Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas: Kajian terhadap Karyakarya Terpilih (The Concept of History according to Syed Muhammad Naquib al -Attas: A Study of Selected 
Works) (Master Dissertation, Department of Islamic History and Civilization, Academy of Islamic Studies, 
University of Malaya, 2012). 
11 Noratiqah Ahmad Kazmar and Azmul Fahimi Kamaruzaman, Falsafah Sejarah Syed Muhammad Naquib al -
Attas: Analisis Teks Islam dalam Sejarah dan Kebudayaan Melayu (Syed Muhamma d Naquib al -Attas’ 
Philosophy of History: Analysis of Islamic Texts in Malay History and Culture ) (Penerbit Universiti Kebangsaan 
Malaysia, 2020).

--- Page 4 of 16 ---
Journal of Al-Tamaddun, Vol. 21 (1), 2026, 1-16 
 4 
guidance for the study of Islamic history. Secondly, metaphysical terms employed in Islamic 
history must be rendered accurately and in accordance with the Islamic interpretation. Thirdly, 
the study of Islamic literature in the Malay world must reflect an Islamic interpretation in order 
to be accurate. Lastly, the accuracy of any interpretation of a historical source can be achieved 
by comparing it to other sources from the Malay world. 
 
Al-Quran as a Main Source in the Study of Islamic History 
Most research on Islam is inseparably linked to Islamic law (shariah), a discipline that applies 
the basic knowledge of Islam as revealed to the prophets and messengers of God. This includes 
research on the history of Islam in the Malay World. As a matter of fact, Louis Massignon 
(1883-1962), a French Islamicist with expertise in Arabic and Persian manuscripts, particularly 
the metaphysics of al -Hallaj, has stressed the importance of understanding Islamic textual 
content, especially metaphysical texts, from the author ’s vantage point, which involves the 
inner self. This approach is particularly compelling in analysing mystical texts, such as those 
written by Sufis, because of the interior nature of mystical experiences. In terms of Islam ’s 
religious originality, Massignon explained the distinctive and original aspects of Islamic texts 
by taking up the Sufi practice of meditation on key terminology from the Quran or the Sufi 
tradition.12 Therefore, from a Muslim standpoint, scholars should consider the Quran as a 
source of knowledge of utmost significance.13 
 
Thus, this approach is expected to extend into the study and discipline of Islamic history. 
However, experts and historians of the Malay World are more inclined towards sources 
grounded in Western histor y as references for the study of Malay and Islamic history. The 
research methodology of al-Attas places the Quran at the epistemological centre, and we now 
elaborate on his research precedents. One such precedent by al -Attas involves the method of 
determining the date of the Terengganu Inscription. Earlier, C. O. Blagden had decided the date 
of the inscription, which bears the day of Friday, in the month of Rajab 702 H, to be on the 
‘Saraṭān’ (Cancer) constellation plane, corresponding to February or March 1303 AD. In 
astronomical terms, ‘Cancer’ refers to the fourth zodiac year, namely the year of the crab. This 
reading is also referred to as the solar calendar and is commonly used by orientalists. 14 AlAttas engaged in a scholarly debate ( munaẓarah) to point out that Western orientalists were 
accustomed to resorting to Hindu tradition in their study of the Malay-Indonesian archipelago, 
especially when confronted with ambiguous data and a lack of knowledge. Many Muslim 
scholars, such as S. Q. Fatimi, also relied on the solar calendar to chart historical events in the 
Malay-Muslim world, rather than the Muslim Calendar. 
 
It is well known that before the coming of Islam, the Malay communities relied on the Hindu 
Calendar System until turning to the Muslim Lunar Calendar following the conversion of their 
community members to Islam. This practice reflects the people ’s obedience to the commands 
of Allah. Al-Attas asserts that this act of obedience does not belittle the influence of Hinduism 
in the lives of the Malay community. It merely reflects the reality of a typical Muslim 
community that they should allow their lives to be guided by the teachings prescribed in the 
Quran and Sunnah, as this is what is taught to new converts to Islam. The Malay states at that 
time had built a solid Islamic foundation, such that the Muslim Calendar became an imperative 
(also known as the Lunar Calendar, which is based on the changing shape of the moon).15 The 
 
12 Christian S. Krokus, The Theology of Louis Massignon: Islam, Christ and the Church (The Catholic University 
of America Press, 2017), 26. 
13 Arzu Eylül Yalçınkaya, God’s Other Book: The Qur’ān Between History and Ideology, 1st Ed., by Mohammad 
Salama, Arab Studies Quarterly 47, no. 4 (2025): 296, https://www.jstor.org/stable/48847397. 
14 Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas, The Correct Dates of the Terengganu Inscription (Museum Department 
States of Malaya, 1984), 4-5. 
15 Al-Attas, The Correct Dates of the Terengganu Inscription, 14.

--- Page 5 of 16 ---
Syed Muhammad Naquib Al-Attas’s Perspective on the Interpretation of Islamic Historical Sources 
 5 
foundational place of the Muslim calendar in Islam 16 can be understood from t he following 
verse of the Quran: 
 
Verily, the number of months on the side of Allah S.W.T. is twelve months, (which 
has been established) in the Book of Allah S.W.T. when He created the heavens 
and the earth, among them four are sacred months. Such is the right religion, so do 
not wrong yourselves during them and fight the polytheists as they fight you and 
know that Allah S.W.T. is with the pious. [Surah at-Taubah (9): 36] 
 
Therefore, in determining the actual date of the inscription, al -Attas perceived an error in the 
reading of ‘Saraṭān’ and highlighted the correct reading as ‘Sharaṭān’. He came to this 
conclusion by observing that the letter ‘sin’ is always represented by the shape of two teeth (ﺳ )
while the letter ‘shin’ is distinguished from the former by the absence of any tooth shape. The 
term ‘Sharaṭān’ here, according to the Arabic (Islamic) constellation, refers to the two stars, as 
symbolized by the two horns of Aries or Ram constellation, which in the Arabic const ellation 
is symbolized by al-Ḥamal or the zodiac of the sheep. In Arabic this is known as ‘al-Minṭāqu’l 
Burūj’. In addition, there is a bright star among the constellation of Aries, known as ‘al-Nāṭiḥ’ 
or ‘al-Naṭḥ’.17 This zodiac or constellation was mentioned in the Quran: 
 
“And for real! We have created in the sky: Stars (of various shapes and conditions) 
and We have decorated the sky for those who see it.” [Surah al-Ḥijr (15): 16] 
 
The role of a scholar who understands the content of the Quran and its interpretation is 
immensely important to the study of Islamic history in the Malay World. This is crucial for 
analyzing Jawi Malay texts or manuscripts that rely on Arabic terms and include Quranic 
citations. Orientalists who lack an understanding of the interpretation of the Quran were at a 
disadvantage in this regard. Al-Attas, in his analysis of the introduction of Ḥamzah Fansuri’s 
work, Asrāru’l ‘Ārifīn, “If you don’t understand this fifteen verses, return to its explanation ” 
(Jika tidak kamu faham pada bayt lima belas bayt ini, lihat pada sharahnya pulang). Our focus 
here is on the quote, “return to its explanation”) which was misunderstood by many scholars 
of Malay literature in the past. The term ‘pulang’ (return) here has been misunderstood by the 
orientalists as ‘pula’ (also or instead), leading scholars to assume that the term ‘pulang’ (return) 
is erroneous. Instead, Al-Attas asserts a literal description of the imperative verb ( fi’l amr) in 
Arabic as ‘irji’ī’ (return), which comes from t he root word ‘raja’a’, and this phrase has been 
described with the term ‘consult, look again’, which also delivers the meaning of thinking or 
contemplating. 18 Al-Attas then showed how the phrase is used in the following verse of the 
Qur’an: 
 
He who created seven heavens in layers. You do not see in the creation of the Most 
Merciful any inconsistency. So, return your vision to the sky. Do you see any 
breaks? Then, return your vision twice. Your vision will return to you humbled 
while it is fatigued. [Surah al-Mulk: 3-4] 
 
The arguments presented here ought to convince the reader that the Quran is indeed relevant to 
the study of Islamic history as a source of guidance for resolving ambiguities in Malay 
literature. It is evident how ingrained the teachings of the Quran were within scholars’ thinking 
and writing efforts at that time. This is most pertinent when referring to the Terengganu 
 
16 Mohammaddin Abdul Niri, Mohd Hafiz Jamaludin, Mohd Saiful Anwar Mohd Nawawi, Nurulhuda Ahmad 
Zaki, and Raihana Abdul Wahab, “Astronomy Development since Antiquity to Islamic Civilization from the 
Perspective of Islamic Historiography ,” Journal of Al -Tamaddun 18, no. 1 (2023): 169 -77. 
https://doi.org/10.22452/JAT.vol18no1.14. 
17 Al-Attas, The Correct Dates of the Terengganu Inscription, 16. 
18 Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas, The Origin of the Malay Sha’ir (Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1968), 60

--- Page 6 of 16 ---
Journal of Al-Tamaddun, Vol. 21 (1), 2026, 1-16 
 6 
Inscription, which records a written legal charter that provides yet another piece of evidence of 
the Islamic legal system of the Malay community there. We affirm that the Malay Muslims 
were firmly practising Islam in their daily lives. 
 
Ensuring an Accurate Interpretation of Metaphysical Terms in Islamic Historical Sources 
Discourses on Islamic metaphysics ( tasawwuf) in the Ja wi Malay manuscripts have been 
extensively studied by scholars and researchers who are experts in either history or Islamic 
thought (specializing in tasawwuf). Ḥamzah Fansuri19 and Nur al-Din al-Raniri are among the 
famous tasawwuf scholars whose works are renowned in the Malay world and became the focus 
of al -Attas’s study. However, scholars who lack in -depth knowledge of the science of 
tasawwuf, will find it challenging to unravel the true me aning of what the scholars want to 
convey. 
 
Al-Attas, on the other hand, had completed penetrative research on the works of Ḥamzah 
Fansuri for his Ph.D. thesis, entitled The Mysticism of Ḥamzah Fansuri. Here, al -Attas 
explicated essential Islamic concepts that were developed into a philosophical discourse in 
Malay, including the concepts of God, man , and his relationship with the universe. As 
conveyed in Malay, these concepts underwent linguistic adaptation and selective reduction to 
reflect the true meanings of the Arabic terms they represent, especially in Islamic philosophy 
and metaphysics. Al-Attas applied the semantic approach in his selection of keywords, in the 
analysis of basic concepts, and in their relationships with others. This approach typically poses 
a problem to researchers of tasawwuf works, as they were not accustomed to this systematic 
method for selecting keywords in those works. A semantic analysis does not merely collect 
specific terms but maps an interconnected network that brin gs out the significance of its own 
concept. In other words, according to al-Attas, this network is likened to a ‘jigsaw puzzle’, with 
each piece contributing to the overall picture of a concept. 20 As an example, let us take the 
concept of ma’rifah (to know)21 which consists of several other keywords , such as God, self, 
haqīqat (reality), and others, that point to the meaning of this concept. 
 
Through his extensive knowledge of the tasawwuf terms, al-Attas has successfully explained 
the origin of Ḥamzah Fansuri, who , according to him , is from Shahr Nawi (Siam), while 
identifying Fansur (Barus) as the place where he grew up. This is achieved through al -Attas’s 
analysis of the metaphysical terms used by Ḥamzah Fansuri about his origins, as seen in al -
Attas’s translation of the following poetry (sha’ir):22 
 
Ḥamzah Shahr Nawi is truly effaced, 
Like wood, all burnt to cinders; 
His origin is the Ocean without currents, 
He became camphor in Barus. 
 
Ḥamzah the stranger is [in reality] the Holy Bird, 
His ‘house’ is the Bayt al-Ma’mur [i.e. the heart], 
The kursi is all camphor, 
In the land of Fansur [extracted] from trees. 
 
Through the first stanza of the passage, the analogy of burned wood turning to dust ( fanā’) is 
explained by al-Attas as the existence of a human being who has a body and it will burn when 
it is drunk in love for Him (ishq), as well as the existence of the soul ( rūḥ) while returning to 
 
19 Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas, The Mysticism of Ḥamzah Fansuri (Universiti Malaya, 1970). 
20 Al-Attas, The Mysticism of Ḥamzah Fansuri, 5-6. 
21 Mohd Affandi Hassan, Pendidikan Estetika daripada Pendekatan Tauhid (Aesthetic Education from a Tawhidic 
Approach) (Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1992), 54. 
22 Al-Attas, The Mysticism of Ḥamzah Fansuri, 7-8.

--- Page 7 of 16 ---
Syed Muhammad Naquib Al-Attas’s Perspective on the Interpretation of Islamic Historical Sources 
 7 
its Lord in the eternal realm ( baqā’). The third line further completes the picture, describ ing 
the state of annihilation in tasawwuf, from which the self will return to its original state , like 
water returning to the ocean of absolute existence. Meanwhile, in the last line of this stanza, 
“became camphor” (menjadi kapur) according to al -Attas, is linked to the term ‘kursī’ in the 
passage “The kursi is all camphor ” (Kursinya sekalian kapuri ), in the second stanza, which 
leads to two meanings:23 
 
i. The general meaning is that of a seat. Ḥamzah describes Barus as the place where he 
lived and carried out all his activities throughout his life, or, in other words, his home. 
ii. From the point of view of tasawwuf the meaning of ‘kursī’ is attached to Sufi 
cosmology. In Islamic eschatology, the term ‘kursī’ is a kursī under the Divine Throne 
(‘arasy). According to Ibn Arabi and other Sufis, kursī refers to the way in which Allah 
created His creation. First, individual beings are in His Divine Knowledge ( ‘ilm) (in a 
spiritual state) before they are physically created (having dhāt). 
 
Based on the passage “became camphor in Barus,” as other scholars have stated, Ḥamzah was 
born in Barus. In this regard, al -Attas explains that this passage refers to Ibn Arabi ’s doctrine 
of ‘Isti’dād aṣlī’, the state Ḥamzah is in, being kursī (based on the quote “ The kursi is all 
camphor”), that means Ḥamzah becomes Malay of Barus. In other words, it is very likely that 
his mother, perhaps together with his father, left Barus for a time and gave birth to him in 
another place, then returned to Barus when he was still a baby or after the death of his parents. 
Next, for the quote “ Ḥamzah is originally of Fansur, he acquired his existence in the land of 
Shahr Nawi” (Ḥamzah nin asalnya Fansuri, Mendapat wujūd di tanah Shahr Nawi), according 
to al-Attas means Ḥamzah is telling us that his origins were from Barus, though he later found 
his existence in Shahr Nawi. The term ‘wujūd’ here, refers to Hamza ’s existence. This word 
can only be interpreted as the time of his birth . In fact, this statement is also supported by 
another quote, “Ḥamzah Shahr Nawi ẓahirnya Jawi” where the terms “ẓahirnya Jawi” and “like 
wood” (seperti kayu) refer to Ḥamzah’s physical appearance. These terms showed that Ḥamzah 
was born as a Malay in Shahr Nawi. 24 In conclusion, based on the preceding explanation, it 
becomes evident that al-Attas has effectively grasped the underlying significance intended by 
Ḥamzah Fansuri in his poetry due to his profound understanding of the science of tasawwuf. 
 
Ensuring the Accuracy of Interpretation in the Study of Islamic Malay Literature 
The relationship between language and literature is indeed intimate and inseparable. It is 
reflected in the vital role of language as a medium for delivering literature. Islamic Malay 
literature is the fruit of the modernization of the Malay language and Malay literature under 
the influence of Islamic elements.25 Influenced by this, Islamic Malay literature can be better 
understood through certain literary elements: analogies and symbols, messages or meanings, 
and their respective forms and manifestations. 
 
The first elements, analogies and symbols, are essential, especially for symbolizing the value 
of beauty and creating meaning. In the Quran, the smallest symbols represent the highest 
meaning by its Supreme Author. For example, the nature of a spider is used to illustrate the 
 
23 Al-Attas, The Mysticism of Ḥamzah Fansuri, 6-7. 
24 Al-Attas, The Mysticism of Ḥamzah Fansuri, 7-8. 
25 The development of writing systems for the Malay language prior to the advent of Islam was characterized by 
a rather sluggish progress. The restricted usage of these characters among specific groups and their potential lack 
of suitability for the inherent characteristics of the Malay language contribute to this circumstance. The 
introduction of Islam to the Malay Archipelago not only resulted in the emergence of a new culture, but also left 
a positive impact on the development of the Malay language. The increased utilization of the Malay language in 
Islamic literature in the Malay Archipelago has led to an elevation in its vocabulary and terminology. This 
development has contributed to its transformation into a rational literary language, thereby establishing its potency 
to supersede Javanese as the dominant literary language among the Malay -Indonesian. Al -Attas, Islam dalam 
Sejarah dan Kebudayaan Melayu (Islam in the Malay History and Culture), 36.

--- Page 8 of 16 ---
Journal of Al-Tamaddun, Vol. 21 (1), 2026, 1-16 
 8 
Creator’s supreme authority and power in creating things. 26 In this regard, al-Quran itself is a 
model for Islamic literature. Nonetheless, its value is too great to be compared with poetry and 
other literary compositions of man, as Muslims view the Quran as a miracle of God for his last 
Prophet and is , therefore, authoritative. 27 However, these elements are also found in the 
analogies used by Ḥamzah Fansuri, such as in the poem Ikat-ikatan Ilmu Nisā’, which is also 
known as Baḥr al-Nisā’. In this regard, the sea analogy symbolizes Allah’s Absolute Power 
and His unity. According to al-Attas, no Malays or traditional poets had used the sea analogy 
in their works before .28 For those who are not familiar wi th the use of the analogy, the term 
‘Baḥr al-Nisā’’ might convey a more erotic meaning. Yet, in this context, the concept meant 
by Ḥamzah is related to the concept of ‘ma’rifah’ (experiential knowledge or gnosis), and other 
concepts that are related to it, such as the ‘mi’rāj’, event of Prophet Mu ḥammad along with 
the bestowals (raḥmat) and realities (haqīqat) brought by him, which leads to the ultimate goal 
in achieving ma’rifah of Allah - reaching the state of proximity to Him (qurb).29 
 
In addition, the term ‘baḥr’ is also synonymous with the term ‘al-’ilm’. Here, knowledge 
(al-’ilm), the sea, is also seen in the context of ‘haqīqat Muḥammad’ (reality of Muḥammad). 
Thus, Baḥr al-Nisā’ is also known as Baḥr al-Nūr,30 which is addressed to Nūr Muḥammad as 
found in his other work, Asrār al-’Ārifīn, likewise with the relationship between the concept 
of ‘rijāl’ and ‘al-insān al-kāmil’, which is often used by the ṣūfīs to symbolize the Prophet ’s 
attributes. Even if you look at other works of Ḥamzah, the term ‘baḥr’ is widely used in the 
titles of his other poems. Among them are Baḥr al-Qadīm, Baḥr al-’Amīq, Baḥr al-’Ulyān, and 
so on.31 It is unusual and not found in previous poems, even in Persian poetry. In fact, it is also 
said to have a symbolic meaning, reflecting Malay souls and synonymous with seafaring.32 It 
clearly shows how the doctrine of ṣufism, or Islamic metaphysics, lays the groundwork for 
Islamic literature in the Malay world. In this case, the message and meaning to be conveyed 
must be in accordance with the demands of Islam itself. This is because literature in Islam must 
have a clear function, and its delivery method should not lead the poet's or the reader's mind 
astray. Three important characteristics must be present in Islamic literature: beauty, truth , and 
goodness, which are interconnected and bound by the ties of monotheism.33 
 
Apart from the message and meaning conveyed by a piece of literature, its form also plays an 
important role. Undoubtedly, Islamic literature also undergoes changes , such as those in the 
form of poetry. This continuous process yields many types of poetry, further enriching a 
language. Such Islamic literature accepts changes so long as there is no cha nge in Islamic 
principles, values, and views of life. Rather, the change pertains to the original appreciation of 
the arts or tradition.34 Islamic principles, values, and views of life are deemed perfect and not 
open to improvement, while literature serves as a vehicle for interpreting the tanzīl, the Divine 
statement as written in the Quran. In this context, prose and poetry play an important role in 
developing Islamic literature, especially in Malay. 
 
 
26 Al-Attas, Islam dalam Sejarah dan Kebudayaan Melayu, 23. 
27 Al-Attas, Islam dalam Sejarah dan Kebudayaan Melayu, 30. 
28 Syed Muhammad Naquib al -Attas, Concluding Postscript to the Origin of the Malay Sya ’ir (Kuala Lumpur: 
Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1971), 13. 
29 Al-Attas, Concluding Postscript to the Origin of the Malay Sya’ir, 26. 
30 Al-Attas, Concluding Postscript to the Origin of the Malay Sya’ir, 26. 
31 Al-Attas, Concluding Postscript to the Origin of the Malay Sya’ir, 27. 
32 Vladimir I. Braginsky, Erti Keindahan dan Keindahan Erti dalam Kesusasteraan Melayu Klasik (The Meaning 
of Beauty and the Beauty of Meaning in Classical Malay Literature) (Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1994), 245. 
33 Shahnon Ahmad, “Islam dan Hubungannya dengan Masyarakat, Kesusasteraan, Melayu dan Kemodenan ” 
(Islam and Its Relationship with Society, Literature, Malay and Modernity), in Sastera Sūfī (The Sufi Poetry) 
(Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1992), 69. 
34 Ismail Hamid, Asas Kesusasteraan Islam (Fundamental of Islamic Literature ) (Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka , 
1990).

--- Page 9 of 16 ---
Syed Muhammad Naquib Al-Attas’s Perspective on the Interpretation of Islamic Historical Sources 
 9 
In this context, prose in Islamic literature is used differently from how it is in modern Western 
literature. It can be seen in the characters, setting, and storytelling techniques of Islamic prose 
across various genres and discourses. Among them is the discourse on nationhood, such as Tāj 
al-Salaṭīn, historical genre or historiography , such as Sulālat al -Salāṭīn or Sejarah Melayu, 
Ḥikāyat Aceh, Ḥikāyat Raja Pasai, and other works of prose. For example, based on an analysis 
of Sulālat al-Salātīn, Arabic semantics is widely applied. Such a situation does not stem from 
the author’s rhetorical style but emerges from the use of Arabic phrases and definitions. This 
is typical of the intellectual language of 13th- to 19th-century Malay societies. In other words, 
classical Malay language, in its role as the vehicle of historical literature, has been Islamized. 
This is a significant point to understand, as it reflects the intellectual life and thought of the 
general public, which underwent the same process of Islamization.35 Syed Muhammad Naquib 
asserted the following: 
 
We have also defined Islamization as involving first the Islamization of language, 
and this fact is demonstrated by the Holy Quran itself when it was first revealed 
among the Arabs. Language, thought , and reason are closely interconnected and 
are indeed interdependent in projecting to man his worldview or vision of reality. 
Thus, the Islamization of language brings about the Islamization of thought and 
reason, not in the secular sense, but in the sense we have described.36 
 
Similarly, philosophy and various Islamic concepts such as tawhid, punishment and 
recompense, justice, governance, destiny, fardh ayn, desire and others - all of these are found 
in literary works such as Sulālat al-Salātīn, Hikayat Siak, Tuhfat al-Nafis, Hikayat Aceh, and 
others. In works linked to Islamic religious tradition, one would not find elements of other 
religions, such as Hindu-Buddhism and Christianity.37 These works offer insight into Islam ’s 
impact on the soul of Malay -Indonesian societies, whic h is reflected in their literary 
compositions.38 Upon closer analysis, it is discovered that many of the teachings by Sufī 
scholars of the Malay world were conceived after studying the works of renowned scholars 
such as Ibn ‘Arābī (1165-1240 AD), al -Jīlī (1365-1424 AD), al -Ḥallāj (858 -922 AD), al -
Ghazālī (1058-1111 AD), Farīd al -Dīn Attār (d. 1221 AD), Jalāl al -Dīn al-Rūmī (1207-1273 
AD), Jāmī’ (1414-1492 AD) and many more. 39 The Malay scholars ’ dedication ensures the 
continuous transmission of these doctrines to Malay societies. 
 
With regard to poetry as a genre, it grew in parallel with the expansion of Islam in the region, 
though more poignantly in the 16th century. Many scholars of Malay literature, especially 
orientalists such as R. O. Winstedt (1878-1966), A. Teeuw (1967), C. Hooykaas (1952), G. W. 
J. Drewes (1899 -1992), Th. Pigeaud (1901 -1988) and others 40 concurred that the form of 
poetry as sha’ir today had established its presence in Malay literature by the 16th century. The 
impact is more significant after tasawwuf scholar, Ḥamzah Fansuri, emerged with his mystical 
poetry ( sha’ir)41 Sha’īr Perahu , Sha’īr Burung Pingai , Sha’īr Dagang and Sha’īr Sidang 
 
35 Tatiana A. Denisova, Refleksi Historiografi Alam Melayu (Reflections on the Historiography of the Malay 
Archipelago) (Penerbit Universiti Malaya, 2011), 112. 
36 Syed Muhammad Naquib al -Attas, Islam and Secularism (International Institute of Islamic Thought and 
Civilization (ISTAC, IIUM), 1993), 45. 
37 Denisova, Refleksi Historiografi Alam Melayu (Reflection of Historiography in the Malay Archipelago), 113. 
38 Al-Attas, Islam dalam Sejarah dan Kebudayaan Melayu (Islam in the Malay History and Culture), 55. 
39 Al-Attas, Islam and Secularism, 106. 
40 Harun Mat Piah, Puisi Melayu Tradisional: Satu Pembicaraan Genre dan Fungsi (Traditional Malay Poems: 
A Discussion of Genre and Function) (Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1989). 
41 The term ‘syair’ is an adaptation of the Arabic term, ‘shi’r’, which means ‘feeling’ or ‘knowledge’, and this 
meaning evolved in literature as artistic feeling and articulated with beautiful language. Its qualities include a 
composite structure with no prefatory statement like a poem and the opposition of sound at the base and in the 
middle between two opposite sections.

--- Page 10 of 16 ---
Journal of Al-Tamaddun, Vol. 21 (1), 2026, 1-16 
 10 
Fakir. This impact is highlighted by al-Attas, A. Hasjmy,42 Hamdan Hassan, 43 Ismail Hamid,44 
Liaw Yock Fang45 and others. Al-Attas made a specific analysis of Ḥamzah Fansuri’s poetry, 
which he later compiled in two of his works entitled The Origin of the Malay Sha ’ir (1968) 
and Concluding Postscript to the Origin of the Malay Sha ’ir (1971). His research analysis is 
spurred by the work of A. Teeuw entitled The Malay Sha’ir, Problems of Origin and Tradition. 
Teeuw had proposed the possibili ty that Ḥamzah Fan ṣuri was the pioneer of Malay syair 
(poetry). This idea became the impetus for al-Attas to further investigate him.46 
 
Ḥamzah’s poetry is unique due to its rhyming form AAAA, which Ḥamzah calls ‘rubā’ī’, 
though not the same as the Persian rubā’ī. The form of Ḥamzah’s rubā’ī matches his statement 
of “ four syllables in each line ” ( empat sechawang pada sebuah bayt ), while 
the Persian rubā’ī does not follow that rhyming form though it is acceptable. The term ‘rubā’ī’ 
was coined by Ḥamzah Fansuri to refer to all of his poetry ( sha’ir).47 Al-Attas confirmed this 
while researching the work of Nur al-Din al-Raniri, Jawāhir al-’Ulūm fī Kashfi al-Ma’lūm, in 
which Nur al-Din al-Raniri made a mention of a book of Ḥamzah Fansuri with the title Rubā’ī. 
This fact effectively refutes Teeuw ’s argument based on the collection of poems of Ḥamzah 
Fansuri with the plural term, Rubā’iyyat Ḥamzah Fansuri.48 Ḥamzah’s poetry stands alone in 
its unique form and philosophical doctrine, being both Islamic and of high calibre. Ḥamzah’s 
poetry sparks intellectual and rational ideas about love for the Creator ( al-Khāliq) while 
illuminating the path of all great Islamic poets whose ambitions and spirits are carried forward 
in Ḥamzah’s compos ition. These famous names included Far id al -Din Att ar, al -Buṣiri, 
Jalaluddin al-Rumi, Firdawsi, Jami’, ‘Umar al-Farid, and Iqbal.49 Perhaps it places Ḥamzah on 
that same path and equal standing with the Sufi poets of the past as a representative of 
Nusantara. In so doing, he proved to the world that the Malay civilization of his period had 
achieved its pinnacle of knowledge. This is an important reminder to many scholars of the 
Malay world, typically orientalists, who conduct research on the Islamic history of the Malay 
Archipelago, to re -evaluate certain condescending presumptions about the scholars of that 
region. 
 
Thus, it is imperative for Muslim scholars to refer to al-Attas’s work, Rangkaian Rubā’īyyāt, a 
book of Malay poetry, to resuscitate the Islamic literary tradition that has been in oblivion for 
centuries.50 It is even more urgent for the young generation to make this work a reference point 
for reconnecting with their identity and the legacy of their forefathers. Through this work, al -
Attas presents a new form of poetry while imbuing a culture of profound thought and deep 
intuition, grounded in the virtues of Islamic philosophy.51 His ideas are never his alone (as this 
could not be possible for anyone) but are a culmination of the influences of Islami c 
philosophers and literary greats throughout the ages, be it from Dzu al-Nun al-Miṣri (295 H/859 
 
42 A. Hasjmy, Rubā’ī Ḥamzah Fansuri (Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1976). 
43 Hamdan Hassan, “Kesan Pemikiran Ulama dan Ahli -ahli Sufi dalam Bidang Penulisan Alam Melayu” (The 
Impact of Scholars’ and Sufis’ Thought on Writing in the Malay Archipelago) (International Seminar on Islamic 
Civilization in the Malay World, Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei, 1-5 June 1989). 
44 Ismail Hamid, Kesusasteraan Melayu Lama dari Warisan Peradaban Islam (Classical Malay Literature from 
Islamic Civilization Heritage) (Fajar Bakti, 1983). 
45 Liaw Yock Fang, Sejarah Kesusasteraan Melayu Klasik (History of Classical Malay Literature ) (Penerbit 
Erlangga, 1991). 
46 Al-Attas, The Origin of the Malay Sya’ir, 4. 
47 Al-Attas, The Origin of the Malay Sya’ir, 19. 
48 Al-Attas, The Origin of the Malay Sya’ir, 25. 
49 Al-Attas, The Mysticism of Ḥamzah Fansuri. 
50 The rubā’ī here refers to a Persian kind of rubā’ī in which most of the rhymes are AABA patterned and 
sometimes AAAA patterned. Syed Muhammad Naquib al -Attas, Rangkaian Rubā ’iyyat (Dewan Bahasa dan 
Pustaka, 1959), vii. 
51 It refers to translations of selected verses from several verses of Rubā’iyyat al-Khayyām and Jami’, as well as 
translations from Fitzgerald, Whinefield and Qazvini. In this regard, al-Attas was able to translate the poem while 
retaining the ruba’ī form without losing its original meaning. al-Attas, Rangkaian Rubā’iyyat, xiv.

--- Page 11 of 16 ---
Syed Muhammad Naquib Al-Attas’s Perspective on the Interpretation of Islamic Historical Sources 
 11 
AD) to the period of N ur al-Din ‘Abdul Raḥman al-Jami’ (898 H/1492 AD), with a dash of 
modern touch from Muḥammad Iqbal (1877-1938) and Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941).52 
 
Ensuring the Accuracy of Interpretation of Historical Sources by Comparing with Other 
Sources 
Comparative analysis is a method al-Attas uses in almost all of his historical studies. This type 
of analysis, which generally uses various relative materials, requires a high level of knowledge 
from the researcher and involves multiple disciplines. In making the comparison, historical 
sources might not be the only material scrutinized; other materials that support the arguments 
presented in the study might also be considered . When analysing the historical study by alAttas, it is evident that he conducted comparative analyses of both primary and secon dary 
sources. This methodology is also important in comprehending facts, strengthening arguments, 
and finding differences and similarities. 
 
The first comparison involves an analysis of primary sources, regardless of whether they 
represent Islamic history . To present an example from Islamic historical sources, al -Attas 
compared two possible meanings of the Malay term ‘open sea’, which means 
‘samudera’. According to al-Attas, the earlier term for open sea is ‘Semutra’, which is said to 
be derived from the term ‘Semutraya’. It is said that the term ‘semut-raya’ emerged from the 
discovery of a giant ant (the size of a cat) by Merah Silau in Hikayat Raja Pasai. In proving 
this argument, al-Attas has compared it with the report in ’Ajā’ib al-Ḥind, authored by Buzurg 
ibn Shahriyar (900 -950 AD), and compiled by Mu ḥammad ibn Babishad (late 10th century 
AD), which states that there used to be large ants roaming northern Sumatra, especially in the 
Lamri islands. 53 It is said that Merah Silau found the ants living in Northern Sumatra. The 
second primary source is taken as evidence for the name ‘semutra’. 
 
The same method of proof is applied to the first Islamic kingdom of the Malay World, believed 
to have been established in the 8th to 9th centuries. This kingdom, known as the Samudera -
Pasai kingdom, was ruled by Sultan Muhammad, who came from Mengiri in Northeastern 
India. Here, a detailed comparison can be made with Malay historical literature, which 
represents the earliest Islamic historiography, such as Hikayat Raja Pasai and Sejarah Melayu; 
with Arab and Chinese annals, such as those of Chua Ju -Kua, al-Dimashqi, al-Mas’udi, and 
Ibn Majid; and with many more. Accord ing to al -Attas’s analysis, Sultan Muhammad was 
brought to Samudra-Pasai by an Arab preacher/missionary named Shaykh Isma’il of 8th to 9th 
century Makkah. He was of Qurayshite Arab descent from the lineage of Abu Bakr al -Siddiq 
and ‘Ali r.a., as cited from the Hikayat Raja Pasai.54 The word ‘fakir’55 in reference to the king 
was cited as part of a hadith56 in Hikayat Raja Pasai and Sejarah Melayu, which al-Attas later 
referred to. 
 
 
52 Al-Attas, Rangkaian Rubā’iyyat, xvi. 
53 Al-Attas, Rangkaian Rubā’iyyat, 12. 
54 Al-Attas rejected the view that the earliest Muslim king in Samudera Pasai is descended from Bengal, as 
suggested by S.Q. Fatimi, who based his statement on Tome Pires. Here, according to al-Attas, the title ‘Bengali’ 
is confused as an ethnic classification, which is incorrect since the author in the Hikayat places Sultan Muhammad 
as a descendant of Abu Bakr al -Siddiq, who was an Arab not a Bengali. Refer to al-Attas, Historical Fact and 
Fiction, 16. 
55 The term ‘fakir’ refers here to the first king of Mengiri named Muhammad, who bore two princes. The term 
‘fakir’ is invoked in order to illustrate how the king who had risen to power in Mengiri, then gave up his position 
and entrusted it to one of his princes when he embarked to Samudra -Pasai. Thus, the exchange of leadership 
position rendered him a ‘fakir’ without any status in his kingdom. As for the factual data available on Mengiri and 
its leader, it is confirmed by S. Q. Fatimi in his reference to al -Biruni. Refer to al-Attas, Historical Fact and 
Fiction, 17. 
56 While this statement, referred to as a ‘hadith’ by the author of Hikayat Raja Pasai , remains unverified, it 
evidently demonstrates that the Malay people of that era acknowledged the hadith as a guiding principle in their 
lives. Refer to al-Attas, Historical Fact and Fiction, 32.

--- Page 12 of 16 ---
Journal of Al-Tamaddun, Vol. 21 (1), 2026, 1-16 
 12 
Indeed, after my demise, there was a kingdom below the wind by the name of 
Samudera; as soon as the news of that kingdom came, you shall command a ship 
carrying royal regalia to bring forth the people of that kingdom, with the majority 
being saints of Allah from there. As for the earliest one, is a ‘fakir’ from the 
kingdom of Mengiri. He is the one to bring forth to the kingdom of Samudera.57 
 
According to the above statement, the Prophet S.A.W. had urged the dispatch of his mission to 
spread Islam ( da’wah), especially in Samudera -Pasai (Sumatra), and this proves that this 
kingdom was indeed known to Arab traders and sailors who traded in the area during the 
Prophet’s lifetime.58 We can say the same for the Western coast of Sumatera namely Fansur 
(Barus), which was famous then for the production of Barus camphor. The camphor was in 
high demand among Arab traders for its preservative element , making it indispensable for 
medical purposes and for the perfume industry. 
 
Following this, al -Attas conducted comparative research on archaeological findings, such as 
tomb inscriptions. For example, through his rejection of certain claims by historians such as S. 
Q. Fatimi that al -Malik al-Salih (d. 1296 CE/696 H) was the first Muslim king of Samudra -
Pasai.59 Concerning this claim, al-Attas referred to the report by Sayyid ‘Alawi bin Tahir al -
Haddad,60 who found the grave/tombstone of al-Malik al-Kamil in Blang Mei in the early 20th 
century, though his death was reported much earlier, in 1210 CE/607 H.61 Not too far from the 
grave of al-Malik al-Kamil, al-Attas discovered the grave of the king’s cousin, named Ya’qub, 
also known as the Amir (commander), for successfully converting the land of Gayo and various 
regions surrounding West Sumatra. The inscription on his tombstone stated his death date as 
1232 CE/630 H. This fact negates the possibility of al-Malik al-Salih being the first Muslim 
king of Samudera-Pasai.62 
 
Lastly, the comparison of s ilsilah or royal lineages of certain kings that appeared in the royal 
lineage documents, such as those of the Palembang royalty, the Cirebon lineage, the Gresik 
lineage, and the Magindanao lineage (Datu Mastura lineage) were included in al -Attas’s 
analyses of royal lineages during the arrival period of Islam to the Malay Archipelago. Based 
on his observations, al -Attas confirmed several family ties amongst various leaders of these 
early Muslim kingdoms, namely between Palembang, Jawa, Sulu, Magind anao, and Brunei.63 
Their lineage is believed to have issued from the grandson of Rasulullah (s), al-Husayn, to the 
Imam Muhammad Sahib Marbat, and through the latter’s descendant, Islam was spread 
throughout the Malay Archipelago with their established kingdoms. Two princes by the name 
of Sharif ‘Alawi (d.1216 CE) and Sharif ‘Ali (d.1193 CE)64 were identified as his descendants. 
In addition, an analysis of the lineage of (silsilah) Hayam Wuruk, the ruler of Majapahit, who 
commissioned the writing of the Nagarakertagama syair (poem) - which was later written down 
by Prapanca, also confirms his place in the royal lineage.65 
 
 
57 MS Hikayat Raja Pasai, 24 (13). 
58 Al-Attas, Historical Fact and Fiction, 20-21. 
59 Al-Attas, Historical Fact and Fiction, 16. 
60 Sayyid ‘Alawi was a historian and Arab geneologist that contributed to Shakib Arslan effort in research Islamic 
Civilization. He is also a close friend of Shaykh Muhammad bin Salim al -Kalali. He has done a detailed 
interpretation and reading of textual engraving on tombstones, down to the fine details that are of great importance. 
Refer to Sayyid ‘Alawi bin Tahir bin Abdullah al-Haddad al-Hadrami, al-Mudkhal ila Ta’rikh al-Islam bi’l Sharq 
al-Aqsa (Dar al-Fikr al-Hadith li Tiba’ah wa al-Nashr, 1971), 69; 82-84. See al-Attas, Historical Fact and Fiction, 
16. 
61 Al-Attas, Historical Fact and Fiction, 16. 
62 Al-Attas, Historical Fact and Fiction, 16. 
63 Al-Attas, Historical Fact and Fiction, iv. 
64 Al-Attas, Historical Fact and Fiction, 89. 
65 al-Attas, Historical Fact and Fiction, 50.

--- Page 13 of 16 ---
Syed Muhammad Naquib Al-Attas’s Perspective on the Interpretation of Islamic Historical Sources 
 13 
Apart from Islamic historical sources, al -Attas considers other historical sources necessary if 
and when their truth is confirmed. We ob served this in his study on the Bani Adam, or 
descendants of Prophet Adam, who lived in the pre-civilization era, coinciding with the period 
of ancient Arabia and Mesopotamia. According to his calculations, Prophet Adam had lived 
around 7,000-8,000 years before our current era, which later coincided with the latest historical 
finding of the earliest human manipulation of metal (stated to have begun around 6,000-7,000 
years ago). 66 The period also coincided with the earliest human writing systems: the 
Babylonian and Sumerian civilizations (cuneiform writing), followed by the Ancient Egyptian 
civilization (hieroglyphic writing), and then the Chinese, Central American, and Indus River 
valley civilizations, covering Pakistan and Northwest India.67 
 
Then, al -Attas compared several secondary sources, particularly the works of several 
luminaries. His critical analysis is significant in verifying the veracity of such works, thereby 
confirming their rigorous status for future researchers. These scholars include G. W. J. Drewes 
for his research on the Terengganu Inscription and its date, A. E. Afifi and A. J. Arberry for 
their exposition of the doctrine of Ḥamzah Fansuri, B. Schrieke, Snouck Hurgronje and van 
Leur for their works on Islam in Malay history and culture, and other scholars. An example of 
al-Attas’s comparison method can be seen from his research on A. Teeuw ’s article titled The 
Malay Sha’ir: Problems of Origin and Tradition.68 In which the scholar attempted to determine 
if Ḥamzah Fansuri is the pioneer of Malay poetry. This began when al-Attas became interested 
in Teeuw’s statement that the term ‘poetry’ was first used in the 16th century AD. In this regard, 
Teeuw has connected th e term ‘sha’ir’ with the word ‘singir’ in 
Javanese. Singir or geguritan is a simple poem with 8 -10 syllables in two couplets and 4 
stanzas. Likewise, the theme of this Javanese poem touches on holy events in Islamic history 
and the life of the Prophet Muḥammad S.A.W. By linking the ancient Javanese term ‘sair’ with 
its modern version ‘singir’, Teeuw is making assumptions about the possibility that the 
term shi’r (ayn) originated from the term singir (ng). Due to this assumption, Teeuw expressed 
his scepticism on whether Ḥamzah Fansuri was indeed the originator and pioneer of the Malay 
sha’ir in Nusantara. However, both words - sair and singir - referred to the poet (wong sangir) 
instead of the poem. It is different in meaning from the Arabic word shi’r , which refers to a 
poem.69 
 
This result led al -Attas to reject Teeuw ’s argument and his extensive treatment of the topic. 
The straw that broke the camel’s back appeared when Teeuw attempted to link sha’ir 
to seloka and upajati despite their vast differences. On the contrary, al -Attas depended on an 
intensive method that focused solely on Ḥamzah’s sha’ir - for which he gained an intimate 
insight into the thoughts of Ḥamzah through special symbols bearing certain mystical 
significance. Al-Attas was critical of Teeuw ’s indecisiveness and pointed out his inability to 
explain how he understood the concept of origin. 
 
Furthermore, Teeuw’s indecisiveness can be seen through his s tatement in which he asserted 
that no poetry existed before the time of Ḥamzah Fansuri (16th century AD), which goes as 
follows: “We must conclude that there is no external evidence for the existence of sha ’ir as a 
literary genre before 1600. Is there any internal evidence in this direction, in other words have 
any sha’ir been preserved of which it might be plausibly suggested or even proven that they 
 
66 Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas, On Justice and the Nature of Man: A Commentary on Surah al-Nisa’ (4):58 
and Surah al -Mu’minun (23):12 -14, (Islamic Banking and Finance Institute Malaysia (IBFIM) and Akademi 
Kebangsaan, 2015), 56-57. 
67 Muhammad Zainiy Uthman, Pemikiran dan Tamadun (Thought and Civilization) (Al-Sultan Abdullah History 
& Civilisation Research Centre (AL-ASAR), 2022), 15. 
68 A. Teeuw, “The Malay Sha ’ir: Problems of Origin and Tradition ,” Bijdragen Tot de Taal -, Land - En 
Volkenkunde 122, no. 4 (1966): 429–446; Al-Attas, The Origin of the Malay Sya’ir (Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 
1966), 1. 
69 A. Teeuw, “The Malay Sha’ir,” 433-434.

--- Page 14 of 16 ---
Journal of Al-Tamaddun, Vol. 21 (1), 2026, 1-16 
 14 
are older?” Here, al-Attas described Teeuw as a ‘hypercritic’, which is an exaggerated doubt 
or scepticism towards a source (sceptic par excellence),70 including towards his very own 
evidence, resulting in his denial of the matter. In fact, what further strengthens al -Attas’s 
argument to support Ḥamzah Fansuri as the pioneer of poetry in the Malay world is the 
existence of Ḥamzah’s very own poems. 
 
The elaborations above showed that profound knowledge and the skilful handling of sources 
must go hand in hand with a strong logical reasoning and analytical mind to perform an 
analytical comparative study of various sources. Al -Attas relies on critical , insightful 
arguments as his primary method of supporting his findings, as he often does in response to the 
mistakes of previous researchers and scholars. 
 
Conclusion 
 
Based on the discussion in this study, it is clear that mastery of Islamic knowledge and thought 
is crucial to the study of Islamic history in the Malay World. It becomes even more significant 
when researching primary sources with limited information about their sources and origins. In 
such circumstances, historical researchers should arm themselves with knowledge from various 
disciplines to verify the truthfulness and authenticity of their findings . This is perceived in a 
serious light due to the nature of Islamic teachings, which are usually accompanied b y the 
Islamic law (shariah) and the use of certain metaphysical terms (tasawwuf), all of which require 
accurate interpretation to convey the principles of Islam correctly and to avoid contradicting 
its true meaning or the Islamic creed itself. This is what distinguishes the study of Islamic 
history from other historical studies. As al-Attas himself has exemplified, the researcher must 
always adopt a cautious attitude, especially when presenting his arguments, and be firm in 
expressing his views and criticisms of the preceding works. 
 
References 
 
Abbas, Shahzada Rahim. “Is Colonization Possible During the Encounter Between Two 
Civilizations?” Policy Perspectives 22, no. 2 (2025): 33 –52. 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/48857426. 
 
Abdul Niri, Mohammaddin , Mohd Hafiz Jamaludin, Mohd Saiful Anwar Mohd Nawawi, 
Nurulhuda Ahmad Zaki, and Raihana Abdul Wahab. 2023. “Astronomy Development since 
Antiquity to Islamic Civilization from the Perspective of Islamic Historiography”. Journal of 
Al-Tamaddun 18 (1):169-77. https://doi.org/10.22452/JAT.vol18no1.14. 
 
Abdullah, Yusri Abdul Ghani . Historiografi Islam dari Klasik hingga Moden (Islamic 
Historiography from Classic to Modern). PT Raja Grafindo Persada, 2004. 
 
Ahmad Kazmar, Noratiqah and Kamaruzaman, Azmul Fahimi . Falsafah Sejarah Syed 
Muhammad Naquib al -Attas: Analisis Teks Islam dalam Sejarah dan Kebudayaan Melayu 
(Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas’ Philosophy of History: Analysis of Islamic Texts in Malay 
History and Culture). Penerbit Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 2020. 
 
Ahmad, Qasim. “Sumber, Pengesahan Fakta dan Pentafsiran Sejarah ” (Sources, Verification 
of Facts, and Historical Interpretation). In Isu-isu Pensejarahan (The Issues of Historiography), 
edited by Abu Talib Ahmad and Cheah Boon Kheng. Penerbit Universiti Sains Malaysia. 
 
 
70 Al-Attas, The Correct Dates of the Terengganu Inscription, 1-2.

--- Page 15 of 16 ---
Syed Muhammad Naquib Al-Attas’s Perspective on the Interpretation of Islamic Historical Sources 
 15 
Ahmad, Shahnon. “Islam dan Hubungannya dengan Masyarakat, Kesusasteraan, Melayu dan 
Kemodenan” (Islam and Its Relationship with Society, Literature, Malay and Modernity) . In 
Sastera Sūfī (The Sufi Poetry), Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1992. 
 
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib. Rangkaian Rubā’iyyat. Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1959. 
 
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib. The Origin of the Malay Sya ’ir. Dewan Bahasa dan 
Pustaka, 1968. 
 
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib. Concluding Postscript to the Origin of the Malay Sya ’ir. 
Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1971. 
 
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib. Islam dalam Sejarah dan Kebudayaan Melayu (Islam in 
the Malay History and Culture). Penerbit Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 1972. 
 
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib. Comments on the Re-examination of al-Rānīrī’s Hujjat alSiddiq: A Refutation. Muzium Negara, 1975. 
 
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib. The Correct Dates of the Terengganu Inscription. Muzium 
Negara, 1984. 
 
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib. The Mysticism of Ḥamzah Fansuri . Penerbit Universiti 
Malaya, 1984. 
 
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib. The Meaning and Experience of Happiness in Islām . 
Ta’dib International, 2023. 
 
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib. Historical Fact and Fiction. Penerbit Universiti Teknologi 
Malaysia, 2011. 
 
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib. On Justice and the Nature of Man: A Commentary on 
Surah al -Nisa’ (4):58 and Surah al -Mu’minun (23):12 -14. Islamic Banking and Finance 
Institute Malaysia (IBFIM), 2015. 
 
Braginsky, Vladimir I. Erti Keindahan dan Keindahan Erti dalam Kesusasteraan Melayu 
Klasik (The Meaning of Beauty and the Beauty of Meaning in Classical Malay Literature ). 
Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1994. 
 
Coedes, G. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia. Australian National University Press, 
1975. 
 
Denisova, Tatiana A. Refleksi Historiografi Alam Melayu (Reflections on the Historiography 
of the Malay Archipelago). Penerbit Universiti Malaya, 2011. 
 
Fang, Liaw Yock . Sejarah Kesusasteraan Melayu Klasik (History of Classical Malay 
Literature). Penerbit Erlangga, 1991. 
 
Hamid, Ismail. Kesusasteraan Melayu Lama dari Warisan Peradaban Islam (Classical Malay 
Literature from Islamic Civilization Heritage). Fajar Bakti, 1983. 
 
Hamid, Ismail. Asas Kesusasteraan Islam (Fundamental of Islamic Literature). Dewan Bahasa 
dan Pustaka, 1990.

--- Page 16 of 16 ---
Journal of Al-Tamaddun, Vol. 21 (1), 2026, 1-16 
 16 
Hasjmy, A. Rubā’ī Ḥamzah Fansuri. Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1976. 
 
Hassan, Hamdan. “Kesan Pemikiran Ulama dan Ahli-ahli Sufi dalam Bidang Penulisan Alam 
Melayu” (The Impact of Scholars’ and Sufis’ Thought on Writing in the Malay Archipelago). 
International Seminar on Islamic Civilization in the Malay World , Bandar Seri Begawan, 
Brunei, 1-5 June 1989. 
 
Hassan, Mohd Affandi . Pendidikan Estetika daripada Pendekatan Tauhid (Aesthetic 
Education from a Tawhidic Approach). Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, 1992. 
 
Hassan, Mohd Affandi, Mohd Tahir, Ungku Maimunah and Abdul Rani, Mohd Zariat . 
Gagasan Persuratan Baru: Pengenalan dan Penerapan (New Literary Ideas: Introduction and 
Application). Institut Alam dan Tamadun Melayu (ATMA), 2008. 
 
In’ami, Moh, Bambang, and Ismail Suardi Wekke. 2025. “Contextualisi ng Adab in Islamic 
Education from the Perspective of Al -Attas”. Journal of Al -Tamaddun 20 (1):145 -58. 
https://doi.org/10.22452/JAT.vol20no1.11. 
 
Krokus, Christian S. The Theology of Louis Massignon: Islam, Christ and the Church . The 
Catholic University of America Press, 2017. 
 
Milner, A. C. The Malays. Wiley-Blackwell, 2008. 
 
Ngadiran, Siti Nor Aisyah. Konsep Sejarah menurut Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas: Kajian 
terhadap Karya-karya Terpilih (The Concept of History According to Syed Muhammad Naquib 
al-Attas: A Study of Selected Works). Master Dissertation, Department of Islamic History and 
Civilization, Academy of Islamic Studies, University of Malaya, 2012. 
 
Parray, Tauseef Ahmad, and Owais Manzoor Dar. “Framing the Sīrah: Representations of 
Prophet Muḥammad in Introductory Texts on Islam by Contemporary Western Islamicists. ” 
Islamic Studies 64, no. 4 (2025): 511–48. https://www.jstor.org/stable/27444674. 
 
Teeuw, A. “The Malay Sha’ir: Problems of Origin and Tradition”. In Bijdragen Tot de Taal-, 
Land- En Volkenkunde 122, no. 4 (1966): 429–446. 
 
Uthman, Muhammad Zainiy. Pemikiran dan Tamadun (Thought and Civilization). Al-Sultan 
Abdullah History & Civilisation Research Centre (AL-ASAR), 2022. 
 
Wan Daud, Wan Mohd Nor . The Educational Philosophy and Practice of Syed Muhammad 
Naquib al-Attas: An Exposition of the Original Concept of Islamization. International Institute 
of Islamic Thought and Civilization (ISTAC), 1998. 
 
Yalçınkaya, Arzu Eylül. God’s Other Book: The Qur’ā n Between History and Ideology. 1st 
Ed., by Mohammad Salama. Arab Studies Quarterly 47, no. 4 (2025): 294 –97. 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/48847397.