Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_09\documents\2008-UNESCO-BatuBersuratTerengganu.pdf
Total Pages: 6
Statistics: Chars=8031, ThaiWords=1606.2, EnglishWords=1593

--- Page 1 of 6 ---
MEMORY OF THE WORLD REGISTER 
Batu Bersurat, Terengganu 
(Inscribed Stone of Terengganu) 
(Malaysia) 
Ref N° 2008-37 
 
1. SUMMARY 
 
The Batu Bersurat, Terengganu or Inscri bed Stone of Terengganu* constitutes the earliest 
evidence of Jawi writing. i.e. writing based on Arabic alphabets) in the Malaya Muslim world 
of Southeast Asia. With the advent of Islam into the region in the 10 th or 11 th Century, a life 
based on the teachings of Al-Quran and the Hadith (practices of the Prophet) became 
widespread in Southeast Asia and together with this, the use of the Jawi script. Thus, it 
heralded a new age of literacy, when converts to the new faith gradually replaced the previous 
Hindu derived script with Jawi, in expressing their new belief. 
 
As a testimony to the spread of Islam that emanated from the Middle East, the Inscribed Stone 
offers more than just a glimpse of the life of the people of the era. This historical artefact also 
depicted the growing Islamic culture subsumed under a set of religious laws. 
 
A concomitant feature of this historic moveme nt was the growth of maritime commerce that 
centred around Kuala Berang, the place where the Batu Bersurat was found. The Inscribed 
Stone alludes to regional trade that flourished in the course of Islamization, with its trading 
pattern and movement of peoples during that time. 
 
While the Islamization of Terengganu was pursued e ffectively, it did not put an end to the old 
way of life. The Batu Bersurat bears witness to the new way of thinking, that did not 
jeopardize their previous way of life unnecessar ily. However, the Inscribed Stone also 
contained a number of Sanskrit terms, a memorial to Southeast Asia’s Hindu past. 
 
*A state on the East Coast of peninsular Malaysia 
 
 
2. DETAILS OF THE NOMIATOR 
 
Name (person or organization): 
 
Department of National Heritage. 
 
Relationship to the documentary heritage nominated: 
 
Preserver of nation’s heritage and Chairm an of Memory of the World National 
Committee. 
 
Contact Person: 
 
Dato’ Professor Emeritus Zuraina Majid. 
Commisioner of Heritage. 
Contact Details: 
 
Department of National Heritage 
Ministry of Unity, Culture, Arts and Heritage of Malaysia. 
16
th floor, Menara TH Perdana, 
1001 Jalan Sultan Ismail, 50694 Kuala Lumpur. 
Tel : 603-2612 7600 
Fax :603-2697 5161

--- Page 2 of 6 ---
3. IDENTITY AND DESCPRITION OF THE DOCUMENTARY HERITAGE 
 
Inscribed Stone 
 
Description: 
 
The Stone is 89cm in height, 53cm in width at the top, and weighs 214.8 kg. All of its four 
sides (sections) have inscriptions written from opposite directions. 
 
The inscription is in Malay written in the Jawi script, and dated 702 Hijrah (1303). The 
promulgation of Islamic Laws established Isla m as the state religion of Terengganu, and 
defined a new way of life for the people. 
 
The Inscribed Stone has 3 facades and the follo wing is a translation of the Arabic on each 
façade (see photo image no. BBT01, BBT02 & BBT03)”. 
 
 
BBT01 (Side A) 
1. Behold the Prophet of God and his apostles. 
2. Praise the God Almighty for giving us Islam. 
3. With Islam, truth revealed to all Thy creatures 
4. On this land the religion of the Holy Prophet shall prevail. 
5. The Holy Prophet, the upholder of truth in Thy kingdom. 
6. Hear ye kings, these messages. 
7. Messages from the Almighty, ye doubt not. 
8. Goodwill, with thee fellow men, saith the Almighty. 
9. Be it known, the land of Terengganu, th e first to receive message of Islam. 
10. On the noon on Friday in the month of Rejab whilst the sun was in the north by 
religious reckoning. 
11. Seven hundred and two years after the demise of the Holy Prophet. 
 
 
BBT02(Side B) 
1. Brethren of lands distant. 
2. Cometh hither to tell ye. The Forth Commandment for debtors. 
3. Take ye not, lose ye not, gold in thy hands. 
4. Fifth Commandment give thee alms and pay thy tithes. 
5. Take thee not, gold of others. 
6. If take thee the gold, return it. 
7. Peril be to adulterers. 
8. To repent, the following be done, command the Almighty. 
9. A hundred whips, for free man, a wife hath. 
10. A married woman, to be buried. 
11. To the waist and stoned to death. 
12. Ignore thee not. Be it the daughter of a prophet. 
 
BBT03(Side C) 
1. Singles, the fine, ten and a half ‘saga’ 
2. A gentry not married, the fine, seven ‘tahils’…… 
3. Two and a half ‘saga’, the fine for older singles…… 
4. Seven ‘tahils’ to the treasury if…… 
5. Free man. The Seventh Commandment; dowry for woman should……. 
6. Deny her husband, if she commit adultery.

--- Page 3 of 6 ---
- Translated by: Terengganu State Museum. 
 
4. JUSTIFICATION FOR INCLUSION/ASSESMENT AGAINST CRITERIA 
 
4.1 Is authenticity established? 
 
The Terengganu Stone is an original piece of work, and is one of its kind in Southeast 
Asia. Now that its historical importance h as been established, it has become a major 
source of reference for researchers working on the Islamisation and the economic 
globalization of the Southeast Asia. 
 
4.2 Is world significance, uniqueness and irreplaceability established? 
 
Bearing its uniqueness and irreplaceablility, the Inscribed Stone of Terengganu has 
assumed additional importance, especially in the context of understanding the political 
and social history of Southeast Asia, a nd the transformation of the religious and 
economic life of its people. 
 
Its world significance includes the fact that it is a historical landmark which allows us 
to map the movements of peoples and unders tand the power configuration associated 
with trade and commerce of the era 
 
4.3 Is one or more of the criteria of (a) time (b) place (c) people (d) subject and theme 
(e) form and style satisfied? 
 
a) The engraving of Batu Bersurat is reminiscent of its time, and is manifest of the 
world of craftmanhip associated with the age of exploration and commerce of the 
people of Southeast Asia in the 14
th century. 
 
c) The presence of traders from various Asia n regions illustrates not only the variety 
of cultures that intersected and interacted on the local scene, but also the migratory 
patterns of the time. The Indianization an d Sinicization of Southeast Asia is well 
encapsulated in the growth of Kuala Bera ng, of which the Inscribed Stone is one 
famous manifestation. While this area a major port-of-call and or and important centre 
of trade, it has assumed a new role as a significant tourist destination. 
 
4.4 Are there issues of rarity, integrity, th reat and management that relate to this 
nomination? 
 
It is unique, and portrays a life-changing episode of a significant number of people in 
the Southeast Asian region. It is now well preserved in the gallery of the Terengganu 
State Museum. 
 
 
5. LEGAL INFORMATION 
 
5.1 Owner of the documentary heritage: 
 
Government of Malaysia 
 
c/o Commissioner of National Heritage 
Department of National Heritage 
Ministry of Culture, Arts and Heritage Malaysia 
16
th Floor, Menara TH Perdana, 1001 
Jalan Sultan Ismail, 50694 Kuala Lumpur 
Malaysia

--- Page 4 of 6 ---
5.2 Custodian of the documentary heritage: 
 
Terengganu State Museum Board 
Bukit Losong 
20566 Kuala Terengganu 
Malaysia 
 
 
5.3 Legal Status: 
 
 
(a) Category of ownership: 
Public 
 
(b) Accessibility: 
 
With Permission From: 
 
Terengganu State Museum Board//Terengganu State 
Government. 
 
(c) Copyright status: 
 
Copyright reserved by the Terengganu State Government. 
 
 
 
(d) Responsible administration: 
 
The Terengganu State Museum Board is responsible for its 
administration. 
 
(e) Other factors: 
Nil. 
 
 
 
6. MANAGEMENT PLAN 
 
6.1 Is there a management plan in existence for this documentary heritage? 
 
No. 
 
 
7. CONSULTATION 
 
 
7.1 Provide details of consultation about this nomination with (a) the owner of the 
heritage (b) the custodian (c) your national or regional Memory of the World 
committee 
 
 
(a) The owner of the heritage: 
 
Government of Malaysia

--- Page 5 of 6 ---
c/ o Commissioner of National Heritage 
Department of National Heritage 
Ministry of Culture, Arts and Heritage Malaysia 
16
th Floor, Menara TH Perdana, 1001 
Jalan Sultan Ismail, 50694 Kuala Lumpur 
Malaysia 
Tel: 603-26127600 
Fax: 603-26975161 
 
 
(b) The Custodian: 
 
 Terengganu State Museum Board 
 Bukit Losong 
 20566 Kuala Terengganu 
 Malaysia 
 Tel: 09-6235444 
 Fax: 09-6231209 
 
 
(c) National Committee: 
Memory of the World National Committee. 
 
The current chairman is: 
 
Dato’ Professor Emeritus Zuraina Majid 
Commissioner of National Heritage 
Department of National Heritage 
Ministry of Culture, Arts and Heritage Malaysia 
16
th Floor, Menara TH Perdana, 1001 
Jalan Sultan Ismail, 50694 Kuala Lumpur 
Malaysia 
Tel: 603-26127600 
Fax: 603-26975161 
 
 
 
 
PART B – SUBSIDIARY INFORMATION 
 
 
 
8. ASSESMENT OF RISK 
 
 
8.1 Detail the nature and scope of threats to this documentary heritage 
 
The Inscribed Stone is a rare historic object, and one of its kind in Southeast 
Asia. As with all important historical artifact, it could be stolen. There is 
also a slight threat of wear and tear through time. 
 
 
 
9. ASSESSMENT OF PRESERVATION 
 
 
9.1 Detail the preservation context of the documentary heritage

--- Page 6 of 6 ---
The Inscribed Stone is well taken care of so long as the existing preservation 
policy is in place. Currently it is kept in the Terengganu State Museum 
under normal temperature and humidity . Granite does not require special 
temperature and humidity control. While is being exhibited in the 
Terengganu State Museum, visitors are not allowed to touch it, and the 
Terengganu Stone has kept it away rom any form of physical human 
contact, touching or rubbing. Both the State Government of Terengganu and 
the Government of Malaysia have shown special interest in its safety and 
preservation. 
 
 
PART C – LODGEMENT 
 
This nomination is lodged by : 
 
 
DATO’ PROFESOR EMERITUS ZURAINA MAJID. 
 
( Signature ):……………………………. 
 
( Date ):………………………………