Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_09\documents\2016-Kamaruzaman-AttasPhilosophyTerengganu.pdf
Total Pages: 7
Statistics: Chars=24040, ThaiWords=4808.0, EnglishWords=4573

--- Page 1 of 7 ---
e-ISSN 2289-6023 International Journal of Islamic Thought ISSN 2232-1314 
Vol. 10: (Dec.) 2016 
 
 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.24035/ijit.10.2016.001 
 
1 
Al-Attas’ Philosophy of History on the Arrival and Proliferation 
of Islam in the Malay World 
 
AZMUL FAHIMI KAMARUZAMAN*, AIDIL FARINA OMAR & 
ROZIAH SIDIK@MAT SIDEK1 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This article examines the philosophy of history of Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas 
on the theory of the arrival and spread of Islam in the Malay world, particularly in 
his work ‘Historical Facts and Fictions’. This philosophy of history is consequent to 
al-Attas' critical research contained in his previous works such as ‘Preliminar y 
Statement on a General Theory of The Islamization of the Malay -Indonesian 
Archipelago’ (1969), ‘Islam in the Malay History and Culture’ (1972) and ‘The 
Correct Date of the Terengganu Inscription’ (1972). This study analyses these 
works and his other works t o look into the aspects of history and historiography 
contained in the philosophy of history of al-Attas on the arrival and spread of Islam 
in the Malay world in terms of their scope, sources and history methods. This study 
found that in terms of episte mology al-Attas has contributed in creating a 
theoretical framework and a novel approach to the philosophy of history of the 
history of Islam in the Malay world. 
 
Keywords: al-Attas, Islam in the Malay world, philosophy of history 
 
 
Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas is philosopher and historian of the twentieth and twenty -first 
centuries recognised in the East and the West . His profound knowledge in the field of theology, 
literature, philosophy and metaphysics and history as well as his experience in leading 
departments and faculties at the University of Malaya and Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
earned him credibility to be appointed by the Government of Malaysia as Founder -Director of 
the International Institute of Islamic Thought and Civilization (ISTAC) (Wan Daud 2012 a). He 
carried out his duties with full responsiblity in ISTAC from 1989 until 2002. The work s of alAttas from 1959 until 2011 amounts to approximately 30 books. His works are very influential 
internationally so much so th at they have been translated into various languages such as 
Indonesian, Persian, Arabic, French, German, Russian, Bosnian, Japanese, Hindi and Korean. The 
thoughts and methods of al -Attas are unwavering and his scientific framework is firm and does 
not change, basing them on knowledge and religious fundamentals. Based on this framework, alAttas elaborates, purify and explain his vast knowledges in his books and one in particular and 
important is Historical Facts and Fictions which explains the Islamic world’s views on the Malay 
world history in term of dating, philosophy and method to counter Western propositions on 
historiography of the Malay world (Alatas 2001). 
 
1 Azmul Fahimi Kamaruzaman *(Corresponding author), Ph.D., senior lecturer and head of Department 
of Arabic Studies and Islamic Civilization, Faculty of Islamic Studies, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 
43600 BANGI, Malaysia , email: azmul@ukm.edu.my; Aidil Farina Omar , postgraduate student at 
Institute of Islam Hadhari, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia , 43600 BANGI, Malaysia , email: 
puanaidil@yahoo.com; Roziah Sidik@Mat Sidek , Ph.D., Deputy Dean of Faculty of Isl amic Studies and 
Assoc. Professor at Department of Arabic Studies and Islamic Civilization, Faculty of Islamic Studies, 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 BANGI, Malasyia, email: roziah@ukm.edu.my. 
Received: 12 July 2016 
Accepted: 25 August 2016

--- Page 2 of 7 ---
Al-Attas’ Philosophy of History on the Arrival and Proliferation of Islam in the Malay World 
Azmul Fahimi, Aidil Farina & Roziah Sidik 
 
 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.24035/ijit.10.2016.001 
 
2 
Historiography of the Arrival and Spread of Islam in the Malay World 
 
Syed Muhammad Naquib al -Attas (1969, 1972 & 2011) criticised the Western theories in 
philosophy of history and interpretation of the history of Islam in the Malay world by stressing 
that the West did not construct correctly the history of the Malay world. This stand is shared by 
Tatiana Denisova when she concluded that most Western writings deny the role of Islam in 
Malay civilization development. Th is idea rises question about what theory of knowledge 
(epistemology) did al-Attas use in interpreting the history of Islam in the Malay world? 
To begin with, this paper wishes to highlight the general discussion on the theory and 
history of the arrival and propagation of Islam in the Malay world. Malay historiography classics 
such as Hikayat Raja Pasai and Sulalatus-Salatin containes notes of the arrival and spread of 
Islam. Among the most important content s are the names of the ruler s and the era of their 
administrations, locations, names of individuals involved in preaching Islam to the Malay world 
and accounts about the calling to preach to the Malay which was a directive of Prophet 
Muhammad. In general, the essence of both classical sources indicates that proselytizing to the 
Malay world was a direct instruction from Arabia to the Malay world. Indian cities such as 
Mengiri (Monghyr /Munger) were merely a stopover before getting to the Malay world. The 
da’wah process occured peacefully and was first and foremost aimed at the ruling class. 
Classical source namely Hikayat Raja Pasai clearly denied t hat the spread of Islam came from 
India or Iran as specified in Western Orientalists theories (Denisova 2011). 
From travellers’ accounts, Islam is known t o advance into the M alay world in the 13th 
century in the regions of Sumatera, followed by other areas in the Malay world. Most Western 
scholars assert that Islam arrives in and spread to the Malay world from India by trading 
activities (Hamid 1982). Ismail Hamid also said that another area indicated as the location of 
origin from which Islam arrived was Arabia, as is the vi ew of scholars like Crawford, Keyzers, 
Niemann and De Hollandar. In Western theories, in addition to trading activities, Islam was said 
to be spread to the Malay world through marriage, politics, the role of the Sufi order and the 
rivalry with the Portuguese (Alatas 1985). 
The question is: do these theories interpret correctly the history of arrival a nd spread of 
Islam in the Malay world? This question was answered by Syed Muhammad Naquib al -Attas 
with his dismissal of such theories as inadequate in interpreting the history of Islam in the 
Malay world because the theories were built on the basis of sup position (conjectural premises) 
and the contents were clearly and visibly biased against the Islamic religion, culture and Arab 
influences. 
According to al-Attas (1969: 25), the advent of Islam in the Malay world was brought by 
Arab or Arab Persian missionaries and they were responsible for spreading Islam in the M alay 
world based on the content of major writings on Islam in the Malay world. Their arrival came 
from a direction of either Arab or through Indi a and China. Al -Attas (2011: 79) specifically 
pointed out that the advent and proliferation of Islam in the 12 th until 16th century in the Malay 
world were carried and spread by the Arabs from the descendants of Bani Alawi of Hadramaut 
which is a bloodline of Hussain, the grandchild of Prophet Muhammad. Here, al-Attas explained 
the missionaries Arab identity is bas ed on genealogy rather than ethnic tribes (Wan Daud, 
2011). This was also supported by Wan Mohd Saghir (1999) through his reference to the bo ok 
of Shams al-Zahirah by al-Sayyid al-Syarif ‘Abd al-Rahman bin Muhammad bin Hus ayn al -
Mashhur. Bani Alawi preachers propagated Islam in the Malay world covering Sumatra, Java, 
Sulu, Makassar, Mindanao, Brunei and the Malay Peninsula. They preached to the local rulers 
and established Islamic Malay governments particularly from the 12th until 16th century. 
In constructing the history of the sprea d of Islam in the Malay world, al-Attas outlined 
several phases of advancement and provided essential features t o each phase, the phases being 
the First Phase 579 -805H / 1200 -1400AD, Second Phase 803 -1112H / 1400 -1700AD and the 
Third Phase 1112H/1700AD onwards (al-Attas 1969: 29-30)

--- Page 3 of 7 ---
e-ISSN 2289-6023 International Journal of Islamic Thought ISSN 2289-6023 
Vol. 10: (Dec.) 2016 
 
 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.24035/ijit.10.2016.001 
 
3 
According to al-Attas, the characteristics of the first phase within the period 579-805H / 
1200-1400AD basically involved the faith i n oneness of God ( tawheed) which was accepted by 
the Malays on the surface only without a deep understanding of the subject of faith. The Malay 
understanding of the subject of Islamic creed was still vague and mixed with their ancestors’ 
beliefs which they had held so far. Islamisation of the Malay community in this phase was more 
due to the Islamic fiqh system that orderly organised their way of life (al-Attas 1969: 29). Wan 
Mohd No r construed the first phase in al-Attas’ theory as a stage involving morality, legal 
aspects and the basics of the faith (Wan Daud 2012: 45). These characteristics of the first phase 
help to interpret the arrival and spread of Islam in the Malay world from cl assical Malay 
historiography sources and discovered artefacts such as the Terengganu Inscription Stone. 
The second phase which was within the 803 -1112H/1400-1700AD period was a 
continuation of the first phase. But the distinguishing feature between the two phases is the 
emphasis on intellectual activities discussed in greater depth the question of tawheed. Ilmu 
Kalam and sufi approaches in discussing aspects of faith and related concepts played an 
important role in accelerating the growth of Islam among the Malays (al-Attas 1969: p. 29). The 
characteristics of this second phase are also helpful in interpreting the arrival and spread of 
Islam in the Malay world from sources of Malay manuscripts by Muslim scholars in that era. In 
discussing the Malay mindset in the 17 th century based on Durr al-Fara'id manuscript, the study 
by Wan Mohd Nor and Khalif Muammar (2009) utilised the characteristics of the second phase 
as described by al-Attas. 
Continuation of the phase occurred in the third one which was around 1112H/1700AD 
onwards during which the legal, academic activities and debates happened in earnest, 
particularly in Sumatra in the 17th century and Java in the 19th century. Important concepts such 
as rationalism, individualism, universality (internationalistic) already existing in the life of 
Muslim Malays and Islamic scholarly tradition continued to develop during the process of 
Westernization in the Malay world (al-Attas 1969: 30). Nevertheless, these concepts will deviate 
from their true meaning if Western approach is used to attain their intentions (al-Attas 2014: 
183). 
 
Al-Attas’s Epistemology 
 
In co ntinuing this discussion, some questions about the context of al-Attas’ epistemolog ical 
theory needs to be elaborated to understand how historical events of Islam’s arrival and 
proliferation in the Malay world were constructed by al -Attas. The first questi on, what is the 
meaning of history as meant by al-Attas? 
Al-Attas ( 2007) explained that any di scipline of knowledge is subject to the Islamic 
worldview which is Ru'yat al-Islam lil Wujud which he interpreted as a holistic view of life or 
perspective on the nature of the universe, which includes the world and the hereafter, outward 
and inward, the seen and unseen world, which is kulli (universal) and juz'i (particular). When a 
subject is based on Islamic worldview, the way of thinking and studying lies within the scope of 
this worldview. This determines the meaning, approach and sources for the subje ct. In terms of 
the meaning or definition of the knowledge, Islamic worldview determines that true knowledge 
(haq) is knowledge that leads people to recognize themselves and know their final destination 
(al-Attas 2014b). This is an understanding of knowledge in Islam which is clearly different from 
secular Western cultures. By this understanding, true knowledge ( haq) is not only the 
knowledge of religion as understood by most members of the society nowadays, but also other 
knowledge in various fields. Based on th is understanding of knowledge, al-Attas stressed that 
the subject of history must also be viewed throug h universal view to get a fair interpretation of 
history (al-Attas 1972: 1-2). Thus, statements that are accepted as true and a fact are when they 
are derived from the 'truth which was sent down' or Revelation (al-Attas 2007 : 6-7). This is 
explained further by reference to the fact and the truth that not all facts are true. True fact is

--- Page 4 of 7 ---
Al-Attas’ Philosophy of History on the Arrival and Proliferation of Islam in the Malay World 
Azmul Fahimi, Aidil Farina & Roziah Sidik 
 
 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.24035/ijit.10.2016.001 
 
4 
when it is interpreted and acknowledged by Islamic worldview (Wan Daud 2011: 7). Facts taken 
into account as an objective must be coupled with values (al-Attas 2011: xii). This clearly shows 
that, to al-Attas, historical knowledge is a science that brings people bac k to the truth and that 
man is capable of achieving confidence in knowledge and this is contrary to the beliefs of 
agnosticism, relativism and subjectivism (Wan Daud 2011). 
Al-Attas outlined some basics that need to be grasped by historians as a precondition for 
an accurate and balanced interpretation of the history of Islam in the Malay world which are 
true knowledge, approach and comprehensive way of thinking: 
 
Rational estimation is not mere conjecture. It pre -supposes in the historian an 
authoritative and genuine knowledge of the religion under investigation, its 
worldview, its symbol and their correct meanings; its adherents and their 
cultural and traditional ways, its religious and intellectual tradition, and sound 
imagination and method of rational and empirical analysis that commends itself 
to the intelligence (al-Attas 2011: xiv). 
 
In this case, true kn owledge on the history of Islam in the Malay world includes a clear 
understanding of the Islamic religion, the fundamental concepts that form its worldview and the 
Islamic civilization terms that describe the characteristics of Islamic civilization. This i s very 
important to understand in interpreting the history of Malay Civilisation because "Malay 
Civilisation is an Islamic civilization" (al-Attas 2011 : xv). Malay Civilisation grew with the 
advancement of Islam in the Malay world and the modern Malay language (Malay-Arab) and the 
Jawi script (Malay-Arab) are proofs to the role of Islam in the Malay world. 
The next question is what are the sources of al -Attas’ knowledge of history? Generally, 
the source of knowledge received by al-Attas are from four channels: the senses (empirical), the 
mind (rational), khabar saddiq (genuine reports) and intuition. The treatmen t of knowledge 
from rational activities and the acquisition of knowledge from the senses are not accepted true 
as such but there are values which determine their truth which is Revelation ( al-Attas 2002: 7). 
Meanwhile, in accepting ideas and achieving confidence in the ideas, al-Attas used intuition. But 
the definition of intuition is not as understood by most people in general. The intuitive process 
involves works through the activities of the mind to solve a problem and this serious process is 
a process o f preparing the soul to accept the meaning or knowledge from Allah (Wan Daud 
2011: 11). Al -Attas’ construct of the history of Islam in the Malay world are through the 
understanding and knowledge about Islam as a religion that forms civilization. Through th is 
understanding and knowledge, al-Attas explained the features of the universal nature of Islamic 
civilization which welcomes the diversity of culture and bind this diversity into the Islamic 
creed and Islamic law (al-Attas 2011: xiv-xv). This means that as long as it does not conflict with 
the principles of Islamic faith and shariah, it is accepted as part of the Islamic civilization. 
Furthermore, in constructing the history of Islam in the Malay world, al-Attas used the 
definition of the term “Malay” and observations on the intellectual and cultural achievements of 
the Malays particularly in language and literature. Wan Mohd Nor said al-Attas also used 
"experience, personal knowledge" in interpreting the history of Islam in the Malay World (Wan 
Daud 2011 : 3). Several primary sources of the Malay world which became his references in 
constructing history of Islam’s arrival and proliferation in the Malay world were Silsilah RajaRaja Palembang , Syajarah Raja -Raja Cirebon , Silsilah Gresik (al-Attas 2011). Thes e primary 
sources were of the Malays, Javanese, Sulus and Moros (Wan Daud 2011). Al -Attas later on 
compared the obtained information with Silsilah Bani Alawi which is Syajarah Bani Alawi to 
identify and verify the identity of Arab preachers in the Malay world. 
Al-Attas also referred to the classical Malay world historiography namely Hikayat Raja 
Pasai and Sejarah Melayu in constructing events such as the arrival of Islam in the Malay world, 
the first Muslim King of the Samudera -Pasai kingdom and the origin of the name of Sumat era.

--- Page 5 of 7 ---
e-ISSN 2289-6023 International Journal of Islamic Thought ISSN 2289-6023 
Vol. 10: (Dec.) 2016 
 
 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.24035/ijit.10.2016.001 
 
5 
Similarly, the book al-Dahr Nukhbat fi 'ajaib al -Barri wa al -Bahr written by al-Dimashqi and 
translated by Fuat Sezqin in his book Islamic Geography and Akhbar al-Sind wal Hind written by 
Solomon Sarafi were among Arabic texts whi ch were referred to by al-Attas in contructing the 
history of Islam in the Malay world such as in the relation between Arab and Malay Muslims and 
the Samudera -Pasai Kingdom. Chinese reports collected and translated by Western scholars 
such as W.P. Groeneveldt and E. Bretschneider were referred either to support the reports from 
Arabic texts or add information that was not available in them. A Chinese report by Chau Ju -Kua 
which was translated and annotated by F. Hirth and W.W. Rockhill was also discussed by AlAttas because it was a reference to most of the scholars in setting the time framework of Islam 
historiography in the Malay world. Meanwhile, studies by scholars like S.Q. Fatimi, R.O. Winstedt 
and C.A. Majul were als o referred to and discussed by al-Attas in interpreting the arrival and 
spread of Islam in the Malay world. 
Meanwhile, the approach used as a historiography methodology of al-Attas and in other 
academic fields is the tauhid approach that unites empirical (sensory methods) and rational 
(mind) approaches with the traditional sources ( naqliyyah) and aqliyyah (Wan Daud 2012 ) alAttas asserted that tauhid approach or method that combines empirical, rational, deductive, 
inductive, subjective and objective methods has been applied by glorious past scholars of Islam 
(al-Attas 2012). They did not partition academic methods as their thoughts system was built 
within the framework of Islamic worldview whose primary source is Revelation ( al-Attas 2014: 
3). 
 
Islam as World History and the Great Man Idea 
 
Resultant from the Islamic worldview framework that forms al -Attas’ methods and knowledge 
sources, he considers history as an important discipline because it contains examples and 
lessons for humanity (Wan Daud 2012). In writing the history of Islam, al-Attas emphasized an 
approach which revolves around Islam as World History because of the nature of Islam as a 
universal religion that forms the scope of historiography or the way of looking at history as 
reformation of mankind through the Messengers, unity, cohesion in diversity and continuous 
contribute and meaning for all mankind (Muhammad Dom 2002; Wan Daud 2011) . Therefore, 
al-Attas used the theory of Human Excellence, " The Great Man Idea" in interpreting the history 
of the arrival and propagation of Islam in the Malay world (Wan Daud 2011). This theory 
suggests a key player in the construction of history and al-Attas explained it through the 
terminology ‘sejarah’ (Malay word for “history”) which originates from the Arabic word 
‘shajarah’ (al-Attas 2011 : 72). Through the elaboration of the terms sejarah/shajarah which 
means traceability and genealogy, al-Attas explained that the important players in the history of 
Islam in the Malay world were the missionaries and the Malay rulers who have traceable family 
roots or genealogy. Those who had their genealogy or family roots known were only Arabs who 
were descendants of Prophet Muhammad through his grandsons Hassan and Husain ( al-Attas 
2011: 73). In the history of the Malay world construct, the missionaries and the rulers who had 
this genealogy were descendants of Imam Ahmad Isa al -Muhajir, from the descendants of 
Husain. 
Islamic Worldview 
 
Based on the Islamic worldview Ru’yat al -Islam lil Wujud which determines that definitions, 
approach and sources for knowledge are subjected to Islamic thought framework, al-Attas 
employed the tradition of selecting Muslim Rulers within Islamic teachings to solve the 
identities and titles of early Muslim Rulers of the Malay World (Wan Daud 2011: 6). In this case, 
al-Attas asserted that the earliest Muslim ruler was not Merah Silu and the title used was not 
Sultan Muhammad. He suggested that early Muslim Rulers in the 9 th and 10th centuries AD used 
the title “al -Malik” as reported by al -Mas’udi and carried titles which showed their ancestry. In

--- Page 6 of 7 ---
Al-Attas’ Philosophy of History on the Arrival and Proliferation of Islam in the Malay World 
Azmul Fahimi, Aidil Farina & Roziah Sidik 
 
 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.24035/ijit.10.2016.001 
 
6 
this case, al-Attas suggested that earliest Muslim ruler in S umatran Islamic government was alMalik al-Muhammad al-Taymi al-Qurashi (al-Attas 2011: 25). 
Since one of the sources of al-Attas was khabar saddiq, he accepted hadith of the Prophet 
Muhammad telling his companions to preach to Sumatra in Hikayat Raja Pasai as true and 
genuinely uttered by the Prophet. For al-Attas, there is no reason for historians t o reject the 
Hadith because the Prophet as the ruler of a government must have received information on 
trade regions visited by Arab traders and the instruction to preach Islam to the Sumatran region 
was to ensure Muslim control of the economy ( al-Attas 2011). Furthermore, knowledge of the 
Arabs about the Malay world has long been known before Islam through trading activities ( alAttas 2011: 2-3). Al-Attas also affirmed that Arab settlements had existed in the Malay world in 
northern Sumatra in the 7 th century AD based on sources from Tang dynasty which confirmed 
that the Malay world was not unfamiliar to the Arabs, including during the time of Prophet 
Muhammad Islam as ruler of the Islamic State. 
 
Empirical and Logical Methods 
 
First, the integration betwee n empirical method (se nsory) and clear logic used by al-Attas in 
proving that the existence of the Malay world region had certainly been known by the Prophet 
Muhammad as the ruler of the Islamic state at the time. This method was also applied by alAttas in proving Islamization activities in the Malay world had occurred since the early period 
by Arab proselytisers of Imam Ahmad Isa al -Muhajir descendants from Hadramaut (Wan Daud 
2011: 5). This is proven by al-Attas through his explanation of the uniformity of the modern 
Malay language (Malay-Arabic) such as in the names of the days of the week, uniformity in Jawi 
script (Malay -Arab), names of local Muslims in the Malay world, the uniformity of Arabic 
pronunciation by Muslim Malays, and the very existence of many Arab population in the Malay 
world from the descendants of the Prophet. All of these show that Islam was propagated in the 
Malay world by those who had the same background, teaching method and pronunciation ( alAttas 2011: 135-142). 
Second, al-Attas used empirical-logical method in proving Malik al-Salih was not the first 
Muslim ruler, through the discovery of a tombstone found in Blang May on which the date of 
death was recorded as 607H/1210AD which was the tombstone al -Malik al-Kamil (Wan Daud 
2011: 5). In addition to the tombstone of al -Malik al -Kamil, there was a tombstone of his kin 
named Ya'qub, the date of death was 630H/1232AD, a person responsible for propagating Islam 
in Gayo and West Sumatra regions (al-Attas 2011: 17). Consequent to these discoveries, al-Attas 
explained that al-Malik al-Salih was not the first ruler in Sumatra as he died in 696H/1296AD. 
Third, al-Attas used this logical -empirical method in verifying the origin of the name 
Sumatera which was Semutra from Semut Raya through the story recorded in Hikayat Raja 
Pasai about Merah Silau witnessing ants as big as cats. He explained that through the spelling by 
referring to reports of Arabic texts in the 13th, 14th and 15th centuries and non -Arabic texts 
(Wan Daud 2011 : 5). al-Attas al so referred to the Arabic text account of 'Ajaib al -Hind which 
confirmed the existence of giant ants in northern Sumatra especially in the Island of Lamri. 
As a con clusion, al-Attas' epistemology encompasses sources, methods and scopes of 
philosophy of his tory of the arrival and propagation of Islam in the Malay world. Through his 
discussions, these three aspects which were constructed within the framework of Islamic 
worldview evidently produced a different interpretation from the previous ones about the 
history of the arrival of Islam and its proliferation in the Malay world. A lack of historical 
documentation in the Malay World requires a highly rational approach which is based on a 
strong premise to explain the role of Islam in the Malay world. Clearly, t he strong premise here 
is the true understanding of Islam and its advancement as a civilization, essential for analyzing 
Islamic history in the Malay world. Through Islam as World History and The Great Man Idea , alAttas has provided a theoretical framewor k and methodology for historians to apply in

--- Page 7 of 7 ---
e-ISSN 2289-6023 International Journal of Islamic Thought ISSN 2289-6023 
Vol. 10: (Dec.) 2016 
 
 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.24035/ijit.10.2016.001 
 
7 
philosophy of history of Islam not only in the Malay world but also everywhere, especially in 
regions which lack historical documentation materials. 
 
References 
 
Abdullah, W. M. S. 1999. Penyebaran Islam dan Sil silah Ulama Sejagat Dunia Melayu . Kuala 
Lumpur: Persatuan Pengkajian Khazanah Klasik Nusantara dan Khazanah Fathaniyah. 
Alatas, S. F. 1985. Notes on Various Theories Regarding the Islamization of the Malay 
Archipelago. Muslim World. 75(3-4): 162–175. 
Alatas, S. F. 2001. Alternative Discourses in Southeast Asia. SARI: Jurnal Alam dan Tamadun 
Melayu. 19: 49–67. 
al-Attas, S. M. N. 1969. Preliminary Statement on a General Theory of the Islamization of the 
Malay-Indonesian Archipelago. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. 
al-Attas, S. M. N. 1972. Islam dalam Sejarah dan Kebudayaan Melayu . Selangor: Universiti 
Kebangsaan Malaysia. 
al-Attas, S. M. N. 2007. Tinjauan Ringkas Peri Ilmu dan Pandangan Alam. Pulau Pinang: Universiti 
Sains Malaysia. 
al-Attas, S. M. N. 2011. Historical Facts and Fictions . Johor Bahru: Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
Press. 
al-Attas, S. M. N. 2014a. Islam and Secularism (Ketiga.). Kuala Lumpur: IBFIM. 
al-Attas, S. M. N. 2014b. Islam Faham Agama dan Asas Asas Akhlak (Kedua.). Kuala Lumpur: 
IBFIM. 
Denisova, T. A. 2011. Refleksi Historiografi Alam Melayu . Kuala Lumpur: Penerbit Universiti 
Malaya. 
Hamid, I. 1982. A Survey of Theories on the Introduction of Islam in the Malay Archipelago. 
Islamic Studies 21(3): 88–100. 
Muhammad Dom, A. S. 2002. Ibn Batuttah, Rihlah Ibn Batuttah dan Falsafah Rihlah Dalam 
Sejarah dan Budaya Islam. Kuala Lumpur: ISTAC. 
Wan Daud, W. M. N. & Muammar, K. 2009. Kerangka Komprehensif Pemikiran Melayu Abad ke -
17 Masihi Berdasarkan Manuskrip Durr al -Fara’’id Karangan Sheikh Nurudin al-Raniri. 
International Journal of the Malay World and Civilization. 2(27): 119–146. 
Wan Daud, W. M. N. 2011. Falsafah Sejarah al -Attas. In Seminar Khas Sejarah Alam Melayu: 
Antara Fakta dan Khayalan. Kuala Lumpur. 
Wan Daud, W. M. N. 2012a. Al-Attas: Ilmuwan Penyambung Tradisi. In Mohd Zaidi Ismail & Wan 
Suhaimi Wan Abdullah (eds.). Adab dan Peradaban: Karya Pengiktirafan untuk Syed 
Muhammad Naquib al-Attas (pp. 1–60). Kuala Lumpur: Mph Group Publishing. 
Wan Daud, W. M. N. 2012b. The State of Isla mization in the Malay Peninsula as Reflected in the 
Terengganu Inscription. In Batu Bersurat of Terengganu: Its Correct Date, Religio -
Cultural, and Scientific Dimensions (pp. 29–52). Kuala Lumpur: Jabatan Warisan Negara.