Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_23\documents\2013-Kouroo-TERNATE_AND_TIDORE.pdf
Total Pages: 77
Statistics: Chars=87352, ThaiWords=17470.4, EnglishWords=17777

--- Page 1 of 77 ---
“ ... TERNATE AND TIDORE ... ”
Ternate and Tidore
WALDEN: Thus it appears that the sweltering inhabitants of
Charleston and New Orleans, of Madras and Bombay and Calcutta,
drink at my well. In the morning I bathe my intellect in the
stupendous and cosmogonal philosophy of the Bhagvat Geeta, since
whose composition years of the gods have elapsed, and in
comparison with which our modern world and its literature seem
puny and trivial; and I doubt if that philosophy is not to be
referred to a previous state of existence, so remote is its
sublimity from our conceptions. I lay down the book and go to
my well for water, and lo! there I meet the servant
of the Brahmin, priest of Brahma and Vishnu and Indra, who still
sits in his temple on the Ganges reading the Vedas, or dwells at
the root of a tree with his crust and water jug. I meet his servant
come to draw water for his master, and our buckets as it were
grate together in the same well. The pure Walden water is mingled
with the sacred water of the Ganges. With favoring winds it is
wafted past the site of the fabulous islands of Atlantis and the
Hesperides, making the periplus of Hanno, and, floating
by Ternate and Tidore and the mouth of the Persian Gulf, melts in
the tropic gales of the Indian seas, and is landed in ports of
which Alexander only heard the names.

--- Page 2 of 77 ---
2 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
By this point, archeologists suspect, humans had begun to notice that certain leaves impart delicious flavor to 
food.Wild date seed were left in the Shanidar Cave of Northern Iraq. Also found at that site was evidence that 
cave dwellers consumed chestnuts, walnuts, pine nuts, and acorns.
50,000 BCE
SPICE
PLANTS

--- Page 3 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 3
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
An archaeological dig at Terqua in Syria has unearthed cloves from an ordinary Mesopotamian household 
1,700 BCE

--- Page 4 of 77 ---
4 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
kitchen dating to this period.
SPICE

--- Page 5 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 5
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
EXODUS records that when the Children of Israel fled from Egypt, they took with them the “principal spices.”
1,520 BCE
SPICE

--- Page 6 of 77 ---
6 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
The Greeks begin the Olympic Games, at which victors were awarded wreaths of bay laurel leaves, a 
condiment or spice.
1,453 BCE
PLANTS

--- Page 7 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 7
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
The Queen of Sheba, paying a royal visit to King Solomon, was accompanied by “camels that bear spices” as 
her principal host-gift.
Hippocrates wrote numerous treatises on medicinal plants, such as saffron, cinnamon, thyme, coriander, mint, 
and marjoram.
At about this point Alexandria in the delta of the Nile was becoming the greatest spice trading port of the 
Eastern Mediterranean, with one of its entrances known as the “Pepper Gate.”
992 BCE
400 BCE
Plant Name Place
Turnip Brassica rapa Western Asia
Apple Malus Pumila Southwestern Asia
80 BCE
SPICE
PLANTS
OTHERS
OTHERS
PLANTS
PEPPER

--- Page 8 of 77 ---
8 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
In China, there being more than one way to skin a cat, a tax was imposed upon the ownership of slaves.
Hippalus, a Greek sea captain, discovered a method of employing monsoon winds in sailing, a finding that 
would open direct sea trade between the Eastern Mediterranean and India.
Aelius Gallus, the Egyptian prefect for Augustus Caesar’s Roman empire, went off on an ill-fated expedition 
to conquer the spice kingdoms of South Arabia.
The funeral rites for Nero’s wife Poppaea at Rome consumed a year’s supply of cinnamon.
Probable date of the earliest surviving cookbook, one by Apicius. The recipes, we note with interest, are richly 
spiced.
17 CE
24 CE
65 CE
300 CE
SPICE
PLANTS
SPICE
PLANTS
SPICE

--- Page 9 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 9
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
On the far side of the earth, cloves were delivered to Constantine — this is the first record of this spice having 
reached so far. The source, flower buds of Syzygium aromaticum, had of course been known for centuries in 
the civilized world, for in the Han court etiquette demanded that a person being received by the Chinese 
emperor hold a clove in his mouth to sweeten the breath.1
335 CE
1. History is silent as to whether these people began to put a clove in their mouth before approaching their Emperor Constantine.
PLANTS

--- Page 10 of 77 ---
10 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
August 23: Yet another altercation involving our favorite pushy people, the Romans: in the Sack of Rome, the 
Visigoths under Alaric defeated the Romans, disrupting the Pax Romana.
Edward Gibbon notwithstanding, the main importance of this event is that it effectively severed the Western 
410 CE
What
goes
around
keeps
coming
around
and
around
and
around...

--- Page 11 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 11
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Roman Empire from the Eastern Roman Empire.
The Visigoths had previously obtained 3,000 pounds of pepper as a ransom for Rome, and two years later

--- Page 12 of 77 ---
12 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
would begin to extract an annual tribute of 300 pounds from the city.
It is customary to say that shock waves ran throughout the Roman world at this event, but actually it is more 
correct to say that shock waves ran through those citizens of the Roman world prosperous enough to care about 
expensive symbols of Roman grandeur. A fair number of wealthy Romans fled the city to country estates in 
Campania, in Sicily, and in north Africa. Enough of them showed up in Hippo for Augustine
 to warn his flock 
that they should receive the refugees with open arms and charity.
Not long after the refugees settled on their African estates and began to frequent the salons of Carthage, the 
more intellectual among them began to wonder aloud whether their new religion might not be to blame for the 
disaster they had suffered. After all, the argument ran, Rome had been immune from capture for fully eight 
centuries; but now, just two decades after the formal end of public worship of the pagan gods (commanded by 
the emperor Theodosius in 391 CE), the city had fallen to the barbarians. Perhaps it was true what pagans had 
said, that the new Christian god with ideas about turning the other cheek and holding worldly empires in low 
esteem was not an efficient guardian of the best interests of the ruling class. Most of the people who indulged 
in these idle speculations were themselves Christian. The “paganism” of these people was no revival of ancient 
SPICE

--- Page 13 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 13
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
religion, but only the persistence of the ancient notion of religion as a bargain you struck with the gods in order 
to preserve your health, wealth, and complacency.
Augustine was invited by the imperial commissioner Marcellinus, who was in Africa to look into the Donatist 
quarrel for the emperor, to respond to these charges. He knew that it was more than a question of why Rome 
fell; here were Christians who still did not know what Christianity was about, how it differed from the Roman 
religions it had replaced. His response was a masterpiece of Christian apologetics, D
E CIVITATE DEI (THE CITY 
OF GOD), whose composition stretched over fifteen years. The first books, consoling those the Visigoths had 
frightened, were published quickly and seem to have done their job. But the work as a whole continued to come 
forth in installments, revealing a broad vision of history and Christianity.
At the age of 25, Mohammed
 married a wealthy spice-trading widow, Khadija, age 40. 
Isidore became archbishop of Seville. He would write of the wedding band: “The ring is given by the espouser 
to the espoused either for a sign of mutual fidelity or still more to join their hearts by this pledge; and therefore 
the ring is placed on the fourth finger because a certain vein, it is said, flows thence to the heart.”
On the Spice Island of Sumatra
, and in Cambodia, would be appearing during this decade the first use of 0, 
our modern symbol for zero.2
Venice was rising as a commercial power, and much of its trade was in spices. At about this point it was 
reintroducing pepper into a Europe that had forgotten about this spice. Pepper would become so popular that 
to describe a family as poor, one would say that they lacked pepper. During the Middle Ages, European 
consumption of pepper would amount to about 33,000 tons per year.
595 CE
680 CE
2. Prior to this, in China, a blank space had been being used as a placeholder, and in this the Mesopotamians had been copying the 
Chinese. We have not yet established, precisely when and where this symbol “0” would first come to be understood as itself a 
number, rather than merely as a placeholder within tables of numbers (and if we ever do establish precisely when and where zero 
came to be understood as itself a number — we’ll need to ask ourselves just how this makes a rat’s ass worth of difference).
900 CE
PLANTS

--- Page 14 of 77 ---
14 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
A guild of pepper wholesale merchants, a pepperers’ guild, was founded in London. Later this organization 
would merge with a spicers’ guild. In 1429 the spicers’ guild would become The Grocers’ Company (the term 
“grocer” comes from vendre en gros, which is French meaning wholesale). The charter of such organizations 
was to manage trade in spices, drugs, and dyestuffs: these guild members maintained their exclusive right to 
“garble” — that is, to select and process spices and medicinal products.
Marco Polo returned from China and described to the Europeans the incredibly precious and strange locales 
in which their spices were originating.
1180 CE
1298
PLANTS
SPICE

--- Page 15 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 15
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
The Portuguese Prince Henry established a navigation college to spur a worldwide spice quest.
This Chinese map bears the date 1763, and its inscription alleges that it is copied from a map made in 1418. 
It does not seem to depict the British Isles, but does depict Africa and Australia:
Well, whaddya know!
1418

--- Page 16 of 77 ---
16 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Diaz worked his way around Africa in search of spice and of trade for the Portuguese.
The city of Worms was hosting Germany’s final major chivalric tournament. Holy Roman Emperor Frederick 
III authorized guild masters to ape the markings of the lower aristocracy: in addition to having their swords at 
their sides they might put feathers in their caps. At about this time, in Padua, Italy, the fencing master Fillipe 
Vadi, who taught fencing at Urbino, was creating DE ARTE GLADIATORIA DIMICANDI (ABOUT THE GLADIATORIAL ART 
OF FIGHTING). This textbook advised its audience of knights and nobles to use their acquired skill to protect 
rather than oppress. DER HEXENHAMMER (THE HAMMER OF WITCHES), however, taught how to improve one’s aim 
with projectile weapons by invoking the aid of Satan: steal consecrated wafers from the Mass service, cast your 
bullets at a crossroad on a Christmas Eve, etc.
January 2, Monday (Old Style): Because the Nasrid ruler of Granada, Muhammad XII Boabdil, had been getting 
nervous while waiting to abdicate in May as had been agreed to in principle in the previous November, the 
Christian flag happened to be being raised over the Alhambra for the first time as negotiations began on this 
day in the tent city without the walls of Granada between the secretary to King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella, 
Juan de Colomba, and Father Juan Pérez, a sponsor of the proposal of Christopher Columbus that sailing to 
the west might well turn up a more direct passage and sources for obtaining for Spain the spice
 riches of the 
Orient.3 Retrospectively, the meeting in the siege tents would come to be regarded as of greater long-term 
significance than this lowering and raising of flags over the fortress palace atop the hill, but at the time there 
was no question in anybody's mind that it was the flag ceremony which was the significant, albeit off-schedule, 
incident of this day. It would not be until 1552 that it would be suggested, by Francisco López de Gómara to 
King Charles V , that the conquest of the Americas that had begun with Columbus had constituted the most 
significant event since the divine Creation of the universe, 
— or, at least, since the 1st Coming of Christ. 
I freely admit that, according to white writers, white
teachers, white historians and white molders of public
opinion, nothing ever happened in the world of any
importance that could not or should not be labeled
1487
1492
3. He would return with corn (Zea mays) and other crop plants.
PLANTS

--- Page 17 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 17
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
‘white.’
— W.E. Burghardt Du Bois, “The Superior Race”
This would turn out to be a key year in the history of tourism. Columbus, or Colon, or Colombo or whatever 
his name was, had made a serious error in calculating the circumference of the earth which could have gotten 
a whole bunch of white people, including himself, lost while sailing the ocean blue and dying of thirst. Instead 
it seems he lucked out. Yes, a whole bunch of people would get killed as a result of this ridiculous 
miscalculation of his, but, by and large, they wouldn’t be white people. I will make only one further comment 
on this year: Bartolomé de las Casas reported,
4 that what this mass-murder Columbus/Colon/Colombo most 
craved was “to discover more.” This is the real world, in which, it seems, it is those of us who most crave who 
are surest to become craven.
4. Las Casas, Bartolomé de, 1951, HISTORIA DE LOS INDIES, Fondo de Cultura Economica, Mexico, V olume I, p.146.

--- Page 18 of 77 ---
18 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
For the longest time, only a rather small group of Spanish intellectuals and bureaucrats would have any interest 
in this crazed figure, Christopher the Christ Carrier, who had supposed the hill of the Garden of Eden to be at 
the origin of every strong ocean current which he had encountered. The half-mythicized faces of America, 
such as that of the Emperor Montezuma (Motechuzoma), would for a long time quite overshadow this

--- Page 19 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 19
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
genocidal figure.
November 22, Friday (Old Style): Christopher Columbus arrived at Hispaniola. On this trip he was bringing with him 
the seed of the lemon, the lime, and the sweet orange trees. He was also introducing sugar cane to the island, 
and by 1516 the first processed sugar would be shipping from Santo Domingo to Spain. Soon afterward, 
Portugal would begin importing sugar from Brazil, and so sugar cane would be, as we know, becoming a 
driving force for the slave trade.
1493
Ethnicity gave Columbus a lobby, a prerequisite to public success in
US culture. The 1850 census reported only 3,679 individuals of
Italian birth. Yet by 1866, Italian-Americans, organized by the
Sharpshooters’ Association of New York, celebrated the landfall and,
within three years, annual festivities were being held in
Philadelphia, St. Louis, Boston, Cincinnati, New Orleans, and San
Francisco on or around October 12. Italians and Spaniards were just
not enough, however, to turn this celebration into a national
practice. Fortunately, ethnicity gave Columbus a second –and more
numerous– group of lobbyists, Irish-Americans. By 1850, there were
already 962,000 Americans claiming Irish descent. Many of them
regrouped in organizations like the Knights of Columbus, a fraternal
society for Catholic males founded in 1881. In less than ten years,
community support and the institutional patronage of the Catholic
church swelled the Knights’ membership. As the association spread in
the northeast with the backing of prominent Irish-Americans,
it increasingly emphasized the shaping of “citizen culture.” Columbus
played a leading role in making citizens out of these immigrants.
He provided them with a public example of Catholic devotion and civic
virtue, and thus a powerful rejoinder to the cliché that allegiance
to Rome preempted the Catholics’ attachment to the United States.
In New Haven, the 1892 celebration of the landing attracted some
forty thousand people –including six thousand Knights and a thousandpiece band conducted by the musical director of West Point– in a joint
celebration of holiness and patriotism.
PLANTS

--- Page 20 of 77 ---
20 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
June 8, Wednesday (Old Style): Christopher Columbus reached the coast of Portugal. He had been gone this time 
for 2 years, 81/2 months, and was returning with pineapple and allspice (not having ever seen whole 
peppercorns, he was supposing this spice berry to be pepper).
1496
PLANTS

--- Page 21 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 21
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
July 8, Saturday (Old Style): The Portuguese captain Vasco da Gama left Lisbon under orders from the King of 
Portugal, to follow a route discovered by Diaz 11 years before around the Cape of Good Hope. His arrival in 
India would mark the first voyage from Europe. This trip and the subsequent voyage of Cabral would break 
the Venetian monopoly on the sugar and the spice trade.
In reference to citrus, Camoes, in recording his voyages to India would write:
A thousand trees are seen towards heaven rising,
With beautiful and sweetly-scented apples;
The orange, wearing on its lovely fruit
The colour Daphne carried in her hair;
Bent low, nay almost fallen to the ground,
The citron, heavy with is yellow load;
And, last, the graceful lemon with its fruit
Of pleasant smell and shaped like virgins’ breasts.
May 20, Sunday (Old Style): The Portuguese captain Vasco da Gama arrived at Calicut on the west coast of India, a 
spice-trading center; pepper prices would decline in Europe. De Gama’s cargo paid for his expedition sixty 
times over. (The pepper season begins in Sumatra with the harvesting of small berries near the ground in 
January. The harvest continues through the spring, with the very finest peppercorns being taken from the tops 
of the vines during May. Some good pepper reaches the ports along the Acehnese coast of Sumatra even as 
late as July, and then pepper become unavailable in bulk until the next January. What the pepper traders along 
this coast desired in exchange was Spanish silver, either in the form of dollars or of pieces of eight, and sacks 
of these silver coins made excellent ballast for the spice ships on their trip out to Sumatra.)
Venice sent ambassadors to the Sultan of Turkey proposing the construction of a canal across the Isthmus of 
Suez. Meanwhile, the Portuguese were founding spice factories along the east coast of India.
1497
1498
1504
PLANTS
PLANTS

--- Page 22 of 77 ---
22 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
The Portuguese found out about Ceylon, source of treasured cinnamon. Their exploitation of the cinnamon 
forests would lead to a system of slavery there, and a monopoly on trade in this spice.
Captain Albuquerque seized Malacca on the Malay Peninsula, one of the most important spice ellipuliums. 
Western explorers discovered that the Molucca Islands (the Spice Islands) were the source of cloves.
Having won battles over Muslim forces, the Portuguese advanced their control over spice producing areas of 
India, Ceylon, Java, Sumatra — and by 1514, the Spice Islands. For nearly 100 years great Portuguese wealth 
would flow from control of the spice trade.
1505
1511
PLANTS
PLANTS

--- Page 23 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 23
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
September 20, Tuesday (Old Style): King Charles V of Spain (Holy Roman Emperor Charles V) having endorsed the 
design of Ferdinand Magellan and Ruy Faleiro, after a year’s preparation their fleet, the San Antonio, Trinidad, 
Concepción, Victoria, and Santiago, sailed out into the Atlantic. With them sailed Magellan’s brother-in-law, 
Duarte Barbosa. When they would reach the coast of Brazil, they would sail down the South American coast 
to the Patagonian bay of San Julián, where they would wintered from March to August 1520. The Santiago 
would be wrecked, and its commander João Serrão and its crew would be taken aboard the other vessels.
1519

--- Page 24 of 77 ---
24 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Captain Magellan was sailing westward instead of eastward from Spain because he was looking for new spice 
lands. Nearly 3 years later, on September 8, 1522, 18 of the original 250 crewmen (lacking Magellan, who fell 
in a local combat on the island of Mactan in the Philippines during April 1521) would return to Seville, 
precisely one day early by their own reckoning, with but one remaining of the five ships that had started. Even 
given such great losses, the 26 tons of cloves
, the sacks of nutmegs, the dried mace, and the cinnamon bark in 
the Victoria’s hold, with the load of sandalwood returned to Spain from the very last legs of the voyage, would 
be enough to cover the entire cost of the expedition. The returning captain, Juan Sebastián de Elcano, would 
be awarded a pension and assigned a coat of arms that displays two cinnamon sticks, three nutmegs, and 12 
cloves. A journal detailing exploits of this voyage would be maintained by Antonio Pigafetta, gentlemanadventurer, and published subsequently as P
RIMO VIAGGIO INTORNO AL MONDO.
Hernando Cortes conquered Mexico. While on reconnaissance in southeastern Mexico, his soldiers were the 
first Europeans to discover the delights of the Aztecan spice, vanilla.
The manufacture of silk was introduced to France.
Pigaphetta, following three years of voyage to the Moluccas, wrote that “in all the islands of the Moluccas 
there are to be found cloves, ginger, sago which is wood-bread, rice, ...pomegranates, both sweet and sour 
oranges, lemons...” He also wrote that: “the betel-nut is a fruit which they keep chewing together with flowers 
of jasmine and orange,” and “the cannibals of the islands...eat no other part of the human body but the heart, 
uncooked but seasoned with the juice of oranges and lemons.”
1521
1522
PLANTS
PLANTS
PLANTS

--- Page 25 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 25
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
April 22, Thursday (Old Style): In the Treaty of Zaragoza, Spain and Portugal divided their claims in the Pacific by 
drawing an imaginary line from pole to pole 297 1/2 leagues east of the Moluccas.
In return for the princely sum of 350,000 ducats, King Charles V of Spain ceded to Portugal all rights claimed 
by Spain in the Spice Islands.
The final day of the 2d diet of Speyer, Germany.
Francis Xavier sailed from Malacca for the Spice Islands.
Dr. Pierre Belon began a journey through Egypt, Asia Minor, Egypt, Arabia and Palestine. He would be gone 
until 1549.
1529
1546

--- Page 26 of 77 ---
26 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Garcia da Orta’s COLLOQUIES ON DRUGS AND SIMPLES OF INDIA, the 1st scientific treatise on oriental spices 
published in the western world.
September 26, Monday (Old Style): From the Indonesian spice islands, Captain Francis Drake sailed across the Indian 
Ocean and around the Cape of Good Hope at the bottom of Africa.
Drake returned in the Golden Hinde to Plymouth, England, to make anxious inquiries as to whether Queen 
Elizabeth were still alive (because he needed for her to protect him against Spanish charges of piracy). Since 
this round-the-world voyage had stopped off along the way in the Spice Islands, his investors would receive a 
profit from the spices in his hold, of 4,700%. The royal person would come visit the dashing captain on board 
his vessel.
1563
1580
SPICE

--- Page 27 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 27
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
King Philip II of Spain sent some of his African slaves to St. Augustine. These were the first African slaves to 
be landed in North America.
He unified control of the Oriental spice trade eliminating the competition in the sugar, spice, and slave trade 
that had existed before his takeover of Portugal in 1580.
Europe began to learn about China, in Gonzalez de Mendoza’s history.
Meanwhile, a ship from the West Indies arrived in Europe with the 1st cargo of Jamaican ginger — a 
breakthrough of great moment had been achieved, in that an oriental spice was being cultivated successfully 
in the New World, reducing our dependence upon a strange Other.
1581
1585
INTERNATIONAL SLAVE TRADE

--- Page 28 of 77 ---
28 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Ralph Lane, 1st governor of Virginia, introduced Sir Walter Raleigh to a device apparently of his own devising, 
a long-stemmed clay pipe for the smoking of tobacco. In Germany, DE PLANTIS EPITOME UTILISSIMA offered 
one of the 1st cautions against indiscriminate use of this “violent herb.”
Upon Thomas Hariot’s return to England from the Virginia coast, his patron having fallen into disfavor at the 
court, he entered the service of Henry Percy, 9th Earl of Northumberland. At Syon House, which was run by 
the earl’s 2d cousin Thomas Percy, he would become a prolific mathematician and astronomer. He has credit 
for the theory of refraction.
Gunung Api (4.525°S, 129.871°E; summit elevation 640 meters), the volcano on the island of Banda Api that 
towers over the spice island of Neira in the Banda Sea, erupted. Gunung Api is the most northeasterly volcano 
in the Sunda-Banda arc, now part of Indonesia. The island of Banda Api is part of a 6-mile-wide caldera, 
mostly submerged, that is the northernmost of a chain of volcanos. Gunung Api forms a conical peak at the 
center of this island. At least two episodes of caldera formation are thought to have occurred, with the arcuate 
islands of Lonthor and Neira considered to be remnants of the pre-caldera volcanoes. (Historical eruptions 
have mostly consisted of Strombolian eruptions from the summit crater, but larger explosive eruptions have 
also occurred and, occasionally, lava flows have reached the coast.)
1586
(man smoking clay pipe)

--- Page 29 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 29
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Sir Francis Drake, on landing at Roanoke off the coast of what is now North Carolina, heard tales of colonists 
who had survived on soup made from Sassafras albidum. When he returned to England he took with him what 
may have been the 1st shipment of this plant. (In 1602 Bartholomew Gosnold would bring more material from 
the plant to England, and by 1607 it would be in great demand both in English coffeehouses and on the street. 
The tea was said to cure a wide range of diseases, while the wood was thought to repel insect attack. Today we 
know that oil of sassafras (once used to flavor root beer but out of use since the early 1960s) is substantially 
the chemical safrole, now regarded as a definite carcinogen. The most significant commercial use for sassafras 
today is the manufacture of filé, a powder made from young, dried leaves (they do not contain any safrole) 
used in the making of gumbo.
In an age dominated by Portuguese carracks and Spanish galleons, that functioned as warships in addition to 
carrying cargo, the first Dutch fluytschip cargo carrier was launched at Hoorn in the Zuider Zee. This vessel 
was six times as wide and twice as long, with a nearly flat, rectangular bottom for efficiency in the storage of 
large quantities of cargo.
In about this year also, the jacht Duyfken was under construction in the Netherlands. This was not a lumbering 
cargo vessel but a fast, lightly-armed ship suitable for small valuable cargoes and for privateering.
Bakers in Montpellier, France were forced to use bushes to fire their ovens because there remained no forest 
in the area to supply firewood. Europe would continue to face energy shortages based on dwindling forest 
reserves. Eventually reliance would move to coal, then to petroleum (remember, even these fossil fuels are 
based on plant life), which would mark a major shift in the history of civilization, from renewable to nonrenewable energy sources.
1595
PLANTS
SPICE
PLANTS

--- Page 30 of 77 ---
30 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
The Queen’s printer John Norton had commissioned a Dr. Priest to prepare an English-language translation of 
a popular herbal by Rembert Dodoens but then, Dr. Priest having died, the press had recruited John Gerard to 
carry the project through to its completion. Gerard added as-yet-unpublished material by the herbalist l’Obel. 
We don’t know how much of this famous GREAT HERBALL, OR GENERALL HISTORIE OF PLANTES of 1597 (the 
earliest English publication to describe the potatoes of Peru) had been completed by Dr. Priest before he died, 
1597
BOTANIZING

--- Page 31 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 31
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
versus how much of this amounted to a fresh contribution by Gerard.
In this year Gerard was appointed Junior Warden of the Barber-Surgeons.
GREAT HERBALL OF 1597
PLANTS

--- Page 32 of 77 ---
32 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
This was another poor harvest year in Europe and was the 3d of the three so-called “dear years” of England, 
during which not only meat but even dairy products were in such low supply that they commanded such a price 
as to be entirely out of the reach of the poor.
5 In these years wheat flour would often need to be augmented by 
grinding and boiling the root of the cuckoopint, Arum maculatum, until even wheat would become too dear 
for regular consumption by the poor and the many would shift their menus in the direction of “Horsse corne, 
beanes, peason, otes, tare and lintels.”6
Willem Barentsz, a Dutch navigator, died on his return from Nova Zembla, having attempted to find a 
northeast passage to the Spice Islands
.
Between this year and 1614, first the British East India Company was chartered by Queen Elizabeth I, and then 
the Dutch, Danish, and French East India Companies were being founded:
In the first voyage made to the East Indies on account of the
English East India Company [1600] there were employed four ships
commanded by Captain James Lancaster, their General, viz. the
Dragon, having the General and 202 men, the Hector 108 men, the
Susan 82 and the Ascension 32. They left England about 18 April;
in July the people were taken ill on their passage with the
scurvy; by the first of August all the ships except the General’s
were so thin of men that they had scarce enough to hand the
sails; and upon a contrary wind for fifteen or sixteen days the
few who were well before began also to fall sick. Whence the
want of hands was so great in these ships that the merchants who
were sent to dispose of their cargoes in the East Indies were
obliged to take their turn at the helm and do the sailors duty
till they arrived at Saldanha [near the Cape of Good Hope]; where
the General sent his boats and went on board himself to assist
the other three ships, who were in so weakly a condition that
they were hardly able to let fall an anchor without his
assistance. All this time the General’s ship continued pretty
healthy. The reason why his crew was in better health than the
rest of the ships was owing to the juice of lemons of which the
General having brought some bottles to sea, he gave to each, as
long as it lasted, three spoonfuls every morning fasting.
By this he cured many of his men and preserved the rest; so that
although his ship contained double the number of any of the
others yet (through the mersey of God and to the preservation
of the other three ships) he neither had so many men sick, nor
lost so many as they did.
7
5. A. Appleby, FAMINE IN TUDOR AND STUART ENGLAND (Stanford CA: Stanford UP, 1978), page 5.
6. J.C. Drummond and A. Wilbraham, THE ENGLISHMAN’S FOOD: A HISTORY OF FIVE CENTURIES OF ENGLISH DIET (London: 
Jonathan Cape, 1958), page 88.
1600
7. Reverend Samuel Purchas. HAKLYUYTUS POSTHUMUS OR PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES, OR AS A RELATION OR IOURNALL OF 
THE BEGINNING AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE ENGLIFH PLANTATION FETTLED AT PLIMOTH, IN NEW-ENGLAND, BY CERTAINE …

--- Page 33 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 33
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Freed of the Spanish yoke and the intermediary for a vast store of riches from the Eastern hemisphere, 
Amsterdam suddenly became the most prosperous city of Europe. “They never complain of the pains they 
take, and go as merrily to the Indies, as if they were going to their Countrey Houses.” Holland’s population 
would be doubling every decade. Brownists and Jews were welcomed, if not exactly with open arms.
Smoking tobacco was introduced into Turkey, and rapidly took hold despite the fact that clerics were 
denouncing it. “Puffing in each other’s faces, they made the streets and markets stink,” wrote historian Ibrahim 
Pecevi.
Sir James Lancaster took four merchant ships to the Spice Islands (eastern Indonesian islands now called the 
Moluccas). The crew of his flagship, the Red Dragon, received a daily dose of lemon juice from bottles and 
there was no scurvy aboard that vessel; on the other three merchantmen in this flotilla many of the sailors were 
lost to scurvy.
Selected as the jacht, or scout, for the “Moluccan Fleet” sailing to the Spice Islands
. Duyfken’s captain for this 
voyage, Willem Cornelisz Schouten, with Le Maire, would later discover and name Cape Horn after the city 
of Hoorn.
On Christmas day the five ships of the Moluccan Fleet reached Bantam (Banten), Java and encountered a 
blockading fleet of Portuguese ships totalling eight galleons and twenty-two galleys. They engaged this fleet 
in intermittent battle until on New Years Day they drove them away. This was a turning point in history: the 
undisputed dominance of the Iberians (Portuguese and Spanish) in the Spice Trade to Europe was over.
Jean Robin published a catalog for his medicinal herb garden.
1601
SPICE
PLANTS

--- Page 34 of 77 ---
34 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Shareholders formed The United (Dutch) East India Company (VOC), with bad consequences for Portuguese 
traders. The Dutch government granted the newly formed company a monopoly on trade to the Spice Islands. 
Over the following two centuries, the Company would pay its investors an average annual dividend of 18%. 
(The profit margins of the English East India Company would be even higher than this.)
The Dutch ship Duyfken was warmly welcomed in Bantam, and was able to repair its battle damage. 
It surveyed Jakarta Bay, in which the Dutch would later build Batavia their capital in the Indies, and then 
sailing by way of Tuban, East Java to the Spice Island of Ternate. It loaded cloves at Ternate and proceeded to 
Banda for a cargo of nutmeg. 
It was then sent on a voyage of exploration to the east.
On the voyage home from the Indies, the Duyfken became separated from the larger ships in a storm off Cape 
Agulhas, southern Africa. Duyfken would reach the Netherlands early in 1603, two months prior to the larger 
ships.
1602
PLANTS
SPICE

--- Page 35 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 35
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
March: An English pinnacle, doing r econnaissance for the expedition of Captain James Lancaster on behalf of the 
newly formed British East India Company, came upon the island of Pulan Run in the Banda group, and hoisted 
their flag on the beach. This island, two and a half miles long by half a mile wide and packed with precious 
nutmeg
 trees, in this manner became the 1st colony of England. (The Dutch, on behalf of their East India 
Company which had been in existence already for a number of years, had previously established nutmeg 
outposts on the neighboring spice islands of Neira and Lonthor where they could obtain nutmegs from the 
natives for a halfpenny the pound — and when retailing them in Europe in the following year could obtain a 
return on this investment, by one calculation at least, of 32,000%.)
December: The Duyfken set out on a 2d voyage to the Indies, in the VOC fleet of Steven van der Haghen with Willem 
Janszoon as its skipper.
The fleet of The United (Dutch) East India Company captured two Portuguese ships in the Mozambique 
Channel and sailed to the Spice Islands
 by way of India, finally reaching Banten, Java on New Years Eve.
1603
1604
SPICE

--- Page 36 of 77 ---
36 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
The Duyfken was in the fleet that recaptured the fort of Van Verre at Ambon in the Spice Islands from the 
Portuguese. Later in the year this ship was selected for another voyage of discovery to the south and east, but 
first it was sent to Bantam Java for urgently needed provisions.
The Dutch East India Company (the VOC) sent the little ship Duyfken, captained by Willem Janzoon, to search 
for “south and east lands” beyond the furthest reaches of their known world. Leaving from Banda (Indonesia), 
Duyfken would reach the Cape York Peninsula and chart 300 kilometers of the coast. This is the 1st historically 
recorded voyage to Australia. All the inhabited continents of the planet were for the 1st time known to 
European geography.
Early in 1606 Willem Janszoon and Jan Roosengijn took the Duyfken southeast from Banda to the Kei Islands, 
then along the south coast of New Guinea, skirting south of the shallow waters around False Cape and then 
continuing east-southeast until they reached and charted the shores of Australia’s Cape York Peninsula.
The Duyfken may have made a 2d voyage east to Australia. Later in the year it was sent to Java to get supplies 
for the beleaguered Dutch fortress on Ternate.
1605
1606
1607
SPICE
SPICE

--- Page 37 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 37
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
In the Fellows’ Garden of Christ’s College, the site for which had been purchased in 1554, a mulberry tree was 
planted in order to boost the English silk industry. This tree is still producing.
The Duyfken engaged in a five-hour battle with three Spanish galleys. In June the Duyfken would be sent with 
larger ships to capture the fortress of Taffaso on Makian Island. A month later the ship would be brought inside 
the reef at Ternate for repairs. It seems that to repair the bottom she was pulled over onto her side — but this 
caused so much further damage that she was judged unrepairable.
Jean Robin and Pierre Valet published the 1st European florilegium, J
ARDIN DU ROY TRES CHRESTIEN HENRI IV. 
This would be followed closely by FLORILEGIUM NOVUM (1611-1614) and FLORILEGIUM RENOVATUM (1641) 
by Jean Theodore de Bry, Besler’s HORTUS EYSTETTENSIS (1613), Emanuel Sweert’s FLORILEGIUM (1612), and 
HORTUS FLORIDUS by Crispin de Passe (1614). These books covered extensive numbers of horticultural floral 
forms. For example, Besler’s work included 660 species and more than 400 variants (doubles, variegates, etc.); 
400 of his plants had medicinal value, 180 were used in cooking, and 250 were grown principally for ornament. 
Besler’s book included numerous forms of lilies, campanulas, delphiniums, hollyhocks, scabiosas, iris, tulips, 
narcissus, roses, hyacinths, and anemones.
A record 116,000-pound shipment of cloves arrived in England.
1608
1609
SPICE
PLANTS
SPICE
PLANTS

--- Page 38 of 77 ---
38 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Tea from China was shipped to Europe for the 1st time by the Dutch East India Company.
Gunung Api, the volcano towering over the spice island of Neira, erupted dangerously. Richard Wickham 
wrote from England to a Mr. Eaton, his colleague in Macao: “I pray you buy for me a pot of the best sort of 
chaw [tea] in Meaco, two Fairbowes and Arrows, some half a dozen guilt boxes square for me to put into bark 
and whatever they cost I will alsoe be willinge accoumpatable unto for them.” [sic] According to Antoine de 
Monchrétien, “The art of industry had made a masterpiece out of nature’s miscarriage, and the name of that 
city created out of a bog was Amsterdam”:
God made the World, but the Dutch made Holland.
Their houses they keep cleaner than their bodies, their bodies
cleaner than their souls.
He who cannot master the sea is unworthy of the land.
1615
SPICE

--- Page 39 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 39
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Samuel de Champlain returned to Canada, bringing with him Père Denis Jamay and two other Recollect 
priests, in addition to a lay brother (Père Caron, one of these men, soon after his arrival proceeded to the 
country of the Hurons on the Georgian bay). Champlain ascended the Ottawa River for some distance, and, 
leaving the river, went partly overland and partly by canoe to the eastern shore of Lake Huron, where, 
embarking, he sailed to its southern extremity; then going overland to the western extremity of Lake Ontario, 
he explored that lake and the St. Lawrence River until he arrived at the Sorel River. Along the way he made 
numerous observations for latitude
 while estimating his longitudes by dead reckoning. Soon afterward he 
attacked a town held by a tribe belonging to the Iroquois league but, through the insubordination of the Hurons, 
was repelled and sustained severe wounds. The Huron carried him back to one of their towns and after 
recovering from his wounds he would visit several tribes, returning to France in the spring of the following 
year. Henry Thoreau
 would write later that “Champlain, the founder of Québec, being far up the Ottawa spying 
out the land and taking notes among the Algonquins, on his way to the Fresh Water Sea since called Lake 
Huron — observed that the natives made a business of collecting and drying for winter use, a small berry which 
he called blues, and also raspberries — the former is the common blueberry of those regions, by some 
considered a variety of our early low blueberry (Vaccinium Pennsylvanicum); and again when near the lake he 
observes that the natives make a kind of bread of pounded corn sifted and mixed with mashed beans which 
have been boiled — and sometimes they put dried blueberries and raspberries into it. This was five years 
before the Pilgrims crossed the Atlantic, and is the first account of huckleberry cake that I know of.”
Batavia, Java was established as headquarters of the Dutch East India Company. Between this year and 1624, 
the Dutch would be establishing a virtual monopoly over the spice
 trade in the Moluccas and other Indonesian 
islands.
1619
CARTOGRAPHY
PLANTS

--- Page 40 of 77 ---
40 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Gunung Api, the volcano towering over the spice island of Neira, erupted dangerously.
The officers of the Massachusetts Company wrote to their Governor John Endecott; — “We have sent grayne 
for seed, wheat, barley, and rye in the chaff.”
John Endecott brought the first domestic European apple trees to America, planting them on Governors Island 
in Boston Harbor, an island which is now beneath the runway of Logan International Airport. Imagine the trees 
of Governor Endecott’s apple orchard interspersed with poles from which hung the bodies of Boston’s pirates, 
dessicating and rotting in chains and screaming their silent warnings to honest sailors, that they should be most 
careful to remain honest.
1629
MASSACHUSETTS BAY
APPLES

--- Page 41 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 41
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
The Dutch East Indies Company had perfected its control over its nutmeg monopoly. By the ruthless 
extirpation of all nutmeg trees not in officially sponsored groves, it ensured that the supply of this spice would 
never outstrip the world’s demand for it at a luxury price. Since this commodity was in no sense a necessity of 
life, surplus was always more to be intercepted than shortage. Distribution control was a money machine.
Although the Portuguese were expelled from their Japanese trade island Deshima, the Dutch would be allowed 
on-going contact with Japanese traders, at first through Hirado and eventually, in 1641, through Deshima 
again.
The Dutch occupied Ceylon, forcing villagers to supply quotas of cinnamon (as had the Portuguese 
previously).
Gunung Api, the volcano towering over the spice island of Neira, again erupted.
1636
1638
PLANTS

--- Page 42 of 77 ---
42 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
The Dutch seized Malacca and took control of most spice production in the East.
The British West Indies had a population of 20,000, most of it employed in the growing of sugar cane. During 
this decade the plant would be being cultivated on the island of Barbados by mixed teams of white and black 
laborers.
Greenwich Village had been known to Native Americans as, among other variants of the term, 
Sapponckanican — “tobacco fields,” or “land where the tobacco grows.” Nieuw Amsterdam’s Gov. Wouter 
Van Twiller had in 1629 appropriated a farm belonging to the Dutch West India Company in the Bossen 
Bouwery (“Farm in the woods”) area of Manhattan island, and there he had begun growing tobacco
. The first 
Dutch references to the name Sapponckanican appear around this year.
In this year, also, a Dutch church was erected inside the stockade.
The Dutch ousted the Portuguese from Ceylon, thus obtaining control over the cinnamon trade. 
They began coffee cultivation in Ceylon.
Sometime during this decade Philip English came to America from the Isle of Jersey. He would become a 
prominent merchant of Salem, Massachusetts and would control 20 ships that sailed to the Channel Islands, to 
Newfoundland and Barbados, and to Suriname.
1640
1658
1660
SPICE
PLANTS
SPICE

--- Page 43 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 43
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Elihu Yale started a spice business, which through corrupt dealings in India would flourish, eventually in 1718 
responding from England to a funding request by sending along at various times various cartons of books, 
volumes which when retailed would provide the substantial sum of £800 for a building at a college in 
Connecticut. That college eventually would choose to rename itself Yale College in recognition of Mr. Yale’s 
generous bequest of cartons of books of significant value.
Robert Morison published the first scientific study of a single plant group (the carrot family).
Gunung Api, the volcano towering over the spice
 island of Neira, erupted.
Gunung Api, the volcano towering over the spice island of Neira, erupted.
The first record of the grapefruit in the West Indies was made by Hans Sloane in a catalog of Jamaican plants. 
It is assumed the grapefruit originated there from chance hybrids between other cultivated citrus. This plant 
was not introduced to Florida until nearly 1850.
1672
1691
1693
PLANTS
PLANTS

--- Page 44 of 77 ---
44 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Van Neck established the initial Dutch trading posts in Banda, Amboina, and Ternate, the original “Spice 
Islands.”
Gunung Api, the volcano towering over the spice island of Neira, again erupted.
By the end of the 17th Century, the few potato plants fetched from the Andes had created a major Irish crop.8
1699
8. By 1845, approximately 1/3d of the tillable land in Ireland would be devoted to this crop and approximately 2/5ths of the 
population would be relying upon this tuber, along with skim milk or buttermilk, as their main source for calories and vitamins and 
minerals and protein. This was not only because potatoes could be grown on marginal land, such as on bogs and on rocky hillsides, 
but also because, growing underground, the crop was less liable to seizure by the English overlords and tax collectors than, say, an 
above-ground crop such as wheat or Indian maize, and because the bulk of the potato and the fact that it could not be stored for long 
periods meant that it functioned better as a local subsistence crop than as a marketable commodity. These righteous overlords were 
therefore referring to it as “the lazy crop.” The spud was seen to be overly compatible with two things which these notables 
considered as the notable crimes of the “potato people” — their indolence and their incessant begetting of children.
PLANTS
IRISH POTATO FAMINE

--- Page 45 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 45
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Towards the end the 17th century, chocolate had made its appearance in Germany. In Prussia at this point in 
time, Frederick I was “The Man.” His policy of restricting the importation of foreign produce at this point led 
Frederick to impose a tax on chocolate. Fred knew what government was for. This was going to be his money 
machine, extracting money from you and injecting it into him. Anyone wishing to pay homage to chocolate’s 
pleasures needed first to pay to him two thalers, for his permission for them so to do.
Europe first read the “Arabian Nights,” and learned of Sinbad’s spice
 quest.
1704

--- Page 46 of 77 ---
46 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
April 12, Sunday (Old Style): Courtesy of the end of the War of Spanish Succession, at 10AM in the marketplace of 
Utrecht, two cannon were fired and a great cheer went up from the assembled Dutch. Holland was going to 
transform itself into a countinghouse defended by a fleet.
To keep up prices, large quantities of cloves and nutmegs were burned at Amsterdam. (This, like our current 
drug traffic, wasn’t about supply, you see; it was about demand.)
May: Poivre sent Provost to check out a small, uninhabited spice island near Ternate, called Miao.
1713
1760
1769
SPICE
SPICE

--- Page 47 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 47
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
An entire year’s supply of nutmegs and cloves was destroyed in Amsterdam on purpose, the goal being the 
maintaining of high prices. Beginning in the 17th century Dutch traders had gained control of spice production 
in the Moluccas (at the expense of the Portuguese). Short supply kept prices high enough to create fortunes.
March 8, Thursday: Provost discovered that every spice tree on the island of Miao had been chopped down by the 
Dutch, in protection of their monopoly.
April 6, Friday: Leopold and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart departed Florence.
A disaffected Dutchman, considering his treatment at the hands of the Dutch EIC, pointed Provost toward the 
small island of Gueby where, unbeknownst, unchopped, spice trees might be obtained. The natives of this 
island, who also had reason to detest the EIC, proved to be helpful to the French. The local headman was 
presented with a French uniform and attired in this costume danced enthusiastically, upon the Dutch flag.
1770
PLANTS

--- Page 48 of 77 ---
48 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
June 24, Sunday: An associate of Governor Pierre Poivre of Mauritius, named Provost, provided Poivre with 400 
rooted nutmeg seedlings, 70 rooted clove seedlings, and thousands of seeds and nuts. By the 1790s these spices 
would be growing on Zanzibar, Madagascar, Martinique, and Grenada, and the spice monopoly of the Dutch 
would be no more. (He at first had obtained only clove seeds and nine nutmeg seedlings and had started a new 
growing area on the French island with the seven nutmeg seedlings that survived the voyage, which would 
have amounted to the first breech in Holland’s East Indies monopoly had any of this batch then matured. The 
spice fortune of Poivre would descend through his widow’s second marriage to become the basis for the 
American fortune of the Dupont de Nemours family, and its Dupont chemical corporation.)
French explorer Pierre Poivre was able to take propagation material of spices
 (clove, nutmeg, cinnamon, and 
black pepper) from the Dutch controlled Molucca Islands to Mauritius and Reunion, breaking the Dutch 
monopoly.
1773
PLANTS

--- Page 49 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 49
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
The English founded Penang, later to become a major eastern pepper port.
Franz Karl Achard of Berlin, in growing different varieties of beets, discovered a variety that seemed 
especially sweet. He went “Yummm...” and then “Hmmm....” It would turn out that the sugar content of this 
root might by careful selective breeding be raised from 8% to more than 20%. Might it be possible for civilized 
people to obtain the sweetness they felt they needed in their lives from sugar beets
 rather than from subtropical 
sugar cane grown by the application of human slavery? Achard would develop the “White Silesian,” ancestor 
to today’s varieties of sugar beet.
1786
SPICE
SWEETS
WITHOUT
SLAVERY

--- Page 50 of 77 ---
50 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Erasmus Darwin’s paper “Mechanical expansion of air” appeared in the Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society.
Georges Louis Leclerc, comte de Buffon died. He had been succeeded in his post at the Jardin du Roi by the 
Count de Lacepede, who did research on electricity and in this year published THE NATURAL HISTORY OF 
OVIPAROUS QUADRUPEDS AND SERPENTS.
Thomas Walter’s FLORA CAROLINIANA was published.
The Linnaean Society was established in London, its first president being the James Edward Smith (17591828) who, with Sir Joseph Banks’s (1743-1820) encouragement, had in 1784 purchased Carl von Linné’s 
1788
BOTANIZING

--- Page 51 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 51
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
library and herbarium.
President Smith would champion the Linnaean system for the next half century even after it had outlived its 
usefulness. Robert Brown (1773-1858) and John Lindley (1799-1865) would lead the opposition to this retrothinking. In France, the changes in social values brought about by the Revolution of 1789 coincided with the 
acceptance of a natural system of classification: Antoine Laurent de Jussieu (1748-1836), nephew of Bernard 
de Jussieu and friend of Linné, in 1789 in his GENERA PLANTARUM... (Paris), would arrange the genera of the 
world’s plants into 100 families (ordines naturales) based on concepts developed by his uncle Bernard, in a 
continuation of the ideas proposed a generation before by Michel Adanson (1727-1806) in FAMILLES DES 
PLANTES (2 vols., Paris, 1763[-1764]). As had Pierre Magnol (1638-1715), Sloane’s professor, long before 
him, Adanson believed that plants could be arranged into natural families and genera in a classification scheme 
free of a priori weighting and metaphysical themes, based solely upon empirical observation of similarities 
and dissimilarities.
Jean Senebier, in his EXPÉRIENCES SUR L’ACTION DE LA LUMIÈRE SOLAIRE DANS LA VÉGÉTATION established the 
relationship between the presence of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and the production of oxygen by plants. 
His studies built on the work of Ingenhousz.
According to Charles Corn’s THE SCENTS OF EDEN: A HISTORY OF THE SPICE TRADE (NY: Kodansha 
America, 1999), pages 243-4:
[O]n a spring morning in 1788, the one-hundred-ton Cadet, built
at Pembroke on the North River, glided down Salem’s harbor
“bound for Madeira and from thence to India and the China Seas:
Prosperous be her voyage,” according to the Salem Mercury
 of
April 15. The daily newspaper celebrated the small brig’s leavetaking as it did that of most ships, because in Salem her being
fitted out for parts unknown was the sort of pulsating news upon
which the port thrived during the heady days after the
Revolution. The Cadet, once owned by Derby, now belonged to the
same William Vans who had sailed with Ebenezer West to Canton
in 1785. Vans was aboard again as supercargo, while the brig was
commanded by Vans’s brother-in-law Jonathan Carnes, who was
thirty years old. A month later the Cadet made Madeira, and then
CAROLUS LINNAEUS
PLANTS

--- Page 52 of 77 ---
52 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
she suddenly disappeared, presumably somewhere in Eastern seas
— the Indian Ocean or perhaps beyond. Not one of the other half
dozen Salem ships in that part of the world could account for
her whereabouts. Then, on May 18, 1790, more than two years
later, the Salem Gazette
 finally reported, “Captain Carnes,
absent on an India voyage upwards of two years, was at the Cape
of Good Hope, February 14, 1790, and was to sail in a few days
for the W. Indies.” But where Carnes’s voyage had taken him
remained a mystery. That he had sailed thirteen thousand miles
to unknown Sumatra
 was this young captain’s secret.... There are
conflicting stories as to what happened next, for there is no
surviving log. Nor are there letters home from crew members, and
the Salem papers do not mention the Cadet’s return, an unusual
omission. With the paucity of records, one can only speculate
on the fate of the Cadet, which remains largely a mystery. Carnes
most certainly left the Cape with a fully laden ship to ride an
easterly wind back across the Atlantic toward the Caribbean. A
likely explanation, though it is by no means conclusive, is that
the brig and her cargo were lost on a reef in the West Indies.
We know only that somehow Carnes found his way back to Salem
with tales of the strangest race of people he had ever seen. But
most important, he returned with a profoundly rich secret: the
opening of a new channel of trade in pepper
, which, to say the
least, was arcane cargo in this brash new nation.
Baptist Reverend Elijah Craig of Scott County, Kentucky, is given credit for first aging Kentucky corn 
whiskey, thus creating America’s first bourbon whiskey.
Ginkgo was planted at Pierce Arboretum (now part of Longwood Gardens) in Kennett Square, Pennsylvania. 
By 1968 that tree was 105 feet tall and about 13 feet dbh.9
According to Charles Corn’s THE SCENTS OF EDEN: A HISTORY OF THE SPICE TRADE (NY: Kodansha 
America, 1999), pages 231-6:
Early one fine morning in 1789, not long after his inauguration
on April 30 at New York City’s Wall Street, George Washington
departed Boston for Salem, Massachusetts, in a large four-horse
coach, followed by a baggage wagon with black lackeys and
outriders in rich livery, his white horse haltered behind. Their
pace was brisk, for this was another leg of a continuing journey
through New England, and there were engagements planned for the
day. Standing aloof from party divisions, the unanimously
elected nations’ first chief executive was keen to emphasize his
role as president of the entire country by a tour through the
1789
9. When measuring trees, the convention is to take their diameter at breast height, four and a half feet above the ground. This is 
referred to as the “dbh” measurement.
SPICE
PLANTS

--- Page 53 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 53
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
northern states, as later he would travel through the South. The
president was especially enthusiastic about visiting Salem, for
there was a strange, unprecedented force at work in this modest
New England port that had all but overshadowed its larger
neighbor, Boston, just a few miles to the southeast. In time,
the successes of the two ports would be reversed. In the
meanwhile, while Boston’s day was yet to come, foreign trade had
for more than a century brought great wealth to Salem, and the
influence of the Washington administration would see it
continued. When the Salem Federal Custom House was opened in
1789, the vast seas east of the Cape of Good Hope awaited
exploitation by Salem’s merchants. Though the British, having
eclipsed the Dutch, still traded in spices, the dissemination
of clove
 and nutmeg seedlings had already reduced the dearth of
the “holy trinity.” Likewise, the pepper trade was for the
English a routine commerce in this bustling era, when tea and
opium commanded a premium. But for the traders of Salem,
Massachusetts, pepper, as we shall see, was anything but a
routine commerce. It was two-o’clock in the afternoon when the
fifty-seven-year-old president stepped down from the coach on
Salem’s Federal Street to take in his large hands the reins of
his horse, already bridled and saddled. His party looked on,
enjoying the ease and authority with which the old general
placed his foot in the stirrup and swung his sturdy-shouldered,
six-foot three-inch frame atop his old charger. Washington, an
experienced rider and foxhunter since his youth, was at home on
horseback and cut a commanding figure. People liked to watch him
ride. The, preceded by an honor guard, the former head of the
colonial forces rode up the line in review of the troops to
Boston Street. Since the bleakest days of the Revolution, when
Massachusetts troops had stood firmly in support of him, a
Virginian, thus solidifying the link between the two most
powerful colonies, Washington had maintained close ties to this
port city. Hurrahs rang out as the president appeared on the
balcony at Town House Square to receive a welcoming address and
to hear a choir sing an ode composed for the occasion. Washington
made a brief reply, ending with these words: “From your own
industry and enterprise, you have everything to hope that
deserving men and great citizens can expect. May your navigation
and commerce flourish, your industry in all its applications be
rewarded, your happiness here be as perfect as belongs to the
lot of humanity, and your eternal felicity be complete.” When
he had finished, a chorus of loud cheers went up. The cheering
din followed Washington as he retired from the Town House
balcony to the home of Joshua Ward, one of the city’s most
distinguished merchants. Ward’s house was a large, new brick
structure well off the street, facing the water. Terraced up in
front, the property afforded at the top a stunning view of the
busy harbor. As one stood and gazed, there was nothing to impede
the vista out to Naugus Head save the long reach of Derby Wharf.
The foreground of the harbor as seen from the house provided a
lively tableau, as if to illustrate the sentiments expressed in
Washington’s remarks spoken earlier. At Derby Wharf a large East
Indiamen, which had arrived earlier that day from the waters
east of the Cape of Good Hope, was berthed and off-loading, her
keep embedded in harbor mud. A roar of incessant noise rose from

--- Page 54 of 77 ---
54 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
the docks –shouted orders, creaking windlasses, shrieking
seagulls, the cacophony of vessels under construction from
nearby shipyards– while prostitutes beckoned to sailors from
nearby windows and the aromas of cinnamon, clove, coffee, tea,
and pepper wafted on the strong-smelling sea air at low tide.
Crew members shouldered bags of sugar from Île de France
(Mauritius) and bolts of cotton from India to be weighed on the
customs scale and the merchant’s scale, while dunnage now
stacked by the merchantman’s bow had been packed around the
cargo as a preventative against its shifting in bad weather.
Berthed just forward of the off-loading ship was a coasting
schooner having its hull coppered; behind Derby’s counting house
and warehouse on the wharf itself, a lumber schooner was putting
in at shipyard with a load of timber. Down the harbor another
merchantman was docked in front of the large, striking, and
somewhat eccentric dwelling later to be known as the House of
the Seven Gables, and beyond it was planned a great finger of
construction reaching into the harbor just where it widened. It
was to be called India Wharf or Crowninshield Wharf, depending
on one’s preference, and it promised to rival that of Captain
George Crowninshield’s arch-competitor Mr. Elias Haskins Derby,
who owned by far the most prominent of Salem’s swelling number
of wharves. Coaches plied the narrow waterfront streets seeking
fares from among the shore parties of the several visiting
frigates. In the early evening, with powdered hair and dressed
in a black velvet suit with gold buckles, yellow gloves, a cocked
hat with an ostrich plume in one hand, and a sword in a white
leather scabbard, President Washington arrived at the Assembly
Hall on Federal Street, where a party was already gathered. Like
the courthouse across town, another notable building of this
enlightened day, the hall with its noble Federalist lines was
an anomalous structure flanked by gambrel-roofed houses; for it
had been built only a few years before expressly for the social
events of Salem’s most prominent citizens. On this evening the
proud building beamed with neoclassical confidence and promise
of intoxicating possibilities. The Reverend Dr. William Bentley,
the local chronicler who kept a finger on Salem’s pulse, noted
the scene glowing beneath the candlelit chandeliers with gentle
irony: “The ladies were numerous and brilliant, the gentlemen
were also numerous!” Washington confided to his diary that there
were a hundred handsome, well-dressed people assembled to pay
him homage. The cream of Salem’s society parted for the
presidential party entering the hall, withdrawing left to right
with curtsies and bows, as the lofty guest of honor was escorted
to a fine armchair at the end of the spacious room offered for
the occasion by Mr. Derby and his wife, Elizabeth Crowninshield
Derby. French tapestries and portraits of persons and ships
adorned the walls; fine silver, crystal, and porcelain pieces
graced the tables and hunt boards; Khotan, Samarkand, and Tabriz
carpets decorated the floor. In one corner hung a highly
polished mahogany spice
 cabinet where the precious condiments
were kept under lock and key. There followed an evening of
dancing until the distinguished visitor retired at nine, as it
was his custom to rise at five, but not before promising wellwishers that he would be riding out into Essex County at eight
the next morning to inspect a new bridge. The festivities

--- Page 55 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 55
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
continued late into the evening, for if the citizens of Salem
knew one thing apart from diligence and hard work, it was how
to live and enjoy themselves. One of the most sedate of the
revelers was Elias Hasket Derby Sr., who had lent the hall for
the evening. Mr. Derby was a bold, visionary maritime merchant
and the head of Salem’s most prosperous family, a house that had
emerged from the Revolution measurably richer, with Derby’s
privateers having captured nearly 150 British prizes at a profit
of one million dollars. “King” Derby has been described as “a
tall man, of fine figure and elegant carriage. His deportment
was grave and dignified, his habits regular and exact.” His
contemporaries were especially struck by his eyes, for one was
blue, the other brown, and the arresting contrast is vividly
revealed in a contemporary portrait. The son of Richard Derby,
he had entered his father’s business at age fifteen not by way
of the quarterdeck, which was the normal way to begin a
merchant’s career, but with the account books in the counting
house. His sons John and Elias Hasket Jr. and other prominent
captains and merchants, known as “Derby’s Boys,” would serve a
similar apprenticeship. By the age of thirty-three in 1772, he
was running the business, and after his father’s death at war’s
end, when Derby was forty-four, he had complete authority over
the port’s greatest merchant house, with wharf, warehouses,
stores, a distillery, brigs, and ships: all without ever having
been to sea or abroad. Refitting his privateers as merchantmen,
he began to broaden his vision, being the first Salem merchant
to dispatch ships to such distant ports as Calcutta, Bombay,
Madras, and Manila. An innovator, Derby established for Salem
ships the role of supercargo, or traveling business agent. He
was most likely the first American merchant to send ships to sea
with coppered bottoms. Having envisioned a centralized global
trade network and developed a system that allowed the
consignment of cargoes to a foreign house, he relieved his
supercargos of the task of dealing with a succession of buyers.
His life was lived in luxury, a style mostly promoted by his
wife. The most envied man in Salem, he was also the luckiest,
having lost but one ship at sea during his entire career. In the
approaching decade, the 1790s, one third of the vessels out of
Salem to round the Cape of Good Hope were to be Derby’s vessels.
Dr. Bentley wrote with some awe of America’s first millionaire,
“Wealth with full tide flows on in that man.” Other merchants
looked to Derby as an example to follow in Far Eastern trade.
Derby, unsurprisingly, had his enemies present that evening,
most notably Captain George Crowninshield, the patriarch of a
rival clan of seafarers and from whose family had come Derby’s
own wife. Crowninshield’s rise in the merchant arena had been
quick, aggressive, and occasionally litigious. Moreover, the
Crowninshields were Republicans, an affront to the aristocratic,
Federalist Derbys. Crowninshield had been a captain for Richard
Derby before the Revolution and was described as a “bluff, warmhearted chivalrous seaman” and “a son of nature [with powers]
such as are employed only in seafaring.” George Crowninshield
had a toughness that matched his ambition, and both these
qualities helped to elevate his firm to a competitive level with
that of Elias Haskins Derby. His five sons who followed him in
the family business were diverse and complemented their father’s

--- Page 56 of 77 ---
56 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
character. Each had mastered navigation at age twelve, sailed
to the East Indies at fifteen, and captained a ship by age
twenty. After independence their father began acquiring ships
of his own, much to Derby’s displeasure, who branded the
Crowninshields as “base plebeians” and “sons of pride.” Derby
brought a suit against his brother-in-law for a wharf that
extended too far into the channel, causing the bottom adjacent
to his own wharf to silt in. After an acrimonious contest, Derby
prevailed. A court decision forced Crowninshield to remove
twelve feet of his wharf, fueling the animosity. Bitterness
between the patriarchs was so rife that when Elizabeth
Crowninshield Derby died in 1799, not one Crowninshield attended
the funeral. Henry David Thoreau
 undoubtedly had these two
dynamic families in mind when he described the ideal merchant
in WALDEN; OR, LIFE IN THE WOODS, published over a half century later,
in 1854: “If your trade ... demands a universal knowledge.” Many
of Salem’s maritime achievements and domestic conflicts were to
be embodied in these rival dynasties of Derbys and
Crowninshields, whose fates were intertwined through
collaboration and competition in trade, politics, and marriage.
Their story is the story of a growing Salem, for the two families
gave great and lasting shape to an American city whose
development is indelibly linked to the East Indies pepper
 trade.
British colonists planted clove trees in Panang. (By the following year the English would have gained control 
over all the Dutch East Indian possessions and their spice trade, with the exception of Java.)
The Derby ship America brought to Salem from Île de France (Mauritius) an elephant that had been procured 
there for $450, and that sold here for $10,000. Good elephant! It drank port and would pick pockets for pieces 
of bread, but would not allow itself to be ridden. Good elephant!10
1795
10. We do not have a record of whether this was an African elephant or an Indian one, but since Indian elephants are smaller and 
easier to transport, and since Charles Darwin would take an elephant ride while on the island of Mauritius and tourists typically can 
ride on an Indian elephant but not so readily on an African one, in all likelihood this was an Indian one. The issue would be, was 
this the same female as would arrive in the port of New-York on the America during the following year, or a different one.
SPICE
PLANTS
SPICE

--- Page 57 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 57
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
November 3, Tuesday: The 120-ton schooner Rajah was fitted out in a Salisbury shipyard on the Merrimack River, 
and registered on this day with William Peele, Jonathan Peele, and Ebenezer Beckner as its owners and 
Jonathan Carnes as its master. It cleared for “India,” a destination which at that time was so vague as to include 
among other areas the East Indies. The ship carried four cannon and her primary cargo out consisted of 12 tons 
of bog iron ingots. Even the ten seamen aboard her had no knowledge that their destination was Sumatra, and 
that the commodity that they would be seeking would be pepper. (Peppercorns were not the gastronomical 
obsession in the American colonies that it was in Europe. When the Salem merchants would begin to profit 
enormously in that trade, it would be by supplying the peppercorns of Sumatra
 to European markets.)
An English fleet captured Ambon in the Spice Islands. Captain Jonathan Carnes of Salem, Massachusetts 
secretly sailed his schooner Rajah to Sumatra to acquire bulk pepper. According to Charles Corn’s THE 
SCENTS OF EDEN: A HISTORY OF THE SPICE TRADE (NY: Kodansha America, 1999), pages 242-4:
The origins of Captain Carnes’s voyage of 1796 may be found in
an earlier expedition. In December 1785 Elias Hasket Derby,
shipowner, had sent the Grand Turk, commanded by the twentyseven-year-old former privateersman Ebenezer West, around the
Cape of Good Hope to Île de France (Mauritius). Though she was
the first American ship to stop there, her captain found little
enthusiasm from the natives for his cargo of butter, fish,
flour, rice, and rum, and trading proceeded slowly. Approached
by a Frenchman to carry a cargo to Canton, West agreed, after
establishing a base on Mauritius for future Salem expeditions.
Sailing to Canton was an audacious move, for the ship was not
insured beyond Île de France, and West had only crude charts for
the unknown waters and the pirate-infested Straits of Malacca,
through which no American ship had ever sailed. But although the
shipowner, Derby, was not seaman himself, he was known for
trusting the judgment of an enterprising shipmaster and giving
him his head. Captain West steered northeast through unknown
waters for China, dreaming of an unprecedented fortune from the
East. Arriving at the mouth of South China’s Pearl Rivers in
September 1786, Captain West learned that the Grand Turk was New
England’s first vessel to reach China
. With a difficult voyage
behind him, West faced another arduous task in meeting the
complex trade regulations and customs of the Chinese, an
elaborate ceremony of bribes and fees. The English East India
Company had established a factory here a hundred years earlier,
followed later by the French and Dutch; by an imperial decree
of 1757, Canton had been made China’s sole port for foreign
trade. But there were tensions. Already the Honourable Company’s
exportation of opium
 from India to China was beginning to alarm
Chinese authorities by its reversal of a trade balance hitherto
favorable to them. This sinister commerce would lead eventually
to the rise of Hong Kong as a deepwater port, the Opium Wars,
and Lord Ashley’s parliamentary denunciation in 1843 that such
trade “was utterly inconsistent with the honour and duty of a
Christian kingdom.” Despite the frictions, however, Canton in
1796
SPICE

--- Page 58 of 77 ---
58 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
1785, with its coveted Chinese products of porcelains, teas,
silks, and rhubarb, was the choice port of call for Western
traders. A “celestial representative,” or customs inspector,
boarded to sail the ship upstream to Whampoa Reach, a widening
in the river twelve miles south of the port proper. Here the
cargo was unloaded and carried upriver in sampans threading
their way through junks and tea-deckers to Canton Harbor, where
the shallow-drafted vessels were unloaded at factories. “New
people,” as visitors were known, were restricted to these walled
compounds of warehouses called hongs, where goods were stored
and negotiations conducted through one of a dozen imperially
appointed Chinese merchants, in this case a man known as Pinqua.
William Vans was West’s supercargo, or traveling business agent,
and it was his responsibility to purchase goods. Soon the ship’s
hold was filled with diverse teas transported in boxes from
eight hundred miles inland on the backs of porters, crates of
porcelain, and sacks of cassia (Chinese cinnamon
). With a loaded
ship and the issue of the grand chop certifying that all duties
and taxes were paid, the Grand Turk was cleared for Captain West
to sail downriver. The ship returned to Salem Harbor in May 1787
to a thunderous welcome, with gun salutes and crowds cheering
over the exotic cargo. Derby had tripled his investment on a
pioneering voyage, and the gaze of Salem seafarers was suddenly
to the Far East.
July 25, Tuesday: Nicholas Marcellus Hentz
 was born in Versailles, France where for political reasons the family was 
living under the name Arnold.
The Salem Gazette reported the return to the port of New-York of the Rajah under Captain Jonathan Carnes 
with a full load of bulk pepper from Sumatra. The dried seeds had been shoveled into her hold like coal, and 
weighed out at an astonishing 150,000 pounds. Since pepper pound for pound was worth about as much as 
gold, there was considerable celebration. Investors would make a 700% profit, spawning investment by other 
Salem merchants and injecting the United States into the world spice
 trade (this Salem-based trade would 
flourish until 1856, creating some of the first great US fortunes).
July: The Rajah, reconfigured as a brig rather than a schooner, sailed again from Salem. This time it would return, 
in October 1799, with 158,544 pounds of Sumatran pepper. (And again, in July 1801, it would bring back 
149,776 pounds.)
1797
1798
PLANTS
SPICE

--- Page 59 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 59
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
February 20, Wednesday: The America, under Captain Benjamin Crowninshield, cleared Salem harbor for the East 
Indies, in a search for the unknown source of the pepper riches which had been brought home by the Rajah. It 
would return with 95,000 pounds bought at higher prices in Bengal, where it did not grow. Soon afterward, 
however, Sumatra would no longer be a secret.
October: The Rajah appeared in Salem harbor with a cargo of 158,544 pounds of Sumatran pepper.
 November 25, Tuesday: Krishna Pal, a 36-year-old Indian carpenter, suffered a dislocated arm, and was 
treated by Dr. John Thomas, the first missionary to India from the Baptist Missionary Society. Dr. Thomas, 
along with the Reverend Joshua Marshman, spoke with this Indian worker about religion. Soon Krishna Pal 
embraced the Christian faith.
The Belisarius under Captain Samuel Skerry, Junior sailed from Salem harbor toward the distant destination 
of the Spice Islands.
1799
1800
SPICE
SPICE
PEPPER

--- Page 60 of 77 ---
60 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
 At this point Ambon, Banda, and Ternate of the Spice Islands were in the hands of the English rather than the 
Dutch. However, the sinister Frenchman Pierre Poivre (he had lost his right arm to a cannonball) would soon 
be succeeding in his agenda to smuggle eleven nutmeg seedlings and some clove seeds out of the region, thus 
ending the monopoly, and the high prices that resulted from the monopoly, of these commodities forever. (Note 
that this might have happened at any earlier time — and the history of colonialism would have been vastly 
different. Why had this not happened earlier? –There were doubts that the trees could survive elsewhere, 
export of seedlings was under the Dutch a crime punishable by a horrible death, and the nutmeg seeds were 
being shelled, coated with lime, and roasted prior to export.)
 July: The Rajah appeared in Salem harbor with a cargo of 149,776 pounds of Sumatran pepper
.
1801
PLANTS
SPICE
SPICE

--- Page 61 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 61
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
 July 30, Thursday: The Essex Register reported:
Arrived the fast-sailing and well-known “Belisarius,” Captain
Samuel Skerry, Junior, one hundred and two days from Bencoolen,
having performed the voyage in the short time of eight months
and three days, as she sailed from Salem, November 25, 1800....
It is supposed that the “Belisarius” has made the shortest
voyage to the East Indies that was ever made from this country.
 July 31, Friday: In Athens, Lord Elgin began removing sculptures from the Parthenon for transport to 
London. Everything he put his hand on would be known, collectively, as “the Elgin Marbles.”
 
December 25, Sunday: On his way home after an extended voyage to Sumatra, Nathaniel Bowditch sailed his 
Putnam into the harbor of Salem and tied up at the dock in an intense snowstorm in the middle of the night, 
with perfect zero visibility. He had been able to make a sight of the sun some two days before and had been 
confident he knew where he and his ship were in the dark waters off New England. At the entrance to the 
harbor, there had been a few seconds in which the white curtain of falling snow had rifted and he and his 
officers had managed to catch one glimpse of a light which he knew could only be the one on Baker’s Island. 
As he walked through the streets of Salem on his way to home and family, he was recognized, and the town 
assumed –since no ship could conceivably have come into the rock-bound and poorly mapped harbor under 
these conditions– that Captain Bowditch had been shipwrecked somewhere along the coast.
11 After this last 
successful voyage, Bowditch would sell the Putnam and be appointed Inspector of Journals for the East India 
Marine Society.
[SEE NEXT SCREEN: 
WOULD THIS BE AN IMPORTANT PARADIGM 
FOR THE JOURNAL OF THOREAU, 
OF HIS LIFE’S VOYAGE IN CONCORD WATERS??]
1803
11. On February 24, 1817, the Union, returning to Salem harbor with a cargo of Sumatran pepper and of tin, would attempt 
this same stunt in a thick snowstorm, but Captain William Osgood would vacillate and lose way and ram hard aground on the 
northwest point of Baker’s Island — littering the beach there with his spoiled riches.
SPICE
PEPPER

--- Page 62 of 77 ---
62 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Since its formation, the East India Marine Society had been
collecting journals of its voyages. The basic purpose of the
society was to acquire nautical information, and to get this
information the society had blank journals printed and bound
for the use of members. Each member starting a voyage took
along a journal to record his trip. In the volume the
shipmaster was supposed to keep an account of wind and
weather, note landfalls, set down the latitude and longitude
of out-of-the-way places not fixed on charts, give weights
and measures and exchange rates of foreign ports, and make
any comments he wished on practically anything else that
might be helpful to other members of the society.
The society looked on Bowditch as its most scholarly member,
the one most capable of examining the journals and noting
information that should be called to the attention of other
shipmasters. And, in fact, his orderly, critical mind made
him an ideal inspector.
These journals were considered most important, as the
comprehensive directions for keeping them testified. These
directions, in addition to calling on members of the society
for nautical information, also stated:
There should be collected, for the Museum, specimens of
various kinds of vegetable substances, earths, minerals,
ores, metals, volcanic disturbances, &c. There should also
be preserved such parts of birds, insects, fish &c. as serve
most easily to distinguish them, and if no part can be
preserved, a description of any that are remarkable may be
given. Inquiry should be made of any remarkable books in
use, among any of the eastern nations, with their subjects,
dates and titles. Articles of the dress and ornaments of
any nation, with the images and objects of religious
devotion, should be procured.
This was quite a tall order, one that was never completely
filled, since no shipmaster is known to have brought home a
volcanic disturbance. Nevertheless, the order was filled to
such a degree that war clubs and spears, ceremonial axes,
feathered headdresses, armor of medieval Asiatic warriors,
carved ivory, and imperial yellow robes were brought into
port along with barrels, bales, and sacks of merchandise. In
the course of years the shipmasters belonging to the East
India Marine Society of Salem collected musical instruments
from Arabia, stone images from Java, swords ornamented with
human hair from Borneo, wooden bowls used at cannibal feasts
in Fiji, a hideous wooden idol from sacred ground in Hawaii.
It was a grisly and fascinating collection, this array of
images of heathen gods, of heathen weapons. Indian temple
bells could be rung on New England shores, and drums made
from human skulls could be thumped in Salem. The museum
founded by the East India Marine Society grew until, years
later, it had art objects long after they had disappeared
from the islands on which they had originated, and figures
of strange gods long after they had been forgotten by the
tribes who had carved them. The curios were put on display
in the society’s headquarters on Essex Street in a big room
arranged for the exhibit, with a painting of the landing of
the Pilgrims on one chimney and on another a portrayal of the
launching of the Essex. Some of the loot hung on the walls;
some of it was in glass cases. The heathen idols stood.

--- Page 63 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 63
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
 In this year the first of 30 volumes of the “V oyages of Humboldt and Bonpland” was going through a press in 
Germany. These volumes would include the 1st accurate maps and records of climate, geology, and 
measurements of the earth’s magnetic field, pertaining to the western hemisphere. Humboldt’s personal 
observations of many different plant habitats resulted in his important generalizations about the relationships 
of plants to their native climates. He is probably best known for making ecological correlations between the 
different plant habitats observed with rising elevation and the changing habitats seen when traveling from the 
tropics to arctic regions. Publication of his ESSAI SUR LA GÉOGRAPHIE DES PLANTES... may be considered the 
beginning of the science of ecology.
At some point during this year of a battle at Trafalgar, which was a British naval victory, and one at Austerlitz, 
which was a victory of the Napoleonic army over Austro-Russian forces, Napoléon Bonaparte met this 
scientist Alexander von Humboldt (or vice versa). The words he dropped on him were with regard to the 
interests of Josefina Tascher Bonaparte, who was a mulatto from the Caribbean region:
This is a response very similar to the response which another ruler who ruled by ruling, President Richard 
Milhouse Nixon, would generate when he was warned by a visiting delegation of computer scientists that there 
would be a problem with computer dates as of the end of the millennium — unless something was promptly 
done to correct the Pentagon’s computer code. Our leader responded:
This may be an opportune point at which to introduce a fabled exchange between the First Consul and PierreSimon Laplace, because it was in this year that Laplace completed the 4th volume of his M
ÉCHANIQUE CÉLESTE 
and so presumably it would have been at this point that he presented this astronomical work. Napoléon asked 
some question about the role of deity in the universe, such as whether he needed to presume as Newton had 
presumed that God would from time to time adjust the machinery of the heavens to keep everything running 
in synch with everything. Laplace’s famous response went something like this: “Je n’avais pas besoin de cette 
hypothèse-là.”
During this year Napoleon not only crowned himself as King of Italy but also abandoned the French 
revolutionary calendar — which might have offered our visiting delegation of computer scientists a hint as to 
what to do in regard to our Y2K situation but in fact did not.
The peak of the Sumatra/Salem pepper traffic; exports alone totaled 7,000,000 pounds in one year. It was at 
about this point that the body of a sailor was brought back home curing in the pepper, and upon arrival was 
uncovered as still looking “very natural.”
1805
PLANTS
You are interested in botany? So is my wife.
Something’s wrong with my TV. Can you fix it?
SPICE

--- Page 64 of 77 ---
64 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
 After the lifting of President Jefferson’s destructive embargo, the US pepper trade resumed, and reached a 
second peak in this year — before the War of 1812 closed it down again.
 June: The Union, commanded by Captain William Osgood, cleared from Salem harbor bound for Sumatra.
 February 24, Monday: The lookout aboard the Union, returning to Salem harbor with a cargo of Sumatran 
pepper and of tin, after midnight sighted the Thatcher’s Island light through a thick snowstorm, and the ship 
tacked to pass north of it. But should there be one light, or two? Perhaps this was instead the Boston light, and 
if so they should be steering to the south of it! During the second-guessing, Captain William Osgood gave a 
command to helm down, and then the ship was unable to regain her course and rammed hard aground on the 
northwest point of Baker’s Island. Although all hands would survive, the beaches of Baker’s Island would be 
littered with salt-spoiled peppercorns
, and scavengers would be salvaging an occasional box or tin for months 
to come.12
Friend Elizabeth Fry wrote in her journal:
I have lately been occupied in forming a school in Newgate for
the children of the poor prisoners as well as the young
criminals, which has brought much peace and satisfaction with
it; but my mind has also been deeply affected in attending a
poor woman who was executed this morning. I visited her twice;
this event has brought me into much feeling by some
distressingly nervous sensations in the night, so that this has
been a time of deep humiliation to me, this witnessing the effect
of the consequences of sin. The poor creature murdered her baby;
and how inexpressibly awful now to have her life taken away.
...
Newgate Prison and myself are becoming quite a show, which is a
1810
1816
1817
12. When Nathaniel Bowditch had attempted this same feat on December 25, 1803, he had gotten away with it cold. But 
not just everybody could pull off the stuff that Bowditch could pull off!
SPICE
PLANTS
SPICE
PEPPER
SPICE

--- Page 65 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 65
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
very serious thing. I believe that it certainly does much good
to the cause in spreading amongst all ranks of society a
considerable interest in the subject, also a knowledge of the
Society of Friends and of their principles.
 The first US spice grinding operation began its processing, in Boston.
 After decades of battles between the Dutch and English over control of the East Indian spice trade, a formal 
treaty gave the Dutch control of the Malay Archipelago, minus North Borneo. The British were settled with 
North Borneo, the Malay mainland, India, Ceylon, and Singapore.
 January: Capture by Malay pirates of the Friendship, and the murder of five members of its crew: the worst 
tragedy in the history of the pepper trade between Salem and Sumatra (the US Navy would of course retaliate).
1821
1824
1831
PLANTS
SPICE

--- Page 66 of 77 ---
66 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Elizabeth Wright’s LICHEN TUFTS, FROM THE ALLEGHANIES. Eventually Lawrence Buell, cherchezing for the 
femme on page 45 of THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMAGINATION, would discover the gender of this author to have 
been of interest:
John Gould Veitch sent 17 new species of conifer from Japan to England, as well as seed and plants of other 
horticulturally valuable stock. His most popular introduction from that trip, however, became Boston ivy, 
Parthenocissus tricuspidata.
Using a pseudonym, E. Douwes Dekker published his novel MAX HAVELAAR. A former Dutch Colonial 
Officer in Java, Dekker in this book revealed the inhumane treatment of native workers in Dutch East Indian 
colonies. The resulting arousal of public concern would force governmental reforms. The Dutch would retain 
control of Javan and Sumatran spice production until WWII.
The Tufts College Alumni Association was formed.
Victoria and Albert visited Oxford privately, to find out how Edward, Prince of Wales was faring at Christ 
1860
The first fictional recreation of Thoreau was by a woman, Louisa
May Alcott (MOODS). The first book, to my knowledge, published by
an outsider to the transcendentalist circle that celebrates nature
as a refuge from hypercivilization with explicit invocation of
Thoreau as model and precursor was written by a woman: Elizabeth
Wright’s LICHEN TUFTS, FROM THE ALLEGHANIES (1860). The first
Thoreau Society was founded by a group of young women (1891)....
PLANTS

--- Page 67 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 67
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Church.

--- Page 68 of 77 ---
68 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
T.S. Mort of Sydney, Australia created the 1st machine-chilled cold-storage unit, thus relegating spices to the 
role of flavor-enhancement rather than the role of preservation. Louis Pasteur challenged the theory of 
spontaneous generation of M. Félix Archimède Pouchet, Director of the Museum of Natural History at Rouen, 
that organic beings are spontaneously generated about us constantly through the processes of putrefaction, by 
putting forth an entirely naturalistic theory of fermentation that involved the agency of “germs,” which is to 
say, pre-existing germinal particles.
The Dutch declared war upon the Acehnese.
1861
1871
SPICE
SPICE
PEPPER

--- Page 69 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 69
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
A generous bequest by C.S. Sargent and H.H. Hunnewell would allow Professor Asa Gray to retire from his 
teaching duties and work fulltime on his NORTH AMERICAN FLORA.
The navel orange was brought from Brasil in 1870 by Saunders and given to the USDA for use as grafting 
stock for the industry. Riverside resident Mrs. Luther Tibbets received two especially successful trees from 
which propagation material was taken. Her plants may be the source for all navel orange trees in North 
America today.
By the end of the Dutch war on the Acehnese, piracy and native hostility had finally been snuffed out in 
America’s direct pepper trade with Sumatra, and the 967th of the 967 pepper voyages was completed.
Sander built his first greenhouse at St. Albans, England. His firm began a system of tracking orchid hybrid 
(grex) names that would later be institutionalized by the Royal Horticultural Society.
Legislation created Yellowstone, the 1st National Park.
The USDA section on Seed and Plant Introduction was formed, with David Fairchild as the “Explorer in 
Charge.”
The last of Salem’s proud square-riggers was repurposed, as a coal barge.
Having discovered major improprieties in bourbon production, the US Congress passed the Bottled-in-Bond 
Act, controlling bourbon production at the source and setting standards for proof and aging.
The American Spice Trade Association was formed.
1873
1897
1907
BOTANIZING
SPICE
PLANTS
PEPPER
SPICE
SPICE

--- Page 70 of 77 ---
70 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
During the mid-1950s, hurricanes hitting the New England coast decimated many of the vacant, decaying, 
flimsily constructed military structures on various of the islands of Boston harbor, such as the POW barracks 
of the World War II detainment camp for Italians at Fort Andrews on Peddocks Island.
During this year “Hurricane Diane” so badly damaged the ugly and inappropriate concrete bridge over the 
Concord River on the site of the Old North Bridge, joining the Battle Monument on the east bank to the Daniel 
1955

--- Page 71 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 71
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Chester French statue of “The Minuteman” on the west bank, that the sturdy structure would need to be 
demolished. In the following year a replica of the original bridge would be erected, based upon the Amos 
Doolittle engraving of the 1775 battle.
There is further indication of the wrath of “Diane” near the present Causeway Bridge, just below the Ox-Bow 
of the Sudbury River, where you can still see the remains of a stone bridge. The western end of this “Stone’s 
Bridge” (erected in 1857 and discussed by Thoreau in 1859 as a new bridge) was taken out, though the ox-bow 
upstream endured through this flood still intact.
As the waters surged down the Blackstone River
 they took out all its bridges except one — the stone bridge 
anchored in bedrock that can be seen just below the dam.
The above has to do only with the hurricanes that came ashore in New England. There were other damaging 
hurricanes. For instance, in this year hurricane Janet destroyed 75% of the nutmeg trees of Grenada. This

--- Page 72 of 77 ---
72 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
represented, at the time, 40% of the world’s nutmeg supply.
In Hong Kong, the Governor was Sir Murray MacLehose.
Spice trading with China was reopened as the US ended its 21-year embargo.
US domestic production of spices reached 30% of total US spice consumption for the 1st time.
String trimmers were introduced.
Robert Helmer MacArthur
’s GEOGRAPHICAL ECOLOGY.
World trade in black pepper set an all-time high of 220 million pounds.
The G6 group was created to bring together the leaders of the biggest national economies (USA, Canada, 
Britain, Germany, Japan, France).
1971
1972
1976
SPICE
SPICE
SPICE

--- Page 73 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 73
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
The American Spice Trade Association completed its first complete nutritional analysis of spices.The 
perfectly preserved corpse (from the 2nd century BC) of the wife of the Marquis of Tai was found in Ch’angsha. In addition to melon seed discovered in her intestines, the tomb contained a bowl of peaches. Belief since 
the Ch’in Dynasty held that peaches “eaten in time” would preserve the body from deterioration forever. This 
custom survives today in the tradition of shoutao — the long life peach — a steamed roll served on birthdays.
During this year and the following one, Deng Xiaoping was emerging as the preeminent leader of China.
For the 1st time, spice usage in the US passed the half billion pound mark.
Hundreds of people in Spain became sick and died from consuming cheap olive oil that had been adulterated 
with French rapeseed oil. The rapeseed oil contained industrial aniline dyes and had been manufactured only 
for use in steel mills.
1977
1981
SPICE
PLANTS
PLANTS

--- Page 74 of 77 ---
74 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
With some 750,000 bathing visits to the pond per year, the urine content of the waters of Walden Pond was 
greater than that of any other fresh waters in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Kary B. Mullis devised the polymerase chain reaction, a system to replicate large quantities of DNA from a 
small initial sample. The ability to create a large sample of DNA for testing and study had extraordinary impact 
on various fields of study, from areas of paleobiology to forensic analysis.
Barbara McClintock received the Nobel Prize for her work with the complex color patterns of Indian corn, 
studies that revealed moveable genetic elements termed “jumping genes.”
A British study discovered powdered ginger to be twice as effective as Dramamine in the prevention of Motion 
Sickness. 
When the US invaded Grenada, nutmeg production there ceased and world prices temporarily escalated.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration published rules for gamma irradiation of spices.
1983
1984
PLANTS
SPICE
SPICE

--- Page 75 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 75
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Taking a page from an old book, the Indonesian Nutmeg Association agreed to market all their product through 
the Catz International B.V . headquartered in Rotterdam — an action which resulted in a new monopoly and 
increased prices.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: In addition to the property of others,
such as extensive quotations and reproductions of
images, this “read-only” computer file contains a great
deal of special work product of Austin Meredith,
copyright 
2013. Access to these interim materials will
eventually be offered for a fee in order to recoup some
of the costs of preparation. My hypercontext button
invention which, instead of creating a hypertext leap
through hyperspace —resulting in navigation problems—
allows for an utter alteration of the context within
which one is experiencing a specific content already
being viewed, is claimed as proprietary to Austin
Meredith — and therefore freely available for use by
all. Limited permission to copy such files, or any
material from such files, must be obtained in advance
in writing from the “Stack of the Artist of Kouroo”
Project, 833 Berkeley St., Durham NC 27705. Please
contact the project at <Kouroo@kouroo.info>.
Prepared: November 23, 2013
1987
NUTMEG
SPICE
“It’s all now you see. Yesterday won’t be over until
tomorrow and tomorrow began ten thousand years ago.” 
– Remark by character “Garin Stevens”
in William Faulkner’s INTRUDER IN THE DUST

--- Page 76 of 77 ---
76 Copyright 2013 Austin Meredith
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
ARRGH A UTOMATED RESEARCH REPORT
GENERATION HOTLINE
This stuff presumably looks to you as if it were generated by a
human. Such is not the case. Instead, upon someone’s request we
have pulled it out of the hat of a pirate that has grown out of
the shoulder of our pet parrot “Laura” (depicted above). What
these chronological lists are: they are research reports
compiled by ARRGH algorithms out of a database of data modules
which we term the Kouroo Contexture. This is data mining.
To respond to such a request for information, we merely push a
button.

--- Page 77 of 77 ---
“Stack of the Artist of Kouroo” Project 77
THE SPICE ISLANDS THE SPICE ISLANDS
HDT WHAT? INDEX
Commonly, the first output of the program has obvious
deficiencies and so we need to go back into the data modules
stored in the contexture and do a minor amount of tweaking, and
then we need to punch that button again and do a recompile of
the chronology — but there is nothing here that remotely
resembles the ordinary “writerly” process which you know and
love. As the contents of this originating contexture improve,
and as the programming improves, and as funding becomes
available (to date no funding whatever has been needed in the
creation of this facility, the entire operation being run out
of pocket change) we expect a diminished need to do such tweaking
and recompiling, and we fully expect to achieve a simulation of
a generous and untiring robotic research librarian. Onward and
upward in this brave new world.
First come first serve. There is no charge.
Place your requests with <Kouroo@kouroo.info>.
Arrgh.