Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_23\documents\2024-Wijaya-European_Fortresses_in_Tidore.pdf
Total Pages: 6
Statistics: Chars=17425, ThaiWords=3485.0, EnglishWords=3350

--- Page 1 of 6 ---
European Fortresses in Tidore 
 
Daya Negri Wijaya1, Hariyono2, Ari Sapto3, Deny Yudo Wahyudi4 
 
 {daya.negri.fis@um.ac.id, hariyono.fis@um.ac.id, ari.sapto.fis@um.ac.id, deny.yudo.fis@um.ac.id} 
 
Universitas Negeri Malang, Jalan Semarang No 5 Malang1,2,3,4 
Abstract. The North Moluccas is a cluster of islands situated in eastern Indonesia, boasting 
a wealth of historical and cultural significance. The focus of this study is on the field of 
historical archaeology intending to delve into the region's history by examining its physical 
remains. The results of this study not only offer a sneak peek into the history of the North 
Moluccas but also contribute to broader discussions within the field of historical 
archaeology. This research analyzes the physical remains of a regi on that was deeply 
impacted by European colonization, exploring themes of cultural hybridity, resistance, and 
power negotiation. Ultimately, this study emphasizes the importance of historical 
archaeology in uncovering untold stories and enriching our comprehension of the past. The 
North Moluccas, with their assorted cultural heritage and intricate history, are a fascinating 
case study that sheds light on the interplay between local customs and global factors. 
Keywords: European Fortresses, Tidore, Historical remains 
1 Introduction 
In the 16th and 17th centuries, spices were a highly marketable commodity with a long history 
in Indonesia and other countries. Their value was so great that they could bring about economic 
and political developments and even trigg er wars. When discussing spices, we often think of 
Maluku as a renowned spice -producing region. The spices were traded from Maluku to other 
places and then brought to Asian markets and even Europe[1]. 
The lure of spices attracted ocean explorers from Europ e to sail the oceans to find spice -
producing areas (The Spice Island). Many of these voyagers faced disasters along the way and 
lost their lives. Ferdinand Magellan was one of the most famous ocean explorers from Spain 
who lost his life on his voyage. Mage llan managed to arrive in Southeast Asia, precisely in the 
Philippines. Magellan died on his mission to find the spice islands. However, the Magellan 
expedition group led by Juan Sebastian Elcano managed to continue their journey and stopped 
at Tidore, one of the spice-producing kingdoms in Maluku [2],[3],[4],[1]. 
Upon their arrival, Sultan Mansyur, the Sultan of Tidore, warmly welcomed Elcano's entourage. 
Two days later, the Spaniards were invited to the Mareku palace for a luncheon by the Sultan. 
Then, Sultan Mansyur allowed the Spaniards to sell their goods in the market and even assisted 
ICOLLEC 2023, October 25-27, Bali, Indonesia
Copyright © 2024 EAI
DOI 10.4108/eai.25-10-2023.2348271

--- Page 2 of 6 ---
in setting up trading places [5]. Once the trade was completed, Sebastian Elcano returned to 
Spain aboard the ship Victoria[6]. 
The cooperation between Tidore and Spain continued after Elcano's return to Spain. Elcano's 
return with good news was the beginning of Tidore and Spain's cooperation in the future. Spain 
helped Tidore in its efforts to confront the Ternate Kingdom, which cooperated with the 
Portuguese. For this reason, Spain established many fortresses in Tidore [7]. Even some traces 
of Spanish forts in Tidore can be found until now. This research will examine the traces of 
cooperation between Tidore and Spain in the form of fortresses established on the mainland of 
the Tidore archipelago. 
2 Research Method 
This study used historical research methods. There are five stages of the historical research 
process according to the historiography method, namely topic selection, heuristics (sou rce 
collection), verification (historical criticism, source validity, source relevance), interpretation 
(analysis and synthesis), historiography (historical writing) [8]. The first step in tracing the 
relationship between Tidore and Europeans, including Spain, in the 16th-17th centuries AD was 
to determine the research topic. The topic was selected based on a review of related literature. 
In the second stage, the researcher collected historical sources related to the chosen topic. These 
sources could be in t he form of archives, documents, books, or journal articles obtained by 
collecting sources in Tidore and other places related to that period. In the third stage, the 
researcher verified and criticized the sources, evaluating their validity and the information they 
contained. The fourth step involved interpreting the obtained data. Finally, the last step was 
writing the research article. This last step of Historiography was done carefully to ensure 
weighty and quality writing. 
3 Result and Discussion 
3.1 The Geopolitics of Tidore 
Tidore was one of the four major kingdoms located in North Maluku. The other three kingdoms 
are Ternate, Jailolo, and Bacan. Together, these four kingdoms were referred to as Moloku Kie 
Raha, and they formed the pillar of political power in the region[8],[9],[10]. Ternate and Tidore 
were the most developed pillars among the four kingdoms due to their expansion to other 
regions. 
Historical records indicate that during the 16th and 17th centuries, Tidore expanded its influence 
to the Pa pua region. According to Abdurachman (1978), Tidore played a significant role in 
mediating the relationship between the Maluku and Papua Islands. This relationship was 
facilitated by the use of the Malay language as a trading language in the 1600s. Tidore was 
unique when compared to other kingdoms in Maluku. Tidore had a more extensive territory 
when compared to the Kingdom of Ternate. In addition, Tidore was classified as multiethnic 
and multicultural, and there are several ethnicities in Tidore, namely Ti dore, Ternate, Makian, 
Jailolo, Bugis, Makassar, Mandar, and Chinese with Chinese settlements [11]. Even Tidore had 
good relations with Europeans, especially Spaniards , signified by the presence of Spanish 
fortifications in Tidore.

--- Page 3 of 6 ---
Tidore's good relations with other ethnicities or nations must be connected to Tidore's strategic 
location as the maritime kingdom of the archipelago. Tidore became increasingly developed 
after spices became known by the international market. Even in the 15th -16th centuries, 
Europeans, such as the Portuguese, Spanish, and Dutch, tried to plant a monopoly on the spice 
trade in Maluku [12]. The strategic location of Tidore, having a port in the archipelago area, 
supported the development of Tidore as a large maritime kingdom; this impacted Tidore's 
growing trade as well. In addition, the Sultan of Tidore was an open -minded man. The Sultan 
of Tidore even carried out trade cooperation with foreign nations such as Spain. Tidore and 
Spain entered into cooperation during the reign of Sulta n Mansur (1512-1526), who succeeded 
his father, Sultan Jamaluddin, who died[5]. 
Good relations between Tidore and Spain were not only motivated by trade factors, but there 
was another contributing factor, namely the competition between Tidore and Ternate, and also 
Spanish and Portuguese. Sultan Mansur was on perfect terms with Spain, allowing the Spanish 
to hold their trades and even helping to establish trading places and forts for the Spanish. This 
close relationship angered the Portuguese in Ternate, who attacked Tidore in 1524[13]. 
Spain helped Tidore to face the Portuguese attack in coalition with Ternate. To strengthen their 
resistance in the Moluccas, the Spanish established several forts in Tidore. The fortifications 
were the defensive fortifications of the king's city or Lugar Grande de el Rey (Soa sio), San 
Joseph de Chovo (Chobo), San Lucas de el Rume (Rum), Marieco el Grande (Marieco), Marieco 
el Chico (Tomanira), Gomafo, Santiago de Los Caballeros (Tohula), Lugar Grande de el Rey 
de Tidore, and Socanora fortress[14]. 
3.2 European Fortresses in Tidore 
There were 8 European fortresses established in Tidore. The first one, known as Fort Rum or 
San Lucas del Rume, was originally built by the Portuguese but later rebuilt by Cornelis 
Sebastiaanszoon in 1605. After that, it was taken over by the Spanish [15]. The fort was 
reconstructed in 1618, under the direct supervision of the Spanish Governor of the Moluccas, 
Lucas de Vergara. The fort was built in a natural harbor northeast of Tidore Isla nd, which 
became a popular destination for ships sailing from Manila. The construction of this fort was in 
response to the concerns of Sultan Mole (1599-1627) of Tidore, who feared that the region was 
at risk of being controlled by the Dutch after the Tern ate attack[16]. The Rum Fort is divided 
into two areas. The first area is located on the plains parallel to the seawater, and it consists of 
defensive complexes equipped with trenches and artillery as port defences. The second area is 
a wooden fortress loc ated on a hill that dominates the port area. In 1653 -1654, the Spanish 
governor Francisco de Esteybar replaced the pointed wooden fence surrounding the wall with a 
stone field[16]. The fort had a strategic defensive position over the Port of Rum, which is the 
main sea access to the island of Tidore. The Dutch controlled Fort Rum in 1605, but a few years 
later, the Spanish regained control. However, the Dutch regained control of Fort Rum 
eventually. This fort is strategically located and plays an essential r ole as an export controller 
of Tidore Field [9]. Fort Rum was the last Spanish enclave in Maluku before the Spanish 
ultimately left the Moluccas in 1663, ending 140 years of Spanish presence in the Moluccas 
Field[17]. 
Second, Fort Marieku el Grande (1609-1646), or Fort Ome, was built on the west coast of Tidore 
Island, located opposite Kastela and Benteng Kota Janji[9]. This fort, located in the South of the

--- Page 4 of 6 ---
Port of Rum, was built to control shipping between the islands of Ternate, Tidore, and Maitara. 
The fort began construction in 1609 by the Spanish governor Lucas de Vergara. This fortress 
was built in Mareku City, the old capital of the Tidore Kingdom. Mareku was the capital of the 
Kingdom of Tidore before the arrival of the Portuguese and Spanish on the island. After the 
arrival of Europeans, the capital of the Kingdom of Tidore was moved from Mareku to Soasio 
because it had a better port. Since then, Soasio has been the arrival point of ships coming to 
Tidore in search of cloves, as well as the docking o f the Magellan -Elcano expedition fleet on 
November 8, 1521 [16]. The Fort changed ownership several times. On 9 February 1613, the 
Dutch occupied the Fort, but due to continued harassment by the Spanish, the Dutch abandoned 
the Fort in 1620. From then on, the fortress of Marieku el Grande was again controlled by Spain 
until 1646. In 1646, the Spanish abandoned the Fort for good due to a reconquest attempt by a 
prominent Dutch fleet. The Spanish then focused defence on the Fort around Soasio City. At 
this time, no structures remain of the original buildings of this Fort due to its destruction and 
abandonment by the Spanish[16]. 
Third, Fort Marieku el Chico (1613-1662) is located south of Marieku el Grande. Fort Marieku 
el Chico, or Fort Tomanira, is on a hill. The Spanish Governor Jeronimo de Silva built this fort. 
At the foot of this hill is the present village of Mareku. This fort was built because Fort Marieku 
el Grande was captured by the Dutch in 1613. The fort was built of stone with two bastions 
using leftover materials from the demolition of Sabugo Fort in Halmahera. The fort had towers, 
watchtowers, cannons, and garrisons that were moved to Fort Marieku el Chi [16]. The local 
population around the fort, namely the local people of Tomanira, always suppor ted the 
Spaniards, even helping the Spaniards to face a massive resistance against Spanish rule, which 
was centred in the village of Toloa, located south of the fort. 
Fourth, Toloa Fort is located in Toloa, one of the essential cities in Tidore's history. The fort is 
located on a hillside to the southeast of the settlement area of Toloa Village. Several structures 
are thought to be semi-circular bastions. On the west side, the fort wall consists of two layers of 
stones sandwiching a layer of earth. The fra gile layer is still present on the east and west sides, 
but the adhesive material consisting of a mixture of sand and white burnt lime can still be seen. 
On the other side, only the stones without the adhesive [9]. There are no Iberian sources from 
the 16th-17th centuries regarding this fort. Local sources say the fort is associated with Kadato 
Biji Negara, one of the ancient settlements on the island. Local people believe it was the former 
centre of Kedaton before i t was moved to Soa Sio [18]. Toloa town held an important position 
in Tidore after the civil war between Cachil Mole (supported by Spain) and Saifuddin (supported 
by Ternate and the VOC) following the death of Sultan Zayde -Magiau (1640 -1657). Sultan 
Saifuddin succeeded to the throne and gave Toala a vital position in Tidore. In 1789, Toloa 
again became a source of rebellion against European rule (this time against VOC rule) during 
the reign of Sultan Nuku, who ruled Tidore from 1738-1805[16]. 
Fifth, Fort Toh ula (1610-1662) or Santiago de los Caballeros, is an impregnable fort. Fort 
Tohula is known as an impregnable fort because it never fell to the enemy and remained under 
Spanish rule from the time it was built until it was abandoned. This fort symbolizes the Spanish 
capital in Tidore. The fort was built in 1610 by the Spanish governor of Maluku, Cristobal de 
Azcueta, with the permission of Sultan Mole. The fort was built on a hill previously a Spanish 
defence area to control Soasio, the capital of Tidore at that time, accessible from the sea. In 
1615, Governor Jeronimo de Silva completed the construction of the fort. Its strategic position 
overlooking the coastline with more than 180 degrees of exposure allowed the Spanish to control

--- Page 5 of 6 ---
maritime traffic between Tidore, Mare Island, and Halmahera. Fort Tohula consists of 3 
bulwarks and 2 Caballeros (buildings within the bulwarks) connected by a cortina (connecting 
wall) and equipped with a garrison and artillery of 60 soldiers. A large tank was inside the fort 
to supply water for several months. The fort also featured an orchard, an inn, and warehouses 
for storing gunpowder and ammunition. Some traces of the fort buildings can still be seen today. 
The walls on the north side are more than 15m high, and there is a local burial site in the lower 
south. Today, the fort can be accessed from the east side using a steep staircase overlooking 
Soasio Village. The Dutch attacked the fort several times in collaboration with Sultan Saifuddin 
(1657-1689) but were never successful[16]. 
Another fort, Fort Chobo or San Jose de Chovo is located in Chobo Village, North Tidore 
District, Tidore Islands City. Fort Chobo is located on a hill or cliff headland that leads to the 
open sea, making it easy to monitor the waters and Fort Oranje on Ternate Island. Two structures 
appear separate at this location. Structure I to the west is ± 150 cm high, and Structure II is ± 
100 cm high. The structure I is larger and resembles a bastion. The structure material consists 
of andesite and volcanic rock with plastered surfaces[9] (Handoko & Mansyur, 2018). In 1644, 
the Spanish demolished the original structure and built a new fort on higher ground. The aim 
was to protect the north -eastern side of the island from attack s coming from the south coast of 
Ternate. This fort was the last defence built by the Spanish in[16]. 
Fort Torre was named after the name of Hernando De La Torre, who sponsored the fort's 
construction. The fort has a rectangular structure, facing south -east[19]. The fort was briefly 
controlled by the Portuguese and was rebuilt by Ruy Lopez de Villalobos in 1545. The 
reconstruction infuriated the Portuguese, who demanded the demolition of the fort. Fort Tore 
was finally demolished in 1551, but a few years la ter, the people of Tidore rebuilt the fort and 
even used it as the official residence of t he Sultan of Tidore until today [16]. Fort Tore, called 
Gomafo by the locals, is built on top of an old lava flow from the Kie Matubu volcano. Large 
chunks of lava on barren land surround the fort and occupy the entire courtyard or centre. This 
makes the defence of Fort Tore even better becaus e of the difficulty of attacking through this 
barren stretch of lava soil[16]. 
The last fort, Fort Socanora (1613 -1620), is located on a hill near the coast in southwestern 
Soasio. The fort was built to defend the southern sea access from Soasio. After t he Dutch 
captured Mareku in February 1613, the Sultan of Tidore built a fort at the tip of Socanora as an 
outpost in anticipation of a Dutch attack. In the same year, the Dutch attacked but were held 
back by the Tidore army supported by Spanish troops. Goo d defences prevented the fort from 
falling to the Dutch[16]. 
4 Conclusion 
Tidore played a significant role as a central point for transcultural interaction between Indonesia, 
Europe, and Southeast Asia during the 16th and 17th centuries. The relationships established 
during this period, especially with European countries like Spain, not only influenced 
geopolitical and economic paradigms but also left cultural relics that reinforced Europeans' 
presence in the region. The Spanish presence in Tidore had a co nsiderable impact on its social, 
political, and cultural dynamics. By analyzing historical materials in their context, historical 
archaeology can reconstruct narratives. The forts in Tidore, especially those associated with the

--- Page 6 of 6 ---
Spanish presence, provide un ique insights into the interactions between the local and global 
cultures, cultural adaptations, and knowledge exchanges that took place during that per iod. 
 
References 
[1] Pigafetta, A. (2010). First Voyage Round the World by Magellan: Translated from the Accounts 
of Pigafetta and Other Contemporary Writers (Issue 52). Cambridge University Press. 
[2] Blair, E. H., & Robertson, J. A. (2004). The Philippine Islands 1493 -1898, vol 02. In Projeck 
Gutenberg. 
[3] Crompton, S. W., & Goetzmann, W. H. (2009). Ferdinand Magellan and the Quest to Circle the 
Globe. Infobase Publishing. 
[4] Morga, A. de. (2020). History of the Philippine Islands. In Projeck Gutenberg. 
[5] Rusdiyanto, R. (2018). Kesultanan Ternate dan Tidore. Aqlam: Journal of Islam and Plurality , 
3(1). 
[6] Pigafetta, A. (2012). Magellan’s voyage: a narrative account of the first circumnavigation . 
Courier Corporation. 
[7] Edward, M., Hidayati, L. A., Muliani, M., Iwaulini, I., Rini, D. P., Irwansyah, I. , Nadrah, N., M 
Darwis, Y., Rasyid, F., & Sujana, U. (2020). Sekilas jejak peninggalan sejarah purbakala di 
Kepulauan Maluku. In Sekilas Jejak Peninggalan Sejarah Purbakala di Kepulauan Maluku . 
Direktorat Jenderal Kebudayaan. 
[8] Kuntowijoyo. (2003). Metodologi Sejarah (2nd ed.). Tiara Wacana Yogja. 
[9] Handoko, W., & Mansyur, S. (2018). Kesultanan Tidore: bukti arkeologi sebagai pusat kekuasaan 
Islam dan pengaruhnya di wilayah Periferi. Berkala Arkeologi Vol. 38 No. 1, Mei 2018 , 38(1), 17–
38. 
[10] Insani, H. R., & Irwandi, A. (2022). Kejayaan Rempah Dari Pulau Kei Raha: Pandangan 
Etnohistori. Balale’: Jurnal Antropologi, 3(1). 
[11] Rais, M. (2018). Wajah Islam Di Bandar Jalur Sutera (Kajian Sejarah Sosial Pada Kesultanan 
Tidore-Maluku Utara). Al-Qalam, 16(2), 191–198. 
[12] Braithwaite, J., & Dunn, L. (2010). Maluku and North Maluku. Anomie and Violence: Non-Truth 
and Reconciliation in Indonesian Peacebuilding, 147–242. 
[13] Darmawijaya. (2010). Kesultanan Islam Nusantara. Pustaka Al-Kautsar. 
[15] Djafaar, I. A. (2007). Jejak Portugis di Maluku Utara. Ombak. 
[16] Rey, J. C., Campo, A., & Ramerini, M. (2022). Benteng-benteng di Kepulauan Maluku: Ternate 
dan Tidore (Las fortalezas de las islas Molucas: Ternate y Tidore). Yayasan Pustaka Obor Indonesia. 
[17] Amal, M. A., Lapian, A. B., & Amal, T. A. (2010). Portugis & Spanyol di Maluku. (No Title). 
[18] Amal, M. A. (2010). Kepulauan Rempah-rempah: Perjalanan Sejarah Maluku Utara 1250-1950 
(Edisi ke-2). Kepustakaan Populer Gramedia. 
[19] Ibrahim, F. (2021). Kajian Bentuk Dan Fungsi Benteng Torre Di Kota Tidore Kepulauan 
Provinsi Maluku. Universitas Muhammadiyah Makasar. 
[20] Raman, L., & Bau, S. O. (2020). Monopoli rempah di Maluku (Utara) dalam kurun niaga 15111799: runtuhnya dominasi Asia dan munculnya supremasi VOC dalam perdagangan cengkih. In (No 
Title). Ombak. 
[21] Villiers, J. (1986). Manila and Maluku : Trade and Warfare in the Eastern Archipelago 1580 – 
1640. Philippine Studies, 34(2), 146–161. 
[22] Abdurachman, P. R. (1978). Moluccan responses to the first intrusions of the west. Dynamics of 
Indonesian History, 161–188.