ISLAM IN THAILAND BEFORE THE BANGKOK PERIOD 
by 
RAYMOND SCUPIN* 
To understand the expansion of Islam into southern Thailand, it is necessary to view it 
from the perspective of the spread oflslam to southeastern Asia. Although there were con­
tacts between Muslim and southeast Asian countries as early as the fourth century A.D ., and 
Persian-Arabic trading colonies were established as early as the ninth century A.D., mass con­
versions to Islam, in a sociological sense, did not begin until the thirteenth century A.D. I 
In general, Persian and Arabic traders were not successful in transplanting their religious tradi­
tions. These colonies were, for the most part, transient or impermanent. 2 The intensification 
of Islamic proselytizing in southeast Asia had to await the implantation of Islam in the 
Gujerati area of northwest India and the increase of the Muslim population in the Malabar 
and Coromandel coasts, the development of Sufism, and the fall of Baghdad in A.D. 12583. 
In the context of the global movement of Islam, the Mongol invasion and the subsequent fall 
of Baghdad led to an exodus oflearned Muslim scholars and missionaries to south, southeast, 
and east Asia . This, coupled with the emergence of Sufism, the mystical variation of Islam, 
paved the way for a successful missionary enterprise. Sufism, as were Hinduism and Bud­
dhism which preceded it, was eclectic enough to accommodate itself to indigenous mystical 
and ~piritual patterns. 4 And the Muslim traders from India , who were also enthusiastic about 
Sufism, aided in the establishment of Islam in the merchant princedoms of northern Sumatra, 
the Celebes, Java, and the ports of Malaysia . 
Mass or 'political' conversions, when rulers or states adopted Islam , began during the 
latter part of the thirteenth century A.D. The northern port of Sumatra, an important trading 
outpost nearest to the Islamic centers of the Middle East and India, was the first town to 
become 'Islamized'. Many scholars have noted that Marco Polo recorded this fact in his 
journals of A.D . 1292. Pasai, a neighbouring coastal principality, was governed by a ruler 
who became a Muslim around A.D. 1300. And from Pasai Islam spread to Malacca, pre ­
sumably by a marriage contracted by a Malaccan ruler and a Muslim Pasai princess. 5 
Later Pasai and Malacca both became missionary and theological centers for the further 
expansion of Islam throughout the Malay-Indonesian archipelago. 
* Department of Anthropology, University of California, Santa Barbara . 
1. G.R. Tibbets, "Early Mus lim traders in Southeast Asia" , Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal 
Society, 30 (I), pp. 1-45. 1957; S.Q. Fatimi, Islam Comes to Ma laysia, Singapore: Malaysian Sociological Insti­
tute, 1963, p. 69; Cesar Adib Majul, International Assoc iation of Historians of Asia, Proceedings, Second Biennial 
Conference, Ta ipei, 6-9 Oct. 1962, p. 343. 
2. G.R. Tibbets, loc. cit., p: 42 . 
3. Fatimi, op. cit., pp. 92-99; Maju l, op. cit., pp. 394-397. 
4. H.A .R. Gibb, Modern Trends in Islam, New York City : Octagon Books, 1972, p . 23. 
5. O .W. Wolters, The Fall of Srivijaya in Malay History, Ithaca: Cornell Un ivers ity Press, 1970, p. 160; 
Majul, op. cit., p. 345. 
55 JSS 68.1 (Jan. 1980) 
56 Raymond Scupin 
It is difficult to establish a definitive date for the introduction of Islam into what · is pre­
sent-day south Thailand. Although some early scholars have posited that Islam came to Patani, 
the principal Muslim center of south Thailand, at an earlier date than its entry into Malacca, 
no firm evidence has been established to corroborate this conclusion. 6 Most specialists of 
the area assume that local inhabitants were converted to Islam during the thirteenth or four­
teenth century A.D. 7 But thanks largely to the scholastic endeavors of Teeuw and .Wyatt on 
the history of Patani, we do have some local traditions concerning the 'process' of Islam­
ization in this southern region. The sources of these local traditions are based upon a recently 
discovered Malay manuscript of the Hikayat Pat ani, and a Thai translation or abridgement of 
this Malay manuscript. The two sources relate a parallel legend of how the ruler ofPatani 
became seriously ill and issued a proclamation to the effect that he would offer his daughter in 
marriage to anyone who could cure him. A Muslim from Pasai who was living near Patani 
offered to cure the ruler, on the promise that the ruler would convert to Islam. The ruler 
agreed, was treated by the Muslim and recovered. However the ruler went back on his 
word and refused to convert. After several relapses and several cures followed by broken 
promises, the ruler finally decided to become a Muslim . 8 Thomas Fraser , in gathering 
ethnohistorical data in Rusembilan (a settlement near Patani) from Haji Wan Jussof, 
arrived at essentially the same basic outline oflslamic conversion in Patani.9 
Several interesting features are derived from these local traditions which illuminate the 
structural and historical process of Islamization in Patani. The first significant aspect of 
this tradition is that individuals occupying high-status positions were the initial converts. 
This is in comf6rmity with what social historians ·have hypothesized about the emergence 
of Islam throughout insular southeast Asia.l 0 In general it appears that Islam was adopt;d 
by ruling families based on personal considerations and political self-interest. This factor is 
reemphasized in that there is simply a nominal acceptance oflslam by the ruler rather than any 
kind of mystical or revelatory experience. 
As for the King himself it is true that he became a Muslim inasmuch as he gave up worshipping idols 
and eating pork; but apart from that he did not alter a single one of his heathen habits.! I 
6. Teeuw and David Wyatt, Hikayat Patani- The Story of Patani, vol. I, The Hague: Niijhoff, 1970, 
p. 4. 
7. Thomas Ladd, "Bureaucratic attitudes and behavior as obstacles to political integration of Thai 
Muslims", Southeast Asia: An International Quarterly, 3 (1), 1974, p. 545; Thomas Fraser, Rusembilan: A 
Malay Fishing Village, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1960, p. 19. 
8. Teeuw and Wyatt, ·op. cit., pp. 148-152; David Wyatt, "A Thai version of Newbold's 'Hikayat 
Patani' ",Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 40, 1967, pp. 16-37. 
9. Fraser, op. cit., p. 21. 
10. Majul, op. cit ., p . 377; J.C. Van Leur, Indonesian Trade and Society: Essays in Asian Social and 
Economic History ; vol. I, 1955, p. 144. 
11. Teeuw and Wyatt, op. cit., p. 152. 
ISLAM IN THAILAND 57 
Another interesting aspect of this legend involves the offering of a daughter in marriage 
by the local ruler . Other historians have also noted this regularity with respect to the spread 
of Islam in Malaysia and Indonesia , whereby a Muslim immigrant would marry into an in­
digenous ruler's family. 12 The case of Malacca is the classical example of this process noted 
above, but undoubtedly there were other cases. And finally, one other factor in the legend is 
that, although the ruler himself accepted Islam, the majority of the population in the hinterland 
did not do so.13 This would seem to indicate a continuous process of Islamization rather than 
any abrupt , millenarian type of conversion . This is consonant with the findings of other 
specialists with regard to Islamization throughout insular southeast Asia.14 Hence this 
Muslim folklore from Patani tends to confirm the conclusions of specialists studying 
Islamization in Malaysia or Indonesia. And it indirectly elucidates our understanding of 
the sociology of conversion in the Patani area, currently part of south Thailand . Apparently 
the expansion of Islam into this area was similar to the way it came to the Malayan-Indo ­
nesian world . 
Thai sovereignty in the Islamic provinces 
According to official Thai historiography, the area of Patani, including Yala, Narathi­
wat, and Sa tun, was incorporated into what was considered the Thai kingdom shortly after the 
coming oflslam. A Thai government pamphlet on 'Islam in Thailand' issued by the Ministry 
ofF oreign Affairs states: 
According to historical records, the 4 provin ces have been an integr al part of Thailand since the period 
of King Ramkhamhaeng. . . They were then called the Territories to the South (Hua Muang Pak 
Tai) .IS 
This would put the date for this event within the thirteenth century , during the Sukhodaya 
period. This historiography may to some extent reflect exogenous sources; for , as Bastin 
and Wyatt show, there were early arguments in Western treatises that the entire Malay 
Peninsula belonged to Sukhodaya from the mid-thirteenth century until the Portuguese 
conquest of Malacca in A.D. 151 p6 On this issue most Western historians follow Coedes, 
who used epigraphic sources combined with Chinese and Pali documents to conclude that 
the greater part of the Malay Peninsula submitted to Ram Gamhen at least as early as A.D. 
1294.17 But Bastin and Wyatt conclude that the Pali and Chinese sources are really incon-
12. Brain Harrison, Southeast Asia: A Short History, London, New York: Macmillan Co., 1966, pp. 
201-202. 
13. Teeuw and Wyatt , op. cit. , p . !52 ; Wyatt, 1967, foe. cit., p. 21. 
14. Majul , op. cit ., p. 397. 
15. Thailand, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Islam in Thailand, English ed ., Bangkok : Thai Government, 
1976, p. 9. 
16. John Bastin and David Wyatt, " Mainland powers on the Malay Peninsula, A.D. 1000-1511 ", 
International (:o1rjerence on Asian History, '5-10 August 1968, unpubl. , Kuala Lumpur: Department of His tory, 
University of Malaya, p. I . 
17. George Coedes, Indianized States of Southeast Asia, Honolulu : East-West Center , 1968, p. 373; A.B. 
Griswold and Prasert na Nagara , "On kingship and society at Sukhodaya",inG. WilliamSkinner and A. 
Thomas Kirsch (eds.), Change and Persiscence in Thai Society, Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 
1975, p. 42; Lawrence P. Briggs, "The Khmer empire and the Malay Peninsula", Far Eastern Quarterly, 9, 
1950, p. 301. 
58 Raymond Scupin 
elusive about the Thai advance southward. 18 Based upon evidence from local chronicles of 
Nagara Sri Dhammaraja (Nakhon Si Thammarat) it does appear that Nagara Sri Dhamma­
raja was in fact in some sort of dependent vassal relationship vis-a-vis Sukhodaya.I9 Nagara 
Sri Dhammaraja had served as a maritime outlet for Sukhodaya, and apparently a Sukho­
dayan king even visited the area in the latter part of the thirteenth century.20 And 
furthermore, Nagara Sri Dhammaraja had tributary vassal relations with many of the 
southern provinces including Patani. Thus Nagara Sri Dhammaraja conceivably could have 
been an intermediate appendage of the Sukhodaya kingdom which maintained some link 
with the southernmost provinces . 
Thus , it appears that the official governmentaccount of the incorporation of the Muslim 
southern provinces is not definitely wrong, yet it is only partially correct. For it cannot be 
denied rigorously that Patani and the surrounding area did not have some relationship with the 
northern Sukhodaya kingdom. And yet to say that these provinces were an 'integral ' part of 
the kingdom is definitely an overstatement of historical reality. The nu.b of this problem 
involves a precise conception of the structure of the vassalage network between the southern 
provinces and the northern kingdom. Most recently Tambiah deals with the problem in an 
illuminating analysis of what he terms "galactic polity ". 21 The model of the galactic polity, 
a variant of Weber's "patrimonial bureaucracy", is applied to the Sukhodayan and Ayudhyan 
kingdoms. In the galactic polity the king directly controls the manpower and resources in the 
central geographical lccation, while the provinces in the outlying districts are essentially 
autonomous replications of the center. Although this model is not new to southeast Asian 
specialists , having been utilized by Heine-Geldern (1942), Leach (1960), Gullick (1958), Geertz 
(1973), eta!. , it is systematically sharpened in respect to the Thai data by Tambiah. 22 He 
concludes that the galactic polities of Sukhodaya and Ayudhya were modelled on India or, 
more precisely, Buddhist cosmological ideals and legal conceptions . But he is quick to 
admit that these notions could have only taken root in Thailand because of preexisting 
indigenous social conditions.23 .· 
With the use of Wales's description of the Sukhodaya kingdom, Tambiah employs the 
galactic model to illustrate the specific conditions of a typical, traditional southeast Asian 
polity. After Sukhodaya gained autonomy from the declining Khmer empire, it brought 
18. Bastin and Wyatt, foe. cit., pp. 21-23. 
19./bid., p. 25; David Wyatt, The Crystal Sands: The Chronicles of Nagara Sri Dharmaraja, Data Paper 
No. 98, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1975, pp. 92-93; Nantawan Haemindra , "The problems of the 
Thai Muslims in the four southern provinces of Thailand (Part One)", Journal of Sourheast Asian Studies, 
7(2), 1976, p. 198; Charnvit Kasetsiri, The Rise of Ayudhya: A History of Siam in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth 
Centuries, Kuala Lumpur, London, New York, Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 1976, pp . 24, 39. 
20. Kasetsiri, op. cit., p. 96. 
21 . Stanley Tambiah, World Conqueror and World Renouncer, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
1976, chaps. 7-8. 
22. R . Heine-Geldern, "Conceptions of state and kingship in Southeast Asia", Far Eastern Quarterly, 2, 1942 
pp . 15-20; Edmund R. Leach , "The frontiers of Burma ", Comparative Studies in Society and Histor;:, 3, 1960 
pp.49-68; J.M. Gullick , Indigenous Political Syst ems of Western Malaya, London School of Economics Mono­
graphs on Social Anthropology No . 17, London: Athlone Press, 1958; Clifford Geertz, Islam Observed, 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press , 1973. 
23. Tambiah, op. cit., p . 103. 
ISLAM IN THAILAND 59 
under its control three of its neighbouring muangs (provinces) which were all located within a 
distance of two days' march. In spite of this, these regions were largely independent satel­
lites, ruled by sons of the king, and were considered as having the status of children vis-a-vis 
the capital province of Sukhodaya . And there were outlying regions beyond these four 
provinces which were independent kingdoms that had tributary relationships with Sukho­
daya. As Tambiah concludes , 
When King Ram Kamheng claimed as part of his kingdom various Lao polities of the north and 
northeast, the old kingdom of Nagara Sri Dhammaraja in the south, and the kingdom of Pegu to the west, 
he was at best claiming this indirect overlordship.24 
Thus, like the early Indonesian kingdoms classified by Geertz as "theater states"25, 
Sukhodaya appeared to have an 'exemplary center' where political symbolism was well de­
marcated, but where an effective administrative structure was absent in respect of outlying 
areas. Political boundaries were constantly fluctuating in accordance with the exigencies at any 
particular time. In territorial terms , the political center was linked to peripheral regions by 
indefinite, tenuous ties.26 Clearly, the four southernmost provinces were not an 'integral' part 
·of the Sukhodaya kingdom , but rather loosely circumscribed tributary polities which were 
extremely localized . Nagar a Sri Dhammaraja appears to have been a mediating node between 
some of these southern Malay states and the Sukhodayan centr al provinces. And , apparently 
after the death of Ram Garnhen and the succession of his son Lodaiya, the tie between the 
southern Malay states and the Sukhodayan political center was severed. 27 
The Ayudhyan kingdom also exhibits the same structural features of the 'galactic polity' . 
Tambiah specified the territorial configuration for the Ayudhyan kingdom at two points of 
time: between 1460 and 1590, and between the seventeenth and eighteenth century. During 
the former period Nagara Sri Dhammaraja was a second-class province of Ayudhya which 
was ruled as an autonomous entity by a local hereditary ruler . In other words , as Wales 
remarks , its "status differed little from that which it had enjoyed since the time of Rama 
Garnhen". 28 And at that time the more southern Malay states were foreign, 'independent' 
polities on the perimeter of Ayudhya which triennially sent formal tribute, bunga mas, or gold 
and silver trees, to the Thai king. But during the latter part of the Ayudhyan period, after 
King Naresuan 's reforms (A.D. 1590-1605), Nagara Sri Dhammaraja was upgraded . to a 
first-class province which reflected a greater degree of centralization, and it extended Thai 
sovereignty. Yet, the status of the southernmost dependencies does not seem to have 
been transformed dramaticall y. 
During the Ayudhyan period, Patani, and its immediate environs, though independent , 
24 . Ibid., p. 113. 
25. Geertz , op. cit., p. 331. 
26. Donald E. Brown , Principles of Social Struct ure: Southeast Asia, London: Duckworth Press, 1976, pp. 
100-108. 
27. Griswold and Prasert na Nagara, loc. cit., p. 49. 
28. H .G. Quaritch Wales, A ncient Siames e Government and Administration , New York: Paragon Book 
Reprint Corp., 1965, p. 106. 
60 Raymond Scupin 
did maintain formal ties with the northern capital. The basis of the alliance appears to be 
related to a straightforward, calculated self-interest, in Patani that was in direct competition 
with Malacca as a commercial entrepot until the seventeenth century. 29 Hence connections 
between Ayudhya and Patani fluctuated in response to local economic contingencies. But 
after the beginning of the seventeenth century and the decline of Portuguese trade, Patani 
became the principal port for Japanese and Thai traders. At that time political relations 
between Patani and the Ayudhyan center became much more substantive. 30 
It was not until the beginning of the Bangkok period (A.D. I 782) that the Thai state 
began to become more deeply involved in the affairs of the southern vassalage network. 
Tambiah has aptly characterized the transformation of the Ayudhyan 'galactic polity' into a 
patrimonial bureaucratic state of Chakri design which he terms the 'radial polity'. 31 The 
concept of the radial polity consists of a state with a primate city (Bangkok) which attempts 
to exert direct political control of the provinces through its governmental agents. In respect 
of the historical record of the southern Malay states, following the Ayudhyan period the 
Burmese occupied the whole of the south from Mergui as the political center. Eventually 
they captured the Thai centers of Nakhon Si Thammarat and Songkhla. 32 But following 
the ascendancy of Rama I these areas were recaptured and designated as administrative 
centers in order to extend Thai hegemony over Patani and its environs. Songkhla was 
detached from Nakhon Si Thammarat and accorded a superior rank with jurisdiction over 
a somewhat rebellious Patani. This policy led to a divisive struggle between these two Thai 
centers which did not aid Bangkok in the implementation of the vassalage. 33 Shortly 
thereafter Patani was divided into seven districts called muang which were governed by 
Songkhla. Then in Chulalongkorn's reign the seven muang were grouped as monthon 
(circle) Patani, and were ruled under the supervision of a special royal commission. 34 
During this period under Prince Damrong's administrative reforms (1892) all muang were 
divided into areas of direct or indirect rule. In the muang classified as being directly ruled, 
indigenous rulers were replaced by centrally appointed officials who were responsible to the 
Ministry of the Interior. But in areas of indirect rule as monthon Patani was, local rulers were 
not replaced but were subject to the jurisdiction of the central bureaucracy in Bangkok. In 
return for this administrative jurisdiction, the local sultans were appointed as titular heads 
of their respective areas and were given an annual salary and part of the rice'tax . Most of 
the loc.al rulers agreed to this scheme, were given Thai names, and were appointed to the 
Ministry of the Interior . 3S In the next major administrative changes following the coup 
d'etat of 1932, all monthon, were abolished, each muang was given some degree of self-
29. Teeuw and Wyatt, op. cit., pp. 7-9; Fraser, op. cit., pp. 19-20. 
30. Teeuw and Wyatt, op cit., p. 13. 
31. Tambiah, op. cit., p. 197. 
32. Klaus Wenk, The Restoration of Thailand Under Rama I, 1782-1809, Tucson: University of Arizona 
Press, 1968, p. 60. 
33. ibid., p. 66; W.F. Vella, Siam Under Ramal II, 1824-1851, Locust Valley, New York: J.J. Augustin, 1957, 
p. 61. 
34. Tambiah, op. cit., p. 197; Haemindra, foe. cit., p.202; M. Vickery,"Thai regional elites and the reforms 
of King Chulalongkorn", Journal of Asian Studies, 39(4), 1970, pp. 876-877. 
35. Fraser, op. cit., p. 28. 
ISLAM IN THAI LAND 61 
government within limits and was classified as changwat. 36 The changwat ofPattani, Satun, 
Yala, and Narathiwat were absorbed into the radial polity which extended outwards from the 
Bangkok metropolis. 
One factor which must be stressed in attempting to account for the establishment of 
Thai sovereignty over these Muslim areas, is the degree to which Thai immigrants from the 
north were settling in the Malay Peninsula. There is some epigraphic evidence to suggest 
that Thai settlers were progressively moving down the Peninsula during the twelfth century. 37 
Folklore accoun ts for Thai settlers in the southern Peninsula during the Sukhodaya period. 38 
In the later Ayudhyan era there appeared to be a governmental policy armed towards 
assimilation, and Thai settlers were introduced into these southern provinces. 39 As Vella 
remarks , by the time of Rama I I I the Thai segment cf the population was increasing more -
rapidly than the resident Malay population .40 Whether this development was the intended 
result of a project by Thai authorities appears to be a matter of interpretation, but the con­
sequences of this southward migration did facilitate the incorporation precess. 
Islam in central Thailand 
The genesis of Islam in central Thailand is distinctly different and separate from the spread 
of Islam to southern Thailand. The earliest evidence indicating a link between central 
Thailand and the Islamic world has been discovered only recently. In 1957, while excavating 
at Wat Rajaburana in ancient Ayudhya, archeologists from Silpakorn University uncovered 
two gold coins with Arabic script on both sides. Wat Rajaburana was built during the early 
Ayudhyan period, in the reign of King Sam Praya Boromaraja (A.D. 1418 -1434). The 
script on one side of each gold coin was read as "Sultan AI-Adil", while that on the 
other side was read as "Zain-ui-Abiden-Malik". 41 The provenance of the coins was 
Kashmir, and they had been minted during the reign of Sultan Zain-ui-Abiden (A.D. 1420-
1470), at Saraf Kadal, known as Tanki Sarai. 42 Ostensibly Ayudhya was a stopping 
place for Muslim traders from Kashmir on the salt trade route to China in the fifteenth 
century. 4 3 Aside from this particular datum, there is nothing to indicate any Muslim 
contact with Ayudhya or central Thailand until the expansion of trade in the seventeenth 
century. 
As in other parts of southeast Asia, trade was the important factor in the migration 
of Muslims to central Thailand. Although foreign trade was relatively unimportant in 
respect to the Thai economy as a whole, by the end of the sixteenth century an overseas 
36. R . Landon, Siam in Transition, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1939, p. 84. 
37. Kasetsiri, op. cit., pp. 35-36. 
38. Francis H. Giles, "The Koh Lak tradition", Journal of the Siam Society, 30, 1938, p. 15. 
39. Wenk, op. cit., p. 102; Teeuw and Wyatt, op. cit., p . 23. 
40. Vella, op. cit., p. 59. 
41. Direk Kulsiriswasd, The Historical and Literary Relations of Muslims in Siam, Bangkok: Silpakorn 
University (in Thai), 1973, pp. 14-15. 
42. R.K. Parmu, A History of Muslim Rule in Kashmir 1320-1819, Delhi: People's Publishing House, 1969, 
p. 155. 
43 . Ibid., pp. 1-5. 
62 Raymond Scupin 
trade began to stimulate a demand for Thai exports. 44 A circular trading network involved 
the importation of Indian cloth for Thai consumption in exchange for non-monetary 
commodities. These commodities were sent on to the Japanese market and exchanged for 
silver and other products, which eventually were sent to India. Thai exports included mainly 
unprocessed natural products such as deerskins, other animal hides, aloe wood, rice, pepper, 
sugar, ivory and elephants. 4 5 This trade gathered momentum during the seventeenth century, 
leading to the eventual penetration of the European economic powers. But Muslim traders 
from various countries had been participating in the Thai foreign trade almost from the 
beginning . 
During the seventeenth century the Thai economy was not a fully developed market 
economy but was rather an administered economy. Both Thai and European records 
indicate that the King of Ayudhya strictly and absolutely controlled both domestic and 
foreign trade. 46 King Mongkut, in writing on Thai trade history late in Chakri dynastic 
times, stated that the kings themselves had established royal monopolies in order to gain · 
revenue for the royal treasury. Many commodities were monopolized by the king, while 
others were denied to traders until the king had as much as he wanted to buy. This royal 
control had also prevailed during the Ayudhyan period. Private traders had been allowed 
to trade in certain so-called 'vulgar' commodities, but most export goods had been subject 
to royal prerogative. Although this institutional framework was not conducive to the 
development of indigenous entrepreneurs, ironically it led to some opportunities for foreign 
traders. For example, at times various Thai kings would lend capital to foreign traders in 
order to stimulate trade in particular commodities and ultimately derive some of the profits 
for the royal coffers. 47 Because of this economic and political climate, many Muslims 
came and established themselves in the Ayudhyan capital to become successful traders. 
Persian Muslims 
One of the most influential ethnic trading communities in seventeenth-century Ayudhya 
was that of Iranian or Persian Muslims. Iranian navigation and commercial activities were 
evident well before the Islamic era. 48 But during the Islamic period this commercial activity 
became more intense, resulting in the establishment of Iranian outposts in various parts of 
southeast Asia. In the inscription of Ram Gamhen of 1292, a Persian word translated as 
44. Teeuw and Wyatt, op. cit., p. 13; W.H. Moreland, From Akbar to Aurangzeb: A Study in Indian Economic 
History, New Delhi : Oriental Books Reprint Company, 1923, p. 65. 
45. James C. Ingram, Economic Change in Thailand, Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1971, p. 21; 
Muhammad ibn Ibrahim, The Ship of Sulaiman, trans. John O'Kane, Persian Heritage Series No. II, London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1972, p . 151. 
46. Ingram, op. cit., pp.21, 26, 27; Simon de La Loubere, The Kingdom of Siam, Oxford: Oxford University 
Prer.s, 1969, p. 112; Nicholas Gervaise, The Natural and Political History of the Kingdom of Siam A.D. 1688, 
Bangkok, 1928, p. 132; G.W. Hutchinson, 1688 Revolution in Siam: The Memoire of Father de Beze, S.J., 
Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1968, p. II. 
47. Gervaise, op. cit., pp. 131-133; Hutchinson, op. cit., p. II. 
48. Paul Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese: Studies in the Historical Geography of the Malay Peninsula 
Before A.D.l500, Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya Press, 1961, p. 283. 
ISLAM IN THAILAND 63 
"bazaar" was used to designate a market in Sukhodaya. 49 This suggests that there may have 
been a trading relationship between Persia and Sukhodaya in this early period. There is some 
linguistic evidence to suggest that Iranians may have known about the city of Ayudhya from 
its foundation in the fourteenth century . In one important navigational tract dated in 1462, 
the city of Ayudhya is referred to as "Shar-i-Naw". The translation of Shar-i-Naw is usually 
rendered as "new town". so Thus it may be inferred that Iranians knew about Ayudhya at 
the time of its initial establishment in A.D . 1350.51 
The first Persian Muslims mentioned in the Ayudhyan chronicles were two brothers, 
Shayk Ahmad and Muhammad Sa-id, who came during the reign of King Naresuan (A.D. 
1590-1605). These Muslims were referred to by the Thais as "khaek'' which was a general term 
covering Arab, Persian, Indian, and Malay immigrants and their descendants. Thus it is some­
what equivalent to the term "pathee" as used by the Burmese. 52 For that reason some writers 
have mistakenly referred to these brothers as Arabs. 53 In fact they were Iranians who estab­
lished a settlement in the area south of Wat Suan Luang near Klong Krajan. This area is 
known as "Tha-Ka-Ji" which was a Thai distortion of the Persian word "aqa" which meant 
"leader" or "chief", with the suffix "ji" added to denote respect. 54 ln this area there are 
the remains of what is called Kudithong or "Golden Mosque" which is identified with the 
·personage of Shayk Ahmad.ss 
Shayk Ahmad, Muhammad Sa-id and their descendants laid the foundations of the 
Bunnag family, a politically prominent family in Thai society for over three centuries. S6 
Although not much is known regarding the life of Muhammad Sa-id, Shayk Ahmad became 
an influential political leader during the early seventeenth century in Ayudhya. Following 
M.R. Kukrit Pramoj's account , Shayk Ahmad helped mastermind the coup staged by King 
Songtam against Pra Sin Si in A.D. 1620.57 He was on good terms with Cha-mun Sri Sorarak, 
later known as King Prasot Thong or the "Bottled Spider". Cha-mun Sri Sorarak had 
also aided Songtam in his coup. For their efforts both Cha-mun Sri Sorarak and Shayk 
49. A.B. Griswold . and Prasert na Nagara, "Epigraphic and Historical Studies, No.9: the inscription of 
King Rama Gamhen of Sukhodaya (A.D. 1292)", Journal of the Siam Society, 59 (2), July 1971, p. 213. 
50. Ayed Naquib AI-Attas, ' ~ Note on the opening of relations between China and Malacca, 1403-05", 
Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Society, 38, 1965, p. 261; George Hans Penth, "An account in the, 
Hikayat Atjeh on relations between Siam and Atjeh", in Felicitation Volumes of Southeast Asian Studies Offered 
to Prince Dhani Nivat, Bangkok: The Siam Society, 1965. 
51. It must be added that in John O'Kane 's translation oflbn Muhammad Ibrahim 's account of a seventeenth­
century Persian voyage to Thailand, the city of Ayudhya is called "Shar- i-Nav" which is translated as "City 
of the Boat". Th is also makes sense in that Ayudhya was completely surrounded by canals, and boats were 
the principal means of transportation. See Ibrahim, op. cit., p. 88. 
52. Moshe Yegar, The Muslims of Burma, Wiesbaden : Otto Harrassowite, 1972, p. 7. 
53. M .R . Kukrit Pramoj, "A history of Muslims in Thailand", in Thai, lecture delivered at Suan Kularb 
College, Bangkok: Aksornsarn Press 1968, p. 3. 
54. Kulsiriswasd, op. cit., p. 15. 
55./bid., p. 15; Pramoj, op. cit., p. 4. 
56. David Wyatt, "A Persian mission to Siam in the reign of King Narai", Journal of the Siam Society, 
62(1), 1974, pp. 154-155; David Wyatt, "Family politics in nineteenth-century Thailand", Journal of Southeast 
Asian History, 9(2), Sept. 1968, pp. 208-228; Akin Rabibhadana, 71ze Organization of Thai Society in the Early 
Bangkok Period, 1782-1873, Interim Report Series No. 12, Data Paper No. 74, Southeast Asia Program, Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1969, p. 213. 
57. Pramoj, op. cit., p. 5. 
64 Raymond Scupin 
Ahmad were given high political posts . Ahmad received the title "Praya Rathanarasetthi" . 
Later during the weii-known attempts at political intrigue on the part of the Japanese samurai 
population in Ayudhya, Ahmad and Cha-mun helped in suppressing these activit ies. They 
were rewarded with yet higher positions. Ahmad was appointed as "Samuhanaiyok" and 
remained so until he was 87 years old. For a time he· was appointed as the "Phraklang" or 
Minister of Foreign Trade which oversaw and regulated foreign trade and had some part in 
controiiing the foreign population of Ayudhya. This position was divided between depart­
ments (krom) of the Central Port or harbor. A Left-Wing Port Department (Krom Tha 
Sai) headed by a person of Chinese descent dealt with the Chinese; and a Right-Wing 
Department (Krom Tha Kwa), headed by a khaek, was in charge of activities dealing with 
khaek and other foreigners. ss 
For later accounts of the Iranian community we must turn to Western sources and Ibn 
Muhammad Ibrahim's perceptive journal. In terms of population size, Ibrahim mentions 
that about 30 traders were living in Ayudhya at the time of his visit in the latter part of the 
seventeenth century. 59 However, there must have been a considerable number of other 
Iranians, for other scholars have noted that there was a substantial number of Muslims from 
the Middle East. 60 Many of the Iranians were descendants of the aristocratic or upper 
classes of Iran; and the community included not only merchants but also a fair number 
of other educated people , such as architects, artisans, scholars, and poets. 61 In other words 
the stream of Muslims from Iran consisted of people, many highly educated, with various 
occupational roles. Though trade provided the major impetus for immigration, other types of 
Iranians followed in the wake of the merchants. In effect, the Iranian immigrants comprised 
a f'u'ily developed ethnic 'community' in this early Ayudhyan kingdom . 
The sociopolitical structure of this Iranian community, within the context of the Ayudh­
yan bureaucracy, has been commented on by La Loubere and Ibrahim, both visitors in 
the seventeenth century. The Iranians had their own quarter of the city, or Ban, headed 
by a political leader, or Nai, appointed by the king to manage the affairs of the community. 62 
As mentioned above, the Phraklang of the Krom Tha Kwa was in charge of all the foreign 
residents with the exception of the Chinese. And since the period of Shayk Ahmad's ascendan­
cy to this position, the Phraklang was held by the leader of the Iranian community for most 
of the seventeenth century. Thus the Nai of the Ban, and Phraklang , were offices jointly 
held by the same individual. This gave the Iranian community ·a great deal of politica l 
leverage in dealings with the royal authorities. There were also other royal appointments held 
by members of the Iranian community. Some positions were adjunct to the Krom Tha Kwa, 
while others were high-ranking titles such as "Khan Upra" or prime minister. 63 Ibrahim 
58. Thailand, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, History of the Bureaucratic Structure of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, in Thai, Bangkok: Thai Government, 1976, p. 19. 
59. Ibrahim, op . cit., p. 94. 
60. La Loubere , op. cit., p. I 12; Wales, op. cit., p. 65; Larry Sternstein , •· 'Krung Kao': the old capital of 
Ayutthaya", Journal of the Siam Society, 53, 1965, p. 1078. 
61 . Ibrahim, op. cit., pp . 46, 57, 102-103. 
62. Ibid., p. 125; La Loubere , op. cit., p. I 12. 
63. Ibrahim , op. cit., p. 51; La Loubere , op. cit., p. I 12; Gervaise, op. cit., p. 131. 
ISLAM IN THAILAND 65 
indicates that this Muslim community was governed by its own religious and secular judges 
in accordance with customary practices . 64 This suggests that the Sharia, or Islamic law, 
may have been operative for this community. Although this was definitely the case for the early 
trading colonies within China, 65 we do not have the evidence to confirm the application of 
the Sharia during the Ayudhya period . 
In terms of Islamic ideology, the Iranians were of the Shia sect, as Iran was the center 
of Shiism in the Muslim world. Important Shia rituals such as the Muharram to honor 
'Ali', the son-in-law of the Prophet and his descendants, were performed regularly in 
Ayudhya. In fact it was in the context of such a ritual that the well-known King Narai 
instigated and successfully implemented a coup in A.D. 1656.66 Though Thailand was a 
Buddhist country, the royal administration was generally tolerant and even supportive of the 
Muslim religious rites in this era. For example, several mosques were established at royal 
expense and the king contributed lavishly towards the Muharram and other Muslim rites. 67 
There was, however, a split between official policy and practice regarding the proselytization 
of Islam in Thailand . According to an edict from the mid-seventeenth century, anyone 
allowing themselves or their kin to be converted to a foreign religion would be considered 
an enemy of the state. They could be imprisoned, have their property confiscated, or have 
other punitive measures taken towards them. 68 Yet, peculiarly enough, for some time 
during the Ayudhya period Thais who did convert to Islam were exempted from the 
corvee. 69 And as Ibrahim observed on his sojourn throughout the kingdom, there was 
some success in the spread of Shia doctrine among the Thais. 70 
Hence, in most respects, the Iranian community had developed a fairly secure social and 
political niche in Ayudhya, and even had limited success in proselytizing Shiism. But this 
security would not persist into the eighteenth century, for with the entrance of the Western 
political and economic powers and their maneuverings, the Iranian community was set on a 
decline. This factor, in conjunction with internal dissension within the community as a conse­
quence of incompetent leadership, weakened the political influence of the Iranians . Initially 
divisiveness and factionalism in the community may have been a result of the recruitment of a 
large number of Iranians from India to serve as a royal militia. These recruits were dissatisfied 
with the treatment given them by both the Thai royalty and the Iranian leadership. 71 Regard­
less of the cause of the split in the ranks, it led to the candidacy of the Greek adventurer Con­
stantine Phaulkon to the Phraklang . The exploits of this Phraklang are well known to Asian 
64. Ibrahim, op. cit., p. 125. 
65. Tibbets, op. cit., p. 41. 
66. Ibrahim, op. cit., pp. 94-95; Ronald Smith, Siam, or the History of the Thais 1569 A.D . to 1824 A .D., 
Bethesda, Maryland : Decatur Press, 1967, p. 57. 
67. Ibrahim, op. cit., p. 77; La Loubere, op. cit., p. 112; Gervaise, op. cit., p . 95. 
68. Wales, op. cit., p . 66. 
69. La Loubere, op. cit., p. 112. 
70. Ibrahim, op. cit., p . 50. 
71. Ibid., p. 100. 
66 Raymond Scupin 
specialists, and they will not be recounted here. 72 But it can be concluded that Phaulkon, 
in pursuing his own interests and European goals, did his utmost to work against the 
political and economic interests of the Iranian community. 73 Therefore the expansion of 
Western political and economic interests, combined with internal schisms within the Iranian 
community, led to the diminution of Muslim influence in central Thailand . Following this, 
many of the Iranian traders departed from Thailand, and others were deprived of their 
preeminent political positions. 74 Although the descendants of some of these Iranian Muslims 
were influential with respect to the Thai political scene, this Iranian Muslim community no 
longer had a decisive role in Thai economic and political affairs after the seventeenth 
century. 
Due to the influential socioeconomic position of the Iranian Muslims in Ayudhyan 
society during the seventeenth century , Persian culture inevitably had an effect on the Thai 
Buddhist sociocultural heritage . Whereas the Thai sociopolitical structure was embryonic 
during this period, the Persian Muslims had migrated from a centralized kingdom which had 
been flourisliing for centuries. Thai royalty was especially eager to learn about Iranian 
political life and court etiquette. Since many of the Iranians seem to have been connected to 
the royal or aristocratic class, they were able to describe in considerable detail the customs 
and practices of Iranian royalty and ruling techniques. Some of these Persian cultural 
influences have been treated popularly by M.R. Kukrit , and in a more scholarly fashion by 
Direk Kusilsriswasd . Ibrahim noted many of the details of this cultural 'diffusion' in his 
journal of the seventeenth century . 
Persian intellectual influence on Thai royal affairs came through the translation or com­
pilation of some Persian literature by a khaek noble who served in the Ayudhyan court.75 
This work in Thai is known as the Iran Rajadhamma or Nithan Sibsawng Liam ("Tale of the 
Twelve Angels") . The work of literature deals with courts, customs, and ruling techniques 
of ancient Iranian and Moghul kings. Much of it is drawn from the famed Shanama ("Book 
of Kings") of the medieval Persian poet Firdawsi. It was compiled in A.D. 1752 during the 
reign of King Boromoraja. M.R. Kukrit remarks that the Thai king would regularly have 
this Persian court literature read to him.76 It is not inconceivable that Iranian and Shia 
concepts of legitimacy and divine right have had an impact on the Thai Buddhist institution 
of kingship. 
All research concurs regarding the direct effect of Iranian custom on the dress of Thai 
royalty. As Ibrahim notes, King Narai wore Iranian dress with the customary dagger. 77 
72. Smith, op. cit., pp. 60-69; Hall , op. cit., pp. 342-352; John F. Cady, Southeast Asia: Its Historical 
Development, New York: McGraw Hill Book Co., 1964, pp. 270-277; W.A.R. Wood, A History of Siam, from 
the Earliest Times to the Year A.D. 1781, with a Supplement Dealing with More Recent Events, Bangkok: 
Siam Barnakich Press, 1933, pp. 198-213. 
73. Ibrahim, op_. cit., p. 60; Gervaise, op. cit., pp. 28, 95, 132; Maurice Collis, Siamese White, London: 
Faber and Faber, 1965, pp. 62-63. 
74. Ibrahim, op. cit., p. Ill; La Loubere, op. cit., p. 112; Gervaise, op. cit., p. 132. 
75. Kulsiriswasd , op. cit., pp. 39-45. 
76. Pramoj, op. cit., p. 5. 
77. Ibrahim, op. cit., p. 99. 
ISLAM IN TH AILAND 67 
Evidently dietary patterns and culinary etiquette were copied from the Persian Muslims by 
the Thai royalty. 78 As evident from some Ayudhyan pagodas , artistic and architectural 
styles were borrowed from Persian forms . Some of the porcelain used in the pagodas was 
imported from Iran. 79 
Indian Muslims 
Muslim merchants from India also migrated to central Thailand during the Ayudhya 
period. As mentioned above there was a healthy trading relationship between India and 
Tha.iland. Evidently an important diplomatic connection was established between King 
Narai and the Moghul emperors; for at the National Museum in Bangkok there is a 
lacquer cabinet (the 'LouisjAurangzeb Cabinet') which allegedly depicts Aurangzeb Alamgir , 
the famed Moghul emperor (A.D. 1658-1707), next to Louis XIV of France. Indian Muslim 
dominated the economic scene in Mergui (Tenasserim) which was part of Thai territory . 80 
Ibrahim, in his journal, notes some of the Indian Muslims at Mergui were followers of the 
Shafii school of Islamic law, while others were Hanafi. 8 1 Although good historical data do 
not exist regarding the Indian Muslims for this period, it appears that their numerical 
strength was limited. 
Indonesian Muslims 
A contingent of Indonesian Muslims also settled in central Thailand in the Ayudhya 
period. The conquest of the port of Macassar by the Dutch naval commander Cornelius 
Speelman in 1667 led to the migration of various political refugees. 82 King Narai offered 
political asylum to an exiled prince of Macassar and his cohorts. Ibrahim describes this 
community on his visit in 1686.83 Although no precise population data are referred to, 
these Macassar Muslims did reside in their own neighborhood or Ban of Ayudhya. 84 Like 
other Muslims of Indonesia and Malaysia they followed the prescriptions of the Shafii school 
of Islamic law and were Sunni. But Ibrahim also mentions non-Islamic magical practices 
and customary ritual dances that were important cultural features of this group. In A.D. 
1686, a coup d'etat was sponsored and attempted by some members of the Macassarese 
community in Ayudhya against King Narai. Though Western sources and Ibrahim's 
account offer conflicting interpretations this historical episode , all sources agree that the 
Macassar community was decimated following the failure of the revolt. 85 
Cham Muslims 
Another group of Muslims who were settled in Ayudhya before the eighteenth century 
were from Cambodia. The Cambodian Muslims have a long history extending back to the 
78. Ibid., p. 68. 
79. Pramoj, op. cit., p. 5. 
80. Collis, op. cit. , pp. 36, 40 . 
81. Ibrahim, op. cit., p. 47. 
82. Hall, op. cit., p. 300; Cady, op. cit., p. 219. 
83. Ibrahim , op. cit., pp . 135-136. 
84. La Loubere, op. cit., p. 112. 
85. Ibrahim, op. cit., p . 138; Wood , op . cit. , p. 207; Smith , op. cir., p. 64. 
68 Raymond Scupin 
Champa kingdom in what is present-day Viet Nam. The Champa kingdom flourished as a 
Hindu-Buddhist state from the second century A.D. until its defeat at the hands of the 
Annamese (southern Vietnamese) in A.D. 1471.86 Although no precise date can be given for 
the appearance of Islam in Champa , it is clear that there were Arab and Persian settle­
ments as early as the second half of the eighth century. 87 Middle Eastern traders had been 
traveling to China since the seventh century, so it is likely that Champa was an important 
intermediate node on this route between the two countries. Documents translated by M. 
Ravaise indicate that there was an urban center in Champa where some of these Muslims 
came to settle. They selected a "Seih es Suq", the "syndic of the marketplace" , to represent 
them in the eyes of the local authorities. A "Sheik ul Islam", or Mufti, looked after their 
spiritual and religious needs, and a "Qadi" (Islamic judge) administered the Sharia, 88 The 
evidence suggests that this communit~· of Muslims included merchants and artisans living 
in Champa in a self-contained social environment similar to the Persian Muslims of 
Ayudhya. But there is no historical evidence to suggest that Islam was adopted by the 
indigenous Cham population outside of these Arab-Persian communities . 
It was not until after the collapse of Champa that Islam was accepted as a popular 
religion by the Chams. After the Annamese victory in A.D. 1491, Cham refugees fled to 
Malacca , Java and Cambodia. Afterwards Islam slowly took root among the Cham 
refugees, mainly through the influence of Malayan-Indonesian culture. Chams are the only 
sizable Mala yo-Polynesian speaking group north of Malaya. 89 Consequently, the Chams 
had extremely close cultural ties with the Malaysian world. After the Cham refugees 
settled in Cambodia , many Malay Muslims went there and were successful in propagating 
Islam. Most of these refugees settled at Kampong Thorn and Kampong Cham near the 
Mekong River, about 120 kilometers from present-day Phnom Penh.9° 
It is not known how some of these Cham Muslims came to settle in Ayudhya. But 
from the evidence that exists it appears that they were primarily involved as military vo­
lunteers. The Cham volunteer corp was organized into a krom designated Krom Asa-Cham . 
The term krom usually is translated as "department " or "palace " , "court" or "chamber".91 
Krom Asa-Cham was subdivided into a left wing and a right wing, both under the command 
of Phraya Jawang, or Chang-Wang. The soldiers and officials of Krom A sa-Cham were 
classified to suit their respective positions within the Sakdi Na socio-political system as 
instituted by King Boromotrailokanat (Trailok) in the Laws of Civil and Military Hierarchy 
of A.D. 1454. The Sakdi Na system was a broadly devised scheme to supplement the 
maintenance of authority over and control of manpower in the Thai state. lt was a struc­
ture of ranks or statuses with prescriptive dimensions which applied to every conceivable 
level in the society from common men and slaves to the senior princes of the realm. 
A key feature of the status arrangement was the quantification of status designations which 
86. G . Maspero, Kingdom of Champa , New Haven : Yale Uni versity Press , 1949, pp. 1-54. 
88. Fatimi , op. cit. , p. 53. 
89. Maspero, op. cit., pp . 15-16. 
89. Robbins Burling, Hill Farms and Padi Fields: Life in Mainland South east Asia, Englewood Cliffs, New 
Jersey: Prentice Hall , 1965, p. 121. 
90. Donald P. Whitaker et a/., Area Handbook for the Khmer Republic (Cambodia) , Washington : U.S . 
Government Printing Office, 1973, p. 73. 
91. Tambiah, op. cit., p. 141 . 
ISLAM IN THAILAND 69 
corresponded to royal land grants. Statuses ranged from 100,000 for the Upparat (the 
highest government official), 10,000 for a minister , to 10-25 for a phrai (cmhmoner) , to 5 
for a that (slave).92 The officials of Krom Asa-Cham were classified into the ranks shown 
in the following chart, listed with their allocated areas of land in units of rai (equivalent 
to 0.16 hectare) . 
KROM ASA-CHAM 
LEFT WING 
I _ 2 directors_ 
(1,600 rai each) 
Chang-Wang 
(2,000 rai) 
l deputy 
(800 rai) 
2 left deputies 
(800 rai each) 
2 right deputies 
(800 rai each) 
RIGHT WING 
I 
_2 directors _ 
(I ,600 rai each) 
2 left deputies 
(800 rai each) 
2 right deputies 
(800 rai each) 
_1 accountant-general_ _1 accountant-general_ 
( 400 rai) ( 400 rai) 
'--------;-----1 I 
Khun Asa-Cham 
(400 rai) 
I 
Muen Asa-Cham 
(200 rai) 
92. Rabibhadana, op . cit., p. 22. 
70 Raymond Scupin 
In religious terms, though there was an early Shiite influence among the Chams, in general 
\they subscribed to the form of Islam found in Ma1aysia.93 That is, they were Sunni and fol­
lowers of the Shafii legalistic school of thought. Historically the Chams of Cambodia were 
always inclined towards orthodoxy. This is in distinct contrast to the Chams who remained 
in the area of Viet Nam . These Vietnamese Chams refer to themselves as Muslims , but 
their ideology and practices diverged radically from normative Islamic doctrines.~4 The 
Chams in Ayudhya came from Cambodia and hence were probably more steadfast in respect 
to orthoprax Islam. 
Chinese Muslims 
Another channel for the entrance of Islam into Thailand was through the 'Islamicized' 
portion of China. In Burma, these Chinese are referred to as Min Chia or Chinese Lisu, but 
most authorities refer to them as Chinese Haw. 95 The areas where the largest groups of Chinese 
Muslims were residing were Yunnan Province in the southwest part of China , and the Provinces 
of Shensi, Kamsu, and Sinking in the northwest. The Haw Muslims in Thailand originate 
from the southwestern part of Yunnan. Historically this ethnic group operated an expansive 
trading network between the Shan States, China, and northern Thailand . For example, they 
carried Chinese silk and metal products into north Thailand and returned to China with 
cotton. 96 Although some of these Muslims gradually settled in the northern Provinces of 
Chiang Mai, Chiang Rai, Mae Hong Son, and Lamphun , it appears that they were a transient 
population until the nineteenth century. 
In explaining the entrance of Islam into Thailand, the historical processes for two divergent 
cultural areas must be considered: the insular southeast Asian states of Malaysia , and the main­
land central and northern regions of Thailand. The Islamization of south Thailand must be 
evaluated within the broader context of the global expansion of Islam into insular southeast 
Asia and the transformation of the Thai 'bureaucratic polity'. During the thirteenth century 
Islam was diffused throughout the ports and principalities of the Malayan world including the 
present-day area of Pattani, Satun, Yala, and Narathiwat Provinces. Shortly after this the 
93. Fatimi, op. cit., p. 47; Anton Cabaton, "Indochina", in B. Lewis et al., The Encyclopaedia of Islam, 
London , Leiden: E.J . Brill, 1971, pp. 1209-1210. 
94. Ibid., p . 1210. 
95. Edmund R . Leach, Political Syst ems of Highland Burma, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1954, 
p. 59; William Skinner, Chinese Society in Thailand: An Analytical History, Ithaca : Cornell University Press 
1957, p. 81; Frederick W. Mote, "The rural Haw (Yunnanese Chinese) of northern Thailand", in Peter Kunstadter 
(ed.), Southeast Asian Tribes, Minorities, and Nations, vol.2, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967, p. 490. 
96. Michael Moerman , "Chiang Kham's trade in the 'old days'". in G. William Skinner and A. Thomas 
Kirsch (eds.), Change and Persistence in Thai Society, Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1975, pp . 
154-155; Suthep Soonthornpasuch, "lslamic identity in Chiang Mai City: a historical and structural comparison 
of two communities", unpubl. diss. (anthrop.), University of California, Berkeley, 1977, pp. 49-50. 
ISLAM IN THAILAND 71 
Sukhodayan and Ayudhyan kingdoms became involved in the internal affairs of these 
Provinces, albeit in a limited way. Hanks, in a characterization of the Thai state previous to 
the Chakri era, likens the Thai political structure to a chain store, operating where it had 
affiliates. 97 Thus before the Bangkok period, the 'galactic polities' of Sukhodaya and Ayudhya 
were only loosely tied to their southern tributary Malay states. But as the Chakri kings 
established themselves in Bangkok and t~eir kingdom expanded into a 'radial polity', political 
authority was exercised in a more direct way throughout the Islamic provinces . This process, 
coupled with the immigration of Thais from the north, cinched the full-scale incorporation 
of the southern domains. 
Very different historical conditions apply to the Muslims of central Thailand . Although 
there were attempts at the proselytization of Islam on the part of Muslim migrants and visitors 
to central Thailand, they had very little success.98 In contrast to the situation in Malaya and 
Indonesia, the establishment of Islam in central Thailand was due solely to immigration and 
intermarriage. The Iranian, Indian, Indonesian, and Cham Muslims settled in Ayudhya and 
at times intermarried with Thais to create the original nucleus of the Muslim population in 
the central Thai region. 
The principal reasons for the relatively insignificant success in converting the majority of 
Thais to Islam in the central zone are similar to those proposed for Burma by Yegar.99 First, 
geographically and commercially these areas, unlike insular southeast Asia, were not part of 
the major trading arc between southeast Asia and the Middle East. But perhaps more impor­
tantly, Buddhism had been adopted as the popular religion by a massive population in central 
Thailand, and it was not just the religious form adopted by a few virtuosos and a small elite. tOO 
This was in contrast to what was the prevailing cultural milieu in insular southeast Asia where 
Buddhism had become simply a 'high-status' religion. And Buddhism also had become insti­
tutionalized as the state religion during the Ayudhya period. 1 o 1 Hence, Buddhism had apparent­
ly filled an ideological void in central Thailand as islam had in Malaysia, Indonesia and the 
southern Philippines. 
97. Lucien Hanks, "The Thai social order as entourage and circles", in G. William Skinner and A. Thomas 
Kirsch(eds.), op. cit., p. 209. 
98. Gervaise, op. cit., p. 95; Ibrahim, op. cit., p. 50. 
99. Yegar, op. cit., pp. 26-28. 
100. Charles F. Keyes, The Golden Peninsula: Culture and Adaptation in Mainland Southeast Asia, New York: 
Macmillan Publishing Co., 1977, p. 82. 
101. Wales, cp . cit.,p. 131 . 