 
 
 
 
 
No. 33 
 
ISLAM AND SOCIETY IN  
SOUTHEAST ASIA 
AFTER SEPTEMBER 11 
 
 
 
Barry Desker 
 
 
 
Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies 
Singapore 
 
 
SEPTEMBER 2002 
 
 
 
 
With Compliments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Working Paper series presents papers in a preliminary form and serves to stimulate 
comment and discussion.  The views expressed are entirely the author’s own and not that 
of the Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies
 
 
The Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies (IDSS) was established in July 1996 as an 
autonomous research institute within the Nanyang Technological University.  Its objectives are to: 
 
• Conduct research on security, strategic and international issues. 
• Provide general and graduate education in strategic studies, in ternational relations, defence 
management and defence technology. 
• Promote joint and exchange program mes with si milar regional and inte rnational institutions; 
organise seminars/conferences on topics salient to  the strategic and policy  communities of the 
Asia-Pacific. 
 
Research 
Through its Working Paper Series, IDSS Commentary and other publications, the Institute seeks to 
share its research findings with the strategic studies and defence policy  com munities.  The 
Institute’s researchers are also encouraged to publish their writings in refereed journals.  The focus 
of research is on issues relating to the security  and stability  of the Asia-Pacific region and their 
implications for Singapore and other countries in th e region.  The Institute has also established the 
S. Rajaratnam Professorship in Strategic Studies (n amed after Singapore’s first Foreign Minister), 
to bring distinguished scholars to participate in th e work of the Institute.  Previous holders of the 
Chair include Professors Stephen Walt (Harvard Un iversity), Jack Snyder (Columbia University) 
and Wang Jisi (Chinese Academ y of Social Sciences).  A Visiting Research Fellow Program me 
also enables overseas scholars to carry out research in the Institute. 
 
Teaching 
The Institute provides educational opportunities at  an advanced level to professionals from  both 
the private and public sectors in Singapore and overseas through the Master of Science in Strategic 
Studies and Master of Science in International Relations programmes.  These are full-time courses 
conducted by  an international faculty  from  July  - June each year.  In 2002, the Institute 
inaugurated a PhD program me in Strategic Studies/ International Relations.  In addition to the 
graduate program mes, the Institute also c onducts courses on geopolitics and regional security  
issues for the SAFTI Military  Institute (Officer Cadet School, Advanced Officers’ School and the 
Singapore Command & Staff College), the SAF Wa rrant Officers’ School, as well as the Defence 
and Foreign Ministries.  The Institute also runs a one-sem ester course on ‘ The International 
Relations of the Asia Pacific’ for undergraduates in NTU. 
 
Networking 
The Institute convenes workshops, seminars and colloquia on aspects of international relations and 
security developm ent which are of contem porary and historical significance.  Highlights of the 
Institute’s activities include a regular Co lloquium on Strategic Trends in the 21st Century , the 
annual Asia Pacific Programme for Senior Military Officers and the biennial Asia Pacific Security  
Conference (held in conjunction with Asian Aerosp ace).  Institute staff participate in Track II 
security dialogues and scholarly  conferences in the Asia-Pacific.  The Institute has contacts and 
collaborations with many think-tanks and research institutes in Asia, Europe and the United States.  
The Institute has also particip ated in research projects funded by  the Ford Foundation and the 
Sasakawa Peace Foundation.  The Institute serves as the Secretariat for the Council for Security  
Cooperation in the Asia- Pacific, (CSCAP) Singapore.  Through these activities, the Institute aim s 
to develop and nurture a network of researchers whose collaborative efforts will yield new insights 
into security issues of interest to Singapore and the region. 
i 
ABSTRACT 
 
This paper discusses the struggle for the soul of Islam  within the global Muslim  
community in the context of  two m ajor Mus lim m ajority nations in Southeast Asia, 
Indonesia and Malaysia.  An ongoing, unsettled debate between ‘Liberal Islam ’ and 
‘Literal Islam ’ continues unabated.  In its m idst, evidence of  terrorist networks in the 
region have surfaced.  Som e extrem e proponent s of Literal Islam  harbour irredentist 
visions and are com mitted to establishing an Islamic state unif ying the territories of  
Indonesia, Malaysia, Brunei, southern Philippi nes and Singapore.  Such visions are not 
compatible with ASEAN cooperative arrangem ents to encourage increased and intra-
regional communications, tourism and trade.  This incompatibility raises questions about 
ASEAN’s cohesion and highlights the inescapable reality in Southeast Asia that the state 
remains fragile and open to challenge in an era of political instability, economic stagnation 
and social disruption.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
************* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barry Desker is the Director of the Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies, Nanyang 
Technological University.  He was Singapore's Ambassador to Indonesia from 1986 to 
1993. 
ii 
 
ISLAM AND SOCIETY IN SOUTHEAST ASIA AFTER SEPTEMBER 11 
 
 
The terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, the ensuing war in Afghanistan and the 
recent revelations of the exis tence of al-Qaeda networks in Southeast Asia have drawn 
attention to the challenge posed by radical Islamic ideologies to global and regional 
security.  It appears to validate Sam uel Hun tington’s “clash of civilizations” thesis that 
there is an inevitable conflict between Islam and the West.1 
 
 This is a m istaken view.  The uncritical  acceptance of such a perspective risks the 
adoption of self-fulfilling US  policies which underm ine US relationships with states 
having Muslim  m ajorities, increases the like lihood of a crescent of instability from  the 
Middle East to Southeast Asia and fosters hostility towards the United States and the West 
by Muslims around the globe. 
 
 Since Septem ber 11, Christian fundam entalists in the United States have 
demonstrated a lack of understanding of Isla m.  The leading television evangelist Pat 
Robertson broadcast that Islam  “is not a peacef ul religion that wants to co-exist…I have 
taken issue with our esteem ed president in regard to his stand in saying that Islam  is a 
peaceful religion.  It’s just not.” 2  Franklin Graham , the son of  Billy Graham , claim ed:  
“The God of Islam  is not the sam e God…It’s a very different God, and I believe it is a 
very evil and wicked religion.” 3  The danger is that this simplistic view of  Islam  will 
permeate the popular im agination, form ing the basis of policy decisions by key 
government officials in the United States and the W est.  One exam ple to be avoided is a 
comment by the Chairm an of the US H ouse of Representatives Sub-Com mittee on 
Terrorism and Hom eland Security, Rep. C. Saxby Cham bliss (R-Georgia).  He told 
Georgia state law enforcem ent officials that th ey should “just turn (the sheriff) loose and 
have him arrest every Muslim that crosses the state line.”4  
                                                 
1 Samuel Huntington, “The clash of civilizations?”, Foreign Affairs, Vol. 72 (3), Summer 1993, pp. 22-49. 
 
2 Alan Cooperman, Washington Post, 22 February 2002. 
 
3 Franklin Graham, The New York Times, 20 November 2001.  
 
4 Thomas B. Edsall, Washington Post, 21 November 2001. 
 
1 
 The reality is that there is a struggle for the soul of Islam within the global Muslim 
community today.  To provide an insight in to this struggle within the global Muslim  
community, this analysis discusses the role of Islam  in Southeast Asia, focusing on the 
two m ajor Muslim  m ajority states in th e region, Malaysia and Indonesia.  W ith a 
population of 228 m illion, of whom  88% identif y themselves as Muslim s, Indonesia has 
the world’s largest Muslim  population but rem ains a secular state.  59% of Malaysia’s 
population of 23 m illion is Muslim .  Malaysia’s success in m aintaining a pluralistic 
political system, a vibrant econom y which has grown at 8% per annum  over the past two 
decades and the adoption of policies which ha ve fostered social integration has m ade 
Malaysia a successful developm ental m odel for m any Islam ic and em erging countries.   
The small Islamic monarchy of Brunei and the significant Muslim minority populations in 
Thailand, the Philippines and Singapore are in fluenced by trends and developm ents 
affecting Muslims in Malaysia and Indonesia. 
 
 Historically, when Islam came to Southeast Asia in the third wave of its expansion, 
brought by Sufi m issionaries from West and Central Asia, it adapted to the m ulti-cultural 
milieu of societies that had long been influenced by Hinduism and Buddhism.   
 
A division developed in the 19 th century between the Sufi-influenced practices of 
the Kaum Tua and the W ahhabi-influenced approach of the Kaum Muda in Indonesia and 
later in Malaysia.  The Kaum Tua  represented the traditional court-centred doctrines in 
Malaysia and the inclusionist beliefs of the Javanese heartland, which had accom modated 
pre-Islamic and Sufi practices and beliefs.  The Kaum Muda represented the m odernist, 
Muslim reformists strongly influenced by the pan-Islam ic revivalist movement originating 
from Egypt.  It sought to expunge the pre-Isla mic beliefs that had been woven into the 
fabric and practice of Islam in Malaysia and Indonesia.  As a result of the large numbers of 
pilgrims who went on the haj to Mecca and Muslim  clerics who had attended madrassahs 
(Islamic religious schools) in Arabia and Indi a, the austere literal interpretations of the 
Islamic faith contained in W ahhabi doctrines  have had a growing im pact on the region 
since the 1870’s.5 
                                                 
5 William R. Roff, The Origins of Malay Nationalism (New Haven, Yale University Press, 1967) especi ally 
Chapters 3, 4 and 6.  In reality, some Modernist ideas were influential in Sufi circles while many Modernists 
continued to be i nfluenced by traditional Sufi practices.  For a di scussion of t he Islamic roots of Malayo-
Indonesian mysticism, see R obert W . Hefner, “Int roduction” in Robert W. Hefner and Pat ricia Horvatich 
2 
 In Indonesia, this division between traditionalists and W ahhabi-influenced 
modernists was reflected earlier in the shar p differences between Nahdlatul Ulam a (the 
Association of Religious Scholars) a nd Muham madiyah.  NU was perceived as 
traditionalist, conservative and rural Javanese-based while Muham madiyah was regarded 
as modernist, innovative and urban-based with strong support in the urban centres of Java 
and in the outer islands of Indonesia.  Toda y, NU retains influence within the Indonesian 
government and society through its accom odationist stance, inclusive approach and the 
emergence of a younger generation of innovative Islamic thinkers within its intellectual 
leadership.  Muham madiyah has becom e dom esticated, with a turning to Suf ism while 
maintaining a com mitment to ref orm within the f ramework of  an essentially secular, 
multi-religious Indonesian society.6  Most devout Muslim s (santri) in Indonesia today are 
affiliated with either NU or Muham madiyah, a significant fact as both organizations are 
moderate in character.7 
 
Saudi Arabia’s petrodollar boom  of th e 1970’s following the quadrupling of oil 
prices led to Saudi Arabia becom ing a m ajor influence in the prom otion of W ahhabi 
doctrines in the region.  Financial support a nd grants were given by the Saudi governm ent 
and private organizations such as the Jeddah- based World Muslim League to those groups 
who advocated more fundamentalist approaches to Islamic doctrines and were most active 
in seeking the creation of Islam ic states.  Such  groups were in the forefront of efforts to 
emphasise the Muslim character of believers by encouraging the use of distinctive Muslim 
dress, education in madrassahs and an emphasis on literal interpretation of  the Koran and 
the hadiths, the sayings and invocations of the Prophet Mohammad. 
 
Over the past two decades, Malaysian Governm ent policies have aimed at winning 
Malay Muslim  political support in the face of sustained com petition from  the Pan-
Malaysian Islamic Party (PAS) which advocated an Islamic state.  This competition led to 
                                                                                                                                                   
(eds.), Islam in an Era of Nation-States: Politics and Religious Revival in Muslim Southeast Asia (University 
of Hawaii Press, Honolulu, 1997), pp. 3-40. 
 
6 The Islamic revival in Indonesi a has t ended to be di scussed i n scripturalist terms.  However, Jul ia Day 
Howell has demonstrated Sufi sm’s at traction t o modernising sect ors of Indonesi an soci ety, especi ally the 
urban middle and upper cl asses, even as a vi gorous revival of Islamic practices occurs in these sectors.  Cf. 
Julia Day  Howel l, “Sufi sm and t he Indonesi an Isl amic R evival”, The Journal of  Asi an St udies 60, no. 3 
(August 2001), pp. 701-729. 
 
7 Greg B arton, “The Prospect s for Isl am”, i n Gray son Ll oyd and Shannon Smith, Indonesia Today: 
Challenges of History (Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, Singapore, 2001), pp. 244-255. 
3 
efforts to out-Islam ise PAS with the creation of  a Muslim  religious bureaucracy and the 
codification of laws that provided the basis of an Islam ic state.8  In Indonesia, for m ost of 
President Soeharto’s tenure, political Islam  was seen as the opposition to the state.  The 
Indonesian Government strongly supported the re ligious needs of the Muslim  community.   
However, efforts to transform  Indonesia into an Islamic state were opposed vigorously by 
President Soeharto and the Indonesian arm ed forces.  Key developm ents that should be 
recalled include the bloody crackdown on rioters in Tanjong Priok  in 1984, the trials of 
leading proponents of a Muslim  state ( Dar-ul Islam) and the governm ent’s emphasis on 
the state ideology of Pancasila which provided for belief in one God without defining what 
that God should be.  With the emasculation of political parties and the establishment of an 
authoritarian political system , increased re ligious identification was often synonym ous 
with distancing from the existing political system in Indonesia. 
 
The past two decades have seen an increasing santri-ization of Indonesian society.   
(The santri com munity is seen as devout Muslim s com pared to the abangan nom inal 
Muslims.  In reality, the divisions are not so stark and there is a continuum that reflects the 
diverse practice of religious faith. 9)  Increased public practice of their Islam ic faith has 
also characterised Malaysian and Singapore Mu slims.  The focus has been on the form  
rather than the substance of  religious belief , including social pressure to attend Friday 
prayers at the m osque, for wom en to wear the tudung (Muslim  head dress) and for 
Muslims to eat separately from non-Muslims. 
 
At the same time, there has been greater awareness of Islam's global identity, with 
growing support for the Palestinian cause, and com mitment to support the struggles of 
Muslims in Afghanistan during the Soviet  occupation, Bosnia, Kosovo and Chechnya.  
While the governm ents of Malaysia and Indonesia backed the governm ents of the 
Philippines and Thailand in the face of Isla mic separatist m ovements in the southern 
Philippines and southern Thailand, popular suppor t for the insurgents exists at the ground 
                                                 
8 Mohamad Abu Bakar, “Islam, Civil Society and Et hnic R elations i n M alaysia” i n Nakam ura M ituso, 
Sharon Siddique and Omar Farouk Bajunid, Islam and Civil Society in Southeast Asia  (Institute of Southeast 
Asian Studies, Singapore 2001), pp. 57-75. 
 
9 For a di scussion of t he sant ri/abangan (kejawen) va riations in  relig ious p ractices, refer to     
Koentjaraningrat, Javanese Culture (Singapore, Oxford University Press, 1985). 
 
4 
level in Malaysia and Indonesia, especially am ongst those who perceive them selves as 
forming part of a larger global ummah (community). 
 
But increased cultural conservatism  and religious identification does not explain 
the emergence of transnational terrorist networks nor the desire to establish exclusionist 
Islamic states in Southeast Asia.  Neither does the Iranian Revolution of 1979, as Iranians 
are Shiite whereas Southeast Asian Muslim s are predom inantly Sunni.  Saudi Arabia’s 
strategy in prom oting its austere literal versi on of  Islam  has not been widely discussed 
because of the aversion to evoking Saudi protes ts, especially in the United States, which 
has been dependent on Middle Eastern oil.   
 
Although Western analysts have shied away  from using the term Wahhabism, “the 
fact that Wahhabi-inspired ideas have been promoted in Pakistan, Afghanistan and Central 
Asia in the last thirty years through a variet y of sem i-official and official actors is 
undeniable”.10  The Taliban was “the final and the most formidable product of this long 
term strategy”. 11  The W ahhabi influence has also b een seen in Southeast Asia.  This 
analysis has therefore deliberately referred to  the im pact of W ahhabism to describe the 
Islamist enterprise in Southeast Asia. 
 
The Islam isation race in Malaysia has re sulted in the Islam ic discourse dom ain 
being dominated by conservative ulam as and advocates of W ahhabi austerity.12  As one 
Malaysian Muslim intellectual advocates, it is critical that “m oderate Muslims…reclaim 
centre stage”. 13  A leading Malaysian scholar of contemporary Islam , Farish A Noor 
                                                 
10 Shireen T. Hunter, “Religion, Politics and Security in Central Asia”, SAIS Review, 21, No. 2 (Summer-Fall 
2001), p. 72-81. 
 
11 Ibid. 
 
12 See D. C amroux, “State Responses to Islamic Resurgence in Malaysia: Accommodation, Co-option and 
Confrontation”, Asian Survey, 1996, vol . xxxvi, no. 9, pp. 852-68, for an assessm ent of t he major Islamic 
movements in Malaysia and the government organizations set up to counteract them.   Also, Shamsul A.B.  
“Identity Construction, Nation Fo rmation an d Islam ic Rev ivalism in  Malaysia”, in  Hefn er an d Ho rvatich   
(eds.), op.cit., pp. 207-227, for a di scussion of Isl amic revi valism i n M alaysia wi thin t he cont ext of 
redefining Malayness. 
 
13 Karim Raslan, “Now a Historic Chance to  W elcome Mu slims in to th e System ”, International Heral d    
Tribune, 27 November 2001. 
5 
complains that “a m oral and ideological cris is” has beset “the collective Muslim  mind”.14  
This perspective provoked the Thai Muslim  scholar and form er Foreign Minister of 
Thailand, Surin Pitsuwan, to lam ent that th e spirit of inquiry which led Arab Muslim  
intellectuals of  Islam ’s Golden Age to attain  great heights of achievem ents in science, 
philosophy, mathematics and the arts a m illennium ago has long been absent am ong the 
faithful.  Surin Pitsuwan argues that the general principle in Southeast Asian madrassahs 
appears to be “memorization, stop thinking, stop rationalising”.15 
 
The most trenchant criticism  of Wahhabism has com e from Islamic scholars and 
analysts in Indonesia.  Describing their m ovement as Liberal Islam, these activists believe 
that they are fighting a war against “extrem ism and fundam entalism” and the role of 
Literal Islam.  However, Literal Islam is a term coined by the Liberal Islam  activists.  It is 
more appropriate to describe the advocates of Literal Islam  as W ahhabis.  The W ahhabis 
subscribe to the view that Muslim s should be com plete ( kaffah) because Islam  
encompasses all aspects of life and a totally  Islamic outlook is required.  They advocate 
the establishment of an Islamic state, the implementation of sharia law and the imposition 
of state-sponsored codes of dress and public behaviour.16 
 
First enunciated in 1999, Liberal Islam  was initiated by a group of Jakarta-based 
intellectuals led by Ulil Abshar Abdalla a nd Luthf i Assyaukanie.  In the f amiliar 
Indonesian style of coining acronym s, it is now known as “Islib”.  In March 2002, they 
established the Liberal Islam Network (Jaringan Islam Liberal) to disseminate their views 
through the m edia.  An active website has been established ( www.islamlib.com).  In a 
moderated chat group, islamliberal@yahoogroups.com, they debate issues, respond to 
questions and views, cite the Koran to s upport their arguments and even provoke debates 
with their critics.  Their website highlights i ssues on their agenda such as secularisation, 
                                                 
14 Personal communication cited in Barry Desker and Kumar Ramakrishna, “Forging an Indirect Strategy in 
Southeast Asia”, The Washi ngton Quarterly (Spring 2002), p. 172.  For Fari sh Noor’s vi ews, see Fari sh 
Noor, New Voices of Islam (Institute for the Study of Islam in the Modern World, Leiden, 2002). 
 
15 Surin Pitsuwan, Strategic Challenges Facing Islam in Southeast Asia”, (Lecture delivered at the Institute   
of Defence and Strategic Studies and the Centre for Contemporary Islamic Studies, Singapore, 5 November 
2001).   
 
16 The following section on the views of Liberal Islam follows Santi W.E. Soekanto, “ ‘Liberal’ and ‘Literal’ 
Islam must sit and talk together”, The Jakarta Post, 1 March 2002; Asep Saefull, “Penayangan Maya Islam 
Liberal”, Pantau, Year 2, No. 021 (January  2002), p. 6-7, and information on its website 
(www.islamlib.com). 
 
6 
emancipation, power relations, pluralism , gender, dem ocratisation, tolerance and hum an 
rights. 
 
 Members of Liberal Islam  write a s yndicated Sunday colum n published in the 
widely circulated Jawa Pos  daily newspaper and forty regional Indonesian language 
newspapers including Riau Pos (Pekan Baru) and Fajar (Makassar).  This ensures that the 
views of this group are the m ost widely distributed in Indonesia, even though its activists 
also write in the better known quality newspapers such as Kompas and Jakarta Post.  A 
weekly talk show is broadcast every Thur sday by Radio 68H and is relayed by 20 other 
radio stations throughout Indonesia.  They have form ed the Liberal Islam  W riters 
Syndicate and have published booklets and pam phlets on controversial issues such as 
jihad, the sharia and the establishment of houses of worship.17 
 
The key activists prom oting the Liberal Islam  m ovement in Indonesia have 
complementary strengths.  Ulil Abshar-Abdalla  is a colum nist f rom a Nahdlatul Ulam a 
background.  Luthfi Assyaukanie is a lecturer  at Universitas Param adina and is cyber-
savvy.  Nong Darol Mahm ada, the daughter of a Banten kiai (religious teacher), plays a 
key role in m oderating radio discussions and raising women’s awareness in the debate on 
issues affecting Islam.  They have been able to attract well-known com mentators of Islam 
to write columns and appear on their radio talk  shows.  Nurcholis Majid, the University of  
Chicago-trained intellectual who has cam paigned for secularisation since the 1970s, has 
supported this m ovement.18  Other m ajor figures who have participated include Hasyim  
Muzadi and Mazdar F. Mas’udi of Nahdlat ul Ulam a, Syafii Ma’arif and Moeslim  
Abdurrachman of Muhammadiyah and Azyum ardi Azra of  the State Institute f or Islamic 
Affairs (IAIN), Jakarta.19  
 
                                                 
17 Soekanto, Ibid. 
 
18 For Nurcholish Madjid’s significant role in promoting neo-modernist ideas, see Greg Barton, “Indonesia’s 
Nurcholish Madjid and Abdurrachman Wahid as Intellectual Ulama: The Meeting of Islamic Traditionalism 
and Modernism in Neo-modernist Thought”, Islam and C hristian-Muslim Relations (October 1997), vol . 8 
(3), pp. 323-50. 
 
19 Saefull, op.cit., p. 7.  Significantly, the pr oponents of Liberal Islam are drawn from both the traditionalist 
NU and modernist Muhammadiyah camps.       
 
7 
Liberal Islam activists have com e from the network of  State Institutes f or Islamic 
Affairs (IAIN) and have of ten been educated at m ajor W estern universities including 
Chicago, Columbia, Leiden and London.   By contrast, proponents of Literal Islam  tend to 
be educated at madrassahs in Pakistan or universities in Saudi Arabia if  their training was 
in Islamic studies.  Literal Islam  activists in  Malaysia and Indonesia have also frequently 
been graduates in science and engineering from universities in their hom e countries or 
from the West.  Such science and engineering graduates have reflected a tendency to apply 
the analytical tools of  the Western scientific tradition to the re-interpretation of  Islam in a 
narrow, literal fashion. 
 
The essence of the argum ent of Liberal Islam is the need for separation of religion 
and the state.  Religion is regarded as a private m atter, not a question of public concern.  
Literal Islam is regarded by ‘Islib’ as adopti ng literal interpretations of  the Koran and the 
hadiths, resulting in extrem ist, even fundam entalist perspectives on politics and society.  
There are at least four organizations that Li beral Islam  has categorised as Literal Islam  
groups: Laskar Jihad, Front Pem bela Islam  (Is lamic Defenders Front), Partai Keadilan 
(Justice Party) and Dewan Dakwah Isla miyah Indonesia (Indonesian Council for the 
Propagation of the Islamic Faith).20 
 
Laskar Jihad, a Muslim  m ilitia, was born a year af ter the eruption of  
Christian/Muslim religious violence in Ambon, Maluku which began on 19 January 1999.  
Ulama and students from Islamic boarding schools ( pesantren) went to Ambon to support 
their co-religionists, providing arm s, m anpower and food supplies.  The com mander of 
Laskar Jihad, Ja’far Um ar Talib, also leads a pesantren in Jogjakarta.  Ja’far studied in 
Pakistan in 1986 under the sponsorship of the Dewan Dakwah Islamiyah Indonesia.  Ja’far 
had known Osam a bin Laden when they were both Afghan mujahideen active in the 
resistance to the Soviet occupation of Af ghanistan in the 1980s.  Laskar Jihad was 
reportedly funded and supported by elem ents of the Indonesian arm y, including the 
Commander, Special Operations Command (KOSTRAD), Djaja Suparman.21 
                                                 
20 Soekanto, op.cit., p. 4. 
 
21 For a discussion of the creation of Laskar Jihad, see Noorhaidi Hasan, “Faith and Politics: The Rise of  the 
Laskhar Jihad in the Era of Transi tion in Indonesia”, Indonesia, 73 (Apri l 2002) pp. 145-169.  Ja’far has 
been detained since 4 May 2002 for t hreatening President Megawati Soekarnoputri and her fam ily.  But he 
was visited in jail by Vice-President Hamzah Haz who described Ja’far as his “Muslim brother”. 
 
8 
Front Pem bela Islam  is an organiza tion dom inated by Jakarta-based youths 
established shortly before the 1999 general elec tions and with links to elem ents of the 
Indonesian army.  It has achieved notoriety in  Indonesia because of its raids on bars and 
brothels.  It dem ands the closure of places of gam bling and prostitution, two vices that 
Islam deems as serious violations, and which, if left unchecked, would lead to even greater 
social ills, according to literal interpretations of the hadiths.  Like Laskar Jihad, it is led by 
an ulama of Arab descent, Habib Rizieq Muhammad Shihab who studied earlier at King 
Muhammad ibn Saud University in Riyadh.  (However, som e observers claim  that it is 
little more than a protection racket.) 
 
Partai Keadilan was set up shortly before  the 1999 general elections.  It has a 
strong base on university cam puses cultivated  since the 1980s, is active in university 
mosques and in cam pus Islam ic societies.  Se veral of its leaders were educated in the 
United States, Europe and the Middle East.  Fo r example, Nurmahmudi Ismail, a graduate 
of Texas A&M University, becam e Abdurrachm an W ahid’s Minister of Forestry.  The 
views of Partai Keadilan in favour of the es tablishment of an Islam ic state have been 
influenced by fundamentalist Islamic perspectives influential in university campuses in the 
West. 
 
Dewan Dakwah Islam iyah Indonesia (Indone sian Council for the Propagation of 
the Islamic Faith) is an organization for th e propagation of Islam , set up in 1968 by the 
late Moham mad Natsir.  He was a leader of the m odernist Muslim  party Masjum i and 
Prime Minister from  Septem ber 1950 to  March 1951 during the earlier period of 
parliamentary dem ocracy (1950 - 1957).  Natsir strongly opposed the Soeharto 
government.  The Council has received financ ial support from the Saudi governm ent and 
Natsir was supported by Saudi interests through his appointment as vice-president of the 
World Muslim Congress. 
 
For the fundam entalists, Liberal Islam  is seen as anathem a, comprising Muslims 
who want to f ollow their own belief s while clai ming to be Muslim s.  Instead of a strict 
adherence to doctrines and teachings, supporters of Liberal Islam  are perceived as re-
interpreting texts handed down by the Prophet to  suit their own convenience.  ‘Islib’ is 
regarded as a group of secularists who are spreading confusion and disinformation among 
9 
the m asses.  Ironically, the debate between  the Muslim  fundam entalists and liberals 
mirrors similar debates between Christian fundamentalists and liberals.22 
 
This analysis has included a detailed di scussion of Liberal Islam  because the 
viewpoint it has presented to the Indonesian pub lic reflects the wide range of views within 
Indonesian society.  Although 88% of the Indonesian population identifies itself as 
Muslim, the total vote obtained by all Islamic political parties in all general elections since 
1955 has never exceeded 43.5% of the votes cast.  Despite recurrent attem pts to seek the 
adoption of sharia law in Indonesia since 1945, there has been declining support within 
Parliament for such a m ove on every occasion when the issue has been raised again.  The 
latest attempt in 2001 was opposed by the two la rgest Muslim organizations in Indonesia, 
Nahdlatul Ulam a and Muham madiyah.  In th e 1999 elections, the two largest political 
parties, Partai Dem okrasi Indonesia (Perjuangan) and Golkar were secularist.  Although 
Abdurrachman Wahid of NU was elected as President defeating Megawati Soekarnoputri 
of PDI-P, W ahid adopted secularist policies in governm ent and had a reputation within 
Indonesia as a liberal thinker with an in clusivist outlook.  Under his leadership, NU 
nurtured a group of eclectic intellectuals and thinkers who sought to re-define Islam  to 
meet the needs of current society.  However,  because NU’s roots were in the reaction to 
revivalist teachings originating in the Middle East, it has been described in the academ ic 
literature as traditionalist and perceived as old-fashioned.23 
 
The views articulated by Liberal Islam  th erefore have wider resonance within 
Indonesian society and provide a window into  the internal discourse in Indonesia.  
Nevertheless, Indonesia has become more santri (devout Muslim).  There is an increase in 
the public and private practice of the Islam ic faith but this should be distinguished from  a 
turn towards the establishm ent of  an Islam ic state.  Som e have even observed that the 
Indonesian arm ed forces are represented by m any m ore santri within its senior ranks 
today.  However, this was a result of recruitm ent policies into the of ficer corps during the 
Soeharto era when there was an effort to dr aw in talent from  around the archipelago.  It 
was also a reflection of the absence of santri in command positions in the 1970s and 1980s 
                                                 
22 For criticism s of Liberal Islam  by supporters of Lite ral Islam, see the website of the Indonesian Islam  
Information and Communications Centre ( .www.alislam.or.id ). 
 
23 A generation of scholars was influenced by Clifford Geertz, The Religion of Java (Free Press, New York, 
960).  Geertz’s perspective is critiqued in Hefner, op.cit. pp. 13-18. 
 
10 
as m ost santri of ficers had participated in the Dar-ul Islam  revolt and the regionalist 
revolts of the 1950s.  
 
Increased santri influence also arose from  Soeharto’s efforts to seek new sources 
of support following Soeharto’s estrangement from senior leaders of the Indonesian armed 
forces in the late 1980s.  The establishm ent of the Association of Indonesian Intellectuals 
(ICMI, Ikatan Cendiakawan Muslim Se-Indonesia) in December 1990 with Soeharto as its 
patron and Minister of Research and Technology B.J. Habibie as its chairm an highlighted 
Soeharto’s overtures to the Muslim  com munity.  Habibie’s ascent to the Presidency of 
Indonesia in May 1998, following Soeharto’s re signation in the afterm ath of the anti-
Chinese riots, paved the way for the appoint ment of leading Muslim  activists to key 
positions in Habibie’s administration.24 
 
The perception of increased santri influence accompanied by resurgent Indonesian 
nationalism has shaped the Indonesian respons e to the issue of terrorism  by Islam ic 
fundamentalists in the region.  The Indonesian governm ent, press and public reacted with 
disbelief to reports that Indonesian ulam a and their followers were at the core of planned 
attacks on American installations and other targets in the region.  Although the Malaysian 
and Singapore governm ents have nam ed the Ch airman of the Indonesian Mujahideen 
Council, Abu Bakar Bashir, and Riduan Isam uddin (also known as Hambali) as “directing 
figures” of a transnational terrorist network, Bashir continues to m ove freely in Indonesia 
while Ham bali is believed to be residing there. 25  The Malaysian authorities provided 
information to Indonesian security agencies on four tons of am monium nitrate sent by 
detained Malaysia-based m ilitants to Batam , an Indonesian island thirty m inutes by boat 
                                                 
24 For a di scussion of t he transition from Soeharto to Habibie, see Leo Suryadinata,  “A Year of Upheaval 
and Uncertainty: The Fall o f Soeharto and t he Rise of Habi bie”, Southeast Asian Affairs 1999 (Institute of 
Southeast Asian Studies, Singapore 1999), pp. 111-127.  Soehart o’s overtures to the Muslim community is 
covered i n Robert W . Hefner, “Isl am, St ate and C ivil Soci ety: ICMI and the Struggle for the Indonesian 
Middle Class”, Indonesia No. 56 (1993), pp. 1-35 and R. W illiam Liddle, “The Islamic turn in Indonesia: A 
Political Explanation”, The Journal of Asian Studies, 55, no. 3 (August 1996), pp. 613-634. 
 
25 Abu Bakar B ashir (known as B a’asyir i n Indonesi a) runs Ngruki  pesantren, a conservative Islam ic       
boarding school in Solo.   He was arrested in November 1978 for leading the Jemaah Islamiyah, a part of the 
clandestine Negara Isl am Indonesia (NII) m ovement (better known at that time as Kom ando Jihad, a hard-
line group fi ghting for an Isl amic st ate).  A ni ne y ear jai l t erm was halved on appeal.  Bashir fled to  
Malaysia on hi s rel ease, ret urning t o Indonesi a i n 1999 aft er t he fal l of Soehart o.  The concept  of Darul 
Islamiyah Nusantara was developed during their stay in Malaysia by Bashir and a fellow ulama who fled to 
Malaysia, the late Abdullah Achmad Sungkar, who was jailed in Indonesia for the same charge as Bashir and 
also had his jail sentence halved.   For the earlier Jemaah Islamiyah link, see Noorhaidi Hasan, op.cit., p.150.  
 
11 
from Singapore.  However, no action was taken by the Indonesian Governm ent.  For 
regional leaders used to cooperation on secur ity issues, the Indonesian response has com e 
as a shock, particularly as Indonesia appears to have becom e a safe haven for terrorist 
threats to the surrounding region. 
 
In the light of these revelations, Indonesia’s unwillingness to act against 
Indonesian nationals involved in terrorist ac tivities has raised concern around the region.  
Singapore’s Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew, for example, has called on Indonesia to take 
action, resulting in strong responses from  Jaka rta highlighting the lack of legislation 
similar to the Internal Secur ity Acts of Malaysia and Singapore.  The Indonesian Minister 
of Foreign Affairs Nur Hassan W irajuda claimed that Indonesia was a dem ocracy, unlike 
authoritarian Singapore.  However, the reality is  that the political elite in Jakarta is aware 
of the increased clout of po litical Islam in Indonesia today.  This constrains Indonesian 
Government responses to the dem ands fr om Indonesia’s neighbours.  The Muslim -
dominated Poros Tengah (Middle Axis) led by Am ien Rais was instrum ental in denying 
the Presidency to Megawati Sukarnoputri in 1998 when it prom oted the election of 
Adurrachman W ahid.  Am ien Rais’ opposition to W ahid and agreem ent to Megawati’s 
succession paved the way for W ahid’s ouster and Megawati’s election in July 2001.  The 
Indonesian Council of Ulam as (MUI) issued  a declaration on 25 Septem ber 2001 calling 
“on Muslim s in the world f or jihad fii sabilillah  (fight in the path of Allah) should the 
aggression by the US and its allies against Afghanistan and the Islamic world occur”.26  An 
observer of Indonesian Islam  described this declaration as “one of the harshest statem ents 
of support for the Taliban heard from  any st ate-sponsored religious body in the Muslim  
world”.27  The increased influence of m ore extreme Muslim  views received public 
attention when Um ar Jafar Talib in flowi ng Arabic robes took centre stage opposite the 
American Ambassador at a dialogue session be tween Muslim leaders and am bassadors of 
major Western states on “Islam and the West: Working Together for a Peaceful World” on 
26 March 2002.28  
                                                 
26 Jakarta Post, 26 September 2001. 
 
27 Robert W . Hefner, “Muslim  Politics in Indonesia af ter September 11”, Testim ony to the US House of 
Representatives Sub-Com mittee on East Asia and th e Pacific, 12 December 2001, available online at 
http://www.house.gov/international_relations/hefn1212.htm [accessed on 1 Aug 2002]. 
 
28 Personal communication.   See also Kompas, 26 March 2002, Straits Times, 28 March 2002. 
 
12 
Greg Fealy has observed that the ineptit ude of Lt.Gen. (Ret) A.M. Hendropriyono 
has strengthened rather than allayed widesp read suspicions in the Islam ic com munity 
about the intentions underlying the anti-terrorism  campaigns in Indonesia.  As head of the 
State Intelligence Agency (BIN), Hendropriyono’ s allegations of al-Qaeda involvem ent in 
Indonesia and subsequent retractions unde rmined his credibility.  Nevertheless 
Hendropriyono’s unfortunate lack of circum spection should not be allowed to obscure the 
fact that because of dom estic political c oncerns, the Indonesian leadership has not 
responded to evidence provided by the Malaysian, Singapore and Philippines authorities.29 
 
An even greater shock to the region has been the sudden awareness that al-Qaeda 
linked radical Islam ists were active in th e region.  In recent m onths, the Malaysian 
Government arrested m ore than 40 m embers of a m ilitant Muslim group, the Kum pulan 
Militan Malaysia (Malaysian Militant Movem ent).  KMM has been im plicated in bank 
robberies, murders and kidnapping.  KMM was part  of a larger network that intended to 
establish an Islam ic state (Darul Islam iyah Nusantara) linking Malaysia, Indonesia, 
southern Thailand and the southern Philippi nes.  The m ost extensive expose of the 
regional linkages of these radicals was contai ned in a Singapore Government statement on 
11 January 2002.  It stated that it had detained 13 m embers of Jem aah Islamiyah (JI), a 
clandestine network with cells in Singapore,  Malaysia and Indonesia.  Surveillance had 
been mounted on the US, Israeli, British and Australian embassies, the Singapore Ministry 
of Defence and US com panies in Singapore.  JI had attem pted to purchase 21 tons of 
ammonium nitrate to be used for truck bom bs under the direction of a foreign al-Qaeda 
operative and bom b-maker with the Moro Islam ic Liberation Front (MILF). 30  T he 
Philippines Government arrested the Indonesi an bomb-maker, Fathur Rohm an Al-Ghozi, 
as he was about to leave for Thailand.  He  adm itted financing bom bings that killed 22 
people in Manila in December 2000 and his arrest led the Philippine authorities to one ton 
of explosives intended for attacks in Singapore.31 
 
                                                 
29 Greg Feal y “W hy Indonesi an M uslims are scept ical about  t errorists i n t heir m idst, “AUS-C SCAP 
Newsletter No.13 (May 2002), pp. 17-18. 
 
30 “Yishun Target in Group’s Plans”, Straits Times (Singapore), 12 January 2002, p. A1. 
 
31 Ibid.  See also Lee Kuan Yew, Text of Address to the IISS Asia Security Conference, Singapore, 31 May 
2002, available online at http://www.iiss.org.uk/misc/shangri-la/kuan_yew.doc [accessed on 2 Aug 2002]. 
 
13 
These regional terrorist networks indicat e the dim ensions of the new security 
challenges facing Southeast Asia.  The transnational al-Qaeda terrorist network will be the 
major security threat to governm ents in the region over the next decade.  Because of its 
regional network, Southeast Asia will rem ain a m ajor centre of  al-Qaeda activity.  
However, the identification of radical fundam entalist Islam with terrorist activity risks the 
spread of the perception that Islam  is the cause  of regional terrorism , especially in states 
where Muslims are minorities such as Singapore, the Philippines and Thailand.  In reality, 
these radical fundam entalist Islam ic terrorists represent the extrem e m anifestation of 
Wahhabism.  
 
Even for Islamists committed to the need to establish Islamic states, the approaches 
taken will change over tim e.  They will re- position them selves to take advantage of  
political opportunities while adjusting to a cha nging social environm ent.  The objectives 
and goals of  an Islam ic state will be re-def ined.  In conf ronting states intent on retaining 
their existing identities, the strategies adopted w ill vary in the years ahead as they have in 
the past.  Terrorist attacks and violent conf rontations, public agitation, private resentments 
and attempts to infiltrate public spaces will o ccur.  A key role will be played by Muslim s 
from diverse backgrounds that will participate in the public debate.  The debate within 
Indonesia sparked by Liberal Islam  dem onstrates one response to attem pts by the 
Wahhabis to dom inate the Islam ic agenda.  Its salience arises from  the wider support 
provided by the larger com munity when such ac tivists have m oved to take the stage and 
debate issues.  Sim ilar responses elsewhere in the region will help to ensure that the 
Wahhabis do not emerge as the dominant voices in the Islamic debate. 
 
Our discussion has shown that the debate  within the Islam ic communities in the 
region continues.  Islam  is not a m onolithic entity within the region.  Its believers stretch 
from secular m odernists sensitive to the m ulti-religious, multi-cultural fabric of societies 
in the region, inclusivists aware of the acco mmodation that Islam had made with existing 
beliefs when it penetrated the region, to reviva lists seeking a return to an Islam ic Golden 
Age and terrorists intent on overthrowing ex isting regim es and creating a new Muslim  
state linking all the territories in the region with Muslim majorities.   
 
From the perspective of regional order, the inaction of the Indonesian Governm ent 
despite concrete evidence has undermined existing trends in regional security cooperation.  
14 
While proponents of ASEAN previously highli ghted ASEAN’s evolution into a security 
community32 recent developm ents draw attention to the risks of m ore open borders 
resulting from  ASEAN arrangem ents to encourage increased intra-regional 
communications, tourism and trade.  It is a reminder that the creation and maintenance of a 
security community is dependent on the recogn ition by participating states that they need 
to cooperate when it is a neighbouring state that is threatened. 
 
The frictions am ong ASEAN states follo wing the arrests of radical Islam ic 
terrorists highlights the decline in ASEAN’ s cohesion following the expansion of ASEAN 
to include all ten Southeast Asian states in the 1990’s, the onset of the regional financial 
and economic crisis and the dow nfall of the Soeharto regim e in Indonesia.  Ironically, it 
was during this period that radical Islam ists com mitted them selves to establishing an 
Islamic state unifying the Muslim  m ajority territories of Indonesia, Malaysia, Brunei, 
southern Philippines and southern Thailand.  W hile Singapore does not have a Muslim  
majority, the JI activists planning terrorist attacks in Singapore concluded that its existence 
at the heart of Southeast Asia required Si ngapore’s incorporation into Darul Islam iyah 
Nusantara.  Even as the original m embers of ASEAN wrestled with the doctrines of non-
intervention and non-interference in a wo rld where the concept of hum anitarian 
intervention has received increasing support, they were challenged by radical Islam ists 
seeking to create a unified Islamic state through the violent overthrow of existing regimes, 
and heeding calls emerging from Afghanistan, for the establishment of a new caliphate. 
 
 Such irredentist visions highlight the fragility of  the post-colonial states in 
Southeast Asia.  The com munications revolution has resulted in Southeast Asians 
receiving CNN im ages sim ultaneously with th e rest of the world.  Israeli attacks on 
Palestinian targets and US bom bing of Osam a bin Laden’s hideouts in Afghanistan are 
immediately transmitted to the region.  Political  violence in Europe and the United States 
is replicated by terrorists in the region.  Cont rary to the image of strong states treading on 
the rights of citizens, the reality in Southeast Asia is that the state remains fragile and open 
to challenge in an era of political instability, economic stagnation and social disruption. 
 
                                                 
32 Amitav Acharya, Constructing a Security Community in Southeast Asia (Routledge, London, New York, 
2001). 
15 
 
IDSS Working Paper Series 
 
1.  Vietnam-China Relations Since The End of The Cold War 
Ang Cheng Guan 
 
(1998) 
2.  Multilateral Security Cooperation in the Asia-Pacific Region: Prospects and 
Possibilities 
Desmond Ball 
 
(1999) 
3.  Reordering Asia: “Cooperative Security” or Concert of Powers? 
Amitav Acharya 
 
(1999) 
4.  The South China Sea Dispute re-visited  
Ang Cheng Guan 
 
(1999) 
5.  Continuity and Change In Malaysian Politics:  Assessing the Buildup to the 1999-
2000 General Elections 
Joseph Liow Chin Yong 
 
(1999) 
6.  ‘Humanitarian Intervention in Kosovo’ as Justified, Executed and Mediated by 
NATO:  Strategic Lessons for Singapore 
Kumar Ramakrishna 
 
(2000) 
7.  Taiwan’s Future:  Mongolia or Tibet? 
Chien-peng (C.P.) Chung 
 
(2001) 
8.  Asia-Pacific Diplomacies: Reading Discontinuity in Late-Modern Diplomatic Practice  
Tan See Seng 
 
(2001) 
9.  Framing “South Asia”: Whose Imagined Region? 
Sinderpal Singh 
 
(2001) 
10.  Explaining Indonesia's Relations with Singapore During the New Order Period: The 
Case of Regime Maintenance and Foreign Policy 
Terence Lee Chek Liang 
 
(2001) 
11.  Human Security: Discourse, Statecraft, Emancipation  
Tan See Seng 
 
(2001) 
12.  Globalization and its Implications for Southeast Asian Security: A Vietnamese 
Perspective 
Nguyen Phuong Binh 
 
(2001) 
13.  Framework for Autonomy in Southeast Asia’s Plural Societies  
Miriam Coronel Ferrer 
 
(2001) 
14.  Burma: Protracted Conflict, Governance and Non-Traditional Security Issues 
Ananda Rajah 
 
(2001) 
15.  Natural Resources Management and Environmental Security in Southeast Asia: 
Case Study of Clean Water Supplies in Singapore 
Kog Yue Choong 
 
(2001) 
16.  Crisis and Transformation: ASEAN in the New Era  
Etel Solingen 
 
(2001) 
17.  Human Security: East Versus West? 
Amitav Acharya 
 
 
(2001) 
 
 
18.  Asian Developing Countries and the Next Round of WTO Negotiations 
Barry Desker 
 
(2001) 
19.  Multilateralism, Neo-liberalism and Security in Asia: The Role of the Asia Pacific 
Economic Co-operation Forum 
Ian Taylor 
 
(2001) 
 
20.  Humanitarian Intervention and Peacekeeping as Issues for Asia-Pacific Security 
Derek McDougall 
 
(2001) 
21.  Comprehensive Security: The South Asian Case 
S.D. Muni 
 
(2002) 
22.  The Evolution of China’s Maritime Combat Doctrines and Models: 1949-2001 
You Ji 
 
(2002) 
23.  The Concept of Security Before and After September 11 
a. The Contested Concept of Security 
 Steve Smith 
b. Security and Security Studies After September 11: Some Preliminary 
Reflections  
 Am itav Acharya 
 
(2002) 
24.  Democratisation In South Korea And Taiwan: The Effect Of Social Division On 
Inter-Korean and Cross-Strait Relations 
Chien-peng (C.P.) Chung 
 
(2002) 
25.  Understanding Financial Globalisation 
Andrew Walter 
 
(2002) 
26.  911, American Praetorian Unilateralism and the Impact on State-Society Relations 
in Southeast Asia 
Kumar Ramakrishna 
 
(2002) 
27.  Great Power Politics in Contemporary East Asia: Negotiating Multipolarity or 
Hegemony? 
Tan See Seng 
 
(2002) 
28.  What Fear Hath Wrought: Missile Hysteria and The Writing of “America” 
Tan See Seng 
 
(2002) 
29.  International Responses to Terrorism: The Limits and Possibilities of Legal Control 
of Terrorism by Regional Arrangement with particular reference to Asean 
Ong Yen Nee 
 
(2002) 
30.  Reconceptualizing the PLA Navy in Post - Mao China: Functions, Warfare, Arms, 
and Organization 
Nan Li 
 
(2002) 
31.  Attempting Developmental Regionalis m Through AFTA: The Domestic Politics – 
Domestic Capital Nexus 
Helen E S Nesadurai 
 
(2002) 
32.  11 September and China : Opportunities, Challenges, and Warfighting 
Nan Li 
 
(2002) 
33.  Islam and Society in Southeast Asia after September 11 
Barry Desker 
 
(2002) 
 
 