Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_25\documents\1993-Jstage-Kyoto_University.pdf
Total Pages: 19
Statistics: Chars=42159, ThaiWords=8431.8, EnglishWords=8242

--- Page 1 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
Southeast Asian Studies. Vol. 31, No. 1, June 1993
 Islamization in Southeast Asia :
 Reflections and Reconsiderations with Special
 Reference to the Role of Sufism '
 Anthony H. JoHNs "
In 1961 I published a paper on the islamization of peninsular and insular Southeast
Asia [Johns 1961]. At that time it had seemed that there was a simple explanation to
this vast, further expansion of the demain of Islam:it could be understood largely in
religious terms reducible to a single factor, the appeal of Sufism to the peoples of those
areas of Southeast Asia that now include the modern nation states of Malaysia,
Singapore, Brunei, Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines.
 Yet it could never have been as simple as that. Nothing ever is. There were
political and econemic factors involved. The facts of social life in the port cities of the
island archipelago befere Islam certainly included political structures of a certain
sophistication. Urban activities inevitably had to be seen in reference to the position
of the ruler and his entourage, a religious elite and religious institutions. The
bureaucracy must certainly have included a harbour master and tax collectors. The
security of the state would have required armed forces, however organised, on land
and sea, Trades people would have included carpenters, ship-builders, weaponmakers, smiths and a range of service industries. There was a need for regular
supplies of food-rice, vegetables, fish, and meat, which would have led to a merging
of urban life with that of the rural hinterland. All these activities inevitably were
among the challenges confronting the appeal and adaptivenes$ of the new religion.
 
' Earlier versions of this paper were prepared during my tenure of a Special Foreign
 Professorship at Chiba University, Japan, October 1 to December 31 1991, sponsored by the
 Japanese Ministry of Education, Science and Culture, and presented in the seminars held at
 the Institute of Asian Culture, Sophia University, Tokyo ; Institute of Middle Eastern Studie$,
 International University of Japan, Urasa, Niigata Prefecture, and Center for Southeast Asian
 Studies, Kyoto University. I would like to express my sincere appreciation to my colleagues
 at these institutions for their fruitful discussions.
 
" South East Asia Centre, The Faculty of Asian Studies, The Australian National University,
 GPO Box 4 Canberra ACT 2601 
' '
 43

--- Page 2 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 rtpt7ti7-X 31gle
 Islamization in this context should not necessarily be understood as synonymous
with conversion, at least in the first instance. At this stage the word conversion is
best avoided, for it has connotations of an individual choice of one religion rather than
another on largely theological considerations such as one finds motivating religious
change in the modern world, at least in the individualistic west. But were such
unmixed considerations always the determinant factor? ls it not likely that religious
change was gradual, and came about after a long process of association between local
peoples and Muslims, beginning with curiosity, followed by a perception of selfinterest leading eventually to attachment to and finally entry to that religious
community, rather than a response on an individual basis to the preaching of a
message ? In the light ef such consideratiQns, my idea of the primacy of the mystical
dimension of Islarn in the Islamization of Southeast Asia needs re-consideration, and
along with it a nurnber of tacit assumptions as to the nature of Sufism and its relation
to Islam more generally that lay behind it.
 The end of the thirteenth century, which saw the earliest physical evidences of an
Islamic port city in North Sumatra marked the beginning of a strong forward
movement of Islam in the region. By this time tariqa had becorne great international
corporations, and were playing a rnajor role in maintaining the unity of the Islamic
world after the fall of Baghdad to the Mongols in 1258. In fact a process was in train
-which by the eighteenth century led Gibb to remark 
"membership
 of the religious
orders was practically synonymous with the profession of Islam" [Gibb and Bowen
1957:76]. When Ibn 
`Arabi
 died in 1240, the monistic theosophy of the Sufi tradition
was well articulated and widely diffused. This, together with the fact that the earliest
extant MSS from North Sumatra, albeit some three centuries later, showed evidence of
a strong concern with such a theosophy seemed to suggest a causal relationship
between the development of theosophical Sufism and Islamization in our region.
 This was after all a view to which my early research on Sufism in Sumatra during
the Seventeenth century [Johns 1957] disposed rne. Ihad at that time an enthusiasm
for the theosophy of Ibn 
`Arabi,
 doubtless imperfectly understood, for which such
generalizations seemed to provide an acceptable social context, and was intoxicated by
the writings of Nicholson and Massignon.
 Ibn 
`Arabi's
 visionary Sufism is indeed intoxicating. His phiiosophical monism
expressed in the term wahaa al-wwfu'd (the Unity of Being) transforms the emanational
"
i

--- Page 3 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 A. H. JoHNs : Islamization in Southeast Asia
ideas of Islamic Neo-Platonism into an extraordinary system of aspects and relationships, generated by the lines of force inherent in the Ninety Nine most Beautiful
Names of God, vehicles of His power and being, names such as al-Rahman (The
Merciful), al-Hayy (The Living), al-Qayyam (The Self-Subsistent) and al-Muhaymin
(The Guardian). Even so such religious concepts were for a spiritual elite, not for
every Muslim, and even with this qualification, they were not universally accepted,
 Islamization is a word with a variety of meanings, depending on the mix of trends
and tendencies within the world of Islam at any one time. Such trends and tendencies
are responses to the internal and external challenges that Muslim communities have
faced since the religion was first preached in Arabia, and which still continue. The
division between Sunni and Shi`a, as a response to different views concerning the
leadership of the comrnunity, is one example, but there are others which sometimes led
te schism, at others resulted in no more than a shifting distribution of varying
emphases in the formulation of doctrines on which all Muslims agreed, Examples of
such issues can be seen in debates as to whether the interpretation of the Qur'an was
to be literal or allegorical, whether rationalism or gnosticism should be the dorninant
characteristic of the religion, whether the Law or spiritual insight should have the
primary role in determining its norms and ideals.
 The spiritual dirnension of Islam was from the beginning a central concern in my
research. It lies at the heart of the development of what was later to be called Sufism,
Central to this dimension is the longing for an experimental awareness of God, in
Qur'anic language, a yearning to see His face. This yearning in the history of Sufisrn
is expressed in different ways and associated with varying styles of spirituality and
spiritual taste. They range from the severely ascetic and sober, based on techniques of
self-scrutiny, to the ecstatic, induced by recitation of the Qur'an accompanied by
music and dance leading to exuberances of theosophical expression. But these
differences are not mutually exclusive, and there is a distribution of emphases within
them and between thern.
 Such modes of spirituality are part of the general history of the Islamic peoples,
Southeast Asia not excepted. This area of the world, however, presents special
problems to Islamicists. One of the reasons is that Islamized Southeast Asia is a region
without a stable urban tradition and in which the eral tradition is stronger than the
literary, It is therefore difficult to bring to it the philological and historical
 45
 NII-Electronic

--- Page 4 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 fiwt797-X 31gE
methodologies developed in the study of Islam in the Middle East or the Indian subcontinent. Thus scholars concerned with the traditional Islamic disciplines found little
there of interest to them cornpared to the intellectual excitement to be derived from
the literary traditions of South and West Asia. And many of the scholars who devoted
themselves to the study of the history and society of Southeast Asia lacked a wider
knowledge of the world of Islam, let alone an effective mastery of the Islamic
disciplines, and tended to overlook the role Islam played in many areas of local life.
The result was in many writings, a prominence given to issues such a$ 
"syncretism"
and the 
"conflict"
 between adat and Islamic law, suggesting that these were distinctive
of Islam in the region and not encountered elsewhere in the Muslim world.
 In fact, the presence and role of Islarn in Southeast Asia has been consistently
underestimated. This is in part because in a number of critical regions, Central Java
being a case in point, many cultural forms of the pre-Islamic past still have a vigorous
life, notably the shadow theatre and the garnelan orchestra. Moreover, in the search
for a classical tradition (every country has to have one!) the pre-Islamic archaeological and literary culture represented by monuments like the Borobudur and the
retelling in old Javanese poetry or prose of episodes of the Hindu Buddhist epics from
the pre-Muslim past have exercised a stronger appeal for philologists and scholars of
religion than the living tradition of Islam, which for many lay unobserved. In addition, thanks to the tendency to regard Central Java as representing the core of insular
Southeast Asian culture, Islam appeared to lack any legitimacy and cultural status,
and was seen as a cultural blight that put an end to the splendour of Hindu Java. The
presence of Islam was neted, and needed cursory reference, but often scholars were
uncertain as to how ,to handle it, and so looked the other way.
 This attitude was c6mpounded by the currency of such terms as the heartland and
the periphery of the Islamic world to refer to the Middle East and the Indonesian
islands respectively-as though the further one got from Mecca the weaker Islamic
faith and practice inevitably became. Such are the ways in which we are made
captive to metaphors of our own creatien!
A corollary of this has been that what passes for conventional wjsdom concerning
Islam there ranges from the bizarre to the patronizing. It is said, for example, that
Javanese Muslims are tolerant, and do not exhibit the aggressive characteristics of
46
:

--- Page 5 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 A. H. JoHNs : Islarnization in Southeast Asia
Middle Eastern Muslims because pre-Islamic beliefs are still strong, the implication
being that the Javanese in revealing this dimension of tolerance are not behaving as
Muslims at all, or that a tropical climate with its heavy rainfall, has dampened
religious enthusiasm.
 It is difficult to exaggerate how widespread such generalizations are, or how
superficial. Tolerance and intolerance are not distributed geographically. There are in
Egypt and Pakistan, for example, Muslims with a far broader range of religious
sympathies than many Indonesians. There are Indonesians with a far more narrowly
scripturalist understanding of the religion they profess than sorne Saudi Arabians.
The reverse of course is also true.
 If such were the views simply of European non-Muslims, it would be bad enough,
but in fact one finds similar attitudes among Muslims in the Middle East who speak
patronizingly of their co-religionists in Indonesia or Malaysia, as though to say, due to
their distance from the Holy Land, they are not really Muslims, or at best, that their
way of being so is so distinctive that there can be no strength of identification with
them as fellow-members of the Muslim community.
 A different perception, however, follows almost immediately from the adoption of
a perspective other than that provided by the dichotomy between the heartland and
periphery of the Muslirn world, one that takes as its starting point a consideration of
the active engagement of Southeast Asian Muslims in the cornmonwealth of Islam,
 It is necessary, by way of example, to take account of their observance of the daily
ritual prayer, the passage rites of circumcision, marriage and burial, and alongside
these, those areas of life in which Islamic Law of the Shafi'ite school is applied, and the
great annual events such as the Fast and the Pilgrimage. One should consider.
Iikewise, their participation in revival movements such as that of the Wahhabis, or the
reformist movement initiated by al-Afghani and Muhammad Abduh, or in the
radicalization of Islam in modern times by Mawdudi, Sayyid Qutb and Khomeini. One
has to appreciate the part they played in the transmission, development and
vernacularization of the Islamic disciplines in their part of the world : their knowledge
of Arabic, the manuscript copies they made of authoritative Arabic texts before the
advent of printing and acceptance of its use for religious works. and their competence
in the Islamic disciplines. In addition, one can look to their association with
outstanding teachers in other areas of the Muslim world, the part they played in the
 47

--- Page 6 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 ptM7J,7Ma 31gle
 Islamic cornmonwealth of religious scholars, and their preparation of text books for
 local cenditions, making their own contribution to such disciplines as Qur'anic
 exegesis, dogmatics, jurisprudence and eschatology. Not least one should be aware of
 the implications of their adoption of the Arabic script to write their own languages.
 Finally one should take account of the establishment of Islamized forms of the state,
 and the role of sultanates in the region in the days before sultans were forced to give
 way-at least in some areas, to Colonels and Presidents.
 It is only in such a wider context that the mere specific question may be asked :
 how did they participate in the various Sufi traditions known in other parts of the
 Muslim world, share in and make their own contribution to the mystical dimension of
 Islam? It is in this context that one may ask whether there were any aspects of
 Sufism that facilitated the spread of the religion, or may have predisposed Muslirns in
 the various areas of what is now Indonesia to being Muslim in one way rather than
 another. In this respect, the word 
"Indonesia"
 as the name of a modern nation state is
 an obstacle to a clear understanding of the processes of Islamization in the region. It
 is easily overlooked that the word had no political content before the early twenties of
 this century. The fact that it is an over-arching term does not imply any
 homogeneity in the regions it subsumes, and certainly does not wipe out a millenium
 and more of the histories of a variety of languages and cultures all important in their
 own right. People in different areas of what is now Indonesia naturally participate in
 the Islamic world in different ways.
 It is from such a perspective that one should attempt to highlight the various
 aspects and emphases in the Islamization of the region frorn the time that it began.
 Self-evidently, it cannot be separated from the trading system of the Indian Ocean. As
 soon as Muslims took phrt in that system, and eventually they were te dominate it, a
 discreet, silent process of Islarnization began, as Muslim trading communities became
 established at focal points along the northeast coast of Sumatra and on the Malay
 Peninsula, the north coast of Java, Borneo and the Celebes. Such points were
 convenient stopping places to exchange goods, to take on water and firewood and wait
 for a change of the monsoon, either to journey on to China for silks and porcelain, or
 to take on board spices and locally produced goods.
 How long these communities had remained silent and discreet before appearing on
 the pages of history with a political profile there is little way of knowing, any more
 48
 NII-Electronic

--- Page 7 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 A. H. JoHNs:Islamization in Southeast Asia
than whether they formed settlements in areas largely uninhabited, to which they
attracted other traders, or whether they formed autonomous quarters in already
existing centres of populatioB and trade. At any rate. as Muslims. they had their
networks of international contacts within which business confidence was secure, due
to the writing of contracts according to Muslim Law. Business confidence is infectious, and the association of non-Muslim peoples in the trading enterprises of Muslims
with contracts written according to Islamic Law, followed by the growth, stability and
prosperity of Muslim communities is a widely recognized mode of Islamization.
 Now if Muslim communities are to function effectively as communities, they
require the presence of 
'ulamdi;
 those individuals trained in Islamic jurisprudence who
understand the principles of contracts-whether for trade or marriages-, who can
work out legal solutions to the conflicts that arise in any community, and who can
perform the necessary astronomical calculations to determine the times for prayers,
the approach of the fasting month, and the pilgrimage season. Such an elite, a class of
scholars, have their own networks, both among themselves, the teachers from whom
they had studied and acquired their legal expertise, or from whom they had been
inducted into one or another of the great tanrqa.
 Once these things have occurred, there is already effective participation in the
world of Islam, even if, in the thirteenth century, as far as Southeast Asia is concerned,
documentation is sparse. But there is another development to take into account. By
the thirteenth century, the new institution of the sultan had becQme well--established.
The first ruler whose coins bear the title Sultan was apparently the Seljuq Tughril Beg
1055 [Hitti 1979 :474]. From his time on, Sultanates sprang up like mushrooms in the
Middle East, the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia. Once the precedent had
been established, any leader of a cornmunity who had established an adequate power
base could, when he deemed the time ripe consolidate that power base by declaring
himself su!tan and claiming an area of territorial jurisdiction. A sultanate, barring
coups and/or assasinations is a hereditary institution and given a measure of stabi!ity,
and a succession of able rulers, is able to expand its area of authority. At some stage,
this happened in Sumatra, and it is the culmination of a process of silent Islamization
that is marked by the first evidence of a sultan in Sumatra, the grave stone of Sultan
Malik al-Saleh at Pasai with an inscription giving as the date of his death a year
corresponding to 1297 or 1307, depending en how the inscription is interpreted [Hall
 49
 NII-Electronic

--- Page 8 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 Mpt7ti7ffza 31ts1-g
1955:177].
 Pasai was a harbour principality, and it is the establishment of such harbour
principalities under a sultan with their religious and mercantile orientation across the
Indian ocean that provide the politicar and economic mechanism for the further
expansion of Islam. It is likewise this institution that provides the means of a closer
relationship with other Muslims, and creates opportunities in the structure of the state
for the establishment of religious scheols, the participation in teaching of foreign with
local 
`utama;
 and the creation of libraries.
 If one asks whether during this period there is any direct evidence of Sufi
involvement in the Islamization that had reached the level at which the leader of a
Muslim community might declare himself Sultan, the answer is no. But if the question
is put differently : what is the likelihood of individual traders and 
'ulama'
 law brokers
essential for business confidence being members of tan-qas?, then by the thirteenth
century, the answer must be that it is high, particularly if the trader, as so many of
them were, was from Indian subcontinent. There is indirect evidence in the traditional
stories that are elaborated in the court chronicles which attribute the coming of Islam
to the preaching of itinerant holy men from abroad, one of them commissioned by
Muharnrnad himself [Jones 1979]. But such stories are largely ex post facto fabricatlons.
 There is evidence that the Pasai court was aware of personalities and events in
other, older established centres of autherity in the Muslim world. Fatimi [1963:11],
using infermation provided by Hitti, has drawn attention to the possible significance
of the name of the Pasai Sultan, Malik al-Saleh (as it is usually spelt in histories of
Indonesia) mentioned above. This name, Fatimi points out, eponymous with that of
the Ayyubid ruler al-Malik al-Salih (r. 1240-1249), who restored Jerusalem to Islamic
rule in 1244. Might this net have been a reason for him on becoming or declaring
himself Sultan, to adopt this name? It is possible to see a similar motivation in his
narning of two of his sons Malik al-Zahir [sic] and Malik al-Mansur [sic], both
eponymous with two near contemporary figures in the Middle East. al-Malik al-Zahir
Baybars was the fourth Mamluk sultan <r. 1260-1277). He aspired to be a second Salah
al-Din, and played a major role in blocking the Mongol's advance towards Cairo [Hitti
1979:656].
 al-Malik al-Mansur (r. 1279-1290), was likewise a great anti-crusader, and the rnost
50

--- Page 9 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 A. H. JoHNs : Islamization in Seutheast Asia
outstanding Mamluk figure after Baybars. He achieved such renown that even the
ruler of Ceylon sent an embassy to his court with a letter no one could read ! `) The
correspondence of names may be coincidentaL but it is not inherently unlikely that the
Pasai Malik al-Saleh was sufficiently in touch with events across the Indian Ocean,
mediated perhaps through trading contacts. perhaps through Pasai pilgrims or a Pasai
community in Mecca, to be aware of these three famous names from the Middle East,
and to be heartened by reports of Muslim victories against the crusaders. After all,
events there would have had econornic consequences for Pasai. At the very least,
Fatimi's implied point that to be a sultan was to become a member of an exclusive
club of Muslim rulers is important.
 It is not until the late sixteenth century that local MSS sources from Sumatra
become available. All are written in the Arabic script, adapted to indicate those
sounds in Malay that have no counterpart in Arabic, and all show a significant
stratum of Arabic loan words and a number of features of syntax that could reflect
Arabic influence. Although relatively young, it is clear that they belong to a traditiQn
that is much older and are evidence of a long and close participation of local peoples
in Islamic life and culture, The earliest example is the poems, the Malay quatrains, of
the Achehnese Hamzah Fansuri (d. 1590). He is an auther belonging to the theosophical tradition of Ibn 
`Arabi
 mediated by the Iraqi al-Jili (d. circa 1408). His rendering of
numbers of Qur'anic verses into Malay and interpretation of them as they are understood in this mystical tradition, no less than his vernacularisation of Arabic words and
concepts, is extraordinary. His writings show an ecstatic passion for union with God,
and include a brilliant tangential allusion to al-Hallaj's identification of himself with
the burning bush in the vision of Moses, by an identification of himself with the tree
that is burnt to yield camphor. 2)
 By the seventeenth century, it is possible to demonstrate a close relationship
between religion and political authority in the Acheh sultanate (1496-l874). This
relationship is evidenced in a number of ways: through the investiture of the ruler
Sultan IskandarMuda <1607-1636) in a Sufi tan-qa by his Shaikh al-Islam, (perhaps a
conscious use of an Ottoman title) Shams al-Din. It is also seen in this Shaikh al-
 1) See [ibid,: 678]. Fatimi's sumrnary and interpretation of these events should be read
 against the information given in [ibid.: 655-656 and 677-678].
 2) See [Drewes and Brakel 1986]. The specific, verse reference is p. 143 v. 13.
 51
 NII-Electronic

--- Page 10 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 ntwi7ti7-- 31g1e
Islam acting in a political role as foreign minister and in addition Vicegerent when
Iskandar was incapacitated by bouts of insanity. This combination in a single
individual of the roles of Sufi adept, murshld to the ruler, and holder of two senior
positions of state is striking [Nieuwenhuijze 1945: 6-21].
 The position of Islam in the state is likewise illustrated by reference, in a
nonchalant and unstudied rnanner, to two well-known mystical verses of Ibn 
`Arabi
 in
a Malay werk published under the title Hikop'at Abeh a lengthy fragment of a
panegyric to Iskandar Muda [Iskandar 1958 : 67].
 When a remote ancestor of- Iskandar fincls his future bride in a clump of barnboo,
to quieten her alarrn at this unexpected discovery, he says to her: God has made
manifest today our former hidden union (in the knowledge of God, before individual
existents were differentiated one from the other). In this allusion.there is both
reference to the predestined greatness of Iskandar, and a highly sophisticated sexual
conceit, the product of close, even playful familiarity with the formulations of the
central doctrine of Sufi theosophy, that of the Unity of Being.3)
 Chance allusions of this kind are more revealing of the currency of religious ideas
than the fact that Shams al-Din wrote a number of treatises in Arabic, still extant, and
in fact was an early, if not the earliest Sumatran on record to have written in Arabic.
 The writings of Shams al-Din moreover demonstrate that there has been a shift in
the provenance of religious theught popular in court circles from the Iraq/Iran
tradition of al-Jili represented by Hamzah Fansuri to one that derives from
Muhammad b. Fadl Allah al-Burhanpuri, a north Indian teacher who wrote in 1590 a
work outlining a system of seven grades or manifestations of Being-a theosophical
system that, while based on the sarne concept of the unity of being as that espoused
by Harnzah, expresses it in a different formal structure [Johns 1965:9-10].
 It should be remembered that acceptance of the Ibn 
`Arabi
 tradition represents
only one way of participation in the mystical life of Islam, and that other medels are
represented in fragments of works in Javanese from the late sixteenth century, dealing
 3) The lines in question are:
 We were lofty sounds unuttered
 held in the highest peaks of the hills
 I am you in Him, and we are you and you are He
 All is He in Him-ask those who have attained.
 For a Malay commentary on these line$ by the Achehnese 
'Abd
 al-Ra' uf see [Johns 1955].
52

--- Page 11 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 A. H. JoHNs : Islamization in Southeast Asia
with dogmatics and spirituality, from one or another of the north coastal towns of
Java [Drewes 1954 ;1969]. These works have little to do with the monistic theosophy
of the Ibn 
'Arabi
 tradition but are based largely on the ethical mysticism of al-Ghazali.
These examples are sufficient to demonstrate the independent net-working of groups
of religious teachers with varying spiritual taste at the various centres of trade and
authority in the archipelago, and the discrete character of local traditions all over the
archipelago.
 By the mid-seventeenth century, a fuller documentation of this participation
becomes possible, with evidence in Arabic sources of the presence of Sumatrans in
Mecca and Medina and their attatchment to a particular teacher. This is sufficiently
important to present is some detail. We are able to put together a Kurdish scholar,
Ibrahim al-Kurani (1615-1690) who was affiliated to a number of tan-qa, and a fehalijke
of the Shattariyya order, who settled in Medina; 
'Abd
 al-Ra'uf, an Achehnese who
studied with Ibrahim in Arabia 1640-1661, and Yasuf`) a Makassarese who was in
Medina with 
`Abd
 al-Ra'uf for some years ; and Ibrahim's pupil al-Hamawi, who wrote
a biographical dictionary FZitva'id al-inihal wa IVata ij al-Sofar (The profits of travel
and the gains of journeying) a biographical dictionary of the 
`ulama'
 of Mecca and
Medina, in the eleventh Islamic century (seventeenth century CE) with an entry on his
teacher Ibrahim and the Sumatrans who studied from him, reporting what they said to
Ibrahim and what Ibrahim said to him about them.5)
 In this entry Hamawi says:
 Our Shaikh (Ibrahim) told me that one of our Jawi associates-and he was
 reading with him the [work entitled] al-Ttzofa al-mursala iin nth al-nabt- while
 we were present-told him that this treatise and the matters it treats of was
 popular and well-known in the lands of the Jawi, and that it is read in their
 religious schools.
Ibrahim had a special relationship with Jawi students, foremost ameng them 
`Abd
 alRa'uf whom he designated as his khalha to spread this tanea in Sumatra when he
 4) Yasuf al-Maqasiri (1626-1699), a rnajor religious-Political figure in Java in the middle
 years of the seventeenth century. See Heer [1979:15].
 5) Johns [1975: 33-55]. See in particular pp, 48-49.
 53

--- Page 12 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 MM797Mee 31g1g
returned. They asked him questions about the correct understanding of the work,
referred to by Hamawi and the system of seven manifestations of Being that it set out.
It was in response to their questions that Ibrahim wrote a major work on the topic,
entitied lthaf al-Dhaletr. In his introduction to his work he refers to the Sumatrans and
the questions that they put to him:
 We have reliable information from a group of Jawi that there have becorne
widespread among the inhabitants of the lands of 
"Java"
 : some books on Realities
and esoteric teachings by rnen attributed with knowledge because of their study
and the teaching of others, but who lack any understanding of the Law of
(Muhammad) the Chosen, the Elect.
He continues :
 They told me that among the best known of books among them was the
compendium entitled al-7}ttlijia al-mursata ila rtZh at-nabl (the work by Muhammad
ibn Fadl Allah mentioned by Hamawi in the biographical entry referred to above),
and more than one of them has asked my humble self to prepare a commentary
upon it te make clear the conformity of the questions (it discusses) to the basis of
the principles of religion, confirmed by the noble Book, and the Sunna of the Lord
of the Messengers.
What kind of a man was Ibrahim? What did his teaching communicate to 
`Abd
 alRa'uf, and how did it contribute to the participation of his countrymen in Islamic life
and devotion? In other words, what was the range of learning and the kind of
spirituality to which he attracted them? In the introduction to his work nhaf alDhalet-, he plays on the most beautiful names of God as though they were a musical
instrument with the compass and resonances of a great organ, 
"God
 is the First and
the Last, the Outward and the Inward : the First before whom nothing was, the Inward
beneath whom nothing is more hidden." He justifies the seeking of inward meanings
in the Qur'anic verses and hadith, but condemns any abandonment of their literal
meaning, quoting from al-Ghazali's Mishkat al=t4nwdr al-Ghazali's use of the tradition
"Angels
 do not enter a house in which there is a dog," to condemn the Baginlyya. To
54

--- Page 13 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 A. H. JoHNs : Islamization in Southeast Asia
 discover an inward sense to the hadith, i. e. that the word 
"house"
 may signify heart
 and 
"dog"
 the spirit of anger, and thus that it rneans 
"angels
 do not enter a heart in
 which is the spirit of anger" does no violence to the words of the Messenger. It would
 enly do so were one to claim that the only meaning of this hadith is the inward one.
 Knowledge of such an inward meaning however, does not exempt the believer from
 the duty of obeying the literal sense of the wQrds. But, Ibrahim says, the Sufis do not
 do this, rather they affirm the outward sense of the words, and in addition understand
 them in whatever inward way that Allah reveals to thern, for there is nothing impos-
 sible in God giving to anyone of His servants He chooses an understanding of rnean-
 ings in His Book and the sayings of his Prophet that are not explicitly expressed.6)
 What was he like as a teacher? There is an anecdote told in a biographical
 dictionary :
 Ibrahim used to say : the Ritiha should be recited at the end of every meeting.
 There was once an old faqih who said: I married a young woman when I was
 advanced in years, Her family loved me and trusted me, but secretly, she disliked
 me because of my old age, and only pretended affection for me for the sake of her
 family.
 Now one day a woman friend visited her, and I listened to them talking
 without their knowing it. Every word she spoke complaining about rneIwrote
 down en a piece of paper I had by me. Then the woman visitor made to leave, but
 my wife said to her: 
`tnot
 until we have recited the IJIitiha together, as do the faqth
 and his friends when they part." So the pair of them recited the Mtiha, and I
 wrote that down too, as they recited it.
 ThenItold her brothers all that she had said about me, and said to them:do
 not make her stay with me, for I wish to divorce her. They were displeased with
 her and reproached her, but she denied everything I had accused her of having
 said against me. So I said : here is the paper on which I wrote everything dewn as
 you were saying it, And lo! there was nothing on the page except the RItiha, and
 so I realised that the IJIItiha had blotted out every evil thing she had said [al-
 Afrani:21O-211].
 6) These passages are summarized from a draft translation of the itht;f al=Dhaki based on the
 Leiden Ms. Cod. Or. 7050.
 55
 NII-Electronic

--- Page 14 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 MM7ti7-Z 31g1g
A number of maxims are attributed to him. They include: 
"It
 is better to reconcile
two conflicting points of view rather than to choose one of them or the other" ; 
'`Truth
lies at the mid-point between excess and inadequacy" and 
'`The
 philosophers got close
to ultimate truth, but did not quite succeed in attaining it."
 And what of 
'Abd
 al-Ra'uf? He lived for 30 years in Acheh on his return from 20
years in Arabia He exchanged letters with Ibrahim across the Indian Ocean. He was
supported by the court, by the Sultana Safiyatu'1-Din (r. 1641-1675). He wrote
prolifically, and his contribution to the vernacularization of Islam in Malay is
remarkable. He wrote a treatise, on the orders of the sultana, on that branch of fi4h
known as al-muamalat called MirUt al-tullabl a work of 600 pages in Ms; he
prepared a Malay rendering of the wfstr of al-Jalalayn that is still in use today and is
regularly reprinted. (This work, entitled 71cxnjumdn al-Mustoftid was regarded by
Snouck Hurgronje as a translation of Baydawi's Anwar al-7iznet-l). He wrote a lengthy
treatise on the spiritual exercise of dhiler called 
`Umtlat
 al-enuhtojin, and a theoretical
work on the concept of the unity of being, which may be summarised: the world is
from God. Everything is The Reality, at"aqq, but not as it is here and now. Bejng is
one, but only at the level of non-manifestation in the knowledge of God [Voorhoeve
1952:109 - 115].
 
`Abd
 al-Ra'uf's concerns were broad. He brings together the exterior and interior
disciplines (as did his teacher Ibrahim). He writes on ttofsir without reference to the
mystical dimension of exegesis, hadtth and fiqh Yet he also writes on the spiritual
exercise of dhikny and on the unity of Being. As a teacher, he inducted many individuals into the Shattariyya order, and was responsible for its popularity in Java.
This is the first occasion in the history of Islam in the region in which it is possible to
bring together such a constellation of facts and sources of inforrnation : concerning a
Sumatra scholar, 
'Abd
 al-Ra'uf ; the ruler of Acheh, Safiyatu'1-Din,who was his patron ;
the Kurd, Ibrahim al-Kurani, who was 
`Abd
 al-Ra'uf's teacher in Medina, and the
biographer of Ibrahim, Hamawi who refers to the presence of Sumatrans in the circle
of Ibrahim's students. In addition, we have works that they produced. We can put our
hands on their writings and in some cases MSS of the letters they wrote to each other
across the Indian Ocean.
 Another, later instance of such a constellation of elements occurs in the mid56
NII-ElectronicMbraryService

--- Page 15 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 A. H, JoHNs : Islamization in Southeast Asia
eighteenth century under the aegis of the Sultanate of Palembang in south Sumatra.
It is possible to document the relationship between 
`Abd
 al-Samad (1703-1788) of
Palembang, and Arab scholars in the Holy Land, including the Egyptian Azharite
professor Ahmad b. 
`Abd
 al-Mun`im al-Damanhuri who visited Mecca in 1763, and
Muhammad b. 
`Abd
 al-Karim al-Samman (1719- 1775) who founded the Sammaniyya
tan-qa. 
`Abd
 al-Samad was inducted into this tartqa, and through his students in
Mecca returning home to Sumatra, it was established in Palembang where it flourished
within the founder's life-time [Drewes 1977:2!9-220].
 Palembang was a centre of Muslim learning that deserves detailed study. Within
a period of 50 years or less, Malay versions of such works on dogmatics as Ibrahim alLaqani's (d. 1631) commentary on the rhyrned credal statement Jdwahantt al-Tdwhid,
works of ethical rnysticisrn as the Hiham of Ibn 
'Ata
 Allah, and the Risalatfi'l-Tbwhid
by Raslan al-Dirnishqi enlarged by the Cairo auther Zakariyya al-Ansari (d. 1520) and
later 
`Abd
 al-Ghani al-Nabulusi (d. 1731) a Sufi text that lays greater emphasis on
inner worship, purity of motivatien, and the spiritual stages of shuhz rida and sabn
than on absorption into the Divinity. Then most important of all, 
`Abd
 al-Samad's
rendering into Malay around 1788 of Lubab ihya' 
`utam
 at-din. an abridgement of alGhazali's lh),a' 
`utam
 al-din, by al-Ghazali's brother Ahmad. Here again is documentation of a Sumatran scholar who spends years in Mecca, his association with Arab and
Egyptian scholars, his induction into a tan-qa, his spreading of this tartqa, in
Palembang both personally, and through the students who came from Sumatra to
study with hirn in Mecca, the major contribution he makes to the vernacularization of
Islam with a work that is still reprinted, and the role of the Palembang court in
supporting religious learning [ibid. :36-37].
 A nineteenth century example is furnished by the career of al-Nawawi al-Bantani.
He was born in i814, went to Mecca in 1829 and lived there the remainder of his long
life. He wrote on the various disciplines of hadith fiqh utsir my$ticism grammar and
rhetoric. He was teacher and guide to many generations of Jawi in Mecca over 40
years. Snouck Hurgronje met him in 1885 and in his book Mekha in the latter Part of
the 19th century [Snouck 1931:268-267] notes that he was acknowledged as head of
the Jawi community ; and had just published, on the newly established Mecca Press, a
two volume cornmentary on the Qur'an.
 al-Nawawi was the author of over 100 works in Arabic, a number of them still in
 57

--- Page 16 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 MM797orza 31kle
current use in religious teaching institutions, regularly reprinted in Mecca, Cairo, and a
number of major cities in Indonesia. His two volume ttofsin Marah Labid [al-Nawawi
1965] deserves special mention. In an introduction he lists the authors and their
works on whom he depends. They include Fakhr aFDin al-Razi (d. 1209), Shirbini (d.
1570), and Abu'1-Su`ud (d. 1574). In fact about 70 percent of his ttofsit is selected from
Razi's great work Mafatth al-Ghayb, giving his own compilation, followihg in Razi's
footsteps, a markedly rationalist character. Moreover, following Razi, he omits many
illustrative stories to the Qur'anic text that Razi rejects, which modern Muslims
dismiss as Isra'iliyyat. Thus Razi's influence on him is highly significant, an influence
that he passed on to thousands of his students from the Indies over a period of forty
years, and in these respects anticipated and facilitated, the rapid spread of Muhammad
`Abduh's
 reformist ideas there. Indeed, by way of a digression,Iowe Nawawi, a great
personal debt, for it was through him that I discovered Razi, and found a new career in
Raziana.
 These examples are far from exhaustive. They are, however, sufficient to show
that reference to Sumatra and Java as part of a remote periphery of the Muslim world
is misleading. Rather the islands of Indonesia were linked to the Arabian Peninsula by
the Indian Ocean, not separated from it. Modes of participation varied from place to
place. During the silent years of Islamization preparing the ground for the appearance
-of Islam with a political face in the region, the Sufi dimension was present, both
explicitly and implicitly at appropriate levels in Muslim communities.
 In my giving a primacy to the Sufi movement in Islamization, the issue was
wrongly put, but the putting of it was not wholly wrong. If the generalization that
the Indies became Islarnized due to the spiritual appeal of Sufism was too broad, it is
not necessarily wrong to say that many, if not a majority of the 
`ulamti'
 who played a
role in the establishment of Muslim communities in Southeast Asia had Sufi
affiliations. By the same token, it is certainly' overly sirnplistic to speak tout court of
Islam being brought to the Indies by traders without reference to the helamat
 During the early years of Islamization, local evidence is so scarce that it is
necessary to proceed by inference. Nevertheless it must be recognized that we have to
do not simply with local peoples encountering Muslims, and eventually adopting a
new religion in a particular geographical area, but with their involvement in a wideranging international comrnunity through a variety of net-works comprising related
58
NII-ElectronicMbrary
L
 l
 1
 i
 t

--- Page 17 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 A. H. JoHNs : Islamization in Southeast Asia
ethnicities, merchant groups, religious teachers and tan-qas, All this was a cofitinuing
process that by zealous networking at an individual level pari Passu with the
expansion and contraction of political authority at the level of the ruler, extended the
domain and depth of Islam in the region, particularly when the Muslim ruler allied
himself with (or fought against) another local Muslim ruler.
 During this period (eleventh -eighteenth centuries) Sufism should not be thought
of as distinct or separate from the vast body of jurisprudence which it complemented
and alongside which it grew out of the primary sources of the Qur'an and the sunna,
notwithstanding that the house of Islam has long been divided in its attitude to the
Ibn 
'Arabi
 tradition of theosophical Sufism. The Sufi Shaikhs were not necessarily to
be thought of as individuals or a class separate from the 
`ulama1
 It is in part the antitan-qa stance of the reformists of Muhammad Abduh's generation that have exaggerated this tension which they have projected back anachronistically, and a number
of Western scholars have followed in their wake.
 The Sufi movement is a dimension of Islam, and in so far as it has a separate
identity, represents only one aspect of Islamization. There are many others which
complement and support each other. Among them is story-telling, especially as
represented by local re-tellings, adaptations and enlargements of Qur'anic presentations of scenes from lives of the prophets, qisas al-anbiya. (Stories of the Prophets)
which long before the Germans invented the term heilsgeschicht, established a widely
socialized perception of a universalistic salvation history from Adam to Muhammad.
 My examples have been limited to Acheh, Palernbang and Banten, and they are far
from exhaustive. One could refer to other centres and periods with similar kinds of
documentation. But this brings us to a paradox: of how intensely local such
communities and centres of trade and culture are, and how the religious elites were
ernbodied in these communities, in a way that presented a fusiQn of universal forms of
Islam with local beliefs and life-styles [Lapidus 1990:259]. This is indeed true of
Indonesia today, with its distinctive styles of fusion of local elements with the
universalistic doctrines of Isiam in say Acheh, Minangkabau, Central Java and the
Celebes, but it is certainly not peculiar to Indonesia and its neighbours. Lapidus' great
work rnakes this abundantly clear.
 What it amounts to is that the processes of Islamization in Southeast Asia and the
results of those processes are more like than unlike what happened elsewhere in the
 59
 NII-Electronic

--- Page 18 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
 fiM7ti7-za 31g1g
Islamic world; in the so-called polarization between what is called shartke and adat
law, we are only seeing the same processes that were to yield the so-called classic
formulations of Islamic Law-a bringing together and infusing with an Islamic spirit
and norms, a whole range of practices in familial, commercial and criminal law,
administrative regulations, bringing in Persian, Byzantine and Hellenistic rnaxirns,
elements of the canon law of the orthodox church, Talmudic and old Babylonian lawbringing all into conformity with God's wjll [ibid. :102-103]. Equally, 
"syncretism,"
no matter how this troublesome word is understood, is a phenomenon well attested in
all parts of the Muslirn world.
 Sufism then had and has its role in a variety of styles of Islamization in different
regions and periods in combination with many other things besides in Southeast Asia.
It is a dimension which offered a variety of modalities of participation in the universe
of Islam according to the spiritual taste, cultural traditions and Zeitgeist of those parts
of Southeast Asia that were to become part of the domain of Islam.
 So let me conclude:the role of Sufism in our region js not all that different from
that of Sufism in other parts of the Muslim world. There is rittle reason to regard the
Muslims of Southeast Asia overal as being necessarily rnore legalistic, more mystical
or more prone to 
"syncretisrn"
 than other peoples of the Muslim world. From Morocco
to the Moros the Domain of Islam includes a mix of shared emphases, and a varying
･distribution of emphases within that mix. Indeed, a major challenge to Southeast
Asianists is to learn to recognize that the presence of Islarn as a living, functional
component permeating the diverse traditions of the region is far greater than
conventional wisdom up to the present has allowed. To echo the Qur'anic words: ...
Sidghata 
`llah!
 Wa man ahsanu mina Vldhi st'dghatan . . . as the dye of Allah! And who,
better than Allah can spread the tincture of a dye? (Sura 2,Baqara:138) This 
`dye
 of
Allah' is more widely and deeply infused than many have realized.
 Bibliography
al-Afrani at-Marakishi. 7lebaqat at-sulaha' (Lithograph, no place, no date).
Drewes, Gerardus W. J. 1954. Een lbvaanse Primbon uit de Zesttende Eeuw, Leiden : E. J, BriII.
 . 1969. The Admonitions of Seh Bari, Bibliotheca Indonesica 4. Dordrecht: Floris
 Publications Holland.
 . 1977. Directions for 71ruvellers on the ltdystic POth. VKI (Verhandelingen van het
 Koninklijk Instituut veor Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde) 81, The Hague.
60
NII-ElectronicMbrary
 ,
Service )

--- Page 19 of 19 ---
Kyoto University
NII-Electronic Library Service
KyotoUniversity
A. H. JoHNs I Islamization in Southeast Asia
Drewes, Gerardus W.J.; and Brakel, Lode F. 1986. 71he POems of Htimeah thnsunL Bibliotheca
 Indonesica 26. Dordrecht : Floris Publications Holland.
Fatimi. Syed Q. 1963. lslam Comes to Mdlaysia. Singapore: MSRI (Malaysian Sociological
 Research Institute Ltd).
Gibb, Hamilton A. R.; and Bowen, Harold. 1957. Islamic Society and the PVest Vblume 
L
 lslamic
 Socz'ety in the Eighteenth Centuty Part fiZ London : Oxford University Press.
Hall, Daniel G. E. 1955. A Histo7y of Southeast Asia. London : Macmillan.
Heer, Nicholas L. 1979. The llrecious Rearl. Albany: SUNY Press.
Hitti, Philip K. 1979. Histor:y of the Arabs. London : Macmillan (Papermac).
Iskandar, Teuku. 1958. De HikcijatAijeh. VKI (Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor
 Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde) 26, The Hague.
Johns, Anthony H. 1955. Daka'ik al-Huruf by Abd al-Ra'uf of SingkeL .Ll?AS (Journal of the
 Roya] Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland) 1955 : 55 - 73, 139 - 158.
 . 1957. Malay Sufism as Illustrated in a Collection of Anonymous Malay Tracts.
 IMBRAS (Journal of the Malayan Branch Royal Asiatic Society) No. 178, Vol. 30, Part 2 .
 . 1961. Sufism as a Category in Indonesian Literature and History. .lozarnal of Southeast
 Astan History 2 <2): 10-23. Singapore.
 . 1965. [IVte Gift Addressed to the SPin't of the P)rQphet. Oriental Monegraph Series, No. 1 ,
 Canberra : Australian National University Press.
 , 1975. Islam in Southeast Asia: Reflections and New Directions. indonesla (Cornell
 Modern Indonesia Project) No. 19.
Jones, Russell. 1979. Ten Indonesian Conversion Myths. In Conversion to tslam, edited by N.
 Levtzion, pp. 129-158. London : HQImes and Meier.
Lapidus, Ira M. 1990. A Histo7v of lslamic Societies. Cambridge University Press.
al-Nawawi al-Bantani. 1965. Mtirah Labld. Cairo : Halabi.
Nieuwenhuijze, Cornelius, A. O. van. 1945. Shamstt 
'l-Din
 van POsai. Leiden : E. J. Brill.
Snouck Hurgronje, Christiaan. 1931. Mekka in the Latter Rirt of the I9th Century. Leiden: E. J.
 Brill.
Voorhoeve, Pieter. 1952. Bayan Tadjalli, IZBG (Tijdschrift Bataviaasch Genootchap voer Indisch
 Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde) 85(D.
61