Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



J-/)/oiZy//j,j 




BacbacO Cnlltge lititatt 

JAMES WALKER, D.D., LL.D., 



THE 



YOGAVACAEA'S MANUAL 



OP 



INDIAN MYSTICISM 



AS PRACTISED BY BUDDHISTS. 



EDITED BY 

T. W. RHYS DAVIDS, PED., LLJ). 



'i 

r' 

LONDON 

PUBLISHED FOE THE PALI TEXT SOCIETY BY HENRY FROWDB 

OXI'ORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER B.C. 

1896. 



> - jsr. f/0^.^ 



NO 



\/^ J^LiL-L >4 113. Z 



.-,p5iT:-o fToTJV^.^ 



\ 



DECf 2 1898 







This volume is printed at the expense of 
Edwaed T. Stubdt. 



Printed by W. Drugulin, TjelpziK (Germany). 



This, the first hook on the subject published in 
Europe, and also the first book in Sinhalese printed 
in European characters, is dedicated to 

EDWARD T. STURDY, 

to whom we owe the publication and translation of 
so many texts on Indian Mysticism, with the cordial 
sympathy and sincere admiration of his friend 

THE AUTHOR. 



YOGAVACARA MANUAL. 



INTKODUCTIOK 



The unique MS. on which the following edition is based 
is at Bambara-galla Wihare, in Teldeniya, Ceylon. 
It was discovered there in 1893 by Mr. H. Dhabma- 
PALA. He succeeded through the kind offices of the then 
Interpreter Mudaliyar at the Kandy Kachcheri in obtain- 
ing a copy of it, brought the copy to London (which he 
passed through on his way to the Parliament of Religions 
at Chicago) and was kind enough to come down to Little- 
stone, where I was then slowly recovering from very serious 
illness, in order to leave the MS. with me. He expressed 
the hope that I should be able to make something more 
out of it than either he, or the members of the Order in 
Ceylon, where the practise of Jhana had quite died out, 
could do. 

I was immensely interested in the MS., and began immedi- 
ately to copy it out. But the very scanty limits of the 
leisure time which my official duties as secretary of the 
RAS. leave me. prevented me from finishing the work till 
this year. And it could not have been finished now if it 
had not been for the devotion and ability of my wife, who 
took down at dictation, often in evening hours when I had 
returned too tired to do anything but dictate, the Sinha- 
lese and Pali sentences of which the MS. is composed. 
The task was not easy, and a perusal of the text will 
justify its being called tedious. It was. finished at last, 
and the result is the present edition. 



— VI — 

Our MS. gives a text that is not satisfactory. The copy 
has evidently been hurriedly made, and contains not a few 
clerical errors. And it is also pretty evident that the 
original from which it is made was written by a scribe 
who had but a smattering of Pali. Throughout the whole 
text the omission of the nasals (that is, putting the crude 
form for the accusative) ^ the insertion of Sinhalese words 
in the middle of Pali sentences ^ the odd division of 
clauses 3, and other signs of ignorance or carelessness are 
so constant that it is not probable they are wholly due 
to the writer of our copy. He would sometimes, however 
rapidly he wrote, have been right, if his original was 
right. 

The omission of long marks, mere twists of the style, 
over the i's and u's is of less importance. They are often 
omitted in Pali MSS., both Burmese and Sinhalese, which 
otherwise show signs of scholarship, just as the dots to 
the i's, or the crosses to the t's, are omitted in European 
writing. So also the continual use of the dental n for 
the cerebral, and vice versa, common in all Sinhalese 
writing and even printing, though not found in the very 
best Pali MSS., is common, even in good ones. Our MS. 
uses the two n's, in both the Sinhalese and Pali, quite 
indiscriminately: and it is very probable that the original 
is not much better. The letters of our copy are well and 
clearly formed; and there is very seldom any doubt, even 
in the case of n's and t's, or in the case of c's' m's and 
w's, as to which letter is intended. 

The question arose whether it was worth while, on 
materials so inadequate, to publish an edition of this book. 
There is little doubt as to the great interest and impor- 
tance, both from the historical, and from the psychologi- 
cal point of view, of the subject treated in this manual. 



' See note ^ on p. 4 and passim. 

^ For instance dili p. 5 line 4, iti pandam on p. 16. 

3 See the notes throughout. 



— vn — 

We have no other work in Buddhist literature, either PaK 
or Sanskrit, devoted to the details of Jhana and Samadhi. 
It is highly improbable that the incumbent of the Bam- 
bara-galla Wihara will ever lend his unique MS. to Europe. 
And the passages where the readings remain doubtful are 
not of special importance — the great difficulties of the 
text are of another kind, and would not be removed by 
right readings, in similies or other subordinate phrases. 
For these reasons it has been thought better to publish 
what we have than to wait an indefinite time for a per- 
fection possibly unattainable. 

The MS. consists of 141 palm leaves 167/8 by 2V4 
inches in size with 8 lines on a leaf, but occasionally 9, 
and in one or two instances 10. It bears no title either 
at the beginning or the end. As the person for whose 
use it is intended is called several times 'Yogavacara' 
(see pp. 42, 43, 44, 94, 97), and as it is not intended to 
be read but to be used as a manual, I have ventured to 
call it *the Togavacara's Manual'. 

It sets out in detail the means to be adopted, the plan 
to be followed, in practising meditation as an ethical self- 
training. The states of mind to be brought on by this 
exercise are as follows, and in the following order, each 
successive one being dependent on the successful attain- 
ment of its predecessor. 

1. Joy (Piti) of five kinds* 

a. khuddaka piti slight joy 

b. khanika piti momentary joy 

c. okkantika piti joy that causes a shock 

d. ubbega piti joy that amounts to transport 

e. pharana piti joy that suffuses the whole being 



^ The distinction between these is explained at length 
by Buddhaghosa (Attha Salini pp. 115—117, Visuddhi 
Magga Chap. IV). 



M 


W 


„ Order 


» 


W 


good conduct 


n 


w 


generosity 


n 


?? 


Nirvana 


« 


« 


the gods 


« 


?? 


death 


44 


44 


the one idea 
the one element 



— IX — 

6. The Ten Memories (Anussati's) 

Buddhanussati memories of the Buddha 

Dhammanussati „ „ „ Doctrine 

Samghanussati 

Silanussati 

Caganussati 

Upasamanussati 

Devatanussati 

Marananussati 

• 

Ekasannanussati 
Ekadhatuvatanussati 

7. The Four Planes of Being 

Akasa space 

Yinnana consciousness 

Akincanna freedom from obstacle 

Nevasannanasanna neither ideas nor the absence 

thereof 
Arupavacara all the above four together 

8. The Four Excellent Conditions 

(Brahma-vihara's) 
Metta Love 

Karuna Pity for other's sorrow 
Muduta Sympathy in others' Joy 
Upekkha Magnanimity 

9. The Tenfold Knowledge (Nana) 

Samatha-dassana-nana Insight into Nirvana 
Udaya-vyaya-dassana-nana Insight into origin and 

decay 
Bhanganudassana-nana Insight into disintegration 

now 
Bhayatupatthana-dassana-nana Insight into disinte- 
gration in the future 
Adinavanudassana-nana Insight into dangers 
Nibbidanudjassana-nana Insight into vanity 
Muccitu-kamyata-dassana-nana Insight into desire 

for escape 



— X — 

Patisankhanupassana-nana Insight into the consti- 
tuent parts of individuality 

Sankharupekkhanupassaiia-nana Insight into there 

being no *soul' therein 

Anuloma-anupassana-nana All these together. 

10. The nine Transcendent Qualities 
(Lokuttara Dhamma) 

4 The four stages of the Noble Path 



5 — 8 The fruit of the attainment of each of them 
9 Nirvana 

It is impossible of course to give all that these tech- 
nical terms imply and connote in the few English words 
selected as suggestive translations. The full meaning must 
be gathered from other Buddhist works. We have here 
10 groups embracing 112 different qualities or states of 
meditation which it is desired, one after another, to pro- 
duce in one's mind or heart. And the method adopted is, 
I think, intended to be the same for each, though the full 
text is not given for each and all of them. 

That method is as follows: 

The student recluse commences (at top of page 3) with 
calling to mind the three gems — the Buddha, the 
Dhamma, and the Sangha — and taking refuge in them. 
There then follows a formula of confession and absolution 
(taken from the Vinaya), to be repeated three times. Then 
a statement of the state of mind it is desired to call up. 
Then a renewed appeal to the memory of the Buddha 
and the great disciples of the past; and an expression of 
devotion to them. All the above is in Pali. Then follows 
the following quotation, also of course in Pali, found in 
the Satipatthana and other Suttas. 

*He seats himself cross-legged keeping his body erect, 
firm in self possession; thoughtfully he inhales, thought- 
fully exhales his breath, so that taking a long inbreathing 
or a long outbreathing, or taking a quick inbreathing 
or a quick outbreathing, he knows in each case what he 
does.' 



— XI — 

There is no doubt that he is intended to suit the act 
to the word. So far he has been squatting on the ground 
on his heels, and with joined palms (the attitude of reve- 
rence); now he sits on the ground cross-legged with his 
hands on his lap (the attitude of thought). Neither of 
these positions is possible to ordinary Europeans. We 
need not be put off by the fact that it is not expressly 
stated that he does so. The quotation from the suttas 
also has no expressed nominative to the verb *he sits'. It 
has to be supplied from the foregoing sentences in each 
Sutta. So here we have no expressed nominative through- 
out the book till page 42 where the word yogavacara 
occurs. We need only notice, in passing, that this con- 
stant change of posture, which takes place more than 
1500 times in the course of the whole exercise, completely 
excludes ajiy notion of hypnotic trance. 

Then follows the following sentence, not found in the 
Pitakas, but probably a quotation from some later Pali 
book. 

*With my eyes closed (with the subconsciousness of the 
eye) I see the tip of my nose, and breathing regularly, 
and fixing the object of my thought in the heart, I take as 
my aid (parikamma) the idea of Arahatship.' 

Then the text goes on in Sinhalese: 

*When he has thus continued in meditation, keen in in- 
tellect, two images appear, first hazy then clear. When 
the hazy has withdrawn, gone out as it were through the 
imperfections passing away, and cleansed of all impurities 
the clear image has penetrated his whole being, then 
entering the door of the mind the element of brightness 
(tejo dhatuwa) becomes manifest. The conception (the 
appana) has the colour of the shining of the evening 
star, the preliminary aid to this (the parikarma) is 
the colour of gold, the sustaining aid (the upacara) has 
a colour like that of the young sun rising in the east. 
Taking all three (the appana, parikarma and upacara) 
from the tip of the nose, putting them for a while in the 
heart, he finally locates them in the navel'. 



— XII — 

» 

The meaning of this last sentence must be that he first 
(his eyes being closed) gets the conception of brightness 
at the tip of his nose, and then, in thought, follows it 
down to his heart and afterwards still lower down to his 
navel. Nothing of this kind has been found in the Pitakas. 

The same framework is followed throughout, the state 
of mind aimed at, and the appearing image, varying in 
each case. The states of mind have been given above, the 
images are always, in order, the five elements, earth water 
fire wind and space (or solidity, fluidity, brightness 
airiness, and space) and each of these five has a different 
set of appana, parikarma, and upacara of a similar 
kind to those given above for brightness. 

When this exercise has been successfully carried out for 
each of the five kinds of joy in order, accompanied by 
each of the five elements in order, other exercises follow 
in the following order: 

2. Patipatiya In order 

3. Chasaddaggahana The six words 

4. Vidatthi The span 

5. Dhatu-samuha The group of elements 

6. Catu-naya The four ways 

7. Panca-naya The five ways 

8. Ha day a The heart 

9. Samadhi Concentration 

10. Dhamma-tira-tthitika The lasting of the faith 

11. Iti-pandam puja The candle 

12. Kaya-vasl-vatta Command of the body. 

The frame-work of each of these exercises is given on 
page 7. The name of the exercise reached and of the 
state of mind at the moment aimed at is given and the 
quotation from the Satipatthana follows. The elements 
form no part in any of these exercises, except the first 
and the two last; and the signification of the names in the 
above list of these exercises is nowhere explained. In each 
of them each of the items of the group of mental states 
is taken first in direct (anuloma) then in reverse (pati- 



— XIII — 

loma) order. As the framework is only repeated for the 
first in each group, the exposition of each of these exer- 
cises usually becomes in our manual merely a string of 
words showing the state of mind at the moment under 
consideration (See for instance pp. 37 — 39). But the candle 
exercise is set out at somewhat greater length: and it will 
be foimd for the first group (of the five joys) on pages 14 — 16. 
In this case a lighted candle is divided into eight por- 
tions by eight bits of wood stuck into the candle at equal 
distances an inch or so apart. Each of the five joys is 
then meditated upon until the image of the corresponding 
element appears ; and that is kept in mind, located as be- 
fore, until one section of the candle has burnt and the 
stick marking it has fallen out. At the sound of the fall 
(he cannot of course see it) he rises from the posture of 
meditation, adopts the posture of reverence, and goes on 
to the next meditation. When he has reached the end of 
the group of five joys, he takes them up again, one by one, 
in the reverse order, and meditates on each during the 
time marked by the falling of the sticks that mark the 
divisions in the candle. 

In No. 12 of these latter exercises the point of differen- 
tation is the spot where the appearing image is located, 
first in direct and then in reverse order, one inch away 
from (either below or above) the place where it was lo- 
cated in the previous meditation. 

The 112 states of mind being thus exercised in 12 
different ways we have in this manual 1344 meditations, 
and the number is more than doubled by the method used 
in the latter exercises of taking each member of each group 
first in the direct, then in the reverse order: and by the 
method of taking a separate meditation, in Groups 4, 5, 
and 8, for each member of the group successively with 
each of the five Jhanas successively. 

As might be expected, there is no discussion or expla- 
nation of any one of the 112 states of mind. But the 
constructor — we can scarcely say the author — of the 
manual seems to dwell with special favour on the Excellent 



— XIV — 

Conditions (the Brahma Viharas) of Love, Pity, Sym- 
pathy, and Magnanimity. Already in the Suttas' it is 
laid down how, beginning with a small portion, the whole 
world is to be gradually suffused with each of these four 
feelings in order. Our manual expands this part of its 
subject to great length so that this group has twenty pages 
(68 — 89), one fifth of the whole book, allotted to it. 

It is not easy to see how the calling up of the mental 
image of the five elements, and especially how the locating 
of this image in different parts of the body, can be of 
assistance in the practice of the ethical states set out in 
the 10 groups. The idea is no doubt to suffuse the whole 
body with the particular feeling being practised at the 
particular moment. The psycho-physics involved will seem 
to Western minds mistaken. But it really requires a 
practised Yogavacara, who has actually experienced what 
does happen, to be able to explain and to rightly judge 
of this. Nothing of the kind has been found in the K- 
takas. And I do not know from whom or at what period 
or in what degree it was adopted by Buddhists. Even 
Buddhaghosa, so far as his works are known to us, has 
nothing about it, though he has a great deal on methods 
and details of meditation beyond what the Pitaka texts 
give us. And this particular form of exercise is not 
referred to in the Yoga Sutra. But there are many other 
possible sources. It should be emphasised that the prac- 
tice of a detailed and systematised meditation is, in India, 
pre-Buddhistic; and that it is closely allied with very an- 
cient beliefs and practices prevalent throughout the world. 
The subject has never yet been discussed with any full- 
ness of detail, or with the necessary historical insight; and, 
of course, it can only be touched on here. 

In the very earliest times of the most remote animism 
we find the belief that a person rapt from all sense of 
the outside world, possessed by a spirit, acquired in that 

^ For instance my ^Buddhist Suttas' pp. 201, 202, 
272, 273. 



— XV — 

state a degree of sanctity, and often of insight and 
knowledge, denied to ordinary mortals. In the most 
ancient instances handed down the person entranced is 
so often a woman, and so often associated with the 
worship of Mother Earth, that the natural inference 
would seem to point to these beliefs having originated at a 
time even preceding polytheistic views and patriarchal in- 
stitutions. Beliefs of this kind are found so persistently, 
wherever we have ancient records, that it is evident they 
were not only very old, but also so very widely distributed 
that they may reasonably be regarded as universal. And 
this is by no means strange since the beliefs are chiefly 
based on the attempt to explain, by means of the soul- 
theory, the actual but mysterious facts of catalepsy, automa- 
tism, and hypnotism \ 

With the gradual rise of polytheism beliefs so ancient, 
sacred, and mysterious could not be pushed aside. Differing 
as they did, from the first, in important details, in the 
method of applying to complicated facts the crude and 
inconsistent soul theories, it was easy to modify them, in 
a manner sufficient to ensure their continuous life, by 
harmonising them with the newer views ^ 

With the rise of monotheism the beliefs still survived, 
and the practises were carried on. Held in holy passion, 
his rapt soul sitting in his eyes, the thinker forgot 
himself to marble. Only Milton is too modern in his 
phraseology. The rapt soul was never supposed to be in 
the eyes. It has left the body altogether, and in a sup- 
posed Union with the deity, the great soul of the universe, 
is seeing things hidden to worldly eyes. Plato is full of 
it, and the Neo-platonists carried these ecstacies to great 

' See Pierre Janet *L'Automatisme Psychologique'. 

* See for instance the rich collection of material on the 
history of these beliefs among the Greeks 800 to 500 B.C. 
in Rohde's *Psyche'. Percival Lowell in his *Soul of the 
Far East' has an interesting study of similar beliefs and 
practises in quite modern times among the polytheists of 
Japan. 



— XVI — 

perfection. The Gnostics in the early centuries and the 
German mystics in later times worked on the same lines; 
and Meister Eckhart and his followers had been antici- 
pated when they showed how easily such ideas could be 
reconciled with Christian theories. Under the cloak of 
Muhammadanism the ancient frenzy of the dance, and 
the newer transports of ecstacy have continued in vogue 
through the centuries, and the whirling of Dervishes and 
the raptures of Sufis are known from Persia all the way 
to Spain. So in India from the Soma frenzy in the 
Veda, through the mystic reveries of the Upanishads and 
the hypnotic trances of the Yoga, allied beliefs and practises 
have never lost their importance and their charm. 

It was simply impossible, when Gotama studied and 
thought in the sixth century BC, for any view of life, 
claiming to be complete, to avoid this question. It is 
clear from the Pitakas, and from Buddhist tradition outside 
the Pitakas, that the question was not only much older 
than Buddhism, but that it filled a very important place 
in the previously prevalent systems of thought. In the 
Dialogues Gotama is represented as describing the opinions 
of his teachers, Alara Kalama and Uddaka the son and 
pupil of Rama, as insufficient precisely because their aims 
were two particular stages of ecstacy, and not Nirvana ^ 
And other men who came to talk with him, either them- 
selves teachers, or persons interested in the questions of 
the day, are often said to have turned the conversation 
to or started the discussion on points of a similar kind. 
In the Jataka legends pre-Buddhistic sages are frequently 
stated, after retiring to the Himalaya region, to have 
practised the Eight Concentrations. (Attha-Samapattiyo) 
or other specific stages of ecstacy ^ As a technical term 
in Pitaka usage this expression means the Four Jhanas and 
the Four Arupa-Vimokhas3. It would probably be an 

' M. I. 163—166. Compare J. 1. 66. 
^ See, for instance, Jat. II. 55, 56, 57, 61, 62, 65, 69, 
72, 86. 

3 As set out M. 1. 159, 399, 436, 455 etc. 



— xvn — 

anachronism to suppose this to be the meaning then, and 
so far as I am aware the author of the Jataka Commen- 
tary (I have not traced the words in the verses) does not 
explain it in the specific later same. But it is enough 
for our argument that he takes it as a matter of 
course that they practised advanced forms of regulated 
ecstacy. 

Brahmin tradition is entirely in accord with this. The 
Yoga books, many centuries younger, in their present 
form, than the Dialogues, are unfortunately the only 
evidence we have of the details of the methods adopted 
by Brahmin Mystics. But though the details may have 
varied and the technical terms have changed their meaning, 
it is clear that the practices were carried out centuries 
before, for the Yoga is referred to in much older docu- 
ments. However vague and indefinite these references 
may be, they establish the fact of a regulated system of 
hypnotic and mystic exercises at the date of the books in 
which this occur. Only one of these is pre-Buddhistic: 
the Taittiriya Upanishad (2. 4). The oldest of the others 
are the Svetasvatara Maitri and Katha Upanishads, and 
then come the Maha-Bharata and Manu. In these books 
the Yoga system is incidentally referred to as well known, 
but no details are given. The age of these references is 
still matter of controversy; and it is, to say the least, 
very doubtful whether the Yoga practices referred to in 
them are, or are not, the same as the practices discurbed 
in the later Yoga Sutra. But these references to an 
established system confirm the accuracy of the Buddhist 
tradition. 

This question of the age of Yoga practices is quite 
distinct from^^ that of the age of the philosophical system 
of the Sankhya Karika on which the existing Yoga Sutra 
is based throughout. There may have been Yoga practices 
based on other systems of philosophy though we do not 
know the details of any such except the Buddhist. 

Professor Garbe holds the Sankhya to be older than 
Buddhism; I have already discussed his views in my 



— xvm — 

American Lectures % and given the reasons why, in my 
humble opinion, it would be more accurate to say 'there 
were before the time of the Buddha isolated thinkers, of 
whose words we have no trace, who elaborated views 
similar to those out of which the Sankhya was eventually 
developed'. 

On the other hand Father Dahlmann thinks that 
system late, and tries to show that there was an. older 
Sankhya, now preserved in the Mahabharata, and there 
called the Sankhya, from which the later one (and also both 
Vedantism and Buddhism) w^ere derived. These views have 
reserved the very cordial approval of Professor von 
Schroeder* and of Professor Jacobi; and the latter in 
a most valuable and suggestive paper 3 after showing how 
Professor Garbe's reasoning is, in his opinion, insufficient, 
has pointed out interesting parallels between an obscure 
paragraph found in the Pali Suttas and certain passages 
of the Sankhya- Yoga. When he jumps to the tremendous 
conclusion that the Buddhistic philosophy as a whole is there- 
fore derived from the Sankhya — from the Sankhya, that is, 
of the Mahabharata, not that of the Sankhya Karika — 
I confess myself unable to follow him. It is difficult to 
see how the evidence he adduces takes us farther than 
(if inded so far as) the conclusion quoted above; and I 
would refer to the whole context there, and to the views 
expressed on Father Dahlmann's theories in the 'Journal 
of the Royal Asiatic Society' for 1897 pp. 407—410. 

As for the Yoga Rajendra Lai Mitra says in his Pre- 
face to the Yoga Sutra (p. XVIU) that 

'The meditations he (CJotama) practised were all in 
accord with the Rules of the Yoga system, and even their 
technical terms are the same.' 

It is difficult to see how in January 1883, the dg,te of the 



^ 'American lectures' 1896, pp. 24—29. 
2 'Vienna Oriental Journal' 1897 (Vol. XI) pp.190— 197. 
^ Nachrichten der K. Gresellschaft der Wissenschaften 
zu Gottingeii. Phil. Hist. Classe 1896; 1 — 15. 



\ 



— XIX — 

Preface, so positive a judgment could be defended. Mr. 
Mitra in fact does not attempt to defend it. He gives in 
the preface no single instance, and no passages in support of 
either of ^is statements. In the body of the work, on 
p. 92, he says that murder theft falsehood incontinence 
and avarice, called collectively yama in the Yoga Sutra, 
are called Paramita's by the Buddhists. This, if accurate, 
would be an instance of diversity i^the use of technical 
terms. But he gives no authority; and the statement is 
not only a mere blunder, but it is one he might easily 
have avoided \ He is equally wrong in his note on p. 154. 
In speaking of the unusual mental and physical conditions 
of ecstacy and trance both the Yoga Sutra and the 
Buddhist texts are compelled to use ordinary words in a 
forced, technical sense. It is surprising how very seldom 
they have happened on the same words. The cases do 
not amount to one per cent; and are in fact confined 
to a few expressions, such as Dhyana and Samadhi, 
common to all schools of thought in India. And in not 
one single instance that I can discover do these two 
schools use even those words in the same technical sense. 
And this is not to be wondered at. For whereas the 
Yoga (though it has its intellectual and even ethical side) 
is predominantly physical and hypnotic, the Buddhist 
method of meditation (though it has its physical side) 
is predominantly intellectual and ethical. 

It is not accurate to speak of the practice of systematic 
exercises for the attainment of various stages of mental 
exaltation, ecstacy and rapture as Buddhist. They have 
been carried out in India by men belonging to diverse 
schools of thought with a devotion and persistence, and 

^ The Paramita group has not yet been found in the 
primitive books. But the idea was in full life as early 
as the form when the Cariya Pitaka, which is arranged 
according to it, was put together. Since that time it is 
common property of all tlie schools: and a reference to 
Ohilders, or to the Petersburg Dictionary, or to Spence 
Hardy would have saved the mistake. 



/ 



— XX — 

to a measure of success, probably unequalled in the world. 
They are Buddhist only because both the early Buddhists 
and Buddhism were alike Indian. And they are quite 
independent of the special features, either of thought or 
of practice, which distinguished Buddhists from other 
Indians. The position assigned to these practices in 
primitive Buddhism is set out in the following texts. 

In the well known Dialogue, the Samaiina-phala 
(Digha Collection No. 2) King Ajatasattu, after pointing 
out the advantages derived from their occupations by a 
long list of ordinary people, asks whether the members 
of the order derive any corresponding advantage, visible 
in this life, from theirs. The answer is a list of advan- 
tages which are said to be intended to be taken in a 
gradually ascending degree of value: 

1. The honour and respect shown to members of a re- 
ligious order. 

2. The training in all those lower kinds of mere mora- 
lity set out in the very ancient document called the Silas 
(incorporated in each of the 13 Dialogues in the Slla 
Vagga). 

3. The absence of fear, confidence of heart, thence resulting. 

4. The way in which he learns to guard the doors of 
his senses. 

5. The constant self possession he thus gains. 

6. The power of being content with little, with simpli- 
city of life. 

7. The emancipation of mind from the five obstacles to 
selfmastery — covetousness, illwill, laziness, conceit, and 
doubt. 

8. The Four Jhanas. 

9. The insight arising from knowledge (Nana-dassanam). 

10. The power of projecting mental images. 

11. The Five Abhinna's. 

12. The knowledge that leads to the passing away of 
cravings, becomings, and ignorance, (that is, to Arahatship). 

Here No. 8 and 11, and perhaps 10 (the interpretation 
of this item is still doubtful) belong to Mysticism. 



— XXI — 

In the 79*^ Dialogue of the Majjhima collection, the 
Cula Sakuludayi Sutta, Gotama says that the 4 Jha- 
nas are a more effectual method for obtaining happiness 
than the mere observance of ordinary morality such as 
abstinence from murder theft incontinence falsehood or 
the practice of austerities (tapo). tJdayi then asks him, 
whether it is for the sake of realising that happiness that 
men follow his (Gotama's) religion. The answer repeats 
Nos. 2 — 8 inclusive of the last list saying that each is 
higher and better. And then goes on to say that each 
of the 5 Abhiniias is higher and better still, and. finally 
that No. 12 is the best of all the things for the sake of 
realising which men adopt his religion. 

Here Nos. 9 and 10 are omitted, and the wording 
between 7 and 8 is sUghtly varied. But the argument is 
practically identicals 

In the 24*^ Dialogue of the Majjhima Sari- 
putta is the questioner,- and Punna expounds the 
doctrine. The question is *what is the object aimed at 
by those who follow the religion of Gotama'. One after 
another Punna denies that the aim is any one of the 
following: 

1. Purification of moral conduct. 

2. Purification of the heart. 

3. Purification of one's views. 

4. Removal of doubt. 

5. Insight gained by knowledge of the right path and 
the wrong. 

6. Insight gained by knowledge of the right method 
and the wrong. 

*Well but then, if the object be none of these, pray 
which can it be?' Says Sariputta. 

*It is anupada parinibbanam' is the reply S 



^ So also, but shorter, in Majjhima No. 27, 38, and 39. 

* For parinibbanam and parinibbayati used of 
the living Arahat see M. 1. 45, 46, 235, 251 (= S. 3, 54) 
446 2. 102; Dhp. 89; S. 3, 26; It. 52, 56; Mil. 50; Jat. 4. 
302 453 &c. 



— xxn — 

*And is that purification of moral conduct?' 

*No, Sir! it is not.' says Punna, who then denies, one 
after another, its identity with Nos. 2 — 6: and finally 
admits it is all the six taken together. 

Here we have the same question as in the last extract, 
and the answer omits all reference to Mysticism. And 
in the Milinda we find Nagasena on being twice asked 
the same question giving a similar answer in different' 
words, again without any reference to mystic states. And 
this is not one of the case^ where the Milinda has later 
doctrine; for since my Milinda appeared the identical 
phraseology has been twice found in a Pitaka text^ 

So in Majjhima No. 32 where the six chief disciples, 
one beautiful night, in the Gosinga Sala Wood, ask one 
another what is the mental quality in a Bhikkhu which 
could add a fresh charm to the beauty of the scene, we 
have the following six replies: 

1. Ananda says: *When a Bhikkhu knows the Word by 
heart, understands it, and can expound it well'. 

2. Revata says: *When a Bhikkhu fights out for himself 
internal peace, and devoted to solitude, resisting not the 
feeling of rapture (Jhana), becomes endowed with insight', 

3. Anuruddha says: *When a Bhikkhu has the Di- 
vine Eye'. 

4. Kassapa says: *When a Bhikkhu keeps the vows, is 
content with little, devoted to solitude, avoids society, is 
given to earnestness, to wisdom, to Samadhi, to emanci- 
pation to the insight which comes from the assurance of 
emancipation'. 

5. Moggollana says: ^When two Bhikkhus talk together 
over the Abhidhamma, ask each other questions, and have 
profit therefrom'. 

6. Sariputta says: *When a Bhikkhu rules his heart, 
and does not let his heart rule him'. 

They then tell these and six answers to the Buddha, 
and ask which was right. He gives the preference to 

' My Milinda I 49, 101. Compare S. IV, 253; V, 6. 



— xxin — 

Sariputta's, and adds: *But hear from me what sort of 
Bhikkhu could on such a night add glory to the wood. 
It is one who sitting calm, collected, selfpossessed, makes 
resolve *I rise not up from this seat until my heart is set 
free from the Asavas!'^ 

Here the third reply belongs to Mysticism which enters 
into the second: but does not occur in the Buddha's 
own reply. 

The three lower Jhanas are said to be within the range 
of a disciple who is still learning (a sekha) whereas the 
4*^ Jhana is a sort of Samadhi which belongs to the 
Arahat*. But on the other hand all the 4 Jhanas are 
said (in the 64*^ Sutta of the Majjhima) to be useftd for 
the removal of the five bonds which prevent a man from 
becoming an Arahat. 

So in the Vinaya it is probably to the extraordinary 
insight attainable by the prolonged self-concentration of 
Jhana and Samadhi that the Fourth Parajika Rule 
refers when it lays down that any member of the Order 
wrongly claiming to have attained the alam-ariya- 
nana-dassanai?i3 ceases ipse facto to be any longer a 
member. 

These Rules are undoubtedly among the very oldest 
Buddhist documents we have. But the Commentary on 
them, the Sutta Vibhanga, gives two inconsistent expla- 
nations. In the Introductory Story, telling why and when 
the rule was made, it gives as the reason, that certain 
members of the Order said of one another that such 
and such a one had practised one or other of the 4 Jhanas, 
or one or other of the 6 Abhinna's. This Story belongs 
to the work of the authors of the Sutta Vibhanga. Now 

* The asavas are those qualities the being set free from 
which constitutes Arahatship. 

^ A. 1. 220 compare M. 2. 37. 

3 (apparently *the insight of that knowledge beyond 
that of ordinary men which suffices to make an Ariya', 
that is an Arahat). See M. 1. 68 (= Jat. 1. 389) 246 
(= Mil. 244, 289) 208, 472. 



— XXIV — 

they include also in this work a still older commentary 
whose name is lost. And that Old Comment (V. 3. 91) 
explains the powers referred to as follows — the expla- 
nation of the terms by the authors of the Sutta Vibhanga 
(V. 3. 93) being added in parentheses: 

1. Jhana (the four Jhanas)^ 

2. Vimokkha (Threefold emancipation of the heart — 
by being delivered from the notion of soul, by meditation 
free from worldly objects, and free from lust illwill and 
delusion) *. 

3. Samadhi (Concentration, threefold as the last). 

4. Samapatti (Attainment, threefold as the last). 

5. Nana (Knowledge, threefold, — of his own and of 
other peoples previous births, and the knowledge requisite 
for Arahatship) 3. ^ 

6. Magga-bhavana (the 37 constituent elements of 
Arahatship)4. 

7. Phala-sacehikiriya (Realisation of the fruit of 
the 4 stages of the paths to Arahatship). 

8. Kilesa-pahana (Putting away the evil states — to 
wit lusts, illwill, and dullness — ^the putting away of 
which is Arahatship). 

9. Vinivaranata (Removal of the obstacles — to wit 
either the same three, as the commentary says here, or 
the five — covetousness, illwill, laziness, conceit and 
doubt — as set out in the Digha itself s, which last ex- 
planation is preferable). 

10. Sunnagare abhirati (Delight in solitude). 
Here we have first the Rules of the Order, then the Old 

Comment upon them, then the still later Sutta Vibhanga 
on that. As the last of these must date before the 
Council of Vesali (that is within, in round numbers, 100 



' Translated in my ^Buddhist Sutta's' p. 272. 
' S. 4. 296, 297, 363, A. 2. 299 Mil. 377. 

3 A. 2. 163—165. 

4 As set out in my 'Buddhist Suttas' pp. 62, 63. 

5 See above p. XX. 



— XXV — 

years of the Buddha's death ==145 of his Nirvana) this • 
gives us very old Vinaya evidence. And it agrees with 
the evidence brought together above from the Suttas. 

Samadhi, best rendered perhaps by concentration or 
serenity, is not itself a specific kind or method of medi- 
tation, but is a habit of mind which is a condition pre- 
cedent, a necessary preliminary, to the special varieties, 
and indeed to all the higher stages of the progress 
towards Arahatship. The second Jhana is always said to 
be bom of it, just as samadhi itself arises out of moral 
conduct. Without samadhi one cannot see things .a#e Cuo 
they really are; without that insight one cannot become 
detached; without detachment one cannot have the insight 
which arises from the knowledge of Emancipation (A. 3. 
19, 200). With samadhi one can attain to all these 
things, one can remove mountains (A. 3. 311 •comp. 427) 
and the delusions of self (A. 1. 132 — 134), acquire the five 
fold knowledge (A. 3. 24) and the five sorts of higher 
Wisdom (A. 3. 28) and Arahatship itself (A. 2. 45, 3. 29). 

But of course there is both action and reaction. The 
practice of Jhana in its turn produces and strengthens 
the habit of mind (the ceto -samadhi of S. 4. 297). They 
are often mentioned together (V. 1. 97, 104); in one 
passage the four Jhanas and Paccavekkhana (consi- 
deration or imagination) make up the five limbs of samadhi 
(A. 3. 25 — 27), and in another (A. 2. 45) the 4 Jhanas 
are one of four divisions of samadhi, while in a third 
(8. 5. 9) the two are absolutely identified. All this is 
right enough as exegesis, as edifying gloss. But the very 
inconsistency of these glosses is sufficient so show that 
they must not be interpreted too strictly in opposition to 
the general tenor of all the passages on Samadhi. 

This is well summed up in the standing definition in 
the Dhamma Sangani (15. 24, 287 &c) of Samma-sa- 
madhi. 

"Stability insistence persistence of thought, absence of 
wavering of perplexity of intellectual distraction, serenity, 
the faculty the power of rapt composure, right rapture". 



— XXVI — 

As the same definition is given also (Dh. S. 11) for 
cittass' ekaggata, 'concentration of mind', it is clear 
that this term is considered as about equivalent to Sa- 
madhi, of which indeed Buddhaghosa (Attha SalinI 118) 
says it is a name. He goes on: 

"As for its characteristics and so on the following is 
said in the Commentary^: 'Samadhi has as its characte- 
ristics the being the chief (positive), and the absence of 
distraction (negative)' ^ For just as the centre wood of a 
peaked hut, from the fact that all the rest of the mate- 
rials of which the hut is made are joined on to it, be- 
comes the chief, just so from the fact that samadhi sets 
all good qualities in the mind in motion samadhi is the 
chief of them all" (compare S. 3. 156). 

He then quotes from the Milinda p. 38 the similes to 
the same effect translated in my Milinda Vol. 1. p. p. 60, 
61, and concludes thus: 

"There is another way of putting it. This concentration 
of mind called samadhi has as its characteristic mark 
the absence of wandering, of distraction; as its essence 
the binding together of the states of mind that arise 
with it, (as water does the lather of soap); as its condi- 
tion precedent calmness; as its sustenance wisdom, (for 
it is said: *He who is at peace he knows and sees'). And 
in the specific meditation it has ease as its proximate 
cause. It must throughout be understood as steadiness 
of mind, (like the steadiness of the flame of a lamp in a 
place where there is no wind)". 

In its literal meaning samadhi is 'placing together \J;ol UgKt 
'co-allocation' 'composure'. It has not yet been found in 
any book, either Sanskrit or Pali, older than the Pitakas; 
and throughout Indian literature it is used only of mental 
states, never in a physical sense. The oldest passages in 
which it is found outside the Pitakas are the Maitra- 
yana Upanishad 6. 14, 38; and the Bhagavad Gita 2. 44, 53. 

^ That is the old commentary in Sinhalese, now lost, 
on which his own, in Pali, is based. 

^ See also Buddhaghosa himself in Sumangala I. 64. 65. 



— xxvn — 

In the first of these passages it is the third of six stages 
of Yoga, the two preceding ones being ^holding the breath' 
and ^preventing the action of the senses'. It may well 
denote, therefore, the drawing together of the mind that 
prevents wandering in thought. And this is I think its 
meaning, though both Deussen^ and Max Miiller^ render 
it vaguely ^meditation'. But its being mentioned as a stage 
in the attainment of trance is the commencement of the 
process by which it afterwards came in Yoga books to 
be used in the sense of a specific sort of meditation. In 
the Pitakas though, as we have seen, it is closely allied 
to Jhana, yet it is always essentially the habit of mind. 

In Anguttara 1. 299 (Sutta 163) Samyutta IV. 363, 
and Vinaya 3. 93 three kinds of Samadhi are mentioned — 
the empty, the aimless and the signless, (sunnata, appani- 
hita, animitta). These are very curious as qualifications 
of a state of mind which is so full, from the Buddhist 
point of view of the most desirable results ; which has, as 
its aim, the very highest state, that of Arahatship; and 
which has numerous signs by which it can be recognised. 
The words are in fact riddles, and are dealt with at some 
length by Buddhaghosa (Asl. 179—180, 222 and foil., 290 
and foil.) He explains them as meaning respectively 
emptied of lust, illwill, and dulness; aimless as having, 
got rid of the aim of rebirth in heaven; signless as 
free from the three signs (laksanas), that is, as based 
on the three doctrines of impermanence, sorrow as involved 
in individuality, and the absence of any 'soul', any abiding 
principle 3. But he admits that the explanation of the third 
word, signlessness , may change places with that of the 
first word, emptied. In that case emptied is emptied of 
permanence, &c, and signless is without the three signs 
of lust, illwill, and dulness. And this agrees better with 
the explanation given of these qualifications as applied in 
Samyutta 4. 297 to Emancipation of Heart. 

^ *Sechzig Upanishad's' 344. ^ Upanishads 2. 318. 
3 These are explained in full in my *American Lectures' 
pp. 121—134. 



— xxvm — 

Sunnata, Emptiness, always in this specific sense is 
in constant use^; and the misunderstanding of the term 
has led to the use of the phrase *Buddhist Nihilism', 
which connotes a great deal more than is warranted by 
the primitive use of the phrase it is supposed to represent. 

The conclusion is plain that the practice of the current 
Mysticism in all its phases was admitted as part of the 
training of a member of the Order. But that it was a 
small, and that not the highest and most important 
part; and might be omitted altogether. The states of 
rapture are regarded as conditions of happiness (phasu- 
vihara A. 3. 119). They are regarded as useful to some 
people for the help they give towards the removal of the 
mental obstacles to the attainment of Arahatship. Of the 
thirty seven constituent parts of Arahatship they enter 
only into one group of four. And to seek for Nirwana 
in the mere practise of the four Jhanas in considered a 
deadly heresy 2. So they are both pleasant in themselves, 
and useful as one of the means to the end proposed. But 
they are not the end, and the end can be reached without 
them. 

It is also to be observed that the passages quoted 
throw very little light on the details and processes of the 
mystic exercises referred to. Our present work is good 
evidence of the nature of those details as practised in 
modern times in Ceylon. How far we can argue back 
from it to the time of primitive Buddhism is exceedingly 
doubtful. The very word Yogavacara does not occur 
in the published Pitaka texts. The earliest instance of 
its use is in the Milinda. The same holds good of yogi 
and though yogo is found once or twice in its later sense 
(M. 1. 472) it is usually and often used simply in the 
sense of ^attachment'. We even find the term dhamma- 
yogo used in direct opposition to jhayl as in A 3. 355 

' See M. 1. 435, 483 A. 1. 72 =-3. 107 Mil. 96. 319, 
337. K. V. A. 64, 177. 

2 See the last four of the 62 great heresies in the 
Brahmajala Sutta. 



— XXIX — 

where the Bhikkhu ^addicted to righteousness' finds fault 
with his brother who meditates so much. 

That one of the most marked features of our manual, 
the use of the mental images of the elements in conjunc- 
tion with ethical ideas is not found in the Pitakas, or in 
Buddhaghosa, so far as published, is noteworthy. And 
the argumentum ex silentio holds good here as regards 
the Pitakas, though not as regards the great commen- 
tator. It is impossible to believe that had these very 
curious exercises been practised in Gotama's time the 
Pitakas would have omitted all reference to them. 

Even the groups of ethical states are not all found in 
the Pitakas. 

Group 1, The Five Joys (Panca Pritiyo) are not in 
the Pitakas. They are found in Buddhaghosa (A. Sal. 
84. 166. Vis. M. Ch IV. p. 99) and in the Jataka Commen- 
tary (Jat. 1. 33. 5. 492). 

Group 2, The Six Pairs (Cha Yugalani) are not found 
in the earlier books of the Pitakas, but they occur together 
(though not under that name) in the Dhamma Sangani. 

Group 3, The Four Forms of Bliss, occur in the Pi- 
takas as separate ethical concepts but not as a group. 

Group 4 is a single term, found in the Pitakas. 

Group 5 has three divisions. Of these the Kasinas are 
mentioned as a group, without details, in the Sakuludayi 
Sutta (M. 2). The Asubhas are all practically included 
in the four sorts of meditation on Impurity given at A. 
3. 323, but in a group of ten I have not traced them in 
the five Nikayas. In Dh. S. (263, 4) the ten Asubhas 
are given, but only in connection with the first Jhana. 
Buddhaghosa on this (A. Sal. 199) has the very logical 
remark that vitakka, attention to the inferences to be 
drawn, being necessary to proper meditation on the 
Asubhas, and that being precisely absent from the other 
Jhanas besides the firsts those meditations do not occur 
in the others. Our author slurs over this difficulty, and 
has all the five Jhanas in conjunction with the Asubhas 



— XXX — 

(in contradiction therefore to the Pitakas). The list of 
parts of the body is found in the Suttas. 

Group 6, the Ten Memories, does not occur as a group 
in the published texts of the Nikayas. A group of six of 
them, the first five and the 7*^ is given in detail in A. 3. 284 — 8 
and again in A. 3. 3 1 2 — 31 7. But another group under the same 
name of six memories, consisting of the first 3 Jhanas, the 
a 1 oka s anna (one of the 10 kasinas in our group 5), the medi- 
tation on the parts of the body, and that on the asubhas 
(both in our Group 5), is given at A. 3. 322—5. The 8*^ 
in our group 6 is several times referred to alone, (e. g. 
A. 3. 304—8). Buddhaghosa (Vis M. Ch. 7) has only 
the 6 memories but he discusses the 8*^ in our list se- 
parately in Chap. 8. 

Our group 7 is not found in the Pitaka texts as a 
whole. Each item of it is so found and Nos. 1 — 4 are the 
4th 5 th gth and 7*^ of the constantly recurring group called 
the Vimokhas (translated in my 'Buddhist Suttas' pp. 
51, 52). 

Our group 8 occurs constantly in the Suttas. 

Our group 9 is later. It has only been found so far 
in the Visuddhi Magga. 

Our group 10 does not occur as a group, but all the 
nine items that compose it are well known in the earliest 
books. 

Finally the Jhanas, not a group in the Yogavacara 
Manual but treated in it conjimctively as associated with other 
groups, are constantly mentioned in the Suttas. But there 
they are always four in number. In our book they are 
always five, the second being split up into two. As is 
well known this is a later modification, found first in the 
Dhamma Sangani. 

So far as the above results are negative they are liable 
to correction when the rest of the Suttas, or of the Pi- 
takas, comes to be published. But they are sufficient to 
show that our volume represents, almost throughout, a 
stage of belief and of practice much later than the 
Pitakas, and often later even than Buddhaghosa. 



— XXXI — 

But these remarks must be brought to a close. It has 
been quite impossible for me, chained as I am to the 
desk, to do more than try to indicate the points on which 
farther investigation is desirable. And I have done so 
in the hope that some one with leisure at his command 
may b^ induced to devote to the problem of Buddhist 
Mysticism, as difficult as it is interesting, the time and 
the labour which it so richly deserves. 

T. W. Rhys Davids. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Introduction v 

States of mind . vn 

The first exercise . . . .' x 

Exercises 2 — 12 xn 

Mysticism and trance generally xiv 

In India older than Buddhism xvi 

Yoga and Sankhya parallels xvn 

The place of Mysticism in Buddhism according to the 

Suttas XX 

In the Vinaya xxm 

Samadhi in Buddhism xxv 

Relation of the present work to primitive Buddhism xxvm 

Table of Contents xxxn 

Contractions xxxm 

The Five Joys 1 

Exercises 2—12 10 

The Six Pairs of Adaptabilities 20 

Exercises 2—12 36 

The Four Forms of Bliss 39 

Anapana-sati 42 

The 10 Kasinas 46 

The 10 Asubhas 53 

The 32 Parts of the body 58 

The 10 Memories . . , 63 

The 4 Planes of Being 67 

The 4 Excellent Conditions (1. Love) 68 

(2. Pity) 82 

(3. Sympathy) 88 

(4. Magnanimity) 89 

The 10 Forms of Knowledge 92 

The 9 Transcendent Qualities 98 

Index of Pali and Sinhalese words 103 



CONTEACTIONS. 



A. 


Anguttara Nikaya. 


A p. 


Apadana. 


Asl. 


Attha Salinl. 


D. 


Digha Nikaya. 


Dhp. 


Dhammapada (quoted by verses). 


DLS. 


Dhamma Sangani. 


Dh.K. 


Dhatu Katha. 


It. 


Iti-vuttaka. 


J. 


Jataka (the verses only). 


Jat. 


Jatakatthavannana. 


J.P.T.S. 


Journal of the Pali Text Society. 


J .Si. A.O. 


. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 


. Kh.P. 


Khuddaka Patha. 


K.V. 


Katha Vatthu. 


M. 


Majjhima Nikaya. 


Mil. 


Milinda (the Pali text). 


S. 


Samyutta Nikaya. 


S.N. 


Sutta Nipata. 


Sm.p. 


Samanta Pasadika. 


V. 


Vinaya. 


Vs.m 


Visuddhi Magga. 



' The quotations are by volume and page unless other- 
wise stated. 



»* 



THE 

YOGAVACARA'S 

MANUAL 

[ka] Araham araham. 

^Bhikkhave,iiiahanem. Idha me ^asanayehi. Bhikkhu 
sasara bhaya lesin dakna artthayen bhikshu nam laddha 
hetema. Aranna-gato va, aranyayata giye ho. Rukkha- 
mtilagato va, bhawanawata sudusu wrksa mtilayakata 
giye ho. Sunnagaragato va, esema bhawananurupawu 
janayangen siswa tibena geyakata giye ho hetema. Pal- 
lankam abhujitva, baddha paryyankaya baenda. Ka- 
yam ^arlraya. Ujum panidhaya, ijukota astadasa pra- 
manawu kondu seta sandhi no nsemi owun owun kerehi 
pihita tibena se awankawa kaya pihituwa gena. Pari- 
mukham satim, nirwana ^apayehi ma sita elba^ situwa 
ema niwan ma aramunu keremin sihiya abhimukha kota. 
Upatthapetva, pihituwa gena. Nisldati hindineya, so 
e bhawanawata nisi lesa mese sihiya obi noba ya no dl 
bsenda gena hunnawu hetema. Sato va, sihiyen ma. As- 
sasati aswasaya pawatwanneya. Sato va, sihiyen ma. 
Passasati praswasaya paewatwima karannS. Digham 
va assasanto, dirggha kota aswasaya karannS ho. Di- 
gham assasamiti pajanati, dirggha kota aswasaya ka- 
rannemiyi danneya. Digham va passasanto, dirggha 
kota praswasaya karanne ho. Digham passasamiti pa- 



' Sanna on imragraphs 3 and 4 on imge 5. ParagraiiHi 
3 i5 a passage of the Satipatthana Sutta (M. 1. 56). 
^ MS elaba. 

1 



— 2 — 

janati, dirggha kota praswasaya keremiyi danneya. Ras- 
sam va passasanto, luhundu kota aswasaya karannemi 
danneya. Rassam va passasanto, luhundu kota praswa- 
saya karanne ho. Rassam passasamiti pajanati, 
Hraswase luhundu kota praswasaya karannemi danneya. 
Sabbakaya siyalu aswasa praswasayage, hewat nabhiya 
patan nasikagraya dakwa udu kuruwa pawatna Sswasayage 
da, ese ma nasikagraya patan nabhiya dakwa yati kuruwa 
pawatna praswasayage da yana me siyalu ma aswasa pra- 
swasa kayayage utpatti kramadi siyalu prawrattiya ^ Pa- 
tisamvedi, wisesayen prakasawa waetahi bhavana karana 
tsenattahu wisin. Cakkhuvinnanam, cakshuwiiinanayen. 
Nasikaggam, nasikagraya. Lokemi, balami. Citta- 
vinna^am, cittawinnanayen. Assasapassasa, aswasa 
praswasaya ^ Sati arammanam, sihi aramunuya. Ha- 
daye3 thapetva lehi taba. Parikammam, [ka] pari- 
kammiyan. Arahan yanu mema kramayayi, mehi palamu 
kota dsekku a-yanna dhamma ratnaya, deveni wu ra-yanna+ 
Buddha ratnaya, tunweni wa dsekku ha-yanna samgha 
ratnaya me arahan yanu padaya bhawanayi. 

Mese bhawana kala kalhi uggaha nimitte kisunii dos 
pena pahara adi kisunu dos peneyi, hewat dhuma akara 
ho ahashi sudu walakulu akara uggaha nimitta peneyi. 
Pratibhaga nimitta payyen ganna lada kaetapotaks men 
da mana kota suddha kala sak patak men da wala aturen 
nikmunu sanda mandalak men da megha mukhayehi bala 
kawaka^ men da uggaha nimit pala gena nikmunak men, 
e uggaha nimittata wada kisunu dos nsetiwa siyak guna 
dahasak gunayen pirisudu wa bhawangaya sindagena mano 
dwaraya awarjjana kota pathawi dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi 
appanawe laksana nam ratrin dinayehi sobhamat wa dili- 
yena kanamsediliyange warnna sadrisaya; Parikarmmaya, 
udaya kalayehi sobhamat wa payana bala suryyage warnna 
sadrisaya; Upacaraya nil kata rolu mal hiri karnnikamal 
sadrisaya. Me pathawi dhatuwe appana parikarmmaya 



^ So MS. ' MS. pra° 3 MS. Hade. ^ MS. ran« 
^read kaedapatak. 



— 3 — 

upacara nasikagrayen gena hadaye taba iisewata nabhiye 
tabanu. 

Namo tassa Bhagavato arahato samma-sambuddhassa. 

Tatiya-varam. 

Buddham jivitam yava nibbanam saranam gacchami 
Dhammam jivitam yava nibbanam saranam gacchami. 
Sangham jivitam yava nibbanam saranain gacchami. 

Iti pi so Bhagava araham samma sambuddho vijja-ca- 
rana-sampanno sugato lokavidu anuttaro purisadamma- 
sSrathi sattha devamanussanam buddho bhagavati. 

Dutiyam pi Buddham -pe- . . . dutiyam pi dhammam -pe- 
. . . dutiyam pi sangham -pe- saranam gacchami. 

Svakkhato Bhagavata dhammo sanditthiko akaliko ehi- 
passiko opanayiko paccattam veditabbo vinntihiti. 

Tatiyam pi Buddham -pe- . . . tatiyam pi dhammaiii -pe- 
• . tatiyam pi sangham -pe- saranam gacchami. 
Supatipanno Bhagavato savaka-sangho uju-patipanno 
Bhagavato savaka-sangho naya-patipanno Bhagavato sa- 
vaka-sangho samici-patipanno Bhagavato savaka-sa^gho 
yad idam cattari purisa-3rugam attha purisa-puggala , esa 
Bhagavato [ki] savaka-sangho ahuneyyo pahuneyyo dakkhi- 
neyyo anjalikaraniyyo anuttaram punnakkhettam lokassati. 
Iccevam accanta namassaneyyam 
Namassamano ratanatattayam yam 
Puniiabhisandam vipulani aladdham 
Tassanubhavena hatantarayo. 

Karaniyam atthakusalena . . . pe . . . punar etiti' 

Pancamare jino natho patto sambodhim uttamam 
Catusaccam pakasesi mahaviram namami 'ham 
Etena saccavajjena sabbe Mara palayantu 
Imina puiinakammena upajjhaya gunuttara 
Acari upakara ca mata pita piya mamam 
Suriyo candima-raja^ gunavanta nara pi ca 
Brahma Mara ca Inda va lokapala ca devatil 

* So MS. The full text of these verses is in the Khud- 
daka Patha. * MS. candima raja. 



— 4 ~ 

Yamo mitta manussa ca majjhatta verika pi ca 
Sabbe satta sukhi hontu puniiani pakatani me 
Sukhan ca tividham dentu khippam papetha^ vo matam 
Imina punnakammena imina uddisena ca 
Khippaham sulabhe ceva tanhuppadana chedanam 
Ye santanehina ^ dhamma yava nibbanato mamam 
Nassantu sabbada yeva yattha jato bhave bhave 
Uju-cittam sati panna sallekho viriyam 'mina* 
Mara labliantu n'okasam katunca viriyesu me 
Buddhadi-pavaro natho dhammo natho varuttamo 
Natho pacceka-sambuddho sangho nathottaro mamam 
Tesottamanubhavena Maro 'kasam labhantu ma. 

Namo tassa Bhagavato 

Arahato Samma Sambuddhassa. 

Tatiyavaram^. 

Oka8a\ Accayo no me^ bhante accagama3 yatha bale 
yatha mulhe yatha akusale ye mayaip 
akaramha evam bhante accayo no 
patiganhatha ayatim samvaraya^. 

Tatiyavarams. 

Okasa. Aham patipatti pujaya ovadam sabbannu-Go- 
tamassa patikaromi. 

Aham yacami uggaha-nimittan ca patibhaga-nimittan 
upacara-vidhim appana-samadhi-vidhiin antogabbha-panca- 
pitisu khanika-pitim.^ 

Nava - lokuttara - dhamma jata Buddhassa dhammassa 
paccekabuddhassa sanghassa asiti mahasavakanam nibba- 
nam atikkantanam catusu maha-samuddesu vSluka para- 
jaya^ Tan te paveni-parampara vittharam yacami. 



^ So MS. 2 rep. Ill: Tayovaram. 

3 MS. always ajjagama. 4 MS. reyyama always. 

5 rep. Ill: Tayo-v® 

^ MS. khannika-piti. TJiroughout the MS. the crude 
form is usually given in this constantly repeated phrase. 
But occasionally the accusative singular recurs, and this is 
doubtless right. 



— 5 — 

Tarn dhammaiji paiicakkhandhesu cakkhudvara-mano- 
dvara-kayadvaresu ca me uppajjatu. Bhavanam bhavetum^ 
nisinna-kale tarn khanikaya pi tena [ki] saccavacanena me 
dUi^ 

Aham yacami Buddha-gunam dhamma-gunam sangha- 
gunam patisaranam me, acariya-gimam susikkhitam kam- 
matt-hanam patisarapam me , sabba-kammatthana-gunam 
patisaranam me. Idani jiYitam me demi. Tinnam ratananan 
ca pancannam ratananan ca nibbanam sacchikarissami. 
Nibbana-paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati pallankam abhujitva ujum kayam panidhaya 
parimukham satim upatthapetva , so sato va assasati sato 
passasati, digham va assasanto dlgham assasamiti pajanati, 
digham va passasanto digham passasamiti pajanati, rassam 
va assasanto rassam assasamiti pajanati, rassam va passa- 
santo rassam passasamiti pajanati. 

Cakkhu-vinnanara nasikaggam olokemi , citta-viniianam 
assasa-passasa-sati-arammanam had ay e^ ^hapetva pari- 
kammam araham araham. 

« • • 

Mese tiksana-prajiiawen yedi^ bhavana kala kalhi ug- 
gaha patibhaga nimits dwaya peneyi. E ^uggaha nimit7 pa- 
lagena® nikmunakhu9 men e uggaha nimittata wada kisunu 
dos nsetiwa siyak guna^"* dahasak gunayen pirisudu \va" 
bhawangaya sindagana" mano dwaraya awarjjana kota tejo 
dhatuwa pahalawe. Ehi appanawa nam osadhi tarakapra- 
bhawak ha psehae setteya, parikarmmaya suwarnna-warnnaya, 
upacar^ya udaya payana bala suryyage warnnayata bandu 
paehae aetteya. Me tejo dhatuwe appana parikarmma upa- 



' MS. .«tu. _ ^ So MS. 3 MS. his: -hade. 
^ rep. II: -iianayen bhav*>, rep. Ill: prajnawa yehi pi- 
hita bhav** 

5 rep, ni: -nimitta dwaya pahala we ug"*, MS. nimi, 
bis &c. ^ rep. omitSy rep. II likewise. 
7 rep. Ill: nimitta. ^ rep. II: -gana. 
9 rep. II seyin- for men. 
rep. Ill om. 
rep. Ill om. wa. 
rep. I: sindagena, rep. Ill: sindagana. 



lO 

II 

12 



— 6 — 

cara nasikagrayen gena hradaye taba nsewata nabhiye 
tabanu. 

Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samma sambuddhassa 

Tayo varam. 

Buddham jivitam . . . pe (3, 4) . . . tatiya-varam. 

Okasa . . . pe (4) . . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . . pe (4) . . . panca pitisu okkantika- 
pitim. 

Nava . . . pe (4, 5) [ku] . . . araham araliam. 

Mese tiksana . . . pe (5) . . . mano dwaraya awarjjana 
kota apo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi appanawa nam solos 
kalawen sampurnna wu candramandalayata bandu psehae 
aetteya, parikarmmaya dahas peti mal war^naya, upaca- 
raya kinihiri mal bandu psehse setteya. Me apo dhatuwe 
appana parikarmma upacara pahala kara bala nasika- 
grayen ganimim hradaye taba naewata nabhiye tabanu. 

[kr] Namo tassa . . . . pe (3, 4) . . . ubbega pitim . . . 

pe (4, 5) -sinda gana mano dwaraya awarjjana kota vayo 

dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi appanawa nam nabho maddya^ 
gata suryya mandalayata bandu warnnaya, parikarmma 
madata wan pataya, upacaraya megawalaha dedunna se 
peneyi. Me wayo dhatuwe appana parikarmma upacara 
mana-kota bala nasikagrayen ganimin hradaye taba nse- 
wata nabhiye tabanu.*^ 

[kf] Namo tassa . . . pe pharana-pitim . . . pe . . . • 

sindagana mano dwaraya awarjjana kota akasa dhatuwa 
pahala we. Ehi appanawa nam idda mal da saman mal 
sudu nelum mal me adi subhra^ warnna ho peneyi, pari- 
karmmaya monara pil raesak se peneyi, upacaraya adiin 
wan paehae bandu kuruweniyage warnna kala warniia ho 
peneyi. Me akasa dhatuwe appana parikarmma upacara 
pahala kota bala bala nasikagrayen gena hradaye taba 
nsewata nabhiye tabanu. 



' 8o MS. ^ MS. srabra. 



— 7 — 

[kl] Ptirwwa krama no waradawa wsenda puda panca 
pitiyata ekawata aradhana kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham patipatti-pujaya ovadam sabannu-Gota- 
massa patikaromi. Aham yacami uggaha-nimittan ca pa- 
tibhaga-nimittam upacara-vidhim appana-samadhi-vidhiiji 
antogabbha- panca -pitisu khuddaka-pltim khanika^-pitim 
okkantika-pitim ubbega-pitim pharana-pitim. Nava lo- 
kuttara-dhamma . . . pe . . . nibbana-paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . araham araham. 

Mese bhavana kala kalhi uggaha patibhaga nimit dwaya 
peneyi. Uggaha nimit palagana nikmmiak men e uggaha 
minittata wada kisunu dos nsetiwa siyak dahasak gunayen 
pirisudu wa mano dwaraya awarjjana kota panca pitiye 
dhatu pahala we. Ehi 6ama appana parikarmma upacara 
piliwelin manak. b. b. n. g. na. m. udukuru kota tabanu. 
Me panca pritiye ap. parik. up. wisesayen dsena eyin 
mattehi ptirwwa kratyaya no waradawa waenda puda dham- 
ma sannawata aradhana kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham patipatti pujaya . . pe . . patikaromL 

Okasa okasa okasa. Aham patipatiya pavisitva 
antogabbha-khuddaka - pitim anuloma-vasena rakkhissami. 
Aciren' eva kalena bhesajjam bhunjitva nitthite tasma utthi- 
tassa me dhamma-saiina patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe (5) . . . arahaip. araham. 

Mese bhavana kala kalhi nila pandani laksana dhamma 
sanna paha kara bala naskagrayen gena nabhiye taba, 
purwwa kratyaya no waradawa wsenda puda, panca priti- 
yata aradhana kota anuloma patiloma kata yutu. 

Okasam. Aham . . ^e {6) . . patikaromi ki taenata — 
Okasa okasa okasa. Aham . . . pe (7) . . . patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe . . araham araham. 

Mese bhavana kala kalhi pathawl dhatu wa pahala we. Ehi 
appana parikarmma upacara mana kota bala nasikagrayen 
ganimin nabhiyata angalakin udu kona anulomayen tabanu. 

[kl] Okasa okasa okasa . . pe (7) . . . khuddaka-pltiiji pati- 
loma-vasena rakkhissami. Aciren' eva . . pe . . patura hotu. 



MS. kann*^ 



— 8 — 

Mese arS,dhana kala kalhi pathawl dhatuwa bala anu- 
lomayata tsebu taenhi patilomayen udu tabanu. 

Okasa okasa. Aham patipatiya pavisitva antogabbha- 
khanika^-pltim anmloma-vasena rakkhissami . . . pe . . . 
patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kala kalhi tejo dhatuwe appana pari- 
karmma upacara mana kota bala bala nasikagrayen gena 
khuddaka pitiyata angalakim udu kona anulomayen ta- 
banu. 

Okasa. Ahaip patipatiya pavisitva antogabbha kha- 
Xiika^-pltiip patiloma-vasena . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kala kalhi tejo dhatuwa bala anulometa 
tsebu taenhi patilomayen udu tabanu. 

Okasa okasa. Ahaiji patipatiya pavisitva antogabbha- 
okkantika-pitim anuloma-vasena rakkhissami . . pe . . pa- 
tura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kala kalhi apo dhatuwe appana pari- 
karmma upacara mana kota bala bala nasikagrayen gani- 
min khanika^ pitiyata^ angalakin mattehi anulomayen tabanu. 

Okasa okasa. Ahaip patipatiya pavisitva antogabbha 
.okkantika-pitiiji anuloma-vasena . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kala kalhi apo dhatuwa anulometa taebu 
tsenhi patilomayen udu tabanu. 

Okasa okasa. Aham patipatiya pavisitva antogabbha 
ubbega-pltiip. anuloma-vasena . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kota wayo dhatuwa [ke] upadawa ok- 
kantikawata mattehi an gala pramaijie tabanu. 

Okasa. Ahaip patipatiya pavisitva antogabba ubbega- 
pltiip patiloma-vasena . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi wayo dhatuwa upadawa anulometa 
ta)bu trenhi patilomayen udu tabanu. 

Okasa. Ahaip patipatiya pavisitva antogabbha pharana- 
pltiiTi anuloma-vasena . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi akasa dhatuwa upadawa ubbega 
pitiya ha hradaya ha me deyature angala pramane anu- 
lomayen taba^nu. 



* MS. kann°. ^ MS. khann^. 3 J/fif. khann^ 



— 9 — 

Okasa. Ahani . . pe . . pharana-pltiip patiloma-vasena 
. . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi akasa dhatuwa anulometa . . pe . . 
tabano. 

Okasa. Aham patipatiya pavisitva antogabbha khudda- 
ka-pitini anuloma-vasena . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi pathawi dhatuwa pahala we. 

Okasa. Aham patipatiya pavisitva antogabbha khani- 
ka pitiip. anuloma-vasena . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwa pahala we. 

Okasa. Ahaip. . . pe . ^ okkantika-pitim anuloma-vasena 
. . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi apo dhatuwa pahala we. 

Okasa. Aham* . . pe . . ubbega-pitim anuloma-vasena 
. . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kala kalhi wayo dhatuwa pahala we. 

Okasa. Ahain . . . pe . . . pharana-piti anuloma-vasena 
[kai] . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi akasa dhatuwa pahala we. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . pharaiia-pitim patiloma-va- 
sena . . . pe . . . patura hotu [kai]. 

Mese aradhana kalhi akasa dhatuwa pahala we. 

Okasa. Ahaiji . . pe . . ubbega-pitim patiloma-vasena 
. . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi wayo dhatuwa pahala we. 

Okasa. Ahaiii . . pe . . okkantika-pltiin patiloma-vase- 
na . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi apo dhatuwa pahala we. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . khanika-pitim patiloma-vasena 
. . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwa pahala we. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . khuddaka-pitim patiloma-vasena 
. . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi pathawi dhatuwa pahala we. 



Patipatiya nitthitam. 



— 10 — 

Purwa krtyaya no waradawa wsenda puda: — 
*Okasa. Aham patipatti-pujaya ovadam sabbannu-Go- 
tamassa patikaromi': ki tsenata, — *Okasa, okasa, okasa. 
Aham cha-sadda-ggahanam samadayitva antogabbha khud- 
daka-pltim anuloma . , . pe (7) . . . patura hotu. Nisidati 
. . . pe (7) • . , parikammam araham araham. 

Okasa, okasa. Aham cha-sadda-ggahanam . . pe . . 
khuddaka-pitim patiloma , . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Okasa . . . pe . . . okkantika-pitim ^ anuloma . . . pe . . . 
patura hotu. [ko] 

Okasa, okasa . . . pe . . • okkantika-pltim patiloma 
. . 13e . . patura hotu. ■ ^ 

Okasa. Aham cha-sadda-ggahanam . . pe . . pharaiia- 
pitim anuloma . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Okasa. Aham cha . . pe . . pharana-pltim patiloma 
. . pe . patura hotiu 

. . khanika pitim anuloma .... 
. . khanika pitim patiloma ... 
. . ubbega pitim anuloma . . . 
. . ubbega pitim patiloma . . . 
. . khuddaka pitim anuloma ... 
. . okkantika pitim anuloma . . . 
. . pharana pitim anuloma ... 
. . khanika pitim anuloma ... 
. . ubbega pitim anuloma . . . 
. . ubbega pitim patiloma , . . 
. . khannika pitim patiloma . . . 
. . pharana pitim patiloma . . . 
. . okkantika pitiin patiloma . . . 
. . khuddaka pitim patiloma . . . 



Cha-sadda-ggahanam nitthitam. 



Purwa kratyaya no waradawa w^nda puda: — Aham 
patipatti-pujaya ovadam sabbannu-Gotamassa patikaromi. 
Okasa, okasa, okasa. Aham vidatthim samadayitva anto- 
gabbha khuddaka-pitim okkhantika-pitim pharana-pltim 



^ So MS, khanika-piti is apparently omitted hy mistake. 



— 11 — 



anuloma . . . pe (7) . . . patura hotu. Nisidati . . pe . . 
parikammani araham araham. 

. . . [kau] pharana-pitim okkantika-pitim khuddaka- 
pitim patiloma . . pe . 4 patura hotu. 

. . . khanika-pitim ubbega-pitim anuloma . . . 

. . . ubbega-pitim khannika-pitim patiloma . . . 

. . . khuddaka-pltim okkantika - pitiip. pharana - pitim 
anuloma ... 

. . . khanika-pltiin ubbega-pitim anuloma . . . 

. . . ubbega-pitim khannika-pitim patiloma . • . 

. . . pharana-pitim okkantika-pitini khuddaka-pitim pa- 
tiloma . . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Vidatthim nitthit^n. 



Purwa k^atyaya no waradawa wsenda puda: — 
Okasa. Aham patipatti . . pe . . patikaromi ki tsenata: 
Okasa, okasa, okasa. Aham dhatu-samtihani samadayitva 
antogabbha khuddaka-pitim khannika-pitiiii okkantika- 
pitim ubbega-pitini pharana-pitim anuloma . . pe (7) . . 
patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . x)e . . x)arikammaiii arahani arahanu 
Okasa okasa okasa. Aham dhatu-samuham samadayitva 
antogabbha -pharana -pitim ubbega-pitim okkantika-pitim 
khaiiika-pitim khuddaka-pitim patiloma . . . pe . . . patura 
hotu. 



Dhatu-samuham nitthitam. 



Purwa kratyaya no waradawa . • . pe . . . ki tsenata: — 

Okasa, okasa, okasa. Ahani chatu-nayam samadayitva 
antogabbha khuddaka-pitim khanika-pitini anuloma . . pe . . 
patura hotu. Nisidati . . parikammani araham araham. 

Okasa, okasa. Aham chatu-nayam samadayitva anto- 
gabbha khanika-pitim khuddaka-pitim patiloma . . pe . . 
patura hotu. 

Okasa, okasa. Aham . . pe . . khanika-x^itiip. anuloma 
. . pe . . patura hotu. 



- 12 -^ 

.... [kam] akkantika-pitiipL patiloma .... 
.... ubbega-pltim anuloma . . * . 
.... ubbega-pitim patiloma .... 
.... pharana-pitim anuloma .... 
.... pharana-pitim patiloma .... 
.... khuddaka-pitim khanika-pitiiji anuloma .... 
.... okkantika-pltim anuloma .... 
.... ubbega-pitim anulonia .... 
.... pharana-pitim anuloma .... 
.... pharana-pitim patiloma .... 
.... ubbega-pitiip. patiloma .... 
.... okkantika-pitim patiloma .... 
.... khanika-pitini khuddaka-pitim patiloma . . pe . 
patura hotu. ^ 

Catu-nayam nitthitam. 



Purwa kratyaya . . pe (10) . . ki tsenata: — 
Okasa, okasa. Aham panca-nayam samadayitva anto- 
gabbha khuddaka-pitim anuloma . . pe (7) . . patura hotu. 
Nisidati . . pe . . parikammam araham araham. 

. khuddaka-pitim patiloma . ... 

. [kah] khanika-pitim anuloma .... 

. khanika-pitiiji patiloma .... 

. khanika-pitim patiloma .... 

. okkantika-pitim anuloma .... 

. okkantika-pitim patiloma .... 

. ubbega-pitim anuloma .... 

. ubbega-pitim patiloma .... 

. pharanp'-pitim anuloma .... 

. pharana-pitim patiloma .... 

. khuddaka-pitiiji anuloma 

. khanika-pitiip. anuloma. . 

. okkantika-pitim anuloma 

.. ubbega-pitini anuloma . . 

. pharana-pitim anuloma . 

. pharana-pitim patiloma . 

. ubbega-pitim patiloma . 



• . . 



. . 



— 13 — 

. . . . okkhantika-pitim patiloma . . . . 
. . . . khanika-pitim patiloma .... 
. . . . khuddaka-pltim patiloma .... 



Panca-nayam nitthitam. 



[kha] Purwa k^atyaya . . . pe (10)*. . . kl tsenata: — 
Okasa, okasa, okasa. Aham liadayam samadayitra anto- 
gabbha khuddaka-pitim. anuloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 
Nisldati . . pe . . parikammam araham araham. 

. . . khuddaka-pltim patiloma .... 

. . . khanika-pitim anuloma .... 

. . . khanika-pitim patiloma .... 

. . . okkantika-pitim anuloma . . . . 

. . . okkantika-pitim patiloma .... 

. . . ubbega-pitim anuloma .... 

. . . ubbega-pitim patiloma .... 

. . . pharana-pitim anuloma .... 

. . . pharana-pitim patiloma .... 

. . . khuddaka-pitim anuloma .... 

. . . khanika-pitim anuloma .... 

. . . okkantika-pitim anuloma .... 

. . . ubbega-pitim anuloma .... 

. . . pharana-pitim anuloma .... 

. . . pharana-pitim patiloma .... 

. . . ubbega-pitim patiloma .... 

. . . okkantika-pitim patiloma .... 

. . . [kha] khanika-pitim patiloma .... 

. . . khuddaka-pitim patiloma .... 



Hadayam nitthitam. 



Purwa kratyaya no . . pe (10) . . ki tsenata: — 
Okasa, okasa. Aham samadhim samadayitva antogabbha- 
khuddaka-pitim anuloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 
Nisldati . . pe . . parikammam araham araham. 

Ml as in last section. 



Samadhim nitthitam. 



— 14 — 

[khi] Purwa kratyaya • . pe . . ki tenata: — 
Okasa, okasa, okasa. Aham dhamma tiratthitikain 
samadayitva antogabbha khuddaka-pitim anuloma- . . pe . . 

as in last section hut one. 



Dhamma-tirattbitikam nittbitam. 



[khi] Purwa kratyaya no waradawa wsenda puda panca 
pritiye sitthaka dlpa pujawata aradhana kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham patipatti . . pe (4) . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . . pe (4) . . . khuddaka pitim. 

Nava lokuttara-dhamma . . . pe (4, 5) . . . nibbana- 
paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe (5) . . araham araham. 

Mese tiksana prajnawen yedi . . . pe (5) . . . nimit dvaya 
peneyi. Uggaha nimit palagana nikmunak hu seyin 
. . . guna . . . bhawangaya sindagana . . . pathawi dhatuwa 
. . . Ehi upacara parikarmma manakota bala nasikagrayen 
ganimiin nabhiyata angalakin mattehi taba sitthaka dipaye 
dsengala pramane dana turu bhawana kala kalhi palamu 
salaka gilihihunu anukarana Sabdayen dsena ukkutikayen 
inda: — 

Okasa okasa okasa. Aham sitthakadanda-dipam sama- 
dayitva antogabbha-khuddaka-pltim anuloma- . . pe (7) . 
patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi ema pathawi dhatuwa pahala we. 
Ehi appana parikarmma upacara mana kota bala bala 
nasikagrayen ganimin upacara parikarmma tsebu tsenhi 
anulomayen udu taba angala pramane dana turu bhawana 
kala kalhi deweni salakaya wseteyi; esa lakunen nsekita^ 
ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . khanika-pitim anuloma . . pe 
. , patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwa bala khuddaka piti-; 
yata angalakin mattehi taba sitthaka dipaye angala pra- 
mane dana turu [khu] bhawana kala kalhi tunweni sala- 
kaya gilihihunu anukaranayen ukkutikayen inda: — 

^ read noegita. 



— 15 — 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe (14) . . . okkantika-pitim anu- 
loma- . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi apo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi 
appana parikarmma upacara manakota bala khanika plti- 
yata angalakin . . . pe (14) . . . kalhi satara weni sala-- 
kaya gilihunu anukaranayen dsena ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . . ubbega-pltim anuloma- . . . 
pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi vayo dhatuwa pahala we . . . .' 
mana kota okkantika pitiyata angalakin . . . pe . . . kalhi 
pasweni salakaya gili .... pe ... . inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . . pharana-pitim anuloma . . 
pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi akasa dhatuwa pahala we. 
Ehi . . .^ mana kota bala3 ubbega pitiyata angalak ha. 
hradayata angalak ha dsengalak seia atare angala pramane 
anulomayen taba sitthaka dipaye angala pramane dana 
turn bhawana kala kalhi sa-woeni salakaya gilihunu anu- 
karanayen dsena aradhana no kota hadayamata yata ta- 
bana lad a pathawi dhatuwa palamu sema mana kota taba » 
bhawana kala kalhi sitthaka dipaye angala pramane da 
sat-weni salakaya giUhena anukaranayen dsena esema 
inda samadhiyatat ema khuddakawe pathawi dhatuwa pa- 
lamu sema mana kota taba sitthaka dipaye angala pra- 
mane dana turn bhawana kala kalhi ata-weni salakaya 
gilihena anukaranayen anulomaye krama data yutu. 
Patilomayata balana widhi nam yata kiyana lada seyin 
khuddaka pitiyata pahala wu pathawi dhatuwe upacare 
patan parikarmmayata bala anulometa tsebu tsenhi pati- 
lomayen udu taba sitthaka dipaye dsengala pramane da 
salakaya wsetena turn bhavana kala kalhi ukkutikayen 
inda: — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka-danda-dipam samadayitva anto- 
gabbha-khuddaka-pltim patiloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi pathawi dhatuwa pahala we 



* There is wo ... pe ... m the MS. 

* Ehi . ... is not in the MS. ^ Not in the MS. 



— 16 — 

mana kota anulomayata tsebu tseiihi patilomayen udu taba 
sitthaka dipaye angala pramane da deweni salakaya 
wsetena turn bhavana kala kalhi ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . khanika-pitim patiloma . . pe 
. . patura hotu [khu]. 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwa pahala we ... . mana 
kota anulomayata tsebu tsenhi patilomata taba s. d. a. p. 
da tunweni salakaya gilihena turn . . pe . . inda: — 

Okasa. Ahaiii . . pe . . okkantika-pitim patiloma . . 
pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi apo dhatuwa pahala we ... . mana 
kota anulomayata tsebu tsenhi . . pe (16) . . pramane dana 
turn bhavana kala kalhi ukkutikayen inda : * — 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . ubbega-pitim patiloma . . pe 
. . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi wayo dhatuwa . . pe . . tsenhi 
patilomayata taba sitthaka d. a. p. da pasweni salakaya 
wsetena turn bh. k. k. uk. inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . pharana-pitiin patiloma . . pe 
. . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi akasa dhatuwa . . pe . . anuloma- 
yata bselu tsenhi patilometa . . pe . . da saweni salakaya 
gilihena turn bhavana kala kalhi hadayamata yata kiyana 
lada seyin pathawi dhatuwa mana kota bala anulometa 
tsebu tsenhi patilomayata taba sitthaka dipaye angala pra- 
mane da salakaya gilihena turn bhawana kala kalhi 
samadhiyata mema dhatuwa upadawa anulometa tsebu 
tsenhi patilomayata taba sitthaka dipaye angala pramane 
da ataweni salakaya gilihena turn bhawana kata yutu. 

Panca-prltiye itipandam puja krama-nitthitain. 

Purwa krtyaya no waradawa wsenda puda: — 

Okasa. Ahaiji patipatti-pujaya ovadam sabbaniiu Go- 
tamassa patikaromi: — kl tsenata: — 

Okasa. Aham kaya-vasl-vattain samadayitva antogabbha 
khuddaka-pltim anuloma . . pe (7) . . patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe (5) . . parikammaiji araham araham. 

^ There is no mention of the fourth salakaya. 



— 17 -^ 

Mese aradhana kalhi pathawl dhatuwa pahala we. Nabhi- 
yata dakunatin satarangula pramane sarwanga naharayayi 
kiyana lada naharak. dana^ mandala dakwa naegl tibeyi. 
Ehi me dhatuwe appana parikarmma iipacara nasikagrayen 
ganimin nabhiyata i^amawa taen [khr] bala eyata angalin 
mattehi anulomayen tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . khuddaka-pltim patiloma . . 
pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi pathawi dhatuwa bala anulometa 
taebti tsenhi patilomayen udu tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . khanika-pitim anuloma . . pe 
. . patura hotu. 

Mese . . pe . . tejo dhatuwa pahala we, mana kota 
khuddaka pitiyata angalakin mattehi anulomayen tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . khanika-pltim patiloma . . pe 
. . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwa anulomayata tsebu 
taenhi patilomayen udu tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . okkantika-pitim anuloma . . 
pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese . . pe . . apo dhatuwa khanika pitiyata angalakin 
mattehi mana kota anulomayen tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . okkantika-pitioi patiloma . . 
pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese . . pe , . apo dhatuwa anulometa tsebu tsenhi 
patilomayen udu tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . ubbega-pltim anuloma . . pe 
. . patura hotu. 

Mese . . pe . . wayo dhatuwa pahala we, mana kota 
okkantika pitiyata a. mattehi anulomayen tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . ubbega-pitiiii patiloma . . pe 
. . patura hotu. 

Mese . . pe . . wayo dhatuwa anulomayata baelu tsenhi 
patilomayen udu tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . pharana-pitim anulomii . . pe 
. . patura hotu. 



MS. danna. 



— 18 — 

Mese aradhana kalhi akasa dhatuwa pahala we mana 
kota ubbegawata angalak ha tana maiidalata angalak ha 
dsengalak aera atare angala pramane anulomayen tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . pharana-pitim patiloma . . pe 
. . patura hotu. 

Mese . . pe . . dhatuwa anulometa tsebu tsenhi pati- 
lomayen udu tabanu. 

[khr] Me wak patan sarwanga nahare tabana lada paiica 
pritiye karmmasthanawalata aradhana kala lesin bala 
anuloma patiloma kata yutu. 

. . khuddaka-pitim anuloma . . pe . . 

. . khanika piti anuloma 

. . okkantika piti anuloma 

. . ubbega piti anuloma 

. . pharana piti anuloma . . . pe . . . 

. . pharana piti patiloma 

. . ubbega piti patiloma 

. . okkantika piti patiloma 

. . khanika* piti patiloma 

. . khuddaka piti patiloma . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Kaya-vasi-vattam nitthitam. 

Paiica pritiyata anaturu kota cha yugalaya keren ptirwa 
kratyaya no waradawa w^enda pud a kaya passaddhi yana 
karmmasthanayata aradhana kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham patipatti-pujaya . . pe (4) . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami uggaha-nimittan ca patibhaga-nimittam 
upacaravidhim appana-samadhi-vidhim antogabbha-cha- 
yugalesu kaya-passaddhim. Nava lokuttara-dhamma . . 
pe (4, 5) . . Nibbana-paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe . . araham araham. 

Mese tiksana iianayen uggaha nimit patibhaga nimit- 
dwaya pirisinda bala uggaha nimit palagana nikmunak hu 
men e uggaha nimittata wada siyak guna dahasak gunayen 
pirisuduwa bhavangaya sindagena mano dwaraya awarjjana 
kota apo dhatuwa pahala we. E dhatuwa appana [khl] 
parikarmma upacara mana kota bala nasikagrayen gani- 
min hradaye taba nsewata nabhiye tabanu. 



— 19 — 

Purwwa kratyaya no waradawa wsenda puda citta- 
passaddhi aradhana kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . . pe . . . antogabbha-cha-yuga- 
lesu cittapassaddhim. 

Nava . . . pe . . . nibbana-paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe . . araham araham. 

Mese tiksana nanayen bhavana kala kalhi apo dhatuwa 
pahala we. Ehi appana parikarmma upacara mana kota 
hradaye taba nsewata nabhiye tabanu. 

Purwwa kratyaya no waradawa wsenda puda kayalahuta 
yana karmmasthanayata aradhana kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham patipatti . . pe . . antogabbha cha-yuga- 
lesu kaya-lahuta. 

Nava . . pe . . paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe , . araham araham. 

Mese arahain yana padaya aswasa praswasa ha sa- 
manga menehi kota bhavana kala kalhi tejo dhatuwa pa- 
hala we. Ehi appana . . pe . . tabanu. 

Purwwa kratyaya . . pe . . puda: — 

Okasa. Aham patipatti . . pe . . patikaromi, kl taenata, 
Okasa. Aham yacami . . . pe . . . cha-yugalesu citta- 
lahuta. Nava . . . pe . . . araham araham. 

Mese bhavana kala kalhi kaya lahutata men tejo dha- 
tuwa pahala w^e. Ehi appana . . . pe . . . tabanu. 

Purwwa kratyaya . . pe . . patikaromi. Aham yacami 
. . . pe . . . antogabbha kayamudata. 

Nava . . . pe . . . [khl] arahani araham. 

Mese bhavana kala kalhi pathawi dhatuwa pahala we. 
Ehi appana . . . pe . . . mana kota bala hradaye . . pe 
. . tabanu. 

Purwwa kratyaya . . . pe . . . antogabbha cha-yugalesu 
citta-muduta. Nava . . . pe . . . araham araham. 

Mese bhavana . . pe . . we . . pe . . tabanu. 

Purwwa kratyaya . . pe . . cha-yugalesu kaya kamman- 
nata. Nava . . pe . . araham. 

Mese bhavana kala kalhi apo dhatuwa pahala we . . 
pe . . mana kota bala bala hradaye . . pe . . tabanu. 



— 20 — 

Purwwa kratyaya . . pe . . cha-yugalesu citta kamman- 
iiata. Nava . . pe . . araham. 

Mese bhavana kala kalhi apo dhatuwa . . pe . . tabanu. 

Purwwa kratyaya . . pe . . cha-yugalesu kaya-pagunnata. 
Nava . . pe . . araham. 

Mese bhavana kala kalhi wago dhatuwa pahala we. . . 
pe . . tabanu. 

[khe] Purwwa kratyaya . . pe . . cha-yugalesu cittapa- 
guiinata. Nava . . pe . . araham. 

Mese . . pe . . wayo . . pe . . tabanu. 

Purwwa kratyaya . . pe . . cha-yugalesu kayujjugata\ 
Nava . . pe . . araham. 

Mese . . pe . . akasa dhatuwa . . pe . . tabanu. 

Purwwa kratyaya . . pe . . cha-yugalesu cittujjugata^ 
Nava . . pe . . araham. 

Mese . . pe . . akasa dhatuwa . . pe . . tabanu. 

Purwwa kratyaya . . pe . . cha-yugalesu 

kaya passaddhi, kaya kammaiinata, 
citta passaddhi, citta kammaniiata, 
kaya lahuta, kaya pagunnata, 

citta lahuta, citta pagunnata, 

kaya muduta, kayujjugata, 

citta muduta, cittujjugata. 

Nava . . pe . . araham. 

Mese bhavana kala kalhi uggaha patibhaga nimit dwaya 
peneyi uggaha nimit palagana nikmunak hu seyin e uggaha 
nimittata wada kisunu dos nsetiwa siyak dahasak gunayen 
pirisuduwa bhavangaya sindagana mano dwara awarjjana 
kota cha yugale* karmmasthanawala sama appana pari- 
karmma upacara pahala we mana kota bala bala nasika- 
grayen ganimin nabhiye mseda udukuru kota tabanu. Cha 
yugale sama appana parikarmma upacara wisesayen dsena 
purwa kratyaya no waradawE waenda puda dhamanasanna- 
wata aradhana kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe (4) . . patikaromi ki tsenata: — 



So MS, 2 So MS, corrected from yugalesu. 



— 21 — 

Okasa, okasa, okasa. Aham patipatiya pavisitva anto- 
gabbha-cha-yugalesu kayapassaddhi cittapassaddhi anuloma 
. . pe (7) . . dhammasanna patura hotu. 

Nisldati . . pe . . araham. 

Mese bhawana kara khila pandain lak^ana dhamma- 
sanna bala nasikagrayen ganimin nabhiye taba nsewata 
chayugale karmmasthanawalata aradhana kota anuloma 
patiloma karana widhi dakwanu Isebe. 

Okasa, okasa, okasa. Ahani patipatiya . . pe . . patura 
hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi apo dhatuwe appana parikarmma 
upacara mana kota bala bala nasagrayen * ganimin nabhi- 
yata angalakin mattehi anulomayen tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham patipatiya pasisitva antogabbha-citta- 
passaddhi-kayapassaddhi patiloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi ema apo dhatuwe upacare patan 
appanawata mana kota bala bala anulomayata bselu tsenhi 
patilomayen udu tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . antogabbha kayalahuta citta- 
lahuta anuloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese Sradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwe appana . . pe . . 
bala bala kaya passaddhiyata angalakin mattehi anulo- 
mayen tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . antogabbha cittalahuta kaya- 
lahuta patiloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kota bhawana karana kalhi ema tejo 
dhatuwe upacare . . pe . . anulomayata tsebu tsenhi . . pe 
. . tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . kayamuduta citta muduta anu- 
loma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese . . pe . . path awl dhatuwe . . pe . . bala bala 
kaya lahutawata . . pe . . tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . cittamuduta kayamuduta pati- 
loma . . pe . . patura hotu. 



So MS. 



— 22 — 

Mese . . pe . . pathawi dliatuwe upacara . . pe . . tabanu. 
Okasa . . . kaya kammannata cittakammaniiata anuloma 
. . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi apo dhatuwa pahala we mana 
kota bala kayamuduta cittamudutawata angalakin mattehi 
anulomayen tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham [kho] . . antogabbha cha-yugalesu citta- 
kammannata patiloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi apo dhatuwe upacare patan 
appanawata bala anulometa taebu tsenhi patilomayen udu 
tabanu. 

Okasa . . kayapagunnata cittapagunnata anuloma . . 
pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese . . pe . . wayo dhatuwa upadawa kaya kammaniia- 
tawata angalakin mattehi anulomayen tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . antogabbha chayugalesu cittapagunnata 
patiloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese . . pe . . wayo dhatuwa anulometa tsebu tsenhi 
patilomayen udu tabanu. 

Okasa . . pe . . cha-yugalesu kayujjugata cittujjugata 
anuloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi akasa dhatuwa upadawa ehi appana 
parikarmma upacara mana kota bala bala nasikagrayen 
ganimin kaya paguniiatawata hradayata da atare angala 
pramane tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . cha-yugalesu cittujjugata ka- 
yujjugata patiloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi akasa dhatuwe bala anulomaya^ 
tsebu tsenhi patilomayen udu tabanu. Meyin mattehi 
aradhana kala lesin anuloma patiloma kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham. . . pe . . cha-yugalesu kayapassaddhi 
anuloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Okasa chayugalesu 

. . . kaya lahuta citta lahuta anuloma .... 
.... kaya muduta citta muduta anuloma .... 
.... kaya kammannata citta kammannata anuloma . . . . 
.... kaya pagunnata citta pagunnata anuloma .... 
.... kayujjugata cittujjugata anuloma .... 



— 23 — 

. . . . cittujjugata kayujjugata patiloma .... & so on in 
reverse order, [khan] .... patura botu. 



Patipatiya nitthitam. 



Purwwa kratyaya no waradawa wsenda puda: — 
Okasa. Aham patipatti . pe (4) . . patikaromi, 
ki taenata, 

Okasa, okasa. Aham cha-saddaggahanam samadayitva 
antogabbha cha-yugalesu kayapassaddhi cittapassaddhi 
anuloma . . . pe (7) . . .patura hotu. 
Nisldati . . pe . . araham. 

cittapassaddhi kayapassaddhi patiloma . . . 

kayamuduta cittamuduta anuloma . . . 

cittamuduta kayamuduta patiloma . . . 

kaya kammannata citta kammaniiata anuloma . . . 

citta kammannata kaya kammannata patiloma . . . 

kayujjugata cittujjugata anuloma . . . 

cittujjugata kayujjugata patiloma . . . 

kaya lahuta citta lahuta anuloma ... 

citta lahuta kaya lahuta patiloma . . . 

kaya pagunnata cittapagunnata anuloma . . . 

citta pagunnata kayapaguiinata patiloma . . . pe . . . 
patura hotu. 

kaya passaddhi citta passaddhi anuloma ... 

kaya muduta citta muduta anuloma . . . 

kaya kammaiinata citta kammaiifiata anuloma . . . 

[kham] kayujjugata cittujjugata anuloma ... 

kaya lahuta citta lahuta anuloma . . . 

kaya pagunnata citta pagunnata anuloma . . . 

cittapagunnata kayapagunnata patiloma . . . and so 
on in reverse order . . . 



Cha-saddaggahanam nitt-hitam. 



Purwwa kratyaya no AvaradaAva w^enda puda: 
Okasa. Aliam . . pe . . patikaromi, 
kl taenata, 



— 24 — 

Okasa, okasa, okasa. Aham vidatthim^ samadayitva 
antogabbha cha yngalesu kaya-passaddhi citta-passaddhi 
kaya-muduta citta-muduta 
kaya-kammannata citta-kammannata 
kayujjugata cittaujjugata . . . anuloma . . pe . . 
patur.a hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe . . araham. 
Okasa. Aham vidatthim . . pe . . 
cittujjugata kayujjugata 
citta kammannata kaya kammaiinata 
citta muduta kaya muduta 
citta passaddhi kaya passaddhi patiloma 
Okasa. Aham vidatthim . . pe . . 
kaya-lahuta citta-lahuta 
kaya-pagunnata citta-paguniiata 
anuloma .... 
v^ivasa . > . . 

citta- pagunnata kaya-pagunnata 
citta-lahuta kaya-lahuta 
patiloma .... 

Okasa. Aham vidatthim 

kaya-muduta citta-muduta 
kaya-kammannata citta-kammannata 
kayujjugata cittujjugata . . . anuloma . . pe . . 
patura hotu. 

[khah] Okasa. Aham vidatthim . . pe . . 
. . . kaya-lahuta citta-lahuta . . . 
. . . kaya-pagunnata citta pagunnata anuloma . . . 
vJKasa .... 

. . . citta-pagunnata kaya-paguniiata . . . 
. . . citta-lahuta kaya-lahuta patiloma . . . 
v^i^asa .... 

cittujjugata kayujjugata, cittakammannata kayakamman- 
nata, . . . muduta . . . passaddhi patiloma . . . 



Vidatthim=^ nitthitam. 



MS. always vidatti, except in the title. ^ So MS. 



— 25 — 

Ptirwwa kratyaya no waradawa waenda puda: — 
Okasa. Aham , . . pe (4) . . . patikaromi, 
kl tsenata, — 

Okasa. Aham dhatu-samtiham samadayitva antogabbha 
cha-yugalesu 

kaya-passaddhi citta-passaddhi, 
kaya-lahuta citta-lahuta, 
kaya-muduta citta-muduta, 
kaya-kammaniiata citta-kammannata, 
kaya-pagunnata citta-pagunnata, 
kayujjugata cittujjugata anuloma . . pe (7) . . 
patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe . . araham. 

Okasa. Aham dhatu samuham . . pe . . cha-yugalesu 
cittujjugata kayujjugata [and so on] patiloma . . pe. . . 
patura hotu. 

Dhatusamuham nitthitam. 

• • • • 

Ptirwwa . . pe . . puda: — 
Okasa . . . pe (4) . . . patikaromi, 
kl tsenata, 

Okasa. Aham catu-nayam samadayitva antogabbha cha- 
yugalesu 

kaya-passaddhi citta-passaddhi, 
kaya-lahuta citta-lahuta, 

kaya-muduta citta-muduta, . . . anuloma . . pe (7) 
. . patura hotu. Nisidati . . pe . . araham. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . cha-yugalesu citta-muduta kaya- 
muduta [as above] patiloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . cha-yugalesu kaya-kammaniiata 
citta-kammannata anuloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . cha-yugalesu citta-kammaiinata 
kaya-kammannata patiloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Okasa 

. . . kaya-pagunnata anuloma 

. . . citta-pagunnata anuloma 

. . . citta-pagunnata patiloma 

. . . kaya-pagunnata patiloma 



— 26 



kayujjugata anuloma ... ... 

cittujjugata anuloma ... ... 

cittujjugata patiloma 

ka}'ujjugata patiloma 

kaya-passaddhi anuloma 

citta-passaddhi anuloma 

kaya-lahuta anuloma 

citta-lahuta anuloma 

kaya-muduta anuloma 

citta-muduta anuloma 

kaya-kammaiinata anuloma 

citta-kammaniiata anuloma ... ... 

kaya-pagufmata anuloma . .-. . * . 

citta-pagufmata anuloma 

kayujjugata anuloma 

cittujjugata anuloma 

cittujjugata patiloma 

kayujjugata patiloma 

citta-pagufmata patiloma 

kaya-pagunnata patiloma 

citta-kammaiinata patiloma 

kaya-kammanfiata patiloma 

citta-nmduta patiloma 

kaya-muduta patiloma 

citta-lahuta patiloma 

kaya-lahuta patiloma 

citta-passaddhi patiloma 

k:iya-passadhi i)atiloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 



Catu-uayam nitthitam. 

Piii'wwa kratyaya no waradaAva Ava^nda puda: — 
Okasa. Ahani patipatti . . pe (4) . . patikaromi, 
ki ta3nata. 

Okiisa, okasa. Aham panca-nayam samadayitva anto- 
gabl)lia cha-yugalesu 

kaya-passaddhi citta-passaddhi 
kaya-lahuta citta-lahuta 
anuloma . . pe (7) . . patura hotu. 



— 27 



\ 



Nisldati . . pe . . araham. 
Okasa. Aham . . pe . . cha-yugalesu 
citta-lahuta kaya-lahuta 
citta-passaddhi kaya-passaddhi 

. . . . patiloma 

. kaya-muduta anuloma 

. citta-muduta anuloma 

. . . . [dodo reversed] . . . patiloma 

. kaya-kammaiinata anuloma 

. citta-kammannata anuloma 

. [Ga] citta-kammannata patiloma . . 

. kaya-kammaniiata pat-iloma 

. kaya-pagunnata anuloma 

. citta-paguiiiiata-anuloma 

. citta-pagunnata patiloma ... ... 

. kaya-paguniiata patiloma 

. kayujjugata anuloma 

. cittujjugata anuloma 

. . . . [reversed] patiloma 

. k . . c . . passaddhi anuloma . . . 

. k . . c . . lahuta anuloma 

. k . . c . . muduta anuloma 

. k . . c . . kammaniiata anuloma . . 

. k . . c . . paguiinata anuloma . . . 

. k . . c . . ujjugata anuloma ... . 

. c . . k . . ujjugata patiloma ... . 

. c . . k . . paguiinata patiloma . . . 

. c . . k . . kammaimata patiloma . . 

. c . . k . . muduta patiloma ... . 

. c . . k . . lahuta patiloma 

. c . . k . . passaddlii patiloma . . . 



Paiica nayam nitthitam. 

Purwwa . . pe . . puda: — 
Okasa . . . j)e . . . patikaromi, kl tsenata, 
Okasa, okasa, okasa. Aham hadayam samadayitva anto- 
gabbha cha-yugalesu kaya-passaddhi citta-passaddhi anu- 
loma . . pe . . patura hotu. 



— 28 - 

[gi] Nisldati . . pe . . arahaiji. 

. cittapassaddhi kayapassaddhi patiloma. 
. k . . c . . lahuta anuloma . . . 
. c . . k . . lahuta patiloma . . . 
. k . . c . . muduta anuloma . . . 
. c . . k . . muduta patiloma . . . 
. k . . c . . kammannata anuloma . . . 
. c . . k . . kammannata patiloma ... 
. k . . c . . paguniiata anuloma . . . 
. c . . k . . paguiinata patiloma . . . 
. k . . c . . ujjugata anuloma . . . 
. c . . k . . ujjugata patiloma . . . 
. k . . c . . passaddhi anuloma . . . 
. k . . c . . lahuta anuloma . . . 
. muduta . . . kammannata . . . pagunnata . . . ujju- 
gata anuloma . . . 
. ujjugata . . . pagunnata . . . kammannata patiloma . . . 
. muduta . . . lahuta . . . passaddhi patiloma . . . 
. pe . . . patura hotu. 



Ha day am nitthitam. 



Purwwa . . . puda: — 
Okasa . . pe . . patikaromi, kl tsenata, 
Okasa, [ter], Ahana samadhim samadayitva antogabbha 
cha-yugalesu 

. . . k . . c . . passaddhi anuloma . . . 
. . . c . . k . . passaddhi patiloma . . . 

and as informer section up to end, 

Samadhim nitthitani. 



[GuJ Purwwa . . . puda . . . pe . . . taenata, 
Okasa, okasa, okasa. Aham dhammatiratthitikam sama- 
dayitva antogabbha cha-yugalesu 
. . . k . . c . . passaddhi . . . 

and so on as in section Hadayam. 



Dhammatiratthitikam nitthitam. 

• • • • • • 



— 29 — 

Ptirwwa . . . pe . . . puda, cha yugale patipatti puja- 
wata aradhana kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham patipatti . . pe (4) . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami uggaha-rainittan ca patibhaga-minittam 
upacara-vidhini appana-samadhi-vidhim antogabbha cha 
yugalesu kaya-passaddhim citta-passaddhiip. 

Nava lokuttaradhamma . . pe . . nibbana-paccayo hotu. 

Nisldati . . pe (5) . . araham. 

Mese bhawana kara apo dhatuwe upacaraya patan pari- 
kanninayata bala bala nasagrayen gena nabhiyata angala- 
kin mattehi taba sitthaka dipaye dsengala pramane da sala- 
kaya gilihena turu bhawana kala kalhi ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa [ter], Aham sitthaka dandadipam samadayitva 
antogabbha cha-yugalesu kaya-passaddhim citta-passaddhiip 
anuloma . . . pe (7) . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kara bhawana kala kalhi ema apo dha- 
tuwa pahala we. [Gf] Ehi appana parikarmma upacara 
bala bala nasagren gena ema upacara parikarmma tsebu 
tsenhi anulomayen taba sitthaka dipaye angala pramane 
da deweni salakaya gilihena turu bhavana kala kalhi 
ukkuhikayen inda. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . 

k . . c . . lahuta anuloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kara bhawana kota tejo dhatuwa upa- 
dawa, ehi appana parikarmma upacara bala bala nasa- 
grayen ganimin yata kiyana lada kayapassaddhiyata an- 
galakin matte anulomayen taba sitthaka dipaye angala 
pramane da tunweni salakaya gilihena turu bhawana kala 
kalhi ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . 

k . . c . . muduta anuloma 

Mese . . pe . . kota pathawl dhatuwa upadawa, ehi a. 
p. upacara pirisuduwa bala nasagrayen ganimin kaya 
lahutata angalakin mattehi anulomayen taba sitthaka di- 
paye angala pramane da tunweni^ salakaya gilihena turu 
bhawana kala kalhi ukkutikayen inda: — 

* So MS. ? satara-weni 



— 30 — 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . 

k . k . c . . kammannata anuloma .... 

Mese . . pe . . apo dhatuwa apadawa, . . pe . . upa- 
cara bala nasagrayen ganimin kayamudutata . . pe . . da 
salakaya* gilihena . . pe . . inda: — 

Okasa. Ahaip . . pe . . 

k . . c . . pagunnata anuloma 

Mese . . pe . . kalhi wayo dhatuwa . . pe . . upacara 
bala nasagrayen gaminin kayakammannatawata angalakin 
. . pe . . pramane dana turu . . pe . . kalhi saweni sala- 
kaya wsetena bawa dsena ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . 

k . . . c . . . ujjugata anuloma 

[Gl] Mese aradhana kara bhawana kala kalhi akasa 
dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi . . pe . . nasagrayen gena kaya 
pagunnatawa ha hradaya ha me deya ture anulomayen 
taba sitthaka dipaye angala pramane dana turti bhawana 
kala kalhi satweni salakaya wsetena bawa dsena hadaya 
samadiyata palanga^ no hsera inda yata kiyana lada 
kaya passaddhiyata pahala wu apo dhatuwe appana pari- 
karmma upacara bala bala nabhiyata angalakin matte 
anulomayata taebu tsenhi ema lesin ma taba sitthaka di- 
paye angala pramane da salakaya gilihena turu bhawana 
kala kalhi esema inda samadhiyatat mema appana pari- 
karmma upacara pahala kara bala bala ema lesin ma 
taba sitthaka dipaye angala pramane da salakaya gili- 
hunu anukaranayen anulomaye krama data yutu. Pati- 
lomayata balana krama nam asane palanga* bsenda inda 
yata kiyana lada kaya passaddhi yana kamatahanata 
balana lada apo dhatuwe upacare parikarmmaya bala 
bala anulomayata taebu tsenhi patilomayata taba sitthaka 
dipaye dsengala pramane dana turu bhawana kala kalhi 
palamu salakaya wsetena bawa dsena ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Ahani . . . pe . . . 

kaya-passaddhi citta-passaddhi^ patiloma .... 

Mese aradhana . . . pe . . . apo dh. p. we. Ehi . . pe 
. . bala anulometa tsebu tsenhi patilometa taba sitthaka 

^ MS. phalanga. * So MS. 



— 31 — 

dipaye angala pramane dana turu bhawana kala kalhi 
deweni salakaya waeteyi. E anukarana ^abdayen daena 
ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . 

kaya-lahuta citta-lahuta patiloma 

Mese . . pe . . kalhi tejo dhatwiia pahala we. Ehi . . 
pe . . . upacara mana ko^a bala bala anulomayata tabana 
lada kramayen patilomayata taba sitthaka dipaye angala 
pramane dana . . pe . . tunweni salakaya wsetena bawa 
dsena ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham 

kaya-muduta citta-muduta patiloma 

Mese aradhana kara bhawana kota pathaAvl dhatuwe 
appana parikarmma upacara mana kota bala bala anu- 
lomayata taebu tsenhi patilomayata taba sitthaka dipaye 
angala pramane dana turu bhawana [Gl] kala kalhi satara- 
weni salakaya waeteyi. E ksanayehi ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . 

kaya-k° citta-kammaiinata patiloma 

Mese aradhana kara bhawana kota apo dhatuwe appana 
parikarmma upacara mana kota bala bala anulomayata 
taba angala. pramana dsena turu bhawana kala kalhi 
pasweni salakaya wsetena bawa dsena ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . 

kaya-pagunnata citta-pagunnata patiloma 

Mese aradhana kara bhawana kala kalhi wayo dhatuwe 
. . pe . . anulomayata tabana lada kramayen patilomayen 
kota sitthaka dipaye angala pramane dana .turn bhawana 
kala kalhi saweni salakaya gilihena anukarana Sabdayen 
dsena ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa . . . kayujjugata cittujjugata patiloma 

Mese a. k. bh. k. okasa dhatuAve . . pe . . anulomayata 
tabana . . kota taba sitthaka . . . kalhi satweni salakaya 
wsetena bawa dsena palanga^ no hsera inda hadayamata 
yata balana lada apo dhatuwe appana parikarmma upa- 
cara mana kota bala bala anulomayata tsebu tsenhi pati- 

^ So MS. 



— 32 — 

lomayen udu taba bhawana kala kalhi sitthaka dipaye 
angala pramane da ataweni salakaya wsetena bawa dsena 
esema inda samadhiyatat mema dhatuwe appana pari- 
kannma upacara mana kota bala bala anulomayata tsebu 
taenhi patilomayata taba bhawana kota nimiya yutu. 

Cha yugale pratipatti puja krama nitthitam. 

Ptirwwa kratyaya no waradawa waenda puda: 

Okasa, okasa, okasa. Aham kayavasivattam samadayitva 
antogabbha chayugalesu k . p . c . . passaddhi anuloma 
. . pe (7) . . patura hotu. Nisldati . . p^ (7) . . araham. 

Mese bhawana kota apo dhatuwa upadawa nabhiyata 
wamalayen satarangula pramane sarwwanga naharayayi 
kiyana lada naharak tana mandala dakwa nsengi tibeyi. 
Ehi upadawana lada apo dhatuwe appana parikarmma 
upacara mana kota bala bala nasikagrayen ganimin nabhi- 
yata samawa angalakin [ge] matte anuloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham kayavasivattam . . . cha-yugalesu c. p. k. 
passaddhi patiloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhanakara ema appana parikarmma upacara mana 
kota bala anulomayata tsebu taenhi patilomayen udu tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . yugalesu k . . c . . lahuta anu- 
loma . . . 

Mese aradhana kara bhawana kota tejo dhatuwe appana 
parikarmma upacara mana kota bala bala kaya passaddhi- 
yata angalakin matte anulomayen tabanu. 

Okasa ... . . . c . . . k . . . lahuta patiloma . . . 

Mese . . pe, . . patiloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa k . . c . . muduta anuloma 

Mese . . pathawi dhatuwe . . . kayalahutata .... tabanu. 

Okasa c . . . k . . . muduta patiloma . . . 

Mese . . . anuloma kota tsebu taenhi patiloma kota . . . 
tabanu. 

Okasa . . . k . . c . . kammannata anuloma . . . 

Mese . . . apo dhatuwe . . . kota bala kayamudutata 
angalakin matte anuloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa . . . c . . k . . kammannata patiloma . . . 

Mese . . . anuloma kota taebu taenhi patiloma kota tabanu. 



— 33 — 

Okasa . . . [gai] k . . . c . . . pagunnata anuloma . . . 

Mese . . . wayo dhatuwe . . . kota bala kaya kammanna- 
tata . . . anuloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa . . . c . . k . . pagunnata patiloma . . , 

Mese . . . patiloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa . . . k . . c . . ujjugata anuloma . . . 

Mese . . . akasa dhatuwe . . . bala nasikSgrayen gani- 
min kaya paguniiatawata da tana mandala da atare 
sarwwanga nahara anuloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa . . . c . . k . . ujjugata patiloma . . . 

Mese-. . pe . . kota bala bala . . . pe . . . patiloma 
kota tabanu. 

Huyaka amunana lada nana wariariayehi mutu msenik 
raBsak seyin sarwwanga naharayehi cha sthanaka yugala- 
yehi appana parikarmma upacara mana kota taba meyin 
mattehi aradhana kala lesin dsena anuloma patiloma^ 
kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham kayavaslvattam . . pe (32)*. . k . p . citta- 
passaddhim anuloma . . . pe . . . patura hotu 

Apo dhatuwa. 
. . . k . . c . . lahuta anuloma 

Tejo dhatuwa. 

. . . k . . c . . muduta anuloma 

Me yata pathawl dhatuwa balanu. 

. . . k . . c . . kammaiinata anuloma 

Apo dhatuwa. 
. . . . k . . c . . pagunnata anuloma 

Wayo dhatuwa. 
. . . k . . c . . [go] ujjugata anuloma 

Akasa dhatuwa. 
. . . c . . k . . ujjugata patiloma 

Akasa dhatuwa. 
. . . c . . k . . pagunnata patiloma 

Wayo dhatuwa. 
. . . c . . k . . kammannata patiloma 

* M8. repeats this word. 

3 



• • 



— 34 — 

Apo dhatuwa. 

c . . k . . muduta patiloma 

Pathawl dhatuwa. 

. . . c . . k . . lahuta patiloma 

Tejo dhatuwa. 

. . . c . . k . . passaddhi patiloma 

Apo dhatuwa. 
Cha yugale karmma sthanawala appana parikarmma 
upacara mana kota sarwwanga nahare taba catii ware 
anuloma patiloma karana widhi data^ yutu. 

Kayavaslvattam nitthitam. 

Yugalayata anaturu kota kayasukha cittasukha Buddha- 
nussati upacara samadhi yana karmmasthana keren 
purwwa kratyaya no waradawa wsenda puda kayasukhayatar 
aradhana kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe (4) . . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacaml uggaha nimittan ca patibhaga-nimittam 
upacara-vidhim appana-samadhi-vidhim antogabbha-kaya- 
sukham. 

Nava lokuttara-dhamma . . . pe (4, 5) . . . hotu. 

Nisldati . . . pe (5) . . araham. 

Mese bhawana kota uggaha patibhaga nimit dwaya 
peneyi. E uggaha ^ * pe (5) . '. * awarjjana kota apo 
dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi appana parikarmma upacara 
mana kota bala bala nasikagrayen gaminin hradaye taba 
nsewata nabhiye tabanu. 

Purwwa . . . pe . . . puda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . pe . . antogabbha-cittasukhaiji. 

Nava lokuttara dhamma . . pe . . arahani. 

Mese bhawana kota apo dhatuwe appana . . pe . . 
tabanu. 

Purwwa . . pe . . antogabbha-Buddhanussatiin. 

Nava lokuttaradhamma . . pe . . arahaiji. 

Mese bhawana kara uggaha nimit patibhaga nimit 



X 



MS. tada. 



— 35 — 

dwaya mana kota bala e uggaha nimit palagena nikmunak 
hu men tejo dhatuwe appana upadi ehi appana parikarmma 
. . pe . . nasikagrayen gena hradaye taba . . tabanu. 

Ptirwwa kratyaya . . . pe . . . puda. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . . pe . . . antogabbha upacara-samadhim. 

Nava-lokuttara . . pe . . araham. 

Mese bhawana kota uggaha . . pe . . peneyi. E uggaha 
nimit palagana nikumunak men siyak dahasak gunayen 
pirisudu wa mano dwEraya awarjjana kota pathawl dhatuwe 
appana parikarmma upacara upadi mana kota . . pe . . tabanu. 

Ptirwwa . . pe . . puda: — 

Okasa * . pe . . antogabbha kayasukha cittasukha 
Buddhanussati upacara samadhim. 

Nava lokuttara . . pe . . araham. 

Mese niwan aramunu kota bhawana kara mema 
karmmasthanawala ^ama appana parikarmma upacara upa- 
dawa mana kota bala bala nasikagrayen ganimin nabhiya 
maeda anulomayen tabanu. 

Ptirwwa . . pe . . puda: — 

Okasa. [Gam] . . pe . . patikaromi, 

Id taenata, 

Okasa, okasa. Aham patipatiya pavisitva antogabbha 
kayasukha cittasukha anuloma . . pe (7) . . patura hotu. 
Nisidati . . pe . . araham. 

Mese bhavana kara nlla pandain laksana dhamma sanna 
bala nasikagrayen ganimin nabhiye taba, naewata kaya- 
sukha cittasukhaye karmmasthana anuloma patiloma karanu. 

Okasa, okasa. Aham patipatiya . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Mese aradhana kara bhawana kota apo dhatuwa apa- 
dawa, Ehi appana parikarmma upacara upadawa mana • 
kota bala bala nasikagrayen ganimin nabhiyata angalakin 
matte anuloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . cittasukha kayasukha patiloma . . . 

Mese aradhana kara ema appana parikarmma upacara 
anulomayata tsebti tsenhi patiloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . antogabbha Buddhanussati 
anuloma . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 



— 36 — 

Mese aradhana kara bhawana kota tejo dhatuwe appana 
parikarmma upacSlra mana kota bala bals, nasikagrayen 
ganimin kaya sukhayata angalakin matte anuloma kota 
tabanu. 

Okasa . . . Buddhanussati patiloma ...... 

Mese aradhana kara . . . pe . . . anuloma kota tsebu 
tsenhi patiloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa . . . antogabbha upacara samadhi anuloma 

Mese aradhana . . pe . . pathawi dhatuwa . . pe . . 
ganimin hradayata Buddhanussati karmmasthanayata da 
me deyature anuloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa upacara samadhi patiloma . . . 

Mese . . pe . . tabanu. Meyin mattehi aradhana kala 
lesin bala tabana lada kammasthana anuloma patiloma 
kata yutu. 

Okasa antogabbha kayasukha cittasukha anu- 
loma . . . [gah]. 

. . . . apodhatuwa 

. . . . Buddhanussati anuloma 

. tejo dhatuwa 

. upacara samadhi anuloma . . . 

. pathawi dhatu 

. upacara samadhi patiloma . . . 

. pathawi dhatuwa 

. Buddhanussati patiloma . . . 

. tejo dhatuwa 

. cittasukha kayasukha patiloma 

. apo dhatuwa . . . 



Patipatiya nitthitam. 



Purwwa . . . . puda: — 

Okasa. Aham patipatti . . pe . . patikaromi, kl 
taenata; — 

Okasa, okasa. Ahain cha-saddaggahanain samadayitva 
antogabbha kayasukha cittasukha . . pe (7) . . patura hotu. 

Nisldati . . . pe (5) . . . araham. 



/ 
/ 



— 37 — 

. cittasukha kayasukha patiloma . 
. upacara samadhi anuloma . . . 
. upacara samadhi patiloma . . . 
. Buddhanussati anuloma . . . 
. kayasukha cittasukha anuloma . 
. upacara samadhi anuloma . . . 
. Buddhanussati anuloma . . . 
. Buddhanussati patiloma . . . 
. upacara samadhi patiloma . . . 
. cittasukha kayasukha patiloma . 



[Grha] Cha saddaggabanam nitthitaip. 



Purwwa . . . puda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . . patikaromi. ki tsenata; — 
Okasa, okasa. Aham vidatthim samadayitva antogabbha 
kayasukha cittasukha upacara-samadhi anuloma . . . 
Nisidati . . . pe . . . araham. 

. . upacara-samadhi cittasukha kayasukha patiloma . . . 

. . Buddhanussati anuloma 

. . Buddhanussati patiloma 

. . kaya-sukha citta-sukha upacara-samadhi anuloma . . . 

, . Buddhanussati anuloma 

. . Buddhanussati patiloma 

. . upacara samadhi cittasukha kayasukha patiloma . . . 



Vidatthim nitthitam. 



Purwwa . . . puda: — Okasa . . . patikaromi, ki tsenata, 
— Okasa, okasa. Aham dhatu - samuham samadayitva 
antogabbha kayasukha cittasukha Buddhanussati upacara 
samadhi anuloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe . . araham. 

. . . upacara-samadhi Buddhanussati cittasukha kaya- 
sukha patiloma ... 



Dhatu-samuham nitthitam. 



— 38 — 

Purwwa kl tsenata, Okasa, okasa. Aham catu- 

nayam samadayitva antogabbha kayasukha cittasukha 
Buddhanussati anuloma . . . 

Nisidati . . pe . . araham. 

. . . [Gha] Buddhanussati cittasukha kayasukha pati- 
loma . . . 

. . . upacara samadhi anuloma . . . 

. . . upacara samadhi patiloma 

. . . kayasukha cittasukha Buddhanussati anuloma . . . 

. . . upacara-samadhi anuloma ... 

. . . upacara-samadhi patiloma ... 

. . . Buddhanussati citttasukha kayasukha patiloma . . . 



Catu-nayam nitthitaiii. 



Purwwa . • . kl taenata: — 

Okasa. Aham panca-nayain samadayitva antogabbha 

kayasukha cittasukha anuloma 

Nisldati . . pe . . araham. 

. . cittasukha kayasukha patiloma 

. . Buddhanussati anuloma 

. . Buddhanussati patiloma 

. . upacara-samadhi anuloma 

. . upacara-samadhi patiloma 

. . kayasukha cittasukha anuloma 

. . Buddhanussati anuloma 

. . upacara-samadhu anuloma 

. . upacara-samadhi patiloma 

. . Buddhanussati patiloma 

. . cittasukha kayasukha patiloma 



Panca-nayam nitthitam. 



Purwwa . . . ki tsenata: — 

Okasa, okasa. Aham hadayam samadayitva antogabbha 
kayasukha cittasukha anuloma . . . 
Nisidati . . araham . . 
. . . cittasukha kayasukha patiloma 



39 — 



. Buddhanussati anuloma . . 
. Buddhanussati patiloma . 
. upacara samadhi anuloma 
. upacara samadhi patiloma 
. k . . c . . sukha anuloma 
. Buddhanussati anuloma . . 
. upacara samadhi anuloma 
. upacara samadhi patiloma 
. Buddhanussati patiloma . . 
. c . . k . . sukha patiloma 



Hadayam nitthitaip. 



Purwwa . . . ki taenata: — Okasa, okasa. Ahain sa- 
madhim samadayitva antogabbha k , . c . . anuloma. 
Nisldati . . . pe . . . araham. 

[Ml as in last section]. 



[Ghi] Samadhim nitthitam. 



Purwwa . . . kl taenata: — 

Okasa, okasa. Aham dhammatiratthitikam samadayitva 

antogabbha kayasukha cittasukha anuloma 

[All as in last section]. 



[Ghu] Dhammatiratthitikain nitthitam. 



Purwwa . . . puda: 

kaya sukha citta sukhaye pratipatti pujawata aradhana 
karanu: — 

Okasa. Aham . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami uggaha-nimittan ca patibhaga-nimittaiji 
upacara-vidhim appana-samadhi-vidhim antogabbha kaya- 
sukha citta-sukha. 

Nava lokuttara dhamma . . pe . . nibbana paccayo hotu. 

Nisldati . . pe . . araham. 

Mese bhawana kala kalhi uggaha patibhaga nimit dwaya 
peneyi. E uggaha nimit palagana nikmunak hu men apo 



— 40 — 

dhatuwa peneyi. E dhatuwe upacara parikarmma mana 
kota bala nasagrayen ganimin nabhiyata matte angala 
pramane taba sitthaka dipaye dsengala pramane dana 
turu bhawana kala kalhi salakaya gilihi waetana bawa 
dsena ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka-danda-dipam samadayitva anto- 
gabbha kaya-sukha citta-sukba anuloma 

Mese aradhana kara ema apo dhatuwe appana pari- 
karmma upacara mana kota bala bala nasagrayen ganimin 
ema dhatuwe upacara parikarmma tsebu tsenhi anuloma 
kota taba sitthaka dipaye angala pramane da salakaya 
wsetena turu bhawana kala kalhi ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . antogabbha Buddhanussati anu- 
loma . . pe . . 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwe appana p. u, mana 
kota bala kaya sukhayata matte angala pramane anuloma 
kota taba sitthaka dipaye angala pramane dana turu bha- 
wana kala kalhi salakaya gilihi wseteyi. E bawa dsena 
ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa . . pe . . antogabbha upacara samadhi anuloma 
. . pe . . 

Mese . . . pathawi dhatuwe . . . bala Buddhanussatiyata 
da hradayata da me deyature angala p. a. k. t s. d. a< 
pramane da salakaya gilihena turu bh. k. kalhi esema inda 
hadayamata yata kiyana lada kaya sukhayata pahala wu apo 
dhatuwe a. p. u. mana kota bala anulomayata bselu kra- 
mayen taba sitthaka d. a. p. da salakaya gilihena turu bh. 
k. k. samadhiyatat mema dhatuwe a. p. u. m. b. kaya 
sukhayata baelu kramayen taba sitthaka dipaye angala 
pramane da salakaya g. t. bh. k. k. anulomayata balana 
krama data yutu. 

Patilomayata balana krama nam kaya sukhayata balana 
lada apo dhatuwe upacara parikarmma bala anulomayata 
bselu tsenhi patilomayen taba sitthaka dipaye dsengala; 
pramane da s. g. t. bh. k. k. ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa . . . antogabbha cittasukha kayasukha patiloma^ 



^ M8. kayasukha cittasukha patiloma. 



— 41 — 

Mehi a. p. u. anulomayata baelu taenhi patilomayen udu 
taba sitthaka dipaye angala pramane da salakaya gilihena 
turu bh. k. k. ukk. inda: — 

Okasa antogabbha Buddhanussati gatiloma 



Mehi a. p. u. . . taenhi patilomayata taba . . pe . . inda: — 
Okasa . . . antogabbha upacara samadhi patiloma . . . 
Mehi . . [as the last] bh. k. k. esema inda hadayamata 
anulomayata tabana lada apo dhatuwe a. p. u. m. b. anu- 
lomaye kramayen tabU s. d. a. p. da s. g. t. bh. k. k. sa- 
madhiyatat mema dhatuwe a. p. u. m. anulomaya kramayen 
taba s. d. a. p. da s. g. t. bh. k. k. patilomaye krama ni- 
mawunu bawa data yutu. 



Kayasukha cittasukhayehi sitthaka dipa prati- 

patti puja vidhim nitthitam. 



Purwwa . . . . ki taenata: — 

Okasa, okasa. Aham kayavasivattam samadayitva anto- 
gabbha [Ghr] kayasukha cittasukha anuloma (7) . . . hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe . . araham. 

Mese nirwana Papaya aramunu kota bh. k. k. apo dha- 
tuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. m. b. bala nasagrayen ga- 
nimin dakunu tana pute basse anuloma kota tabanu: — 

Okasa cittasukha kayasukha patiloma . . . 

Mehi a. p. u. anulomayata tsebu taenhi patiloma kota 
tabanu: — 

Okasa antogabbha Buddhanussati anuloma . . . 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwe a. p. u. m. b. bala 
nasikagrayen ganimin wan tana pute basse anuloma kota 
tabanu. — 

Okasa . . . antogabbha Buddhanussati patiloma 

Mehi ema a. p. u. anulomayata tsebu taenhi patiloma 
kota tabanu: — 

Okasa . . . antogabbha upacara samadhi anuloma 

Mese aradhana kota pathawl dhatuwe a. p. u. m. b. b. 
nasagrayen ganimin dakunu tana pute basse anuloma kota 
tabanu: — 



— 42 — 

Okasa . . . antogabbha upacara samadhi patiloma . . . 

Mehi ema dhatuwe a. p. u. m. b. b. anulomayata bselu 

tsenhi patiloma kota tabanu. — Meyin mattehi de tana 

pute tabana lada karmmasthanawalata aradhana karana 

widhi bala anuloma patiloma kata yutu. 

. antogabbha kayasukha cittasukha anuloma . . . 

. Buddhanussati anuloma 

. upacara samadhi anuloma 

. upacara samadhi patiloma . . . 

. Buddhanussati patiloma . . , 

. [Ghf] cittasukha kayasukha patiloma . . . 
Prasada waha wu ratnakara yakahata gat mutu ruwan 
bandawu kayasukha cittasukha Buddhanussati upacara 
samadhi yana karmmasthanawala hata gat Sama a. p. u. 
namseti mutu ruwan bala bala de tana mandale tabana 
widhi kriya data yutu. 



Kayavasivattam nitthitam. 



Kayasukha cittasukhayata anaturu kota purwwa krat- 
yaya no w. w. p. Sugata Tathagata wara dharmma cakra 
seti trai lokadhipati asara^asarana saranagata wajra pan- 
jara karuna nidhana lokaswamiwu Bhagawat arhat apa 
sammasambudu rajanan wahanse adikota seti anantapar- 
yanta Bhagawatunta sarwanata nana nsemati guna ruwan 
sada ganta mula karanawa pratyaksa kota dutu heyin 
purwwa bhagayehi me anapana samadhi pratyaksa kota 
duti heyin me samadhiya ^antadi santaguna elawanneyayi 
kiya Bhagavat hu wisin anek' akarayen warnna kota mula 
karmmasthanayayi kiya garu tsenhi taba wadala heyin 
sasara bhaya lesin dat yogavacarayan wisin sneha seti wa 
bhawita kota wisesadhigamayata utsaha kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe (4) . . . patikaromi. 

AhaipL yacami uggaha-nimittan ca patibhaga-nimittan 
upacara-vidhim appana-samadhi-vidhim antogabbha ana- 
pana sati. Nava-lokuttara-dhamma . . pe (4, 5) . . nib- 
banapaccayo hotu. 



— 43 — 

Nisldati . . pe (5) . . parikarmmam pathamam dutiyam 
tatiyam. catutthaip. pancamain. 

Mese tik§ana nanayen manaskaraya aswasa praswasaya 
ha samanga menehi karannahata uggaha pratibhaga nimitta 
dwaya upadl, Ehi laksana ke-bandu dayat uggaha nimitte 
kisunu dos rsela nsegi nsegi pena bubulu musu diyek wl 
nam e banduwa ma waetahe pena pahara adi kisunu dos 
peneyi nohot sala wsetup demin sembara min saela min 
naegena dum salawak men da ahas-hi sudu walakulak men 
da uggaha nimit peneyi. Pratibhaga nimittaya ahas tubu 
mini tal wsetak men da, minimaya ksetapatak men da, 
walaturen nikmunu sanda mandalak men da, megha mukha- 
yehi bala ka waku men da uggaha nimit palagana nik- 
munak hu men uggaha nimittata wada kisunu dos nsetiwa 
siyak guna dahasak gunayen pirisuduwa bhawangaya sin- 
dagana mano dwaraya awarjjana kota akasa dhatuwa 
pahala we. Ehi appanawa nam suwapahas seti himbul 
pulun kappasika pulun men idda mal daesaman mal sudu 
nelun mal me adi subra ^ warnna ho peneyi, parikarmmaya 
mayura pinjayakata bandu monara pil raesak se peneyi, 
^pacaraya andun wan psehse bandu kalu kuruweniyage 
warnnayata bandu kala warnna ho peneyi. Me appana 
parikarmma upacara mana kota bala bala nasikagrayen 
ganimin hradaye taba naewata nabhiye tabanu. Ita ikbiti 
wa nasa pute taebiya yutu. Meyin mattehi purwwa krat- 
yaya n. w. w. p.: — 

Okasa. Aham . . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . . antogabbha anapanasati. Nava lokut- 
tara dhamma . . . pe . . . nibbana-paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe . . parikammam pathamam dutiyam tati- 
yam catuttham pancamam. 

Mese bhawanawehi yedena yogavacara bhiksun wisin 
prajna nsemati suryya rsesmiyen kamacchandadi moha 
naemati ghanandhakaraya widwamsanaya kerimin aswasa 
praswasa ha samaga menehi kara kara bhawana kala 
kalhi mano dwaraya awarjjana kota aka^a dhatuwa pahala 

' So MS. 



— 44: — 

we. Ehi appana p. u. m. k. b. b. dasa digata balana 
widhi aturen citta vinnanayen psedum digata balana krama 
nam nasikagraya patan mema a. p. u. krama kramayen 
angul gananin bala bala dwadasa angulak seta bselu ^ kalhi 
wiyatek we. E kalhi huyaka amunana lada nana warnna- 
yen yuktawu mutu wselak se da mal damak men da wsetahe. 
Nsewata wiyatin de wiyatak seta bselu kalhi riyanek we. 
Kiyanin dekak aeta bselu kalhi wadu riyanak we. Wadu 
riyanin sat riyanak seta bselu kalhi yatek we. Yatayen 
wissak seta bselu kalhi isbek we. Isben asuwak seta bselu 
kalhi gawuwek we. Gawuwen satara gawuwak seta bselu 
kalhi yodunek we. Yodunen siyak yodunak ho dahasak 
yodunak ho seta bselu kalhi sagaraya wseni satahan weyi. 
Eyin seta bselu kalhi Aswakarnnadi sapta kuta parwatayan 
da, eyin seta bselu kalhi Meru mastakaya yana sanninna^ 
gena ehi mema a. p. u. anulomayen tabanu. 

Nsewata patilomayata Meru mastakayehi tabana lada a. 
p. u. cittawiiinanayen gena Yugandhara, [G\] ISadhara, 
Karawika, Sudassana, Nemindhara, Winataka, Aswakarn- 
nadi sat kula paw da satta sagaraya da pasu kota bala, 
dahasak yodun asanna wu kalhi siya gananin pasu kota 
bala, siyak yodun asanna wu kalhi yodun gananin pasu 
kota bala, yodunak pamana asanna wu kalhi gawu gananin 
pasu kota bala, gawuwak pamana asanna wu kalhi isbu 
gananin pasu kota bala, isbak pamana asanna wu kalhi 
yata gananin pasu kota bala, yatak pamana asanna wti 
kalhi wadu riyanin pasu kota bala, wadu riyanak pamapa 
asanna wu kalhi tani riyanak pasu kota bala, riyanak 
pamana asanna wu kalhi wiyatin pasu kota bala, wiyatak 
pamana asanna wu kalhi angul gananin pasu kota bala, 
angulak pamana asanna wu kalhi balana lada akasa 
dhatuwe a. p. u. wisesayen pahala kara bala mana kota 
nasa pute patilomayata tsebiya yutu. 

Mema kramayen pa^cima digata ho dakunu digata ho, 
uturu digata ho, anudik aturen gini kona ho naitryawa ho 
wayamba ho isanaya ho mehi kiyana lada ata diga ma 

^ MS. b«lu. ^ So MS. 



— 45 — 

purwwa digata kiyana lada widhi kriyayen anuloma pati- 
loma kota naewata mattehi Meru Mandaradi parwatayan 
no balana heyin catur maharajikadi sa-diwya-lokaya da 
solos bamba talaya da bala aja^aka^ayata bseliya yukteya, 
hettha bhagayen de laksa satalis dahasak ghanaya seti 
pas palowaya sara laksa asu dahasak ghanaya seti jala 
polowaya nawa laksa Sata dahasak ghanaya seti wa polowa 
dakwa bseliya yukteya. Mehi kiyana lada dasa disawa 
ma yogavacarayan wisin citta vinnanayen anuloma pati- 
lomayen bala nasa putaye tsebiya yutu. 

Pathavi anto apo uddham^ tejo hettha vayo bahi akasa 
majjhe 

yanadi kramayen dhyana pahe appana parikarmma 
keseda? Pathamajjhane appanawa khajjopama akaraya, 
pscrikarmma upacara paiica pitiye akaraya ^ Dutiyajjhane 
appanawa candra mandala akaraya, parikarmma upacara 
panca pitiye akaraya. Tatiyajjhane appanawa Osadhi3 
tarakawakata bandu warnnaya, parikarmma upacara panca 
pitiye akaraya. Catutthajjhane appanawa suryya mandala 
akaraya, parikarmma upacara panca pitiye akaraya. 
Pancamajjhane appanawa idda mal adi subra warnna, 
parikarmma upacara panca pitiye akaraya. 

Me dhyana paha anapana sati nsemati situmini ruwana 
prawesan karana yoglhu wisin nasapute taba anuloma 
patilomata palamu kota ma purwwa kratyaya n. w. w. p. — 

Okasa. Aham [ghe] . . . pe (4) . . . patikaromi; ki tsenata, 

Okasa, (ter). Aham pathamajjhanam samadayitva anto- 
gabbha anapSnasati anuloma-vasena rakkhissami. Aciren' 
eva kalena bhesajjam bhunjitva nitthite tasma utthitassa 
me dhamma sanna patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe (7) . . parikammam pathamam dutiyam 
tatiyam catuttham pancamam chatthamaip sattamaiji na- 
vamam dasamam*. 

Me gananawen pahen yatat dasayen mattehit no gsena 
aswasa praswasa ha samaga gananuwa hata mano dwaraya 



* MS. apodan. ^ See above p. 5. 3 MS. Osadi. 
^ Scil. disam. 



— 46 — 

awarjjana kota dhamma saiina pahala we, mana kota nila 

pandaiii laksana dhamma saiina bala, yata kiyana lada 

'pathawi anto' yanadi kramayen anuloma patiloma karanu. 

Okasa. Aham pathamajjhanam • • pe • . sati patiloma 



pe 



patura hotu. 
. dutiyajjhanam 
. dutiyajjhanam 
. tatiyajjhanam . . 
. tatiyajjhanam • . 
. catutthajjhanam 
. catutthajjhanam 
. pancamajjhanam 
. pancamajjhanam 
. pathamajjhanaip. 
. dutiyajjhanain . 
, tatiyajjhanain . . 



• • • 



« • • 



anuloma . . . 

patiloma . . . 

anuloma . . . 
patiloma . . . 

. anuloma . . . 

. patiloma . . . 
. . anuloma . . . 
. . patiloma . . . 
. . anuloma 

anuloma . 



• • • 



• « • 



anuloma 
catutthajjhanam [ghai] . , • anuloma . . . 
pancamajjhanam . . . anuloma . . . 
pancamajjhanam . . . patiloma . . . 
[and so on, reverse order] to 
. . . pathamajjhanam . . . anuloma ... 
Sasara bhaya lesin dutu nuwansettan wisin me Snapana 
sati nsemati dkarmmakarayehi kimi da appana parikarmma 
upacara nsemati guna ruwan Iseba ^antati^anta wisesaya 
pinisa no pamawa utsaha karanneyi. 



Anapana sati. 



Anapana satiyata anaturu kota dasa kasinayehi^yedenu 
ksematiyawun wisin purwwa kratyaya no waradawa wsenda 
puda dasa kasinaya keren pathawi kasineta aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe (4) . . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . pe (4) . . antogabbha-dasa-kash^esu 
pathawi-kasinam.* Nava lokuttara-dhamma . • pe (4) . . 
nibbana paccayo hotu. 



So MS. 



— 47 — 

Nisidati . . pe (5) . . parikammam pathavi-kasinam, 
pathavl kasinam. 

Mese bhawana karana yogi janaya wisin wissak pamana 
pathawl dhatuwe kunapa ko.tthasayan da dwadasayak 
pamana apo dhatuwe kunapa kotthasayan da me dwattim- 
sakara kunapa ^ariraya maranin wisirena bawa da asara 
astira^ pilikul bawa salaka bhawana kala kalhi yata kiyana 
lada uggaha patibhaga nimit dwaya pahala we. Uggaha 
nimit palagana nikmunak hu men e uggaha nimittata wada 
siyak dahasak gunayen pirisuduwa bhawangaya sindagana 
mano dwaraya awarjjana kota pathawl dhatuwa pahala 
we. Ehi appana parikarmma upacara mana kota hradaye 
taba nsewata nabhiye tabanu. 

Meyin matuyehi purwwa kr. n. w. w. p. dhamma sanna 
bala anuloma patiloma [Gho] ka^a yutu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . patikaromi; ki taenata, 

Okasa (ter). Aham pathamajjhanam samadayitva anto- 
gabbha pathawi-kasinam anuloma . . pe (7) . . dhamma- 
sanna patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe (5) . . parikammani pathavl-kasi^am 
p athavi-kasinam. 

Mese bhawana kota dhamma sanna bala mana kota 
' pathawi dhatuwe a. p. u. bala bala nasikagrayen ganimin 
angalakin mattehi appana parikarma upacara anulomayen 
tabanu. 

Okasa . . . pathavi-kasinam patiloma 

Mehi ema a. p. u. m. k. anulometa taebu tsenhi patiloma 
kota tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham dutiyajjhanam samadayitva antogabbha 
pathavi-kasinam anuloma 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwa upadawa pathamajj- 
hanayata angalakin mattehi anuloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa . . . pathavi-kasinam patiloma ... 

[Gho] Mehi ema tejo dhatuwa anulomayata bselu tsenhi 
patiloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa . . . tatiyajjhanain samadayitva antogabbha 
pathavi-kasinam anuloma . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

» So MS. 



— 48 — 

Mese aradhana kota bhawana kala kalhi apo dhatuwa 
bala mana kota dutiyajjhanayata angalakin mattehi anu- 
loma kota tabanu. 

Okasa . . pe . . patiloma . . pe . . 

Mehi ema apo dhatuwa anulomayata * bselu tsenhi pati- 
loma kota tabanu. 

Okasa. Aliam catutthajjhanam samadayitva antogabbha 
pathavi-kasinam anuloma . . . pe . . . 

Mese aradhana kalhi wayo dhatuwa m. k. bala tati- 
yajjhanayata angalakin matte anuloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa . . . pathavi-kasinam patiloma . . . 

Mehi ema wayo dhatuwa mana kota anulomayata bselu 
. . pe . . tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham pancamajjhanam . . . pathavl-kasinain . . . 

Mese aradhana kara akasa [GhanJ dhatuwe a. p. m. k. 
b. catutthajjhanayata da hradayata atare angala pramane 
anuloma kota tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham pancamajjhanam samadayitva antogabbha 
pathavi-kasinam patiloma . . . 

Mehi ema akasa dhatuwa mana k. b. anulomayata bselu 
tsenhi tabanu. 

Meyin mattehi aradhana karana widhi kriya bala tabana 
lada sthanawala anuloma patiloma kata yutu. 

Okasa. AhanoL pathamajjhanam anuloma . . . pe . . . 

patura hotu. 

. . . pathawi dhatuwa^ 

Okasa. Aham dutiyajjhanaiii anuloma . . . 

. . . tejo dhatuwa 

Okasa. Aham tatiyajjhanam anuloma . . . 

. . . apo dhatuwa 

Okasa. Aham catutthajjhanam anuloma . . . 

. . . wayo dhatuwa 

Okasa. Aham pancamajjhanam anuloma . . . 

. . . akasa dhatuwa 

Okasa. Aham pancamajjhanam . . . patiloma . . . 

^ MS, anukota corrected to anuloma kota. 

"" So MS^ No doubt we have to supply as on pp. 46, 47. 



— 49 — 

. . . akasa dhatuwa 

[and so on in reverse order down to . . . 
. . . pathavi dhatuwa]. 
Me pathamajjhanaya adi kota dhyana paha nabhiya 
matte ho nohot wata ho me de akarayen bhawanawS 
yedena yogawacarahuge kaemati lesakata taba pathawi kasi- 
naya catu ware anuloma patiloma widhi kiyana ladseyi 
data yutu. 



Pathawi kasinam. 



Pathawi kasineta anaturu kota purwwa k. n. w. w. p. 
apo kasineta aradhana kata yutu. 

Okasa . . . pe (46) . . . [gham] antogabbha apo-kasinam 
. . parikammam apo-kasinam (bis). 

Mese bhawana kala kalhi yata kiyana lada u. p. n. dwaya 
upadi uggaha nimit . . . pe (46) . . . uggaha patibhaga 
nimittata wada kisunu dos nsetiwa siyak . . . kota apo dha- 
tuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. m. kota bala bala nasika- 
grayen ganimin hradaye taba nsewata nabhiye tabanu. 

Ita ikbitiwa pathawi kasineta kiyana lada widhiyen anu- 
loma patiloma karanu. 



Apo-kasinam. 



Apo kasinayata anaturu kota purwwa k. n. w. w. p. 
tejo kasinayata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa tejo-kasinam . . . 

Mese bhawana ... ... lada kramayen uggaha pati- 
bhaga ... tejo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi . . . tabanu. 

Ita ikbitiwa . . . lada kramayen anuloma patiloma kota 
nimawa: — 

Tejo-kasinam. 



— 60 — 

Tejo wayo kasinayata . . . 

Okasa wayo-kasinam [as for the last] [ghah]. 



Wayo-kasinam. 



Purwwa k. n. w. w. p. catur widha bhuta kasinawalata 
ekawata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . patikaromi; kl tsenata; — 

Okasa [ter], Aham pathamajjhanam dutiyajjhanam tati- 
yajjhanam catutthajjhanam pancamajjhanam samadayitva 
antogabbha pathavi-kasinam apo-kasinam tejo-kasinam 
vayo-kasinam anuloma patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . pathavi-kasinam [bis]. 

Mese bhawana kota catubbidha bhuta kasinawala saema 
a. p. u. wise^ayen pahala kara bala bala nasikagrayen 
ganimin nabhiya mseda anuloma kota taba naewata pan- 
camajjhanaye app: p. u. m. k. b. b. anuloma patilomayata 
kiyana lada tsenhi anuloma kota tsebiya yutu. 



Bhuta-kasinam nitthitam. 



Caturwwidha bhuta ^kasinawalata anaturu kota chab- 
bidha wu wanna kasina aturen purwwa kr. n. w. w. p» 
nila kasinayata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . pe . . antogabbha dasa kasiriakamata- 
hanesu' nila-kasinam. 

Nava lokuttara dhamma . . pe . . paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe . . nila-kasinam [bis], 

Mese bhawana kala kalhi uggaha patibhaga nimitta 
dvaya peneyi. E uggaha nimit palagena nikmunak hu 
seyin siyak dahasak gunayen pirisuduwa bhawangaya sin- 
dagena mano dwaraya awarjjana kota pathawi dhatuwa 
upadi; ehi a. p. u. m. k. b. b. hradaye taba naewata nSr 



^ This Sinhalese form is used so regularly in the Ms. 
that it has not been corrected into the Pali form. 



- 51 — 

bhiye tabanu. Ita ikbitiwa^ yata kiyana lada pathawi 
kasine widhi kriyayen anuloma patiloma kota nimawa: — 

Nila kasinam. 



Nlla kasinayata anaturu kota p. k. n. w. w. p. pita kasi- 
nayata ar. karanu* 

Okasa **kanesu pita-kasinam. Nava ... pe . . . 

Nisidati . . . pe pita-kasinaiji [bis]. 

Mese . . . dwayata wada bhawangaya . . . [Nga] apo 
dhatuwa pahala we. E. a. p. . . . pe . . . tabanu. Ita 
. . . nimawa: — 



Pita kasinam. 



Pita kasinayata . . . lohita kasinayata. Okasa . . . lohita- 
kasinam. Nava . . . pe lohita-kasi^am \bis]. 

Mese . . . dwaya upadi, e uggaha nimittata wada siyak 

guna dahasak gunayen pirisuduwa kota tejo 

dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi . . . tabanu. Tta . . . patbam 
kasinehi kiyana lada kramayen anuloma patiloma karanu. 



Lohita-kasinam. 



Lohita kasinayata 

. . . °hanesu odata-kasinam &c . . 

Mese manas karaya pawatwa bselu kalhi yata kiyana 
lada kramayen uggaha patibhaga nimit dwaya peni akasa 
dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi . . . pe . . . tabanu. Ita . . . patham 
kasine kramayen odata kasinaya anuloma patiloma kota 
nimawa: — 



Odata-kasinam. 



Odata kasinayata . . . pe . . . akasa kasinam [bis], 

Mese mehi kara bselu kalhi yata kiyana lada kramayen 

uggaha patibhaga nimit [Nga] dwaya ipada mano dwa- 

raya awarjjana kota akasa dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi . . . 

. * . tabanu. Ita ikbitiwa yata kiyana lada pathawi kasi- 

^ MS. ikbiti kota. 



— 52 — 

Behi kiyana lada kramayen akasa kasinayata anuloma 
patiloma kota nimawa: — 



Akasa kasinam. 



Akasa kasinayata aloka-kasinam [bis]. 

Mese bhawana kala kalhi palamu kiyana lada kramayen 
uggaha patibhaga nimit dwaya ha samaga mano dwaraya 
awarjjana kota akasa dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi . . . ta- 
banu. It-a ikbitiwa pathawi kasinehi kiyana lada krama- 
yen me aloka kasinaya anuloma patiloma kota nimawa: — 



Aloka-kasinam. 



Mehi dakwana lada dasa kasinaya keren pathawl ka- 
sina adi kota catur widha bhtita kasinawala widhi kriya 
nimi heyin chabbidha^ vm wa^a kasinawalata p. kr. n. 
w. w. p. ekawata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa patikaromi; 

kl taenata, 

Okasa [ter], Aham pathamajjhanam samapajjitva anto- 
gabbha dasa-kasina-kamatahanesu nila-kasinam pita-kasi- 
nam lohita-kasinam odata-kasinain akasa-kasi^am aloka- 
kasinam anuloma vasena rakkhissami. Aciren' eva kalena 
bhesajjain bhunjitva nittbite tasma utthitassa me dhamma- 
saniia patura hotu. I»Jisidati ... ... nila-kasinain [bis], 

Mese bhawana kota chabbidha^ wti wa^na kasinawala 
sama a. p. u. m. k. b. b. nabhiye maeda anuloma kota taba 
nsewata paiica dhyanawala dhatu anuloma patilomayata 
kiyana lada taenhi manakota bala tabanu. Dipukarawu* 
dasa kasine widhi kriya lesa matrayak kiya nimawana 
ladseyi data yutu. 



Kasina-kammatthanam. 



AfS. chabbhidha. * So MS, (read wiprakarawu). 



— 53 — 

Dasa kasinayata anaturu kota dasa widha wtl awinna- 
naka asubhayan kerehi watayen pirunu kamburu samak 
men maranin matuyehi [Ngi] kramak kramayen nsengi 
naengi indamnnu bsewin uddhumataka nam me asubhaya 
bhawanawe yedena wun wisin tamange ho anunge ho 
panca skandha dharmayata me bandu adinava anarttha 
wanneyayi sita purwwa kr. n. w. w. p. e uddhumataka 
asubhayata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . . antogabbha dasa-asubha-kamataha- 
nesu"" uddhumatakam. 

Nava lokuttara-dhammam . . . pe . . . nibbana paccayo 
hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . uddhumatakam [bis], 

Mese tiksana prajnawen yedi bhawana kala kalhi yata 
kiyana lada kramayen uggaha patibhaga nimit dwaya 
peneyi. E uggaha nimit palagana nikmunak hu men mano 
dwaraya awarjjana kota tejo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a. 
p. u. mk. b. b. hradaye taba nsewata nabhiye tabanu. Ita 
ikbitiwa pathawi kasine kiyana lada kramayen me uddhu- 
mataka asubhaya anuloma patiloma kota nimawa: — 



Uddhumatakam. 



Uddhumataka asubhayata anaturu kota winilam winila- 
yayi sudu ran adi wisin mi^ra warnna sette kiyanu laebe 
nohot purwwa warnnayen perali warnna aette kiyanu laebe. 
Mamsaya us tsenhi ratta warnna aeti puya raeswa siti 
tsenhi sweta warnna aeti we boho sema nila warnna seti 
nila thane nil tsenhi nil pa^ak perawiya waeni wu mala 
siru rata namekl. Atita anagata warttamana kala trayehi 
hata ganna paiica skandhayo me bandu vikarayata pae- 
mina naesenneyayi salaka kala kin eyin midena pinisa 
purwwa kr. n. w. w. p. winilaka asubhayata aradhana 
karanu. 



So MS. 



— 54 — 

Okasa. Aham patikaromi 

Aham yacami . . . antogabbha dasa asubha-kamataha- 
nesu vinilakam. 

Nava lokuttara-dhamma . . . pe . . . paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati [Ngi] vinilakam [bis]» 

Mese tiksana nanayen niwan a^amu^u kota bhawana 
kala kalhi uggaha pratibhaga nimit dwaya ipada mano 
dwaraya awarjjana kota patbawl dhatuwa pahalawe. Ehi 
a. p. u. mk. b. b. . . . tabanu. Ita .... me winilaka . . . 
nimawa: — 



Vinilakam. 



Vinilaka asubhayata anaturu kota Sariraya bun tsenha 
wsehennawu piya atte wipubbakam wipubbakam nam we. 
P. kr. n. w. w. p. wipubbaka asubhayata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Ahaiii . . pe . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . . kamatahanesu vipubbakam. Nava . . . 
. . . paccayo hotu. Nisidati . . pe . . vipubbakaiii \bis]. 

Mese tiksana nanayen bhawana karannahata uggaha p. 
n. d. ipada apo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. rak. 
b. b. . . . tabanu. Ita ikbitiwa yata kiyana lada pathawi 
kasine paewati widhi kriyayen me wipubbaka asubhaya 
anuloma patiloma kota nimawa: — 

Vipubbakam. 

Sariraya dekak kota kaplmen wicchiddayayi kiyanu Isebe. 
P. k. n. w. w. p. me wicchidda asubhayata aradhana kata 
yutu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . patikaromi ... 

Aham yacami . . . pe . . . kamatahanesu vicchiddakam. 

Nava paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati . . . vicchiddakam [bis]. 

Mese tiksana prajnawen wisesadhigama pinisa bhawana 
kala kalhi yata kiyana lada kramayen uggaha p. n. d. i. 
m. d. a. k. wayo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi . . . tabanu. 



— 55 — 



Ita ikbitiwa yata kiyana lada pathawi kasine widhi kriyayeu 
wicchiddaka asubhaya anuloma patiloma kota nimawa: — 

[Ngu] Yicchiddakam. 



Wicchiddaka asubhayata anaturu kota maedin dekak 
kota ksepu ^ariraya sona sigaladlhi balu kaenahil adin 
wisin e taena boho kota kana ladde wikkhayikam wikkha-^ 
yika nam we. Panca skhandha dharmmayanta me bandu 
winasa wanneyayi sita kalakiri iskhandha dharmmayangen 
midena pinisa p. kr. n. w. w. p. e wikkhayika asubhayata 
aradhana kara bhawana kata yutu. 

Okasa. Ahaiii . . . palikaromi . . . 

Aham yacami . . . kamatahanesu vikkhayikam. 

Nava . . . hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . vikkhayikaiji [bis], 

Mese tiksana prajnawen nirwanabhimukhawa ese bha- 
wana karannahata yata kiyana lada kramayen uggaha 
patibhaga nimit dwaya upadi. E uggaha nimit palagana 
nikmunak hu men mano dwaraya awarjjana kota akasa 

dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi tabanu. Ita . . . 

pe (55) . . . me wikkhayika asubhaya ni- 
mawa: — 



Vikkhayikam. 



Wikkhayika asubhayata anaturu kota aneka prakarayen 
balu kaenahil adln wisin kaeya siru ruwen wen wa e e 
tsenha wisirena ladde wikkhittakam wikkhittaka nam we. 
Purwwa kr. n. w. w. p. wikkhittaka asubhayata aradhana 
karanti. 

Okaso. Aham . . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . . kamatahanesu vikkhittakam. 

Nava vikkhittakam [bis], 

Mese tiksana prajnawen nirwana rasayehi sita elaba* 
situwa bhawana kala kalhi mano dwaraya awarjjana kota 

' So MS. 



— 56 — 

pathawl dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a tabanu. 

Ita ikbitiwa pathawi kasinehi kiyana lada kramayen wik- 
khittaka asubhaya anuloma patiloma kota nimawa. 



Vikkhittakam. 



Wikkhittaka asubhayata anaturu kota anga pungayam 
kapa wen ka^a^a lada sirura hata wikkhittakam hata wik- 
khittaka namseyi data yutu. Ptirwwa kr. n. w. w. p. e 
hata wikkhittaka asubhayata aradhana kata yutu. . 

Okasa. Aham [Ngu] kamatahanesu hata-vik- 

khittakam. Nava . hata-vikkhittakam \bis], 

Mese tiksana prajnawen niwan aramunu kota bhawana 
kala kalhi uggaha patibhaga nimit dwaya ha bhawangaya 
sindagana mano dwaraya awarjjana kota wayo dhatuwa 
pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. b. b. . . tabanu. Ita ikbihi- 
va y. L 1. p. kasinehi k. 1. kramayen anuloma p. k. nimawa. 



Kata- vikkhittakam. 



Lohitain e taena kaepu siruren waegirenawu . le lohitam 
lohitaka asubhayayi data yutu. 

Purwwa kr. n. w. w. p. me lohitaka asubhayata aradhana 
kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . patikaromi. Aham kama- 
tahanesu lohitam. Nava lohitain \bis]. 

Mese menehi kara baelu kalhi uggaha p. n. dw. peneyi. 
E uggaha minittata wada mano dwaraya a. k. tejo dha- 
tuwa p. w. Ehi a. p. u. mk. b. b. nasikagrayen ganimin 
hr. t. nae. nabhiye tabanu. Ita ikbitiwa p. k. k. 1. kr. lohi- 
taka asubhaya a. p. k. nimawa 



Lohitakam. 



Pulawe panuwan nava dwarayen ka W8egi^e^a ladde pu- 
lawaka asubhayayi data yutu. Iskhandha dharmmayo me 
bandu adinawayata psemina winasa wanneyayi kalakirl 



— 57 — 

eyin midena pinisa p. kr. n. w. w. p. pulawaka asubhayata 
aradhana kata yutu. 

Okasa patikaromi. Aham kamata- 

hanesu pulavakam^ Nava pulavakam \bis]. 

Mese bhawana kala kalhi uggaha pratibhaga n. dw. 
upadi uggaha nimit palagana nikmunak men eyata [Ngr.] 
wada mano dwaraya a. k. apo dhatuwa p. w. Ehi a. p. 

tabanu. Ita ikbitiwa yata kiyana lada p. kasi- 

nehi k. 1. da kramayen pulawaka asubhaya a. p. k. ni- 
mawa 



Pulavakam. 



Pulawaka asubhayata anaturu kota atthikam seta pilikul 
karana heyin atthika asubhayayi data yutu. 

P. kr. n. w. w. p. me atthika asubhayata aradhana 
karanu. 

Okasa. Aham kamatahanesu atthikam. 

• • • • • 

Nava atthikam \bis]. 

Mese pilikul wasayen bhawana kala kalhi u. p. n. dw. 
upadi, e u. n. p. n. hu seyin uggaha nimittata wadasiyak 
dahasak gunayen pirisuduwa bhawangaya sindagana m. 
dw. a. k. akasa dhatuwa p. w. Ehi ap. . . . tabanu. Ita 
ik. y. k. 1. p. k. k. 1. kramayen me atthika asubhaya a. p. 
kota nimawa 



Atthikam. 



Atthika asubhayata anaturu kota p. kr. n. w. w. p. me 
dasa asubhayata ekawata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . patikaromi, 

ki tsenata, 

Okasa. Aham pathamajjhanam samapajjitva antogabbha 
kamatahanesu uddhumatakam vinilakam vipubbakam vic- 
chiddakam vikhayikam * vikkhittakam hata-vikkhittakam 
lohitakam pulavakam atthikam anuloma vasena rakkhissami. 



' MS^ pulakam. ^ So MS. 



— 58 — 

Aciren' eva kalena bhesajjam bhuiijitva nittbite tasma 
utthitassa me dhammasanna patura hotu. Msidati . . . 
pe . . . uddhumatakam uddhumatakam. 

Mese tiksana prajnawen nirwanabhimukha wa bhawana 
kala kalhi uggaha patibhaga n. dw. upadi, uggaha ni- 
mittaya udun baha tubu matra kiri bata hunu sum waeti- 
yak bandu wa calawa waetahe, pratibhaga nimittaya e 
akarayen sanhun we niscala we, yana meyin uggaha nimit 
patibhaga nimit-huge wenas nam niscala bawa ha prati- 
bhaga nimit-hu dum wseti wana bawayayi kiyati. E uggaha 
nimit palagana [Ngr] nikmuna men uggaha nimittata wada 
siyak dahasak gunayen pirisuduwa bhawangaya sindagena 
m. dw. a. k. dasa asubha karmma sthanawala dhatu pahala 
we. Ehi a. p. u. m. k. piliwelin b. b. nasikagrayen gani- 
min nabhiya maeda anuloma kota tabanu. Panca dhyanaye 
dhatu bala bala anuloma patiloma yata kiyana lada taenhi 
mana kota taebiya yutu. Dasa asubhayehi widhi kriya 
samksepayakin kiyana ladaeyi data yutu. 



Asubha-kammatthanam. 



Dasa asubhayata anaturu kota daham dakna Budu rajahu 
wisin kaya gata satiyehi aneka nayin tri laksanaya prakasa 
kota desana lada dwattimsakara karmmasthana keren 
purwwa kr. n. w. tri widha ratnaya waenda puda kesa 
yana kamatahanata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . patikaromi. Aham yacami . . . 
(4) . . . antogabbha kaya gatanussati kesa. 

Nava-lokuttara-dhamma . . . pe . . . nibbana paccayo 
hotu. 

Nisldati . . pe . . parikammam kesa kesa. 

Mese tiksana prajnawen nirwana rasayehi sita elba 
pihituwa ema niwan ma aramunu kota bhawana kala kalhi 
uggaha patibhaga nimit dwaya upadi e uggaha nimit pa- 
lagana nikmunak hu men eyata wada siyak dahasak guna- 
yen pirisuduwa bhawangaya sindagana mano dwaraya 
awarjjana kota pathawi dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. 



— 59 — 



mk. h. b. . . . tabanu, Ita kramayen kesa yana 

kamatahana anuloma patiloma kota nimawa: — 



Kesa. 



Kesa yana kunapayata anaturu kota p. kr. n. w. w. p. 
loma yana kamatahanata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa . . . patikaromi. Aham yacami . . . pe (4) . . . 
antogabbha kayagatanussati loma. Nava . . pe . . hotu. 
Nisidati . . . pe (5) . . . parikammam loma loma. 

Mese nirwanabhimukhawa bhawana kala kalhi uggaha 
patibhaga nimit dwaya ipada tejo dhatuwa pahala we. 
Ehi appana parikarma upacara mana kota bala bala na- ' 
sikagrayen ganimin hradaye taba naewata nabhiye tabanu. 
Ita ikbitiwa yata prakasa wu pathawl kasine widhi kri- 
yayen loma yana kamatahana anuloma patiloma kota ni- 
mawa: — 



Loma. 



Same (with apo dhatuwa) for section on 



Nakha. 



Same {with wayo dhatuwa) for section on 



Danta. 



Sam^ (with akasa dhatuwa) for section on 



Taco. 



Same (with pathawi dhatuwa) for section on 

M a m s a m. 



Sam^ (with 'iQ}0 dhatuwa) for section on 



Naharu. 



— 60 — 
Same {with apo dhatuwa) for section on 



Atthi. 



Same {with wayo dhatuwa) [Nge] for section on 



Atthiminja. 



Same {with apo dhatuwa) for section on 



Yakkam. 



Same {with pathawi dhatuwa) for section on 



Haday aip. 



Same {with tejo dhatuwa [Ngai] for section on 



Yakanam. 



Same {with apo dhatuwa) /or section on 



Kilomakam. 



Same {with wayo dhatuwa) for section on 



P i h a k a m. 



Same {with akasa dhatuwa) [Ngo] for section on 



Papphasam. 



Same {with pathawi dhatuwa) for section on 



Antam. 



Sam^ {with tejo dhatuwa) for section on 



- 61 — 

Antagunam. 
Same (with apo dhatuwa) for section on 



Udariyam. 



Same (with wayo dhatuwa) for section on 



K an s am. 



Same (with akasa dhatuwa) for section on 



Matthake\ 



Same (with akasa dhatuwa) [Ngam] for section an 



Matthalungam. 



Kaya gata satiyehi de wadserun wu dhatu dwayen pra- 
kasawu wissak pamana pathawi dhatuwe kunapa kotthasa* 
yanta anaturu kota mattehi apo dhatuwe dwadasayak 
pamana prakasa wannawu kunapa kotthasayan kerehi 
purwwa kratyaya n. w. w. p. pittam yana kamatahanata 
aradhana karana. 

Okasa. Aham patipatti pujaya ovadam sabbannu Gota- 
massa patikaromi. Aham yacami . . . antogabbha kaya- 
gatanussati pittam. Nava lokuttara-dhamma . . . pe . . . 
nibbana-paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe . . parikammam pittam pittam. 

Mese tiksana prajnawen bhawana kala kalhi uggaha 
patibhaga nimit dwaya ha bhawangaya sindagana mano 
dvaraya awarjjana kota pathawi dhatuwa pahala we. 
Ehi . . . pe (49) . . . b. nasikagrayen ganimin . . . tabanu. 
lia ikbitiwa pathawi kasinayehi kiyana lada prakarayen 
pittaiji yana kamatahana anuloma patiloma kota nimawa 



Pittam. 



So MS. 



— 62 — 

Pittam yana kimapayata anaturu kota p. kr. n. w. w. p. 
semham yana kunapayata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . patikaromi. Aham yacami . . 
pe . . parikammam semham semham. 

Mese tiksana prajnawen menehi kota bhawana kala 

kalhi . . . pe (61) . . . wayo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi 

tabanu. Ita . . p« . . nimawa 



Semham. 



Semham yana . . . pe . . . pubbo yana . . . karanu. 

Okasa . . . pe . . . parikammam pubbo pubbo. 

Mese bhawana kala kalhi . . . pe . . . kota apo dhatu- 
wa pahala we. Ehi . . . pe . . . tabanu. Ita . . . pe . . . 
nimawa 



Pubbo. 



Same (with tejo dhatuwa) for section on 

Lohita. 



Same (with wayo dhatuwa) for section on 



Sedo. 



Same (with akasa dhatuwa) [ca] for section on 



Medo. 



Sam^e (tvith pathawi dhatuwa) for section on 



I . 



Assu. 



Same (with wayo dhatuwa) for section on 



Vasa. 
Same (with tejo dhatuwa) [ca] for section on 



— 63 — 

Khelo. 
Same (with tejo dhatuwa) for section on 

Singatika. 
Similar (with wayo dhatuwa) section for 

L a s i k a. 
Similar (with akasa dhatuwa) [Ci] section for 

Muttam. 



Kaya gata satiyehi dakwana lada^ dwattinsakara karmma 
sthanayanta p. k. n. w. w. p. ekawata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa . . . pe . . . patikaromi; kl tsenata: — 

Okasa. Aham pathamajjhanam samapajjitva antogabbha 
kayagatanussati kesa loma nakha danta taco mamsam 
naharu atthi atthiminja vakkam hadayam yakanam kilo- 
makam pihakam papphasam antam antagunam udariyam 
karisam mattake mattalungam pittam semham pubbo lohitam 
sedo medo assu vasa khelo singatika lasika muttam anuloma- 
vasena rakkhissami. Aciren' eva kalena bhesajjaiii bhun- 
jitva nitthite tasma utt-hitassa me dhammasanna patura 
hotu. Nisldati . . pe (7) . . parikammam kesa kesa. 

Mese tiksana nanayen pariksa kara bhawana kota 
dwattimsakara karmma sthanawala piliwelin ^ama appana 
parikarmma upacara mana kota pahala kara bala bala 
nasikagrayen ganimin nabhiye anuloma kota taba nsewata 
dhyanawala dhatu mana kota bala bala tabanu. Me kaya 
gata satiyehi dwattimsakara karmma sthanayan no pama- 
wa nuwanaettan wisin [cl] bhawana kota wisesadhigamaya 
pinisa haema welehi ma sell wasaya karanneyi. 

Kaya-gata-sati. 

Kaya-gata-satiyata anaturu kota dasa waedserum wu 
anussati kamataha^un kerelii Buddhanussati Budun ara- 
munu kota upan anussati tomo Buddhanussati nam we. 

^ Tlie scribe has apparently corrected this into satiye 
dakna da. 



— 64 — 

P. k. n. w. w. p. Buddhanussati kamatahanata aradhana 
karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe (4) . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . . pe (4) . . . antogabbha Buddhanussatim. 

Nava lokuttara-dhamma . . . pe . . . nibbana-paccayo 
hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe (5) . . . Parikammam *Buddhanussati' [bis], 

Mese nawa arahad Budu guna aramunu kota bhawana 
kala kalhi bhawangaya sindagana mano dwaraya awarjjana 
kara pathawl dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. b. b. 
nasikagrayen ganimin hradaye taba naewata nabhiye ta- 
banu. Ita ikbitiwa pathawi kasinayehi kiyana lada pra- 
karayen Buddhanussati kamatahana anuloma patiloma 
kota nimawa: — 

Buddhanusmrtiyehi yedi wasana acara kula putrayahata 
haema welehi ma Budu gunayam sit-hi waetena baewin 
abhimukhayehi Budhum daknak-hata men biri otap deka 
elamba sitiyi. Eheyin me bhawanawen matuyehi pihita 
kota satvayan pratiwedha no karanuye sugatiya ma sam- 
parayana kota aette we^ sugati gama we. Ese heyin nu- 
wanaettan wisin me Buddhanusmrti bhawanawa wada no 
pamawa wisesadhigamayata utsaha karanneyi. 



Buddhanussati. 



Buddhanusmrti kamatahanata anaturu kota p. kr. n. w. 
w. p. Dhammanussati kamatahanata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Aham antogabbha Dham- 
manussati parikammam Dhammanussati 

[bis], 

Mese tiksana nanayen dharmanusmrta bhawana kala . . . 
pe (64) . . . tejo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi . . . pe (62) 
. . . nimawa: — 



Dhammanussati.* 



So MS. 



— 65 — 
Same {with apo dhatuwa) . [cu] Jqr section on 



Sanghanussati. 



Same (with wayo dhatuwa) for section on 



Silanussati. 



Same {with akasa dhatuwa) for section on 



Oaganussati. 



Same for section on 



Dpasamanussati. 



\IIere read . . .] ^parikammam nirodho nirodho. 
Mese tiksana prajnawen nirwana rasaya [Ou] aramui^u 
kota . . &c . .; also . . *pathawi dhatuwa'. 



Sam^ for section on 



Devatanussati. 



With . . . *parikaminain sadda sadda'. 
*Mese tiksana nuwanin salaka bhawana kala kalhi' . . . ; 
also . . *tejo dhatuwa'. 



Same for section on 



Marananussati. 



With . . . *parikammam maram maram' {sic). 
Mese tiksana nuwanin marananusumrti bhawana' &c . . ; 
also *apo dhatuwa'. 



— 66 — 
Same for section on 



Ekasafinanussati. [cr] 

Reading . . *parikainmai?i patikulam patikulam. Mese 
tiksana nuwanin aharaya pilikulaeyi salaka bhawana &c' . .; 
also *wayodhatuwa'. 



Same for section on 



Ekadhatuvatanussati^ 



Beading . . . *parikammam ekadhatu'. Mese bhawana 
kala kalhi .... akasa dhatuwa' . . . 



Mehi kiyana lada dasanussatiyata p. kr. n. w. w. p. eka- 
wata aradhanu. 

Okasa patikaromi, 

ki tsenata: — 

Okasa, okasa. Ahaip pathamajjhanam samapajjitva 
antogabbha 

Buddhanussati Upasamanussati 

Dhammanussati Devatanussati 

Sanghanussati Marananussati 

Silanussati Ekasannanussati^ 

Caganussati Ekadhatuvatanussati 

anuloma vasena rakkhissami. Aciren' eva kalena bhesaj- 
jam bhunjitva nittbite tasma utthitassa me dhammasanna 
patura hotu. Nisidati . . pe (7) . . parikammam Buddhanus- 
sati [bis]. 

Mese tiksana nuwanin bhawana kara dasanussatiyehi 
^ama appana p. u. mk. piliwelin b. b. nasikagrayen gani- 
min nabhiye anuloma kota tabanu, nsewata dhyanawala 
dhatu bala ehi ma tsebiya yutu [Of]. 



Dasanussati-kammatthanam. 



MS, has once ekadhatuwawatanussati. 



— 67 — 

Dasanussatiyata anaturu kota catur widha arupavacara 
keren p. kr. n. w. w. p. akasanancayatanayata aradhana 
karanu. 

Okasa. Aham patipatti-pujaya ovadam sabannu-Gota- 
massa patikaromi. 

Aham yacami uggaha-nimittan ca patibhaga-nimittam 
upacara-widhin appana-samadhi-widhin antogabbha artipa- 
vacaresu akasayancayatanam. 

Nava lokuttara dhamma . . . pe (4, 5) . . . nibbana 
paccayo hotu. 

Nisldati . . pe . . parikammam akaso anto akasaip anto. 

Mese tiksana nanayen bhSwana kala kalhi bhawangaya 
sindagana mano dwaraya awarjjana kota pathawi dhatuwa 
pahala we. Ehi appana parikarmma upacara mana kota 
bala bala nasikagrayen ganimin hradaye taba nsewata 
nabhiye tabanu. Ita ikbitiwa pathawi kasinayehi kiyana 
lada prakarayen akasanancayatanaya anuloma patiloma 
kota nimawa: — 



Akasanancayatanam. 



Same for section on 



Vinnanancayatanam. 



Reading . . . ^parikammam akasam kinci akasam kinci'; 
also ... tejo dhatuwa'. 

Same for section on 



Akincannayatanam. 



Reading .... ^parikammam n'atthi kinci n'atthi kinci'; 
also . . . *apo dhatuwa'. 

Same for section on 

N'eva-sanna-nasannayatanaip. 



— 68 — 



Beading . . . 'parikammaiji etam [01] santam etaiii pa- 
nitam'; also . . . *wayo dhatuwa'. 



Mehi dakwana lada catur widha arupavacarayata p. kr. 
n. w. ekawata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa . . . patikaromi, 

ki tsenata, 

Okasa [ter]. Aham pathamajjhanaiji samapajjitva anto- 
gabbha catusu arupavacaresu aka. vi. aki. n'ev. anuloma- 
vasena rakkhissami. 

Aciren' eva kalena bhesajjam bhunjitva nittbite tasma 
uttbitassa me dhammasanna patura botu. 

Nisidati . . pe . . parikammam akaso anto akasaip anto 
[Us]. 

Mese tiksama nuwanin salaka bbawana kala kalbi bba- 
wangaya sindagana mano dwaraya awarjjana kota catur 
widba arupavacara karmmastbanawala ^ama a. p. u. pa- 
hala we; mana kota piliwelin bala bala nasikagrayen ga- 
nimin nabbiye mseda anuloma kota taba nsewata dhyana- 
wala a. p. u. mana kota bala ehi tsebiya yutu. 



Arupavacara-kammathanam. 



Same for section on 
the four Brahmavibaras: — 

1) Metta br. v: — 

with . . . *parikammam abam sukbl homi [bis] ; also . . . 
*pathawi dhatuwa'; 

2) Karuna br. v: — 

with . . . ^parikammam abam pamuncami'; also . . . *tejo 
dhatuwa' ; 

3) Muduta br. v: — 

with . . . *parikammam abam gama vigaccbami' [bis] ; also . . 
*apo dhatuwa'. 

4) Upekkha br. v: — 

with . . . parikammam kammassa kho homi [bis]\ also . . 
*wayo dhatuwa'. 



— 69 — 

[Each of the four Brahmaviharas is then repeated ivith 
each of the five Jhanas, and with the 6 Saddaggahanas, and 
with Vidatthi, Dhata-samtiha, Catu-Nayam, Panca-Nayam, 
Hadayam, Samadhi, Dhammatiratthitikam; &with Sitthaka- 
Dandadipaiii respectively inserted before . . ^samapajjitva'. 

Then follows: —] 

[Chu] Catu brahmaviharanaya keren dasa dig wasana 
siyulu satwaya kerehi met paturuwa balana widhi aturen 
p. kr. n. w. w. p. metta brahmaviharanayata aradhana 
kara purwwa dig bala pratipatti puja kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . patikaromi. Aham yacami . . . anto- 
gabbha brahmaviharesu metta-brahmaviharaip. 

Nava lokuttara-dhamma . . . pe (4, 5) . . . hotu. Nisidati 
. . . pe . . . parikammam aham sukhi homi, aham sukhi 
homi. 

Mese tiksana prajnawen bhawana kala kalhi bh. si m. 
d. aw. k. p. dh. pahala we. Ehi upacara parikamma mana 
kota citta vinMnayen psedum diga loka dhatuwata abhi- 
mukhawa nasagraya patan kramak kramayen dasa daha- 
sak sakwala kela laksayak sakwala ananta paryyanta sak- 
wala Meru mastakaye balana lada upacara parikarmma 
manakota taba salakaya indawu sitthakadipaye dsengala 
pramane da salaka gilihena turu bhawana kala kalhi uk- 
kutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka-danda-dipam samapajjitva anto- 
gabbha catu brahmaviharesu mettabrahmavihara-patha- 
majjhanam anuloma . . . pe (7) . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi pathawi dhatuwa upadawa: — 

Ekissa disayam visati appana katva panca sattanam 
punnam datva ekissa disayam atthavisati 3,ppana katva 
satta deva-manussanam punnam datva: [Ekam disaip panca 
satta nama sabbe satta sabbe pana sabbe bhuta sabbe 
puggala sabbe attabhava-pariyapanna — ime satta panca 
satta nama honti. Ekam disam satta deva-manussa nama 
sabba itthiyo sabbe purisa sabbe ariya sabbe anariya sabbe 
deva sabbe manussa sabbe vinipatika — ime satta satta- 
devamanussa nama honti]. 



— 70 — 

Sabbe satta avera hontu abyapajjha* hontu anigha hontu 
sukhi attanam pariharantu. Anto-parikammaiji: — «ahai?i 
sukhi homi» [ter]. Sisato nikkhamana-kale: — «sabbe 
satta sukhi hontu» [ter]. Dasasahasa-cakkavala-sampatta- 
kale: — «satta sukhi hoiitu» [ter]. Sata-sahassa-koti-cakka- 
vala-sampatta-kale; — «sukhi hontu [ter]. Ananta-cakka- 
vala-sampatta-kale, sukhi, sukhi, sukhi. 

Purwwa diga ananta cakkawalayehi met paturuwa balana 
lada pathawi dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. Meru matthake anu- 
lomayen taba sitthaka dipaye angala pramane da salakaya 
gilihena turn bhawana kala kalhi ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka-dandadipam samapajjitva anto- 
gabbha catu-brahmaviharesu metta-brahmavihara dutiyaj- 
jhanam anuloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwe a. p. u. upadawa: — 

Ekissa disayam visati appana katva panca sattanam 
punnam datva ekissa disayam atthavisati appana katva 
satta deva-manussanam punnam datva — ekaiji disaiji 
panca satta nama sabbe satta sabbe pana sabbe bhuta 
sabbe puggala sabbe attabhava-pariyapanna ime satta 
panca satta nama honti. Ekaiji . . . pe (69, 70) . . . 
sukhi, sukhi, sukhi. 

Ananta cakrawalayehi met paturuwa balana lada tejo 
dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b. Meru matthake anulomayen 
udu taba sitthaka dipaye angala . . . inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . • brahmavihara tatiyajjhanam anu- 
loma . . . hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi apo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b. : — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe . . . ananta [Chf] cakkavala- 
sampanna-kale sukhi sukhi sukhi. 

Ananta cakrawalayehi met . . . apo dhatuwe . . . pe . . . 
inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . . catutthajjhanam hotu. 

Mese &c . . . . (with *wayo dhatuwe'). 

Okasa. Aham . . . paiicamajjhanam . . . hotu. 

Mese &c. (with akasa dhatuwe) . . . sukhi [ter]. 

"■ MS. abya° 



— 71 — 

Ananta cakkawalayehi met paturuwa balana lada a. p. 
u. mk. Meru matthake . . . pe (70) . . . kala kalhi hadayamata 
pathawl dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. pahala kara ananta cakra- 
walaya salaka bala Meru matthakaye mk. anulomayen udu 
taba sitthaka dipaye angala pramane da salakaya gilihena 
turn bhawana kalhi naewata samadhiyata mema a. p. u. 
mk. kiyana lada kramayen Meru matthake anulomayen 
udu taba sitthaka dipayehi angala pramane da salakaya 
gilihena turn bhawana kata yutu. 

Anulomayata anaturu kota patilomayata balana krama 
nam: — 

Metta brahmaviharanata balana lada pathawl dhatuwe 
upacara parikarmma anantapariyanta sakwala anuloma- 
yata [OhlJ tabana lada Meru masthakayen citta vinnana- 
yen upadawa kramak kramayen anantaparyyanta sakwala 
kela laksayak sakwala dasa dahasak sakwala patilomayen 
pasu kota Sirsayata'^ asanna wu kalhi nasagrayen ganimin 
nabhiye taba sitthaka dipaye daengala pramane da sala- 
kaya gilihena turn bhawana kalhi ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka-danda-dipam samapajjitva anto- 
gabbha catu brahmaviharesu metta -brahmavihara- patha- 
majjhanam patiloma . . pe . . patura hotu. 
, Mese aradhana kalhi anulomayata tabana lada pathawl 
dhatuwe a. p. u. b. b.: — 

Ekisa disayam ... datva ekam disam panca satta nama 
sabbe aham sukhl homi \ter]^ 

Puna patiloma -vasena agamana-kale satta satta satta, 
ananta-cakkavala sampatta-kale sukhl sukhi sukhi. Satta- 
sahassa-koti cakkavala sampatta-kale sukhi hontu — tayo 
varani — Dasa-sahassa-cakkavala-sampatta-kale satta sukhi 
hontu — tayo varam — Sisam sampatta-kale sabbe satta 
sukhi hontu — tayo varam — Anto sampatta-kale ahain 
sukhi homi, aham sukhi homi, aham sukhl homi. 

Mehi dakwana lada kramayen pathawi dhatuwe a. p. u. 
mk. nabhiye taba sitthaka dipayehi angala pramane da sa- 
lakaya gilihena turn bhawana kala kalhi ukkutikayen inda: — 



' MS. sirssayata. 



— 72 — 

Okasa. Aham sittbaka . . . pe . . . metta-brahmavihara- 
dutiyajjhanam patiloma . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Ananta cakkawalayehi tabana lada tejo dhatuwe a. p. 
u. mk b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe . . . ahaip sukhl homi [ter]. 

[Chi] Patilomayata balana krama nam — anulomayata 
seyin tejo dhatuwe upacara parikarmma mana kota taba 
sitthaka dipayehi dsengala pramane da salakaya gilihena 
turn bhawana kala kalhi ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka ... pe (71) . . . brahma-viharesu 
karuna-brahma-vihara-pathamajjhanaiii patiloma . . . pe 
(7) . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk anuloma- 
yata bselu tsenhi patilomayata taba sitthaka dipayehi an- 
gala pramane da salakaya gilihena turu bhawana kala 
kalhi hadayamata mema tejo dhatuwa anulomayata seyin 
patilomayata taba sitthaka dipayehi angala pramane dE 
s. g. t. bh. kalhi samadhiyata mema tejo dhatuwa anuloma- 
yata seyin patilomayata taba sitthaka dipaye angala pra- 
mane da salakaya g. t. bh. kata yutu. 

Dasa prakara loka dhatuwehi wasana sakala praijiln 
kerehi catu brahma vihara bhawanawen yedl wasana kriya 
aturehi p. kr. n. w. w. p. karuijia brahmaviharanayata 
aradhana kota ehi patipatti puja kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe (4) . . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami • . . pe (4) . . . antogabbha catu brahma- 
viharesu karuna-brahma-viharam. 

Nava lokuttara dhamma . . . pe (4, 5) . . . hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe (5) . . . parikammam aham pamuncami, 
aham pamuncami. 

Mese bhawana kala kalhi bh. si. md. aw. k. tejo dh. 
pahala we. Ehi u. p. mk b. b. dasa widha wu lokadhatun 
keren purwwa digata citta vinnanayen sir§aya patan karuiia- 
wa saha yomu* kota kramak kramayen dasa dahasak sakwa- 
laya kela laksayak sakwalaya eyin pitat ananta cakra- 
walayehi karunawa paturuwa ehi Meru matthake u. p. mk. 



MS. asasa. ^ So MS, 



— 73 — 

anulomayen taba sitthaka dipayehi d«ngala pramane da 
. . . pe (72) . . . ukkutikayen inda. 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka . . . pe (69) . . . viharesu karu^a- 
brahma-vihara-pathamajjhanam anuloma hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b. 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe (69) . . . nama honti. 

Alabha pamuncantu ayasa^ pamuncantu ninda pamun- 
cantu dukkha pamuncantu sabbe satta, satta avera hontu 
abyapajjha hontu anigha hontu sukhi attanam pariharantu. 
Anto parikammam aham pamuncami, aham pamuncami. 
Sisato nikkhamana-kale yava dasa-sahassa-cakkavalam: — 
sabbe satta pamuncantu [ter]. 

Mese ananta cakkawalayehi karuna paturuwa b. 1. a. 
p. u. mk. [che] ehi Meru mudune anulomayen udu taba 
sitthaka dipayehi . . . pe (70) . . . inda: — 

Okasa karuna-brahmavihara-dutiyajjhanam . . . 

. . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi pathawi dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b. : — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe (73) . . . dukkha pamuncantu . . . 
pe . . . pariharantu. Anto . . . pe . . . pamuncami. Sisato 
. . . pe . . . pamuncantu [ter], Data-sahassa-cakkavalato 
yava sata-sahassa-koti-cakkavalam satta pamuncantu [ter]. 
Sata-sahassa-koti-cakkavalato yava ananta-cakkavalam: — 
pamuncantu [ter], 

Mese ananta cakrawalayehi karunawa meheya balana 
lada a. p. u. mk. ehi Meru mudune . . . pe . . . inda. 

Okasa. Aham . . . tatiyajjhanam . . . patura hotu. 

Mese . . . apo dhatuwe . . . b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe . . . ananta-cakkavalam pamun- 
cantu [ter]. 

Same for fourth Jhdna with 
wayo dhatuwa. 

Mehi mk. meheya balana lada . . . pe . . . ukkutikayen 
inda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . . pancamajjhanam . . . pe . . . patura 
hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi akasa dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b. : — 



— 74 — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe (72, 73) . . . ananta-cakkavalaiji- 
pamuncantu [ter]. 

Mana kota meheya balana lada a. p. u. ehi Meru mudune 
anulomayen. udu taba s. d. a. p. da s. g. t. bhawana kalhi ha- 
dayamata karunawata pahalawti tejo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. 
b. dasa dahasak sakwala kela laksayak sakwala ananta 
cakrawalaya dakwa karuna bhawana kota ehi Meru matthake 
ema a. p. u. anulomayen s. d. a. p. da»s. g. t. bhawana kota 
nsewata samadhiyata ema tejo dhatuwa ema kramayen Meru 
matthake taba sitthaka-dlpaye angala . . . bhawana kata yutu. 

Anulomayata anaturu kota patilomayata balana krama 
nain: — 

Karunawata pahalawu tejo dhatuwe u. p. ananta cakra- 
walayehi anulomayen udu tabana lada Meru matthakayen 
citta vinnanayen gena krama kramayen anantaparyyanta sak- 
wala kela laksayak sakwala dasa dahasak [chai] sakwala pati- 
lomayen udu pasu kota sirsayata asannawti kalhi nasagrayen 
ganimin nabhiye karmmasthane taba sitthakadlpayedsengala 
pramane da s. g. t. bhawana kala kalhi ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka karuna-brahma-vihara- 

pathamajjhanam patiloma .... pe ... . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwe a. p. u. m. k. b. bala*. — 

Ekissa disayam . . . . pe (69, 70) ... . anto parikammaiji 
aham pamuncami aham pamuncami. 

Puna patiloma^ Ananta^ cakravalato* agamana kale 
yava sata sahassa koti cakkavalam satta satta satta, sata 
sahassa koti cakkavalato yava dasa sahassa cakkavaJaipL 
satta pamuncantu. Tayo varaip. Sisato yava nabhiip ahaip 
pamuncami aham pamuncami aham pamuncami. 

Mehi patilomayen balana lada a. p. u. nabhiye taba 
sitthaka dipaye a. pr. da . . . . ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka . . . pe . . . viharesu karuna- 
brahma-vihara-dutiyajjhanam patiloma . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi anulomayata ananta cakrawalayehi 
mana kota citta vinnanayen bala tabana lada pathawl 
dhatuwe a. p. u. bala bala: — 



' MS, anta. ^ So MS. 



— 75 - 

Ekissa disayam visati . . . pe . . . anto parikammam 
aham pamuncami (his). 

Puna patiloma. Ananta . . . pe . . . Tayo varam. Dasa sahassa 
cakkavalato yava sisaiii sabbe satta pamuncantu. Tayo varam. 
Sisato yava nabhim ahaiii pamuncami aham pamuncami. 

Mese balana lada a. p. u. nabhiyata dsengalakin mattehi 
patilomayen udu taba sitthaka dipayehi angala pramane da 
salakaya gilihena turu bhawana kalhi ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka . . . pe . . . vihara tatiyajjhanam 
patiloma . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi anulomayata ananta cakrawalayehi'^ 
karuna bhawana kara tabana lada apo dhatuwe a. p. u. 
mk. b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe . . . anto parikammam aham 
pamuncami aham pamuncami. 

Puna patiloma. Ananta cakkawala . . . pe . . . pa- 
muncami. 

Mese mana kota balana lada a. p. u, nabhiyata dakune 
angala pramane da patilomayen udu taba sitthaka dipaye 
angala pr. da s. g. t. bh. kala kalhi ukkutikayen [cho] inda: — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka . . pe . . -vihara catutthajjhanam 
patiloma . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Mese ar. k. anulomayen ananta cakrawalayehi salaka 
tabana lada wayo dhatuwe a. p. u. mL b. bala: — 

Ekissa disayaiii . . . pe . . . anto parikammam aham 
pamuncami [ter]. 

Puna patiloma. Ananta cakkawala . . pe . . pamuncami. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . -vihara pancamajjhanam pati- 
loma . . pe . . hotu. 

Mese . . pe . . cakrawalayehi tabana lada akasa dha- 
tuwe a, p. u. mk. b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe . . . pamuncami. 

Puna patiloma . . . pe (74) . . . pamuncami. 

Mese manawa balana lada akasa dhatuwe a.p.u. nabhiyata 
wame angala pramane taba sitthaka d. angala pr. d.s. g. t. bh. 
k. k. naewata hadayamata anulomayen udu tabana lada 



MS, antacatawatayehi. 



76 



tejo dhatuwe a. p. u. patilomayen udu nabhiye taba s. g. 
t. bh. kara nsewata samadhiyata anulomayen udu tabana 
lada tejo dhatuwe a. p. *u. patilomayen udu nabhiye 
karmmasthane taba s. g. t. bh. kata yutu. Ptirwwa diga 
gilihena turn lokadhatuwehi wasana sakala pranin kerehi 
anuloma patilomayen karuna bhawana karana widhi kriya 
data yutu. 

Purwwa digata anaturu kota pa^cima diga loka dhatuwa 
ho dakunu diga loka dhatuwa ho ^ uturu diga loka dhatuwa 
ho satara anudig aturehi ginikona wayamba naityawa da 
isana diga ho mattehi Meru Mandaradi parwatayam nseti 
bsewin Ajatakasata ho hettha bhagayen esema deyak nseti 
bsewin wa poluwa dakwa ho mehi dakwana lada dasa 
prakara loka-dhatun purwa diga balana lada prakarayen 
anuloma patiloma kota nimawa: — 

P. kr. n. w. w. p.: — 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . patikaromi, kl tsenata: — 

Okasu. Aham kayavasi-vattaiii samapajjitva antogabbha- 
catu-brahma-viharesu karuna-brahma vihara-pathamajjha- 
nam anuloma: . . pe . . hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . parikammam ahaiii pamuncami 
aham pamuncami. 

. . vihara-dutiyajjhanam patiloma* 



Okasa. Aham kaya . . 
. . pe . . . hotu [Chau]. 
Okasa. Aham kaya . . 



. . . . pe 

Okasa. 
loma . . . 

Okasa. 
loma . . . 

Okasa. 
loma . . . 

Okasa. 
loma . . . 

Okasa. 
loma . . 



. . . hotu. 
Ahai|i kaya 



. pe . 
Aham 
. pe . 
Aham 
. pe . 
Aham 

• 

. pe . 
Ahain 
. pe . 



. . hotu. 
kaya . . . 

. . hotu. 
kaya . . . 

. . hotu. 
kaya • . , 

. . hotu. 

kaya . . 

. . hotu. 



vihara-tatiyajjhanaip anuloma 
vihara-catutthajjhanaiii anu- 
vihara-pancamajjhanaiji anu- 
vihara-pancamajjhanaiji pati- 
vihara-catutthajjhanam pati- 
. vihara-tatiyajjhanam pati- 



* MS, yo hut see p. 81. 



So MS. 



— 77 — 

Okasa» Aham kaya .... vihara-dutiyajjhanaiji pati- 
loma .... pe ... . hotu. 

Okasa. Aham kaya .... vihara-pathamajjhanam pati- 
loma .... pe ... . hotu. 



Karuna-bhavana. 



Catu brahma viharanayehi yedentawun wisin karuna 
brahma vihara^ayata anaturu kota p. kr. n. w. w. p. mu- 
duta brahma viharanayata aradhana kota dhamma saniia 
bala ehi anuloma patiloma kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . patikaromi, kl tsenata; 

Okasa, okasa. Aham pathamajjhanam samapajjitva an- 
togabbha-catubrahma viharesu (karuna-brahma-viharesu) * 
muduta-brahma-viharaip amiloma . . pe (7) . . patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . parikammam, Aham ma vigacchami, 
aham ma vigacchami! 

Mese bhawana kala pandam laksana dhamma sanna 
bala nabhiye taba anuloma patiloma kata yutu. 

Okasa . . . pe (77) . . . patura hotu. 

Mese bhawana kara pathawi dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. 
nabhiye karmmasthaneta tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham dutiyajjhanum anuloma . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. nabhi- 
yata matte angala pramane tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham tatiyajjhanam anuloma . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Mese ar. k. wayo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. nabhiyata dakune 
angala pr. tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham catutthajjhanaQi anuloma . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Mese ar. k. akasa dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. nabhiyata yata 
disawe angala pr. tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham paiicamajjhanam anuloma . . . pe . . . 
hotu. 

Mese ar. k. ema akasa dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. nabhiyata 
wama laye angala pr. tabanu. 

Okasa. Ahain pancamajjhanaiqa samapajjitva . . . pe 
. . . patiloma . . . hotu. 

" ' So MS, 



— 78 — 

Mese ar. k. akasa dhSltuwe a. p. u. n. wame anuloma- 
yata bselu tsenhi patilomayen udu tabaniu 

And so with the other 4 Jhdnas in reverse order [Cham]. 

Mehi anuloma patilomayen udu dhatu sampur^na kota 
nimawa balana widhi kriya data yutu. Tawa da mehi 
patipatiyadi metta brahma viharanayehi kiyana lada pra- 
karayen anuloma patilomayen kata yutu. 

Index to all these varieties follows [chah and ja]. 

Catu brahma viharanayehi yedenta un wi8i^ p. kr. n. w. 
w. p. muduta brahma viharanayata aradhana kota ehi 
patipatti puja kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . patikaromi. 

Aham yScami . . . pe (4) . . . antogabbha catu brahma- 
viharesu muduta-brahma-viharam. 

Nava lokuttara dhamma . . . pe (4, 5) . . . nibbana 
paccayo hotu. 

Nisldati . . . pe (7) . . . parikammain. Ahaiji ma vi- 
gacchami, aham ma vigacchami. 

Mese tiksana nanayen bhawana k. k. bhawEnga sinda- 
gana mano dwaraya awarjjana kota apo dhatuwa upadi, 
ehi u. p. mk. b. b. nabhiye karmmasthane tabanu. 

Okasa. Ahaiii sitthaka-danda-dipam samapajjitva anto- 
gabbha catu- brahma -viharesu muduta - brahma - viharain 
pathamajjhanam anuloma . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese ar. k. apo dhatuwa a. p. u. mk. b. b. nabhiye 
tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham yacami •. . . pe . . . -viharaip. 

Nava lokuttara -dhamma . . . pe . . . nibbana-paccayo 
hotu. 

Nisldati . . . pe . . . parikammam Ahai?i ma vigacchami. 

Mese tiksana nana nuwanin bhawana kala kalhi bh. s. 

• • • • 

md. a. k. apo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi u. p. mk. dasa 
diga lokadhatun keren psedun desata meheya dasa da- 
hasak sakwala kela laksayak sakwala ananta paryyanta 
sakwala salaka bhawana kara ehi Meru matthake anu- 
lomayen udu tabanu. 



— 79 — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka . . . pe . . . vihara-pathamajjha- 
nam anuloma . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese ar. k. apo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam vlsati [ja] . . . pe (69) . . . honti. 

Laddha - sampattito ma vigacchantu. Laddha - yasato 
ma vigacchantu. Laddha - pasamsato ma vigacchantu. 
Laddha-sukhato ma vigacchantu. Aham ma vigacchami, 
ahaiji ma vigacchami. 

Sisato nikkhamana-kale yava dasa-sahassa-cakkavalam 
sabbe satta ma vigacchantu, ma vigacchantu. Dasa-sahassa ' 
cakkavalato yava sata-sahassa-koti cakkavalaip, *sabbe 
satta ma viggacchantu' [ter]. Sata-sahassa-koti-cakkava- 
lato yava anta-cakkavalam * ma vigacchantu [ter]. 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka . . . pe . . -vihara-dutiyajjhanaiji 
anuloma . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese ar. k. tejo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe . . . honti. 
' Laddha . . . pe . . . vigacchami. 

Sisato . . . pe . . . vigacchantu [ter]. 

Dasa-sahassa . . . pe . . . vigacchantu [ter]. 

Sata-sahassa . . . pe . . . vigacchantu [ter]. 

Okasa. ... pe ... vihara - tatiyajjhanaiii anuloma 
. . . pe . . . hotu. 

Mese . . . b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe . . . aham ma vigacchami. Si- 
sato . . . pe . . . vigacchantu [ter]. 

Okasa . . . vihara catutthajjhanam anuloma . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Mese ar. k. wayo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam vigacchantu. 

Okasa vihara-pancamajjhanam anuloma . . . 

pe . . . hotu. 

Mese ar. k. [ji] balana^ lada a. p. u. mk. nabhiyata 
angalakin mattehi taba sitthaka dipaye angala pramane 
da salakaya gilihena turn bh. k. k. ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa viharesu metta-brahmavihara tatiyaj- 

jhanam patiloma . . . pe . . . hotu. 



So MS. ^ MS. yen balana. 



— 80 — 

Ananta cakrawalayehi anulomayen met paturuwa tabapa 
lada apo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe (69) . . . antoparikammam, 
Ahaiji sukhi homi [ter]. 

Firna patiloma-vasena agamanakale sattS. satta satta. 
Ananta-cakkavala-sampatta-kale sukhl, sukhl, sukhi. Sata- 
sahassa-koti-cakkavala-sampattakale , Sukhi hontu [ter\. 
Anto sampattakale, Aham sukhi homi [ter]. 

Mk. balana lada a. p. u. nabhiyata dakune angala pra- 
mane patilomayata taba sitthapa-dipaye angala prama^ie 
da salakaya gilihena turn ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka Metta-brahma- 

yihara-catutthajjhanam patiloma . . . pe . . . hota. 

Meso ar. k. ananta cakrawalayehi met paturuwa tabana 
lada wayodhatuwe a. p. u. mk. upadawa: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe . . . anto parikammam, Aham 
sukhi homi [ter]. 

Pima patiloma-vasena agamana-kale satta satta satta 
. . . pe . . . anto sampatta-kale Aham sukhi homi^ 

Ananta cakrawalayehi met paturuwa tabana lada 
akasa dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe (69) . . . anto parikammain. 
Aham sukhi homi. Tayo varam. 

Puna patiloma-vasena . . . pe (80) . . . anto sampatta- 
kale aham sukhi homi. Tayo varam. 

Patilomayata balana lada a. p. u. mk. nabhiyata wama 
laye angala pramane taba sitthaka dipayehi angala pra- 
mane da salakaya gilihena turu bhawana kala kalhi hada- 
yamata ananta cakrawalayehi anulomayen met paturuwa 
tabana lada pathawi dhatuwe a. p. u. patilomayata [Ji] 
krama kramayen pasu kota bala mana kota nabhiye taba 
sitthaka dipayehi a. p. da. s. g. t. bhawana kata yutu. 

Purwwa diga loka dhatuwehi wasana sakala satwaya 
kerehi anuloma patilomayen met paturuwa bhawana karana 
widhi data yutu. 

* MS. Aham ta ananta (sic). The ta is probably the 
letter of hadayamata, a whole line (as just below) being 
last here omitted by mistake. 



— 81 — 

Purwwa digata anaturu kota pa^cima diga loka dhatuwa 
ho dakunu diga loka dhatuwa ho uturu diga loka dhatuwa 
ho me satara digata anaturu kota anudik aturen ginikona 
ho wayaba ho nairtthyawa^ ho isana diga ho me ata di- 
gata anaturu kota mattehi Meru Mandaradi parwatayan 
naeti bsewin ajatakasayata hettha bhagayen esema deyak 
naeti baewin wa polowa dakwa ho me kiyana lada dasa 
prakara loka dhatuwala wasana sakala pranin kerehi 
maitri paturuwa Sama loka-dhatun purwwa diga balana 
lada kramayen anuloma patiloma kota nimawa: — 

Purwa kratyaya no waradawa waenda puda: — 

Okasa. Aham patipatti patikaromi kl ksenata: 

Okasa. Okasa. Aham kayavasivattam samapajjitva anto 
c. br. V. m. br. v. pathamajjhanam anuloma . . . pe . . . 
patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . parikammam: Aham sukhi homi, 
aham sukhl homi, aham sukhi homi. 

Okasa .... dutiyajjhanam anuloma . . . pe . . . patura 
hotu 2. 

Okasa .... tatiyajjhanam anuloma .... pe ... . pa- 
tura hotu . . . Apo dhatuwa. 

Okasa .... catutthajjhanam anuloma .... pe ... . 
patura hotu .... Wayo dhatuwa. 

Okasa .... pancamajjhanam anuloma .... pe ... . 
patura hotu .... Akasa dhatuwa. 

pancamajjhanam patiloma .... Akasa 

dhatuwa. 

[ju] catutthajjhanam patiloma .... Wayo 

dhatuwa. 

tatiyajjhanam patiloma . . . Apo dhatuwa. 

. . . dutiyajjhanam patiloma .... Tejo dhatuwa. 

. . . pathamajjhanam patiloma .... Pathawi dhatuwa. 



Metta bhavana. 



So MS. 



2 No dhatuwa is given, 

6 



— 82 — 

Catu brahma viharanaya kerehi metta brahma viharana- 
yata anaturu kota p. k. n. w. w. p. karuna brahma viha- 
ranayata aradhanS kara dhamma saniia bala anuloma pat-i- 
loma karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe (4) . . patikaromi kl tsenata: — 

^Okasa. Okasa. Aham pathamajjhanam samapajjitva 
antogabbha catu-brahma- viharesu karuna-brahma-vihara 
anuloma . . . . pe (7) . . . . dhamma-sanna patura hotu. 

Nisidati .... pe .... parikammam: Aham pamun- 
cami, aham pamuncami. 

Mese bhawana kala kalhi khila pandan laksana dhamma 
saima bala naewata esema bhawana kara karunawe tejo 
dhatuwa nabhiya mseda eheyin pathawi dhSttuwe a. p. u. 
mk. b. b. nasikagrayen ganimin nabhiye karmasthane 
tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham dutiyajjhanam samapajjitva .... pe ... . 
patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi apo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. nabhi- 
yata mattehi angala pramane tabanu. 

Okasa tatiyajjhanam 

Mese aradhana kalhi wayo dhatuwa nabhiyata dakuipie 
angala pramane tabanu. 

Okasa . . . catutthajjanam .... 

Mese aradhana kalhi akasa dhatuwa manakota bala 
nabhiyata hettha bhagayen angala pramane tabanu. 

Okasa .... pancamajjhanam .... 

Meso aradhana kalhi ema akasa dhatuwa nabhiyata 
wame angala pramane tabanu. 

Okasa . . . pancamajjhanam . . . patiloma . . . patura 
hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi akasa dhatuwa nabhiyata wame 
anulomayata bselu tsenhi patilometa tabanu. 

Okasa . . . catutthujjhanam patiloma [ju] . . . 

hotu. 

Wayo dhatuwa nabhiyata hettha bhagayen anulomayata 
bselu taenhi patilomayata tabanu. 

^ Comp. 153. 



— 83 — 

Okasa . . . tatiyajjhanam . . . patiloma . . . 
Apo dhatuwa nabhiyat-a dakune tabanu. 
Okasa . . . dutiyajjhanam . . . patiloma . . . 
Pathawl dhatuwa nabhiyata matte tabanu. 
Okasa . . . patbamajjhanam . . . patiloma . . . 
Karunawe tejo dhatuwa nabhiye pathamajjhaneta tabanu. 



Mese anuloma patilomayen karunawe dhyana sampuri;ia 
wti kalhi purwa kratyaya no waradawa waenda puda: — 
Okasa aham . . . patikaromi kl taenata: — 
Okasa okasa. Aham patipatiya pavisitva antogabbha 
catu-brahma-viharesu karuna-brahma-vihara-pathamajjha- 
nam anuloma . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . parikammam: Aham pamuncami, 
aham pamuncami. 

. . . Tejo dhatuwa . . . 
Okasa . . . dutiyajjhanam anuloma . . . 

. . . Pathawi dhatuwa . . . 
Okasa . . . tatiyajjhanam anuloma . . . 

. . . Apo dhatuwa . . . 
Okasa . . . catutthajjhanam anuloma . . . 

Wayo dhatuwa. 
Okasa . . . pancamajjhanam anuloma . . . 

Akasa dhatuwa. 
Okasa . . . dutiyajjhanam anuloma . . . 

Pathawi dhatuwa. 
Okasa . . . pathamajjhanani anuloma . . . 

Tejo dhatuwa. 
Okasa . . . pathamajjhanam patiloma . . . 

Tejo dhatuwa. 
Okasa . . . dutiyajjhanam patiloma . . . 

Pathawi dhatuwa. 
Okasa [jr] . . . pancamajjhanam patiloma . . . 

Akasa dhatuwa. 
Okasa . . . catutthajjhanam patiloma . . . 

Wayo dhatuwa. 
Okasa . . . tatiyajjhanam patiloma . . . 

Apo dhatuwa. 



OkEsa . . 



Okasa . . 



— 84 — 

dutiyajjhanam patiloma . . 

Pathawi dhatuwa. 
pathamajjhanam patiloma . 
Tejo dhatuwa. 



PatipatiyS.. 



Purwa kratyaya no waradawa wsenda puda: — 

Okasa. Aham patikaromi ki tsenata: — 

Okasa. Aham cha-saddaggahanam samapajjitva antog. 

c. br. V. k. br. v. pathamajjhanam anuloma . . . pe . . . 

patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe (83) ... 

Tejo dhatuwa. 

[Then the second okasa paragraph p. 84 (without the 
nisidati paragraph) repeated as follows: — ] 

dutiyajjhanam an Pathawi 

pathamajjhanam an Tejo 

dutiyajjhanam an Pathawi 

tatiyajjhanam an Apo 

pathamajjhanam an Tejo 

pancamajjhanam an Tejo 

pathamajjhanam an Tejo 

catutthajjhanam an Wayo 

pancamajjhanam [jf] an. . . . Akasa 

pathamajjhanam an Tejo 

pathamajjhanam patiloma . . . [Dhatu 
pancamajjhanam patiloma. . . [Dhatu 
catutthajjhanam patiloma . . . [Dhatu 
pathamajjhanam patiloma . . [Dhatu 
catutthajjhanam patiloma . . . [Dhatu 
pathamajjhanam patiloma. . . [Dhatu 
pathamajjhanam patiloma. . . [Dhatu 
tatiyajjhanam patiloma .... [Dhatu 
dutiyajjhanam patiloma .... [Dhatu 
pathamajjhanam patiloma . . [Dhatu 
dutiyajjhanam patiloma . . . [Dhatu 



omittei 

omitted 

omitted] 

omitted] 

omitted] 

omitted] . 

omitted] 

omitted] 

omitted 

omitted 

omitted 



— 85 — 

dutiyajjhanaiii pat-iloma .... [Dhatu omitted] 
pathamajjhanam patiloma . . [Dhatu omitted] 



Ohasaddaggahanam. 



Purwa kratiyaya no waradawa wenda pudS: — 

Okasa. Aham patikaromi ki taenata: 

Okasa [Jl]. Aham vidatthim samapajjitva antogabbha 
c. br. V. k. br. v. dutiyajjhanaiji tatiyajjhauaip pancamajjha- 
nam anuloma .... pe ... . patura Jbotu. 

Nisidati .... pe .... parikammata: Aham pamun- 
cami, aham pamuncS.mi. 
[Then the second Okasa paragraph repeated with: — ] 
. . . Pathamajjhanam catutthajhanam anuloma . . . 
. . . Catutthajjhanam pathamajjhanam patiloma . . . 
. . . Pancamajjhanam tatiyajjhanam dutiyajjhanam pa- 
tiloma . . . 



Vidatthim. 



Meyin mattehi dhatu samtiham yanadi dhamma tiratthi- 
tikam dakwa metta brahma viharanaye kiyana lada praka- 
rayen anuloma patiloma kata yutu. Mudutawe apo dha- 
tuwa pathamajjhaneta balanu, dutiyam pathawi dhatuwa, 
tatiyaipL tejo dhatuwa, catuttham wayo dhatuwa, pancamam 
akasa dhatuwa. 



Catu-nayam. 



Mudutawe apo dhatuwa , . . pancamam akasa dhatuwa. 



Panca-nayam. 



[Same sentence for each of the three following]. 



Hadayam [jl]. 



— 86 — 
Samadhi. 

Dhammatiratthitikam. 



Catu brahma viharanaya kerehi yedentawun wisin p. k. 
no. w. w. p. karuna brahma viharanayata aradhana kara 
pratipatti puja kat-a yutu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe (4) . . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami uggaha-nimittan ca patibhaga-nimittaiji 
upacara-vidhim appana-samadhi-vidhim antogabbha catu- 
brahma-viharesu karuna-brahma-viharam. 

Nava-lokuttara-dhamma . . . pe (4, 5) . . . nibbana- 
paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe (5) . . . parikammaiji: Aham pamun- 
cami, aham pamuncami. 

Mese tik8a^ayen ^ menehi kota bhawana kala kalhi bha- 
wangaya sindagana manodwaraya awarjjana kota tejodha- 
tuwa pahala we. Ehi upacara parikarmma mana kota 
nabhiye karmmasthane taba sitthaka dipayehi dsengala 
pramane da salakaya gilihena turu bhawana kala kalhi 
ukkutikayen inda: — 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka-danda-dipam samapajjitva anto- 
gabbha catu brahma -viharesu karuna- brahma -viharaiji 
pathamajjhanam anuloma . . . pe (7) . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. na- 
bhiye karmmasthane taba s. dipayehi a. pr. da. s. g. t. bh. 
k. k. esema inda, hadayamata mema dhatuwa manakota 
nabhiye karmmasthane taba s. d. angala pr. da salakaya 
g. t. bh. k. k. samadhiyata mema tejodhatuwa mana kota 
mesema taba s. d. angala p. da, s. g. t. bh. kata yutu. 

[Je] Akasa dhatuwe a. p. tl mk. b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe (69) . . . honti. Sabbe satta 
laddha-sampattito ma vigacchantu, laddha-yasato ma vi- 
gacchantu, laddha-pasamsato ma vigacchantu, laddha-suk- 
hato ma vigacchantu, aham ma vigacchami [ter]. Sisato 
nikkhamana-kale yava dasa-sahassa-cakkavalam sabbe satta 

^ So MS. 



— 87 — 

ma vigacchantu. Dasa-sahassa-cakkavalato yava sata-sa- 
hassa koti-cakkavalam sabbe satta ma vigacchantu. Sata- 
sahassa-koti cakkawalato yava ananta cakkavalaiii ma vi- 
gacchantu ma vigacchantu. 

Hadayam samadhi dwayata mudutawata balana lada 
apo dhatuwe a. p. u. sirasa patan anta^ cakrawalaya sa- 
laka bhawana karanu. Patilomayata balana krama nam: — 
Anulomayata seyin apo dhatuwe upacara parikarmma 
mana kota balanu. 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka . . . pe (86) . . . antogabbha catu 
brahma-viharesu muduta brahma-viharain pathamajjhanam 
. . . patiloma 

Mese aradhana kalhi apo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b. 
Ekissa disayam . . . pe . . . aham ma vigacchami [ter]. 

Puna patiloma . . . pe (74) dasa sahassa . . . pe (74) 
[with «sabbe satta ma vigacchantu» for «pamuncantu»] . . . 
sisato yava nabhim, aham ma vigacchami, aham ma vi- 
gacchami. 

Okasa. Aham . . . dutiyajjhanam . . . patiloma . . . 

Mese . . . pathawi dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b. 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe . . . aham ma vigacchami [ter]. 

Puna patiloma .... 

[as on p. 74, with «ma vigacchantu»]. 

Okasa . . . tatiyajjhanam . . . patiloma . . . 

Mese . . . tejo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . 

[as on p, 74, with «ma vigacchantu))]. 

Okasa . . . catutthajjanam . . . patiloma • . . 

Mese ar. k. k. wayo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b.: — 

Ekissa disayam .... 

[as on p. 74 &c] 

Okasa . . . pancamajjhanain . . . patiloma . . . 

Mese . . . apo dhatuwe . . . 

Hadayam samadhi dwayata mema apo dhatuwe karmma- 
sthane mana kota tab a bhawana kata yutu. Purwa digata 
anaturu kota pascima diga dakunu diga dakunu diga* 

' So MS. 



— 88 — 

ginikona wayamba nairtyawa isanaya mattehi Meru Ma^- 
daradi parwatayan nseti bsewin ajat-akasayata da hettha 
bhagayen esema deyak naeti heyin wa polowata da [jai] 
yana me ki dasa prakara loka dhatun purwa dik-hi kiyana 
lada prakarayen anuloma patiloma kota nimawa: — 

Purwa k. no w. w. puda: — 

Okasa. Ahain .... patikaromi kl tsenata: — 

Okasa. Ahaiji kaya-vasi-vattam samapajjitva antogabbha 
catu-brahma-viharesu muduta brahma-viharain pathamajj- 

hanam patiloma^ Nisidati .... parikammam : 

Aham ma vigacchami (his). 

(Second Okasa paragraph with) 

.... dutiyajjhanam anuloma 

.... tatiyajjhanam anuloma 

.... catutthajjhanain anuloma 

.... pancamajjhanam anuloma 

.... pancamajjhanam patiloma 

.... catutthajjhanam patiloma 

.... tatiyajjhanam patiloma 

.... dutiyajjhanam patiloma 

.... pathamajjhanam patiloma 

Muduta-bhavana. 



Catu brahma viharanayehi yedentawun wisin muduta 
brahmavihananayata anaturu kota purwa k. no w, w. puda 
upekkha brahma viharanayata aradhana kota dhamma 
sanna bala ehi anuloma patiloma kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham .... patikaromi ki tsenata: — 

Okasa. Aham pathamajjhanam samapajjitva antogabbha 
c. b. V. upekkha b. v. anuloma 

Nisidati parikammam dhammassa* kho homi 

dhammassa kho homi. 

Mese bhawana kara khila pandan laksana dhamma sanna 
bala pathawi dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. nabhiye karmasthane 
tabanu. 



* So MS, (read anuloma). * jjjg^ dhamma. 



— 89 — 

Okasa .... dutiyajjhanam 

Mese aradhana kalhi tejo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. nabhi- 
yat-a matte angala pramane tabanu. 

Okasa tatiyajjhanam .... 

Mese .... apo dhatuwe nabhiyata dakune an- 
gala pramane tabanu. 

Okasa .... catutthajjhanam .... 

Mese .... akasa dhatuwe .... nabhiyata yata dasawe 
angala pramane tabanu. 

Okasa .... pancamajjhanam [Jo] 

Mese akasa dhatuwe nabhiyata wamen 

angala pramane tabanu. 

Okasa .... pancamajjhanam .... patiloma .... 

Mese .... akasa dhatuwe .... 

Okasa .... catutthajjhanam .... patiloma .... 

Mese .... apo dhatuwe .... nabhiyata yata dasawe 
angala pramane tabanu. 

Okasa .... tatiyajjhanam .... patiloma .... 

Mese .... tejo dhatuwe .... nabhiyata dakune an- 
gala pramane tabanu. 

Okasa .... dutiyajjhanam .... patiloma . . . 

Mese .... pathawi dhatuwe . . . nabhiyata matte anu- 
lomayata kl taenhi patilomayen udu tabanu. 

Okasa . . . pathamajjhanam ... * patiloma .... 

Mese .... wayo dhatuwe .... nabhiye karmasthane 
tabanu. 

Upekkhawehi dhatu sampurna kota balana laeda widhi 
kriya data yutteyi. Tawa da mehi patipatiyadi metta 
brahma viharanayehi kiyana lada prakara anuloma pati- 
loma kata yutu. 

Panca-nayam. Karunawata tejo dhatuwa pathamajjhaneta 
balanu. Dutiyam pathawi dhatuwa. Tatiyam apo dhatuwa. 
Catutthaiji wayo dhatuwa. Paiicamam akasa dhatuwa. 

Hadayaip. Karunawata tejo dhatuwa pathamajjhaneta 
balanu. Dutiyam tejo^ dhatuwa. Tatiyam apo dhatuwa. 
Catuttham wayo dhatuwa. Pancamam akasa dhatuwa. 



So MS. ? pathawi. 



90 — 



Samadhi (same as panca-nayam), 
Samadhi (Treated) [Jau]. 



Catu brahma viharanayehi yedentawun wisin purwa k. 
no w. w. puda upekkhawat-a aradhana kota ehi pratipatti 
puja kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham .... patikaromi. 

AhaipL yacami uggaha-nimittan ca patibhaga-nimittaiji 
upacara-vidliim appana-samadhi-vidhiiji antogabbha catu 
brahma-viharesu upekkha-brahma-viharam. 

Nava lokuttara dhamma .... pe . . . . nibbana pac- 
cayo hotu. 

Nisidati .... pe ... . dhammassa kho homi dham- 
massa kho homi. 

Mese bhavana kalhi bhawanga sindagana mano dwaraya 
awarjjana kota wayo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi upacraa 
parikarma mana kota nabhiye tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka-danda-dlpam samapajjitva anto- 
gabbha-catu-brahma-viharesu upekkha-brahma-vihara-pa- 
thamajjhanam anuloma . . . pe . . . patura hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi wayo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b. 
nabhiye tabanu. Hadaya samadhi dwayata upekkhawata 
pahala wu wayo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. nabhiye karmasthane 
tabanu. Patilomayata balana krama nam anulomayata 
seyin wayo dhatuwe u. p. mk. nabhiye tabanu. 

OkaSa .... pathamajjhanam patiloma .... 

Mese a. p. u. mk. anulomayata kl taenhi patilo- 

mayen udu tabanu. Hadaya samadhi dwayata mema wayo 
dhatuwe anulomayata kl taenhi mana kota tabanu. 



Catu brahma v. y. w. p. k. no w. w. p. u. ar. kota dasa 
diga lokadhatuwa bala pratipatti puja kata yutu. 

Okasa. Aham .... pe ... . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . . . pe (89) .... dhammassa kho homi. 

Mese . . (90) . . wayo dh. p. we. Ehi u. p. mk. yata ki- 
yana lada kramayen purwa diga loka dhatuwa balimin: 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka pathamajjtanam anu- 
loma .... pe ... . hotu. 



— 91 — 

Mese ar. k. wayo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. bala: — Ekissa 
disayam .... pe (69, 70) .... ananta-cakkavala-sampatta- 
kale* dhammassa* kho hontu (ter). 

Okasa. Ahain sitthaka . . . dutiyajjhanain anuloma . . . 
pe . . . hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi pathawi dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. 
bala: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . dhammassa kho hontu. 

. . . tatiyajjhanam . . . tejodhatuwe . . . ekissa . . . 

. . . Catutthajjhanam . . . apodhatuwe . . . ekissa . . . 

. . . Pancamajjhanam . . . akasadhatuwe . . . ekissa . . . 

[Jam] Hadaya samadhi dwayata upekkhawata pahala 
wu wayo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. b. bhawana karanu. 

Mehi anulomayata anaturu hota patilomayata balana 
krama nam anulomayata seyin wayo dhatuwe u. p. mk. 
patilomayen udu nabhiye tabanu. 

Okasa. Aham sitthaka ... pe ... pathamajjhanam 
patiloma . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Mese aradhana kalhi wayo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. b. 
bala: — 

Ekissa disayam . . . pe (74) . . . sisato yava nabhim: 
Ahaiji kammassu kho homi, kammassa kho homi. 

Okasa . . . dutiya . . . pathawi . . . ekissa. 

Okasa . . . tatiya . . . tejo . . . ekissa. 

Okasa . . . catuttha . . . apo . . . ekissa. 

Okasa . . . pancama . . . akasa . . . ekissa. 

Hadaya samadhi dwayata wayo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. 
bala nabhiye karmmasthane tabanu. 

Purwa diga loka dhatuwa anuloma patilomayen balana 
widhi kriya kiyana ladseyi data yutuyi. 



Purwa digata anaturu kota pa^cima diga dakunu diga 
uturu diga ginikona wayamba nairtyawa isanaya mattehi 
Meru Mandaradi parwatayan naeti baewin ajatakasayata 
da hettha bhagayen esema deyak [Jah] nseti bsewin polowa 



MS. cakkavalam. * 8o MS. 



— 92 — 

dakwa da yana me ki loka dhatun purwa diga kiyana 
lada prakarayen upekkhawe pratipatti puja kota nimawa: — 

P. kr. no. w. w. p.: — 

Okasa. Ahaiji . . . pe (4) . . . patikaromi: — 

ki tsenata: — 

Okasa. Aham kayavasi vattam samapajjitva antogabbha 
catu-brahma-viharesu upekkha-brahma-vihara-pathamajjha- 
nam anuloma .... pe ... . patura hotu. 



Nisidati 


... pe ... parikammam khamma 


homi (his). 




Okasa . . 


. . . dutiyajjhanarp anuloma .... 


Okasa . 


. . . tatiyajjhanam anuloma .... 


Okasa . . 


.• . catutthajjhanam anuloma .... 


Okasa . . 


. . pancaraajjhanam anuloma .... 


Okasa . . 


. . pancamajjhanaiji patiloma 


Okasa . 


. . . catutthajjhanam patiloma .... 


Okasa . . 


. . tatiyajjhanam patiloma .... 


Okasa . . 


. . dutiyajjhanaiji patiloma .... 


Okasa . . 


. . . pathamajjhanam patiloma .... 




Upekkha bhSvana. 



Catu brahma viharanayata anaturu kota dasa widhi wu 
nanayen kerehi purwa kratyaya no waradawa wsenda puda 
samatha* darsana nanayata aradhana karanu. 
Okasa. Ahaip . . . . pe (4) . . . . patikaromL 
Aham yacami uggaha-nimittan ca patibhaga-nimittaiji 
upacara-vidhim appana-samadhi-vidhim antogabbha-dasasu 
nanesu samatha '-dassana-nanam ^ 

• • • 

Nava lokuttara-dhamma . . . pe . . . nibbana-paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . parikammam aniccain dukkhaiji 
anattam anuccam dukkhain anattam. 

Mese tiksana nanayen niwan aramu^u kota bhavana 
kala kalhi bhawangaya sindagana mano dwaraya awarjjana 
kota pathawi dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. b. bala 
hradaye taba nsewata nabhiya tabanu. Ita ikbiti wa pa- 



^ MS, samata always, * MS, darsana-nanain. 



— 93 — 

thawl kasinayehi kiyana lada prakarayen anuloma pati- 
loma kota nimawa: — 

Samatha-darsana-nanaIn^ 

Udaya wyaya nana nam me namarupayage utpattiyat-a 
ptirwa bhagayehi ek tsenaka rasi bhutawa* sitimakut naeta, 
pahala wannahuge rasiyata [Ni] sita ena gamanakut naeta, 
naesennahuge disanudisawakata yamakut naeta naesunu kalhi 
ek taenaka raeswa sitimakut naeta, wina gayana karana kalhi 
pahala wu ^abdaya palamu taenaka raeswa sitiyet noweyi 
taenaka sita awut pahala wtiyet nowe niruddhawa anik 
taenakata giyet nowe waeli se wi da winaya upawinaya 
purusayage tad anurupawti waeyamaya yana me ki kara- 
nayen pera naetiwa aeti wuye da atiwa naeti wuye da, e 
paridden siyalu ruparupa dharmmayo naetiwa aetiwannaha 
aetiwa naetiwannahuyayi yanadin pawatna nanayayi. Me 
bandu adinawa dakna yogihu wisin p. kr. no. w. w. p. 
udaya wyaya darsana nanayata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . . patikaromi. Aham yacami 
uggaha-nimittan ca patibhaga-nimittam upacara-vidhim 
appana-samadhi-vidhim antogabbha dasasu nanesu udaya- 
vyaya-dassana-nanam. 

Nava lokuttara-dhamma ... pe . . . nibbana-paccayo 
hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . parikammam aniccam dukkham 
anattam^, 

Mese niwan aramunu kota bhawana kala kalhi tejo dha- 
tuwa pahala we. Ehi . . . tabanu. fta . . . (92) . . . nimawa. 



Udaya-vyaya-dassana-nanam. 



Bhanganudarsana fianaya^ nam yam se aes aeti purusayek 
gan teraka ho pokunu teraka sitiye maha poda aeti waesi 
wasina kalhi diya pita mahat mahati diya bubulu naegi 
naegi sighrawa bindena desedaki da e paridden siyalu 
sanskara dharmmayo bindeti bindetiyi dakna wu iianayayi. 



^ See appendix. * So MS. 

3 MS, anatta. 4 Compare J. P. T. S. 1893. 151. 



— 94 — 

P. k. no. w. w. p. bhanganudarsana nanayata aradhana 
karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . . dasasu uanesu bhanganudassana- 
nanam. Nava hotu. 

Nisldati . . . analtam. 

Mese nirwanabhimukhawa bhawana kala kalhi bhawan- 
gaya s. m. d. a. L apo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi 
tabanu. Ita nimawa. 



. • • 



Bhanganudassana-nanam. 



Bhayatupatthana nanaya nam siyalu samskara dharma- 
yan bhangannpassana wasayen bhawana karannawu yoga- 
wacarayahata siyalu bhava yoni sthiti satwa wasangata 
wu samskara dharmayo ^apa se jiwati wanu kaemati bhi- 
ruka purusayak-hata simha vyaghra yaksa raksasasirbbi- 
sadi' men waemaheda da e bandu nanayayi. 

Purwa kratyaya no waradawa waenda puda bhawatu- 
pattbana nanayata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Aham .... pe ... . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami . . . nanesu bhayatupatthana-dassana-na- 
nam. Nava . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . parikammam . . . anattam. 

Mese nirwanayahi sita elamba situ bhawana kala kalhi 
bhawanga s. m. d. aw. kota wayo dhatuwe a. p. u. mk. hra- 
daye taba naewata nabhiye tabanu. fta .... nimawa : — 



Bhayatupattbana-dassana-nanaipL. 



Adinawa darsana nanaya nam mese bhayatupatthana 
iianaya asewanaya karannawu purudu karannawu yogawa- 
carayahata ramaniyyakarayen pihitiyawti simha vyaghradi 
canda satwa ditthi nawa gahanayak men da raksasa pari- 
grahlta pus karanniyak men da kudu gat at seti ^atru 
bhayan men da wisa misra bhojanayan men da gini gat 

' So MS. for asivisadi with inserted r. 



— 95 — 

geyak men da siyalu samskara dharmayan upadrakarayen 
wsetahennawu nanayayi. 

Purwa k. no w. w. puda adinawa darsana nanayata 
aradhana karanu. [Ni] 

Okasa. Aham .... pe ... . patikaromi. 

Aham yacSmi iianesu adinavanudassana-nanam ^ 

Nava . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Nisldati . . . pe . . . parikammam . . . anattam. 

Mese tiksana nanayen nirwana guna salaka bhawana 
kala kalhi bhawanga s. m. d. aw. k. akasadhatuwa pahala 
we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. hradaye taba nsewata nabhiye tabanu. 
Ita ikbitiwa . . . nimawa: — 



Adinavanudassana-nanam. 



Nirbbidhanudarsana^ nanaya nam yam se Citra-kuta 
parwata prantayehi aeti wasaya karaiiawu swarna rajahan- 
sayek apa citrawu candala gama dwarayehi gawarawaleka 
sell wasaya no kare da, e paridden siyalu samskara dham- 
mayehi nerbbidhakarayen^ pawatnawu iianayayi. 

Purwa kr. n. w. w. p. nerbbidhanudarsana nanayata 
aradhanu karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami ... pe (92) » . . nanesu nibbidanu- 
passana-iianam 3. 

Nava . . . hotu. 

Nisldati . . . pe . . . parikammam . . . anattam. 

Mese nirwana abhimukhawa bhawana kala kalhi pathawi 
dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. hradaye taba nsewata 
nabhiye tabanu. Ita . . . nimawa. 



Nibbidanudassana-nanam. 



• • 



Muccitukamyata^ nanaya nam dffilehi bsendunu massa- 
yaku men da sarpa mukhayaka psemini manduwaku men 



^ MS. adinavanupassana darsana nanaya nam. 

* So MS, 3 MS. nimittanupassana darsana nanaip. 

4 Muncitu-kammana. 



— 96 — 

da maediriye kalu paksijaku men da gamda mukhayakata 
paemini naga rajayaku men da Rahu mukha gata candrayS 
men da sivalu samskara dharmmavan keren midenu kaemseti 
wa pawatna Mnajayi. 

P. kr. n. w. w. p. muccitukamyata n^nayata aradhana 
karaniL 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . . patlkaromi. 

Aham yacSmi . . . pe (92 j . . . uanesa muccitu-kamyata-nanaIp^ 

Xava . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . parikammam . . . anattaip. 

Mese tiksana fianayen bhiiwana kala kalhi bhawangaya 
s. m. d. a. L tejodhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. 
hradaye .... tabanu. Ita . . . pe . . . nimawa: — 



Muccitu-kamvata-dassana-nanam*. 



P. k. n. w. w. p. patisankhanupassana nanayata aradhanS 
karaniL 

Okasa. Aham . . pe . . patlkaromi. 

Aham yacEmi . . pe (4) . . nanesu patisankhanupassanS 
nanam. Xava . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Xisidati . . . pe . . . parikammam . . . anattam. 

Mese tiksana iianayen bhawana kala kalhi bhawangaya 
s. m. d. a. k. apo dhatuwa-pahala we. Ehi . . . pe . . . 
tabanu. Ita . . . pe . . . nimawa. 



Patisankhanupassana-iianam. [Xu] 



The same for 



Sankharupekkhanup as Sana- nanam. 



P. kr. n. w. w. p. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . . patikaromi. 
Ahaiji yacami . . . pe (4) . . . antogabbha anuloma anu- 
passana nanam. 



' MS. muficitakamayathanapassana darsana nanaijL 
* MS. Muficitu kamata darsana nanam. 



— 97 — 

Nava . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Nisidati . . pe . . . parikammam . . . anattam. 
Mese nirwana gunaya salaka bhSwana kala kalhi akasa 
dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi . . . pe . . . tabanu. Ita . . . pe 
' . . . nimawa. * 



Anuloma anupassana-nanain. 



P. kr. n. w. w. p. dasa nanayata ekawata arSdhana 

karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . . patikaromi, ki tsenata: — 
Okasa. Aham pathamajjhanaip samapajjitva antogabbha 

dasa nanesu 

samatha-dassana-nanam, 

bhanganudassana-nanam, 

bhayatupatthana-dassana-nanam, 

adinavanupassana-dassana-nanam, 

nibbidanupassana^-dassana-nanam, 

muccitu-kamyatanupassana^-dassana-nanam, 

patisankhanupassana-dassanananam, 

sankharupekkhanupassana-dassana-nanam, 

anuloma-anupassana-dassana-nanam 
anuloma . . . pe (7) . . . dhammasanna patura hotu. 
Nisidati . . . pe . . . parikammam . . . anattaiji. 
Mese bhawana kala kalhi dasa nanayehi sama a. p. u. 
piliwelin mana kota bala bala nabhiye tabanu. Dhyana- 
wala a. p. u, mk. esema tsebiya yutuyi. 

Yam se mat^ya grahana pinisa diyata bata purusayek 
mat^yaka yana sannayen kris^a sarpayage griwaya tara 
kota alwa gena mahat-mat^yayaku ladimiyi satutuwa diyen 
osawa bala so wseti tuna dseka bhita wa dosa daeka kala 
kiri 1 gselawl yanu ksemsetiwa haranata upaya karanuye, 
waladhiya aga patan ata wela gat darana muda ata 
osawa waladhiya gena de tun witeka is awata karakawa 
durwala kota piya dusta sarpayayi dura dama yuhuwa 

* nimitta** ^ muncitu kamayathanupassana. 

7 



— 98 — 

goda nsengi mahat wisa ghora sarpa mukhayakin gSBlawl 
giyemiyi a pasu balamin siti da, e paridden mehi yogava- 
caraya pajamuwen atma bhawaya laebha satutuwu kalaya 
diya yata dl sarpaya alwa masaku alwa ganimiyi satutuwu 
wak men anityaya dukkhaya anatmayayi trilaksanaya dutu 
wak men sanskara dharmayehi bhaya na^aya pahalawima 
sarpaya dseka bhaya gat kalaya men adinawanudarsanaya 
sarpayagen wana upadrawa dutu wak men nirweda-nanaya 
sarpaya kerehi kala kirunak men bhawayen^ midenu 
kaemaeti muccitu kamyata nanaya sarpaya keren midenu 
kaemaeti u wak men patisa^khanupassana nanaya e puru- 
$aya sarpa mukhayen midlmata upaya kalak meni 



Saipkharupeksa nanaya nam — yam se ginnata* [Nu]. 

[Nr] kukulu piyatiyen a passata kaerakse wena misa 

gini dasawatat no ye da — e paridden siyalu samskara dhar- 
mayan kerehi sell madhyastakarayen^ pawatnawu nana- 

yayi. 

Satyanuloma nanaya nam yam se dharmmistawu rajek 
adhikarana sthanayehi unne adhikarana nayakayan ata 
deneku kala yukti winiscaya asa chandadiyen agatiyata no 
gos msedahatwa adhikarana nayakayan da ptirwa raja 
dharmayata anukulawti winiscaya kala niyayen hapataeyi 
abhimata we da — e paridden ma yathokta wti udaya 
wyayadi asta darsapa nanayanta da sat tis bhodhi paksika 
dharmayanta da anukula wa pawatna nai^iayayi. 

Mehi kiyana lada widarsana iianayanta anaturu kota 
nawa lokuttara dharmayan kerehi ptirwa kratyaya no 
waradawa waenda puda sotapatti margayata aradhana 
karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . . patikaromL 

Aham yacami uggaha-nimittan ca patibhaga-nimittam 
upacara-vidhiiii appanasamadhi-vidhim antogabbha cutusu 
maggesu sotapatti-maggam. 



^ So MS. 

* In the MS. a section which belongs below p. 99 is here 
inserted by mistake. I give it in its right place. 



— 99 — 

Nava . . . pe . . . hotu. 

Nisidati ... pe . . . parikammam aniccam dukkham 
anattam. 

Mese tiksana na^ayen nirwana gunaya salaka bhawana 
kala kalhi bhawangaya s. m. d. aw. k. pathawi dhatuwa 
pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. udu talle ransiwiya maeda 
tabanu. 

Purwa k. no. w. w. puda: — 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . . patikaromi 

ki taenata: — 
. Okasa. Aham pathamajjhanam samapajjitva antogabbha 
catusu maggesu sotSpatti-maggam anuloma . . . pe . . . 
patura hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . anattam. 

dutiya .... tatiya .... catuttha .... pan- 

cama .... anuloma .... 

Okasa. Aham pancama . . . catuttha . . . tatiya . . . 
dutiya • . . pathamajjhanam .... patiloma .... 

The samej from purwa kratyaya p. 98 line 27 to p. 99 
line 18 for sakadagami-magga; but reading, 

.... tejo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. yati 
talle ransiwiya maeda tabanu. 

The same for anagami-magga with 

.... apo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. hra- 
daye ransiwiya maedu tabanu and also adding the five 
dhatuwas respectively after the five jhanas taken reversely. 

^ Purwa kratyaya no waradawa waenda puda arhat-mar- 
gayata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Ahain .... pe ... . patikaromi. 

Aham yacami antogabbha catusu maggesu ara- 

hatta-maggam. 

Nava 1. dh . . . . pe . . . . nibbana-paccayo hotu. 

Nisidati . . . pe . . . parikammam aniccain dukkham 
anattaip (his). 

* The following, with the last clause of the preceding 
section, is the portion referred to in the note above (on 
p. 98), as having been misplaced. 



— 100 - 



Mese nirvanayehi sita elba situwa bhawana kala kalhi 
wayo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. nabhiye ransi- 
wiya mseda tabanu. 

P. k. no- w. w. puda. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . . patikaromi 

ki taenata. 

Okasa. Aham pathamajjhanam samapajjitva antogabbha 



catusu maggesu arahanta-maggam anuloma 
patura hotu. 

Nisldati .... 

Pathawl dhatuwa 



... 



pe 



... 



. . dutiya . . 
. . tatiya . . 
. . catuttha . 
. . pancama 
. . pancama 
. . catuttha . 

. . tatiya . . 
. . dutiya . . 



anuloma . . 
anuloma . . 
, . anuloma , 
. . anuloma 
. . patiloma 
. . patiloma 



tejo dhatuwa 
apo dhatuwa 
. . wayo dhatuwa 
. . akasa dhatuwa 
. . akasa dhatuwa 
. . wayo dhatuwa. 



[Hiatus in the MS.] 
patiloma . . . apo dhatuwa 
patiloma ... tejo dhatuwa 



. . pathama . . . patiloma . . . pathawl dhatuwa. 



The same for sotapatti-phala reading. 

Mese tiksana prajiiawen nirwana sita elba situwS ema 
niwan ma aramunu keremin sihiya abhimukha kota bha- 
wana kala kalhi bhawangaya s. m. dw. aw. kota pathawi 
dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. telwala mseda ran- 
siwiye tabanu. 

The same for sakadagami-phala reading: 

Mese niwan aramunu kota bhawana kala kalhi tejo dha- 
tuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. dakunu wale ransiya 
maeda tabanu. 



The same for anagami-phala reading: 

Mese tiksana prajnawen^ nirwana Papaya salaka bha- 



' MS. prajnanayen. 



— 101 — 



wana kala kalhi apo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a., p. u. 
mk. bala baema ature ransiya mseda tabanu. 



The same for arahatta-phala reading: 

Mese tiksana nanayen nirwana rasaya salaka bhawana 
kala kalhi wayo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. 
bala nasature tabanu. 



The same for nibbanaip reading: 

Mese tiksanayen bhawana kala kalhi akasa dhatuwa 
pahala we. Ehi a. p. u. mk. bala nasa de puta maeda 
tabanu. 



The same for catusu maggesu pathamam reading: 
Mese bhawana kala kalhi pathawi dhatuwa pahala we. 
Ehi a. p. u. mk. wasata katuwe ransiwiya maeda tabanu. 



The same for catusu maggesu dutiyam reading: 
Mese bhawana kala kalhi tejo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi 
a. p. w. mk. bala nabhiye ransiwiya maeda tabanu. 



The same for catusu maggesu tatiyam reading: 
Mese bhawana kala kalhi apo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi 
a. p. u, mk. hradaye ransiwiya maeda tabanu. 



The same for catusu maggesu catuttham reading: 
Mese bhawana kala kalhi bhawangaya sindagana mano 
dwaraya awarjjana kota wayo dhatuwa pahala we. Ehi 
a. p. u. mk. bala diwa wara ransiwiya maeda tabanu. 



Purwa kratyaya no waradawa waenda puda nawa lokut- 
tara saddharmayata ekawata aradhana karanu. 

Okasa. Aham . . . pe . . . patikaromi. 

kl taenata. 

Okasa. Aham pathamajjhanam samapajjitva antogabbha 
catu maggesu sotapatti-maggam sakadagami-maggam ana- 
gamimaggaiji arahatta-maggam sotapatti-phalaiji sakada- 



— 102 — 

gami-phalaip anSgami-phalaip arahatta-phalai^ nibbanam 
pathamam dutiyaip tatiyai^ catutthaip anuloma . . . pe . . . 
patura hotu. 

Nisidati &c. 

Mese nirwa^a ^apayehi ma sita elba situwa ema nima- 
wam ma ema aramu^a karamin sihiya abhimukha kota 
bhawana karannahata nawa lowutura dharmayanta bselu 
Sama appan^ parikarmma upacara mk. bala bala nasika- 
grayen ganimin yata kiyana lada e e isthanawalahi ma 
taba dhyanawalahi appana parikarmma upacara anuloma- 
yata tabana lada kramayen taebiya yutu. 

Samatha wipassana wasayen kiyana lada widhi kriya 
samksepayakin data yutteyi. 



Imaqi likhita-punnena Metteyyam upasainkami 
Patitthapetva sarane suppatitthami feSsane. 



Lowutura Budu wemawa. Sarwartha-siddhir astu. 
S'riyam bhavatu. Aroyyam astu. 



Sri suddha Buddha warsayen de das sara siya sa tis* 
wana wasa jEsala masa pura wiseniya nam tithiya lat 
kuja dina me diwasa liya nimawana ladi. 

^ 2436 A . B = 1893 AD. 



INDEX OF PALI 



AND 



Sinhalese words. 



Ajatakasaya 46, 91 

atttika 57 

attabhava 70 

Attha SaUni VII, VIH 

anussati X 

anuloma-anupassana-nana X, 

97 
antogabbha 4, 21, 34 
appana XI, 4 
arahatta 99 
ariya 69 

arupavacara IX, 68 
asubha VIII, 63 
aswakarna 44 

Akasa IX, 52, 67 
akincawa IX, 67 
anapana-samadhi 42 
adinava IX, 95 
anapana-sati XII, 42 
aloka-kasina 52 

Iti-pandama XII, 16 
itthi 69 
idda mal 45 
isba 44 
Isadhara 44 



Uggaha-nimitta 4 
ujjugata VIII 
udaya-vyaya IX, 93 
uddhumataka 53 
upacara XI, XII 
upacara-samadhi VII, 34, 42 
upacara-samadhi VIH, 34 
upasamanussati IX, 65 
upekha IX, X, 97 
ubbega piti VII, 6—18 

Ekasannanussati IX, 66 
elba 1, 55, 58, 100, 102 

Okkantika piti VII, 6—18 
osadhi 45 

Kappasika 43 

karawika 44 

karuna 77 

kasina VIII, 46 

kunapa 47 

kamacchanda 43 

kamafinata VIII 

kaya VUI, 18—34 

kayavasivatta XII, 16, 32, 41 

kisiinu 2, 43 

kaetapatak 2, 43 



— 104 — 



khajjopama 45 
khanika piti VII, 4—18 
khila 21 

khuddaka Patha 3 
khuddaka piti VH, 7—18 
kuruweniya 43 

Ganana 45 
gananuwa 45 
gawuwa 44 

Cakkavala 70 

catu-nayaXII, 12, 25, 38, 69, 85 

candra 45 

caganussati IX, 65 

citta VIII 

citta-vannai^a 2, 44, 45, 69 

cha^saddaggahana XII, 10, 

23, 37, 69, 71, 85 
cha-yugalani VIII, 18 — 34 

Jhana VHI, XHI 

Na^ia IX 

Tana mandala 32 
tana pute basse 41 

Disa 69 foil 
devatanussati IX, 65 
dhamma-tira-tthitikaXII, 14, 

28, 39, 69, 86 
dhamma-sangani VIII 
dhamma-saiinawa 7, 20, 45 
dhammanussati IX, 64 
dhatu-samuha XII, 11, 25, 

37, 69 

Nahara 32 
nairtyawa 44, 81 



nibbida IX, 96 
nimitta 4 

nirwana 58, 59, 102 
nuwansetta 63 
nevasannanasanna IX, 67 
nemindbara 44 

Pagunnata VIII, 18—34 
patipatiya XII, 9, 21, 36, 86 
patibbaga-nimitta 4 
patisankba IX, 96 
panca-naya XII, 13, 27, 38, 

69, 85, 89 
pandama XII, 16, 21 
passaddbi VIII, 18—34 
parikarma XI, anto-p** 70 
palanga 30, 31 
piti VII, 1—9 
pute 41, 43, 44, 45 
pulavaka 57 
polowa 45 
paedum 78 
pbarana piti VII, 6, 7 

Buddbanussati VIII, IX, 35, 

64 
bbanganudassana IX, 94 
bbayatupattbana IX, 94 
bubulu 43 
brabma-vibara IX, XIV, 68 

Marananussati IX, 64 
mayura 43 

muccitu-kamayata IX, 96 
muduta VIH, IX, 78, 88 . 
metta IX, 69 
metteyya 102 
Meru 44, 69, 71, 74 



Yala 44, 45 
yugEbndhara 44 
joduna 44 
yoga XIV 
yogavacara VII, XIV, 

43, 45 
jogi 45, 47 
yomu 72 

Ratnakara 42 
riyana 43 
Tiela 43 



LohutS Vin 
loknttara X, 4 
lo^vutul« 102 

Vikkhayika 56 

-vikkbittaka 56 

vicijhidilaka 55 

viimana 67 (see citta -v") 

vidatthi Xn, 11, 24, 37, 69, 85 

vinllaka 34 

vipubbaka 54 

vimokha XVI 

Tisuddbi magga VII, VIII 

WadSruma 61 
walakula 43 
wa polowa 45, 81 
widwanisanaya 43 
winataka 44 



Tvipassana. 102 
wiprakara 52 
wiyata 44 
wisirena 47 
wisesa 2, 42, 63 
wissak 61 
wffitup 43 
wEeyaiiia 93 

Satahana 44 

sankhara X, 96 

sanghanussati IX, 65 

satipattb'aDa X, XII 

sartda 2, 43 

saBiatha IX, 93, 102 

samadbi VIII, XII, 4 
28. 39, 42, 69, 86 

samapatti XVI 

aarwanga naharaya 17, 32, 33 

salakaya 14, 29, 40 

sasara 1, 42 

sitthaka-dapda-dfpo 14, 29, 
I 40, 69 

I situmiiti niwana 45 
1 silaniissati IX, 65 

sukha VIII 

sudassana 44 
1 surya 43, 45 

: Hata-vikkhittaka 56 
liadaya XII, 13, 28, 39,64, 



13, 



CORRIGENDA ET ADDENDA. 







p. 3 line 5 read sarauam. 


p. 3 ,. 


4 „ nibbanaiii. 


p. 6 ,. 


18 „ wayo. 


p. 7 , 


26 „ nasikagrayen. 


p. 17 „ 


3 „ tana for dana (?). 


p. 41 , 


, 15 „ vidhim. 


p. 42 , 


, 12 „ ratnakarayaka hata. 


p. 42 „ 


26 „ dutu. 


p. 42 „ 


29 „ yogavacara. 


p. 43 , 


,29 „ dhamma. 


p. 44 , 


, 2 from bottom read nairtyawa. 


p. 45 , 


, 6 read pas polowaya. 


p. 56 , 


, 16 „ Hata-vikkhittakani. 



The Asubhas, p. VIII and p. XXXI. See now Samyutta Nikaya 
Vol. 5. pp. 129—140 (just passing through the press). 

\). XXX. mystic meditation, it should have been added, is consi-. 
dered from the Buddhist point of view as by no means incompatible 
with moral depravity. So Devadatta— the Judas Iscariot of the 
Buddhist story — is great at Jhana (J at 1. 140). 

p. XXXII. For further research on Buddhist mysticism Mr. Laf- 
cardio Hearn's beautiful and suggestive book ^Gleanings in Buddha- 
Fields', published since the above was in type, can be strongly re- 
commended. (See the notice of it in J.R.A.S. 1898). 



v.-^ 



- ) 



.■•• 



!•••« 



.. • 



- n 



3 2044 024 192 585 



This book should be returned to 
the Library on or before the last date 
stamped below. 

A fine is incurred by retaining it 
beyond the specified time. 

Please return promptly. 



m 




FEB (01995 




