PREFACE 

Medieval  “  Hinduism  ”  (to  use  a  convenient,  if  somewhat  vague,  term) 
was,  as  its  successor,  modern  Indian  orthodoxy,  is,  largely  Tantrik.  The 
Tantra  was  then,  as  it  is  now,  the  great  Mantra  and  Sadhana  1  Sastra 
(Scripture),  and  the  main,  where  not  the  sole,  source  of  some  of  the  most 
fundamental  concepts  still  prevalent  as  regards  worship,  images,  initiation, 
yoga,  the  supremacy  of  Guru,  and  so  forth.  This,  however,  does  not 
mean  that  all  the  injunctions  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  S&stra  are  of 
universal  acceptance,  as  is  pointed  out  in  the  Introduction  which  follows. 
This  Introduction,  however,  is  but  a  mere  sketch  of  that  which  I  hope 
to  develop  in  a  future  volume  after  the  ritual  (in  its  widest  sense)  has  been 
dealt  with  in  detail.  What  is,  in  fact,  wanted  in  this  matter  is  an  accurate 
statement  of  the  facts;  whereas  up  to  now  such  cursory  accounts  of  the 
Tantra  as  have  appeared  arc  as  a  rule  mere  general  statements  by  way  of 
condemnation  of  it. 

One  of  the  earliest  of  such  accounts  in  English  is  contained  in  that 
interesting  though  biassed  and,  in  essential  respects,  ill-unden  tan  ding 
work1 *  written  by  W.  Ward,  and  published  by  the  Seramporc  Mission 
in  1818.  Of  this  book  Horace  Hayman  Wilson  wrote,  in  his  well-known 
“  essays,”  *  that  Ward’s  information  was  merely  oral,  and  might  be 
regarded  as  unsatisfactory.  It  is  a  fuller  account,  however,  than  his  own, 
and  contains  a  certain  amount  of  information  which  is  fairly  accurate  with 
some  which  is  not  so.  The  author,  however,  like  so  many  of  his  English 
successors,  was  influenced  by  a  strong  racial  and  credal  bias,  which  in  the 
old  style  he  quite  frankly  and  honestly  displayed  to  view.  With  a  strong 
faith  in  Protestant  Christianity  he  combined  exaggerated  notions  of  the 
universal  piety  and  morals  of  his  own  people  who  professed  it.4  On  the 


1  That  is,  ritual,  practice.  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Saitra. 

*  "  A  View  of  the  History,  Literature,  and  Mythology  of  the  Hindus.” 
See  vol.  i,  pp.  496-502;  vol.  ii,  pp.  xxxviii-xli. 

*  “  Essays  and  Lectures,  chiefly  on  the  Religion  of  the  Hindus,”  Ed.  1862, 
vol.  i,  p.  258. 

4  Comparing  the  virtues  of  his  country  with  the  general  Indian  iniquity, 
he  writes:  “  Where  shall  we  find  piety  more  elevated  or  morals  more  correct 
even  among  individuals  in  the  lowest  orders  of  society  than  in  our  own  land  ?  ” 


2 


PRINCIPLES-  OF  TANTRA 


other  hand,  he  wrote  at  a  time  when,  according  to  his  account,  Hinduism 
was  at  a  low  ebb,  and  in  its  lower  forms  apparently  productive  of  many 
evils.  Contrasting,  as  some  of  his  successors  have  since  done,  an  over- 
painted  picture  of  Western  “Light”  with  a  fictitious  or  exaggerated 
Eastern  “  Darkness,”  he  expressed  himself,  as  some  of  them  have  also 
since  done,  much  perturbed  by  the  fact  “  that  for  some  time  past  a  very 
unjust  and  unhappy  impression  appeared  to  have  been  made  in  the  public 
mind  by  encomiums  passed  on  the  Hindu  writings.”  1  He  was  certainly 
not  himself  guilty  of  the  offence  he  here  deplored.  For  we  are  told  by 
him  that  the  “  Hindu  system  is  the  most  puerile,  impure,  and  bloody  of 
any  system  of  idolatry  that  was  ever  established  on  earth  ”  amongst  “  an 
idle,  effeminate,  and  dissolute  people  "  of  “  disordered  imaginations,”  who 
“  frequent  their  temples,  not  for  devotion,  but  for  the  satisfaction  of  their 
licentious  appetites.”  The  result  of  this  alleged  general  depravity  is 
stated  in  the  extraordinary  charge  that  “  a  chaste  woman  faithful  to  her 
husband  is  scarcely  to  be  found  in  all  the  millions  of  Hindus,”  whose 
“  notions  of  the  evil  of  sin  are  so  superficial  ”  that  “  they  cannot  be 
expected  to  promulgate  the  doctrine  ”  of  endless  punishment  in  Hcll-firc.a 

Given  these  circumstances,  we  are  not  surprised  to  find  that  he  had 
only  eyes  for  that  which  he  understood  to  be  bad.  The  good  which  is  to 
be  found  in  other  religions  is  of  no  value  to  the  mere  controversialist. 
Thus,  given  the  general  brevity  of  his  account,  over-lengthy  descriptions 
are  set  forth  of  such  matters  as  how  to  kill  an  enemy  by  making  his  image 
in  bull’s-dung,  taking  it  to  a  burning-ground,  then  boiling  the  flesh  of  a 
hawk  with  spirits  in  a  skull,  with  invocations  to  An  taka;  charms  against 
snake-bite,  and  so  forth.  Ward,  like  many  another  who  followed  him 
(and  I  deal  with  his  case  as  in  many  respects  typical  of  the  others),  seems 
to  have  thought  that  the  chief  and  practically  the  sole  subjects  of  the 
Tantra  were  sensual  rites  and  black  magic.  It  does  not  seem  to  have 
occurred  to  either  him  or  them  that,  apart  from  its  manifold  secular 
contents,  the  Sastra  is  the  repository  of  a  high  philosophic  doctrine,  and 
of  the  means  whereby  its  truth  may  through  bodily  psychic  and  spiritual 
development  be  realized.  It  is  doubtless  less  easy  to  understand  and 
describe  these  matters.  The  Scripture,  however,  is  misjudged  if  we  look 

1  Ward,  vol.  ii,  p.  Ixxiv.  The  author  of  a  quite  recent  work  inspired  by 
the  same  motive  thinks  to  cure  the  European  mind,  “  corrupted  by  theo- 
sophical  moonings  and  mystical  sentimentalism,”  by  violent  and  ignorant 
invective.  “  Hinduism,”  he  writes,  “  is  the  most  material  and  childishly 
superstitious  animalism  that  has  ever  masqueraded  as  idealism.”  It  has  no 
morality,  and  the  absurd  object  of  its  worship  is  “  a  mixture  of  Bacchus,  Don 
Juan,  and  Dick  Turpin.”  It  is  not  a  religion  at  all,  but  “  is  a  pit  of  abomina¬ 
tion,  as  far  set  from  God  as  the  mind  of  man  can  go  and  so  forth.  “  The 
Light  of  India,”  by  Harold  Begbie. 

*  Ward,  see  vol.  ii,  pp.  boevii,  xlix,  xiii,  xlii,  xxii;  vol.  i,  p.  499. 


PREFACE 


5 


merely  to  practices  to  be  found  therein  similar  to  those  contained  in 
Western  Grimoires,  such  as  “  Le  Petit  Albert,"  and  other  even  less  reput¬ 
able  works.  A  cursory  glance,  it  is  true,  is  thrown  on  higher  matters,  but 
with  the  same  result.  The  lofty  doctrines  of  Yoga,  which  the  author  of  a 
quite  recent  work 1  finds  to  be,  “  with  its  repulsive  developments  ”  “  much 
the  same  as  Shamanism,"  was  long  ago  declared  by  his  predecessor  to  be 
“  absurd,  impious,  and  ridiculous  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  to  find 
that  the  more  disputable  theories  and  ill-famed  practices  of  some  of  the 
Tantras  are  not  accurately  described,  and  are  indeed  misunderstood. 
Whatever  we  may  think  of  such  doctrines,  they  arc  not  truly  represented 
by  the  statement  that  a  certain  division  of  worshippers  seek  to  “  blunt  the 
edge  of  the  passions  with  excessive  indulgence.”  * 

The  later  experience  of  Brian  Hodgson,  whose  valued  work  in  Nepal 
should  be  better  known,  led  him  to  describe  the  Tantra  as  “  lust,  mum¬ 
mery,  and  black  magic." 

The  work  of  H.  H.  Wilson,  though  Btated  to  be  based  in  part  on  the 
texts,  is  admitted  by  its  author  to  be  necessarily  superficial,  depending  on 
a  cursory  inspection  of  some  of  the  documents.*  The  account  of  the 
Tantras  occupies  but  a  small  part  of  a  description  which  purports  to  deal 
with  all  the  Hindu  sects.  Of  these  Scriptures  in  particular  he  wrote  what 
is  as  true  now  as  then,  “  that  they  had  been  little  examined  by  European 
scholars.”  He  added,  however,  that  such  attention  as  had  been  paid  to 
them  was  enough  in  his  opinion  to  warrant  the  accusation  that  “  they  arc 
authorities  for  all  that  is  most  abominable  in  the  present  state  of  the 
Hindu  religion.” 5  His  work  is  also  written  from  the  standpoint  of  one 
to  whom  all  other  systems  arc  “shown  to  be  fallacious  and  false  by 
the  Itburiel  spear  of  Christian  truth,"  a  standpoint  which  did  not  permit 
a  countenance  of  cither  “  devotees  of  superstition  ”  on  the  one  hand,  or 
the  men  of  learning  on  the  other,  “  whose  toleration,”  he  complained, 
“is  so  comprehensive  that  it  amounts  to  indifference  to  truth.”  The 
Tantrik  ritual  in  particular  is  described  to  be  “  nonsensical  extravagance,” 
at  which,  he  says,  he  is  disposed  to  laugh.  Ny&sas 4  are  “  absurd  gesti¬ 
culations,”  and  so  forth.  H.  H.  Wilson  was  doubtless  a  distinguished 
Orientalist,  and  his  work  is  in  many  respects  of  acknowledged  value;  but 
there  are  matters  in  his  book  which,  from  want  of  sympathy  and  knowledge, 
he  wholly  foiled  to  understand,  not  only  as  regards  general  Hindu 
doctrines,  but  the  specific  teaching  and  ritual  which  is  to  be  found  in 
the  Tantra.  Nyasa,  for  instance,  is  alleged  to  be  absurd,  but  it  does  not 


*  “  Antiquities  of  India,”  by  Dr.  L.  Barnett,  p.  17. 

*  Wilson,  vol.  i,  p.  8.  '  Wilson,  vol.  ii,  p.  77. 

'  See  as  to  this  form  of  ritual,  htrodaction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 


4 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


appear  that  he  or  those  who  followed  him  really  knew  what  it  was,  any 
more  than  he  understood  the  nature  of  BIja.  We  learn  nothing  from  his 
definition  “  monosyllabic  ejaculations  of  imagined  mysterious  import  ” 
beyond  this — that  he  had  nothing  else  to  say.  His  observation  that  the 
Abbe  Dubois  committed  some  egregious  blunders  may  be  applied  to  many 
others  who  have  dealt  with  Hinduism,  including  himself.1  Indeed  if  we 
are  duly  modest,  we  will  all  of  us  be  ready  to  admit  the  possibility  of  going 
astray  in  what  is  to  us  both  a  difficult  and  alien  subject.  Thus  he  appears 
to  think  that  the  oft-quoted  verse  commencing  with  the  words,  “  Pitva, 
pitva,  punah  pitva,” 1  is  a  Tantxik  counsel  of  drunkenness  as  a  means 
to  secure  what  we  call  salvation.  Apart  from  any  special  knowledge  on 
the  point,  it  might  Rave  been  reasonably  supposed  that  such  an  interpre¬ 
tation  was  absurd.  And  if  it  be  hardly  credible  that  a  celebrated  Sans- 
kritist  and  intelligent  man  thought  otherwise,  this  only  shows  that  more 
is  required  for  the  understanding  of  a  Hindu  Sastra  than  linguistic  talent, 
however  great.  The  verse  is  as  litde  understood  as  some  others  (such  as 
Matriyonium  paritajya  viharet  sarvvayonisku  ”)  which,  in  the  language  of  a 
recent  work,*  are  supposed  to  inculcate  “the  sacred  duty  to  practise 
incest.” 

Since  Wilson’s  time  all  who  have  dealt  with  the  Tantras  appear  to 
have  adopted  second-hand  the  accounts  given  by  him  and  Ward,  but 
never,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  with  the  qualifications  which  Wilson  thought 
in  fairness  should  be  added  to  his  adverse  judgment.  Thus,  to  take  but 
one  instance,  we  find  all  authors  up  to  the  present  time  reproducing 
Wilson’s  erroneous  statement  that  the  MudrS  of  the  Panchatattva  are 
“  mystical  gesticulations,”  when  in  fact  the  term  means  parched  cereal 
food  of  various  kinds.  The  matter  may  appear  to  some  a  small  on$,  even 
though  accuracy  is  always  important.  But  it  is  not  the  only  instance  of  a 
repeated  error;  and  how  was  it  possible  for  those  who  have  discoursed 
upon  the  Panchatattva  of  the  VirachAra  ritual  to  have  read  the  texts 
dealing  with  it,  and  not  to  have  learnt  what  this  particular  Tattva  means? 


*  Wilson,  vol.  ii,  pp.  8,  115,  82,  39,  219,  78;  Wilson,  vol.  i,  p.  208. 

1  “  Having  drunk,  drunk,  and  again  drunk,  and  having  fallen,  let  him 
rise  again  and  attain  liberation  ”  (vol.  i,  p.  260).  We  find  apparendy  the  same* 
error  in  Ward,  vol.  Ii,  p.  xl.  The  explanation  is  too  long  to  be  given  here. 
I  deal  with  it  elsewhere.  It,  however,  refers  to  the  ascent  and  descent  in  the 
body  of  Kundalinl  Sakti  from  its  basic  to  its  cerebral  centre. 

1  “  Antiquities  of  India,”  by  Dr.  L.  Barnett.  The  verse  does  not  mean 
that  incest  may  be  committed  with  any  woman  save  a  mother,  but  that  in 
doing  recitation  (japa)  of  the  Sakti  Mantra  count  is  to  be  made  on  all  the 
joints  (yoni)  of  the  fingers,  except  on  the  two  upper  joints  of  the  first  (index) 
finger,  technically  in  such  case  called  the  Matriyoni.  In  the  case  ofjapaof 
the  Mantra  of  a  male  Devata,  the  two  lower  joints  of  the  middle  finger  are 
called  Matriyoni. 


PREFACE 


5 


In  the  work  last  cited,  and  in  a  review  of  my  Edition  of  the 
Mah&nirvana,  the  opinion  is  expressed  that  there  is  in  the  body  of 
Scripture  called  Tantra  a  nucleus  only  of  Tantrik  teaching  property 
so  called,  which  nucleus  is  defined  as  “  black  art  of  the  crudest  and 
filthiest  kind,  with  a  rough  background  of  the  Siva  Sakti  cult.” 
Round  this  nucleus,  it  is  suggested,  gathered  a  varying  mass  of 
Vaidik  and  “  Brahmanic  ”  ritual,  together  with  a  certain  “quantum 
•of  Upanishadic  idealism.”  “  The  Tantra  ”  is  itself  said  to  be  of  two 
kinds.  One  of  such  classes  is  alleged  to  represent  the  “unvarnished" 
Tantrik  teaching  above  stated.  Of  Scriptures  representing  this  class  it  is 
said  that  they  arc  not  merely  “  full  of  silly  and  vulgar  superstition  and 
magic,”  but  have  the  additional  “  spice  of  wickedness  and  obscenity.”  It 
is  of  them  that  the  author  cited  says:  “The  highly  coloured  Yogic 
imagination  pales  beside  the  doctrines  of  the  infamous  Tantras  in  which  a 
veritable  Devil’s  mass  is  purveyed  in  various  forms  to  a  swarm  of  sects, 
mostly  of  the  Sivaitc  persuasion.”  The  alleged  second  class  of  Tantras 
are  apparently  those  in  which  the  original  wickedness  and  obscenity  has' 
been  removed  or  rendered  innocuous,  or  at  least  comparatively  so,  with 
the  result  that,  according  to  the  author  cited,  the  most  that  can  be  said  of 
them  is  that  they  are  “  full  of  silly  and  vulgar  superstition  and  magic.” 

I  cannot  within  the  limits  of  this  Preface  discuss  these  strongly  worded 
appreciations.  I  would,  however,  like  to  add  this  much  to  what  is  stated 
in  the  Introduction  which  follows:  Allegations  as  regards  “the  Tantra ” — 
that  is,  as  regards  the  whole  body  of  existent  Scripture  which  passes  under 
that  name — must  be  received  with  caution.  There  is  no  European  scholar 
who  has  read  “  the  Tantra  ”  in  this  sense  even  approximately.  The 
reasons  for  this  arc  obvious.  In  the  first  place,  a  great  deal  of  the  S&stra 
has  disappeared.  Of  the  Tantras  which  survive,  and  which  arc  still 
numerous,  some  are  extremely  rare  and  others  are  fragmentary.  I  have 
myself  been  endeavouring  for  some  years  past  to  secure  MSS.  of  several 
Tantras,  but  without  success.  A  few  only  have  been  printed  and  imper¬ 
fectly  edited,  and  even  these  are  but  little,  if  at  all,  known  in  Europe. 
The  frequently  erroneous  character  of  current  criticism  of  the  Tantra  leads 
me  to  suppose  that  its  authors  are,  generally  speaking,  second-hand  by 
report,  and  without  a  knowledge  of  the  actual  texts.  If  this  be  in 
some  cases  not  so,  then  it  would  seem  that  only  portions  of  some  Tantras 
have  been  read,  and  not  infrequently  ill-understood.  The  Tantra,  in  fact, 
contains  many  a  technical  term  and  secret  doctrine  which  are  not  to  be 
understood  by  the  sole  aid  of  a  Sanskrit  dictionary  and  grammar.  When 
it  is  better  known,  some  of  the  charges  which  have  been  made  against  it 
will  have  to  be  withdrawn.  It  has  hitherto  commonly  been  supposed  that 
this  Scripture  is  the  expression  in  all  its  parts  of  all  wickedness.  The 
distinction  above  made,  whether  correct  in  itself  or  not,  at  least  marks 


6 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


an  advance 1  towards  a  more  correct  appreciation  of  the  Sastra,  even 
though  it  renders  the  same  kind  of  justice  as  that  which  is  done  when  a 
not  unintelligent  man  whom  we  have  hitherto  called  a  knave  is  charged 
with  being  merely  a  vulgar  fool.  It  must,  however,  be  now  obvious  that 
conclusions  based  on  such  fragmentary  material,  and  without  knowledge 
of  the  occult  teachings,  is  without  authoritative  value.  In  the  present 
state  of  our  knowledge,  generalizations  concerning  the  Tantra  arc  likely  in 
important  matters  to  be  hazardous.  They  seem  to  me  to  be  particularly 
valueless  when  they  take  the  form  of  mere  abuse. 

There  is  another  important  matter  which  is  to  be  borne  in  mind, 
and  which  one  of  my  Indian  critics  thinks  that  I  have  myself  over¬ 
looked  in  my  Edition  of  the  Mahanirvana.  He  says  that  the  account 
I  have  there  given  of  Tantrik  leaching  is  vitiated  by  the  erroneous 
supposition  that  all  the  Tantrik  works  arc  complementary  to  each  other, 
and  that  I  have  ignored  the  distinctions  which  exist  between  vary¬ 
ing  schools  and  traditions.  I  was  not  unaware  of  the  alleged 
'distinctions  to  which  my  critic  refers,  though  their  existence  and  nature 
have  yet  to  be  established.  I,  however,  then  expressly  staled  that  I  did 
not  deal  with  these  subjects,  reserving  as  I  did  such  observations  as  I  had 
at  present  to  make  for  this  work.  A  number  of  questions  present  them¬ 
selves  for  solution  upon  this  difficult  matter.  What,  for  instance,  are  the 
specific  characteristics  of  the  various  classes  of  Agamas  known  as  Damara, 
Yaznala,  Uddlsa,  and  Tantra,  whether  of  the  so-called  Saiva  (such  as 
the  Kamika,  Dipta,  Vijaya,  etc.);  Vaisnava  (such  as  the  Gandharva, 
Gautama,  Radha,  Brihadrudrayamala  and  others);  or  the  £akta,  Kaula, 
or  Devi  type  of  Tantra?  A  similar  question  may  be  raised  as  to  the 
sixty-four  Tantras  of  the  Three  Krantas  respectively.  Again,  wkat  are 
the  Tantras  in  force  in  the  present  Svetavaraha  Kalpa  ?  Again,  what  is 
the  relation  between  all  these  Sastras  as  representing  the  specifically 
“Indian”  Tantra  and  the  “Buddhist”  Tantra?  Finally,  what,  if  any, 
are  the  developments  which  have  taken  place  as  regards  these  Sastrik 
teachings?  For  Indian  thought  moves,  even  though  some  who  write  of 
it  from  books  only  think  of  it  as  something  merely  past.  As  H.  H.  Wilson 
says  of  the  Hindu  religion  generally:  “  Its  internal  constitution  has  not 
been  exempt  from  those  varieties  to  which  all  human  systems  of  belief  are 
subject,  and  it  has  undergone  great  and  frequent  modifications,  until  it 
presents  an  appearance  which  there  is  great  reason  to  suppose  is  very 
different  from  that  which  it  originally  wore.”  Lastly,  what  (and  this. 

1  Not  that  it  is  the  first.  In  more  moderate  language  Sir  Monier 
Williams  had  already  suggested  a  distinction  between  die  orginal  Tantrik 
teaching  and  its  subsequent  developments  and  between  the  Tantras  them¬ 
selves;  adding,  however,  that  little  was  known  on  the  subject.  ("  Indian 
Wisdom,”  p.  524). 


PREFACE 


7 


is  my  immediate  subject)  is  the  Tantrik  doctrine  and  practice  as  it  is  at 
present  understood  and  followed  ?  When  these  and  a  number  of  other 
questions  of  great  difficulty  are  solved,  we  may  permit  ourselves  a  greater 
dogmatism  than  our  present  state  of  knowledge  allows.  I  am  more 
immediately  concerned  with  another  matter — namely,  the  present  beliefs 
of  the  Indian  peoples.  In  connection,  however,  with  this  purpose,  I  may 
here  say  this:  if  it  is  assumed  that  there  arc  different  schools,  then 
Tantras  of  the  same  school  may  obviously  be  taken  as  complementary  to 
one  another.  In  respect  of  other  Tantras,  even  if  they  do,  as  alleged, 
represent  varying  traditions,  it  will,  I  think,  be  found  that  there  arc  in 
any  case  many  common  elements  accompanying  their  own  alleged 
distinctive  differences  which  render  them  complementary  to  other  Tantras 
to  that  extent.  Take,  for  instance,  the  specific  Tantrik  Yoga,  known  as 
Satcakrabheda,  which  involves  concentration  on  the  lower  centres. 
This  is  dealt  with  in  Tantras  which  are  alleged  to  be  the  expression  of 
differing  doctrine  and  practice  in  other  respects.  Similar  observations 
may  be  made  as  regards  the  general  worship  (Upasana),  and  so  forth. 

As  the  foregoing  observations  may  possibly  be  misunderstood  by 
some  to  mean  that  I  think  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  Tantra  which  is 
likely  to  provoke  dissent,  and  that  nothing  has  been  done  in  the  name,  or 
by  followers,  of  the  Sastra,  which  is  in  fact  evil,  it  is  necessary  for  me  to 
say  that  that  is  not  my  opinion,  though  I  think  that  the  Sistra  as  a 
whole  has  not  hitherto  been  understood — a  fate  which  it  has  shared  with 
many  another  Hindu  doctrine  and  practice. 

Looking  at  the  matter  from  a  purely  objective  standpoint,  every 
Orientalist  must  admit  that  an  accurate  knowledge  of  this  S&stra  is 
of  fifst-ratc  importance.  But  apart  from  this  historical  view,  there 
arc  in  the  Tantra  principles  and  practices  which  arc  of  value  in 
themselves.  There  is,  for  instance,  a  deep  philosophic  doctrine  and 
a  wonderful  ritual  which  artistically  shares  with  the  Buddhist  Tantras, 
though  in  a  different  way,  the  vehement  splendour  which  has  aptly 
been  ascribed  to  the  latter;  a  ritual  which  is  at  the  same  time,  when 
rightly  understood,  singularly  rational  and  psychologically  profound. 
One  of  my  English  critics  aptly  appreciated  this  character  of  the 
Tantrik  ritual  when  he  said  that  “from  one  point  of  view  it  is  perhaps 
the  most  elaborate  system  of  auto-suggestion  in  the  world;”'  a  remark 
which,  as  well  as  the  theory  of  auto-suggestion  itself,  will  have  a  deeper 
content  for  those  who  are  conversant  with  the  Indian  doctrine  of  the 
Atman  and  states  of  consciousness  than  for  the  ordinary  English  reader. 
It  is  necessary,  however,  that  the  ritual  should  be  understood,  otherwise 
it  will  not  unlikely  appear  to  be  the  “  nonsensical  extravagance  ”  which 


1  The  Qjust,  October,  1913. 


8 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


H.  H.  Wilson  called  it.  Disdain  for  “  meaningless  mystical  syllables,” 
“  absurd  gesticulations,”  and  so  forth,  is  often,  after  all,  nothing  but  the 
rather  foolish  expression  of  annoyance  which  is  felt  at  the  presence  of 
something  not  understood.  These  things,  however,  are  not  so  senseless 
as  some  suppose. 

In  the  next  place  we  have  in  the  Tantra  the  recognition  of  the  fine 
principle  that  this  doctrine  and  its  expression  in  ritual  are  (subject  to  their 
varying  competencies)  for  all,  whatever  be  their  race,  caste,  or  sex.  This 
marks  a  great  advance  on  the  parochial  restrictions  of  the  Vedas,  which 
are  so  often  placed  in  favourable  opposition  to  the  Tantra  by  English 
writers.  The  &udra  and  woman  are  under  none  of  the  Vaidik  bans. 
What,  again,  can  be  finer  than  the  high  veneration  of  woman  which  the 
Tantra  inculcates.  The  Sufi  author  of  the  Dabistan,1  describing,  in  the 
seventeenth  century,  the  Saktas,  speaks  of  the  Mother  of  the  World  in  the 
following  charmful  passage : J  “  This  Maya  is  the  maker  of  the  productions 
of  this  world  and  of  its  inhabitants,  and  the  Creator  of  the  spirits  and  of 
the  bodies:  the  universe  and  its  contents  arc  bom  from  Her:  from  respect 
of  the  said  production  and  of  the  mentioned  effects  She  is  entitled  Jaga- 
datnba,  or  Mother  of  the  Universe.  Nonentity  finds  no  access  to  this 
Creator.  The  garment  of  perishablenras  does  not  sit  right  upon  the  body 
of  this  fascinating  Empress.  The  dust  of  nothingness  docs  not  move 
round  the  circle  of  Her  dominion.  The  real  beings  of  heaven  and  the 
accidental  creatures  of  the  nether  world  arc  equally  enamoured  and 
intoxicated  of  desire  before  Her.  Bound  by  these  tics  of  deceit  in  this 
revolving  world,  whoever  rebels  feels  the  desire  of  Mukti — that  is,  of 
emancipation,  independence,  and  happiness;  nevertheless,  from  careless¬ 
ness,  he  pays  obedience  and  worship  to  this  world-deceiving  Queen, 
and  never  abandons  the  path  of  adoration  of  this  bewitching  Lady 
who,  as  the  spiritual  principle,  exists  in  all  living  beings  in  the  Six 
Circles.”  As  women  are  the  earthly  incarnations  of  this  great  Queen 
he  goes  on  then  to  say:  “The  Agama  (Tantra)  favours  both  sexes 
equally,  and  makes  no  distinction  between  women,  for  men  and  women 
compose  equally  humankind.  This  sect  holds  women  in  great  esteem  and 
calls  them  Saktis  (powers),  and  to  ill-treat  a  Sakti — that  is,  a  woman — is 
held  to  be  a  crime.”  As  H.  H.  Wilson  also  himself  points  out,J  women,  as 
manifestations  of  the  Great  Cause  of  all,  are  entitled  to  respect  and  even  to 
veneration.  Whoever  offends  them  incurs  the  wrath  of  Prakrti,  the  Mother 
of  all,  whilst  he  who  propitiates  them  offers  worship  to  Prakrti  Herself.4 

1  Ed.  Shea  and  Troyer  (1843). 

*  Ed.  Shea  and  Troyer  (1843)  vol.  ii,  p.  149.  *  “  Essays,”  vol.  i,  p.  246. 

*  Even  if  it  be  held,  as  Wilson  does,  that  this  doctrine  has  led  with  one 
branch  of  the  sect  at  least  to  abuse,  the  existence  of  such  abuse  cannot  affect 
the  doctrine  itself  as  above  described. 


PREFACE 


9 


And  so,  at  a  time  when,  as  some  allege,  in  accordance  with  the  Vedas,1 
the  rite  of  Sati  was  being  practised,  and  many  a  woman  was  being  horribly 
oppressed,  it  was  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra*  which  forbade  it  on  the 
grounds  above  stated.  In  conformity,  also,  with  these  views  we  find  that, 
according  to  the  Tantra,  alone  of  the  great  Sastras,  a  woman  may  be  a 
spiritual  teacher  (Guru),  and  initiation  by  her  achieves  increased  benefit. 
Thus  initiation  by  a  mother  of  her  son  is  eightfold  more  fruitful  than  any 
other.  This,  some  may  think,  is  not  without  example  to  us  in  the  West, 
where,  notwithstanding  the  increasing  recognition  of  the  place  of  woman, 
her  right  of  spiritual  teaching  is  still  denied.  There  are  other  matters  in 
the  Tantra  to  which  in  this  connection  I  might  refer,  such  as  true  principles 
of  Sadhana  on  the  path  of  desire,  were  it  not  impolsible  to  discuss  such  a 
subject  shortly  except  at  peril  of  misunderstanding. 

Whatever  we  may  think  upon  these  matters,  it  will  occur  to  everyone 
of  experience  and  free  from  prejudice  that  there  must  be  more  in  a  §astra 
which  has  obtained  so  great  a  credence  and  wide-spreading  authority  than 
the  moral  abuses  and  silly  superstitions  alone  with  which  it  is  charged. 
From  the  purely  objective  and  detached  standpoint  of  the  historical 
student,  the  whole  of  the  Sastra  is  of  value  and  interest.  Historical 
research  in  itself  is  not  concerned  with  moral  values.  Its  subject  is  what¬ 
ever  man  has  taught,  or  said,  or  done.  When  we  consider,  however,  these 
values,  the  case  is,  of  course,  different.  From  the  latter  point  of  view,  the 
Tantra  is  an  encyclopedic  amalgam  of  elements  of  varying  character  and 
worth,  extending  from  the  doctrines  of  a  lofty  speculation  to  practices 
which  to  the  higher  occultism  arc  suspect,’  and  to  prescriptions  which  may 
be  used  for  the  purposes  of  cvil-intentioned  magic.  Here,  therefore,  wc 
must  distinguish.  In  short,  we  must  first  inquire  and  learn  what,  in 
fact,  the  Sastra  is,  and  then  understand  and  discriminate. 

Up  to  the  present,  however,  want  of  knowledge  is  responsible  for  an 
indiscriminating  condemnation  of  the  whole  of  an  extensive  literature,  the 
cultural  expression  of  the  varied  activities  of  a  secular  epoch.  It  is  suffi¬ 
cient  at  present  for  practical  purposes  to  say  that  {apart  from  magic)  the 
ritual  in  the  Sastra  to  which  objection  has  been  taken  forms  but  one 
portion  of  the  Scripture  properly  applicable  to  a  select  class  of  adepts,  and 
that  the  remainder  of  its  provisions  deal  with  matters  which  are  free  from 
exception  on  the  grounds  on  which  the  Tantra  has  been  adversely  criticized. 

1  The  existence  of  Vaidik  authority  is  disputed. 

I  See  Introduction,  post. 

I I  have  here  in  mind  what  is  technically  called  Nil  Sadhana.  and  express 
myself  as  I  do  remembering  that  some  great  Sadhakas  have  practised  it.  It  is 
noteworthy  that  both  it  and  Mahachinachira  (a  term  in  itself  full  of  signifi¬ 
cance)  are  the  two  chief  dements  in  the  Indian  Tantra  which  are  alleged  to  be 
non-Aryan  importations. 


10 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


It  is  unnecessary  here  to  further  develop  a  proposition  of  which  the  book 
now  translated  is  itself  the  proof. 

I  had  at  first  intended  merely  to  draw  upon  the  author’s  work  and 
other  sources  for  the  purpose  of  a  presentation  in  Western  form  of  some  of 
the  fundamental  principles  of  a  Sastra  which  has  been  hitherto  so  little 
understood.  The  execution  of  this  intention  I  defer  to  some  future  time, 
when  I  hope  to  deal  in  my  own  way  with  the  metaphysical  and  psycholo¬ 
gical  bases  of  Hindu  worship,  a  subject,  on  its  practical  side,  hitherto 
untouched.  For  the  present,  however,  I  present  the  subject  in  the  words 
of  an  orthodox  Hindu,  who  is  an  adherent  of  the  Tantra  Sastra,  and 
whose  work  (Tantratattva)  is  here  translated.1  For  those  who  might  be 
disposed  to  accept  t£c  correctness  of  the  views  expressed  by  the  Authors 
above  cited  would  not  unlikely  entertain  a  suspicion  of  the  genuineness 
of  the  Tantrik  character  of  a  work  .of  the  present  description,  if  upon  a 
reading  they  should  find  it  to  be  neither  silly,  nor  vulgarly  superstitious, 
magical,  wicked,  or  obscene.  The  exposition,  therefore,  here  given  is  not 
mine,  but  the  Pandit’s. 

His  work  is,  however,  in  no  sense  complete,  but  deals  in  a  popular 
style  with  some  portions  only  of  the  subject-matter.  After  I  had  written 
the  Introduction  which  follows,  I  received  a  letter  from  him  in  which  he 
explains  that  his  book  was  published  over  twenty  years  ago,  with  a  view 
to  combating  both  the  errors  of  what  is  called  “  Reformed*’  or  “  Pro¬ 
testant  ”  Hinduism,  and  the  mistakes  of  some  incompetent  defenders  of 
orthodoxy;  and  that  therefore  both  the  matter  and  form  of  his  work  were 
determined  by  the  arguments  of  those  whom  he  controverted.  As  a  result, 
his  reply,  which  is  presented  in  a  somewhat  discursive  manner,  does  not 
treat  of  some  subjects  with  which  he  desired  to  deal.  He  writes,  therefore, 
to  me  to  say  that  he  has  in  preparation  a  third  part,  in  which  he  proposes 
to  give  an  exposition  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Tantra.  The  two  Parts,  now 
published,  treat  of  (to  use  our  parlance)  the  religious  side  of  certain  portions 
of  the  subject,  though  in  India  philosophy  and  religion  arc  mingled  in  a 
way  which  the  West  has  not  known  since  the  age  when  philosophy  was 
held  to  be  Ancilla  Theologix.  This  third  Part,  when  ready,  I  hope  to 
publish  in  continuation  of  the  volume  now  issued. 

Further,  there  arc  certain  matters  of  doctrine  and  practice  which  are, 
as  the  Author  states,  for  the  initiate  alone,  and  of  which,  therefore,  he 
treats  either  cursorily  or  not  at  all.  What,  however,  he  does  say  will 
effect  more  than  a  mere  acquittal  of  his  system  of  the  wholesale  charges 
of  absurdity  and  vice  so  commonly  made  against  it.  Referring  to  what 
is  blameworthy,  the  Pandit  himself  says;  “We  know  that  there  are 
reasons  for  saying  some  hard  things  ”  ;  though  he  adds :  “  But  how  are 


1  The  work  and  its  author  are  referred  to  in  the  Introduction  which  follows. 


PREFACE 


II 


Kali  or  Siva  or  Tantra  to  blame?”  As  regards  the  likelihood  of  abuse 
in  any  system,  there  is  more  to  be  said  for  the  Hindu  view  of  the  naturally 
crooked  influence  of  time  than  for  the  notion  of  “  progress  ”  from  moment 
to  moment  which  some  of  us  in  the  West  would  seem  to  entertain.  But 
for  all  that,  it  would  indeed  be  a  phenomenon  of  strange  degeneracy  if 
India,  which  has  thought  the  deepest  thoughts  of  the  world,  and  which 
has  been  marked  by  the  intensity  of  its  religious  feelings,  should,  even  in 
its  most  unfortunate  days,  have  produced  a  system  of  extensive  influence 
and  authority  which  is  intellectually  nothing  but  “  brainless  hocus-pocus,” 
and  morally  a  mere  facile  reversal  of  the  high  notions  of  Dharma,1  which 
have  distinguished  its  peoples  beyond  all  the  races.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
and  to  my  knowledge,  even  at  the  present  day  some  of  the  most  learned 
Pandits  and  the  greatest  Sadhakas  esteem  and  follow  this  Scripture,  which 
they  regard  as  the  treasure  of  their  heart.  How  comes  this  to  be  if  it  is 
merely,  as  alleged,  the  debased  product  of  the  Hindu  spirit  “  at  its  lowest 
and  very  worst  ”  ?  Whether  particular  portions  of  its  teachings  or  practice 
should  be  generally  approved  is  another  matter.  The  difficulties,  however, 
which  atLcnd  an  exposition  of  even  such  parts  of  the  Sastra  as  seem  to 
be  at  first  view  readily  exposed  to  attack  arc  such  that  those  who 
have  any  real  knowledge  concerning  them  will  be  the  first  to  abstain 
from  hasty  generalizations,  particularly  when  they  take  the  form  of 
mere  abuse. 

As  regards  such  portions  of  doctrine  as  arc  here  exposed,  the  Author 
in  the  course  of  the  defence  of  his  own  beliefs  has  in  many  an  instance 
severely  castigated  his  opponents  for  their  inaccurate  statements  and 
loose  thinking.  For  reasons,  however,  which  I  give  in  the  Introduction 
which  follows,  views  more  favourable  to  the  Author’s  position  now  more 
generally  prevail  in  India  than  was  the  case  when  his  work  was  first 
written.  Many  wen  of  those  who  nowadays  are  not  prepared  to  accept 
orthodox  doctrine  in  its  entirely  arc  yet  disposed  to  think  that  the  beliefs 
of  their  fathers  were  not,  afler  all,  quite  so  foolish  as  under  the  first 
influences  of  the  English  “  Illumination  ”  they  considered  them  to  be.  But 
this  change  of  view  is  not  peculiar  to  India  only.  We  ourselves  have  also 
recently  experienced  something  of  the  same  kind.  An  intelligent  under¬ 
standing  of  Christian  ideas  and  Catholic  ritual  has  dispelled  many  a 
shallow  criticism  to  which  they  have  been  subjected  by  a  narrow  sectari¬ 
anism  on  the  one  hand,  and  an  equally  narrow  “  rationalism  ”  on  the 
other.  By  this,  however,  it  is  not  meant  that  no  adverse  criticisms  in 
either  of  these  matters  have  had  force,  or  that  in  some  Indian  quarters  the 
S&stra  is  not  still  regarded  as  (to  use  the  words  of  an  Indian  writer) 

“  mines  of  superstition 


1  Religion,  duty,  etc.  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sostra. 


12 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Though  the  Pandit’s  work  is  issued  in  two  parts,1  I  have,  for  the 
benefit  of  the  readers  of  the  first  volume,  given  the  table  of  contents  of  the 
second  part  now  in  the  press,  which  will  be  ready  for  publication  this  year. 
This  will  he  preceded  by  an  Introductory  essay  from  the  pen  of  Sj.  Barada 
Kanta  Majumdar. 

Later  I  hope  to  make  up  for  the  deficiencies  in  the  present  work  by 
others  dealing  with  the  ritual  in  greater  detail.  Thus  the  Pandit  in  the 
second  part  refers  to,  but  does  not  treat  of,  the  Tantrik  yoga  process, 
known  as  Satcakrabheda.  This  I  have  dealt  with  in  the  work  now  in 
the  press,2  entitled  “  The  Six  Centres  and  the  Serpent  Force,”  being  a 
translation  from  the  Sanskrit,  with  Introduction,  commentary,  and  plates 
of  the  Satcakranirup'ana  of  Pumananda  Svami,  the  Sanskrit  treatise 
itself  forming  part  of  the  extensive  Sritattvaeintamani,  which  is  also 
being  prepared  for  publication  in  the  scries  of  “  Tantrik  Texts.” 

The  references  to  the  “  Introduction  ”  arc  to  the  Introduction  of  my 
Edition  of  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra.*  References  to  “  Introduction,  ante” 
are  to  the  Introduction  which  follows  this  Preface. 

Arthur  Avalon 

Benarks 

December  28,  1913 


1  Publishers’  Note:  Combined  in  one  volume  in  the  present  edition. 
•Publishers’  Note:  Since  published  under  the  tide  “SeTpent  Power” 
Sixth  Edition,  1958. 

•  Publishers’  Note:  Now  published  as  a  separate  volume  entided  ”  Introduc¬ 
tion  to  Tantra  Saatra.” 


INTRODUCTION 


This  work,  by  an  Indian  Pandit,  is  a  presentment,  the  first  of  its  kind, 
of  the  principles  of  that  development  of  the  Vaidika  Karmakapda  which, 
under  the  name  of  the  Tantra  Sastra,  is  the  scripture  (Sastra)  of  the 
Kali  age.  This  Sastra,  together  with  its  accompanying  oral  tradition,  is 
the  voluminous  source  of  the  greater  part  of  the  Hindu  ritual,  Hathayoga, 
and  the  various  forms  of  spiritual  training  which«pass  under  the  generic 
term  “  Sadhana.”  In  fact,  both  popular  and  esoteric  Hinduism  is,  in  its 
practical  aspects,  largely  Tdntrik. 

Recently  an  increased  interest  has  been  shown  in  the  Hindu  bcliefi. 
Hitherto,  however,  attention  has  been  chiefly  directed  to  those  great 
Vedantik  principles,  which,  subsumed,  to  a  greater  or  less  degree,  in  the 
beliefs  and  practices  of  all  the  Hindu  sects  arc  yet,  in  their  conscious 
realization,  the  very  end  only  of  the  highest  spiritual  effort.  Litde  has 
been  done  to  present  the  practical  application  of  those  principles  in  the 
particular  form  which  they  assume  in  the  various  divisions,  methods,  and 
rituals  of  the  Indian  worshippers.  This  side  of  practice,  though  neglected, 
has  both  intrinsic  value  and  helps  to  a  clearer  and  deeper  understanding 
of  the  general  principles  than  can  be  gathered  from  any  bare  theoretical 
statement  of  them.  Ritual  and  spiritual  exercise  are  objectively  considered 
their  pictorial  statement,  as  they  are  subjectively  the  effective  means  of 
their  realization.  The  knowledge  of  hymn,  and  legend,  of  worship  and 
sadhafta,  will  alone  give  that  full  knowledge  of  the  Hindu  spirit  without 
which  its  religious  and  philosophical  conceptions  arc  likely  to  be  but 
poorly  understood.  The  present  development  of  upasana  (worship)  and 
sadhana  can  only  be  learnt  from  the  Tantra,  which  is  the  Mantra  and 
Sadhana  Sastra  and  its  accompanying  oral  traditions. 

“  Some  years  ago,”  Professor  Cowell  wrote,  “  the  Tantras  form  a 
branch  of  literature  highly  esteemed,  though  at  present  much  neglected 
yet,  as  Professor  Sir  Monicr  Williams 1  has  more  recently  pointed  out,  none 
of  the  numerous  Tantras  had,  when  he  wrote,*  been  printed  in  Europe 
or  investigated  or  translated  by  its  Orientalists. 

The  account,  which  the  work  last  cited  gives  of  them,  itself  affords,  by 
its  meagre  character  and  inaccuracies,  evidence  of  the  lack  of  information 

1  “  Indian  Wisdom,”  p.  522  et  siq. 

*  I  have  since  published  an  English  translation  of  the  current  Sanskrit  ver¬ 
sion  of  the  Mah&nirvana  Tantra  entitled  “  The  Great  liberation,”  and  have 
in  preparation  a  translation  of  the  Kulamava. 


14 


PRINCIPLES  OP  T ANTRA 


on  the  subject  of  which  its  author  speaks.  Thus  the  mudra  of  the 
Panchatattva  does  not,  as  there  Stated,  mean  “  mystical  gestures,”  but,  in 
the  case  of  the  r&jasika  and  lamasika  panchatattva,  parched  cereal  of  various 
kinds  as  defined  by  the  Yogini  Tantra.1  In  the  sattvika  sadhana  it  has 
another  and  esoteric  meaning,1 *  equally  dissimilar  from  the  sense  of  the  term 
“  mudra  ”  as  that  word  is  employed  in  ordinary  upasana  and  hathayoga. 
“  Nigama  ”  is  not  the  name  of  a  “  sacred  book  appealed  to  by  Dakshina- 
charins  ”  as  opposed  to  “  Agama,”  but  is  that  form  of  Tantra  in  which  the 
Devi  is  guru  instead  of  risya,  as  opposed  to  “Agama,”  in  which  the  Devi 
is  risya  and  Siva  is  guru.’  It  follows,  therefore,  that  Agama  does  not  mean 
“a  sacred  book  appealed  to  by  Vamacharins  ”  as  opposed  to  Nigama  of 
the  followers  of  Dakshinachara.  Nor  is  the  term  Vamacharin  itself  a 
synonym  for  Kaula,  for  a  person  may  be  the  first  without  being  the  second.4 * 6 
The  Mahanirvana  Tantra  is  not  the  only  Tantra  “  attributed  to  Siva,” 
but  all  Sastra  so  called  has  Him  as  its  Revealer  and  Gane£a  as  its  scribe.4 
The  Saradatilaka  and  Mantramahodadhi  are  not  Tantras,  but  Tantrik 
compendia  and  commentaries.  The  Tantrik  rite  called  Bhutaiuddhi 
does  not  mean  “  removal  of  demons,”  *  but  the  purification  of  the  elements 
(earth,  air,  fire,  etc.,  and  the  tattvas  of  which  they  arc  derivatives)  in  the 
body  of  the  sadhaka,  and  90  forth. 

As  might  be  expected,  errors  abound  in  accounts  given  by  authors 
claiming  less  expert  competence,  whether  European  or  Indian.  Thus  an 


1  Chap,  vi: 

Bhrishtad&nyadikang  yad  yad  charvaniyang  prachakshate, 
Sa  mudra  kathita  devi  sarveshang  naganandmi. 


The  same  and  other  errors  occur  in  Encyc.  Brit.,  xiii,  pp.  511-512. 

*  See  Agamasara;  Kaivalya  Tantra,  and  the  Tantra  passim,  and  Introduction 
to  Tantra  Rostra. 

1  See  the  Agamadvaitanimaya,  cited  post.  On  the  contrary,  the  Nigamas 
are  said  to  be  Pumarahasya.  Agama  and  Nigama  are  also  applied  to  the  Veda, 
but  Agama  as  applied  to  the  Tantra  has  the  above  signification,  though,  as 
Professor  Whitney  says,  it  etymologically  means  “  that  which  has  come  down  ” 
(Century  Dictionary  and  Cyclopaedia,  vol.  ix,  p.  978). 

*  The  Kaula  is  a  member  of  the  highest  of  the  several  divisions  of  worship- 

a(AchSra),  of  which  Vamachara  is  one.  It  is  only  after  a  Sadhaka  has 
ed  all  preceding  Dharmas  that  he  is  qualified  for  Kauladharma, 

6  See  Gayatri  Tantra,  chap.  I.  Professor  Whitney  ( loc .  cil.)  says  that  their 
authorthip  is  sometimes  ascribed  to  Dattatreya.  Of  this  I  have  never  heard, 
and  if  such  ascription  is  made  it  is  incorrect.  There  is  a  work  dealing  with 
Indrajala  Vidya  called  the  Dattatreya  Tantra,  as  also  a  Yamala  of  the  same 
name,  and  Dattatreya  is  a  Rishi  said  to  be  particularly  revered  by  the  Nakuli- 
vadhuta  Sect.  The  Tantras  generally  were,  as  stated  in  the  text,  revealed  by 
Siva. 

*  See  same  author's  (Monier  Williams),  Sanskrit  Dictionary,  sub  not* 
"  bhuta,”  where  also  are  given  some  inaccurate  definitions  of  the  §atcakra. 


INTRODUCTION 


15 


Indian  writer '  explains  the  Mudra  of  the  Panchatattva  to  be  “  gold  or 
coins.”  It  is  true  that  “  coin  ”  is  one  of  the  meanings  of  the  term 
“  MudrS,"  but  even  in  the  absence  of  special  information  it  might  have 
reasonably  been  surmised  that  “  Tintriks  ”  do  not  worship  with  a  gold 
mohur  or  rupee.  Nor  is  the  Sakti,  which  is  by  these  and  other  rites 
worshipped,  material  force,  as  was  supposed  by  the  founder  of  the 
Bharatavarshlya  Brihmasamaj,  who  wrote  some  years  ago  of  the 
European  materialists  of  his  day  as  “  Saktas  offering  dry  homage  to 
force  victorious  over  the  European  Bhaktas,  worshippers  of  the  God  of 
Love.” 1  Nor  is  it  the  fact  “  that  Saktas  divide  themselves  into  the 
Dakshina  and  Varna  classes  according  to  whether  they  attach  the  greater 
importance  to  the  male  or  to  the  female  principle  Respectively  ”*  and  so 
forth.  Misconception  of  the  teaching  of  Tantra,  together  with  abuses 
committed  by  one  of  the  communities  of  Tantrik  worshippers,  led  a 
Bengali  apologist  of  the  Sastra,  when  writing  some  twenty  years  ago  on 
the  subject  of  Tantra,  to  say: 4  “  Unfortunately,  however,  their  intentions 
have  been  so  grossly  misrepresented  in  our  days  that  the  very  name  of 
Tantra  shocks  our  nerves;  yet  two-thirds  of  our  religious  rites  arc  Tantrik, 
and  almost  half  our  medicine  is  Tantrik.” 

The  causes  of  this  neglect  of  the  Sastra  in  the  country  of  its  origin 
and  in  the  West  are  several.  Their  consideration  will  also  explain  the 
standpoint  from  which  this  book  here  translated  is  written.  In  the  first 
place,  in  the  case  of  India,  must  be  reckoned  the  effects  of 
English  education.  This,  when  first  introduced,  not  merely  struck 
at  faith  in  all  Indian  Sastra,  but  was  in  a  particular  manner  adverse 
to  that  form  of  it  which  was  then  current,  and  with  which  we  here 
deal.  Tantrik  Hinduism  is  in  its  more  common  aspect,  essentially 
of  a  “sacramental  and  ritualistic  character.  Those  who  first  in¬ 
troduced  and  gave  English  education  were  for  the  most  part 
Protestants,  with  no  sympathy  with,  or  understanding  of,  a  mode  of 
religious  thought  and  practice  which  to  a  considerable  extent,  both  in 
its  inner  spirit  and  outward  forms,  bore  resemblance  to  that  which  in 
Europe  Protestantism,  in  its  various  sects,  had  arisen  to  oppose.  Their 
general  attitude  is  illustrated  by  a  passage  in  a  recent  work  *  (containing 


1  “  Country  and  Temple  of  Kam5khyi,”  Calcutta  Review,  October,  1911. 

*  “  The  New  Dispensation,”  pp.  103,  109.  Nor,  it  may  be  here  noted,  is  it 
correct  to  say  that  TSntriks  believe  the  universe  to  have  been  developed  by  the 
inherent  power  of  matter,  as  stated  in  the  "  Cyclopaedia  of  India,”  vol.  v,  p  72. 
Nor  is  it  correct  to  apeak,  as  H.  H.  Wilson  did  (“  Essays,”  p.  241),  of  the 
“  worship  of  the  female  principle  as  distinct  from  the  Divinity.” 

*  *'  The  Soul  of  India,”  by  G.  Howells,  p.  320. 

*“  Lectures  on  the  Hindu  Religion,”  by  K.  Chakravarthi  (1893),  itself  an 
inaccurate,  though  well-intentioned,  little  book. 

*  “  The  light  of  Asia,”  by  Harold  Begbie,  p.  148. 


16 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


a  singularly  ignorant  and  unjust  estimate  of  Hinduism),  in  which  the 
author  says  that,  when  standing  before  a  Buddhist  shrine,  he  felt  as  if  he 
was  before  that  of  St.  Carlo  Borromeo  at  Milan,  adding:  “  But  the  chief 
feeling  that  one  had  was  of  the  extraordinary  close  similarity  of  Latin 
Christianity  and  Pre-christian  Buddhism — the  feeling  and  sensation  of 
the  same  immemorial  superstition  persisting  through  the  forms  and  ritual  of 
two  religions  so  diametrically  opposed."  As  this  matter  presented  itself 
to  the  English  teachers,  so  it  did  to  the  Indian  students,  who  (to  use  a 
Bengali  expression)  “  held  their  tail  This  the  latter  did  the  more 
readily  both  because  of  the  abuses  for  which  some  of  the  followers  of 
the  Sastra  were  responsible  and  of  the  unintelligent  and  mechanical 
formalism  of  the  worship  of  others.  To  the  Hindu  so  educated  the 
Tantra  was  in  all  its  parts  as  much  superstitious  “  mummery  ”  as  it  was 
to  his  English  teachers.  This  education  did  not,  however,  from  the 
religious  point  of  view,  bear  the  results  which  were  expected  of  it.  For 
while  many  Hindus  were  led  through  such  teaching  to  reject  their 
ancestral  belief,  but  few  were  found  who  were  willing  to  accept  the  form 
of  faith  which  was  offered  to  them  as  its  substitute.  Possibly  to  some 
extent  different  results  might  have  been  achieved  had  there  been  more 
points  of  contact  between  the  two  faiths,  for  these  might  have  served  both 
to  guard  the  common  religious  sentiment  and  to  afford  some  sort  of 
foundation  upon  which  a  Christian  structure  might  have  been  raised. 
Such  had  been  the  thought,  in  earlier  times,  of  Jesuit  missionaries  both  in 
India  and  China.  Many  of  the  Hindus  whose  faith  had  been  unduly 
disturbed  commenced  (so  far  as  Indians  can — a  matter  for  them  of 
fortunate  difficulty)  to  question  the  validity  of  the  religious  sense 
itself.  A  period  of  scepticism  then  followed,  which,  of  course,  has  not 
wholly  passed  away  in  India  any  more  than  it  will  wholly  pass  away 
elsewhere. 

Theories  stale  in  the  West,  but  new  in  the  East,  were  adopted  by 
some  with  the  same  indiscriminating  fervour  as  were  the  discarded  fashions 
of  English  "  art  ”  and  articles  of  commerce.  Some  there  were  who, 
judging  all  things  by  a  narrow  test  of  “  utilitarian  ”  principle,  found 
every  historic  religion,  whether  of  East  or  West,  to  be  the  outcome 
merely  of  the  deceit  of  priests,  whose  “  highest  achievement  ”  in  all  lands 
has  been  “  abomination  worship.”  And  of  this  in  India 1  the  Sakta  and 
other  cults  were  dted  as  the  worst  examples.1 

1  As  regards  the  West,  the  author  of  the  work  dted  is  of  opinion  that  the 
system  of  auricular  confession  made  further  priestly  efforts  in  the  direction  of 
“  abomination  worship  ”  supererogatory. 

1  “  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,”  by  J.  N.  Bhattachaiji-  I  cite  this  apparently 
nasdka  work  as  one  of  a  type  only,  it  being  fairly  well  known  and  read.  The 
author  writes  down  even  the  Buddha  as  an  ambitious  schemer. 


INTRODUCTION 


17 


The  use  of  this  strong  language  applied  to  all  the  religions  of  East 
and  West  suggests  the  observation  that,  while  grounds  for  adverse  judgment 
may  have  existed,  we  must  examine  the  criticisms  by  Hindus  of  the  beliefs 
of  their  countrymen  as  we  would  any  other,  in  order  to  see  whether  the 
author  knows  that  of  which  he  speaks,  and,  if  so,  whether  he  is  free  (which 
the  author  dted  was  not)  from  prqudice  against  “  religion  ”  in  general,  or 
the  sectarianism  which  exists  in  India,  as  elsewhere.1  Nor  is  the  language 
used  in  such  cases  to  be  always  taken  literally.  If,  for  instance,  we  can 
imagine  the  astonished  mind  of  an  otherwise  uninformed  Hindu,  after  the 
perusal  of  the  stanza  of  the  “  Orange”  hymn  cited  below,1  it  is  not  improb¬ 
able  to  suppose  that  a  too  literal  understanding  of  its  words  might  give 
him  notions  as  to  the  “  obscenity  ”  of  the  tenets  and  practice  of  the  Catholic 
Church  which  would  appear  exaggerated  even  to  the  inflamed  judgment 
of  the  author  of  the  “  hymn  ”  in  question. 

In  the  West  this  raw  philosophizing  has  for  some  time  past  been 
appreciated  at  its  true  value.  More  mature  views  will  find  a  deeper 
source  for  the  religious  instinct  than  the  machinations  (even  though  they 
exist)  of  priests. 

The  following  passage  from  another  writer,*  purporting  to  give  the 
verdict  of  “  New  India  on  Religion,”  is,  in  its  blustering  crudities,  remi¬ 
niscent  of  our  own  cheap  rationalism  of  the  second  half  of  the  last  century: 

“  The  world  is  pasting  from  faith  to  reason.  The  future  is  for  reason. 
When  reason  is  established  the  problem  of  the  world  will  be  easy  of 
solution.  Reason  will  stand  no  miracles,  no  humbug,  no  special  incarna¬ 
tions  or  exclusive  revelations.  It  will  elbow  out  all  creeds,  and  admit 
nothing  which  cannot  be  demonstrated  to  the  intelligence.  Forms  of 
worship  are  excrescences  of  religion.  Belief  in  the  supernatural  and 
transcendent  is  getting  into  a  discount.  The  element  of  mystery  once  be¬ 
lieved  to  be  an  inseparable  factor  of  religion  is  disappearing,”  and  so  forth. 

They  are  but  weakly  met  by  such  mawkish  presentments  of  the 
“  Religion  of  the  Future  ”  as  those  of  which  the  following  passage  is 
a  vaguely-conceived  and  worded,  however  well-intentioned,  example: 
“  No  priest  can  lead  us  by  the  nose  and  make  us  believe  in 
meaningless  practices  which  profit  no  one  but  the  professional 


1  Particular  animosity  used  to  exist,  and  amongst  the  sectarian-minded 
still  exists,  between  Saktas  and  Vai$navas. 

1  “  Scarlet  Church  of  all  uncleanness. 

Sink  thou  to  the  deep  abyss, 

To  the  orgies  of  obscenencss. 

Where  the  Hell-bound  Furies  hiss, 

Where  thy  father’s  Satan’s  eye 
Hails  thee,  hellish  Popery.” 

The  /«&»  World,  July,  1910. 

2 


18 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


priest!1  Free  thought  will  be  the  watchword  of  the  churches  of  the 
future.  Religion  will  be  a  real  beingj  becoming.  Growing  in  life  from 
within  like  an  endogen;  drawing  sustenance  also  from  without.  Religion 
is  to  be  in  tune  with  the  infinite.  It  will  be  the  budding  forth  of  the  lotus 
of  the  heart;  the  correspondence  with  the  environments  of  the  soul;  the 
opening  out  of  the  fountains  from  within;  the  setting  allow  of  the  waters  of 
life  proceeding  from  the  throne  of  the  Most  High.  Religion  will  not  be  a 
theorem,  a  Q.E.D.,  but  a  problem,  Q.E.F.”  * 

A  more  definite  attempt  to  reconcile  religious  tradition  and  “  modern 
thought  ”  was  made  by  the  Brahmasamaj,  the  doctrines  of  which,  as  also 
of  the  Secularist  school,  are  combated  in  this  book.  The  Adisamaj,  which 
preceded  it,  more  dosely  adhered  to  orthodox  Hinduism,  being  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  latter  by  the  rejection  of  some  of  its  beliefs  and  practices. 
In  the  Brahmasamaj  the  doctrines  became  of  a  more  syncretistic  character. 
There  was  a  further  divergence  from  orthodoxy,  and  an  attempt  was 
made  to  incorporate  alien  forms  of  thought  and  ritual.  The  Brahmasamaj 
describes  itself  in  the  words  of  one  of  its  prominent  supporters  as  “  a 
humble  gleaner  of  the  truth  wherever  found.”  The  resulting  eclecticism 
possesses  its  share  of  the  weaknesses  of  all  such  systems. 

All  these  influences,  the  outcome  of  English  education— whether  they 
be  of  the  Secularist  type,  abandoning  all  ancient  forms  of  beliefs,  or  of  that 
which  claims  to  reform  but  as  often  destroys  them,  or  of  the  more  modem 
kind  which  seeks  a  belief  which  shall  be  freed  of  form — led  away  from  the 
standpoint  of  orthodox  form,  which  is  that  of  the  Tantra.  The  process 
was  accelerated  by  the  decadence  of  many  of  the  followers  of  the  Vama- 
cara  community  governed  by  the  Sastra. 

In  the  general  neglect  of  Sastra,  and  repulsion  caused  by  abuse,  no 
attempt  was  made  to  ascertain  what  in  fact  were  the  true  teachings  of  that 
portion  of  it  which  governed  this  community.  No  distinction  was  made 
between  such  doctrine  and  the  abuses  of  it,  nor  between  the  particular 
portion  of  the  Sastra  prescribing  and  regulating  Vamacara  ritual  and 
those  other  portions  which  governed  other  divisions  of  Sadhakas  or  the 
community  in  general.  The  Sastra  was,  generally  in  its  entirety,  con¬ 
demned  as  useless  where  it  was  not  considered  morally  harmful.  To  some 
extent  these  conclusions  may  have  influenced  European  Orientalists,  but 


1  This  and  the  rest  of  the  quotation  are,  of  course,  inspired  by  a  type  of 
Western  thought.  To  the  Hindu  mantra  is  not  mere  ak$ara,  nor  guru  a  mere 
man,  but  the  manifestation  of  the  Supreme  and  only  Guru,  the  Adin&tha 
Mahakgla.  The  revolt,  however,  is  supported  to  some  extent  by  the  fact  of  the 
incompetence  of  many  of  the  gurus. 

* "  The  Religion  of  the  Future,”  by  Hemendra  Nath  Sinha,  BA.,  pp.  38, 
39.  The  last  sentence  is  like  the  rest  obscure,  but  perhaps  indicates  the  work¬ 
ings  of  the  pragmatic  bacillus  even  in  the  East. 


INTRODUCTION 


19 


probably  in  much  less  degree;  for  scientific  investigation  of  human 
activities  in  whatsoever  sphere  is  not  (without  closure  of  all  historical  inquiry) 
to  be  thwarted  by  the  fear  that  what  may  be  found  on  investigation  is  not 
that  which  is  likely  to  be  approved.  Nor  are  the  difficulties  of  a  linguistic 
character,  the  Tantras  being  written  in  comparatively  simple  Sanskrit. 
The  reason  is  rather  to  be  found  in  difficulties  of  a  different  kind. 

The  Tantra  in  some  of  its  aspects  is  a  secret  doctrine  (guptavidya)  to 
be  gathered,  not  from  the  written  record,  but  verbally  from  those  who  hold 
the  key  to  it.  So  with  Eastern  allegory  it  is  said:  “  Verily,  verily,  and 
without  a  doubt  the  Veda  Sastra  and  Puranas  are  like  a  common  woman, 
free  to  all,  but  the  doctrine  of  Sambhu  (it.,  the  Tantra)  is  like  a  secret 
house  bride,  to  reveal  which  is  death.” 1  The  key  te  the  method  has  been 
with  the  initiate. 

Next  there  are  two  special  difficulties  as  regards  the  record;  firstly,  its 
fragmentary  character  and  its  existence  in  manuscripts  which  are  not  easily 
procurable,  and  then  the  technical  character  of  the  terminology.  Next, 
the  ritualistic  character  of  the  Tantra  requires  as  a  preliminary  for  its 
exposition  at  least  some  general  knowledge  regarding  the  subject,  which 
does  not  ordinarily  exist  except  among  Hindus.  In  the  case  of  certain 
Tantric  doctrines  and  practices,  the  more  ordinary  difficulties  have  been 
increased  owing  to  the  complex  and  esoteric  character  of  the  rituals,  and, 
as  some  allege,  to  the  existence  of  higher  and  lower  traditions  (amnaya), 
which  to-day  have  become  confused.  Lastly,  while  the  Sastra  provides  by 
its  various  acaras  for  all  types,  from  the  lowest  to  the  most  advanced,  its 
essential  concepts,  under  whatever  aspects  they  are  manifested,  and  into 
whatever  pattern  they  are  woven,  are  (as  Professor  de  la  ValMe  Poussin 
says  of  the  Buddhist  Tantra)  of  a  metaphysical  and  subtle  character.  This 
is  particularly  so  as  regards  Saktitattva,  Mantratattva,  and  Yogatattva, 
though  there  are  others.  It  is  claimed  that  the  true  T&ntrikacirya  is  the 
master  of  Veda,  and  that  its  esoteric  teaching  can  only  be  fully  understood 
from  the  Sastra  and  its  accompanying  traditions,  and  the  personal 
experiences  which  are  the  practical  fruits  of  its  Sadhana. 

Since  this  work  was  first  published  the  so-called  “  progressive  ”  move¬ 
ment  has  been  followed  by  a  reaction  in  the  orthodox  Hindu  world,  which 
is  not  without  its  own  defects.*  The  spread  of  Theosophical  ideas  first 


1  Vedaiastrapuranani  samanyaganika  iva 

Ya  pun  ah  fambhavl  vidya  gupta  kulabadhuriva 
Prakiie  pranahanih  syit  sat  yang  satyang  na  sang$ayah. 

So  also  the  Tantrasara  (Ed.  R.  M.  Chatteiji),  p.  691,  which  says:  “  Kadachid- 
dehahSnistu  na  chagupti  kadachana,  varam  puji  na  karttavyi  na  cha  vyaktih 
kadSchana.” 

*To  those,  for  instance,  whose  supposed  “  Hindu  ’’  sentiment  would  revive 
the  practice  of  Safi  may  be  recommended  the  words  of  the  Mahanirvaoa 


20 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


renewed  an  interest  in  the  teachings  of  India’s  great  past,  and  an  awaken¬ 
ing  national  spirit  has  done  the  rest.  The  T antra  has  had  a  share  in  this 
interest  as  is  manifested  in  the  fair  number  of  Tantras,  T&ntrik  compendia 
such  as  the  Pranatoaim,1  and  other  works  on  the  Sastra  (of  which  that 
now  translated  is  one),  which  have  been  first  published  or  reprinted  in 
recent  years.  It  is  a  sign  of  the  times  to  find  even  a  Brahma  publication 
on  the  SJatcakra.*  This  interest  is  due  in  part  to  the  general  religious 
revival  in  progress,  and  also  to  the  increasing  recognition  of  the  necessity 
of  s^dhana  (practice),  as  distinct  from  mere  philosophizing,  if  any  prac¬ 
tical  result  is  to  be  attained. 

According  to  orthodox  views,  the  Tantra  will  continue  in  force  until 
the  close  of  the  Kaliyifga,  when  the  golden  age  (Satya  yuga)  will  reappear, 
governed  by  its  appropriate  Sastra.  The  India  of  to-day  is,  however,  not 
in  the  same  sense  as  of  yore  the  “  Sri  Bharata,  adored  of  the  Devas  ” 
(SurSrchitabharata),  to  which  the  book  now  published  makes  salutation. 

The  author  has  many  a  lament  over  the  changes  occurring  in  what 
appears  to  him  to  be  a  darkening  time. 

“  If  to-day  all  men  had  the  strength  of  faith  of  Kamadeva  Tarkika, 
hero  most  powerful  in  the  field  of  austerity,  or  of  Ganeia  Upadhyaya, 
whose  life  was  one  long  surrender  to  the  Mother;  or  of  Ramaprasada,*  who 
was,  as  it  were,  a  bee  intoxicated  with  the  honey  of  the  lotus  feet  of 
Sakti,  *  should  we  in  that  case  have  had  to  sing  in  Tantra  Tattva  ‘  the  song 
of  all  these  evil  designs  (against  the  Sastraa).  But  the  day  is  now  lost  to 
us.  That  unflinching  faith  in  Tantra,  the  S&dhana-Sastra,  has  been 
shaken.” ' 

“  Alas  !  the  lion-hearted  heroes,  pillars  of  SanStana  Dharma  !  where 
are  you  to-day  in  this  dismal  time?  That  resplendent  lustre  of  yours 
hallowed  by  Sadhana,  is  mingled  with  the  Mantra  Sastra  itself.  Do  ye 
to-day  shed  that  lustre  in  every  letter,  in  every  accent.  Let  the  Sastra  of 


Tantra:  “O  KulcSani,  a  wife  should  not  be  burnt  with  her  dead  husband.  Every 
woman  is  Ih?  image.  Thou  resides!  concealed  in  the  forms  of  all  women  in  this 
world  (tava  svarfipa  r&mani  jagatyachchhannavigraha).  That  woman  who  in 
her  delusion  (moha)  ascends  die  funeral  pyre  of  her  lord  shall  go  to  hell  ”  (chap, 
x,  verses  79-80). 

•From  the  same  source  cornea  the  Pranakrifnaiabdambuddhi,  which  I 
hope  to  publish. 

1  GayatrimOlaka  sat cakrervyaky Una  o  s&dhana,  a  publication  by  the 
Mangala  Ganga  Mission  Press. 

1  The  celebrated  Bengali  poet  and  Sakta. 

*  Sakti  is  Devi — that  is,  both  the  power  of  God  and  God  Himself  Each 
of  the  Devas  has  His  Sakti  or  power  worshipped  under  the  form  of  His  spouse. 

*  This  book.  •  “  Principles  of  Tantra^” 


INTRODUCTION 


21 

Bh&rata  be  again  resplendent  with  the  fire  of  the  Tapas1 II  of  Bhirata's 
sons.”  * 

But  his  cause  is  not  wholly  lost  to  him,  and  he  continues  to  defend 
it — with  a  certain  spacious  splendour  of  imagery  and  feeling  which  belong 
to  a  passing  world. 

“  Reasoning,  argument  and  inference  may  be  the  work  of  other 
S&stras,  but  the  work  of  Tantra  is  to  accomplish  superhuman  and  divine 1 
events  by  the  force  of  its  own  Mantras.  Destruction,  driving  away,  and 
establishment  of  control,*  and  such  other  powers,  are  still  to  be  daily  seen. 
Hundreds  of  thousands  of  great  and  accomplished  Sadhakas  still  illumine 
all  India  with  the  glory  of  their  austerities.*  In  every  cremation  ground  ‘ 
in  India  the  refulgent  and  divine  halo  of  Bhairavas  and  Bhairavis 1  is  yet 
to  be  seen  mingling  with  the  light  of  the  flames  of  funeral  pyres,  rending 
apart  the  waves  of  nocturnal  darkness  and  illuminating  the  wide  expanse 
of  Heaven.  Dead  and  putrefying  corpses  submerged*  near  cremation 
grounds  are  still  brought  to  life  by  the  force  of  the  Sadhakas’  Mantras 
and  made  to  render  aid  to  SSdhana  and  Siddhi.  Whilst  still  living  in  this 
mortal  world  Tantrik  Yogis  even  now  obtain,  through  the  potency  of 
Mantras,  direct  vision  of  the  supersensual  activities  of  the  world  of  Devas. 
She,  with  dishevelled  hair,  the  dispeller  of  fear  from  the  hearts  of  Her 
devotees,  still  appears  in  great  cremation  grounds,*  to  give  liberation  to 
Her  devoted  Sadhakas  who,  made  afraid  by  the  fear  of  this  existence, 
make  obeisance  to  and  supplicate  Her.  Sadhakas  still  merge  themselves 
in  the  Self  of  Brahman  by  laying  their  Brahmarandhra  “  at  those  lotus  feet 
of  Brahmamayi,"  which  are  adored  by  Brahma  and  other  Devas.  The 
throne  of  the  Daughter  of  the  Mountain  ”  is  still  moved  by  the  wondrous, 
attractive  force  of  Mantras.  This,  in  the  eyes  of  Sadhakas,  is  the  ever 
broad  and  royal  road  upon  which  they  travel  untiring  to  the  city  of 
liberation.”  *' 


I  Austerities,  etc.  (see  Introduction).  1  “  Principles  of  Tantra.” 

•Daiva.  *  Maranam,  Ucchatanam,  VaiSkarapam.  ‘Tapas. 

*  Sma&uia,  where  Savasana,  Mundaaana,  Latasadhana  and  other  Tantrik 
rites,  are  practised. 

’  Adept  Tantrik  men  and  women. 

*  Before  and  whilst  awaiting  burning,  the  corpse  is  placed  in  the  sacred 
stream. 

*  Mahasmaianai,  where  some  of  the  most  difficult  forms  of  Tantrik 
S&dhana  are  practised.  The  auspicious  K&liU  is  thought  of  as  with  dishevelled 
hair  (vigalitachikurS),  and  so  is  the  hair  of  the  devotee  (see  Karpur&di  stotra, 
verses  3, 10). 

“  The  cavity  of  Brahman  at  the  top  of  the  head,  here  used  for  the  head 
generally. 

II  The  Devi.  “  The  Dev!  as  daughter  of  Himavat. 

Principles  of  Tantra.” 


22 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


The  same  forces,  however,  against  which  this  book,  as  also  other 
orthodoxies,  protest,  are  in  conflict  both  with  Hinduism  in  its  present 
Tantrik  form  and  with  Christianity  of  die  older  type.  In  the  present 
mingling  of  East  and  West,  each  is  providing  a  ferment  for  the  other, 
which,  when  all  is  said,  is  as  much  a  divine  product  as  the  Revelations, 
which  it  sometimes  appears  to  threaten.  The  embodied  Atma,  however, 
must  ever  seek  itself  revealing  its  search  to  us  in  that  which  we  call  the 
“  religious  spirit,”  clothed  though  It  must  also  be  in  forms  new  or 
renewed  1 — its  changing  expression  in  a  world  of  unceasing  change. 

*  •  *  • 

For  the  understanding  of  the  Tantrik,  or,  indeed,  any  other  beliefs 
and  practices,  the  usual  dry-as-dust  investigation  of  the  savant  is 
insufficient.  In  the  first  place  a  call  should  be  made  upon  actual  present 
experience.  The  primary  inquiry  should  be  addressed  to  the  ascertain¬ 
ment  of  the  present  belief  and  practice  of  those  whose  religious  history  is 
under  investigadon.  It  is  obvious  that  the  course  of  time  effects  changes. 
But  whatever  these  may  be,  present  beliefs  are  the  descendants  of  those  of 
the  past.  Much,  therefore,  which  was  in  the  parent  will  be  found  in  the 
child.  A  study  of  the  present  will  help  to  an  understanding  of  ancient 
documents  which,  if  made  the  sole  basis  of  research,  often  prove  the  source 
of  error.  For  these  reasons  I  have  selected  a  modem  exposition  of  the 
general  basis  of  Tantrik  doctrine  by  one  who,  as  its  adherent,  has  inherited 
its  traditions  { vaktradvaktrena) .  We  arc  now  recommencing  to  value 
tradition,  which  everywhere  provides  the  key  to  truth.  It  is  in  all  religions 
of  equal  if  not  of  greater  truth  than  the  imperfect  and  sometimes  falsified 
documentary  evidence  we  at  present  possess  of  their  origin  and  history. 

Whatever  may  be  the  case  upon  the  purely  historical  questions  which 
have  been  raised  in  connection  with  the  Sastra,  with  respect  to  doctrine 
and  practice,  the  first  and  simplest  course  is  to  learn  from  the  lips 
of  its  living  adherents  what  in  fact  they  are,  and,  in  so  far  as  they  can  be 
given,  the  reason  of  and  authority  for  them. 

Mere  book-learning  (pustake  likita  vidya),  will  not  carry  the  student 
the  full  way  without  error.  It  must  be '  supplemented  by  information 
derived  from  the  Tantrik  Acaryas  and  Gurus.  The  truth  of  learning  so 
gained  can  only  be  tested  by  personal  experience. 

Hindu  beliefs,  to  be  understood  aright,  should,  if  possible,  be  learned 
both  of  those  who  have  not,  as  also  of  those  who  have,  received  an  English 
education.  The  latter — in  the  past,  at  any  rate — has  generally  involved 
the  neglect  of,  and  (prior  to  the  recent  national  movement)  often  resulted 
in  a  contempt  for,  all  that  is  ancient  and  specifically  Hindu,  whether 


1  Hinduism  is  already  taking  on  a  new  life. 


INTRODUCTION 


23 


in  Religion,  Literature,  or  Art.1  In-  its  tendency  it  is  not  only — under  its 
present  conditions,  at  any  rate,  and  whether  for  good  or  ill — destructive  of 
tradition,  but  also  in  varying  degrees  of  the  mentality  which  originally 
produced  the  beliefs,  and  by  which  alone  they  may  be  completely 
apprehended.  Even  in  cases  where  competency  assumes  a  favourable 
attitude  towards  the  ancient  teaching,  there  is  often  to  be  found  a  tendency 
to  read  modern  ideas  into  it. 

A  modern  Indian  publicist  and  author*  makes  upon  this  matter  some 
very  just  observations.  In  treating  of  the  concept  “  mother  ”  as  applied 
to  India  by  her  children,  he  says  that  there  is  no  mere  metaphor  behind 
it,  though  most  modern  educated  Hindus  understand  the  word  in  a 
poetical  and  metaphorical  sense.  “  But  this  is,  ”  he  says,  “  because  their 
education  and  environment  have  more  or  less  completely  diverted  their 
thought  and  imagination  from  the  ancient  realities  of  their  language  and 
literature.  There  are,  indeed,  numerous  words  in  common  use  amongst 
us  to-day  that  have  entirely  lost  their  original  sense,  owing  to  the 
loss  of  the  genuine  thought-life  of  the  people  in  the  wilderness  of  un¬ 
understood  and  un-assimilatcd  foreign  words  and  concepts  accumulat¬ 
ed  by  our  present  system  of  education.  With  the  Europeanization  of 
our  minds  and  modes  of  thinking ,  even  our  words  have  been  perceptibly  Euro¬ 
peanized.  ”  This  criticism  has  a  very  extensive  application,  and  one  is 
reminded  of  it  at  every  step  in  reading  the  works  of  English-educated 
Hindus  on  Hindu  life  and  thought,  which  their  prudent  reader  will  in  some 
instances  do  well  to  peruse,  bearing  the  above  well-founded  remarks  in 
mind.  As  regards  his  countrymen,  the  author,  in  the  second  part 3  of 
this  work,  observes:  “  Nowadays,  most  of  those  who  represent  the  ideal 
type  of  a  learned  man  in  society  are  considered  ignorant  and  devoid  of  all 
sense  in  the  community  of  the  Religious  (Sadhakas).”  It  is  also  to  be 
remembered  that  amongst  the  English-speaking  Hindus  who  have  attained 
success  and  even  distinction  there  are  many  who,  being  of  other  castes,  have 
neither  inherited  the  traditions  of  the  Brahmana  nor  had  the  benefit  of  his 
teaching.  Interpretations  coming  from  these  classes  are  likely  (though 
exceptions  may  exist)  to  suffer  by  reason  of  their  ancient  disabilities. 

The  Tantratattva  (Principles  or  subject  matter  of  Tantra),  of  which 
the  first  part4  is  here  translated,  is,  so  far  as  I  am.  aware,  the  only 

*  As  regards  the  two  former,  see  the  observations  in  Babu  Dinesh  Chandra 
Sen’s  valuable  11  History  of  Bengali  Literature,”  published  by  the  Calcutta 
Liniversity.  As  to  Art,  a  limited  residence  in  India  will  afford  distressing  proof. 

*  Bepin  Behary  Pal,  "  The  Soul  of  India,  ”  p.  145. 

*  S-e  chapter  on  Gurukula  and  Kulaguru.  . 

*  The  work  was  originally  published  in  one  volume.  The  second  ediuon 
has  been  divided  into  two  parts,  of  which  the  first  only  has  been  published,  the 
other  being,  when  this  was  written,  in  the  press.  (Publishers’  Note:  Both  the 
parts  are  contained  in  this  edition.) 


24 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


considerable  modem  work  of  its  kind.  It  was  written  in  Bengali  by  Pandit 
Siva  Chandra  Vidyamava  Bhattacharya,1  and  first  published  some 
twenty  years  ago,  bong  now  in  its  second  edition. 

The  present  work  is  a  defence  of  the  Tantra,  of  which  Sastra  the 
author  is  an  adherent  and  a  polemic,  undertaken  in  the  interests  of  Hindu 
orthodoxy  in  its  &&kta  and  TSntrika  form  against  Secularism  on  the  one 
hand,  and  on  the  other  the  religious  eclecticism  and  various  “  reforming  ” 
movements,  of  which,  when  the  book  was  first  written,  the  BrahmasamSji 
was  a  leading  type.  In  fact,  in  parts  the  book  reads  like  an  orthodox 
Catholic  protest  against  “  modernism,”  and  is  thus  interesting  as  showing 
how  many  fundamental  principles  are  common  to  all  orthodox  forms  of 
belief,  whether  of  West  or  East. 

The  author  of  the  Tantratattva  is  a  well-known  Tantrik  Pandit, 
preacher,  and  secretary  of  the  Sarvamangalasabha  of  Benares,  who,  happily 
for  our  purposes,  knows  no  English.  His  work,  which  is  written  in  Bengali, 
may  therefore  be  taken  to  be  an  accurate  popular  statement  of  modem  or¬ 
thodox  views  on  the  subject  treated  of  by  him.  The  word  “  Tattva  ”  is  a 
very  comprehensive  one,  which  it  is  by  no  means  always  easy  to  translate. 
I  have  rendered  the  title  of  the  book  as  “  Principles  of  Tantra,”  though, 
maybe,  as  a  friend  has  pointed  out,  it  should  be  “  Subjects  of  Tantra.” 
The  work  deals,  it  is  true,  with  chosen  topics  of  Tantra.  This,  however, 
also  involves  a  statement  of  certain  fundamental  principles  which  govern 
S&strik  teaching  on  the  subjects  dealt  with,  and  this  as  well  as  the  con¬ 
tents  of  possible  future  volumes  must  be  my  justification  for  giving  the 
book  a  more  ambitious  tide. 

The  author  is  both  a  poet  and  a  preacher — a  circumstance  which 
accounts  for  the  rhetorical  style  and  popular  devotional  character  of  the 
work.  Apart  from  such  intrinsic  merits  as  it  may  possess,  it  is  of  value  as 
a  document  which  records  the  thought  and  workings  of  an  Indian  mind 
affected  but  little,  if  at  all,  by  the  current  notions  of  the  day.  It  deals  in 
the  main,  and  in  a  popular  way,  with  the  philosophical  and  religious 
grounds  of  the  orthodox  system  in  its  Sakta  form.  As  regards  some  of  its 
practical  aspects,  the  author  has  considered  that  this  was  a  subject  fitter 
for  the  reader’s  Guru  than  for  a  book  addressed  to  the  public  at  large. 
It  may  therefore  have  proved  a  disappointment  to  those  who,  at  the  mention 
of  Tantra,  always  expect  to  hear  of  rituals  with  wine  and  women,  the 
midnight  circle  (Cakra),  black  magic  in  the  cremation  grounds,  and  so 
forth.  The  constant  desire  to  hear  of  such  things  is  not  evidence  of  a  true 


1  Editor  of  the  journal  Sam,  and  author  of  several  other  works — “  Gltan- 
”  “  Mi,"  “  Svabhava  o  abhava,”  “  Vidyaraaver  durgotsava,”  “  Kartfi  o 
oa,”  “  Pithamala,”  "  Gangeia.” 


INTRODUCTION 


25 


interest  in  the  $3stra,  but  a  confession  of  personal  weakness.1  To  such 
it  may  come  as  a  surprise  to  learn  that  the  Tantra  also  concerns  itself  with 
matters  of  undoubted  respectability  even  to  its  critics,  and  of  universal,  if 
less  sensational,  interest.  It  is  commonly  assumed  by  such  persons 
(though  altogether  erroneously)  that  the  Tantra  Sastra  is  only  concerned 
with  the  Cakra  ritual  of  those  who  are  called  (but  incorrectly  so) 
“  lefthand  ”  upasakas,  who  follow  vlracara.1  This,  however,  is  of  course 
not  the  fact.  On  the  contrary,  the  main  subjects  of  Tantra  arc  Mantra 
and  Sadhana  in  all  its  forms.  It  is  also  the  chief  repository  of  Yoga 
practice,  and  its  general  range  of  subject,  as  hereafter  mentioned,  is 
encyclopedic. 

As  Professor  B.  K.  Sarkar  has  well  said,  the  Aicyclopxdias  of  India 
known  under  diverse  names,  such  as  Samhitas,  Puranas  and  Tantras, 
are  really  generic  terms  under  which  the  whole  culture  of  certain 
epochs  in  Indian  history  found  expression  and  currency.  He  adds  that, 
while  it  is  difficult  and  sometimes  impossible  to  assign  to  such  store¬ 
houses  of  information  respecting  the  national  life  the  names  of  any 
particular  authors  or  compilers  and  the  question  of  their  dates  may  never 
be  solved  satisfactorily,  they  furnish  undeniable,  though  sometimes 
conflicting  accounts,  of  the  manners  and  customs,  rites  and  ceremonies, 
sects  and  Sampradayas,  sentiments  and  traditions,  which  prevailed  among 
the  Hindus  for  epochs  extending  over  hundreds  of  yean. 

The  translation  is  primarily  the  work  of  my  friend  Babu  Jfiancndralal 
Majumdar,  himself  a  Bengali.  My  own  part  has  consisted  in  its  revision. 
The  translation  may  read  rather  cumbrously  in  parts,  but  this  is  due  to 
our  desire  to  keep  as  close  as  possible  to  the  somewhat  discursive  and 
rhetorical  form  of  the  original.  I  have  added  some  explanatory  notes  to 
the  text.  I  should  have  liked  to  have  made  the  notes  fuller  if  it  could  have 
been  done  without  overloading  the  text.  I  have,  however,  referred  in  the 
notes  to  the  Introduction  written  for  ray  edition  of  the  MahSnirvana 
Tantra,*  where  I  have  explained  at  greater  length  such  terms  as 
“  yantra,”  “  mantra,”  “  mudra,”  “  nyasa,”  “  panchaiattva,”  the 
“  jatcakra,”  and  others,  and  have  in  a  general  and  summary  way  dealt 


1  Inquiry  as  to  these  matters  is,  to  use  a  chess  term,  a  common  though  bad 
“  opening  ”  for  those  who  have  a  real  desire  to  know  the  S&stra. 

1  In  “  Non-Christian  Religions,”  by  Howard,  pp.  77-78.  The  author, 
after  a  statement  that  the  “  Tantnk  System  ”  originated  with  the  Buddhist 
monk  Asanga,  says: 11  Further  than  this  we  must  decline  to  plunge,  even  with  the 
parts  of  the  Tantra  accessible  to  English  readers.”  I  am  unaware  of  any  parts 
“  accessible  to  English  readers  ”  when  this  statement  was  made,  and  the 
author  was  evidently  ignorant  of  any  other. 

*  The  references  to  the  Introduction  are,  unless  otherwise  stated,  to  that 
work,  since  published  as  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra. 


26 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


with  sadhana,  upasana,  and  hathayoga.  I  have  retained  certain  technical 
Sanskrit  terms  in  the  text,  as  there  is  no  corresponding  English  word 
which  accurately  gives  their  meaning. 

The  following  pages  deal  with  certain  general  aspects  of  the  Sastra, 
its  nature,  origin,  age,  and  authority — subjects  which  were  either  not  then 
treated  of  or  were  more  summarily  referred  to.  If  upon  some  of  these 
topics,  such  as  the  age  of  the  Sastra,  I  have  not  presented  sufficiently 
certain  and  detailed  conclusions,  it  is  because,  for  want  of  the  necessary 
knowledge,  1  am  unable  to  do  so.  The  subject  is  a  novel  one,  and 
possibly  many  years  of  inquiry  into  Indian,  Chinese,  and  Tibetan  records 1 * * 4 
will  have  to  be  made  before  opinions  of  any  finality  can  be  formed  as  to 
many  matters  in  and  Vouching  the  Sastra. 

*  *  *  * 

Current  definitions  of  Tantra  as  “  Sacred  writings  of  the  Hindus,  ” 
“  Scriptures  of  Saktas,”  “  Collections  of  Magical  Treatises,”  and  the  like, 
are  cither  inaccurate  and  insufficient,  or  by  their  generality  useless.  A  type 
of  such  inaccurate  statements  characterized  by  the  usual  vagueness 
and  indecision  says  that:  “  The  Tantras  are  a  later  development  of  the 
Puranic  creed.  They  are  the  writings  of  Saktas  or  votaries  of  the  female 
energy  of  some  Divinity  (sic),  mostly  the  wife  of  Siva.  Such  ideas  are  not 
altogether  absent  in  the  Puranic  works.  But  in  the  Tantras  they  assume  a 
peculiar  character,  owing  to  the  admixture  of  magic  performances  and 
mystic  rites  of  perhaps  an  indelicate  nature.  Amarasinha  knows  not 
of  them,”  *  In  passing,  it  may  be  noted  that  this  reference  to  the  Amara- 
kofa  is  a  common  one.  It  is  true  that  the  word  Tantra  is  not  mentioned 
in  the  svargavarga  of  that  book.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  so  cite  it 
omit  to  state  that  some  other  ancient  Sastras,  including  the  Atharyaveda, 
are  not  there  mentioned;  and  in  the  Nanarthavarga  reference  is  made  to 
Agama  Sastra,  which  is  one  of  the  names  of  Tantra.  An  anonymous 
author  who  writes  on  what  he  calls  “  Transformed  Hinduism  ”  *  says,  after 
a  description  of  the  Puranas,  “  Another  literature  of  a  still  more  degrading 
type  has  been  incorporated  in  the  modem  Hinduism,  and  this  is  the  religious 
books  called  the  Tantras,  of  which  there  are  sixty-four  volumes.*  These 
books  are  mostly  manuals  of  mysticism  and  magic,  written  otherwise  very 

1  Indian  tradition  connects  China  and  the  Tantra,  and  both  Chinese 
and  Tibetan  records  are  reputed  to  contain  Sanskrit  works  which  have 
long  since  disappeared  from  India. 

*  “  History  of  Classical  and  Sanskrit  Literature,”  by  M.  Krishna  ma- 
charya,  M.A.,  B.L.,  p.  34. 

*  P.  180. 

4  The  author,  in  speaking  of  these  *'  volumes  ”  as  he  calls  them,  is  thinking 
of  the  64  Tantras  assigned  to  each  of  the  three  kriintas,  which  make  them, 
however,  so  far  as  such  divisions  are  concerned,  192  and  not  64. 


INTRODUCTION 


27 


much  on  the  same  lines  as  the  puranas.  The  religion  advocated  in  these 
books  is  the  exponent  («c)  of  Saktism,  the  wife  of  Siva  (nc),  under  her 
various  manifestations.”  Whilst  the  Indian  author  last  quoted  rather 
vaguely  refers  to  “  mystic  rites  of  perhaps  an  indelicate  character  ”  the 
book  now  cited  more  definitely  affirms:  “It  is  a  licentious  worship, 
and  leads  to  cruelty,  self-indulgence,  and  sensual  gratification.  Hence 
it  is  a  blot  upon  the  ‘  Modern  Hinduism.’  This  sect  goes  under  the 
name  of  the  Bahm  Marges  (hr),  or  the  secret  sect.”  1  The  Accounts  of 
these  and  other  uninformed  authors  treat  the  Tantra  as  a  Sastra  of  the 
Saktas  only  where  they  do  not  as  in  the  last  cited  quotation  regard 
it  merely  as  the  Sastra  of  the  VaraachSra  community  of  §&kta  Sadhakas. 

The  word  Tantra  has  various  meanings,  and  Smongst  others  Sastra 
generally,  and  therefore  does  not  necessarily  denote  a  religious  Sastra.* 
In  the  sense,  however,  in  which  the  term  is  most  widely  known  and  is  here 
used,  it  denotes  thaL  body  of  religious  scripture  (Sastra  which  is  stated 
to  have  been  revealed  by  Siva  as  the  specific  scripture  of  the  fourth 
or  present  Kali  age  (yuga).  This  is  the  definition  of  the  Tantra 
according  to  the  Sastra  itself. 

There  are  four  such  ages  (Mahayuga) — namely,  the  Satya  yuga,  or 
golden  age;  the  Trcta  yuga,  age  in  which  righteousness  (dharma)  de¬ 
creased  by  one-fourth;  the  Dvapara  yuga,  in  which  dharma  decreased  by 
one-half;  and  the  present  Kali  yuga,  the  most  evil  of  the  ages,  in  which 
righteousness  exists  to  the  extent  of  one-fourth  only.  At  the  close  of  this 
last  age  the  Kalki  Avatara  of  Visnu,  “  the  rider  on  the  white  horse,” 
will  destroy  iniquity  and  restore  the  rule  of  righteousness.  Each  of  these 
ages  has  its  appropriate  Sastra,  or  Scripture,  which  is  designed  to  meet 
the  requirements  of  the  men  of  each  age. 

The  Hindu  Sastras  are  classed  into  Sruti,  Smfti,  Purana,  and 
Tantra.  The  three  last  all  assume  the  first  as  their  base,  and  arc,  in  fact, 
merely  special  presentments  of  it  for  the  respective  ages.  It  has  been  said 
that  the  Tantras  “  are  regarded  by  those  who  follow  them  as  a  fifth  Veda 


1  The  author  means  the  vama  marga,  or  vamacara,  as  it  is  ordinarily 
called.  The  Tantra  does  not  only  deal  with  this  “  sect,”  which  i9  one  only  of 
its  Scaras,  the  tenets  of  which  the  author  does  not  understand.  Daksina- 
caras  and  others  are  also  followers  of  Tantra,  The  work  is  incorrect  both  as  to 
the  Tantra  and  other  Sastras  and  practices  of  the  Hindus  which  it  proposes  to 
“  transform.” 

1  Thus  in  the  SabdaSaktiprakaiM  it  is  said:  “  Tarkangtantranchaviduska 
vidushangtoshakarika,  kriyate  jagadlshena  where  Tantra  means  the  theory 
or  science  of  argument.  So  the  Pafichatantra,  which  the  so-caJled  “  Tantrik 
Order  of  America  "  includes  in  its  International  Journal  amongst  the  Sanskrit  and 
Tibetan  Tantras,  is  not  a  Tantra  in  the  sense  here  dealt  with  at  all,  but  a  book 
of  fables. 


28 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


as  ancient  as  the  others  and  of  superior  authority.”  1  No  Sastra  is  or 
can  be  superior  to  the  Veda.  That  practical  application  of  its  teachings, 
however,  which  is  prescribed  in  the  Tantra  is  to  be  followed  in  preference 
to  the  vaidik5c£ra  in  the  Kaliyuga.  The  relations  of  the  Veda  to  the 
Tantra  has  been  compared  with  that  of  the  Jivatma  to  the  Param&tma. 
The  Tantra  is  said  by  its  adherents  to  represent  the  inner  core  of  the 
former.  Professor  de  la  Valine  Poussin  says  *:  “  Si  I’on  veut  instituer  une 
comparaison  qui  d’ailleurs  n’est  pas  sans  danger  on  sera  frappe  des  res- 
semblances  inaptrruts  qui  permettent  de  rapprocher  ces  deux  manifestations  si 
difftrentes  de  la  pens^e  Hindoue,  le  V6disme  et  le  Tantrismc.”  These 
resemblances  which  struck  the  learned  author  are,  of  course,  due  to  the 
fact  that  there  is  a*  base  common  to  the  Veda  and  the  Tantra,  the  latter 
being,  according  to  orthodox  notions,  a  branch  of  the  Vaidik  tree.  It  is 
only  those  who  would  altogether  disassociate  the  Tantra  from  the  Veda 
who  will  experience  any  surprise  at  finding  resemblances  between  the 
Sastras  for  the  respective  ages.  As  the  Kularnava  Tantra  says,  for  each 
age  (yuga)  a  suitable  Sastra  is  given — namely,  in  Satyayuga,  Sruti;  in 
Treta,  Smrti;  in  Dvipara  the  Puranas;  and  in  the  Kali  age  the  Tantra.* 
The  truth  to  be  taught  ever  remains  the  same,  though  the  method 
of  inculcating  it  varies  with  the  ages.  Current  definitions,  when  not 
incorrect,  fail  to  bring  out  this  character  of  the  Tantra  as  a  Yuga  (age) 
Sastra  and  its  relations  to  the  other  Scriptures.  As,  however,  our  author 
well  says  *  it  is  by  no  means  impossible  that  now  towards  the  end  of  the 
Kali  age  a  few  parasites  should  be  found  growing  on  some  of  its  branches. 

The  original  and  highest  source  of  dharma  is  Sruti,  or  that  “  which 
has  been  heard,”  and  which  is  the  ipsissima  verba  of  divine  revelation.  The 
Vedas  are  apauruscya  (without  any  personal  composer),  manifested  to  the 
R?is  who  were  not  their  authors,  but  only  their  Seers  (dra?tarah).  The 
term  “  Sruti  ”  is  sometimes  used  in  (what  is  to  some)  an  extended  sense, 
as  where  Kulluka  Bhatta  speaks  of  Tantra  (which  has  sometimes  been 
described  as  the  fifth  Veda)  as  Sruti  (vaidild  tantrikichaiva  dvividha 
kirttita  Srutih).  Popularly,  however,  the  term  is  limited  to  the  four 
Vedas — Rk,  Sama,  Yajus,  and  Atharva — and  the  Upanisads,  of  which, 

1  Beveridge,  “  History  of  India,”  ii.  77.  And  to  the  same  effect  “  Biblical, 
etc.,  Encyclopedia,”  McClintoch  and  Strong,  xii,  864. 

*  Bouddhisme  fitudes  et  Matlriaux. 

*  Krite  irutyuktacharastrelayyang  smj-tisambhavah 
DvSpare  tu  purSnoktang  kalau  agamakevalam. 

See  also  Mahanirvana  Tantra,  chap,  i,  verse  28,  and  KubjikS  Tantra,  where 
Sruti,  Smrti,  and  Purana  are  assigned  to  the  first  three  ages,  and  Tantra  to 
the  fourth. 

*  See  post.  And  as  to  the  relation  of  Agama  and  Veda,  see  Mahabhaga- 
vata  cited,  past. 


INTRODUCTION 


29 


Professor  Paul  Deussen  says:  “Die  Upanisads,  sind  far  den  Veda  was 
far  die  Bibel  das  neuc  Testament  ist.”  1  In  its  primary  signification  the 
term  “  Vedanta  ”  means  the  latter  part  of  the  Veda.  The  Jflanak&pda  of 
the  Vedas  is  therefore  the  Vedanta  in  the  original  sense  of  the  word.  As 
such  it  is  Sruti,  and  therefore  in  this  sense  the  Vedanta  is  identical  with 
the  Upanisads,  which  teach  as  the  gist  of  Vaidik  doctrine  the  knowledge 
of  the  Absolute  Being  (Paramatma)  and  union  with  It.  The  Devas 
worshipped  in  the  Mantras  of  the  Karmakapda  are,  as  well  as  the  whole 
visible  universe,  but  manifestations  of  It — the  “  Tat  Sat,”  or  the  Reality. 
Based  on  Upani$ad  is  the  Vedanta  Dariana,  or  philosophy  embodied  in 
the  Vedanta  Sutras  ascribed  to  Vyasa,  which  have  again  been  the  subject 
of  the  commentaries  known  as  Saiikarabh&syan*  (of  SankaracSrya), 
Sribhasyam  (of  Ramanuja),  Madhvabhasyam  (of  Madhva),  and  the  less 
important  Govindabh&syam. 

Smrti  is  “  that  which  is  remembered,”  and  has  been  handed  down  by 
Rais.  It  is  regarded  as  the  expression  of  the  Divine  Will  conveyed  to 
mankind  by  inspiration  through  the  agency  of  human  beings.  It  is  divided 
into  the  Srauta  sutras,  dealing  with  Vaidik  ceremonies,  and  the  Gfhya 
sutras,  concerning  the  household  rites;  the  prose  Dharma  sutras,  which 
lay  down  rules  of  law  properly  so  called  (of  which  there  are  various 
caranas  or  schools,  such  as  those  of  Gautama,  Baudhlyana,  Apastamba, 
Vaiistah,  and  others),  and  Dharma  Sastras,  or  metrical  versions  of 
previously  existing  dharma-sfitras,  such  as  the  Code  of  Manu  (Manu- 
smrti',  the  Yajfiavalkya,  Narada,  Paraiara  Smrtis,  and  other  frag¬ 
mentary  Dharma  Sastras  and  secondary  Smrtis  of  later  periods.  On 
these  Smrtis  there  are  various  commentaries,  such  as  those  of  Medhatithi, 
Kulluka  Bhatta,  and  others  on  the  Manu  Smjli;  the  commentaries  on  the 
Yajfiavalkya  Smrti  by  Vijnandvara  (known  as  the  Mitakfara),  and 
others;  commentaries  on  the  PariS ara  Smrti ;  and  other  commentaries 
such  as  those  on  the  Mitaksara.  These  commentaries  have  given  rise  to 
various  schools  of  law,  such  as  the  Mitak$ara,  Dayabhaga,  Mithila,  and 
others.  Smrti  provides  for  pravritti  dharma,  as  the  Upanisads  had 
revealed  the  path  of  nivritti,  or,  as  it  is  loosely  called,  “  renunciation.” 

The  third  Sastra,  that  of  the  Dvapara  yuga,  is  that  contained  in  the 
Puranas,  the  principal  of  those  now  extant  being  eighteen  in  number.* 
They  by  myth  and  story  convey  in  an  exoteric  manner  the  doctrines  of  the 


1  “  Die  Geheimlehre  des  Veda  ”  (1909). 

*  The  Vifnu  Bhagavata  (it  is  a  matter  of  dispute  whether  this  is  the  Sri- 
madbhagavata  or  Devi  Bhagavata,  both  of  which  are  largely  quoted  in  this 
book);  Naradiya;  Garuda;  Padma;  Varaha;  or  Vai$nava  Puranas;  Siva, 
Liriea,  Skanda,  Agni  (or,  according  to  other  accounts,  Vayu),  Matsya,  Kurma; 
or  Saiva  Puranas;  the  Brahma,  Brahmanda,  Brahmavaivarta,  Mirkandeya, 
Bhavi?ya,  and  V5mana  Puranas. 


30 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Vedas  to  the  declining  intelligence  and  spirituality  of  the  men  of  the  third 
age.  Like,  however,  the  T antra,  they  deal  with  nearly  every  subject  of 
knowledge — theogonies,  cosmogonies,  genealogies,  chronology,  the  astro¬ 
nomical,  physical,  and  other  sciences.  In  addition  to  the  Mahapuranas, 
there  are  the  secondary  Puranas  or  Upapuranas.1 * *  Both  of  these  are 
referred  to  in  the  Mahanirvana  T antra,  when  dealing  with  the  Sastra  of 
the  different  ages,  as  Samhita.  This  word,  which  literally  means 
“  collection,”  and,  according  to  the  Sabdaratnavali,  includes  Dharma 
Sastra,  Smfti,  Srutijivika,  also  comprises*  Purana,  Upapurana,  Itihasa 
(history  such  us  Mahabharata  and  RamSyana),  the  work  of  Valmiid, 
Vatistha,  and  others. 

The  specific  Sastra  for  the  fourth  or  Kaliyuga  (according  to  orthodox 
views,  the  present  age)  is  the  Tantra.  Though  there  are  Agamas  or 
Tantras  which  are  called  Siva  and  Sakta  or  Devi  (according  to  the 
particular  form  of  the  One  which  is  regarded  therein  as  Istadevata),  it  is, 
according  to  orthodox  notions,  a  mistake  to  regard  the  Tantra  generally  as 
if  it  were  a  petty  Sastra  of  any  particular  division  of  Hindu  worshippers. 
It  is  said,  on  the  contrary,  to  be  a  universal  Sastra  governing  all  men  in 
the  Kali  age,  though  particular  provisions  in  it  may  have  reference  to 
particular  divisions  of  worshippers.  Thus,  while  certain  communities  who 
perform  the  rahasyapuja  make  use  of  wine  in  worship,  others  do  not,  and 
it  is,  in  fact,  forbidden  to  them  by  the  Tantra  itself,  as  is  the  specific  Sakti- 
puja  associated  with  such  use.  So  the  Nitya  Tantra  prohibits  the  latter 
in  the  case  of  the  Paiu5  (ratrau  naiva  yajeddeving  sandhyayang  vaparan- 
hake).  On  the  other  hand,  other  portions  of  the  Tantra  govern  the  whole 
orthodox  Hindu  community.  So  not  only  the  Sakti  mantra,  but  also 
the  Visnu  and  Siva  mantras  arc  Tantrik.  The  Tantrika  Sandhya  may  be 
said  by  all,  and  the  Sastra  is  the  source  of  the  bulk  of  the  generally 
current  ritual.  A  remark  of  a  friend  who  read  the  first  part  of  this 
book,  “  that  he  could  find  little  of  the  Tantra  in  it,”  4  is  typical  of  the 
general  misconceptions  which  prevail  as  to  the  nature  of  the  Sastra. 

It  is  true  that  the  so-called  “  Sakta  "  Tantras  prescribe,  in  the  case 
of  one  of  the  Acaras,  a  form  of  sadhana  peculiar  to  this  acara  known  as 
the  Panchatattva,*  or  worship  with  wine,  meat,  fish,  grain,  and  woman 

1  Kalika,  Sanatkuraara,  Narasingha,  and  others. 

1  See  Bralunavaivarta  Purana,  Jfianakhanda,  chap,  cxxxii. 

*  Because  such  worship  connotes  maithuna,  which  is  not  for  the  paiu  on 
the  path  of  pravritti,  and  who  is  still  in  the  heavy  bonds  of  desire. 

4  Because  it  does  not  deal  with  those  portions  of  the  Tantra  which  are 
concerned  with  the  Panchatattva,  viracara,  etc. 

*  This  is  the  term  used  by  Tantriks  themselves  in  speaking  of  the  conjoined 
elements.  Vulgarly,  they  are  called  the  “  five  M’s  ”  (panchamakara),  because 


INTRODUCTION 


31 


(Sakti) :  and  not  uncommonly  the  Tantra  is  associated  with  such  worship 
only,  with  the  result  that  a  “  Tantrik  ”  has  come  to  connote,  in  the  minds 
of  many,  merely  a  Hindu  who  practises  this  Sadhana.  Less  narrow  and 
crude  notions  popularly  associate  the  Tantra  with  the  Sakta  cult  only, 
though  they  would  include  all  forms  of  worship  within  the  Sakta  com¬ 
munity,  and  do  not  limit  the  scope  of  governance  of  the  Tantra  to  the 
community  of  Vamacarins  worshipping  with  the  rajasika  Panchatattva. 
The  reason  for  such  views  appears  to  be  this:  Though  there  may  have 
been  Saiva  Tantras,  as  there  have  been  what  are  called  Saiva  Puranas, 
and  there  are  Tantras  such  as  the  Radha  Tantra,  which  deal  with  the 
Visnu  cult;  and  though  in  ordinary  worship  there  is  adoration  of  the 
“  Five  Devatas  1  ”  (Panchopasana),  yet  in  those  scriptures  which  are  more 
usually  referred  to  when  the  Tantra  is  spoken  of,  the  worship  of  Sakti 
assumes  a  more  special  form.  All  such  notions,  however,  as  regards 
Tantra,  though  popular,  bespeak  according  to  its  followers  a 
fundamental  misconception  of  the  scope  of  the  Sastra.’  Properly 
speaking,  a  Tantrik  should  be  defined  as  one  who  is  governed  by 
and  follows  the  provisions  of  Tantra  which  are  applicable  to  his  particular 
case.  In  1881  Dr.  Rajendra  Lai  Mitra  ’  wrote  that  the  followers  of  Tantra 
might  be  reckoned  by  the  hundreds  of  thousands,  and  that  the  life  of 
many  an  Indo-Aryan  (he  might  have  said,  in  one  way  or  another,  practi¬ 
cally  all)  was  that  of  “  bondage  to  its  ordinances.”  As  a  Yuga  Sastra, 
the  Tantra  claims  to  govern  all  orthodox  communities  of  worshippers  in 
the  Kaliyuga.  But  this  does  not  mean  that  all  its  provisions  are  appli¬ 
cable  to  each  one  of  them.  The  contrary  is  the  case.  There  arc  some 
matters,  such  as  Mantratattva,  which  are  of  common  applicability  to  all 
such  communities.  There  are  other  matters  which  arc  peculiar  to,  and 
govern  only,  a  particular  community  or  section  of  it.  But  both  the 
common  and  special  provisions  have  the  same  Sastra  as  their  source.  It 


each  of  the  ordinary  names  of  the  elements  commences  with  that  letter  {madya, 
mangsa,  matsya,  mudra,  maithuna).  Some  of  these  have,  however,  esoteric 
names  used  by  Tantriks  amongst  themselves.  “  Lata  Sadhana  ”  is  a  better  and 
in  some  cases  more  accurate  description  of  the  fifth  tattva  than  the  word 
“  maithuna  ”  with  its  vulgar  implications. 

1  Siva,  Vi?nu,  Surya,  Ganeia,  and  the  Devi. 

*  According  to  the  views  (whether  historically  justifiable  or  not) 
of  Tantrik  Pandits  with  whom  I  have  discussed  this  matter,  it  is  not  as 
though  there  were  separate  and  conflicting  Sastras,  but  one  Sastra— the 
Tantra  with  different  sections  appropriate  to  the  various  divisions  in  the 
community  of  worshippers.  So,  again,  the  Puranas  constitute  one  body  of 
Sastra,  though  any  particular  Purana  may  appear  to  give  support  to  a 
sectarian  hypothesis  by  reason  of  its  emphasizing  the  cult  of  some  particular 
Devata. 

*  “  Indian  Aryans  ”  (1893),  vol.  i,  p.  404. 


32 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


is,  however,  not  here  meant  that  every  practice  followed  by  the  orthodox  * 
communities  is  of  Tantrik  origin.  Some  rites,  such  as  that  of  Homa,  have 
descended  from  Vaidik  times.  Others  are  of  modem  origin.  Thus,  to 
take  one  instance  from  amongst  others:  the  Vaisnavas  sing  and  dance 
and  recite  the  name  of  Hari  (Visnu)  in  Kirtans  which  are  of  a  popular 
and  emotional  character.  This  mode  of  worship  was  introduced  by  the 
great  Chaitanya  Deva  to  meet  the  needs  of  his  time,  and  has  nothing  in 
common  with  the  formal  and  intellectual  character  of  the  Tantrik  ritual.  As 
to  this,  the  author  says:1  “  When  Chaitanya  Deva  deluged  all  Bengal  with 
huge  waves  of  the  name  of  Hari,  he  observed  that  Brahmana,  K$atriya, 
and  VaiSya  families  were  on  the  verge  of  ruin.  He  thought  that  in  the 
then  state  of  society,  full  of  middle-class  (NavaSakha)  Sudras,  incom¬ 
petent  for  either  the  Vaidik  or  Tantrik  dharma,  Harinam  sangkirtana 1 * 
was  the  best  form  of  dharma  (religion),  and  consequently  he  preached 
that  dharma.”  Though  some  may  nowadays  be  disposed,  through  ignor¬ 
ance  or  other  reasons,  to  dispute  their  connection  with  the  Sastra,  the 
matter  may  be  put  to  some  very  simple  tests.  If  such  a  disputant  be 
orthodox  (whether  Saiva,  Vaisnava,  or  Sakta),  he  might,  if  he  would 
answer  such  a  question,  be  asked  whether  he  has  been  initiated,  and,  if  so, 
in  what  form — what  mantra  he  then  received,  and  where  that  mantra 
comes  from.4 * * *  And  then,  when  worshipping  before  an  image 8  in  Sahara 
u  pis  ana,  with  the  sixteen  articles  of  worship  (sodaAa  upacira),  inquiry 
may  be  made  as  to  the  authority  for  such  image-worship,  and  in  what 
Sastra  this  ritual  and  the  rules  relating  to  NySsa,  Bhutaiuddhi,  and  so 
forth,  is  to  be  found.  The  answer  in  all  these  and  similar  cases  will  be  the 
Tantra.  On  the  other  hand,  as  above  stated,  certain  provisions  of  the 
Saatra  may  have  no  applicability  to  a  particular  Sadhaka.  As  the 
Istadcvata  of  the  various  religious  communities  differs,  so  in  some 
respects  does  the  puja  and  s&dhana.  The  Basil  leaf  (tulsi)  is  sacred  to 
Visnu;  the  Bad  (bilva)  to  Siva;  the  Scarlet  hibiscus  or  China  Rose  to 

1 1  thus  exclude  all  the  little  sects,  some  of  a  very  peculiar  and  original 
character,  with  which  India  abounds,  though  sometimes  loosely  affiliated,  or 
claiming  to  be  affiliated,  to  the  larger  one;  such  as,  apparently,  the  Chaliya 
Pantha  of  Jodhpur,  which  Sellon,  in  his  Annotations,  calls  “  Kauchiluas.” 

1  See  post. 

1  The  singing  of  Vijnu’s  (Hari’s)  name  with  music  and  dancing.  Among 
the  Vaisnavas  there  is  a  good  deal  of  worship  of  a  congregational  character. 

4  Thus  in  the  Vijnu  mantra  “  Kling  Iding  Gop&la,”  KJing  is  a  Tantrik 

blja  which  is  to  be  found  in  no  other  S5stra  but  the  Tantra.  In  the  same  way, 

in  the  Kpna  mantra,  given  in  the  notes  (see  post),  Aing  and  Sluing  are 
Tantrik  bijas. 

*  I  include  under  this  term  not  merely  the  image  strictly  so-called,  but 

also  the  jar  (ghata)  in  Devi  worship,  and  the  lingam  and  ialagrama  in  Saiva 
and  Vaijnava  upSsana,  respectively. 


INTRODUCTION 


33 


the  Devi.  Whilst  animal  sacrifice  is  made  to  Kali,  it  is  forbidden  in  the 
worship  of  the  aspect  of  the  One  which  is  named  Vispu.  The  use  of  the 
rajasika  pancatattva  is  prescribed  for  $akta  initiates  in  Vamacara. 
It  is  forbidden  to  the  Sakta  non-initiate,  and  to  other  communities  of 
worshippers.  But  both  the  injunctions  aad  the  prohibitions  have  as  their 
authority  the  same  Sastra,1 * 3  which  governs  in  some  way  or  other  all 
orthodox  communities. 

In  short,  it  is  considered  an  error  to  regard  the  Tantra  as  the  petty 
Sastra  of  any  religious  sect  only,  and  a  still  greater  mistake  to  limit  its 
operation  to  that  which  is  but  one  only  of  its  particular  methods  or 
divisions  of  worshippers  (ac&ras). 

As  mentioned  later,  the  Tantra  deals  with  alt  matters  of  common 
belief  and  interest,  from  the  doctrine  of  the  origin  of  the  world  to  the 
laws  which  govern  kings  and  the  societies  which  they  have  been  divinely 
appointed  to  rule,  medicine  and  science  generally.  The  Tantra  is  not 
only  the  basis  of  popular  Hindu  practice,  on  which  account  it  is  known  as 
the  Sadhana  Sastra,  but  it  is  the  repository  of  esoteric  belief  and  practices, 
particularly  those  relating  to  yoga  and  mantra-tattva.  Indeed,  as  regards 
the  last,  which  is  one  of  the  most  peculiar,  and  at  the  same  time  most 
profound,  aspects  of  Hindu  teaching,  the  Tantra  is  to  such  an  extent  the 
acknowledged  repository  of  this  spiritual  science  that  its  other  name 
is  the  Mantra  Sastra.  Its  claims  to  such  a  name  could  not  have  been 
made  good  were  there  not  some  ground  for  its  assertion  that  it  is  a  Yuga 
Sastra  for  the  Kali  age.  As  to  which  Tantras,  however,  arc  authoritative 
there  appear  to  be  differences  of  opinion,  such  differences  being  due 
either  to  a  mistaken  sectarianism,  or  possibly  to  real  divergences  as  regards 
doctrinal  thought  and  historical  descent. 

The  Tantras  are  referred  to  as  Agamas.  An  Indian  author*  and 
student  of  the  Saivagama  expresses  the  opinion  that  the  Agamas  have 
branched  out  from  the  same  stem  of  the  Vaidik  tree  which  produced  the 
earlier  Upanisads,  and  were  at  one  time  as  widespread  in  India  as  the 
Upanisads  themselves;  that,  like  the  Upanisads,  the  Agamas  also  became  in 
course  of  centuries  the  basis  of  a  number  of  “  creeds  ”  which,  unanimous 
in  accepting  the  essentials  of  the  Agamic  teaching,  were  divergent  as 
regards  rituals,  observances,  and  minor  essential  details.  He  says:  “The 

1  This  is  overlooked  in  the  common,  though  erroneous,  appellation — “  right 
hand  ”  and  “  left  hand  ”  worship,  used  in  a  sense  as  if  the  two  had  no 
SSstrik  connection  with  one  another.  The  worship  is  not  “  right "  and 
“  left  ”  in  the  sense  of  “  proper  ” '  and  “  improper,”  orthodox  and  heterodox. 
Each  is  a  recognized  form  of  worship,  presented  by  the  “  Tantra  ”  for  differing 
grades  of  its  Sadhakas.  Each  has  a  common  authority.  Therefore  no  follower 
of  the  Tantra  which  prescribes  these  two  acaras  thus  speaks  of  them. 

*  Dr.  V.  V.  Ramana  Sastrin,  in  his  Introduction  to  J.  M.  Naliaswami 
Pillai's  “  Studies  in  Saiva  Siddhanta 

3 


34 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


A  gam  as  contend  that  they  constitute  the  truest  exegesis  of  the  Vedas,  and 
their  origins  are  certainly  as  ancient  as  those  of  some  of  the  classical 
Upani$ads.  If  the  Fire  worship  be  regarded  as  the  ritual  inculcated  in 
the  Vedas  as  the  outer  symbolism  of  spiritual  truths,  the  temple  worship 
may,  on  its  side,  be  also  said  to  assume  a  similar  importance  in  regard  to 
the  Agamas.  For  the  rest,  it  will  be  seen  that  in  India  at  the  present 
day  there  is  hardly  a  Hindu  who  does  not  observe  some  kind  of  temple 
worship  or  another,  which  points  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Agamas  have 
had,  in  one  form  or  another,  an  universal  hold  upon  the  continent  of 
Hindu  India,  and  that  their  influence  tells.”  The  principles  and  ritual  of 
Saivaism  are  said  to  be  determined  by  the  Agamas  or  Tantras,  which  are 
twenty-eight  in  number,  from  Kamika  to  Vatula. 

According  to  some,  the  Vedas,  issued  from  four  out  of  the  five  mouths 
of  Siva  and  the  Tantra  of  the  “  higher  tradition  "  (urddhvamnaya)  from 
His  central  or  fifth  mouth.  The  other  Tantra  is  said  by  some  to  have 
proceeded  from  the  current  issuing  “  below  the  navel  ” 1  of  the  Deva. 
According  to  another  account,  all  the  mouths  of  Siva  gave  issue  to  those 
Tantras  which  spring  from  the  “  upward  current,”  and  the  others  arc  the 
produce  of  the  downward  current  ”  “  below  the  navel  ”.1  According, 
however,  to  both  versions  a  distinction  is  made  between  the  two  classes  of 
tradition.  In  the  Lalita  Sahasranama,  Bhaskararaya,  commenting  on  the 
Sloka  in  which  the  Devi  is  addressed  as  Nijajfiarupa  Nigama,  (the 
“  Nigama  are  the  expression  of  Thy  commands  ”),  says:  *  “  Athava  Santi 
vedanuyayini  Saivatantrani  kamikadinyastavingsatih  vedaviruddhani 1 
kapalabhairavadlni  cha  tc?u  vaidikani  nigamapadavacyani  paramci- 
varasya  mukhadudbhutatvidSjftarupani  napunamabhyadho  bhagadut- 
pannani  vcdaviruddhanltyarthah.”  He  there,  referring  to  the  Devi 
Bhagavata  and  Skanda  Puranas,  states  that  there  arc  twenty-eight  Saiva 
Tantras  commencing  with  Kamika  which  adhere  to  the  Vaidik  injunctions, 
as  there  are  others  commencing  with  Kapala,  Bhairava,  etc,  (assigned  by 
him  to  the  “  downward  current  ”),  which  do  not,  and  the  reference  in  the 
Lalita  to  Nigama  is,  according  to  his  views,  to  the  former  class.  As  they 
sprang  from  the  mouth  of  Parameivara,  they  are  said  to  be  the  form  of 
the  Devfs  commands.  The  five  Tantras,  commencing  with  Kamika 
sprang  from  the  sadyojata  face  of  Siva.  From  the  other  four  faces — 
viz.,  the  vamadeva,  aghora,  tatpurusa,  and  Hina — sprang  respectively 
the  five  Tantras,  Dipta,  and  others  of  its  class,  the  five  Vijaya  and 

1  See  post. 

*  See  as  to  the  meaning  of  these  expressions  post.  *  Verse  67. 

*  As  to  whether  the  rahasyapuja  of  the  Tantra  is  opposed  to  the  Veda,  see 
post.  In  similar  fashion  Aufrecht  (see  Adikarmapradipa)  says:  “  Subbagama 
appellata  a  via  Vcdis  pncscripta  non  descendant  ideoque  samayachara 
appellantur." 


INTRODUCTION 


.35 


others,  the  five  Vairocana  and  others,  and  the  eight  Tantras  Prodgita 
and  others.  These  twenty-eight  are  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  “  upward 
current,”  and  the  others  from  the  current  issuing  “  below  the  navel  ”.1  The 
Kamika  identifies  these  twenty-eight  Saiva  Tantras  or  Agamas  with  various 
parts  of  the  body  of  the  Dew,  Her  ornaments  and  garments;  and  all  other 
auxiliary  and  supplementary  Tantras  with  the  hair  on  Her  body.  For  the 
body  of  the  great  livari,  who  is  one  with  I$vara  Her  Lord,  is  contemplated 
upon  under  the  form  of  all  the  Tantras  (Sarvatantrarupa).  The  same 
commentator,1  dting  the  Kurma  Purajja,  observes: 

“  Y§ni  Sastrani  driiyante  lokesmin  vividhani  tu 
Srutismftiviruddhani  dvaitavadaratani  cha  ( 

Kapalang  bhairavangchaiva  sakalang  gautamang  matam 
Evangvidhani  chan  yani  mohanarthani  tani  tu 
Ye  kuiastrabhiyogena  mohayantiva  man  a  van 
Maya  fristani  iastrani  mchayaishhang  bhavantare.” 

In  another  place  Devi  says  to  Himavat :  “  Whatsoever  Scriptures  are  found 
opposed  to  Sruti  and  Sm|ti  devoted  to  dualism — viz.,  Kapala,  Bhairava, 
Sakai  a,  Gautama,  and  similar  ones — exist  for  the  purpose  of  bewilderment.* 
Those  who  are  confused  by  false  scriptures  also  confuse  the  world.  These 
were  all  created  by  me  for  the  sake  of  bewilderment.”  * 

In  the  passage  cited  from  the  Lalita,  Bhaskar&raya  refers  to  the 
Saivagamas  or  Saiva  Tantras,  and,  according  to  his  apparently  sectarian 
view,  the  other  Tantras  are  those  which  proceed  from  “  below  the  navel  ”. 

There  are,  however,  what  are  called  Sakta  Tantras,  and  to  these  the 
term  Tantra  is  more  commonly  applied,  because  in  this  form  they  have 
been  perhaps  more  known  and  spoken  of.  According  to  the  view  of  the 
author  cited,  the  “  Saivagamas  are  not  related  to  the  Sakta  Tantras  by 
any  organic  community  of  thought  or  descent  Whatever  be  the 
historical  basis  of  this  conclusion,  which  is  not  stated,  it  is  to  be  noted  (for 
the  thought  is  profound)  that  in  the  passage  from  the  Lalita,  though 
different  types  of  Tantra  arc  said  to  have  sprung  from  different  currents, 
they  are  yet  both  represented  as  issuing  from  the  body  of  the  God.  Siva 

1  Orddhasmtobhavi  ele  nabhyadhasrotasah  parah;  the  former  existing  in 
the  chaste  (urddharetas),  whose  “  stream  of  life  ”  (retas)  tends  upwards. 

1  Lalita,  verse  137. 

*  The  Devi  is,  while  die  great  Liberatrix,  also  the  “  all-bewildering  ” 
(SarvamobinI).  When  devoid  of  Her  grace,  men  are  bewildered  by  Her 
Mayi. 

'  Similar  language  is  used  as  regrads  the  Atheistic  School  in  chap,  txxvii 
of  the  Kaiika  l’tirana,  which  says:  “  Vamah  kayobrahma  nopi  mangsa- 
modyadibhuktaye,  kritomaya  mohanaya  charwakadipravarttakah,”  The 
reference  here  is  to  the  nastika  doctrines  of  Charwaka  and  his  followers. 

*  Dr.  Ramana  Sastrin,  loci  at.  See  ante. 


36 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


is  represented  as  the  author  of  all  Agamas.  There  is,  in  fact,  but  one 
source  whence  all  forms  of  religion,  as  all  else,  come.  If  the  ray  of  pure 
sattvik  light  appears  to  be  variously  coloured,  or  even  at  times  clouded  or 
obscured,  it  is  not  by  reason  of  the  alteration  of  its  nature,  but  of  the 
disturbing  and  darkening  qualities  of  the  other  gunas  constituting  the  Devi’s 
substance  manifesting  in  the  Jiva.  It  is  not  without  reason  that  Siva, 
the  Friend  of  all,  is  represented  as  surrounded  by  Bhuta  and  the  demoniac 
hosts.  If  the  Devi,  as  Vidya,  liberates,  by  Her  MSya  (from  which  the 
religious  sense  no  more  than  any  other  is  free),  She  also  binds.  The 
sectarian,  whether  a  £aiva  or  other,  naturally  discovers  abundance  of 
this  mayik  play  in  the  creed  of  his  neighbour  which  he  condemns. 

I  doubt  myself  whether  there  exists  at  present  material  for  conclusions  of 
any  degree  of  certainty  as  to  the  historical  origin  of  the  so-called  Sakta 
Tantras.  Certainly  no  one  has  yet  collected  such  as  may  exist.  They  are, 
however,  I  believe,  at  base  (whatever  may  be  the  accretions  they  are  said 
by  some  to  have  received)  an  outcome  from  the  same  Vaidik  source,  the 
Mother  of  all  Dharma,  as  the  Saiva  Tantras,  though,  having  regard  to 
the  difference  of  acara,  they  may  derive  from  this  common  source  in 
different  form. 

That  which  is  commonly  regarded  as  telling  against  this  conclusion 
is  the  viracara  ritual  with  the  Pancatattva.  It  is  said  *  by  a  modem 
Saivite  that  the  Saivagamas  prohibit  drink  and  the  eating  of  flesh. 
Though  we  may  recall  both  Vaidik  usage  and  the  curse  of  Bhrgu  on  those 
who  follow  the  rites  of  Bhava:  VLjantu  iivadik?ayam  yatra  daivam 
surasavam ;  *  this  prohibition  is  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the 
“  Sakta  ”  Tantras,  which  limit  the  ritual  use  of  wine  and  flesh  to  the 
worshippers  of  Sakti  initiate  in  vamacara.  , 

That  the  provisions  of  Tantra  which  relate  to  the  Pancatattva  are 
opposed  to  the  Veda  is  a  notion  which  is  declared  by  the  Indian  Tantrik 
pandits  to  be  erroneous.  Manu  says: 

“  Na  mangsabhaksane  doso  na  madye  na  cha  maithunc, 

Pravrittircsa  bhutanang  nivrittistu  mahaphala."1 *  3 

“  There  is  no  wrong  in  the  eating  of  meat,  nor  in  the  drinking  of 
wine,  nor  in  sexual  intercourse;  for  these  things  arc  natural  to  men.  At 
the  same  time  abstention  therefrom  is  productive  of  great  fruit.” 

1  Saiva  Siddhanta,  315,  v.  ante. 

1  Bhagavata  Purana,  cited  in  Muir,  S.O.T.,  377-382. 

3  So  also  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra  says :  “  Eating  and  sexual  union, 
O  Devi,  are  desired  by  and  natural  to  men,  and  their  use  is  regulated  for  their 
benefit  in  the  ordinances  of  Siva.” 

“  Nrinang  svabhfivajang  dev!  priyang  bhojaaamaithunam 
Samksepaya  hitirthaya  fcuvadharmme  nirupitam.” 

■  (UJlasa  ix,  verse  283) 


INTRODUCTION 


37 


He  is  doubtless  there  referring  to  those  enjoyments  which  belong  to 
the  Pravjtti  Marga — the  use  of  meat  and  fermented  liquor  during  the 
Vaidik  age  being  well  known.  But  such  use  formed  also  a  part  of  its 
sacrificial  and  ritual  system.  As  regards  Latasadhana,  the  Kalikopani- 
sad  of  the  Atharvaveda  and  other  Sastras  are  relied  on  as  authorities  by 
Tantrik  Papdits  in  support  of  the  Viracara  ritual.  It  is  unnecessary  to 
deal  with  this  ritual  here,  as  its  discussion  forms  no  part  of  the  author’s 
work.  Not  improbably  (in  part  at  least)  originating  in  a  doctrine 
intended  for  the  detached  non-dualisdc  initiate,1  and  kept  closely 
secret,*  it  may  have  been  perverted  by  the  vulgar,  to  whom  some  portions 
of  it  became  later  known.  The  abuses  of  these  commoner  people,  as  time 
went  on,  developed  such  proportions  as  to  ultimately  obscure  all  other 
matters  in  the  Tantra,  thus  depriving  them  of  that  attention  which 
is  their  due. 

The  objections,  however,  which  have  been  made  to  the  Tantrik 
rahasyapujii  have  probably  been  the  chief  cause  of  the  attack  made  upon 
the  age  and  authority  of  the  Sastra.  It  would  be  beyond  the  limits  of  a 
general  Introduction  such  as  this  to  enter  at  length  into  this  difficult  and 
debated  question.  As  the  view  which  is  to  be  found  more  commonly 
stated  is  adverse  to  the  Sastra  on  both  these  points,  it  may  be  shortly 
pointed  out  that  the  Tantra  is  referred  to  in  works  of  acknowledged 
authority  such  as  the  Srimadbhagavata,  the  celebrated  Vaipjava 
Sastra,  the  Devi  Bhagavata  (which  in  the  ninth  skanda  speaks  of  it  as  a 
Vcdahga),  and  in  the  Varaha,  Padma,  SkaDda,  and  other  Puranas.  In 
the  first-named  work  Bhagavan  says:  “  My  worship  is  of  three  kinds, 
Vaidik,  Tantrik,  and  mixed  (raiira),”  and  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the 
eleventh  skanda  of  the  same  work  it  is  said  that  Kclava  assumes 
different  forms  in  the  different  Yugas,  and  should  be  worshipped 
in  different  ways,  and  that  in  Kaliyuga  he  is  to  be  worshipped 
according  to  the  injunctions  of  Tantra.  The  great  Sankaracarya 
recognizes  the  Sastra  in  his  Ananda  Lahari  and  Saktamoda,  as  does 
An  and  a  Tirtha,  the  commentator  of  Punjaprajiiadarfana.  The  Sastra  is 
frequently  quoted  in  the  celebrated  work  on  Smfti,  the  Astaviipiati- 
tattva  of  Raghunandana,  which  is  itself  universally  accepted  as  an  authority 
throughout  Bengal.  In  short,  as  the  Veda  issued  from  the  mouth  of 
Brahma,  so  the  Agama  Sastra  is  said  to  have  come  from  that  of 

’Thus,  as  regards  worship  with  woman  (LatasSdhanaJ,  it  is  said  that  it 
is  not  possible  for  one  who  is  a  dualist  devoid  of  the  knowledge  of  Kula,  and 
addicted  to  sexual  intercourse,  to  duly  follow  Siva's  mandate.  Hell  follows 
lust.  As  the  Tantrasara  says,  “  Lingayonirato  mantri  rauravang  narakang 
brajet  ”  (“  The  Mantrin  addicted  to  lust  goes  to  the  Raurava  Hell  ”) — that  is, 
the  hell  in  which  the  qualities  of  the  fiery  tejas  tattva  exist  in  painful  excess. 

*  MJtriyonivat,  as  it  is  said. 


38 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Sadli&va,1  Current  objections  to  the  Tantra  on  the  ground  that  it  lacks 
the  authority  of  Sruti,  Sm^ti,  or  Pur&pa,  and  is  of  more  recent  date,  are 
based,  according  to  orthodox  views,  on  a  misconception.  According  to 
those  views,  all  Sastras  are  without  beginning  and  eternal,  as  indeed  in 
one  sense  they  are,  though  their  phenomenal  appearance  may  be  success- 
ivc.  Letters  or  sounds  are  the  sensuous  manifestation  of  words,  the 
essence  of  which  resides  in  the  spho(a  or  conception  which  existed  from  ail 
eternity  before  ever  these  sounds  or  words  were  uttered.  The  phenomenal 
appearance  of  Tantra  postdates  the  other  Sastras  in  the  same  sense  as 
that  in  which  the  Kaliyuga  is  said  to  succeed  to  the  earlier  ages  of  the 
present  Mahayuga.  There  is,  in  fact,  but  one  truth  variously  presented 
to  the  respective  ages.  So  the  Tantra  has  been  said  to  exist  in  the  Veda 
as  the  perfume  exists  in  the  flower.  While  the  theoretical  portion  of  the 
Gayatri  Tattva  is  contained  in  the  Vedanta,  the  practical  and  ritualistic 
portion  is  in  the  Tantra.  Both  the  theoretical  exposition  and  practical 
application  of  universal  principles  varies  with  the  needs  of  the  ages  and 
the  JIva  living  therein.  It  is  said  of  the  Devi:  “  Many  arc  the  paths  which 
vary  according  to  the  Sastras  but  all  leading  to  fruition  (siddhi)  merge  in 
Thee  alone,  as  all  rivers  merge  and  are  lost  in  the  sea.” 

For  orthodox  views  on  this  matter  I  will  here  refer  the  reader  to  our 
author  and  to  a  recent  essay  on  the  “  Antiquity  of  the  Tantra,”  by 
Mahamahopadhyaya  Jadavdvara  Tarkaratna.*  The  Pandit  prefaces  the 
matter  by  a  notice  of  the  views  generally  entertained  by  what  arc  called 
“  educated  ”  Indians,  which  he  summarizes  as  follows:  They  hold,  he 
tells  us,  that  the  Tantras  are  of  recent  production;  that  to  the  Vaidik  age 
succeeded  the  Upanisadik.  Then  followed  the  Pauranik  age,  and  then, 
quite  recently,  that  of  the  Tantras.  But  even  then  the  latter  Sactra  was 
not  of  general  authority,  having  neither  governance  nor  influence  in  other 
parts  of  India  than  Bengal,  where  alone  it  was  predominant.  There  it  was 
created  by  Bengali  Pandits  upon  the  model  of  the  Buddhist  teaching  and 
practice  of  the  Mahayana  sect.’  These  Bengali  Pandits  arc  also  alleged 
to  have  incorporated  therewith  the  worship  of  Sakti,  the  goddess  of  the 
aboriginal  barbarian  inhabitants  of  Bengal.  The  date  of  many  of  the 
Tantras  is  said  to  fall  within  the  last  three  hundred  years,  and,  amongst 
other  proofs  of  this,  reference  is  made  to  the  fact  that  the  Yogini  Tantra 
mentions  the  name  of  the  founder  of  the  Coochbehar  Raj,  which  was 
established  within  that  time. 


1  Some  other  authorities  will  be  found  cited  in  the  later  pages  of  this  book; 
and  I  summarize  in  the  following  pages  the  opinion  of  Mahamahopadhyaya 
Jadavdvara  Tarkaratna,  in  his  article  on  the  antiquity  of  Tantra  (Tantrer- 
prachinatva)  in  the  SShitya  Samhiti  of  Assin,  1317. 

1  See  preceding  note.  *  See  post. 


INTRODUCTION 


89 


These  objections  are  .then  classified  under  four  headings:  (i)  The 
Tantra  is  not  an  ancient  Dhanna  Sastra  of  the  Aryan  race  having  effect 
in  all  parts  of  India,  but  was  in  force  in  Bengal  alone,  being,  indeed,  an 
invention  of  the  Bengalis,  who  naturally  honoured  their  own  creation, 
(2)  Amongst  Mahay3na  Buddhists  there  is  worship  of  Tara,  VajrayoginI, 
K?etrap2la,  and  the  use  of  mantras,  bijas,  and  japa,  in  the  cult  of  such 
Devatas.  There  is  similar  worship  in  the  Tantra,  which  must  therefore 
be  derived  from  Mahayana  Buddhism.  (3)  Aboriginal  tribes  arc  worship¬ 
pers  of  Sakti,  ghosts,  snakes,  and  trees.  The  Tantras  also  deal  with  such 
worship,  and  have  therefore  adopted  the  worship  of  such  aborigines.  (4)  A 
book  which  relates  an  incident  which  took  place  not  more  than  three 
hundred  years  ago  cannot  itself  be  older.  • 

To  these  objections  the  Mahamahopadhyaya  replies  as  follows:  As  to 
the  first,  he  rejoins  that  Tantrik  influences  are  to  be  found,  not  only  in 
Bengal,  but  throughout  India.  Just  as  the  Bengalis  of  the  higher  castes  are 
divided  into  Saktas,  Vaisnavas,  and  Saivas,  so  it  is  with  the  peoples  of 
Kamarupa,  Mithila,  Utkala,  and  Kalinga,  and  the  Kashmirian  pandits. 
The  Sakti  mantra,  Siva  mantra,  and  Visiju  mantra,  are  each  Tantrik. 
Amongst  Daksinatyas,1  Mahamahopadhyaya  Subramanya  Sastri,  and 
many  others,  are  Saktas.  The  late  Mahamahopadhyaya  Rama  Miira 
Sastri,  Mahamahopadhyaya  Rama  Sastri  Bhagavatacarya,  and  many 
others,  were  and  arc  Vaisijavas.  Mahamahopadhyaya  Sivakumara 
Sastri,  and  a  number  of  others,  are  Saivas.  In  Brindavan  there  are 
many  Sakta  as  well  as  Vaispava  Brahmaijas,  though  amongst  the  higher 
castes  in  Maharastra  and  other  Southern  Indian  countries,  Saivas  and 
Vaisnavas  are  more  numerous  than  Saktas.  Followers  of  the  PaSupata 
and  J^ngama  cults  arc  Saivas  whereas  those  of  MadhavacSrya  and 
Ramanujacarya  arc  Vaisnavas.  Many  in  the  North-west  arc  initiated 
in  the  Rama  mantra,  which  is  to  be  found  only  in  the  Tantra.  It  is  still 
more  remarkable  that,  according  to  this  author,  the  pandas  of  Srf  Pnru- 
soUama  *  arc  all  Saktas,  and  the  priests  of  Kamakhya  Devi  *  are  all 
Vaispavas. 

Passing  to  the  second  argument,  he  denies  that  similarity  between  two 
doctrines  and  practices  is  necessarily  proof  that  the  first  is  borrowed  from 
the  second.  It  may  equally  be  argued  the  other  way.  If,  because  the 
Buddhists  worship  Tara,  Hayagriva  and  others  with  dhyanas  and  bfjas 
similar  to  those  in  the  Tantra,  it  is  contended  that  the  latter  is  derived 
from  the  former,  it  may  equally  well  be  urged  that  such  Buddhist  worship 
is  taken  from  the  Tantra.  If  the  Hindu  mind  was  moved  by  and  drawn 


1  Pandits  of  Southern  India. 

*  Jagannatha  at  Puri. 

*  At  Kamrup  in  Assam,  a  great  Tantrika  centre. 


40 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


to  the  touching  teachings  of  Buddhism,  why,  he  asks,  should  it  concern  it¬ 
self  with  the  externals,  and  not  with  the  fundamental  principles  of  the 
religion  to  which  it  is  so  attracted  ?  Why  should  the  Hindu,  instead  of 
striving  for  Nirvana,  stand  before  Buddhist  images,  fashioned  after  Buddhis¬ 
tic  models,  and  with  folded  palms  pray  for  beauty,  victory,  glory,  and  the 
destruction  of  foes?  There  is  obviously  a  great  difference  between  yoga 
undertaken  for  the  extinction  of  all  desires,  and  such  prayers  to  the  Deity 
for  wealth  and  the  destruction  of  foes,  as  form  part  of  the  Vaidik  religion. 
The  Bhagavadgita  preaches  niskfima  karma,1  which,  with  the  pursuit  of 
spiritual  knowledge  leads  to  the  acquisition  of  such  knowledge,  and  there¬ 
after  to  Nirvana;  and  on  this  account  the  “  educated  ”  say  that  the  Gita 
is  influenced  by  Buddhistic  ideals.  In  the  Tantra  there  is  performance  of 
work  with  desire,  which  is  contrary  to  Buddhist  teaching.  Hinduism 
alone,  of  all  religions,  provides  different  forms  of  religious  teaching  for 
persons  of  differing  religious  competence  (adhikara).  Buddhism  does 
not.  How,  otherwise,  is  it  possible  to  account  for  Buddhadcva’s 
vairagya,1  his  loss  of  faith  in  Hinduism,  and  his  discovery  of  the 
new  path  whereby  man  shall  escape  the  infirmities  of  old  age  and  death? 
Buddhism,  out  of  pity  for  all  living  creatures,  forbids  the  sacrifice  of 
animals.  It  is,  he  thinks,  an  astonishing  proposition  that  Tantrikas 
followed  such  a  religion,  when  at  the  same  time  they  are  supposed  to  have 
invented  a  novel  Sastra,  enjoining  the  sacrifice  of  goats,  buffaloes,  and 
other  animals,  before  images  of  Dev  as  and  Devis,  also  drawn  from 
Buddhism.  While  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  all  will  understand  the 
complexities  of  Buddhist  philosophy,  pity  is  a  virtue  which  goes  with 
humble  minds.  If  there  be  anything  which  might  prove  attractive  in 
Buddhism  to  men  in  general,  it  is  its  prohibition  against  the  slaughter  of 
animals — an  ordinance  which  melted  the  hearts  of  a  large  number  of  the 
Hindus  and  made  them  Buddhists.  It  is  scarcely  probable,  then,  that 
Hinduism  should  omit  that  which  is  fundamentally  attractive  in  a  religion 
which  (in  his  view)  denies  the  existence  of  God,  and  should  inaugurate  a 
new  Sastra  (the  Tantra)  providing  for  the  worship  of  Devas  and  Devis, 
according  to  the  tenets  of  the  Buddhist  Mahayana  school.  It  is  modem 
Vai^pavism,  on  the  contrary,  which,  in  its  prohibition  of  animal  sacrifice, 
is  inspired  by  the  Buddhistic  principle  that  “  cessation  from  the  killing  of 
animals  is  the  highest  form  of  religion  In  the  great  yajfia,  which  lasted 
a  hundred  years,  Saunaka  and  other  Rsis  used  to  listen  to  the  Srimad 
Bhagavata  from  the  mouth  of  Suta,  and  at  the  same  time  to  sacrifice 
animals.’  In  the  Aivamedha  yajfia  which  King  Yudisthira,  the  disciple 
of  Krsna,  performed  under  the  guidance  of  Sri  Kr?na  himself,  a  horse 


1  The  performance  of  work  selflessly,  without  desire  for  its  fruit. 

*  Dispassion.  *  Skanda  I. 


INTRODUCTION 


41 


was  killed,  offered  to  Devas,  and  eaten.  Bhagavan  Sri  Krsna  Himself 
hunted  a  boar  under  the  command  of  Vasudcva  for  the  satisfaction  of  the 
Pit^s  in  Sraddha.  The  eleventh  skanda  of  the  Bhagavata1  explicitly 
states  that  the  killing  of  animals  in  sacrifice  is  no  killing. 

Amongst  the  Vaiiyas  of  Mathura,  many  had  become  Buddhists,  and 
others  Jains.  Greatly  moved  as  they  were  at  the  sight  of  Chaitanya’s  love 
for  Kfina,  and  drawn  thereby  to  Hinduism,  they  yet  hesitated  to  return 
to  it  on  the  ground  that  it  sanctioned  the  slaughter  of  animals  in  sacrifice. 
It  was  perhaps  at  that  time  that  the  Vaisnava  teachers  announced  that 
the  killing  of  animals  was  not  sanctioned  by  their  tenets,  and  thus  succeed¬ 
ed  in  converting  Buddhists  and  Jains  to  their  faith.  It  is  probably  from 
this  time  that  Vaisnava  families  abandoned  animal  Sacrifice  on  occasions 
of  puja.  Although  common  Vaisnavas  eat  fish,  the  flesh  of  other  animals 
is  forbidden.  In  Bengal,  Utkala,  and  other  countries,  Buddhist  teachers 
adapted  from  Hinduism  the  establishment  of  images  of  Devas,  the  worship 
of  such  Devas  with  mantras  and  bijas,  and  called  themselves  Mahayana 
Buddhists — a  sect  which,  of  course,  came  into  existence  long  after  the 
passing  away  of  the  Buddha.  The  Lalitavistara,*  or  biography  of  Sakya- 
singha,  states  that  he  had  a  special  knowledge  of  Nigama,  Puranas, 
Itihasa,  and  the  Vedas.  Whenever  both  Veda  and  Nigama  are  mention¬ 
ed  in  the  same  passage,  the  latter  term  refers  to  Tantra,  which  goes  by  the 
names  of  Agama  and  Nigama.* 

Again,  Sakyasingha  is  made  to  say  to  the  Bhiksukas.4  “  Such  fools 
seek  the  protection  of,  and  pay  obeisance  to,  Brahma,  Indra,  Rudra, 
Visnu,  the  Devi,  Kartikcya,  Mother  Katyayani,  Ganapati,  and  others. 
Some  perform  tapasyS  in  cremation  grounds,  and  at  the  crossing  of  four 
roads.”*  Speaking  of  the  practice  of  heretics  (pisantfas),  Sakyasingha 
mentions  the  use  of  wine  and  flesh.  Had  not  the  Tantrik  form  of  worship 
been  then  in  existence  how  could  he  have  known  and  spoken  ill  of  it  ?‘ 
Seeing,  also,  what  the  Lalitavistara  says,  can  it,  he  asks,  be  contended  that 
the  Tantra  is  derived  from  Mahayana  Buddhism? 

To  the  third  objection  the  Mahamahopadhyaya  answers  that  the 
views  there  expressed  are  similar  to  those  given  under  the  second  heading, 
and  the  rejoinder,  therefore,  is  similar.  It  may,  however,  he  says,  be 


1  XI,  Chapter  v,  lloka  xiii. 

*  Chapter  xii.  *  Vide  ante. 

4  Buddhist  Sannyasis.  *  Lalitavistara,  chap.  xvii. 

*  This,  of  course,  does  not  necessarily  follow.  All  that  is  here  proved  is 
that  Tantrik  practices  antedated  the  Lalitavistara,  whatever  be  the  date  at 
which  the  latter  was  written.  From  the  standpoint  of  Western  criticism  this 
and  all  similar  orthodox  arguments  are  weakened  by  the  too  ready  credit  some¬ 
times  given  to  the  age  and  authority  of  the  literary  material  on  which  they 
rest. 


42 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


asked  who  are  meant  when  the  barbarian  aborigines  of  India  are  spoken 
of.  According  to  the  English,  such  aborigines  were  Dravidians,  Odras, 
and  Paundrakas.  Is  it,  he  says,  to  be  supposed  that  Bengali  Pandits 
composed  the  Tantra  Sastra  in  imitation  of  the  practices  of  Dravidians 
inhabiting  the  distant  Deccan  ?  Or  was  the  Tantrik  system  adopted  from 
Mundas,  Santhas,  Garos,  Meches,  Kuchcs,  Khasias  and  other  primitive  in¬ 
habitants  of  Assam? '  The  Pandit  hesitates  “  to  lay  this  heavy  burden  of 
ignominy  on  the  heads  of  Bengali  Pandits  ”  seeing  that  the  Sakti  Devata 
is  established  and  worshipped  in  all  parts  of  India.  Thus  Kamakhya  is 
worshipped  at  Kamarupa,  VindhyavasinI  on  the  Vindhya  Hills,  Yogamaya 
and  Pau mamas!  at  Brindavan;  Annapurna,  Sankata,  Tripurabhairavi, 
sixty-four  Yoginls,  *Kalabhairavi,  Durga,  Sitala,  Mangala,  and  other 
Devis  at  Kaii;  Ku;ali  at  Kau$ali;  Parvati  on  the  Sahya  Hills,  Poona; 
Guhyeivari  in  Nepal;  Gayatri  and  Savitri  in  Rajputana;  Lalita  at 
Prayaga;  Ugratara  at  Tirhut;  Mayadevi  at  Haridvara; 1 * *  Chandi  on  the 
Chandi  Hills  near  Haridvara;  Jvalamukhi  at  Jalandhara;  *  Cinnamasta, 
some  forty  miles  therefrom ;  Kali  (whom  King  Prithvi  worshipped)  seven 
miles  to  the  south  of  Delhi;  Mumba  in  Bombay  city;  Mahalaksmi,  on 
the  sea  coast  near  Bombay;  Kali  kit  on  the  Harsha  Island,  west  of  and 
near  MaliakakSvara;  Kprabhavani  near  Kashmir;  and  Devi  Minaksi, 
south  of  Madras.4 * *  All  these  Devis  (to  which  many  others  might  be 
added)  arc  still  worshipped,  and  were  established  in  their  various  places  in 
distant  and  unknown  ages.  Even  at  the  seat  of  Purusottama  in  Utkala,11 
Vimala  is  worshipped,  so  also  arc  Sarasvati,  Bhuvaneshvari,  Kali,  and 
Laksmi.  Obeisance  is  made  to  Subhadra  *  with  the  mantra :  “  Katya- 
yani,  salutation  to  Thee.”  Bhuvancsvari  is  worshipped  at  Bhubanei- 
vara;  DhavalcSvari  at  Dhavaleivara ;  eight  Saktis,  Viraja,  Indrani  at 
Yajpur,  and  Katakachandi  at  Cuttack. 

If  it  be  argued  that  the  Tantra  Sastra  is  of  recent  origin  because  it 
provides  for  the  worship  of  $akri,  then  the  same  observation  must  apply 
to  the  Puranas,  Mahabharata,  and  even  the  Vedas  and  Upanisads.  The 
Mahabharata  contains  hymns  in  honour  of  the  Devi.  The  Srimad- 
bhagavata  provides  for  the  worship  of  Uma.  The  maidens  of  Vraja 
worshipped  Kutyayani.  The  Markandeya  Purana  relates  the  greatness  of 
Devi.  In  the  Puranas  Her  greatness  is  sung.  Numerous  passages  in 


1  The  Pandit’s  reply,  of  course,  takes  benefit  from  the  folly  of  the  statement 
he  answers. 

s  After  whom  the  place  (Hardwar)  is  called  Mayapuri  in  the  Sastra. 

*  Where  fire  is  said  to  ever  burn  to  consume  the  offerings. 

4  The  Devi  at  Madura. 

*  The  temple  of  Jagannatha  (Visnu)  at  Puri,  Orissa. 

*  Sister  of  Jagannatha. 


INTRODUCTION 


43 


proof  of  this  may  be  culled  from  the  Skanda,  Brahma,  Brahmavai- 
varta,  Bhavisya,  Padma,  Devi,  and  Kalika  Puranas.  The  autumnal 
Durga  Pflja  is  mentioned  in  many  PurSijas.  It  is  an  error  to  suppose  that 
Raghunandana  Bhattacharya  alone  has  prescribed  for  the  worship  of 
Durga.  Previous  to  him  many  others  had  done  so,  such  as  Srldatta, 
Harinatha,  Vidyadhara,  Ratnakara,  Bhojadeva,  JimOtavahana,  Hala- 
yudha,  Riyamukuta,  Vacaspati  Miira  and  many  other  renowned 
compilers.  Many  well-known  books  written  before  the  age  of  Raghu¬ 
nandana  contain  provisions  for  Durga  Pflja,  such  as  the  Durgabhakti- 
tarangiru,  Samvatsarapradipa,  Kalakaumudi,  Jyoti^amava,  Smrtisagara, 
Kalpataru,  Krityamahamava,  Krityaratnakara,  Kamanipujanibandha, 
Krityatattvflmava,  Cbakrflnflrflyanl,  Kriyayogopasamvara,  Durgabhakti- 
prakaSa,  Daksinatya,  Kalanimaya  and  Pujaratnakara. 

Although  the  Bengali  practice  of  worshipping  earthen  images  of 
Durga  with  great  pomp  is  not  followed  in  all  parts  of  India,  yet  She  is 
everywhere  worshipped  in  Ghatas  (jars).  Shrines  which  contain  Her 
images  are  visited;  nine-day  vratas  arc  made,  fasts  observed,  and  the 
Chandi  read  on  the  Mahastami  day.  Even  now  the  women  of  Vraja  in 
Brindavan  bathe  in  the  Jumna  early  every  morning  for  the  first  nine 
days  of  the  bright  fortnight  of  the  month  of  ASvina,  and  worship  images 
of  the  Devi,  which  they  draw  on  the  banks  of  the  river.  Readers  of  the 
Chandogya,  Talavakara  and  other  Upanisads  are  aware  of  the  incident 
in  which  Uma,  the  Daughter  of  the  Mountain,  riding  a  lion  in  a  blaze  of 
light,  appeared  to  Indra  and  the  other  Devas  in  order  to  prove  that  it 
was  not  by  their  Sakti  that  they  lived  and  moved,  but  that  all  which  was 
donr  was  so  done  by  virtue  of  that  MahaJakti.  In  the  Veda  there  is  the 
Sarasuali  sflkla,  in  the  Yajurveda  the  LaksmI  sflkta,  and  in  the  tenth 
Mandala  of  the  Rgvcda  the  Devi  sflkta.  Even  the  worship  of  Devi 
Manasa  is  based,  not  on  the  Tantra,  but  Purana.  And  the  same  may  be 
said  as  regards  the  worship  of  the  TulsI  plant,  and  the  Bael  and  ASvattha 
tree.1  Far  distant  from  Bengal,  on  the  summit  of  Mount  Govarddhana, 
there  is  an  image  of  Devi  Manasa.  And  in  the  land  of  Vraja,  where 
animal  sacrifice  is  condemned,  goats  are  sacrificed  before  this  Devi.  Snake 
worship  exists  in  other  countries  than  Bengal,  and  was  not  introduced  by 
the  Tantra  Sastra.  A  survey  of  the  religious  practices  prevalent  in 
ancient  times  and  in  other  countries  does  not  support  the  conclusion  that 
because  the  Tantra  advocates  Sakti  worship  it  is  therefore  of  recent  origin. 

Passing  to  the  fourth  heading,  the  Pandit  asks  how  it  is  that,  if  the 
Yogini  Tantra  is  at  most  only  three  hundred  years  old,  Raghunandana 

1  The  TulsI  and  Asvattha  are  wore  hipped,  and  bael  leaves  arc  offered  to 
Siva.  A$vattharupobhagavan  vijnureva  na  sanriayah  rudrarupovatastadvat 
palaio  brahmarupadhrik.  Padma  Purana,  Uttara  Khan  da,  ch.  cbc. 


44 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


BhattachSrya,  the  great  Smarta,  and  K^pananda  Bhattacharya, 
contemporaries  of  Sri  Chaitanya,  referred  to  and  quoted  it  as  an 
authority  in  the  Smjtitattva  and  Tantrasara.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
common  knowledge  that  if  in  some  obscure  family  a  great  person  (maha- 
punisa),  or  a  succession  of  great  persons,  is  bora,  their  descendants  and 
disciples  name  the  members  of  that  family  after  those  of  some  other  well- 
known  family,  so  as  to  create  the  notion  that  the  two  families  are  the 
same.  It  was  perhaps  in  this  way  he  surmises  that  the  Raj  family  of 
Cooch  Behar  was  raised  to  the  position  of  being  the  descendants  of  Siva 
mentioned  in  the  Yogini  Tantra. 

Madhavacarya,  the  commentator  upon  the  Vedas,  has,  in  dealing 
with  the  Patanjala  *  Dariana  in  his  compilation  of  the  six  Darianas, 
quoted  many  passages  from  the  Tantra  Sastra  with  reference  to  the  ten 
forms  of  Samskaras  prescribed  therein.  VScaspati  Miira,  the  commen¬ 
tator  upon  the  six  Darfanas,  has,  in  his  commentary  on  the  Patanjala 
Darfana,  recommended  dhyana  of  Devatas  as  prescribed  in  the  Tantras. 
BhagavSn  Sankaracarya,  also,  has,  in  the  Sariraka  Bha^ya,  made 
mention  of  the  Tantrik  §atcakra.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that 
none  of  these  three  great  men — Sankaracarya,  Madhavacarya,  and 
Vacaspati  Miira,— was  a  Bengali.  Before  the  compilation  of  Kfsna- 
nanda’s  Tantrasara,  there  were  many  compilers  of  Tantra,  such  as 
Raghav&nanda,  Raghavabhatta,  Virupaksa,  and  Govindabhatta.  In  his 
observations  upon  the  Yantra  of  NUasarasvati,  in  his  Tantrasara,  Krsna- 
nanda,  observes:  “  Said  by  even  Sri  Sankaracarya.”  The  famous  Sakti 
Stotra, 1  named  Anandalahari  (wave  of  bliss),*  is  everywhere  known 
to  be  the  work  of  Sankaracarya,  and  is,  as  such,  universally  recited 
by  devotees  before  Devatas  with  feeling  and  reverence.  Compilations  of 
Tantra,  such  as  the  Ramarcana  Candrika,1  the  Mantramuktavali,  the 
Sarasamgraha,  the  Bhuvaneivariparijata,  the  Saradatilaka,  the  Tripura- 
sarasamuchchaya,  the  Svachchhandasangraha,  the  Sarasamuchchaya,  the 
Mantratantraprakaia,  and  the  Somabhujangavali,  were  prepared  long 
before  the  time  of  Krsnananda  and  Raghunandana.  References  to  these 
books  are  to  be  found  in  the  works  of  Krsnananda  and  Raghunandana. 
In  the  well-known  astronomical  work  called  Dipika,  days  for  taking 
DiksS  (initiation)  have  been  determined  separately  from  those  for 
commencement  of  education  and  investiture  with  the  sacred  thread  (upa- 
nayana).  That  Dfksa  must,  therefore,  be  Tantrik  Diksa,  distinct  from 

1  Hymn  to  Sakti. 

'  See  Arthur  and  Ellen  Avalon’s  “  Hymns  to  the  Goddess  ”  for  this  and 
other  Hymns  to  the  Devi. 

*  Pali  ages  compiled  in  the  Ramarchana  Chandrika  have  been  quoted  by 
Vacaspati  Miira  in  the  chapter  on  Vasanti  Puji  in  his  Krityacmtamani. 
This  supports  the  antiquity  of  Ramarchana  Chandrika. 


INTRODUCTION 


45 

Vaidik  Dfksa  or  Upanayana.  Compilations  come  into  existence  long 
after  the  preparation  of  original  works  and  when  capacity  for 
their  production  has  ceased.  It  is  when  ordinary  folk  find  difficulty 
in  establishing  a  concordance  between  the  ordinances  contained  in 
numerous  original  and  other  works — that  the  learned  undertake  the 
making  of  compilations  for  the  determination  of  the  right  forms  of  religious 
practice,  the  regulation  of  objections  against  the  Sastra,  the  establishment 
of  a  concordance  between  apparently  conflicting  authorities  and  the  settle¬ 
ment  of  all  disputed  matters.  A  period  of  at  least  a  thousand  years  must, 
in  this  author’s  opinion,  be  considered  to  have  elapsed  between  the  date 
of  original  works  and  that  of  compilations.  Many  of  the  compilers  whose 
names  have  been  mentioned  lived  a  thousand  ycars*Ugo.  There  is  there¬ 
fore  no  ground,  in  the  Pandit’s  opinion,  for  doubting  that  the  Tantra 
Sastra  is  at  least  two  thousand  years  old.  In  the  eleventh  skanda  of  the 
Srimadbhagavata  it  is  said  that  Kdava  (Visnu)  should  be  worshipped 
in  the  manner  prescribed  in  the  Tantra  Sastra;'  and,  again,  that  men 
desirous  of  acquiring  jfiana  (spiritual  knowledge)  should  worship  Bhagavan 
according  to  Vaidik  and  Tantrik  ordinances.1  The  same  book  in  the 
same  skanda  also  says:  “  Hear  how  people  should  worship  Me  in  the 
Kali  age  according  to  various  Tantras.*  They  should  observe  my  YJtras 
(DolayatrS,  Rathayatra,  etc.),  perform  sacrifices,  be  initiated  in  the 
Vaidik  and  Tantrik  modes,  and  undertake  to  perform  the  vrata  in  which 
I  am  worshipped.” 

In  the  Brahma  Purana  it  is  said  that  people  should  enter  into  the 
temple  pf  Bhuvandvara  in  the  Garden  of  a  single  mango  Tree,1  and 
there  worship  Mahadcva  according  to  Vaidik  and  Tantrik  rites.  This 
passage  has  been  quoted  by  Raghunandana  in  his  Purusottamatattva. 
The  Kurina  Purana  says:  “  There  arc  found  in  the  world  many  Sastras 
antagonistic  to  Sruti  and  Smrti.  The  ordinances  of  such  Sastras  are 
tamasik.*  Karala,  Bhairava,  Yamala,  and  similar  other  books  follow 
VSmamarga,  ”  "  and  so  on.  This  passage,  which  is  also  contained  in  the 
Kurma  Purana,  has  been  quoted  by  Raghunandana  and  other  compilers. 
The  Pandit  points  out  that  Karala,  Bhairava,  and  Yamala  are  Tantrik 
works,  and  that  the  Vamamarga  is  a  mode  of  Tantrik  worship.  In  the 
Ramayana  there  are  references  to  Bala  and  Atibala,7  which  are  Tantrik, 

1  Chapter  iii,  Slokas  47  and  48.  See  Sridhara  Svami’s  note. 

*  Chapter  v,  Sloka  28.  Sridhara  Svami’s  note. 

*  Chapter  v,  floka  31.  Sridhara  Svami’s  note. 

*  The  town  of  BhuvaneSvara. 

*  That  is,  the  outcome  of  a  state  in  which  the  tamoguna  predominates. 

*  See  Inttotiuctim  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 

1  Baiakanda,  canto  xxii,  ilokas  12,  13,  and  15.  These  are  Vidyas  taught 
by  Visvamitrii  to  Roma  and  Lakgmana. 


46 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


and  the  mode  of  acquiring  which  is  given  in  the  Tantrasara.  Raghava 
Bhatta  and  Raghunandana  quote  Narada  as  to  the  nature  of  the  Tantrik 
mode  of  worship  for  persons  in  impure  conditions.  In  the  Parajara 
Bha$ya  there  is  a  quotation  said  to  have  been  originally  made  by  Govinda- 
bhatta,  which  says  that  mantras  with  Om  should  not  be  taught  to  Sudras, 
and  so  on.  In  Bhojaraja’s  Vyavaharasamuchchaya  there  is  reference 
to  a  passage  stating  that  Upanayana  and  DIksa  should  not  be  performed 
whilst  Brihaspati*  is  in  Rahu.2  The  Varaha  says  that  learned  men  should 
worship  Janardana  either  according  to  the  Vedas  or  according  to  the 
Tantras.  The  Padma  Parana,  in  its  Uttarakhanda,  asks  how  it  is  possible 
that  one  may  become  bhagavata  *  without  taking  dlksa  in  the  Vaisnavi 
cult?  In  the  third  chapter  of  the  Narada  Pancaratra  it  is  said  that  whilst 
meditating  on  the  six  Cakras  named  Muladhara,  Svadhis{hana,  Mani- 
pura,  Anahata,  Viiuddha,  Ajna,  Sri  Krsna  was  seen  in  the  thousand- 
petalled  lotus,  resplendent,  of  the  colour  of  a  freshly-formed  cloud,  wear¬ 
ing  yellow  silk,  two-armed,  beautiful,  pure,  and  smiling,  in  the  company  of 
his  own  Sakti,  Kundalini.  Again,  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  the  same  book, 
the  author  uses  the  terminology  of  the  Tantra  Sastra  when  he  says, 
“  Laksmirmaya  Kamabljam,”  etc.,*  and  thus  introduces  the  great  mantra 
of  Sri  Kr?na,  consisting  of  bijas,  and  formed  of  eight  syllables.  All  arc 
aware  that  the  piercing  of  the  six  Cakras,  their  names,  and  the  Devi 
Kundalini  arc  matters  of  the  Tantra  Sastra.  There  arc  references  to 
Tantrik  prapayama  in  the  Patahjala  Dariana  and  in  the  Bhagavadglta, 
and  other  places  of  the  Mahabharata.*  It  should  also  be  pointed  out  here 
that  there  is  indirect,  though  not  direct,  reference  to  the  Tantra  Sastra  in 
Yudhisthira’s  question  to  Bhisma  contained  in  the  7th,  8th,  and  9th  ilokas 
of  the  259th  chapter  in  the  Santi  Parva  of  the  Mahabharata,  .dealing 
with  Moksadharma.  These  Slokas  may  be  translated  as  follows : 

“  I  have  heard  that  Vaidik  ordinances  are  gradually  coming  into 
disuse,  in  the  progress  of  ages.  There  is  one.form  of  dharma  for  the  Satya 
age,  another  for  the  Treta  age,  another  for  the  Dvapara  age,  and  another 
again  for  the  Kali  age.  The  Vedas  contemplate  different  forms  of  dharma 
according  to  different  capacities  of  men.  The  words  of  the  Vedas  are 
true,  and  from  these  words,  again  have  emanated  all-embracing  Vedas,” 
and  so  forth.  Now,  here  it  may  be  asked,  what  arc  these  all-embracing 
Vedas  which  have  emanated  from  the  Vedas?  In  the  Mahamaho- 
padhyaya’s  opinion  no  other  reply  is  possible  but  that  the  Tantras  are 
here  referred  to.  Smrtis  also,  like  the  Vedas,  do  not  give  to  all  castes 
equal  adhikara  (right)  to  them,  and  prohibit  their  study  to  Sudras. 

1  The  planet  Jupiter.  *  The  ascending  node. 

*  Devoted  to  Bhagavan.  *  LaksmI,  Maya  and  Kama  Hljas. 

*  Shanti  Parva,  chap,  cd,  tfokas  17  and  19,  with  Nilakantha’s  note. 


INTRODUCTION 


47 


The  “all  embracing  Vedas,”  therefore,  cannot  mean  Sm^tis.  The 
Tantras  give  adhikara  to  people  belonging  to  all  castes,  so  that  they  alone 
are  “  all  embracing  Moreover,  there  is  no  instance  of  the  word  Veda 
being  used  in  the  sense  of  Smjti.  There  is,  however,  ample  use  of  the 
terms  Agama  and  Nigama  in  the  sense  of  the  Tantras — terms  which 
originally  meant  the  Vedas.  Just  as,  according  to  the  Sastra,  the  Vedas 
have  no  author,  but  are  merely  remembered  by  fourheaded  Brahma,  so 
the  Tantras  also  have  not,  according  to  the  Sastra,  any  author,  but  have 
merely  emanated  from  the  mouths  of  Siva.  Neither  the  Vedas  nor  the 
Tantras  have  emanated  from  the  mouths  of  munis,  rsis,  or  the  spiritually 
wise  (jfiani).  Brahma  is  livara  and  Siva  also  is  I&vara,  and  the 
Sastra  says  that  the  Vedas  emanate  from  the  mouths  of  the  former,  and 
the  Tantras  have  issued  from  those  of  the  latter.  More  explicit  are  the 
ilokas  12 1,  122,  123,  and  124  of  chapter  ccxxdv  in  the  Sand  Parva  of 
the  Mahabharata  dealing  with  Moksadharma.  Here  Mahadeva  says  to 
Daksa:  “  Extracting  from  the  Vedas  complete  with  their  six  angas 
(limbs),  and  from  the  Sarnkhya-Yoga,  I  promulgated  the  Paiupata  vrata 
with  such  austere  and  extensive  upas  as  no  Deva,  or  Danava  could 
perform.  This  vrata  is  superior  to  all  practices  ordained  in  the  Vedas  and 
other  Sastras,  all-good,  beneficial  to  all  castes  and  airamas,'  everlasting, 
performed  in  three  years  and  ten  days,*  secret,  highly  spoken  of  by  wise 
men,  spoken  ill  of  by  fools;  opposed  (viparitam)  in  some  matters  to 
Vanjairamadharma,*  though  in  many  others  similar  thereto;  prescribed 
by  learned  men;  practised  by  men  who  have  risen  superior  to  Airamas,1 * * 4 
and  beneficial.  Daksa,  you  will  obtain  all  the  fruits  of  such  Paiupata 
vrata,”  and  so  forth.  To  what  Sastra,  the  Pandit  asks,  other  than  the 
Tantra  Sastra,  can  this  PSJupata  vrata  belong?  It  cannot  be  the  Vedas, 
for  the  vrata  is  said  to  have  been  extracted  from  them.  Again,  the  reader 
will,  he  thinks,  be  astonished  to  know  that  the  Mahabharata  has  adopted 
the  TSntrik  terminology  and  Tantrik  methods  in  the  introduction  of 
mantras.  In  the  74th  iloka  of  chapter  ccxxciv  of  the  Santi  Parva 
referred  to  above,  the  following  mantra  occurs: 


1  It  is  open  to  all,  which  the  Veda  is  not. 

*  Quaere-  The  text  I  have  before  me  runs:  Abdair  daiardha  sangyuktam, 
which  according  to  Nilakantha,  means  that  it  may  be  acquired  in  years  or 
shortly  by  the  merit  of  those  who  practise  the  five  yamas  and  five  niyamas. 
Some  read  “  daiaha  ”  (ten  days)  for  “  daiardha.”  There  seems  to  be  no 
reason  for  limiting  the  period  of  the  vrata  thus. 

*Thus  there  is  no  caste  in  the  cakra;  the  smartha  vratas,  such  as  fasting, 
are  not  generally  observed;  puja  in  VamacSra  is  done  at  night  and  other 
matters. 

4  Paramahamsas,  Parivrajakas,  etc. 


48 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  Ghana  charu  chcli  milt  brahma  kayikamagmnam.” 1 

Nilakantha  explains  this  mantra  as  follows: 

“  GhantI  ■=  Ora.  The  word  ‘  Rudra  ’  must  be  introduced.  Agnlnant 
kayikam  —  the  wife  of  Fire,  or  Svaha;  Brahma  =  Om.  Thus  the  following 
mantra,  containing  eighteen  syllables,  has  been  here  quoted:  Om  Rudra 
cheli  chell  cheli  cheli  mill  mill  Om  Svaha.  ”*  In  the  379th  £loka  of 
chapter  xiv  of  the  Anu$3sana  Parva,  Sri  Kr$ga  says  to  Yudhis^hira: 
“  Eight  days  passed  as  though  they  were  but  a  moment,  and  I  took  mantra 
from  that  Brahmana  (Upamanyu).  ”  After  this  verse  it  is  narrated  how 
Sri  Krsna  performed  austere  tapasya  in  the  worship  of  Siva  by 
repeating  this  mantra;  how  Siva,  being  pleased,  appeared  before  him  in 
the  company  of  Umfi:  how  the  hymn  sung  by  Sri  Krsna  pleased  Siva 
and  Uma,  so  that  they  granted  him  blessings  and  so  forth.  One  is  there¬ 
fore  astonished  to  hear  some  educated  persons  say  that  nowhere  in  the 
Mahabharata  is  there  any  mention  of  Sakti  save  in  the  Virata  Parva, 
where  Yudhis{hira  hymns  Durga.  In  the  story  of  Dak^a’s  yajna,  related 
in  the  Mahabharata,  there  is  no  mention  of  the  death  of  Daksa’s 
daughter,®  but  it  is  said  that  Bhadrakali  rose  out  of  Her  body  for  the 
destruction  of  the  yajna/  and  that  pleased  by  the  hymn  sung  by  Daksa, 
Durga  appeared  with  Mahadcva  before  him,  and  then  disappeared. 
Amongst  the  thousand  names  spoken  of  by  Krspa  in  the  Anu&sana 
Parva  there  appear  “  Vamadeva,  and  Varna,  and  Prak,  and  Daksina, 
and  Vamana,”  and  “author  of  the  Vedas  and  author  of  Mantras.” 


1  The  full  verse  is — 

“  Ghanto’ghanto  ghat!  ghantj  charu  cheli  mill  mill 
Brahma  kayikamagninang  dandimundastridandadhrik.” 

The  meaning  of  which  is  as  follows:  Ghantah=»  prakaiavan,  or  shining — 
that  is,  Pumabrahmasvarupah.  Aghantah  =■  Mayavritatvena  prachchhanna- 
prakaia — viz.,  that  whose  shining  is  concealed  on  account  of  its  being  covered  with 
may2.  orjiva.  Gathi«=he  whoghatayati  (joins)  men  with  the  fruit  of  their  karma, 
or  who  attaches  fruit  to  the  karma  of  men.  Ghanti=ghantavan,  or  possessor  of 
ghantah  ( q .  v.).  Charu = those  who  move  (charanti) — that  is,  jivas,  movable  and 
immovable  men,  animals,  trees,  etc.  Cheli— player;  as  men  play  with  birds,  so 
Siva  plays  with  us.  Mill— one  who  has  mila  (attachment).  Siva  as  the  cause 
is  attached  to,  or,  as  we  should  say,  in,  all  effects.  The  word  is  mentioned  twice 
for  emphasis.  Brahma =  Pranava.  Kayikamagmnam  =  the  spouse  of  Fire,  or 
Svahi.  Dandimunda = ascetics,  paramahamsai,  etc.  Tridandadhrik  =  holding 
the  three  stalls  of  bael,  palaia  and  bamboo,  as  is  done  in  Upanayana.  These 
staffs  are  thrown  into  the  Ganges  on  the  twelfth  day  following  Upanayana. 
Siva  is  thus  Purnabrahman;  Jlva;  the  Giver  of  the  fruit  of  Karma;  the  all- 
briUiant  One;  all-moving  Jivas:  He  who  plays  with  Jlva;  who  as  all  Causes  is 
in  all  effects;  Praijava;  and  Sv&ha;  the  ascetic  and  Gfhastha  life. 

*  This  is  according  to  the  G auras  who  say  that  Ghanti=Om;  and  insert 
Rudra  in  the  vocative  case,  and  repeat  cheli  four  times. 

*  Safi.  4  Santi  Parva,  chapter  ccxxciv,  it  okas  32  and  54. 


INTRODUCTION 


49 


Mantras  here  cannot  be  said  to  refer  to  Vaidik  mantras  owing  to  the 
distinction  made  between  the  author  of  the  Vedas  and  the  author  of 
mantras,  and  Nilakantha,  the  commentator,  in  fact,  explains  mantras  as 
Tantrik  mantras.  By  Vama  and  Dak$ipa  are  meant  {the  Pandit  thinks) 
the  v§ma  and  the  dakjina  acaias  in  Tanlra.  Tantrik  BIja  mantras  are 
known  to  many.  In  the  AnuSasana  Parva  also,  where  moksadharma  is 
treated  of,  it  is  said:  “Four-mouthed  Mahalinga  and  CaruliAga  etc., 
ruler  of  bijas,”  author  of  bijas,  and  so  forth.  There  are  even  more 
explicit  references  to  the  Tantra  Sastra  in  the  Mahabharata.  For  instance, 
it  is  said,  “O  Rajarp:1 * *  the  Sankhya  Yoga,  the  Pancaratra,  the  Vedas, 
and  the  PaSupata,  know  these  Sastras,  the  purpose  of  which  is  to 
establish  jnana,  ”  and,  again:  “Srlkantha  Siva,  husband  of  Uma  and 
lord  of  all  things,  promulgated  the  Pasupata  Jnanasastra  when  in  placid 
mood.  Bhagavan  Himself  is  the  Knower  of  the  entire  Pancaratra.  ”* 
Sanskrit  scholars  in  India,  according  to  the  Pandit,  believe  the 
Pancaratra  to  be  a  Tantra.  Again,  the  injunction  that  in  the  Kali  age 
people  should  worship  Iiv:ua  in  the  manner  prescribed  in  the  Tantra 
Sastra  leads  many  people  to  think  that  the  Tantras  are  recent  because 
they  are  intended  for  the  Kali  age.  The  Pandit  replies  that  the 
Mahabharata  itself  answers  this  view  in  the  Santi  Parva,  where 
it  is  said  that  in  the  Satya  age  Rudra,  engrossed  in  Yoga,  told 
the  Tantra  Sastra  to  Balakhilya’  Rsis;  but  that  subsequently  it  again 
disappeared  through  the  maya  of  that  Deva.4  In  the  17th  Sloka  of 
Chapter  cclxvii  ‘  of  the  Santi  Parva,  Mahar?i  Kapila  questions  Syu- 
marairai  as  follows:  “  Tell  me  if  you  have  seen  any  Sastra  other  than 
Agama,”  In  reply  SyumaraSmi  speaks  of  many  things,  and  at  the  end 
of  each,  statement  he  remarks:  “  This  is  Sruti.”  The  Pandit  then  asks 
what  is  meant  by  the  word  Agama  in  Mahafsi  Kapila’s  question.  In 
his  Commentary  on  the  Sariraka  Sutra,  “  owing  to  the  impossibility  of 
generation,”  Bhagavan  Sahkaracarya  refers  to  the  fourfold  division  of 
Vasudeva,  Sankarsana,  Pradyumna,  and  Aniruddha*  as  stated  in  the 
Pancaratra,  and  whilst  he  does  not  attempt  to  disprove  it,  he  does  dis¬ 
prove  the  theory  of  the  generation  of  Sankarsana  from  Vasudeva 


1  Rri  and  King.  1  Santi  Parva,  chap,  ccc.ixl,  llokas  64  to  68. 

*  Small  R$is  the  size  of  a  thumb  (angutfha),  60,000  in  number. 
Markandeya  Purana  says  they  are  children  of  the  wife  of  Kialu  and  'Ordharc- 
tas.  It  is  believed  that  they  still  appear,  and  bathe  on  Pau$a  Sankranti  Day 
at  Gangasagara. 

•Santi  Parva,  chap,  ccc.xl.viii,  see  flokas  17  and  18.  The  reference 
should  be  to  chap.  349.  *  This  should  be  chap,  cclxviii. 

*  Vasudeva  =»  Paramatma;  Sankarsana  —Jiva;  Pradyumna  =  Manas; 
Aniruddha  =  Ahankara. 

4 


50 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


advanced  by  the  followers  of  the  Pancaratra.  Again,  in  his  Commentary 
on  the  Sutra:  “The  Lord  cannot  be  merely  the  instrumental  cause  on 
account  of  the  existence  of  diversity  in  creation,”  he  writes:  “  MaheS- 
varas,  too,  admit  it,”  “  AD  this  was  taught  by  Paiupati,  who  is  livara, 
for  undoing  the  bonds  of  palus,”  etc.  In  his  Sribhasya  on  the  first 
Sutra  quoted  above,  Ramanuja  Svami  writes,  “  Elucidated  by  Narayana 
Himself  in  the  Pancaratra  Tantra,”  and,  again,  “  Non-Vedic  practices 
are  opposed,  and  not  the  cults  of  Yoga  and  Paiupati;  for  Satikhya, 
Yoga,  Pancaratra,  the  Vedas  and  Paiupata,  are  self-evident,  and 
cannot  be  disproved  by  reasoning,”  and  so  forth.  Ramanuja  Svami  quotes 
as  evidence  all  the  passages  of  the  Mahabharata  above  mentioned,  as  well 
as  many  other  passages  from  the  same  epic,  and  other  works.  There  is  a 
scripture  named  Sutasamhita,  of  which  the  Brahmaglta  is  a  portion.  Its 
Speaker  is  Brahma,  and  throughout  it  deals  with  Sankara.  Its  annota¬ 
tor  is  Madhavacarya  himself,  the  writer  on  all  Darsanas,  and  com¬ 
mentator  of  the  Vedas.  At  the  end  of  every  Chapter  he  writes:  “By 
Madhavacarya,  an  inhabitant  of  Kail,  a  devotee  of  the  Sakti  of  action, 
a  server  of  the  lotus-feet  of  the  three-eyed  Deva  and  illuminator  of  the 
path  of  Upani$ad.”  Here  Madhavacarya  calls  himself  a  devotee  of  the 
Sakti  of  work  (Kriyaiakti),  but  the  Tantra  alone  deals  with  Sakti  of 
wih,  Sakti  of  knowledge,  and  Sakti  of  action.  Not  only  in  the  Maha¬ 
bharata,  but  in  all  Puranas  the  greatness  of  the  Devi,  as  extolled  in  the 
Tantras,  has  been  described  either  shortly  or  with  elaboration.  In  the 
account  of  the  greatness  of  Rudra  contained  in  the  Varaha  Purana  it  is 
said :  “  Sankara  has  as  many  aspects  as  there  are  Mahaiaktis.  He 
who  worships  Her  ever  worships  Him  as  husband.”  Again :  “  If  he  who 
worships  the  Dcvls  pleases  Rudra  also,  these  Devls  become  for  ever  siddha 
to  that  Mantrin.  There  is  no  doubt  of  this.”  1  What  is  there  in  the 
Tantras,  it  is  asked,  more  than  what  this  verse  says?  In  the  Sankara- 
Saiphita,  which  forms  a  part  of  the  Skanda  Purana,  the  Rsis  ask  Suta, 
“Bhagavan,  we  desire  to  hear  of  the  system  of  VIramaheSvara,”  and  so 
forth.  And  Kartikeya  says  to  Mahadcva:  “  There  are  few  who  know 
Saiva- Agama.”  Sankara,  in  His  reply,  says:  “  The  essence  of  the 
Vedas,  the  Agama,  and  the  Puranas  charms  the  mind  and  should  be  kept 
secret.”  *  According  to  the  Mahamahopadhyaya,  Saiva-Agama  undoubted¬ 
ly  means  the  Tantra-iastra,*  as  docs  the  word  Agama  in  the  expression 
“  the  Vedas,  the  Agama,  and  the  Puranas,”  because  it  is  mentioned  sepa¬ 
rately  from  the  Vedas.  There  are  many  Upani$ai^s  other  than  the  ten 
on  which  Sahkaracarya  wrote  his  Commentary.  He  selected  these  ten 


1  Varaha  Purana,  chap.  xxd. 
*  Vide  ante. 


1  Chapter  xxc. 


INTRODUCTION 


51 


because  they  supported  his  monistic  theories.  Just  as  there  was  no  neces¬ 
sity  to  write  a  Commentary  on  the  Vedas,  so  it  was  not  necessary  that  he 
should  write  commentaries  on  the  Upanijads  which  dealt  with  the 
methods  of  worship  (upasana).  The  Aksamalika  Upanisad  enumerates 
the  substances  which  should  be  used  for  the  rosary  with  which  japa 1  is 
done.  They  are  coral,  pearl,  crystal,  conch,  silver,  gold,  sandalwood, 
putrajivika,  lotus-seed,  and  rudraksa.  The  Tantra  Sastra  mentions 
exactly  the  same  substances.  There  arc  many  Upanisads  of  the  Atharva 
Veda,  such  as  Atharvarikha,  Atharvaiirah,  Advayataraka,  Adhyatma, 
Annapurna,  Airptanada,  Amrtabindu,  Avyakta,  Krsna,  Kaula,  Ksu- 
rika,  Ganapati,  -Katyayana,  Kal5gnirudra,  Kundika,  Tripura-tapanlya, 
Daksinamurti,  Devldvaya,  Dhyanabindu,  Nadabindu*  Narada,  Narayana, 
Nirvana,  Nrsimha-tapaniya,  Pasupata,  Brahma-paingala,  Paippalada, 
Vahvricha,  Vj-flajjavaia,  Bhasma,  Muktika,  Rahasya,  Rama-tapani, 
Vajra-panjara,  Varaha,  Vasudeva,  Sarasvati-rahasya,  Sita,  SudarSana, 
Hayagriva,  etc.’  As  there  are  21  recensions  of  the  Rgveda,  109  of  the 
*  Yajurvcda,  and  1,000  of  the  Samaveda,  so  there  are  the  same  number  of 
Upanisads  belonging  to  each  of  the  Vedas  respectively.  The  Sanskrit- 
knowing  reader  will  have  surmised  from  the  name  of  the  Upanisads 
above  enumerated  that  each  of  them  deals  with  forms  of  worship  similar  to 
that  prescribed  by  the  Tantra.  There  arc  many  commentaries  on  the 
Npsirphatapaniya  Upanisad,  one  of  which  is  written  by  BhagavSn 
SankaracSrya  and  another  by  his  great  guru  Gaudapadacarya,  known 
by  the  name  of  Munlndra.  There  is,  therefore,  no  ground,  it  is  contended, 
for  the  supposition  that  this  Upanisad  may  be  a  spurious  one.  Kulluka 
Bhatta,  the  author  of  the  most  authoritative  commentary  on  the  Manu 
Samhita*  has,  in  his  note  on  the  first  Sloka  of  Chapter  ii  of  the  book 
quoted  a  passage  from  Harita’s  work  which  says:  “  Now  we  shall  explain 
dharma.  Dharma  is  based  on  the  authority  of  Sruti.  Sruti  is  of  two 
kinds — Vaidik  and  Tantrik.”  From  this  it  is  evident  that  the  Tantra 
Sastra  is  nothing  else  than  a  part  of  the  Vedas,  and  is,  consequently, 
known  by  the  names  of  Agama  and  Nigama.  The  passages  above  quoted 
from  the  Mahabharata  prove  that  Mahadeva  first  promulgated  the  Vedas, 
and  then  the  Paiupata  dharma  from  a  part  of  it.  Thus,  from  the  state¬ 
ment  also  made  by  Mahadeva  Himself,  we  learn  that  the  Tantra  Sastra 
is  a  part  of  the  Vedas. 

According  to  the  Pandit,  the  Tantra  Sastra  is  referred  to  by  the 
word  “  rahasya  ”  (mystery),  used  over  and  above  the  expression  “  AU  the 
Vedas,”  in  the  165th  Sloka  of  chapter  ii  of  the  Manu  Saiphita,  and  also 


1  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

’Se*  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  MSS.  in  the  Government  Oriental 
MSS.  Library,  Madras,  vol.  i,  part  iii. 


52 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


by  the  word  “  vidya,”  which  is  used  in  addition  to  the  Vedas  and  the 
Upaniijads  in  the  loth  sQkta  of  the  4th  Brahmana  in  the  2nd  varga  of  the 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanifad.  The  Vriddhaharltasamhita  contains  a  full 
account  of  the  Tantrik  form  of  initiation  (dlksa).  The  Uganahsaiphita 
makes  clear  references  to  the  Pancaratra  and  the  Paiupata  dharma. 
The  KatySyana  Sarphita  ordains  worship  of  Ganc$a,  Gauri  and  other 
Devas  and  Devls.  The  Vyasa  Samhita  recommends  japa  of  the 
guhyavidya,1  use  of  rosaries,  with  beads  of  crystal  and  the  like, 
and  worship  of  Rudra  with  Gayatri.  Nowhere  else  but  in  the 
Tantra  Sastra  is  there  a  Gayatri  for  Rudra  or  any  other  Devata.  The 
Sangkha  Samhita  says  that  after  dhyana  of  a  Devata,  japa  should  be 
made  with  a  rosary  of  crystals  of  other  beads,  the  number  of  recitations 
being  recorded  by  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand.  In  the  Vriddhagautama- 
samhitii  there  is  a  list  of  the  names  of  the  authors  of  Dharma  Sastras. 
In  this  list  there  occur  the  names  of  Brahma,  as  also  those  of  Uma  and 
MaheSvara.  It  is  unnecessary,  in  the  Pandit’s  opinion,  to  further  quote 
passages  or  to  cite  more  authorities.  Like  the  Puranas,  all  Smrti,  and 
Samhilas  contain  references,  direct  as  well  as  indirect,  to  the  Tantra 
Sastra,  but  the  Tantra  Sastra  makes  no  reference  to  either  Smrti  or 
Purana.  This  also  proves  the  great  antiquity  of  Tantra  Sastra.  There 
is  a  Tantrik  scripture  named  Sivagama  containing  Sutras  which  have  been 
quoted  as  authorities  by  Krsijananda  in  his  Tantrasara.  Its  commentator 
is  Abhinavagupta,  the  Court  pandit  of  Gonardda,  King  of  Kashmir. 
Gonardda  died  the  death  of  a  hero  in  the  great  war  of  Kuruksctra.’ 

We  need  not  here  follow  the  Pandit  in  his  speculations  as  to 
Buddhistic  influences  in  Ancient  America  as  established  by  Mexican 
architecture,  or  as  to  the  similarity  of  the  ritual  of  Ancient  Egypt  *  to  that 
of  the  Tantra,  beyond  stating  that  in  his  opinion  such  speculation  supports 
the  more  direct  inferences  derivable  from  the  study  of  Indian  history  and 
literature  as  to  the  antiquity  of  the  Tantra  Sastra,  which  his  essay  is 
written  to  prove.  The  learned  Mahamahopadhyaya  concludes  with  the 
expression  of  a  doubt  whether  the  reasons  and  arguments  he  adduces  will 
appeal  to  “  the  great  men,  free  of  all  prejudice,  learned  in  Western  language 
and  science,  with  intellects  brightened,  sharpened,  and  coloured  by  Western 
philosophy,”  and  apologizes  for  himself,  with  perhaps  some  latent  sarcasm, 
as  follows:  “  I  had  not  the  good  fortune  of  learning  deductive  and 


*  Secret  Mantra. 

*  See  the  Kajatarangini  of  Kashmir,  and  the  Commentary  on  Sivagama, 
of  which  there  is  a  copy  in  the  Library  of  the  Maharaja  of  Darbhanga. 

*  He  points  out  with  regard  to  Horus,  one  of  the  Egyptian  Devata*,  that 
Aharpati  (Lord  of  the  Day)  and  Ahari$a  (Ruler  of  the  Day)  are  Sanskrit  * 
epithet*  of  the  sun. 


INTRODUCTION 


53 


inductive  logic.  In  the  Chatusplthi  of  a  native  Brahmana  Pandit,  I 
learnt  to  argue  *  whether  sound  follows  the  fall  of  a  palm-fruit  or  precedes 
it,’  ”  though  he  says  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  other  great  logicians 
were  mainly  engaged  in  discussions  of  the  “  palm-fruit-falling  ”  nature. 

Western  writers  and  Indians  influenced  by  their  works  and  general 
outlook  are  much  occupied  with  this  question  of  the  antiquity  and  date 
cf  the  Tantra.  To  the  orthodox  all  Sastra  is  eternal.  Moreover,  to  the 
Indian  temperament,  as  one  of  them  has  well  said,  sugar  is  prized  for  its 
sweetness  without  regard  to  the  land  whence  it  came  or  the  cultivator  by 
whom  it  was  grown.  It  can  hardly  be  said  that  we  have  the  necessary 
materials  for  final  judgment  from  the  purely  historical  standpoint.  If  it  be 
alleged  that  Indians  have  sometimes  gone  to  opposite  extremes,  European 
critics  and  their  Indian  followers  have,  as  a  general  rule,  displayed  almost 
a  mania  for  belitding  the  antiquity  of  Indian  religions,  literature,  and  art. 
In  coining  to  any  conclusion  on  this  matter,  it  is  necessary  first  to  inquire 
into  the  different  elements  of  doctrine  and  practice,  to  distinguish  what  is 
original  from  what  is  alleged  to  be  an  accretion,  or  interpolation,  and  to 
consider  the  allegation  of  non-Aryan  influences  and  so  forth.  It  is  necessary 
also  to  distinguish  between  Tantrik  doctrine  and  practice  so  ascertained  from 
its  expression  or  record  in  any  particular  document.  The  latter  may  be  of 
yesterday,  and  yet  its  subjects  may  be  of  the  ages.  Some  would  derive  the 
Tantra  from  Mahayana  Buddhism.  Others  contend  that  the  Mahayana 
school  appears  to  have  adopted  the  doctrines  of  the  Indian  Tantra,  which 
is  in  notable  respects  opposed  to  the  original  doctrines  of  the  Buddha. 
The  influence  of  his  teachings  are  rather,  it  is  said,  to  be  found  amongst 
the  Vaisnavas,  who  have  in  their  number  many  cryptic  Buddhists,  than 
in  fomjs  of  worship  which,  not  to  mention  other  salient  differences, 
prescribe  the  sacrifice  of  animals  with  elaborate  rituals  before  the  images  of 
Dcvas  and  Dcvls.  In  fact,  the  Lalitavistara1  already  cited  represents 
Sakyasingha  as  condemning  the  “  fools  ”  who  make  obeisance  to  numer¬ 
ous  Devatas  and  who  perform  tapasyS  in  the  cremation  grounds  and  at 
the  crossing  of  four  roads,  as  also  the  practice  of  “  sinful  men  and  heretics 
(pasandas)  ’’  who  use  wine  and  flesh,  he  having  prescribed  the  ascetic  life 
and  the  avoidance  of  injury  (whether  by  sacrifice  or  otherwise)  to  all  beings. 
Professor  Masaharu  Anezaki,2  after  citing  the  Rajatarangin!  as  evidence  of 
T5ntrik  worship  at  the  time  of  Aioka  (240  b.c.)*,  says  that  without  a 
doubt  the  Tantra  began  to  develop  even  before  Nagaijuna  (a.d.  200),  and 


*  Chap,  xvii,  using  that  work,  not  historically,  but  as  an  indication  of  a 
Buddhist  view  of  a  §3stra  which  some  would  derive  from  Buddhism. 

*  “  History  of  the  Religions  in  Ancient  India.” 

*  I  cite  the  author’s  views  without  myself  expressing  an  opinion  on  the 
evidential  value  of  the  particular  work  cited. 


54 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


that  in  observing  Buddhism  it  has  been  successful  despite  all  efforts  to  the 
contrary.  In  fact,  as  regards  Buddhism,  the  Tantra,  according  to  this 
view,  stands  for  a  Hindu  conquest.  How  far,  as  some  allege,  the  conquer¬ 
ing  doctrine  has  been  itself  subjected  to  non-Aryan  influences  is  another 
question.  Some  contend  that  here,  as  in  most  things,  there  is  some  truth 
in  both  contentions,  and  that  Indian  and  Buddhist  thought  are  likely  to 
have  influenced  one  another.  Such  may  think  that  the  influence  of  the 
latter  has  predominated  as  regards  certain  Tantrik  schools  and  rituals. 
It  is  thus  noteworthy  that  the  Tara  Tantra,  which  is  said  by  some  to 
belong  to  the  northern  tradition,  states  that  Buddha  and  Vaiistha  were 
Tantrika  munis  and  Kula  Bhairavas.1 * *  According  to  the  Rudrayamala, 
the  worship  of  'I'ari  was  introduced  from  Mahacina  in  the  Himalayas  by 
Vaiisflia,  who  worshipped  the  Devi  BuddhISvari,  according  to  one  of 
the  Sakhas  of  the  Atharvaveda.  The  solution  may  possibly  be  found  in 
a  more  perfect  knowledge  of  the  various  traditions,  which  are  said  by  some 
to  have  existed,  than  we  now  possess. 

Whatever  be  the  date  of  the  first  appearance  of  specifically  Tantrik 
doctrines,  which  owing  to  the  progressive  nature  of  its  developments,  may 
never  be  ascertained,  it  will  be  probably  found,  upon  a  profoundcr  inquiry 
into  the  subject  than  has  been  hitherto  made,  that  the  antiquity  of  the 
Tantra  has  been  much  under-estimated.  This,  however,  docs  not  mean 
that  all  the  current  Tantras,  or  all  their  contents,  arc  of  great  antiquity. 
The  contrary  is,  I  believe,  the  fact.  The  Mcru  Tantra,*  in  a  curious 
jloka,  says:  “  There  will  be  born  at  London  English  folk  whose  mantra  • 
for  worship  is  in  the  Phiranga4  language,  who  will  be  undefeated 
in  battle  and  Lords  of  the  world.”1  Whatever  be  the  age  of  this  Tantra, 
it  may  be  argued  that  this  passage  at  least  was  probably  not  written 
earlier  than  the  eighteenth  century. 

Comparatively  modern  Tantras  may,  however,  be  based  on  older 
versions  now  lost.4  On  the  orthodox  hypothesis,  moreover,  there  is  no 


1  See  A.  K.  Maitra’s  Introduction  to  this  Tantra  published  by  the 
Varendra  Anusandhana  Samiti. 

*  Twenty-third  Praka£a. 

*  That  is,  unlike  some  defiled  (mlechcha)  countries,  it  is  not  without 
a  religion  of  its  own, 

4  Here  English.  The  term,  which  is  ordinarily  derived  from  “  Frank,”  is 
applicable  to  the  European  peoples  generally.  Its  meaning,  however,  according 
to  the  Sabdakalpadruma.  is,  “  those  addicted  to  sin  and  anger  ”.  It  is  also  used, 
as  a  qualificative  of  disease^  to  denote  syphilis,  because  of  the  prevalence  of  the 
disease  in  Europe. 

*  Phirangabhasaya  mantrastesangsangsadhanadbhuvi 
Adi pam  an d al  an  an  cha  sangramesvapar&jitah 
IngrejanavasatpaBcha  landrajaschapi  bhavinah. 

*  See  also  what  the  author  of  the  Tantratattva  says,  past. 


INTRODUCTION 


reason  why  new  Sastras  should  not  even  now  appear  in  the  world.  The 
work  of  Siva  has  not  come  to  an  end  with  the  inception  of  the  Kaliyuga. 
In  this,  as  in  other  matters,  Indian  tradition,  when  rightly  understood, 
may  perhaps  be  found  to  largely  justify  itself.  The  following  remarks  of 
Professor  Hayman  Wilson  have  a  bearing  on  this  point,  both  on  the 
general  question  of  the  antiquity  of  the  Hindu  Sastras  and  that  of  the 
Tantra,  if,  as  is  commonly  done,  the  date  of  the  latter  is  to  be  fixed  with 
reference  to  the  alleged  date  of  the  Pauranik  period,  which,  according  to 
general  European  views,  precedes  them:  “  It  is  therefore  as  idle  as  it  is 
irrational  to  dispute  the  antiquity  or  authenticity  of  the  greater  portion  of 
the  contents  of  the  Purapas  in  the  face  of  abundant  positive  and  circum¬ 
stantial  evidence  of  the  prevalence  of  the  doctrines  tthich  they  teach,  the 
currency  of  the  legends  which  they  narrate,  and  the  integrity  of  the 
institutions  which  they  describe  at  least  three  centuries  before  the 
Christian  Era.  But  the  origin  and  development  of  these  doctrines,  tradi¬ 
tions,  and  institutions  were  not  the  work  of  a  day,  and  the  testimony 
which  establishes  their  existence  three  centuries  before  Christianity  carries 
it  back  to  a  much  more  remote  antiquity— to  an  antiquity  that  is  probably 
not  surpassed  by  any  of  the  prevailing  fictions,  institutions,  or  beliefs  of  the 
ancient  world.” 1 * * 4 

The  Tantras  are  generally  cast  in  the  form  of  dialogues  between 
Siva  and  his  Sakti  Parvatl,  the  form  in  which  Sati,  his  Spouse,  re¬ 
appeared  after  her  death  at  Daksa’s  sacrifice,  or  in  their  forms  as 
Bhairava  and  Bhairavi.  Siva  is  called  AdinStha,  the  first  Guru.  But  he 
is  also  Sakti,  for  he  and  the  Dev!  arc  one.*  The  Dev!  is  therefore  includ¬ 
ed  with  him  in  the  circle  of  Gums.  Sadaiiva,  as  the  Mahasvachanda 
Tantra^  states,  promulgates  as  both  guru  and  iisya  (disciple),  the  Tantras 
in  the  form  of  question  and  answer,  by  the  division  of  his  real  and  mani¬ 
fested  forms  (prakaia  and  vimaria).  Where  the  questioning  is  .  by  the 
Dev!  as  Sisya  and  the  answers  are  given  by  Siva  as  guru,  the  Tantra  is 
in  the  form  called  Agama.  Where  the  Dev!  is  the  teacher,  as  in  the 
Nigamakalpadruma  and  other  Nigamas,*  the  Sastra  is  known  as  a 
Nigama.  Both  terms  are  derived  from  the  italicized  letters  of  the  Sanskrit 
verses  which  occur  in  the  Agamadvaitanirnaya,'  and  which  run:  “An 


1  Vi$pu  Purana,  xeix. 

*  Mah&nirvana  Tantra,  chap,  i,  verse*  14-16,  M amarupasi devi tvam  nabhe- 
do’ste  tvayamama;  for  in  theif  ultimate  ground  both  Puru$a  and  Sakti  are  one. 

1  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  Nigama*  appear  to  deal  largely  with  the 
Rahasyapuja. 

4  Agatang  Sambhuvaktrebyah  Nirgato  girijS  vaktrat 

gatancha  girija  mukhe  gatascha  giriiaft-utrim 

matancha  vasudevena  matascha  va*udevasya 

tasmldagama  uchyate  nigamah  parikathyate. 


56 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


Agama  is  so  called  because  it  proceeds  from  the  mouth  of  Sambhu 1 * *  and 
goes  to  Girija,*  being  approved  by  Vasudeva.*  Nigatna  is  so  described 
because  it  emanates  from  the  mouth  of  Girija  to  enter  the  ear  of  GiriSa,4 
being  approved  by  Vasudeva.”  The  seven  marks  or  topics  of 
an  Agama  are  said  by  the  Varahl  Tantra  to  be  sr$£i,  pralaya,  devatana- 
marcanam,  sadhana,  puraicarana,  satkarma,  and  dhyanayoga. 

Sr^tiicha  pralayaichaiva  devatanang  yatharchchanam. 
Sadhanangchaiva  sarvesang  puraicarapameva  cha, 
$atkarmmasadhanangchaiva  dhyanayogaichaturwidhah. 
Saptabhirlaksanairyuktamagamamtadbidurbudhah.4 * 
r 

The  same  and  other  Tantras  describe  the  subject  (laksana)  of  such  a 
Sastra  to  be:  The  Supreme  Spirit,  the  creation  and  destruction  of  the 
universe,  the  origin  and  worship  of  the  Devas,  classification  of  beings 
(bhutanang  sangsthanam),  the  heavenly  bodies,  description  of  the  worlds 
and  hells,  of  man  and  woman,  and  of  the  centres  (cakra)  of  the  human 
body,  the  law  and  duty  (dharma)  of  the  different  ages  and  of  the  stages  of 
life  in  the  individual  called  airama,  the  sacraments  (samskaras),  the 
consecration  of  images  of  Dcvata,  mantra,  yantra,4  mudra,7  all  forms  of 
spiritual  training  (sadhana),  and  worship  (puja,  upasana),  whether  external 
or  mental,  including  worship  with  the  pancatattva,*  consecration  of 
houses,  tanks,  wells,  trees,  etc.,  descriptions  of  holy  shrines  (txrtha), 


1  Siva. 

*  The  mountain-bora  Devi,  His  Spouse. 

*  Vi?rm.  The  above  is  the  special  meaning  of  these  two  terms,  which 
both  also  denote  the  Veda.  See  as  to  Nigama,  Srimadbhagavata  Skanda, 
chap,  v,  verse  39. 

‘Siva. 

4  That  is,  creation  and  destruction  of  the  universe,  the  worship  of  Devas, 
spiritual  exercises,  the  rite  called  puraicarana,  the  six  “  magical "  powers 
tilled  §atkarma  (viz.,  mlranam,  ucchatanam,  vaiikaranam,  stambhanam, 
vidve$anam,  s  vasty  ay  an  am),  and  the  form  of  Yoga,  so  called. 

*  Is  the  diagram  for  worship  by  which  the  mind  is  fixed  on  its  object.  The 
imprints  of  the  Sri  yantra,  the  Gayatri  yantra  and  the  KAli  yantra  appear 
elsewhere  in  the  book.  Yantra  is  Mantra  in  the  sense  that  it  is  the  body  of  the 
Devata  who  is  Mantra.  Yan  tram  mantramayam  proktam  mantratma  devataiva 
hi.  Debatmanoryatha  bhedo  yantradevatayostatha  (Kaulavaliya  Tantra).  As 
to  this  and  Mantra,  see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

1  Gestures  made  by  the  hands  and  positions  of  the  body  employed  in  wor¬ 
ship  and  hathayoga.  Devan&m  modada  mudra  tasmattam  yatnatalcharet. 

*  Wine,  meat,  fish,  gram,  woman  (maithuna),  both  in  their  literal,  substi¬ 
tutional,  and  esoteric  meanings,  for  the  Tattva  are  of  three  kinds.  See  Intro¬ 
duction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 


INTRODUCTION 


57 


puraicaraija.i  japa,  vrata,'  $atkaimas&dhaiia,*  and  all  forms  of  ceremonial 
rites  and  “  magic,”  meditation  (dhyana),  and  yoga,  the  duties  of  kings, 
law,  custom,  medicine,  and  science  generally. 

The  Tantras,  in  fact,  were  {for  they  exist  only  in  fragment)  encyclo¬ 
pedias  of  the  knowledge  of  their  time. 

The  Tantras  are  still  very  numerous,  though  the  greater  part  has  been 
lost,  destroyed,  or  is  missing.  Of  those  which  are  known,  only  a  portion 
has  been  printed,  and  of  these  last  the  versions  in  circulation  are  some¬ 
times  incomplete.  Thus  the  current  version  of  the  Mahanirvana  lacks  the 
second  part,  which  is  double  the  extent  of  the  first.  This  latter  part  has 
been  long  supposed  missing.1 * * 4 * *  On  the  other  hand,  the  first  part  of  the 
Rudiayamala  *  is  at  present  not  found,  though  fragments  may  exist,  such 
as  the  Mantrabhidhana,  which  is  reputed  to  belong  to  that  part,  and  which 
I  have  published.*  The  Saradatilaka,  a  Tantrik  compendium  which  is 
much  esteemed  in  Orissa,  contains  more  matter  than  is  to  be  found  in  the 
current  printed  versions  known  to  me,7  as  is  also  the  case  with  the  current 
Bljakofa.  Other  Tantras  appear  to  exist  in  defective  or  mutilated  copies  only. 

According  to  the  Tantras,  there  are  three  regions  called  Vispukranta, 
Rathakranta,  and  Afvakranta  (sometimes  called  Gajakranta)  respectively 
to  which  different  Tantras  are  assigned.  According  to  the  Sakrimangala 
Tantra,  Visnukranta  extends  from  the  Vindhya  Mountain  to  Chattala 
(Chittagong),  thus  including  Bengal;  the  Rathakranta  from  the  same  place 
to  Mahacina,  including  Nepal;  and  Alvakranta,  from  the  same  mountain 
to  “  the  great  ocean,”  apparently  including  the  rest  of  India.  The 


1  Vide  aide. 

*  Japa  is  recitation,  either  external  or  mental,  of  mantras,  according  to  cer¬ 
tain  rules  (viddhanena  raantroccharapara).  Vratam  is  a  part  of  naimittikam 
or  occasional  karma,  such  as  those  of  the  Jaomajtami,  Sivaratri,  Durgapuja,  etc. 

*  Vide  ante. 

4  It  exists,  however,  and  I  hope  to  publish  it  in  my  collection  of  Tantrik  Texts. 

*  Certain  Tantrik  Sastras  are  called  Yamalas  and  Damaras,  such  as  the 
Yamalas,  Siddhi-Yamala,  Rudra-Yamala,  Brahma-Yamala,  and  the  Bhuta 
Damara,  Deva  Damara,  Yakja  Damara.  The  writer  of  an  article  in  vol.  v  of 
the  “Asiatic  Researches,”  pp.  53-67  (Calcutta,  1798),  says:  “  I  am  informed 
that  the  Tantras  collectively  are  noticed  in  very  ancient  compositions;  but  as 
they  are  very  numerous  they  must  have  been  composed  at  different  periods.  It 
may  be  presumed  that  the  Rudrayamala  is  amongst  the  most  ancient,  as  it  is 
noticed  in  the  UurgS  Mahattva,  where  the  principal  Tantras  are  noticed  as 
4  Kali,  Mundamala,  Tara,  Nirvana  (not  the  Mahanirvana),  Sarvasasana,  BIra, 
Lingarcana,  Bhuta.  Uddasana,  KAlika.  Bhairavi,  Bhairavlkalpa,  Todaia, 
Matfbhedanaka,  Maya,  Bireivara,  Viivasara,  Samaja,  Brahmayamala,  Rudra¬ 
yamala,  Sonkuyamala,  Gayatri,  Kalikakala,  Sarvasva,  KulSrnava,  Yogini, 
Mahisamardini.  These  are  universally  known.  Oh  Bhairavi,  greatest  of  souls: 
And  many  arc  the  Tantras  uttered  by  Sambhu  (Siva).” 

*  Vol.  i  of  my  Tantrik  Texts. 

7 1  have  come  across  what  appears  to  be  a  complete  mamucript  in  Puri. 


58 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


MahAsiddhasara  Tantra  agrees  with  this  as  to  Visnukranta  and  Ratha- 
krauta,  but  makes  the  Aivakranta  extend  from  the  Karatoya  River  1  (in 
the  Dinajpur  District)  to  Java.  The  following  Tantras  are  assigned  *  to 
the  several  regions,  though  there  are  differences  of  opinion  as  regards 
particular  Tantras.  Thus,  in  the  first  list  some  would  exclude  the  Tantran- 
tara  and  include  the  Yogarnava.  Some  Tantras  appear  in  more  than  one 
of  these  lists. 

The  Tantras  of  the  Visnukranta  arc  said  to  be : 


t.  Siddhlsvara 

23.  Kulaprakasaka 

44.  Sanatkumara 

s.  Kalitantra 

24.  Devikalpa 

45.  Yoni 

3.  Kularnava 

25.  Gandharva 

46.  Tantrantara 

4.  Jnanarnava 

26.  Kriyasara 

47.  NavaratneSvara 

5.  Nilatantra 

27.  Nibandha 

48.  Kulachudamani 

6.  Phctkari 

28.  Svatantra 

49.  Bhavachud&mapi 

7.  Devyagama 

29.  Sammohana 

50.  Devapraka£a 

8.  Uttara 

30.  Tantra-raja 

51.  Kamakhya 

9.  Srikrama 

31.  Lalita 

52.  Kamadhcnu 

to.  Siddhiyamala 

32.  Radha 

53.  Kumari 

11.  Matsyasukta 

33.  Malini 

54.  Bhutadamara 

12.  Siddhasara 

34.  Rudrayamala 

55.  Yamala 

13.  Siddhisarasvata 

35.  Brhat-Srikrama 

56.  Brahmay&mala 

14.  Varahl 

36.  Gavaksa 

57.  Viivasara 

15.  Yogini 

37.  SukumudinI 

58.  Mahakala 

16.  GanciavimarSini 

38.  ViSuddhdvara 

59.  Kuloddisa 

17.  Nitya-tantra 

39.  Malini-vijaya 

60.  Kulamfta 

18.  Sivagama 

40.  Samayacara 

61.  Kubjika, 

19.  Chamunda 

41.  Bhairavi 

62.  Tantratintamapi 

20.  Mundamala 

42.  Yogini-hydaya 

63.  KalTvilasa 

21.  Haipsa-Mahesvara 

43.  Bhairava 

64.  Mayatantra 

22.  Niruttara 

The  following  are  given  as  Rathakranta  Tantras: 

1.  Chin  may  a 

7.  Mahanila 

13.  Vasudeva-rahasya 

2.  Matsya-sukta 

8.  Maha-nirvana 

14.  Brhadgautamiya 

3.  Mahisamarddinl 

9.  Bhuta-damara 

15.  Varpoddhrti 

4.  Matrkodaya 

10.  Deva-damara 

16.  Chhayanila 

5.  Haipsa-Mahesvara 

11.  BIjacintamapi 

17.  Brihadyoni 

6.  Meru-tantra 

12.  Ekajata 

18.  Brahmajnana 

1 A  very  sacred  river  which  is  notable  in  this — that  it  never  loses  its  sanctity. 
AH  others  do  so  in  the  month  of  Sravan  (July-August). 

*  Sec  Sadhanakalpalatika,  by  Nilmani  MukhopSdhySya,  part  ii,  pp.  22-26; 
and  Introduction  to  Vol.  I  of  my  “  Tantrik  Texts.”  As  to  other  T&ntrik 
works,  su  post. 


INTRODUCTION 


59 


19.  Gambia 

34.  Yaksinitantra 

50.  Sammohini 

20,  Varna-vilSsa 

35.  Svarodaya 

51.  Acarasara 

21.  Bala-vilasa 

36.  Jnana-bhairava 

52.  Cinacara 

22.  Puraicaraija- 

37.  Akaia-bhairava 

53.  Sadamnaya 

candrika 

38.  Rajarajcsvari 

54.  Karalabhairava 

23.  Puraicarana- 

39.  Rcvati 

55.  §odha 

rasollasa 

40.  Sarasa 

56.  Mahalakjml 

24.  Pancadaii 

41.  Indra-jala 

57.  Kaivalya 

25.  Pichchhila 

42.  Krikalasa-dlpika 

58.  Kulasadbhava 

26.  Prapancasara 

43.  Kangkalamalini 

59.  Siddhi-taddhari 

27.  Paramcsvara 

44.  Kalottama 

60.  Kftisara 

28.  Navaratndvara 

45.  Yaksadamara 

6  it  Kalabhairava 

29.  Naradiya 

46.  Sarasvatl 

62.  Uddamarcivara 

30.  Nagarjuna 

47.  Sarada 

63.  Maha-kala 

31.  Yogasara 

48.  Saktisanggama 

64.  Bhutabhairava 

32.  Daksinamurti 

49.  Saktikagamasar- 

33.  Yoga-svarodaya 

vasva 

The  Tantras  of  Aivakranta  are  given  as  follows: 

1.  Bhuta-Suddhi 

23.  Sivachchana 

44.  Kamaratna 

2.  Gupladiksa 

24.  Samvara 

45.  Gopalilamfta 

3.  Brhatsara 

25.  Sulinf 

46.  Brahmanda 

4.  Tattvasara 

26.  Mahamalini 

47.  Cina 

5.  Varnasara 

27.  Moksa 

48.  Mahaniruttara 

6.  Kryasara 

28.  BrhanmaUni 

49.  Bhutdvara 

7.  Gupta-tantra 

29.  Maha-moksa 

50.  Gayatri 

8.  Gupta-sara 

30.  Brhan-moksa 

51.  VisuddheSvara 

9.  Brhat-todala 

31.  Gopi-t antra 

52.  Yogarnava 

10.  Brhannirvana 

32.  Bhutalipi 

53.  Bheranda 

11.  Brhatkahkalinl 

33.  Kamini 

54.  Mantracintamaiji 

12.  Siddha-tantra 

34.  MohinI 

55.  Yantrachudamani 

13.  Kala-tamra 

35.  Mohana 

56.  Vidyullata 

14.  Siva-tantra 

36.  Samirana 

37.  Bhuvandvari 

15.  Saratsara 

37.  Kamakcsara 

58.  Lllavati 

16.  Gauri-tanlra 

38.  Mahavira 

59.  Brhachchlna 

17.  Yoga-tantra 

39.  Gadamani 

60.  Kuranja 

18.  Dharmaka-tantra 

40.  Gurvarchcbana 

61.  Jayaradhamadhava 

19.  Tattvacintamani 

41.  Gopya 

62.  Ujjasaka 

20.  Vindu-tantra 

42.  Tiksna 

63.  Dhflmavatl 

21.  Maha-yogini 

43.  Man  gala 

64.  Siva 

22.  Bfhad-yoginI 

Particular  Tantras  have  been  from  time 

to  time  printed,  such 

as  the  well-known 

Mahanirvapa,  the  Yogini,  K&li  Tantras,  and 

60 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


others.  The  chief  collection,  however,  is  that  of  Babu  Rasik  Mohan 
Chattcijee,  who  has  published  at  Calcutta  the  following  Tantras  or 
Tantrik  works  in  Bengali  character:  Mundamala,  Saktakramana,  Maya, 
Bhutajuddhi,  Kaulikarchanadipika,  Kubjika,  Visvasara,  Purafcanunara- 
sollasa,  Saktanandat&rangipi,  Nila,  Todala,  Gandharva,  Rudraya- 
mala,  Guptasadhana,  Gayatri,  Fetkarini,  Niruttara,  MahacinacSra- 
krama,  Nirvapakramadipika,  Mantrakosa,  Yogini,  Kularpava,  Kama- 
khya,  Kankalamalini,  Matfkabheda,  Kimadhenu,  Mahanirvaija  (first 
part),  Sanatkumara,  Saradatilaka,  Tripurasarasamuchaya,  Uddamard- 
vara,  Kaulavali,  Mantramahodadhi,  Vrhannila,  Tararahasyam,  Radha, 
ShySm&rahasya. 

A  few  of  these  afid  others  have  been  printed  at  Calcutta  in  Dcvanigari 
and  edited  by  Pandit  JIvananda  Vidyasagara — namely,  Kulamava, 
Tararahasya,  Tripurasarasamuchchaya,  Mahanirvana,  Yogini,  Rudraya- 
mala  (Uttarabhaga),  Shyamarahasya,  Tantras;  the  Saradatilaka,  Prana- 
to$ini,  Mantramahodadhi;  also  a  collection  of  small  works  on  magic 
(Indrajala)  entitled  Indrajalavidyasangraha. 

Considerable  portions  of  some  of  the  Purapas  arc  appropriated 
(as  Professor  Hayman  Wilson  pointed  out  as  regards  the  Agni  Purana)  to 
instructions  for  the  performance  of  religious  ceremonies  which  belong  to  the 
Tantrik  ritual  and  arc  translated  from  the  principal  authorities  of  that 
system.  In  fact,  a  large  number  of  Purapas  and  Upapuranas  contain 
Tantrik  forms  of  worship,  and  on  that  account  and  in  accordance 
with  the  general  view  of  the  comparative  modernity  of  the  Tantras  rejected 
as  “  genuine  ”  Puranas,  though  accepted  and  relied  on  as  such  by  the 
Tantrik  pandits.  The  reader  is  referred  to  the  introduction  of  Professor 
H.  H.  Wilson’s  Visnu  Purana.  Reference  may  be  here  made. to  the 
Kalika,  Brahmanda,  Garutja,  Agni,  Srimadbhagavata,  Dcvi-bhagavata, 
and  other  Puranas.  In  the  twelfth  chapter  of  the  Kurina  Purana  on  the 
other  hand,  it  is  said:  “  The  Bhairava,  Vama,  Arhata,  and  YAmala 
SSstras  are  intended  for  delusion." 

In  addition  to  the  Tantras,  there  are  Tantrik  compendia,  commenta¬ 
ries,  such  as  the  Tantrasara,  Prapatojinl,  Prapakfsna4abd2mbuddhi, 
Tantrabhidhana,  or  Mantrakosa,  and  others.  Krspananda’s  Tantrasara, 
is  one  of  those  now  best  known.  But  before  his  time  there  were,  as 
already  stated,  other  compilers,  such  as  Raghavananda,  Raghavabhatta, 
VirQpaksa,  and  Govindabhatta;  and  such  works  as  the  Ramarchanachan- 
drikS,  Mantramuktavali,  BhuvancSvarfp&rijata,  Saradatilakam,  Tri¬ 
purasarasamuchchaya,  Svachchandasangraha  Sarasamuchchaya,  Soma- 
bhujangavali,  and  Mantratantraprakaia. 

Controversy  has  also  divided  the  Agamas  into  “  good  ”  Agamas 
(SadSgama)  and  “  bad  "Agamas  (Asadagama).  Brahmananda  Giri,  the 
author  of  the  celebrated  Saktanandatarangipl  (Wave  of  Delight  for 


INTRODUCTION 


61 


Saktas),  says:1  “Sadagama  cva  agamaiabdaaya  mukhyatvat”  (“  Sada- 
gama  alone  is  Agama  [Tantra]  according  to  the  primary  meaning  of  the 
word  Agama  ”).  Siva  condemns,  in  the  Agama  Samhita,'  the  Asada¬ 
gama,  saying:  “  Oh!  DeveSi  men  in  the  Kali  age  are  generally  of  a  rajasik 
and  tamasik*  disposition,  and  being  addicted  to  forbidden  ways  deceive 
many  others.  Oh  !  SurcSvari — those  who  in  disregard  of  their  varpaSra- 
madharma1  offer  to  ns  flesh,  blood,  and  wine — become  bhutas,  pretas, 
piiacas,  and  brahmaraksasas.”5  It  is  denied  that  this  passage  is  any 
proof  that  the  Tantra  prescribing  the  Pancatattva  Sadhana  with  wine 
and  so  forth  is  an  Asadagama.  That  these  verses  do  not,  in  the  opinion  of 
the  author  of  the  Saktanandataranginl,  amount  to  condemnation  of  this 
sadhana  is  said  to  be  shown  by  the  following  pas  sag#  in  the  same  work  in 
which  the  previous  verses  appear.  “  He  who  sees  wine,  fish,  meat,  woman 
should  salute  the  Bhairavi  Devi  and  say:  Om!  salutation  to  the 
beloved  of  Siva,  the  remover  of  all  obstacles.  Salutation  to  Thee,  the 
giver  of  all  boons,  adorned  with  a  garland  of  severed  heads  stained  with 
streams  of  blood.  Thee  I  salute  for  the  destruction  of  all  obstacles  and 
the  wellbeing  of  Kulacara.”*  The  meaning  of  these  two  passages  is 
therefore  said  to  be  that  wine,  flesh,  and  so  forth,  arc  prohibited  in  those 
cases  where  their  use  is  forbidden  by  the  Acara  of  the  particular  worship¬ 
per,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Palu.  This  form  of  worship  is  not  to  be  followed 
indiscriminately  and  without  reference  to  the  rules  which  properly  govern 
it.  For  in  that  case  instead  of  being  a  help  to  the  sadhaka,  it  leads  him 
along  the  downward  path.  The  Asadagama,  in  short,  is  said  to  be  that 
Agama  which  prescribes  forbidden  acts,  that  is,  acts  forbidden  by  the 
SLcara  of  a  particular  worshipper;  not  all  such  rites,  but  the  false  rites 
followed  by  the  bad.  Where  true  worship  is  the  aim  there  is  sal,  where 
it  is  not  there  is  asat. 

•  O  *  • 

It  may  be  asked,  What  is  the  general  characteristic  of  the  Tantra  as 
compared  with  other  Sastras?  In  the  first  place  the  Sastra  contains 
provisions  which  are  applicable  for  all  without  distinction  of  race,  caste,  or 


1  Chap.  ii.  *  Cited  in  Saktanandataranginl,  chap.  ii. 

*  That  is,  of  a  sensual  and  ignorant  disposition. 

1  The  law  governing  caste;  and  the  stages  oflife,  student,  house-holder, 
etc,,  called  A  dramas.  The  terra  as  a  general  one  includes  the  acara  of  the 
Sadhaka. 

*  That  is,  unclean,  malignant,  and  demoniac  spirits; 

Kalau  prayena  devesi  rajasastamasastatha, 

Nishiddhacharanah  santo  mohayantyaparan  bahiin, 

Avabhyang  pishitang  raktang  suranchaiva  surcivari, 
Varn&ratnochitang  dharmmaraavicharyyarpayanti  ye, 
Bhutaprctapifacharhaste  bhavanti  brahniaralgasah. 

Chap.  xv. 


62 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


sex.  The  SSstra  affords  to  all,  with  freedom  from  Vaidik  exclusiveness, 
the  practical  method  (more  extensive  than  mere  ritual  in  its  ordinary 
English  sense)  which  qualifies  the  Sadhaka  for  the  reception  of  the  higher 
doctrine  of  the  path  of  knowledge  (jnana  marga).  The  Sudra  and 
woman  are  not,  as  in  the  case  of  Vaidikacara,  under  any  ban.  As  the 
Gautamiya  Tantra  says 1  people  of  all  castes,  and  whether  men  or  women, 
may  receive  its  mantras  “  Sarvavamadhikaraicha  narinam  yogyameva 
ca.”  In  the  Cakra  there  is  no  caste  at  all,  even  the  lowest  Candida  ‘ 
being  deemed,  whilst  therein,  higher  than  Brahmanas.  The  Mahanirvaga 
Tantra  says : 5  “  That  low  Kaula  who  refuses  to  initiate  a  C and  ala  or  a 
Yavana 4  into  the  Kaula  dharma,  considering  them  to  be  inferior,  or  a 
woman,  out  of  disrespect  for  her,  goes  the  downward  way.  All  two-footed 
beings  in  this  world,  from  the  vipra  *  to  the  inferior  castes,  arc  competent 
for  kulacara.” 

In  the  next  place,  as  regards  the  subject  matter  in  respect  of  which 
liberty  is  so  given,  it  is  necessary  to  understand  the  distinction  which 
Hindus  draw  in  religious  matters  between  knowledge  ( jnana)  in  the  sense 
of  actual  experience,  as  distinguished  from  mere  mental  theorizing, 
and  action  (kriya).  The  answer,  then,  is  that  the  Tantra  is  above  all  a 
practical  scripture  primarily  concerned  with  action  and  ritual,  which  the 
undisccming  may  think  has,  in  any  case,  been  prescribed  to  an  excessive 
extreme.  It  is  so  concerned  because,  though  action  cannot  alone  and 
directly  secure  liberating  knowledge,  the  attainment  of  the  latter  must 
necessarily  be  preceded  by  right  action.  For  how  otherwise  can  such 
spiritual  knowledge  be  gained  ?  In  order  to  secure  the  development  of  the 
Jiva’s  body,  certain  physical  exercises  are  necessary.  Similarly  both  these 
and  other  mental  and  spiritual  exercises  are  required  if  liberating  knowl¬ 
edge  (brahmajfiana)  is  to  be  attained.  Such  exercises  are  genetically 
termed  “  Sadhana,”  and  include  both  worship  (puja)  and  all  its  ritual. 

Sadhana  has  historically  varied  with  race  and  creed.  The  Hindu 
has  his  own  in  the  Tantra  which  is  called  the  Sadhana  Sastra.  The  pro¬ 
vision  of  such  a  definite  training  is  the  strength  to  a  greater  or  less  degree 
of  all  ancient  orthodoxies,  just  as  its  absence  may  prove  to  be  the  rock  on 
which  the  more  modem  forms  of  religion  may  split.  Doubdess  to  the 
newer  “  Protestant  ”  spirit,  whether  issuing  from  Europe,  Arabia,  or  else¬ 
where,  all  ritual  is  liable  to  be  regarded  as  “  mummery,”  except  possibly 

*  Chap.  i.  s  One  of  the  lowest  and  most  unclean  castes, 

*  Chap,  xiv,  verses  1 87,  184. 

*  Here  generally  used  for  non-Hindu,  a  term  specially  applied  to  the 
Greeks  or  Bactrians.  There  is  nothing,  therefore,  to  prevent  a  non-Hindu  from 
being  initiated  in  Kaula  dharma,  provided  that  he  be  fit  for  such  initiation. 
Initiation,  however,  in  such  a  case  would  ordinarily  be  given  by  an  avadhuta. 

*  Brahman  a. 


INTRODUCTION 


63 


the  particular  and  perhaps  jejune  variety  which  it  calls  its  own.  For  even 
the  most  desiccated  “  Protestantism  ”  has  not  been  able  altogether  to 
dispense  with  it.  There  is  room  for  this  spirit  as  for  others,  or  it  would 
not  be  there.  like,  however,  everything  else,  it  may  go  beyond  the 
purposes  which  are  claimed  to  justify  its' origin. 

Etymologists  have  derived  the  word  “  ceremony  ”  from  “  cor  ”  and 
“  monerc”.  The  derivation,  though  inaccurate,  explains  well  the  purpose 
of  the  thing  itself.  The  sacred  rites  which  are  the  expressions  of  inner¬ 
most  feeling  proclaim  the  religious  truths  which  have  inspired  them  and 
excite  devotion,  rendering  man  more  sensible  of  the  Divine  Presence. 
So,  as  the  Council  of  Trent  declared,  “  the  Catholic  Church,  rich  with  the 
experience  of  ages  and  clothed  with  their  splendour,  Hhs  introduced  mystic 
benediction  (mantra),  incense  (dupa),  water  (aramana,  padya,  etc.), 
lights  (dipa),  bells  (ghanta),  flowers  (puspa),1  vestments,  and  all  the 
magnificence  of  its  ceremonies  in  order  to  excite  the  spirit  of  religion  to  the 
contemplation  of  the  profound  mysteries  which  they  reveal.  As  arc  its 
faithful,  the  Church  is  composed  of  both  body  (deha)  and  soul  (atma).  It 
therefore  renders  to  the  Lord  (I$vara)  a  double  worship,  exterior 
(bahyapuja)  and  interior  (manasapiija),  the  latter  being  the  prayer  (vanda- 
na)  of  the  faithful,  the  breviary  of  its  priest,  and  the  voice  of  Him  ever 
interceding  in  our  favour,  and  the  former  the  outward  motions  of  the 
liturgy.”  The  human  need  for  ceremonial  in  the  sense  of  the  necessity 
which  man  feels  of  an  exterior  manifestation  which  shall  both  stimulate 
and  translate  his  inner  feelings,  is  such  that  no  religion  of  the  past  has  been 
without  its  rites  and  ceremonies,  and  even  the  shallowest  of  epochs,  whilst 
affecting  a  superiority  to  them,  have  yet  preserved  these  ceremonies 
in  its  ciyil  life. 

The  necessity  which  is  thus  admitted  exists  with  greater  urgency 
in  the  spiritual  sphere.  It  is  idle  to  suppose  that  all  or  any  may,  through 
Vedantik  talk  or  by  the  mere  dosing  of  the  eyes  in  pious  pose,  realize  the 
Nirguija  Brahman.  The  great  teaching  of  the  Vedanta  by  itself  and  with¬ 
out  accompanying  Sadhana  can  achieve  nothing  of  real  worth.  Its  study 
may  produce  a  Pandit.  But  to  the  Sadhaka  the  disputations  of  Pandits, 
whether  philosophical  or  scientific,  is  like  “  the  cawing  of  crows  ”.  There 
is  both  reason  and  humour  in  the  Hindu  saying  that  a  logician  will  be 
reborn  a  jackass.  It  is  Sadhana  which  alone  in  any  system,  whether  Hindu 
or  otherwise,  is  really  fruitful.  The  Tantra  claims  to  be  practical  and  to 
be  a  pratyaksa  Sastra  in  that  it  affords  the  direct  proof  of  experience. 
It  is  therefore  one  of  its  common  sayings  that,  “  Whereas  other  Sastras 
are  concerned  with  speculation  only,  the  art  of  medicine  and  Tantra  arc 
practical,  self-evident  and  prove  themselves  at  every  step.” 


1  Portions  of  the  §odafa  Upac3ra  of  Hindu  worship. 


64 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


The  Tantra  further  claims  not  only  to  be  practical  and  to  contain 
provisions  available  for  all  without  distinction  of  caste  or  sex,  but  also  to 
be  fundamentally  rational.  Nowhere  else,  in  fact,  than  in  the  Hindu 
Sastras  do  we  find  greater  stress  laid  on  the  necessity  of  thought  and 
reasoning.  For  in  India  it  is  said  want  of  reasoning  involves  loss  of 
dharma.  “  There  is  no  sage  who  has  not  an  opinion  of  his  own.” 1  The 
virtue  of  its  general  method  is  not  merely  thaumaturgic,*  but  is  inherent 
in  the  mental  states  induced  by  dhyana  and  other  physical  and  mental 
processes,  and  the  excitation  of  the  exterior  rituals;  an  inherence  chiefly 
explained  by  the  fact  that  as  at  base  all  existence  is  of  the  nature  of  mind, 
the  transformation  of  mind  is  the  transformation  of  existence  itself.  Thus 
the  sacramental  enCrgy  of  the  mantra,  even  when  the  Guru  (who  is 
himself  the  manifestation  on  the  terrestrial  plane  of  Adlnatha  Mahakala)* 
has  vivified  it  with  consciousness  (caitanya),  depends  in  part  for  its 
efficacy  on  the  competence  (adhikara)  of  him  who  receives  it. 

Profoundly  based  on  truth,  however,  as  ail  ritual  is,  the  Tantra  yet 
recognizes  that  there  is  a  stage  in  spiritual  progress  in  which  it  becomes 
not  merely  unnecessary,  but  an  obstacle  to  further  advance.  If  Sadhana 
be,  as  it  is,  but  a  means  to  an  end  (brahmajiiana,  or  the  realization  in 
personal  experience  of  the  Brahman),  with  the  attainment  of  such  end,  and  to 
the  extent  that  approach  is  made  to  it,  it  becomes  superfluous.  As  the 
Mahanirvana  says:  “  To  him  who  has  faith  in  the  root,  of  what  use  are 
the  branches  and  leaves?”  This  stage  is,  however,  both  a  high  and 
infrequent  one,  which  the  great  majority  (notwithstanding  the  fancies  of 
some  of  the  “  emancipated  ”  in  this  matter)  have  by  no  means  reached. 
As  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra  says,  Brahmasadhana  is  the  highest  state 
of  mind;  dhyanabhava  is  the  middling  slate,  and  japa  comes  next. 
External  worship  is  the  lowest  of  all.  Yoga  is  the  process  whereby  union 
of  the  Atma  and  Paramatma  is  achieved.  Puja  (worship)  is  the  union  of 
worshipper  and  worshipped.  But  for  him  who  realizes  that  all  things  are 
Brahman,  there  is  neither  yoga  nor  puja.  For  him  there  is  neither  sin  nor 
virtue,  heaven,  or  future  birth.  There  is  none  to  meditate  on  nor  one  to 
meditate.4 

In  the  opening  chapter  of  the  Kulanjava  Tantra  it  is  said  that 
“  There  are  fools  who,  pleased  with  the  mere  name  of  the  Karmakapda, 
deceive  themselves  with  a  multitude  of  rites.  It  is  not  by  eating  one  meal 
a  day  that  knowledge  of  the  transcendent  is  attained.”  “  If  the  ant-hill 
be  struck,  is  the  serpent  thereby  killed  ?  ”  “  If  the  mere  rubbing  of  the 
body  with  mud  and  ashes  gains  liberation,  then  the  village  dogs  who  roll 


1  Nasau  muniryasya  matam  na  bhinnam,  as  the  Mahabharata  says. 

*  Sse  as  to  this  De  la  Vall6c  Poussin,  op.  cit.  *  Yoginl  Tantra. 

4  Ullasa  xiv,  verses  122,  124.  See  post. 


INTRODUCTION 


65 


thereto  have  attained  it.”  Ritual  is  necessary,  but  it  must  be  accompanied 
both  by  sincerity  and  increasing  knowledge,  which  leads  to  tattvajhana, 
the  sole  cause  of  liberation.  It  is  not  to  be  had  by  talk  and  self-conceit. 
Those  who  read  the  Scriptures  and  know  not  the  truth,  but  pass  their 
dme  in  disputation,  are  like  “  the  ladle  which,  lying  in  syrup,  knowB  not 
the  taste  of  it.”  Mere  talk  leads  to  nothing.  “  One  may  discuss  as  to 
what  is  knowledge  and  what  is  knowable,  for  a  thousand  years.”  “  Life 
is  short.  Many  are  the  Vedas,  many  are  the  Sastras,  infinite  are  the 
obstacles;  therefore  it  is  necessary  that  the  essences  be  mastered,  as  the 
gander  sips  from  the  water  the  milk  which  has  been  mixed  with  it” 
Ritual  schemes  exist  to  meet  the  requirements  of  all  grades  of  competency; 
and  their  accomplishment  with  sincerity  and  irteBigence  effects  their 
purpose.  But  of  the  perfected  (siddha)  Tantrika  Kaula,  who  has  passed 
through  all  preliminary  acaras,  it  is  said :  “  The  wise  man  who  through 
study  of  the  Scriptures  has  realized  the  Truth  discards  them  all  as  he  who 
gathers  paddy  throws  away  the  husk  and  straw.”  Jnana  derived  from  the 
Agamas  leads  to  the  Sabdabrahman.  That  which  issues  from  viveka 
(discrimination)  is  the  Parabrahman.  There  is  no  realization  (tattva- 
jnana)  with  attachment  to  Vaidik  and  Agamic  rites,  however  much  these 
may  be  necessary  as  the  preliminary  means  to  its  attainment. 

*  *  *  * 

If  the  injunctions  of  the  Sastra  are  to  be  rendered  intelligible, 
certain  general  principles  must  first  be  understood.  This  is  the  necessary 
preliminary  to  the  presentation  of  the  ritual  facts.  For  in  these  principles 
lie  their  ultimate  significance.  The  author,  in  his  preface,  very  truly  says: 
“  I  feel  it  keenly  myself  how  useless  it  is  to  follow  a  religious  practice 
without  understanding  it.” 

For  those  to  whom  the  Indian  way  of  thinking,  expression,  imagery, 
allusions,  and  metaphor  are  unfamiliar,  it  is  not  always  easy  to  follow  at  a 
first  reading  the  author’s  discursive  argument.  A  summary  of  that  argu¬ 
ment  in  a  Western  and  more  ordered  form  would  therefore  be  useful. 
The  conclusion  of  our  enquiry,  however,  appears  to  be  the  fitting  time  for 
such  a  summary,  even  were  there  space  available  for  it  in  this  volume. 
The  author’s  preface  indicates  the  main  lines  on  which  he  proceeds, 
which  I  here  shortly  state  and  amplify. 

The  previous  portion  of  this  Introduction  states  the  circumstances  under 
which  Indian  Sastra  was  at  one  time  neglected  where  it  was  not  misunder¬ 
stood  or  condemned.  Scepticism,  unbelief,  and  then  {according  to  ortho¬ 
dox  views)  heresy,  passing  under  the  name  of  “  reform,”  had  prevailed. 
The  author,  in  the  beginning  of  his  Preface,  rejoices  to  note  a  revival  of 
true  religion,  but  as  an  adherent  of  Tantra  is  grieved  to  observe  that  this 
$3stra  bad  not,  when  he  wrote,  received  its  due  share  of  attention.  This 
was  the  more  necessary  in  that  it  is  the  source  of  all  Sadhana  (practice) 


66 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


and  of  all  Mantras  and  Yantras.  Brahma-knowledge  cannot  be  attained 
without  self-purification,  and  for  this  the  Tantra  provides  the  only  means 
in  the  Kaliyuga. 

Doubtless  there  are  (he  writes)  to  be  found  nowadays  some  superior 
Vedantic  persons  1  who  are  wont  at  all  times  to  say  that  the  portion  of  the 
Sastras  which  relates  to  worship  and  ritual  practice  (Karmakanda)  is  only 
for  those  who  are  devoid  of  knowledge.  This  is  so ;  but  the  implication 
that  they  have  escaped  this  class  has  often  but  little  foundation.  They  are 
doers  of  action  (Karma),  and  as  much  affected  by  it  as  are  others.  The 
knowledge  of  which  the  Sastra  speaks  is  not  the  metaphysical  faculty  (with 
its  acquisitions)  of  the  mind  on  the  ordinary  plane  of  jagrat  consciousness 
but  is  that  spiritual  Experience  the  existence  of  which  constitutes  the  fourth 
stage  of  turiya  consciousness  attained  by  successful  yoga.  Notwithstanding 
— and,  in  fact,  because  of — their  philosophical  disquisitions,  such  persons 
still  belong  to  the  dualistic  world,  and  there  is  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of 
in  that.  We  cannot  blow  it  away  with  our  breath,  and  why  should  we 
trouble  to  do  so  if  it  is  alleged  to  be  a  mere  nothing.  It  would  seem  as  if 
modem  Monism  had,  through  dread  of  the  dualistic  world  shrunk  all  its 
limbs,  and  was  trying  to  find  a  place  wherein  to  hide  its  head  in  an  un¬ 
happily  existing  universe.2 *  Monism  (advaitavada)  is  doubtless  true;  but 
so  also,  necessarily,  is  the  world  of  duality  for  that  state  of  consciousness 
whence,  indeed,  it  comes.  In  its  own  way,  this  world  is  as  real  as  the 
Brahman  whose  Ilia  *  it  is.  What  else  is  the  world  play  of  the  Brahman 
but  that  show  of  duality  which  surrounds  us? 

Worship,  by  its  definition,  involves  the  dualistic  idea,  and  is  itself 
necessary  for  every  dualist,  since  it  is,  whether  in  its  ordinary  sense,  or  in 
that  in  which  it  is  conceived  as  all  action  dedicated  to  and  informed  by 
spiritual  purpose  and  intention,4  the  true  and  only  expression  of  the  Atma 
to  Itself  on  this  plane.  It  is  an  essential  verity  that  the  Self  alone  knows 
the  Self.  But  how  may  complete  self-recognition  be  attained  except  the 
preliminary  stages  of  Sadhana  and  worship  have  been  passed?  If  the 
elect  attain  success  along  the  path  of  knowledge  (jftana  marga),  it  is 
because,  through  action  and  devotion  in  this  and  previous  births,  they 
have  become  competent  for  that  path.  What  the  persons  to  whom  the 
author  refers  really  mean  is  that  such  Karma  as  consists  in  worship  and  so 
forth  must  be  abandoned,  but  that  which  is  required  for  the  service  of  wife 
and  children  may  be  retained  by  the  possessors  of  Brahma-knowledge.  It 
is,  however,  only  those  who  have  truly  acquired  siddhi  who  are  thereby 

1  See  post.  1  See  post. 

*  “-Play  ”,  When  understood,  a  very  profound  Indian  concept,  proceeding 

on  the  ground  that  no  other  reason  can  be  assigned  for  the  world  appearance 
than  that  which  is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  Brahman  itself.  See  post.*  , 

4  See  the  fine  Mantra  in  Mahanirvana  Tantra.  Ch.  vi,  w.  178-181. 


INTRODUCTION 


67 


released  from  the  obligation  of  observing  these  rules  of  the  Karmakap^a, 
which  help  to  produce  it.1  The  Tantra  docs  not,  therefore,  at  the  outset 
ignore  this  visible,  palpable  world.  We  must  acknowledge  and  righdy 
tread  this  earth  before  the  consciousness  of  the  embodied  Atma  can  be 
transformed  into  that  other  state  of  consciousness  which  reveals — for 
it  is  in  fact — the  unconditioned  Atma  Itself.  But  haste  to  know  the 
Beyond  should  not  blind  us  to  that  which  is  its  present  manifestation, 
constituting  both  the  spacious  field  and  material  for  Sadhana.  He  alone 
realizes  the  sweetness  of  the  Divine  Play  “  who  has  plunged  into  non- 
dualisdc  truth  after  having  churned  the  dualistic  world,”  which  is  Its 
expression  to  us. 

The  Brahman  is  reached  through  Its  universe^ aspect.  The  world 
does  not  intervene,  as  though  it  were  an  obstacle  hard  to  surmount  be¬ 
tween  man  and  God,  and  set  to  frighten  us.  It  is  the  wealth  of  the  Sakti 
of  Viivelvari,’  whom  it  reveals.  The  Tantra,  therefore,  takes  into  its 
arms,  as  if  they  were  its  two  children,  both  Dualism  and  Monism,  affording 
by  its  Sadhana  and  the  spiritual  knowledge  generated  thereby  the  means 
whereby  their  antinomies  arc  resolved.  It  does  not  entertain  the  conceit 
that  metaphysics,  and  still  less  science,  however  useful  in  their  own  sphere 
they  may  be  to  the  full  development  of  conditioned  consciousness,  can  effect 
anything  beyond  it.  Being  but  workings  of  the  jagrat  mind,  they  can 
never  of  themselves  transcend  the  limits  of  those  conditions  which  constitute 
it.  The  ultimate  questions  which  that  mind  raises  never  receive  an  answer 
which  it  can  verify  whilst  it  remains  in  its  conditioned  state.  The  end  of 
all  Sadhana  is  the  establishment  of  that  fourth  or  higher  state  of  conscious¬ 
ness,  the  existence  of  which  is  itself  the  answer  to  a  question  which  is  no 
longer  put.  The  Tantra  harmonizes  VedSntik  Monism  and  Dualism.  Its 
purpose  is  to  give  liberation  to  the  jiva  by  a  method  through  which  monis¬ 
tic  truth  is  reached  through  the  dualistic  world.  It  immerses  its  sadhakas 
in  the  current  of  divine  bliss  by  changing  duality  into  unity,  and  then 
evolving  from  the  latter  a  dualistic  play,  thus  proclaiming  the  wonderful 
glory  of  the  Spouse  of  Paramaiiva  in  the  lovc-embrace  of  Matter  (jada) 
and  Spirit  (caitanya).  Those  who  have  realized  this,  move  and  yet  re¬ 
main  unsoiled  in  the  mud  of  worldly  actions  the  mere  touch  of  which  is  to 
others  the  cause  of  their  perdition.  Though  resting  and  rocking  upon  the 
waves  of  the  samsara,  they  arc  not  of  it,  but  detached,  and  as  it  were  the 
petals  of  some  wind-rocked  lotus.  Siva  has  therefore  said:  “In  the 

1  The  results  of  sincere  worship  are  patent.  If,  however,  the  cause  of  this 
he  sought,  it  will  be  found  to  lie  in  the  psychological  truth  that  such  a  worship¬ 
per  grows  akin  to  that  which  he  worships — a  truth  which  is  expressed  in  the 
Indian  notion  of  the  blissful  abodes,  samipya,  salokya,  and  others.  The  Devata 
becomes  not  only  the  content  of,  but  the  consciousness  itself,  of  the  Sadhaka. 

*  The  Devi  as  Mistress  of  the  Universe. 


68 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


world  some  desire  non-dualistic,  others  dualistic,  knowledge,  but  those  who 
have  known  My  truth  have  passed  beyond  Dualism  and  Non-Dualism.” 

Sadhana,  which  is  of  three  kinds — physical,  verbal,  and  mental — must 
be  accomplished  by  the  body,  senses,  and  intellect,  according  to  present 
conditions  of  country,  time,  and  person.  These,  however,  are  all  now  bad. 
India,  which  has  for  centuries  eaten  the  bread  of  servitude  to  strangers,  is 
to-day  filled  with  persons  born  of  parents  of  different  castes,  foreigners, 
defiled  people,  and  adherents  of  other  religious  faiths.  Bad  and  filthy  habits 
and  practices,  oppression,  license,  and  prostitution  prevail.  In  the  impure 
body,  lust,  anger,  greed,  pride,  delusion,  and  envy,  contend  as  upon  a 
battle-field.  Restless  are  the  senses,  and  doubting  the  heart.  The  circum¬ 
stances  of  the  times  render  the  carrying  out  of  the  Vaidik  rites  and  disciplines 
impossible.  That  Aryan  life  no  longer  exists  in  which  every  event,  from  the 
conception  in  the  womb  to  the  cremation  of  the  body,  was  accompanied  by 
Vaidik  Mantra.  A  heavenly  body  which,  through  the  control  of  the  passions, 
has  become  a  suitable  vehicle  for  the  development  of  Brahma-knowledge 
according  to  Vaidik  rules,  is  nowadays  impossible  of  achievement.  Foresee¬ 
ing  this,  Siva  revealed  the  path  of  Tantra,  the  Sadhana  of  which  is  framed 
to  meet  the  needs  and  circumstances  of  the  Kaliyuga,  and  the  varying 
temperaments  and  proficiency  of  those  who  live  in  it.  If  there  be  any 
doubt  of  its  efficiency,  actual  practice  will  verify  the  reality  of  its  claims. 

It  is  not  necessary  that  faith  should  precede  Sadhana.  This  if  sin¬ 
cerely  performed,  will  produce  faith  by  the  effects  it  achieves  in  the  mind 
of  the  Sadhaka.  If  the  knowledge  of  the  Brahman  already  exists,  there  is 
no  use  of  Sadhana.  It  is  in  fact,  the  very  want  of  such  knowledge  which 
renders  all  prayer  and  practice  necessary.  Further,  whether  one  believes 
in  it  or  not,  medicine  has  the  power  to  cure  disease.  It  docs  not  wait  upon 
the  intellectual  recognition  of  that  fact.  In  the  same  way  Siddhi 
(success),  the  visible  (pratyaksa)  fruit  of  the  Sastra,  is  the  result  of  its 
inherent  potency.  Who  knows  what  will  happen  in  the  next  birth  ?  That 
is  the  best  of  all  philosophies  which  bears  actual  and  visible  fruit  in  this 
world.  For  reasons  which  the  author  explains  the  provisions  of  the  Sastra 
act  with  speed  and  efficiency,  so  that  fruit  ripens  on  the  Tantrik  tree 
before  even  blossoms  appear  on  the  Vaidik  tree.  Owing,  however,  to  the 
neglect  of  these  practical  principles,  no  useful  results  were  being  obtained 
from  the  renewal  of  the  religious  spirit  beyond  mere  barren,  pious  velleities. 

The  spiritual  ambitions  of  some  were  far  too  presumptuous.  Instead 
of  attending  to  daily  duty  and  worship,  they  were  giving  quite  an  incom¬ 
petent  attention  to  such  extremely  subde  and  advanced  subjects  as  Nirvi- 
kalpa  Samadhi,  Videhakaivalya,1  and  the  like  matters,  which  are  in  no 

1  That  is,  the  highest  form  of  ecstasy:  liberation  from  the  gross  body,  etc.  m 
The  author’s  remarks  are  not  without  application  to  such  Westerners  as  are  * 
prematurely  attempting  Yoga. 


INTRODUCTION 


69 


way  the  concern  of  the  vast  hulk  of  men,  who  are  making  good  progress, 
according  to  their  state,  if  they  worship  God,  and  do  not  hate  or  cheat 
their  neighbours.  Others  of  greater  spiritual  competence,  through  neglect 
or  ignorance  of  the  practical  directions  of  the  Tantra,  which  alone  reveals 
the  path,  had  lost  their  way.  After  pointing  out  that  it  is  idle  to  suppose 
that  knowledge  of  the  truth  can  be  acquired  by  simply  reading  the  Yoga 
Vaiisfha  or  Gita  in  the  gloom  and  under  the  sway  of  the  Kali  age,  the 
author,  in  an  interesting  passage,  states  that  he  has  known  many  a  spirit¬ 
ually  disposed  man  who,  under  the  influence  of  such  a  day-dream,  “  has 
ended  in  becoming  neither  a  believer  nor  an  unbeliever,  but  a  queer  being 
half  man,  half  lion.”  “  By  constant  meditation  on  a  nasty  nothing  his  mind 
and  heart  become  such  a  vacuity  that  there  is  neither  faith,  reverence, 
devotion,  nor  love  in  them,  but  merely  a  bewilderment,  with  the  inward 
lament,  ‘  Alas !  I  am  lost.’  ”  He  continues  “  In  many  places  we  have 
found  such  persons  coming  sccrcdy  to  ask,  ‘  What  means  arc  there  left  to 
us?  ’  But  their  only  difficulty  is  this — they  want  to  know  whether  it  is  not 
possible  for  them  to  become  Tantrik  or  Paurapik  worshippers  in  secret 
whilst  keeping  up  the  show  of  the  possession  of  Brahma-knowledge,  and 
without  having  publicly  to  wear  the  sacred  crown  lock,  or  thread,  or  to 
paint  their  body  with  the  sacred  marks.”  “  Is  it  not  deplorable,”  he 
asks,  “  that  a  man  should  be  in  this  condition,  repenting  at  last  in  this 
fashion,  at  the  close  of  his  life,  after  having  gone  through  all  its  useless 
troubles  ?  ”  Doubts  concerning  the  Tantra,  the  Sadhana  Sastra,  arise  from 
ignorance  of  its  true  character.  Here  is  to  be  found  the  reason  why 
recourse  has  not  been  had  to  it.  Common  people  had,  no  doubt,  much 
talked  about  the  Sastra,  and  quarrelled  over  it.  Some  “  illiterate  traders, 
crafty  discoverers  of  magic,  and  thoughtless  and  starving  interpreters 
of  the  Sastra,”  had  busied  themselves  with  it.  “  But  want  of  faith 
in  the  Sastra  is  becoming  deeply  rooted  in  people’s  minds  by  the 
troubles  into  which  they  fall  through  failure  to  realize  the  truth,  and  by  the 
exposition  to  vulgar  gaze  of  things  a  proper  understanding  of  which  can  be  acquired 
from  Gurus  only .” 1  "  It  is  difficult,”  he  says,  “  to  guess  how  many 
hundreds  of  simple-minded  Sadhus  have  been,  and  arc  being,  deceived 
by  the  dangerous  temptations  held  up  before  them  by  these  people.”  Want 
of  understanding  of  the  Sastra,  together  with  actual  abuses  of  its  injunc¬ 
tions  by  some  of  its  adherents,  have  led  to  the  insults  now  levelled  at  it. 
Discussion  and  agitation  and  insult  have,  he  says,  to  such  an  extent  and 
with  such  constancy  persecuted  and  wounded  the  community  of  Sadhakas 
that  no  one  who  is  a  son  with  a  body  of  flesh  and  blood  and  strength  can 
bear  to  see  the  sacred  names  of  the  Mother  and  Father  of  the  universe 


1  See  post.  One  of  the  causes  of  this  degeneracy  is  referred  to  by 
the  author  later. 


70 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


slandered  and  abused  in  such  manner.”  “  Whose  heart,”  he  writes,  “  is 
not  pained  to  see  the  axe  of  bitter  abuse  laid  at  the  root  of  Siddhi  and 
Sadhana  ?  The  object  of  our  effort  is  to  remove  this  great  pain  in  the 
heart  of  the  community  of  Sadhakas.  We  hope  that  the  sons  of  the 
Aryan  race  will  not  hesitate  to  uphold  the  blissful  standard  of  triumph 
in  the  assuring  name  of  Her  who  destroys  all  Asuras.”  1  From  the  Tantra 
alone,  must  be  learnt  its  principles,  the  exposition  of  which  he  lays  as  his 
daksiria  (offering)  at  the  Lotus  Feet  of  Dai$ina  (the  gracious  Devi). 

Arthur  Avalon 


1  The  demoniac  enemies  of  the  Dev  a*  and  of  Dharma.  Here  also  the  • 
earthly  representatives  of  the  Asura  spirit,  who  oppose  religion. 


TANTRA  TATTVA 


PART  I 


INVOCATION1 * * * * * 7 

OBEISANCE  TO  THE  ALL-GOOD  MOTHER  WHO  IS  THE 
SUPREME  DEVATA 

1 

O  All-Good  Mother! 

I  bow  to  Thee  Who,  sweet  in  the  joyous  play  of  the  music  of  the 
flute,  art  the  beloved  of  Radhika;* 

Who  appeared)  as  a  sun  illumining  the  three  worlds  with  Thy 
effulgent  rays;* 

Who  destroycth  the  body  of  Kama  in  the  right  half  of  Thine  own 
eternal  Self;  * 

Who  art  in  joyous  play  Hcramba  •  the  son,  resting  on  the  lap  of 
Thine  own  Self  as  Ambika  the  Mother; 

Who  art  the  field  of  play  for  the  desires  of  Mahakala;  and 

Who  giveth  birth  to  the  three  worlds. 

2 

May  the  Kaivalya  fruit  of  Kulatattva  *  grow  in  the  grove  of  my  heart 
on  that,  blossoming  and  verdant  Creeper 1  who,  crowned  by  the  beauty  of 

1  Mangatacarana. 

*  The  beloved  Prakrti  of  Krsna  in  Goloka.  “  He  who  is  the  First  male, 
the  imperishable  One,  Hari,  on  Him  you  have  fixed  your  affection.  Him 
whom  all  extol  as  the  invisible,  the  unseen,  the  impenetrable,  you  regard  as 
your  husband  ”  (Prem  Sagar).  Here  the  Devi  is  saluted  in  Her  incarnation  as 
Kfs^ia,  the  adored  of  the  women  of  Vraja.  Tantra  says  that  in  the  Kali  age, 
Kj-jpa  and  Kali,  Gopala  and  Kalika,  are  awake  (jagrala) — that  is,  effective. 

8  See  Lalita  Sahasranama,  verse  3. 

1  Man  and  wife  form  one  body,  of  which  the  right  half  is  the  male.  Siva 
destroyed  Kama,  the  Deva  of  Desire,  with  fire  flashed  from  his  eye,  when  the 
latter  sought  to  distract  him  from  his  great  Yoga. 

*  The  elephant-headed  GaneSa,  son  of  Siva  and  Parvatl. 

*  The  liberation  which  is  the  fruit  of  Tintrik  Kulasadhana. 

7  Lata:  a  term  for  woman,  who  is  thus  thought  of,  embracing  and  dependent 
on  man,  as  the  creeper  (lata)  clings  to  a  tree.  Thus,  in  the  Yogavafijtha, 
Gauri,  the  wife  of  Siva,  is  described  “  embracing  him  as  the  Madhavl  creeper 
clasps  the  young  Amra  tree,  with  her  bosom  like  a  cluster  of  blossom  ” 
(Nirvana  Prakarana,  chap,  xviii.) 


74 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  crescent  moon,  and  more  beautiful  than  the  rain-clouds,  and  more 
playful  than  the  wife  of  the  rain-cloud,1 * *  rests  on  the  soft,  flowery  bed  of 
the  breast  of  Mahakala,8 *  intoxicated  with  the  sweetness  of  supreme  bliss. 

3 

O  my  heart,  seek  the  shelter  of  that  blue  cloud-like  Lady  Who  saith 
“  Fear  not,”  Whose  restless  curling  hair  makes  lines  of  refulgent  beauty. 
Whose  graceful  form  is  clothed  with  space,5 *  Who  charms  the  great 
Bhairava*  with  the  soft  and  sweet  delights  of  Her  eyes,  playful  like  two 
large  bees.4 

4 

I  bow  at  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Supreme  Devi;  '  at  those  feet  which  give 
joy  to  the  heart  of  Him  Who  is  ever  joyful,'  whose  form  is  the  mantra 7 
in  the  mahayantra,7  and  Whose  embodiment1  is  the  Tantra. 

5 

Mother,  in  Thy  two  aspects  of  &akti  ’  and  Sakta,10  Thou  art  the  source 
of  both  Agama  and  Nigama  Sastras.11  What  Thou  hast  said  as  Parvati 11 
is  Nigama,  and  what  Thou  hast  said  as  Siva  is  Agama.  Thou  alone,  in 
Thy  two  aspects  of  Sakti  and  Sakta,  art  the  nurse  and  nourisher  of  both 
Agama  and  Nigama.  Thou  alone,  in  Thy  two  forms  as  Sadhika  and 
Sadhaka,1*  holdeth  in  Thy  bosom  the  Tantra  Sastra,  with  its  teachings 
concerning  Sivatattva  and  Saktitattva.14  Again,  it  is  Thou  Who,  in  Thy 
aspects  of  Sakti  and  Sakta,  art  the  shelter  and  guardian  of  both  Nigama 


1  That  is,  the  lightning.  1  Siva. 

*  That  is  who  is  naked  as  both  Kali  and  Siva  are  represented  to  be. 

4  So  the  Yogavaiisjha  speaks  of  the  eyes  of  Gouri  “  as  resembling  the 
clusters  of  black  bees  fluttering  in  the  summer  sky  ”  (Nirvana  Prakara^a,  chap, 
xviii.) 

4  ’’  Goddess  or  God  in  Its  mother  aspect  as  creatrix,  nourisher,  and  ruler 

of  the  worlds. 

*Siva,  Her  spouse;  as  are  also  His  worshippers.  Tantrik,  Gurus  names 
end  with  Ananda  ( joyful). 

7  Devi  is  Sarvayantratmika  (Lalita,  verses  53  and  56). 

8  Taltva.  And  so  the  Lalita  (verses  53)  addresses  Devi  as  Saratantrarupa. 

8  Power. 

18  That  is  Saktiman,  or  one  who  possesses  power.  He  in  whom  She  as 
Sakti  inheres,  though  in  reality  both  are  one. 

11  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra.  18  Spouse  of  Siva. 

18  That  is,  male  and  female  practisers  of  SSdhana,  and  worshippers. 

14  That  is,  the  principles  relating  to  the  Siva  and  Sakti  aspects  of  the  one 
Brahman.  The  Devi  is  in  the  form  of  Siva  (Sivamflrtili),  for,  as  Sruti  says: 

“  There  is  one  Rudra  hidden  in  all  things.  He  is  with  MayS.  He  is  Devi  , 
Herself,  and  not  separate  from  Her.  ” 


INVOCATION 


75 


and  Agama.  Whatever  modes  of  Sadhana 1 * *  have  been  prescribed  in  the 
Tantra  Sastra  are  hidden  in  Thy  bosom  in  Thy  two  aspects  of  Siva  and 
Sakti.  It  was  for  this  I  said,  O  Mother,  that  it  is  Thou  Who  giveth  birth 
to,  nourisheth,  and  guardeth  Nigama  and  Agama  in  this  world.  But  to 
destroy  them,  that  even  Thou  canst  not  do.  For  the  Tantra  Sastra  all 
full  of  mantra  is  but  another  form  of  Thyself.  Were  the  Tantra  destroyed. 
Thou  also  would  be  destroyed.  Though  Thou  Art  the  destroyer  of  the 
universe,  Thy  power  of  destruction  avails  not  against  Tantra.  So  I  say,  O 
Mother,  that  the  Nigama  and  Agama  which  are  in  Thee  will  never  be 
destroyed  !  But  destroy  for  once,  O  Mother,  the  Nigama  and  Agama 
which  are  in  me.  Make  cease  my  repeated  coming  in  and  going  out  of 
this  world  as  Sakti,  as  Sakta,  as  Prakrti,  as  Puruja.*  , 

(Or  it  may  be  explained  in  another  way).*  O  Mother,  Thou  alone, 
as  Sakti  and  Sakta  (as  Prakrti  and  Purusa),  art  the  creator  of  the  Nigama 
and  Agama 4 * * 7 8 * 10  of  Jiva.'  It  is  by  Thy  law  that  Jiva,*  through  the  union  of 
Prakrti  and  Purusa,  takes  birth.  It  is  Thou  who,  in  Thy  two  aspects  of 
Sakti  and  Sakta  (mother  and  father),*  nourisheth  and  protcctcth  Jiva. 
Thou  alone,  O  Mother,  in  Thy  twin  aspects  of  Sakti  and  Sakta,  whereby 
Thou  crcatcth,  and  sustaineth  and  guardeth  the  outgoing  and  incoming 
of  the  world,  art  the  cause  of  the  outgoing,  sheltering,  incoming,  birth, 
sustenance,  and  preservation  of  Jiva. 

By  Thy  Mercy,  bring  about  the  dissolution '  of  my  world  *  in  these 
twin  aspects  of  Thyself  as  Sakti  and  §£kta. 

O  Thou  Who  art  Sakti-Siva  in  Thy  universal  Prakrti-Purusa  form,* 
grant  me  wisdom  so  that  the  beauty  of  the  world-enchanting  Mother  may 
fill  my  eyes,  my  mind,  my  heart,  and  the  whole  of  my  world.* 

Appear,  O  Mother,  in  Thy  eternal  form  illumining  the  ten  quarters. 
Witt  the  collyrium  paint  **  of  wisdom  grant  glorious  vision  to  the  eyes 
of  Thy  son  blind  since  birth. 


1  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

*  There  is  a  play  on  the  words  Nigama  and  Agama,  as  meaning  not  only 

forms  of  the  Tantra  but  also  the  coming  in  and  going  out.  the  birth  and  death 
and  rebirth,  of  the  human  Jiva,  who  is  the  manifestation  on  the  earthly  plane  of 
Prakrti  and  Purusa. 

*  That  is,  the  Author  says  that  this  Sanskrit  “Sloka”  may  bear  (and  probab¬ 
ly  was  written  to  bear)  another  interpretation.  4  Birth  and  death. 

1  The  embodied  spirit,  which  is  the  supreme  Spirit,  viewed  under  the  appa¬ 
rently  limiting  conditions  known  as  “  upadhi  ”. 

*  The  mother  is  always  placed  first,  not  “  father  and  mother,”  as  in  English. 

7  Pralaya,  or  the  dissoludon  of  the  world,  which  completes  the  return  move¬ 
ment  to  its  cause. 

8  That  is,  the  world  as  it  appears  to  the  Author.  For  to  each  person  the 
world  is  his  own  creation;  it  is  only  imagined. 

*  See  as  to  Prakrti  and  Purusa  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

10  Afljana,  which  is  used  to  clear  the  vision. 


76 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Grant  to  me  that  wheresoever  I  may  turn  them,  whether  on  earth,  the 
waters,  or  on  space.  Thy  beauteous  form  may  make  me  forgetful  of  the 
appearance  of  the  world. 


Invocation  1 

Mother!  in  this  world,  all,  before  setting  themselves  to  ought,  make 
invocations  of  varying  kinds. 

But  what  invocation  shall  I  make? 

I  know  of  none  but  that  to  the  feet  of  the  all-good  Goddess. 

All  that  I  am  about  to  write  in  the  Tantratattva  is  already  known  to  Thee 
who  knoweth  the  hearts  of  men. 

Yantra,®  Mantra,®  and  Tantra  arc  not  distinct  from  Thee. 

But  I,  though  in  reality  inseparatc,  wish  to  remain  separate.1 * 

As  Thou  in  thy  substance  art  Brahman,4 *  as  Thou  existeth  in  the  form  of 
the  universe,*  so  art  Thou  full  of  play  and  dancing.* 

As  Thou  art  all  full  of  joy,  will,  consciousness  and  matter,’ 

So,  O  Mother,  I  wish  Thee  to  fill  my  mind,  my  eyes,  my  heart,  with  love. 

Thou,  too,  art  the  power  whereby  it  is  in  me  to  take  Thy  name. 

It  is  Thine  own  song  which  Thou  wilt  hear. 

In  the  love  of  Thyself  Thou  wilt  dance. 

What  invocation  then  can  I  make  ? 

The  food  which  I  shall  give  Thee  is  already  Thine.  Of  it  my  portion  will 
be  the  sacred  remnants  only. 

Thou  wilt  be  intoxicated  and  forget  Thyself  in  Thine  own  joy. 

In  the  tranquil  and  solemn  ocean  of  unity  I  shall  swim,  and  raise  therein 
the  waves  of  duality  which  arc  the  cry  of  “  Mother,  Mother.” 


1  Mangalacarana — in  Bengali:  the  preceding  invocation  being  in  Sanskrit, 

with  Bengali  translation  and  commentary.  *  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  &  astro. 

"By  the  will  to  separate  life,  which  while  itself  a  manifestation  of  the 
Devi,  is  overcome  by  Her  as  Mahavidya:  and  because  thus  only  can  he  enjoy 
Her. 

4  Brahmamayi.  In  the  Kurina  Puraria  Siva  says:  “  The  supreme  Sakti  is 
in  me,  and  is  Brahman  Itself.  This  Maya  is  dear  to  me,  by  which  this  world  is 

bewildered.”  Hence  the  Devi  in  the  Lalita  is  called  “  SarvamohinI  ”  (all-be¬ 
wildering).  6 7  Visvamayl. 

•Nrtyamayi  and  Lilamayi.  The  world  is  the  movement  and  play  of  the 
Supreme,  as  the  Sutra  says:  Lokavattulila  kaivalyam. 

7  Anandamayi,  Icchhamayi,  Chinmayi  and  Mrimnayi.  The  Brahman  is 
Sat  (existence),  Cit  (consciousness),  and  Ananda  (bliss).  Icchha  (will)  is  one 
of  its  Saktis,  and,  having  created  the  visible  world,  the  Brahman  enters  into  it. 
Tat  ifstva  tadevanupravi^at.  The  Devi  is  (Lalita,  verse  76)  K^etrasvarupa — 
that  is,  the  field,  which  is  known  by  the  Soul  (Ksetrajfta)  or  matter.  Linga 
Pr.  says :  “  Devi  becomes  matter  ”  (Kjetra). 


INVOCATION  77 

If  it  vexes  Thee,  drown  me  with  a  thrust  of  Thy  foot,  but  then  in  so  doing 
Thou  must  fust  raise  Thy  foot  from  the  breast  of  Mahakala.1 * * 4 

May  be  Thou  wilt  turn  to  Him  with  wrathful  eyes,  and  say:  “  Kill  him.” 
But  instantly  I  shall  laugh  outright  and  clap  my  hands,  and  say: 
“  This  is  Mother’s.”  *  O  Dark  Beauty,  whose  substance  is  a  mass  of 
consciousness ! 5 *  O  Mother!  show  me  for  once  the  full  play  of  wrath 
upon  the  splendour  of  Thy  world-bewitching  beauty. 

Great  is  my  desire,  O  Mother!  to  sec  the  play  of  merciful  flames  redden¬ 
ing  with  wrath  *  in  that  face  of  Thine  adorned  with  smiles/ 

Unless  that  desire  of  mine  is  fulfilled,  Sadhana •  becomes  full  of  paiD. 

O  Thou  who  dispclleth  fear  from  the  heart  of  Thy  Devotees 7 

O  Thou  who  gladdcnest  the  heart  of  Bhava 1 * 

Thou  knowest  (the  secret  of )  Thy  play. 

Whether  Thou  makest  me  afraid  or  makest  me  laugh  or  weep,  teach  me 
to  say  “  Mother,”  so  that  in  doing  that  which  is  auspicious  (Mangala- 
carana)  or  inauspicious  (Amangalacarana)  I  may  take  shelter  at  the 
feet  of  Her  Who  is  good  (MangalS),*  dancing  and  shouting: 

“  Victory  to  the  Mother.” 

Victory  to  Kulcndra  Kulananda.10 

Victory  to  Guru,11  Kamadeva  Tarkika. 

Victory  to  Kuladananda  u  and  his  disciples. 


1  Siva.  The  Devi  is  represented  as  standing  on  Siva,  who  is,  as  it  were,  a 
corpse,  for  he  is  bhokta  (enjoycr)  only,  whilst  she  is  karttri  (actress). 

"This  is  a  play  on  the  word“ma”  (mother)  which,  as  a  noun  in  the 
possessive  case  becomes  in  Bengali  “  mar,"  which  is  also  the  verbal  imperative 
“  mar,”  meaning  “  kill 

*  Cidghana,  as  if  Her  body  were  a  thickened  mass  of  consciousness. 

4  The  Devi  is  KrodhSkarankusojjvala  (Lalita,  verse,  2).  This  is  explained 
in  chap.  XVIII  of  the  second  part. 

*  The  Devi  is  (Lalita,  verse  59)  caruhasa  (with  beautiful  smile) ;  the  saying 

“  The  moon  is  thy  sweet  smile  ”  means  that  there  is  a  certain  state  of  conscious¬ 
ness  (prabodha),  which  gives  the  highest  bliss,  and  which  should  be  learnt  from 
the  Guru.  *  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 

7  Fearlessness,  at  which  the  TSntrik  aims,  and  which  is  the  special  gift  of 
the  Devi.  The  Markantfeya  Purana  says:  “  When  you  are  remembered  in 
times  of  difficulty,  you  take  away  all  fear  of  all  beings.”  She  is  Bhayapaha 
(remover  of  fear).  Sruti  says  (Tan  Up.,  ii.  9-1) :  “  By  knowing  the  bliss  of  that 
Brahman,  none  fear  anything.” 

*  The  watery  form  of  Siva  in  the  As{amurtih. 

*  A  play  on  the  word  “  manga  lScarana,”  which  also  means  “  invocation  ” 

10  Celebrated  Tantrika. 

11  See  the  Lalita  (verse  137) :  “  We  adore  the  Devi  who  assumes  the  form 
of  the  Guru  (Secret)  in  the  Form  of  secret  knowledge  beloved  by  her  secret 
.devotees,  residing  in  the  secret  place.”  Hence  she  is  Guhyarupipl. 

11  Celebrated  Tantrika. 


78 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


Victory  to  the  Lord,  the  Supreme  Guru. 

Victory,  Victory,  Victory  to  Krgijananda.1 
Victory  to  the  most  Supreme  Guru. 

Victory  to  Guru,  the  object  of  highest  desire. 

Victory,  Victory  to  Bhairava  and  BhairavL* 

Victory,  Victory  to  the  accomplished  Sadhaka.” 

Victory,  Victory  to  the  Sadhika  who  grants  Siddhi.4 
Victory  to  Yantra,  Victory  to  Tantra. 

Victory,  Victory  to  the  Tantra  Sastra. 

Victory,  Victory  to  the  revealer  of  the  Tantra; 

Victory,  Victory  to  the  ISvari  *  of  the  Tantra. 

Victory,  Victory  to’Her  who  fulfils  all  desires. 

Victory,  Victory  to  Her  who  is  all-good. 

Victory,  Victory,  Victory,  Victory  to  the  name  “  The  all-good  Mother 
of  the  world.”  * 


•  1  Celebrated  Tantrika. 

a  Siva  and  Sakti  and  their  worshippers  are  so  named. 

'  *  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

*  Success. 

*  Feminine  of  uvara — Lord:  the  Devi  the  object  of  Tantrik  worship, 
who  is  ruler  or  promulgator  of  all  Tantras,  Sarvatantres!  and  Sarvatantrarupa 
(Lalita,  verse  53). 

®  The  Devi  is  the  Holy  Mother — Srimata—  the  first  of  Her  thousand  names 
in  the  Lalita  Sahasranama,  where  its  commentator  Bhaskararaya  says:  “The 
mother  is  usually  called  upon  in  times  of  sorrow,  but  our  natural  mothers  are 
not  able  to  remove  the  three  forms  of  pain  (tapatraya).  Great  men  have  said: 

‘  Since  I  have  had  many  thousands  of  births,  I  have  liad  many  mothers  and 
many  fathers.  I  know  not  how  many  I  may  have  in  the  future.  O  Treasure 
House  of  compassion,  save  me  who  am  overpowered  with  fear,  and  have  no  other 
refuge  from  the  vast  ocean  of  Samsara,  full  of  disaster.’  The  greatest  World- 
Mother  is  the  only  one  who  can  remove  the  endless  misery  of  existence.  We 
should  praise  Her  as  the  Mother,  sb  that  She  may  be  induced  to  show  • 
mercy  to  us.” 


VICTORY  TO  SrI  Sri  tfVARI,  THE  ALlrGOOD  DEVl 


PREFACE 

By  the  grace  or  the  all-good  Mother,  the  drum  of  Sana  tana  Dharma 1 
seems  to  be  again  sending  forth  sweet  and  auspicious  notes  of  triumph  in 
Bharatavarsa,1  the  land  of  Aryas.  Just  as  an  intelligent  man,  who  has  a 
good  knowledge  of  music,  is  naturally  impelled,  as  it  were,  by  some 
mantra  on  hearing  the  deep  and  soft  sound  of  musical  instruments  to  beat 
time  at  every  measure;  so  also  a  child  who  has  no  knowledge  of,  but  who 
loves  and  is  charmed  by,  music,  feels  himself  impelled  to  keep  time  at 
every  measure  by  shaking  his  head,  or  moving  his  finger,  or  clapping  his 
hands,  or  dancing,  or  by  some  other  movement.  Similarly,  every  scion  of 
the  Aryan  race  in  India,  be  he  intelligent  or  not,  is  to-day  intoxicated 
with  the  sweet  music  of  the  charming  mantra  of  the  widespread  agitation 
on  the  subject  of  the  Sanatana  Dharma,  and  is  keeping  time  at  every 
measure  and  dancing.  In  this  great  festival,  in  this  ancient  Durga 
festival  of  India,  astrology,  philosophy,  Smrti,  Purana,  Veda,  Vedanta,  and 
many  other  musical  instruments  are  playing  in  the  extensive  courtyard 
of  the  universe.  But  wc  arc  grieved  to  find  that  the  great  instrument 
of  the  Tantra  Sastra,  in  which  all  other  instruments  are  included, 
on  which  all  other  instruments  depend,  and  which  is  the  sole 
source  of  all  yantras 5  and  mantras,  is  to-day  silent.  We  know  that 
the  proper  place  for  the  playing  of  this  instrument  is  not  a  court¬ 
yard,  but  the  interior  of  the  temple  of  Tantra  Sastra,  which  is  full  of 
mantras;  as  also  that  the  proper  place  for  its  discussion  is  not  at  a 
meeting  or  by  society  at  large,  but  in  the  heart  of  the  accomplished 
Sadhaka.  But  what  can  wc  do  ?  We  arc  players  on  the  outside.  So  long 
as  we  do  not  hear  the  solemn  sound  of  sweet  mantras  from  the  accom¬ 
plished  mouth  of  the  Sadhaka  within  the  temple  as  also  the  triumphant 
sound  of  the  bell  in  his  hand,  so  long  do  we  fail  to  make  out  what  music 

1  In  the  present  connection  the  phrase  may  he  understood  to  refer  to  the 
eternal  religion  of  the  Hindus.  As  to  Dharma,  see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

*  India. 

*  The  imprints  of  the  Sri  Vidya  Yantra,  and  that  of  Smaiann  Kali  appear 
elsewhere  in  the  book. 


80 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


to  play — the  music  of  ablution,  the  music  of  arati,'  the  music  of  sacrifice,’ 
or  the  music  of  bhoga,’  The  discordant  noise  of  musical  instruments  in 
the  mantra-less  courtyard  outside  the  seat  of  worship  is  the  sole  cause  of 
all  the  disorder  which  now  besets  the  work  of  preaching  dharma,  even  in 
spite  of  so  much  agitation,  discussion,  speech-making,  and  interpretation. 
These  musical  instruments  observe  neither  time  nor  measure.  Perhaps  at 
the  place  of  worship  the  rite  of  great  ablution*  has  not  yet  been  begun; 
but  in  the  courtyard  outside  the  music  of  the  final  oblation  in  homa ' 
is  commencing.  It  is  deeply  to  be  regretted  that  the  very  community 
which  trembles  with  fear,  like  a  person  suffering  from  constitutional  fever, 
at  the  very  mention  of  the  rules  of  practice,  is  to-day  constantly  busying 
itself  with  such  cxtmmcly  subtle  and  secret  matters  as  nirvikalpa-samadhi, 
samadhi,"  videha  kaivalya,'  supreme  love,  and  nirvana,  liberation.  The 
result  is  that  this  untimely  and  timeless  music  has  come  to  be  of  no 
purpose  and  impossible  of  performance. 

In  fact,  the  sight  of  this  outward  bustle  of  science  and  philosophy 
made  by  the  community  devoid  of  siddhi  and  sadhana  *  reminds  us  of  our 
village  (biirwari)  puja.’  Just  as  the  condition  of  the  puja  makes  one  fear 
lest  in  course  of  time  even  the  image  itself  should  be  dispensed  with,  so 
the  condition  of  society  to-day  makes  one  afraid  lest  the  talk  of  siddhi 
and  sadhana  should  one  day  disappear  from  the  Aryan  Society.  Let  us, 
however,  console  ourselves  with  the  knowledge  that,  even  if  it  were 
possible  for  the  sun  and  moon  to  cease  to  move,  it  is  impossible  for 
this  puja”  to  become  a  village  puja.  Although  it  is  the  property  of 
common  people,  it  is  always  uncommon;  and,  although  it  is  always  un¬ 
common,  every  member  of  the  Aryan  Society  has  always  a  perfect 
right  to  it  as  an  independent  sadhaka.  In  this  puja  the?c  is  no 
priest  (purohita).  Its  object  is  not  self-deception,  but  sadhana  for  the 
self  and  acquirement  of  siddhi.  In  this  temple  of  sadhana  the  worshippers 
are  not1  11  unwilling  to  repeat  the  mantra  on  which  we  depend,  but  are 
doubtful  about  its  efficacy.  They  are  not  incapable  of  repeating  the 
mantra,  but  arc  apprehensive  lest  it  be  of  no  effect.  There  is,  therefore, 
a  hope  that  if  this  doubt  can  be  dispelled  and  this  apprehension  removed, 

1  Arati  {waving  of  light  before  the  image). 

•  Bali.  ’  Offering  of  food.  '  Mahasnana. 

•  The  sacrifice  in  fire. 

•  Highest  form  of  “  ecstasy 

I  Kaivalya,  in  which  the  Jlva  becomes  free  from  the  trammels  of  the  body. 

•  See  Introduction  to  Tantro  Sdstra. 

•  A  puja  carried  out  by  subscription,  in  which  often  more  attention  is  paid 

to  the  accompanying  amusements  than  the  puja  {worship)  itself)  which  is  their 
justification.  10  That  is,  Siddhi  and  Sidhana. 

II  As  in  the  village  puja,  where  the  worship  is  left  to  the  purohita. 


PREFACE 


8! 

a  day  will  soon  come  when  die  ten  quartos  of  India  will  resound  with 
the  united  voice  of  innumerable  Axyas,  loudly  declaring:  “There  is  no 
Sastra  superior  to  Tantra,  no  guru  superior  to  Tantra,  no  path  superior 
to  Tantra,  no  method  superior  to  Tantra.”  Emboldened  by  this  hope, 
we  make  this  novel  entry  into  the  field  of  work,  depending  on  the 
community  of  Sadhakas  for  support. 

It  may  be  said  that  when  doubts  have  arisen  about  the  Sadhana 
Sastra,1  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  remove  them.  We,  too,  do  not  deny  this. 
But  we  say  that  the  fact  that  it  is  not  easy  docs  not  make  it  altogether 
impossible.  It  is  happy  news  that  doubts  have  arisen.  When  thirst 
has  appeared,  one  need  not  be  anxious  about  getting  water.  An  unfathom¬ 
able  lake  full  of  water  to  the  brim  lies  in  front.  Ope  has  only  to  come 
down  to  drink  of  the  water.  Having  before  us  the  well-arrayed  presence 
of  the  Tantra  Sastra  full  of  the  nectar  of  eternal  truth,’  we  need  not  be 
anxious  about  dispelling  the  doubts  of  the  Aryan  mind.  It  is  only 
necessary  to  advance  slowly  in  the  path  of  truth.  It  is  a  matter  for 
regret  that,  although  thirst  has  appeared  and  the  lake  lies  in  front,  it 
has  yet  become  necessary  to  advertise  the  fact  and  to  preach  in  order  to 
induce  people  to  drink  the  water.  Advertisement  is,  however,  in  fact, 
required,  not  so  much  in  order  to  induce  people  to  drink  the  water,  but 
that  the  path  may  be  cleared. 

There  is  now  much  discussion,  dispute,  and  quarrel  among  common 
people  over  the  Tantra  Sastra,  and  the  path  which  leads  to  the  inner 
truth  has  become  very  difficult,  very  tortuous,  full  of  doubts  and  thorns. 
These  thorns  and  doubts  are  not  ascribable  to  any  fault  in  lake  itself  but 
are  due  to  want  of  traffic  thereto. 

Formerly,  in  the  glorious  days  of  happiness  and  good  fortune  of 
Bharatavarja,  Aryan  sadhakas  were  wont  to  enjoy,  even  in  their  homes, 
the  blessing  of  drinking  the  nectar  of  truth  *  granted  to  them  by  their  gurus. 
It  was  not  then  necessary  that  they  should  bathe  in  a  place  of  pilgrimage  * 
for  the  purpose. 

Under  the  remorseless  pressure  of  the  wheel  of  destiny  such  days  are 
now  past  for  BhSratavar?a.  One  by  one  the  crest-gems  of  the  race 
of  sadhakas  have  found  rest  at  the  lotus-feet  of  liberation 4  of  Her  who  is 
all-merciful.  For  want  of  competent  gurus  the  community  of  disciples  is 
lamenting  in  deep  darkness.  We  know  not  when  again  will  the  Ifvari  * 
of  the  world  illumine  the  hearts  of  devotees  with  the  brilliant  light  of 
Her  merciful  glances;  when  again  the  blind  children  of  the  world,  who 


*  The  Tantra  which,  being  a  practical  Sastra,  is  essentially  concerned  with 
Sadhana,  as  to  which  see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdrtra. 

*  Tattva.  *  Tirtha.  *  Kaivalya  ; 

*  The  Devi,  Mother  and  Mistrett  of  the  world. 

6 


82 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


now  live  at  a  distance  from  their  mother,  will  open  their  eyes  of  conscious¬ 
ness,  and,  immersed  in  the  efiulgence  of  the  beauty  of  Her  whose  substance 
is  consciousness,  get  up  on  the  lap  of  Anandamayi,1  crying  with  an 
overpowering  joy  “  Mother,  Mother  nor  when  again  shall  we  hear 
the  words,  “  The  tie  of  the  heart  is  broken ;  all  doubts  are  dispelled  and 
all  kannas  *  are  destroyed  for  him  who  has  seen  Him  is  higher  than  the 
highest.” 

It  is  true  that  the  path  of  Tantra  has  become  frill  of  thorns,  but  if, 
on  hearing  this  terrible  news,  we  sit  down  for  ever  to  ponder  on  it  with 
fearful  hearts,  the  thorns  will  never  be  removed.  If  you  wish  to  follow  a 
path,  you  must  take  your  stand  on  it.  The  thorns  do  not  belong  to  the 
path,  but  have  come  to  it  from  outside.  Do  not  be  afraid.  The  dry  and 
worthless  thorns  will  be  broken  and  ground  to  dust  under  the  heroic 
tramp  of  the  feet  of  sidhakas.'  Fearing  lest  you  should  not  believe  in  our 
words,  we  shall,  with  our  eyes  fixed  on  the  feet  of  sadhakas,  be  to  them 
their  shoes.4  We  care  not  if  we  be  cut,  tom,  wounded,  and  lacerated  all 
over.  We  have  a  strong  desire  to  reach  the  path  of  truth,  holding  the 
feet  of  sadhakas  to  our  heart,  and  to  sink  for  once  in  the  vast  lake  of  the 
nectar  of  Tantra.  We  hope  that  the  community  of  accomplished  sadhus 6 
and  sadhakas  will  not  fail  to  fulfil  this  desire  on  our  part. 

During  the  progress  of  the  nineteenth  century  many  Tantras  have 
been  printed  and  translated.  Of  these,  the  compilation  made  by  Mahatma 
Rjunatosaga  Bhattacarya  under  the  title  of  “  Prapatosipi,”  and  published 
by  Prana  Kr?na  Biswas  Mahodaya,  is  a  work  which  really  gladdens 
the  heart  of  the  world  of  sadhakas.  Next  the  Aryan  Society  has  been 
greatly  benefited  by  the  publication,  by  Rasika  Mohana  Chattopadhyaya 
MahSiaya,  of  the  Tantrasara  with  a  translation,  and  of  many  other 
Tantras.  A  faint  idea  of  many  a  Tantrik  principle  has  thus  been  re¬ 
flected  in  the  mirror  of  the  hearts  of  sadhakas.  But,  unfortunately, 
these  indistinct  impressions  have  themselves  become  a  source  of  terror 
arising  from  deep  doubts.  A  study  of  the  Sastra  has  served  rather  to 
make  the  intricate  bonds  of  the  heart  stronger  than  to  break  them.  Still, 
it  seems  to  have  been  a  source  of  great  good;  for,  from  the  doubts  it  has 
raised,  there  has  to-day  appeared  in  society  a  spirit  of  inquiry  into 
42s trie  (scriptural)  truths.  With  the  exception  of  the  Pranatosini  and  the 
Tantras&ra,  all  works  which  have  been  published  on  the  subject  of  Tantra 
are  but  thorns  on  the  path  of  truth. 


1  The  cver-Blissful  Mother.  *  Effects  of  action. 

*  Those  who  practise  Sadhana:  devotees. 

*  As  the  shoe  comes  between  the  road  and  the  feet  and  protects  them,  so 
the  Author  will  come  between  Sadhakas  and  the  thorns  to  protect  them. 

*  Saintly  men. 


PREFACE 


83 


Three  classes  of  vipers  are  riding  together  over  the  Tantra  Sjstra — 
namely,  a  number  of  short-sighted  and  illiterate  traders,  a  few  crafty 
discoverers  of  practices  of  magic,1  and  some  thoughtless  and  starving 
spiritual  interpreters  of  the  Sastra.  Through  them  society  is  to-day  going 
down  to  perdition.  It  is  difficult  to  guess  how  many  hundreds  of  simple- 
minded  sadhus  have  been,  and  are  being,  deceived  by  the  dangerous 
temptations  held  up  before  them  by  these  people.  Want  of  faith  in  the 
Sastra  is  becoming  deeply  rooted  in  people’s  minds  by  the  troubles  into 
which  they  fall  through  failure  to  realize  the  truth,  and  by  the  exposition 
to  vulgar  gaze  of  things  a  proper  understanding  of  which  can  be  acquired 
from  gurus  only.  This  want  of  faith  cannot  be  eradicated  by  anything 
but  the  weapon  of  Sastra.  One  must  stand  at  the  do»r  of  Sastra  in  order 
to  dispel  doubts  about  it.  From  the  Tantra  alone  must  be  learnt  what 
the  Tantra  has  said  about  the  principles  of  Tantra’. 

Secondly,  as  regards  worship,5  many  people  think  that  faith  must 
precede  practice.  But  we  do  not  think  this  possible,  particularly  in  the 
case  of  those  most  hidden  and  obscure  mysteries  about  Tantrik  worship 
to  which  we  find  reference  made.  The  intellect  is  powerless  to  understand 
why  the  Sastra  has  enjoined  their  performance.  Nothing  but  disgust, 
hatred,  disrespect  and  irreverence  can  find  place  in  the  conclusion  at 
which  man’s  erring  intellect  then  arrives.  Not  to  speak  of  matters  which 
are  unknown  to  common  people,  even  amongst  such  things  as  are  of 
common  knowledge,  and  thus  well  known  to  them,  concerning  Satcakra  * 
alone  there  arc  innumerable  interpretations,  ideas,  and  experiences.* 
Most  of  those  who,  in  the  rush  of  the  daily  novel  religious  waves  of  the 
twentieth  century,  lose  their  looting  and  know  not  what  to  do,  nowadays 
take  the  name  of  Kula-Kupdalini,*  in  order  to  establish  themselves  on 
firm  ground. 

Besides  this,  there  is  a  class  of  yogis 7  devoted  to  the  Upani$ads  and 
enlightened  by  the  Yogavaiistha,  who  often  say  that  there  is  really  a  lake  of 
clear  water  within  the  body,  and  that  lotuses  blooming  in  them  form  the 
Satcakra!  In  sorrow  the  Sadhaka  and  poet  Ramaprasada  has  said: 

“  O  mind,  what  search  do  you  make  for  Her?  Madman!  She  must  be 
contemplated  with  feeling  in  a  dark  room.  Can  she  be  caught  without 
such  feeling?  ” 

But,  with  a  loud  voice  intoxicated  with  the  drink  of  the  honey  of 
lotuses  he  has  sung: 

■  “  In  the  bed  of  lotuses  KAli,  in  the  form  of  a  female  swan  (hamsl), 
plays  amorously  with  the  male  swan  (hamsa).” 

1  Indraj&la.  1  Tantra-tattva.  *  Upasana. 

*  The  Centres  in  the  body. :  *  *  Pratyakja  siddhi. 

*  The  Devi  whose  seat  is  is  the  MiiladhSra  Cakra. 

7  Ironically. 


84 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


It  has  become  difficult  to  bear  in  silence  all  the  insult  to  which  we 
see  the  Saatra  subjected  nowadays.  Moreover,  there  is  a  class  of  pure 
sattviks'  who  every  now  and  then  say  that  Kill  Is  “  butcher  KAli  that 
Tantra  means  “licensed  grog-shop”;*  that  Siva  wrote  the  Tantra 
Sastra  under  the  influence  of  the  fumes  of  gafija,*  and  so  forth. 

We  have  no  time  to  pay  any  heed  to  the  words  of  these  Non-Aryas. 
Goats  begin  to  cry  as  soon  as  the  drum  sounds  the  music  of  the  Durga 
pflja  festival,  but  that  does  not  do  away  with  Fuji.*  Good  deeds,  of 
which  the  Dak$ayajna  *  is  an  example,  will  be  taken  care  of  by  Vlrabhadra* 
himself.  We  know  that  there  are  reasons  for  saying  some  hard  things,  but 
how  is  Kali  or  Siva  or  Tantra  to  blame?  The  pity  ofit  all  is  that  those 
who  abuse  the  Taitra  in  this  way  are  themselves  initiated  in  Tantrik 
mantra.  But  what  can  we  do?  It  is  the  nature  of  unchaste  women  to 
live  on  the  means  of  their  husbands,  and  at  the  same  time  to  sing  the 
praises  of  their  paramours.  We  arc  not  sorry  to  sec  the  downfall  of  those 
whose  nature  is  such.  What  we  are  sorry  for  is  that  the  discussions  and 
agitations  carried  on  by  these  wicked  people,  and  their  example,  constantly 
persecute  and  wound  the  community  of  sadhakas  to  such  an  extent  that  it 
is  almost  on  the  point  of  being  destroyed.  Who  that  is  a  son  with  a  body 
of  flesh  and  blood  and  possessed  of  strength,  can  bear  to  see  the  sacred 
names  of  the  Mother  and  the  Father  of  the  universe  slandered  and  abused 
in  such  a  manner?  Whose  heart  is  not  pained  to  sec  the  axe  of  bitter 
abuse  laid  at  the  roots  ofsiddhi  and  sadhana?  The  object  of  our  effort  is 
to  remove  this  great  pain  in  the  heart  of  the  community  of  Sadhakas.  We 
hope  that  the  sons  of  the  Aryan  race  will  not  hesitate  to  uphold  the  blissful 
standard  of  triumph  in  the  assuring  name  of  Her  who  destroys  all  AsuraS.* 

Thirdly,  we  often  find  that  of  such  members  of  the  Aryan  Society  as 
have  been  recently  initiated,  or  are  willing  to  be  initiated,  many  are 
aimlessly  moving  about  along  various  paths.  Of  some,  perhaps,  the  gurus 
are  dead;  some  have  taken  initiation  from  women  gurus;  some  are  sorry 
for  the  incompetence  of  their  Gurus;  some  arc  disciples  of  sannyasis,  who 
have  gone  away  to  distant  places  where  it  is  difficult  to  go  to  them;  some 
have,  only  sons  of  gurus,  who,  too,  arc  of  immature  age,  ill  educated. 


1  Persons  in  whom  the  sattva  guna  predominates,  “good  people,”  here 
used  ironically. 

*  Because  animal  sacrifice  is  made  to  this  Devata. 

*  Abkari:  the  reference  being  to  the  use  of  wine  in  the  ritual  of  the  Tantrik 
VamacSrins,  and  the  abuse  of  that  ritual  in  disobedience  to  Sastric  injunctions, 
Intemperance,  as  the  Syamarahasya  says,  leads  to  Hell. 

4  Hemp  (Cannabis  indiea). 

1  At  which  they  are  sacrificed.  •  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

*  The  Great  Bhairava  produced  by  Siva  to  destroy  Data’s  sacrifice. 
*Demons. 


PREFACE 


85 


or  uninitiated.  In  the  care  of  some,  the  families  of  gurus  have  died  out; 
and  some,  again,  who  have  seen  the  different  views  of  different  munis’  in 
the  works  of  Tantra  Sastra  printed  with  translations  and  commentaries, 
are,  as  it  were,  counting  one  by  one  the  waves  of  a  vast  sea.  Every  one 
says:  “  Do  this,”  “  Don’t  do  this.”  But  if  I  ask  why  I  should  do  this,  he 
becomes  dumb.  I  do  not  disbelieve  the  words  of  the  Sastra,  nor  do  I  say 
that  it  will  be  useless  to  follow  them.  I  only  want  to  know  what  it  is  that 
I  do.  Unfortunately,  there  is  no  means  of  my  knowing  it.  Such  a 
destructive  thunder  has  fallen  on  the  high  head  of  the  present  high  society 
that  not  only  people  are  ignorant  that  the  mulamantra 9  of  the  I^adevata,* 
the  DevatS  of  one’s  worship,  has  a  meaning,  but  many  are  even  averse  to 
believing  that  it  may  have  one.  It  might  not  have  mattered  whether  I 
know  the  meaning  or  not,  had  not  the  Sastra  itself,  on  the  authority  of 
which  we  base  our  practices,  or  the  little  of  them  we  follow,  said  that  it 
was  useless  and  improper  to  follow  a  practice  without  knowing  and 
understanding  it. 

In  the  Kularpava  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  O  Spouse  of  Sambhu !  fruitless 
arc  the  worship  and  all  the  acts  of  those  who  do  not  know  the  true  nature 
of  Devata,  the  principle4  underlying  yantras,9  and  the  £akti  *  of  mantras.” 

I  cannot  disbelieve  the  great  saying  of  the  Sastra,  for  how  can  I  ignore 
the  prohibitions  of  the  Sastra  whose  commands  I  have  to  obey?  Next  I  sec 
it  proved  in  my  own  case  that  it  will  be  useless  to  follow  a  practice  without 
knowing  and  understanding  it.  How  can  I  disbelieve  that  of  which'  I 
myself  am  a  witness?  I  feel  it  keenly  myself  how  useless  it  is  to  follow  a 
religious  practice  without  understanding  it.  The  prohibition,  therefore, 
must  be  acted  upon,  and  in  order  to  do  so  the  thing  must  be  known  and 
understood.  I  have,  however,  already  stated  what  the  condition  is  of 
those  from  whom  I  am  to  know  and  understand  it.  Owing  to  these 
circumstances,  it  has  become  necessary  to  find  out  a  means  by  which 
people  will  be  prevented  from  giving  up  practice  through  want  of  under¬ 
standing,  trampling,  through  want  of  knowledge,  on  the  Syamantaka  gem 
which  adorns  His  head,  and  thinking  that  daily  worship  and  the  like  are 
so  much  waste  of  labour.  It  is  necessary  that  I  should  have  firm  faith  in 
the  doctrine,  that  the  truth  which  I  have  come  by  is  unerring  whether  or 
not  I  can  act  according  to  it,  and  that  the  path  which  I  have  taken  is  the 
broad  royal  road  to  the  scat  of  the  Queen  of  Queens  ’  of  the  universe.  It 
Is  after  a  due  consideration  of  the  opportunities  which  the  elements  of  time, 
place,  and  person  may  at  present  offer  for  finding  out  a  means  of  effecting 


1  Sages  (satirically). 

*  The  principal  Mantra  of  a  D?va.  *  Deity  of  the  worshipper. 

*  Tattva,  *  Worshipped  diagrams. 

*  The  potency  of  the  mantra.  9  R*jarSje$varf. 


66 


PRINCIPLES  OF TANTRA 


this  that  we  undertake  this  great  pious  act1  of  expounding  the  principles  of 
Tahtra.  This  pious  act  is  no  doubt  higher  than  the  highest,  and  we  arc 
tbore  insignificant  than  the  most  insignificant.  It  makes  one  laugh  to 
think  of  Rajasuya*  Yajfia  in  a  beggar’s  house.  But  there  is  no  help  for  it. 
One  who  is  hungry  cannot  afford  to  be  ashamed  of  eating.  In  particular 
one  who  stands  on  this  path  should  naturally  be  devoid  of  shame;  for  He 
who  is  the  crest-gem  of  shameless  people  and  clad  with  space*  is  the 
Revealer  of  the  Tantra  Sastra.  In  this  path  there  is  no  cause  for  shame 
in  being  a  beggar.  He  who  has  shown  the  path  by  performing  this  Raja- 
suya  Yajfia  is  Himself  the  crest-gem  of  beggars.  In  spite  of  His  being  the 
King  of  Kings*  of  the  three  worlds,  He  is  eternally  a  beggar  at  the  door 
of  Annapurna,1  the  Mother  of  the  universe.  Being  the  meanest  of  the 
servants  of  such  a  world-renowned  Beggar-Master,  why  should  I  be 
ashamed  of  begging?  Begging  is  the  tribute  which  we  have  to  pay  to  our 
King.  The  fundamental  principle  of  our  worship  is  to  worship  the 
Mother  with  alms  received  from  Her  (to  worship  the  Ganges  with  Ganges 
water).  If  one  is  to  be  called  a  beggar  or  to  be  ashamed  for  this,  then  we 
do  not  know  who  is  not  a  beggar  and  who  will  not  be  ashamed.  The 
three  worlds  beg,  and  there  is  none  but  that  Jagaddhatri 1  to  give  alms. 
Directly  or  indirectly,  She  is  the  only  hope.  We,  therefore,  trust  that 
Mother  Annapurna,  who  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  all  Sadhakas,  and  is  the 
Intelligence  who  works  the  jiva-instrument,7  will  fill  this  begging  bowl  of 
ours  with  remnants  of  Her  food.  By  the  blessing  of  the  Father  of  the 
universe  and  the  grace  of  the  Mother  of  the  universe,  even  in  such  a 
destitute  house  as  we  possess,  the  final  dalqina  *  of  the  rajasuya  of  Tantra 
Tattva  will  be  placed  at  the  lotus  feet  of  Daksina  (the  gracious  Devi). 

Sri  Siva  Chandra 

&ARMA  VlDYARNAVA 

(Benares), 

1811,  Saka  Era, 

The  month  of  Falguna. 


1  Vrata. 

*  A  great  sacrifice  performed  in  ancient  times  by  conquering  Kings. 

*  Siva  is  represented  naked.  *  Raj  arajes vara. 

1  The  Devi  bountiful  who  dispenses  food,  and  who  presides  at  Benares. 

*  The  Devi  as  supporter  of  the  universe. 

7  Jiva-yantra;  the  jiva,  embodied  spirit,  is  Her  instrument. 

1  Presents  offered  to  die  officiating  Brihmaijas  at  the  conclusion  of  a  rite. 


CHAPTER  I 

APPEARANCE  AND  APPLICABILITY  OF  THE 
TANTRA  SCRIPTURE 

Necessity  for  the  Scripture* 

The  living  together  of  many  persons  in  one  family  is  called  the  Samsara.1 * * 
He  is  a  praiseworthy  Kartta,’  who  in  the  performance  of  his  iamily  duties, 
justly  makes  all  members  of  the  family  the  objects  of  an  equal  care,  and  of 
both  affection  and  punishment.  Though  the  householder  has  equal  care 
and  affection  for  all,  yet  punishment  is  properly  awarded  to  him  who 
strays  from  the  right  path  and  thinks  the  Kartta  is  partial.  This  is  house¬ 
hold  morality  in  man’s  small  kingdom,  the  house.  This  morality,  when 
applied  to  a  kingdom,  is  called  statesmanship.  In  short,  whenever  equality 
is  to  be  kept  among  a  number  of  people  living  in  union,  the  King  must, 
as  all  admit,  make  provision  both  for  the  contentment  and  punishment  of 
his  subjects.  Whether  these  understand  it  or  not,  the  King  must,  if  he 
would  preserve  the  kingdom,  take  hold  of  this  rod  of  statesmanship  which 
is  both  stern  and  sweet.  What  Indian  is  there  who,  living  in  this  portion 
of  the  .Empire  which  is  under  the  sole  sovereignty  of  the  present  Queen 
Empress  *  (Rajrajcivari)  will  deny  this  ?  You  and  I  arc  each  the  King  of  a 
small  family  kingdom.  It  is  of  such  combined  kingdoms  that  the  Empress 
of  India  is  to-day  RSjrSjefvari.  Again,  She4  is  the  Rajrajeivari  of  the 
three  worlds,*  whose  kingdom  is  the  countless  millions  of  vast  worlds. 


1  The  Samsara  is  the  coining  and  going,  the  cycle  of  birth,  action,  death, 
and  rebirth:  the  world  in  which  ail  live  who  have  not,  by  knowledge  of  the  self 
(Atmajfiana)  and  the  extinction  of  the  will  to  separate  life,  attained  liberation 
(Mok$a).  Brahman  is  the  root  of  the  eternal  Asvattha  (fig)  tree,  with  roots 
above  and  branches  below  (Ka$h.  Up.,  iii.  2.  1).  It  also  means  in  Bengali  a 
family. 

*  The  head  of  the  joint  family  in  a  Hindu  household. 

*  The  book  was  written  under  the  reign  of  Queen  Victoria,  whose  name  is 
retained  to  give  point  to  that  which  follows. 

4  The  Devi  (“  Goddess  ”)  or  God  in  Its  mother  aspect  as  matrix,  nouri- 
sher,  and  ruler  of  the  worlds  (see  A.  and  E.  Avalon's  “  Hymns  to  the  Goddess”), 

*  The  Triloka,  Earth  (Bhuh),  the  upper  world  (Bhuvah,  Suvab,  and  others), 
and  the  underworlds  (PftUla) . 


88 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


She  is  the  Queen  without  a  second  of  the  kingdom  of  the  universe,  and 
SSstra1  is  the  name  of  her  universe-controlling  and  unfailing  will.  You 
and  I  have  not  the  capacity  to  understand  the  principles  which  govern  the 
profound  statecraft  of  the  kingdom  of  eternal  worlds  which  belong  to  the 
Empress  of  the  universe.  You  and  I  are  in  this  more  insignificant  than 
the  most  insignificant,  illiterate,  and  ignorant  people.  Our  sole  capacity 
is  to  obey  Her  commands.  They  alone  understand  the  world-play 1  of 
Brahmamayi,'  who,  by  the  mercy  of  Mahavidya  and  the  grace  of  Brahma- 
vidy3,*  have  been  able  to  make  their  way  through  the  mass  of  dualistic  * 
darkness  thick  with  illusion,1  and  to  reach  the  ultimate  truth  of  monistic 
doctrine.T  You  and  I  have  come  to  this  world  with  the  duty  cast  upon  us 
of  advancing  only  along  that  path  which  is  marked  by  their  footprints.  As 
the  courtiers  of  a  royal  court  are  not  the  authors,  but  merely  the  inter¬ 
preters,  of  statecraft,  so  the  truth-seeing  Ij^is  •  are  not  the  originators  of 
the  Sadhana  Sastra,’  but  its  remembrancers  merely.1'  It  is  not  a  Sastra 
marred  by  mistakes,  errors,  and  deception.  Bhagavan,  the  creator  of  all 
creatures  and  knower  of  all  hearts,  is  its  revealer.  He  in  whom  mistakes 
are  mistaken,  in  whom  error  is  erroneous,  and  in  whom  deception  is  itself 
deceived.  Bhagavatl,"  the  supporter  of  the  world  is  its  hearer.  Narada 
and  other  Rsis  learnt  the  truth11  from  Brahma11  and  other  Dcvas."  Vafiistha, 
Viivamitra,  Gautama,  and  other  Gurus14  Icamt  in  their  turn  from  the 
latter.  It  is  these  alone  who  arc  the  courtiers  of  the  royal  court  of  the 
Empire  of  the  Universe.  You  and  I,  the  subjects  of  this  Empire 
of  the  Universe,  are  merely  the  servants  of  that  statecraft  in  the  form 


1  Scripture. 

a  The  world  is  the  play  of  the  Brahman.  As  the  Sutra  says,  Lokavattulila 
Kaivalyam. 

*  The  Devi  who  is  one  with  Brahman. 

*  The  Devi  as  destroyer  of  ignorance  and  illusion  (Avidya),  which  veils  the 
Reality.  Both  Maya  and  Vidyi  reside  in  the  Lord  as  His  Saktis,  like  shade  and 
light  of  the  sun,  and  are  the  respective  causes  of  bondage  and  liberation. 

'Dvaita  is  that  which  sets  the  world  and  the  embodied  spirit  (Jiva),  apart 
from  the  supreme  spirit  (Parabrahman),  as  opposed  to  Advaita  which  proclaims 
their  unity.  •  Avidya.  7  Advaita. 

*  Inspired  seers,  by  whom  the  Sastra  were  “  seen  ” — that  is,  to  whom  it  was 
revealed. 

*  Sadhana  is  the  means  employed  to  attain  an  end;  in  this  case  the  ultimate 
aim  of  Bang.  The  Tantra  is  pre-eminendy  a  practical  Sadhana  $2stra. 

10  The  Author  of  SSstra  is  the  Brahman  (God).  The  Rsis  merely  heard 
and  handed  it  down. 

u  Feminine  of  Bhagavan— the  Devi.  u  That  is,  the  Sastra. 

11  The  creative  Deva  of  the  “  Trinity  ”  (Trimurti),  who  must  be  distinguished 
from  the  Supreme  Brahman  in  the  neuter  voice. 

«“  Shining  ones,”  or  “  Gods 


11  Spiritual  teacher*. 


TANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


89 


of  S&stra  which  has  been  promulgated  by  them.  They  have  had 
the  privilege  of  being  near  the  person  of  the  King,  and  have  thus  had  an 
opportunity  of  observing  with  their  own  eyes  the  principles  which,  even  in 
the  smallest  matters,  govern  His  actions.  They  have,  with  bowed  heads, 
admitted  the  unerring  truths  of  S&stra.  To  look,  then,  askance  at  these 
truths,  to  attempt  airily,  without  reaching  the  greatness  or  acquiring  the 
knowledge  of  the  R?i*  to  set  them  aside  is  just  as  if  one  were  to  try  to  blow 
away  the  Himalayas — an  act  which  is  ridiculous  enough  to  make  the 
intelligent  laugh,  the  mad  man  dance,  and  which  is  likely  to  bring  a 
violent  death  to  the  foolish  Non-Arya.1 * * 

Understanding  of  the  Scripture 

I  hear  you  say:  “  Take  me  there;  I  will  examine  with  my  own  eyes 
whether  the  thing  be  true  or  not."  But  the  answer  is  that  it  becomes  him 
alone  to  say  this  who  has  eyes  to  see  and  feet  to  walk,  and  simply  desires  a 
knowledge  of  the  path.  As  for  me,  I  have  neither  eyes  nor  feet  nor 
knowledge  of  the  path,  but  only  a  demoniac,  indomitable  egotism,  which 
prevents  me  from  seeing  what  I  have,  and  what  I  have  not.  Still,  I  know 
not  how  kind  She  is.  Lame  as  I  am,  the  Mother*  has  carried  me  through 
the  journey  of  eighty-four  lakhs  of  births,’  fraught  with  the  greatest  of 
difficulties,  and  has  placed  me  in  an  Aryan  gotra4 * *  in  Aryavarta,  in  the 
land  of  Bharata,*  where  freedom  has  its  fullest  play.  But  how  hard  is  the 
wheel  of  ill  fortune!  The  moment  I  fall  from  the  lap  of  the  Mother,* 
that  very  instant  my  head  is  made  restless  with  the  waves  of  freedom. 
Now,  I  would  rather  sink  in  that  sea  of  freedom  which  I  love  so  much, 
and  would  rather  die  than  believe  that  I  am  dying  without  ocular  proof  of  it. 

You  may  say,  “  My  path  leads  to  death,  but,  unless  I  die,  how  can  I 
know  that  that  path  of  mine  is  bad  and  that  yours  is  good  ?  This  is  all 
that  I  can  say  about  acquaintance  with  the  path.”  Even  he  who  is 
prepared  to  serve  egotism  with  such  deadly  resolve,  the  ever-merciful 
Rsis  call  with  a  sweet  tone  softened  with  love,  and  say:  “  You  are  not 
asked  to  believe  as  a  favour.  Practise,  and  you  will  see  for  yourself  that 
Medicine,  Astrology,  and  Tantra  produce  visible  results  at  every  step.”7 


1  The  Hindus  are  properly  called  Arya,  and  their  country  Aryavarta. 

*  The  Devi  who  is  called  Ambika  and  Srlm&ti. 

•The  previous  births,  as  inorganic  things,  aqueous  animals,  creeping 

animals,  birds,  beasts,  and  man,  through  which  the  soul  evolves.  Cf.  Empe¬ 
docles  apud  Diog.  Leart.,  viii.  77.  4  Lineage.  *  India. 

•  Literally,  “  the  skirt  of  the  dress  ”  of  the  mother,  to  which  little  children 

cling. 

7  A  common  saying  establishing  the  pratyakja  and  experimental  character 
of  the  S&stra,  which  is  primarily  concerned  not  so  much  with  speculation  as 
with  fact. 


90 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Lame  though  I  am,  I  thus  reach  the  place  I  sought  by  the  blessing  of  die 
Most  High;  and  by  the  grace  of  SSastra,  unbelieving  even  as  I  am,  the 
path  is  made  known  to  me.  But  still  my  wants  arc  not  supplied.  With¬ 
out  eyes,  how  can  I  see?  How  can  I  look  for  the  path?  Instantly  the 
Sastra  says:  “Jlva,1  even  though  you  are  blinded  by  the  darkness  of 
ignorance,  seek  shelter  at  the  feet  of  the  Guru.*  He  with  sticks  smeared 
with  the  brilliant  paint*  of  wisdom  will  open  your  celestial  eyes.”  The 
Sastra  says:  “  By  whom  the  eye  is  opened.”  *  But  I  hear:  “  By  whom  the 
eye  is  rooted  out.” 1 * * * * 

How  may  one  avert  this  misfortune?  What  shall  I  do  with  this 
egotism  which  makes  me  feel  ashamed  to  say  to  the  Guru :  “  I  do  not 
understand.”  It  tfas  for  this  I  said  that  there  is  no  peace  until  this 
indomitable  egotism  ceases.  It  is  useless  to  take  a  Guru  if  you  have  your¬ 
self  understood.  But  if  you  have  not,  why  should  you  be  ashamed  to 
admit  it?  Perhaps  you  will  say:  “  Explain  first,  and  then  I  shall  believe.” 
Why  all  this  useless  importunity  ?  If  you  think  that  you  can  show  that  the 
Sastras  arc  mistaken  by  dint  of  your  own  intelligence,  and  that  you  will  . 
destroy  it  withjthc  sharpened  arrows  of  reasoning,  argument,  and  judg¬ 
ment,  then  you  must  have  made  good  progress  indeed!  This  Sastra  is 
neither  philosophy  nor  science.  It  is  the  Sadhana*  which  leads  to  Siddhi.* 

It  must  be  practised  as  well  as  understood.  By  practice,  even  though 
without  understanding,  it  will  be  made  plain.  But  no  amount  of  under¬ 
standing  without  practice  will  effect  this.  A  Mahamahopadhyaya 
pandit7  who  has  conquered  the  whole  world  with  his  learning  is,  if  devoid 
of  practice,  not  the  equal  of  the  meanest  of  insects  in  the  domain  of 
Sadhana.  On’;.thc  other  hand,  should  a  great  fool  prove  himself  to  be  a 
faithful  devotee  attached  to  Sadhana,  he  is  considered  by  Sastra  to  be  one 
in  a  thousand.  It  has  been  said :  “  Perhaps  but  one  man  in  a  thousand 
strives  for  Siddhi,  and  amongst  a  thousand  of  those  who  strive,  maybe 
only  one  may  be  found  who  knows  me  truly.”  It  is  not  the  hero  of 
intellect,  who  is  not  also  the  hero  of  austere  practices,8  who  wins  the 
battle  of  Sadhana.  Just  as  all  the  efforts  of  a  great  charioteer  who  has 
with  him  an  army  complete  in  all  its  four  component  parts*  are  useless 


1  The  embodied  spirit,  here  the  human  being.  *  Spiritual  director. 

1  Collyrium,  applied  with  stick  to  the  eyes,  which  is  believed  to  dear  the 

vision.  *  A  play  on  the  words  “  unmllitam  ”  and  “  unmulitam.” 

*  Art  and  practice. 

*  Siddhi  means  success  generally.  It  indudes  the  right  lesser  great  powers, 

such  as  dominion  over  the  dements,  and  the  groat  Siddhi  or  liberation  (Mukti). 

7  A  title  of  honour  given  to  learned  pandits. 

*Tapas. 

*  That  is,  infantry,  cavalry,  elephant  corps,  and  the  chariots. 


TANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


91 


if  he  be  himself  unarmed,  so  all  the  learning  of  a  pandit  of  mighty  intellect 
is  but  a  vain  thing  if  he  be  not  equally  possessed  of  the  power  which 
arises  from  Sadhana.  Whoever  with  the  resolve,  “  I  will  accomplish  my 
object  or  die  in  the  effort,”  has  jumped  into  a  fire,  to  him,  a  crest-jem 
amongst  devotees,  the  Sastra  gives  shelter  in  its  secure  arms.  If  to-day 
all  men  had  the  strength  of  faith  of  Kamadeva  TSrkika,  hero  most  power¬ 
ful  in  the  field  of  austerity,  or  of  GaneSa  Upadhyaya,  whose  life  was  one 
long  surrender  to  the  mother;  or  of  RAmaprasada,'  who  was,  as  it  were,  a 
bee  intoxicated  with  the  honey  of  the  lotus  feet  of  Sakti,*  should  we  in  that 
case  have  had  to  sing  in  Tantra  Tattva *  the  song  of  all  these  evil  designs 
{against  the  Sastra)?  But  the  day  is  now  lost  to  us.  That  unflinching 
faith  in  Tantra,  the  Sadhana-Sastra,  has  been  shaken.* 

Doubts  Concerning  this  Scripture 

It  is  said:  “We  have  the  Vedas  the  Sastra  of  prayer.  Why, 
then,  has  the  Tantra  Sastra  again  been  put  forward  ?  ”  This  is  the 
first  point  of  doubt  in  the  prescnl-day  society  of  men  vain  of  their 
education.  What  appears  to  them  as  a  matter  of  still  greater  doubt  and 
the  mere  raving  of  a  madman  is  the  assertion  that  by  means  of  the 
Tantra  Sastra  such  Siddhi  may  be  gained  in  one  life,  in  one  year — 
nay,  in  one  week — as  can  only  be  otherwise  with  uncertainty  attained  after 
the  practice  of  age-long  austerities.  Why,  they  say,  should  Bhagavan1 * *  4 * *  be 
so  merciful  to  the  Kali  age 8  with  all  its  most  heinous  sins,  as  to  make  it 
possible  to  attain  in  one  life  or  in  one  week  that  which  was  rarely  attained 
even  by  Dcvas  like  Indra.*  If  such  be  possible,  then  livara,7  they  say, 
must  bo  highly  partial.  At  such  talk  it  is  difficult  to  restrain  a  smile. 


1  The  celebrated  Bengali  poet  and  Sakta.  i 

*  Sakti  is  Devi — that  is,  both  the  power  of  God  and  God  Itself.  Each  of  the 
Devas  has  His  Sakti  or  power  worshipped  under  the  form  of  His  spouse. 

*  This  book. 

4  God;  that  is.  He  who  is  possessed  of  the  six  forms  of  aiivaiva  which 
pertain  to  Ilvara— n'c.,  Sri  (auspicious ness),  Virya  (power),  Jitana  (wisdom), 
Vairagya  (dispassion),  Klrti  (glory),  and  Mihatmya  (greatness). 

4  The  fourth  or  last  of  the  four  ages  in  which  the  orthodox  consider  the 
world  now  to  be,  and  which  is  marked  by  sin  and  weakness.  The  first,  or  Satya 
Yuga,  was  the  golden  age;  in  Treta  Yuga  virtue  declined  by  one-quarter;  in 
DvJpara  Yuga  by  one-half;  and  in  Kali  Yuga  by  three-quarters. 

*  Deva  of  the  firmament.  King  of  the  celestials.  '• 

7  The  “  personal  God,”  Creator  and  Ruler  of  the  world,  the  Brahman  with 

qualities;  thought  of  with  Prakrti;  associated  with,  but  not  Himself  subject  to, 
May5  (Mayavichchhinnam  caitanyam  ca  Paramesvara)  (Vedanta  Paribha$a, 
9).  The  supreme  individuality  is  the  quality  of  Uvara.  In  the  Vtfvaiarlra 
chapter  of  the  Virupakjapaiicaiika  it  is  explained  as  “  Lordship,  activity, 
independence,  consciousness  itself." 


92 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


You  and  I  might  just  a a  well  be  inspectors  of  the  kingly  work  of  livara, 
whose  reputation  for  administration  would  in  that  case  depend  on  your  or 
my  criticism.  On  the  other  hand,  I  ask,  if  He  is  partial,  what  do 
you  or  I  lose  by  that?  If  He  who  is  the  highest,  all-powerful,  omni¬ 
present,  and  the  knowcr  of  all  hearts  becomes  partial,  how  can  you  or 
I  prevent  that?  You  may  say  we  shall  blame  Him.  But  what  does  it 
matter  to  Him  whether  you  and  I  blame  Him?  He  who  knows  the 
hearts  of  the  meanest  insect,  does  He  not  know  that  you  and  I  will 
blame  Him?  In  spite  of  His  knowing  it,  He  has  taken  on  Himself  the 
blame,  and,  solemnly  declaring,  “True,  true,  again  true — true  there 
is  no  doubt,”  has  said :  “  It  is  true  and  beyond  all  doubt  true 
that  in  the  Kali  agfe  there  is  no  liberation  for  him  who  forsakes  the  path 
laid  down  in  the  Agama,'  and  attempts  to  pursue  another.  In  the  Kali 
age  the  fool  who  seeks  to  attain  Siddhi  by  the  paths  shown  in  other 
Sastras  is  like  a  thirsty  man  who  digs  a  well  on  the  very  banks  of  the 
JahnavL*  For  the  attainment  of  happiness  in  this  world  or  the  next  there 
is  no  path  which  leads  to  both  enjoyment  and  salvation 1  so  excellent  as 
that  shown  in  the  Tantra.”  * 

What  will  you  gain  by  threatening  with  your  blame  Him  from  whose 
own  mouth  has  come  this  unerring  conclusion?  He  who  is  afraid  of  blame 
or  pleased  by  praise  may  be  your  Iivara,  but  he  is  not  the  God  of  the 
world.  He  who  is  God  (ISvara)  of  the  world  is  the  Lord  (Isvara).  His 
divinity  and  lordship  over  the  universe  stands  supreme,  spuming  both 
glory  or  disgrace,  praise  or  blame.  This  is  the  wealth  of  his  Vaikuptha.* 
If  you  please,  you  may  blame,  you  may  chastise,  you  may  deal  hard  blows 
with  your  fist  at  the  foot  of  the  Himalaya  Mountains,  yet  the  immovable 
Lord  of  mountains  will  not  be  shaken,  though  your  fingers  will  be  torn  and 
broken.  Those  who,  in  endeavouring  to  discuss  the  truth  as  to  the  divine 
(Iivara  Tattva),  have  realized  the  effect  of  doing  so  may  desist.  But  those 
who  judge  God  by  their  own  ideas  of  justice  will  not  be  satisfied  with  that. 
We  ourselves  do  not  deny  the  apparent  partiality  alleged,  but  we  say  that 
His  strict  adherence  to  justice  has  not  been  broken  by  the  mercy  shown  to 
the  creatures  of  the  Kali  age.  On  the  contrary,  not  to  have  treated  them 
with  such  kindness  would  have  been  unjust.  We  ask  what  sort  of  justice 


*  Here  the  Tantra.  1  The  River  Ganges. 

*  The  peculiar  claim  of  the  Tantras  is  that  it  gives  both  worldly  enjoyment 
and  salvation.  It  is  Bhuktimuktikarapica.  In  Yoga  there  is  no  enjoyment 
(Bhoga),  and  in  enjoyment  no  Yoga  (union  with  the  Supreme).  But  the 
Tantrik  has  both  (Mahinirv&na  Tantra,  chap,  i,  verses  50,  51 ;  Mupdamala 
Tantra,  chap.  ii).  Bhoga,  or  enjoyment,  it  of  five  kinds — pleasure  arising  from 
sound,  touch,  sight,  taste,  and  smell.  This  enjoyment  may  be  had  on  earth  or 
in  the  transitory  heavens  of  enjoyment,  which  are  to  be  distinguished  from 
mukti,  or  liberation,  the  state  which  alone  endures. 

4  Mahanirvana  Tantra,  chap.  v.  *  The  heaven  of  Vipju. 


T ANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


93 


was  it  on  the  part  of  God  to  give  to  them  of  the  Satya  age1  a  longevity  of 
a  lakh  of  years,'  with  their  life  centred  in  the  marrow,*  and  then  to  give  to 
men  in  the  Kali  age  a  longevity  of  a  hundred  years,  and  life  dependent  on 
food?  If  one  injustice  is  done,  that  is  no  excuse  for  doing  a  hundred 
others.  Moreover,  what  can  you  do  if  injustice  has  been  once  done?  But, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  “  Poison  is  the  remedy  for  poison.”  What  does  it 
matter  to  you  or  me  if  He  has  made  up  for  the  deficiency  in  justice  caused 
by  the  grant  of  greater  longevity  in  the  Satya  than  in  the  Kali  age,  by, 
according  to  Sadhana,  a  more  rapid  effect  in  the  Kali  age  than  in  the 
Satya  age  ?  In  fact,  in  Him  there  is  neither  deficiency  nor  the  reverse.  In 
this  drama  of  the  world  He  is  both  the  Chief  Actor  and  the  Chief  of 
Actresses.  This  drama  commenced  in  the  beginning  with  the  union  of 
Actor  and  Actress,  and  will  conclude,  according  to  His  unfailing  will,  at 
that  night  which  is  the  end  of  time. 

Those  who  arc  acquainted  with  the  principles  of  Sanskrit  drama  know 
that  it  is  composed  in  the  form  of  the  tail  of  a  cow.4  I  do  not  know  on 
what  evidence  rhetorical  poets  discovered  this  form  of  composition,  but,  so 
far  as  one  can  surmise,  it  appears  that  form  was  adopted  in  imitation  of 
the  ideal  drama  of  that  Primeval  Poet,*  the  Creator  of  the  universe. 
From  the  description  of  the  four  ages — namely,  Satya,  Trcta,  Dvapara, 
and  Kali" — it  would  seem  that  in  the  ideally  composed  play  of  the 
universe  the  chain  of  things  from  Brahma,  the  Hiranyagarbha  and  grand¬ 
father  7  of  men,  to  the  close  of  the  Kali  age  is  arranged  in  the  form  of  a 
cow’s  tail.  When  the  close  of  the  play  approaches,  the  King  of  actors, 
Mahakala,*  will  after  hastily  withdrawing  all  the  materials  for  the  play, 
lay  down  to  rest  upon  the  couch  of  Mahapralaya*  in  the  last  world-scene, 
the  gre^t  cremation  ground  strewn  with  ashes.  The  Mother,  the  Queen 
of  actresses  and  Charmer  of  Mahakala,10  will  place  Her  right  foot  on  His 
heart,  and,  losing  Herself  in  the  waves  of  love  and  joy  of  the  great  mass  of 


1  The  first,  or  golden  age,  marked  by  virtue,  prosperity,  happiness,  health, 
etc.  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdslra).  1 100,000. 

•  The  Hindu  belief  is  that  in  the  first  age  life  was  centred  in  the  marrow,  in 
the  second  age  in  the  bones,  in  the  third  age  in  the  blood,  and  in  the  last  or 
present  age  is  dependent  on  food. 

«  As  Sloka,  277,  of  the  Sahitya  Durpana,  saysr  Gopuchchhagrasamagrantu 
vandbanantasya  kirtitam.  The  acts  of  a  drama  should  be  so  arranged  as  to  be 
reduced  in  size  from  the  first  to  the  last,  just  as  the  tail  of  a  cow  beginning 
broadly  tapers  to  a  point. 

•  Brahma,  so  called  in  the  Srimadbhagavata,  and  elsewhere. 

•  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra.  7  Lokapitamaha. 

•  Siva  (see  Mahanirvana  Tantra,  chap.  v). 

•  The  great  dissolution  of  things,  when  all  will  return  to  that  from  which 
they  on  the  morning  of  the  day  of  Brahmk  originated. 

10  The  Devi,  as  MahlkSfi. 


94 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


consciousness,'  appear,  as  it  were,  a  dancer  maddened  by  untiring  dancing. 
The  hasty  closing  and  destruction  of  the  Kali  age  is  but  a  preparation  for 
this  dancing,  and  nothing  else.  The  thought  of  this  scene  may  make  the 
unbelieving  and  impious  tremble  with  fear,  but  these  happy  tidings  will 
raise  joyous  waves  of  love  in  the  heart  of  the  devout.  The  will  of  Her 
whose  substance  is  will*  shall  be  fulfilled,  for  it  is  in  the  power  of  none  to 
frustrate  it. 

Next,  when  you  become  jealous  at  the  mere  mention  of  His  unfathom¬ 
able  mercy  towards  His  creatures  of  the  Kali  age  as  compared  with  that 
which  He  showed  to  those  of  the  Satya  age,  it  would  seem  as  if  you 
thought  that  the  creatures  of  these  two  ages  constituted  two  distinct  classes 
at  feud  one  with  {he  other,  and  never  meeting  in  each  other’s  home.  A 
creature  of  the  Satya  age  will  not  (you  suppose)  appear  in  the  Kali  age, 
and  one  of  the  latter  age  will  not  have  appeared  in  the  former.  No 
matter;  be  it  so.  But  I  ask:  Everyone  admits  that  not  every  creature  in 
the  first  three  ages  has  attained  Siddhi,*  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  every¬ 
one  in  the  Kali  age  devoid  of  Siddhi.  What,  then,  is  the  fate  of  such 
Sadhakas 1 * *  4 * *  of  the  first  three  ages  who  have  not  attained  Siddhi,  and  of 
such  men  of  the  Kali  age  as  are  not,  but  are  about  to  become,  Sadhakas? 
According  to  your  argument,  no  creature  of  the  Kali  age  will  have  appear¬ 
ed  in  the  Satya  age,  and  no  individual  of  the  latter  age  will  appear  in  the 
Kali  age.  In  other  words,  at  the  close  of  these  ages  such  persons  will 
attain  cither  Nirvipa,8  and  be  totally  absorbed  in  the  Parabrahman,*  or 
will  sink  at  once  into  an  eternal  hell.  Blessed  be  this  judgment  to  which 
your  justice  leads  you!  What  an  unerring  decision!'  You  were  startled 
at  hearing  that  the  Jiva  *  in  the  Kali  age  can  attain  Siddhi  in  one 
lifetime.  But  the  Jlva  of  your  Satya  age  attains  Nirvana  the  moment  it 
commences  Sadhana.  It  may  thus,  indeed,  happen  that  a  man  who  by 
good  fortune  is  bom  at  the  close  of  the  Satya  age  may  attain  without 
labour  in  one  life,  and  by  the  mere  circumstance  of  his  birth  at  the  close 
of  that  age,  that  same  Siddhi  which  another  has  only  attained  in  the  same 


1  Cidghana.  Cit,  the  pure  Brahman,  is  the  hearth  of  fire  from  which, 
according  to  the  Lalita,  the  Devi  springs  (Cidagnikupdasambhuta). 

a  Ichchhamayi.  The  substance  of  the  Dew  is  the  three  &aktis,  Ichcha 
(will  or  desire),  JAana  (knowledge),  and  Kriya  (action). 

*  That  is,  become  a  siddhapurusa. 

4  That  is,  those  worshippers  who  practise  Sadhana. 

1  That  is,  complete  unconditioned  Mukti,  as  distinguished  from  the  tempo¬ 
rary  and  conditioned  padas  known  as  S&lokya,  Sarupya,  Samipya,  and  Sayujya. 

*  The  unconditioned,  attributeless  or  higher  Brahman,  as  contrasted  with 

the  same  Brahman  manifesting  itself  with  attributes  in  creation — the  apara  or 
“  lower  ”  Brahman.  7  Valihari. 

8  The  embodied  spirit,  which  is  the  supreme  spirit,  viewed  under  the, 
limiting  conditions  known  as  “  upidhis 


T ANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


95 


age  by  the  practice  of  austerities  for  ten  million  years.1  Advocate  of 
Justice,  tell  me  now  of  what  kind  of  justice  is  this  the  impartial  and 
carefully  considered  opinion? 

•  You  and  I,  whose  knowledge  does  not  extend  beyond,  at  most,  a 
hundred  years,  are  not  in  a  position  to  argue  as  regards  that  justice,  the 
wheel  of  which  turns  but  once  in  eighty-four  lakhs 1  of  births.  In  the 
Viivasara  Tantra  the  Sastra  says:  “  There  is  no  birth  like  unto  the  human 
birth.  Both  Devas5  and  Pitjs*  desire  it.  For  the  Jiva  the  human  body 
is  of  all  bodies  the  most  difficult  to  come  by.  For  this  it  is  said  that 
human  birth  is  attained  with  extreme  difficulty.  O  Parvati,1  amongst 
those  beings  who  have  obtained  this  rare  human  birth,  those  who  have 
conquered  all  doubt  are  very  few,  and  of  those  who  have  conquered  doubt 
such  as  are  attached  to  Mantra  *  and  Tantra  are  again  very  few.  Among 
such  pious  men  as  are  attached  to  Mantra  and  Tantra,  such  as  are  pro¬ 
ficient  in  Tantra,  which  is  adored  by  all,  are  the  best;  and,  again,  amongst 
the  latter  the  Sadhaka  is  the  best  of  all,  who  is  deeply  versed  in  all  the 
Tantras.” 

“  It  is  said  in  all  the  Sastras  that  of  the  Jiva’s  eighty-four  lakhs  of 
births  the  human  birth  is  the  most  fruitful.  In  no  other  birth  can  Jiva 
acquire  knowledge  of  the  truth.  Human  birth  is  the  stepping-stone  to  the 
path  of  liberation.  But  rare  are  the  meritorious 1  who  come  by  it.” 

“  O  Daughter  of  the  mountain,*  JlvatmS,  which  decreaseth  not, 
passes  through  eighty-four  lakhs  of  births  as  inorganic  things,  insects, 
birds,  beast,  and  the  like.  And  after  that,  O  Supreme  Devi,  it  attains  that 
human  body  which  is  so  difficult  to  acquire.” 

Jiva  attains  the  position  of  the  twicc-bom,*  having  had  thirty  lakhs  of 
births  as  inorganic  things,  nine  lakhs  of  births  as  aqueous  animals,  ten 
lakhs  of  births  as  creeping  animals, 10  eleven  lakhs  of  births  as  animals  of  the 
air,"  twenty-four  lakhs  of  births  as  beasts,  and  four  lakhs  of  births  as  human 
beings,  having  thus  in  all  travelled  through  eighty-four  lakhs  of  births. 
When  Jiva  attains  the  human  body,  it  becomes  Lord  of  Dharraa.11  It  is 


1  A  cro re,  or  an  hundred  Ialdu,  or  10,000,000.  *  8,400,000. 

*  Devas,  the  celestial  intelligences  intermediate  between  Iivara,  the  Lord, 

and  Man.  *  See  Introduction, to  Tantra  Sutra. 

‘The  spouse  of  the  God  Siva.  The  Tantras  are  generally  cast  in  the  form 
of  a  dialogue  between  Her  and  Her  husband. 

•  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra.  ’  Pupya. 

1 A  title  of  Parvati  as  daughter  of  the  mountain-king  Himavat. 

•That  is,  the  three  superior  castes,  Brahmana,  Ksattriya,  and  Vaifya  which 
upon  the  Upanayana  ceremony  become  twice-born,  and  have  thus  both  a 
natural  and  a  spiritual  birth. 

19  Worms,  serpents,  etc.  A  lakh=  100,000. 

11  Birds,  etc.  11  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  SSltra. 


96 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


again  bom  and  again  dies.  In  this  manner,  controlled  by  the  bonds  of 
Karma,1  the  Jlva  takes  birth  from  various  sources,*  and  dies  eighty-four 
lakhs  of  times.  By  the  command  of  Yama,'  Jlva  goes  to  the  Brahmaloka.* 
On  its  return  from  thence,  it  obtains  the  human  body,  which  is  so  rarely 
obtained,  and  is  able  to  secure  from  a  good  Guru  initiation  in  the  mantra 
of  Mahavidya  and  knowledge  of  the  truth.  Then  alone  does  the  Jlva  gain 
the  supreme  liberation,  and  by  the  grace  of  Mahavidya  has  not  to  return 
so  long  as  the  universe  •  endures.  In  its  eighty-four  lakhs  of  births  as  in¬ 
organic  and  organic  things,  beasts,  birds,  insects,  flics,  and  the  like,  the 
Jiva  enjoys  longevity  according  to  its  Karma.  Some  live  one  hundred 
yean,  some  a  thousand,  some  a  lakh,  some  even  more,  and  some  live 
crores  *  and  crores.  of  years.  It  passes  my  understanding  that  Sastra  can 
be  your  authority  for  the  notion  that  all  Jivas — past,  present,  and  future — 
of  this  enormous  cycle  will  attain  the  highest  Samadhi,’  owing  to  the 
simple  circumstance  that  an  age  has  come  to  an  end,  and  this  in  spite  of 
the  fact  that  their  Karma  is  of  all  forms  fuliiUed,  unfulfilled,  and  partly 
fulfilled,  and  partly  unfulfilled,  worked  out  and  unworked  out,  partly 
worked  out  and  partly  unworked  out.* 

But  you  may,  as  a  last  resort,  say:  “I  do  not  believe  in  eighty-four 
lakhs  of  births.”  But  it  does  not  become  you  to  say  this  either;  for  the 
very  authority  and  reasoning  upon  which  you  accept  the  four  ages  spoken 
of  in  the  Sastras  are  the  same  as  that  on  which  you  are  bound  to  accept 
the  statement  as  to  eighty-four  lakhs  of  births.  Both  are  conclusions  of 
Sastra.  Who  will  believe  the  man  who  accepts  one  part  of  the  Sastra  and 
judges  the  other  mistaken?  Who  thinks  the  right  half  of  a  man’s  body  to 
be  conscious  and  the  left  unconscious  ?  Let  me  put  to  you  a  plain  question. 
Why  should  you  not  believe?  What  is  the  cause  of  your  unbelief?  You 
will  say,  The  number  eighty-four  lakhs.  But  I  reply  that  that  very 
number  which  is  the  cause  of  your  unbelief  is  the  ground  of  my  firm  faith. 
Who  are  you  to  say  that,  because  these  eighty-four  lakhs  of  births  are 
unseen  by  you  and  me,  that  what  is  unseen  does  not  exist?  The  moat  you 
can  say  is  that  you  do  not  know  whether  they  exist  or  not.  For  the  same 
reason,  that  I  cannot  say  that  it  exists  because  I  have  not  seen  it,  you 

1  Karma  is  action  and  the  product  of  action.  Each  action  produces  its 
necessary  result.  So  long  as  a  man’s  Karma  is  not  worked  out,  and  the  thirst 
for  separate  life  is  not  exhausted,  so  long  he  remains  in  its  bonds.  It  is  of  two 
kinds,  good  and  bad,  both  constituting  the  “  impurity  of  action  ”. 

*  Yoni.  *  Lord  of  the  lower  world  and  of  death. 

*  Satya:  region  of  Brahma,  the  highest,  or,  according  to  some,  the  three 
highest  of  the  upper  worlds— Satya,  Mahah,  and  Tapoloka. 

*  Brahmanda,  lit.  "  egg  of  Brahma 

*  A  crore  is  100  lakhs,  or  10,000,000.  1  Here  “  end  ”, 

*  Purpa  apurpa,  punjapurna,  bhukta,  abhukta,  bhuktabhukta. 


TANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


97 


cannot  say  that  it  does  not  exist  because  you  have  not  seen  it.  If  it  is 
non-existent  because  I  have  not  seen  it,  then  the  world  does  not  exist  for 
the  blind  man.  The  blind  man,  moreover,  does  not  see  himself.  Is  it, 
therefore,  to  be  concluded  that  he  does  not  exist  for  himself  ?  It  matters 
not  if  he  does  not  exist.  But  I  ask,  who  is  it  that  affirms  the  negative? 
He  who  is  himself  non-existent  cannot  affirm  or  deny  anything. 

At  the  time  of  the  happening  of  that  cause  which  gives  fatherhood  to 
man  and  motherhood  to  woman,  the  child  exists  in  the  atoms  of  semen 
and  blood.  He  docs  not  see  that  incident.  Why  do  you,  then,  without 
visual  evidence  on  your  part  and  on  the  faith  of  dthers’  words  believe  that 
those  who  are  called  your  father  and  mother  arc  such?  Maybe  on 
principle  you  will  object  and  say  that  you  do  not  believe  in  that  also.  On 
rare  occasions  a  real  cause  may  exist  for  this  unbelief.  But,  being  a  man, 
can  you  boldly  assert  it?  Are  we  to  suppose  that  every  father  and  mother 
in  the  world  is  subject  to  such  a  doubt?  Such  a  statement,  even  if  one 
were  able  to  make  it,  would  be  nothing  but  the  raving  of  a  madman. 
I  have  no  objection  to  your  doubting  the  eighty-four  lakhs  of  births. 
But  I  say  in  that  case  let  it  be  strictly  a  doubt.  Do  not  bring  it 
under  the  category  of  things  certain.  For  the  doubt  is  whether  the 
eighty-four  lakhs  of  births  exist  or  not,  and  no  doubt  can  exist  without  a 
knowledge  of  either  existence  or  non-existence.  There  can  never  be  a 
doubt  about  the  existence  of  that  which  you  know  to  be  non-existent. 
It  does  not  exist.  This  is  not  a  doubt,  but  a  certainty.  This  is  why  I  said 
that,  should  you  be  doubtful,  say  that  you  do  not  know  whether  the  eighty- 
four  lakhs  of  births  exist  or  not.  To  arrive  at  once  at  the  conclusion 
that  they  do  not  exist  because  it  is  doubtful  whether  they  do  exist  is  but  a 
shocking  manifestation  of  ignorance.  In  our  discussion  upon  reincarna¬ 
tion  we  will  set  ourselves  to  dispel  this  doubt.  Here  we  shall  say  this 
much — that  when  the  number  of  eighty-four  lakhs  is  definitely  given,  it 
would  be  wise  to  believe  in  it.  Of  him  who  docs  not  admit  the  fact  of 
reincarnation  in  any  manner,  whether  partly  or  incompletely,  directly  or 
indirectly,  I  ask:  “  Are  the  eighty-four  lakhs  of  births  mentioned  in  the 
religious  book  of  any  other  religious  community  of  any  country  of  which 
we  know  the  history  ?  ”  Can  either  the  philosophy  of  Carvaka,1  or  the 
Koran  or  Bible,  proclaim  boldly  that  the  Jiva  takes  eighty-four  lakhs  of 
births?  Whose  sight  can  stretch  to  the  extremity  of  the  universe,  so  as  to 
be  able  to  penetrate  through  the  molecules  and  atoms  of  the  fourteen 
worlds — namely,  Bbuh,  Bhuvah,  Svah,  Mahah,  Janah,  Tapah,  Satya, 
A  tala,  Vitala,  Sutala,  Talatala,  Rasatala,  Mahatala,  and  Patala,’  and  thus 

1  Sceptic  and  atheist. 

*  The  worlds  from  Bhfih  (the  earth)  to  Satyaloka  are  the  upper  world,  and 
.from  A  tala  to  P&tala  the  nether  worlds,  which  according  to  some  accounts  must 
be  distinguished  from  the  Hells,  which  He  between  earth  and  the  nether  world. 

7 


98 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


gaining  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  every  Jlva  with  grave  solemnity  affirm 
and  say:  “Jlva  has  eighty-four  lakhs  of  births.  True,  true,  true  again — 
true,  there  is  no  doubt.”  Not  to  speak  of  pointing  this  out,  how  can  one 
even  boldly  say  that  the  number  of  births  is  eighty-four  lakhs?  The 
Jiva,  through  change  of  the  curtain  of  memory  in  every  birth,  forgets  its 
previous  birth.  Its  memory  is  opened  and  closed.  It  is  not,  then,  within 
its  power  of  intelligence  to  say  with  certainty,  cither  by  philosophy, 
science,  perception,  or  inference,  that  the  number  of  births  is  eighty-four 
lakhs.  Only  that  Dharma  and  that  Sastra  can  affirm  this,  which  takes  its 
birth  in  the  heart  whose  substance  is  will  of  Her  who  is  the  infinite  and 
eternal  Intelligence,1  who  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  all  Jlvas  who  are  mani¬ 
fested  with  Her  breath.1  Who  can  measure  the  extent  of  the  births  of  the 
Jiva  but  that  Sastra  which  has  emanated  from  the  mouth  of  Anandamayi 1 
Herself,  at  whose  feet  this  small  world  is  but  a  plaything  for  Her  eternal 
play?  It  is  only  that  Sastra  which  dances  with  joy  at  the  sight  of  the  play 
of  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  taking  place  at  every  twinkling 
of  the  eye  which  can  boldly  assert  that  the  number  of  births  is  eighty-four 
lakhs.  If  other  Sastras  be  astounded,  let  them  remain  so.  You  and  I 
have  no  need  to  faint  away  on  hearing  that.  At  present  merely  understand 
this  much:  that  as  he  who  can  count  a  thousand  has  surely  known  the 
mathematical  sign  for  that  number,  so  he  who  can  assert  the  number  of 
eighty-four  lakhs  of  births  has  surely  seen  them. 

Reasoning  on  the  Scripture 

You  may  have  heard  that  a  reasonable  saying  should  be  accepted  even 
from  a  boy,  and  that  discussion  without  reasoning  causes  loss  of  Dharma. 
But  perhaps  you  have  not  had  the  leisure  to  discern  what  is  the  subject  of 
that  reasoning,  and  what  kind  of  reasoning  it  is.  The  reasoning  by  which 
the  Sastra  asks  you  to  discuss  is  that  reasoning  which  is  within  the  control 
of  your  intellect — the  reasoning  of  practical  Sastras  helpful  to  discussion. 
How  can  you,  with  worldly  reasoning,  prove  the  truth  of  that  unworldly 
spiritual  Sastra  which,  if  studied  and  followed  with  constancy,  will 
develop  the  intellect  and  will,  and  when  Siddhi  is  attained  by  such 
Sadhana,  open  the  portals  of  the  super-sensual  principle 4  which  is  within 
you?  Do  not  lament  because  you  have  intellect,  nor  be  ashamed  because 
you  cannot  come  to  any  decision  without  it.  It  is  true  that  you  have  an 


1  Caitanya — the  supreme  is  Sat  (existence),  Cit  (intelligence,  conscious¬ 
ness),  and  Ananda  (bliss).  The  Devi  is  Chinmayl  (Lalita,  third  hundred). 

*  The  world  is  the  out-breathing  of  the  Supreme. 

*  A  title  of  Devi,  whose  substance  is  bliss  [sec  post). 

*  Atindriya  tattva. 


TANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


99 


intellect,  but  the  pity  of  it  is  that  you  have  not  the  intelligence  to  under¬ 
stand  what  sort  of  intellect  it  is.  You  may  feel  sorry  and  ashamed,  but 
that  will  not  open  the  lock.  If  you  put  too  much  pressure,  the  key  will  be 
broken,  and  even  a  Bengal  lock  1  will  not  open.  This  is  why  I  was  saying 
that  if  you  proceeded  to  open  the  lock  of  spiritual  principles  with  the  key 
of  worldly  reasoning,  even  the  play  of  native  intelligence  will  cease,  and, 
being  unable  what  to  decide,  you  will  find  yourself  at  loss  in  everything.3 
For  this  reason  the  Sastra  has,  after  careful  consideration,  and  taking  the 
oath  upon  its  head,  said:  “  Do  not  attempt  to  deal  by  argument  with 
things  which  arc  beyond  the  range  of  thought.” 

What,  again,  may  be  asked,  is  the  necessity  for  a  Sastra,  in  respect  of 
a  matter  which  you  and  I  can  decide  by  argument  an8  discussion?  That 
is  called  Sastra  which  deals  with  things  beyond  the  reach  of  the  senses, 
which  are  unthought  of,  unseen,  and  unattained  by  you  and  me.  Where 
direct  vision  is  blind  and  inference  lame,  there  Sastra  alone  reigns  supreme. 
The  fact  that  you  and  I  have  got  eyes  does  not  enable  you  and  I  to  sec 
what  the  animals  moving  in  the  unfathomable  depths  of  ocean  sec.  The 
power  of  sight  is  different  in  that  kingdom  from  ours.  You  and  I  are 
blind  in  this  respect,  despite  our  eyes.  Similarly  you  and  I  have  not  the 
privilege  to  behold  that  which  the  Rsis,  seers  of  deep  truths  immersed  in 
the  Divine  bliss,*  have  seen. 

Many  people  are  heard  to  say  in  argument  as  follows:  “  How  can 
those  whose  minds  are  constantly  occupied  with  the  thought  of  the  feet  of 
the  Dcvata  of  their  heart  in  Nirvikalpa  Samadhi  Yoga,*  by  the  complete 
immcrsal  of  their  own  mind  and  Prakrti  *  in  Paramatma,*  find  time  to 
observe  also  the  physical  principles 1  governing  the  molecules  and  atoms  * 
of  the  untold  millions  of  universes,*  each  of  which  is  composed  of  fourteen 
worlds?  How,  again,  can  Yogis,10  Rsis,  and  Munis"  whose  state  is  one  in 
which  the  illusion  of  a  dual  existence  disappears  through  their  acquire¬ 
ment  of  non-dualislic  truths,1*  find  time  to  turn  their  eyes  from  Brahman 
to  observe  the  Brahmanda  ?  ”  11  Brahman,  you  say,  cannot  be  seen  unless 
the  Brahmanda  is  forgotten.  The  Brahmanda  cannot  be  seen  unless  the 
Brahman  is  forgotten.  You  argue,  therefore,  that  it  is  impossible  to 
harmonize  these  two  mutually  conflicting  statements.  We,  too,  do  not 

1  That  is,  locks  manuJactured  in  Bengal,  which  are  (or  were)  of  inferior 
quality. 

1  Literally,  “to  fall  off  from  here  and  be  lost  from  there.” 

*  Brahmananda.  *  Ecstasy.  See  Introdwtion  to  Tantra  Sistra. 

*  Ibid.  *  The  Supreme  Spirit. 

*  Vastutattva.  t  *  Apu  and  paramanu. 

*  Brahmanda,  “  Egg  of  Brahma.” 

10  Adepts  in  Yoga. 

11  Advaita  tattva. 


31  Seen  and  sages. 
**  Universe. 


100 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


deny  the  difficulty,  and,  although  this  is  not  the  place  for  an  elaborate 
explanation,  we  will  briefly  refer  to  one  point. 

Poets  have  said  that  if  a  pearl  and  a  java 1  flower  arc  brought  to¬ 
gether,  the  red  hue  of  the  java  will  redden  the  pearl,  but  the  white  lustre 
of  the  latter  will  not  whiten  the  former.  This  is  because  the  pearl  is  free 
of  all  impurity,1 *  while  the  java  is  not  so.  A  thing  which  is  naturally 
transparent  will  take  the  reflection  of  other  things,  whilst  that  which  is  not 
so  may  itself  be  reflected  but  cannot  receive  reflection.  For  instance,  my 
face  is  reflected  in  a  mirror,  but  the  mirror  is  not  reflected  in  my  face, 
because  the  mirror  is  pure,  which  my  face  is  not.  Similarly  in  a  Brah¬ 
manda  made  impure  by  Maya,5  everything  is  impure.  Only  that  one 
Brahman  who  is  Beyond  Maya  is  pure.  The  impure  Brahmanda  cannot 
receive  a  reflection  of  the  pure  Brahman,  but  is  itself  naturally  reflected 
in  it. 

Looking  at  a  spot  of  ground  on  the  bank  of  some  lake  or  river,  we  see 
only  the  verdant  land  and  clumps  of  trees,  but  not  the  stretch  of  water. 
Yet  the  instant  we  withdraw  our  sight  from  the  bank  and  cast  it  on  the  . 
water,  we  see  everything  therein— the  trunks,  the  tops,  the  branches,  twigs, 
fruits,  and  flowers  of  the  trees,  and  their  very  roots,  together  with  the 
verdant  land  on  which  they  stand.  Wc  sec  also  the  immense  zone  of  the 
firmament  covered  with  coundcss  clusters  of  stars.  We  thus  see  all  things 
one  after  another  displayed  in  the  lake.  But  that  which  faces  upwards  on 
land  faces  downwards  in  the  water,  and  that  which  faces  downwards  on 
land  faces  upwards  in  the  water.  Similar  is  the  vision  of  those  who  are 
immersed  in  the  sea  of  truth.4  Just  as  we  can  see  everything  up  to  the 
very  zone  of  the  firmament  merely  by  looking  at  the  water  of  the  lake  and 
without  casting  our  eyes  around  it,  so  the  Rsis,  without  glancing  at  the 
Brahmanda  produced  by  Maya,  cast  their  vision  upon  Brahmamayi,6 
and  see  in  Her  person,  whose  substance  is  a  mass  of  conscious  bliss,*  endless 
millions  of  worlds  in  the  hollow  of  every  hair  of  Her  body,1  now  appearing 
and  now  disappearing  in  each  twinkling  of  the  eyes,  as  it  were  bubbles  in 


1  The  scarlet  hibiscus,  the  flower  of  the  Tantriks. 

»  Literally,  “  is  dirtless.” 

*  Illusion,  the  power  of  the  Supreme  whereby  It  makes  Itself  to  appear 
other  than  It  really  is.  Maya  enshrouds  and  conceals  the  nature  of  the  Atman. 

4  Tattva.  *  The  Devi.  *  Cidghanananda. 

*  The  Kamika  is  quoted  as  saying  that  there  are  224  worlds,  which  should 
be  meditated  upon  as  if  they  were  the  hairs  on  the  body  of  the  Lord.  This  Is 

the  Bhuvana  method.  Others  arc  the  “  letter  ”  method  of  meditation  on  fifty 
letters,  as  on  the  skin  of  the  Lord  of  Devas;  the  mantra  method  of  meditation 
on  the  blood  of  Siva  by  means  of  Mantra;  the  “  word  ”  method,  where  they 
stand  for  the  flesh  of  the  blood-vessels  of  the  Lord;  and  the  “  Tattva  "  method* 
where  the  thirty-six  Tattvas,  beginning  with  the  earth,  are  the  forms  of  Siva’a 
sinews,  bone,  and  marrow  {see  Bhaskararaya  Commentary,  Lalita,  v.  52). 


T ANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


101 


water.  No  need  is  there  for  them  to  take  any  wearying  journey,  nor  to 
waste  their  lives,  nor  to  pass  over  the  courtyard 1  of  the  world  so  hard  to 
traverse.  But  they  merely,  by  the  eye  of  wisdom,'  in  the  bed  of  medita- 
tion,'  in  the  house  of  Sadhana,  see  that  beauteous  dream  of  the  three 
worlds,  and  that  truth  *  to  which  the  Jiva  cannot  attain  even  in  its  causal 
body,  and  which,  notwithstanding  the  break  of  ecstasy,'  they  cannot  forget. 
Their  vision  has,  however,  this  peculiarity :  whatever  you  and  I,  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  the  scientific  truths  of  the  gross  world,  see  and  think  of  appears  to 
us  to  be  elevated  and  of  uplifted  face,  as  if  nothing  else  in  the  samsara  was 
more  elevated  than  they;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  devotees,  looking  at 
the  reflection  cast  upon  the  waves  of  blood  of  the  causal  sea  in  the  womb 
of  Bhagavatl,  perceive  that  that  which  is  elevated  in  this  world  is  low  at 
the  feet  of  Brahmamayi,  and  that  whatever  was  downcast  in  the  world  has, 
on  approaching  the  Mother,  received  Her  caress  and  joyfully  lifted  its 
head  on  seeing  the  Brahman  aspect  of  Anandamayl.  The  same  things  are 
there  in  both  cases.  What  was  seen  on  land  appears  again  in  water,  but 
reversed  through  change  of  the  medium  through  which  we  view  it.  For 
those  who  only  see  the  Brahmanda  in  the  Brahmanda,  what  can  be  higher 
to  them  than  it  ?  But  those  who  have  seen  the  Brahmanda  in  Brahman 
have  seen  the  Queen  of  Queens,  Brahmamayi,  sitting  on  a  throne  made 
of  all  the  highest  things  of  the  Brahmanda  from  the  regions  of  the  pole- 
star,  moon,  and  Brahma*  to  the  cloud-piercing  peak  of  Mount  Sumeru  ’ 
on  earth.  Seeing  that  all-pervading*  play  of  Sakti  which  makes  the 
universe  stare  with  wonder,  Dcvas  and  Rsis  have  bowed  their  heads  to 
earth,  and  said :  “  Obeisance,  obeisance  to  the  Devi  who,  as  consciousness,* 
pervades  the  entire  universe.” 

“  Is*  it  necessary  to  say,  O  great  Devi,  that  She  lives  in  the  bodies  of 
all  living  creatures  when  She  is  present  in  the  form  of  energy,1*  even  in 
such  lifeless  things  as  stocks  and  stones?  There  is  no  place  in  the  world 
where  the  substance  of  Mahamaya  is  not.” 

Man,  how  dare  we  expect  that  that  divine  11  sight  of  theirs  and  this 
carnal u  sight  of  yours  and  mine  will  be  the  same  ?  The  Sastra  says  that 
this  play  of  the  universe  is  nothing  but  the  play  of  the  waves  in  the  sea  of 
consciousness.  Just  as  those  who  have  gone  to  the  sea,  need,  in  looking 
at  the  sea,  make  no  special  effort  to  see  its  waves,  so  those  who  had  seen 


1  That  is,  the  surface.  '  Jfiana. 

*  Dhyana  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdttra).  *Tattva.  *  Samadhi. 

4  Dhruvaloka,  Candraloka,  and  Brahmaloka. 

I  Mount  Meru,  wherein  is  the  pole  of  the  earth. 

*  Viraj  Tattva;  »  Caitanya. 

14  Tejas,  which  also  denotes  fire,  brilliancy,  glory,  and  energy. 

II  Daivl.  **  Jaivi,  or  sight  pertaining  to  the  Jiva. 


102 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Brahmamayi  had  not  to  make  any  effort  to  see  the  Brahmanda.  They 
did  not  see  the  universe  with  the  help  of  telescopes  or  of  vehicles  on  land, 
in  water,  or  in  air.  When  they  saw  the  livari 1  of  the  universe  it  was  then 
they  saw  the  latter1  also  resting  at  Her  feet.  The  difference  between  the 
sight  of  those  who  nowadays  display  their  knowledge  of  science  by  a 
discussion  of  the  principles  of  matter 3  and  that  of  the  Rsis  is  this :  The 
former,  in  their  short  lives  having  seen  but  a  small  portion  of  the  small 
world,  gasp  out  with  tired  voices:  “  Who  knows  what  lies  beyond  this?  ” 
However,  on  seeing  this  world-play,  one  only  feels  that  wonderful  indeed 
must  be  the  nature,4  of  the  real  form  of  Her  whose  play  it  is,  and  that  if 
one  would  have  knowledge  of  that  wonderful  Sakti,‘  there  arc  no  better 
means  in  human  *life  than  to  study  the  principles  of  the  universe.  It  is 
here  that  Rsis  are  wont  to  say  that  this  sport  is  nothing  wonderful  for  Her 
who  is  full  of  eternal  and  ever-novel  play.  The  playful  manifestation  in 
the  molecules  and  atoms  of  a  single  world  counts  for  an  incident  scarcely 
worth  mention  for  Her  upon  whose  mere  glance  *  depend  the  creation, 
preservation,  and  destruction  of  countless  millions  of  universes.  The  • 
universe  docs  not  appear  wonderful  in  the  sight  of  him  who  has  seen  the 
primordial  Sakti,7  the  source  of  birth  of  this  perfect  play.  And  there¬ 
fore  the  Rsis  disregarding  the  Samsara  with  its  charming  display 
of  actors  and  acting,  have  sunk  in  the  fathomless  sea  of  the  ocean  of  Her 
who,  holding  the  thread  of  the  universe  in  Her  hand,  makes  all  those 
actors  act.  They,  after  an  attentive  view  and  the  attainment  of  Siddhi, 
have  thrown  up  their  hands,  and  cried  and  said:  “  Do  not  let  your  mind 
and  heart  be  charmed  with  the  varied  beauty  of  this  world,  litis  pleasant 
illusion  will  not  last  for  ever.  As  you  hope  for  peace,  surrender  your  mind 
and  heart  at  the  lovely  lotus-feet  of  Anandaraayi  playing  on  the*breast  of 
Sadananda.8  Cast  off  the  threefold  sorrow,8  and  you  will  then  discover 
that  millions  of  worlds  move  and  move  around  every  petal,  every  filament, 
every  particle  of  pollen,  of  those  lotus-feet,  and  then  disappear  immersed 
in  the  love-pollen  of  those  lotuses.” 

To  our  ears  these  words,  though  true,  appear  somewhat  strange.  To 
disregard  the  joys  and  sorrows  of  the  visible  world,  and  to  be  immersed  in 
the  joy  of  the  unseen  Brahman,  is  a  remote  affair.  For  the  present  anyone 
who  avers  it  seems  to  be  an  unsocial,  witless  fellow.  This  advice  to  run  in 

1  Feminine  of  livara  (Lord).  Title  of  the  Devi.  s  Tattva. 

*  Bhutatattva.  The  Bhuta  are  the  elements. 

4  Tattva.  4  Power. 

*  “  The  series  of  worlds  arise  and  disappear  with  the  opening  and  shutting 
of  Her  eyes  ”  (Lalita  Sahasranama,  v.  66). 

7Adya  Sakti,  the  Devi  as  primordial  source  and  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  energy.  ,  , 

*  Siva,  the  ever  JoyfuL  8  Tapatraya  (see  post). 


TANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


103 


search  of  something  unseen,  in  disregard  of  the  visible  phenomenal 
samsira,  is  thought  to  be  as  unbearable  and  inopportune  as  would  be 
flippant  talk  to  a  person  who,  disconsolate  and  with  flooding  tears,  is 
holding  his  dead  child  to  his  breast,  or  as  would  be  a  request  to  accompany 
a  funeral  procession  to  a  young  man  adorned  and  joyful  on  his  way  to 
his  marriage.  Owing  to  the  unacceptable  nature  of  the  advice,  you  and  I 
consider  the  adviser  mad;  but  the  latter  is  not  to  be  put  off  from  his 
purpose  by  that. 

Let  us  suppose  that  you  and  I  do  not  know  what  acting  is,  but  are 
present  at  a  representation  of  the  Ramayana.  The  grief  of  Kauialya,  the 
death  of  Oaiaratha,  the  lamentation  of  Slta,  the  tears  of  Man^odari,  move 
us  to  profuse  tears.  On  the  other  hand,  the  heroic  valour  of  Laksmana, 
the  world-subduing  military  skill  of  Ramacandra,  the  pride  of  Indrajit, 
the  war-cries  of  Ravaiia,  fill  us  now  with  joy  and  delight,  now  with  fear, 
astonishment,  and  awe.  At  the  same  time  we  observe  that  someone  who 
is  sitting  in  our  midst,  but  whom  we  do  not  know,  has  been  shaking  his 
sides  with  laughter  at  the  very  same  scenes.  You  and  I  will  probably  say 
that  the  man  is  mad,  but  that  will  not  stop  his  laughter.  I  say  that  it 
does  not  matter  whether  or  not  you  call  the  man  mad.  Still  you  ought  to 
reflect  why  the  man  laughs.  The  place  is  the  same,  the  scenes  are  the 
same,  the  subject  is  the  same.  But  while  all  other  people  are  laughing 
at  one  time  and  weeping  at  another,  why  does  that  one  man  alone 
constantly  laugh  ?  If  wc  seek  to  know  why  this  is  so,  wc  shall  discover  that 
there  is  only  one  cause  for  the  laughing  and  weeping,  and  it  is  this: 
You  and  I  have  come  to  see  the  play  without  either  knowing  how  to  act  or 
what  acting  is.  But  that  man  has  come  to  it  with  the  full  knowledge  of 
what  atting  is.  To  us  Rama  and  Ravana  appear  as  real,  and  so  wc  make 
a  great  display  of  weeping,  and  so  on.  But  that  man  sees  that  Nflambara 
Cakravarti 1  is  playing  the  part  of  Ravana  and  that  Pitambara  Cakra- 
varti1  is  crying  in  the  part  of  Sita.  What  to  our  eyes  are  Rama  and  Slta 
to  him  are  Nilambara  and  Pitambara,  and  so  he  is  full  of  laughter. 
Wc  become  restless  at  the  sight  of  the  incidents  in  the  play,  but  that  man 
who  sees  what  is  at  the  back  of  them  is  calm.  Wc  are  calling  him  mad, 
but  you  may  be  certain  that  be  is  forgiving  us  on  account  of  our  igno¬ 
rance.  The  man  whom  we  slight  by  repeatedly  referring  to  him  as 
“  that  man,  that  man,”  is  not  mad.  From  the  spiritual  point  of  view, 
he  it  is  who  is  possessed  of  the  highest  wisdom,  and  is  the  crest-gem  of  the 
race  of  devotees.  He  who  knows  that  all  things  on  the  stage  of  Samsara 
are  merely  the  materials  for  the  play  is  not,  on  seeing  the  performance, 
charmed  with  the  acting,  but  is  intoxicated  with  the  blissful  love  of  the 
actor  and  actress  whose  acting  it  is.  Rsis,  though  calm,  are  yet  maddened 


*  “  Monsieur  un  tel.” 


10* 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


by  that  love;  and  so  they  have  told  us  not  to  waste  this  human  birth, 
which  is  so  difficult  of  attainment,  by  thinking  of  the  little  things  of  the 
Samsara,  but  to  think  that  thought  only  which  will  save  us  from  all  further 
thinking.  And,  so  speaking  to  himself,  the  Sadhaka  has  thus  expressed  the 
purpose  of  his  heart: 

“The  time  of  life  (Kala)  is  past,  death  (Kala)  approaches;  let  me 
repair  to  solitude. 

In  deep  seclusion  let  me  sing  the  glory  of  Kalakaminl.” 1 

The  day  upon  which  you  and  I  shall  be  on  their  side,  and  shall 
believe  or  attain  the  fitness  for  believing  their  word,  on  that  day  all 
thinking  will  be  as  an  end.  And  we,  too,  shall  understand  that  the 
Samsara  is  but  a  mock  representation,  and  that  both  the  things  we  see,  as 
well  as  the  people  themselves  who  sec,  arc  She,  the  Brahmamayi,*  full  of 
the  bliss  of  the  mass  of  consciousness  who  has  entered  the  Samsara  as  Jiva, 
and  is  revelling  in  this  joyous  play.  But  because  you  and  1  have  not  eyes 
to  see,  we  say: 

“  What  sort  of  a  play  is  this  of  yours,  O  Mother?  It  is  not  a  play,  but 
the  very  father  of  imprisonment. 

The  first  scene  of  the  play  is  a  gathering  on  the  stage  before  the  actor 
and  actress. 

Here  the  actor  is  nowhere  to  be  found,  so  who  can  find  the  actress? 

With  the  first  act  begins  the  play;  next  the  scenes  of  a  drama 
are  required. 

Here,  be  it  the  first  act  or  the  last,  from  beginning  to  end,  the  drama 
is  full  of  scenes. 

The  scene  in  which  the  son  appears  is  that  in  which  the  father 
disappears. 

Instantly  the  curtain  is  dropped  before  the  eye,  and  then  who  is  the 
son,  and  who  is  the  father?  ” 

You  and  I  have  restless  hearts,  and  so  we  become  disconsolate  with 
weeping.  But  the  very  same  play  raises  waves  of  love  in  the  heart  of  a 
calm  devotee.  Kamalakanta,  the  peaceful  Sadhaka,  has  therefore  sung 
as  follows: 

“  You  know  not,  O  mind,  the  highest  cause 

Syama  *  is  not  always  in  the  form  of  a  woman. 

At  times  assuming  the  colour  of  clouds, 

She  takes  on  the  form  of  a  man. 

With  dishevelled  hair  and  sword  in  hand, 

She  strikes  terror  into  the  hearts  of  the  sons  of  Danu. 


1  Siva’s  spouse. 


*  The  Devi. 


TANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


105 


At  times  She  comes  to  the  dty  of  Vraja,*  and,  playing  on  the  flute, 
captures  the  hearts  of  the  women  of  Vraja. 

At  times,  holding  the  three  gunas,2  She  creates,  preserves,  and  destroys. 

Oh!  She  binds  Herself*  with  her  son  Maya.4 

The  sufferings  of  the  world  She  Herself  endures. 

In  whatsoever  form  one  thinks  of  Her/  in  that  form  She  grants 
one’s  desires. 

In  a  lotus  in  the  lake  of  Kamalakanta’s  heart  She  appears.” 

It  is  for  this,  I  was  saying,  that  in  what  the  Sastra  has  said  there  is 
nothing  to  discuss,  but  there  is  ground  for  faith.  Of  Her  to  whom 
the  Sastra  belongs,  the  Rsis  have  said  that  that  ctcjnal  highest  Vidya,* 
who  is  the  sole  flrst  cause  in  samsara  both  of  bondage  and  liberation,  is 
the  creatrix  of  all  creators.*  The  creative  power  of  none  surpasses  Her 
who  is  the  creatrix  of  all  creators.  Whether  you  and  I  understand  it  or 
not,  the  unfailing  wheel  of  state  of  that  Queen  of  Queens,’  whose  sub¬ 
stance  is  will,  is  sure  to  turn  in  eighty-four  lakhs  of  births  of  the  Jiva. 
Should  you  ever  after  this  ask  why  it  should  be  so,  and  what  is  the  reason 
for  it,  I  shall  not  in  reply  need  to  say  much,  but  will  simply  put  you  this 
question :  What  reason  is  there  which  establishes  that  the  present  birth 
has  at  all  taken  place  ?  At  base  the  reasoning  is  the  same  for  all  births. 
For  reasoning  which  establishes  this  birth  establishes  that  which  follows  it. 
If  one  section  of  a  wheel  turns,  all  sections  turn  at  the  same  time.  This 
is  the  law  of  Her  nature.  From  Brahman,  the  Jiva  who  is  His  avatara 
has  come  into  this  samsara.  There  after  wanderings  and  wanderings,  it 
will  again  assume  the  aspect  of  Brahman  and  be  absorbed  in  the  Para- 
brahman.  This  is  the  natural  law  in  the  world  of  Jivas.  In  our  discourse 
on  the  principles  of  reincarnation,  wc  will  enter  into  a  detailed  explana¬ 
tion  as  to  the  law  under  which,  and  the  process  by  which,  this  will  be 
accomplished. 

Should,  even  after  this,  anyone  say,  “  Everything  ends  with  death. 
Who  will  then  be  bom  again  ?  ”  to  him  also  we  shall  explain  in  that 
discourse  that  he  is  probably  ignorant  of  what  life  and  death  mean.  He 
who  knows  the  nature  of  life  knows  also  that  Jiva  has  no  real  death 
except  that  in  Nirvana.*  What  you  and  I  speak  of  as  death  is  but  the 
death  of  the  mind,  and  not  the  death  of  Jiva.  In  short,  just  as  it  is 
impossible  to  make  a  complete  survey  of  a  life  in  its  various  stages  of 


1  That  is,  in  the  form  of  Kr$na. 

*  That  is,  the  three  “  qualities  ”  which  form  the  substance  of  Prakrti— 
namely,  sattva,  rajas,  tamas  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  §Sstra). 

*  That  is,  in  the  person  of  Jiva.  *  Power  of  illusion. 

*  The  Devi.  *  livari  of  all  Ifvaras.  7  Rajarajrfvari. 

1  When  the  Jiva  ceases  to  exist  u  such. 


106 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


boyhood,  youth,  manhood,  old  age,  and  so  forth,  so  also  it  is  impossible  to 
judge  of  the  justice  or  injustice  of  eighty-four  lakhs  of  births,  or  even  the 
justice  or  injustice  of  any  single  birth — which  forms  but  a  fraction  of  the 
entire  life  of  a  Jiva.  Bhagavan  Ramacandra,  crest-gem  of  the  race  of 
Raghu,1  after  killing  all  RSksasas*  in  Viivamitra’s  yajna,3  threw  Marica 
with  the  force  of  his  arrotVs  to  the  other  side  of  the  sea.  On  hearing  this, 
a  short-sighted,  restless  man  might  easily  form  the  idea  that  Ramacandra 
felt  weak  after  slaying  so  large  a  number  of  Raksasas,  and  thus,  while  able 
with  such  strength  as  he  still  retained  to  throw  Marica  to  a  great  distance 
from  the  seat  of  the  sacrifice,  was  yet  unable  to  kill  him.  But  he  who  has 
read  the  whole  of  the  Ramiiyana  from  the  Ayodhyakapda  to  the  Aranya- 
kanda 4  knows  that  Marica  reappears  in  the  guise  of  a  deer  in  the  forest  of 
Dandaka  at  the  time  of  SIta’s  abduction  and  has  at  the  same  time  under¬ 
stood  whether  Ramacandra  had  strength  or  not.  Bhagavan,  dweller 
in  Vaikunfha,  who  ever  relieves  the  burden  of  earth,  there  incarnated  to 
carry  out  the  work  of  the  Devas — the  killing  of  Ravana.  It  was  because 
he  knew  that  the  work  of  destroying  Ravana  would,  later  on,  have  to  be  ' 
commenced  through  the  same  Marica,  that  Ramacandra,  instead  of 
killing  him,  threw  him  to  the  other  side  of  the  sea.  Had  this  not  been  so, 
no  greater  effort  would  have  been  needed  to  send  Marica  to  the  other 
side  of  the  sea  of  existence 6  than  to  send  him  to  the  other  side  of  the 
salt  sea.  To  understand  the  deep  mysteries  underlying  this  play  of 
Bhagavan,  the  dweller  in  hearts,  it  is  necessary  to  know  the  incidents 
of  the  Aranyakanda;  otherwise  I  should  not  understand  more  than  this — 
that  the  Almighty  had  not  sufficient  strength  in  His  body  to  enable 
Him  to  kill  Marica. 

Similarly,  in  order  to  judge  of  His  justice  or  injustice  towards 
Jiva  in  the  Satya  and  Kali  ages,  I  must  know  the  history  of  all  the 
ages  to  their  final  chapter,  Brahmakaivalya  or  Nirvana.  Then  only 
can  be  considered  the  jusdee  and  injustice  of  the  entire  existence  of 
Jiva.  It  is  therefore  the  height  of  impudence  to  judge  the  justice  of 
Her  who  is  the  eternal  ever-present  truth  by  a  life  of  forty  years’ 
duration.  If  we  are  to  judge  His  justice  upon  the  strength  of  reason¬ 
ing  alone,  why  should  we  not  suppose  that  it  is  the  Sadhakas  of  the  Satya, 
Treta,  and  Dvapara  ages  who  failed  to  acquire  Siddhi  and  have  there¬ 
fore  been  reborn  in  the  Kali  age  through  the  revolution  of  the  wheel 
of  time,  and  the  attraction  of  the  mass  of  their  religious  merits.  This 
mass,  which  is  nearly  ripe,  is  about  to  bear  fruit  through  the  oppor¬ 
tunities  offered  by  place,  time,  and  person.  They,  the  children  of  the 

1  The  solar  race,  celebrated  in  the  Raghuvamsa. 

*  Demons.  *  Sacrifice. 

1  The  titles  of  the  parts  of  the  Ramayana  epic.  1  Bhavaaamudra. 


T ANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


107 


Mother,  will  again  get  up  on  Her  lap.  You  say  that  Siddhi  has  been 
attained  in  one  age,  but  I  sec  that  Siddhi  has  been  attained  in  Kali, 
the  fourth  age,  after  austerities  which  have  extended  over  three  ages. 
The  jack-fruit  which  ripens  in  the  month  of  A$a(Jha  does  not  first  grow  in 
that  month.  It  first  grows  in  winter,  increases  in  spring,  and  matures  in 
summer.  The  bael  fruit  first  grows  in  the  month  of  Caitra.  It  also 
ripens  in  Caitra.  From  this  fact  a  European  eating  the  fruit,  but  who 
had  never  seen  it  growing,  might  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  growth, 
death,  and  final  dissolution  of  a  bael  fruit  all  took  place  in  one  and  the 
same  month;  but  a  descendant  of  the  Aryas  living  in  India  knows  that: 

“  In  the  month  of  Caitra  the  bael  grows 
In  the  month  of  Caitra  it  ripens. 

In  one  Caitra  it  grows, 

But  in  another  Caitra  it  ripens.” 

On  meeting  Sadhakas  1 

You  may  ask,  “  Why,  then,  is  the  number  of  Sadhakas  so  small  in 
the  Kali  age?”  But  I  reply:  “Who  says  that  it  is  small  ?  ”  You  may 
rejoin  that  if  the  number  be  not  small,  why  do  we  not  sec  them  every¬ 
where,  in  every  village,  in  every  city?  I,  however,  say  that  the  popula¬ 
tion  of  a  country  may  be  considered  to  be  small  if  people  are  not  seen 
everywhere  in  it,  but  the  number  of  Sadhakas  cannot  on  similar  grounds 
be  so  considered.  It  has  been  already  stated  that  the  Creatrix  of  the 
universe,  incarnated  as  Daughter,  told  Her  father  that  “one  in  a 
thousand  struggle  for  Siddhi,  and  perhaps  only  one  amongst  such 
thousand  knows  me  in  my  true  aspect.”  The  same  was  said*  to  Aijuna 
by  Bhagavan,  the  Lord  of  Vaikun^ha  on  the  battlefield  of  Kuruksetra. 
She  has  again  said:  “It  is  only  on  attaining  Siddhi  after  many  births 
that  Jiva  reaches  the  highest  station.”  Again:  “Jiva  attains  to  me  only 
upon  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  after  many  births.”  In  the  Niruttara 
Tantra  it  is  said:  “The  root  of  knowledge  is  that  which  relates  to  the 
union  of  Siva  and  Sakti.  Knowledge  of  Sakti  is  acquired  after  many 
births.  O  Devi,  without  a  knowledge  of  Sakti,  Nirvana  can  never  be 
attained.” 

How,  then,  dare  you  and  I  expect  to  sec  crowds  of  travellers  upon  a 
road  on  which  the  Sastra  says  they  are  so  very  scarce.  There  is  a  full 
number  of  Sadhakas  even  should  but  one  man  in  a  hundred  thousand 
become  such.  Wise  men  have  said  that  a  ruby  is  not  to  be  had  in  every 
hill,  and  that  every  elephant’s  head  does  not  contain  a  pearl.  A  saint* 


1  A  Sadhaka  is  he  who  does  sadhana  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Rostra),  a. 
devotee.  *  In  the  Bhagavadgita.  *  Sadhu. 


108 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


is  not  to  be  met  with  everywhere,  and  sandal  does  not  grow  in  every 
forest.  Bhagavan  Sri  Kr?na  told  Uddhava,  crest-gem  of  devotees,  that 
when  a  Muni '  passes  who  is  calm,  free  of  malice,  and  equal  mind  he 
follows  him,  hoping  to  be  sanctified  by  the  touch  of  the  dust  of  his  feet. 
What  impurity  could  attach  to  Him,  the  utterance  of  Whose  name  by  a 
devotee  sanctifies  the  three  worlds,1  so  that  He  should  need  to  purify 
Himself  by  touching  the  dust  of  the  latter’s  feet?  It  was  no  impurity,  but 
intoxication  caused  by  love  for  the  devotee,  which  led  Bhagavan,  in  his 
desire  to  proclaim  his  greatness,  to  lose  Himself,  and  to  show  that,  were  it 
possible  for  Him  to  be  tainted  with  impurity,  even  He  could  regain  purity 
by  touching  the  devotee.  Realize  from  this  how  rare  a  thing  a  true 
devotee  is.  Another  Sastra  has  said:  “As  a  cow  runs  after  its  calf,  so 
Siva  and  Gauri  *  run  after  him  who  repeats,  ‘  Mahadcva,1 * *  Mahadeva, 
Mahadcva’.”  Why,  what  reason  has  the  consort  of  Bhavani,5 * *  the 
Creator  of  all,  the  shade  of  Whose  feet  supports  the  Brahmanda,  to  run 
after  His  devotees  ?  The  necessity  was  none  other  than  that  of  showing 
that  where  there  is  a  devotee  there  He  Himself  is. 

It  is  said  in  the  Tantra  that  “  all  admit  that  the  places  of  pilgrimage* 
are  the  cause  of  purity.  But,  O  Girija,’  in  very  truth,  I  say  that  it  is  the 
Sadhaka  of  the  Kulacara 8 *  rite  who  gives  purity  even  to  all  such  places  of 
pilgrimage.  Blessed  is  the  mother*  of  a  Kaula! 10  Blessed  arc  his  father 
and  kinsmen  and  relatives!  Blessed  are  those  who  have  conversed  with 
him !  In  heaven  the  ancestors  of  a  master  of  Kula 11 * * * * * *  sing:  *  In  our  race  will 
be  bom  a  master  of  Kula.’  ”  In  the  Utpatti  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Devi, 
wherever  a  Vira 18  or  a  Divya  u  resides,  there  also  arc  all  the  sacred 


1 A  sage  or  saint.  Uddhava,  son  of  Devabhaga,  was  versed  in  Yogi. 

1  The  earth,  the  upper  and  nether  worlds. 

*  A  name  of  Devi  as  spouse  of  Siva. 

*  “  The  great  God  ”  Siva.  In  the  Astamurti,  Siva  is  so  called  in  his  form 
of  the  moon. 

*  A  name  of  the  Devi  as  spouse  of  Bhava  (Siva). 

•Tirtha,  holy  shrines,  such  as  Gaya,  or  the  temple  of  Juggemath  at  Puri, 
with  which  India  is  studded. 

I  Daughter  of  the  mountain — a  title  of  the  Devi  as  daughter  of  the  Mountain 
King. 

8  The  way  of  the  Kaulas,  one  of  the  divisions  of  Tantrik  worshippers. 

8  The  mother  is  always,  by  way  of  honour,  placed  first  and  before  the 

father.  19  One  who  follows  Kulacara  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  tiirtm). 

II  One  who  is  versed  in  Kulacara. 

11  Men  are  by  the  Tantras  divided  into  three  classes  or  temperaments: 

Paiu  (“  animal  ”),  in  whom  the  dark,  inert  quality  (Gupa)  of  tamas  predomi¬ 

nates  and  who  is  bound  by  the  bonds;  Vira  (hero),  or  those  in  whom  the  active 

quality  (rajas)  prevails ;  and  divya  (celestial),  in  whom  the  pure  (Sattva)  quality 

prevails.  Worship  varies,  and  is  adapted  to  the  temperament  of  the  worshipper 

(see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra).  18  See  post. 


T ANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


109 


shrines.'  O  Thou  who  art  desired  of  the  Vira,  there  is  no  doubt  that  a 
VIra,  though  having  a  human  body,  is  in  flesh  and  blood  a  Devata  "  and 
Siva  Himself.  O  Devi,  what  fear  can  he  have  who  lives  where  a  Vira 
lives,  and  under  his  protection?  The  protection  of  a  worldly1 * *  Vira 
relieves  us  of  worldly  fear,  but  the  protection  of  the  spiritual 4  Vira 
relieves  one  of  the  fear  of  famine,  disease,  the  king,  and  death.  It  relieves 
of  the  three  forms  of  fear — namely,  that  which  arises  from  troubles  of  the 
body,  senses,  and  mind,3 *  from  external  material  objects  *  and  from  all 
superhuman  beings.”  7 * * 

In  the  Kularnava  Tantra  *  it  is  said : 

“  My  beloved,  in  all  the  world  the  sight  of  a  Kulacarya  *  is  indeed 
rare,  and  is  only  obtained  after  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  a  vast  heap  of 
religious  merit.”  Should  even  a  Candida  10  or  a  person  of  still  lower  caste 
become  attached  to  Kuladharma,"  then  the  very  memory  of  him,  the 
recitation  of  his  name  and  qualities,  the  singing  of  his  praises,  sight  of, 
and  talk  with  him  purifies  a  Jiva.  “  O  noble  lady,  you  and  I  for  ever 
reside  there  where  he  who  has  a  knowledge  of  Kulacara  lives.  It  is  not 
on  Mount  Kailasa,'*  Sumeru,11 * *  or  Mandara 14 *  that  I  always  live.  I  ever 
abide  there  where  Sadhakas  versed  in  Kulatattva  14  arc.”  (The  meaning 
of  this  is  that  He  would  rather  abandon  his  abode  on  these  mountains 
than  the  companionship  of  Kaulikas.16  The  devoted  Sadhaka  will  know 
from  this  which  is  the  greater — the  glory  of  Mount  Kailasa  or  that  of  a 
Kaula.)  “  The  place  where  a  great  Tantrika 17  lives  should  be  visited  and 
seen  with  care,  even  if  it  should  be  remoter  than  the  remote,  for  you  and 
I  live  in  joy  there.” 

The  meaning  of  this  is:  It  may  be  asked  why  one  should  take  so 
much  trouble  to  see  a  man.  Lest  such  an  evil  notion  should  seize  the 
naturally  weak  heart  of  man,  Bhagavan  has  clearly  given  us  to  understand 

1  Tirtha,  see  ante. 

I  Deva.  The  Vira  here  referred  to  is  the  Siddha  Vira. 

*  Laukika,  or  hero  in  the  ordinary  English  sense. 

4  Paramarthika.  B  Adhyatroika. 

6  Adhibhautika — e.g.,  fear  of  injury  from  the  elements  or  other  men. 

7  Adhidaivika,  such  as  Devas,  ghosts,  demons,  etc. 

8  Chap.  ix.  *  Master  of  Kaula  doctrine. 

10  One  of  the  lowest  castes,  rag-pickcrs,  cleaners  of  privies,  etc. 

II  The  Dharma  or  doctrine  of  the  Kaulas,  a  division  ofTantrik  worshippers. 

12  The  paradise  of  Siva. 

11  Vide  ante,  and  chap,  ii,  Vispu  Puraija.  The  Devi  is  Merunilaya  (residing 

on  Mount  Meru)  (Lalita  S.,  v.  i48).  The  Sricakra  has,  it  is  said,  three  aspects 

— Bhumi,  Kailaia,  Meru;  the  last  being  when  it  is  identified  with  the  sixteen 

Nitya  Deities. 

“  Used  as  a  staff  to  churn  the  Ocean  for  Amfta. 

« Kaula  knowledge.  18  Kaulas.  17  Mahapuruja. 


1 1 0  PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 

that  wc  should  not  desist  from  visiting  a  Kulasadhaka,  considering  him  to 
he  a  mere  man.  It  is  not  a  human  body  that  the  Kaulika  possesses.  The 
Siva  Sakti  aspect ’  is  that  of  which  the  Kaulikas  arc  worshippers,  and  is 
that  which  the  world  is  so  eager  to  behold.  In  that  aspect  Siva  and  Sakti 
unite  and,  as  Ardhanarisvara,’  live  in  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  joy  in  the 
body  of  the  Kulasadhaka.  To  see  him,  therefore,  is  the  same  as  seeing 
Their  undivided  and  united  form. 

“  If  a  Guru  of  Kulatattva  lives  even  afar,  visit  him,  but  not  a  pasu,1 * * * * * 
even  if  he  be  near.”  By  the  term  “  Kaulika,”  worshippers  should 
understand  a  Sadhaka  of  Kulacara,*  the  characteristics  of  which  we  shall 
explain  in  our  discourse  on  Acaralattva.  By  Pa£u  is  meant  a  person  bound 
by  the  eight  fetters  of  shame,  etc.*  “  Sacred  is  the  land  in  which  a 
master  of  Kula  is  born.  By  seeing  and  honouring  a  Kaulika  one  gives 
deliverance  to  thrice  seven  generations.” 

“  Seeing  a  master  of  Kula  born  in  their  family  and  living  in  their 
house,  his  ancestors  in  heaven  say,  ‘  At  length  we  shall  obtain  the  highest 
abode.*  As  cultivators  with  craving  eyes  pray  for  rain,  so  the  ancestors 
in  heaven  pray  with  eager  hearts  that  a  son  or  grandson  of  their  family 
may  be  initiated  in  the  truths  of  Kula  doctrine.  Then  blessed  will  that 
sinless  great  man  be  in  Samsara.” 

“  Beloved  after  death,  masters  in  Kula  joyfully  come  to  me.  When  a 
great  Kaulika  comes  to  the  Kaulika  house,*  Yoginis,7 8  with  Yogis,  come  to 
sec  and  welcome  him.”  “  Even  Pitrs  and  Dcvatas  seek  the  protection  and 
pay  homage  to  the  great  Kaula  Yogi.  And  for  this  great  men  devoted  to 
the  knowledge  of  Kula  should  be  honoured  and  worshipped.” 

“  Dcvl,  such  sinful  men  as  after  the  adoration  of  Thyself  fail  to 
worship  Thy  devotees  never  win  favour  of  Thee.” 

“  When  Sadhakas  place  the  Naivcdya  *  before  me,  I  accept  it  by  sight 
only.  But,  O  lotus  eyed,  I  eat  it  by  the  mouths  of  the  saintly  devotees.” 

“Devi,  there  is  no  doubt  that  if  one  worships  Thy  devotee  he 
worships  Me,  so  that  he  who  would  do  that  which  is  pleasing  to  Me 
adores  Thy  devotees  only.” 

1  Murti,  or  form.  *  The  bisexual  form  of  Tsvara. 

1  Vide  anti,  See  post.  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastta. 

*One  and  the  highest  division  of  Tantrik  worshippers,  whose  way  oflife 

(acira)  is  according  to  Kula  doctrine. 

*  See  ibid.  The  reference  is  to  the  classification  of  the  Kulamava  Tantra. 

The  “  afflictions  ”  which  are  variously  numbered,  are  given  as  five  in 
the  Linga  Purana.  The  Devi  Bhag.  Pr.  says:  “  In  the  knower  of  truth  they 
sleep.  In  the  Yogis  they  are  burned  up.  In  those  attached  to  the  world  they 
arise  unimpeded.” 

*  That  js,  to  Siva’s  abode.  7  Female  yogis. 

8  A  foil  plate  of  offerings  to  the  Deva,  consisting  of  rice,  ghee,  vegetables, 
honey,  etc. 


TANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


111 


“  Whatever  is  done  in  the  name  of  Kula  disciples  is  done  in  the  name 
of  Deva.  All  Dcvatas  love  Kula.  Therefore  should  Kaulikas  be 
worshipped.” 

“  Parvatl,  even  if  in  any  other  place,'  I  am  worshipped  with  great 
reverence,  I  am  not  so  well  pleased  as  when  a  great  Kaulika  is  worshipped.” 

“  The  fruit  which  he  cannot  obtain  even  by  pilgrimage,  austerities,* 
gifts,  sacrifices,*  and  voluntary  religious  practices,*  that  the  JIva  can 
obtain  by  the  worship  of  a  Kaulika.  O,  Ambika,*  even  if  a  Kaulika 
(not  to  speak  of  any  other)  dishonours  a  master  of  Kaula,  all  his  gifts, 
sacrifices,  homas,*  austerities,  worship,  and  recitation  of  mantra’  are 
of  no  avail.” 

As  a  reward  for  what  religious  merit  can  worldly  creatures  like  you 
and  I  expect  to  meet  those  unworldly  great  men  whose  greatness 
the  Sastras  have  declared  by  lakhs  of  such  evidence?  To  what  hill,  to 
what  forest  hermitage,  to  what  great  cremation  ground,  to  what  great 
shrine"  have  wc  been?  In  what  Muni’s  hermitage,"  in  what  saint’s 10 
humble  abode,  in  what  Dandi’s  "  matha,1 * * * * **  in  what  Brahmacari’s  13  abode 
have  we  sought  protection?  What  mantra  have  wc  recited  according 
to  the  rules  of  Japa?11  What  Devata  have  we  worshipped?  In  what 
Vrata  “  have  wc  been  initiated?  Along  what  path  have  we  advanced? 
Restraint  of  mind  and  body,  contentment,  forbearance,  medita¬ 
tion,  concentration  of  thought  and  process  towards  ecstatic  contem¬ 
plation  “ — which  of  these  have  wc  practised?  Listening,'7  thinking,13 
and  constant  meditation,13  which  of  these  have  we  done?  Of  discrimi¬ 
nation,10  dispassion,”  what  have  wc  understood  ?  In  the  name  of  Dharraa 
open  your  heart  and  say,  brother,  what  have  we  done  to  deserve  to  meet 
the  saintly  Sadhakas  whom  even  Dev  as  rarely  meet  ?  You  will  say,  maybe, 
we  have  not  done  anything,  but  still  wc  honour  and  revere  them,  bow 
to  them,  and  anxiously  pray  to  meet  them.  That  is  not  altogether 
untrue.  We  pray  in  our  minds,  but  what  of  our  actions?  Had  we 
acted,  we  should  not  have  remained  satisfied  with  mere  prayer,  but 


1  That  is,  than  in  the  person  of  a  great  Kaulika. 

“Tapasya  {see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdslra).  3  YajBa  (ibid.). 

*  Vrata  (ibid.).  Voluntary,  as  distinguished  from  those  which  are  obligatory 

(Nitya). 

"Mother,  title  of  the  Devi  (see  port). 

•  The  sacrifice  made  by  pouring  clarified  butter  into  fire. 

7  Japa  (see  ibid.).  *  Mahapijha.  “  See  post. 

10  Sadhu.  11 A  class  of  ascetics.  '*  Monastic  institution. 

13  Celibate  ascetic.  14  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra.  13  Ibid. 

14  Samadhi.  17  Sravana.  13  Manana. 

"  Nididhyasana.  “  That  is,  between  the  real  and  the  unreal. 

“  Vairagya:  unattachment  to  worldly  things. 


112 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


we  should  have  run  with  passionate  hearts  without  looking  at  the 
path,  and  having  found  him,  we  would  have  prostrated  ourselves  and 
clasped  his  feet,  and  said:  “  Lord,  I  have  made  no  provision.  How 
shall  I  be  saved?  ”  Say  truly,  O  brother,  has  anyone’s  heart  wept 
in  this  fashion?  If  it  had,  it  would  not  have  had  to  weep  any  more. 
The  pious  poet  DaSarathi  Ray  has,  on  the  subject  of  the  coining 1  of 
the  Mother  of  the  world,2  said: 

“  My  child,  the  mother  says,  you  will  come  to  know, 

You  will  no  longer  have  to  weep. 

Incessant  tears  have  brought  an  end  to  weeping. 

The  child  who  clings  to  and  calls  ‘  mother/ 

That  child  holds  the  mother  fast. 

The  mother  is  ashamed  to  let  it  weep. 

Mother  does  not  care  for  the  children  who  mix  with  others 
And  go  about  laughing  and  playing. 

She  does  not  go  to  them  and  easily  obtains  leisure. 

And  takes  the  child  who  weeps  on  her  lap.” 

O  Thou  who  art  full  of  mercy  for  the  poor,  tell  me,  O  Mother, 
when  will  the  day  come  for  Thy  Sadhaka,  when  I  shall  weep  as  I  ought 
to  weep  for  Thee,  the  day  on  which  Thou  wilt  come  and  say :  “  No  longer 
weep.  Incessant  tears  have  brought  an  end  to  weeping  ?  ” 

A  patient  in  delirium  suffering  from  Sannipatika  fever*  feels  no 
sorrow.  Hari,  Hari/  shall  we  leam  to  weep?  If,  when  we  arc  at 
worldy  work,  anyone  should  happen  to  stand  before  us  in  the  dress  of 
a  Sadhaka  we  instantly  leave  the  work,  and  with  all  the  frown  and  fury  at 
our  command,  expel  him  from  our  house  and  then  find  peace.  Being 
such  as  we  arc,  will  our  sinful  hearts  weep  to  obtain  Sadhakas,  instead  of 
weeping  for  Hell.  O  thou  Dweller  in  the  Heart!  O  thou  Saviour!  Dost 
thou  know,  O  Mother,  how  long  it  wilt  be  before  we  arc  delivered  of  this 
sin?  With  a  heart  such  that  the  very  attempt  to  speak  of  it  makes  me  fear 
because  of  the  fearful  visions  of  sin  which  it  raises  before  my  eyes,  I  am 
prepared  to  dishonour  Sastra,  Sadhu,  and  Dharma.  With  such  a  heart 
again  I  proceed  to  meet  Sadhus.  How  great  is  my  shamelessness!  To  say 
that  were  there  living  any  saintly  Sadhaka,  he  would  surely  one  day 
or  other  meet  me  in  my  house,  argues  great  vanity  on  my  part.  What  a 
ridiculous  display  of  impudent  presumption!6  Why,  what  Indras, 
Candras,  Vayus  or  Varunas,  have  you  and  I  become  that  we  should 
meet  Sadhakas  without  having  to  stir  from  our  houses?  You  will  say,  you 

1  Agamanl.  1  jagadamba,  a  title  of  the  Devi. 

*  A  violent  fever,  said  to  affect  the  blood  and  produce  delirium. 

♦Name  of  Vijnu. 

*  Dev  as  of  the  firmament,  moon,  wind,  and  water. 


TANTRA  SCRIPTURE 


113 

have  learning,  wealth,  and  a  following.  You  have.  But  what  is  that  to 
the  Sadhaka?  It  is  our  mistake  which  leads  us  to  tell  him  we  have  leant* 
ing.  Shall  I  speak  of  learning  to  him  who,  through  the  grace  of  Malta* 
vidya,  holds  the  eight  forms  of  Siddhi 1 * * 4  in  the  palm  of  his  hand  ?  Shall  I 
boast  of  my  wealth  to  those  who,  possessing  the  priceless  wealth  of  the  feet 
of  Tara,’  consider  even  the  position  of  an  Indra  as  of  no  worth  ?  I  want  to 
show  the  strength  of  my  following  to  the  son  of  that  Mother,  Creatrix  of 
all.  Whose  very  glance  commands  the  service  of  everyone  from  Sankara  * 
Himself  to  the  molecules  and  atoms  of  the  Brahmanda!  How  mighty  is 
the  strength  of  my  intellect!  And  even  should  we,  whilst  sitting  at  home, 
or  going  to  places  of  pilgrimage,  or  moving  about  cremation  grounds  or 
places  of  execution,  ever  come  across  Sadhakas  arc  v*e  able  to  recognize 
them?  Have  we  come  to  know  Devata  because  He  is  installed  in  every 
house  ?  *  When,  after  killing  Hiranyakaripu,  Bhagavan  Nrsimhadcva 1 
wished  to  grant  a  boon  to  Prahlada,*  crest-gem  of  devotees,  the  latter  at 
once  said :  “  As  worldly  persons  who  are  unable  to  discriminate  the 
unreal  from  the  real,  form  lasting  attachments  to  wife,  children,  and  other 
things,  so  often  as  they  willingly  or  unwillingly  constantly  think  of  them, 
so  may  I  constantly  remember  Thee.  May  my  love  for  Thee  never 
forsake  me.”  Bhagavan,  the  abode  of  the  supreme  love,  was  then  stand¬ 
ing  in  a  visible  form  before  him,  but  yet  Prahlada  did  not  say :  “  I  want 
Thee.”  Without  seeking  Bhagavan  himself,  he  prayed  that  he  might 
have  devotion  towards  Him.  For,  Prahlada,  the  crest-gem  of  those  who 
have  true  knowledge,'  knew  that  the  presence  of  Bhagavan  was  not  rare, 
since  He  pervades  the  universe.  He  knew,  however,  that  what  is  rare  is 
devotion  to  His  feet.  To  him  who  desires  to  possess  devotion,  the  pre¬ 
sence  or  absence  of  Bhagavan  are  the  same,  since  there  can  be  no 
realization  of  Bhagavan  without  piety.  But  if  a  man  have  devotion, 
Bhagavan,  even  though  he  were  at  a  distance  of  hundred  crore  of  yojanas  * 
must  appear  before  him  wherever,  and  in  whatsoever  form,  he  desires. 
Just  as  the  water  of  a  river  when  mingling  with  the  sea  cannot  be 
distinguished  from  it,  so  the  existence  of  a  devotee  mingling  with 


1  The  eight  great  powers,  as  to  which  sec  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 

1  One  of  the  ten  great  forms  (Dasa  Mahavidya)  of  the  Dew  (see  Daia 
MahSvidya,  Upas  an  a  Rahasya,  by  Pro*  anna  Kumar  Sastri). 

1  Siva. 

4  Referring  to  the  image  (Pratima)  installed  in  Hindu  households. 

8  Vi$xju  in  his  man-lion  incarnation,  undertaken  for  the  destruction  of  the 
atheist  Hirapyakaripu,  who  had  cruelly  tortured  his  son  Prahlada  because  the 
latter  was  a  devotee  of  Visnu. 

•  For  his  great  devotion  to  the  Deva, 

’  literally,  persons  proficient  in  tattva. 

*  A  crore  is  10,000,000,  and  a  yojana  is  about  eight  mile*. 

B 


114 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Bhagavan  cannot  be  distinguished  from  Him-  Just  as  the  rare  presence  of 
Bhagavan  is  obtained  through  devotion,  so  pious  men  too,  though  rare  in 
every  place,  are  subject  to  control  by  love.  Again,  just  as  through  want 
of  piety  we  are  a  hundred  yojanas  from  the  presence  of  Bhagavan,  though 
he  is  always  before  us,  so  we  are  unable  to  discern  the  real  self  of  a  saintly 
Sadhaka,  a  devotee  of  Bhagavan,  even  if  we  meet  him.  We  see  with  our 
physical  eyes,  but  our  eyes  of  wisdom  are  ever  blind.  The  Tantra 
Sastra  has  said  that  he  alone  is  dear  to  the  Mother  of  the  world,1  whose 
heart  naturally  rejoices  with  love  at  the  sight  of  Kulasadhakas,*  in  the 
same  way  as  the  heart  naturally  rejoices  at  the  sight  of  wife,  children,  and 
friends. 

Now,  to  speak  truly,  do  I  look  at  Sadhakas  with  eyes  open  with  such 
joy  and  softened  with  such  love?  If  I  did,  how  could  my  heart  forsake 
their  company  and  be  charmed  by  that  of  kith  and  kin?  And  why  does 
my  heart  long  for  the  latter  even  after  I  have  seen  a  Sadhu?  The  reason 
is,  that  a  saint  is  saintly,  but  my  vision  is  unsaintly,'  and  is  therefore  a 
hindrance  instead  of  being  a  help  towards  meeting  Sadhakas.  Say  now, 
is  it  not  a  great  sin  to  think  that  there  arc  no  Sadhakas  merely  because  we 
do  not  see  them  in  every  city  or  village?  Whether  we  see  them  or  not, 
do  not  widen  your  own  path  to  Hell  by  saying  that  there  are  no  Sadhakas 
in  the  world.  Do  not  also  be  astounded  to  hear  that  in  the  Kali  age 
Sadhakas  who  follow  the  Tantrik  form  of  worship  attain  Siddhi  in  one 
lifetime.  At  the  very  moment  when  you  and  I  arc  virulently  criticising 
the  subject  of  Sadhakas,  be  sure  that  at  that  moment  hundreds  of 
Sadhakas  in  the  boundless  kingdom  of  the  universe  are  making  their  births 
blessed,  their  lives  blessed,  and  the  world  blessed  by  clasping  to  their 
hearts  the  feet  of  Her  who  gives  success  to  all  purposes.  Blcsscij  are  we 
who,  being  born  in  Bharatavarsa,4  made  holy  by  the  touch  of  their  feet, 
are  able  to  gratify  ourselves  by  the  taking  of  their  names. 


1  JagadambS.  *  Worshippers  according  to  Kulacara. 

1 A  Sadhu  is  Sadhu,  but  the  vision  is  Asidhu. 

4  India. 


CHAPTER  II 

WHAT  IS  THE  NECESSITY  FOR  THE  TANTRAS 
WHEN  THERE  IS  THE  VEDA? 

Now  we  come  to  the  doubt  we  have  mentioned — namely:  “Why,  seeing 
that  there  is  the  Veda,  was  the  Tantra  Sastra  created  ?  ”  In  the  first  place, 
we  object  to  the  objection  itself.  The  question  why  the  Tantra  &  Astra 
was  created  comes  next.  We  ask  why  this  question  has  arisen?  Perhaps 
the  modem  educated  community  of  fastidious  critics  will  be  astonished  to 
hear  us  ask  this  question.  The  reason  for  their  astonishment  lies  in  our 
assertion  that  it  is  not  possible  that  the  Sastra  should  be  created.  The 
Sastra  in  our  opinion  is  an  eternal  thing.  I  know  that  you  will  probably 
say:  “  What  orthodoxy !  what  blindness!  what  shocking  superstition !  ”  It 
does  not  matter  if  you  do.  Just  as  it  is  blind  faith  to  be  partial  to 
one  side  without  heeding  the  reasons  which  really  exist  in  favour  of  the 
other,  so  it  is  scepticism  to  rely  on  mistaken  inferences  in  total  disregard  of 
the  reasons  which  exist  against  them.  In  your  opinion  it  is  orthodoxy  to 
speak  of  the  Sastra  as  an  unerring  and  eternal  thing,  but  in  mine  it 
is  scepticism  to  deny  it.  We  shall  therefore  at  once  proceed  to  investigate 
that  which,  if  disregarded,  is  scepticism,  and  if  regarded,  is  orthodoxy. 

In  the  first  place  the  root  and  cause  of  dispute  is  that,  while 
in  your  opinion  the  Sastra  was  prepared  after  a  view  of  the 
world  and  in  accordance  with  it,  in  my  opinion  the  world  was 
constructed  on  a  view  of  the  S Astra  and  in  accordance  with  it. 
Consequently,  while  in  your  opinion  man  is  the  author  of  the  Sastra, 
in  mine  the  Sastra  has  no  author  but  only  revealers — namely,  Brahma, 
Vi$nu,  and  Maheivara,'  and  after  them  the  succession  of  Rsis. 
To  this  perhaps  the  philosophic  Pandits  of  our  own  country  will  take  some 
exception.  For  they  not  improbably  have  heard,  or  read  in  the  Veda, 
that  the  Veda,*  Vedahga,3  and  Vedanta  4  all  emanated  from  the  mouth  of 


1  Siva. 

8  The  scriptures  of  the  Hindus — Rg,  Yajur,  SSroa,  and  Atharva  Vedas.  It 
has  been  said  that  the  Tantra  is  a  fifth  Veda.  *  See  post. 

‘Doctrine  of  the  Vedas  (Upanijadg):  the  subject  of  the  philosophy 
(dariana)  so  named. 


116 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


ParameSvara  Himself.  We  do  not  deny  this,  but  would  point  out  that 
the  very  Veda  which  they  know  to  be  the  language  of  ParameSvara  has 
been  described  to  be  Brahman  Itself  by  its  Revealers,  those  three  most 
worshipful  Dev  as. 

In  the  Vi'hannlla  Tantra 1  it  is  said: 

“  Daughter  of  the  mountain !  know  the  Veda  to  be  Brahman  Itself. 
The  Veda  has  no  author,  but  is  self-manifested.  Of  yore  the  Veda  was 
sung  by  Bhagavan  to  Svayambhu  Brahma.1  From  Mahadeva  Himself 
to  the  Rsis  all  are,  age  after  age,  the  remembrancers  of  the  Veda,  but 
none  is  its  author.” 

The  Sastra  says  that  the  Rg  Veda  and  other  Vedas  came  out  with 
the  breath  of  Brihma.  Many  consider  this  to  be  strong  evidence  of 
Parameivara’s  authorship  of  the  Veda.  But  it  is  not  that,  but  evidence  of 
the  revelation  of  the  Veda.  Because  the  Veda  was  breathed  out  by 
Brahma,  it  does  not  follow  that  He  was  its  author,  for  no  one  is  the  author 
of  his  own  breath.  We  arc  simply  instruments  of  inspiration.  None  of  us 
is  their  creator.  For  he  who  can  create  breath  is  indestructible  even  in 
the  great  dissolution  of  things.*  Brahma’s  body,  unlike  our  own,  is  not 
made  of  gross  matter  consisting  of  the  five  elements.  That  body  of  His  is 
all  Himself,  full  of  the  play  of  eternal  consciousness.  It  is  some  particular 
part  of  Himself  which  has  emanated  from  Him  as  Veda  in  the  form  of 
breath.  This  is  why  the  Sastra  has  said:  “  Daughter  of  the  mountain, 
know  the  Veda  to  be  Brahma  Himself.” 

Bhagavan,  though  capable  of  creating  all  things,  is  incapable  of 
creating  another  like  Himself— that  is,  something  which  is  not  Him  but  is 
yet  similar  to  Him.  Rama,  Krsna,  Gaiiga,  Visnu,  Durga,  Kali,  whomso¬ 
ever  you  may  mention,  all  are  Himself.  You  cannot  point  to  anyone  who 
is  different  from,  and  yet  is  like,  Him.  Had  there  been,  or  could  have 
been,  another  like  Him,  he  would  never  have  been  sole  Mistress®  without 
a  second.*  As  I  can  only  appear  and  disappear  with  my  own  selfncss, 
but  cannot  create  another  like  myself,  so  Brahma,  too,  cannot  create  the 
Veda,  which  is  but  another  aspect  of  Himself.  He  merely  reveals  the 
Veda  as  His  expiration  at  the  beginning  of  creation,  and  withdraws  it  as 
His  inspiration  at  the  time  of  the  great  dissolution.  The  Sastra  has 
therefore  said:  “  In  respect  of  the  sayings  of  a  man,  it  is  permissible  to 
inquire  whether  there  be  error  or  not,  but  in  the  case  of  the  Veda,  as  it  has 
no  author,  the  question  of  error  docs  not  arise  at  all.” 

Here  someone  may  say  that,  if  that  be  so,  ParameSvara’sJcreation 
itself  is  an  impossibility,  for  if  you  and  I,  and  every  other  Jiva  are  all  He, 


1  See  also  Rudra  Yamala,  chap.  iv.  *  The  self-born. 

*  Siva.  *  Mahapralaya. 

5  Adhiivari.  *  Advitlya. 


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  TANTRAS 


117 


-whom  then  does  He  create?  If,  however,  creation  by  Brahma  becomes 
impossible,  we  are  not  at  all  afraid.  Why  should  the  descendants  of 
Ary  as  be  astonished  to  hear  that  “  there  is  no  creation,”  when  all  their 
Sastras  freely  say  that,  in  a  real  spiritual  sense,  there  is  no  creation, 
preservation  and  destruction  by  Brahma,  all  such  being  a  mere  illusive 
display?  As  a  matter  of  fact,  although  in  a  real  sense  there  is  no  creation, 
yet  for  us  Jivas  subject  to  Maya,  of  which  we  are  the  product,  creation 
undoubtedly  exists.  But  the  Veda  was  not  created  even  in  the  sense  of 
that  which  we  call  creation.  Just  as  Rama,  Kr$na,  and  the  other  incar¬ 
nations  are  the  eternal  Brahman,  so  is  the  Veda.  Just  as  It,  although 
self-manifest,  manifested  Itself  in  the  womb  of  KauSalya*  or  Devaki3  by 
means  of  its  Maya;  so  also  the  Veda,  though  self-iflanifest,  appeared  in 
the  heart  of  Bhagavan,  and  came  out  with  His  breath  at  the  will  of  Her 
whose  very  substance  is  will.  The  Vedas,  Puranas,  Tantras,  and  other 
Sastras,  are  self-manifest  and  self-evident.  Language,  which  is  the  gross 
form  of  sound,  is  its  own  author.*  It  matters  very  little  if  at  the  first 
hearing  these  things  seem  impossible.  In  our  discussion  as  to  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  Mantra,  we  shall  proceed  to  decide  this  point  according  to  the 
Sastras.  For  the  moment  the  Sadhaka  will  excuse  me  a  few  intervening 
Chapters. 

Here  let  us  understand  what  harm  will  result  if  the  Dharma  Sastra  of 
the  Ary  as  is  supposed  to  be  of  human  origin.  What  is  that  defect  for 
fear  of  which  it  has  been  declared  to  be  self-manifest  and  emanent  with 
the  breath  of  I  $  vara?  We  reply  not  for  fear  of  any  defect.  The  Veda  is 
called  self-manifest  because  it  is  so.  It  is  not  for  fear  of  darkness  that  we 
admit  the  fact  that  light  gives  lustre.  Whether  darkness  be  present  or  not, 
it  is  foR  ever  evident  that  a  light  is  self-manifest.  That  which  cannot  be 
manifested  by  another,  but  which  itself  makes  manifest  all  things,  is  called 
self-manifest.  The  Sastra  says:  “There  is  no  need  to  sweeten  by  means 
of  something  else  a  thing  which  is  sweet  by  nature,  and  which  imparts 
sweetness  to  things  which  are  not  sweet,  nor  is  there  anything  which  can 
impart  sweetness  to  that  which  is  naturally  sweet.  We  sweeten  things  like 
milk,  cream  and  curd  with  gur,*  sugar-candy,  honey  and  the  like.  But 
there  is  no  need  to  sweeten  honey  in  a  similar  way;  nor  is  there  anything 
in  the  world  which  can  sweeten  honey.  We  reveal  the  courtyard  and 
interior  of  a  house,  and  all  things  in  it  by  a  light.  But  to  reveal  that 
light  another  is  not  required.  The  light  reveals  itself,  and  is  therefore 
called  self-manifest.  Light  alone  of  all  things  in  the  world  possesses  the 
power  to  reveal.  Light  is  itself  luminous;  what  else,  then,  can  reveal  it? 
Like  honey  and  light,  the  Veda  also  is  self-manifest.  The  Veda  reveals 

1  Mother  of  Rama.  *  Mother  of  Kr$na. 

*  That  is  sound  in  the  subtle  state  and  which  exists  in  gross  form  as  speech 
(Vaikhari)  is  uncreated.  *  Molasses. 


118  PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 

the  principles  of  all  things  in  the  Brahmaijda,  but  is  itself  its  own  revealer. 
Who  can  reveal  that  which  reveals  all?  It  is  not  possible  to  have  some¬ 
thing  which  is  beyond  everything.  Even  if  for  fear  that  there  may  be 
darkness  we  do  not  admit  the  existence  of  light,  yet  light,  revealing  itself, 
makes  visible  and  thus  destroys  darkness.  Similarly,  if  for  fear  of  any 
imperfection  we  do  not  admit  that  the  Sastra  is  self-manifest,  yet  the 
Sastra,  revealing  itself,  makes  plain  and  thus  removes  the  imperfection. 
That  imperfection  is  this :  Aryan  philosophers  have  said :  “  What  is  free 
from  mistake,  error,  and  deceit,  that  is  authoritative.” 1  Sastras  are 
authoritative  sayings — that  is,  the  sayings  of  Sastra  are  free  from  mistake, 
error,  and  deceit.  When  we  hear  it  said  that  man  is  the  author  of 
Dharma  Sastra,  it*  seems  to  us  as  if  light  and  darkness  were  holding  a 
consultation.  It  is  evident  that  while  man  is  erring,  Sastra  is  unerring. 
Sastra  never  makes  a  mistake.  Man  is  always  doing  so.  Sastra  is  the 
eternal  seat  of  mercy.  Man  the  source  of  deceit.  Sastra  has  no  beginning 
or  end,  Man  is  ever  subject  to  birth  and  death.  Man  is  the  slave  of  his 
senses.  Sastra  guides  to  the  supcrscnsual.  Sastra  is  the  unselfish  Guru  * 
of  the  world.  Man  is  a  very  worm  of  selfishness.  It  is  a  baseless  fancy 
to  try  to  bring  about  an  agreement  between  these  mutually  conflicting 
conditions. 

Many,  made  restless  by  the  inconstant  waves  of  glittering  physical  science, 
are  wont  to  say  that  Sastra  is  nothing  but  the  outcome  and  evidence  of 
extensive  experience.  Someone,  it  is  supposed,  has  said,  or  written  down, 
as  much  as  he  has  seen.  From  this  it  follows  that  whether  the  principles 
contained  in  Sastra  be  true  or  not,  great  credit  must  be  given  to  him  who 
spoke  it.  We,  too,  arc  not  niggardly  in  giving  such  credit,  but  wc  find  it 
very  difficult  to  give  credit  to  another  whilst  going  to  perditiofi  oneself. 
You  yourself  arc  blind,  and  will,  by  leading  me  along  some  thorny  path 
which  you  have  discovered,  drown  me  in  a  dark  well.  It  is  the  height  of 
folly  to  expect  that  in  this  state  of  things  I  shall  speak  of  your  extensive 
experience.  I  admit  that  you  have  seen  and  heard  much  more  than  I 
have.  But  who  says  that  all  which  you  have  seen  and  heard  are  unerring, 
incontrovertible,  and  eternally  pure  ?  May  be  one  day,  in  going  to  a 
river,  its  water  seemed  to  you  very  pure  and  very  cool.  But  who  told  you 
that,  if  relying  on  your  word,  I  go  into  the  river  to  bathe,  I  shall  not  be 
caught  by  a  crocodile  ?  What  is  the  evidence  that,  even  if  the  water  be 
pure,  there  is  no  fear  of  danger  ?  My  going  into  the  water  may  be  the 
result  of  your  extensive  experience,  but  who  will  be  responsible  for  my 
life?  Secondly,  this  extensive  experience  appears  to  be  to  a  large  extent 
worthless.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  the  experience  of  a  blind  man.  Next,  it 
is  difficult  to  ascertain  the  length  of  the  period  of  which  experience  has 


1  Apia. 


*  Spiritual  teacher. 


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  TANTRAS 


119 


been  had.  Of  all  the  experience  which  man  has  acquired  during  the  four 
ages — namely,  Satya,  Trcta,  Dvapara,  and  Kali — we  know  only  Arya- 
varta,1  BhSratavarsa,3  or  at  the  most,  Jambudvipa,3  and  perhaps  the  salt 
sea  beyond.  This  is  the  furthest  limit  of  experience.  Now  I  ask.  Who  is 
it  that  has  made  mention  in  the  Sastra  of  seven  seas — to  wit,  the  seas  of 
salt,  sugar-cane  juice,  wine,  clarified  butter,  curd,  milk,  and  sweet  water? 
You  will  say  that  whoever  may  have  done  so  has  made  a  mistake.  It 
matters  not.  But  whence  came  the  names  of  the  seven  seas  ?  You  and  I 
have  not  crossed  the  uncrossable  sea,  and  reached  the  region  of  those  seas. 
Whence  could  this  country  have  got  the  names  of  the  seven  seas  lying  one 
after  the  other  beyond  the  salt  sea,  which  it  is  so  difficult  to  traverse,  and 
upon  view  only  of  the  farthest  quarter  of  which  cxprtt  foreign  navigators 
retrace  their  steps  ?  You  may  say :  “I  do  not  believe  in  your  salt  sea  ” ; 
but  you  know  by  what  language  you  will  be  addressed  should  such 
ingratitude  on  your  part  to  that  which  supports  your  body  with  its  salt 
become  known.  Lay  aside  your  far-fetched  interpretation,  your  philoso¬ 
phical  reasoning,  your  scientific  argumentativeness.  I  do  not  want  to 
hear  of  them  where  a  matter  of  direct  vision  is  concerned.  I  will  not 
admit  the  validity  of  any  other  evidence.  I  will  not  bow  my  head  before 
anything  except  the  Sastra.  May  I  be  reminded  of  the  lives  of  Samara- 
simha,  Pratapasimha,  and  Sivaji,*  before  I  turn  my  thoughts  to  the  words  of 
those  who,  though  possessed  of  the  sense  of  sight,  proceed  to  disprove 
the  existence  of  things  seen,  and  of  truths  established  by  Sastra,  and  to 
give  far-fetched  interpretation  of  them.  Alas!  the  lion-hearted  heroes, 
pillars  of  Sanatana  dharma!  where  are  you  to-day  in  this  dismal  time? 
That  resplendent  lustre  of  yours  hallowed  by  Sadhana  is  mingled  with 
the  Mantra  Sastra  itself.  Do  ye  to-day  shed  that  lustre  in  every  letter, 
in  every  accent?  Let  the  Sastra  of  Bharata  be  again  resplendent  with  the 
fire  of  the  austerities'  of  Bharata’s  sons. 

Next,  the  earth  is  composed  of  seven  islands,  each  of  which  is  divided 
into  nine  continents.*  The  nature  of  the  surface  of  each  continent,  its 
extent,  heights,  and  depths,  its  inhabitants,  their  religion,  practices,  and 
longevity,  the  various  Devatas  who  exercise  particular  power  in  each 
particular  place,  the  different  Devatas  who  are  worshipped  in  different 
places,  and  lastly,  the  special  accounts  given  of  the  seven  Svargas7  and 
seven  Patalas,*  and  so  forth:  these  are  all  matters  which  I  have  not  at  all 
mentioned.  Say,  are  all  these  things  dreams  or  illusion,*  or  mere 


1  Country  of  the  Aryas. 

1  India,  as  described  in  chap,  iii  of  the  Vi?nu  Purana. 

*  The  continent  of  that  name  (see  Ibid.,  chap.  ii). 

*  Rajput  and  Mahratta  heroes.  *  Tapas.  *  Var?a. 

7  Upper  worlds.  •  Under  worlds.  *  Maya  or  Moha. 


220 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


imagination  ?  It  matter?  not  if  you  explain  them  away  as  mere  imagination, 
but  save  your  own  head.  If  you  call  it  all  imagination,  then,  as  the  salt  sea 
is  imagination,  as  Bharatavar^a  is  imagination,  so  you  and  I  too  are 
imagination.  We  would  advise  you,  instead  of  calling  so  many  things 
imagination,  to  consider  you  reelf  alone  as  imaginary,  in  which  case  all 
trouble  will  be  at  an  end.  Not  to  speak  of  you  and  I,  who  are  but  the 
meanest  of  insects,  even  those  whose  acute  and  overpowering  intellect 
penetrated  into  Brahmaloka1  have,  when  dealing  themselves  with  things 
which  are  beyond  the  senses,  trampled  on  all  kinds  of  evidence,  and 
loudly  declared  to  the  world'  “  Sastrayonitvat”’  In  that  deeply  dark 
place  where  all  kinds  of  evidence  fail,  Sastra  alone  is  the  glowing  light. 
We  know  not  hoV  powerful  must  be  the  evil  Karma1  acquired  from  birth 
to  birth  of  him  who  suspects  or  believes  the  Sastra  to  be  of  human  author¬ 
ship,  It  is  said4:  “Thieve  not,  lie  not,  believe  in  and  love  the  Creator, 
and  you  will  attain  eternal  peace.”  A  Dharma  Sastra,  the  foundations 
of  which  are  based  on  a  few  such  settled  maxims  as  these  may  be  the 
fruit  of  extensive  experience.  To  be  induced  by  such  a  form  of  faith  to 
doubt  or  disbelieve  the  Sanatana  Dharma  and  Sanatana  Sastra,*  visible 
manifestation  of  Brahman  himself,  is  the  greatest  degradation  possible. 
It] may  be  that  in  the  case  of  that  Sastra  which  has  as  its  main  object  the 
maintenance  without  conflict  of  a  balance  between  the  four  actions  of 
eating,  sleeping,  fearing,  and  sexual  intercourse,  its  responsibility  may 
cease  with  the  provision  of  a  few  such  maxims  as  “Thieve  not, 
lie  not,  etc.”  It  is,  however,  the  greatest  impudence  for  us  to  discuss 
the  truth  or  otherwise  of  that  Sastra  the  object  of  which  is  to  declare 
the  principles  relating  to  the  molecules  and  atoms  of  the  endless 
crores  of  Brahmandas,  each  consisting  of  fourteen  worlds/  These 
principles  we  shall  state,  so  far  as  it  lies  in  our  power,  in  our 
discourse  on  worship.*  Man  is  imperfect,  and  whatever  he  does 
is  imperfect.  The  imperfect  can  never  attain  the  goal,  and  that  which 
has  not  reached  the  goal  is  ignorant  of  the  full  truth  about  the  Brahman. 
Who  dare  proceed  along  an  unseen  path  in  reliance  upon  the  word  of  such 
an  ignorant  guide?  Instead  of  relying  upon  their  own  words,  Devas  and 
R?is  have  therefore  admitted  the  evidence  of  Sastra,  composed  of  authori¬ 
tative  sayings,  to  be  alone  the  sole  authority. 


1  The  highest  of  the  seven  upper  worlds. 

* "  On  account  of  its  having  Sastra  as  its  source,”  the  third  aphorism  of  the 
First  Part,  chap,  i,  in  the  Vedanta  Sutra. 

*  Frarabdha,  or  that  Karma  which  has  begun  and  is  already  bearing  fruit 
(see  Introduction  to  Tanlra  Sastra,  “  Karma  ”}. 

*  Bv  “  reformed  ”  Hinduism. 

*  The  eternal  and  immutable  scripture  and  code  of  duty  of  the  Hindus; 

*  Puja. 


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  TANTRAS 


121 


Responsibility  for  the  education  of  children  always  rests  with  the 
parents.  How  can  a  senseless  child  be  saved  unless  warned  by  parents, 
who  point  out  to  it  which  is  the  path  oflife,  and  which  is  the  path  of  death  ? 
It  is  under  this  responsibility  that,  after  the  declaration  of  the  truth, 
Bhagavan  Himself  has,  descending  on  earth  in  the  form  of  SSstra,  said : 
“Both  Turiya1 * *  and  Sabda  Brahman’  are  my  eternal  bodies.”  Though 
invisible  to  human  eyes,  the  Supreme  Creatrix,  *  taking  the  world  which 
She  maintains  upon  Her  lap  has,  as  it  were,  with  the  finger,  pointed  out, 
and  declared :  “  Do  not,  through  misunderstanding,  fall  away  from  truth, 
and  Dharma,  and  the  Veda.  Do  not  stray  from  the  path  of  right 
practice.”4 * *  Following  upon  the  echo  of  that  solemn  sound,  millions  of 
sacrificial  pits*  have  been  lighted  on  mountains,  riverbanks,  in  fields, 
forests,  hermitages,  temples,  sacrificial  chambers  of  monarchs,  and  house¬ 
holders,  and  in  the  abodes  of  celibate  ascetics.  The  very  tops  of  the 
palaces  in  Heaven  *  have  been  reddened  with  the  light  of  the  sacrificial 
fires  on  earth.  None  can  say  how  many  millions  of  Aryan  great  men 7 * 
have  done  sacrifices  in  religious  observances  *  extending  over  twelve, 
a  hundred,  and  a  thousand  years,  and  have  with  bodies  cleansed  of  sin  by 
their  austerities,’  entered  through  its  open  portals  the  Brahmaloka.10 

Introduction  of  Tantra 

The  curtain  of  the  drama  of  time  gradually  and  inexorably  continued 
falling.  Slowly  evil  days  of  unrighteousness,11  murky  with  Maya,  continued 
to  cast  a  gloom  of  impure  practices1*  over  the  world  of  Dharma. 
Unknowingly,  men  steeped  in  that  darkness  began  to  enter  wrong  paths. 
Disease/ sorrow,  grief,  and  anguish  sorely  oppressed  the  life  of  the  world. 

A  diseased  child  brings  death  on  itself  by  eating,  under  the  influence 
of  delirium,  unwholesome  food.  Although  the  child  does  not  understand, 

I  The  fourth  state  of  consciousness  above  dreamless  slumber  (sujupti),  the 
sleep  of  dreams  (svapna),  and  the  awakening  (jagrat).  According  to  the 
Upanisads,  there  are  the  three  last  states;  three  functions — viz.,  creation,  pre¬ 
servation,  destruction;  and  the  three  individual  Jiva  (Viiva,  Taijaia,  Prajfla), 
the  collective  Jiva  (VaiSvanara,  Hiranyagarbha,  Sutratman),  and  the  Para- 
matman.  The  fourth  state  above  these  is  the  Turiya.  Saiva  doctrine  speaks 
of  a  nameless  fifth  beyond  Turiya,  and  two  functions,  viz-,  Turodhana,  the 
function  of  Ilvara,  and  AnugTaha,  the  function  of  Sadaiiva. 

•The  manifested  Brahman  with  attributes — the  sound  or  word  as  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  the  attributeless,  unmanifested  absolute — the  Parabrahman. 

*  Parameivarl — the  Dew.  4  Acara. 

4  The  Kunda,  in  which  the  sacrificial  fire  is  lighted. 

*  Svarga.  7  Mahapuru$a. 

8  Vrata.  •  Tapas. 

18  The  highest,  or  the  three  highest,  of  the  fourteen  worlds. 

II  Adhanna.  ’*  Anacara. 


122 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  Mother,  who  foresees  the  consequences,  does.  The  thought  of  the 
child’s  inevitable  harm  naturally  pains  the  heart  of  the  mother,  who  is 
goodness  incarnate.  In  accordance  with  this  natural  law,  the  loving 
heart  of  the  good  All-Mother  Creatrix  of  the  three  worlds  was  moved, 
and  the  Mother,  deluded  by  Her  own  play  with  a  grieving  heart,  questioned 
Vaidyanatha,1  saying:  “  Deva  of  Devas,  how  shall  the  Jiva  be  saved?  ” 

In  the  Kularnava  Tantra  we  read : 

“  Devi  said :  *  Bhagavan,  Thou  art  the  Deva  of  even  Devas,  Thou  art 
livara,  the  ordaincr  of  the  five  duties,  omniscient,  easily  approached  by 
devotion,  and  merciful  to  thy  supplicants.  Though  Paramesvara,  Thou 
art  the  Iivara’  of  Kulasadhakas  and  the  only  source  of  the  nectar  of 
mercy.  Deva,  in  this  worthless  dark  Samsara,  all  Jivas  are  oppressed  with 
the  gloom  of  sorrow.  The  countless  multitude  of  Jivas  inhabiting  all  kinds 
of  bodies  constantly  suffer  the  pains  of  both  birth  and  death.  There  is  no 
end  of  all  this.  None  is  happy,  but  all  are  oppressed  with  a  deep  sorrow. 
O  chief  of  Devas  and  Lord,  tell  me  how  these  may  be  delivered  from  the 
bonds  of  existence.’  ” 

Here  the  Mother  has  given  full  expression  to  the  purpose  for  which 
She  has  willingly  become  the  Mother  of  the  world.  The  heart  of  the 
Mother  of  the  world  was  the  first  to  weep  at  the  sight  of  its  miseries. 
Though  Herself  ever  changeless,  Her  heart  throbbed  with  the  agitation 
caused  by  the  immense  rolling  waves  of  emotion  into  which  Her  eternal 
mercy  was  now  thrown.  “  Mother,  this  Brahmapda  is  Thy  image  and 
reflection.  Thou  seest  Thine  own  face  in  the  mirror  of  Maya,  and  art 
intoxicated  with  Thine  own  love.  The  day  upon  which,  at  sight  of  the 
misery  of  the  world,  Thy  mercy  shadowed  with  gloom  that  eveijoyful 
countenance  of  Thine,  on  that  same  day  the  countenances  of  Thy  children 
were  shadowed  with  the  thought  of  the  pain  which  comes  of  separation 
from  Thy  love.  From  that  day  the  world  which  had  been  separated  from 
its  Mother  knew  the  love  of  the  Mother’s  heart.  From  that  day  Thy 
children  in  the  universe  have  learnt  to  call  Thee  by  various  names: 
DurgS,  when  they  have  fallen  amidst  the  insurmountable  difficulties  of 
the  world;  Tara,  when  they  behold  the  huge  waves  of  the  ocean  of 
existence  so  difficult  to  traverse;  and  Kail,  when  crushed  by  the  torment 
of  a  terrible  fate.  Glory  to  the  stream  of  mercy  in  the  merciful  Mother. 
Glory  to  the  wave  of  pity  in  Her  who  is  full  of  pity.  Glory  to  the  Mother’s 
endless  love.  From  that  day  the  never-ceasing  currents  of  Thy  love  flow 
through  all  the  veins,  the  marrow  of  the  bones,  and  the  heart  of  Jiva. 
And  so  to-day,  O  Mother,  should  even  a  vile,  hellish  sinner  like  myself 


1  Siva,  as  chief  physician  of  all  human  ills. 

*  That  is,  though  He  is  the  supreme  Lord  and  Guide  of  all,  He  is  in 
a  special  sense  the  Lord  and  Guide  of  worshippers  according  to  Kulacara. 


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  TANTRAS 


123 


forget  in  his  danger  all  else,  he  cannot  forget  Thy  name.  Whenever  the 
fearful  form  of  danger  appears,  Someone  opens,  as  it  were,  the  door  of 
the  heart,  and  at  that  instant  the  courtyard  of  the  universe  resounds  with 
the  cry:  *  Victory,  Victory,  Victory  to  Tara!  ’  I  know  not  whether  others 
hear  the  sound;  but.  Mother,  since  Thy  own  substance  is  the  sounds 
Nada  and  Bindu,1 * *  what  sound,  then,  wilt  Thou  hear?  Whether  Thou 
hear  it  or  not,  I  hear,  O  Mother,  that  as  I  sound  ‘  Victory  to  Tara,’  another 
instantly  araises  as  an  echo :  *  Fear  not,  have  no  fear.’  Who  is  that  Other, 
O  Mother?  Glory  to  Thy  eternal  play.  O  Mother!  Thou  knowest  and 
Father  knows.” 

When  the  pain  of  disease  becomes  unbearable,  I  am  instantly 
healed  by  saying:  “O  Mother!”  But  the  disease  IS  again  made  worse 
by  the  taking  of  a  bad  diet.  The  heart  is  again  attacked  by  doubts, 
misgivings,  and  reasonings.  Nowadays  our  ears  are  constantly  tormented 
by  the  ravings  of  that  Sannipatika  delirium.  Wherever  we  go  we  hear: 
“  Why  is  there  the  Tantra  when  there  is  the  Veda?  ”  The  patient  does  not 
understand  that  the  delirium  has  got  worse,  and  that  his  end  is  near. 
Upon  this  the  chief  of  Physicians*  is  at  a  loss  to  discover  what  He  should 
do.  He  then  searches  His  entire  store  of  remedies,  and  prescribes  ras£yana* 
At  other  times  it  is  poison,  but  for  delirium  it  is  the  elixir  of  life.4  In  a 
healthy  body  poison  is  the  messenger  of  death,  but  in  delirium  it  acts  as  a 
great  mantra,  renewing  life.  This  is  the  reason  why,  O  Sadhaka,  a  Sadhana 
of  acute,  powerful,  and  burning  mantras,  is  prescribed  for  us  in  the  Tantra. 
It  is  when  all  other  medicines,  all  other  Sadhanas,  have  failed  that  the 
necessity  arises  for  the  Tantra  Sastra,  because  in  the  storehouse  of  Sastras 
there  is  no  other  Sadhana  than  that  prescribed  in  the  Tantra.  Sastra  has 
therefow  said :  “  When  the  south  wind  blows  strongly  from  the  Malaya 
mountains,  there  is  no  longer  need  to  wave  the  palmleaf  fan.”  By  Sadhana 
we  nowadays  understand  something  which  has  to  be  done  upon  one  day 
in  our  life,  like  vaccination  against  small-pox.4 *  Formerly  we  took  the 
Bengal  form  of  vaccination.4  What  does  it  matter  that  we  now  take  the 
English  form?7  Formerly  we  did  both  Sadhana  and  Bhajana8  according 
to  the  Veda,  Purapa,  and  Tantra.  What  harm  (you  say)  will  follow  if 


1  From  the  Sakala  Parame^vara  came  Sakti;  from  Sakti  came  Nada,  and 
from  Nada  issued  Bindu.  The  Devi  Paramefvari  is  container  of  them  all  (see 
Saradatilaka,  chap.  i). 

*  Vaidyanatha  or  Siva. 

*  A  class  of  medicine  in  the  Ayurvedic  system. 

4  Literally,  Amrta,  or  nectar. 

*  The  true  nature  of  Sfidhana  is  long  and  persistent  effort  and  self-training 
until  success  (Siddhi)  is  achieved. 

*  Vaccination  direct  with  smali-pox  virtu. 

7  Vaccination  with  scrum. 


•  Worship. 


124 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


we  now  do  them  according  to  the  Bible  or  even  the  Koran?  No  other 
harm  is  done  than  this,  that  life  is  itself  harmed.  It  may  be  enough  for 
those  to  whom  religion  and  duty  are  mere  forced  labour.*  But  in  the 
case  of  those  who  wish  to  see  Dharma  as  a  thing  directly  visible,  and  who 
wish  by  its  minute  virion  to  realize  all  supersensual  things,  their  resolve 
extends  to  death,  their  purpose  to  fruition,*  their  path  to  the  Brahmaloka, 
and  their  destination  is  the  Brahman  Itself.  O  Jlvas  of  this  earth  I  Con¬ 
ceive  to  what  highest  of  abodes  they,  after  penetrating  through  this 
cauldron-shaped  Brahmapda,  must  ascend,  whose  final  aim  is  the  lotus  feet 
of  the  Mother  of  the  world,’  kissed  by  the  head  of  Him  who  bears  the 
crescent  moon.4 

This  great  Sddhi  is  the  Jiva’s  perfect  wealth  to  be  gained  by 
Sidhana,  without  which  none  can  come  by  it;  sought  for  as  it  is  even  by 
Him  who  is  worshipped  by  all  creatures.  Sadhana  is  the  name  of  that 
which  ends  in  Siddhi.  If  I  want  that  Siddhi  I  must  do  Sadhana,  which 
is  the  work  of  a  Sadhu.4  So  that  if  I  have  to  do  Sadhana,  I  must  become  a 
Sadhu,  or  if  I  do  Sadhana,  I  shall,  as  a  matter  of  course,  become  a  Sadhu. 

That  Sadhana  is  of  three  kinds:  physical,  verbal,  mental.  Siddhi  and 
Sadhana  I  must  accomplish  with  my  body,  senses,  and  mind  according  to 
circumstances,  country,  time,  and  person.  Now  it  must  be  remembered 
that  all  my  best  wealth  consists  only  of  what  I  shall  be  able  to  acquire 
under  the  following  conditions:  It  must  be  acquired  in  this  country, 
crowded  by  Varnasamkaras,*  Mlechchhas,  Yavanas,7  and  persons  who 
adhere  to  other  religious  beliefs;  in  the  Kali  age,  with  its  bad  practices, 
filthy  habits,  oppression,  licence,  and  prostitution;  with  an  impure  body 
where  lust,  anger,  greed,  pride,  delusion,  and  envy*  contend  as  upon  a 
battlefield;  with  restless  senses,  a  doubting  heart,  and  in  a  life  which  will 
last  at  the  most  a  hundred  years.  All  my  commerce  in  the  market  of 
this  world  is  with  this  capital  only,  and  in  its  use  I  must  both  guard  the 
capital  and  see  to  the  profits.  Now  tell  me  who  will  perform  religious 
ceremonies9  and  sacrifices10  lasting  twelve,  a  hundred,  or  a  thousand 
yean?  Where  shall  I  get  the  Vaidik  Hotars,  Rtviks,  Adhvaryus,  and 
Acaryas,1 11  versed  in  mantra  for  such  a  sacrifice?  Of  the  thousands  of 
Sakhas 11  of  the  Veda,  but  a  few  now  remain  as  memorials;  the  rest  are 


1  Begar,  done  by  compulsion  and  without  reward.  *  Siddhi. 

*  Jagadnmba.  4  Siva  called  Candrarfekhara. 

*  Pious  person.  •  People  born  of  parents  of  different  castes. 

7  Defiled  person  and  foreigners  of  different  kinds. 

*  The  six  sins — Kama,  Krodha,  Lobha,  Moha,  Mada,  Matsarya. 

•Vrata.  14Yajfia. 

11  Various  classes  of  Vedic  priests. 

11  Branches  or  school  of  Veda:  the  traditional  text  followed  by  a  particular 
school. 


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  TANTRAS 


125 


lost.  Which  mantra  of  which  of  the  these  Sskhas  will  to-day  draw  down 
which  Deva  to  the  seat  of  sacrifice  ?  From  whence  will  the  needed  lakhs 
of  heaps  of  Samidh1  be  to-day  daily  procured?  Will  it  ever  again  happen 
in  that  Bharatavarsa,*  in  the  capital  of  which  a  thousand  cows  arc  now 
daily  slaughtered,  that  the  milk  and  ghee  of  milch  cows  will  flow  in 
streams  like  rivers?  Will  the  glowing  fire  be  ever  again  gratified  by 
the  offering  purified  by  mantra  of  mountainous  heaps  of  the  holy  flesh 
of  animals  sacrificed?  Will  Bhagavan  Vaiivanara,'  with  bearded  face 
and  matted  hair  effulgent  with  Brahmik  light,  ever  again  rise  from  the 
sacrificial  pit  and,  bursting  through  columns  of  fire  playing  in  fearful 
tongues  of  flame,  stand  before  the  giver  of  the  sacrifice,4  and  say: 
“Choose  thy  blessing?”  Will  the  Lord  of  Vaikuptha 6  ever  again  leave 
Vaikuptha 8  at  the  prayer  of  R?is  oppressed  by  Raksasas  and  Asuras 1 
and  descend  to  earth  to  guard  the  -sacrifice  from  the  harm  which  they 
fear?  Will  a  master  of  truth*  like  Sukadeva,  *  or  a  great  Sakti  like 
Draupadi,  "  be  ever  again  bom  of  the  sacrificial  fire?  Will  Taksaka, 
King  of  Nagas, 8  trembling  with  fear  because  of  a  sacrifice,  ever  again 
have  to  seek  the  protection  of  Indra?  Will  the  Dcva  of  a  thousand  eyes  '* 
ever  again  be  about  to  fall  with  Tak?aka  into  a  sacrificial  pit,  whirled 
down  through  space  by  the  power  of  Brahman  as  and  the  wondrous 
potency  of  Mantras?  India  has  to-day  lost  her  old  strength  and  the 
vigour  of  her  austerities.15  Gone  is  that  old  faith,  strength,  and  fortitude; 
gone  is  that  courage.  In  what  an  unlucky  moment  was  the  fatal  snake 
sacrifice14  commenced!  Then  worshipped  Fire  became  displeased  with 
India,  because  of  the  deprivation  of  his  worship.  Then  the  mantra 
power  of  the  Brahmana  became  offended  at  being  prevented  from 
consuming  the  King  of  the  Devas 18  with  Taksaka.  That  displeasure  and 
that  offence  has  been  in  operation  ever  since.  The  old  day  has  never 
returned.  The  curtain  of  the  sacrificial  world  has  finally  dropped.  It 
has  not  been  raised  again.  How  contaminating  must  be  the  effect  of 
the  Kali  age,  that,  despite  the  presence  in  their  full  strength  of  Devat&s, 
Mantras,  Brahma tj as,  and  the  materials  for  sacrifice,  the  latter 
was  never  completed.  Who  can  unravel  the  mystery  of  the  play 
of  YajneSvari?  14 


1  Wood  used  for  the  homa,  sacrifice.  *  India. 

*  Agni,  Lord  of  Fire,  or  the  Bhagavan  Himself  in  His  aspect  of  fire. 
•Yajamina.  “Vljnu.  4  The  heaven  of  Vi?nu. 

7  Demonic  beings.  *  Tattvajfia.  *  Son  of  Vyaaa. 

10  Wife  of  the  five  Pantfus.  11  Serpent  divinities  of  the  nether  world. 

« Indra.  “Tapas. 

14  Sarpasatra,  performed  by  King  Janamejaya  for  the  purpose  of  destroying 
all  snakes,  a  snake  having  lulled  his  father,  Paiiksit, 

15  Indra.  11  The  Devi  as  Lord  of  sacrifice  (Yajfia). 


126 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


For  ihis  reason  I  was  saying:  “O  JIva,  bom  in  the  Kali  age,  how 
dare  either  you  or  I  proceed  there  where  Maharajas  Parik?it  and  Jana- 
mejaya  failed  ?  ”  And  even  if  we  were  to  advance,  would  that  make  every¬ 
one  happy?  Yajna1  is  the  Sadhana  of  only  those  who  desire  enjoyment, 
wealth,  and  heaven.*  Are  those  who,  being  supplicants  for  the  ambrosial 
feet  of  the  spouse  *  of  Sankara/  set  no  value  upon  the  abode  of  the  Suras,’ 
Indra,  or  Brahma6 — are  they  to  be  tempted  by  Yajna?  What  is  to 
be  done  for  such  as  these?  With  what  Sadhana  will  you  gratify  them? 
You  will  say  by  purity  of  mind  and  body,7  living  in  the  Guru’s  house, 
listening/  thinking,"  constant  meditation,"  contemplation,11  concentra¬ 
tion1*  and  ecstasy."  These  means  exist  in  the  Vaidik  path  for  the 
acquisition  of  the  truth.  True;  they  exist  as  jewels  exist  in  the  sea.  But 
what  is  that  to  you  or  me  ?  Who  can  be  such  a  sacrificing  monarch  as 
Ravana  that  Varurtadeva 14  should  collect  the  jewels  and  present  them  to 
him?  Who  is  such  an  Emperor  in  the  domain  of  austerity  like  Vaiisjha, 
ViSvamitra,  Jabali,  Janaka,  or  Jaimini,  that  Bhagavan  will  chum  the 
ocean  of  the  Veda,  and  place  all  the  jewels  of  the  knowledge  of  truth  in 
his  hand?  Who  can  acquire  a  heavenly 15  body  with  the  effulgence  of 
Brahman,"  like  that  of  Naciketa,  so  as  to  enable  him  to  go  to  the  house  of 
Yama,”  and  there  from  Yama  himself  receive  instructions  in  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  Brahman?  No  more  is  to  be  found  that  Aryan  life  in  which 
every  event  from  the  conception  in  the  womb  to  the  cremation  of  the 
body  was  accompanied  by  Vaidik  mantra.  It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say 
that  a  heavenly  body,  the  passions  of  which  have  been  controlled,  and 
which  is  thus  made  a  suitable  vehicle  for  the  development  of  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  Brahman  according  to  Vaidik  rules,  is  nowadays  impossible  of 
achievement.  Need  it  be  said  that  no  longer  does  anyone  lie  with  lawful 
wife  but  once  only  after  her  monthly  period  "  kindling  the  sacrificial  fire 


1  Sacrifice.  *  Svarga. 

*  That  is,  of  the  Goddess,  or  Devi.  4  Siva,  her  husband. 

*  Devas.  •  Lord  of  the  Celestials  and  the  creative  Brahma. 

7  Brahtnacarya.  *  Sravana  *  Manana. 

10  Nididhyasana.  11  Dhyana. 

“Dharapa.  u  Samadhi. 


14  Lord  of  the  waters.  18  Divya. 

16  Brahmatejas.  17  Lord  of  death. 

11  According  to  the  ancient  Vaidik  rule,  sexual  union  must  take  place  once 
a  month,  from  the  fourth  or  fifth  to  the  fifteenth  day  after  the  menses  {the 
conceptual  period),  and  then  only,  without  breach  of  that  continence  which 
governs  the  married  state.  The  follower  of  this  Vaidik  rule  is  described  as  Paiu 
in  the  Nitya  Tantra  (Rtukalam  vinadeviramanam  paribaijayet). 

17  The  union  of  man  and  wife  is  a  veritable  sacrificial  rite,  a  homa,  wherein 
she  is  both  hearth  (Kund)  and  flame.  See  the  great  thirteenth  Mantra  of  the. 
Homaprakarana  in  the  Bfhadaranyaka  Upanigad. 


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  TANTRAS 


127 


-with  a  heart  set  steadily  on  the  Parabrahman,1 * *  in  the  desire  to  get  a  son 
who  will  himself  be  full  of  the  divine  spirit.  The  ancient  Brahmaqik  fire  * 
has  sunk  to  ashes  through  eating  the  bread  of  servitude  to  foreigners  *  for 
hundreds  of  generations.  No  longer  arc  our  blood  and  seed  pure  and 
vigorous  with  the  strength  of  austerity*  and  mantra.  No  longer  do 
parents  observe  continence.8 *  And  so  I  was  saying,  long  past  is  that 
day  when  the  summit  of  the  edifice  of  the  Vaidik  Brahma-knowl¬ 
edge  could  be  made  to  rest  upon  the  foundations  of  an  unswerv¬ 
ing  purity.*  Men  no  longer  meditate  on  the  Parabrahman  with 
closed  eyes,  restraining  the  senses  of  perception  and  action,  merging 
the  mind  in  Prakrti.7  Amongst  those  who  nowadays  shut  their  eyes8 
and  make  a  pretence  of  such  meditation  you  wilt  discern  a  move¬ 
ment  in  their  shuttings  and  blinkings  even  in  the  darkness.  All  this  is  but 
a  show  of  self-restraint.  Bhagavan,  speaking  even  of  those  who  have  really 
controlled  their  senses,  but  who  have  not  through  habit  been  able  to  dispel 
the  mass  of  impressions  which  these  have  made  upon  their  minds,  has  said 
in  the  Gita :  “  The  fool  who,  after  controlling  his  senses  of  action,  inwardly 
thinks  of  the  objects  of  those  senses,  is  called  a  hypocrite.” 

Is  it  not  a  vain  presumption  on  our  part  to  hope  to  be  able  to  success¬ 
fully  travel  along  a  path  in  which  the  discipline  is  so  strict  and  the  trial  is 
of  so  searching  a  character?  Sri  Krsna,  who  was  Bhagavan  in  person,  failed 
to  impress  the  truth  on  Arjuna,  though  he  pointed  it  out  to  him,  as  it  were, 
with  a  finger  in  the  Yuga-Sandhya,8  at  the  close  of  the  Dvapara  age  and  the 
commencement  of  the  Kali  age.  He  failed  (Aijuna  being  a  K$atriya  *),  to 
make  him  hold  fast  in  his  heart  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  10  which  is  the 
possession  of  Brahmanas.  We  are  surely,  therefore,  not  awake  but  dream¬ 
ing  if  we^hope  to  acquire  knowledge  of  truth  by  reading  the  Yogavalistha, 
Ramayana,  and  the  Gita  while  sunk  in  the  gloom  and  under  the  full  sway 
of  the  Kali  age.  We,  on  the  contrary,  know  that  many  a  spiritually  dis¬ 
posed  man,  who,  under  the  influence  of  such  a  daydream,  has  attempted 
to  become  a  Yogi  along  the  Vaidik  path,  has  ended  in  becoming  neither  a 
believer  nor  an  unbeliever,  but  a  queer  being,  half  man,  half  lion.  By 


1  TheSupreme.  Similarly  the  Tantra  (Yogini,  chap.vi)  says  that  union  should 

be  performed  with  a  divine  feeling  and  disposition  (Maithunam  pracareddhiman. 
devatabhavace Jtitam) ,  accompanied  by  the  mantras  given  in  the  Tantrasara. 

*  Brahmatejas.  8  Yavanas.  4 * *  Tapas. 

8  See  post.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  brahmacarya  (continence)  is 

limited  to  one  of  the  airamas  only.  It  governs  all,  including  the  married  state 

(see  Yogiyajnavalkya,  chap.  i).  8  Brahmacarya. 

7  The  Source  whence  the  senses  (indriyas),  mind  (man as),  and  all  the 
phenomenal  bring,  derives. 

8  That  is,  the  period  of  transition  from  one  Yuga  to  another,  reckoned  at  a 

thousand  years. 

8  Warrior  caste.  10  Tattva. 


128 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


constant  meditation  upon  a  misty  nothing,1 * *  his  mind  and  heart  become  such 
a  vacuity  that  there  is  neither  faith,  reverence,  devotion,  nor  love  in  them, 
but  merely  a  bewilderment  with  the  inward  lament:  “  Alas,  I  am  lost!  ” 
In  many  places  we  have  found  such  persons  coining  secretly  to  ask :  “  What 
means  arc  there  left  for  us  ?  ”  But  their  only  difficulty  is  this :  They  want 
to  know  whether  it  is  not  possible  for  them  to  become  Tantrik  or  Paurapik 
worshippers  in  secret,  whilst  keeping  up  the  show  of  the  possession  of 
Brahma-knowledge  and  without  having  publicly  to  wear  the  sacred  crown 
lock,*  or  thread,*  or  to  paint  their  bodies  with  the  sacred  marks.4  Is  it 
not  deplorable  that  a  man  should  be  in  this  condition,  repenting  at  last  in 
this  fashion  at  the  close  of  his  life,  after  having  gone  through  all  its  useless 
troubles  ?  . 

It  was  with  the  knowledge  that  man  might  have  to  die  such  an  un¬ 
hallowed  death  even  after  the  acquisition  of  the  precious  human  body, 
which  is,  as  it  were,  a  thornless  step  to  the  door  of  Brahman,  that  She  who 
dwells  in  the  heart  prescribed  the  remedy  millions  of  years  ago.  But  what 
can  we  do  ?  As  I  have  said,  a  diet  which  is  daily  bad  aggravates  the  disease. 
The  musical  Sadhaka  4 * 7 *  has  therefore  said: 

“  It  is  the  fault  of  none,  O  Mother  &yama. 

It  is  I  myself  who  dig  and  thus  sink  in  the  water.” 

And  is  that  death  an  easy  one  ?  The  suffering  of  that  repentance  is 
more  unbearable  than  even  the  torture  of  a  hundred  rods  at  the  hands  of 
Yama.  The  thought  of  the  remembrance  of  such  a  horrible  death  melts 
the  hardest  heart,  and  flooding  tears  wet  the  livid  visage  of  the  dying  man. 
Then,  with  unrestrainablc  force,  a  fountain  of  tears  bursts  forth  from  the 
innermost  recesses  of  the  heart. 

“What  shall  I  do,  O  Mother?  Day  by  day  the  malady  grows 
stronger.  I  am  in  grave  danger  through  the  disorder  of  Pitta  as  Sattva, 
Vayu  as  Rajas,  and  Kapha*  as  Tamas.  This  time  the  delirium  is  that  of 
Sannipata.’  O  Mother,  it  is  my  destruction,*  and  thus  I  weep  inces¬ 
santly!” 

At  the  close  of  such  a  life,  wanting  in  trust  and  full  of  lament,  both 
inward  and  outward  restraint  •  are  impracticable.  The  ecstatic  trance 10  is 

1  Akatfa:  literally,  ether,  space. 

*  The  Sikha,  or  long  strand  of  hair  worn  at  the  back  of  the  top  of  the  head 
by  orthodox  Hindus  from  after  the  date  of  the  Cddakaraba  ceremony. 

*  Worn  by  the  twice- bom  classes  among  the  Hindus. 

1  Tilaka,  or  sectarian  marks,  and  Nama,  or  names  of  the  Deities. 

*  Ramaprasada. 

•Bile  as  sattva,  the  manifesting  principle;  wind  as  rajas,  principle  of 
activity;  and  phlegm  as  tamas,  principle  of  inertia. 

7  A  fever.  *  Sannipata — a  play  on  the  word. 

*  Sama  and  dama.  10  S  amid  hi. 


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  TANTRAS 


129 


impossible.  The  dawning  of  the  truth  that  all  is  Brahman 1  is  a  far-off 
thing.  In  consequence,  a  journey  along  that  difficult  path,  with  a  body 
decrepit  such  as  mine,  is  hardly  to  be  thought  of.  To  take  to  the  Vaidik 
path  and  then,  upon  failure  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  truth,  to  judge  the 
Veda  to  be  ineffectual,  is  as  though  one  were  to  judge  a  tree  to  be  without 
fruit  after  we  had  touched  its  roots  only,  when  the  tree  gives  its  fruit 
to  him  alone  who  can  reach  its  topmost  branches.  There  is  more  chance 
of  getting  the  fruit  some  day  or  other  without  even  touching  the  tree  if 
one  has  but  faith  in  the  existence  of  the  fruit,  and  takes  up  one’s  abode  in 
its  shade. 

It  may  seem  a  mystery  hard  to  unravel  that  the  mere  sitting  down  at 
the  foot  of  a  tree  which  gives  its  fruit  only  to  him  .who  can  reach  its 
topmost  branch,  without  even  touching  its  root  and  in  dependence  on 
faith  alone,  will  yet  one  day  or  other  surely  secure  the  fruit,  yet,  in  fact,  it 
is  not  such  an  impossibility  as  it  appears  to  be  when  first  stated. 

It  often  happens  that  parents  walk  about  in  the  gardens  attached  to 
the  bouses  of  rich  landholders,  enjoying  the  evening  breeze,  holding  by 
their  hands  their  son  and  daughter.  It  may  also  happen  that  on  such  an 
occasion  a  tree  is  discovered  in  the  garden  to  be  laden  with  ripe  fruit. 
The  parents,  desirous  of  seeing  how  the  hearts  of  their  children  yearn  for 
the  fruit,  speak  to  them,  and  pointing  out  the  fruit,  say:  “  See  what  nice 
fruit  has  ripened  on  the  tree.”  Instantly  turning  their  eyes  to  the  fruit, 
the  rich  man’s  children,  bred  up  in  softness  and  indulgence,  are  unable  to 
restrain  themselves,  and  at  once  assail  their  parents  with  weeping  and  the 
cry:  “  Give,  give,  give!  ”  Out  of  play  the  parents  say:  “  Then  climb  up 
the  tree  and  bring  the  fruit  down.”  But  the  children  know  that  they 
cannot  4°  so.  and  the  parents’  fun  only  fires  them  with  anger.  They  then 
throw  themselves  about  on  the  ground  weeping.  The  heart  of  the  loving 
mother  is  melted,  and  she  says  to  her  husband :  “  Enough  now,  find  out 
the  means.”  Then  father  and  mother  take  up  the  two  children  in  their 
arms,  and  hold  them  up  to  the  branches  of  the  tree.  Thus  supported  by 
their  parents’  arms,  the  boy  and  girl  pluck  the  wished-for  fruit  with  their 
own  hands  and  dance  with  joy.  And  thus  we  sec  that  it  is  not  impossible 
for  the  children  of  the  rich,  brought  up  with  indulgence,  to  make 
unreasonable  demands,  and  yet  to  have  them  satisfied. 

Sadhaka,  tell  me  what  King  and  what  Queen  you  consider  to  be  the 
greatest  in  the  world  ?  Who  is  a  King  before  the  King  of  Kings  of  three 
worlds?  And  who  is  a  Queen  before  the  Queen  of  the  greatest  Yogi?  *  She 
whose  feet  are  worshipped  by  Upendra  and  Surendra  ?  *  You  and  I  are 

1  Literally,  the  tattva  of  advaita  Brahman. 

*  That  is,  Siva,  who,  by  His  great  austerities,  is  the  Lord  and  exemplar  of 
all  ascetics. 

*  *  Names  of  Vi?pu  and  India.  Vi$pu  is  the  younger  brother  of  Indra. 

9 


130 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


children  of  such  parents.  Wherein  are  we  of  no  account?  Wherein  do  we 
lack  tender,  affectionate,  and  indulgent  treatment?  On  the  day  upon  which 
Jiva  sheds  bitter  tears  for  the  fruit  of  liberation  borne  by  the  Tree  of  Veda 
in  the  garden  of  the  world,  on  that  very  day  the  Mother  of  the  world, 
seeing  that  her  weak  children  were  unable  to  climb  that  tree,  addressed 
the  Deva  of  Devas,'  and  affectionately  said :  “  No  longer  play;  but  quickly 
find  some  means.”  And  what  other  means  could  there  be  than  that  which 
they  gave?  The  Father  and  Mother  of  the  world  extended  their  two  assur¬ 
ing  arms  of  Agama  and  Nigama,1 * *  and  held  up  their  sons  and  daughters, 
the  men  and  women  of  the  world.  Supported  by  their  parents’  arms, 
they  have  plucked  with  their  own  hands  the  fruit  of  liberation  precious 
even  to  Yogis  bopie  by  the  tree  of  Veda.  Sadhakas  have  thus,  without 
having  had  to  climb  the  tree  of  Veda,  easily  attained,  by  means  of  the 
mantras  of  the  Tantra  Sastra,  Kaivalyasiddhi,’  the  fruit  of  Veda.  We  do 
not  know  whether  so  much  kindness  is  shown  at  all  times.  But  it  must  at 
least  be  shown  at  the  time  of  enjoyment  of  the  evening  breeze.4 

The  sun  is  setting,  and  a  deep,  dark,  fearful  night  approaches.  At 
such  time  can  the  Mother  leave  Her  children  alone  in  the  dense  and 
gloomy  forest?  Satya,  Treta,  and  Dvapara  ages,  the  three  praharas 1 *  of 
the  Mother’s  day,  are  passed,  and  the  last  prahara  of  the  Kali  age  is  about 
to  pass.  The  sun  of  the  life  of  Jiva  in  the  Kali  age  cannot  long  remain 
above  the  horizon,  and  so  he  too  is  going  to  set.  A  dense,  dark,  deadly 
night  is  coming.  Is  it  to  be  thought  that  the  Mother  who  gladdens  the 
heart  of  Maliakala 1  and  dispels  all  fear  arising  from  existence  will  leave 
Her  children  alone  in  such  a  terribly  perilous  evening?  When  She  enters 
her  Cintamaui  house  '  surrounded  by  parijata,7  flowers  in  the  island  of 
gems,'  Her  sons  and  daughters  also,  whose  only  support  is  tlyr*  skirt  of 


1  Siva. 

'The  Agama  is  here  the  Tantra  when  in  the  form  in  which  the  Devi  is 
questioner  and  Siva  the  teacher;  and  Nigama  when  the  Devi  assumes  the  latter 
rfile  to  instruct  Her  spouse. 

'Final  liberation  (Moksa);  Bhojaraja,  commenting  on  the  Yoga  Sutra 
(iv.  33),  explains  Kaivalya  to  be  that  state  of  energy  in  which  modification  is 
extinct,  and  it  remains  alone  in  its  own  nature. 

'  That  is,  at  the  dose  of  the  last  of  the  ages. 

•  A  prahara  is  three  hours,  day  and  night  thus  being  of  eight  praharas 
duration. 

'  Cintamani  is  the  jewel  which  yields  all  desires.  Of  this  the  house  or 
city  is  built  Brahmapda  Pr. :  In  the  Gaurapada  Sutra,  7,  the  house  is  explain¬ 
ed  as  the  place  of  origin  of  all  those  mantras  which  bestow  all  desired  objects 
(dntita). 

7  A  heavenly  tree  in  the  paradise  of  Indra. 

*  Mapidvipa,  in  the  ocean  of  nectar,  called  by  the  Rudrayamala  “  the 
lamp  of  the  world.” 


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  TANTRAS 


131 


their  mother’s  dress,  will,  with  quick  steps,  follow  their  Mother  into  the 
eternal  region.  Our  Mother  is  RajarSjeivari 1 * * 4 *  and  all-merciful,  and  thus 
we  are  so  spoilt,  proud,  and  prone  to  take  offence.  We  cannot  give  up 
the  habit  of  readily  taking  offence,*  which  we  have  acquired  from  our 
•companionship  with  our  mother.  This  habit  is  essential  to  the  relation¬ 
ship  between  Mother  and  child,  and  so,  as  long  as  life  exists,  we  cannot 
give  it  up.  This  habit  is  a  part  and  parcel  of  our  life,  and  at  death  we 
will  make  a  present  of  it  to  Her  feet.  Reciting  the  life-renewing  mantra, 
“  We  are  of  the  Mother  and  the  Mother  is  ours,”  we  shall  bid  farewell  to 
the  Samsara.  This,  by  the  Mother’s  grace,  is  the  standard  of  perpetual 
victory  here  and  hereafter  for  the  Sadhaka,  the  Mother’s  child.  The  Sadhaka 
knows  that  this  play,  consisting  of  mantras  of  Her  whose  embodiment  is 
yantra  *  and  Tantra,  is  very  beautiful,  sweet  and  charming  to  the  mind 
and  heart. 


MONISM  * 

VedAnta  and  Sankara  carya 

Here  and  there  we  find  a  number  of  monists  *  who  firmly  believe 
that  the  knowledge  of  Tattva  or  non-dualistic  Siddhi,  as  promulgated  by 
the  adored  great  man  Sankaracarya,  cannot  be  attained  in  any  other 
way  than  that  laid  down  by  him,  and  that  none  but  he  can  teach  the 
principles  of  monism.  Had  these  people  been  themselves  proficient  in 
such  principles,  we  might  have  found  ground  to  believe  what  they  said. 

But  we  regret  that  their  statement  is  the  only  evidence  of  their 
knowledge-  We  are  unable  ourselves  to  make  out  by  what  evidence 
they  have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  non-dualistic  Siddhi  •  is  not 
attainable  by  any  other  means  than  that  prescribed  by  the  Vedanta. 
It  may  be  that  they  believe  that  there  was  never  bom  another  as  pro¬ 
ficient  in  its  principles  as  Sankaracarya,  who  was  an  incarnation  of 
Sankara 7  Himself.  We,  too,  admit  this  with  bowed  heads.  But  what 
is  the  proof  that  the  attainment  of  monistic  truth  is  impossible  except 
through  the  Vedantik  philosophy,  as  taught  by  him  ?  You  and  I  cannot 
be  men  like  Sankaracarya.  But  cannot  he  be  like  Him  whose  incarnation 
he  is  said  to  be,  and  for  which  he  is  honoured  and  worshipped  ?  Is  that 

1  Queen  of  Queens. 

*  The  meaning  is  that  a  child  takes  more  offence  at  that  which  is  done  by 
the  mother  he  loves  than  at  that  which  is  done  by  a  stranger,  to  whom  he  is 
indifferent. 

*  Tantrik  diagrams,  used  in  worship. 

4  Advaita.  *  Advaitists. 

*  That  is,  the  realization  of  the  unity  of  all  things. 


7  Siva. 


132 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


truth  unknown  to  Siva  which  was  promulgated  by  His  incarnation? 
How  can  we  believe  that  a  spark  can  burn  the  whole  world,  and  that 
yet  there  is  no  heat  in  fire?  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  principle  of  monism* 
which  was  taught  by  the  Vedanta  philosophy,  has  been  brought  into 
harmony  with  the  principle  of  dualism  in  the  Tantra  Sastra.  It  is  hard 
to  say  how  many  hundreds  of  Yogis  and  Rsis,  Sadhus  and  Sadhakas, 
have  been  slain  or  wounded  in  the  fights  over  dualism  and  monism. 
Bhagavan,  the  Creator  of  all  things,  has  in  the  Tantra  Sastra  brought 
that  fight  to  a  close  by  harmonizing  prakrti  and  vikrti.1  But  those 
who  are  by  nature  inclined  to  fighting  ever  consider  peace  to  be  a  trouble, 
and  this  is  why  even  to-day  there  are  to  be  found  many  dualists  in  the 
community  of  the  Jearncd  who  are  hostile  to  Tantra.  But  the  idea  of  a 
quarrel  between  JIva  and  Siva  at  one  and  the  same  time  shames  us  and 
makes  one  laugh. 

Looking  at  the  matter  with  the  eye  of  a  philosopher,  it  seems  as  if 
monism  and  dualism  are  as  much  asunder  as  the  eastern  and  western 
seas.  On  the  one  side  monism  says  that  the  Samsara  is  a  mirage,  a  wave 
of  Maya,  an  effect  of  illusion,  just  as  the  mistaking  of  a  rope  for  a  serpent, 
or  of  the  nacre  of  an  oyster  shell  for  silver.  Brahman,  who  is  knowledge, 
eternal,  pure,  and  without  attribute,  is  beyond  ignorance,  attributes 
and  the  samsara.  He  has  no  desire,  activity,  endeavour  nor  is 
subject  to  Karma.  In  short,  only  He  exists,  and  nothing  else. 
On  the  other  hand,  dualism  says  that  He  has  desire,  activity, 
endeavour,  care,  and  is  subject  to  Karma.’  In  short,  all  things  which 
are  said  to  exist,  exist  in  Him.  There  is  nothing  which  does  not  exist  in 
Him.  Both  arc  Sastras.  The  one  is  not,  in  authority,  either  superior  or 
inferior  to  the  other.  Which  will  give  way  to  which?  Both  bavoBhaga- 
van  for  their  witness  and  Judge.  The  settlement  of  this  dispute  is 
impossible  by  mere  men.  Therefore,  to  dispel  the  doubts  of  the  three 
worlds,  She  who  dwells  in  all  hearts  Herself  assumed  the  rflle  of  questioner, 
and  He  who  dwells  in  all  hearts  and  is  the  beloved  consort,  of  the  all-good 
Devi  answered  Her  questions,  and  Narayana  ’  Himself  accepted  the 
answer  as  the  truth* — Agata,  or  issued  from  the  mouth  of  Siva;  Gaia , 

'Vikrti  is,  literally,  “  change,"  as  of  form — here  effect.  The  meaning  is 
that  the  Tantra  harmonizes  the  origin  of  things  with  its  effects— God  and  His 
world. 

*  All  manifestations  of  Deity  are  subject  to  both  time  and  Karma.  Thus  it 
is  said,  Namastat  karmabhyo  vidhirapi  na  yebhyah  prabhavati  (Salutation  to 
Karma,  over  which  even  the  Creator  Brahma  cannot  prevail),  and, 

Ye  samasta  jagatsnfisthitisaniharakaririah 

Te  pi  kale$u  liyante  kalohi  balavattarah 

(The  Creator,  Preserver,  and  Destroyer,  in  time  become  extinct;  because  time 
is  the  stronger). 

*  Vifpu 


*  Tattva. 


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  TANTRAS 


133 


or  entered  into  the  mouth  of  the  Daughter  of  the  Mountain; 1  and  Abhimata, 
or  approved  of  by  Vasudeva.* 

For  these  three  reasons,  and  taking  the  initial  letters  of  the  three 
words,  the  Tantra  Sastra  is  called  Agama.®  Where  Parvatl  is  the 
questioner  and  Mahe^vara  answers,  there  the  Sastra  is  called  Agama. 
Where,  to  heighten  the  sweetness  of  the  play,  Mahadeva  is  the  questioner 
and  Mahe4vari  answers,  there  it  is  called  Nigama.  The  Tantra  Sastra  is 
called  Nigama  by  taking  the  initial  letters  of  the  three  words  nirgata,  gata, 
and  mata,  in  the  verse  in  which  it  is  said — Nirgata,  or  issued  out  of  the 
mouth  of  the  Daughter  of  the  Mountain;  Gata,  or  entered  into  the  mouths 
of  the  five-mouthed  Dcva;4  and  Sammata,  or  acquiesced  in  by  Vasudeva.® 
The  Tantra  Sastra  is  divided  into  these  two  parts  of  Agama  and  Nigama. 
Just  as,  however,  there  is  in  reality  no  difference  between  Bhagavan  and 
BhagavatT,  the  male  and  female  speakers  of  Tantra,  so  there  is  none 
between  Agama  and  Nigama  revealed  by  them.  The  sole  purpose  of  both 
is  to  give  liberation  to  the  JIva  by  a  method  through  which  monistic  truth 
is  reached  through  the  world  of  duality. 

Despite  the  essential  truth  of  the  monistic  principle,  its  comprehension 
by  all  is  an  impossibility  in  this  dualistic  phenomenal  Samsara.  For  this 
reason  it  has  not  been  generally  accepted  as  the  path  to  be  followed,  though 
it  has  been  preached  even  to  the  farthest  quarters  of  the  earth  by 
Saiikar&carya  himself,  and  successive  generations  of  thousands  of  disciples 
who  have  followed  him.  Amongst  those  who  have  travelled  along  the 
monistic  path,  scarcely  one  in  a  thousand  has  succeeded  in  reaching  his 
destination  safely,  without  trouble.  When  we  speak  of  the  nondualistic 
path  shown  by  Sahkaracarya,  many  may  think  that  that  which  is  devoid 
of  TantHk  practice  and  is  advocated  solely  by  the  Vedanta  is  that  path. 
But  we  mean  nothing  of  the  kind,  nor  is  it  our  purpose  here  to  say  any¬ 
thing  as  to  whether  that  path  is  or  is  not  accompanied  by  Tantrik  practice. 
This  much  only  we  now  say — namely  that  the  monistic  path  advocated 
by  Sankaracarya  is  one  which  is  characterized  by  the  force  of  an  intense 


1  Girija,  or  the  Devi  as  Parvati.  *  Vi?nu. 

*  The  author  here  refers  to  the  definition  of  Agama — 

“  Agatang  Sambhuvaktrevyah 
Gatanca  girljamukhe 
Matanca  vasudevena 
Tasmat  agama  ucyate. 

*  &va. 

0  The  definition  as  ordinarily  given  is: 

“  Nirgato  girijavaktrat 
Gatasca  girlga  irutim 
Matasca  vasudevasya 
Nigama  par  ika  thy  ate. 


134 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Vairagya,1 * * 4 * *  as  is  shown  by  the  command:  “  Hastily  get  out  of  your  home.’r 
It  is  doubtful  whether  one  man  in  a  hundred  thousand  has  ever  been  able 
to  attain  Siddhi  *  along  this  path.  We  do  not  know  whether  there  are  at 
the  present  time  any  true  monists,  but  whether  there  are  any  or  not,  there 
are  still  many  who  in  the  name  of  Sarikaracarya  pretend  to  be  such  in  the 
Dandi’s  matha,'  the  Brabmacari’s  asrama,‘  and  the  Mohanta’s  akharha* 
It  is  not  yet  time  to  speak  of  these.  There  are  men  in  the  successive 
generations  of  Sahkaracarya’s  disciples  who  have  earned,  in  the  opinion  of 
philosophers,  a  world-wide  reputation  as  monistic  Vedantists,  and  are  still 
worshipped  as  Gurus,  owing  to  the  uncommon  power  of  argument  which 
they  displayed  in  demolishing  the  views  of  Nyaya  philosophers,®  atheists, 
and  others.  How  ‘‘much  Siddhi  such  men  (despite  their  being  Gurus  of 
the  philosophic  world)  really  attained,  Sadhakas  can  only  guess  from  the 
fact  that  they  disproved  other’s  views  and  established  their  own.  It 
passes  our  understanding  how  he  who  has  knowledge  of  nothing  beyond 
Brahman  can  yet  resolutely  engage  in  militant  discussion  with  Nyaya 
philosophers.  A  power  of  astute  argument  in  philosophy,  and  monistic 
Siddhi  attained  by  Sadhana,  are  not  one  and  the  same  thing.7  Non- 
dualistic  Siddhi  is  a  far  cry  for  him  who  has  still  the  principle  of  argument 
in  him.  Who  will  deny  that  a  discussion  with  philosophers  creates  an 
amount  of  distracting  dualistic  propensities  a  thousand  times  greater  than 
that  created  by  contact  with  wife  and  children?  However  that  be,  while 
we  are  bound  to  make  our  reverence  to  these  philosophical  Dandis  on  the 
ground  of  their  power  of  discussion,  we  are  disinclined  to  give  them  even 
a  nod  on  the  ground  that  they  should  be  considered  as  having  attained 
monistic  Siddhi.  Such  being  the  case  of  the  Gurus,  it  is  needless  to  say 
what  sort  of  Siddhi  is  attained  by  their  disciples. 

The  power  upon  attainment  of  Siddhi  in  Vairagya  Sadhana  *  to  make 
the  knowledge  of  the  Truth  *  one’s  pursuit  is  a  very  rare  thing  in  this 
Sarps&ra. 

It  is,  therefore,  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  achievement  of  the 
comprehension  of  monistic  truth  in  the  face  of  the  antagonism  of  a  dualistic 
world  is  an  impossibility.  Non-dualists  travelling  the  path  of  the  Vedanta 

1  Dispas  sion  or  indifference  to  the  things  of  the  world;  other-worldiness. 

1  Success;  that  is,  here,  the  liberation  which  is  the  end  of  all  spiritual 
striving;  or  success  in  the  preliminary  stages  leading  to  it. 

*  Monastic  establishment  of  Dandis,  a  sect  of  Sanyasis. 

4  Abode  of  celibate  ascetic. 

*  Monastic  establishment,  presided  over  by  its  chief  or  Mohant. 

*  One  of  the  six  systems  of  Hindu  philosophy. 

7  One  is  talk  about,  and  the  other  is  realization  of,  the  Brahman. 

4  That  is,  upon  having  attained  to  the  state  of  dispassion. 

*  Tattva. 


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  TANTRAS 


135 


know  that  a  person,  in  order  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  truth,  must  first 
appear  before  a  Guru  devoted  to  Brahman  and  seek  his  help,  and  that  it 
is  only  if  the  latter  kindly  gives  him  instructions  that  he  can  acquire  non- 
dualistic  knowledge.  Where,  however,  according  to  monism,  all  are 
Brahman,  the  relation  of  teacher  and  student  becomes  an  impossibility. 
“Non-duality  is  to  be  sought  everywhere  except  with  Guru.”  The 
relationship  between  Guru  and  disciple  is  a  thing  of  dualism.  Just  as,  in 
order  to  pursue  the  monistic  path,  I  must  first  with  submission  travel 
along  the  path  of  dualism — since,  without  a  Guru,  the  attainment  of 
Siddhi  is  impossible — so  the  Tantra  Sastra  points  out  to  us  that  if  we 
entertain  any  hope  of  being  able  to  travel  along  the  monistic  path  wc  must 
first  pass  through,  and  must  not  attempt  to  leap  over,  the  dualistic  world. 
Great  and  mighty  heroes  have  maimed  themselves  by  taking  such  a  jump. 

I  know  that  I  have  to  climb  to  the  top  of  a  high  precipice,  but  to 
throw  my  arms  in  the  air  and  try  to  fly  to  it  is  not  the  act  of  an  intelli¬ 
gent  man.  Those  who,  in  the  pride  of  the  strength  of  their  arms,  have 
attempted  to  do  so  have  invariably  ended  in  being  thrown  to  earth  with 
broken  bones  and  joints.  At  length,  with  grieving  hearts,  they,  too,  have 
said :  “  Know,  O  Sadhu  I  that  it  is  more  difficult  to  control  the  mind  than 
to  drink  up  all  the  water  of  the  ocean,  to  uproot  Mount  Sumeru1  or  to  eat 
fire,  were  such  possible.” 

It  was  to  save  the  Sadhaka  from  this  deplorable  condidon  and  from 
these  lamentarions  that  the  Tantra  Sastra  was  at  length  introduced.  The 
Tantra  Sastra  docs  not,  therefore,  at  the  outset  ignore  this  visible,  palpable 
dualisdc  world.  As,  to  ascend  a  precipice,  one  must  advance  slowly. 


stepping  on  the  earth  itself,  so  also,  in  order  to  realize  monisdc  truth,  one 
must  progress  slowly  through  the  dualisdc  world.  You  will  only  make 


monisdc  Siddhi  more  distant  and  difficult  to  achieve  if  it  be  believed  that 


the  dualisdc  world  is  inimical  to  Sadhana. 

The  Tantra  Sastra,  instead  of  calling  the  dualisdc  view  of  things 
inimical  to  Sadhana,  embraced  it  as  a  friend.  It  took  into  its  arms,  as 
though  they  were  its  children,  both  dualism  and  monism.  Tantrik 
Sadhakas  are  filled  with  joy  at  the  sight  of  the  loving  sports  of  both.  He 
alone  realizes  the  sweetness  of  the  play  of  both  who  has  plunged  into  the 
non-dualisdc  Truth  after  having  churned  the  dualisdc  world.  Though 
resting  and  rocking  upon  the  waves  of  Samsara,  he  is  not  of  it.  Though 
living  in  and  affected  by  the  dangers  and  prosperities  of  the  Samsara,  he, 
like  the  petals  of  a  wind-rocked  lotus,  is  ever  detached  from  its  joys  and 
sorrows.  Full  as  his  heart  is  of  the  perfect  joy,  sorrow  never  casts  its 
gloomy  shadows  upon  him.  Because  of  this,  Sadananda,1  elated  with  joy 


1  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 
*  Siva,  the  ever  joyous. 


136 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


for  his  devotees,  has  said  in  the  Tantra:  “  In  the  world  some  desire  non* 
dualistic,  others  dualistic  knowledge,  but  those  who  have  known  My  truth 
have  passed  beyond  both  dualism  and  non-dualism.” 

Had  those  who  would  do  away  with  the  dualistic  world  as  unreal 
been  really  able  to  do  so,  then  no  harm  would  have  been  done.  But  on 
many  occasions  we  see  that,  whether  they  have  or  have  not  this  power, 
they  unquestionably  do  away  with  themselves.  Why  do  you,  who  consider 
it  to  be  nothing,  dread  the  dualistic  world,  which  you  think  to  blow  away 
with  your  breath?  Again,  why  take  so  much  trouble  to  blow  away  that 
which  is  nothing?  On  listening  to  the  lamentation  of  non-dualists,  one  feels 
as  if  the  dualistic  Samsara  had  been  created  merely  to  frighten  them.  For 
them  there  is  no  peace,  love,  freedom  from  disease,  or  joy  in  the  Samsara, 
but  only  the  cry,  “  Alas,  I  am  lost!  ”  and  the  lamenting  call  to  “  Save, 
save !  ”  It  is  as  though,  from  dread  of  the  dualistic  world,  monism  had 
shrunk  all  its  limbs,  and  was  trying  to  iind  a  place  wherein  to  hide  its 
head  in  the  eternal  Brahman^a.  Where  shall  it  go  to  save  itself?  Where¬ 
soever  it  goes,  it  finds  a  dualistic  world.  It  is  of  the  dualistic  principle 
that  the  world-play  of  Brahmamayl  is  made.  Who,  living  in  the  world, 
can  understand  monistic  truth  by  ignoring  the  dualistic  world?  What 
greater  folly  can  there  be  than  to  expect  that  you  and  I  can  with  a  frown 
do  away  with  the  dualistic  world,  which  even  men  like  the  royal 
Rsi  Janaka,  Sukadeva,1  Sankaracarya,1  and  others  could  not  ignore. 
Not  to  mention  others,  even  ParameSvara  Himself,  the  Guru  of  all  moving 
and  motionless  things,  at  whose  feet  Suras  *  and  Asuras  *  pay  homage, 
made  pretence  to  be  deluded  by  Maya,  and  sought  protection  at  the  feet 
of  Her  whose  Maya  it  was. 

In  the  Tararahasya  it  is  said: 

“  The  Deva  of  Devas  *  in  obeisance  prostrated  himself  at  the  lotus  feet 
of  Jagadamba,*  and  said:  ‘  Devi,  I  have  been  through  120,000  books,  and 
I  am  yet  unable  to  say  what  is  Kalatattva.7  O  SurcSvarf,*  do  thou  relate 
to  me  that  Kalayoga!  ’  O  Devi,  lover  of  devotees,  O  Mother  Kalika,  be 
pleased  with  me!  ’  Hearing  these  words  of  Maheivara,6  the  Saviour  of  the 
three  worlds  smiled  and  said:  ‘All  men  in  the  Brahmanda  are  Thy 
image,10  and  all  women  are  My  image.  O  Mahadeva,  practise  this  yoga 
day  by  day!  ’  ” 

Let  the  Sadhaka  here  particularly  take  note.  Here  Mahcivari 
Herself  is  the  teacher,  and  Mahejvara  the  pupil.  Mahadeva  is  Sadhaka; 

1  The  R$i,  son  of  Vyasa. 

*  The  expounder  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy. 

*  Devas.  *  Demonnec  spirits.  1  Siva. 

*  The  Devi  as  Mother  of  the  world.  7  Art  of  Sadhana. 

*  Mistress  of  Suras  (mtt).  *  Art  of  Yoga.  18  Svarfipa. 


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  TANTRAS 


137 


Mahadevi  answers  his  questions.  The  men  and  women  of  the  world  are 
the  objects  of  Sadhana.  Though  omniscient  and  Lord  of  all,  Siva  himself 
is  bent  on  practising  this  yoga  of  knowledge,’  and  She  who  dwells  in  all 
hearts  warns  to-day  even  a  disciple  such  as  Siva,  and  says :  “  Mah&deva, 
practise  this  yoga  day  by  day.”  ’  The  crest-gem  of  the  greatest  Yogis 
will  practise  Yoga,  and  that  by  means  of  daily  meditation.  Though  He 
is  Himself  the  Creator  of  the  world.  He  must  worship  the  world  before  the 
Truth  of  Sakti  *  can  bloom  in  his  heart.  It  is  only  when  it  has  fully 
bloomed  that  the  dualistic  universe  will  disappear  in  the  knowledge  which 
draws  no  distinction  between  Siva  and  Sakti.  The  disappearance  of  the 
Brahmanda  will  lead  to  the  knowledge  of  the  true  substance  of  Brahma- 
mayi.  The  Sadhaka  will  now  understand  how  the  truth  as  to  the 
Brahman  *  may  be  reached  through  Its  universe. 

To  this  objection  may  be  raised  that  there  are  not  only  men  and 
women  in  the  world,  but  rivers,  seas,  tanks,  forests,  groves,  fields, 
mountains,  earth,  air,  sky,  sun,  moon,  planets,  and  stars.  How  will  these 
be  eliminated  ?  We  reply  that  nothing  will  be  eliminated,  but  everything 
will  remain.  When  direct  knowledge  of  the  truth  of  Sakti  *  is  gained,  the 
Sadhaka  will  perceive  that  the  entire  Samsara  is  nothing  but  the  wealth 
of  the  Sakti  of  ViSveSvari.®  The  dualistic  world  will  then  no  longer 
appear  to  be  inimical  to  Sadhana.  On  the  contrary,  this  Samsara  will 
then  be  recognized  to  be  a  most  spacious  and  sacred  field  full  of  materials 
for  Sadhana.  We  will  fully  discuss  this  matter  in  the  Chapter  on  the 
worship  of  form  (Sakara  Upasana)  and  the  play  of  Sakti  (Sakti  1T13.) .  Here 
we  close,  after  giving  a  mere  hint  of  the  matter  in  connection  with  the 
subjcc^of  the  necessity  of  Tantra. 

Next,  many  people  express  an  anxiety  as  to  the  possibility  of  attain¬ 
ing  knowledge  of  this  hidden  Yoga  during  this  polluted  Kali  age.  This 
also  is  not  the  place  for  a  full  reply.  This  much  only  I  here  say, 
that  just  as  rasayana  *  is  the  proper  treatment  for  a  delirious 
patient,  so  also  the  delirious  condition  of  a  patient  is  that  which 
is  proper  for  the  application  of  rasayana.  By  the  beneficial  law  of 
nature,  delirium  generates  such  force  and  strength  in  the  patient’s  body 
that,  when  he  drinks  poison,  he  is  able  easily  to  counteract  its  life-destroy¬ 
ing,  and  to  absorb  its  life-restoring,  properties.  Similarly,  the  corrupt  in¬ 
fluence  of  the  Kali  age  has  generated  such  a  strong  poison  in  the  body  of 
Jiva  that  in  the  delirium  which  is  born  in  the  malady  of  existence  7  he 


1  That  is,  as  Siva  and  Sakti  are 
women,  who  are  their  vibhutis. 

*  Jfianayoga. 

4  Brahmatattva. 

*  See  post. 


the  objects  of  Sadhana;  so  are  men  and 

*  Saktitattva. 

*  Mistress  of  the  Universe. 

7  Bhavaroga. 


138 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


overcomes  the  life-destroying  property  of  that  mighty  cure,  full  of  the  fire 
of  Yogis  and  Bhairavis,1  the  Tantrik  Mantra,  and  with  the  help  of  its  life- 
renewing  properties  attains  to  the  position  of  a  conqueror  of  death.  Con¬ 
sequently,  the  Kali  age  is  as  fit  for  the  Tantra  Sastra  as  that  Sastra  is  for 
the  Kali  age. 

Non-dualistic  Siddhi  in  the  attainment  of  knowledge  of  Siva  and  Sakti 
existing  in  all  men  *  and  women 3  may  be  new  to  you  and  me,  but  in  the 
domain  of  Sadhana  it  is  the  utterance,  ever  true  and  eternal,  of  Deva.  In 
the  Kularnava  Tantra  it  is  said: 

“The  substance  of  the  world  is  Siva  and  Sakti4 — that  is  to  say, 
Prakrti  and  Purusa.  Whether  this  truth  exists  or  not,  Kuladharma  eternally 
exists.  On  account  of  this  sovereign  privilege,  Kuladharma  is  the  greatest 
of  all  Dharmas.  How  can  that  which  is  greatest  be  common  to  everybody  ? 
That  is  to  say,  since  qualification  for  Sadhana  in  Kauladharma  arises  only 
after  the  achievement  of  Siddhi  in  other  dharmas,  how  can  it  be  said  to  be 
upon  equality  with  them?  ” 

It  is  by  virtue  of  this  direct  knowledge  of  the  Brahman  in  the  form  of 
Siva  and  Sakti  that  Tantrik  Sadhakas  ever  conquer  the  world.  Strength¬ 
ened  by  it,  the  Sadhaka  does  not  deign  even  to  cast  a  look  at  other  Sastras. 
To  him  to  whom  the  realization  of  Siva  and  Sakti  throughout  the  world  is 
a  constant  achievement,  the  world  is  but  an  insignificant  thing.  Even  the 
Brahmanda  itself  cannot  contain  the  love  which  the  Father  and  Mother, 
everywhere  present  in  it,  bear  for  him  who  has  realized  that  Jiva  is  Siva 
and  Siva  is  Jiva,  whether  in  Suras,*  Asuras,*  or  men,  or  moving,  or  im¬ 
movable  things,  insects,  flies,  water,  land,  space,  or  in  the  eternal  millions 
of  moving  and  non-moving  things.  It  is  the  intoxication  of  that  love  that 
the  Sadhaka  poet  Ramaprasada  has  said: 

“  The  Mother  is  present  in  every  house. 

Need  I  break  the  news  as  one  breaks  an  earthen  pot  on  the  floor? 

Janaki  goes  with  Rama, 

Notwithstanding  younger  brother  Laksmana  is  with  him. 

Bhairavis  are  with  Bhairavas,  and  boys  with  girls. 

Ramaprasada  says :  ‘  What  shall  I  say  of  mother, 

Daughter,  wife,  sister,  or  other?  ’ 

Think  for  yourself.”  5 

Tantra  Sastra  has  discovered  the  hidden  path  by  which  one  may  leam 
the  monistic  truth  through  the  dualistic  world.  It  has  immersed  the  world 

1  Women  yogis  (yogini),  adepts  in  the  Tantrik  yoga. 

*  Puru$a.  3  Prakrti.  4  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 

5  Devas.  *  Demoniac  spirits. 

7  These  are  all  aspects  under  which  the  Mother  exists  in  the  world. 


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  TANTRAS 


139 


of  Sadhakas  in  the  current  of  the  divine  Bliss  *  by  now  changing 
duality  into  unity,  and  again  from  the  latter  evolving  a  dualistic 
play.  It  has  proclaimed  the  wonderful  glory  of  the  beloved  spouse 
of  Parama$iva  in  the  love-embrace  of  Matter*  and  Spirit.*  At 
the  sight  of  all  this,  one  feels  as  if  duality  and  non-duality  were 
two  boys  who,  quarrelling  with  each  other  and  maddened  by  anger,  go 
weeping  to  their  mother,  and  stand  before  her  in  the  eager  expectation 
to  see  whom  she  will  caress  and  whom  she  will  rebuke.  But,  on  the 
contrary,  the  mother  instantly  puts  forth  her  two  arms  and  takes  both 
upon  her  lap,  when  each  melts  with  the  love  she  bestows  upon  him. 
Then  in  their  love  for  their  mother,  with  hearts  full  of,  and  gazing  upon, 
her,  they  both  forget  themselves  in  their  joy,  and  fell  asleep  on  their 
mother’s  lap,  her  mere  presence  having  put  an  end  to  all  their  quarrels 
and  disputes.  Here  the  Sadhaka  will  receive  particular  help  from  the 
last  song  in  the  first  part  of  Gitanjali*  entitled,  “  The  great  subject  of 
discussion  between  the  Tantra  and  the  Veda  is  the  Mother.” 


1  Literally,  current  of  the  rasa  of  Brahmaqtja. 

*  Jada.  »  Caitanya. 

4  A  volume  of  poems  by  the  Author. 


CHAPTER  III 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 

We  shall  have  to  refer  to  many  a  picture  painted  by  former  accomplished 
Sadhakas.  Here  we  reproduce  two  modern  examples,  joyous  and  sorrow¬ 
ful,  of  dualism  and  non-dualism.  Although  it  is  not  a  picture  of  pure 
non-dualism,  as  advocated  by  the  Vedanta,  yet  we  refer  to  it  as  having 
been  drawn  in  that  light.  Sadhakas  will  pardon  me  for  such  a  quotation, 
which,  though  out  of  place  in  the  Tantra  Tattva,  is  necessitated  by  the 
corrupt  state  of  things  produced  by  a  revolution  in  dharma.  A  thinker, 
overpowered  by  a  dread  of  the  dualistic  world,  has  said: 

“  Thy  intoxication  of  pride  is  unceasing,  and  Thy  desires  are  unending. 

Thou  knowest  that  thy  body  and  mind  pass  away; 

Still  thou  doeth  as  if  thou  knew  it  not. 

The  seasons,  tithis,1  and  months  will  come  as  before, 

But  thou  dost  not  once  think  whither  thou  wilt  go. 

So  listen,  I  bid  you.  Abandon  the  gunas  of  rajas  and  lamas.' 

Think  of  Him  who  is  stainless, 

And  thy  dangers  will  then  cease.” 

To  this  song  the  high-soulcd  Tantrik  Sadhaka  Digambara  Bhattacarya 
has  made  the  following  reply: 

“  Om  intoxicates  the  mind.  Desire  is  eternal. 

The  body  is  true,  the  mind  is  true. 

And  so  is  the  Sadhana  of  Syama.5 

Winter,  summer,  all  six  seasons,4  come,  stay  and  depart. 

The  Sadhana  of  the  Mother’s  son  endures, 

And  so  docs  the  kindness  of  the  Mother’s  heart; 


1  Lunar  days.  *  The  qualities  of  passion  and  darkness  or  sloth. 

8  The  Black  One— -a  title  of  the  Devi  as  Kali. 

4  There  are  six  seasons — viz.,  Grisma,  corresponding  with  parts  of  March 
and  April  (VaiSakha  and  Jyeftha);  Varsa,  May,  June  (Aiadha  and  Sra- 
vana) ;  Sarat,  July,  August  (Bhadra  and  ASvina) ;  Hemanta,  September  and 
October  (Kartika  and  Agrahayana);  Sita,  November,  December  (Pauja  and 
Magha);  Vasanta,  January,  February  {Falguna  Caitra). 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 


141 


So  I  say  to  you,  listen.  Cease  saying:  ‘  Untrue,  untrue  ’  ! 

Seek  the  Devi,  who  is  Herself  truth. 

Free  then  shall  thou  be  of  thoughts  untrue.” 

The  Sadhaka  will  here  realize  the  difference  between  the  two.  The 
non-dualist  says:  “  Thy  body  and  mind  pass  away — thou  knowest  this — yet 
still  doeth  as  if  thou  knew  it  not.”  But  Digambara,  despite  his  knowledge 
of  the  ephemeral  nature  of  body  and  mind,  says  that,  though  they  may  be 
ephemeral  in  and  as  part  of  the  Samsara,  yet  “  The  body  and  mind  and 
practice  of  the  Sadhana  of  SySm&  are  true.”  If  the  mind  and  body  be  un¬ 
true,  how  can  I  expect  to  reach  the  true  and  eternal  Mother  by  doing 
Sadhana  with  these  false  materials?  And  can  you,  too,  think  of  “  Him  who 
is  stainless  ”  with  your  false  mind  ?  The  pursuit  of  the  false  Samsara  makes 
the  work  of  the  mind  and  body  false.  But  the  work  of  the  same  body  and 
mind  will  turn  out  to  be  true  if  these  undertake  a  search  for  Her  whose 
substance  is  truth.1  If  the  body  and  mind  be  false,  why  should  your  dread 
be  true?  Next,  the  non-dualist,  says:  “Winter,  summer,  and  the  other 
seasons,  the  tithis,  and  twelve  months,  will  come  as ‘before;  but  whither 
thou  wilt  go  thou  dost  not  once  think.” 

These  words,  however,  do  not  lie  well  in  the  mouth  of  a  believer,  as 
if  there  were  no  certainty  as  to  where  I  shall  go  on  leaving  the  world  in 
which  there  are  the  tithis,  and  twelve  months,  and  other  seasons;  as  if  all 
things  changing  and  revolving  in  the  world  will  remain,  but  I  only  shall 
not  remain;  as  if  this  will  be  my  final  end.’  This  is  much  like  what  infidels 
say:  “  Can  the  body  return  after  it  has  once  been  reduced  to  ashes?  ” 

However  that  may  be,  the  believing  Sadhaka  has  frowned  upon  this 
Lament  of  the  transitoriness  of  things,  and  with  an  unflinching  heart  has 
said :  ‘^Winter,  summer,  six  in  all,  come,  stay,  and  go.  The  Sadhana  of 
the  Mother’s  son  endures,  and  so  docs  the  kindness  of  the  Mother’s 
heart.”  Nothing  goes  away  anywhere  for  ever.  Things  remain  at  the 
place  to  which  they  belong.  The  only  difference  is  that  they  go,  and 
return  as  new  things.  As  in  the  Samsara  all  things  go,  and  return  in  a  new 
form,  so  the  kindness  of  the  Mother  is  ever  with  the  Sadhaka  Her  son  in 
birth  after  birth.  Nothing  is  lost  for  ever. 

The  Sadhaka  will  here  take  note  of  the  divine  vision  of  the  accomp¬ 
lished  devotee.  “  Winter,  summer,  six  in  all,  come,  stay,  and  go,  but  the 
son’s  Sadhana  and  the  Mother’s  kindness  alone  endure.”  Everything  is 
ephemeral  in  the  world  which  you  know  to  be  ephemeral.  Only  the  son’s 
Sadhana  and  the  Mother’s  kindness  endure.  To  the  eyes  of  the  Sadhaka 
privileged  to  know  that  truth,  the  ephemeral  world  also  appears  as  eternal. 
Again,  the  non-dualist  says:  “  I  say  to  you,  listen.  Abandon  the  gunas  of 


1  Literally,  the  true  tattva. 
*  Ecstasy— here  “  end.” 


142 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


rajas  and  tamas.  Think  only  of  Him  who  is  stainless,  and  your  dangers 
will  cease.”  That  is,  “These  gunas  are  merely  inimical  to  Sadhana;  so 
drive  them  away;  do  not  tread  a  path  infested  by  robbers.  On  the  other 
hand,  think  of  Him  who  is  stainless,  and  your  perils  will  be  at  an  end.” 
That  is,  He  who  is  to  be  thought  of  is  stainless.  His  beauty 
is  of  a  pure  and  perfect  whiteness.  The  gunas  of  rajas  and  tamas  are,  as 
it  were,  stains.  With  such  stains  one  cannot  think  of  Him  who  is  stainless. 

Thus  we  must  understand  that  the  white  Sattva  guna  is  necessary  in 
order  to  think  of  the  white  Brahman.  Now,  I  ask,  is  not  Maya  a  bond, 
and  is  it  not  composed  of  Sattva  as  well  as  of  Rajas  and  Tamas?  Some  day 
you  will  have  to  throw  off  that  Sattva  guna  also.  Perhaps  you  will  say 
that  constant  thought  of  the  Stainless  One  will  cause  the  Sattva  guna  to 
fall  off  of  itself.  To  that  I  would  ask,  Is  that  thought  of  yours,  which  can 
drive  away  even  the  Sattva  guna,  so  afraid  of  the  other  gunas  that  it  cannot 
appear  in  their  presence  ?  Thinker,  your  thought  is  full  of  cares.  That  it 
is  which  makes  you  so  thoughtful.  It  is  because  Rajas  gupa  and  Tamas  guna 
ever  maintain  the  false  show  of  the  Samsara  that  they  have  to  be  discarded, 
and  the  mind  made  to  rat  on  the  Stainlas  One. 

It  is  at  this  point  that  the  Sadhaka  says:  “  Brother,  if  you  are  a  hero,1 
with  the  keen  sword  of  Sadhana  in  your  hand,  why  should  you  be  afraid 
of  the  robber?  It  is  only  the  frail  coward  who  fears  him.”  -In  reliance 
upon  the  fear-dispelling  name  of  Abhaya 1  you  cry:  “Victory  to  Jaga- 
damba!  ”  and  advance  to  conflict  face  to  face,  and  by  the  grace  of 
Vijayabhairavi,*  victory  will,  without  doubt,  be  yours.  Sec,  however,  that 
you  do  not  destroy  anything  in  the  dominion  of  RajarajeSvari.  Put  your 
foes  under  your  feet,  and  then  you  will  see  that  these  very  enemies  will  be 
charmed  by  your  dauntless  bearing,  and  become  your  obedient  'servants, 
and  will  be  to  you  like  sons,  friends,  and  attendants.  Then  joy  will  over¬ 
power  you  at  the  sight  of  the  eternal  and  the  transitory  playing  with  one 
another.  Do  not  despise  anything  as  untrue.  Digambara  the  Sadhaka 
has  therefore  said:  “So  I  say,  listen.  Give  up  repeating,  ‘Untrue, 
untrue!’  Seek  the  Devi,  who  is  truth  Herself,  and  you  will  be  free  of 
untrue  thoughts.  Just  so  long  as  the  truth 4  of  Her  whose  substance  is 
truth  itself  does  not  possess  the  mind,  so  long  the  world  will  appear  to  be 
fleeting.  When,  however,  the  rays  of  the  beauty  of  the  Mother  who  is 
Truth  itself  come  to  fill  the  heart,  when  the  eyes  arc  filled  with  the  vision 
of  the  Mother,  then  the  variegated  picture  of  the  world  is  merged  in  the 
Mother’s  Self.” 

1  VIra. 

1  The  Devi  as  dispeller  of  fear.  The  true  Tantrik  is  essentially  the  fearless 
one.  1  Dev!  of  victory. 


1  Tattva. 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 


143 


In  whatever  direction  I  turn  my  eyes  I  sec  nothing,  nothing  but  the 
Mother.  In  water,  on  land,  and  in  space  the  Mother  dances  before  the 
eyes  of  the  Sadhaka,  to  whom  the  world  thus  appears  true.  When  the 
world  becomes  full  of  the  Mother,  then  all  the  gupas  cease  to  be  enemies. 
Nothing  is  then  a  stain.  It  is  no  longer  necessary  to  regard  the  world  as 
stained,  and  to  look  upon  another  as  stainless.  When  the  Mother,  paint¬ 
ed  with  brilliant  collyrium,1  dispeller  of  the  feats  of  Her  devotee,  seats 
Herself  in  his  heart,  then  everything,  be  it  stained  or  stainless,  becomes 
but  the  ornament  of  Her  lotus  feet.  When  great  waves  of  emotion  rise  in 
the  ocean  of  the  Sadhaka’s  love,  then  the  three  worlds  sink  in  the  surging 
billows  of  its  waters.  The  lustre  of  the  black*  beauty  of  Her  who 
charms  the  three  worlds,  falling  whereon,  lays  *open  the  gate  of 
Brahmanda.  Maddened  with  joy,  the  Sadhaka  also  then  opens  the  door 
of  his  heart,  and  sings : 

“  He  who  takes  shelter  at  the  feet  of  Syama 
Never  goes  to  the  house  of  Death. 

Whose  heart  and  soul  revels  to  drink  the  nectar  of  Syama’s  name.' 
Whose  thought  and  meditation  Sy5mS  fully  possesses, 

For  him,  in  life  and  death,  Syama  is  his  death’s  destruction. 

Opening  wide  the  portals  of  heaven  and  earth. 

Raising  on  high  the  standard  in  Syama’s  name, 

By  his  own  strength  he  goes  to  the  cremation-ground; 

Yet,  having  attained  Sivahood,  he  does  not  become  a  corpse. 

How  can  he  become  a  corpse  whose  Yoga  has  been  done  on  hundreds 
of  corpses?* 

He  who  holds  in  the  cage  of  his  heart  the  Syama  bird 4 
Makes  Syama  one  with  the  Self, 

And  ever  beholds  the  Self  in  Syama. 

In  love  and  with  joy  Syama,  uniting  with  the  Self,  dances. 

Oh,  the  hair  of  my  Syama  is  dishevelled ! 

In  Her  black  hand  She  holds  a  black  sword; 

The  dark  moon  adorns  Her  dark  tresses; 

On  Her  dark  face  a  dark  smile  plays. 

The  dark  rays  of  Her  body  darken  the  face  of  the  three  worlds. 

The  spirit  (Atma)  is  Syama, 

The  body  is  Syama, 

1  Afijana,  put  on  the  eyes  to  increase  brilliancy,  to  cure  redness,  burning  of 
the  eyes,  etc. 

1  Syama,  a  name  also  of  the  Devi  as  Kali. 

*  Referring  to  the  Tantrik  Savasana,  or  posture  in  which  the  fearless 
Tantrik  performs  his  rite,  seated  on  a  corpse. 

*  An  Indian  bird  of  that  name. 


144 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


The  Samsar  is  Syama, 

Syaraa  is  one’s  home. 

Nothing  exists  but  Syama. 

Delusion  also  is  full  of  Syama. 

In  the  false  vision,  which  is  Syama, 

The  only  cure  of  this  Syama  malady 

Is  a  draught  of  the  pure  nectar  of  Syama’s  name. 

Oceans  and  rivers  and  all  other  waters 
Become  one  in  the  waters  of  dissolution;1 
All  these  are  but  corpses  at  the  feet  of  Syama. 

The  memory  of  Syama  fills  the  Samsara  with  Syama. 

When  shall  th«  form  of  Syama  meet  my  gaze 
In  the  form  of  corpses  and  in  the  form  of  Siva?  ”  * 

The  community  of  Sadhakas  will  consider  whether  he  is  non-dualist 
or  duality  itself,  the  mirror  of  whose  heart  reflects  the  scene : 

“  The  spirit  is  Syama; 

The  body  is  Syama; 

The  Samsara  is  Syama. 

Syama  is  one’s  home,  and  ocean  and  rivers. 

And  all  other  waters  become  one  in  the  water  of  dissolution.” 

Difference  between  and  Similarity  of  Veda  and  Tantra 

The  world,  of  course,  appears  to  be  thus  blissful  in  the  eyes  of  every 
Sadhaka,  be  he  Vaidik  or  Tantrik,  who  by  the  grace  of  Anandamayi  has 
attained  Siddhi.  There  is,  however,  this  difference,  that  the  Tantrik 
Sadhaka  does  not — in  this  unlike  the  Vaidik  Sadhaka — see  a  hell 
in  the  Samsara.  The  hateful  and  hideous  picture  which  the  Vaidik 
Sadhaka  has  drawn  of  the  Samsara,  full  as  it  is  of  wife,  sons,  friends, 
attendants,  and  other  relations,  is  enough  to  create  a  revulsion  in  the 
mind  of  even  an  ordinary  man.  But  it  is  a  matter  for  great 
wonder  that  Tantrik  Sadhakas  have  discovered  the  play  of  the  waves 
of  Brahma-Bliss  in  this  very  Samsara,  and  have  pointed  out,  as  it  were 
with  the  finger,  that  every  process  of  cause  and  effect  which  obtains  in  the 
Samsara  is  in  a  direct  manner  the  stairway  of  Sadhana.  It  is  a  matter 
of  still  greater  wonder  that  Tantrik  Sadhakas,  like  fish,  move  and  yet 
remain  unsoiled  in  the  mud  of  worldly  actions,  the  mere  contact  with 
which  would  send  you  or  I  to  perdition.*  That  pure  transparent  heart 
of  his  is  not  soiled  or  stained  by  anything.  Even  in  the  midst  of  fierce 


1  Praia  ya. 

*  The  above  verses  are  from  the  Author’s  Gitanjali. 

*  Rasa  tala. 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 


145 


waves  he  remains  as  free  as  the  petals  of  a  lotus  in  water.  A  Vaidik 
Sadhaka,  also,  on  attaining  Siddhi,  does  not  think  of  the  Sams&ra  as  being 
anything  but  Brahman.  There  is,  however,  this  much  difference,  which 
we  may  illustrate  as  follows : 

Let  us  imagine  that  there  is  in  a  forest  an  ancient  royal  palace, 
the  inner  rooms  of  which  are  adorned  with  untold  treasures.  I  approach 
the  building  with  a  desire  freely  to  see  or  to  take  them.  But  such  a 
foul  stench  comes  from  all  sides  that  it  is  difficult  to  stay  there  for  even 
a  minute.  Unable  to  settle  what  to  do,  I  look  about  in  every  quarter. 
I  find  that  at  my  very  side  there  is  a  Sight  of  stairs.  The  lower  wall 
bears  elaborate  ornaments,  but  the  stench  prevents  me  from  standing 
there  to  closely  examine  it.  In  particular,  I  note  thht,  though  there  is 
ornament,  there  is  no  sign  of  a  door  whereby  to  enter  the  house.  I  am 
therefore  obliged  slowly  to  ascend  by  the  flight  of  stairs,  and  with 
good  fortune  find  myself  at  the  top  of  the  building.  I  there  find  that  the 
entrance  door  of  the  palace  is  wide  ajar,  as  if  to  welcome  visitors. 
Entering  by  that  door,  I  descend  by  a  staircase,  and  in  every  room 
discover  proof  of  the  incomparable  wealth  of  the  King  of  Kings  illuminat¬ 
ing  it  with  the  lustre  of  its  beauty.  Whilst  gazing  with  astonishment 
I  descend  into  the  lowest  room.  I  then  see  the  leaves  of  a  side  door  flung 
open  at  my  very  side,  through  which  another  visitor  enters  into  the  build¬ 
ing.  Astonished  and  curious,  I  say  to  Him:  “  Sir,  I  did  not  know  that 
there  was  a  door  here.  When  I  came  I  examined  the  wall  for  a  long  time 
but  could  only  discover  ornament,  and  not  a  door.”  The  new-comer 
laughs,  and  says:  "  There  was,  of  course,  the  door,  but  you  could  not  find 
it.”  I  again  say:  “  But  you  found  it.  How  was  it  that  I  did  not?”  He 
says :  “  You  came  by  the  right  path,  but  I  by  the  left  one,”  1  upon  which 
the  following  dialogue  ensued: 

/.  What  is  the  difference  between  the  two  paths,  New-comer? 

JV.  The  decorations  of  the  right  path  merely  beautify  the  wall, 
whilst  in  the  left  path  there  is,  besides  beauty,  a  device  whereby  the 
lines  of  a  door  are  worked  into  it. 

/.  How  came  you  to  know  of  this  device  ? 

JV.  By  the  instruction  of  the  Guru. 

I.  But  how  came  the  Guru  to  know  of  it  ? 

JV.  By  command  of  the  Great  Architect  who  built  this  edifice. 

/.  When  you  pushed,  did  the  door  at  once  open,  or  was  a  key 
required? 

JV.  A  key  was  required. 

I.  Where  did  you  get  the  key? 

JV.  Gtirudeva  gave  it  to  me. 

•  ' 

*  That  is,  that  of  the  Veda  and  Tantra  (md*  post ) 

10 


146 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


I.  But  how  were  you  able  to  stand  in  that  foul  smell? 

jV.  The  bad  smell  is  on  the  right  path  only.  The  left  path  is  ever 
pleasant,  fragrant  with  the  scent  of  full-blown  flowers,  and  illumined  by 
their  beauty. 

Upon  this  I  am  very  much  astonished,  and  ask: 

I.  As  both  are  paths  to  the  royal  palace,  why,  then,  this  difference 
between  the  two? 

JV.  [laughing) .  The  portion  on  the  left  is  the  inner  apartment.1 
Seekers  of  justice  and  favour  and  payers  of  taxes  alone  pass  along  the  right 
path.  It  is  their  evil  conduct  and  contact  which  renders  the  path  on  the 
right  so  miserable.  But  should  anyone  amongst  those  who  have  more  in¬ 
timate  acquaintance  with  the  royal  family  desire  at  any  time  to  see  the 
Queen  of  Queens  (Rajarajdvari),  he  goes  along  the  path  on  the  left. 

/.  What  intimate  connection,  then,  have  you  with  the  royal  family? 

N,  The  Queen  our  Mother  is  my  dharma-mother.* 

/.  In  our  country  the  relationship  between  a  dharma-mother  and  a 
dharma-son  is  a  very  distant  one.  How,  then,  do  you  call  it  intimate  ? 

JV.  I  have  said  She  is  my  dharma-mother. 

7.  But  what  of  that  ? 

N.  You  have  said  that  in  your  country  a  dharma  relationship  is  a 
very  distant  one,  but  in  this  our  royal  palace  the  relationship  is  very  inti¬ 
mate,  so  I  say  She  is  no  mother  according  to  your  dharma,  but  my 
dharma-mother. 

I  am  abashed,  and,  taking  him  with  me,  leave  the  house.  Standing 
by  the  sides  of  the  door,  I  mark  with  his  help  the  places  of  juncture.  I  see 
that  the  lines  meet  in  such  a  fashion  that  one  cannot  avoid  giving  innumer¬ 
able  thanks  to  the  artist,  and  showering  a  thousand  curacs  on  thc'blindness 
of  one’s  own  eyes.  The  edges  of  the  door  leaves  are  so  neatly  formed  that 
it  is  not  possible  to  discover  them  without  knowledge  of  the  secret  sign. 
Looking  with  ordinary  eyes,  one  sees  nothing  but  decorations  on  the  wall. 
Moreover,  one  is  likely  to  receive  a  sudden  fright  at  the  sight  of  the  snake¬ 
like  markings  to  be  found  at  every  joint.  However  that  may  be,  I  am 
happy  to  see  and  hear.  But  I  ask  myself  why,  in  spite  of  the  existence  of 
this  path,  I  took  the  needless  trouble  to  traverse  one  which  was  so  circuitous. 

Sadhaka,  the  “  I  ”  of  this  dialogue,  is  a  Vaidik,  and  the  new-comer  a 
Tantrik  Sadhaka.  The  building  is  our  gross  *  and  subtle  body.*  The  foul 
smell  which  surrounds  it  is  egoism,  attachment,  delusion,  affection,  hatred, 

1  Antahpura,  occupied  by  the  ladies,  who  in  all  Hindu  households  live  in 
the  zenana,  apart  from  the  men. 

*  Persons  not  connected  by  blood,  but  who  entertain  tender  feelings  for 
each  other,  establish  such  relationship  by  making  Dharma  their  witness.  . 

*  Sthula,  or  material  body  of  food. 

*  Sulqma,  the  subtle  body. 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM  147 

shame,  anger,  fear,  slander,  and  the  like.  The  Sight  of  stain  is  the  succes¬ 
sion  of  SSdhanas.  The  open  door  at  the  top  of  the  edifice  is  knowledge  of 
Tattva.'  The  store  of  jewels  therein  is  Siddhi  or  Brahmavibhuti.’  The 
paths  to  the  left  and  right  are  the  Tantra  and  Veda  respectively.  The  key 
is  the  Tantrik  Mantra  given  by  the  Guru.  The  decorations  of  the 
wall  are  the  mechanism  of  the  human  body.  The  door  leaves  in  the 
wall  are  the  Muladhaxa,*  and  the  snake-like  markings  are  Kula- 
kundalini  Herself.1  What  else  remains  to  be  understood  cannot  be 
revealed.  This  much  alone  we  can  disclose.  The  rest,  the  Sadhaka 
will  understand  of  himself.  The  Vaidik  Sadhaka  does  not  enter  the 
house,*  or  even  wait  a  minute  on  the  ground-floor,  for  fear  of  the  foul 
smell.  He  has  no  knowledge  of  the  Satcakra*.  In.  deep  disgust  he 
goes  up,  and  there  attains  the  knowledge  of  the  unity  of  the  JIva? 
and  the  Brahman,  which  is  the  meaning  of  all  such  great  sayings  as 
41  Thou  art  that.”  *  But  from  the  moment  that  knowledge  of  “  That 
thou  art  ”  causes  him  to  see  the  Brahman<ja  as  a  Brahmavibhuti,*  he 
slowly  acquires  knowledge  of  the  truth  as  to  Jlva  through  knowledge  of 
Brahman.  And  then,  not  to  speak  of  the  ground-floor,I * * 4 * * 7 * * 10  even  the  despicable 
hell  of  foul  smell  which  surrounds  it  appears  to  him  as  nothing  but  the  Brah¬ 
man.  On  acquiring  this  Siddhi,  the  world  no  longer  has  any  terror  for  him. 
Then  the  Vaidik  Sadhaka  at  last  comes  to  sec  the  BrahmavibhOti  in  the 
Samsara.11  On  the  other  hand,  the  Tantrik  Sadhaka  renounces  the 
Samsara  whilst  seeing  the  Brahmavibhuti  in  the  Samsara  itself.1*  Although 
the  latter  is  full  of  foul  smells,  his  nostrils  are  pleased  with  a  divine 
fragrance,  nor  has  the  Samsara  power  to  make  its  own  foul  smell  per¬ 
ceptible  or  to  quench  this  fragrance.  For  who  can  quench  that  sweet 

I  The  Brahman.  *  Power,  wealth,  and  manifestation  of  Brahman. 

*  The  lowest  of  the  six  cakras  (Satcakra),  or  centres  in  the  body,  situate  in 

the  perirueiun,  between  the  genital  organs  and  anus. 

4  The  Devi  who  abides  in  this  cakra,  coiled  round  the  Svayambhu  Liiiga 
(sec  the  ^afeakra  JViripario,  edited  by  Arthur  Avalon). 

*  That  is,  on  the  ground-floor  of  the  Samsara,  with  its  senses  and  passions. 

*  Doctrine  of  the  six  cakras  or  centres  in  the  body,  which  is  one  of  the 
fundamental  principles  of  the  Tantrik  Yoga. 

7  The  embodied  spirit,  which  is  one  with  Brahman. 

*The  Mahavakya  of  the  Upani?ads  (Tat  Tvam  Asi),  which  establishes 
this  unity. 

*  That  is,  he  sees  the  universe  as  a  flowering  of  that  tree  which  is  God’s 
power. 

10  The  Samsara,  or  transitory  world. 

II  That  is,  the  display  of  the  Brahman  in  the  Samsara  itself  which  is  but 

Its  aspect  to  us.  .  . 

,  11  He  neither  denounces  the  Samsara  nor  becomes  attached  to  it,  recogrrfz- 

sng  it  to  be,  what  it  is,  the  display  of  the  Brahman  to  us. 


148 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


perfume  which  by  a  natural  law  proceeds  from  its  navel,1  and  spreads 
over  a  yojana?*  And,  similarly,  when  the  KulakundalinI  Mantra,  with 
its  fragrance  of  musk,  awakes  in  the  cave  of  the  Muladhara  at  the  base 
of  the  Sadhaka’s  navel,  the  univerae  becomes  filled  with  fragrance,  which 
intoxicates  the  world.  The  Sadhaka  himself,  overpowered  by  his  own 
joy,  scatters  the  lustre  of  that  joy  throughout  the  Samsara.  Such  would 
also  be  the  case  were  the  Samsara  really  a  hell.  But,  in  fact,  and  when 
viewed  with  discernment,*  the  Samsara  is  neither  a  heaven  nor  a  hell. 
It  is  only  that  which  is  its  root  ingredient.*  Just  as,  by  whatever  name 
you  or  I  may  call  a  thing,  whether  cup,  jar,  bowl,  or  vessel,  it  remains 
in  reality  nothing  but  earth ;  just  as,  by  whatever  name  you  or  I  may 
call  a  thing,  whether  earring,  bracelet,  or  necklace,  it  is  in  reality  nothing 
but  gold;  just  as  water  is  water,  whether  you  call  it  a  river,  lake,  or  sea; 
so  the  Brahmaoda,  by  whatever  name  we  may  call  it,  husband  or  wife, 
father  or  son,  friend  or  stranger,  is  but  one  or  other  aspect  of  the  Brah- 
mamayi.*  You  or  I  may  not  understand  or  admit  it.  But  call  upon  all 
Dharmas,*  all  Dharmaiastras,1  and  all  the  religious  bodies  on  earth,  and 
ask  them.  None  will  be  able  to  deny  the  glaring  truth  told  in  Chandi  :* 
“  O  Thou  all-pervading  Devi,  Thou  art  the  Sakti  •  in  all  things  spiritual l# 
or  gross,11  whatsoever  or  wheresoever  they  be.  How  is  it  possible  to 
hymn  Thy  praise  ?  ” 

The  whole  world  will  surely  and  loudly  admit  the  truth  of  this 
Sastrik  Tattva.  What,  then,  will  you  hate  as  being  a  hell,  or  foul  smelling? 
In  the  Vaidik  path  the  perception  of  this  truth  is  the  fruit  of  Sadhana; 
in  the  Tantrik  path  it  is  both  the  root  and  the  fruit  The  Vaidik 
Sadhaka  first  tastes  the  sweetness  of  the  fruit,  and  then  waters  the  root; 
the  Tantrik  Sadhaka,  though  he  docs  not  find  sweetness  in  the  itoot,  yet 
waters  it  in  the  hope  that  he  may  enjoy  the  sweetness  of  the  fruit.  This 
is  the  reason  why  fruit  ripens  on  the  Tantrik’s  tree  long  before  blossoms 
appear  upon  the  Vaidik’s  tree.  It  is  impossible  for  a  Vaidik  to  attain  in 
a  hundred  years  the  Siddhi  which  a  Tantrik  has  in  the  palm  of  his  hand 
in  the  course  of  one  year.  Tantra  therefore  says:  “  Without  doubt,  Jiva, 
during  its  sojourn  in  Samsara,  will  quickly  reach  the  abode  of  liberation 


1  Nabhi,  as  in  the  case  of  the  musk  deer. 

1 A  distance  of  eight  to  nine  miles. 

*  Viveka. 

*  That  is,  it  is  only  that  which  it  really  is — an  aspect  of  the  Brahman. 

*  The  Den,  or  God. 

*  Codes  of  religion,  duty,  etc.  T  Scripture  touching  the  same. 

*  The  most  sacred  portion  of  the  Mirkapdeya  Purina,  reciting  the  actions- 
and  praises  of  the  Den. 

*  Power. 


M  Sat. 


“Asat. 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM  149 

if  he  but  tread  the  great  path  of  Kuia  Dharma.1  For  this  reason  the 
protection  of  the  Kaula  Dharma  should  be  sought.” 

Many,  whilst  admitting  without  doubt  that  the  essential  conclusion 
of  all  Sastras  is  that  She  is  all  Sakti,  and  pervades  all  things,  yet  ask; 
“  What  is  the  use,  so  long  as  knowledge  of  this  fact  is  not  realized,  of 
worshipping  according  to  the  Tantra  Sastra?  ”  Such  an  objection  inclines 
•one  to  laughter.  We  in  turn  ask:  “  If  the  knowledge  that  ‘  She  pervades 
all  things  ’  is  realized  from  the  very  beginning,  then  wbat  is  the  use  of 
Sadhana  at  all  ?  ”  It  is,  in  fact,  the  very  want  of  that  knowledge  which 
makes  all  prayer  and  Sadhana  necessary.  It  is  not  want  of  knowledge 
which  should  make  one  desist  from  practising  Sadhana.  On  the  contrary, 
this  circumstance  should  increase  one’s  attachment  to  it* 

To  prescribe  giving  up  food  because  the  patient  has  a  distaste  for 
it  is  not  the  advice  of  an  intelligent  man.  On  the  contrary,  an  honest 
physician  will  advise  that  morsels  of  food  be  eaten  every  day,  so  that 
thereby  the  distaste  for  it  may  be  overcome.  In  Tantra  &astra,  also, 
the  chief  of  Physicians  *  has  given  this  very  prescription.  Different  diets 
have  been  prescribed  in  different  cases,1 *  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
•disease.4 *  But  all  the  trouble  and  danger  of  which  we  hear  nowadays  in 
the  community  of  Tantriks  are  fundamentally  due  to  mismanagement  of 
those  diets.  The  patient,  through  greed,  cats  bad  food.  Local  medical 
men,  for  the  sake  of  self-interest  (and  it  may  be,  perhaps,  without  knowing 
the  condition  of  the  patient),  will  assent  to  his  doing  so.  At  last,  when 
death  arrives,  a  number  of  laymen  will  come  and  say  that  the  fault  is 
attributable  to  the  system  of  medicine,  and  to  nothing  else.  Similarly, 
through  the  disciple’s  greed  and  the  Guru’s  fault,  many  an  untimely  death 
happens  in  the  community  of  Sadhakas.  Seeing  that,  a  number  of  laymen 
belonging  to  the  outride  world  are  of  opinion  that  the  fault  is  that  of  the 
Tantra  Sastra,  and  of  nothing  else.  Hearing  this,  many  people  show 
their  intelligence  by  asking:  “  Is  initiation  in  the  Tantrik  mode  indispen¬ 
sable?”  Valihari! 6  What  a  conclusion!  We  say:  Why  take  all  this 
trouble,  when  medicine  makes  a  distinction  between  good  diet  and  bad 
diet  imperative  ?  May  not  all  treatment  be  dispensed  with  ?  You  and  I 
find  fault  with  Siva  and  with  the  Sastra,  but  the  suffering  patient  plaint¬ 
ively  says  : 

“  Whom  else  shall  I  blame,  O  Mother, 

But  myself  only  and  through  fault  of  my  own  ? 

1  Tantrik  Dharma  of  the  Kaulas. 

1  Vaidyanatha,  a  title  of  Siva. 

*  Adhikara,  which  is  also  a  division  of  Hindu  treatises  on  medicine. 

4  The  reader  should  note  the  following  passages;  which  give  the  Author’s 

explanation  of  the  corruptions  which  have  taken  place  in  practice. 

*  An  exclamation  at  some  absurdity.  As  we  should  say  “  astounding  ”• 


150 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


I  was  mine,  but  said  I  was  Thine, 

And  thus  in  a  falsity  I  am  caught.” 

Old  men  say  that  if  both  the  diseased  and  the  disease  be  on  one  side,  not 
even  the  physician’s  father  or  grandfather  can  cure  him.  But  as  ill-fortune 
would  have  it,  in  our  case  the  diseased,  the  disease,  and  the  physician  arc  all 
three  on  one  side.  That  even  in  this  state  of  things  a  few  cures  are  taking 
place  is  due  to  the  unfailing  fitness  of  the  Sastra. 

Consensus  of  other  Scriptures  as  Regards  the  Authority 
of  the  Tantra 

Who  asks  the  wind  to  make  the  fire  blaze  ?  As  wind  comes  of  itself  to 
a  smoking  fire  and  reduces  villages,  towns,  forests,  and  groves  to  ashes,  so 
when  the  first  signs  of  chaos  in  Dharma  appear  through  the  crooked 
influence  of  time,  suspicious  doubt  and  unbelief  manifest  themselves,  and 
the  heart  of  man,  well  furnished  with  the  wealth  of  heaven,  is  burnt  by 
the  fire  of  irreligion,  and  reduced  to  ashes.  Just  as  a  fire  first  breaking  ■ 
out  in  a  poor  man’s  cottage  gradually  turns  even  the  royal  palace  into  a 
mass  of  charcoal,  so  if  unbelief  takes  root  in  the  mind  of  any  member  of  a 
religious  body  it  makes  even  the  hearts  of  Pandits  of  the  greatest  intellect 
shake.  An  inflammable  thing  burns  itself  and  at  the  same  time  any  other 
thing  which  comes  in  contact  with  it.  Similarly,  an  unbelieving  man 
himself  falls  from  Dharma,  and  also  turns  others  who  come  into  contact 
with  him  into  unbelievers.  For  this  reason  all  Sastras,  from  the  Veda 
and  Tantra  to  the  ordinary  Nitiiastra,1  have  counselled  the  companion¬ 
ship  of  pious  men.*  In  the  course  of  time  society  has  long  been  denied 
the  sight  of  such.  Moreover,  impious  men  have  proudly  usurped  their 
seats,  and,  though  themselves  deceived,  deceive  society.  The  Rsis  were 
wont,  sitting  on  the  banks  of  a  lake,  to  worship  the  Dcvas  and  the  Pitrs,1 
and  to  throw  the  offerings  into  the  water.  In  the  belief  that  the  Rsis  are 
there,  and  attracted  thereby,  the  fish  in  the  waters  swarm  near  the  shore, 
but,  fools  that  they  arc,  they  do  not  know  that  the  R?is  have  gone,  and 
that  their  place  is  to-day  occupied  by  fishermen  who  spread  their  nets. 
They  who  were  wont  to  practise  austerities  and  to  distribute  for  the  good 
of  living  creatures  the  offerings  accepted  by  Devas  have  disappeared,  and 
it  is  beyond  the  power  of  the  ordinary  man  to  penetrate  the  motive 
of  those  who  have  spread  nets  of  selfishness  from  their  place.  Moreover, 
it  is  these  people  who  lead  the  hosts  of  different  sects  and  different 
Sistras.  They  are  very  often  heard  to  say  that  other  Sastras  have  no 
sympathy  with  the  Tantra  Sastra,  and  that  the  latter  is  not  a  S&stra, 

1  Prescribing  good  conduct. 

*  The  “  Gods  ”  and  forefathers. 


*  Sadhus. 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM  151 

• 

which  all  admit  to  be  authoritative.  By  other  Sastras  are  meant  princi¬ 
pally  the  Vedas,  Puranas,  Samhitas,'  and  Jyotija,1  and,  following  them, 
the  Dhanurveda,*  Ayurveda,*  Gandharva-veda,*  and  other  Szistras. 

The  severe  blows  of  political  and  religious  revolutions  have  left  us  but 
portions  of  all  Sastras.  The  rest  are  lost.  Rk,  Yajur,  Sama,  Atharva, 
Dhanuh,  and  Gandharva  Vedas  are  almost  entirely  lost.  Of  Tantras, 
Puranas,  Jyotisa,  and  Ayurveda,  portions  only  are  extant.  All  present 
criticism  must  therefore  be  made  to  rest  on  ruined  columns.  Let  us 
suppose  that  three  subjects  have  been  dealt  with  in  the  beginning,  middle, 
and  end  of  a  S&stra,  and  that  only  a  portion  of  the  first,  middle,  and  final 
part  of  the  Sastra  is  extant.  Every  intelligent  man  will  admit  that  it  is  a 
very  wrong  inference  to  draw  if  in  such  a  case  it  “were  said  that  the 
Sastra  sought  to  establish  only  what  was  mentioned  in  that  particular 
portion,  and  nothing  else.  It  is,  therefore,  a  sign  of  one-sidedness  and 
shortsightedness  to  conclude  that  the  Tantra  is  authoritative  only  if 
its  authority  is  acknowledged  in  such  fractional  Sastras  as  are  now 
current,  and  not  otherwise.  Next,  if  these  current  Sastras  anywhere  assert 
the  Tantra  to  be  unauthoritative,  then  the  Tantra  is  authoritative;  for 
Sastra  which  disproves  the  Tantra  must  be  subsequent  to  it.  If  the 
Tantrik  cult  had  not  been  in  vogue  previous  to  such  Sastra,  how  could  it 
proceed  to  disprove  it? 

According  to  Aryan  principles,  all  Sastras  are  without  a  beginning,  so 
that  none  is  anterior  or  posterior  to  another.  Even  now,  in  almost  all  of 
the  extant  Sastras  mention  is  made  of  all  other  Sastras.  Such  a  deeply 
secret  tic  binds  them  the  one  to  the  other  that,  should  anyone  slip  from  it, 
all  arc  tom  and  scattered.  It  is,  therefore,  impossible  for  one  Arya  Sastra 
to  disprove  another.  Such  adverse  criticisms  as,  despite  this  fact,  we  sec 
nowadays  paraded  as  “  opinions  of  the  Sastra  ”  on  the  Tantra  Sastra, 
are  not  the  opinions  of  Arya  Sastra  at  all,  but  the  mere  outcome  of  the 
activity  of  non-Aryan  intellects.  Upon  the  question  whether  there  is  in 
reality  any  opposition  to  the  Tantrik  cult  in  the  Arya  Sastra,  we  shall  lay 
before  SSdhakas  a  few  Sastrik  authorities,  so  that  they  may  for  themselves 
see  whether  other  Sastras  approve  or  disapprove  of  the  Tantra. 

Upani?ad  says:  “  The  Supreme  Siva,8  the  Author  of  all  Sastras  and 
ordinances,  prepared  the  eighteen  Vidyas 7  of  Sruti 8  and  all  the  Darianas,* 
manifesting  Himself  therein  in  play.70  Being  anxiously  requested  by 

1  Such  as  the  Manava  and  other  Dharmaiastras. 

*  Astrology.  *  Veda  of  the  art  of  warfare. 

*  Veda  of  the  art  of  medicine.  *  Veda  of  the  art  of  music,  etc. 

*  Paramaiiva.  7  Branches  of  knowledge  described  post. 

8  Revelation.  *  Systems  of  Philosophy. 

10  That  is,  by  incarnating  Himself  as  the  R$u,  who  were  their  reveaiers  or 
authors. 


152 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Bhagavati,1  who  is  inseparable  from  His  own  Self,  He  revealed  them  from 
His  five  mouths  in  five  amnayas 1 *  as  the  highest  good.*  The  eighteen 
Vidyas  are  the  four  Vedas — Rk,  Sama,  Atharva,  and  Yajur;  the  four  sub- 
Vedas — Ayurveda,  Gandharva  Veda,  Dan^a  Niti,  and  Dhanurveda;  4  six 
Vedangas — viz-,  Siksl,  Kalpa,  Vyakarana,  Nirukta,  Chhandah,  and 
Jyoti§a ; 4 *  and  Purana,  Nyaya,  Miraamsa,  and  Dharroa  Sastra;  and,  lastly, 
the  six  Darianas* — Vedanta,  Yoga,  Saiikhya,  Mimamsa,  Viiesa,  and 
Nyaya.” 

We  believe  that  no  one  is  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  a  fundamental  part 
of  Tantrik  Sadhana  is  Satcakrabheda.7  The  first  aphorism8 *  of  the 
§atcakrabheda  comes  from  Upanisad  itself.  We  arc  unable  to  quote  the 
Vaidik  Mantra  infc  book,*  but  for  the  purpose  of  illustration  we  shall  refer 
only  to  its  substance.  It  says:  “One  hundred  and  one  nadis 10  emanate 
from  the  base  of  the  heart.  Of  these,  only  one — Sugumna — passes  out 
through  the  head.11 * *  If  at  death  the  fife-giving  Sakd  passes  upward  along 
this  nadi,  the  Jiva  penetrates  through  the  gate  of  Suryaloka,1*  and  attains 
liberation.  All  other  nadis  are  the  cause  of  the  Jiva’s  return  to  Samsara.11 
Susumna  alone  leads  to  liberation.” 

The  same  is  stated  in  the  seventh  Mantra  of  the  Prasna  Upanisad.  In 
the  Kalika,  Tara,  Narayana,  Siva  Upanisads,  the  Nfsimhatapanl,  Gopala- 
tapani,  and  other  works,  short  but  pregnant  aphorisms  deal  with  the 
appearances14  of  Devata,  Mantras,  Dhyana,14  worship, 14  and  other  things 
alone  related  in  the  Tantra.  This,  we  believe,  is  not  unknown  to  any 
worshipper.  In  addition  to  this,  the  greater  part  of  the  processes  dealt 


I  The  Devi.  *  Teachings  handed  down  from  Guru  to  Guru. 

*  Paramartha. 

4  Medicine,  art,  code  of  punishments,  warfare. 

*  That  is,  pronunciation  of  words,  or  euphony,  ritual,  grammar,  glossary, 
prosody,  astronomy,  and  astrology. 

4  Systems  of  Philosophy. 

7  That  is,  the  piercing  of  the  six  cakras  or  centres  in  the  human  body  by 

rousing  Kufldalinl  in  the  Muladh&ra,  and  leading  Her  to  and  through  each  of 

them  successively,  by  the  passage  of  the  Sujunmi  Nadi  (sec  Arthur  Avalon’s 
Description  of  the  six  centres  or  $atcakramrupapa). 

8  Sutra.  *  This  being  forbidden. 

14  Generally  translated  “nerve”  or  “  artery,”  but  as  used  in  the  case  of  the 

Susumna  and  other  similar  nadis,  the  word  also  denotes  more  subde  channels 
of  energy  than  the  nerves  and  arteries  of  the  gross  body. 

II  This  nidi  is  centrally  situated  in  the  Merudanda,  or  spinal  column, 

between  Ida  and  Pihgala. 

11  Abode  of  the  sun.  11  The  world. 

14  Murti  of  a  Devata.  14  Contemplation.  14  Uplaana. 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 


153 


with  in  Tantra  relative  to  killing,  driving  away,  and  so  forth,1 * *  is  contained 
in  the  Atharvaveda.  Many  Vaidik  Mantras  have  also  been  prescribed 
in  Tantrik  worship.  Then  who  can  say  how  many  hundreds  of  Tantrik 
up&sana  tattvas  *  have  disappeared  with  the  loss  of  hundreds  and  thousands 
of  Sakhas  *  of  the  Vedas  ?  Other  examples  are  unnecessary. 

In  our  discussion  upon  the  principle  of  Mantra,  Sadhakas  will  be 
given  clear  proof  to  show  that  even  the  Pranava,*  the  greatest  treasure 
and  very  pith  of  the  Veda,  is  not  outside  the  scope  of  the  Tantrik  Mantras. 
In  the  Naradapancaratra  *  it  is  said :  “  Meditating  on  the  six  cakras, 
Mtiladhara,  Svadisthana,  Manipura,  Anahata,  Viiuddha,  and  Ajnakhya,8 
he  sees  his  own  adored  Devata,  Sri  Kfsna,  in  his  heart,  seated  on  the 
lotus  of  a  thousand  petals  embraced  by  the  Sakti*  KundalinI  smiling, 
beauteous,  pure,  having  the  lustre  of  a  young  cloud,7 10  garmented  in 
yellow  silk.  In  the  following  Sloka  *  the  great  eight-lettered  Mantra 
of  Bhagavan  Sri  Kr$na  is  given : 

“  Laksmlrmaya  kamavijam  ’ng’entam  krsnapadam  tatha 
Vahnijayantamantranca  mantrarajam  manoharam.”  * 

In  the  Varaha  PurSna  it  is  said:  “Beloved,  the  remembrance, 
praise,  sight,  or  even  touch  of  a  Candala who  is  devoted  to  Bhagavan 11 
easily  purifies  the  world.  Lady!  knowing  this  more  than  earthly 
power  of  devotion  to  Bhagavan,  intelligent  men  should  worship  Janar- 
dana”  by  the  rites  prescribed  in  the  Veda  of  Agama.”  11 


1  This  refers  to  the  Tantrik  $atkarma,  or  magical  powers — Maranam 

(destruction);  uchchatanam  (driving  away);  vafikaranam  (bringing  under 
control,  which  would  include  hypnotism);  stambhanam  (arrest — e.g.,  staying  a 
storm,  striking  a  man  dumb);  vidvesanam  (causing  antagonism  between 
persons) ;  svastyayanam  (curative  and  helping  power  in  disease,  misfortune, 
and  danger). 

*  Forms  of,  or  discourses  concerning,  worship. 

*  Branches  of  the  Veda.  4 * * 7  The  Mantra  Ora.  *  Chap.  iii. 

*  These  are  the  names  of  the  six  cakras  situate  in  the  perineum  and  in  the 
regions  of  the  genital  organ,  navel,  heart,  throat  and  between  the  eyebrows, 

respectively. 

7  A  cloud  when  first  formed — black  with  a  tinge  of  blue  from  the  sky 
behind  it. 

*  From  chap,  iv  of  same  work. 

*  The  author  does  not  translate  this  verse,  which,  however,  runs  as  follows: 
*'  The  charming  King  of  Mantras  is  Laksmi  Maya,  Kama  bijas,  together  with 
the  fourth  case  ending  of  Krpja  (K^piya),  followed  by  the  wife  of  fire.” 

Vahnijaya  is  Svaha,  the  wife  of  the  lord  of  Fire.  Nor  does  the  author  give 
the  Mantra,  which  is:  Aim,  Srim,  Klim,  Kifnaya  Svaha.  The  first  three 
words  are  Tantrik  bijas  of  Lak?ml,  May  a,  and  KSma,  respectively. 

10  One  of  the  lowest,  untouchable  castes.  11  God. 

»  Kjsija.  “  The  Tantra. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


154 


In  the  KalikS  Purana1 * *  it  is  said :  “  The  Devi  should  be  meditated 
upon  as  ten-handed,  and  worshipped  according  to  Durga  Tantra.” 
This  is  merely  an  indication  of  the  line  of  worship.  The  entire  Kalika 
Purina  follows  the  Tantra.  All  the  bijas*,  Mantras  and  Murtis  of 
Bhagavan  MaheSvara*  which  are  given  for  the  Sivakavaca 4 * * * * *  in  the 
Brahmottara  Khapda  *  of  the  Skanda  Pur&jja  are  inspired  by  Tantra. 

The  Padma  Purana  says."  “  O  Devi  of  beautiful  thighs,’  the  religious 
arts  of  the  uninitiated  avail  not.  Such  a  one  is  begotten  a  beast  after  death. 
How  can  JIva  be  beloved  of  Bhagavan  without  Vaisnavi  initiation,  without 
the  Gauri’s  favour,  and  without  Vaisnava  Dharma  ?  ” 

In  the  Devi  Bhagavata  we  read :  “  In  this  manner  in  the  Satya  Yuga* 
Brahmanas  used  to  fiiakc  constant  japa  ’  of  the  Gayatri,  Tara,  and  Hrillekha 
Mantras.”  Hrillekha  is  a  Mantra  spoken  of  in  the  Tantra.  Besides  this, 
the  whole  of  the  Upasana  Khanda  10  of  the  Devi  Bhagavata  is  ornamented 
with  garlands  of  Tantrik  Mantras. 

In  the  Mahabharata  11 * *  we  have  Bhagavin  Maheivara’s  words  to  Daksa 
on  the  subject  of  his  sacrifice :  “  O  doer  of  good  deeds,  I  shall  again  grant 
you  a  blessing.  Accept  it,  and  hear  the  message  of  this  blessing  with  joyous 
countenance  and  attentive  mind.  This  auspicious  Paiupata  Vrata  ,J  was  of 
yore  created  by  me.  It  is  a  vrata  extracted  by  me  widi  careful  considera¬ 
tion  from  the  Veda  with  its  six  angas  **  and  the  Sahkhya  and  Yoga  Sastras. 
It  is  performed  with  severe  and  long  austerities  by  Dcvas  and  Danavas  14  ; 
hitherto  unknown;  of  universal  application  and  everlasting  effect.  It  may  be 
accomplished  in  five  years,  is  secret,  never  blamed  by  the  wise  (or  it  is 
blamed  by  fools),  and  is  opposed  to  the  Dharma  based  on  caste  distinc¬ 
tions.'*  It  is  above  airama  dharma  '*  and  is  practised  by  the  great, 

I  Sftradlya  Adhikara. 

*  Tantrik  ”  Seed  "  mantras,  such  as  klim,  hriro,  Shrim,  hum,  etc. 

*  Siva. 

4  Amulet  of  Siva,  borne  as  an  armour  (Kavaca)  against  evil. 

6  A  portion  of  the  Skanda  Purana. 

*  Uttarakhand^  (last  part). 

’  See  Lalita  Sahasranama;  Kamefajfiatasaubhagya  mardavom  dvayanvita. 

*  The  first  or  golden  age. 

*  Recitation  of  Mantra. 

10  The  portion  of  the  Devi  Bhagavata  dealing  with  worship. 

II  Sand  Parva  (sec  translation,  Introduction,  ante). 

M  Voluntary  religious  vow  or  rite. 

11  Parts  (see  post).  14  Demonic  spirits. 

t*  VarnaSramadharma — relating  both  to  caste  and  the  a&ama,  or  stages  of 
life:  brahmacaii  (student),  grhastha  (householder),  vanapraatha  (recluse), 
bhiksu  (religious  mendicant).  Historically,  the  Tantra  appears  to  represent  in 
some  degree  influences  contrary  to  caste  and  Brahmapical  claims. 

14  Law  and  duty  relating  to  the  Alrama  (see  post). 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 


155 


who  arc  not  afraid  of  death.  High-favoured  Daksa!  Enjoy,  without  even 
performing  the  great  vrata,  the  great  fruits  which  it  bears  to  those  who 
duly  perform  it.  Cease  to  grieve  at  the  destruction  of  the  sacrifice. 
Granting  this  blessing  to  Dak$a  Prajapati,  Bhagavan  Mahadeva,  of  im¬ 
mense  might,  disappeared  with  his  consort  and  followers.”  The  community 
of  Sadhakas  will  understand  that  this  great  Pasupatavrata  was  according 
to  the  Tantra.  Besides  this,  there  are  many  places  which  closely  follow 
the  Tantra.  It  is  needless  to  mention  them  all. 

Next  comes  the  Mahabhagavata.  It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  this 
great  Purana  follows  the  Tantra,  seeing  that  it  is  eternally  set  on  the 
thousand  petals  of  the  lotus,  whereon  Jagadamba  is  seated,  and  that  it  is 
that  which  Bhagavan  Vcdavyasa  1  declared  to  be  cfhly  another  form  of 
Tantra.  It  is  needless  to  quote  any  single  piece  of  evidence  from  the 
book,  for  the  whole  of  it,  from  beginning  to  end,  is  evidence. 

In  the  Yoga  Sastra,  the  philosophy  of  Patanjali,  it  is  said:  “  Siddhi 
is  of  five  kinds — namely,  acquired  by  birth,  drugs,  Mantra,  austerity 
and  ecstasy.'  Some  are  in  possession  of  Siddhi  from  birth,  such  as 
Kapila,  Prahlada,  Suka,  and  others.  Some  get  it  by  taking  drugs, 
such  as  the  Rsi  Mandavya.  Some  acquire  it  by  constant  japa  of 
the  Mantra,  such  as  the  successful  Sadhakas.  Others  obtain  it  by  dint 
of  austerities,  such  as  Viivamitra  and  others.  Some  attain  to  it  by  means 
of  ecstasy,*  and  such  are  Yogis.” 

All  these  five  forms  of  Siddhi  are  the  results  of  practice  in  Yoga  in 
former  births.  In  the  present  life  they  are  simply  revealed  by  the  help 
of  such  causes  as  birth,  drugs,  Mantra,  etc.  That  form  of  Siddhi  which 
comes  from  constant  repetition  of  Mantras  cannot  be  acquired  without 
the  help  of  Tantra,  the  Mantrasastra.  Again,  according  to  the  Tantra,  it 
is  not  the  highest,  but  the  second  form  of  Siddhi. 

As  to  the  Ayurveda,  every  good  physician  knows  (as  is  also  not 
unknown  to  Sadhakas  that  all  forms  of  worship  directed  in  connection 
with  the  saying  of  Mantra  *  over  medicines,  preparation  of  metallic  drugs 
of  the  ash  of  mercury,  and  other  things,  as  described  in  the  Ayurveda, 
follow  processes  prescribed  in  the  Tantra  and  employ  T&ntrik  bljas. 
Mantras,  etc.*  We  are  unable  to  openly  quote  all  those  Bijas,  Mantras, 
etc.  Competent  inquirers  will  obtain  a  mass  of  evidence  by  going  through 
this  Sastra. 

In  Jyotisa  it  is  said:  “  At  inauspicious  times,  such  as  unclean  months, 
the  following  acts  should  not  be  done:  commencement  of  education, 

1  Who  arranged  the  Vedas,  wrote  Mahabharata  and  the  eighteen  great 
Purina*. 

1  Janmaja,  Oshadhija,  Mantraja,  Tapoja  and  Satnadhija. 

*  Samadhi.  *  Amantrana, 

*  Indian  medicine  is  greatly  indebted  to  the  Tintrilts. 


156 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


piercing  of  the  ear-lobes,  tonsure,  investiture  with  the  sacred  thread, 
marriage,  bathing  for  the  first  time  at  a  place  of  pilgrimage,  seeing  the 
Anadi-devata,1  examination,  enjoyment  of  ease,  puraicarana,1 *  and  initia¬ 
tion.”  *  Had  not  the  Tantra  Sastra  been  an  ever-existent  authority,  how 
could  puraScarapa  and  dlk$a  have  been  dealt  with  in  it  ? 

Smrri  Agastya  Samhita  says:  “The  Mantra,  which  Guru  gives  with 
satisfaction  and  a  joyous  countenance  .  .  .  performing  these  prelimi¬ 
naries  and  mentioning  the  time  of  solar  eclipse,  it  has  been  said  that  the 
Mantra  which  a  person  receives  from  his  Guru  at  that  time  becomes  easily 
successful 4  for  the  Sadhaka.” 

In  the  Mahakapila  Paiicaratra  we  find:  “  Instruction  in  Mantra 
given  by  Guru  at«the  said  Naksatra,  Tithi,  Karana,  Yoga,  and  Vara,5 
becomes  auspicious  to  a  Sadhaka.” 

According  to  Pingala,  “  a  Mantra,  once  rightly  accomplished,  be¬ 
comes  propitious  even  if  it  is  not  practised  and  worshipped  (afterwards).” 

In  the  Mantramuktavall:  *  “  Initiated  persons  should  duly  make  japa 
of  Mantras  and  worship  Devatas,  for  no  sin  or  uncleanliness  touches  the 
initiated  who  are  self-controlled.” 

It  has  been  said  in  the  Narada  Samhita:  “  Next,  we  shall  provide 
for  puja,  as  prescribed  in  Agama,7  concerning  persons  tainted  with 
uncleanliness. 

Besides  this,  there  is  a  mass  of  proof  in  Brahma  Purana,  Siva  Purana, 
Vi?nu  Purana,  Markantjeya  Purana,  Agni  Purana,  Aditya  Purana,  Vayu 
Purana,  Lihga  Purana,  Nandike4vara  Purana,  Bhavisya  Purana,  Matsya 
Purapa,  Kurma  Purapa,  Garu<ja  Purapa,  Brahmantfa  Purapa,  Brahma- 
vaivarta  Purapa,  Matsya  Sukta,  Siva  Samhita,  liana  Samhita,  Siva 
Dharma,  Siva  Sutra,  and  other  Sastras.  Were  wc  to  quote  the  evidence 
of  every  hook,  it  would  not  be  possible  to  find  room  for  them  in  this  small 
volume.  We  are,  therefore,  obliged  to  refrain  from  doing  so  against 
our  will. 

.  Next,  it  is  necessary  to  inquire  in  this  connection  whether  there  were 
ever  any  Sadhakas  or  Sadhikas  *  initiated  in  Tantrik  Mantras,  and  possess¬ 
ed  of  Siddhi  therein,  amonpt  those  who  were  discoverers,  controllers,  and 
founders  of  Skstras,  or  amongst  those  who  were  worshipped  throughout 
the  world  as  successive  generations  of  gurus  for  their  practices,  study, 

1  Siva  lingam. 

*  A  rite  in  which  mantras  are  repeated  at  prescribed  manner  of  times  (see 
Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra) . 

1  Dikji.  4  Siddha. 

*  Star,  lunar  day,  a  division  of  the  day  (of  which  there  are  eleven),  con¬ 
junction,  week  day. 

4  Adhikara  (chapter)  on  ASauca  (uncleanliness).  7  Tantra. 

*  Female  Sadhaka. 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 


157 


Sadhana,  and  Siddhi  in  every  Sastra,  or  amongst  those  who  descended  on 
earth  from  the  Deviloka  and  Devaioka,1  for  the  establishment  of  Dharma, 
the  preservation  of  the  human  race,  and  the  promulgation  of  Sastra.  We 
shall  make  no  reference  to  the  community  of  Sadhakas  coming  after  them. 
Those  only  we  shall  present  here  whose  names  the  Sastras  have  proclaimed. 

The  Kulacudamani  says:  “Manu,  Gandra,  Kubera, .  Manmatha, 
Lopamudra,  Mani,  Nandi,  Sakra,  Skanda,  Siva,  Krodhabhattaraka. 
Pancaml,  Durvasa,  Vyasa,  Surya,  Vaiista,  ParaSara,  Aurva,  Vahni,  Yama, 
Nirrita,  Varuna,  Aniruddha,  Bharadvaja,  Daksinamurti,  the  Ganapa,  the 
Kulapa,  Laksmi,  Ganga,  Sarasvatl,  DhStri,  Sesa,  Pramatta,  Unmatta, 
Kulabhairava,  K$etrapala,  Hanuman,  Daksa,  Garuda,  Kaiyapa,  Kutsa, 
Kunta,  Jamadagni,  Bhrgu,  Brhaspati,  the  Chief  of  the»Yadus,  Dattatreya, 
Yudhispra,  Aijuna,  Bhimasena,  Dropacarya,  Vfs5kapi,  Duryodhana, 
Kunti,  Sita,  Rukmini,  Satyabhama,  Draupadx,  Crvaii,  Tilottama,  Pu$pa- 
danta,  Mahabuddha,  Vala,  Kala,  Mandara,  KaiLaia,  Ksfrasindhu,  Udadhi, 
Himavan,  Narada — all  these  are  Virasadhakas.1  They  have  been  spoken 
of  as  great  Viras,*  and  by  the  grace  of  Mahavidya  4  they  have  attained 
Samadhi  in  their  respective  lines  of  action.” 

The  Jfianarnava  6  says :  “  The  said  Vidya  4  is  worshipped  by  Manu  ” ; 
and  the  Daksinamurti  Samhita  says:  “  The  above-mentioned  Mantra  is 
worshipped  by  Surya,”  and  “  the  said  Vidya  is  worshipped  by  Agastya,” 
and  as  to  another  Mantra,  “  The  said  Vidya  is  worshipped  by  Durvasa.” 

In  addition  to  all  these,  Dattatreya,  Paraiurama,  Vi4vamitra,  Rama- 
candra,  Balarama,  Sri  Krsna,  Brahma,  Visnu,  Maheivara,  Mahakala 
Himself,  the  imperturbable  Narada,  Matanga,  and  other  Bhairavas, 
Sanatkumara,  Gautama,  Kapila,  Katyayana,  and  other  R?is,  were  all 
initiated  in  the  Mantras  of  Tantra,  and  attained  Siddhi  therein.  From 
the  special  mention  of  these  persons  as  initiates  it  does  not  follow  that  the 
rest  were  uninitiatc.  Sastra  has  merely  mentioned  the  names  of  those 
whom  circumstance  has  made  renowned  in  all  the  worlds,  and  of  the 
names  mentioned  but  one  small  sQtra  has  been  quoted.  In  one  word,  it 
may  be  said  that,  amongst  those  whose  names  have  been  mentioned  in 
the  Ary  a  Sastras,  Smrtis,  and  Samhitas,  those  who  were  uninitiated  in 
the  Mantras  of  the  Tantra  are  very  rare. 

On  hearing  that  even  Mahakala,  imperturbable  Brahma,  Vispu  and 
Maheivara,  Ramacandra,  Sri  Kj-apa,  Ganga,  Lakjrnl,  Sarasvatl,  Sita, 
Rukmipi,  and  others,  were  initiated  in  TSntrik  Mantras,  let  none  think 
that  their  greatness  was  lowered  thereby.  Their  store  of  greatness  is  not 


1  Abode  of  Devi  and  Devas  (heaven). 

*  That  is,  Sadhakas  following  vir&c&ra. 

*  Here  one  of  the  T&ntrik  divisions  of  worshippers.  4  The  DevL 

» In  the  Mantra  adhikara  (chapter).  4  Feminine  Mantra. 


158 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


80  small  as  yours  or  mine  that  it  is  liable  to  be  dried  up  at  every  wind. 
The  addition  or  subtraction  of  one  or  two  waves  makes  very  little  differ¬ 
ence  in  a  greatness  which  is  of  endless  extent,  unfathomable,  and  solemn, 
like  a  vast  ocean  unruffled  by  any  wind.  How  can  their  greatness  be 
lowered  unless  they  worship  another? 1 *  It  is  because  we  are  talking  that 
we  are  obliged  to  use  the  word  “  their  ”.  But  from  the  spiritual  point  of 
view  it  should  be  “  His  ”.  Sadhaka,  know  it  for  certain  that,  under  the 
names  of  Kali  or  Krsna,  Hari  or  Hara,*  it  is  Him  whom  we  know — He 
who,  moved  by  the  sweetness  of  His  own  play,  and  with  the  desire  to  shed 
the  joy  of  love  and  Brahma-bliss  upon  the  hearts  of  His  devotees, 
saves  the  universe  in  five3  forms,  though  but  one  Brahman  in  reality.  He 
is  five  in  one  and  one  in  five,  and,  together  with  the  universe,  is  one 
without  a  second.  What  other,  then,  is  there  whom  He  can  worship?  If 
in  any  form,  in  the  course  of  play  or  in  any  incarnation,  He  has  worship¬ 
ped,  know  that  worship  to  be  nothing  but  the  tapasya  of  Nara  Narayana 4 * 
in  the  Badarikasrama,6  the  pancatapah  of  Jagadamba  in  the  Himalaya,3 
the  worship  of  Govardhana  in  Brindavana,7  the  Katyay ani-V rata,8  the 
love  for  Sri  Krsna,  and  worship  of  Krsna-Kali  by  Sri  Radhika,  and  the 
worship  of  Mahadcva  by  Sri  Krsna,  after  receiving  initiation  from  Veda- 
vyasa.  He  has  made  obeisance  to  Himself,  and  that  not  in  order  to 
worship  another,  but  in  order  to  preach  to  the  world  the  potency  of 
Mantra,  Tapas,  and  Dharma.  Whenever  it  has  become  necessary  to 
preach  any  Sakti  to  the  religious  world,  He  Himself  has  shown  the  path 
by  acquiring  Siddhi  in  the  Sadhana  of  that  Sakti,  worship  being  but  the 
means  to  the  attainment  of  Siddhi.  He  has  thus  given  instruction  to  all 
people.  Bhagavan  appears  in  the  heart  of  Guru,  and  Himself  gives  His 
own  Mantra  to  the  disciple.  In  this  His  greatness  does  not  suffer.  How 
can  the  son  learn  to  make  obeisance  to  his  parents  unless  the  parents 
themselves  show  it  to  him?  The  parents  of  the  world  have,  therefore, 
made  obeisance  to  themselves,  and  so  taught  the  world  how  to  make 
obeisance  to  them.  As  His  full  Brahmahood  is  not  affected  by  His 


1  That  is,  they  worship  themselves. 

1  Vi?nu  and  Siva. 

*  The  paftcadevata:  Siva,  Visnu,  Sakti,  Ganefe,  and  Surya. 

4  Nara,  an  ancient  rsi,  and  Narayana  is  Vi$nu.  Both  did  tapas  in  the 
Badarikairama  (Badarinath)  in  the  Himalaya.  Nara  subsequently  incarnated 
as  Arjuna,  and  Narayana  as  Sri  Krsna,  at  the  end  of  Dvapara  Yuga. 

•  See  last  note. 

•  Gauri  performed  the  pancatapah  (five  penances  to  secure  Siva  as  Her 
husband). 

7  Sri  K^na  worshipped  the  mountain  Govardhana. 

*  Vrata  which  Sri  Kr^na  asked  the  Gopis  (herds women)  to  perform  before 
the  Rasa  festival. 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 


159 


appearance  as  a  daughter  of  the  Lord  of  Mountains  as  the  fruit 1  of  Maha- 
deva’s  austerities  and  for  the  destruction  of  the  demon*  T&raka,  or  by  his 
appearance  as  the  son  or  daughter  of  Nanda  as  the  fruit  of  the  devotion 
of  the  herdswomen 3  and  for  the  destruction  of  Kamsa  and  others,  so 
neither  His  sole  unity  without  a  second  nor  His  greatness  are  affected  by 
His  initiation  in  Tantrik  Mantras  and  the  attainment  of  Siddhi  in  worships 
prescribed  in  the  Tantra,  done  to  show  to  the  world  the  potency  of 
Mantra. 

If  is  needless  to  point  out  that  Dattatreya,  Gautama,  Sanatkumara, 
Kapila,  Narada,  and  other  Rsis  were  Tantriks.  Works  such  as  the 
Dattatreya  Samhita,  Gotama  Tantra,  Sanatkumara  Tantra,  Kapila 
Pancaratra,  Narada  Pancaratra,  and  others,  are  obvious  proofs  of  it. 
Probably  there  is  no  Sadhaka  who  does  not  know  of  the  great  Rsi 
Katyayana.  Drawn  by  the  intensity  of  his  devotion,  Devi  Herself  assumed 
the  form  of  a  girl,  full  of  youth,  and  appeared  at  the  root  of  a  bael  tree 
on  the  sixth  evening  after  the  new  moon,  in  the  month  of  A$vina,  for  the 
destruction  of  the  Demon*  Mahisa.  Since  then  the  Victrix  of  Mahisa 
has  been  worshipped  in  autumn4  under  the  name  of  KatyayanI  or 
daughter  of  Katyayana.  It  is  this  Rsi  Katyayana  who  is  the  author  of 
the  Gfhya 5  of  the  Yajur  Veda. 

The  Direct  and  Superior  Power  of  Tantra 

It  seems  the  result  of  some  great  sin  even  to  harbour  the  thought  that 
upon  the  favourable  or  unfavourable  opinion  of  other  Sastras  the  authority 
of  that  Tantra  depends  which  keeps  living  and  safe  in  the  shadow  of  its 
mighty  arms  all  things  moving  and  unmoving  in  the  universe  and  world  of 
SSdhana  from  the  creation  of  the  First  Self’  to  the  great  dissolution.’ 
Authors  of  Smrti,  Samhitas,  Puranas,  and  Darianas,  have,  even  after  the 
practice  for  ages  of  severe  austerities,  failed  to  discover  Her,  and,  pro¬ 
strating  themselves  to  the  earth  in  obeisance,  have  said :  “  O  Thou  whose 
gunas  8  arc  unknown  to  all  Nigamas,*  how  can  we,  O  Mother,  describe 
that  beauty  of  Thine  which  is  visible  only  to  Paramaiiva  ?  ”  10 

Again,  it  has  been  said:  “  O  Mother,  Creatrix  of  all!  who  else  is  able 
and  will  dare  to  describe  the  greatness  of  Thy  gunas,  which  even  Brahma, 
the  Lord  of  creation,11  with  his  four  mouths;  the  victor  of  Tripura,  with  his 


1  Siddhi.  *  Asura.  8  The  gopts,  who  loved  Sri  Kr$na. 

4  Sarat,  the 'months  of  Bhadra  and  Alvina. 

8  Grhya,  or  household  sutras  of  that  Veda. 

8  Puruja  or  Ego.  7  Mahapralaya.  8  Qualities,  iunctions. 

*  Tantras.  18  The  Supreme  Siva.  11  Praj&pati. 


160 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


five  mouths; 1  K&rtikeya,  commander  of  the  celestial  armies,  with  his  six 
mouths ;  *  and  Anantadeva,  the  Lord  of  serpents,  with  his  thousand 
mouths,*  are  unable  to  describe  ?  ” 

Pu$padanta  has  said:  “  If  Sarasvati  herself  were  to  write  for  unending 
ages  with  a  pen  made  from  an  indestructible  branch  of  the  Kalpa-trcc,4 
with  ink  in  volume  equal  to  that  of  the  Black  Mountain  contained  in  the 
ocean  as  its  pot,  upon  the  wide  surface  of  the  earth  as  writing-paper,  even 
then  She  would  fail  to  record  Thy  gupas.” 

It  is  a  dangerous  learning  which  to-day  makes  a  man,  in  order  to 
prove  the  authority  of  Tantra  Sastra,  the  word  of  Siva  Sakti  (who  is 
beyond  the  mind  and  speech  of  this  world,  Whose  merciiul  regard  the 
three  worlds  supplicate,  whose  meanest  servants,  the  Yogis,  Rsis,  Munis, 
Siddhas,  Sadhus,  and  Sadhakas,8  are  honoured  throughout  the  world), 
depend  on  the  words  of  the  self-same  R$is. 

Learned  man !  lay  aside  this  learning  of  yours,  and  be  not  ashamed 
for  having  done  so.  If  any  have  come  to  this  world  with  a  perverse 
intellect,  you  undoubtedly  arc  their  chief.  Disputes,  questionings,  doubts, 
and  misgivings  on  this  subject  arise  in  your  and  my  minds.  But  in  none 
of  the  Sastras  do  we  find  those  who  are  to  remove  our  doubts  themselves 
raising  a  whisper  against  Tantra.  Nowhere  therein  do  we  find  it  ques¬ 
tioned  whether  the  Tantra  Sastra  is  authoritative  or  not.  You  will  say 
that  perhaps  they  had  not  such  an  all-embracing  vision  as  we  have  got. 
But  there  is  no  “  perhaps  ”  in  the  matter.  Such  scepticism  was  not  in  their 
nature.  You  and  I,  though  bom  of  Brahmana  parents,  are  to-day 
behaving  like  Candalas  *  through  bad  companionship.  And  so  we  consider 
it  derogatory  to  our  honour  to  bow  our  heads  at  the  feet  of  our  parents. 
But  they  were  sons  of  Brahman  as,  and  Brahmanas  themselves,  and  thus 
the  sceptical  question  suitable  only  to  a  Cantfala’s  nature  never  found  a 
place  in  their  minds.  Where  there  is  no  question,  how  can  there  be  an 
answer? 

Just  as  people  fearlessly  enter  the  palace  of  their  King  at  the  time  of 
payment  of  their  yearly  taxes,  and  seek  his  protection  when  unavoidable 
danger  appears,  so,  whenever  any  unavoidable  difficulty  has  arisen  in 


1  Siva  called  Tripurari  from  his  victory  over  the  Demon  Tripura,  or  as  some 
say,  the  three  cities  of  the  Asuras. 

*  Son  of  Siva. 

*  Who,  from  under  the  nether  worlds  (patala),  supports  the  universe  on  his 
head  (see  Vi?iju  Parana  tf,  chap.  5). 

4  The  heavenly  tree,  which  granted  all  desire  as  its  fruit. 

'Adepts  in  Yoga,  Seen,  sages,  the  perfected  (siddha),  holy  men,  and 
religious  men  who  practise  Sadhana. 

*  One  of  die  lowest  castes. 


161 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 

matters  of  worship  or  any  idhyatmik,  adhibhautik,  or  adhidaivik  danger 1 
has  arisen,  all  Sastras  have  stood  at  the  door  of  Tantra  and  given  instruc¬ 
tions  in  its  name  for  man’s  safety.  And  at  other  times,  whenever  then:  has 
been  occasion  to  describe  practices,*  rules  of  caste,*  history,  and  the  like, 
they  have  timidly  assumed  silence,  considering  the  saying  of  Tantra  to  be 
as  weighty  and  solemn  as  royal  messages,  and  beyond  penetration  on  their 
part.  Consequently,  they  do  not  launch  into  a  discussion  upon  Tantra 
at  every  word.  This  is  not  due  to  want  of  faith,  but  bespeaks  perfect 
reverence  on  their  part. 

It  is  in  Bengal  alone  that  we  hear  people,  now  here,  now  there, 
raising  the  grating  cry  of  “  Tantra,  Tantra!  ”,  But  in  other  provinces,  such 
as  Maharas{ra,4  Dravida,6  Utkala,*  Kasmira,  and  NcfKtia,  people  do  not 
call  that  Sastra,  Tantra,  but  Mantra  Sastra,  just  as  people  do  not  take  the 
name  of  their  fathers,  but  call  them  “  Father”.  The  meaning  of  this  is 
that  worship  of  ISvara 7  is  every  person’s  daily  duty,  and  that  Mantra  is 
essentially  necessary  for  worship.  If  Mantra  be  necessary,  then  one  must 
necessarily  ask  the  help  of  a  Mantra  Sastra.  If,  in  spite  of  such  eternally 
valid  evidence  as  the  words  of  Sastra,  lives  of  Rsis,  immemorial  practice, 
anyone  still  says  “  Unauthoritative  ”  to  such  we,  as  followers  of  the  Sastra, 
will  reply:  “The  Vedas,  Smfti  and  words  inspired  by  the  spirit  of 
Dharma  are  authority,  and  if  to  any  person  all  this  is  of  no  authority, 
then  who  will  accept  his  words  as  authority  ?  ” 

Such  evidence  is  sufficient  to  prove  the  acquiescence  of  the  Sastras, 
but  the  acquiscencc  which  is  required  by  polemics  is  different. 

In  anticipation  of  danger  from  doubt,  which  is  the  characteristic  of 
the  Kali  age,  the  great  Ordainer  has  made  adequate  provision  against  it. 
Other  Sastras  have  repeatedly  and  clearly  said :  “  The  doubt  of  a  person 
without  faith  is  no  example  ’’—that  is,  should  an  unbeliever  do  any  work 
ordained  of  Sastra,  and  yet  derive  no  benefit  from  it,  then  his  case  docs 
not  stand  for  an  example,  “  because  everywhere  it  is  only  a  believer  who 
is  competent  *  for  the  performance  of  Vaidik  rites.”  Whatever  may  be 
the  reason,  the  Sastra  will  only  bear  fruit  for  those  who  have  faith  in  it. 
The  matter  is,  however,  otherwise  with  Tantra.  For  I  cannot  disbelieve 
it  even  though  I  be  the  greatest  and  most  obdurate  of  sceptics.  I  may 
not  have  faith  in  Veda  or  Sastra,  in  God,  the  next  world,  sin  and 
righteousness.  Heaven  and  Hell,  yet  I  cannot  but  believe  in  Tantra. 

Of  the  three  forms  of  evidence  * — namely,  perception,  inference,  and 
Sastra 10 — the  sceptic 11  may  not  have  faith  in  inference  and  Sastra,  but  he 

1  See  post.  *  Aeara.  *  Varoadharma 

4  Mahrajta  country.  4  Dra vidian  country — Madras. 

«  Orissa.  7  The  “  personal  ”  God.  *  Adhik&ra. 

*  Pram  ana.  10  That  is,  pratyakjam,  anumanam,  Sabda. 

**  Nastika,  or  disbeliever  in  the  Vedas. 

II 


162 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


yields  to  and  accepts  direct  perception  as  the  only  true  form  of  evidence. 
And  thus,  even  though  I  be  the  greatest  sceptic,  I  cannot  ignore  Tantra, 
which  is  a  Pratyaksa  Sastra  *:  “  The  potency  of  a  thing  does  not  wait  upon 
intellectual  recognition."  Whether  you  believe  it  or  not,  medicine  has 
power,  and  will  cure  disease.  It  does  not  wait  upon  your  intellectual  recog¬ 
nition  of  the  fact.  There  is  an  inherent  power  in  fire  to  burn.  It  will  bum 
the  hand  which  is  knowingly  or  unknowingly  put  into  it  without  waiting  for 
the  belief  or  unbelief  of  the  owner  of  that  hand  or  anyone  else.  Similarly 
Siddhi,  the  visible*  fruit  of  the  Tantra  Sastra,  is  the  outcome  of  its 
natural  potency.  Whether  you  or  I  believe  it  or  not,  Tantra  Sastra 
will,  when  applied  as  directed  by  itself,  bear  visible  *  fruit.  The  combined 
determination  of  lhkhs  of  persons  such  as  you  or  I  will  not  avail  to  prevent 
that.  Relying  on  the  strength  of  its  own  arms,  Tantra  does  not  recognize 
the  efficacy  of  anything,  call  it  reasoning  or  evidence,  judgment  or  infer¬ 
ence.  All  &astras,  in  malting  ordinances  in  conformity  with  Tantra,  have 
guarded  their  individual  honour.  For  as  it  would  matter  little  to  the 
sea  if  all  the  waves  were  to  become  cross  and  to  turn  their  currents  away  • 
from  it,  so  it  would  matter  little  to  the  Tantra  even  if  all  other  Sastras 
were  to  go  against  it. 

You  may  rush  towards  a  lion  with  marshalled  herds  of  furious 
elephants,  but  at  the  moment  the  resounding  roar  is  heard  of  the  maned 
King  of  Beasts,  subduing  even  the  loudest  voices,  then  everyone  will  fly, 
one  knows  not  whither.  Similarly,  place  all  Sastras  on  one  side  and 
Tantra  on  the  other,  and  then  you  will  see  that  the  directly  perceptible  * 
war  cry  of  Mantras,  resounding  like  the  solemn  booming  of  thunder¬ 
clouds,  will  make  them  senseless,  and  disperse  and  drive  them  away  to 
places  of  which  there  is  no  knowing.  It  is  because  of  this  eternally  self- 
evident*  superhuman  virtue  of  the  power  of  Mantra  that  the  Tantra  and 
the  Devata  worshipped  therein  are  eternally  awake.  Who  will  with 
impunity  throw  weapons  of  crooked  and  fallacious  argument  at  one  whose 
Voice  is  guided  by  the  Devata,  who  directs  all  intellects  in  the  Brahmapda, 
and  who  dwells  in  every  heart?  The  fancies  of  inference*  are  ever 
trampled  under  foot  by  direct  perception.*  Tantra  has  therefore  said: 
“Kulaiastra*  is  eternal  evidence,  because  it  bears  visible*  fruit.  Putting  aside 
the  sceptics,  even  such  animals  as  beasts,  birds,  and  the  like,  admit  visible  * 
things  to  be  evidence.  It  is  by  force  of  the  realization  of  such  evident* 
fruit  that  Tantra  has  destroyed  all  perverse  arguers.  Who  knows  what 
will  happen  in  the  hereafter?  *  That  is  the  best  of  all  philosophies  *  which 
bears  actual  and  viable*  fruit  in  this  world.”  This  is  what  Sastra  says. 


1  A  practical  Sastra  of  experience. 
*  Anum&nam. 

®  That  is,  in  the  next  birth. 


*  Pratyaksa. 
4  Tantra, 

•  Dariana. 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 


163 


When,  however,  in  society  it  is  found  that  on  many  occasions  T&ntrik 
rites  bear  no  fruit,  doubt  arises  in  the  people’s  mind.  We  ourselves  are 
much  pleased  to  see  and  hear  all  this.  For  where  they  complain  of 
a  want  of  fruits  we  do  not  discern  it.  Is  it  not  a  fruit  if  Svastyayana 1 
leads  to  dire  consequences  ?  Through  our  ill-fortune  a  mango-tree  bears 
amda,*  or  through  lack  of  intelligence  we  wish  an  amdah-tree  to  bear 
mangoes.  This  it  is  which  gives  rise  to  the  difficulty  about  fruit.  Your 
and  my  belief  that  “  we  do  a  work  according  to  the  &2stra  ”  is  really  a 
wicked  vanity  on  our  part.  And  it  is  because  Sastra  and  Devata  are 
unable  to  bear  with  this  insolence  of  ours  that  they  shatter  our  conceit  in 
giving  us  fruit  the  opposite  of  what  we  sought.  And  then  we  think  “  alas! 
what  has  happened?  faith  is  shaken!”  but  if  we  understand  the  matter 
rightly  it  is  only  a  wrong  belief  which  is  dissipated.  Neither  place,  time, 
nor  subject  is  according  to  faith,  yet  still  there  is  the  meaningless  and 
unreasoning  cry,  “  according  to  Sastra  Why  should  $astra  tolerate 
this  wrong?  Sastra  ordains  that  a  puja  is  to  be  held  at  dead  of  night. 
But  maybe,  cither  from  fear  of  keeping  up  at  night  or  attracted  by  the 
mahaprasada,4  you  sit  in  worship  in  the  early  evening.  Why  then  should 
not  what  is  begun  in  early  evening  end  in  misfortune?  For  this  reason 
Sastra  has  said :  “  Who  does  not  worship  Mahavidya,*  or  repeat  Mantras.” 
It  is  only  for  want  of  one  thing — namely,  the  proper  disposition* — that 
there  occurs  a  want  of  fruit.  It  is  a  very  difficult  thing  to  worship  Her 
with  a  heart  inspired  with  true  feeling  for  Her.  Ramaprasada  has  there¬ 
fore  said:  She  is  to  be  sought  through  feeling.  Gan  we  without  feeling 
find  Her?” 

In  fact,  it  is  great  foolishness  to  doubt  Mantra  or  Devata  on  account 
of  one’s  own  deficiencies.  It  bespeaks  great  stupidity  to  put  out  a  fire  by 
pouring  water  on  it,  and  then  to  opine  that  it  has  not  the  power  to  burn. 
Similarly,  it  is  a  heinous  sin  to  misdo  Tantrik  work  and  then  to  doubt 
£&stra.  It  is  always  the  mark  of  a  weak,  feminine  nature  to  endeavour 
to  establish  one’s  superiority  on  the  issue  of  a  verbal  quarrel,  whereas  it  is 
the  sign  of  a  man  to  desire  to  conquer  the  world  by  the  strength  of  one’s 
own  arms.  Similarly  reasoning,  argument  and  inference  may  be  the  work 
of  other  Sastras,  but  the  work  of  Tantra  is  to  accomplish  superhuman  and 
divine 1  events  by  the  force  of  its  own  Mantras.  The  power  to  destroy, 
to  banish,  and  control,*  are,  with  others,  matters  of  daily  accomplishment. 

1  A  rite  to  dispel  evil  and  to  bring  about  good. 

*  A  sour,  skinny  fruit. 

*  That  is,  everyone  nowadays  is  speaking  of  Sastra,  but  none  really  cares 
for  or  applies  it. 

*  The  great  food  or  flesh  of  the  animal  of  sacrifice. 

5  The  Devi.  *  Bhava. 

7  Daiva.  9  Maraiiam,  Uchchatanam,  Vailkaranam. 


164 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


Thousands  of  great  and  accomplished  SSdhakas  still  illumine  all  India 
with  the  glory  of  their  austerities.1 *  In  every  Indian  cremation  ground  * 
the  refulgent  and  divine  halo  of  Bhairavas  and  BhairavTs  3 4 *  is  yet  to  be 
seen  mingling  with  the  light  of  the  flames  of  funeral  pyres,  rending  apart 
the  waves  of  nocturnal  darkness  and  illuminating  the  wide  expanse  of 
Heaven.  Dead  and  putrefying  corpses  submerged  *  near  cremation  grounds 
are  still  brought  to  life  by  the  force  of  the  Sadhakas’  Mantras,  and  made 
to  render  aid  to  Sadhana  and  Siddhi.  Tantrik  Yogis  even  now  and  in 
this  world  obtain,  through  the  potency  of  Mantras,  direct  vision  of  the 
world  of  Dcvas,  which  lies  beyond  our  senses.  She,  with  dishevelled  hair, 
the  Dispeller  of  fear  from  the  hearts  of  those  who  worship  Her,  still 
appears  in  great  Cremation  grounds,6  to  give  liberation  to  Her  devoted 
Sadhakas,  who,  fearful  of  this  existence,  make  obeisance  to  and  supplicate 
Her.  Sadhakas  still  merge  themselves  in  the  Self  of  Brahman,  laying  their 
Brahmarandhra  9  at  those  lotus  feet  of  Brahmamayi,7 *  which  are  adored  by 
Brahma  and  other  Devas.  The  throne  of  the  Daughter  of  the  Mountain  3 
is  still  moved  by  the  wondrous,  attractive  force  of  Mantras.  This,  in  the 
eyes  of  Sadhakas,  is  the  ever  broad  and  royal  road  upon  which  they  travel 
untiring  to  the  city  of  liberation.  Maybe  there  is  nothing  but  darkness 
for  the  bedridden  and  dying  blind  man.  Yet  know  that  of  a  surety,  oh 
blind  man,  that  the  darkness  exists  only  in  your  eyes. 

We  arc  obliged  to  say  something  else.  In  Bengal  a  species  of 
high-class  creatures  called  “  educated  critics  ”  has  come  into  exis¬ 
tence,  who  at  every  word  are  wont  to  say:  “  The  Tantra  Sastra  is  a 
recent  production.  The  age  of  the  earth  is  5,000  years  in  all.  Within 
this  period  the  creation  of  man  dates  back  3,000  years.  Previous  to  that 
his  forbears  were,  according  to  some,  frogs,  and  according  to  others, 
monkeys.”  Whose  antiquarian  researches  have  led  to  such  discoveries? 
It  is  no  wonder  that  they  should  deem  the  Tantra  Sastra  a  recent  thing. 
We,  too,  cannot  oppose  or  be  sceptical  of  their  views.  Even  if  we  think 
we  shall  not  believe  it,  our  intellect  believes  of  itself.  For  had  not  such 

1  Tapas. 

*  Smasana,  where  Savasana,  Mui^dasana,  Latasadhana,  and  other  Tantrik 
rites  are  practised. 

3  Adept  Tantrik  men  and  women. 

4  Before  and  whilst  awaiting  burning,  the  corpse  is  placed  in  the  sacred 

stream. 

6  Mahasmaianas,  where  some  of  the  most  difficult  forms  of  Tantrik  Sadhana 
are  practised.  The  auspicious  Kalika  is  thought  of  as  with  dishevelled  hair 

(vigalitachikura),  and  so  is  the  hair  of  the  devotee  (see  Karpuradi  stotra, 
verses  3,  10). 

*  The  cavity  of  Brahman  at  the  top  of  the  head,  here  used  for  the  head 
generally. 

*  The  Devi. 


*  The  Devi  as  daughter  of  Himavat. 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 


165 


been,  the  state  of  their  forbears,  why  should  the  descendants  be  such  as 
they  are?  Alas!  O  Providence,1  we  know  not  whether  you  ever  dreamt  of 
such  a  perversion  of  intellect,  of  such  a  disastrous  change  of  nature  in 
the  children  of  Manu.  Be  the  idea  sound  or  superstitious,  we  still  say: 
“  From  the  time  that  the  Devas  were  established  in  the  seven  heavens,’  on 
the  summit  of  Mount  Sumeru,  from  that  time  we  Br&hmapas  have 
belonged  to  the  race  of  Brahma.  So  long  as  Ganga’  endures  on  earth, 
we,  too,  shall  endure  in  the  race  of  Brahma.  So  long  as  the  sun  and  moon 
shine  in  the  sky,  wc,  too,  shall  endure  in  the  race  of  Brahma.”  In 
Sastra  alone  does  a  Brahmana  live,  so  that  the  existence  of  Brahma^ as 
and  Sastras  are  one  and  the  same  thing.  Judging  from  the  point  of  view 
of  those  for  whom  the  creation  of  man  is  3,000  yean  bid,  Tantra  will  be 
a  recent  creation  of,  say,  a  100  years’  age.  Intelligent  men  must  therefore 
now  consider  that  within  these  100  years  only,  in  the  midst  of  four  or  five 
revolutions  caused  by  minor  forms  of  Dharma,4  in  the  course  of  contest 
with  sceptics,  the  Tantrik  Sastra  and  initiation  have  been  promulgated 
and  preached  through  heaven,*  the  mortal  world,*  and  the  nether  world,7 
to  the  ears  of  every  man  and  woman  of  every  home  in  Bharatavarja,  con¬ 
sisting  of  Cfna,  great  C5na,*  Nepala,  Ka?mira,  the  Dravidian  Land,*  Maha- 
ra$tra,'“  Ariga,11  Baiiga,1*  Kaliiiga,1*  Saurastra,14  Magadha,1*  Pancala,14 
Utkala,17  and  other  countries  and  continents  beginning  from  the  mount  of 
sunrise  to  the  mount  of  sunset.1"  What  blessed  criticism  1  ’*  It  is  on  this 
account  that  old  far-sighted  grammarians  gave  the  prefix  “  sam  ”  instead 
of  any  other  to  samalocana ,0  (criticism}.  Historical  critic,  what  shall  we 
say  to  you  ?  Valihari ! 11 

There  is  yet  another  sad  thing  to  tell.  In  the  community  of  worship¬ 
pers  there  arc  a  few  persons  belonging  to  the  Vai?nava  sect  **  who  believe 

1  Vidhata.  *  Svarga. 

*  The  holy  River  Ganges.  4  Upadharma,  used  in  a  bad  sense. 

5  Svarga.  *  Martya.  7  RasStala.  *  Mahacina. 

*  Madras  country. 

10  Mahratfa  country. 

11  Country  about  Bhagalpur,  Tirhut.  **  Bengal. 

18  Part  of  Orissa  described  in  the  Tantras  as  from  Puri  to  the  Kr$na 
River. 

14  Surat.  14  Southern  portion  of  Behar. 

14  Punjab.  17  Orissa. 

18  Udayacala  and  Astacala:  the  mountains  from  which  the  sun  is  said  to 
rise,  and  on  which  it  sets,  respectively. 

18  Samalocana. 

*°  A  pun;  the  word  “ sam  ”  in  Bengali  meaning  “  a  clown.” 

81  A  form  of  exclamation  which  literally  means  “  I  am  beaten.  I  have  no 
words  for  it.  Astounding.” 

**  Worshippers  of  Vi^pu. 


166 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


that  the  Tantra  is  the  S&stra  dealing  with  the  worship  1  of  Saivas  *  and 
Saktas*  alone,  and  that  it  is  in  thorough  antagonism  to  the  Vaisnava 
Dbarma.  We  do  not  know  what  to  say  in  reply  to  this.  To  those  who 
hold  such  a  belief  we  with  folded  hands  put  the  question:  “  What  Tantra 
is  this?  ”  The  name  of  the  Tantra  of  which  they  have  heard  from  their 
Lords  4  is  Svatantra,8  while  that  which  is  Sastra  is  called  Tantra.  When 
dealing  with  the  subject  of  the  characteristics  of  Tantra,  it  has  been  said 
that  it  is  that  which  is  “  approved  of  by  Vasudeva”. a  In  this  there  is 
nothing  to  which  a  true  Vaisnava  can  take  exception.  But  then  we  have 
nothing  to  say  to  those  with  whom  the  objection  lies,  because  they  are 
Lords.7  When  they  interpret  the  Sastra  of  Devotion,*  it  seems  that  they 
arc  Lords  of  Vaijnavas  alone;  but  when  they  sit  in  judgment  disproving 
Tantra,  it  would  seem  that  they  are  Lords  of  Visnu  also;  otherwise,  how 
can  they  dare  to  disprove  the  words  of  their  Lord?  ®  If  the  Tantra  Sastra 
is  hostile  to  Vai$navas,  we  then  ask  by  whose  grace  did  they  receive  that 
Visnu  Mantra,  initiated  in  which  they,  in  their  pride  of  Vaisnavism,  cast 
sinister  glances  at  the  Tantra  Sastra?  It  is,  indeed,  a  sign  of  great  scepticism 
to  be  an  enemy  of  Tantra  after  initiation  in  a  Tantrik  Mantra.  We  know 
that  honest  Vaisnava  Sadhakas  are  never  inimical  to  Tantra.  But  still, 
for  those  who  are  so  mistaken,  it  is  necessary  to  point  out  what  the  Tantra 
itself  has  to  say  in  this  respect. 

Tantra  says:  “  Kali  alone  in  the  Kali  age,  Krsna  alone  in  the 
Kali  age,  Gopala  and  Kalika  10  in  the  Kali  age,  are  the  Devatas  who  are 
awake.”  11 

“  Mahakall  and  MahakSla  exist  in  the  manner  of  a  grain  of  gram. 
Just  as  the  grain  of  gram  has  on  the  outside  a  covering,  and  is  in  the 
inside  divided  into  two  equal  portions  closely  touching  each  other,  so  the 
Parabrahman11  is  covered  on  the  outside  by  Maya,  and  exists  interiorly  as 
Siva  and  Sakti  in  equal  parts  closely  united  the  one  to  the  other.  It  is 

1  Upasana  Sastra. 

I  Worshippers  of  Siva. 

8  Worshippers  of  the  Goddess,  or  of  Sakti  the  Devi. 

*  Prabhu,  the  title  by  which  the  gosvamis,  or  religious  preceptors  of 
Vai?navas,  are  called  by  their  disciples. 

*  Svatantra  means  “  different’’.  There  is  a  play  on  die  words,  the  meaning 
of  the  passage  being  that  Tantra  is  Sastra,  but  what  they  have  heard  is  different, 
that  is  not  SSstra. 

4  Vi?nu,  Lord  of  Vaisnavas  (see  post.). 

7  Prabhu,  the  title  referred  in  footnote  4  above. 

8  Bhaktifastra.  *  Visnu,  by  whom  the  Tantra  is  approved  (see  post.). 

14  Krsna  and  Kali. 

II  That  is,  active;  whose  activities  are  efficacious. 

"Literally,  “Tattvaof*’. 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 


167 


this  Paramatma  existing  in  the  forms  of  Siva  and  Sakti  who  is  Maharudra, 
Mahavijnu,  and  Mahabrahma.  The  one  only  Brahman  is  called  and 
differentiated  by  the  three  names  Brahma,  Visnu,  and  MaheSvara.1  But 
he  who  looks  upon  the  different  forms  which  pass  under  these  different 
names  as  really  different  never  attains  liberation.” 3 

In  the  Mundamala  Tantra  3  it  is  said :  “  So  long,  O  Supreme  Devi, 
as  it  is  thought  that  there  is  a  different  Spirit  in  different  beings,*  so  long 
only  is  the  world  multiform,  activities  different,  and  feeling  diverse; 
Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Maheivara  distinct ;  GapeSa,  DineSa,’  *  Vahni,' 
Varuna,’  Kubera,8  and  the  Dikpalas  •  different  Devas ;  effort  is  of  many 
kinds;  beings  are  masculine,  feminine,  and  neuter;  bael  leaves 10  are 
different  from  tulsi  leaves,11  Java,  Droija,  and  Aparajita  V  are  different  from 
Tulsi-leaves;  the  Divya,  VIra,  and  Paiu  forms  of  worship  are  different,13 
the  idea  of  difference  exists  in  Tantra;  different  forms  of  worship  are 
prescribed  for  different  Devatas;  and  so  long  (O  Mother  of  the  world) 
is  Hari 14  deemed  separate  from  Hara,1  and  so  long  (O  Siva)  13  arc  Kali 
with  the  terrible  jaws,  She 13  with  the  beautiful  matted  hair,1?  SoiJaSI 
and  Bhairavi,18  different  Devls;  Bhuvaneivarl,  Cinnamasta,  Annapurna, 
Bagalomukki,  Malangi,  and  Kamalatmika 19  are  different  Devls,  and 
Sarasvati  and  Radhika  30  are  distinct.  As  long  as  the  notion  of  unity  at 
the  lotus  feet  of  Bhavani 91  does  not  exist,  so  long  endeavours,  activities, 
modes  of  worship,  and  practice  are  different,  O  Devi  of  fair  body! 
O  Sarikari !  ”  when  perception  of  the  truth 33  grows  in  the  lake  of  the 
Sadhaka’s  pure  heart,  then  in  the  resplendent  bloom  of  the  flower  of 
non-duality,  which  is  the  lotus  feet  of  Tarinl,1*  the  vision  of  one  only 
Brahman,  not  only  in  all  Devas  and  Devis,  but  in  every  being 33  in  the 
Samsara,  opens  to  the  view  of  the  Sadhaka.” 

I  Siva. 

3  Such  as  he  who  worships  Visnu,  thinking  him  to  be  different  from 
Siva.  3  Chap.  vi.  *  Jiva.  3  The  Sun. 

8  The  Lord  of  Fire.  7  Lord  of  water.  8  Lord  of  wealth. 

*  The  regents  of  the  ten  quarters.  10  Sacred  to  Siva. 

II  The  holy  basil  (ocymum  sanctum),  sacred  to  Vi?nu. 

18  The  hibiscus,  drona  (a  white  flower)  and  clitoria — flowers  sacred  to  the 
Devi. 

13  The  three  different  forms  of  Tantrik  worship  (UpSsana). 

14  Visiju.  14  A  title  of  the  Dew. 

18  Tara,  one  of  the  Daiamahavidya,  or  ten  great  forms  of  the  Devi. 

17  Jaja.  18  Forms  of  the  Devi.  18  Ibid. 

90  Sarasvati  is  Devi  of  speech,  and  Radhika  the  beloved  of  Krsna. 

31  Title  of  the  Dew;  Bhava  is  Siva.  The  Devi  and  Vayu  PurSnas  say  that 
the  Devi  is  Bhavani,  as  giving  life  to  Bhava. 

33  Sahkari  is  feminine  of  Sankara,  a  title  of  Siva. 

33  Tattva.  34  Tide  of  the  Devi,  as  Saviour.  33  Jiva. 


168 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  The  S&dhaka  who  contemplates  Maheivari,1 * *  knowing  that  She 
is  not  different  from  Guru,*  Visnu,  and  MaheSvara,  and  Mantra,  is 
undoubtedly  MaheSvara  *  Himself,  even  though  he  be  a  Jiva.”  4 

To  say  that  the  S&stra  in  which  such  a  universally  accepted  conclusion 
is  the  object  of  Sidhana  and  Siddhi,  is  yet  antagonistic  to  Vaisnavas, 
though  it  does  not  harm  Tantra,  yet  smears  the  spotless  Vai?nava  name 
with  the  mud  of  indelible  infamy. 

To  bring  about  harmony  in  place  of  their  quarrels,  Puspadanta  has 
stud  in  the  Mahironastava: 5 *  “  All  the  conflict  of  opinion  which  exists  in 
the  threefold  Sastra,*  Sarikhya,7  Yoga,  cult  of  Paiupati,8 * *  and  Vaisnava 
Sastra,*  is  due  to  differences  of  ideas,  and  is  nothing  but  the  doubt 
whether  this  or  that  is  the  right  path.  But,  O  Lord !  just  as  the  waters 
of  all  rivers,  in  whatever  direction  they  flow,  and  whether  in  straight 
or  sinuous  course,  mingle  in  the  end  in  one  great  ocean,  so  Sadhakas 
(whatever  be  the  path  they  follow)  are  at  their  journey’s  close  sure  to 
meet  each  other  in  Thee  Who  art  the  one  only  ocean  of  Unity.” 

Sadhaka,  know  it  for  certain  that  that  is  the  final  conclusion  of  every 
S&stra,  be  it  Veda  or  Tantra. 

There  are  present-day  Vaisnavas  who  revel  in  daily  new  emotions,14 
who  are  not  satisfied  with  the  forms 11 *  of  the  ten  incarnations 14  of  Bhagavan, 
or  the  four  armed  Narayana  Vasudeva  dwelling  in  Vaikunlha,13  nor  even14 
with  the  conjoined  u  form  of  Bhagavan  Sri  Krsna,  the  perfect  incarnation, 
and  who  in  many  instances  abandon  the  Caitanyaless 14  Mantra  of  Visnu 
and  Krsna  worshipped  by  their  forefathers,  and  received  by  them  at  the 
time  of  initiation,  and  get  initiated  in  a  Mantra  which  has  Caitanya  in 
it.17  Amongst  such  people  there  are  many  who  say  that  it  were  better  if 

1  Title  of  Devi,  as  spouse  of  Siva,  MaheSvara. 

4  Religious  preceptor.  •  Siva. 

*  An  embodied  Bpirit;  here,  “  man 

*  Hymn  in  praise  of  the  greatness  of  Siva. 

4  Trayi — the  Veda.  So  called  because  it  consists  of  the  three  things — song, 

prose,  and  verse;  or  because  the  first  three  Vedas  are  alone  included. 

7  Philosophical  school.  8  The  Tantra. 

8  Sastras  dealing  with  the  cult  of  Vi?nu. 

10  Rasa.  11 * *  Murti.  u  Avatara  of  Vi?nu.  14  Visnu’s  heaven. 

14  Yugalamurti,  or  that  in  which  the  persons  of  both  Kpspa  and  RSdha  are 

shown  together. 

18  Piima  avatara.  18  See  next  note. 

17  There  is  here  both  pun  and  sarcasm.  Caitanya  means  consciousness  or 

intelligence,  and  is  also  the  name  of  the  celebrated  Vaisnava  Saint  who  is  the 

head  of  a  large  section  of  the  Varavas.  The  meaning  is  that  some  people 

have  the  audacity  to  think  that  the  Mantra  of  Vi$nu  is  without  caitanya 

(acaitanya) — that  is,  without  consciousness — because  not  associated  with  die 

Saint  Caitanya  and  to  think  that  a  Mantra  associated  with  the  same  Caitanya 

has  alone  consciousness  (sacaitanya) . 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 


169 


Tantra  Sastra  ceased  to  exist.  They  have  both  the  daring  and  the 
opportunity  to  say  this  because,  considering  the  nature  of  the  daily  novel 
Mantras  in  which  they  are  initiated,  and  which  are  found  neither  in 
Veda,  Purana,  nor  Tantra,  the  existence  of  the  Tantra  Sastra  is  a  source 
of  danger  to  them.  However  that  may  be,  it  is  not  necessary  to  waste 
time  in  writing  about  them.  The  only  refuge  of  the  Hindu  race  is  the  tree 
of  Veda,  which  is  manvantaras 1  and  kalpantaras 1 *  old.  The  five  forms* 
of  Tantrik  worship  are  its  five  branches. 

It  is  by  no  means  impossible  that  now,  towards  the  end  of  the  Kali 
age,  a  few  parasites  should  be  found  growing  on  some  of  its  branches. 
Those,  however,  who  know  the  original  tree  will  recognize  the  parasites 
the  moment  they  see  the  leaves.  However  that  may  be,  we  do  not 
consider  them  as  included  in  any  of  the  five  communities  of  worshippers, 
and  are  therefore  unable  to  accept  their  opinion  as  that  of  Hindu  society. 
Wc  know  them  only  as  Vaisnavas  who  are  inidated  according  to  Sastra 
in  Visnu  Mantras.  If  they  want  to  destroy  the  Tantra  Sastra  they  will 
simply  destroy  themselves,  because  the  Visnu  Mantras  themselves  are 
stated  in  Tantra  alone.  To  become  inimical  to  Tantra  owing  to  enmity 
with  Saktas,4 *  caused  by  difference  in  practice,  is  like  turning  a  father  out 
of  home  because  of  a  quarrel  with  a  brother. 

There  is  another  thing  of  which  we  are  ashamed  even  to  think.  We 
are  really  pained  to  see  so  much  anger  and  enmity  in  Vaijnavas  who 
worship  such  an  amiable,  peaceful,  smiling,  and  swcct-faccd  Devata,  and 
who  daily  eat  havisya  6  without  flesh.  If  in  this  matter  they  were  to  ask 
their  Gurus,  instead  of  venting  independent  opinions  of  their  own,  then 
we,  too,  shall  be  saved.  If  Tantra  Sastra  be  deemed  merely  the  Sastra 
of  the  Saktas,  then  by  the  grace  of  what  Sastra  have  Vaisnavas  and  the 
Gosvamis  of  the  well-known  families  of  Advaita,  Nityananda,  and  others, 
who  are  Gurus  of  the  Vaisnavas,  and  who  give  initiation,  preserved  their 
great  glory  so  long  ?  Blinded  by  anger,  people  often  forget  their  relation 
with  others,  and  abuse  them,  but  that  is  another  matter.  As  a  fact,  both 
Saktas  and  Vaisnavas  are  equally  initiated  in  Tantrik  Mantras.  The 
authority  of  the  Srimad  Bhagavata  is  held  by  the  Vaisnavas  in  much 
higher  esteem  than  that  of  any  other  Purana  or  Tantra.  That  Srimad 
Bhagavata  *  says :  “  He  who  would  free  himself  of  the  bond  of  the  heart 


1  A  manvantara  is  a  fourteenth  part  of  a  Kalpa  (see  post.). 

1  A  Kalpa,  or  day  of  Brahma,  is  4,320.000,000  years. 

*  Vaisnavas,  Saivas,  Saktas,  Sauras,  Ganapatyas. 

4  Worshippers  of  Sakti,  or  the  Devi. 

*  A  very  pure  form  of  food,  prepared  with  fruit,  vegetable,  and  rice. 

*  Eleventh  Book. 


170 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


should  worship  Bhagavan  in  the  manner  prescribed  in  Tantra.”  Again, 
after  referring  to  the  forms  of  worship  prescribed  in  both  Veda  and 
Tantra,  it  refers  separately  to  the  Tantrik  form  of  worship  for  the  Kali 
age,  and  says :  “  Hear  also  how  worship  is  to  be  performed  in  the  Kali 
age  according  to  the  ordinance  of  various  Tantras.” 

Commenting  on  this  verse  SridharasvamT  says:  “By  a  separate 
reference  again  the  superiority  of  the  Tantrik  path  in  the  Kali  age 
is  shown.” 

In  the  same  work  Bhagavan  counselled  Uddhava,  the  crest-gem 
of  devotees,  as  to  what  should  be  done  in  His  own  worship.  “  In  all 
parvas 1 * *  in  the  year  provision  should  be  made  for  Jatras  *  and  Valis  * 
in  my  honour.  Vaidik  initiation  4 *  and  Tantrik  initiation  should  be 
received  successively,  and  the  Catunnasya,6  EkadaSi,®  and  other 
Vratas 7 * *  should  be  observed.”  Again,  “All  articles  of  Puja,  such  as 
water  for  washing  the  feet,*  for  sipping,  a  and  the  others,10  should  be 
set  out  in  order.  Marking  out  a  seat  for  me  with  Dharma  and  other 
Saktis,  nine  in  all,  make  therein  a  lotus  of  eight  petals  bright  with  the 
pollen  of  its  womb.  Then  worship  me  with  Mantras  prescribed  in  both 
the  Veda  and  Tantra  Sastras  lor  the  attainment  of  siddhi  in  both.”  Here 
Sridharasvami  has  in  his  Commentary  laid  down  that  worship,  according 
to  both  Veda  and  Tantra,  is  requisite  for  the  acquisition  of  both  enjoy¬ 
ment  11 12 *  and  liberation,1*  as  stated  in  both  Veda  and  Tantra.  “  Worship 
of  me  is  of  three  kinds— namely,  Vaidik,  Tantrik,  and  mixed  (that  is, 
Vaidik  and  Tantrik  and  mixed,  or  Pauranik).  I  should  be  duly  adored 
according  to  all  the  three  forms.” 11  “  If  the  Sadhaka  adores  me  by  the 
Vaidik  and  Tantrik  paths  of  Kriyayoga,14  he  will  receive  from  me  siddhi  in 
both  Veda  and  Tantra.” 

1  Auspicious  tithis  (or  lunar  days}  for  religious  observances. 

*  Festivals  in  the  worship  of  Krsna,  such  as  Rathajatra,  Dolajatra,  Snana- 

jatra. 

*  Worship  (puja)  with  offerings. 

I  Diksa. 

6  Four  monthly. 

•  On  the  eleventh  lunar  day  after  new  or  full  moon. 

7  Occasional  and  voluntary  religious  observances. 

s  Padyam. 

•  Acamanam. 

10  That  is,  the  other  (ordinarily  fourteen)  upacaras. 

II  Bhoga. 

12  Mok$a. 

11  The  author’s  Bengali  translation  appears  here  to  differ  somewhat  from  the 
Sanskrit,  which  runs:  “  Trayapamlpsitenaiva  vedhina  mam  samarchchayet,” 
or  “  I  should  be  adored  by  whichever  of  the  three  forms  it  is  desired.” 

14  Yoga  of  work. 


THE  EPHEMERAL  AND  MODERN  MONISM 


171 


We  ask  those  who  have  faith  in  Bhagavan  and  the  Bhagavata  whether 
they  have  faith  in  these  commands  of  Bhagavan,  as  stated  in  the  Bhaga¬ 
vata.  Now  the  Sadhaka,  who  stands  arbitrator  in  the  dispute,  will  see 
whether  the  Tantrik  initiation  and  Scripture  do  not  form  the  very  life’s 
stay  for  the  Vaisnava  who  follows  Sastra.  When  the  time  for  the  dissolu¬ 
tion  of  a  family  comes,  we  find  that  both  inmates  and  outsiders  become  of 
the  same  mind,  and  so  through  the  misfortune  of  the  present  Aryan  society 
we  find  that  in  many  cases  to  be  so. 


CHAPTER  IV 


GAYATRl  MANTRA1  AND  IMAGE  WORSHIP* 

Although  all  admit  that  the  Gayatri  is  the  fundamental  part 1  of  worship 
as  directed  in  Sifttra,  yet  the  characteristics  of  the  present  time  make  it 
necessary  to  consider  it  both  in  some  degree  separately,  and  also  in  con¬ 
nection  with  Tantra.  For  there  are  nowadays  some  who  even  ask:  “  What 
is  the  necessity  for  the  adoption  of  Tantrik  Mantras  when  there  is  the 
Vaidik  Gayatri?”  The  reply  is  that  there  is  no  necessity  if  necessity  for 
initiation  ends  with  initiation;  but  those  who,  on  the  contrary,  have  to 
perform  worship  based  on  initiation  must  certainly  be  reinitiated  according 
to  the  Tantra.  For  in  the  Kali  age  worship  of  Gayatri  is  not  possible 
according  to  the  Vaidik  method.  Without  reinitiation  in  Tantrik  Mantra, 
worship  of  the  Gayatri  even  cannot  be  considered  to  be  accomplished. 
Should  anyone  on  that  account  regret  because  he  thinks  the  Gayatri  is 
disgraced  thereby  then  Gayatri  Herself 4  will  judge  the  matter.  But  there 
is  no  cause  for  lament.  There  is  no  fear  that  the  line  will  fail  even  if  the 
son  should  feel  himself  insulted  and  therefore  die,  when  the  grandson  is 
taken  in  the  arms.  It  is  asked,  what  is  the  necessity?  But  we  ask,  where 
is  even  the  want  of  it.  Who  will  say  that  the  boy  who  has  passed  the 
matriculation  examination  will  not  in  time  be  eligible  for  studies  suitable 
for  a  degree  examination?  However  that  may  be,  more  of  this  hereafter. 
At  present  let  us  discuss  what  Gayatri  is  according  to  Aryan  notions.  Is 
th,e  Gayatri  mere  words  or  Mantra?  If  it  be  merely  the  former,  how  can 
it  be  so  supreme  as  to  be  accepted  as  the  fundamental  part 5  of  worship, 
the  supreme  Brahman  Himself?  If  the  glory  of  Gayatri  is  due  merely  to 
its  being  a  great  saying,  weighty  and  solemn,  pure,  full  of  sense  and  truth, 
then  there  are  hundreds  of  thousands  of  great  sayings  in  the  Aryan  Sastras 


1  Gayatritattva.  The  Gayatri,  the  famous  Mantra,  is  the  essential  tattva  of 
Vedas:  “  Om,  let  us  contemplate  upon  the  wonderful  spirit  of  the  Divine  Creator 
of  the  terrestrial,  atmospheric,  and  celestial  regions.  May  he  direct  our  minds 
(towards  the  acquisition  of  Dharma,  Artha,  Kama  and  Moksa).” 

*  Sakara  upasana.  *  Tattva. 

4  For  the  Mantra  is  the  Devi  Herself. 

6  Tattva  or  principle. 


GAYATRl  mantra  and  image  worship 


173 


which  arc  equally  replete  with  truth,  and  marked  with  more  feeling  and 
sweetness.  Why,  instead  of  worshipping  them,  do  we  worship  Gayatri 
alone  as  the  essential  portion1  of  all  the  Vedas?  Why  am  I,  whether 
learned  or  ignorant,  with  or  without  understanding,  called  a  Brahmana 
provided  I  am  initiated  according  to  Sastra  in  the  Gayatri  Mantra?  Put¬ 
ting  aside  the  world,  why  has  the  Lord  of  it  said:  “  Every  Brahmana  is 
my  body,  be  he  learned  or  unlearned.”  In  Srimad  Bhagavata,  Sri  Bhaga- 
van  has  said:  “Even  this  four-armed  form’  dwelling  in  Vaikunfoa  is  not 
dearer  to  me  than  a  Brahmapa.  A  Brahmana  is  full  of  all  Vedas,  and  I, 
too,  am  full  of  all  Dcvas.”  That  is  to  say,  the  world  is  maintained  by 
both  Veda  and  Devata,  and  both  are  therefore  equally  worshipful.  But 
as  all  Vedas  and  myself  who  are  full  of  all  Devas,  unite  in  the  Brahman 
body  of  a  Brahmana,  the  latter  is  the  most  worshipful  of  alL*  “  Malicious 
and  misguided  men  who  know  not  this  truth  slight  me  who  am  the  all- 
pervading  Supreme  Spirit,  the  Guru  of  the  three  worlds,  and  Brahtnaija 
in  form,  by  worshipping  my  images  and  symbols  only  "  (that  is  to  say,  by 
.  omitting  to  worship  a  Brahmana  as  Bhagavan).  Manu  says:  “On  the 
birth  of  a  Brahmana,  livara  Himself*  is  born  on  earth  in  order  to  guard 
the  sheath  of  Dharma  of  all  creations.”  For  him  who  neglects  the  Gayatri, 
&astra  again  says  in  the  Gayatri  Tantra :  “  It  is  the  embodied  spirit  of  a 
twice-born  person  formed  of  Gayatri  who  is  the  worshipper  of  Devata, 
and  not  the  body  nor  senses,  nor  anything  else.  Vi§nu,  Siva  and  other 
Devatas  are  fit  objects  of  worship  for  him  only  who  is  such  a  Devata.  A 
Brahmana  who  neglects  the  Gayatri  should  not  touch  tulsi  leaves  nor  take 
the  name  of  Hari.  A  twice-born  who  neglects  the  Gayatri  is  like  the 
lowest  Candala.  What  will  he  gain  by  worshipping  Sri-Krspa  ?  If  through 
ill-fortune  a  miscreant  who  forsakes  Mantra,  Guru  and  Deva  is  born  in 
one’s  family,  he  as  well  as  all  his  kith  and  kin  of  the  same  gotra  *  should 
do  expiation  for  it.  An  effigy  made  of  fifty  ku£a  leaves  should  be  burnt 
according  to  the  rules  prescribed  in  Veda.  Otherwise  his  sin  will  soon 
enter  into  all  his  relatives  of  the  same  gotra,  and  such  as  come  in  contact 
with  him  will  share  in  his  guilt.  In  the  Kali  age  the  number  of  such 
sinners  will  daily  and  particularly  increase.”  Again  in  the  same  Tantra 
it  is  said :  “  The  twice-born  who  through  wilfulncss  or  neglect  omits  to  do  ‘ 
japa  *  of  the  Gayatri  is  of  a  surety  born  of  the  seed  of  a  Yavana.’  The 
Brahmana  who  is  without  faith  in  even  the  Gayatri  is,  O  Devi,  truly  a 
Yavana,  and  being  such  how  can  he  repeat  the  Gayatri  ?  Fallen  is  the 
country  in  which  that  sinful  Yavana  dwells,  and  fallen  also  is  the  Ruler  of 
that  country.  Brahmanas  who  associate  with  him  are  fallen  and  infamous. 

1  Tattva  or  principle.  *  Murti. 

*  A  Brahmana  b  called  “  earth-deva,”  (Bhiideva). 

*  The  Lord.  *  Lineage. 

'  Recitation  of  Mantra.  7  Foreigner. 


174 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Food  given  by  a  person  who  neglects  the  Gayatri  is  worse  even  than  food 
given  by  a  Yavana.  It  were  better  to  partake  of  the  food  of  a  Yavana 
than  even  to  drink  water  brought  by  a  sinner  who  neglects  the  Gayatri.” 

Why?  Why  is  it  that  the  influence  of  a  few  words  makes  a  man 
worthy  of  adoration  by  Devatas?  And  again,  why  is  it  that  the  want  of 
those  few  words  makes  him  the  lowest  Can^ala,  lower  than  a  Yavana?1 
The  Sastra  has  neither  enmity  nor  friendship  with  Jiva.  It  rebukes  none 
and  caresses  none.  It  says  only  what  is  true.  If  anyone’s  feelings  are 
wounded  on  account  of  the  statement  of  a  truth,  then  not  he  who  utters 
that  truth  but  the  truth  itself  must  be  considered  the  cause,  and  therefore 
inquiry  should  be  made  into  that.  The  truth  about  Jiva  will  be  revealed 
if  the  true  principles 3  concerning  Gayatri,  according  to  Saslra,  are  dis¬ 
covered.  In  fact,  it  is  because  we  do  not  know  the  true  nature4  of  Gayatri 
that  we  hear  of  all  these  “  why’s”.  The  moment  we  realize  the  true 
aspect  of  Gayatri  then  no  “  why  ”  will  remain.  Then  we  shall  understand 
that  there  can  never  be  distrust  in  Gayatri  unless  a  Brahmana’s  nature 
becomes  fundamentally  corrupt,  and  that  in  such  a  case  the  epithets  of  ■ 
Cantata  and  Yavana  arc  not  exaggerated,  but  merely  appropriate  expres¬ 
sions.  The  authors  of  Sastra  knew  at  least  as  well  as  you  or  I  that  it  is 
of  little  moment  whether  a  few  words  are  said  or  not.  You  or  I  have 
not  done  well  in  thinking  that  the  Gayatri,  which  even  a  muni,*  who  has 
taken  a  vow  of  silence,  may  not  omit  to  inwardly  repeat  without  ceasing 
to  be  a  twice-born,  is  mere  language  and  words.  It  should  be  understood 
that  that  which  makes  a  Brahmana  by  its  presence  and  a  Yavana  by  its 
absence  is  not  mere  language,  but  the  great  supersensual  Mantrasakti 4 
which  controls  the  Brahmanda,  and  appears  as  eternal  consciousness;  and 
that  what  we  have  taken  for  mere  words  and  feet  of  verse  is  not  so,  but 
a  great  Mantra,  full  of  brilliance  appearing  in  the  form  of  characters 
replete  with  transcendent  principles.*  A  firesdek  *  may  be  only  an  ordin¬ 
ary  piece  of  wood  to  a  §  a  vara 7  gathering  fuel  in  the  forest,  but  to  the 
performer  of  sacrifice  with  the  fire  it  is  a  veritable  womb  which  bears 
luminous  fire.  Similarly  the  Gayatri  may  appear  only  a  string  of  letters 
to  an  unbeliever,  but  to  a  Sadhaka  of  divine  wisdom  it  is  a  very  mass  of 
radiant  shining  energy »  of  Mantra.  Just  as  when,  sitting  even  in  a  dark 
room,  the  sacrificer  lights  the  sacrificial  fire  by  the  friction  of  fire-sticks, 

1  Foreigner. 

*  Gayatri  Tattva,  or  the  nature  of  or  principles  concerning  Gayatri.  In  a 
general  way  Gayatri  Tattva  means  the  subject  of  Gayatri. 

*  Sage  or  saint. 

*  Mantra  power. 

8  Gayatri  Tattva,  or  the  nature  of  or  principles  concerning  Gayatri.  In  a 
general  way  Gayatri  Tattva  means  the  subject  of  Gayatri. 

*  Arani.  7  Candala.  *  Tejas. 


GAYATRI  MANTRA  AND  IMAGE  WORSHIP 


175 


and  by  casting  the  offerings  in  that  fire  offers  full  oblation 1  in  homa,* 
so  the  sadhaka  living  in  the  deep  dark  sams&ra  illumines  the  cave  of  his 
heart  with  the  light  of  Brahman,*  kindled  by  the  fricdon  of  mind  and 
Mantra.  He  then  offers  to  that  burning  fire  of  the  Parabrahman  in  the 
fire-pit  of  consciousness 4  existing  as  mind  engirdled  with  the  three  gunas, 
all  the  three  forms  of  action  done  in  waking,  dream,  and  dreamless  sleep, 
whether  sattvik,  rajasik,  or  tamasik,6  and  whether  by  mind,  speech,  or 
action,  and  lives  in  a  state  of  constant  and  perfect  liberation. 

The  effect  of  mere  language  is  to  produce  ideas  of  skill  and  emotions 
and  sweetness,  whilst  that  of  Mantra  is  to  stimulate  the  mental  faculties 
with  the  divine  radiant  energy,4  and  to  thus  lead  to  a  full  understanding  of 
constantly  visible  supersensual  realities.7  A  mere  coHection  of  words  is 
something  gross,  whilst  Mantra  is  full  of  consciousness.  A  word  is  a  mere 
display  of  letters,  whilst  Mantra  is  a  mass  of  radiant  .energy.  Sayings 
give  advice  to  men  of  the  world,  whilst  Mantras  awaken 4  superhuman 
&akti.  A  mere  saying  is,  therefore,  like  a  Jiva,  subject  to  birth  and 
death;  whilst  a  Mantra  is  Brahman  Himself,  unwasting,  undecaying.  So 
long  as  there  is  a  difference  between  gross  matter  and  consciousness, 
between  Jiva  and  Brahman,  so  long  will  there  exist  this  difference  between 
a  saying  and  a  Mantra — a  difference  as  wide  as  that  between  the  heaven 
and  the  nether  world.  This  is  why,  as  regards  the  Gayatri,  the  notion 
that  sayings  and  Mantra  are  identical  is  a  false  and  mistaken  idea.  In 
order  to  guard  ourselves  against  it,  we  must  first  understand  the  word- 
meaning  of  Mantra,  and  then  proceed  to  deal  with  Mantra  Sakti.*  In 
the  Gayatri  Tantra  it  is  said:  "That  is  called  Mantra  by  the  meditation10 
upon  which  Jiva  acquires  freedom  from  sin,  enjoyment  of  heaven,  and 
liberation,*1  and  by  the  aid  of  which  he  attains  in  full  the  fourfold  fruit.”  14 
Again :  “  Because  She  is  sung  (gita)  in  meditation  from  Muladhara 11  to 
Brahmarandhra 14 — that  is  to  say.  She  enjoying  the  music  of  the  lute,1®  ever 
resides  as  the  Mother,  consisting  of  the  fifty  letters  in  the  regions  which 
extend  from  the  four-petalled  to  the  thousand-pe tailed  lotus 18 —  there¬ 
fore  is  She  gayat ,”  and  because,  if  meditated  upon,  She  gives  liberation 


1  Ahuti.  *  The  sacrifice  into  fire.  *  Brahmatejas.  4  Caitanya. 

4  That  is,  possessing  the  characteristics  of  the  three  gunas— sattva,  rajas,  and 
tarn  as.  4  Tejas. 

7  Tattvas.  8  Literally,  make  to  shine. 

*  Power  of  Mantra.  10  Manana.  11  Mokja. 

“  That  is,  dharma,  artha,  kama,  moksa. 

18  The  lowest  Cakra  in  the  peroneal  legion. 

14  The  cavity  of  Brahman  on  the  crown  of  the  head.  14  Vina. 

14  That  is,  from  the  MulSdh&ra  padma  to  the  Sahasrara  padma. 

17  “  Sung  ”. 


176 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


(trana)  to  Jiva  by  the  piercing  of  the  sheath  of  the  ^atcakra,1 * *  therefore 
is  She  trt.  By  the  combination  of  gayat  and  M  is  formed  the  word 
Gayatri,  which  is  the  name  of  that  great  Sakti  who  consists  of  Mantra.” 

In  another  Tantra  it  has  been  said:  “Mantra  is  so  called  because 
it  is  achieved  by  a  mental  process.  Dhyana  is  meditation.  In  Samadhi  * 
the  self  merges  with  the  Self  of  the  Istadcvata,*  and  Homa  is  so  called 
because  in  it  offerings  are  made.” 

The  nature  of  mind  and  its  faculties  is  thus  explained  in  Sastra : 4 * 
“  Mind  is  the  master  of  the  ten  senses,  and  is  situate  in  the  centre  of  the 
lotus  of  the  heart.  It  is  also  called  antahkarana, 6  because,  without  the 
senses,  it  has  no  power  of  action  as  regards  external  things — that  is,  if 
the  ear  does  not'  hear  a  sound,  if  the  skin  does  not  feel  a  touch,  or  if  the 
eye  does  not  see  a  form,  if  the  tongue  does  not  perceive  a  taste,  or  if  the 
nose  does  not  perceive  a  smell,  mind  becomes  incapable  of  perceiving  the 
nature  of  anything.  The  mastery  of  mind  consists  in  this  alone,  that 
when  the  senses  have  been  directed  each  on  its  own  object,  mind  sits  in 
judgment  on  them.  Mind  examines  what  is  good  and  what  is  bad. 
Mind  has  three  gunas* — namely,  sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas.  It  is  from 
these  gunas  that  all  the  different  changing  states 7 * *  of  mind  arise.  The 
gunas  being  three,  therefore,  the  three  mental  states  are  also  threefold 
according  as  they  are  sattvik,  rajasik,  and  tamasik.  The  sattvik  states  are 
non-attachment  to  the  world,*  forgiveness,  generosity,  and  the  like.  The 
rajasik  states  arc  passion,  anger,  greed,  striving,  and  the  like;  and  laziness, 
error,  lethargy,  and  the  like,  are  tamasik  states.  Sattvik  states  lead  only 
to  virtuous  acts,  rajarik  only  to  sin,  and  tamasik  states  give  rise  neither  to  sin 
nor  virtue,  but  merely  waste  a  life,  which  is  spent  to  no  purpose.” 

“  Antahkarana  ”  *  is  fourfold — namely,  manas,  of  which  the  func¬ 
tion  is  doubt;10  buddhi,  of  which  the  function  is  certainty;11  and 


I  That  is,  the  process  called  Safcakrabheda  by  which  the  roused  Kun<JalinI 

pierces  and  ascends  the  six  Cakras  until  She  unites  with  the  Siva  of  the 
Sahasrara.  *  Ecstasy. 

*  That  is,  the  Deity  which  a  particular  person  worships. 

4  The  Pafichadaft.  *  Literally,  means  “  doing  inside 

*  Qualities  or  principles.  7  Vikara.  *  Vairagya. 

*  The  antahkarana,  which  is  the  ego  in  general  (Ahomartha  antahkarana 

Bamanyam — Yoga  Vafitfha),  is  really  one,  though  its  functions  are  distin¬ 
guished  as  above. 

10  Manas  is  that  mental  faculty  which  considers  whether  the  subject  present¬ 

ed  to  it  is  this  or  that — “doubt” — manah  sankalpa  vikalpakatmakam 

(Sahkhya  Tattva  Kaumudi). 

II  After  manas  functions  it  presents  its  object  to  the  self,  which  sets  itself  as 
subject  against  it.  Then  Buddhi,  which  is  determination  (Adyavasaya  buddhi, 
ii,  chapter,  xiii,  Sutra,  Sahkhya  Pravacana  Darfanam),  follows  with  its  quality 
of  certainty  (Niicayakarinl) 


177 


GAYATRl  MANTRA  AND  IMAGE  WORSHIP 

ahafikara 1  and  dtta,  *  of  which  the  functions  are  egoism  and  remem¬ 
brance*  respectively. 

The  function  of  antahkarapa,  consisting  of  doubt,  is  called  “  manas”; 
the  function  of  antahkarapa,  consisting  of  certainty,  is  called  “buddhi”; 
the  function  of  antahkarapa,  consisting  of  self-consciousness,  is 
“  ahankara  ” ;  and  the  function  of  antahkarapa,  consisting  of  remembrance, 
is  called  “  dtta  ”,  In  the  sphere  of  worship  “  dtta  ’’  occupies  the  first 
place.  Remembrance  of  Mantra  and  Devata,  contemplation  on  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  Mantra,  and  meditation  on  Devata,  and  all  such  related  matters, 
are  accomplished  by  processes  of  the  function  of  “  dtta  ”.  The  meaning 
of  “  aksa  ”  is  sense.  The  taking  cognizance  by  the  senses  of  anything  is 
called  in  the  Sastra  “  pratyak$a  A  sense  devoid  of  consciousness 
cannot  perceive.  The  senses  are  but  the  doors  through  which  the 
antahkarapa  perceives  all  directly  perceptible  things.  This  is  the  reason 
why  in  dreamless  sleep,*  swoon,  and  delirium,  the  mind,  being  unable 
to  function,  even  things  close  by  arc  not  perceived,  despite  the  existence 
of  the  senses.  When  mind  has  perceived  a  thing  through  the  gate 
of  sense,  the  thought  of  that  thing  continues  like  the  steady  flow  of  a 
current  in  the  antahkarapa,  which  is  not  possessed  by  any  thing  else.  But 
just  as  innumerable  waves  rise  and  fall  during  the  rainy  seasons  upon  the 
heaving  bosom  of  a  river,  so  various  operations  of  the  mind,  working  upon 
the  innumerable  things  of  the  outside  world,  come  and  go  in  the  antah¬ 
karana  of  Jfva.  In  consequence,  no  particular  function  of  the  mind  is 
stationary  even  for  a  moment.  Some  other  appears  and  thrusts  it  aside. 
That  process  by  which  the  antahkarapa  endeavours  to  put  aside  a  later 
and  to  recall  an  earlier  operation  is  remembrance,  or  function  of  citta. 
The  next  question  is,  What  will  dtta  remember  ?  How  can  citta  remember 
that  which  has  not  been  registered  by  the  senses  and  perceived  by  the 
mind?  Unless  a  thing  has  once  been  perceived,  its  remembrance  is  not 
possible.  Here  it  may  be  objected  that  persons  in  dreams  perceive  heaven, 
places  of  pilgrimage,  and  the  effulgent  forms  of  Dev  as  and  Devis  which 
they  have  never  seen  before.  How  can  these  things  be  reflected  in  the 
mind  during  dreams  without  having  first  been  seen  by  the  physical  eye? 
This  objection  has  no  force,  because  all  such  things  as  are  perceived  in 


1  Self-consciousness — the  ego  recognizing  itself  (abhimana  ahankara,  ii, 
chap,  xvi,  Sutra,  ibid.). 

*  A  term,  in  its  wide  signification  meaning  “  mind  ”  or  the  antahkarapa  in 
general,  but  here  meaning  that  which  functions  as  cinta,  “  contemplation  ”  of  a 
present  or  remembered  object  of  thought.  In  S&fikhya,  as  opposed  to  Vedanta, 
Cinta  is  included  in  Buddhi. 

*  Involved  in  all  contemplation. 

*  Direct  perception. 

12 


*  Sufupti. 


178 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


dreams  are  mental.  During  sleep  all  the  senses  become  inactive,  mind 
alone  remaining  conscious.  In  the  dream-play  mind  is  the  only  actor,  so 
that,  whatever  is  shown,  the  acts  and  scenes  of  that  play  are  but  die  sport  of 
that  one  actor  assuming  different  characters.  Lions,  tigers,  snakes,  bears, 
wife,  son,  friend,  and  servant,  heaven  and  hell,  and  all  such  things  seen  in 
dreams  are  nothing  but  transformations  of  the  antahkajana.  Whatever 
the  mind  has  at  any  time  seen,  heard,  or  thought,  remains  engraved  there¬ 
on  like  marks  on  a  stone.  For  various  reasons,  in  sleep  subsequent 
superimposed  impressions  disappear,  laying  former  marks  exposed  to  view. 
As  the  outer  curtain  is  raised,  the  inner  scene  is  revealed.  It  is  not  that 
heaven  has  never  been  perceived.  All  that  we  can  say  is  that  it  has  not 
been  perceived  in  this  birth.  We  have  no  right  to  say  that  it  was  not 
perceived  in  any  previous  birth.  These  matters 1  will,  however,  be  ex¬ 
plained  in  our  discourse  on  reincarnation.  This  much  only  we  shall  say 
here,  that  mind  is  the  builder*  of  the  heaven  seen  in  dream,  when  it 
perceives  not  by  aid  of  the  senses,  but  works  only  with  the  aid  of  such 
materials  as  were  perceived  by  it  before.  It  is  with  such  materials  that 
the  mind  builds  in  dream  heaven,  earth,  hell,  and  all  such  things.  Mind, 
then,  without  the  aid  of  eye  or  ear,  sports  with  such  things  as  it  has  seen 
or  heard  by  the  eye  or  ear,  but  with  this  difference,  that  by  bringing  one 
thing  in  contact  with  some  other  previously  perceived  thing,  it  makes 
both  appear  in  a  form  different  from  their  real  one.  True,  we  see  heaven 
in  dreams,  but  the  idea  that  that  heaven  is  heaven  is  but  a  reflection  of 
the  heaven  which  the  ear  has  perceived  through  Vedas  and  Vcdangas. 
Had  we  not  heard  the  beauty  of  heaven  described  by  Itihasas,*  Puranas, 
and  the  like,  and  impressed  that  heaven  in  our  minds,  the  idea  of  heaven 
would  never  have  been  found  within  us,  and  without  such  idea  we  should 
never  have  seen  heaven  in  dream.  It  is  the  previous  impressions  caused 
by  our  having  heard  of  heaven  which  makes  us  see  heaven  in  the  dream 
picture.  In  this  lies  the  distinctive  character  of  the  picture.  The  palaces, 
temples,  woods,  and  groves  which  we  see  in  it  are  but  reflections  of  things 
which  we  have  seen  on  earth,  with  this  difference,  that  through  its  previous 
impressions  the  mind  decks  them  out  in  various  ways.  In  the  case  of  a 
shining  city  seen  in  dream  the  brilliance  as  well  as  the  city  are  of  previous 
perception.  Mind  only  puts  the  brilliance  and  the  city  together.  Dense 
forests  full  of  animals  of  prey  have  always  existed,  but  to-day  mind  places 
me  before  a  tiger  in  such  a  forest.  In  this  alone  is  to  be  seen  the  handi¬ 
work  of  mind,  the  hidden  mystery  of  the  drama,  the  characteristic  of  the 
dream.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  have  said  that  a  thing  which  has  not 
been  perceived  by  one  of  the  five  senses  can  never  be  seen  in  dream,  for 
mind,  the  showman,  does  not  contain  it  in  his  store-house.  Dreams 


1  Tattvas. 


*  Viivakarma. 


*  Histories. 


GAYATRl  mantra  and  image  worship 


179 


relating  to  DevatSs  worshipped  by  Sadhakas  are,  however,  brought  about 
by  a  different  process,  which  we  shall  explain  in  the  chapter  on  the  eight 
forms  of  Siddhi  of  a  Sadhaka. 

This  instance  of  dream  proves  that,  whether  in  waking  or  sleep, 
citta  cannot  remember  anything  which  has  not  been  heard,  touched, 
seen,  tasted,  or  smelt. 

Even  in  the  case  of  meditation  upon  a  Mantra  some  one  or  other  of 
these  five  sense-principles  must  be  present.  In  the  case  of  the  Gayatri 
there  is  much  difficulty  on  this  point. 

Worship  of  GAyatrI 

Many  people  nowadays  believe  that  it  is  the  Brahman  without  attri¬ 
bute  who  is  the  Devata  of  the  Gayatrl,  so  that  with  the  Gayatri  Mantra 
only  his  attributeless  aspect  should  be  contemplated.  But  in  this  there 
is  a  difficulty.  The  attributeless  Brahman  is  beyond  the  range  of  the 
mind,  speech,  or  senses,  and  how  can  mind  think  or  citta  remember  that 
which  is  not  within  the  range  of  the  senses.  If  it  is  impossible  even  in 
dream  to  sec  anything  which  has  not  been  previously  perceived  by  the 
senses,  how  is  it  possible  to  do  so  when  awake  ?  The  contemplation  of  the 
Gayatri  Mantra  is  thus  rendered  impossible.  Secondly,  the  attributeless 
Brahman  is  beyond  all  attributes.  That  which  is  such  shows  neither 
favour  nor  disfavour,  neither  satisfaction  nor  dissatisfaction,  so  that  nothing 
should  be  desired  or  expected  from  it  in  this  Sams&ra.  And  what  is  the 
use  of  going  to  that  from  which  nothing  can  be  obtained,  of  which  nothing 
can  be  expected,  and  to  whom  nothing  is  near,  and  nothing  is  distant? 

It  may  be  said  that  Gayatri  does  not  ask  anyone  to  go  or  come,  but 
only  to  sit  down  and  meditate.  But  meditation  is  not  possible  without 
mind.  The  latter  is  intimately  associated  with  the  three  qualities.  The 
supreme  Brahman  is  without  them.  It  is,  therefore,  as  impossible  to  hold 
the  firmament  between  a  pair  of  tongs  as  it  is  to  worship  the  attributeless 
Brahman  by  a  mind  with  attributes.  Thirdly,  whether  we  be  on  the  paths 
of  knowledge,1  devotion,*  or  work,*  worship  of  the  Brahman  without 
attribute  is  against  all  opinions,  reason,  and  &£stra.  “  The  mental  process 
by  which  the  self  is  related  to  the  Brahman  with  attributes  is  called 
worship.”  For  this  reason  it  would  have  been  preferable  that  anything 
else  than  worship  should  be  done  in  relation  to  the  attributeless  Brahman, 
which  it  is  supposed  the  GSyatri  seeks  to  establish.  But  how  can  we  help 
it?  The  $2stra  has,  again,  said :  “  The  twice-born — that  is,  Brkhmapas, 
Ksattriyas,  and  Vaiiyas — are  all  Saktas,4  and  not  Saivas  or  Vai^navas ; 

1  Jfiana.  '  *  Bhakti.  1  Karma. 

1  Worshippers  of  thr  Devi,  as  opposed  to  worshippers  of  Siva  and  Vijpu. 


180 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T4NTRA 


for  they  all  worship  Gayatri  Dev!,  the  Mother  of  the  Vedas.”  This 
means  that,  whatever  one  may  become  afterwards,  whether  Saiva, 
Vaisnava,  Saura,1  or  Gagapatya,*  one  is  at  base  a  Sakta. 

For  Gayatri,  who  is  the  Mother  of  the  Vedas,  and  from  whom  a 
person  derives  his  twice-born  character,  is  Herself  an  embodiment  of 
mighty  Sakti. 

Here  also  it  has  been  said:  “  All  worship  Gayatri  Devi.”  How  can 
one  who  is  attributeless  be  made  the  subject  of  a  mind  with  attributes? 
Fourthly,  it  is  said  that  the  Brahman  which  Gayatri  seeks  to  establish  is 
attributeless.  Sastra,  however,  says  that,  when  meditating  on  Gayatri 
during  japa,*  She  should  be  contemplated  under  three  forms  according  as 
it  is  morning,  noon,  or  evening.  In  the  morning  She  is  Gayatri,  and 
appears  as  a  young  girl,  rosy  like  the  young  sun.  She  is  two-armed 
Brahmani,4  riding  a  swan,*  holding  in  her  hand  rudraksa  beads,8  the 
thread,  and  begging-bowl,’  residing  in  the  disc  of  the  sun,  the  presiding 
Devi*  of  the  Rgveda.  At  noon  She  is  Savitri,  and  appears  as  a  young 
woman,  dark  as  the  petals  of  a  blue  lotus.  She  is  Vai$navi,*  riding  the 
bird  Garuda,  holding  in  Her  four  arms  a  conch  shell,10  discus,11  mace,1* 
and  a  lotus,  residing  in  the  orb  of  the  sun,  the  presiding  Devi  of  the 
Yajurvcda.  In  the  evening  She  is  Sarasvati,  and  appears  as  an  older 
woman  of  spotless  white  beauty.  She  is  three-eyed  Rudrani,18  crowned 
with  the  crescent  moon,  riding  a  bull,  holding  a  trident 14  and  drum,111 
residing  in  the  solar  disc,  the  presiding  Devi  of  the  Samaveda. 

In  the  commentary  of  Sankaracarya  on  Sandhya,18  as  prescribed  in 
the  Yajurvcda,  the  following  passages  are  quoted:  “Gayatri  at  morn, 


1  Worshipper  of  the  sun.  *  Worshipper  of  Ganeia. 

*  That  is,  Dhyana,  during  recitation  (japa)  of  mantra,  as  the  Catholic, 
when  saying  the  rosary,  thinks,  of  each  scene  of  the  joyful,  sorrowful,  or  glorious 
mysteries. 

4  Feminine  aspect  or  Sakti  of  Brahma. 

1  Hamsa,  which  is  also  described  as  a  goose  or  flamingo,  the  vehicle 
(Vahana)  of  Brahma. 

I  The  seed  of  a  fruit,  used  for  mSla  (rosary),  etc. 

7  Kamaijdalu,  used  by  ascetics  to  carry  food  given  to  them. 

*  Adhistatri. 

*  Feminine  aspect  or  Sakti  of  Vijiju,  whose  Vahana  is  the  Bird-King 

Garuda.  10  Sankha. 

II  Cakra.  11  Gada,  all  three  held  by  Visnu. 

>»  Feminine  aspect  or  Sakti  of  Rudra  (Siva),  whose  VShana  is  a  bull. 

“Triftla. 

«  Damaru,  a  small  “  hour-glass  ”  drum,  held  as  well  as  the  trident  by  Siva. 

u  Daily  worship,  performed  at  morning,  noon,  and  eventide. 


gAyatri  mantra  and  image  worship 


181 


Savitri  at  noon,  Sarasvati  at  eventide.  She  bears  these  three  names  at  these 
three  times  of  the  day,  and  She  herself  is  Sandhya  at  all  three  times  (Vyasa). 

“The  morning  Sandhya  is  Gayatri,  the  noon  Sandhya  is  Savitri, 
and  the  evening  Sandhya  is  Sarasvati”  (YSjftavalkya). 

“  Gayatri  is  red,  Savitri  is  white  (according  to  some  1  Veda),  and 
Sarasvati  is  dark  (according  to  some 1  Veda).  These  three  appearances  of 
G&yatri  have  been  mentioned  for  the  three  Sandhyas.  In  meditation  at 
other  times  She  should  be  contemplated  upon  as  being  of  a  white  colour  ” 
(Vyasa). 

“  Three-footed  Gayatri  who  in  Her  three  feet  embodies  the  three 
Saktis*  of  Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Maheivara;  Her  alone  should  the  twice- 
born  seek  and  worship  in  three  forms.” 

Again,  it  has  been  ordained  that  this  very  Gayatri,  who  appears 
as  Sakti,  should  be  contemplated  as  a  male  at  the  time  of  prapaySma  *  thus: 

“At  the  time  of  inspiration*  of  breath  contemplate  (according  to 
some 1  Veda)  the  Mahatma  *  dark  as  the  petals  of  a  blue  lotus,  with  four 
arms  in  the  circle  of  the  navel.  At  the  time  of  retention  of  breath  * 
contemplate  (according  to  some  7  Veda)  Brahma,  the  grandfather  of 
the  world,*  red  of  body,  with  four  mouths  seated  on  a  lotus  in  the  region 
of  the  heart.  At  expiration »  of  breath  contemplate  Mahcivara,10  the 
Destroyer  of  sin,  clear,  fair  and  white,  like  the  purest  crystal  in  the  region 
of  the  forehead.” 

Oh,  thou  Brahmana,  who  hast  privilege 11  in  Veda  and  worshippest 
Gayatri,  tell  me  now,  do  these  forms  represent  that  aspect  of  the  Brahman 
which  is  without  attributes? 

Whether  the  Brahman  be  with  or  without  attribute,  and  possessed  of  ' 
form  or  not,  will  be  hereafter  discussed.  Sastra  says  that  the  Brahman 
whom  the  Gayatri  speaks  of  is  without  attribute,  but  it  also  says  that  at 
time  of  japa  and  prapayama  His  form  with  attributes  should  be  contem¬ 
plated.  How  are  we  to  harmonize  these  two  statements  of  Sastra  ?  If  in 
Gayatri  He  is  explained  to  be  without  attribute,  why  docs  Sastra  again 
enjoin  that  He  should  be  contemplated  with  attributes  ?  How  shall  we  estab¬ 
lish  a  concordance  between  these  apparendy  conflicting  statements?  We 
shall  deal  with  this  matter  afterwards.  But  here  we  ask  why  has  this  conflict 
come  about  ?  Has  Sastra  itself  the  power  to  determine  anything  in  Him  ?  '* 

I  Sic  in  original.  *  Powers. 

*  Regulation  of  breath,  or  breath  exercises  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra). 

*  Puraka.  *  Great  Spirit ;  here  Visnu. 

*  Kumbhaka.  T  Sic  in  original. 

B  Loka.  •  Recaka.  »•  Siva. 

II  Literally,  “  enjoy est  adhikara  in  Veda.’* 

”  Literally,  “  to  build  or  break  anything  about  Him.” 


182 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Of  coune  not.  Is  it  not  bound  to  say  that  which  He  really  is?  Had  the 
Sastra  been  the  creation  of  mere  human  authorship  then  there  would 
certainly  have  been  much  ground  both  for  affirmance  and  denial.  But 
according  to  the  Aryan  view  Sastra  is  not  a  human  production,  but  the 
production  of  Him  concerning  whom  these  questions  arise.  How  then 
can  objection  arise  as  to  why  the  Sastra  has  said  this  or  that?  Bhagavan 
Himself  takes  his  own  portraits  in  His  own  camera.  These  portraits 
reproduce  the  different  appearances  in  which  He  is  sitting  before  it.  His 
will  is  the  sole  cause  of  these  differences.  For  this  reason  an  objection  as 
to  why  Sastra  has  said  this  or  that  is  fundamentally  impossible. 

The  \ftcYAl  and  Vac  aka  1  Saktis  of  a  Mantra 

Sadhakas  will  particularly  bear  in  mind  that  not  only  in  the  Gayatrl 
but  in  every  Mantra  there  are  two  Saktis — the  Vacya  Sakti  and  the 
Vacaka  Sakti.  The  Devata  who  is  the  subject  of  a  Mantra,’  is  the  Vacya 
Sakd,  and  the  Devata  who  is  the  Mantra  itself*  is  Vacaka  Sakti.  For 
instance,  the  Devata  presiding 4  over  all  Visnu  Mantras  is  Durga  in  the 
Mantra  of  the  hymn  of  one  thousand  names  of  Durga.  Durga  is  the 
Devata  and  Mahamaya  is  the  Sakti.  In  the  hymn  of  a  thousand  names 
of  Visnu,  Paramatma  Sri  Krsra  is  the  Devata,  and  the  son  of  DevakI  ‘  is  the 
Sakti,  and  so  on.  As  the  seed  lies  inside  the  fruit  so  the  Vacya  Sakti  lies 
within  the  Vacaka  Sakti.  As  one  cannot  see  the  seed  without  penetrating 
through  the  fruit,  so  one  cannot  perceive  the  true  nature  of  the  Vacya 
Sakti  without  first  worshipping  the  Vacaka  Sakti.  It  is  the  Vacya 
Sakti  who  is  the  life  of  a  Mantra,  and  the  Vacaka  Sakti  is  that  by  which 
such  life  is  sustained.  Without  life  what  is  there  to  sustain?  And  if 
it  be  not  sustained  life  is  not  possible.  For  this  reason,  without  both  of 
these  two  Saktis  a  Mantra  cannot  even  be  awakened  *  and  Siddhi  cannot 
be  obtained  in  it.7  In  particular,  without  worship  of  the  Vacaka  Sakti 
life  cannot  be  infused  into  a  Mantra.*  To  think  of  Sadhana  and  Siddhi 
in  connection  with  an  unconscious  Mantra  is  as  though  one  were  to  take 


1  These  terms  are  explained  in  the  text. 

1  Pratipadya  Devata.  s  Mantramayi  Devata. 

*  Adhi}(atri  residing  in  or  presiding  over.  Every  mantra  has  its  Adhistatri 

Devata.  6  Mother  of  Knna. 

*  That  is,  there  is  no  mantracaitanya.  Unless  the  mantra  is  awakened  in 
and  by  the  consciousness  of  the  sadhaka  the  mantra  thus  becoming  parcel  of 
the  consciousness  of  the  sadhaka  himself,  it  is  mere  dead  sound  and  letter 
and  without  fruit  1  Mantrasiddhi  (see  Introduction  to  Tmtra  Sastra). 

*  The  conditioned  consciousness  necessarily  works  by  and  through  form 
(which  is  the  nature  of  its  thinking)  to  the  formless  “  That  ”  which  manifests  to 
the  sidhaka  in  worship  as  form. 


GAYATRI  mantra  and  image  worship 


183 


a  dead  child  in  one’s  lap,  and  thought  to  attain  worldly  prosperity  with 
its  help.  By  worship  1  the  Sadhaka  must  here  understand  not  the  worship 
of  the  twentieth  century  spreading  like  some  contagious  disease,  but  the 
worship  ordained  by  Slstra  for  the  Aryan  race.  For  the  fruit  of  this 
worship,  to  which  we  shall  refer,  is  stated  in  the  Sastra.  The  Mantra  of 
this  worship  is  not  prayer  or  self-dedicadon,  ending  in  roaring  thunder 
and  storm-clouds  in  an  autumnal  sky.*  The  first  fruit  of  its  utterance  is  a 
shower  of  glances  from  Devas  powerful  enough  to  deluge  the  universe,  and 
the  last  is  the  wealth  of  Siddhi.  As  the  waters  of  earth  drawn  by  the  sun 
gather  in  the  sky,  and  then  fall  on  the  earth  as  rain  and  are  dried  up,  and 
again  and  again  are  drawn  by  the  sun,  and  fall  and  arc  dried  up,  so  is 
this  dualistic  world  drawn  towards  the  brilliant  solar  o*b  which  is  the  sub* 
ject  of  the  Gayatri,  and  then  descends  as  knowledge  of  the  non-dualistic 
truth,®  flooding  the  dry  dualistic  samsara,  making  a  current  of  non- 
dualistic  Brahma-knowledge  and  Brahma-bliss  to  flow  all  over  the  dualistic 
universe,  setting  aside  illusive  dualism,  drawing  non-dualistic  knowledge 
towards  Her  from  whom  dualistic  existence  originates.  And  in  the 
meantime  the  wealth  of  the  eight  Siddhis 4  grows  and  ripens,  filling  the 
vast  universe,  the  field  of  action  *  belonging  to  that  worthy  cultivator  the 
Sadhaka.  For  this  reason  we  are  not  to  understand  by  the  Gayatri 
Mantra  the  beginning  of  a  storm,  but  the  Mother,  who  is  fair  as  clouds 
laden  with  water.  The  attributeless  Vacya  Sakti,  who  is  the  subject  of 
the  Gayatri,  knows  that  Her  aspect  without  attribute  is  unapproachable 
by  Jivas  who  have  attributes.  She  has  therefore  blessed  the  world  of 
devotees  by  the  assumption  of  form  with  attributes  favourable  to  the 
Sadhana  and  Siddhi  of  the  Sadhaka,  and  it  is  this  form  dwelling  in  the 
hearts  of  devotees  which  is  the  V&caka  Sakti  resident  in  the  Gayatri 
Mantra.  It  is  the  lustre  of  Her  colours,  white,  yellow,  blue,  and  red, 
which  manifests  itself  in  the  lustre  of  Kulakunqlalini,1  voicing  the  fifty 
letters  of  the  Alphabet.  It  is  of  Herself  that  every  letter  speaks.  Sastra 
therefore  says :  “  Oh,  Muni,  who  can  relate  the  unparalleled  greatness  of 
that  Adya  Sakti?7  Siva  Himself,  with  his  five  mouths,  has  failed  to 
describe  it.  When  death  approaches  the  dweller  at  Benares  who  longs  for 
liberation,  to  him  Sambhu  *  Himself  appears,  and  utters  in  His  ear  the 
great  Mantra  called  Taraka-Brahma  in  the  form  in  which  it  was  given  by 
his  Guru,  and  thus  grants  him  the  supreme  liberation  of  Nirvana.  Oh, 
Jaimini  Brahmana  and  B?i !  it  is  that  great  Sakti  who  gives  the  liberation 
of  NirvSna,  for  She  alone  is  the  blja  *  of  all  Mantras.  Oh,  high-souled 


1  UpasanS.  *  That  !s,  in  moaning,  weeping,  etc.  *  Tattva. 

*  See  Introduction  to  T antra  Sastra.  *  Karma. 

8  The  Devi  whose  seat  is  in  the  MuladhSra.  7  Primal  Sakti. 

8  Siva.  •  Seed  or  seed  znantra. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


184 

man,  all  Vedas  have  described  that  Guru  of  liberation  as  the  DevatS  who 
resides  in  all  Mantras.  In  the  city  of  Benares,  Mahejvara,  desirous  of 
granting  liberation  to  all  creatures,  even  to  such  as  hares,  insects,  and  the 
like,  who  have  received  no  initiation,  Himself  utters  in  their  ears  at  the 
time  of  death  the  name  Durga,  the  great  Taraka-Brahma  Mantra.” 1 

Again,  in  the  chapter  on  Creation  in  the  same  Sastra,  it  has  been 
said:  “  High-souled  man!  in  this  manner  Bhagavan  Brahma  created  the 
whole  world,  and  Prakrti  Devi,  appearing  through  part  of  Herself 
as  Savitri,  whom  the  twice-born  worship  at  three  sandhySs,1  received  Him 
as  Her  husband.  Similarly  the  Devi  incarnated  Herself  in  part  as  LaksmI 
and  Sarasvad,  and  in  Her  play  received  Visnu,  the  maintainor  of  the 
three  worlds,  as  He?  husband.” 

Over  and  above  this  there  are  descriptions  of  Her  innumerable  mani¬ 
festations  *  in  the  form  of  the  Matrka  varnas.4  To  these  aspects  we  shall 
refer  in  their  proper  place.  In  fact,  there  is  no  difference  in  substance 
between  the  different  states,  Vacya  and  Vacaka,  of  Sacchidanandamayf. 8 
As  clouds  are  the  compact  state  of  water,  so  the  aspect  with  attributes  of 
the  Vacaka  Sakti  is  but  the  compact  state  of  the  attributclcss  Vacya  Sakti. 
As  clouds  moved  by  the  wind  liquefy  and  pour  rain,  so,  moved  by  the 
love  of  devotees,  the  Deva  with  form  and  attributes  gratifies  them  by 
manifesting  to  their  view  that  aspect  of  Hers  without  attributes  which 
pervades  the  universe.  Sadhana  and  Siddhi  are  the  necessary  processes 
to  secure  such  gratification.  For  this  reason  we  find  in  Sastra  that  when¬ 
ever  She  has  out  of  Her  extreme  favour  to  a  devotee  fully  manifested 
Herself,  She  has,  despite  of  Her  being  formless,  shown  the  world-form  8  as 
Her  own  form.  Had  the  Vacaka  Sakti  been  separate  from  the  Vacya 
Sakti,  how  were  it  possible  for  the  unlimited  Sakti  extending  throughout 
the  universe  to  appear  in  that  limited  form  ?  How  could  the  womb  of  a 
limited  form  hold  this  universe  ?  And  so,  oh,  devotee,  I  say  the  cloud  is 
but  a  condensed  mass  of  particles  of  water.  Open  your  heart,  cry  “  Oh, 
Mother  l  ”  fan  it  with  the  wind  of  devotion,7  and  then  you  will  see  that  a 
copious  incessant  downpour  will  deluge  the  three  worlds.  And  then,  not 
only  ourselves,  but  the  whole  dualistic  world  will  enter  and  sink  in  the 
unfathomable  womb  of  the  one  and  only  existence.4  When  the  Sakti  with 
attributes  resident  in  the  Mantra  is,  by  dint  of  the  Sadhana  of  the 
S&dhaka,  awakened,  She  will  open  the  gate  of  the  monistic  truth,  when  it 
will  become  possible  to  see  the  true  nature  and  essence  •  of  this  universe. 

1  Mahabhagavata  Discourse  between  Vyasa  and  Jaimini. 

*  Morning,  noon,  and  evening.  *  Vibhuti. 

4  Letters  of  the  alphabet. 

8  She  whose  substance  is  existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss:  the  definition 
of  Brahman.  •  Viivarupa.  7  Bhakti.  *  Tattva. 


gayatri  mantra  and  image  worship 


185 


Just  as  in  order  to  obtain  a  knowledge  of  the  magic  art  of  acting  the 
actors  and  actresses  must  themselves  play  their  parts,  so  unless  the  Actor 
and  Actress  in  the  play  of  this  world  themselves  graciously  show  us  their 
art,  none  can  give  a  true  perception  of  what  is  Brahmavidya.'  But  the 
matter  is  different  for  those  who,  appearing  themselves  in  the  character 
of  actors  and  actresses,  make  a  play  of  that  play,  who  in  reading  dramas 
themselves  become  the  dramatis  personae,  and  who  the  moment  they  close 
their  eyes  cause  the  universe  with  attributes  to  vanish,  and  see  the  attri¬ 
buteless  Brahman.*  For  they  are  themselves  both  exhibitors  and  specta¬ 
tors,  both  actors  and  audience.  They  can  change  their  character  ten 
times  in  an  hour,  and  themselves  enjoy  the  sight  of  it.  They  can  do  what 
they  like.  We  have  nothing  to  say  to  it.  Nevertheless,  whatever  others  may 
say,  they  themselves  know  that  they  are  not  one  whit  better  than  what 
they  were  before,  but  have  merely  assumed  a  part.  So  much  about  the 
playing  of  parts;  the  seeing  of  the  real  play  is  a  different  matter.  But 
the  thirst  of  the  heart  of  those  who  hope  that  He  will  play,  and  they  will 
see;  that  He  will  dance,  and  they  will  be  the  cause  of  His  dancing;  that 
He  will  show  His  real  aspect  and  they  will  enjoy  it  to  their  hearts’  con¬ 
tent,  cannot  be  satisfied  by  the  sight  of  this  worthless  play.  Their  solemn 
resolve  is  that  so  long  as  new  and  charming  clouds  do  not  appear  in  the 
sky,  they  would  rather  cry  with  plaintive  hearts  and  parched  throats 
incessantly,  like  a  cataka,*  in  this  life,  tormented  by  the  three  kinds  of 
sorrow,*  than,  being  drawn  by  the  false  attraction  of  the  mirage,  rush 
towards  it  like  foolish  deer,  and  be  untimely  consumed  with  the  fire  of  a 
burning  thirst.  Sooner  or  later  a  day  must  come  in  the  year  of  human 
life  when  the  eye  will  be  soothed  and  the  heart  refreshed  by  the  blissful 
world-filling  beauty  of  the  soothing  shining  cloud,  and  the  thirst  of  the 
heart  will  be  satiated  for  life  by  the  shower  of  Her  gracious  glances  full 
of  nectar.  For  this  reason  the  devotee  depends  on  Her  alone,  is  all  sub¬ 
mission  to  Her,  never  begs  at  the  door  of  others,  and  says:  “  Oh,  Mother, 
I  know  that  Thy  true  aspect  is  Brahmakaivalya,*  that  Thou  art  without 
attribute,  and  attainable  by  true  knowledge  alone.  I  know  that  Thou 
art  also  full  of  kindness  for  Thy  devotee.  I  know  that  Thou  art  our  Lady,* 
and  that  the  universe  is  Thy  form.  I  know  that  Thy  substance  is  existence, 
consciousness,  and  bliss,  and  that  Thou  in  various  forms  grantest  the 

1  Knowledge  of  Brahman. 

*  A  remark  directed  against  the  Brahmo  sect,  who  are  here  described  as 
thinking  that  they  can  do  without  Sadhana,  and  by  simply  closing  their  eyes 
can  see  the  Nirguija  Brahman. 

*  A  bird  which  is  said  to  live  only  on  rain.  *  Vide  ante. 

*  The  supreme  liberation. 

*  Ifvari,  feminine  of  lSvara,  the  “  personal  “  Deity. 


186  PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 

desires  of  Sadhakas.  I  know  that  Thou  holdest  the  three  worlds 
in  play.  I  know,  oh.  Mother,  that  Thou  art  the  ordainer  of  all  ordainers. 
But  still  I  know  that  for  the  man  who  is  helpless,  destitute,  and  woebegone, 
who  seeks  a  shelter  from  danger,  and  who  has  no  means  of  fulfilling  his 
desire,  Thou  art  the  sole  amulet,  Mantra,  and  healing  balm.  It  is  in 
order  that  She  may  grant  this  prayer  of  the  SSdhaka  and  to  prove  the 
truth  of  this  faith  that  She  who  is  the  Vacya  Sakti,  whose  substance  is 
eternal  consciousness,  assumes  playful  forms  as  Vjicaka  Sakti.  Dwelling 
as  Daughter  in  such  a  form  the  Mother  of  the  world  said  to  Her  Father, 
Himalaya:  ‘None  can  comprehend  my  subde  ’  form  without  first  having 
duly  meditated  *  on  my  gross  *  form.  The  sight  of  this  subtle  form  releases 
JIva  from  the  bofids  of  Samsara,  and  gives  him  Nirvana  Samadhi.*  For 
this  reason  a  Sadhaka  who  desires  liberation  must  first  seek  refuge  in  my 
gross  forms,  and  then,  having  by  Kriyayoga  duly  worshipped  these  forms 
slowly  and  step  by  step,  think  of  My  supreme,  unwasdng,  subtle  form.’  ” 

The  Sadhaka  will  from  this  realize  that  it  is  only  after  full  worship  of 
Her  in  Her  aspects  with  form  that  he  has  the  right  to  think,  little  by  little, 
of  Her  subtle  aspect.  Now  where  is  that  subtle  aspect,  and  where  stand 
you  and  I  ? 

As  in  Gayatri,  so  in  every  Mantra,  the  Vacya  Sakti  is  without  attri¬ 
bute,  and  the  Vacaka  Sakti  is  with  attribute,  for  the  latter  is  the  object  of 
worship  and  the  former  the  object  which  is  to  be  attained.  The  Vacaka 
Sakti  must  be  used  as  a  means  and  support  in  order  that  the  Vacya  Sakti 
may  be  attained. 

So  long  as  I  must  worship  with  this,  my  mind  and  heart  preserving 
the  distinction  that  I  am  the  worshipper  and  She  is  the  worshipped,  so 
long  there  is  no  other  alternative  than  to  worship  that  aspect  of  Her 
which  has  both  form  and  attributes.  But  on  the  day  that  my  mind  and 
heart  sink  in  the  womb  of  Prakrti  *,  the  twenty-four  tattvas  •  will  dis¬ 
appear  in  Herself,  all  egoism  will  be  destroyed,  and  I  shall  lose  myself  in 
that  state  beyond  all  speech  and  thought,  in  which  “  neither  you  nor  I 
exist On  that  day  where  am  I  or  who  is  mine?  Your  existence  depends 
on  mine,  so  that  if  I  cease  to  exist  where,  then,  are  you  ?  And  even  if 
“  you  ”  do  exist  there  will  be  no  “  1  ”  to  discover  “  you  Only  so  long 
as  a  river  does  not  fall  and  lose  itself  in  the  sea  does  the  distinction 
between  river  and  sea  exist.  But  when  the  river  mingles  with  the  sea  the 
former  ceases  to  exist ;  and  so  docs  the  sea  to  the  river,  which  is  lost  in 
it,  though  it  exists  for  all  the  world  besides.  The  individuality  of  the 


1  Suksma.  •  Dhyana.  *  Sthula.  4  Ecstasy  of  liberation. 

8  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Rostra. 

•  Of  Sankhya — «$.,  Prakrti,  Mahat,  Ahankara,  Manas,  Indriyas,  Tan- 
matras,  Mahab.hu  tas. 


gAyatri  mantra  and  image  worship 


187 


river  ceasing  to  exist,  it  can  no  longer  say  what  it  has  become  owing  to 
the  loss  of  its  self.  There  is  then  no  means  of  either  separating  the  “self” 
of  the  river,  nor  can  the  river  separate  itself.  For  this  reason  I  say  that 
when  I  cease  to  exist  She,  too,  notwithstanding  Her  existence,  ceases  to 
exist  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  for  with  the  destruction  of  my  individuality 
Her  individuality  in  its  relationship  to  me  has  also  been  destroyed.  Now 
tell  me,  O  Sadhaka!  whom  shall  you  worship  when  sinking  in  the  attri¬ 
buteless  aspect  of  the  Self.  This  state  is  not  worship,  but  the  ultimate 
fruit  of  it  called  Nirvana  or  Brahmakaivalya.  In  this  state  the  worshipper 
becomes  one  with  the  worshipped.  There  remains  neither  worshipper 
nor  worshipped,  but  only  She.  If  you  consider  this  as  also  suitable  for 
worship,  I  know  not  where  in  the  domain  of  the  Lafly  with  dishevelled 
hair1  you  can  get  liberation.  However  that  may  be,  the  question  is  one 
which  concerns  only  those  who  have  attained  that  state.  We  say  to  you, 
Jiva,  that  so  long  as  that  state  of  a  Jiva  lasts,  no  other  means  are  available 
to  you  but  worship.  So  long  as  you  must  worship  you  must,  in  order  to 
maintain  that  worship  as  such,  continue  to  worship  a  Deity  which  possesses 
form.  Do  not  be  afraid.  Neither  you  nor  I  will  have  to  clutch  indis¬ 
criminately  at  anything  or  everything. 

She  who  created  Jiva  knew  aforehand  the  pangs  of  the  Jiva’s  heart, 
and  because  She  must  be  attained  the  Daughter  of  the  Mountain  has 
surrendered  Herself  to  various  forms.  Because  of  this  we  on  earth  may 
dare  to  stretch  our  hands  towards  heaven  to  seize  Her.  Although,  whether 
on  earth,  in  heaven,  or  in  the  nether  world,  She  is  one  without  a  second, 
She  has  yet  assumed  various  forms  as  Mother  of  the  dualistic  world.  It  is 
the  sight  of  this  grand  play  of  Brahmamayi  which  has  led  Sastra  to  say  in 
the  Kularpava  Tantra: 1 * 

“  Brahman,  who  is  all  consciousness,  without  body  or  part,  and 
beyond  the  power  of  speech  and  mind,  builds  forms  for  Himself  for  the 
benefit  of  Sadhakas.” 

In  the  Mah&nirvana  Tantra,  SadaSiva  says  to  the  Devi:  “  Hear  why 
Thou  art  worshipped,  and  why  Thy  Sadhana  leads  Jiva  to  Brahma- 
Sayujya®?  Thou  art  the  supreme  Prakrti  of  the  Supreme  Soul.  O  Sive! 4 * 
the  whole  world  is  bom  of  Thee.  Hence  Thou  art  its  Mother.  O  Lady! 
everything  in  this  world,  be  it  great  or  small,  moving  or  unmoving,  has 
been  created  by  Thee,  and  exists  under  Thy  contrdk  Thou  art  the 
Mulaprakrti  6  of  all  Vidyas,6  and  the  origin  of  even  Us  7;  Thou  knowest 


1  Dev!  as  Kali  and  other  appearances  (Murti)  is  so  represented. 

*  Chap.  vi.  *  Union  with  Brahman. 

4  The  Devi. 

4  The  root  or  primal  Prakfti.  4  Saktu. 

7  That  is,  Brahma,  Vi«ju>  Siva,  and  other  Dev  as. 


188 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  Tattva 1  of  the  entire  universe,  yet  none  knows  Thy  true  aspect.  Thou 
art  Kali,  Tara,  DurgS,  So^aii,  BhuvaneSvari,  and  Dhumavati.  Thou  art 
Bagala,  Bhairavi,  and  Cinnamasta.  Thou  art  Annapurna 1 *  and  the  Devi 
of  speech.*  Thou  art  Mahalaksmi,  who  dwells  in  a  lotus.  Thou  dost 
embody  all  Saktis.  In  Thee  are  all  Devas.  Thou  art  subtle  as  well  as 
gross,  manifested  as  well  as  unmanifested.  Formless,  Thou  dost  possess 
also  forms.  Who  can  know  Thy  true  aspect?  For  the  success  of  worship¬ 
pers,  the  welfare  of  the  whole  world,  and  the  destruction  of  the  Danavas,4 
Thou  assumeth  all  kinds  of  bodies.  Thou  art  four-armed,  two-armed, 
six-armed,  and  eight-armed.  For  the  preservation  of  the  universe  Thou 
holdeth  all  kinds  of  arms  and  weapons.  Mantra,  Yantra,5 *  and  other 
modes  of  Sadhana,  as  well  as  the  three  forms  of  worship,  Paiu,  Vira,  and 
Divya,*  are  all  described  in  Tantra  in  accordance  with  these  different 
aspects  of  Thine.”  The  same  Tantra  says:  “Thou  dost  embody  all 
Saktis;  Thou  art  the  supreme  Adyaiakti.7  Our  Saktis*  as  Creator, 
Preserver,  and  Destroyer  of  the  universe,  arc  derived  from  Thy  Sakti. 
Thy  eternal  forms  are  of  varied  colour  and  shape,  and  adored  by  means  of 
various  forms  of  Sadhana.  Who  can  describe  all  these  ?  It  is  by  the  grace 
of  a  drop  of  Thy  mercy  that  it  has  been  given  to  Me  to  describe  in 
Kulatantra  Agama  and  other  Sastras  the  mode  of  Sadhana  and  worship 
of  those  forms  of  Thine.” 

From  these  Sastrik  references  it  appears  that  the  Daughter  of  the 
Mountain,  knowing  the  incapacity  of  Jlva  to  conceive  any  idea  of  Her 
subtle  nature,9  incarnated  Herself  in  various  forms  for  Sadhana  and 
Siddhi,  the  welfare  of  the  three  worlds,  and  for  the  relief  of  earth  from 
the  burden  of  its  sins.10  This  is  the  firm  faith  of  those  who  proceed  along 
the  path  of  Sadhana  under  the  control  and  protection  of  Sastra.  Dif¬ 
ferent  is  the  opinion  of  those  who  hurry  along  the  path  of  selfishness, 
keeping  Sastra  under  their  control.  None  can  object  to  another  preaching 
his  own  individual  opinions.  But  those  who  hide  themselves  under  the 
cloak  of  Sastra,  and  in  an  unnatural  way  kill  or  wound  it,  stabbing  its 
heart  with  wrong  meanings  and  perverted  interpretations,  pouring  into  it 
the  poison  of  selfishness,  proclaiming  to  the  world  that  they  are  doctoring 
the  Sastra  from  the  poisonous  bag,  full  of  sharp  weapons  of  selfishness 
belonging  to  modem  social  reformers,  founders  of  religion,  critics,  and 

1  Truth,  Principle,  Nature,  Essence. 

*  Various  forms  of  the  Devi,  including  the  Daiamahavidya. 

*  Sarasvatl. 

4  Demons.  *  The  worshipped  diagram. 

6  The  three  Bhavas.  7  Primal  Sakti. 

*  That  is,  the  powers  of  Brahma  and  others. 

•Tattva:  existence  or  reality. 


10  Bhubhar  a. 


gAyatrI  mantra  and  image  worship 


189 


murdering  charlatans,  must  be  exposed  in  order  to  show  with  what 
excellent  remedies  they  trumpet  their  doctoring  of  the  religious  world. 
We  must  also  see  whether  the  very  wasted,  contracted,  and  slumbering 
state  of  religion  which  they  have  brought  about  in  the  present  time  by 
virtue  of  their  treatment  is  merely  a  sleep  of  rest  for  religion,  or  its  eternal 
sleep  in  death.  In  this  section  we  shall  disclose  to  Sadhakas  that  new 
treatment  of  Sadhanadharma  by  these  doctors,  which  consists  of  hitting  its 
head  with  the  Brahma-weapon : 1 

Cinmayasyaprameyasya  niskalasyaSaririnah. 

Sadhakanara  hitarthaya  brahmano  rupakalpana. 

That  is  to  say,  Brahman  who  is  all  consciousness,  without  body  or 
parts  and  beyond  the  reach  of  speech  and  mind,*  bhilds  forms  for  the 
benefit  of  Sadhakas. 

We  have  given  before  the  interpretation  of  this  verse,  based  on  the 
authority  of  Sastra.  But  the  above  mentioned  doctors  are  opposed  to  this 
interpretation.  They  say  that  worshippers  have  themselves  given  imaginary 
forms  to  Brahman  for  their  own  purposes,  although,  as  a  matter  of  fact. 
Brahman  has  no  form.  If  this  be  true,  then  Sadhakas  have  not  only  given 
imaginary  forms  to  Brahman,  but  their  alleged  purposes  and  benefit  must 
be  imaginary.  If  Brahman  has  really  no  form,  how  can  we  believe  that  a 
true  purpose  can  be  served  by  attributing  false  and  imaginary  forms  to 
Him?  You  may  say  that  contemplation  of  form  merely  produces  con¬ 
centration  of  mind,  and  that,  by  His  grace,  gives  siddhi.  Here  we  ask. 
Docs  it  not  make  one  feel  inclined  to  laugh  when  one  thinks  of  something 
as  existing  which  one  knows  to  be  non-existing?  It  is  neither  contempla¬ 
tion  nor  concentration,  but  the  play  of  a  child  with  Brahman.  A  girl 
knows  well  enough  that  a  doll  can  never  be  a  living  thing.  She  is 
not  also  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  she  is  a  little  un-married  maiden.  Still 
when  she  plays  she  shows  great  concern  for  her  doll-son,  pretends  that  it 
is  crying,  feigDS  to  give  it  milk,  takes  it  on  her  lap,  caresses  it,  and  so 
satisfies  her  own  mind.  The  attribution  of  false  forms  to  Brahman  is 
exactly  similar.  I  know  that  the  attributeless  Brahman  has  no  pleasure, 
displeasure,  virtue,  vice,  attraction,  attachment,  pity,  generosity,  no 
love,  affection,  dual  relation,  or  even  body.  Is  it  not  then  absolutely 
useless  for  me  to  meditate  upon  imaginary  forms  of  that  attributeless 
reposeful  Brahman  who  has  no  form,  and  to  worship  Him  to  gain  His 
favour?  Who  will  deny  that  they  are  madmen  who  believe  that  during 
the  eternal  flow  of  worldly  events  from  time  immemorial  Aryan  worshippers 
have  been  simply  wasting  their  energies  in  such  a  useless  task  ? 

*  A  pun ;  the  Brahma-weapon  is  a  very  dangero 
the  modem  eclectic  sect,  called  the  Brahma  Sam&j. 

*  Apramcya. 


i  us  one.  Here  it  refers  to 


190 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Secondly,  if  forms  are  imagined  in  order  with  their  help  to  acquire 
concentration  of  mind,  why  abandon  such  forms  as  are  naturally  beautiful 
and  calculated  at  the  very  first  glance  to  captivate  the  mind;  and  why 
make  the  restless  mind  still  more  restless  by  the  imagination  of  all  kinds 
of  unnatural  and  various  forms  for  Dcvas  and  Devls.  There  is  no  objection 
to  such  an  argument  in  the  case  of  those  who  have  imagined  such  un¬ 
natural  forms.  But  such  an  idea  is  dangerous  to  those  whose  success 
depends  on  the  dictates  of  Sastra.  Whilst  worshipping,  I  am  independent, 
but  at  the  time  of  receiving  the  fruits  of  worship  I  am  dependent  on 
!§5stra!  It  is  very  difficult  to  enter  into  this  monstrous  mystery. 

Docs  Siddhi  obey  my  command  ?  Is  it  not  the  height  of  impudence 
or  the  raving  or a  madman  to  suppose  that  Siddhi  will  appear  and  move 
in  the  way  I  shall  order  it,  and  follow  upon  whatever  form  I  shall  con¬ 
template?  Knowing  that  this  vanity  of  free  thought  in  Sastra  must  one 
day  be  shattered,  Bhagavan,  in  the  discourse  between  Sri  Bhagavan  and 
Uddhava  in  the  Srimad  Bhagavata,1  says: 

“  The  Sadhaka  who  disobeys  Sastrik  ordinances  and  docs  sadhana 
according  to  his  will,  not  only  fails  to  achieve  siddhi,  but  also  goes  to 
Hell.”  His  licence  deprives  him  of  siddhi,  and  the  great  sin  of  disobe¬ 
dience  to  Sastra  leads  him  to  Hell. 

Will  you  and  I  to-day  give  imaginary  forms  to  Him  whose  will  has 
created  the  infinite  of  the  Brahmanda?  It  is,  indeed,  creditable  to  you  that 
you,  being  a  man,  have  been  able  to  believe  it.  I  ask.  What  is  your 
authority  for  this  imagination  of  forms  ?  You  will  reply  that  Sastra  had 
said:  “  Sadhakanamhitarthaya,  brahmanorupakalpana.” 1  I  find  nothing 
to  object  to  in  what  Sastra  has  said,  but  the  danger  lies  in  the  manner  in 
which  it  is  understood. 


1  Chap.  xii. 

1  Vide  ante-,  the  proper  translation  is,  “  For  the  good  of  s&dhakas  Brahman 
builds  forms,”  but,  as  pointed  out  later,  the  author’s  opponents  translate  the  • 
sentence  differently. 


CHAPTER  V 


COMMANDS  OF  SASTRA 

S Astra,  which  sees  Brahman  as  He  really  is,  has  said  that  Brahman  Him¬ 
self  builds  forms  for  Himself  for  the  benefit  of  Sadhakas.  But  you  take  the 
S&stra  to  mean  that  worshippers  have  given  imaginary  forms  to  Brahman. 
The  word  Sadhakanam  is  formed  by  adding  the  sixth  case-ending  to  the 
word  Sadhaka.  This  sixth  case,  according  to  you,  indicates  the  nomina¬ 
tive,  and  you  take  the  word  Rupakalpana  with  Sadhakanam.  Again,  the 
word  Brahmanah  which  is  formed  by  adding  the  sixth  case-ending  to  the 
word  Brahman  is  supposed  by  you  to  have  its  sixth  case  in  the  genitive 
sense.  You  thus  explain  the  whole  thing  as  “  forms  have  been  imagined 
by  Sadhakas  in  relation  to  Brahman  But  this  is  not  its  right  explana¬ 
tion.  It  is  the  word  Sadhakanam,  which  has  its  sixth  case  in  the  genitive 
sense,  and  should  be  read  with  the  word  hitarthaya.  Again,  the  word 
Brahmanah  has  its  sixth  case  in  the  nominative  sense,  and  should  be  read 
with  rfipakalpana.  Thus  the  whole  verse  comes  to  mean  “  forms  have 
been  built  by  Brahman  for  the  benefit  of  Sadhakas  Although  both  sides 
may  be  equally  liable  to  mistake,  still  the  view  which  I  have  taken  har¬ 
monizes  with  the  context  of  the  Sastrik  saying.  For  the  above  verse 
appears  in  the  Kularpava  Tantra  in  connection  with  the  worship  of  Devas 
possessing  forms.  First  Devi  says : 

“  I  now  desire  to  hear  of  the  character  of  worship,  so  tell  me  the 
mode  of  worship  in  the  purification  of  Kula  articles,  etc.  ”  In  answer  to 
this  question  Bhagavan  Siva,  the  Creator  of  all  things,  explains  in  the 
chapter  on  Worship,  the  necessity  or  otherwise  of  invoking  Devas,  and 
establishes  the  fact  of  the  possession  of  form  to  be  the  very  foundation  of 
invocation.  It  is  in  this  connection  that  the  verse  appears  whilst  making 
provision  for  the  worship  of  embodied  Deities.  To  say  that  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  that  they  should  have  aspects  with  form  is  not  merely  irrelevant,  but 
disproves  the  very  thing  which  it  is  sought  to  prove.  This  instance  affords 
no  opportunity  for  the  service  of  selfish  ends  by  giving  a  fallacious  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  Sanskrit  verse. 

Secondly,  there  are  ample  grounds  for  the  support  of  my  view, 
namely,  ( i )  If  Sadhakas  give,  according  to  their  desire,  imaginary  forms  to 
Brahman,  why  should  the  eternal  Sastra  accept  such  as  evidence?  (a)  If 
Sadhakas  may  create  forms  according  to  their  own  sweet  will,  it  would  be 


192 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


hard  to  guess  the  number  which  have  been  already  created  by  innumer¬ 
able  Sadhakas  of  different  casts  of  mind,  and  the  countless  forms  which 
will  also  in  the  future  be  created.  Besides,  if  worship  of  all  these  forms 
gives  siddhi,  why  has  not  Sastra  separately  provided  in  the  case  of  them 
the  mode  of  worship,  consisting  of  Dhyana l.  Mantra,  etc.  ?  (3)  If  I  am 
independent  in  the  matter  of  the  imagination  of  forms,  why  should  not  also 
the  mode  of  worship  be  guided  by  my  own  free-will?  (4)  If  I  imagine 
a  form  according  to  my  own  desire,  what  is  there  to  oblige  Isvara  to 
appear  in  that  form?  (5)  If  I  can  build  forms,  why  cannot  I  build  Mantras 
as  well?  (6)  If  Mantra  Sakti*  is  guided  by  my  Sakti,  why,  instead  of 
expending  it  on  Mantra,  do  I  not  worship  in  some  other  way?  (7)  Why 
should  one  accept  a  guru  in  respect  of  a  worship  which  is  to  be  performed 
by  me  according  to  my  imagination  ?  (8)  What  Sakti  *  is  there  in  Jlva 
himself  whereby  he  may  obtain  supersensual,  superhuman  siddhi  without 
the  help  of  Sastra?  {9)  When  have  I  seen,  or  heard,  or  been  convinced 
by  argument  of  such  siddhi  having  been  obtained  by  any  person  so  that 
I  may  believe  it?  (10)  Who  will  be  responsible  if  in  trying  to  obtain  such 
siddhi  I  happen  to  fall?  (11)  Who  knows  in  what  time  such  siddhi  may 
be  attained?  (12)  If  siddhi  may  be  attained  according  to  one’s  own  desire, 
what  is  the  necessity  of  worshipping  Gayatri,  whose  substance  is  mantra, 
as  said  in  Sastra? 

These  and  other  grounds  are  as  favourable  to  my  view  as  they  are 
unfavourable  to  yours.  How  will  you  dare  to  say  that  Sadhakas  imagine 
forms  without  first  answering  fully  these  questions  I  have  put  against  you  ? 

When  dealing  with  Her  dhyana,  the  Gayatri  Tantra  has  said:  “She 
has  adopted  playful  bodies  according  to  Her  own  desire.”  Again,  in 
Bhagavadgita,4  Bhagavan  Himself  (whose  form  is  in  question  here), 
has  said: 

“  Though  unborn,  the  imperishable  Self,  and  also  the  Lord  of  all 
beings,  brooding  over  Nature,  which  is  Mine  own,  yet  I  am  bom  through 
My  own  Power. 

“Whenever  there  is  decay  of  righteousness.  OBharata!  and  there  is 
exaltation  of  unrighteousness  then  I  Myself  come  forth. 

“  For  the  protection  of  the  good,  for  the  destruction  of  evil  doers,  for 
the  sake  of  firmly  establishing  righteousness  I  am  bom  from  age  to  age. 

“Any  devotee  who  seeketh  to  worship  with  faith  any  such  aspect,  I 
verily  bestow  the  unswerving  faith  of  that  man.”  * 


*  Meditation.  1  Potency  of  mantra. 

•  Power.  *  Chap,  iv,  verses  6,  7,  8;  and  chap,  vii,  verse  21. 

'  For  convenience,  reference  is  made  to  a  published  translation.  This  and 
the  other  extracts  from  the  Bhagavadgita  are  from  Mrs.  Besant'i  translation, 
with  the  Sanskrit  text 


COMMANDS  OF  S ASTRA 


193 


The  Markandeya  Purarta  in  Devimah&tmya 1  says Eternal  is  She 
whose  appearance  *  is  the  universe  which  She  pervades,  yet  hear  from  me 
of  Her  birth  in  various  forms.  Wherever  She  appears  to  do  the  work  of 
Devas  She  is  known  in  the  three  worlds  to  be  bom  (although  She  is  in 
reality  free  from  birth  and  death).” 

The  same  book  in  the  hymn  in  praise  of  the  Devi  says :  “  Mother, 
Thou  hast  by  dividing  Thyself  into  many  forms,  achieved  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  great  Asuras,3  the  enemies  of  Dharma.  By  whom  else  can 
this  be  done?  ” 

The  following  discourse  between  Himalaya  and  Parvati  appears  in 
Bhagavati  Gita  in  Mahabhagavata : 

The  Devi  said:  “O  father,  Lord  of  Mountains,  ol*my  own  free-will 
have  I  divided  My  own  form  for  the  purpose  of  creation  into  the  dual 
aspects  of  male  and  female.  Of  these,  Siva  is  the  supreme  Puru?a,  and 
Siv«S  the  supreme  Sakti.4  Great  King,  Yogis  who  discern  the  truth  •  speak 
of  Me  as  Brahmatattva,  with  its  two  aspects  of  Siva  and  Sakti.*  As 
.  Brahma  I  create  this  universe  of  moving  and  non-moving  things,7  and  as 
Maharudra  I,  of  My  own  will,  destroy  it  at  the  time  of  dissolution.'  High- 
souled  Himalaya,  it  is  I,  too,  who,  for  the  putting  down  of  evil-doers, 
maintain  as  Vispu,  the  supreme  Puru?a,  this  entire  created  universe.  High- 
soulcd  Himalaya,  it  is  I,  too,  who,  by  repeated  incarnations  on  earth  as 
Rama  and  others,  destroy  Danavas s  and  save  this  world.  Father!  of  all 
these  eternal  and  occasional  forms  of  Mine,  the  greatest  is  that  consisting 
of  Sakti,  for  it  is  certain  that  without  Sakti,  the  spirit  in  the  form  of 
Purusa  has  no  power  of  action.  Great  King,  know  all  such  forms  of  Mine 
as  have  been  above  mentioned,  as  well  as  my  forms  of  daughter  and  the 
like  visible  to  you,  to  be  My  gross  forms.  I  have  already  told  you  what 
My  subtle  form  is.  Great  Mountain,  none  can  apprehend  My  subde 
form,  the  sight  of  which  gives  nirvana  kaivalya  to  Jiva  without  first  medi¬ 
tating  on  My  gross  form.  For  this  reason  a  Sadhaka  who  desires  libera¬ 
tion  must  first  seek  refuge  with  My  gross  forms,  and  after  having  fully  and 
duly  by  Kriyayoga '  worshipped  these  forms,  slowly  and  little  by  little 
meditate  on  my  unwasting,  subtle,  and  supreme  form.” 

Himalaya  then  said:  “  Mother  Maheivari,  many  are  Thy  gross  forms. 
Which  of  these  should  Jiva  seek  refuge  with  in  order  easily  to  attain  to 
liberation  ?  As  thou  wouldst  favour  me,  Mahadevi,  tell  me  this.” 

The  Devi  replied :  “  This  universe  consists  of  my  gross  forms.  Of 
all  these,  the  Devi  form  deserves  the  highest  worship,  and  soon  grants 


1  Chap.  i.  *  Mflrti.  *  Demons. 

4  That  is,  the  supreme  “  male  ”  and  “  female  "  principles. 

*  Tattva.  *  See  note  2.  1  That  is,  the  organic  and  inorganic  world. 

*  Pralaya.  *  Yoga  of  action. 

13 


19*  PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 

liberation.  High-souled  Himalaya,  that  Dew  form  is  a Iso  manifold.  Of 
these,  the  Mahavidyas  grant  liberation  speedily.  Great  King,  hear  their 
names  from  me:  Mahakall,  Tara,  Sodail,  Bhuvanesvari,  Bhairavi, 
Bagala,  Chinnamasta,  Mahatripurasundari,1  Dhumavati,  Matangi.1  All 
these  insure  liberation.  If  Jiva  will  give  his  devotion  to  these  forms 
liberation  is  of  a  certainty  soon  within  his  reach.  Father,  by  means  of 
Kriyayoga  seek  the  protection  of  any  of  these  forms.  Directing  your  mind 
towards  Me  alone  you  will  of  a  surety  possess  Me.  O  Mountain,  high- 
souled  people  who  have  found  Me  are  never  reborn.  For  them  there  is 
no  birth  in  this  life  transient  and  full  of  sorrows.  King!  to  the  devoted 
yog!  who  ever  remembers  me  with  undistracted  devotion  I  grant  liberation. 
If  one  but  once'  remembers  Me  with  devotion  at  the  time  of  death  he  is 
nevermore  overcome  with  the  mass  of  worldly  sorrows.  High-souled  man ! 
to  him  who  worships  Me  with  devotion  and  singleness  of  heart  I  grant 
eternal  liberation.  Seek  My  protection  in  My  aspect  as  Sakti.  It  is  that 
which  surely  procures  liberation,  and  liberation  will  be  attained  by  you. 
Great  King!  even  those  who  worship  other  Devatas  with  respect  and , 
devotion  really  worship  Me  alone,  for  I  am  in  all  and  the  giver  of  reward 
in  every  sacrifice.  [That  is,  since  I  am  in  everything  there  is,  leaving 
aside  Devatas,  nothing  in  this  world  which,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  is  separate 
from  me.  And  as  to  Devatas,  whoever  of  them  may  be  worshipped, 
they  arc  merely  manifestations  of  My  own  greatness;  so  that,  whatever 
sacrifice  may  be  performed,  it  is  I  who,  in  the  form  of  the  Devata  wor¬ 
shipped  therein,  grant  in  return  for  such  worship  its  reward.]  But,  great 
King !  liberation  can  never  be  obtained  by  those  who  are  devoted  to  these 
Devatas  alone  [that  is  to  say,  who  in  their  devotion  to  the  Devatas  whom 
they  worship  arc  indifferent,  disrespectful,  or  wanting  in  devotion  to  other 
Devatas,  considering  the  latter  to  be  different  from  the  former].  There¬ 
fore  with  thy  mind  under  control,  seek  shelter  with  Me  for  the  loosening 
of  the  bonds  of  physical  existence,  and  without  a  doubt  you  shall  find  Me.” 

In  the  Niruttara  Tantra  it  has  been  said:  “  Devi,  Siva  and  Sakti  are 
each  divided  according  as  they  are  with  or  without  attribute.  The 
supreme  attributeless  Brahmasanatani 1  is  full  of  lustre,  as  is  also  the 
supreme  attributeless  Purusa,4  who  shines  like  a  great  blue  jewel.  But 
that  attributeless  shining  Daksinakalika  *  is  far  removed  from  all  prapancas6 
[that  is  to  say,  Her  attributeless  aspect,  being  imperccivable  by  physical 


1  Kamala. 

*  The  ten  forms  which  the  Dew  assumed  prior  to  Daksayajfia  (see  Intro¬ 
duction  to  Tantra  Ssstra). 

*  Sakti.  4  Siva.  *  See  note  3. 

*  Objects,  consisting  of  the  combination  of  the  five  tattvas:  “  earth,”  » 
«  water,”  “  fire,”  “  air,”  and  “  ether 


COMMANDS  OF  SASTRA 


195 


beings  formed  by  Maya,  lies  at  a  great  distance,  for  it  is  beyond  the  reach 
of  Maya,  and  therefore,  so  far  as  JIva  formed  of  Maya  is  concerned  is 
situate  beyond  the  sea  of  Maya]. 

“  In  Her  attributeless  aspect  that  unbounded  Sarasvatl  is  of  un¬ 
measurable  power,  and  the  Mulaprakrti  of  the  fifteen  phases  of  Sakti,  such 
as  Kali,  Kapalini,  Kulva,  and  others.  Again,  in  Her  state  with  attributes, 
when  She  gives  birth  to  the  three  Devas — Brahma,  Viijpu,  and  Mahc$vara 
— in  the  great  ocean  of  the  original  cause,1  Her  womb;  it  is  She  who  gives 
birth  to  Mahakala,  the  first-born.  It  is  She  who,  assuming  a  female  form, 
gives  birth  to  the  entire  universe,  consisting  of  moving  and  unmoving 
things.  It  is  She  who,  as  Vi$numaya  and  Mahalaksmi,  has  spread  Her 
charm  over  this  entire  universe.  That  Adyaiakti  Daksinakali  is  Siddha- 
vidya,  and,  as  such.  She  is  Mulaprakrti  and  Purusa.  PrakrU  and  Purusa 
arc  inseparably  connected.  One  does  not  exist  independent  of  the  other. 
United  with  Sakti,  Purusa  attains  Sivahood;  and  united  with  Siva, 
Prakrti  attains  Saklihood.  It  is  the  inseparable  connection  consisting  of 
this  union  which  is  Parabrahmatattva.  It  is  in  this  union  that  they 
should  be  contemplated.  It  is  of  this  union  that  Siva  Mantra  consists. 
In  Dhyanayoga 1  alone  should  japa  be  made  of  this  union.  The  Mantra 
consisting  of  this  union  of  theirs  is  the  Mahamantra,  and  gives  both  enjoy¬ 
ment  *  and  liberation.*  He  who  desires  enjoyment  attains  the  four 
abodes,  Salokya  and  others,4  and  he  who  desires  liberation  is  absorbed  in 
nirvanakaivalya.  Kali,  unbounded  Sarasvati,  is  the  great  desire-gratifying 
tree  •  of  those  who  long  for  the  fourfold  fruit  of  dharma,  artha,  kama,  moksa,T 
for  She  is  the  sole  source  of  enjoyment  and  liberation  even  for  Brahma, 
Visnu,  Maheivara.  [That  is  to  say,  imperfect  Jlvas  alone,  completely 
under  the  influence  of  Maya,  seek  from  such  a  tree  that  fruit  which  is 
according  to  their  individual  desire.  But  the  peculiarity  of  this  tree  is  that 
even  those  who  are  the  guardians  and  controllers  of  Maya,  and  who  are 
perfect  Iivaras,  have  to  depend  upon  it  for  their  individual  enjoyment 
and  liberation.]  A  Sadhaka  should  be  initiated  by  his  Guru,  and  by 
virtue  of  his  grace  worship  Kali,  that  great  tree  gradfying  the  desires  of 
Mahakala,  who  embodies  all  Mantras  and  Tantras.” 

The  following  are  Sadaiiva’s  words  to  Devi  in  the  Mahanirvarja 
Tantra: 4  “  Mahakala,  the  destroyer  of  the  universe,  is  but  another  aspect 
of  Thyself.  At  the  time  of  the  great  dissolution  Kala  will  swallow  the 
entire  universe.  Because  of  this  gathering  unto  death  and  destruction  of 
all  created  things.  He  is  called  Mahakala  and  you  Kali.  The  three  worlds 


1  Karana.  *  Yoga  by  meditation.  *  Bhoga. 

*  Mok$a.  4  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra.  •  Kalpataru. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra.  *  Chap.  iv. 


196 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


sing  of  Thee  as  the  Primal  One,1  because  at  the  time  of  giving  birth 
Thou  didst  give  birth  to  even  Mahakala,  the  first  Pumsa;  and  as  Kali, 
because  at  the  time  of  destruction  Thou  dost  gather  into  Thyself  even 
Mahakala,  the  Destroyer  of  all.  Then  Thou  alone,  in  Thy  formless  aspect, 
unknowable  and  beyond  speech  and  mind  dost  exist.  Thou  art  formless, 
though  possessing  form  [that  is  to  say,  Thou  art  not  bound  to  any  parti¬ 
cular  form,  as  a  Jiva  is  who  possesses  form],  for  by  means  of  Maya  Thou 
dost  assume  innumerable  forms  according  to  Thy  desire.  Thou  Thyself 
art  without  beginning,  and  yet  art  the  beginning  of  all  [that  is  to  say, 
there  is  none  prior  to  Thee].  It  is  Thou  who  crcateth,  preserveth,  and 
destroyed!  the  world.” 


On  Formlessness  and  Form 

Sadhaka,  what  do  you  understand  from  these  statements  of  Sastra? 
Are  the  forms  of  Brahman  imagined  by  Sadhakas  or  built  by  Himself? 
What  clearer  evidence  than  this  do  you  expect  from  Sastra?  This  is  why  I ' 
said  that  there  can  be  no  objection  to  what  Sastra  has  said.  It  is  the  fault 
of  our  intelligence  which  does  all  the  mischief.  Sastra  has  repeatedly  said 
that  He  took  forms  according  to  His  own  desire.  But  you  and  I  are 
ashamed  of  believing  this,  because  on  fust  entering  school  it  dawned  on  us 
that  “  livara  is  formless  and  consciousness  itself.”  Every  dawn  has  its 
setting,  but  in  the  “  Dawn  of  Sense”  *  there  is  neither  dawning  nor  setting. 
From  beginning  to  end,  in  both  purpose  and  effect,  it  is  only  full  of 
accounts  of  livara’ s  own  self.  Many  people  arc  therefore  troubled  with 
the  thought  that  Sastra  is  Iivara’s 5  word,  and  “  the  Dawn  of  Sense  ”  is 
also  ISvara’s  ‘  word,  so  they  know  not  which  to  disregard  at  the  risk  of 
going  to  Hell.  The  livara  of  the  nineteenth  century  is  truly  an  extra¬ 
ordinary  and  wonderful  thing:  for  though,  according  to  Sastra,  Brahman 4 
and  livara  arc  in  one  sense  one  and  the  same,  yet  in  another  sense  they 
are  not  so.  Brahman  is  without,  whilst  livara  is  with,  attributes.  Brah¬ 
man  is  inactive,  while  livara  creates,  preserves,  and  destroys.  But  in  the 
various  little  religions4  of  the  nineteenth  century  Brahman  and  livara 


1  Adya. 

*  Bodhodaya,  the  title  of  a  work  for  children  by  the  late  Pandit  livara 
Chandra  Vidyasagara.  The  following  passages  are  a  satirical  play  on  the  word 
livara  as  denoting  the  Pandit  and  also  the  name  of  God. 

*  God.  4  The  Pandit. 

*  Brahman  as  the  unknowable  Supreme  without  attributes  is  contrasted 
with  that  aspect  of  It  which  manifests  Itself  in  the  work  of  creation,  etc.,  and  is 
adored  as  the  “  personal  ”  God  (livara). 

*  Upadhanna:  as  if  one  were  to  say  not  creeds  but  “  creedlets 


COMMANDS  OF  S ASTRA 


197 


have  come  to  mean  one  and  the  same  thing.  Such  a  golden  cup  of  stone 
was  never  seen  before.1  This  also,  indeed,  is  part  of  ISvara’s  sport!  How¬ 
ever  that  may  be.  He  whom  the  Sastra  names  l£vara  can  never  be  form¬ 
less,  for  His  function  is  aiSvarya,  or  lordship  over  the  universe.  He  who 
has  thia  self-consciousness  of  lordship  cannot  be  without  attribute,  and  it 
is  impossible  to  be  formless  without  being  attributeless.  Again,  self-con¬ 
sciousness  is  a  particular  state  of  mind.  He  who  has  mind  has  surely 
body,  and  it  is  mere  tautology  to  say  that  He  whose  body  is  eternally 
established  possesses  form.  To  call  l$vara  the  Lord  of  the  universe,  devoid 
of  form,  whether  done  under  the  authority  of  Sastra  or  reason,  is  as  though 
one  said  that  the  ocean  was  devoid  of  water.  An  livara  with  form  is 
necessary  for  the  creation  of  a  universe  with  form.  HSd  He  been  devoid 
of  form.  His  creation  also  would  have  been  devoid  of  it. 

Such  were  our  dawning  ideas  as  the  result  of  our  training  under  a 
schoolmaster  in  boyhood.  What  we  have  subsequently  understood  of  our¬ 
selves,  and  which  science  is  supposed  to  confirm,  is  that  an  I$vara  possess¬ 
ing  body  can  never  be  omniscient;  for  we  suppose  that,  having  a  body. 
He  must  necessarily  be  bound  by  Maya,  and  possessed  of  limited  knowledge. 
Such  being  our  inference,  it  would  be  wrong  to  hold  that  Yogis  and  Rsis, 
who  were  free  of  the  bonds  of  life,  were  unerring  either;  for  they,  too,  had 
bodies.  Not  to  mention  fcvara,  the  powers  of  Yogis,  Rsis,  Sadhus,  and 
Sadhakas,  derived  from  Siddhi  are  still  daily  visible.  Even  infidels  cannot 
ignore  this  directly  perceptible  *  truth.  Believers  as  wc  are,  how  can  you 
and  I  ignore  it?  Is  He,  then,  by  whose  worship  even  Jivas  with  limited 
knowledge  and  under  the  influence  of  Maya  become  free  from  the  bonds 
of  Maya,  and  acquire  omniscience — is  He  not  omniscient  also  ?  Is  not  this 
a  point  worthy  of  thought?  As  when  the  door  of  a  room  is  opened  the  air 
within  it  is  united  with  the  great  spaces  without,  so  by  the  opening  of  the 
doors  of  their  minds  composed  of  the  three  gupas  the  individual  *  and  the 
supreme  *  principles  unite,  and  are  merged  in  the  Self  of  the  Parabrahman. 
Is  He  by  whose  grace  they  achieve  this  unable  to  keep  Himself  free  of  the 
influence  of  Maya  because  of  His  having  of  His  own  free-will  assumed 
form? 

Sastra  *  says :  "  How  can  He  be  subjected  to  bondage  because  of  His 
having  taken  to  Himself  a  body  of  his  own  free-will — He  who  gratifies  by 
the  enjoyment  of  the  pollen  of  His  lotus  feet  Munis  who,  by  the  force  of 
Yoga,  have  thrown  off  the  ties  of  all  Karma,  and  are  no  longer  bound 
whatsoever  they  may  do  ? 


1  A  Bengali  saying  for  an  impossibility.  *  Pratyaksa. 

a  Jlvatattva.  *  Para  brahma  tattva. 

8  Chapter  on  Rasa  in  the  Srimad  Bh&gavata. 


198 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Bhagavan,  then,  in  spite  of  His  contact  with  MayS  due  to  the  as¬ 
sumption  of  mayik  forms,  is  free  from  the  bondage  of  Maya,  This,  of 
course,  is  a  thing  unattainable  in  the  Jivatattva.1 * * 4  But  how  can  we  help 
that?  He  is  l£vara  for  the  very  reason  that  such  superhuman  conditions 
are  possible  with  Him.  His  livrahood  consists  of  this  superhuman  power. 
Sastra  has  therefore  said:  “  Anima,  Laghima,  Prapti,  Prakamya,  Mahima, 
Isitva,  VaSitva,  and  Kamavasayitva — these  are  the  eight  Siddhis  of 
livara.” * 

The  Srimad  Bhagavata,  in  the  discourse  between  Bhagavan  and 
Uddhava,  says:  “Anima  is  minuteness  so  fine  as  to  be  imperceptible  by 
the  senses,*  Mahima  is  greatness.  Laghima  is  lightness.  Prapti  is  knowl¬ 
edge  of  all  which  the  Jlva  perceives  by  His  senses,  due  to  the  fact  that 
IS  vara  is  the  presiding  Dcvata  of  the  senses  of  all  living  creatures. 
Prakamya  is  the  enjoyment  of  all  things  heard,  seen,  etc.,  liitva  is  the 
application  of  Sakti  or  the  spreading  of  the  Sakti  of  His  own  maya  over 
every  Jlva  in  the  universe.  Vasitva  is  freedom  from  the  three  gunas  of 
sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas.  Kamavasayitva  is  the  attainment  of  whatsoever 
I  desire.  Good  man !  these  are  My  eight  natural  siddhis.” 

He  is  Isvara  or  livarl,  Bhagavan  or  Bhagavati,  in  whom  these  eight 
siddhis  eternally  exist.  Now  tell  me,  O  Jiva,  are  these  human  powers? 
Without  such  powers  He  becomes  a  mere  Jiva  like  you  or  me.  If  He 
becomes  subject  to  maya  like  you  or  me,  what  difference  is  there  between 
Jiva  and  livara? 

Though  eternally  connected  with  maya,  maya  is  yet  subject  to  Him. 
Though  full  of  maya,*  He  is  above  it.  It  has  therefore  been  said  in  the 
Vedanta  doctrine: 

“Prakrti,  in  which  the  Brahman,  who  is  all  consciousness"  and 
bliss  '  is  reflected,  and  which  consists  of  the  three  gunas,  sattva,  rajas, 
and  tamas,  is  twofold.  Prakrti  consisting  of  pure  sattva  guna  is  maya, 
and  prakrti  consisting  of  impure 1  sattva  guna  is  avidya.  The  image 
of  consciousness  reflected  in  maya  is  called  Isvara.  When  reflected  in 
avidya  it  is  called  Jlva.  As  maya  has  but  one  aspect,  so  Isvara,  the 
reflection  in  it,  has  but  one  aspect.*  Avidya  which  consists  of  many 
guqas,  has  many  aspects,  with  the  result  that  Jiva,  the  reflection  in  it,  has 
also  many  aspects.  The  difference  between  Jlva  and  ISvara  is  that  while 
livara  rules  maya,  Jlva  is  subject  to  it.” 


1  World  of  embodied  spirits.  1  See  post  and  following  passage, 

*  That  is,  the  power  to  make  oneself  as  little,  as  big,  as  light,  as  heavy, 

etc.,  as  one  will. 

4  Mayamaya.  *  Cit.  *  Ananda. 

*  That  is,  sattva  and  the  other  guiias. 

*  Svarupa — that  is,  that  which  it  really  is. 


COMMANDS  OF  SASTRA 


199 


Both  are  connected  with  m5ya,  but  whereas  may&  is  subject  to  Iivara, 
Jiva  is  subject  to  maya.  This  is  the  difference  between  Jiva  and  Iivara. 
It  is  only  because  man  cannot  conceive  the  superhuman  force  of  Iivara’s 
Sakti  that  he  wonders  how  Iivara  can  be  almighty  and  omniscient  if  he 
possesses  form.  Foreseeing  such  an  error,  Bhagavan  said  to  Aijuna: 1 

“  The  foolish  disregard  Me,  when  clad  in  human  semblance,  ignorant 
of  My  supreme  nature,  the  great  Lord  of  being.” 

In  the  Bhagavat!  Gita  *  the  Mother  of  the  universe  *  gave  the  same 
instruction  to  Himalaya: 

“  Similarly  all  other  sattvik,  rajasik,  and  tamasik  dispositions  which 
exist  derive  from  Me  and  exist  in  Me  under  My  control.  But,  Great 
Mountain !  I  am  not  under  their  control.  Great  Kin£ !  Jivas,  charmed 
by  My  maya,  fail  to  recognize  this  all-pervading  supreme,  unwasting,  non- 
dualistic  form  of  Mine.  But,  Father!  only  those  who  with  a  single  mind 
worship  Me  with  devotion  can  cross  this  vast  ocean  of  maya  and  enter 
into  that  supreme  form  of  Mine.” 

As  we  cannot  directly  see  the  beauty  of  the  lunar  orb  unless  the  moon 
rays  come  in  contact  with  the  eye,  so  unless  the  mind  and  heart  become 
intoxicated  with  the  worship  of  Him,  His  true  essence  *  cannot  be  per¬ 
ceived.  For  this  reason,  although  Sastra  gives  a  thousand  and  one 
instructions  to  persons  who  have  not  yet  acquired  a  fitness  to  receive 
them,  they  are  but  as  music  to  the  ears  of  a  deaf  man. 

The  root  objection  nowadays  is  that  as  something  without  bounds 
cannot  be  contained  in  a  receptacle  with  bounds,  as  unbounded  space 
cannot  be  held  in  a  limited  room  as  a  lake  which  measures  a  yojana  * 
cannot  contain  such  a  mass  of  water  as  can  deluge  the  universe,  so  the 
limited  body  of  Iivara  cannot  possibly  hold  the  iakti  *  of  Iivara.  But  here 
let  us  say  that  while  illustrations  and  comparisons  may  be  of  value  and 
adornment  in  history  and  literature,  yet  illustrations  taken  from  the  things 
of  this  world  have  not  always  equal  application  to  matters  touching  super- 
worldly  realities.  It  is  the  height  of  folly  to  proceed  to  discuss  the  matter 
with  the  notion  that  only  that  is  true  which  fits  with  our  illustrations,  and 
that  that  which  will  not  so  fit  is  false.  For  instance,  in  worldly  matters 
whoever  does  a  thing,  docs  it  with  some  object.  There  is  no  inclination 
to  action  which  has  not  a  selfish  interest  in  it.  If,  however,  you  apply 
this  rule  to  the  matter T  of  the  creation,  will  you  tell  me  what  selfish 
interests  Iivara  served,  or  will  serve,  by  creating  this  universe?  Ask  all 
Sastras  and  Sub-Sastras  on  earth,  Veda,  Tantra,  Purapa,  Koran,  the 
Bible,  etc.,  and  see  if  you  get  an  answer  to  this  quesdon.  Who  can  say 

1  Bhagavad  Gita,  chap,  ix,  verse  ii.  *  Part  of  the  Devi  Bh&gavata  Parana. 

*  Jagadamba.  4  Tattva.  *  Eight  miles. 

*  Power.  i  Tattva. 


200 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


that  for  a  selfish  end  ISvara  has  created  this  world  ?  Ask  of  the  greatest 
and  bravest  of  warriors,  “  Why  has  this  world  been  created  ?  ”  and  he  will 
at  once  be  vanquished  and  fly  from  the  field.  All  discussions,  disputes, 
inferences,  and  theories  of  Philosophy 1 * *  arc  concerned  with  such  questions 
as  to  how  the  world  was  created,  is  preserved,  and  will  be  destroyed. 
But  directly  the  question  arises  as  to  why  the  world  was  created  the  six 
systems  of  darfana  (philosophy)  become  adariana  (sightless).*  The 
authors  of  Yoga,  Visesa,  Munamsa,  Nyaya,  and  Samkhya,  the  Veda 
and  Vedanta,  arc  all  blind  to  the  path  whereby  an  answer  may  be  got  to 
the  question,  Why  does  this  samsara  exist?  ”  The  Sadhaka  poet  Rama- 
prasada  has  therefore  sorrowfully  said:  “  Six  blind  men  wrote  books,  and 
they  were  called  DarSana  (philosophies).”  When  Sastra  does  not 
answer  this  question  I  must  either  be  a  sceptic,  or  say  ISvara  must  have 
some  selfish  purpose.  But  to  say  that  He  has  self-interest  is  to  divine 
Him.  There  can  be  no  self  without  others,  nor  self-interest  without  self. 
As  there  can  be  no  happiness  without  sorrow,  nor  sorrow  without 
happiness,  no  light  without  darkness  or  darkness  without  light,  so  there 
can  be  no  “  others’  interest  ”  without  “  self-interest,”  and  no  “  self-interest  ” 
without  “  others’  interest  ”.  If  Isvara,  then,  created  for  His  own  selfish 
interest,  there  must  certainly  have  been  other  interests  existing  before  the 
creation.  For  there  can  be  no  self  without  another.  And  if  there  are 
others,  then  ISvara  is  not  one  without  a  second,  and  there  must  be  some¬ 
one  else  to  dispute  His  sovereignty  (the  idea  of  the  Mussulman’s  Satan 
comes  in  imperceptibly  here).  Secondly,  if  before  Him  there  was  another 
different  from  Him,  who  created  that  other?  If  someone  else  created  that 
other,  then  Ifvara  is  not  the  creator  of  all.  And  if  it  be  said  that  Ifvara 
Himself  created  him,  then  in  the  first  place  was  He  such  a  fool  as  to  Him¬ 
self  create  His  own  enemy?  In  the  second  place,  had  Ifvara  any  interest 
in  creating  him?  If  He  had  such  interest,  who  was  that  other  in  respect 
of  whom  such  interest  arose,*  and  against  whom  did  ISvara  create  him? 
Proceeding  continually  in  this  manner  to  think  of  others  and  others,  the 
world  is  filled  with  others  only.  And  if  then  Iivara  begins  His  creation 
He  becomes  a  creator  no  better  than  Viivamitra.4  Secondly,  if  I$vara 
created  him  without  self-interest,  what  was  the  reason  of  being  self-inter¬ 
ested  when  creating  us? 

But  be  His  interest  served  or  not,  what  right  has  He  to  throw  me  on 
the  rack  of  this  samsara  and  crush  me?  You  say  He  is  almighty.  That  He 


1  Dar$anasastra. 

1  Dar&ma  means  sight.  Philosophy  is  said  to  be  the  cause  of  sight. 

*A  play  upon  the  word  “Svartha”  (own  interest)  and  “parartha” 
(another’s  interest),  in  the  sense  that  the  first  suggests  the  second. 

4  That  is,  he  would  begin  creation  when  the  world  was  already  created. 


COMMANDS  OF  SASTRA 


201 


may  or  may  not  be;  but  I  am  weak,  and  He  is  sufficiently  mighty  to 
crush  me  at  every  step.  Is  not,  according  to  you,  Iivara  just?  Now,  what 
sort  of  justice  is  it  that  He  should  crush  me  day  and  night  at  every  step 
because  He  is  mighty?  You  will  say  that  I  suffer  the  fruits  of  my  own 
karma,  and  that  for  this  He  cannot  be  blamed.  Then  I  reply:  “  Who 
created  me  and  gave  me  this  propensity  for  doing  karma  ?  ”  *  It  was  the 
work  of  your  I  &  vara,  and  I  am  unable  to  understand  what  sort  of  mercy 
this  is  of  your  merciful  livara  to  put  a  thorn  into  one’s  eyes,  and  then  to 
chastise  one  for  crying  on  that  account.  Advocates  of  illustrations  tell 
me  now:  shall  I  become  a  sceptic,  or  say  that  Iivara  is  extremely  partial 
or  selfish  ?  It  is  to  such  a  conclusion  that  your  illustration  leads.  Ask  this 
illustration  for  once  whether  the  selfish  propensity  of  ourselves  has  any 
correspondence  in  Isvara,  and  you  will  see  that  it  will  follow  the  same 
path  as  Veda  and  Vedanta  have  followed.  Press  it  hard,  and  the 
illustration  will  say:  “  In  the  name  of  Dharraa  my  name  is  drsfanta 
(illustration) .  I  am  the  end  (anta)  of  what  is  visible  (drsja) .  I  am  not 
even  the  beginning,  not  to  speak  of  being  the  end,  of  that  which  I  have 
neither  seen  nor  heard.  Illustration  is  the  conclusion  of  only  such  things 
as  wc  perceive  by  natural  processes.  But  we  must  understand  whose  is 
this  natural  process  ?  The  nature  of  Jiva  is  to  exist  only,  whilst  that  of  the 
Mother  of  the  universe  is  to  create,  exist,  and  destroy.  How  can  wc, 
with  our  nature  made  to  exist  only,  judge  of  the  nature  of  her  of  whom 
wc  know  neither  the  beginning  nor  the  end?  Illustration  has  not  the 
power  to  move  a  step  in  a  matter  unheard  and  unseen  beyond  the  scope 
of  intellect.” 

Puzzled  by  this  problem  of  the  solution  of  questions  by  illustrations. 
Gitanjali 2  sings,  with  a  sorrowful  mind,  as  follows: 

Whose  sport  is  this?  this  Samsara  bound  by  Maya  from  which  there 
is  no  escape. 

Who  arranges  this  dance  and  clown  show?  Whom  should  I  blame? 

Who  is  the  author  of  Yoga,  Visesa,  Nyaya,  Saiikhya,  Veda,  and 
Vedanta?  *  Why  this  Samsara? 

All  are  blind  to  the  answer  of  this  question. 

The  blind  put  forth  their  shoulders  to  lift  the  blind  thereon  that  they 
may  trample  on  opponents  and  wave  the  banner  triumph. 

These  six  systems  of  philosophy  are  a  fearful  sight. 

They  are  mere  disputations,  like  the  rumblings  of  clouds, 

Hence  difference  of  opinion  is  likely  to  bring  death  by  thunderstroke. 


1  Pravrtti, 

*  A  volume  of  verse  by  the  author. 

*  Veda  and  systems  of  philosophy. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


True  it  is  Thy  sport  is  eternal,  and  Thou  playest  the  instrument 
of  Maya. 

So  decked  like  a  clown  we  all  dance.  The  whole  is  like  a  juggler’s 
display. 

Bands  of  ghosts  play  with  dust,  blind  to  the  time  Thou  keepest. 

From  five  ghosts  innumerable  ghosts  are  created. 

The  Samsara  is  but  the  playground  of  ghosts. 

But,  O  Mother!  I  ask  again,  It  is  Thou  who  makest  the  Samsara  dance, 
And  it  dances;  but  what  fruit  dost  thou  reap  from  its  dance, 

That  Thou  should  make  it  dance  incessantly  ? 

If  Thou  sayest  Thou  desirest  no  fruit,  then  the  dance  closes. 

Who  is  it  that? Thou  makest  to  dance? 

It  is  Thyself  who  dances  under  the  enchantment  of  Thy  own  Mantra, 
Discrimination  says  all  arc  one;  or  may  be  I  am  different  from  Thee. 
Thyself  am  I ;  or  I  am  Thine,  according  as  it  is  unity  or  separation. 
All  are  transient.  Such  is  the  supreme  truth.  Why,  then,  isjiva 
in  bonds? 

The  fire  of  the  Samsara  bums  the  heart.  Why  docs  Jiva  suffer  so 
miserably  ? 

When  a  madman  dances,  what  interest  has  he  to  dance? 

Similarly  it  is  Thy  nature  to  dance.  There  is  neither  beginning  nor 
end  of  the  dance  Thou  danccst. 

Unceasing  is  Thy  dance  on  the  lotus  of  Mahakala’s  heart. 

That  dance  makes  dance  the  Samsara,  and  all  its  Jivas  in  the  womb 
of  Kala  (time). 

Whoever  Thou  mayest  be,  O  Brahmaraayi!  thou  art  the  place  of 
birth  of  the  Brahmanda. 

“  I,”  “  You,”  and  “  All  ”  exist  in  Thee  without  whom  all  are  blind. 
The  joyous  dance  of  the  Dancing  Lady  is  in  the  hearts  of  all. 

When  it  ceases,  then  Jiva  ceases  also. 

All  this,  O  Mother!  is  surely  fruit  of  Karma.  All  are  subject  to 
Thy  will. 

Thou  art  full  of  desires  to  create,  preserve,  and  destroy. 

It  was  Thyself  who  existed  before  and  exists  now. 

There  is  nothing  of  “  I  ”  in  me. 

In  Thee  all  is  bom  and  destroyed. 

That  only  which  remains  is  the  relation  of  Mother. 

If  in  Thy  aspect  of  Jiva  Thou  constantly  makest  Jiva  dance. 

Or  laugh,  or  weep,  wherein  is  the  harm?  What  matters  it? 

Thine  is  the  rule.  Thyself  art  the  ultimate  cause. 

This  knowledge,  too,  I  possess,  but  the  mind  is  blind. 

So,  O  Syama!  O  Mother!  I  say  mayest  thou  destroy  Siva  Candra’s 
sorrows. 


COMMANDS  OF  SASTRA 


203 


For  this  it  was  that  I  said  that  all  things  do  not  equally  come  within 
the  province  of  illustrations.  If  in  spite  of  his  having  (as  you  say)  no 
attributes,  you  impute  attributes  to  the  attributeless  livara,  and  call  Him 
Creator,  why,  because  of  the  absence  of  attributes  are  you  so  unwilling  to 
admit  that  I§vara  with  form  has  omnipotence? 

Secondly,  you  are  unwilling  to  admit  that  a  small  receptacle  can 
contain  a  vast  number  of  powers.  But  how  is  it  that  you  will  admit  the 
existence  of  these  powers  where  there  is  no  receptacle  at  all?  Sastra  says: 
“  He  takes  swiftly  even  without  hands,  moves  swiftly  even  without  feet, 
secs  even  without  eyes,  and  hears  even  without  ears.  He  knows  the 
universe,  but  none  know  Him.  It  is  Him  whom  Sastra  has  called 
Pradhana  and  Adipurusa.1  The  Brahman  without  body  and  without 
hands,  feet,  eyes,  and  ears,  can  yet  take,  move,  see,  and  hear.  Why,  then, 
arc  you  astonished  when  told  that  the  embodied  Brahman,  who  has  hands, 
feet,  eyes,  and  ears,  can  take,  move,  see,  and  hear.  The  possibility,  then, 
of  applying  the  illustration  that  a  small  receptacle  cannot  hold  a  vast 
number  of  saktis  is  removed  to  the  distance  of  a  hundred  yojanas.-2  You 
will  next  say  that  if  He  can  see  and  hear  without  eyes  or  cars,  why  should 
He  take  eyes  and  ears  to  Himself?  Do  you  really  take  the  Sloka  to  mean  that 
He  has  no  eyes  and  cars,  and  still  sees  and  hears?  If  this  be  so  you  under¬ 
stand  it  wrongly.  Just  consider  that  seeing  and  hearing  are  functions  of 
eyes  and  ears.  Where  did  He  who  had  never  eyes  and  cars  learn  to 
see  and  hear?  Who  will  believe  that  there  is  action  without  acting? 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  He  has  neither  action  nor  acting.  He  who  is 
the  sole  cause  of  all  causes  of  “  acting  ”  has  not  to  wait  for  “  acting  " 
Himself. 

He  has  no  eyes,  ears,  nor  secs,  nor  hears.  He  is  the  embodiment  of 
eternal  knowledge,  and  is  all  consciousness.  Ignorance  cannot  avail  against 
Him  so  as  to  make  Him  lack  the  knowledge  of  anything  in  the  universe. 
Even  without  the  organs  of  sense,  He  is  full  of  that  knowledge  which  you 
and  I  acquire  only  through  direct  perception  by  means  of  the  organs  of 
sight,  hearing,  and  so  forth.  He  does  not  lack  knowledge  because  of  the 
absence  of  sense-organs.  He  knows  all  without  seeing  or  hearing.  Sastra 
has  therefore  said :  “  He  knows  the  universe,  but  none  know  Him.”  In 
fact,  it  is  not  the  purpose  of  Sastra  to  say  that  He  sees  even  without  eyes. 
Sastra  means  that  He  has  knowledge  of  all  things  even  without  seeing. 
For  what  we  understand  by  sight  is  not  possible  without  eyes.  For  this 
reason  Sastra  only  says  at  the  end,  “  None  know  Him,”  instead  of  saying 
at  each  of  the  different  parts  of  the  £loka:  “None  hold  Him,”  “None  go 
to  Him,”  “  None  see  Him,”  “  None  hear  Him.”  The  sutra  consists  only 


1  That  is,  material  and  efficient  cause. 
*  About  8  or  9  miles. 


204 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


of  that  part  of  the  Sloka  which  says  “  None  know  Him.”  All  other 
portions  are  merely  explanatory  and  are  required  that  we  may  under¬ 
stand  it.  Sastra  first  of  all  taking  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  various 
forms  of  knowledge  acquired  by  direct  perception  mentions  the  sense 
organs  through  which  such  perception  is  had,  and  then  says  that  the 
knowledge  which  we  acquire  by  direct  perception  through  the  organs  of 
sense  exists  eternally  in  Him  despite  the  absence  of  such  organs.  There¬ 
fore  at  the  end  only  it  is  said:  “  None  know  Him.”  1  The  conclusion  is 
that  although  He  knows  everybody,  none  know  Him;  or,  in  other  words, 
He  is  the  vessel  of  all  knowledge,  but  none  are  the  vessel  of  His  knowledge. 
All  knowledge  rests  in  Him,  and  has  Him  as  its  end.  This  is  what  Sastra 
means,  and  not  thut  He  secs  even  without  eyes. 

Thirdly,  you  say  that  eternal  Sakti  cannot  exist  in  limited  forms,  by 
which  you  wish  to  say  that  His  Sakti  of  seeing  all  things  is  infinite,  but 
that  the  eyes  of  a  limited  body  are  small.  It  does  not,  however,  follow 
from  this  that  you  have  no  faith  in  His  possessing  a  body  or  eyes.  On 
the  contrary,  your  dissatisfaction  appears  to  rest  on  the  ground  that  the 
eyes  I  speak  of  are  very  small.  You  wish  to  see  a  body  much  bigger  than 
that  to  which  I  refer;  so  big  that  we  cannot  see  the  whole  of  it  from  head 
to  foot  all  at  once.  You  arc  then  a  more  profound  believer  in  Isvara’s 
body  than  I  am.  In  fact,  whenever  Bhagavan  (or  Bhagavatl)  has  shown 
His  (or  Her)  true  appearance  to  a  devotee  in  order  to  gratify  the  desire 
of  the  believer  in  His  or  Her  body,  whenever  a  devotee,  weeping,  has 
eagerly  prayed  to  see  Its  true  appearance,  then  Bhagavan,  who  is  ever 
merciful  to  devotees,  has  shown  His  universal  appearance;  and  knowing 
that  that  appearance,  boundless  and  of  shining  brilliance,  is  invisible  to 
ordinary  eyes,  He  has  first  granted  Divine  vision  to  the  devotee,  and  then 
manifested  that  appearance  to  Him.  The  following  occurs  in  the 
Bhagavad  Gita: 

“  O  Supreme  Lord,  even  as  Thou  describest  Thyself,  O  best  of  beings, 
I  desire  to  see  Thy  form  omnipotent. 

“  If  Thou  thinkest  that  by  me  It  can  be  seen,  O  Lord,  Lord  of  Yoga, 
then  show  me  Thine  imperishable  Self.” 

The  Blessed  Lord  said:  “Behold,  O  Partha!  a  Form  of  Me,  a 
hundredfold,  a  thousandfold,  various  in  kind,  divine,  various  in  colours 
and  shapes. 

“  Behold  the  Adityas,  the  Vasus,  the  Rudras,  the  two  ASvins,  and 
also  the  Maruts;*  behold  many  marvels  never  seen  ere  this,  O  Bharata.” 

“  Here,  to-day  behold  the  whole  universe,  movable  and  immovable, 
existing  in  My  body,  O  Gudakesa.  What  else  desirest  thou  to  see? 


,  1  Aphorism,  verse. 

*  Vaidik  Devata. 


COMMANDS  OF  SASTRA 


205 


“  But  verily  thou  art  not  able  to  behold  Me  with  these  thine  eyes. 
The  Divine  eye  I  give  unto  thee.  Behold  My  Sovereign  Yoga.” 

Sanjaya  said:  “  Having  thus  spoken,  O  King,  the  great  Lord  of 
Yoga,  Hari,  showed  to  Partha  His  supreme  form  as  Lord. 

“  With  many  mouths  and  eyes,  with  many  visions  of  marvel,  with 
many  Divine  ornaments,  with  many  upraised  Divine  weapons. 

“  Wearing  Divine  necklaces  and  vestures,  anointed  with  Divine 
unguents,  the  God  all-marvellous,  boundless,  with  face  turned  everywhere. 

,c  If  the  splendour  of  a  thousand  suns  were  to  blaze  out  together  in 
the  sky,  that  might  resemble  the  glory  of  that  Mahatman.1 

“  There  Pandava  beheld  the  whole  universe,  divided  into  manifold 
parts,  standing  in  one  in  the  body  of  the  Deity  of  Deities. 

“  Then  he,  Dhanaiijaya,  overwhelmed  with  astonishment,  his  hair 
upstanding,  bowed  down  his  head  to  the  Shining  One,  and  with  joined 
palms  spake.” 

Aijuna  said : 

“  Within  Thy  Form,  O  God,  the  Gods,  I  see 
All  grades  of  beings  with  distinctive  marks; 

Brahma,  the  Lord,  upon  His  lotus-throne. 

The  II all,  and  Serpents,  the  Divine 

With  mouths,  eyes,  arms,  breasts  multitudinous, 

I  sec  Thee  everywhere,  unbounded  Form. 

Beginning,  middle,  end,  nor  source  of  Thee, 

Infinite  Lord,  infinite  Form,  I  find.”  ' 

The  following  passage  occurs  in  the  discourse  between  Dew  and 
Himalaya  in  the  Bhagavati  Gita  in  Maha  Bhagavata.  Himalaya  said : 

“  Mother,  although  Thou  art  eternal  (devoid  of  birth  and  death), 
Thou  hast  graciously  taken  birth  in  my  house.  The  cause  of  this  grace 
must  surely  be  a  store  of  religious  merits  accumulated  in  many  births  in 
consequence  of  which  I  am  favoured  to  sec  Thee  in  this  appearance  of  a 
Brahmamayi  daughter.  (But  for  the  fruit  of  austerities  and  devotions 
earned  in  scores  of  births  this  could  not  have  been  even  with  a  thousand 
years  of  prayer.  By  the  sight  of  this  appearance  of  Thine  all  the  fruit  of 
religious  merit  has  been  exhausted.  I  am  thus,  O  Mother!  destitute  and 
without  claim.  Formerly  you  were  bound  to  show  mercy  to  me;  but 
now,  O  Mother!  I  am  a  mendicant  for  your  mercy.)  Of  Thy  grace  show 
unto  me  now  Thy  appearance  as  Mahe$vari.  (Viivcivari,  Thou  art  the 
Ilvari  of  the  universe — Viiva.  Poor  as  I  am,  what  can  I  do  for  Thee? 
What  is  there,  O  Mother!  in  my  power  to  do?  All  that  I  am  capable  of 


1  Great  Spirit. 

1  Bhagavad  Gita,  chap,  xi,  verses  3-16.  I  have  slightly  altered  Mis.  Besant’s 
translation  in  the  first  three  lines  of  this  passage. 


goe  PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 

is  to  offer  my  lasting  obeisance  to  those  beauteous  lotus-feet  of  Thine.) 

I  bow  to  Thee.” 

ViSveSvan  Devi  said:  “  Father,  I  grant  you  divine  vision.  (With  that 
vision)  look  at  my  appearance  as  IiSvara  of  all.  Destroy  all  the  doubts  of 
your  heart,  and  know  Me  as  holding  all  Devas  in  Myself.” 

Sri  Mahadeva  said  to  Narada:  “  Thus  granting  the  most  excellent 
(knowledge  of  Brahman)  to  the  King  of  mountains  who  made  obeisance, 
Devi  then  showed  him  Her  divine  Mahdvara  aspect  effulgent  with  the 
brilliance  of  ten  million  moons ;  bearing  on  His  head,  with  its  clusters 
of  matted  hair,  the  beautiful  crescent  moon;  holding  in  His  left  hand  a 
trident,  and  with  the  right  bestowing  blessings,  yet  awesome  and  terrible 
to  see.”  Himalaya  was  struck  with  wonder,  and  (with  a  heart  fearful 
and  unsatisfied)  said  again : 

“  Mother,  show  me  another  aspect  of  Thine.”  Thereupon,  O  great 
Muni !  the  Devi,  eternal  and  of  universal  form,  withdrew  that  appearance 
of  Hers  and  showed  another. 

This  next  was  beautiful  as  the  moon  in  autumn.  The  head  bore  a  < 
beautiful  crown,  and  the  four  hands  were  adorned  with  a  conch-shell, 
discus,  mace,  and  lotus.1  The  form  was  brilliant,  with  three  lustrous 
eyes,  clad  with  celestial  garments,  hung  with  celestial  garlands,  anointed 
with  celestial  perfumes,  and  its  fair  lotus  feet  were  adored  by  great  yogis. 
The  King  of  mountains  saw  that  from  all  sides  of  this  vast1  body  in¬ 
numerable  arms  were  extended,  and  innumerable  feet  were  displayed, 
and  that  faces  with  opened  eyes  were  all  over  its  body.  The  sight  of  this 
supreme  excellent  appearance,  replete  with  the  qualities  of  Isvara,  filled 
the  Great  Mountain  with  wonder.  Prostrating  himself  at  the  lotus  feet  of 
his  daughter  Brahmamayi,  Himalaya  said: 

“  Mother,  the  sight  of  this  supreme  and  excellent  appearance  of 
Thine,  replete  with  the  qualities  of  ISvara,  has  filled  me  with  wonder. 
Again  I  pray  Thee  show  me  another  aspect  of  Thine.  O  Highest  Isvara, 
for  him  who  possesses  Thee  none  in  this  world  can  grieve.  He  is  truly 
blessed.  (There  is  no  one  in  this  world  who  has  not  a  want  of  some 
sort,  but,  O  Mother!  what  want  can  he  have  who  possesses  Thee;  whose 
self  is  merged  in  Thy  vast  Self;  whose  littleness  has  by  its  force  compelled 
Thee  to  abandon  Thy  greatness,  and  to  attach  Thyself  to  the  heart  of 
Thy  devotee;  whose  force  has  compelled  the  livara  of  all  to  supplicate 
the  supplicant,  the  Kalika  maintainer  of  the  universe  entreating  the 
devotee  that  he  may  be  satisfied;  and  has  even  compelled,  O  Mother! 
the  mother  of  the  three  worlds,  to  incarnate  as  daughter.  A  want  must 
exist  in  relation  to  something,  but,  O  Mother!  where  Thou  existeth  such 


1  Sankha,  cakra,  gada  and  padma  of  Vipju 
1  Virap 


COMMANDS  OF  SASTRA  207 

a  want  can  never  exist.  Thou  art  the  Sakti  in  all  things  good  or  bad, 
lifeless  or  living,  in  the  world.  So  I  say,  O  Mother;  he  who  possesses 
Thee  of  universal  form  can,  because  of  Thee,  have  no  want,  not  merely 
in  this  universe  alone,  but  even  in  untold  millions  of  universes.  People 
grieve  for  him  alone  who  is  destitute.  But  who  will  grieve  for  him  who 
holds  Thee  ?  who  holdest  all  things  in  Thyself?  Sinking  in  Thy  existence 
Jiva  is  beyond  all  want  and  its  satisfaction.  Though  he  be  the  meanest 
and  poorest  of  men  in  the  samsara,  he  is  by  Thy  grace  a  King  of  Kings. 
None  therefore  grieve  for  him.  All  rather  envy  him,  and  being  unable 
to  emulate  him  speak  of  him  as  a  man  thrice  blessed.  O  Mother!  by 
Thy  grace  lavour  me;  even  after  receiving  such  grace  I  again  seek  grace, 
for  how  else  shall  1  dare  to  look  at  the  true  <q>pcarancc  of  Her 
whose  appearances  are  numberless?)  Knowing  that  I  shall  receive 
this  grace,  I  say,  O  merciful  Mother!  obeisance  to  Thy  feet  for 
evermore.” 

After  seeing  many  other  forms  of  his  daughter,  Himalaya,  at  the 
end  of  the  hymn,  says:  “  Mother,  who  is  there,  Deva  or  human  being, 
in  the  three  worlds  capable  of  fully  describing  this  universe,  which  is 
Thy  appearance,  or  Thy  qualities,  even  by  the  effort  of  many  ages? 
(Devi,  Thy  true  aspect  is  unapproachable  by  even  Brahma  and  the  other 
Devas.)  What  can  one  of  small  intelligence  like  myself  say  of  it?  What 
1  have  to  say,  O  Mother!  is  this:  If  Thou  hast  mercy  for  me,  by  Thy 
grace,  charm  me  not  by  Thy  great  maya.  I  have  nothing  else  to  say  to 
Thee.  O  Mother !  Isvari  of  the  universe,  I  bow  to  Thee.” 

Oh,  thou  advocate  of  formlessness,  after  witnessing  all  this  vast  play 
full  of  forms  and  attributes  as  described  in  the  Sastra,  do  you  still  grieve 
at  the  smallness  of  His  appearance  ?  Wheresoever  you  will  look  you  will 
see  innumerable  eyes,  innumerable  feet,  innumerable  hands,  innumerable 
heads,  which  even  infinite  space  is  unable  to  contain.  What  more  eternal 
sports  of  eternity  do  you  wish  to  see  ?  Even  Aijuna,  conqueror  of  the 
three  worlds,  was  tormented  with  fear  at  the  sight  of  the  terrible  Kala- 
aspect  of  Bhagavan,  and,  weeping,  said : 

“  Radiant,  Thou  touches!  heaven,  rainbow-hued, 

With  opened  mouths  and  shining  vast-orbed  eyes, 

My  inmost  self  is  quaking,  having  seen, 

My  strength  is  withered,  Visnu,  and  my  peace. 

Like  Time’s  destroying  flames :  I  see  Thy  teeth. 

Upstanding,  spread  within  expanded  jaws; 

Nought  know  I  anywhere,  no  shelter  find. 

Mercy,  O  God!  refuge  of  all  the  worlds.” 1 


’  Bhagavad  Gita,  chap,  xi,  verses  24  and  25. 


208 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


(Formerly  I  thought  that  you  were  a  Deva,  now  I  know  that  you  are 
DeveSa,  Lord  of  Devas.  Formerly  I  thought  that  Thy  abode  was  in  the 
universe.  Now  I  know  that  the  universe  is  in  Thee:  So  I  say,  O  Lord!  the 
conclusions  at  which  I,  a  Jiva,  have  arrived  are  false.  Be  now  pleased 
with  Thy  natural  graciousness  to  grant  me  power  to  see  Thy  true  aspect.) 

Sadhaka,  do  you  still  believe  that  you  and  I  have  the  courage  to 
look  upon  that  appearance?  Docs  this  enormous  power  which  shatters 
the  Brahmanda  and  destroys  all  the  regions  bespeak,  in  your  opinion,  but 
a  small  Sakli?  The  quantity  of  water  which  the  sea  holds  is  not  small, 
but  the  jars  which  you  and  I  possess  are  small.  The  Saktis  and  Vibhutis 1 
in  the  body  of  Bhagavan  are  unlimited  and  eternal,  but  neither  your  nor 
my  brain  can  contain  them.  The  smallness  of  the  quantity  of  water  in 
our  jar  makes  us,  when  sitting  in  our  houses,  think  that  the  endless  sea  is 
small  when  in  truth  it  is  not.  In  case  you  should  say  that  a  perfect 
display  of  Iivara’s  Sakti  was  not  proved  by  the  fact  that  it  overpowered 
the  weak  human  heart  of  Arjuna,  frightened  at  the  prospect  of  kith  and 
kin,  I  will  cite  another  example.  It  is  true  that  Arjuna,  in  his  play  as  a 
human  being,1  was  already  afraid  of  committing  an  unrighteous  act. 
That  fear  was  the  fear  of  a  Jiva,  but  He  who  is  above  both  righteousness 
and  unrighteousness,  and  is  ever  feared  by  Indra,  Yama,  Candra,  and 
Surya,  is  afraid  of  nothing.  The  heart  of  the  almighty  Supreme  Purusa, 
higher  than  the  highest,  who  alone  among  the  Devas  is  the  vanquisher 
of  death,  whose  name,  ParameSvara,  is  the  true  epithet  of  His  real  self, 
who  after  he  has  destroyed  the  Brahmanda  *  at  the  time  of  the  great 
dissolution,*  Himself  exists  for  ever  as  Purna  Brahman;*  Mahakala, 
unwasting,  untouched  by  time,  immortal,  is  neither  weak  nor  afraid  of 
anything.  Yet,  notice  how  He,  too,  once  trembled  with  fear  and  was 
beyond  Himself  when  He  could  not  find  a  path  of  escape. 

When  Mahadeva  refused  Jagadamba  permission  to  attend  Daksa’s 
sacrifice,'  even  though  She  repeatedly  besought  it,  the  daughter  of  Daksa/ 
who  is  eternal  perfect  Brahman,  seeing  that  Bhagavan  was  influenced  by  a 
husband’s  vanity,'  assumed  a  terrible  aspect,  with  the  object  of  shattering 
that  vanity.  Sastra  gives  the  following  account  of  this  in  Maha  Bliagavata. 
Sri  Mahadeva  said: 


1  Manifeslalions. 

'  Aijuna  was  an  incarnation  of  the  Rsi  Nara. 

*  The  egg  of  Brahman,  or  universe.  4  Mahapralaya. 

*  Perfect  or  complete  Brahman. 

•  Yajfia. 

’  That  is,  the  Devi  (Jagadamba)  in  Her  incarnation  as  Satl,  wife  of  Siva. 

•  Thinking  himself  superior  to  his  wife:  as  appears  from  the  text  a  very 
ancient  piece  of  presumption. 


COMMANDS  OF  S ASTRA 


209 


When  thus  spoken  to  by  Maheivara,  Sati,  the  daughter  of  Daksa, 
with  eyes  reddened  with  anger,  pondered  for  a  moment  Sahkara 1  has 
obtained  me  as  His  wife  (by  virtue  of  My  own  gift)  after  long  prayer 
severe,  austerities ;  *  yet  to-day  He  slights  and  speaks  harshly  to  Me 
(though  in  the  play  of  incarnation  He  is  my  husband,  I  shall  forsake  this 
proud  Mahadeva,  as  also  My  father,  the  arrogant  Prajapati,  and  in  My 
own  play  live  for  some  time  in  My  own  abode,  the  region  of  Kaivalya). 
Later  on,  being  begged  (and  entreated  in  severe  sadhana)  by  this 
Mahe£vara,  I  shall  reappear  as  Himalaya's  daughter,  and  become 
Sambhu’s  wife.  Pondering  thus  in  Her  mind  for  a  moment,  the  daughter 
of  Dak$a  opened  Her  three  fearful  eyes,  and  overpowered  Sahkara  with 
illusion.*  fiambhu  stood  still  at  the  sight  of  the  Devi,  with  Her  lips 
parted  in  anger  and  eyes  shining  like  destructive  fire.  On  being  thus 
looked  at  by  the  frightened  Mahesvara,  the  Devi  suddenly  displayed 
the  terrible  teeth  in  Her  terrible  mouth  and  laughed  aloud.  On 
hearing  that  frightful  sound  of  laughter,  Mahadeva  was  paralyzed 
with  fright.  Opening  His  three  eyes  with  great  effort  He  saw  (but  once) 
the  world  terrifying  aspect  of  Jagadamba.  When  He  looked  upon  Her, 
Her  body  immediately  lost  its  golden  colour,  and  took  on  that  of  a  dark 
mass  of  crushed  eye-paint.4  She  appeared  naked  as  space,  with  dis¬ 
hevelled  hair,  with  a  lolling  tongue,  and  four  arms.  She  was  languorous 
with  desire,*  terribly  furious,  bathed  in  sweat  (caused  by  her  anger),  and 
of  frightful  countenance;  garlanded  with  skulls,  bearing  on  Her  head  a 
brilliant  crown  and  a  crescent  moon,  shining  like  ten  million  suns.  Her 
voice  thundered  loudly. 

In  such  a  fearful  aspect  Sad,  dazzling  by  the  mass  of  her  own 
brilliant  energy,*  stood  before  Mah2deva,  and  uttered  loud  peals  of 
laughter.  Seeing  the  wonderful  appearance  of  the  Devi,  Mahadeva  lost 
all  self-control,  and,  bewildered  with  fright,  sought  to  flee  in  all  directions. 
Seeing  the  Lord  of  Kailasa  thus  overcome  by  fear,  the  daughter  of  Dakfa 
again  uttered  peal  after  peal  of  dreadful  laughter,  and,  with  the  object  of 
reassuring  Him,  shouted:  “  Fear  not!  fear  not!  ”  Hearing  this  cry  and 
the  fierce  peals  of  laughter,  Mahadeva  was  so  bewildered  with  terror  that 
He  frantically  rushed  again  in  Eight  in  every  direction.  Seeing  her 
husband  so  overcome  with  fear  Parameivaii  was  moved  to  pity,  and  with 
a  view  to  restrain  Him  stood  for  a  moment  before  Him  at  each  of  the  ten 
quarters  of  the  Heaven  in  the  form  of  the  ten  Mah&vidyas.  In  whatever 
direction  He  ran  with  haste  He  thus  saw  a  fearful  form  standing  before 
Him.  In  fright  He  fled  in  another  direction,  only  to  be  again  confronted 
by  another  such  form.  After  having  thus  run  towards  each  of  the  ten 
quarters  of  the  Heaven  He  saw  that  there  was  none  without  danger  for 

1  Siva.  *  TapasyiL  *  Moha. 

4  Afljana.  4  KaxnSJasakalevarS.  4  Teja*. 

14 


210 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Him.  Then,  feeling  altogether  helpless,  He  sat  down  on  earth  and  shut 
His  three  eyes,  and  (a  moment  later  as  through  an  inner  fear)  he  opened 
them.  He  saw  before  Him  Syama.  Her  smiling  face  was  like  a  full-blown 
lotus.  Her  breasts  were  large.  Her  eyes  wide  and  terrible,  and  Her  hair 
dishevelled.  She  was  four-armed,  naked  as  space,  shining  with  the  light 
of  ten  million  suns  (although  black  in  colour  like  a  fresh  cloud),  and 
stood  facing  the  south,  the  heavenly  form  of  Daksina.  Seeing  Her  thus  (of 
a  strange  form  full  of  an  uncommon  beauty),  Sambhu,  as  if  in  great  fear, 
asked:  “  Who  art  Thou,  Syama?  *  Where  has  SatT,  my  beloved,  gone?  ” 

Devi  said :  “  Mahadeva,  I  am  Thy  Sad  here  standing  before  Thee, 
and  yet  Thou  dost  not  recognize  Me !  Why  is  Thy  mind  so  confused 
to-day?  Do  I  appear  to  Thee  different  from  Thy  Sad?  ” 

Siva  said :  “  If  Thou  really  art  my  beloved  Sad,  daughter  of  Dak?a, 
why  hast  Thou  become  black  and  fearful?  Who  are  these  forms  of  terrible 
aspect  standing  in  all  direcdons  around  Me?  Amongst  these  which  art 
Thou?  Tell  me  everything,  for  these  wonderful  forms  have  made  Me 
greatly  afraid.” 

Sad  said :  “  I  am  the  subtle  (beyond  the  reach  of  speech  and  mind) 
MahSprakrti  who  creates  and  destroys.  Owing  to  the  promise  I  had 
aforedme  given  Thee  (to  bless  Thee  for  Thy  tapasya)  I  (put  my  true  form 
under  restraint,  and)  incarnated  as  a  fair  girl  in  Daksa’s  house  merely 
to  get  Thee  as  My  husband  (to  charm  Thee  by  becoming  Thy  wife). 
I  have  to-day  assumed  this  fearful  aspect  for  the  destruction  of  father 
Dakfa’s  great  yajfia.  But,  O  Maheivara!  Thou  hast  no  reason  to  be 
afraid  of  Me  (for  this  fearful  aspect  is  assumed  to  terrify  Daksa  alone). 
The  ten  terrible  forms  which  Thou  seest  in  each  of  the  ten  directions  are 
each  of  them  My  aspect.  Oh,  Sambhu !  Thou  possessest  immense  wisdom. 
Be  not  afraid  (but  see  with  Thy  eye  of  wisdom).  Thou  art  My  most 
beloved  husband,  and  I  am  Thy  wife.  Seeing  Thee  so  greatly  afraid  and 
turning  in  all  directions,  I  stood  before  Thee  blocking  them  by  these  ten 
forms  of  Mine." 

Siva  said:  “Thou  art  the  subtle  (beyond  the  reach  of  speech  and 
mind)  Mulaprakfti  who  creates,  preserves,  and  destroys.  It  is  not  possible 
that  one  should  know  Thee  who  art  beyond  the  reach  of  speech  and 
mind,  so,  not  knowing  Thee  through  great  illusion,  I  have  said  unpleasant 
words  to  Thee.  Pardon  me,  O  Paramefvari,  the  offence  which  I  have 
thus  committed.  Tell  me,  O  Consort  of  Siva  with  fearful  eyes,  the  names 
of  each  of  these  ten  most  dreadful  forms  of  Thine  standing  in  each  of  the 
ten  quarters.” 

Devi  said:  “O  Mahadeva,  these  MahividySs  are  but  different 
aspects  of  My  own  Self.  Listen!  Their  names  are  Kali,  Tara,  Sod  ail. 


1  Black  Lady. 


COMMANDS  OF  SASTRA  211 

Bhuvane&vari,  BhairavT,  Chhinnamasta,  Sundari,1  Bagal&mukhi,  DhumS- 
vati,  and  M&tangi.” 

Siva  said:  “O  Devil  who  supporteth  the  universe,  if  Thou  art 
pleased  with  me,  tell  me  which  of  these  forms  bear  these  respective  names.” 

Devi  said :  “  The  dark-coloured  form,  with  terrible  eyes,  which 
Thou  dost  see  before  Thee  is  Kali.  She  who  is  above  Thee  of  Syaxna  * 
colour  is  Mahavidya  Tara,  the  very  image  of  MahakSla,  The  lean, 
destitute  and  very  frightful  Devi  whom  Thou  dost  see  on  Thy  right  ride 
is,  O  high-soulcd  Mahadeva,  MahSvidya  Chhinnamasta.  O  Samhhu,  the 
Devi  on  Thy  left  side  is  Bhuvaneivari.  She  who  is  behind  you  is  Devi 
Bagalamukhi,  Destructress  of  foes.  She  who  appears  as  a  widow  on  the 
south-east  is  Devi  Mahavidya  Dhumavati,  a  great  Iivari.  The  Devi  on 
the  south-west  is  Tripur^sundari.*  In  the  north-west  is  Matangi,  and  in 
the  north-east  Mahavidya  §oda4I,  a  great  Iivari.  She  who  is  below  Thee 
is  Bhairavi.4  O  Sambhu !  be  not  afraid  (at  the  sight  of  these  ten  forms, 

1  Kamala  or  Mahalakaml. 

3  Grass  green,  dark  blue,  blackish.  *  Kamala. 

4  See  Da^a-Mahavidya-Upasana-Rahasya,  by  Prasanna  Kumara  Sastri, 
which  illustrates  both  the  figures  and  yantras.  The  text  also  illustrates  the 
positions  as  follows: 

TAR* 

Above 

KALI 


N 


BAG  ALA 
Below 

bhairamT 


212 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


which  are  My  manifestations,  and  destroy  the  fear  of  existence.)  Of  My 
many  forms  (ninety  millions  of  manifestations) 1  these  ten  are  the  best  (the 
most  perfect  vibhfitis) To  such  Sadhakas  as  worship  them  with  devotion 
they  grant  the  four-fold  fruit*  and  ail  that  is  desired,  O  MaheSvara!  all 
such  things  as  Sadhakas  desire,  such  as  Marana,  Ucchatana,  Ksobana, 
Mohana,  Dravana,  Stambhana,*  Vidveiana,  are  granted  by  them.  Each 
of  these  ten  Mahavidyaa  is  to  be  kept  secret  and  never  revealed.  Thou 
shalt  be  the  ordinancer  and  interpreter  of  yantras,  mantras,  puja,  homa, 
puraicaraija,8  stotra,*  kavaca 7  practices,  rules,  and  ail  else  concerning 
them  which  may  be  required  by  S&dhakas.  There  is  none  else  in  the  world 
who  can  reveal  them.  The  Agama  Sastra  which  Thou  shalt  reveal  from  Thy 
mouth  will  be  renowned  in  the  three  worlds.  O  Sankara!  Agama  and 
Veda  are  my  two  arms.  With  them  I  support  the  entire  universe  of 
moving  and  unmoving  things.  The  world  is  maintained  by  Dharma,  as 
ordained  in  Tantra  and  Veda.  The  fool  who  disregards  them  through 
delusion  falls  assuredly  from  the  arms  which  save  the  three  worlds.  I  am 
unable  to  save  him  who,  in  disregard  of  Agama  or  Veda,  worships  Me  in  . 
a  manner  different  from  that  ordained  in  it.  This  is  nothing  but  the 
strictest  truth.  Agama  and  Veda  are  both  causes  of  liberation.  But  both 
are  difficult  to  understand  and  carry  out.  Knowledge  of  them  is  hard  to 
attain  even  by  intelligent  men.  They  are  eternal  and  without  end.  The 
intelligent  wiU  know  that  the  purpose  of  both  the  Sastras  is  the  same,  and 
will  practise  dharma  accordingly.  The  wise  will  never,  through  delusion, 
consider  them  to  be  different.  Those  who  worship  these  ten  Mahavidyas 
will  act  like  Vai?ijavas,  but  in  rapt  concentration  will  rest  their  hearts  on 
Me.  The  Sadhaka  will  with  great  care  keep  secret,  and  never  speak  to 
others  of  mantra,  yantra,  kavaca,  and  other  matters  which  he  receives 
from  his  guru.  If  these  things  are  given  out  siddhi  will  be  unattained  and 
evil  will  result.  A  good  Sadhaka  will  therefore  conceal  them  with  every 
care.  High-aoulcd  Mahadeva,  I  have  now  spoken  to  you  of  the  subject 
of  worship.  (Let  not  the  sight  of  these  aspects  of  Mine  strike  terror  into 
Thy  heart,  and  make  Thee  doubt  My  single-minded  love  for  Thee.  I  am 
Thy  beloved  wife,  and  Thou,  too,  art  My  very  beloved  husband.  To-day 
I  wish  only  to  humble  the  pride  of  my  father,  Prajapati.  So  I  pray  to 
Thee,  O  Deva  of  Dev  as,  that  if  Thou  will  not  go  to  the  place  of  sacrifice 
permit  Me  so  to  go.  O  Deva!  it  is  my  intention,  with  Thy  permission,. 


1  Vibhfitis.  1  See  pat. 

*  Dharma,  artha,  kama,  mok?a. 

4  “  Magical  ”  powers  of  destruction,  driving  away,  perturbing,  enchanting, 
putting  to  flight,  stopping  or  paralyzing  causing  dissension. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra .  *  Hymn.  7  Amulet. 


COMMANDS  OF  SASTRA  213 

to  go  and  destroy  the  sacrifice  1 * *  of  My  father,  Prajapati  Daksa  (and  not  to 
frighten  Thee).” 

MahSdeva  said  to  Narada :  “  Hearing  these  words  of  Devi,  Sambhu 
stood  as  one  struck  with  intense  fear,  and  then  spoke  as  follows  to  the 
fierce-eyed  Kali.” 

Siva  said :  “  Dev!,  I  know  that  Thou  art  Paramqsvari,  the  best,  per¬ 
fect,  and  supreme  Prakrti.  Pardon  me  the  unbecoming  words  which, 
overpowered  by  delusion,  I  have  in  forgetfulness  used  towards  Thee.  Thou 
art  the  primal  *  supreme  Vidya  *  who  existeth  in  all  created  things.  Thou 
art  independent  and  supreme.  Thou  art  Sakti.  Who  is  there  to  order 
Thee  to  do  or  to  desist  from  doing  anything  ?  O  Sivi  4 * *  if  Thou  goest  to 
destroy  Daksa’s  sacrifice,  what  power  have  I  to  restrain  that?  And  why 
should  I  dare  to  do  so  ?  O  Mahc$vari,  pardon  me  for  what  (presuming 
on  my  position  as  Thy  husband)  I  have,  under  the  influence  of  intense 
delusion,  said  to  Thee.  Do  Thou  as  it  pleases  Thee.”  * 

Interpreter  of  Sastras,  do  you  consider  that  that  display  of  power  is 
•  of  no  account,  at  the  sight  of  which  even  Maharudra,  who  causes  the 
great  dissolution,  was  astounded,  trembled  with  fear,  and  sought  to  flee  ? 

When  Ni&umbha  was  killed  in  the  battle  with  the  Devi,*  Sumbha, 
seeing  Brahma^!,  Vaispavl,  Mahefvari,  Indram,  Kaumari,  Varahl, 
Narasinghl,  Camuniji,  Kaufikl,  and  Sivaduti,7  fighting  with  fury,  sarcasti¬ 
cally  addressed  Her  who  rejoices  in  war,  saying: 

1  Because  Dak?a  had,  to  offer  him  a  slight,  purposely  neglected  to  invite 
Siva,  Her  husband. 

*  Adya. 

*  As  opposed  to  Avidya,  though  She  is  both. 

4  The  Devi  as  wife  of  Siva. 

*  Sati  then  went  to  the  sacrifice  (yajna).  There,  Daksa  poured  invectives 
on  the  head  of  Siva.  Sati’s  great  devotion  to  Her  husband  (the  Hindu  girl 
prays  that  she  may  become  like  Sati  and  get  a  husband  like  Siva)  could  not 
bear  to  hear  Data’s  abuse  of  Him,  and  She  gave  up  Her  life.  Nandi  hastened 
to  Kailasa  and  told  Siva,  who  rose  in  terrible  wrath.  Fire  flashed  from  His 
eye  and  took  the  fearful  form  of  Bhairava,  who  went  with  a  host  of  ghosts  and 
goblins  to  destroy  the  yajfia.  Siva  followed.  The  yajfia  was  destroyed.  Nandi, 
Siva’s  follower  cut  off  Daksa’s  head  and  threw  it  into  the  fire.  Siva  then 
took  up  the  dead  body  of  Sati  and  went  away  bearing  it  on  His  shoulder. 
The  story  continues  with  the  history  of  the  Mahaplfiias.  Sati  reappeared 
in  Her  incarnation  as  daughter  of  the  Mountain-king.  The  story  of  the 
Dak;a-yajfia  is  one  of  the  most  ancient,  as  it  is  one  of  the  best  known,  of  all 
Siva  and  Sakti  legends. 

*  The  brothers  Ni&umbha  and  Sumbha  were  Lords  of  the  Demoniac 
Danavas,  who  had  defeated  the  Devas.  The  Devi,  however,  in  whose  body 
was  the  united  Sakti  of  all  the  Devas,  slew  first  Dhumralocana,  Canda,  and 
Mupda,  who  had  been  sent  against  Her,  and  then  the  great  Dinava  Raktablja, 
and  finally  both  Sumbha  and  Niiumbha  (see  Candl  of  Markaijdeya  Purfiga). 

7  The  Saktis  of  Brahma,  Vianu,  Siva,  and  other  Saktis. 


214 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTKA 


“  O  Durga,  proud  of  the  strength  of  Thy  arms,  be  no  longer  proud. 
She  who  fights  with  the  help  of  the  powers  of  other  Dev  as  has  no  reason 
to  pride  Herself  so  much  as  the  single-handed  conqueror  of  the  three 
worlds.”  1 

She  who  dwells  in  all  hearts  and  who  ever  leans  to  mercy  showed  it 
then  without  stint.  In  that  field  of  battle  she  made  Sumbha  a  reply 
unheard  of  even  by  great  yogis  who  had  attained  siddhi  and  become  pure 
and  free  of  the  bonds  of  life.  Jagadamba  knew  that  the  King  of  the 
Daityas  was  moved  in  his  actions  by  an  ill-directed  intelligence  and  a 
naturally  wicked  nature.  Thus,  just  as  a  mother  cannot  forsake  her  son 
even  if  he  commits  hundreds  and  thousands  of  offences  against  her,  but 
rather  with  smil£  and  joy  takes  him  on  her  lap,  and  then  with  feigned 
anger  calls  him  wicked,  so  the  Mother  of  the  universe,  looking  upon 
Sumbha  with  merciful  eyes  but  with  such  a  feigned  anger,  said:  “  Wicked 
one,  I  alone  exist.  Who  other  is  there  in  the  world?  Look!  All  these 
manifestations 1  will  enter  into  Me.  I  will  then  dispel  the  doubt  which 
has  arisen  in  your  mind  at  the  sight  of  a  number  of  Deva^aktis.”  (The 
mother,  as  if  caressingly,  said :  “  Wicked  one,  you  see  these  Deva£aktis, 
and  now  by  a  trick  wish  to  know  the  truth  concerning  them.”)  Then  in 
an  instant,  at  the  will  of  Her  who  is  all  will  Herself,  Brahman!  and  all 
other  Devis  entered  into  Brahmamayi’s  body,  and  (Sumbha  saw  that  in 
the  battle-field)  there  was  none  but  Ambika  alone. 

Then  Dew  again  said:  “  I  withdraw  the  many  forms  in  which  I 
(displaying  My  wealth  of  manifestation)  *  appeared.  I  now  alone  stand 
in  the  battle-field.  So,  Sumbha,  now  desist.” 

It  was  as  if  a  boy  on  seeing  many  mothers  was  disconsolate  on  being 
unable  to  recognize  his  own.  The  Mother  therefore  showed  him  Her 
real  self,  and  consoled  him,  saying :  “  Look,  I  am  thy  Mother,  so  be 
quiet.”  But  Sumbha  was  not  one  to  be  satisfied  with  knowing  what  She 
was  without  letting  Her  know  what  he  was,  so  putting  on  the  arms  and 
accoutrements  of  the  hero,  the  hero  son  of  the  heroine  Mother  advanced 
to  heroic  struggle.  O  Mother!  he  who  runs  to  your  arms  with  his  own 
strength  is  not  a  mendicant  for  your  mercy.  So  the  music  of  war  rang 
out,  fiercely  shaking  heaven,  earth,  and  the  nether  world,  and  the  ever- 
triumphant  Lord  of  Daityas  stood  in  hand-to-hand  conflict,  to  the  sound 
of  victory-giving  shouts  from  this  and  other  worlds. 

Sastra  says  that  when,  wounded  in  the  heart  by  the  Devi’s  spear  he 
fell  dead  and  dropped  from  the  sky  to  earth,  the  latter,  with  its  seven 
principal  mountain  ranges,1  seven  seas,  and.  seven  islands,  shook  with  the 


1  That  is,  Sumbha  himself. 

*  Vibhiiti,  see  post. 

*  KufScala. 


COMMANDS  OF  SASTRA 


215 


unbearable  weight  of  his  body.  At  his  death  all  the  regions  rejoiced.  The 
whole  world  regained  health.  The  sky,  hitherto  overcast  with  a  deep 
mist,  cleared.  Inauspicious  clouds  which  had  been  shooting  meteora  all 
around,  disappeared.  Rivers,  the  flow  of  which  had  long  been  stayed  by 
the  din  of  the  twang  of  his  bow  and  his  thundering  shouts,  became  on  his 
destruction  again  free,  and  moved  along  their  channels.  The  hearts  of 
Devas  were  filled  with  immeasurable  joy.  Gandharvas 1  commenced  to 
sing  in  sweet  tones.  Kinnaras,  Siddhas,  and  S&dhyas 1  began  to  play 
on  musical  instruments.  Apsaras  *  commenced  to  dance.  Pure  air  again 
flowed;  the  sun  at  length  assumed  his  natural  radiance.  Fires  could  at 
last  burn  quietly,  and  without  making  the  heavens  resound  with  the 
sound  of  their  burning. 

Sadhaka!  whose  power  can  compare  with  the  power  of  him  for  whose 
sake  the  ordained  course  of  Nature  was  arrested?  Is  it  not  a  sign  of  the 
shortness  of  our  life,  intelligence,  good  fortune,  and  sadhana  that  we 
presume  to  deem  small  the  power  of  manifestation  4  of  Her  whose  great 
maya  charmed  even  the  great  charmer  Sumbha,  ruler  over  the  three 
worlds?  Can  you  say  that  the  Sakti  is  small  of  Her  who  can  make  the 
impossible  possible,  whose  maya  made  even  B  hag  a  van  Ramacandra 
forgetful  of  himself  upon  the  occasion  of  the  destruction  of  the  hundred* 
headed  Ravapa? »  Does  not  Her  play  in  Her  incarnations  as  a  fish,  tortoise, 
and  boar,  whereby  She  saved  the  Vedas,  supported  the  universe,  and  held 
the  earth  on  the  end  of  the  boar’s  tusk,  bear  evidence  of  a  full  display  of 
divine  Sakti  ?  4 *  The  sudden  appearance,  bursting  through  a  crystal  pillar, 
of  the  strange  half-man,  half-lion,  in  order  to  save  Prahlada,  chief  among 
devotees;7  the  display  of  the  Brahm&nd3  within  Her  mouth  to  mother 
Yasoda; 8  the  destruction  of  Putana  by  sucking  milk  from  her  breasts;  • 


1  Celestial  beings  (Devayonis)  who,  according  to  the  Vi?nu  Purina,  were 
sons  of  Brahma,  “  bom  imbibing  melody  ”;  celestial  musicians  and  choristers 
who  play  and  sing  at  the  banquets  of  the  Devas;  belonging  together  with  the 
Apsaras — their  wives — to  Indra’s  heaven, 

*  Other  classes  of  Devayonis. 

5  Beautiful  and  voluptuous  Devayonis  of  Indra’s  Heaven;  wives  of  the 
Gandharvas ;  produced  at  the  churning  of  the  ocean.  4  Vibhuti. 

4  When  Rama  was  returning  from  Lanka,  he  met  the  hundred-headed 

Ravapa.  On  seeing  him,  forgetful  that  he  was  Bhagavan,  Rama  did  not  dare 
to  fight. 

*  Various  incarnations  of  Vi|nu. 

7  The  Nf-simha  AvaiSra  of  Vijnu. 

8  Yaioda  was  wife  of  Nan  da,  in  whose  home  Krsria  was  brought  up.  The 
infant  Kfsna  showed  to  Yaioda  the  universe  in  His  mouth. 

*  Pufana  was  a  female  demon  (Raksail)  with  poisoned  breast,  sent  by 
Kamsa  to  destroy  the  infant  Kfgna,  who,  however,  destroyed  her  by  sucking  her 
breasts. 


216 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  upholding  of  Mount  Gavardhana  by  a  boy  of  seven J;  the  charming, 
unknown  to  the  three  worlds  of  Brahma  through  one  whole  year,  by  the 
raising  of  calves,  cows,  and  cowherds  by  maya*;  the  humbling  of  the 
pride  of  Kandarpa  *  by  the  assumption,  in  playful  favour  to  devotees,  of 
thousands  of  fonns  in  early  youth  for  the  gratification  ofherdswomen 
who  were  maddened  with  love,  and  had  attained  siddhi  by  the  practice 
of  tapas  for  many  ages*;  the  showing  of  the  virat*  aspect  toAkrura* 
in  the  waters  of  the  Yamuna 7 — all  these  arc  doubtless  not  perfect  mani¬ 
festations  so  far  as  the  perfect  Brahman  is  concerned,  yet,  O  man,  I  ask 
you,  can  you  imagine  even  in  dream  any  thing  greater  than  these  ?  The 
world  of  Jivas  could  (were  it  to  desire  it)  obtain  even  greater  things  of  Him. 
But  there  are  none  who  have  the  capacity  to  entertain  such  a  desire. 

“  Manifest  Thy  divine  Sakti  to  such  an  extent.”  It  is  beyond  the 
power  of  Jiva  to  measure  His  greatness  by  saying  “  to  such  an  extent 
For  this  reason  the  extent  to  which  He  has  manifested  His  Sakti  for  the 
removal  of  the  burden  of  the  earth  in  consequence  of  the  tapasya  per¬ 
formed  by  the  devotees  is  sufficient  for  Jivas.  So  I  say.  Do  not  trouble 
yourself  with  the  thought  that  the  receptacle  is  small.  It  is  not  really  so ; 
it  assumes  a  small  form  to  serve  the  extremely  small  purposes  of  the  small 
world.  You  and  I,  the  small  Jivas  of  this  small  world,  do  not  count  even 
as  much  as  the  smallest  atom  in  His  view.  What  right  have  we  to  see 
His  universal  aspect,  which  is  rarely  seen  by  Brahma  and  other  Devas? 
Secondly,  the  Lord  of  the  universe  has  no  need  to  show  that  sort  of  lordli¬ 
ness  which  you  and  I  show  to  others  with  greatness,  largeness  and  the  like. 
What  avails  our  ignoring  of  His  lordliness  when  even  Sutnbha,  Nisumbha, 
Ravapa,  and  Kumbhakarpa  ,*  could  avail  nothing  by  their  ignoring  it? 
So  I  say  that  when  the  greatly  powerful  King,  Bali,  could  not  save 
himself  by  looking  on  Vamanadeva  •  as  really  a  dwarf,  why  do  we,  who 
are  really  dwarfs,  stretch  out  our  arms  to  catch  the  moon  shining  in  the 
firmament  of  the  devotee’s  heart  ?  As  you  use  the  illustration  of  water  to 
show  that  a  small  receptacle  cannot  contain  a  vast  iakti  so  I  will  take  that 
of  fire  to  show  that  an  immeasurable  iakti  can  be  eternally  hidden  even 

1  By  Knna. 

1  BrahxnS  stole  the  calves  and  cowherds  of  Gokula  in  order  to  test  Kona’s 
power.  The  latter  assumed  the  forms  of  the  stolen  cows  and  cowherds,  so  their 
absence  was  not  noticed.  This  lasted  for  one  year,  when  the  calves  and 
cowherds  were  restored  by  Brahma,  and  Kf$pa  withdrew  his  maya. 

•  Deva  of  love.  The  reference  here  is  to  the  Rasallla. 

4  That  is,  the  Gopis.  *  Universal. 

•  Uncle  of  Kr?na,  who  induced  Rama  and  Kr?na  to  go  to  Mathura  and 
kill  Kamsa. 

7  River  Yamuna. 

»  Daityas  and  R5k?asas.  The  last  was  brother  of  Ravapa. 

•  Incarnation  of  Vi?pu>  the  form  of  a  dwarf. 


COMMANDS  OF  SASTRA 


217 


in  a  small  receptacle.  Put  a  spark  of  fire  on  a  mountain  heap  of  grass, 
and  you  will  see  that  spark  will  extend  throughout  it  and  will  illumine 
every  side  with  enormous  tongues  of  flame,  kissing  the  cheeks  of  the 
firmament.  The  spark  is  no  longer  a  spark,  but  has  become  a  destructive 
fire  flaming  terrifically  and  fit  to  consume  the  whole  heap.  Similarly, 
however  small  Bhagavan’s  appearance  in  His  incarnation  may  seem  to 
you  to  be,  bring  to  it  a  substance  fit  for  the  display  of  divine  manifesta¬ 
tion  1 * * * * *  and  you  will  see  that  the  BrahmSpda  is  filled  with  the  eternal 
Brahma-play  of  Sakti  and  has  become  the  field  for  the  display  of  Sakti 
such  as  the  Nrsimha  of  PrahlSda,'  §rikr?na  of  Aijuna,  Gopala  *  of  YaAod£, 
Syamasundara*  of  the  herdswomen,®  Nandanandana  of  Akrura,®  Syama 
of  Sumbha,7 * *  Uma  of  Himalaya,®  Sita  of  Rama,®  and  Sa’ti  of  Siva.10  You 
will  then  realize  that  His  greatness  is  not  small,  but  that  the  JIva’s  capacity 
is  small;  His  appearance  is  not  small,  but  the  eyes  of  Jiva  are  so.  He  is  not 
small,  but  you  and  I  are  so.  So  I  say,  O  Sadhaka,  do  not  suppose  that  a 
small  receptacle  cannot  hold  the  eternal  Sakti,  or  proceed  to  measure  the 
greatness  of  Mahamaya,  whose  power  can  make  that  possible  which 
seems  impossible. 

But  while  there  is  yet  time,  seek  the  protection  of  Her  feet,  and 
opening  the  door  of  your  heart  say :  “  Mother,  all  my  intelligence,  learn¬ 
ing,  and  reasoning  are  at  an  end.  Now  be  gracious  to  me.  In  my 
struggle  with  doubt  stand  before  me  as  Thou  didst  stand  before  Aijuna 
and  before  Sumbha.  Fill  the  world  for  once  with  Thy  true  appearance  so 
that  my  birth  may  be  blessed,  my  life  may  be  blessed,  my  eyes  may  be 
blessed,  and  I,  O  Mother,  may  sink  in  Thee,  becoming  wholly  Thine.” 


1  Vibhuti. 

*  The  man-lion  incarnation  of  Vi$nu  for  the  protection  of  the  son  of 
Hiranyakafipu. 

*  One  of  Krsna’s  108  names.  That  by  which  he  was  called  by  Yaiodfi. 

*  The  name  by  which  Kjsna  was  called  by  the  Gopis. 

®  Gopis  of  Vraja  who  loved  Kysna. 

*  Name  of  Kfsna;  as  to  Akrura,  see  post. 

7  The  Devi  Victrix  of  the  demon  Sumbha  (see  post). 

9  The  Devi  as  daughter  of  Himalaya  and  wife  of  Siva.  As  to  the  derivation 
of  the  name  see  the  first  canto  of  Kalidasa’s  KumSra-sambhavam.  Uma 
unmarried,  is  the  Sakti  of  will,  as  the  Sutra  says,  “  lochaiakti  uma  kumari.” 

*  Wife  of  Rama. 

10  Deri,  wife  of  Siva  and  daughter  of  Dak?a. 


CHAPTER  VI 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 

SAdhaka,  against  our  wish  wc  arc  obliged  to  say  again  that  the  healers 
of  whom  we  have  spoken  are  wont  to  quote  four  sayings  from  the  Maha- 
nirvana  T antra  as  evidence  in  favour  of  their  views.  Though  these 
statements  are  supposed  to  be  evidence  on  their  behalf,  we  shall,  in  order 
to  show  what  this  evidence  is,  quote  the  entire  text  consisting  of  the 
Devi’s  questions  and  the  answer  of  Sada&va.  From  these  texts  the  right  . 
thinking  will  readily  understand  how  difficult  it  is  to  become  a  healer 
without  killing  thousands.1 

In  the  fourteenth  Ullasa  of  this  Tantra,*  after  Mahadcva  had  spoken 
of  the  rules  and  ritual  relating  to  the  consecration  of  the  images  of  Devas, 
Devi  said : 

“  Lord,  tell  me  truly  what  devotees  should  do  if,  for  some  unforeseen 
reason,  the  consecrated  image  of  a  Devata  is  left  without  worship.  Tell 
me  also  through  what  faults  images  of  Devas  become  unfit  for  worship, 
for  what  faults  they  should  be  rejected,  and  what  means  exist  for  remedy¬ 
ing  those  faults.” 

Sadaiiva  said: 

“  If  there  be  an  omission  to  worship  for  a  day,  then  the  worship 
should  be  twice  performed;  if  for  two  days,  then  the  worship  should  be 
four  times  performed;  if  for  three  days  it  should  be  celebrated  eight  times. 
If  the  omission  does  not  exceed  six  months  then  the  Deva  should  be  bathed 
with  eight  jars  full  of  water,  sanctified  by  His  mantra,  and  then  worshipped. 
If  the  omission  to  perform  worship  exceeds  six  months,  then  the  image 
should  again  be  consecrated  and  then  worshipped.  If  the  image  of  a 
Deva  is  defective,  cracks,  or  breaks,  it  should  be  consigned  to  water.  If 
it  has  fallen  on  unholy  ground  it  should  not  be  worshipped.  A  defective, 
cracked,  or  broken  image  should  be  consigned  to  water,  but  an  image 
polluted  by  touch  should  be  purified  and  then  again  worshipped. 


1  That  is  to  say,  without  having  had  experience  at  the  cost  of  others. 
*  Verse  95  it  seq. 


WORSHIP  OP  DEVATAS 


219 


Mahapithas 1 * * * * *  and  Anadilingaa*  are  free  from  all  faults — that  is  to  say,  the 
above-mentioned  causes  do  not  operate  on  them  to  detract  from  their 
virtue.  For  this  reason  the  people  should  worship  their  own  Iftadcvas8  in 
them  for  the  attainment  of  their  desired  blessings.*  Mahamaya,  I  have  thus 
related  to  you  in  detail  all  that  you  wished  to  know  for  the  good  of  men 
who  act  with  a  view  to  the  fruits  of  action.”* 

As  He  thus  spoke  the  eye  in  the  forehead  of  Bhagavan  Mahakala 
opened  as  if  to  peer  into  futurity. 

Nowadays  one  meets  with  many  an  adept  in  Tattva,*  who  professes 
to  have  renounced  action,  and  says  at  every  opportunity:  “  The  kanna- 
kan^a7  is  intended  only  for  those  who  are  devoid  of  knowledge;  why  then 
should  he  who  has  attained  to  it  do  action  ?  ” 

Unfortunately,  most  of  those  who  say  this  are  themselves  doers  of 
karma.8  What  they  therefore  say  must  mean  that  such  karma  alone  as 
consists  in  the  worship  of  Devas  is  for  those  who  are  devoid  of  true 
knowledge;  while  such  karma  as  is  required  for  the  service  of  wife,  children, 
•  and  the  like  may  be  done  even  by  those  possessed  of  true  knowledge.  For 
their  Sastra  says:  “  It  is  also  by  doing  what  pleases  Him  that  He  is 
worshipped.”  However  that  may  be,  it  was  as  if  He  thought  of  what 
would  happen  in  the  future  that  Bhagavan,  who  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  all 
wise  men,  said*  :  No  Jiva  possessing  body  can  be  without  karma  for  even 
half  a  minute.  Helpless  he  is  drawn  by  the  current  of  karma  even 
against  his  will.  That  is  to  say,  just  as  everything  follows  the  wind, 
which  it  is  unable  to  check,  so  everyone  follows  the  irresistible  flow  of 
karma.  By  karma  18  alone  Jiva  enjoys  happiness,  by  karma  alone  he 
suffers  misery.  Under  the  influence  of  karma  alone  he  is  born,  lives,  and 
dies.  For  this  reason  I  have  made  mention  of  various  kinds  of  karma  in 


1  Holy  shrines  where  the  body  of  Devi  as  Sati  fell  to  earth  (see  Intro¬ 
duction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

*  Anadi,  without  beginning.  That  is,  those  I  ingams  which  spring  from 
earth  supematurally  (called  Svayambhu,  or  self-existent),  as  distinguished  from 
those  fashioned  and  installed  by  men.  Of  the  former  class  are  the  lingams  at 
Vaidyanatha,  Tarake$vara,  the  Candradekhara  at  Chittagong  and  other  places. 

*  The  worshipper’s  own  chosen  Deity. 

*  Dharma,  Artha,  Kama,  Mok?a. 

*  That  is,  those  on  the  path  of  pravrtti,  who  act  interestedly  (sakama 
karma),  as  opposed  to  those  who  renounce,  and  who  act  rightly  and  unselfishly 
without  thought  of  gaining  fruit  of  their  action  (niskama  karma). 

8  Sacred  science. 

7  The  portion  of  the  scripture  which  relates  to  worship,  ritual  practice 
(karma),  which  last  word  means  that  which  is  done,  action. 

*  See  post. 

*  Verse  104  et  stq.  of  chap,  xiv  of  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra. 

18  See  post. 


220 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


sadhanayoga,  in  order  to  attract  the  minds  of  those  of  little  knowledge  to 
nirva )?a-  dh arma 1 — that  is  to  say,  in  order  to  induce  them  to  work  until 
they  reach  the  stage  which  follows  nirvikalpa  samadhi,*  and  to  keep  them 
away  from  wrong  action  (that  is  to  say,  if  the  mind  remains  ever  engaged 
in  the  thought  of  good  things,  no  bad  thoughts  can  germinate  in  it).” 

Sadaiiva  next  proceeded  to  explain  the  subject  of  karma  with  more 
explicitness  *  :  “  Karma  is  of  two  kinds,  auspicious  and  inauspicious. 
Through  the  latter  Jiva  suffers  acute  pain  and,  O  Devi!  through  the 
former  Jiva  becomes  attached  to  the  fruits  of  action,  and  controlled  by 
the  bonds  of  karma,  sojourns  again  and  again  in  this  world  and  the  next.” 
That  is  to  say,  you  must  correct  your  notion  of  a  twofold  bond  of  karma 
to  the  effect  that  karma  consisting  of  worship  of  Dcvas  and  DcvTs  is  the 
cause  of  bondage,  whilst  that  done  in  the  service  of  the  world  removes 
bondage;  and  you  must  understand  that  whatever  you  do  is  karma,  that 
what  is  good  karma  is  auspicious,  and  what  is  bad  karma  is  inauspicious, 
and  that  both  auspicious  and  inauspicious  karma  are  instrumental  in 
causing  the  bondage  of  Jiva  to  samsara. 

“  Not  even  in  a  hundred  kalpas*  can  Jiva  attain  liberation  unless  both 
his  auspicious  as  well  as  inauspicious  karma  come  to  an  end  ” — that  is 
to  say,  as  good  karma  will  come  to  an  end  so  will  bad  karma  come  to 
an  end  with  it;  otherwise,  if  all  your  good  karma  pass  away,  leaving  the 
flow  of  your  bad  karma  the  same  or  gradually  increasing,  such  a 
destruction  of  karma  will  not  remove  bondage  to  samsara.  Rather  the 
want  of  good  karma  will  break  the  tie  with  Heaven  and  make  that  with 
Hell  yet  firmer  still  through  the  influence  of  bad  karma.  “  As  it  makes 
no  difference  to  the  binding  power  of  a  chain  whether  it  be  of  iron  or 
gold,  so  karma,  whether  auspicious  or  inauspicious,  is  equally  powerful 
to  bind  Jiva.”  •  Accumulated  karma,  whether  good  or  bad,  inevitably 
acts  so  as  to  bring  the  Jiva  back  to  samsara.  “Jiva,  even  though  he  be 
in  constant  action  and  endure  hundreds  of  austerities,  cannot  attain 
liberation  so  long  as  he  does  not  acquire  true  knowledge  •  ” — that  is  to 
say,  if  knowledge  is  not  sought  as  the  accompaniment  of  action  the  latter 
alone  can  never  be  directly  instrumental  to  secure  liberation.  “It  is 
only  after  the  destruction  of  sin  and  the  purification  of  the  heart  by 
thought  upon  Tattva  (the  thought  that  Brahman  alone  in  an  essential 
sense  exists,  while  the  world  docs  not — that  is  to  say,  that  the  world 
is  nothing  but  a  display7  of  the  Brahman)  and  by  performance  of 


1  That  is,  to  the  path  which  leads  to  liberation. 

1  See  Introduction  to  Ttutlra  Sistra. 

*  MahSnirvana  Tantra,  chap,  xiv,  verse  107.  4  See  post. 

6  Mahanirvana  Tantra,  chapter  xiv,  verses  109,  1 10. 

*  Ibid.,  verae  111.  7  VibhOti,  see  post. 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 


221 


disinterested  action1  that  knowledge  dawns1 *” — that  is  to  say,  that 
knowledge  only  appears  when  the  mind  has  been  so  purified  by  the 
practice  of  Brahma-Tattva  and  constant  worship  of  BhagavSn  with  karma 
performed  without  desire  for  fruit,  that  no  sinful  propensity  arises  in  it, 
but  only  the  presence  of  the  pure  sattva  guija  is  felt  without  the  least 
appearance  of  the  rajas  and  tamas  gui>as. 

“  From  Brahma  to  a  blade  of  grass  everything  in  the  world  is  the 
creation  of  maya.  Parabrahman  alone  is  the  sole  truly  existent  one.  When 
knowledge  of  this  tattva  is  gained  then  the  Jiva  attains  true  happiness  1  ’’ 
— that  is  to  say,  whatever  variety  we  see  in  the  dualistic  world,  is  like  a 
dream  or  a  magic  show,  the  creation  of  maya.  Just  as  the  magician 
alone  truly  exists  and  all  which  he  does  is  illusion,  so  the  nondual 
Parabrahman  alone  is  true  and  all  the  things  raised  by  Him  to  form  the 
samsara  are  illusive.  Just  as  when  sleep  is  dispelled  all  dreams  disappear, 
so,  when,  by  the  grace  of  Bhagavan,  the  sleep  of  maya  is  dispelled,  this 
samsara,  full  of  maya,  disappears  at  the  same  time.  As  when  Jiva  awakes 
he  secs  that  he  alone  and  neither  sleep  nor  dream  remains,  so  when  Jiva 
becomes  self-conscious  he  sees  that  neither  maya  nor  the  samsara  remains, 
but  only  he  himself  as  the  Supreme  Spirit.4  It  is  only  when  Jiva  thus 
sinks  into  the  sea  of  Tattva  *  that  he  gains  such  happiness  as  never  gives 
place  to  sorrow. 

“  He  alone  is  free  from  the  bonds  of  karma  who,  renouncing  name 
and  form,  has  attained  to  the  knowledge  that  on  the  immutable  Brahman 
all  things  ■  rest.”  1  One  must  rise  above  name  and  form  and  make  all 
things  •  rest  in  the  true  immutable  Brahman.  From  this  it  must  be  under¬ 
stood  that  if  Brahman  is  true  and  immutable,  names  and  forms  are  false 
and  mutable.  What  is  true  is  stable  and  what  is  false  is  unstable,  so  that 
to  reach  the  true  the  false  must  be  abandoned.  To  sink  in  Brahmatattva, 
which  is  above  maya,  names  and  forms  which  are  made  of  maya  must  be 
abandoned.  By  name  and  form  we  must  understand  not  true  name  and 
form,  but  the  name  and  form  which  arises  from  change  of  nature.'  For 
instance,  the  true  name  of  earth  is  earth.  Its  form  is  the  ordinary 
ground.  When,  however,  cups,  jugs,  pots,  dishes,  and  other  like  things, 


1  That  is,  nijk&ma  karma  (opposed  to  sakama  karma),  or  right  action  done 
unselfishly  without  hope  of  reward  and  simply  because  such  action  is  right. 

■  Mahanirvana  Tantra,  chap,  xiv,  verse  112. 

*  Ibid.,  vote  113.  Brahma  is  the  first  Deva  of  the  Trinity,  a  transitory 
manifestation  of  the  supreme  Brahman. 

4  Paramfitma.  *  Here  the  infinite  waters  of  the  ocean  of  Brahman. 

•  lit.  “  all  Tattva  rest.”  1  Mahaairvajpa  Tantra,  ibid.,  verse  1 14. 

8  Vikara:  change  of  form  or  nature;  transformation;  deviation  from  natural 
state.  In  Sinkhya,  Vikfti  is  that  which  is  evolved  from  a  previous  source  or 

Prakrtt 


222 


PRINCIPLES  OP  TANTRA 


are  made  of  it,  the  names  and  forms  of  those  articles  are  due  to  nothing 
but  change — that  is  to  say,  had  not  the  true  form  of  earth  been  transform¬ 
ed  into  the  changed  forms  of  cups,  and  the  like,  the  substance  earth 
would  never  have  received  the  names  of  cups,  jars,  and  the  like.  When 
these  break  and  return  to  the  form  of  common  earth  those  names  also 
disappear  along  with  those  forms.  Cups,  jars,  and  the  like,  are  all  false; 
earth  alone  is  true.  Just  as  in  understanding  the  nature  1  of  earth  I 
cannot  leave  out  of  consideration  cups,  and  the  like,  so  in  directing  the 
mind  to  the  nature  1  of  Brahma  I  must  not  omit  to  consider  the  Brah- 
mapqla  consisting  of  names  and  forms.  It  was  earth  before  the  formation 
of  cups,  and  subsequently  it  again  became  earth.  Only  for  a  short  time 
between  these  two  states  the  cry  of  “  Cup,  cup !  ”  arose,  which  alone  is  to 
be  considered  false.  Sastra  has  therefore  said :  “  If  a  thing  which  did  not 
exist  either  before  or  afterwards  appears  to  exist  during  a  middle  period, 
know  it  also  to  be  false.”  This  falsehood,  again,  is  not  fundamentally 
false.  A  thing  seen  in  a  dream  may  be  false,  but  neither  dream  nor 
sleep  is  false.  Similarly,  this  world  may  be  false,  but  the  maya  at  its  root 
never  false.  If  sleep  be  false,  who  shows  the  dream  ?  If  maya  be  false, 
who  creates  the  Bamsara?  If  maya  be  false,  then  the  samsara  becomes 
true.  Maya,  therefore,  exists  and  will  exist,  and  it  is  through  this  maya 
that  mother  Mahamaya  must  be  seen. 

Gitanjali 1  therefore  sings: 

“  Veda  says:  vain  is  our  effort,  for  everything, 

O  Brother !  is  Maya. 

Tantra  says  through  Maya  is  heard  the  laugh  of  Mahamaya; 

For  it  is  the  Mother’s  Maya.” 

Veda  says:  “  Whatever  is  designated  by  speech  and  called  by  name 
is  Vikara.*  Only  earth  is  true.”  4  Vikara  is  not  false;  it  is  only  the  state 
of  change  of  that  which  is  real.  A  changed  thing  is  only  the  real  thing 
in  another  state;  it  is  only  the  changed  name  and  form  which  appear  and 
disappear.  The  true  form  has  neither  appearance  nor  disappearance. 
Just  as  cups,  jars,  dishes,  or  whatever  else  you  may  make  with  earth  will 
undoubtedly  remain  earth  in  substance;  as  wrist-chains,  bracelets,  earrings, 
or  whatever  else  you  may  make  with  gold  will  be  gold  in  substance  and 
nothing  else,  so  in  this  dualistic  world,  with  all  its  variety  of  names  and 
forms,  father,  mother,  brother,  sister,  wife,  son,  daughter,  you  and  I,  non¬ 
moving  and  moving  things,  insects,  dies,  and  the  other  names  and  forms 
which  we  see,  are  all  only  the  Parabrahman  manifesting  Itself  in  different 
forms,  such  forms  being  due  to  change  by  MSyS,  and  in  reality  nothing 


1  Tattva.  *  A  volume  of  verses  by  the  Author.  *  See  post. 

4  Referring  to  the  simile  of  a  gfaafa  (jar).  What  is  called  jar  is  untrue;  but 
the  earth  of  which  it  is  composed  is  true. 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 


223 


but  a  manifestation  of  Brahman.1 * *  The  only  distinction  is  that  in  the 
body  of  livara  this  power  of  manifestation  *  is  fully  manifested,  whilst  in 
the  body  of  Jiva  it  is  not  so.  I  therefore  said  that  because  changed  names 
and  forms  are  false,  the  true  names  and  forms  are  not  so. 

In  the  domain  of  Sadhana  this  is  Brahma-vision.  Gitanjali  *  has 
therefore  put  into  the  mouth  of  Menaka: 

“  UmS  is  the  adored  of  the  world; 

No  mere  daughter  is  She. 

With  Brahman  as  Hara,  on  a  bejewelled  throne. 

She  sits  as  Farabrahmasanatani.* 

Thy  Tripurasundara  Digambara  *  exists, 

Far  excelling  in  lustre  ten  million  suns. 

On  the  left  of  Hara  sits  my  Uma, 

Whose  golden  beauty  shines  as  a  thousand  million  moons. 

There  laughs  §a<Jdnana,4 * *  in  Sadananda’s  *  arms; 

Gajanana 7  dances  in  Jagadamba’s 8 *  arms. 

The  Music  of  Sambhu’s  dambura  * 

Draws  peals  of  laughter  from  Kumara 10 
And  from  Gane£a,  at  the  clap  of  Uma’s  hands. 

In  the  arms  of  two  Brahmas  11  rest  the  two  Brahma-children,18 
And  you  and  I  again  are  Brahma’s  father  and  mother. 

This  samsara  instinct,  with  Brahma-bliss,  is  but  a  Vikara 11  of 
Brahman, 

And  thus  my  perfect  Brahman  is  His  charming  spouse. 

O  Mountain !  I  hear  another  strange  thing — 

Brahma,  Vistju,  and  Hara  are  Uma’s  sons; 

Uma  is  not  thine  and  mine  alone. 

She  exists  as  everything  moving  or  immovable  in  the  Universe. 

Grandfather  says  She  is  grandmother 

Who  gave  birth  to  Pifambara 14  and  Digambara.14 

Upon  hearing  you  and  me  call  her  *  daughter  ’ 

How  She  must  laugh  in  her  mind ! 

Being  thus  ashamed  and  afraid  to  call  Her  daughter, 


1  Brahmavibhuti. 

*  Referring  to  the  simile  of  a  gha{a  (jar).  What  is  called  jar  is  untrue;  but 

the  earth  of  which  it  is  composed  is  true. 

4  A  volume  of  verses  by  the  Author. 

4  Devi  as  the  eternal  Parabrahman.  4  Siva. 

•  The  six-headed  Kirtikeya,  son  of  Siva. 

7  Elephant-headed  Ganeja.  4  The  Devi.  4  Siva’s  drum. 

10  Kirtikeya,  vide  ante.  n  Devi  and  Siva.  14  Kartikeya  and  Ganeda. 

u  See  post.  14  Vi?pu,  who,  as  Kf?na,  wean  yellow  cloth. 

14  Siva,  who  is  naked. 


224 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


The  Queen  (MenakS)  may  well  call  herself  the  daughter's  daughter 
But  that  daughter  is  not  daughter  to  the  Queen  alone. 

If  entreated  She  becomes  even  the  daughter  of  a  beggar-woman; 

Siva  Candra  says,  O  Lady  of  the  Mountain!  (Menaka) 

Why,  now  that  you  know  all,  do  you  still  call  Her  daughter? 

Be  yourself  daughter  for  once. 

And  offering  Jaba  flowers  to  the  daughter’s  lotus  feet, 

Cry:  ‘  Victory  to  Mother!  ’  ” 1 * * 4 

One  must  rise  above  names  and  forms  and  make  all  things  *  rest  on 
the  immutable  Brahma.  In  order  to  rise  above  written  names  and  forms 
discrimination  *  is  necessary.  Discrimination  *  is  nothing  but  the  under¬ 
standing  of  the  true  nature  of  things.  In  discussing  the  fundamental 
nature  of  name  and  form  the  whole  attention  must  be  directed  to  the 
Parabrahman,  just  as  in  discussing  the  question  of  the  substance  of  a  cup 
the  attention  is  directed  to  the  earth  (of  which  it  is  made).  But  because 
you  must  use  names  and  forms  this  does  not  mean  that  you  must 
leave  this  Brahmanda,  with  its  names  and  forms,  and  go  to  live  in 
another  Brahmanda.  Judge  as  you  are,  your  name  and  form  will  accom¬ 
pany  you  to  whatever  Brahmanda  you  may  go.  One  cannot,  therefore, 
discuss  name  and  form  by  throwing  off  name  and  form  altogether.  Just 
as  the  true  nature  of  light  would  not  be  known  were  it  not  for  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  darkness,  so  the  non-dualistic  existence 1  cannot  be  known  without 
the  existence  of  this  dualistic  Brahmanda  composed  of  names  and  forms. 
Without  it  there  could  have  been  no  judge  of  dualism  and  non-dualism, 
nor  indeed  any  necessity  for  such  a  judge.  To  understand  the  true  nature 
of  earth  it  is  not  necessary  to  go  to  a  country  where  there  are  no  pots  and 
potters.  A  person  of  intelligence  will  place  a  pot  before  himself,  and  sec 
that  under  its  form  there  is  really  nothing  but  earth.  He  who  has  re¬ 
cognized  this  is  not  astonished  at  the  sight  of  a  pot,  but  is,  on  the  contrary, 
pleased  to  see  the  wonderful  capacity  which  earth  possesses  of  taking 
on  forms.  Similarly,  he  who  has  mastered  the  Brahmatattva  *  is  not 
astonished  at  the  sight  of  this  created  universe,  but  is,  on  the  contrary, 
overjoyed  to  see  the  eternal  fakti  of  Brahmamayi.  He  forgets  all  names 
and  forms  and  sees  in  every  form  the  Brahma-form  underlying  the  worldly 
form.  As  everyone  sees  that  there  are  pots,  but  the  wise  alone  know  that 
there  is  nothing  but  earth,  so,  although  all  see  the  samsHra  full  of  wives, 
sons,  and  relations,  the  Tantrik  sadhaka  alone  knows  that  it  is  nothing 


1  The  gist  of  these  verses  is  that  Parvati  and  Siva  are  not  merely  the 

daughter  and  son-in-law  of  the  Lord  of  Mountains  and  Menaka,  but  are  the 
one  Supreme  Spirit,  manifesting  as,  and  dwelling  in,  all  forms. 

•  *  Tattva.  *  Viveka. 

4  s’.#.,  who  knows  that  all,  whatever  may  be  its  varied  appearance,  is  but 
the  one  Brahman. 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 


22* 


but  Brahmamayi's  self.  He  who  has  understood  that  in  order  to  rise 
above  name  and  form  it  is  necessary  to  forget  that  things  have  distinctive 
properties  giving  rise  to  such  names  and  forms,  and  to  know  that  the  true 
Sakti  of  Brahma  alone  exists,  he  alone  has  risen  above  name  and  form  and 
has  perceived  that  all  is  but  the  immutable  Brahman. 

“  No  amount  of  japa,  homa,  and  fasting  will  give  liberation.  It  is 
by  the  realization  alone  that  *  I  am  indeed  Brahman,’  that  Jiva  will  gain 
liberation.” 

As  the  mind  of  a  drunken  or  deeply  slumbering  man  is  not  affected 
even  if  he  is  embraced  by  a  young  woman,  so  self-realization  or  perception 
of  the  real  docs  not  come  to  one  who  is  intoxicated  with  an  intense  delu¬ 
sion  1 * * 4 * *  and  is  under  the  influence  of  the  sleep  of  maya,  even  should  he  be 
animated  by  Sadhana.  If  Japa,  Homa,  Vrata,*  and  fasts  are  not  accom¬ 
panied  by  self-knowledge  they  avail  nothing,  even  though  they  be 
practised  for  a  hundred  years.  It  is  not,  however,  meant  that  all  japa, 
homa,  etc.,  is  ineffectual  to  gain  liberation.  For  why,  then,  should  it  be 
necessary  to  state  that  (under  certain  conditions)  they  are  so  ineffectual  ? 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  japa,  homa,  fasting  are  so  many  means  of  attaining 
self-knowledge.  Sastra  has  consequently  said  that  liberation  will  not  be 
gained  even  after  a  hundred  years  by  the  mere  performance  of  the 
ordinary  karma,*  if  there  be  complete  disregard  for  what  is  fundamental — 
namely,  self-knowledge.  Sastra  does  not  mean  that  one  who  has  known 
the  self  •  has  no  karma  to  perform ;  it  rather  means  that  none  but  those 
who  know  the  self  have  a  right  to  perform  karma. 

Atma  *  is  witness  •  (that  is,  it  only  looks  upon  the  working  of  the 
universe  caused  by  maya  without  interest  therein)  and  is  omnipresent,, 
perfect,  true,  without  a  second  and  higher  than  the  highest.  (Like  the 
space  in  a  room)  7  Atma  possesses,  yet  does  not  possess,  body  (that  is, 
although  Atma  inhabits  the  body,  it  remains  ever  detached  from  its 
qualities).  Jiva  attains  liberation  when  he  realizes  this  truth.  He  is 
without  a  doubt  liberated  who  has  cast  off  all  idea  of  name  and  form  as 
mere  child’s  play  and  has  become  solely  devoted  to  the  Brahman. 

1  Moha.  *  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

*  Ritual  acts. 

4  Presumably  the  author  here  and  in  next  line  refers  to  the  stages  prior  to 
complete  sell-recognition — viz.,  regard  for  and  endeavour  to  obtain  self, 
knowledge.  *  The  Spirit. 

4  And  so  it  is  said:  Atma  saksl  chetah  kevalo  nirgunaSca  ”  (Atma  is 

the  sole  intelligent  witness  without  attributes).  To  its  endurance  as  permanent 

witness  of  all  changing  states  is  due  the  Kantian  “synthetic  unity  of 
apperception  ”. 

7  That  is,  space  has  no  form  itself  but  takes  form  from  the  room  in 
which  it  is. 

15 


226 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


During  play  children  think  of  their  dolls  as  sons  and  daughters;  but 
their  names  and  forms  disappear  when  play  is  over.  In  the  same  way, 
however  much  you  may  build  in  your  own  mind  names  and  forms  by  the 
establishment  of  relationships,  whether  by  way  of  wife,  son,  father,  and 
mother,  with  jivas  who  are  the  mSyS-dolls  in  the  play-ground  of  this 
samsara,  know  it  for  certain  that  with  the  end  of  your  earthly  life  all  such 
names  and  forms  will  disappear.  Therefore,  he  who  has  ceased  from  play 
and  cast  aside  all  mayik 1  names  and  forms  while  there  is  yet  time, 
and  who,  setting  his  mind  and  Atma  on  the  Parabrabman  who  is  above 
xnaya,  has  united  himself  with  the  Paramatma,  such  an  one,  even  though 
inhabiting  the  mayik1  body,  is  undoubtedly  eternally  free,  like  the 
Brahman  Itself. 

“  If  images  imagined  in  the  mind  could  give  liberation  to  Jiva,  then 
one  could  also  become  a  King  by  receiving  a  kingdom  in  dream.” 

As,  despite  his  mayik  body,  Jiva  may  obtain  freedom  from  birth  by 
knowledge  of  the  essential  truth,*  the  perception  of  the  truth  of  the  Self 
being  the  sole  cause  of  such  freedom,  so  a  Sadhaka  may  attain  nirvana 
kaivalya  by  the  worship  (with  knowledge  of  the  Self)  of  an  image  of Jaga- 
damba  in  the  form  in  which  She  appeared  in  maya  for  the  benefit  of  Her 
devotees,  and  by  perception  of  the  greatness  of  that  image — that  is,  of  the 
presence  in  it,  in  eternal  forms,  of  the  eternal  Sakti  of  Her  who  is  eternity 
itself.  This  is  the  sole  cause  of  such  nirvana  kaivalya.* 

He,*  who  with  loins  girt  with  yellow  cloth,  sat  as  Partha’s  *  charioteer, 
glorious  with  the  glory  of  his  devotee,  on  the  seat  of  Aijuna’s  chariot  as 
the  Paijdavas’  friend,  holding  the  reins  of  the  white  horses  in  his  left,  and  a 
whip  in  the  right  hand;  He,  who  but  a  moment  before,  finding  his  friend 
Aijuna  overcome  by  impatience  and  delusion,*  and  unwilling  to  do  his 
own  dharma,7  had  counselled  him  in  words  of  wisdom;  He,  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye,  changed  that  form  of  His — that  sweet  form  of  a 
delicate,  dark  hue,  like  that  of  a  freshly  formed  cloud,  charming  the  minds 
and  hearts  of  the  whole  world,  and  disappeared,  and  in  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye  thousands  of  hands  and  feet  of  the  universe-embracing  great 
body  extended  to  each  of  the  ten  quarters  of  the  heavens,  and  a  terrible 
mass  of  light,  issuing  from  thousands  of  widely-expanded  eyes,  dimmed 
the  rays  of  the  sun.  Notwithstanding  his  endowment  of  divine  vision, 
that  Prince  of  Heroes,  Aijuna,  shook  with  fear,  and  with  trembling  voice 
and  folded  hands  said:  “  I  cannot  see  the  quarters  of  space  nor  am  I  at 
ease.  Have  mercy,  O  Lord  of  Devas!  in  whom  the  world  resides.” 


1  Made  of  and  by  Maya. 

*  'fattva.  8  Supreme  liberation  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra) . 

*  Sri  Kf^ija.  *  Arjuna.  *  Maya  and  Moha.  *  Duty. 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 


227 


In  Bali’s1 * *  Yajfia*  heaven,  earth,  and  the  nether  world  were  covered 
by  the  two  feet  of  the  Vamana  Brahmana.®  By  Bali’s  good  fortune  a 
third  foot,  hitherto  unseen  by  even  Brahma  and  other  Dev  as,  shot  out 
from  Bhagavan’s  navel,  through  the  wonderful  Sakti  of  the  Almighty. 
Advised  by  his  Queen,  who  was  learned  in  spiritual  lore.  King  Bali 
bowed  down,  and  then  the  foot,  the  dispellcr  of  fear  and  the  wealth  of 
devotees,  was  placed  on  his  head.  The  fortunate  King  Bali  went  to  the 
nether  world,  and  Bhagavan,  the  reliever  of  the  burdens  of  the  world, 
abandoned  even  Vaikuntha,  and  Himself  became  Bali’s  door-keeper  in 
the  nether  world.  To-day,  only  if  he  permits  and  kindly  opens  the  door, 
can  one  see  King  Bali.  The  Lord  of  Vaikuntha,4 *  the  monarch  of  mon- 
archs,  Himself  stands  at  Bali's  door,  though  at  His  own  door  of  Vaikuptha 
Brahma  and  other  Devas  ever  remain  standing,  praying  for  admittance 
to  His  presence,  the  all  in  all  of  a  devotee’s  life.  Bhagav&n,  the  creator 
•of  all  things,  Thou  alone,  O  Lord!  knowest  the  greatness  of  a  devotee. 
And  you.  King  Bali,  a  Prince  of  Daityas,  *  are  a  Prince  of  Devotees. 
*What  kingdom  is  it  which  you  have  acquired,  to  guard  which  the  Supreme 
Monarch  of  the  universe  has  Himself  become  your  door-keeper? 

Again,  on  the  banks  of  the  Yamuna,  at  the  root  of  the  kadamba-tree, 
the  sweet  flute  •  sounded.  By  what  mantra  of  what  secret  sadhana  we 
know  not,  the  fair  women  of  the  city  of  Vraja  stood  in  their  thousands  in 
the  ecstasy  of  their  great  love,7  surrounding  Bhagavan,  the  son  of  Nanda, 
as  immovable  stars  surround  the  full  moon.  Instantly,  by  virtue  of  his 
wonderful  Vaisnavl  maya,  Bhagavan  appeared  to  each  of  them  in  a 
separate  body,  and  threw  his  arms  round  the  neck  of  each  of  the  fair 
women,  unseen  by  the  others.  The  Devas  assembled  in  the  sky  above 
Bpidavana  in  order  to  see  the  incomparable  beauty  of  the  body  of 
Kfsna  in  the  waters  of  the  Yamuna,  on  land  and  in  space.  Admidst 
showers  of  flowers  offered  by  them  with  reverence,  to  the  joyous  sounds 
of  music  and  dancing  by  Vidyadharas,  Siddhas,  Gandharvas,  Kinnaras, 
Apsaras,  Yaksas,  and  Caranas,®  to  the  song  of  triumph  by  the  herds- 
women,  and  admidst  the  manifestation  of  the  perfect  greatness  of  Purna 


1  Bali  was  a  Daitya,  grandson  of  Prahlada,  who  conquered  the  three 
worlds  and  then  performed  a  great  yajfta,  in  which  he  intended  to  give  away 
all  that  belonged  to  him,  when  Visnu  as  Vamana  appeared  before  him  and 
asked  for  land  sufficient  to  put  three  feet  on.  This  was  promised,  when  the 
Vamana  with  two  feet  covered  the  world. 

*  Sacrifice. 

8  The  Visnu  avatara  of  that  name — as  dwarf. 

4  Vi.jpu’s  heaven.  6  Demonic  beings. 

*  Of  Sri  Kr?na.  7  Rasa. 

*  Various  forms  of  celestial  male  and  female  spirits  (Devayoni). 


228 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Br ahmasanatana, 1  the  huge  waves  of  the  heroic  valour  of  the  charmer  of' 
Madana  *  rolled  in  the  sea  of  the  play  of  love.* 

The  sight  of  the  misery  of  Devas,  caused  by  the  oppressions  of 
Mahisa  the  Asura,  pained  the  loving  heart  of  Her  who  is  full  of  mercy 
for  all  sufferers.  She,  who  embodies  all  iaktis,  manifested  Her  Sakti  and. 
appeared  in  the  form  of  a  mass  of  fury  born  of  the  anger  of  the  Devas.. 
The  earth  sank  under  the  weight  of  the  beauteous  lotus  feet  of  that  form* 
all  full  of  consciousness  of  Her  who  is  consciousness  itself.  Her  crown, 
pierced  the  firmament,  and,  delighting  in  war,  She  stood  extending  Her 
thousand  arms  over  the  held  of  battle.  Seeing  the  Brahman  aspect  of  the 
Brahmamayi  the  immortals  shouted:  “Victory!  victory!  victory!”  and 
in  joy  began  to  worship  the  lotus  feet  of  the  blissful  Devi. 

Again,  when  previous  to  the  destruction  of  Sumbha  and  Niiurabha,1 
Kauiiki  *  emerged  from  the  body  of  Parvatl,  beautiful  as  a  golden  champak 
flower,  the  fair  appearance  of  Parvatl  became  instantly  changed  into  the 
shining  blue  lustre,  more  beautiful  than  that  of  a  blue  lotus,  of  Uma,  who 
appeared  as  Syama.  Into  the  glowing  fire  of  Her  presence  the  King  of- 
the  Daityas  jumped  and  was  thereupon  consumed  as  if  he  were  a  mere 
insect.  Again,  in  the  battle  with  Canda  and  Mun<la,4  the  sakti  of 
Camunda8  burst  forth  from  the  forehead  of  £y&m&,  wrinkled  with 
wrath.  In  the  battle  with  Raktabija,4  Sivadutl  •  issued  from  Syama,  who- 
is  Mulaprakfti.  In  the  fight  with  Sumbha  it  was  into  Her  body  that 
Brahmaiji  and  other  Saktis  suddenly  disappeared.  Prior  to  Daksa’s 
yajna7  ten  Mahavidyas  appeared  from  out  of  the  single  body  of  Sail  and 
again  disappeared  into  it.  Again,  at  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  that 
yajna,  a  shadow-Satl 8  appeared  from  out  of  the  original  body  of  Sati,  and 
the  mayik  body  was  abandoned  into  the  fire  of  yajna.  Later,  in  the 
home  of  Himalaya,  he  was  shown  the  world-form  manifestation  of 
Brahman  in  the  newly-born  body  of  a  daughter,*  and  into  that  body 
again  those  manifestations  were  withdrawn. 

The  appearance  and  disappearance  in  the  manner  of  innumerable 
playful  bodies  from  and  into  Her  single  body  clearly  proves  that  the  body 
of  Sacchidanandamayi 10  is  nothing  but  Sacchidinanda;  that  the  variety  in 
forms  is  due  to  variety  in  maya  made  by  Her  own  desire,  and  that  there- 

1  The  full  eternal  Brahman.  1  The  Deva  of  love. 

*  The  passage  refers  to  the  r&salil&  play  of  love  of  Sri  Kr?na  and  the  Gopls. 

4  Demons  (see  the  Devi-Mahatmya). 

8  A  terrific  form  of  the  Devi.  4  A  Sakti  issuing  from  Syama. 

7  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdttra  and  ante. 

8  Chhayasatl. 

*  Devi  incarnating  as  Parvatl. 

“The  Devi  as  existence,  knowledge,  and  bliss.  Sacchidananda  is  the- 
Brahman. 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 


229 


is  no  means  of  specifying  any  of  Her  particular  forms  as  being  Her  real 
■form  truly  defined  by  unquestionable  signs.  From  the  One  comes  the 
infinite,  which  becomes  One  again  by  the  disappearance  of  the  infinite. 
In  this  manner,  in  Her  body,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  there  is  creation, 
and  in  another  twinkling  a  dissolution.*  In  this  state  of  things  to 
endeavour  to  ascertain  the  forms  of  Her  who  is  co-extensivc  with  the 
universe  is  but  the  counting  of  the  waves  of  the  sea.  Again,  in  the 
hearts  of  S&dhakas  who  have  attained  Siddhi  She  appears  and  disappears 
•eternally  in  infinite  forms,  such  forms  changing  at  every  moment;  this 
being  so,  it  is  impossible  to  say  that  She  is  in  reality  bound  to  any  one 
particular  form.  To  know,  therefore,  the  truth*  as  to  Her  form, 
wc  must  understand  that  Her  real  Self  is  above  all  forms.  Though 
connected  with  infinite  forms,  She  is,  in  fact,  unattached  to  any  form. 
Whenever  the  Icch&mayi 1  puts  forth  any  form  of  maya  according  to 
Her  desire,  then  a  reflection  appears  of  the  form  which  She  willingly 
assumes.  Seeing  that  reflection  in  the  mirror  of  mayi  She  becomes 
•  charmed  with  Her  own  form  and,  like  an  enchanted  girl,  the  Ananda- 
mayi 4  dances  with  joy  and  claps  Her  hands.  In  the  establishment  of  a 
•dual  relationship  between  JIva  and  Brahman  She  dances  in  Her  own  joy, 
into  which  She  sinks. 

Overwhelmed  with  emotion  at  this  play  of  Here,  a  Sadhaka,  had  said  : 

“  Kali,  Charmer  of  the  mind  of  Mahakala!  Thou  who  art  ever  full 
of  bliss.  Thou  danceth  in  Thy  own  joy,  O  Mother!  and  Thyself  dost  clap 
Thy  hands.” 

He  who,  when  practising  Sadhana  of  the  Brahma-forms  of  the  Brah- 
mamayl,  does  not  possess  this  knowledge  concerning  the  Brahman  is  not, 
in  fact,  competent  to  worship  Her  forms.  Whenever,  during  creation, 
preservation,  and  destruction,  a  necessity  has  arisen  for  any  particular 
form  She  who  is  will  itself  has  entered  into  that  form,  and  when  Her 
purpose  has  been  served,  that  mayik  form  has  at  once  disappeared.  The 
forms,  however,  with  which  the  eternal  flow  of  the  universe  is  eternally 
concerned  and  in  which  the  three  principles  *  of  creation,  preservation,  and 
destruction  are  contained  are  ever  true  and  eternal.  As  they  are  eternal 
before  creation,  so  they  are  eternal  after  the  great  dissolution;  for  the 
Sastra  has  said  that  such  eternal  forms  are  resident  in  the  non-dualistic 
region  unknown  to  this  ephemeral  mSyik  world.* 

*  So  in  the  Lalita  Sahas  ranama  (verse  66),  it  is  said :  “  Unme$a- 

nimisotpannavipannabhuvanSvalih  ”  (The  series  of  worlds  arise  and  disappear 
with  the  opening  and  shutting  of  Her  eyes).  *  Tattva. 

*  The  Devi  whose  substance  is  will. 

*  The  Devi  whose  substance  is  bliss.  *  Tattva. 

*  That  is,  the  forms  referred  to  exist  in  potential  state,  otherwise  there  could 
be  no  recreation  after  dissolution. 


230 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Veda  has  said : 

"Just  as  one  fire  in  entering  into  the  womb  of  earth  assumes 
in  every  object  its  form,  so  the  one  Dweller  in  all  objects  assumes 
their  forms.” 

Fire  exists  in  a  subtle  form  in  every  object  in  this  world  composed  of 
the  five  elements  ;  but  from  without  it  is  not  at  all  visible.  If,  however, 
there  is  friction  by  mutual  contact,  or  fire  from  without  touches  it,  the 
fire  burns  forth.  It  is  the  law  of  Nature  that  what  does  not  exist  in  a 
thing  can  never  appear  in  it.  Had  not  fire  existed  in  a  subtle  form  in 
everything  in  the  world,  all  things  would  not  have  been  combustible.  We 
must  therefore  understand  that  fire  exists  eternally  in  the  subtlest  form  in 
every  atom  of  any  object,  and  that  it  also  exists  in  a  subtle  form  in  the 
gross  body  of  any  object  (which  is  but  a  conglomeration  of  atoms),  per¬ 
meating  every  part  of  it.  For  this  reason  the  body  of  a  piece  of  wood 
composed  of  the  five  elements  should  also  be  considered  as  the  body  of 
one  of  those  elements — namely,  fire.  Similarly,  Paramatma,'  which  dwells 
in  all  things,  enters  and  exists  throughout  the  body  of  the  universe.1 , 
Tantra  has  therefore  said  that  he  cannot  worship  images  who  is  ignorant 
of  the  spiritual  knowledge,  that  “  She  exists  as  Sakti  in  even  vehicles, 
stones,  and  metals.”  Again,  £rimad  Bhagavata  has  said  images  are  of  eight 
kinds — namely,  those  made  of  stone,  wood,  iron,  vermilion,  sandal  paste, 
etc. ;  painted,  made  of  sand,  jewels,  and  mental.  “  At  the  time  of  wor¬ 
ship  a  Sadhaka  first  of  all  worships  the  mental  image  inwardly,1  and  then, 
after  communicating  the  spirit*  of  Brahman  within  him  to  the  image 
without,  commences  external  worship.  Again,  those  who  worship  yantras* 
without  an  image,  worship  the  mental  image  of  the  Dcvata.  This  is  the 
fundamental  principle*  relating  to  Her  eternal  presence  and  manifestation 
in  yantras  and  images.  For  those  who  do  not  understand  Her  omnipre¬ 
sence  and  this  communication  of  the  inward  spirit,  but  merely  think  to 
attain  liberation  by  the  simple  imagination  of  a  form  in  their  minds,  such 
liberation  is  but  a  dream.”  Sastra  has  therefore  said : 

"If  the  mere  imagination  of  forms  in  the  mind,  without  spiritual 
knowledge  and  sSdhana,  can  secure  liberation,  then  people  can  also- 
become  kings  by  receiving  kingdoms  in  dreams.” 

Along  with  the  contemplation  of  images  the  entire  fundamental  truth 
concerning  them  must  be  understood.  When  this  is  understood  it  must 


1  The  Supreme  Spirit. 

*  The  Brahman  is  in,  though  also  beyond,  the  Brahmanda. 

*  Literally,  "  in  inward  yajfia,”  as  to  which  see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra 

and  last  chapter.  4  Tejas — light,  force,  brilliance,  spirit. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra.  *  Tattva,  or  truths. 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 


231 


be  realized,1  and  then  the  spirit  must  be  communicated  to  the  external 
image,  when  the  process  of  giving  it  life  will  have  been  accomplished  *  It 
is  only  when  in  this  manner  the  Devata  has  been  established  that  the 
lustre  of  consciousness  of  Caitanyamayi  *  will  burst  through  that  earthly 
image  and  scatter  its  rays  around,  illuminating  the  heart  of  the  Sidhaka, 
filling  him  with  joy  and  liberating  his  soul  from  physical  existence.  The 
Sadhaka  will  find  this  subject 4  dealt  with  in  greater  detail  in  the  Chapter 
on  ordinary  worship. 

Preserving  the  former  sloka,®  in  the  form  of  a  sutra,®  Bhagavan  Him¬ 
self  has  explained  it  in  the  form  of  a  clear  vrtti : 1 

“Without  knowledge  men  cannot  attain  liberation,  even  though  they 
practise  severe  austerities  with  the  full  belief  that  images  made  of  earth, 
metals,  wood,  and  the  like  are  l£vara  Himself.” 

Ritual  action8  is  futile  if,  in  performing  it,  one  is  ignorant  of  the 
supreme  Truth  which  is  to  destroy  the  bonds  arising  from  action.  If  I  do 
not  know  by  what  process  this  earthen  image  which  I  worship  is  changed 
*  into  an  image  full  of  consciousness,  then  my  image  worship  is  nothing  but 
earth  worship.  Sastra  lias  therefore  said  that  without  knowledge  no  amount 
of  severe  austerities  will  enable  one  to  see  the  True  Form  of  Her  Who  is 
the  embodiment  of  all  spiritual  and  intellectual  knowledge.  It  is  the 
sight  of  Her  alone  which  frees  one  of  bondage.  He  who  is  devoid  of 
such  knowledge  is  therefore  not  qualified  to  worship  images.  Without 
knowledge  neither  asceticism  *  nor  enjoyment  of  worldly  pleasure  can  give 
liberation. 

To  illustrate  this  Bhagavan  has  said: 

“  If  performance  of  Karma 10  alone,  without  knowledge  of  the  Brahman, 
can  give  liberation,  then  those  who  by  fasting  have  reduced  themselves  to 
skeletons,  and  those  who,  through  gluttony,  have  become  big-bellied,  can 
gain  liberation  by  such  abstinence  and  indulgence.  But  in  truth  are  they 
really  liberated  ?  ”  “If  the  mere  performance  of  a  vow  to  live  on  air,  grass, 
broken  particles  of  rice,  or  water  alone  can  give  liberation,  then  serpents, 
beasts,  birds,  and  animals  of  the  waters  also  (who  live  on  such  things)  can 
be  liberated  (in  spite  of  the  absence  of  knowledge).” 

1  Literally,  “  made  Pratyaksa.”  There  are  four  kinds  of  proof,  according  to 
Nyaya,  and  three  according  to  Sarikhya.  The  latter  are:  (1)  Pratyaksa,  or  direct 
perception  by  the  mind  and  senses  of  sight,  smell,  touch,  taste,  and  sound;  (2) 
anumanam,  or  inference;  (3)  iabda-pramanam,  or  scriptural  proof;  to  which 
the  Nyaya  adds  (4)  upamana — that  is,  analogy  or  recognition  of  likeness. 

*  That  is,  the  pranaprati?ta  rite  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra) . 

*  The  Devi  Whose  substance  is  consciousness. 

4  Tattva.  *  Verse.  •  Aphorism. 

7  A  form  of  commentary. 

*  Karma.  •  Tapaaya. 

19  Ritual  action,  austerities,  alms-giving,  and  action  generally,  etc. 


252 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


There  are  four  different  forms  of  worship  called  “  states  *’  or  “  dis¬ 
positions,”  *  according  to  four  different  states  of  knowledge.  These  are: 
“  Seeing  the  Brahman  in  all  things ;  this  is  the  highest  form.*  Constant 
■contemplation 1 II  of  the  Devata  in  the  heart  is  the  middle„form.  Recitation  of 
mantras 4  and  saying  of  hymns  ‘  is  the  lowest  form,  and  mere  external 
worship 4  is  lower  than  these.” 

“  Perception  of  the  identity  of  Jivatma  and  Paramatma  is  Brahma- 
bhiva.  Concentration  of  mind  on  the  Devata  by  the  process  of  yoga  is 
dhyanabh&va.  Poja  as  the  bhava  which  arises  out  of  the  dualistic  idea  of 
the  servant  and  the  Lord,  the  worshipper  and  the  worshipped.  But  he 
who  knows  that  all  is  Brahman  needs  neither  yoga  nor  puja,  because  his 
competency  is  such  that  he  has  risen  above  both  the  bhavas  of  yoga  and 
puja.  For  him  there  is  neither  worshipper  nor  worshipped,  but  all  is 
Brahman.  In  his  sight  Jiva  and  Brahman,  I$vara  and  Sadhaka  are  not 
different  things.  Where  there  is  no  difference  between  two  things  there 
can  be  no  yoga,  nor  worship  of  the  one  by  the  other.  For  this  reason, 
hymn,  recitation  of  mantra,  contemplation,  concentration,  vows,  restraint,7 
and  the  like,  are  not  for  those  *  who  know  the  Brahman.  “  For  him  in 
whose  heart  the  highest  knowledge,  that  of  the  Brahman,  reigns,  recita¬ 
tion,  sacrifice,  austerities,  restraints,  vows,*  and  the  like  are  useless.”  They 
are  not  only  useless  for  him,  but  he  has  not  even  the  right  to  do 
ritual  acts. 

The  Sadhaka  will  now  gradually  see  who  is  such  a  knower  of 
Brahman.  “  The  Brahman,  who  is  the  embodiment  of  pure  knowledge 
and  bliss,  alone  is  true  ” — that  is,  without  Him  all  this  visible  world  is  but 
the  false  display  of  may  a.  “  Whoever  realizes  this  and  becomes  Brahman, 
for  him  there  is  no  longer  any  necessity  for  external  worship,  contempla¬ 
tion,  and  concentration.”  18 

“  I  am  Jiva.”  The  liberated  Mahapurusa  whose  heart  is  freed  from 
the  egoism  involved  in  this  saying  has  neither  sin,  nor  piety,  nor  heaven,*1 
nor  rebirth.  For  him  who  has  realized  that  all  is  Brahman  there  is 
neither  subject  for  meditation  nor  person  meditating,  neither  Jiva  to 
meditate  nor  Iivara  on  Whom  he  may  meditate. 


I  Bhava.  *  Ibid.  *  Dhylna  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstta) . 

4  Japa,  v.  ibid.  8  Suva.  *  Puja. 

7  Suva,  japa,  dhyana,  dharana,  vraU,  niyama  (acc  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra) . 
•  Literally,  “  are  beyond  the  adhikara  (competency).” 

•Japa,  Yajfia,  Tapa,  Niyama,  VraU  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra) . 

1*  Puja,  dhy&na,  and  dharana. 

II  Svarga. 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 


233 


“  This  Atma  is  always  free  and  unattached  to  any  objects.  In  what 
bondage  can  it  be  ?  Why,  then,  should  men  of  perverted  intellect  H^mand 
its  liberation  ?  ”  1 

“  The  Universe  is  composed  of  His  own  maya,  and  impenetrable  even 
to  the  intellect  of  Dcvas.  Atma  exists  as  one  who  has  entered  into  it 
.although  in  reality  He  docs  not  enter  into  it.” 

“  Just  as  space  exists  both  inside  and  outside  all  things,  so  Atma, 
whose  substance  is  consciousness,  shines  as  witness,  both  inside  and  outside 
all  things.” 

“  Atma  has  neither  birth,  boyhood,  youth,  nor  age.  It  is  ever  the 
same,  incorruptible,  and  is  consciousness.” 

“  Birth,  youth,  age,  and  the  like  belong  to  the  gross  body  alone. 
Atma  is  free  of  them.  Jivas  whose  intellect  are  obscured  by  maya  see 
this,  but  yet  seem  not  to  see  this.” 

“Just  as  the  one  sun  appears  as  many  (when  reflected)  in  the  water 
contained  in  a  vessel  (although  in  reality  the  sun  is  one  and  not  many), 
•  so  in  the  water  of  maya  contained  in  the  vessel  of  the  Jiva’s  gross  body 
Atma  appears  as  many  (although  in  reality  it  is  one  and  not  many).” 

“  As  when  the  lunar  orb  is  reflected  in  water  a  fool,  who  sees  the 
quivering  of  the  restless  ripples,  thinks  that  the  lunar  orb  itself  is  quivering, 
•so  those  who  are  destitute  of  true  knowledge,  on  seeing  the  resdessness  of 
intellect,  think  that  the  Atma  is  resdess.” 

“  As  when  a  cup  is  broken  the  space  contained  in  it  remains  the  same, 
so  even  when  the  body  is  destroyed  Atma  remains  the  same.” 

“  Devi,  when  Jlva  attains  this  supreme  knowledge  of  the  self  which 
alone  can  give  salvation,  he  is  liberated  even  in  this  world.  This  is  true, 
again  true,  and  without  a  doubt  true.” 

“  Neither  action,*  nor  charity,  nor  progeny  *  can  bring  liberation. 
Knowledge  of  the  Atma  by  the  Atma  can  alone  give  liberation  to  man.”  4 

“  Atma  is  the  dearest  of  all.  There  is  nothing  so  dear  as  the  Atma. 
O  consort  of  Siva!  all  other  things  (wife,  son,  and  the  like,  etc.)  become 
dear  because  of  their  relation  to  Atma.” 

“  Knowledge,  object  of  knowledge,  and  knower — this  threefold  division 
is  caused  by  maya.  If  wc  carefully  consider  the  nature  *  of  these  three, 
Atma  alone,  which  is  knowledge,  remains  in  the  end.” 

“  It  is  Atma  or  consciousness  who  is  knowledge,  it  is  Atma  who  is 
the  object  of  knowledge,  and  it  is  Atma  who  is  the  person  who  knows. 
He  who  knows  this  knows  the  truth.” 

1  That  is,  the  Atma  is  ever  free.  It  is  the  Buddhi  which  must  be  liberated 
from  the  bonds  which  obscure  this  actually  existing  freedom. 

*  Karma. 

*  That  is,  through  their  offering  of  the  pi$d&  in  die  obsequial  rites. 

4  Only  the  Atma  can  know  AtmS.  4  Tattva. 


234 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  I  have  thus  related  to  you  the  truth 1  about  knowledge,  the  direct 
cause  of  nirvapa  liberation.  This  is  the  highest  treasure  of  the  four 
classes  of  avadhutaa.”  1 

The  religious  healers,  of  whom  we  have  already  spoken,  quote  the 
following  four  41  okas  out  of  those  above-mentioned  as  strong  evidence  in 
support  of  their  theory  that  He  is  devoid  of  form:1 

“  He  alone  is  free  from  the  bonds  of  Karma  who  has  risen  above 
name  and  form  and  has  made  all  principles  and  things  rest  on  the  true 
immutable  Brahman.”  “He  is  undoubtedly  liberated  who  has  shaken 
off  all  notions  of  name  and  form  as  though  they  were  child’s  play,  and 
has  solely  devoted  himself  to  Brahman.”  “  If  forms  imagined  in  the  mind 
can  give  salvation  to  Jiva,  then  men  may  also  be  Kings  by  receiving 
kingdoms  in  dreams.”  “  Without  knowledge  men  cannot  attain  liberation 
even  though  they  practise  severe  austerities  with  the  full  belief  that  images 
made  of  earth,  metals,  wood,  etc.,  are  ISvara  Himself.” 

From  the  explanation  which,  along  with  those  £lokas  we  have  given 
of  their  meaning,  supported  by  consideration  of  the  context,  conclusion,  * 
and  object,  Sadhakas  will  understand  to  what  perversion  of  iastrik  con¬ 
clusions  the  wrong  interpretations  of  present  day  interpreters,  blinded  by 
selfishness,  lead.  Sastra  says  that  Jiva,  before  he  can  attain  liberation, 
must  forget  the  condition  of  Jiva  subject  to  maya,  assumed  by  Brahman 
in  the  maya-built  Brahmanda,  and  sink  himself  in  the  unity  of  Jiva  and 
Brahman,  which  it  is  the  purpose  of  all  great  sayings,  such  as  “  Thou  art 
It,”  to  establish.  Jiva  must  rise  above  all  names  and  forms  which 
are  the  object  of  dualistic  knowledge.  According  to  our  notion  of 
this  non-dualistic  perception  of  the  truth  *  we,  whilst  keeping  intact 
the  names  and  forms  of  our  own  selves  and  relatives  and  also  of 
the  whole  world,  consisting  of  moving  and  non-moving  things,  yet 
consider  it  to  be  the  pith  of  the  teaching  that  it  is  only  the  names  and 
forms  of  Devatas  which  are  false  and  that  these  only  should  be  abandoned.. 

I  fail  to  understand  the  necessity  for  such  hurry  in  doing  away  with  that 
particular  name  and  form  which  alone  will  endure,  whilst  keeping  those 
names  and  forms  which  will  prove  to  be  false.  It  is  as  though  a  great 


1  Those  who  have  renounced  the  world:  ascetics.  The  life  of  the  avadhuta 
is  the  Sannyairama  of  the  Kali  Yuga  (see  Mahanirvaaa  Tantra,  chap,  via, 
verse  2).  The  term  has  been  defined  as  follows: 

“  Aksaratvat  varenvatvSt  dhutasamsaravandhanat. 

Tattvamasyar  thaaiadhatvadavadhutobhidhiyate.  ” 

[An  avadhuta  is  so  called  on  account  of  his  being  possessed  of  undecaying 
greatness,  having  washed  off  the  bonds  of  samsSra  and  learnt  the  meaning  of 
(the  great  saying)  "  Thou  art  That.”] 

*  Nirakaravida. 


*  Tattva. 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 


235* 


famine  threatens  the  market  of  Brahmajnana 1 — a  famine  which  will  make 
all  things  so  dear,  that  whatever  purchase  be  now  made  will  then  be 
profitable.  I  do  not  want  to  deprive  them  of  this  profit.  What  I  am 
sorry  for  is  that  the  names  and  forms  which  constitute  the  bonds  of  sam- 
sara  remain,  whilst  the  names  and  forms  which  will  cut  those  bonds  is 
done  away  with.  Hearing  that  the  price  of  things  will  go  on  increasing 
our  purchasers  have  been  in  such  a  hurry  that  they  have  forgotten  to 
bring  even  the  wherewithal  to  make  purchases  at  the  outset.  Even  He  has 
been  forgotten  Whose  worship  gives  the  fruit  of  the  knowledge  of  Brahman. 

I  know  that  they  say:  “For  him  whose  nature,  has  become  Brahman  1 
there  is  no  longer  any  necessity  for  puja,  dhyana  and  dharana.”  We,  too, 
do  not  deny  this.  Sastra  has  said:  “  Whose  nature.”  That  is,  the  case  , 
of  the  man  who,  even  without  dhyana  and  the  like  remains  immersed  in 
Brahma-bliss  as  naturally  as  he  eats  or  sleeps.  For  one  who  has  thus 
become  Brahman  or,  in  other  words,  whose  condition  of  a  Jiva  has 
disappeared  and  been  converted  into  Brahman;  for  him  there  is  no  longer 
any  necessity  for  dhyana,  dharana,  and  puja.  But  through  our  ill-fortune 
it  has  nowadays  so  happened  that  a  number  of  persons  who,  by  nature, 
are  Brahma-ghosts,*  have  appeared  who  have  neither  dhyana,  nor  dharana, 
nor  puja,  nor  adoration.  The  words  of  the  Sastra  cannot  be  false.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  such  self-willed  people  who  pervert  the  true  meaning  of  the 
Sastra  have  no  right  to  dhyana,  dharana,  puja,  or  japa.  Consequently, 
these  things  do  not  exist  so  far  as  they  arc  concerned.  The  four  Slokas  on 
which  they  rely  arc  preceded  by  the  iloka :  “  From  Brahma  to  a  blade  of 
grass  everything  in  the  world  is  the  creation  of  maya,  and  Parabrahma 
alone  is  the  sole  truth.  When  this  knowledge  is  attained  Jiva  attains 
liberation.”  The  £loka:  “  Atma  is  witness,  omnipresent,  perfect,  true, 
without  a  second  and  higher  than  the  highest.  Atma  possesses  body  and 
yet  docs  not  possess  it.  Jiva  attains  liberation  when  he  realizes  this  truth,” 
is  in  the  midst  of  the  Slokas  cited.  The  following  Sloka  follows  them :  • 
“  If,  without  knowledge  of  Brahman,  performance  of  Karma  alone  can 
give  liberation,  then  such  men  as  are  reduced  to  skeletons  by  constant 
fasting,  and  such  men  as  become  big-bellied  by  excess  of  eating  may  be 
liberated  through  such  abstinence  and  indulgence.  But  are  they  really 
liberated  ?  ”  We  fail,  then,  to  understand  how  these  four  £lokas,  can  be 
put  forward  to  prove  that  “  Brahman  cannot  have  any  form,”  seeing  that 
they  relate  to  knowledge  of  Brahman.  Sastra  of  course,  says:  “From 
Brahma  to  a  blade  of  grass  everything  in  the  world  is  the  creation  of  may  3,. 

1  Knowledge  as  to  the  Brahman. 

*  Svabh&vfit  Brahmabhuta. 

*  The  reference  is  to  the  sect  of  Brahmos.  There  is  here  a  pun  on  the 
term,  “  bhfita,”  which,  used  as  a  suffix,  means  "  state,”  and  used  independently 
means  (among  other  things)  “  ghost  ”. 


236 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


-and  Parabrahman  alone  is  the  sole  truth,”  and  we,  too,  do  not  deny  this. 
But  in  the  world,  where  everything  from  Brahma  to  a  blade  of  grass  is  false, 
are  you  and  I— advocates  of  the  theories  of  Brahman  possessing  form,  and 
Brahman  being  formless  respectively — are  we  true?  If  this  word  “  false” 
means  non-existent,  then  you  and  I  too  do  not  exist.  I  admit  that 
spiritually  you  and  I  do  not  exist,  but  because  we  admit  it  do  we  really 
feel  it?  Is  it  possible  that  such  men  as  do  feel  it  question  whether 
Brahman  possesses  or  does  not  possess  form?  Where  you  and  I  turn 
out  false,  where  your  “  you-ness  ”  and  my  “  I-ness  ”  disappear,  two 
persons  cannot  exist.  And  where  two  do  not  exist,  with  whom  can  there 
be  argument  ?  Now,  will  the  dualistic  world  become  non-existent  because 
you  and  I  desire  it  to  be  so  ?  Sastra  has  said  everything  from  Brahma  to 
a  blade  of  grass  is  false;  but  the  question  is,  whether  we  have  ever  been 
able  to  make  even  a  single  blade  of  grass  false  as  the  Sastra  says  ?  If  we 
have  not,  why  do  wc,  who  have  not  the  power  to  do  away  with  a  blade  of 
grass,  presume  to  do  away  with  Brahma?  Do  we  feel  ashamed  even  to 
think  of  this?  Why,  the  very  &astra  which  is  invoked  to  do  away  with 
the  existence  of  Devas  and  Devis,  who  are  Brahmas  with  forms,  that  very 
Sastra  itself  says:  “  From  Brahma  to  a  blade  of  grass.”  If  Brahman  does 
not  take  form,  whence  comes  this  Brahma?  And  if  it  is  “  from  Brahman  ” 
instead  of  “from  Brahma,”  then  everything  vanishes,  and  nothing 
remains  as  true. 

Sastra  is  the  command  of  Devata.  For  JIvas  it  contains  ordinances 
and  teachings.  Because  it  has  said  that  the  world  is  false  you  and  I 
cannot  beat  time  to  that  tune  and  dance.  The  speaker  of  Sastra  is 
Bhagavan,  who  dwells  in  all  things,  and  is  above  raaya.  Its  hearer  is 
Mahejvari.  She  who  dwells  in  all  things  is  turiya-caitanya 1  incarnate, 
and  governs  universal  maya.  To  them  the  falsity  of  the  world  is  a  matter 
of  direct  perception;  but  to  you  and  me  it  is  Brahma-tattva,*  attainable 
only  by  age-long  Sadhana,  and  beyond  the  reach  of  mind  and  speech. 
What  the  result  of  a  battle  will  be  is  the  concern  of  the  King  or  Queen; 
the  soldier’s  only  duty  is  to  start  for  war  immediately  on  receiving  an 
order  to  do  so.  The  King  and  Queen  know  that  in  this  war  their  victory 
is  inevitable,  so  that  in  their  conversation  on  the  subject  they  can  express 
satisfaction  and  joy.  But  if,  on  hearing  this  conversation,  their  soldiers 
were  to  think,  “  Since  victory  is  inevitable  what  is  the  use  of  fighting?  ” 
and  were  to  give  themselves  up  to  rejoicing,  it  is  most  likely  that  the 
banner  of  triumph  would  fly  in  the  dust.  You  say:  “  Mahadeva  has  said 
that  the  world  is  false;  why,  then,  should  I  worship  and  adore  names  and 


1  As  to  the  turlya  state  of  consciousness,  see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra 
and  ante. 

1  The  truth  concerning  the  Brahman. 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 


23? 


forms?”  If;  with  this  idea  that  the  world  is  nothing  but  Brahman, 
S&dhaias  were  to  give  up  performing  worship  and  ritual,1  the  kind  of 
Brahma-knowledge  which  will  be  attained,  and  is,  in  fact,  being  nowadays 
attained,  is  not  worth  mentioning.  Veda  has  said:  “  When  everything  in 
relation  to  a  Jlva  has  been  unified  with  Brahman  what  will  he  then  sec, 
what  will  he  hear,  what  will  he  smell,  etc.,  and  with  what?  ”  That  is  to 
say,  where  mind,  intellect,  body,  senses,  and  everything  else  is  Brahman, 
then  worship  and  ritual 1  is  impossible.  It  is  of  no  use  to  sec  Brahman,  to 
hear  Brahman,  etc.,  with  Brahman.  The  author  of  Vedanta  Paribh£§il 
concludes:  “  Although  the  world  is  false,  it  is  not  false  to  those  who  are 
in  the  samsara.”  That  is  to  say,  a  dream  is  not  false  when  a  person  sees 
it.  Had  dreams  been  false  when  seen,  why  should  we  have  cried  with 
terror  at  the  sight  of  tigers  in  dreams  ?  Sruti,  again,  says  as  the  result  of 
a  spurious  perception  of  a  dualistic  world,  Jiva  becomes  instantly  sepa¬ 
rated  from  Brahman  and  sees  the  world  in  a  separate  aspect  Philo¬ 
sophers  have  therefore  said  as  follows:  Although  the  notion  that 
the  body  is  the  Self  is  spiritually  false,  it  is  yet  deemed  an  established 
fact  from  the  worldly  point  of  view — that  is  to  say,  people  consider  the 
body  to  be  the  Self  and  say :  “  I  have  become  thin,  I  have  become 
fat,  I  have  been  cured,  I  am  ill,  etc.”;  yet  Atma,  which  is  nothing 
but  existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss,  is  neither  thin  nor  fat,  diseased 
nor  cured,  but  is  ever  free  from  change  or  corruption,  joy,  sorrow,  disease, 
grief,  thinness,  fatness,  etc.,  which  are  conditions  of  the  body  alone.  Just 
as  people  consider  the  body  to  be  that  Atma,  and  consider  all  these 
conditions  to  be  established  facts  in  the  worldly  state,  so  the  dualistic 
world,  though  in  fact  false,  must  yet,  so  long  as  Brahman  is  not  perceived 
in  all  things,  be  considered  as  an  established,  separately-existing  fact. 
We  know  that  the  sun  always  rises  in  the  east;  still,  if  we  go  to  a  new 
place,  it  appears  that  the  sun  is  rising  in  the  west,  north,  or  south.  Just 
as,  in  spite  of  knowing  the  truth  in  this  matter  and  disbelieving  the 
opposite,  we  become  firmly  convinced  that  that  opposite  itself  is  really 
true;  just  as  this  mistake  in  the  matter  of  the  direction  or  the  sun’s  rising 
is  inevitable,  so  this  false  perception  of  the  dualistic  world  also  is  inevit¬ 
able.  We  cannot  be  asked  as  a  favour  to  accept  the  dualisdc  world  as 
an  established  fact.  Until  this  dream  of  maya  is  dispelled,  until  the 
bonds  of  Karma  are  destroyed,  until  the  idea  of  difference  between 
“  you  and  me  ”  disappears,  Jiva  cannot  but  have  faith  in  this  dualistic 
universe,  call  it  false,  a  dream,  or  fancy,  as  you  may.  The  influence  of 
Karma,  the  force  of  action,  will  compel  me,  even  against  my  own  will, 
to  believe  in  it.  Just  as  a  weak  fish  caught  in  a  net  in  water  can  never 
pass  outside  the  net,  however  much  it  may  move  about  inside  it,  so  the 


1  Karma. 


2S8 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


worldly  JIva  caught  in  the  maya  of  the  samsara  can  never  sever  the 
bonds  of  maya  and  enter  into  the  unfathomable  depth  of  Brahmatattva 
,  outside  of  maya.  Just  as,  in  spite  of  being  in  water,  the  fish  is  prevented 
from  moving  out  by  the  bondage  of  the  net,  so,  in  spite  of  being  in  the 
universe  full  of  Brahman,  Jlva  is  prevented  by  the  bondage  of  maya 
from  entering  freely  into  that  Blissful  Presence.  Living  in  this  duahstie 
world,  you  and  I,  m&yik  Jivas,  are,  therefore,  bound  to  believe  in  it  as  a 
.  constant  reality  even  against  our  will,  although  it  is  in  fact  not  so. 

Every  worshipper  is  actuated  by  an  earnest  desire  to  know  the 
nature 1  of  his  real  self;  but  the  existence  of  the  desire  does  not  bring 
.  about  its  fulfilment  for  all.  It  is  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  desire 
that  sadhana  is  required.  Without  sadhana  it  can  never  be  fulfilled.  A 
.  child  in  the  womb  may,  of  course,  form  a  desire  to  sec  its  mother,  but 
so  long  as  it  is  in  the  womb  it  is  impossible  for  it  to  do  so.  The  desire 
can  be  fulfilled  only  for  that  child  who  has  fortunately  been  safely  bom. 
Similarly,  it  is  impossible  for  people  living  in  Mahamaya’s  maya-womb 
of  this  universe  to  see  that  beautiful  appearance  of  Hers  which  charms 
the  heart  of  the  conqueror  of  Death.1  He  who  has,  by  the  accumulation 
of  religious  merits  in  many  births,  been  delivered  from  the  sheath  of  the 
womb  of  maya  of  the  Mother  of  the  Universe,  he  alone  is  a  fit  child  to 
see  the  Brahma-form  of  the  Brahmamayi.  It  is  only  such  a  child  who 
truly  has  the  right  to  suck  that  milk  from  the  breast  of  Brahmamayi, 
which  even  Brahma  and  other  Devas  rarely  obtain.  He  alone  may  share 
Her  assuring  lap  with  Kartika  and  GaneSa.  If,  however,  on  seeing  the 
pains  of  austere  Sadhana  practised  by  any  of  Her  children,  the  merciful 
Mother  should  gratify  him;  if  She,  who  dwells  in  the  heart  of  the 
Lord  of  Yogis,*  should  rend  the  deep  darkness  of  the  black  night  *  in 
Her  womb  by  the  mass  of  light  issuing  from  Her  black,  cloudlike  appear¬ 
ance,  which  dispels  the  fear  of  death  and  Herself  appear  in  the  heart  of 
the  child  lying  in  yoga  in  her  womb;  if  She  cuts  the  bonds  of  samsara- 
maya  with  the  sharp  edge  of  Her  own  maya  sword  and  takes  the  devoted 
s3dhaka  up  on  Her  lap — then  also  in  such  a  case  know  that  this  is  done 
as  the  inevitable  fruit  of  much  austere  sadhana  practised  in  many 
previous  births,  and  that  none  of  these  things  have  been  accomplished 
without  sadhana.  It  is  a  domain  which  none  can  reach  but  through  real 
sadhana.  Although  the  desire  for  going  out  may  be  strong,  yet  the  door 
of  the  room  in  which  Jiva  is  shut  is  not  within  his  reach.  The  utmost  that 
Jiva  can  do  is  to  lie  down  on  the  bed  of  maya  and  weep  ;  but  it  is  Mother 
alone  who  can  open  the  door.  Jiva  can  only  weep  loudly  and  awaken 
the  Mother.  By  virtue  of  austere  sadhana  the  Sadhaka  can  awaken  Mother 


1  Tattva.  *  Mj-tyunjaya,  or  Siva. 

*  Mahadeva;  Siva.  4  Kalaratri. 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 


239 


Kulakurwjalim, 1  sleeping  in  the  Muladh&ra*  If  She  rises  and  opens  the 
•door  of  Brahmarandhra,’  then  alone  may  JIva  come  forth  ;  otherwise  all 
worship  and  adoration  are  but  a  crying  in  the  wilderness.  The  siddhi, 
which  is  attained  in  S&dhana  by  the  piercing  of  the  six  chakras,’  is 
never  attained  by  Jiva  whilst  he  is  crushed  by  the  wheels  of  the  Samsara. 

Secondly,  it  is  not  within  the  province  of  Jiva  to  say  whether  Brahman 
has  or  has  not  name  and  form  and  even  if  he  speaks  none  will  hear  him, 
for  the  matter4  is  beyond  the  knowledge  and  intellectual  perception  of 
Jiva.  Our  belief  and  unbelief  in  this  world  are  due  merely  to  the  fact 
that  what  we  believe  has  been  stated,  and  what  we  disbelieve  has  been 
denied,  by  a  Sastra,  which  is  revealed  and  not  of  human  origin.  The 
point  is  this  :  the  very  Sastra  which  says  that  Brahman  has  no  name  and 
no  forms  also  says,  “  From  Brahman  to  a  blade  of  grass  everything  in  the 
world  is  the  creation  of  maya.”  If  the  practical  existence  of  a  thing  could 
be  done  away  with  by  the  mere  statement  that  it  is  the  creadon  of  maya, 
why,  then,  docs  this  world,  consisting  of  moving  and  non-moving  things, 
exist? 

The  world  is  not  a  thing  imperceptible  to  Jiva,  If  it  is  perfectly  true 
that  in  the  world  created  by  mSya  even  a  blade  of  grass  can  exist,  we  are 
unable  to  understand  what  it  is  which  makes  the  existence  of  Brahma  in  it 
impossible.  If,  by  a  far-fetched  interpretation,*  it  is  said  that  the  root 
word  Brahman  here  does  not  refer  to  fourheaded  and  red-coloured 
Brahma  possessing  a  body,  there  is  an  end  of  the  matter.  If  even  formless 
and  attribute! CSS  Brahman  becomes  the  creation  of  maya  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  false  along  with  a  blade  of  grass,  then  what  remains  as  the  true 
Brahman  ?  To  cut  the  branch  of  a  tree  on  which  one  sits  ;  to  do  away  with 
formless  Brahman  in  endeavouring  to  dispense  with  Brahman  possessing 
form  is  a  Kalidasa*  kind  of  intelligence  which  will  produce  an  inevitable 
fall  for  the  interpreter.  In  this  connection  we  have  nothing  to  say  but  to 
give  a  warning.  It  is  on  the  authority  of  that  Sastra  we  say  that  Brahma 
is  included  in  the  world,  so  that  Brahma  will  exist  so  long  as  the  world 
■exists,  or  the  world  will  exist  so  long  as  Brahma  exists.  As  the  world  is 
not  false  to  you  and  me,  in  spite  of  its  being  the  creation  of  maya,  so 
Brahma  and  other  Devatas  also  are  not  false  to  Sadhakas. 

Thirdly,  if,  in  spite  of  its  being  untenable  according  to  reasoning, 
argument,  and  authority,  we  were  to  accept  the  interpretation  of  the 
followers  of  the  theory  that  fevara  is  formless  and  to  say  that  Brahman 

1  Vide  ante  and  Introduction  to  Tantra  tidstra.  *  See  Introduction  to  Tanlra  f&stra. 

*  Satcakrabheda  ( vide  ante). 

4  T  attva.  4  Adhyatmik,  in  the  sense  of  untrue. 

*  Kalidasa,  the  great  poet,  is  said  to  have  been  in  his  early  years  such  a  fool 
in  practical  matters  as  to  have  attempted  to  cut  down  the  branch  of  a  tree 
whilst  sitting  on  it 


240 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


has  really  no  name  and  form,  then  also  there  is  no  escape.  If  Brahman- 
has  no  name  and  form,  who  is  it,  then,  that  says,  “  Brahman  has  no  name 
and  form  ”  ?  The  speaker  of  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra  is  Sad&iiva  and  the  per¬ 
son  spoken  to  is  Adyaiakti,  both  being  the  Brahman  with  names  and  forms. 
Sastra  says:  “MaheSvara  has  introduced  the  Tantras  by  means  of  questions- 
and  answers.  Himself  taking  the  places  both  of  Guru  (teacher)  and  Si?ya 
(pupil)” — that  is  to  say,  in  Agama  the  Devi  has  put  questions  as  disciple 
and  Mahadeva  has  answered  them  as  guru,  and  in  Nigama  Mahadeva 
Himself  has  asked  questions  as  disciple,  and  the  Devi  has  replied  as  Gum;, 
or,  in  aspect  inseparable  from  the  Devi,  the  Deva  Himself  has,  in  both 
places,  revealed  the  Tantras  both  as  guru  and  pupil.  If  Brahman  has  no 
name  and  form,  then  this  Deva  and  this  Devi  become  false;  and  if  the 
Deva  and  the  Devi  become  false,  how  can  the  Tantra  Sastra  remain  true? 
Tantra  is  the  most  glorious  of  all  Sastras  because  it  is  the  word  of  Maha¬ 
deva  and  Mahadevl.  If  to-day  that  Deva  and  Devi,  the  speakers  of 
Tantra,  turn  out  to  be  false,  where  then  is  the  glory  and  authority  of 
Tantra?  If  Tantra  is  not  the  command  of  Devata  it  may  be  easily 
explained  away  as  the  mistaken  word  of  man  and,  consequently,  unworthy 
of  respect.  No  one  will  then  bow  his  head  to  the  authority  of  the  Maha- 
nirvapa  Tantra.  If  the  follower  of  the  theory  of  Brahman  possessing  no 
form  says  that  he  docs  not  believe  that  Brahman  has  name  and  form,  the 
follower  of  the  theory  of  Brahman  possessing  form  will  instantly  reply  that 
he  has  no  faith  in  the  authority  of  Mahanirvapa  Tantra.  Thus  all  dis¬ 
cussion  and  reasonings  will  cease,  all  interpretations  will  be  useless,  and 
all  authorities  and  evidence  will  be  of  no  value.  I  therefore  say,  where 
there  is  no  means  of  defending  one’s  own  side,  it  is  the  height  of  folly  to 
try  to  serve  one’s  purpose  by  tricks. 

Another  thing.  If  in  discussion  a  position  of  authority  must  be 
assigned  to  Sastra  everything  which  is  said  in  it  should  be  accepted  as 
correct.  If  a  sadhaka  abandons  the  worship  of  images  and  takes  to- 
dhy£na  and  dharapa  alone,  then  the  mental  image  formed  by  him  in  his 
mind  becomes  the  object  of  his  dhyana  and  adoration.  If  an  image  im¬ 
agined  in  the  mind  is  supposed  to  be  unable  to  give  liberation,  then  there 
is  no  reason  why  dhyana  and  dharapa 1  without  image  worship  should 
give  it,  because  in  that  dhyana  also  the  sadhaka  has  to  depend  on  a  mental 
image.  And  if  dhyana  docs  not  bring  liberation,  then  Devarsis,  Maha- 
ygis,  Rajahs,*  Yogis  and  Munis  *  are  mere  fools,  who  waste  their  days  in 
useless  labour.  Accomplished  great  sadhakas  also  become  deprived  of 
aiddhi.  Moreover,  why  in  that  case  should  the  Mahanirvapa  Tantra  have 
said:  “The  dhyanabhava  is  the  middle  form  of  worship ”?  Who  says- 


1  Meditation  and  concentration  of  mind  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra) . 
*  Classes  of  R$is,  or  seen.  1  Adepts  in  yoga  and  sages. 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 


241 


that  only  the  four  Slokas  of  the  Mahanirvaz^a  Tantra,  referred  to  above, 
are  worthy  of  being  considered  as  authority  and  the  rest  of  the  book, 
consisting  of  two  voluminous  parts — Uttar akhagda  and  PurvakhS^a— 
is  erroneous?  If  this  Tantra  is  correct,  then  the  whole  of  it  must  be 
correct;  if  incorrect,  then  the  whole  of  it  must  be  incorrect.  What  sort 
of  impartial  judgment  is  it  to  consider  only  four  Slolcas  which  are  to  one’s 
liking  as  correct  and  all  the  rest  incorrect?  I  take  out  four  palmfuls  of 
water  from  the  Ganges  and  consider  that  small  quantity  of  water  as 
Brahmamayl  Ganga,  who  dwells  in  Brahma’s  Kamandalu,1  and  all  the 
rest  of  the  stream  flowing  in  an  irresistible  current  from  the  Himalaya  to  the 
sea,  as  but  ditch-water.  What  sort  of  faith  is  this  ?  The  Mahanirvana  Tantra 
deals  with  VarnaSrama,1  Yugadharma,*  Yogatattva,1  the  six  Gakras,4 
politics,  Vyavahara  dharma,*  Sadhana  dharma,7  creation,  preservation, 
and  destruction,  the  divisions  of  the  Brahmaijda>8  the  fourteen  worlds,* 
seven  svargas,*  and  seven  patalas,10  names,  seats,  and  worships  of  Dev  as 
and  Devis,  the  divya,  vlra,  and  paiu  forms  of  worship,11  Mantras  10  and 
Yantras 10  of  Devat&s,  the  consecration  of  temples  and  images,  the  various 
kinds  of  liberation,1*  and  with  a  whole  mass  of  rules  and  regulations  on 
various  other  subjects. 

To  consider  the  statements  contained  in  the  book  on  all  these  subjects 
to  be  incorrect  with  the  exception  of  four  Slokas,  and  these  only  subject  to 
a  wrong  and  perverse  interpretation,  is  not  judgment  but  treachery, 
intense  selfishness,  lawlessness,1*  or  the  raving  of  a  madman.  Everywhere 
the  Sadhana  dharma  has  been  classified  under  the  three  distinct  sections 
of  Karma,  Jfiana,  and  Bhakti,  whether  according  to  Tantra  or  Veda  or 
Purapa.14  According*  to  this  system  Bhagavan  has,  in  the  Mahanirvana 
Tantra,  given  instructions  in  the  Jfiana  division  after  purification  of  the 
mind  by  performance  of  Karma.  It  is  from  these  instructions,  when 
handled  by  the  senseless  interpreters  of  the  present  day,  that  all  this 
scepticism,  by  which  nothing  is  gained  but  everything  is  lost,  arises.  Just 


1  A  vessel  carried  by  ascetics.  *  Caste  system  and  rules. 

*  The  peculiar  characteristics  and  Dharma  of  the  different  ages. 

4  Science  and  art  of  Yoga. 

B  Centres  in  the  body  which  are  dealt  with  in  works  on  Tantrik  yoga 
(see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra) . 

*  Law.  1  Rules  relating  to  Sadhana  {Introduction  to  Tantra  Rostra). 

*  Universe.  •  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 

10  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

11  Suited  to  the  three  classes  of  men. 

11  Mukti,  which  is  not  gained  at  one  step. 

18  Svecchha — that  is,  acting  according  to  own  will,  and  not  according  to 
law  or  rule. 

14  Action  (including  ritual),  knowledge,  and  devotion. 

16 


242 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


as  milk  put  into  the  mouth  of  a  naturally  venomous  snake  is  turned 
into  poison,  so  Sastra,  handled  by  selfish  persons  who  are  naturally 
faithless,  gives  rise  to  such  scepticism.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  not  the 
case  that  those  who  arc  determined  thus  to  ruin  the  Aryan  society  by 
wrong  interpretations  of  Sastra  are  themselves  unaware  of  their  own 
treachery;  but  although  they  are  aware  of  it  the  selfishness  of  the  weak 
human  heart  prevents  them  from  acting  according  to  that  knowledge. 
What  they  know  remains  within  them,  and  what  they  try  to  make 
illiterate  and  foolish  villagers  understand  is  something  quite  different. 
Nowadays  we  can,  in  speaking  of  them,  merely  use  the  expression 
“  double-tongued,”  one  tongue  being  within  and  another  without.  But 
we  can  dare  say  that  had  an  Aryan  Prince  now  ruled  the  country  the 
tongues  of  such  interpreters  would  forthwith  have  been  actually  made 
double.1 * * 4 

Again:  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  he  should  always  speak  ill  of 
that,  the  excellent  virtues  of  which  he  has  no  knowledge;  just  as  a 
huntswoman  throws  away  the  pearl  which  is  formed  in  the  heads  of. 
elephants  and  adorns  herself  with  a  garland  of  berries,1  Aryan  poets  have, 
therefore,  said  that  such  things  should  not  be  regretted,  for  what  one  has 
no  power  to  comprehend  one  neglects  but  does  not  dishonour.  “  The 
nose  alone  smells  the  fragrance  of  Mallika  and  Malati  flowers  and  not  the 
eye.”  The  eye  does  not,  however,  commit  any  offence  thereby;  it  is 
merely  devoid  of  the  power  of  smelling.  Similarly,  should  a  person  (who 
has  yet  to  await  many  births  before  he  acquires  that  Jnana  and  Bhakti 
and  purity  of  mind  which  befit  one  for  the  worship  of  images)  say  that 
worship  of  images  is  a  mistake,  he  must  not  be  undemood  to  commit  any 
offence  or  to  deserve  any  punishment.  In  fact,  he  is  an  object  of  pity 
to  the  public,  for  Bhagavan  has  not  yet  granted  him  the  power  to 
comprehend  the  deep  and  solemn  truth 1  relating  to  the  worship  of  images 
of  the  Deity.  It  should  be  understood  that  although  he  is  a  manava 
(man)  in  outward  appearance,  internally  he  is  still  imperfect  in  mSna- 
vatva.*  He  is  still  a  stranger  in  the  human  world  only  just  elevated  from 
the  lower  stratum  of  being.  However  that  may  be,  wayfarers  need  be 
warned  before  giving  moral  advice  to  a  highway  robber.  All  this  argu¬ 
ment  should  be  postponed  and  first  of  all  society  should  be  warned. 
Fortunately,  the  robbers  have,  by  their  inopportune  howling,  made  them¬ 
selves  known,  and  wayfarers  have  recognized  their  voice.  The  Aryan 

1  Their  tongues  would  have  been  slit  for  their  heresy. 

*  Gunja,  a  red  blackberry,  used  by  goldsmiths  in  India  as  a  small  weight 

*  Tattva. 

4  The  proper  state  of  a  descendant  of  Manu  or  Humanity.  As  some  one 
has  remarked,  the  bulk  of  human  beings  now  existing  can  only  be  said  to  be 
candidates  for  true  humanity. 


WORSHIP  OF  DEVATAS 


243 


society  has  for  some  time  discovered  the  hidden  purpose  of  these  inter¬ 
pretations  of  the  Sastra.  The  Mother  of  the  world,  the  subduer  of 
Daityas,1 * *  has  appeared  in  the  hearts  of  devotees  and  saved  the  world 
from  these  Daityas  of  Kali  Yuga.  At  that  part  of  the  Srimad  Bhagavata 
■where  Bhagavan,  the  dispeller  of  the  fear  of  existence,  in  dealing  with 
sadhana  dharma,*  discusses  with  Uddhava,  the  Prince  of  devotees,  the 
■subject  *  of  devotees,  He  says : 

“  TIrthas  4  consisting  of  water  are  not  such  tirthas ;  images  of  Devas 
made  of  earth  and  of  stone  are  not  such  Devas  as  sadhus  5  are,  for  tirthas 
consisting  of  water  and  images  of  Devas  made  of  earth  and  stone  purify 
■sinners  after  long  service  and  worship,  whilst  sadhus  possess  such  wonderful 
power  that  their  sight  alone  sanctifies  Jlva.” 

“  He  who  worships  my  image  without  (through  illusion)  knowing 
me,  as  Atma-I&vara,  the  dweller  in  all  things,  merely  pours  oblations 
into  ashes.”  4 

The  aforesaid  healers  consider  these  two  Slokas  also  as  evidence  in 
•  favour  of  the  theory  of  the  Deity  possessing  no  form.  From  the  first 
•£loka  they  glean  that  tirthas  consisting  of  water  are  not  tirthas  at  all,  and 
images  of  Devas  made  of  earth  are  not  Devas  at  all.  But,  I  ask,  had  it 
been  so,  why  should  it  be  said  that  they  purify  after  a  long  time  ?  By  what 
power  can  a  tlrtha  which  is  not  a  tirtha,  and  a  Deva  who  is  not  a  Deva, 
purify  Jlva  even  after  long  service?  When  Bhagavan  has  said  that  they 
purify  if  they  arc  long  served,  the  iloka  must  be  understood  to  mean  that 
the  power  of  purification  which  pious  devotees  possess  is  greater  than  that 
■of  tirthas  and  images  of  Devatas.  Purification  by  tirthas  and  images  of 
Devas  depends  on  long  service  and  worship  by  Jlva,  but  this  is  not  needed 
to  gain  purification  by  the  gracious  look  of  devotees  who  freely  dispense 
their  mercy.  We  arc  confident  that  sadhakas  will  forgive  the  thieves  who 
possess  so  little  intelligence  and  cunning  as  to  proceed  to  commit  theft 
in  the  first  and  second  parts  of  a  verse,  in  the  third  of  which  they  are 
•delected. 

Again,  from  the  second  &loka  they  have  gathered  that  those  who 
worship  images  instead  of  praying  in  this  fashion,  “  ISvara,  who  dwells 
in  all  things,”  merely  pour  oblations  into  ashes.  We  regret  to  say  that 
the  thought  of  this  illustration  in  connection  with  such  an  illustrator 

1  Demons. 

*  The  rules  relating  to  Sadhana.  For  Dharma,  see  Introduction  to  Tantra 
■Sdstra. 

*  Lit. :  “  states  the  tattva.” 

4  Places  of  pilgrimage,  such  as  K&JIgh&t,  Gaya.  K&makhya,  Puri,  etc.  The 
•esoteric  tirthas  are  in  the  human  body  itself. 

4  Saintly  men. 

4  That  is,  he  does  what  is  useless;  for  oblation  should  be  poured  into  fire. 


244 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


induces  us  to  smile  as  well  as  puts  us  to  shame.  Why  do  such  men 
as  have  no  faith  in  puji,  japa,  stava,  and  homa 1  make  use  of  the 
illustration  of  pouring  oblations  into  ashes?  It  is  because  oblations 
are  actually  poured  into  fire  that  the  expression  “pouring  oblations 
into  ashes  ”  means  the  contrary  thing.  To  pour  oblations  into  fire 
is  an  act  of  worship  towards  an  embodied  Deity.  If  this  worship  of 
embodied  Deity  is  itself  a  mistaken  act,  whence  comes  this  illustration 
drawn  from  homa?  However  that  may  be,  Bhagavan  has  said  that 
whoever  worships  His  image  without  the  knowledge  that  He  dwells  in  all 
things  and  is  AtmS  and  ISvara,  merely  pours  oblations  into  ashes,  because 
without  the  knowledge  that  He  is  in  all  things,  sentient  as  well  as  non- 
sentient,  how  can  one  believe  in  His  existence  in  that  image  and  in  the 
possibility  of  the  invocation  of  His  life  into  it,  and  the  like?  In  other 
words,  whoever  has  not  the  knowledge  that  He  is  Brahman  without  dis¬ 
tinctions  is  even  totally  unfit  for  image  worship.  The  import  of  the 
Hoka,  therefore,  comes  to  this,  that  without  knowledge  of  Brahman, 
image-worship  is  of  no  avail;  but  by  virtue  of  the  pernicious  influence  of 
the  present  time  it  has  come  to  mean  that  whoever  worships  images 
merely  pours  oblations  into  ashes.  Great  man!  keep  your  interpretation 
to  yourself.  Do  not,  with  an  uncalled-for  generosity,  come  forward  to 
preach  that  to  people  which  will  make  them  as  poor  as  street  beggars.  Do 
not,  I  pray,  any  longer  create  mischief  in  the  name  of  interpretation. 


1  Worship,  recitation,  hymn  and  fire-sacrifice  (homa)  (see  Introduction  to- 
T antra  Sdstra). 


CHAPTER  VII 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI  ? 1 

Here,  in  the  course  of  the  present  discussion,  it  has  become  necessary  to 
decide  a  few  points  about  Sakti-tattva.  Whether  because  of  the  parti¬ 
cular  age  we  live  in,  or  of  sectarianism,  there  exist  in  Bengal  a  number  of 
leaders,  or  pseudo-leaders,  of  the  religious  community  who  think  and 
preach  that  they  alone  and  a  few  other  persons  belonging  to  their  com¬ 
munity  and  holding  their  views  are  learned  in  all  Sastras,  competent 
to  pass  judgment  on  all  Tattvas  and  Diksa-gurus  of  sadhakas  *  belong¬ 
ing  to  all  communities.  We  know  not  by  what  curse  of  Bhagavan 
they  consider  it  a  great  sin,  for  which  there  is  no  atonement,  to 
believe  that  Bhagavan  and  Bhagavati  are  one  and  the  same  being,  nor 
why  they  look  down  with  hatred  and  disgust,  even  as  though  their 
touch  were  polluting  as  that  of  hell-worms,  on  all  persons  who  entertain 
such  a  belief.  Such  conduct  by  men  towards  their  fellow-beings  is  not 
altogether  impossible;  but  there  is  no  escape  for  even  Devatas,  no 
pardon  for  even  fsvara,  from  them.  A  little  inquiry  in  confidence 
will  reveal  to  Sadhakas  that  in  most  places  these  people,  being  them¬ 
selves  Vaisnavas,  first  worship  Sri  Kj-sija,  and  then  offer  to  Sri  Radhika 
the  articles  already  offered  to  Him.  The  reason  for  their  doing  so  is  that 
$ri  Krsna,  who  holds  all  Sakti,  is  Lord  and  Sri  Radhika,  who  is  Sakti 
Herself,  is  His  handmaid,  and  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  handmaid  to 
partake  of  the  leavings  of  Her  Lord’s  food,  leavings  which  are  tokens  of 
His  favour  and,  consequently,  precious  and  particularly  dear  to  Her. 
The  honour  of  Radhika,  however,  is  thus  in  a  fashion  maintained,  because 
She  is  the  companion  or,  at  least,  handmaid  of  Sri  Kr$na.  But  the  case 
of  Gayatri,  who  is  single,  is  different.  Had  She  been  the  companion  of 
any  Deva  they  could  easily  have  included  Her  in  the  same  class  with 
Radhika;  but  Gayatri,  the  Mother  of  the  three  Vedas,  and  the  progenitrix 


1  Sakti-tattva.  Sakti  is  that  which  makes  able,  or  that  Power  by  virtue  of 
which  things  happen  or  act  (see  post).  That  power  belongs  to,  or  more  properly 
is,  the  Brahman,  and  is  of  various  kinds,  as  to  which  see  following  pages. 

*  That  is,  gurus  who  initiate:  and  other  matters  relating  to  sadhakas. 


246 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


of  the  triad  of  Devas,1  is  no  one’s  companion,  and  thus  there  is  no  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  call  Her  anyone’s  handmaid.  For  this  reason  they  have  altogether 
abandoned  Gayatri,  considering  Her  to  be  “  bare  Sakti  Bom  in  the  line 
of  Brahma,  these  people  yet  think  that  it  is  a  great  sin  to  repeat  Gayatri 
or  even  to  admit  that  She  is  Brahman  or  ISvara,  and  consider  that  it  is 
improper  to  divulge  to  the  public  this  intense  secret  devotion  in  the  store 
of  sadhana.  It  is  only  with  a  view  to  keeping  up  social  and  family  custom 
and  distinction  of  caste  in  the  sight  of  others  that  Brahmana  Purohitas  * 
are  called  in,  as  a  formal  matter,  to  invest  their  children  with  the  sacred 
thread.*  If,  unable  to  make  time  himself,  the  Purohita  requests  the  father 
or  grandfather  of  the  invested  boy  to  teach  him  Sandbya 4  and  Gayatri,1 * 
it  is  often  found  that  the  greatest  difficulty  arises. 

Besides  this,  there  are  a  few  philosophical*  pandits  who  say  that 
worship  of  Sakti  is  not  directly  worship  of  Brahman.  In  their  opinion 
such  an  inference  is  not  even  contrary  to  the  teaching  of  Sastra.  They 
have  decided  that  Adyaiakti  Mahamaya 7  is  She  who  is  called  maya  *  or 
avidya  *  by  the  Vedanta.  This  may2  or  avidya  is  gross  matter,  something  ' 
devoid  of  consciousness.  It  is  only  when  Atma,  who  is  consciousness  itself,, 
is  reflected  in  Her  that  She  appears  to  possess  consciousness  for  Her  work. 
For  this  reason  these  people  say  that  He  who  possesses  Sakti  is  full  of 
consciousness  while  Sakti  is  gross  matter.  What,  then,  are  those  who 
worship  gross  matter  instead  of  Brahman  but  gross  matter  themselves? 

Let  us  see  whether  this  conclusion  of  theirs  is  approved  of  by  the 
Sastra.  What  the  Tantra-Sastra  has  said  about  Sakti  we  reserve  for 
subsequent  discussion.  For  those  people  firmly  believe  that  the  purpose 
of  the  Tantra  Sastra  is  to  give  predominance  to  Sakti,  and,  consequently, 
evidence  drawn  from  this  source  will  not  appear  to  be  of  much  weight  to 
them.  For  this  reason  wc  shall  first  of  all  quote  evidence  from  the 
Srimad  Bhagavata.  The  following  appears  in  the  hymn  to  Siva  by  Brahma 
contained  in  the  Chapter  on  Dak$a’s  sacrifice  in  the  Srimad  Bhagavata : 

“  I  know  that  thou  art  the  livara  (creator)  of  the  universe.  I  know 
also  that  Thou  art  Parabrahman,  in  whom  are  inseparably  united  Sakti 
and  Siva,  the  womb  (yoni)  and  the  seed  from  which  the  universe  is  bom. 
Bhagavan,  it  is  Thou  who  dividcst  Thyself  into  the  two  forms  of  Siva  and 

1  Brahma,  Vi?nu,  Maheivara.  1  Priests. 

*  At  the  up&nayana  ceremony. 

4  The  prayers  and  ritual  which  go  by  that  name  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra- 
S&stra). 

*  The  mahSmantra  of  that  name. 

*  DSrianik.  7  The  Devi  as  primal  Sakti. 

*  Illusion  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra) . 

*  Ignorance  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI? 


247 


Sakti,  and,  like  a  spider  in  play,  dost  create,  preserve  and  destroy  the 
universe.” 

Here  Brahma  Himself  says  that  Parabrahman  is  the  non-differentiated 
substance  1 * *  of  Siva  and  Sakti.  He,  therefore,  has  not  embraced  Brah- 
maism  by  omitdng  that  part  which  consists  of  Sakti.  Again,  in  the 
Srimad  Bhagavata,  Bhagavan  says  to  Uddhava: 

“  Prakrti,  the  material  of  this  universe,  the  supreme  Puru^a,  its 
receptacle  and  Kala  (Time)  its  revealer — I  am  Brahman  divided  into 
these  three  parts.” 

in  the  Srimad  Bhagavadgita,  Bhagavan  says  to  Aijuna: 

“  Earth,  water,  fire,  air,  ether,  mind,  and  reason  also,  and  egoism  * — 
these  are  the  eightfold  division  of  My  nature. 

“  This  the  inferior.  Know  My  other  nature,  the  higher,  the  life* 
element,  O  mighty-armed !  by  which  the  universe  is  upheld.”  * 

Here  Bhagavan  first  speaks  of  gross  4 * *  Prakfti,  which  is  divided  into 
eight  parts,  and  then  calls  the  Sakti,  who  is  eternal  consciousness  8  itself 
and  gives  life  to  all  Jlvas,  as  His  (Supreme)  *  prakrti,  thus  dividing  prakrti 
into  two  main  parts  according  as  She  is  “  gross  ”  and  “  conscious 

Again,  “  Brooding  over  nature  (prakrti)  which  is  Mine  own,  I  am 
bom  through  My  own  Power  (maya).”  7 

Here,  also,  Bhagavan  has  differentiated  between  His  own  true  prakrti 
and  maya. 

The  following  appears  in  the  hymn  to  Siva  by  Putatma  contained  in 
the  KaSikhanda  of  the  Skanda  Purana: 

“  O  Viivrfvara,4  Thou  art  the  universe  itself.  There  is  no  difference 
between  Thee  and  the  universe,  for  Thou  art  omnipresent  and  the  subject 
of  praiseful  hymn,*  the  maker  of  the  hymn  and  even  the  hymn  itself. 
Thou  art  both  with  and  without  attributes.  Even  yogis  are  without 
spiritual  perception  of  this  truth  concerning  Thee,  O  Lord,  who  moveth 
as  Thou  willeth.  She  is  Thy  Sakti  who  appeared  as  an  embodiment  of 
Thy  desire  when  Thou  wert  no  longer  able  to  enjoy  Thyself  alone. 
Though  one  in  reality,  Thou  hast  acquired  a  dual  aspect  according  as 
Thou  art  Siva  and  Sakti.  Thou  art  BhagavSn,  the  embodiment  of 
knowledge  and  desire  is  Thy  Sakti.  Thou,  in  Thy  twofold  aspect  of  Siva 
and  Sakti,  gave  rise  in  Thy  play  to  the  Sakti  of  action,  and  from  this 


1  Tattva.  *  Manas,  buddhi,  aharikSra. 

8  Bhagavadgita,  chap,  vii,  verses  4  and  5.  4  Ja<ja. 

8  Caitanya.  *  Paraprakrti. 

’  Bhagavadgiti,  chap,  iv,  verse  6.  A  slight  departure  has  been  made 

from  Mrs.  Bes  ant’s  translation  in  order  not  to  differ  from  the  author’s  Bengali 

version.  Mrs.  Besant’s  translation  is:  “  Though  brooding  over  nature,  which 

is  Mine  own,  yet  I  am  born  through  my  own  Power.” 

8  Lord  of  universe.  •  Stava. 


248 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Sakti  of  action  has  been  generated  this  world.  Thou  Thyself  art  the 
embodiment  of  the  Sakti  of  knowledge,  Uma  is  the  embodiment  of  the 
Sakti  of  desire,  and  this  universe  is  the  embodiment  of  the  Sakti  of 
action.1  Thus  Thou  art  the  sole  cause  of  the  universe.” 

Again:  “Thou  as  Prakrti  and  Puru?a  first  created  the  Brahmanda, 
and  then  inhabited  it  as  all  things  moving  and  non-moving.  Therefore, 
O  Thou  who  pervadeth  the  whole  world,  nothing  is  different  from  Thee. 
All  things  exist  in  Thee,  and  Thou  pervadeth  all  things.”  Valmiki  says 
in  the  Uttarakhanda  of  Adbhflta  RSmayana: 

“  Janalri  is  primeval,  eternal.  She  is  the  visible  Prakjti  itself. 
Through  Her,  austerity  is  fruitful  and  heaven  is  gained.  She  is  the  eternal 
vibhQti  of  vibhus.1  It  is  that  Mahaiakti  whom  Brahmavadis  *  describe 
in  the  two  forms  of  Vidya  and  Avidya.  She  is  Riddhi;4  Siddhi,  full  of 
gurtas,  made  of  gupas,  and  above  gunas.  She  exists  as  both  Brahman 
and  Brahmapd^.  She  is  the  cause  of  all  causes.  She  eternally  plays  as 
Prakrti  and  Vikrti.*  She  is  full  of  consciousness,  and  blooms  in  conscious¬ 
ness.  She  exists  in  all  things,  is  Brahman  and  Mahakundalini.  All  this  * 
world,  consisting  of  moving  and  non-moving  things,  is  but  Her  play,  O 
Brahman.  Holding  Her  in  their  hearts,  yogis  sever  the  heart’s  tics,  and 
exist  under  their  own  true  aspect.  O  Good  Doer  !  whenever  dharma  * 
becomes  tarnished  and  adharma 7  flourishes,  Mahaprakfti  appeals  through 
Her  own  maya.  Rama  also  is  the  supreme  light,  the  supreme  abode,  and 
the  supreme  Purusa  in  flesh  and  blood  ;  for  there  is,  in  reality,  no  real 
difference  between  Sita  and  Rama.  It  is  because  sadhus  have  realized 
this  that  they  have  thrown  off  the  slumber  of  mayS,  awakened  to  the  state 
of  the  knowledge  of  truth,  and  crossed  from  the  jaws  of  death  to  the  other 
ride  of  the  sea  of  sams&ra.  Rama  is  incomprehensible,  full  of  eternal 
consciousness,  omniscient,  omnipresent,  the  sole  creator,  preserver,  and 
destroyer  of  all  things,  blissful  and  all  pervading.  Yogis  contemplate 
Him  inseparably  with  Sita.  I  shall  truly  relate,  by  way  of  illustration, 
how,  though  in  truth  birthless,  Prakfti  and  Puru§a,  who  exist  in  causal 
bodies,  take  high  and  wonderful  births.  Being  in  truth  formless,  They 
assume  forms  for  the  salvation  of  mankind  and  out  of  their  mercy  for  it.” 

Again,  when  thousand-headed  Ravapa  was  lulled  by  Sita  in  the  form 
of  Kalika,  Ramacandra  said  in  his  hymn  to  Her: 


1  The  three  Saktis— -Jfiana  (cognition),  Icchha  (volition),  Kriya  (motion). 

*  VibhQti  is  the  thing  which  characterizes  the  higher  nature.  Vibhu  is 
one  who  is  all-pervading,  and  vibhuti  is  both  that  which  it  displays  and  the 
power  by  which  it  displays. 

*  Worshippers  of  the  Brahman.  4  Spiritual  wealth. 

*  Freely  rendered  as  “  As  cause  and  effect” 

*  Righteousness. 


T  Unrighteousness. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI? 


249 


“  Blessed  is  my  birth  to-day,  and  successful  is  my  devotion;  for,  being 
unrevealed  to  the  world.  Thou  hast  favoured  me  by  appearing  to  my 
■view.  All  the  world  is  Thy  creation,  and  Pradhana1  and  other  Tattvas* 
are  seated  in  Thee.  At  the  time  of  the  great  dissolution  this  world  disap¬ 
pears  in  Thee.  Thou  art  the  highest  goal  of  JIva.  Some  speak  of  Thee 
as  Prakrti,  different  from  Vikrti,  while,  O  Companion  of  Siva,  others  of 
the  spiritually  wise  describe  you  as  Siva,  Pradhana  Purusa,  Mahattattva, 
Brahma,  livara,  Avidya,  Niyati,  Maya  and  Kala*  and  hundreds  of  other 
limbs  emanate  from  and  exist  in  Thee.  Thou  art  the  supreme  Sakti, 
which  is  eternal  and  the  highest  good.  Thou  art  free  from  all  differences, 
and  the  shelter  of  all  differences.  Thou  existeth  as  Thine  own  true  Self, 
O  YogcSvari,  who  art  Paramclvari.  It  is  by  entering  into  Thee  Purusa 
makes  and  unmakes  Pradhana  4  and  all  other  things  of  the  world.  It  is 
by  uniting  with  Thee  that  Puru?a,  the  supreme  Deva,  enjoys  the  bliss  of 
His  Ownself.  Thou  art  the  supreme  bliss  and  also  the  giver  of  supreme 
bliss.  Thou  art  the  supreme  space,  the  supreme  light,  immaculate,  Siva, 
•omnipresent,  subtle,  Parabrahman,  and  eternal.” 

The  following  appears  in  the  Mahabhagavata : 

“  I  bow  to  the  Dew,  who  grants  heaven  and  liberation,  by  worship¬ 
ping  whom  Virinci 5  has  become  the  creator,  Hari  •  the  preserver,  and 
Giri£a7  the  destroyer,  of  this  world  ;  who  is  the  object  of  contemplation  by 
Yogis,  whom  Munis  possessed  of  spiritual  knowledge  describe  as  the 
primal  and  supreme  Prakrti. 

“  May  She  preserve  us  *  who  on  creating  this  world  according  to  Her 
free  will  has  taken  birth  in  it,  and  receiving  Sambhu  for  Her  husband, 
and  whose  feet  Sambhu  placed  on  His  breast  when  receiving  Her  for  His 
wife  as  the  fruit  of  His  austerities.” 

Suta*  said:  “High  minded  Mahaf$i  Bhagavan  Vyasa  the  speaker 
of  endless  Dharma&astras,  chief  of  all  men,  learned  in  the  Vedas,  and 
proficient  in  spiritual  knowledge,  received  no  satisfaction  from  his  work  in 
connection  with  the  seventeen  Pur  arias.  He  then  bethought  himself  ‘  How 
shall  I  relate  that  Mahapurana,  than  which  no  greater  Purana  exists  on 
earth,  and  wherein  the  supreme  Bhagavati  is  dealt  with  in  all  detail  ?  ’ 
Failing  to  know  the  truth10  about  the  Devi,  his  heart  became  agitated.  He 


1  The  material  cause.  *  Its  derivatives. 

*  Siva  ;  the  material  and  efficient  cause  ;  the  Tattva  Mahat,  first  of  their 

issue  ;  Creator  ;  lord  ;  nescience  ;  destiny  ;  power  of  illusion  and  time.  Niyati 
also  is  the  Saiva  category  of  space.  4  Vide  last  note. 

*  Brahma.  •  Vispu.  7  Siva. 

*  The  author’s  rendering  is  free  here.  He  writes  :  “  May  the  creatrix  of  the 
universe  who  is  worshipped  by  Siva  preserve  the  three  worlds.” 

*  LomaharjapS,  the  narrator.  10  Tattva. 


250 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


thought,  ‘How  can  that  supreme  and  most  abstruse  truth 1  be  known  to 
me  which  is  not  known  to  even  Mahdvara  of  vast  knowledge  ?  ’  So 
thinking,  and  finding  no  other  means,  Vyasa  of  great  intelligence  set  his 
whole-hearted  devotion  *  on  Durga, '  went  to  the  Himalaya,  and  there 
practised  severe  austerities.  The  consort  of  Siva,  who  is  ever  fond  of  Her 
devotees,  was  pleased  with  such  devotion  and,  remaining  unseen  in  the 
sky,  said,  ‘Mahamuni  VySsa,  go  to  Brahmaloka  where  all  the  Srutis 
incarnate*  live;  there  you  will  know  my  stainless  supreme  existence.1 
There  sung  by  the  Srutis,  I  shall  become  visible  and  do  what  is  desired  of 
by  you.”  Hearing  the  message  from  above,  Bhagavan  Vedavyasa  at  once 
repaired  to  Brahmaloka,  bowed  to  the  four  Vedas  and  asked,  “  What  is  the 
supreme  and  undecaying  Brahman?” 

“  Great  Muni,  hearing  the  Rsi  ask  this  question  with  modesty  and 
submissiveness,  the  Vedas  at  once  replied  by  turn.” 

Rgvcda  said :  “  In  whom  are  contained  all  things,  out  of  whom 
appear  all  things,  and  whom  all  describe  as  the  highest  Being,'  that  Adya 
(primal)  Bhagavati  is  Brahman  itself.” 

Yajurvcda  said :  “The  Iivari  who  is  worshipped  in  all  yajfiaa  and  in 
yoga  and  for  whose  existence  we  (Vedas)  are  deemed  the  authority,  that 
Bhagavati  alone  is  Brahman  itself.” 

Samaveda  said:  “By  whom  this  universe  is  moved,  whom  all  yogis 
contemplate,  and  by  whose  light  the  universe  is  manifested,  that  world- 
pervading  Durga  alone  is  supreme  Brahman.” 

Atharvavcda  said :  “  The  livaii  of  Suras  •  whom  all  who  are  favoured 
for  their  devotion  sec,  that  Bhagavati  Durga  all  Sastras  describe  as 
Supreme  Brahman.” 

Suta  said,  hearing  the  incarnate  Srutis  thus  express  themselves: 
“  Vyasa,  the  son  of  Satyavatl,  became  certain  that  Bhagavati  Durga  was 
supreme  Brahman.”  After  they  had  spoken  as  above  mentioned,  the 
Srutis  also  again  said  unto  the  Mahamuni :  “  What  we  have  said  we  shall 
make  directly  visible  to  you.”  So  saying,  the  Srutis  began  to  sing  in 
praise  of  that  Paramcivari  who  is  existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss,  who 
is  pure,  and  who  holds  in  Herself  all  Devas  and  Devis. 

The  Srutis  said :  “  Supreme  universe-embracing  Durga  be  pleased. 
The  three  Puru?as 5  Brahma,  Vi$nu,  and  Maheivara,  are  created  with  their 
individual  guiias  according  to  Thy  will  for  the  threefold  work  of  creation, 
preservation,  and  destruction.  But,  O  Mother,  Thou  hast  no  creator  in 
the  three  worlds.  Who  in  the  world  can  therefore  describe  Thy  qualities, 
impenetrable  by  the  intellect  of  Jlvas? 

1  Tattva.  ’  Bhakti. 

•That  is,  the  four  Vedas  incarnate  (Murtimatl).  literally,  “possess¬ 
ing  form 

*  Devas  and  Devis. 


*  “  Persons”. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI? 


251 


“  O  Mother  of  the  three  worlds,  it  is  by  worshipping  Thee  that  Hari 
destroys  invincible  Daityas  and  thus  preserves  the  three  worlds,  and  it 
was  by  holding  Thy  feet  on  His  breast  that  MaheSvara  was  able  to  drink 
poison  deadly  enough  to  destroy  the  three  worlds.1  What  can  we  say 
which  will  describe  the  force  of  that  (incomprehensible)  nature  of 
Thine?  ” 

“  We  bow  to  Thee,  O  Mother  who  art  the  body,  the  consciousness, 
the  Sakti  of  motion,  and  other  Saktis,  and  the  highest  Sakti,  constituted 
of  Thy  own  gupas  by  the  instrumentality  of  maya  of  the  supreme  Purusa 
(Paramatma),  and  Thou  art  She  who  residest  as  consciousness  in  the 
bodies  of  Jivas,  who,  charmed  by  Thy  maya  and  with  differentiating 
knowledge,*  describe  Thee  as  Purusa.” 

“  Brahma-tattva  is  that  aspect  of  Thine  which  is  devoid  of  all 
distinctive  conditions,*  such  as  masculinity,  femininity,  etc.  Next,  Sakti 
is  that  primary  desire  of  Thine  which  arose  in  Thee  for  creating  the 
world.  That  Sakti  appeared  in  one  half  as  the  supreme  Purusa,  so  that 
both  Prakrti  and  Purusa  are  but  Sakti  in  different  forms.  Both  are  but 
manifestation  of  Thy  maya.  Even  Parama-brahmatattva,  therefore,  is 
nothing  but  Thyself  as  Sakti.” 

“Just  as  to  a  searcher  for  truth  things  like  hail  formed  of  water  and 
yet  hard,  are  known  to  him  to  be  water,  so  to  an  inquirer  into  the  nature  4 
of  all  things  in  this  world  which  has  its  origin  in  Brahman,  the  latter  has 
no  separate  existence  from  that  of  Sakti.  Buddhi  as  Purusa,  when 
realized  as  Sakti,  also  is  Brahman;  for  Sakti  is  manifested  Brahman.”* 

“The  six  Sivas,  beginning  with  Brahma,  which  exist  in  the  six 
cakras  in  the  body  of  the  Jiva  arc,  when  considered  separately  from 
Thee,  only  pretas  (that  is  to  say,  gross  matter*  in  regard  to  their  individual 
functions).  It  is  only  when  they  come  under  Thy  protection  that  they 
attain  Paramesvara-hood  (that  is  to  say,  become  Sivas  under  the  influence 
of  Sakti).  So,  O  Sive,  Ifivara-hood  is  not  in  Siva,  but  in  Thee.  O 
universe-pervading  Devi  Durga,  O  Mother  Whose  lotus  feet  are 
worshipped  by  immortals,  have  mercy  on  us.” 

Suta  said :  “  Thus,  sung  in  a  hymn  by  the  incarnate  Srutis,  the  eternal 
Mother  of  the  universe  showed  Herself  to  them.” 

1  At  the  churning  of  the  ocean,  poison  was  one  of  the  things  which  issued 
from  the  waters.  As  this  poison  was  powerful  enough  to  destroy  the  worlds, 
Siva  drank  it,  holding  it  in  His  throat,  which  made  it  blue.  Hence  He  is  called 
Nilakantha  (blue- throated). 

*  Bhedajfiana;  that  is,  knowledge  distinguishing  between  Puru?a  and 
Prakrti,  who  are,  in  reality  and  according  to  monistic  knowledge,  one. 

9  Upadhi.  4  Tattva. 

*  If  we  realize  Buddhi  to  be  Sakti,  and  Sakti  is  manifested  Brahman,  then 
Buddhi  is  such  Brahman. 

*Jada. 


252 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  Although  that  Mahadevi  exists  as  light  (consciousness)  in  all  living 
things  yet  She  assumed  a  distinct  body  in  order  to  dispel  the  doubts  of 
Vyasa.” 

“  That  body  was  of  the  brilliance  of  a  thousand  suns,  and  fair  with 
the  beauty  of  ten  million  moons.  She  had  a  thousand  arms  bearing 
celestial  weapons,  was  decked  with  celestial  ornaments  and  garments; 
smeared  with  celestial  unguents,  and  seated  on  a  lion.  At  times  She  was 
also  seated  on  a  corpse,  and  had  four  arms,  and  was  of  the  colour  of  a 
freshly  formed  cloud.  In  this  manner  She  appeared  sometimes  as  two- 
armed,  sometimes  as  four-armed,  sometimes  as  ten-armed,  sometimes  as 
eighteen-armed,  and  sometimes  as  an  hundred-armed.  At  times  She 
appeared  possessed  of  an  infinite  number  of  arms  and  of  a  sublimely 
divine  form.” 

"  Sometimes  She  appeared  as  Visnu,  with  Laksmi  on  His  left,  at ' 
others  as  Sri  Krsna  with  RadhikS  on  His  left;  yet  again  as  Brahma,  with 
Sarasvati  on  His  left,  and  then  as  Siva,  with  Gauri  on  His  left.” 

“  The  all-pervading  Devi  who  is  Brahman  in  reality  dispelled  • 
Vyasa’s  doubts  by  thus  assuming  various  forms.” 

Suta  said:  “  Seeing  all  these  wonderful  forms  of  Jagadamba,1  Vyasa, 
the  great  Muni  and  son  of  Paraiara,  knew  the  sublime  Brahmatattva,  and 
became  free  from  the  condition  of  a  Jlva.  Then,  knowing  the  desire  of 
Vyasa,  Devi  Bhagavati,  the  dweller  in  all  hearts,  showed  him  the  thousand- 
petalled  lotus  lying  under  Her  feet.  In  the  petals  of  the  lotus  Vyasa,  the 
great  R?i,  saw  the  great  Purana,  named  Mahabhagavata,  replete  with 
sublime  letters.  Thus  blessed,  he  praised  the  Devi  in  various  ways,  bowed 
to  the  earth  before  Her,  and  returned  to  his  hermitage.” 

“  He  then  disclosed  the  Mahabhagavata  Purana,  most  sacred  and  full 
■of  sublime  letters,  just  as  he  had  found  it  in  the  thousand-pe tailed  lotus 
lying  under  the  lotus  feet  of  Jagadamba.”  1 

Again,  the  following  appears  in  the  second  chapter  of  the  same  book: 

N&rada  asked :  “  O  Thou,  the  worshipped  of  the  three  worlds,  chief 
-of  Dev  as  and  merciful  to  devotees,  Thou  art  the  greatest  of  those  who 
know 1  the  pure  Atma  and  Brahman.  O  Parameivara!  Thou  alone 
knowest  the  nature  of  all  things 1  O  Lord  of  the  universe.  The  other 
Devas  and  Rjis  know  it  not.”  “  Thou  (alone  of  all  Devas)  fondly  holdest 
-on  Thy  head  Gang5.,‘  who  purifies  the  three  worlds  (because  Thou  knowest 


1  The  mother  of  the  world.  *  Jfiaiu. 

*  Vastu-tattva,  the  principle  of  all  physical  existence. 

4  Siva  called  Gangadhara.  “  Whose  coiled  and  matted  hair  is  wet  with 
the  spray  of  Ganga  ”  (Mahanirvana  Tantra,  chap.  i).  When  the  River  Ganges 
descended  from  Heaven,  He  intercepted  it  by  His  head,  so  that  the  earth  might 
not  be  crushed  by  the  weight  of  the  falling  stream. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI  ? 


25S 


Her  greatness).  Thou  hast  made  the  moon  Thy  head 1 * * 4  ornament  (because 
Thou  knowest  its  essential  beauty).  Tell  me,  therefore,  O  omnipresent 
Deva,  that  which  I  ask  of  Thee  now.  O  MahcSvara,  who  is  the  Devata 
whom  Ye  too  worship  ?  ”  * 

“  Whoever  worships  Thee  as  well  as  Bhagavan  Visnu,  and  Brahma, 
the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  with  devotion,  attains  to  such  a  high  state  as  it 
is  in  the  power  of  none  on  earth  to  describe.  Such  being  the  more  than 
worldly  greatness  of  yourselves,  I  desire  by  all  means  to  know  the  Devata 
whom  Ye  too  worship.  Tell  me,  O  MaheSvara,  who  is  that  Devata.” 

Vyasa  said:  “  O  great  Muni  Jaimini,  hearing  these  words  of  Narada, 
Mahadeva  repeatedly  revolved  the  matter  in  His  mind,  and  then  Maha- 
deva  said :  *  Great  Rsi,  that  which  you  desire  to  know  is  the  highest  and 
most  abstruse  truth.*  My  child,  how  can  I  reveal  that  unrevcalable 
truth?’”* 

Vyasa  said:  “  Thus  replied  to  by  the  Deva  of  Devas,  Narada  stood, 
and,  with  folded  hands,  thus  addressed  Narayana,  the  omnipresent  Lord 
of  the  universe : 

“  Though  very  merciful  to  His  devotees,  Bhagavan  Mahe&vara,  the 
Deva  of  Devas,  is  yet  reluctant  to  say  who  is  the  Devata  He  worships.  Tell 
me  therefore,  O  Thou  Who  art  merciful  to  the  supplicant,  and  chief  of 
Devas,  who  that  Devata  is.” 

Narayana  said:  “Great  Rsi,  what  need  have  you  to  hear  of  that 
matter?  *  We  are  your  Devatas,  and  you  will  attain  the  highest  state  by 
worshipping  us.  What  reason  can  you  then  have  to  know  the  Devata 
We  ourselves  worship  ?  ” 

Vyasa  said:  "Thus  spoken  to  by  Bhagavan  Visnu  also,  Narada,  the 
great  Muni  (finding  no  other  means),  thus  prayed  with  folded  hands  and 
propitiatory  words,  to  both  Siva  and  Visnu.” 

Narada  said :  “  O  ViSveivara,  the  Deva  of  Devas,  be  gracious  unto 
me;  O  Vasudeva  Narayana  be  gracious  unto  me.®  O  Sambhu,  brilliant 
with  the  ornament  of  snakes,  be  gracious  unto  me.  O  Visnu,  decked  with 
the  kaustubha  jewel,  be  gracious  unto  me.  O  merciful  Gangadhara,  O 
worshipful  Deva,  armed  with  the  cakra,1  be  gracious  unto  me.  Viiveivara, 
naked  as  space,  O  Gadahara,  dressed  in  yellow,  be  gracious  unto  me.  O 
Destroyer  of  Asura  Tripura,  I  bow  to  Thee.  O  Destroyer  of  Asura  Baka, 
I  bow  to  Thee.  O  Destroyer  of  Asura  Andhaka,  I  bow  to  Thee ;  O  De¬ 
stroyer  of  Asura  Kamsa,®  I  bow  to  Thee.  O  five-headed  Deva,  riding  on 
a  bull,  I  bow  to  Thee.  O  Vi?nu,  seated  on  Garuda,*  I  bow  to  Thee.” 

1  Siva  is  represented  as  bearing  the  crescent  moon.  1  Tattva. 

8  Narada  prays  alternately  first  to  Siva  and  then  to  Kr$i>a. 

4  Discus  of  Vi?nu. 

4  Demons,  Tripura,  and  Andhaka,  slain  by  Siva  and  the  other  two  by 

•  The  king  of  birds,  carrier  of  Vijpu- 


254 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Seeing  Nfirada,  the  great  Deva^i,  thus  engaged  in  prayer,  Bhagavan 
Visnu  looked  towards  Deva  MaheSvara  and  said: 

Vi§nu  said :  “  Narada,  the  son  of  Brahma  is  devoted,  wise  and 
modest.  Thou  ought  by  all  means  to  favour  him,  for  Thou  art  gracious 
to  devotees.” 

VyLsa  said:  “  Hearing  these  words  of  Visnu,  MabeSvara,  too,  who  is 
«ver  gracious  to  the  supplicant,  said,  ‘  Be  it  so.’  ” 

Then  high  souled  Narada,  possessed  of  pure  knowledge,  again 
questioned  Mahadeva,  the  seal  of  mercy  and  Deva  of  Devas. 

Narada  said:  “It  is  by  worshipping  Thee,  Vi?nu  and  Brahma,  the 
Lord  of  the  Universe,  that  Indra  and  other  Lokapalas 1  have  attained 
high  states.  O  Chief  of  Devas,  who  is  the  perfect,  immutable  Devata 
whom  Ye  worship?  Tell  me  this  if  Thou  hast  favour  for  me.  If  Thou 
wilt  tell  me  by  whose  favour  Ye  have  attained  such  high  l£varahood, ' 
then  shall  I  know  that  Thou  art  gracious  unto  me.” 

Vyasa  said :  “  Thus  addressed,  Bhagavan,  high-souled  Sartkara, 
the  Lord  of  Yogis,  receiving  Narada’s  words  in  good  grace,  revolved  all 
things*  in  His  heart,  repeatedly  contemplated  the  lotus-feet  of  Sri 
Durga,  and  began  to  speak  to  Narada  the  great  Muni  of  the  one  perfect 
and  supreme  Brahman.” 

Mahadeva  said:  “She  who  is  pure,  eternal  Mulaprakrti  is  Para- 
brahman  itself  and  the  Devata  We  worship. 

“  That  Mahe$vari  is  the  sole  Mistress  *  of  the  millions  ‘  of  Brahmas, 
Vispua,  and  Maheivaras  who  arc  Lords  of  creation,  preservation,  and 
destruction,  in  different  Brahman  das  just  as  this  Brahma,  this  Janardana, 
and  myself,  Mahesvara,  arc  the  Lords  of  creation,  preservation,  and  des¬ 
truction  in  this  Brahmaijda.  Though  really  formless,  that  MahadevI 
assumes  bodies  in  play.  This  entire  universe  has  been  created,  is  being 
maintained,  and  will,  in  the  end,  be  destroyed  by  Her.  And  during  its 
existence  the  world  is  overpowered  by  Her  enchantment” 

"  In  Her  own  play  She,  in  former  times,  incarnated  Herself  in  full  * 
-as  the  daughter  of  Dak$a  Prajapati;  She  also  incarnated  Herself  as  Um3, 
daughter  of  Himalaya.  In  partial  incarnation  *  She  is  the  consort  of 
Vijpu  as  LaksmI  and  Sarasvad,  and  the  consort  of  Brahma  as  Savitri.” 

Narada  said:  “  Chief  of  Devas,  if  Thou  art  pleased  with  me,  if  Thou 
hast  kindness  for  me,  then,  O  Lord,  tell  me  fully  and  in  detail  how  that 

1  Regents  of  the  quarters,  Indra,  Agni,  Yaraa,  Nirpti,  and  others. 

*  Tattva.  *  Vidhatri. 

*  Crores.  Each  world-system  has  its  own  Brahma,  V5?pu,  and  Siva. 

*  Purna — that  is,  in  such  incarnation  all  the  Vibhutis  (see  pest)  of  the 
Bhagavan  are  manifested,  not  so  in  partial  (Anjik)  incarnation. 

*  See  last  note.  For  as  Brahma  and  Visnu  are  but  partial  manifesta¬ 
tion  of  the  Brahman,  so  are  their  Saktis. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI? 


255 


perfect  Prakfti  formerly  took  birth  as  Daksa  Prajapati’s  daughter,  and 
how  MaheSvara  obtained  Her  who  is  in  truth  Brahman  for  wife;  again, 
how  She  took  birth  as  Himalaya’s  daughter,  and  how  three-eyed  Mahadeva 
obtained  that  three-eyed  Devi  for  His  wife;  and  again,  how  that  Mother  of 
the  universe  gave  birth  to  Her  two  sons,  invincible  and  six-headed  Kartikcya 
and  elephant-headed  Ganeia.”. 

“  Before  creation  this  world  was  devoid  of  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  and 
without  day  and  night.  There  was  no  fire  and  no  distinction  of  directions. 
The  Brahmanda  was  then  destitute  of  sound,  touch,  and  the  like,  etc., 
devoid  of  other  force,1 * * 4  and  full  of  darkness.  Then  but  that  one  eternal 
Brahman  of  whom  the  Srutis  speak,  and  the  Prakrti,  who  is  existence, 
consciousness,  and  bliss,  alone  existed.” 

“  She  is  pure,  full  of  knowledge,  beyond  the  reach  of  speech,  per¬ 
petual,  immaculate,  unapproachable  by  even  yogis,  all-pervading, 
untroubled,  eternally  blissful,  subtle,  and  devoid  of  all  such  properties  as 
heaviness,  lightness,  and  the  like.” 

“  Subsequently,  when  that  An  and  a  may!  became  desirous  to  create 
in  order  to  manifest  Her  own  play  of  bliss,  that  supreme  Prakfti,  though 
in  truth  formless,  at  once  assumed  a  form  by  the  strength  of  Her 
own  will. 

“  That  Devi  with  form  was  of  the  colour  of  crushed  collyrium.1  Her 
face  was  fair  and  as  charming  as  a  full-blown  lotus.  She  had  four  arms, 
fiery  eyes,  dishevelled  hair,  and  full  and  erect  breasts.’  She  was  naked 
as  space,  terrific,  and  seated  on  a  lion. 

“  She  then  at  once  created,  of  Her  own  will,  a  Puru?a  (Mahaktla) 
with  her  three  gupas,  sattva,  rajas,  and  lamas.  But  the  Purusa  was  even 
then  devoid  of  unconsciousness.” 

“  Seeing  that  Purusa  made  of  three  guijas  unconscious,  She  com¬ 
municated  to  Him  Her  own  desire  for  creation.” 

“  Being  thus  possessed  of  Sakti  through  the  communication  of  the 
desire  of  MahSiakti,  that  Mulapuru$a  *  created  with  delight  three 
Purus  as,  according  to  the  threefold  division  of  gunas — namely,  sattva, 
rajas,  and  tamas,  and  the  three  Purusas  thus  created  were  termed 
Brahma,  Vi$i>u,  and  Mahe&vara.” 

“  Still,  when  She  saw  that  there  was  no  sign  of  creation,  the  Devi 
■divided  that  Mulapuruja  into  two  parts — namely,  Jlva  and  Parama- 
puru$a.” 


1  Tejas.  *  Afljana. 

*  The  Devi  is  generally  represented  as  so  formed.  They  and  other  physical 

features  arc  the  signs  of  the  Great  Maternity.  See  passages  cited  in  A.  and  E. 
Avalon’s  “  Hymns  to  the  Goddess  ”. 

4  Primeval  or  root  Purusa. 


256 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  Prakrti  also  divided  Herself,  according  to  Her  own  will,  into  three 
parts — namely,  Maya,  Vidya,  and  Parama.” 

“  Of  these  Maya  is  She  who  charms  Jlvas  and  is  the  Sakti  who 
creates  the  Samsara.  Parama  is  the  Sakd,  full  of  consciousness  and  life, 
who  is  the  cause  of  movements  in  Jivas,  and  Vidya  is  She  who  is  made  of 
pure  spiritual  knowledge  and  who  is  the  Sakti  which  dissolves  the 
samsara.” 

M&yavrto  hi  jivastang  paramang  neksate  mune 
Tabhyang  samasritastespi  purusa  visayaisinah 
Babhuburmunisarddula  mugdhastanmayaya  tada 
Sa  trtiya  para  vidya  pancadha  yabhavat  svayam 
Ganga  durga  ca  savitri  laksmischaiva  sarasvati 
Sa  praha  prakrtirvidya  brahmavisnumahrivaran 
Pratyaksaga  jagadhatri  viniyojya  prthak  prthak 
Sristyarthank  purusa  yuyang  may  a  srsta  nijecchhaya 
Tatkurusva  mahabhaga  yathechha  mama  jayate 
Brahma  Srijatu  bhutani  ithavarlni  carani  ca 
Vividhani  vicitrani  casamkhyeyani  samyatah 
Visnuresa  mahavahuh  karotu  pratipalanam 
Nihatya  jagatang  ksobhakarakan  valinang  varah 
Sivastamogunakrantah  5cse  sarvamidang  jagat 
Nasayisyati  nasecchha  yada  me  sambhavisyati 
Parasparanca  srstyadilcaryesu  trisu  vaidhruvam 
Vidhatavyang  hi  sahayyang  yusmabhih  purujatrayaih 
Ahanca  pancadha  bhutva  savitryadya  varanganah 
Bhavatam  vanita  bhutva  viharisye  nijecchaya 
Tathangsatasca  sambhuya  sarvajantusu  yositah 
Prasavisyami  bhutani  vividhani  nijecchaya 
Brahman gs tv ang  manaslng  siting  karotu  mama  sasanat 
Sampratam  nanyatha  srstirvistrteyam  bhavisyati 
Ityuktva  tanmahavidya  prakrfih  sa  paratpara 
Svayamantardadhe  te$ang  brahmadinanca  pasyatam 1 

[“O  Muni!  overpowered  by  Maya,  Jiv'a  does  not  see  that  Parama. 
Subject  to  these  two  (Parama  and  Maya),  O  great  Muni,  those  Purus  as 
(Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Siva)  also  became  at  that  time  attached  to  the 
world,  being  influenced  thereto  by  Maya.  The  third  supreme  Vidya  is 
She  who  divided  Herself  into  five  forms — namely,  Ganga,  Durga,  Savitri, 
Lak$mf,  and  Sarasvati.  Addressing  Herself  to  Brahma,  Vi?nu,  and 
Maheivara  separately,  that  Prakrti  Vidya,  the  visible  Jagaddhatri  (holder 


1  The  author  does  not  translate  these  verses,  an  English  rendering  of  which 
is  given  in  brackets  below. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI? 


25? 


of  the  universe),  said  to  them :  « You,  Purusa,  have  been  created  by  me  of 
my  own  accord  for  the  purpose  of  creation.  O  high-favoured  Devils,  do 
that  which  is  my  desire.  Brahma,  do  Thou  create  with  care  all  things, 
movable  and  immovable,  of  various  kinds,  diversified  and  innumerable. 
Vi?nu,  this  great-armed  Deva,  the  best  of  the  strong,  do  Thou  maintain 
by  destroying  all  such  as  oppress  the  worlds.  Siva,  through  the  tarn  as 
guna,  will  in  the  end  destroy  all  this  world  when  the  desire  for  destruction 
will  arise  in  me.  In  these  three  works  of  creation  and  the  like  do  you 
three  Purusas  render  help  to  each  other.  I,  too,  will  divide  myself  into 
five  forms  as  Savitri  and  other  fair  women,  and  being  your  wives 
move  as  I  desire.  And  becoming,  with  a  part  of  myself,  the  female 
among  all  living  things,  I  shall  give  birth  to  various  beings  of  my  own 
will.  O  Brahma,  do  you,  under  my  order,  make  a  mental  creation.  At 
present  no  other  creation  should  be  made.*  Saying  this  to  them,  that 
Frakrti  Mahavidya,  who  is  supreme  over  the  supreme,  Herself  disappeared 
from  the  sight  of  Brahma  and  the  other  Devas.”] 

The  following  appears  in  the  second  chapter  of  Devi  Bhagavata : 

“  The  Panama  (supreme)  Adya  (primal)  Sakti,  who  is  called  VidyS. 
according  to  &ruti,  She  who  dwells  in  all  things,  resides  in  all  hearts, 
destroys  the  bonds  of  samsara,  and  is  incomprehensible  to  the  wicked;  She 
who  is  ever  visible  to  munis  who  meditate  upon  Her — may  that  Bhaga- 
yatl,  whose  substance  is  existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss— grant  a  pious 
mind  to  Jiva.” 

“  She  who,  after  having  created  the  universe  as  sat 1  and  asat  *  and 
jada 3  and  caitanya,4  maintains  it  by  Her  own  Sakti  consisting  of  three 
gunas;  She  who,  again,  at  the  end  of  the  Kalpa,  alone  sinks  in  Self-bliss 
after  destroying  the  manifestation  of  this  universe — -I  remember  that 
Mother  of  the  Universe  in  my  heart.” 

“  It  is  generally  known  that  Brahma  creates  all  this  universe;  but 
those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  Purapas  and  Vedas  say  that  He  took 
birth  in  the  navel-lotus  of  Visiju.  They  have  thus  indirectly  said  that 
Brahma  is  not  an  independent  Creator  of  the  world  for  He,  too,  has  had 
to  be  born  elsewhere  according  to  another’s  desire.” 

“  For  when  in  Mahapralaya  Vispu  lay  on  the  bed  of  Ananta,®  Brahma 
appeared  in  His  navel-lotus.  Here,  too,  thousand-headed  Ananta  Deva 
supports  Vi$nu  on  His  body.  How  can  Bhagavan  be  said  to  possess 
independent  Sakti  when  He  has  to  depend  on  another  for  His  support  ?  ” 

When  in  Mahapralaya  the  world  is  converted  into  a  single  ocean  the 
water  of  that  single  ocean  is  undoubtedly  liquid.  All  admit  that  a  liquid 

1  True,  permanent.  *  Untrue,  transient. 

*  Gross,  material,  immovable. 

4  Consciousness,  moving  sentient  life. 

*  The  thousand-headed  snake. 

»7 


258 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


can  never  exist  without  a  receptacle.  But  Vi$iju  supports  Brahma, 
Allan ta  Deva  supports  Visnu,  and  the  water  of  the  ocean  supports  Ananta 
Deva;  but  who  supports  this  mass  of  water?  Extremely  difficult  to  under¬ 
stand  is  this  matter.  When,  on  carefully  examining  one  receptacle  after 
another,  one  comes  to  the  end  of  all  receptacles,  then  it  is  that  there  is 
disclosed  the  Supreme  existence 1  of  the  MahSiakti  who  supports  all 
things.  I  make  supplication  to  that  Mother  of  all  things. 

“  I  make  supplication  to  that  Supreme  Said,  to  that  Devi  to  whom 
Brahma,  seated  on  the  navel-lotus,  prayed  when  (on  the  occasion  of  the 
destruction  of  Madhu  and  Kaitabha)  he  saw  Visnu  with  His  eyes  shut  in 
yoga-nidra.”  * 

Again  the  following  appears  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  the  same  book: 

Sdta  said:  “Thus,  asked  by  Vyasa,  high-minded  Narada,  proficient 
in  the  knowledge  of  Veda,  spoke,  with  great  delight” 

Narada  said:  “  High-favoured  son  of  Paraiara  the  matter  which  you 
ask  me  was,  of  yore,  asked  by  my  father,  Brahma,  of  Bhagavan  Madhu- 
sudana.”  * 

“  Seeing  Hari,  the  chief  of  Devas,  Lord  of  the  world,  and  husband 
of  Lak^mi,  rapt  in  meditation,  my  father  was  astonished  and  questioned 
that  Vasudeva,  immersed  in  intense  devotion,  who  is  decked  with  the 
Kaustubha  Jewel,4  holds  the  conch-shell,*  discus,*  and  mace,7  bears  the 
Srivatsa*  mark,  and  is  dressed  in  yellow  garments;  He  who  is  four-armed, 
the  cause  of  all  Lokas,*  the  Guru  of  the  world,  the  Lord  of  the  world, 
the  Deva  of  Devas.” 

Brahma  said:  “  O  Janardana,  Deva  of  Devas  and  Lord  of  the  world, 
Bincc  Thou  art  Thyself  the  ISvara 19  of  past,  future  and  present,  why  dost 
Thou  perform  austerity  and  devotion,  and  whom  dost  Thou  contemplate  ? 
This  is  a  matter  of  great  wonder  to  me.  Being  Thyself  the  Lord  of  all 
the  world,  yet  Thou  contemplateth  another.  What,  O  chief  of  Devas,  can 
be  stranger  than  this  ?  ” 

“  Sprung  from  Thy  navel-lotus  I  am  Creator  of  this  entire  universe. 
Thou  art  the  cause  of  all  causes.  What  greater  Devata  can  there  be  in 
this  world  than  Thyself?  O  husband  of  Laksmi!  tell  me  this.” 

“  Lord  of  the  world,  I  know  that  Thou  art  the  first  of  all,  the  cause 
of  all,  the  creator,  preserver,  and  destroyer  of  all,  the  doer  of  all  work, 
and  the  possessor  of  all  Saktis.  Great  King,  I  create  this  world  according 


1  Tattva.  *  Sleep  of  Yoga. 

*  A  name  of  K^na  as  the  destroyer  of  Madhu,  the  demon. 

4  A  gem  secured  by  Vifnu  at  the  churning  of  the  ocean. 

*  Sankha.  *  Gakra  7  Gada. 

*  A  patch  of  white  hair  on  the  breast  of  Viftm. 

*  The  fourteen  regions.  15  Lord  Ordainer. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI? 


239 

to  Thy  desire;  and  Hara,  who  destroys  it  at  the  time  of  dissolution,  is 
also  always  guided  by  Thy  words. 

“  ISa,1  it  is  under  Thy  orders  that  the  sun  travels  in  the  sky,  the  wind 
blows  auspiciously  or  inauspiciously,  fire  gives  heat,  and  clouds  pour  rain. 

“  Being  Ifivara  of  all,  what  Devata  dost  Thou  contemplate  ?  This  I 
■cannot  conceive;  for  as  for  myself  I  do  not  see  a  greater  Devata  than 
Thyself  in  the  three  worlds.” 

“  O  Noble-doer,  I  pray  Thee,  kindly  tell  me  this,  for  Smrti  says  that 
great  people  seldom  make  a  secret  of  anything.” 

Hearing  these  words  of  Prajapati,*  Visnu  said:  “  Be  attentive;  I  shall 
tell  you  that  which  I  have  in  my  mind.” 

“  Although  Devas,  Asuras,  and  men  know  Thyself,  Myself,  and 
Mahadeva  to  be  creator,  preserver,  and  destroyer,  yet  Thou,  versed  in  the 
Veda,  know  that  it  is  through  Sakti  that  Thou  art  creator,  I  am  preserver, 
and  Mahadeva  is  destroyer.”  8 

“  In  Thee  exists  the  RajasI  Sakti  who  brings  forth  the  world,  in 
Myself  the  SSttviki  Sakti,  who  maintains  the  world,  and  in  Maharudra 
the  Tamasi  Sakti,  who  destroys  the  world.” 

“  Devoid  of  these  Saktis  Thou  art  no  longer  Lord  of  creation,  I  am 
unable  to  maintain  the  world,  and  Mahadeva  also  is  unable  to  destroy  it.” 

“  Vibhu,4  both  directly  and  indirectly  we  arc  always  subject  to  that 
ISvari  of  all.  O  Noble-doer,  listen  to  an  instance  of  this.” 

“  It  is  true  that  in  Mahapralaya8  I  lie  on  Ananta  as  my  couch,  but 
■even  then  I  am  certainly  dependent;  for  subject  to  that  Mah&akti,  I  again 
awake  at  the  proper  time  under  the  influence  of  Kala.”  • 

“  It  is  under  Her  that  I  ever  practise  austerity  and  at  times  freely 
•  enjoy  the  company  of  Laksxni,  and  at  times  I  am  engaged  in  terrific  wars 
with  Danavas — wars  fearful  to  all  Lokas  and  oppressive  to  the  beings 
therein.” 

“  Knower  of  Dharma,  of  yore,  in  that  one  ocean,  I  fought  a  hand  to 
hand  fight  for  five  thousand  years.  You  saw  that  with  Your  own  eyes.” 

“  It  was  through  the  grace  of  the  Supreme  Devi  that  I  was  able  to 
kill  the  two  wicked  Danavas,  Madhu  and  Kaitabha,  intoxicated  by  vanity 
and  bom  of  the  dirt  of  my  ears.” 

“  Did  You  not  perceive  even  then  that  the  Sakti  aspect  alone, 
supreme  over  the  supreme,  is  the  cause  of  all  action  ?  Great  Soul,  who  do 
You,  then  repeatedly  ask  about  the  matter?  ” 

1  Lord  Ordainer.  •  Brahma. 

*  And  so  the  Kubjika  Tantra  says  that  it  is  not  Brahma,  but  Brahmi,  who 
•creates;  it  is  not  Vijnu,  but  Vaijpavi,  who  preserves;  it  is  not  Rudra,  but 
Rudrani,  who  destroys.  Their  husbands  are  as  inert  as  corpses. 

*  Omnipresent  Deva. 

*  The  great  dissolution  of  things. 


•  Time. 


260 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


“  She  is  the  cause  of  all  causes,  created  by  whose  will  I,  as  Purusar 
live  in  the  one  ocean  and  incarnate  myself  age  after  age  as  tortoise,  boar, 
half-man  and  half-lion,  dwarf,  and  the  like.” 

“  No  one  in  the  three  worlds  wishes  to  be  bora  as  a  lower  animal.  I, 
too,  did  not  of  my  own  free  will,  take  birth  as  a  boar  and  as  other  lower 
animals.” 

“  Who  will  willingly  take  birth  as  a  fish  or  the  like,  forsaking  the 
blissful  company  of  LaksmI  in  Vaikmjtha?  What  independent  Puru?a 
leaves  a  soft  bed  for  the  back  of  Garuda 1  and  proceeds  to  wage  formidable 
wars  with  invincible  Daityas  ?  ” 

“  O  birthless  Deva,  in  ancient  time,  when  the  bow-string  slipped  in 
your  presence,  my  head  was  severed  and  thrown  off,  no  one  knew  where. 
At  that  time  You  cut  off  the  head  of  a  horse  and  had  it  attached  to  my 
body  by  ViSvakarma,  the  great  artisan.”  1 * * * * 

“  Since  then  I  am  known  by  the  name  of  Hayagriva,  Lord  of  Lokas.8 
That  incident  You  saw  with  Your  own  eyes.  Had  I  been  independent 
why  should  I  have  suffered  so  much  trouble  amongst  the  Lokas  ?”  8 

“  Know,  therefore,  that  I  am  not  independent,  that  I  am  in  every 
way  subject  to  Sakti,  and  that  I  always  contemplate  that  great  Sakti. 
Lotus-born  Deva,  I  do  not  know  of  any  truth*  superior  to  this.” 

Narada  said  :  “  This  was  told  by  Viapu  to  the  lotus-born  Deva.  O 
great  Muiii,  the  lotus-bom  Deva  subsequently  told  this  truth*  to  me.” 

“  Do  you  too,  therefore,  worship  the  lotus-feet  of  the  Dev!  in  your 
heart  without  misgiving,  for  the  attainment  of  your  object.” 

Sadhaka,  can  anyone  who  has  no  bias  as  regards  Sakti  and  no  malice 
also  as  regards  Visnu,  if  chosen  an  arbiter,  ever  say,  on  seeing  all  this  evi¬ 
dence  drawn  from  the  Sastra,  that  he  who  considers  Sakti  to  be  devoid  of 
consciousness*  is  a  believer?  In  all  ages,  and  particularly  in  the  Kali  age, 
the  career  of  religious  revolution  is  indomitable.  When  Caitanya-deva  * 
deluged  all  Bengal  with  huge  waves  of  the  name  of  Hari,  he  observed  that 
Brahmana,  Kgattriya,  and  Vaiiya  families  were  on  the  verge  of  ruin.  He 
thought  that  in  the  then  state  of  society  full  of  Navaiakha  Sudras,7 


1  The  Bird-king,  vehicle  (vahana)  of  Vijnu. 

1  Hence  Visnu  is  called  Hayagriva  (horse-faced  one).  The  incident  is  relat¬ 
ed  in  Devi  Bhagavata.  Vi$nu  fell  asleep  resting  on  his  bow.  Brahma  and 
others,  wishing  to  awaken  him,  induced  the  white  ants,  called  vamris,  to  bite 

through  the  bow-string.  The  mighty  bow  was  released  and  cut  off  Visnu’s 

head,  which  was  not  found,  and  a  horse’s  head  was  then  joined  to  the  body. 

*  The  fourteen  regions.  See  Introduction  to  Tantro  S astro.  *  Tattva. 

*Jada.  8  The  Vaijnava  Saint  of  that  name. 

7  Milkman,  gardener,  oilman,  weaver,  confectioner,  betel-grower,  potter, 
smith,  and  barber  castes— middle-class  Sfldras,  as  opposed  both  to  the  highest 

class  Kayasthas,  etc.,  and  the  lowest  class. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI? 


261 

incompetent1  for  either  the  Vaidik  or  Tantrik  dharma,  Harinam  Samkirtana2 3 
was  the  best  Dharma,  and  consequently  he  preached  that  Dharma. 

In  those  days,  owing  to  the  degeneration  of  Brahmapas  in  a  society 
full  of  Sudras  and  of  the  lowest  classes,  such  Puranas  as  Devi-bhagavata, 
Mahabhagavata,  etc.,  in  which  the  greatness  of  Sakti  is  established,  ceased 
to  be  preached  in  Bengal.  Moreover,  owing  to  the  steady  increase  of  the 
lowest  classes  through  the  influence  of  the  Kali  age,  only  such  Puranas  and 
Sastra  as  are  favourable  exclusively  to  the  preaching  of  the  name  of  Hari, 
and  mainly  and  elaborately  describe  the  greatness  of  Vianu  amongst  all 
Devas  and  Dcvis,  began  to  be  read,  explained,  recited,  and  so  forth. 
Although  the  teachers®  and  Brahmapas  of  the  country  proficient  in  Sastra 
were  in  many  cases  worshippers  of  the  Sakti  Mantra,  most  of  them  were 
yet  dependent  on  Sudras  for  their  living,  so  that  in  spite  of  their  knowledge 
of  the  Sastras  in  which  the  greatness  of  Sakti  is  established,  they  dared  not 
bring  them  forward  to  the  public  notice  for  fear  of  thereby  losing  their 
means  of  livelihood. 

Next,  those  who  became  Prabhus,4  upon  the  spread  throughout  the 
country  of  branches  and  sub-branchcs  of  the  Caitanya®  community,  have 
from  generation  to  generation  shown  extreme  partiality  towards  one  part 
of  the  Sastra,  so  that  the  inferences  which  they  have  drawn  therefrom  touch 
only  that  part  of  the  Sastras,  and  are  alone  revered  as  essential  truths  within 
their  own  community.  It  is  these  one-sided  inferences  of  the  Prabhus 
which  have  brought  ruin  on  Bengal.  Ordinary  Vaispavas  have  been  given  to 
understand  that  the  Lord  is  the  owner  of  Sakti  and  that  Sakti  is  His  servit- 
rcss,  so  that  they  worship  Radhika  with  articles  of  food  already  offered  to 
Sri  Krspa.®  At  the  present  time  the  book  Can<^i,  contained  in  the  Markap- 
<Jcya  Purana,  which  describes  the  greatness  of  the  Devi,  is  commonly  taken 
to  be  the  Sastra  in  which  Sakti  stands  supreme.  The  Prabhus,  quoting  it 
as  their  authority,  say  that  as  one  of  the  names  of  Sakti  is  Visnumaya,  she 
must  therefore  be  a  great  Vaispavi. 7  It  is  thus  because  Sakti  is  considered 
to  be  a  great  Vaispavi,  that  modern  Vaispavas  do  Siva  the  favour  of  taking 
Him  for  a  “  Spiritual  brother  Let  Bhagavan  judge  their  conduct.  Here 
we  shall  merely  discuss  the  Sastrik  evidence,  on  which  the  notion  that 
Bhagavati  is  a  great  Vaispavi  is  based. 


1  Adhikara. 

2  Singing  Han’s  (Vi?nu’s)  name  with  music  and  dancing. 

*  Adhyapakas, 

4  Gossains,  or  religious  preceptors  of  Vaispavas. 

&  The  Vaigpava  Saint  of  that  name. 

•  Literally,  leavings  of  food  partaken  by  Sri  Kf$na. 

3  Worshipper  of  Vi?pu. 


262 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


It  has  been  said  in  Caij^i  : 

“  Under  the  influence  of  the  MahSmaya  of  Bhagavan,  who  preserve* 
the  samsira,  Jlvas  fall  into  the  pit  of  illusion,1  with  its  eddies  of  ‘  minc- 
neas  * 

Do  not,  therefore,  be  astonished  at  this.  Mahamaya  is  the  Yoga- 
nidrS  *  of  Hari,  the  Lord  of  the  universe,  and  it  is  by  Her  that  this  world 
is  charmed. 

“  That  Devi  Bhagavati  Mahamaya  forcibly  draws  the  mental  faculties- 
of  even  the  wise  and  gives  them  over  to  illusion.”  4 

By  Her  is  created  this  world,  consisting  of  things  moving  and  non- 
moving,  and  She  alone,  when  so  pleased,  is  the  dispenser  of  blessings  and 
gives  salvation  to  JIva. 

“  That  eternal  (Supreme}  Vidya  *  is  both  the  cause  of  salvation,  and 
the  cause  of  Jivas'  bondage  in  Samsara.  She  is  the  Iivari  of  the  I&varas 
of  all”* 

The  Vaisnava  Prabhus  here  say  that  the  two  adjectival  expressions, 

“  The  Yoganidra  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  ”  and  “  The  Mah&m&ya  of’. 
Hari,”  prove  beyond  doubt  the  subordination  of  Mahamaya  or  Sakti  to 
Hari,  otherwise,  “  Why,”  they  argue,  “  should  Sastra  call  Her  the  Maha¬ 
maya  of  Hari  or  the  Yoganidra  of  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  ?”  What  is 
known  through  another  is  surely  subordinate  to  that  other ;  as,  for  in¬ 
stance,  expressions  such  as  man’s  sleep,  man’s  intelligence,  and  man’s 
power  indicate  sleep,  intelligence,  and  power  subordinate  to  man. 

We  shall  subsequently  refer  to  the  Sastrik  interpretations  and  infer¬ 
ences  regarding  the  points  in  issue.  Here  it  is  merely  necessary  to  under¬ 
stand  whether  Bhagavan’s  Yoganidra  is  a  thing  similar  to  your  or  my 
nidra.7  Assuming,  for  argument,  that  Yoganidra  is  nothing  but  the  nidra- 
Sakti*  subordinate  to  Bhagavan  :  the  question  still  remains,  why,  in  the 
chapter  relating  to  the  destruction  of  Madhu  and  Kaitabha,  and  in  which 
the  power  of  Yoganidra  has  been  described,  Brahma,  seated  on  the  navel- 
lotus  of  Bhagavan,  is  said  to  have  prayed  to  Nidra  instead  of  to  Visnu  for 
Vi?pu’s  awakening?  Who  is  there  in  the  world  so  foolish  as  to  pray  to 
sleep,  a  thing  unconscious,  instead  of  the  sleeping  conscious  person  for  his 
awakening?  Again,  the  killing  of  Madhu  and  Kaitabha  by  Bhagavan 
redounds  to  the  glory  of  Bhagavan  alone.  But  why,  when  about  to  relate 
the  greatness  of  Sakti  in  the  Can^I,  does  Markandeya,  the  great  Rsi,  first 

1  Moha.  *  Mamata  (egoism).  *  Sleep  of  Yoga  of  I  jvara. 

4  Moha;  and  so  also  the  Kalika  Pur  an  a  states  that  the  Devi  leads  men  into 
confusion,  egoism,  sensual  desire,  etc.  She  is  the  bewilderer  (sarvamohinl) 
(LaBti  Sahasranama,  verse  137),  bewildering  the  world  with  Her  mfiy&  (Karma 
Purina), 

•The Devi  (see  Introduction  to  T antra  Sistra) . 

1  Sleep. 


4  Lord  of  all  Lords. 
•  Power  of  sleep. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  263 

of  all  speak  of  the  greatness  of  Visi^u  as  illustrated  by  the  killing  of  Madhu 
and  Kaitabha? 

We  deem  it  a  sin  even  to  believe  that  anything  said  by  the  great 
Rsi,  Markandeya,  can  be  tainted  with  the  fault  of  superfluity.  What, 
then,  is  the  right  solution  of  these  questions?  Some  interpreters  of  the 
Candl  have,  with  the  object  of  arriving  at  that  solution,  devised  forced 
meanings  of  the  Slokas  concerned,  and  by  their  means  endeavoured  to 
establish  the  greatness  of  Sakti.  But  we  say  that  a  solution  arrived  at 
through  forced  meanings  of  the  words  of  Sastra  can  never  be  a  right  solution. 
Again,  what  danger  has  there  appeared  which  is  so  great  that  the  unsus¬ 
pecting  world  must  be  deceived  with  forced  interpretations  of  the  words 
of  Sastra?  What  does  it  matter  to  you  or  to  me  if,  according  to  Sastra, 
Vi;ou  becomes  supreme  and  Sakti  His  subordinate?  In  reality,  what  the 
interpreters  consider  to  be  a  danger  is  none  at  all,  but  rather  a  blessing. 
None  can  become  subordinate  or  supreme.  What  one  is,  one  remains. 
Only  you  and  I,  through  the  perversity  of  our  intellects,  ascribe  to  Devatas 
the  states  of  superiority  and  subordination  to  which  we  ourselves  are 
subject,  and,  being  thus  unable  to  perceive  the  subtle  Sastrik  truth,1  we  go 
down  to  perdition.  The  Sakti- tattva  made  of  maya,  with  which  you  and 
I  are  acquainted,  is  not  the  same  thing  as  the  Sakti-tattva  superior  to 
maya  which  belongs  to  Bhagav&n.  The  sleep  consisting  of  delusion*  and 
maya,  which  we  know  of,  is  not  the  same  thing  as  Bhagavan’s  sleep,  which 
consists  of  constant  consciousness.  Just  as  you  and  I  are  overpowered  by 
sleep,  so  your  and  my  sleep  is  also  corrupted  by  the  corruption  of  non- 
consdous  gross  matter.*  But  when  Bhagavan  is  overpowered  by  sleep,  His 
yoganidra  is  that  great  Sakti  which  is  ever  awake  and  full  of  light.*  When 
a  Jiva  sleeps  his  imperfect  sleep,  another  can  awaken  him  by  any  means; 
for  any  sharp  contact  with  sound,  touch,  etc.,  causes  the  Jiva’s  senses  to 
ruffle  the  imperfect  power  of  sleep  and  to  awaken  him  by  his  own  consd- 
ousness;  thus  you  and  I  can  awaken  a  sleeping  person  by  calling  or 
pushing  him. 

But  not  so  with  Bhagavan.  He  possesses  all  iaktis.  No  Sakti  in  Him 
is  imperfect.  For  this  reason,  while  Jiva’s  sleep  is  sleep,  Igvara’s  sleep  is 
yoganidra.  Your  and  my  maya  is  called  simply  maya.  But  this  maya  is 
called  yoga-maya.  You  or  I  can,  at  the  utmost,  be  a  yogi,  but  Bhagav&n 
is  the  l£vara  of  all  yogas,  and  so  His  Sakti  is  I&vari  of  the  Iivara  of  all 
yogas.  A  Jiva  can  rarely  acquire  an  infinitesimal  part  of  that  Sakti  by 
dint  of  yoga,  but  that  Sakti  is  eternally  present  in  BhagavSn.  Jiva  is 
imperfect;  so  Jiva’s  Sakti  also  is  imperfect.  Bhagavan  is  perfect;  so  His 
Sakti  also  is  perfect.  Jiva  is  constituted  mainly  of  the  inert  *  prindple ; 


1  Tattva. 
*Ja<Ja. 


*  Moha. 

*  Jyotih. 


264 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


and  so  Jiva’s  iakti  is  also  predominated  by  the  same  principle.  Bbagav&n 
is  made  of  consciousness;  so  His  Sakti  also  is  made  of  consciousness. 
Your  or  my  sakti  of  sleep  is  constituted  of  the  inert  principle,  but  Bhaga- 
van’s  Sakti  of  sleep  is  constituted  of  the  conscious  principle. 

Even  when  He  is  asleep.  He  remains  awake;  for  while  your  or  my 
sleep  is  merely  constituted  of  the  tamas  gupa,  His  sleep  is  superior  to 
tamas  guna,  although  constituted  of  it.  For  this  reason,  at  the  time  of 
the  great  dissolution 1  the  Mother  of  the  universe  assumes  the  aspect  of 
sleep;  and,  taking  on  Her  lap  all  Her  sons  and  daughters  from  Brahma, 
Vi$pu  and  Maheivara  downwards,  inhabiting  the  innumerable  crores  of 
Brahman^as,  She  puts  them  all  to  sleep.  But  She  who  is  existence, 
consciousness,  and  bliss,  and  supports  the  universe.  Herself  remains  awake. 
When,  after  a  whole  day’s  play,  the  son  stands  before  the  mother  in  the 
evening,  with  a  weary  body,  she  at  once  takes  him  on  her  lap  and  removes 
the  weariness  by  putting  him  to  sleep.  It  is  this  subject  *  which  has  been 
so  well  depicted  in  the  illuminating  story  of  the  killing  of  Madhu  and 
Kaitabha.  After  the  great  dissolution 1  when  the  world  remains  immersed 
in  the  one  ocean,  Bhagavan  sleeps  in  Yoganidr&  to  the  close  of  ages, 
shutting  his  eyes  and  lying  on  Ananta  in  the  midst  of  that  mass  of  water 
which  deluges  the  Brahmandas. 

Visnu  is  the  preserver  of  the  world.  Whom  will  He  preserve  when 
the  great  dissolution 1  is  accomplished  ?  When  there  will  be  creation  again, 
then  there  will  be  necessity  for  preservation.  The  long  period  intervening 
is  the  time  for  Visnu’s  rest.  Visnu  plays  till  the  arrival  of  the  great 
dissolution,  and  instantly  the  son’s  play  it  ended  the  Mother  lays  Him  on 
the  bed  of  rest  and  puts  him  to  deep  sleep.  Unlike  other  mothers,  She 
has  to  make  no  effort  in  order  to  put  the  son  to  sleep.  The  universe-per¬ 
vading  Devi  is  Herself  in  one  aspect  sleep.  In  proper  time  She  appears 
in  that  aspect,  and  lays  Bhagavan  on  Her  lap.  He  cannot,  therefore,  be 
awakened  by  being  called  like  other  sleeping  persons.  He  can  rise  only 
when  the  Devi,  who  appears  as  sleep,  frees  Him  from  Her  own  tamasik 
bonds.  When,  therefore,  Bhagavan  Brahma  failed  to  break  Visnu’s  sleep 
by  all  manner  of  prayer,  entreaty,  etc.,  He  understood  that  that  sleep, 
which  was  in  reality  consciousness,  was  not  ordinary  sleep.  Perceiving 
that  the  mercy  of  Yoganidra,  the  Mother  of  the  world,  could  alone  save 
Him,  He  began  to  praise  Her.  From  the  very  fact  that  all  the  prayers, 
entreaties,  loud  calls,  and  the  like,  of  Brahma,  with  His  four  mouths, 
could  not  break  Visnu’s  sleep,  it  must  be  understood  that  sleep  was  not 
subordinate  to  Vi$nu,  but  Visnu  was  subordinate  to  sleep.  Had  it  been 
Vi$rju’s  sleep,  it  would  have  been  easily  broken ;  but  it  was  sleep’s  Vi?pu, 
and  therefore  the  sleep  did  not  break. 


1  Mahapralaya. 


*  Tattva. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI? 


265 


Again,  in  the  place  where  Bhagav&n  is  described  as  being  tired  with 
fighting  with  Madhu  and  Kaitabha,  Sastra  says: 

“  Charmed  by  Mahamaya  those  two  Daityas,  maddened  with  the 
pride  of  their  great  strength,  requested  KeSava 1  to  ask  for  some  blessing 
from  them.”  What  kind  of  thing  was  that  charming  by  Mahamaya  ?  The 
Candi  docs  not  particularly  relate  when  and  how  She  charmed  the  Asuras, 
and  why  the  two  Daityas  also  all  at  once  asked  Bhagavan  to  seek  a  blessing 
from  them.  In  fact,  although  the  greatness  of  the  Devi  has  been  des¬ 
cribed  in  the  Candi,  the  description  is  very  short.  We  cannot,  therefore, 
get  a  correct  answer  to  these  intricate  questions  from  the  Candi  itself. 
For  this  reason  we  shall  quote  from  the  Dcvi-Bhagavata  the  relevant 
portions  of  the  account  which  it  gives  of  the  killing  of  Madhu  and 
Kaitabha.  Seekers  of  truth  will  know  from  them  the  deep  mystery  which 
surrounds  the  story  of  the  killing  of  Madhu  and  Kaitabha  and  free  their 
minds  from  doubts. 

When,  after  having  performed  severe  austerities  for  a  thousand  years, 
and  having  received,  on  that  account,  the  blessing  of  death-at-will  *  from 
the  Devi,  Madhu  and  Kaitabha  advanced  to  fight  with  Brahma  in  order 
to  wrest  from  Him  His  lotus-seat,  Brahma  prayed  to  Visnu  in  great  fear 
but  failed  to  awaken  Him.  Here  Sastra  says : 

“  Seeing  that  all  His  prayers  were  of  no  avail  in  awakening  Bhagavan 
Hari,  who  was  lying  under  the  influence  of  Yoganidra,  Brahma  thought 
to  himself  that  Vi$nu  was  surely  sleeping  under  the  influence  of  that 
Mahaiakti.  What  will  my  sorrow  avail,  when  the  Founder  of  Dharma* 
Himself  will  not  awake  at  this  crisis  of  Adharma  ? 4 

“  The  two  Danavas,  puffed  up  with  pride,  have  come  with  the  object 
of  killing  me.  What  shall  I  do — where  shall  I  go?  There  is  none  to  save 
me.”  Revolving  this  in  His  mind,  Brahma  decided  and  resolved  to  pray 
to  Yoganidra  with  unswerving  devotion.  He  considered  in  His  mind  that 
in  the  insurmountable  danger  which  faced  Him  at  the  time,  Maha£akti 
alone  could  save  Him;  that  Mahaiakti,  under  whose  influence  even  Vi^pu, 
whose  substance  was  eternal  consciousness,  lay  deprived  of  the  power  of 
movement. 

“Just  as  a  dead  man  does  not  perceive  sound  and  other  qualities  of 
the  things  of  the  world,  so  Hari  also,  with  eyes  closed  in  sleep,  does  not 
perceive  the  prayers  that  I  am  making  to  Him.”  When,  in  spite  of  my 
many  and  earnest  prayers.  He  does  not  shake  off  His  sleep,  I  know  of  a 
certainty  that  sleep  is  not  under  His  control,  but  that  He  is  under  the 
-control  of  sleep.  He  who  is  under  the  control  of  another  is  surely  that 


1  Vi?nu.  *  Death  only  when  desired. 

*  Righteousness.  *  Unrighteousness. 


266 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


other’s  servant.  This  Yoganidra  is,  therefore,  mistress  over  even  Bhagav&n 
Hari,  husband  of  LaksmI. 

(It  is  not  only  that  Bhagavan  Vi?qu  is  under  the  power  of  Parame&- 
van  in  Her  full  aspect,  but  He  is  also  under  the  power  of  Her  partial 
incarnation.)  “  He  is  always  bound  in  love  to  even  Lalqmi,  the 
daughter  of  Ocean,  and  under  Her  control.” 

“  It  is  therefore  certain  that  Bhagavati,  in  Her  aspect  of  Sakti,  thus 
holds  the  entire  universe  under  Her  control.  There  is  not  the  least  doubt 
that  myself,  Vi$qu,  Sambhu,  Savitri,  Rama,  and  Uma — everyone  of  us — 
is  under  the  control  of  that  Hvari  of  all:  under  whose  influence  even 
Bhagavan  Hari  sleeps  like  an  ordinary  mortal  without  control  over  His 
limbs.  What  wonder,  then,  that  under  Her  influence  all  other  great 
persons  should  remain  charmed?  I  shall  to-day  please,  by  means  of 
prayers,  that  Yoganidra  by  whom,  when  released,  Janardana  Vasudeva1 
will  engage  in  war.”  Having  thus  determined,  Bhagavan  Brahma  began 
to  pray,  from  His  place  on  the  stem  of  Visqu’s  navel-lotus,  to  Yoganidra  in 
Narayaqa’s  body. 

Brahma  said:  “Mother,  all  that  the  Vedas  say  has  taught  me  that 
Thou,  O  Dew,  art  the  sole  cause  of  this  phenomenal  world;  wherefore 
even  Purusottama*  Vi?nu,  who  awakens  all  worlds,  is  to-day  lying  asleep 
under  Thy  influence.  Dweller  in  all  things,  Mother,  Thou  art  above 
guqas.  Who  is  so  wise  amongst  the  millions  of  Dev  as  as  to  certainly  know 
that  which  is  the  free  play  of  illusion  caused  by  Thee  ?  I  am  in  every  way 
ignorant  in  the  matter,  and  Narayana  here  sleeps  without  control  over 
Himself.  The  person  whom  followers  of  the  Samkhya  Philosophy  call 
Purusa,  whose  substance  is  consciousness,  is  admitted  by  them  to  be  also 
Prakrti,  the  Creatrix  of  the  world  devoid  of  consciousness.’  Art  Thou 
really  such  Prakrti?  Otherwise,  why  should  Narayaqa,  the  seat  of  all  con¬ 
sciousness  in  the  world,  be  to-day  made  unconscious  by  Thee  ?  (Unless  the 
Mother  be  unconscious,  how  can  She  bear  the  sight  of  such  misery  of  Her 
son  ?)  BhavanI,  with  Thy  guqas,  Thou  art  making  all  manner  of  play.1 
Who  has  the  power  to  know  the  process  of  this  yoga  of  creation  practised 
by  Thee  whom  munis  thrice  daily  contemplate  under  the  name  SandhyS 
with  all  gunas  ?  Mother,  Thou  art  intelligence,  which  is  the  source  of  all 
knowledge  in  the  three  worlds.  Devi,  Thou  art  Lak$mi,  who  ever  grants 
happiness  to  Suras,6  and  glory  (intelligence,  patience,  beauty,  reverence) 

1  Vi$qu.  1  The  best  of  Puru?as. 

*  The  Samkhya  distinguishes  between  Purusa  and  Prakrti.  But  probably 
Brahma,  the  speaker,  here  means  to  say  that  Prakrti  and  Purusa  are  really  one, 
and  not  two,  and  it  is  that  one  whom  the  Samkhya  Philosophy  sees  in  two 
aspects,  at  one  time  as  full  of  consciousness,  and  again  as  devoid  of  con¬ 
sciousness. 

1  Natya. 


1  Devas. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI? 


267 


and  love  in  the  hearts  of  all  bangs  in  the  three  worlds.1  Thinking  even 
in  a  hundred  ways  on  the  present  state  of  my  sorrow  and  suffering,  I  find 
nothing  more  strongly  proved  than  this,  that  Thou  art  the  Genetrix  of  all 
the  world;  otherwise  who  but  the  Mother  of  Brahma  and  others,  and  the 
Genetrix  of  the  Brahmai?<Ja,  can  put  to  sleep  the  son  who  is  all  full  of 
Brahman?*  Devi,  withdraw  Thyself  from  the  limbs  of  Narayana  and 
assume  a  wonderful  form.  Sportful  as  Thou  art,  like  a  child  (Thy  sport 
is  sport  of  will  like  that  of  children)  Thou  canst  do  whatever  Thou  likes t. 
Do  Thou  kill  me  or  these  two  Daily  as.  And  if  Thou  wilt  not  kill  them 
Thyself,  awaken  Hari,  who,  when  awake,  will  kill  them.  Whether  Thou 
Thyself  killest  or  by  means  of  Vipju,  in  both  cases  the  work  will  be 
Thine  alone.” 

Suta  said :  “  Thus  prayed  to  by  Brahm5  in  the  waters  of  the  one 
ocean  that  Devi  whose  substance  was  the  tamas  guija  *  withdrew  Herself 
from  all  the  limbs  of  Vi?nu  of  incomparable  brilliance,  in  order  to  destroy 
the  two  Daityas.  Assuming  a  charming  form.  She  stood  beside  Bhagavan. 
Upon  the  Devi  withdrawing  Herself  from  Bhagav&n’s  body,  it  moved. 
Seeing  Narayana  regaining  consciousness,  Vidhata  4  was  greatly  satisfied.” 

Again,  the  following  appears  in  the  eighth  chapter  in  connccdon  with 
the  fight  with  Madhu  and  Kaitabha: 

“  When  full  five  thousand  years  had  passed  in  the  fight,  Narayana 
bethought  himself  how  their  death  might  be  caused.  ‘  Five  thousand 
years  have  I  fought.  It  is  a  wonder  to  me  that  although  I  feel  tired,  these 
formidable  Danavas  are  not  at  all  wearied.  Where  arc  gone  my  strength 
and  prowess  in  this  fight  ?  And  why  do  they  fully  retain  their  strength  ? 
What  is  the  cause  of  this  ?  Let  me  think  upon  it.’  Seeing  Narayana  thus 
immersed  in  thought,  the  two  Daityas,  intoxicated  with  vanity,  became 
overwhelmed  with  joy,  and  said,  with  voices  deep  as  the  rumbling  of  clouds: 

“  ‘  Visnu,  if  you  have  no  strength  left  in  you,  if  the  fight  has  wearied 
you  out,  join  the  palms  of  your  hands,  and,  putting  them  on  your  head, 
say:  “Surely  do  I  become  your  slave.”  Otherwise,  if  you  are  capable, 
fight  with  us,  so  that  we  may  first  kill  you,  and  next  this  four-headed  one.’  ” 

Suta  said:  “  Hearing  these  words  spoken  by  them  in  that  vast  ocean, 
Vispu,  of  mighty  intellect,  and  wise  to  conciliate,  gently  spoke.” 

Hari  said:  “  It  is  the  Sanatana  Dharma  *  of  heroes  not  to  strike  any¬ 
one  who  is  wearied  or  is  afraid,  or  has  given  up  arms,  or  has  fallen  down, 

1  And  so  also  the  Gita  says :  Kirttih  Srirvak  ca  narinam  smritir-medha 
dhfitih  ksama. 

*  The  son  all  full  of  Brahman  is  Vi$ou  under  the  influence  of  yoganidra. 
Brahma  is  here  saying  that  this  Yoganidra  must  be  the  mother  of  Brahma, 
Vi$nu,  and  Mahe^vara,  for  who  but  this  mother  can  put  Vi?nu  to  sleep  ?  The 
Mother  alone  can  put  the  son  to  sleep. 

*  Sleep.  4  Brahma.  •  The  immutable  duty. 


268 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


or  is  young  in  age.  Besides  this,  for  five  thousand  years  I  have  {ought 
singly  with  you  two  brothers,  who  are  both  equally  powerful.  You  have 
alternately  taken  rest.  But  from  beginning  to  end  I  have  fought  singly, 
so  that  I  shall  first  take  as  much  rest  as  you  have  done,  and  then  fight 
with  you.  Although  you  are  strong  and  intoxicated  with  pride,  you  arc 
in  justice  bound  to  wait  so  long  as  I  take  my  rest.  And  after  rest  I  too 
shall,  as  injustice  bound,  engage  in  fight  with  you.” 

Suta  said:  “Hearing  these  words  uttered  by  Bhagavan,  the  two 
Danavas  became  assured,  and,  being  resolved  on  fighting,  sat  at  a  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  field  of  battle.  Seeing  the  Daityas  sitting  at  a  consider¬ 
able  distance,  Vasudcva  began  to  think  to  himself  how  their  death  might 
be  caused.  In  meditation  Bhagavan,  the  Dweller  in  all  things,  came  to 
know  that  Devi  had  given  them  the  blessing  of  death-at-will,  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  the  hard  labour  of  fighting  could  not  weary  them.  He  thought: 
Uselessly  have  I  fought  so  long,  useless  has  become  my  labour,  and  now 
that  I  have  for  certain  known  the  truth,  how  can  I  fight  with  them  ?  But 
if  I  do  not  fight,  how  will  these  two  Danavas,  puffed  up  with  the  blessing  < 
which  they  have  received,  and  who  arc  the  source  of  constant  trouble  to 
Devas,  be  destroyed  ?  The  blessing  which  Bhagavati  has  granted  to  them 
is  but  little  likely  to  be  fulfilled;  for  even  they  who  have  most  cause  for 
grief  do  not  willingly  court  death.1  When  even  the  diseased  and  poverty- 
stricken  do  not  desire  to  die,  why  should  these  two  Asuras,  in  the  intoxi¬ 
cation  of  pride,  court  death  willingly?  However  that  may  be,  I  shall  to¬ 
day  seek  the  protection  of  Mahavidya  who  is  Sakti  and  fulfillcr  of  all 
desires;  for,  unless  She  is  pleased,  no  desire  can  be  fulfilled.”  As  He 
thus  thought,  Bhagavan  Visnu  saw  Yoganidra,  the  consort  of  Siva,  appear 
in  a  charming  form  in  the  sky.  Thereupon,  almighty  Narayana,  the 
master  of  yoga,  began  to  pray  with  joined  bands  to  that  Isvari  of  the 
world,  the  dispenser  of  blessings,  for  the  destruction  of  the  two  Asuras. 

Visnu  said :  “  I  bow  to  Thee,  O  Devi,  Candi  Mahamaya,  Thou  who 
hast  no  beginning  and  no  end,  who  dost  create,  preserve,  and  destroy, 
who  grantest  both  enjoyment  and  salvation,  and  who  art  the  consort  of 
■Siva.  Devi,  I  know  neither  your  form  with  attribute,*  nor  your  attribute- 
less  *  aspect. 

“  How  can  I,  therefore,  know  the  innumerable  forms  under  which 
Thou  appearest?  Although  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  gauge  your  power, 
this  much  at  least  I  know,  that  I  slept  and  was  unconscious  under  Thy 
influence.  I  could  not  awaken,  though  repeatedly  and  assiduously  sum¬ 
moned  by  Brahma.  Mother,  because  my  five  senses  of  knowledge,  and 

-  _ _  f 

1  The  blessing  is  death-at-will,-  and  as  no  one  desires  death  there  is  no 
likelihood  of  this  blessing  being  fulfilled — that  is  to  say,  of  their  death,  which 
depends  on  their  will,  occurring. 

*  Saguna.  *  Nirguna. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI? 


269 


my  mind,  contracted  under  Thy  influence,  I  became  wholly  unconscious. 

I  awoke  only  when  I  was  released  by  Thee,  and  after  that  I  have  fought 
much.  This  long  fight  has  tired  me,  but  failed  to  tire  these  two  Asuras 
whom  your  blessing  has  made  great  heroes.  When  the  Danavas,  intoxi¬ 
cated  with  pride,  came  to  kill  Brahma,  I  challenged  them  in  fight  in  any 
fashion  they  might  choose.  Since  then  I  have  fought  hard  with  them  in 
this  vast  ocean. 

“  But,  O  Giver  of  honour,  who  can  dishonour  those  whom  Thou 
hast  honoured  ?  When,  after  five  thousand  years  of  fight,  I  saw  that  they 
neither  desisted  nor  were  tired,  then  I  came  to  know  that  Thou  hadst 
granted  them  a  wonderful  blessing  in  the  matter  of  death.  Knowing  this, 
I  seek  the  protection  of  Her  who  protects  all  who  are  helpless.  Mother, 
in  the  long  fight  I  have  become  tired.  O  Destroyer  of  the  foes  of  Devas, 
help  me  in  the  work  of  the  Devas.  Through  haughtiness  caused  by  the 
blessing  granted  by  Thee,  the  two  Asuras,  who  are  incarnations  of  sin, 
have  now  become  ready  to  kill  me.  Mother,  what  shall  I  do  now, 
where  shall  I  go  (but  seek  Thy  protection  in  this  great  peril)  ?  ”  Thus, 
addressed,  the  Devi  smiled,  and  said  to  the  bowing  Lord  of  the  world  i 
“  Vasudcva,  these  two  heroes  can  be  deceived  and  then  killed.  Narayapa, 
I  shall  charm  them  with  arch  glances.  Thus  charmed  by  my  maya  you 
shall,  O  Narayana,  soon  destroy  them.” 

Suta  said:  “Hearing  these  loving  words  of  the  Devi,  Bhagavan 
reappeared  in  the  field  of  battle  in  the  midst  of  that  vast  ocean.  Then, 
those  two  composed  and  mightily  powerful  heroes  came  to  the  same  place 
and  were  delighted  to  sec  that  Vi$nu  had  already  arrived  there.  They 
said:  ‘  O  high-aspiring  one,  stay  (we  are  two-armed),  but  you  are  four- 
armed.  Still  take  the  field  of  battle,  knowing  for  certain  that  victory  and 
defeat  depend  on  fate.  The  strong  ever  win,  but  the  weak  also  do  some¬ 
times  win  by  chance.  Wise  persons  should,  therefore,  indulge  in  neither 
joy  nor  grief  in  these  matters.  Enemy  of  Danavas,  many  Daityas  have,  in 
former  times,  been  defeated  by  Thee.  But  now’,  fighting  with  us,  you  are 
defeated.” 

Suta  said:  “Seeing  that  the  two  long-armed  Danavas  who  had  thus 
spoken  were  prepared  for  fight,  Visnu,  with  wondrous  skill,  dealt  blows 
on  them  with  his  fists.  They  also,  intoxicated  by  their  great  strength, 
began  to  strike  Bhagavan  with  their  fists.  Thus  they  waged  terrible 
war  with  each  other.  Seeing  the  powerful  Danavas  thus  engaged  in 
fighting,  Narayajna,  with  a  pained  look,  cast  his  gaze  upon  the  Devi’s 
face.” 

Suta  said :  “  Seeing  Visnu  thus  looking  pained  and  pitiable,  the  Devi 
(whose  three  eyes  were  like  the  morning  sun)  deeply  reddened  them,  and, 
glancing  at  the  two  Asuras,  laughed.  Then,  smiling  softly,  she  pierced 
their  hearts  with  arch  glances,  which  spoke  of  feelings  of  love  and  desire. 


270 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


and  were  as  the  five  arrows  of  Kama.1 * *  Sorely  struck  by  the  arrows  of 
'desire,  the  two  sinful  Danavas,  thinking  that  the  arch  glances  of  the  Den 
meant  favour  to  them,  were  charmed.  They  stood  motionless,  regarding 
the  transparent  beauty  of  the  Devi.  Visnu,  too,  who  knows  the  purpose 
of  every  action,  understood  the  Devi’s  object,  and  perceiving  that  the 
Danavas  were  charmed,  smiled  and  sweetly  said,  with  a  voice  which 
sounded  like  the  rumbling  of  clouds :  ‘  Heroes,  I  have  been  much  pleased 
with  your  fighting.  Ask  for  any  blessing  which  you  may  desire  and  I 
shall  grant  it.  Formerly,  I  have  seen  many  Danavas  fighting;  but  I  have 
neither  seen  nor  heard  of  any  Danava  who  can  fight  as  you  have  done.  I 
am,  therefore,  greatly  pleased  at  the  incomparable  strength  of  arms  pos¬ 
sessed  by  you  two  brothers,  and  am  ready  to  grant  you  any  blessing  which 
you  may  desire.” 

Suta  said :  “  The  two  Daityas,  who  were  overcome  by  lust,  at  the  sight 
of  Mahamaya,  in  whom  all  the  world  find  delight,  said,  their  vanity  being 
wounded  by  Visnu ’s  words:  ‘Hari,  what  is  it  that  you  desire  to  give  us? 
We  are  not  beggars,  rather  we  are  ready  to  give  to  you.  Know  us  to  be 
givers  and  not  beggars.  Hrjlkeia,*  ask  for  whatever  blessing  you  may 
desire.  Vasudeva,  we  too  have  been  pleased  with  your  admirable  fight¬ 
ing.’  Hearing  these  words,  Janardana*  said  in  reply:  ‘  If  you  have  been 
pleased,  grant  me  to-day  this  blessing  that  you  be  killed  by  me.’  ” 

Sflta  said:  “  Hearing  these  words  of  Visnu  the  two  Danavas  became 
extremely  astonished  and,  thinking  themselves  to  have  been  deceived, 
were  grieved  at  heart.  Then,  seeing  all  the  world  full  of  water  and 
destitute  of  land,  they  bethought  themselves,  and  said  to  Visnu:  '  Lord  of 
Dev  as,  Janardana  Hari,  you  are  truthful,  therefore  grant  us  now  the 
blessing  desired  of  us,  which  you  promised  us  but  a  while  ago;  kill  us  in 
some  extensive  place  where  there  is  no  water.  We  have  kept  our  promise 
by  being  willing  to  be  killed  by  you,  and  now  you  too  keep  your  promise 
and  be  truthful.'  Remembering  His  Sudariana  cakra,*  Bhagavan 
Viwu  smiled  and  said  :  ‘  High-favoured  Danavas,  I  accept  your  proposal, 
and  shall  kill  you  in  an  extensive  place  where  there  is  no  water.’  So  say¬ 
ing,  the  Lord  of  Devas  extended  His  thighs  and  displayed  them  as  a  water¬ 
less  place  above  the  waters  of  that  vast  ocean,  saying  to  the  two  Danavas  : 

■  Here  there  is  no  water  ;  lay  your  heads  upon  them  so  that  I  may  keep 
my  word  and  you  too  may  keep  yours.’  Hearing  these  words  of  Bhagavan 
in  keeping  with  His  promise,  the  two  Daityas  devised  a  plan  in  their 
minds  and  extended  their  bodies  to  an  extent  of  one  thousand  yojanas4 


1  Dcva  of  Love. 

*  Visnu.  *  Sudariana  is  the  name  of  the  weapon  (cakra 

or  discus)  of  Visnu  and  means  of  good  appearance. 

4  A  yojana  is  about  eight  miles. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI? 


271 


each.  Seeing  this,  Bhagavan  also  extended  His  thighs  to  double  those 
dimensions.  Madhu  and  Kaitabha  were  astonished  at  seeing  such  incon¬ 
ceivable  power  of  maya  possessed  by  Narayana,  in  whom  all  maya  is  seated, 
and  laid  their  heads  on  the  two  wonderfully  extended  thighs  of  BhagavSn. 
Thereupon,  Visnu  of  great  prowess,  rapidly  severed  with  His  Sudargana 
cakra,  the  great  heads  of  the  two  Daityas  lying  upon  His  thighs.  Thus  the 
two  Daityas  died,  and  the  mass  of  fat  which  was  emitted  from  their  bodies 
covered  the  whole  surface  of  the  ocean.  Because  of  this,  the  earth  is  every¬ 
where  known  as  medini,  and  for  the  same  reason  (that  is  to  say)  because 
formed  in  mixture  with  that  mass  of  fat  soil  is  unfit  for  eating. 

“  Great  Munis,  what  you  asked  me  I  have  related  truly  and  precisely. 
Wise  men  should  worship  Mah&mayS,  who  is  also  Mahavidya.  She  is 
Par  am  a  Sakti,  whom  Suras  and  Asuras  and  all  worship.  There  is  no  truth1 
higher  than  this  in  the  three  worlds.  This  is  the  truth,  the  truth,  and  the 
truth  again.  This  is  the  spiritual  truth  which  the  Veda  Sastra  establishes. 
Worshipful  is  that  Parama  Sakti,  whether  in  Her  form  with  attribute  or  in 
Her  attributcless  aspect.” 


*  Tattva. 


CHAPTER  VIII 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI  ?  {Contd.) 

In  the  case  of  the  ordinary  followers  of  the  theories  that  Sakti  is  uncon¬ 
scious  or  that  She  is  a  great  Vaispavi,  we  entrust  judgment  upon  their 
opinions  to  the  Sadhakas  of  these  communities  respectively.1  Let  them 
consider  whether  the  above  two  classes  adopt  their  respective  conclusions 
because  there  is  Sastrik  evidence  in  their  support,  or  because  of  their  in¬ 
ability  to  enter  into  the  deep  and  weighty  truth  which  the  Sastra  reveals  in 
the  ilokas  above  quoted,  or  because  they  have  not  seen  or  heard  of  all  this 
Sastrik  evidence,  or  lastly  because,  even  if  they  have  so  seen  or  heard  it, 
they  do  not,  through  vanity,  care  to  take  note  of  it.  The  above-quoted 
Sastrik  evidence  proves  that  Saktitattva  is  divided  into  two  parts— first, 
mayaiakti,  that  is,  Sakti  whose  substance  is  gunas,  and  second,  citiakti, 
which  is  above  gunas,  and  is  massive  bliss.  By  mayaiakti  has  this  vast 
and  variegated  drama  of  samsara  been  composed.  In  this  drama  citiakti 
appears  as  Purusa  and  Prakrti  who,  though  free  from  all  attachment  in 
their  real  aspects,  as  Jivas  perform  this  vast  Brahmanda  play.  Giving 
birth  to  all  things  from  Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Maheivara,  to  the  minutest 
insect,  and  spreading  the  manifestations*  of  Herself  both  as  gross  and 
intelligent  substance,®  She  pervades  the  world.  If  you  and  I  were  to 
understand  the  Mother’s  maya,  which  charms  the  minds  of  even  munis, 
with  whom  will  that  Anandamayi  play  the  play  of  the  unconscious  world  ? 
Blind  man  !  should  you  be  proud  of  your  philosophical  knowledge  ?  False 
devotee  !  If,  in  spite  of  your  being  an  enemy  of  Saktas,4  you  deem  yourself 
to  be  a  learned  devotee,  it  is  not  the  glory  of  the  &astra  which  will  be  in 
any  way  dimmed,  but  it  is  you  who  will  be  liable  to  punishment.  You 
and  I  may  hate  or  be  malicious  towards  Saktas  and  yet  not  consider  our¬ 
selves  sinners,  but  Hiranyagarbha  Brahmii*  becomes  a  Sakta,  and  says  : 

1  That  is,  the  Sadhakas  of  the  same  communities  to  which  these  theorists 
belong  are  a  superior  order  of  men,  not  likely  to  be  swayed  by  such  foolish 
ideas.  To  their  judgment,  therefore,  the  question  may  be  safely  left.  The 
theorists  are  those  who  form  the  bulk  of  the  NSstika  and  Vai?oava  communities. 
Nastika  as  here  used  means  a  person  who  thinks  that  Sakti  is  unconscious. 

*  Vibhuti.  *  Jada  and  Caitanya.  4  Worshippers  of  Sakti. 

*  Brahma,  who  sprang  from  the  effulgent  or  golden  womb. 


273 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  {Contd.) 

“  O  Thou  who  art  all  things,  how  canst  Thy  greatness  be  hymned 1 * * * * * 
when  Thou  art  the  Sakti  in  everything,  asat  or  sat,*  which  is  anywhere  in 
the  world  ?  Who  can  hymn  Thee  by  whom  even  Bhagav&n,  the  creator, 
preserver,  and  destroyer  of  the  world,  has  been  overcome  through  sleep  ? 
From  Thee,  Visnu,  Myself,  and  I  Sana*  have  derived  our  bodies.  Who  is, 
therefore,  capable  of  making  hymn  to  Thee  who  art  the  origin  of  even 
Brahma  and  others?  Devi  of  unspeakable  power.  Thy  own  vast  powers  be 
praised  :  and  do  Thou  charm  these  two  indomitable  Asuras,  Madhu  and 
Kaitabha.” 

Again,  Vi?nu  says  :  “  Devi,  I  know  not  any  form  in  which  Thou  ap- 
peareth,  be  it  with  attribute  or  attributelcss.  How,  then,  can  I  know  the 
innumerable  aspects  of  Her  of  whose  form  even  I  am  ignorant  ?  ” 

After  the  war  with  Mahigasura  all  Devas,  descendants  of  Devas,  and 
Maha^is*  stood  before  Katyayani,  who  visibly  appeared  to  them,  and 
said  : 

“  We  bow  with  reverence  to  the  lotus  feet,  worshipped  of  all  Devas 
and  Maharsis,  of  the  Mother  who  has  assumed  form  by  the  withdrawal  of 
all  the  Saktis  from  the  bodies  of  Devas,  and  who  has,  by  Her  own  Sakti, 
created  this  world  consisting  of  things  moving  and  non-moving.  May  She 
grant  us  good  things!  May  Capdika,  whose  incomparable  power  and 
strength  even  Bhagavan,  Ananta,  Brahma,  and  MaheSvara  are  unable  to 
describe,  resolve  to  maintain  all  this  world  and  destroy  pernicious  fear! 
Mother  of  the  world!  Thou  art  the  cause  of  all  this  world,  but  still  Thou 
containeth  three  gupas.  From  Brahma  to  Brahmapda  everything  is 
covered  with  these  gunas,  so  that  not  even  Hari,  Hara,  and  others  are  able 
to  penetrate  this  covering  and  know  Thy  true  reality.  For  Thy  great¬ 
ness  is  unfathomable.  Thou  art  the  shelter  of  all  things.  All  this  world 
is  derived  from  a  part8  of  Thee  and  yet  Thou  art  above  this  world. 
Thou  art  unchanged,*  primal.  Supreme  Prakrti.” 

Advocate  of  the  theory  that  Sakti  is  unconscious  gross  matter  or 
force  1 7  O  man  1  blundering  Jiva  as  you  are,  will  not  your  tongue  become 
void  of  strength  before  it  enounces  your  conclusions  that  that  Sakti  is 
unconscious*  whose  nature  even  Brahma,  Vispu,  and  Mahefivara  have 
described  to  be  indefinable  and  beyond  the  reach  of  mind  and  speech  ?  By 
constandy  thinking  of  Prakrti -tattva  as  “  Prakjti  of  the  world  ”  your 
mind  has  become  void  of  understanding,*  and  so  to-day  you  dare  call 

1  Stava  or  hymn  in  which  the  powers  and  doings  of  the  Deity  adored  are 

lauded. 

■  That  is,  jada  or  caitanya  (eade).  *  Siva.  *  Great  R?is. 

*  That  is,  God,  though  in  the  world,  is  yet  more  than  the  world. 

•  AvikjtS:  that  is,  Prakjti  in  the  state  in  which  no  vikara  (change}  has 

occurred  as  opposed  to  the  evolving  state  of  Prakjti. 

7  Jada.  “Lit.  :  “  become  jada.” 

18 


274 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


MahAprakrti  gross  unconscious  matter1,  who  is  Herself  existence,  consci¬ 
ousness,  and  bliss.  But  have  you  ever  considered  Prakjti-tattva  in  the  light 
that  “the  world  is  of  Prakrti  ”  instead  of  Prakfti  being  of  the  world?  Had 
you  done  that  you  would  not  have  fallen  into  such  a  gross  blunder  as  to 
the  true  nature  of  Prakrti.  Leaving  aside  philosophical  theorems,*  if  your 
knowledge  extends  to  even  the  root  meanings  of  words,  I  ask  you,  do  the 
expressions  “  Prakrta-tattva  ”  and  “  Prakfta-tathyam  ”•  which  you  are 
wont  to  use,  signify  tilings  false  ?  Or  do  they  signify  things  true  ?  If  the 
meaning  of  Prakrta  be  “not  true,”  what  will  you  call  Vikrta?*  In  the 
Samsara  there  are  two  things,  one  Prakrti,  and  another  Vikrti.  That 
which  is  instinct  with  Prakrti  is  Prakrta,  and  the  rest  Vikrta.  Leaving  out 
of  consideration  differences  of  gender  due  to  suffixes,  Prakrti  and  prakAra* 
are  one  and  the  same  thing.  What  is  one’s  svarupa*  is  one’s  prakara;  as, 
for  instance,  the  expression  "  Of  what  prakara  is  such  and  such  a  thing?” 
means  “  What  is  its  svarupa  ?”  Svarupa  is  nothing  but  another  name  for 
Prakrti.  For  this  reason,  to  explain  a  thing  as  what  it  is,  an  idea  of  its 
Prakrti  has  to  be  given.  In  common  parlance,  therefore,  what  is  a  thing’s 
Prakrti  is  called  that  thing’s  svabhava.''  Analyzing  the  word  svabh&va  we 
get  sva,  signifying  self,  and  bhava,  signifying  substance,*  Svarupa,  Prakrti, 
or  Sakti.  In  conclusion,  therefore,  that  which  is  the  Svarupa  of  Self  is 
svabhAva  or  Prakrti.  Now,  tell  me,  O  philosophical  advocate  of  the 
theory  that  Sakti  is  unconscious,'  is  Brahman’s  Brahmahood,  Sakti, 
Pralqti,  or  Svarupa  false?  If  not,  on  what  authority  do  you  call  Sakti 
unconscious?'  Brahman  of  eternal  consciousness  is,  as  you  say,  truth  in 
substance.10  Unless  Sakti  be  false,  it  can  never  be  separate  from  Brahman 
who  is  truth  in  substance;  and  unless  it  be  something  separate  from 
Brahman,  who  is  all  consciousness,  it  can  never  be  called  unconscious.8 
The  ultimate  conclusion,  therefore,  of  this  theory  is  that  it  is  the  svarupa 
tattva  of  Brahman  who  is  all  consciousness  which  is  unconscious.* 
Philosopher!  praised  be  your  knowledge  of  Sakti!  Wonderful  is  your  faith 
in  the  Supreme!  It  is  from  seeing  and  hearing  all  this  that  a  Sadhaka  has 
said:  “  Who  knows  that  Kali,  the  darfana 11  of  whom  the  six  DarSanas1* 
do  not  obtain?” 

It  is  by  trying  to  understand  Prakfti-tattva,  according  to  the  notion 
that  “  Prakrti  is  of  the  world,”  that  Carvakas 11  have  become  sceptics. 
Different  is  the  method  of  understanding  for  the  faithful. 

1  J&da.  '  Tattva.  *  Real  truth. 

*  Untrue;  that  which  is  changed,  transformed,  or,  as  it  is  some  times  said, 

corrupted.  *  Kind;  nature. 

♦Own  form;  what  a  thing  or  person  really  is.  The  thing  or  person  in 
itself  or  himself.  *  Own  nature.  8  Sattva. 

*  Jada  10  Satyasvarupa.  11  Sight.  11  Systems  of  Philosophy. 

18  Followers  of  the  atheist  Carvaka. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  (Contd.)  275 

The  faithful  will  understand  that  Prakrti  is  not  of  the  world,  but  the 
world  is  of  Prakrti. 

The  expression  “  Prakrti  of  the  world  ”  conveys  no  idea  to  a  man; 
for  the  world  is  of  infinite  extent  and  destined  to  last  till  the  end  of  the 
Kalpa,1  while  the  longest  stretch  of  longevity  for  man  is  one  lakh  of 
years.*  And  he,  although  superior  to  all  other  worldly  Jivas,  is  yet  liable 
to  mistakes  and  blunders.  The  only  wealth  of  man  is  his  litde  intelligence 
and  he  is,  moreover,  oppressed  by  hunger  and  thirst,  boyhood,  youth 
and  age,  disease,  sorrow,  and  fear.  For  man  to  judge  of  the  substance  of 
the  Brahmanda  is  tantamount  to  the  acquisition  of  a  thorough  knowledge 
of  the  sea  by  a  shallow-water  fish  (that  is  to  say,  both  are  equally 
impossible).  An  Aryan  Sadhaka  desiring  to  understand  the  Prakrti-tattva 
of  the  world  will  have  to  become  a  slave  of  the  Mother  of  the  world 
instead  of  the  world  itself.  He  must  adore  Her  world-embracing 
form  by  seeing  Her  reflection  in  the  mirror  of  the  £&stra.  He  must 
form  an  idea  of  the  appearance  of  the  son  by  seeing  the  appearance 
*  of  the  mother;  to  know  the  truth  *  concerning  the  Brahmanda  by 
sinking  into  the  self  of  Brahmamayi.  Those  who  have  known  the  matter 
in  this  fashion  have  earned  immortality  in  mortal  life  and  laid  down  their 
lives  as  an  offering  to  the  lotus-feet  of  Parameivari !  To  say  that  Prakrti  is 
of  the  world  first  of  all  gives  rise  to  the  suspicion,  in  an  ordinary  mind, 
that  if  the  world  be  nothing  else  than  a  composition  of  the  five  elements,4 
then  livara,  Devata,  Brahma,  Prakrti,  or  Sakti — in  short,  nothing  superior 
to  gunas,  raaya,  and  the  world — can  exist;  for  Prakrti  is  then  what  the 
world  is.  Thus  scepticism  slowly  appears  in  the  field,  and  to  a  sceptic’s 
eye  the  samsara  appears  full  of  only  such  things  as  arc  perceptible  to  the 
senses.®  But  if,  with  the  vision  of  the  faithful,  it  is  realized  that  “  the 
world  is  of  Prakrti,”  no  danger  of  such  doubts  exists,  for  whether  made  of 
five  elements,  or  unconscious  (whatever  the  world  may  be),  there  is  no 
possibility  of  such  qualities  being  necessarily  attached  to  the  self  of  Prakrti, 
because  of  the  mere  fact  of  Her  being  known  through  the  world.  It  is  not 
necessary  that  the  mother’s  body  should  resemble  the  son’s  body  limb  per 
limb.  On  the  contrary,  there  must  be  some  resemblance  of  the  mother  in 
the  son.  Similarly,  whether  the  Mother  of  the  world  has  anything  in  Her 
of  the  world  or  not,  the  world  has  surely  some  Sakti  of  the  Mother  in  it. 
This  is  the  method  of  understanding  for  those  who  are  subject  to  differentiat¬ 
ing  knowledge,4  although,  according  to  the  spiritual  vision  of  adepts  in 
.spiritual  science,8  there  is  no  difference  between  the  world  and  the  Mother 
of  the  world.  Again,  to  know  the  world  merely  in  relation  to  itself  we 

1  See  post.  •  100,000. 

*  Tattva.  4  Bhutas ;  elements — earth,  air,  water,  fire,  ether. 

5  Pratyak?a.  *  Bhedajfi&na,  vide  ante* 


276 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


have  to  know  the  world  and  the  world’s  Sakti,  but  to  know  the  world  in 
relation  to  the  Mother  of  the  world,  we  have  to  know  the  world,  the 
world’s  Sakti,  and  the  great  Sakti  superior  to  the  world.  Although  I  am 
imperfect  in  the  world,  the  Mother  of  the  world  is  perfect,  eternal 
Brahman.  Consequendy  in  order  to  know  Her  I  must  rise  above  the 
imperfect  existence  of  the  imperfect  world  and  reach  that  most  perfect 
existence  in  which  all  things  besides  Herself  are  imperfect  and  yet  all  such 
imperfect  things  are  full  of  Her  perfection.  For  this  reason  Aryan 
worshippers,  the  best  of  faithful  men,  are  averse  to  respect  imperfect 
knowledge  at  the  cost  of  a  disregard  for  perfection,  or  to  discuss  created 
things  in  disregard  of  the  supreme  subject  for  our  thought — the  Creatrix 
of  the  Creator  of  all  created  things. 

Another  thing.  It  is  indeed  a  terrible  mystery  that  you  should, 
through  perceiving  the  visible  world  to  be  unconscious,1  have  come  to 
think  that  the  great  Sakti  who  has  created  that  world  is  also  so.  If  you 
consider  the  world  to  be  unconscious,1  I  do  not  want  to  dispute  the 
matter  with  you  for  the  present ;  but  I  wish  to  know  on  what  authority  ‘ 
you  consider  the  Sakti  who  works  the  world  to  be  unconscious.1  On  the 
one  hand,  philosophers  say  that  “  although  the  Sakti  of  the  world  is 
unconscious1  it  appears  as  conscious  owing  to  the  reflection  of  the  Sakti  of 
consciousness1  in  it”  On  the  other  hand,  Brahma  himself  says :  “  Thou 
art  the  Sakti  in  everything,  asat  ( jada)  or  sat  (Caitanya).”*  In  each  of  these 
statements  both  the  states  of  Sakti  have  been  demonstrated  but  with  this 
difference,  that  while  philosophers  say  that  it  appears  as  conscious  on 
account  of  its  reflecting  consciousness  thrown  upon  it,  Brahma  says  that  it 
seems  to  be  unconscious 1  because  unconsciousness  appears  in  it  (otherwise 
nothing  is  so).4  According  to  philosophers,  the  Sakti  of  the  world  is  in 
reality  unconscious,  but  appears  as  conscious  because  it  reflects  the  Sakti  of 
consciousness;  and  according  to  Brahma,  the  Sakti  of  the  world  is  in  reality 
conscious,  but  seems  to  be  unconscious  because  that  state 1  appears  in  it.6 

Now,  whether  the  Sakti  of  the  world  reflects  consciousness  or 
unconsciouness,  each  of  these  views  admits  the  existence  of  both  consci¬ 
ousness  and  unconsciousness  at  least  in  the  ordinary  state  of  things,  if  not 

1  JatJa.  *  Cit.  *  That  is,  in  gross  and  intelligent  substance. 

4  That  is,  asat:  that  is,  otherwise  nothing  in  the  world  would  be 
unconscious. 

6  The  meaning  of  these  passages  is  as  follows:  Brahma  has  said  that  Sakti 
is  in  everything,  conscious  and  unconscious.  On  the  next  page  it  is  said  that 
unconsciousness  is  a  false  or  mayik  manifestation.  Hence  it  follows  that  Sakti 
is  in  reality  conscious,  but  sometimes  appears  as  unconscious  on  account  of  the 
play  of  Maya  in  it,  and  which  May&  also  is  itself  nothing  but  a  peculiar  aspect 
of  Sakti.  Thus  unconsciousness  is  but  a  miyik  phase  of  conscious  Sakti,  and 
in  this  sense  a  thing  which  really  exists;  otherwise  Brahma’s  word  that  Sakti 
is  in  unconscious  things  is  meaningless. 


277 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  (Contd.) 

in  the  state  of  spiritual  vision.  It  is  admitted  on  all  hands  in  the  com¬ 
munity  of  the  faithful  that  unconsciousness  1  has  come  out  of  conscious¬ 
ness,*  and  that  the  Sakti  of  the  world  has  its  origin  in  the  Sakti  of 
consciousness.  “  The  world  is  all  full  of  Brahman.”  “  One  alone  exists 
and  no  second.”  “  The  world  is  all  full  of  Vasudeva.”  “  The  universe  is 
all  full  of  Siva  and  Sakti.”  “  There  is  no  difference  between  Thee  and 
the  universe.”  “  Hari  is  the  world  and  the  world  is  Hari.”  “  When  Hari 
is  both  within  and  without,  what  is  the  use  of  performing  austerities  ?  ”  IF 
all  these  great  sayings  of  the  Sastra  be  true,  if  He  alone  exists  and  no 
second  thing,  whence  have  come  this  unconscious 1  world  and  the  Sakti  of 
the  world  ?  In  reply  to  this  question,  it  must  either  be  said  that  the  world 
and  the  Sakti  of  the  world  are  the  BrahmavibhQtis  *  of  that  great  Sakti, 
or  that  the  world  and  the  Sakti  of  the  world  have  no  existence.  Otherwise, 
the  singleness  of  Brahman  or  Sakti  cannot  be  maintained.  It  can  by  no 
means  be  said  that  the  world  does  not  exist  and  again  it  is  not  the  view 
of  the  Arya  Sastra  that  anything  besides  and  second  to  Brahman  exists. 
It  must,  therefore,  be  said  that  the  world,  the  Sakti  of  the  world,  or  what¬ 
ever  else  they  may  be,  all  are  nothing  but  the  pure  display  4  of  that  great 
Sakti ;  or,  in  other  words,  nothing  really  exists  but  the  Sakti  of  consci¬ 
ousness.8  All  which  is  seen  as  unconscious  matter  in  the  world,  full  of 
maya,  although  it  appears  to  be  true,  is  not  in  reality  so,  but  is  only  a 
display  of  error.4  Again,  that  error  itself  is  a  manifestation4  of  Brabma- 
Sakti  and  that  manifestation4  is  called  maya.  Of  that  maya,  consisting 
of  three  gupas,  the  part  in  which  the  rajas  and  tamas  gup  as  predominate 
Is  called  avidya;  the  state  which  includes  everything  from  pure  sattva 
guna  to  the  attributclcss  Brahman  is  called  vidyS;  in  that  vidya  again. 
She  who  is  turiya  Sakti  above  all,7  and  whose  substance  is  pure  bliss,  is 
called  Mahavidya.  Overpowered  with  joy  in  love  for  Her  who  is  pure 
existence,  consciousness  and  bliss,  the  ever-joyful  Ifivara  of  all  has  said 
in  the  Camupda  Tantra: 

“  Kali  and  Tara  are  Mahavidyas ;  $otfaSl,  Bhuvanedvarl,  Bhairavi, 
Chhinnamasta,  and  Dhumavatl  are  vidySs;  Bagala,  MStangi  and  K  am  ala 
are  Siddhavidyas.”  These  ten  MahSiaktis  are  Mahavidyas,  Vidyaa,  and 
Siddhavidy&s  in  order.  That  is  to  say,  in  these  ten  Mahaiaktis  which 
embody  perfect  manifestations  of  the  Saktitattva  must  be  sought  the 
harmonious  setting  forth  of  Mahavidyas,  Vidyas,  and  Siddhavidyas,  in  the 
above  order.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  above  quotation  as  it  appears 
from  the  wording  of  the  Slokas.  In  the  SySmS-Rahasya,  however,  all  the  ten 
£aktis  have  been  called  Mah&vidyas.  “  Kali,  Tara,  Sotfafi,  Bhuvanedvari, 


1  Ja«Ja.  *  Caitanya. 

4  Vibhuti  (see  post). 

9  laterally,  “  above  all  Tattva  ”. 


*  Brahma  manifestations  (sec  post). 

*  Citiakti.  4  BhrantL 


278 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Bhairavi,  Chhinnamaata,  Matangi,  Kamala,  Dhumavatl,  and  Bagala  arc 
called  Mahavidyas.”  In  another  place  of  the  same  treatise  it  has  been 
said :  “  In  the  Kali  age  Siddhi  in  all  the  Mahavidyas  is  the  best.”  Here 
the  word  “  all,”  which  expresses  combination,  and  the  use  of  the  plural 
number,  signify  that  all  the  ten  are  called  Mahavidyas.  Besides  this,  in 
the  ViSvasara  Tantra  it  has  been  clearly  stated  that  “  Mahavidya  is  pre¬ 
ceded  by  the  prefix  maha.”  For  this  reason  all  T&ntrik  teachers  are  of 
opinion  that  in  the  last  line — “  eta  daia  mahavidyah  siddhavidyah  pra- 
kirtitah  ” — of  the  above  quotation  from  the  Cimun^a  Tantra  all  the  ten 
have  been  indirectly  called  by  the  general  names  of  mahavidya  and 
siddhavidya.  Hence,  according  to  ViSvasara  Tantra,  Kali  and  Tara  arc 
Mahamaha-siddhavidyas,  §odali,  Bhuvancsvari,  Bhairavi,  Chhinnamasta, 
and  Dhumavatl  are  Mahasiddhavidyas,  and  Bagala,  Matangi,  and  Kamala 
are  Siddhamahasiddhavidyas. 

In  the  Chapter  on  the  play  of  £akti,  we  shall  attempt  to  show,  so  far 
as  it  will  lie  in  our  power,  what  appearances  of  massive  Bliss  they  have  in 
the  aspect  of  turiya  consciousness.  At  present  we  shall  discuss,  according 
to  Sastra,  whether  She  is  maya  or  maya  is  Hers. 

The  Mother’s  name  is  Mahamaya,  and  this,  too,  is  a  maha  (great) 
may5  of  Hers.  Blinded  by  this  Maya  pandits  of  unripe  intelligence  fall 
into  the  pit  of  erroneous  inferences,  and  losing  themselves  in  it,  think  that 
maya  is  nothing  but  the  material  of  the  gross  unconscious'  world  and  that 
She,  too,  is  maya  by  whom  that  maya  is  held,  and  who  is  primal,  eternal,, 
and  perfect  Brahman.  If  She  too  is  maya,  then  why  has  She  the  name 
Mahamaya?  If  maya  and  the  person  possessing  miya  are  one  and  the 
same  thing,  if  the  Beed  and  the  tree  are  one  and  the  same  thing,  then  why 
should  there  be  difference  of  conditions  of  names  and  aspects  ?  In  fact, 
wherever  Sastra  has  made  mention  of  that  Mahaiakti,  with  reference  to 
the  part  of  Her  which  is  maya,  it  has  given  Her  the  name  of  Mahamaya; 
and  again,  wherever  it  has  made  mention  of  Her  with  reference  to  Her 
Brahma-aspect,  there  also  it  has  called  Her  Mahamaya.  In  both  places 
the  root-word  mahat  is  the  adjective  of  maya  with  this  difference  that  in 
the  place  where  reference  is  made  to  maya  the  samasa*  is  Karmadharaya* 
— that  is  to  say.  She  who  is  mahad  (great)  maya  is  Mahamaya,  while  in 
the  place  where  reference  is  made  to  the  Brahma-aspect  the  samasa  is 
Bahubjihi  * — that  is  to  say,  She  who  has  mabatl  (great)  maya  is  MahS- 
mSya.  Just  as  the  larva  of  a  silkworm  is  both  the  instrumental  and  the 
material  cause  of  the  production  of  thread — instrumental  because  threads 
are  produced  by  its  will,  and  material  because  they  are  produced  from  its 
body — so  Mahaiakti  is  both  the  instrument  and  the  material  cause  of  the- 


1  JacJa.  *  Compound. 

*  Descriptive.  •  Possessive. 


279 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  (Contd.) 

work  of  the  world.  She  is  the  instrumental  cause  because,  being  will 
itself.  She  has  willed  to  create  the  world  in  Her  blissful  true  resolve,  and 
She  is  the  material  cause  because  She  has  spread  maya  which  is  her  own 
vibhuti,1  and  out  of  it  fashioned  all  things  both  moving  and  non-moving. 
That  instrumental  aspect  is  Sakti  or  Brahman,  and  this  material  aspect  is 
MayS. 

In  the  process  of  creation  also,  in  the  body  of  the  JIva,  the  Brahma- 
aspect  is  Atma  and  the  Maya  aspect  is  antahkarapa.*  In  the  illustration 
of  the  larva  of  the  silkworm  itself  there  appears  another  phase  of  maya. 
Imprisoned  in  the  web  of  threads  produced  by  itself,  which  it  thinks 
belongs  to  itself,  it  remains  for  some  time  bound  by  them  and  yet  does  not 
feci  itself  to  be  so.  In  course  of  time  its  aspect  undergoes  a  change  under 
that  covering  of  threads,  and  after  a  while  that  very  larva  assumes  the 
form  of  a  butterfly,  rends  the  sheath  formed  of  its  own  threads,  and  with 
its  sublimely  beautiful  body  flies  forth,  spreading  its  fine  and  transparent 
wings  in  the  infinite  sky,  in  perfect  bliss,  with  an  unfettered  life  and  a  free 
heart,  leaving  behind  on  earth  only  its  rent  sheath  of  threads.  Similarly, 
the  maya  aspect,  mind,  which  is  bound  by  the  self-created  threads  of 
samsara  and  is  attracted  to  and  crushed  by  that  samsara,  controls,  by 
means  of  self-restraint,  all  affection,  attraction,  and  attachment  of  and  to 
the  samsara,  and  is  even  while  confined  in  the  womb  of  samsara,  absorbed 
in  the  thought  of  the  beauteous  lotus-feet  of  Her  who  holds  the  universe  in 
Her  womb  and  dwells  in  the  heart  of  ViivcSvara.  Thus  absorbed,  its 
form  changes  of  itself,  unknown  to  the  three  worlds;  then,  in  the  fullness  of 
time,  it  rends,  with  its  own  strength,  the  maya-sheath  of  samsara.  Blessed 
with  the  merciful  regard  of  the  Charmer  of  Mahakala*  and  dispeller  of  the 
fear  of  death,  it  spreads  its  two  wings  of  discrimination4  and  dispassion,* 
and  taking  with  it  the  brilliant  and  shining  Atma  which  then  forms  its 
body,  the  pure  and  sattvika  maya,  which  is  mind,  becomes  a  PrajSpati 
(Lord  of  the  Universe  through  Sakti).  As  Vidya*  it  rises  above  the  universe 
and  soars  high  in  the  infinite  expanse  of  heaven  towards  the  seat  of 
existence,  consciousness  and  bliss,  which  belongs  to  Mahavidya.  The 
flame  of  the  forest  fire  is  lost  in  the  orb  of  the  sun;  lightning  shot  from  its 
region  is  lost  in  the  body  of  the  cloud  of  massive  bliss.7  The  broken  cage 
of  mind — that  is  to  say,  the  body  composed  of  five  elements — is  alone  left 
behind  in  the  samsara. 


1  Manifestation. 

*  Mind,  etc.  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra).  *  The  Devi. 
4  Viveka,  the  power  to  distinguish  the  real  and  the  unreal. 

*  VairSgya,  indifference  to  worldly  things. 

*  Spiritual  knowledge;  as  the  soul  which  knows  (vide post). 

1  Anandaghana. 


280 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


It  is  this  phase  of  maya  consisting  of  spiritual  knowledge  which  is 
called  vidya.  By  virtue  of  this  vidya  one  reaches  Her,  the  Mahavidya,  who 
is  adored  of  all  the  world,  and  is  the  object  of  sadhana.  Sadhaka,  he  alone 
in  the  world  has  acquired  useful  knowledge  whose  knowledge  is  employed 
not  to  earn  worldly  riches,  but  spiritual  wealth  or  Mahavidya.  In  this 
vast  sea  of  saznsara  he  alone  is  past  master  of  the  art  of  sailing  across  the 
world  who  has  moored  his  vessel  in  the  port  of  Kulakundalini.  Thus,  O 
Sadhaka,  the  Mother  is  yours.  Am  I,  then,  motherless?  Have  I  no 
mother,  although  the  three  worlds  have  their  mother?  Say  then,  O 
Mother,  that  you  are  the  Sadhaka’s  Mother.  Extremely  ignorant  and 
devoid  of  siddhi  and  sadhana  as  I  am,  what  will  become  of  me  ?  Although 
a  son  of  Mahavidya,  I  have,  O  Mother,  been  blinded  and  benighted 
by  deep  avidya.1 

What,  then,  will  be  my  fate?  This  vessel  of  mine  is  drifting  down  the 
stream  of  samsara  with  the  ebb  of  pravrtti 1 1  cannot  hold  it  back;  I  have 
not  the  power  to  stay  it  with  nivftti.1 * *  Nay,  Mother,  the  vessel  is  unable 
even  to  drift  on  any  longer.  It  is  a  small  craft,  and  has,  moreover,  , 
nine  openings  in  it.'  The  sea  has,  by  constandy  breaking  over 
it,  filled  it  with  its  salt  waters,  and  has  left  not  even  standing-room.  Now 
I  shall  sink,  and  that  not  to  rise.  Daughter  of  the  earth’s  supporter,1 *  hold 
me,  hold  me,  O  Mother.  There  is  no  strength  left  in  these  my  weak  arms. 
Extend  for  once,  O  Mother,  your  two  hands  of  blessing  and  assurance.* 
Merciful  Mother,  turn  once  and  look  at  me.  My  Mother,  in  this  vast  sea 
this  widess,  helpless  child  of  yours  has  none  else  whom  he  can  call  his  own. 
O  Mother,  Mother  Kula-kupdalinI,  be  a  mother  and  take  me  up  once 
into  your  bosom.  Let  this  vessel  sink  for  good.7  The  Sastra  says  that  you 
arc  Mahavidya,  because  you  can  be  reached  through  vidya.  But,  I  ask, 
how  are  you  Mahavidya  unless  you  can  save  the  child  of  yours  who  is 
destitute  of  vidya?  Through  my  vidya  I  sink.*  Now  through  your  vidya 
save  me,  and  prove  that  you  are  rightiy  called  Mahavidya.  Let  the  vanity 
which  this  sinner  entertains  of  having  acquired  vidya,  such  a  vidya  as  has 
led  to  his  downfall,  be  destroyed.  Glory  to  you,  Mother  Mahavidya! 


1  Ignorance  *  The  path  of  desire.  See  Introduction  to  Tanlra  S&stra. 

*  Cessation  of  desire. 

*  The  vessel  is  the  body.  The  nine  openings  are  the  two  eyes,  the  two  ears, 

the  two  nostrils,  the  mouth,  the  genitals,  and  the  anus. 

*  Dharadhara,  the  mountain. 

1  The  Devi’s  hands  make  the  mudras,  vara  and  abhaya. 

7  That  is,  let  the  vessel  sink  for  good  so  that  it  may  not  have  to  struggle 
again  on  the  surface  of  the  worldly  ocean  of  sams&ra.  Let  it  sink  in  Her  bosom 
where  there  is  no  such  struggle. 

*  This  vidya  is  “  my  vidyS”  which  is  really  avidyJL 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  (Contd.)  281 

Whether  I  have  the  power  or  not,  you  arc  the  wealth  which  the  world  seeks 
in  sadhana. 

S&dhaka,  just  as  mental  Sakti,  which  is  manifested  maya,  is  called 
vidya  when  it  becomes  free  from  the  bonds  of  samsara  and  rushes  towards 
the  Mahaiakti  with  dishevelled  hair  ;  so  it  is  called  avidya  when  it  forgets 
Her  and  is  intoxicated  by  the  things  of  the  world — wife,  children,  and  the 
like.  In  this  connection  we  may  cite  the  following  from  the  Markantjeya 
Purana  : 

“  That  Devi  Bhagavatl  Mahamaya  forcibly  draws  the  mental  faculties 
of  even  the  wise,  and  gives  them  over  to  delusion.  By  Her  is  created  all 
the  world,  consisting  of  things  moving  and  non-moving,  and  She  alone, 
the  dispenser  of  blessings,  when  pleased,  grants  salvation  to  JIva.  That 
eternal  supreme  Vidya  is  the  cause  of  liberation.  She,  again,  is  the  cause 
of  Jiva’s  bondage  in  samsara.  She  is  the  I$vari  of  all  ISvaras.” 

Again  :  “  King  (  although  eternal,  that  Devi  Bhagavatl  incarnates 
Herself  again  and  again  in  the  manner  aforesaid,  and  maintains  the  world. 
By  Her  is  this  universe  deluded,  and  She  gives  birth  to  the  universe.  If 
pleased,  She  grants  wealth  and  knowledge  to  all  who  beg  it  of  Her.  Lord 
•of  men  !  at  the  time  of  the  great  Dissolution1  this  entire  universe  is  pervad¬ 
ed  by  that  Mahakali  in  the  form  of  a  great  destructive  power.*  She  it  is 
who  at  times  appears  as  a  destructive  power  ;  She  it  is  who  again  appears 
as  the  creation  ;  and,  again,  it  is  that  unborn  eternal  Devi  who  at  times 
preserves  all  things.  In  prosperity  She  is  Laksmi  in  the  houses  of  men 
■granting  increase.  In  adversity  She  becomes  AlaksmI  for  their  ruin.  (Here 
it  may  be  objected,  why,  then,  worship  Her,  if,  according  to  men’s  lot, 
She  appears  as  Laksmi  and  AlaksmI  in  prosperity  and  adversity  in  order 
to  do  service  or  disservice  to  them  ?  In  answer  to  this  question  the  follow¬ 
ing  is  said) :  When  duly  prayed  to  and  worshipped  with  flowers,  incense 
and  the  like,  She  grants  wealth,  progeny,  and  other  things  to  the  Sadhaka 
who  desires  such  things,  and  beneficial  attachment  to  dharma*  to  him  who 
■does  not  desire  them.” 

Again,  in  the  following  Chapter  it  is  said:  “  Oh  King,  I  have  thus 
related  to  you  the  greatness  of  the  Devi,  which  is  the  best  of  all  things 
which  man  can  relate.  So  wonderful  is  the  power  of  the  Devi  who  sup¬ 
ports  the  world.  Even  as  She  holds  the  world  under  the  spell  of  maya- 
moha,*  so  also  the  same  Bhagavatl  Vispu-maya  provides  it  with  vidya.* 
That  maya  has  deluded  and  deludes  you,  this,  VaiSya,  and  all  other  people 


1  Mahapralaya. 

*  Mahamari,  which  generally  means  a  great  plague. 
•Duty,  religion  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  $  astro). 

*  The  delusion  which  is  caused  by  mayS. 

*  Spiritual  knowledge. 


282 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


who  have  the  faculty  of  discrimination,1 * *  and  will  delude  all  such  people 
bora  in  future.  Great  King,  seek  the  protection  of  that  ParameSvaru 
Being  worshipped,  She  grants  worldly  happiness,  heaven,*  and  liberation  * 
to  men."  Here,  too,  the  Ksi  has  in  view  two  aspects  of  Sakti.  In  relation 
to  the  bondage  of  samsara,  He  speaks  of  the  maya  aspect,  and,  again,  for 
liberation  from  that  bondage  he  points  out  the  Brahma-aspect  for  worship, 
and  says:  “  Seek  the  protection  of  ParameSvari.”  “  She  alone,  the  Dispenser 
of  blessings,  grants  liberation  to  Jlva  when  pleased.”  “  O  Devi,  a  spell  of 
delusion  spreads  over  all  this  world.  Being  pleased.  Thou  alone  in  the 
world  can  grant  liberation.” 

It  is  when  the  Mother  of  the  world,  in  the  aspect  of  may&,  appears  as 
the  deluder  of  the  world  that  She  assumes  various  forms,  the  variety  of 
which  is  due  to  differences  in  sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas  gunas  in  them,  and 
it  is  then  that  She  plays  the  Acts  and  the  Scenes  of  the  drama  of  Samsara. 
Such  forms  are  intelligence,  sleep,  hunger,  chhaya,4 5  power,  thirst,  forbear¬ 
ance,  caste  and  class,  shame,  peace,  reverence,  beauty,  wealth,  function,4 
memory,  mercy,  contentment  (inclination),  error,  intellect,  earth,  nourish-  . 
ment,  brilliance,  restraint,  and  other  innumerable  £aktis.  At  the  root  of 
all  these  forms  lies  She  who  is  eternal  consciousness,  and  who,  again,  is,  as 
maya,  known  in  the  three  worlds  by  the  name  of  Visnu-maya.  It  is  a 
sight  fit  only  for  the  divine  vision  of  Devas.  When,  therefore,  through 
fear  of  Sumbha  and  NiSumbha,  they  began  to  worship  Her  who  dwells  in 
the  heart  of  Sambhu,  they  first  of  all  showed  that  She  was  the  Ordainer  of 
the  universe  as  maya,  and  then  made  prayer  to  Her  by  calling  Her 
"  Saviour  ”.  So  at  the  beginning  of  the  hymn  it  is  said: 

“  To  the  Devi  who  is  Visnu-maya  in  all  things,  obeisance,  obeisance, 
obeisance  to  Her,  obeisance,  obeisance.  To  the  Devi  who  is  called  con¬ 
sciousness  in  all  things,  obeisance,  obeisance  to  Her,  obeisance  to  Her, 
obeisance,  obeisance.  To  the  Devi  who  exists  in  all  things  as  intelligence, 
obeisance,  obeisance  to  Her,  obeisance  to  Her,  obeisance,  obeisance,”  and 
so  forth. 

It  is  here  that  the  philosophers  who  advocate  the  theory  that  Sakti  is 
unconscious 1  have  given  supreme  evidence  of  their  intelligence  and  learn¬ 
ing.  They  think  that  all  these  £aktis  held  in  the  body  of  the  Jiva  are  gross  * 


1  Literally,  “  possessing  viveka  ”.  This  is  ordinary  discrimination  which 

distinguishes  one  thing  from  another  in  the  common  world  of  appearance,  as, 
for  instance,  happiness  from  sorrow,  and  not  the  higher  form  of  discrimination, 
which  distinguishes  the  “  real  ”  from  that  which  appears  to  be  such. 

1  Svarga.  *  Mukti. 

*  Lit :  shadow  or  reflection.  (See  A.  and  E.  Avalon’s  “  Hymns  to  the 
Goddess.”) 

5  Vrtti.  The  vftti  of  a  thing  is  the  work  that  it  does,  and  therefore  function. 

•Jada. 


283- 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  (Qmtd.) 

jaktis.  The  Devas  have  said :  “  The  Devi  who  is  called  the  Sakti  of  con¬ 
sciousness  in  all  things,”  “  who  pervades  this  entire  universe  as  conscious¬ 
ness,  obeisance,  obeisance,  obeisance  to  Her.”  The  Devas  say  that  She  is- 
consciousness  itself,  but  the  philosophers  possessing  so-called  acute  vision, 
think  that  She  is  unconscious.  For  this  we  cannot  blame  the  philosophers, 
for  of  course  nothing  that  they  say  is  unsupported  by  reason.  And  the 
reason  here  is  this:  If  She  is  not  unconscious,1  whence  have  the  philoso¬ 
phers  got  such  an  idea,  notwithstanding  Her  being  intelligence,  memory, 
and  the  like  ?  What  they  say  is,  therefore,  true.  What  difference  would 
there  be  between  Deva,  Danava,  and  man,  if  what  Devas  see  as  conscious 
does  not  appear  as  unconscious  to  the  eyes  of  men?  Whilst  the  sight  of  a 
lovely  child  makes  the  milk  flow  from  a  mother’s  breast  it  causes  the 
lolling  tongue  of  a  wolf  to  quickly  waggle.  The  form  in  which  She 
appears  before  a  person  depends  on  the  peculiar  tendencies  with  which 
he  is  endowed  by  Her.  Moved  by  fear  for  Madhu  and  Kaifabha,  Bhaga- 
van  Brahma  made  prayer  to  the  tamasi  ja^a-iakti,*  appearing  as  sleep, 
•  and  instantly  that  sleep,  which  robs  people  of  consciousness,  became 
consciousness  itself,  and,  assuming  the  aspect  of  a  four-armed  Devi  riding 
a  lion,  stood  forth  in  the  Armament.  Philosopher,  if  you  are  a  believer, 
if  you  have  faith  in  the  words  of  Devas,  explain  to  me  by  means  of  reason¬ 
ing  and  arguments  why  you  understand  this  Sakti  to  be  unconscious 1 
Sakti.  What  shall  I  say  to  you?  To  Her  alone  I  say,  O  Mother,  in  the 
Satya  age  you  destroyed  the  Daityas  Sumbha  and  NiSumbha  by  first 
spreading  your  vibhuti  iaktis*  and  then  withdrawing  them,  but  how 
much  longer  will  you  allow  these  Daityas  of  the  Kali  age  to  live !  Or  who 
is  such  a  Sadhaka  in  this  Kali  age  as  can,  like  the  Devas,  bring  You  to 
earth  with  his  prayer?  I,  therefore,  ask,  O  Mother,  when  will  such  a 
powerful  Sadhaka  be  bom  as  will  be  able  to  sacrifice  these  Daityas  before 
You,  and  with  their  blood  make  the  current  of  your  worship  again  flow 
strong  in  India  ? 

So  much  about  what  philosophers  have  understood.  What  Sadhakas 
will  next  hear  will  astound  them.  The  very  remembrance  of  the  thing 
makes  me  feel  as  if  the  gates  of  hell  are  opening  under  me.  The  Brahma- 
daityas  *  of  the  nineteenth  century  have  arrived  at  still  another  conclusion. 
They  say  that  the  Sakta-Dharma  *  is  a  result  of  the  coalescence  between 
Hinduism  and  Buddhism.”  In  sorrow  for  such  things  as  this  have  poets 

’Jada- 

*  The  unconscious  iakti,  whose  substance  was  the  tarn  as  gupa. 

*  KaujikI,  Kali,  and  so  forth. 

*  The  sect  of  Brahmos,  against  whom  the  book  wars,  and  who  are  called 
demons  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

*  The  religion  of  the  worshippers  of  Sakti. 

*  See  Introduction  to  this  book. 


1284 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


sung:  “What  do  not  people  see  when  the  sun  sets!  Innumerable  stars 
shine  in  the  sky,  lights  show  their  power  in  every  house,  and  even  the 
tiny  young  of  glow-worms  spread  their  lustre  in  every  direction.”  There 
is  nothing  in  what  they  (the  Brahmos)  say  which  deserves  a  reply  rather 
than  mere  ridicule.  To-day  the  sun  of  Bharaia’s1  Dharma  has,  in  circling 
round  Bharata-Sumeru,'  disappeared  on  one  side,  and  in  the  darkness 
which  has  ensued  Daityas,  Danavas  and  Pisacas®  have  made  their  appear¬ 
ance.  Community  of  Sadhakas!  this  state  of  things  will  not  last  much 
longer.  Ruddy  rays  of  the  young  sun  have  become  visible  on  the  summit 
of  the  Sumeru.  She  who  grants  all  desires  Herself  stands  forth  to  reply, 
and,  with  high  arms  outstretched,  says:  “  Fear  not,  fear  not!  Sit  for  one 
more  moment  on  the  vira’s  seat  of  4ava-sadhana  in  this  great  cremation 
-ground  and  firmly  continue  the  japa  *  of  the  great  mantra  of  the  great 
Sakti.  The  sun  of  siddhi  for  the  Tantrik  world  is  about  to  rise.  She 
to  whom  the  Tantra  belongs  says:  ‘No  Paius6  will  remain  on  earth, 
but  only  Kaulas.’  ” 

Even  here  the  trouble  does  not  end.  Towards  the  close  of  the  above-  . 
mentioned  saying  of  the  Devas  relating  to  the  aspects  of  the  Devi,  and 
while  dealing  with  the  maya-vibhuds •  of  the  Mayamayi,  they  say:  “  To 
the  Devi  who  exists  in  all  things  as  error,  obeisance,  obeisance  to  Her, 
obeisance  to  Her,  obeisance,  obeisance.”  But  this  expression  of  truth  from 
the  small  hearts  of  Devas  has  found  no  place  in  the  large  heart  of  this 
little  religion.7  A  thief's  wife  may  enter  into  the  apartments  of  a  queen 
and  steal  her  ornaments,  but  on  reaching  home  she  is  at  her  wits’  end  to 
know  which  ornament  to  put  on  which  part  of  her  body. 

Similarly,  the  eclectic  fraternity,  which  is  bent  on  establishing  con¬ 
cordance  between  all  schools  of  thought,  has,  by  purloining  this  statement 
■of  the  aspects  of  Maya-Brahma  from  the  Markapdeya-Candi,  put  it  on  the 
head  of  the  new  Brahman  of  theirs,  which  is  partly  with  and  partly  with¬ 
out  attributes,  and  have  at  last  found,  with  utter  astonishment,  that  “  The 
Devi  exists  in  all  things  as  error.”  Horror  of  horrors !  This  cannot  be. 
The  Merciful  Father  can  never  exist  as  error;  for  everyone  professing  the 
“  little  religion,” 7  is  unerring  and  above  all  error.  The  Brahmo  has, 
therefore,  substituted  the  expression  “  as  good  ”  (mangala-rupetja)  for  the 
■expression  “as  error”  (bhrantirupena).  O  what  depth  of  learning! 
His  knowledge  of  versification  is  commensurate  with  his  knowledge  of 


1  India.  8  Mount  Mem. 

*  Demons  and  filthy  and  malignant  spirits. 

4  An  allusion  to  the  T&ntrik  rite  in  which  the  sadhaka  recites  mantras 
-seated  on  a  corpse. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra.  *  Maya-manifestations. 

7  Upadharma — that  is,  Brahmoism. 


285- 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  (Conld.) 

Brahman!  The  Brahman  who  is  supposed  to  be  formless,  taintless,  and 
made  of  all  sorts  of  negation,  has  nothing  to  do  with  whatever  is  frightful, 
horrible,  oppressive,  and  dangerous,  or  with  the  darkness,  sorrow,  grief, 
disease,  dirt,  abomination,  damnation,  and  sin  which  there  are  in  the 
world,  but  sits  still  and  alone  in  a  formless  abode  of  peace,  selecting  and 
gathering  by  Its  side  only  such  things  as  are  good  according  to  Brj&hmos. 
Around  It  the  infinite  multitude  of  Jivas  inhabiting  the  infinite  universe 
arc  consumed  in  the  fire  of  sin,  trouble,  grief,  sorrow,  disease,  and  suffering. 
But  Brahman,  who  is  I&vara  and  Bhagavan,  and  aware  of  their  existence, 
takes  no  heed  of  them,  but  in  hatred  and  disgust  turns  His  face  against 
them.  Tell  me,  brother  Brahmajnani,1  does  not  this  bespeak  onesidedness 
on  the  part  of  the  universe-pervading  Creator  of  the  Universe?  Brother, 
you  take  pride  in  your  knowledge  of  Brahman.  But  what  is  the  meaning 
of  the  word  Brahman?  The  verbal  root  “bringha”  means  pervasion. 
What  is  all-pervading  is  called  Brahman.  Is  it  possible  for  Brahman  who 
is  all-pervading  to  be  so  one-sided  as  to  be  associated  with  what  is  good  to 
the  exclusion  of  what  is  bad,  with  smiles  and  not  with  tears,  with  heaven 
and  not  with  hell — to  be  in  virtue  and  not  in  sin  ?  Our  Brahman  is  a  quite 
different  thing;  the  Brahman  of  the  Aryaiastra,  from  which  you  have 
obtained  the  name  of  Brahman,  exists  as  well  in  heaven  as  in  hell,  as  well 
in  virtue  as  in  sin,  as  well  in  desire  as  in  cessation  of  desire,*  as  well  in 
good  as  in  evil,  as  well  in  creation  as  in  destruction,  as  well  during 
awaking  as  in  sleep,  as  well  in  Atma  as  in  mind,  as  well  in  prana  as  in 
the  senses.  It  exists  the  same  everywhere,  in  every  molecule  and  atom  *' 
of  the  innumerable  millions  of  universes,4  consisting  each  of  fourteen 
worlds*;  It  exists  everywhere  in  unconsciousness,*  consciousness,*  and  in 
the  play  of  consciousness.  It  is  She  who  causes  bondage,  and  it  is  She, 
again,  who  brings  about  liberation.  For  this  reason,  after  the  killing  of 
Mahisa,  the  Asura,  the  Devas  understood  that  just  as  the  worshipping  pro¬ 
pensity  in  their  hearts  came  from  Her,  so  the  fighting  propensity  in  the 
hearts  of  Asuras  also  came  from  Her.  Just  as  She  provided  the  Devas 
with  Svargalakjm!8  for  their  prosperity,  so  also  She  was  the  cause  of  the 
fatal  night  of  Asura  Mahi?a’s  death.  When  the  Devas  perceived  this, 
they  said : 

“  Oh  Devi,  who  art  Lak?rru » in  the  houses  of  virtuous  men,  AIak?mI 10 
in  the  houses  of  sinful  men,  intelligence  in  the  hearts  of  cultured  men, 
reverence  in  the  hearts  of  pious  men,  and  shame  in  men  born  of  good 


1  Knower  of  Brahman;  here,  a  BrShmo. 

*  Ami  and  pararaanu. 

6  Bhuvanas.  •  Ja/Ja. 

*  The  tutelary  Devi  of  S varga,  or  Heaven. 
10  The  opposite  of  Lakyml. 


*  Nivrtti. 

*  Brahmandas. 

7  Caitanya. 

*  Devi  of  prosperity. 


286 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


families,  I  bow  to  Thy  lotus-feet-  O  Devi,  maintain  the  universe.”  It  is 
because,  as  avidya,  which  is  error,1  She  can  bind,  that  as  vidya,  which  is 
knowledge,*  She  can  again  remove  the  bondage.  Otherwise,  who  is  She 
to  liberate  who  has  not  the  power  to  bind?  It  can  never  be  that  while  the 
judge  will  order  imprisonment,  the  jailer  will  give  release.  Just  as  the 
judge’s  order  is  necessary  for  imprisonment,  so  it  is  also  necessary  for 
release.  The  AryaSastra  is  not  so  blind,  so  foolish,  and  so  erring,  as  to  be 
terrified  on  hearing  that  “  She  exists  as  error.”  The  Sastra  therefore  says: 
*'  That  eternal  supreme  Vidya  is  the  cause  of  liberation.  She,  again,  is 
the  cause  of  JIva’s  bondage  in  samsara.  She  is  the  Isvari  of  the  Isvaras  of 
all !  Although,  according  to  prison  rules,  a  prisoner  can  sometimes  obtain 
temporary  freedom  to  walk  in  the  prison  yard,  such  freedom  cannot  give 
him  permanent  release,  for  his  hands  and  feet  remain  still  firmly  bound 
by  iron  chains.  Similarly,  although  one  can  live  in  heaven*  and  similar 
regions  4  in  consequence  of  having  performed  works  of  high  religious  merit, 
one  does  not  thereby  become  free  from  the  bondage  of  m5yS.  Unless 
Mahamaya,  in  whom  are  the  three  gunas  and  who  holds  in  Her  hand  the 
cords  of  the  three  gunas  constituting  the  bondage  of  maya,  Herself  removes 
the  bonds,  who  else  in  the  world  can  grant  release  ?  The  Sastra  has, 
therefore,  said,  “  She  is  the  livari  of  the  ISvaras  of  all  ” — that  is  to  say, 
although  Brahma  and  other  Dcvas  are  Ifvaras  of  all,  they  have  to  pray  to 
Her,  the  supreme  l£vari,  for  the  removal  of  their  bondage  and  liberation. 
She  is  the  sole  ISvari  of  the  ISvaras  of  all. 

The  aforesaid  physical  6aktis — intelligence,  sleep,  hunger,  thirst, 
beauty,  memory,  intellect,  restraint,  etc. — which  appear  unconscious6  to  us 
in  our  ordinary  vision,  are  not  in  reality  unconscious.  Just  as  light  cannot 
be  dark,  so  Sakti  cannot  be  unconscious.  Different  parts  of  the  maya-sakti 
which  consists  of  the  three  gunas,  sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas,  can  only  differ 
from  each  other  in  so  far  as  one  or  other  of  the  gunas  predominate;  for 
instance,  the  sattva  guna  predominates  in  Saktis  like  mercy,  peace,  beauty, 
shame,  forgiveness,  and  reverence;  the  rajas  guna  predominates  in  daktis 
of  passion  like  desire,  anger,  greed,  effort,  intoxication  of  mind*  and 
vanity;  and  the  tamas  guna  predominates  in  sakds  like  delusion,  lethargy, 
error,  drowsiness,  and  sleep. 

Of  these,  the  sattvik  faktis  arc  always  naturally  manifest  and  consci¬ 
ous;  the  tamasik  Saktis  are  always  unmanifest  and  seemingly  unconscious, 
full  of  delusion,  and  insensible;  and  the  rajasik  £aktis  arc  partly  manifest 
and  partly  unmanifest,  partly  conscious  and  partly  unconscious.  On  seeing 


1  Bhrinti.  *  Jflana. 

*  S varga,  one  of  the  fourteen  regions  (lokis). 

1  Loka  (see  post  and  Introduction  to  Tantra  SSstra) . 
*Ja«Ja. 


*  Mada. 


287 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  (Contd.) 

the  tamasik  §aktis  above-mentioned,  a  person  may  easily  arrive  at  the  con¬ 
clusion  that  they  are  unconscious.  But  does  he  never  ask  himself,  whence 
have  these  iaktis  come  ?  According  to  Jiva’s  destiny,  from  the  very 
that  he  takes  a  body,  an  inseparable  relationship  is  established  between 
him  and  the  enjoyment  of  happiness  and  suffering  of  sorrow.  The  senses, 
the  mind,  the  function  of  life  and  the  whole  of  the  Jiva’s  body  are  made 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  suitable  for  this  enjoyment  and  suffering.  For 
this  reason  sleep  is  as  much  necessary  to  him  as  food.  And  according  to 
this  necessity  She,  as  Jiva,  appears  both  as  enjoyment  and  suffering  as  well 
as  sleep.  If  She  does  not  exist  as  consciousness  at  the  root  of  sleep,  who, 
then,  is  its  cause  ?  Light  in  the  moon,  radiance  in  the  sun,  power  of  burn¬ 
ing  in  fire,  motion  in  air,  coolness  in  water,  smell  in  earth — these  Saktis 
may  ordinarily  appear  to  be  unconscious,  but  in  reality  they  are  not  so. 
They  merely  seem  to  be  unconscious.  To  admit  that  all  these  iaktis  arc 
really  unconscious  is  almost  to  accept  the  atheistic1  principle  ;  for  self-ori¬ 
gination  of  material  iakti  is  the  same  thing  as  creation,  preservation,  and 
•destruction  of  the  world  by  Nature.  In  the  eyes  of  the  faithful  there  is 
nothing  really  unconscious  in  the  dominion  of  the  Mother,  who  is  made  of 
consciousness.  All  the  things  which  we  know  to  be  unconscious  are,  to  the 
sight  of  wise  men,  nothing  but  emanations  of  consciousness  from  Her 
whose  substance  is  consciousness  ;  only,  by  reason  of  the  incapacity  of  the 
world  which  is  composed  of  the  three  gunas  to  manifest  pure  consciousness, 
they  are  darkened  just  as  are  the  sun’s  rays  when  passed  through  a  blue 
glass,  with  this  difference— that  while  the  sun’s  rays  and  the  blue  glass  are 
different  things,  in  the  case  of  this  light  the  sun,  the  rays,  and  the  glass  are 
one  and  the  same  thing. 

In  the  root  She  is  all-Brahman  ;  in  the  stem  She  is  all-m5ya  ;  in  the 
flower  She  is  all-world,  and  in  the  fruit  She  is  all-liberation.  Brahman, 
ISvara,  Maya,  and  Avidya — these  are  Her  four  aspects.  Dividing  Herself 
Into  these  four  parts,  the  Player  of  the  blissful  play  throughout  the  world 
becomes  Herself  mad  in  the  intoxication  of  Her  own  joy — Herself  taking 
birth,  Herself  dying.  Herself  dancing  in  Her  own  cremation  ground,  and 
Herself  becoming  Siva  in  Her  own  corpse.  She  Herself  enjoys  the  play. 
She  is  Herself  Puru?a,s  Herself  Prakjti,  Herself  the  spouse  of  Mahakala, 
Herself  attachment,  inclination,  and  goal,  and  Herself  the  daughter  of 
Supreme  bliss.  She  is  Herself  maya,  Herself  non-maya,  and  Herself  She 
who  yields  maya.  She  is  Herself  vidya.  Herself  avidya  and  Herself  the 
eternal  Devi  who  is  the  object  of  sadhana.  Ask  the  Vedas,  the  Vedantas, 
the  Purapas,  or  the  Tantras,  and  every  one  of  these  Sastras  will  bear  un¬ 
mistakable  testimony  to  this  Her  (monistic)  character.  In  this  Sastrik 


1  Nastika. 


*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra. 


288 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


vision  of  faith,  a  sadhaka  sees  the  Brahman  da-play  in  both  Her  aspects  of 
vidya  and  avidyS,  and  sits  on  the  Mother’s  lap  in  both  bondage  and  libe¬ 
ration.  The  world  regards  the  bondage  as  due  to  maya,  but  he  sees  it  to 
be  caused  by  the  Mother.  It  then  inspires  him  with  love  and  a  feeling  of 
wounded  pride.  Softened  by  that  love,  and  hardened  by  that  feeling  of 
wounded  pride,  he  sits  lovingly  on  the  lap  of  the  Mother,  holding  Her 
hand  with  his  hands,  which  are  bound  with  the  bonds  of  maya,  and,  over¬ 
whelmed  with  tender  feeling,  says  :  “  Mother,  what  a  mad1  girl  you  are!  ” 
The  mad  Sadhak  Vilambara  has  therefore  said,  addressing  the  mad 
mother:  “  Is  it  for  nothing  that  I  tell  you,  O  Kali,  that  you  were  a 
magician’s  daughter?  Otherwise,  why  should  you  have  enchanted  the 
whole  world  with  maya-magic  ?  ” 

Again,  the  peaceful  S&dhaka  Kamalakanta  has  sung:  “  Tell  me,  what 
is  bad  and  what  is  good  in  you.  Some  you  save  by  granting  them  know¬ 
ledge  in  the  form  of  vidya.  Others  you  cover  with  avidya  and  draw  down 
into  the  pit  of  delusion.  Many  people  say  that  every  Jiva  is  Siva.  Why, 
then,  does  He  who  is  ever  joyful  become  destitute  of  joy?  Mother  Kali,  I,  ■ 
Kamalakanta,  tell  you  my  mind.  Some  enjoy  happiness  followed  by 
happiness,  while  others  pass  their  lives  in  sorrow.”  After  seeing,  hearing, 
and  thinking  over  all  this,  one  can  only  say :  “  I  always  seek  Thee  who 
art  above  maya,  full  of  maya,  universal  maya,  eternal,  pure,  blameless,  one 
without  a  second,  and,  again,  the  cause  of  the  world’s  liberation  through 
maya,*  the  bridge  over  the  sea  of  existence.” 

Those  who,  on  merely  hearing  the  name  of  Sakti,  leap  to  the  conclu¬ 
sion  that  Sakti  is  maya  without  understanding  the  three-fold  division  of 
iakd-tattva 1  into  vidya,  avidya,  and  parama,  and  without  knowing  the 
difference  between  maya-sakti  and  Brahma-iakti — to  them  it  is  needless  to 
show  any  evidence  other  than  the  words  of  that  Maya  and  professor  of 
Maya;  for  these  words  are  sufficient.  When  the  Mother  of  the  world  was 
born  of  the  womb  of  Menaka  in  the  house  of  Himalaya,  the  King  of 
mountains  was  astonished  at  the  sight  of  Her  form  possessing  the  lustre  of 
a  crore  4  of  suns,  bearing  on  Her  head  the  crescent  moon,  large-eyed,  and 
eight-armed  and,  bowing  down  to  the  earth  before  Her,  with  folded  hands, 
and  voice  trembling  with  reverence,  said  *: 

1  As  pointed  out  by  Babu  Dinesh  Chandra  Sen  (“  History  of  Bengali  Lan¬ 
guage  and  Literature,”  p.  119),  the  English  word  “  mad  ”  does  not  convey  the 
meaning  of  the  word  “  pagla,”  for  in  Bengali  it  is  tinged  with  a  feeling  of  ten¬ 
derness,  and  persons  so  called  are  greatly  loved.  The  term  denotes  rather  a 
person  of  amiable  and  eccentric  character,  and  is  akin  to  the  Persian  dewana. 

1  May&  is  here  both  the  binder  and  the  liberator  (see post).  As  binder  She 
is  universal  m&yS,  and  as  liberator  She  is  above  maya.  In  what  sense  Maya 
can  liberate,  is  explained,  see  post. 

*  Here  meaning  iakti. 

4  10,000,000. 


*  BhagavatigltS,  in  the  Mahibhagavata. 


289 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  ( Ctmtd .) 

"  Mother,  who  are  you  of  wonderful  form,  possessing  large  eyes  and 
auspicious  marks?  My  child,  I  fail  to  discover  who  you  really  are.  Yourself 
tell  me  the  truth  about  Yourself.’* 

In  reply  to  this  question  put  by  Himalaya,  the  Devi  said: 

“  Know  Me  to  be  (supreme)  Sakti,  the  Genitrix  of  the  world,  under 
whose  protection  Maheivara  lives,  whose  substance  is  all  ai&varyas 1  and 
knowledge,  and  who  is  the  cause  of  all  activities  and  the  ordainer  of 
creation,  preservation,  and  destruction.  I  dwell  in  the  hearts  of  all  things ; 
I  carry  men  across  the  sea  of  samsara;  I  am  eternal  bliss;  I  am  eternal, 
Brahman  in  substance  and  levari.*  Father,  pleased  with  the  austerities  * 
practised  by  you  and  mother  Menaka,  and  worshipped  as  daughter  by 
you  both,  I  have,  through  your  wonderful  good  fortune,  taken  birth  in 
your  house.”  Here,  also,  She  has  described  Herself  as  parama-Aakti,4 
above  may  a. 

Again,  in  the  same  book,4  where  reincarnation  is  dealt  with.  She  says: 

“  On  coming  out  of  the  mother’s  womb,  Jiva  is  deluded  by  my  maya, 
.and  forgets  the  pains  it  suffered  therein.” 

“  Father,  for  his  liberation  from  the  chains  of  body  a  seeker  of  salva¬ 
tion  should  contemplate  me  as  blameless,  subtle,  beyond  the  reach  of 
speech,  pure,  attributelcss,  transcendently  luminous,  all-pervading,  the 
sole  cause  of  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction,  without  a  second, 
without  beginning,  whose  substance  is  existence,  consciousness  and  bliss.” 

“  Great  King,  deluded  by  my  maya,  Jivas  fail  to  know  that  supreme  and 
undccreasing  form  of  mine  which  is  in  everything  and  is  without  a  second. 
But  those  who  worship  Me  with  devotion  cross  the  great  sea  of  this  miya.” 

Himalaya  also  himself  says :  "  Do  not  delude  me  any  longer  with  Thy 
supreme  maya.  O  levari  of  the  universe,  I  bow  to  Thee.” 

In  the  Dev!  Bhagavata,  and  other  books  also,  the  same  thing  has  been 
said.  Now  tell  me,  O  advocate  of  the  maya  theory !  If  Sakti  Herself  is 
nothing  but  maya,  what  is  that  other  maya  which  She  specifies  as  “  my 
maya  ”  ? 

The  following  appears  in  the  Mahanirvapa  Tantra6: 

“  The  Devi  asked :  What  is  the  form  of  Mahakal!  who  is  the  origin 
of  mahat 7  and  other  tattvas;  who  is  subtler  than  the  subtlest,  greatly 
luminous,  and  the  primal  Sakti  ?  Form  is  possible  in  only  such  things  as 
are  the  work  of  Prakrti.  But  She  is  above  Prakrti,  and  supreme  beyond 
all.  Deva,  be  pleased  to  dispel  thoroughly  this  doubt  from  my  mind.” 


1  Qualities  of  lordship  of  ISvara  (see  post). 

*  Ruler.  *  Tapas  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra ). 

4  Supreme  Sakti.  5  Chap.  xvii.. 

•  13th  ullasa.  7  Buddhi  (sec  Introduction  to  Taritra  S&stra). 

19 


290: 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Now,  if  She  is  merely  Prakjti,  why,  then,  does  the  Devi  say  that  it  is 
not  possible  for  Her  to  have  a  form  originated  from  Prakrti  ?  1 * * 

In  the  Kulamava  Tantra,  Mahadeva  says  to  the  Devi:  “  He  who 
is  deluded  by  Thy  mSyii  secs  not  while  he  sees,  understands  not  while  he 
hears,  and  knows  not  the  truth *  while  he  reads.” 

(Here,  also,  if  the  Devi  is  only  maya,  why,  then,  docs  Mahadeva  say 
"Thy  maya?”)  The  Sastra  says  that  She  is  maya,  whose  substance  is 
mayS,  and  who  is  yet  above  maya.  Advocate  of  the  maya-theory!  forget 
for  once  the  maya  of  maya  and  be  charmed  by  the  maya  of  the  Mother. 
Know  this  maya  to  be  not  maya  only,  but  the  Mother’s  maya — seeing 
the  maya-play  of  the  Mother  sink  in  the  sweetness  of  maya.  It  is  because 
this  maya  exists  that  as  children  of  the  Mother  we  strive  to  sit  on  the  lap 
of  the  Mother.  It  is  with  reference  to  this  maya-theory  that  in  Gitanjali  * 
it  is  said:  “The  Vedas  say  that  all  efforts  are  in  vain;  for,  O  brother, 
everything  is  maya.  The  Tantras  say  that  Mahamaya  smiles  through 
maya,  for  it  is  the  Mother’s  maya.” 

Viewed  with  a  little  discrimination,  the  very  maya  which  is  nothing  . 
but  the  cause  of  bondage  in  samsara  appears  as  attractive  as  an  elysium 
of  bliss.  Cannot  the  very  same  maya,  by  the  influence  of  which  we 
become  attached  and  bound  in  love  to  father,  mother,  wife,  children, 
etc.,  also  liberate  us,  if  through  it  we  become  attached  by  love  to  the 
Mother  who  is  all  full  of  maya  ?  It  is  because  this  maya  exists  that  there 
exists  the  difference  between  the  worshipper  and  the  worshipped.  Once 
the  tie  of  this  maya  is  broken,  the  relation  between  the  worshipper  and 
the  worshipped  will  cease,  as  much  as  that  between  father,  mother,  wife, 
children,  and  the  like.  A  devotee  is,  therefore,  afraid  lest  maya  should  dis¬ 
appear,  and  he  should  thus  be  debarred  from  taking  the  name  of  Mother. 
Although  a  jhani 4 *  desires  to  be  altogether  free  from  miya,  a  bhakta,6 
while  he  throws  off  m3ya  so  far  as  the  samsara  is  concerned,  secretly  and 
carefully  nourishes  maya  for  the  Mother  in  the  core  of  his  heart.  Leaving 
the  samsara  of  maya,  he  enters  into  the  samsara  of  the  Mother.  All  who 
live  in  this  samsara  of  the  Mother  constantly  ring:  “  Parvati  is  our 
Mother,  Deva  MaheSvara  is  our  Father,  the  Bhairavas  are  our  brothers, 
and  the  three  worlds  are  our  home.” 

But  lest,  through  the  influence  of  the  Mother’s  name,  which  is 
antagonistic  to  tniyS,  this  m&yS  should  disappear,  leaving  no  means  of 

1  That  is,  if  Mahakali  is,  in  substance,  nothing  but  Prakrti,  then  it  is  but 
natural  that  She  should  arise  out  of  Prakrti  and  have  a  form.  The  very  fact 
that  the  Devi  thinks  it  impossible  for  Mahakali  to  have  a  form  arising  out  of 

Prakrti  proves  that  She  is  more  than  Prakrti. 

*  Tattva.  *  The  author's  work  of  that  name. 

4  He  who  follows  the  path  of  jflana,  or  knowledge. 

*  He  who  follows  the  path  of  bhakti,  or  devotion. 


291 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  (Canid.) 

protecting  the  self,  I  desire,  while  there  is  yet  time,  to  take  the  name  of 
the  Mother  to  my  heart’s  content;  lest,  when  the  Mother  and  the  son  will 
meet,  there  should  be  left  no  opportunity  for  the  son  to  take  the  Mother’s 
name;  lest  there  should  be  for  the  rest  of  my  existence  an  end  to  my 
taking  the  name  of  Mother — the  GItanj ali  mournfully  says: 

“The  day  passes;  it  will  last  no  longer.  How  much  longer,  O 
Mother,  shall  I  bear  the  torments  of  the  bondage  of  existence?” 

“  To  this  samsara  full  of  may  a  you  make  me  return  time  after  time, 
under  the  influence  of  maya.  My  heart  is  rent;  I  can  bear  it  no  longer.” 

“  If  everything  in  samsara  is  possessed  of  maya,  then  grant  me,  O 
Mother,  that  maya  in  which  the  son  knows  none  but  the  Mother.” 

“  Untie  the  cords  of  the  present  maya,  and  tic,  O  Mother,  the  cord  of 
that  maya  by  virtue  of  which  the  fire  of  mkya  will  not  touch  me.”1 * * 4 

“  Putting  away  from  me  the  three-fold  fire,*  take  me  up,  O  Mother, 
on  Thy  lap.  Let  me,  for  the  last  time  in  my  life,  call  ‘  Mother,  Mother,’ 
and  then  I  shall  call  no  more.” 

“  My  life  bums  with  an  intense  hunger.  Give  me,  O  Mother,  the 
nectar  of  Thy  milk  to  drink.  The  fire  of  woes  burns  constant  and  furious. 
It  will  not  be  extinguished  but  by  that  nectar.” 

“  O  Spouse  of  Siva,  do  not  fear  that  if  once  I  get  that  nectar  I  shall 
not  seek  it  any  more.  Simple  child  1  do  you  not  know  that  the  thirst  for 
nectar  is  not  satiated  with  the  drinking  of  it?  ” 

Such  Paurapik  evidence  as  has  so  far  been  produced  on  the  subject  of 
Sakti-tattva  proves  that  it  is  from  Sakti  that  the  entire  and  universal 
Brahmanda  takes  its  birth;  that  She  alone  creates,  preserves,  and  destroys 
it,  and  that  She  alone  is  the  highest  and  the  best,  and  the  object  of 
worship  to  even  the  Devas  whom  the  world  worships.  Because  of  this 
Saivas,  Vaisnavas,  S auras,  and  Ganapatyas*  should  not  think  that  Siva, 
Vi$pu,  the  Sun  and  Ganapati  avail  nothing.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  all  the 
Devas  who  arc  worshipped  according  to  the  five  forms  of  worship 
(paficopasana)*  are  equally  instinct  with  Sakti ;  none  is  superior  or  inferior 
to  another.  When  Rsis  have  had  it  in  mind  to  intensify  the  piety  and 
devotion  of  a  class  of  Sadhakas,  they  have  described  the  character  and 
play  of  a  particular  Dcvata  in  a  Purana,  and  shown  that  Devatfi  of  that 
Parana  to  be  the  highest  of  all  Devat&s.  So  much  is  this  so  that  in  books 
like  the  Devi  Bhagavata,  the  Skanda  Purana,  the  Kalika  Purana,  and  the 
Kurma  Puranas,  the  greatness  of  Siva,  Visnu,  or  Sakti  has  been  describ¬ 
ed  in  such  a  way  in  one  part,  and  in  such  another  way  in  a 

1  That  is,  instil  vidya  in  order  that  avidya  may  be  dispelled. 

*  That  is,  the  three-fold  sorrows  (tapatraya). 

*  Worshippers  of  Siva,  Vi^pu,  the  Sun,  and  Gapeia  respectively. 

4  That  is  the  four  Devas  above  mentioned  and  the  Devi. 


292 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


subsequent  part,  that  the  two  parts  seem  to  be  mutually  contradictory. 
The  contradiction,  however,  lies  in  our  human  vision,  full  of  differentiating- 
ideas.  It  did  not  in  the  least  exist  in  the  divine  vision  of  the  great  R?is, 
who  were  endowed  with  the  non-differentiating  faculty.1  They  say  that 
the  Devata  whose  greatness  they  were  describing  in  one  place  under  the 
name  of  Kali  or  Siva,  was  Visnu  Himself,  and  that  the  Devata  whose 
greatness  they  are  describing  in  another  place  under  the  name  of  Visnu 
was  none  other  than  Kali  or  Siva.  Questions  of  inconsistency,  superi¬ 
ority,  exaggeration,  or  false  imputation,  did  not,  therefore,  at  all  arise 
in  their  minds.  They  revealed  for  the  liberation  and  benefit  of  the 
followers  of  the  five  forms  of  worship,  the  manifestations  *  of  Brahman  {of 
which  great  R$is,  possessed  of  divine  virtue,  had  direct  knowledge),  in  the 
course  of  their  description  of  the  play  of  the  particular  Devatas  the  latter 
individually  worshipped.  This  point  will  be  more  elaborately  explained 
in  the  section  on  “Concordance  between  the  five  forms  of  worship”. 
Sadhakas  will,  on  inquiry,  find  that  Devatas  like  Siva,  Visnu,  and  others, 
have  been  extolled  immediately  before  or  after  the  places  from  which  we  • 
have  quoted  evidence  on  the  subject  of  iakti-tattva.  There  is  scarce  room 
in  the  small  volume  of  the  Tantra-tattva  for  illustrations  of  every  instance 
of  this  kind.  It  is  only  with  the  object  of  acquainting  Sadhakas  with  the 
learning  and  intelligence  of  this  class  of  precocious,  avidya-bom,  and 
matriridal  monsters,  who  give  expression  to  their  malice  against  Maha- 
vidya  by  calling  Her  maya,  ja<Ja,  avidya,  a  great  Vai?navl  *,  and  so  on, 
that  we  have  said  a  few  words  concerning  the  Mother  of  the  world. 

“O  Devi,  nirvapa  cannot  be  attained  without  a  knowledge  of 
Sakti” — this  is  the  conclusion  of  the  Tantra  Sastra.  At  first  sight  it 
would  seem  to  mean  that  no  Devata  other  than  Sakti  has  the  power  to 
grant  nirvana  salvation.  But  if  this  matter 1  is  understood  in  accordance 
with  the  purpose  for  which,  and  the  manner  in  which,  it  has  been  ex¬ 
plained  in  the  Tantra  Sastra,  there  will  remain  no  ground  for  any  such 
conclusion. 

We  shall  therefore  quote  here  what  the  Tantra  Sastra  itself  has  said 
in  brief  about  Sakti-tattva: 

“Brahmanl  creates,  and  not  Brahma.  So,  O  Mahesvari,  Brahma  is 
undoubtedly  a  mere  preta4.  Vai$ijavi  preserves,  and  not  Vijiju.  So, 
O  Mahesvari,  Vi$nu  is  undoubtedly  a  mere  preta.  RudranI  destroys,  and 
not  Rudra.  So,  O  Mahesvari,  Rudra  is  undoubtedly  a  mere  preta. 


1  Tattva.  1  Vibhutis. 

1  As  explained  in  preceding  pages. 

4  This  term  literally  means  the  human  spirit  after  death  and  before  the 
performance  of  the  Sraddha ;  in  the  general  sense,  a  ghost.  Here  used  in  the 
sense  of  a  dead  body. 


293 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  ICoxtd.) 

"Without  the  part  of  Sakti  which  they  possess,  Brahma,  Vi?gu,  Mahe£- 
vara,  and  other  Devas  are  all  without  power,1  for  it  is  beyond  all  doubt 
that  without  Praiqti  they  are  unable  to  do  anything  by  their  own  efforts.”  8 
Now  it  remains  to  be  considered  what  is  the  true  nature  of  that  which 
is  called  Sakti.  But  here  we  are  in  a  difficulty.  All  Sastras  have  at  the 
conclusion  of  their  specification  of  all  aspects  of  Her  nature,  merely  said 
the  term  “  Sakti,”  and,  after  a  low  obeisance,  retired  from  the  field.  How 
can  it  then  be  possible  for  us  to  specify  the  nature  of  that  Sakti  who  is 
Herself  Herself?*  The  juice  of  the  sugar-cane  when  boiled  becomes 
molasses,4  the  molasses  when  boiled  becomes  uncrystallized  sugar,8  the 
uncrystallized  sugar  when  boiled  becomes  crystallized  sugar,*  and  the 
crystallized  sugar  when  boiled  becomes  sugar-candy.7  After  the  state 
of  sugar-candy,  the  juice  admits  of  no  more  condensation.  Similarly,  the 
consequence  of  Brahman  is  the  Brahmapda;  of  Brahmapda  may  a;  of 
maya  Is  vara ;  and  of  I  $  vara  Sakti;  that  is  to  say,  in  order  to  know 
what  there  is  in  the  cause  it  should  first  of  all  be  seen  what  there 
is  in  the  effect.  To  understand  the  truth8  concerning  Brahman,  it 
is  necessary  to  understand,  first  of  all,  that  concerning  the  Brahmai?d&** 
If  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of  the  Brahmanda  is  considered, 
the  sole  and  final  conclusion  is  maya.  In  order  to  understand  the 
fundamental  truth8  concerning  maya,  it  is  necessary  to  fix  the  mind 
on  l£vara,  the  possessor  of  maya.  And  in  order  to  know  the  funda¬ 
mental  nature  of  l£vara,  it  is  necessary  to  fix  the  mind  on  Sakti.  Beyond 
Sakti  there  can  be  no  discussion  of  anything.*  Sakti  is  the  real  nature 
of  all  things,10  but  the  nature  of  Sakti  is  nothing  but  Sakti  Herself. 
The  sun  reveals  all  things,  but  nothing  reveals  the  sun  save  itself. 
However  that  may  be,  just  as  the  Sakti  of  the  seed  can  be  guessed  by 
observing  the  fruits,  flowers,  leaves,  branches,  roots,  stem  of  the  tree, 
so  we  shall  proceed  to  open  the  Tantra-door  of  the  temple  of  Sakti-tattva 
by  observing  the  process  of  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  of 
Brahmanda,  the  scat  of  Her  eternal  play. 

May  the  Mother  of  the  universe  hold  the  lamp  of  Self-revelation  in 
Her  hand,  and  showing  to  Her  children,  who  are  living  separate  from 
their  Mother,  the  path  leading  to  Her  own  Self,  ultimately  take  them  up 
on  Her  lap. 


1  Jada.  *  The  above  is  from  the  Kubjika  Tantra. 

8  Svarupa :  who  iB  Herself  Herself.  4  Guda. 


*  Sarkara  sikata,  called  dalo. 

7  Sitopala,  called  mifri. 

•  The  universe,  or  “  egg  of  Brahma  ”. 
10  Sakti  is  the  svarupa,  or  thing  in  itself. 


•  Sita  Sarkara. 
8  Tattva. 


294 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


The  word  ”  Sakti  ”  is  formed  by  adding  the  suffix  “  kti  ”  to  the  verbal! 
root  “ftak”  in  the  passive  voice.  The  verbal  root  “  Sak  ”  means  “  Sakti  ” 
just  as  the  word  “  gam  ”  means  “  gati  ”  (motion) .  The  philosopher  would 
explain  “  Sakti-tattva  ”  by  means  of  discussion. 

This  method,  however,  has  little  pertinency.  At  the  very  outset  the 
grammarian  has,  in  trying  to  define  the  term  “  Sakti,”  found  himself  at 
sea,  and  left  the  matter  exactly  where  he  found  it.  The  root  “  Sak  ” 
means  “  Sakti  the  passive  voice  means  the  same  thing  as  does  the  root — 
that  is  to  say,  “  Sakti  and  the  word  that  is  formed  by  adding  the  suffix 
to  the  root  is  also  “  Sakti  It  therefore  comes  to  this,  that  the  gram¬ 
marian  has  explained  the  word  “  Sakti  ”  as  Sakti,  Sakti,  Sakti ;  as  if  he  has 
sworn  thrice  and  said :  “  In  the  name  of  dharma,  the  word  ‘  Sakti  ’  means 
‘Sakti,  Sakti,  Sakti’.” 

Sadhakas  will  here  see  that,  if  the  interpretation  of  the  word  itself 
has  led  to  such  difficulty,  how  much  more  difficult  must  be  the  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  thing  denoted  by  the  word.  In  the  opinion  of  phi¬ 
losophers  “  mutual  dependence  ”  is  a  fault,  but  grammarians  adopt  it  as ' 
the  fundamental  principle  for  safe  guidance.  The  object  of  grammarians 
is  to  State  the  true  nature  of  a  thing  in  conformity  with  its  use,  while  the 
object  of  philosophers  is  to  explain  a  thing  with  a  show  of  learning  and 
intelligence.  A  grammarian  will  plainly  say,  The  root  “gam"  means 
“  gati  ”  (motion) ;  but  a  man,  if  a  philosopher,  will,  with  a  show  of  keen 
intelligence,  explain  the  same  thing  as:  “Going  is  that  particular  form  of 
action  in  which  there  is  produced  a  cessation  of  touch  confined  to  one  place 
with  a  view  to  establish  at  the  same  time  a  touch  confined  to  another 
place.” 1  The  word  “  gati,”  consisting  of  two  syllables  only  is  thus  explained 
by  thirty-five  syllables.  And  one  can  easily  increase  this  number  by 
adding  to  the  interpretation  a  few  more  “  tva-tva-avacchhinna.”s  But 
what  is  the  result  of  so  much  labour  ?  If  a  grammarian  asks  a  philosopher, 
“Have  you  eaten?  ”  the  latter  will  most  probably  reply,  “ I  have  made 
food  to  go  ” — that  is  to  say,  “  I  have  made  food  to  leave  the  plate  and  be 
deposited  in  my  stomach.”  Again,  when  the  same  food  leaves  the  stomach 
and  returns  to  the  earth  as  in  vomiting,  a  great  difficulty  arises  if  this 
action,  too,  has  to  be  named  according  to  the  definition  of  leaving  one 
place  and  establishing  touch  with  another.  After  all  the  trouble  taken 
over  the  interpretation,  eating,  going,  and  vomiting  become  one  and  the 
same  thing. 


1  POrvadfltavacchinnasamyoga 
ganuk  u  la vy ap  ar a vi  fc§ogam  an  am . 


bhavasahakrtottaradesavacchhinnasamyo- 


*  Limitations,  such  as  “ness,"  “ness,”  “  confined  to,”  etc.,  for  which  the 
Nava  Nyaya  school  here  satirized  displays  such  predilection.  It  is  commonly 
believed  that  a  logician  will  in  his  next  birth  be  bora  a  jackass. 


295 


WHAT  IS  $AKTI  ?  (Contd.) 

To  avoid  this  difficulty  the  clever  philosopher  has  added  the  expression 
“  a  particular  form  of  action,”  meaning  thereby  that  every  act  of  aban¬ 
doning  one  place  and  establishing  touch  with  another  place  is  not  going, 
but  that  a  particular  form  only  of  such  action  is  called  going.  Now,  if  it 
is  asked.  What  is  this  particular  form  of  action  which  is  called  going  ?  the 
philosopher  will  reply  :  “  It  is  touching  another  place  with  the  feet.”  But 
in  that  case  kicking  also  becomes  going.  One  is  therefore  at  last  obliged 
to  say  that  “  going  ”  is  the  name  of  that  action  which  people  call  “  going 
It  thus  comes  to  this  :  “gamana”  (going)  means  “gati”  (motion),  and 
“  gati  ”  (motion)  means  “gamana”  (going).  It  is  because  he  will,  after 
all,  have  to  die  this  death  that  the  old  and  intelligent  grammarian  has  at 
the  outset  accepted  the  death,  and  said  in  plain  terms  that  “  gamana  ” 
means  “  gati  ”,  But  the  philosopher  will  not  easily  accede  to  this.  He 
will  die  the  same  death  at  last,  but  with  a  frown  on  his  brow.  This  is 
what  is  called  having  too  much  intelligence.  A  philosopher’s  wisdom  con¬ 
sists  in  puzzling  the  intelligence  with  a  voluminous  combination  of  words 
*  while  he  knows  full  well  that  there  is  no  other  means  than  “  mutual  depen¬ 
dence  ”.  It  must  therefore  be  understood  that  the  loquacious  philosopher 
and  the  sadhaka  who  knows  the  truth 1  concerning  things  are  not  one  and 
the  same  person.  The  fundamental  principle  of  a  sadhana  Sastra  is 
attainment  of  siddhi,  while  the  fundamental  principle  of  philosophy  is 
merely  looking  abroad  with  the  eyes  wide  open.  In  the  present  discussion 
of  Sakti-tattva  we  shall  therefore  depend  entirely  on  Sadhana-Sastra,*  and 
have  nothing  to  do  with  philosophy;  for  millions  of  systems  of  philosophy 
may  disappear  from  view,  but  not  the  least  change  can  occur  in  a  sadhana- 
sastra.*  However  that  may  be,  what  wc  understand  from  grammar  is 
that,  as  in  the  case  of  “  gati,”  there  is  no  means  of  understanding  Sakti  with 
the  help  of  any  term  expressive  of  quality  other  than  the  same  word 
“  Sakti  ”.  Considering  the  manner  in  which  the  word  “  sakti  ”  is  ordinarily 
used,  it  appears  from  the  adjuncts  of  Sakti  in  such  expressions  as  intellec¬ 
tual  Sakti,  mental  Sakti,  mnemonic  Sakti,  visual  Sakti,  aural  Sakti,  active 
sakti,  vital  Sakti,  etc.,  that  Sakti  merely  takes  different  names  according  as 
it  manifests  itself  in  different  places,  while  in  reality  the  thing  Sakti  is  every¬ 
where  the  same.  What  is  the  root  of  the  Saktis  which  are  in  the  branch, 
the  leaf,  the  fruit,  and  the  flower  ?  What  is  that  sakti  under  the  influence 
of  which  these  saktis  disappear  ?  And  what,  again,  is  that  Sakti  under  the 
influence  of  which  they  appear  ?  It  is  universally  admitted  that  the  answer 
to  this  question  is,  that  Atma  is  at  the  root  of  all  these  Saktis.  Now  we 
must  understand  what  this  Atma  is. 

There  is  a  class  of  believers  who,  when  they  hear  the  Upani$ads 
taking  the  name  of  Atma,  become  senseless  with  emotion,  and  say  that 


1  Tattva. 


*  Tantra. 


296  PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 

Atm  a  is  “  attributeless  and  omnipresent  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a 
class  of  sceptics  who  take  up  the  sword  at  the  very  mention  of  the  name 
of  Atma,  saying  that  it  is  "  a  false  and  fanciful  thing Put  under  the 
edges  of  the  saws  applied  by  these  two  classes  of  people,  Atma  has,  in  the 
nineteenth  century,  become  finer  and  finer,  and  has  ended  in  being 
something  almost  non-existent.  It  is  only  because  Atma  has  an  Atma  of 
its  own  that  it  has  not  altogether  ceased  to  exist.  For  this  reason,  in  order 
now  to  find  out  the  true  nature  of  Atma,  it  must  be  rescued  from  the 
hands  of  both  these  classes  of  people,  kept  in  a  separate  place,  and  viewed 
from  there. 

In  dualistic  vision  cause  and  effect  are  two  different  things,  but 
looked  at  from  the  monistic  point  of  view,  they  are  the  same.  That  which 
is  the  effect  is  also  the  cause,  and  that  which  is  the  cause  is  also  the  effect; 
for  what  did  not  exist  in  the  cause  cannot  exist  in  the  effect,  and  what 
does  not  exist  in  the  effect  cannot  have  existed  in  the  cause.  The  Sakti 
which  does  not  exist  in  the  seed  can  never  appear  in  the  tree,  and  the 
Sakti  which  does  not  appear  in  the  tree  cannot  have  existed  in  the  seed. ' 
A  consideration  of  the  similarity  between  the  seed  and  the  tree  leads 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  seed  is  the  latent  state  of  Sakti  while  the  tree  is 
in  its  patent  state.  Similarly,  all  the  Saktia  which  appear  manifest  in  life 1 
— the  senses,  the  body,  and  the  mind — are  but  patent  states  of  Atma,  that 
great  Sakti  of  the  seed.  To  say  that  Sakti  resides  in  Atma  is  to  present  the 
thing  in  the  form  in  which  it  may  be  understood  by  means  of  ordinary 
intelligence.  The  final  decision  of  the  Sastra,  however,  is  that  in  reality 
Sakti  is  Atma  and  Atma  is  Sakti.  It  is  but  a  mode  of  speech  to  say  that 
fire  has  the  power  (Sakti)  of  burning.  The  truth  is  that  fire  exists  as 
power  of  burning  and  the  power  of  burning  appears  as  fire.  We  in  our 
ordinary  virion  see  only  the  material  and  gross  aspect  of  fire. 

The  Sastra  has  therefore  called  that  easily  perceptible  aspect  by  the 
name  of  fire,  and  designated  the  power  of  burning  as  its  Sakti  (power). 
But  leaving  the  material  aspect  aside,  spiritually  speaking  fire  is  nothing 
but  Sakti.  Although  the  expression  “  My  Atma,”  used  in  ordinary 
parlance  by  worldly  people,  means,  in  reality,  “  What  is  Atma  that  I  am,” 
yet,  by  falsely  considering  the  physical  body  to  be  the  person  (Atma)  we 
are  wont  to  say  “  my  Atma  ”  in  the  sense  that  Atma  exists  in  this  my 
physical  body.  Here,  also,  if  we  leave  out  of  consideration  the  physical 
side,  Atma  becomes  nothing  but  Sakti,  because  no  such  thing  exists  in 
the  world  as  the  Sakti  of  Atma.  That  which  is  Atma  is  Sakti,  and  that 
which  is  Sakti  is  Atma.  In  many  places  in  the  Sastra  there  is  mention  of 
the  Sakti  of  Atma,  but  in  all  sucb  places  it  is  Atma  alone  which  has  really 
been  spoken  of,  just  as  people  speak  of  the  water  of  the  Ganges,  the  head 


1  Prana. 


297 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  {Contd.) 

of  R&hu,1  the  refulgence  of  the  sun,  the  light  of  the  moon,  etc.,  although, 
in  reality,  the  water  is  Ganges,  the  head  is  Rahu,  the  refulgence  is  the 
sun,  the  light  is  the  moon,  and  so  on.  Just  as,  in  order  to  express  the 
power  of  Sakti,  a  distinction  has  to  be  imagined  in  ordinary  usage,  and 
expressions  like  “  the  water  of  the  Ganges  ”  have  to  be  used;  so  although 
what  is  Sakti  is  Atma,  yet  authors  of  Sastras  have,  in  order  to  enable 
people  to  understand  the  Sakti-tattva,*  often  spoken  of  the  Sakti  of  Atma; 
but  in  conclusion  they  have  unanimously,  and  with  one  voice,  said: 
“  There  is  no  distinction  between  Sakti  and  the  possessor  of  Sakti.”  In 
spite,  however,  of  this  absence  of  distinction,  they  have  had,  even  while 
establishing  such  absence,  to  speak  of  two — namely,  Sakti  and  the  possessor 
of  Sakti — in  order  to  explain  the  matter  to  people  whose  knowledge  consists 
of  distinctions.  Without  two  there  can  be  no  distinction,  and  without 
distinction  there  can  be  no  establishment  of  the  absence  of  distinction. 

There  is  yet  something  more  for  consideration.  What  is  the  true 
nature  of  that  Atma  over  which  there  is  so  much  quarrel,  dispute,  and 
discussion  ?  Why  do  we  admit  its  existence  ?  Looking  at  this  part  of  the 
question  we  see  that  the  body  of  the  Jiva  is  unconscious,  his  senses  arc 
unconscious,  and  even  his  mind  is  almost  so,  for  although  the  mind  pos¬ 
sesses  a  little  of  consciousness,  it  cannot  exist  independently  and  supported 
by  itself.  It  is,  therefore,  a  subject  for  consideration  under  whose  subjec¬ 
tion  all  these  dependent  things  exist.  This  matter  has  been  very  clearly 
decided  in  the  form  of  a  question  in  the  Kena  Upanisad.  There  it  is 
asked,  By  what  arc  the  senses  of  work,  the  senses  of  knowledge,  mind, 
intellect,  etc.,  able  to  perform  their  respective  functions?  What  is  the  true 
nature  of  Him  who  is  the  eye  of  the  eye,  the  car  of  the  car,  the  life  of  the 
life,  the  mind  of  the  mind  ?  He  has  been  called  “  the  eye  of  the  eye,  the 
ear  of  the  ear,  the  life  of  the  life,”  but  not  the  Atma  of  the  Atma;  because 
if  the  nature  *  of  Atma  is  decided  first  of  all,  the  question  “  By  what  ?  ” 
•cannot  at  all  arise.  For  that  is  the  final  point,  the  ultimate  goal.  However 
that  may  be,  after  all  these  questions  the  Kena  Upanisad  goes  on  to  say: 
“  Indra,  Candra,4  Vayu,®  Varuna,4  Agni,’  and  other  Devas  who  preside 
■over  the  senses  in  the  Jlva’s  body  were  directing  the  working  of  the  uni¬ 
verse  with  their  various  powers  and  boasting  of  their  victory  over  Astiras, 
when  suddenly  a  mass  of  indescribable  brilliance  8  appeared  before  them. 
Unable  to  make  out  what  that  enormously  powerful  mass  of  light  was, 
Agni  and  other  Devas,  deputed  by  Indra,  went  over  one  by  one  to  It  and 
were  asked  by  It  who  they  were.  First  of  all  Agni  said  that  he  was  Agni 

1  One  of  the  navagrahas  (planets) . 

*  Subject  of  or  principle  concerning  Sakti. 

8  Tattva.  8  Moon.  8  Air. 

*  Water.  7  Fire.  8  Tejae. 


298 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


(fire)  and  Jataveda,1  and  that  he  could  bum  the  whole  world.  There¬ 
upon  that  Devata  made  of  light,  placed  before  Agni  a  blade  of  grass  and 
said,  “  Bum  it.”  Agni  tried  his  best  but  failed  to  bum  the  grass. 

Subsequently,  after  Vayu  and  other  Devas  had  been  equally  put  to 
shame  and  had  returned,  Indra  himself  went,  but  in  an  instant  that 
Devata,  the  refulgent  mass  ol  light,  disappeared.  Seeing  the  mass  of  light 
disappear,  Indra  understood  that  It  had  disappeared  because,  although 
He  was  the  ruler  of  the  three  worlds,  He  was  yet  not  a  fit  person  even  to 
approach  that  Devata.  Thus  shattering  the  pride  of  Indra,  She,  who  is 
perfect  Brahman  and  eternal,  assumed  the  fairest  form  of  Gauri  and 
appeared  before  the  Devas,  illumining  the  firmament  with  Her  lustre. 
Then,  when  the  Lord  of  Devas 1  questioned  Her  about  Her  real  nature. 
She  replied . 

We  are  unable  to  divulge  Her  reply  to  the  public,  for  that  is  Upani- 
sad.  We  shall,  however,  quote,  from  the  elaborate  account  of  this 
subject  given  in  the  Devi  Bhagavata,  that  portion  in  which  the  Devi’s 
reply  is  contained.  From  this  sadhakas  will  know  Her  real  nature. 

The  Devi  said:  “This  aspect  of  mine  is  Brahman  in  reality,  the 
cause  of  all  causes,  the  scat  of  maya,  witness  to  all  and  free  from  all  defect. 
Divided  into  two  parts,  I  create  the  entire  world.  One  of  these  parts  b 
Sacchidananda-Prakrti  and  the  other  is  Maya-Prakrti.  That  maya  b 
my  Parama 1  Sakti,  and  I  am  the  livari  who  possesses  that  Sakti.  But 
just  as  moonlight  b  not  distinct  from  the  moon,  so  I  am  not  distinct 
from  maya.  O  Lord  of  Devas!  during  the  dissolution*  of  the  whole 
world  this  maya  cxbts  inseparate  from  me  in  a  state  of  equilibrium, 
and  again,  in  consequence  of  the  past  karma  of  Jivas,  thb  unmanifested 
maya  becomes  manifest.  The  aspect  of  Sakti,  in  which  She  b  inward 
looking,  b  called  ‘  maya,’  and  that  in  which  She  b  outward  looking  b 
called  1  avidya  ’.  It  was  from  tamas,  the  outward-looking  avidyii,  that 
sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas,  the  three  gupas,  appeared  at  the  beginning  of 
creation,  and  from  that  threefold  division  appeared  Brahma,  Vi$pu,  and 
Maheivara.  The  rajas  gupa  predominates  in  Brahma,  the  sattva  gupa  in 
Vi?pu,  and  the  tamas  guna  in  Rudra,  who  is  the  embodiment  of  all 
causes.* 


1  A  Vaidik  name  for  Agni.  The  word  means  “  known  by  all  things  that 
are  bom,”  or  “  known  as  it  b  bom  ”  (spreads)  (Sayana’s  commentary  on 
Rgveda). 

*  Indra.  *  Supreme.  4  Pralaya. 

*  The  Bengali  word  is  “  Karana  ”.  All  effects  lie  in  a  potential  state 
in  their  causes.  Thb  potential  state  represents  tamas  gu?a.  Rudra,  in  whom 
tamas  predominates,  thus  holds  all  effects  in  him  as  their  cause. 


299- 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI?  (Canid.) 

“  In  this  Brahma^ida  (which  is  but  a  manifestation  of  avidya  con¬ 
sisting  of  tamas)  Brahma  is  like  my  gross 1  body,  Visnu  is  like  my  linga  * 
body,  Rudra  is  like  my  causal  *  body,  and  I  myself  am  turiya  caitanya.4 
It  is  in  ray  state  of  equipoise  that  I  reside  in  all  things.  Beyond  that, 
I  am  Parabrakman,  devoid  of  form.  I  have  two  aspects,  according  as  I 
am  with  and  without  attributes.  The  aspect  which  is  above  maya  is 
attributeless,  and  the  aspect  with  maya  is  with  attributes.  Thus,  possessing 
two  aspects,  I  create  the  world  as  Maya,  enter  into  it  as  Brahman, 
and  send  Jivas  along  their  respective  paths,  whether  good  or  bad, 
according  to  law  and  karma.”  * 

“  It  is  I,  again,  who  appoint  Brahma,  Visnu,  and  MaheSvara  to  do 
the  work  of  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  of  the  three  worlds. 
It  is  out  of  fear  of  me  s  that  the  wind  blows,  the  sun  rises  and  sets,  Indra 
gives  rain,  lire  bums,  and  death  takes  the  lives  of  Jivas.  For  this  reason 
I  am  called  ‘  the  best  of  all  ’  (sarvottama),  ‘  the  ruler  of  all  *  (sarvcSvari.) 
It  is  through  my  grace  that  ye  triumph  in  all  things.  Ye  are  but  puppets 
in  my  hand.  Being  will  in  substance,  I  ever  act  according  to  my  own 
will,  and  according  to  your  karma  I  grant  victory  at  one  time  to  you,  and 
at  another  to  Asuras.  Through  pride,  and  overpowered  by  intense 
delusion,  you  forgot  me,  the  dweller  in  all  things.  For  this  reason,  in 
order  to  favour  ye,  my  energy,7  the  Sakti,  which  is  *  the  best  of  all,’ 
emerged  from  out  of  your  bodies  and  appeared  before  you  as  what  you 
thought  to  be  a  Yaksa.” 8  (That  is  to  say,  separated  from  that  great 
Sakti,  you  failed  to  recognize  your  individual  Saktis  and  also  were  unable 
to  do  the  works  for  which  you  are  appointed  in  the  world.) 

“  Henceforward,  by  all  means  shake  off  pride  and  seek  the  protection 
of  me,  who  am  existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss.”  (That  is  to  say, 
knowing  me  to  be  the  controller  of  all,  attribute  the  fruits  of  all  works, 
done  or  undone,  to  the  full  exercise  of  my  great  Sakti,  and  be  gratified  on 
thus  resigning  yourselves  to  me.) 

Adya-Sakti  (primal  Sakti)  says:  “Divided  into  two  parts,  I  create. 
One  of  these  parts  is  Sacchhidananda-Prakrti,  and  the  other  is  Maya- 
Prakrti.”  Again,  when  maya  is  Her  Sakti  She  is  the  levari  possessing 
Sakti.  Spiritually  speaking,  Sakti  is  not  different  from  Her,  just  as 
moonlight  is  not  different  from  the  moon.  It  is  the  said  part  which  is 
pure  Sacchhidananda  which  has  been  designated  as  Atma  in  all  Sastras. 
The  body,  the  senses,  the  mind,  the  life,  all  are  subordinate  to  Him,  all 


1  Sthula.  1  Subtle  body.  *  Karatia. 

4  Consciousness  in  its  fourth  state  (see  Introduction  to  Tanlra  tfastra). 

*  See  Introduction  to  T antra  Sastra. 

•  That  is,  in  obedience  to  me.  7  Tejas. 

8  That  is,  as  some  being  of  a  high  order  deserving  honour  and  adoration.. 


300 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


functions  are  within  His  control;  for  all  things  in  the  body  are  unconscious 
and  that  Atm5  which  is  consciousness  is  the  sole  cause  of  their  being 
possessed  of  consciousness. 

Just  as  the  sun  is  the  only  source  of  all  light  during  the  day,  so  Atma 
is  the  only  source  of  all  physical  consciousness.  As  the  sun  is  not  a 
■different  thing  from  its  light,  so  At  mi  is  not  a  different  thing  from  Sakti  or 
consciousness.  The  ultimate  point  to  which  atma-tattva'  leads  is,  therefore, 
Cit&akti.*  What  we  know  as  consciousness  is  called  Sakti.  In  explaining 
the  word  Sakti  it  may  finally  be  said  that  Sakti  is  that  thing  which  makes 
able — that  is  to  say,  that  power  by  virtue  of  which  the  body,  the  senses, 
the  mind,  and  the  prana,*  which  are  all  unconscious,4  become  able  to  act 
like  conscious  things.  It  is  because  &akti  is  universe-pervading  that  its 
■other  name  is  Atma.  What  pervades  is  Atma;  He  who  pervades  all  is 
called  Atma. 

In  the  driving  of  a  carriage  we  see  that  the  carriage,  the  driver  of  the 
•carriage,  the  person  driven,  and  the  horse,  all  four  in  fact,  arc  in  motion. 
Of  these  four,  only  one  is  independent  and  conscious,  two  arc  dependent  • 
and  conscious,  and  the  remaining  one,  though  itself  unconscious,  is 
drawn  like  a  conscious  thing.  The  horse,  though  conscious,  is  under  the 
control  of  the  driver;  the  driver,  though  conscious,  is  under  the  control  of 
the  person  driven;  and  the  carriage,  though  itself  unconscious,  is  suc¬ 
cessively  under  the  control  of  all  three — viz.,  the  person  driven,  the  driver, 
and  the  horse.  Sadhakas  constantly  see  such  a  carriage-driving  within 
their  bodies.  The  body  composed  of  five  elements  is  nothing  but  a 
carriage  for  carrying  a  person  in  and  out  on  this  journey  of  samsara. 
The  ten  senses  arc  its  ten  horses,  the  mind  is  its  driver,  and  Atma,  that 
great  Sakti,  is  the  person  driven.  Just  as  the  driver  guides  the  horses 
according  to  the  directions  of  the  person  driven,  so  the  mind  also,  urged 
by  the  Sakti  of  Atma,  sends  the  senses  to  their  individual  pursuits. 

As  the  carriage  runs  drawn  by  the  horse,  the  body  moves  drawn  by 
the  senses.  The  mind  and  the  senses  are  both  conscious  under  the 
influence  of  the  consciousness  of  Atma.  In  all  the  pursuits  of  the  senses 
the  body  appears  as  conscious.  The  body  is  subordinate  to  the  senses,  the 
senses  are  subordinate  to  the  mind,  the  mind  is  subordinate  to  Atma.  Of 
the  four,  therefore,  three  are  dependent,  and  only  Atma  is  independent, 
all  the  others  being  subordinate  to  Him.  There  is,  however,  this 
peculiarity  here,  that,  unlike  the  ordinary  person,  seated  in  a  carriage, 
the  person  who  is  driven  in  the  carriage  of  the  body  does  not  travel  along 
any  path  fixed  by  Him;  He  simply  orders  the  driver  to  drive  the  carriage 

J  The  discussion  of  the  Atma — spiritual  science. 

*  Consciousness  is  the  ultimate  Sakti.  *  Vital  principle. 

4  That  is  when  dualistically  considered  as  separate  things. 


WHAT  IS  SAKTI  ?  {Contd.)  301 

and  then  retires.  The  driver  is  left  to  choose  whichever  path  he  likes,  and 
to  enjoy  or  suffer  from  the  comforts  and  discomforts  of  the  path  on  which 
his  choice  may  fall.  The  person  driven  has  neither  comfort  nor  dis¬ 
comfort.  Atma  is  ever  free  from  attachment. 

The  driver  may,  with  unerring  discretion,  take  the  carriage  safely 
through  the  paths  of  sin  and  virtue  which  the  Sastra  indicates;  but  if  he  is 
weak,  there  is  danger  for  him.  The  ten  wayward  horses  draw  the 
carriage  in  ten  different  directions  and,  consequently,  the  small  carriage, 
built  with  five  pieces  of  wood1 * * 4 *  and  full  of  innumerable  joints,  breaks 
down  in  mid-path.  Besides  this,  the  hero  who  has  taken  charge  of  driving 
the  carriage  is  hardly  able  to  control  himself,  not  to  speak  of  controlling 
the  horses.  He  has  a  dread  of  the  two  reins  iama  and  dama,*  which  arc 
prescribed  for  controlling  the  horses.  Even  the  thought  of  them  often 
greatly  frightens  him,  and,  in  many  cases,  he  is  of  opinion  that  the  idea  of 
handling  and  using  them  in  tightening  or  loosening  the  hold  on  the  horses, 
is  but  an  incredible  fancy.  It  is  owing  to  such  weakness  on  the  part  of 
the  driver  that  in  the  hunt  for  happiness  in  the  samsara,  Jiva  so  often 
forgets  his  aim. 

It  is  here  in  the  samsara  that  the  terrible  catastrophe  begins. 
Although  the  driver  is  weak,  he  can  cast  his  eyes  towards  the  person 
sitting  in  the  carriage,  and  then,  forgetting  fatalism,*  one  becomes 
inclined  to  say:  “O  Mother!  what  play  is  this  of  yours?  The  strength 
and  intelligence  of  the  driver  are  not  unknown  to  You;  why,  then 
knowing  everything,  have  You  placed  the  carriage  in  charge  of  such  a 
worthless  driver?  True  it  is  that  I  am  a  great  sinner,  but  for  that  You 
cannot  abandon  me.  In  this  great  crisis  neither  the  driver  nor  the 
person  driven*  can  save  himself.  I  know  that  I  must  suffer  the  fruits  of 
my  own  karma;  but  still,  O  Mother!  I  desire  to  see  You  once  in  this 
broken  carriage6  of  mine.” 

“  As  in  Ravana’s  last  drive  in  a  carriage,  so  in  this  last  drive  of  mine 
appear  for  once,  O  Mother!  mad  and  shouting,  ‘  Fear  not !  fear  not !  \ 
Stand  in  the  carriage,  holding  me  to  Thy  bosom.  Do  not  disappear,  but 
appear  for  a  moment  in  my  heart,  so  that  I  can  for  once  see  the  lustrous 
glory  of  your  world-encompassing  beauty,  filling  ray  eyes,  filling  my  mind, 
filling  my  life.  O  Mother!  let  the  light  of  that  death-conquering  black 


1  The  five  elements. 

*  Equanimity  and  self-restraint,  external  and  internal. 

*  Adrsta  vada. 

4  There  is  no  escape  for  the  driven,  because  he,  too,  is  associated  with  the 

sufferings  of  the  Jiva,  though  he  does  not  feel  them. 

6  The  human  body. 


302 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


beauty  of  yours,  which  has  the  lustre  of  a  million  moons,  dispel  the 
■darkness  of  my  fear  of  death.  O  Mother!  may  I,  climbing  to  your  bosom 
and  becoming  yours,  die  the  death 1  for  which  even  immortals,  regardless  of 
their  privilege  of  immortality,  long.  So  I  say,  come,  O  Mother!  let  us 
two,  Mother  and  son,  together  undertake  today  the  journey  by  carriage. 
Let  me  for  once  see,  O  Mother!  your  Car-journey*  in  the  carriage  of  my 
body,  in  the  carriage  of  my  eyes,  in  the  carriage  of  my  mind,  in  the 
carriage  of  my  heart.  I  have  heard  that  there  is  no  return  journey8  in 
your  carriage,  and  hence  this  desire  on  my  part.” 


1  Of  the  individual  self  in  the  bosom  of  the  Mother. 

*  Rathajitra,  or  car  festival,  in  which  the  Deva  or  Deri  is  drawn  in  a  car. 
Here  the  human  body  is  the  Deri’s  car. 

*  To  the  worlds  of  birth  and  death. 


CHAPTER  IX 


Siva  and  Sakti 

Sadhaka,  no  Sastra  or  community  denies  that  the  above-mentioned  Atma, 
who  is  Sakti,  is  Brahman.  Differences  of  opinion  exist  among  those 
whose  knowledge  consists  of  distinctions  only,  in  respect  of  the  three  words 
Atma,  Sakti  and  Caitanya.1  The  word  Atma  is  masculine,  the  word 
Sakti  is  feminine,  and  the  word  Chaitanya  is  neuter.  As  there  are 
differences  of  gender  between  the  three  as  names,  so  there  are  also 
differences  of  kind  between  them  as  things — Brahma,  Vi$nu,  and 
Mahe&vara  are  male,  Sakti  is  female,  and  Caitanya  or  Brahman  is  neuter. 
As  there  is  no  scope  for  distinction  of  kind  in  attributeless  Ciriakti  the 
Sastra  has  designated  Caitanya  or  Brahman  as  neuter.  Again,  owing  to 
differences  in  the  forms  in  which  the  Sakti  of  will,  the  Sakti  of  knowledge, 
and  the  Sakti  of  action  appear,1  the  Sastra  calls  the  Deva  male  and  the 
Devi  female,  in  accordance  with  the  male  or  female  principle  inherent  in 
all  fathers  and  mothers  in  the  world,  beginning  at  the  root  from  the 
Father  of  the  world  and  the  Mother  of  the  world.  This  is  no  mere 
imagination  on  the  part  of  the  authors  of  the  Sastra;  it  is  but  a  statement 
of  what  is  really  true.  Femininity  and  masculinity  exist  wherever  there 
is  a  description  of  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  caused  by  maya 
through  a  union  of  the  two  persons.  The  neuter  state,  or  the  state  beyond 
that  of  a  male  or  a  female  exists  when  the  aspect  above  maya  is  described. 
To  speak  of  neuter  does  not  imply  complete  absence  of  the  male  or  the 
female  principle;  it  implies  only  an  unmanifested  or  undeveloped  state  of 
those  principles  (Sakti).  Even  in  the  bodies  of  neuters  we  see  in  life  that 
both  the  masculine  and  feminine  marks  are  found  to  be  present.  In  some 
cases  the  neuter’s  body  is  found  to  be  more  like  that  of  a  male,  while  in 
others  it  is  found  to  be  more  like  that  of  a  female,  the  only  distinction 
being  that  the  male  or  the  female  principle  is  not  fully  developed. 

From  what  the  Sastra  says  about  the  generation  of  neuters  it  appears 
that  when  neither  the  male  nor  the  female  principle  can  subdue  the  other, 


1  That  is,  spirit,  power,  and  intelligence  or  consciousness  respectively. 
*  Icchhaiakd,  jflanafakti,  kriyaiakti. 


304 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


a  neuter  is  created,  in  whom  the  two  principles  exist  in  a  state  of  equili¬ 
brium.  The  S&rad5tilaka 1  says:  “An  excess  of  menstrual  blood  causes 
the  birth  of  a  female,  an  excess  of  seed  that  of  a  male,  and  an  evenness- 
of  the  quantities  of  blood  and  semen  that  of  a  neuter.  This  is  certain.” 

The  MStrkabheda  Tantra  says:  “  An  excess  of  the  Sakti’s  (woman’s) 
blood  over  the  purusa’s  (man’s)  seed  causes  the  birth  of  a  female  child; 
its  opposite  causes  the  birth  of  a  male  child,  and  if  the  blood  and  the 
semen  be  equal  in  quantity  a  neuter  is  bom.  This  is  certain.”  It  has 
also  been  stated  what  proportions  of  blood  and  semen  mean  equality 
in  quantity. 

"  At  the  time  of  procreation  twenty-two  *  units  of  menstrual  blood 
and  fourteen  units  of  seed  arc  produced  in  the  bodies  of  the  woman  and 
the  man  respectively.  This  is  equality.  If  the  blood  be  in  excess  (that 
is  to  say,  if  twenty-two  units  of  blood  mix  with  less  than  fourteen  units 
of  semen),  a  female  is  bom;  and  if  the  semen  be  in  excess  (that  is  to  say, 
if  fourteen  units  of  semen  mix  with  less  than  twenty-two  units  of  blood), 
a  male  is  bom;  and  if  the  above-mentioned  numbers  of  units  of  blood 
and  semen  remain  the  same,  a  neuter  is  bom.” 

Even  in  this  equality  of  the  numbers  of  units  the  excess  *  of  half  a 
unit  one  way  or  the  other  leads  to  the  appearance  of  female  marks  or 
male  marks  in  the  body  of  a  neuter;  and  according  to  these  marks  neuters 
may  be  divided  into  male-neuters  and  female-neuters.  But  the  Sastra, 
which  notices  the  result  only,  has  rejected  this  useless  classification  and 
has  ordinarily  treated  all  neuters  as  the  same.  Nevertheless,  although  the 
difference  between  male  neuters  and  female  neuters  makes  no  difference 
in  the  fruit,  it  makes  some  difference  at  the  root  and  in  the  flower;  other¬ 
wise,  the  difference  would  not  have  appeared.  At  the  root  there  is  the 
difference  between  the  quantities  of  blood  and  semen,  and  in  the  flower 
there  are  differences,  physical,  mental,  and  functional.  The  neuter  whose 
body  resembles  that  of  a  male  develops  mostly  masculine  tendencies,  and 
the  neuter  whose  body  resembles  that  of  a  female  develops  mostly  feminine 
tendencies.  Similarly,  just  as  the  male  and  female  principles  exist  un¬ 
developed  in  neuters,  their  developed  forms  being  the  male  and  female 
entities,  so  both  the  principles  of  Sakti  and  Siva  exist  unmahifested  in  the 
Brahman,  their  manifestations  being  Umi  and  Mahe&vara,  Lak§rtu  and 
Narayana,  Radha  and  Krsna,  Sita  and  Rama,  and  so  on.  Besides  this, 
that  blissful  Brahman  aspect  of  Siva  and  Sakti,  wherein  They  are  manifest 


1  See  also  as  to  the  process  of  sexual  union,  chap,  ii,  of  the  Matfkabheda 
Tantra,  chap,  i,  Ssktanandatarangipi ;  PrSnatosini,  p.  29. 

*  See  Saradihilaka. 

*  The  equality  is  supposed  to  hold  so  long  as  there  is  not  the  difference  of 
one  full  unit. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


305 

and  yet  unmanifest  and  are  inseparate  from  each  other,  and  which  can 
be  worshipped  only  as  an  undifferentiated  mass  of  consciousness  and 
bliss — that  aspect  is  Mahavidya,  primordial,  beginningless,  worshipped 
of  Brahma  and  other  Devas  and  sought  by  the  three  worlds. 

We  shall  possibly,  while  dealing  with  the  subject  of  s&dhana,  be  able 
to  present  to  the  scrutiny  of  Sadhakas  a  sketch  of  a  part  of  that  aspect 
wherein  bliss  has  its  full  play  and  which  is  monistic  and  eternal  and 
above  maya.  Here  we  must  understand  that  Caitanya1  is  nothing  but 
Sakti.  although  the  word  itself  is  neuter  in  gender.  To  this  end  we  shall 
quote  a  single  sutra  from  the  Tantra  Sastra,  in  which  the  all-luminous 
aspect  of  Brahman  is  established.  The  Nirvana  Tantra  2  says: 

“  In  the  Satyaloka  s,  Mahakali  and  Mahanidra  live,  embracing  one 
another  inseparably.  That  eternal  Sakti,  possessing  the  lustre  of  the 
moon,  the  sun,  and  fire,  taken  together  and  united  with  the  eternal 
Furusa,  exists  like  a  grain  of  gram.  (That  is  to  say  just  as  the  two  halves 
of  a  grain  of  gram  are  attached  to  one  another,  so  they  too  are  attached 
.to  one  another.)  As  a  grain  of  gram  is  covered  by  an  external  shell,  so 
She  is  covered  by  Her  own  covering  of  maya.  As  the  shell  of  a  grain  of 
gram  is  dark  and  hard  compared  with  its  brilliant  and  soft  valves,  so 
maya  also,  discordant  with  its  three  gunas,  is  dark  and  hard  compared 
with  Siva-Sakti,  full  of  brilliance  and  soft  with  supreme  bliss.  As  the  whole, 
consisting  of  two  halves  and  a  shell,  is  called  gram,  so  the  whole  consisting 
of  Siva-Sakti  and  maya,  is  called  Brahman.  To  an  ordinary  observer, 
making  his  observation  from  outside  the  shell,  a  grain  of  gram  seems  to 
contain  only  one  thing,  but  he  who  can  sec  through  the  shell  finds  within 
that  grain  two  halves  facing  and  inseparably  attached  to  one  another. 
Similarly,  he  who  judges  Brahma-tattva  through  maya  finds  Brahman 
to  be  but  one.  To  the  eyes,  however,  of  an  adept  in  such  knowledge,* 
an  accomplished  Sadhaka,  who  is  aware  of  the  deceptive  character  of 
maya,  there  are  manifested  both  His  aspects  of  Siva  and  Sakti,  all  full 
of  supreme  love.  As  sparks  shoot  from  a  burning  fire,  so  Jlvas,  forming 
parts  of  Her  body,  shoot  from  the  limbs  of  the  luminous  Devi  into 
infinite  millions  of  Brahmand35-” 

The  male  and  female  forms,  different  from  one  another,  are,  whether 
they  appear  in  the  aspect  of  1 6 vara  or  in  that  of  JIva,  but  instruments  in 
the  dualistic  play.  They  are  different  only  as  instruments,  but  not  as 
agents.  The  agent  is  the  same  for  both  the  instruments,  and  that  is  Atma 
or  Sakti.  Again,  as  in  the  bodies  of  males  and  females,  so  in  the  bodies 
of  neuters  also,  Atma  or  Sakti  is  the  presiding  Devata.  It  therefore  comes 

1  Consciousness. 

*  This  is  not  to  be  confused  with  the  Mahanixvana  Tantra. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra.  *  Tattva. 

20 


306 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


to  this,  that  the  bodies  of  males,  females  and  neuters  are  alike  seats  of  the 
play  of  Citiakti.  There  is  no  other  alternative.  It  is  an  extremely 
erroneous  conclusion  that  because  words  ending  in  the  suffix  “  kti  ”  are 
feminine,  £akd  must  always  refer  to  the  female  body  and  have  no  concern 
with  the  male  body. 

But,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  Why  does  the  word  Sakti  mean  a  female 
only?  To  this  question  we  shall  be  bound  so  far  as  it  will  be  in  our  power 
to  give  a  suitable  answer  in  its  proper  place.  Here,  we  shall  say  this 
much  alone,  that  the  word  $akti,  meaning  the  female  principle,  is 
Yogarudha,1 * *  for,  fundamentally,  Sakti  is  the  same  as  Prakjti,  and  males 
and  neuters  arc  but  changed  forms  of  that  Prakrti.  The  assumption  of 
the  male  form  by  Sakti  for  the  purpose  of  creation  is  but  an  exhibition  of 
play.  At  the  close  of  the  play  of  samsara,  MahaSakti  will  withdraw  this 
form  and  exist  in  that  which  is  really  Her  own.  This  is  the  conclusion  of 
those  who  believe  in  a  perfect  Maha-pralaya.(  But  the  arguments  and 
authorities  in  favour  of  this  view  arc  very  weak. 

The  Tantra  Sastra,  therefore,  holds  that  the  purusa  side  *  is  the  cause 
of  the  bondage  consisting  of  attachment  to  the  samsara,  and  that  the  sakti 
side  is  the  cause  of  liberation  4 *  or  cessation  of  attachment  to  the  samsara. 
There  is  no  ground  for  the  occurrence  of  a  perfect  great  Dissolution  6  of 
the  flow  of  worlds.  For  this  reason,  eternal  are  the  creation,  preservation, 
and  destruction  by  Her  who  is  eternally  blissful.  Eternal  is  Her  bondage, 
and  eternal  also  is  Her  liberation.  In  the  eternal  form  of  Her  who  is  ever 
liberation  itself,  eternal  also  is  Purusa  as  the  seed  of  creation.  But  in  the 
case  of  liberation  in  the  form  of  perfect  nirvana,  the  Purusaiakti  exists 
only  to  enjoy  the  play  of  bliss.  Waves  of  creation  no  longer  play  in  Her  * 


1  That  is,  a  word  which  has  an  etymological  as  well  as  a  special  or  con¬ 
ventional  meaning,  but  is  used  only  in  the  latter  sense.  Thus,  pankaja,  which 
etymologically  applies  to  what  is  “  mud-bom,”  is  used  only  in  respect  of  a 
particular  thing — viz.,  the  lotus  of  which  it  is  the  synonym. 

*  A  pralaya  (dissolution  of  things)  after  which  there  is  no  creation. 

*  Literally,  “  part  ”  (of  Sakti) — that  is,  the  Sakti  of  creation.  Purusa  is 
not  here  used  in  the  Samkhya  sense,  but  in  that  of  the  male  tide  of  creation. 
According  to  Hindu  ideas  it  is  the  male  who  creates:  the  mother  side  is  the 
support — ad  Kara  only. 

4  In  so  far  as  Sakti  represents  the  supreme  motionless  Brahman,  and  Purusa 
the  Daksina  dakti  its  manifestation  (see  Mahakala  Tantra,  Post). 

*  Mahapralaya.  For  karma  is  eternal,  and  after  pralaya  exists  in  the 
Brahman  in  a  latent  subdued  form,  which,  on  the  rewakening,  becomes  the 
seed  of  new  worlds. 

*  That  is,  in  liberation  (mukti)  that  aspect  of  Sakti  which  is  creative  ceases 
to  create,  and  there  is  then  only  lilananda-mukti,  the  play  of  the  supreme 
Divine  Bliss. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


307 


For  this  reason,  keeping  that  §akti 1  beneath  Her  as  a  mere  instrument 
of  play,  the  Mahasakti,  who  grants  liberation,  stands  upon  it  and,  lost  in 
the  enjoyment  of  the  sweetness  of  Brahma-bliss,  assumes  the  part  of  a  mad 
woman,  subduing  the  inactive  Puru?a,  or  creative  Sakti,*  under  Her  feet. 
She  of  dishevelled  hair  proclaims  the  victory  of  liberation,  and,  extending 
Her  uplifted  hands,  gives  assurance  to  Her  children,  frightened  by  the 
dread  of  existence,  with  the  cry,  **  Fear  notl  fear  not!  That  Purusa,  the 
■creative  Sakti,  is  Mahakala,  and  on  his  breast  that  Dispeller  of  the  fear  of 
death,  that  Delighter  of  the  heart.  Charmer  of  the  mind  of  Kala  holds 
Her  Kaivalya-play.  It,  has,  therefore,  been  said  in  the  Mahakala  Tantra: 

“  Purusa  is  called  right  (Daksina,  because  he  is  the  right  side  of  the 
body),  and  Sakti  is  called  left  (Varna,  because  she  is  the  left  side  of  the 
body) .  So  long  as  the  right  and  left,  the  male  and  female,  remain  equally 
powerful,  so  long  alone  does  the  bondage  of  samsara  endure.  When,  by 
dint  of  intense  sadhana,  the  left  sakti  has  been  awakened,  when  the  left 
has  overpowered  Purusa,  the  right  Sakti,  and  lost  Herself  in  gracious  joy 
t  on  His  body  (that  is  to  say,  when  both  the  parts  of  right  and  left  are 
filled  with  Her  power),  then  She  (who  is  bliss  unalloyed)  grants  highest 
liberation  3  to  Jiva.  For  this  reason,  the  Mother,  the  saviour  of  the  three 
worlds,  is  called  Daksina  Kali.  Just  as  the  body  of  a  neuter,  which 
represents  the  unmanifested  state  of  both  the  male  and  female  sides,  is  not 
produced  without  a  union  between  a  male  and  a  female,  so  the  Brahman 
aspect  docs  not  appear  without  the  presence  in  it  of  Siva  and  Sakti,  the 
Father  and  Mother  of  the  Brahman^a  in  an  unmanifested  state. 

“As  a  neuter  cannot  give  birth  to  children,  so  the  Brahman  aspect, 
which  is  above  the  three  gunas,  is  devoid  of  the  creative,  preservative,  and 
destructive  activities.  Again,  in  its  state  with  attributes  there  appear  from 
it  Brahma,  Visnu,  Mahesvara,  Surya,  Gane^a,  Savitri,  LaksmI,  Sarasvatl, 
Gaurl,  and  other  forms,  according  to  distribution  of  gunas,  and  as  the 
male  and  female  agents  for  the  control  of  those  gunas.  It  is  from  the 
same  aspect  of  Sakti  that  the  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  of 
untold  millions  of  Brahmandas  take  place.” 

It  therefore  follows  that  Brahma,  Visnu,  MaheSvara,  Rama,  Krsna, 
Surya  and  Gane&a,  Radha,  LaksmI,  Sarasvatl,  Savitri,  Durga,  RukminI, 
and  whomsoever  else,  male  or  female,  you  may  mention,  are  all  aspects  of 
Sakti.  Brahma  is  the  aspect  of  Sakti  in  Her  play  of  creation,  Visnu  is  the 
aspect  of  Sakti  in  Her  play  of  preservation,  and  Mahesvara  is  the  aspect 
of  Sakti  in  Her  play  of  destruction.  Surya  is  the  aspect  of  Sakti  in  Her 


1  That  is,  Puruja. 

*  Though  the  creative  agent.  He  has  ceased  to  create. 

*  Mahanaokga. 


308 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


play  as  light  and  heat,1  Gage£a  is  the.  aspect  of  Sakti  in  Her  play 
as  siddhi,4  Radha,  Lak$ml,  Sarasvatl,  Savitri,  Durga,  Slta,  Rukmipi 
and  others  are  the  aspects  of  Sakti  in  Her  play  as  the  Mahaiakti,  who 
is  at  the  root  of  all  Saktis,  and  in  whom  they  all  rest.  If  a  Sadhaka 
is  a  Vai$nava,  his  knowledge  of  Visnu-Sakti  will  remain  imperfect 
so  long  as  he  docs  not  understand  that  that  Sakti  is  not  different 
from  Siva,  Durga,  Surya,  and  GaijeSa  Saktis;  and  if  he  is  a  Sakta  his 
knowledge  of  Saktitattva  will  remain  imperfect  so  long  as  he  does  not 
recognize  that  the  Ady£&akti 3  is  not  different  from  Vi$pu,  Siva,  Surya,  and 
Gape^a  Sakds.  And  this  is  the  case  whichever  be  the  Sakti  a  Sadhaka 
may  worship.  And  so  long  as  knowledge  remains  thus  imperfect,  libera- 
don  is  unattainable. 

The  Devata  I  worship  is  the  Devata  whom  the  world  worships.  I  do 
not  think  of  Siva,  Sakd,  Surya,  Ganeia,  Visnu,  or  whomsoever  else  you 
may  mendon,  as  nothing  to  me,  and  as  one  whom  I  cannot  worship,  for 
all  of  them  arc  but  different  aspects,  assumed  in  play,  of  Him  whom  I  do 
worship.  All  these  aspects  represent  the  play  which  He  loves,  who  is  the . 
life  of  my  life  and  the  dearest  treasure  of  my  heart.  How  can  I  dishonour 
those  aspects,  the  beloved  wealth,  and  the  treasure  of  sadhana  of  Him  who 
forms  my  most  beloved  treasure?  When  such  perfect  love  appears  with 
full  force,  the  heart  of  the  Sakta  is  rent,  as  it  were,  into  a  hundred  pieces 
by  the  thunderbolt  of  discriminating  knowledge*  were  he  to  think  of 
Krsna  as  different  from  Kali.  The  Vaisnava,  also,  is  sorely  pained  to 
think  of  Kali  as  different  from  Vispu,  No  one  can  be  perfectly  happy 
with  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  Devata  he  worships.  The  Tantra 
Sastra  has  therefore  said,  with  a  deep  voice  which  stirs  the  community 
of  Sadhakas: 

“‘O  Devi!  Nirvana  can  never  be  attained  without  a  knowledge  of 
Sakd.’  This  message  is  as  dear  to  the  heart  of  the  devoted  Sadhakas,  full 
of  love,  as  it  is  painful  to  the  community  of  Asuras  in  human  form,  who 
arc  inimical  to  Devas.  It  has  always  been  a  self-evident  truth  that  words 
spoken  by  Devas  pain  the  hearts  of  Asuras.  We  have,  therefore,  nothing 
to  say  on  the  point.  Just  as  Saktas  have  imperfect  knowledge  of  sakti- 
tattva  if  they  think  that  the  term  *  Sakd  ’  denotes  only  such  aspects  as 
Kali,  Tara,  and  Durga,  which  are  but  fruits  of  Saktitattva  so  Vaisnavas 
have  imperfect  knowledge  of  Visnutattva  also  if  they  distinguish  Visnu 
from  Sakd,  with  this  difference,  however,  that  the  latter  consider  them¬ 
selves  pandits  to  boot.  But  Bhagavan,  the  ocean  of  eternal  knowledge, 
and.  the  treasure  which  devotees  worship,  has  in  speaking  of  His  own  self,, 
aid  in  the  Tantra  Sastra: 


1  Tejas. 

3  The  primordial  Sakd. 


1  Success  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra) 
*  Bhedajhana. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


309 


“  ‘  Sakti,  MaheSvara,  and  Brahman — these  three  words  mean  the 
same  thing.  The  only  difference  which  exists  between  them  is  that  one  is 
feminine,  another  is  masculine,  and  another  is  neuter. 

“  c  This  difference,  however,  belongs  only  to  the  words.  In  them¬ 
selves  there  is,  in  the  highest  sense,  no  difference  between  them.’  ” 

We  fail  to  understand  the  notions  which  those  people  entertain  of 
Paramesvara  and  Paramcsvari  who,  when  they  observe  marks  of  masculin¬ 
ity  and  femininity  in  the  appearance  of  Devatas  of  worship,  thereupon  say 
that  the  forms  of  even  Paramesvara  and  ParameSvari  differ,  in  that  the 
one  is  a  male  and  the  other  a  female  principle.  If  the  shape  of  ISvara’s 
body  be  as  fixed  and  material  as  that  of  the  body  of  a  Jiva,  then  of  what 
does  his  111a 1  consist  ?  That  is  called  Ilia  which,  though  not  really  true,  is 
done  as  if  it  were  true  in  the  excitement  of  the  bliss  enjoyed  by  the  Self. 
Just  as  an  actor  has  really  no  connection  with  the  parts  he  plays,  so 
Bhagavan  or  Bhagavatf  also  has  no  connection  with  the  forms  which,  in 
play,  they  assume  in  various  ways. 

Their  connection  with  the  assumption  of  forms  is  the  same  as  that 
which  exists  between  an  actor  and  his  acting.  Nevertheless,  although  the 
assumption  of  forms  is  not  really  true  so  far  as  they  are  concerned,  it  is 
perfectly  and  undoubtedly  true  so  far  as  a  Jiva  is  concerned.  For,  to  their 
eyes,  the  samsara  is  as  much  a  play  as  their  own  bodies,  but  so  long  as  this 
samsara  does  not  appear  to  you  and  me  as  a  play.  Their  bodies  also  do  not 
appear  to  us  as  such.  Secondly,  if  for  the  sake  of  peculiarities  of  terms,  it  be 
necessary  to  admit  that  their  forms  follow  those  peculiarities,  then,  like 
the  female  and  male  forms  of  Sakti  and  Siva,  or  LaksmI  and  Narayana, 
the  form  of  Brahman  becomes  neuter  owing  to  the  term  Brahman  being 
neuter;  but  in  reality  the  thing  denoted  by  the  term  Brahman  is  not 
neuter,  although  it  is  so  according  to  the  gender  of  the  terms.  Similarly, 
the  things  denoted  by  the  terms  Siva  and  Sakti  are  not  in  reality  always 
bound  in  male  and  female  forms  respectively,  although  they  are  male  and 
female,  according  to  the  gender  of  the  terms. 

There  is,  however,  this  particularity  to  be  noted  here,  that  as  forms 
for  play  are  impossible  in  the  state  of  an  attributeless  neuter.  He  assumes 
male  and  female  forms  as  a  being  with  attributes  for  the  purpose  of 
creating,  preserving,  and  destroying  the  dualistic  world,*  fulfilling  the 
desire  of  Sadhakas,  and  that  the  sweetness  of  the  play  be  enhanced. 
Worship  of  an  attributeless  being  is  impossible.  The  Tantra  *  there¬ 
fore  says: 


1  Play  (see  Introduction  to  <  this  book). 

*  Prapaftca;  literally  things  formed  by  the  combination  of  the  five 
elements. 

*  Gandharva  Tantra,  34th  papila. 


310 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


“  The  neuter  state  of  monistic  existence,  which  is  the  result  of  the 
union  of  Siva  and  Sakd,  is  revealed  of  Itself,  without  any  separate 
worship  thereof.1 * * 4 *  The  attributeless  aspect,  which  is  the  fruit  of  all  sSdhana,. 
and  in  which,  at  the  conclusion  of  all  sadhana,  the  worshipper  sinks  and 
loses  himself,  cannot  be  attained  while  sadhana  continues.  It  is  attained 
by  the  great  siddhi  known  as  nirvana.” 

Whatever  form  She  may  assume  in  Her  aspect  with  attributes  is  but 
Her  form.  That  &akti  alone  who  grants  enjoyment,  salvation,  and 
devotion,  is  in  all  such  forms.  Now  the  Sadhaka  may,  if  he  so  desires, 
know  Her  as  Visnu,  Krsna,  Siva,  and  Rama,  or  as  Kail,  Tara,  Radha, 
Durga,  Sita,  and  Laksmi,  or  please  himself  by  calling  Her  mother,  father, 
friend,  and  well-wisher.  It  does  not  matter  whether  the  Vaispava  con¬ 
siders  Her  as  Visnu  in  the  form  of  Sakti,  or  the  Sakta  considers  Her  as 
Sakti  in  the  form  of  Vi$nu.  When  we  sink  in  the  ocean  of  Her  substance, 
which  is  Cit-iakti,*  forgetful  of  all  differences  of  masculinity  and  femininity 
appertaining  to  forms,  then  Krsnaiakti,  SivaSakti,  or  KaliSakti,  and  all 
other  Saktis,  will  be  mingled  into  one  by  the  waves  of  that  ocean. 

That  Mahaiakti  is  everywhere  the  real  giver  of  liberation,  from 
whomsoever  it  may  come,  whether  Siva,  Visnu,  Durga,  Ganeia,  or  Surya. 
This  condition  of  unity  docs  not  arise  without  a  knowledge  of  Sakli-tallva. 8 
Nirvhna  liberation  is  impossible  so  long  as  all  tilings  do  not  combine  into 
a  state  of  unity.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Tantra  has  said :  “  O  Devi ! 
Nirvana  can  never  be  attained  without  a  knowledge  of  Sakti.”  Rama- 
prasada  *  also,  whose  life  was  in  the  Tantra,  has  sung  the  same  air:  “  You 
assume  five  principal  forms,  according  to  differences  of  worship.  But,  O 
Mother!  how  can  you  escape  from  the  hands  of  him  who  has  dissolved  the 
five  and  made  them  into  one  ?  ” 

To  our  great  misfortune,  our  doubts  thicken  round  the  very  names 
of  the  Mother  of  the  world  on  account  of  that  very  sadhana,  with  which 
devoted  sadhakas  sink  into  the  sweetness  of  Her  being 6 *  and  arc 
blessed  and  liberated  from  the  state  of  a  Jiva.  One  of  Her  names, 
which  are  suspected  to  contain  imprints  of  Mayavida,*  is  Visnumaya. 
It  is  out  of  this  name  that  Her  title  of  “  great  Vai$navi  ”  has  been  evolved. 
It  has  been  said  in  the  YoginI  Tantra “  Remembering  the  time  when, 


1  That  is,  the  male  and  female  forms  are  assumed  by  the  Supreme  for 

s&dhana.  When  a  sadhaka  has  attained  siddhi  in  any  of  these  forms,  the  neuter 
form  reveals  itself  before  him  without  any  further  effort  on  his  part. 

*  See  post.  8  The  truth  relating  to  Sakti. 

4  Rama  Prasad  a  Sen,  the  great  Bengali  poet,  Tantrik,  and  worshipper  of 

Kali  Mi;  bom  1718,  died  1775. 

4  Lit. :  “sweetness  of  Tattva.” 

*  May 3  theory. 


1 10th  pa  (ala. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


311 


after  the  destruction  of  the  Asura,  Ghora,  in  the  waters  of  pralaya,  Adya- 
Sakti  gave  to  Brahma,  Vi?tiu,  and  MaheSvara  the  charge  of  creation,  pre¬ 
servation,  and  destruction  respectively,  Mahadeva  said  :  ‘  O  Spouse  of 
Sambhu  !  that  MahakalT  granted  us  the  Sakti  of  will,  the  Sakti  of  knowl¬ 
edge,  and  the  Sakti  of  action  for  doing  the  work  of  creation,  preserva¬ 
tion,  and  destruction.  She  gave  the  Sakti  of  will  to  Brahma  for  creation, 
the  Sakti  of  action  to  Visnu,  and  the  Sakti  of  knowledge,  which  is  the 
embodiment  of  all  Saktis,  to  me.’  ” 

According  to  differences  in  the  mutual  relation  of  the  gunas  of  m&ya 
which  consists  of  three  gunas,  the  rajas  guna  gives  rise  to  the  Sakti  of  will, 
the  sattva  guna  gives  rise  to  the  Sakti  of  action,  and  the  tamas  guna  gives 
rise  to  the  sakti  of  knowledge.  In  Her  play,  wherein  She  appears  as  em¬ 
bodied  beings,  these  three  forms  of  sakti  constitute  the  forms  of  Brahmani, 
Vaisnavi,  and  MaheSvari.  In  these  three  forms  She  is  as  much  Brahma- 
maya  and  Sivamaya  as  She  is  Visnumaya  ;  but  still,  in  most  places,  the 
Sastra  has  spoken  of  Her  as  Visnumaya.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  from 
the  commencement  of  creation  to  time  of  pralaya,  Jivas,  in  this  samsara 
arc  subject  to  the  preservative  Sakti.  The  preservative  Sakti  rests  in 
Visnu,  and  the  presiding  Devi  over  the  act  of  preservation  is  Vaisnavl- 
sakti  or  Visnumaya.  The  Devas  have  thereiore  said  in  this  hymn  to  the 
Devi  : 

“  O  Devi  !  thou  art  VaisnaviSakti  of  infinite  power.  Thou  art  Parama 
(supreme)  Maya,  which  is  the  seed  of  the  universe.  All  this  world  is 
deluded  by  Thee,  and  Thou,  again,  when  pleased,  grantest  liberation  to 
Jivas.”  Although  as  Maya  She  is  Sivamaya  and  Brahmamaya  also,  the 
Devas  said  :  “Thou  art  VaisnaviSakti,  Thou  art  Parama  (supreme)  Maya,” 
because  preservation  of  the  Universe  is  impossible  without  the  influence  of 
Vaisnavi-Maya.  For  this  reason  they  again  said  :  “  Thou  art  the  seed  of 
the  Universe,”  because  “all  this  world  is  deluded  by  Thee  ” — that  is  to 
say,  without  delusion  the  Universe  cannot  exist.  It  is  under  the  power 
of  VisnuSakti  that  Jiva  is  overcome  by  delusion,1  and  for  this  reason  one  of 
the  names  of  Visiiu  is  Janardana,  or  He  who  overcomes  Jana.* 

The  world,  whilst  in  the  condition  of  preservation,  has  not  so  much 
concern  with  the  Maya  of  Brahma,  by  which  it  was  created  in  the  past, 
or  the  Maya  of  Mahesvara,  by  which  it  will  be  destroyed  in  the  future,  as 
with  the  Maya  of  Vi§nu,  which  has  operation  in  the  present  time.  At  the 
time  of  creation  Jivas  had  no  independence  in  the  matter  of  coming  into 
the  world,  for  the  Jivahood  of  Jivas  was  created  by  the  force  of  the  will  of 
Him  who  also  created  the  world  by  His  will.  Again,  at  the  time  of  the 
great  Dissolution,*  Jivas  will  have  no  independence  in  the  matter  of 
leaving  the  samsara  for  the  Jivahood  of  Jivas  is  withdrawn  by  Him  who 


1  Maya  and  moha. 


*  An  Asura. 


*  Mahapralaya. 


312 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


also  destroys  the  world.  Neither,  therefore,  at  creation  or  dissolution  have 
Jlvas  an  opportunity  to  think  or  even  a  right  to  pray  independently.  At 
those  periods  Jlvas  are  naturally  bound  to  enter  into  the  womb  of  Prakrti, 
and  to  issue  from  it  even  against  their  will,  just  as  a  child  is  bound  to 
enter  into  and  issue  from  the  womb  of  its  mother.  As  from  the  time  of 
conception  to  that  of  delivery  a  mother  remains  pregnant  with  child,  so 
from  the  time  of  creation  to  that  of  dissolution  Maya  remains  full  of  the 
spirit  of  preservation.  It  is  during  this  period  that  She  is  called  Visijumaya. 
The  Sastra  says:  “  The  child  in  the  womb  grows  according  to  the  quality  of 
the  food  which  the  Mother  takes.”  Similarly,  we,  the  children  in  the 
womb  of  Prakrti,  will  be  built  or  grow  according  to  the  things  She  enjoys 
in  the  samsara,  The  best  efforts  of  the  Jiva  should  therefore  be  directed 
towards  seeing  that  the  things  enjoyed  by  Prakrti  become  free  from  ele¬ 
ments  of  rajas  and  tamas  gunas,  and  full  of  the  sattva  guna.  Customs, 
principles,  practices,  rules  and  regulations,  sadhanas  and  bhajanas,1 
mantras  and  tantras,  all  are  required  for  this  end. 

He  who,  by  satisfying  the  Prakrti  of  the  self  with  sattvik  food,  and  ' 
being  himself  nourished  by  the  high  quality  of  that  food,  is  able  in  due 
time  and  with  safety  to  issue  from  the  womb  of  Maya;  he  alone  is  able, 
after  Her  delivery,  to  see  the  child-bearing  aspect  of  Mother  Mahamaya, 
and  will  fondly  be  placed  on  Her  lap.  Just  as  on  issuing  from  the  womb 
a  child  who  has,  while  living  within  it,  suffered  indescribable  pains,  forgets 
them  all  at  the  right  of  the  affectionate  face  of  its  mother,  so,  issuing  from 
the  womb  of  Maya,  a  great  yogi,  who  has  attained  riddhi,  forgets  all  the 
sufferings  of  the  dualistic  samsara  at  the  sight  of  the  refulgent  liberating* 
beauty  of  the  lace  of  Mother  Brahmamayi,  full  of  love  for  the  universe. 
When  confined  in  the  womb  of  Maya,  the  Sadhaka  saw  the  terrors  of 
the  darkness  of  delusion;  but  issuing  from  it  he  to-day  takes  shelter  in  the 
lap  of  the  same  Mother  of  the  Universe. 

He  now,  instead  of  being  in  darkness,  sinks  in  the  sea  of  an  existence 
made  of  light,  brilliant  with  the  lustre  of  a  hundred  crores*  of  autumnal 
moons,  and  beauteous  with  bliss.  Rocked  on  the  Jap  of  the  Mother  by 
the  waves  of  his  emotion  and  the  ripples  of  affection,  he  now  plays,  and 
sees  that  Maya  no  longer  exists  as  Maya,  but  has  become  Mother  Maya- 
mayi.*  For  this  reason  I  said  that  in  conformity  with  the  custom  of  enter¬ 
taining  a  pregnant  mother  in  s&dha,1  so  all  the  sadhana*  and  bhajana  in 


1  Worship.  *  Kaivalya.  •  See  post. 

*  The  Mother  whose  substance  is  maya. 

6  Sari  ha  is  the  entertainment  of  a  mother  during  the  eighth  or  ninth  month 
of  her  pregnancy,  so  that  no  desire  for  food  may  be  left  unfulfilled. 

•  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


313 


the  samsara  are  but  eatables  offered  to  Prakrti  for  Her  sadha.  In  pre¬ 
paring  for  this  entertainment  it  is  only  necessary  to  understand  that  these 
infinite  millions  of  Brahmapdas  receive  their  conception  from  the  Sakti 
•of  Brahma,  or  the  Sakti  who  is  Brahma ;  that  the  nourishment  of  the  child 
in  the  womb  comes  from  VisnuSakti,  or  the  Sakti  who  is  Visnu,  and  that 
the  delivery  is  caused  by  Sivaiakti  or  the  Sakti  who  is  Siva. 

The  Sakti  in  whom  the  rajas  guna  predominates  causes  the  creation 
of  the  world  of  Jivas;  the  Sakti  in  whom  the  sattva  gupa  predominates 
•causes  its  preservation;  and  the  Sakti  in  whom  the  tamas  guna  predomin¬ 
ates  causes  its  dissolution — that  is  to  say,  release  from  the  bondage  of 
Maya.  A  change  in  the  creation  which  proceeds  from  Brahmaiakti  is 
impossible,  so  that  any  desire  on  the  part  of  a  Jiva  to  alter  the  physical 
creation  by  means  of  worship  of  Brahmafakti  or  Brahmamaya  is  futile; 
hut  if  the  worship  is  intended  for  any  other  object,  that  is  a  different 
thing  altogether.  Every  Jiva  is,  in  the  present  state,  subject  to  Vispu- 
sakti  or  Visnu-maya.  The  question  of  destroying  the  rajas  guna  and  the 
.  tamas  gupa  can  arise  only  in  the  future  state  when,  by  means  of  sadhana 
and  bhajana  practised  in  the  present  state,  the  sattva  gupa  has  been 
developed.  It  is  only  then  that  one  becomes  fully  competent  to  worship 
Sivaiakti,  the  Destructrix  and  Dispeller  of  the  woes  of  samsara. 

Fundamentally,  the  very  tamas  gupa  with  which,  as  Avidya,  She 
creates  the  samsara,  is  again  destroyed  at  the  time  of  the  great  dissolution  ‘ 
by  Herself  in  Her  aspect  of  Sivaiakti,  as  is  eternal  knowledge  and  bliss  ; 
but  this  competence  for  worship  arises  only  with  the  perfection  of  sattva 
gupa.  All  the  instructions  of  Sastras  are  meant  for  the  development  of 
the  sattva  gupa  during  the  period  that  Jiva  lives  in  the  womb  of  Avidya, 
•overpowered  by  the  rajas  and  tamas  gunas.  In  explaining  mayatattva  to 
those  who  have  acquired  competence  for  sadhana,  the  Sastra  has  therefore 
in  most  places  referred  to  Maya  as  Vi§numaya,  who  exercises  direct  power 
in  the  present  state  instead  of  as  Brahmamaya  or  Sivam&yS,  whose  work 
concerns  the  past  and  the  future  respectively.  The  reason  why  the  Sastra 
•does  this  is  that  the  Jiva’s  direct  knowledge  of  Maya  *  must  be  derived 
from  the  present  display  of  Her  power  in  the  samsara. 

By  Vi$numaya  or  Vispuiakti  is  not  meant  maya  or  Sakti  subordinate 
to  Vispu.  Such  Vaijnavas  as  arc  ill-disposed  towards  Sakti  will  prob¬ 
ably  refuse  to  understand  this;  but  we  say  that  whether  Vai?pavas  under¬ 
stand  it  or  not,  Vispu  Himself  understood,  in  His  battle  with  Madhu  and 
Kaitabha,  whether  Sakti  is  subordinate  to  Vispu  or  Visnu  is  subordinate 
to  Sakti,  and  made  others  also  understand  it.  In  short,  O  Vaispava!  the 
very  notion  which  you  possess  of  the  “  dual  ”  existence  of  Sakti  and  posses¬ 
sor  of  Sakti,  or  of  maya  and  the  wielder  of  maya,  is  erroneous.  In  reality 


1  Mahapralaya. 


*  Maya  Tattva. 


314 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  aspect  of  Visnu  is  but  an  aspect  assumed  by  Her  who  is  Maya  or 
Sakti. 

Again,  some  communities,  proud  of  their  Vaispavisro,  arc  nowadays 
heard  to  say  that  Bhagavati  is  a  great  Vaisnavi.  “  To  serve  as  if  it  were 
one’s  own  self”  (to  serve  God  as  one  would  serve  oneself)  is  the  conclusion 
(idea)  of  the  Vaispava  Sastra.  We  have  therefore  nothing  to  say  to  the 
Vaisnva  who  holds  that  Bhagavati  is  a  great  Vaisnavi,  because  this 
notion  merely  bespeaks  his  own  nature.  There  is,  moreover,  this  delight¬ 
ful  inconsequence,  that  while  the  Mother  is  considered  a  Vaispavl  the 
Father  is  a  spiritual  brother.1 *  Blessed  be  thou,  O  Vaisnava  !  Bravo  to  thy 
conclusion!  Living  in  the  society  of  men,  you  alone  have  realized  the 
beauty  of  this  relationship.  If  you  have  such  a  strong  desire  to  call  Maha- 
deva  your  spiritual  brother  in  order  to  create  a  precedent  (which  they 
follow)  for  your  own  community,  then  why  not  treat  every  one  equally, 
from  the  Mother  of  Brahma,  Visnu  and  MaheSvara  to  the  mother  of  the 
smallest  insect  ?  Let  the  3akta  and  the  Vaisnava  unite  their  voices  in  sing¬ 
ing  :  “  JIva  is  Siva  !  Siva  is  Jlva  !  ”  Then,  why  Mahadcva  alone  ?  All  ■ 
Dcvas,  Adhidevas, 1  Upadcvas, 3  Danavas, 4 5  Manavas,  *  and  all  the  crea¬ 
tures  in  the  Brahmanda  will  appear  to  be  nothing  but  the  children  of 
Jagaddhatri,  °  who  brings  forth  endless  millions  of  worlds.7 

There  will  then  exist  no  other  relationship  but  that  of  the  spirit,  so 
that  the  three  worlds  will  then  be  full  of  spiritual  brothers  only.  Can  you 
tell  me,  O  Vaijpava  !  when,  by  the  blessings  of  Vaisnavas  and  the  grace 
of  Visnu,  the  day  will  come  on  which  you  will  realize  Sakti,  not  as 
Visnumaya,  but  as  Visnu?  Sakti  is  called  Vaisnavi,  not  because  She  is 
possessed  by  Visnu,  but  because:  She  is  progenitrix  of  Vi$pu.  Ganga* 
is  called  Bhaglrathl  because  She  was  worshipped  and  brought  down  by 
Bhagiratha.  The  reason  for  Her  being  called  after  the  name  of  Bhagl- 
ratha  is  not  that  She,  whom  even  Brahma  and  other  Devas  are  rarely 
able  to  worship,  is  under  the  protection  of  Bhagiratha,  but  that,  urged 
by  the  tender  desire  “  to  be  called  the  mother  of  Bhagiratha,”  and  in 
order  to  immortalize  in  the  three  worlds  the  immense  glory  of  Bhagi¬ 
ratha,  that  crest-gem  of  devotees,  the  Mother  of  the  universe,  dweller  on 
the  head  of  Sankara,  and  dispellcr  of  the  sorrows  of  samsara,  has 
proclaimed  to  the  three  worlds,  out  of  love  for  Her  devotees,  the  greatness 
of  devotion  shown  to  Her,  by  the  adoption  of  the  name  of  Bhagirathi. 


1  That  is,  Siva  the  Father  must  be  a  Vai?pava  if  the  Dev!  be  Vai?navl  ;  and 

as  Vaisnava  he  is  a  spiritual  brother — that  is,  one  of  the  same  sect. 

*  Ruling  Devas. 

*  Subordinate  Devas.  4  Demonic  spirits. 

5  Men.  *  Devi  as  supporter  of  the  universe. 

7  BrahmAnda*.  6  The  River  Ganges. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


315- 


Similarly,  in  spite  of  Her  being  the  progenitrix  of  Brahma  and  other 
Devas,  and  Mother  of  the  universe.  She  has  proclaimed  Her  iaktis  of 
creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  by  adopting  the  names  of  Brah- 
mapl,  Vaisnavi,  and  Maheivarl.  She  was  born  as  Brahma,  Visnu,  and 
Mahesvara  and  was,  again.  Herself  their  Mother.  If  you  call  Her  depen¬ 
dent,  She  is  dependent  on  Herself  alone.  If  you  call  Her  patroness.  She 
patronizes  none  but  Herself.  There  is,  therefore,  no  possibility  of  Her 
being  injured  by  anything  which  may  be  said  about  Her.  What,  however, 
we  can  do  is  to  march  along  the  path  to  hell.  So  I  say,  O  Sadhaka, 
beware !  save  yourself  from  all  these  sinful  notions. 

Another  of  the  names  of  the  Mother  is  Brahmamayl.  This,  too, 
gives  to  the  detractors  an  opportunity  to  object  that  She  who  is  Brahman 
can  never  be  Brahmamayl.  If  She  is  BrahmapI  why,  then,  is  She  called 
Brahmamayl?  She  might  very  well  be  called  Brahman.  In  reply  to  this 
objection  we  shall  not,  after  recitation  of  the  whole  of  Ramayana,  proceed 
to  give  an  account  of  SIta.1  It  is  no  wonder  that  man,  whose  nature  it 
is  to  err,  will  be  deluded  by  Her  maya,  which  sometimes  deludes  even 
Brahma  and  other  Devas  ardently  devoted  to  Her.  Sadhakas  who  are 
inquirers  after  spiritual  knowledge4  should,  however,  know  that  just  as 
beads  are  made  of  gold,*  images  are  made  of  earth,4  Ganga*  is  made  of 
water,*  and  the  sun  is  made  of  light  and  heat,7  so  the  substance  of  the 
Mother  of  the  world  is  Brahman.*  The  word  Brahmamayl  has  been 
formed  by  adding  the  suffix  mayat  to  the  word  Brahman  in  the  sense  of 
“  Own  form  ”  *. 

What  is  Her  “  own  form  ”  that  is  Brahman;  or  what  is  Brahman’s 
“  own  form  ”  that  is  She.  Even  while  embodied,  Brahman  She  is,  in 
reality,  above  all  gunas,  and  so  She  is  called  Brahmamayl.  Her  hands, 
feet,  and  other  limbs,  her  raiments,  ornaments,  and  conveyances,  the 
members  of  Her  family,  etc.,  are  all  Brahman’s  “  own  form,”  and  so  She 
is  Brahmamayl.  The  meaning  of  the  term  Brahmamayl  is  not  “  One 
who  pervades  Brahman,”10  but  “  One  who  is  Brahman  ” u.  Brahman 
pervades  the  universe,  but  the  Arya  Sastra  makes  no  mention  of  any¬ 
thing  which  can  pervade  Brahman. 

From  all  that  wc  have  so  far  said  on  the  subject  of  Sakti-tattva, 
Sadhakas  have  surely  come  to  understand  that  the  Sakti  to  whom  ill- 
disposed  Saktas  and  Vaisnavas  refer  is  not  the  same  Sakti  as  forms  the 
subject  of  the  Tantra  Sastra. 

1  That  is  to  say,  to  repeat  which  is  a  useless  task. 

*  Lit. :  “  inquirers  of  tattva.”  *  Svarnamayi.  4  Mpjmayi. 

*  The  River  Ganges.  ‘Jalamayi.  7  Tejomayl. 

■  Brahmamayl.  *  Svarupa. 

10  Brahma vyapinl.  11  Brahmarupiai. 


316 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


RSdhS,  Lak$mi,  Sita,  Rukmini,  Savitrl,  Sarasvati,  Gangi,  Gauri, 
Gapela,1  Suiya,  Siva,  V199U,  Indra,  Candra,  Vayu,  Varuija,  Deva, 
Danava,*  Gandharva,  Kinnara,  Yaksa,1 *  Raksa,4 * *  man,  beast,  bird,  insect, 
and  the  endless  universe  which  is  full  of  all  such  moving  and  motionless 
things  is  Sakti  in  substance.  Again,  Radha,  Laksmi,  Sita,  Satl,  and  other 
manifestations  of  Brahman,  are  but  the  Kaivalya  play*  of  MahaSakti. 

In  the  quotation  which  we  have  already  made  in  connection  with  the 
destruction  of  thousand-headed  Ravana,  Sadhakas  have  obtained  a  notion 
of  Sitatattva.* 

Here  we  shall  make  a  few  quotations  to  illustrate  the  manner  in  which 
the  Sastra  supports7 * *  the  contention  of  the  Vaisnavas  that  Radhika  is 
“  Srikrsna’s  handmaid,”  and  their  praedee  of  worshipping  Radhika 
with  articles  of  food  first  offered  to  Srikryna.  From  this  play  of  the  waves 
of  iastrik  authority,  Sadhakas  will  form  a  conception  of  the  vast  expanse 
and  grave  solemnity  of  the  sea  of  the  nectar  of  Radhatattva.* 

In  the  Devi  Bhagavata*  Sri  Narayapa  says  to  Narada:  “  In  the  region 
of  Goloka10  Radhika  was  first  of  all  worshipped  by  Krsna,  the  Paramatma,  • 
within  the  Rasamapdala"  on  the  full-moon  day  in  the  month  of  Kartik. 
Next,  under  the  command  of  Bhagavan,  She  was  worshipped  by  the  com¬ 
pany  of  herdswomen  and  cowherds,  their  boys  and  girls,  the  cows,  and 
Surabhi,  the  queen  of  the  race  of  cows.  Since  Her  worship  by  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  Goloka,  Brahma,  Vijpu,  MaheSvara,  and  other  Devas,  and 
the  Munis  inhabiting  the  city  of  immortals  ever  worship  and  adore  Her 
with  devotion,  with  flowers  and  incense.  On  earth  She  was  first  worshipped 
by  Suyajna  in  the  sacred  field  of  Bharatavarsa,  under  the  direction  of 
Bhagavan  Mahadeva.  Subsequently,  under  the  command  of  Srikjsna, 
the  Paramatma,  the  inhabitants  of  the  three  worlds  began  to  worship 
Her.” 


I  RSdha,  beloved  of  Kr$na;  the  Devi  Laksmi;  wife  of  Rama;  wife  of 
Kona;  wife  of  Brahma;  the  Devi  Sarasvati;  the  River  Ganges  (considered  as 
Devi);  the  elephant-headed  Deva,  son  of  Siva. 

*  The  sun;  Siva;  Vijnu;  Lord  of  the  Devas;  the  moon  as  a  Deva;  the  Lord 
of  air;  the  Lord  of  waters;  Deva;  and  demonic  spirit. 

*  Devayonls  of  those  names  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdslra). 

4  Demonic  beings. 

*  That  is,  the  play  of  unity  in  diversity.  Radha,  Laksmi,  Sita,  and  Sati 
are  Mahajakti,  and  so  one  with  Her. 

4  The  subject  of  Sita,  wife  of  Rama. 

7  That  is,  does  not  support. 

B  The  subject  of  Radha.  *  Chap.  ix. 

14  Kopa’s  heaven  (see  Visnu  Purana,  I.  in). 

II  The  enclosure  within  which  the  rasalila  was  performed. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


317 


In  the  second  Ratra1  of  the  Naradapancaratra  it  is  said:  “Just  a& 
Srikrsna,  who  is  Brahman  in  reality,  is  above  Prakrti  and  free  from  attach¬ 
ment,®  so  Radhika,  who  is  also  Brahman  in  reality,  is  above  Prakrti  and 
free  from  attachment.  Just  as,  for  the  sake  of  work  to  be  done,  He  at 
times  assumes  forms  with  attributes,  so  Mahaprakrti  Radhika  also,  for 
the  same  purpose,  at  times  assumes  the  form  of  gross  Prakrti.  In  gross- 
form  that  subtle  Prakrti  lives,  by  the  force  of  yoga,  in  the  life,3  the  tongue, 
the  intellect,  and  the  mind  of  Srikrsna,  the  Paramesvara.  Naradal  at 
times  She  seems  to  appear  in,  and  disappear  from,  the  world  formed  of 
maya;  but  in  reality  She  neither  takes  birth,  nor  is  dependent  on  the 
action  of  any  other  being  or  person.  Like  Bhagavan  Hari,  BhagavatT 
Radhika  also  is  eternal  and  truth  in  substance.  O  Muni !  the  Mahaiakti 
who  presides  over  the  life  of  Bhagavan  Srikrsna  appears  as  Radha,  and 
She  who  presides  over  His  tongue  is  Sarasvati  Herself.  She  who  presides 
over  His  intellect  is  Durga,  the  destroyer  of  evil,  who  has  now  incarnated 
Herself  as  the  daughter  of  Himalaya,  the  Mountain-king,  the  destroyer 
of  the  enemies  of  the  Devas,  who,  by  appearing  in  the  form  of  the  mass 
of  energy4  of  all  the  Devas,  crushed  the  race  of  Daityas,®  and  gave  back 
to  the  Devas  the  sovereignty  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  She  it  is  who  holds 
the  three  worlds,  who  appears  as  hunger,  thirst,  mercy,  sleep,  contentment, 
nourishment,  forgiveness,  shame,  and  error,  who  rules  over  all  Jivas,  and 
who,  in  particular,  presides  as  Savitri  over  the  hearts  of  Brahmanas.  It 
was  from  the  left  side  of  Radhika  that  Mahalaksmi  appeared,  She  who 
is  the  presiding  Dcvata  over  the  wealth,0  of  l§vara.  From  a  part  of  that 
Mahalaksmi  appeared  the  sea-born7  Kamala,  who  arose  from  out  of 
the  sea  of  milk  what  time  it  was  churned.  It  is  She  who  is  the  earthly 
Laksmi  on  earth,  and  the  spouse  of  Narayana  who  lies  upon  the  sea  of 
milk.  'The  heavenly  Laksmi  also,  who  presides  over  the  dwellings  of 
Indra  and  other  Devas,  appeared  from  a  part  of  Devi  Mahalaksmi  who 
Herself  is  the  spouse  of  the  Lord  of  Vaikunfria.  Savitri,  who  dwells  in 
the  Brahmaloka,  is  the  wife  of  Brahma.  At  the  command  of  Bhagavan, 
Sarasvati  had  already  divided  Herself  into  two  parts.  The  first  part 
remained  as  Sarasvati  and  the  second  became  Bharatl.®  Both  were  accom¬ 
plished  yoginis  by  dint  of  yoga.  Of  them,  Bharatl  is  the  wife  of  Brahma, 
and  Sarasvati  is  the  spouse  of  Visnu.  ParameSvari  Radhika,  the  mistress 
of  the  play  of  Rasa,9  is  the  presiding  Devata,  over  the  Rasa-circle,  and 

1  Chap.  ii.  *  Nirlipta. 

8  Praria,  the  vital  principle. 

4  Tejas.  6  Titans. 

*  Aiiivaryya,  that  which  constitutes  Hvara-hood  (see post). 

7  Sindhubala,  who  came  out  of  the  sea. 

•  Savitri. 


9  See  post. 


318 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


that  eternal  Brahmasanktaiu  incarnated  Herself  in  full  in  the  region  of 
Brndavana.1  Within  the  RSsa-circle  She  was  the  principal  actress  of 
the  play  of  Rasa,  making  use  of  the  occasion  of  the  love-play  to  show  Her 
love  to  devotees.  Bhagavatl  ate  betel  chewed  by  Bhagavan,  and  Bhagavan 
ate  betel  chewed  by  Bhagavatl  (in  order  to  show  their  love  for  devotees, 
or  to  show  that  both  of  them  were,  in  fact,  the  same).  In  reality  both  of 
them  have  the  same  body.  (In  outward  vision  they  appear  to  possess 
different  bodies,  to  enhance  the  sweetness  of  their  play,  but  in  reality  no 
such  difference  exists.)  The  difference  between  them  is  like  the  difference 
between  milk  and  its  whiteness,  that  is  to  say,  just  as  the  substance  milk 
is  an  aggregate  of  such  constituent  qualities  as  whiteness,  liquidity,  sweet¬ 
ness,  and  so  forth,  so  the  substance  Brahman  is  an  aggregate  of  existence, 
consciousness,  bliss,  and  the  like.  Just  as  the  state  of  milk  cannot  be 
determined  if  wc  omit  any  of  its  qualities,  such  as  whiteness,  liquidity, 
sweetness,  and  so  forth,  so  Brahmanhood  cannot  be  determined  if  wc  omit 
any  of  its  qualities,  such  as  Sakti,  possessor  ofiakti,  sakti  vibhuti,2  and  the  like. 
Just  as  substantially  no  difference  exists  between  the  constituent  parts  of 
a  thing,  although,  according  to  the  method  of  linguistic  exposition,  differ¬ 
ences  are  imagined  to  exist  between  them,  and  different  names  are  assigned 
to  them,  so  actually  no  difference  exists  between  Radha  and  Krsna,  al¬ 
though  they  are  different  in  the  aspects  they  assume  in  play.  Brahman  is 
both  Radha  and  Krsna.  She  who  is  Radhika  is  also  Krsna,  and  He  who 
is  Krsna  is  also  Radhika.  Those  who  distinguish  between  Radha 
and  Krsria,  who  constitute  one  non-differentiable,  non-dualislic  supreme 
Being,*  will  not  escape  the  torments  of  hell  so  long  as  the  sun  and  moon 
will  endure.  The  heinous  bodies  of  those  who  make  a  distinction  be¬ 
tween  them,  and,  failing  to  understand  the  play  of  Brahman,  speak  ill  of 
Radhika,  the  supreme  Prakrti,  will  be  boiled  in  the  Kumbhipaka  hell 
so  long  as  Brahma  lives.” 

Again,  in  the  sixth  Chapter  it  is  said:  “  First  utter  the  name  of  Radha 
and  next  that  of  Krsna  or  Madhava.4  Whoever  reads  in  the  opposite 
way  surely  commits  a  sin  equal  to  that  of  murdering  a  B rah m ana.  Radhika 
is  the  Mother  and  Srikfgna  is  the  Father  of  the  universe.*  Although  both 
are  the  same  in  substance,  yet  in  the  incarnation  They  take  in  play,  and, 
according  to  human4  custom,  the  Mother  is  the  object  of  a  hundred  times 
greater  glory,  adoration,  and  worship7  than  the  father.” 


*  The  town  Brndavana,  in  the  united  Provinces. 

1  Manifestation  of  Sakti  (see  past).  *  Tattva. 

*  M3dbava  is  one  of  the  names  of  Krsna  as  destroyer  of  the  demon  Madhu. 

*  The  mother’s  name  is  always  placed  first.  1  Laukika. 

7  See  post.  The  child  should  regard  its  mother  and  father  as  two  visible 
incarnate  Deities  (Mahfiiiirvana  Tantra,  chap,  viii,  verse  25). 


SIVA  AND  SAKTI 


319 


“  It  is  in  order  to  maintain  this  glory  that  Sastra  has  enjoined  men 
to  take  the  name  of  RSdhika  first  and  that  of  Srikrsna  next.  It  is  natural 
to  expect  that  because  the  mother  is  the  wife  of  the  father  her  position 
will  be  less  glorious  than  his,  according  to  men’s  notions;  but  here  custom 
is  inspired  by  dharma,1  and  is,  consequently,  approved  by  the  S&stra. 
Not  only  the  custom  of  men,  but  even  the  Sastra  itself  says:  *  In  glory  the 
mother  surpasses  the  father  a  thousand  times.’  The  reason,  also,  for  this 
has  been  stated  in  the  Sastra.  It  says  that:  ‘  The  mother  is  an  object 
of  greater  glory  than  the  father  because  she  holds  the  child  in  her  womb 
and  nourishes  it.’  He  is  the  Guru  of  the  world  by  whom  the  world  is 
educated  and  initiated.  Prakrti  tests  this  education  and  initiation  of 
the  world — that  is  to  say,  the  Guru  can  teach  only  what  the  Jivas*  (nature) 
can  accept.  Prakrti,  therefore,  has  the  charge  of  testing  the  passion  or 
dispassion  for  education. 

“  This  Prakrti,  the  examiner  of  the  world,  however,  has  also  to  receive 
education  and  initiation  from  mother  Mahaprakrti.*  For  ten  months 
and  ten  days  before  its  appearance  in  the  world  of  men  the  child’s  Prakrti 
is  initiated  in  the  mantra  which  is  contained  in  the  mother’s  body,  food, 
senses,  and  mind,  and  educated  therein.  It  has  already  been  shown  that 
in  the  proportion  of  seed  and  blood  the  quantity  of  blood,  which  is  the 
mother’s  portion,  is  the  greater.  For  this  reason  the  mother’s  contri¬ 
bution  to  the  Jiva’s  body  is  larger  than  the  father’s.  At  the  very  outset 
this  gives  to  the  mother  superiority  over  the  father.  Next  comes  the  preg¬ 
nancy  for  ten  months  and  ten  days.  During  this  period  the  record  of 
the  Jiva’s  destiny  lies  engraved  on  the  foundations  of  the  mother’s  body. 
The  child’s  body  is  built  and  developed  according  to  her  thoughts,  her 
doings,  and  the  humours4  and  blood  flowing  in  her  body. 

“  After  this,  again,  for  five  years  the  child  drinks  the  mother’s  milk. 
Taking  all  these  matters  together,  it  appears  that  the  child’s  indebtedness 
to  the  mother  permeates  his  veins,  arteries,  bones,  marrow,  vital  airs, 
body,  senses,  mind,  and,  indeed,  every  molecule  and  atom  from  the  tip 
of  his  toe  to  the  top  of  his  head.  His  indebtedness  to  his  father  is  only 
in  respect  of  the  act  of  procreation.  This  is  the  law  of  nature.  The 
child’s  indebtedness  to  his  father  for  acts  done  subsequent  to  procreation, 
such  as  performances  of  the  ten  samskaras,*  education,  maintenance, 
and  so  forth,  is  not  such  as  must  naturally  appertain  to  the  father,  for 
in  his  absence  these  acts  may  be  done  by  any  other  guardian.  For  this 
reason  it  does  not  matter  very  much  to  the  child  if  the  father  dies  after 


1  A  religious  spirit. 

"Prakrti. 

*  Rasa. 


8  The  greater  Prakrti. 

a  Sacraments  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra). 


320 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


procreation;  but  if  the  mother  dies  after  conception,  not  even  the  united 
power  of  the  three  worlds  can  supply  her  place. 

“  Under  the  weight  of  this  great  and  solemn  glory  the  Sastras  ordaining 
household  duties  have,  with  heads  bowed  down,  said:  *  The  mother  is 
a  thousand  times  more  glorious  and  more  worshipful  than  the  father.’ 
Such  being  the  decision  of  even  such  Sastras  as  deal  principally  with  domestic 
duties,  it  need  hardly  be  said  that  in  the  spiritual1  vision  of  the  Tantra 
Sastra,  which  deals  principally  with  sadhana  dharma,*  there  is  in  this  no 
difference  between  the  worldly  mother  and  the  spiritual  Mother  (orSakti). 
In  the  chapter  on  Saktilila*  we  shall  try,  as  far  as  it  will  be  in  our  power, 
to  show  how  the  principle1  (of  the  superiority)  of  human  motherhood  is 
applicable  to  Radha,  the  embodiment  of  the  unattached*  Brahman,  and 
what  the  Tantra  Sastra  says  on  the  subject.  Here  we  desist,  for  to  do  so 
would  be  to  digress.  For  the  present,  the  very  notion  under  which  Sadhakas 
know  Her  as  Mother  will  enable  them  to  understand  this  much,  that 
the  name  of  Radha  should  be  taken  first  and  then  that  of  Kr$na,  and  that 
a  reversal  of  this  order  is  faulty  worship  in  their  sadhana  for  truth.1 

“  Those  who  speak  ill  of  Radhika  either  through  perversity  of  intellect 
caused  by  unavoidable  fate,  or  through  blindness  due  to  ill-feeling  towards 
Vamacara,*  or  through  ignorance  or  sin,  do  not  know  that  Radhika  is 
an  aspect  of  Hari’s  own  self,  and  that  an  enemy  of  Radha  is  also  an  enemy 
of  Hari.  In  the  next  world  the  place  of  such  a  man  will  be  in  a  cauldron 
of  boiling  oil  in  the  midst  of  the  Kumbhipaka  hell  for  the  life-time  of  a 
hundred  Brahmas,  and  in  this  world  the  extinction  of  his  progeny  and 
his  own  total  ruin  is  inevitable.” 

“  (So  long  as  that  detractor  of  iakti  shall  not  die),  he  will  fall  (from 
his  own  dharma*  through  unrighteousness),’  and  be  deprived  of  the 
power  to  arise  on  account  of  malice  against  Sakti;  he  will  be  prostrate 
on  earth  and  suffer  from  endless  disease  and  perils  at  every  step.  In  the 
Brahmaksetra,*  the  Puskara  tartha,  this  (truth)  about  Radha  was  told  by 
Hari  to  Brahma,  and  subsequently  I  heard  it  from  Brahma.  Sadhus 
(who  are  themselves  pure  and  purify  others)  constantly  worship  the  lotus- 
feet  of  Radha,  who  purifies  the  three  worlds.  Bhagavan  Srikrsna  Him¬ 
self  ever  offers  arghya*  with  devotion  at  those  worshipful  lotus-feet.  Besides 

1  Tattva  *  Rules  as  to  ritual  practice,  worship,  etc. 

'  The  play  of  Sakti. 

4  Nirlipta.  The  supreme  inactive  Brahman,  unaffected  by,  and  unattached 
to,  the  Brahmanda  (universe). 

*  Vamacara  is  one  of  the  Tantrik  Acaras  (see  introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra). 

*  Svadharma.  ’  Adhanna. 

8  At  Pufkara,  in  Ajmer,  where  there  is  a  temple  to  Brahma. 

*  An  offering  of  grains  of  paddy  and  blades  of  durva  grass  to  a  person 
honoured  and  respected,  or  to  an  image. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


321 


this,  (during  the  play  he  enjoyed)  in  the  woods  and  groves  of  Bpid&vana, 
Bhagavan  (possessed  of  a  form  sweet  with  love)  painted  with  devotion 
(by  soft  touches  of  his  own  finger)  the  tips  of  the  toes  of  the  lotus-feet  of 
Her  (who  was  all  full  of  love  and  Brahman  incarnate)  with  the  cool  and 
brilliant  paint  of  alakta.”  1 

In  the  Radha  Tantra  it  has  been  said:  “  In  the  great  mantra  consist¬ 
ing  of  Radhik£’s  thousand  names,  Srilq^pa  is  the  Rsi,  the  great  Devi  who 
crushed  Mahisa  is  the  presiding  Devata  and  Gayatri  is  the  metre.  The 
application  of  this  mantra  is  for  siddhi  in  Mahavidya.”  * 

The  R?i  of  a  mantra  is  he  who  was  the  first  to  be  initiated  and  attain 
siddhi  in  it.*  There  is  nothing  to  say  to  those  who  arc  worshippers  of 
the  yugala  form*  and  with  a  knowledge  of  monistic  truth  do  not  discri¬ 
minate  between  Radha  and  Krspa.  But  even  from  the  dualistic  stand¬ 
point  sadhakas  should  now  understand  how  Radhika  stands  in  relation 
to  Sri  Kr?ija.8 

Again,  in  the  Narada  Pancaratra  it  has  been  said:  “  Of  the  great 
mantra  consisting  of  one  thousand  names  of  Radhika,  by  whose  grace 
Sri  Krsna  is  the  Sovereign  Master 1  of  the  region  of  Goloka,  and  has  attained 
the  position  of  supreme  Lord  or  the  great  mantra,  Narada  is  the  Rsi,  and 
(owing  to  its  being  a  different  mantra)*  Radhika,  who  is  supreme  over 
the  supreme,  is  the  Devata.  Its  application  is  for  the  fulfilment  of  the 
fourfold  aim.”  B 

Radhika  is  the  handmaid,  initiation  in  whose  mantra,  and  education 
and  accomplishment  in  whose  Tantra,  made  Bhagavan  to  become  Bha¬ 
gavan.  To  worship  Her,  even  the  Lord  of  the  universe  descended  on 
earth  from  Goloka  and  became  Her  servant.  In  the  hope  of  kissing  Her 
graceful  feet  the  head  of  Cintamapi10 — the  thought  of  whose  feet  gratifies 
the  world  of  moving  and  unmoving  things,  who  is  the  crest-gem  of  the 
four-headed  Deva11 — touched  the  dust.  If,  then,  you  call  Her  who  is 
such  an  one  Sri  Krspa’s  handmaid,  then  whom  would  you  call  Sri  Kpjna’s 
Isvari  ? 18  I  would  not  of  my  own  accord,  say  all  this.  I  am  obliged  to  do 


1  Red  lac  paint,  with  which  the  soles  of  the  feet  of  Hindu  women  are 
painted. 

*  The  successful  attainment  of  knowledge  of  Devi  Mahavidya. 

*  And  who  reveals  it. 

*  The  form  in  which  Radha  and  Kfspa  are  combined. 

*  That  is,  even  if  they  make  a  distinction  between  Radha  and  Krspa, 
sadhakas  should  understand  from  the  above  the  relation  of  the  one  to  the 
other. 

*  Chap,  v,  5th  Ratra.  1  Adhttvara.  8  From  the  preceding. 

*  Dharma,  art  ha,  k&ma,  mok?a  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra). 

10  One  of  the  names  of  Kpppa.  11  Brahma. 

J*  Feminine  of  Lvara,  or  Lord. 

21 


322:  PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 

so  in  reply  to  your  words.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  there  is  so  much  dis¬ 
cussion  about  honour  and  dishonour.  My  Kr?na  has  neither  a  hand¬ 
maid  nor  an  Ifivari;  but  when  your  Kjsna  has  necessity  for  a  handmaid, 
why  should  he  not  have  necessity  for  an  Iivari  as  well  ?  The  moment  you 
step  within  the  bounds  of  dualistic  knowledge  He,  in  spite  of  His  being 
IS  vara,  will  have,  by  your  grace,  to  suffer  inevitably  as  well  the  state  of 
a  servant  as  that  of  a  master.  Or,  if  in  your  language,  the  person  served 
is  called  handmaid  and  the  person  serving  is  called  master,  then  we  have 
nothing  to  object  to  this  servitude  and  lordship.  However  that  may  be, 
O  you  whose  knowledge  is  of  a  dualistic  kind,  take  note  that  it  is  the  nine¬ 
teenth  century  of  the  Kali  yuga,  and  apparently  the  custom  of  the  age 
is  to  call  mothers  and  aunts  handmaids ! 

However  that  be,  it  requires  now  to  be  seen  what  we  gain  or  lose, 
whether  or  not  there  exists  a  relation  of  master  and  servant  between 
Bhagavan  and  Bhagavati.  If  it  exists,  a  worshipper  has  no  right  to  dis- 
cubs  it,  nor  is  there  the  necessity  to  do  so.  If  Radhika  is  to  be  worshipped 
merely  on  the  ground  of  Her  being  Bhagavan’s  handmaid,  and  if,  in  that 
worship,  Her  satisfaction  is  to  be  sought,  then  surely  it  is  necessary  to 
ascertain  and  arrive  at  a  final  conclusion  as  to  whether  She  is  really  Sri 
Krsna’s  handmaid  or  not.  But,  then,  who  will  judge  the  matter  ?  If  you 
say  that  we  shall  be  the  judges,  and  Radha  and  Krsna  themselves  will 
supply  the  evidence,  then,  too,  it  will  be  extremely  difficult  to  arrive  at 
a  definite  conclusion.  For  in  the  play  of  love  which  they  enjoyed  during 
their  stay  at  Vraja,  when  Radhika  said  to  Sri  Krsija,  “  You  are  my  all,” 
Sri  Kr;pa  said  to  Radhika,  “  I  am  unable  to  call  You  *  You  ’.  To  call 
You  ‘  my  own’  is  not  much."  1  Putting  aside  even  what  Sri  Krsna  said, 
which  is  more  *  than  what  Radhika  said,  if  the  two  are  considered  to  be 
of  equal  positions,  then,  also,  one  of  them  cannot  be  a  servant  or  handmaid 
of  the  other.  Now,  how  can  the  matter  be  judged  on  the  evidence  of 
such  witnesses?  If,  therefore,  you  want  to  judge  the  matter  by  a  considera¬ 
tion  of  acts  instead  of  words,  then  it  is  not  for  you  and  me  to  judge  and 
arrive  at  a  final  conclusion  on  the  matter.  In  this  effort  to  appease  the 
anger®  of  Radhika,  Bhagavan  Himself  finally  decided  the  question  at 
the  feet  of  Radhika. 

But  if  you  say  that  you  will  call  Radhika  Sri  Krona’s  handmaid,  and 
worship  Her  with  food  first  offered  to  Sri  Krsna  in  reliance  only  on  the 
sentiment  expressed  by  the  words,  “  You  are  my  all,”  spoken  by  R&dhika 
to  Sri  Krsna  in  a  temporary  moment  of  service — a  ripple,  as  it  were,  in 


1  The  meaning  of  this  is :  “  You  and  I  are  the  same,”  so  that  the  relation¬ 
ship  of  the  speakers  is  not  fully  expressed  by  the  expression  “  You  are  my  all 
4  For  Kr?pa  did  not  discriminate  between  Him  and  Her. 

*  MSna — of  wife  with  husband  in  love  matters. 


Siva  and  sakti 


323 


ithe  midst  of  waves  df  play  in  the  sea  of  love — then  even  Radhika  cannot 
be  called  inferior  to  Krspa.  If  you  can  worship  Radhika  with  food  first 
•offered  to  Sri  Kfsna,  then  I,  too,  can,  in  reliance  upon  the  incident  in  which 
he  appeases  Radhika’s  anger,  represent  him  as  hankering  after  the  leavingB 
•of  Radhika’s  food  and  driven  off  with  weeping.  The  service  I  speak  of 
.is  as  much  one  of  sentiment  as  the  one  you  speak  of.  As  your  words  are 
sweet,  but  your  acts  are  deceitful,  so  I  am  obliged  to  make  my  acts  and 
words  similar.  In  this  state  of  things  it  is  impossible  for  us  even  to  come 
together,  much  less  to  arrive  at  any  decision. 

In  sorrow  have  poets  said:  “  If  two  persons  be  both  candid,  then  the 
love  that  grows  between  them  remains  for  ever  candid  and  unshaken. 
If  one  of  them  be  candid  and  another  crooked,  then  love  between  them 
endures  for  a  few  days  only — that  is  to  say,  so  long  as  the  crookedness 
of  the  crooked  person  does  not  show  itself.  And  if  both  of  them  be  crooked, 
there  can  be  no  love  between  them,  much  less  a  permanent  love.”  O 
you  who  speak  of  distinctions,  this  crookedness  of  yours  and  mine  pre- 
,  eludes  the  possibility  that  love  may  grow  between  us.  Think  but  once 
■that  They  who  are  referred  to  in  this  discussion  on  the  subject  of  love  are 
both  very  crooked,1 *  with  three  bends  in  their  bodies,®  and  yet  unite  to 
form  one  person.3  The  devotee  has  therefore  said:  “  The  moon  will 
perish,  the  sun  will  perish,  the  Brahmanda  formed  by  the  spread  of  the 
three  gunas  will  perish,  in  the  great  dissolution,  but  it  is  the  firm  con¬ 
viction  of  the  HarivamSa  *  community  that  the  constant  play  of  Radha 
•  and  Krsna  at  Brndavana  will  never  come  to  an  end.” 

So,  I  say,  O  Sadhaka,  see  the  threefold  play  of  creation,  preservation, 
and  destruction  in  the  thrice-bent  and  fair  bodies  of  the  Father  and  the 
Mother  of  the  universe,  and  forget  all  distinctions.  Call,  for  once,  the 
Father  Mother  and  the  Mother  Father,  and  making  the  Father  and  the 
-Mother  one,  take  them  to  the  Sahasrara.4 *  There,  in  the  heart  of  that 
full-bloomed  and  thousand-petalled  lotus,  shining  with  the  refulgence 
of  the  sun  and  moon,  in  that  seat  of  the  undifferentiated  6  kaivalya-play  7 
of  Him  who  is  full  of  light  and  Her  who  is  full  of  light,  stand  with  folded 
hands,  and  with  a  disconsolate  heart  weep,  and  say:  “  I  know  not  who 
you  arc?  Be  you  Father  or  Mother  or  another,  tell  me  whose  I  am?” 

1  Kutila. 

*  Tfbhanga:  a  favourite  representation  of  the  body  withTndian  artists  is 
that  with  three  curves,  formed  by  the  inclined  neck,  trunk,  and  legs. 

3  Bhagavan  and  Bhagavati  are  here  called  kutila  and  trbhanga  because  of 
the  inscrutability  of  Their  ways. 

*  Vahjnava.  Harivamia,  pr  “  family  of  Hari,”  is  the  name  of  a  Patiranik 
work  which  gives  the  history  of  die  family  of  Hari  or  KfSOa. 

4  The  thousand-petalled  latus  in  the  head,  above  the  six  cakras  (see 

Introduction  to  Tantra  SSstra). 

8  Abhinna.  T  Kaivalya  is  mpk$a. 


324 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Brother  Sadhaka,  be  you  a  worshipper  of  the  Father  or  a  worshipper  of 
the  Mother,  you  cannot  have  a  better  opportunity  for  putting  both  the 
Father  and  the  Mother  to  shame1 * *  than  at  that  time  when  they  become  one. 

When  the  Father  and  the  Mother  will  lower  their  faces  in  shame  at 
making  themselves  known  as  Father  or  Mother,  know,  O  Sadhaka,  that 
on  that  day  you  will  be  victorious  in  this  discussion.  Whoever  has  once 
seen  the  place  of  the  soft  and  sweet  smile  of  shame  in  their  silent  faces, 
lowered  in  shame  at  the  question  of  the  son,  for  him  all  doubt  as  to  who 
is  the  Father  and  who  is  the  Mother,  or  who  is  great  and  who  is  small, 
has  been  for  ever  dispelled.  O  ye  who  arc  intimately  associated  with  the 
principles  of  Tantra!  O  Sadhakas,  who  form  the  most  beloved  wealth* 
of  the  Mother!  if  for  any  of  you  such  a  day  has  ever  come  or  may  come 
in  future,  then  on  this  or  that  day  kindly  remember  for  once,  at  least, 
this  poor  and  destitute  son  of  the  Mother  who  is  full  of  mercy  for  the  poor. 

What  can  I  do,  O  brother?  The  truth  which  has  to  be  attained  by 
sadhana  cannot  be  explained  in  words.  Once  call  out  to  Her  who  is 
truth '  itself,  and  of  whom  we  now  speak,  and  opening  the  portals  of  your . 
heart,  say:  “  O  Mother,  be  Thou  Radha  adored  by  Sri  Kr?na,  or  Radhika 
adoring  Him,  Thou  knoweth  Thy  own  play.  O  playful  Mother,*  appear 
once  in  Thine  own  real  form  in  the  solitary  grove  of  this  heart,  and  in 
the  company  of  Thy  companions  stand  with  three-fold  bend,  yet  making 
your  body  one  with  the  body  of  Syama.6  O  charmer  of  the  mind  of  the 
charmer  of  love,*  illumine  but  once  the  forest  of  my  heart  with  the  re¬ 
fulgence  of  Thy  world-enchanting  beauty,  so  that  I  may  see  Thee  with 
Thine  own  light,  just  as  one  worships  the  Ganges  with  Ganges’  water. 

O  beloved  of  Syama,  stand  forth  once  with  a  dark  body,  so  that, 
O  Gauri!  all  idea  of  difference  between  a  fair  and  a  dark  body  may  be 
dispelled  from  my  mind.7  O  Mother,  Thou  Thyself  dost  rouse  and  allay 
Thine  own  anger,®  Thou  Thyself  dost  clasp  Thine  own  feet  as  Rai  (Radhika), 
Thou  Thyself  dost  inflame  Thine  own  anger,  and  as  Syama  Thou  Thyself 
dost  appease  it.  Thou  art  all  full  of  play,4 *  and  art  Brahman,®  and  so 
this  anger  becomes  Thee.  But,  O  Mother,  we  are  erring  Jlvas,  blinded 
by  an  intense  intoxication.1®  We  can  be  angry,  but  cannot  appease  it. 

1  The  shame  (lajja)  is  caused  by  their  having  manifested  themselves  in  the 
distinctive  aspects  of  Father  and  Mother. 

*  literally,  “  wealth  bound  in  the  skirt  of  the  dress  of  the  Mother." 

*  Tattvamayi.  4 *  UMUnayl 

4  Syama  is  a  name  of  Kftpa,  meaning  of  dark  colour.  *  Madana. 

’The  beloved  of  &y&ma  is  Radha,  who  is  fair-coloured.  The  word 

“  Gauri  ”  means  “  one  who  is  fair  It  is  also  the  name  of  the  wife  of  Siva, 

who  is  in  reality  the  same  as  Radha.  The  author  here  prays  Radha  to  assume 

a  dark  body — that  is  to  say,  a  body  of  the  colour  of  Kr?na — so  that  his  mind 

may  be  disabused  of  all  ideas  of  difference  between  Radha  and  Kfiita. 

*  M&na  (see  a*U).  *  BrahmamayL  10  Mada. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


325 


Bang  Jivas  full  of  maya,1  wc  cannot,  therefore,  understand  the  meaning 
•of  the  (appeasing)  of  the  anger  of  Her  who  is  Brahman. 

O  Mother,  for  him  who  has  understood  its  meaning,  both  honour  * 
and  dishonour  *  have  for  ever  disappeared.  O  Dispeller  of  the  fear  of 
existence,  Gladdcncr  of  the  hearts  of  devotees,  eternally  pure  Devi;  O 
Mother,  Thou  art  Sakti  incarnate,  the  granter  of  iakti  and  liberation. 
Of  Thy  mercy  grant  unto  us  the  Sakti  to  understand  the  truth  concerning 
Thyself,  so  that  we  may  leave  this  samsara  never  to  return  thereto,  after 
having  offered  all  honour  and  dishonour  at  those  lotus-feet,  so  desired  of 
devotees. 

O  you  who  speak  of  distinctions,  do  not  widen  the  path  whereby 
you  go  to  your  downfall  by  imagining  distinedons  between  Sakti  and  the 
possessor  of  Sakti.  If  you  offer  to  Radhika  food  first  offered  to  Sri  Krsna, 
She  will  not  be  insulted  thereby;  for  in  Her  eyes  the  person  4  of  Krsna  is 
but  a  manifestation  of  Herself  in  play.  But,  for  yourself,  should  this 
insulting  idea  arise  in  your  mind,  there  is  no  escape  from  hell.  Even  He 
•  in  the  pride  of  whose  glory  you  entertain  these  insulting  notions  concerning 
Radhika- — even  He  has,  in  intense  devotion  to  Her  who  is  ever  kind  to 
devotees,  said,  in  the  Nirvana  Tantra: 

“  Those  who  make  japa  of  the  names  of  Radha  and  Krsna,  placing 
the  name  of  Krsna  after  that  of  Radha,  to  him  do  I  undoubtedly  grant 
the  lot  that  is  mine.  Those  who,  instructed  by  gurus  in  the  path  of  bhava* 
or  of  mantra,  worship  me  in  this  manner — that  is  to  say,  those  who,  knowing 
Radha  and  Kr$ria  to  be  inseparable  in  reality  and  yet,  in  order  to  proclaim 
the  triumph  of  the  love  of  Her  who  is  all  full  of  love,*  make  japa  of  the 
great  mantra  of  the  two  names,  placing  the  name  of  Krspa  after  that  of 
Radha — they  are  ever  as  powerful  as  Myself. 

“  That  woman,  who  worships  me,  a  male,  in  the  faith  that  I  am 
inseparable  from  Thee,  also  of  a  truth  acquires  power  equal  to  Thine  own. 
Hear,  O  Radhika!  To  those  who  (firmly  believing  that  you  and  I  are 
inseparable)  worship  the  yugala  aspect  7  with  or  without  pious  devotion, 
to  them  I  grant  the  state  which  is  mine,  owing  to  Thy  love  for  me.”  That 
is  to  say,  such  is  the  unthinkable  power  of  the  yugala  aspect,  that,  whether 
one  has  full  devotion  or  not,  it  pours  an  abundant  shower  of  love  on  one’s 
heart,  were  it  even  the  adamantine  heart  of  a  great  sinner,8  and  makes 
the  tree  of  Parabrahmatattva,9  which  is  love  for  Radha  and  Krsna,  blossom, 
flower,  and  bear  fruit  thereon. 


1  Mayamaya.  *  Mana  (see  ante).  *  A  pa  mana .  4  Mflrti. 

6  Sentiment,  emotion,  love,  devotion.  8  Premamavi. 

7  In  which  both  Kps  pa  and  Radha  are  combined. 

8  Literally,  “  heretic  ”  (pa$apda).  '  • 

•  The  tree  which  symbolizes  the  Parabrahman. 


326 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  O  you  discriminating  Vaisnava!  How  dare  you  extend  your  authority 
over  Vi$pu,  after  whose  name  you  are  called  a  Vai?pava,  and  who  is  your 
authority  in  everything?  Being  the  servant  of  Vijnu’s  servant’s  servant, 
what  makes  you  so  proud  that  you  insult  the  DevatS  whom  Vispu  adores  ?’ 
You  would  not  admit  the  superiority  of  any  over  the  Dcvata  you  worship.. 
Very  well.  But  ought  you,  on  that  account,  to  divide  one  thing  into  two' 
parts,  and  attribute  lordship  to  one  and  servitude  to  another?  Why  should 
you  call  Radha  Kona’s  handmaid  instead  of  Krsna’s  own  self?  li  And 
even  should  you  do  so  in  the  spirit  of  play,  why  do  you  not  also  call  Krspa 
Radha’s  servant,  just  as  you  call  Radha  Krsna’s  handmaid?  Or  do  you 
think  that  Krsna’s  lordship  cannot  be  maintained  without  calling  Radha 
His  handmaid  ?  Is  this  your  idea  of  Krona’s  Brahmahood  ?  He  who  is  the 
Lord  will  always  be  so,  whether  Radha  becomes  His  handmaid  or  not. 
O  brother,  you  proceed  to  establish  Krspa’s  lordship  on  Radha’s  servitude ; 
you  proceed  to  worship  the  adored  Dcvata  of  Kjspa  with  food  first  offered 
to  Him.  But  you  do  not  even  once  desire  to  understand  why  you  are  in 
such  a  miserable  plight  in  spite  of  your  worship  of  Krsna?  Why  are  you 
not  saved  in  spite  of  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  the  Saviour  of  the  three 
worlds?  To  strike  with  a  weapon  the  left  limb  of  Him  whose  right  limb 
you  worship !  Ah,  we  know  not  whether,  in  consequence  of  such  worship, 
Bhagavan  will  gratify  you  by  appearing  before  you,  or  greet  you  with  His 
Sudariana.2  Friend  of  the  poor!  Merciful  Deva!  Thou  alone  art  the 
Saviour  of  the  three  worlds,  Thou  art  ever  the  reliever  of  burdens  of  the 
earth. 

“  Lord,  save  the  community  of  Sadhakas  from  these  false  beliefs. 
Or,  O  Lord,  it  is  miserliness  shown  by  your  self  of  your  own  accord.  It  is 
because  Thou,  O  Kjsna,  art  unwilling  to  make  the  being  s  of  Radha  in 
which  Thou  hast  sunk  and  lost  Thyself  the  property  of  all,  that  Thou, 
O  crest-gem  of  schemers,4  hast  turned  the  wheel  of  the  intelligence  of 
JJvas.  So  I  say,  O  discriminating  Vaisnava,  if  your  understanding  of  the 
subject  is  of  a  dualistic  character,  then  understand  this  also,  that  it  is. 
doubtful  whether  even  after  a  hundred  crores  *  of  births,  you  will  be  able 
to  worship  Her  whose  worshipper  Kr?na  Himself  is.” 

Amongst  those  who,  by  throwing  all  these  thorns  upon  the  spiritual 
path,  consider  themselves  to  be  learned,*  there  are  some  who  are  even 
heard  to  say  that  Sakti  can  exist  only  by  the  support 7  of  the  possessor  of 
iakti,  and  therefore  ask  what  is  the  necessity  of  worshipping  the  thing 
supported  instead  of  the  supporter? 

Sadhakas  have  already  been  given  ample  evidence  to  show  the  nature 
of  this  relation  of  the  supporter  and  the  supported,  between  the  possessor- 


1  Svarupa.  *  The  discus  of  Vi^u,  1  Tattva.  4  Cakri. 

*  1,000,000,000.  •  Pandit.  7  Afcaya. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


327 


of  Sakti  and  Sakti.  What  new  answer  can  we  now  give  to  the  above  ques¬ 
tion?  If,  however,  the  matter  must  be  judged  from  the  point  of  view  of 
the  supporter  and  the  supported,  then,  leaving  aside  considerations  of 
Sakti-tattva,  we  see  that  Brahma  is  supported  by  a  swan,1  Vi?nu  is  supported 
by  Garuda,  Mahadeva  is  supported  by  a  bull,  and  the  Devi  is  supported 
by  a  lion.  Should  we,  then,  for  this  reason  ignore  Brahma,  Visjju, 
Maheivara,  and  Mahe$vari,  and  worship  the  swan,  Garuda,  the  bull,  and 
the  lion,  in  the  belief  that  as  supporters  they  are  the  more  important  of 
the  two  ?  The  relation  between  the  possessor  of  Sakti  and  Sakti  is  the  same 
as  that  which  exists  between  the  carrier  2 *  and  the  person  carried.  This  is 
the  only  fit  reply  to  a  fit  question. 

In  reality,  there  are  no  such  two  tilings  as  Sakti  and  possessor  of  &akti. 
There  is  no  evidence  of,  nor  is  there  any  necessity  for,  the  existence  of  the 
two  things.  Male,  female,  and  neuter,  all  are  Sakti.  Body,  senses,  mind, 
and  Atma,  all  are  manifestations  2  of  £akti.  Citiakti  4  as  Atma  is,  like 
the  solar  orb,  the  condensed  and  massive  form  of  iakti ;  while  body,  senses, 
mind,  and  other  things  are,  like  sun’s  rays  spreading  on  all  sides,  but  fluid 
parts  oft  hat  great  massive  Sakti.  Although  the  sun  is  in  reality  energy  * 
in  substance,  yet  for  common  understanding  such  expressions  as  “  the  sun 
is  possessed  of  energy  ”  and  “  the  sun’s  energy  ”  are  used.  Similarly,  although 
Atma  is  Sakti  itself  in  substance,  yet  in  order  that  JIva  may  the  better  under¬ 
stand,  Sastra  has  used  such  expressions  as  “  Atma  is  possessed  of  Sakti  ” 
and  “  Atma’s  Sakti  ”.  This  is  the  only  difference  between  Sakti  and  the 
possessor  of  Sakti.  In  a  spiritual  sense,  nothing  exists  as  possessor  of  Sakti 
besides  Sakti. 

Even  the  Purusa-fbrm,8  which  you  and  I,  according  to  our  language 
and  understanding,  know  as  the  possessor  of  £akti,  is  but  another  or 
changed  7  form  of  Prakfti.  Other  evidence  is  unnecessary.  Paramcivara 
himself,  the  sole  and  best  Purusa  in  the  world,4  who  presides  or  dwells  in 
all  Purusas,  has  said  in  the  NirvSpa  Tantra: 

“Just  as  trees  grow  on  the  earth  and  again  disappear  in  it;  just  as 
bubbles  are  formed  in  water  and  again  disappear  in  water;  just  as  lightning 
is  formed  in  clouds  and  again  disappears  in  them;  so  at  the  time  of  creation 
Brahma,  Vispu,  Maheivara,  and  other  Dev  as  are  born  of  the  body  of  that 
beginningless  and  eternal  Kalika,  and  at  the  time  of  dissolution  they  again 
disappear  in  Her.  O  Devi,  for  this  reason,  so  long  as  Jiva  does  not  know 
the  supreme  truth4  in  regard  to  Her  who  plays  with  Mahakala,14  his  desire 
for  liberation  can  only  give  rise  to  ridicule.  From  a  part  only  of  Kaliki, 


1  Hamsa,  or  some  say  goose,  duck,  or  flamingo.  *  Vfih&na. 

2  Vibhuti.  1  See  anU.  4  Tejas. 

4  Murti.  *  Vikrti. 

8  Jagadekapurujottama.  •  Tattva.  18  MahakAlavilfaini. 


328 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


lie  primordial  Sakti,  arises  Brahma,  from  a  part  only  arises  Janardana, 
'and  from  a  part  only  arises  Sambhu.  O  fair-eyed  Devi,  just  as  rivers  and 
lakes  arc  unable  to  traverse  a  vast  sea — that  is  to  say,  however  strong  their 
currents  may  be,  they  all  lose  their  individual  existence  entering  into  the 
vast  womb  of  the  sea — so  BrahmS  and  other  Dev  as  lose  their  separate 
existence  on  entering  into  the  untraversable  and  infinite  being 1  of 
Mahakali.  Compared  with  the  vast  sea  of  the  being 1  of  Kali,  the  existence 
of  Brahma  and  other  Devas  is  nothing  but  such  little  water  as  is  contained 
in  the  hollow  made  by  a  cow’s  hoof.  Just  as  it  is  impossible  for  a  hollow 
made  by  a  cow’s  hoof  to  form  a  notion  of  the  unfathomable  depth  of  a  sea, 
so  it  is  impossible  for  Brahma  and  other  Devas  to  have  a  knowledge  of  the 
nature 1  of  Kali.  (For  Brahma,  Vispu,  and  Maheivara  are  the  presiding 
Devas  of  the  three  periods  of  creation,  preservation,  and  dissolution;  but 
who  can  master  with  his  intellect  the  nature  1  of  that  Kali  with  whose 
playful  glance  even  Mahakala,  to  whom  the  three  periods  of  time  are  but 
three  twinkles  of  His  three  eyes,  appears  at  one  moment  and  disappears  at 
another?).  Neither  Brahma,  nor  Visnu,  nor  Maheivara  knows  Her  ' 
fully.” 

“  They,  too,  arc  bom  at  the  beginning  of  creation  as  Lords  of  creation, 
preservation,  and  destruction,  and  again  disappear  in  Her  at  the  time  of 
dissolution.  For  this  reason  Her  Purusa  appearances*  can  lead  only  to 
svarga  and  other  regions.*  There  is  none  other  but  Herself  who  can  grant 
nirvana  liberation.  The  south  is  the  region  where  Yama,  who  awards 
punishment  to  sinners,  presides.  Even  if  a  great  sinner,  trembling  with 
fear  of  death,  utters  but  once  the  name  of  Kail  while  passing  towards  that 
south,  the  holder  of  the  rod  of  punishment 4  becomes  frightened  by  the 
(tremendous  force  of  the  Brahmipda  piercing)  name  of  Brahman,*  and 
flees  to  all  the  quarters  (forsaking  his  own  place  of  rule,  the  southern 
region).  The  inhabitants  of  the  three  worlds,  therefore,  sing  Her  name 
as  1  Dakjina  •  Kali  ’  (the  Dispeller  of  the  fear  of  the  south).  Or  She  is 
called  Dak$inS  7  KfilT,  because  She  is  daksipS  or  skilful  in  creating  and 
destroying  even  Mahakala,  the  Purusa,  who  is  above  gunas.” 

Vikjti  alone  appears  and  disappears,  while  Prakrti 8  is  eternally 
unchanging.  Bhagavan,  therefore,  has  again  said:  “  It  is  only  when 
Prakrti  attains  the  state  of  Vikrti  that  She  sees  the  three  worlds  (fashioned 
by  Herself) ;  and  again  when  Vikjti  attains  the  state  of  Prakrti,  She  does 


1  Tattva.  *  Murti. 

*  Lota.  Only  the  Brahmamayi  can  give  liberation  (Mukti). 

4  Yama-dandadhara.  *  Kali. 

•  Southern.  The  south  is  the  region  of  death.  7  Skilful. 

8  The  true  nature,  as  compared  with  its  changing  transformations  or 
f*  corruptions  V  (vikrti). 


Siva  and  Sakti 


329 


not  see  anything  (for.  She  then  exists  in  the  form  of  Kaivalya  ”  — that  is 
to  say,  when  Vikrti  in  the  form  of  the  duaiistic  Brahmanda  disappears  in 
the  womb  of  Prakrti,  that  monistic  Prakrti  alone  exists  in  whose  womb  the 
Brahmat>da  i*  contained,  and,  consequently,  nothing  remains  to  be  seen 
but  Herself.  In  another  place  the  Sastra  has  clearly  said :  “  Puru$a  is 
but  a  Vikrti 1 *  3  of  Prakrti.” 

In  the  Saktamala  Candrika  it  is  said :  “  Brahma  is  Sakti,  Siva  is  Sakti, 
Visnu  also  is  Sakti,  and  Vasava  3 * *  is  Sakti.  Sakti  is  at  the  root  of  all  the 
many  other  Dcvas.  Without  Sakti  none  is  able  to  preserve  his  individual 
existence.  O  Thou  who  possesseth  a  high  mind,  know,  therefore,  that 
Sakti  is  the  greatest  of  all.” 

In  the  Brahmanda  Tantra  it  is  said :  “  Amongst  Vaispavas  some 
meditate  upon  that  great  Sakti  as  Krspa,  two-armed  and  beautiful  with  a 
dark  *  complexion,  and  others  as  the  husband  of  Lak$mi,  four-armed  and 
tranquil.  She  whom  some  Saivas  see  as  five-headed,  naked  as  space,  and 
holding  the  trident;  and  others  as  four-headed,  one-headed,  and  so  on, 
According  to  different  forms  of  meditation — that  great  Devi  Prakrti  inhabits 
the  region  8  of  Brahma-tejas.8  Great  yogis,  by  single-minded  practice  of 
the  yoga  of  devotion,7  see  that  Prakrti  alone  behind  all  things.  Just  as 
one  single  sun  is  reflected  in  thousands  and  thousands  of  forms  in  mirrors, 
so  one  single  Prakrti  is  reflected  in  infinite  forms  in  Her  own  maya.  Just 
as  in  spite  of  the  existence  of  different  upadhis,8  by  which  space  *  is  known 
according  as  it  is  space  in  a  pot,10  space  in  a  room,11  space  reflected  in 
water,13  extensive  space,18  and  so  on,  there  is  in  reality  no  difference  in 
space;  so  in  spite  of  the  existence  of  infinite  different  forms,1*  there  is 
in  reality  no  difference  in  Her  who  is  infinity  itself.  That  one  sole 
Mahavidya  fills  the  universe.16  The  names  only  are  different.” 

The  Kurma  Purapa  says:  “  The  truth,  which  is  the  conclusion  of  all 
Brahmavadins18  in  the  Vedas  and  Vedantas,  is  that  which  yogis  see  as  one 
all-pervading,  subtle,  attributeless,  motionless,  and  fixed.  That  is  the 
supreme  state  of  Mahadevi.  What  yogis  see  as  endless,  unwasting,  sole, 
pure  Parabrahman,  that  is  the  supreme  state  of  Mahadevi.  That  eternal 
existence,17  higher  than  the  highest,  universal,  beneficent  and  faultless, 
which  is  in  the  womb  of  Prakrti,  that  is  the  highest  state  of  Mahadevi. 


1  The  state  of  liberation  from  all  phenomenal  existence. 

*  Evolved  form  (vide  ante). 

3  Indra.  *  §y&ma. 

•  The  glorious  luminous  energy,  which  is  Brahman. 

8  Apparently  limiting  conditions. 

10  Ghatakaia.  11  Grihakaia. 

13  Mahakaia.  . 18  Rupa. 

18  Those  who  speak  of  and  worship  the  Brahman. 


8  Mandaia. 

7  Bhakti. 

•  Akaia. 

13  JaJakaia. 
i*  Viivamayi. 
17  Tattva. 


330 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


That  which  is  white,  spotless,  pure,  attributeless  and  non-dualistic,  that 
which  is  only  a  matter  for  realization  by  the  Atm&,  that  is  the  highest 
state  of  Mahadevi.” 

The  DevFs  words  in  the  same  Purana  arc:  “  The  supreme  aspect  of 
Mine  the  substance  of  which  is  consciousness,1  sole,*  and  pure;  the 
immortal  state  which  is  free  from  all  upadhis,’  and  eternal,  that  is  only 
attainable  by  knowledge  alone.  Those  who  see  the  Atma  as  knowledge,4 
undoubtedly  enter  into  Me.” 

In  the  Devi  Agama  it  is  said :  “  That  Mahamaya,  who  in  reality  is 
consciousness  and  Parabrahman,  has  assumed  various  forms  out  of  favour 
to  devotees.” 

The  Yogini  Tantra  says:  "  He  who  exists  pervading  the  viSva 
(universe)  as  Deva  ViSveSvara  is  Himself  Viiveivarl,  the  universe-pervading 
Devi.” 

“  Whatever  sakti  anything  possesses,  that  is  Devi  Visvesvari,  and  all 
those  things  arc  Deva  ViSvesvara.  She  into  the  hollows  of  whose  every 
hair  millions  of  Brahmandas  constantly  disappear;  She  it  is  who  grants 
the  desires  of  Sadhakas  by  the  assumption  of  various  forms  in  play  (for 
such  is  Her  kindness) 

In  the  NavaratneSvara  it  is  said:  “  That  Devi  who  is  absolute  existence, 
absolute  consciousness,  and  absolute  bliss,  should  be  thought  of  as  a  female, 
or  as  a  male,  or  as  pure  Brahman.  In  reality,  however,  She  is  neither 
male  nor  female,  nor  neuter — (that  is  to  say,  she  is  not  bound  to  any 
particular  form) . 

“  Still,  just  as  a  kalpalata  1  is  called  by  a  feminine  name,  so  She,  too, 
is  called  by  a  feminine  name  [Sakti — that  is  to  say,  one  obtains  from  a 
kalpalata  anything  which  he  desires,  be  it  the  fruit  of  a  creeper  (lata)  or 
that  of  a  tree,  and  this  reveals  a  divine  *  sakti  beyond  that  of  a  lata  (creeper) 
or  of  a  tree].  Still,  just  as  a  kalpalata  is  a  lata  (creeper)  in  form,  so  She 
assumes  a  female  form,’  in  spite  of  Her  being  all  forms  and  above  all  forms.” 
Just  as  the  form  of  a  lata  (creeper)  is  the  real  form  of  a  kalpalata,  in  spite 
of  its  bearing  fruits  of  trees,  so  the  form  of  Sakti  is  Her  real  form  in  spite 
of  all  male  appearances,8  such  as  Devas,  Danavas,  and  so  on,  which  are 
Her  forms  *  only.  Whether  in  dualistic  or  in  non-dualistic  play,  in  the 
form  of  Brahman  or  in  the  form  of  Jiva,  the  female  is  Sakti,  and  the  male 
is  iakta.  Sakti  is  the  person  worshipped,  and  Purusa  is  the  person 
worshipping.  This  is  the  last  step  of  s&dhana,  the  highest  state  of  spiritual 
realization.10 


1  Ciiunaya. 

1  Apparent  limitations,  side  anil. 

*  Desire-fulfilling  creeper.  •  Daiva, 

•  Miirti.  *  Rupa. 


*  Kcvala. 

8  Jfiana. 

*  Strirupadharipl. 
10  Prapti. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


331! 


Although  male  and  female  are  both  Her  aspects,  yet  Her  &akti  is. 
naturally  revealed  more  in  the  female  than  in  the  male  form,  and  this  is 
the  cause  of  the  distinction  of  worshipper  and  the  worshipped,1  and  it  is 
on  account  of  this  greater  manifestation  that  females  are  called  “  Sakti 
From  this  one  must  not  suppose  that  Sakti  is  less  present  in  such 
appearances*  as  Siva,  Krsna,  Rama,  Surya,  Vi§nu,  Gape&a,  and  so  on. 
For  although  these  appearances  are  actually  male,  they  are  not  bound  to 
the  male  form.  They  arc  merely  formed  in  the  play  of  Her  who  is  con¬ 
sciousness  in  manifesting  consciousness.  If  a  Sad  ha  k  a  who  is  a  worshipper 
of  the  form  of  Krsna  desires  to  see  Him  as  Kali,  then  Bhagavan,  the  fulfiller 
of  the  desires  of  devotees,  is  bound  to  appear  before  him  in  that  form. 

Radhika  Herself  has,  by  pretending  *  to  be  afraid  of  Ayana,4  given 
evidence  of  this  perfect  Sakti  of  Bhagavan.4  It  is  with  reference  to  this 
force  of  perfect  Sakti  in  the  female  form  that  Maheivari  Herself  has  said, 
in  the  DurgagTta  of  the  Mupdamala  T antra: 

“It  is  I  who  am  Radhika  in  Goloka,  Kamala  in  Vaikun^ha,  and 
•Savitri  and  Sarasvatl,  the  presiding  Devi  of  speech  in  Brahmaloka.  It  is 
I  who  am  Parvati  in  Kailaia,  JanakI  in  Mithila,  Rukmini  in  Dvaraka, 
and  Draupadi  •  in  Hastinapura.  I  am  Sandhya 7  and  Gayatri,  the 
Mother  of  Vedas,  the  objects  of  adoration  to  all  the  twice-bom  people. 
Among  Yogas  8  I  am  Pusa,  among  flowers  I  am  black  Aparajita,®  among 
leaves  I  am  the  bael-lcaf,10  among  pi$has  I  am  the  Yonipitha,11  I  am  Maha- 
vidya  formed  of  Hari  and  Hara,**  and  I  am  also  the  worshipped  of  Brahma, 
Visnu  and  Siva.  O  Lord,  O  Sankara,15  it  is  only  by  my  special  favour 
that  Jivas  can  know  me  (what  more  need  I  say,  O  my  husband!) ;  wherever 
there  is  Sakti  (a  female)  there  I  am.  O  Mahadeva,  know  for  certain  that 
this  is  the  manner  in  which  I  am  best  contemplated.  Whoever  forsakes 
this  path  of  Sakti  and  proceeds  along  another  path  in  search  of  Me  throws 
away  the  jewel  which  is  in  the  palm  of  his  hand,  and  runs  after  a  heap 
of  ashes.” 


1  The  female  principle  is  called  iakti  because  there  is  more  iakti  revealed 
in  it  than  in  the  male  principle.  As  the  Muodamal&  Tantra  says,  “  Wherever 
there  is  a  female  (Sakti),  there  I  am.”  For  the  same  reason  the  female  is 
worshipped  by  the  male. 

*  Muni.  4  Abhinaya.  4  Radhika’s  husband. 

*  This  point  here  is  not  at  all  clear.  For  the  story  is  that  Kj-?iia  took  the 
form  of  Kali  for  fear  of  Ayana. 

*  As  to  these  names,  vide  ante. 

I  Morning,  noon,  and  evening  prayers  personified  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra 
SSstra). 

*  Sec  post.  •  The  flower  clitoria.  10  Sacred  to  Siva. 

II  Kamrup,  in  Assam  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

14  Vijrm  and  Siva.  14  Siva 


332 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


This  is  the  command  of  Sastra.  If,  after  this,  any  of  you  wish  to 
.solve  the  matter  by  a  thorough  understanding  in  the  light  of  science  or 
philosophy,  in  that  case  also  it  must  be  admitted  that  there  is  no  Sakti  or 
possessor  of  Sakti  other  than  the  Sakti  of  Atma,  by  which  body,  senses, 
mind,  and  life  *  are  guided.  If  everything  is  performed  by  Sakti,  then 
why  wait  for  a  possessor  of  Sakti  ?  If  you  ask  by  whose  support  *  this  Sakti 
exists,  then  do  you  yourself  tell  me  by  whose  support  the  possessor  of  Sakti 
exists.  If  the  Brahmaiakti  who  supports  the  Brahmapda  has  to  wait  for 
another’s  support,  then  this  Brahman  da  must  go  to  perdition.*  Who  is 
the  container  4  of  the  contained  Sakti  ?  By  whose  energy  *  does  fire  bum  ? 
By  whose  speed  does  wind  blow?  Such  questions  do  not  bespeak  a  natural 
state  of  the  mind.  However  that  may  be,  it  is  because  Pura?a  is  enabled 
by  the  support  of  Sakti  to  display  Himself*  that  Sastra  has  designated 
him  as  Saktiman  (the  possessor  of  Sakti).  The  BrahmSnda  play  of 
Brahmamayi  manifests  the  same  principles.  For  this  reason,  in  the 
■creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  of  the  dualistic  material  world,7 
the  Purusa  aspects  of  Sakti  are  Brahmi,  Visnu,  and  MahcSvara,  and  Her  • 
Prakrti  aspects  arc  Brahman!,  Vaisnavi,  and  Mahesvari.  In  the  Gayatri 
mantra  also  it  is  these  two  Purusas  and  Prakrti  aspects  which  have  to  be 
worshipped  at  the  commencement  in  pranayama.*  Brahma,  Visnu,  and 
MaheSvara  arc  the  Purusas,  and  at  the  end,  in  the  GSyatri  dhyana,* 
BrahmapI,  Vaisriavi,  and  MahcSvari  are  the  Prakrtis.  The  Gayatri  is 
merely  a  Sutra  (aphorism),  and  the  Sandhya-prayers  arc  its  vrtti 
(exposition)  or  Bh&sya  (commentary).  In  the  Gayatri  mantra  five  forms 
of  Brahman’s  self 10  have  been  specified — namely,  pervadcr  of  the  universe,11 
creator  of  the  world,1*  object  of  worship,1*  playful  Deva,14  and  instigator  of 
Jiva’s  intelligence.1*  Of  these  five,  the  epithet  “  pervadcr  of  the  universe  ” 
denotes  the  Self-aspect,1*  and  comes  first.  Next  follows  the  introduction 
of  the  dualistic  world.  The  world  cannot  be  created  in  the  attributeless 
state,  and  without  fully  bringing  into  play  the  three  gunas.  By  whom  will 
He  be  worshipped  if  no  worshipper  exists?  Play  17  is  impossible  if  no  desire 


I  PrSfla.  *  Airaya.  *  RasStala.  4  Adhara.  *  Tejas. 

4  Lit. :  to  spread  his  own  vibhutis  (see post). 

7  Prapaftca.  *  Breath-control  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra). 

•  The  formula  of  meditation  on  the  Gayatri.  18  Svarupa. 

II  Bhurbhuvah  suvah.  11  Tatsavituh.  11  Varenyam  Bhargah. 

14  Devasya  dhlmahi.  The  Deva  is  described  in  the  text  as  playful 

(lllamaya),  for  1115  is  a  characteristic  of  Devas. 

18  Dhiyo  yo  nah  pracodayat  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra).  The 
Sanskrit  in  notes  10  to  14  are  the  portions  of  the  Gayatri  referred  to,  though 
not  expressed,  in  the  text. 

14  Svarupa. 


17  Lila. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


333; 


exists.  Lastly,  why  should  He  direct  JIva’s  intelligence  if  He  has  not 
taken  upon  Himself  the  lordship  of  the  Brahmanda?  Intelligent  Brahmapas 
will  now  understand  from  the  Gayatri  mantra  itself  whether  the  Devata, 
who  forms  its  subject,1  is  attributeless  Brahman  or  with  attribute.  Brahman, 
whom  the  GSyatri  seeks  to  establish,  is  neither  attributeless  nor  with 
attribute — that  is  to  say.  It  is  both  attributelcss  and  with  attribute.  A 
Sadhaka,  when  he  has  attained  siddhi  in  the  sadhana  of  Brahman  with 
attribute  will,  in  natural  course,  lose  himself  in  the  attributeless  Self.* 
He  need  not  before  this  time  shut  his  eyes  and  see  darkness  for  three  ages.3 
By  Brahman  with  attribute  you  and  I  may  understand  a  small  Brahman. 
But  in  the  eyes  of  the  Sastra,  Brahman  is  neither  small  nor  great,  as  you 
think. 

As  an  aquatic  animal  must  pass  through  the  rivers  if  it  wishes  to 
journey  to  the  sea,  so  a  JIva  must  pass  through  the  dualistic  world  if  he 
wishes  to  make  his  way  to  the  Brahman.  Sastra  has,  therefore,  said 
that  to  reach  mahanirvana,  which  is  His  attributeless  aspect,  one  must 
proceed  by  the  aid  of  the  support  of  His  forms  4  with  attributes.  By  the 
term  “  attributeless  ”  one  is  not  to  understand  that  Brahman  has  no 
attribute,®  but  that,  although  with  attributes,®  He  is  not  attached  7  to 
them.  The  Sea  is  not  waterless.  But  as,  notwithstanding  its  fullness  of 
water,  it  is  the  Lord  or  presiding  Devata  over  waters,  so  Brahman,  with 
attribute  or  attributeless,  is,  notwithstanding  such  attributes.  Lord  or 
presiding  Devata  over  attributes.  Every  attribute  bears  eternal  evidence 
of  the  infinite  number  of  attributes  of  Her  in  Whom  arc  all  attributes.® 

To  say,  therefore,  that  She  is  attributelcss  is  only  to  show  one’s  ignor¬ 
ance.  The  manifestations  of  Sakti  in  the  forms  9  of  Dcvas,  Danavas,  and  men, 
signify  nothing  but  the  spread  10  of  attributes  belonging  to  Her  who  holds 
the  three  gunas.  Attachment,  inclinadon,  permanence,  peace,  self-control, 
patience,  error,  enjoyment,  liberation,  devotion,  and  the  like  are  all  nothing 
but  Sakti.  Thanks,  then,  to  the  tongue  of  him  who  says  that  She  is 
unconscious.  She  in  whose  substance  hearing,  thinking,  going,  seeing,  and 
other  acts  of  consciousness  exist.  Whether  a  person  who  asks  if  he  has 
got  a  tongue  has  really  got  it  or  not,  will  be  understood  by  others  if  not  by 
himself.  But  he,  too,  ought  to  understand  this  much,  that  if  he  has  not 
got  a  tongue,  with  whose  help,  then,  does  he  ask :  “  Have  I  got  a  tongue  ?  ” 

Similarly,  an  advocate  of  the  theory  that  Sakti  is  unconscious,11  ought 
at  least  to  ask  himself  under  whose  influence  earthly  JIvas  become 
conscious?  If  Sakti  be  not  really  consciousness,  by  whose  grace  do  I  possess 


1  Pratipadya.  *  Svarupa. 

*  That  is,  he  has  not  got  to  wait,  but  the  result  follows  immediately. 

4  Murti.  *  Gupa.  •  Guoamaya.  *  Lipta. 

•  Gunamayl.  •  Murti.  10  Vistara.  u  J»d*- 


:334 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  power  of  asking  whether  Sakti  is  conscious  or  unconscious?  I  know 
not  what  severe  punishment  for  terrible  crimes  committed  in  previous 
births  it  is  which  smites  a  man  so  senseless  as  to  cause  him  to  make  so 
delirious  a  statement  as  that  “  Sakti  is  unconscious  He  is  saying  that 
of  a  Sakti  the  beams  of  the  moon  of  whose  consciousness  are  powerfully 
manifested  in  every  vein,  every  artery,  and  in  every  atom  of  a  Jiva’s  body. 
Sastra  has  said:  “  O  Devi,  without  a  knowledge  of  Sakti  nirvana  cannot 
be  attained.”  Do  you  think,  O  Jiva!  that  you  will  gain  the  knowledge  of 
.Sakti  tattva  which  leads  directly  to  nirvana  liberation,  merely  by  virtue  of 
your  being  a  great  polemist,  and  without  the  possession  of  a  wealth  of 
sSdhana  stored  by  in  many  previous  births  ? 

Are  you  to  possess  the  wealth  which  is  worshipped  by  Brahma  and 
other  Dcvas — the  treasure  which  lies  eternally  hidden  in  the  storehouse  of 
Sadananda’s  heart?  Hari,  Hari,  Hari!  You  and  I  want  to  obtain  Her  by 
the  force  of  intelligence,  but  wc  fail  to  realize  that  we  have  not  the  power 
to  understand  anything  beyond  what  She,  who  is  the  intelligence  of  even 
intelligence,  has,  with  proper  judgment,  given  us  the  competence  to  under*, 
stand.  Not  to  speak  of  anyone  else,  even  Sankaracarya  himself,  O 
Sadhaka,  played  at  this  sport. 

When  Bhagavan  Sankaracarya,  upholder  of  the  maya  doctrine, 
preacher  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy,  and  crcst-gcm  of  philosophers,  arrived 
at  Ka4i  after  having  proved  himself  a  conqueror  in  every  quarter;  when 
followers  of  other  systems  of  philosophy,  wounded  all  over  by  the  powerful 
arrows  of  his  arguments,  had  been  dispersed  and  scattered,  he,  by  some 
play  of  the  Mother  of  the  world  which  we  know  not  of,  commenced,  to 
the  immense  joy  of  the  Saiva  community,  to  hurl  relentless  thunderbolts 
on  the  heart  of  the  S&kta  community.  For  he  proceeded  to  establish  that 
“  nothing  exists  as  Sakti  ”  besides  Siva.  Saktas  thus  sorely  oppressed  by 
him,  though  defeated  outwardly  by  arguments,  were  undefeated  in  inner 
reasoning.  They  were,  however,  intensely  grieved  to  see  such  scepticism  1 
proclaimed  against  the  Dcvata  whom  they  worshipped.  Who  but  She 
who  dwells  in  all  hearts  can  realize  the  intensity  of  such  grief  in  the  hearts 
of  Sadhakas?  Sankaracarya,  however,  could  not  understand  this  even 
then;  for  his  ideas  did  not  go  beyond  the  notion  that  “  Kaii *  belonged  to 
Siva.”  It  was  even  then  unknown  to  him  that  there  was  also  a  Mistress  * 
of  KaS.  The  throne  of  Her  who  is  Sakti  in  reality,  was  therefore  moved 
to  appease  the  pangs  of  the  hearts  of  SSdhakas,  and  to  lift  the  curtain  of 
error  which  had  fallen  upon  Saftkaracarya,  the  incarnation  of  all 
devotion.* 


1  Nastikavada. 
*  Adhiivari. 


*  The  city  of  Benares. 

*  Bhaktavatara. 


SIVA  AND  SAKTI 


335 


One  day,  therefore,  Sarikaracarya,  after  an  untiring  discussion 
lasting  till  midday,  lay  with  a  wearied  body  on  the  Manikarnika  ghat, 
enjoying  in  his  mind  his  triumph  in  having  disproved  the  Sakti  doctrine.1 
He  then  saw  a  girl  of  serene  appearance  slowly  approaching  the  ghat,* 
carrying  a  small  pitcher  on  her  lap.  Sarikaracarya  was  lying  with  his 
head  towards  the  south  and  feet  towards  the  north,  in  such  a  way  as  to 
completely  block  the  path.  On  coming  near  him,  the  girl  very  meekly 
said:  “  Bhagavan,  please  raise  your  feet  so  that  I  may  fill  my  pitcher  with 
water  and  go  away.”  Sarikaracarya  said:  “  Mother,  you  may  step 
over  me.  There  will  be  no  blame  in  your  doing  so.”  The  girl  replied: 
“  How  can  that  be  ?  You  are  a  Brahmana.  How  can  I  step  over  you  ?” 
Sarikaracarya,  proud  of  his  knowledge,  said:  “  Mother,  you  are  an 
ignorant  female,  and  in  that  a  mere  girl.  Brahmapa,  Ksattriya,  VaiSya, 
Sudra,  female,  male — all  such  differences  merely  arise  from  our  ignorance.3 
In  the  eyes  of  the  wise  everything  is,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  in  substance, 
Brahman.  You  may  pass  over  me,  and  will  commit  no  sin  thereby.” 
The  girl  looked  greatly  grieved,  and  said:  “  Lord,  you  yourself  have  said 
that  I  am  an  ignorant  female,  and  have  no  competence  for  such  spiritual 
knowledge.4  I  can  by  no  means  step  over  a  Brahmana.  Be  good  enough 
to  raise  your  feet  so  that  I  may  pass.”  Sarikaracarya  was  displeased, 
and  said:  “  Mother,  I  have  repeatedly  told  you  what  to  do,  and  yet  you 
will  not  hear  me?  My  body  is  extremely  tired,  and,  moreover,  suddenly 
I  feel,  I  know  not  why,  as  if  I  had  not  the  Sakti  (strength)  even  to  raise 
my  feet.”  The  girl,  who  appeared  to  be  somewhat  frightened,  said: 
“  Lord,  pardon  me.  Had  I  but  known  that  you  had  not  the  sakti  to  do 
so,  1  would  never  have  asked  you  to  raise  your  feet.  I  am  one  who  is 
not  fit  to  understand  your  spiritual  knowledge,  and  have,  in  consequence, 
disturbed  you  repeatedly  through  my  great  fear  at  having  to  step  over  a 
Brahmana.  Had  you,  instead  of  speaking  of  spiritual  knowledge,  told 
me,  at  the  beginning,  plainly  that  ‘  you  had  not  the  Sakti  to  move,’  I 
would  myself  have  raised  your  feet  and  gone  down  to  the  water.  How¬ 
ever  that  may  be,  if  you  will  now  let  me,  I  shall  myself  raise  your  feet.” 
Sarikaracarya  was  greatly  abashed  at  these  words  of  the  girl,  and  said: 
“  You  may  do  what  you  like.”  The  girl  then  raised  his  feet  with  her  own 
hands  and  put  them  aside,  and  then  went  down  to  the  water,  filled  the 
pitcher,  and  ascended  the  steps.  Sarikaracarya,  who  was  lying  pros¬ 
trate  with  fatigue,  called  to  the  girl,  and  said:  “Mother,  I  have  been 
long  thirsty,  give  me  a  little  water.”  The  girl  smiled,  and  asked:  “  Why? 
You  are  lying  on  the  water-side.  How  is  it,  then,  that  you  suffer  from 
thirst?”  Sarikaracarya  replied:  “How  many  times  more  need  I  tell 


1  Sakti  vada. 
*  Ajftana. 


*  Steps  leading  down  to  the  river. 
4  Tattva-jfiana. 


336 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


you  that  I  have  not  the  Sakti.  to  rise  ?  ”  The  girl  then  rolled  her  eye,1  and 
making  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  resound  with  Her  solemn  voice,  said: 
“  Sahkara,  is  it  not  you  who  ignore  Sakti?”  Wounded  by  the  echo  of 
that  heartpenetrating  solemn  sound,  Sankaracarya,  who  had  been  like 
a  sleeping  child  starded  by  lightning,  shut  his  eyes  for  a  moment,  and 
then,  as  he  fearfully  opened  them,  he  saw  that  in  the  angry  eyes  of  the 
girl  waves  of  unbearable  light,  such  as  might  proceed  from  hundreds  of 
suns  and  moons,  were  playing.  Instantly,  as  he  cried  “  Mother !  ”  and 
with  outstretched  arms  rushed  to  clasp  Her  feet,  the  play  of  that  playful 
Devi  closed.  The  great  light  of  Her  who  is  Light  itself,*  which  had  shown 
itself  in  the  form  of  a  girl,  disappeared.  None  but  a  kindred  sufferer  can 
understand  the  darkness  into  which  Sankaracarya  sank  upon  the  dis¬ 
appearance  of  that  light.  The  summit  of  pride  of  Brahmajnana  *  to  which 
he  had  risen  was  shattered  into  pieces  by  a  single  glance  of  the  daughter 
of  the  King  of  Mountains,4  as  the  summit  of  a  mountain  is  shattered  by 
a  thunderbolt.  Then,  like  a  blind  man  who  has  fallen,  like  a  child  which 
has  lost  its  mother,  he  wept  loudly,  and  crying,  “  O  my  Mother,  where, 
have  you  gone  ?  "  ran  with  breathless  speed  towards  the  temple  of  Anna¬ 
purna.  Now  the  mother’s  son  belongs  to  the  Mother,  and  goes  to  the 
Mother’s  temple  crying,  “  Mother!  ”  Although  there  was  nothing  strange 
in  this,  yet  the  sight  of  such  an  unprecedented  change  in  Sankaracarya, 
the  sceptic  about  Sakti,  charmed  the  Saktas  with  the  greatness  of  the 
Mother.  The  temple-yard  was  filled  with  their  cry:  “  Victory  to  the 
Mother  of  the  world.”  Surrounded  on  all  sides  by  the  assembly  of  Sakta 
devotees,  Saiikaracarya  came  to  the  door  of  the  temple  of  the  Rajara- 
jesvari s  of  the  three  worlds,  the  Queen  *  of  the  Lord 7  of  KaSI,  and,  trembling 
with  fear  at  having  committed  so  grave  an  offence,  placed  his  head  on 
the  shrine  of  the  feet  touched  by  the  heads  of  Suras  and  Asuras,  of  Adya 
Sakti,  the  Mother  of  the  world.  Then,  weeping,  he  said:  “  O  Mother, 
Siva  is  able  to  maintain  His  Lordship  only  if  He  is  united  with  Sakti; 
otherwise  (if  He  is  separated  from  Sakti)  He  is  unable  not  merely  to  main¬ 
tain  His  Lordship,  but  even  (to  maintain  His  own  existence)  to  move 
His  eyes.  Explained  in  another  way:  According  to  Tantra,  Sakti  is 
denoted  by  the  letter  *  i  Siva  is  Siva  so  long  only  as  He  is  joined  with 
Sakti — that  is,  with  ‘  i  The  instant  He  is  separated  from  Sakti — that 
is,  from  ‘  i  ’ — He  ceases  to  be  Siva,  and  becomes  a  motionless  Sava  [corpse]. 
Thou  art,  therefore  [Adya  Sakti]  an  object  of  worship  to  even  Hari,  Hara, 


1  In  surprise  and  resentment. 

1  Jyotinnayi.  *  Knowledge  of  Brahman. 

4  The  Devi,  who  had  thus  appeared  to  the  philosopher. 

*  Queen  of  Queens.  4  Adhifvari.  7  Ilvara. 

*  Called  Vamaksi  or  V&manctra  (left  eye),  also  Rati. 


Siva  and  Sakti 


337 


Virifici,1 * * * * *  and  others  who  are  themselves  worshipped  by  the  world.  O 
Mother,  how  am  I,  who  have  done  no  act  of  religious  merit,  able  to  bow 
my  head  to,  or  hymn  the  feet  [the  lotus-feet,  difficult  of  attainment  by 
the  three  worlds,  at  which  Brahma  and  other  Dev  as  lay  their  heads] — 
that  is  to  say,  unless  Thou  thyself  reveal  it,  who  has  the  power  to  know  the 
Sakti-tattva,  which  is  in  reality  Thyself?  Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Maheivara, 
who  know  but  a  part  only  of  Thy  greatness,  have  sought  shelter  at  Thy 
feet.  That  tattva  is  not  revealed  to  any  who  have  not  a  store  of  religious 
merits  acquired  by  Sadhana  in  many  a  previous  birth.  It  is  not  within 
the  power  of  Jivas  to  know  the  nature  of  Tar3,*  who  is  beyond  the  reach 
of  mind  and  speech.  It  is  therefore  that  a  JIva  fails  to  know  Thee,  O 
Mother,  even  though  he  lies  on  Thy  lap.  O  Mother,  such  is  my  state 
to-day.  Out  of  fear  of  the  offence  I  have  committed,  I  have  not  the 
courage  either  to  make  hymn  or  to  bow  to  Thee.” 

In  this  manner  Sahkaracarya  made  hymn  to  the  Mother  of  the 
world  by  one  hundred  and  three  verses,  in  which  he  described  Her  appear- 
^ance,  qualities,  and  greatness.  In  the  conclusion  he  said:  “To  make 
hymn  to  Thee  with  words  uttered  by  Thy  grace  is  like  the  waving  of 
lights s  before  the  sun  in  his  worship,  or  the  preparation  of  Arghya  *  for 
the  moon  with  the  particles  of  water  secreted  by  a  moon-gem,*  or  the 
offering  of  libations  of  its  own  water  to  the  sea.” 

Thus  gratified,  Sahkaracarya  made  provision  so  that  none  among 
the  descendants  of  his  disciples  might  ever  be  deprived  of  the  wealth  of 
the  Sadhana  of  Sakti,  or  fall  from  Tantrik  initiation,  notwithstanding 
that  they  were  Sannyasins  in  the  Vaidik  cult.  For  this  reason  we  see 
the  Yantra  of  Sri*  established  wherever  there  are  Ma{has,7  temples,  and 
the  like,  founded  amongst  such  Darn^is8  as  are  followers  of  Sahkaracarya. 
This  fact  people  daily  see  even  at  the  present  time,  except  that  it  is  in 
some  places  openly  displayed,  and  in  some  places  kept  secret  as  Sadhakas, 
who  know  the  secret,  are  fully  aware. 

However  that  may  be,  we  have  something  to  say  about  the  spiritual 
error  of  Bhagavan  Sahkaracarya,  an  incarnation  of  Sankara,  in  the 
incident  described  above.  Bhagavan  Sahkaracarya  was  an  incarnation 
of  Siva,  who  is  Sakti  Herself.  It  is  extremely  astonishing  that  He  who 
has  in  His  original  form  laid  His  breast  under  the  feet  of  Mah&akti,  and 


1  Vi«m»  Siva,  Brahma. 

*  That  is,  the  tattva  of  Tar4,  one  of  the  Mahividyas  (see  Introduction  to 

Tantra  Sistra). 

*  Arad,  or  the  waving  of  lights  in  worship  before  an  image. 

*  An  offering  made  to  show  respect  to  a  person  on  meeting  him,  or  to  a 

Devata.  1  CandrakAnta  mani.  *  The  Devi. 

7  Monastic  establishments.  *  A  class  of  high  Sannyisins. 

22 


338 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


sunk  in  Brahma-bliss  by  resigning  Himself  to  the  Brahma-form  of  Brah- 
mamayi,  should,  in  His  incarnate  form,  commit  such  an  error  in  respect 
of  Sakti-tattva.  We  are  therefore  led  to  think  that  it  was  in  order  to 
shatter  the  pride  of  knowledge,  consisting  of  eternal  ignorance,  which 
filled  the  followers  of  the  Vedantik  system  of  philosophy,  who  were  advo¬ 
cates  of  the  MiyS  doctrine,1 * *  deluded  by  the  Maya  of  Mahamaya,  that 
he  first  ignored  the  existence  of  Her  who  is  perfect  and  eternal  Brahman, 
and  then  proclaimed  the  greatness  of  the  Mother  of  the  world  by  holding, 
through  Her  grace,  the  ever-triumphant  banner  of  the  Tantra  Sastra 
in  his  own  hand.  Otherwise,  it  is  not  to  be  believed  that  the  author  of 
the  hymn  of  which  we  have  quoted  the  beginning  and  the  end,  and  which 
bespeaks  a  deep  and  impressive  knowledge  of  the  entire  Tantra  Sastra, 
was  a  disbeliever  in  Sakri,  or  did  not  know  or  worship  Her. 

Gaura  Candra,*  the  full-moon  of  the  Sea  of  Gaura,*  descending 
upon  Navadvipa,4  also  belonged  to  a  branch  of  Bhagavan  Sarikaracarya’s 
followers.  His  Guru  who  initiated  him  in  asceticism,4  was  Swami  Kciava 
Bharati,  a  disciple  in  the  line  of  the  disciples  of  the  Sahkara  community. 
Intelligent  Sadhakas  will,  therefore,  easily  understand  in  what  system 
Gaura  Candra  was  initiated,  and  according  to  which  he  was  accustomed 
to  worship.  Still,  we  shall  try  to  deal  with  this  subject  in  its  proper  place, 
so  far  as  it  will  lie  in  our  power. 

Sadhaka,  whom  shall  I  recognize  as  a  greater  philosopher  than 
Bhagavan  Sarikaracarya,  who  played  his  part  in  the  above-mentioned 
sport?  Where  is  the  advocate  of  the  theory  that  Sakri  is  unconscious,4 
who  is  himself  thereby  lowered  to  the  state  of  some  unconscious  thing, 
whose  words  I  shall  respect?  If  Sankaracarya,  an  incarnation  of  Him 
who  possesses  all  Saktis,  lost  the  power  (sakri)  of  raising  his  feet  because 
he  said,  “  There  is  no  Sakri,”  who  are  you  and  I  that  we  should  raise 
our  heads  to  say,  “  There  is  no  Sakri  ”  ? 

He  is  very  deeply  mistaken  who  thinks  that  be  can  understand  the 
Sakd-tattva  by  means  of  philosophical  arguments,  discussions,  and  reason¬ 
ings.  If  She  were  a  treasure  to  be  acquired  by  arguments,  discussions, 
and  reasonings,  for  whose  sake,  then,  are  sadhana  and  bhajana?  required? 
Sarikaracarya  did  not  know  Her  by  means  of  philosophy  (dargana). 
He  knew  Her  in  consequence  of  seeing  Her  (dariana).*  He  was  not  a 
blind  philosopher,  like  the  pandits  we  meet  nowadays.  His  spiritual 


1  The  MayavSda,  which  speaks  of  Maya  as  Avidya  only,  and  not  (ignoring 

the  true  nature  of  Sakri)  as  both  Vidya  and  Avidya. 

*  The  Vaipjavite  Saint  Caitanya.  *  The  country  Gaur  or  Bengal. 

4  The  town  of  Nadia,  where  Caitanya  was  born. 

4  Sannyasa.  4  Ja<jla. 

7  Worship.  *  A  play  on  the  word  “  darAana  ”, 


Siva  and  Sakti 


339 


•  eye  was  painted  and  made  brilliant  by  the  collyrium  paint1 * *  of  the  light 
of  Her  who  is  ever  stainless.*  The  Mother  of  the  world  showed  Herself 
to  him,  and  that  sight  (darSana)  made  him  (one  who  sees  or)  a  philosopher 
(dSrianik).  But  we  unfortunate  Jivas  of  the  Kali  age  are  becoming  blind 
in  the  name  of  philosophy  (darsana).  This  is  our  ill-fortune.* 

Is  he  not  the  greatest  of  sceptics 4  who  finds  it  in  him  to  say  that  &akti 
“  does  not  exist  ” — the  Sakti  whose  existence  has  given  to  Bhagavan  the 
name  of  “  possessor  of  all  Saktis  ”  ?  What  can  be  a  greater  folly  than  that 
you,  O  JTva,  should  proceed  to  discuss  the  existence  or  non-existence  of 
the  Sakti,  whose  greatness  is  preached  by  Bhagavan;  the  Sakti  whose 
greatness  is  such  that  Bhagavan  Himself  has,  in  order  that  it  may  be  pro¬ 
claimed,  ordained  that  the  name  of  Sakti  should  be  uttered  first,  and  then 
that  of  the  possessor  of  Sakti,  declaring  that  he  who  shall  fail  to  utter  the 
names  as  Radha-Krsna,  LaksmT-NSrayana,  Uma-Mahe&vara,  Gauri- 
Sankara,-5 *  and  SltA-R&ma  is  guilty  of  a  sin  as  great  as  that  of  murdering 
a  Brahmana.  In  the  uncrossable  ocean  of  Her  existence  a  Brahmanda- 
•cauldron  is  less  even  than  a  bubble  of  water.4 

Is  it  the  Mother’s  fault  or  the  son’s  ill-fortune  that  living  in  that  bubble 
and  even  sinking  in  that  ocean,  you  and  I  do  not  see  Her;  that  sitting 
in  the  Mother’s  lap,  nourished  by  the  Mother’s  milk,  and  tended  by  the 
soft  fingers  of  the  Mother’s  hand,  the  son,  bom  blind,  docs  not  see  Her? 
Who  docs  not  take  birth  in  his  Mother’s  womb  ?  But  for  that  reason  every¬ 
one  does  not  have  the  good  fortune  of  seeing  hi*  mother.  The  graceful 
and  refulgent  beauty  of  the  three  eyes7  of  the  thrcc-eyed  Devi  are  reflected 
in  the  mirror  of  the  eye  of  him  only  whose  eye  of  knowledge  has  been 
opened  by  Her  mercy,  and  has  been  smeared  by  his  guru’s  kindness  with 
the  collyrium  paint  of  love.  Sarikaracarya  has  said:  “What  power 
has  Jiva  to  sec  that  beauty  of  Thine,  which  is  visible  only  to  Parama- 
6iva  ?” 

So  I  say,  O  brother  Sadhaka,  do  not  forget  the  Mother’s  authority 
and  power  because  you  have  not  yourself  got  the  power  to  see  Her.  And 
you,  community  of  false  devotees,  who  see  a  difference  between  Sakti 
and  possessor  of  Sakti,  who  are  partial  on  the  Father’s  side  and  inimical 


1  Ahjana  used  to  give  brilliance  to  the  eyes.  *  Nirafijana. 

*  A  play  on  the  word  dartana.  Philosophy  is  so  called,  as  it  is  supposed  to 

give  sight;  but  is  here  the  cause  of  blindness. 

4  Literally,  the  great-grandfather  of  sceptics: 

*  That  is,  the  names  of  the  Saktis  are  placed  first,  and  those  of  the  Devas 
second. 

4  The  universe,  which  is  shaped  like  a  cauldron,  is  but  as  a  bubble  in  the 
(limitless  ocean  of  Her  being. 

7  Including  the  central  eye  of  wisdom. 


340 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T  ANTRA 


to  the  Mother’s  side,  to  you,  too,  I  say,  whichever  form  a  JIva  may  worship, 
be  it  the  form  of  a  male  or  that  of  a  female,  the  door  of  liberation  is  free 
to  him. 

He  who  worships  the  Father  has  not  to  wait  to  worship  the  Mother 
before  he  can  secure  liberation;  but  know  it  for  certain  that  not  even  the 
Father’s  father  has  the  power  to  liberate  him  who  worships  the  Father 
in  a  spirit  of  antagonism  to  the  Mother.  Sumbha,  Niiumbha,  Jambba, 
Mahisasura,1 * *  and  many  others,  worshipped  the  Father  in  this  spirit.  But 
I  know  not  how  vast  is  the  mercy  of  Her  who  is  full  of  mercy.  Enmity 
cannot  touch  Her  in  the  least,  so  that  the  Devi  with  dishevelled  hair, 
whom  immortals  worship,  liberated  them  from  the  bonds  of  existence 
even  when  in  war  with  them.  Nevertheless,  by  placing  Himself  in  the 
form  of  a  corpse  under  the  Mother’s  feet,  the  Father  showed  to  the  Daityas 
that  the  garland  of  pearls  of  liberation  lies  ever  set  and  ever  stored  under 
the  feet  of  the  Devi  with  dishevelled  hair.  To  put  on  that  garland  one 
must  place  one’s  heart  under  those  feet  and  lose  one’s  self.  It  is  with  the 
view  of  this  truth*  that  thoughtful  devotees  of  subtle  inright  have  said: 
“Everyone  says  ‘Father,  Father!’  no  one  says  ‘Mother!’  But  in  the 
Father  court  *  the  final  decision  is  that  which  is  the  Mother’s  command.” 

So  I  say:  “O  you  who  discriminate  between  the  Father  and  the 
Mother,  human  birth  is  difficult  of  attainment.  Open,  then,  the  door 
of  your  heart  while  there  Is  yet  time,  and  with  tears  in  your  eyes  say  for 
once. 

“  ‘  A  bad  son  may  sometimes  be  bom 
But  a  bad  mother  never.’  ”4 


1  Daityas  or  demonic  brings  so  named  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra 

and  antt.) 

*  Tattva.  *  Durbar  or  court  held  by  Rajas  etc. 

4  Kuputro  jayeta  kvachedapi  kumata  nabhavati.  This  is  a  quotation  from 
Sankaracarya'a  hymn  “  Dcvyapararihakyunapana  stotra,”  translated  in  A. 
and  E.  Avalon’s  “  Hymns  to  the  Goddess  **. 


CHAPTER  X 


WORSHIP  OF  THE  FIVE  DEVATAS 

Brahman  with  attributes  is  the  object  of  adoration  in  the  Gayatri  worship 
already  mentioned,  although  attributeless  Brahman  is  the  goal.  That 
worship,  however,  is  sufficient  and  adequate  only  for  the  sandhya-prayers 1 
said  thrice  a  day.  The  sandhya-prayers  may  be  the  only  and  highest 
form  of  worship  for  him  who,  disregarding  the  dualistic  Brahmanda, 
has  profoundly  understood  the  monistic  truth,  and  lost  all  false  dualistic 
potions  concerning  the  body,  senses,  mind,  and  life.  Although  in  the 
acamana  *  of  sandhya,  there  is  something  of  self-resignation  which  belong 
to  the  province  of  dualistic  perception,  yet  that  is  intended  only  for  the 
casting  off  of  sin.  For  this  reason,  this  part  may  be  called  self-purification 
instead  of  self-resignation.  However  that  may  be,  the  loving  heart  of 
a  devotee  cannot  rest  satisfied  with  this  part  only.  The  sandhya  cannot 
gratify  the  heart’s  desire  of  Him  whose  earnest  wish  is  to  place  everything 
which  he  can  call  his  own  at  Her  feet,  and  to  be  taken  as  a  slave  in  return 
for  Her  love. 

From  the  Gayatri  I  learn  that  Mahasakti,  under  the  aspects  of  Brahma, 
Visnu,  and  MaheSvara,  is  the  creatrix,  preservatrix,  and  destructrix  accord¬ 
ing  to  differences  which  exist  between  the  three  gupas  of  sattva,  rajas, 
and  tamas.  But  this  amount  of  understanding  does  not  satisfy  the  mind 
and  heart.  Why  this  play  of  Hers?  What  is  the  process  by  which  this 
play  is  regulated  ?  What  was  Her  true  aspect  *  before  this  play,  and  what 
will  Her  aspect  be  after  it?  Being  Herself  full  of  play,4  how  is  She  detached 
from  it?  How  can  Jiva,  who  is  but  a  mere  puppet,  pass  beyond  this  play 
and  enter  into  Her  real  Self?  A  Jiva’s  heart  is  naturally  anxious  to  have 
the  answer  to  these  and  other  questions. 

Secondly,  suppose  that  I  understand  from  the  Gayatri  as  much  as 
I  can  of  these  matters.5  I  then  understand  that  She  is  pure  Brahman 
whose  substance  is  existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss.  But  what  do  I 
gain  by  that?  I  am  an  impure,  unconscious •  Jiva.  I  hear  that  the  sea 


1  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 

1 A  portion  of  the  sandhya  ritual  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&tra). 

*  Svarupa.  4  Lilamayi.  8  Tattvas. 

4  Jada— that  is  here,  spiritually  unconscious. 


342 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


contains  innumerable  gems.  But  what  is  that  to  me?  The  gems  of  the 
sea  are  in  the  sea,  and  my  poverty  is  in  me.  So  long  as  I  do  not  secure 
those  gems  in  my  own  hand,  it  will  not  end  my  miseries  to  hear  or  know 
of  them.  So  long  as  I  do  not  sec  Her  with  my  eyes  and  bless  myself  by 
holding  Her  to  my  breast,  there  is  no  peace  for  me.  I  am  therefore  in 
want  of  a  means  whereby  I  can  secure  Her.  I  shall  do  so  the  day  on 
which  my  egoism  will  be  destroyed  by  the  intense  fire 1  of  spiritual  knowl¬ 
edge.  But  my  gross  intellect,  mind,  and  life  are  not  satisfied  with  such 
a  subde  form  of  attainment.  I  am  a  JIva  with  ten  senses,  and  possessed 
of  mind  and  life,  and  these  things  form  the  only  hope  and  support  of  my 
egoism.  I  want  a  suitable  way  of  obtaining  Her  without  losing  these 
things.  Atma  has  never  any  happiness  or  sorrow. 

My  samsara  exists  in  order  to  make  the  mind  happy.  If  I  cannot 
make  that  mind  happy,  if  I  am  only  to  meet  Her  after  the  mind  is  dead,, 
then  it  is  the  same  to  me  whether  I  meet  Her  at  all  or  not.  And  if  the 
mind  is  to  die,  with  whom  will  that  meeting  take  place  ?  2  This,  too,  is  a 
serious  problem.  For  this  reason  I  want  Her  whom  my  mind  wants.* 
This  is  no  doubt  a  very  great  expectation.  But  what  can  1  do?  I  shall 
not  be  able  to  make  my  mind  suited  to  Her,  so  that  She  must  make  Herself 
suited  to  my  mind,  for  She  or  He  is  possessed  of  all  Saktis.  Mind  is  not 
able  to  suit  itself  to  Her,  for  She  is  beyond  the  reach  of  mind— that  is  to 
say,  mind  cannot  see  Her  or  become  suited  to  Her  by  its  own  power. 
But  She  dwells  in  everything  and  sees  everything,  so  that  it  is  neither 
impossible  nor  astonishing  for  Her  to  become  suited  to  the  mind  as  She 
sees  it.  For  my  mind  is  happy  if  it  can  form  a  samsara  with  the  senses. 
Its  concern  is  with  happiness,  and  it  is  as  much  ready  to  form  a  samsara 
with  persons  who  are  in  no  way  connected  with  it,  provided  it  can  be  happy 
with  them,  as  it  is  to  forsake  father,  mother,  wife,  and  son,  if  it  docs  not 
get  happiness  from  them.  If,  therefore,  it  obtains  happiness, — that  is 
to  say,  if  the  senses  which  are  its  limbs  obtain  objects  upon  which  they 
can  function;  if  the  eye  can  sec  Her;  if  the  car  can  hear  Her  words;  if  the 
skin  can  touch  Her;  if  in  this  manner  and  in  every  way  She  can  provide 
happiness  to  the  mind,  the  life,  the  body,  and  the  senses ;  if  by  withdraw¬ 
ing  all  the  functions  of  the  senses  to  the  mind  *  She  can  immerse  them  in 
the  sea  of  joy  along  with  the  mind — then  the  mind  may  forsake  father,, 
mother,  wife,  son,  and  others,  and  live  as  in  a  samsara  with  Her. 


*  Tejas. 

*  Cf.  the  saying:  “  I  do  not  want  to  be  sugar,  but  to  eat  it.” 

*  That  is,  withdraw  the  senses  from  external  objects  and  concentrate  them 
in  the  mind,  in  order  that  supcrscnsual  perception  may  be  had  of  Her.  The 
senses  are  the  effects  of  the  mind,  and  can  be  withdrawn  into  it  by  yoga,  when 
the  JIva  acquires  the  power  of  spiritual  perception. 


WORSHIP  OF  THE  FIVE  DEVATAS 


343 


If  it  is  happy,  why  should  it  consider  as  to  who  is  its  own,  and  who 
is  not  its  own  ?  To  judge  of  happiness  by  relationship  is  not  a  sure  mode 
of  judgment.  On  the  contrary,  relationship  should  be  judged  by  happiness. 
It  is  because  happiness  is  concerned  that  She,  who  has  no  connection  with 
even  seven  generations  above  me,  is  my  (better)  half.  This  is  an  instance 
of  a  person’s  happiness  in  the  samsara.  If  the  mind  in  the  samsara  loves 
to  be  occupied  with  the  samsara,  then  why  not  form  that  samsara  with 
Her?  She  then  becomes  father,  mother,  wife,  son,  friend,  and  companion. 
Devotion,  respect,  affection,  and  love,  whatever  I  have  to  bestow,  I  bestow 
on  Her.  If  I  can  be  happy  by  feeding,  clothing,  and  decking  Her,  just 
as  one  is  said  to  be  happy  in  this  samsara  by  feeding,  clothing,  and  decking 
one’s  children;  if  the  samsara  can  be  kept  up  with  Her  in  this  manner, 
then  it  will  not  be  long  before  the  mind  is  made  suited  to  Her — that  is, 
just  as  She  would  have  it  to  be.1 

But  in  order  thus  to  make  my  mind  suited  to  Her,  it  is  necessary 
that  She  should  first  be  suited  to  my  mind.  It  will  not  do  for  Her  to  remain 
•  sitting  in  the  orb  of  Sfirya  *  or  the  sphere  of  Agni,1  but  She  must  come  and 
sit  in  the  circle  4  of  my  heart.  I  shall  not  be  able  to  contemplate  different 
forms  of  Her  at  different  times — viz-,  three  forms*  in  three  sandhySs. 
She  must  remain  for  ever  fixed  in  one  form,  whether  standing,  sitting, 
or  in  any  other  posture.  It  will  not  do  that  I  shall  meet  Her  in  three 
sandhyas  during  daytime,  but  never  during  the  night.  Like  the  flow 
of  the  Ganges  towards  the  sea,  the  flow  of  my  sight  towards  Her  will  be 
uninterrupted.  Whatever  else  may  cross  my  sight,  it  will  turn  only  to¬ 
wards  Her. 

Unless  I  desire,  all  distinctions  of  time,  space,  and  person  will  cease 
to  exist.  In  whatever  state,  under  whatever  circumstances,  I  may  live, 
in  happiness  or  in  sorrow,  in  prosperity  or  in  adversity,  my  life  will  encircle 
Her  beauteous  feet.  If,  answering  these  expectations  of  mine,  You  first 
make  yourself  suited  to  my  mind,  then  I  shall  make  myself  suited  to  Your 
mind.  It  is  in  order  to  fulfil  these  loving  expectations  of  the  Sadhaka, 
that  She  who  is  perfect  and  eternal  Brahman  has  provided  for  Tantrik 
initiation  in  addition  to  initiation  in  the  Gayatri.  And  Her  mercy  appears 
all  the  more  from  the  fact  that  even  those  who  have  no  competency  *  for 
initiation  in  the  Gayatri  have  been  made  eligible  by  Her  for  Tantrik 
initiation.  All  persons,  and  whether  men  or  women,  are  equally  eligible 

1  If  the  sadhaka’a  samsara  consists  of  Her  alone — that  is  to  say,  if  he  is 
occupied  with  nothing  but  Her — then  the  frame  of  his  mind  will  easily  become 
what  She  likes,  so  that  he  may  be  in  a  position  to  enjoy  Her  company 
constantly. 

*  The  sun.  *  Fire.  4  Mandaia. 

*  Rupa;  an  allusion  to  the  three  dhy&nas  of  the  sandhya. 

*  Adhikara. 


344 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


for  it.  This  Door  of  liberation  is  ever  free  to  the  access  of  even  the  basest 
and  lowest  bora  Can<jala.1 

We  do  not  observe  distinction  of  caste  when  stepping  into  a  ferry 
boat;  no  distinction  is  made  between  sinful  and  virtuous  men  as  regards 
bathing  in  the  Ganges;  and  no  distinction  exists  between  unmoving  objects, 
moving  objects,  insects,  and  the  like  dying  in  the  region  of  Benares  in 
respect  of  their  right  to  Nirvana  liberation.  In  the  same  way  in  the  boat 
in  which  we  cross  the  sea  of  existence,  in  the  sacred  water  of  the  Ganges 
of  knowledge,  and  in  the  Benares  of  Tantrik  initiation  extending  over 
the  whole  Brahmand3;  no  bar  is  set  against  the  initiation  of  any.  In 
short,  just  as  fire  will  appropriate  anything  to  itself,  so  the  Tantra  will 
appropriate  anyone  to  the  Brahman.  The  Tantrik  form  of  initiation 
is  therefore  an  unfailing  means,  having  no  equal,  for  the  liberation  of  the 
three  worlds. 

Why  not,  then,  worship  in  this  manner  any  one  of  the  three  Puru?a 
aspects  and  the  three  Sakti  aspects  specified  in  the  Gayatri-tattva?  There 
is  no  fear  of  such  an  objection  here ;  for  Brahma,  Vispu,  Siva,  Sakti,  and ' 
Surya,  are  the  five  Devatas  mentioned  in  the  GSyatri.  Of  these  the  worship 
of  Brahma,  in  the  Tantrik  form,  has  been  abolished  by  Devafxi  Narada’s 
curse,  and  in  the  place  of  BrahmS  the  worship  of  GaneSa,  who  is  an  ava- 
tSra  of  Visnu,  has  been  established;  in  fact,  the  worship  of  none  of  these 
five  Devatas  is  outside  the  scope  of  the  Gayatri-tattva.  It  is,  therefore, 
superfluous  to  say  that  it  is  the  Devatas  of  worship  according  to  the  Gayatri- 
tattva  who  are  also  objects  of  worship  according  to  the  Tantrik  initiation. 

Moreover,  in  the  Giyatri  Mantra  five  attributive  epithets  have  been 
used — namely,  pervader  of  the  universe,  creator  of  the  world,  object  of 
worship,  playful  *  Deva,  and  director  of  Jlvas’  intelligence. ■  The  Sakti 
qualified  by  these  five  attributes  is  eternally  seated  in  each  one  of  the 
five  Devatas  of  worship.  The  five  aspects 4  are  all  eternal  and  perfect 
Brahman.  The  Sakti  of  will,  the  Sakti  of  action,  and  the  Sakti  of  knowl¬ 
edge  *  are  infinite  and  unlimited  in  each  of  them.  They  arc  all  equally 
powerful  in  creating,  preserving  and  destroying,  for  He  is  five  in  one  and 
one  in  five.  Secondly,  the  aspects  for  worship  in  the  Gayatri-tattva  are 
six,*  while  the  worshipper — that  is,  I  and  my  mind — are  one.  It  is  im¬ 
possible  for  a  Jiva  to  adore  six  aspects  with  equal  love  in  the  same  mind. 
The  love,  which  is  to  sound  constantly  in  the  mind  like  the  note  of  a 


1  One  of  the  lowest  castes. 

*  UlSmaya.  '  See  ante,  and  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 

*  Mfirtis. 

*  Iccha,  Kriya,  and  Jflana  Saktis  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra). 

*  That  is,  three  Purufa  forms — Brahma,  Vijiju,  Maheivara— -an d  three 
Sakti  forms — Brahm&ol,  VaisnavT,  RudrSrri. 


WORSHIP  OF  THE  FIVE  DEVATAS 


345 


tambura,1  will  be  interrupted  if  transferred  from  one  aspect  to  another. 
'Sastra  itself  has  said : 

“  For  one  whose  mind  travels  from  one  state 1 *  to  another,  and  so 
on,  there  is  no  liberation,  for  it  is  impossible  for  such  a  one  to  perform 
single-minded  Sadhana.”  Again:  “From  morning  to  evening,  and  from 
evening  to  morning,  all  that  I  do,  O  Mother  of  the  world,  is  your  worship.” 
Thus,  to  resign  oneself  wholly  day  and  night  to  the  lotus-feet  of  the  supreme 
Devata;  to  be  dependent  on  Her  protection  only  by  maintenance  of  an 
intimate  reladon  with  Her  at  all  times,  whether  in  adversity  or  in  pros¬ 
perity,  awaking  or  sleeping,  in  life  or  in  death;  to  feel  truly  in  the  heart 
and  say,  “  My  mind  knows  nothing  but  Thy  beautiful  feet  ” ;  to  sink  in 
the  untraversable  sea  of  the  thought  *  that  “  I  am  Mother  and  the  Mother 
is  mine  ” — such  a  whole-hearted  love  for  one  cannot  be  formed  in  respect 
of  six  aspects.  I  know  that  She  is  one  in  six;  but  my  mind  cannot  be  two 
instead  of  one  in  the  unbeginning  and  unending  flow  of  time.  How  can 
I  offer  my  one  mind  to  the  feet  of  six  persons  ?  How  can  I  love  six  persons 
*  as  I  love  my  life?  For  this  reason  I  must  accept  some  one  aspect  as  the 
centre  of  the  joy  of  love,  making  it  the  support  of  my  life.  Though  all 
aspects  are  but  really  Her,  yet  the  three  worlds  do  not  possess  another 
aspect  similar  to  that  of  which  the  Mantra  restores  my  life,  of  which  the 
Yantra  is  the  amulet  for  my  safety,  and  of  which  the  Tantra  *  is  the  occu¬ 
pation  of  my  whole  lifetime,  whether  that  aspect  be  dark  blue  like  crushed 
collyrium,4 *  or  fair  like  a  mass  of  heated  gold,6  or  white  like  a  mountain 
of  silver.®  “  With  Thyself  alone,  O  Mother,  can  Thyself  be  compared,” 
and  “  O  Mother,  what  Thou  art  to  me,  Thou  alone  art  that  to  me.” 
The  sweetness  of  Her  beauty  is  not  to  be  judged  by  these  physical  eyes 
of  the  Jiva.  Who  but  She,  who  is  the  only  beauty  in  the  world,  and  who 
is  full  of  love  for  devotees,  can  say  whom  the  eye  of  love  will  consider 
beautiful  ?7  Here  Deva  •  Hanuman,  a  guide  •  for  the  journey  to  the  sea 
of  love,  has  said:  **  Although  from  the  point  of  view  of  spirit  there  is  no 
difference  between  Narayapa,  the  husband  of  Lak§ml,  and  Ramacandra 
the  husband  of  Janaki,  yet  lotus-eyed  Ramacandra  alone  is  my  all." 
That  is  to  say,  although  there  is  no  real  difference  between  the  aspects 
of  Rama  and  Narayapa,  yet  Ramacandra  is  the  full-moon  of  the  sea  of 


1  A  stringed  instrument  used  by  lingers  in  keeping  up  the  note. 

*  Bhava.  *  Cult,  authority. 

1  The  Devi  as  Syama,  Kali,  Tara,  etc. 

*  The  Devi  as  Uma,  Gauri,  Durga,  etc.  4  Siva  is  thus  described. 

7  That  is.  She  determines  for  each  devotee  that  which  he  will  regard  as 

most  beautiful. 

6  Used  honorifically  of  the  monkey  Hanuman,  the  son  of  Pavana. 

*  Guru;  because  of  his  great  devotion  of  Ramacandra. 


346 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


my  love,  and  consequently  there  is  nothing  in  the  three  worlds  so  charm¬ 
ing  to  my  mind,  life,  and  eyes,  as  the  aspect  of  lotus-eyed  Rama,  fair  of 
colour,  like  a  young  blade  of  grass.  Bhagavan,  also,  is  ever  bound  by 
the  tender  ties  of  this  love,  so  dear  to  the  Sadhaka.  We  therefore  read 
in  such  books  as  the  Puranas  that  whenever  that  incarnation  of  devotion, 
the  son  1 *  of  Pavana  *  went  to  Vaikuntha,  Bhagavan,  through  love  for  the 
devotee,  changed  His  usual  aspect  of  Narayana  into  that  of  Rama,  and, 
causing  Mahalaksmi  to  appear  as  the  daughter  of  Janaka,  sat  with  Her 
on  the  same  seat.  This  love  play  of  Brahman  is  fully  displayed  to  a  devotee. 
Bhagavan  has  therefore  said :  3  “  Any  devotee  who  seeketh  to  worship 
with  faith  any  such  aspect,  I  verily  bestow  the  unswerving  faith  of  that 
man.”  He  alone  presides  in  all  appearances,*  He  alone  is  the  seat 
of  all  forms  of  love.  Of  whatever  aspect  a  Sadhaka  may  be  the  worshipper, 
it  is  He  alone,  the  only  desire-gratifying  tree,*  who,  by  the  play  of  the 
sacred  fountain  of  his  love,  can  cool  the  Jiva’s  heart,  scorched  by  the  three¬ 
fold  heat.®  If  He  be  attained  there  is  no  need  for  the  protection  of  another. 
The  Sadhaka  has  therefore  loudly  said,  with  arms  thrown  up  in  joy:  “  I 
do  not  wish  to  look  at  another.  I  do  not  strive  for  another.  I  do  not 
remember  another.  I  do  not  want  to  seek  the  protection  of  another 
My  only  prayer  is  that  I  may  never  forget  in  my  heart  the  fair  form  of 
Tripurasundari.”  7 8 

“  Bhagavan  Mahc&vara,  crowned  with  the  crescent  moon,  is  my 
refuge.  MahcSvari,  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Mountains,  is  my  refuge. 
I  again  say  that  they  both  form  ray  only  refuge.  I  will  not  seek  the  shelt¬ 
er  of  any  other  Devata.” 

“  I  do  not  believe  in  any  Deva  whose  throat  is  not  marked  with  the 
blue  stain  caused  by  the  drinking  of  poison,*  whose  body  is  not  decked 
with  ornaments  of  serpents;  whose  hand  docs  not  hold  a  pot  made  of  a 
skull,  who  has  not  a  shining  eye  on  his  forehead,  whose  forehead  is  not 
adorned  with  the  crescent  moon,  and  whose  left  side  is  unoccupied  by 
his  better  half.”  *  By  the  words  “  I  do  not  believe  ”  is  not  meant  that 
I  do  not  admit  the  existence  of  any  other  Deva,  or  that  1  have  no  love  or 
respect  for  Him.  What  is  meant  is  that  there  is  no  necessity  for  me  to 

1  Hanuman.  1  Deva  of  the  Wind. 

1  Bhagavadgita,  chap,  vii,  Sloka  21.  4 * *  Murti. 

*  Kalpataru.  ®  Tapatraya,  or  threefold  miseries  (see  ante). 

1  The  Devi,  so  called,  according  to  the  KalikS  Purana,  because  She  is 

everywhere  triple,  and,  according  to  the  Tripuramava,  because  She  dwells  in 

the  three  Naqia  (see  Bhaskararaya,  Comm.  LalitS,  verse  125,  and  Benedictory 

Sloka). 

8  At  the  churning  of  the  ocean  (Siva  NIlakap{ha). 

•  Male  and  female  form  one  complete  whole,  of  which  the  male  is  the  right 
side,  and  the  female  the  left  and  better  half. 


WORSHIP  OF  THE  FIVE  DEVATAS 


3*7 

believe  in  any  other  Deva  for  the  purpose  of  worship,  for  I  am  ever  gratified 
with  Him  whom  I  have  got.  Just  as  a  chaste  woman1  may  love  her 
husband  only  with  a  pure  attachment  in  which  none  else  has  a  share, 
so  a  Sadhaka  may  bestow  his  love  for  the  Lord  of  the  world  on  one  Person 
only.  Initiation  in  the  Mantra  of  one  Dcvata  is  necessary  in  order  that 
the  mind  and  Atma  (spirit)  may  have  this  right,  and  this  initiation  is 
the  Tantrik  initiation. 

A  system  of  fivefold  initiation  is  found  to  prevail  in  the  families  of 
many  accomplished  Sadhakas.  Many  people  express  great  astonish¬ 
ment  at  this  form  of  initiation;  for  it  is  an  extremely  troublesome  and 
almost  useless  affair  to  be  inidated  in  the  Mantras  of  the  five  Devatas, 
Siva,  Sakti,  Surya,  Visnu,  and  Gajicia,  and  to  attempt  to  worship  them 
all  with  equal  devotion.  It  is  no  doubt  so  if  all  of  them  have  to  be  worship¬ 
ped  with  equal  devotion.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  not  a  question  of 
equal  worship.  The  worship  of  every  worshipper  is  fivefold;  for  in  the 
centre  of  the  circle  is  the  worshipper’s  own  Istadevata,*  and  on  each  of 
His  four  sides  the  four  other  Devatas  preside.  The  only  peculiarity, 
in  this  respect,  of  the  fivefold  initiation  is  that  in  this  form  of  initiation 
a  person  takes  from  the  mouth  of  his  Guru  the  Mantras  of  all  the  five 
Devatas,  while  in  other  forms  of  initiation  Mantras  of  only  one  Devati 
are  thus  taken.  Initiation  in  any  one  Mantra  entitles  a  S&dhaka  to  all 
Mantras.  Although  want  of  initiation  in  the  Mantras  of  all  five  Devatas 
in  no  way  interferes  with  this  right,  yet  the  speciality  of  initiation  by  a 
Guru  in  all  the  Mantras  is  that  this  right  is  thereby  made  to  bear  fruit 
more  speedily. 

Secondly,  in  their  anxiety  for  the  welfare  of  their  descendants,  accom¬ 
plished  and  non-discriminating*  Sadhakas,  crest-gems  of  Kula,4  under¬ 
stood  it  to  be  great  imprudence  to  allow  of  the  possibility  of  their  families 
being  ruined  through  the  great  sin  of  bearing  ill-feeling  towards  any  Deva. 
They  therefore  provided  against  this  contingency  by  prescribing  initiation 
in  the  Mantras  of  all  the  five  Devatas,  so  that  no  one  might  think  that 
because  he  was  a  Sakta,  Visnu  was  not  a  Dcvata  for  his  worship,  and  that 
consequently  it  was  not  necessary  for  him  to  bear  respect,  and  devotion 
for  Vi?nu;  or  that  because  he  was  a  Vaisnava,  Sakti  was  not  a  Dcvata 
for  his  worship,  and  consequently  it  was  useless  for  him  to  worship  Sakti. 


1  SatJ. 

*  The  Dcvata  selected  by  the  Sadhaka  for  his  special  worship. 

*  That  is,  between  one  Dcvata  and  another  in  the  knowledge  that  all  are 

one. 


1  T&ntrik  doctrine. 


348 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


TAntrik  Initiation 

-The  moment  a  Brihmana  is  initiated  in  the  Gayatri  Mantra,  he 
becomes  fundamentally  entitled  to  the  five  forms  of  worship.  The  spe¬ 
ciality  of  Tantrik  initiation  is  that  it  matures  this  title  to  the  point  of 
bearing  fruit.1  Tantrik  initiation  indicates  the  sprouting  state  of  that,* 
of  which  the  seed  is  sown  by  initiation  in  the  Gayatri.  Bhagavin  Sri 
Kjsna  has  therefore  said  to  Uddhava,  the  crcst-gem  of  devotees,  in  the 
Srimad  Bhagavata: 1 

“  In  all  parvas 4  during  the  year  one  should  perform  my  YStra  *  and 
Bali,  and  should  take  both  Tantrik  and  Vaidik  initiation,  and  observe 
Vrata  7  in  my  name.” 

Again:  “  My  worship  is  of  three  kinds — namely,  Vaidik,  Tantrik, 
and  mixed  (Pauranik).  I  should,  therefore,  be  worshipped  according  to 
the  rules  prescribed  in  the  three  Sastras  of  Veda,  Tantra,  and  Purana.” 

In  the  Tantra  Sastra,  Bhagavan  Mahesvara  also  has  laid  down  the 
same  rule,  drawing,  however,  a  distinction  between  the  ages. 

In  the  Kubjika  Tantra  it  is  said:  “In  the  three  Yugas  of  Satya, 
Treta,  and  Dvapara,  Devas  should  be  worshipped  according  to  rules 
prescribed  in  Sruti  and  Smrti.  In  the  Kali  Yuga  Devas  should  be  wor¬ 
shipped  only  according  to  rules  prescribed  in  the  Tantra.  In  the  Kali 
Yuga,  Devas  arc  not  pleased  with  worship  performed  according  to  rules 
laid  down  in  any  other  Sastra.”  • 

In  another  Tantra  •  this  has  been  more  clearly  stated. 

“Performance  of  Dharma1®  should  follow  the  Vaidik  method  in  the 
Satya  Yuga,  the  method  of  Smrti  in  the  Treta  Yuga,  the  Pauranik  method 
in  the  Dvapara  Yuga,  and  the  Tantrik  method  in  the  Kali  Yuga.” 

The  following  passage  occurs  in  the  Puraicarapa  Rasollasa:  “  In 
the  Kali  Yuga,  in  Bharatavar$a,u  the  Dhyanas 11  and  Mantras  prescribed 
in  Tantra  are  proper.  O  Devi  of  restless  glances,  O  fair-faced  lady,  the 
Dhy5nas  and  Mantras  prescribed  in  the  Vedas,  the  Smrtis,  and  the  Pura- 
nas  are  never  proper  in  Bharatavar£a  in  the  Kali  Yuga.” 


1  A  person  may  be  qualified  to  do  a  thing,  but  it  does  not  follow  that 
without  further  aid  he  can  accomplish  it;  and  this  aid  the  Tantrik  initiation 
supplies. 

*  Tattva.  *  Eleventh  Skandha. 

*  Specified  occasions  for  religious  observances. 

*  Festivals  such  as  Dolyatra,  Rathayatra,  etc. 

*  Worship.  7  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 

*  Not  stated,  but  a  similar  passage  occurs  in  the  Kulfrpava  Tantra. 

10  Religious  rites.  11  India. 

u  Formulae  of  meditation  (sec  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra). 


WORSHIP  OF  THE  FIVE  DEVATAS 


349 

In  the  MahanirvSpa  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  My  beloved!  In  the  Kali 
Yuga  there  is  no  other  path  but  that  path  prescribed  in  Agama.1  O 
spouse  of  Siva,  it  has  already  been  stated  by  me  in  Sruti ,  Smrti,  Purana, 
etc.,  that  in  the  Kali  Yuga  the  wise  should  worship  Devas  according  to 
the  rules  prescribed  in  Agama.”  1 

“  In  the  Kali  Yuga  the  Mantras  prescribed  in  Tantra  are  naturally 
efficacious,*  speedily  bear  fruit,  and  are  proper  in  Japa,  Yajfia,*  and  all 
other  rites.  The  Mantras  of  the  Veda  were  fruitful  in  Satya  and  other 
Yugas.  In  the  Kali  Yuga  they  are  as  impotent  as  vcnomless  snakes, 
and  are,  as  it  were,  dead.  Just  as  the  senses  of  figures  pictured  on  a  wall 
are  without  action,  so  in  the  Kali  Yuga  Mantras  other  than  those  pres¬ 
cribed  in  Tantra  are  unable  to  effect  any  result.” 

In  the  Dattatrcya  Yamala  we  read:  “Just  as  a  person  without  a 
guardian  has  no  protection  in  the  world,  so  a  person  without  initiation 
has  no  protection,  whether  in  this  world  or  the  next.” 

In  the  Gautamiya  Tantra  it  is  said:  “Just  as  the  sons  of  the  twice- 
born  4  who  have  not  received  the  sacred  thread  have  no  right  to  study  the 
Veda  and  so  forth,  but  acquire  such  right  by  investiture  with  the  sacred 
thread,  so  the  uninitiated  twice-born  have  no  right  to  recite  4  Mantras, 
worship  Devas,  and  so  forth,  but  acquire  such  right  by  initiation.  For 
this  reason,  after  investiture  with  the  sacred  thread,  the  twice-born  should 
again  purify  themselves  according  to  the  &astra  revealed  by  Siva.”  • 

The  following  is  from  the  Kularnava  Tantra:  “  Tapasya,®  observance 
of  rules;7  observance  of  Vrata,4  pilgrimage  to  Tlrthas,®  bodily  restraint 
and  other  acts,  are  ineffectual  if  performed  by  one  who  is  uninitiated.  One 
should,  therefore,  by  all  means  be  initiated  by  a  Guru.” 

In  the  Agama  Sandarbha  it  is  said:  “To  take  the  Gayatri  is  the 
first  initiation  for  the  awakening  of  a  knowledge  of  the  Atma.” 

For  this  reason  worship  of  the  Gayatri  should  come  first  and  worship 
of  another  (Istadevata)  according  to  Tantrik  initiation  should  follow. 
This  is  the  proper  Tattva  •  for  the  Br&hmai?a,  K$attriya,  and  VaiSya  castes 
— that  is  to  say,  after  first  taking  initiation  in  the  Gayatri  by  the  Samskara 10 
of  Upanayana,u  one  should  be  initiated  according  to  Tantra  in  the  Mantra 
of  one’s  Istadevata.  For  Sudras,  for  whom  there  is  no  Samskara  of 
Upanayana,  the  Tantrik  initiation  alone  is  prescribed.  In  the  Kali 
Yuga  initiation  in  the  Gayatri,  though  originally  Vaidik,  is  acceptable 
only  in  the  form  prescribed  in  the  Tantra  Jsastra. 

1  The  Tantra.  *  Siddha. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra.  4  Members  of  the  three  superior  castes. 

*  Japa.  •  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra.  7  Niyama. 

8  Holy  shrines.  •  Principle,  doctrine,  line  of  work. 

10  “  Sacrament  ”  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra). 

u  Putting  on  of  the  sacred  thread. 


-350 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


The  Mahanirvana  Tantra  says:  “  This  Savitri,1 II  who  is  Brahman, 
is  as  much  Tantrik  as  Vaidik — that  is  to  say,  is  proper  both  in  Vaidik 
and  Tantrik  rites.  O  Devi!  for  this  reason,  when  the  Kali  age  is  in  strength, 
the  twice-born  are  entitled  to  perform  daily  worship  with  the  Gayatrl 
Mantra  alone  of  all  Vaidik  Mantras.  But  in  the  Kali  age  the  GSyatri 
Mantra  should  be  preceded  by  the  Pranava 1  in  the  case  of  Brahmanas ; 
by  the  Lakgmi-bija  *  in  the  case  of  Ksattriyas;  and  by  the  Sarasvatl-bija  * 
in  the  case  of  VaiSyas.” 

Besides  this,  the  Vaidik  Mantras  which  have  been  prescribed  in  Tantrik 
rites,  such  as  the  ten  Samskaras  and  the  like,  have,  in  spite  of  their  Vaidik 
origin,  become  Tantrik  owing  to  their  having  been  repeated  by  MaheSvara 
and  MahcSvari  in  connection  with  the  Tantrik  Method.  For  this  reason, 
rites  performed  with  those  Mantras  in  the  Kali  Yuga  will  not  be  fruitless. 

“  O  Devi,  without  Samskaras  *  the  body  is  not  purified,  and  therefore 
without  them  a  person  is  not  entided  to  perform  rites  relating  to  Devas 
.and  Pitrs.’  Members  of  the  Brahmana,  and  other  castes  who  dcsirc 
their  welfare  in  this  and  the  next  world,  should,  therefore,  by  all  means, 
and  with  care,  receive  the  Samskaras  specified  for  their  respective  castes. 
Garbhadhana,  Pumsavana,  SImantonnayana,  Jatakarma,  Namakarana, 
Ni?kramana,  AnnapraSana,  Chudakarana,  Upanayana,  and  Vivaha’ — 
these  arc  the  ten  Samskaras  prescribed  in  the  Sastra  for  Brahmanas, 
K$attriyas,  and  Vaityas.  Sudras  and  people  other  than  §udras — that 
is  to  say,  the  lowest  classes  of  Sudras — have  no  Upanayana ;  so  that  they 
have  only  nine  Samskaras,  the  twice-born  castes  only  having  the  full  ten 
Samskaras.  O  fair  Lady!  these  ten  Samskaras  and  all  other  rites,  daily, 
incidental,  or  done  to  gain  some  reward,’  should  be  performed  according 
to  the  mode  laid  down  by  Sarobhu  ’—that  is  to  say,  according  to  the 
Tantrik  method. 

“  My  beloved,  as  Brahma,  the  revealer  of  the  Vedas,  I  have  already 
related  the  rules  which  should  be  followed  in  different  rites.  Mantras  also 
have  been  indicated  according  to  different  castes,  such  as  Brahmana  and 
others,  for  all  the  Samskaras  and  other  rites.  O  Kalika,1’  in  the  Satya, 
Treta,  and  Dvapara  ages,*1  in  those  rites  the  Pranava u  should  precede 
those  Mantras.  O  Parameh/ari,  in  the  Kali  age  men  should  perform  those 


1  Gayatrl  Mantra,  as  to  which  see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 
a  That  is,  “  Om  *  That  is,  “  firing  ”.  4  That  is,  “  Aing  ”, 

6  Sacraments  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdslra). 

•  The  forefathers  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdslra). 

I  For  a  description  of  these  various  “  sacraments,”  or  Samskaras  see 
Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra.  ’  Siva.  l’  The  Dew. 

II  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra.  11  That  is,  “  Om  ”, 


WORSHIP  OF  THE  FIVE  DEVATAS 


351 


rites,  using  the  Mayabija1  at  the  commencement  of  those  Mantras  by  the 
command  of  Safikara8 — that  is  to  say,  according  to  the  Tantra  Sastra. 
In  Nigama,  Agama,8  the  Tantras  (Gautama,  SanatkumSra,  etc.),  the 
Vedas,  and  the  Samhitas,*  I  have  laid  down  all  Mantras.  But  in  differ¬ 
ent  ages  they  should  be  applied  in  different  ways.  O  Mahamaya,  I  shall 
next  speak  of  Garbhadhana  and  other  rites.  Of  those,  here  first  of  all 
of  the  purification  of  the  menses,4  and  next,  in  their  order,  of  all  the  other 
rites.” 

From  the  above  Sadhakas  will  learn  that  initiation  in  the  Gayatri, 
although  originally  Vaidik,  is  Tantrik  in  the  Kali  age. 

Again:  “  In  the  Kali  age  men  should  by  all  means  purify  their  Atma 
by  practice  of  truth,  and  perform  all  the  duties  prescribed  for  their  res¬ 
pective  castes  according  to  the  mode  prescribed  by  Myself — that  is  to  say, 
according  to  the  Tantra  Sastra.  Dik$a,*  Puja,8  Japa,  Homa,  PuraS- 
carana,7  Tarpana,®  Vrata,7  (Upanayana),  Vivaha,  Pumsavana,  STman- 
tonnayana,  Jatakarma,  Namakarana,  Cudakarana,®  Antycsthikriya,10 
.  Sraddha  of  forefathers  (Pitrs),  should  all  be  performed  according  to  the 
Tantra  Sastra.  Sraddha  7  in  Tirthas,  Vfsotsarga,11  Saradiya  Utsava,1* 
Yatra,1*  Grhapravcfia,14  the  putting  on  of  new  clothes  and  the  like,  con¬ 
secration18  ol’  tanks,  wells,  and  the  like;  rites  to  be  performed  on  particular 
Tithis,18  such  as  Pratipada,17  beginning  the  construction  of  a  house,  the 
consecration  of  a  house,  the  establishment  of  images  of  Devatas,  duties 
to  be  performed  by  day  or  night  on  specific  occasions  18  in  particular  seasons 
or  months,  or  every  year,  and  all  other  acts  daily  or  incidental  to  be  done 
or  not  done,  should  be  governed  by  the  rules  prescribed  by  me.  If  through 
delusion  or  wickedness,  any  Jlva  fails  to  perform  these  acts  according  to 
Tantrik  rules,  he  will  be  deprived  of  the  fruits  of  all  religious  performances 
done  by  him,  and  will  in  the  next  world  be  bom  as  a  worm  in  dung.  O 
MaheSvari,  should  anyone  in  the  Kali  Yuga  forsake  my  cult 18  and  perform 


1  That  is,  “  Hring  ”.  *  Siva. 

•  See  Introduction,  ante. 

4  Rtusamskara,  which  precedes  Garbhadhana  Samskara.  8  Initiation. 

•  External  worship,  consisting  of  the  rites  beginning  with  Avaranapuja, 
and  ending  with  the  worship  of  the  principal  Deity. 

7  See  Introduction,  ante.  8  Offering,  oblations. 

•  These  are  various  Samskaras,  or  “  Sacraments  ”,  described  in  Introduction 

to  Tantra  S&stra.  10  Funeral  rite.  11  Offering  of  bulls  in  Sraddhas. 

“  The  autumnal  festival,  Durga  Puja. 

18  The  commencement  of  journey. 

18  The  first  entry  into  a  house. 

18  Pratistha.  18  Lunar  days. 

17  The  first  day  after  the  new  moon  or  the  full  moon. 

18  Parva.  18  Mata. 


352 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


any  rite  according  to  another  Sastra,  that  rite  will  bear  for  him  fruit  con¬ 
trary  to  that  which  he  desires.  In  the  Kali  age  initiation  in  a  cult 
opposed  to  mine  (prescribed  in  a  Sastra  other  than  Tantra)  will  prove  to 
be  the  destruction  of  the  Sadhaka’s  life.  Puja  performed  by  him  will  be 
fruitless,  Homa  performed  by  him  will  be  as  the  pouring  of  Ghee  into 
ashes.1  He  will  incur  the  anger  of  Devas,  and  will  be  in  danger  at  every 
step.  O  Ambika,  when  the  Kali  age  is  ripe,  should  anyone  who  knows 
the  command  of  the  Sastra  issued  from  my  mouth,  perform  any  rite  accord¬ 
ing  to  another  Sastra,  such  a  one  will  be  guilty  of  a  great  sin.  And  in 
particular,  if  anyone  should  perform  the  sacred  thread  ceremony,'  or 
marriage,  according  to  other  methods  than  those  prescribed  by  me,  that 
man  will  remain  in  a  terrible  hell  so  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  endure. 
The  performance  of  Upanayana  according  to  rules  laid  down  by  any 
other  Sastra  will  be  equivalent  to  the  sin  of  killing  a  Brahmapa.*  And  the 
boy  who  in  such  case  wears  the  sacred  thread  will  be  fallen  4  and  more 
degraded  than  a  Candida.4  The  thread,  too,  worn  by  him  round  his  neck 
will  be  without  virtue.*  A  wife  married  according  to  the  rites  of  another 
Sastra  will  not  be  a  legitimate  wife,  according  to  Dharma.  O  Devi, 
leader  in  Kula,  the  man  who  marries  her  will  sin.  By  intercourse  with 
her  he  will  daily  commit  the  sin  of  having  intercourse  with  a  prostitute. 
Devas  and  the  Pitrs  will  not  accept  food  and  water  from  his  hand.  For 
the  food  offered  by  him  is  like  excrement,  and  the  water  offered  by  him 
is  like  pus.  The  child  bom  of  that  man  and  woman  will  be  a  bastard,7 
excluded  from  all  religious  acts,*  and  deprived  of  the  right  to  perform  all 
rites  *  relating  to  Devas  and  Pitrs,  and  to  be  a  follower  of  Kula.  Should 
the  image  of  a  Dcvata  be  established  by  a  method  other  than  that  ordained 
by  Sambhu,  then  such  Dcvata  will  never  appear  in  such  image.  The 
establishment  of  that  image  will,  therefore,  be  useless  as  respects  the  next 
world,  and  will  simply  spell  trouble  and  waste  of  money  in  this.  Should 
anyone  perform  a  Sriddha  according  to  a  method  other  than  that  prescribed 
in  Tantra,  then  that  Sraddha  will  be  useless,  and  the  person  so  performing 
it  will  go  to  hell  with  all  his  forefathers.  Water  offered  by  him  will  be 
like  blood,  and  pintfa 10  offered  by  him  will  be  like  excrement.  For  this 
reason,  man  should  by  all  means  seek  the  shelter  of  the  path  prescribed 
by  Sankara.  O  Devi,  what  more  need  I  say?  Truly,  truly,  I  say,  any 


1  It  should  be  poured  into  fire.  *  Upanayana. 

*  One  of  the  six  great  sins.  Upanayana  is  investiture  with  the  sacred 

thread.  4  Vratya.  •  One  of  the  lowest  castes. 

*  That  is,  it  will  be  a  mere  common  piece  of  thread. 

7  Kanina:  child  bom  of  an  unmarried  woman. 

8  Dharma.  *  Tintrik  rites. 

10  Balls  of  food  offered  in  Sr&ddha  to  the  Pitfi. 


WORSHIP  OF  THE  FIVE  DEVATAS 


35S 


act  performed  according  to  any  other  method  than  that  prescribed  by 
Sambhu  will  prove  of  no  avail.  Not  to  speak  of  religious  merit  to  be 
acquired  in  future,  even  that  which  has  been  acquired  in  the  past  will  be 
destroyed.  There  is  no  escape  from  hell  for  one  who  follows  not  the 
practices  ordained  by  Sambhu.  O  MaheSvari,  it  is  by  the  performance 
of  daily  and  incidental  religious  acts  according  to  the  path  described  by 
me  that  a  person  performs  your  Sadhana.  Of  these,  worship  with  your 
Mantra,  Yantra,  etc.,  form  special  Sadhana.  I  shall  now  speak  of  the 
great  remedy  for  the  disease  brought  about  by  the  Kali  age.  Do  Thou 
listen  to  it.” 

Loss  of  Tantras  and  Treatises  on  this  Scripture 

From  these  commands  of  Bhagavan,  who  is  the  seat  of  the  welfare  of 
the  three  worlds,  Sadhakas  will  also  surmise  what  irremediable  loss  has 
been  caused  to  the  Aryan  race  through  want  of  knowledge  of,  and  practice 
•according  to,  the  Tantra  Sastra.  A  large  number  of  treatises  on  the 
Tantra  Sastra  are  required  for  the  proper  performance  of  these  religious 
rites  and  duties,  and  it  is  inevitable  that  there  should  be  a  longing  in  the 
hearts  of  Sadhakas  to  collect  such  treatises  for  the  purpose  of  meeting 
this  requirement. 

What,  however,  is  lamentable  in  this  respect,  is  that  the  store  of 
medicines  has  been  burnt  before  the  appearance  of  the  disease.  The 
mountain-heap  of  religious  treatises  has  been  almost  consumed  at  the  very 
beginning  of  the  Kali  age  in  the  powerful  destructive  fire  of  religious 
revolution.  Later  on  in  this  book  we  shall  not  have  the  opportunity  to 
mention  the  names  of  the  treatises  of  which  we  have  information  from 
original  books  and  compilations  on  Tantra,  and  which  formed  a  part  of 
the  mass  of  treatises  which  has  now  been  almost  destroyed.  For  this  reason, 
before  we  proceed  to  deal  with  the  subject  of  Mantra-tattva,1  wc  shall  state 
here,  for  the  information  of  Sadhakas  in  connection  with  the  present 
subject,  the  names  of  a  few  such  treatises.  From  these  they  will  be  able 
to  see  that  when  compared  with  the  mass  of  other  treatises  on  Sastra,8 
they  form  such  an  insignificant  mass  that  they  are  lost  in  the  vast  womb 
of  the  untraversablc  sea  of  Tantra  so  full  of  deep  truths. 

Kallvilasa  Mayatantra  Malinivijaya 

KamkalamalinI  Matrkabheda  Mahanlla 

MuijqUunala  Matrkodaya  MahSkalasamhita 

MahisamardinT  Mahanirvana  Pherutantra 

1  The  principle  of  Mantras. 

8  Apparently  Tantra  Sastra,  in  which  case  the  sense  is  that  the  treatises 
which  the  author  enumerates  form  but  an  insignificant  part  of  the  vast  mass  of 
T&ntrik  books  which  are  not  found  or  enumerated. 

23 


354 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Bhairavatantra 

Bhairavitantra 

Bhutadamara 

Virabhadra 

Bijacintamani 

Ekajata 

Nirvanatantra 

Tripurasara 

ViSvasara 

Varadat  antra 

V  asudevarahasya 
Varahltantra 

V  f  hadgau  tamiya 

V  ar  noddh  rtitantra 
Vi$nuyamala 
Vrhannila 
Vrhadyoni 
Vifjtjurahasya 
VamakeSvara 
Brahmaj  nanatantra 
Brahmayamala 
Advaitatantra 
Varnavilasa 
Phetkarini 
Puraftcaranarasollasa 
PuraAcaraQacandrika 
Picchilatantra 
Prapaficasara 
Hamsa 

ParameSvaratantra 

Navaratneivara 

Nityatantra 

Nllatantra 

NarayanSyaka 

Niruttara 

Naradiya 

NagSdina 

Daksinamurtisamhita 

Yaksinitantra 

Yogimtantra 

Yonitantra 

Yogas  ara 

Yogarnava 


Yoginlhjdaya 

Yogasvarodaya 

Akaiabhairava 

Rajarajesvari 

Radhatantra 

Revatitantra 

Rudrayamala 

Ramarcanacandrika 

Savaratantra 

Indrajalatantra 

Kalilantra 

Kamakhyatantra 

Kamadhcnutantra 

Kalikulasarvasva 

Rumanian  tra 

Krkalasadlpika 

Kalottara 

Kubjikatantra 

Kuloddi&a-Kularnava 

Kulamulavatara 

Kulaiutra 

Yaks  ad  am  ara 

Sarasvatitantra 

Saradatantra 

Saktisangama 

Saktikagamasarvasv  a 

Crddhamnaya 

Svatantratantra 

Sammohanatantra 

Cinacara 

Todalatantra 

Buddhatantra 

Ekaviratantra 

Nigamakalpadruma 

Nigama-kalpalata 

Nigamasara 

Syamarahasya 

Tararahasya 

Skandayamala 

Annadakalpa 

Annapurnakalpa 

Agamakalpadruma 

Agamatattvavilasa 


Agamadvaitanirnaya 

Agamasandarbha 

Agamasara 

Adityahfdaya 

Uttarakamakhya 

Uttaratantra 

Utpattitantra 

Umayamala 

Ekavir&kalpa 

Kamalatantra 

Kamalavilasa 

Katyayanitantra 

Kalikarcanacandrika 

Kalikalpa 

Kalikulasadbhava 

Kalikulamrta 

KallkuJamava 

Kalikrama 

KaJihrdaya 

Kumarikalpa 

Kulacudamani 

Kulaprakaia 

Kulasara 

Kulasundara 

Kulacara 

KuVajnava 

Krsparcanacandrika 

Kaul&rcanadipika 

Kaulavall 

Kramacandrika 

Kramadipika 

Kryayogasara 

Kfyasara 

Gane4avimarsini 

Gandharvatantra 

Gayatrltantra 

Guptadiksa 

Gu  ptasadhana 

Guptarnava 

Gurutantra 

Gudharthadipika 

Gautamlyatantra 

Gauriyamala 


WORSHIP  OF  THE  FIVE  DEVATAS 


355 


fGherai>$asamhit£ 

•Cakravicara 

Cmatantra 

Yamala 

Jfianatantra 

Jfianarnava 

Damara 

Tantrakaurnudi 

Tantracudamani 

Tantradlpika 

T  antrapramoda 

Tantraratna 

Tantraraja 

Tantrasagarasamhita 

Tantrasara 


Pujas&ra 

Praparicasara 

Prayogasara 

V5laviI5sa 

Brahmayamala 

Brahmandatantra 

Bhagavadbhaktivilasa 

Rhavacudamani 

Bhimaparakrama 

Bhuvanesvaritantra 

Bhuvanesvariparijata 

Bhutasuddhitantra 

Bhairavakosa 

Bhairavayamala 

Bhairavasamhita 


V  rhattantrasara 
Vrhattodalatantra 
Vrhatsrikramasangraha 

V  rhadrudrayamala 
Vrhannirvapa 

V  rhanmayatantra 

V  eh  ayasimautrakosa 

V  y  omake4  asamhita 
Vyomaratnatantra 
Saktiyamala 
Saktitantra 
Sambhusarphita 
Saktakrama 


Saktanandatarangini 
Sambh  avitantra 


Tantradar^a  Matsyasukta 

Tantrikadarpana  Mantra  tan  trapraka  4a 

Tarakhancja  Mantradarpana 

Taranigama  Mantramahodadhi 

Taratantra  Mantramuktavali 

Tarapradipa  Mantraratna 

Tarabhaktisudharnava  Mantraratnavali 

Tararnava  Mahakapilapaficaratra 

Tarasara  Mahakalamohinitantra 

Tripurakalpa  Mahanilatantra 

Tripurarnava  Mahalinge4varatantra 

Tripurasarasamucchaya  Manasollasa 
Trailokyasammohana  MaJinitantra 

Daksinamurtikalpa  Mrdanitantra 

Dattatrcyayamala  Merutantra 

Durgakalpa  Yogacintamani 

Deviyamala  Rcvatantra 

Devyagama  Laksasagara 

Nandike4varasamhita  Laksmikularnava 


Sarad  at  antra 

Saradatilaka 

Saivatatantra 

Sikharintantra 

Sivatandava 

Sivadharma 


Sivarahasya 

Sivasangraha 

Saivaratna 

Saivagama 

Syamakalpalati 

Syamapradipa 

Svamarcanacandrika 

Syamasaparyakrama 

BySmasapary&vidhi 

Srikulimava 

Sritattvacintamani 


Sriramasangraha 

Sanatkumaratantra 


Naradapancaratra 

Narayanitantra 

Nigamakalpasara 

Nigamatattvasara 

Nibandhatantra 

Nrsimhakalpa 

Paramahamsapafala 

Paradevirahasya 

Purascaranabodhini 


Lingarcana 

Varnabhairava 

V  amadevatantra 

V  aya  vlyatantra 
Varahltantra 
Vidyanandani  bandha 
Vidyotpattitantra 
VimalStantra 
VIratantra 


Samayatantra 

Samayacaratantra 

Sammohanatantra 

Sarasvatltantra 

Saracintamani 

Sarasamraha 

S  arasamucchay  a 

Sv&rasvatatantra 

Simbavahinltantra 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 

§odaSIsamhita 


356 

Siddhalaharitantra 

Siddhavidyadlpika 

Siddbantas&ra 

Siddhc^varTtantra 

Somaiambbu 

SacchhandamaheSvara 

Hayaiirsapancaratra 

Haragaurisamvada 

Uddamareivara 

Kalikollasa 

Kulakalpalata 

K&makhyadarpana 

Kaumarivilasa 

Candikarcanacandrika 

Camunda  tantra 


Aghorabhairava 

Bhairavanandasara 

Nigamatattvaratna 

Sivasutra 

Nityaprayogasara 

Nirvapaaamhita 

Kamarupadlpika 

Kamesvaratantra 

Kamakhyaprayoga 

Hanumatkalpa 

Vijayatantra 

PItharatnakara 

Katyayanikalpa 

Gauritantra 

Matangi  tantra 


Parvatltantra 

Oamarasutra 

Safkarma  dipika 

Satkarmadidhiti 

Cakreivara 

Cakramukura 

Kaulakrtyatattva 

Krtyatattva 

Krtyaprayoga 

Agamanjava 

Abhicarakavaca 

Syamasaparya 

Siddhitantra. 


Wc  have  mentioned  the  above,  in  order  to  give  an  idea  of  a  fraction  ■ 
only  of  the  names  of  the  treatises  of  which  authoritative  mention  has  been 
made  in  the  way  of  ordinary  research.  Besides  this,  we  hear  from  Tantrik 
teachers1  that  the  number  of  treatises  on  Tantra  is  one  lakh,1  and  some 
say  that  it  is  even  more.  Moreover,  a  particularly  trustworthy  community 
holds  that  even  now  there  is  no  cessation  in  the  creation  of  Tantras,  and 
that  there  will  also  be  no  such  cessation  in  all  the  ages  to  come.  Even 
now  BhagavSn,  Ganapati  Deva,  at  the  command  of  his  Father  and  Mother,* 
relates  to  Rsis,4 *  inhabiting  the  Himalayas  any  Tantra  which  he  hears 
from  them.  Mahals,6  and  accomplished  Sadhakas,  the  well-wishers  of 
the  three  worlds,  promulgate  them  therein  through  successive  generations 
of  disciples.  As  it  is  in  this  way  that  Tantras  reach  the  earth,  there  can  be 
nothing  to  wonder  at  if  new  Tantras  daily  appear  in  the  world.  Even 
to-day,  in  the  discourse  of  the  Father  and  the  Mother  of  the  three  worlds  • 
{the  pair  who  are  the  Parabrahman),  seated  on  a  throne  in  the  midst  of 
the  assemblage  of  Brahma  and  other  Dcvas  in  the  bejewelled  temple  of 
Kailasa,  the  Tantra  Sastra,  which  is  Sabdabrahman  7  daily  appears  in 


1  Ac  ary  as. 


*  100,000. 

*  Siva  and  ParvatL 
4  See  the  Gayatri  Tantra,  chap.  iv. 


4  Great  seers  {see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sditra). 

•  The  Tantras  are  written  in  the  form  of  a  discussion  between  Siva  and  His- 

spouse  Pfirvati. 

7  Sound-Brahman  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 


WORSHIP  OF  THE  FIVE  DEVATAS 


357 


new  forms.  Lost  Tantras  also  arc  being  recovered  for  the  salvation  of 
the  race  of  sinners  sunk  in  the  sea  of  the  sins  of  the  profoundly  sinful 1  Kali 
■age.  Hus  is  the  unerring  proclamation  of  the  race  of  Sadhakas  based  on 
knowledge  gained  by  divine  vision. 


END  OF  PART  I 


1  Ghor,  which  literally  means  “  interne,”  “  unadulterated,”  an  adjective 
here  implying  the  markedly  (sinful)  characteristics  of  the  Kali  age. 


TANTRA  TATTVA 


PART  II 


PREFACE 


Thb  second  part  of  Tantratattva,  the  translation  of  which  is  primarily 
the  work  of  Sj.  Jnanendralal  Majumdar,  is  the  last.  In  the  Preface  to 
the  First  Part,  I  spoke  of  the  preparation  of  a  third  section,  dealing  with 
the  philosophical  bases  of  Tantra.  I  greatly,  however,  regret  to  announce 
the  unexpected  death  of  Pandit  Shiva  Chandra  about  the  middle  of  this 
year.  This  particular  project  therefore  unfortunately  falls  to  the  ground, 
and  the  work  is  limited  to  the  dimensions  in  which  it  was  first  issued 
some  twenty-two  years  ago.  The  philosophical  aspect  of  the  Tantra  will, 
however,  be  found  touched  upon  in  the  Introduction  from  the  pen  of 
Sj.  Barada  Kanta  Majumdar  which  follows,  and  I  have  myself  further 
set  out  my  own  views  on  this  part  of  the  subject  in  my  forthcoming  work 
“  The  Six  Centres  and  the  Kundalini  Power.”  1  The  work  here  translated 
is,  as  already  stated,  that  of  an  Indian  mind  unaffected  by  Western  thought. 
On  the  other  hand,  a  knowledge  of  the  latter  gives  a  special  value  to  the 
Introduction  which  precedes  it.  Apart  from  its  intrinsic  merits,  it  has 
such  value  as  being  the  record  of  the  views  of  an  English-educated  Hindu, 
who  finds  in  the  conclusions  of  recent  Western  science  a  corroboration  of 
his  ancient  Eastern  beliefs.  Its  author  is  now  an  old  man,  to  whom  the 
Tantra  has  been  the  subject  of  study  for  many  years.  He  yet  modesdy 
says  (sec  post) :  “  I  have  attempted  to  give  the  reader  the  result  of  a  general 
survey  of  the  philosophy  upon  which  Tantrik  Sadhana,  or  self-culture,  is 
based.  But  in  so  recondite  and  unfamiliar  a  subject,  when  the  correctness 
of  every  individual  interpretation  may  be  called  in  question,  the  reader 
is  requested  to  go  himself  to  the  source,  and  there,  with  faith  and  devotion, 
and  under  the  guidance  of  a  Guru,  drink  of  its  waters.” 

So  far  as  I  have  examined  the  matter,  I  find  myself  to  be  in  general 
agreement  with  his  statements  as  to  what  constitutes  the  teaching  of  the 
Tantra  on  the  matters  dealt  with.  This  agreement  does  not,  however, 
necessarily  extend  to  every  statement  or  to  all  matters  of  detail.  Some  of 
these  are  open  to  discussion,  as  he  admits.  I  should,  for  instance,  myself 
dispense  with  the  “  magnetic  current  ”  to  which  the  Introduction  refers 
with  reference  to  the  worship  of  images,  and  would  deal  with  the  matter 
as  one  of  purely  transformed  consciousness  in  the  worshipper  himself. 

1  Since  published  Serpent  Power,  6th  Edition,  1958. 


362 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Some  things  also  are  from  the  limited  character  of  the  Introduction 
unsaid. 

As  the  reader  will  see  for  himself,  Sj.  B.  K.  Majumdar  treats  his 
subject  from  a  religious  standpoint.  There  arc,  in  fact,  two  lines  of  work 
in  the  Tantra — namely,  religion  and  magic.  It  is  with  the  former  that 
the  author  of  this  book  and  of  the  Introduction  which  follows  deals.  There 
are  to  be  found  described  in  the  Tantra  practices  which  have  nothing  to 
do  with  religion  in  its  proper  sense,  and  are  indeed  opposed  to  it.  Such 
are  deemed  “  obstacles  ”  by  all  those  who  arc  desirous  of  liberation. 
Thus  what  is  called  Nayika  Sadhana,  or  the  invocation  of  female  spirits, 
is  alleged  in  the  Tantric  works  to  have  the  effect  there  described.  But 
nevertheless  the  same  Scriptures  assert  that  these  and  other  practices  exist 
“for  delusion”.  So  the  Saktananda  Tarangini  says:  “  Avidya  binds  the 
Sadhaka  with  Karma,  and  destroys  knowledge.  Therefore  it  is  that 
Vidya  should  be  worshipped,  but  Avidya  never.”  But  why,  it  may  be 
then  asked,  are  such  practices  to  be  found  in  the  Tantra  at  all,  if  it  be 
admitted  that  they  destroy  and  delude?  This  is  a  characteristically  modem 
question.  A  complete  answer  to  it  would,  however,  on  account  of  its 
length,  be  out  of  place.  It  is  sufficient  here  to  say  that  the  Tantras  are 
an  encyclopaxlia  of  all  the  sciences  on  all  the  planes,  though  the  worker 
on  the  higher  path  is  also  taught  not  to  venture  below.  A  statement  in 
a  work  on  “  Toxicology  ”  that  such  and  such  substances  will,  if  com¬ 
pounded,  produce  a  deadly  poison  is  a  description  of  a  simple  fact,  and  not 
an  invitation  to  compass  thereby  the  death  of  a  neighbour  who  stands  in 
our  way.  A  correct  recipe  may  have  been  given,  but  he  who  so  employs 
it  is  likely  to  incur  the  extreme  punishment.  In  the  same  way  there  are 
spiritual  executions.  I  raise  the  question  to  distinguish  that  aspect  of  the 
Tantra  of  which  the  author  of  the  Introduction  and  myself  speak  from 
practices  with  which  we  arc  not  here  concerned. 

The  Introduction  also  limits  itself  to  a  short  review  of  the  contents 
of  the'  Tantra  in  the  sense  above  described.  Notwithstanding  the  present 
fashion  in  English-educated  India,  Sj.  B.  K.  Majumdar  has  not  essayed 
historical  speculation.  Whilst  every  form  of  knowledge  has  its  use,  the 
Indian  mind  rightly  apprizes  as  of  the  highest  value  the  world  of  ideas, 
deeming  the  question  of  their  “  historical  ”  origins  and  development  to 
be,  as  it  in  fact  is,  of  much  inferior  importance.  To  the  Western,  and  in 
particular  the  English  Sanskritist  the  position,  is  in  general  reversed.  For, 
from  the  point  of  view  he  not  uncommonly  adopts,  Indian  civilization 
has  little,  if  any,  intrinsic  value  of  its  own;  the  bulk  of  its  content — religious, 
philosophical,  scientific,  and  artistic — being  demodi  where  it  was  not  in  its 
inception  altogether  absurd.  In  such  a  case,  the  only  issue  of  importance 
is  the  question :  When,  where,  and  whence  did  these  various  “  errors  ” 
and  “  absurdities  ”  arise,  and  how  were  they  developed  and  propagated  ? 


PREFACE 


36$ 


Yet  they  are  not  altogether  niggardly  of  compensation  even  to  such  an 
inquirer,  for  material  which  is  itself  without  value  may  yet  be  so  put 
together  as  to  make  very  good  history.  I  do  not  myself  share  these  views, 
since  I  find  that  many  Indian  concepts  conform  to  the  results  of  the  most 
recent  scientific  and  psychological  research  and  metaphysical  speculation, 
not  to  speak  of  other  matters  which  demand,  and  in  fact  obtain,  a  different 
kind  of  verification.  The  historical  aspect  of  the  question  is  not,  however, 
to  be  neglected,  and  I  therefore  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  of  adding 
some  observations  to  those  I  have  already  made  in  the  first  volume,  and 
which  have  been  suggested  to  me  by  criticisms  received  since  its 
publication. 

When  it  is  asked  what  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Sastra  of  which  this  work 
treats,  it  is  necessary  to  clearly  understand  what  is  meant  by  “  theTantra  ”, 
It  is  sometimes  held  that  “  the  Tantra  ”  is  something  altogether  different 
from  and  wholly  unconnected  with  ordinary  prevalent  “  Hinduism,”  to 
use  a  convenient,  though  in  itself  vague,  term.  According  to  this  view, 
•  the  doctrines  and  practice  of  “  the  Tantra  ”  are  really  foreign  to  ordinary 
Indian  thought.  Another  and  less  extreme  view  agrees  with  the  last 
mentioned  in  so  far  as  it  holds  that  there  is  in  “  the  Tantra  ”  a  nucleus 
of  doctrine  and  practice  which  is  specially  “  Tantrik  ”  in  the  sense  that 
it  is  different  from  general  Indian  doctrine  and  practice  and  the  particular 
teachings  and  practices  of  all  others  of  its  various  sects.  It  is  then  suggested 
that  around  this  nucleus  has  accumulated  a  body  of  doctrine  and  practice 
which  the  Tantra  shares  in  common  with  other  Sastras.  In  this  view 
the  supposed  “  original  Tantra  ”  has  borrowed  doctrine  and  practice  both 
from  general  Hinduism  and  its  particular  division  of  worshippers,  and 
has  incorporated  them  into  a  composite  system  which  is  then  called 
“Tantrik 

The  result,  on  this  view,  is  that  the  Tantra  is  an  amalgam  consisting 
of  a  hypothetical  nucleus,  foreign  in  its  character  to  Hinduism  proper, 
enveloped  by  a  number  of  other  doctrines  and  practices  borrowed  by  it 
from  the  latter.  Those  who  hold  by  this  theory  of  an  original  nucleus 
have  not  yet  told  us  what  it  precisely  is,  or  when  it  arose,  nor  whence  it 
came,  nor,  indeed,  where  we  may  look  for  it.  This  theory  may  or  may 
not  be  correct,  but  before  we  can  be  called  upon  to  accept  it,  it  must  be 
established  by  evidence.  Until  then  our  hesitation  to  do  so  seems 
warranted  by  the  fact  that  doctrines  and  practices  which  have  been  alleged 
to  be  specifically  “  Tantrik  ”  have  their  counterparts  in  the  Vaidik  acara 
(way  or  practice).  Thus  the  use  of  flesh,  and  wine,*  which  are  supposed 
to  be  peculiar  to  one  form  of  the  Tintrik  ritual,  was  common  in  the  Vaidik 

1  The  term  is  here  and  elsewhere  used  by  me  in  a  general  sense  for  intoxi¬ 
cating  beverages.  In  India  wine  is  also  made  of  other  substances  than  the 
grape — e.g.,  honey,  rice,  molasses,  etc. 


364 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


age.  The  MahSbharata,  Harivamsa,  Kalika,  Markandeya,  and  Kurina 
Puranas  also  refer  to  the  consumption  of  wine,  meat,  and  flesh.  As 
regards  “  the  fifth,”  even  if  we  exclude  Upanisads  and  other  Sastras 
•which  are  alleged  by  some  to  be  of  sectarian  authority  only,  we  find  a 
ritual  use  of  that  Tattva,  though  doubtless  in  different  form,  in  the 
Mahavrata  of  the  Aitarcya  Aranyaka  and  in  the  Vamadevyam  Vrata  of 
the  Sama  Veda.  In  this  connection  reference  may  be  made  to  the 
Br&hmavaivarta  Purina.  Magic,  again,  with  which  the  Tantra  has  been 
particularly  charged,  forms  a  large  part  of  the  Atharva  Veda. 

Then,  as  to  the  worship  of  Sakti  or  Devi,  reference  is  made  to  Her  in 
the  Veda,  such  as  the  Sarasvatisukta,  in  the  Yajur  Veda  the  Laksmi  Sukta, 
and  in  the  tenth  Mandala  of  the  Rg  Veda  the  Devi  Sukta;1  and  we  have 
in  the  Upanisads  1  the  story  of  Uma  appearing  in  a  blaze  of  light  to  Indra 
and  the  other  Dcvas,  to  prove  to  them  that  it  was  not  by  their  iakti  that 
they  lived  and  moved,  but  that  all  which  was  done  was  so  done  by  virtue 
of  that  MahaSakti.  Touching  this  subject,  nothing  more  is  taught  by  the 
Tantra,  though  one  portion  of  it  has  doubdess  gready  elaborated,  both 
on  its  theoretical  and  practical  side,  the  magnificent  doctrine  of  Sakti,  or 
the  Power  or  Energy  of  the  Brahman  whereby  the  Universe  originates. 
Though  this  notion  of  Sakti  is  of  great  importance  in  the  Tantra,  it  is  by 
no  means  the  peculiar  appanage  of  that  Scripture,  but  is,  like  other 
concepts,  shared  by  it  with  other  Indian  Sastras,  commencing,  as  above 
mentioned,  with  the  Mulasastra — that  is,  the  Vedas  and  Upanisads.  It  is, 
however,  of  special  importance  in  Tantra,  because  one  of  its  schools  has 
developed,  presented,  and  emphasized  the  doctrine,  and  has  moulded  its 
scheme  of  sadhana  and  worship  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  the  practical 
■expression  of  its  form  of  theoretical  exposition.  Thus,  on  the  one  hand, 
we  have  in  what  are  called  for  convenience  the  Sakta  Tantras,  a  philo¬ 
sophical  doctrine  of  Sakti  fully  developed  on  the  one  side  (Jnanakanda), 
and  devotion  to  and  worship  of  the  World-Mother  on  the  other  (Upasana- 
kapda).  As  the  notion  of  Sakti  is  accepted  by  other  classes  of  Indian 
worshippers,*  the  promulgation  of  this  cult  has  historically  done  much  to 
weld  together  the  different  Indian  sects  through  the  recognition  of  a  bond 
of  common  unity  which  the  acceptance  of  the  doctrine  of  Sakti  implies. 
To  this  the  Saktisangama  Tantra  *  refers  when  it  says:  “  For  the  purpose 


1  See  Introduction  to  Part  I. 

1  In  varying  ways — thus  some  worship  Saktiman,  “  He  who  is  the 
possessor  of  Sakti  ”  in  varying  Deva  forms;  others  worship  Sakti  Herself — 
philosophically  there  is  no  difference,  as  the  possessor  of  Sakti  and  Sakti  are  one 
and  the  same. 

1  Eighth  Pa(ala  cited  with  text  in  Nagendra  Nath  Vfisu's  “  Archaelogical 
"Survey  of  MayurabhafLja,”  p.  lx. 


PREFACE 


365 


of  creation  various  religions  have  been  promulgated,  such  as  those  of  the 
Saktas  (worshippers  of  Sakti),  Saivas  (worshippers  of  Siva),  Vaispavas 
(worshippers  of  Vispu),  Gapapafyas  (worshippers  of  Ganeia),  Sauras 
(sun  worshippers),  and  Buddhists,  and  many  others.  These  sects  often 
blame  one  another,  and  yet  a  harmony  may  be  found.  Explanation  has 
been  given  of  these  doctrines  in  order  to  bring  about  this  unity.  In  order 
to  attain  this  all  should  worship  the  Devi  Kalika,  the  Saviour  (Taripi). 
I  have  promulgated  the  Sakta  cult  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  unity  of 
the  fourteen  branches  of  knowledge.1 * *  The  Goddess  Bhavataripl  is  the 
Deity  presiding  over  the  four  Vedas,  and  the  Goddess  Kalika  is  the  Deity 
presiding  over  the  Atharva  Veda.  Though  different  sects  find  fault  with 
one  another,  a  harmony  may  be  established  between  the  seemingly  contrary 
doctrines.  In  order  to  bring  about  this  desired  harmony  all  sects  should 
worship  Kalika,  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Rites,  according  to  the  Atharva 
Veda,  cannot  be  performed  without  Kali  or  Tara.*  She  is  called  Kalika 
in  Kerala  (Malabar),  Tripura  in  Kashmir,  and  Tara  in  Gauqla  (Bengal). 
She  is  the  Kalottara  or  chief  Divinity  of  Kalottarayana.® 

“  It  appears,”  says  the  author  of  the  work  last  cited,  “  that  from  the 
above  passages  of  the  Saktisangatna  Tantra  the  Sakta  or  Tantrika  cult 
was  promulgated  in  order  to  effect  harmony  among  the  various  jarring 
sects.  The  result  was  that  all  the  sects  began  to  worship  the  female 
Energies  of  their  own  respective  Deities’.4  Some  accepted  a  few  Saktis, 
others  accepted  many. 

“  This  is  perhaps  the  reason,”  he  adds,  “  of  the  great  fellow-feeling 
between  the  Hindu  and  the  Buddhist  Saktas,  as  well  as  of  the  rites  of  the 
one  being  found  in  the  Tantras  of  the  other,  and  vice  versa ,  for,  according  to 
Dr.  Kern,1  the  development  of  Tantrism  is  a  feature  that  Buddhism  and 
Hinduism  in  their  later  phases  have  in  common.” 

So  far  I  have  referred  only  to  what  are  called  the  Sakta  Tantras,  or 
those  Tantras  which  predominantly  e  deal  with  the  worship  of  Sakti  or 
Devi,  the  great  Mother  of  the  Universe.  Thus,  in  the  Saiva  Tantras,  or 
rather  in  the  Saiva  (as  distinct  from  Sakta)  worship,  governed  by  the 


1  That  is,  as  the  verse  says,  Purana,  Nyaya,  Mimamsa,  Samkhya, 
Pataftjala,  Vedanta,  Dhaxmasastra,  Anga,  Chhapda,  Astronomy,  and  the  four 
Vedas. 

*  Vina  kaling  vina  tarang  natharwapo  vidhi  kvachit.  See  last  note. 

*  One  of  the  Buddhist  sects. 

4  Thus  establishing  a  common  worship  of  Sakti,  whatever  be  the  form  the 
latter  might  assume  in  the  different  sects. 

*  “  Manual  of  Indian  Buddhism,”  p.  133. 

*  In  all  Tantrik  cults  Sakti  is  worshipped;  for  where  Siva  or  Vi?nu  is  the 
Itfadevatfi,  Sakti  is  necessarily  is  associated  with  Them. 


366 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Agama,  the  use  of  wine  and  animal-food  is  forbidden  1 — on  the  other 
hand,  matters  which  appear  in  the  Sakta  Tantras  occur  elsewhere.  The 
particular  Yoga  called  Sa^cakrabheda,  or  matters  dealt  with  by  it,  arc  to 
be  found  referred  to  in  some  of  the  Upanisads  and  Puranas,  and  in  the 
works  on  Hathayoga,  such  as  Sivasamhila,  Gherandasamhita,  and  Hatha- 
yogapradipika.  It  has  indeed  been  suggested  that  the  Tantriks  borrowed 
this  Yoga  from  “  Nathism  There  are  some  who  think  that  they  have 
given  both  fact  and  explanation  when  they  have  invented  a  name.  But 
what  proof  is  there  that  the  Hathayogis  were  not  Tantriks,  or  that  the 
latter  did  not  also  include  as  part  of  its  doctrine  Hathayoga.  And  if  the 
two  were  different  from  one  another,  which  borrowed  from  the  other  and 
what  is  the  proof  of  it?  The  matter  is  of  subordinate  interest.  It  is  more 
important  to  know  whether  this  Tantrik  Yoga  is  confined  to  and  is  the 
invention  of  the  Tantrik  and  Hathayogi,  or  whether  it  has  its  roots  in 
common  Indian  tradition.  The  Tantra  is  called  the  Mantraiastra,  but 
Mantras  arc  not  confined  to  the  Tantra.  It  deals  with  the  theory  of 
sound  (Sabda),  but  so  did  the  Mimamsakas.  It  mentions  the  twenty-five' 
Tattvas,  but  these  are  drawn  from  the  Samkhya.  There  arc  Tantrik 
works  which  are  Vedantik  in  their  general  trend  and  aim.  If  there  be 
one  subject  which  appears  to  distinguish  the  Tantras  it  is  portions  of  its 
■ritual,  such  as  the  Yantras,  Mudras,  Bijas,  BhutaSuddhi,  and  so  forth. 
Indeed,  it  is  more  by  these  than  aftything  else  that  the  “  Tantrik  ”  character 
of  a  work  is  established,  and  yet  we  find  portions  of  this  ritual  in  the 
Puranas.  Further  there  appear  to  have  been  varieties  of  traditions  or 
schools  in  the  Sastras  which  are  gathered  together  under  the  collective 
name  of  Agama,  which  after  the  Upani?adic  age  regulated  the  temple  and 
domestic  rituals.  Which  (or  is  it  all  of  these)  constituted  the  alleged 
Tantrik  “nucleus"?  There  are  thus  the  Tantras  of  the  three  Krantas.* 
There  arc  also  what  are  called  the  Five  Amnaya,*  not  to  mention  the 
Saiva,  Sakta,  and  Vaisnava  divisions  of  Tantrik  worshippers.  Though  the 
fact  is  not  generally  known  certain  Tantras  arc  alleged  to  have  authority 
in  different  ages  and  places.  Thus  certain  existent  Tantras,  such  as  the 
Kallvilasa,  are  alleged  not  to  be  in  force  in  the  present  Kalpa,  but  to 
represent  a  prior  tradition.4  So  this  Kallvilasa  and  other  Tantras  are 

1  In  some  forms  of  worship  substitutes  are  prescribed  (see  Introduction  to 
my  “  Tantra  of  the  Great  Liberation.’’)  This  practice  of  substitution  has,  I  am 
informed,  been  extended  even  to  such  Upakriya  as  Savasana,  where  the  corpse 
is  made  of  Ku£a  grass. 

*  See  “  Principles  of  Tantra,”  Part  I,  Introduction. 

*  Uttaramnaya,  Daksinamnaya,  PurvamnSya,  Paicimimnaya,  Urddhvam- 
naya. 

4  In  the  28th  Patala  of  this  Tantra,  Kali  is  represented  as  saying  to  Kysna: 
“  After  this  day  of  Brahma  you  will  become  the  beloved  of  Radha,  who  will 
be  bom  of  my  body  ”  and  the  35th  Patala  refers  to  Kr?na,  Nanda,  Radha  of 


PREFACE 


367 


said  to  have  been  operative  in  Aiva  Kranta  in  the  Kalakalpa.  Of  such 
the  Mahavi$vasara  Tantra  says  that  Tantras  which  belong  to  other  Kalpas 
exist  for  the  delusion  of  unbelievers  (Pasandas).  The  burden  of  proof  is 
on  those  who  put  forward  a  theory  or  hypothesis  in  these  matters.  Present 
historical  knowledge  is  not  enough  to  answer  the  various  questions  here 
raised.  I  prefer  myself  to  proceed  as  far  as  possible  upon  the  sure  ground 
of  fact  and  not  upon  historical  surmises,  for  which  there  is  at  present  at 
least  no  sufficient  evidence,  and  which  are  not  infrequently  prompted  by 
a  dislike  of  the  Sastra,  and  therefore  by  a  desire  to  disassociate  it  altogether 
from  the  common  current  of  Indian  tradition.  In  any  case  doctrine  and 
practice  arc  of  greater  importance  than  the  question  of  historical  origins. 
But  those  who  are  interested  in  this  form  of  research  should  first  study  and 
endeavour  to  understand  the  living  Tantra  with  the  aid  of  those  who 
profess  it,  and  then  accumulate  the  fact  upon  which  alone  any  historical 
hypothesis  of  value  can  rest. 

Whatever  theories  may  be  advanced  as  to  the  existence  and  origin 
•of  some  elements  in  the  Tantra  peculiar  to  itself,  there  is  no  doubt  that  as 
it  now  stands  it  embodies  a  large  number  of  others  which  are  to  be  found 
in  other  Sastras,  both  religious  and  philosophical,  though  some  of  these 
are  expressed  by  this  Scripture  according  to  its  own  peculiar  terminology 
and  form  of  exposition.  But  if  we  deal  with  the  facts  as  they  are  known 
to  exist  now  and  have  existed  for  unknown  centuries  past,  we  find  that  the 
Tantra  embodies  and  is  interwoven  with  the  general  fabric  of  “  Hinduism,” 
of  which  it  is  an  integral  and  closely  associated  part.  Professor  de  la  Valine 
Poussin  was  then,  it  seems  to  me,  right  when,  in  answer  to  one  of  his 
English  critics,  he  said  of  the  Tantras:  “  Jc  constate  qu’ils  sont  inhlrcnts 
k  toutes  les  formes  religicuses  dc  ITndc.”  1 

In  a  similar  manner  a  critic  of  a  previous  work  of  mine  a  incompetently 
complained  that  in  a  general  account  I  there  gave  of  some  portions  of 
Tantrik  doctrine  I  had  dealt  with  beliefs  and  practices  to  be  found  in  other 
Sastras  and  systems  of  philosophy,  a  procedure  which  he  charged  was 
calculated  to  mislead  others  into  the  belief  that  they  formed  part  of  Tantrik 


the  third  (present)  Kalpa.  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  the  10th  Patala  wine  is 
forbidden  in  the  Kaliyuga;  and  Patala  4  directs  all  to  follow  the  Acara  of  the 
Paiu. 

1  From  a  letter  to  Professor  Rhys  Davids,  dated  November  29,  1896, 
published  in  J.  R.  A.  S.,  January,  1899.  He  adds:  “  IIs  vous  choquent  j’en  suis 
chagrin;  mais  avouez  que  je  n’v  peux  rien.  Declarer  inutile  I’6tude  des 
Tantras  sous  pretextes  qu’ils  sont  modemes  e’est  vraiment  abuser  d’une 
prrmisse  peu  stable  et  mal  definie.” 

1  Mahanirvana  Tantra.  I  should  like  here  to  state  that  the  Introduction 
which  I  wrote  for  that  work  does  not  in  any  way  profess  to  be  an  historical 
criticism.  It  was  a  simple  and  very  abbreviated  statement  of  some  generally 
accepted  notions  and  practices  prevalent  in  the  Tantra  as  it  exists  to-day. 


366 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


teaching.  A  want  of  knowledge  was  here  displayed.  Why,  he  queried, 
had  I  dealt  with  the  S&mkhya,  thereby  “  creating  for  the  thousand  and 
first  time  the  false  impression  that  the  Tantra  was  concerned  with  it.” 
This  criticism,  which  is  a  display  of  ignorance,  might  equally  well  be 
directed  against  the  work  here  translated,  which  not  only  cites  the  Tantra, 
but  also  the  Puranas,  Darianas,  Smrti,  and  Vedas. 

The  answer  is  the  simple  one  that  I  dealt  with  some  of  the  notions  of 
the  Samkhya  because  they  are  expressly  incorporated  in  the  Tantras  and 
Tantrik  works  with  which  I  was  conversant.  I  may  refer  my  reader  by 
way  of  example  to  the  first  chapter  of  the  celebrated  Prapancasara  Tantra,* 
and  to  the  well-known  and  authoritative  treatise,  Sarada  Tilaka.  From 
what  source  other  than  the  Samkhya  did  the  former  derive  its  notions  of 
Purusa,  Prakrti,  Buddhi,  AharikSra,  and  the  other  Tattvas,  the  Gunas, 
and  so  forth?  And  of  a  passage  in  the  second,  the  great  Tantrik  Commen¬ 
tator  Raghava  Bhatta  expressly  says:  “  Here  the  Samkhya  doctrine  is 
exposed.”  From  what  source  again  but  the  Vedanta  docs  the  Tantra 
derive  those  doctrines  which  reconcile  the  Samkhyan  dualism  in  the  unity  • 
of  the  Brahman  ?  The  Tantra,  in  fact,  could  not  claim  to  be  an  authoritative 
Indian  Sastra  if  it  did  not  recognize  commonly  accepted  Indian  doctrines. 

According  to  orthodox  teaching,  all  Sastras,  just  as  truth  itself,  con¬ 
stitute  a  unity.  Otherwise  the  Tantra  would  be  a  mere  sectarian  Scripture 
out  of  all  relation  with  common  Indian  beliefs,  and  essentially  foreign  to 
them.  But  a  Scripture  which  is  not  in  essential  agreement  with  other 
Sastras  is  itself  no  Slstra  at  all.  The  Sastra,  therefore,  generally  accepts 
and  incorporates  such  common  beliefs,  though  it  may  present  them  in  its 
own  peculiar  way  and  terminology,  and  though  it  seeks  practically  to  realize 
them  by  its  own  peculiar  methods.  It  is  in  fact  the  latter  which  is  the 
chief  characteristic  of  this  Sastra.  The  sphere  of  Indian  religion  has  three 
departments,  respectively  known  as  Karmakanqla  (or  formal  ritual  in  its 
Vaidik  sense),  Upasana  Kanda  (or  psychological  worship),  and  Jnana 
Kanda  (or  esoteric  knowledge).  It  is  the  second  which  is  the  peculiar 
subject  of  Tantra.  Thus,  again,  it  is  said  that  ritual  in  its  widest  sense, 
as  including  both  Karma  and  Upasana,  is  threefold — that  is,  Vaidik, 
Tantrik,  and  Mixed  (MiSra),  or  Pauranik.  But  each  of  these,  according 
to  Indian  teaching,  has  in  common  certain  philosophic  and  religious 
doctrinal  bases.  When  I  speak  of  “  the  Tantra,”  I  refer  to  what  passes 
under  that  name  to-day  a  so  far  as  it  is  known  to  me,  and  not  some  hypo¬ 
thetical  doctrine  of  past  time  of  which  at  present  we  know  with  certainty 
nothing.  In  a  review,  however,  of  the  first  volume  of  this  work  an  Indian 


1  Published  as  the  third  volume  of  my  “  Tantrik  Texts  ”. 

1  Similarly,  in  the  letter  of  Professor  de  la  Vallfie  Poussin,  from 
which  I  have  already  cited,  he  says:  “  M.  R.  appelle  Bouddhisme  la 


PREFACE 


369 


writer,  in  the  Prabuddha  Bhdrata  1  made  the  following  remarks  on  what  he 
believes  to  be  the  origin  of  the  Tantra.  His  speculations,  whether  correct 
or  not,  are  of  such  interest  that  I  quote  them  in  full.  He  writes: 

“  Hitherto  all  theories  about  the  origin  and  the  importance  of  the 
Tantras  have  been  more  or  less  prejudiced  by  a  wrong  bias  against 
Tantrikism  which  some  of  its  own  later  sinister  developments  were  calcu¬ 
lated  to  create.  This  bias  has  made  almost  every  such  theory  read  either 
like  a  condemnation  or  an  apology.  All  investigation  being  thus  disquali¬ 
fied,  the  true  history  of  Tantrikism  has  not  yet  been  written;  and  we  find 
cultured  people  mostly  inclined  either  to  the  view  that  Tantrikism  originally 
branched  off  from  the  Buddhistic  Mahayana  or  Vajrayana  as  a  cult  of 
some  corrupted  and  self-deluded  monastics  or  to  the  view  that  it  was  the 
inevitable  dowry  which  some  barbarous  non-Aryan  races  brought  along 
with  them  into  the  fold  of  Hinduism.  According  to  both  these  views, 
however,  the  form  which  this  Tantrikism — either  a  Buddhistic  development 
or  a  barbarous  importation — has  subsequently  assumed  in  the  literature  of 
.Hinduism  is  its  improved  edition  as  issuing  from  the  crucibles  of  Vedic  or 
Vedantic  transformation.  But  this  theory  of  the  curious  co-mingling  of 
the  Vedas  and  Vedanta  with  Buddhistic  corruption  or  with  non-Aryan 
barbarity  is  perfectly  inadequate  to  explain  the  all-pervading  influence 
which  the  Tantras  exert  on  our  present-day  religious  life.  Here  it  is  not 
any  hesitating  compromise  that  we  have  got  before  us  to  explain,  but  a 
bold  organic  synthesis,  a  legitimate  restatement  of  the  Vedic  culture  for 
the  solution  of  new  problems  and  new  difliculdes  which  signalized  the 
dawn  of  a  new  age. 

“  In  tracing  the  evolution  of  Hinduism,  modern  historians  take  a 
blind  leap  from  Vedic  ritualism  direct  to  Buddhism,  as  if  to  conclude  that 
all  those  newly  formed  communities  with  which  India  had  been  swarming 
all  over  since  the  close  of  the  fateful  era  of  the  Kuruksetra  war,  and  to 
which  was  denied  the  right  of  Vedic  sacrifices,  the  monopoly  of  the  higher 
threefold  castes  of  pure  orthodox  descent,  were  going  on  all  the  time  with¬ 
out  any  religious  ministrations.  These  Aryanized  communities,  we  must 
remember,  were  actually  swamping  the  Vedic  orthodoxy,  which  was 
already  gradually  dwindling  down  to  a  helpless  minority  in  all  its  scattered 
centres  of  influence,  and  was  just  awaiting  the  Anal  blow  to  be  dealt  by 
the  rise  of  Buddhism.  Thus  the  growth  of  these  new  communities  and 
their  occupation  of  the  whole  land  constituted  a  mighty  event  that  had 

doctrine  prtchee,  par  Sakyamuni;  j’appellc  Bouddhisme  l’6tat  g£n6ral  de 
croyance  qui  s’est  condense  autour  du  nom  du  Buddha.”  In  the  case  of  the 
Tantra  the  reasons  for  such  a  course  are  much  stronger;  for  whilst  we  do 
know  something  of  Buddhism,  those  of  the  Tantra  are  obscure. 

i  A  journal  published  at  the  Mayavatl  ASrama,  founded  by  the  late 
Syimi  Vivekananda  in  the  Himalayas  (Issue  of  July,  1914). 

24 


370 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


been  silently  taking  place  in  India  on  the  outskirts  of  the  daily  shrinking 
orthodoxy  of  Vedic  ritualism,  long  before  Buddhism  appeared  on  the 
field,  and  this  momentous  event  our  modern  historians  fail  to  take  due 
notice  of,  either,  it  may  be,  because  of  a  curious  blindness  of  self-com¬ 
placency  or  because  of  the  dazzle  which  the  sudden  triumph  of  Buddhism 
and  the  overwhelming  mass  of  historical  evidences  left  by  it  create  before 
their  eyes.  The  traditional  Kali  Yuga  dates  from  the  rise  of  these 
communities,  and  the  Vedic  religious  culture  of  the  preceding  Yuga  under¬ 
went  a  wonderful  transformation  along  with  the  wonderful  attempt  it 
made  to  Aryan! ze  these  rising  communities. 

“  History,  as  hitherto  understood  and  read,  speaks  of  the  Brahmins 
of  the  pre-Buddhistic  age — their  growing  alienation  from  the  Jnana-kapda 
or  the  Upanisadic  wisdom,  their  impotency  to  save  the  orthodox  Vedic 
communities  from  the  encroachments  of  the  non-Vedic  hordes  and  races, 
their  ever-deepening  religious  formalism  and  social  exclusiveness.  But  this 
history  is  silent  on  the  marvellous  feats  which  the  Upanisadic  sects  of 
anchorites  were  silently  performing  on  the  outskirts  of  the  strictly  Vedic. 
community,  with  the  object  of  Aryanizing  the  new  India  that  was  rising 
over  the  ashes  of  the  Kuruksetra  conflagration.  This  new  India  was  not 
strictly  Vedic,  like  the  India  of  the  bygone  ages,  for  it  could  not  claim  the 
religious  ministrations  of  the  orthodox  Vedic  Brahmins,  and  could  not 
therefore  perform  Yajiias  like  the  latter.  The  question,  therefore,  is  as  to 
how  this  new  India  became  gradually  Aryanized,  for  Aryanization  is  essen¬ 
tially  a  spiritual  process,  consisting  in  absorbing  new  communities  of  men 
into  the  fold  of  the  Vedic  religion.  The  Vedic  ritualism  that  prevailed 
in  those  days  was  powerless,  we  have  seen,  to  do  anything  for  these  new 
communities  springing  up  all  over  the  country.  Therefore  we  arc  obliged 
to  turn  to  the  only  other  factor  in  Vedic  religion  besides  the  Karma-kapda 
for  an  explanation  of  those  changes  which  the  Vedic  religion  wrought  in 
the  rising  communities  in  order  to  Aryanize  them.  The  Upanisads  represent 
the  Jnana-kapda  of  the  Vedic  religion,  and  if  we  study  all  of  them,  we 
find  that  not  only  the  earliest  ritualism  of  Yajflaa  was  philosophized  upon 
in  the  earlier  Upanijads,  but  the  foundation  for  a  new,  and  no  less 
elaborate,  ritualism  was  fully  laid  in  many  of  the  later  Upanisads.  For 
example,  we  study  in  these  Upanisads  how  the  philosophy  of  Panca- 
upSsani  (fivefold  worship) — viz-,  the  worship  of  Siva,  Devi,  Sun,  Gapeia, 
and  Vi$pu)  was  developed  out  of  the  mystery  of  the  Pranava  (‘  Om '). 
This  philosophy  cannot  be  dismissed  as  a  post-Buddhistic  interpolation, 
seeing  that  some  features  of  the  same  philosophy  can  be  dearly  traced 
even  in  the  Br&hmanas — e.g.,  the  discourse  about  the  conception  of  Siva. 

“  Here,  therefore,  in  some  of  the  later  Upanisads  we  find  recorded 
the  attempts  of  the  pre-Buddhistic  recluses  of  the  forest  to  elaborate  a 
post-Vedic  ritualism  out  of  the  doctrine  ,  of  the  Prapava  and  the  Vedic 


PREFACE 


871 


-theory  of  Yogic  practices.  Here  in  these  Upanisads  we  find  how  the 
Blja-mantras  and  the  Safcakra  of  the  Tantras  were  being  originally 
developed,  for  on  the  Pranava  or  Udgitha  had  been  founded  a  special 
learning  and  a  school  of  philosophy  from  the  very  earliest  ages,  and  some 
of  the  ‘  spinal  ’  centres  of  Yogic  meditation  had  been  dwelt  upon  in  the 
earliest  Upanisads  and  corresponding  Brahmanas.  The  Upakaranas  of 
Tantrik  worship — namely,  such  material  adjuncts  as  grass,  leaves,  water 
and  so  on — were  most  apparently  adopted  from  Vcdic  worship  along  with 
their  appropriate  incantations.  So  even  from  the  Brahmanas  and  the 
Upanisads  stands  out  in  clear  relief  a  system  of  spiritual  discipline — which 
we  would  unhesitatingly  classify  as  Tantrik — having  as  its  core  the  Paftca- 
upasana,  and  around  it  a  fair  round  of  rituals  and  rites  consisting  of 
Bija-mantras  and  Vedic  incantations,  proper  meditative  processes  and 
proper  manipulation  of  sacred  adjuncts  of  worship  adopted  from  the  Vedic 
rites.  This  may  be  regarded  as  the  earliest  configuration  which  T&ntrikism 
had  on  the  eve  of  those  silent  but  mighty  social  upheavals  through  which 
■the  Aryanization  of  vast  and  increasing  multitudes  of  new  races  proceeded 
in  prc-Buddhistic  India,  and  which  had  their  culmination  in  the  eventful 
centuries  of  the  Buddhistic  coup  de  grace. 

“  Now,  this  prc-Buddhistic  Tantrikism,  perhaps  then  recognized  as 
the  Vcdic  Panca-upasana,  could  not  have  contributed  at  all  to  the  creation 
of  a  new  India,  had  it  remained  confined  completely  within  the  limits  of 
monastic  sects.  But,  like  Jainism,  this  Panca-upasana  went  forth  all  over 
the  country  to  bring  ultra-Vedic  communities  under  its  spiritual  ministra¬ 
tions.  Even  if  we  inquire  carefully  into  the  social  conditions  obtaining  in 
the  strictly  Vcdic  ages,  we  find  that  there  was  always  an  extended  wing 
■of  the  Aryanizcd  Bocicty  where  the  purely  Vedic  Karmakai?da  could  not  be 
promulgated,  but  where  the  moulding  influence  of  Vcdic  ideals  worked 
through  the  development  of  suitable  spiritual  activities.  It  is  always  to 
■the  Jn£nakap(la  and  the  monastic  votaries  thereof  that  the  Vedic  religion 
owed  its  wonderful  expansivcncss  and  its  progressive  self-adaptability,  and 
every  religious  development  within  the  Vedic  fold,  but  outside  the  ritualism 
of  Homa  sacrifices,  is  traceable  to  the  spiritual  wisdom  of  the  all-renouncing 
■forest  recluses.  This  '*  forest  ’  wisdom  was  most  forcibly  brought  into 
requisition  when,  -after  the  Kuruksetra,  a  new  age  was  dawning  with  the 
onrush  and  upheaval  of  non-Aryan  and  semi-Aryan  races  all  over  India 
— an  echo  of  which  may  be  found  in  that  story  of  the  Mah&bharata,  where 
Aijuna  fails  to  use  his  Gandiva  to  save  his  protigis  from  the  robbery  of  the 
non-Aryan  hordes. 

“  The  greatest  problem  of  the  pre-Buddhistic  ages  was  the  Aryaniza¬ 
tion  of  the  new  India  that  rose  and  surged  furiously  from  every  side  against 
tthe  fast-dwindling  centres  of  the  old  Vedic  orthodoxy  struggling  hard,  but 
in  vain,  by  social  -enactments  to  guard  its  perilous  insulation.  But  for 


372 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


those  religious  movements,  such  as  those  of  the  Bhagavatas,  Saktas,  Sauras, 
Saivas,  Ganapatyas,  and  Jains,  that  tackled  this  problem  of  Aryanization 
most  successfully,  all  that  the  Vcdic  orthodoxy  stood  for  in  the  real  sense 
would  have  gradually  perished  without  trace.  These  movements,  specially 
the  five  cults  of  Vcdic  worship,  took  up  many  of  the  non-Aryan  races, 
and  cast  their  life  in  the  mould  of  the  Vedic  spiritual  ideal,  minimizing 
in  this  way  the  gulf  that  existed  between  them  and  the  Vedic  orthodoxy, 
and  thereby  rendering  possible  their  gradual  amalgamation.  And  where 
this  task  remained  unfulfilled  owing  to  the  mould  proving  too  narrow  still 
to  fit  into  the  sort  of  life  which  some  non-Aryan  races  or  communities 
lived,  there  it  remained  for  Buddhism  to  solve  the  problem  of  Aryanization 
in  due  time.  But,  still,  we  must  remember  that  by  the  time  Buddhism 
made  its  appearance,  the  pre-Buddhistic  phase  of  Tantrik  worship  had 
already  established  itself  in  India  so  widely  and  so  firmly  that,  instead  of 
dislodging  it  by  its  impetuous  onset — all  the  force  of  which,  by  the  by,  was 
mainly  spent  on  the  tottering  orthodoxy  of  Vcdic  ritualism — Buddhism  was 
itself  swallowed  up  within  three  or  four  centuries  by  this  Tantric  worship,  and- 
then  wonderfully  transformed  and  ejected  on  the  arena  as  the  Mahayana. 

“  The  latest  configuration  of  Tantrikism  dates  from  this,  its  wonderful 
absorption  and  assimilation  of  Buddhism,  and  from  this  important  fact  it 
derives  some  important  features  of  its  later  development.  The  prophecy 
of  Gautama  Buddha  on  the  eve  of  investing  his  aunt  with  Abhisampada  or 
Samyasa  was  fulfilled  too  literally  when  the  proximity  and  free  intercourse 
between  the  two  orders  of  monks  and  nuns  created  in  Buddhist  history 
that  odious  problem  of  their  religious  life  which  they  had  to  solve  by 
introducing  some  mysterious  rites,  the  philosophy  of  which,  however,  can 
be  traced  in  the  Vedas.  No  wonder  if  the  current  of  such  developments 
grew  deeper  and  dirtier  in  time;  only  it  is  alleviating  that  there  were 
cross-currents  of  constant  correction  flowing  from  Vedantic  sources. 
Neither  is  it  possible  to  deny  that  the  Buddhistic  phase  of  Tantrikism 
absorbed  into  the  fold  of  Hinduism  non- Ary  an  conceptions  and  rites  of 
worship  far  more  promiscuously  than  its  pre-Buddhistic  phase;  but  history 
proves  that  the  digestive  and  secretive  processes,  as  it  were,  have  ever 
since  been  working,  tardily  sometimes,  but  successfully  always,  and  the 
Tantras,  as  the  marvellous  restatement  of  the  Vedas  and  the  Vedanta, 
have  at  last  appeared  in  the  boldest  relief  through  that  miraculous  embodi¬ 
ment  of  the  synthetic  spirituality  of  the  whole  race  which  we  have  to 
recognize  to-day  by  the  name  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  Paramahamsa.” 

The  writer  adds  that  a  “  vindication  of  the  Tantras  redounds  directly 
to  the  benefit  of  Hinduism  as  a  whole,”  for,  in  his  opinion,  "  Tantrikism 
in  its  real  sense  is  nothing  but  the  Vedic  religion  struggling  with  wonderful 
success  to  reassert  itself  amidst  all  those  new  problems  of  religious  life  and 
discipline  which  later  historical  events  and  developments  thrust  upon  it.” 


PREFACE 


373 


Of  equal  interest  with  the  above  is  the  following  extract  from  another 
review  by  the  well-known  Bengali  litterateur  Sj.  Panchkori  Bandyop&dhy&ya 
in  the  Calcutta  journal  Sdhitya.1  This  article,  from  which  I  omit  passages 
personal  to  myself  or  touching  the  book  there  criticized,  deals  with  die 
history  of  the  Tantra  in  quite  recent  times  in  Bengal.  Sj.  Panchkori 
Bandyopadhyaya  writes: 

“At  one  time  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra  had  some  popularity  in 
Bengal.  It  was  printed  and  published  under  the  editorship  of  Pandit 
Ananda-candra  Vedantavagiia,  and  issued  from  the  Adi-Brahma-Samaj 
Press.  Raja  Ram  Mohan  Roy  himself  was  a  follower  of  the  Tantras, 
married  after  the  Saiva  form,  and  used  to  practise  the  Tantrik  worship. 
His  spiritual  preceptor,  Svami  Hariharananda,  was  well  known  to  be  a 
saint  who  had  attained  to  perfection  (siddha-purusa).  He  endeavoured 
to  establish  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra  as  the  Scripture  of  the  Brahma* 
Samaj.  The  formula  and  the  forms  of  the  Brahma  Church  are  borrowed 
from  the  initiation  into  Brahman  worship  (Brahma-dlksa)  in  this  Tantra. 
'The  later  Brahmos,  somewhat  losing  themselves  in  their  spirit  of  imitation 
of  Christian  rituals,  were  led  to  abandon  the  path  shown  to  them  by  Raja 
Ram  Mohan;  but  yet  even  now  many  among  them  recite  the  Hymn  to 
the  Brahman  which  occurs  in  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra.  In  the  first  era 
of  the  excessive  dissemination  of  English  culture  and  training,  Bengal 
resounded  with  opprobrious  criticisms  of  the  Tantras.  No  one  among  the 
educated  in  Bengal  could  praise  them.  Even  those  who  called  themselves 
Hindus  were  unable  outwardly  to  support  the  Tantrik  doctrines.  But 
even  then  there  were  very  great  Tantrik  Sadhakas  and  men  learned  in 
the  Tantras,  with  whose  help  the  principles  of  the  Tantras  might  have 
been  explained  to  the  public.  But  the  educated  Bengali  of  the  age  was 
bewitched  by  the  Christian  culture,  and  no  one  cared  to  inquire  what  did 
or  did  not  exist  in  their  paternal  heritage;  the  more  especially  that  any 
who  attempted  to  study  the  Tantras  ran  the  risk  of  exposing  themselves 
to  contumely  from  the  educated  community.  Maharaja  Sir  Jatindra 
Mohan  Tagore,  of  sacred  name,  alone  published  two  or  three  works,  with 
the  help  of  the  venerable  Pandit  Jaganmohan  Tarkalankara.  The  Hara- 
tattva-didhiti  associated  with  the  name  of  his  father  is  even  now  acknowl¬ 
edged  to  be  a  marvellously  glorious  production  of  the  genius  of  the  Pandits 
of  Bengal.  The  venerable  (vrddha)  Pandit  Jaganmohan  also  published  a 
commentary  on  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra.  Even  at  that  epoch  such  study 
of  the  Tantras  was  confined  to  a  certain  section  of  the  educated  in  Bengal. 
Maharaja  Sir  Jatindra  Mohan  alone  endeavoured  to  understand  and 
appreciate  men  like  Bam  a  Khepa  (mad  BSmS),  the  Naked  Father 
{Nyamta  Baba)  of  Kadda  and  Svami  Sadananda.  The  educated 


1  Sraban  1320  (July,  August,  1913),  translated  from  the  Bengali. 


374 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


community  of  Bengal  had  only  neglect  and  contempt  for  Sadhakas  like 
Bishe  Pagla  (the  mad  Bishe),  and  Binu,  the  Candala  woman.  Bengal  is 
even  now  governed  by  the  Tantra;  even  now  the  Hindus  of  Bengal  receive 
Tantrik  initiation.  But  the  glory  and  the  honour  which  the  Tantra  had 
and  received  in  the  time  of  Maharajas  K^qa  Candra  and  Sivacandra  no 
longer  exist.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  TSntrik  Sadhakas  of  Bengal  are 
not  so  well  known  at  present.  .  . . 

“  The  special  virtue  of  the  Tantra  lies  in  its  mode  of  Sadhana.  It  is 
neither  mere  worship  (Upasana)  nor  prayer.  It  i&  not  lamenting  or 
contrition  or  repentance  before  the  Deity.  It  is  the  Sadhana  which  is 
the  union  of  Purusa  and  Prakrti;  the  Sadhana  which  joins  the  male 
principle  and  the  mother  element  within  the  body,  and  strives  to  make 
the  attributed  attributeless.  That  which  is  in  me  and  that  for  which  I  am. 
(this  consciousness  is  ever  present  in  me)  is  spread  like  butter  in  milk, 
throughout  the  created  world  of  moving  and  unmoving  things,  through 
the  gross  and  the  subtle,  the  conscious  and  unconscious — through  all.. 
It  is  the  object  of  Tantrik  Sadhana  to  merge  that  self-principle  (Svarat) ' 
into  the  Universal  (Virat).  This  Sadhana  is  to  be  performed  through  the 
awakening  of  the  forces  within  the  body.  A  man  is  Siddha  in  this  Sadhana 
when  he  1b  able  to  awaken  Kundalini  and  pierce  the  six  Cakras.  This  is- 
not  mere  ‘  philosophy  ’ — a  mere  attempt  to  ponder  upon  husks  of  words 
—but  something  which  is  to  be  done  in  a  thoroughly  practical  manner. 
The  Tantras  say:  ‘  Begin  practising  under  the  guidance  of  a  good  Guru;, 
if  you  do  not  obtain  favourable  results  immediately,  you  can  freely  give 
it  up.’  No  other  religion  dares  to  give  so  bold  a  challenge.  We  believe 
that  the  Sadhana  of  the  Moslems,  and  the  ‘  esoteric  religion  ’  or  secret 
Sadhana  (and  rituals)  of  the  Christians  of  the  Roman  Catholic  and  Greek 
Churches,  is  based  on  this  groundwork  of  the  Tantras. 

“Wherever  there  is  SSdhana  we  believe  that  there  is  the  system  of 
the  Tantra.  While  treating  of  the  Tantras  some  time  back  in  the  Safutya, 
I  hinted  at  this  conclusion,  and  I  cannot  say  that  the  author  Arthur 
Avalon  has  not  noticed  it  too.  For  he  has  expressed  his  surprise  at  the 
similarity  which  exists  between  the  Roman  Catholic  and  the  Tantrik 
mode  of  Sadhana.  The  Tantra  has  made  the  Yoga  system  of  Patanjali 
easily  practicable,  and  has  combined  with  it  the  Tantrik  rituals  and  the 
ceremonial  observances  (Karmakanda) ;  that  is  the  reason  why  the  Tantrik 
system  of  Sadhana  has  been  adopted  by  all  the  religious  sects  of  India. 
If  this  theory  of  the  antiquarians — that  the  Tantra  was  brought  into  India 
from  Chaldea  or  Sakadvipa — be  correct,  then  it  may  also  be  inferred  that 
the  Tantra  passed  from  Chaldea  to  Europe.  The  Tantra  is  to  be  found 
in  all  the  strata  of  Buddhism;  the  Tantrik  Sadhana  is  manifest  in  Confu¬ 
cianism;  and  Sintoism  is  but  another  name  of  the  TJLntrik  cult.  Many 
historians  acknowledge  that  the  worship  of  Sakti,  or  Tantrik  S&dhana,. 


PREFACE 


375 


which  was  prevalent  in  Egypt  from  ancient  times,  spread  into  Phoenicia 
and  Greece.  Consequently  we  may  suppose  that  the  influence  of  the 
Tantras  was  felt  in  primitive  Christianity. 

“  The  Tantra  contains  nothing  like  idolatry,  or  *  worship  of  the  doll,’ 
which  we,  taking  the  cue  from  the  Christian  missionaries,  nowadays  call 
it.  .  .  .  The  Tantra  repeatedly  says  that  one  is  to  adore  the  Deity  by  becom¬ 
ing  a  Deity  (Devata)  himself.  The  Isja-devata  is  the  very  self  of  Atman, 
and  not  separate  from  It ;  He  is  the  receptacle  of  all,  yet  He  is  not  contained 
in  anything,  for  He  is  the  great  witness,  the  eternal  Purusa.  The  true 
Tantrik  worship  is  the  worship  in  and  by  the  mind.  The  less  subtle  form 
of  Tantrik  worship  is  that  of  the  Yantra.  Form  is  bom  of  the  Yantra. 
The  form  is  made  manifest  by  Japa,  and  awakened  by  Mantra  Sakti. 
Tens  of  millions  of  beautiful  forms  of  the  Mother  bloom  forth  in  the  heavens 
of  the  heart  of  the  Siddha  purusa.  Devotees  or  aspirants  of  lower  order  of 
competency  (nimna-adhikari),  under  the  directions  of  the  Guru,  adore 
the  great  Maya  by  malting  manifest  (to  themselves)  one  of  Her  various 
*  forms  which  can  be  only  seen  by  Dhyana  (meditation) .  That  is  not  mere 
worship  of  the  idol;  if  it  were  so,  the  image  would  not  be  thrown  into  the 
water;  no  one  in  that  case  would  be  so  irreverent  as  to  sink  the  earthen 
image  of  the  Goddess  in  the  water.  The  Primordial  &akti  is  to  be  awakened 
by  Bhava,  by  Dhyana,  by  Japa,  and  by  the  piercing  of  the  six  Cakras. 
She  is  all-will.  No  one  can  say  when  and  how  She  shows  Herself,  and  to 
what  Sadhaka.  We  only  know  that  She  is,  and  there  arc  Her  names  and 
forms.  Wonderfully  transcending  is  Her  form — far  beyond  the  reach  of 
word  or  thought.  This  has  made  the  Bengali  Bhakta  (devotee)  sing  this 
plaintive  song: 

‘  Hard  indeed  is  it  to  approach  the  sea  of  forms,  and  to  bathe 
in  it. 

Ah  me !  this  my  coming  is  perhaps  in  vain.' 

“  The  Tantra  deals  with  another  special  subject — Mantra  Sakti.  .  . . 
The  Tantras  say  that  the  soul  in  the  body  is  the  very  self  of  the  letters— of 
the  Dhvani  (sound).  The  Mother,  the  embodiment  of  the  fifty  letters 
(Varna),  is  present  in  the  various  letters  in  the  different  Cakras.  Like 
the  melody  which  issues  when  the  chords  of  a  lute  arc  struck,  the  Mother 
who  moves  in  the  six  Cakras,  and  who  is  the  very  self  of  the  letters,  awakens 
with  a  burst  of  harmony  when  the  chords  of  the  letters  (Varnas)  are  struck 
in  their  order.  Then  Siddhi  becomes  as  easy  of  attainment  to  the  Sadhaka 
as  the  keeping  of  an  Amalaka  fruit  in  one’s  hand  when  She  is  roused. 
That  is  why  the  great  Sadhaka  Ramaprasada  awakened  the  Mother  by 
the  invocation — ‘  Arise.  O  Mother  ’  (Jagfhi,  janani) .  That  is  the 
reason  why  the  Bhakta  sang: 

‘  How  long  wilt  thou  sleep  in  the  Muladhara,  O  Mother  Kula- 
kundalinl?  ’ 


376 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  The  Bodhana  (awakening)  ceremony  in  the  Durga  Puja  is  nothing 
but  the  awakening  of  the  Sakti  of  the  Mother,  the  mere  rousing  of  the 
consciousness  of  the  Kuttfahni.  This  awakening  is  performed  by  Mantra 
Sakti.  The  Mantra  is  nothing  but  the  harmonious  sound  of  the  lute  of 
the  body.  When  the  symphony  is  perfect.  She  who  embodies  the  Worlds 
(Jaganmayi)  rouses  Herself.  When  She  is  awake,  it  does  not  take  long 
before  the  union  of  Siva  and  Sakti  takes  place.  Do  Japa  once;  do  Japa 
according  to  rule,  looking  up  to  the  Guru,  and  the  effects  of  Japa  of  which 
we  hear  in  the  Tantra  will  prove  to  be  true  at  every  step.  Then  you  will 
understand  that  the  Tantra  is  not  mere  trickery,  or  a  false  weaving  out  of 
words.  What  is  wanted  is  the  good  Guru — Mantra  capable  of  granting 
Siddhi,  and  application  (Sadhana).  .  . . 

“  The  Tantra  accepts  the  doctrine  of  rebirth.  It  docs  not,  however, 
acknowledge  it  as  a  mere  matter  of  argument  or  reasoning,  but  like  a 
geographical  map,  it  makes  clear  the  unending  chain  of  existences  of  the 
Sadhaka.  The  Tantra  has  two  divisions — the  Dharma  of  Society  (Samaja), 
and  that  Dharma  of  Spiritual  Culture  (Sadhana).  According  to  the 
regulation  of  Samaja-Dharma,  it  acknowledges  birth  and  caste.  But  in 
Sadhana  Dharma  there  is  no  caste  distinction,  no  Brahmana  or  Sudra, 
no  man  or  woman;  distinctions  between  high  and  low  fallow  success  in 
SSdhana  and  Siddhi.  Wc  only  find  the  question  of  fitness  or  worthiness 
(Adhikara-tattva)  in  the  Tantra.  This  fitness  (Adhikara)  is  discovered 
with  reference  to  the  Samskaras  (tendencies)  of  past  existences;  that  is 
why  the  Caridala  Purnananda  is  a  Brahmana,  and  Krpasiddha  the  Sadhaka 
is  equal  to  Sarvananda;  that  is  why  Ramaprasada  of  the  Vaidya  caste 
is  fit  to  be  honoured  even  by  Brahmanas.  The  Tantra  is  to  be  studied 
with  the  aid  of  the  teachings  of  the  Guru,  for  its  language  is  technical, 
and  its  exposition  impossible  with  a  mere  grammatical  knowledge  of  roots 
and  inflections.  The  Tantra  is  only  a  system  of  Sakti-Sadhana.  There 
are  rules  in  it  whereby  we  may  draw  Sakti  from  all  created  things.  There 
is  nothing  to  be  accepted  or  rejected  in  it.  Whatever  is  helpful  for  Sadhana 
is  acceptable.  This  Sadhana  is  decided  according  to  the  fitness  of  the 
particular  person  (AdhikSri-anusare).  He  must  follow  that  for  which  he 
is  fit  or  worthy.  Sakti  pervades  all,  and  embraces  all  beings  and  all 
things — the  inanimate  and  the  moving,  beasts  and  birds,  men  and  women. 
The  unfolding  of  the  powers  (Sakti)  enclosed  within  the  body  of  the 
animal  (Jlva)  as  well  as  the  man  is  brought  about  only  with  the  help  of 
the  tendencies  within  the  body.  The  mode  of  Sadhana  is  ascertained 
with  regard  to  these  tendencies.  The  very  meaning  of  Sadhana  is  unfold¬ 
ing,  rousing  up  or  awakening  of  power  (Sakti).  Thus  the  Sskta  obtains 
power  from  all  actions  in  the  world.  The  Sadhana  of  the  Tantra  is  not 
to  be  measured  by  the  little  measuring-yard  of  the  well-being  or  ill-being 
of  your  community  or  mine. 


PREFACE 


377 


“  ‘  Let  you  understand,  and  I  understand,  O  my  mind ! 

Whether  anyone  else  understands  it  or  not.’ 

“  The  Tantra  has  no  notion  of  some  separate  far-seeing  God.  It 
preaches  no  such  doctrine  in  it  as  that  God  the  Creator  rules  the  Universe 
from  heaven.  In  the  eye  of  the  Tantra  the  body  of  the  Sadhaka  is  the 
Universe,  the  autokratos  (Atma-Sakti)  within  the  body  is  the  desired 
(Ista),  and  the  *  to  be  sought  for  ’  (Sadhya)  Deity  (Dcvata)  of  the  Sadhaka. 
The  unfolding  of  this  self-power  is  to  be  brought  about  by  self-realization 
(Atma-darsana),  which  is  to  be  achieved  through  Sadhana.  Whoever 
realizes  his  self  attains  to  liberation  (Mukti).  .  .  .  The  principles  of  the 
Tantra  must  be  lectured  on  to  the  Bengali  afresh.  If  the  Mahanirvana 
Tantra  as  now  translated  is  spread  abroad,  if  the  Bengali  is  once  more 
desirous  to  hear,  that  attempt  might  well  be  undertaken. 

“  Our  land  of  Bengal  used  to  be  ruled  by  Tantrik  works  such  as  the 
Saradatilaka,  Saktanandatarangini,  Pranatosini,  Tantrasara,  etc.  Then 
the  Mahanirvana  Tantra  did  not  have  so  great  an  influence.  It  seems  to 
'  us  that  considering  the  form  into  which,  as  a  result  of  English  education 
and  culture,  the  mind  and  intellect  of  the  Bengali  has  been  shaped,  the 
Mahanirvana  is  a  proper  Tantra  for  the  time.  Raja  Ram  Mohan  Roy 
endeavoured  to  encourage  regard  for  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra  because 
he  understood  this.  If  the  English  translation  of  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra 
is  well  received  by  the  thoughtful  public  in  Bengal,  the  study  of  the  original 
Sanskrit  work  may  gradually  come  into  vogue.  This  much  hope  we  may 
entertain.  In  fact,  the  English-educated  Bengali  community  is  without 
religion  (Dharma)  or  action  (Karma),  and  is  devoid  of  the  sense  of 
nationality  (Dharma),  and  caste.  The  Mahanirvana  Tantra  alone  is  fit 
for  the  country  and  the  race  at  the  present  time.  .  .  .  An  auspicious  oppor¬ 
tunity  for  the  English-knowing  public  to  understand  the  Tantra  has  arrived. 
It  is  a  counsel  of  the  Tantra  itself  that  if  you  desire  to  renounce  anything, 
renounce  it  only  after  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  it;  if  you  desire  to 
embrace  anything  new,  accept  it  only  after  a  searching  inquiry.  The 
Tantra  embodies  the  old  religion  (Dharma)  of  Bengal.  Even  if  it  is  to  be 
cast  away  for  good,  that  ought  only  to  be  done  lifter  it  has  been  fully 
known.  .  .  .  Will  not  the  Bengali  receive  with  welcome  such  a  full  offering 
(Arghya)  made  from  a  foreign  land  ?  ” 

Whether  (as  the  writer  of  this  article  and  of  the  Introduction  which 
follows  contend)  the  doctrines  and  ritual  of  orthodox  Hinduism  are  suitable 
for  the  India  of  to-day  is  a  matter  for  its  people  to  decide.  I  have  cited 
this  highly  interesting  appeal  to  stand  on  ancient  ways  because,  to  use  the 
language  of  a  friend  of  mine,  and  student  of  the  Buddhist  Tantra,  it  is 
“  pleine  de  ditails  intiressants  et  rivile  d’une  facon  tris  claire  l’itat 
d’esprit  dcs  Bengalis’— je  crois  que  I’on  pourrait  mime  dire  des  Hindous 
•«n  giniral — et  leur  opinion  intime  touchant  le  Tantrisme.” 


378 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Even  if  this  statement  be  held  to  go  too  far,  it  has  certainly  a  very 
wide  application,  and  it  is  for  this  very  reason  that,  in  a  study  of  the  Indian 
religions,  the  Tantra  is  of  such  importance. 

Konarak, 

December  31,  1914.  Arthur  Avalon 


INTRODUCTION 


Vaidik  and  Tantrik  Systems  of  Spiritual  Culture 

Compared 

As  the  Vedas  arc  the  Word  of  Brahma,  so  are  the  Tantras  the  Word  of 
Siva.  Both  are  the  Breath  of  the  Supreme.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that 
the  Hindus  look  upon  the  Vedas  or  the  Tantras  in  the  same  light  as  the 
Christians,  Jews,  and  Muhammadans  regard  the  Revelation  on  Mount 
Sinai,  or  the  Koran.  The  Hindus  have  never  said  that  the  Godhead, 

'  having  assumed  a  human  form,  descended  and  revealed:  Divine  knowledge 
in  human  language  to  His  chosen;  nor  do  they  hold  that  God  or  one  of 
His  Angels  wrote  out  the  Divine  Revelation,  and  then  handed  it  over  to 
His  Rasool.  The  meaning  of  Hindu  Revelation  is  different  from  that 
which  is  generally  assumed.  The  Breath  of  the  Supreme  is  pure  Divine 
Ideation,  from  which  is  evolved  the  universe.  Sitting  on  His  Cosmic  lotus- 
throne,  alone  in  the  primeval  darkness  of  immense  space,  Hiranyagarbha, 
the  infant  Brahma,  the  progenitor  of  the  manifested  universe,  knew  not 
yet  what  He  was  nor  what  He  had  to  do.  Long  years  of  meditation  at 
length  revealed  to  Him  the  Divine  Law,  which  is  Divine  knowledge  (Jnana), 
thus  enabling  Him  to  evolve  the  universe.  From  Brahma  to  the  hosts  of 
illuminated  Rsis  all  are  Seers  or  revealers  of  the  arcane  (immutable 
knowledge),  which,  like  respiration,  comes  forth  from  the  Brahman  who 
is  the  Supreme  at  the  dawn  of  evolution,  and,  like  inspiration,  is  withdrawn 
into  Its  fathomless  Unknowable  depths  on  the  eve  of  dissolution. 

This  eternal,  immutable  Jnana  (knowledge)  is  the  Word  of  Brahma- 
or  Siva  which  is  revealed  to  humanity  in  its  language  by  the  illumined  and, 
therefore,  unerring  Seers,  the  Rsis.  The  Word  is  the  Sound,  the  Spiritual 
Sound,  which  is  the  Vehicle  of  the  manifested  Divinity,  the  Saguna 
Brahman,  and  hence  it  is  that  the  infallible,  immutable  Gnosis,  the  Vedas, 
is  given  the  same  name  as  that  which  is  given  to  the  Divinity  Himself— 
namely,  Sabda-Brahman  (the  Sound-Brahman,  or  Immense  Sound). 

Such  being  Divine  Revelation,  the  Tanlra  is  to  the  human  spirit 
what  science  is  to  its  intellect.  The  evolution  of  the  human  intellect,  and 
the  consequent  mastery  of  man  over  phenomenal  nature,  depend  upon 
the  pursuit  of  scientific  method,  which  reveals  to  man  the  secrets  of  objective 
nature,  and  thereby  renders  her  subservient  to  his  purposes.  Similarly, 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


380 

the  Tantras  have  a  science,  a  methodology,  by  the  pursuit  of  which  the 
human  spirit  can  enter  into  the  secret  background  of  objective  nature, 
free  itself  from  the  trammels  of  the  senses  and  of  their  objects,  and  soar 
above  them  until,  by  gradual  evolution,  it  raises  itself  into  that  plane  of 
consciousness  which  is  unalloyed  bliss.  At  length  the  embodied  spirit 
(Jiva),  after  its  long  and  tedious  journey  in  eight  millions  of  bodies  from 
the  mineral  to  the  animal,  and  many  thousands  of  births  and  re-births  in 
the  human  vehicle,  returns  to  That  whence  there  is  no  journeying  back 
again. 

It  may  here  be  asked,  “  Why  are  there  the  Tantras  when  the  Vedas 
exist  to  point  out  to  man  his  several  paths  to  Dharma,  Artha,  Kama,  and 
Moksa,1 * * 4  the  fourfold  aspirations  of  humanity?”  No  such  question  arose 
for  the  thousands  of  years  during  which  the  Tantrik  method  of  spiritual 
culture  was,  as  it  is  still,  being  followed  by  the  Hindus,  be  they  Saktas, 
Saivas,  Vaisnavas,  Sauras  or  Ganapatyas.*  The  live  classes  of  Hindu 
worshippere  must  be  initiated  according  to  the  Tantrik  method,  which 
has  been  directed  to  be  followed  even  in  the  Vaisnavik  scripture  Srimad 
Bhagavata  (see  Skandha  XI,  chap,  xxvii).  All  the  Bija  Mantras,*  excepting 
the  Pranava  (it),  arc  Tantrik,  and  the  greater  pan  of  the  methodology 
is  either  Tantrik  or  mixed — that  is,  Tantrik  mixed  with  Vaidik,  pure  Vaidik 
methods  having  long  been,  and  rightly  so,  abandoned.  Under  these 
circumstances,  the  question,  thus  mooted,  savours  somewhat  of  scepticism 
and  unbelief  in  the  Hindu  Dharma;  at  any  rate,  it  does  not  lie  in  the  mouth 
of  a  Hindu  to  put  such  a  question.  Be  that  as  it  may,  since  the  question 
arises  in  these  degenerate  days,  it  is  but  meet  that  it  should  be  answered. 

The  influence  of  time  upon  the  constitution  of  man  is  a  factor  which 
must  always  be  borne  in  mind  in  all  considerations  affecting  his  spiritual 
progress.  The  Hindu  Sastras  hold  that  the  cver-rccurring  four  ages 
(yugas)  *  exert  a  mighty  influence  not  only  upon  the  human  race, 
but  upon  everything  in  the  universe.  Men  in  the  first  or  Satya 


1  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  5 astro. 

[Dharma  is  the  performance  of  meritorious  acts  for  the  enjoyment  of 
happiness  in  Heaven. 

Artha  is  the  acquisition  of  wealth  and  of  whatever  renders  life  happy  here 
below. 

K&ma  is  desire  and  its  fulfilment. 

Mok^a  •»  liberation  or  emancipation  from  birth  and  death. —  B.K.M.] 

*  The  five  divisions  of  Hindu  worshippers,  wonhipping  as  their  Istadevata, 
Sakti,  Siva,  Visnu,  the  Sun  and  Gape4a. 

*  [Root-Mantras.  A  particular  Blia  Mantra  is  a  particular  sound- 
expression  of  a  particular  form  of  the  Deity,  so  that  a  Bija  Mantra  is  not  a 
combination  of  letters,  but  is  the  Divinity  Itself. — B.K.M.] 

4  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


381 


Yuga  had  a  very  long  life  on  earth;  their  average  height  was  that  of  a 
giant;  they  were  capable  of  undergoing  very  great  physical  and  mental 
strain.  They  were  truthful,  honest,  kind,  compassionate,  unavaricious^ 
pure-hearted,  and  contented.  Mendacity,  theft,  greed,  lust,  anger,  vanity, 
jealousy,  oppressiveness,  and  other  faults  were  almost  unknown  to  them. 
They  were  a  race  of  sturdy,  pure-minded  humanity,  for  whom  the  method 
of  spiritual  culture  was  that  promulgated  in  the  Vedas.  They  had  their 
passions  under  their  control,  which  enabled  them  not  only  to  undergo 
long  Brahmacarya  1 * *  and  Tapas  *  in  their  youth,  but  to  pass  cheerfully 
through  the  most  rigid  ordeals  incumbent  upon  a  Vaidik  neophyte.  Their 
extraordinary  physical  and  moral  stamina  enabled  them  to  practise  Dharapa 
(concentration),  Dhyana  (meditation),  and  Samadhi  (union  with  the 
Brahman)  for  a  great  length  of  time.  Their  longevity  favoured  their 
protracted  spiritual  exercises  according  to  the  Vedas;  and  their  indomitable 
will,  unyielding  fortitude,  and  strong  physique  permitted  the  performance 
of  Yajnas  s  extending  continuously  over  a  period  of  twelve  years  or  more. 
It  was  for  the  guidance  of  men  of  such  a  constitution  that  the  Vaidik 
method  of  spiritual  self-culture  existed.  Men  of  the  next  Yuga  (Treta) 
naturally  deteriorated,  but  were  still  giants  compared  with  the  pigmies  of 
the  Kali  (or  last  and  present)  yuga.  For  them  the  pursuit  of  Vaidik 
methodology,  though  comparatively  arduous,  was  yet  still  practicable. 
Then  came  the  Dvapara  Yuga,  when  longevity  declined  by  nine-tenths 
and  stature  by  a  half.  Men  began  to  fall  considerably  from  the  moral 
and  spiritual  eminence  of  the  former  two  Yugas.  Lust,  avarice,  jealousy, 
greed,  and  all  other  expressions  of  the  lower  human  nature  appeared 
prominently  on  the  scene,  to  degrade  man  from  his  high  physical  and 
moral  throne.  It  was  then  that  Dharma  4 *  appreciably  declined  owing  to 
man’s  incapacity  to  pursue  and  practise  Vaidik  methods.  The  great 
R$is,  who  arc  ever  solicitous  of  the  weal  of  the  human  race,  perceiving  this 
inevitable  decline,  dived  deep  into  the  perennial  ocean  of  eternal  verities, 
which  is  the  Vedas,  and  drew  from  out  of  them  the  Smrtis  6  as  the  metho¬ 
dology  which  to  them  seemed  to  be  adapted  to  the  altered  circumstances 
of  the  times.  The  Vedas  fell  into  the  shade,  and  in  course  of  time  there 
existed  very  few  who  could  really  unravel  their  mysteries.  The  Pura^ias 
were  devised  partly  to  preserve  Vaidik  teaching  in  the  form  of  legends 
and  myths,  and  partly  to  present  a  popular  exposition  of  the  cardinal 


1  Control  of  the  sexual  propensities  and  over  whatever  ministers  to  them. 

a  Austerities.  Endurance  of  the  pairs  of  opposites,  such  as  hut  and  cold,, 
light  and  darkness,  happiness  and  misery,  pleasure  and  pain,  etc. 

*  Sacrifices,  etc.  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 

4  Religion,  Morality.  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 


■382  PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 

truths  of  the  Sanatana  Dharma  (Vaidik  cult)  to  humanity  such  as  it 
•then  was. 

It  must  not  he  thought  that  the  method  of  self-culture  prescribed  for 
humanity  of  the  Satya  Yuga  was  irksome  and  arduous  to  them.  It  was, 
-on  the  contrary,  exactly  such  as  to  suit  the  people  of  those  times  in  view 
of  their  longevity,  and  of  their  physical  and  moral  strength.  But  to  the 
short-lived,  debilitated,  and  morally  debased  men  of  the  Kali  Yuga  the 
Vaidik  methodology  is  a  mountain-load  which  they  have  not  the  capacity 
to  bear.  What  is  deemed  irksome  to  us  was  but  natural  to  them.  Let  us 
imagine  the  fate  of  some  weak  Indian,  were  the  dumb-bells  with  which 
Ram  Murti,  the  modem  Hercules,  exercises,  placed  in  his  hands,  and  he 
were  bidden  to  strengthen  his  muscles  with  them!  Such  an  Indian  must 
have  instruments  suited  to  his  physique  for  his  physical  culture.  Even  so 
is  the  case  with  spiritual  culture.  How  can  people  whose  average  age  is 
about  thirty  or  forty  years  devote  two-thirds  or  more  of  it  to  Vaidik  study 
and  Vaidik  practice  of  Karmakapda,2  maintaining  strict  celibacy  and 
undergoing  great  privations?  They  have  neither  the  physical  nor  the. 
moral  strength  necessary  for  it.  And,  even  if  it  be  supposed  that  they 
could  do  it  in  some  fashion  or  other,  how  can  they  find  the  time  sufficient 
to  carry  on  the  arduous  duties  of  a  Vaidik  householder,  then  go  to  the 
jungles  to  prepare  themselves  for  jnana  (knowledge),  and  finally,  when 
ripe  in  divine  wisdom,  to  assume  the  Sannyasi’s  bowl?*  This,  indeed,  is 
the  Vaidik  scheme  of  life.  It  was  suited  to  men  of  that  fortunate  time. 
As  it  is  now  impracticable  by  the  average  man,  it  has  naturally  fallen  into 
•disuse.  Methods  of  self-culture  based  on  the  immutable  Vaidik  truths 
are,  from  time  to  time,  either  devised  by  Rsis,  such  as  the  innumerable 
Vaidik  Sakhas,9  most  of  which  are  now  defunct,  or  arc  promulgated  by 
Avat&ras,*  or  revealed  by  the  Godhead  in  view  of  the  times  in  which  men 
live.  The  Vedas  stand  paramount  for  each  one  and  all  of  them.  A 
method,  therefore,  which  is  essentially  at  variance  with  the  Vaidik  cardinal 
truths  must  be  rejected  as  a  man-made  scheme,  unworthy  of  acceptance. 

Towards  the  eve  of  the  third  yuga  (age)  moral  and  spiritual  degenera¬ 
tion  overtook  mankind,  and  it  was  then  that  the  Divine  Mother  and  the 
•Divine  Father  revealed  those  Tantras  which  were  suited  to  the  constitution 
of  the  degenerate  race  of  the  men  of  the  Kali  Yuga. 

The  Divine  Mother,  the  ambrosial  milk  of  whose  breast  ever  flows 
for  the  succour  of  Her  children,  thus  addressed  Her  Lord : 

1  Sacrifices  and  other  rites  and  ceremonies  prescribed  in  the  Vedas. 

*  The  mendicant  ascetic  of  the  fourth  or  last  Vaidik  Alrama.  See 
Introduction  to  T antra  Sdstra. 

*  Branches  or  recensions  of  the  Vedas. 

*  Descents  of  the  Brahman:  when  on  to  the  physical  plane  called 
“  incarnations 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  383 

^  »R1:  | 

qfrapafisfa:  tin  TOfal:  I 

wm  im  n$F  ii 

yin»wi^«><n.  M 
3m  *#r&  iz&mmw.  i 
55^T:  •RfelT  *wiRJl:  fiwwi:  (I 
mi£m-  gwr:  i 

surf  srofcira  ^u^fwpwt:  i 

ww  ^  || 

Mahanirvdna.  First  Ull&sa 

“  Under  cyclic  influence  men  will  naturally  become  evil-minded  and 
will  be  addicted  to  sinful  acts.  O  saviour  of  the  humble !  O  Lord !  graciously 
tell  me  the  means  by  which  men  may  acquire  long  life,  health,  strength, 
vigour,  and  manliness;  by  which  they  may  become  learned  and  sound- 
minded;  by  which  they  may  get  effortless  welfare;  by  which  they  may 
become  endowed  with  great  strength  and  intrepidity;  by  which  they  may 
become  pure-minded,  benevolent,  obedient  to  parents,  faithful  to  their 
wives,  averse  to  others’  wives,  lovers  of  God  and  of  Guru,  supporters  of 
sons  and  relatives;  by  which  men  may  become  knowers  of  Brahman, 
learned  in  Brahmavidya  (the  transcendental  science),  and  thinkers  on 
Brahman.  I  pray  Thee  to  tell  me  the  means  by  which  their  welfare  both 
here  and  hereafter  may  be  secured.” 

The  result  of  this  prayer  is  the  statement  by  Siva  of  the  Tantrik 
methods  of  self-culture  and  of  the  rules  of  conduct  to  be  pursued  by 
Sadhakas  (aspirants). 

Here  I  may  state  parenthetically  that  esoteric  Tantrism  is  as  ancient 
as  the  Vedas. 

sro  i 

fall:  flsfa  U5WRPI  3ft  || 

Sukla  Tajuroeda,  Chap,  aix 

“Oh,  Deva  Soma!  bang  strengthened  and  invigorated  by  Sura 
(wine),  by  thy  pure  spirit,  please  the  Devas;  give  juicy  food  to  the  sacrificer 
and  vigour  to  Br&hmapas  and  Kfattriyas.” 


384 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Rgvtda 

“  Worshipping  the  sun  before  drinking  madira  (wine).” 

Mantra  Brdhmana 

“  By  which  women  have  been  made  enjoyable  by  men,  and  by  which 
water  has  been  transformed  into  wine  (for  the  enjoyment  of  men),”  etc. 

tfldWKTC  *?g  SfaRS  II 
WW  g^:  II 

urcnft  Rfarft  ^  i 

Ramayana,  Uttar  a  K3nda  (20-18-20) 


“  Like  Indra  in  the  case  of  (his  wife)  Sad,  Ramacandra  made  Sita 
drink  purified  honey-made  wine.  Servants  brought  for  Ramacandra 
meat  and  sweet  fruits.” 


1 

Sfaaft  3  faUWNP^  II 
Wi  UtdRHH  I 
U^Rndluft^tl  || 

3?#F??  =*  i^nUT  ^  UfTPH:  (I 


MahSbhirata,  Udyoga  Parva 


“  Aijuna  and  Sri  Krsna  drinking  wine  made  from  honey  and  being 
sweet-scented  and  garlanded,  wearing  splendid  cloths  and  ornaments,  sat 
on  a  golden  throne  studded  with  various  jewels.  I  saw  Sri  Krsiia’s  feet 
on  Aijuna’s  lap,  and  Aijuna’s  feet  on  Draupadi  and  Satyabhama’s  lap.” 

It  is  only  old  wine  in  new  jars  which  is  presented  by  Siva  and 
Bhagavati  to  men  of  the  Kali  Yuga.  An  exoteric  aspect,  however,  suitable 
for  the  generality  of  folk  was  added  to  the  already  extant  esoteric  path, 
which  only  a  few  are  competent  to  pursue. 

It  may  be  contended  that  ISvara  Himself,  having  incarnated  towards 
the  end  of  the  I>vapara  Yuga  for  the  salvation  of  mankind,  there  was  no 
need  for  the  Tantras.  But,  in  the  first  place,  it  must  be  understood  that 
Ifoara,  Hari,  Sri  Kf^rta,  Adyaiakti,  and  Mahadeva  are  one  and  the  same 
Supreme,  only  the  vehicle  in  which  the  Supreme  manifests  Itself  being 
different.  The  Tantras  had  already  been  revealed  before  the  incarnation 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


385 


of  Sri  Kjsria.  The  worship  of  the  Divinity  as  Mother,  which  is  the  principal 
characteristic  of  the  Tantras,  had  prevailed  long  before  the  advent  of 
Sri  Krsna.  The  Vraja  Gopls  worshipped  Katyayani  that  they  might  gain 
Kanai  as  their  husband.  RukminI,  having  paid  homage  to  the  Divine 
Mother,  prayed:  “  O  Katyayani!  O  Mahamaya!  O  Mahayogini!  O  Lady 
Paramount  of  all  the  Lords !  O  Devi !  give  me  the  son  of  Nanda-Gopa  as 
my  consort;  I  bow  to  Thee  ”  (Srimad  Bhagavata,  Sk.  X).  Besides  this, 
I  have  already  drawn  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  Srimad  Bhagavata 
prescribes  the  Tantrik  form  of  worship,  and  that  all  the  Paurariik  worships 
abound  in  Tantrik  Mantras.  To  the  mass  Sri  Krsna  taught  Karma  Yoga 
by  Himself,  performing  various  Yajfias,1  to  the  cultured  classes  He  gave 
the  transcendental  philosophy  of  the  Vedas,  which  is  also  the  rock  upon 
which  the  Tantras  are  built;  and  to  those  who,  having  emancipated 
themselves  from  the  thraldom  of  the  world  and  its  conventions,  to  the 
God-loving  Gopls,  He  imparted  the  highest  mystery  of  Divine  com¬ 
munion,  which  is  likewise  the  highest  mystery  of  Tantrik  worship.  Sri 
•  Krsna  perpetuated  the  Tantrik  methods  of  worship  and  yoga.  He  did 
not  set  up  a  new  method,  nor  did  He  revive  the  obsolete  Vaidik  system. 

Mankind  in  the  Kali  Yuga  have,  by  the  efflux  of  cyclic  time,  dwindled 
into  pigmies,  both  physically  and  spiritually,  though,  by  the  law  of  evolu¬ 
tion,  their  intellectual  capacity  has  increased.  But  it  is  not  through  intellect 
alone  that  Spirit  can  march  on  in  its  career  of  spiritual  progress.  A  man, 
however  great  in  intellectual  accomplishments,  may  yet  be  a  child  so  far 
as  his  spiritual  nature  is  concerned.  To  cultivate  the  spirit,  it  is  necessary 
to  withdraw  to  a  considerable  extent  his  mind  from  the  senses  and  the 
brain,  which  arc  the  instruments  of  intellectual  culture.  The  Kali  Yuga 
dwarf  finds  himself  a  prey  to  the  glamour  of  phenomena  and  the  allure¬ 
ments  of  the  senses.  Not  having  spiritual  insight,  he  takes  the  unreal  for 
the  real,  the  evanescent  for  the  eternal,  bondage  for  freedom,  and  identi¬ 
fying  himself  with  the  body  and  the  lower  mind,  makes  of  himself,  in  spite 
of  his  intellectual  acumen,  in  spile  even  of  his  Upanisadik,  Vedantik,  and 
philosophic  lore,  a  being  who,  so  far  as  spirituality  is  concerned,  is  not  far 
above  the  animal  kingdom.  Not  having  the  strength  nor  the  longevity  to 
pursue  the  arduous  Vaidik  spiritual  training,  man  would  find  himself  in 
a  very  precarious  state,  and  the  Divine  Scheme  of  spiritual  evolution  would 
be  frustrated,  had  not  provision  suitable  to  the  times,  been  made  for  his 
salvation.  The  Divine  Mother,  Adya$akti,  in  Her  unbounded  compassion 
for  Her  children  and  in  concert  with  the  Divine  Father,  Mahadeva, 
therefore,  revealed  the  Agamas  and  the  Nigamas  a  for  the  salvation  of 
humanity.  These  Agamas  and  Nigamas  are  known  as  Tantra. 


1  Sacrifices,  etc.  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 

*  As  to  the  technical  meaning  of  these  terms,  see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 
25 


386 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


There  may  be  souls,  few  and  far  between,  who  having,  after  ages  of 
self-culture,  been  bom  in  the  present  Kali  Yuga  with  a  goodly  stock  of 
spiritual  training,  are  fitted  to  continue  their  evolution  according  to  the 
Vaidik  methods.  But  the  vast  vessel  of  humanity  as  a  mass  would  be 
rudderless  to  pass  safely  through  the  ocean  of  the  world  were  it  not  for 
the  Tantra  which  is  revealed  towards  the  dawn  of  every  Kali  Yuga.  The 
TSntrik  methodology  of  spiritual  self-culture  has  been  followed  and  prac¬ 
tised  these  thousands  of  years,  and  the  country,  from  end  to  end,  is 
permeated  with  it.  But  it  is  to  be  deplored  that,  owing  to  English  educa¬ 
tion,  which  has  given  a  great  impetus  to  intellectual  culture,  and  has 
brought  philosophy  within  the  reach  of  all,  the  aspirations  of  many  who 
are  spiritually-minded  far  exceed  their  spiritual  capacity.  Aspiring  thus 
to  what  they  do  not  deserve,  they  become,  oftener  than  not,  disappointed 
and  dejected. 

The  great  merit  of  the  Tantra  is  its  all-comprehensiveness.  Humanity, 
in  each  of  its  phases  and  conditions,  has  been  provided  with  a  system  of 
culture  suited  to  the  nature  and  capacity  of  each  individual.  The  milk 
of  compassion  of  Jagadamba,  the  Divine  Mother,  flows  perpetually  and 
equally  to  every  one  of  Her  children,  that  they  may  drink  of  it  and, 
acquiring  thereby  spiritual  strength,  may  return  to  Her  loving  lap.  She 
does  not  exact  from  Her  weak  and  short-lived  children  of  the  Kali  Yuga 
long  and  trying  Brahmacarya '  and  austerity  to  show  them  the  way  to 
Her  Lotus  Feet.  Enervating  is  the  influence  of  the  Kali  Yuga,  but,  in 
inverse  ratio,  high  is  the  potency  of  the  medicament  She  has  prescribed 
for  Her  children.  The  low  and  the  high,  all  are  equally  taken  care  of, 
and,  for  all,  the  path  has  been  made  smooth  and  straight. 

The  doctrine  of  the  Tantras,  whilst  recognizing  Samkhya-Patafijala, 
is  Vedantik  Advaitavada.  It  reconciles  duality  (Dvaita)  with  unity 
(Advaita),  the  haven  into  which  the  wandering  ego  will  at  last  find  its 
eternal  rest  after  it  has  worked  out  its  Karma.  The  Advaita  philosophy 
and  the  method  of  self-culture  founded  upon  it,  have  their  origin  in  the 
Vedas.  It  has,  in  modem  times,  been  expounded  by  Srimad  Sahkaracarya; 
at  any  rate,  its  interpretation  by  Sahkaracarya  has  obtained  firm  hold  in 
many  men’s  minds,  and  is  regarded  by  them  as  infallible.  There  is 
another  interpretation  of  Advaitism  by  RarnSnuja,  which  has  also  a  large 
following  in  many  parts  of  India.  Both  Sartkara  and  Ramanuja  are  human 
expounders  of  the  Vaidik  law,  and  both  are  great  souls  of  the  Kali  Yuga, 
but  not  Rsis.  Sankara’s  transcendental  philosophy  advocates  knowledge 
{jnana);  Ramanuja’s  Vedantism  champions  devotion  (bhakti)  as  the 
means  to  salvation.  But  both  agree  in  having  a  pessimistic  standpoint 
The  world,  they  maintain,  has  nothing  in  it  which  may  help  a  man’s 


1  See  ante. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


387 


spiritual  progress.  It  is  darkness,  misery,  and  the  arch-enemy,  *which, 
by  heavy  chains,  binds  down  man.  The  aspirant  to  spiritual  culture  must 
shun  it  as  he  would  the  python  who  might  strangle  him.  All  the  faculties 
of  the  brain-mind  have  to  be  brought  into  requisition  to  combat  the  world, 
both  subjective  and  objective,  and  thus  to  free  the  aspirant  from  the  coils 
of  the  enemy.  By  elaborate  processes  of  discrimination  (vivcka)  the 
world  must  be  negatived;  and  renunciation  of  everything  appertaining  to 
it  crowns  the  efforts  of  the  aspirant  to  knowledge  (jnana).  Even  if  the 
world  were  really  what  it  is  dismally  painted  to  be,  how  many  among  all 
its  millions  can  fight  such  a  battle  and  emerge  as  the  conqueror?  Such  a 
system  of  spiritual  culture  is  bound  to  fail,  and  to  render  religion  an 
impossibility  for  the  mass  of  the  people.  They,  no  doubt,  have  been 
provided  with  an  elementary  system  of  religion,  but  the  root-idea  is  there, 
and  fighting  nature  out  is  the  watchword  everywhere.  This  impotent 
militant  spirit  has  wrought  havoc  in  the  Hindu  mind,  and  rendered  it  a 
slave  to  the  very  world  which  it  has  been  taught  to  vanquish.  There 
•have,  certainly,  been  great  souls  who,  after  a  culture  extending  over  many 
births  and  rebirths,  have  at  last  succeeded  in  attaining  the  spiritual  heights. 
But  such  souls  arc  but  few  among  many  millions.  “  Sarvam  khalvidam 
Brahma  ”  (Verily  all  this  is  Brahman)  is  the  saying  of  the  Veda  and 
Vedanta.  The  neophyte  who  had  been  taught  to  hate  the  world  as 
-Kakabistha  (excrement  of  the  crow),  at  length,  and  after  ages  of  Sadhana, 
finds  it  to  be  nothing  but  Brahman.  The  Kakabistha  then  reveals  itself 
;to  him  in  all  the  glory  of  Divine  effulgence. 

The  Tantras  prescribe  a  very  different  method  of  self-culture.  Here 
the  Great  God  (Maha  Dcva)  Himself  is  the  expounder  of  the  Law — that  is, 
the  Divine  knowledge — which  He  revealed  at  the  dawn  of  creation  in  His 
aspect  as  Brahma. 

“  The  hall  of  sorrow,”  “  the  vale  of  tears,”  “  the  hall  of  torments,” 
and  other  such  names  by  which  schools  of  transcendental  philosophy 
■disparage  the  world,  have  no  place  in  the  Tantra.  The  Tantra  is  the 
Breath  of  Divinity,  and  the  world  is  evolved  from  that  Breath.  The 
Divine  Mother  (call  Her  Father  or  Father-Mother  as  you  choose)  is  in 
■  every  molecule,  in  every  atom,  in  all  things  which  constitute  the  world. 
In  fact.  She  is  the  causeless  Cause  of  whatever  is;  She  is  the  manifested 
Brahman.  The  world  is  the  playground  (Lilaksetra)  of  the  All-blissful 
Anandamayf.  The  world  is  neither  an  illusion  nor  a  non-reality ;  nor  is  it 
under  the  government  of  the  Ruler  of  Hell,  whose  autocratic  tyranny 
drives  sensible  men  first  to  raise  the  standard  of  revolt,  and  then,  when 
they  find  no  King  great  enough  to  drive  the  tyrant  off,  sends  them  in  a 
stampede  to  the  unknown  and  unknowable  kingdom  of  an  Abstraction, 
■which  is  absolute  existence,  absolute  knowledge,  and  absolute  bliss.  But, 
ito  their  misfortune  and  discomfiture,  they  come  to  realize  that  the  ramparts 


388 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


and  battlements  and  fortifications  of  the  kingdom  of  the  supposed  Arch  devil 
are  impregnable;  that,  as  far  as  their  imagination  can  extend,  his  empire 
also  extends;  and  that  their  own  selves — that  is,  their  minds  and  whatever 
constitutes  their  individual  selves — is  of  the  same  material  as  that  with 
which  the  alleged  nefarious  world  is  constituted.  Having  learnt  this  sad 
truth  at  last,-  many  Sadhakas  of  other  schools  fall  precipitately  from  the 
height  of  their  hopes  and  aspirations.  Discomfited,  dejected,  and  crest¬ 
fallen,  they  can  neither  seek  the  supreme  object  of  life  (Paramartha)  nor 
reconcile  themselves  to  the  world,  in  which  they  have  to  live  not  only 
during  their  present  lives  but  in  many  lives  yet  to  come.  This  dismal 
philosophy  is  not  merely  the  heirloom  of  Sadhakas.  It  has  been  almost 
indelibly  impressed  upon  the  consciousness  of  the  ordinary  run  of  men, 
with  the  result  that  the  Hindus  are  in  general  pessimists  and  fatalists  in 
high  degree. 

The  Tantrik  Sadhaka,  by  his  method  of  worship,  is  led  from  the 
outset  to  feel,  and  then  by  higher  processes  of  self-culture  to  realize,  the 
All-blissful  Mother  in  the  universe — nay,  to  regard  the  universe  as  the 
Mother  Herself.  Every  man  and  every  woman  is  to  him  the  Mother 
Herself;  every  living  object  is  to  him  an  object  of  obeisance.  His  thought 
and  conduct  arc  made  to  flow  in  that  all-loving  and  all-reverencing 
channel.  Training  his  mind  thus,  the  Sadhaka,  far  from  finding  the 
world  to  be  a  vale  of  tears,  of  sorrow,  and  of  suffering,  views  it  as  the  very 
Kashmir  of  subjective  and  objective  beauty.  Every  man  and  woman — 
nay,  all  living  things — are  glowing  with  Divinity.  This  state  of  mind  not 
only  quenches  the  thirst  of  his  lower  nature,  but  spiritualizes  its  animal 
tendencies;  not  only  does  it  buoy  him  up  with  fresh  energy  to  pursue  the 
Path,  but  he  attains  liberation  (Mukti),  eating  the  sweet  fruit  of  the  world, 
of  which  the  Sadhakas  of  other  schools  are  deprived.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  man  of  the  world  who  professes  Tantrism  has  every  faith  in  the  reality 
of  the  world.  To  him  it  is  not  an  illusion  nor  an  evil,  and  therefore  he 
exerts  his  utmost  to  make  it  the  happy  lap  of  the  Mother,  which  it  really  is. 

The  Tantrik  Path,  as  I  have  already  said,  is  smooth  and  straight.  It 
is  fitted  to  the  constitution  of  the  Kali  Yuga  man.  The  method  of  Tantrik 
self-culture  has  the  supreme  merit  of  accomplishing  within  a  short  time 
what  other  methods  can  hardly  accomplish  within  a  life.  This  is  testified 
to  by  numberless  adepts,  ancient  and  modern.  And  it  is  for  this  that 
Pauraniks  have  largely  drawn  upon  it.  It  is  also  said  that  Sankaracarya’s 
Yoga  system  owes  much  to  Tantrism.  The  Mahayana  Buddhistic  system 
is  saturated  with  it.  Nagarjuna,  the  great  Buddhistic  Arhat,  who  flourished 
about  seven  hundred  years  ago,  was  a  great  Tantrik  yogi  and  alchemist, 
whose  Bauddha-Tantrik  works  are  the  authority  of  Northern  Buddhism. 

The  Tantra  is  non-sectarian.  It  provides  methods  of  self-culture  to 
all  schools  of  Sadhakas,  be  they  Saktas,  Saivas,  Shuras,  Gifriapatyas,  or 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


389 


V aisnavas,  and  holds  that  the  Sadhana  of  the  Divine,  as  the  All-blissful 
Mother,  is  the  easiest  and  straightest  Path. 

The  Tantra  is  the  only  Divine  Revelation  which  throws  open  the  gates 
of  arcane  nature  to  those  who  have  the  courage  to  peer  into  it.  Man,  in 
his  onward  Path,  must  dive  deep  into  nature’s  heart  to  discover  what  he, 
and  the  universe  of  which  he  is  a  component  part,  is.  The  method  of 
spiritual  self-culture  leads  him,  step  by  step,  to  an  acquaintance  with 
nature’s  supersensuous  beings,  high  and  low,  and  teaches  him  how  to 
utilize  the  services  of  the  high,  and  to  ward  off  the  evil  influences  of  the 
low.  This  knowledge  is  of  essential  importance  to  the  sojourner  on  the 
Path;  for  the  evil  spirits  throw  every  manner  of  obstacles  to  impede  his 
march  and  encompass  his  ruin;  whereas  the  good  spirits  would  gladly  help 
him  on  if  he  but  knew  how  to  obtain  their  help.  Woe  to  the  aspirer  who, 
having  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  lower  spirits,  abandons  his  true  end 
and  aim  and  utilizes  their  service  for  unlawful  worldly  purposes.  Such 
arc  the  black  magicians  whose  lot  is  miserable  both  here  and  hereafter. 

•  Self-culture,  according  to  the  Tantrik  method,  develops  the  Will  and 
endows  the  Sadhaka  with  some  lower  powers  (Siddhis)  within  a  com¬ 
paratively  short  time.  Those  who  are  charmed  with  those  powers  and 
arc  tempted  to  use  them  are  like  to  share  the  same  fate  with  the  black 
ntagidans.  The  end  and  aim  of  high  Tantrik  Sadhana  is  the  realization 
of  the  Advaita  Tattva — the  attainment  of  Kaivalya  Mukti; 1  and  it  is  to 
this  end  that  the  true  Sadhaka  consecrates  not  only  his  present  life,  but  a 
succession  of  lives  extending  over  many  ages.  By  intense  Sadhana  *  he 
has  first  to  free  himself  from  the  chain  of  Karma,3  which  fastens  him  down 
to  the  three  Lokas,  Bhuh,  Bhuvah,  and  Svah.1  When  past  this  triad  of 
the  Karmik  chain,  his  onward  progress  continues  until  he  can  “  pierce 
through  ”  the  Spiritual  Sun  (the  manifested  Brahman),  and  merge  himself 
with  the  Supreme.  There  must,  indeed,  be  very  few,  even  throughout 
countless  periods  of  time,  who  have  attained  this  liberation  (Mukti)  upon 
earth.  But  Sadhakas  who  devotedly  and  pcrscveringly  pursue  the  path 
become  Devas,  Lords  of  Manvantaras,6  Ixikapalas  (planetary  Lords),  and 
Dikpalas  (Lords  of  space),  and  the  like,  and  rise  higher  and  higher  until 
their  work  is  ended.  There  arc  others  who,  refusing  liberation,  come 
down  from  time  to  time  as  Saviours  of  mankind. 

The  investigations  of  the  Tantrik  into  the  inner  temple  of  nature 
reveal  to  him  many  secrets  both  of  an  objective  and  subjective  nature, 

1  Union  with  the  Brahman. 

3  Practise.  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Rostra. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra. 

*  The  three  worlds — Earth,  the  atmospheric  and  celestial  planes. 

*  A  period  of  time.  Sec  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra. 


390 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


including  those  of  the  human  mechanism.  It  is  thus  that  he  is  a  theurgist 
and  thaumaturgist,  alchemist,  herbalist,  metallurgist,  physician,  astrologer,, 
and  astronomer.  The  Tantrik’s  alchemy  crossed  the  ocean  and  reached 
Europe;  his  chemistry  discovered  ages  ago  many  truths,  some  of  which 
have  dawned  upon  European  scientists  within  but  recent  times.  He  was 
the  first  in  the  world  to  use  mercury,  snake  poison,  and  the  metals 
as  medicine.  His  system  of  medicine  has  superseded  that  of  the  Ayurveda. 
His  science  of  Breath  is  still  a  mystery  to  the  Europeans.  Last,  though 
not  the  least,  there  is  what  may  be  called  his  science  of  psycho-physical 
culture,  which  renders  the  physical  body  obedient  to  the  will,  and  thus  by 
certain  postures  not  only  enables  him  to  ward  off  and  cure  diseases,  but 
to  control  the  mind.  The  Tantra,  in  fine,  is  from  its  very  nature  an 
Encyclopsedic  science.  It  is  practical,  and  has  no  concern  with  wordy 
warfare.  It  lights  the  torch  and  shows  the  way,  step  by  step,  until  the 
sojourner  comes  to  the  end  of  his  journey,  realizing  the  universe  in  the 
Brahman  and  the  Brahman  in  the  universe.  So  has  it  been  said: 

f*Hi^  3  ^  SCTfo  l 
^  ^  STPPWli^ftt  II 

“  All  other  Sastras  are  merely  entertaining;  they  can  show  nothing  on 
earth.  But  the  medical  science,  astrology,  and  Tantra  prove  themselves 
at  every  step.” 


Saxti 

In  the  Sanskrit  language  the  word  Sakti  is  feminine.  It  must  not,, 
therefore,  be  supposed  that  that  which  is  denoted  by  it  is  feminine.  There 
is  no  word  in  the  English  language  which  conveys  the  exact  meaning  of 
the  word  Sakti  as  it  is  used  in  the  Hindu  Spiritual  Science.  It  is  neither 
force  nor  energy  of  physical  science.  The  word  Power  may  be  used  to. 
designate  it. 

Power  or  Sakti  is  the  root  of  all  existence.  It  is  from  Sakti  that 
universes  are  evolved;  it  is  by  Sakti  that  they  are  sustained;  and  it  is  into- 
Sakti  that  they  are  finally  resolved.  It  is  the  same  as  Parabrahmaru 
Parabrahman  is  Existence  (Sat),  Consciousness  (Cit),  and  Bliss  (Ananda). 
By  Sakti  is  denoted  exactly  these  three  aspects  in  the  One  without  a  second. 
Cit  is  the  Power,  and  the  two  other  aspects  go  along  with  it;  for  without 
consciousness  there  would  be  neither  existence  nor  happiness.  Sakti,  then, 
is  essentially  absolute  Satcitananda. 

Within,  so  to  say,  the  womb  of  Sakti,  is  Maya  or  Prakfti,  the  matrix 
of  the  universe  which,  during  cosmic  inaction  or  Mahapralaya  is  potential’ 
and  latent,  even  as  fire  is  latent  within  wood.  Maya  or  Prakrti  is  not  a 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


391 


non-reality,  nor  a  state  of  equilibrium  of  certain  things;  nor  is  it  a  some¬ 
thing-nothing,  something  little  (yatkincit),  an  idea  (bhava).  It  is  as 
immutable  and  permanent  as  the  triple  aspects  already  mentioned.  It 
enfolds,  to  use  chemical  phraseology,  a  triad  of  Gunas  or  Reals  which, 
mutating  and  combining,  make  up  the  appearance  of  the  ever-changing 
world,  and  which,  in  Mahapralaya,  are  withdrawn  within  the  bosom 
from  whence  they  emerged.  Maya  or  Prakrti  it  must  be  understood, 
is  ever  in  association  with  Cit,  be  it  in  Mahapralaya  or  in  evolution;  for 
there  is  only  One  without  a  second,  and  Prakrti  must  be  an  inseparable 
part  or  power  of  It.  Parabrahman  thus  has  a  quadruple  aspect,  and  is 
symbolized  in  the  Tantra  by  a  grain  of  gram  (Canaka).  As  a  grain  of 
gram  is  a  bi-valvular  unity,1  enveloped  by  an  outer  skin,  so  is  Sakti  a 
Unity  having  the  characteristic  of  a  duality  when  viewed  through  the  veil 
of  Prakrti.  This  duality  is  neither  Jiva  nor  Atma,  nor  matter  and  spirit, 
but  a  polarity.  From  the  fathomless  womb  of  Parabrahman  or  Sakti  is 
evolved  the  universe,  and  into  that  womb  it  is  withdrawn  when  the  hour 
for  final  dissolution  strikes.  Sakti  is,  therefore,  both  centrifugal  and 
centripetal  Power.  It  is  male-female,  and  therefore  expressed  by  the 
word  Brahman,  in  the  neuter  gender. 

The  notion  seems  to  prevail  that  what  the  Tantriks  posit  by  Sakti  il 
dead  matter,  Prakrti.  Nothing  can  be  farther  from  this  unwarrantable 
conclusion.  Sakti,  as  that  which  is  potential,  is  much  more  expressive 
than  Brahman  considered  as  something  neutral.  Prakrti,  the  matrix  of 
the  universe  of  names  and  forms,  is  the  veil  through  which  alone  it  is 
possible  to  approach  the  Sat-cit-ananda  Brahman  by  the  human  conscious¬ 
ness.  It  is  the  destiny  of  human  consciousness,  which  is  relative,  to  merge 
itself  into  the  one  true  Consciousness,  which  is  absolute,  and  thus  to  fulfil 
the  end  and  aim  of  life.  The  Tantra,  therefore,  along  with  all  other 
spiritual  sciences,  worships  the  Absolute  through  that  in  which  It  is 
manifested. 

The  expression  “  Veil  of  Prakrti  ”  is,  however,  not  an  appropriate 
one.  It  is  borrowed  from  the  Theosophical  literature.  Cit  or  Sakti  is 
self-manifesting.  But  immutable,  undifferentiated  Prakrti  is  the  only 
ground  in  which  it  can  manifest  itself  so  as  to  be  cognizable  to  the  self, 
be  it  of  man  or  of  Devata.  Prakrti,  therefore,  is  not  a  “  Veil,"  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  Sakti  itself  in  Evolution.  When  the  first  hour  strikes 
for  the  commencement  of  the  cosmic  play  (Jagat  Lila),  Prakrti  becomes 
the  Conscious  Sakti,  the  Unmanifested  Manifest,  the  First  Cause,  the 
Supreme  Power,  the  Sun  of  all  suns,  from  which  universes  are  to  evolve. 
It  is  the  K&rana  Deha  (causal  body)  of  Cit-Sakti.  It  is  impersonal,  all- 
pervading,  immutable,  and  Cit  itself.  It  is  the  God  of  all  Gods;  the 


1 A  grain  of  gram  contains  within  one  enfolding  sheath  two  halves. 


392 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


object  of  the  highest  form  of  human  worship — nay,  the  object  of  the 
worship  of  all  the  Gods,  including  Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Mahesvara.  It  is 
symbolized  in  the  Tantra  by  a  Bindu  or  dot  (.),  and  expressed  in  human 
language  by  the  word  “  Gnghana  ”  1 

Bindu  or  Sakti  is  neither  male  nor  female,  but  partakes  of  the  charac¬ 
teristics  of  both.  In  its  Advaita,  or  non-dual  nature,  is  a  dual  characteristic, 
a  polarity,  as  I  have  already  said,  which  may  be  expressed  by  the  terms 
“  positive  ”  and  “  negative,”  and  which  is  denominated  in  the  Tantra  by 
Siva  and  Sakti;  pum  (male),  and  stri  (female);  Sun  and  Moon;  the  male 
principle  being  Siva,  and  the  female  principle  being  Sakti  or  Mahakall, 
Mahakala  (Sri  Krsna)  is  as  much  Sakti  as  Mahakall,  the  one  bring  the 
female,  and  the  other  the  male  aspect  of  the  selfsame  Sakti. 

The  Tantra  is,  therefore,  all-comprehensive  and  non-sectarian.  It 
enjoins  the  worship  of  Sakti — that  without  which  nothing  can  live  and 
move  and  have  its  being.  The  worship  of  Visnu  is  as  much  a  part  of  it 
as  is  the  worship  of  Kali,  although  the  worship  of  the  latter  is  held  to  be 
comparatively  easy,  and  more  suited  to  the  present  race  of  men  for  reasons 
which  I  shall  have  occasion  to  state  later. 

It  must  not  be  thought  that,  although  Prakrti  becomes  conscious 
Sakti  in  manifestation,  it  is  in  any  of  its  forms  the  ultimate  object  of  worship. 
Worship,  however,  implies  a  duality.  And  although  essentially  the  wor¬ 
shipper  and  the  worshipped  are  the  same— and  it  is  the  realization  of  this 
Unity  which  is  the  end  and  aim  of  worship — yet  Sakti  in  manifestation 
cannot  but  be  the  object  of  worship  so  long  as  the  Ego  has  its  individuality, 
which  is  made  of  the  stuff  of  Prakrti.  It  is,  therefore,  that  in  spiritual 
culture  the  Tantra  postulates  two  Saktis:  Vacaka  Sakti  is  manifested  Gt 
in  Prakrti,  and  Vacya  Sakti  is  Gt  itself,  which  is  the  goal  to  be  attained. 
It  is  by  the  realization  of  Vacaka  Sakti  that  the  Vacya  Sakti  can  be  attained. 
The  Vacya  Sakti  is  formless,  and  cannot,  therefore,  be  the  object  of  any 
form  of  Upasana  (worship)  or  yoga  practice. 

The  manifested  Sakti  is  the  Power  which  is  the  object  of  adoration, 
prayer,  and  praise.  So  long  as  the  human  Soul  remains  such,  it  cannot 
go  beyond.  But  when  the  Soul— that  is,  the  causal  body  or  Karana 
Sarira — is  cast  off,  the  duality  for  ever  disappears,  and  the  self  is  merged 
into  that  which  is  Sakti  in  itself. 

By  whatever  name  it  may  be,  whether  Krsna,  Visnu,  Siva,  Kali, 
Durga,  Ganapati,  or  Surya,  It  is  the  manifested  Sakti,  the  Saguna  Brahman. 
But  there  are  certain  sects  of  worshippers  who  assign  an  inferior  position 
to  Sakti,  and  regard  it  as  a  female  power  only,  subordinate  to  the  God  they 
worship.  That  the  God  they  worship  is  Sakti  as  well  is  ignored  by  them. 
In  this  they  take  an  anthropomorphic  view  of  the  Supreme,  who  according 

1  That  is,  a  thickened  mass  of  tit  or  consciousness. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  393 

to  them,  is  male  (Saktiman),  and  Sakti  (his  Consort)  is  his  inferior,  like 
some  conceptions  of  an  Oriental  wife.  The  Tantra  repudiates  this  view, 
and  regards  both  Saktiman  and  Sakti  as  the  male  and  female  aspects  of 
the  one  Sakti.  Where  would  be  Visnu  or  Krsna  without  Sakti  (Power)  ? 
Bereft  of  Sakti,  the  Vehicle,  designated  as  Krsna  or  Visiju,  and  all  other 
Vehicles  from  the  highest  God  to  the  lowest  atom,  would  be  but  a  dead 
inert  mass.  It  is  Sakti  which  is  life,  intelligence,  and  consciousness.  No 
slate  of  existence  can  be  superior  to  it.  Both  these  aspects  of  Sakti  are 
inseparable,  and  the  one  is  not  inferior  to  the  other,  any  more  than  the 
negative  pole  of  electricity  can  be  considered  to  be  subordinate  to  the 
positive.  Hence  it  is  that  all  the  Gods  are  associated  with  Goddesses; 
hence  it  is  that  Rama  has  his  Sita,  Krsna  has  his  Radha,  and  Mahakala 
is  accompanied  by  Mahakall. 

It  is  Sakti  (Power)  which  creates,  Sakti  which  sustains,  and  Sakti 
which  withdraws  into  Her  fathomless  womb  innumerable  worlds  in  infinite 
space.  Indeed,  She  is  space  itself,  and  every  being  therein. 

Physical  science  is  acquainted  with  one  of  Her  physical  powers,  and 
that  by  its  abnormal  manifestations  only;  for  the  nature  of  electric  force 
is  unknown  to  the  scientist.  Science  used  to  distinguish  force  and  matter 
as  two  different  things;  but  the  trend  of  scientific  thought  seems  to  have 
undergone  in  this  respect  a  revolution.  The  theory  is  now  put  forward 
that  matter  is  a  modification  of  force.  Spiritual  science  holds  exactly  a 
similar  view,  but  on  a  very  broad  line  of  thought,  and  maintains  that  from 
Sakti  (Power)  everything  emanates,  first  in  the  spiritual,  then  in  the 
celestial,  and  then  in  the  terrestrial  Kosmogenesis. 

It  is  peculiar  to  the  Universal  Mother  that,  unlike  human  and  animal 
mothers.  She  devours  and  then  disgorges  Her  offspring.  Seated  in  the 
lotus  forest,  which  floats  in  the  water  of  space,  She  is  perpetually  devouring 
and  disgorging  the  Elephant  (the  Kosmos).  When  She  disgorges  and 
nourishes  She  is  the  most  beautiful  of  the  beautiful;  Her  beauty  enchants 
even  the  Gods;  She  is  then  BhuvancSvari  and  Bhuvanamohini.  It  is  the 
descent  of  Spirit  into  matter.  When  She  devours  Her  offspring  with  Her 
thousand  mighty  jaws,  She  is  Mahakall;  Her  transcendental  beauty  is 
realizable  only  by  the  wise  and  the  devotee.  Westerners  and  Hindus 
demoralized  by  Western  civilization  have  the  profanation  to  call  this  Her 
aspect  as  ugly  and  terrible.  Yes,  She  is  terrible  to  the  earth-bound  soul. 
But  to  the  pilgrim  on  the  path  of  return — the  path  of  Nivrtli — the  Majesty 
of  Her  beauty  and  the  message  of  peace  and  comfort  in  Her  right  hand 
are  ineffable.  It  was  this  stupendous  Majesty  which  the  Lord  Sri  Krsna 
(who  is  the  same  as  Kali)  exhibited  to  His  dear  disciple  Aijuna,  when  the 
latter  entreated  Him  to  appear  before  him  in  His  godly  form.  Aijuna  had 
entreated  Him  thus:  “  O  Yogi,  how  should  I  contemplate  Thee  so  as  to 
know  Thee?  O  Bhagavan!  in  what  object  should  I  contemplate  Thee?” 


394 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


The  Lord  then  enumerated  some  of  His  Vibhutis  (distinguishing  qualities) 
which  yet  could  not  satisfy  the  disciple;  for  they  were  too  abstract  for 
contemplation  and  devotion.  The  Bhakta  (devotee)  must  have  something 
tangible  to  fix  his  mind  upon.  Therefore  he  exhorted  the  best  of  Purusas 
to  show  him  his  Divine  Rupa  (Form).  Endowing  him  with  spiritual  vision, 
the  Lord  showed  him  the  Rupa  with  which  he  had  to  commune.  Sankara- 
carya,  in  his  commentary,  describes  this  Rupa  as  endowed  with  Knowledge 
(jnana),  Godly  Qualities  (aiivarya),  Sakti,  Strength,  Virility  (vlrya),  and 
Effulgence  (tejas).  O  Sadhaka  of  the  Vaisijava  school!  is  this  Rupa  ugly 
and  hideous?  O  devotee!  do  not  be  deluded  by  the  glamour  of  earthly 
beauty;  feast  your  spiritual  eye  with  the  Majesty  of  Divine  grandeur 
and  beauty. 

She  is  Maya,  because  Maya  is  a  part  of  Her  nature ;  She  is  Avidya 
because  She  binds;  She  is  Mahamaya  because  She  dominates  Maya; 
She  is  Vidya  because  She  holds  the  torch  which  illumines  the  Path  of 
return,  She  is  Mahavidya  because  She  is  the  Mother  in  whose  sweet  and 
soothing  bosom  the  wayworn  pilgrim  finds  his  eternal  rest. 

The  Divine  Mother  is  thus  the  cause  both  of  bondage  as  well  as  of 
liberation.  She  is  in  all  things,  and  all  things  are  in  Her.  She  is 
consciousness;  She  is  intelligence;  She  is  sleep;  She  is  wakefulness;  She  is 
hunger;  She  is  thirst;  She  is  shadow;  She  is  substance;  She  is  power;  She 
is  impotence;  She  is  mercy;  She  is  compassion;  She  is  bashfulness;  She  is 
peace;  She  is  esteem:  She  is  beauty;  She  is  ugliness;  She  is  prosperity; 
She  is  adversity;  She  is  memory:  She  is  truth;  She  is  falsehood;  She  is 
good;  She  is  evil;  She  is  avarice;  She  is  contentment;  She  is  mother; 
She  is  error;  She  is  rectitude;  She  is  illusion:  She  is  reality;  She  is  the 
power  of  the  senses:  She  is  ignorance;  She  is  knowledge;  She  is  the 
mysterious  dispenser  of  a  double  force,  from  one  of  which  surges  forth  the 
universe,  and  the  other  it  is  which  withdraws  it;  She  is  the  tide  and  ebb, 
the  inspiration  and  respiration,  the  diastole  and  systole  of  the  universe. 
Both  centrifugal  and  centripetal  forces  are  in  Her.  The  Human  Ego  has 
the  privilege  to  choose  either  of  these  spiritual  forces  to  work  out  its  destiny: 
by  the  one  it  is  thrown  into  the  eddy  of  Pravrtti  (desire),  to  be  whirled 
round  and  round  until  the  great  dissolution  (Mahapralaya) ;  the  other 
girts  it  up  with  that  power  and  energy  which  will  enable  it  to  strike 
through  the  eddy  and  reach  the  serene  centre  of  the  Mother’s  bosom. 

The  three  aspects  of  Sakti,  which  constitute  the  Trinity  of  the  Hindus, 
are  Volition  (iccha&akti),  Administration  (kiyaSakti),  and  Cognition  (jiiana- 
Sakti).  These  are  the  three  Powers  which  direct  the  evolution,  the 
sustentation,  and  the  involution  of  the  Universe.  The  Nirvapa  Tantra 
says:  “  In  the  region  of  Truth,  the  Formless  and  Resplendent  Pervader  of 
the  universe,  casting  off  the  covering  of  Maya,  became  divided  into  two. 
The  idea  of  creation  arises  from  the  division  of  Siva  and  Sakti,  O  Parvati!' 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE- VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


395- 


Firat  of  all  was  bom  the  son  named  Brahma.  Said  Kalika:  Hear  me, 
O  son!  O  Hero!  take  care  to  marry.  Hearing  this,  Brahma  then  said: 
There  is  no  Mother  other  than  Thee;  O  beautiful  One,  give  me  a  Sakti 
(wife).  Hearing  this,  the  Mother  of  the  universe,  from  Her  own  body, 
gave  him  a  charming  wife,  who  is  the  second  Mahavidya,  the  great  Power 
named  Savitri.  Associate  thyself  with  Her,  and  publish  the  Veda  (Divine 
Knowledge),  and  become  the  Creator  of  the  universe  with  case.  The 
second  son  bom  was  Visnu  vehicled  by  Sattva  guna.  Said  Kalika:  Hear 
me,  O  Son!  O  Hero!  take  care  to  marry.  Said  Visnu:  Thy  sight  renders 
man  passionless.  O  Mother,  O  Consort  of  Siva!  How  can  I  marry  unless 
Thou  givesl  me  a  fair  maiden  for  wife  ?  The  Mother,  from  Her  own  body, 
gave  him  a  wife.  O  Goddess!  She  is  the  Vaisnavi  Mahavidya,  Srividya. 
With  her  help  Visnu  sustains  the  universe.  The  third  son  begotten  was 
the  great  Yogi  SadaSiva.  Seeing  him  Mahakali  beamed  with  joy.  O  Son, 
great  Yogi!  give  heed  to  what  I  say.  Who  is  there  a  male  like  thee,  and 
who  is  there  a  female  like  me?  Therefore,  O  Siva!  forthwith  marry  me. 
Sadaiiva  said:  O  Mother!  Thou  hast  verily  said  the  truth;  there  is  none 
who  charms  like  Thee.  There  is  no  Purusa  like  myself.  But  I  cannot 
marry  Thee  in  Thy  present  body.  If  Thou  art  kind  to  me,  change  Thy 
body.  Instantaneously  Mahakali  gave  him  Bhuvaneivari.’’ 

The  Kubjika  Tantra  says:  “  Brahman!  creates,  surely  not  Brahma,, 
therefore  Brahma  is  but  a  Preta,”  1  and  so  on  with  regard  to  Visiju  and 
Siva.  Brahma,  Vispu,  and  Siva  are  quite  powerless  to  discharge  their 
respective  functions  without  Sakti  or  Power. 

The  Devibhagavata  (Skandha  III.  Cha.  vi)  relates  that  Brahma 
having  asked  Adyaiakti  as  to  whether  She  was  male  or  female,  the  Divine 
Mother  thus  explained  Herself: 

*ini**i  ti 


■swtaifeM  5  sm  fffoi  AdiddH.  I 
+18  It 


1  Literally  a  disembodied  spirit  before  the  performance  of  the  obsequial' 
rites.  Here  used  in  the  sense  of  an  inert  corpse,  for  He  can  do  nothing 
without  the  vivifying  influence  of  Sakti. 


396 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


s?  ^  n 
»ns  lift  9  2*ii«iit  »i  ^  i 
flft  f^:  ^  3^:  || 

“  That  Male  (Purusa)  and  Myself  are  ever  the  same.  There  is  no 
■difference  between  Him  and  Me.  The  Purusa  is  what  I  am;  I  am  what 
the  Purusa  is.  Difference  arises  only  from  ignorance.  He  who  is  intelli¬ 
gent  and  is  free  from  the  bondage  of  the  world  can  know  our  subtle 
difference;  there  is  no  doubt  about  this.  The  one  without  a  second, 
perennial  Brahman  becomes  dual  at  the  time  of  creation.  As  a  single 
lamp  becomes  dual  by  difference  of  Upadhi  (condition),  as  a  single  face 
becomes  dual  in  the  form  of  an  image  in  a  mirror,  as  a  single  body  appears 
in  dual  form  with  its  shadow,  even  so  our  images  are  many  owing  to  the 
difference  of  minds  (which  are  made  up  of  Maya).  O  Aja  (unborn), 
for  the  purpose  of  creation  the  difference  arises  at  the  time  of  creation. 
It  is  only  the  difference  between  the  seen  and  the  unseen.  At  the  lime 
of  final  dissolution  I  am  neither  male  nor  female  nor  neuter.  The 
difference  (male  and  female)  is  imagined  only  at  the  time  of  creation.” 

To  form  a  concept  of  the  Godhead  one  worships,  the  idea  of  Sakti  or 
Power  is  for  the  devotee  a  surer  guide  than  the  nebulous  idea  of  Atma 
(spirit).  It  is  very  hard  for  those  who  have  no  faith  in  Sakti  to  trace  the 
“  one  without  a  second  ”  through  the  physical  to  the  spiritual  plane  of 
existence,  there  being  no  appreciable  link  to  chain  the  planes  together. 
But  a  worshipper  of  Sakti  need  contend  with  no  such  difficulty.  In  all 
the  planes  of  existence  he  finds  the  one  power  all-pervading.  It  is  therefore 
laid  down  in  the  Tantras: 

9%:  | 

“  O  Devi!  without  a  knowledge  of  Sakti,  Mukti  (liberation)  is  mere 
mockery.”  1 


The  Soundless  Sound 

The  second  bell  of  cosmic  evolution  tolls.  A  flutter,  a  vibration 
thrills  the  triple  Gunas  in  the  womb  of  Sakti.  Rajas,  the  active  guna, 
after  its  long  Pralayik  slumber,2  receives  an  impulse  towards  awaking. 
Immediately  as  its  eyes  open  a  bifurcation  takes  place  in  Sakti,  resulting 
in  what  all  religions  designate  the  Verbum,  the  Sabdabrahman — the 

1  That  is,  without  such  knowledge  liberation  cannot  be  attained. 

1  That  is,  slumber  during  dissolution  (pralaya). 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


397 


immense,  all-pervasive,  all-comprehensive,  unbroken,  undifferentiated 
Sound  Spiritual.  One  aspect  of  Sabdabrahman  is  Nada,  and  another 
aspect  is  Bindu.  As  Nada  She  is  the  Mother,  and  as  Bindu  He  is  the 
Father,  of  the  universe.  They  are  an  inseparable  twain,  ever  in  association 
in  cosmic  evolution.  Sabdabrahman  is  the  God,  the  Lord,  the  Mother, 
the  Word,  the  object  of  worship  of  all  sentient  beings. 

The  first  manifestation  of  Sakti  in  the  Spiritual  plane  is  “  Sound,” 
which  is  undifferentiated  intelligent  AkaSa,1  the  Cidakasa  3  of  philosophy, 
the  Saguna  Brahman  of  religion. 

This  Sound,  the  causeless  cause  of  manifold  universes,  must  not  be 
confused  with  the  sound  with  which  we  are  familiar,  and  which  we  have 
been  taught  to  regard  as  the  result  of  vibrations  in  molecules  of  matter. 
It  is  not  the  Karyakasa  or  atomic  AkaSa  of  philosophy,  which  is  integrated 
and  limited  and  evolved  from  Tamasik  Ahahkara.5  Nor  is  it  a  quality 
of  such  Akasa.  It  is  Git  Sakti  vehicled  by  undifferentiated  Prakrti — the 
manifested  Godhead,  uncreatc,  unborn,  and  eternal.  Sabdabrahman  is 
consciousness  and  intelligence,  both  cosmic  and  individual.  It  is  the  dual 
Sakti  in  unity,  inseparatcly  associated,  though  functioning  in  different  ways. 

Duality  in  unity  is  the  root  principle  of  the  Tantra.  This  duality 
may,  for  want  of  a  better  expression,  be  called  a  “  polarity  The 
Vaisnavas  have  adopted  this  idea  in  their  Krsna  and  Radha,  Hari  and 
LaksmI.  The  Hindu  Sastras  hold  that  the  universe  has  been  evolved  from 
the  One — “  without  a  second  ” — Cause,  and  that  that  Cause  is  both 
immanent  and  transcendent.  The  microcosm  is  in  miniature  what  the 
macrocosm  is.  Evolution  proceeds  from  the  subtle  to  the  gross.  We  find 
in  the  great  physical  force  a  duality  of  poles,  which  when  brought  in 
mutual  contact  produces  a  magnetic  current.  In  the  realms  of  atoms  and 
molecules  the  same  force  has  the  aspects  of  attraction  and  repulsion  which 
make  the  existence  of  material  objects  possible.  In  living  mechanisms  the 
heart  and  the  lungs  are  worked  by  a  dual  force  which  draws  in  and  throws 
off  blood  and  air,  which  render  organized  life  possible.  The  fluid  space 
of  the  earth  is  dominated  by  a  similar  dual  force,  which  rhythmically 
causes  both  ebb  and  tide.  We  thus  find  that  what  little  we  know  of  force 
on  the  physical  plane  gives  countenance  to  the  theory  of  duality  in  unity. 

But  the  most  extraordinary  fact  is  the  duality  of  all  organized 
structures.  Take,  for  instance,  the  structure  of  man.  It  is  a  duplex 


1  “  Ether,”  the  quality  of  which  is  sound,  but,  as  hereafter  explained,  not 
the  ether  of  the  elements  (mahabhuta). 

*  Literally,  “  ether  consciousness,”  which  is  explained,  post. 

5  Ahahkara  or  egoity  is  threefold,  according  as  one  or  other  of  the  gun  as 
of  Prakrti  predominate  in  it.  Tamasika  Ahahkara  is  therefore  that  form  of  this 
tattva  in  which  the  inert  Tam  as  guna  predominates. 


398 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


.Structure.  “  Man  is  not  formed,”  to  quote  the  learned  author  of  “  The 
Mechanism  of  Man,”  “  as  one  whole,  but  of  two  distinct  halves  joined 
together.  He  has  two  sets  of  bones,  muscles  and  nerves,  and  two  brains. 
True  there  is  but  one  liver,  stomach,  and  intestine.  This  at  first  sight 
seems  to  be  in  conflict  with  the  theory.  But  further  examination  shows 
the  internal  structure  to  be  substantially  the  same  as  the  external  frame, 
the  only  difference  being  that  the  position  is  reversed,  and  instead  of  the 
point  of  junction  being  side  by  side,  as  with  the  framework  of  bone  and  its 
appendant  muscles,  it  is,  from  the  necessity  of  its  position  within  the  body 
and  the  requirement  of  but  one  heart,  one  liver,  etc.,  only  a  junction  of 
two  halves  before  and  behind.  Tracing  these  internal  parts  from  their 
point  of  union  with  the  external  frame  at  the  neck,  it  will  be  seen  at  once 
that  one-half  of  the  whole  springs  from  one  side  of  the  body,  and  the  other 
half  from  the  other  side,  and  that  they  unite  at  a  central  line  throughout, 
precisely  as  the  two  halves  of  the  external  frame  are  united.  .  .  .  Looking 
beyond  the  human  body,  it  will  be  seen  that  all  organized  beings  arc  built 
.after  the  same  fashion.  It  will  be  found,  on  close  inspection,  that  all 
other  animals  are  so  made.  So  likewise  arc  all  vegetables.  Every  leaf  is 
duplex;  so  is  every  part  of  a  flower.  All  organized  beings  arc,  in  truth, 
formed  of  two  halves  joined  together  at  a  central  line.  Nothing  organized 
is  structured  as  one  whole."  1 

This  duality  in  unity  in  all  organized  structures  is,  as  is  pointed  out 
by  the  learned  author  above  quoted,  due  to  the  fact  that  two  parents  arc 
required  for  the  production  of  every  organized  being,  and  that  each  parent 
contributes  a  germ,  by  the  junction  of  which  the  duplex  structure  is  formed. 
The  human  mind,  also,  has  a  dual  nature — it  is  swayed  as  much  by  senti¬ 
ments  as  by  reason.  Taking  all  these  facts  into  consideration,  it  will  not 
be  wrong  to  infer  that  the  Cause  from  which  these  effects  are  produced  is 
a  dual  unity.  The  Tantra,  however,  postulates  this  as  a  fact,  and  builds 
up  its  Science  upon  it. 

The  Nada  aspect  of  Sabdabrahman  is  Kula-kun<jalinl.  Kula  means 
the  female  organ  of  generation  (jwm).  In  the  Bhagavadgita  (xiv.  3), 
Lord  Sri  Krsija,  as  the  male  power,  says : 

tfs*  TO  11 

“  My  womb  is  the  great  Eternal;  in  that  I  place  the  seed;  thence 
cometh  the  birth  of  all  beings,  O  Bharata. 

According  to  the  Mahanirvaija  Tantra,  Kula  means  Jiva,  Prakrti, 
Dik,  Kila,  and  the  five  mahabhiitas  (sensibles)  taken  together.  Now,  all 


1  “  The  Mechanism  of  Man,”  by  E.  W.  Cox,  vol.  i. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


399 


these  taken  together  constitute  the  intelligent  and  material  cause  of  the 
universe,  which  is  the  same  as  Yoni.  As  Kun^ala  means  the  Coil  (of  the 
serpent),  Kulakunqlalinl  means  the  Spiritual  Power  (the  cosmic  Mother) 
who  Creates  the  universe  of  names  and  forms  and  coils  up  round  it.  She 
is  Cit  or  consciousness  vehicled  by  Prakrti.  She  is  Sound,  because  the 
first  manifestation  of  Pralqti  is  sound,  which  is  withal  Jnana  (knowledge) 
and  Light  Spiritual.  She  is  the  One  Breath,  One  Life.  She  is  universal 
Consciousness,  all-pervading,  not  limited  by  time  and  space.  She  clothes 
herself  with  Prakrti  when  the  hour  for  creation  arrives.  Essentially  She  is 
not  different  from  the  male  aspect  of  Sabdabrahman,  as  both  the  aspects 
arc  indissolubly  associated.  She  is  the  Paraprakj-ti  or  Supreme  Power  of 
Brahman.  From  Her  is  sprung  the  universe,  from  Mahat 1  to  the  atom, 
and  the  universe  is  under  Her  control.  She  is  Adya — the  First  Cause; 
She  is  all  knowledge;  and  Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Siva  have  their  being  in 
Her.  She  knows  the  universe,  but  none  know  Her.  She  is  the  embodi¬ 
ment  of  all  Power;  She  is  subtle;  She  is  gross;  She  is  manifested;  She  is 
•  unmanifested;  She  is  formless,  and  yet  with  form. 

From  the  Sound  Spiritual  proceed  two  lines  of  Evolution.  The  first 
line  is  by  SadriSa  parinama — that  is,  the  resolution  of  like  to  like — and 
consists  of  three  female  Powers  and  their  male  Counterparts  in  the  following 
order: 

Raudri— Rudra  — fire  — Tamas — Power  of  Cognition. 

(/)  («) 

Jyes^ha — Brahma  — Moon — Rajas  — Power  of  Volition. 

(/)  (*) 

Varna  — VifQU  — Sun  — Sattva  — Power  of  Causation  (action). 

if)  O) 

These  three  male  and  female  Powers  are  the  first  triplication  of  the 
One  Sabdabrahman,  possessing  within  itself  the  three  Powers  of  Volition, 
Causation,  and  Cognition;  the  three  gunas,  Sattva,  Rajas,  and  Tamas; 
and  Its  duplex  Constitution.  This  line  of  creation  is  called  Sound  Creation 
(Sabdasfsti). 

The  second  line  of  evolution  is  called  Form-creation  (Arthasf?ti)- 
It  is  subdivided  into  two.  The  first  subdivision  embraces  the  Lords,  and 
the  second  the  Tattvas.*  These  are  the  Lords  of  our  universe,  having 
Paraiiva  as  their  Overlord.  There  are  seven  cosmic  centres  (Lokas)  of 
Power,  over  each  one  of  which  each  of  these  Lords  presides  in  association 
with  an  aspect  of  Kulakundalini  as  His  guiding  Power.  The  centres  and 
the  Lords  are  thus  stated: 


1  The  Tattva  also  called  Buddhi. 

*  Buddhi  and  other  derivatives  of  Prai|ti. 


400 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Loka 

Male  Power 

Female  Power 

Satyam 

Paraiiva  or  Mahavisnu 

Adyaiakti  Mahakali 

Tapah 

Sambhu 

Siddhakali 

Janah 

Sadafiva  (called 
Ardhanarisvara) 

Mahagauri 

Mahah 

Isa 

Bhuvaneivari 

Svah 

Rudra 

Bhadrakali 

Bhuvah 

Visnu 

Radha 

Bhuh 

Brahnia 

Savitri 

These  seven  centres  are  also  seven  planes  of  consciousness.  Philosophy 
generalizes  these  seven  planes  of  consciousness  into  three— viz-,  Jagrat 
(waking),  Svapna  (dreaming),  and  Susupti  (slumbering,  or  dreamless 
sleep).  The  cosmic  Virat-body  is  waking,  Hiranyagarbha-body  is  dream¬ 
ing,  and  the  Isvara-body  is  slumbering  consciousness.  The  Virat-body  is 
evolved  from  the  last  three  centres,  the  Hiranyagarbha-body  from  the 
three  centres  above  it,  and  the  livara-body  from  the  highest  centre.  The 
consciousness  of  Visnu  is  higher  than  that  of  Brahma,  the  consciousness 
of  Rudra  is  higher  than  that  of  Visnu,  and  the  consciousness  of  ISvara  is 
higher  than  that  of  the  three;  and  so  on  until  we  come  to  Parasiva  or 
Mahavisnu,  whose  consciousness  is  the  highest  form  of  relative  consciousness. 

The  second  subdivision  begins  with  Mahat  Tattva,  and  ends  in  the 
five  Bhutas,  which,  being  familiar  to  every  student  of  Hindu  philosophy, 
need  not  be  detailed  here. 

Kulakundalini  is  the  vital  Power  of  the  universe.  Her  vehicle  is  the 
Hamsa  of  philosophy  and  religion.  By  Hamsa  is  to  be  understood  the 
vital  force,  dual  in  its  character,  borne  upon  which  She  creates  the 
universe. 

In  the  human  body  Kulakundalini  is  said  to  reside  in  the  root-centre 
(Muladhara  cakra)  of  force  evolution  inside  a  coiling  nerve  (Nadi).  She 
coils  round  Svayambhu  the  male  aspect  of  Sabdabrahman,  and  covers  his 
mouth  with  Her  hood.  Though  sound  is  perpetually  emanating  from 
Her  body,  She  is  said  to  be  slumbering.  What  Her  slumber  in  the  human 
body  means  is  explained  later  on,  I  shall  now  deal  with  the  sound 
emanating  from  Her  body,  and  its  nature  and  function. 

Hamsa  is  the  name  given  to  the  root-sound  emanating  from  the 
Pranik  Vehicle  of  the  Divine  Mother.  From  Hamsa  emanate  forms,  and 
from  forms  evolve  universes,  and  all  that  appertains  to  them.  This  Pranik 
Vehicle  is  a  duality  of  male  and  female  principles,  the  function  of  the 
male  principle  being  to  throw  out  and  that  of  the  female  principle  to  draw 
in,  or,  in  other  words,  they  are  centrifugal  and  centripetal  respectively. 
In  the  human  body  and  in  the  body  of  every  living  being  the  Pyapik 
principle  or  Vital  Power  expresses  itself  in  expiration  and  inspiration,  and 
represents  the  sum  total  of  a  man’s  life  on  this  earth  in  his  present  birth. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


401 


From  the  involuntary  expiration  of  breath  in  the  human  body  arises  an 
inaudible  sound,  called  Ajapa  Mantra,  which  every  man  recites  unawares. 
CosmicaUy  this  Ajapa  is  the  centrifugal  and  centripetal  energy,  the 
attraction  and  repulsion  of  forces,  observed  everywhere;  spiritually  these 
two  mighty  aspects  of  the  same  Sakti  are  PravrttL  and  Nivftti,  and  so 
it  is  said: 

91  WRPft  I 

“  That  lady  paramount  of  all  the  Lords  as  the  great  Vidy&  is  the 
cause  of  liberation;  and  as  (Avidya)  She  too  is  the  cause  of  bondage.” 
— Candi- 

The  Vital  Power  is  called  N5da,  Jiva,  Prana,  Ghosa,  and  by  other 
names.  The  Vital  Sheath  of  the  Divine  Serpent  undergoes  differentia¬ 
tions.  From  the  first  differentiation  arise  the  Seeds  of  the  universe.  When 
the  second  differentiation  takes  place,  the  root-sound  Hamsa,  Sound  and 
•  Form,  and  all  other  dualities,  come  into  being.  In  its  triple  state  the  three 
Gunas,  three  Vedas,  three  articulate  sounds  (Varnas),  three  nerves  (Nadis), 
and  other  triads,  are  projected.  In  its  quadruple  form  four  Vargas 
(sounds)  and  the  quartemaries  are  evolved.  In  this  wise  various  Sounds 
and  Forms  are  produced,  until  in  the  fiftieth  differentiation  the  fifty 
articulate  Sounds,  called  Varnas,  or  letters  of  the  alphabet,  are  manifested 
in  the  Divine  Vehicle  of  the  cosmic  Mother.  It  is  therefore  said  that  the 
Divine  Mother  sings  the  symphony  of  the  universe,  the  beginning  of  which 
is  creation,  and  the  conclusion  is  dissolution  (Mahapralaya) . 

In  the  human  mechanism  the  Muladhara  Cakra  is,  as  already  said, 
the  seat  of  Mother  Kulakugdalim,  where  She  with  the  fifty  Vargas  as  the 
strings  of  Her  Divine  harp  forever  chants  Her  Celestial  Song.  Blessed 
be  the  Soul  who  has  listened  to  this  Divine  Nada,  and  thereby  liberated 
itself  from  the  trammels  of  Maya. 

The  fifty  Vargas  are  fifty  sounds  of  the  Sanskrit  language,  or  rather 
of  the  primitive  language  of  which  Sanskrit  is  the  modification.  These 
articulate  sounds  have  been  represented  in  different  languages  by  different 
symbols;  and,  according  to  the  divergent  conformations  of  the  vocal  organs 
of  different  races  inhabiting  different  zones  of  the  earth,  they  are 
pronounced  differently.  For  instance,  the  first  sound  of  the  vowels  is 
symbolized  by  at  in  Sanskrit,  a  in  English,  a  in  Greek,  I  in  Arabic,  and 
so  on.  It  is  pronounced  aw  in  Sanskrit  and  derived  languages  in  India, 
a  in  English,  Alpha  in  Greek,  Aliph  in  Arabic,  and  so  on. 

These  sounds  are  very  subtle  things,  effulgent  and  chromatic.  They 
are  living  energies,  which  human  thought  prompts  to  expression  through 
the  vocal  organ.  When  the  seat  of  Sound — that  is,  the  vehicle  of  Mother 
Kugdalini — is  penetrated  by  the  active  principle  (Rajas)  of  Prakfri  the 
26 


402 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


sound  is  called  dhvani.  Dhvani  penetrated  by  the  inert  principle  (Tamas) 
is  called  Nada.  Nada  becomes  Nibodhika  by  a  further  impression  of 
Tamas,  and  by  successive  impressions  of  the  same  quality  it  passes  through 
successive  stages  of  Ardhendu  and  Bindu,  until  at  last  it  translates  itself  in 
the  Muladhara  Cakra  into  what  is  known  as  the  Para  state  of  sound. 

When  the  sound  reaches  the  Svadhijthana  Cakra,  it  is  called  Pasyanti. 
It  is  then  propelled  to  the  heart-cakra,  where  it  makes  a  more  distinct 
vibration,  which  is  audible  to  the  Yog?  during  his  first  stage  of  concentra¬ 
tion,  when  his  mind  for  the  time  being  is  withdrawn  within  itself.  This  is 
called  the  Madhyama  state  of  sound.  It  is  what  is  known  as  Nada  Anahata 
Sabda  of  Mother  Kundalini.  It  is  stated  in  Saradatilaka,  a  Tantrik  work 
of  high  authority,  that  the  first  sound  heard  by  a  Yogi  is  like  the  humming 
of  bees;  the  next  sound  he  hears  is  like  that  of  air  passing  through  a  hollow 
bamboo ;  then  is  heard  a  bell-like  sound ;  and  so  on.  When  a  Yogi  becomes 
accustomed  to  the  hearing  of  sound,  his  inner  consciousness  wakens  and 
he  begins  to  acquire  knowledge,  which  dispels  the  dark  illusion  of  the 
world.  From  the  heart-lotus  the  sound  is  propelled  upwards,  and,  coming 
into  contact  with  the  eight  organs  of  speech,  it  issues  from  the  mouth  and 
becomes  audible. 

The  fifty  primary  sounds  which  constitute  the  vehicle  of  Mother 
Kundalini  are  called  Varijas,  because  they  are  coloured.  They  are  of 
various  colours:  some  red,  some  white,  some  blue;  some  are  the  colour  of 
melted  gold,  and  others  of  coral,  and  some  are  like  electric  light  or  other 
colours  and  hues.  They  are  called  Aksaras  because,  forming  as  they  do 
the  body  of  the  universal  Mother,  they  are  imperishable.  They  are  called 
Matrka,  because  from  them  the  whole  universe  of  forms,  visible  and 
invisible,  terrestrial  and  celestial,  has  sprung  into  being. 

That  molecular  vibrations  or  sounds  with  which  we  arc  familiar 
produce  forms  on  sandy  or  some  such  surface  over  which  sound-vibrations 
can  act  without  friction,  is  known  to  scientific  musicians.  A  particular 
tune  produces  a  particular  form.  A  tune  being  a  compound  of  primary 
sounds,  it  stands  to  reason  that  primary  sounds  have  forms  as  well.  If 
each  of  the  seven  tones  of  the  gamut  did  not  possess  a  form  of  its  own,  it 
would  be  quite  impossible  for  a  tune,  which  is  a  compound  of  primary 
tones,  to  express  itself  in  a  form.  It  has  been  found  by  experiment  that 
each  tune  has  a  peculiar  figure  or  form  of  its  own.  It  may  therefore  safely 
be  said  that  each  musical  form  or  figure  is  the  molecular  expression  of  a 
tune,  which  is  a  compound  of  primary  sounds.  If  this  state  of  things  is 
found  to  be  the  order  of  nature  in  the  world  of  molecules,  it  is  but  reasonable 
to  suppose  that  the  same  law  should  prevail  at  the  primordial  source, 
whence  worlds  are  evolved.  The  T antra  says  that  the  Kosmos  is  evolved 
out  of  the  fifty  MatfkS  sounds.  The  meaning  of  this,  in  the  light  of  the 
above  experiment,  is  plain  enough.  The  MStfka  sounds,  in  the  processes 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


403 


of  evolution,  undergo  various  permutations,  thereby  giving  rise  to  subtle 
figures,  which  form  the  ground-work  upon  which,  with  the  accumulation 
■of  atoms  and  molecules,  bodies  of  diverse  density  and  shape  are  formed. 
The  gross  human  figure  of  bones,  muscles,  and  flesh  has  for  its  groundwork 
a  network  of  fine  nerves.  Behind  this  nerve-structure  is  the  subtle 
body,  or  Suksma  Sarira.  Farther  in  there  is  the  K&rana  Sarlra  or 
■causal  body,  the  fifty-stringed  lute  (Vlija)  of  Kup^alini  Herself,  upon 
which  She  plays  the  Divine  Song  of  the  universe  until  its  dissolution 
(Mahapralaya). 

When  in  the  course  of  evolution  rational  man  appeared,  it  was 
necessary  to  impart  to  him  knowledge  for  the  perpetuation  of  the  human 
race  as  well  as  for  his  liberation.  It  was  to  this  end  that  the  Self-existent 
Manu  came  down  and  gave  him  language.  And  what  is  that  Language? 
It  is  not  an  arbitrary  invention  of  words  to  signify  objects.  The  Divine 
Manu,  knowing  the  sound-forms  of  objects,  gave  man  those  forms  and 
taught  him  the  relation  between  those  forms  and  the  objects  they  connote. 
•  These  sound-forms  are  words,  and  the  objects  they  connote  are  the 
meanings  of  those  words.  The  sound-forms  or  subtle  bodies  of  universal 
objects  being  imperishable,  words  are  imperishable.  Gross  bodies  are 
■evanescent,  but  the  subtle  body  or  Sfiksma  Sarlra  persists  till  final  dissolu¬ 
tion  of  the  universe,  and  the  Karana  Sarira,  or  causal  body,  is  said  to  be 
eternal.  The  language  which  Manu  taught  was  the  primeval  language  of 
root-words,  remnants  of  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  Vaidik  Mantras. 
Sanskrit  is  derived  directly  from  it.  The  innumerable  languages  of  the 
world  are  its  corruptions,  or  rather  adaptations,  in  consonance  with  man’s 
environments  in  different  parts  of  the  earth,  and  the  consequent  divergent 
configurations  of  his  vocal  organs.  In  every  language  there  are  root-words 
which  are  identical.  There  could,  in  fact,  be  no  language  without  such 
root  words  as  their  basis.  True  it  is  that  man  has  invented  arbitrary 
words,  and  given  them  conventional  meanings,  but  they  are  mere  accre¬ 
tions  to  the  original  language.  One  may  hear  of  words  being  coined 
(often-times  from  the  primitive  root- words),  but  who  has  ever  heard  of 
language  being  invented  ?  If  none  have  so  heard,  then  scoffing  at  what  the 
Tantras  reveal  as  the  origin  of  language  is  unjustified.  It  may,  in  any 
case,  be  accepted  as  a  workable  theory  which  will  help  materially — nay, 
powerfully — in  aspiration  for  spiritual  development.  This  aspect  of  the 
■question  I  shall  touch  on  later  when  dealing  with  Mantra. 

The  Bhagavadgita  is  regarded  universally  as  the  highest  embodiment 
■of  spiritual  truths.  In  it  {chap,  viii,  verse  13)  we  find: 


3lRiAwqi(  TO  I 

s  *1#  'wf  11 


404 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“‘Om!’  the  one-syllable d  Eternal  (Brahman),  reciting,  thinking 
upon  Me,  he  who  goeth  forth,  abandoning  the  body,  he  goeth  on  the 
highest  path.” 

If  words  be  human  inventions,  and  meanings  conventional,  then 
would  it  not  be  foolish  to  believe  that  a  conventional  word  like  aft  (Om) 
should  possess  such  mighty  power  as  to  liberate  a  nun  from  his  cumula¬ 
tive  Karmic  causation,  and  to  carry  him  there  whence  there  is  no 
return? 

The  Mandukyopanisad  opens  thus: 

“  One  is  livara.  The  universe  is  its  meaning.  Present,  past,  and 
future  are  all  one.  That  which  is  beyond  the  triple  time  is  also  aft 

(Om)” 

In  the  Srimad  Bhagavata  we  read : 

“  Sound  Brahman  and  the  Supreme  Brahman  are  both  my  immutable 
body.” 

From  these  and  innumerable  other  passages  in  the  Vedas,  Upanisads, 
Dariana*,1  and  Puranas,  the  discerning  will  Icam  that  the  Tantra  only 
explains  what  the  Veda  asserts. 

The  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  embodied  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  John 
strengthens  our  position,  and  proves  the  unity  of  truth  in  all  revelations. 
The  Gospel  says:  “  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  the  Word  was  God, 
and  the  Word  was  with  God.”  The  “  Word  ”  is  the  Logos  of  the  Greeks 
and  Kabalists,  and  the  Sabdabrahman  of  the  Hindus.  When  the  Kosmos 
is  evolved,  the  Supreme  Sacchidananda,*  becomes  Sabdabrahman, 
the  Word;  and  Sabdabrahman,  or  livara,  being  uncreate,  unborn, 
and  immutable,  is  ever  with  the  Supreme.  Hence  in  the  Gita  we 
read:  iffloft  flfasifj  "lam  the  image  of  God.” 

“  That  is  my  Supreme  abode,  whence  there  is  no  coming  back.” 

If  livara  be  vehicled  by  Sound,  then  the  inevitable  conclusion  is  that 
the  Kosmos  is  evolved  out  of  Sound. 

That  there  was  one  root-language  is  also  borne  out  by  the  Biblical 
myth  of  the  confusion  of  tongues.  Philology  has  considerably  cleared  the 
ground,  and  the  day  may  not  be  very  far  distant  when  Science  will  astonish 


1  Systems  of  philosophy. 

1  Existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss— or  the  Brahman. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  405 

the  world  by  its  discovery  of  the  one  common  root-language  of  the 
human  race. 


Mantra 

If  one  were  to  make  a  Mantrik  survey  of  India,  one  would  be 
astonished  to  find  that  the  Hindu  life  is  saturated  with  Mantra.  Be  he  a 
peasant  or  a  prince,  his  whole  life  is  regulated  by  Mantra.  Various  are 
the  purposes  for  which  Mantras  are  invoked,  and  their  enumeration  here 
will  help  towards  the  elucidation  of  the  subject  under  consideration- 
Mantras  are  invoked  for:  (i)  Secondary  mukti  (liberation).  (2)  Worship 
of  the  manifested  God.  (3)  Worship  of  DevatSs.  (4)  Communication 
with  Devatas.  (5)  Acquisition  of  super-human  powers.  (6)  Feeding 
Pitrs  and  Devatas.  (7)  Communication  with  Ghosts  and  Upadevatas.1 
(8)  Warding  off  evil  influences.  (9)  Exorcizing  Devils.  (10)  Cure  of 
diseases.  (11)  Preparing  curative  water.  {12)  Doing  injury  to  plants, 
‘animals,  and  men.  (13)  Eliminating  poison  from  the  animal  body. 
(14)  Influencing  others’  thoughts  and  actions.  (15)  Bringing  men,  beasts, 
Upadcvas  1  and  Ghosts  under  control.  {16)  Purification  of  the  human 
body  by  ceremonies  called  Samskaras,  and  many  other  purposes,  which 
need  not  be  mentioned  here.  From  the  mother’s  womb  to  the  funeral 
pyre  a  Hindu  literally  lives  and  dies  in  Mantra. 

What,  then,  in  this  mighty  force  which  is  believed  to  wield  such  a 
great  influence  upon  a  nation  reputed  to  be  both  spiritually  great  and 
intellectually  acute  ?  From  the  hoary  antiquity  of  Vaidik  Mantras  down 
to  modem  times,  great  and  varied  are  the  changes  which  have  taken  place 
in  the  Hindu’s  philosophical  thoughts  and  religious  ideas,  but  Mantra 
stands  with  its  head  erect  and  limbs  sturdy  as  the  undying  witness  of  God’s 
grace  to  His  Hindu  sons.  The  question,  I  fear,  has  not  been  seriously 
asked  by  the  English-educated  Hindu.  The  Hindu  of  the  old  school  takes 
it  as  an  heirloom  from  his  ancestors  without  ever  trying  to  understand 
what  it  really  is  and  how  it  can  be  utilized.  He  recites  it  parrot-like,  and 
thinks  he  has  done  his  duty.  It  is  this  indifference  on  the  one  hand,  and 
apathy  on  the  other,  which  has  rendered  the  Hinduism  of  the  present  day 
almost  a  de  ad  religion. 

The  above  enumeration  of  uses  for  which  Mantras  are  invoked  will 
have  shown  that  they  are  of  various  classes,  and  that  they  possess  subtle 
powers  of  acti  on  on  the  spiritual,  mental,  and  physical  planes  of  existence. 
They  are  not  words  and  sentences,  neither  arc  they  syllables,  although 
they  are  ex  pressed  by  written  character  in  words  and  sentences.  There 
are  various  Mantras  in  the  vernacular  of  India,  used  for  non-spiritual 


1  Lesser  spirits. 


406 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


purposes.  In  the  Bengali  language,  especially  in  the  form  in  which  it  is- 
used  in  Assam,  there  are  numbers  of  Mantras  which  are  apparently  quite 
meaningless;  many  of  the  words  used  therein  are  no  words  at  all,  for  they 
convey  no  meaning.  Words  and  sentences  which  have  no  meanings  to- 
convey  to  the  understanding  are  no  part  of  a  language.  If  you  believe 
that  they  are  efficacious,  you  must  admit  that  they  are  sound-powers 
acting  on  different  planes  of  consciousness. 

The  efficacy  of  Mantras  is  not  a  matter  of  opinion,  a  mere  theory 
which  needs  cogent  arguments  to  bring  it  home  to  men’s  minds.  It  is  a 
fact  in  the  arcana  of  nature  revealed  by  God,  testified  to  by  the  unim¬ 
peachable  evidence  of  selfless,  disinterested  Rsis  of  hoary  antiquity,  and 
corroborated  by  hosts  of  SSdhakas 1  of  all  ages.  There  are  numberless 
S&dhakas  still  living  who  have  had  direct  proof  of  the  efficacy  of  Mantras. 
Each  one  of  us  can,  if  we  will,  obtain  such  direct  proof  ourselves.  The 
Tantra  which  is  known  as  the  Mantra-Sastra  is  an  exact  science,  and  does 
not  shrink  from  the  severest  test  which  may  be  applied  to  it.  Use  a 
Mantra  under  the  directions  of  a  competent  Guru,  and  you  will  acquire' 
direct  evidence  of  its  efficaciousness.  Our  hereditary  professional  Gurus 
initiate  us  with  sacred  Bijamantra  *  and  Gayatri,*  and  teach  us  Mantras 
for  the  worshipping  of  our  Istadcvata.4  We  go  on,  as  we  have  been  taught, 
from  the  day  of  our  initiation  to  the  end  of  our  life,  but  it  may  be  that  no 
result  is  perceived.  If  we  ask  our  Guru  how  this  is  so,  he  will  reproach 
us  with  impatience  and  want  of  devotion.  Placed  in  this  predicament 
we  lose  our  faith  in  Mantras,  and  become  indifferent  to  them.  But  wc  do- 
not  pause  to  reflect  whether  it  be  the  fault  of  the  Mantra,  or  of  the 
instructor  from  whom  we  had  the  misfortune  to  receive  it,  or  of  ourselves. 
It  is  quite  an  error  to  suppose  that  if  Mantra  be  a  sound  power,  it  must 
yield  the  result  sought  for  as  soon  as  it  is  pronounced.  Now,  electricity 
is  a  physical  force  which  has  been  imprisoned,  so  to  say,  in  various  sorts 
of  mechanical  contrivances  in  order  to  produce  various  results.  There 
are  books  which  describe  these  contrivances  and  prescribe  their  uses. 
Can  anyone,  by  mere  reading  of  the  books,  handle  these  machineries  and 
produce  the  desired  results?  If  such  be  the  case  in  dealing  with  physical 
forces,  how  much  more  is  practical  instruction  necessary  for  the  handling 
of  spiritual  and  psychical  forces. 

For  the  moment  I  leave  out  all  other  Mantras  in  order  to  confine  my 
attention  to  such  alone  as  are  known  as  Bija  Mantras.  They  are  the 

1  In  a  general  sense  worshippers.  See  as  to  Sadhana,  or  practice,  In¬ 
troduction  to  Tantra  Sdttra. 

*  Seed-Mantras.  See  ante. 

*  The  celebrated  Vaidik  Mantra  of  that  name.  See  Introduction  to  Tantra 
Sdstra.  “Gayatri." 

4  The  chosen  Deity  of  the  particular  worshipper. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


407 


powers  which  carry  us  safe  through  the  world’s  entanglements  towards 
that  haven  of  peace  and  bliss  for  which  the  human  mind  naturally,  though 
unconsciously,  yearns,  though  in  ignorance  of  the  path  it  diverges  into 
different  treacherous  ways,  lured  by  the  tempting  light  of  Kama  desire. 

From  what  has  been  said  regarding  Varnas,  it  will  have  been  seen 
that  Vanjas  are  living,  conscious  sound-powers.  From  Vargas  are  evolved 
secondary  sound-powers,  called  Mantras.  It  has  also  been  related  how 
Sabdabrahman  becomes  a  septenary  of  male  and  female  Powers  for  the 
purposes  of  creation.  Innumerable  other  Powers  are  evolved  from  them, 
who  constitute  the  hierarchy  of  Devatas.  The  Powers,  higher  or  lower, 
are  spiritual  entities,  possessing  body  and  mind,  though  the  body  of  the 
higher  Gods,  such  as  Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Siva,  is  to  the  human  conscious¬ 
ness  as  unfathomable  as  the  human  body  and  mind  is  to  a  cell  inhabiting 
the  human  body.  The  embodied  higher  Devatas  are  Lords  of  Mercy. 
They  also  manifest  themselves  from  time  to  time  in  the  Deva  Loka  (the 
region  of  Devas),  and  on  earth  for  the  good  of  Devas  and  of  humanity. 
They  create  their  Avatara-body  when  they  find  it  necessary  to  manifest 
themselves.  The  bodies  of  Devatas  are  sound-powers.  In  the  fourth 
chapter  of  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra  it  is  said: 

diwwi  aura raft  i 

*WMi  foirerra ■nsnfa^HSF|:  n 

■'ta&n  ^  fsspn  <K«i*nEjj4i  twr  i 

WH  dHRUSHWlftofl  || 

. . 

(^pfgra:, 

“  For  the  benefit  of  worshippers,  for  the  good  of  the  universe,  and  for 
the  destruction  of  Danavas,1  Thou  assumest  various  bodies.  Thou  art 
four-handed,  two-handed,  six-handed,  and  eight-handed.  For  the  safety 
of  the  universe  Thou  bearest  divers  weapons.  In  the  Tantras  are  revealed 
Yantras,  Mantras,  and  other  methods  of  self-culture,  according  to  those 
bodies.” 

Again,  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  same  Tantra  it  is  stated: 

m  dHWUlfvflfo  I 


1  Demons. 


406 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


W  fWaiPWfts  I 


tfi  WHkiWroi: 


^3  ^5  ^  a^3  ^  ^  Hflfildi:  i 

^  $  <13  ipsn:  Slfe  11 

“Thy  manifestations  are  infinite,  having  diverse  colours  and  forms. 
Different  are  the  methods  which  must  be  diligently  followed  in  order  to 
realize  them.  None  can  describe  them  all.  A  little  of  Thy  favour  has 
enabled  me  to  describe,  according  to  My  power,  the  methods  of  their 
worship  and  attainment  in  the  Tantras.” 

“  Thy  Mantras  are  infinite,  by  crores  and  arbuds’  .  .  .  Because  thou 
art  the  Adya  Prakrti,  therefore  all  the  Mantras  mentioned  in  the  Tantras 
are  Thy  Mantras.” 

From  the  above  it  will  appear  that  Mantras  are  the  bodies  of  the 
Devatas.  They  are  not  gross  (sthula)  bodies,  but  subtle  vehicles  through 
which  they  manifest  themselves.  In  the  Yamalatantra  this  is  more 
expliddy  stated : 

“  Verily  the  body  of  the  Devata  arises  from  Bija.” 

The  SaktSnandatarafigiru,  a  Tantrik  work  of  great  reputation  by  the 
renowned  Brahmananda  Gin,  explains  the  word  (vljat)  to  mean 
qufa  (varrtat).  And  301  (varna)  means  sound-power,  as  already  explained. 

If.  one  reads  between  the  lines,  divesting  his  mind  of  the  Illusion 
Theory  of  Srimat  Sankaracarya,  he  may  find  a  corroboration  of  the 
principle  above  laid  down  in  the  following  couplet  from  the  fourth  chapter 
of  the  Bhagavadgita: 

www  *13.  | 

ill#  BWPIIWWi  || 

“  Unborn,  immutable, ;  Lord  of  all  beings  though  I  am,  entering  my 
Prakfti,  I  am  bom  by  my  own  M&ya.” 

Here  the  Lord  ISvara,  and  not  Parabrahman,  explains  to  his  disciple 
Aijuna  how  He  incarnates — that  is,  appears  in  human  body.  His  birth 

1  An  arbud  is  ten  crores,  and  a  crore  it  ten  millions. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


409 


is  not  like  the  birth  of  men;  it  is  divyam  (Divine)  ( vide  Sloka,  ix,  chap.  iv). 
The  suk?ma  iarira  (subtle  body)  of  man,  after  having  spent  its  subjective 
Karma,  is  impelled,  by  its  own  inexorable  destiny,  to  take  birth  on  earth 
through  an  earthly  father  and  mother,  who  supply  the  materials  for  the 
building  up  of  the  physical  body.  The  Lord  has  no  such  SOk^ma  Sarira 
which  may  serve  as  the  instrument  by  which  a  Sthula  body  functions; 
for  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  without  Prapa  (the  vital  principle)  an 
Antahkarana  (the  mind  and  the  scnsorium)  a  physical  body  cannot  for  a 
moment  live.  The  Lord  enters  his  Prakrti,  or  rather  brings  it  into  requisi¬ 
tion  to  form  a  Suk$ma  Sarira  for  Himself.  Now,  what  is  the  Prakrti  of 
I&vara  but  Mula  Prakrti  in  action  ?  Is  it  not  for  exactly  that  reason  that 
Iivara  is  called  Sabdabrahman  ?  It  is  therefore  spiritual  sound  by  which 
T&vara  (that  is  Sabdabrahman)  forms  his  subtle  body  of  life,  and  scnsorium. 
Herein  lies  the  Divine  character  of  Ifvara’s  appearances  (Avatara).  It  is 
therefore  called  Divine  (divyam).  The  subsequent  process  of  acquiring  a 
gross  body  is  described  in  the  above  verse  to  be  Atmamayaya  (by  My  own 
•Maya).  Now,  if  Maya  and  Prakrti  be  one  and  the  same,  the  verse  becomes 
meaningless.  Maya  or  AvidyS  is  that  phase  of  Prakrti  in  which  evolution 
from  spirit  to  matter  takes  place,  as  distinguished  from  MahamayS  or 
Vidya,  which  is  the  agent  for  the  involution  of  matter  to  spirit.  The 
Lord,  to  appear  in  flesh  and  blood,  had  therefore  first  to  build  his  Sound- 
body,  and  then  to  issue  from  the  Mother’s  womb  in  the  ordinary  way. 
It  is  this  Sound-body  of  the  Lord  which  is  the  Mantra  of  the  Vai^navas 
worshipping  Sri  Krsija. 

Mantra  is  not  merely  an  important,  but  an  essential,  element  of 
self-culture  in  Krya  Yoga.  The  realization  of  Atma,  the  One  True  Self, 
is  not  possible  so  long  as  the  mind  functions  in  the  brain  and  identifies 
itself  with  the  sensations,  perceptions,  and  concepts  furnished  by  the 
phenomenal  world.  By  Samadhi  (communion)  alone  the  true  self  can  be 
realized.  Krya  Yoga  prepares  the  mind  for  Samadhi.  In  Fatanjali’s 
Darfana  (Yoga  Philosophy)  Krya  Yoga  is  thus  defined: 

This  aphorism  is  explained  by  Vedavyasa  in  his  Commentary  thus: 

i  tsrcqflNM  iwgwH  i 

A  free  translation  of  the  aphorism  and  its  Bha^ya  is  given  below: 


410 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  Discipline  (of  body,  speech,  and  mind),  repetition  of  Mantras,  or 
study  of  Moksa  Sastras  (scriptures  teaching  liberation),  and  worship  of 
God,  constitute  Kfya  Yoga.” 

“  Yoga  is  not  attainable  by  persons  who  have  not  brought  their  body, 
speech,  and  mind  under  discipline.  The  mind  being  coloured  with  the 
accumulated  Samskaras  or  impressions  of  Karma  without  beginning  and 
with  desires  resulting  in  misery,  its  Rajasik  and  Tamasik  (unctions  cannot 
be  minimized  without  Tapas.1  Mind-cleansing  Tapasya  should  be  so 
practised  that  it  may  not  injure  the  body.  The  word  Svadhiyaya  means, 
repeating  (japa)  of  Pranava  (3TT — Om)  and  other  Mantras,  or  the  study 
of  such  Sastras  as  inculcate  Moksa  (liberation).  Iivara-prapidhana  means 
the  dedication  of  all  works  to  the  greatest  Guru  Iivara  (The  Lord),  or 
doing  unselfish  works.” 

Japa 1  of  mantra  is  thus  an  important  factor  in  arriving  at  that  stage 
of  the  mind  which,  in  Yoga  Sastra,  is  called  Samprajnata  Samadhi — that 
is,  conscious  communion.  When  man  reaches  that  plane  of  consciousness, 
his  accumulated  Karma,  and  his  earth-bound  desire  which  is  the  cause  of 
Karma,  vanish  never  to  return  again.  He  realizes  the  all-blissful  Divinity, 
and  becomes  Divinity  itself.  Divine  worship  is  ordained  as  a  preliminary 
step  for  this  consummation ;  for  it  is  by  Bhakti  and  Prema  (Faith  and  Love) 
to  God  that  our  congenital  tenacious  attachment  to  worldly  things  can  be 
replaced,  and  the  thirst  for  happiness  of  the  ever-restless  mind  quenched. 
The  daily  worship  which  the  Hindus  perform  consists  of  Sandhya  and 
Puja,*  in  both  of  which  Mantra  is  a  necessity;  for  the  Mantra  is  not  only 
potent  in  withdrawing  the  mind  from  its  external  functions,  but  it  makes 
worship  possible.  From  Mantra  the  worshipper  gains  the  form  of  the 
object  of  his  worship  upon  which  he  must  practise  his  concentration  and 
devotion,  and  when  the  worshipper  has  made  some  advance  he  will 
recognize  the  Mantra  itself  to  be  his  Istadevata.  Last,  though  not  the 
least,  is  the  power  of  Mantra  to  awaken  the  latent  powers  of  the  mind. 
The  last  chapter  of  Patanjali’s  Dariana  opens  thus: 

“  Uncommon  power  of  the  mind  is  attained  by  birth,  drugs,  Mantra, 
Tapas,  and  Samadhi.” 

The  practice  of  Mantra  according  to  the  Tantrik  method  develops- 
without  fail  the  latent  faculties  of  the  mind,  with  the  help  of  which  the 


1  Devotion,  austerity,  etc.  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra,  and  also  for  the 
meaning  of  the  gunas,  rajas,  tamas,  sattva. 

*“  Recitation”  or  “repetition”  are  the  nearest  English  equivalents  for 
this  term,  which  is  more  fully  explained  in  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra  sub.  voce . 
“Japa  *  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  41 1 

Sadhaka  must  climb  step  after  step  until  the  final  rung  of  the  ladder  ia- 
reached. 

The  object  to  be  attained,  or  rather  the  one  Immutable  True  Existence 
to  be  realized,  according  to  the  Tantrik  philosophy,  is  Parabrahman.  But 
the  instrument — the  mind — with  which  man  has  to  realize  is  Pr&lqtik — 
that  is,  evolved  out  of  the  three  gupas  of  Prakrti.  The  gunas,  being  dis¬ 
similar  in  nature  to  Sat,  Cit,  and  Ananda,1  cannot  be  the  instrument  which 
can  direcdy  seize  the  Absolute,  just  as  one  cannot  catch  air  by  iron  tongs. 
Hence  it  is  that  the  Son  of  God  is  the  Mediator  of  the  Christians,  and 
Sabdabrahman  or  Saguna  livara  *  is  the  object  of  worship  of  the  Hindus. 
The  Mantra,  I  mean  Bija  Mantra  is  Sabdabrahman.  The  Mantra  power 
of  Sakti  has  two  aspects — Vacaka  and  Vacya,  which  are  explained  in 
the  text.9 

The  Vacaka  Sakti  of  a  Mantra  is  the  vital,  intelligent,  and  conscious 
entity  through  which  the  unconditioned  evolves,  or  through  which  Nirgupa 
(attributeless)  Brahman  must  be  realized.  Vacaka  Sakti  in  its  female  aspect 
*  is  Kupdalini,  and  its  male  aspect  Paraiiva  or  Mah&visnu.  Vacya  Sakti  is 
that  which  is  sought  to  be  realized  through  the  VScaka  Sakti.  It  is 
Nirgupa  Brahman.  The  Mantra,  by  its  innate  power,  reveals  the  Vacaka 
Sakti  to  the  human  mind  which,  being  thus  freed  from  the  chain  of  causa¬ 
tion,  is  translated  into  the  Vacaka  Sakti  itself.  The  realization  of  the 
Vacya  Sakti  is  the  last  leap  forward  into  that  region  of  the  Absolute  whence 
no  traveller  ever  returns  either  as  ISvara  or  Deva  or  Manava  (man). 
The  Tantrik  Sadhaka  is  therefore  warned  against  that  ignorance  which 
takes  Mantras  to  be  mere  words  or  letters  of  the  alphabet: 

MfclHWi  filtSfeJM  l| 

“  Perdition  is  the  lot  of  him  who  thinks  that  Guru  is  a  mere  man, 
that  Mantras  are  mere  letters  of  the  alphabet,  and  that  Pratima  (the 
Image)  of  the  Deity,  is  mere  stone.” 

The  word  Mantra  is  thus  explained  in  the  Pingala  Tanlra,  quoted  in 
SaradStilaka : 

*13:  ^1^  II 

”  That  from  'which  the  true  knowledge  of  the  universe  and  freedom 
from  the  bondage  of  the  world  is  attained  is  called  Mantra.” 

1  Existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss,  the  nature  of  the  Brahman. 

1  The  Lord  with  attributes,  as  contrasted  with  the  attributeless  supreme— 
the  Parabrahman.  *  See  ante. 


412 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


The  “  true  knowledge  ”  of  the  universe,  according  to  Tantra,  is  tho 
realization  of  the  identity  of  Brahman  and  Brahmaij^a.  This,  too,  is  the 
Vaidik  conception,  as  it  is  expressed  in  the  aphorism:  gq 
(“Verily  all  this  is  Brahman”).  I  have  elsewhere  quoted  from  the 
Bhagavadgita  a  passage  in  which  it  is  said  that  the  Mantra  aft  (Om) 
is  capable  of  freeing  the  Jiva,  or  embodied  spirit,  from  the  bondage  of 
births  and  deaths.  How  mighty  is  the  power  of  Mantra!  It  is  Sound- 
spiritual,  it  is  Divinity  itself.  Blessed  is  the  man  who,  having  heard  the 
sweet,  soul-soothing,  ineffable  Madhyama  sound  in  the  lotus  of  the  heart, 
plunges  deep  into  the  ocean  of  Susumna,1  to  rise  at  the  feet  of  Kulakundalin! 
singing  Her  song  of  the  universe  in  Her  Para  melody.*  Of  all  the 
methods  for  hearing  the  Sound-spiritual  taught  in  different  schools  of 
Yoga,  the  Mantra  Yoga  is  the  best,  straightest,  and  easiest,  because 
Mantra  itself,  being  Sound-power,  has  greater  aptitude  than  anything  else 
to  reach  the  bodily  Sound-centres. 

Initiation  (DixsA),  Guru  (Teacher)  and 
£i$ya  (Disciple) 

According  to  the  Ayurvcdik  system  of  medicine,  four  factors  arc 
essential  for  successful  treatment  of  a  disease.  They  are  called  Khuddak 
Catusthaya.  They  are  physician,  medicine,  nurse,  and  patient.  The 
physician  must  be  capable  of  making  a  correct  diagnosis  of  his  patient’s 
ailment,  the  medicine  should  be  appropriate  and  powerful,  the  nurse 
must  he  dutiful,  and  the  patient  careful  of  his  health  and  possessed  of 
faith  in  his  physician.  A  successful  treatment  of  the  disease  of  the  soul, 
called  Bhavaroga,  or  earthly  sufferings,  is,  similarly,  dependent  upon  four 
essential  factors.  The  patient  is  the  man  who,  convinced  of  the  existence 
of  the  disease  which  has  over-taken  him,  is  anxious  to  be  cured;  Bhakti,  or 
devotion,  is  his  nurse;  he  is  the  Guru,  or  teacher,  who  can  properly 
diagnose  the  particular  form  of  the  patient’s  illness,  and  impart  to  him 
the  proper  medicament — I  mean  Mantra — which  has  the  potency 
to  heal. 

The  disease  of  the  soul  needs  much  more  physicking  than  the  disease 
of  the  body,  of  which  the  patient  is  fully  cognizant,  and  which  is  of 
comparatively  shorter  duration  and  can  be  diagnosed  by  objective  means. 
But  the  disease  of  the  soul  is  a  chronic  ailment  of  many  births  and  re¬ 
births.  The  lot  of  such  a  patient  is  spiritually  dismal,  no  doubt,  but  the 
glamour  of  M5ya  transports  him  to  a  fool’s  paradise,  where  lust,  avarice, 


1  The  channel  of  energy  of  that  name  situate  in  the  spinal  axis. 

See  Arthur  Avalon’s  “Serpent  Power 
1  In  the  MGladhara  ( vide  ibid.). 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  413 

greed,  power,  and  ambition  feed  him  with  dainty  dishes,  and  lull  him  to 
forgetfulness  of  the  disease  which  is  eating  into  his  very  vitals.  Fortunate 
is  the  man  who,  knowing  his  real  condition,  is  to  be  found  at  the  lotus-feet 
of  his  Guru. 

Knowledge  of  the  human  ego’s  real  condition  arises  first  mediately 
from  a  proper  study  of  the  S&stras,  and  then  directly  by  self-illumination. 
But  the  study  of  the  Sastras  as  a  mere  intellectual  exercise  is  fraught  with 
mischief.  In  the  Kularpava  Tantra  the  Lord  has  a  significant  admoni¬ 
tion  on  this  subject,  which  translated,  runs  thus : 

“  Fools  led  by  the  bondage  of  their  animal  nature  fall  into  the  deep 
well  of  the  six  systems  of  philosophy,  and  are  unable  to  know  what  the 
Paramartha  (supreme  good)  is.  Perverse  logicians,  owing  to  their 
ignorance  of  the  real  meaning  of  the  Vedas,  roam  here  and  there,  scorched 
by  the  fire  of  scepticism.  They  do  not  know  that  within  the  surging 
waves  of  time  they  are  under  the  mighty  jaws  of  death.  The  man  who 
knows  the  Vedas,  Agamas,  and  Pur  anas,  but  who  is  yet  ignorant  of 
•the  Paramartha,  and  gives  instructions,  simply  caws  like  a  crow. 
Unmindful  of  the  Paratattva  (the  Supreme),  he  is  ever  thinking  of 
what  is  knowledge  and  what  is  knowable,  and  is  immersed  in  study 
day  and  night.  The  words  of  such  are  flowing  and  rhetorical,  but 
at  heart  they  are  anxious,  sorry,  and  ill  at  ease.  Men  take  great 
pains  to  prove  the  Paratattva  to  be  what  it  is  not.  They  explain 
the  gist  of  the  Sastra  to  be  what  it  is  not.  They  explain  supersen- 
suous  matters  without  themselves  realizing  them.  Some,  led  by  vanity, 
study  the  Vedas  without  a  Guru’s  help;  but  a  knower  of  the  real  sense 
of  the  Vedas  is  hard  to  find.  As  a  spoon  does  not  know  the  taste  of  the 
food  cooked  with  it,  as  the  head  carries  a  load  of  flowers,  but  the  nose 
enjoys  its  fragrance,  so  they  study  the  Veda  Sastra,  but,  being  ignorant 
of  the  Paramartha  (which  is  known  only  to  Sadhakas),  quarrel  among 
themselves.  As  a  milkman,  forgetting  the  goat  in  his  arms,  sees  it  in  its 
image  in  a  well,  even  so  are  men,  who  are  unconscious  of  the  Paratattva 
that  is  in  them,  deluded  by  the  Sastras.  As  the  darkness  of  a  house  can 
never  be  dispelled  by  uttering  the  word  ■“  lamp,”  even  so  is  the  word- 
meaning  of  Sastra  impotent  to  dispel  the  mayik  darkness  of  the  Ego. 
The  study  of  Sastra  by  people  not  possessed  of  Prajfia — that  is,  the  inner 
light — is  as  though  a  blind  man  opened  his  eyes  to  see.  The  Sastra  gives 
Divine  knowledge  (Tattvajnana)  to  those  who  have  Prajfia.” 

tEgldgUW  firSllfPI  “  The  object  of  Sastra  is  to  impart  such  knowledge 
as  cannot  be  gained  through  the  senses.”  It  therefore  stands  to  reason 
that  the  real  meaning  of  Sastra  cannot  be  acquired  merely  through  the 
brain.  The  door  to  supersensuous  knowledge  must  be  unlocked,  and  the 
sleeping  Kula-KuptJalini  awakened.  This  is  done  by  Dik$a  or  initiation. 
Dik;a  is  thus  explained  in  the  Tantras: 


414 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


3Rt  ^  n 

i 

3ft!  1  Sjft:  i 

rWR^  fllmld  5WT  $f$rat  || 

WIW^  I 

afflfeff  3*  feir:  I 

frlT  feTOH&s^ll 


WJ I 


#5°I  PT  ftgflR:  TORdT  9%,  I 

bm  s*ft  fi3l  ii 


I 


•i  rp  »4^s%  ft3t  ftd.  il 
dSKWI^dlR  W  ftdl  ^  I 


dT 


II 


f5I^I 

d  m  ^  ffefftft  ft  ft  II 

I 

?pi  ?Pi  j^l'feM  sift^ftra  R3^  I 
pp:  fen:  sfe#Wf|I:  II 


The  above  verses,  rendered  freely  into  English,  read  thus: 

“  Those  who  commune  with  the  Divinity  call  it  Dik$&  because  it 
imparts  Divine  knowledge  and  cuts  worldly  bonds  ”  (Yogini  Tantra). 

“  He  who  has  not  been  initiated  cannot  acquire  Divine  knowledge, 
.and  cannot  gain  a  desirable  state  after  death.  Hence  it  is  that  one 
should,  by  all  means,  get  himself  initiated  by  a  Guru  ’’  (Rudra  Yamala). 

“Those  who,  without  being  initiated,  perform  Japa,  Pflja,  etc., 
derive  no  benefit,  even  as  seeds  sown  on  stone,  do  not  germinate  ” 
(Rudra  Yamala). 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


415 


“  As  iron  is  transmuted  into  gold  when  it  is  penetrated  by  Rasendra 
(great  fluid),  even  so  is  the  individual  Ego  converted  into  the  Divinity 
by  Dik$a.  His  Karma  being  burnt  by  the  fire  of  DUqil,  he  becomes  freed 
from  the  bondage  of  Karma,  and  thus  the  fetters  of  Karma  being  removed, 
the  Jiva  becomes  Siva  ”  (Kularnava  Tantra,  quoted  in  the  Commentary 
on  Kalpasutra) . 

“  No  amount  of  Upasana  (worship),  without  Diksa,  can  give  Divine 
knowledge:  so  one  should,  by  all  means  get  himself  initiated  for  the 
purpose  of  rendering  the  Mantra  efficacious  ”  (Kularnava  Tantra). 

“  One  cannot  derive  any  benefit  by  repeating  a  Mantra,  learnt  from 
books;  on  the  other  hand,  injury  is  incurred  at  every  step  ”  (quoted  by 
Raghava  Bhatta). 

“  Having  acquired  the  Mantra  from  the  Guru,  it  should  be  cultivated 
in  the  disciple’s  consciousness.  Religious  exercises  for  liberation  are  for 
fruition  dependent  entirely  upon  the  Guru.” 

From  what  has  been  stated  regarding  the  Sound-Spiritual,  Mantra 
.and  Kula-Kundalini,  it  will  have  been  seen  that  Mantra  is  a  living 
spiritual  sound- Power  emanating  from  the  vehicle  of  the  Divine  Serpent. 
The  human  Ego,  born  on  the  earth  as  the  consequence  of  his  actions 
in  previous  lives,  must  work  out  such  Karmas  as  are  germinating,  and 
will  also  germinate  Karmas  for  its  weal  or  woe.  He  is  placed  here 
below  in  direct  communication  with  the  objective  world  through  its  five 
agents  of  knowledge  and  five  agents  of  action.  The  knowledge  acquired 
through  the  five  senses  is  phenomenal:  it  is  not  true  knowledge;  it 
is  knowledge  as  it  seems,  not  knowledge  as  it  is.  It  is  the  knowledge  of 
actors  as  they  appear  on  the  stage,  and  not  of  the  individuals  who  are 
dressed  as  actors  in  the  green  room.  The  green  room  of  nature  is  hidden 
from  the  view  of  the  senses.  But  it  is  in  the  green  room  that  nature  must 
be  seen  by  the  Ego  in  order  that  it  may  free  itself  from  the  glamour  of 
maya  which  has  rendered  it  an  earth-bound  spirit.  Unless  one  recognizes 
the  reality,  there  is  no  escape  from  its  semblance.  But  the  physical  brain 
is  not  the  place  where,  nor  are  the  senses  the  avenue  through  which,  the 
one  Reality,  the  All-blissful  Sat-cit-ananda  enthroned  in  the  effulgence  of 
the  spiritual  world  is  to  be  seen.  The  human  body  is  a  duality  not  only 
in  the  objective  plane,  but  in  the  subjective  plane  as  well.  The  mind 
receives  objective  knowledge  through  the  brain  by  means  of  the  senses  and 
the  sensory  nerves.  It  can  receive  subjective  knowledge  through  the  spinal 
column  by  means  of  senses  which  have  to  be  developed.  But  the  passage 
through  which  the  green  room  of  the  human  body  must  be  entered  is 
barred  by  the  hood  of  the  Slumbering  Serpent  Kula-Kuq^alini.  To  wake 
Her  up,  to  implore  Her  Divine  grace  that  we  may  be  shown  the  Real 
(which  is  no  other  than  She),  and  that  the  unreal  may  be  dispelled,  is  the 
work  of  the  living  Mantra-Power  for  the  earnest  Ego. 


416 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Electricity  is  ubiquitous.  It  is  in  every  atom,  in  every  molecule,  and 
in  every  thing  made  up  of  atoms  and  molecules.  My  pen  is  made  up  of 
atoms  and  molecules.  Why  does  it  not,  then,  announce  to  me  the 
existence  of  electricity  in  it?  Why  does  it  not  fan  me  in  this  grilling  heat 
and  give  brilliant  light  to  my  failing  virion,  although  that  is  my  earnest 
wish?  The  reason  is  that  electricity,  by  processes  known  to  experts,  must 
be  roused  into  action,  and  manipulated  in  different  ways  to  yield  different 
results.  Mantra  Sakti,  similarly,  is  ubiquitous;  it  is  in  every  form  of 
existence.  Indeed,  from  Sound-power  the  universe  is  built.  It  has 
countless  forms  which  pervade  the  universe.  It  is  the  Guru,  the  Mantrik 
Scientist,  who  alone  knows  how  to  manipulate  it  and  to  employ  it  in 
producing  the  desired  result — that  is  to  say,  in  awakening  the  Slumbering 
Divine  Serpent  in  man. 

The  mere  communication  of  an  atomic  sound  from  one's  mouth  to 
another’s  ear  cannot  be  expected  to  produce  such  a  result.  The  Gum 
has  himself  to  vitalize  and  energize  the  Mantra  in  his  own  inner  conscious¬ 
ness,  and  then  to  communicate  the  living  spiritual  force  to  the  conscious-' 
ness  of  his  disciple  (Sisya) .  If  there  be  reason  to  believe  in  transference  of 
thought  from  a  hypnotise!  to  his  subject— and  hypnotism  has  now  been 
recognized  as  a  science— there  is  no  ground  for  disbelieving  the  transfer¬ 
ence  of  a  power  even  subtler  than  a  thought  (which  is  a  power  as  well) 
from  a  Gum  to  his  disciple.  When  such  an  event  happens  in  the  life  of  a 
person,  his  whole  mental  system  undergoes  a  revolution;  he  receives  a 
second  birth,  and  it  is  for  this  that  an  initiated  man  is  a  Dvija  (twice-born). 
The  Veda  withheld  the  privileges  of  a  Dvija  from  the  fourth  caste 
(Sudra),  but  the  Tantra  throws  the  portals  of  initiation  wide  open  to 
every  man  or  woman,  whoever  he  or  she  may  be.  The  Cantjala 1  and  all 
others  are  all  the  children  of  the  Divine  Mother,  the  milk  of  whose  eternal 
breast  is  sucked  by  every  living  being. 

Diksa,  thus,  is  not  a  conventional  usage,  a  toll  paid  to  the  Divine 
ferryman  for  carrying  the  sojourner  across  the  ocean  of  the  world 
(Bhavasindhu) .  Spiritual  India  has,  unfortunately,  come  to  this  pass,  and 
it  is  the  Tantra  which  can  alone  save  it,  as  it  has  saved  it  in  the  Kali 
Yuga  of  every  Kalpa. 

Sabdabrahmamayi,  the  Divine  Mother,  must  be  reached.  A  deep, 
surging  sea  divides  the  sojourning  Ego  from  Her.  It  is  the  Black  Sea  of 
objective  knowledge,  the  Vaitarani  of  Hindu  mythology.  Mantra  is  the  bark 
to  carry  it  thither.  The  Guru  must  help  the  Ego  in  each  of  its  steps  forward 
into  the  region  of  the  unknown.  Indeed,  without  the  Guru’s  help  the 
disciple  cannot  move  one  such  step.  The  disdplc  must  also  work  hard, 
under  the  instructions  of  the  Guru,  to  keep  up  the  energy  of  the  Mantra. 


*  One  of  the  lowest  castes. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


417 


And  when  Mantra  is  assimilated  in  the  inner  consciousness  of  the  disciple, 
he  is  said  to  have  become  Siddha  (accomplished)  in  it.  He  can  then  use 
it  at  his  will,  and,  awakening  Kula-Kundalinl,  plunge  with  Her  into  the 
Lotus-garden,  where  alone  the  nature  of  the  Atmi  and  Anatma 1  can  be 
realized.  The  human  body,  according  to  the  Tantra,  is  a  microcosm, 
which  contains  in  miniature  all  that  is  contained  in  the  Kosmos.  It  has 
the  seven  Lokas,  worlds  or  regions  located  in  it,  and  the  S^dhaka,  who, 
with  the  help  of  his  B!ja  Mantra,  has  known  them  and  their  over-Lords 
has  left  the  mother’s  womb  never  to  come  back  again.  It  may  here  be 
noted  by  way  of  parenthesis  that  the  seven  Lokas  are  not  states  of  exist¬ 
ence,  but  worlds  made  up  of  different  modifications  of  matter,  and  peopled 
by  beings  on  different  planes  of  consciousness. 

Such  being  Diksa,  imagine  what  the  Guru  is! 

^  fSISF^St  &  Ml!  I 
&NJ  cJBT  ^  tl 

^  ^  ^  II 

Jlbo***  I 

“If  the  Guru  is  pleased,  Siva  is  pleased;  if  he  is  displeased,  Siva  is 
displeased.  If  the  Guru  is  pleased,  SivanI*  is  pleased;  if  the  Guru  is 
displeased,  SivanI  is  displeased.  Hence,  O  MahcSani! '  the  Guru  is  the 
Lord,  the  sustainer  and  the  annihilator.  It  is  he  who  can  give  Moksa  ” 
(Guru  Tantra). 

But  the  human  Guru  is  not  the  real  Guru.  The  real  Guru  is  in  the 
Thousand-pctalled  Lotus.  The  human  Guru  bears  the  same  relation  to 
the  Divine  Guru  that  Vacaka  Sakti  of  a  Mantra  bears  to  the  Vacya 
Sakti.  The  Yogini  Tantra  thus  explains  Guruship: 

^  I 

3$:  35  %  WHm  I 

53T4  II 

33T3  I 

HiCWlil  3:  I 

33  3TO:  II 


*  Not  atma. 

*  The  DrvI  as  consort  of  Siva. 

27 


418 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


^  ^  «  35^  tfsra:  ii 
*W+w  WWR:  I 

*t«W^i»w>A  f^  hi^  I 

aifiBH  *dm  fiwi  mfc  II 
3  *JWI  ifcfa  *H3^  •n^Rf:  I 
*FTO  q^ilH  $:  I 
33*IR  (I 

^  ^siiPt  ^  3?:  W®  I 
^RBriWi^  wi  *&aft  I 
RISIR  ti$8Ng  5frft  II 

“  Sri  Devi  said:  ‘  Merciful  MaheSvara!  tell  me  who  is  Guru.  You 
have  told  me  that  the  Guru  is  greater  than  Thou  art.’  Sri  livara  said : 
‘  He  who  is  the  first  Lord  and  is  called  Mahakala  is  the  Guru,  O  Devi! 
in  all  Mantras.  None  else  is  the  Guru.  He  is  verily  the  Guru  of  the 
Saivas,  Saktas,  Vai?navas,  Ganapatyas,  Moon-worshippers,  Maha$aivas, 
and  Sauras.*  He  and  none  else  is  the  promulgator  of  Mantra.  At  the 
time  of  imparting  Mantra,  O  Daughter  of  mountain*.  He  manifests 
Himself  in  him  who  imparts  Mantra.  Hence,  O  Devi !  verily  there  is  no 
Guruship  in  man.  The  human  Mantra-giver  meditates  upon  the  same 
Guru  in  the  Head-Lotus  as  Him  upon  whom  the  disciple  must  there 
meditate.  Therefore,  O  MaheSvari  !  there  is  only  one  Guru.  Because 
He  manifests  himself  in  the  human  Guru,  therefore  the  greatness  of  the 
human  Guru  is  published  in  all  the  Sastras.” 

The  Yam  ala  Tantra  says: 

3^!i:  *  ShW:  I 

g^E^ft  II 

*p*  $  nffc  Rsiw^  l 

ii 

“  There  is  only  one  Guru,  who  undoubtedly  is  Myself;  Thou,  too,  O 
Devi!  and  Mantra,  too,  is  Guru.  Therefore  Guru,  Devata,  and  Mantra, 


1  Vidt  ante. 

1  The  Devi  as  Parvati,  daughter  of  the  mountain  King  Him&vat, 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  419 

sire  the  same.  He  is  always  to  be  contemplated  in  the  Thousand-petalled 
Lotus,  sometimes  in  the  Heart-Lotus,  and  sometimes  as  existing  before 
the  eyes — that  is,  in  human  form.” 

In  initialing  and  instructing  a  disciple,  the  human  Guru  undertakes 
a  vicarious  duty,  the  magnitude  of  which  he  should  folly  realize.  He 
must  fill  himself  with  the  Divine  Presence,  that  his  Sijya  may  be  bom  to 
the  spiritual  life.  He  must  also,  impart  to  his  disciple  that  sure  knowledge 
which  will  lead  him  without  error  on  the  onward  path  of  Sadhana. 
Henceforward  the  life  of  -the  disciple  becomes  a  part  of  the  Guru’s  life. 
The  Guru  becomes  responsible  for  the  sins  of  his  disciple. 

We  arc  apt  to  complain  of  the  rarity  of  the  Gurus,  but  we  do  not 
pause  to  consider  the  paucity  of  Sisyas  (disciples).  Ganapati,  the 
elephant-headed  Devata,  by  the  grace  of  His  Divine  mother,  had  the  con¬ 
solation  to  believe  that  He  was  the  best  of  singers.  We,  too,  by  the  grace 
of  Avidya,  have  an  overweaning  confidence  in  our  intellectual  attainments, 
thinking  that  wc  arc  perfectly  qualified  to  receive  the  highest  spiritual 
(instructions. 

The  Gaulamiya  Tantra  says-; 

few  gSCRHI  gwfapm:  I 
$513:  RqflhiRicI  *51:  II 
w.  I 

failRlft  frlSR:  || 

“  The  Sisya  (disciple)  should  be  of  good  parentage,  pure-minded, 
bent  upon  realizing  the  fourfold  aspirations;1  he  should  be  learned  in  the 
Vedas,  diligent,  devoted  to  the  welfare  of  parents;  he  should  know  Dharma 
and  practise  it;  he  should  serve  the  Gum;  he  should  be  acquainted  with 
.the  true  meaning  of  the  Sastras;  he  should  possess  a  strong  physique  and 
a  strong  mind.  He  shoald  always  do  good  to  living  objects;  he  should  do 
only  such  deeds  as  are  good  for  the  after-life.  He  should  serve  the  Gum 
■by  speech,  thought,  body,  and  money.  He  should  avoid  works  of  which 
-the  result  is  transitory,  and  be  diligent  in  working  for  enduring  results. 
He  should  be  one  who  has  conquered  passions,  indolence,  illusory  knowl¬ 
edge  (Moha),  and  anger.” 

1  That  is,  Dharma,  Astha,  Kama,  and  Mok$a.  See  Introduction  to  Tantra 

tSistra. 


420 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


From  the  above  it  will  appear  that  to  be  a  real  Sisya  mere  intellectual 
attainment  is  not  sufficient.  While  he  should  be  conversant  with  the 
Sastras  (scriptures)  to  enable  him  to  understand  what  he  is,  what  his 
destiny  is,  what  relation  he  bears  to  the  universe  and  to  the  Lord  of  the 
universe,  he  should  have  purified  his  mind  from  the  thousand  and  one 
worldly  pursuits  which  detract  rather  than  bring  peace  to  it.  He  should 
diligently  do  what  the  Sastras  enjoin,  and  scrupulously  avoid  un-Sastrik 
actions.  He  should  have  a  living  faith  in  his  religion,  and  an  earnest, 
irrepressible  longing  for  spiritual  advancement.  Lust,  anger,  and  their 
train  should  not  be  his  masters.  His  profession  should  be  in  strict  accord¬ 
ance  with  Sastrik  morality.  He  should  consciously  do  nothing  that  hurts 
or  injures  a  fellow-being,  and  the  milk  of  his  kindness  should  ever  flow 
to  relieve  suffering  humanity.  These  and  many  other  qualifications  are 
required  of  the  aspirant  to  the  great  path.  It  is  also  stated  that  a  candi¬ 
date  must  remain  under  the  personal  observation  of  a  Guru  for  a  whole 
year  before  he  can  hope  to  be  initiated.  Deluded  by  Avidya,  however,  we 
do  not  pause  to  reflect  whether  the  field  in  which  the  seed  is  to  be  sown  is1 
worthy  of  it.  Sometimes,  in  our  impatience  (which  is  a  state  of  mind 
quite  unfitted  for  spiritual  culture),  we  fly  to  sannyasls  (ascetics),  and, 
getting  ourselves  initiated  by  them,  hasten  homeward,  hardly  knowing 
that  thereby  wc  transgress  a  positive  injunction  of  the  Sastra,  and  place 
ourselves  in  difficulties.  It  is  laid  down  in  the  Tantras : 

W  ^  fiat  ^  i 

■S 

I 

Rfcfpftq)  i  hi  whiM  ii 

tfrot  gflpnftia:  i 

appft  iRRHlftalK!  I 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


421 

“In  the  initiation  one  should  exclude  the  maternal  grandfather, 
father,  a  SannySsI,  and  Vanaprastha,1  otherwise,  there  being  contrariety 
in  the  respective  positions  of  Guru  and  Sisya,  the  Sisya  is  sure  to  meet 
death.” 

“  Initiation  by  a  Yati,1  by  one’s  father,  by  a  Vanaprastha,1 *  or  by  a 
Sannyasi  is  not  favourable  to  the  welfare  of  a  Sisya.” 

“  One  should  receive  Diksa  from  a  householder  residing  in  the  same 
locality  with  the  Sisya.” 

“  The  Tantra  enjoins  initiation  from  a  Guru  who  has  wife  and 
children.” 

“  The  Guru  should  be  a  householder,  meditative  and  well  versed  in 
Tantrik  knowledge  and  in  Mantra.” 

The  reason  why  a  man  who  has  freed  himself  of  the  illusory  world 
and  stands  outside  of  it  is  ill-qualified  to  show  the  light,  step  by  step,  to  a 
disciple  whirling  in  the  eddies  of  the  world  is  plain  enough.  A  Sannyasi 
is  one  who  has  given  up  Karma,  his  mind  having  been  purified.  He  is  an 
>  AdvaitT,  8  whose  only  avocation  is  the  realization  of  the  One  without  a 
second.  But  a  householder  is  a  man  in,  even  if  he  be  not  of,  the  world. 
He  is  practically  a  DvaitI, 4  though  intellectually  he  may  not  be  so.  His 
distracted  mind  must  be  soothed  by  worship,  prayer,  and  hymn,  and  by 
other  acts  of  devotion  (Bhakti)  to  his  Istadcvata.5  A  Sannyasi,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  a  Jnani  (one  possessed  of  true  knowledge)  who,  having 
crossed  the  threshold  of  Bhakti  (devotion),  looks  down  upon  it  as  an 
illusion,  an  unreality.  The  mental  attitudes  of  a  householder  and  of  a 
Sannyasi  are  poles  asunder.  It  is,  therefore  inevitable  that,  in  spite  of 
his  best  endeavours,  a  Sannyasi’s  teachings  must  contain  much  that  is 
unassimilablc  by  a  householder,  who,  by  his  strenuous  efforts  to  practise 
such  instructions,  must  succumb  bodily  and  mentally. 

A  householder  Guru,  on  the  other  hand,  is  much  on  the  same  plane 
of  consciousness  with  his  disciple.  Though  in  the  small  rowing-boat  of 
Bhakti  (devotion),  he  has  oared  manfully  towards  the  ship  of  his  destina¬ 
tion,  and  neared  it.  His  Bhakti  is  suffused  with  the  Divine  halo  of  Jnana 
(knowledge).  He  is  the  fittest  person  to  lead  a  world-ridden  disciple  by  the 
hand,  instructing  him  in  every  point,  and  teaching  him  by  personal  example : 

SSIWlft  | 


1  One  who  has  gone  to  the  forest  according  to  the  rule  of  the  third  Airaroa. 

9  Ascetic. 

*  A  spiritual  monist,  not  a  mere  philosophical  monist,  but  one  who  himself 
in  various  degrees  exp erien tally  realizes  the  truth  of  that  doctrine. 

4  Dualist.  *  See  post. 


422 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“Himself  practises  and  puts  disciples  in  practice”  (Rudra  Yamala).. 

Those  who  are  real  aspirants  need  not  encumber  their  progress  by 
adhering  to  the  ancestral  Guru.  If  they  have  already  been  initiated  by 
him,  they  may  leave  him  and  find  out  a  higher  one. 

The  Kam&khya  Tantra  says : 

2^3  f|  I 

«r3i  %  m  *  ^  S&pi  I 

tic<+3ilci  II 

$TR  ^  twwifcl  fl  ^  ^  I 
5R°t  35^  II 
<r-P®3l  W  3*:  3°^  3®^  I 

wifuw  n 

“  A  Guru  exists  to  impart  Jnanas  (different  forms  of  knowledge). 
Jnana  leads  one  to  Moksa  (liberation).  Hence  Jnana  is  the  supreme 
good.  Therefore  the  Guru  who  is  incapable  of  imparting  Jnana  should 
be  abandoned,  as  one  who  is  desirous  of  food  abandons  the  person  who 
has  no  food  to  give.  One  in  whom  Jnana  shines  is  Guru;  ho  is  Siva. 
Abandoning  the  ignorant,  one  should  take  the  shelter  of  the  wise.  As  a 
bee  roams  from  flower  to  flower  in  quest  of  honey,  even  so  should  a 
Si?ya,  in  quest  of  Jnana,  go  from  one  Guru  to  another.” 

If  the  ancestral  Guru  be  really  ignorant,  there  is  nothing  in  the 
Tantra  Sastra  to  compel  one  to  seek  initiation  from  him.  But  I  feel  the 
necessity  of  a  word  in  favour  of  this  much-abused  man.  I  fear  the  Hindu 
Society  is  much  more  to  blame  than  the  ancestral  Guru  for  this  state  of 
things.  There  was  a  happy  time  when  every  Hindu  deemed  it  his  duty 
not  only  to  be  initiated,  but  to  practise  worship  with  devotion  and  piety.. 
Many  amongst  the  higher  classes  lived  a  life  which  was  .rather  religious 
than  a  purely  social  one.  It  was,  therefore,  incumbent  upon  the  Guru  so 
to  qualify  himself  as  to  render  himself  a  being  higher  than  those  around 
him.  But  the  Hindu  mind  having  considerably  receded  from  such  an 
ideal  of  life,  initiation  and  worship  are  disregarded.  There  being  very 
little  demand  for  real  initiation  and  instruction  in  true  worship,  the 
supply  of  duly  qualified  Gurus  has  naturally  fallen  off.  That  the  Guru- 
class  still  exists  is  due,  to  a  large  extent,  to  our  love  for  the  husk  with 
which  we  want  to  fill  the  social  granary.  The  Gurus,  moreover,  are  now 
ill-fed  by  the  Sijya  community,  which  accounts  for  many  Guru  families- 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


*28 


giving  up  the  profession.  It  is  the  paramount  duty  of  the  Hindus  of  the 
present  generation  to  reform  the  Guru  community,  which  can,  I  think,  be 
easily  effected  by  fostering  the  growth  of  a  sincere  and  earnest  desire  to 
learn  and  to  practise  among  ourselves. 

There  is  one  aspect  of  initiation  which  I  have  left  untouched  for 
want  of  information — I  mean  its  astrological  aspect  It  is  said  that  the 
nativity  of  a  candidate  and  the  particular  Mantra  in  which  he  should  be 
initiated  are  correlated.  As  I  am  not  an  astrologer,  I  am  not  competent 
to  speak  as  to  this.  Those  who  profess  to  be  astrologers  are  really 
empirics,  and,  having  no  scientific  knowledge  of  astrology,  cannot  explain 
this  correlation.  But  opinions  are  divided  amongst  Tantriks  on  this  point, 
and  so  it  need  not  trouble  us. 

The  Octagon  of  Self-Culture 

In  the  previous  sections  I  have  attempted  to  give  the  reader  the 
result  of  a  general  survey  of  the  philosophy  upon  which  Tantrik  Sadhana, 
or  Self-culture,  is  based.  But  in  so  recondite  and  unfamiliar  a  subject, 
where  the  correctness  of  every  individual  interpretation  may  be  called 
in  question,  the  reader  is  requested  to  go  himself  to  the  source,  and  there, 
with  faith  and  devotion,  and  under  the  guidance  of  a  Guru,  drink  of 
its  waters. 

I  shall  now  address  myself  to  the  subject  of  the  supreme  importance 
of  Tantrik  Sadhana,  which,  as  already  observed,  is  the  easiest  and  the 
straightest  path  to  follow  for  men  of  the  Kali  Yuga.1  I  should  not  be 
understood  to  preach  Sakta  Dharma*  to  one  and  all.  The  Tantrik 
method  of  spiritual  culture  is  not,  as  I  have  already  said,  sectarian.  The 
Tantra  provides  paths  of  culture  for  all  the  five  classes  of  Upasakas 
(worshippers)  in  Hinduism,  and  an  advanced  TSntrik  Guru  is  as  capable 
of  illumining  the  path  of  a  Vaispava  as  that  of  a  Sakta. 

The  path  of  Dharma  is  twofold:  the  path  of  desire  (pravjtti)  and 
the  path  of  cessation  of  desire  (nivftti).  These  two  paths  arc  in  conformity 
with  the  two  great  Powers  which  are  perpetually  at  work  in  the 
universe.  One  of  the  Powers  is  called  Maya  and  the  other  Mah&mSya. 
They  are  the  two  phases  of  the  one  immutable  Sakti.  Maya  weaves  the 
woof  and  the  warp  of  Evolution  from  Spirit  to  matter;  Mahamaya  frees 
the  Ego  from  its  Karmik  garb,  and  leads  it  on  to  its  destination.  To  sail 
downstream  is  easy  enough.  It  needs  no  toil,  no  struggle.  The  current 
is  favourable;  hoist  the  sail  of  your  Desires  on  the  mast  of  your  untrained 


1  The  present,  the  last,  and  worst  of  the  ages. 

*  The  way  or  religion  of  those  who  worship  Sakti. 


424 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Will,  and  sail  pleasantly  along.  But  your  pleasure  is  short-lived;  there 
is  sorrow  in  all  of  it.  Like  Sisyphus,  you  roll  your  stone  up  the  mountain- 
top  only  to  come  down  again.  And  as  the  desires,  even  of  the  most 
intellectually  cultured,  know  no  bounds,  the  Ego  is  drowned  more  and 
more  in  the  quagmire  of  matter,  forgetting  its  own  self,  and  foregoing  the 
privileges  of  a  human  Ego  which  after  millions  of  joumeyings,  it  has  had 
the  good  fortune  to  acquire.  The  soft  heart  of  the  Divine  Mother  cannot 
bear  to  see  Her  children  thus  lost.  She  steps  in  and  proclaims  Pravrtti 
Dharma,  which  her  ordinary  children  must  follow,  so  that  in  the  long-run 
Pravrtti  may  lead  to  Nivrtti.  This  Dharma  is  work  prescribed  in  the 
Sastras  to  be  performed  with  Bhakti  or  devotion  to  God  for  accomplishing 
definite  results.  Pravrtti  being  bridled  by  Dharma,  unrestrained  licence 
of  desires  is  prevented,  and  the  sojourner  on  the  Pravrtti  path  begins  to 
leam  Bhakti  or  devotion.  The  fulfilment  of  his  desires,  however  worldly, 
depends  upon  the  favour  of  God  whom  he  invokes  from  the  depths  of  his 
heart.  He  performs  the  rites  and  ceremonies  prescribed  for  the  particular 
object  he  has  in  view  with  austerities  and  penances  which  are  required,' 
and  thus,  though  the  mainspring  of  his  action  be  selfish,  he  unconsciously 
develops  his  higher  instincts  and  nobler  nature.  From  hankering  after 
sensuous  pleasure  in  the  shape  of  money,  power,  fame,  popularity, 
progeny,  and  so  forth,  he  gradually  lifts  his  eyes  upwards  and  longs  for 
power  in  the  unseen  world.  He  devotes  his  mind  and  soul  to  its  acqui¬ 
sition.  And  when  he  is  fortunate  enough  to  obtain  but  a  morsel  of  it, 
he  at  once  realizes  the  nothingness  of  worldly  desires.  He  forthwith  parts 
with  them  as  a  serpent  parts  with  its  dead  skin.  The  worshipper  on  the 
path  of  desire  now  lives  in  the  supersensuous  world ;  his  worldly  hanker¬ 
ings  have  ceased  at  any  rate  to  a  considerable  extent,  and  he  has  made 
more  progress  towards  the  path  of  Nivrtti  than  one  whose  desires  are  not 
restrained  by  Dharma,  and  who  depends  solely  upon  his  own  resources 
to  combat  Pravrtti. 

To  combat  Pravrtti !  How  sweetly  sounds  the  phrase !  To  do  works 
for  others!  How  much  sweeter  still!  Let  us  not  deceive  ourselves,  as  we 
are  apt  to  do.  The  octopus-like  grasp  of  our  cumulated  Karma,  extending 
over  millions  of  births  and  rebirths,  is  so  firm  that  it  is  impossible  to  free 
ourselves  from  it  unless  we  begin  in  Pravrtti  Dharma  and  end  in  Nivrtti. 
Is  it  possible  for  anyone  to  jump  from  the  bottomless  abyss  of  desires  to 
the  celestial  height  of  Nivrtti  by  a  single  leap  ?  There  must  be  intermediate 
rounds  on  the  ladder,  for  nature  does  not  work  by  leaps  and  bounds; 
sequences  of  causes  and  effects  pervade  it.  Not  even  the  Lokapalas, 
Dikpalas,1  and  Lords  higher  still  are  free  from  desires,  though  they,  by 
spiritualizing  many  of  such  desires,  have  risen  higher  and  higher  on  the 


1  Lord  of  the  Regions  and  Quarters. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  425 

upward  path  of  progress.  How  can  one  be  selfless  unless  he  has  dedicated 
his  self  to  the  Lord  of  all  selves?  And  how  can  one  dedicate  his  self  to 
the  Lord  of  all  selves  by  one  single  bound?  As  householders  (Grhis)  we 
are  chained  to  the  world  by  a  thousand  and  one  knots.  Our  family,  our 
lust,  our  greed,  our  avarice,  our  ambition,  all  bind  us  down.  We  are 
•overwhelmed  with  desires  even  unto  death.  Where,  then,  is  our  altruism  ? 
If  there  were  a  scalpel  to  open  the  mind,  or  an  X-ray  apparatus  to  display 
it,  it  would  doubtless  be  found  that  altruism  is,  in  many  a  case,  traceable 
to  love  of  fame,  love  of  popular  applause,  love  of  power,  and  other  little 
self-loves.  It  is  intense  love  of  God  alone  which  can  make  a  person 
selfless  in  action.  It  is  very  unfortunate  that  in  the  name  of  altruistic  work 
many  English-educated  Hindus  have  given  up  Pravrtti  Dharma,  the  inesti¬ 
mable  boon  which  the  wise,  holy  R$is  have  given  us  for  our  salvation. 

In  the  Bhagavadgita,  the  Lord  (I  adopt  Mrs.  Besant’s  transla¬ 
tion)  says: 

Jjf  | 

a  ^  *r  fw:  ii 
35R1:  snsft  i 

8«ftra:  «  ft  II 

R  ipi  II 

“  Fourfold  in  division  are  the  righteous  ones  who  worship  Me,  O 
Aijuna :  the  suffering,  the  seeker  for  knowledge,  the  self-interested,  and 
the  wise.  Of  these  the  wise,  constantly  harmonized,  worshipping  the 
One,  is  the  best;  I  am  supremely  dear  to  the  wise,  and  he  is  dear  to  Me. 
Noble  arc  all  these ;  but  I  hold  the  wise  as  verily  Myself;  he,  self-united, 
is  fixed  on  Me,  the  highest  goal.  At  the  close  of  many  births  the  man 
full  of  wisdom  cometh  unto  Me.  *  Vasudeva  is  all,’  saith  he,  the  Mahatma, 
very  difficult  to  find.’’ 

Of  the  four  kinds  of  worshippers  mentioned  by  Bhagavan,  the  arlia 
and  the  artk&rtki  (the  suffering  and  self-interested)  arc  Sakama  Upas ak as,1 


1  Worshippers  for  reward,  and  with  the  view  to  benefits  to  be  gained  such 
as  the  worshipper  whose  action  is  determined  by  the  hope  of  gaining  the 
pleasures  of  heaven  or  avoiding  the  pains  of  hell;  as  contrasted  with  the 
Nigkama  Sadhaka  who  acts  for  God’s  good  sake  only,  and  not  because  such 
action  will  produce  benefits  for  him. 


426 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


who  are  on  the  path  of  desire.  All  the  worshippers  are  called  “  sukjtinah  ” 
(righteous) — that  is,  even  those  who  are  on  the  path  of  desire,  have  germs 
of  good  work  in  them,  otherwise  worship  would  not  have  formed  a  part  of 
their  work.  “  Udirah  sarva  eva  te  ” — that  is,  all  of  them  arc  noble,  dear 
to  God,  because  the  Godward  mind,  even  if  selfish,  attains  an  amount  of 
mental  purification  and  contentment  which  is  impossible  for  others  to 
acquire.  The  last  couplet  means  that  a  true  JnanI — an  advaitist 1  is  a 
product  of  many,  many  births,  and  that  such  a  Mahatma  *  is  very  rare. 
It  will  thus  be  seen  that  Pravrtti  Dharma  has  a  place  in  self-culture, 
however  low  compared  with  the  highest,  that  place  may  be.  It  is  for 
those  who  cannot  dissociate  their  minds  from  worldly  desires.  And  I  need 
hardly  say  that  the  bulk  of  humanity  is  of  that  temperament.  If  there  be 
a  blessed  few  amongst  us  who  have  governed  their  desires  effectually,  who 
are  rather  in  than  of  the  world,  Pravrtti  Dharma,  like  dry  leaves  of  trees, 
will  fall  from  off  them;  but  they  are  not,  therefore,  justified  in  giving  up 
the  Sastrik  Dharma-Karma.  The  Lord  Himself  has  exhorted  them  to 
perform  religious  works  prescribed  in  the  Sastra  selflessly  for  the  instruc-  ' 
tion  of  the  mass  of  men.  Like  a  patient  who  accepts  his  physician’s 
diagnosis  but  rejects  his  prescription,  it  would  be  the  height  of  folly  to 
accept  Hindu  philosophy  and  to  reject  its  practice. 

The  Tantrik  system  of  culture  on  the  path  of  desire  is  remarkable  for 
its  aptitude  in  producing  desired  results.  This  is  known  to  Hindus  of  all 
denominations.  But  it  is  not  a  mere  hankering  after  worldly  benefits. 
On  the  contrary,  the  Sakama  Sadhaka  longs  more  for  a  glimpse  into  the 
arcana  of  nature  than  for  mundane  comforts,  and  his  longing  is  soon 
crowned  with  success.  And  having  acquired  a  personal  proof  positive  of 
supersensuous  things,  the  vanity  of  sensuous  desires  forces  itself  upon  him 
in  a  manner  that  mere  Sravana  (study)  and  Manana  (contemplation)  can 
hardly  approach.  This,  it  must  be  conceded,  is  a  long  leap  forward.  To 
withdraw  the  mind  from  worldly  attractions  and  repulsions  many  births 
and  rebirths  have  to  be  spent  in  study,  contemplation,  and  discrimination. 
The  Tantrik,  on  the  much-despised  path  of  desire,  however,  transfers  his 
consciousness  from  mundane  attractions  and  repulsions  to  a  higher  plane 
of  existence  within  one  life  and  even  a  much  shorter  period.  Although  it 
cannot  give  him  Mukti  (liberation)— -and  Mukti  is  not  a  bunch  of  grapes- 
to  be  had  by  the  mere  stretching  of  the  hand  upwards  to  the  trellis  on 
which  they  hang— it  can  make  him  a  Lokapala,  a  Dikpala,8  a  Man- 
vantaradhipati,4  or  the  like. 


1  S«  ante.  *  Great  soul. 

1  Lords  of  the  regions  and  quarters. 

4  Lord  of  the  period  called  Manvantara. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


427 


It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  Sakama  Tantrik  worships  Devatas 1 
as  the  Divinity.  He  no  doubt  pays  homage  to  Devatas  as  higher  bangs; 
but  the  object  of  his  worship  is  the  Divine  Mother,  who  is  the  same  as 
Mahavi?nu,  the  manifested  God,  and  the  methods  of  his  worship  are  very 
much  the  same  as  those  of  the  worshipper  on  the  Nivrtti  path.  What  is 
stated  in  the  Gita  as  to  the  consequences  of  worshipping  Devatas,  Pitre, 
and  Bhutas  has  no  application  to  a  Tantrik,  the  ladder  of  whose  spiritual 
culture  begins  with  the  path  of  desire  as  the  lowest  round,  and  ends  at 
that  of  which  none  knows — that  is,  Kaivalya  Mukti,  or  complete  liberation. 

So  long  as  a  man  is  a  Gfhl  (householder),  so  long  is  his  path  the 
path  of  Pravrtti.  If  he  thinks  that  he  has  outgrown  it,  but  at  the  same 
time  earns  money,  enjoys  the  world,  forms  attachments  and  repulsions, 
seeks  name,  fame,  and  popular  applause,  discharges  the  functions  of 
a  father  of  his  household  and  of  a  member  of  the  community  in  which 
he  lives,  he  deceives  himself.  The  path  pointed  out  to  him  by 
the  Tantrik  is  the  best  that  he  can  have  as  an  individual,  as  the  father 
of  a  family,  and  as  a  member  of  society.  The  Tantrik  culture  is 
an  all-round  growth.  It  makes  the  body  sturdy  and  strong,  and 
proof  to  heat,  cold,  and  rains ;  it  wards  off  diseases  from  without,  and 
resists  diseases  from  within;  it  makes  one  hardy,  painstaking,  and  patient. 
His  will  being  regularly  trained,  he  is  resolute  and  intrepid.  All  these 
qualities  of  body  and  mind  render  him  as  much  a  useful  member  of 
society  as  a  humble  supplicant  for  the  dust  of  the  Mother’s  feet.  As  for 
altruism,  people  thus  trained  arc  taught  from  the  very  beginning  to  do 
good  to  others.  flTFjpi  1  «« Kali  is  the  slave  of 

those  pious  men,  the  rule  of  whose  life  is  to  do  good  to  others,”  says 
the  Tantra. 

Now  let  us  pass  to  the  study  of  the  path  of  cessation,  called  the  path 
of  Nivrtti.  Those  whose  minds  have  become  sattvik  by  the  reduction  of 
their  rajasik  desires  through  practice  on  the  path  of  desire,  and  those 
fortunate  few  whose  past  lives  have  prepared  them  for  it,  are  the  fit 
Adhikaris 2  on  the  Nivrtti  path.  The  Hindu  Sastras,  whether  Vaidik  or 
Tantrik,  regard  Adhikara  or  personal  competency  as  the  most  important 
factor  in  determining  the  mode  of  culture  to  be  prescribed  for  a  candidate. 
The  Guru  must  test  the  mental  calibre,  moral  proclivity,  and  physical 
aptitude  of  his  would-be  disciple  (sisya),  and  must  point  out  to  him  that 
path  for  which  he  is  the  most  suited. 


1  The  writer  here  refers  to  the  higher  Intelligence  intermediate  between 
ISvara  and  man.  Dcvata  is  used  also  in  another  sense.  Thus,  the  Divine 
Mother  in  Her  various  leading  forms  is  called  Devata. 

*  Persons  competent  for  a  thing.  The  whole  of  Hinduism  rests  on  the 
theory  of  competency,  or  adhik&ravSda. 


428 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Sadhakas  on  the  path  of  cessation  of  desire  arc  divided  into  two 
•classes — viz-,  those  who  are  yet  bound  by  the  ties  and  conventionalities  of 
the  world,  and  those  who  have  got  rid  of,  or  are  resolved  to  get  rid  of, 
them.  Their  methods  of  culture  arc  different.  The  tics  and  conventions 
arc  called  Paia — that  is,  fetters.  They  are  eight  in  number,  as  the 
Kularnava  Tantra  says: 

fin  5^1  ^  4^41  i 

sftg  cPU  •difotal  RRII:  n^tlddf:  II 

I 

“Aversion,  shame,  fear,  grief,  disgust,  family,  custom,  and  caste; 
these  arc  declared  as  fetters.” 

I  need  hardly  point  out  that  there  is  hardly  one  among  a  million 
who  can  say  that  he  is  free  from  these  fetters.  And  there  are  but  few 
who  struggle  to  sail  clear  of  them.  My  task  is  to  study  the  Sadhana  of 
Adhikaris  of  the  former  class.  This  Sadhana  may  be  roughly,  though  not  • 
exhaustively,  classed  under  four  heads:  i.  Sandhya,  or  obligatory  daily 
service.  2.  Upasana,  or  worship.  3.  Satcakrabheda.  4.  Mudra  Sadhana. 
The  first  two  of  these  will  form  the  subject  of  this  section. 

In  Pataiijali’s  Yoga  Sastra  eight  methods  are  laid  down  as  modes  of 
self-culture  for  realizing  the  True  Self.  They  arc:  1.  Constant  practice, 
and  Vairagya  or  that  state  of  mind  which  is  proof  against  worldly  attrac¬ 
tions  and  repulsions.  2.  Worship  of  the  manifested  God.  3.  Pranayama, 
or  regulation  of  breath.  4.  Concentration  of  mind  on  any  one  of  the 
objects  of  the  senses.1  5.  Concentration  in  the  heart-lotus.  6.  Concentra¬ 
tion  with  a  mind  free  from  desires.1  7.  Concentration  on  the  particular 
image  of  the  Godhead  worshipped  by  the  Sadhaka,  as  it  appears  in  the 
dream-state,  and  on  the  Sattvik  nature  of  the  mind  in  dreamless  sleep. 
8.  Meditation  on  any  object  of  liking. 

Excepting  Nos.  4  and  6,  which  are  particular  modes  of  concentration 
practised  by  Tantriks  in  Satcakrabheda 3  and  secret  worship,4  the  Tantrik 
Upasana  includes  all  these  and  much  more.  I  shall  first  take  up  the  last, 
about  which  much  misconception  seems  to  prevail.  The  original  text  is: 

•WlPWtMMl&l  1 

“And  by  meditation  on  any  object  ofliking”  (the  being  copulative 
and  not  alternative). 

1  Visayavati  va  pravrttirutpanna  sthitinibandhani.  (PataSjala,  1-35). 

*  Vitaraga  visayadva  cittam  (ib.  1-37). 

*  As  in  Dhyana  on  the  gandha  tattva  in  the  Muladhara,  etc. 

4  Rahaiya  puji;  a  special  mode  of  worship  undertaken  with  the  object  of 
freeing  the  mind  from  desires. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


42» 


Vyasa’s  commentary  on  the  above  aphorism  is: 

“Whatever  may  be  the  object  of  one’s  liking,  let  him  meditate  upon  that. 
If  the  mind  settles  upon  that  particular  object,  it  may  settle  also  elsewhere.” 

This  aphorism  does  not  give  unbridled  licence  to  practise  concentra¬ 
tion  upon  any  object  at  random.  There  are  people  who  have  very 
pronounced  predilections  for  particular  objects  which  they  are  unable  to- 
ignore.  It  is  for  these  people  that  the  above  wholesome  advice  is  given. 
An  anecdote  may  here  be  related  in  illustration  of  this.  Once  upon  a 
time  there  lived  a  very  pious  King,  who  was  earnest  upon  giving  a  religious 
training  to  his  son.  He  repaired  to  a  famous  Yogi  for  whom  he  enter¬ 
tained  great  respect.  After  the  usual  exchange  of  greetings  the  King  said : 
“  Mahatman !  If  you  please,  I  should  Me  to  have  my  son  initiated  by 
your  Holiness.”  “Very  well,  my  son,”  replied  the  Yogi,  “send  him 
hither.”  The  King,  very  much  gratified,  prostrated  himself  before  the 
holy  man,  and  sped  homeward.  The  day  after  the  royal  scion  appeared 
before  the  Yogi,  and  paid  his  obeisance.  “God  bless  you,  child;  Live 
here,  and  make  yourself  comfortable,”  said  the  Yog:  to  him. 

The  royal  youth,  however,  found  not  much  in  the  Yogi’s  Airama 
(hermitage)  to  comfort  him,  but  the  wild  scene,  the  beautiful  rivulet,  the 
ravine,  and  the  birds’  song  made  captive  his  heart.  For  three  or  four 
days  he  was  found  to  enjoy  Nature,  but  in  the  midst  of  his  enjoyment  he 
was  observed  suddenly  to  sigh  and  become  pensively  meditative.  One 
day  the  Yogi  asked  him:  “Child,  what  ails  you?”  “  Sir,"  replied  the 
Prince,  I  have  a  beautiful  young  elephant  at  home,  which  I  love  with  all 
my  heart.  Its  absence  pains  me.”  “  Very  well  I  shall  send  for  it,”  said 
the  holy  man.  The  day  after  the  young  elephant  was  brought.  The 
Prince’s  joy  knew  no  bounds;  he  began  to  caress  it,  kiss  it.  The  Yogi  said 
“  Child,  the  first  lesson  I  give  you  is  to  forget  everything  else  and  to  con¬ 
centrate  your  mind  upon  this  young  elephant.”  “  I  obey,”  said  the 
Prince.  A  year  after  the  Yogi  inquired:  “  Well,  how  far  have  you  pro¬ 
gressed?  ”  The  Prince  said:  “  I  have  not  yet  been  successful.”  The  Yogi 
encouraged  him  to  persevere.  Two  years  rolled  on.  One  day  the  Prince 
appeared  before  the  Yogi,  and  said :  “  Holy  Father,  my  mind  is  completely 
lost  in  the  image  of  the  young  elephant.  I  see  it  everywhere.  There  is 
nothing  else  in  the  world  to  captivate  my  mind.”  “  SarvamangalS 1  bless 
you,  my  child,  you  have  quickly  won  the  battle.  Come  now  and  be 
initiated  in  the  Mantra  of  your  Iftadevata.”*  So  saying,  the  holy  one  put 
the  Prince  on  the  path. 

1  The  all-auspicious  Goddess. 

*  See  post. 


430 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


The  reader  will  thus  find  that  the  choice  of  the  object  of  concentra¬ 
tion  does  not  depend  upon  individual  caprice.  If  the  mind  be  so  weak 
that  it  cannot  readily  part  with  its  predilections,  it  is  by  a  regulated  exer¬ 
cise  of  those  predilections  that  the  ever-roving  mind  is  settled.  It  is  but  a 
temporary  arrangement  for  rare  cases.  To  reduce  the  mind  to  a  focus  is 
a  task  of  great  magnitude,  perhaps  of  a  whole  life.  Nothing  should  be 
allowed  to  be  identified  with  the  mind  except  a  Divine  image — that  is,  a 
form  in  which  Divinity  incarnates,  and  for  this  plain  reason  that  what  a 
man  thinks  upon  thai  he  becomes.  If  one  concentrates  upon  a  glass  ball, 

.  a  glass  ball  shall  he  become.  Says  Lord  Sri  Krsna: 

^  m  i 

In  the  Tantrik  Mantra  the  worshipper  finds  an  image  of  the  Incarna¬ 
tion  of  the  Divinity,  not  a  dead  image,  a  shadow,  but  an  image  which,  by 
Sadhana,  can  be  conjured  up  into  the  Divinity  itself,  the  spiritual  power 
inherent  in  the  Mantra  fortifying  the  will-power  of  the  Sadhaka  to  produce 
this  result  From  the  very  outset  a  Sadhaka  is  enjoined  to  fill  his  mind 
with  the  thought  that  he  and  the  Divinity  are  one  and  the  same.  The 
realization  of  (I  am  He)  is  the  aim  and  end  of  his  worship. 

The  Tantrik  Sandhya  is  an  obligatory  service,  which  must  be  per¬ 
formed  thrice  a  day— at  dawn,  at  noon,  and  at  sunset.  It  opens  with  a 
Mantra,  which  reminds  the  worshipper  that  his  individual  self  is  really  no 
-other  than  the  one  Self,  manifested  in  the  universe  as  the  male  and  the 
female  Power.  The  Marika  Saktis  are  then  brought  into  requisition  to 
render  his  body  and  mind  active  with  their  soul-inspiring  energy.  The 
worhipper  pays  homage  to  the  Dcvas,  Rsis,  Pitjs,  to  his  Guru,'  and  to 
humanity.  With  a  libation  of  water  he  declares:  qg’ajjffltiqjfa — that  is 
“  I  gratify  mankind.” 

As  die  Divine  Mother  is  in  everything  and  everything  is  in  Her, 
■  service  to  every  living  being,  whether  human  or  not,  is  a  part  of  his 
religion. 

Meditation,  concentration,  Prapayama,  and  Japa  are  the  principal 
features  of  Sandhya.  The  object  of  Prapayama  is  to  bring  the  involuntary 
.  act  of  breathing  under  control,  and  suspend  its  action  at  the  will  of  the 
Sadhaka.  The  constituents  of  the  subtle  body  are  the  vital  air,  the  sen- 

•  sorium  and  the  mind.  The  latter  is  intimately  connected  with  breath. 
The  breath  serves  as  an  instrument  to  introduce  the  mind  to  the  world 
without.  If  one  can  regulate  the  breath,  he  can  control  the  otherwise 

•  uncontrollable  mind.  The  more  one  learns  this  art,  the  more  is  his  will¬ 
power  developed,  the  more  is  he  enabled  to  concentrate  his  mind  upon 

.  a  particular  object,  and  the  more  do  his  passions  cease.  As  breath  is  the 


1  Gods,  seers,  and  forefathers. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


431 


measure  of  life,  and  not  days,  years,  and  months,  the  Sadhaka’s  span  of 
life  is  prolonged,  and  his  body  is  rendered  immune  to  diseases.  life  is  a 
resultant  of  the  kinetic  karinik  forces  of  a  man  in  his  previous  birth.  The 
karmic  forces,  either  potential  or  kinetic,  become  a  part  of  the  mental 
sheath  of  the  reincarnating  Ego  along  with  its  sensorium  and  vital  power, 
which  latter  is  manifested  in  the  body  as  breath.  Breath  is  the  nexus 
which  joins  the  body  with  the  mind.  Control  it,  and  you  control  the 
dalliance  of  the  mind  with  the  external  world  through  the  body.  Prapa- 
yaraa  is,  therefore,  an  indispensable  aid  to  meditation,  concentration,  and 
the  development  of  will-power. 

In  his  commentary  on  verse  7,  chap,  ii,  of  the  Svctajvatara  Upani$ad, 
Saftkaracarya  quotes  from  Sruti: 


“  ‘  The  soul  being  purified  by  Pranayama  realizes  Parabrahman, 
hence  there  is  nothing  higher  than  Pranayama,’  thus  says  Sruti.” 

He  then  says: 

“  First,  Yajnas  and  other  works  should  be  performed,  then  Pranayama, 
etc.;  then  Communion,  then  knowledge  of  Vedaatic  teaching,  and  then 
liberation.” 

Then,  in  his  commentary  on  verse  8  of  the  same  chapter,  he  says: 
“  Because  the  man,  the  impurities  of  whose  mind  have  been  cleansed  by 
Pranayama  is  able  to  concentrate  his  mind  on  Brahman,  therefore  Pran&-' 
yama  is  introduced  (in  this  Upanisad).  At  first  the  nerves  should  be  puri¬ 
fied,  and  alter  that  one  becomes  fit  to  practise  PrariaySma.” 

The  Svetaivatara  Upanisad  says  (chap,  ii,  verse  9) : 


“  A  wise  man  should  skilfully  regulate  his  breath.  When  the  Prana 
becomes  feeble  it  should  be  let  off  through  the  nostrils  in  small  quantities. 
When  one  thus  becomes  gradually  accustomed  to  holding  the  breath,  the 
mind,  like  a  chariot  drawn  by  unruly  horses — that  is,  senses — becomes 
fixed  and  fitted  for  Brahma-Jnana  ”  (knowledge  of  the  Brahman). 

In  Chapter  XIV,  Skandha  XI,  of  (Srimad  Bhagavata,  in  answer  to 
Uddhava’s  question  as  to  how  one  who  desires  mukti  (liberation)  should 
contemplate  Him,  Bhagav&n  says:  “  Sitting  at  ease  upon  an  Asana 
(seat),  neither  high  nor  low,  with  the  body  erect,  keeping  the  palms  of 


432 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  hands  one  upon  another  upon  the  lap,  one  should  fix  his  eyes  upon 
the  tip  of  his  nose;  then,  governing  all  the  senses,  the  path  of  breath 
should  be  cleansed  by  Puraka  (drawing  in  the  breath),  Kumbhaka  (hold¬ 
ing  it)  and  Recaka  (giving  it  out).  Having  by  Prajjayama  drawn  the 
senses  from  their  respective  objects,  practice  should  also  be  made  by 
degress  in  an  opposite  direction.  The  sound  3JT  (Om)  in  the  heart,  which 
is  like  a  continuous  bell-sound,  should  be  drawn  upwards  by  Pranayama, 
and  then  Bindu  should  be  placed  upon  it.  In  this  wise  Pranayama,  with 
#  (Om),  should  be  practised  ten  times  in  each  of  the  three  Sandhyas. 
By  doing  this  the  breath  is  conquered  within  a  month.” 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  Upanisads,  the  Puranas,  and  the  Tantras 
with  one  voice  proclaim  the  supreme  importance  of  Pranayama  in  self¬ 
culture.  It  is,  however,  the  Tantra  which  has  preserved  the  knowledge  of 
the  mode  of  practice  of  this  noble  art,  and  it  is  the  Tantriks  who  can  teach 
it.  Sankaracarya,  in  his  commentary  above  quoted,  mentions  fllfeirfij, 
or  purification  of  the  Nadis,1  as  a  condition  precedent  to  practising  Pra- 
nayama.  I  believe  the  Tantriks  are  the  only  Gurus  who  know  how  to  do 
it.  Pranayama  is  essential  in  Sandhya,  Upasana,  and  Satcakra  Sadhana. 
But  it  must  be  learnt  very  cautiously  and  with  the  help  of  a  Guru.  As 
it  has  to  be  learnt  by  degrees  it  forms  an  essential  part  of  daily  services 
Sandhya  is  mental  exercise.  The  image  of  the  Divine  Mother, 
which  is  potential  in  the  worshipper’s  Ista-Mantra*  and  described  in 
what  is  generally  known  as  Dhyana  (Contemplation),  must  be  done  in 
the  mind.  The  mental  image  thus  arising  should  be  identified  with  the 
all-pervading  Divine  Mother,  and  concentration  practised  upon  it. 

Dhyana  (meditation)  is  of  two  kinds,  Suksma  and  Sthula— that  is, 
supersensuous  and  sensuous, 

^  ^  RMsPwtn  ii 

Wltenfi 

^  31W  II 

^  ^  sk  ii 

spaitf  iwwia,  1 

mz&m  i 


1  “  Nerves."  See  Arthur  Avalon’s  “  Serpent  Power,”  and  Introduction  to 
Tantra  Sdstra. 

*  The  particular  Mantra  which  the  particular  S&dhaka  receives  at  initiation. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


4SS 


apw  | 

*FWt  I 

<l¥win  jfaw  ^  || 

igWw^  i 

The  Yamala  says: 

“  Dhyana  is  of  two  kinds,  Sthula  (gross)  and  Suk$ma  (subtle). 
Suksma,  or  supersensuous,  is  Thy  sound-body  (q^stjq  )  •  Sthula  is 
meditation  on  Thy  image,  which  is  made  up  of  hands,  feet,  etc.  Thy 
Sukfmarupa  (subtle  form)  is  the  Jnanamaya  (conscious)  body  of  Prakjti. 
O  MaheSvarf!  The  supersensuous  seldom  arises  in  the  mind;  therefore 
one  should  concentrate  his  mind  on  the  Sthula  form  and  attain  Molqa 
(liberation).” 

The  Mahanirvaga  Tantra  says : 

“  Dhyana  is  of  two  kinds,  Sarupa  (having  visible  image)  and  Arflpa 
(not  having  visible  image).  Thy  Arupa  Dhyana  is  beyond  the  cognizance 
of  speech  and  mind;  it  is  unmanifested,  all-pervading,  incapable  of  being 
pointed  out  as  ‘  this  ’  or  ‘  that  \  Yogis  alone  can  cognize  it  by  long 
Samadhi  (ecstasy).  I  relate  to  you  Sthula  Dhyana,  so  that  Sadhakas 
being  hopeful  of  Suksma  Dhyana  may  practise  it  by  fixing  the  mind  upon 
it  for  the  attainment  of  the  object  of  their  desire.” 

In  the  Dawn-Sandhya  the  Divine  Mother  must  be  contemplated  in 
the  root-lotus  as  the  Creative  Power,  symbolized  by  a  maiden  having 
a  string  of  beads  in  Her  right  hand  and  a  jar  filled  with  water  in  Her  left, 
riding  on  a  white  swan.  The  white  swan  is  the  Hamsa  of  philosophy,  the 
vital  Power  which  must  needs  be  Her  vehicle  for  the  purpose  of  creation, 
for  without  the  vital  power  creation  is  impossible.  The  string  of  beads 
symbolizes  Japa — that  is,  meditation  on  the  creation  of  the  previous  Kalpa 
and  production  of  similar  sound-forms,  which  are  the  substratum  of  all 
things  sensuous  and  supersensuous.  The  jar  of  water  is  the  “  cause-water  ” 
tqircffRTfr)  of  philosophy,  the  protoplasm  out  of  which  all  bodies  are 
formed. 

In  the  Noon-Sandhya  She  rides  on  the  King  of  Birds,  Garuda,  in  the 
heart-lotus,  holding  in  Her  four  hands  conch,  discus,  mace,  and  lotus,  and 
wearing  a  garland  of  flowers  on  Her  breast.  Garuda  is  light  (which  is 
life  as  well),  the  conch  is  sound,  the  discus  is  Avidya  or  that  Power  by 
which  creation  comes;  the  mace  is  the  symbol  of  authority,  and  the  lotus 
is  the  universe.  She  is  now  the  Vaigpavi  Sakti,  who  maintains  and 
28 


434 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


nourishes  the  universe.  The  garland  of  flowers  symbolizes  the  countless 
beings  whom  She  nourishes.  The  explanations  of  the  symbols  given  in 
this  and  the  preceding  and  succeeding  paragraphs  are  my  own.  The 
Srimad-Bhagavata  explains  the  garland  as  meaning  Maya,  the  mace  as 
denoting  the  vital  Power,  the  conch  as  meaning  water,  the  discus  as 
symbolizing  light,  and  the  lotus  as  symbolizing  Ananta,  or  space. 

In  the  Evening-Sandhya  She  rides  the  Great  Bull  (JlSfl^q:)  in  the 
white  lotus  holding  a  trident  in  Her  right  hand  and  a  noose  in  the 

left.  When  the  day  of  Brahma — that  is,  a  Kalpa — comes  to  a  close  the 
bifurcated  male  and  female  Powers  again  meet  in  equilibrium.  This 
is  symbolized  by  the  trident.  The  noose  is  Avidya,  which  She  has  with¬ 
drawn  into  Her  own  hand  to  repose  there  until  the  darkness  of  Brahma’s 
night  is  dispelled. 

As  Creator  Her  vehicle  is  Rajasik,  as  Preserver  it  is  Sattvik,  and  as 
Withdrawer  of  the  universe  it  is  Trigupa  Maya,1  the  Tamasik  Guna 
predominating.  The  creative  energy  is  volition  the  preserva¬ 
tive  energy  is  action  ),  and  the  destructive  energy  is  cognition 

(SPPlfrfi)  ■  These  three  phases  of  the  all-pervading  Sakti  must  be  con¬ 
templated  on  day  by  day  in  order  that  the  Sadhaka  may  realize  what  the 
object  of  his  worship  is  in  manifestation. 

The  image  of  the  Istadevata  must  first  be  formed  in  the  mind  by 
Dhyana.  Then  the  Bija  mantra  should  be  repeated,  keeping  the  image 
in  view  and  withdrawing  the  mind  from  all  other  thoughts.  This  is 
called  Japa. 

FwPmi  wrt  wft*  ii 

AwitWWWlWsIt'RW'H:  I 

3^  ffa  || 

i 

The  Bhutaiuddhi  Tantra  says: 

“  Meditating  on  the  form  of  the  Devata  denoted  by  the  Mantra,  Japa 
should  be  made  in  the  mind.” 

The  Kulamava  Tantra  says : 

“A  mantra  should  be  repeated  with  faith,  devotion,  attention,  sub¬ 
mission,  and  perception  of  the  Divine  image  in  the  mind." 

Japa  is  of  three  kinds:  Vacika  (by  audible  words),  UpafigSa  (lips  and 
tongue  moving,  but  inaudible  to  the  person  making  Japa),  and  MSnasika 


1  MayS  of  the  three  gupas. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAID1K  AND  TANTRIK 


435 


'(mental;  lips  and  tongue  not  moving).  Japa  the  supreme  virtue  of 
gradually  withdrawing  the  mind  from  other  thoughts  and  impressions,  and 
fixing  it  on  the  Divine  image.  When  concentration  by  this  means  is  per¬ 
fected,  the  consciousness  of  the  Sadhaka  is  transferred  to  the  Mantra- 
devata.  This  is  called  Mantra-caitanya  (awakening  of  Mantra)  and  the 
Sadhaka  is  said  to  have  become  Mantra-siddha  (Mantra-perfect). 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  Sandhya  is  of  the  highest  efficacy  in  spiritual 
culture,  and  it  is  on  this  account  that  it  is  obligatory  on  every  Hindu  of 
whatever  division  of  worshippers  he  be.  I  have  already  quoted  from 
■the  Srimad  Bhagavata,  which  is  the  scripture  of  the  Vaisnavas,  to  show 
the  importance  of  Prapayama  and  Sandhya.  Other  quotations  from  the 
same  Sastra  follow: 

“  One  who  is  desirous  of  cutting  the  bondage  of  I-am-ness  of  the 
Jivatma  should  worship  Keiava  according  to  the  Tantrik  method,  which 
contains  in  it  the  Vaidik  method  as  well  ”. 

The  man  who  in  this  wise  worships  Ilvara  in  Agni,  Surya,  water,  etc., 
•or  in  one’s  own  heart,  as  the  Atma,  according  to  the  Tantrik  Karmayoga, 
soon  attains  Mukti  (liberation).” 

Skandha  XI,  chap,  iii 

“  O  Uddhava!  visiting  My  image  and  other  symbol,  visiting  My 
Bhakta  (devotee),  .  .  .  Diksa,  according  to  the  Vedas  and  the  Tantras 
.  .  .  these  arc  the  signs  of  Bhakti  (devotion)  to  Me.” 

Skandha  XI,  chap,  xi 

“  My  worship  is  of  three  kinds:  Vaidik,  Tantrik,  and  mixed.  Which¬ 
ever  of  these  three  be  to  one’s  liking,  let  him  worship  Me  by  that” 

Skandha  XI,  chap,  xxvii 

“  Saunaka  said :  O  Suta,  you  arc  devoted  to  Bhagavin,  you  know  all 
the  doctrines  of  Tantra  and  many  other  things.  I  now  ask  you  a  question. 
Narayapa,  the  husband  of  Sri,  is  only  Cidghana  (massive  consciousness), 
but  Tantrik  Upasakas  (worshipper),  at  the  time  of  worship,  attribute 
limbs,  and  these  and  other  parts,  such  as  Garuda,  etc.,  weapons  such  as 
Sudarfana,  and  ornaments  such  as  Kaustubha,  to  Him.  Tell  me  what 
things  (Tattvas)  are  symbolized  by  them.  I  am  desirous  of  knowing 
Krya  yoga.*  Therefore,  relate  to  me  that  skill  in  KriyJL  (action)  by  which 
men  attain  Mukti  (liberation).  Suta  said:  Saluting  my  Gurudeva,  I 
relate  to  you  the  Vibhutis 1  of  Vi?nu  as  stated  in  the  Veda  and  the  Tantra 
by  Brahma  and  other  Acaryas  (teachers).” 

Skandha  XII,  chap,  xi 

These  and  other  like  statements  should  induce  my  Vaispava  brothers, 
who  are  too  often  apt  to  assail  the  Tantra,  to  abstain  from  the  terrible  sin 
•of  a  patricide. 


1  Yoga  through  action. 


1  Powers  and  manifestations. 


.436 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Upasana  is  the  worship  of  the  Vacya  Sakti 1  through  the  VScaka 
Sakti  of  a  Sadhaka’s  Iftamantra.1  If  the  Istamantra  denotes  an  AvatSra* 
in  male  body,  the  worship  is  regulated  in  conformity  with  it;  and  if  the 
Istamantra  denotes  a  female  Avatara  the  method  of  worship  is  of  a  dif¬ 
ferent  type.  But  the  main  principles  of  worship  are  identical.  The  I§pa- 
mantra,  or  Bija  Mantra,  as  previously  stated,  denotes  two  Powers,  the 
Vacaka  and  the  Vacya  Sakti.  By  realizing  the  Vacaka  Sakti,  the  abstract, 
unconditioned  Paramatma,  which  is  the  Vacya  Sakti  of  a  Mantra,  must 
be  realized,  the  ultimate  goal  of  all  Sadhana  being  the  realization  of  the 
One  True  Self.  The  Vacaka  Sakti  is  the  Manifested  God  Saguna  ISvara,. 
the  Sakti  of  the  Tantrik  philosophy.  We  have  seen  how  the  one  Sakti  is 
bifurcated  into  male  and  female  Saktis  for  the  purposes  of  evolution,  thus, 
giving  expression  to  Sabdabrahman.  We  have  also  seen  how  our  solar 
system  is  presided  over  by  seven  Lords  in  its  seven  planes,  each  of  these 
Lords  being  an  aspect  of  Sabdabrahman.  In  Upasana  (worship)  the 
Virata  Sarira — that  is,  the  physical  body  of  Sabdabrahman — is  the  vehicle 
through  which  worship  is  offered.  It  is  the  Virata  Sarira,  which  is  the 
ground  of  all  Avataras.  The  Sahasrasirsa  Purusa  (thousand-headed 
Purusa)  of  the  Vedas  is  the  Virat  Purusa  of  philosophy.  The  five  Maha- 
bhutas  (elements),  the  ten  senses,  the  five  vital  airs,  Manas  (sensorium), 
Buddhi  (intuition),  Ahankara  (ego),  and  Citta  (mind)  constitute  the 
Sarira  or  body  of  Sabdabrahman,  the  plane  of  whose  consciousness  is 
called  Jagrata,  or  waking.  Worship  begins  from  this  state  of  Divine 
consciousness  until  it  reaches  the  dreaming  state,  or  Svapna.  Beyond  the 
dreaming  state  is  Susupti,  or  slumbering  consciousness  of  Sabdabrahman, 
where  worship  ends.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  self-same  Sacchida- 
nanda  is  worshipped  in  different  vehicles,  even  as  the  selfsame  gold  is 
worn  as  a  ring,  a  chain,  a  bracelet,  and  the  like. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  Kali  and  Visnu  are  essentially  the  same,  only 
the  vehicles  and  their  characteristic  qualities  differing.  The  Tantrik’s 
predilection  for  the  Divinity  in  its  female  form,  as  the  Mother  of  the  Uni¬ 
verse,  arises  in  part  from  the  fact  that  the  mother’s  heart  being  softer  than 
that  of  the  father,  she  is  more  readily  moved  in  favour  of  the  son  than  the 
father.  Some  no  doubt  would  regard  this  as  a  very  pronounced  instance 
of  anthropomorphism.  But  in  truth  it  cannot  be  denied  that  as  the 
human  mother  is  a  spark  of  the  Divine  Mother,  the  qualities  of  head  and 
heart  of  the  former  are  but  an  infinitesimally  small  expression  of  similar 
qualities  in  the  latter.  From  the  bodies  of  the  Divine  Father  and  the 
Divine  Mother  proceed  all  evolutions  of  body  and  mind.  The  human 


1  See  post. 

*  Manifestation  called  “  incarnation  ”  when  it  takes  place  on  the  physi¬ 
cal  plane. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  437 

father  and  the  human  mother,  and  all  fathers  and  mothers  in  the  universe, 
are  Amsa-Saktis — that  is,  individual  powers  emanating  from  the  Divine 
Parents,  who  do  not,  like  the  Christian  and  the  Mohammedan  God, 
personally  create  bodies  and  souls.  The  characteristic  predominance  of 
^emotional  qualities  in  human  mothers  is  an  index  that  it  must  be  so  in 
the  Divine  Mother;  the  experience  of  Sadhakas  proves  this,  and  is  con¬ 
eeded  in  the  scriptures  of  Vai^tjavas  as  well. 

There  is  yet  a  weightier  consideration  than  the  above  which  has 
won  the  Tantrik  over  to  the  lotus-feet  of  Mother  Kali.  The  paternal  and 
maternal  Saktis,  the  positive  and  negative  poles,  the  centrifugal  and 
centripetal  forces,  are  perpetually  in  harmonious  association  to  evolve  and 
nourish  the  universe.  The  Paternal  Sakti  is  ever  fecundating,  and  the 
Maternal  Sakti  ever  holding  the  child  in  her  womb  and  nourishing  it.  This 
is  the  law  of  Pravrtti  (desire)  in  the  universe.  When  the  Divine  Mother 
refuses  fecundation  and,  dominating  the  Divine  Father,  asserts  Her  Will, 
then  is  She  Mahavidya,  then  is  She  Niramayapadonmukhi  (facing  the  state 
*  of  freedom  from  sufferings).  The  milk  of  Her  perennial  breast  then 
nourishes  the  aspirant,  and  gives  him  strength  to  march  along  the  path  of 
Nivjtti  (cessation).  It  is  then  that  She,  the  Varna,  the  left-hand  consort,1 
usurps  the  right-hand  place,  and,  slaying  the  demon-propensities  of  Her 
beloved  sons,  gives  them  hope  and  courage  with  Her  right  hand.  The 
Fecundating  Father,  the  source  of  Pravrtti.  falls  prostrate  under  Her  feet 
to  avert  the  destruction  of  His  world.  Such  is  Mahavidya,  the  Divine 
Mother,  the  Lady  Paramount  of  the  Path  of  Nivrtti  (path  of  cessation), 
whom  the  Tantrik  worships. 

Upasana,  or  worship,  is  of  two  kinds,  internal  and  external. 

fsfr*  *»  1*11*1,  I 

iw<  || 

jTMI%ww  I 

“  Upasana  (worship)  of  the  initiated  is  of  two  kinds — internal  and 
-external.  Internal  worship  is  ordained  for  Sannyasis,  and  both  internal 
.and  external  for  others.” 

Tantra  Samhita 


*  The  position  of  the  wife  is  on  the  left  hand. 


438 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  Antaryaga,  or  internal  worship,  gives  Mukti  (liberation)  even  to  a 
living  Sadhaka.  Only  Murauksus  or  Munis  (sages)  bent  upon  Mukti  are 
entitled  to  it.  The  Sadhakas,  who  arc  incapable  of  Antaryaga,  should 
perform  it  like  external  Puja  (woiship)  with  mental  offerings.” 

Gautamiya  Tantra 

Antaryaga  is  based  entirely  upon  a  direct  knowledge  of  the  Power- 
centres  or  Cakras  in  the  human  body.  The  Sadhaka,  having  awakened 
Kula-KundalinI  in  the  root-chakra,  takes  Her  up,  with  the  help  of  the 
vital  air,  from  centre  to  centre,  until  the  thousand-petalled  centre  in  the 
crown  of  the  head  is  reached;  there  the  male  and  female  Powers  arc 
brought  together  in  blissful  union.  The  Sadhaka  having  enjoyed  this 
temporary  bliss,  which  vitalizes  his  body  and  mind,  transfers  his  con¬ 
sciousness  to  the  heart-centre,  in  the  ethereal  space  of  which  he  forms  the 
mental  image  of  the  Divine  Mother  as  it  is  expressed  in  his  Bija-mantra. 
When  the  image  has  been  thus  formed,  the  mind  is  concentrated  upon  it 
with  firm  faith  and  devotion.  When  the  image  is  portrayed  upon  the 
canvas  of  the  mind  with  all  the  details  of  limbs  and  organs,  as  if  it  were-  ' 
a  painting,  the  Sadhaka  offers  his  sacrifices: 

f?RlRR  I 

•IW  || 


fad  |: 

i  i  gqf#*  II 

tiHlW  i 

tWT  II 

^  m  i 

sffifai  m  \ 

'rasai  dd:  m  II 


“  Give  the  heart-lotus  as  the  seat;  give  the  nectar  flowing  from  the 
thousand-petalled  lotus  for  the  washing  of  the  feet:  dedicate  the  mind! 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  439 

(Manas)  as  Arghya  (offering).  For  washing  the  lace  and  for  bathing  give 
the  same  nectar.  Give  ether  (AkaSa)  as  clothing;  the  principle  of  smell 
for  odour;  the  mind  (Citta)  for  flower;  the  vital  airs  (Pranas)  as  incense; 
the  principle  of  light  (Tejas)  as  the  lamp;  the  ocean  of  nectar  for  food; 
the  sound  called  Anahata  (inaudible  sound  in  the  heart-lotus)  as  the  bell 
(ghapta) ;  the  principle  of  air  as  fan  and  fly  whisk  (Camara) ;  the  actions 
of  the  senses,  as  well  as  the  restlessness  of  the  mind,  as  dancing.  For  the 
realization  of  divine  thought  give  diverse  flowers :  freedom  from  delusion, 
egotism,  attachment,  spiritual  insensibility,  pride,  arrogance,  enmity, 
perturbance,  envy,  and  greed — freedom  from  all  these  are  called  the  ten 
flowers.  The  supreme  flower  of  Ahimsa  (non-injury  of  any  living  thing), 
the  flower  of  subjugation  of  the  senses  and  the  flowers  of  pity,  forgiveness, 
and  knowledge — these  are  the  five  flowers.  With  these  fifteen  flowers 
formed  of  sentiments  (bhavas)  should  a  worship  be  performed.” 

After  offering  this  mental  sacrifice  to  his  I$tadevat£  standing  before 
his  mental  eye  in  the  heart-lotus,  the  Sadhaka  makes  mental  japa : 

API  &MCtSI<i?Wfaid| 

“  The  rosary  is  said  to  be  formed  of  Varnas,  or  sound-powers,  strung 
together  by  the  thread  Kup^all.” 

The  fifty  severed  heads  of  men  which  make  up  the  necklace  of 
Mother  Kali  must  be  replaced  mentally  by  the  fifty  sound  Power* 
(Vardas),  strung  together  by  Kulakupdalini  as  thread,  and  the  BIja  Mantra 
is  repeated  with  the  help  of  this  rosary.  He  then  performs  mental  Homs. 

The  Nitya  Tantra  says: 

t  II 

3iR^  ii 

| 

tlit  || 

<WI>4)«.  ^  TO  11 

3«t  Apt  4tafcc)  i 

fW  *  II 


440 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


^  ^W-WI  *RT  I 
fim  II 

“O  All-beautiful  One!  I  tell  you  the  ritual  of  Jnana-honia  (homa  of 
knowledge),  give  ear  unto  me.  By  knowing  it  one  becomes  Sada&va,  the 
Creator  and  Destroyer.  The  quadrangular  Vcdi  (altar)  is  made  of  Atma 
(individual  soul),  Antaratma  (the  manifested  God),  Paramatma  (the 
Divine  Mother),  and  Jnanatma  (the  Absolute).  The  Ardhamatra 
(Kup^alinl)  should  be  considered  the  Yoni  of  the  Homa-pit;  the 
Mekhaia  of  the  Vedi  (altar),  that  is  to  say,  the  line  which  encircles  it 
as  if  by  a  waist-chain,  should  be  thought  of  as  consisting  of  Ananda  (bliss) ; 
and  tite  other  three  lines  on  the  Vedi  should  he  taken  as  its  three  BaWs, 
that  is  to  say,  bcauty-lincs  on  the  abdomen.  The  Kula-bhairava — that  is 
the- Yogi — should  kindle  in  it  the  fire  of  knowledge  (Jiiana) ;  then  the  forms 
of  the  Matrka-sounds  should  be  sacrificed  in  the  fire  of  Jiiana,  by  which 
the  sounds  become  Soundless  Brahman.  O  the  Adored  of  Viras !  Merits, 
demerits,  desires,  doubts,  action,  inaction  and  Prakrti  should  be  sacrificed 
by  the  mental  spoon.  Thus  one  becomes  full  of  Jiiana,  and  Parabrahman 
Itself.” 

From  the  above  description  of  subjective  Upasana,  it  will  have  been 
seen  that  only  such  highly  developed  Yogis  and  devotees  arc  capable 
of  it  as  have  attained  Samprajfiata  Samadhi,  or  Temporary  Com¬ 
munion,  in  which  the  knower  and  the  known  are  distinguished.  It  is 
the  last  stage  of  Upasana,  a  thin  veil  only  separating  the  individual 
Atma  from  the  universal  Atma.  Such  Yogis  arc  the  product  of  ages  of 
culture. 

Sadhakas,  whose  mental  image  is  not  so  well  defined  and  who  cannot 
make  it  steady  for  any  length  of  time,  must  form  an  objective  image, 
exactly  in  the  likeness  of  the  subjective  image,  and  worship  their  Istadevata 
in  it.  They  must,  however  perform  mental  Upasana  first  as  best  as  they 
can,  and  then  vitalize  and  energize  the  external  image.  By  establishing  a 
magnetic  current  between  himself  and  the  image  before  him,  the  mentally 
vitalized  image  is  communicated  to  it  The  external  image  is  no  longer  a 
mere  doll;  it  is  the  Istadevata  Herself.  Between  the  Sadhaka’s  faith  and 
will,  on  the  one  side,  and  his  Mantra-power,  on  the  other,  a  change,  so  to 
say,  takes  place  in  the  inanimate  image.  It  is  Mantra-$akti  which  is  alone 
capable  of  performing  this  wonderful  change  and  of  rendering  worship  in 
images  possible. 

The  Kulanjava  Tantra  says: 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


441 


qifitePTO  frw  'J3TTCT  ^  I 


aorfatwK  I 


“  As  milk,  which  is  produced  in  every  limb  of  the  cow,  flows  out 
through  the  udders,  so  the  all-pervading  DevatS  manifests  Herself  in 
external  images,  etc.  By  the  similitude  of  the  external  image  to  the 
mantrik  image,  by  the  speciality  of  the  Puja,  and  by  the  faith  of  the 
Sadhaka,  the  Devata  manifests  himself.” 

Pranapratistha  (enlivening)  thus  accomplished,  the  Sadhaka  worships 
the  Divine  Mother,  rapt  in  devotion  and  love.  He  has  now  no  great 
difficulty  in  concentrating  his  mind  upon  the  visible  Istadevata.  He 
makes  meditation  (Dhyana)  and  recitation  (Japa)  before  this  living  image 
as  long  as  he  is  capable  of  it.  He  offers  flowers,  incense,  sweet-scents,  the 
choicest  eatables,  valuable  cloths  and  ornaments  to  his  beloved  Mother, 
•who  accepts  them  all.  Thus,  practising  day  by  day,  his  restless  mind 
begins  gradually  to  compose  itself,  finding  better  and  purer  happiness  in 
the  Lotus  Feet  of  the  Divine  Mother  than  in  all  that  the  world  can  offer 
him.  Thus,  learning  to  taste  of  celestial  happiness,  true  Vairagya  (dispas- 
sion)  towards  worldly  happiness  engrosses  his  mind.  A  man  might  spend 
a  dozen  lives  in  discrimination  as  to  what  is  permanent  and  what  is  not 
so,  yet  Vairagya  would  be  as  far  off  from  him  as  die  mirage  in  a  sandy 
desert;  for,  according  to  Vedanta  Nitya-anitya-vicara,  or  discrimination 
between  what  is  permanent  and  what  is  transient,  does  not  unfold  itself 
in  a  mind  which  has  not  been  purified  by  worship  (Upasana).  To  try 
to  be  indifferent  to  worldly  happiness  without  Upasana  is  to  put  the 
cart  before  the  horse. 

The  more  the  mind  composes  itself  by  external  worship,  the  more 
abiding  becomes  the  mental  image.  When,  by  this  means,  the  state 
of  Samadhi,  or  ecstasy,  is  reached,  the  external  image  is  no  longer 
required. 

After  finishing  his  worship,  the  Sadhaka,  by  a  process  known 
as  Samhararaudra,  withdraws  the  vitality  communicated  to  the 
image,  which  then  becomes  a  mere  material  image,  fit  to  be  thrown 
away. 

External  Upasana  is  not  mere  prayer  and  praise  and  offering  of  food 
and  drink.  The  Bhakta’s  (devotee’s)  mind  cannot  rest  satisfied  without 
singing  the  praise  of  his  beloved  Mother;  the  more  he  sings  Her  praise, 
the  more  his  mind  is  elevated  towards  Her.  The  Mantra-power  helps 
him  to  make  his  offerings  acceptable.  In  the  Gita  the  Lord  says  that  he 
accepts  flowers,  leaves,  etc.,  offered  to  Him  with  Bhakti  (devotion).  But 
how  are  such  offerings  to  be  communicated  to  Him  unless  the  offerer  and 


442 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  image  through  which  He  is  worshipped  are  m  rapport?  The  Tantra 
here  steps  in  and  solves  the  question.  Prayer,  praise,  and  offerings  apart, 
the  most  important  features  of  Upasana  are:  (i)  Bhutaiuddhi  (purification 
of  the  elements  constituting  the  subtle  body).  {2)  Nyasa  (the  placing 
of  the  Matrka  sounds  and  BIja  Mantras  on  different  parts  of  the  body). 
(3)  Pranayama,  or  breath  control.  {4)  Meditation  (Dhyana).  (5)  Mental 
worship.  (6)  Japa,  or  recitation  of  Mantra.  The  first  is  accomplished 
either  by  Yoga  process  or  by  means  of  a  particular  Mantra.  The  object 
of  this  is  to  purify  the  mind  of  its  good  and  evil  tendencies  which  have 
rendered  the  Ego  a  body-bound,  selfish,  small  thing.  The  worshipper, 
in  doing  this  purificatory  rite,  must  think  that,  for  the  time  being,  his 
Karmik  body  has  been  purified,  that  he  (the  true  self— that  is,  Atma)  now 
wears  the  mantle  of  KulakundalinI  (the  body  of  the  Sound  Spiritual), 
and  that,  therefore,  he  is  no  other  than  the  object  of  worship  him 
self.  Being  Deva  himself,  he  worships  Dcva,  thus  realizing  the  Vaidik 
saying: 

jwrfoi  irngfiiM  wngan  I 
swFf&wifcn  11 

1 

“  Brahman  the  oblation,  Brahman  the  clarified  butter,  arc  offered  in 
Brahman  the  fire  by  Brahman;  unto  Brahman  verily  shall  he  go  who  in 
his  action  meditates  wholly  upon  Brahman.” 

The  object  of  the  second  rite  (Nyasa)  is  to  render  the  body  spirit¬ 
ualized  by  the  sound  and  Mantra  Powers. 

The  rest  (3,  4,  5,  and  6)  have  been  dealt  with  in  their  proper  places. 

It  is  by  spiritualizing  the  body  and  the  mind,  and  by  devoutly  think¬ 
ing  himself  to  be  a  part  of  the  Unity,  that  a  Sadhaka  must  perform  his 
worship,  which  is,  in  fact,  more  subjective  than  objective.  Without  these 
essentials,  Upasana  would  be  like  royalty  without  territory.  To  withdraw 
the  mind  from  external  attractions  and  repulsions  and  to  consecrate  it  to 
the  Divine  Mother,  Prapayama,  Dhyana,  and  Japa  are  essential. 

Upasana  has  many  subsidiary  elements  in  it,  upon  which  it  is  not 
necessary  here  to  dwell,  as  they  are  not  likely  to  interest  the  general 
reader;  they  are,  however,  all-important,  and  should  not  be  eliminated  by 
an  earnest  Sadhaka  from  his  Sadhana. 

Hindu  society  has  been  so  constituted  by  the  B^is  of  Vaidik  antiquity 
that  it  is  not  enough  that  every  member  of  it  is  a  good  citizen.  One- 
should  not  only  be  a  good  citizen,  but  a  good  individual;  and  not 
only  a  good  individual,  but  a  God-loving  individual  withal.  Such 
is  the  end  and  aim  of  Varpairama  Dharma  (caste-system  of  Hinduism).. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


443 


Caste  is  not  only  a  civil  rule,  but  a  religious  ordinance  as  well.  Society 
was  so  framed  that  it  worked  automatically  to  supply  the  material  and 
spiritual  wants  of  its  members.  Hindu  society  being  thus  constituted,, 
every  member  of  it  is  bound  to  be  initiated,  either  according  to  his  own 
choice,  or  according  to  the  form  of  religion  of  his  ancestors.  The  Hindus 
are  generally  either  Vaisnavas  or  Saktas.  The  mode  of  Upasana,  briefly 
sketched  above,  is  too  high  for  the  average  Sakta  Hindu,  who  must 
practise  Sandhya  and  Upasana  with  devotion  and  faith,  so  that  in  the 
long  run  he  may  be  prepared  for  the  path. 

Spiritual  self-culture,  is  pre-eminently  Sattvik.1  The  passions,  pro¬ 
pensities,  attachments,  aversions  and  all  those  creations  of  RajaB  and 
Tamas  *  which  chain  man  down  to  earth  and  to  things  earthly,  must  be 
gradually  but  effectually  washed  off  and  the  mind  rendered  perfectly 
Sattvik.  The  Upasana,  above  described,  is  Sattvik  in  all  its  forms.  Those, 
therefore,  who,  though  governed  by  the  laws  of  their  caste  (Vanja)  and 
stage  of  life  (Airama),  which  is  called  Varn  airama  Dhanna,  yet  infringe 
‘them,  and  under  cover  of  religious  practice  unlawfully  eat,  drink,  and 
sexually  enjoy  for  the  gratification  of  their  senses,  arc  condemned  by  Siva 
in  the  passage  which  the  author  of  the  Saktananda  Tarahgini  quotes  from 
the  Agamasamhita  on  the  subject  of  false  Tantras  (Asadagama) : 


^  Sfl^Jl  ^Ift  <l*WI<ril*WW*IT  I 
faftd  i 

^  ft*  I 


“  O  Devi!  in  the  Kali  Yuga  most  of  the  Rajasik  and  Tamasik  people, 
having  adopted  prohibited  practices,  delude  many  others.  O  SureJvarl ! 
those  who,  regardless  of  Varnasrama  Dharma,  offer  us  flesh,  blood,  and 
wine,  are  (various  forms  of)  evil  spirits.”  * 

I  believe,  however,  that  more  than  half  of  Hindu  India  is  Sakta,  and 
I  can  safely  assert  that  90  per  cent  of  them  are  free  from  reproach  in 
respect  of  the  violation  of  true  Sastric  principles  and  practice. 


1  The  outcome  of  the  Sattva  guna  (See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

1  See  as  to  these  gupas,  ibid. 

*  See  as  to  this  passage  the  remarks  in  the  Introduction  by  Arthur  Avalon 
to  Part  I  of  this  book. 


444 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


The  Pilgrimage  of  the  Human  Ego 

%R?J  RM:  R5JRT  I 

RfofM  RRTCT  3IRRI  II 


In  the  above  quotation  from  the  Mup^akopanisad  it  is  said: 

“  This  subtle  Paramatma  can  only  be  known  by  the  mind,  within  the 
body,  where  the  five  vital  airs  reside.  The  minds  of  all  arc  pervaded  by 
the  vital  aiis.  The  Paramatma  manifests  Himself  in  the  mind  when  it  is 
purified.” 

The  Ego  must  clothe  itself  with  eight  millions  of  bodies,  from  the 
stone  to  the  animal,  before  it  can  be  fit  to  assume  the  human  form. 
There  is,  however,  no  knowing  how  many  births  and  rebirths  in  each 
'class  of  bodies  it  must  undergo  before  it  can  adapt  itself  to  the  next 
higher  body.  Ages  untold  and  births  unnumbered  at  last  usher  the 
journeying  Ego  into  the  human  body— the  most  perfect  of  all  bodies 
cognizable  by  the  senses.  The  Ego  itself  is  but  a  body,  a  Suksraa  Sarira— 
that  is,  a  subtle  body,  consisting  of  the  vital  airs,  the  sensorium,  and  the 
mind.  This  bundle  of  very  fine  “  matter,”  unlike  its  gross  sheath,  which 
decomposes  and  decays  at  short  intervals,  persists  from  the  creation  to  the 
final  dissolution  of  the  universe.  It  has  a  causal  body  (Karapa  Sarira) 
within  itself,  which  is  composed  of  a  homogeneous  finer  “  matter".  The 
experiences  of  countless  births  and  re-births  are  stored  up  in  the  subtle 
body,  and  very  fine  impressions  of  those  experiences  arc  stamped  upon  the 
■causal  body.  The  one  immutable  Atma,  pervading  and  containing  all 
existences,  is  made  a  captive,  as  it  were,  in  each  subtle  body,  from  which 
■circumstance  it  acquires  its  Egoity.  The  unconditioned  Atma  being  thus 
■conditioned,  the  pleasures  and  the  pains,  the  happiness  and  the  misery  of 
the  body  are  attributed  to  it;  this  is  the  work  of  Nature’s  great  housewife 
■called  AvidyS  (ignorance).  When,  however,  the  Ego  acquires  the  human 
body,  which  is  the  most  perfect  of  Sthula  Sariras — that  is,  gross  bodies — it 
is  blessed  with  the  opportunity  of  making  a  pilgrimage  to  its  primeval 
source,  and  (dissolving  the  compact  subde  body)  of  uniting  Atma  with 
Atma,  It  needs  ages  of  self-culture  to  accomplish  this  Paramaxtha 
(supreme  object) ;  but  a  beginning  must  be  made  by  every  human  being. 

Avidya,  the  most  expert  and  cunning  housewife,  has  ten  thousand 
arts  and  wiles  to  captivate  her  children.  Like  Rassellas,  they  must  not  be 
-allowed  to  peep  beyond  the  lofty  ramparts  of  the  happy  valley.  She  has 
provided  every  creature  comfort  for  her  children.  People,  charmed  by 
her  unceasing  attentions,  quite  forget  their  real  Mother,  Vidya 
(knowledge),  and  hug  the  other  with  all  the  devotion  of  dutiful  children. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  445 

To  save  humanity  from  their  pseudo-mother,  Divinity  from  time  to  time- 
incarnates  and  sends  His  chosen  sons  to  teach  them.  It  is  by  this  means, 
that  man  acquires  the  knowledge  of  his  real  state,  and  learns  that  he  has 
a  true  Mother,  who  alone  can  save  him  from  the  glamour  of  Avidya. 

In  this  golden  land  of  Divine  Rsis,  the  land  whence  Divine  knowledge 
radiated  to  all  other  lands,  the  path  to  Vidya  was  made  an  art  and 
divided  into  different  progressive  grades.  The  curriculum  consists  of 
VarnaSrama  Dharma1  (for  full  particulars  of  which  the  reader  is  referred 
to  my  Bengali  book  on  the  subject),  external  and  internal  worship,  and 
Yoga.  VarnaSrama  Dharma  is  the  ground  whereon  the  first  battle  must 
be  fought  with  Avidya.  It  is  the  place  where  the  Ego  must  put  chains 
around  the  neck  of  Avidya  so  that  she  may  not  lead  people  wheresoever 
she  may  choose.  It  is  here  that  man  gets  the  first  glimpse  of  his  real 
Mother  Vidya.  External  worship  further  girds  up  the  Ego  to  cope  with 
Avidya.  By  these  two  means  the  Ego  gradually  learns  to  feel  that  it  has 
a  real  Father  and  Mother;  to  find  out,  to  worship,  to  love,  and  to  know 
whom  is  the  end  and  aim  of  its  being.  When  the  conviction  of  its 
necessity  grows  irresistible,  the  Ego  determines  to  make  the  pilgrimage. 
But  where  is  the  grand  trunk  road  over  which  it  must  wend  its  way. 

From  the  text  of  the  Mundakopanisad,  which  opens  this  section,  it 
will  be  seen  that  the  Divinity  has  to  be  sought  within  the  body  of  the 
Sadhaka.  Although  the  Divine  Essence  is  immanent  in  everything  in  the 
Kosmos,  the  body  of  the  Sadhaka,  which  is  a  part  of  the  Kosmos,  is  the 
place  where  he  can  best  find  it,  for  the  mind,  which  has  to  make  the 
search,  and  the  apparatus,  with  which  the  search  has  to  be  made,  are 
located  in  the  body ;  besides,  the  body  is  a  Microcosm,  containing  within 
it  the  seven  centres  of  Power  and  the  seven  presiding  Lords  mentioned 
in  the  second  section.  The  seven  centres  are  seven  planes  of  evolution, 
and  over  each  plane  there  is  a  presiding  Deity,  who  directs  and  controls 
its  work. 

The  Universe,  according  to  Tantra,  consists  of  a  single  Mahabrah- 
manqla,  or  grand  universe,  and  numberless  Brhat  Brahmantfas,  or  great 
universes.  From  the  seven  planes  of  the  grand  universe  are  evolved 
innumerable  great  worlds  each  one  of  which  is  also  divided  into  seven 
planes.  Each  planet,  each  satellite,  each  star,  and  every  living  entity  in 
each  world  is  itself  a  world  in  miniature,  and  has  within  it  the  seven 
centres  of  Power  and  the  seven  presiding  Deities. 

The  Nirvana  Tantra  says: 

“  ngMW'&rak  i  =*  i 

*  ii  ” 


1  Vide  ante. 


446 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  O  Devi!  within  the  Mahabrahmanda  is  Bfhat  Brahmaijda;  within 
it  are  beings  and  regions.” 

^ i  icgsrwra:  ti  ” 

“O  Parameivari!  O  DevcS!  all  varieties  of  beings  and  things  which 
are  in  the  Mahabrahmanda  are  also  within  the  Brhat  Brahman^a.” 

“O  beauti fill-eyed  one!  hundreds  of  thousands  of  Brahmandas 
(universes)  are  evolved  within  it  (Mahabrahmanda).” 

A  vivid  description  of  Brhat  Brahmanda  is  given  in  the  same  Tanlra. 
But  as  it  is  very  long,  I  am  reluctantly  compelled  to  resist  the  temptation 
to  quote  it.  I  shall,  however,  place  before  the  reader  its  salient  points. 
The  Brhat  Brahmanda,  or  Macrocosm,  has  its  Meru  or  vertebral  column 
extending  longitudinally  from  top  to  bottom.  At  the  top  is  situated  Satya 
Loka,  and  at  the  bottom  Avici.  Between  Satya  Loka  and  Avici  lie  the 
other  six  Lokas  (worlds  or  regions)  and  the  other  six  nether  regions, 

.  altogether  making  up  fourteen  Bhuvanas  or  regions.  Within  the  Meru 
reside  the  Gods— that  is,  the  Powers  which  preside  over  the  fourteen 
Bhuvanas.  The  centres  of  Power  within  the  Meru  arc: 

1 .  Adhara 1  Cakra,  which  is  also  called  Brahma-Padma  (Brahma- 
lotus).  It  is  just  above  the  seven  nether  regions.  The  clement  earth  is 
within  its  anther.  The  scat  of  Kama  (desire)  is  there.  Within  the  seat 
of  Kama  is  the  male  Deity,  Svayambhu  Linga,  and  the  female  Deity, 
Kulakurujalini.  The  Creator  Brahma  resides  in  the  clement  earth.  His 
female  Consort  is  called  Savitri.  This  is  the  causal  Bhurloka.  Here 
resides  the  Spiritual  Sun. 

2.  Bhlma  Padma,  or  lotus,  or  Svadhisfhana  Cakra.  The  element 
water  is  within  its  anther.  Vispu  resides  here  with  His  consort.  It  is  the 
causal  Bhuvarloka  in  which  the  heaven  of  Vijpu,  called  Vaikurj^ha,  is 
situated.  On  the  right  of  Vaikuntha  is  Goloka,  where  Vispu  assumes  the 
form  of  a  two-handed  being  with  a  flute  in  his  hand.  Here  he  is  associated 
with  the  female  Power  Radhika. 

3.  Mapipura  Padma.  The  element  fire  is  within  its  anther,  Rudra 
resides  here  with  his  consort  Bhadra  Kill.  This  is  the  causal  Svarloka. 

4.  Anahata  Padma.  The  element  air  is  within  its  anther.  Ijvara 
resides  here  with  his  consort  Bhuvane$vari.  Iivara  is  the  overlord  of  the 
three  previous  Lokas  and  their  Lokapalas — viz.,  Brahma,  Vispu,  and 
Siva.  This  is  the  causal  Maharloka. 

1  Or  MuUdhara,  as  to  which  and  the  following  cakras,  or  centres  see 
A.  Avalon’s  “  Serpent  Power  ”. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


447 


5.  Viiuddha  Padma.  The  element  ether,  or  Alcana,  is  in  its  anther. 
The  presiding  Deity  is  half-male  and  half-female,  called  Ardhanari£vara, 
or  Mahagauri,  and  Sadhaiiva,  whose  Vahana  (carrier)  is  an  animal, 
which  is  half-bull  and  half-Hon.  This  is  the  causal  Jana  Loka. 

6.  Ajna,  or  Jfiana  Padma.  There  is  no  element,  but  the  universal 
Manas  (sensorium)  is  the  seed  here.  The  Deities  arc  Paraiiva  and  his 
consort  Siddha  Kali.  This  the  causal  Tapa  Loka.  Here  resides  the  Spirit¬ 
ual  Moon. 

7.  Sahasrara  Padma.  This  is  the  region  of  the  First  cause,  the 
cause  of  the  six  previous  causes;  it  is  duality  in  unity  described  in  the 
second  section.  This  is  the  Satya  Loka. 

These  are  the  seven  I .okas,  or  regions,  of  the  Brhat  Brahmanda. 

The  reader  will  note  that  they  are  within  the  Meru.  We  have  heard 
of  a  Meru  of  the  earth,  a  mountain  situated  just  where  there  is  a  depression 
on  the  orange-shaped  planet  of  ours.  This  mountain  is  said  to  be  a 
hollow,  vertical  column  of  stone,  which  externally  holds  the  earth  fast,  and 
■  internally  contains  the  centres  in  which  the  Devas — that  is,  the  presiding 
septenary  Gods — reside.  This  idea  of  Meru  must  be  magnified  and 
transferred  to  the  Meru  of  the  Brhat  Brahmanda  with  a  view  to  form  a 
notion  of  what  is  meant  by  it. 

It  must  be  noted  that  the  Kosmic  Kundalini  is  vehicled  by  Trigupa 
Prakrti 1  in  Satya  Loka,  where  She  is  called  Maha  Kundall,  and  by  the 
eight  primary  divisions,  [earth,  water,  fire,  air,  ether,  manas  (sensorium), 
Buddhi  (mind),  and  Ahankara  (I-am-ness)],  of  Prakrti  in  Bhurloka, 
where  She  is  called  Kulakundall.  The  highest  and  the  lowest  of  the 
centres  of  Power  are  both  guarded  by  Kundalini  in  Her  two  aspects.  As 
in  the  Muladhara,  so  in  the  Sahasrara  Padma  She  covers  the  cleft  in  the 
male  Power  with  her  hood.  She  coils  up  round  the  Universe  with  Her 
tail  within  Her  mouth,  having  the  inverted  triangles  within  Her  coils. 
The  Theosophical  Society  has  adopted  this  symbol  from  the  Tantras.  The 
triangles,  as  the  Tantrik  symbol  of  the  male  and  the  female  Divinity, 
being  well  known,  it  is  not  necessary  to  quote  Tantra  to  prove  it;  but  as 
it  is  not  generally  known  that  the  serpent  lying  with  its  tail  within  its 
mouth  is  a  Tantrik  symbol,  I  quote  the  following  from  the  Siva  Samhit&r 

Cf5f  ^  || 

flW  in#:  I 

ar  33*  fwn  11  ” 


1  That  is,  Prakrti  composed  of  the  three  gunas — Sattva,  Rajas  and  Tamas. 


448 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  Between  the  anus  and  the  generative  organ  is  the  Yoni,  having  its 
mouth  downwards.  There  is  what  is  called  the  root.  Kuijdall  is  always 
there.  Encircling  all  the  nerves  with  her  body  of  three  and  a  half  coils- 
(and)  with  her  tail  in  her  mouth,  She  lies  within  the  cavity  of  the 
Susumna  nerve.” 

As  the  Macrocosm  has  in  it  centres  of  Power,  so  has  the  Microcosm. 
The  Nirvana  Tantra  says: 

“mm  5  I 

^  ^  SwlPt  ^  II 

«nawwri>  as  #i  i 

^  ^  II 

'fonfa  iwps  ^  B3PJ:  II” 

“  Within  the  Brahma  Padma,  the  earth,  arc  men  and  other  beings. 
O  Devi!  they  arc  all  worlds,  and  within  them  arc  the  regions.  Within 
them  arc  the  seven  nether  regions  and  the  seven  heavens.  In  this  manner 
in  all  bodies,  within  the  lotuses,  are  the  fourteen  regions.  O  Lady  Para¬ 
mount!  verily  every  body  is  a  Brahmanda  (world).” 

The  human  body  is  called  by  the  Hindus  Bhogayatna — that  is,  a 
mansion  wherein  the  reincarnating  Ego  is  born  to  reap  the  fruits  of  its 
Prarabdha  or  Kinetic  Karma;  but  it  is  also  called  Brahma-pur  a,  the  city 
of  Brahman.  Under  the  Hindu’s  law  of  evolution  it  must  be  so;  for 
evolution,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out  in  the  previous  section  is  a  double 
parallel  motion,  one  tending  downwards  and  the  other  tending  upwards. 
Pravftti  and  Nivrtti,  that  is  the  outgoing  and  return  movements  arc 
conspicuous  everywhere  in  nature.  For  the  purpose  of  reaping  the  fruits 
of  Karma  the  embodied  Ego  must  come  in  contact  with  the  outside  world, 
its  subjective  enjoyments  and  sufferings  having  come  to  an  end  in  heaven 
and  hell.  The  objective  world  is  the  arena  where  it  must  battle  with  the 
results  of  its  own  previous  Karma,  and  generate  new  Karma  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  Pravpti  law  of  nature.  To  this  end  it  is  furnished  with  a 
system  of  nerves,  which  presides  over,  controls,  and  regulates  the  functions 
of  the  other  systems — viz.,  the  circulatory  system,  the  respiratory  system, 
the  digestive  system,  the  excretory  system,  the  muscular  system,  and  the 
skeletal  system.  These  nerves  are  classified  into  three  main  groups: 
(i)  Efferent  nerves,  (a)  Afferent  nerves,  ($)  Inter-central  nerves. 

“Efferent  or  centrifugal  nerves  are  those  which  conduct  impulses 
from  the  central  nervous  system  (brain  and  spinal  cord)  to  other  parts  of 
the  body.”  “Afferent  or  centripetal  nerves  are  those  which  conduct 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


449 


impulses  in  the  reverse  direction — viz.,  from  all  parts  of  the  body  to  the 
central  nervous  system.”  “  Inter-central  nerves  are  those  which  connect 
nerve-centres  together;  they  connect  different  parts  of  the  brain  and  of  the 
cord  to  one  another.”  1 

The  Bhogayatana  aspect  of  the  human  body  is  dealt  with  in  the 
science  of  Biology,  and  its  Brahmapura  aspect  in  the  science  of  Yoga. 

The  earth,  as  a  Microcosm,  has  its  Meru,  a  stony  vertical  column 
extending  from  its  northern  point  of  depression  to  the  southern  point.  It 
is  within  the  bowels  of  the  earth  that  the  Meru  is  situated,  and  the  septe¬ 
nary  Gods,  presiding  over  the  earth,  are  located  inside  the  Meru.  What 
are  known  as  the  north  and  the  south  pole  are  only  circumpolar  regions 
of  the  earth.  The  human  body  is  a  Microcosm  as  well.  Its  Meru  is  the 
vertebral  column  of  bones  extending  from  the  depression,  called  Brahma- 
randhra  (the  hollow  of  Brahman,  where  the  two  halves  of  the  body,  like 
the  two  hemispheres  of  the  earth,  meet)  to  the  anus.  This  bony  column 
is  filled  with  white  and  grey  matter,  wherein  are  nerves  and  nerve  cells* 
•  The  principal  Yoga  nerves  are  fourteen  in  number,  of  which  three  are 
prominent — viz.,  Ida,  Pirigala,  and  Susumna.  Like  all  other  nerves,  their 
root  lies  in  the  Yoni — that  is,  the  region  between  the  anus  and  the  genera¬ 
tive  organ.  This  region  is  called  the  Muladhara  Padma.  The  Su?umn& 
nerve  is  within  the  cerebro-spinal  axis,  and  extends  from  the  Mul&dhara 
Padma  to  the  Sahasrara  Padma,  which  is  in  the  crown  of  the  head.  It  is 
called  the  Jnana  nerve,  the  nerve  of  pure  psychosis.  The  Ida  and  the 
Pingala  nerves  are  in  the  periphery  of  the  spinal  cord,  and  starting  from 
the  Yoni  (the  Ida  from  the  root  of  the  left  testes,  and  the  Pingala  froni 
that  of  the  right  testes),  wind  up  spirally,  meeting  the  Susumna  nerve  at 
five  points — viz.,  the  Yoni,  the  root  of  the  generative  organ,  the  navel, 
the  heart,  and  the  throat.  From  the  throat  Pingala  makes  a  circuit  of 
the  root  of  the  nose  between  the  two  eyebrows  and  enters  the  right  nostril ; 
the  Ida,  making  a  similar  circuit,  enters  the  left  nostril.  In  this  wise  an 
island-like  centre  is  formed  at  the  root  of  the  nose.  The  five  points  of 
contact  of  the  Ida  and  the  Pingala  nerves  with  the  Susumna  nerve  are 
five  Padmas,  or  lotuses,  or  Cakras,  or  centres,  and  the  island-like  place 
is  another  centre,  thus  making  six  centres  from  the  Yoni  to  the  root  of  the 
nose.  Above  the  sixth  centre  and  below  the  thousand-petalled  lotus  are 
two  Padmas,  which  are  described  in  connection  with  the  sixth.  With 
these  two  and  the  thousand-petalled  lotus  the  Padmas,  or  lotuses,  are 
nine  in  number.  All  of  them  are  located  within  or  above  the  cerebro¬ 
spinal  axis,  which  is  called  the  Meru  of  the  human  body. 

The  cause  of  a  thing  is  called  its  Pralqtj,  and  that  which  arises  out 
of  Prakfti  is  called  Vikfti.  The  three  principles  of  Mulaprakrti  (original 

1  “  Handbook  of  Physiology,”  Chap.  XV,  by  W.  D.  Halliburton, 
M.D.,  F.R.C.S. 

29 


450 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“material”  cause  of  the  universe) — viz.,  Sattva  (spirit-manifestation). 
Rajas  (activity),  and  Tam  as  (inertia)  are  the  primary  cause  of  the 
universe.  From  these  three  are  evolved  eight  derivative  or  secondary 
causes,  which  are : 

(i)  Mahat,  which  is  also  called  Buddhi,  or  intelligence,  intuition; 
(2)  Ahankara,  the  sense  of  separateness,  individuality;  (3)  Manas,  the  mind 
in  its  ordinary  sense,  including  the  sensorium,  the  perceptive,  ratiodnative, 
imaginative,  volitional,  emotional,  and  other  faculties;  (4)  Akaia  (ether); 

(5)  V&yu  (air);  (6)  Tejas  (fire);  (7)  Apas  (water);  and  (8)  K?iti  (earth). 

What  is  called  Paraprakrti  in  the  Bhagavadgiti  is  Cit  Power,  which 

has  been  discussed  in  the  first  section.  When  worlds  are  evolved,  Mula- 
prakfti  and  Paraprakrti  are  united  kinetically,  and  the  result  is  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  seven,  or  rather  nine,  planes  of  conscious  Powers,  corresponding 
to  the  one  primary  cause  and  the  eight  secondary  causes  of  the  universe. 
In  the  human  body,  which  is  a  miniature  universe,  these  planes  or  centres 
of  conscious  power  are : 

(1)  Sahasr&ra  Padma.  (2)  Nada  Padma.  (3)  Bindu  Padma., 
(4)  Ajfia,  two-petalled  Padma.  (5)  Viiuddha,  sixteen-petalled  Padma. 

(6)  Anahata,  twelve-pc tailed  Padma.  (7)  Manipura,  ten-petalled  Padma. 
(8)  Svadhisffiana,  six-petalled  Padma.  (9)  Muladhara,  four-petallcd 
Padma. 

It  may  here  be  noted  that  the  conscious  Intelligences  from  the  second 
plane  downwards  are  sound-powers,  emanating  from  the  first  cause,  the 
Mahasurya  (the  Grand  Sun)  of  the  worlds,  whose  hallowed  mansion  is  the 
S&hasrara  Padma,  as  also  that  from  the  fourth  to  the  ninth,  the  Padmas 
are  petalled  by  fifty  primary  sound-powers  (see  second  section).  These 
primary  sound-powers  are  distributed  in  the  Padmas  in  accordance  with 
esoteric  principles  of  combination  of  sounds. 

Enough  has  been  said  in  the  first  section  regarding  the  bifurcation  of 
Sakti  into  male  and  female,  and  there  is  no  necessity  to  recapitulate  it 
here.  Sufficient  be  it  to  say  that  all  the  conscious  powers  in  the  nine 
Padmas  are  male  and  female. 

Before  entering  into  a  general  description  of  these  Padmas,  it  is  to  be 
observed  that  the  nomenclature  of  the  Gods  and  the  Goddesses  is  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  religious  ideas  of  the  great  S&dhakas,  who  have  revealed  this 
most  esoteric  knowledge  for  the  Supreme  good  of  suffering  humanity. 
The  Padmas  and  their  presiding  Gods  are  facts  in  nature,  which  a  Sadhaka 
has  the  privilege  to  see  and  to  call  by  whatever  names  he  chooses.  Hindus, 
Mahommedans,  Christians,  Parsecs,  Buddhists,  nay,  agnostics,  if  they 
choose,  can  enter  this  Yoga  path  without  committing  themselves  to  any 
particular  form  of  religion.  One’s  own  religion,  whatever  it  be,  will,  if 
practised  through  this  esoteric  path,  lead  the  soul  with  scientific  precision 
on  to  its  destination. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


451 


With  a  view  to  put  the  subject  in  a  clear  light  before  the  reader,  I 
•shall  first  divide  the  nine  Padmas  into  three  groups.  The  first  three 
Padmas  constitute  the  first  group,  the  region  of  cognition,  in  which  the 
three  cognitive  Powers  (Jn&na  Saktis)  are  located.  It  may  be  called  the 
region  of  pure  Ideation  in  which  the  universe  exists  potentially.  The 
second  three  Padmas  constitute  the  second  group,  the  region  of  action,  in 
•which  the  three  active  Powers  are  located.  It  may  be  called  the  region 
■of  mind,  in  which  the  universe  assumes  a  form  more  definite,  having  the 
vital  power,  the  sensorium,  and  the  mind  as  its  constituents.  The  third 
group  of  Padmas  are  presided  over  by  the  Powers  of  volition,  action,  and 
■cognition,  in  subordination  to  the  former  group,  who  create,  sustain,  and 
destroy  the  fully  manifested  universe. 

At  the  top  of  and  above  the  cerebro-spinal  axis  is  the  Sahasr&ra,  and 
at  the  bottom  the  Miiladhara  Padraa.  KundalinI  is  at  both  these  points. 
The  Sahasrara  is  the  Mah&surya,  the  Grand  Sun,  both  kosmically  and 
■individually,  within  whose  effulgence  AdyJUakti  Mahakali  and  ParaAiva 
.are  inseparably  united.  This  Power  is  the  First  Cause,  the  V&caka  Sakti 
of  Sadhaka’s  worship.  The  First  Cause  is  Saguna  Brahman,  or  Brahman 
with  attributes,  and  contains  within  it  the  three  Gupas,  the  three  Powers, 
and  the  nine  planes  in  the  same  manner  as  a  lotus-seed  holds  within  itself 
the  future  lotus-tree.  In  the  Muladhara  Padma  lies  the  duplicate  Sun, 
which  is  the  effulgence  of  Kulakundalini  and  Svayambhu  Siva.  Brahma, 
the  creator  of  names  and  forms,  is  there  with  his  consort  Savitri.  The 
creative  desire  or  Will,  called  Kama,  is  there  also.  As  there  is  a  hollow 
on  the  top  of  the  highest  Padma,  so  is  there  a  cleft  on  the  head  of 
Svayambhu  Siva,  which  is  closed  up  by  Mother  Kulakundalini,  who, 
■coiling  round  all  the  nerves  at  their  root  and  encircling  the  Siva,  breathes 
forth  the  rhythmic  vital  Power  through  Ida  and  Pihgala.  Like  one  who 
sleeps,  all  Her  other  functions  are  apparently  at  rest;  hence  She  is  said  to 
be  sleeping.  The  creative  Brahma  with  his  consort  Savitri  is  the  con¬ 
scious  Power  of  earth. 

Earth  is  evolved  from  water.  The  preservative  Vi?nu  with  his 
•consort  Radha  is  the  conscious  Power  of  water.  The  centre  within  which 
they  are  located  is  Svadhisfhana  Padma. 

Water  is  evolved  from  fire.  The  destructive  Siva  or  Rudra  with  his 
■consort  BhadrakSli  is  the  conscious  Power  of  fire.  Their  centre  is 
Manipura  Padma. 

These  three  Padmas  are  the  three  Lokas,  Bhu,  Bhuvah,  and  Svah 
respectively.  The  re-incamating  Ego  takes  its  recurring  births  and 
re-births  in  'these  three  Lokas. 

Higher  above,  in  the  heart-lotus,  is  the  region  of  air,  in  which  are 
located  ISvara  and  I  Avar!,  the  immediate  cause  of  the  three  lower  regions 
.and  their  presiding  Deities.  This  is  called  An&hata  Padma.  If  the  Ego 


452 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


can  escape  the  eddy  of  birth  and  re-birth,  and  merge  its  consciousness  in 
Iivara,  it  attains  what  is  called  Salokya  Mukti.  This  region  is  called 
Maharloka.  The  heart-lotus  has  behind  it  another  lotus,  in  which  lies- 
the  seat  of  the  JlvatmS,  the  reincarnating  Ego.  To  bring  this  truth  home 
to  the  mind  of  the  Sadhaka,  the  Upanisad  says: 

“ar  pnf  flipr  mm  to  f?  qftwwE*  i 

ftm  ||  » 

“  Two  friendly  birds  live  together  on  the  same  tree,  of  whom  one 
cats  the  sweet  fruits,  and  the  other,  without  eating,  only  sees.” 

Higher  up  is  VHuddha  Padma,  in  the  region  of  the  throat.  Here  is 
the  region  of  ether,  in  which  are  located  Sada&va  and  Mahagauri.  This 
is  the  Janaloka. 

Between  the  eyebrows,  at  the  root  of  the  nose,  is  the  region  of  mind, 
where  Sambhu  or  Mahakala  and  Siddhakali  reside.  This  is  called  Ajna 
Padma.  This  region  is  the  subjective  Viranas!1  (Kaii)  of  Visvcivara," 
between  the  Ganga  and  Jamuna — that  is,  Ida  and  Pingala  nerves.  Within 
the  anther  of  this  Padma  is  the  spiritual  moon. 

The  second  and  third  Padmas  are,  in  fact,  the  higher  Powers  of  the 
fourth— -that  is,  the  Ajna  Padma.  Their  Vehicles  arc  Mahatattva  and 
Ahahk&ratattva,  which  are  luminous  like  the  Sun.  The  second,  third, 
and  fourth  Padmas  are  Tapas  Loka,  while  the  Sahasrara  is  the  Satya 
Loka  of  the  micro  cosmic  human  body. 

The  knowledge  of  these  centres  of  Power  in  the  human  body  is  as  old 
as  the  Vedas  themselves.  The  great  Rsis  of  the  Vaidik  wisdom-religion 
(Jnanadharma)  learnt  it  from  their  Gurus,  and  it  was  passed  on  until  we 
reach  Manu,  who,  having  received  it  by  inspiration  from  the  Most  High, 
instructed  humanity  in  the  knowledge  of  Yoga,  of  which  the  doctrine  of 
the  centres  of  Power  in  the  human  body  is  an  essential  part.  The  wisdom- 
religion  enunciated  in  the  Upanisads  is  based  upon  Yoga,  which  one  must 
practise  if  he  be  solicitous  of  Brahma-Jnana  (knowledge  of  Brahman,  or 
spiritual  knowledge).  A  mere  study  of  the  Upani$ads  does  not  impart 
that  wisdom.  The  Upani?ads  contain  frequent  references  to  some  of  the 
centres  of  Power  on  which  the  attention  is  particularly  directed  to  be  fixed. 
Il$i  Patafljali’s  Philosophy  of  Yoga  and  Vedavy&sa’s  Commentary  thereon 
mention  these  centres  as  the  places  in  the  human  body  where  concentration, 
meditation,  and  communion  should  be  practised.  R$i  Yajfiavalkya  of 
Upanfeadik  feme  has  a  treatise  on  the  method  of  Yoga  in  which  he  in¬ 
structs  his  wife  Gargi  as  to  how  Yoga  should  be  practised  within  these 
centres. 


1  Benares. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


453 


It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  centres  of  Power  in  the  human  body  are 
not  an  innovation  of  the  T&ntriks.  They  have  their  root  in  the  Kosmic 
Law  of  evolution,  and  were  revealed  to  mankind  for  their  salvation.  But 
man,  ever  prone  to  drink  of  the  lethean  water  of  desire,  had,  in  the  great 
efflux  of  time,  forgotten  the  inestimable  boon  of  Yoga  conferred  on  him 
and,  therefore,  towards  the  middle  of  the  third  cycle— -that  is,  Dvapara 
Yuga — his  condition  as  a  religious  being  had  greatly  deteriorated.  In  view 
of  this  state  of  things,  and  having  regard  to  the  approach  of  the  Kali  Yuga 
(age),  with  its  darkening  influences,  the  Lord  of  Yoga,  Mahadeva,  made  a 
fresh  revelation  of  Yoga  with  a  method  at  once  comprehensive  and  suited 
to  the  times.  In  the  method  thus  revealed  the  centres  of  Power  in  the 
human  body  have  been  perspicuously  dealt  with,  and  culture  through 
them  definitely  laid  down.  Thus  has  Yoga  been  saved;  and  even  now 
there  are  numbers  who  have  kept  the  Divine  science  alive  by  following 
the  method  of  the  Lord  of  Yoga.  The  description  of  this  Yoga  is  to  bo. 
found  in  the  Tantras,  and  the  Tantriks  are  the  masters  of  its  practice. 

I  wish  to  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  make  a  few  observations 
on  Yoga,  about  which  much  misconception  seems  to  prevail  amongst  a 
certain  section  of  the  English-educated  Hindu  community.  The 
Hindus  have  only  one  system  of  Yoga,  which  has  come  down 
to  them  from  the  time  of  the  Vedas.  It  is  called  Astanga,  or  eight-limbed 
Yoga.  Mahan?i  Patanjali’s  “  Yoga  Aphorisms  ”  constitute  the  philosophy 
of  this  Yoga.  Although  the  methods  of  Yoga-practice  are  in  the  keeping 
of  Gurus,  books  on  such  methods  are  not  wanting.  From  Maharsi 
Yajnavalkya  and  Maharsi  Dattatrcya  to  Yogi  Goraksanatha  of  modem 
tunes  many  have  left  treatises  on  the  subject,  and  there  is  the  Siva  Samhita 
attributed  to  Siva  himself.  The  eight-limbed  Yoga,  for  the  purpose  of 
practice,  is  divided  under  five  heads : 

(i)  Mantra  Yoga.  (2)  Laya  Yoga.  (3)  Hatha  Yoga.  (4)  Raja 
Yoga.  (5)  Rajadhiraja  Yoga. 

I  have  dwelt  upon  Mantra  Yoga  in  the  previous  section.  Laya  Yoga 
is  a  Yoga  the  nature  of  which  is  described  in  the  Gherapqla  Samhita  and 
similar  works.  Hatha  Yoga  includes  what  is  commonly  known  as 
Prapayama,  the  object  of  which  is  to  produce  in  one’s  own  body  voluntary 
suppression  of  breath.  In  the  previous  section  I  have  quoted  Upanisad 
■and  Purana  to  prove  its  vital  importance  in  Yoga.  The  following  quota¬ 
tions  will  show  that  Veda,  Tantra,  Smrti,  and  Purana  are  unanimous  in 
holding  that  Pranayama  is  an  absolute  necessity  in  Yoga.  Manu  says: 

"  «iT®#  ft  m  m:  I 

^  fjftsra,  n  ” 

I 


454 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


“  As  baser  things  mixed  with  gold  and  other  metals  are  removed  by 
burning  those  metals,  so  the  propensities  of  the  senses  are  removed  by 
Prfcjayama.” 

Rsi  Patafijali  says: 

“  93:  I  ” 

“  From  that  (viz.,  by  practising  Pranayama)  the  veil  which  hides 
pure  knowledge  is  removed.” 

Now,  it  must  be  distinctly  understood  that  as  Pranayama  is  Hatha 
Yoga,  the  elimination  of  the  latter  from  Yoga-practice  would  be  as 
beneficial  to  the  practiser  as  the  removal  of  his  brain  would  be  to  a 
thinker.  Yoga  has  two  divisions,  one  outer  and  the  other  inner.  The 
outer  division  comprises  Yama  (control),  Niyama  (regulation),  Asana 
(posture),  Pranayama  (breath-exercise),  and  Pratyahara  (withdrawal), 
and  the  inner  division  comprises  Dharana  (concentration),  Dhyana 
(meditation),  and  Samadhi  (communion).  Pranayama,  without  which 
Pratyahara  or  withdrawal  of  the  senses  from  their  objects  is  impossible, 
stands  at  the  gate  leading  from  the  outer  to  the  inner  division.  It  cannot 
be  avoided  if  one  seriously  wishes  to  practise  Yoga.  It  may  here  be 
observed  that  there  is  no  royal  road  to  Yoga,  which  is,  in  fact,  nothing 
less  than  the  complete  reversal  of  the  natural  order  of  things  in  its  aspirer. 
Round  after  round,  from  Yama  (control)  upwards,  the  aspirer  must 
ascend,  fortifying  his  body  and  mind  with  energy  and  vitality  enough  to 
enable  him  to  cope  with  the  nature  he  has  built  within  himself  during 
myriads  of  births.  The  chronic  diseases  of  the  body  and  the  mind  must 
first  be  grappled  with  by  means  of  Yama  (control)  and  Niyama  (regula¬ 
tion),  which  include  among  other  things  continence  and  worship.  When 
the  mind  is  full  of  faith  and  devotion,  and  the  body  is  buoyant,  due  to 
the  conservation  of  virile  energy,  it  is  then  that  the  aspirer  must  perfect 
his  postures  (asanas),  which  help  him  materially  in  regulating  his  breath.. 

Purification  of  nerves  (dealt  with  in  the  fifth  section)  is  the  next  step 
to  be  taken.  The  nerves,  in  their  natural  state,  are  covered  with  impuri¬ 
ties,  which  must  be  removed  before  commencing  Pranayama.  To 
accomplish  this  there  are  available  two  alternative  processes.  The  first 
is  by  inspiration  (Puraka),  retention  (Kumbhaka),  and  expiration 
(Recaka)  of  breath  upon  a  regulated  scale  and  with  the  repetition  of 
certain  Bija  Mantras.  The  second  is  altogether  physical,  and  is  known 
by  the  name  of  Satkarma  (ax  practices) 1 — that  is,  Dhauti  (washing),  Vasti 
(contraction  and  expansion  of  the  anus),  Neti  (cleansing  of  nostrils  and 
throat  by  thread),  Lauliki  (pendulum-like  motion  of  the  stomach), 
TrStaka  (gazing  at  an  object  without  winking  until  the  tears  trickle),  and 

1  See  as  to  them  Introduction  to  Tontra  S&stro. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


455 


Kapalabhati  (inspiration  and  expiration  of  air,  etc.).  The  second  alter¬ 
native  method  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Siva  Samhita.  It  need  not  be 
practised  by  a  real  aspirant  who  has  no  physical  infirmity  or  disease  to 
obstruct  his  S&dhanS.  One  of  these — viz.,  Trataka — however,  is  practised 
by  those  who  are  very  loud  in  their  denunciation  of  Hatha  Yoga.  In  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  physical  and  mental  temperament  of  his  Si$ya,  the  Guru 
must  decide  which  of  the  six  modes  of  physical  culture  should  be  given 
him  along  with  the  first  method,  which  is  absolutely  necessary.  It  generally 
happens  that  almost  all  the  six  modes  are  dispensed  with. 

Here  I  must  warn  the  reader  that  mere  physical  culture,  such  as 
Asana,  Satkarma,  and  Pripayama,  are  of  little  avail  unless  they  are 
accompanied  with  other  practices  of  Sadhana.  We  daily  meet  pBcudo- 
sannyasis  and  athletes  who  exhibit  for  a  few  pice  their  skill  in  such 
physical  feats,  and  even  levitation.  They  may  accompany  spiritual  self¬ 
culture,  but  by  themselves  they  are  nothing. 

Having  purified  his  nerves,  the  Sadhaka  must  practise  PrSp&y&ma, 
*  the  object  of  which  is  to  suspend  breathing  for  a  considerable  time  without 
feeling  the  least  uneasiness  in  respect  of  this  reversal  of  the  ordinary  respira¬ 
tory  law  of  Nature.  This  is  called  Kumbhaka;  and  when  that  is  attained, 
it  is  then  that  real  Yoga  begins.  For  those  who  are  physically  or  otherwise 
unfit  to  practise  Kumbhaka  by  the  inspiration  (Puraka)  and  expiration 
(Recaka)  method,  other  methods  are  laid  down  in  the  Yoga  Sastra. 

To  awaken  Kulakunqlalinl  is  the  first  grand  work  achieved  through 
long  practised  Kumbhaka.  In  the  Muladhara  Cakra  Her  vital  sheath 
sends  out,  through  the  Ida  and  Pingala  nerves,  an  incessant  centrifugal 
and  centripetal  energy,  which  draws  in  and  drives  out  the  atmospheric  air. 
It  is  said  that  the  range  of  the  vital  energy  thus  sent  out  extends  to  nine 
inches  without  the  nostrils.  This  output  of  the  vital  energy  has,  by  voluntary 
effort  by  means  of  Kumbhaka  to  be  withdrawn.  When  Kumbhaka  is  of 
sufficiently  long  duration,  the  vital  energy,  being  no  longer  able  to  act 
and  re-act  upon  atmospheric  air,  rebounds  upon  the  vital  sheath  itself^ 
thus  producing  an  abnormal  action,  not  only  upon  the  vital  sheath,  but 
on  the  space  in  the  vicinity  occupied  by  potential  fire.  When  those  two 
Nature’s  finer  forces,  allied  together,  impinge  upon  the  vital  sheath,  the 
mind,  ever  sensitive  to  abnormal  actions  of  the  body,  forthwith  repairs  to 
the  spot,  and  makes  its  first  acquaintance  with  its  real  Mother,  Kula- 
kundalini.  Kulakup^hni  is  thus  aroused  from  Her  apparent  slumber, 
and  the  Ego  finds  itself  at  the  lotus-feet  of  its  long-lost  Mother.  The 
glamour  of  its  stepmother,  Avidya,  for  the  time  being  vanishes,  and  the 
Ego— -the  reincarnating  Jlva  of  millions  of  births  and  sufferings — implore* 
the  arms  of  its  ever-gradous  loving  Mother. 

But  the  accomplishment  of  this  end  by  the  ordinary  process  of 
Pripay&ma  is  very  arduous  and  tardy.  The  Yoga  Sastra,  therefore. 


456 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


provides  certain  psycho-physical  processes,  called  Mudras,  which  operate 
as  stimuli  to  Kumbhaka. 

The  Siva  Samhita  says: 

“  m  w  i 

cE[T  «^fnj  jpralsft  ^  11 

m  H  ” 

“  When,  by  the  grace  of  the  Gum,  the  slumbering  Kundali  wakes  up, 
it  is  then  that  the  lotuses  arc  penetrated,  and  the  knots  (of  karma)  untied. 
Hence,  to  awaken  the  ISvari,  sleeping  on  the  cleft  of  Brahman,  practise 
Mudra  by  all  means.” 

Being  thus  awakened,  Kupdalini  enters  the  great  road  to  liberation  ’ 
(Mukti) — that  is,  the  Su?umna  nerve — and  penetrating  the  centres  one  by 
one,  ascends  to  the  Sahasrara,  and  there  coming  in  blissful  communion  with 
the  Lord  of  Lords,  again  descends  down  through  the  same  passage  to  the 
Muladhara  Cakra.  Nectar  is  said  to  flow  from  such  communion.  The 
Sadhaka  drinks  it  and  becomes  supremely  happy.  This  is  the  wine  called 
Kulamfta,  which  a  Sadhaka  of  the  spiritual  plane  drinks.  There  are 
three  planes  of  Sadhana,  corresponding  to  the  three  planes  of  conscious¬ 
ness  in  which  the  manifested  Divinity  is  realizable — viz.,  the  Adhibhautik 
(subtle  physical)  plane,  the  Adhidaivik  (psychic)  plane,  the  Adhyatmik 
(spiritual)  plane.  In  reference  to  the  latter  the  Tantra  says : 

“  'fh^i  3*h  ’Star  'sift  *i$i^  l 
^  3*  ift^i  33^  q  foft  ii » 

“  Drinking,  drinking,  again  drinking,  drinking  fall  down  upon  earth; 
and  getting  up  and  again  drinking  there  is  no  re-birth.” 

During  the  first  stage  of  Satcakra  Sadhana,  the  Sadhaka  cannot 
suppress  his  breath  for  a  sufficiently  long  time  at  a  stretch  to  enable  him 
to  practise  concentration  and  meditation  in  each  centre  of  Power.  He 
cannot,  therefore,  detain  Kujjdalini  within  Susumna  longer  than  his  power 
of  Kumbhaka  permits.  He  must  consequently,  come  down  upon  earth — 
that  is,  the  Muladhara  Cakra — which  is  the  centre  of  the  element,  earth, 
after  having  drunk  of  the  heavenly  ambrosia.  The  Sadhaka  must  practise 
this  again  and  again,  and  by  constant  practice  the  cause  of  re-birth — that 
is,  vasanS  (desire)—- is  removed. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


457 


When  Kumbhaka  has,  by  practice,  become  of  sufficient  duration,  the 
Sidhaka  must  concentrate  his  mind  upon  each  of  the  centres,  beginning 
from  Muladhara.  Mother  Kundalini  leads  him.  She  unites  Herself  with 
the  Lord  of  each  of  the  centres,  and  the  Sadhaka  must  meditate  on  the 
united  male  and  female  Deity  as  his  Istadevata,  that  is,  the  object  of  his 
worship.  When  meditation  on  each  of  the  centres  is  thus  perfected,  the 
Sadhaka  becomes  master  of  the  element  which  dominates  it.  In  this  wise, 
the  five  elements  dominating  the  five  centres,  from  Muladhara  to  ViSuddha, 
being  conquered,  the  Sadhaka  is  emancipated  from  the  bondage  of  the 
objective  world.  Wealth,  power,  prestige,  carnal  passion,  and  all  their 
train,  have  no  power  over  him,  he  having  become  the  master,  and  no 
longer  the  slave,  of  the  elements.  His  mind  and  body  gain  immensely  by 
the  acquisition  of  such  mastery.  By  meditation  on  and  communion  with 
the  presiding  Deities  of  the  centres,  his  consciousness  becomes  identified 
with  their  consciousness.  Thus  the  effect  gradually  merges  into  the  cause, 
as  the  Sadhaka  rises  from  the  lower  to  the  higher  Divine  Lotuses. 

The  sixth  lotus  from  the  lowest — that  is,  the  Ajna  Cakra — is  reached. 
It  is  called  Ajna  Cakra  because  therein  is  the  Lord  of  mind,  whose 
Ajna  or  fiat  creates  and  uncrcates  the  elements  and  their  Lords.  Medi¬ 
tation  on  and  communion  with  the  Lord  of  this  centre  (which  com¬ 
prises  the  Nada  and  the  Bindu  centres)  renders  the  Sadhaka  master 
of  Manas,  Ahankara,  and  Buddhi.  He  is  no  longer  the  creature 
of  duality  that  he  was.  Worship  of  forms  is  passed,  and  true  knowl¬ 
edge  is  revealed  to  him.  He  learns  to  distinguish  between  Atma 
and  non-Atma.  Prakrti,  with  her  multifold  divisions  and  subdivisions, 
being  cognized,  Atma  is  realized.  Mother  Kundalini  now  reveals  Herself 
to  Her  dear  son  in  Her  pure  Prakrtik  garb,  and  leads  him  on  to  the  Lord 
of  Lords,  Cause  of  Causes,  the  Saguna  ISvara,  where  the  Sadhaka  finds 
Her  and  the  Lord  in  undistinguishable  association  and  becomes  the  Lord 
Himself.  This  is  called  Raja  Yoga. 

The  Sadhaka,  who,  having  now  discovered  the  Vacaka  Sakti  of  his 
worship,  and  having  himself  become  the  Vacaka  Sakti,  wishes  to  become 
the  Vacya  Sakti  (the  real  object  of  his  search),  casts  off  the  last  remains  of 
his  Suksma  Saiira  (subtle  body),  or,  rather,  Kirapa  Sarira  (causal  body) 
and  piercing  the  Spiritual  Sun,  drops,  as  it  were,  into  the  ocean  of  Cit — 
the  real  Sakti,  the  one  true,  blissful  existence,  the  bourn  whence  no 
traveller  ever  returns.  This  is  accomplished  by  what  is  called  Rajadhiraja 
Yoga. 

In  the  Taittiriyopanisad  self-culture  through  what  are  called  Sheaths 
(KoSas)  is  indicated  but  not  detailed.  Bhrgu,  the  son  of  Varuna,  is  said 
to  have  accomplished  it  by  Tapas.  Safikaracarya  explains  Tapas  here 
to  mean  concentration  of  the  mind  and  the  senses.  Concentration, 
•meditation,  and  communion  are  the  higher  practices  of  Raja  Yoga,  and 


458 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


as  nothing  within  the  body  can  be  cognized  without  concentration,  it  is- 
clear  that  Bhrgu  practised  Raja  Yoga  for  the  acquisition  of  BrahmajMna 
(spiritual  knowledge).  The  Sheaths  are  five  in  number— viz. : 

(i)  Annamaya  KoSa  (the  Sheath  of  food).  (2)  Pranamaya  KoSa  (the 
Sheath  of  life).  (3)  Manomaya  KoSa  (the  Sheath  of  lower  mind).  (4) 
Vijiianamaya  KoSa  (the  Sheath  of  higher  mind).  (5)  Anandamaya  KoSa 
(the  Sheath  of  bliss). 

According  to  my  view,  these  KoSas  are  mentioned  to  indicate  the 
causes  from  which  they  arise,  for  Yoga  is  practised  in  the  lotuses  or  centres 
of  Power  through  the  Susumna  nerve.  There  is  no  difference  of  opinion 
on  this  point.  That  Brahmajnana  cannot  be  acquired  without  Yoga,  and 
that  Raja  Yoga  is  the  most  potent  means  to  acquire  it,  is  conceded  by  the 
Commentators  and  indicated  in  the  Upanisads  themselves.  Even  in  the 
Taittiriyopanisad  the  lotuses  are  broadly  hinted  at  thus: 

Ar.  ft  ^  IN 

dhtlqiMld'W, 

“  Within  the  heart  (lotus)  is  an  ethereal  space,  in  which  the 
immortal,  resplendent  Lord  of  mind  resides.  The  path  of  Brahman  lies 
within  the  hanging  breast-shaped  thing  (cranium)  at  the  crest  of  the  head 
where  the  hairs  divide.” 

The  centres  of  Power  arc  the  causes  from  which  the  five  Sheaths 
arise.  Bhfgu,  by  practising  Yoga  in  those  centres,  gradually  discovered 
the  Sheaths.  His  first  discovery  was  the  Annamaya  Koia,  which  arises 
from  the  elements — earth,  water,  and  fire.  Earth  and  water  produce 
food,  which  is  assimilated  by  fire  and  converted  into  the  substance  which 
forms  the  body  it  nourishes.  Earth,  water,  and  fire,  being  the  presiding 
elements  in  Muladhara,  Svadhigthana,  and  Mapipura  centres  respectively, 
they  became  the  objects  of  Bhrgu’*  concentration  in  the  first  place; 
because,  by  awakening  Kulakuptjalinl  the  Sadhaka  first  meets  Muladhara, 
then  Svadhisthana,  and  then  Mapipura. 

The  Pranamaya  KoSa  arises  from  Anahata  and  ViSuddha  centres,  in 
which  vital  air  and  AkaSa  respectively  preside. 

The  Manomaya  KoSa  is  evolved  from  the  Ajfia  centre,  which  is  the 
centre  of  mind. 

From  the  Bindu  and  Nada  Cakras  arises  the  Vijiianamaya  KoSa. 
And  undifferentiated  Prakrti  in  the  Sahasrara  is  Anandamaya  KoSa. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  by  mentioning  the  KoSas  the  Upanisads  do 
not  lay  down  a  system  of  culture  different  from  that  through  the  centres- 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


459' 


of  power  in  accordance  with  the  Rajayoga  system.  In  fact,  there  are  only 
two  systems  of  self-culture  mentioned  in  the  Hindu  Sastras — viz.,  Bhakti 
Yoga  (Path  of  Faith  and  Love)  and  Jnana  Yoga  (Path  of  the  Eight- 
limbed  Yoga).  As  the  Upani^ads  are  the  science  of  Jnana  (knowledge), 
it  is  plain  that  Bhakti  Yoga  is  not  meant  to  be  the  instrument  of  culture 
for  cognizing  the  Kolas.  I  have  touched  upon  the  Kolas  to  impress- 
upon  the  minds  of  the  public  which  reads  the  Upanisads  the  fact  that  in 
self-culture  the  path  of  knowledge  is  but  one,  and  that  that  path  is  the 
Eight-limbed  Yoga. 

I  will  conclude  with  a  few  observations  on  self-culture  by  Faith  and 
Love  (Bhakti  Yoga)  and  self-culture  by  knowledge  (Jnana  Yoga).  The 
path,  which  begins  with  the  suppression  of  breath  (Kumbhaka)  and  ends 
in  the  realization  of  the  unconditioned,  immutable  Brahman,  is  no  doubt 
the  high  road  to  perfect  knowledge;  but  it  is  a  long,  tedious,  and  trying 
journey,  which  very  few  are  physically  and  mentally  capable  of  accom¬ 
plishing.  Many  aspirants,  indeed  break  down,  and  many  succumb.  One 
'  who  is  desirous  of  following  this  path  should  undertake  it  early  in 
youth  if  he  be  physically  and  morally  strong  enough  to  pass  through 
the  rigid  ordeals  to  which  a  neophyte  is  subjected  by  the  Gurus  who 
follow  the  Vaidik  method  of  Yoga-training.  I  have  heard  it  said  by  a 
venerable  personage,  who  is  reputed  to  be  an  eminent  Yogi  and  a  great 
Sanskrit  scholar,  that  successful  Yoga-culture  is  not  possible  unless  pursued 
according  to  the  Tantrik  method,  which  renders  the  otherwise  bleak 
prospect  cheerful  to  the  neophyte,  and  buoys  him  up  with  strength  and 
courage  commensurate  with  the  arduous  task  he  has  undertaken.  Very 
few,  indeed,  are  there  who  are  physically  and  morally  fit  for,  and  who 
have  the  opportunity  to  devote  their  life  almost  entirely  to,  the  pursuit  of 
Jnana  Yoga.  Besides,  the  Hindu  scriptures  insist  upon  the  culture  of  the 
Path  of  Faith  and  Love  as  the  initial  stage  through  which  an  aspirant 
must  pass  before  he  is  fit  to  undertake  the  Path  of  Knowledge. 

Of  the  Eight-limbed  Yoga,  Niyama  (Regulation)  is  the  second  limb, 
in  which  Ilvarapranidhana — that  is,  worship  of  God — is  the  most  pro¬ 
minent  feature.  It  will,  therefore,  be  seen  that  to  eliminate  the  first  and 
second  limbs  and  begin  with  the  third  is  a  violation  of  the  scheme  of  self¬ 
culture  laid  down  in  the  Sastras,  the  effect  of  which  cannot  but  be 
disaster. 

When  the  fiery  path  of  Jnana  Yoga,  dwelt  upon  in  this  section,  is  fit 
for  but  a  few,  the  milky  way  of  Bhakti  Yoga,  which  is  the  subject  of  the 
previous  one,  is  open  to  all — to  the  young  and  the  old,  the  weak  and  the 
strong,  and  to  the  man  of  business  who  has  not  much  time  to  spare  for  the 
systematic  pursuit  of  Jnana  Yoga.  Bhakti  Yoga  carries  the  aspirant 
slowly  but  surely  through  the  eddy  of  the  world  to  that  bourn  where 
serene  peace  and  calm  predominate.  It  yields  almost  the  same  result  as 


460 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


-does  the  other  system  of  culture.  The  first  and  foremost  achievement  of  a 
Sadhaka  is  the  awakening  of  Kulakun<jalini.  Unless  and  until  that  is 
done,  the  roving  mind,  identified  with  the  objective  world,  cannot  be 
drawn  in,  and  concentration  and  meditation  successfully  practised.  It  is 
by  concentration  and  meditation  that  the  blessed  state  of  Samadhi 
(communion)  is  reached,  and  the  Ego  is  freed  from  the  trammels  of  the 
objective  world.  The  important  work  of  awakening  the  Divine  Serpent  is 
as  much  within  the  reach  of  the  Tantrik  Bhakti  Yogi  as  it  is  of  the 
Jfiana-Yogi.  Japa  and  worship  according  to  the  Tantrik  method  and 
other  means  as  taught  by  the  Tantrik  Guru,  will  infallibly  awaken 
Kulaku$dalini. 

The  following  aphorism  from  Patanjali’s  “  Yoga  Darsana  Sadhana- 
pada,”  S.  45,  will  convince  the  reader  that  worship  of  God  leads  to 
Samadhi: 


“  By  worshipping  God  Samadhi  is  attained.” 

High  Tantrik  Sadhakas  unite  both  the  Yogas  in  their  self-culture,  and 
•  obtain  most  happy  results  within  a  comparatively  shorter  time,  without 
undergoing  those  privations  and  hardships  which  are  the  inseparable 
companions  of  the  Sadhakas  of  the  other  school. 

Spiritual  self-culture,  like  the  culture  of  the  mind,  must  be  begun 
from  the  beginning.  As  with  the  cultivation  of  the  mind,  so  is  it  with  the 
unfoldment  of  the  spirit;  the  rudimentary  stages  of  knowledge  cannot  be 
leaped  over  and  the  highest  wisdom  at  once  attained.  External  worship 
leads  to  internal  worship;  internal  worship  purifies  the  mind;  purity  of 
mind  induces  concentration  and  meditation;  when  meditation  is  ripe 
communion  (Samadhi)  ensues  and  the  Sadhaka  attains,  at  last,  the 
Highest  Bliss. 

Tantrik  Bhakti  Yoga  has  another  phase.  It  leads  the  intrepid 
■  Sadhaka,  within  but  a  short  period,  into  the  arcana  of  Nature,  and  brings 
him  even  face  to  face  with  the  Vacaka  Sakti  of  his  worship.  But  as  these 
are  secret  things,  I  cannot  speak  of  them  here. 

The  Science  of  Tantrik  Spiritual  Culture 

Tantrik  Spiritual  Culture  (Sadhana)  connotes  three  terms — viz.,  the 
subject,  the  object,  and  the  means.  The  subject  is  the  aspirer,  the 
disciple  who  employs  certain  special  means  for  the  achievement  of  certain 
definite  results,  and  who  is  called  the  Sidhaka.  The  object  is  that  which 
is  sought  to  be  attained,  and  is  called  the  SSdhya.  Thirdly,  the  means 
■are  the  various  methods  of  culture  laid  down  in  the  Tantras,  which  are 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  461' 

only  to  be  employed  by  a  disciple  under  the  direction  of  a  competent 
Guru. 

Sadhakas  are  of  three  classes.  The  ordinary  householder,  who  has 
a  family  to  support,  and  who  is  bound  by  social  and  other  ties,  belongs  to- 
the  lowest  class.  Higher  Sadhakas,  though  householders,  are  free  from 
many  of  the  passions,  prejudices,  and  desires  for  the  enjoyment  of  earthly 
blessings  which  form  the  principal  mainspring  of  action  of  the  lowest  class. 
The  highest  class  of  Sadhakas  comprises  god-like  men,  who  have  no  fixed 
habitation,  or  family,  or  other  ties  which  chain,  who  have  no  social  duties 
to  discharge,  no  conventionalities  to  conform  to,  no  desires  to  satisfy,  and 
nothing  which  is  of  this  earth  to  seek.  A  Sadhaka  of  the  lowest  class  is 
practically  a  dualist,  for  his  own  self  is  not  in  harmonious  association  with 
the  Supreme  Self  of  all  the  universes.  His  actions,  therefore,  flow  from 
his  desire  for  self-gratification.  His  devotion  to  the  Supreme  or  his 
acquisition  of  occult  Yoga  powers  is  motived  by  the  enjoyment  of 
blessings  suited  to  his  taste.  A  Sadhaka  of  the  next  higher  class  believes 
his  self  to  be  in  esse  the  same  as  the  Supreme  Self,  thus,  fixing  his  faith  on 
the  Advaita  (non-dual)  Brahman,  he  endeavours  to  view  the  universe  as  one 
unbroken  chain  of  appearances,  which,  though  apparently  divided,  are  but 
inseparable  parts  of  one  homogeneous  whole.  His  actions,  therefore,  are  in 
accordance  with  his  faith.  Passions,  prejudices,  distinctions,  conventional¬ 
ities,  and  all  those  hosts  of  feelings,  emotions,  and  motives  which  crystal¬ 
lize  themselves  into  attachment  (Raga)  and  repulsion  (Dvcsa)  have  con¬ 
sequently  no  place  in  his  broadened  mind.  Though  living  in  the  world, 
he  is  not  of  it.  He  is  called,  in  the  Tantra,  a  Gphavadhuta.  Persistent 
conduct  in  conformity  with  these  ideas  leads  him  to  that  stage  of  blessed 
consummation  where  he  is  more  a  god  than  a  man;  the  egotism  of  his 
gross  and  subtle  bodies  vanishes,  he  realizes  the  Eternal  Blissful  Mother, 
and  finds  Her  in  every  being  and  in  every  thing.  He  is  called  a  Kula- 
vadhuta,  and  belongs  to  the  highest  class  of  Sadhakas. 

The  Sadhya,  or  the  object  sought  to  be  attained,  varies  from  the 
Highest  Advaita  Brahman  to  the  lowest  beings  of  the  spirit-world,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  capacity  and  proclivity  of  the  Sadhaka.  Unseen  beings,  inter¬ 
mediate  between  man  and  the  manifested  Brahman,  good,  bad,  and 
malignant,  swarm  in  the  •  universe  in  every  direction.  They  are  either 
nature-bom,  or  disembodied  human  egos.  The  Science  of  Tantra  not 
only  recognizes  their  existence,  but  describes  and  classifies  them,  and 
provides  means  by  which  communication  may  be  had  with  them,  and  by 
which  they  may  be  controlled  or  avoided.  Whilst  the  higher  among 
these  unseen  Powers  bestow  upon  a  Sadhaka  prosperity,  progeny,  health, 
fame,  power,  learning,  and  the  like,  and  grant  to  him  whatever  he  prays, 
for  his  welfare,  the  lower  and  the  lowest  of  the  Powers  only  satisfy  his 
base  and  carnal  longings.  He  who  cultivates  acquaintance  with  such 


462 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


intermediate  beings  can  never  hope  to  attain  liberation  from  the  sorrows 
and  pains  of  the  world.  Even  Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Siva  are  perishable; 
allegiance  even  to  Them  is  not  beyond  the  grip  of  Maya.  The  fate  of 
such  worshippers  is  thus  summarized  in  the  Bhagavadgita: 

"Those  who  worship  the  Devas  go  to  the  Devas;  to  the  Pitts 
(ancestors)  go  the  Pi tf -worshippers ;  to  the  Bhutas  (spirits)  go  those  who 
sacrifice  to  Bhutas;  but  My  worshippers  come  unto  Me.” — Chap,  ix, 
verse  25. 

The  KulaTnava  Tantra  thus  admonishes  unwise  men: 

awla,  11 

“Brahma,  Vispu,  Mahcia,  and  other  Devatas,  being  within  the 
category  of  ‘  matter  ’  (Bhflta),  are  hastening  towards  destruction.  Hence 
do  what  is  right.” 

What  is  right  (Sreya)  is  distinguished  from  what  is  dear  (Prcya)  in 
that  the  thing  dear,  though  honey  for  the  time  being,  is  venom  in  the 
long  run;  whereas  what  is  right  is  unsavoury  in  the  beginning,  but  is 
ambrosia  in  the  end.  The  Tantra  Saatra  holds  that  the  right  conduct  of 
man  is  to  identify  himself  with  what  is  unperishable  and  perennial  Bliss, 
and  to  forego  all  objects  of  desire,  however  sweet  they  may  be,  as  so  many 
binding  chains  added  to  the  already  numerous  heavy  bonds  which  bind 
the  Karmic  body. 

The  Tantras,  like  the  Vedas,  while  laying  down  the  Upasana  worship 
of  hosts  of  Devas  and  Devis  for  unwise  men,  who  cannot  overcome  their 
cherished  VasanS  (desires)  for  present  and  but  short-lived  future  happiness 
proclaims  the  Upasana  of  the  “  One-without-a-second  ”  Brahman,  and 
explains  in  detail  how  that  supreme  good  may  be  attained. 

The  manifested  aspect  of  Brahman  is  the  object  of  worship.  The 
Kathopanisad  describes  the  Manifested  Brahman  thus: 

m  | 

35T  I  ^  3^1 

$1  l 

*1  nJM'dWd  I  >53$  3^1 

“  He,  who  was,  by  meditation,  the  first-born  before  the  creation  of  the 
five  elements,  who  resides  in  the  hollow  of  the  hearts  of  bongs,  and  is  in 
all  causes  and  effects.  He  who  perceives  Him  in  this  manner  perceives 
the  Absolute  in  Him.” 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


463 


“  She,  who  was  bom  as  Pra^a  (the  ‘  One  Life  ’),  in  whom  are  all 
Devatas,  who  is  Aditi  (eater  of  the  five  elements),  who  resides  in  the 
hollow  of  the  heart,  is  in  all  causes  and  effects.  He  who  perceives  in  this 
manner  perceives  the  Absolute  Brahman  in  Her.” — Kathopanijad,  Chap, 
iv,  verses  6  and  7. 

The  SvetaSvataropanijad  opens  with  the  query,  What  is  the  cause  of 
the  universe  and  all  that  is  contained  in  it?  The  answer  to  this  question  is 
given  in  the  following  verse: 

“  Immersed  in  concentration  and  meditation  they  found  the  Power 
(Sakti)  which  is  the  cause  of  the  universe 1  to  be  lying  hidden  by  Her  own 
Gunas”  (Sattva,  Rajas,  and  Tamas). — Chap,  i,  verse  3. 

Reading  between  the  lines,  the  truth  is  patent  that  the  manifested 
Brahman  is  Sakti,  and  that  Sakti,  though  one  and  indivisible,  has  dual 
action  in  cosmogenesis,  and  is  therefore  expressed  in  terms  masculine  and 
feminine,  to  explain,  however  indirectly,  the  idea  of  Divine  causation  in 
human  language.  The  manifested  Brahman  being  essentially  the  same  as 
the  unmanifested  Absolute  Brahman,  Sakti,  when  unmanifested  is  Cit 
(pure  consciousness),  and  when  manifested,  is  Cit  with  May&  or  Prakrti, 
which  is  the  material  cause  of  the  Univeise,  and  which  is  the  “  own  attri¬ 
bute  or  guna  ”  (^'PO  of  Sakti. 

The  Tantrika  View  of  Sakti  is  exactly  the  same,  as  has  been  explained 
already  in  an  earlier  portion  of  this  essay.  In  Sarvasamrajyamedha 
Stotra  of  Dalqinakali  the  following  very  clear  statement  is  to  be  found: 

^  qHitftdl  'RAW  I 
'btePTT  tffen  II 

3  m  m  I 

II 

(The  word  55PTT  in  the  above  is  thus  explained  in  Brahmayamala : 

®I*TI  SW^lftftfRn  I  “  This  Chh5ya  is  Devi-Sakti  emerged 
from  the  body  of  Brahman.”) 

The  above  four  lines  may  be  thus  rendered: 

“  The  ineffable  Superior  Power  is  supremely  attributeless  (that  is, 
Absolute).  This  Devi  (Power),  being  playful,  imagined  forms  in  Sflnya* 

1  The  phrase  ^Rri5lffK  means  ^TtRT  I  commentary 

of  Sankarachirya. 

*  “  The  soundless  Sat-cit-ananda  Brahman  is  called  Sunya  *’  (Yogas  varo- 
daya). 


m 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


(that  is,  in  the  Absolute).  In  the  initial  work  of  creation,  when  She  saw 
ChhayS,  then  She  became  the  Power  of  Volition,  and  by  Her  Mahakala 
was  created.” 

Duality  in  unity  is  the  characteristic  of  the  Tantrik  doctrine,  and  all 
its  methods  of  worship  are  based  upon  this  truth.  The  KuULnjava  says: 

“  Some  wish  (me  to  be)  Advaita  (non-dual),  and  others  wish  (me  to 
be)  Dvaita  (dual).  He  who  knows  me  in  essence  is  free  from  both  Dvaita 
and  Advaita.” 

The  Sadhaka  who  realizes  Duality  in  the  “  one-without-a-second  ” 
Brahman  liberates  himself  from  the  bondage  of  Maya.  He  is  a  true 
knower  of  Brahman;  he  is  a  true  Kaula. 

B  ^  II 

“  Kula  is  the  Power  of  Brahman;  Akula  is  called  Brahman;  he  who 
knows  Atma  to  be  essentially  Kula  and  Akula  is  called  Kullna  ” — 
Kularpava  Tantra. 

As  in  Kosmic  creation  Sakti  becomes  Nada  and  Bindu — Sakti  and 
Siva— so  docs  Sakti  become  male  and  female  in  individual  creation,  the 
male  principle  existing  in  the  smallest  degree  in  the  female,  and  the 
female  principle  existing  in  the  smallest  degree  in  the  male.  These  two 
great  principles,  which  are  ever  in  association  in  every  act  of  creation, 
sustentation,  and  dissolution,  are  never  divorced  from  each  other,  but  are 
ever  inseparably  connected,  though  the  predominance  of  the  one  or  the 
other  in  objects  present  the  spectacle  of  apparent  separation. 

It  is  Sakti  alone  which  can  save  a  Sadhaka  from  the  quagmire  of  the 
senses  and  their  objects  and  lead  him  on  to  the  blessed  abode  of  Brahmi- 
nanda  (Brahman  as  Bliss).  The  individuality  of  a  person  is  but  the 
resultant  of  his  feeling  and  emotions,  ideas  and  thoughts  in  relation  to  the 
objective  world,  which  he  has  experienced  in  thousands  of  births  and 
rebirths,  and  which  bind  him  down  to  the  world  and  its  objects.  The 
dissolution  of  his  physical  body  translates  him  into  a  region  of  temporary 
subjective  happiness  or  misery,  but  as  sure  as  the  sun  rises  from  the  east,  he 
must  again  pass  into  the  mother’s  womb,  there  suffer  untold  misery;  and 
thence  issuing  into  the  world,  must  there  for  a  brief  span  of  time  be  tossed 
to  and  fro  by  his  own  Kansas.  This  play  is  enacted  for  ever  and  ever. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  465 

and  there  is  no  escape  therefrom  unless  he  can  extricate  himself  from  the 
grip  of  AvidyS  (nescience),  the  charming  syren  of  worldly  bondage,  and 
take  refuge  at  the  holy  feet  of  vidya  (knowledge).  Vidya  alone  can  make 
a  Sadhaka  the  master  of  himself,  and  the  conqueror  of  the  elements,  the 
senses,  and  the  mind. 

«ii  for  st  *i5mrar  m  %  ^  \ 

TO:  II 

“  Vidya  is  Mahamaya,  She  should  be  served  by  the  wise;  he  who 
worships  Avidya  enters  the  region  of  darkness.” — Saktananda  TaraAgipi. 

How  Sakti  became  Sabdabrahman  has  been  previously  described. 
Sakti,  when  manifested,  is  PrJija,  the  one  intelligent,  all  powerful,  creative 
vital  principle: 

aiRTO  mail  |  ^  TO: 

I 

“  From  the  Atma  this  Prana  is  bom.  As  shadow  is  to  the  body,  so  is 
Prana  associated  with  Atma;  it  comes  to  this  body  by  the  action  of  the 
mind.”1 — Prasnopani^ad,  verse  32. 

Hiranyagarbha  or  Pratja  is  called  the  ‘  First-bom  ’  in  the  Upanisads. 
We  have  seen  that  Hiranyagarbha  and  Adiri  are  one  and  the  same,  and 
that  Aditi  is  what  the  Tantra  called  Sakti,  We  have  also  seen  that  Sakti 
as  Kulakundalim  is  the  Mother  of  Universes,  whose  Breath  is  life.  The 
fifty  Malika  sounds,  which  form  Her  body,  are  Praijik  principles,  from 
which  universes  are  evolved,  by  which  they  are  sustained,  and  into  which 
they  arc  disintegrated.  “  Sound  ”  and  Prana  are  univocal  terms : 

“  (Sound)  is  called  Nada,  Prana,  Jiva,  Ghosa,  etc.” — Prapaficasara, 
4th  Patala. 

In  Rudrayamala,  quoted  by  the  author  of  Pranatosini  KulakundalinI, 
is  called  ST^tTT  — “  of  aerial  form,  located  in  the  Miila- 

dhara  Cakra.” 

The  knowledge  of  Sakti  as  Prana  is  of  vital  importance  in  spiritual 
self-culture.  The  Pralnopani$ad  thus  summarizes  the  result  of  such 
knowledge: 

1  Karma  which  works  is  SamskSra,  and  the  latter  manifests  as  the  mind. 
Therefore  Samskara  as  mind  produces  life.  With  the  destruction  of  mind 
(man as)  there  is  liberation. 

30 


466 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


3wi  ^  tow  (i 

“  He  who  knows  in  detail  the  birth,  the  arrival  (in  human  body),  the 
place  (in  the  body),  the  pervasiveness,  the  external  (as  sun,  etc.)  and  the 
internal  (as  eyes,  etc.)  manifestations  of  Prana  becomes  immortal.” — 
Verse  41. 

The  Upanisad  lays  down  the  Sutra  or  principle,  which  the  Tantra 
works  out  and  develops  into  a  methodology,  by  the  faithful  observance  of 
which  a  Sadhaka  can  not  only  approach  the  “  The  One  Life,”  the 
Sabdabrahman,  the  All  blissful  Mother,  but,  freeing  himself  from  the 
K&rmik  sheath  which  made  him  dissimilar  to  the  Mother,  become  Her 
Very  Blessed  Self. 

It  is  only  Yoga  culture,  described  under  the  heading  “  The  pilgrimage 
of  the  human  ego,”  which  enables  a  Sidhaka  to  know  in  detail  “  the 
birth,  the  arrival,  the  place,”  and  the  like  of  Prana. 

The  relation  of  the  manifested  Brahman  or  &akti  to  the  universe  in  its 
three  planes  of  existence  and  its  extra-kosmik  aspect  must  be  thoroughly 
grasped  by  a  Sadhaka  of  the  two  higher  classes.  For,  without  such 
knowledge  SSdhana  is  impossible,  and  its  ultimate  result,  the  realization 
of  Brahman,  unattainable.  The  following  is  quoted  from  the  Mipduk- 
yopani$ad  as  a  key  to  the  acquisition  of  such  knowledge: 

w  Siswt  \  11 

TO:  II  *  II 

flHUf  TO  II  *  II 

TO  pt  3  ^TO  TO!  TOWfr  ^  ^  W  I 

55HWR  qtigjfc  TORTO  TOFFTO^I  TOISpfa: 

TO  II  H  II 

TO  TOtS*wf«fa  4lft:  H 

11  ^  II 

J|Rt:TO  «l  *  TOFW*  i  TO  TOTO  1 

^5  8  *m  fiiR:  II  «  II 

«  The  syllable  ‘  Om  ’  is  all  that  is  the  univene,  and  is  Brahman;  it  is 
the  Atma,  and  is  Brahman.  Brahman  (as  Para  and  Apara)  consists  of 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE  —V  AID  IK  AND  TANTRIK 


467 


four  parts.  (Not  that  Brahma  has  really  four  parts,  but  to  explain  its  all- 
pervasiveness  parts  are  imagined.)  ” 

“  The  first  part  is  the  Wakeful  State,  cognizer  of  the  objective  world, 
seven-limbed l * *,  nineteen-mouthed  *,  gross-eater  (called  Vaiivanara). 

“  The  second  part  is  the  Dreaming  State ,  cognizer  of  the  subjective 
■world,  seven-limbed,  nineteen-mouthed,  eater  of  desires  (called  Taijasa  *). 

“  That  is,  the  State  of  Sound  Sleep,  where  no  desire  is  felt,  no  dream 
is  seen,  which  is  the  undistinguishable  cause  and  effect,  in  which  the 
'mentalities  of  the  two  previous  states  are  undistinguishably  blended 
together  (as  different  objects  in  pitch  dark  nights),  which  is  blissful 
(unaffected  by  the  senses,  their  objects,  and  the  mind),  the  eater  of  bliss 
and  cognizer  of  the  wakeful  and  dreaming  states  through  the  mind.  This, 
the  third  part,  is  called  Prajna.4 

“  He,  Prajna,  is  the  Lord  of  all,  is  allwise,  is  the  regulator  of  all 
beings,  is  the  birthplace  (yoni)  of  all,  is  the  creator  and  destroyer  of  all 
beings.4 

“  Not  the  cognizer  of  the  objective  world,  not  the  cognizer  of  the 
subjective  world,  not  the  cognizer  of  both,  not  one  in  whom  all  states  of 
mind  are  inseparably  blended  together,  neither  cognizer  nor  non-cognizer; 
'unseen,  not  an  object  of  action,  imperceptible,  undefinable,  unthinkable, 
ineffable,  cognizable  only  by  the  knowledge  that  the  One  Atma  pervades 
.all  the  three  previous  states;  in  which  the  three  previous  Mayik  states  are 
not — that  is,  the  undifferentiable,  peaceful,  all-blissful  Advaita  the  fourth 
— He  is  Atma,  He  is  the  fit  object  of  knowledge.” 

The  human  mind  being  the  result  of  accumulated  Karma,  good,  bad, 
.and  indifferent,  of  untold  ages,  its  natural  alliance  with  the  objective 
world  has  rendered  it  rather  a  product  of  such  alliance  than  an  entity 
i possessing  intrinsic  capacity  for  cognizing  the  Supreme.  As  it  is,  the 
formation  of  a  true  concept  of  the  Godhead  is  a  difficult  task,  which 
depends  much  more  upon  the  purification  of  mind,  by  religious 
.works,  penances,  devotion,  and  the  like,  than  upon  the  power  of  the 
intellect,  however  cultured  the  latter  may  be.  Such  being  the  case, 


1  Seven  limbs:  Heaven  is  hit  head,  the  sun  is  his  eyes,  air  is  his  Prflpa,  the 
Akaia  is  the  trunk  of  his  body,  water  is  the  hinder  part  of  hii  body,  the  earth  is 
his  foot,  and  fire  is  his  mouth. 

*  Nineteen  mouths — viz.,  ten  Senses,  five  Pranas,  Manas,  Btiddhi,  Aharikira, 
■Citta.  Because  he  cognizes,  feels  and  eats  the  gross  objects  by  means  of  these 
nineteen  mouths  or  doon,  therefore  he  is  called  “  gross-eater 

■  Taijasa  is  beyond  the  cognizance  of  senses.  He  feeds  upon  mental  states 
•only. 

4  These  three  states  of  Divine  Consciousness  are  symbolized  by  the  three 
Jetters  of  3flJ£  (Qm)j  «T  being  the  first  state,  and  is  called  Rgveda:  3  the  second 
.state,  is  called  Yajurveda;  and  B  the  third  state,  is  called  SSmaveda. 


468 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


it  is  but  natural  that  Sadhakas  should  oftener  than  not  form  a  partial', 
idea  of  the  Supreme.  The  Sadhaka’s  idea  of  the  Supreme  regulates  the 
results  of  his  Sadhana.  The  Prasnopanisad  thus  sets  forth  the  matter: 

^  $  tft  tTfilT  i Z&II  M  *#n5R3- 

\\\  tl 

3w  ftw  Btsafw  i, 

3  flfcafr  fH&W  II  »  11 

i:  3^  it  swftaipftti  a  $  *N:  I 

m  ftftjara  1 1  swir  *rc&?  a 

TOR*  wr  sfori  ii  ^  || 

“  If  he  (the  Sadhaka)  meditates  on  Brahman  as  consisting  of  one 
part  only  (the  first  part,  as  cognizer  of  the  objective  world),  then  by  such 
meditation,  acquiring  knowledge,  forthwith  does  he  come  to  the  earth 
(after  death);  the  first  part  as  Rgveda  transmits  him  to  the  human  species, 
where,  by  penance,  continence,  and  faith,  he  enjoys  glory.” 

“If  he  meditates  on  Brahman  as  consisting  ol  the  second  part 
(cognizer  of  the  subjective  world),  he  attains  the  subjective  world.  He 
(after  death)  is  carried  by  Yajurveda  to  the  Soma  Loka  (Moon).  There 
enjoying  glory,  he  comes  back  amongst  men.” 

“  He  who  meditates  on  the  Great  Lord  as  one  whole,  consisting  of  all 
the  three  parts,  attains  to  the  effulgent  sun.  As  a  snake  gets  rid  of  its  skins 
so  is  he  freed  from  his  impurities,  and  is  raised  to  the  Brahma-I.o  kal  by 
Simavcda.  He  realizes  by  meditation  the  Paramatma,  which  is  within 
the  body  of  every  being,  and  which  is  greater  than  the  aggregate  of  Jlva, 
(individuals).”* 

The  Tantrik  systems  of  self-culture  are  constructed  in  strict  accor¬ 
dance  with  the  three  aspects  of  the  Divine  Mother,  so  that  no  Sadhaka’s 
work  and  toil  may  go  amiss.  They  raise  him  step  by  step  from  the  most 
external  belfry  to  the  innermost  Tabernacle  of  Mother  Mahakali,  never 
forcibly  weaning  him  from  his  habits,  but  transforming  those  habits  into 
fragrant  flowers  and  grateful  offerings. 

1  Called  also  Satyaloka,  the  highest  region  of  the  manifested  Supreme. 

1  The  manifested  Supreme  is  the  soul  of  all  Jivas.  He  is  the  Antaratma  of 
all  beings  within  the  form  of  Linga  Deha.  The  apparently  separated  Jivas  are 
heaped  together,  as  it  were,  in  him  without  distinction,  hence  he  is  called 
“  aggregate  of  Jivas”  While  in  the  Brahmaloka-state,  the  Sadhaka 

is  blessed  with  the  vision  of  the  Absolute,  and  of  union  with  It  as  water  unitea 
with  water  (B.  K.  M.). 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


469 


The  importance  of  possession  of  a  thorough  knowledge  of  Sakti  is  thus 
-stated  in  Niruttara  Tantra: 

^•11  | 

sipfrt  11 

“After  many  births  the  knowledge  of  Sakti  is  acquired.  O  Devi! 
without  the  knowledge  of  Sakti,  Nirvana  is  unattainable.” 

The  knowledge  of  Sakti  is  dependent  upon  self-culture  for  its  attain¬ 
ment,  for  mere  intellectual  knowledge  gained  by  study  cannot  raise  a  man 
to  the  state  of  Divinity.  Even  intellectual  unerring  knowledge  of  the 
transcendental  science  is  not  attainable  without  devotion  to  God  and 
Guru. 

The  mind  must  be  thoroughly  trained  in  spirituality,  and  brought  in 
harmony  with  supersensuous  truths  before  one  can  hope  to  be  able  to 
understand  the  true  import  of  that  with  which  the  transcendental  science 
•  deals. 

’^Wfd&TT  3^  tWl  I 
d$cl  1P&  M'tiRi't)  «4kh«i:  11 

“  The  meaning  of  these  truths  of  which  I  have  spoken  is  revealed  to 
the  high-soulcd  man,  who  has  supreme  and  equal  devotion  to  Devati  and 
Guru.” 

The  path  of  desire  and  the  path  of  non-desire  or  cessation  are  the 
two  paths,  cither  of  which  a  Sadhaka  must  choose  for  himself.  As  man 
is  a  bundle  of  desires  and  propensities,  the  regulation  of  such  desires  and 
propensities  on  lines  which  may  eventually  free  him  from  those  bondages 
of  woe  is  the  end  and  aim  of  all  method,  either  Vaidik  or  Tantrik.  As 
the  four  Vedas  are  replete  with  hymns  and  prayers  to  God  or  the  Gods, 
for  the  attainment  of  objects  of  desire,  so  also  the  Tantras  are  full  of 
methods  for  the  attainment  of  the  same  end.  By  following  those  methods, 
desires  and  propensities  are  circumscribed,  passions  curbed,  and  animal 
nature  transformed  into  Divine  nature.  It  is  in  the  lot  of  but  a  few  to 
pursue  the  path  of  cessation  from  the  outset.  The  vast  majority  of  men 
must  be  looked  after,  in  order  that  they  may  not  only  save  themselves, 
from  being  mere  brutes,  but  may  become  good  fathers,  mothers,  sons, 
brothers,  neighbours,  citizens — healthy,  robust,  and  God-loving.  The 
Tantra  proclaims  that  its  votaries  shall  become  all  these,  irrespective  of 
caste,  colour,  and  creed. 

Whether  one  be  on  the  path  erf  desire  or  on  the  path  of  cessation. 
Karma  Yoga,  Jfiana  Yoga,  and  Bhakd  Yoga  are  indispensable  to  him.  By 


470 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


continually  practising  works  prescribed  by  the  Tantras  one’s  mental  and 
physical  impurities  are  expurgated,  the  mind  becomes  pure  and  transparent, 
so  as  to  be  susceptible  of  the  presence  of  the  Divine  light  within;  the  body 
is  no  longer  the  habitual  store  of  Rajasik  and  Tamasik  cells  which  incite 
the  senses  to  ignoble  works.  By  Jnanayoga  knowledge  of  Divinity  is 
gained,  and  by  Bhakti  Yoga,  Jiva  and  Siva  arc  united,  and  the  supreme 
good  attained;  for,  according  to  Tantrik  Monism,  not  even  a  scintilla  of 
difference  is  admitted  to  exist  between  Jiva  and  Siva  essentially. 

One  of  the  characteristic  works  prescribed  in  the  Tantras  is  what  is 
called  Prayoga  (deputation).  Ordinarily,  what  man  achieves  is  the  result 
of  his  own  exertions  aided  by  the  exertions  of  others,  or  of  labour  and  skill 
purchased.  But  human  exertions,  labour,  and  skill  often  fail  to  produce  a 
desired  result.  In  the  Hindu  mind  belief  in  the  help  of  supersensuous 
beings  is  as  ancient  as  the  Vedas.  Indeed,  the  Vedas  are  replete  with 
sacrifices  to  Devas  for  attaining  desired  objects.  The  Tantrik  System, 
called  “  Deputation,”  is  less  arduous  and  less  expensive,  and  can  be  given 
effect  to  within  a  short  time.  When  at  critical  moments  human  efforts  ' 
and  skill  give  way,  man  in  every  country  naturally  raises  his  eyes  upwards, 
imploring  Divine  help  and  mercy.  Divine  help  and  mercy,  though  in  fact 
attainable,  are  yet  very  difficult  to  attain,  for  the  degree  of  spiritual  culture 
requisite  for  such  a  purpose  is  the  attainment  of  but  very  few.  The 
Tantra  provides,  however,  comparatively  easy  means  by  which  Devatas 
may  be  communicated  with  and  their  help  obtained.  This  branch  of 
Tantrik  knowledge  is  no  part  of  a  man’s  self-culture,  it  being  merely  an 
art,  more  useful  than  spiritually  efficacious. 

Whether  in  the  path  of  desire  or  in  the  path  of  cessation,  the  worship 
of  one  Brahman  is  the  burthen  of  the  Tantra,  and  the  object  of  that 
worship  is  the  liberation  of  the  individual  soul  from  eternally  recurring 
misery,  uniting  Atmi  with  AtmS,  by  the  dissolution  of  the  Karmik  body. 
To  achieve  that  end,  concentration,  meditation,  and  communion  are 
essential.  But  an  object  is  necessary  upon  which  to  concentrate  the  mind. 
The  universal  or  all-pervading  form  of  Brahman  functioning  in  undivided, 
homogeneous  effulgence,  through  the  waking,  dreaming,  and  slumbering 
state  of  being,  is  scarcely  such  an  object  as  the  mind  can  grasp.  Pratikas 1 
are  therefore  used  as  its  substitute.  The  AvatSra  forms,  Yantras,  and 
human  forms  in  special  Pujas,  are  the  best  forms.  Images  are  fashioned 
after  AvatSra  forms.  When  by  dint  of  Sadhana  Divine  effulgence  is 
cognized  in  a  Pratika,  then  is  it  that  the  Sadhaka’s  vision  opens  to  see  the 
universal  Form.  The  incarnation  forms  *  of  the  Divine  Mother,  called 

1  Pratikas  are  substitutes  of  Brahman  in  Upasana.  Such  substitutes  are  an 
aspect  of  Brahman,  or  a  part  of  it,  and  are  worshipped  as  if  it  were  Brahman 
itself  (B.K.M }. 

*  These  forms  are  Nitya — that  is,  everlasting  (B.K.M.). 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


47! 


the  Ten  Mahavidyas,  are  the  Upasya  Devata  {the  worshipful  God)  of  the 
Sakta  Tantriks.  Sadhakas,  according  to  their  predilections,  heredity,  or 
mental  conditions,  worship  one  or  other  of  them,  believing  the  particular 
Form  to  be  Brahman.  Images  of  such  Forms,  or  Yantras,  are  made,  an H 
externa]  worship  made  to  them  as  Brahman.  If  a  Sadhaka’s  Sadhana  be 
interne  and  high.  Brahman  or  the  Divine  Mother  manifests  Her  Divine 
Self  in  the  image,  which  for  the  time  being  glows  with  Divine  Life. 

tw  sW  Is:  11 

ftwi  'jsfpjw  I 

mwt  1  11 

“  As  milk,  pervading  the  whole  body  of  cows,  comes  out  through  the 
teats,  so  is  the  all-pervading  Deva  revealed  in  images,  etc.  The  reflection 
*  (of  Atma)  in  images,  etc.,  being  the  same  as  the  Atma  of  the  Sadhaka.1 
By  virtue  of  the  Puja  and  the  Sadhaka’s  faith,  the  Devata  appears.” — 
Kularnava  T antra. 

Sacrifice  to  God  or  the  Gods  in  the  form  of  food  and  drink  is  an  old 
institution  found  in  the  records  of  almost  all  religions,  ancient  and  modern, 
in  all  parts  of  the  world,  not  even  excepting  Christianity  and  Mohamraa- 
danism.  But  the  ethics  of  these  religions  do  not  give  the  raison  d'itre  of 
such  an  institution.  This  seems  to  be,  on  the  face  of  it,  an  anomaly, 
considering  that  the  God  of  most  of  those  religions  is  extra-kosmic  and 
formless.  The  Vaidik  manifested  God  being  both  immanent  and  trans¬ 
cendent  in  the  Kosmos,  the  legitimate  conclusion  is  what  the  Mi^uk- 
yopanisad  quoted  above  lays  down  as  positive  truth.  In  the  Bhagavad- 
gita,  the  Lord  says: 

"  He  who  offereth  to  Me  with  devotion  a  leaf,  a  flower,  a  fruit,  water, 
that  I  accept  from  the  purified  selfi  offered  as  it  is  with  devotion.” 
— Chap,  ix,  verse  26. 

The  Tantra,  which  claims  to  be  the  most  correct  and  practical  inter¬ 
pretation  of  Vaidik  truths,  holds  that  the  Sadhaka  who  longs  to  be  in 
harmony  with  the  Divine  Mother  should  not  only  sacrifice  to  Her  as 
Varivanara,  but  as  Taijasa  and  PrajAa  as  well.8  Indeed,  the  whole  life  of 
a  Sadhaka  is  a  sacrifice;  he  must  efface  his  own  personality  and  Ahaiikara 
(I-am-ness),  dedicating  all  his  thoughts,  deeds,  and  speech  to  the  Divine 


1  The  Sadhaka  communicates  the  ray  of  his  Atma  to  the  image  by  what  is 
called  PrS^apratislha  (Life-giving  ceremony).  (B.K.M.) 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra  and  “  Serpent  Power”. 


472 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Mother  who  resides  in  full  glory  in  his  heart,  and  is  the  real  cognizer  of 
the  body. 

Understand  me  as  the  Knower  of  the  Field  (body)  in  all  the  Fields, 
O  Bharata!  ’’—Bhagavadgita,  chap,  xiii,  verse  2. 

This  is  called  Atmanivedana  (self-dedication).  Egoism  is  the  cause 
of  heterogeneousness.  The  thought,  “  I  am  the  doer,  I  am  the  eater,  I  am 
the  enjoyer,  and  I  am  the  sufferer,”  makes  apparent  divisions  within  the 
homogeneous  One,  thereby  rendering  the  individualized  egos  a  prey  of  the 
attractive  and  repulsive  forces  of  Avidya  and  their  miseries.  The  initial 
work,  therefore,  of  a  Sadhaka  is  to  surrender  himself  completely  to  the 
Divine  Will. 

“  Whatsoever  thou  doest,  whatsoever  thou  eatest,  whatsoever  thou 
offerest,  whatsoever  thou  givest,  whatsoever  thou  doest  of  austerity, 
O  Kaunteya!  do  thou  that  as  an  offering  unto  Me. 

“  Thus  shall  thou  be  liberated  from  the  bonds  of  action,  yielding  good 
and  evil  fruits;  thyself  harmonized  by  the  Yoga  of  renunciation,  thou  shalt 
come  unto  Me  when  set  free.” — Bhagavadgita,  chap,  ix,  verses  27,  28. 

The  question  is,  How  can  this  complete  resignation  be  effected— resig¬ 
nation  in  act,  resignation  in  speech,  and  resignation  in  thought  ?  Men’s 
physical  wants,  passions,  propensities,  and  emotions  are  the  motives  of  his 
actions— either  these  are  to  be  suppressed  for  the  development  of  his  spiritual 
nature,  or  they  are  to  be  so  used  that  they  may  not  bind,  but  become  useful 
agents  for  leading  the  small  self  to  the  Great  Mother.  Suppression  being 
out  of  the  question,  various  devices  have  been  resorted  to  for  circumscrib¬ 
ing  them,  prominent  among  which  is  Brahmacarya  (absolute  continence) 
and  offering  of  food  to  God  before  it  is  taken.  A  Sadhaka  on  the  high 
spiritual  path  should  be  a  celibate  and  very  abstemious  in  food.  Such  are 
the  hardships  and  restraints  imposed  upon  him  that  oftener  than  not  he 
succumbs  in  his  effort  to  soar  to  his  high  aim;  the  strength  of  his  wings 
fails,  and  he  falls  down,  bruised  and  broken.  Thus  rendered  unfit  for  both 
the  lower  and  the  higher  paths  of  culture,  his  life  becomes  a  desert  of 
burning  sands  and  scorching  winds.  A  householder  is  bidden  to  offer  food 
to  God,  and  then  eat  it  as  Prasada  (gracious  leaving).  He  is  enjoined  to 
cohabit  with  his  wife  only  during  a  few  days  in  the  month  when  fecunda¬ 
tion  is  physiologically  possible.  These,  as  restraints  on  the  propensities  of 
eating  and  sexual  intercourse  (the  two  most  prominent  propensities  which 
rule  man’s  life),  are  serviceable  bits  wherewith  to  check  the  wayward 
steed  of  the  senses;  but  the  desire  to  relish  the  one  and  the  other  remains 
as  fresh  as  ever.  Though  constant  restraint  may  put  down,  it  cannot 
efface.  So  says  the  Lord  in  the  Bhagavadgita. 

“  The  objects  of  sense,  hut  not  the  relish  for  them,  turn  away  from  an 
abstemious  dweller  in  the  body,  and  even  relish  tumeth  away  from  him 
after  the  Supreme  is  seen.” — Chap,  ii,  verse  59. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


473 


The  Yogavasiftha  RJjniyapa  says: 

^  CIl'TOWl  *II«kI  I 

33T  *WI  II 

“  Man’s  disrelish  for  the  objects  of  sense  docs  not  arise  until  the 
Knowable  is  known,  as  a  creeper  (is  not  bom)  in  a  desert.” — Chap.  ii. 

So  long  as  relish  remains,  so  long  is  man’s  individuality  in  the 
ascendant;  and  so  long  as  man’s  individuality  is  in  the  ascendant,  so  long 
he  is  the  enjoyer  of  food,  drink,  and  the  like.  How  can,  then,  all  his  actions 
be  offered  to  the  Supreme  so  that  the  offerer  may  be  liberated  from  the 
bonds  of  action  ? 

The  answer  is.  By  self-surrender  or  resignation  to  the  Supreme.  The 
Tantrik  Sadhaka  is  enjoined  to  feel  the  Supreme  as  Divine  Mother  and 
Father,  not  only  within  himself,  but  within  every  being.  By  knowledge 
of  Sastra,  by  faith,  and  by  devotion  to  God  and  Guru,  he  must  persist- 
_  cntly  practise  this  feeling  so  that  in  time  it  becomes  a  part  of  his  nature. 
The  nature  of  the  Supreme  as  the  True  Self,  the  real  doer  and  the  real 
feeler  being  realized,  he  can  place  his  Karmik  self  completely  at  Her 
■disposal  in  all  his  acts  with  a  devout  heart  and  inflexible  will ;  he  can 
worship  Her  with  his  thoughts,  feelings,  and  propensities,  whatsoever  they 
may  be,  and  realize  what  he  recites  every  morning. 

SFTT?  STCUlcl.  RTtfa  3  I 

“  From  the  time  I  rise  in  the  morning  till  evening,  and  from  evening 
till  morning,  whatsoever  I  do,  O  Mother  of  the  Universe!  that  is  surely 
Thy  worship.” 

This  is  the  mental  attitude  (vtR:)  of  a  hero  as  distinguished  from 

the  mental  attitude  of  the  animal  man  (qg-)>  who,  however  otherwise 
devoted  and  wise,  eats  the  gracious  leavings  of  God,  relishing  them  as  an 
individual  only 1  and  does  not  dare  unite  with  his  wife  as  an  act  of  divine 
worship.  Whereas  every  mouthful  of  food,  every  sexual  relation,  and  every 
act  is  an  oblation  of  the  hero,  who  by  these  practical  means  spiritualizes 
his  nature,  and  with  the  Divine  Mother’s  blessings  becomes  a  Man-God 
>,  to  be  eventually  dissolved  and  lost  within  the  blissful  effulgence 
of  Mother  Anandamayi.1 

1  When  food  (prasada)  is  offered  to  the  Devata  by  the  Pafu,  it  is  considered 
that  the  Devata  eats  the  subtle  portion  and  leaves  the  gross  part  for  the  wor¬ 
shipper.  The  latter  eats  it  as  devotee  (Bhakta) — that  is,  as  one  who  considers 
himself  as  separate  from  the  Devata,  and  whom  he  worships.  The  Vira  however, 
regards  himself  as  the  Devata,  and  therefore,  when  he  eats,  it  is  the  Devatfi,  and 
not  the  individual  worshipper,  who  eats.  This  is  a  fundametal  principle  of  the 
secret  worship.  *  The  Devi  who  is  Bliss. 


474 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


Brahmamay! 1  has  created  this  earth  as  the  field  wherein  Jivas  must 
reap  the  fruits  of  this  Karma,  and  as  sparks  of  Divinity  perpetuate  the 
human  species.  To  reap  the  fruits  of  Karma  the  body  must  be  kept  up 
by  food,  and  to  perpetuate  the  species  sexual  union  must  take  place.  But 
considering  the  misery  attendant  upon  both  these  functions,  none  would 
care  to  participate  in  them  were  not  the  monitors  of  hunger  and  passion 
implanted  in  him,  to  goad  him  to  action  which  he  would  not  otherwise 
willingly  take.  But  mere  hunger  and  passion  would  not  effectually  serve 
the  Divine  purpose  if  relish  for  both  were  not  implanted  in  him.  As  the 
Divine  Mother  and  Father  enjoy  their  creation  in  the  aggregate,  so  docs 
the  Jiva  in  the  individual.  The  Jlva  being  essentially  the  same  as  the 
Divine  Mother  and  Father,  bliss  (Ananda)  is  his  natural  heritage. 

Thus  both  eating  and  sexual  union  are  Divine  acts,  which  have 
nothing  impure  in  them.  Impurity  is  the  progeny  of  Ajnana  (absence  of 
knowledge),  which,  having  divorced  Divinity  from  the  Divine  act,  has 
lowered  it  into  being  mere  sexual  enjoyment.  Thus,  man  divine  has  fallen 
from  his  high  state  to  that  of  man  the  beast.  It  is  the  work  of  the  Vira 
(hero)  to  undo  the  instincts  bom  of  Ajnana  and  harmonize  himself  with 
the  Divine  Law. 

The  Divine  Mother  creates,  maintains,  and  annihilates  the  Universe 
as  an  act  of  retributive  justice  to  Karma-bound  Jivas.  It  is  Her  pleasure 
or  play  (Lila),  that  Her  children,  by  reaping  the  fruits  of  their  Karma, 
may  return  to  Her  lap,  never  again  to  be  tied  and  fettered  by  Kanna. 
She  enacts  this  drama  of  the  universe,  and  Herself  enjoys  it  Her  actions, 
however,  cast  no  fetters  round  Her,  because  She  is  free  from  attachment 
and  repulsion,  which  are  the  binding  cords  of  Maya.  It  is  this  feature  of 
Her  character  which  differentiates  Her  from  the  Jiva.  So  the  Vedantik 
terse  saying  is: 

a  \ 

“  He  is  God,  under  whose  control  is  MSya;  He  is  Jiva,  who  is  lorded 
over  by  Her  (Maya).” 

The  Jiva,  who  sets  his  heart  upon  the  task  of  freeing  himself  from  the 
bondage  of  Maya,  must  infuse  every  part  of  the  alluring  frame  of  the 
Enchantress  with  Divine  love,  and  then  throw  them  as  a  sacrifice  into  the 
Fire  of  that  Love.  It  is  only  by  this  means  that  lording  Maya  may  be 
brought  under  control. 

What  a  Sadhaka  must  do  to  free  himself  from  the  attractions  of 
objects  of  sense  is  thus  stated  in  the  V5maie$vara  Tantra: 


1  The  Devi  who  is  Brahman. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK. 


475- 


■n  ^  n 

dWT  w.  *SdT: 

areR5PWRI  folR?t  qfKtftdl:  || 
♦ilWt  f^  r®h:  i 

<WTWr  WT  ^  TOTOWd:  ^1:  11 


^  m  i 

5a*K4l<+^^l«l§d^R+)|:  || 

«ta:  5T7^  ftrfr  qrr^RIW^  I 

*W  3fTCR  JFRfad:  || 


*MIS?4t  WIT  =?  J 

%RH^  fife?  f^RI^  f*&  || 
0^:  «n||  =51  ^  3^  anwr  ?m,  I 
firajT  *m  q*qts*i  it 

sqtftq  z$tk  ^g’sqt  i 
3Wlf^  ^«T*TCt  *ft»TWPTRf^ft:  II 
q%ra  pot  ^  faoti  «d]^§<5f  i 
ai^T  ^  W:  || 

ar^nwnpJT  Rwwwi  *sr:  I 

*PH  qS$d  ®TR  W7!  II 

3^13  WT  I 

*i(tt»4l5T  R^Slfadl:  (| 

3r  I 


^dT:  q^lrf^t  3f«T%  ^TT:  II 
dWT:  TO  *HT:  I 

«^3  **WW3T  ^  ^  ^  ?f^FT  ^31:  II 

qnwHffrft  «^r  fifto  q#sfi  n 


*76 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


fcff  HRf:  FWfcl  cRI  II 

3|g^I  W.  %TC  ^  I 

RTTO :  || 

“  Many  are  the  branches  of  knowledge  touching  work,  some  distin¬ 
guishing  features  of  which  I  shall  briefly  tell  thee.  In  literature  there  are 
nine  Rasas  *;  there  are  said  to  be  eight  Rasas  in  Yoga;  in  learning  there  arc 
eighteen  Rasas;  nine  arc  the  Rasas  in  the  Yoga  of  devotion;  in  objects  of 
sense  there  are  six  Rasas.  O  Devi!  the  Rasa  of  wine  are  five.  These  arc 
the  fifty-five  Rasas.  O  Dear  One !  hear  attentively  the  names  of  the  Rasa 
in  the  different  works  mentioned.  The  nine  Rasas  in  literature  are — 
sexual  love,  heroism,  compassion,  laughter,  wonder,  terror,  hate,  peace, 
and  anger.  O  Mahadcvl!  O  Dear  One!  In  Yoga  Sastra,  Yama,  Niyama, 
Asana,  Prana  yama,  Pratyahara,  Dharana,  Dhyana,  and  Samadhi  arc  the 
eight  Rasas  told  in  detail.*  The  eighteen  Rasas  of  learning  are — (i)  Chan- 
das,  which  are  the  legs  of  the  Veda;  (2)  Vyakarana  (Grammar)  is  known  to 
be  its  mouth;  (3)  Siksa  is  its  nostrils;  (4)  its  hands  arc  said  to  be  Kalpa; 
(5)  O  Dew!  Jyotisa  (astronomy,  astrology)  is  its  eyes;  (6)  Nirukta  is  its 
ears;  (7-10)  each  of  the  four  Vedas  is  a  limb  of  the  Veda;  (1 1)  Mlmamsa; 
(12)  Nyaya1 * *;  (13)  Dharma  Sastra;  (14)  Purana;  (15)  Ayurveda; 
(16)  Dhanurveda;  (17)  Gandharva  Veda;  and  (18)  Arthaiastra.4  The 
nine  Rasas  in  Bhakti  Yoga  (Yoga  of  devotion)  are  known,  O  Dew!  to 
be  thinking,  praise,  meditation,  remembrance,  serving  the  Holy  Feet, 
worship  and  hymn,  servitude,  fellowship,  and  self-dedication.  In  objects 
of  sense,  O  Paramesvari!  the  six  Rasas  are — flowers,  scents,  the  beloved 
woman,  bed,  dress,  and  ornaments.  In  wine  the  five  Rasas  are — that  made 
of  molasses,  that  made  of  honey,  that  made  of  sugar-cane,  that  made  of 
fruits,  and  that  made  of  com.” 

“  Those  who  are  experienced  in  the  feeling  of  Rasa  in  these  are  call¬ 
ed  Rasika.” 

“O  ParameSvari!  O  Devi!  regulations  concerning  work  are  of  five 
classes— namely,  regulations  as  to  daily  service,  Japa,  purification,  externa] 
and  internal  worship,  and  Puraicarana.1  Regulations  as  to  daily  service 
relate  to  morning,  noon,  and  evening  rites.” 


1  This  term  means  relish,  taste,  sentiment,  juice,  etc. 

*  See  Introduction  to  7 antra  Sdstra. 

*  Philosophies  so-called. 

4  Science  of  medicine,  warfare,  music,  and  economics. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE -VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK  477 

“  Experiencing  all  the  Rasas  and  performing  the  prescribed  works,  the 
Sadhaka,  with  tranquil  mind,  shall  perform  Puri?abhi?ecana.”  1 

M  wRt  m  i 

’SJfRf  || 

’SLJTRdt  I 

*R7  I 

#1  WU  5TRft  ^  WI^  || 

?far  wjii4  g  535  ipnf^i  Jifo  1 
4H  ft*il  iwflw  *1  Jlfc)R*iti  f*ft  II 
g  1 

3lW>lt  f^df  0-^1  «l  *til*ld  (h4<4^  (I 
^gw<l4l*lq:  '»4lfti:5[W  d^h  ^  | 

U^Tdl^ld.  II 
fd^»  5rwift4n  sipi^  1 
nFwft  aw5[  srafSi  11 

aN  <ndf*q  9  gsdifawi^g  i 
*n«i  f^n  »i  *jr4  sng.  dAd  n 
Rre*rcn«  did+ift.  5i^n^i  i 
'df4dl*)l'k}*Mld,  §[4fo  yfafotl  II 
^F:  H$R«fed[:  xw^i^id^ti:  I 
Rl4  jfafal  Rfl  9^  II 

iWRjft  g  3^  "UdltdpHIW  I 

jrnwnft  5^  ^  fsft  i 
9TCFK#  #1  II 

9^?  *lPl4  9  ?PT«i%g.  I 

3W  ^  W!:  II 


*  The  Purn5bhi$ecana  here  mentioned  is  not  the  second,  but  the  fourth' 
degree  of  initiation,  known  as  Purnadlkja  (B.K.M.). 


-478 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


iPwMl&ii  ^  4Su«^|,ilftHI  I 
Wit  ^fwqf  || 

^  ^URRfRflSfl  I 
^  *raHI  tR(,  *r6lRtin  || 

<rh3  w&tti  i 

^  fl%:  Wlgltf  ^  || 

tRJ  %i  WW  | 

3RT  ^  JltsTfft  WI II 

33*1*1  WFf.  *WWRra  f^  I 
^31^3  frwtt  «n%  W  ii 
Rt4il*l  T^U*q4  3®*^  I 
^  %  *raifaq  *  *  ^  ii 
f^qj  font  m&i  i 

'i»%RWT-Kl4^Tkl  ll 

“  Hear  attentively  from  roe  the  different  characteristics  of  the  Rasa. 
.‘Sexual  love  should  be  learnt  of  the  hero ;  in  it  arc  compassion,  etc.  Sexual 
love,  etc.,  and  hate,  etc.,  arise  from  the  sexual  Rasa  ”  (Srrigara). 1 

“  O  Devi!  when  sexual  love  realises  the  Supreme  Object  (Paramartha),* 
then  is  Supreme  tranquillity.  (The  Sadhaka)  then  acquires  the  state  of 
Rudra.” 

“  O  dearer  than  life!  hear  from  me  the  purport  of  this.  O  Dear 
Onel  as  the  body  cannot  move  without  limbs,  so  the  Vedic  path  none 
can  enter  without  a  knowledge  of  Chandas  (metre).  O  sweet-tongued 
Devi!  Chandas  is  not  beautiful  without  rhetoric.  The  eye  penetrates 
that  which  is  unseen,  so  does  astronomy;  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  the  moon 
make  astronomy  a  science  of  direct  evidence.  Nirukta  is  a  branch  of  Veda; 
from  the  branches  Brahma  is  born.  Devotion  to  Brahma  arises  from 
hearing  songs;  song  arises  from  the  mouth  and  nostrils.  Without  song 

1  Which  is  the  root  principle  of  all  creation.  Sexual  love  in  this  passage 
refers  to  its  manifestation  in  the  individual.  The  sexual  Rasa  from  which  it 
arises  is  its  general  principle  of  origin. 

•That  is  when  irrigara,  which  the  author  translates  as  sexual  love,  is 
experienced  in  the  union  of  the  Jivatma  and  Paramitma — that  is  the  supreme 
-object  of  S&dhana,  The  Bhairavi  is  Devi.  The  Sadhaka  is  Siva.  In  their 
union  there  is  no  distinction. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE — VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


479 


there  is  no  dance;  dancing  is  bom  of  songs.  Sik?a  and  drama,  etc.,  words 
and  grammar  are  the  couples  inseparably  allied.  The  Vedas  with  their 
six  limbs  explain  the  Brahman.  The  Nyaya  with  Mimamsi  surely  explains 
Brahman.  From  constant  thought  upon  the  Paramatma,  knowledge  of 
Brahman  arises  in  the  JIva.  Precepts  are  sctded  according  to  Dharrna 
Sastra;  Puranas  spring  from  it,  O  Dear  One;  The  Jiva,  the  Supreme 
object  of  whose  life  is  bliss  Divine  (Brahm&nanda),  and  who  is  eager  for 
self-preservation,  must  leam  Ayurveda  (science  of  life — i.e.,  medical 
science),  Dhanurveda  (archery),  and  Gandharva  Veda  (music).” 

“  O  Devi,  the  fully  wise  Sadhaka,  with  honey,  juice  of  sugar-cane, 
milk,  com,  scents,  garlands,  dress,  and  ornaments,  should  worship  in 
union  woman,  who  is  the  image  of  the  Motfier  of  the  Universe.  O  Devi! 
the  culture  of  the  Rasa  of  sexual  love 1  consists  in  the  worship  of  woman.* 
Worship  and  the  five  classes  of  work  already  stated  should  be  performed 
by  the  hero  (VIra)  for  attaining  the  Devi.  By  worship  arise  nine  degrees 
of  devotion  and  ecstasy  of  Rasa.  Then  the  Yogi,  practising  Yoga,  shall 
be  immersed  in  communion  ”  (Samadhi). 

“Therefore,  O  Mahcsani,  have  I  already  stated  that  by  feeling  all  the 
fifty-five  Rasas  one  loses  all  desire  for  objects  of  sense  and  worldly  work.* 
The  effect  of  non-desire  is  wonderful,  and  the  Divine  Mother  is  gradfied 
by  it.  Embodied  man  cannot  give  up  Karma  (action)  so  long  as  he  is 
embodied;  so,  concluding  in  this  wise,  divine  acts  by  festive,  religious,  and 
other  works,  the  Sadhaka  verily  becomes  liberated  in  this  life  (Jlvanmukta) 
by  virtue  of  his  full  knowledge  and  bliss  of  Rasa.” — Chap.  liv. 

Wine,  as  a  means  of  spiritual  self-culture,  is  another  singular  feature 
of  some  forms  *  of  Tantrik  Sadhana.  In  India  the  free  use  of  wine  in 
social  and  religious  festivals  was  fairly  general  in  the  Satya,  Treta,  and 
Dvapara  Ages  (Yugas).  It  was,  however,  probably  after  the  ruin  of  the 
race  of  Yadus  during  the  last  days  of  Sri  Krsna’s  life  that  stringent  laws 
were  framed  in  the  Smjti  Sastras  against  the  use  of  wine  by  three  higher 
classes.  Those  laws  were  sedulously  administered  by  the  Hindu  Govern¬ 
ments,  and  the  result  was  a  general  abhorrence  of  spirituous  drinks. 
Nothing  better  could  have  been  devised  for  the  welfare  of  man,  for  wine 
not  only  wastes  the  body,  but  it  works  havoc  on  the  intellectual  and 
moral  faculties,  pulling  down  man  to  the  level  of  beasts.  The  Tantra 
Sastra — the  Word  of  God — is  fully  alive  to  this : 

i 

* Vanitapujane.  According  to  the  “ Mahanirvana  Tantra”  the  wor¬ 
shipper’s  own  wife. 

*  Each  pleasure  is  but  a  portion  (khantja)  of  the  whole  mixed  with  pain. 
He  who  has  felt  the  whole  (akhanda)  attains  Brahma  bliss  and  loses  desire  for 
worldly  things. 

4  Not  of  all  and  by  some  Tantra  s  only. 


480 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


»1«9^  f 

3  Wtrf)  3ft  sfafafrgcl:  II 

jpi  i»iwi^«i  $335  I 
53  *lfe  *rc^>  ^3^  ll 
f*It  tIR  g  3$ft  !?NH  | 

W5l4ld«t>  3ft  3gft 5  II 

“  One  who,  being  unripe  in  Kaula  knowledge,  wishes  to  drink  wine, 
is,  O  Devi!  a  great  sinner,  and  is  unlit  to  perform  all  religious  works.” 

“  He  goes  to  Raurava  Hell  who  drinks  unpurificd  wine,  commits  rape, 
and  slaughters  animals  for  self-gratification.” 

“  O  Devi!  that  is  called  drinking  of  wine  which  is  not  for  Divine 
purposes;  that  is  a  great  sin  according  to  the  Vedas,  etc.” — Kularnava 
Tantra.  (5-95,  99). 

Further,  it  is  said  in  the  same  Tantra  (2.  1 17-1 19) : 

*lpt  *lf3  fefig  I  | 

WIPR3I:  ft  fefe  TO3  qi*R7:  II 

hrwvwwi  | 

^  J«M«I  II 
^  wkt  3  I 
grfil:  Q:  ^fe^uild.  II 

“  If  man  could  attain  spirituality  by  drinking,  then  all  ignoble  drinkers 
would  be  liberated.  If  residence  in  heaven  be  the  result  of  meat-eating, 
then  all  carnivorous  beings  would  be  righteous.  If  O  Devi !  enjoyment  of 
women  be  the  cause  of  liberation,  then  all  creatures  by  enjoying  women 
would  be  liberated.” 

Why,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  are  all  these  “  gates  of  hell  ”  introduced 
in  self-culture,  the  object  of  which  is  liberation  from  the  fascinations  of 
Maya?  The  same  Tantra  which  prescribes  Sadhana  with  woman,  wine, 
and  meat,  prescribes  also  various  other  methods  of  worship,  and  supplies 
Mantras,  without  which  Hinduism  all  over  India  would  be  paralyzed.  It 
is  irrational  to  accept  one  portion  of  a  SSstra  as  valuable  and  reject 
another  as  worthless.  The  earnest  inquirer  must  forgo  his  prejudices  and 
passions,  cherished  ideas  and  preconceived  notions,  before  he  can  enter  the 
holy  temple  of  spiritual  truth  embodied  in  the  mandates  of  Lord  Siva. 
It  must  always  be  remembered  that  this  is  spiritual  culture,  and  not  the 
culture  of  the  body  and  its  senses. 


481 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 

The  Tantra  Sastra,  like  all  other  revelations,  does  not  always  assign 
reasons  for  its  mandates,  but  asserts  that  as  Sadhana  is  practical,  the  most 
direct  evidence  of  the  truth  of  its  statements  can  be  obtained  by  accepting 
the  Sadhana  and  working  according  to  instructions. 

The  principle  underlying  this  Sadhana  is  thus  enunciated: 

%  I 

%I  ^1  >W1  II 

“  The  Great  Bhairava  has  ordained  in  the  Kaula  doctrine  that  Siddhi 
(spiritual  advancement)  must  be  achieved  by  means  of  those  very  things 
which  are  the  causes  of  man’s  downfall.” — Kularnava  Tantra. 

The  consideration  of  this  principle  leads  us,  in  the  first  place,  to  adopt 
the  evidence  of  analogy  in  regard  to  the  physical  body  of  man.  Cobra 
poison,  arsenic,  aconite,  croton,  opium,  and  other  animal  and  vegetable 
poisons,  are  destructive  of  life.  But  skilfully  prepared  and  purified, 
they  not  only  save  life  but  invigorate  it  The  Indian  physician’s  prepara¬ 
tion  of  cobra  poison  is  famous  for  its  life-giving  and  invigorating  virtues, 
so  are  the  apothecary’s  preparations  of  arsenic,  etc.  In  some  parts 
of  India  raw  arsenic  is  used  in  moderate  quantities  for  prolonging 
life  and  putting  off  old  age.  It  would  thus  appear  that  nothing  is 
absolutely  harmful  in  Nature.  By  skilful  manipulation  even  poison  yields 
manna.  The  poison  of  wine,  by  skilful  treatment  according  to  Tantrik 
precepts  and  instructions  of  Gurus,  is  not  only  rendered  innocuous,  but 
is  turned  into  a  distinct  force  of  labour,  energy,  patience,  and  intrepidity, 
all  of  which  are  essential  in  spiritual  culture. 

Wine,  by  exciting  the  brain,  turns  the  mind  to  that  channel  of 
thought  which  is  uppermost  in  the  drinker's  mind.1  When  the  mind  is 
pre-eminently  devotional,  the  effect  of  wine  upon  it  is  to  render  it  more 
so  by  concentrating  all  the  thoughts  upon  the  object  of  devotion.  Ecstasy 
(Ullasa)  and  communion  (Samadhi)  are  after  a  long  practice  its  riper 
developments  in  a  Sadhaka. 

That  which  most  attracts  men  to  the  taking  of  wine  is  its  power  to 
develop  happiness  in  the  drinker.  The  S&dhaka’s  mind,  freed  from  all 
base  and  ignoble  thoughts  and  feelings,  enjoys  Brahman  an  da  (Brahman 
Bliss)  under  its  influence. 

As  to  the  use  of  meat  and  fish,  the  Vaidik  and  the  Tantrik  Sastras 
agree  in  holding  that  slaughter  of  animals  for  Divine  purposes  is  not  sinful. 

3?Rfll$  snf&Rf  fifal  Sfr  [I 

1  The  effect  of  wine  is  to  intensify  and  reveal  what  is  already  in  the  mind. 
Hence  it  is  said  In  vino  veritas. 

31 


462 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


^3?1l5  3T  5^1  ^  II 

“  O  Dear  One!  in  sacrifices  to  the  Pitrs  and  Gods  killing  of  prescribed 
animals  is  ordained.  For  self-gratification  killing  of  beings  is  nowhere 
permitted.  Even  a  blade  of  grass  should  never  be  cut  without  a  lawful 
purpose.  Killing  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Gods  and  twice-born  (Dvijas) 1 
is  not  sinful.” 

The  Kularpava  Tantra  says: 

$WI  5?f %m:  I 

WRPlfaftgT  ^  Wt  II 

^  wn  ftftera;  i 

3Wl:  Wilt  I 

JlFPH  fift  || 

^  3wrni4^ii:  I 

SfaifeT:  m&R'.  || 

cW:Rft|3  ^  I 

twi  mm  wm  ^  &&  ii 
*3^  $3E[ai  fft  I 
^  (taPd  5PRH  q  II 
f§flt  flftt  ajrfit  Ifa:  | 

ti&rvwi'i'^  qfeff  3^^  il 
srwnt  ^  ^  srafsnpj  i 
m  n 

£p$qf  3ft  ft|^l  I 
MctewwT  m  i! 

»  ■  •  «  • 

4l3ftl  | 

"Tpft  II 


1  Here  Brahmanas  to  whom  the  sacrificial  meats  are  given. 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK. 


483 


renRiffta  ^  i 

%%5  ?!  11 

^I'S^uiwT^  *?q?T:  I 

*HMrafttT^4  JT^TR  W^ll 
*1:  ?!  'Tra#  I 

+wj'wi«imi<{hi  Hi^tidi  l 

WB  f^TP^  ?|5R!  fift  I! 

*Wr  ^T£|  ftiplT  #*RM  I 

<rai  *r,4  mk  m\w,*jkh,  w 
#5$:  mtHIH,  I 

Pl^ci  mpwi  qw#  ll 
sprer  fa  i 

s^jsjdR^I  'ffaT  Wi  || 

•  ••■«• 

qtflTCft  ?!  ^W:  ?g:  M(PlIiti«w:  || 

3W35T  *#:  5lf%:  JTJST  'Jllww  q  I 
5IF5  ^ft  ?!  |] 

q  3fl$  tfPfl'WI:  II 

ift  ww^i  tot  i 
fM  q;  ?!  5 ®!^  II 

•  «•■■• 
5IM4rff#5_  | 
q  fro  q*is4^  fsft  ll 
5,'WKI’Hn^+:  | 


484 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


5J6KHI  'iilcJti&e:  il'toltafaqfSia:  I 

§j^  | 

jR.ft n 
^^bsftfcl  ^RltJ.  fl4tyftij0llf*M:  I 
^  ?fel  Stffel:  g@j5U#  ^  || 

Ptoisw:  I, 

HT3»I:  II 

"As  the  personal  servants  of  a  king  and  not  the  State  servants  arc  dear 
to  him,  so,  O  Devi !  are  those  who  are  devoted  to  internal  worship,  not 
others.  Those  who  with  devotion  offer  with  their  hands  meat  and  wine 
cause  bliss  (Ananda);  they  are,  my  Dear  One!  Kaulikas.  Our  Supreme 
form  described  as  Sat,  Cit,  and  Ananda,  verily  develops,  O  Dear  One ! 
by  the  enjoyment  of  wine.  Bhairava  inspires  those  who  drink  with  a 
knowledge  of  the  principles  of  Kula  (Sakti),  and  who  view  all  objects  with 
an  even  eye.  As  a  dark  house  is  illumined  by  light,  so  does  the  Atma, 
enveloped  by  Maya,  become  visible  by  drinking.  O  Dear  One!  those  who 
drink  wine  sanctified  by  Mantra  (the  mystic  words  of  power)  and  offered 
to  Gurudeva  will  never  drink  the  mother’s  milk  again  (that  is,  will  never 
be  reborn).  Wine  is  Sakti,  meat  is  Siva.  Their  enjoycr  is  Bhairava 
himself;  the  bliss  arising  from  their  union  is  called  liberation.  Ananda  is 
Brahman.  It  exists  in  bodies.  Wine  reveals  it;  hence  Yogis  drink  it. 
Without  attachment,  fearless,  unmoved  by  pairs  of  opposites  (as  pleasure 
and  pain),  without  curiosity  to  know,  versed  in  Vaidik  lore,  the  Vlra 
drinks  wine  which  grants  blessings.” 

*  *  *  • 

“  O  Parvati!  the  drink  of  nectar  purified  by  Mantra  develops  god-like 
nature,  and  liberates  man  from  the  bondage  of  the  world.” 

*  •  *  * 

“  For  the  gratification  of  the  Gods,  and  also  for  the  attainment  of  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman,  should  wine  and  meat  alone  be  taken;  he  is  a 
sinner  who  consumes  them  in  order  to  satisfy  his  carnal  appetite.  Wine 
should  be  drunk  in  order  that  a  clear  perception  of  the  form  (of  the 
Devata)  arising  from  the  Mantra  (of  the  SSdhaka)  may  be  thereby 
attained,  and  for  pacification  of  the  mind  and  the  undoing  of  the 
bondage  of  the  world.  He  who  takes  wine  and  the  rest  for  self-gratifi¬ 
cation  is  a  tinner.  These  things  should  be  taken  without  thirst  and 
longing,  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Devata  alone.  O  Dear  One!  the 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


485 


partaking  of  fish,  meat,  wine,  and  other  things  which  cause  excitement, 
-at  times  other  than  those  of  worship,  is  sinful.  As  Soma-drinking  is 
prescribed  to  Brahmapas  during  sacrifice,  so  wine,  as  that  which  yields  joy 
■and  liberation,  should  be  drunk  at  its  proper  time.  It  is  only  after  the 
true  import  of  the  Kula  Sastra  has  been  learnt  from  the  Guru  that  one 
should  partake  of  the  five  articles,1  otherwise  one  becomes  a  sinner.  Even 
a  Kaula  goes  to  hell  who  drinks  after  the  manner  of  Paius9  without 
worshipping  Bhairava  Dcva,  and  without  doing  Tarpapa  with  Mantra.” 
*  *  *  * 

“  He  who  withdraws  the  senses  from  their  objects  and  unites  them 
with  Atma  is  a  true  meat-eater,  others  are  mere  slaughterers  of  animals. 
The  Sakti  of  a  Paiu  is  asleep,  that  of  a  Kaula  is  awake;  he  who  enjoys 
this  Sakti  is  an  enjoyer  of  Sakti.  He  who  enjoys  the  bliss  arising  from  the 
union  of  Paraiakd  with  Atma  has  true  sexual  union,9  others  are  mere 
enjoyers  of  women.  O  Mistress  of  Kula!  he  who  partakes  of  the  five 
articles,  knowing  from  the  mouth  of  the  Guru  their  true  significance,  is 
liberated.” 

•  *  •  m 

“  O  Devi !  I  myself  with  Thee  accept  with  pleasure  Sricakra  Puja 
performed  with  Mantra  by  one,  well-versed  in  the  Sastrik  import  of  Puja 
and  Abhiseka,  who  is  devoted  to  Devata  and  Guru,  who  worships  daily, 
who  knows  the  esoteric  meanings  of  the  Kula  Sastra,  who  with  zeal  per¬ 
forms  worship,  who  has  received  instructions  from  Guru,  whose  mind  is 
pure,  who  is  active,  who  is  devoid  of  anger  and  greed,  who  is  averse  to  the 
religious  practices  of  Paius,  and  who  offers  oblations.  The  wise  Yog?  should 
perform  Kula-puja,  filling  his  mind  with  the  thought  ‘  I  am  Bhairava 
Possessed  of  these  and  other  qualities  the  Kaulika  who  regularly  worships 
Thee  obtains  enjoyment  and  liberation.” 

These  rather  long  extracts  will,  it  is  hoped,  amply  repay  perusal,  and 
bring  home  to  the  mind  of  the  unbiased,  earnest  inquirer  the  truth  of  the 
compatibility  of  enjoyment  and  liberation  existing  harmoniously,  provided 
that  such  enjoyment  be  lawful  and  not  sinful.  Yoga,  which  liberates,  and 
Bhoga  (enjoyment),  which  chains  down,  have  been  treated  as  though 
they  were  poles  asunder  in  other  schools  of  thought,  which  make  it  incum¬ 
bent  upon  the  pursuer  of  the  one  to  shun  the  other  as  one  would  shun 
a  deadly  cobra.  The  effect  of  this  has  been  refenred  to  more  than  once 
in  this  essay.  The  Tantra  Sastra  reconciles  the  two,  not  only  in  theory, 
but  in  practice.  The  testimony  of  thousands  of  Tantrik  Yogis  from  remote 
.antiquity  corroborates  its  truth. 

1  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 

1  Paftcamudra. 

*  This  is  the  Srng&ra  Rasa  of  the  Vira. 


466 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


According  to  the  eight-limbed  Yoga  process,  Kula-kundalinI  can  be 
united  in  the  thousand-petalled  lotus  with  Para&iva.  This  is  the  union  of 
Siva  and  Sakti,  and  the  fluid  arising  from  this  union  is  wine  which  the 
Yogi  drinks.  The  truth  of  this  is  unquestionable,  and  forms  the  basis  of 
the  Satcakxa-Sadhana  briefly  described  in  a  previous  part  of  this  essay. 
This  system  of  Sadhana  is  called  Jnana  Yoga — that  is,  the  Yoga  of  Knowl¬ 
edge  as  distinguished  from  Bhakti  Yoga,  the  Yoga  of  Devotion.  The  Yoga 
of  Knowledge  is  so  arduous  and  diflicult  that  but  very  few  amongst  many 
thousands  can  appreciably  succeed  in  it.  On  the  other  hand,  very  many 
persons  are  physically  unfit  for  it. 

Tantrik  Yogis  who  pursue  the  path  of  knowledge  regard  the  path  of 
devotion  as  indispensable,  for  the  latter  wonderfully  develops  the  spiritual 
faculties,  unties  worldly  bondage  more  effectually,  and  operates  as  a 
guarantee  against  fall,  the  danger  of  which  attends  every  step  taken  in  the 
practice  of  the  Yoga  of  Knowledge. 

Tantrik  Bhakti  Yoga  stands  upon  its  own  feet,  firm,  sure,  unerring, 
and  suited  to  all  constitutions  and  to  all  stations  of  life.  It  is  for  the 
prince  as  for  the  peasant,  for  the  poor  as  for  the  rich,  for  the  man  of 
business  as  for  the  man  of  leisure.  It  makes  no  distinction  of  caste,  colour, 
creed,  or  nationality,  welcoming  one  and  all  who  will  bow  to  the  lotus- 
feet  of  the  Divine  Mother.  It  exhorts  no  privation,  imposes  no  hard  and 
fast  conditions,  but  accommodates  itself  to  the  tastes  and  capacities  of  its 
followers,  so  that  they  may  slowly  but  surely  march  on  like  heroes  to  the 
capture  of  the  citadel  of  bliss.  It  only  asks  the  ordinary  disciple  to  be 
honest,  sincere,  kind,  compassionate,  and  truthful,  and  to  keep  his 
passions  and  greed  under  control.  If  he  wants  prosperity,  progeny,  and 
other  material  advantages,  let  him  devoutly  pray  to  the  Divine  Mother, 
and  “  depute  ”  Her  angels  to  secure  them  for  him.  His  desire  will  thus 
have  a  better  chance  of  being  gratified  than  by  servitude,  servility  and 
many  another  questionable  worldly  artifice. 

Passion  and  greed  being  the  two  great  powers  of  Avidya,  which  sow 
seeds  of  disease,  death,  discord,  poverty,  and  ruin  broadcast  all  over  the 
world,  they  are  so  handled  in  the  Yoga  of  Devotion  that  they  not  only 
lose  their  own  strength,  but  become  cheerful  friends  of  the  sojourner.  The 
path  of  devotion — that  is,  the  Kaula  path — is  therefore  a  blessing,  not 
only  individually,  but  socially. 

Extreme  Vedantik  pessimism  has  rendered  India  what  it  is  to-day— 
neither  soaring  to  heaven  nor  blooming  on  earth.  Both  heaven  and  a 
fruitful  life  on  earth  were  the  portion  of  its  great  ancestors  who  were 
wont  to  perform  the  Soma  sacrifice  in  bygone  ages.  Casting  our  eyes  on 
the  West,  we  are  dazed  by  the  dazzle  of  worldly  wealth  on  the  one 
hand,  and  terrified  by  the  ghostly  shadow  of  poverty  on  the  other.  Big 
religious  bodies  there  are,  but  where  is  God?  Whilst  India  has  no  faith 


SPIRITUAL  CULTURE— VAIDIK  AND  TANTRIK 


4«7 


in  the  world,  and  only  a  dreamy  faith  in  heaven,  the  West  seeks  a  heaven 
in  this  world.  The  best  remedy  for  this  disease  is  to  be  found  in  that 
religion  which  both  fully  recognizes  the  reality  of  the  world,  and  regards 
it  as  the  training-ground  whereon  man  may  grow  into  God.  And  so  says 
the  Kulargava  T antra: 

^  i 

*  w:  $3*5  f&aft  II 

“O  Mistress  of  Kula!  in  Kuladharma,  Bhoga  (enjoyment)  becomes 
complete  Yoga  (union  of  JIva  with  Brahman),  bad  deeds  are  made  good 
deeds,  and  the  world  becomes  the  scat  of  Liberation.” 

Om  Santih,  Om  Santih,  Om  Santih,  Om  Kali. 

Barada  Kanta  Majumdar 

Benares 

March  23,  1914 


Obeisance  to  the  Supreme  Divinity,  the  All-good  and  Beauteous  Mother 

CHAPTER  XI 

ON  MANTRA1 * * 

The  tribute  of  water  which  Bhagavan  Suryadeva,*  the  Regulator  of  the 
entire  universe,  takes  from  the  earth  during  the  eight  months  of  Kartika, 
Agrahayana,  Pausa,  Magha,  Phalguna,  Caitra,  VaiSakha,  andjyaistha, 
He  returns  to  the  same  earth  in  the  form  of  rain  during  the  four  months  of 
Asadha,  Sravana,  Bhadra  and  A$vina.  This  taking  of  tribute  again  is 
performed  by  the  stretching  out  of  arms.  Arm  is  the  name  of  the  agency 
by  which  things  are  done*  For  this  reason  Suryadeva  is  called  by  the 
names  of  “  the  thousand-rayed  one,”  “  the  thousand-armed  one,”  and 
so  forth.  Terrestrial  water  is  drawn  by  the  power  of  the  sun,  and  rises 
to  the  solar  region.4  It  is  this  power  of  the  sun  which  is  called  by  the 
name  of  Raudra.5 *  It  is,  however,  a  matter  for  consideration  why  the 
power  of  the  sun  is  called  Raudra.  It  ought  to  have  been  called  Saura 
(that  is,  appertaining  to  the  sun).  Raudra  is  what  appertains  to  Rudra. 
Why,  then,  is  sunshine  called  Raudra?  In  order  to  understand  that  it  is 
necessary  to  discuss  the  subject*  of  Gayatri.  Brahman!,  VaisQavi,  and 
MahcSvari,  the  presiding  and  controlling  Deities  of  the  three  gupas  of 
sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas,  the  Creatrix,  Prescrvatrix,  and  Destructress 
respectively,  are  the  three  Saktis 7  whose  forms  are  meditated  upon  in 


1  Mantratattva — that  is,  the  subject  of  and  principles  relating  to 
Mantra.  1  Sun  God. 

1  Theie  is  from  the  beginning  a  play  on  the  Sanskrit  word  kara,  which 
means  “  tribute,”  “  ray,”  and  “  arm,”  and  is  derived  from  the  verbal  root 

Ky,  to  do. 

4  Suryaloka.  5  Sunshine.  •  Tattva. 

7  Sakti  is  that  “  which  makes  able,”  or  the  power  by  which  things  happen 

or  act  That  power  belongs  to,  or  more  properly  is,  the  Brahman  (God),  and 

manifests  in  various  ways  (see  Chapter  VII  of  First  Part)  At  Sandhya  the 
Sadhaka  worships  the  three  powers  of  the  Brahman  as  creator,  main  tain er, 
and  destroyer  of  all  things.  These  Saktis  are  contemplated  upon  in  the  female 
forms  of  Brahmanl,  Vaisnavi  and  Raudri,  or  Mahejvari,  the  Saktis  of  Brahma, 
Vij?u,  and  Siva,  threefold  aspects  of  the  One. 


490 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  solar  orb  at  the  three  Sandhyas.1  In  the  creation,  preservation,  and 
destruction,  which  take  place  every  day,  the  morning  Sandhya  is  the  time 
of  creation,  the  noon  Sandhya  is  the  time  of  preservation  or  maintenance, 
and  the  evening  Sandhya  is  the  time  of  destruction.  In  the  morning  the 
world  of  Jivas  is  freed  from  sleep,  the  tamasa  *  Sakti  who  rules  supreme 
at  the  time  of  dissolution,8  and,  loosened  from  the  grasp  of  darkness, 
awakes.  In  the  night  the  universe,  although  as  before,  remains  covered 
by  a  tamasa  envelope,  so  that,  notwithstanding  its  actual  existence,  it  is 
not  perceived  by  Jivas  in  a  state  of  sleep.  For  this  reason,  the  universe 
must  then  be  considered  "non-existing,”  otherwise  dissolution*  has  no 
meaning.4  In  dissolution3  the  world  of  Jivas  exists  in  the  womb  of 
Prakfti  in  a  subtle  form  as  seeds,  and  then  later  the  first  blooms  of  creation 
appear  through  the  power  of  Brahmaiakti.  In  the  creation  also  which 
takes  place  every  day  it  is  this  Brahmaiakti  who  emerges  from  the  solar 
orb  and  suffuses  the  whole  world.  This  is  why  in  the  moming-Sandhya 
rite,  Brahmaiakti,  the  Creatrix,  should  be  contemplated  upon  in  the  form 
of  Brahmani  in  the  solar  orb.  At  noon,  when  the  adult  world  has  reached 
its  full  maturity,  when  the  forces  (Sakti)  of  hunger  and  thirst  have 
established  their  full  sway  over  the  world  of  Jivas;  when  even  trees,  plants, 
shrubs,  and  creepers  arc  wearied  of  drinking  the  rays  of  the  sun,  and 
yet,  under  the  influence  of  the  force  (Sakti)  of  preservation,  hanker  for 
that  drink  till  evening;  when  the  sun  has  been  established  in  mid-sky 
between  the  mount  of  sunrise  on  one  side  and  the  mount  of  sunset  on 
the  other,  it  is  then  that  in  the  noontime-Sandhya  rite — the  Visnulakti, 
the  Preservatrix  of  the  Samsara — must  be  contemplated  upon  in  the  form 
of  Vaispavl  in  the  solar  orb.  Again,  in  the  evening,  when  the  world  of 
Jivas  has  done  its  daily  play  and,  weary  of  body,  seeks  to  enjoy  the 
blessing  and  balm  of  the  sleep  of  dissolution,8  it  is  then  that  Sivalakti,  She 
who  gives  the  unalloyed  bliss  of  the  enjoyment  of  the  balm  of  dreamless 
sleep  *  and  is  the  Destructrcss  of  the  universe,  appears  (in  order  that  She 
may  provide  that  balm)  in  the  solar  orb  in  the  form  of  MahelvarL  She 
covers  life  with  Tamasa  Sakti,  and  drops  the  curtain  of  sleep  on  this 
Samsara,  the  Mayik  playground  of  error,  and  dispels  from  the  minds  of  Jivas 
all  the  impressions  which  they  have  received  from  the  outer  world,  such  as 
wife,  children,  and  so  forth.  It  is  this  Sivalakti  who  must  be  worshipped 
in  the  evening-Sandhya  rite.  The  Sastra,  therefore,  enjoins  that  the 

1  That  is,  morning,  noon,  and  evening. 

1  That  is  the  Sakti  which  manifests  the  dark  inert  Tamasa  Guna  (See 
Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra).  1  Pralaya. 

*  That  is,  if  the  world  ceases  to  exist  during  pralaya,  it  must  cease  to 
exist  (to  the  sleeper)  during  sleep.  If  the  condition  during  sleep  is  not  pralaya, 
then  nothing  can  be  called  such. 

8  Pralaya. 


•  Sufupti. 


ON  MANTRA 


491 


Sandhya-rite,  if  performed  other  than  at  the  prescribed  time,  is  ineffectual. 
To  let  the  moming-Sandhya  (when  the  Sakti  of  creation  is  supreme)  go 
by,  and  to  worship  the  Sakti  of  creation  during  the  period  of  supremacy 
of  the  Sakti  of  preservation,  is  tantamount  to  living  in  the  domain  of 
one  King  and  paying  the  tribute  due  to  him  to  another.  The  same  rule 
also  holds  good  in  the  case  of  the  performance  of  the  midday-Sandhya 
in  the  evening  or  at  night  when  the  supremacy  of  the  Sakti  of  preservation 
has  passed,  or  in  the  case  of  the  performance  of  the  cvcning-Sandhya 
on  the  following  day  after  the  supremacy  of  the  Sakti  of  destruction  has 
passed  away  in  the  previous  evening.  I  here  give  a  general  idea  of  the 
matter.  To  understand  it  more  deeply  and  accurately  we  should  know 
that  Mahaprakrti,1  who  is  the  aggregate  of  the  three  Saktis  of  creation, 
preservation  and  destruction  is  composed  of  the  three  Gunas  of  Sattva, 
Rajas  and  Tamas.*  It  is  not  that  when  one  of  the  Guijas  is  in  play 
that  the  other  Gunas  remain  dormant.  The  eternal  play  of  creation, 
preservation  and  destruction,  is  ever  equally  present  in  Her,  but  we  fail 
'  to  recognize  this  with  our  imperfect  vision.  Let  us  suppose,  for  instance, 
that  we  see  a  hungry  tiger  killing  a  deer.  We  think  that  it  is  the  play 
of  destruction  of  the  Mother  of  the  world.  But  a  keener  insight  into  the 
incident  will  make  it  clear  to  us  that  even  in  this  play  of  destruction  there 
equally  exists,  in  succession,  the  play  of  the  three  Gunas  of  Her  whose 
substance  is  the  three  Gunas.  We  see  only  the  destruction  of  the  deer. 
But  although  this  is  a  case  of  destruction  so  far  as  the  deer  is  concerned,  it 
is  a  case  of  preservation  if  we  look  at  it  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  tiger. 
For  the  tiger’s  body  is  preserved  by  the  blood  and  flesh  of  that  deer.  Again, 
the  generation  of  the  tiger’s  cub  is  due  to  the  maintenance  of  the  tiger’s 
body.  Consequently,  what  is  destruction  for  the  deer  is  creation  for  the 
tiger’s  cub,  just  as  our  own  eating  involves  destruction  of  the  seed-power 
of  the  tree,  preservation  of  ourselves,  and  creation  of  our  children.  It 
must,  therefore,  be  understood  that  in  Her  the  three  forms  of  play  of  the 
three  Gupas  exist  equally  and  always,  but  that  according  to  the  Prarabdha 
Karma  8  of  Jivas  they  appear  as  creation  to  some,  preservation  to  others, 
and  destruction  to  the  rest.  The  Mother’s  play  is  uniform,  but  with  this 
difference — that,  owing  to  diversity  in  the  Karma  of  Jivas,  the  nature  of 
that  play  is  different.4  She  is  the  aggregate  of  all  Saktis  whose  substance 
is  the  eternal  play  of  all  three  Gunas.  That  triple  play  of  Hers  does  not 
rest  for  a  single  moment.  It  is  only  the  blind  virion  of  Jivas  involved  in 
error  which  makes  it  appear  as  if  such  play  occurred  in  succession.  The 
same  water  which  quenches  the  thirst  and  gives  life  to  one  man  gives  death 
by  drowning  to  another.  What  are  we  to  understand  from  this — that 


1  Great  Prakjti.  *  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra.  *  Ripe  Karma. 
*  That  is,  it  is  either  creation,  preservation,  or  destruction. 


492 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


water  possesses  the  power  (Sakti.)  of  preserving  life,  or  that  it  has  the 
power  of  destroying  it?  Again,  fish,  tortoise,  crocodile,  shell-fish,  and  other 
aquatic  animals  are  bom  in  that  same  water  and  live  therein,  and  die  if 
taken  out  of  it  Are  we  to  understand  from  this  that  water  has  the  power 
of  creating  and  preserving  life?  The  same  sunshine  which  destroys  the  life 
of  the  wayfarer  oppressed  by  summer  heat  in  some  far-stretching  plain 
gives  life  to  the  cold  Himalayan  traveller  whose  limbs  have  been  stiffened 
by  the  fall  of  snow.  Say,  now,  does  this  indicate  the  life-destroying  power 
or  the  life-preserving  power  of  sunshine?  Without  this  sunshine,  trees, 
shrubs,  and  creepers  dwindle  and  die.  Again,  this  very  sunshine  draws 
water  from  the  earth  and  carries  it  to  the  solar  orb.  It  was  Narayana,1 
the  preserver  of  the  world,  who  destroyed  Ravapa,  Kumbhakarna, 
Kamsa,1  and  others  in  their  incarnations,  as  Rama  and  Kr$na.  His  name 
varies  accordingly,  and  is  suited  to  the  different  forms  of  His  play  in 
different  capacities.  The  energy s  which  draws  water  from  the  earth  is 
Raudra  4  or  terrible,  so  far  as  water  is  concerned.  The  same  energy  which 
previously  manifested  a  different  form  then  assumes  a  terrible  aspect  ‘  for 
the  purpose  of  drawing  water.  For  this  reason,  although  it  is  Saura  or 
solar  energy,  it  is  then  Raudra  or  terrible  energy.  Thus  sunshine  is  called 
Raudra  or  terrible.  The  play  of  His  forms  and  their  names  correspond  to 
the  play  of  the  Guijas.  Brother  Sadhaka,  consider  but  once  what  difference 
does  there  lie  between  this  Raudra  or  sunshine  and  Surya  or  sun.  Sun  is 
the  name  of  a  mass  of  compact  energy  *  solid  and  circular  in  form,  while 
Raudra  or  sunshine  is  the  name  of  the  rays  which  it  scatters  on  every  side 
of  it.  In  fact,  the  difference  between  the  sunshine  and  the  sun  is  the  same 
as  that  between  the  waves  of  the  sea  and  the  sea.  Just  as  in  the  sea,  water 
exists  in  a  collected  form,  so  in  the  solar  orb  energy  *  exists  in  such  form. 
Just  as  in  the  sea  single  waves  heave  eternally,  so  do  waves  of  energy  in 
the  solar  orb.  It  must,  therefore,  be  understood  that  wave  is  the  same 
thing  as  water,  and  sunshine  is  the  same  thing  as  sun.  The  solar  orb  lies 
above  (terrestrial  water)  at  a  distance  of  one  lakh  of  yojanas*  and  terrestrial 
water  lies  below  (the  sun)  at  the  same  distance.  If  the  sun  were  to  cease 
to  draw  this  water  from  the  earth  by  his  energy,  would  it  be  in  the 
power  of  water  to  rise  to  the  solar  orb  ?  Or  would  it  be  in  the  power 
of  anything  else  in  this  universe  to  raise  water  to  the  solar  orb? 
At  what  height  lies  that  Brahmamayi  who  is  hardly  known  to  Vedas  and 


1  Vi?nu.  1  Daityag,  or  demoniac  beings.  *  Tejas. 

4  Raudra  is  an  adjective  of  Rudra  or  Siva,  and  means  “  terrible  The 
season  why  sunshine  is  called  Raudra  or  “  terrible  ”  is  later  explained. 

*  Rudra  Mfirti. 

*  A  yojana  is  equal  to  eight  or  nine  miles,  and  a  lakh  equals  100,000. 


ON  MANTRA 


493 


Vedangaa,  and  worshipped  with  difficulty  by  Yogis  and  princes  of  Yogis— 
She  who  is  beyond  the  reach  of  mind  and  speech  of  even  Brahma,  Vispu. 
and  Maheivara,  and  who  is  above  the  three  Gunas?  Again,  at  what  depth 
does  the  insignificant  Jiva  lie — he  who  is  devoid  of  true  consciousness,1 * * 
full  of  Maya,  and  a  member  of  the  Samsara,  which  is  made  of  the  Gugas 
in  various  combinations?  Can  it  ever  be  in  the  power  of  the  Jiva  to  enter 
by  his  own  unaided  JivaSakti  *  into  Sivaiakd8?  Can  the  child  who  wishes 
to  rise  to  the  arms  of  its  mother  do  so  unless  the  gracious  mother  extends 
her  affectionate  arms  and  herself  raises  her  child  ?  Who  has  the  power  and 
courage  to  say  to  him  who  stands  in  this  limitless  field  of  the  universe  and 
desires  to  go  to  Her,  “  Go,  Sadhaka,  reach  safely  the  arms  of  the  Mother 
of  the  Dispeller  of  all  obstacles;4  I  stand  security  for  your  success?  ”  That 
alone  which  has  such  power  is  Mantraiakti.6  Both  Bhagavan  and 
Bhagavati,  therefore,  say,  “Just  as  Parabrahman  is  my  eternal  self,  so 
also  Sabdabrahman  *  (which  is  Mantraiakti)  is  my  eternal  self.”  Like 
sunshine,  which  is  the  energy  of  the  sun,  Mantraiakti  alone  is  able  to  raise 
the  Jivas  who  inhabit  this  universe  to  the  arms  of  Brahmamayi,  for 
Mantraiakti  is  Herself.  Mantraiakti  alone  can  lead  the  unconscious  Jlva- 
world  to  a  true  perception  of  Paramatma  by  endowing  it  with  that  con¬ 
sciousness  which  it  is.  For  this  reason  Mantraiakti  is  that  which  is  alone 
efficient  in  all  Sadhana,7  prescribed  in  the  Arya  Sastra,  or  to  secure  the 
Siddhi  spoken  of  in  it.  Just  as  a  lifeless  body  is  incapable  of  work,  so 
methods  and  processes  devoid  of  Mantraiakti  are  incapable  of  achieving 
anything  in  the  domain  of  Sidhana. 

In  my  brief  account  of  Mantra  in  the  First  Part  of 11  Tantra  tattva,”  • 
I  have  shown  that  the  Devata  presiding  over  a  Mantra  appears  in  a  two¬ 
fold  aspect — first  in  the  aspect  of  Vacaka  Sakti,  and  secondly  in  the  aspect 
of  Vacya  Sakti.  The  Vacya  Sakti  reveals  Itself  only  when  the  Vacaka 
Sakti  has  been  aroused  through  the  worship  of  the  Sadhaka.  Whatever 
may  be  the  appearance  of  the  Devata  presiding  over  a  Mantra,  such 
appearances  are  nothing  but  different  manifestations  of  power  *  of  Kula- 
kundalini 10  playing  at  the  aperture  in  the  Muladhara.  It  is  the  string  of 


1  Literally,  “  he  who  is  Jada 

*  The  Sakti  appertaining  to  Jivahood,  the  state  of  the  embodied  spirit. 

*  The  Sakti  appertaining  to  Sivahood.  4 *  Vighnahara,  a  name  of  Gape^a. 

4  The  potency  of  Mantra,  which  is  Devata. 

4  Supreme  Brahman  as  contrasted  with  the  Manifesting  Sabda  Brahman 

(Sound  Brahman). 

7  That  is,  spiritual  training,  practice,  and  ritual  of  all  kinds  which  are  the 

cause  of  spiritual  achievement  (Siddhi).  (See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

4  p.  273.  4  Vibhuti. 

14  The  Devi  of  that  name  whose  abode  is  the  Miladhara  Cakra  of  the  Jiva. 

(See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra  and  Arthur  Avalon’s  The  Serpent  Power.) 


494 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


fifty  letters  from  A  to  K?a  which  is  the  (rosary)  of  Aksas 1  of  Mother 
Sarasvati.  Out  of  these  fifty  letters  have  been  formed  the  nine  crorcs  *  of 
great  Mantras,  which  arc  the  sole  source  and  means  of  Siddhi  and  Sadhana.* 
A  Mantra  takes  different  forms  according  as  it  appears  as  seed,  sprout,  root, 
stem,  trunk,  branch,  twig,  leaf,  flower,  and  fruit.  Just  as  one  cannot  have 
leaf,  flower,  fruit,  twig,  and  so  forth,  without  first  sowing  the  seed,  so  one 
cannot  acquire  competence  *  for  the  reception  of  other  Mantras  without  first 
being  initiated  in  the  special  Mantra  of  the  Devata.*  For  this  reason  the 
Mantra  of  the  Devata  which  is  received  at  the  time  of  initiation  is  called 
Bijamantra,  or  seed-mantra.  The  great  Bija  or  seed  which  Parabrahman 
as  Guru  sows  in  the  field  of  the  Sadhaka’s  heart,  after  having  cleared, 
ploughed,  and  irrigated  it  with  the  water  of  His  grace.  The  Mantra 
formed  of  the  name  of  a  Devata  is  the  sprout  which  rises  out  of  that  great 
Mantra,  and  Tantrik  Sandhya,*  Gayatri,1  NySsa,4  Puja,8  and  Upacara- 
mantras.8  are  all  its  stems,  trunk,  branches,  and  twigs.  Hymns  of  praise  * 
and  homage 10  are  its  leaves  and  flowers ;  and  the  Kavaca,11  consisting  of 
Mantras,  is  its  fruit.  Just  as  all  seeds  are  contained  in  the  fruits,  and 
sprout,  trunk,  leaf,  flower,  and  so  forth,  are  contained  in  the  seed  in 
extremely  subtle  states,  so  all  BIjamantras  are  contained  in  the  Kavaca, 
which  is  the  fruit  of  Mantra;  and  Siddhi  and  Sadhana-iakti,1*  and  so  forth, 
are  also  contained  in  the  Bija  in  extremely  subtle  state.  Now,  to-day 
many  people,  through  ignorance  of  Sastric  principles,  think  that  Mantra  is 
the  name  of  the  words  by  which  one  expresses  what  one  has  to  say  to  the 
supreme  Divinity.  It  therefore  follows  that  I  may  submit  my  prayer  to 
Him  in  whatever  language  I  choose.  What,  then,  is  the  necessity  of  my 
using  the  ever  ancient  words  of  the  Sastra?  In  reply  to  this  we  would  at 
the  very  start  point  out  that  the  definition  which  has  been  given  to  Mantra 
by  those  who  hold  this  view  is  contrary  to  Sastric  principles,  and  conse¬ 
quently  incorrect.  In  defining  Mantra,  Sastra  says:  “  That  is  called 
Mantra,1*  from  the  Manana  or  meditation  of  which  arises  the  Universal 
special  knowledge,  that  is,  special  knowledge  embracing  the  whole  universe, 
or  realization  of  the  Monistic  truth  that  the  substance  of  the  Brahmanda14 
is  not  different  from  that  of  the  Brahman.  Man  of  mantra  comes  from 


I  Seeds  of  a  plant  used  for  rosaries.  *  A  crore  is  ten  million. 

*  See  note  ante.  4  Adhikara.  ‘  That  is,  the  Sadhaka’s  Ijfadevata. 

8  These  terms  are  explained  in  Arthur  Avalon’s  Introduction  to  T antra  Sastra. 

7  The  Mantra  by  that  name. 

8  Mantras  used  in  making  offerings  to  Devata*.  *  Stuti.  10  Vandana. 

II  The  protective  Mantra.  (See  Introduction  to  Tantra  £ astro) 

11  That  is,  the  Baku  generated  by  Sadhana. 

l*  Derived  from  the  combination  of  man  and  tra. 

14  Universe,  or  “  egg  of  Brahma 


ON  MANTRA 


495 


Manana,  which  leads  to  Trana,  or  liberation  from  the  bondage  of  Samsara 1 * * 
(fra  of  Mantra  comes  from  traija)  and  which  calls  forth  (Smantraga) 
Dharma,  Artha,  Kama,  and  produces  Moksa.* 

Putting  aside  unbelievers,  such  as  have  faith  in  the  ordinances  of  the 
Sastra  must  now  understand  that  to  be  mantra,  in  which  eternally  exists 
the  super-worldly  threefold  power  of  perceiving  the  Brahman  in  and 
throughout  the  Universe,  of  loosening  the  bonds  of  Samsara,*  and  of  call¬ 
ing  forth  Dharma,  Artha,  Kama,  and  Moksa.* 

Everyone  desires  to  practise  Sadhana  and  Bhajana,4  but  the  question 
is  whether  the  hard  labour  which  is  involved  will  bear  fruit  directly. 
Who  can  answer  this  question?  Faced  by  this  difficult  problem,  who  but 
Mantra  alone  can  proudly  and  loudly  declare,  “  Siddhi  comes  from  Japa,* 
Siddhi  comes  from  Japa,  Siddhi  comes  from  Japa  without  doubt  ”  ?  Who  has 
the  confidence  to  say:  “  If  Siddhi  is  not  achieved,  I  shall  be  responsible  ’’  ? 
Who  holds  such  dominion  over  the  three  worlds  as  to  be  able  to  stand 
between  that  Devata  who  is  sought  for  difficult  of  worship,  and  beyond 
the  reach  of  mind  and  speech  on  the  one  hand  and  the  Jfvasadhaka 
steeped  in  great  delusion  on  the  other,  and  say :  “  Sadhaka,  be  not  afraid, 
I  stand  surety  for  you  ”  ?  That  surety  is  Mantra  alone,  the  grantor  of 
Siddhi  and  redeemer  of  all  liabilities.  How  indomitable  must  be  the 
attractive  force  of  Mantra  that  it  is  able  of  its  own  strength  to  move  even 
the  great  Devata,  who  is  eternally  possessed  of  Siddhi,  and  so  stay  by  it* 
own  mighty  power  even  the  movements  of  Prakrti,  instilling  Sivahood  into 
the  Sadhaka  by  the  expulsion  of  hisjiva  nature;  thus  making,  without 
labour  on  his  part,  the  eight  forms  of  Siddhi  to  play  constantly  before  his 
eyes.  When  by  virtue  of  Siddhi  in  Mantra  vision  of  the  three  worlds  is 
opened  to  the  Sadhaka,  then  nothing  is  super-worldly  to  him.  When  by 
the  grace  of  Mahamaya  the  door  of  Her  Maya  which  makes  the  impossible 
possible  is  opened,  then  there  is  nothing  impossible  for  the  Sadhaka 
himself.  For  this  reason,  it  is  sheer  ignorance  to  suppose  that  Mantra  is 
mere  language.  Bijamantras,  in  particular,  cannot  possibly  be  language, 
for  they  convey  no  meaning  according  to  the  human  use  of  language. 


1  The  Samsara  is  the  coming  and  going,  the  cycle  of  birth,  action,  death, 
And  rebirth;  the  world  in  which  all  live  who  have  not  by  knowledge  of  the 
self  (atmajftSna)  and  the  extinction  of  the  will  to  separate  life  attained  liberation 
or  mok^a. 

'  That  is,  Religion,  Wealth,  Desire,  and  its  fulfilment  known  as  the  Tri- 
varga,  forming  with  mokfa  (liberation)  the  caturvarga,  or  four  aims  of  aU 
■sentient  beings.  (See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra  ) 

*  See  ante. 

4  As  to  S&dhana,  see  ante.  Bhajana  is  simple  worship. 

*  Japa,  oral  or  mental,  ‘'recitation”  of  Mantra,  which  is  here  stated  to 
lead  to  success  (Siddhi). 


496 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


They  are  the  Devata  Herself,1  who  is  the  highest  spiritual  object  for  us. 
They  are  neither  language,  nor  words,  nor  letters,1  nor  anything  which 
you  and  I  read  or  write  but  the  Devata,  who  is  eternally  possessed  of 
Siddhi,  and  is  the  Dhvani, 8  which  makes  all  letters  sound,  and  exists  in  all 
that  we  may  say  or  hear.  It  is  a  great  sin  even  to  think  that  that 
Devata  is  mere  letters.  The  fsastra  has,  therefore,  said:  “  They  go  to  hell 
who  think  that  Gurudeva  is  but  a  man,  Mantra  is  but  letter,  and  image  of 
a  Devata  is  but  a  stone.” 

Here  it  is  necessary  to  understand  with  some  clearness  the  nature4  of 
alphabets.5  Commonly  we  consider  alphabets  to  be  written  characters 
and  pronounced  letters.8  In  ordinary  usage  all  the  letters*  arc  called 
Ak?aras,8  but  “  Letters  ”  *  come  to  an  end  the  moment  they  are  pro¬ 
nounced,  and  never  wait  for  a  third  moment.  Viewing  the  matter  from 
this  philosophical  standpoint,  it  is  impossible  for  a  word,  a  sentence,  or 
language  in  general  to  be  a  combination  of  letters. 7  As,  for  instance,  in 
pronouncing  the  word  Kalaia  {pitcher),  when  La  is  pronounced  after  Ka, 
Ka  is  no  more;  and  when  Sa  is  pronounced  after  La,  La  is  no  more;  so 
that,  although  the  letters  Ka,  La,  and  Sa  are  successively  pronounced,  it  is 
impossible  to  pronounce  (all  at  once)  the  word  Kalaia.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  it  is  the  letters  which  are  pronounced,  and  not  the  words.  Only  the 
letters  linked  together  in  the  forms  of  words  as  willed  by  Isvara  are  pro¬ 
nounced  successively  one  after  another  according  to  rules  of  the  Saslras. 
It  has,  therefore,  been  said:  “  The  particular  letters  and  number  oflettcrs 
which  l£vara  has  ordained  should  convey  a  particular  meaning,  and  are 
capable  of  conveying  that  meaning,  do,  when  uttered  successively  in  the 
manner  fixed,  convey  that  meaning.”  The  truth  concerning  the  origin 
of  language  is  that  after  the  appearance  of  the  Vedas,  which  arc  the 
Sabdabrahmani  8  in  the  form  of  Mantras,  I$vara,  when  creating  for  the 
world  of  Jivas  languages  consisting  of  an  aggregate  of  sounds,®  willed  that 
such  and  such  letters,10  when  combined  together,  should  as  a  sound  convey 


1  Literally,  Svarupa  of  the  Devata.  Svarupa  literally  means  “  having  its 
own  fonn,”  as  opposed  to  the  existence  or  appearance  of  the  same  thing  in 
another  form. 

*  Vania  or  Ak$ara.  *  Unlettered  sound. 

4  Tattva.  *  Akjara. 

,  *  Varna.  Both  Varna  and  Alqara  (Letters)  are  Kundalini  made  articulate 

in  speech  and  visible  in  writing.  Akjara  also  means  an  alphabet  and  “  indes¬ 
tructible 

7  That  is,  there  cannot  be  a  combination  of  letters  any  more  than  there  can 
be  such  between  the  present  and  the  past. 

*  Sound  Brahman.  *  Sab  das. 


10  Varna. 


ON  MANTRA 


497 


such  and  such  a  meaning.1 * *  This  is  the  eternal  law  and  accomplished  fact. 
No  one  can  change  it  by  reasoning,  argument,  and  controversy,  and  cause 
a  revolution  in  language.  It  is  the  existence  of  this  eternal  law  which 
supports  the  world.  For  this  reason  the  Sastra  has  said :  “  The  three 
worlds  would  all  have  lain  in  deep  darkness  had  not  the  light  called 
Sabda  (sound)  blazed  throughout  the  entire  Samsara.”  The  sound  here 
referred  to  is  that  of  the  Vaidik  language  approved  of  by  the  SSstra.  It 
is  unnecessary  to  mention  other  languages,  lor  they  are  all  but  transfer* 
mations  *  of  that  great  Prakrti  the  Vaidik  language.  However  that  may 
be,  our  concern  at  present  is  with  the  original  language  only.  Here  also 
two  letters  cannot  be  pronounced  together.  How  can  we  admit  that  to 
be  an  Aksara a  (letters  of  the  alphabet),  which  is  created  at  one  instant,  is 
destroyed  at  the  next,  and  which  when  pronounced  has  disappeared? 
Yet  its  name  is  Aksara — that  is  to  say,  that  which  never  wastes,  is  never 
destroyed,  but  is  unbeginning,  unending,  ever  established,  and  everlasting. 
It  is  a  pity  that,  although  we  have  all  along  been  writing,  reading,  seeing, 
and  hearing  Aksaras 4 * *  we  do  not  know  as  yet  what  an  Aksara  is. 
Bhagavan  has  said:  “Just  as  Parabrahman  is  my  eternal  body, 
so  Sabdabrahman  is  also  my  eternal  body.”  Who  but  that  self-mani¬ 
fest  Bhagavan  whose  eternal  body  is  sound  can  set  forth  its  nature? 
In  the  Yogini  Tantra  it  is  said  that  at  the  beginning  of  creation, 
after  the  dissolution*  at  the  end  of  a  Kalpa,*  the  unborn  and  immortal 
charmer  of  the  mind  of  Mahakala7 * *  stood  with  warrior  frenzy  on  his  breast 
in  order  to  destroy  the  Daitya * named  Ghora,  who  had  been  bom  out  of 
a  part  of  Siva  in  the  course  of  the  joyful  play  of  the  two  Parabrahmans.* 
The  infinite  millions  of  Yoginis 10  bom  of  the  rays  of  that  lustrous  form  of 
the  Mother  of  the  World  then  began  to  dance  around  Her  in  mad  joy. 
The  war-music  of  Brahmaraayi  in  martial  play  began  to  resound  upon 
the  battlefield  of  the  entire  Universe.  Beating  time  to  that  music,  my 
Mother,  who  is,  as  it  were,  the  flag  of  victory  over  death,11  set  in  motion  a 
second  period  of  dissolution*  by  Her  untiring  dancing.  Of  that  time 
Mahakala  Himself  gives  the  following  account: 


I  The  relation  between  sound  and  its  meaning  is  permanent.  Language 

is  not  a  mere  matter  of  convention.  A  word  denotes  a  thing  because  it  must  do 
so :  Iivara  having  so  willed  it.  *  Vikfti. 

•  Aksara  means  both  a  letter  of  the  alphabet  and  “  indestructible 

4  See  ante.  *  Pralaya. 

•  A  Kalpa  is  a  period  between  two  dissolutions. 

7  Siva.  *  Demon. 

•  That  is,  Sakti  and  Siva,  who  though  in  fact  one,  manifest  in  these  dual 

forms.  19  A  class  of  Saitis  attendant  on  Kali. 

II  Whoever  reaches  Her  becomes  victorious  over  death. 

32 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


498 

“Seeing  that  very  wonderful  and  mad  dance  of  the  Mother  of  the 
world,  ray  mind  was  so  distracted  with  fear  that  (finding  no  other  means  of 
escape)  I  took  shelter  in  the  body  of  Herself  of  Universal  form,1 * * 4 * *  and  then, 
entering  the  path  of  Susumna,*  I  saw  and  heard  (inside  that  luminous  Brah¬ 
man  body)  things  which,  O  Devi,  were  all  so  wondrous  that  I  have  never 
seen  or  heard  the  like  again,  and  which  I  have  not  even  the  power  to  des¬ 
cribe.  Who  can  count,  O  Devi,  the  countless  millions  of  great  Universes,* 
which  constantly  move  within  Her  body  ?  Brahmas,  Visnus,  and  MaheSvaras* 
with  millions  of  arras,  heads,  and  differing  forms  (not  to  speak  of  Brahmas, 
Visnus,  and  MaheSvaras  with  four,  five,  or  a  thousand  heads)  exist  in  that 
body.  They  are  all  Creators,  Preservers,  and  Destroyers  of  different  Uni¬ 
verses,  and  possessors  of  all  great  powers."  O  Devi,  the  sight  of  all  these 
wonderful  things  overpowered  my  mind,  and  I  forgot  all  (which  had 
happened  in  the  past.  I  even  forgot  myself,  and)  I  wondered  who  I  was 
(Great  Dcvas  were  there,  but  none  seemed  to  notice  me) .  Nowhere  was 
I  asked  by  anybody  who  I  was,  (where  I  had  been),  and  whence  I  came. 
O  Devi,  in  the  World  of  that  Devi’s  body  I  thus  became  forgetful,  and 
doubts  arose  in  my  mind.  I  could  remember  nothing.  Moving  about 
in  this  way  for  a  million  years  I  (passed  your  navel  region  and)  reached  the 
lotus  of  your  heart.®  The  wonderful  and  beautiful  sight  which  I  saw  there 
I  have  not  the  power,  O  Parameivari,  to  describe  fully.  There  I  saw  the 
Sastras  which  arc  the  source  of  the  Dharma,  Artha,  Kama,  and  Moksa  of 
Jlvas.7  Of  that  Sastra  body  Agama  or  Tantra  (consisting  of  mantra)  is 
the  Paramatma,  Vedas  are  the  Jivatma,  Darianas  •  arc  the  senses,  Puranas 
are  the  body,  and  Smrtis  are  the  limbs.  O  fair-faced  Devi,  all  the  other 
Sastras  exist  as  hairs  of  Her  body.  In  short,  as  the  Jivatma  is  to  the 
Paramatma,  so  is  the  Veda  to  the  Tantra.  (That  is  to  say,  just  as  the 
existence  of  the  mind  or  the  Jivatma,  according  to  the  Nyaya  Philosophy, 
depends  on  the  existence  of  Atma,  so  the  existence  of  Veda  depends  on 


1  Viraj. 

*  The  Nadi,  or  channel  of  energy  of  that  name.  (See  Introduction  to  Tantra 
Sdstra  and  Arthur  Avalon’s  “  Serpent  Power  ”.) 

*  Brahmandas. 

4  There  is  not  only  one  Brahma,  Vi?nu,  and  Mahdvara.  Those  which  men 
worship  are  the  Devas  of  this  Universe,  but  there  are  countless  Universes,  each 
of  which  has  its  own  trinity  of  Devas. 

1  Aiivarya — that  is,  the  attributes  of  Iivara. 

4  That  is,  he  passed  the  Manipura  cakra  in  its  Universal  form,  and  reached 
the  heart  (anahata)  centre  of  the  Devi’s  body,  the  universe.  The  brackets  are 
the  Author’s. 

7  Religion  and  religious  merit,  wealth,  desire  and  its  fulfilment,  and 
liberation.  (See  Introduction  lo  Tantra  Sastra.) 

4  The  philosophies. 


ON  MANTRA 


499 


<fhe  existence  of  Tantra.  Just  as  in  the  body  of  the  Jiva  Paramatma  is  the 
,$akti 1  of  pure  consciousness,  so  in  the  body  of  the  Sastra  Tantra  is  the  Sakti 
of  consciousness  consisting  of  Mantras.  Just  as  all  activities  of  the  Mana- 
£akti a  with  Gunas,®  flow  constantly  through  the  JlvStmi,  so  all  Vicara. 
Saktis,4  consisting  of  knowledge  varying  according  to  competence  *  caused 
by  differences  in  the  three  Gunas,  Sattva,  Rajas,  and  Tamas  are  eternally 
seated  in  the  Veda.  Just  as  the  ultimate  goal  of  mind  is  immersion  in 
the  Parabrahman,  and  the  end  of  the  active  forces,  consisting  of  Sattva, 
Rajas,  and  Tamas,  is  to  disappear  altogether,  so  the  ultimate  goal  of 
Veda  is  to  be  merged  in  Tantra  through  the  knowledge  of  the  omnipre¬ 
sence  of  Brahman.  And  the  end  of  the  different  Adhikaras  4  caused  by 
differences  in  the  Gunas  is  to  be  totally  destroyed.)  Then,  O  Devi,  I  saw 
letters 7  of  dazzling  brightness  at  the  edges,  the  middle,  and  the  roots 
of  the  petals  of  that  lotus  of  Thy  heart,  embracing  Siksa,  Kalpa,  Nirukta, 
•Chandas,®  and  all  other  minor  Sastras,  givers  of  welfare  to  the  three 
worlds.  Then,  O  Devi,  I  saw,  within  the  pericarp  of  Thy  lotus,  hundreds 
of  groups  of  letters7  shining  most  brilliantly  like  millions  of  suns  and  moons, 
and  surrounded  by  circles  of  the  light  of  millions  of  great  fires.  Those 
luminous  letters,7  with  as  their  substance  the  true  and  lasting  Para^ 
brahman,  shone  with  the  brilliance  of  millions  of  suns,  were  cool  lik" 
millions  of  moons,  and  radiant  as  millions  of  fires.  O  Devi,  those 
luminous  letters 7  consisted  of  all  knowledge,  of  all  wonders,  of  all  sacri¬ 
fices,®  and  of  all  places  of  pilgrimage.10  (That  is  to  say,  when  the  subject 
of  Sadhana  is  the  form  of  Mantras,  the  letters 7  generate  knowledge  of 
the  science  of  all  things  in  the  Brahmanda.  It  is  a  matter  of  everyday 
experience  that  wonderful  events  arc  brought  about  by  changes  produced 
inevitably  in  the  laws  of  Nature  by  the  great  power  of  Mantragakti,11 
which  can  make  the  impossible  possible.  The  Sadhana  of  letters  leads 
unfailingly  to  the  vision  of  the  supreme  Dcvata,  a  result  which  the 

1  Force,  power,  or  active  principle. 

I  Mind-power,  or  more  strictly,  Salrti  in  form  of  the  lower  mind  or  Manas. 

*  Qualities.  (See  Introduction  to  Tantra  $dstra.) 

4  Powers  of  judgment  and  reasoning.  4  Adhikara. 

4  Adhikara  is  competency.  A  SSdhaka  is  entitled  to  worship  and  to 
"have  knowledge  according  to  such  competency.  This  competency  is  affected 
by  the  predominance  of  particular  Gupas  in  the  Sadhaka  himself.  When 
Brahmaifiana  is  attained,  then  all  question  whether  a  man  is  fit  for  this  or  that 
necessarily  disappears.  The  establishment  of  Adhikara  is  only  a  means  to  an 
•end,  and  with  die  attainment  of  the  end  (spiritual  knowledge)  disappears. 

7  Var^ia. 

*  These  are  four  VedaAgas,  dealing  with  orthography,  ritual,  etymology^ 
.and  prosody. 

*  Yajfias.  «  Tlrthas. 

II  The  potency  of  Mantra  or  Sakti  as  Mantra. 


500 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


performance  of  all  the  sacrifices  like  the  Aivamedha 1  and  so  forth  cannot 
give.  By  the  Sadhana  of  the  great  Mantra  of  letters  one  achieves  at  the 
same  time  the  fruits  of  seeing  and  touching  all  places  of  pilgrimage.  In  fact, 
we  go  not  too  far  in  saying  that  places  of  pilgrimage  themselves  desire  to 
be  sanctified  by  the  sight  and  touch  of  Great  men*  accomplished  in 
Mantras.  For  a  Sadhaka’s  body  is  not  an  ordinary  material  body,  but 
is  the  permanent  dwelling-house  of  Her  who  is  the  Mistress  of  all  places 
of  Pilgrimage,*  and  who  raises  the  fallen  and  grants  liberation  to  the 
three  worlds.  O  Devi,  in  these  letters  4  reside  all  religious  merit,6  all 
righteousness,*  all  knowledge,  and  all  Brahma-bliss.  (That  is  to  say,  by 
worshipping  them  one  performs  all  acts  of  religious  merit  at  one  and  the 
same  time.  One  achieves  by  a  single  means  all  forms  of  righteousness 
which  are  the  fruits  of  all  religious  acts;  and  one  acquires  that  knowledge, 
which  is  the  fruit  of  all  righteousness — namely,  that  Brahman  is  omni¬ 
present  throughout  the  universe;  for  such  an  one  the  Brahmanda  7  is  filled 
with  Brahma-bliss,  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  knowledge  of  Brahman.)  O 
Maheivari !  these  (Mantras)  are  evidence  *  of  the  existence  of  the  Vedas 
and  the  Sastras,  and  all  Jivas  are  themselves  the  supreme  energy8  of 
Brahman  and  the  supreme  blessing.  That  is  to  say,  many  may  easily  say 
feat  a  spiritual  Sastra  which  speaks  of  fruit  to  be  reaped  in  the  next 
world  is  unauthoritative.  But  even  unbelievers 10  will  shrink  from  calling 
a  Sastra  unauthoritative  the  fruits  of  which  are  viable  in  this  very 
world.  What  this  self-evident  Sastra  lays  down  as  authoritative  must 
also,  as  a  matter  of  course,  be  considered  as  such  by  all  people.  Even 
believers11  may  sometimes  be  led  to  doubt  the  authority  of  Veda 
because  they  sec  not  its  effects.  But  if  Tantra  which  produces  visible 
effects  admits  that  Veda  or  Vcdanga,  or  any  other  Sastra,  is  authorita¬ 
tive,  then  not  even  unbelievers  can  dispute  it,  for  Tantra  is  self-evident. 
It  is  also  self-evident  that  the  letters  w  which  are  Mantras  are  a  form 
of  evidence  of  the  existence  of  Jivas.1*  The  use  of  the  terms  guttural, 
palatal,  cerebral,  and  so  forth,  in  classifying  letters  *  relates  only  to  seats 
of  pronunciation,14  and  not  to  scats  of  generation.16  For  instance,  what  is 
pronounced  from  the  throat  is  called  guttural,  what  is  pronounced  from 


I  The  Vaidik  horse-sacrifice.  *  Mahapurujas.  *  Tirthas. 

4  Varna.  6  Punya.  •  Dhanna. 

7  Universe.  *  Pramajja,  vide  post.  *  Tejas. 

II  Nastika.  11  Astika. 

11  Each  individual  letter  is  a  Mantra. 

18  Sound  outwardly  expressed  manifests  itself  to  the  senses.  As  the  organs 
of  speech  are  not  the  seat  of  its  generation,  this  indicates  that  there  is  an  inner 
manifestation,  as  to  which  see  post. 

14  Ucckrana.  u  Utpatti. 


ON  MANTRA 


501 


the  palate  is  called  palatal,  and  so  forth.  The  word  pronunciation 1  also 
means  ut  (above),  charana  (to  cause  to  move) — that  is,  to  make  letters 1 
which  were  moving  below  to  move  above.  When  that  motion  above  is 
manifested  outwardly,  and  is  perceived  by  the  sense  of  hearing,  it  is 
■certain  that  the  motion  below  has  also  an  inward  manifestation  in  the 
most  subtle  supersensual  form.  It  is  this  deep  truth  which  has  been 
clearly  expressed  in  the  Sastra  as  follows:  In  the  Prapancasara3  it  is  said: 
“  When  through  obstruction  4  of  the  vocal  passage  a  child  utters  indistinct 
sounds,  it  is  Kulakunijalinl,  who,  playing  in  the  aperture  of  the  Mula- 
dhara  and  coiled  round  Susumna,  utters  indistinct  sounds  repeatedly.  It 
is  the  echo  of  this  indistinct  sound  which  comes  out  of  the  passage  of  the 
child’s  throat.” 

The  Prayogasara  says:  “O  Devi,  at  that  time  Antaratraa,  the  substance 
of  which  is  sound,4  Himself  utters  sounds.  It  is  these  sounds  of  His  which, 
in  combination  with  each  other,  appear  as  letters.” 

In  the  Saradatilaka  it  is  written:  “  Sabdabrahman  •  exists  in  all 
things  as  consciousness.  So  it  is  this  Sabdabrahman,  the  substance  of 
which  is  consciousness,  which  exists  in  the  bodies  of  living  beings  in  the 
form  of  Kundalinl,  and  then  appears  as  letters  in  prose,  poetry,  and  so 
forth,  being  carried  by  air  7  to  the  throat,  palate,  teeth,  and  other  places.” 

In  the  ViSvasara  Tantra  there  is  the  following:  “  Sadaiiva  Himself 
has  spoken  of  Him  as  Sabdabrahman.  That  Sabda  (sound)  is  in  the 
Anahata  Cakra.” 

And  in  the  second  Patala  of  the  same  book  it  is  said :  “  O  beloved 
■one!  in  the  Jlva’s  own  body  itself  blissful  Parabrahman  exists  as  Sabda¬ 
brahman,  whose  substance  is  all  Mantras.”  All  Mantras  arc  manifesta¬ 
tions*  of  Kulakuodahni  Herself,  who  is  the  Sabdabrahman,  whose 
substance  is  consciousness.  So  that  the  fact  that  they  are  pronounced 
(outwardly  manifested)  from  such  places  as  the  throat,  palate,  and  so 
forth,  does  not  prove  that  Sabda  (sound)  or  Mantras  are  generated  at 
such  places.  Although  Brahman  as  Sabda  is  not  in  reality  generated, 
yet  it  first  appears  at  the  Muladhara.  However  that  may  be,  what  is 
known  to  us  as  Sabda  (sound)  or  varna  (letter)  is  the  Sakti  which  gives  life 
to  Jivas,  so  that  without  doubt  Mantras  which  are  Sakti  *  are  eternal 
evidence  of  the  existence  of  Jivas.  Next  it  has  been  said  that  “  Mantras 
are  the  supreme  energy 10  of  Brahman  According  to  philosophers,  Sabda 


1  Uccarana.  *  Varna. 

*  See  vol.  iii  of  the  “  Tantrik  Texts,”  edited  by  Arthur  Avalon. 

4  This  may  also  refer  to  incomplete  formation.  4  Nada. 

*  Brahman  as  “  sound  ”  manifesting  the  Universe,  which  is  its  Brahma- 

•vibhuti.  7  Vayu. 

*  SvarupavibhOti .  •  Saktunaya.  10  Tqas. 


502  PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 

(sound)  is  everywhere  the  quality  (Gupa)  of  Akaia  (ether  and  space)- 
For  this  reason  many  people  are  under  the  impression  that  Sabda  (sound) 
is  produced  from  Space  (Akaia).  This  is  merely  observation  of  the  effect. 
According  to  Tantra  which  sees  the  cause  of  everything,  this  is  a  mistaken 
inference.  Tantra,  which  sees  through  the  subtlest  supersensual  things,1 
and  is  ever  in  favour  of  direct  perception,1  holds  that  Sabda  is  the  cause 
of  the  Universe,*  and  not  the  effect  of  anything.  The  production  of 
Sabda  from  Akaia  is  merely  its  outward  manifestation.  In  reality  Sabda 
eternally  exists  as  Brahman. 

In  the  Kamadhenu  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Matfkasakti,4  consisting  of 
the  fifty  letters,®  from  A  to  Ksa,  is  the  seed  of  all  things  moving  or  non- 
moving.  Of  these  letters,®  again,  Visarga®  is  Sakti,  and  Bindu 1  is 
Purusa,  and  in  the  Ajapamantra*  of  Prakrti  and  Purusa  in  union 
She  *  is  undifferentiated  Purnabrahman.10  O  Devi,  from  letters  which  arc 
Mantras 11  arc  bom  Prajapati,  Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Rudra,  the  Destroyer 
of  the  world.” 

“  It  is  true  and  certain  that  supreme  Kulakunqlalim  Herself,  who 
is  the  fifty  letters,®  from  A  to  Ksa,  has  given  birth  to  this  entire  universe, 
consisting  of  moving  and  non-moving  things.” 

In  the  Matrkodaya  it  is  said:  “Isvara  is  the  author’1  of  Vedas,. 
Mahaysis  (great  seers)  are  the  authors  of  Puranas,  but  in  no  Sastra  is  it 
said  that  there  is  any  author  of  Her.  Matrka  Devi,  who  is  letter,  is, 
therefore,  not  created,  but  self-existent.11  (For  this  reason  a  name  of 
Kulakundalini,  the  Mantradevata  whose  substance  is  letters,  is  Matrka— 
that  is  to  say,  the  Generatrix  of  these  infinite  crores  of  universes.  It  is 
not  possible  for  Her  to  have  a  father  and  a  mother.  She  is,  therefore, 
called  only  by  the  name  of  Matrka,  the  Mother.  She  is  the  Mother  of 
all,  and  not  the  child  of  any.)  Just  as  in  space14  waves  of  sound 
are  produced  by  movements  of  air,16  so  also  in  the  space15  inside 


I  Tattvas.  1  Pratyaksa.  1  Brahman^a. 

4  Matfka,  which  is  an  adjective  derived  from  Mother,  means  the  letters 
of  the  alphabet. 

®  Varna.  4  The  h  breathing  with  two  parts. 

.  1  The  nasal  breathing  with  one  point.  1 

®  That  is,  the  Mantra  of  inhalation  and  expiration. 

*  That  is,  MatfkSiakti.  10  Perfect  Brahman.  u  Mantramaya. 

II  Karta:  here  only  in  the  sense  that  the  world  got  it  through  him; 
see  pest. 

11  Svayambhu.  14  Akaia,  or  ether. 

15  Literally,  by  strikes  and  counter-strikes  of  air  (vayu). 


ON  MANTRA  508 

the  Jlva’s  body  currents  of  sounds  flow  owing  to  the  movements 1  of  the 
vital  air,*  and  its  inward  and  outward  passage  as  inhalation  and  exhalation. 
There  is  no  generation  of  sound  in  space.*  Sound  is  only  manifested 
therein.  Every  intelligent  man  will  understand  that  this  manifestation 
of  the  gross  4  form  of  sound  is  impossible  unless  sound  exists  in  space  *  in 
a  subtle  *  form,  which  is  the  permanent,  separate  root  of  gross  sound. 
Such  people,  however,  as  want  to  explain  away  the  universe  with  its 
fourteen  worlds  by  reading  only  the  history  of  India  or  the  Science  of 
language  0  may  And  scepticism  more  agreeable  to  them  than  the  taxing 
of  their  brains  with  such  an  extremely  remote  question  as  “  whence  come 
sounds  ** 1  in  space  ?  3  They  satisfy  themselves  by  saying  that  it  is  the  law 
of  nature  that  sound 1  should  be  produced  in  space,3  and  nothing  can  be 
said  in  respect  of  that  which  is  a  natural  law.8  We,  however,  have  no 
faith  in  the  words  of  those  who  are  so  pleased  to  put  such  implicit  faith 
in  nature.  For  we  think  that  in  reality  nature  as  a  thing  in  itself  does 
not  exist.  The  existence  of  those  qualities  and  properties  in  a  thing 
*  which  constitute  such  thing  is  its  nature.  If,  therefore,  one  says,  “  A 
thing  is  produced  by  nature,”  does  he  answer  the  question  why  it  is  so 
produced  ?  To  say  that  a  thing  happens  by  nature  is  to  say  that  it  happens 
because  it  happens.  Such  a  statement  indicates  no  search  for  truth,  but  only 
an  attempt  at  escape.  In  fact,  Sastra  (Scripture)  is  for  those  people  only 
whose  minds  have  become  restless  with  the  desire  to  know  the  truth. 
Thoge  who  have  understood  that  the  manifestation  of  sound 7  in  space 0  is 
an  effect,  and  docs  not  indicate  that  space  is  the  cause  of  sound,  arc  hardly 
likely  to  find  peace  and  satisfaction  in  the  statement  that  sound  is  the 
quality  of  space.3  What  they  want  to  know  is  the  real  truth,  supersensuai 
though  it  be.  But  it  is  not  within  the  power  of  any  Jiva  to  open  the  door 
which  hides  that  deep  truth  from  us.  Nevertheless,  the  pain  which  is 
caused  by  ignorance  of  that  truth  is  unbearable.  For  this  reason  Bhagavan, 
who  is  the  creator  of  all  things,  and  sheds  His  mercy  on  all  who  seek 
it,  has  Himself  revealed  in  T antra,  for  the  benefit  of  the  three  worlds, 
what  He  Himself  saw  in  the  eternal  body  of  waves  of  existence,"  con¬ 
sciousness,10  and  bliss 11  of  Her  who  is  all-merciful.  He  has  said  that  in  the 
eternal  body  of  the  Devi,  Mantras  also,  in  the  form  of  letters,10  are  eternal 
Brahman,  full  of  energy 13  and  aspects  of  Herself.  Mantras  which  are  seeds 11 

I  literally,  by  strikes  and  counter-strikes  of  air  (vayu). 

*  PrSnavayu.  *  Alcana,  or  ether. 

4  Sthula.  *  Sukpna. 

•  Bhajapariccheda.  *  Sabda. 

0  Svabhava.  Ia  other  words,  it  is  the  nature  of  the  thing,  and  there  is  an 
end  of  it.  "Sat.  10  CSt.  u  Ananda. 

II  Varyas.  *»  Tejas.  14  Blja. 


506 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


be  said  that  Mantra  has  been  created  by  Brahman.  Rather  is  it  that 
the  Parabrahman  appears  as  Mantra.  For,  although  Brahman  is  the 
Creator  of  the  world,  He  is  not  the  Creator  of  Himself.  Creation  of 
Brahman  is  impossible,  for  He  is  without  beginning  and  ever-existent.  For 
this  reason  Sastra  concludes  that  He  appears  to  and  disappears  from  the 
view  of  the  world  according  to  the  will  of  Her  who  is  will  itself.  Just  as 
in  the  physical  world  Bhagavan  has  incarnated  Himself  as  Rama,  Kpspa, 
and  so  forth,  so  in  the  world  of  Dharma 1 *  also  He  *  has,  through  Samadhi  or 
spiritual  knowledge,  manifested  Himself  as  Sastra,3  which  is  Sabdabrahman, 
for  the  severance  of  the  bonds  of  ignorance.4  As  &yamasundara,s  whether 
in  His  four-armed  or  two-armed  appearance,3 *  residing  in  Vaikunfha 7  or 
Goloka,8 *  incarnated  as  Rama  or  Krsrta,*  so  the  luminous  Mantra  form, 
existing  in  the  beautiful  dark  blue 10  limbs,  made  of  massive  consciousness, 
of  Her  whose  substance  is  consciousness,  and  in  every  undulation  of  Her 
supreme  beauty  appears  to  the  world  as  Sastra,  which  is  Sabda- 
brahman.11 

At  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  the  Universe  the  luminous  bud  of 
Mantras  blossomed  and  created  the  fourteen  worlds,  which  are  the  petals 
of  its  flower.  It  is  the  fragrance  of  its  pollen  which  is  existence,1*  conscious¬ 
ness,1*  and  bliss,14  which  fills  the  three  worlds  with  delight  After  the 
greater  dissolution,13  Brahma,  the  lotus-bom,13  appeared  in  the  centre  of 
the  thousand-petallcd  lotus,  which  crowned  the  stem  issuing  from  the 


1  Here  the  spiritual  world.  *  As  Yogin. 

3  He  appears  to  the  mind  of  the  Yogin  who  is  Bhagavan  as  Sastra. 

4  Avidya-  3  Vi?nu.  3  Murti. 

I  The  abode  of  Visnu  (Visno hp aramarii  padara) ;  a  heaven  of  enjoyment 
with  its  celestial  dty,  jewelled  dwellings,  and  aerial  can  (vimaaa),  as  described 
in  Chapter  XXIV  of  Padma  Purana. 

f  The  abode  of  light  (go-jyotih),  a  white  circular  ring  of  resplendent  light, 
like  a  thousand  moons:  purity  itself  (suddha  tattva),  surrounded  by  transludd 
waters  situate  in  Vaikuntha,  the  abode  of  the  flute-playing  Kp?na  and  of 
Radhika  Devi;  a  heaven,  where  there  are  many  Dcvas  offering  homage  to 
Vi$pu  Sattvarupa  amidst  the  chanting  of  Vedas  and  of  the  musical  modes  known 
as  Ragas,  as  described  in  Chapter  XXVIII  of  the  Brahmavaivarta  Purana.  In 
the  Tantra  Siva  says,  “  I  know  of  no  place  which  is  better  than  Goloka  ” 
(Yadrupam  golokam  dhama  tadrupam  nasti  mamake  jaanc). 

3  Mflrd.  13  Syamasundara. 

II  The  meaning  of  this  passage  is  that  just  as  Vignu  is  the  mulasvarupa 

(root-being)  of  those  incarnations  of  His  which  are  called  Rama,  Kftna,  and 

so  forth-  so  the  luminous  mantramurti  is  the  mulasvarupa  of  Sistra,  which  is 

Sabdabrahman. 

11  Sat.  13  Cit.  14  Ananda. 

**  Mabapralaya.  There  are  minor  and  intermediate  dissolutions  (pralaya). 

13  Brahma  was  bom  on  the  lotus  which  sprang  from  Viflju’s  navel. 


LETTERED  AND  UNLETTERED  SOUND 


50? 


navel  of  Bbagavan  NSrayapa,1  lying  in  the  causal  *  sea.  He  then  medi¬ 
tated  the  creation  of  a  Universe  suited  to  the  age,  and  became  immersed 
in  Samadhi,*  achieved  through  the  Yoga  of  meditation  upon  Brahmamayl.4 
It  was  then  that  Veda,  which  is  Sabdabrahman,  appeared  of  itself  in  the 
firmament  of  His  heart,  and,  issuing  out  with  His  breath,  assumed  four 
visible  forms  corresponding  to  RJc,  Yajur,  Sama,  and  Atharva,  and  stood 
before  him.  After  learning  the  principles8  of  creation,  preservation,  and 
destruction  from  the  mouths  of  those  incarnate  Srutis,®  Brahma  set  about 
His  work.  Many  make  abundant  efforts  to  explain  away  this  perfectly 
true  account  of  creation  by  adorning  it  with  such  adjectives  as  “  Mystery,” 
“  Metaphor,”  and  other  far-fetched  terms.7  But  they  do  not  care  to  under¬ 
stand  that  the  day  that  this  Tattva  1  vanishes  you  and  I,  along  with  these 
infinite  Universes,  will  all  vanish,  one  knows  not  where.  Although 
Brahma  is  Himself  perfcct-Brahman,  yet  He  appeared,  as  a  Mother  by  the 
assumption  of  the  form  of  Narayana,  and  Himself  in  play  •  took  birth  in  the 
body  of  the  lotus  sprung  from  his  own  10  Navel,  and  thus  became  the  first  and 
*  yet  bcginningless 11  Jiva  in  the  created  Brahmanda.11  The  same  process 
which  He  adopted  at  the  time  of  His  own  appearance  is  that  which  exists 
eternally  in  the  creation  of  the  world  of  Jivas,  chief  amongst  whom  arc  the 
Suras,  Asuras,  Kinneras,  and  Naras.1*  Narayana  stands  in  the  place  of 
a  Mother  to  Him.  The  Brahmanda  is  the  issue  of  His  womb.  Maya 
is  the  womb.  The  causal 14  sea  is  the  mass  of  water  inside  that  womb. 
The  stalk  issuing  out  of  the  navel  of  Bhagavan  stands  for  the  umbilical 
cord,'8  and  the  thousand-petallcd  red  lotus  for  the  flower  on  that  stalk. 
And  Brahma,  the  grandfather  of  the  world,  who  is  Himself  placed  on 
that  lotus  as  its  fruit,  stands  for  the  child.  Sakti  at  first  held  the  vast 
world-child  in  Her  womb,  and  became  the  Mother  of  Brahma,  and  then, 
as  the  power  of  preservation  appeared,  as  Narayana,  and  assumed  the 
form  of  Jagaddhatri.14  The  child  in  the  mother’s  womb,  on  gaining. 


I  Vi?nu.  *  Karana.  *  Yoga,  ecstasy. 

4  The  Devi  as  Brahman.  8  Tattva. 

4  That  is,  the  four  incarnate  Vedas. 

7  Adhyatmika. 

8  That  is,  creation,  maintenance  and  dissolution,  for  the  existence  of  the 
world  is  bound  up  with  the  existence  and  operation  of  these  Tattvas. 

•  Lila.  The  world  is  the  play  of  the  Brahman. 

14  Because  Brahma  and  Visnu  are  but  aspects  of  the  One. 

II  AnSdi.  11  Universe  or  mundane  “  Egg  of  BrahxnS  ", 

“  That  is,  the  Devas,  their  enemies,  a  class  of  Devayonis  called  Kimnara 
and  men  (Nara). 

14  Karana.  18  Literally  the  mother’s  ni^i. 

11  The  Devi  as  supporter  of  the  Universe. 


508 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


consciousness,  remembers  the  events  of  the  past  lives;  so  the  child  in 
Brahmamayi 1  womb  began,  on  the  rising  of  consciousness,  to  remember 
all  previous  acts  of  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  in  other 
Kalpas.1  Just  as  the  memory  of  previous  lives  then  arises  of  itself  in 
the  child’s  mind,  so  Sruti  3  appeared  of  itself  in  the  mind  of  Brahma. 
Again,  as  memory  is  the  Atma-Sakti 4  in  a  Jlva’s  mind  so  Sruti  is  the 
Sakti  of  consciousness  in  Brahma’s  mind.  The  hidden  state  of  this 
Sakti  of  consciousness  is  Dhvani,  and  its  outward  manifestation  is  sound.* 
That  Dhvani  which  is  as  it  were  the  first  shoot  *  of  sound  is  the  Jiva’s 
vital 7  force. 

In  the  Prapancasara  it  is  said:  “The  Universe  of  immovable  and 
movable  things  is  linked  together  and  pervaded  by  this  Sakti,  which  is 
Dhvani.  It  is  this  Sakti  which  is  called  by  such  names  as  Nada,8  Prana,® 
Jivaghosa,®  and  so  forth.”  Again:  “It  is  this  great  Sakti  whom  Yogis 
know  as  KulakundalinI  moving  in  the  heart,  and  it  is  She  who  ever  makes 
an  indistinct  and  sweet  murmuring  sound,10  like  the  humming  of  a  black 
bee,  at  the  aperture 11  in  the  Muladhara.”  It  is  with  reference  to  this 
Dhvani  that  the  Satcakratattva  has  said : 

“  KulakundalinI  lustrous  as  the  flash  of  a  hundred  lightnings  resides 
in  all  hearts,  and  is  ever  immersed  in  play  in  the  Muladhara 18  lotus.  She 
it  is  whose  sweet  constant  murmuring  humming  sounds  like  that  of  a 
swarm  of  black  bees  intoxicated  with  a  draught  of  honey,  and  who  is 
Dhvani.  Her  voice  it  is  which  sounds  in  the  words  of  soft  poetry,  and  is 
•clearly  audible  in  styles  of  Bheda  and  Atibhcda  composition.13  Again,  it 
is  the  heaving  of  the  Dhvani  which  causes  the  alternate  inspiration  and 
expiration  of  all  Jivatmas  in  this  infinite  world.  [By  the  above  reference 


1  The  Devi.  3  The  period  between  two  dissolutions. 

3  The  revealed  Scripture.  (See  Introduction  to  7 antra  Sistra). 

I  Here  that  which  constitutes  individuality.  *  Sabda. 

*  That  is,  the  earliest  manifestation.  Dhvani  is  unlettered  sound. 

7  Safljivani. 

•  Sound.  1  The  vital  force  manifesting  in  breath.  10  Dhvani. 

II  The  Deri  lies  close  to  the  aperture  in  the  Su^unma. 

13  The  lowest  cakra  of  that  name.  {See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra  and 
Arthur  Avalon’s  “The  Serpent  Power.”) 

13  Bheda  and  Atibheda  arc  two  modes  of  composition  (Alankara).  Bheda 
is  the  mode  in  which  difference  is  posited  between  things  which  are  really  the 
same.  Thus,  to  say  that  a  woman  possesses  celestial  beauty  not  to  be  found 
on  earth  is  bheda,  because  a  distinction  is  made  between  the  beauty  of  the 
woman,  which  is  celestial,  and  terrestrial  beauty,  although  no  such  distinction 
really  exists.  Atibheda,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  mode  in  which  equality  is 
posited  between  different  things;  as,  for  instance,  to  speak  of  a  woman’s  face 
as  a  moon  is  atibheda,  because  an  equality  is  here  established  between  a  face 
and  the  moon  which  are  really  different  things. 


LETTERED  AND  UNLETTERED  SOUND 


509- 


is  made  to  the  Sthula  or  gross  form  of  Kulakupdalini.  The  book  then 
proceeds  to  define  her  Suksma  or  subtle  form.]  She  who  dwells  within 
this  gross  form  as  the  supreme  extremely  subtle  Kala, 1  who  is  conscious¬ 
ness  shedding  the  sweetness  of  everlasting  bliss  and  surpassing  in  beauty 
masses  of  lightning;  She  by  whose  light  the  whole  visible  sphere  of  the 
Universe  is  lighted,  is  that  Parame&vari  Kulakundalini,  who  is  eternal 
knowledge,  and  the  ISvarl 8  of  all.” 

Sadhakas  will  now  understand  that  Kulakundalini  has  two  aspects — 
namely,  a  Sthula,  or  gross  form  with  attributes,3  in  which,  like  the 
humming  of  a  moving  swarm  of  black  bees,  She  indistinctly  utters  the 
fifty  letters  and  a  Suksma,  or  subtle  form,  which  is  attributeless,1  and  is 
existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss.*  It  is  the  Sthula  form  appearing  in 
different  aspects  as  different  Devatas,  which  is  the  presiding  Dcvata  of  all 
Mantras;  and  it  is  the  Suksma  form,  which  is  that  one  Devata  towards 
whom  all  Sadhakas’  worship  is  directed.  For  this  reason  the  door  of  the 
temple  of  the  Mother  of  the  World  is  not  opened  so  long  as  Kulakundalini,. 
•the  snake  sleeping  in  the  bed  of  Svayambhu,*  is  not  awakened;  and 
Siddhi  in  Mantra  is  not  gained  so  long  as  the  Mantra  is  not  awakened.7 
However  that  may  be,  we  seek  only  to  establish  here  that  Sabda  (sound), 
which  is  the  manifestation  *  of  Dhvani,  is  nothing  but  a  manifestation  of 
the  Sakti  of  consciousness  itself,  and  £abda  is  eternally  present,  full  of 
lustre,  in  the  lustrous  eternal  body  of  the  Mother  of  the  World.  Because 
during  creation  it  is  manifested  as  the  property  •  of  AkaSa,10  it  is  not  to  be 
inferred  that  it  is  created  with  the  creation  of  Akaia,10  and  disappears 
with  the  dissolution  11  of  the  latter.  Those,  again,  who  believe  that 
AkaSa  10  is  a  permanent  thing  can  have  no  ground  for  objecting  to  our 
view.  However  much  opinions  may  differ,  it  is  certain  that  Veda 
consisting  of  Mantras  is  formed  of  Dhvani  and  Varga 18  together.  For 
this  reason,  drawn  by  the  Samadhi18  Yoga  of  Brahma,  Brahmamayi 

I  Mulaprakrti,  which  is  here  regarded  as  one  with  the  Brahman. 

8  Female  of  Iivara,  “  Lord  ". 

*  Sagupa.  1  Nirguna.  *  Sat,  cit,  ananda. 

•  “  The  self-existent  one,”  referring  to  the  Linga  of  that  name  in  the 
Muladhara,  around  which  Kundali  is  coiled. 

7  The  awakening  of  the  Mantra  is  called  Mantracaitanya.  Unless  the 
Mantra  is  awakened  in  and  by  the  consciousness  of  the  Sadhaka,  the  Mantra 
thus  becoming  a  part  and  parcel  of  the  consciousness  of  the  Sadhaka  himself  it 
is  mere  dead  sound  and  letter  without  fruit  (Siddhi).  It  is  true  that  Sakti  is 
there  as  everywhere,  but  it  must  be  rendered  conscious  or  realized  to  the 
Sadhaka. 

■  literally,  “ effect”.  *  Guna.  10  Space:  ether. 

II  Pralaya.  18  Letters;  that  is,  audible  Dhvani. 

18  Vide  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 


310 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


appeared  in  His  heart  as  Veda,  which  is  the  Sabdabrahman,  and  to 
instil  into  Him  the  notion  of  the  process  of  creation,  issued  out  of  His 
nostrils.  The  phrase  “Brahma  is  the  author  of  Veda”  means  that 
Brahma  is  the  author  of  the  appearance  of  Veda  in  the  sense  that  a  Jiva 
is  the  author  of  his  expiration  and  inspiration  of  breath.  In  truth,  Veda 
eternally  exists  as  Sabdabrahman,1 *  and  is  not  created  by  Brahma.  Thus 
Veda  is  not  the  creation  of  any.8 *  The  effect 3  of  the  Dhvani  of  Kula- 
kupdalini  in  the  body  of  livara  is  Veda,  and  the  effect  of  the  Dhvani  of 
KulakuijiJalini  in  the  body  of  Jiva  is  Sabda *.4  In  that  Sabda  is  every 
.form  of  Mantra,  which  is  that  which  gives  vitality  to  Jiva. 

According  to  natural  law,  a  great  Mantra  repeats6 7  itself  when 
inspiration  and  expiration  through  the  circular  movement  of  the  vital 
.  air  of  Jiva  revolves  the  wheel  of  Dhvani.  It  is  this  Mantra  which  is 
called  Ajapii-Mantra,  and  it  is  so  called  either  because  it  repeats 6  itself 
naturally  without  any  effort  on  the  part  of  Jiva,  or  because  there  is  no 
other  Japa8  of  a  Mantra  which  is  superior  to  this  one.  This  Ajapa  is 
the  full  life-time  of  a  Jiva.’  For  this  reason  it  is  said :  “  Being  Ajapa 
(one  who  docs  not  repeat  any  Mantra)  during  Ajapa  (life-time),  I  have 
neither  done  Japa  of  any  Mantra  nor  done  any  Tapas.8  My  Ajapa 
(life-time)  is  about  to  end,  and  yet  my  Ajapa  (the  state  of  being  without 
Japa)  does  not  end.”*  As  Brahma  when  on  the  navel -lotus  of  Bhagavan 
thought  of  previous  Kalpas,10  so  a  Jiva  when  in  his  mother’s  womb  con¬ 
stantly  thinks  of  his  past  lives.  At  that  time  waves  of  deep  thought, 
such  as,  “Who  am  I?”  “Where  was  I?”  “Whence  have  I  come?  ” 
“Whose  am  I?”  “Who  is  mine?”  and  so  forth,  arise  in  thejiva’s 
mind.  These  waves  of  thought  mingle  with  the  Prapaiakti.11 * * * *  That 
Priu}tdakti  in  its  turn  within  the  two  Nadis  Ida  and  Pingala  strikes  and 
strikes  again  against  the  Kundalini  Cakra  below  the  abdominal  fire 18  of 
the  belly.  Stung  by  those  blows  dealt  by  Herself,  the  sleeping  snake 


1  The  sound  or  manifested  Brahman. 

8  That  is,  it  is  apaurugeya.  8  Parinama. 

‘Veda  is  Dhvani  uttered  by  Brahma,  and  Sabda  is  Dhvani  uttered 

■by  Jiva. 

6  Literally,  “is  made  Japa  of”. 

1  Vide  last  note  and  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 


7  For  the  Mantra  consists  of  the  breathing  and  expiration  which  ceases 

:  at  death. 


•  Devotion,  austerity,  etc. 

Introduction  to  Tantra  tiastra. 


As  to  Japa  or  “recitation”  of  Mantra,  see 


•  A  play  on  the  word  Ajapa.  Ajapa  means  “  life-time "  because  life 

-exists  only  so  long  as  it  is  repeated.  Next  Ajapa  may  be  made  to  mean  “  one 

-who  does  not  perform  Japa,”  and  also  “  not  Japa  i.e.,  the  state  of  bring 

-without  Japa. 

18  See  post. 


11  Vital  force. 


11  Jajharagnl. 


LETTERED  AND  UNLETTERED  SOUND 


511 


Kulakuodalini  then  hisses  loudly.1 * *  The  Matfkas,*  or  fifty  letters*  of 
the  alphabet  from  A  to  Ksa*  are  only  the  manifested  state  of  that 
hissing  Dhvani.4 * * 7  It  is  with  the  help  of  these  letters 8  that  the  thoughts 
of  the  Jiva  in  the  womb  relating  to  past  lives  is  reflected  in  waves  of 
language;  *  and  then  the  JTva’s  mind  *  sees  with  mental  eyes  and  hears 
with  mental  ears.*  When  at  birth  upon  the  bursting  of  the  womb  the  doors 
■of  all  the  senses  of  the  Jiva  are  opened,  then  that  internal  Dhvani  *  passes 
•out  through  the  passage  of  the  throat.  When  Jiva  sitting  in  the  dark 
prison-chamber  of  the  womb  meditates  on  the  deep  past  history  of  itself,1 
■then,  as  in  the  case  of  dream,  it  is  mind  alone  which  works  and  judges 
everything.  The  final  conclusion  to  which  that  judgment  leads  is  also 
related  in  the  Sastras  as  follows: 

In  the  Bhagavatigita  in  Mahabhagavata  Devi  says  to  Himalaya : 

“Jiva,  dejected  at  the  remembrance  of  the  work  of  his  bodies  in 
previous  births,  then  bethinks  himself  over  the  matter  as  follows : 

“  i.  In  this  way  suffering  many  sorrows  in  previous  lives,  I  have 
,  again  taken  birth  on  earth;  for  whilst  in  the  Samsara  I  failed  to  worship 
Bhagavati  Durga,  the  Dispeller  of  misery,  but  merely  maintained  relatives 
with  money  earned  by  unfair  means. 

“  2.  If,  however,  I  am  this  time  delivered  from  any  suffering  in  the 
womb,*  no  work  will  I  do  but  the  service  of  MahcSvari  Durga,  ever 
worshipping  Her  with  self-restraint. 

“  3.  By  my  useless  desires  for  wife,  children  and  the  like,  I  have  over 
and  over  again  bound  myself  to  the  Samsara,9  and  thus  worked  only  evil 
for  myself.  Therefore  is  it  that  I  am  suffering  this  intense  pain  in  the  womb. 
I  therefore  do  resolve  that  I  will  no  more  uselessly  serve  this  Samsara. 

“  4.  Thus  suffering  from  various  sorrows  according  to  his  Karma,19 
the  Jiva  enveloped  in  the  womb  is  expelled  by  the  labour  wind  u  and 
crushed  through  the  pelvic  bone.  And  then,  widening  his  inner  path, 


I  Gaijana.  Literally,  “roars  ”. 

*  A  name  for  the  letters  as  embodying  mother-sound. 

*  Varna.  *  Subtle  sound  (see  ante).  *  Vak. 

*The  meaning  appears  to  be  that,  though  being  in  the  womb,  the  Jiva 

has  no  articulate  speech,  yet  all  thinking  is  by  the  aid  of  words  whether 
-expressed  or  not.  At  that  stage  it  is  the  mind  and  not  the  outward  senses 

which  are  working. 

7  Literally,  “  on  the  profound  past  tattva  of  his  Atma  ”. 

*  According  to  Hindu  notioni,  the  child  in  the  womb  endures  great  pains, 
'which  are  forgotten  on  birth. 

9  See  ante.  10  Actions  and  their  effects.  (Sec  Introduction  to  Tanira  $&stra). 

II  Praaava-vayu. 


512 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


and  smearing  himself  all  over  with  fat  and  blood,  he  falls  on  earth,  as  it 
were,  a  sinner  in  some  terrible  Hell.  Whereupon,  deluded  by  My  Mayi 
the  Jiva  forgets  all  the  sorrows  experienced  during  his  stay  in  the  womb, 
and  then  exists  for  some  little  time  an  insignificant  mass  of  flesh. 

“  5.  So  long  as  the  outside  of  the  child’s  susumna  nadi 1  remains 
covered  with  mucus,*  he  cannot  utter  words  with  clearness.” 

We  arc  here  obliged  to  make  mention  of  a  modem  saying  in  this 
connection,  hoping  to  be  pardoned  by  Sadhakas  for  this  digression. 

Nowadays  a  number  of  poets  and  men  learned  in  its  science  say  that 
the  excruciating  pain  of  the  mother  in  child-birth  has  no  other  cause  than 
ISvara’s  despotic  will;  for,  as  He  is  Almighty,  could  He  not,  had  He  so 
desired,  have  provided  an  easy  form  of  delivery  instead  of  one  which  is 
very  painful  both  for  the  child  and  its  mother  ?  Why,  because  a  Jiva  is  to 
be  bom,  should  another  Jiva  causelessly  suffer  such  horrible  pain  ?  We  say 
that  no  such  questions  can  be  put  to  Him.  For  in  the  first  place,  in  the 
vast  scheme  of  Bhagavan’s  designs,  which  are  like  a  great  ocean,  the 
individual  counts  for  less  than  a  mere  bubble;  and  secondly  His  work 
consists  in  “  killing  seven  serpents  with  one  blow  ”  *.  Who,  then,  can  say 
that  what  you  and  I  consider  as  your  or  my  woe  or  weal  is  not  linked 
with  the  weal  and  woe  of  hundreds  of  JIvas  in  this  infinite  world  of  moving 
and  unmoving  things?  Did  Manthara*  think  that  her  words  could  have 
any  other  consequence  beyond  the  gaining  of  Kaikeyi’s  favour?  It  was 
Bhagavan  (Rama)  alone,  He  who  for  whose  fourteen  years’  exile  in  the 
wood  all  Dcvas  had  conspired,  seeking  the  help  of  wicked  Sarasvati 8  who 
understood  what  the  effect  of  her  words  would  be;  for  He  is  the  dispenser 
of  all  effects  in  the  universe.  Manthara  did  not  expect  anything  from  her 
words  besides  the  fulfilment  of  a  selfish  end.  Those  words,  hqwever, 
brought  about  Ramacandra’s  exile  in  the  woods  for  fourteen  years  with 
His  younger  brother  and  wife;*  the  untimely  death  of  Maharaja  Daiaratha ; 7 
the  widowhood  of  Kaufalya,  Sumitra,  and  Kaikeyi;  the  severe  brahma- 
carya  of  Bharata;  the  killing  of  M&rica;  the  abduction  of  Sita;  the  death 
ofjatayu;  the  killing  of  Vali;  the  bridging  of  the  sea;  the  burning  of  Lanka; 

1  The  “  nerve  ”  of  that  name.  (See  Introduction  to  Tardra  Sdstra).  *  Slesma. 

*  The  Bengali  expression  for  killing  two  birds  with  one  stone. 

4  Maidservant  of  Kaikeyi,  wife  of  Daiaratha  and  stepmother  of  Rama, 
whose  exile  she  caused  when  at  the  instance  of  Manthara  she  requested 
Daiaratha,  her  husband,  to  make,  Bharata,  her  son  king  instt  ad  of  Rama. 

*  The  Devas  wanted  Rama  exiled  that  he  might  go  and  destroy  Ravana 
and  the  Rakgasas.  Sarasvati  is  here  spoken  of  as  wicked  (du;{a),  as  the 
authoress  of  Manthara’s  evil  suggestions. 

•Sakti. 

7  This  and  the  following  are  all  incidents  in  the  Ramayana,  which  were 
the  effects  of  Manthara’s  advice  to  Kaikeyi. 


LETTERED  AND  UNLETTERED  SOUND 


515 


the  wounding  of  Lak$mana  with  SaktiSela; 1  the  destruction  of  Ravapa, 
with  his  whole  family;  the  ordeal  through  fire  of  Slta;  the  gaining  of 
heaven  *  by  the  Devas,  and  so  forth.  These  incidents,  further,  are  but  a 
few  of  the  greater  waves  in  the  untraversable  sea  of  Ramalila.*  Who  can 
measure  the  destinies  of  the  millions  of  Jlvas  which  are  linked  with  this 
Ramalila  *  ?  The  Ramalila  *  was  but  the  gateway  through  which  those 
destinies  issued.  In  a  Jiva’s  lila,4  also,  a  similar  mutual  connection  of 
fates  always  exists,  with  this  difference  only,  that  in  Bhagavan’s  lila 4  the 
destinies  concerned  are  in  number  millions,  whilst  in  your  or  my  lila  they 
are  only  hundreds.  Who  can  say  that  the  destiny  which,  in  the  course  of 
its  production  of  fruits  brings  about  the  terrible  suffering  of  the  child  at 
birth,  is  not  connected  with  the  destiny  of  the  Mother?  Secondly,  the 
question  why  livara  did  this  instead  of  doing  that  cannot  be  asked  of 
Him.  We  cannot  object  and  ask :  “  Why  has  He  created  eyes  in  man’s 
face  instead  of  in  his  back?”  For,  had  He  created  eyes  in  man’s  back, 
it  might  have  been  asked :  "Why  has  He  created  eyes  in  man’s  back  instead 
*  of  in  his  face  ?  ”  One  can  question  in  this  way  anything.  ISvara  never 
escapes  these  interrogations,  which  are  the  natural  characteristics  of  ignor¬ 
ance.  A  Jiva  devoid  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Self 6  is  ever  ignorant  to 
Him  who  possesses  all  knowledge.  So  long  as  the  Jiva,  as  it  were  a  drop  of 
water,  does  not  mingle  with  the  ocean,  which  is  Siva,  there  is  no  end  to 
the  former’s  interrogations.  Siva  gratifies  the  Jiva’s  curiosity  to  the  extent 
of  telling  him  that  only  which  He  has  been  pleased  to  divulge  in  the  Sastra 
spoken  by  Himself.  The  Medical  Sastras  may  be  ignorant  of  that  purpose 
of  His  which  is  served  by  woman’s  labour-pains,  but  it  is  known  to  the 
Sadhana-sastra.* 

In  Tantra,  Bhagavan  says:  “  O  Devi,  at  this  critical  ninth  or  tenth 
month  of  pregnancy  the  Jiva  is  struck  by  the  powerful  labour-wind,7  and 
issues  through  the  channel  like  an  arrow  let  loose  from  a  bow.  Senseless 
from  the  womb,  he  does  not  know  of  his  fall.  The  force  of  the  labour- 
wind  and  the  pressure  of  the  generative  channel  at  the  time  of  birth  make 
the  Jiva  forget  all  that  which  he  had  revolved  in  his  mind  during  his  stay 
in  the  womb.” 

In  the  Prapancasara  it  is  said :  “  The  more  sinful  the  Jiva  is,  the 
greater  is  the  pain  which  he  suffers  in  issuing  from  his  mother’s  womb. 
Extremely  wonderful  is  the  history  of  men’s  Karma  guided  by  the  will  of 
the  Lotus-born.”  8 

1  A  missile  named  Sakti.  *  Svarga. 

*  Rama’s  play  on  earth.  4  Play. 

4  Atmajnana. 

*  The  Tantra  which  is  called  by  that  name. 

*  Prasava-vayu.  8  Padmayoni,  or  Brahma. 

S3 


514 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


One  sometimes  meets  a  person  who  was  formerly  half  paralyzed,  or 
was  attacked  with  some  other  disease  equally  or  even  more  serious,  or  who 
was  injured  and  almost  died  through  violent  delirium,  but  who  has  re¬ 
turned  to  life,  and  is  now  free  from  disease.  He,  however,  cannot  now 
recognize  his  wife,  son,  or  daughter,  or  others,  or  his  possessions.  Although 
to  this  man’s  friends  he  still  possesses  all  he  had,  yet  the  man  himself  is 
not  aware  that  he  has  anything  which  he  can  call  his  own.  This  is  a 
kind  of  rebirth  in  one’s  life. 

When  we  find  that  such  deep  knowledge  as  one  acquires  through 
impressions  received  in  early  life  is  lost  in  old  age,  maturity,  or  even 
adolescence,  it  is  a  matter  for  no  wonder  that  the  light  impressions 
on  the  child’s  soft  mind  should  disappear  under  the  grinding  oppres¬ 
sion  of  the  horrible  pain  of  birth,  and  that  the  terrible  horror  of  the 
frightful  swooning  and  insensibility  then  experienced  should  dispel  all 
memory  of  past  events.  Loss  of  memory  is  possible  whenever  the  mind 
and  brain,  which  arc  the  store-houses  of  all  knowledge,  arc  violently 
disturbed  through  any  cause.  If  by  any  violent  shock  the  order  in  which 
the  picture  impressions  lie  arranged  in  successive  layers  in  the  mind  is  in 
any  way  disturbed,  the  tie  with  all  these  impressions  is  loosened,  and  the 
threads  which  bind  them  to  each  other  are  scattered  one  knows  not 
where.  The  pain  of  childbirth  has  been  ordained  only  that  the  trace  of 
past  events  may  be  dispelled  from  the  Jiva’s  mind.  Jiva’s  assumption  of 
a  body  is  in  order  that  he  may  suffer  the  consequence  of  past  sin.  It  is 
not  that  the  punishment  is  suffered  owing  to  the  assumption  of  body,  but, 
as  Sastra  holds,  assumption  of  body  takes  place  owing  to  the  necessity  of 
suffering  punishment.  It  is,  therefore,  useless  to  regret  the  assumption 
of  body.  Things  have  been  so  arranged  according  to  the  desire  of  the 
all-good  Devi,  who  is  full  of  goodness,  that  a  Jiva  suffers  the  consequences 
of  sin  at  such  times,  in  such  manner,  and  by  such  means,  as  may  clear  of 
obstruction  on  the  path  of  his  welfare.  This  is  why  it  is  often  found  that 
Jivas  whose  destiny 1  is  almost  worked  out  die  of  the  very  pain  of  child¬ 
birth  in  places  of  pilgrimage,*  and  other  seats  of  liberation,  and  are  thus 
themselves  liberated. 

As  regards  the  question  why  the  mother  suffers  pain,  the  answer 
is  that  the  mother’s  destiny1  is  alone  responsible  for  the  suffering. 
We  must  understand  that  she  is  engaged  in  giving  birth  simply 
because  she  may  thereby  suffer  the  fruits  of  her  destiny,1  and  not 
that  she  suffers  pain  in  order  that  she  may  give  birth  to  a  child.  In 
that  market  in  which  the  commodity  is  destiny1  there  does  not,  and 


1  Adfsta.  That  is  the  “  unseen  ”  cause  of  man’s  fete,  which  he  has 
himself  produced  through  previous  Karma. 

*  Tlrthas. 


LETTERED  AND  UNLETTERED  SOUND 


515 


•cannot,  exist  any  consideration  of  relationship.  In  this  domain  of  merci¬ 
less  creatures  of  stone,  nobody,  be  he  or  she  lather  or  mother,  son  or 
■daughter,  husband  or  wife,  or  anyone  else,  cares  for  another.  And  yet 
there  does  exist  a  strong,  intimate,  and  mysterious  mutual  connection 
between  such  stones,  like  the  mutual  attraction  between  iron  and  magnet.1 
Both  are  hard  to  the  utmost,  and  yet  the  two  arc  in  thorough  union.  But 
if  destiny  *  separates  them,  then  in  a  moment  all  connection  ceases,  and 
the  hard  heart  of  the  stone  breaks  through  its  own  heat.*  The  stone- 
mother  breaks  into  pieces  through  the  heat  of  her  grief,4  but  her  offspring, 
the  stone-child,  driven  by  its  own  destiny,  has  not  one  moment  in  which 
to  think  of  the  suffering  of  its  mother.*  For  this  reason  I  was  saying  that 
in  this  stony  domain  all  are  stones  according  to  the  behest  of  the  Daughter 
•of  Stone.  Here  the  child  does  not  suffer  because  of  the  mother,  nor 
docs  the  mother  suffer  because  of  the  child.  Each  one  follows  his  own  path. 

It  is  only  at  a  crossing  that  one  meets  another  for  a  short  while.  Then 
Maya,  the  guide,  often  establishes  relationships  “  dearer  than  life  ” 
between  them  under  the  sweet  and  enchanting  influence  of  which  the 
traveller  is  made  to  forget  the  weariness  of  the  journey,  and  adroitly  taken 
•by  Her  Maya  to  far-away  abodes,  sometimes  in  Heaven,®  and  sometimes 
in  Hell.*  Sastra  has  appeared  in  order  that  the  traveller  may  surmount 
this  forgetfulness,  and  that  he  be  reminded  now  and  then  of  the  journey; 
and  it  is  in  order  so  to  remind  him  of  the  pains  of  the  journey,  to  bring 
to  his  memory  the  pangs  which  torture  the  depths  of  the  traveller’s  tired 
heart,  that  Ssslra  has  spoken  to  us  in  the  Samsara  of  the  good  resolves 
which  he  had  made  during  his  stay  in  his  mother’s  womb. 

It  is  only  when  a  Sadhaka’s  mind  has  been  perfeedy  cleansed  by 
•devotion*  that  he  can,  on  hearing  the  gracious  relation  of  Sastra,  recall 
such  resolves  to  his  mind.  It  was  with  a  heart  pained  with  such  recall 
-of  past  and  unfulfilled  resolve  that  a  Sadhaka  sang: 

“  I  am,  O  Mother,  O  liberatrix,  a  debtor  at  Thy  feet. 

O  Mother,  I  am  helpless,  having  forsaken  adoration  and 
worship.* 


1  Each  person  on  this  world  works  out  his  own  destiny  through  others,  and 
is  thus  brought  into  relationship  with  those  who  are  associated  with  him  by 
Karma.  The  attraction  which  binds  one  to  the  other  manifests  in  worldly 
relationships. 

*  Adr?ta.  That  is  the  “  unseen  ”  cause  of  man’s  fate,  which  he  has  himself 
produced  through  previous  Karma. 

*  That  is,  it  suffers.  '*  That  is,  she  is  overwhelmed  with  grief. 

1  In  the  working  out  of  fate  there  is  no  reason  why  the  mother  should  not 
suffer  in  birth  if  that  be  her  destiny.  Relationships  temporarily  established  at 
;the  crossing-points  of  different  lives  will  not  affect  this. 

*  Svarga.  7  Naraka. 

’*  Tapas.  *  Bhajana,  Pujana. 


516 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


0  Mother,  I  die  through  eating  the  poison  or  worldly  enjoy¬ 
ment.1 

Suffering  pains  in  the  womb,  I  said:  ‘This  time  I  go  to  the 
world  that  I  may  adore  Thee. 

I  will  remain  at  my  own  place 3  as  a  good  child,  and  will  offer 
three-lcavcd  twigs  of  bael 3  at  the  beauteous  feet  of  the 
Mother.’ 

Now,  having  fallen  on  earth,  I  remain,  O  Mother!  fallen4 

Through  forgetfulness  of  Thee.  O  Mother,  O  deliverer  of  the 
fallen, 

I  have  not  performed,  nor  can  I  now  perform,  Sadhana. 

O  Durga,  Mother!  I  can  no  longer  bear  my  sorrow. 

Good  for  nothing  is  DaSarathi.* 

What  shall  I  do,  O  Sankari?  I  cannot  control  my  mind. 

Now,  O  Mother!  I  pray  that  Thou  mayest  bind  the  elephant- 
like  mind 

With  the  rope  of  Thy  own  high  quality,*  and  deliver  me, 

O  Devi,  of  dishevelled  hair,7  from  this  bondage  to  the  world.” 

Severely  beaten  and  oppressed  by  the  waves  of  a  boundless  sea  of 
sorrows,  the  Sadhaka  has  here  fully  opened  his  heart,  and  with  tears  in 
his  eyes  said:  “  I  have  not  done,  nor  can  I  now  do,  Sadhana.  O  Durga, 
Mother,  I  can  no  longer  bear  my  sorrow.”  In  these  few  words  the 
Sadhaka  has  expressed  the  insufferable  mental  agony  which  a  Sadhaka 
feels  when  he  falls  from  Sadhana,  and  is  burnt  in  the  flaming  torments 
of  Samsara.  Having  relieved  himself  of  such  an  outpouring,  he  moves,, 
as  it  were,  a  cloud  freed  from  its  burdens  of  water  in  some  invisible  sky. 
There  are  many  with  poetic  talent,  but  to  draw  such  a  living  picture  of 
the  sufferer  is  the  work  of  a  living  Sadhaka,  who  has  gained  such  power8 
from  Sadhana  of  the  Mother  of  the  World,  and  not  the  work  of  some 
unconscious  poet,9  with  his  idle  pictures  of  leaves  and  creepers.  Blessed 
are  you,  oh  conscious  Daiarathi,  the  neck  jewel  of  the  land  of  Bengal. 

1  Visaya. 

*  Svapada,  which  expresses  the  same  idea  as  Svaraj.  All  the  sufferings 
of  Jiva  follow  from  neglect  of  this. 

*  Tripatra.  Bael  twigs,  with  three  leaves,  are  offered  in  worship. 

4  A  play  on  the  word  “  fallen,”  which  here  means  firstly  fallen  from  the 
womb  or  born,  and  then  degraded. 

*  The  celebrated  Bengali  poet  and  author  of  this  song. 

*  Her  quality  as  deliverer. 

7  Kali  and  other  destructive  (Samharini)  forms  of  the  Dew  are  so 
dishevelled. 

*  Sakti. 

9  That  is,  one  not  possessed  of  the  high  consciousness  of  the  enlightened 
and  devout  Sadhaka. 


LETTERED  AND  UNLETTERED  SOUND 


517 


blessed  is  your  musical  Sadhana,  or  the  modulation 1  of  the  Dhvani  a  of 
Kulakunqlalini.  You  have  said  that  you  are  a  debtor  to  die  Mother. 
But  this  account  of  your  debt  has  made  the  entire  race  of  Sadhakas 
indebted  to  you. 

Many  are  experts  in  falling  from  Sadhana,  but  very  few  have  the 
good  fortune  to  be  capable  of  such  heart-felt  repentance.  It  is,  however, 
in  order  to  secure  such  good  fortune  that  the  Mother  of  the  World  has,  in 
spite  of  the  Jiva’s  forgetfulness  of  the  events  of  past  limes  and  of  the  life 
in  the  womb,  repeatedly  pointed  to  them  in  the  mirror  of  Sftstra,  saying: 
“  My  child,  you  have  forgotten  all  that  you  said.  Pain  of  birth  has 
been  created  that  there  may  be  this  forgetfulness,  according  to  your 
Karma.” 

However  that  may  be,  our  object  here  in  introducing  a  discussion  of 
this  subject  is  to  show  this  much  only,  that  the  appearance  of  conscious¬ 
ness  in  the  Jlva  is  nothing  but  the  appearance  of  the  eternally  existing 
Sakti  of  Dhvani 2  in  the  child  in  the  womb,  and  that  the  vital  $akti  of  the 
Jlva  is  nothing  but  Dhvani  in  the  form  of  Ajapa-Mantra.  Through 
impressions  acquired  in  previous  births,  a  Jiva  forms  words  mentally  to 
himself  while  in  the  womb.  This  is  why  the  £astra  has  said:  “Jiva,  then, 
himself  thinks  and  speaks  in  his  mind."  *  This  initial  mental  process 
manifests  later  as  crying  and  the  like  after  birth.  Even  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  such  crying  is  made  whilst  in  the  womb.  At  the  time  of  birth  the 
Jiva  in  the  womb  is  greatly  agitated.  As  he  sits  within  the  womb,  all  his 
limbs  are  repeatedly  shaken.  A  feeling  of  weariness,  which  spreads  all 
over  the  body,  makes  the  child  yawn.  He  swoons  at  every  moment,  and 
heaves  sighs  Steeped  in  the  deep  darkness  of  the  womb,  the  Jiva,  on 
discovering  himself  to  be  in  such  terrible  danger,  becomes  desirous  of 
■crying.  All  the  inner  processes  necessary  for  such  an  act  are  performed 
at  that  time;  it  is  only  the  outer  process  which  is  begun  after  birth. 
That  process  is  as  follows:  The  extremely  subtle  state  of  (that  which 
subsequently  appears  as)  a  word  4  is  called  Para,  and  issues  from  the 
Muladhara.6  The  less  subtle  state,  when  it  reaches  the  heart,*  is  called 
FaSyanli.  The  still  less  subtle  state  which  exists  in  conjunction  with7 
Buddhi8  is  known  as  Madhyama.  Lasdy,  there  is  the  gross  state  of 
sound  in  which  it  issues  from  the  throat  of  the  Jiva,  who  now  cries  out. 
This  state  is  known  as  Vaikhari,  and  it  is  at  this  stage  and  in  this  state  of 

1  Murcchhana.  *  Power  of  subtle  sound  (see  ante). 

8  See  ante.  *  Vakya. 

*  For  these  and  other  centres  in  Tantrik  Yoga,  see  Arthur  Avalon's  “  The 
Serpent  Power  ". 

•  Hfdaya.  7  Samyukta. 

8  One  of  the  aspects  of  the  mind. 


518 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


sound  that  the  child’s  cry  becomes  clearly  audible.  Therefore  is  it  that, 
the  string  of  letters  which  exist  (as  subtle  sound)  in  the  Jiva’s  Susumna 1 II 
are  (not  produced  by),  but  merely  manifested  by  means  of  the  outward 
pressure  of  the  vital  air.*  Although  all  letters 3  exist  in  subtle  forms  in 
the  perpetual  Dhvani  in  the  Susumna,*  vet  they  cannot  issue  at  the 
same  dme  that  Kulakun^alini,  whose  substance  is  consciousness,  makes 
Her  appearance.  For  so  long  as  the  paths  along  which  the  current  of 
sound  flows  from  the  Muladhara  to  the  vocal  orifice  is  not  divided,  so  long 
letters  cannot  manifest  in  distinct  forms,  because  those  parts  of  the  body 
are  seats  of  the  manifestation  of  letters. 

Mantras  arc  in  all  cases  manifestations 6  of  Kulakundalint  Herself— 
She  whose  substance  is  all  letters  *  and  Dhvani,  and  who  is  the  Paramatma 
Itself.®  Therefore,  the  substance  of  all  Mantras  is  consciousness,  though 
their  appearance  and  expression  are  in  words.  As,  notwithstanding  the 
existence  of  consciousness  in  all  things,  it  does  not  manifest  without  such 
processes  as  the  union  of  blood  and  semen  and  the  like ;  so,  although  tho 
substance  of  Mantras  is  consciousness,  that  consciousness  is  not  perceptible 
without  the  union  of  the  Sadhaka’s  Sakti  derived  from  Sadhana  with 
MantraSakti.  Hence  it  has  been  said  in  the  Saradatilaka :  “Although 
Kulakundalim,  whose  substance  is  Mantras,  shines  brilliant  as  lightning 
in  the  Muladhara  of  every  Jiva,  yet  it  is  only  in  the  lotuses  of  the  hearts 
of  Yogis  that  She  reveals  Herself  and  dances  in  Her  own  joy.  (In  other 
cases,  though  existing  in  subtle  form,  She  does  not  reveal  Herself.) 
Assuming  the  bodily  appearance  of  a  coiling  serpent,  that  Devi  coils 
round  Svayambhu  Sankara 7  in  the  manner  of  the  spirals  of  a  conch-shell 
(in  three  and  a  half  coils).  Her  substance  is  all  Vedas,  all  Mantras, 
and  Tattvas.®  She  is  all  good,  and  the  extremely  subtle,  perceptible  *' 
Paramdvari.  She  is  Mother  of  the  three  forms  of  energy,10  and 
Sabdabrahman  Itself.” 

Now,  Sadhaka,  remember  that  passage  in  the  Yogini  Tantra  in 
which  it  is  said:  “Mantras  are  proof  of  the  existence  of  all  Jivas,"  and> 


I  Literally,  in  the  yantra  of  the  Susumna,  the  Nidi  of  that  name  (see  ante). 

*  Priiiavayu.  *  Varna. 

*  The  “  nerve  "  of  that  name. 

*  Vibhuti  (See  ante). 

*  That  is,  Kundali,  Paramatma,  Svarupini,  and  Varnadhvanimayi, 

7  That  is,  the  linga.  of  Siva  so  named  in  the  Muladhara. 

*  Here  all  things. 

*  Pratyaksa.  Derived  from  prati  before,  aba  sense;  that  is  perceptible  lo¬ 
ony  sense  according  to  the  form  of  her  manifestation. 

10  Tcjas,  that  is,  Moon,  Sun,  and  Fire. 

II  But  for  Mantra,  Jiva  could  not  exist ;  and  as  Jiva  exists,  Mantra  exists. 


LETTERED  AND  UNLETTERED  SOUND 


519 

are  the  supreme  energy1 * *  of  Brahman  and  the  Supreme  Good."  *  “  Those 
Mantras  consisting  of  energy  are  beyond  all  Mays.  (For  unless  Mantra  * 
had  been  above  Maya,  it  would  not  have  been  possible  for  Mantraiakti 
to  destroy  the  process  of  cause  and  effect  in  the  world.  It  is  not  to  be 
thought  of  that  a  subordinate  should  defeat  by  its  own  power  the  person 
to  whom  he  is  subordinate.  It  is,  therefore,  again  said) :  All  Mantras 
are  destroyers  of  Maya.  (One  who  is  entangled  in  Maya  can  never  sever 
its  bonds.)  Mantras  are  all  blissful.  (That  is  to  say,  when  MantraSakti 
is  awakened,  then  all  forms  of  bliss  which  may  be  had  from  the  attain¬ 
ment  of  any  object  in  the  world  are  enjoyed.  And  for  this  reason  a 
second  adjective  is  given,  it  being  said)  that  Mantras  are  full  of  Brahma- 
bliss.  (That  is  to  say,  there  is  nothing  in  the  world  in  which  Brahman 
does  not  exist,  and  there  is  no  bliss  which  is  unattained  on  the  attainment 
or  Brahma-bliss.  It  has,  therefore,  been  again  said) :  Mantras  are  full  of 
perfect  bliss.  (That  is  to  say,  She,  who  is  Mantra,4 * *  is  existence,  con¬ 
sciousness,  and  bliss,  and  the  sole  centre  of  all  bliss  in  the  universe. 

•  Whoever,  therefore,  attains  Her  through  Siddhi  in  Mantra  lacks  no  form 
of  bliss.  It  is  this  state  of  perfect  bliss  which  is  called  liberation  whilst  in 
the  state  of  a  Jiva.®  For  this  reason  another  adjective  is  applied  to  the 
Mantra,  which  is),  Mantra  is  that  highest  good  which  is  Brahma-nirvipa 
— that  is  to  say,  Kaivalya-liberation  itself).  Mantras  arc  all  Maya,®  all 
Vidya,  all  Tapas,  all  Siddhi.7 8 * *  (Just  as  Brahman  Himself,  though  with¬ 
out  attributes,  is  yet  the  Lord  of  all  attributes  *  and  all  attributes;  •  so 
Mantra,  notwithstanding  that  it  is  above  all  Maya,  is  the  scat  of  the 
manifestation  of  M§y§,  and  is  all  Maya.  Mantrasadhana  1B  is  the  great 
cause  which  enables  a  Sadbaka  to  accomplish  wonders  by  means  of  Maya. 
By  the  words  “  Mantra  is  all  Vidya  ”  is  meant  that  Mantra  is  the  cause 
of  the  divisions  of  Adyaiakti 11  into  the  aspects  of  Mahavidya,  Siddhividya, 
Upavidya,  Vidya,  and  so  forth,  according  to  the  different  forms1*  of 
Vidya.  It  is  by  virtue  of  Mantra-Sadhana  18  that  Sadhakas  see  the  mani¬ 
festation  of  Her  different  aspects.  Or,  Mantras  are  Vidya  because  by 

1  Brahmatejas. 

*  See  ante.  The  quotation  from  the  Yogini  Tantra  is  continued  from  this 
place. 

s  Literally,  “  theTattva  of  Mantra  ”, 

4  Literally,  “  She  who  is  the  Svariipa  of  Mantra  ", 

®  Jivanmukti.  •  Sarvamayimaya. 

7  That  is,  all  Vidya  (as  to  which  see  post),  devotion,  austerity,  etc.,  and 

achievement  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra). 

8  Guna.  *  Gupamaya. 

18  That  is,  Sadhana  with  Mantra. 

“  Primal  Sakti.  '*  Tattvas 

18  That  Sadhana,  the  object  of  which  is  Mantra. 


520 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Mantrasadhana  one  easily  acquires  the  fourteen  forms  of  worldly  know¬ 
ledge  with  their  sixty-four  branches,  as  also  Brahma-knowledge,1  which 
destroys  all  sins.  Mantras  are  all  Tapas,*  because  by  their  grace  one 
acquires,  without  subjection  of  the  body  to  hardships,  the  religious 
merit,®  which  is  otherwise  only  acquired  through  physical  austerities. 
Mantras  are  all  Siddhi,  because  there  is  no  Siddhi  in  the  world  which 
cannot  be  acquired  by  a  Sadhana  with  Mantra.)  ”  * 

“  Mantras  are  all  forms  of  liberation.  (That  is  to  say,  all  forms  of 
liberation  bestowed  by  the  Devata  he  worships,  whether  Salokya, 
Sarupya,  Sarsti,  Sayujya,*  or  Nirvana,  are  attainable  by  Mantrasadhana; 
for  Mantra  is  itself  liberation.*  He  who  wishes  to  ascertain  the  depth 
down  to  a  particular  point  of  an  unfathomable  ocean  must  descend  to 
such  a  point.  So  a  Sadhaka  who  desires  a  particular  form  of  liberation 
must  attain  Siddhi  in  a  Sadhana  suitable  for  its  acquisition.  Just  as  the 
sea  can  from  its  fullness  supply  with  ease  water  in  any  quantity  from  a 
mere  pailful  to  a  mass  great  enough  to  deluge  the  universe,  so  Mantra, 
which  is  replete  with  liberation,  can  grant  to  the  Sadhaka  any  form  of  it  • 
from  the  lowest  Siddhi  to  the  supreme  Nirvana.  Mantra  is  truly  Brahman, 
who  is  light 1  and  perpetual  liberation.  Differences  in  effect  produced  by 
Mantrasadhana  are  due  to  differences  in  such  Sadhana.  Sadhakas  will 
now  be  able  to  say  whether  Mantra,  which  is  unchanged  *  even  in 
Nirvana,*  should  be  considered  to  be  a  more  worldly  physical  sound, 
or  Brahman  Itself  as  the  fourth  state  of  consciousness.50)  Mantras  arc 
all  Vedas.11  (That  is  to  say,  if  a  Sadhaka  attains  perfect  Siddhi  in  even 
a  single  Mantra,  he  becomes  with  ease  possessed  of  the  spiritual 
knowledge  which  is  acquired  by  learning  all  the  Vedas,  with  all 
allied  matters;  or  he  can  perform  with  his  own  Mantra  all  the  rites  which 
are  performed  with  different  Mantras.)  Mantras  are  all  worlds.1*  (That 

I  Brahmavidya.  1  Tapomaya.  *  Dharma. 

*  That  is,  Sadhana  with  Mantra. 

*  These  are  qualified  forms  of  Mukti  (liberation)  viz.,  dwelling  in  the  same 
abode  with  the  Devata  worshipped,  the  assumption  of  his  form  and  powers  and 
unity  with  Him.  Nirvana  is  unqualified  Mukti. 

‘  Muktimaya.  1  Jyotih. 

*  Literally,  “  whose  Svariipa  is  not  changed 

*  Because  the  Mantra  is  the  Brahman. 

10  Turiya  caitanya.  Turiya  comes  from  catur  (four)  and  ca  (the  ca  of 
catur  being  dropped),  and  is  the  fourth  state  (avastha)  of  consciousness.  Sayana 
says  that  Turiya  is  taraka  (deliverer).  According  to  the  Vedantasara,  it  is  that 
state  in  which  the  Brahman  exists  without  upadhi  (limiting  conditions). 
Yadanupadhitan  caitanyam  tat  turiyam  iti  cyayate.  Sruti  says  that  it  is  thus: 
Santam  (peace),  Sivam  (excellence),  and  Advaitam  (non-duality).  (See 
Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra.)  11  Sarvavedamaya, 

II  Sarvalokamaya.  In  Mantra  are  all  the  worlds,  in  that  Mantra  pervades 
all  the  worlds. 


LETTERED  AND  UNLETTERED  SOUND 


521 


is  to  say,  Mantraiakd  can,  at  the  Sadhaka’s  desire,  reach  and  operate  in 
■all  the  fourteen  worlds,  and,  penetrating  through  all  their  barriers,  merge 
the  S5dhaka  in  Itself.1)  In  Mantra  are  all  enjoyments.*  (That  is  to  say, 
whatever  things  arc  enjoyed  by  Sadhakas,  are  all  produced  by  Mantra* 
iakti*;  or  in  Mantraiakti  alone  Sadhakas  find  all  the  enjoyments  and 
happiness  which  others  obtain  from  wife,  children,  and  other  worldly 
objects;  or  through  the  influence  of  the  intense  universe-consuming  power 
of  Mantra  all  enjoyments  become  favourable  to  Siddhi.4  Mantras  are  all 
S&stras.  (That  is  to  say,  after  MantraSakd  has  been  acquired  there  is  no 
necessity  to  know  any  Sastra.) 

“  Mantras  are  all  forms  of  Yoga.  (That  is  to  say,  there  is  no  form  of 
Yoga  which  cannot  be  accomplished  by  Mantrasadhana.)  ” 

“  O  Devi,  my  sight  was  paralyzed  by  the  powerful  splendour  of  the 
light  *  of  this  mass  of  Mantras  and  Sastras  borne  on  every  petal  of  the 
lotus  of  Thy  heart.  I  then  sank  into  the  sea  of  unconsciousness,  which  is 
delusion.*  On  recovery  from  that  swoon,  I  again  saw  that  mass  of 
*  Mantras  resplendent  as  the  sun,  as  one  who  has  been  steeped  in  the  deep 
darkness  of  night  views  the  brilliant  morning  sunrise.  By  the  grace  of 
Mahakall,  the  Deity  presiding  over 7  all  Mantras,  I  have  attained  Siddhi, 
and  have  become  versed  in  all  Sastras.” 

The  string  of  fifty  letters,*  from  A  to  Ksa,  which  are  the  MatrkS,* 
*'  is  eternal,  unbeginning  and  unending,  and  Brahman  itself”.  This  great 
saying  is  the  gist  of  all  Tantras.  Lest  through  human  error  the  pronuncia¬ 
tion  of  any  letters*  should  be  last  or  distorted,  Vidhata10  has  created 
alphabets,11  and  put  them  into  writing.  B(haspati 11  says:  “  Because  Jiva  is 
prone  to  error  before  he  is  even  six  months  old,  Vidhata 10  has  created  all 
Aksaras,11  and  put  them  into  writing  in  their  due  order."  Sadhakas 
should  understand  Aksaras 11  to  be  created  by  Vidhata  in  the  same  way 
as  the  Vedas  are  created  by  Him.1*  Vidhata 10  has  created  the  forms 14  of 
written  letters  in  resemblance  to  the  forms  seen  by  MahrSvara  in  the  lotus 
of  MaheSvari’s  heart. 


I  That  is,  the  Mantra  can  procure  Nirvana  for  the  Sadhaka. 

*  Sarvabhogamaya.  *  The  power  of  Mantra.  4  Success. 

*  Tejas.  *  Moha. 

7  Adhisdiatri,  which  is  previously  described  as  the  sthula  form. 

8  Varna. 

*  Mothers,  a  name  for  the  letter  as  embodying  sound  produced  by 

Mother  Kundalini.  10  Brahma. 

II  Aksara.  18  Guru  of  the  Devas. 

“  That  is.  He  does  not  really  create  them,  but  they  issue  from  Him  as  part 
of  His  being  or  His  breath.  14  Murti. 


522 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


That  the  Bindu,  Matra,1 2 *  and  Rekha  in  the  alphabet  are  all  really 
Brahman  is  dearly  shown  in  that  which  the  Kamadhenu  and  other  Tantras 
say  as  to  the  identity  of  the  letters  from  A  to  Ksa,  with  the  Brahma,  Visnu, 
Mahdvara,  Sakti,  Surya,  Ganda;  and  other  Devas  and  Devis  are  presiding 
Dcvatas  of  those  lines  and  points.  In  fact,  the  writing  which  we  in 
ordinary  use  know  as  Aksara  (alphabet)  is  nothing  but  the  Yantra  of  the 
undecaying  Aksara  Brahman.*  Just  as  in  Sadhana  forms  made  of  earth  or 
stone  are  used  as  Devatas,  so  in  writing  Yantras  made  of  lines  arc  used  as 
Aksaras.®  When,  by  virtue  of  Sadhana,  MantraSakti  is  awakened,  the 
presiding  Devata  of  every  line  of  the  resplendent  linear  form  (as  it  were 
an  image)  breaks  through  that  form,  and  later,  when  Siddhi  in  the 
Mantra  has  been  acquired,  the  Devata  of  worship  who  presides  over  all 
Mantras,  considered  as  a  whole,  and  who  is  existence,  consciousness,  and 
bliss,  gratifies  Her  devotees  by  the  reveladon  of  Her  very  Self.4 

At  dawn  the  powerful  spreading  rays  of  the  sun  pierce  the  deep* 
dark  night,  and  are  slowly  followed  by  the  orb  itself,  as  it  were  a  mass  of 
heated  gold  reddening  the  summit  of  the  Mount  of  sunrise.*  Great  Yogis, 
who  arc  immersed  in  Sandhya 1 *  prayer,  see  in  the  centre  of  that  luminous 
orb  the  beautiful  form  of  Suryadeva,  seated  on  a  red,  full-blown  lotus. 
In  the  same  way,  at  the  blessed  appearance  of  dawn  of  Brahmamayt’s 7 
grace,  the  fierce  light  *  of  Mantra  dawns  in  the  Sadhaka’s  heart,  rending 
the  darkness  of  delusion  *  of  the  deadly  night  of  ignorance,10  and  fills  the 
entire  universe  with  the  joyous  love  of  the  supreme  Devata.  Then  suc¬ 
cessive  companies  of  Devas  show  themselves  unsought  in  the  petals 
of  the  Sadhaka’s  thousand-pctallcd  lotus.  At  the  conclusion  of  the 
full  display  of  Her  power,11  Brahmasanatani  who  is  perfect  and  eternal 
Brahman,  reveals  Herself  in  the  form  worshipped  by  the  Sadhaka  in  the 
midst  of  a  circle  of  light  overspreading  the  assembly  of  Devas  and  Devis. 


1  Bindu  is  the  dot  which  indicates  the  nasal  breathing  Anusvara.  Matra  is 
the  upper  part  of  a  letter  or  the  headline;  and  Rekha  is  the  lines  forming 
the  letter  itself. 

2  The  word  Aksara  etymologically  means  a  (not),  and  kfara  (decaying). 

*  Yantra,  which  literally  means  an  “  instrument,”  here  means  the  lines  of 
a  letter.  As  a  stone  image  is  used  to  represent  the  Devata,  so  the  lines,  etc., 
which  go  to  make  up  the  written  alphabetical  characters  are  used  to  denote 
the  Devata,  which  manifests  as  letters. 

4  Svasvarupa. 

*  The  sun  rises  from  the  top  of  Udayacala,  or  the  Mount  of  rising  (sunrise), 
and  goes  and  descends  to  the  Mount  of  sunset  (astacala). 

*  A  rite  performed  thrice  daily  at  mom,  noon,  and  eve  (see  Introduction  to 
Tantra  Sistra). 

7  The  Devi’s.  8  Tejas.  *  Moha.  10  Avidya. 

11  Literally,  “when  all  Vibhutis  have  appeared ”  (sec  ante). 


LETTERED  AND  UNLETTERED  SOUND 


5231 


Immersed  in  the  great  sea  of  self-realization,1 * * *  which  is  the  Kaivalya*  of 
Her  who  is  Kaivalya  itself,  the  Sadhaka,  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  sleep 
of  Brahman-bliss,  rests  in  the  bed  of  consciousness  in  the  bosom  of 
the  great  deep  Peace.  This  it  is  which  is  the  undecaying  nature5 * 
of  Aksaras  (letters).  In  fact,  Aksara,  or  written  Mantra,  is  the  same 
thing  as  Devata  in  image,  or  Yantra.  By  the  force  or  lack  of  force 
of  the  Sadhaka’s  Sidhana,  the  Devata  appears  therein  and  disappears 
therefrom.  Varna,  Nada,  Vindu,  vowel  and  consonant  in  a  Mantra, 
denote  different  appearances  of  the  Devata.  This  is,  of  course,  known, 
to  Sadhakas  proficient  in  the  knowledge  of  Mantras;  but  as  the  matter 
is  strictly  one  to  be  learnt  from  Gurus  only,  we  are  unable  to  deal  with 
it  here.  Certain  aspects  or  Vibhutis  *  of  the  Devata  are  inherent  in 
certain  letters,*  but  perfect  Sakti  appears  only  in  a  whole  Mantra, 
and  not  in  any  disjointed  letter.*  For  this  reason,  any  word  or  letter 
cannot  be  a  Mantra.7 * *  The  Mantra  alone  in  which  the  playful  Devata. 
has  revealed  one  of  Her  particular  aspects  is  capable  of  revealing 
*  that  aspect.  Hence  that  Mantra  is  called  in  Ssstra  the  Mantra  of  that 
particular  aspect.  Bhagavan,  the  Guru  of  all  Mantras  and  Siddhis  and 
creator  of  all  things,  has  therefore  said  to  Bhagavatl :  “  It  is  certain  that 
the  form  of  a  particular  Devata  will  appear  from  the  particular  Mantra 
of  which  that  Devata  is  the  presiding  Deity,*  for  a  Dcvata’s  body  is  formed 
out  of  Bijamantra.”  In  the  Kamadhcnu  Tantra  it  has  been  said:  “  If  a 
Sadhaka  contemplates  with  all  his  power  the  Devi,  according  to  the  Bija 
of  individual  Dcvatas,  and  Prafulla  and  Kalika  (particular  Mantraiaktis), 
then  from  that  Bija  itself  appear  Sakti,  Visnu,  Siva,  Surya,  and  other 
Devas.  From  Bija  is  manifested  the  immaculate  Supreme  Brahman.  How 
can  Hari  or  SadSSiva  appear  in  a  Sadhaka’s  heart  without  contemplation 
of  Bija,  for  the  eternal  Devi,  appearing  as  Bija,  is  the  Genctrix  of  even 
Sadasiva?  ”  All  the  fruits  of  accomplishment  *  which  are  borne  by  the 
creeper 10  of  a  Sadhaka’s  Sadhana  depends  on  the  great  Mantraiakti 

1  Bhava :  that  consciousness  which  is  the  experience  of  the  Kaivalya  state. 

Bh&va  literally  means  existence,  and  then  feeling,  etc.,  the  term  being  here 

loosely  used  for  such  experience.  *  Liberation. 

*  Svarupa — that  is,  the  true  nature  or  aspect.  *  See  ante. 

5  It  is  not  merely  the  whole  Mantra  which  is  the  Devata,  though,  as 

pointed  out  later,  perfect  Sakti  appears  only  in  a  whole  Mantra.  Thus,  in  the 
Maya-Mantra — viz..  “  Hrlng,”  H=Siva,  R=fire,  I=M&yaiakti.  Each  letter 
is  thus  a  Devata,  and  the  whole  Mantra  is  the  Devata  Tripurasundarl,  the 
meaning  being  that  Maya  is  dissolved  in  the  fire  of  knowledge.  *  Varna. 

7  Each  of  the  letters  is,  as  above  stated,  a  Mantra.  What  is  here  meant 

is  that  it  is  not  every  Mantra  which  reveals  a  particular  aspect  sought.  One: 
must  have  recourse  to  that  particular  Mantra  which  is  tliat  aspect. 

*  Ad  hi?  (at  ri  Devata,  which  is  described  (see  ante)  as  the  Sthula  form. 

*  Siddhi,  10  Sadhana  is  here  compared  to  a  creeping  plant. 


524 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


appearing  in  the  form  of  Blja.1 *  Sastra  has  therefore  specified  the  rules  and 
injunctions  relating  to  the  sowing  of  this  Bija,*  according  to  place,  time, 
and  person.  Mantravicara,  Mantroddhara,3  and  the  like,  are  prescribed 
in  order  that  it  may  be  ascertained  what  Mantra  should  be  selected,  and 
then,  on  selection,  in  which  field  and  according  to  what  method  it  sliould 
be  sown  in  order  that  it  may  speedily  have  good  fruit  under  the  special 
influence  of  the  Devata.  For  this  purpose  reference  is  had  to  such  matters 
as  the  zodiacal  constellations,4  star,3 *  the  planets,  and  the  ascending  and 
•  descending  modes  of  the  moon,1  conjunctions,7  and  so  forth,  which  exist 
as  forces  operating  in  the  body  of  the  Sadhaka.* 

In  the  Viivasara  Tantra  it  has  been  said:  “  Wise  men  should  know 
Mantras  to  be  of  four  kinds,  according  to  the  distinctive  nature  of  the 
Cakra 8 * — namely,  Siddha,  Sadhya,  Susiddha,  and  Ari.  Of  these,  a  Siddha 
Mantra,  when  it  has  been  the  subject  of  due  Sadhana,  becomes  Siddha 10 
in  due  time  (that  is,  the  time  specified  in  the  Sastra  for  Siddhi  in  respect 
of  that  particular  Mantra).  A  Sadhya  Mantra  *  becomes  Siddha  10  after  a 
long  time  through  both  Japa 11 * *  and  Homa.1*  A  Susiddha  Mantra 18  be¬ 
comes  Siddha10  the  moment  it  is  received  (from  the  Guru;  but  its 
fruit  appears  according  to  the  Sadhaka’s  Sadhana),  and  a  Ripu 
Mantra 14 * *  lays  the  axe  at  the  root  of  Siddhi.”  “  Know  Siddhamantms 


I  Bijarupinl.  8  Bija  means  seed. 

8  Mantroddhara  is  the  search  for  and  finding  out  of  a  Mantra  for  the 

purposes  mentioned  after  Mantravicara,  or  discussion  with  the  same  object. 

4  Raii.  3  Naksatra. 

*  Graha— that  is,  Rahu  and  Kctu,  or  the  points  at  which  the  path  of  the 

moon  intersects  the  ecliptic.  7  Yoga;  conjunctions  of  stars  with  earth. 

*  The  universe  is  contained  in  the  body  with  all  its  external  details.  With 
the  objective  conjunction,  etc.,  there  is  a  corresponding  conjunction  in  the 

Sadhaka’s  body,  or,  more  strictly,  it  is  the  same  conjunction  viewed  in  different 
aspects. 

*  Before  initiation  it  is  usual  to  ascertain  whether  a  Mantra  is  svakula  or 
akula.  The  circle  in  which  nativity  is  marked  in  Astrology  is  called  Cakra, 
but  here  the  reference  is  also  to  the  Tantrik  Cakras,  such  as  the  A-ka-da-ma 
,  and  others  described  in  Tantrasara  (see  ante  of  my  edition  of  the  Mahanirvapa 
Tantra). 

10  Accomplished,  perfected,  fruitful.  (Siddha)  accomplished — that  is,  with¬ 
out  much  difficulty. 

II  Literally,  “  which  has  to  be  accomplished  This  term,  as  the  others, 

is  here  technically  used  as  descriptive  of  a  particular  Mantra;  here  a  Mantra 
accomplished  with  great  difficulty. 

18  Recitation  of  Mantra  and  sacrifice  unto  fire  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra 
Sastra),  18  Literally,  “  well  accomplished 

14  Or  Ari.  Ari  and  Ripu  are  synonymous  words  meaning  “enemy”;  a 

Mantra  with  which  no  Siddhi  is  attainable  by  the  Sadhaka  to  whom  it  is 

inimical. 


LETTERED  AND  UNLETTERED  SOUND 


525- 


to  be  friends,  Sadhya  mantras  to  be  servers,1 * *  Susiddhamantras  to  be  helpers,* 
and  Satrumantras  *  to  be  destroyers.  Friendly  Mantras  become  Siddha 4 * * 
through  Japa,8 *  according  to  rules  laid  down  in  the  Sastra.  Sadhya- 
mantras  become  Siddha  *  through  much  serving.*  Helper  Mantras  grant 
desires  even  without  much  service,  and  destructive  Mantras  more  surely 
destroy  the  Sadhaka.” 

This  is  the  general  rule,  but  in  certain  special  circumstances,  which 
must  be  learnt  from  Gurus  only,  there  is  no  necessity  for  adjudging  the 
suitability  of  Mantras.7  Here  the  point  for  special  consideration  of 
Sadhakas  is  that,  although  the  object  of  worship*  of  the  Iftadevata,8 
Pata,10  Slava,11  Homa,1*  Dhyana,’3  Dharana,14 * *  Samadhi,18  or  other 
means,  and  of  Siddhi  and  Sadhana  with  one’s  own  Diksamantra,18  is  the 
same;  yet  the  actual  working  varies.  The  fruit  which  a  Sadhaka  achieves 
in  ten  years  by  means  of  Puja,  Pata,  Stava,  and  so  forth,  can  be  obtained 
in  but  one  year,  month,  week,  or  even  one  day,  by  force  of  a  powerful 
Mantrashdhana ;  for  in  the  case  of  Puja,  Stava,  Dhyana,  Dharana  17  and 
•so  forth,  only  the  Sadhaka’s  Sadhanasakti 18  operates;  whilst  in  the  case 
of  Sadhana  with  Mantra,  Sadhanasakti  works  in  conjunction  with  Mantra- 
sakti.1*  For  reasons  of  place,  time,  and  person  a  Sadhaka’s  Sadhana- 
sakti 18  may  be,  and  actually  often  is,  imperfect,  and  meets  with  obstacles. 
But  the  invincible  power  of  MantraSakti 18  can  never  be  defeated.  Mantra 


I  Sevaka;  during  accomplishment.  *  Posaka. 

*  Meaning  the  same  as  Ari  or  Ripu. 

4  Accomplished,  perfected,  fruitful.  (Siddha)  accomplished — that  is,  with¬ 

out  much  difficulty. 

8  Recitation  of  Mantra  and  sacrifice  unto  fire  (see  Introduction  to  T antra 
Sastra). 

*  That  is,  much  Sadhana. 

7  As  where  the  Mantra  is  received  in  dream. 

8  Ceremonial  worship.  For  this  and  the  following  terms  see  Introduction 
to  Tanlra  sastra. 

*  The  particular  Dcvata  whom  a  particular  Sadhaka  worships,  such  as 

Krsna  in  the  case  of  a  Vai?nava,  and  in  whose  Mantra  the  Sadhaka  is  specially 
initiated.  18  Reading  of  Sastra. 

II  Hymn  of  praise.  18  Sacrifice  into  fire,  which  is  of  several  kinds. 

18  Meditation.  14  Concentration. 

18  Yoga  ecstasy,  or  realization  of  the  Brahman. 

i*  The  particular  Mantra  in  which  the  Sadhaka  has  been  initiated. 

17  See  ante. 

18  That  is,  the  force  generated  by  the  Sadhana  of  the  Sadhaka  himself.  Its- 

nature  and  intensity  therefore  varies. 

18  The  power  of  the  Mantra  itself— i.e.,  a  constant  quantity  when  once 
realized  through  Mantrasadhana. 


-526 


PRINCIPLES  OP  TANTRA 


is  equally  and  in  all  places  powerful,  whether  in  the  Upper,1 * *  Middle,* 
■  and  Nether*  worlds,  or  in  water,  on  land,  or  in  space.  Mantrasakti 
is  unconcerned  with  the  question  whether  the  Sadhakas’  purpose  is  good 
•  or  bad.  Fire  will  equally  bum  down  a  house  in  the  case  of  a  malicious 
arson  as  it  will  in  Homa4 * *  accept  the  offerings  made  in  the  sacrificial  pit 
in  the  name  of  Devatas,  Whenever  Mantrasakti  is  invoked,  whether  it  be 
with  the  object  of  doing  good  or  harm  to  one’s  own  self  or  another  person, 
it  will  of  a  surety  accomplish  that  work.  It  is  the  Sadhaka  who  reaps  the 
•consequence,  whether  it  be  Heaven*  or  Hell.*  As  fire  only  dies  out  after  it 
has  consumed  that  to  which  it  has  been  set,  so  Mantrasakti  ceases  to 
•operate  only  when  it  has  fully  revealed  its  power.  A  Sadhaka 's  individ¬ 
ual  (Stma)  Sakti  is  like  wind,  and  Mantrasakti  is  like  fire,  so  that  where 
the  Sadhaka’s  individual  Sakti  is  weak,  the  Divine  Sakti  of  Mantra  can 
in  a  moment  make  it  very,  very  great.  Just  as  waves  of  air,  when  struck 
and  restruck  by  flames  of  fire,  flow  strong  and  fast  in  the  sky,  and  these 
flames  of  fire,  fanned  by  the  rapid  currents  of  air,  blaze  with  redoubled 
force,  so  the  Sadhaka’s  individual  Sakti,  when  struck  again  and  again  by 
Mantrafakti,  is  very  rapidly  developed,  and  then  a  strong,  active  individ¬ 
ual  Sakti  unites  with  Mantrasakti  to  make  the  latter  doubly  powerful. 
Just  as  with  the  help  of  a  breath  of  wind  a  small  fire  is  generated,  which 
then,  by  the  movements  of  the  air  which  is  drawn  into  it,  become  so  great 
that  it  illuminates  the  world  and  firmament  with  its  lustre,  so  with  the 
help  of  a  mere  particle  of  individual  Sakti,  Mantraiakti  in  a  very  small 
.form  appears,  which  then,  with  the  development  of  the  previously  almost 
inert  individual  Sakti,  becomes  so  great  that  it  illumines  the  heart  of  the 
Jiva  and  penetrates  even  through  Brahmaloka.7  It  is  simply  because 
Mantra  possesses  this  wonderful  power  that  a  Jiva  may  accomplish  that 
which  appears  to  be  impossible;  otherwise,  how  could  anyone  expect  a 
Jiva  to  achieve  by  his  own  effort  the  treasure  which  is  worshipped  by 
Siva?  What  individual  Sakti  docs  Jiva  possess  by  virtue  of  which  he  can, 
without  the  help  of  Mantra,  conquer  the  JivaSakti 8  and  transform  it  into 

1  Svarga,  the  heavens. 

1  Martya,  the  world  of  mortals  of  this  earth. 

*  Rasatala,  one  of  the  nether  worlds,  for  which  it  here  stands  as  a  general 
term. 

4  Sacrifice  into  fire.  A  pit  is  prepared,  and  on  the  hearth  (Kunda)  the 
fire  is  laid  into  which  the  offerings  are  thrown,  that  Agni  (Fire)  may  carry 
them  to  the  Devas.  *  Svarga. 

*  Naraka.  When  called  into  active  operation,  Mantrasakti  displays  its 
power,  whatever  be  the  result.  If,  however,  the  Sadhaka  invokes  that  power 

f  . .  JL-I.-I _ _ J  1 _ Ml  l't  1  tt  ii 


ivJ i ‘T- -■ 1  1  ^ TjTj * n 


7  The  highest  of  the  fourteen  worlds  or  regions. 

*  That  is,  the  Sakti  of  Jiva  as  such. 


LETTERED  AND  UNLETTERED  SOUND 


527 


the  Daivxiakti  ?  1 * *  In.  the  vast  field  of  the  Samsara,  and  in  that  darkness 
which  is  delay  in  the  attainment  of  Siddhi,  Mantra  alone  is  the  everlast¬ 
ing  autumnal  full  moon  which  never  sets  and  never  rises.4  The  cool, 
pure,  and  bright  rays  of  this  moon  are  the  infinite  mercy  of  the  Mother 
of  the  world.  Pious  Sadhakas  and  Sadhikas s  arc  the  Cakoras 1 * *  and 
Cakoris,  8 *  who  are  ever  thirsty  to  drink  these  rays.  Spreading  their  two 
wings  of  knowledge  *  and  action,’  they  soar  above  the  region  of  Samsara  to 
the  greatest  heights  of  the  far-extending  firmament  of  Sadhana,  and  there, 
dancing  with  joy,  are  blessed  with  the  draught  of  nectar.  Sadananda  8 
has  therefore  said  to  Anandamayi :  *  “  None  but  the  Cakoras  know  the 
beauty  of  moonshine.”  (Similarly,  none  but  Sadhakas  and  SSdhikas 
know  the  nectar  of  Mantraiakti.  The  sight  of  it  ever  makes  the  com¬ 
munity  of  one-eyed,  faithless  crows  to  squat  in  their  dry  nests,  shutting 
their  eyes  in  fear,  and  hiding  their  heads.) 

More  than  the  above  cannot  be  made  public  on  the  subject  of 
Mantraiakti,  the  creeper  which  grants  the  fourfold  fruit 10  to  the  Sadhaka. 
We,  therefore,  here  stop  after  having  merely  pointed  out  the  main 
principles  alone.11 *  The  entire  tree  will  become  revealed  when  its 
branches,  twigs,  leaves,  and  fruits  are  distinctly  shown.14  The  Tantra 
Sastra  is  not  a  pleasure-ground  for  the  ease-loving  and  luxurious. 
It  is  the  hermitage,  in  the  woods  “  built  by  Yoga,  of  Him  who 
is  the  crest-gem  of  great  Yogis,14  and  the  Guru  of  all  mobile  and 
immobile  things.  Who  has  the  power  to  touch,  without  His  command, 
a  single  leaf  or  flower  belonging  to  this  lovely  forest,  full  of  energy?  l* 
Whoever,  with  the  mad  thought  of  reliance  on  the  powers  of  his  own 
arms,  enters  into  this  forest  without  His  command  will  of  a  certainty 
be  burnt  into  ashes  by  the  most  terrible  fire  18  of  the  Lord  of  Destruction, 
like  flies  which  fall  into  a  flame  or  Kandarpa 14  when  seized  by  the 


I  The  Sakti  of  a  Deva  as  such.  With  this  Sakti  he  can  accomplish  that 
-which  a  Deva  can. 

*  As  it  is  always  above  the  horizon,  it  cannot  be  said  to  rise  or  set. 

*  Female  S&dhakas. 

4  Birds  celebrated  in  Sanskrit  poetry  as  being  very  fond  of  moon-light. 

8  Female  Cakoras. 

*  JfiSna.  ’  Karma. 

8  He  who  is  ever -joyful — Siva. 

*  She  who  is  bliss;  the  Dev!,  His  spouse. 

18  Dharma,  Artha,  Kama,  and  Mok$a  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  £ditra). 

II  Mula-tattva.  14  Which  the  Guru  will  do. 

14  Tapovana.  14  Siva.  18  Tejaa. 

14  The  God  of  Love  who  was  burnt  into  ashes  by  the  fire  of  Siva’s  third  eye. 


528  PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 

jaws  of  death.  This  is  why,  after  having  come  so  far,  we  now  recede 
in  fear. 

As  to  what  yet  remains  to  be  explained,  we  bow  to  those  Lotus-feet, 
so  sought  by  devotees,  and  fervently  pray  that  He  may,  according  to  what 
He  Himself  has  said,  appear  in  ihc  hearts  of  all  Gurus,  and  through  them 
teach  their  disciples  that  aspect  of  His  which  is  Mantra. 


CHAPTER.  XIII 


ON  THE  GURU 1 

All  that  has  been  above  mentioned  in  relation  to  Mantra  Tattva, 
depends  on  Gurutattva,  for  the  root  of  initiation,*  is  in  Guru;  the 
root  of  Mantra  is  in  initiation;1  the  root  of  DevatS  is  in  Mantra; 
and  the  root  of  Siddhi  is  in  Devata.  Bhagavan  lias,  therefore,  said 
in  the  Mundamala  Tantra:  “Mantra  is  bom  of  Guru,  and  Devata 
is  bom  of  Mantra,  so  that,  O  Beauteous  One,  Guru  stands  in  the 
place  of  a  grandfather  to  the  I${adevata.  Just  as  service  done  to  the 
father  or  grandfather  pleases  the  son  or  grandson,  service  done  to  Guru 
pleases  Mantra;  service  done  to  Mantra  pleases  Devata;  and  service  done 
to  both  Gum  and  Mantra  also  pleases  Devata.” 

Any  deviation  from  this  line  of  action  produces  contrary  results;  that 
is  to  say,  just  as  service  done  to  the  son  and  grandson  disregarding  the 
father  and  grandfather  really  displeases  instead  of  pleasing  the  former,, 
so  the  worship  of  Mantra  at  a  disregard  of  Gum  or  worship  of 
Devata,  at  a  disregard  of  Mantra  or  worship  of  I?{adcvata,  at  a 
disregard  of  Gum  and  Mantra,  rather  angers  than  pleases  them.  Here 
it  should  also  be  understood  that,  just  as  there  is  no  possibility  of 
pleasing  the  son  and  grandson  by  serving  them  at  a  disregard  of  the 
father  and  grandfather,  so  also  there  is  no  possibility  of  pleasing  the 
father  and  grandfather  by  serving  them  without  care  for  the  son  and 
grandson.  There  is  no  likelihood  of  pleasing  the  Gum  even  by  serving 
him  and  Mantra  at  a  disregard  of  DevatS,  or  him  alone  at  a  disregard  of 
Devata  and  Mantra.  The  necessity  for  these  observations  exists  in  the  fact 
that  nowadays  one  finds  many  disciples  *  who  only  seek  the  protection  of 
Gum  for  fear  of  having  to  make  Japa  4  of  Mantra,  and  to  worship  Devata. 
Such  respect  for  Gum  is  in  itself  a  sign  of  dishonest  motive.  In  fact, 
Siddhi  is  near  at  hand  for  him  only  who  makes  no  distinction  between 
Gum,  Mantra,  and  Devata.*  Sastra  has  therefore  said:  “What  does  not 


1  Gurutattva.  1  Dik$a. 

*  &i$ya.  4  Vidt,  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

*  All  are  DevatS  and  manifestations  of  the  Brahman. 

34 


330 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  greatly  pleased  Jagaddhitri 1  give  to  him  who  makes  do  distinction 
between  Mantra  and  Gurudeva  ?  ”  This  is  what  Sastra  says.  But 
nowadays  people  greatly  dispute  about  the  Guru.  There  are  many  who 
dislike  to  worship  a  man  as  being  in  a  real  sense  Brahman.  As  Mantra 
is,  in  their  opinion,  mere  letters,*  so  Guru  is,  in  their  judgment,  a  mere 
man.8  As  a  matter  of  fact,  ignorance  as  to  the  subject  of  Gurus  is  the 
sole  cause  of  such  a  conclusion,  for  from  what  Sastra  says  on  the  point 
there  is  no  room  for  doubt  that  the  Guru  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  mere 
man.  She  who  is  the  dispeller  of  all  doubts  and  Mother  of  the  Universe 
has  Herself  made  this  clear.  In  the  Yogini  Tantra  it  is  said:  “Devi 
said,  O  MaheSvara,  who  is  the  Guru  whom  Thou,  O  all-merciful  Deva! 
has  called  greater  than  Thyself?”  liwara  replied:  “O  MahadevI,  the 
Diksaguru 4  in  all  Mantras  is,  O  great  Devi,  the  First  Lord 5  Mahakala, 
and  none  other.  He  is  undoubtedly  the  Diksaguru  in  all  Mantras — 
Saiva,  Sakta,  Vaijpava,  Ganapatya,  Aindava,6  Mahaiaiva,  and  Saura. 
He  alone,  and  none  else,  is  the  speaker  of  all  Mantras.  O  Daughter 
of  the  Mountain,  at  the  time  of  giving  Mantra  to  a  disciple 7  Mahakala 
appears  in  the  body  of  man.  O  Devi,  the  Guru  on  whom  the  giver  of 
Mantra8  meditates  in  the  lotus  in  his  head  is  the  same  as  Him  on  whom 
the  disciple 7  also  meditates  in  the  lotus  of  his  head.  Therefore,  O 
Maheivari,  there  is  the  same  Guru  for  both  teacher  •  and  disciple.  O 
Sahkari,  it  is  because  the  Supreme  Guru 10  appears  in  the  body  of  the 
human  Guru  that  Sastras  relate  the  greatness  of  the  latter." 11  Just  as 
an  image  is,  after  infusion  of  life  into  it,  the  appearance 18  Of  Her  who 
lives  on  Mount  Kailasa,11  notwithstanding  that  it  is  made  with  mere  clay 
taken  from  your  or  my  house,  so,  notwithstanding  that  the  body  of  Guru 
is  born  in  this  or  that  country,  it  is  the  appearance  of  Istadevata.  As 
in  the  Durga  Puja  festival  and  other  Pujas  life 14  must  be  established 14 
in  the  image,  so  at  the  time  of  initiating  disciples  in  Mantras  the  Guru 


1  She  who  supports  the  Universe.  *  Akjara. 

*  Instead  of  being  the  embodiment  of  the  one  and  only  Guru,  the  Brahman. 

4  The  Guru  who  initiates.  *  Adinatha, 

*  From  Indu,  meaning  the  moon.  Moon  worshipper. 

*  Si?ya.  *  The  initiator.  *  Guru. 

10  Whom  both  the  earthly  Guru  and  his  Sijya  worship. 

u  It  is  not  the  man  who  is  praised,  but  the  Supreme  Spirit,  whose  re¬ 
presentative  and  embodiment  he  is.  11  Murti. 

B  The  abode  of  Siva,  where  the  Devi  lives  with  Her  Spouse. 

14  Prana. 

“  Pratijtha.  This  refen  to  the  Prara-pratisthi  rite  by  which  through 
power  of  the  worshipper's  consciousness  Sakti  is  awakened  in  the  inert  substance 
of  the  image,  and  which  is  known  as  establishment  of  life  in  the  image. 


ON  THE  GURU 


531 


must  establish  the  life  of  the  Guru1  in  his  own  body.  Were  Gum 
nothing  but  what  we  take  him  to  be,  then  whose  life  is  it  that  is 
established  in  him?  Again,  at  the  time  of  such  establishment  the  Gum 
docB  not  do  so,  saying:  “  Let  the  life  of  me,  holding  such  title,  belonging 
to  such  caste,  and  possessing  such  an  appearance,  be  established.’'  He 
then  establishes  in  Himself  the  vital  force  *  of  the  Supreme  Gum  seated 
in  the  thousand-petalled  lotus  in  the  head  of  Jivas.  He  who  is  beautifully 
white  like  camphor,  the  jasmine  **flower,  or  the  Autumnal  Moon,  with  His 
two  hands  granting  blessing  and  dispelling  fear,4  embraced  on  the  left  by 
His  Sakti,*  bright  like  the  rising  Sun,  He  sinks  His  own  existence  in  the 
sea  of  His  existence,  and,  considering  Himself  to  be  that  Supreme 
Existence,  bows  to  His  own  self  as  His  £i$ya  bows  to  Him.  Just  as  an 
image  is  an  instrument 4  in  which  Divinity  7  is  seated,  so  also  is  the  body 
•of  the  Gum.  Were  it  the  physical  body  of  Gum  which  Sastra  has 
spoken  of  as  “  Guru,”  then  the  formula  for  meditation  8  for  every  Gum 
would  differ  according  to  the  appearance  of  the  individual  Gum.  For 
this  reason  Sastra  has  clearly  stated  that  one  who  thinks  of  Gum  as  a  mere 
man — “  My  Gum  is  such  a  person  having  such  an  appearance  ” — is  never 
liberated.  If  we  were  to  consider  that  the  image  made  for  worship  this 
year  alone  represents  the  true  form  of  the  Mother  of  the  World,  it  follows 
that  the  image  of  the  preceding  or  following  year  is  unlike  Her,  for  Her 
images  cannot  be  exactly  similar.  Indirectly,  also,  it  follows  that  there 
is  no  divinity  in  the  images  built  in  other  people’s  houses.  Similarly,  if 
we  think  that  “  my  Gum  is  He  whose  name  is  such  and  such,  and  who 
has  such  and  such  a  title,”  we  contradict  the  truth  that  “  He  who  is  my 
Lord  is  the  Lord  of  the  world,  He  who  is  my  Gum  is  the  Gum  of  the 
world.”  We  must  therefore  understand  that  in  whatever  form  an  image 
may  be  made,  in  every  such  image  She  alone  appears  who  is  in  all  things 
in  the  world ;  hence  all  images,  though  differing  in  appearance  from  each 
■other,  are  the  same,  in  that  each  embodies  the  Mother  who  is  one,  and 
not  many.  Similarly,  although  Gurus  have  different  physical  bodies, 
they  are  all  same  in  so  far  as  they  are  embodiments  of  the  One.  Sastra 
has  therefore  said :  “  He  who  is  my  Lord  is  the  Lord  of  the  world,  He 
who  is  my  Gum  is  the  Gum  of  the  world;  and  hence  in  all  Tantras  there 
has  been  ordained  one  Dhyana  *  and  one  Mantra  in  the  case  of  the  Gum. 
In  fact,  just  as  the  wick  of  one  lamp  is  ignited  at  the  flame  of  another,  so 

a  That  is  the  Supreme  Guru. 

*  Prana  iakti.  •  Kupd&, 

4  That  is,  he  makes  the  two  mudras  (gestures)  called  Vara  and  Abhaya. 

*  Spouse.  •  Yantra. 

7  Devattva.  4  Dhyina. 

*  Formula  of  meditation. 


532 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  Divine  Sakti  which  is  Mantra  is  communicated  to  the  disciple’s  body 
from  that  of  the  Guru.  Just  as  the  power 1  of  burning  and  giving  light  in 
the  case  of  either  lamp  or  of  the  fire  which  is  the  result  of  their  combina¬ 
tion  remains  the  same  both  before  and  after  the  ignition  (the  fire  in 
both  lamps  being  the  same),  so  the  real  Guru  is  everywhere  the  same, 
whether  in  the  body  of  the  (earthly)  Guru  or  in  that  of  his  disciple. 

It  is  only  so  long  as  Sakti  is  not  fully  communicated  to  the  disciple’s 
body  from  that  of  the  Guru  that  there  subsists  the  relation 1  of  Guru  and 
disciple.  One  is  a  disciple 1  only  so  long  as  one  is  a  Sadhaka.  On  the 
attainment  of  Siddhi,  this  dualism  is  surpassed.  Then  there  is  none 
other  than  She,  the  One  only,  so  that  the  relation  of  Guru  and  disdple 1 
no  longer  subsists.  Siddhi  and  liberation  are  existence  as  attributeless 
Brahman.  But  just  as  it  is  impossible  to  attain  liberation  beyond  the 
reach  of  attributes  without  worship  of  the  Devata  with  attributes,  so  it  is 
impossible  to  attain  monistic  knowledge  without  worship  of  the  Guru. 
Hence  Sastra  has  said:  “  Obeisance  to  the  Guru,  by  whom  is  shown  the 
Brahman,*  who  pervades  the  entire  universe  of  mobile  and  immobile  * 
things.  Obeisance  to  the  Guru,  by  whom  the  eyes  of  Jiva,  blinded  by  the 
darkness  of  ignorance,  are  opened  with  the  collyrium  stick  *  of  knowledge.” 
He  by  whose  grace  the  Brahman  who  pervades  the  Universe  is  revealed 
and  the  eye  of  knowledge  is  opened  is  not  a  mere  man,  in  spite  of  his. 
appearance  as  such. 

When,  after  attainment  of  the  previous  human  birth  at  the  dose  of  a 
journey  through  eighty-four  lakhs  of  births,  the  gate  of  a  Jiva’s  good 
fortune  is  opened,  then  Bhagavan,  Mahdwara  Himself,  appears  before  his 
eyes  as  Guru.  At  that  time  the  wheel  of  Destiny  has  revolved  to  a  point 
at  which  it  places  the  Jiva  in  a  position  where  he  can  see  all-merciful 
Sadafiva  standing  before  him  as  Jiva’s  Guru.  Hence  it  often  happens  that 
the  Guru,  who  has  baffled  search  for  even  a  hundred  years,  gratifies  of 
his  own  accord,  unsought  and  in  one  moment,  the  fortunate  disdple  with¬ 
out  any  effort  on  the  latter’s  part.  By  good  fortune,  a  current  of  air  then 
blows  similar  to  that  which,  after  a  period  of  terrible  drought,  stirs  fresh 
douds  heavy  with  rain,  which  will  soothe  with  its  ample  showers  the 
bosom  of  the  parched  yet  sprouting  fields.  The  crop  of  Sadhana  which 
adorns  the  great  heart  of  the  Sadhaka'  intoxicates  the  world  with  the 
fragrance  of  full-blown  flowers  and  the  beauty  of  full-grown  fruits.  As 
a  rule  that  fortunate  day  does  not  arrive  unless  it  has  been  preceded  by  the 
germs  of  intense  Sadhana  performed  in  previous'births.  We  therefore  often 
find  that,  even  if  a  great  saint,*  the  very  incarnation  of  Siva,  appears  before 
an  unfortunate  Jiva,  the  latter  does  not  bow  to  his  lotus-feet. .  At  that  time 

1  Sakti.  1  VyavahSra.  *  Si?ya.  *  Brahmapadam. 

*  Afijana  or  collyrium  is  used  to  brighten  the  eyes.  •  Mahapuru^a. 


ON  THE  GURU 


5S3 


the  Jiva’s  heart  i a  so  completely  subdued  by  ignorance  through  the  delud¬ 
ing  Maya  of  the  Mother  of  the  World  that  his  eyes  open  to  discover  only 
faults  and  no  virtues  in  such  a  man.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a  Jtva  has 
acquired  a  store  of  religious  merits  in  previous  births,  attachment  and 
single-minded  devotion  to  the  feet  of  the  Guru  are  natural  qualities  of  his. 
-For  this  reason  Bhagavln  Maheivara  Himself  has  said  in  die  Kularnava 
Tantra: 

“  O  beloved,  how  can  that  subtle  aspect  of  Siva  which  is  one,  omni¬ 
present,  attributcless,1  indifferent,  undecaying,  unattached  like  space, 
unbeginning  and  unending,  be  an  object  of  worship  to  the  dualistic 
mind?  ”  “  Hence  it  is  that  the  Supreme  Guru  has  entered  into  the  body 
of  the  human  Guru.  O  Devi,  if  a  Sadhaka  duly  worships  Him  with 
devotion  he  grants  that  Sadhaka  both  enjoyment  and  liberation  (2).  O 
Devi,  although  this  My  form  as  Siva  is  My  gross  aspect,  it  is  yet  being 
full  of  light  and  energy  1 *  imperceptible  to  human  eyes.  For  this  reason  I 
have  assumed  the  form  of  Guru  in  the  world  of  man,  and  thus  protect  the 
race  of  Sisyas  *  (3).  Parama&va  Himself  in  human  body  secretly  wanders 
on  the  earth  in  order  to  favour  Sijyas  (4).  For  the  protection  of 
Sadhus,4 * *  Sadaiiva  assumes  a  modest  (merciful)*  form,  and  though 
being  Himself  above  the  Samsara,  yet  appears  and  acts  in  this  world 
as  though  he  were  a  man  of  the  Samsara  (5).  O  beloved,  the  Sriguru* 
is  Siva,  though  He  has  not  three  eyes7;  Visnu  too,  though  He  has 
not  four  arms;  and  Brahma  also,  though  He  has  not  four  heads* 

(6) .  O  Bhavani,  *  when  the  fruits  of  sin  predominate,  Guru  appears  as 
man,  and  when  the  fruits  of  virtuous  acts  prevail.  Guru  appears  as  Siva 

(7) .  Like  blind  men  deprived  for  ever  of  sight  of  the  sun,  unfortunate 
Jivas  are  unable  to  see  the  real  aspect  of  Guru,  the  embodiment  of  the 
Brahman,  though  he  is  present  before  their  eyes  (8).  It  is  undoubtedly 
true  that  Guru  is  Deva  Sada&va  Himself,  for  who  is  it  who  grants 


1  Ni?kala.  The  Brahman  is  called  Sakai  a  whext  with  Prakrti,  as  it  is 

Nijkala  when  thought  of  as  without  Prakrti,  for  Kail  is  Prakjti  (Saradatilaka, 

chap.  i).  (See  Introduction  to  A.  and  E.  Avalon’s  “  Hymns  to  the  Goddess  ”.) 

*  Tejas.  *  Disciples.  4  The  pious. 

*  The  brackets  are  the  author’s.  The  original  word  is  Niraharhkara — 
without  Ahankara  or  egotism,  which  is  here  rendered  by  the  author  as  modest. 

*  The  revered  Guru.  Sri,  or  Auspicious,  is  a  term  of  respect. 

7  As  has  Siva. 

*  Vi$pu  has  generally  four  arms,  though  in  his  Krsna  Avatara  he  has  two. 
Brahma  has  four  heads. 

*  Feminine  of  Bhava,  a  name  of  Siva  in  the  watery  form  of  the  AjJamilrti. 
The  Vayu  Purana  says  that  He  is  called  Bhava  because  all  things  come  from 
Him  and  subsist  in  water.  The  Devi  is  Bhavani  as  the  Spouse  and  Giver  of 
life  to  Bhava. 


534 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


liberation  to  Sadhakas  if  Guru  be  not  Siva  Himself?  O  Parvatl,1 * *  there- 
is  not  the  least  difference  between  Deva  Sadafiva  and  Sriguru.  Whoever 
makes  a  distinction  between  them  commits  sin  (10).  For,  O  Devi,  by 
assumption  of  the  form  of  a  preceptor,  Guru  Deva  *  severs  the  multitude 
of  bonds  which  bind  a  JIva  to  the  state  of  a  Pa£u,*  and  enables  him  to 
attain  to  the  Parabrahman  (i  i).  Assuming  the  form  of  a  preceptor 4  all* 
merciful,  ISvara  liberates  by  means  of  initiation 4 *  Pa$us  bound  by  the 
bonds  of  Maya  (12).  Just  as  the  words  Ghata,  Kalaia,  and  Kumbha 1 
designate  the  same  thing,  so  the  words  Devata,  Mantra,  and  Gum 
designate  the  same  subject7 * *  (13).  Devata  in  its  ground®  is  the  same 
as  Mantra,®  and  Mantra  in  its  ground  is  the  same  as  Guru.10  Thus  the 
effect  of  worshipping  Devata,  Mantra,  and  Guru  is  the  same  (14).  In 
My  person  as  Siva  I  accept  worship,  and  by  appearing  as  Gum  I  sever 
the  bonds  of  the  Jlva’s  existence  (15).” 

In  the  Gum  Tantra  it  is  said:  “If  through  good  fortune  acquired  by 
merit  in  previous  births  a  Sadhaka  does  Dhyana  and  Stotra  of  Gum,11 
Japa  of  Gurumantra  u,  worship  of,  satisfaction,  and  devotion  to  the  feet  of 
Gum,11 *  then,  O  Devi,  their  Mantras  become  Siddha,14 *  and  they  are 
liberated  from  existence.  The  merit  which  a  Sisya 16  acquires  during  his 
stay  in  the  Guru’s  house  is  imperishable,  and  if  the  Guru’s  house  happens 
to  be  in  a  sacred  place  of  pilgrimage,1*  that  merit  is  increased  a  hundred¬ 
fold.” 

In  the  Rudrayamala  it  is  said:  “By  devotion  to  Gum  a Jiva  will 
attain  the  state  of  Indra,17  but  by  devotion  to  Me  he  will  become  swine. 
(That  is  to  say,  if  a  Jiva,  whilst  giving  devotion  to  his  Isfadcvata,  yet 
slights  his  Gum,  he  becomes  swine.)  In  fact,  no  Sastra  speaks  of  any¬ 
thing  which  is  superior  to  devotion  to  the  Gum.” 


1  The  name  of  the  Devi,  as  daughter  of  the  Mountain  King,  Himalaya. 

1  The  Guru,  who  is  truly  a  Deva,  being  the  earthly  incarnation  of  Siva 

Himself. 

1  The  unenlightened  tamasik  state  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Saslra). 

*  Acarya.  1  Dik?a. 

*  Synonymous  words  meaning  “  pitcher  ”  or  “jar 

7  PadSrtba .  •  That  is,  the  Svarupa  of  Devata  (see  ante) . 

*  That  is,  the  Svarupa  of  Mantra. 

10  That  is,  the  Svarupa  of  Gum. 

n  That  is,  meditation  on  and  hymns  of  praise  of  the  Gum.  Service  is- 

always  given  to  the  Guru  by  the  Si$ya. 

u  That  is,  "  recitation  ”  (see  Introduction  to  Tunica  Sdstra )  of  the  Mantra, 

of  which  Guru  is  the  Devata  or  “  Aing 

“  As  Deva  the  Gum  is  object  of  worship. 

“  Perfected  and  fruitful.  “  Disciple.  10  Tirtha. 

17  Lord  of  the  Celestials. 


ON  THE  GURU 


535 

Again:  “  O  MaheSvari,  fie  to  his  wrath,  fie  to  his  strength,  fie  to  his 
race,  fie  to  his  works  in  whom  devotion  to  Guru  is  not  engendered  l  ” 

The  YoginI  Tantra  says :  “  The  place  where  Guru  resides  is  Kailasa.1 
The  house  in  which  Guru  lives  is  Cmtamani  house.*  The  trees  in  the 
Guru’s  house  are  Kalpa  trees.*  The  creepers  arc  Kalpa  creepers.*  The 
water  even  in  ditches  is  Gahga.®  In  short,  O  Devi,  everything  in  that 
sacred  place  is  sacred.  The  female  servants  in  the  Guru’s  house  are 
Bhairavls,  and  the  male  servants  are  Bhairavas.®  In  this  manner  it  is 
that  an  earnest  Sadhaka  should  think  of  his  Gum.  O  Mahesvari,  He 
who  has  gone  round  his  Gum  but  once  has  circled  the  whole  earth  with 
its  seven  islands.” 

In  the  Viivasara  Tantra  it  is  said  :  “  The  place  where  Gum  resides 
is  Kail.7  The  water  of  his  feet  is  Jahnavi 8 *  Herself.  Gumdcva  is 
Viivesvara  *  incarnate,  and  the  great  Mantra  uttered  by  his  fair  mouth 
is  the  Saviour 10  Brahman  Himself.” 

“  The  appearance  11  of  Gum  is  the  root  of  Dhyana,  the  lotus-foot  of 
Guru  is  the  root  of  Puja,  the  word  of  Gum  is  the  root  of  Mantra,  and  the 
grace  of  Gum  is  the  root  of  Siddhi.” 

“  If  a  Sadhaka  be  cursed  by  Munis,  Pannagas,  or  Suras,1*  or  if  he  be 
threatened  with  the  calamity  of  death,  then,  O  Parvati,  Gum  can  save 
him  even  at  the  time  of  such  terrible  peril  and  none  other.” 

In  the  Guptasadhana  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Guru  is  Brahma.  Gum 
is  Visnu.  Gum  is  Deva  Mahcivara  Himself.  Gum  is  the  place  of 
pilgrimage.13  Gum  is  the  sacrifice.1*  Gum  is  charity  (that  is,  the  religious 
merit  acquired  by  means  of  charity).  Gum  is  devotion  and  austerities.18 
Gum  is  fire.  Gum  is  Surya.1*  The  entire  Universe  is  Gum.”  17 * * * * 


I  The  sacred  mount  and  abode  of  Siva  (see  Introduction  to  my  “  Maha- 
nirvana  Tantra  ”). 

*  The  Chintamani  Grha  is  that  which  yields  all  objects  desired.  Of 
that  the  chamber  or  house  is  built.  The  Devi  there  resides.  In  the  commentary 
on  the  Gau^apada  Sutra  the  Cintamani  house  is  said  to  be  the  place  of  origin 
of  all  those  Mantras  which  bestow  all  desired  objects  (Cintita).  See  “  Maha- 
nirvana  Tantra 

*  Desire-gratifying  celestial  trees. 

*  Creepers  of  the  same  character. 

*  Water  of  Ganges. 

*  The  terms  Bhairava  and  Bhairavi  mean  Siva  and  Sakti  in  these  forms 
of  that  name.  They  also  mean  Tantriks  who  have  been  initiated  in  the 
Viracara  ritual. 

7  The  sacred  city  of  Benares.  8  The  Ganges  as  daughter  of  Jahnu. 

*  Lord  of  the  Universe.  10  Taraka. 

II  Murtl.  11  Sages,  Serpent  Divinities  and  Devas. 

“  Tirtha.  11  Yajfia.  16  Tapasyfi. 

M  The  sun.  17  Gurumaya. 


536 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


“What  further  religious  merit  can  be  acquired  by  charity  or 
devotion,1  or  by  visiting  places  of  pilgrimage,*  by  him  who  has  worshipped 
the  beautiful  feet  of  his  Guru  ?  For  such  an  one  has  worshipped  the  three 
worlds.  All  places  of  pilgrimage  which  exist  in  the  whole  Universe  reside 
in  the  sole  of  the  Guru’s  Lotus-foot.” 

“  Brahma,  Visnu,  Rudra,  and  ParameSvari  Parvati,  Indra,  and  other 
Dcvas,  Yaksas,  and  other  beings  bom  of  Devas,*  Pitrs,4  Ganga,  and  other 
sacred  rivers,  all  Gandharvas,®  reptiles,  mountains  and  other  moving  and 
unmoving  things  in  the  Universe,  are  eternally  seated  in  the  Guru’s  body. 
That  very  instant  the  Guru  is  satisfied,  they,  too,  are  satisfied.” 

“  Even  Sastra  is  not  greater  than  Guru,  nor  is  Tapasya,8  Mantra,  or 
the  fruit  of  religious  rites  greater  than  Guru,  nor  is  the  Devi  Herself 
greater  than  Guru,  nor  is  even  Siva  greater  than  Guru.  No  form  and 
appearance 7  is  superior  to  that  of  Guru,  and  there  is  even  no  Japa 8 
which  is  superior  to  Guru — that  is  to  say,  by  performance  of  Sadhana  of 
Gum  alone  one  becomes  Siddha*  in  all  the  other  modes  of  Sadhana. 
Hence  it  has  been  said  in  theYamala: 

“  Siva  alone  is  Guru,  and  I  am  that  Siva.  O  great  Dew,  Thou,  too, 
art  Guru,  and  Mantra  alone  is  Guru.  For  this  reason  as  regards  Mantra 
there  is  no  difference  between  Gurudeva  and  Istadevata.10  That  Gurudeva 
must  sometimes  be  contemplated  in  the  thousand-petalled  lotus  (in  the 
head),  sometimes  in  the  lotus  of  the  heart  (as  Istadevata),11  and  sometimes 
in  His  visible  worldly  form.” 

In  the  Pichchhila  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Gurus  are  of  two  kinds  accord¬ 
ing  as  they  teach  and  initiate.1*  The  first  is  the  initiating  Gum, u  and 
then  follows  the  teaching  Gum.14  The  initiating  Gum  is  he  from  whom 
initiation  in  Mantra  is  taken,  and  the  teaching  Gum  is  he  from  whom 
Samadhi,  Dhyana,  Dharana,  Japa,  Stava,  Kavaca,  PuraScarapa,  Maha- 
puraicarapa, 18  and  other  various  forms  of  Sadhana  and  Yoga  are  learnt 

I  Tapasya.  *  Tlrtha.  *  Devayoni. 

4  The  forefathers  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra). 

*  Musical  Devayonis :  sons  of  Brahma. 

*  Devotion,  austerities,  etc.  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra). 

7  Murti.  *  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Stislra,  ante. 

•Successful,  accomplished,  perfect;  for  Sakti  is  thereby  fully  developed. 

10  That  is,  the  Guru  as  Deva  and  the  patron  Deva  of  the  worshipper. 
The  Mantra  is  both. 

II  This  is  not  the  Anahata  lotus,  but  another  dose  by  it,  where  the  chosen 
Deity  is  always  worshipped. 

14  Siksaguru  and  Dik^aguru. 

u  Dikfaguru.  14  SilcsSguru. 

11  That  is,  Yoga,  ecstasy,  concentration,  “  recitation  ”  of  Mantra,  hymn, 
amulet,  and  die  two  rites  known  as  Purakarana  and  the  greater  Puraicarapa 
(see  Introduction  to  Tantra  $&tra) . 


ON  THE  GURU 


537 


after  initiation.  Of  these  two  he  is  the  supreme  Guru,  from  whom  the 
great  Mantra  of  IstadevatS  has  been  heard  and  learnt,  and  by  him  alone 
Siddhi  can  be  attained.” 

In  the  Kulagama,  Gurus  have  been  described  and  divided  into  th^e 
following  six  classes: 

“  Instigator 1  (or  he  who  instigates  initiation  by  explaining  its  utility 
and  that  of  Sadhana) ;  Inaugurator  *  (he  who  inaugurates  Sadhana  and 
its  sums)  *  ;  Explainer 4  (or  he  who  explains  Sadhana  and  its  object) ; 
Director  *  (or  the  person  who  definitely  and  clearly  shows  what  Sadhana 
is  and  its  object) ;  Teacher  *  (or  he  who  teaches  Sadhana  and  its  object 7) ; 
and  Illuminator  *  (or  the  person  who  imparts  knowledge  of,  and  concern¬ 
ing,  Sadhana  and  its  object  by  tearing  asunder  the  ties  of  the  heart). 
Know  Gurus  to  be  of  these  six  kinds,  of  which  the  first  five  kinds  are,  as 
it  were,  the  effects  of  the  last  as  the  cause  ”  (that  is  to  say,  without  the 
spiritual  knowledge  which  the  Illuminator  imparts,  instigation,  inaugura¬ 
tion,  explanation,  direction,  and  teaching,  are  not  only  ineffectual,  but 
even  productive  of  great  harm  both  in  this  world  and  hereafter) . 

For  this  reason  Bhagavan,  the  creator  of  all  things,  has  said  in  the 
Pichchhila  Tantra:  “  This  Sadhanaiastra  is  based  solely  on  Guru.  In  it 
there  is  no  beneficent  lord  other  than  Guru  (that  is  to  say,  there  may  be 
hosts  of  lords  who  are  not  beneficent).  O  Mahcivari  !  a  Sadhaka  should 
seek  the  protection  of  Guru.” 

In  the  Rudrayamala  it  is  said:  “  O  ParameSvari !  the  fool  who  com¬ 
mences  Japa  and  Tapas  •  by  reading  books  instead  of  receiving  instructions 
from  Guru  acquires  nothing  but  sin.  Neither  mother  nor  father  nor 
brother  can  save  him.  O  fair  Lady !  Guru  alone  can  in  a  single  moment 
destroy  the  mass  of  his  sins,  for  in  the  Tantra  Sastra  none  but  Guru  has 
any  competence. ,0  One  should  therefore  take  as  one’s  Guru  a  very 
good  man.” 

In  the  Guru  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  If  Guru  be  pleased,  Siva  Himself  is 
pleased;  if  Guru  is  displeased,  the  three-eyed  Deva11  is  displeased;  if 
Guru  be  pleased,  the  all-good  Devi  is  pleased;  and  if  Guru  be  displeased, 
Tripurasundari 17  becomes  displeased.  Hence,  O  Mahdvari !  for  the 

I  Preraka.  *  Sucaka. 

*  He  who  after  the  first  has  sown  the  seed  of  desire,  for  it  brings  the 
Sadhaka  to  the  point  of  commencing  Sadhana. 

*  Vacaka.  *  DarSaka.  *  Silqaka. 

7  That  is,  he  who  goes  into  details  and  teaches  the  ritual. 

*  Bodhaka,  who  gives  intellectual  grasp  of  the  various  aspects  of  the  subject 
and  spiritual  knowledge. 

*  “  Recitation  ”  of  Mantra,  devotion,  austerity,  etc.  (see  Introduction  to 

Tantra  Sistra).  10Adhikara. 

II  Siva.  ”  One  of  the  Dafewna  havidy  S. 


538 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


crossing  of  the  sea  of  SamsSra,  Guru  is  the  only  master,  protector,  and 
destroyer,  and  he  also  is  the  grantor  of  liberation.” 

The  Sadhaka  should  now  realize  whether  the  state  of  a  Guru  as 
described  in  the  above-mentioned  quotations  from  the  Sastra  is  something 
human  or  Divine,  something  appertaining  to  a  Jiva  or  to  the  Brahman. 
If  we  are  to  suppose  that  the  Gurudeva  becomes  man  because  that 
Gunriakti 1  which  is  Brahman  appears  in  a  human  body,  we  must  also 
conclude  that  Devata  becomes  day  or  stone  because  She  appears  in  a 
clay  or  stone  image.2 *  In  fact,  that  which  constitutes  the  state  of  a  Guru  s 
is  undivided  perfect  Brahman.4 *  Though  appearing  in  clay  or  in  stone, 
the  Brahman  is  all-pervading,  and  cannot  be  limited  to  any  point.  It  is 
impossible  that  that  which  docs  not  become  limited  in  inert  clay  or  stone 
will  become  so  in  constious  man.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  a  Sadhaka  can  by 
the  force  of  his  own  Sadhana  awaken  the  &akti  of  consciousness  in 
unconsdous  images  made  of  clay  or  stone.  On  the  other  hand,  to  him 
who  is  even  not  entitled  to  be  called  a  Sadhaka,  but  is  merely  a  seeker  of 
competency4  for  Sadhana,  that  day  image  is  never  conscious.  For 
this  reason,  then,  it  is  necessary,  in  order  to  gain  Sakti,6  to  distinguish 
between  conscious  and  unconscious.  Amongst  all  consdous  things  such 
an  one  is  required  as  can  by  the  overpowering  force  of  its  consciousness 
make  even  other  unconsdous  things  consdous.  That  is  why,  on  the 
subject  of  taking  Gurus,7  the  Sastra  prescribes  that  discrimination  be  made 
between  persons  competent  and  incompetent  to  become  Gurus,  otherwise, 
had  the  Sakti  which  constitutes  man  been  identical  with  the  Sakti  which 
constitutes  the  state  of  a  Guru,  any  man  would  be  acceptable  as  Guru, 
and  there  would  have  been  no  necessity  for  such  a  critical  examination 
of  inner  and  outer  Saktis.® 

In  the  Kulagama  it  is  said :  “  Those  who  are  instructed  by  sages 
possessed  of  spiritual  knowledge  become  undoubtedly  possessed  of  spiritual 
knowledge  themselves.  Those  who  arc  instructed  by  Pafois  *  should, 
O  Devi!  be  themselves  known  as  Paius.  For  though  a  learned 

1  The  power  resident  in  the  Guru  as  such— not  the  ordinary  human  Sakti. 

*  The  Gurutva  or  Guruhood.  *  One  of  the  DaSamahavidya. 

4  Literally,  Brahmatva  or  Brah manhood.  4  Adhikara. 

1  The  Sakti  of  consciousness  spoken  of  above.  That  is,  those  who  have 

not  realized  consciousness  in  all  things  must,  in  order  to  arrive  at  this  state, 

make  the  distinction  and  take  a  Guru. 

7  Gurukarana. 

®  The  inner  Sakti  is  that  which  manifests  as  true  spirituality.  The  outer 
Sakti  is  such  knowledge  and  faculties  as  learning  in  Sastra,  details  of  Sidhana, 
ritual,  etc. 

*  SJdhakas  of  the  Tamasik  class  in  the  three  Bhavas  (see  Introduction  to 
Tantra  S&stra). 


ON  THE  GURU 


539- 


man  can  save  an  ignorant  man,  the  latter  can  never  save  another 
ignorant  man.  A  boat  can  carry  a  stone  across  a  river,  but  a  stone  can 
never  carry  another  stone  across  it.  One  person  can  never  guide  another 
person  along  a  path  which  he  has  never  trod  himself;  but  he  who  has 
travelled  along  any  one  path,  reached  its  end,  and  thus  known  the  goal  of 
all  paths,  can,  standing  at  the  centre  to  which  all  paths  trend,  call  to  the 
travellers  on  each  of  the  paths,  and  thus  help  them  to  reach  the  place 
where  he  himself  stands.” 

In  the  Mahanirvapa  Tantra  it  is  said:  "  For  Sakti-mantra  a  Sakta 
Guru  is  best,  for  Sivamantra  a  Saiva  Guru  is  best,  for  Vi$numantra  a 
Vai$pava  Guru  is  best,  for  Surya  mantra  Saura  Guru  is  best,  for 
Ganapati-mantra  a  Ganapatya  Guru  is  best,  and  a  Kaula  Guru  is  best 
for  all  these  Mantras.1  A  wise  man  should,  therefore,  heartfully  desire  to 
take  initiation  from  a  Kaula.”  For  “  whoever  has  been  initiated  in  a 
Mantra  by  a  PaSu  Guru  *  is  undoubtedly  a  Pa£u.  Whoever  has  taken 
Mantra  from  a  Viraguru  *  becomes  a  Vira.  Whoever  has  taken  Mantra 
from  a  Kaula  Guru  (one  following  Kulachara)  *  knows  Brahman.” 

In  the  Brhannila  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  A  Saiva  may  teach  other 
Mantras  (than  the  Sivamantra).  A  Vaisnava  may  teach  those  (Vaispavas) 
belonging  to  his  own  community.  A  Saura  may  teach  Sauras.  A  Gana¬ 
patya  may  give  initiation  in  worship  of  Gapapati.  A  Kaula,  however,  is 
competent  to  give  initiation  in  Saiva,  Sakta,  Vaisnava,  and  all  other 
worships.  One  should,  therefore,  by  all  means  seek  the  protection  of  a 
Kaula  Guru.” 

In  the  Saradatilaka  it  is  said:  “  A  Guru,  according  to  the  Tantra 
Sastra,  is  one  who  is  possessed  of  the  following  qualities:  A  body  which 
is  pure  both  on  the  mother’s  and  father’s  side;  purity  of  thought;  mastery 
over  the  senses;  knowledge  of  the  substance  of  all  Tantras;  knowledge  of 
the  purpose  of  all  Sastras;  a  doer  of  good  toothers;  devoted  to  Japa, 
Puja,5  and  so  forth;  truthfulness  of  speech  acquired  by  Tapas;  *  calmness; 


1  To  each  member  of  the  communities  worshipping  Devi  (Sikta),  Siva 
(Saiva),  Visnu  (Vaiinava),  the  Sun  (Saura),  or  Gancia  (Gapapalya),  the 
Mantra  of  the  Devati  worshipped  is  given.  Thus  the  Sakta  receives  the 
Saktimantra  at  initiation.  The  passage  says  that  the  Mantra  should  ordinarily 
be  given  by  a  Guru  of  the  same  community  as  the  worshipper,  though  a 
Tantrik  Guru  of  the  Kaulacara  may  give,  and  is  the  best  to  give  them  all. 

*  One  practising  the  Pa  i  vicar  a — that  is,  the  way  of  the  Pa$u  (see  ante). 

*  One  practising  the  Viracira,  the  AcSra  of  the  Virabhava;  as  to  which,  see 
Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 

•The  last  and  highest  of  the  T&ntrik  Aciras  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  £&stra). 

•  “  Recitation  ”  of  Mantra  and  ceremonial  worship. 

•  Devotion,  austerity,  self-restraint,  self-control,  etc. 


-540 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


proficiency  in  the  Vedas  and  the  Vedangas; 1 * *  eagerness  to  know  the  truths 
of  the  Yoga  path,  and  who  feels  the  presence  of  Devata  in  the  heart,  and 
so  forth. 

In  the  ViSvasara  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Such  a  Guru  is  prescribed  by 
Sastra  as  is  eager  to  impart  knowledge  of  all  Sastras,  efficient,  learned 
in  the  meaning  of  all  Sastras,  sweet  of  speech,  of  good  appearance,  having 
all  his  limbs,  Kulina  (one  practising  the  Kulacara).  Of  auspicious  appear¬ 
ance,  self-controlled,  truthful,  Brahmapa,*  of  a  peaceful  mind,  devoted  to 
the  welfare  of  his  parents,  and  to  all  other  duties  belonging  to  an 
ASrama,*  and  living  in  same  country  as  the  disciple.”  8 

From  the  special  mention  of  the  adjective  “  Brahmana  ”  it  must  be 
understood  that  none  but  a  Brahmana  can  be  a  Guru  for  the  initiation 
of  all  castes. 

In  the  Bhuvanefvari  Tantra  it  is  said:  “O  great  twice-born!  A 
Brahmana  possessed  of  the  knowledge  of  all  times 4 * *  can  favour  all  castes 
by  giving  them  initiation  in  Mantras.  In  his  absence  a  peaceful  and 
pious  Ksattriya  can  so  favour  VaiSyas  and  Sudras.  In  the  absence 
of  even  a  Ksattriya  Guru,  a  Vaiiya  possessed  of  the  above  good  qualities 
may  favour  Sudras.”  A  Sudra  cannot  be  a  Guru  even  for  the  initiation 
of  his  own  castemen,  much  less  can  he  initiate  men  belonging  to  other 
castes.  Thus  the  Saktananda  Tarangini  says:  “  If  a  Sudra  hears  Vidya* 
— i.e.,  receives  a  great  Mantra  from  the  mouth  of  another  Sudra — he  is 
doomed  to  hell*  in  the  next  world,  and  suffers  from  constant  misery 
in  this.” 

In  the  Vasudeva-rahafya  it  is  said :  “  If  a  Sudra  hears  Vidya  or 
Mantra  from  the  mouth  of  another  Sudra,  he  starts  for  the  Raurava 
Hell  with  ten  million  generations  of  his  family.  Both  the  giver  and 
receiver  of  Mantra  in  such  a  case  meet  with  the  same  consequence. 
For  every  word  given  and  received  both  become  guilty  of  the  sin  of 
Brahminicide.7 

In  the  Jfianananda tarangini  it  is  said :  “  A  Sudra  should  never  give 
Mantra  to  another  Sudra.  If  he  does  so,  both  the  giver  and  the  receiver 


1  The  Vedangas  or  “  limbs  ”  of  the  Vedas  are  Siksa  (science  of  proper 
articulation),  Kalpa  (ritual),  Vyakarana  (linguistic  analysis  or  grammar). 
Nirukta  (explanation  of  difficult  Vedic  words),  Jyoti?a  (astronomy),  Chandas 

(metre). 

1  This  is  explained  post. 

*  For  the  reason  of  this,  see  post.  4  Past,  present,  and  future. 

1  Vidya  is  a  Mantra,  but  may  here  mean  such  matters  as  are  the  subject 
of  spiritual  knowledge,  though  the  text  would  indicate  the  former  meaning. 

•  Naraka. 

7  The  killing  of  a  Br&hmana  is  one  of  the  great  sins. 


ON  THE  GURU  54! 

of  Mantra  will  dwell  in  Hell  with  thirty  million  generations  of  their  own 
families.” 

In  the  K&madhenu  Tantra  it  is  said:  “The  country  in  which  a 
sinful  Sudxa  selling 1 * * 4  Mantra  lives  becomes  fallen,  and  its  ruler  also  is 
contaminated  with  sin.  O  Lady  of  restless  glances  1  how  can  the  tongue 
of  that  great  sinner  pronounce  Mantra?  O  fair  Lady !  his  tongue  is  full 
of  excrement,  urine,  and  blood.  His  face  is  like  excrement  and  urine, 
his  food  is  made  of  excrement,  his  water  is  urine  itself,  and  he  is  a 
Chandala 1  by  caste.  The  sight  of  his  face  makes  Gangi  *  to  fly  from 
Her  own  waters,  and  millions  of  sites  of  pilgrimages  *  to  fly  from  their 
respective  seats.  Ganga,  the  purifier  of  the  three  worlds,  undoubtedly 
purifies  even  such  great  sinners  as  have  committed  such  sins  as  Brah- 
minicide  and  so  forth,  but  at  the  sight  of  a  Mantra-selling  Sudra  She  at 
once  leaves  the  place  and  repairs  to  Brahmaloka.”  * 

The  adjeedve,  “belonging  to  an  ASrama,” *  specified  above  in  the 
enumeration  of  the  necessary  characteristics  of  a  Guru  should  be  under¬ 
stood  to  mean  “  belonging  to  the  domestic  ASrama.”  In  the  definition 
of  a  Guru  given  by  the  KulSrijava  Tantra  it  is  stated:  “  A  Guru  should 
know  the  meaning  of  all  SSstras  and  be  a  householder.”  The  purpose 
of  the  requirement  that  the  Guru  should  be  “  living  in  the  same  country  ” 
(as  the  disciple)  is  that  if  the  Guru  lives  in  another  country  it  is  difficult 
for  the  disciple  to  take  instructions  from  and  to  serve  him  constantly. 


1  That  is,  making  a  trade  of  giving  Mantra;  which  is  not,  however, 

unfortunately  confined  to  Siidras. 

*  One  of  the  lowest  castes.  *  The  River  Ganges  as  Deity. 

4  TIrthas.  *  The  highest  of  the  regions. 

*  See  the  quotation  from  the  Vi6vas5ra  Tantra  ante.  - 


CHAPTER  XIV 


DISCUSSION  UPON,  AND  SELECTION  OF 
THE  GURU 1 

In  the  Yogini  Tanlra  it  is  said: 

“Mantra  should  not  be  taken  from  the  father,  maternal  grand¬ 
father,  brother,  one  who  is  younger  in  age,  or  from  one  who  is  of  the 
party  of  one’s  enemy." 

In  the  Ganeiavimariini  it  is  said:  “Initiation  by  a  Yati,8  the 
father,  one  living  in  a  forest,  or  when  taken  from  a  Sannyasi  does  no  good 
to  a  Sadhaka.” 

In  the  Rudrayamala  it  is  said:  “  A  husband  should  not  initiate  his 
wife,  nor  a  father  his  son  or  daughter,  and  a  brother  should  not  initiate 
his  brother.  But  if  a  husband  is  Siddha  Mantra,1  he  can  initiate  his  wife 
as  his  Sakti,  and  in  that  case  the  Guru  will  not  acquire  fatherhood  by 
reason  of  his  having  given  Mantra,  nor  will  the  disciple  become  his 
■daughter  by  reason  of  having  received  it  from  him.4  (The  provision  that 
a  husband  may  initiate  his  wife  as  his  Sakti  must  be  understood  to  apply 
to  Viracara  and  Kulacara 1  only.  Such  an  initiation  is  not  ordained  for 
PaSvacara  *  and  the  like,  for  in  such  Acaras  there  is  no  worship  with 
Sakti.)  The  letters 7  in  a  Mantra  are  the  Devata,  and  the  Devata  is  Guru 
himself;  so  that  Sadhakas  and  Sadhikas*  who  desire  their  own  good 
should  make  no  distinction  between  Mantra,  Devata,  and  Guru." 

In  the  Siddhi  Yaraala  it  is  said:  “  0  beloved  one!  if  by  good  fortune 
.a  Sadhaka  attains  Siddhi  in  a  Mantra,  he  may  dispense  with  the  ordinary 
■conditions  for  becoming  a  Guru,  and  initiate  his  own  Sakti  (wife).” 


1  Guruvicara—  that  is,  selection  with  judgment  after  discussion. 

1  Literally,  “  One  who  has  completely  subdued  the  senses an  ascetic  so 
called. 

*  This  term  has  here  a  technical  meaning,  which  is  explained  at  see  post. 

4  Ordinarily,  when  the  Guru  gives  Mantra,  the  $i?ya  becomes  his  son;  but 
this  is  not  so  in  the  case  stated. 

4  The  two  divisions  of  TSntrik  Sadhakas  of  those  names  (see  Introduction  to 
Tantra  Sistra). 

4  The  Acara  of  the  Paius.  7  Varria. 


*  Women  Sadhakas. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


543 


In  the  Y&mala  it  is  said:  “  A  husband  should  not  initiate  his  wife  nor 
-a  father  his  daughter;  but  if  a  husband  is  Siddhamantra,1  he  may  initiate 
his  wife  as  his  Sakti,  and  in  that  case  the  initiated  docs  not  become 
a  daughter  to  him.  If  a  father  is  Siddhamantra,1  he  may  initiate  his  son, 
and  a  brother  may  be  initiated  by  a  brother  who  is  Siddhamantra, 
and  thus  become  a  Siddhamantra  himself.  For,  in  the  case  of  a 
Siddhamantra  all  disqualifications  for  giving  and  receiving  initiation 
become  qualifications.*  ” 

The  word  Siddhamantra  does  not  here  mean  “  one  who  has  attained 
Siddhi  in  a  Mantra.”  It  is  a  technical  word,  explained  in  the  Krama- 
■candrika  as  follows:  “  Kali,  Tara,  $otfaSi,  BhuvaneSvari,  Bhairavi,  Chhin- 
namasta,  Dhumavatl,  Bagala,  Matangi,  KamalStmika.  These  ten  Maha- 
vidyas  are  called  Siddhavidyas.  Those  who  are  initiated  in  their  Mantra 
arc  called  Siddhamantras.” 

In  the  K5li  Kalpa  it  is  said:  “  O  Mahadevi!  if  a  Mantra  is  worship¬ 
ped  by  three  generations  (great-grandfather,  grandfather,  and  father)  in 
succession,  then  that  great  Mantra  becomes  Siddhamantra.” 

In  the  Matsyasukta,  it  is  said :  “  A  mantra  given  by  a  father  is  not 
faulty  in  &aiva  and  Sakta  rites,  although  it  may  not  have  force  in  other 
rites.” 

Moreover,  in  certainwspecial  matters  a  father  has  the  right  to  initiate 
his  eldest  son  if  he  is  worthy,  as,  for  instance,  the  Matsyasukta  says: 
■“  One  may  give  (Mantra)  to  his  eldest  son,  the  crest  gem  of  his  family." 

The  Srikrama  says:  “  Mantra  may  with  prudence  and  care  be  given 
to  an  intelligent  eldest  son.” 

And  so  forth. 


Women  Gurus 

The  Rudrayamala  says  that  a  woman  may  be  a  Guru  who  possesses 
the  following  qualities:  She  must  be  Kulina  (practising  Kulac&ra,1  Kulaja 
(bom  of  a  Kaula  4  or  respectable  family),  of  auspicious  appearance,'  fair 
face,4  and  lotus-eyed;  decked  with  gold  and  gems;  endowed  with  intellect, 
calmness  of  mind,  and  all  other  good  qualities;  a  follower  of  her  Acira,7 


1  See  below.  ■  That  is,  all  disqualifications  cease. 

*  That  is,  the  Ac&ra  of  the  Kaula  division  of  Tantrik  SSdhakas. 

*  A  family  which  is  and  has  been  in  past  generations  followers  of  Kulac&ra. 
1  She  must  be  endowed  with  all  good  signs. 

*  Literally,  “  whose  face  is  like  the  moon 

7  Sad&c&ra.  Ac&ra  is  the  way  or  practice  which  the  particular  person 
should  follow. 


544 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


good,  pious,  and  chaste,1  with  control  over  the  senses;  of  good  conduct 
and  devoted  to  the  service  of  her  elders;  proficient  in  Mantras  and  in 
their  meanings;  ever  engaged  in  Japa,*  and  devoted  to  the  worship  of 
her  Is^adevata.3  By  the  worship  of  such  a  woman  both  Sadhana  Sakti * 
and  spiritual  knowledge  is  attained.  A  widow  should  not  initiate.* 
Initiation  by  a  woman  is  to  be  recommended;  in  particular,  initiation 
by  a  mother  of  her  son,  which  gives  results  eight-fold  greater  than  is 
ordinary. 

A  widow,  however,  may  initiate  if  she  has  sons.  A  Siddhamantra  * 
may,  without  any  restriction,  be  taken  from  widows,  and  such  initiation 
will  have  ordinary  effect.  If,  however,  it  is  taken  from  the  mother,  it 
will  produce  eight-fold  effect.  If  a  Sat! 1 * * *  who  has  both  husband  and  sons 
gives  Siddhamantra  without  request  and  of  her  own  initiative,  then  also 
such  initiation  will  produce  an  effect  eight  times  that  of  an  ordinary 
initiation.  If  a  mother  gives  her  son  the  Mantra  she  herself  worships, 
and  the  son  becomes  devoted  to  it,  he  undoubtedly  acquires  the  eight 
forms  of  Siddhi.  O  Devi!  initiation  in  the  mother’s  own  Mantra  is 
indeed  precious;  the  Sadhaka  who  receives  it  from  his  mother  in  the  first 
place  obtains  enjoyment 8 * 10  in  whatsoever  form 1  he  desires,  and  then  un¬ 
doubtedly  becomes  possessed  of  the  knowledge  of  the  meaning  of  thousands 
of  crores 10  of  Mantras,  and  finally  attains  liberation.  If  a  mother  gives  her 
own  Mantra  in  a  dream,  and  notwithstanding  the  Sadhaka  is  again  initiat¬ 
ed,  he  is  doomed  to  be  bom  as  a  Danava.11  If  through  special  good  fortune  a 
mother  initiates  her  son  at  his  request,  there  is  in  that  case  no  necessity 
for  Mantravicara,*  and  the  Sadhaka  acquires  Siddhi.  In  the  case  also  of 
a  Mantra  received  in  a  dream  there  is  no  need  for  Vicara,®  either  in 
respect  of  the  Guru  or  the  Mantra. 

In  the  Rudrayamala  it  is  said:  “  In  the  case  of  a  Mantra  received  in 
a  dream  there  is  no  necessity  for  Vicara 11  of  Gum  and  Si|ya.  If  a  Mantra 


I  Sadhvi,  female  of  Sadhu. 

*  “  Recitation  ”  of  Mantra  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra). 

*  The  particular  Devata  which  she  worships. 

*  Power  inherent  in  and  derived  from  Sadhana. 

4  Ordinarily;  for,  sec  post.  *  See  ante. 

7  A  wife  perfectly  devoted  to  her  husband.  4  Bhoga. 

•Literally,  “body”  (Sarira) — he  may  by  Sakama  Sadhana  obtain  such 

forms  of  enjoyment  in  this  body,  or  in  another  body  in  another  birth.  By  Yoga 

he  can  enter  into  other  bodies  in  this  birth.  Thus,  if  he  desires  to  heroine  a 

R5ja,  he  may  in  this  or  the  next  birth  become  one. 

10  A  crore  is  ten  millions. 

II  Demoniac  enemies  of  the  Devas. 

u  Discussion  with  a  view  to  select  {see  ante). 


545 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 

is  received  in  a  dream  from  a  woman,  it  will  be  purified  by  a  Sanukara.*’ 1 
“  No  Mantra  becomes  effective  without  the  taking  of  Gum,*  therefore  the 
life  of  the  Guru  should  be  invoked  into  a  Mantra  received  in  a  dream 
and  into  a  Gha|a,  and  the  Mantra  should  then  be  received  by  writing  it 
on  a  banian  *  leaf  with  Kunkuma.”  *  This  is  laid  down  in  the  Yoginl 
Tantra  and  other  books. 

The  Dbyina,8  Mantra,  Stava,*  Kavaca 1  and  so  forth,  for  women 
Gurus  are  different  from  those  for  male  Gurus.  S&dhakas  will  leam  them 
from  the  Mafrkabhcda,  Gupta-sadhana,  and  other  Tantras. 

We  have  above  quoted  but  briefly  a  few  short  excerpts  from  all  that 
has  been  said  in  Sastra  concerning  GuruvicSra  8  and  the  outer  charac¬ 
teristics  *  of  Guru. 

We  have  not  even  touched  the  inner  characteristics  of  Guru,  which 
have  been  specified  in  the  Kulanjava,  KamSkhya,  Rudray&mala,  and 
other  Tantras.  For  an  exposition  of  these  deep  and  solemn  spiritual 
sayings  would  require  a  separate  volume;  secondly,  these  statements  are 
not  for  public  ears;  and  thirdly,  we  doubt  whether  the  Gurus  of  the 
present  day  will  be  able  to  put  their  teeth  into  them.10  Far  less  do  we 
expect  that  Sisyas11  will  be  able  to  judge  and  select  Gurus  with  in¬ 
telligence.  We  therefore  refrain  from  undertaking  what  is  both  a  useless 
and,  at  the  same  time,  improper  task. 

Guru  Family  and  Family  Guru  18 

In  the  Yoginl  Tantra  it  is  said :  “  A  special  honour  appertains  to  the 
Guru  family  for  ten  generations 18  by  reason  of  giving  Mantra  in  Paivacara; 
for  twenty-five  generations  by  reason  of  giving  Mantra  in  Viracara;  for 


1  Mantrasamskara — that  is,  purification  of  the  Mantra,  which  is  done 
afterwards. 

*  That  is,  acceptance  of  Guru  by  §i?ya,  and  of  Si?ya  by  Guru. 

*  Vaja.  *  A  red  powder  made  of  a  root  called  Sa(hi,  coloured  red. 

1  The  formula  containing  a  description  of  the  Devata,  who  is  the  subject 
of  meditation.  *  Hymn  of  praise. 

1  Amulet.  8  Selection  with  judgment  of  a  Guru. 

*  That  is,  his  knowledge  of  Sadhana,  Sistra,  etc.,  as  compared  with 
spiritual  intuition. 

10  That  is,  understand  them  even  a  little.  11  Disciples. 

i*  Gurukula  and  Kulaguru — that  is,  the  subject  of  the  Guru’s  own  family 
and  of  die  Guru  himself,  who  it  family  Guru  to  others. 

18  That  is,  if  in  searching  for  a  Guru  one  finds  a  member  of  a  Guru  family 
who  comes  within  ten  generations  of  an  ancestor  of  his  who  had  initiated  an 
ancestor  of  the  present  intending  Si?ya,  then  the  Sijya  should  accept  him  as  his 
Gutu,  and  so  mutatis  mutandis  with  the  rest. 

35 


546 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


fifty  generations  where  the  Mantra  is  one  of  any  of  the  MahavidySs,1  and 
and  for  one  hundred  generations  by  reason  of  teaching  Brahmayoga.” 

In  the  Fichchhila  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  If  a  Si$ya  forsakes  the  family 
of  his  ancestral  Guru  under  a  sinful  delusion,  he  dwells  in  terrible  Hell 1 
as  long  as  the  Sun,  Moon  and  Stars  endure.” 

In  the  Bfhaddharma  Purana  it  is  said:  “  For  this  reason,  if  a 
descendant  of  the  Guru  family,  who  is  even  younger  in  age,8  is  a  learned 
man,  he  should  be  accepted  without  discussion  as  Guru  for  initiation 
because  he  belongs  to  the  Guru  family.”  Many  Tantras  have  in  this  way 
ordained  that  the  Sisya  cannot  forsake  the  Guru  family.  But  in  course  of 
time  this  ordinance  has  become  the  cause  of  the  ruin  of  the  Arya  Society. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  cause  of  this  ruin  is  not  the  ordinance  itself, 
but  it  is  the  arrogance  of  the  Guru  family  and  the  ignorance  of  Sisyas 
which  has  brought  it  about. 

In  the  Kularnava  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Death  overtakes  him  who  for¬ 
sakes  Mantra,  poverty  overtakes  him  who  forsakes  Guru,  and  the  Sadhaka 
who  forsakes  both  Mantra  and  Guru  goes  to  the  Raurava  Hell.”  Nowadays 
there  are  many  who  would  make  this  verse  an  authority  against  forsaking 
the  Guru  family.  But  according  to  Tantrik  Acaryas 1  a  Sadhaka  will  be 
'Considered  sinful  in  the  sense  of  this  verse  only  if  he  forsakes  his  own  Guru 
and  Mantra;  for  one  cannot  abandon  a  thing  which  one  has  not  accepted. 
The  saying  “  One  should  not  forsake  the  family  of  his  ancestral  Guru  ” 
means  that  while  there  is  a  person  fit  to  be  Guru  in  the  Guru  family,  one 
should  not  forsake  him  and  adopt  another  Guru.  Otherwise,  the  Sisya 
is  not  prohibited  from  leaving  the  Guru  family.  What,  then,  do  the 
words  “should  not  forsake”  mean?  Even  the  verses  quoted  above  from 
the  Yogini  Tantra  ‘  are  interpreted  by  some  people  to  mean  that  succes¬ 
sive  generations  should  be  honoured  as  descendants  of  Gurus  of  the 
Sisya’s  ancestor,  even  if  they  are  not  actually  taken  as  Gurus.8 

We  do  not  object  to  this  interpretation.  It  cannot,  however,  have 
been  intended  by  the  Sastra  that  members  of  the  ancestral  family  of  Guru 
must  be  taken  as  Gurus,  even  if  they  are  not  fit  to  be  such.  This  is  clearly 
put  in  the  Brhaddharma  Purapa,  which  says .  that,  “  If  a  descendant  of 
the  Guru  family  who  is  even  younger  in  age  is  a  learned  man,  he  should 
be  taken  as  Guru  ”  8 ;  that  is  to  say,  in  such  a  case  only  the  claim  of  the 


1  The  ten  great  murtis  of  the  Devi. 

*  Naraka. 

*  That  is,  than  some  third  person  not  belonging  to  the  Gum  family, 

*  Learned  men.  *  See  anU. 

8  That  is,  though  such  may  not  be  taken  as  Gurus,  respect  must  be  shown 
and  support  given  to  them. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


547 


Guru  family  is  indisputable.  As  to  placing  oneself  in  the  hands  of  an 
incompetent  person  simply  out  of  regard  for  the  Guru  family,  we  leave  it 
to  the  intelligent  reader  to  decide  whether  upon  a  consideration  of  the 
principles  which  govern  the  matter  of  the  Guru  such  a  proposition  is 
reconcilable  with  Dharma  and  reason.  A  learned  man,  though  younger 
in  age,  is  older  in  knowledge.  In  the  domain  of  knowledge  the  Sadhana- 
4astra  is  concerned  with  seniority  of  knowledge  only.  Hence  a  learned 
man,  even  if  he  is  younger  in  age,  is  considered  older,  and  this  seniority 
entitles  him  to  be  a  Guru.  ,  Sisyas  should  also  remember  here  that  the 
learning  which  is  here  spoken  of 1 * * * * *  is  not  the  sort  of  learning  for  which 
degrees  or  titles  *  are  given.  On  the  contrary,  the  learning  I  speak  of  is 
that  which  utterly  destroys  all  the  bondage  of  JIva.*  Nowadays,  most  of 
those  who  represent  the  ideal  type  of  a  learned  man  in  worldly  society 
are  considered  devoid  of  all  sense,  and  perfectly  ignorant  in  the  society  of 
Sadhakas.  Hence,  when  one  speaks  of  a  learned  man  in  the  Guru 
family  we  must  be  understood  to  be  speaking  of  one  who  possesses  the 
learning  which  makes  a  man  a  Guru,  and  not  the  learning  which  consists 
in  knowledge  of  the  ordinances  of  the  Smfti,  or  the  subtleties  of  the  Nyaya 
philosophy.  Notwithstanding  that  a  man  is  considered  to  be  learned 
.according  to  the  notions  of  society,  the  Si?ya  should  ascertain  whether  he 
is  learned  in  the  science  of  Sadhana.  To  the  misfortune  of  Indian  Society 
accomplished  Sadhakas  and  Mahipumsas  *  have  disappeared  from  Guru 
families,  and  with  them  also  the  divine  energy  *  acquired  by  their 
Sadhana.  The  ruins  of  those  Guru  families  now  generally  consist  of  a 
few  Gurus,  who  exist  like  wicks  which  smell  foul  after  the  lamps  have 
been  extinguished.  Society  is  on  the  verge  of  bring  destroyed  by  their 
oppressions  and  persecutions.  They  think  that  the  profession  of  a  Guru 
is  a  second  Kulinism.' 

Considering  how  their  indulgence  in  acts  repugnant  to  Dharma  is 
daily  increasing,  and  how  much  of  the  poisonous  fruits  of  their  Karma 
have  become  ripe,  it  seems  that  the  day  is  not  far  off  when  these  Gurus 
will  be  paid  off.7  Although  such  paying  off  is  inevitable,  according  to 
natural  laws,  yet  we  shall  raise  here  one  or  two  points  dealt  with  in  the 
:£&stra.  For  these  Gurus  have  decided  that  they  have  got  a  charter  over 


1  That  is,  the  learning  of  the  Guru,  on  which  account  he  is  selected  to 

give  initiation.  *  Upadhi. 

1  Literally,  destroys  all  Upadhis  of  Jlvahood,  meaning  the  philosophical 

Upadhis  of  name  and  form.  There  is  here  a  play  on  the  word  Upadhi. 

*  Great  men.  *  Tejas. 

•  As  the  Kullns  think  that  by  virtue  of  their  birth  they  have  a  right  to  a 
superior  position  in  society,  so  do  Guru  families. 

7  That  is,  will  receive  the  Dakfiga  ex'  present  made  to  the  BrShmana  and  go. 


548 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  race  of  Si?yas  for  all  time,  till  the  day  of  final  dissolution,  so  that  no 
one  has  now  the  power  to  deprive  them  of  their  right.  They  think  that 
even  if  they  are  self-willed  and  oppressive,  Sisyas  have  no  right  to  discuss- 
the  matter,  for  “  there  should  be  no  discussion  of  the  Guru’s  family.”  1 * * 
We  ask,  Who  has  given  them  this  charter?  He  within  whose  dominion 
these  matters  arc  has  not  given  such  a  charter.  On  the  contrary,  he  long 
ago  foresaw  that  a  forged  charter  might  be  produced,  and  made  provisions 
accordingly.  It  is  because  these  provisions  are  not  known  to  the  public 
that  all  this  mischief  has  been  done.  If  either  Guru  or  Sisya  has  wrong 
notions  on  this  matter,  he  should  know  the  truth  as  stated  in  the  Sastra, 
and  be  careful  of  his  welfare. 

In  the  Rudrayamala  it  is  said:  “  One  should  abandon  a  Guru  who 
is  destitute  of  Brahma-bliss,  ill-favoured,  of  evil  repute,  debased,  of  crooked 
mind,*  and  heinously  sinful.  No  man,  unless  he  is  the  Guru,  should  be 
honoured  who  suffers  from  the  decomposing,  or  the  Sitra,  form  of  the 
eight  kinds  of  leprosy;  one  who  habitually  practises  black  magic8 ;  sells 
gold  4 ;  is  a  thief  or  a  fool ;  who  is  very  short  statured;  or  has  a  small  tooth 
between  his  two  front  teeth;  who  is  a  person  devoid  of  Kulacara,  or 
restless,5 *  or  with  a  stain  on  his  character;  who  is  diseased  in  the  eyes,  or 
adulterous,  foul-tongued,*  sensuous,  or  with  any  additional  limb  (as  a 
person  possessing  an  additional  finger) ;  or  a  hypocrite;  or  who  has  fallen 
from  Dharma;  or  is  garrulous;  or  is  greedy,  miserly,  or  a  liar;  who  is  a 
restless  character;  or  without  reverent  feeling 7 ;  or  who  does  not  follow 
the  five  Acaras  8  ;  or  possessed  of  many  faults.”  That  is  to  say,  if  after  a 
person  has  been  initiated  his  Guru  contracts  any  of  the  above-mentioned 
faults,  he  should  continue  to  honour  and  not  abandon  him;  but  one  who 
has  previous  to  such  initiation  contracted  any  of  these  faults  should  never 
be  made  a  Guru. 

In  the  Kalpacintamani  it  is  said :  “  He  is  unfit  to  be  Guru  who  is 
consumptive,  or  has  skin  disease,  or  dead  nails,  or  a  small  tooth  between 
the  two  front  teeth  *  ;  or  is  deaf,  or  has  a  cataract  of  the  eye;  or  is  bald,  or 

1  This  is  an  adaptation  from  the  latter  portion  of  the  quotation  from 

Brhaddharma Purana  at,  see  ante,  which  says:  “  Without  discussion,  on  account 
of  his  belonging  to  the  Guru  family.”  a  Krura. 

*  literally,  “  A  person  who  habitually  earns  money  for  injuring  (Himsa) 
people  by  means  of  special  rites  intended  for  the  purpose.” 

1  Sale  of  gold  is  forbidden  in  the  Sastra  for  the  higher  castes. 

1  That  is,  without  peace  on  account  of  outside  troubles. 

*  In  talk. 

1  Bhavahina.  The  brackets  in  the  preceding  case  are  the  author’s. 

8  Apparently  here  the  five-fold  worship. 

* Syavadanta  ordinarily  means  “brown-toothed,”  but  is  translated  as 
above,  according  to  the  previous  translation  of  the  author. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


549 


lame,  or  deformed,  or  has  an  additional  limb;  is  pink-eyed,  or  of  foul 
breath,1  or  has  enlarged  testicles;  or  is  a  dwarf,  hunchback;  or  leper,  or 
who  is  impotent,  or  possessed  of  any  other  physical  defect.”  After  men¬ 
tioning  the  physical  defects,  the  book  goes  on  to  point  out  defects  in  habit 
and  character.  “  Wise  men  should  be  careful  not  to  take  initiation  from 
or  engage  in  any  work  (such  as  the  establishment  of  the  image  of  a  Devata) 
a  Guru  who  does  not  perform  his  duties  as  enjoined  in  the  Vedas  and 
Smftis;  who  is  rough  of  speech  *;  or  is  of  evil  repute;  or  does  a  priest’s 
work1;  or  a  medical  man;  or  one  who  is  sensuous,  crooked  of  mind, 
arrogant,  vain,  addicted  to  vices,  miserly,  or  wicked;  who  keeps  bad  com¬ 
pany;  or  is  an  unbeliever4;  who  is  timid,  or  guilty  of  a  great  sin;  who 
does  not  worship  Devata,  Agni,*  Guru,  the  Mahavidyas,®  and  so  forth; 
who  is  ignorant  of  the  Mantras  for  the  Sandhya-rite,7  Tarpaija,  PfljS,® 
and  so  forth;  who  is  idle,  given  over  to  enjoyments,  or  devoid  of  Dharma; 
-who  is  an  astrologer,  or  has  any  other  defect  mentioned  in  the  Agama.® 

In  the  Kamakhya  Tantra  it  is  said:  “Through  knowledge 10  a  JIva 
attains  liberation,  and  knowledge  is  supreme  over  the  supreme.  Hence 
one  should  forsake  a  Guru  who  is  unable  to  give  knowledge  just  as  a  hungry 
man  seeking  food  forsakes  a  householder  who  has  no  food  to  give  him 
(l).  That  Guru  is  Siva  Himself,  in  whom  shine  the  three  forms  of  knowl¬ 
edge  (namely,  knowledge  ofVira,  Divya,  and  Kaula11;  of  Sattva,  Rajas, 
and  Tamas l*;  of  Guru,  Mantra,  and  Devata;  of  the  meaning  of  Mantra1*; 
the  awakening  of  Mantra 14 ;  and  the  Yonimudra).1*  One  should  seek  the 
protection  of  such  a  wise  Guru,  forsaking  an  ignorant  one  (a).  From 
knowledge  constantly  proceeds  Dharma;  from  knowledge  proceeds  wealth 18 
from  knowledge  proceeds  desire  17  and  its  fulfilment;  and  from  knowledge 
proceeds  Nirvana  liberation  (3).  Knowledge  is  the  highest  object;  noth¬ 
ing  than  it  is  of  greater  worth;  it  is  for  knowledge  that  Jivas  worship 
Devata;  and  knowledge  is  the  final  fruit  of  TapasyS 18  (4).  Just  as  a 

I  Putinasika.  Literally,  “  foul  nosed,”  which  apparently  refers  to  foul 

breath.  *  The  Guru  should  speak  softly  and  tenderly. 

*  Purohita,  who  is  engaged  in  ritual  service.  4  Nastika.  *  Fire. 

*  The  ten  great  appearances  of  the  Devi. 

7  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 

1 0ffering  and  worship.  •  Tantra  Sastra.  10  Jiiana. 

II  Vira  and  Diwa  are  two  of  the  Tantrik  temperaments  (Bhava),  and  Kaula 

is  the  highest  of  its  Acaras.  u  The  three  gupas  of  Prakfti. 

15  Mantrartha.  14  Mantracaitanya. 

15  A  celebrated  Mudr&  in  Hathayoga.  When  Vayu  is  stopped  by  this 
Mudra,  steadiness  of  mind  is  produced,  and  the  detachment  of  Manas  from  its 
objects  leads  to  the  state  known  as  Unmani  (see  Commentary  of  Kalicharapn 
on  v.  36  of  the  §atcakranirupapa;  p.  405  of  “  The  Serpent  Power  ”,  VI  Edition 
(1958). 

14  Art  ha.  17  Kama.  18  Devotion  and  austerities. 


550 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


honey-seeking  bee  flies  from  flower  to  flower,  so  a  knowledge-seeking 
Sisya  should  seek  the  protection  of  Guru  after  Guru  (5).  Many 
are  the  Gurus  who  extract  money  out  of  Sisyas,  but  O  Dew!  rare 
arc  those  truly  good  Gurus  who  allay  the  burning  of  the  Si|yas' 
hearts  (6).  Obeisance  to  that  Guru  who  has,  with  the  collyrium-stick 1 * * 
of  knowledge,  opened  the  Jiva’s  eye  blinded  by  the  darkness  of  ignorance. 
Mindful  of  this  (that  is  to  say,  knowing  how  great  is  the  responsibility 
of  Guru),  a  great  Sadhaka  will  recognize  the  wise  to  be  Gurus  only, 
and  then,  O  consort  of  Siva,  Siddbi  will  surely  be  attained  by  means  of 
the  Sisya's  devotion  only'  (7).  A  good  Guru  is  he  who  is  calm  and 
self-controlled,  is  a  Kulina,  of  pure  mind  worshipping  with  the  five 
Tattvas  *  (8).  He  is  called  a  good  Guru  who  has  the  reputation  of  being 
Siddha, 4 * * *  maintains  his  Sisyas  in  any  way  which  their  necessities  require, 
and  works  wonders  by  means  of  Divine  Sakti  (9).  A  good  Guru  is  he 
who  speaks  of  things  previously  unheard  of  and  suited  to  the  mind  of 
the  hearer  truly  and  in  a  charming  way,  and  who  can  equally  explain 
both  Tantra  and  Mantra  (10).  A  good  Guru  is  he  who  is  always  anxious 
to  benefit  the  Sisya  by  giving  him  knowledge,  and  who  is  capable  of 
punishing  as  well  as  rewarding  (n).  A  good  Guru  is  he  whose  aim  is 
always  the  highest  good s  who  ever  converses  upon  spiritual  truths,  and 
who  has  a  single-minded  devotion  to  the  lotus-feet  of  his  own  Guru  (12). 
O  Dew!  if  a  Sisya  is  able  to  obtain  a  Guru  who  is  the  possessor  of  such 
qualities,  he  should  at  once  seek  his  protection,  relinquishing  •  an  in¬ 
capable  Guru,  and  in  such  a  case  timcT  need  not  be  taken  into  account 
(13).  Reprehensible  is  the  Guru  who  only  takes  property  from  the 
Sijya;  who  is  an  oppressor  of  many  (extracts  money,  etc.,  from  many 
Sisyas  (disciples)  on  the  pretext  of  giving  initiation) 8  and  is  openly 
ridiculed  by  the  people  (14).  If,  notwithstanding  that  the  Sisya  is 
reverent  in  body,  mind,  and  speech  towards  his  Guru,  the  latter  docs 
not  approve  of  a  thing  for  a  Sisya  out  of  desire  for  that  thing  himself, 

1  Aftjana,  which  is  used  to  clear  the  vision. 

*  Query  whether  there  is  a  mistake  in  the  author’s  translation  of  the 
original  Sanskrit,  which  runs,  “  Sijyabhaktya  kevalam  ni&itam  ”  which  may 
mean  that  Kevala  or  Kaivalya-liberation  is  sure  to  be  attained  by  means  of  the 
Sisya's  devotion.  The  author  appears  to  have  taken  the  word  Kevala  to 
mean  “  only 

*  Paficatattva  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

4  Accomplished.  *  Paramirtha. 

*  TyaktvS.  This  does  not  mean  that  he  should  forsake  a  man  actually 

taken  as  Guru,  but  that  in  such  a  case  he  should  relinquish  selection  from  the 
Guru  family. 

1  KalavicSra — that  is,  whether  the  time  is  suitable  for  Gurukaraga. 

*  Author’s  bracket. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


53t 


and  wastes  the  Sigya’s  money  in  improper  ways,  then  that  most  depraved 
man  who  wishes  harm  to  his  Sijya  out  of  greed  should  be  forsaken  (15).” 

S&dhakas  will  now  ask  themselves  if  the  Guru  family  is  to  be 
considered  above  all  discussion?  All  the  authorities  quoted  above 
say  that  such  and  such  a  Guru  should  be  relinquished.  By  the  use 
here  of  the  word  Guru  is  meant  not  a  person  who  has  been  accepted 
as  Guru,  but  reference  is  made  to  that  Guruhood 1  which  is  nothing 
but  the  family  Guruhood  occasioned  by  birth  in  the  family  of 
ancestral  Guru.  If  such  a  Guru  is  fully  qualified  according  to  Sastra, 
the  Sisya  should  take  him  as  Guru  instead  of  seeking  the  protection  of 
another  Guru;  otherwise  he  should  be  forsaken.  This  is  the  meaning 
of  Jsastra.  A  Judge  and  Administrator  *  with  the  necessary  qualifications, 
though  he  is  not  the  King  himself,  is  yet  his  representative,  and  by  virtue 
of  the  King’s  power  his  commands  are  inviolable,  and  he  himself  is 
worshipped  by  all.  This  is  the  civil  law  *  of  the  State.  By  the  authority 
of  this  law  he  is  the  ruler  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  kingdom  desires  to  be 
ruled  by  him.  It  is  because  he  performs  the  duties  imposed  on  him  by 
the  King  that  his  commands  are  accepted  without  question,  and  people 
pay  with  confidence  revenue  into  his  hands.  But  if  through  arrogance  or 
selfishness  he,  trampling  on  all  political  principles,  misappropriates 
that  revenue  and  oppresses  the  innocent,  then  that  kingdom  is  in 
danger  of  destruction  through  his  oppressions.  The  community  of  Sisyas 
is  in  like  peril  through  the  oppressions  committed  by  Gurus.  In  the 
administration  of  the  State  the  Judge  is  concerned  with  political  matters 
only,  and  if  he  interferes  in  any  way  with  the  principles  of  Dharma,*  the 
whole  kingdom  is  in  an  uproar,  and  gives  unending  fuel  *  to  the  flaming 
fire  of  rebellion.  Similarly,  Guru  is  only  the  Judge  of  principles  of 
Dharma;  but  if  he  interferes  in  any  way  and  in  any  matter  concern* 
ing  purely  temporal  matters,  there  is  every  likelihood  that  the  fire  of 
rebellion  may  break  out  among  £i$yas.  And  this  is  what  has  actually 
happened.  There  is,  however,  this  good  news  to  tell — namely,  that 
the  One  Supreme  Queen  *  of  the  three  worlds  has  entrusted  the  people  with 
the  selection  of  the  Judge.  If,  then,  the  people  select  a  robber  as  their 
Judge,  the  Queen  cannot  be  blamed  therefor.  While  in  such  case  the 
oppressiveness  of  the  robber  will,  on  the  one  hand,  deprive  the  people  of 
the  spiritual  wealth  which  is  their  greatest  possession  both  here  and  here¬ 
after,  the  revenue,  on  the  other  hand  which  they  pay  will  not  reach  the 


1  Gurutva.  *  Vicaraka.  *  Rajanlti. 

*  See  Introduction  to  T antra  Sastra.  Here  religious  and  ethical  rules  of  uni¬ 
versal  validity  requiring  universal  allegiance  as  opposed  lo  particular  State  laws. 

*  Ahuti.  Literally,  offering. 

*  Rajarijedvarl. 


552 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


Sovereign’s  treasury.  The  person  to  whom,  as  our  Supreme  Guru,  we 
will  entrust  our  all,  that  it  may  be  carried  to  Parame£varl,  will  misap¬ 
propriate  it,  but  because  he  does  so  we  shall  not  ourselves  be  exempt 
from  the  punishment  of  being  sent  to  hell,1 * *  which  we  incur  under 
the  regulations  of  Her  kingdom.*  Just  as  a  Judge  has  two  aspects,  in 
one  of  which  he  is  an  ordinary  subject  of  the  King  like  you  and  I,  and 
another  in  which,  as  representative  of  the  King,  he  is  Judge  over  us 
both,  so  the  Guru  has  two  aspects,  in  one  of  which  he  is  an  ordinary  Jlva 
with  ten  senses,  MSya  and  Moha,*  like  you  and  I,  and  in  the  other  he  is 
Parabrahman  Siva,  above  the  senses,  and  the  Maya  which  affects  them. 
Revenue  paid  into  a  Judge’s  hand  is  intended  for  the  sovereign  power. 
In  the  same  way  worship  of  the  Supreme  Devata  in  the  person  of  the 
Gurudeva  is  intended  for  BrahmaSakti.  But  as  revenue  paid  into  the 
hands  of  a  Judge  who  does  not  serve  his  Sovereign  goes  not  to  the  latter 
but  to  the  people,4  so  worship  of  the  Rajarajdvari  (Queen  of  Queens) 
entrusted  to  a  Guru  inimical  to  BrahmaSakti  is  likely  to  go,  not  to  the 
Brahmaiakti,  but  to  the  robber  Sakti.4 * *  Hence  the  King  of  Kings,*  who 
has  promulgated  rules  of  State  for  the  universe,  has  in  His  ordinance  on 
the  selection  of  Guru  Himself  proclaimed  to  all  people  as  follows : 

In  the  Brhaddharma  Purina  it  is  said:  “  Sada&va  Himself  is  angered 
against  him  who  is  disliked  by  all.  As  people  pay  the  King’s  dues  to  the 
Headman,  Judges,  or  Superintendents  of  administration,  so  Sisyas  pay  the 
I?tadevata’s  worship  to  Gurudeva.  But  just  as  if  headmen  and  others 
who  are  dishonest  or  inimical  to  the  Sovereign  must  be  deposed,  and  the 
King’s  dues  paid  to  particularly  trustworthy  and  good  men,,  so  Sisyas 
should  forsake  an  inimical  or  arrogant  Guru  (that  is  to  say,  a  mere  man 
devoid  of  Divine  Sakti,  acquired  by  Sadhana,  and  subject  to  the  six 
enemies  ’),  and  take  as  Guru  a  mahapuru?a 8  possessing  the  Sakti  spoken 
of  in  the  Sastra,  and  then  offer  his  Sadhana  at  his  feet.” 

Now  I  ask  you  (who  belong  to  the  Guru-Family),  by  whose  grace  arc 
you  Family-Guru?  You  arc  Guru  because  you  carry  out  the  orders  of  the 

1  Naraka. 

*  Literally,  “  Which  will  be  brought  upon  us  by  the  invincible  power  of 
politics  ” — that  is  on  the  ground  of  not  having  paid  revenue.  If  a  person  owes 
revenue  and  knowingly  charges  a  robber  with  its  transmission,  he  cannot  set  up 
the  robbery  as  an  excuse  for  nonpayment. 

*  He,  like  the  disdple,  perceives  with  senses  which  are  subject  to  illusion. 

4  Praja-iakti. 

4  Daeyu-Sakti.  Such  worship  does  not  advance  spirituality,  but  robs 

the  Sadhaka  of  it.  •  Rajaraje^vara. 

*  “The  six” — that  is,  the  six  great  deadly  sins. 

1  Great  man. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


553 


Guru  of  all  moving  and  unmoving  things.  To-day  that  King  of  Kings,1 
through  whose  Political  Power  you  wield  the  rod  over  the  whole  kingdom, 
is  Himself  wielding  the  rod  against  you.  After  receiving  punishment  from 
you,  I  may  shift  my  residence  to  the  jurisdiction  of  another  Judge;  but 
where  in  the  infinite  millions  of  universe  can  you  find  a  place  which  is  not 
within  the  jurisdicdon  of  Him  by  whom  you  arc  going  to  be  punished  ?  In 
heaven,*  the  mortal  world,*  or  the  nether  world,4  wheresoever  you  may 
flee,  the  tremendous  trident  *  of  Virupak?a  *  is  pointed  with  unfailing  aim 
at  your  breast.  An  ignorant  Sisya  may  be  afraid  of  you,  but  in  the 
blazing  fire  of  the  wrath  of  the  Bhairava,  who  creates,  preserves,  and 
destroys,  and  from  fear  of  whom  the  Sun  and  Moon  shine,  the  wind 
blows,  and  the  God  of  Death 1  is  ever  busy,  you  are  nothing  but  an 
insignificant  speck  of  an  insect.  A  &i?ya  who  has  committed  even  a 
thousand  offences  may  receive  pardon,  but  for  you,  relendcss  Robber- 
Guru,  there  is  no  escape.  O  Judge!  to  me  an  ignorant  subject  you  appear 
to  be  a  Judge,  though  not  really  so;  but  to  the  King  you  are  nothing 
but  a  subject  who  has  been  guilty  of  a  most  heinous  crime.  And  if  you 
are  proud  of  your  judgeship,  then,  O  Judge!  how  much  greater  is  the 
punishment  for  theft  when  the  Judge  is  himself  the  thief!  Hence  I  say,  O 
Guru-Family,  type  of  the  Kali  age!  do  not  attempt  to  put  forward  a  deed 
of  permanent  lease*  as  Family-Guru  of  Sisyas.  If  misappropriation  of 
revenue  is  to  be  taken  as  the  mark  of  an  official,  then  can  you  tell  me 
what  it  is  which  is  called  robbery?  O  Guru-Family  of  worshipful  feet! 
know  (and  we  say  this  with  great  sorrow)  that  to-day  you  have  become 
so  degraded  in  mind  and  position  that  one  prays  to  be  free  of  your 
presence,  and  is  even  ashamed  to  describe  you  as  belonging  to  the  Guru- 
Family.  To-day  a  descendant  of  the  Guru-Family  plays  the  part  of  a 
clown  in  Jatra  parties,*  or  of  the  heroine  in  dramatic  performances,  or, 
in  the  part  of  the  Sisya  of  some  low  man,  touches  the  feet  of  a  Candida 
Guru10  and  the  next  moment  this  same  man  again  places  his  feet  on  the 
head  of  a  pure  Brahmana  and  receives  offerings  of  sandal-paste  and  flower 
consecrated  with  the  great  Mantra  of  Mahaiakti.  Alas !  O  Mother  of  the 


1  Rajarajeivara.  8  Sv&rga. 

•  Martya.  4  Rasatala.  8  Sula. 

•  Siva,  with  the  slanting,  dreamy,  half-closed  eyes  of  one  who  has 

taken  bhang.  ’  Yama. 

8  Mauraai  patfa,  a  lease  in  perpetuity.  Such  a  Guru  is  not  to  pretend 
to  hold  his  disciples  in  perpetual  fief  because  he  belongs  to  the  Guru-Family 
without  regard  to  his  qualifications  to  be  the  Family-Guru. 

•  Acting  without  stage  and  scenery;  generally  the  actors  are  all  males. 

10  The  meaning  is  that  the  man  who  plays  the  part  of  Guru  may  be  a 
Gagdala  (one  of  the  lowest  castes),  whose  feet  the  man  who  plays  the  part  of 
Sigya  must  touch. 


554 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


World !  where  are  you,  O  Mother!  at  this  time!  Rather  the  Mother  is  every¬ 
where,  but  where  are  we  ourselves?  Had  not  the  Mother  been  everywhere, 
had  not  Her  eyes  been  wide  open  to  see  everything,  and  had  not  She  with 
indomitable  force  spread  the  power  of  Her  commands  in  every  place,  would 
the  families  of  Siddha  and  Sadhaka  Gurus,1  the  crest-gems  of  Aryavarta,* 
which  is  the  crown  jewel  of  Bharatavarsa,®  have  become  thus  extinct 
to-day?  Would  the  race  of  Sadhakas  devoted  to  Her  who  fulfils  all  Arthas 
(purposes  and  desires)  have  thus  been  exterminated  for  want  of  Sadhana 
and  for  the  sake  of  Artha  (money)  ?  Would  descendants  of  Brahmanas, 
who  had  performed  austere  Tapas,4  have  thus  turned  Candidas  in  habit? 
A  blind  man  feels  no  discomfort  in  the  dark,  but  he  who  can  see  is  greatly 
frightened  if  the  light  in  his  room  be  extinguished.  Malpractices®  do  no 
harm  to  non-Aryas,  but  if  families  of  Sadhakas  forsake  Sadhana  they  are 
naturally  ruined.  So  it  is,  O  Guru-Family!  that  doves  nowadays  roam 
over  your  homestead  even  at  noon,*  and  Dharma 7  looks  at  it  with  eyes 
wide  open.  But  so  intoxicated  are  you  with  the  wine  of  delusion  that 
your  closed  eyes  can  no  more  be  opened  by  any  means.  Such  as  you  are, 
you  yet  teach  your  Sisya  a  Mantra  of  obeisance  which  runs  “  obeisance 
to  the  Guru  who  has,  by  means  of  the  collyrium-stick  of  knowledge, 
opened  the  eye  of  him  who  was  blinded  by  the  darkness  of  ignorance.” 
O  Mother!  dwelling  in  great  cremation  grounds,®  direct  the  band  of 
Bhairavas  *  to  clear  away  the  heavy  mass  of  ashes  which  are,  as  it  were, 
this  sin.  Command  them  to  fan  into  flame  the  fire  of  the  funeral  pyre  of 
Sat,  Cit,  and  Ananda,1®  and  to  thus  dispel  the  darkness  of  deep  and  crass 
ignorance  in  Bharatavarsa.11  Let  the  children  who  have  lost  the  Mother 
rediscover  the  Father  with  the  help  of  this  light  even  in  the  deep  darkness 
of  the  present  new-moon  night.  Let  them  run  to  Thee,  O  Mother!  and 
find  eternal  rest  at  those  lotus-feet  which  are  fair  as  ten  million  autumn 
moons. 


1  That  is,  the  Gurus  who  have  attained  and  those  who  are  seeking  and  on 
the  way  to  attainment. 

*  The  land  of  the  Aryas.  *  India. 

4  Devotion,  austerities,  etc.  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Satire). 

*  Anacara, 

*  Roaming  of  doves  is  a  mark  of  ruin  and  desolation. 

’Dharma  (religious  duty,  etc.,  here  religion  personified)  cannot  bear 
the  sight  of  any  wrong,  but  here  He  is  represented  as  looking  on  with 
indifference. 

8  SmaSanas,  where  She  in  Her  dread  forms  dwells. 

*  Attendants  of  Mahadeva  and  Mahadevi. 

18  The  state  of  existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss,  which  is  the  Brahman. 

“India. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 
The  Guru  Profession1 * * 


555. 


In  India  there  has  been,  along  with  political  revolutions,  a  revolution, 
in  language;  and  people  now  speak  of  Gurugiri,  or  profession  of  Gum- 
hood.*  Of  all  the  means  of  earning  money  this  profession  of  Guruhood  is 
nowadays  one  of  the  best.  In  it  the  Paramartha  (the  highest  spiritual 
end)  has  joined  with  Artha  (money),  and  from  their  union  has  been  bom. 
an  Anartha  (evil).  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  there  has  not  been  a 
union  in  the  true  sense  between  Paramartha  and  Artha,  and  hence  it  is 
that  this  Anartha  has  come  about;  for  a  union  between  Paramartha 
and  Artha  would  have  the  effect  rather  of  destroying  than  of  creating 
Anarthas  (evils). 

However  that  may  be,  the  community  of  Gurus  who  follow  tltis 
profession  is  divided  into  two  classes — namely,  Prabhu  (lord)  *  and  Vibhu 
(omnipresent).4 * *  There  is,  moreover,  another  class  which  has  taken  the 
field  recently — namely,  the  Svayambhu  (self-existent).  There  is  no  nced- 
to  explain  what  the  first  two  classes  arc,  or  of  whom  they  arc  composed- 
The  name  Prabhu  has  come  into  use  through  the  grace  of  Prabhus. 
Nowadays,  if  anyone  appears  to  be  at  all  out  of  the  common,  people  at 
once  say:  “He  is  a  Prabhu”.  As  for  the  class  of  Vibhus,  they  are 
going  to  be  Vibhu  (elherealized)  themselves  through  their  constant 
efforts  to  show  the  Vibhu  (the  Omnipresent).  Whether  they  be  good  or 
bad,  the  first  two  classes  originally*  based  themselves  on  the  Sastra. 
The  third  class  which  has  succeeded  them  takes  no  heed,  however,  of  any 
Sastra.  “  These  sober  men  are  learned  men  in  their  own  csdmation.” 
“  In  their  own  estimation  they  are  men  of  calm  mind 9  and  learning. 
They  pretend  to  teach  “  Yoga  ”.  It  is  by  long  search  in  Puranas,  histor¬ 
ical  works,  and  so  forth,  that  one  comes  across  the  name  of  a  Yogi  here 
and  a  Yogi  there.  These  had  by  centuries  of  Tapasya 7 *  at  first  acquired 
the  title  of  “  Muni  ”  or  “  R?i,”  and  then  after  another  hundred  or 
thousand  years  received  initiation  in  Yoga  from  a  Devata,  or  some  great 
Yogi  like  a  Devata.  But  nowadays  we  have  regular  fairs  of  Yogis  on  the 
river-side  and  in  the  field,*  and  we  often  hear  it  said :  “  Such  and  such  a  Babu 


1  Gurugiri. 

*  Though  Guruhood  can  never  properly  be  a  profession. 

■  Vaisnava  Gurus. 

4  Referring  to  the  Brahmos,  who  do  not  worship  images  or  Brahman  with 
form,  but  only  the  formless  omnipresent. 

1  Whatever  be  the  subsequent  developments  leading  away  from  Sastra. 

*  Dhira — the  first  fruit  of  Yoga,  and  a  quality  highly  prized. 

7  Devotion,  austerity,  study,  meditation,  etc. 

*  H&tezn&thc-  “  In  the  fair  and  in  the  field  ”  is  a  colloquial  expression — 

that  is,  so-called  Yogis  are  available  in  any  number  at  any  place. 


556 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


has  received  Yoga  from  such  and  such  a  Babu.”  To-day  a  gang  of  men 
who  are  at  heart  atheists,1 * *  Capijalas  defiled  by  eating  the  leavings  of 
women  of  the  town,  the  handmaids  of  PiSacas,®  lapped  in  luxury,  and, 
heedless  both  of  Devata  and  Dharma,  has  taken  the  place  of  the  true 
Yogis  of  yore,  on  whose  account  *  Crvafi,  Menaka,  Rambha,  Pancacu#, 
and  Tilottama,4 * *  were  wont  to  hide  the  lustre  of  their  world-enchanting 
beauty  by  the  assumption  of  the  forms  of  beasts  and  birds,  and  flee  to 
the  very  ends  of  the  earth.  Lord  of  the  Kali  Yuga!  mighty  indeed  is 
your  unfailing  power.  In  this  (so-called)  Yoga  no  Devata’s  name  is 
mentioned.  It  has  no  form  or  Mantra;  in  short,  it  has  little  to  do  with 
worship.*  Next,  it  has  absolutely  no  concern  with  such  things  as  distinc¬ 
tion  of  caste  and  VarnaSramadharma.*  Its  Sadhana  consists  of  inspiration 
and  expiration  of  breath,  and  its  results 7 * *  are  consumption,  phthisis,  or 
cough.  Nowadays  one  meets  a  few  such  Siddhas®  in  every  populous 
place,  and  as  for  Sadhakas  ®  there  is  no  lack  of  them  anywhere.  Those 
who  tread  this  path  generally  belong  to  the  community  of  ease-loving 
people  who  are  ignorant  of  the  A  B  C  of  the  Arya  Sastra,  cast-offs  of 
society  with  perverted  intellects.  The  evil  of  all  this  is  that  such  people' 
and  their  male  and  female  Gurus  profess  themselves  to  be  followers  of 
the  Arya  Dharma. 

A  still  greater  evil  is  threatened  by  the  fact  that  young  men 
puffed  up  with  their  western  education,  but  destitute  of  real  worth, 
aimless  and  extremely  lazy,  show  particular  eagerness  to  learn 
this  newly  discovered  Yoga,  which  presents  itself  to  them  as  a  reli¬ 
gion  10  which  may  be  followed  without  any  labour,  trouble,  or  cost  to 
themselves.  To  avail  themselves  of  such  a  golden  opportunity,  young 
men  often  leave  their  houses  and  roam  about  hills  near  railway  stations,11 


I  Upanastika — though  they  may  not  know  it,  or  may  pretend  not  to  be  so. 

•  Low,  unclean  spirits. 

•  That  is,  for  fear  of  disturbing  their  Yoga. 

4  Celestial  female  spirits  called  Apsaras,  of  surpassing  beauty,  who  some¬ 
times  came  to  tempt  the  Munis  and  Yogis,  and  thus  to  test  the  reality  of  their 
spiritual  progress. 

•  Upas  ana, 

•  Rules  relating  to  caste  (Varpa)  and  stage  of  life  (Asrama;  see  Introduction 
to  Tantra  SSstra).  By  these  qualities  (which  are  also  those  of  the  real  Yoga)  it 
is  rendered  attractive  to  those  who  have 'spiritual  ambitions,  but  wish  to  avoid 
trouble. 

7  Siddhi.  1  Persons  accomplished  in  such  pseudo-Sadhana, 

•  That  is,  persons  striving  to  be  so  “  accomplished  ”.  10  Dharma. 

II  Here  follow  some  caustic  and  amusing  passages  on  spiritual  shamming. 

As  the  aspirants  after  easy  Yoga  are  only  making  a  pretence  of  “  going  into 

the  wilderness,”  the  railway  station  which  brings  them  comfort  and  safety  and 
affords  the  means  of  return  must  be  near  at  hand. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU  557 

and  on  return  they  are  often  heard  to  say:  “  As  I  ascended  the  summit  of 
such  and  such  a  hill  I  saw  a  gTeat  Yogi  resplendent  with  light 1  lying  in  a 
state  of  ecstasy  *  in  a  cave.  My  heart  melted  at  the  sight.  Silently  I 
bowed  to  him  and  remained  standing.  After  a  short  time  the  Yogi 
quietly  opened  his  eyes;  I  again  bowed  to  him.  Immediately  the  Maha- 
puru$a8  looked  at  me,  and,  affectionately  and  with  a  smiling  face,  said: 

*  So  you  have  come,  my  child?  I  was  very  anxious  for  you;  I  have  already 
known  all  about  you  by  means  of  Yoga.  I  have  myself  a  Guru  in  the 
Himalayas.  Hark  there,  he  is  saying,  my  child,  a  future  Yogi  has 
appeared  before  you,’  and  so  on  and  so  on.”  Sadhaka,  the  “  Yogi,”  who 
tells  this  story,  is  the  future  “  Yogi  ”  of  whom  you  have  just  heard  from 
the  ghost  Yogi  (in  the  Himalayas). 

Again,  some  people  are  heard  to  say:  “  Sitting  in  a  forest,  a  Yogi  is 
singing  to  the  strains  of  his  vina,*  and  deer,  tigers,  elephants,  and  lions  are 
embracing  each  other,  and  swooning  away  on  hearing  his  song,  and  so 
on.”  The  “  Yogi  ”  has  renounced  all  and  became  a  Sannyasi,  but  has 
not  been  able  to  part  with  his  dear  vipa.4  Needless  to  say,  that  the 
“  Yogi  ”  who  tells  us  the  story  has  also  a  vipa.  These  sham  Yogis  are 
daily  gaining  mastery  over  the  ignorant  community,  spreading  the  web  of 
their  charm,  to  the  danger  of  even  intelligent  men. 

Finding  no  other  means  of  success,  Mahiravapa,1  the  wizard  of  Lanka, 
at  last  deceived  Hanuman  by  assuming  the  form  of  Vibhlsapa,4  and 
entering  into  the  camp,  carried  away  Raghunatha  7  and  Laksmapa  8  to 
Pitala.®  Similarly,  the  band  of  these  wizaidly  unbelievers  10  are  deluding 
and  deceiving  the  faithful  hearts  of  intelligent  men  by  holding  before 
them  the  standard  of  the  Hindu  religion.  Thus  creeping  into  society, 
they  have  spread  their  net  so  as  to  carry  away  to  Rasa  tala  the  Arya 
Dharma,11  which  is  full  of  real  Siddhi  and  Sadhana.  Arya  society  even 
now,  I  say,  do  not  listen  to  the  words  of  Mahiravapa  as  though  they 
were  the  words  of  Vibhishapa,  the  crest  gem  of  devotees.  Let  not  those 
who  are  enemies  of  DevatS,  of  the  Veda,  and  of  Dharma,  deceive  you 
any  longer  by  their  talk  about  Yoga.  Like  Hanuman,  you  will  practise 
Yoga  at  the  door;  but  Mahiravapa  will  on  his  part  carry  away  from  the 
inner  apartment  to  Rasatala  the  SanStana  Dharma,  which  is  as  precious  a 
thing  in  the  temple  of  your  heart  as  was  Ramachandra  to  Hanuman.11 

1  Jyotih.  *  Samadhi.  'Great man. 

4  A  stringed  musical  instrument.  *  The  brother  of  Ravana. 

*  Ravapa’s  brother,  who  took  the  side  of  R&ma. 

7  Rama.  *  His  brother.  8  The  nether  world. 

10  N&stikas.  11  The  Hindu  religion. 

18  Whilst  Hanuman  was  keeping  guard  at  the  door  of  Rama's  camp 
Mahiravapa  entered  into  it  in  the  guise  of  Vibhl$apa,  and  carried  away 
Rama  to  P&tala. 


558 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


We  know  that  even  in  that  case  there  is  no  cause  for  fear,  for  in  that 
nether  world1 * *  also  Mother  Bhadrakali  is  Herself  the  Saviour.  We, 
however,  are  afraid,  because  we  do  not  know  how  long  it  will  be  before 
we  shall  again  see  the  face  of  Ramachandra.  We,  however,  know  this  also 
that  if  the  Mother  has  determined  to  destroy  Mahiravapa,  then  there  is 
nothing  which  cannot  happen  in  the  kingdom  of  Mahamaya,  who  makes 
the  impossible  possible.®  Still  we  say,  O  Society!  do  not  forget  to  be  on 
your  guard;  do  not  bring  death  on  yourself  by  giving  shelter  to  the 
Dharmarak?asa s  in  your  house;  do  not,  at  this  time  when  Dharma  is 
being  assailed,  yourself  attempt  to  weaken  it. 

Necessity  has  compelled  us  to  say  even  a  few  words  more  than  what 
is  strictly  warranted  on  the  subject  of  Gurutattva.  In  conclusion,  we  say 
to  the  Prabhus  and  Vibhus,4  who  follow  the  Guru  profession,  basing  them¬ 
selves  on  Sastra,  that  they,  too,  are  slowly  approaching  the  condition  of 
the  Svayambhus,  who  compose  the  third  class  of  Gurus.  We  are  servants 
•of  the  Sastra,  and  he  who  destroys  its  authority  is  to  us  an  eyesore, 
however  accomplished  *  he  may  be.  To  us  nothing  is  of  greater  authority 
than  the  words  of  Bhagavan,  who  has  Himself  said,  “  He  who  performs 
religious  acts  according  to  his  own  will,  and  in  violation  of  the  rules  laid 
down  in  the  Sastra,  will  not  merely  fail  to  attain  Siddhi,  but  will  go 
to  helL”  Professional  Gurus,  although  the  root  pf  your  profession  is 
the  Sastra,  its  fruit,  twig,  leaf,  flower,  and  all  else  are  opposed  to 
•the  Sastra. 

Whenever  you  see  a  Sisya,  place,  time,  and  person  have  no  effect 
•upon  you;  but  taking  him  to  be  your  prey,  you  pounce  on  his  shoulder 
according  to  the  rule — “  should  be  eaten  the  moment  when  received.” 
What  Sastra  authorizes  you  to  do  this?  Even  a  deadly  poisonous  snake 
when  it  has  bitten  someone  remains  senseless  and  feverish  for  a  whole 
week.  It  is  generally  at  such  a  time  that  snakes  are,  through  their  want 
-of  power  of  movement,  killed.  Similarly,  energy  passes  from  the  body  of 
the  (juru  to  that  of  Si?ya  at  the  time  of  initiation,  even  if  the  former  has 
previously  greatly  performed  Tapas.4 *  In  order  to  recoup  himself  the  loss 
of  this  energy,7  the  Guru  has  to  perform  for  a  great  length  of  time  Tapas,4 

1  Pat&la. 

1  That  is,  perhaps,  these  Mahirivanas  have  been  only  permitted  to  appear 
and  take  the  sinful  path  that  they  may  be  eventually  destroyed;  for  all  is 
possible  to  Mahamaya. 

*  Rikfasa,  or  demon,  in  the  garb  of  Dharma  religion. 

4  See  aair.  5  Siddha. 

4  Austerities,  worship,  and  similar  preparations  undertaken  with  the  view 

to  kindle  the  fire  of  the  Guru  in  the  latter’s  body,  and  later  to  recoup  the 
.energy  transmitted  to  the  disciple. 

*  Tejas;  the  transmission  of  which  is  known  as  Saktisafic&ra. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


559 


as  also  Puraicaraga  in  the  form  of  Japa 1  of  the  Mantra,  which  he  has 
given  in  initiation.  Thus  only  he  can  regain  his  normal  state.1  But 
you,  the  incarnations  of  abnormality,*  arc  in  the  habit  of  granting 
initiation  at  the  rate  of  ten  or  twenty  a  day,  as  animals  arc  offered  for 
sacrifice  on  the  great  Navami 1 * * * *  day.  Race  of  Prabhus,  the  saviours  of  the 
helpless,  can  you  say  what  will  be  your  fate  ?  In  you  are  combined  a 
venomous  power  to  bite,  and  boa-like  capacity  of  eating.  You  arc 
shaking  with  the  fever  of  delusion  and  stuffed  with  food  up  to  the  throat. 
O  Prabhu !  behold  and  see  that  the  Prabhu  (Lord)  who  punished  the 
Kaliya  Snake*  has  to-day  come  to  test  your  power  and  authority. 
Even  now,  while  there  is  yet  time,  touch  the  beauteous  feet  of  the 
Lord  of  Laksmi  and  say:  “  Lord  of  the  helpless,  friend  of  the  poor, 
I  have  reaped  the  consequence  of  disobedience  to  Thy  commands, 
destroy  the  sins  of  this  sinner,  who  has  sought  protection  at  Thy  feet, 
and  punish  him  with  the  rod  of  Thy  grace.  Let  me  be  blessed  with  the 
touch  of  Thy  beauteous  feet.”  And  on  your  behalf  we,  too,  say:  “  Bhaga- 
van,  the  chief  purpose  of  Thy  play  *  is  to  lighten  the  earth  of  the  weight 
■of  unrighteousness,  which  oppresses  it  in  India.  To-day  the  weight  Gurus 
has  become  a  heavy  burden.  All  merciful  Deva,  who  but  Thee  can  remove 
it?  The  race  of  Aryas  is  sorely  oppressed  with  initiation;  the  waters  of 
the  Jumna  are  terribly  poisoned  by  hiB  deadly  snake,  which  is  the  race 
of  Gurus.  O  Lord,  colour  for  once  the  gem  on  the  head  of  this  snake 
with  the  colour  of  Thy  spotless  lotus-feet,  which  arc  like  the  red  lotuses.7 
With  a  thrust  of  Thy  feet  free  the  earth  of  the  poison  fang  which  is  self- 
seeking  and  drive  this  snake  from  Jambudvipa*  to  Ramapakadvlpa,* 


1  “Recitation  ”  of  the  Mantra  according  to  the  Sastrik  injunctions.  This, 

when  done  under  certain  prescribed  conditions,  is  the  rite  known  as 
Purafcarana. 

*  Prakfti.  *  Vikiti. 

*  The  Durga  puja  begins  on  the  seventh  lunar  day  of  the  bright  fortnight, 
and  Lasts  till  the  ninth  or  Navami  day,  on  which  a  large  number  of  animals 
are  sacrificed. 

*  Kfjna,  who  lulled  Kaliya.  This  was  a  demon  in  the  form  of  a  snake 
which  lived  in  a  lake.  Its  presence  made  the  lake  so  poisonous  that  fish  could 
not  live  therein,  cows  could  not  drink  its  water,  and  birds  flying  over  it  fell 
dead.  Kf&ta  jumped  into  the  lake  and  subdued  the  serpent,  and  compelled  it 
to  return  to  the  sea. 

•Lila. 

7  That  is,  the  Devatk  is  invoked  to  stand  on  the  snake  when  the  red 
painted  soles  of  the  Deva  will  be  reflected  in  the  gem  on  the  head  of  the  snake. 

*  India. 

*  One  of  the  seven  islands.  The  author  takes  advantage  of  the  etymologi¬ 
cal  meaning  of  B  amapaha,  or  that  which  gives  pleasure,  to  make  reference 
to  the  pleasure  of  the  RJUalHa. 


560 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


the  seat  of  your  everlasting  Rasa  festivities.  Let  men  and  women,  boys 
and  girls,  bathe  with  faithful  hearts  in  the  waters  of  initiation  and  cool 
their  minds  and  hearts.  Himavan,1  Ni$adha,  Vindhya,  Sumeru,  Malaya- 
van,  and  many  other  mountains,'  are  situated  in  Jambfidvlpa,'  but,  O 
Lord,  no  mountain  is  so  unbearable 4  as  this  Guru  profession.*  We  have 
heard  that  you  held  Mount  (Giri)  Govardhana.  This  makes  us  hope  that 
some  day  Thou  wilt  surely  hold  this  profession  (Giri)  either  by  Thy  foot 
or  by  Thy  hand,  for  by  the  ill-fortune  of  India  this  profession  (Giri)  also 
has  become  Govarddhana,  thus  fostering  the  ignorant.®  Thou  didst 
uphold  Mount  Govarddhana  in  order  to  shatter  the  pride  of  the  King 
of  Devas.7  Once  again,  O  Lord !  Thou  wilt  have  to  hold  it  in  order  to 
shatter  the  pride  of  the  King  of  the  Kali  Yuga.  It  was  Thou  who  as 
Mount  Govarddhana  didst  receive  the  worship  of  the  herdsmen,  and 
Thou  Thyself  must  receive  worship  as  Guru  Govarddhana  (incrcaser  of 
the  race  of  Guru).8  The  punishment  of  Kaliya '  and  the  upholding  of 
Mount  Govarddhana  were  both  Thy  play.®  Now,  O  Thou  who  art  full 
of  play,'  the  field  has  been  prepared  for  both  these  plays.®  It  remains 
only  that  Thou  Thyself  should  incarnate.  And  to  Thee,  Daughter  of 
the  King  of  Mountains,10  we  say,  O  Mother!  Thou  hast  said  that  a  Guru 
who  gives  Mantra  is  also  Thy  father’s  Guru,  and  so  stands  to  Thee  as  Thy 
grandfather.  If  for  fear  of  destroying  the  Guru’s  glory  of  the  mountain- 
family  of  Thy  father,.  Thou  showest  indulgence  to  this  Guru  profession, 
then  we  shall  be  obliged  to  stand  before  our  Father,  the  Lord  of  Bhai- 
ravas,  and  the  Dak?ayajnau  is  the  outstanding  proof  of  the  little 


I  Himalaya.  '  Giri. 

8  See  ante. 

4  Kfsna  upheld  Govarddhana  when  Indra  deluged  the  surrounding  country 
with  continuous  rain,  and  thus  gave  shelter  to  people  and  the  cattle. 

*  Gurugiri;  a  play  on  the  word  Giri,  which,  as  an  independent  word, 
means  mountain,  and  as  suffix  in  Bengali  means  profession. 

*  A  play  on  the  word  Govarddhana,  which  means  that  which  increases 
(Vardhana)  cows  (Go).  The  ignorant  are  spoken  of  as  a  race  of  cows,  the 
number  of  which  is  increased  by  these  so-called  but  incompetent  Gurus. 

7  Indra  (see  ante). 

8  Kfsna  must  uphold  the  race  of  Gurus  as  he  upheld  the  mountain.  He 
must  raise  the  race  from  their  depressed  condition.  Then  the  race  of  Gurus 
will  be  worthy  of  worship,  as  was  Mount  Govarddhana  after  Kf^a  had  raised 
it.  The  Gurus  are  compared  to  Govarddhana. 

•Lila. 

10  The  Devi  Parvati,  daughter  of  Himalaya,  the  Mountain  King. 

II  The  sacrifice  of  Dak?a,  Siva's  father-in-law,  which  the  latter  destroyed 
on  hearing  of  the  death  of  his  spouse,  the  Devi,  as  Satu 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


561 


forgiveness  he  accords  to  the  family  of  his  father-in-law.1  And  then  the 
remedy  will  surely  be  attained.  But  in  that  case,  O  Mother!  a  blemish 
and  rebuke  will  for  ever  attach  to  Thy  father’s  family.  Hence  we  pray 
you  as  a  good  daughter  to  find  out  a  remedy  for  all  this  while  there  is  yet 
time.  Do  you  yourselves  settle  in  private  a  question  which  concerns  you 
privately? 

44  O  Guru  family!  do  not  attempt  to  become  a  Guru  in  order  to  save 
Sisyas,  but  prepare  yourselves  to  become  a  Si?ya  for  your  own  saving. 
Then  by  the  grace  of  Guru  the  world  will  become  your  £i;ya.  Had  you 
yourself  learnt  how  to  worship  a  Guru,  to-day  you  would  not  have  had 
to  suffer  indignities,  moving  from  door  to  door  amongst  Sisyas.  If  a 
patricide’s  son  is  educated  after  the  notions  of  his  father,  he  is  sure  to 
turn  out  a  patricide  himself.  Similarly,  by  receiving  initiation  from  a 
Guru  like  yourself,  who  is  estranged  from  his  Guru,  your  Si$ya  has  to-day 
become  ready  to  ruin  you.  It  is  useless  to  mourn  over  this,  for  you  are 
reaping  the  consequence  of  your  own  action.  Had  you  yourself  been 
Siddha,1 *  or,  at  least,  a  S&dhaka,'  your  Sisya  might  some  day  have  become 
a  Sadhaka.  Had  you  been  a  servant  of  your  Guru’s  house,  esteeming 
it  to  be  Bptd&vana  or  Kaii 4 * *  itself,  innumerable  men  and  women  would 
to-day  have  left  Kali  and  Brndavana  that  they  might  prostrate  themselves 
in  the  dust  at  your  door.  But  instead  of  that  you  arc  to-day  a  Guru  only 
in  name.  Like  a  servant,  you  appear  at  the  door  of  your  miscreant 
Si$ya  to  receive  your  annual  due  from  him,  only  to  be  driven  away  like 
a  dog;  or  you  heartily  approve  of  his  evil  practices  in  the  hope  of  eating 
the  remnants  of  his  food.  Know  that  it  is  the  powerful  influence  of  the 
Kali  Yuga  which  prevents  a  thunderbolt  from  falling  on  your  head. 
Even  here  the  sorrowful  talc  does  not  end.  In  luxurious  feasts,  where 
wine  and  women  of  the  town  hold  sway,  the  Guru  is  to-day  engaged  in 
cooking,  for  in  the  opinion  of  the  Sifya  the  Guru  is  an  hereditary  slave 
bought  for  nothing.  DharmarSja,*  Yamadcva!  has  hell  become  so  full 
that  it  cannot  afford  room  to  these  men,  whose  proper  place  is  there? 
Save,  O  Bhagavan !  This  current  of  abominable  sin  will  bring  on  a  great 
untimely  dissolution  •  and  destroy  the  world.7  Gurus!  forgive  us.  We 


1  A  playful  threat  against  the  Devi,  The  author  prays  that  She  will 
remedy  this  evil  of  the  Gurus.  If  She  be  unwilling  to  do  so  for  fear  of  destroy¬ 
ing  the  Guru  glory  of  her  father’s  family,  well,  the  author  will  go  to  Her 
husband  Siva,  who,  as  the  Dakfayajfta  showed,  will  not  scruple  to  deal  with 
this  evil. 

■  Perfected. 

*  That  is,  one  seeking  such  perfection  and  power  of  accomplishment. 

4  That  is,  the  town  of  Brnd&vaa,  sacred  to  Krishna  and  the  holy  city  of 

Benares.  *  A  name  of  Yama,  the  God  of  Death. 

4  Mahipralaya.  7  Sarasira. 

36 


S62 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


shall  not  draw  this  picture  of  hell  any  more.  O  Mother,  Jagadamba! 1 
Thou  art  the  Mother  of  the  World.  Be  Thy  sons  good  or  bad,  all  this, 
O  Mother!  is  Thy  play.  We  know  that  Thou  canst  never  forsake  us. 
Hence  with  tears  in  our  eyes  we  say,  O  Mother!  what  play  is  this  of 
Thine  to  throw  Thy  babes  in  arms  in  the  dust?  O  Devi!  beauteous  with 
the  dark  hue  of  clouds  laden  with  water!  O  merciful  Mother!  with  a 
copious  shower  of  mercy  from  that  three-eyed  spring,1 *  the  Devi  Herself, 
which  removes  the  threefold  sorrows 8 *  of  the  three  worlds,  wash  away  for 
once  the  mud  of  infamy  which  soils  the  Guru  family  in  India;  and 
showing  Thy  real  self  to  Thine  erring  children,  lift  them  to  Thy  bosom 
with  Thy  lotus-hands,  which  bestow  blessing  and  dispel  fear.4  Paint, 
then,  their  soiled  and  vice-tainted  eyes  with  the  collyrium *  1  of  Thy  love. 
O  Thou,  who  grantest  all  desires!  O  Mother!  who  art  the  highest  object 
of  all  desires,*  Thou  art  all  to  Siva  and  the  most  precious  to  His  heart. 
If  to-day  Jiva  Thy  son  is  able  to  hold  those  Beauteous  Feet,  the  treasure 
which  even  Siva  by  His  Sadhana  seeks  to  gain,  then,  O  Queen  of  queens 
of  the  Universe,7  of  what  can  he  be  in  want?  What  poverty  is  it  which 
can  then  oppress  him  and  drive  him  to  take  (humble)  stand  at  the  door 
of  his  Sijya?  O  Mother!  stand  forth  as  Mother  taking  up  Thy  son  in 
Thy  arms.  Let  all  the  world  touch  Thy  son’s8  feet  after  it  has  first 
rested  at  Thy  feet.  Make  the  world  of  Si?yas  know  that  in  order  to 
understand  what  a  Guru  *  is,  one  must  know  Thee  first,  and  that  Guru, 
who  is  only  Thyself  in  a  loving  form,  is  weightier 10  than  thee.  And  let 
them  hear  the  most  secret  and  profound  converse  between  Thee  the 
and.  Tby  son,  that  loving  and  endearing  welcome,  which  is 
Mantra.  To  hear  and  understand  this  is  to  destroy  the  diadpleship  oi 
the  Sisya,  the  Guruhood  of  the  Guru,  the  Mantra-nature  11  of  Mantra, 
and  the  strife  and  struggle  to  attain  to  Thee.  With  such  destruction  all 
disappears  in  that  unity  which  is  the  great  truth  that  ‘  when  all  is  gone 


1  The  Devi  as  mother  of  the  world. 

*  Her  three  eyes  are  compared  to  a  spring  of  water. 

*Adhyatmik,  or  mental  and  physical  troubles;  adibhautik,  produced  by 
the  world,  other  men,  animals,  etc.;  adhidaivik,  or  danger  from  Devas  and 
Spirits. 

4  The  Devi’s  hands  are  represented  making  the  gestures  (mudr&)  of  grant¬ 

ing  boons  (varamudra)  and  dispelling  fear  (abhaya  mudra). 

*  Afijana,  used  to  clear  the  vision. 

*  Paramartha  svarupini.  7  Rajarajeivari. 

8  The  Guru.  If  people  get  faith  in  the  Devi,  then  they  will  respect 

the  Guru.  *  Lit.,  gurutattva. 

10  Gurutara;  play  on  the  word  Gum,  which  as  a  noun  means  “  spiritual 
preceptor  ”  and  as  an  adjective  “  heavy  ’’—that  is,  being  greater. 

u  Maatrattva. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


563 


Thyself  alone  remains.’  Let  us  sink  in  the  unity  which  is  Gurutattva, 
Mantra  tattva,  and  Thy  Tattva.  If,  however,  it  causes  Thee  great  pain 
to  destroy  these  three  Tattvas  which  are  so  dear  to  Thee,  then  be  Thou 
at  least  gracious  to  make  us  understand  that1  which  the  destroyer  of 
Kama  8  has  himself  described  as  follows  in  the  Kamakhya  Tantra:  ‘  The 
Devi’B  favour  must  be  secured  first,  and  then  the  favour  of  Sriguru.  Alter 
this,  there  is  generated  single-minded  devotion  to  the  lotus-feet  of  the 
Supreme  Devata,  through  the  influence  of  the  great  Mantra,  which  issues 
from  the  Guru’s  mouth.  That  single-minded  devotion  makes  the  Sadhana 
pure;  out  of  that  pure  Sadhana  arises  pure  knowledge;  and  that  pure 
knowledge  leads  to  the  attainment  of  the  highest  liberation  of  Jiva, 
This  is  the  truth.  This  is  the  command  of  Sastra.’  ” 

The  Characteristics  1  of  Disciples 

Nowadays,  as  there  is  no  one  to  criticize  the  editor  of  a  newspaper, 
whilst  the  latter  criticizes  the  whole  world,  so  there  is  none  to  criticize  the 
characteristics  of  Sijyas  whilst  they  criticize  all  Gurus.*  Just  as  no 
one  who  stands  by  the  side  of  the  sharpened  hundred-tongued  quill  of 
the  editor  has  the  right  to  say  anything  about  him,  so  the  race  of 
Gurus  when  standing  before  the  Si?yas,  so  heroic  in  speech,  can 
say  nothing.  For  to  the  single  tongue  of  the  Guru  there  are  a 
hundred  of  the  Si?yas.  At  the  most  the  Guru  will  perhaps  try  to 
explain  one  or  two  things  to  the  Sisya  in  a  few  words  in  Sanskrit,  but 
then  the  Siaya  will  most  probably  drive  him  away  with  his  ridicule  in 
English.  The  Si;ya  will  test  the  Guru  on  the  touchstone  of  Sastra, 
but  the  Guru  will  stare  blankly  at  the  gilt  on  the  Sijya,  for  Jfiana* 
is  all  that  the  Guru  possesses,  whilst  the  Si$ya  is  strong  with  the  weapon 
•of  Vi-jfiSna.*  Society  complains  that  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  obtain 
a  Guru  such  as  the  Sastra  indicates.  From  this  it  would  seem  that 
there  is  now  no  want  of  Sifyas,  who  are  competent  to  be  such  according 
to  the  Sastra,  We  are,  however,  ourselves  at  a  loss  to  know  whether 
it  is  the  Guru  or  the  §i?ya  who  is  the  more  rare  to  find.  Even  to-day 


1  Literally,  the  tattva. 

*  Siva,  who  destroyed  Kama,  the  God  of  Love,  with  a  flash  of  fire  from 
His  third  eye  when  the  latter  sought  to  disturb  Him  from  His  Yoga,  that  He 
might  unite  with  His  spouse  Parvati  for  the  creation  of  a  son  (K&rtiieya). 

*  Si?ya. 

*  After  administering  due  rebuke  to  the  Gurus  for  their  incompetency, 
the  author  proceeds  to  deal  with  the  failings  of  the  present-day  disciples. 

*  Spiritual  knowledge  which  produces  liberation. 

*  Scientific  and  artistic  knowledge. 


564 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


it  is  not  impossible  to  find  ten  good  Gurus  out  of  every  hundred.  But 
does  one  find  even  a  single  Si?ya  out  of  a  thousand  who  is  competent 
to  be  a  disciple  according  to  the  Sastra?  Whatever  is  necessary  in  any 
fashion,  for  any  purpose  or  in  any  place  in  this  universe  has  been  provided 
for  even  before  its  creation  by  the  Mother.  It  is  impossible  that  She 
who  has  been  careful  to  create  the  mother’s  breast  with  its  milk,  which, 
provides  food  for  the  baby  after  birth,  has  not  created  competent  Gurus 
for  religious-minded  Sisyas.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  just  as  competent  Gurus 
are  never  in  want  of  competent  Sisyas,  so  competent  Sisyas  are  never 
in  want  of  competent  Gurus.1  The  S&stra  has,  therefore,  said,  “  In  the 
matter  of  Devata,  Tirtha,'  Dvija,*  Mantra,  Daivajna,4  medicine  and 
Guru,  each  person  achieves  results  therefrom  according  to  his  thought; 
that  is  to  say,  one  achieves  visible  results  in  proportion  to  one’s  faith 
in  them.  Nowadays  many  people  have  acquired  the  habit  of  despising 
the  race  of  Gurus  on  the  supposition  of  their  being  incompetent.  But 
how  many  of  these  people  consider  whether  they  themselves  are  com¬ 
petent  to  become  Sisyas?  Considering  the  amount  of  competence  which 
you  and  I  possess,  it  is  sheer  presumption  on  our  part  to  deem  the  entire 
race  of  Gurus  to  be  incompetent.  Boys  and  young  men  stirred  by  the 
recent  agitation  over  the  subject  of  the  Sanatana  Dharma  *  and  whose 
meagre  equipment  consists  of  a  knowledge  of  such  matters  as  history, 
fiction,  novel-writing,  and  of  acting  and  the  like,  are  busy  in  the  occupa¬ 
tion  of  selecting  Gurus.  A  section  of  them  have  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  by  “  Guru  ”  is  meant  “  a  prince  of  Yogis  sitting  with  closed 
eyes  in  the  lotus  posture*  on  the  snowclad  summit  of  the  Himalaya, 
or  in  a  solitary  mountain  cave,  or  in  a  thatched  hut  in  the  midst  of  some 
great  forest  outride  the  pale  of  human  habitation,  and  surrounded  by 
tame 7  wild  animals.”  I  admit  that  such  a  person  is  a  good  Guru,  but 
of  what  avail  is  he  to  you  or  me?  True  that  an  infinite  store  of  precious 
gems  exists  in  the  womb  of  the  unfathomable  sea,  but  of  what  use  is 
it  to  you  or  me  ?  What  can  you  or  I  expect  from  him  who  has  forgotten 
the  dualistic  waves  of  the  ocean,  and  has  sunk  to  its  depths  wherein 
is  the  monistic  truth?*  True  that  I  am  thirsty,  and  am  standing  on 
the  bank  of  the  river,  but  the  water  lies  at  a  great  depth  below  the  top 

1  It  is  a  common  saying  that  be  who  is  fit  for  and  truly  deserves  a  Guru 
will  surely  find  one. 

*  Place  of  pilgrimage;  here  the  efficacy  which  is  attributed  to  it. 

*  A  twice-born;  here  a  Br&hmana.  *  Diviner,  foreteller. 

*  The  Hindu  religion. 

*  Padmasana,  a  common  form  of  As  ana  in  Yoga. 

*  Wild  animals  do  not  fear  or  hurt  the  Yog!. 

*  Which  is  the  state  of  the  Yogi,  He  who  can  help  the  dweller  in  a 
dualistic  world  is  he  who  is  himself  a  part  of  it. 


SELECTION  OP  THE  GURU 


565 


of  the  bank.  I  cannot  cross  that  steep  mountain-tike  formidable  shore 
and  descend  into  the  water,  and  yet  my  life  cannot  be  saved  without  it. 
What  is  to  be  done  in  such  a  case?  Am  I  to  beg  water  of  one  who  has 
sunk  and  lost  himself  in  the  mid-current  of  the  river,  the  flow  of  whose  sense 
functions  have  mingled  with  that  current  of  the  river;  who,  though  he  is 
“  who  ”  to  me  is  no  longer  “  he  ”  to  himself  ?  Am  I  to  beg  of  one  who 
will  not  deign  to  turn  his  eyes  even  if  countless  Jivas  like  myself  were  to 
break  their  heads  on  the  bank  ?  To  him  it  is  nothing  whether  the  world 
is  safe  or  the  great  dissolution  1 * *  untimely  threatens.  The  entire  universe 
has  not  the  value  of  a  straw  to  him.  Gan  you  and  I  expect  to  be 
reckoned  as  even  atoms  in  his  eyes?  1  can  get  water  from  the  man 
who  has  crossed  the  shore  and  descended  into  the  water,  but  has  not  yet 
reached  the  bottomless  stream.  For  us  and  the  ordinary  people  the 
Sastra  has  therefore  said,  “and  a  householder  who  knows  the  import  of 
.all  Sastras  is  called  a  Guru,’*  and  again,  “  a  Guru  for  rites  relating  to 
Devas,  Pitrs,  or  both,  should  be  a  house-holder  and  fellow-countryman.” 
To  him  who  has  risen  above  false  dualism  the  relation  of  Guru  and 
£isya  is  nothing  but  a  flower  in  the  ether.* 

Many  people  are  willing  to  take  initiation  only  if  they  can  get 
householders  like  Yajhavalkya  or  Vaiis{ha  for  their  Gurus,  otherwise 
not.  But  they  do  not  stop  to  consider  that  in  order  to  obtain  such 
Gurus  they  themselves  must  be  Sisyas,  like  Rajar$i  Janaka,*  or  Bhagavan 
Ramachandra.4  Doubtless  everyone  has  his  ambitions,  but  if  they 
exceed  the  bounds  of  possibility  men  call  them  mad.  If  one  proceeds 
to  read  fiction  without  understanding  it,  one  is  reduced  to  the  plight  of 
Duryodhana  in  the  court  of  Yudhislhira’s  •  RSjasuya 4  Yajna.  To 
fasten  one’s  heart  in  the  mould  of  novels  and  fulfil  its  unreasonable 
desires,  and  to  acquire  competence  from  Siddhi  and  Sadhana  by  seeking 
shelter  at  the  feet  of  Guru,  arc  not  one  and  the  same  thing.  Only  such  a 
man  who  has  gone  into  the  water  can  do  me  good  as  can  come  out  of 
it,  and  either  bring  water  to  me  who  am  on  land,  or  can  take  me  with 


1  MahSpralaya. 

•  Ak&akusuma;  the  Sanskrit  form  of  the  expressions  “  castle  in  the  air 

*  Sita’s  father;  Rama’s  father-in-law. 

4  Son  of  Daiaratha,  hero  of  Rim&yana,  incarnation  of  Vi$pu. 

*  When  Yudhifthira  did  the  RAjasflya  Yajfla,  a  Gandharva  prepared  for 
him  a  carpet,  the  design  on  which  was  to  natural  that  in  crossing  the  room  in 
which  it  was,  Duryodhana  took  a  tank  which  was  represented  on  it  to  be  real 
water,  and  tucked  up  his  clothes  lest  they  should  be  wetted,  on  which  all  the 
assembly  laughed,  to  the  discomfiture  of  Duryodhana. 

•  A  great  sacrifice  performed  by  a  universal  monarch  at  the  time  of  his 
coronation  as  a  mark  of  his  undisputed  sovereignty. 


566 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


him  from  the  land  to  the  water.  There  may  be  countless  Siddhas 1  who 
are  lying  submerged  in  the  water,  but  there  is  no  means  by  which  I  may 
derive  any  benefit  from  them.  But  I  shall  be  gratified  if  I  get  a  kind- 
hearted  person  who  is  half-sunk  or  almost  sunk,  or  has  just  entered  into- 
the  water.  Hence  for  all  persons  belonging  to  the  household  ASrama, 
householders  make  the  best  Gurus.  Some  people,  again,  think  that  one 
should  not  take  initiation  from  a  Guru  without  first  gauging  the  extent 
of  his  knowledge  and  intelligence.  It  is  difficult  to  restrain  one’s  laughter 
at  this  idea.  If  before  going  to  school  a  boy  can  measure  the  extent  of 
his  teacher’s  knowledge  and  intelligence,  then  what  is  the  necessity  of 
his  going  to  school  at  all  ?  One  must  make  an  offering  of  one’s  ignorance- 
to  whomsoever  one  accepts  as  one’s  Guru.  This  is  the  natural  law  in  the 
world  of  Guru  and  £i?ya.  Unless  one  is  ignorant,  there  is  no  necessity  to 
take  a  Guru.  The  Sastra  therefore  says,  “  I  bow  to  the  Guru  by  whom 
is  opened  with  the  collyrium-sdck 1  of  knowledge  the  eye  blinded  by  the- 
darkness  of  ignorance.”  To  desire  to  test  the  knowledge  and  intelli¬ 
gence  of  the  Guru  is  tantamount  to  the  wish  to  see  that  which  our 
parents  have  done  in  their  childhood.  As  notwithstanding  that  parents 
have  at  one  time  been  children,  they  are  already  youths  when  they 
become  parents;  so  in  spite  of  a  Guru  having  been  ignorant  at  one  time,, 
he  is  already  an  unfathomable  sea  of  knowledge  when  he  initiates  you 
or  I;  otherwise,  if  the  Guru  who  is  to  impart  knowledge  to  the  Sisya  is 
himself  ignorant,  it  is  impossible  to  be  initiated  by  him.  I  can  examine 
only  that  subject  of  which  I  have  knowledge.  But  to  proceed  to  examine 
a  subject  of  which  I  know  nothing  is  tantamount  to  exhibiting  my  own. 
ignorance.  Maybe  that  I  am  a  passed  degree-holder  in  many  subjects. 
But  does  this  entitle  me  to  be  an  examiner  of  a  Guru  ?  Perhaps  the  Guru 
is  not  a  passed  degree-holder  like  myself,  but  what  of  that?  I  am,  despite 
of  my  being  well  educated  in  all  subjects,  a  perfect  ignoramus  in  the  field 
of  Sadhana,  and  the  Guru  is,  notwithstanding  his  ignorance  of  all  subjects, 
a  past'  master  *  in  Siddhi  and  SSdhana.  What  I  have  to  learn  from  him  is 
unknown  to  me  even  in  dream.  It  is,  therefore,  the  height  of  impertinence, 
presumption  and  foolishness  on  may  part  to  try,  blinded  as  I  am  by  the 
vanity  of  worldly  knowledge,  to  test  that  spiritual  knowledge  which  is  the 
possession  of  the  Guru.  There  is  nothing  which  I  can  teach  the  Guru, 
but  my  own  knowledge  is  so  little  that  I  can  spend  a  life-time  in  seeking- 
to  increase  it. 

There  is,  moreover,  another  class  of  men  who  are  charmed  by 
the  glamour  of  love-maddening  plays,  or  by  speech  or  writing,  and  are 

1  Perfect  men  who  have  attained  Siddhi. 

*  Aajana,  which  clears  the  vision. 

1  literally,  MahimahopSdhyaya — that  is,  great  Pap#1- 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


567 


anxious  to  become  Dhruvai 1 * *  or  PraUadas  *  ten  times  every  hour.  Yoga, 
Yajfia,  Tapasya,*  and  such  other  things,  again  are  eyesores  to  them. 
They  think  in  their  minds:  “  I  will  melt  Hari  by  weeping  tears  of  play,4 * * 
whether  my  mind  and  heart  possess  even  a  smack  of  devotion  or  not. 
I  will  be  in  the  world  an  ideal  devotee,  for  I  have  heard  that  a  devotee 
does  not  require  to  perform  Japa,8 *  Tapas,®  worship,  adoration,  or  anything 
of  the  kind.”  All  talk  of  knowledge  is,  as  it  were,  forbidden  by  their 
Dharma.  For  the  fruit  of  knowledge  is  liberation,  and  as  Vaipjava 
books  say,  “  Devotion 7  is  superior  to  knowledge,®  and  liberation  •  is 
its  handmaid,”  they  are  devotees,  and  do  not  want  liberation.  It 
is  as  if  liberation  were  prostrating  itself  in  the  dust  with  tears  in 
its  eyes  before  them,  praying  that  it  be  accepted,  and  with  annoyance 
they  say:  “Be  off!  We  don’t  want  you!”  Nowadays  such  men  are 
found  in  abundance  in  quarters  where  live  unbelievers 10  in  disguise, 
who  carry  the  banner  of  Hinduism,  but  are  actually  devoid  of  all 
Dharma.11 * *  Whatever  be  the  acts  of  unrighteousness  they  may  commit, 
they  are  found  not  guilty,  and  acquitted  on  their  performing  Sahkirtana  u 
to  the  accompaniment  of  a  Khola1*  in  the  evening  at  the  close 
of  every  week.  In  their  opinion  any  Mantra  or  form  of  worship 
other  than  this  “  cry  of  Hari  in  a  tumult  ” 14  belongs  to  the  province  of 
the  lowest  grade  of  worshippers.  However  that  may  be,  through  the 
indifference  and  shortsightedness  of  preachers  of  religion  (Dharma),  and 
the  strong  forbearance  of  the  Arya  Society,  which  nothing  can  move, 
this  community  is  daily  receiving  such  indulgence  that  the  creation  of 
Non-Arya  Society — in  fact  but  dubbed  with  the  name  of  Arya  Society — 
is  undoubtedly  inevitable.  The  band  of  these  pseudo-Prahlldas 14  think 


1  Rija  Uttanapada’s  son,  a  great  devotee  for  whom  Vijnu  made  the 

Dhruvaloka.  The  Pole  star  is  called  Dhruva. 

I  Son  of  Hiranyakalipu,  and  a  great  devotee  ofVipju. 

4  Yoga,  sacrifice,  austerity,  etc. 

4  That  is,  by  feigning  weeping. 

*  Recitation  of  Mantras  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra). 

'  See  anti.  7  Bhakti.  ‘Jfiana.  •  Mukti. 

18  NSstika.  11  That  is,  who  really  do  not  belong  to  it. 

II  Dancing  and  singing  the  name  of  Hari  (Vijnu),  as  Va4navas  do. 

11  An  elongated,  drum-shaped,  musical  instrument  used  in  Sanklrtana. 

The  reference  is  to  Brahmos,  who  hold  weekly  prayer-meetings  after  the 
manner  of  the  Christians. 

14  Gole  Hari  bo  1 — slang  for  doing  a  thing  perfunctorily — e.g.,  where  a  large 

number  of  people  cry  Hari  together,  one  of  them  may  himself  cry  without  care 
or  heart  for  what  he  does  and  without  notice. 

15  See  anU. 


568 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


that  all  Gurus  are  like  Saijda  and  Amarka,1  and  cite  the  case  of 
Prahlada  to  show  that  there  is  no  necessity  to  take  a  Guru.  They, 
however,  do  not  stop  even  once  to  consider  that  if  everyone  can  be  a 
PrahlSda  by  becoming  a  devotee  in  this  fashion,  why  then  has  there  been 
only  one  Prahlada  during  all  these  ages?  In  the  infinite  world  of  moving 
and  unmoving  things  infinite  numbers  of  devotees  to  BhagavSn  have  been 
bom.  But  why  has  there  not  been  bora  another  like  Prahlada  ?  Why 
has  not  Bhagavan  stood  before  any  other  devotee  in  the  form  of  half-man, 
half-lion  ?*  Is  devotion  to  Bhagavan  (it  is  said)  so  partial  towards  one 
party  that  it  cannot  reveal  its  own  power*  to  any  person  other  than 
Prahlada?  If  the  respect  that  is  paid  to  Prahlada  is  due  to  this  sort 
of  devotion,  then  it  is  difficult  to  count  the  number  of  Prahladas  which 
exist  in  this  Samsara.4  Herein  a  little  knowledge  of  the  truth  as  told  in 
the  Sastra  is  necessary.  Unable  to  bear  any  longer  the  oppressions  of 
Hiragyakaiipu,  Brahma  and  other  Devas  sought  the  protection  of  the 
Lord  of  Vaikuptha.  Bhagavan  said  to  them:  “  Wait  a  little  time  more. 
So  long  as  he  does  not  become  the  enemy  of  his  own  self  (Atma),  the 
store  of  his  sins  will  not  be  full,  and  I,  too,  shall  not  be  able  to  destroy 
him.”  The  Devas  were  astonished,  and  asked:  “Lord,  a  Jiva  never 
becomes  an  enemy  of  his  own  self.  How  then  can  this  be  possible?” 
Bhagavan  replied:  “You  need  not  be  afraid;  it  is  the  self  indeed  which 
is  bom  as  a  son,4  and  I  myself  shall  take  birth  as  his  son.”  The  Devas 
understood  the  plane  of  the  crest  gem  of  the  cunning*  and  were  assured. 
In  order  to  accomplish  the  purpose  of  the  Devas,  Bhagavan  incarnated 
Himself  as  Prahlida  as  a  son  of  the  King  of  Daityas 7  in  the  womb  of 
Kayadhu.  Now,  is  it  not  beyond  the  possibility  of  even  a  dream  that 
that  which  happened  to  Prahlada,  the  incarnation  of  Bhagavan  Himself 
in  the  form  of  a  devotee,  should  happen  to  you,  me,  or  anybody  else? 
Because  He  showed  a  divinely  brilliant  example  of  an  unflinching  devo¬ 
tion  to  Himself  by  His  incarnation  as  a  devotee  in  order  to  create  a 
feeling  of  enmity  in  Hirapyakaiipu,  is  it  possible  that  you  and  I  should 
show  the  same?  Hari,  Hari,  Hari!*  If  this  could  happen,  why  should  He 
Himself  have  incarnated  as  Prahlada? 

And  did  He,  on  being  incarnated  as  Prahlida,  show  His  devotion 
without  first  taking  a  Guru?  Those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  Sistra  may 

*  Gurus  to  whom  Prahl&da’s  lather  sent  him  for  education,  and  who  tried 
to  dissuade  Ptahlada  from  worship  of  Vi|pu. 

*  Vifliu  took  this  form  as  Nfsimha  avatara  to  destroy  Prahlada’s  unbelieving 
father  for  his  persecution  of  the  Utter  on  account  of  his  devotion  to  Vijtju. 

1  VibhQti.  4  That  is  to  say,  there  are  innumerable  Prahladas  in  it. 

*  The  fatlier  is  bom  as  the  son. 

4  Chaim.  7  HiranyakaJipu. 

*  Equivalent  to  the  English  exclamation  “  My  God  ”  1 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


569 


easily  come  to  the  conclusion  that  Prahlada  had  no  Guru.  But  learned 
men  and  Sadhus  conversant  with  Sistra  know  that  when  Hirapyakaiipu 
was  away  from  home  and  in  war  the  King  of  Devas 1  stole  away 
Kayadhfi  *  from  the  unguarded  Daitya  City  with  the  object  of  destroying 
her  and  the  child  in  her  womb.  On  the  way  Narada,  the  Divine  Rji, 
questioned  him,  saying:  “  King  of  Devas!  why  this  wickedness  in  taking 
away  a  woman  with  child?  ”  Indra  replied  with  confidence:  “  O  thou 
whose  wealth  is  Tapas,®  the  kingdom  of  Devas  is  on  the  point  of  being 
utterly  destroyed  by  HiraijyakaSipu’s  oppression.  If  after  this  the  father 
and  the  son  unite  to  commit  oppressions,  the  three  worlds  will  be  destroyed. 
From  fear  of  this  I  have  determined  to  kill  the  Daitya’s  Queen  along 
with  the  child  in  her  womb,  for  I  do  not  see  any  other  means  of  averting 
the  danger.”  The  Divine  laughed  and  said:  “  King  of  Devas,  stay 
your  hand.  This  child  has  been  conceived,  and  will  be  bom  for  the 
very  purpose  of  bringing  to  an  end  the  oppressions  of  Daityas.  You  have 
no  need  to  destroy  the  child  in  the  womb,  for  this  child  is  destined  to 
reinstate  the  tutelary  goddess  of  good  fortune4  of  the  race  of  Suras.” 
Trusting  the  R?i’s  words,  the  King  of  Devas  released  the  Daitya  Queen, 
and  went  away  to  his  own  place.  Kay&dhu  then  fell  at  the  R?i’s  feet, 
weeping,  and  said :  “  Lord,  seeing  me  helpless,  the  King  of  Devas  stole 
me  away,  and  now  through  your  grace  I  am  safe  from  him;  but  how  can 
I  now  go  to  the  Daitya  City?  Even  if  a  chaste  woman  of  respectable 
family  thus  falls  into  the  hands  of  an  enemy,  no  one  believes  that  she 
remains  inviolate.  Moreover,  if  the  King  of  Daityas  comes  to  know  of 
that  which  has  happened,  he  will  most  surely  abandon  me.  O  Lord!  of 
what  use  is  life  to  me  if  it  be  made  unbearable  through  public  calumny, 
abandonment  of  my  husband,  and  the  burden  of  pregnancy  ?  But  how, 
on  the  other  hand,  can  I  surrender  a  body  which  bears  a  child?  Father! 
save  me  from  this  terrible  dilemma.”  Seeing  the  Daitya  Queen  to  be 
in  such  great  danger,  the  Divine  Rfi  said:  “  Mother!  fear  not  that  your 
virtue  may  be  impugned ;  for  that  I  am  your  witness.  For  the  present  do 
you  stay  in  my  hermitage  until  Hira^yaka&pu,  your  husband,  returns. 
Then  you  will  go  with  him  to  the  Daitya  City.”  Approving  of  the 
Divine  SL$i’s  assuring  words,  Kay&dhG  stayed  in  NSrada’s  hermitage, 
during  which  time  He  explained  to  her,  at  her  request,  the  Yoga  of 
devotion*  to  Bhagav&n.  Bhagavan,  incarnated  as  a  devotee,  took 
Narada,  the  Guru  of  Devas,  as  His  Guru,  and  Himself  practised  the  Yoga 
of  devotion  *  to  Himself  while  still  living  in  the  womb.  The  effect  of 
that  devotion  *  was  the  assumption  by  Bhagavan  of  a  half-man,  half-lion 


1  Indra.  *  Hiranyakadipu's  wife. 

*  Austerity,  devotion,  study,  self-restraint,  etc.  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra 
&tstra.)  4 1.aVfmT  *  Bhakd. 


570 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


form.1  Now,  seeing  that  Bhagavan  Himself,  the  treasure  which  all 
devotees  worship,  made  His  own  devotee*  His  Guru,  whilst  learning 
devotion  to  Himself,  it  is  the  height  of  ignorance  to  say  to-day  that 
Prahlada  had  no  Guru.  Bhagavan  is  almighty.  It  is  not  possible  that 
He  who  could  burst  through  a  crystal  column  and  assume  a  wonderful' 
half-man,  half-lion  *  form,  full  of  brilliance,  could  not  preach  the  Yoga 
of  devotion  to  Himself  without  instruction  from  a  Guru.  But  still,  in. 
order  to  uphold  the  honour  of  Sastra,  the  Guru  of  the  three  worlds  became 
a  disciple 4  Himself,  and  making  His  own  disciple  His  Guru  whilst  He 
lived  in  the  womb,  He  issued  from  it  as  a  Siddha.*  Now,  Sadhakas  should 
understand  that  even  He,  devotion  to  Whom,  even  when  simulated,*  makes 
us  proud,  carried  out  an  intricate  scheme  by  making  the  King  of  Dcvas  into 
an  instrument  for  upholding  the  glory  of  Guruhood,  and  yet  to-day  we  ima¬ 
gine  Prahlada  an  ordinary  son  of  a  Daitya,  and  proceed  to  quote  him  as  a 
precedent  on  the  supposed  ground  that  he  had  no  Guru.1  Marvellous  is  our 
audacity!  Marvellous  also  are  our  intelligence  and  education,  and  marvel¬ 
lous,  too,  will  be  our  inevitable  downfall !  Hence  we  say,  do  not  imagine 
yourselves  to  be  new  Prahladas,  mistaking  a  play  of  Daityahood  to  be  one 
of  Devahood,  and  a  play  of  Brahmahood  to  be  one  of  Jivahood.8  Do 
not  thus  be  foolish  according  to  the  wish  of  ISvara.*  Dwarfs  that  you 
arc,  do  not  stretch  out  your  hands  to  catch  the  moon;  mere  flies  that 
you  are,  do  not  jump  into  a  pit  of  flaming  fire,  where  you  will  be  reduced 
to  ashes. 

There  is  also  another  class  of  persons  who  think  that  a  man  can  never 
be  a  man’s  Guru;  that  a  man’s  Guru  is  Iivara,  and  that  to  obey  Him 
means  to  follow  the  teachings  which  He  from  time  to  time  gives  through 
the  dictates  of  our  intelligence  and  our  heart.  These  people  consider 

1  Nfsimha,  in  which  He  appeared  to  kill  Hirapyakalipu. 

*  Narada.  1  Njiimha.  4  Sijya. 

8  One  who  is  perfect. 

4  Men  pretend  to  be  devoted  to  Him,  and  take  pride  in  showing  themselves 
off  as  devotees,  so  great  is  the  glory  of  Him  to  Whom  they  offer  their  simulated 
devotion. 

7  That  is,  because  after  His  birth  them  is  no  mention  of  His  having  a  Guru. 
But  Prahlada  was  Visnu,  and  had  a  Gum  when  in  his  mother’s  womb— namely* 
Narada— for  the  latter  gave  the  mother  instructions,  which  the  child  heard. 
So  also  Abhimanyu,  Aijuna’s  son,  learnt  the  art  of  warfare  in  his  mother’s 
womb. 

8  That  is,  do  not  misunderstand.  This  was  an  exceptional  case,  due  to 
the  fact  that  Prahlada  was  not  a  Daitya,  but  Deva;  and  not  a  mere  Jiva,  but 
Brahman. 

*  All  which  is  done,  whether  by  way  of  wisdom  or  folly,  is  done  at  livara’i 
command.  Perhaps  the  meaning  also  is  that  in  so  far  as  Iivara  is  the  creator. 
His  desire  as  such  is  that  men  should  not  follow  the  path  of  liberation,  but 
maintain  the  Samsira. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


57r 


Nature  (Prakrti)  to  be  the  Supreme  Guru.  Mountains,  woods,  groves, 
clouds,  lightning,  rivers,  seas,  and  lakes  are  all  Gurus  according  to  them. 
But  we  hold  that  a  conscious  human  society  cannot  be  built  with  the 
aid  of  such  unconscious  things.  Unaided  Nature 1  can  be  the  Guru  of 
trees,  creepers,  birds,  and  beasts,  but  never  of  men.  Immediately  a  cow 
brings  forth  a  calf,  the  latter  rises  up  and  seeks  its  mother’s  udder  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  law  of  Pralqri  (Nature) ;  but  on  the  birth  of  a  human  child 
the  loving  mother  must  forget  the  pains  of  labour,  and  with  her  own 
hand  hold  her  breast  up  to  its  mouth,  otherwise  its  desire  to  drink  its. 
mother’s  milk  is  not  gratified.  A  calf  one  month  old  will,  if  thrown  into 
water,  easily  swim  across  it  according  to  Prakrti’s  teaching.  But  throw 
a  boy  of  ten  or  even  twenty  years  of  age  into  water,  and  (unless  he  has 
learnt  swimming  from  another  man)  he  will  founder  and  die.  SSdhakas- 
should  know  that  it  is  the  same  people  who  through  their  rejection  of  a 
human  Guru,  and  dependence  on  Nature 1  as  their  guide,*  have  been 
reduced  to  such  miserable  plight  in  the  waters  of  a  mere  tank,  who  are 
prepared  to  cross  the  ocean  of  existence  ten  times  every  half  an  hour  in 
the  name  of  Prakfti-Guru,  and  who  also  call  on  others  to  accompany 
them.  If  your  desire  to  emulate  birds  and  beasts  were  one  which  was- 
capable  of  fulfilment,  then,  O  Sijya  of  Prakrti!*  your  body  also  would 
have  been  similarly  built.  In  fact,  you  do  not  understand  Prakjti,  whose 
Sisya  you  boast  yourself  to  be.  This  is  greatly  to  be  regretted.  What 
JIva  is  there  in  this  universe  who  is  not  a  Sisya  of  Prakrti  ?  From  the 
appearance  of  a  Jiva  to  his  reabsorption  in  Parabrahman  every  faculty 
or  act  of  body,  speech,  and  mind  is  regulated  according  to  the  law  of 
Prakrti.  It  is  neither  the  mark  of  intelligence  to  say,  nor  is  it  the  teaching 
of  Sastra,  that  the  four  faculties  of  eating,  sleeping,  fearing,4  and  of  sexual 
intercourse,  are  alone  governed  by  Prakrti.  Bhagav&n  Himself  has  said 
to  Aijuna:  “  Jivas  follow  their  individual  Pralqli  (Nature).  How  can  it 
be  forcibly  suppressed  ?  *  A  person  is  bom  in  a  particular  caste  according 
to  the  decree  of  fate*  and  the  fruits  of  his  action 7  in  previous  lives.  He 
can  only  attain  Siddhi  through  the  Ac3ra*  and  Mantra  in  which  he 


1  Prakrti.  *  Guru. 

•  Disciple  of  Nature. 

4Bhaya — this  is  a  common,  though  to  us  a  peculiar,  classification  of" 
faculties.  Fear  is  considered  inherent  in  the  Jiva’s  nature,  and  he  can  no  more 
shake  it  off  than  he  can  shake  off  the  desire  to  eat  and  sleep,  etc. 

•  Nigraha.  That  is.  Nature  cannot  altogether  be  crushed.  It  will  recur. 
It  is  only  by  the  slow  process  of  Sadhana  that  it  can  be  modified. 

•  Adrsta.  That  is,  the  unseen  cause  of  that  which  makes  him  what  he- 

is  and  impels  his  action.  7  Karma. 

•The  way  or  practice  which  he  as  a  member  of  such  caste  and  holding: 
such  and  such  a  position  in  it  has  to  follow. 


572 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


has  been  initiated  by  Prakfti.1 * *  The  Sastra  says  that  he  whom  Prakyti 
has  made  a  Brahmapa  must  attain  the  state  of  Brahman  through  the 
Acara  *  of  a  Brihmana.  Just  as  looking  at  things  from  their  gross  aspect 
it  is  impossible  to  turn  a  beast  into  a  man,  so  also  if  their  subtle  aspect 
be  considered  it  is  impossible  to  convert  a  Candala  into  a  Br&hmana.* 
Had  Prakyti  surrendered  all  Her  claim  on  a  Jiva  after  his  birth,  then 
it  might  have  been  possible  some  day  to  bring  about  such  a  change  of 
caste.  But  when  Prakrti  does  not  release  Jiva,  but,  on  the  contrary,  his 
relationship  with  Her  subsists  till  the  moment  immediately  preceding 
complete  liberation,  it  is  by  no  means  possible  to  avoid  Her  rule.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  the  ordinance  of  Guru  Pralq-ti,  an  unconscious  hill  or  mountain 
can  never  be  the  Guru  of  a  conscious  man,  and  thus  take  the  place  of 
a  conscious  human  being.  But  it  is  also  a  wonderful  freak  of  Prakrti 
Herself  that  one  who  is  himself  a  man  can  feel  ashamed  to  call  another 
conscious  man  his  Guru,  but  feels  not  the  least  shame  in  calling  an 
unconscious  hill  or  mountain  such. 

Some  people,  again,  conclude  that  if  work  is  truly  done  by  the 
potency  of  Mantra,  there  is  no  necessity  to  take  a  Guru.  Why  should 
not  a  Mantra  taken  by  one’s  own  self  from  the  Sistra  lead  to  Siddhi? 
Although  we  have  indirectly  answered  this  question  while  discussing  the 
subject  of  Gurus,  yet  we  ask.  Why  should  not  such  people  also  hold  that 
the  potency  of  Mantra4 * *  is  without  effect  where  a  Guru  is  not  taken? 
For  the  necessity  of  taking  a  Guru  is  as  much  asserted  in  the  Sastra  as 
the  potency  of  a  Mantra.  What  sort  of  faith  is  it  which  accepts  one  part 
of  the  Sastra  and  rejects  another? 

The  Sastra  says:  “All  Japa  is  based  on  initiation,  all  TapasyS  *  is 
based  on  initiation.  It  is  under  the  shelter  of  initiation  that  one  should 
live  in  Brahmacarya,  Garhastha,  and  Vanaprastha  Airamas.*  O  Beloved 
Dev!!  the  performance  without  previous  initiation  of  Japa,  Puji,7  and 
so  forth,  is  like  the  sowing  of  seeds  on  a  rock.  As  such  seeds  will  never 
bear  fruit,  nor  will  such  acts.  O  Dev!!  an  uninitiate  attains  neither  a 
good  state*  nor  Siddhi.  For  this  reason  one  should  by  all  means  receive 
initiation  from  a  Guru.  If  a  person  dies  uninitiated,  he  goes  to  the 
Raurava  HelL  One  should  therefore  take  care  to  receive  initiation  from 


1  That  is,  Nature  has  made  him  Adhikirl  for  a  particular  Acara  or  Mantra. 
Nature  here  is  only  the  resultant  of  his  previous  Kanna. 

*  The  way  or  practice  which  he  as  a  member  of  such  caste  and  holding 
such  and  such  a  position  in  it  has  to  follow. 

*  That  is,  from  one  of  the  lowest  castes  into  the  highest. 

4  Mintraiakti.  *  Sec  Introduction  to  T antra  Sdstra  and  anti. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tmtra  Sistre.  7  Ceremonial  worship. 

*  Sadgati :  a  better  state  than  that  which  he  possesses. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


573 


Tantrik  Guru.  If  a  man  without  being  initiated  by  a  Guru  take*  a  Mantra 
which  he  reach  in  a  book,  then  even  a  thousand  Manvantaras 1  will  not  end 
the  sufferings  in  hell  of  that  wont  of  men.  O  Queen  of  Devas  1  initiation 
taken  according  to  the  Sastra  at  once  consumes  lakhs  8  of  sins  and  crores 1 
of  greater  sins.*  It  does  not  become  an  intelligent  person  to  say  that 
because  when  a  lamp  is  lighted  a  man  can  sec  things  for  himself  there  is 
therefore  no  necessity  to  light  the  lamp.  If  a  Sadhaka  has  acquired  the 
necessary  Sastrik  competence,  he  can  by  virtue  of  MantraSakti  1  endow 
even  an  unconscious  image  with  consciousness. 

But  in  order  to  awaken  Mantraiakti4  a  Guru  is,  like  a  lamp, 
necessary.  It  is  true  that  the  work  will  be  done  by  the  Mantraiakti,  but 
who  but  a  Guru  has  the  power  to  awaken  it?  Just  as  a  wick  can,  when 
lighted,  bum  and  illuminate  according  to  the  quantity  of  its  combustible 
substance,  but  in  order  to  light  it  another  flame  is  required,  so  similarly 
for  the  uninitiated  a  Gum  in  whom  there  is  Divine  Power,  Sadhana  and 
Siddhi  is  necessary.  Such  powers,  however,  exist  in  conscious  beings 
only,  and  not  in  unconscious  things.  Among  conscious  beings  also  they 
can  exist  only  in  a  Devata  who  is  fully  conscious,  or  in  a  DevatS-likc 
great  man.  This  is  why  the  SSstra  ordains  that  a  Siddha  or  S&dhaka  man 
should  be  taken  as  Gum,  and  not  creepers,  leaves,  hills,  or  mountains. 
Whatever  may  be  the  process,  such  initiation  and  Sadhana  as  are  spoken 
of  in  the  Sastra  can  never  be  accomplished  without  a  Gum.  It  is  true 
that  the  account  of  a  country  contains  descriptions  of  its  roads,  but  if  a 
person  is  suddenly  faced  by  a  danger  in  the  midst  of  these  roads,  how 
is  he  to  be  saved?  As  none  but  he  who  is  fully  acquainted  with  the  road 
can  know  how  to  save  him,  jo,  although  the  Sastra  contains  accounts  of 
Sadhana  and  Siddhi,  yet  when  some  superhuman  *  difficulty  arises  in  the 
course  of  Sadhana,  none  but  a  Gum  can  save  from  it.  The  Sastra  has 
therefore  said :  “  If  the  Is(adeva  becomes  wrathful,  the  Gum  can  save  a 
Sadhaka;  but  if  the  Gum  becomes  angered,  neither  the  Istadevata  alone 
nor  even  all  Devatas  together  can  save  him."  The  meaning  of  all  this 
will  not  probably  be  understood  in  a  society  without  Sadhana,  but  even 
now  in  India  incidents  frequently  occur  which  reveal  the  truth  of  these 
infallible  commands  which  have  issued  from  the  beauteous  mouth  of 
Bhagavan  Himself.  Many  S&dhakas  who  have  reached  a  high  stage  of 

1 A  Manvantara  is  the  one-fourteenth  part  of  a  Kalpa,  or  day  of  Brahma, 
which  is  4,320,000,000  years. 

*  A  lakh  equals  100,000,  and  a  crore  equals  10,000,000. 

*  Sins  arc  divided  into  upapataka  (venial  sins),  pataka  (greater  sins),  and 
Mahapataka  (great  sins),  though  generally  the  classification  is  into  the  two 
last  classes. 

*  The  power  inherent  in,  or  which  more  strictly  is.  Mantra  itself. 

*  Daiva. 


574 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


development  are  yet  overthrown  by  the  displeasure  of  the  Guru,  notwith¬ 
standing  their  good  equipment  of  Sadhana,  and  become  as  low  and 
destitute  of  lustre  as  stars  which  have  fallen  from  the  firmament.  Again, 
we  often  see  persons  without  S&dhana  or  purity  of  body,  speech,  or  mind, 
without,  in  fact,  anything  to  speak  of  in  the  way  of  Sadhana  or  worship, 
but  who  have  ever  in  their  mouths  the  cry,  “  Victory  to  Thee,  O  Guru! 
O  Sriguru !  ”  both  in  prosperity  and  in  adversity.  And  yet  by  the  mercy 
of  Her  who  is  merciful,  that  Sadhaka  easily  acquires  by  his  worship 
of  Her  in  Her  aspect  as  Guru,  but  for  a  very  short  time,  the  fruit  which 
he  could  not  acquire  by  lifelong  worship  of  Her  in  Her  aspect  as 
IftadevatS.  He  whose  heart  constantly  rings  with  the  triumphant  clarion 
•call  to  Siddhi 1 * *  through  austere  Sadhana,  whose  heroic  feet  are  resdess  to 
•dance  a  leaping  *  furious  dance  in  the  field  of  battle,  full  of  horror  and 
intense  darkness,  and  whose  strength  of  Siddhi  is  ready,  and  is,  as  it  were, 
roaring  thunder  for  the  shattering  of  the  formidable  army  of  Samsara 
with  its  six  divisions,*  such  a  man  knows  that  the  triumphant  and  heroic 
son  of  Bhairavi 4 * *  of  Victory  is  unconquerable  in  the  three  worlds  solely 
by  virtue  of  his  possession  of  the  Supreme  Weapon8  of  devotion  to 
Guru.  He  alone  who  is  ready  to  pass  through  that  ordeal  of  burning 
fire  knows  that  “  the  word  of  Guru  is  true  and  everything  eke  is  fake  ”. 
The  Sastra  says:  “  If  the  Guru  gives  a  command  which  is  even  contrary 
to  the  Tantra  Sastra,  that  command  must  be  considered  approved  of 
by  the  Veda  like  the  words  of  Maharudra.* 

When  all  earthly  means  fail:  when  Sastra  shrinks  back  and  Sastra 7 
is  robbed  of  its  power;  when  even  the  Devata,  with  uplifted  hand  to 
bless,  checks  Her  indomitable  will  and  stands  back;  when  in  that  terrible 
and  pitiless  great  cremation  ground,*  where  horror?  do  a  frantic  dance,' 
there  is,  despite  the  presence  of  the  all-good  Mother,  nothing  in  all  the 
infinite  world  which  for  our  safety  we  can  call  our  own;  in  that  deep 
-darkness  of  a  new-moon  night,  haunted  with  destructive  Bhairavas, 
Vet  alas,  Siddhas,  Bhutas,  Vapikas,  and  Dakiius  • ;  when  even  the  fire  of 


1  Calling  upon  Siddhi  to  come  to  the  Sadhaka.  *  Uttala. 

•  Six  enemies  or  sins—lust  (Kima),  anger  (Krodha),  greed  (Lobha), 

•delusion  (Moha),  pride  (Mada),  envy  (Matsarya),  which  arc  here  compared 
to  the  six  divisions  of  the  army,  the  Sams&ra,  which  is  to  be  conquered. 

4  The  Dev!,  as  spouse  of  Siva  the  formidable  (Bhairava). 

8  Brahmas tra.  *  Siva. 

7  There  is  here  a  play  on  the  words  Sistra  and  Sastra:  the  first  meaning 
Scripture,  and  the  second  arms,  or  here  religious  rites,  by  which  the  spiritual 
•combat  is  won. 

■  Smaflna,  where  corpses  are  burnt. 

*  Various  terrible  spirits  whose  assaults  the  Sadhaka  during  his  S&dhana 
suffers,  and  resistance  to  whom  proves  his  worth. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


575 


the  Sadh  aka’s  austere  Tapas 1 * *  is  dimmed,  and  the  firm  and  heroic  heart 
•of  even  the  great  Vira  *  shakes  with  fear;  when  even  the  intricate  bonds 
of  the  Sadhaka’s  posture,*  on  the  back  of  the  corpse  which  is  awakened 
by  Mantra,  is  loosened  4 ;  when  with  a  fainting  heart  the  Vira 1 *  feels  as 
he  sits  the  earth  quake  furiously  under  him;  when  without  means  of 
Tescue  he  is  about  to  fall  and  be  crushed;  when  he  is  overtaken  by  the 
swoon  of  death — if  even  at  such  times  the  Sadhaka  but  freely  and  with 
full  confidence  opens  his  heart  but  once,  and  extends  his  uplifted  hands, 
saying,  “  Save  me,  I  pray  thee,  O  Gurudcva  !  ”  then  the  Mother  of  the 
world,  who  is  Herself  the  Guru,  at  once  forgets  all  his  faults,  dispels  all 
his  difficulties  with  Her  glance,  and  stretching  forth  ten  hands  instead 
of  two,  says :  “  Come,  my  child,  there  is  no  more  fear,”  and  blesses  the 
Sadhaka  by  raising  him  to  Her  assuring  bosom.  On  that  day  the 
S&dhaka  also  puts  to  its  final  test  the  question  whether  Guru  is  greater  or 
the  Mother  is  greater.* 

Hence  I  say,  O  brother  Sadhaka!  when  will  that  day  come  to  you, 
the  day  on  which  the  Guru  will  merge  in  the  Mother’s  self,*  and  you  will 
be  beside  yourself  in  that  maddening  joy  which  is  bom  of  that  union? 
O  All-Merciful  Mother!  turn  for  once  Thy  merciful  glance,  brighten  for 
once  the  fire  7  in  the  heart  of  the  Sadhakas  of  Thy  beloved  Bharata,*  and 
grant  full  success  to  the  Sadhana  of  Thyself  as  son  by  appearing  before 
him  as  his  Guru  in  Thy  aspect  as  Father  and  in  Thy  aspect  as  Mother, 
so  that  as  servants  bound  to  Thee  by  that  grace  of  Thine  we  may  dance 
with  joy  and  sing: 

“  None  beseeches  Thee,  O  Syamal  Thyself  fulfillest  Thy  own  desire. 
Thou  wee  pest  also  just  as  Thou  laughest  in  the  intoxication  of  Thy 
happiness.” 

There  is,  however,  a  class  of  inquirers  into  Sastra  who  encourage 
themselves  with  the  notion  that  they  will  set  their  minds  to  Siddhi  and 
Sadhana  in  old  age,  after  their  intellect  has  been  matured  by  knowing, 
hearing,  and  assimilating  the  views  of  all  Scriptures.  From  the  energy 
which  these  people  display  it  would  seem  as  if  great  men,  such  as 
Markaijdeya,  Dadhlchi,*  Baliraja,10  and  Bhismadeva,u  who  enjoy  eternal 


1  Devotion,  austerity,  etc.  (see  Introduction  to  Tanlra  Sdstra). 

I  Literally,  “  Hero  ”  ;  here  one  who  follows  the  Tantrik  Virac&ra. 

*  Padmdsana,  or  11  lotus-seat,”  on  the  back  of  the  corpse  on  which  his 
S6dhana  is  done. 

4  From  fear,  or  due  to  the  moving  of  the  corpse  through  force  of  the  Mantra. 

*  This  idle  question  will  be  solved  in  the  realization  of  their  unity. 

*  Svarupa.  7  Tejas.  8  India.  *  Munis. 

10  Prahlada’s  grandson,  for  whom  the  V&mana  avatara  took  place. 

II  Hero  of  the  Mahabh&rata,  General  of  the  Kauravas. 


576 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


life,  belong  to  their  community,  and  that  death  finds  no  place  in  their 
nativity.1  It  is  with  an  eye  to  this  class  that  poets  have  said:  “  It  is  only 
ignorant  boon  1 *  who  think  that  they  will  bathe  when  there  are  no  longer 
waves  in  the  sea.” 

And  for  this  reason  Bhagavan  has,  in  the  discoune  between  the  Dcva 
and  the  Devi  in  the  Kulinjava  Tantra,  said:  "  If  Atma  itself  does  not 
keep  Atma  from  injury,  then  where  in  the  world  is  the  benefactor  who 
can  deliver  AtmS  from  this  sea  of  Samsara?  (i)  He  who  in  this  world 
does  not  undergo  treatment  for  that  disease  which  leads  to  hell,  what 
will  he  do  when  with  such  disease  he  goes  to  the  next  world,  in  which 
there  is  no  medicine  ?  (2)  The  supreme  truth  should  be  sought  so  long  as 
this  body  exists.  Who  is  there  so  perverse  as  to  commence  the  excavation, 
of  a  well  with  a  view  to  extinguish  a  fire  which  has  already  caught  his 
house  ?  (3)  Like  a  tigress,  old  age  *  waits  with  open  mouth  to  swallow  the 
Jiva.  As  water  continually  exudes  from  a  broken  vessel,  so  is  the  period 
of  life  being  constantly  shortened.  Diseases  constantly  inflict  wounds 
like  enemies  laying  siege  to  a  house.  Hence  one  should  as  early  as 
possible  engage  in  the  working  of  good  to  oneself4  (4).  Good  work 
should  be  done  what  time  there  is  no  sorrow  or  danger,  and  when  the 
senses  are  not  disabled  (5).  Time  passes  in  various  occupations,  but  the 
Jiva  knows  it  not.  Happiness  and  sorrow  bom  of  the  Sams&ra  kill  the 
Jiva,  but  even  then  he  does  not  know  the  path  of  the  welfare  of  Atma  (6). 
How  many  Jivas  arc  bom,  fall  into  dangers,  become  subject  to  suffering 
and  sorrow,  and  die  ?  Even  the  sight  of  such  does  not  enlighten  the  Jiva, 
maddened  as  he  is  by  drinking  the  wine  of  delusion  as  to  what  is  his  own 
good  (7).  Prosperity  is  like  a  dream,  youth  is  shortlived  like  a  flower, 
and  life  passes  like  a  flash  of  lightning.  How  can  a  man  feel  satisfied 
who  has  seen  all  this?  (8)  The  utmost  period  of  a  man's  life  is  a  hundred 
yean.  Half  of  it  is  passed  in  sleep,  and  the  remaining  half  also  is  made 
useles?  to  him  by  childhood,  disease,  old  age,  sorrow,  and  other  such 
causes  (9).  Utterly  indifferent  to  the  work  which  ought  by  all  means 
to  be  begun,  sleeping  during  the  time  he  should  be  awake,  and  fancying 
danger  where  there  Bhould  be  firm  faith — alas  1  by  what  ill-fortune  is  man 
in  this  fashion  destroyed?  (10)  How  can  Jiva,  cherishing  the  fleeting 
Samsira  so  dear  to  him,  live  without  fear  in  this  body  as  evanescent  as 
a  bubble  of  water,  and  which  endures  as  little  as  the  stay  of  a  bird 
on  the  branch  of  a  tree?  (1 1)  He  seeks  benefit  from  things  which 


1  The  celestial  combinations  which  are  cast  upon  the  horoscope. 

1  Varvaras:  ignorant,  rustic.  The  term  “  barbarian  ”  comes  from  this  root. 

*  Jar5  (feminine). 

4  That  is,  of  course,  not  in  the  selfish  sense,  but  in  the  doing  of  good,  which 
in  fact  benefits  the  Self. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


577 


do  him  injury,  thinks  the  impermanent  to  be  permanent,  see#  his 
highest  good  in  that  which  is  evil,  and  yet  does  he  not  see  that  death  is 
coming  upon  him?  (12)  O  Devi!  deluded  by  the  great  Maya,  the  Jiva 
sees  and  yet  sees  not,  hears  and  yet  understands  not,  reads  and  yet  knows 
not  (13).  The  whole  of  this  world  is  at  each  moment  sinking  in  the  deep 
sea  of  time,1 * *  infested  with  the  great  alligators  of  death  and  disease  (14).” 

Great  is  the  power  of  those  to  make  Providence  *  laugh  who  hope 
to  be  initiated  after  they  have  without  aid  heard  and  understood,  and 
become  learned  in  that  which  baffles  understanding  even  when  under¬ 
stood.  To  hope  to  get  initiated  after  having  studied  philosophy,  logic, 
Veda  and  Vedanta,  is  even  more  dangerous. 

In  the  Kularnava  Tantra  Bhagavan  has  said:  “  Fools  bound  by  the 
bonds  of  Paiuhood  *  fall  into  the  deep  well  of  the  six  systems  of  philo¬ 
sophy,  and  fail  to  know  what  is  their  highest  good  4  (1).  Through  ignor¬ 
ance  of  the  meaning  of  the  Vedas  wrong-headed  disputants  ever  wander 
about  scorched  by  the  fire  of  doubt,  knowing  not  that,  driven  by  the 
waves  of  time,  they  live  within  the  fearful  jaws  of  death  (2) .  The  words 
of  a  pandit  who  is  well  versed  in  Veda,  Agama,  and  Purana,  but  has  no 
knowledge  of  the  highest  good,4 *  is  for  others  a  mere  infliction.  Know 
his  words  to  be  like  the  croak  of  a  crow.*  (The  nature  of  the  cawing 
of  a  crow  indicates  good  or  bad  to  men,  but  the  crow  itself  is  ignorant 
of  this.*)  (3).  Oppressed  by  such  thoughts  as  what  is  knowledge  and 
what  is  knowable,  they  read  Sastras  day  and  night.  But,  O  Dew!  they 
for  ever  remain  ignorant  of  the  supreme  truth7  (4).  Many  there  are  who 
acquire  in  the  world  a  reputation  for  poetry  and  rhetoric,  but  the  inner 
life  of  those  fools  whose  senses  are  without  repose  is  full  of  care  and 
sorrow  {5).  The  highest  good*  is  one  thing,  but  Jlvas  ever  strive  to 
picture  it  as  something  else.  The  purpose  of  the  Sastra  is  one  thing, 
but  they  explain  it  as  another.  They  explain  with  perplexed  minds,  but 
do  not  themselves  understand  what  they  explain.  There  are  some  who, 
without  instructions  from  a  Guru,  but  smitten  by  vanity,  read  the  Vedas 
and  other  £astras;  but  those  who  are  possessed  of  the  knowledge  of  their 
true  meaning  are  very  rare.  As  a  ladle  does  not  know  the  taste  of  the 


1  Kala,  which  is  not  translated  as  death,  because  death  occurs  below. 

*  Vidhata,  the  Dispenser. 

*  The  Tamasa  state  of  a  Paiu  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

4  Paramartha.  *  Which  may  or  may  not  be  auspicious. 

*  Good  or  bad  fortune,  may  be  indicated  by  the  sounds  of  animals.  Such 

a  pandit  may  do  good  or  bad  without  knowing  it.  The  parenthesis  is  the 
author’s. 

7  Paramatattva. 

37 


*  Paraxnaxthatattva. 


578 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


liquid  which  it  serves  to  stir,  and  as  the  head  carries  flowers,1 * *  but  their 
fragrance  is  smelt  by  the  nose,  so  while  these  people  read  the  Sastras,  the 
truth  they  reveal  is  known  by  good  Sadhakas  only.  Much  labour  do 
they  give  in  the  study  of  the  fsastras,  but  the  result  of  such  study  is  mere 
dispute  between  themselves  (6*9).  The  foolish  Jiva  sees  not  the  spirit* 
within  himself,  but  is  deluded  into  studying  Sastra  like  the  silly  herdsman 
who,  carrying  the  goat  under  his  arm,  yet  thinks  he  secs  it  in  the  shadow 
which  it  casts  in  the  water  of  a  well  (to).  Mere  verbal  knowledge*  of 
Sastras  can  never  destroy  the  happiness  and  sorrow  which  arises  from 
the  world  of  sense  any  more  than  the  rays  of  light  of  a  pictured  lamp 
can  remove  the  darkness  of  a  room  (n).  Study  of  Sastras  by  unen¬ 
lightened  4  men  is  like  seeing  by  blind  men  (a  parting  of  the  eyelids  only).* 
O  Devi!  to  those  only  who  are  enlightened  are  Sastras  the  source  of 
spiritual  knowledge  {12).  Some  people  stand  in  front,  others  at  the  back, 
some  on  the  left,  and  others  on  the  right  of  the  place  where  the  truth 
5s,  and  quarrel  between  themselves,  saying  that  the  truth  is  of  this  kind, 
or  of  that  kind,  or  of  that  other  kind,  and  so  forth.  Even  *  in  the  case  of 
a  man  famous  by  reason  of  his  education,  charity,  heroism,  and  other 
qualities,  but  who  is  absent,  some  people  say  that  he  is  of  this  kind,  some 
others  that  he  is  of  that  kind,  and  so  forth:  thus  picturing  him  in  various 
ways.*  (In  fact,  all  will  admit  that  the  Spirit  is  far  from  those  who 
dispute  whether  It  is  of  this  kind  or  that)  (13-14).*  None  has  direct 
knowledge,  though  there  are  some  who  have  knowledge  derived  from 
report  (that  is,  to-day  men  possess  that  scholastic  knowledge  which  enables 
them  to  argue  with  one  another  as  regards  the  various  paths  spoken  of 
in  the  Sastra.  They  refrain,  however,  from  performing  Sadhana,  which 
will  give  them  direct  and  immediate  knowledge).1 *  O  Beloved  One! 
there  is  no  doubt  that  those  who  as  regards  Sastra  move  in  the  dark  are 
indeed  far  away  from  its  fundamental  truths 7  (15).  Men  desire  to  know 
from  all  Sastras  what  is  knowledge  and  what  is  knowable.  But,  O  Devi! 
the  Jiva  does  not  realize  that  one  cannot  reach  the  end  of  Sastras  even  if 
one  were  to  spend  in  the  pursuit  a  life  of  a  thousand  years,  much  less 
can  they  do  so  in  a  life  of  a  hundred  years  (t6).  The  Vedas  and  other 
Sastras  are  many,  but  Efe  is  very  short.  Moreover,  in  this  life  there  are 


1  As  women  and  others  do,  or  as  the  Brihxnana  in  Pfija  puts  flowers  in  his 

tied  Sikha.  *  Tattva. 

*  That  is,  knowledge  of  the  letter  and  not  of  the  spirit. 

4  PrajMhlna,  *  Author’s  parenthesis. 

1  That  is,  the  people  may  forget  the  qualities  of  an  ordinary  man,  but 

even  in  the  case  of  a  famous  one  there  is  dispute,  etc. 

7  Mula-tattva. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


579 


millions  of  hindrances.  Therefore,  one  should  acquire  only  the  essence 
■of  all  Sastras  just  as  a .  duck  takes  the  milk  out  of  water  with  which  it 
has  been  mixed 1  (i  7).  An  intelligent  man  should,  after  studying  all 
Sastras,  and  after  acquisition  of  knowledge  of  their  essential  principles,* 
abandon  them  all  just  as  one  who  collects  paddy  throws  away  the  husk  and 
straw.  As  he  who  has  been  satisfied  by  a  drink  of  nectar  no  longer  cares 
for  food,  so  one  who  has  known  the  Spirit 8  has  no  longer  need  of  the 
Sastras  (18).  O  Lady  adored  of  Viras  *!  liberation  comes  from  knowledge 
alone;  liberation  cannot  be  had  from  anything  else,  neither  from  a  study 
of  the  Vedas  nor  from  reading  of  the  Sastras.  Neither  the  Vedas  nor 
the  philosophies  are  causes  of  liberation.  Similarly,  no  Sastra  is  Buch 
cause.  Knowledge  alone  is  the  cause  of  liberation.  All  other  branches 
of  knowledge  8  arc  (for  this  purpose)  fruitless.  Better  is  it  to  bear  even  a 
single  life-inspiring*  great  Mantra  taught  by  Guru  than  the  load  of 
lifeless 1  blocks  erf  wood  which  are  various  forms  of  worldly  knowledge  8 
(21).  Only  from  the  mouth  of  Guru  can  a  Jlva  learn  the  one  immutable  9 
Brahman 10  which  has  been  taught  by  Siva  Himself.  Such  knowledge 
cannot  be  attained  through  the  study  of  even  ten  million  Sastras  ”  (22). 

The  Sastra  not  only  speaks  of  the  necessity  of  testing  the  Guru, 
but  also  of  the  need  to  carefully  test  the  Sijya.11  Before  initiation 
a  Sisya  should  live  in  his  Guru’s  house  for  one,  two,  three,  or  four 
years,  according  to  his  caste.  During  these  periods  the  Guru  will 
test  the  reality  of  his  devotion  to  Guru  and  Devata  by  constantly 
giving  hard  commands.  Nothing  concerning  the  Sisya’s  body,  mind, 
and  speech  should  remain  unknown  to  the  Guru.  During  these  years 
of  residence  with  their  tests  the  Guru  will  learn  all  about  the  Sigya’s 
whole  life.  He  will  test  him  to  see  whether  after  Sastrik  initiation  the 
Si$ya  will  continue  in  the  path  of  Sadhana  as  ordained  in  the  S&stra. 
We  do  not  know  how  many  Si?yas  exist  to-day  who  are  ready  to  undergo 
these  tests,  or  how  many  are  even  aware  of  them,  nor  can  we  say  how 
many  Gurus  are  capable  of  holding  such  a  test.  It  appears  from  the 
practice  prevailing  in  these  days  that  Gurus  and  Sisyas  have  made  a 
private  agreement  between  themselves  to  absolve  each  other  of  the 
responsibility  of  such  mutual  tests.  In  consequence  of  this  compact, 
the  race  of  Gurus  is  to-day  being  exterminated,  and  the  Sisyas,  who  should 


1  It  is  able  to  sip  the  milk  and  leave  the  water,  notwithstanding  the  two 
are  together.  *  Tattva-padartha.  8  Tattva. 

*  See  ante.  1  VidyL  •  Sanjivana. 

1  literally,  “  unconscious".  8  Laukika  Vidya. 

1  That  is,  the  Brahman  is  Nijkriya  (activeless),  Prakfti  is  Sakriya  (with 
.action).  Where  there  is  non-duality  there  is  no  action. 

19  Ad vaita- tattva.  11  Disciple. 


580 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


properly  be  the  ruled,  are  becoming  the  rulers.  Bhagavan,  the  Creator 
of  all  things,  has  also  in  the  Tantra  Sastra  ordained  rules  for  the  testing 
of  the  Sisya,  and  has  spoken  as  follows  of  the  consequence  of  their 
violation: 

In  the  NavaratneSvara  it  is  said:  “  A  Guru  acquires  fitness  to  give- 
initiation  and  a  Sisya  to  receive  it,  if  they  live  together  for  one  year.” 

In  the  Sarasangraha  it  is  said:  “  A  good  Guru  will  test  the  Sisya 
under  his  care  for  one  year.”  This  test  is  for  a  Brahmana  Sisya  only. 
In  the  case  of  Sigyas  belonging  to  the  Kgattriya  and  other  non-Brahmanik 
castes,  the  test  is  to  be  extended  over  gradually  lengthening  periods. 

In  the  Rudrayamala  it  is  said:  “  Fitness  to  receive  initiation  is 
acquired  by  a  Brahmana  in  one  year,  by  a  Ksattriya  in  two  years,  by 
a  Vaiiya  in  three  years,  and  by  a  Sudra  in  four  years,  after  their  devotion 
to  Guru  has  been  during  such  period  tested.” 

In  the  Kularnava  and  other  Tantras  it  is  said:  “  If  a  Guru  initiates' 
one  who  is  unworthy  through  desire  for  wealth  or  through  fear,  greed, 
or  the  like,  then  the  curse  of  Dcvata  will  fall  on  that  Guru,  and  the 
initiation  given  by  him  will  be  fruitless. 

“  It  is  useless  to  give  initiation  to  one  who  is  the  Sisya  of  another,, 
or  who  belongs  to  a  bad  family,  or  is  a  knavish,  cunning,  fraudulent 
man,1  or  who  is  vain  of  his  learning,  or  who  is  disliked  by  his  wife,*  or 
who  has  passed  the  proper  time  for  initiation,  or  has  any  physical  defect.” 

“  He  who  gives  initiation  improperly,  and  he  who  receives  it  im¬ 
properly,  both  the  giver  and  receiver  are  cursed  by  the  Dev!.  Without 
initiation  according  to  the  proper  method  and  worship  of  the  lotus-feet 
of  Guru,  the  Sisya  will  but  meet  poverty  and  the  Devi’s  curse  in  this 
world.” 

“  A  Guru  should  first  test  a  Sisya  according  to  the  rules  of  Sastra 
for  the  working  out  of  the  latter’s  Bhoga  *  and  Moksa,1  and  then  give 
him  instruction  in  Mantra,  otherwise  the  initiation  will  be  in  vain.  If 
through  delusion  both  the  Guru  and  Sisya  give  and  receive  instruction 
respectively  in  Mantra  without  mutually  testing  the  fitness  of  one  another, 
then  both  are  doomed  to  the  state  of  a  Piiaca.®  Both  he  who  gives 
instruction  contrary  to  the  Sastra,  and  he  who  receives  it  will,  together 
with  twenty-one  generations  above  him,  go  to  a  terrible  hell.” 


1  Dhurta. 

*  Stridviija.  In  rites  the  help  of  the  wife  is  required,  and  nothing  of  use 
is  achieved  where  there  is  lack  of  marital  harmony.  Moreover,  his  wife  to  the 
Si?ya  should  be  his  house  goddess  (gyha  devata),  and  it  is  his  duty  to  please  hcav 

*  Enjoyment  and  suffering,  *  liberation. 

*  A  low  class  of  unclean  spirits. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


581 


“  If  a  foolish  Guru  gives  instruction  to  one  who  is  unpurificd,1  then 
all  his  Mantras  are  destroyed — that  is  to  say,  their  potency  is  lost,  just 
as  when  paddy-seeds  are  sown  in  sandy  soil  their  power  to  germinate  is 
gone.  As  the  minister’s  sin  affects  the  King,  or  that  of  a  wife  the 
husband,  so  a  sin  committed  by  a  Sisya  affects  the  Guru.”  8 

In  the  Rudrayamala  it  is  said :  “  A  Guru  should  forsake  a  Si?ya  who 
is  ever  addicted  to  vice,  lustful,*  given  over  to  other  passions,4  of  wicked 
mind,®  and  evil  repute,  untruthful,  lacking  in  due  humility,®  wanting  in 
knowledge,  wisdom,  and  dull  of  intellect,  neglectful  of  Vaidik  duty  and  of 
the  A  car  a 7  of  his  ASrama,1  irreverent,  impatient,  wrathful,  adulterous,  of 
evil  mind  and  thought,  without  devotion,  weak-minded,  wicked,  truthless, 
who  does  Sadhana  with  a  heart  unpurified,  full  of  the  defects  of  the  Kali 
age,  and  spoken  ill  of  by  all.  O  Vira !  *  if  a  Guru,  through  hope  of  wealth 
or  the  like,  does  not  abandon  such  a  Si$ya,  then  that  sinful  Guru  (more 
guilty  than  the  Sisya)  will,  as  well  as  the  Sijya,  be  doomed  to  hell.  The 
load  of  sins  earned  by  that  Sisya  will,  in  a  moment,  destroy  the  Guru’s 
Siddhi,  and  at  once  throw  him  into  hell  for  the  undoing  of  all  his  deeds. 
Hence  let  a  Guru  take  Sisyas  after  careful  discrimination  according  to  the 
rules  prescribed  in  the  Sastra,  otherwise  he  will  be  doomed  to  hell  for  his 
Sisya’s  faults.” 


The  Time  For  Initiation 

We  nowadays  find  many  reputed  families  of  even  the  Brahmana 
caste,  not  to  speak  of  Ksattriya  and  other  castes  whose  members,  though 
in  no  way  under  the  influence  of  atheistic 10  principles,  and  having  faith 
and  reliance  in  Dharma,11  are  yet  under  the  impression  that  the  command 
of  the  Sastra  in  the  matter  of  initiation  is  properly  obeyed  if  a  person  is 
initiated  some  day  or  other  of  his  life,  no  matter  how  old  he  may  then  be. 
It  is  a  matter  of  even  greater  regret  that  their  Guru  families  labour  under 
the  same  error.  The  cause  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  Guru  profession 
of  the  Guru  families  which  we  have  described.  However  that  may  be,  it 
is  admitted  on  all  hands  that  initiation  is  necessary  for  the  purpose  of 
Sadhana,  and  that  its  effect  is  Siddhi.  Sadhana  is  performed  with  the 
•co-operation  of  the  threefold  means  of  body,  speech,  and  mind.  When 

1  As&mskrta.  One  who  has  not  received  the  Samskaras. 

*  The  Guru  will  have  to  suffer  for  the  §i?ya’s  sin.  *  Kamuka. 

4  Kamadipriya.  •  Ku(ila,  a  designing  man.  *  Avuuta. 

7  Acara  from  the  root  car  (to  do) — that  is,  acts,  habits,  practice.  Evil 
practices  are  Anacira. 

*  Stage  of  life  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra). 

*  See  ante. 

14  Nistika.  11  Religion  and  duty. 


382 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


bodily  functions  have  been  fully  developed  and  begun  to  show  themselves 
in  the  spring  shoots,  it  is  then  that  the  wind  of  the  spring  of  initiation  has 
begun  to  blow.  It  is  to  such  persons  as  are  not  initiated  at  this  time  that 
the  Sastra  refers  when  it  speaks  of  persons  who  have  “  passed  the  proper 
time  for  initiation  ”  in  the  above  quoted  passage,  setting  forth  the 
character  of  prohibited  Sijyas.1  The  proper  time  for  initiation  is  the  age 
of  sixteen.  The  words  of  Devi  to  Sri  Rr$na  in  the  Radha  Tantra  are  as 
follows: 

“  One  should  receive  initiation  with  devotion  on  the  attainment  of 
the  age  of  sixteen.  My  Sonl  for  one  who  has  not  received  initiation  at 
that  age,  even  the  Samskara 3  of  taking  the  name  of  Hari  is  fruitless.  (It 
is  impossible  to  fully  perform  Sadhana  after  the  expiry  of  the  time  for 
Sadhana,  and  a  Mantra  which  has  not  been  matured  by  Sadhana  does  not 
bear  fruit.8)  One  should,  therefore,  take  care  to  receive  initiation  at  the 
age  of  sixteen,  otherwise  everything  which  is  done  is  counted  but  as  the 
work  of  a  PaSu.” 

For  this  reason  Bhagavan  Maheivara  has  said:  “O  Mother  of  the 
three  worlds !  whoever  after  having  travelled  through  eighty-four  lakhs  4 
of  births  has  received  the  rare  human  form,  yet  fails  to  worship  Thee,  is 
like  a  man  who  rises  to  the  top  of  a  flight  of  stairs,  and  then  falls  down 
again.”  If  a  man  falls  from  one  of  the  middle  or  lower  steps  of  the 
staircase,  he  probably  is  wounded;  or  if  he  falls  from  one  of  the  higher 
steps,  he  is  likely  to  be  killed;  but  if  he  falls  from  the  highest  point  of  the 
staircase,  he  cannot  escape  from  being  crushed  and  ground  to  dust. 
Similarly,  if  one  falls  after  attaining  human  birth  and  Brahmanahood, 
which  is  rarer  still,  there  is  no  easy  escape  for  him. 

In  the  Kularnava  Tantra  it  is  said:  "What  wonder,  O  Devi!  that 
this  earthly  body  should  be  destroyed  by  the  power  of  Him  by  whose 
power  the  earth  is  consumed,  the  Sumeru 1  is  rent,  and  the  Sea  is  dried 
up  (i).  We  speak  of  *My  son,’  ‘  My  wife,’  ‘  My  wealth,’  ‘  My  friend,' 
but  before  one  has  got  over  this  sort  of  senseless  talk  death  seizes  the 
body  like  a  tiger  (2).  Death  seizes  a  man  while  he  is  still  engaged  in 
doing  this  thing  or  that  thing,  or  thinking  that  he  will  have  to  do  this 
thing  or  that  thing  (3).  An  intelligent  man  will  do  to-day  the  work  of 
tomorrow,  and  in  the  forenoon  the  work  of  the  afternoon,  for  death  does 
not  wait  for  the  finishing  or  unfinishing  of  any  work  (4).  Does  not  Jiva 
see  approaching  him  before  his  eyes  Death’s  terrible  army  of  diseases 
guided  by  Old  Age,  and  with  orders  from  Death  himself  ?  (5).  Death 
eats  man  after  piercing  him  with  the  spit  of  thirst  (desire),  smearing 
him  with  the  Ghee  of  mundane  objects,*  and  roasting  him  in  the  fire  of 


1  See  ante. 

4  A  lakh  equals  100,000. 


1  “  Sacrament  ”,  *  Author’s  parenthesis, 

4  Mountain.  •  Vijaya. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


583 


attachment  and  dislike  (6).  Death  brings  all  under  his  rule,  both  boy 
or  youth,  old  man  or  child  in  the  womb.  The  visible  world  thus  remains 
subject  to  death  (7).  Brahma,  Visiju,  MahcSvara,  and  other  Dcvag,  and 
all  classes  of  beings,  move  towards  their  own  destruction  (disappearance).1 * * 
A  JIva  should,  therefore,  be  prompt  in  doing  with  all  his  heart  such  things 
as  are  calculated  to  benefit  him  in  this  world  and  hereafter  (8).” 

To  him  who  has  faith  in  such  direct  statements  of  the  Sfistra,  and 
has  eyes  to  see  the  transiency,  under  natural  law,  of  the  physical  body, 
which  is  but  a  bubble  in  the  visible  world  of  Jivas,  even  the  sovereignty 
of  the  vast  Universe  is  as  worthless  as  a  blade  of  grass  when  compared 
with  the  value  of  even  half  a  second  of  human  existence.  We  know  not 
to  what  benighted  region  we  shall  have  to  travel,  according  to  our  own 
Karma,  after  the  dissolution  of  this  present  body.  Even  Dcvas  pray  to  be 
bom  in  Bharata-var$a,a  that  they  may  be  there  liberated  by  birth  in  a 
precious  human  body  after  foisaking  all  its  enjoyments.  This  is  that 
Bharatavarsa,  the  Aryavarta,*  which  is  the  field  of  liberation  and  which, 
as  well  as  our  human  body  has  been  attained,  not  by  our  effort,  but  by 
Her  grace.  If  this  time  we  lose  these,  who  is  so  fortunate  amongst  us  as 
to  dare  say  that  he  will  surely  return  to  this  Bharata,  this  Aryavarta,  the 
land  which  it  is  hard  for  even  Devas  to  attain?  Who,  too,  will  dare  to 
say  that  he  will  also  regain  this  human  state  and  this  Brahmanism?  Who 
can  say  to  what  unseen  region  this  vaporous  cloud  will  be  blown  by  the 
wind  of  some  unknown  fate  4  ?  Hence,  while  there  is  yet  time  and  the  sun 
shines,  the  Mother’s  son  must  cease  playing,  and  seek  to  go  to  the 
Mother.  He  must  take  refuge  with  all  his  heart  at  the  feet  of  Guru, 
that  he  may  find  the  path  in  this  deep  darkness,  making  himself,  according 
to  the  command  of  the  Sastra,  the  meanest  servant  of  the  Guru,  in  order 
that  he  may  become  an  object  of  his  mercy. 

The  Sastra  itself,  the  seat  of  infinite  mercy,  has  specified  the  charac¬ 
teristics  which  a  Si?ya  must  possess  in  order  that  the  desire-fulfilling 
creeper 5 *  of  Guru’s  grace,  may  bear  fruit. 

For  instance,  it  is  said  in  the  Gautamiya  Tantra:  “  Bom  in  a  noble 
family;  of  pure  spirit;  seeking  that  which  is  the  necessity  of  Puru$a 
(PurusSrtha — the  four-fold  object  of  Dharma,  Artha,  Kama,  and  Mok$a  *) ; 
learned  in  the  Vedas;  wise;  devoted  to  the  service  of  parents;  knower  of 
Dharma 7  and  a  doer  thereof;  attached  to  the  personal  service  of  Guru; 


1  Author’s  parenthesis.  *  India. 

*  ArySvarta  is  the  western  portion  of  Northern  India.  Bharatavarsa  is  all 

India,  but  now  commonly  used  synonymously, 

4  Adrfta.  *  Kalpalata. 

*  Author’s  parenthesis — that  is  religion,  wealth,  desire  and  its  fulfilment, 

and  liberation.  7  Religion,  duty,  etc. 


584 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


proficient  in  Sastra;  strong  of  body  and  mind;  ever  desirous  of  doing 
good  to  Jivas;  a  doer  of  acts  which  bear  good  fruit  in  the  next  world; 
devoted  to  the  service  of  Guru  in  speech,  mind,  body,  and  with  his  wealth; 
mindful  only  of  acts  the  fruit  of  which  endure 1 * * ;  with  control  over  the 
senses;  free  from  sloth;  free  from  delusion  and  vanity;  devoted  to  Guru’s 
son,  wife,  and  so  forth  as  to  the  Guru  himself— of  such  qualities  should  a 
§i$ya  be  possessed  otherwise  he  is  but  a  source  of  trouble  for  his  Guru.” 

In  the  Kularnava  Tantra  it  is  said :  “  O  Mother !  a  Guru  should 
not  take  as  his  Sisya  one  who  is  possessed  of  any  of  the  following  or 
similar  faults:  He  should  not  accept  one  who  is  bom  in  a  family  cursed  by 
a  Brahmapa  or  almost  extinct *;  without  any  good  quality  on  the  maternal 
side;  one  who  has  been  already  initiated  by  a  good  Guru;  an  unbeliever9; 
imbecile  (physically  impotent  or  incapable  of  performing  Sadhana) 4 * *; 
with  an  overweening  idea  of  his  own  learning;  having  less  or  more  than 
the  usual  number  of  or  deformed  limbs;  paralyzed,  blind,  deaf,  dirty, 
diseased,  excommunicated,  foul-mouthed;  careless  of  the  rules  of  dress s; 
full  of  faults*;  with  imperfect  limbs,  gait,  and  speech;  ever  inactive; 
under  the  influence  of  sleep  or  drowsiness;  lazy  and  addicted  to  gambling 
and  similar  vices;  whose  appearance  docs  not  betoken  devotion ;  mean- 
minded,  wanting  in  loyalty,  and  given  to  exaggerated,  improper,  and 
obscene  talk7 *;  wanting  in  feeling  for  others;  with  no  will  of  his  own; 
ready  to  receive  initiation  and  do  other  acts,  not  out  of  any  particular 
desire  of  his  own,  but  at  the  instigation  of  others;  the  mere  instigator  of 
others  (he  does  not  do  anything  himself,  but  instigates  others  *) ;  cunning; 
impure  as  regards  wealth  and  wife  (he  whose  wealth  has  not  been  earned 
in  the  way  prescribed  in  the  Sastra,  or  whose  wife  is  not  married  to  him 
according  to  the  Sastra,  or  is  not  chaste)  *;  given  to  the  performance  of 
acts  prohibited  by  the  Sastra,  and  omitting  to  do  those  which  it  enjoins; 
whose  habit  it  is  to  divulge  secrets,  and  to  do  mischief ;  of  catlike  quali¬ 
ties  *  (as  a  cat  takes  away  an  article  of  food  from  the  presence  of  men  and 


1  Not  troubling  over  that  which  is  transient  and  of  no  real  account 

*  For  this  indicates  some  inherited  sin. 

*  PSjanda. 

4  Author’s  parenthesis. 

*  Svecchavegadhara,  who  dresses  as  he  likes,  neglectful  of  the  rules 
therefor.  In  Sastra  there  are  rules  for  dressing,  and  for  dressing  at  different 
times  and  for  different  Sadhana. 

4  Dufita. 

7  This  is  the  author’s  translation  of  Vyalikavadi.  By  exaggerated  talk  is 

meant  impossible  “yarns”.  It  is  “improper”  where  things,  which  may  be 
permissibly  said  before  one  person,  are  not  so  permissible  in  the  case  of  others 
— e.g.,  before  parents  and  women.  Ailila  is  obscene. 

1  Author’s  parenthesis.  *  Marjjaravytti. 


SELECTION  OF  THE  GURU 


585 


«ats  it  in  a  secluded  place)  x;  self-conceited;  crane-like  in  nature  (as  a  crane 
appears  to  be  outwardly  very  calm  and  quiet  while  all  the  time  it  is  think¬ 
ing  of  destroying  others’  lives,  so  this  class  of  man,  whilst  possessing  the 
•external  appearance  of  quiet,  is  yet  in  his  inner  self  most  dangerous)  *; 
a  detractor;  deceitful;  ungrateful;  given  to  spying  into  others’  secrets; 
treacherous;  rebellious;  sinful;  atatayi  (atatayis  are  criminals  of  six 
classes — namely,  incendiaries,  poisoners,  persons  who  bear  arms  to  injure 
others,  who  steal  others’  wealth,  or  lands,  and  others’  wives)  l;  one-eyed; 
of  ill-repute;  who  bears  false  witness;  a  deceiver  of  people ;  braggart  or 
liar;  cruel;  indecent  in  speech;  talkative;  of  wrong  judgment  as  regards 
men  or  things;*  quarrelsome;  given  to  rebuking  people  without  reason ; 
ignorant;  Carvaka  (Nastika  or  unbeliever)1 *;  a  bore  *;  one  who  slanders 
people  behind  their  back  and  speaks  well  of  them  before  their  face;  or 
one  pretending  to  a  knowledge  of  Brahman  which  he  does  not  possess; 
plagiarist;4 *  or  self-praiscr,  envious,  given  to  evil-doing,  or  peevish  (dis¬ 
satisfied  with  his  own  self  through  being  of  an  excessively  angry  tem¬ 
perament)  8 

In  the  Gandharva  T antra  it  is  said:  “  Duly  possessed  of  the  aforesaid 
qualities;  very  sweet  of  tongue;  stainless  in  body  and  speech;  wearing 
white  cloth;  pure  in  habits4;  incapable  of  speaking  ill  of  others,  or  of 
showing  disrespect  to  Devatas;  never  covetous  of  others’  food,  wives,  and 
land;  unwilling  to  give  pain  to  others;  kind  to  all  creatures;  sharp- 
witted;  a  master  of  his  senses;  a  believer 7  devoted  to  Guru;  pure;  calm- 
minded;  without  avarice,  constant  in  his  friendships;  assiduous  to  obey 
the  Guru’s  words;  ever  firm  in  devotion  to  Guru,  Mantra,  and  Devata; 
a  Si?ya  should  be  possessed  of  such  qualities,  otherwise  he  will  surely  be 
a  source  of  trouble  to  his  Guru.” 

“  A  Sisya  should,  after  bowing  to  his  Guru,  sit  beside  him,  and  leave 
his  presence  only  with  his  permission.  He  should  serve  his  Guru  always 
with  the  desire  to  satisfy  him,  and  should  obey  his  orders  with  pleasure. 
He  should  never  tell  a  lie  or  talk  idly  before  his  Guru.  A  Sisya  should 
not  give  way  to  lust,  anger,  greed,  displeasure,8  loud  laughter,  flattery, 
fickleness,  crookedness,  remorse,  before  his  Guru;  nor  should  he  have 
relations  with  him  by  way  of  lending,  borrowing,  selling,  or  buying.  For 
Guru  is  Siva  Himself,  and  any  attempt  to  establish  with  Him  a  relation 
•other  than  that  of  worship  with  prayer  and  obeisance  is  likely  to  lead  the 


1  Author’s  parenthesis.  *  Kuvicara,  wrongly  judging  people  or  things. 

*  Through  his  talk.  V agvi dam  vak a,  literally,  “  one  who  punishes  others 

,by  his  talk.” 

4  Vidyicaura.  1  Atmakrodhana;  author’s  parenthesis. 

4  Suci.  7  Astika.  4  Mina. 


586 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


§i$ya  to  think  of  him  as  a  mere  man.  To  know  that  there  is  no  distinction 
between  Ijtadevata  and  Mantra,  between  Mantra  and  Guru,  and  between 
Guru  and  Atmi.  This,  O  Beloved!  is  the  order  in  which  devotion  shows 
itself.  He  who  disregards  his  Guru’s  words  and  performs  prayer  and 
worship 1  according  to  his  own  notions  thereof  will  never  attain  Siddhi  in 
either  Japa  *  of  Mantra  or  worship  of  DevatS.  One  should  daily  worship 
one’s  Guru  according  to  the  Sastra  by  Japa  or  Mantras.  The  seat,  bed, 
clothes,  ornaments,  shoes,  shadow,  and  wife,  and  every  other  thing 
belonging  to  or  connected  with  the  Guru  should  be  wonhipped  as 
though  they  were  parts  of  the  Guru  himself.*  One  should  never  walk 
across  the  Guru’s  bed,  seat,  shoes,  umbrella,  bathing-water,  or  shadow. 
At  the  sight  of  Guru  one  should  be  cheerful  and  full  of  great  joy,  but 
should  regard  his  lotus-feet  with  awe  and  cautious  eyes.  There  is  not 
room  enough  in  this  book  to  quote  even  a  hundredth  part  of  all  that 
is  ordained  in  the  Sastra  as  to  the  duties  of  a  Sisya  towards  his  Guru. 
It  will,  therefore,  be  useless  to  go  further  into  that  point  here.  The  very 
fact  that  in  the  Sastra  Guru  has  been  spoken  of  “  as  Siva  Himself  in 
visible  form,”  thus  giving  to  even  the  Is(adevata  a  secondary  position, 
will  of  itself  enable  intelligent  Sadhakas  to  understand  what  are  a  Sisya’s. 
duties  towards  that  most  worshipful  Supreme  Devata. 


1  Upasana.  1  “  Recitation  ”  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra). 

*  Literally,  “  as  his  Vibhutis  ’’—that  is,  as  belonging  to  or  connected  with 
him;  something  of  him  may  be  said  to  enter  into  them.  Moreover,  true  respect 
is  shown  to  a  person  when  all  which  belongs  to  or  is  connected  with  him  is 
respected. 


CHAPTER  XV 


WORSHIP  IN  GENERAL 1 * * 
POjA* 

Many  people  nowadays  in  a  community  which  lays  claim  to  great  wisdom; 
believe  that  image-worship  was  introduced  and  is  maintained  in  the- 
Arya  Society  for  those  only  who  are  very  weak — that  is,  those  who  belong 
to  a  very  low  order  of  spirituality.  We  have  little  leisure  to  devote  our 
attention  to  the  words  of  such  men  as  discuss  these  matters  from  the 
outside,  just  as  a  non-Arya  look  at  the  Durga-puja  festival  in  an  Arya 
house  from  the  courtyard  outside  the  Candlmandapa.*  We  are  servants 
of  the  Sastra,  and  as  such  are  bound  to  preach  what  the  Sastra  has  clearly 
established.  We  shall  therefore  now  see  what  Puja  (worship)  is  according 
to  the  Sastra.  It  is  a  matter  of  great  regret  that  even  amongst  preachers 
of  Sastrik  principles  there  are  many  who  are  under  the  impression  that 
“  worship  of  the  Deity  with  form 4 *  or  image-worship  •  is  only  a  means 
of  producing  steadiness  of  mind.*  They  opine,  therefore,  that  for  him 
who  has  acquired  such  steadiness  there  is  no  longer  any  necessity  of 
worship  of  the  Deity  with  form  or  image-worship.  According  to  this 
argument  we  must  suppose  that  there  is  an  arrangement  between  the 
Devata  appearing  with  form  or  present  in  an  image  and  the  worshipper 
by  which  the  latter’s  connection  with  the  former  endures  only  so  long 
as  his  mind  is  not  steadied,  and  that  when  it  is  so  the  Devata  ceases  to 
exist  for  him.  At  the  commencement  and  end  of  the  worship  of  the 
Deity  with  form 7  the  Sadhaka  forgets  himself  and  offers  at  His  feet  every¬ 
thing  which  he  calls  ‘  My  ’  or  ‘  I  As  regards  this  worship  Bhagavan 
Himself,  the  Creator  of  all  things,  has  in  the  Kularriava  Tantra  said 

1  Sidharaija-upasanatattva. 

*  Puja  is  ceremonial  worship  with  articles  of  worship  (upacara),  generally 
before  images.  Upasana  has  a  wider  signification,  being  worship  in  its  widest 
sense,  including  spiritual  practices  of  all  kinds,  whilst  the  Sadhaka  is  in  the- 
realm  of  dualism. 

*  Place  in  the  house  in  which  worship  of  images  is  performed. 

4  Sahara  upasani.  4  Murti  piija;  Murti  (form  or  appearance)- 

*  Manahsthira.  7  Sahara  up  as  an  2. 


588 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  Obeisance  to  the  faith  from  which  springs  Siddhi  in  all  things  and  the 
force  of  which  makes  even  earth,  wood,  and  stone  bear  real  fruits.” 
Reference  is  here  made  to  the  whole-hearted  faith  by  the  attraction  of 
which  Devata  Himself,  who  is  all  consciousness,  is  drawn  towards  and 
made  to  appear  in  unconscious  images 1  made  of  earth,  wood,  or  stone, 
or  in  Yantras,2  and  grants  real  fruits  to  Sadhakas  in  the  form  of  Siddhi. 
If,  then,  worship  with  form  founded  on  a  Sadhaka’s  firm  faith  is  com¬ 
patible  with  the  belief  that  the  Devata  with  form  is  false  and  is  merely 
a  means  of  steadying  the  mind,  then  I  know  not  what  kind  of  worship 
with  form  it  is.  Secondly,  from  such  a  wrong  conclusion  contrary  to 
Sastra  and  opposed  to  all  experience,  it  also  follows  that  Puja,  Pa{ha, 
Japa,  Homa,  &anti,  Svastyayana,2 4 *  and  the  like,  are  nothing  but  lost  labour, 
for  we  are  told  that  the  only  effect  of  worship  of  the  Deity  with  form  is  the 
■establishment  of  steadiness  of  mind.  We  need  hardly  say  that  it  is  also 
lost  labour  to  proceed  to  disprove  a  conclusion  which  on  examination 
displays  its  own  profound  infidelity.  Our  object,  however,  in  introducing 
the  subject  here  is  to  reveal  the  mystery  of  the  problem  as  to  “  how  in 
■course  of  worship  of  the  corporeal  the  incorporeal  is  seen.” 

The  Sastra  says  a  Sadhaka  should  engage  in  meditation  *  by  gradually 
concentrating  *  his  mind  on  all  parts  of  the  Istadevata’s  body;  that  is 
to  say,  the  Sadhaka  should,  by  repeatedly  fixing  his  attention  on  the 
parts  of  the  Istadevata’s  body  one  by  one,  from  the  sole  of  His  foot  to 
His  face,  or  from  His  face  to  the  sole  of  His  foot,  acquire  such  concen¬ 
tration  as  will  during  unperturbed  meditation  reveal  to  his  mind’s  eye 
the  whole  body  of  the  Devata  at  one  and  the  same  time.  If  this  be  done, 
meditation  on  the  Deity  with  form  will  gradually  become  both  profound 
and  steady.  But  remarkable,  indeed,  must  be  the  profundity  of  medita¬ 
tion  and  concentration  of  those  who  from  this  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  Formless  will  appear  of  itself  in  the  course  of  meditation  on 
the  Deity  with  form  in  the  sense  that  the  Formless*  will  drive  away 
the  Deity  with  form.7  The  Sastra  has,  of  course,  said  that  when  the 
mind  has  become  steady  through  meditation  on  the.  gross  image  it 
may  meditate  on  the  subtle  image.  When  the  mind  has  been  perfectly 


1  Pratima:  Prati= likeness.  *  Diagrams  (see  Introduction  to  Tanlra  Sastra). 

*  That  is,  ceremonial  worship,  reading,  and  recitation  of  the  sacred  texts, 
repetition  of  Mantras,  sacrifice  into  fire,  rites  for  working  good  and  dispell¬ 

ing  evil. 

4  Dhyana.  6  Dharana.  *  Nirakara. 

7  Sakara.  There  are  a  class  of  people  who  think  that  forms  are  nothing, 

and,  bang  purely  imaginary,  disappear  when  the  real  Formless  One  appears, 
and  are  merely  useful  to  prepare  the  way  for  this;  whereas  the  forms  are  the 

real  bodies  of  the  Devata,  just  as  the  physical  body  is  the  sheath  of  the  Atma. 
The  Devata  does  really  appear  in  these  forms. 


WORSHIP  IN  GENERAL 


589* 


centred,  then  the  Devata  is  revealed  in  both  Her  gross  and  subtle 
aspects;1  that  is  to  say,  in  course  of  meditation  on  His  playful 1 *  image 
such  subtle  aspects  as  omnipresence,  possession  of  Maya,  state  of  being 
above  Maya  and  so  forth,  are  perceived  in  a  subtle  form  as  Sakti  of  con¬ 
sciousness,  just  as  such  gross  aspects  as  love  for  devotees,  all-mercifulness,, 
almightiness  and  so  forth,  instinct  with  the  outcome  of  play,  are  perceived;, 
and  this  is  what  actually  happens  to  a  Sadhaka  when  he  attains  Siddhi. 
We  are  unable  to  make  out  how  it  can  be  concluded  from  this  that  the 
Devata  with  form  vanishes  and  the  formless  appears.  It  is,  of  course,  not 
a  matter  of  wonder  that  to  those  whose  meditation  on  the  Deity  with 
form  is  from  the  very  commencement  based  on  the  notion  that  “  the  form 
is  fake,”  such  form  will  vanish  by  the  force  of  their  angular  devotion;  nor 
is  it  impossible  that  when  the  form  has  vanished,  an  incorporeality  which 
is  non-cxistence  8  itself  will  be  seen  as  a  matter  of  course.4  What  is  to  be 
here  regretted  is  that  mere  men  should  without  hesitation  seek  to  establish 
as  Sastrik  this  sight  of  an  incorporeal  nothing  which  their  fate 1 *  has  made 
inevitable  for  them.4 

In  the  Srimadbhagavata  Bhagavan  Himself  has  said  to  Uddhava, 
the  crest-gem  of  devotees:  “Just  as  gold  is  freed  of  its  dross  only  by  fire,, 
and  also  gains  its  own  (bright)  7  appearance  by  the  heat  of  that  fire,  so 
a  Jiva’s  Atma  is  cleansed  of  the  filth  of  Karma  and  desire  by  means- 
of  the  Yoga  of  devotion  8  to  Me,  and  is  ako  transformed  into  My  Brahman 
aspect  by  means  of  that  same  Bhakti-Yoga.  Atma  becomes  purer  and 
purer  by  hearing  and  uttering  sacred  hymns  •  in  My  praise.  The  devotee 
whose  heart  is  thus  purified  by  devotion  to  Me  sees  with  increasing 
power  the  supersensual 10  subtle  truth  as  the  physical  eye  when  painted 
with  collyrium  is  enabled  to  perceive  very  minute  objects.  Just  as  the 
heart  of  a  person  who  constantly  thinks  of  wife,  son,  and  other  mundane 
objects,  becomes  attached  to  them  only,  so  the  heart  of  him  who  con¬ 
stantly  thinks  of  Me  becomes  merged  in  Myself.  Hence,  O  Uddhava!! 
give  up  thinking  of  the  objects  of  the  world,  fake  and  made  of  M£ya  as 
they  are,  like  objects  of  desire  got  in  dream,  and  rest  your  mind,  lull 
of  thoughts  of  Me  in  Me.”  Again,  on  the  subject  of  meditation 11  He 
has  said:  “A  Yogi  will  call  to  mind  within  the  circle  of  fire  in  the1 


1  Sukjmatattva  and  Sthulatattva.  1  Lliimaya.  8  Abhiva. 

4  The  author  is  here  satirical.  In  the  case  of  him  who  does  not  perceive 
the  Devata  with  form,  and  thinks  it  to  be  nothing,  it  is  quite  natural  that  the: 
Formless,  whose  form  it  is,  should  be  nothing. 

5  Adma. 

4  They  have  not  the  fortune  to  be  able  to  perceive  the  truth. 

1  Author’s  parenthesis.  1  Bbakti 

9  Gfilha.  ”  Atindriya.  11  Dhyana. 


390 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


lotus  of  his  heart  this  form 1  of  mine,  beneficial  in  meditation— namely, 
a  form  full-limbed,  calm,  of  beautiful  features,  with  four  long  *  and  beautiful 
arms;  a  graceful  neck  and  a  fair  forehead;  with  divine  and  gracious  smile; 
decked  with  brilliant  ear-ornaments 1  in  his  two  well-shaped  cars;  dressed 
in  yellow  or  deep  blue;  brilliant  with  the  beauty  of  the  Srivatsa  mark 4 * *; 
bearing  a  conch  shell,  a  discus,  a  dub,  and  a  lotus  in  his  four  hands,  and  a 
.garland  of  wild  flowers  on  the  breast;  with  lotus-feet  shining  with  the 
lustre  of  bejewelled  anklets  *;  illumined  with  the  light  of  the  Kaustubha 
gem;  ornamented  with  shining  crown,  bracdets,  waist-chain,  and  armlets; 
beauteous  in  all  limbs,  pleasant;  his  countenance  sweet  with  grace,  with 
tender  eyes  and  form  fair  to  look  upon.  He  will  meditate  on  this 
pleasing  Brahma-form  by  fixing  his  mind  on  all  its  limbs.  Drawing  his 
.senses,  such  as  sound,  touch,  sight,  taste,  and  smell  from  their  objects  by 
means  of  his  mind,®  and  with  the  aid  of  Buddhi,7 * *  the  charioteer,  the 
Sadhaka  will  bathe  his  mind  completely  in  the  waters  of  love  for  Me. 
After  that  he  will  draw  that  mental  vision  *  hitherto  spread  over  all  my 
limbs  to  one  place  and  hold  it  there.  It  will  not  then  be  necessary  for  the 
Sadhaka  to  think  of  anything  else.®  He  will  only  meditate  upon  My 
countenance,  on  which  plays  a  soft  and  sweet  smile.  When  the  mind  can 
uninterruptedly  and  without  distraction  contemplate  that  countenance, 
he  will  withdraw  his  single-pointed  mind  and  fix  it  in  the  ether.10  Then, 
after  perceiving  My  (aforesaid)  subtle  manifestations 11  in  ether,  in  the 
mansions,1*  or  in  the  whole  of  the  infinite  ether,  he  will  draw  his  mental 
faculty,  which  has  had  the  entire  ether  as  its  object,  and  again  rest  it  in 
Me  as  the  Paramatma.  Then  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  meditate  on 
anything.1®  The  Yogi,  thus  in  Samadhi,14  will  see  me  as  the  Paramatma 
of  all  Jivas  as  his  own  Atma;  as  one  light  mingled  with  another,  and  not 
different  from  it.  In  a  Yogi,  who  has  thus  by  intense  meditation  attained 
Samadhi,1*  the  three  forms  of  error  1#—  namely,  object  of  knowing,  and 
action 17 — will  soon  be  subdued.” 

A  Sadhaka  will  here  understand  that  Upasana 10  exists  only  so  long  as 
Dhyana 10  exists.  In  the  next  stage,  which  is  Samadhi  or  Nirvana,  the 


I  Rtipa.  *  Long  arms  are  a  sign  of  strength. 

*  Makaras  and  Kundalas,  ornaments  of  the  ear. 

4  A  lock  of  hair  on  the  breast  of  Visnu  *  Nupuras. 

4  Manas.  7  Intellect  *  Cittavjtti. 

9  Previously  the  mind  has  been  thinking  of  various  attributes  of  the 

Devata — His  person,  dress  adornments,  and  so  forth:  now  it  simply  gazes  on 

His  countenance.  10  Vyoma. 

II  Vibhutis.  11  Kak$a — thus  a  solar  system  would  be  such. 

11  For  the  mind  and  all  else  now  become  one  with  the  ParamatmS. 

14  Ecstasy,  or  the  fourth  Turiya  state.  l*  Brahma. 

14  Dravya,  jfifina,  kriyi.  17  Worship.  11  Meditation. 


WORSHIP  IN  GENERAL 


591 


mental  faculty1 * *  is  lost  in  the  womb  of  Prakfti.  The  Yogi,  who  has  thus 
lost  his  mind,*  forgets  even  the  JivStma  as  something  separate  from  the 
ParamStma.  Who,  then,  is  it  who  perceives  the  incorporeal  aspect  in  the 
one  and  only  substance  of  consciousness  at  the  time  when  even  the  sense 
“  I  exist  ”  is  lost,  when  the  senses,  mind,  and  even  the  “  I,”  do  not  exist? 
It  is  indeed  difficult  to  solve  this  problem.  We  call  this  state  not 
seeing  the  incorporeal,”  but  Videha-Kaivalya.*  We  may  admire  the 
energy  of  those  who  in  the  hope  of  their  becoming  incorporeal  in  the 
circumstances  described  above,  invoke  the  incorporeal,  and  see  shapeless 
dreams  for  a  hundred  births :  but  to  such  we  would  also  say  that  there  is 
no  need  to  try  to  make  arrangements  to  become  incorporeal,  for  He  who 
will  one  day  make  this  entire  corporeal  universe  incorporeal  will  not  bide 
long  to  make  cither  you  or  me  incorporeal  when  the  occasion  for  doing  so 
arises.  But  know  it  for  certain,  that  so  long  as  the  Deity  with  form  does 
not  appear  before  you,  not  even  the  DevatS  without  form  can  dissolve 
your  own  bodily  form  and  give  you  Kaivalya.4  So  much  about  medita- 
•  don,  concentration,  and  trance.* 

Next  comes  the  process  of  Puja.4  We  have  more  than  once  shown 
that  there  can  be  no  Upasana  4  of  anything  incorporeal.  Now,  what  is 
image-worship  ? 7  We  must  also  see  whether  image-worshippers  are 
really  fools  of  a  low  order  of  spirituality  who  arc  led  by  blind 
faith.  We  cannot  call  that  a  criticism  of  image-worship  which  comes 
from  those  who  have  no  inner  knowledge  of  the  subject.  Rather  it  is  a 
criticism  of  what  they  understand  to  be  image- worship;  for  Puja  and  so 
forth  are  things  of  the  Sastra,  which  lays  down  the  mode  of  Puja,  and  the 
person  competent  to  perform  Puja  is  a  Sadhaka.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
critic’s  criticism  is  contrary  to  what  the  Sastra  and  Sadhaka  say — “  It  is 
Sadhana  and  Siddhi,”  say  the  Sastra  and  Sadhaka.  “  It  is  play  and 
amusement,”  says  the  critic.  Now,  in  this  conflict  of  views  how  can  we 
disbelieve  the  word  of  those  who  by  their  practice  have  intimate  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  matter,  and  believe  those  who  have  nothing  to  do  with 
S&stra,  SSdhana,  or  Siddhi  ?  Image-worship  is  not  to  be  understood  from 
outside.  Only  the  worshipper  understands  it.  The  critic,  therefore,  is 
nothing  but  a  critic  of  his  own  intelligence  and  education.  One  who  docs 
Puja  and  one  who  merely  observes  it  are  not,  surely,  the  same  thing.  One 
who  looks  at  a  sweet-shop  can  tell  us  the  shape,  colour,  and  quantity  of 
the  sweets  there,  as  also  whether  they  arc  hot  or  cold  to  the  touch;  but 


1  Manovrtti.  *  Manas. 

•Bodiless  Kaivalya — that  is,  Kaivalya  in  which  all  trammels  of  body  or 

limitation  disappear,  or  lull  liberation. 

4  Because  in  such  a  case  the  worship  is  of  no  avail. 

*  Dhyana,  Dharana,  Samadhi.  4  Vide  ante,  7  Murtipuja. 


592 


PRINCIPLES  OP  TANTRA 


can  he  tell  us  whether  their  taste  is  sweet  or  bitter,  sour  or  pungent? 
Howsoever  clever  a  man  may  be,  he  only  can  tell  us  thereof  who  has 
tasted  them  with  his  tongue.  Again,  one  who  himself  knows  the  taste  of 
a  sweet  can  never,  despite  his  personal  knowledge,  make  another  who 
has  never  tasted  it  realize  its  taste  even  by  the  use  of  a  thousand  forms  of 
speech  or  other  device.  Similarly,  how  can  a  man  without  faith  know 
that  supersensual  truth  which  a  capable  Sadhaka  realizes  when  he  estab¬ 
lishes  a  Devata’s  life  in  his  image  by  the  powerful  potency 1  of  Mantra? 
The  fsastra  has  nowhere  said  that  one  may  as  one  wishes  perceive  the 
presence  of  Devata  in  the  street,  market,  or  at  the  bathing  ghat  *  just 
as  one  desires.  It  has  said,  if  such  and  such  things  are  done,  such  and 
such  things  will  happen.  Now  I  ask,  How  much  of  those  things  have  you 
and  I  done?  The  Sastra  has  said  that  it  is  only  when  a  Sadhaka  has  long 
served  his  Guru,  after  having  been  tested  and  initiated  by  him  in 
accordance  with  Sastra,  and  when  he  has  fully  understood  the  principles 
of  Sadhana  and  become  able  to  awaken  the  potency  *  of  Mantra  through 
the  preliminary  Sastrik  rites,  that  he  becomes  competent  to  cause  by 
means  of  that  Mantra  the  appearance  of  the  conscious  Devata  in  Yantras, 
images,  and  so  forth,  made  of  such  unconscious  substances  as  earth,  stone, 
and  the  like.  Now,  brother  critic,  tell  me  truly  in  the  name  of  Dharma, 
opening  for  once  the  door  of  your  heart,  what  have  you  done  of  all  this? 
At  the  outset  you  are  .  deeply  suspicious,  a  great  unbeliever.  You  have 
not  the  right  even  to  serve  Guru  or  receive  initiation,  not  to  speak  of  per¬ 
forming  Sadhana  and  worship,4  yet  such  as  you  arc  you  proceed  to 
criticize  the  worship  of  Devata  in  images,  which  can  only  be  done  by 
competent  Sadhakas,  who  have  knowledge  of  super-worldly  truths.* 
What  can  be  greater  impudence  on  your  part  than  this?  Unfortunately, 
in  this  land  of  madmen  there  is  none  to  call  a  madman  mad,  and  so,  O 
brother  critic !  fortunately  for  you  there  is  none  to  criticize  you.  But  do 
not  for  this  reason  think  to-day  that  the  earth  is  the  capital  of  mad 
men  only. 

The  subtle  criticism  of  critics  and  the  goodness  of  Dayananda’s 1  party 
have  nowadays  given  birth  to  a  few  new  words,  such  as  image-worship,7 
doll  worship,8  and  so  forth.  In  consequence  of  the  wide  currency  which 


*  The  steps  leading  down  to  the  river  or  other  water  down  which  those 
who  go  to  the  bath,  etc.,  descend. 

*  Sakti.  4  Bhajana.  •  Tattva, 

1  Founder  of  the  “  reformed  ”  Hinduism  known  as  the  Arya  Samaj. 

*  Pratimipqja,  or  mfirti-puj&. 

8  Pauttalikati.  Puttali  means  doll. 


WORSHIP  IN  GENERAL 


593 


has  been  given  to  such  language  by  the  community  of  unbelievers,  many 
senseless  Hindus,  both  illiterate  and  literate,  now  take  pride  in  publicly 
calling  themselves  image-worshippers  or  idolaters.  Perhaps  they  think 
that  these  words  are  approved  of  the  Sastra.  But  how  regrettable  is  this 
when  we  consider  that  such  words  cannot  issue  from  the  mouth  of  a  man, 
the  son  of  Manu,  unless  he  has  been  bom  in  a  non-Arya  family  with  a 
non-Arya  disposition.  The  words  when  we  consider  them  reveal  a  mine 
of  profound  infidelity.1 *  Many  authors  write,  “  The  practice  of  wor¬ 
shipping  images  has  been  prevalent  in  the  Arya  community  from  ancient 
times.”  One  might  suppose  from  this  that  we  had  merely  to  do  with  the 
worship  of  images  without  reference  to  Mantra,  Devata,  or  SSdhana. 
Others,  fond  of  far-fetched  meanings,  say  that  image-worship  is  like  the 
modem  practice  of  showing  respect  and  honour  to  the  lifeless  statues  raised 
in  memory  of  lamented  deceased  persons;  just  as  if  Devatas  were  all  dead, 
and  we  (shameless  men  who  have  no  faith  in  the  next  world  and  yet  call 
ourselves  Arya)  were  showing  our  gratitude  to  them  before  their  images. 
Alas!  O  Bhagavan!  when  will  the  eyes  of  this  class  of  bom-blind  educated 
fools  be  opened  ?  When  will  we  be  saved  from  all  such  interpretations  ? 
How  long  will  this  generation  of  Ghajotkachas,1  sprung  from  the  seed  of 
Bhima  in  the  womb  of  Hidimba,  last?  Half-castes  are  governed  by  the 
Dharma 3  of  their  mothers,  therefore  is  it  Bharata’s  ill-fortune  that  so- 
called  religious  principles  *  propounded  in  the  nineteenth  century  vomit 
only  infidelity.  But  the  matter  does  not  rest  even  here.  For  is  it  not 
said  that  Aryas  who  worship  the  Deity  with  form  are  idolaters,1 * *  that 
idolatry  is  their  Dharma,  or,  in  other  words,  that  those  who  worehip  the 
Deity  with  form  worship  idols,  images  of  Devatas  being  those  idols;  that 
worship  of  the  Devata  with  form  is  like  the  play  of  ignorant  children  with 
dolls,  and  that  those  who  perform  such  worship  are  as  ignorant  as  such 
children.  O  critic!  you  consider  yourself  to  be  a  wise  man.  Will  you 
tell  me  that  those  Sadhakas,  crest-gems  of  the  race  of  the  wise,  worshippers 
of  the  Devata  with  form,  were  ignorant  fools — men  who  produced  •  the 
Vedas,  Tantras,  Puranas,  systems  of  Philosophy,  Astronomy,  Ayurveda  7 
and  Dhanurveda?  8  Why!  it  is  the  partaking  by  you  of  the  mere  leavings 


1  Nastikata.  Because  it  is  not  the  pratimi  or  the  murti,  still  less  a  doll, 
which  is  worshipped,  but  the  Devata  in  the  heart,  which  in  the  prSnapratistha 
rite  is  transferred  to  the  image  and  worshipped. 

*  Demon  Rak^asa,  son  of  Bhima. (one  of  the  P&ndavas),  and  Hidimba,  a 

Rakjasi.  *  Law. 

4  Adhyatmika  tattva.  *  Puttalika. 

*  That  is,  in  the  sense  that  the  Scriptures  are  revealed  to,  and  through,  and 

spoken  by  the  R$is,  who  arranged  them.  In  the  higher  sense  the  Veda  is 

apauruscya — that  is,  without  author. 

i  Medical  Sastra.  1  Scripture  of  warfare;  literally,  archery. 

39 


594 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


of  their  food  in  the  pages  of  books  which  makes  you  so  proud  of  your 
knowledge  and  wisdom.1 * * 4 * * *  Is  it  not  to  invite  death  for  insects  like  you  and 
I  to  attempt  to-day  to  leap  across  that  sky-kissing  untraversable  mass  of 
light,*  which  they  with  all  the  profundity  of  their  knowledge,  philosophy, 
and  science  took  this  worship  to  be?  Hari!  Hari!  to  call  the  most 
worshipful  image  of  Devatsi,  the  object  of  the  Sadhaka’s  Sadhana 
an  idol.8 *  To  call  the  Yantra*  (in  which  presides  the  Devata  who 
is  consciousness  itself)  unconscious  and  inert  And  yet  it  is  only 
because  an  indistinct  shadow  of  that  Devata  of  consciousness  is  cast  upon 
you  that  you  helieve  your  own  body  to  be  conscious!  When  as  an  ignorant 
little  child  you  sleep  you  may  easily  think  that  you  are  devoid  of  conscious¬ 
ness.  But  will  a  grown-up  child  also  (who  can  call  and  awaken  you  *) 
think  so?  To  the  Father  or  the  Mother  of  the  Universe  you  and  I  are 
similarly  ignorant  children,  and  hence  to  us  His  or  Her  image  appears 
unconscious.  But  he  who  can  call  and  awaken  Him  or  Her — that  is  to 
say,  he  to  whom  Mother  Kulakundalini  the  Dev!,  who  is  eternal  wakeful¬ 
ness,  has  given  the  power  to  call  and  awaken  Her  by  awaking  Herself  in 
him — to  him  the  true  image  of  Her  body  can  never  appear  unconscious 
for  by  the  grace  of  Her  who  is  consciousness  he  himself  has  been  trans¬ 
formed  into  consciousness  itself.  You  and  I  are  unconscious  •  ourselves 
and  so  to  us  Her  image  also  appears  unconscious.  It  is  neither  Her  fault 
nor  the  fault  of  Her  image.  It  is  the  fault  of  the  Karma  done  by  us  in 
past  lives. 

A  discussion  is  impossible  on  the  subject  of  the  diverse  fruits  of  worship, 
for  it  is  difficult  to  explain  the  character 1  of  fruits  to  a  person  who  has  no 
knowledge  of  the  different  kinds  of  taste.  For  this  reason  we  shall 
endeavour  to  see  by  a  consideration  of  the  mode  in  which  worship  is  done 
whether  the  community  of  Arya  Sadhakas — the  worshippers  of  the 
corporeal,*  the  worshippers  of  the  Deity  with  form  * — are  ignorant  fools  of 
a  low.  grade  of  spiritual  competency  or  not. 

According  to  the  Sastra  it  is  the  nature 10  of  Asuras  11  to  be  made 
dumb 18  with  anger  at  the  very  mention  of  images  of  Devata.  A  feeling  of 

1  What  these  men  have  put  in  their  books  is  regarded  as  their  food.  So 

great  are  they  that  the  so-called  critics  are  proud  of  a  knowledge  gained  second¬ 
hand  from  the  leavings  of  such  food. 

*  Tejas.  *  Puttaii. 

4  Diagram  (see  Introduction  to  T antra  jSistra). 

*  Author’s  parenthesis. 

*  Ja«Ja;  not,  of  course,  wholly  so,  but  in  the  sense  that  we  do  not  possess 

true  consciousness,  which  perceives  the  Brahman  in  all  things. 

?  Tattva.  *  Murtimayl. 

*  Sahara  upasana.  u  Dhanna. 

u  The  demoniac  enemies  of  the  Devas.  11  Literally,  “  unconscious  ”. 


WORSHIP  IN  GENERAL 


595 


■enmity  against  Devata  can  never  arise  in  a  person’s  mind  unless  there  is 
an  Asura  disposition  in  his  character  and  family.  Again,  without  the 
appearance  of  such  a  feeling  of  enmity  one  is  never  liberated  from  the  state 
•of  an  Asura.  Just  as  according  to  natural  laws  when  fever  is  about  to 
leave  a  man  his  body  perspires,  so  when  the  time  comes  for  liberation  from 
the  state  of  an  Asura  a  feeling  of  enmity  against  Devata  is  shown,  for  neither 
religious  merit  nor  sin  bears  fruit  in  this  world  unless  it  grows  enormous. 
Perhaps  you  think,  “  the  image  is  not  Devata.  Why,  then,  does  this  body 
■of  fools  1  laugh  or  -weep?  ”  I  ask,  O  prince  of  learned  infidels!  why,  then, 
■do  you  become  angry  at  the  mention  of  images  of  Devata?  It  is  true  that 
an  Asura  becomes  angry  at  the  mention  of  the  names  of  Devata,  but 
according  to  you  an  image  is  not  DevatS.  Why,  then,  do  you  become 
angry  at  the  mere  sight  of  it  ?  Anger  is  a  Vikara  *  as  much  as  laughter  and 
weeping  are.  It  may  be  that  the  sight  of  a  Devata’s  image  causes  in  you 
anger,  a  r&jasa  vikSra  characteristic  of  a  Danava’s  state;  while  it  causes  in 
me  joy,  laughter,  or  tears  of  joy,  Sattvika  vikSras  *  characteristic  of  man- 
*  hood.  Prakrti,  constituted  of  three  Gunas,  is  the  Mistress  of  those  Gunas, 
.and  according  to  the  proportions  in  which  they  occur  in  different  persons 
She  reveals  different  characteristics  in  them.  If  the  sight  of  a  Devata’s 
image  had  not  produced  any  VikSra  in  you,1  then  you  might  one  day  say, 
“  Why  do  these  people  laugh  or  weep  ?  ”  But  when  you  arc  wont  to  become 
angry  at  the  sight  of  an  image,  you  would  do  well  to  think  that  that 
which  can  make  one  person  angry  can  also  make  another  person  laugh  or 
weep— -that  in  the  unconscious  image  there  is  some  such  powerful  conscious¬ 
ness  as  makes  your  eyes  (which  look  upon  all  other  persons  and  things 
with  feelings  of  love,  mercy,  and  brotherlincss)  red  with  a  feeling  of  enmity. 
You,  of  course,  do  not  believe  that  the  image  is  the  Devata.  But  just 
consider  that  if  the  mere  giving  the  image  the  name  of  Devata  can  cause 
in  you  a  Vikara  *  so  contrary  to  human  feelings,  what  a  great  Vikara  of 
joy  and  felicity  ought  to  be  produced  in  those  who  sec  in  that  image  the 
true  light  *  of  Devata.  With  your  physical  eyes  you  see  the  worship  of  an 
image,  but  he  who  worships  sees,  with  his  superhuman  vision,  die  full 
appearance  of  Her  who  is  consciousness  itself  in  that  unconscious  instru¬ 
ment,7  the  image.  During  the  period  extending  from  the  invocation  of  life  8 


1  That  is,  the  author  and  those  that  think  with  him. 

4  Transformation  of  a  thing  from  that  which  is  its  original  nature. 

4  That  is,  transformations  due  to  the  action:  of  the  Rajas  and  Sattva  Gunas 
respectively. 

*  That  is,  had  you  yourselves  been  apathetic. 

*  Vide  ante.  •  Pratyakja  jyotih.  7  Yantra. 

*  Into  the  image  by  the  Sadhaka. 


596 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


until  its  final  disposal 1 * *  the  earthen  image  is  in  the  eyes  of  the  Sadhaka, 
which  have  been  cleared  by  the  collyrium  paint  of  Siddhi,  consciousness 
itself.*  It  sheds  the  light,  which  is  Brahman,  of  the  beauty  of  the  Mother 
of  the  Universe,  the  Brahmamayi,  full  of  ever  new  charms. 

This  is  the  Sadhaka’s  point  of  view.  But  if  you,  without  Sadhana 
and  full  of  scepticism,  know  and  really  believe  the  image  to  be  unconscious, 
then  what  a  mean,  hateful,  cowardly  disposition  you  show  in  becoming 
angry  with  it.  Why  become  angry  with  a  thing  which  you  know  is  uncon¬ 
scious  and  without  power?  Why,  like  Asura  Kamsa,  do  you  proceed  to 
break  the  image  by  dashing  it  against  the  ground  ?  *  You  want  to  grasp 
and  dash  against  the  ground  that  which  even  a  Prince  of  Yogis  cannot 
keep  confined  in  the  temple  of  his  heart! 4  You  want  to  destroy  one  whom 
Kamsa  could  not  subdue! 4  What  can  be  a  greater  impudence  on  your 
part  than  this?  With  a  frown  at  insignificant  insects  like  you  the  Daughter 
of  Nanda  *  will  return  to  the  Vindhya  mountain  in  order  to  destroy  the 
conquerors  of  the  three  worlds,  such  as  Sumbha  and  NiSumbha ;  but  in 
order  to  crush  your  arrogance  She  will  leave  behind  that  manifestation  1 *  of 
Hers,8  who  descends  in  Nanda’s  house  in  Gokula  for  play  •  in  the  world  of 
men.  Had  not  Kamsa  believed  that  he  would  receive  from  the  eighth  child  of 
Dcvaki 1  the  punishment  he  deserved  for  his  sins,  would  he  have  proceeded 
to  destroy  her  sons  and  daughters?  This  example  makes  us  think  that  it  is 
not  that  you  do  not  believe  in  the  divinity  of  images,  but  that  it  is  in  the 
fear  of  having  to  suffer  the  cruel  torments  of  hell  in  repentance  for  your 
sins  that  you  proceed  to  break  them.  This  is  the  distinctive  characteristic 
of  your  faith.  From  such  fear  you  believe  in  images,  but  the  pity  of  it  is 
that,  like  the  memory  of  an  intoxicated  man,  this  belief  leaves  you  the 
moment  you  become  blinded  with  a  feeling  of  enmity.  When  under  the 
influence  of  anger  only  you  proceed  to  break  them,  you  fail  to  realize 
whom  you  are  going’ to  break.  O  critic!  none  can  break  or  make  Her. 


1  Visaijana ;  the  withdrawing  of  the  mental  image  from  the  objective  image, 
with  the  Samhara  (dissolution)  Mudra  when  it  is  broken  and  thrown  away. 
It  must  be  disposed  of  as  a  dead  body.  The  root  Visrja=to  abandon,  to  leave, 
to  give  up;  and  Visaijana  is  allowing  the  Deity  invoked  to  go  from  the  image 
at  the  conclusion  of  worship. 

*  As  collyrium  clears  the  eye,  so  Siddhi  or  success  in  worship  enables  the 
Sadhaka  to  see  in  the  earthen  image,  Consciousness. 

*  This  Asura  dashed  the  children  of  his  sister  Dcvaki  on  a  stone,  as  he  had 
been  told  that  one  of  the  children  would  be  his  destroyer. 

4  So  great  is  the  Devata  that  even  great  Yogis  cannot  hold  Her. 

*  That  is,  Kf?pa. 

8  Deri  as  Yogamiya  incarnated  as  daughter  of  Nanda,  who  gave  Her  to- 

Vasudeva  in  exchange  for  Kf?na,  who  was  left  with  Nanda. 

1  VibhCti.  1  That  is,  K^pa.  *  T.Tks 


WORSHIP  IN  GENERAL 


597 


Whom  do  you  want  to  frighten  by  breaking  the  outer  image?  We,  too, 
break  it  after  worship.  May  be  that  you  dispose  of  it  within  your  house 
while  we  dispose  of  it  in  water.1 * * 4 * *  We  dispose  of  the  outer  image  outwardly 
and  guard  the  inner  image  in  our  heart.  The  light  of  the  image  whose 
substance  is  consciousness,  which  we  brought  out  from  within  us  and 
attached  to  the  image  made  of  earth,  we  take  back  into  ourselves  after 
we  have  done  with  the  worship  of  this  earthen  image.  Nothing  is  thus 
broken  and  done  altogether  away  with  as  in  your  case.  As  the  outer 
temple  8  held  the  brilliance  of  a  beauty  filling  the  world,  so  also  does  the 
inner  temple  hold  the  grandeur  of  an  incomparable  beauty.  Our  Mother 
is  without  as  She  is  within,  and  within  as  She  is  without.  By  my  thus 
moving  Her  in  thought  from  within  to  without  and  from  without  to  within 
the  door  of  my  heart  will  become  fully  opened.  On  that  day  all  invoca¬ 
tion  8  and  final  dismissal  *  into  and  from  the  image  will  cease  for  ever. 
The  day  on  which  I  shall  see  the  inner  image  when  looking  at  the  outer 
image,  and  the  latter  when  I  look  within,  when  it  will  be  the  same  within 
as  without — on  that  day  the  Mother  will  bring  my  own  coming  and 
going  *  to  an  end,  and  the  restless  dancing  Kali  *  will  scat  Herself  and  rest 
in  peace;  unless  it  be  that  the  blissful  Devi,T  finding  the  path  open  both 
within  and  without,  runs  from  sheer  joy  hither  and  thither  with  even 
greater  activity  than  before.  But  even  if  She  does,  I  shall  not  on  that  day 
call  or  bring  Her.  In  Her  own  joy  She  will  come,  go,  dance,  sing,  and 
play  of  Her  own  accord.  I  shall  only  beat  time  and  dance  with  Her, 
crying  out,  “  Victory  to  Mother”.  O  brother  critic!  thou  who  art  also 
the  Mother’s  son,  by  the  Mother’s  grace  may  you  not  be  deprived  of  this 
joy.  It  is  She  whom  you  know  as  Mother  within  who  graciously  issues 
thereout  by  Her  own  power,*  and  thus  gratifies  the  Sadhaka.  Of  this 
power*  we  shall  give  an  account  afterwards.  Here  we  shall  say  this 
much,  that  it  is  a  mistake  to  think  that  to  an  Arya  Sadhaka  the  want  of 
an  outer  image  means  the  want  of  an  image  within.  On  the  contrary, 
it  is  because  there  is  an  image  within  that  it  has  been  revealed  without 
It  is  only  after  we  have  the  inner  image  that  we  commence  the  outer 
worship.  Even  in  the  absence  of  an  outer  image  the  Sadhaka  is  able  to 
carry  out  worship  by  means  of  the  inner  image. 

In  the  Srimadbhagavata  S&stra  BhagavSn  has  said:  “  Images  are  of 
eight  kinds — namely,  of  stone,  wood,  iron  (metals),9  pastes  10  of  clay,  and 


1  After  worship  the  image  is  thrown  into  water,  such  as  the  sacred  Ganges. 

*  Mandapa. 

*  Avahana,  when  the  Goddess  is  called  into  the  image. 

4  Visaijana,  see  ante.  *  In  the  Samsara.  •  Njtyakall. 

7  Anandamayi.  ■Sakti.  *  Author’s  parenthesis. 

11  Pastes  of  sandal  and  the  like. 


598 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


such  other  substances;  made  of  jewels,  painted;  and  mental.”  In  the 
presencc  of  any  of  the  seven  kinds  of  images  made  of  stone  and  the  like, 
the  mental  image  should  be  first  worshipped  with  mental  articles  of  worship 
before  worship  is  done  of  the  outer  image  with  material  articles.  But  in 
the  absence  of  any  of  those  seven  kinds  of  images,  those  who  do  external 
worship  must  bring  from  within  themselves  the  inner  image  and  worship 
it.  It  is  in  this  connection  that  Ramaprasada,1  the  Prince  of  Sadhakas, 
has  said :  “  Prasada  1 *  says,  ‘  My  heart  is  a  mould  made  of  spotless  lotuses. 
Mayest  Thou  dance  after  Thou  hast  been  cast  in  that  mould  and  made 
mental.’  ”  * 

In  the  Kularpava  Tantra,  the  Lord  of  Devas  has  said:  “  O  Great 
Devi!  Sadhakas  devoted  to  the  Karmakanda 4 * *  by  the  combined  force  of 
Bhakti,®  and  Mantra  give  form  to  Her  who  is  above  form  *  and  the  supreme 
Siva  Himself;  and  worship  Her  between  the  sacred  pit  and  the  sacrificial 
ground,7 *  on  winnowing  fans  (even  now  in  many  places  Arya  women  design 
images  of  Devatas  on  winnowing  fans  with  vermillion,  sandal  and  Durva 
grass,  Atap  rice  •  in  Pujas  and  Vratas  of  Mafigalacandi,  Kulacandl,9’ 
and  many  other  Devatas) 10 ;  on  walls  (generally  amongst  Aryasin  the  north¬ 
west  images  of  Devatas  are  painted  on  walls),10  in  Puja,  Vrata,  and  other 
religious  rites 11 ;  in  Mandalas 11 *  (Sarvatobhadra  and  other  Mamjalas  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  Sastra),10  on  slabs  (metal,  wood,  or  stone  slabs),10  in  the  head  ** 
and  in  the  heart  (i).  Although  the  milk  of  a  cow  is  produced  from  the 
blood  which  circulates  through  her  whole  body,  it  flows  only  from  the 
teats  of  her  udder;  so,  although  the  univene-pervading  Devati  is  present 
everywhere,  Her  true  aspect 14  is  realized  in  images  only  (3).  If  an  image 
be  in  all  respects  similar  to  the  aspect  of  Devata,  as  described  in  the  Sastra, 
if  the  articles  of  worship 14  are  collected  with  care,  and  if  the  Sadhaka  has 


1  Ramaprasada  Sen,  the  celebrated  Bengali  poet  (bom,  1718;  died,  1775). 

*  That  is,  Ramaprasada. 

*  That  is,  by  being  moulded  in  the  heart  of  the  Sadhaka. 

4  The  Scripture  dealing  with  ritual. 

1  Devotion.  *  RupJtlta.  7  Sthandila. 

4  There  are  two  lands  of  rice  prepared  from  paddy.  In  the  first  the  paddy 

is  boiled  and  the  husk  is  removed.  In  the  other  the  husk  is  removed  without 

such  boiling  by  exposing  the  paddy  to  the  sun.  This  is  atap,  and  the  other  is 

called  “  siddha  ”. 

*  Devis.  14  Author’s  parenthesis. 

u  As  to  Vratas,  see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 

a  A  geometrical  figure  frequently  drawn  or  made  with  various  colours.. 
The  difference  between  a  Mapdala  and  Yantra  is  that  the  former  is  used  in  the 
case  of  any  Devata,  whereas  a  Yantra  is  appropriate  to  a  specific  Devata  only. 

14  Brahmarandhra.  “Svarupa. 

“  Upacara,  such  as  water,  flower;  incense,  lights,  food,  etc. 


WORSHIP  IN  GENERAL 


599 


unswerving  faith,  then  that  DevatS  is  sure  to  enter  that  image  (4).  Cream 
so  long  as  it  remains  in  a  cow’s  body  does  not  nourish  anyone,  but  for 
those  who  draw  milk  from  the  cow  and  collect  the  cream  from  it  by  their 
personal  exertion  in  the  way  of  boiling  and  so  forth,  that  cream  becomes 
a  cause  of  physical  nourishment.  Just  as  in  this  way  only  the  cream 
becomes  a  cause  of  physical  nourishment,  so,  O  Parameivari!  the  Devata 
residing  in  the  body  of  every  person  becomes  the  cause  of  the  SSdhaka’s 
liberation  in  consequence  of  worship  only.  Without  such  worship  She  does 
not  grant  the  desired  object  to  the  Sadhaka  (5-6).  For  this  reason  the 
Devata  should  be  worshipped  by  invoking  into  Her  image  Her  life,  senses, 
and  everything  else  appertaining  to  Her,  and  by  establishing  them  in  such 
image  with  Tantrik  Mantras;  otherwise,  without  such  establishment  of 
life,1 *  the  worship  will  be  ineffectual  (7).  If  the  establishment  of  life  in  an 
image  is  performed  according  to  the  Sistra,  the  worship  will  bear  the  great 
fruit  of  liberation,  even  if  it  be  defective  as  regards  other  Mantras  and 
rites.*  Such  defects  will  be  cured  by  the  Sadhaka’s  prayer  to  the  Dcvatft 
•  for  forgiveness  (8).  Karma  *  done  in  violation  of  the  rules  laid  down  in 
the  S&stra  will  be  wholly  fruitless  in  consequence  of  the  fault  known  as 
Karmabhanga  4  (9).  Karmas  falling  short  of,  or  going  beyond,  the  rules 
laid  down  in  the  Sastra  will  never  bear  fruit.  The  fruits  of  all  good 
Karmas 3 *  performed  according  to  the  Sastra  will  always  be  as  visible 
as  a  fruit  or  other  thing  held  in  one’s  hand  (10).  Hence,  in  Japa, 
Homa,  Puja  4,  and  the  like.  Karma  3  performed  in  strict  conformance 
with  Sastrik  rules  will  please  the  Devata,  and  secure  both  the  fruits  of 
Bhoga  and  Moksa*  for  the  Sadhaka  (n).  O  Spouse  of  Sambhu!  futile 
is  the  worship  and  so  forth  done  by  those  who  do  not  know  the  nature  7 
of  the  Devata,  Yantras,  and  Mantraiakti  3  (12).  Yantras  are  all  Mantra,* 
and  Devata  is  the  Sakti  of  Mantra  itself.  Therefore  the  Devata  is  at  once 
pleased  if  She  is  worshipped  with  Mantras  according  to  the  S&stra  (13). 
A  Tantra  is  so  called  because  it  subdues  (Niyantrapa)  lust,  anger,  and 
other  faults  of  JIva  and  the  sufferings  caused  thereby.  This  Yantra  is  a 
source  of  satisfaction  to  Devata  when  She  is  worshipped  in  it  (14).  As  the 
body  is  for  a  JIva  and  as  oil  is  for  a  lamp,  so  is  Yantra  the  seat  of  eternal 


1  Priinapratis^ha. 

*  That  is,  other  than  those  relating  to  the  Pr&^apratigtha  rite. 

3  Rites.  4  Violation  of  the  order  of  worship. 

1  *•  Repetition  ”  of  Mantra,  the  sacrifice  into  fire  and  ceremonial  worship 
(see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

4  Enjoyment  and  liberation. 

1  Svarupa.  «  Potency  of  Mantra. 

•  Mantramaya.  The  Yantra  is  the  body  of  the  Devata,  who  is  Mantra. 


€00 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


play  for  all  DevatSs  (15).  Hence,  the  principal  part 1 * *  of  worship  *  is  to 
adore  the  Parameivari,  after  the  making  of  and  drawing  of  Her  image  and 
Yantra.  But,  O  My  Beloved!  the  worship  should  be  performed  according 
to  the  rules,  and  after  the  Sadhaka  has  received  full  instruction  therein 
from  Guru  {16).” 

Wherever  £&tra  has  spoken  of  images,  it  has  in  this  way  similarly 
referred  to  the  Mantra  and  Devata.  It  has  also  said :  “  In  this  way  the 
Sadhaka,  who  has  controlled  his  Prana,8  should,  having  through  meditation 
beheld  his  Istadevata  in  his  heart,  contemplate  upon  the  unity  of  the  image 
of  the  Devi  both  within  and  without.”  The  process  for  so  doing  will  be 
described  in  its  proper  place  later.  Here  only  this  much  should  be  under¬ 
stood  that  it  is  the  inner  image  which  must  be  brought  out  and  established 
in  the  outer  image.  Our  critic  will  now  consider  whether  it  is  not  the 
height  of  folly  to  try  to  do  away  with  worship  of  the  Deity  with  form  by 
breaking  its  image.  Be  the  image,  mental  or  material,  we  break  it  every 
day  after  worship.  But  in  spite  of  so  much  breaking  we  cannot  really 
break  it  for  a  single  moment.  Whenever  or  wherever  I  look,  within  or  • 
without,  1  ever  sec  the  Devi,  whose  substance  is  will,  as  Bhagavan  or 
Bhagavati,  in  whatsoever  form  She  is  pleased  to  appear.  I  see  my  Mother, 
the  mad,4  disordered  girl,  dancing  with  gentle  movements  of  her  body, 
now  taking  up  the  flute  instead  of  the  sword,  or  again  seizing  the  sword 
instead  of  the  flute,  or  yet  again  at  times  making  both  the  sword  and  the 
flute  into  one  in  Her  hand;  mingling  Her  laughter  with  Her  dancing; 
now  loosening  and  now  binding  up  Her  hair.  If  I  sleep,  she  awakens  me 
by  coming  Herself  and  playing  on  the  flute.  If  I  commit  any  offence, 
She  raises  Her  sword  and,  smiling  gently,  threatens  me  with  it.  What 
infidel  *  is  there  who  can  break  this  image  ?  Who  in  the  three  worlds  has 
the  power  to  break  the  image  to  which  my  heart  is  bound  with  such  a 
deep  love?  The  outer  image  with  which  you  are  concerned  is  nothing  but 
a  reflection  of  the  real  one.  So  long  as  the  inner  image,  which  is  thus 
reflected,  is  not  broken,  what  will  you  gain  by  breaking  its  reflection? 
The  fair  and  transparent  moon  is  reflected  in  the  clear  bosom  of  a  river. 
The  light  of  its  golden  beauty  is  borne  upon  the  innumerable  ripples  raised 
by  the  gende  stirrings  of  the  evening  wind.  If  like  foolish  children  you 
and  I  proceed  to  strike  at  the  reflection  with  our  sticks,  think  you  that 


1  Kalpa,  *  Fuji. 

•That  is,  his  breath  by  PranjiySma. 

4  Pigla,  as  already  stated  (see  ante),  the  English  word  “  mad  ”  fails  to 
convey  the  meaning  of  the  word  “  pagli,"  for  in  Bengali  it  is  tinged  with  a 
feeling  of  tenderness,  and  persons  so  called  are  often  gready  loved.  The  term 
denotes  rather  a  person  of  eccentric  and  amiable  character,  and  is  akin  to  the 
Persian  DewSnS. 

4  Pafa^d*  (heretic,  miscreant). 


WORSHIP  IN  GENERAL 


601 


we  shall  thereby  break  the  moon  itself?  Mistaken  as  we  are,  the  agitation 
of  the  water  may  lead  us  to  think  that  the  moon  has  been  shattered  into  a 
hundred  or  a  thousand  fragments;  but,  O  brother!  wait  but  a  moment, 
and  you  will  see  that  when  the  water  has  again  become  calm  the  full  moon 
shines  as  fully  there  as  ever.  Then  you  will  understand  that  the  moon 
which  is  agitated  by  the  waves  is  only  a  reflection  of  and  not  the  moon 
itself.  The  moon  appears  in  the  water  because  the  rays  of  the  moon  in 
the  heavens  have  reached  it.  O  brother!  you  energetic  child!  the  moon 
in  the  heavens  will  not  be  broken  until  the  little  arms  of  dwarfs  such  as 
you  and  I  can  reach  through  the  firmament  where  the  moonlight  plays 
and  touch  the  lunar  orb  itself.  I  therefore  ask  you,  O  brother!  what  is 
the  use  of  striking  at  the  reflection  if  you  cannot  touch  that  which  it  reflects  ? 
The  external  image  which  you  see  before  a  devotee  is  not  merely  such, 
nor  is  the  image  (which  has  risen  in  the  sky  of  the  devotee’s  heart)  of  Her 
who  plays  on  the  breast  of  Siva  and  stirs  in  the  hearts  of  devotees  a  mere 
outward  thing.  That  image  of  Brahmamayl,  which  is  reflected  in  the 
river  of  the  devotee’s  love-laden  eye,  shedding  the  light 1  of  Brahman  on 
the  playful  lucid  waves  of  feeling;  that  image  of  Her  who,  though  the  one 
and  only  l$vari,  is  reflected  in  multiple  innumerable  waves  in  the  eyes  of 
countless  devotees,  is  not  a  mere  outward  thing.  Were  anyone  to  break 
that  inner  image,  it  might  become  him  to  say  one  day:  “  I  shall  do  away 
with  the  worship  of  the  Deity  with  form  by  breaking  Her  image.”  If 
to-day  you  and  I  proceed  to  break  an  outer  image  with  the  cudgel  of  our 
own  violent  infidelity,  do  you  think  it  will  be  really  broken  thereby? 
Never!  If,  however,  the  eye  of  the  devotee  is  hurt,  sweet  tears  of  devotion 
will  fall  from  them,  the  sight  of  which  will  stir  the  hearts  of  all  men.  But, 
then,  instantly  before  your  eyes  the  deep  waters  assume  a  calm,  gentle, 
and  tranquil  aspect.  The  agitation  of  the  water  does  not  cause  the  moon’s 
reflection  to  disappear.  On  the  contrary,  the  clear  moon-beams  like 
garlands  of  light  dance  and  play  on  every  ripple.  Similarly,  your  blow 
will  not  drive  away  the  Devata’s  image  from  the  devotee’s  eyes.  On  the 
contrary,  the  great  Sakti  of  the  mental  Devata  will  play  on  every  ripple 
in  the  water  of  the  tears  of  the  devotee’s  eye.  But  before  your  own  eyes 
the  consoling  peace  will  shortly  descend  and  calm  the  tears.  Then  instantly 
■you  will  see  that  Brahmamayi,  who  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  devotees,  has 
again  fully  appeared  without;  and  then,  seeing  the  displayed  and  fearful 
nature  of  Her  gende,  sweet  laughter  in  the  presence  of  the  devotee,  and  the 
vanity  of  our  effort  to  break  that  image,  it  will  seem  to  you  as  if  the 
victorious  queller  of  Mahi$a  *  is  to-day  laughing  peals  of  laughter  after 
She  crushed  the  pride  of  Danavas  under  the  toe  of  Her  left  foot  and  has 
bestowed  the  dominion  of  heaven  *  on  Devas.  O  Mother  of  the  world  1 


1Jyotih. 


*  The  Asura. 


*  S  varga. 


602 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


let  me  see,  O  Mother!  that  day.  By  Thy  kindness  teach  me  that  unbelief 
which  causes  Thee,  O  Mother  (whom  even  Princes  of  Yogins  seldom 
attain  in  meditation),1  to  appear  in  person  in  the  field  of  battle  with 
assumption  of  a  visible  warrior  form.  Teach  me  that  unbelief  which  causes 
Thee  in  Thy  intense  love  to  place  on  the  hard  neck  and  shoulder  of  the 
restless  Danava  2 *  the  beauteous  lotus-foot,  which  is  the  treasure  of  the 
heart  of  Mahdvara.*  O  Mother,  full  of  unbounded  mercy!  there  is 
nothing  in  the  three  worlds  to  compare  with  this  mercy  of  Thine.  It  is 
by  reason  of  this  that  Thou  art,  O  Mother!  the  Mother  of  the  Universe. 
What  better  proof  of  Thy  mercy  is  there  than  this,  that  Thou  hast  no 
enemy  in  the  Samsara  other  than  Thy  son?4  Hallowed  is  the  merciful 
Mother!  Hallowed  art  Thou,  hallowed  is  Thy  mercy,  and  still  more 
hallowed  is  Thy  inimical  son!  Brother  critic!  as  you  are  my  friend,  I  tell 
you  with  tears  in  my  eyes  that  everyone  is  hallowed  in  this  Samsara,. 
which  is  the  Mother’s  dominion.  But  you  and  I,  unfortunate  as  we  are, 
seem  to  be  the  most  unhappy  of  those  who  are  unhallowed.  We  are 
neither  faithless  nor  faithful.  We  have  neither  been  able  to  become 
enemies  nor  sons.  In  deep  sorrow  and  with  tears,  therefore,  I  say:  “  Tell 
me,  Mother!  where  am  I  to  stand,  Mother?  ” 

She  alone  knows  where  I  am  to  stand.  But  I  am  here  to  say  what 
I  have  heard  about  the  path.  I  shall,  therefore,  tell  you  one  or  two  more 
things  to-day.  I  hear  that  you  are  given  to  saying  at  every  word  “  image- 
worshippers  are  worshippers  of  unconscious  matter”.4  From  this  it 
indirectly  follows  that  you  are  a  worshipper  of  consciousness  itself.  It  is 
not  at  all  strange,  but  rather  natural,  on  your  part  for  you  to  say  that 
image-worshippers  are  worshippers  of  unconscious  matter,  for  “  a  person 
speaks  only  of  that  which  he  understands,”  and  no  one  can  blame  him  for 
so  doing.  There  is,  therefore,  nothing  to  say  to  you  on  the  score  that  you 
call  image-worshippers,  worshippers  of  unconscious  matter.  But  we  shall 
to-day  ask  you  one  or  two  things,  because  you  are  a  worshipper  of  Brahman 
Himself,  who  is  consciousness  itself. 

You  know  that  the  verbal  root  bjngha  means  to  pervade,  and  that 
Brahman  is  the  name  of  Him  who  pervades  the  Universe.  You  are  also 


1  Dhyana.  *  Son  of  Danu,  enemy  of  the  Devas. 

*  It  is  the  Dew’s  love  which  leads  her  to  punish  the  Asuras.  As  the  latter 
have  thus  drawn  the  love  of  the  Devi,  even  though  it  takes  the  form  of  punish¬ 
ment,  the  author  expresses  himself  to  be  envious  of  the  Asuras,  enemies  of  the 
Devas,  who  are  thus  more  fortunate  than  great  Yogis  (see  verses  8  and  9  of  the 

Hymn  to  Jagadambika  in  Chapter  xix  of  the  Devibhagavata  Pur&na,  translated 
in  A.  and  E.  Avalon's  “  Hymns  to  the  Goddess  ”). 

4  That  is.  She  looks  on  them  as  Her  sons,  although  they  are  Her  enemies. 

*Jada. 


WORSHIP  IN  GENERAL 


60S 


in  the  habit  of  saying  that  Brahman  is  consciousness  itself.  Being  a 
worshipper  of  that  Brahman,  with  what  heart,  O  brother!  can  you  call 
an  image  unconscious  matter  ?  Is  it  an  expression  of  faith  on  your  part  to 
say  that  He  who  pervades  the  Universe,  who  pervades  everything  and 
exists  everywhere,  who  is  equally  present  everywhere  from  Heaven  to- 
Hell,1  does  not  exist  in  an  image?  It  may,  to  a  certain  extent,  become  a 
dualist  to  say  that  “  unconscious  matter  and  consciousness  are  two  different 
things  But  being  a  worshipper  of  undefinable  *  Brahman,  with  what 
face  do  you  admit  the  existence  of  that  which  is  called  “  unconscious 
matter”  as  distinct  from  consciousness?  You  may,  of  course,  escape  by 
saying,  “  Be  it  unconscious  matter  or  consciousness,  I  do  not  care  for 
worship  at  all.”  But  in  that  case  also  you  are  in  another  way  bound  to 
admit  that  there  is  nothing  which  can  be  called  unconscious  matter.  You 
call  these  things  unconscious  matter  in  which  you  do  not  see  any  sign  of 
consciousness,  as,  for  instance,  earth,  water,  wood,  stone,  and  so  forth. 
Now,  I  ask,  is  it  because  there  is  really  no  consciousness  in  these  things 
that  you  regard  them  as  unconscious,  or  is  it  because  you  yourself  have 
not  the  eye  to  see  them  otherwise?  Many  people,  again,  say  that  such 
things  as  plants,  trees,  shrubs,  creepers,  and  so  forth,  are  unconscious. 
Perhaps  they  think  that  eating,  sleeping,  fearing,  and  having  sexual  inter¬ 
course,®  are  four  inseparable  marks  of  JIvahood,  and  that  all  such  things 
as*  arc  without  them  are  unconscious.  The  Sastra,  however,  says  that 
plants,  creepers,  and  so  forth,  are  not  unconscious  things,  but  unmoving 
Jivas.  Manu  says:  “  Through  faults  arising  out  of  the  body — that  is  to- 
say,  sins  committed  by  means  of  the  body — men  become  unmoving  things 
(are  born  as  plants,  shrubs,  creepers,  and  so  forth)  *;  that  is  to  say,  the 
punishment  for  such  sins  consists  in  this,  that  in  their  subsequent  birth, 
such  men  arc  unable  to  do  any  desired  work  by  their  physical  exertion. 
Through  sins  committed  by  speech  men  are  bora  as  birds  or  beast;  that 
is  to  say,  the  punishment  for  such  sins  consists  in  this,  that  in  their  subse¬ 
quent  birth  these  men  have  not  the  faculty  of  speech.  As  the  result  of 
sins  committed  by  mind,  men  are  bom  in  the  lowest  castes.  The  object 
of  such  punishment  is  that  in  their  subsequent  birth  they  may  not  be 
endowed  with  broad  intelligent  *  minds.  It  is  merely  in  order  to  determine 
where  we  stand  that  we  quote  this  passage  from  Manu.  In  fact,  there  are 
many  others.  Hundreds  and  thousands  of  reasons  and  authorities  may  be 
given  and  quoted  in  this  connection,  but  we  are  afraid  of  digressing. 
What  we  want  to  show  by  the  above  passage  is  that  plants,  creepers,  and 


1  Svarga  to  Naraka. 

*  Nirvifcsa — that  is,  to  whom  no  limiting  attribute  can  be  given. 

1  See  ante.  *  Author’s  parenthesis. 

*  Their  minds  are  enveloped  by  the  Tamoguga. 


€04 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


so  forth,  are  not  unconscious  or  inert,  but  living  things,  that  they,  too,  are 
bom  and  die,  share  happiness,  prosperity,  and  adversity,  and  so  forth,  in 
a  remarkable  degree,  with,  however,  this  difference  from  other  living 
things,  that  while  we  can  clearly  observe  the  changes  which  are  caused  in 
the  latter  by  happiness  and  sorrow,  we  do  not  perceive  similar  changes  in 
the  case  of  trees,  creepers,  and  so  forth.  There  are  two  reasons  for  thi? 
■difference.  First,  the  force  of  consciousness 1  which  exists  as  Jiva  in  a 
plant  or  creeper  is  completely  overpowered  by  the  force  of  Maya  2;  and 
secondly,  the  changes  which  arc  caused  in  plants  and  the  like  by  happiness 
and  sorrow  are  so  fine  that  our  senses,  gross  as  they  are,  have  not  the 
keenness  and  subtlety  to  perceive  them.  Only  Rsis,  who  have  attained 
Siddhi  by  Tapas 3 * * *  and  see  all  things,  and  Devas  and  Devayonis  *  (Yaksas, 
Kinnaras,  Vidyadharas,  and  so  forth),  have  the  power  to  perceive  them. 
For  this  reason  wc  read  in  Pauranik  and  similar  stories  that  whenever  some 
great  person  has  through  a  curse  taken  birth  as  a  plant  or  the  like,  Rsis  or 
Devas  have,  on  knowing  when  the  curse  comes  to  an  end,  delivered  him 
from  life  as  an  unmoving  thing.  Sri  Krsna  Himself  bears  evidence  of  this 
in  the  incident  of  the  breaking  of  the  trees  Yamala  and  Arjuna.* 

Next,  as  to  stones  and  metals.  It  is  not  necessary  to  deal  separately 
with  the  subject  of  metals,  for  metals  exist  in  mines  in  the  womb  of  moun¬ 
tains,  and  there  is  no  difference  between  stones  and  metals  as  regards 
consciousness  or  unconsciousness.  A  mountain  is  a  great  living  thing, 
and  the  greatest  *  of  things  that  spring  out  of  earth.  It  is  in  mountains 
that  the  earth’s  power  of  bearing  burden  is  mainly  seated.  Hence  moun¬ 
tains  are  called  “  supporters  of  the  earth  ”.7  Mountains  rise,  grow,  and 
become  decayed.  They  rise  by  piercing  through  the  earth;  they  grow  by 
extending  to  the  earth ;  and,  again,  during  the  time  of  their  decay  they 
gradually  sink  into  the  womb  of  the  earth.  As  a  mountain  rises  by 
penetrating  through  the  earth,  inch  by  inch,  in  thousands  and  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  years,  so  it  also  disappears  into  the  womb  of  the  earth  inch 
by  inch  during  the  same  periods.  A  mountain  has  also  birth  and  death. 
In  a  dead  tree  there  remains  no  vitality.  The  stones  of  a  dead  mountain 


1  C5t-£akti.  *  Mayaiakti. 

3  Austerity,  devotion,  etc.  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

*  Spirits  emanating  from  the  Devas  and  the  Deva  world.  Deva  eva  yonih 
nidinabhutat  yaiya, 

*  There  is  a  tree  called  Arjuna.  Sri  Krsna  broke  a  twin  Aijuna-tree,  and 

two  Devayonis  sprang  forth,  who  had  been  cursed  by  a  R$i.  The  author  here 

speaks  of  Yamala  and  Arjuna,  but  Yamala  means  twin,  and  it  should  be 
44  twin  Arjuna  trees 51 .  •  Literally,  crest-gem. 

7  Earth  is  that  which  is  the  supporter  of  everything,  and  it  is  mainly  through 
the  mountains  that  it  is  so,  for  they  are  the  greatest  masses  of  earth,  and  the 
mountain  ranges  are  thought  to  be  the  back-bone  of  the  earth. 


WORSHIP  IN  GENERAL 


60S 


become  rough  and  destitute  of  moisture,  like  the  dry  wood  of  a  dead  tree; 
and  as  does  such  wood,  they  break  into  pieces  under  light  blows.  Dealers 
in  stones  who  are  versed  in  the  science  of  the  subject  unhesitatingly  admit 
this.  They  can  also  show,  on  an  examination  of  them,  which  mountain 
is  alive  and  which  is  dead.  But  perhaps  you  are  shaking  your  sides  with 
laughter  on  hearing  that  mountains  have  life.  But  can  you  say  that 
to-day  the  mountains  are  not  laughing  on  seeing  you  laugh  in  this  way? 
Can  you  show  any  substance  in  the  world  which  has  no  life,  and  yet  grows 
and  decays  ?  The  longevity  of  a  mountain  is  lakhs  of  crores 1 * *  of  years, 
thousands  of  Yugas,*  hundreds  of  Manvantras,8  while  you  and  I  are  not 
reckoned  as  even  insignificant  bubbles  in  the  vast  sea  of  time.  How  is  it 
possible  for  us  in  a  single  life  to  probe  into  the  question  of  consciousness 
or  unconsciousness  of  a  mountain  by  observing  its  birth  and  death?  Who 
can  say  how  many  times  *  you  and  I  are  to  be  re-incamated  during  the 
one  life-time  of  a  single  mountain?  It  does  not  therefore  become  us  to 
determine  the  question  of  consciousness  or  unconsciousness  of  a  mountain, 
though  we  cannot  sec  its  birth  and  death.  We,  however,  daily  see  the 
growth  and  decay  of  small  hills,  and  from  this  you  can  very  well  realize 
whether  a  mountain  is  conscious  or  unconscious. 

Then  comes  the  question  of  earth.  Consciousness  of  earth  is  still 
more  subtle — indeed,  as  subtle  as  any  matter  can  be.  It  is  extremely 
difficult  to  discover  it  with  the  help  of  physical  perception  alone.  It  can 
be  ascertained  only  by  means  of  Divine  *  powers  attained  by  Sadhana. 
It  is  not  therefore  capable  of  explanation.  Besides  this,  even  if  we  think 
that  the  earth  is  unconscious,  wc  must  consider  whether  it  is  really  so; 
whether  earthly  atoms  are  seats  of  the  play  of  unconscious  forces  •  only, 
or  whether  the  force  of  consciousness  lies  in  a  subtle  form  within  them 
and  achieves  its  purposes  by  means  of  these  unconscious  forces  which  it 
has  made  its  servants.  Let  us  assume  that  earth  is  the  seat  of  the  play  of 
unconscious  forces  only.  But  there,  where  I  saw  yesterday  a  stretch  of 
barren  earth,  I  see  to-day  the  sprouting  of  new  tender  shoots.  Whence 
has  this  vitality  of  conscious  living  things  come  to  the  inert  atoms  of  uncon¬ 
scious  earth?  This  is  the  first  stage.  The  subsequent  stages  are  still  more 
wonderful.  Before  our  eyes  the  shoots  grow  into  stalks  and  leaves  and 
gradually  bear  fruit.  When  the  crop  becomes  ripe,  it  is  eaten  by  men, 


1  A  lakh  equals  100,000  and  a  crore  ii  10,000,000. 

1 A  Yuga  or  age  is  a  portion  of  a  Katpa,  or  day  of  Brahma  of  4,320,000,000 
years  (sec  next  note). 

*The  Kalpa  is  divided  into  fourteen  Manvantras,  which  are  again 
subdivided  into  seventy-one  Mahayuga,  each  of  which  is  composed  of  Yugas. 

4  Literally,  “  how  many  eighty-four  lakhs  of  times.” 

*  Daiva  (super-physical).  4 *  Jat)a  Sakti. 


•606 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


beasts,  and  birds,  and  is  digested  in  the  fire  of  the  stomach.  The  essence 
•of  the  digested  crop  is  then  transformed  into  fat,  semen,  and  blood  in  the 
body.  In  the  womb  again  the  semen  and  blood  are  digested  and  grow 
into  the  living,  conscious  child  in  the  womb.  However  learned  we  may 
be  in  various  Sastras,  we  are  unable  to  realize  this  directly,  the  mother 
alone  being  able  to  do  so.  Gradually  when,  after  ten  months  and  ten 
days,  the  child  issues  from  the  mother’s  womb,  we  then  see  that  the  eating 
•of  an  unconscious  crop  has  produced  this  conscious  fruit.  If  the  semen 
and  blood  had  not  the  force 1  of  consciousness  in  them,  whence  has  con¬ 
sciousness  come  to  the  child?  If  the  crop  which  has  been  eaten  had  no 
consciousness  in  it,  whence  did  consciousness  come  in  the  semen  and  blood  ? 
If  the  tree  had  not  consciousness  in  it,  whence  did  consciousness  come  in 
the  crop  ?  And  if  earth  had  no  consciousness  in  it,  whence  did  conscious¬ 
ness  come  in  the  tree?  Now,  critic,  who  talks  of  unconsciousness!  Tell  me, 
is  it  the  earth  which  is  unconscious,  or  is  it  you  and  I  who  are  so  ?  Is  it  not 
a  sign  of  one’s  own  unconsciousness  to  consider  the  earth  as  earthen  only, 
whep  it  is  thus  full  of  consciousness  in  a  subtle  form.  What  can  be  more 
idiotic  than  to  hold  that  the  soil  of  the  earth  is  unconscious  matter,  when 
men,  beasts,  birds,  insects,  trees,  shrubs,  mountains,  and  all  else  derive 
their  consciousness  from  the  force  of  consciousness  contained  in  every  atom 
of  the  earth,  and  to  ridicule  away  with  ideas  that  which  has  puzzled  the 
brains  of  even  philosophers?  The  philosopher  has  said: 

“  Unconscious  semen  becomes  instinct  with  consciousness  during  its 
stay  in  the  womb.  Gradually  hands,  head,  and  various  other  organs 
spring  up.  Again,  that  same  semen  which  has  thus  grown  into  a  Jiva 
takes  on  successively  the  attributes  *  of  childhood,  youth,  old  age,  infirmity, 
and  so  forth,  one  after  another,  and  sees,  eats,  hears,  smells,  and  moves 
about.  What  greater  magic  can  there  be  than  this?  ” 

Here  it  may  be  objected  that,  if  worship  can  be  performed  with  earth, 
atones,  wood,  metal,  and  such  other  things,  having  regard  to  the  Brahman- 
■consdousness  existing  in  a  subtle  form  within  it,  why  cannot  it  be  performed 
with  the  bodies  of  men,  beasts,  birds,  and  so  forth,  in  which  that  conscious¬ 
ness  is  more  manifest?  We  ask  in  reply,  Who  is  it  who  says  that  worship 
is  not  performed  in  this  way?  In  fact,  it  is  so  performed;  the  worship  of 
the  supreme  Brahman  appearing  as  Guru  is  done  towards  the  human 
body  of  the  Guru,  Kumar! 1  is  worshipped  in  the  bodies  of  virgins.  The 
Spouse  of  Siva  is  worshipped  in  the  animal  body  of  jackals,  and  it  is  in  the 
form  of  the  Brahmini  bird 4  that  the  daughter  of  Dakja  grants  Siddhi  to  a 
Sadhaka’s  Sadhana.  All  this  is  worship  done  with  other  bodies.  But  a 
Sadhaka  must  first  of  all  worship  his  Istadcvati  in  his  own  body,  and  then 


J  Sakti.  *  Upadhi.  *  The  Devi  as  a  virgin. 

4  The  Brahmini  Kite  (Kgeraangkari)  is  worshipped. 


WORSHIP  IN  GENERAL 


607 


he  will  be  entitled  to  do  worship  of  Her  in  other  bodies.  Worship  with 
portions 1 * *  of  Brahma-caitanya  *  leads  to  perfection  *  of  Brahma-Jn&na  4 
and  not  to  the  perfection  of  Brahman-worship.4 *  For  the  puipose  of 
Brahman-worship  it  is  necessary  to  worship  a  form  which  has  been  assumed 
by  the  Devata  to  show  Himself  to  Sadhakas  and  to  bestow  favours  on  them. 
This  image,  again,  must  not  be  a  production  of  the  Sadhaka’a  imagination 
only.  Such  images  alone  should  be  worshipped  as  are  images  of  forms 
actually  assumed  by  Her.  The  worship  also  must  be  performed  in  the 
method  approved  of  by  the  Sastra,  and  then  Sadhana  performed  according 
to  the  Sastra  is  sure  to  lead  to  Siddhi.1  Mantra-SakU 7  wields  sole  authority 
wherever  Siddhi  is  concerned.  In  Sadhana  with  Mantra  the  Devata’ s 
real  form  is  revealed  by  the  Sakti  of  the  Mantra.  Hence  the  only  form 
which  I  should  meditate  on  is  the  form  which  is  the  subject  of  the  Mantra 
in  which  I  am  initiated.  In  my  own  self  I  can  meditate  on  that  form  for 
a  very  short  time  only.  But  so  long  as  this  meditation  does  not  develop 
into  perfect  Samadhi,®  I  have  not  the  power  to  hold  that  true  form  of  Her 
constantly  in  my  heart.  It  is  therefore  as  an  aid  to  this  end  that  the  same 
form  is  worshipped  outwardly  in  images.  Secondly,  unswerving  medita¬ 
tion  is  impossible  at  the  time  of  worship.  I  am  the  worshipper,  She  is  the 
worshipped,  and  to  worship  is  my  duty.  No  worship  is  possible  without 
this  three-fold  knowledge.®  Moreover,  when  we  make  our  various  offerings 
we  are  thinking  of  these  things.  Single-pointed  meditation  is  never 
possible  when  so  many  different  forms  of  knowledge  crowd  together  in  the 
mind.  For  this  reason  there  can  be  no  outer  worship  without  the 
establishment  of  an  outer  image. 

It  may,  however,  be  asked,  Why  should  the  Sakti,  which  is  Her  real 
aspect,  appear  in  the  outer  image  at  my  desire.  That  is  a  different  question. 
•On  the  one  hand,  images  made  of  earth,  stone,  and  so  forth,  arc  given  the 
forms  which  Mantraiakti  has  revealed  in  the  Sastra,  so  that  the  condition 
is  immensely  favourable,  instead  of  being  unfavourable  to  the  appearance 
of  that  true  Sakti  in  them.  On  the  other  hand,  MantraS  akti  will  awake 
by  its  own  force  and  unite  the  Brahma-tejas  in  the  heart  of  the  Sadhaka 

1  Amia.  *  Brahman  as  consciousness.  *  Siddhi. 

4  Brahman  knowledge,  or  spiritual  knowledge. 

*  By  worshipping  the  objects  in  which  the  Brahman  exists,  a  man’s  knowledge 

of  Brahman  may  be  perfected;  but,  considered  as  worship,  it  is  not  the  worship 
of  Brahman  in  its  entirety,  which  is  only  accomplished  m  the  case  of  Avatar  as 

on  the  earthly  or  spiritual  plane,  such  as  the  MahSvidySs. 

*  Fruition. 

7  The  potency  of  Mantra,  or  rather  Sakti  as  Mantra. 

*  Ecstasy,  or  the  attainment  of  the  turiya  consciousness  (see  Introduction  to 
Tantra  Sistra). 

*  That  is,  of  worshipper,  worshipped,  and  duty  to  worship. 


608 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


with  the  Tejas  in  the  outer  form  of  the  Devata,  and  then  the  two  Tejas 
will  together  hum  like  a  sacrificial  fire,  accepting  the  offerings  made  by 
the  Sadhaka.  What  is  there  in  this  for  you  or  I  to  object  to  or  rack  our 
brains  over? 

Mantra  alone,  which  is  the  mediator  in  the  affair,  is  responsible  for  it. 
Mantra  will,  by  its  own  power,  bring  divinity 1  to  the  image;  you  and  I 
need  not  be  anxious  about  it.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  MantraSakti  *  is  at 
the  root  of  all  Sadhana.  Mantra  can,  by  becoming  one  only  Isvara 
(that  is,  supreme  over  all),  cause  such  events  by  means  of  its  super- worldly 
power  as  the  three  worlds  or  the  universe  cannot  accomplish  by  their  united 
effort.  It  is  because  Mantra  possesses  such  wonderful  power,  that  you 
and  I,  mere  men  though  wc  be,  are  able  to  worship  Devata.  The  Sastra 
has,  therefore  said:  “  If  the  worshipper  has  strength  of  Tapasya 1 *  (that  is 
to  say,  if  his  Mantra  is  conscious),1  and  if  there  is  an  abundance  of  offerings 
(that  is  to  say,  if  such  offerings  inspire  the  Sadhaka’s  heart  with  single- 
pointed  devotion  to  the  Devata),1  and  if  the  image  represents  the  true 
form  of  the  Devata  (that  is  to  say,  if  at  the  sight  of  the  image  the  Sadhaka’s 
mind  and  eyes  sink  in  the  sea  of  its  beauty,  sweetness,  and  gracefulness),* 
then  the  Devata  readily  approaches  that  image.”  In  order  to  gain  for 
oneself  the  different  Saktis  which  Brahmamayi  has  put  in  different  Yantras  4 * 
in  this  house  of  the  Universe,  such  as  river,  sea,  mountain,  tree,  shrub, 
creeper,  and  so  forth,  it  is  necessary  to  worship  Her  in  these  Yantras.6 
This  is  the  ground  of  Her  worship  in  jackals,  Brahmini  kites,  cremation 
grounds,*  dead  bodies,  women,7 *  bael-trees,  aSvattha  trees,  aparajita  flowers, 
cows,  bulls,  Brahmaijas,  places  of  pilgrimage,  fire,  and  so  forth.  Oppor¬ 
tunity  offering,  we  shall  try  to  explain  the  principles  of  this  subject  in  its 
proper  place.  Here  this  much  only  should  be  understood,  that  in  whatever 
Yantra  or  image  She  may  be  worshipped,  it  is  the  worship  of  Herself  in 
that  form.*  For  this  reason  even  Vedantik  Dandis,9  who  take  refuge  with 
knowledge  only,  have  said  in  the  PancadaSI:  “  In  the  Viivarupa  portion 10 


1  Devatva.  *  See  ante. 

*  Author’s  own  interpretation.  4  Instruments. 

6  In  order  to  acquire  the  Sakti  of  Hers,  which  is  manifested  as  rivers,  moun¬ 

tains,  etc.,  it  is  necessary  to  worship  Her  under  those  aspects.  This  refers  to 

minor  Siddhis.  Thus  it  is  said  that  when  Rama  Kysna  Paramahamsa  was  with 

another  SSdhaka  travelling  to  Dak$ine4vara  on  a  dark  night,  this  Sadhaka 
turned  his  back  to  him,  and  light  issued  from  it.  It  would  be  said  that  that 
power  was  gained  by  Agni  (fire)  Sadhana. 

*  Smai&nas.  7  Saktis. 

*Svarupa  Vibhuti — e.g.,  if  a  tree  be  worshipped  as  Devata,  it  is  not  the 
tree  which  is  worshipped,  but  the  Devi  in  the  form  of  a  tree. 

9  A  sect  of  ascetics. 

u  Section  dealing  with  the  macrocosmic  appearance  of  Bhagavfin. 


WORSHIP  IN  GENERAL 


609 

of  the  Purusa  Suita,1 * *  it  has  been  said,  from  Brahma,  to  a  blade  of  grass 
everything  is  a  limb  of  the  vast  *  macrocosmic  body  of  Bhagavan  (i). 
ISvara,  Sutratma,*  Virata,  Brahma,  Visiju,  Rudra,  Indra,  Agni,  Vighna,4 
Bhairava,  Mairala,  M&riia,  Yaksa,  Raksasa,  Brahman  a,  Ksattriya,  VaiSya, 
Sudra,  cow,  home,  deer,  bird,  Aivattha,  banian,  mango,  and  other  trees, 
barley,  paddy  grass,  and  other  crops,  water,  stone,  earth,  wood,  axe, 
spade,  and  so  forth — all  are  I i vara.  When  worshipped  as  Iivara  they 
grant  fruits  according  to  the  Saktis,  inherent  in  their  respective  Yantras  4 * 
(2-4).  The  fruit  of  the  worship  will  be  according  to  the  Yantra  and  the 
mode  in  which  the  worshipper  performs  the  worship.  The  differences  in 
quality  which  are  found  to  exist  in  these  fruits  are  caused  by  differences  in 
the  character  of  the  Yantras  of  worship  and  of  the  worship  itself,  according 
as  it  is  Sattvik,  Rajasik,  or  Tamasik.8 *  But  liberation  can  never  be  attained 
without  a  knowledge  of  the  Brahman,  just  as  we  sleep  until  we  awaken 
ourselves.  When  one  attains  to  knowledge  of  the  non-dualistic  Brahman, 
all  this  Universe  of  conscious  and  unconscious  things  in  the  forms  of  Iivara, 
Jiva,  and  so  forth,  appears  to  be  nothing  but  a  dream  (5-7).” 

Three  causes  operate  for  the  attainment  of  this  knowledge  of  Brahman: 
(1)  Hearing,7  thinking 8  and  constant  meditation,8  prescribed  in  the  Vedanta 
Philosophy;  (2)  practice  of  Yoga;  and  (3)  Sadhana,  consisting  of  a  combina¬ 
tion  of  the  three  things — Karma  (work),  Yoga,  and  Jnana  (knowledge),  with 
Bhakti  (devotion)  as  their  root.10  Of  these  three  means  the  last  is  the  easiest, 
most  pleasant,  most  rapidly  effective,  and  is  suited  to  all  the  three  classes  of 
worshippers — namely,  those  who  are  given  to  worldly  pursuits,  those  who 
arc  dissatisfied  with  the  world,  and  those  who  yearn  for  liberation.  In  the 
realm  of  devotion  the  most  worshipful  and  supreme  objects  of  adoration  11 
are  those  forms  only 11  of  the  Supreme  Dcvata  ParameSvari,  in  which  She 
as  the  central  source  of  all  Saktis  has  manifested  Herself  in  order  to  make 
worship  possible.  The  ultimate  Siddhi  spoken  of  in  the  Tantra  Sastra 


1  The  Valdik  Sukta  of  that  name. 

*  Virata.  The  whole  Universe  is  considered  to  be  the  body  of  the  Devata, 
its  constituent  parts  being  the  microcosmic  aspect. 

1  That  is,  the  Atma  considered  as  the  continuing  thread  on  which  the 
objective  world  is  strung  and  which  it  infuses. 

•Vighna  DevatS.  Ganeia  is  so  called  as  remover  of  obstruction.  What 
follows  and  precedes  are  Devas,  Devayonis,  castes,  etc. 

*  That  is,  the  Sadhaka  acquires  the  Sakti  which  is  manifested  in  the  objects 

4  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 

7  Sravana.  See  as  to  this  and  two  following  op.  cit.  supra. 

*  Manana.  8  NidjdhySsana. 

18  Commencement  must  be  made  with  Bhakti. 

u  Tattvas. 

39 


18  SvarQpa. 


610 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


dances  on  the  palms  of  the  hands 1  of  such  men  as  are  not  satisfied  with 
Siddhi  acquired  from  the  worship  of  partial  manifestations  *  from  Brahma 
to  a  blade  of  grass  described  above  as  Her  Vir&ta  Vibhuti,  but  are  desirous 
of  attaining  single-pointed  devotion  and  liberation.  They  alone  are  com¬ 
petent  to  worship  the  Parabrahma  aspect  spoken  of  in  the  Tantra  Sastra 
of  Her  who  is  Parabrahman.  It  is  for  them  that  the  Mother  of  the  three 
worlds,  who  is  Turiya  consciousness,’  has  assumed  that  Brahman  aspect, 
which  is  massive  consciousness,4  and  bliss,  and  full  of  play.fi  And  it  is  for 
them  that  the  Tantra  Sastra  has  loudly  said:  “  Without  a  doubt  he  who 
enters  upon  the  great  path  of  Kuladharma  4  will  soon  walk  into  the  city 
of  liberation.  A  man  should  therefore  place  himself  under  the  direction 
of  a  Kaula.” 


1  That  is,  “  is  easily  attained  by  1  Vibhiitis. 

*  The  fourth  state. 

4  Cidghana — that  is,  nothing  but  a  mass  of  consciousness. 

»  LilS.  4  Dhanna  of  the  Tantrik  Kaulas. 


CHAPTER  XVI 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUNAS 1 * * 

He  as  Siva  is  sweet  of  form  with  infinite  Guijas,  notwithstanding  that  He 
is  the  immutable  Being  above  Gunas;  *  the  Only  Lord  and  Controller  of 
the  Tamas  Guna,  though  that  is  of  His  substance;  *  self-manifest  and 
luminously  white,  like  a  silver  mountain,  though  seated  on  the  throne  of 
(the  dark)  Tamas  Guna  4 * * 7 * *;  the  Supreme  Guru  of  spiritual  knowledge, 
though  His  substance  is  of  the  Tamas  Gu$a;  found  in  great  cremation 
grounds,*  notwithstanding  that  He  is  the  Lord  of  inconceivable  wealth; 
an  untraversablc,  calm,  and  solemn  ocean,*  though  He  is  the  Mah&rudra 
of  the  great  dissolution  dependent  on  the  bliss  of  his  own  Sadhana,* 
notwithstanding  that  He  is  all  joy  itself;  merciful  and  loving  in  appearance, 
in  spite  of  being  wrong-eyed  •;  the  guide  in  the  path  of  worship  of  Himself; 
though  He  is  the  worshipped  of  the  three  worlds;  the  owner  of  half  of  the 
body  of  the  Daughter  of  Mountain,10  even  though  He  is  the  one  eternal 
unity;  the  seeker  11 *  of  the  company  of 'Her  who  is  His  eternal  companion 
notwithstanding  that  He  is  companionless 11 ;  the  destroyer  of  the  passion 
of  desire,1*  though  He  eternally  appears  in  the  coupled  u  form  of  husband 
and  wife;  the  grantor  unasked  of  eternal  liberation  11  to.  all  Jivas  in  the  city 
of  Kail,1*  despite  his  being  the  Dispenser  of  all  fruits  of  action  to  the  whole 

1  Giujallla;  Guna  is  “  Quality  ”  (see  .  as  to  this  Introduction  to  Tantra 
Sastra).  i  ■  ■  • 

*  Niskalatattva,  or  the  Tgttva  without' Kala  or  Prakyti. 

*  He  is  tamogutjamaya. 

4  See  ante,  note.  Siva  as  such  subdues  manifestation  (Sattva). 

*  Smaianas. 

*  He  is  both  the'  ocean  of  peace  and  the  destroyer. 

7  In  His  form  as  the’  great  Rudra  (Mahfcnidra)  of  the  great  dissolution 

(Mabapral^ya).  *  Siva  was  Himself  a. great  Sadhaka. 

4  Virupakja.  His  e^es  are  represented  'as  being  in'  a  dreaming,  half-dosed, 
and  slanting  position,  like  the  eyes  of  those  who  have  taken  bhang.  He  Is  also, 
.according  tb  some,  called  Virfipik?a,  because  he  b  three-eyed. 

10  Parvati. 

11  Sadhaka.  11  Nllisimga;  unattached  to  ariything,  as  are  Yogis. 

t*  Kama.  44  Vugala.  18  Kaivalya.  “  BctUrres. 


€12 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


Universe;  easily  appeased,1  even  though  he  is  also  formidable  and  wrath¬ 
ful  *;  blue-throated,  though  he  is  also  white  •;  the  Saviour  of  the  three 
worlds  through  his  drinking  deadly  poison,4  yet  also  their  Destroyer; 
taking  pleasure  in  adorning  Himself  with  serpents,6  despite  his  being  the 
Director,  grey  with  ashes4,  to  the  path  of  everlasting  dispassion;  crested 
with  the  crescent  moon,  though  His  head  is  covered  with  matted  hair 7; 
the  carrier  of  trident  and  axe,  though  He  grants  blessing  and  dispels  fear  8; 
prostrate  under  the  feet  of  the  Devi  with  dishevelled  hair,  notwithstanding 
that  He  is  Himself  the  grantor  of  liberation  to  devotees 4;  the  Maha- 
bhairava,10  who  drinks  the  wine  u  of  joy,  in  spite  of  being  perfect  joy  Himself; 
the  crier -of  “  Fear  not,” 14  though  He  is  Himself  a  Bhairava  u;  five-faced,14 
in  spite  of  being  thousand-headed 16;  three-cyed,  even  though  He  has  eyes 
which  turn  towards  all  things  in  the  Universe;  clad  in  space,14  notwith¬ 
standing  that  He  is  Himself  space;  of  infinite  forms,  though  of  eight  forms 17 ; 
the  Preceptor  of  knowledge,  though  knowledge  itself;  He  who  brings  us 
liberation,  and  yet  attainable  through  liberation;  the  Lord  of  Kailasa  and 
Kail,18  though  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  world;  the  Lord  of  all  creatures,14  • 
though  also  the.  Master  of  the  Spirit  world  40 ;  the  Lord  of  creatures,41 


1  A$utok.  This  with  simplicity  is  one  of  the  chief  qualities  which  make 
Him  lovable  to  Devotees.  4Cgra. 

4  Siva  is  represented  white  as  a  mountain  of  silver.  The  blue  mark  on  His 
throat  was  caused  by  His  drinking  (in  order  to  save  the  world)  the  poison  which 
issued  from  the  churning  of  the  ocean.  *  See  last  note. 

6  Siva  is  represented  as  garlanded  with  serpents,  and  as  here  taking  pleasure 
in  the  play  of  such  adornment,  notwithstanding  that  neither  this  nor  any  other 
worldly  thing  is  of  concern  to  Him  who  is  the  accomplishcr  of  liberation. 

4  Siva,  as  do  the  Yogis,  smears  His  body  with  ashes. 

7  jatajtya  worn  by  ascetics;  either  their  own  hair  or  the  hair  of  others  bound 
up  in  a  high  twisted  and  matted  mass  on  the  crown  of  the  head. 

•In  His  hands  He  carried  the  trident  (triiula)  and  axe  (paraiu),  and  with 
two  others  makes  the  gestures  (mudra)  called  vara  and  abhaya. 

4  Siva  is  generally  represented  as  Sava  (corpse),  lying  under  the  feet  of  Devi, 
for  without  Her  Sakti  (power)  He  is  inert. 

14  A  Bhairava  is  he  who  follows  viracara. 

11  Karana,  a  technical  term  in  Tantra  for  wine. 

14  MS  bhaya.  14  That  is,  formidable  and  the  causer  of  fear. 

41  PaAcSnaruu  14  Sahasraiirsa.  .  14  Digambara,  or  naked. 

17The  .a^am&rti  of  Siva— viz.,  Bhava- '(water),  Sarwa  (earth),  Paiupatl 
(mam  the  sacrificer),  Bhima  (ether),  Cgra  (air),  Rudra  (fire),  Mahfideva  (moon), 
liana  (sun).  .«;•'• 

14  The  mountain  Kailasa,  His  abode  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra ),  and 
Benares,  the  city  sacred  to  Him. 

u  Bhutapati,  living  on  earth  as  opposed  to  ghosts  which  follow.  • 

44  Bhutanfttha.  >  ..  nPa4upati, 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUNAS 


613 


though  the  destroyer  of  the  bonds  of  the  Palu  *;  He  who  upholds  GangS 
in  His  plaited  hair,*  though  fixe  is  in  the  eye  on  His  forehead;  the  Destroyer 
of  Dak?a’s  sacrifice,I * * 4 * * 7 8  though  He  is  the  Supreme  Lord  i  of  all  Yajfias; 
sorely  grieved  at  sight  of  the  play*  of  the  Devi's  death,*  though.  Himself 
above  all  delusion  7;  the  son-in-law  of  the  King  of.  Mountains,®  notwith¬ 
standing  that  He  is  beyond  all  relationship;  the  father  of  young  Heramba,* 
though  He  is  Himself  the  Parabrahma 19;  the  Linga,11 * *  which  is  the  source 
of  the  origin  of  the  entire  Universe;  the  eternal  cause  of  Yoganidra,1* 
though  attainable  by  Karma,  Jnana,  and  Yoga 18;  the  sole  Saviour  of  the 
world  of  devotees,  though  also  the  Destroyer  of  the  three  worlds;  the  con¬ 
stant  companion  of  devotees,14  and  yet  also  attainable  by  Jn&us  14 ;  friend 
of  the  poor,  and  yet  omnipresent;  the  Lord  of  the  helpless,  and  yet  the 
Lord  of  the  three  worlds;  loving  towards  supplicants,  yet  also  loving  towards 
the  whole  Universe;  the  sole  Lord  of  Tantrik  Mantras,  though  being  the 
object  of  worship  in  all  Mantras  and  Yantras 14 ;  the  eternal  King  of  Kings  17 
on  the  throne  of  the  devotee’s  heart,  notwithstanding  that  He  is  the  one 
•  I$vara  (Lord)  in  the  infinite  world. 

Again,  as  Krsna,  He  is  the  master-actor,  cunning  and  full  of 
deception,18  though  Himself  undisturbed  by  the  waves  of  dualism;  the 
assumcr  of  a  sweet  form  with  three-fold  bend,18  in  spite  of  being  above  all 

I  The  Pasu  is  the  unillumined  man  bound  by  the  bonds  (p2ja),  which, 

according  to  the  enumeration  of  the  Kularnava  Tantra,  arc  pity,  ignorance, 
shame,  family,  custom,  and  caste.  ; 

*  Siva  held  the  Ganges  in  His  hair  when  ii  was  called  down  from  heaven  by 
Bhagiratha,  and  fire  flashes  from  His  third  eye. 

*  Yajfia,  according  to  the  well-known  legend  as  to  which,  see  ante. 

4  U vara.  Siva  is  YajScsvara. 

4  Lila;  for  all  which  Devatas  do  is  such. 

*  At  the  sacrifice  of  Dak$a  on  hearing  Her  husband  slighted  by  the  former. 

7  Maya  and  moha.  >  •  , ,  •  , 

8  Siva’s  Spouse  Parvati  was  the  daughter  of  Himavat  (Himalaya). , 

*  Ganeia.  10  And  beyond  all  causal  forms.  _  11  Phallus. 

II  “  Sleep  of  Yoga.”  Jivafakti  produces  diversity.  Yoganidra  Sakti  accom¬ 
plishes  unity — namely,  that  Sakti  of  Brahman  which  establishes  unity  with 
Him. 

18  Action,  knowledge,  and  Yoga.  14  Bhakta. 

15  Those  “  who  know  ”  and  who  have  acquired  spiritual  knowledge. 

14  Diagrams  of  worship  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra). 

17  Rajaraje^vara.  • 

18  Kapata  Sapi.  Thus  He  pretended  to  suck  the  breast  of  Putana,  who  was 
sent  to  destroy  Him,  but  in  doing  so  He  sucked  out  her  life  (her  pragav&yu). 

11  Tribhanga,  a  position  loved  of  the  Hindu  artist.  The1  body  makes  three 

bends:  the  head  is  turned  to  one  side,  the  opposite  hip  is  thrown  out,  and  the 

limbs  below  take  the  direction  of  the  head. 


614 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


changes  of  nature  *;  beautiful  with  the  dark  colour  of  water-laden  clouds,* 
though  he  is  pure  Sattva  itself*;  iiKamated  as  the  son  of  the  ruler  of 
Vraja  ‘  for  the  purpose  of  relieving  the  earth  of  her  burden,  though  Himself 
the  Perfect  Brahman  who-  is  existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss,  the  wearer 
of  garlands  of  gunja  seeds,*  and  yet  possessed  in  full  of  the  six  forms  of 
Lordliness  •;  covered  with  the  dust  of  Bjndavana,1 * * * * * 7  and  yet  being  the  adored 
of  the  Lakjmi  of  Vaikuptha  *;  a  herdsboy,  though  the  supporter  of  the 
three  worlds;  the  beggar  of  food  from  a  Brahmapa  lady,  though  He  is 
Himself  the  provider  of  the  Universe  *;  decked  with  peacock’s  feathers,  in 
spite  of  his  possession  of  infinite  beauty;  the  wearer  of  yellow-tinted  loin¬ 
cloths,  though  he  is  beyond  the  covering  of  Maya  18 * * ;  He  who  look  the  help 
of  Balarama,11  though  He  Himself  helps  the  entire  Universe;  Who  wandered 
in  pastures,1*  and  yet  Who  moved  in  the  hearts  of  great  Yogis;  upholder  of 
Mount  Govardhana,18  though  also  the  upholder  of  the  infinite  Universe; 
the  destroyer  of  the  arrogance  of  Kamsa  M  and  Kaliya,11  and  yet  the  peaceful 
charmer  of  Madana 11 * ;  the  Damodara,17  who  holds  ihc  Universe  in  his 
belly,  though  appearing  in  the  form  of  a  young  herdsboy;  the  charmer  of 
Brahma,  though  He  is  Himself  Hari,  Hara,  and  Brahma;  out  of  His  love 
full  of  fear  for  Yaioda,1*  notwithstanding  that  He  is  the  Fear  of  Fear  itself; 
ever  present  in  Brndavana,18  though  also  present  in  every  atom  of  the 

1  Bhava  vikSra.  The  tribhanga  is  crooked.  His  straightness  or  uniformity 
is  contrasted  therewith. 

*  Krena’s  body  is  a  very  dark  blue. 

*  The  Gupa  is  here  thought  of  as  colourless. 

*  Nanda,  Kpsna’s  foster-father. 

•A  small  red  berry,  with  a  black  spot  on  top,  used  as  a  weight  by 
goldsmiths. 

*  Aiivarya,  such  as  omnipotence,  omnipresence,  and  the  like. 

7  The  city  of  Brndavan,  sacred  to  Kjspa. 

8  The  Tutelary  Goddess  of  the  heaven  of  Visnu,  as  to  which  see  ante. 

8  He  once  begged  food  of  a  Brahmana  woman  in  order  to  show  her  favour.. 

18  Maya  is  represented  as  a  veil  covering  the  pure  Spirit. 

11  His  brother.  u  As  a  cowherd . 

18  In  order  to  save  Bpidavan  from  a  great  deluge. 

14  Aaura,  King  of  Mathura,  who  attempted  to  destroy  Kjsna,  his  sister’s 

(Devaki)  son.  14 * *  The  serpent  destroyed  by  Him. 

11  The  God  of  Love  or  Desire.  He  surpasses  Madana  in  attractiveness. 

17  He  in  whose  belly  (Udara)  all  Damas — that  is,  regions  (Lokas)— are 

located.  Vi?pu  is  called  Damodara  also,  because  he  has  Dama,  or  self-control, 
and  SvapraldUa,  or  self-manifestation.  In  Harivamia  it  is  said  that  Yaioda, 
Kjsna’s  foster-mother,  tied  a  rope  round  his  belly,  and  fastened  it  to  a  Udukhala 
Quaking-bowl)  to  keep  him  out  of  mischief  while  she  was  doing  her  household 
duties. 

“Seeaflfr. 


“The  City  of  Bpidavan. 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUI^AS 


615 


infinite  Universe;  the  stealer  of  the  clothes  of  young  girls  performing 
Katyayan!  Vrata,1  though  He  is  also  the  supplier  of  innumerable  clothes 
to  Draupadi  when  oppressed  with  shame  and  fear  for  her  honour  *;  rejoicing 
in  the  sound  of  a  flute,  notwithstanding  that  He  is  the  source  of  Nada, 
Bindu,  Dhvani,  and  Murchana  *;  ever  eager  to  enjoy  the  Rasa 4;  of 
R5sa»#  though  He  is  Himself  the  great  Rasa 8 ;  grieved  at  Radhika’s  anger 
of  love,7  and  yet  eternally  full  of  joy;  constantly  seeking 8  the  company  of 
Radhika,  though  He  is  sought  by  Her  *  who  seeks  supreme  love ;  ever 
bound,  as  it  were  by  cords,  by  the  love  of  the  beauties  of  Vraja,10  notwith¬ 
standing  that  He  is  eternally  free,  unattached,  and  without  attribute; 
proficient  in  the  amorous  arts  of  women,  and  yet  free  of  all  sensuality  11 ; 
a  youth  victorious  in  war  with  passion,11  and  yet  immersed  in  the  midst  of 
waves  of  passion  ls;  who  appears  separately  to  each  of  the  innumerable 
groups  of  innumerable  herdswomen,14  though  He  is  Himself  one  without  a 
second;  restless  and  mad  in  His  play  as  Brahman,  though  incarnated  by 
way  of  play  as  a  man;  making  Himself  out  to  be  adulterous  to  His  own 
wives  15  in  order  to  delude  unhappy  Jivas  devoid  of  Sadhana;  He  who 


1  Gopis  performed  the  worship  of  Katyayani  before  the  Rasa  festival,  at 
which  time  Krsna  stole  tHcir  clothes  in  order  to  make  them  appear  before  Him 
naked. 

1  It  is  narrated  in  the  Mahabharata  that  when  Draupadi  was  brought  to 
the  Court  of  Dhritarastra,  one  of  his  sons,  in  order  to  insult  her,  began  pulling 
off  her  cloth.  She  then  prayed  to  Krsna,  who  supplied  her  with  an  endless 
cloth  for  the  protection  of  her  person. 

*  Different  aspects  of  Sakti  as  subtle  “  sound Murchana,  as  a  term  of 
gross  sound  in  the  form  of  music,  is  the  seventh  of  the  grSma  or  gamut  (seven 
notes — sa,  re,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni),  corresponding  with  the  European  scale — 
c,  d,  e,  f,  g,  a,  b.  The  intervals  between  them  are  the  sub-tones  or  &rutis,  of 
which  there  are  twenty-two.  The  gramas  are  threefold — low,  middle,  and  high, 
or  Udara,  Mudara,  Tara,  corresponding  with  the  three  Svaras.Udatta,  Anudatta, 
and  Svarita  pronounced  from  the  navel,  chest,  and  head,  and  called  by  the 
musicians  nabhi  (navel),  bak>a  (chest),  kapala  (head).  As  there  are  seven 
tones  and  three  gramas,  there  are  twenty-one  Murchanas. 

4  Essence  of  delight.  4  The  Rasa  festival. 

*  Bliss.  All  forms  of  bliss  are  from  the  Brahman,  who  is  Bliss  itself 
(rasovai  sah). 

7  Mana,  such  as  happens  between  husband  and  wife  who  are  yet  attached 
to  one  another.  *  Sadhaka. 

*  Radhika,  10  The  herdswomen  who  loved  Him. 

11  Kamadosa.  4*  Kama. 

M  Not  that  He  is  overcome  by  it,  but  exists  in  the  midst  of  it. 

14  To  gratify  the  beautiful  herdswomen  (Gopi),  His  devotees.  He  appeared 
to  each  of  them  as  if  she  alone  was  enjoying  Him.  There  were  thus  as  many 
Kfjnas  as  there  were  Gopis. 

14  RukminI  and  Satyabharaa,  to  whom  He  appeared  to  be  adulterous  owing 
to  His  companionship  with  the  Gopis. 


616 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


points  out  the  subtle  course  of  Sadhana  Dharma,1  despite  His  being  the 
Guard  of  the  bridge  of  Samsara  Dharma  *;  the  rescuer  of  the  triumphant 
standard  of  Sadhana  Dharma 1 *  after  defeat  of  Samsara  Dharma,1  though 
He  is  the  creator  of  both  these  Dharmas;  partial 1  towards  Dharma,  and 
yet  the  dispenser  of  both  Dharma  and  Adharma  for  the  preservation  of  the 
world  *;  the  constant  friend  of  the  Pandava 4  family,  though  He  has  equal 
care  for  all  things;  the  all  in  all  to  Bhaktas,1 * * * *  though  also  the  adored  of 
Karmis,*  Yogis,’  and  Jhanis  *;  the  seeker  of  refuge  with  devotees,  notwith¬ 
standing  that  He  is  Himself  the  refuge  of  all  who  are  refugeless. 

Again,  as  Sakti  She  possesses  infinite  Gunas,  notwithstanding  that 
She  is  the  sum  of  all  Saktis  above  Gunas;  She  is  the  establisher  of  con¬ 
cordance  between  mutually  conflicting  masses  of  Gunas  in  the  dualistic 
world,  though  Herself  without  a  second;  the  dispcller  of  the  devotees’ 
fears,  yet  revelling  Herself  in  battle  •;  the  delight  of  the  heart  of  Siva,  though 
also  the  Mother  of  the  trinity  of  Devas  10 ;  the  beloved  daughter  11  of  the 
great  Mountain,12 * 14  notwithstanding  that  She  is  the  Brahman  who  is 
existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss;  possessed  of  eternally  fresh  youth,  and 
yet  the  Mother  of  the  Grandfather 12  of  the  three  worlds;  beyond  the 
reach  of  speech  and  mind,  though  omnipresent  in  the  three  worlds;  partial 
towards  Dharma,  though  She  is  above  all  contraries l<;  the  Destroyer  of 
the  Daitya  race, 11  despite  Her  being  the  Mother  of  the  Universe;  again, 


1  The  Dharma,  which  leads  man  out  of  the  Samsara,  as  opposed  to  that 
which  keeps,  but  regulates,  him  in  the  world  (Samsara  Dharma). 

2  Though  to  the  Supreme  there  is  no  distinction  between  Dharma  and 
Adhaima,  yet  he  leans  (paksapata)  to  the  former. 

•He  is  the  Dispenser  of  unrighteousness  (Adharma),  as  also  of  Dharma, 
such  evil  being  necessary  foT  the  preservation  of  the  world. 

4  The  five  sons  of  Pandu  who  warred  with  their  cousins,  the  Kauravas,  as 
related  in  the  Mahabharata. 

*  Those  who  seek  Him  through  devotion. 

4  Those  who  seek  Him  through  Karma  or  work. 

’Those  who  seek  Him  through  Yoga. 

•  Those  who  seek  Him  through  Jfiana,  or  knowledge. 

•The  Devi  is  a  great  warrior  contending  against  the  demoniac  hosts  of 
Asuras,  Danavas,  and  Daityas. 

10  Whilst  She  is  the  Spouse  of  Siva  in  Her  form  as  Parvati,  in  Her  higher 

aspect  of  Sakti,  of  which  Parvati  is  but  a  partial  manifestation.  She  is  the  Mother 

of  Brahma,  Vi$nu,  and  Siva. 

“Parvati.  “Himalaya.  “Brahma  (see  ante). 

14  Dharma  and  Adharma,  or  righteousness  and  unrighteousness;  both  issue 
from  Her,  though  as  Dharma  is  that  which  supports  the  worlds,  She  is,  as  its 
supporter,  partial  to  it. 

“  Enemies  of  the  Devas. 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUtfAS 


617 


the  Deliverer  of  the  Dana v a  race,1  though  also  its  destroyer;  the  Dweller 
in  the  sea  of  milk,1 *  yet  moving  in  all  the  seven  seas  ■;  the  Dweller  in  the 
Isle  of  Gems,4 * * 7  though  also  the  Mistress  of  the  seven  Islands  *;  the  Dweller 
in  the  house  of  Chintamani,8 *  and  yet  also  above  all  name  and  form  *; 
attached  to  the  Parijata  forest,  though  She  is  equally  at  home  as  in  the 
forest;  seated  under  the  Kalpa  tree,*  though  being  the  eternal  Kalpa 
creeper  bearing  the  four-fold  fruit  of  Dharma,  Artha,  Kama,  and  Moksa  •; 
seated  on  a  jewelled  throne,  though  to  Her  both  ashes  and  jewels  are  the 
same;  lying  on  the  lotus-seat  of  Sadafiva,  the  great  Preta,10  though  She  is 
the  Sakti,  the  container  11 * *  of  the  infinite  Universe;  deeply  black  like  black 
clouds,  yet  the  giver  of  light  to  infinite  millions  of  suns,  moon,  and  other 
fires;  blue  like  a  mass  of  crushed  collyrium,1*  though  full  of  light 14  and 
self-manifest;  dark  of  colour,11  and  yet  the  Dispeller  glowing  with  existence, 
consciousness,  and  bliss  of  the  inner  darkness  in  the  world  of  innumerable 
devotees;  garlanded  with  fifty  heads,  whilst  rejoicing  in  the  sounds  of  fifty 
letters,1*  and  of  the  lute  14 ;  the  dweller  in  the  Tripancara,17  despite  the  fact 
that  She  is  above  all  Prapaficas  18 ;  crested  with  a  crescent  moon,  yet  averse 
to  display;  learned  in  the  merriments  of  Kala  (time),  though  the  expert 
baffler  of  Kala  (death) ;  the  dweller  in  great  cremation  grounds,14  notwith¬ 
standing  that  She  is  Mistress  of  the  entire  Universe ;  whose  hair  is  ever 
dishevelled  for  the  removal  of  the  bonds  which  bind  devotees,80  despite  the 
fact  that  She  is  Herself  the  Author  of  the  bonds  of  existence; 81  the  Conqueror 


1  Sons  of  Danu;  enemies  of  the  Devas.  *  K;ira. 

8  Of  milk,  water,  ghee,  and  honey,  salt  and  sugar-cane  juice. 

4  Manidvipa  (sec  A.  Avalon’s  “  Mahanirvapa  Tantra  ”). 

•  Jambu,  Plaksa,  Salmali,  Kuia,  Kraufica,  Saka,  and  Puslcara. 

•  The  stone  which  grants  all  desires  (see  A.  Avalon’s  “  Mahanirvana 

Tantra  ’’). 

7  Upadhi  (limiting  conditions).  8  Desire-gratifying  tree. 

•  Religion,  wealth,  desire  and  its  fulfilment,  and  liberation  (see  Introduction 

to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

18  Preta  is  literally  the  spirit  of  a  person  before  the  obsequial  rites.  In  this 
connection  it  is  used  in  die  sense  of  corpse — that  is,  Siva  is  inert,  and  can  do 
nothing  without  Her  vivifying  Sakti. 

11  Adhara.  “  Afijana.  18  Jyotih. 

14  The  Dew,  as  Kali,  Tara,  and  Ghinnamasta,  is  represented  of  a  black  colour. 

18  Varpas.  In  Her  terrible  forms  the  Devi  is  garlanded  with  heads.  As 

Kundalini  She  is  present  in  the  fifty  letters  existing  as  Dhvani  in  the  Tattvik 
centres.  18  The  Vina. 

17  A  Yantra  with  three  times  five  (Tripafica)  comers  (Author’s  note). 

18  Prapafica  is  that  which  is  made  of  the  five  elements — earth,  water,  fire, 

air,  and  ether.  u  Sinaia nas. 

80  As  to  the  Pala  (bond),  see  ante.  **  Bhavabandhana. 


618 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


of  the  right  side  by  putting  forth  the  right  foot,1  in  spite  of  Her  assuming 
the  form  of  a  woman  whose  place  is  the  left  side  *;  with  fearful  moving  red 
eyes  rolling  with  intoxication,8  and  yet  above  all  delusion4;  smiling 
sweetly,  though  having  a  terrible  countenance;  the  giver  of  blessings  and 
of  assurance  of  safety,  yet  at  the  same  time  bearing  a  sword  and  a  severed 
head ;  the  most  shameless  of  women,1  and  yet  Herself  the  author  of  the 
feeling  of  shame;  dad  in  space,*  though  pervading  in  infinite  space;  mad 
after  the  delights  of  Yoga,  despite  of  Her  being  all  delight  Herself;  the 
beloved  of  Mahakala,7  though  the  Mother  of  all  things  both  moving  and 
unmoving. 

O  Sadhaka!  where  dsc  will  you  find  such  an  incomparable  infinite 
array  of  mutually  conflicting  Gunas  in  one  and  the  same  person  ?  It  is  as 
if  the  infinite  number  of  Gunas  of  Her  whose  substance  is  untold  Gunas 
had  flown  away  from  their  centre  of  attraction  and  were  moving  about  the 
infinite  Universe,  but  have  now  found  Her  whose  Gunas  they  are,  and 
rest  in  untroubled  sleep,  in  their  mother’s  arms,  like  children  who,  having 
lost,  have  found  again  their  mother.  O  Sadhaka !  in  worship  8  the  prindpal 
place  is  awarded  to  the  form  with  attributes.*  It  is  these  Gunas  of  Her 
whose  substance  is  Gunas  which  draw  the  Sadhaka’s  mind  and  heart  from 
the  Samsara,  thus  giving  him  the  enjoyment  of  incomparable  peace  in  the 
cool  shade  of  the  Kalpa  tree  10  of  Her  beauteous  feet.  It  is  because  that 
form  is  the  seat  of  infinite  Gunas  that  it  is  so  sweet  and  charming.  Wherever 
a  single  Guna  establishes  its  supremacy,  it  comes  into  conflict  with  other 
Gunas.  Where  pity  is  supreme,  severity  is  uncarcd  for  and  banished; 
Gunas  arc  thus  naturally  conflicting.  But  where  no  Guna  is  supreme  or 
the  ruler,  how  can  any  one  Guna  be  in  conflict  with  another?  Children 
quarrel  bitterly  over  their  food  only  so  long  as  their  mother  does  not  come 
and  divide  it  among  them,  and  assign  to  each  of  them  their  respective 
places.  Similarly,  Gunas  quarrel  with  each  other  only  so  long  as  She 
who  is  above  Gunas  does  not  take  them  up  in  Her  own  bosom,  which  is 
itself  free  from  all  attachment.  At  the  touch  of  Her  beauteous  self  all 
Gupas  disappear.11  This  is  why  Her  Gunas  are  not  in  mutual  conflict; 
why  streams  of  mercy  flow  from  the  Mother  in  the  form  of  furious  laughter; 


1  In  the  Dhyanas  She  is  represented  as  putting  forth  the  right  foot. 

*  Varna,  which  means  both  female  and  left  side. 

8  Madabharaghumita.  *  Maya  and  Moha. 

8  Nirlajja — without  the  physical  or  other  shame  of  woman.  She  shows 
Herself  naked,  dances  naked,  drinks  wine,  etc. 

*  Naked.  7  Siva,  the  great  Destroyer. 

*  Upasana.  *  Guna.  10  Vide  ante. 

11  Literally,  “  All  the  Gunas  assume  Nirgiuja  aspect  in  spite  of  being  Gupas.5> 
Nirguna  is  the  aspect  without  Guna,  the  Parabrahman  aspect. 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUISTAS 


619* 


why  the  three  worlds  are  deluged  with  waves  of  love  of  the  Devi,  who 
rejoices  in  war;  why  the  Purusa,  who  is  Nirgupa  and  always  blissful,  pours 
forth  His  heart  and  rolls,  under  Her  feet,  drawn  thereto  by  the  attraction 
of  Gu^as  and  love  of  Her  whose  substance  is  bliss.  Marvellous  is  the  play 
of  Guijas  of  Her  whose  substance  is  Gunas,  a  play  which  is,  however,, 
above  Gunas.  Marvellous  is  the  play  of  Gupas  of  Her  who  is  without 
Gupa.1 * *  Marvellous  is  the  array  of  Her  Gunas  in  the  Samsara  which  is. 
with  Guija.* 

It  is  because  Her  Nirguna  *  aspect  cannot  exist  in  the  Saguna 
Samsara  4 * *  that  She  who  is  above  Gunas  has  assumed  forms  in  which  we 
find  the  full  play  of  Gupas.*  Although  in  the  terrestrial  world  She  resides 
in  the  heart  of  every  JIva,  he  cannot  find  room  for  all  Her  Gunas.  For 
this  reason  it  is  ordained  that  She  should  be  worshipped  first  in  the  image 
of  unrevcalcd  consciousness,  in  which  are  reflected  infinite  Gunas,  instead 
of  in  a  Jiva,  who  is  but  a  part  of  Her  eternal  revealed  consciousness.  When 
at  length  life  is  installed  *  in  the  image,  and  Brahma-consciousncss  7  is 
infused  into  it  by  Mantraiakti,8 *  a  Sakti,  which  is  itself  consciousness,*' 
appears  in  the  image,  earthen  though  it  be,  the  like  of  which  is  never  seen 
in  the  body  of  a  Jiva,  however  much  and  with  whatever  devotion  he  may 
worship.10  Hence,  although  She  is  omnipresent,  it  is  easiest  to  worship- 
Her  in  an  image.  Bhagavan,  the  creator  of  all  things,  has  therefore  said: 
“  Although  milk  is  produced  in  all  parts  of  a  cow’s  body,  it  is  obtained 
only  from  the  teats  of  her  udder.  Similarly,  although  Devata  is  all- 
pervading,  Her  true  existence 11  is  realized  only  in  an  image.”  Should 
anyone  attempt  to  draw  milk  from  the  nose,  tail,  or  any  other  part  of  a 
cow’s  body,  on  the  ground  that  milk  is  produced  in  all  parts  of  her  body, 
he  is  certain  to  get  for  his  pains  only  phlegm,  dung,  and  other  such  things. 
Similarly,  if  anyone  worships  Her  as  a  Jiva  in  a  human  body  because  She 
resides  there  as  in  all  other  things,  he  will  discover  the  Jiva  and  not  the 

I  Nirguna.  *  Sagupa. 

*  Attributeless.  *  The  world  of  attributes. 

8  In  Her  all  opposites  meet.  Therefore  what  appear  to  be  Her  Gunas  are 

not  really  Gunas  of  Her  who  is  above  all  Gunas.  What  is  Nirguna  cannot  exist 

in  the  Samsara. 

*  At  the  Pranaprati^hS  rite. 

7  Brahmacaitanya. 

*  Power  of  Mantra  or  Sakti  as  Mantra. 

*  Chinmaya. 

10  A  conscious  man  is  ever  imperfect.  So  that  he  is  not  a  fitting  object  for 
the  reflection  of  all  Her  Gunas  in  him;  but  the  image  being  unconscious,  it  offers- 
through  Mantra&kri  the  best  place  for  the  reflection  of  Her  Gunas. 

II  Svarupa  Satta. 


620 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Brahman.1 * *  If,  again,  Brahman  is  worshipped  in  ins  partial  aspect  as  Jiva, 
all  his  Saktis  are  not  revealed  in  such  Jiva  *  body.  If,  again,  for  this  reason, 
the  limiting  condition  of  Jivahood  be  put  aside  and  pure  consciousness 
only  is  sought  to  be  worshipped,  what  necessity  is  there  for  a  JIva’s  body? 
If  Upadhis  arc  omitted,  the  whole  Universe  is  filled  with  Her  presence. 
We  thus  come  again  to  Her  Nirguna  aspect.  When  this  matter  8  of  the 
Nirguna  aspect  is  realized,  there  is  no  longer  any  necessity  for  worship. 
In  order,  therefore,  to  realize  in  the  Sagupa  state  the  presence  of  Brahman, 
who  is  eternally  above  Gunas,  and  yet  whose  substance  is  eternally  Gunas, 
in  order  to  feel  the  true  presence  of  that  Sakti,  not  by  imagination,  analogy, 
or  example,  but  truly  and  directly  by  the  force  of  Her  command  and  by 
means  of  Mantra,  there  is  no  other  means  in  the  matter  of  worship  than 
to  worship  the  forms,  full  of  play,4  assumed  by  Her  of  Her  own  will.  This 
is  the  cause  of  the  incomparable  greatness  of  images.  This  is  why  an 
image  is  a  pillar  of  support  to  Her  worship.  This  is  why  an  image-wor- 
shipper  is  entitled  to  Brahma-Kaivalya  ‘  itself. 

A  Yantra  also  is  like  an  image,  the  permanent  seat  of  Her  Brahma- 
play.  But  the  subject  of  Yantra  *  is  one  which  should  be  learnt  from  a 
Guru  only.  Wc  arc  unable  to  reveal  its  solemn  secret  depths  to  the  public. 
At  most,  wc  can  say  that  a  Yantra  is  merely  a  true  manifestation  of  Her 
Mantra  form.  None  but  Sadhakas  of  a  very  high  order  of  competency 
can  understand  the  subject  of  Yantras.  A  Guru  will  test  his  Sisya’s  condi¬ 
tion  before  disclosing  it  to  him.  For  this  reason  the  Dcva  of  Dcvas  has, 
in  the  Kularnava  Tantra,  ordained: 

“  Hence,  the  principal  part  of  worship  is  adoration  of  the  ParameSvari 
by  preparing  Her  image  or  drawing  Her  Yantra.  But,  O  my  beloved! 
the  worship  should  be  performed  according  to  the  injunctions,  after  having 
learnt  them  all  from  the  Guru.” 

Now,  such  as  consider  themselves  famous,  wise,  and  of  great 
experience,  on  the  ground  that  they  have  seen  the  map  and  read  the 
geography  of  India,  and  who  inwardly  entertain  the  vanity  of  being 


1  Literally,  the  Jiva-Tattva,  and  not  the  Brahma-Tattva.  In  the  ordinary 
case  of  image-worship  the  image  of  unrcvealed  consciousness  is  selected,  as  it 
affords  a  perfect  mirror  for  the  reflection  of  the  internal  conscious  image.  It  is 
otherwise  in  the  case  of  the  partial  revelation  of  consciousness  in  a  Jiva.  If  the 
conscious  Jiva  as  such  is  worshipped  as  Brahman,  there  is  obviously  merely  the 
worship  of  Jiva  by  Jiva. 

*  Or  title,  Upadhi. 

8  Tattva.  The  author  here  deals  with  three  cases :  (1 )  If  a  Jiva  is  worshipped 
as  such,  then  nothing  is  thereby  got.  (2)  If  the  Jiva  be  not  so  worshipped,  but 
as  a  partial  manifestation  of  the  Brahman,  then  there  b  only  a  partial  vision  of 
Divine  Sakti.  (3)  If  all  Upadhi  b  put  aside  and  pure  consciousness  is  wor¬ 
shipped,  then  we  have  done  with  body  altogether. 

4  LUa.  *  Supreme  liberation.  •  Yantratattva. 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUtfAS 


62! 


accomplished  Sidhakas,  full  of  spiritual  knowledge,  on  the  ground  of  their 
having  read  the  Yogava4i$tha,  Ramayana,  the  Pataftjala  Sutras,  and  the 
PahcadaS,1  will  perhaps,  after  all  I  have  said,  even  now  reply  with  their 
belief  in  set  phrases,  “  What  is  invocation  *  or  dismissal  *  of  that  which  is 
all-pervading  ?  ”  There  is  no  need  to  give  a  reply  to  all  that  such  people 
object.  This  much  only  we  say:  If  the  notion  that  “  He  is  omnipresent  ” 
had  really  a  place  in  your  heart,  instead  of  being  only  a  word  in  your 
mouth,  would  you  in  that  case  have  spoken  of  such  relativities  as  “  you 
and  I,  that  man  and  this  man,  he  and  who,”  and  come  forward  to  answer 
my  words?  Need  I  say  O  Brother!  that  the  idea  that  “  He  is  omnipresent  ” 
is  contained  in  your  books  and  not  in  your  head?  You  have  not  and 
cannot  have  the  capacity  to  understand  the  cause  of  the  classification  into 
Jnanayoga,  Bhaktiyoga,  and  Karmayoga,  or  of  the  distinctions  which  exist 
between  them.  This  is  why  the  very  name  of  invocation  and  dismissal 1 * 4 
throws  you  at  first  into  a  stupor,5 *  and  then  makes  you  burst  out  into  a 
loud  cry  ten  times  every  half  an  hour.*  Had  you  but  the  sense  to  under¬ 
stand  that  invocation  and  dismissal  of  the  Devata  are  nothing  but  the 
taking  of  the  Devata  in  the  heart  out  of  the  heart  and  replacing  the  Devata 
of  the  heart  in  the  heart  at  the  close  of  external  worship;  had  even  the 
germ  of  the  notion  that  Siddhi  in  Sadhana  is  but  the  name  given  to  the 
appearance  of  super-worldly  divine  Sakti  existed  in  the  impressions  you 
acquired  in  previous  births,  you  could  never  have  asked  such  a  question, 
“  How  can  there  be  invocation  or  dismissal  of  Her?  ”  We  doubt  whether 
the  tense  of  understanding  existed  in  the  seed  from  which  all  this  senseless 
affair  has  sprung,  and  therefore  much  less  are  we  likely  to  find  it  in  the 
flower  and  fruit.7  This  is  no  exaggeration  on  our  part.  What  has 
blossomed  in  the  flower  has  come  out  in  the  fruit.  Judge  yourself  from 
this,  the  power  of  the  seed.* 

Raja  Ram  Mohan  Ray  says:  “  O  mind!  what  is  this  delusion  of 
yours  ?  Whom  do  you  invoke  or  dismiss  ?  You  say  ‘  come  here  *  to  the  omni¬ 
present  Being  who  is  everywhere!  Who  are  you  and  whom  do  you  invoke? 

1  Books  dealing  with  the  Vedanta  and  Yoga. 

*  Avahana  (see  next  note). 

*  Visaijana.  Both  refer  to  invocation  and  dismissal  of  the  Devata,  which  is 
nothing  but  the  rising  into  existence  and  the  withdrawal  of  the  Devata-con- 
sciousness  in  the  mind  of  the  Sadhaka. 

4  That  is,  of  the  Devata. 

*  Literally  “  into  sleep  ”  (Svapna).  •  Dantja — 22  dandas=  1  hour. 

7  The  meaning  is  that  even  Raja  Ram  Mohan  Ray,  who  inaugurated  the 
new  school  of  “  reformed  ”  Hinduism,  had  not  a  clear  idea  of  invocation  and  so 
forth.  It  is  not,  therefore,  at  all  likely  that  his  followers  should  have  any  better 
notions. 

*  Possibly,  the  flower  is  Raja  Rim  Mohan  Ray’s  writings,  the  fruit  is  his 
followers,  and  the  seed  is  himself. 


■622 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


What  wonderful  thing  is  this?  You  offer  a  seat  to  Him  who  holds  the  infinite 
Universe  in  Himself,  and  tell  Him,  ‘  Scat  yourself  here.’  How  absurd  this 
is !  And  you  utter  hymns  in  praise  of  Him  who  is  the  master  of  this  Universe, 
after  having  offered  Him  all  kinds  of  food.  How  incongruous  this  seems 
tome!” 

We  need  not  ourselves  give  a  reply  to  this.  The  reply  which  has 
been  given  by  high-souled  Digambara  Bha(tacarya,  whose  heart  was  in 
Sadhana,  is  sufficient.  He  says :  “  In  delusion  1  is  my  peace.  What  harm 
does  invocation  or  dismissal  do  to  anybody  ?  Air  fills  every  place,  but  still 
when  the  weather  becomes  oppressively  hot,  we  say:  ‘  Come,  air!  Come, 
O  life-giver! 5  The  Mother  of  the  Universe  pervades  the  Universe;  but  when 
I  am  overwhelmed  with  sorrow,  I  say:  ‘  Come,  O  Brahmamayl,  save  me!  ’ 
In  fact,  meditation,  knowledge,  water,  iruit,  and  all  else  belong  to  Her 
whom  I  worship  with  living  and  inanimate  things,3  What  harm  docs 
invocation  or  dismissal  do  to  anybody?  ” 

The  delusion  is  not  a  thing  to  be  shaken  off;  and  if  it  can  be,  words 
or  songs  arc  not  the  means  of  effecting  this.  Why,  then,  suffer  from  all 
this  mental  disquietude  by  crying,  “Delusion!  delusion!”  with  tears  in 
your  eyes?  The  sleep  is  not  to  be  broken.  What,  then,  is  the  use  of  brood¬ 
ing  over  sorrow  and  distress  and  seeing  the  horror  of  bad  dreams?  It  is, 
on  the  contrary,  a  rign  of  intelligence  to  think  of  longed-for  happiness 
instead  of  sorrow,  and  to  enjoy  dreams  of  that  happiness  during  sleep.* 
This  is  why  Digambara  was  blessed  with  Sadhana — was  indifferent  to  this 
life,  scorched  by  the  fire  of  Samsara,  and  said:  “  In  delusion  is  my  peace. 
What  harm  does  invocation  or  dismissal  do  to  anybody  ?  ’*  It  does  no  harm 
to  you,  or  to  me,  or  to  Him,  who  is  invoked.  Whom,  then,  docs  it  harm? 
You  are  not  harmed,  because  it  is  I  who  invoke.  I  am  not  harmed  because 
I  find  peace  in  such  invocation,  nor  is  She  whom  I  invoke  harmed  in  any 
way.  In  Her  eyes  it  is  not  I  who  am  invoking,  but  She  who  is  invoking 
Herself  by  becoming  I.  You  and  I  think  that  you  and  I  are  invoking, 
but  such  invocation  is,  in  fact,  unreal.  You  may,  however,  ask,  Why 
does  She  make  this  unreal  invocation?  We  reply  that  you  had  fetter  ask 
Her,  instead  of  a  mere  Jiva,  for  a  reply  to  this  question:  “  Why,  being 
Herself  Brahman,  She  has  become  Jiva?  Why,  being  existence,  conscious¬ 
ness,  and  bliss,  has  She  become  entangled  in  the  world  of  contraries  and 
sorrows  ?  ”  Full  of  the  bliss  of  play 1  is  She,  and  play  8  is  Her  play  8  of  bliss. 
If,  in  this  drama  of  Samsara-play,  She  intoxicates  Herself,  with  Her  own 


1  Bhr3nti,  or  error. 

3  That  is,  with  various  articles  of  worship,  such  as  animals  (in  sacrifice), 
water,  light,  etc. 

*  Get  as  much  happiness  as  you  can  even  in  delusion. 

*  Lila.  '  8  Nataka,  which  means  drama,  etc. 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUtf  AS 


623 


bliss  by  appearing  as  Jiva  and  invoking  Herself,  or  She  Herself  enjoys  Her 
own  peace  by  seeing  dreams  in  Her  own  delusion,  what  harm  does  it  do 
Her?  And  if,  being  a  Jlva,  I,  considered  as  a  Samsari,1  invoke  Her,  that 
invocation  also  is  in  accordance  with  Her  command.  What  question  of 
harm  to  Her  can  then  arise  over  this?  Hence,  though  he  knew  that  tins 
Samsara  was  full  of  delusion,  and  had  awakened  from  the  horrible  dream 
of  the  sleep  of  delusion,  the  cause  of  which  he  fully  understood,  the  wild 
and  deluded  Sadhaka  and  unerring  Tantrika,  Digambara,  sinking  in  the 
sea  of  peace,  has  said :  “  In  delusion  is  my  peace.”  “  You  say,  come  here 
to  the  Omnipresent  Being,  who  is  everywhere.  Who  are  you  and  whom 
do  you  invoke  ?  What  wonderful  thing  is  this  ?  2  There  is  no  ‘  here  or  there  ’ 
for  Him  who  is  Omnipresent;  how,  then,  can  it  be  said  to  Him, 
Come  here  ?  ’  ” 

Had  Ray  3  looked  into  the  matter  a  little  more  deeply,  he  would  not 
most  probably  have  said  this;  for  it  is  universally  admitted  that  there  is  no 
here  or  there  for  the  Omnipresent  Brahman.  Whose,  then,  is  this  “  here  ” 
*  in  the  phrase  “  Come  here?  ”  It  is  the  Sadhaka  who  says  it,  and  it  is  his 
own.  Although  there  is  no  here  or  there  for  the  Brahman,  there  is  here 
or  there  for  the  Sadhaka.  He  says:  “  Come  to  this  place  of  mine.”  Had 
I  said,  “  Come  to  this  place  of  Yours,”  I  might  some  day  be  called  to 
account  for  it.  But  the  Sadhaka’s  “  here,”  which  is  spoken  of  in  the 
Sastra,  has  through  deficiency  of  intelligence  in  the  interpreter,  become 
Brahman’s  “  here  ”;  and,  unfortunately,  like  one  blind  man  resting  on  the 
shoulders  of  another  blind  man,  you  and  I  also  have  understood  that  this 
“  here  ”  is  in  reality  Brahman’s  “  here  If,  after  this,  it  is  objected  that 
there  is  no  “  herr  or  there  ”  for  Brahman,  how,  on  being  asked  to  come 
here,  can  He  actually  come?  Should  anyone  make  this  objection,  wc  would 
ask  him  to  go  a  little  further.  If  there  is  no  “  here  or  there  ”  for  Brahman, 
there  is  also  no  coming  or  going  for  Him.  Why,  then,  object  to  his 
“  coining  here  ”  instead  of  at  once  objecting  to  the  fundamental  matter, 
the  “coming  ”  itself  ?  For  him  for  whom  there  is  no  coming  and  no  going, 
there  is  also  no  eating,  no  dressing,  no  taking,  no  giving,  and,  in  short, 
nothing  which  can  be  negatived,  and  not  even  worship  by  you  or  me — 
nothing,  nothing,  nothing!  Everything  is  thus  cleared  away  and  dismissed. 
This  is  what  is  called  being  too  intelligent !  Here  Ray  ought  to  have  under¬ 
stood  that  what  he  was  saying  belonged  to  a  different  province  *  altogether. 


1  Inhabitant  of  the  Samsara — that  is,  from  the  the  point  of  view  of  Jiva, 
and  Samsara. 

*  See  ante.  *  Raja  R&m  Mohan  Ray. 

*  A ihikara.  That  is,  it  was  true  as  regards  the  Brahman  aspect  of  things 
but  false  when  applied  to  the  Jiva  aspect  and  his  worship,  which  is  necessarily 
duatistic. 


624 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Its  proper  place  is  in  the  sphere  of  pure  knowledge,1 * *  It  has  no  place  in' 
the  sphere  of  Upasana,*  which  is  Karma,  with  Juana,  accomplished  by 
Bhakti.*  To  seek  to  ridicule  a  matter  which  belongs  to  one  province  4  by 
taking  it  into  another  is  unjustifiable.  This  is  what  is  called  “  absence  of 
common  sense.” 

Ray  again  says:  "  Who  are  you?  and  whom  do  you  invoke?  What 
wonderful  thing  is  this?  ”  The  cause  of  his  wonder  is:  “  Who  are  you? 
Whom  do  you  invoke  ?  ”  This  “  Who  are  you  ?  Whom  do  you  invoke  ?  ” 
can  be  explained  in  three  ways.  First,  “  Who  are  you  ?  Whom  do  you 
invoke?  ”  may  mean,  you  arc  He,  for  a  Jlva  is  a  part  of  Brahman.  This 
assumes  a  perfect  knowledge  of  Brahman,  and  is  consequently  a  repetition 
of  the  same  blunder  above  mentioned ;  and,  as  we  have  already  replied  to 
this  phase  of  the  question,  we  have  nothing  to  say  about  it  here.  The 
second  way  of  interpretation  is,  “  Who  arc  you  ?  And  whom  do  you 
invoke  ?  ”  That  is  to  say,  when  She  resides  in  your  own  heart,  whom  again 
do  you  invoke?  We  say,  wonderful  indeed  must  have  been  Ray’s  knowledge 
of  outer  worship  if  he  thought  that  for  the  purpose  of  that  worship  we 
invoke  a  Devata  other  than  the  Devata  residing  in  our  heart!  He  ought 
not  to  have  ridiculed  or  even  discussed  a  matter  which  he  did  not  under- 
stand.  “  He  who  worships  an  outer  Devata,  abandoning  the  Dcva.ta 
resident  in  his  heart,  is  like  one  who  runs  after  a  heap  of  ashes,  having 
thrown  away  the  gem  which  he  holds  in  his  hand.”  (For,  unless  the 
spirit  *  of  the  Devata  residing  in  the  heart  is  communicated  to  the  outer 
image,  the  worship  becomes  a  worship  of  the  image  only,  and  not  of  the 
Devata.)  #  If  Ray  understood  that  the  worship  which  was  bared  on  these 
words  of  the  Sastra  was  a  worship  of  an  outer  Devata,  to  the  exclusion  of 
the  Devata  resident  in  the  heart,  then,  also,  he  was  greatly  mistaken. 
Finally,  the  third  way  of  interpretation  is,  “  What  arc  you  ?  Whom  do  you 
invoke?  ”  That  is  to  say,  “  You  are  a  Jiva  smaller  than  the  smallest,  while 
She  is  greater  than  the  greatest,  boundless  and  external  How,  then,  is  it 
possible  for  you  to  bring  Her  to  you?  ”  We  reply,  you  and  I  have  no  reason 
to  be  anxious  about  this,  for  we  do  not  worship  Her  according  to  a  method 
devised  by  ourselves.  The  Sastra  is  Her  command,  and  we  conduct  our¬ 
selves  according  to  it.  She  has  Herself  considered  the  question  how  we 
may  bring  Her  to  ourselves,  and  it  is  because  She  has  done  so  that  She  has 
assumed  forms  and  manifested  Herself  as  Mantraiaku,’  and  Herself  made 
provirion  for  Her  worship  accordingly.  Moved  by  pity  for  Jivas,  She  has. 

1  JfiinakEnija.  *  Worship. 

1  Action  done  with  knowledge  and  accompanied  by  devotion. 

4  Adhikara. 

4  Tejas.  Force  and  energy,  vitality.  4  Author’s  parenthesis. 

7  Power  as  Mantra. 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUltfAS 


625 


(infinite  though  She  is)  assumed  finite  forms,  sometimes  immense  and  some¬ 
times  small,  because  there  can  be  no  worship  of  the  infinite  and  the  eternal. 
According  to  the  third  way  of  interpretation  also,  the  passage,  “  Who  are 
you?  And  whom  do  you  invoke?  What  wonderful  thing  is  this?  ”  seems  to 
us  to  be  truly  strange.  Now,  another  thing  may  be  said  here.  It  is  this: 
We  admit  that,  although  there  is  no  “here  or  there”  for  Brahman, there 
is  “  here  and  there  ”  for  the  Sadhaka;  but  when  it  is  certain  that  Brahman 
is  already  at  the  place  where  you  would  invoke  Him,  why  uselessly  make 
the  invocation  at  all?  It  is  with  the  view  to  this  objection  that  the  Sadhaka, 
with  spiritual  perception,  has,  by  an  analogy,  explained  this  matter  of  the 
invocation  and  appearance  of  the  Devata.  “  Air  fills  every  place,  but  still, 
when  the  weather  becomes  oppressively  hot,  we  say:  *  Come,  air!  Come 
O  life-giver!  ’  ”  In  the  material  Universe  the  air  is  admittedly  all  pervading; 
but  when  the  terrible  heat  of  summer  almost  kills  us,  who  is  it  who  does 
not  piteously  and  from  his  heart  say:  “  Come,  air,  come  to  us  ”?  Why  do 
people  say  this  ?  Whence  will  air  come  ?  Air  is  everywhere.  Had  the  move¬ 
ment  of  air  been  in  fact  stopped,  would  Jivas  have  existed  anywhere? 
A  Jiva  lives  because  there  is  air  both  within  and  without  him,  and  because 
he  breathes  it  into  and  out  of  himself.  Why,  then,  invoke  air,  saying: 
“  Come  air,  come  ”  ?  When  wc  look  at  the  matter  from  the  point  of  view 
of  ourselves  and  not  of  the  air,  there  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  such  invocation. 
The  oppressive  heat  of  fiery  summer  is  scorching  my  mind  and  body; 
I  feel  then  an  acute  necessity  to  invoke  air.  At  such  a  moment,  despite 
the  universal  presence  of  air,  to  me  it  seems  to  be  in  fact  absent.  It  is  not 
for  respiration  that  I  invoke  air.  I  invoke  the  air  to  save  me  from  the 
unbearable  tortures  of  heat  I  suffer  inwardly  and  outwardly — a  work 
which  cannot  be  accomplished  by  subtle  air  which  has  not  taken  on 
distinctive  form.  For  this  purpose  we  want  the  Wind-King,  who  moves 
on  the  breast  of  the  Malaya  Hill,  robs  the  fragrance  of  sandal  forests, 
soothes  the  burning  of  the  Universe,  and  suppresses  the  rigours  of  summer. 
This  is  why,  in  spite  of  the  universal  presence  of  subtle  air,  I  then  ignore  it 
and  invoke  the  gross  air,  saying,  “  Come,  air!  Come,  O  life-giver!  ”  And 
it  is  not  merely  a  matter  of  words  only;  for,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  so  long  as 
this  body  of  mine  is  not  soothed  by  cool  and  refreshing  waves  of  wind 
blowing  strongly  and  with  its  sweet  life-inspiring  touches,  I  may  search 
this  entire  vast  Universe  without  finding  anywhere  the  relief  I  seek. 
Similarly,  although  there  is  no  reason,  so  far  as  She  is  concerned,  for  my 
invoking  Her,  there  is  ample  reason,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  for  my 
doing  so.  I  am  a  Jiva  scorched  by  the  fire  of  the  three  forms  of  sorrows.1 
My  mind  and  life  are  constantly  on  the  rack  of  the  terrible  troubles  of  the 
Samsara.  Suffering  miserably  under  the  influence  of  the  poisonous 


1  Caused  by  the  self,  the  material,  and  the  spirit  world. 
40 


€26 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


exhalations  of  the  world,  I  cry  day  and  night,  “  Save!  save!  ”  At  such  a 
time  the  feet  of  Her  being  everywhere  does  not  remove  my  burning  pains. 
And  hence,  in  spite  of  Her  reading  in  all  things  as  formless  substance, 
to  me  Her  presence  seems  Her  absence;  and,  in  spite  of  my  knowing  that 
Her  substance  is  consciousness  itself,  Her  presence  with  me  does  not  satisfy 
me.  I  want  Her  whose  presence  will  remove  all  my  troubles.  I  am 
completely  surrounded  by  the  fearful  huge  fire  of  Samsara,  and  have  no 
way  for  escape.  Scorched  on  all  sides  by  the  burning  heat  of  this  circle 
of  fire,  I,  in  despair,  throw  up  my  arms,  and  with  heart-rending  and 
deeply  plaintive  voice  cry:  “  O  Mother  of  the  world!  where  art  Thou? 

I  die — I  die!  O  merciful  Mother,  save  me!  Come,  O  Mother!  Come,  O 
Mother!  Come,  O  Mother,  Mother  of  mine!  ”  Instantly,  while  these  words 
are  yet  in  my  mouth,  the  Mother,  the  chaimer  of  the  heart  of  Bhairava,1 
grieved  on  learning  of  Her  son’s  sorrow,  forsakes  Her  golden  throne  on 
Mount  Kailasa,8  and,  without  even  staying  to  arrange  Her  dress,  hastens 
to  and  stands  before  me,  extending  Her  ten  fear-dispelling  arms  in  all  ten 
directions,8  and  crying:  “Fear  not!  fear  not!”  Then  only  will  my  sins, 
my  diseases,  my  griefs,  my  troubles,  and  my  pains  be  for  ever  at  an  end. 
My  distress  will  not  be  relieved  without  the  aid  of  this  merciful  and  gross 
manifestation,  even  though  I  should  possess  the  knowledge  of  Her  subtle 
existence  as  the  all-pervading  Devi.  Digarabara  has,  therefore,  said: 
“  The  Mother  of  the  Universe  pervades  the  Universe,  but  still,  when  I  am 
overwhelmed  with  sorrow,  I  say:  ‘  Come,  O  Brahmamayi,  save  me!  ’  ” 
That  the  Mother  of  the  world  pervades  the  Universe  is  known  to  me  as 
well  as  it  is  known  to  you;  but  knowledge  alone  without  realization  will 
not  end  our  troubles.  Hence,  when  we  arc  overwhelmed  with  sorrow, 
we  say:  “Come,  O  Brahmamayi!”  True  it  is  that  we  invoke  Her  by 
saying,  “  Come,”  but  we  invoke  4  the  aspect  of  Her  which  governs  all 
things,  and  not  that  in  which  She  pervades  all  things.8 

Ray  says:  “  You  utter  hymns  in  praise  of  Him  who  is  the  master  of 
this  Universe,  after  having  offered  Him  all  kinds  of  food.  How  incon¬ 
gruous  this  seems  to  me!  ”  One  is  pleased  if  one  gets  a  thing  which  one 
does  not  possess;  but  it  seems  highly  incongruous  to  utter  hymns  in  praise 
of  Him  whose  infinite  wealth  consists  of  this  entire  Universe,  after  offering 
Him  all  kinds  of  food.  The  offerings  belong  to  His  Universe,  and  not  to 
you.  Who  are  you,  then,  to  offer  Him  that  which  already  belongs  to 
Him?  Before  making  a  gift  of  a  thing  you  must  establish  your  right  of 


J  Siva.  8  The  abode  of  Siva. 

*  N.,  N.E.,  E.,  S.E.,  S.,  S.W.,  W.,  N.W.,  Above,  and  Below. 

4  Vibhuti. 

8  She  is  not  invoked  in  Her  omnipresent  aspect,  but  in  Her  form  as  the 
Mistress  of  the  Universe. 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUNAS 


627 


ownership  to  it.  If  you  proceed  to  establish  your  right  of  ownership  to 
things  which  belong  to  Him,  you  will  be  in  a  manner  liable  to  punishment 
on  a  charge  of  theft;  so  what  you  gain  by  your  offering  is  the  punishment 
for  theft.  It  is  in  reply  to  this  that  Digambara  has  said:  “  In  fact,  medi¬ 
tation,  knowledge,  water,  fruit,  and  all  things  belong  to  Her  whom  I 
worship  with  living  and  inanimate  things.”  If  one  becomes  liable  to 
punishment  of  asserting  one’s  own  right  to  things  belonging  to  Her,  then 
we  cannot  avoid  punishment;  for  we  ought  to  have  remembered  it  when 
we  speak  of  “  my  wife,  my  son,  my  property,  my  family,”  and  so  forth, 
instead  of  only  calling  it  to  mind  at  the  time  of  making  offerings  in  worship.1 
What  have  you  to  call  “  your  ”  in  wife,  son,  house,  and  family  ?  If,  for  the 
purpose  of  your  own  gratification,  you  can  safely  enjoy  these  things  as 
your  own,  why  should  you  object  to  my  offering  Her  Her  own  things  as 
though  they  were  mine  for  Her  gratification.  The  punishment  for  theft 
will  be  the  same  for  you  as  for  me;  not  only  so,  but  my  punishment  for 
having  made  offerings  to  Her  first  and  then  partaken  of  it  as  Prasada  * 
*  will  most  probably  be  of  a  different  nature  from  that  which  you  will  receive 
for  having  enjoyed  yourself.*  Digambara  has  therefore  said  that,  be  it 
meditation,  or  knowledge,  or  water,  or  fruit,  everything  belongs  to  Her, 
whom  we  worship  with  living  and  inanimate  things.  Your  body,  senses, 
mind,  meditation,  knowledge,  and  all,  are  Hers.  If  She  cannot  be  wor¬ 
shipped  with  offerings  belonging  to  Her,  how  can  one  pray  to  Her  at  all 
by  meditation  with  a  mind  belonging  to  Her,  or  sing  songs  in  Her  name 
with  a  voice  which  is  Her  possession  ?  You  call  me  a  thief  if  I  offer  Her 
things  which  arc  Hers,  but  She  whose  things  they  are  has  said :  “  If  a  man 
enjoys  the  things  given  by  Devas,  such  as  gold,  beasts,  grains,  and  so  forth, 
without  first  offering  them  to  the  Devas,  he  is  a  thief.”  Now  say,  brother, 
is  it  I  who  am  a  thief  for  having  made  my  offering,  or  you,  who  are  a  thief 
for  not  having  done  so?  It  is  true  that  this  Universe  is  Hers,  but  have  you 
and  I  realized  it?  Would  anything  have  then  remained  as  “mine”? 
Many  people  are  very  quick  to  understand,  as  a  matter  of  mere  knowledge, 
that  the  Universe  is  “  Hers,”  but  they  find  it  extremely  difficult  to  put 
this  knowledge  into  practice.  On  that  day  on  which  I  shall  really  under¬ 
stand  that  everything  is  “  Hers  ”  there  will  be  an  end  of  the  phrase  “  my  ” 


*  A  theme  the  author  has  in  other  places  rightly  enlarged  upon.  We  hug 
dualism  for  our  awn  purposes;  it  is  only  when  we  come  to  the  question  of  worship 
that  we  conveniently  seek  to  ignore  it,  and  posit  a  philosophic  monism  which, 
though  lying  in  our  mouths,  is  at  variance  with  all  we  do. 

*  Dedicated  food. 

*  That  is,  it  bring  conceded  that  all  things  belong  to  Her,  the  offence  is  less 
if  we  first  offer  what  is  Her  own,  and  then  partake  of  that  which  we  have  acknowl¬ 
edged  to  be  Her  own,  than  if  without  such  tribute  and  worship  we  take  for  our 
own  sensual  enjoyment  what  is  not  our  own. 


€28 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


and  of  worship  as  well;  but  so  long  as  I  am  incapable  of  doing  that,  with 
what  lace  do  you  ridicule  Her  worship  on  the  ground  that  it  is  “  by  me  ”? 
Hence  I  say,  immersed  in  delusion  as  you  are,  it  is  a  great  blunder  on  your 
part  to  call  this  delusion  “  delusion  Undeluded  Digambara  has  there¬ 
fore  said :  “  In  delusion  is  my  peace,  What  harm  does  invocation  or 
dismissal  do  to  anybody  ?  ”  High-souled  Daiarathi  Ray  1  also,  the  musical 
Sadhaka,  has  preached  the  same  doctrine.  In  his  Agamani  *  he  writes: 

“  The  auspicious  journey  s  gave  Mountain  4  auspicious  fruit.  On  an 
auspicious  day  in  an  auspicious  moment  came  the  Lady  of 
Sankara.4 

In  haste  did  Mountain 4  perform  auspicious  rites  of  invocation.’ 

On  the  auspicious  seventh  moon  everything  was  ready  for  the 
auspicious  worship. 

The  Tantradharaka  9  went  reciting  Mantras  from  the  book  in 
his  hand. 

Mountain  began  to  worship  Brahmamayi,  knowing  Her  to  be 
Brahman. 

He  sat  *  on  his  seat  with  a  pure  mind. 

In  various  places  near  Caijdl 1#  the  sacred  book  of  Capdi  began 
to  be  recited. 

In  the  midst  of  this  he  fixed  his  meditation  on  Candl,  his  daughter. 

And  putting  a  flower  on  his  head,11  he  worshipped  Her  with  mental 
offerings. 

Restless  grew  Mountain’s  mind  as  he  saw  Her. 

He  saw  that  the  infinite  Universe  was  all  His  Uma’s. 

Everything  was  contained  in  the  Daughter’s  womb. 

The  Daughter  was  no  daughter. 


’The  celebrated  Bengali  poet,  born  1804,  died  1857. 

*  The  coming  of  Durga. 

*  That  is,  the  coming  of  Durga  to  the  earth. 

4  Himalaya,  DurgS’s  lather.  *  Siva. 

*  Devi’s  father,  to  whose  house  Dew  every  year  went. 

’  Marigalacaraiia. 

*  One  of  the  priests  whose  duty  it  is  to  prompt  the  other  priests  with  Mantras 
from  sacred  books. 

*  Literally,  “  He  sat  with  care  ” — that  is,  he  followed  out  the  injunctions 
relating  to  the  place  of  sitting,  the  mode  of  posture,  etc. 

10  The  Deri,  a  tide  of  Durga,  Sakti  of  Siva,  as  the  powerful  victrix  of  the 
demoniac  hosts. 

u  Before  worship  a  flower  is  put  on  the  head,  often  inserted  in  the  Sikha 
(crown-lock). 


'  THE  PLAY  OF  GUNAS 


629 


The  world  was  filled  with  the  Daughter’s  daughters  and  sons. 
Millions  of  Brahmas,  Vi?pus,  and  of  Sftlap&pis 1 * *  lived  under  the 
protection  of  Her  feet.  The  Queen  of  Siva  was  Mistress  over  all. 

Giving  up  meditating,  Mountain  said,  a  hundred  streams  flowing 
from  his  eyes: 

*  What  have  I,  O  Capdl!  with  which  to  worship  Thy  feet?  I  am  not 
in  truth  the  monarch  of  this  dominion. 

O  Brahmamayi !  whose  articles,  then,  shall  I  give  to  whom? 

Under  the  influence  of  delusions  people  say,  “  My,  my!  ” 

And  who  is  it  who  lives  in  the  household  ASramai  *  who  is  not 
deluded  ? 

O  Mahamaya!  what  a  Maya  {delusion)  it  is  that  thou  hast  cast 
upon  me ! 

I  pray  Thee  accept  my  offerings.’  ” 

Song 

“  O  Uma!  *  what  riches  have  I  that  I  can  give  Thee?  Shutting  my 
eyes,  I  see  that  all  things  in  the  Universe  are  Thine. 

What  gems  and  garments  shall  I  give  Thee  when  the  sea,  which  is 
the  mine  of  gems,  is  Thy  servant,  and  in  golden  KaS  Thou 
dost  live  ? 

O  ISvari  Annapurna,4 * *  who  can  say  that  Hara  *  is  a  beggar,  when 
Kubera  *  is  the  store-keeper  in  His  house  ?  The  three  worlds  are 
beggars  at  the  door  of  Thy  three-eyed  beggar.”  8 

Highly  pleased,  the  Devi,  with  good  cheer,  said  to  Her  father: 

“  Finish  the  worship  which  you  have  resolved  on.7 

True  the  infinite  Universe  is  all  Mine. 

The  wealth  I  have  given  You  is  Your  own.* 

By  CapdI’s  •  grace  Mountain  worshipped  the  feet  of  Capdl. 

The  seventh  moon  day  ended,  and  night  approached.” 

1 A  name  of  Siva  as  holder  of  the  trident. 

*  Stage  of  life  of  which  there  are  four — viz.,  student  (brahinacari),  house¬ 
hold  (grhastha)  here  spoken  of,  forest  recluse  (vanaprastha),  and  wandering 
beggar  (bhikyu).  According  to  the  Mahanirvana  Tantra  there  are  only  two 
Airamas  in  the  Kaliyuga — viz.,  the  second  and  fourth. 

*  Spouse  of  Siva  so  called,  according  to  Kalidasa’s  Kumarasambhavam, 
because  “  By  the  words  ‘  U,  Ma  ’  (‘  oh,  not  ’)  She  was  thus  forbidden  by  Her 
mother  to  practise  austerity.  Thereafter  the  pure  Uma  obtained  Her  name.” 

4  The  Deri  as  Lady  Bountiful — giver  of  food. 

8  Siva.  *  God  of  Riches. 

7  Samkalpa  (sec  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdttra). 

“That  is  to  say,  as  explained  later,  the  wealth  in  respect  of  which  the  Deri 
has  given  the  Sadhaka  the  illusory  notion  that  it  is  his  own. 

*  The  Deri  (see  ante). 


630 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Ah!  how  charming!  This  is  truly  the  Devi’s  divine  message  in  the 
heart  of  the  devotee!  “  Finish  the  worship  which  you  have  resolved  on. 
Your  mental  worship  is  done  on  your  understanding  that  all  things  in  the 
Universe  are  Mine.  Now  finish  the  outer  worship  which  you  have  resolved 
on  in  the  notion  that  it  is  yours.”  Lest  you  should  say,  “  What  I  shall 
offer  you  in  outer  worship  is  also  Thine,”  the  Mother,  who  dwells  in  all 
hearts,  has  said  by  way  of  reply:  “  True,  the  infinite  Universe  is  all  mine, 
but  the  wealth  I  have  given  you  is  your  own.”  1  From  whose  mouth, 
but  that  of  the  Mother,  can  I  expect  such  a  simple  reply  in  such  sweet, 
simple  words?  “Although  the  Infinite  Universe  is  all  Mine,  the  wealth 
I  have  given  you — that  is  to  say,  the  wealth  in  regard  to  which  I  have 
given  you  the  sense  of  ‘  mineneas  ’ — is  your  own;  for  this  sense  of 
*  mineness,’  which  you  have  also,  is  My  gift.  Although  the  title  to  the 
substance  of  the  thing  is  Mine,  the  title  to  its  enjoyment  is  yours.  To-day 
you  offer  this  title  of  yours  to  Me,  and  in  doing  so  you  will  finish 
your  worship.  Give  Me,  O  father!  the  burden  that  is  Mine,  and  be  free 
from  care  yourself.  Let  Me  to-day  free  you  from  all  burdens  by  taking 
them  on  Myself.”  O  Mountain  King!  this  is  the  way  in  which  is  accom¬ 
plished  the  worship  of  those  who  see  with  their  eyes  that  all  is  Hers  instead 
of  merely  babbling  of  it  with  their  tongue.  Blessed  arc  you  as  a  worshipper 
in  this  Samsara!  You  are  the  best  of  those  who  have  worshipped  the 
Mother!  You  have  said:  “Under  the  influence  of  delusion  people  say, 
‘  My,  my!  ’  And  who  is  it  who  lives  in  the  household  Asrama  *  who  is  not 
deluded  ?  ”  But  we  do  not  know  if  there  was  ever  in  this  world  an  undeluded 
follower  of  the  household  ASrama  like  you.1 *  Millions  of  great  Yogis  have 
been  unable  to  master,  by  means  of  their  undeludcd  inner  worship,  what 
you  have  achieved  in  the  household  Airama,  through  deluded  outer 
worship.4 

Everyone  in  this  world  performs  outer  worship,  but  has  the  Treasure 
of  the  heart  ever  issued  to  console  anyone  as  She  has  done  for  you  ?  Full  of 
Spirit,*  full  of  Brahman,  and  full  of  bliss,  is  my  Mother.  Although  She  is 
the  presiding  Devata  in  the  heart,  She  has  come  to  receive  your  outer 
worship.  To  whose  house  does  She  thus  come  of  Her  own  accord  and 
with  loving  regard  to  grant  success  to  the  Sadhana  of  the  SSdhaka,  after 


1  Though  not  really  so  the  Sadhaka’s  wealth  appears  to  be  his  own,  as  it  is 
the  Devi  Himself  who  is  the  cause  of  the  delusion  that  it  belongs  to  him.  So 

long  as  the  Sadhaka  is  under  delusion  the  wealth  is  really  his.  What  is  the  use 
of  frlfcing  about  it  as  “  Her  wealth  ”  unless  this  is  realized  by  dispelling  the 
illusion? 

s  yUt  ante.  *  Himalaya,  the  Devfs  lather. 

4  “  Deluded  ”  is  not  here  used  in  a  condemnatory  sense,  but  in  the  sense 
that  it  is  dualisdc,  and  like  all  which  is  such  in  a  sense  delusive. 

sJyotih. 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUNAS 


631 


having  passed  an  anxious  year 1  in  Her  jewelled  residence  in  Kailasa,  the 
seat  of  peace  ?  Who  is  so  fortunate  in  this  Universe  as  to  be  able  to  place 
before  himself  the  Devata,  full  of  Spirit,  and  of  Brahman,  residing  in  the 
heart,  as  a  Devata  in  visible  form  *  at  the  very  beginning  of  worship  ?  Who 
is  so  fortunate  that  She  who  is  the  treasure  sought  in  Sadhana  seeks  from 
him  outer  worship  of  Her  own  accord  ?  Not  only  have  you  *  the  glorious 
title  of  “  Gauri’s  Guru,”  4  but  you  are  the  Guru  of  the  whole  world  by 
reason  of  your  having  initiated  it  in  the  worship  of  Gauri.  It  is  on  being 
initiated  in  the  great  Mantra  of  GaurTs  worship  received  from  you  that 
this  Samsara,  consisting  of  moving  and  unmoving  things,  has  to-day 
become  entitled  to  the  Durga  Puja  festival.  For  this  reason  Durga,  the 
treasure  acquired  by  you,  through  austere  Sadhana  is  your  Daughter, 
despite  that  She  is  the  Mother  of  the  Universe.  Who  has  the  power  to 
worthily  express  the  blessedness  of  the  Mother?  But  O  Mountain  King, 
the  prince  of  devotees !  O  Siddha  King,  the  beloved  father  of  Siddheivari !  * 
Blessed,  blessed,  blessed  are  you  to-day!  and  blessed  are  we,  the  inhabitants 
of  the  world,  in  that  we  have  you  for  our  maternal  grandfather.  Hence 
wc  say:  “  O  Lord!  we  pray  Thee  to  make  the  fountain  of  the  love  of  your 
Daughter,  the  charmer  of  Siva,  to  play  for  once  in  the  desert  of  the  hearts 
of  those  who  are  unblessed  in  the  world  through  failure  to  understand  this 
blessedness  of  Yours.  Let  high  waves  of  the  sweet  cry  of  *  Mother  ’  cool 
their  burning,  stony  hearts,  and  may  infinite  streams  of  bliss  flow  to-day 
through  the  earth  by  the  grace  of  its  supporter.”  * 

It  is  with  reference  to  the  above-mentioned  notions  of  delusion  that 
Ray  7  has  said  in  another  song  : 

“  Whose  are  you  ?  Who  is  yours  ?  Whom  do  you  call  your  own  ?  It  is 
a  dream  which  you  have  socn  in  the  sleep  of  great  delusion.4 

Just  as  a  man  mistakes  a  rope  for  a  snake,  so  this  world,  which  is  a 
compound  of  the  five  elements,  is  false.  The  immaculate  •  One 
alone  being  true. 

At  night  all  sorts  of  birds  live  happily  on  the  same  tree.  When, 
however,  morning  comes,  they  all  fly  away  to  different  places. 


1  In  anxiety  for  her  parents.  *  MQrtimayi. 

*  Himalaya,  the  Devi’s  father. 

4  Gauri  is  the  Devi.  The  Devi  Purana  says:  “  She  who  was  burned  by 
the  fire  of  Yoga  was  again  bom  of  Himalaya.  As  She  has  the  colour  of  the 
conch,  jasmine,  and  moon.  She  is  called  Gauri.”  She  is  of  a  golden  colour. 

•The  Devi,  as  mistress  of  all  Siddhi  (success).  Her  father  is  Siddha,  as 
the  possessor  of  it. 

*  The  Mountain.  7  RAja  Rim  Mohan  Ray. 

*  Mahamaya.  •  Nirafljana. 


€32 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Know  that  advisers,  friends,  relations,  and  all  will  similarly  pass 
away  in  time,  and  there  will  te  none  to  prevent  them  doing  so. 
When  crud  death  will  grasp  you,  where  will  your  flowers  be,  your 
sandal  paste,  jewelled  ornaments,  the  men  and  women  you  love, 
your  wealth,  youth,  honour,  and  your  pride?  ” 

Ray  has  seen  the  horrors  of  delusion  in  the  fearful  dream  of  Maya  1 
sleep  in  the  earthly  Samsara.  What  he  has  said  is  doubtless  true, 
approved  of  all  Sastras,  and  admitted  by  everyone;  but  even  this  Samsara, 
full  of  delusion  as  it  is,  appears  to  be  the  seat  of  unending  peace  when  one 
hears  what  bigh-souled  Digambara  has  said  on  experiencing  the  most 
peaceful  dream  of  that  Maya-sleep,  which  is  full  of  the  Mother.  Digam- 
bara’s  reply  is: 

“  The  Mother  is  mine,  I  am  the  Mother’s,  and  I  call  Her  my  own. 

I  see  in  my  dream  the  Mother  who  is  Mahamaya.® 

When  through  mistake  you  think  you  see  a  snake  in  what  is  only  a 
rope,  do  you  then  say  that  both  the  snake  and  the  rope  are  false? 
After  living  happily  together  at  night,  birds  fly  away  in  different  direc¬ 
tions.  But  they  return  again  as  I  do. 

The  coming  and  going  in  this  Samsara  gives  news  of  its  permanency 
and  of  its  truth.  The  thought  of  the  Feet  of  Her  who  is  made  of 
consciousness  is  the  bondage  of  Samsara.”  * 

What  incomparable  strength  floods  in  the  unswerving  heart  of  the 
devotee  who  has  held  the  great  Sakti  in  it!  Immediately  he  is  asked  under 
the  infallible  authority 1 * 4 *  of  the  Vedanta  Philosophy,  “  Whose  are  you  ? 
Who  is  yours?  ”  the  world-conquering  devotee  replies  boldly  and  proudly, 
“  I  am  the  Mother’s,  and  the  Mother  is  mine.”  Whom  do  you  call  your 
own?”  "  I  call  Her  my  own."  It  is  no  dream  which  you  have  seen  in 
the  sleep  of  great  delusion.  I  see  in  my  dream  the  Mother  who  is 
Mahamaya.  The  dream  of  MayS  frightens  you  out  of  your  wits.  I  see 
in  my  dream  the  Mother  who  is  Mahamaya  Herself,  the  Queen  over  that 
MayS.  How  can  Maya  make  him  afraid  to  whom  Mother  Mahamaya 
reveals  Herself? 

“  The  world  which  is  a  compound  of  five  elements  is  false,  the  Imma¬ 
culate  One  6  (alone)  being  true.”  This  is  true  as  much  for  me  as  for  you. 
But  you  say  that  whatever  is  seen  in  this  Samsara,  made  of  Maya,  be  it  in 


1  The  sleep  of  delusion  of  worldly  life. 

*  As  both  the  Welder  and  the  Victrix  of  Maya. 

*  Life  itself  is  a  SSdbana,  and  every  Jlva  is  willingly  or  unwillingly  a  Sadhaka. 
Before  he  can  attain  liberation  he  must  accomplish  that  worship  for  which  he  is 
in  the  world,  and  until  it  is  accomplished  he  is  bound  thereto. 

4  Literally,  “  with  the  force  of  the  infallible  weapon.” 

*  Nirahjana. 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUN  AS 


633 


tiie  earthly  Samsara  or  in  the  Samsara 1  of  Sadhana,  is  a  dream  (just  as 
through  mistake  a  man  sees  a  snake  in  a  rope).*  From  this  it  follows  that 
you  axe  a  non-dualist,  and  have  no  faith  in  anything  which  is  dualistic. 
It  is  therefore  certain  that  you  have  no  faith  in  Sadhana,  because  it  deals 
with  the  worshipper  and  the  worshipped.  Since  you  have  no  faith  in 
Sadhana,  and  neither  know  what  it  is  nor  practise  it,  you  will  not  be  able 
to  understand  this  Maya-sleep  and  dream  even  if  they  be  explained  to  you. 
It  is,  therefore,  useless  to  discuss  them  with  you.  Or  perhaps  what  you 
have  said  is  not  intended  for  the  Samsara  of  Sadhana,  in  which  case  also 
there  is  nothing  to  say.  Now,  “Just  as  through  mistake  a  man  sees  a 
snake  in  a  rope,  so  the  world  which  is  a  compound  of  five  elements  is  false.” 
This  also  is  true.  What,  however,  we  must  here  understand  is  the  answer 
to  the  question,  “  When  does  it  become  false  ?  For  whom  docs  it  become 
false?  And  who  may  and  may  not  say  that  it  is  false?  ” 

Digambara  therefore  says:  I  admit  that  the  seeing  of  a  snake  in  a 
rope  is  caused  by  mistake  and  is  consequently  false;  but  “  when  through 
mistake  you  see  a  snake  in  a  rope,  do  you  then  say  that  both  the  snake 
and  the  rope  arc  false  ?  ”  When  a  man  is  frightened  by  the  sight  of  a  tiger 
in  a  dream,  docs  he  then  think  that  the  tiger  is  false?  If  so,  would  anybody 
have  ever  been  frightened  by  the  sight  of  a  tiger  in  a  dream?  True,  it  is 
that  the  tiger  of  a  dream  is  eventually  seen  to  be  false,  but  that  is  after  the 
dream  passes  off.  Similarly,  by  mistake  one  sees  a  snake  in  a  rope.  It  is 
true  that  the  snake  is  false.  But  this  knowledge  of  falsity  is  gained  when 
the  mistake  is  discovered.  How,  then,  can  you  realize  that  the  Samsara 
is  false  during  such  time  as  you  see  the  Samsara  dream  in  the  sleep  of 
Maya  ?  It  is  precisely  because  JIvas  do  not  realize  this  that  the  teachings 
of  the  Maya  doctrine  are  unheeded  by  Jivas  in  the  Samsara. 

Another  thing:  if  there  is  Maya,  whose  Maya  is  it?  If  even  whilst 
living  in  the  midst  of  Maya  I  gain  Her  from  whom  Maya  comes,  then 
notwithstanding  that  Maya  is  full  of  falsehood,  the  working  of  Maya 
becomes  lull  of  truth  for  me.*  As  even  in  dreams  people  take  real  medicines, 
or  laugh  real  laughs  in  the  ecstasy  of  unreal  joy,  or  really  weep  on  seeing 
the  horrors  of  unreal  danger,  or  are  really  engaged  in  discussion  on  reaching 
unreal  places  of  debate;  so  if  in.  the  dream  of  Samsara  in  the  Maya-sleep 
I  can  reach  the  domain  of  Sadhana  and  truly  obtain  the  Mother  whose 
substance  is  truth,  then  what  better  dream  of  happiness  or  better  dream 

1  Here  the  author  plays  on  the  word.  The  sense  is  the  sphere  of  SSdhana. 

*  Author’s  parenthesis. 

•That  is,  by  true  worship  the  Sadhaka  gains  the  Mother  Herself.  If  he 
succeeds  in  this,  then,  in  spite  of  his  being  in  the  midst  of  Maya,  he  has  attained 
the  highest  aim  of  being  which  is  full  of  truth.  Maya  cannot  ham  the  Sadhaka, 
for  the  latter  possesses  the  very  Dcvata  from  whom  Maya  comes  and  who  is 
its  Mistress. 


634 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


of  peace  can  I  have  than  this  Maya?  As  people’s  dreams  pass  off  the 
moment  they  receive  medicine  therein, 1  so  if  my  dream  of  Mayi  also 
passes  off  in  consequence  of  my  receiving  the  great  remedy  for  the  disease 
of  existence,  then  I  shall  be  blessed.  If  my  practice  of  Sadhana  on  the 
dualistic  understanding  that  She  is  the  Mother  and  I  am  the  son,  She  is 
the  Master  and  I  am  the  servant,  secures  for  me  Her  grace,  then  of  a  surety 
I  shall  be  able  to  float  joyously  on  the  bosom  of  the  sea  of  monism,  swim* 
ming  in  the  waves  of  dualism  *  As  undecaying,  immortal,  and  indestructible 
consciousness  I  shall  flow  on  the  current  of  devotion,  instead  of  sinking  in 
the  unfathomable  depth  of  liberation,  and  thus  swimming  through  the  sea 
of  liberation  I  shall  at  length  land  on  that  shore  which  is  the  Feet  of  the 
Dew  with  dishevelled  hair.  Then  waking,  I  shall  sec  that  my  dream  has 
really  brought  me  to  the  shore  of  Kulakundalini,8  and  that  in  consequence 
of  receiving  the  great  remedy  for  the  disease  of  existence  the  sleep  of  existence 
has  in  truth  passed  away.  Digambara  has  therefore  said:  It  is  well  that 
you  see  a  dream  in  sleep  and  do  not  awake  again.  Had  you  really  woken, 
then  that  awaking  would  have  been  happy  and  peaceful.  But  what  you 
call  waking  is  only  a  play  of  wakefulness  without  awaking,  and  itself  a  bad 
dream.  Real  waking  brings  happiness  and  peace,  whilst  wakefulness  with¬ 
out  waking  drives  them  away,  producing  want  of  peace,  and  the  lamenta¬ 
tion,  “  Alas!  I  am  lost.”  Did  all  birds  when  leaving  the  trees  do  so  for 
good  and  all,  then  the  trees  would  have  become  birdless  in  a  single  day. 
Similarly,  had  all  Jivas  passed  away  for  good  and  all,  the  Samsara  would 
have  ended  in  a  single  age.4  But  just  as  birds  fly  away  in  the  morning  and 
return  in  the  evening,  so  Jivas  pass  away  when  they  die  and  return  when 
they  are  bom  again.  Hence  it  follows  that  what  you  call  transiency  of 
the  Samsara  is  in  a  way  nothing  but  its  flowing  permanence.  Moreover, 
the  constant  coming  and  going  to  this  and  the  next  world  gives  news  of 
the  permanence  and  truth  of  the  Samsara.  The  Samsara  therefore  is 
permanently  permanent  in  spite  of  its  transiency;  •  and  thought  of  the 
feet  of  Her  whose  substance  is  consciousness  is  the  only  permanent  chain 
which  binds  me  to  this  Samsara.  I  love  the  permanent  Samsara  always 
and  with  all  my  heart,  lest  monistic  experience  should  unite  the  Mother 
and  the  son  into  one.® 

1  As  where  a  person  with  an  ailment  dreams  that  medicine  b  given  to  him 
by  some  Devata,  which  dream  wakes  him  up;  as,  for  instance,  at  the  Siva  at 
Tarakeivara. 

1  The  motionless  sea  itself  is  monism,  but  the  waves  with  which  it  b  agitated 
are  dualism. 

*  The  Devi  presiding  in  the  Miiladhira.  4  Yuga. 

*  The  world  may  be  in  flux,  but  the  flux  is  a  permanent  thing. 

*  The  position  here  taken  b  that  of  the  Bhakta  or  devotee,  whose  devotion 
can  only  find  play  in  a  dualistic  world  which  u  shattered  on  the  attainment  of 
Brahmaj&ana. 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUtfAS 


635- 


I  cannot  bear  this  Samsara,  for  I  am  terribly  afraid,  lest  falling  under 
the  charm  of  liberation  I  should  loosen  my  hold  of  the  Feet  of  the  Mother 
with  dishevelled  hair.  How  can  I  when  liberated  rest  satisfied  unless 
I  have  the  Mother,  and  can  call  upon  Her  ten  times  every  half  an  hour: 
“  Mother,  O  Mother!  O  Mother!  Mother  mine!  O  Uma!  O  Syami! 
O  Mother,  Mother?  ” 

This  is  why  I  say  that  even  liberation  is  not  more  agreeable  than 
being  bound  by  the  chain  of  the  Mother’s  love.  And  Digambara  has, 
therefore,  said:  “  Thought  of  the  Feet  of  Her  whose  substance  is  conscious¬ 
ness  is  the  bondage  of  Samsara.”  1  As  to  the  last  few  lines  of  Ray’s  song, 
the  naked  (Digambara)  Samsara  of  Digambara  *  did  not  contain  any  of 
the  things  mentioned  in  them.*  So  he  did  not  care  to  give  any  reply 
to  them. 

Ray  has,  again,  said : 

“  Alas  by  whom  have  you  been  deluded,  O  mind  ?  How  unfortunate 
it  is  that  you  believe  imagination  to  be  truth! 

You  cannot  give  life  to  that  which  is  under  your  control  and  yet 
desire  to  attain  Him  who  is  the  life  of  the  world. 

Sometimes  you  give  the  image  ornaments  and  sometimes  good  food. 
At  one  time  you  establish  it  and  at  another  destroy. 

You  make  that  dance  before  you,4  which,  nevertheless,  you  believe 
to  be  your  Lord.  Who  has  ever  seen  so  much  folly  anywhere  in 
this  Samsara?  ” 

Digambara  replies: 

“  She,  the  Charmer  of  the  world,  has  deluded  the  world  with  Maya. 
The  Mother  has  revealed  Herself,  making  imagination  true. 

On  imagination  is  She  established,  in  imagination  I  give  Her  life. 

But  this  much  I  know,  that  truly  do  I  offer  myself  to  Her. 

Sometimes  I  give  Her  ornaments  and  sometimes  food.  At  one  time 
I  establish  Her  and  at  another  destroy. 

I  see  Her  as  Mother  dancing  on  the  breast  of  Father,  and  in  fear 
I  say:  O  Thou  who  art  all,  save  all!  ” 

The  Sadhaka  will  here  notice  what  a  great  difference  there  is  between 
the  two.  Ray  asks,  “  Alas!  by  whom  have  you  been  deluded,  O  mind?  ” 


1  Vide  ante. 
*  There  is 


'naked ' 


a  play  on  the  word  Digambara.  The  name  also  means 


*  Digambara  has  answered  the  other  lines  of  Ram  Mohan  Ray,  but  not 
those  at  p.  632  about  flowers,  sandal  paste,  jewels,  etc.,  which  did  not  form  part 
of  his  world,  and  about  which  therefore  he  did  not  trouble. 


4  The  Devi  in  some  of  Her  forms  appears  as  a 
Kill  is  Nj-tya-Kall,  or  the  “  dancing  Kali  ”, 


dancer:  one  of  the  names  of 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


-636 


Digambara  replies:  “  Why  mind  alone?  She,  the  Charmer  of  the 
world,  has  deluded  the  world  with  Maya.” 

Do  you  think  that  you  will  escape  being  deluded  by  the  Maya  of  Her 
whose  Maya  deludes  the  three  worlds?  Moreover,  what  you  consider  to 
be  a  folly  in  image-worship  is  also  to  be  found  in  your  worship  of  Samsara.1 * 
If  in  spite  of  the  worship  of  Samsara  being  false  you  consider  it  to  be  true, 
why  should  you  not  consider  the  worship  of  images  also  to  be  true?  While 
you  yearn  for  the  company  of  father,  mother,  wife,  son,  and  so  forth, 
despite  the  fact  that  your  relationship  with  them  is  false,  why  should  you 
not  also  consider  Her  company  an  event  of  singular  good  fortune  for  you? 

Next,  had  it  been  my  imagination  which  I  believed  to  be  the  truth, 
then  you  might  say  that  I  was  mistaken.  But  it  is  not  so.  This  imagina¬ 
tion  is  Hers,  who  has  created  the  universe  out  of  Her  imagination.  She 
has  thus  created  wife  and  son,  and  we  cannot  forget  them.  How  can  we, 
then,  forget  the  form  *  which  She  has  created  (or  imagined)3  for  Herself. 
Hence,  while  you  say:  “  How  unfortunate  it  is  that  you  believe  imagination 
to  be  the  truth,”  we  say:  “  Alas!  what  a  pity  that  you  consider  truth  to  be 
imagination  in  relation  to  the  domain  of  Sadhana  only,  and  not  in  relation 
to  the  Samsara  also.”  This  is  a  sign  of  great  self-forgetfulness.  You  may, 
however,  say:  “  Although  the  Samsara  is  an  imagination,  an  image  does 
not  appear  to  me  to  be  as  true  as  my  parents.”  What  matters  it  to  anybody 
that  it  does  not?  What  matters  it  to  the  sun  that  the  owl  does  not  see  it? 
Moreover,  had  it  been  possible  for  us  to  see  whenever  one  so  wished,  you 
might  perhaps  with  some  reason  have  said:  “  I  do  not  see.”  But  here, 
She  whom  I  want  to  see  must  show  Herself  before  I  can  sec.4  Hence  I  do 
not  wish  to  affirm  of  anything  that  it  is  true.®  But  She,  on  Her  side,  gives 
reality  to  Her  imagination  (or  creation)  and  presents  Herself  to  view. 
What  can  you  say  to  this?  If  it  seems  impossible  to  you  that  She  who  can 
give  reality  to  such  an  imagination  as  is  this  vast  and  yet  false  universe 
can  also  (being  Herself  truth  personified)  give  reality  to  Her  own  promise, 
then  I  have  nothing  more  to  say,  for  wonderful  indeed  is  your  knowledge 
of  truth!  As  Her  image  is  an  imagination,  so  also  is  Her  presidency  therein. 
As  the  giving  of  life  to  the  image  is  an  imagination,  so  life  also  is  an  imagi¬ 
nation;  as  the  Samsara  is  an  imagination,  so  you  and  I  also  are  an  imagi¬ 
nation;  and,  last  of  all,  Her  imagination  (or  creation)  also  is  an  imagination. 


1  That  is,  pursuit  of  worldly  objects.  *  Murti:  image. 

•There  is  all  along  a  play  on  the  word  Kalpana,  which  means  both 

“  imagination  ”  and  “  creation  Moreover,  the  creation  is  ISvara’a 
imagination. 

4  He  to  whom  She  shows  Herself  can  alone  sec. 

1  Everything  is  in  a  sense  untrue,  but  until  this  is  realized  it  is  idle  to  select 
•out  one  thing  from  an  illusive  Samsara  as  true  and  reject  another  thing  as  false. 


63  T 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUNAS 

It  is  thus  a  pure  futility  to  discuss  the  point.  So  long  as  the  imagination 
(or  creation)  of  the  forms  which  you  and  I  possess  is  true,  so  also  is  Her 
form,  even  though  imagined  by  Her,  yet,  true,  true,  true.  On  the  same 
day  on  which  your  “  you-ncss  ”  and  my  “  I-ness  ”  will  disappear.  Her 
“  She-ness  ”  also  will  disappear.  For  the  moment  you  had  better  consider 
yourself  an  imagination  than  call  Her  such.  Hence  I  make  that  dance 
before  me,  which  I  believe  to  be  my  Lord  (it  is  not  I  who  cause  the 
dancing).1 * *  I  see  Her  as  Mother  dancing  (of  her  own  accord)  on  the 
breast  of  Father,  and  so  in  fear  I  say:  “  O  Thou  who  art  all,  save  all!  ” 
When  I  do  not  forget  the  multiple  form  of  Her  *  who  is  all,  what  great  sin 
have  I  committed  that  I  should  forget  this  form  which  is  Herself  in  reality? 
Her  form  will  ever  remain  an  imagination  8  to  such  men  as  do  not  know 
Her,  but  those  who  wish  to  see  form  and  have  faith  in  Her  ever  say:  “  The 
Mother  has  revealed  Herself,  making  imagination  true.” 

In  another  song  Ray  says:  “  O  mind! , always  do  SSdhana  of  Him 
who,  being  without  Gupas,4 * *  is  the  seat  of  Gunas,  and  is  without  imagina- 
ion.”  Digambara  (the  Sadhaka),  the  chosen  son  of  Digambara  (Siva), 
at  once  says  in  reply:  “  Why,  then,  madman,  do  you  do  Sadhana  of  Him, 
if  He  is  without  Gunas  and  without  imagination?  ”  * 

Wc  have  not  been  able  to  find  a  subsequent  verse  in  which  another 
portion  of  Digambara's  reply  is  contained.  First  of  all  Ray  says :  “  Always 
do  Sadhana  of  Him.”  This  Sadhana  is  not  the  Sadhana  spoken  of  in  the 
Sastra.  It  is  Ray’s  own  Sadhana.  For,  in  one  of  the  following  lines  he 
says  that  Siddhi  and  such  other  things  “  are  fancies  of  the  mind,  impossible 
of  achievement  ”.  (And  yet  he  tells  us  that  wc  are  always  to  do  Sadhana 
of  Him!)  •  Next  he  says:  “  Wonderfully  is  the  universe  made.  See  the 
work  and  believe  in  its  Author.  Know  only  that  He  exists,  beyond 
thoughts.”  To  this  Digambara  replies:  “  If  you  know  only  that  He 
exists,  why,  then,  do  you  sing  songs?  On  whom  do  you  meditate  when 
dosing  your  eyes,  and  whom  do  you  think  of  ?  ”  7  Here  Digambara  has 
proved  that  there  is  no  correspondence  between  Ray’s  words  and  his 
actions.  In  another  song  Ray  says:  “What  an  error  it  is  (of  yours),® 

1  Author’s  parenthesis;  but  She  again  it  is  who  is  the  cause  of  that  appearance 

of  dancing  to  the  Sadhaka. 

*  That  is,  the  world.  *  That  is,  an  unreality. 

4  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra  sub  voce  “  Gupa  ”. 

4  Without  Kalpana — the  expression  here  means  the  same  thing  as  Ni$kriya, 
or  inaction. 

•Author’s  parenthesis.  This  is  absurd,  for  Sastrik  Sadhana  is  done  to 
obtain  Siddhi,  and  Siddhi  is  the  result  of  due  Sadhana. 

7  How  can  we  think  anything  of  that  of  which  we  know  nothing,  except 
that  it  is  something  which  exists. 

®  This  parenthesis  belongs  to  the  original  song. 


<638 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


O  mind!  The  eye  does  not  see  Him  whom  you  wish  to  see.  The  ether 
surrounds  the  Univeree.  How  is  it  that  you  consider  Him  to  be  like  the 
ether  who  has  made  it  so  widespread?  ” 

“  What  pains  you  are  at  to  display  Him  who  makes  the  sun,  moon, 
and  other  planets  to  move  constantly !  And  we  want  to  feed  Him  who  is 
higher  than  the  highest,  who  gives  food  to  men,  birds,  and  creatures  of 
the  waters!  ” 

He  who  does  not  see  the  fruits  of  a  work  calls  it  a  folly.  This  is  why 
Ray  has  said,  “  What  an  error  it  is!  ”  But  he  who  has  reaped  its  fruits  has, 
with  a  clear  vision,  said:  “  It  is  not  an  error,  it  is  not  an  error.  Look 
there,  look.  There  stands  my  Brahmaraayi  shedding  light  in  darkness. 
Under  Her  feet  lies  Mahesa,  prostrate  and  unable  to  move.  Hundreds  of 
thousands  of  human  arms  form  Her  waist-chain.  From  Her  eyes  issue  the 
fire  of  suns  and  moons.  Her  mouth  utters  the  words  ‘  fear  not,  fear  not  ’. 
She  sends  forth  peals  of  loud  laughter.  Fearful  is  She  to  look  upon.  The 
Heavens  tremble.  Victorious  is  She  in  battle.  Free  is  the  laugh  She 
laughs  with  Her  terrible  mouth.  The  earth  trembles  under  Her  swan-like 
gait.1  Keeping  time,  gracefully  She  dances,  tathai,  tathai.”  * 

In  the  course  of  his  reply  to  another’s  words,  Digambara  has  in  this 
place  given  an  account  of  his  own  work.  Sadhana  has  here  trampled  on 
argument,  and  carried  the  Sadhaka  to  the  viable  temple  of  SiddhcSvari,* 
and  what  it  shows  him  there  makes  him  speak  inccssandy  words  which 
depict  his  own  thought,  leaving  him  no  leisure  to  reply  to  those  of  others. 
Just  as,  if  a  man  meditates  on  some  subject  before  he  falls  asleep  an  indis¬ 
tinct  shadow  of  that  subject  falls  on  his  dreams  (even  if  the  dream  relates 
to  a  different  matter),  so  the  sky,  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  which  had  passed 
through  Digambara’s  mind  before  he  composed  the  song  and  was  consi¬ 
dering  “  Whether  it  is  a  mistake,”  appeared  indistinctly  along  with  the 
Virata  *  form  of  the  Mother  of  the  World.  Digambara  was  at  that  time 
lost  in  what  he  saw  when  he  said,  “  Look  there,  look,”  or  in  what  he  saw 
before  he  said,  “  Look  there,  look.” 

A  Sadhaka  will  here  observe  what  a  difference  there  is  between 
Sidhana  and  philosophical  reasoning— a  difference  as  great  as  that  between 
Heaven  and  Hell.  Can  the  bubbles  of  philosophical  and  scientific  reason¬ 
ing  attract  the  notice  of  him  who  has  sunk  into  the  play  of  the  waves  of 
the  charming  sweetness  of  the  Charmer  of  the  world?  Ah,  how  sweet,  how 
sweet?  What  an  accomplishment  in  Sadhana!  It  is  as  if  She  who  is  life 
itself  has  thrown  the  gate  of  life  open  and  plays  before  the  eyes  of  the 


1 A  waddling  movement  in  women  like  that  of  a  duck  or  swan  is  considered 
.beautiful,  for  the  swaying  movements  reveal  the  hips  and  their  action. 

1  An  onomatopseic  word  to  denote  the  thud  of  dancing. 

*  The  Devi  as  Lord  of  all  Siddbi.  *  The  vast  form. 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUN  AS 


639 


•devotee,  and  the  devoted  S&dhaka,  clapping  his  hands,  fills  himself  with 
the  sight  and  then  shows  it  to  the  world,  saying:  “  Look  there,  look  at  ray 
Mother!  Free  is  the  laugh  She  is  laughing  with  Her  terrible  mouth.  The 
earth  trembles  under  Her  swan-like  gait,  and  keeping  time  She  is  gracefully 
dancing,  tathai,  tathai.”  1 *  Blessed  Sadhaka,  blessed  arc  you!  blessed  is 
the  earth  with  your  blessing ! 


Adhyatmikkm  * 

We  give  a  hundredfold  praise  to  the  community  which  suffers  from 
the  mental  malady  which  makes  them  say  that  the  Deity  can  have  no  form 
for  having  themselves  afforded  us  the  means  by  which  they  can  be  found 
out.  But  there  is  another  class  of  interpreters  who  suffer  from  a  contagious 
fever,  whose  mere  touch  is  fatal,  and  who  yet  can  by  no  means  be  so  easily 
found  out.  These  men  have  surpassed  the  two  Adhibhautik  and  Adhi- 
daivik  kingdoms  and  entered  into  the  Adhyatmik  realm.3  Hence,  what¬ 
ever  may  be  their  practice,  they  are  in  speech  advocates  of  Adhyatmildsm. 
To  them  even  the  visible  Samsara  formed  of  the  five  elements  is  almost 
Adhyatmik,  not  to  speak  of  invisible  abodes  of  the  Devatas,  Dharma,  the 
next  world,  and  so  forth. 

According  to  them,  Vedas,  Tantras,  Puranas,  Itihasas,4  are  allegorical; 
Brahma,  Visrm,  and  MahcSvara,  are  allegorical 1 *  persons;  and  so  are 
PrakrU  and  Purusa,  the  ten  Avataras;  8 *  the  ten  Mahavidyas  7  and  all 
Devas  and  Dcvls  arc  all  allegorical  beings;  Narada  and  other  R?is  are 
allegorical  persons;  and  so  are  Madhu,  Kaifabha,  Hirapyak$a,  Hirapya- 
ka$ipu,  Sumbha,  Nifumbha,  Mahisasura,  Ravana,  Kumbhakarna,  Kamsa, 
Siiupala,  Jarasandha,*  and  others;  the  five  Pandavas,®  Draupadi 10  Duryo- 
dhana,11  and  others  are  allegorical  persons;  and  so,  too,  arc  Vidyadharas, 


1  Vide  ante. 

I  Adhyatma  and  Adhyitmika  are  adjectives  meaning  that  which  belongs  or 
relates  to  the  Atma  or  Self.  When  used  with  Jfiana  or  Vidya  it  means  the  inner 
doctrine  such  as  that  taught  by  the  Upani$ads.  Here  the  term  is  used  in  the 
sense  of  a  mistaken  over-subtlety,  a  false  esotericism;  a  discovery  of  imaginary 
hidden  meanings  in  plain  statements,  which  it  does  not  suit  the  “  esoteric  ” 
interpreter  to  accept,  and  accordingly  resort  is  had  to  allegory. 

•The  author  is  here  sarcastic,  referring  to  the  threefold  divisions  of  the 
world,  the  Devas,  and  the  self.  They  give  the  go-by  to  the  two  former,  but 
suffer  the  pains  of  self-imagination. 

4  Historical  works.  5  Rupaka. 

8  The  ten  incarnations  of  Visnu,  as  Matsya,  Varaha,  etc. 

7  The  ten  great  appearances  (murtl)  of  the  Devi,  as  Kali,  Tara  fjodafi, 

Chinnamasta,  DhOmavati,  BagaiA,  Bhairavi,  Karaala,  Bhuvaneivari,  Matangl. 

Bee  ante. 

•  Various  Asuras.  *  Sons  of  PSndu.  10  Their  wife. 

II  Head  of  the  Kauravas,  the  cousins  of  the  Ptndavas. 


540 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Kinnaras,  Apsaras,  Caranas,  Siddhas,  Gandharvas,  Yak? as,1  Raksas,* 
Bhutas,  Pretas,®  Pi^acas,4  Daityas,  and  Danavas  *;  the  cities  Kaffl,  Kaflchi, 
Avanti,  Ayodhya,  Mathura,  Maya,  Viraja,  Dvaraka,  Hastina,  the  sun,  the 
moon,  the  planets,  the  stars,  Svarga,  Martya,  Rasatala,®  are  all  allegorical 
things.  Even  the  ascending  generations  above  father  and  grandfather  and 
the  descendants  grandson  and  great-grandson  are  allegorical.  In  short, 
whatever  we  actually  see  and  touch  is  true,  everything  which  is  invisible 
is  allegorical.  We  are  told  that  fools  who  are  unable  to  grasp  the  weighty, 
solemn,  and  hidden  principles  of  the  Sastra,  perform  the  Sraddha  ’  of 
fourteen  generations.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact  grandfather,  great  grand¬ 
father,  and  the  like,  have  hidden  Adhyatmik  or  “  scientific  ”  meanings. 
For  instance,  the  word  Vamia  means  a  cluster  of  bamboos.  Father,  grand¬ 
father,  and  so  forth,  arc  each  a  pura  (link)  of  that  bamboo.  This  is  why 
they  are  called  Purvapurusas  (forefathers).8  The  Aryan  Sastra  enjoins 
that  every  year  Sraddha  should  be  performed  for  them,  and  the  Sastra 
explains  the  word  Sraddha  as  whatever  is  given  to  Pitrs  out  of  Sraddha 
or  respect  is  called  Sraddha.  We  arc,  however,  told  that  the  injunction 
that  Sraddha  should  be  performed  every  year  for  them  means  that  every 
year  a  new  cluster  of  bamboos  should  be  planted  round  the  house  in  a 
reverential  spirit.  Such  men  as  have  clusters  of  bamboos  in  their  houses 
know  this  rule  very  well.*  This  is  the  secret  Adhyatmik  interpretadon  of 
the  Sastrik  command,  and  this  is  why  the  Sastra  says  that  the  VamSas 
(lines  of  descendants)  of  those  who  annually  perform  Sraddha  for  Purva¬ 
purusas  never  die  out;  that  is  to  say,  their  houses  never  stand  in  want  of 
bamboos,  and  so  on.  Similarly,  we  are  to  understand  that  all  the  rules 
and  regulations  contained  in  the  Sastra  concerning  worship  and  like  matters 
are  equally  allegorical.  That  people  do  not  understand  them  to  be  so, 
but  take  them  in  a  different  light,  is  due  simply  to  the  lack  of  discoverers 
of  their  hidden  meanings  or  Adhyatmik  interpreters. 

O  Sadhaka!  such  matters  as  worship  of  Devas  and  Devis  have  also 
interpretations  similar  to  the  interpretations  of  Sraddha  you  have  heard 
above.  These  interpretations  are  nowadays  so  widely  preached  to  the 
public  that  we  refrain  from  relating  them  here.  In  fact,  just  as  when 
Bhagavan  Ramacandra,  whose  life  was  in  JanakI,10  had  gone  in  pursuit 


1  Devayonis  of  various  classes.  *  Demoniac  spirits. 

*  Ghosts,  spirits  before  the  performance  of  the  obsequial  riles. 

4  Demoniac  spirit. 

*  Enemies  of  the  Devas. 

•  The  upper,  earthly,  and  nether  worlds. 

T  Obsequial  rites  (see  post).  8  Author’s  parenthesis. 

•  This  is,  of  course,  all  sarcasm. 

10  Sita,  daughter  of  Raja  Janaka,  wife  of  Rama. 


641 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUNAS 

of  Marica,  the  horrible  Rak^asa  Ravasja  appeared  in  the  garb  of  a  Brah- 
majja  practising  austerities  at  the  door  of  the  cottage  of  the  Mahalaksmi  i 
of  the  solar  race  on  the  pretext  of  begging  alms;  so  these  Dharmaraksasas,* 
seeing  that  the  Arya  society  is  nowadays  equally  masterless,  helpless,  and 
desolate,  have  slowly  come  forth  in  the  garb  of  beggars  and  stood  at  the 
door  of  Dharmapravrtti  .*  By  reason  of  the  nature  of  the  present  age 
Bhagavan  is  at  a  great  distance  from  us.  Our  only  course  of  safety  lies  in 
keeping  to  the  rules  laid  down  by  devoted  seekers  of  the  truth  concerning 
Bhagav&n.  Dharmapravrtti  4  needs,  therefore,  to  be  loudly  warned  to-day 
lest  Janaki  cross  the  circle  drawn  by  Laksmaga  about  her.  The  present 
band  of  interpreters  have  undoubtedly  the  inner  natures  of  Raksasas  how¬ 
ever  much  they  may  outwardly  appear  as  ascetics.  It  is  only  until  such 
time  as  they  shall  get  the  Dharmapravrtti  *  of  the  public  completely  in 
their  power  that  they  will  continue  to  expound  such  sweet  interpretations 
as:  herdswomcn  means  sensuous  functions;  *  Sri  Kfgpa  means  Atm&;  cloth 
means  shame  ’;  Kadamba  tree  4  means  §a(cakra;  *  His  blue  colour  is  the 
sky!  the  hues  of  dawn  are  His  yellow  cloth;  the  rainbow  is  his  charming 
diadem,  and  so  on.  Later  on,  when  enticed  by  these  apparently  sweet 
interpretations,  the  Dharmapravrtti  *  of  the  public  has  said  “  Yea  ”  to 
them,  and  stepped  beyond  the  bonds  prescribed  for  it,10  they  will  at  once 
throw  off  this  ascetic  garb,  and,  revealing  their  frightful  R&ksasa  aspect, 
say  that  “  Sri  Kpaija  ”  or  “  His  Ilia  (play)  ”  are  unrealities,  but  that,  in 
order  to  attract  the  minds  of  ignorant  people,  the  authors  of  Sastras  have 
thus  allegorically  explained  the  (omnipresence)  of  formless  Brahman.1* 
Then,  oppressed  by  the  demoniac  power  of  the  Raksasas,  our  Dharma¬ 
pravrtti  will  go  weeping  to  the  other  side  of  the  sea.  On  the  way  it  may 
perhaps  meet  one  or  two  Jatayus,1*  but  they  will  not  be  able  to  rescue  it 

1  Sita,  who  was,  as  it  were,  the  great  Lak?mi  or  tutelary  goddess  of  the  solar 
race  to  which  her  husband  Rama  belonged. 

*  Evil  spirits,  destroyers  of  true  religion. 

*  Religious  instinct;  that  inclination  (pravjtti)  in  men  which  leads  them 
to  religion. 

4  A  simile  is  drawn  between  the  circumstances  of  Sita’s  abduction  and  the 
abduction  of  Dharmapravrtti  by  the  Dharmaraksasas. 

*  Vide  ante. 

*  Referring  to  the  Gopls  who  worshipped  Kr$na. 

7  Referring  to  the  incident  when  Kp?na  removed  the  clothes  of  the  bathing 
Gopls  to  compel  them  to  appear  before  Him  naked. 

8  Nauclea  kadamba,  a  tree  with  fragrant  orange  blossoms  under  which 
Kfjna  played. 

*  The  Tattvik  centres,  Muladhara,  etc.  See  A.  Avalon’s  “  Serpent  Power  ”. 

18  That  is,  by  Sadhakas  and  Bhaktas.  u  Nirakara. 

u  When  R&vana  was  carrying  away  Sita,  on  the  road  he  met  Ja{Syu,  a 
great  bird  who  was  Sita’s  father-in-law’s  friend.  Jafayu  fought  with  Rava^ia, 
but  was  lulled  by  him. 

41 


€42 


PRINCIPLES  OP  TANTRA 


from  the  Raksasas’  hands.  We  know  that  Bhagavan  Himself  is  ever  soli¬ 
citous  to  rescue  Dharmapravrtti,  which  is  the  object  of  His  love.  But 
that  is  no  reason  why  we  should  willingly  invite  danger.  No  one  should 
find  time  or  inclination  to  discuss  the  inferences  and  conclusions  of  such 
men.  Whenever  one  meets  them  one  should  summarily  dismiss  them  from 
the  door,  saying,  “  Begone!  ”  Of  course,  if  one  thinks  that  a  guest  should 
not  be  dismissed  without  a  gift,  one  may  give  him  such  as  he  deserves.1 

Whatever  a  man  does  is  done  with  a  motive.  These  people  also  have 
theirs.  It  is,  however,  amusing  to  see  how  they  dare  expose  their  beloved 
Simul  cotton-fruit  *  to  a  violent  storm — a  fruit  which,  if  but  slightly  touched, 
bursts  into  a  hundred  fragments  before  a  thousand  eyes.  The  Sastra  has, 
we  are  told,  described  the  Devata,  the  Devata’s  play,*  and  the  seat  of  such 
play,*  allegorically;  but  has  also  told  me  that  in  order  to  see  that  holy 
place  of  pilgrimage  of  allegory  I  must  travel  60,000  yojanas.*  I  must, 
then,  really  waste  this  real  body  of  mine  to  a  skeleton  for  the  allegorical 
Devata,  and  for  it  I  am  called  upon  to  say:  “  I  must  either  accomplish  my 
object  or  die  in  the  attempt.”  The  Adhyatmik  interpreter  has,  of  course, 
explained  all  this  in  the  Adhy&tmik  fashion,  but  I  am  at  a  loss  to  make 
out  how  I  can  now  give  an  Adhyatmik  interpretation  of  himself.  If  the 
facts  arc  not  real,  but  imaginary,  was  it  right  on  the  part  of  Bhagavan  and 
the  R?is  who  promulgated  the  Sastra  to  delude  the  hearts  of  simple  folks 
with  allegorical  falsities.  The  purpose  of  the  Sastra  is  to  kindle  die  light 
of  true  knowledge  in  the  hearts  of  men;  and  yet  we  are  asked  to  say  that 
it  is  that  same  Sastra  which  throws  the  world  into  a  deep,  dark  sea 
of  delusion  by  its  false  histories!  This  same  Sastra  ever  befriends  Jiva  in 
this  world  and  hereafter  by  pointing  out,  with  the  utmost  minuteness, 
what  is  good  and  what  is  bad  for  him  at  every  moment,  and  every  act 
from  his  conception  in  the  womb  to  the  final  rites  in  the  cremation  ground; 
from  the  mother’s  womb  to  the  Brahmaloka;  from  Hell8  to  liberation*; 
and  yet  they  tell  us  that  this  Sastra  it  is  which  plunges  the  entire  world 
Ras&tala 1  by  means  of  its  falsehoods  and  fancies !  We  leave  it  to  such  to 
tell  us  also  whether  they  themselves  should  be  welcomed  as  learned  men 
or  avoided  as  Can^alas.*  How  intense  must  be  the  enmity  of  these  men 
with  Sastra  or  Bhagavan  that,  in  order  to  avenge  themselves  upon  it,  they 
should  lay  out  jars  of  Adhyatmik  poison  with  layers  of  sweets  and  facile 
meanings  on  the  top!  The  Sastra  is  not  a  net  of  selfishness  spread  by 
human  Pijacas.* 


*  Give  him  some  blows. 

*  When  the  covering  is  burst,  the  cotton  within  is  blown  away. 

*  Lila.  *  A  yojana  is  eight  or  nine  miles. 

*  Naraka.  *  Nirvana.  7  One  of  the  seven  nether  worlds. 

*  One  of  the  lowest  castes.  *  Low  evil  spirits. 


643 


THE  PLAY  OF  GUtfAS 

Its  promulgators  arc  He  who,  leaving  Vaikup|ha,  descended  on  the 
■earth  in  order  to  save  the  three  worlds;  and  they  who,  in  spite  of  being 
masters  of  the  eight  forms  of  Siddhi 1  by  the  force  of  Tapas,"  yet  lived  in 
•dense  forests,  wearing  plaited  hair  and  barks  of  trees,  walked  upon  the 
topmost  heights  of  discernment  8  and  dispassion,*  and  were  full  of  mercy, 
which  they  shed  unsought.  They  have  said  that  it  is  true,  true,  thrice 
true:  “  True,  true,  true  again;  true,  there  is  no  doubt.”  If  to  those  who, 
intending  to  serve  mean  selfish  ends,  call  that  firm  truth  falsehood,  we  give 
the  credit  of  being  truthful  men,  then  who  are  to  be  counted  liars  in  the 
world?  It  is  also  indeed  curious  that,  while  the  Ayurveda,  the  Dhanurveda, 
the  Gandharvaveda,4  Astrology,  and  the  Tantraiastra  which  deals  with 
Mantras,  are  not  considered  allegorical,  only  that  section  of  the  Vedas 
which  deals  with  the  worship  is  thought  to  be  so.  You  are  at  liberty  to 
think  it  allegorical,  but  when  you  become  ill,  why  do  you  not  explain 
medicine  to  be  allegorical?  Why  do  you  not  take  the  sun  and  moon  as 
allegorical,  and  therefore  light  lamps  at  noon  and  bathe  at  night?  The 
form  of  composition  known  as  allegory  is  a  thing  to  be  understood  and 
enjoyed;  but  in  what  poetical  work  have  you  read  that  it  is  also  a  thing 
to  be  practised?  Does  not  your  sinful  tongue  rend  itself  into  a  thousand 
parts  when  you  say  that  the  Maharpi,*  who,  proficient  in  all  Sastras, 
penetrated  the  depths  of  Sadhana,  lying  beyond  even  the  keen  intelligence 
of  philosophers,  and  who,  attaining  Siddhi  in  that  Sadhana,  disclosed 
superworldly  Divine  truths  to  men  as  if  they  were  ordinary  visible  things, 
could  yet  not  find  out  the  allegory  you  discover,  even  although  they  could 
apprehend  the  Formless  One? 

Arc  all  the  efforts  which  accomplished  Sadhus,  Sadhakas,  and  learned 
men  have  bestowed  on  Yajfia,’  meditation,  knowledge,  Japa,  Tapas,* 
worship,  study,  and  the  like  during  the  successive  ages  of  Satya,  Treta, 
Dvapara,  and  Kali,  a  mere  waste  of  labour?  Could  none  of  them  under¬ 
stand  the  Adhyatmik  meaning  based  on  allegory?  Wonderful,  indeed,  is 
the  power  of  research  which  you  have  acquired  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord 
of  the  Kali  age!  The  word  Adhyatmik  means  that  which  concerns  Atma; 
but  Atma  is  devoid  of  form,  so  that  all  that  concerns  it  must  also  be  formless. 
Thus  the  doctrine  that  the  Deity  is  possessed  of  form  *  is  about  to  be 


1  The  powers  known  as  anima,  laghimS,  etc. 

*  Austerity,  devotion,  etc.  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Siitra). 

8  Viveka.  *  Vairigya. 

*  The  Scriptures  dealing  with  the  art  of  medicine,  archery  (warfare),  and 
music. 

•  Great  Seers.  7  “  Sacrifice  ”  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

8  Repetition  of  Mantra;  austerities,  devotion,  etc.  Vide  ibid. 

•  SakSravada. 


644 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


explained  away.  One  may  kill  a  serpent  without  breaking  one’s  stick.1 
Let  the  doctrine  of  the  Deity,  being  possessed  of  form,  be  quietly  abandoned,, 
but  in  such  a  way  that  society  may  not  be  offended.  This  is  the  reason 
why  we  meet  with  so  much  unswerving  faith  in  the  Adhyatmik  principles; 
this  is  why  Adhyatmik  interpretations  of  Srimadbhagavata,  Bhagavadgita, 
Mahanirvapa  Tantra,  and  other  books  have  nowadays  gone  abroad  and 
are  bang  sold,  distributed,  and  discussed  in  meetings  held  under  the 
standard  of  Aryaiastra;  this  is  why  hypocritical  infidels  arc  moving  about 
the  country  preaching  the  irreligion  *  of  Adhyatmik  interpretation  under 
the  pretence  of  preaching  Dharma;  this  is  why  unsuspecting  honest  people 
who,  having  in  good  faith  collected  those  sharp  weapons  with  the  notion 
that  they  were  Sastrik,  are  now  being  wounded  with  them.  It  is  simply 
because  they  disguise  themselves  behind  the  name  of  Sastra  that  these 
robbers  in  the  field  of  Dharma  get  shelter  from  religious  men.  It  is,  how* 
ever,  good  news  that  the  time  for  appearance  of  the  mercy  of  Her  who  is 
full  of  mercy  for  the  poor  has  become  ripe,  and  that  almost  everybody  has 
now  learnt  die  lesson  of  experience.  Still,  according  to  the  rule  that  well- 
wishers  should,  out  of  love,  reiterate  an  advice,  even  if  it  is  already  known, 
we  say  again:  -“Society,  beware,  beware!”  It  matters  not  whether  you 
fear  cholera,  small-pox,  and  malaria  or  not;  but  whenever  you  meet  an 
Adhyatmik  teacher,  do  not  forget  to  make  a  profound  bow  and  take  leave 
of  him  in  fear! 

We  shall  most  probably  have  to  show  in  the  course  of  our  discussion 
of  other  topics  later  on  how,  why,  and  whence  this  system  of  Adhyatmik 
interpretation  has  been  evolved.  For  this  reason  we  desist  from  further 
dealing  with  the  subject  here. 


1 A  Bengali  adage  meaning:  **  One  may  accomplish  one's  object  without 
injury  to  oneself," 

1  AH  harms.. 


CHAPTER  XVn 


OUTER  WORSHIP 1 

The  Mahanirvana  Tantra  says:  “  The  highest  state  is  that  in  which  the 
presence  of  Brahman  is  perceived  in  all  thing*.  The  middle  state  is  that 
of  meditation.  The  lowest  state  is  that  of  hymn  and  Japa,1  and  the  state 
lower  than  the  lowest  is  that  of  external  worship.*  Yoga  is  realization  or 
the  accomplishment  of  Unity  between  JIva  and  Paramatma.  Worship  is 
based  on  the  twofold  knowledge  that  He  it  Iivara,  and  I  am  His  servant 
but  for  him  who  has  known  that  everything  is  Brahman  there  is  neither 
Yoga  nor  worship.” 

The  Niruttara  Tantra  says:  “  Mental  worship  is  superior,  and  external 
worship  is  inferior.  By  worshipping  Devata  a  Sadhaka  is  himself  honoured. 
Japa,  without  a  doubt,  leads  to  Siddhi  in  Mantra,  and  Homa  leads  to 
Siddhi  in  all  things;  for  this  reason  a  Sadhaka  should  perform  all  these 
three  things — namely,  Wonhip,  Japa,  and  Homa.  “  O  Kulcivari!  * 
Sadhakas  following  the  Viracara  and  Divyacara  *  are  competent  for  mental 
worship— that  is  to  say,  they  alone  are  competent  to  perform  mental  without 
outer  worship.” 

Similarly,  other  Tantras  also  have  described  external  worship  as  bong 
of  a  lower  kind.  It  is  these  statements  and  authorities  which  have  now¬ 
adays  appeared  in  the  society  of  common  people  like  a  mighty  comet 
threatening  untimely  dissolution,  and  this  is  why  people,  proud  of  their 
philosophical  knowledge,  arc  most  averse  and  even  opposed  to  external 
worship.  They  are  strongly  of  opinion  that  outer  wonhip  is  worse  than 
the  worst,  so  that  its  performance  is  degrading,  or  that  the  most  degraded 
persons  only  will  perform  it.  Why,  then,  should  they  perform  it?  We, 
too,  admit  that  outer  worship  is  inferior;  but  we  ask,  To  what  is  it  inferior? 
Is  it  inferior  to  spiritual  knowledge,  or  to  meditation,  or  to  Japa  and  hymn, 
•or  to  that  which  they  themselves  do,  abandoning  all  these? 

It  is  true  that  outer  wonhip  belongs  to  the  lowest  order  of  competence, 
but  what  sublimity  have  you  reached  that  you  can  turn  up  your  note  at 

1  That  is,  external  ceremonial  wonhip  as  opposed  to  inner  mental  wonhip. 

*  Repetition  of  Mantra  (see  Introduction  to  Tatra  Sistra). 

1  Mistress  of  the  Tintrik  Rauls*. 

*  The  two  Tantrik  Acinu  above  PaiyScira. 


646 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  very  mention  of  it?  To  write  Ka-Kha 1  in  a  primary  school  is  no¬ 
doubt  the  lowest  stage  in  education,  but  do  you  think  you  will  become  a 
great  Pip,  proficient  in  all  Sastras,  without  having  first  acquired  a  knowl¬ 
edge  of  letters?  If  anyone  has  ever  acquired  proficiency  in  all  Sastras,  it  is 
because  of  his  writing  of  Ka-Kha  under  the  Guru-Mahaiaya.*  Similarly,, 
if  anyone  has  ever  acquired  competence  in  spiritual  knowledge,  know  that 
he  has  done  so  by  virtue  of  external  worship.  It  is  true  that  the  student 
leaves  the  primary  school  for  the  Tol  *  or  the  college,  but  it  is  certain  that 
he  docs  not  leave  behind  him  Ka-Kha.*  When  Ka-Kha  has  become 
firmly  and  indelibly  impressed  in  their  minds  for  all  life,  it  is  then  that 
boys  enter  the  boundless  sea  of  Sastra  on  the  craft  of  that  same  Ka-Kha. 
Similarly,  when,  in  course  of  the  S&dhana  of  the  lotus-feet  of  the  Supreme 
Devata  in  external  worship  in  the  primary  school  of  the  Supreme  Guru, 
meditation  and  concentration  become  natural  to  a  Sadhaka,  it  is  then 
that  he  enters  the  sea  of  eternal  knowledge  and  crosses  to  the  other  side  of 
existence  with  the  help  of  the  craft  of  those  fear-dispelling  Feet.  The 
relation  between  the  Sadhana  of  Mahavidya  *  and  the  worship  of  the 
Devata,  whose  substance  is  the  Mantra  given  by  the  Guru,  is  similar  to 
that  which  exists  between  the  cultivation 1  of  Vidya 1  and  the  writing  of 
Ka-Kha  under  Guru-MahaSaya.  Whatever  Sgstra  you  may  attempt  to 
learn,  the  Mantra  of  Ka-Kha  will  take  you  safely  through  all  difficulty. 
However  vast  the  sea  of  Sastra  may  be,  Ka-Kha  will  carry  you  across  it. 
Similarly,  however  vast  be  the  domain  of  Jfiana,  Yoga,  and  Samadhi  *' 
may  be,  the  great  Devata,  who  is  Mantra,  will  assume  form,  take  you  by 
the  hand,  and  carry  you  across  it.  I  shall  see  that  the  Mother,  the  I&vari 
of  all,  with  dishevelled  hair,  whose  substance  is  bliss,  is  joyously  laughing 
and  dancing  in  Jnana,  Yoga,  Samadhi,*  or  in  whatever  else  I  may  think 
or  do,  and  that  such  untiring  dance  is  raising  waves  of  love  in  the  sea  of 
my  knowledge.  You  are  mistaken,  O  brother!  From  whom  have  you 
heard  that  I  have  anything  in  this  Samsara,  be  it  Sadhana,  prayer,10  medi¬ 
tation;11  knowledge,1*  enjoyment,1*  or  liberation,1*  in  which  the  Mother  is 
not?  In  my  Sadhana  is  the  Mother;  in  the  object  of  my  Sadhana  is  the 
Mother;  in  my  Siddhi  is  the  Mother;  and  in  the  object  which  I  get  by 
Siddhi  is  the  Mother.  She  is  at  the  beginning,  at  the  middle,  at  the  end, 


•That  is,  A  B  C.  Ka-Kha  being  the  first  two  letters  of  the  Sanskrit 
alphabet.  *  The  teacher  in  a  primary  school. 

*  Orthodox  Sanskrit  school. 

*  He  does  not  unlearn  all  that  he  had  learnt  before. 

‘  Supreme  spiritual  knowledge.  *  Sadhana. 

1  The  lower  knowledge.  *  Literally,  “  Of  the  Tattva  of  Jiiana,”  etc. 

*  Spiritual  knowledge.  ••  Bhajana.  u  Dhyana. 

“JMna.  “Bhukti.  ’  «  Mukti, 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


647 


and  beyond  the  end.  Know  that  that  which  remains  when  all  is  gone  is 
the  Mother  only.  When  there  are  none  left  to  call  the  Mother  “  Mother,” 
know  that  then,  also,  there  will  be  the  Mother  only.  For  the  Mother  is 
my  Mother  as  well  as  my  son’s  Mother,  my  father’s  Mother,  my  mother’s 
Mother,  and  even  Her  own  Mother;  so  that  when  all  else  is  lost,  there 
will  remain  the  Mother,  the  Mother,  the  Mother!  When  will  that  day 
come  on  which,  losing  all  we  possess,  we  ourselves  shall  be  like  corpses 
and  see  the  Mother  only  ? 

Nowadays  numbers  of  precedents  and  authorities  are  being  collected 
for  the  abolition  of  external  worship.  Someone  writing  on  the  life  of 
R&maprasada 1  says:  “  Did  he  worship  the  earthen  Kali?  Never.”  He 
said:  “  The  fierce-visagcd  Devi  in  the  temple  of  the  heart-lotus,”  as  if 
Ramaprasada’s  Kali  was  never  wont  to  issue  from  himself,  or  as  if  the 
Kali  of  those  who  worship  Her  earthen  image  never  appears  in  their  heart- 
lotuses.  The  expression  “  earthen  Kali  ”  itself  is  ridiculous,*  brother  critic! 
Even  the  earthen  Kali  is  of  real  worth;  but  it  is  a  matter  of  lasting  regret 
that  being  a  man  of  flesh  and  bone  you  have  become  earthen  and  of  no 
worth.  We  know  not  when  Fortune  will  smile  on  you  so  that  the  Mother 
will  show  Herself  in  and  through  earth;  when  you  will  understand  that 
although  earth  is  earth,  there  is  no  lack  of  the  Mother  in  it !  Ramaprasada 
says :  “  Hundreds  of  true  Vedas  say  that  my  Tara  is  without  form.”  Out 
of  the  thousand  songs  of  Ramaprasada  only  this  much  has  been  quoted; 
not  even  one  whole  song,  but  only  that  portion  of  it  in  which  the  word 
“  without  form  ”  occurs,  as  if  Ramaprasada  says  on  oath:  “  Everything 
else  that  I  have  said  is  falsehood;  only  the  portion  ‘My  Tara  is  without 
form  ’  is  pure  truth  ”;  and,  as  if  the  following  passages  were  mere  raving 
fantasy  or  senseless  talk,  the  only  sensible  statement  bring  that  which 
speaks  of  the  Devi  as  being  “  without  form  ”. 

Song 

“  O  Mother,  how  Thou  didst  dance  in  battle ! 

Incomparable  is  Thy  garment, 

Loose  is  Thine  hair. 

Naked  art  Thou  on  Hara’s  breast. 

How  Thou  didst  dance  in  battle! 

Who  is  that  dark  Lady?  * 

Her  colour  is  like  crushed  collyrium. 

Her  face  is  like  the  circle  of  the  autumnal  moon, 


1  The  celebrated  Bengali  poet  and  Tantrik. 

■  For  Kali  cannot  be  earthen.  *  Syama. 


648 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Her  tresses  are  loosely  flowing, 

Her  body  is  splashed  with  blood; 

She  shines  like  a  freshly-formed  cloud  streaked  with  lightning! 

O  who  is  that  Charmer  of  mind — that  Charmer  of  mind? 
like  a  mass  of  molten  lightning  is  She. 

Her  beauty  shines  like  gems  and  rubies. 

O  who  is  that  Charmer  of  mind? 

With  a  swaying  gait,  who  comes  there? 

Her  tresses  are  loose,  and  She  is  stirred  by  wine, 

She  moves  fast  in  battle, 

Seizes  those  who  surround  me,1 

Holds  elephants  in  the  hollow  of  Her  hand; 

Ah!  who  is  that  Dark  Lady  coming  there? 

Who  is  She,  young  and  naked, 

And  yet  devoid  of  shame? 

She  charms  the  world. 

What  unseemly  conduct  for  a  lady  of  respectable  family! 

Her  gait  is  like  that  of  an  elephant, 

She  is  intoxicated  with  wine,1 
Her  tongue  is  lolling, 

Her  hair  is  loose, 

The  sight  of  Her  makes  men  and  Devas  fear  Her. 

Roaring  She  crushes  Danavas.” 1 

0  critic!  wonderful  indeed  is  the  impartiality  of  your  criticism!  Rama- 
praskda  during  his  lifetime  was  seldom  heard  to  speak  of  the  formless. 
It  was  only  when,  after  having  worshipped  the  Devi,  whose  substance  is 
consciousness  in  her  image  of  Earth  in  the  dead  of  the  new  moon  night, 
he,  on  the  following  morning,  went  to  throw  that  image  of  the  Mother  of 
the  world  into  water,  and  after  having  placed  the  Mother’s  image  on  the 
bank  of  the  Ganges,  descended  into  the  water  until  it  reached  his  waist— it 
was  then  that  the  Mother’s  son  stood  before  the  Mother  as  “  belonging 
only  to  the  Mother  then,  keeping  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  Mother’s  image 
without,  he  went  into  Samadhi,4  having  made  the  Samsara  Mudri,8  and 
called  the  Mother  within  from  without  Then  immediately  the  Mother, 
the  treasure  of,  and  dweller  in  the  heart,  and  subduer  of  Death,  knowing 
the  approaching  end  of  the  son’s  play,1  appeared  all  full  of  smiles  in  his 


1  Apparently  referring  to  man’s  sins. 

1  Asaveravda.  *  Sons  of  Danu;  enemies  of  the  Devas. 

4  Trance;  ecstasy. 

1  The  Mudra  of  dissolution  which  is  done  when  the  life  is  taken  from  the 
image. 

•  LOi;  here  hit  sojourn  on  earth. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


649 


heart  The  fear-dispelling  look  of  the  Blissful  Dew  dispelled  the  fear  of 
existence.  The  dance  of  love  of  the  Dancing  Kali  opened  the  door  of  his 
heart  His  body,  tired  with  the  overflowing  bliss  of  love,  began  to  lose 
all  self-control.  His  eyes,  closed  with  bliss,  filled  with  tears;  then  it  was 
that,  bringing  to  an  end  his  beloved  Sadhana,  the  Sadhaka  rang  to  his 
heart’s  content  for  the  last  time  in  his  life  to  the  ringing  chords  of  his 
heart: 


“  The  black  cloud  rises  in  the  sky  within. 

With  joy  the  mind-pcacock 1  dances  and  plays. 

The  clouds,  with  rumbling  sound,  say,  “  Fear  not,” 

The  soft  smile  of  the  bliss  of  love  is  like  the  beauty  lightning 
therein. 

Fixed  is  the  Sadhaka’s  gaze. 

From  the  eyes  tears  flow  incessantly  wherewith  the  thirst  and  fear 
of  the  hcart-cataka  *  are  soon  removed. 

After  this  birth  comes  the  next  birth,  and  then  many,  many 
births. 

But  Ramaprasada  says:  ‘  There  will  be  no  more  births  for  him 
in  the  womb.’  ” 

Notwithstanding  his  achievement  he  still  hankered  for  the  Mother. 
In  fact,  the  certain  knowledge  that  “  there  will  be  no  more  birth  in  the 
womb  ”  increases  such  hankering  a  hundredfold;  and  then,  feeling  unbear¬ 
able  pain  at  the  prospect  of  being  separated  from  the  right  of  the  Mother 
of  the  world,  the  S&dhaka,  whose  life  was  in  the  Mother,  again  fell  at  Her 
feet  and,  weeping  piteously,  said: 

“  Will  such  a  day  come,  O  Tara!  a  day  on  which  tears  will  stream 
from  my  eyes,  when  I  will  cry,  ‘  Tara,  Tara,  Tara!  *  * 

My  heart-lotus  wi^  be  fully  blown. 

The  mind’s  darkness  will  be  dispelled,  and  then  I  shall  fall  and 
roll  on  the  earth,  and  be  beside  myself,  crying,  ‘  Tara!  ’  * 

I  shall  forsake  all  distinction. 

My  mind’s  sorrow  will  be  destroyed. 

O !  hundreds  of  true  Vedas  say  that  my  Tira  is  ‘  without  form  *. 

Sri  Ramapras&da  says  ‘  The  Mother  dwells  in  all  bodies. 

O  blinded  eye!  see,  the  Mother  is  in  darkness  the  dispeller  of 
darkness.’  ” 


1  Referring  to  the  play  of  the  peacock  under  cloudy  skies. 

*  A  bird  which  is  said  to  live  on  the  raindrop. 

*  Title  of  the  Devi  as  “  Saviour  ”, 


650 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


O  Tara!  when  will  the  day  come  on  which  you  will  be  without  form?' 
The  day  on  which  the  heart-lotus  will  be  fully-  blown  and  the  mind’s 
darkness  will  be  dispelled. 

Then  I  shall  be  beside  myself,  and  falling  on  the  earth,  cry,  “  Tir&!  ” 

On  the  day  on  which  I  shall  forsake  all  distinctions  and  my  mind’s 
sorrow  will  be  destroyed,  on  that  day  hundreds  of  true  Vedas  will  say, 
“  My  Tara  is  without  form,”  and  then  only  will  the  Vedic  saying,  “  Tara 
is  without  form,”  become  true  for  me. 

On  the  day  on  which  this  form  of  mine  will  vanish,  on  that  same  day 
my  Tara  also  will  be  formless.  Tara  will  not  really  be  without  fonn,  but 
will  be  so  for  me.  This  is  what  Ramaprasada  means  to  say,  because  it  is 
the  state  of  possession  of  form  by  me  which  leads  to  my  worship  of  Her. 

On  the  day  on  which  this  form  of  mine  will  vanish  and  I  shall  merge 
in  Her  great  liberation  aspect,1  whose  substance  is  consciousness,  on  that 
day,  as  I  shall  be  without  form,  so  my  Tara  also  will  be  without  form. 
TTien  will  be  the  due  time  for  the  realization  of  the  truth  that  Tara  is 
without  form,  according  to  the  teaching  of  the  Veda;  then,  with  the  loss 
of  power  to  perceive  my  own  individuality,  I  shall  also  lose  the  power  to 
perceive  the  Tarahood  of  Tara — that  is,  the  fact  that  She  is  possessed  of 
form  or  individuality.1  If,  therefore,  there  is  any  possibility  of  Tara  ever 
being  to  me  without  form,  it  will  be  on  that  day;  but,  so  long  as  I  possess 
my  own  individuality,  or  so  long  as  I  am  I,  my  Tara  also  is  undoubtedly 
Tar3,  possessed  of  form  and  Mother. 

Now  tell  me,  is  Ramaprasada,  called  Tara,  possessed  of  form  or 
formless?  You  want  to  quote  the  authority  of  Ramaprasada,  but  we  are 
greatly  sorry  that  you  do  not  feel  that  it  will  be  long  before  you  can  under¬ 
stand  what  Ramaprasada  has  said.  There  is  another  thing  which  I  want 
to  ask  you:  Is  it  because  you  look  upon  Ramaprasada  as  your  Guru  that 
you  quote  his  words  as  authority,  or  because  he  happened  to  say  some¬ 
thing  to  your  liking  that  you  are  disposed  to  quote  his  authority?  or,  do 
you  want  to  draw  people  to  your  party  without  understanding  and  mis¬ 
understanding  what  Ramaprasada  has  said  ?  Do  you  wish  to  steal  the  whole 
of  the  beginning  and  end  of  what  Ramaprasada  has  said,  and  then  to 
frighten  them  by  a  quotation  from  the  middle  of  a  single  passage,  without 
citing  that  which  precedes  or  follows  it?  If  you  look  upon  Ramaprasada 
as  your  Guru  and  follow  his  teachings,  why,  out  of  his  thousand  sayings, 
have  you  quoted  only  the  passage,  “  Hundreds  of  true  Vedas  say  my  Tara 
is  formless?  ”  From  the  fact  that  you  have  done  so,  it  appears  that  there 
is  a  secret  connection  of  some  formless  *  love  between  you  and  that  which 
is  “  without  form  ”.  Here  you  have  shown  yourself  to  be  partial,  so  that 


1  Kaivalya.  1  literally,  “  She-ness  ”. 

*  Nirakara — undefined.  Here  unsubstantial,  fancied. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


651! 


how  can  you  escape  ?  In  order  to  give  a  judgment  as  an  umpire  on  any 
matter  one  must  be  careful  to  observe  the  strictest  neutrality.  How  can 
the  interest  of  the  public  be  safe  where  your  actions  are  guided  by  selfish 
motives?  You  who  seek  to  establish  that  the  Deity  is  without  form!  It  is  a 
nice  question  which  you  have  raised;  no  one  objects  to  it.  But  the  question 
is,  How  is  it  that  while  out  of  a  thousand  songs  you  have  picked  out  an 
expression  which  occurs  only  once  in  them,  you  have  yet,  out  of  those 
thousand  songs  containing  thousands  of  references  to  the  Deity  possessing 
form,  not  selected  a  single  one  of  such  references  ?  Of  course,  there  is  no 
doubt  that  that  which  possesses  form  is  immensely  heavier  than  that  which 
is  without  form  1  and  is  a  burden  for  most  people.  How  can  you  alone 
bear  the  weight  of  Her  whom  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  universe,  composed 
of  three  worlds,  have  joined  together  in  bearing  for  all  time?  As  your  body 
is  fine,  your  mind  is  fine,  and  your  worship  is  fine;  so,  by  good  fortune, 
the  Devata  whom  you  worship  is  also  fine,  extremely  fine — in  fact,  destitute 
of  form.  The  weight  of  such  a  Devata  is  enough  for  you;  but  still,  in  spite 
of  the  fact  that  you  find  the  weight  of  a  Devata  possessing  form  to  be 
unbearable,  you  have  not  done  well  in  suppressing  the  fact  of  the  existence 
of  that  unbearable  weight.  If  you  could  yourself  raise  it,  you  ought  at 
least  to  have  pointed  out  that,  whilst  Ramaprasada  spoke  a  thousand 
times  of  the  Devata  as  possessing  form,  he  only  once  spoke  of  the  Devata 
as  being  formless;  but  such  a  saying  was  not  for  you  and  I,  or  for  even 
Ramaprasada  himself.  It  was  for  the  stage  at  which  the  individuality  of 
Ramaprasada  vanished,  and  the  relation  of  worshipper  and  worshipped 
was  past. 

Sri  Ramaprasada  says:  “The  Mother  dwells  in  all  bodies.  Blinded 
eyes!  see,  the  Mother  is  in  darkness  the  dispcller  of  darkness.”  The  Mother 
is  present  in  all  things;  but  it  is  regrettable  that  you,  whose  eyes  have  been 
blinded  by  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  do  not  see  Her  for  want  of  the  sight 
of  knowledge,  and  it  is  a  matter  for  great  regret  that,  although  the  Mother 
is  the  dispeller  of  darkness,  you  do  not  see  Her  in  the  darkness.  It  is  true 
that  the  sun  and  the  moon  dispel  the  darkness  of  the  world,  but  they  cannot 
dispel  the  darkness  which  enshrouds  a  blind  man. 

Unfortunately,  a  blind  man  differs  greatly  from  those  possessing  eye¬ 
sight.  A  blind  man  is  himself  wanting  in  eyesight,  through  the  fault  of 
the  Karma  done  by  him  in  previous  births.*  Had  it  been  darkness  from 
without,  the  sun’s  rays  could  have  dispelled  it.  But  the  darkness  inherent 
in  the  blind  man’s  eyes  is  due  to  the  want  of  vital  power;  no  external  cause 
has  brought  about  this  want.  It  is  an  internal  cause  which  has  induced 


1  Here  possessed  of  form = substantial,  not  possessed  of  form —unsubstantial. 
*  Qf.  the  New  Testament:  “  Rabbi,  who  did  sin,  this  man  or  his  parent 
that  he  was  bom  blind?  ” 


■652 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


it  is  me,  and  the  name  of  this  cause  is  misfortune.  If,  now,  I  can  destroy 
this  misfortune  by  doing  such  acts  as  bring  good  fortune,  i i,  by  the  grace 
•of  Devati,  I  get  back  my  eyesight,  then  only  I  shall  first  see  that  the  Mother 
it  the  destroyer  of  darkness  even  in  the  darkness,  and  next,  being  myself 
freed  from  all  darkness,  I  shall  see  the  Mother  Herself  fully.  For,  just  as 
the  Sun  cannot  be  seen  unless  its  power  of  dispelling  darkness  is  seen,  or  a 
lamp  cannot  be  seen  unless  its  light  is  seen,  or  the  lightning  cannot  be  seen 
unless  its  flash  is  seen;  so,  despite  the  fact  that  the  Mother  is  all  Saktis, 
She  cannot  be  seen  unless  Her  Sakti  becomes  manifest.  She  is  eternal 
knowledge  and  bliss.  Who  can  perceive  Her  omnipresence  without  the 
light  of  Her  knowledge  ?  True,  the  Mother  is  the  destroyer  of  darkness, 
but  then  I  am  blind  through  the  fault  of  my  Karma.  This  darkness  of 
mine  is  not  from  without;  it  is  the  inner  darkness.  The  Sadhaka  says  I 
need  not  be  afraid  on  this  account,  for  just  as  this  darkness  is  within,  so  are 
the  sun  and  moon  which  will  illumine  it.  She  rises  in  the  inmost  recess 
•of  that  which  is  within,  so  that  that  which  is  inner  darkness  in  respect  of 
the  outer  world  is  outer  darkness  in  respect  to  Her  who  is  within  the  inmost 
recess  of  the  heart,  and  darkness  flees  afar  from  the  fear-dispelling  Sakti  of 
Her  refulgent  rays.  In  order,  therefore,  to  obtain  the  protection  of  the 
Mother  of  the  world,  whose  glances  are  like  infinite  millions  of  suns  and 
moons,  we  must  leave  the  domain  of  darkness  and  attain  the  lunar  region; 
and  if  one  lives  even  in  the  darkness  of  Patala,*  the  rays  of  Her  mercy  make 
that  region  shine  as  though  it  were  that  of  the  moon.  This  is  why,  although 
you  are  blind  within,  you  should  know  that  even  this  “  within  ”  is  without 
when  compared  with  the  place  where  She  resides.  This,  too,  is  why,  in 
spite  of  his  knowledge  thaj  his  eyes  are  blind,  Ramaprasada  says:  “  Blind 
eyes  see  the  Mother.  For  although  you  are  blind  in  the  dark  She  is  the 
destroyer  of  darkness,”  and  the  moment  his  darkness  will  be  destroyed 
you  will  see  that  “  the  Mother  dwells  in  all  bodies  In  feet,  although 
Ramaprasada  had  been  in  the  past  a  blind  JIva,  he  was  not  blind  when 
he  said  this.  It  was  with  reference  to  the  blindness  of  his  past  life  that 
he  Bays  “  blinded  eyes”.  What  he  sees  now  elates  him  with  joy,  and  he 
gives  expression  to  it  when  he  sayi:  “  See  the  Mother  is  in  darkness,  the 
destroyer  of  darkness.”  There  is  no  more  fear  of  darkness.  The  destroyer 
of  darkness  has  come.  Hence,  look  while  there  is  yet  time,  “  the  Mother 
dwells  in  the  bodies.” 

“  Will  such  a  day  come,  O  Tara!  ”  This  piteous  prayer  of  RSma- 
prasada’s  heart  is  to-day  being  heard  and  fulfilled  by  Tara  Herself,  who 
stands  before  him.  Men  see  that  Ramaprasada  has  to-day  brought  the 
Mother  to  the  bank  of  the  Ganges  *  to  throw  Her  away,  but  the  Mother 


*  The  nether  world. 

*  After  worship  of  the  image  it  is  thrown  into  the  sacred  river. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


653- 


secs  that  Ramaprasada  has  to-day  brought  the  Mother  to  the  bank  of  the 
Ganges  in  order  that  he  may  throw  himself  away.1 * * 

In  order  to  bring  the  worldly  play  of  the  worldly  Ramaprasada  to 
an  end,  in  order  that  She  may  take  up  to  Her  bosom  Her  most  beloved 
child,  and  conclude  with  Daksijja  *  the  worldly  sacrifice  of  Her  devoted 
son,  Daksiqa  *  Herself  has  to-day  appeared  in  the  visible  image.  Even 
through  that  image,  which  has  been  abandoned  by  means  of  Mantra,4 * * 7 
Her  inner  advent  has  been  revealed.  The  waves  of  light  of  Her  whose 
substance  is  light  have  mingled  with  the  waves  of  the  Ganges,  and  with 
them  have  swelled  the  waves  of  the  love  of  Ramaprasada,  who  has  seen 
Varapali 8  in  water,  on  land,  and  in  the  heavens.  “  To  him  who  dies  in 
Kafi,”  *  Siva  says,  “  Thou  art  That  Above  my  *  Thou  art  That  ’  is  the 
Queen  of  Mahda.”  “  Why  should  I  live  in  places  of  pilgrimage?  4  Many 
a  Gaya,  Ganga,  and  Varapali  8  I  shall  see  under  Syama's  feet.  What 
need  have  I  for  Kali?  8  The  lotus-feet  of  Kali  are  the  equal  of  innumerable 
places  of  pilgrimage.”  These  old  sayings  have  to-day  become  true. 

“The  day  on  which  tears  will  stream  from  my  eyes  as  I  will  cry, 
'  Tara,  Tara,  Tara !  ’  ”  “  Presently  I  shall  be  beside  myself  and,  falling, 
roll  on  the  earth,  crying,  ‘  Tara!  *  ”  When  such  a  day  truly  came,  by  the 
grace  of  the  Mother  who  is  the  Saviour  of  the  poor,  the  refulgent  light  of 
the  black  beauty  of  the  cloud-like  black  Devi,  the  charmer  of  Kala,’  made 
day  and  night  one  and  the  same.  The  three  worlds  sank  in  the  playing 
waves  of  that  beauty.  The  dark  son  of  the  dark  youthful  Mother  at  last 
reached  the  shore,  which  is  the  Mother’s  bosom,  after  having  swum 
through  the  ocean  of  time.  The  child  of  Kali,  opening  the  temple  of  the 
heart,  and  bringing  therein  the  Mother  from  without,  shaking  the  bank 
of  the  Ganges  with  the  deep  and  loud  cry  of  the  name  of  Kali,  the  con¬ 
queror  of  Kala,1  and  offering  his  life  as  an  oblation  in  the  Kali  Puja  on 
the  illuminated  new  moon  night,  at  last  slept  in  Kali  bosom.  The  worship 
of  Bhavanl  *  ended  with  Ramaprasada’*  life-play,®  and  he  died  without 
having  to  perform  the  ceremony  in  which  the  image  is  thrown  away. 
We  say:  “ Oh,  the  Mother’s  blessed  beloved  son!  Truly  had  you  learnt 


1  In  death. 

*  The  present  made  to  the  officiating  priest  at  the  conclusion  of  the  sacrifice 

(Yajfia). 

8  A  name  of  the  Devi  as  the  “  favourable  one  ”. 

*  At  the  conclusion  of  worship  the  Devi  is  let  depart  from  the  image  by  the 
Visaijana  Mantra  and  Samhara  MudrS. 

8  Kali  or  Benares.  •  Tirtha. 

7  Siva,  death  or  time. 

8  The  Devi  as  spouse  of  Siva  in  his  form  as  Bhava. 

*  Bhavalila  or  life. 


‘654 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


how  to  bid  the  Mother  depart  by  means  of  the  SamhJra  Mudri 1 * *  after 
you  had  worshipped  Her!  and  blessed  art  Thou,  O  Mother  Bengal!  Truly 
good  teaching  hast  Thou  given  to  Thy  child.  A  marvellous  teaching  in 
the  Mahamantra  of  Mahavidya  didst  Thou  impart  to  Ramaprasada  by 
.the  grace  of  which  even  that  which  he  earned  *  in  the  work  of  throwing 
away  the  image  became  endless,  wasteless,  and  unfailing  both  in  tins 
world  and  hereafter. 

“  To-day  hundreds  of  thousands  of  the  poor  who  walked  the  road  in 
India  enjoy  as  masters  the  spiritual  wealth  of  these  earnings  of  Rama¬ 
prasada.  Victory  to  Thee,  O  Mother!  Victory  to  Thy  Prasada!  ”  8 

The  Sadhaka  will  now  understand  in  what  way  Ramaprasada’s  Tara 
was  formless.  Ramaprasada  called  Tara  formless  at  a  time  and  on  a  day 
when  he  himself  was  no  longer  Ramaprasada.  At  present  it  has  become 
very  easy  to  the  community  of  Asuras 4 * *  to  call  Tara  formless  by  taking  up 
the  note  which  Ramaprasada  sounded  at  the  time  of  his  Samadhi 8  in 
Parabrahma.  The  very  mention  of  the  name  of  Tara  possessing  form 
makes  the  hearts  of  Asuras  tremble.  Their  community  can  find  no  rest 
unless  Tara  becomes  formless.  Nevertheless,  the  precedent  of  Rama¬ 
prasada  is  not  acceptable  so  long  as  one  does  not  oneself  realize  the  Vidcha 
Kaivalya  •  which  Ramaprasada  attained.  Ramaprasada  became  himself 
formless  immediately  upon  his  calling  Tara  formless,  whilst  the  more  these 
men  cry  out,  “  Without  form!  Without  form!  ”  day  and  night,  the  more 
do  their  own  forms  grow.  What  sort  of  formlessness  is  this? 

While  an  effort  is  being  made  to  prove  that  Ramaprasada’s  Tira 
was  without  form,  and  that  he  did  not  beheve  in  the  Deity  possessing 
form,  it  is  also  said  that,  as  if  urged  by  a  presentiment  of  approaching 
death,  he  worshipped  Kali,  and  on  the  next  day,  at  the  time  of  throwing 
away  the  image,  he  was  standing  in  the  Ganges  with  the  water  reaching 
to  bis  waist,  and  was  singing  the  last  song  of  his  life,  when  his  Brahma- 
randhra  7  burst  open,  and  he  died. 

People  nowadays  say  that  he  did  not  die  of  any  disease,  but  that 
excess  of  emotion  a  caused  his  death.  What  a  strange  conclusion  this  is 
of  the  messenger  of  Kali!  •  Ramaprasada  did  not  believe  in  the  Deity 

1  The  Mudra,  signifying  dissolution,  used  with  the  Visaijana  Mantra. 

*  The  spiritual  merit  earned. 

*  Prasada  may  be  a  shortened  form  of  Ramaprasada’s  name,  or  may  be 
“  grace  ” — probably  the  first. 

4  Enemies  of  the  Gods;  here  inimically  disposed  men,  their  types,  on  earth. 

*  Ecstatic  union  with  the  Brahman. 

*  Liberation  by  union  with  the  Paramatma. 

’  Opening  in  the  centre  of  the  crown  of  the  head  through  which  the  Prana 
in  the  Yogi  escapes  at  death. 

*  Bh&va.  •  The  Kali  age  personified. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


655 


possessing  form,  but  when  he  felt  the  approach  of  death  he  worshipped 
K5li  in  an  image  possessing  form,  and  on  the  next  day  died  while  preparing 
to  throw  away  the  worshipped  image.  If  he  did  not  believe  in  the  Deity 
possessing  form,  was  it  through  fear  of  death  that  he  worshipped  Kali  in 
the  image?  If  so,  the  critic  ought  to  have  understood  that,  whether  during 
our  lifetime  we  believe  or  do  not  believe  in  the  Deity  possessing  form,  we 
should  so  believe  at  the  time  of  death,  since  even  such  a  man  as  RJkma- 
prasada  had  to  believe  it  then.  It  was  only  when  Ramapras&da  became 
fully  enabled  to  feel  an  unembodied  presence  that  he  said  only  once  and 
from  his  own  standpoint:  "  My  Tara  is  without  form.”  Ah!  how  charming! 
What  an  incomparable  unfailing  power  does  the  love  of  Sadhana  proceed¬ 
ing  from  the  heart  wield,  so  that,  even  when  “  without  form,”  “  Tar4  is 
mine  ” !  Despite  being  “  without  form,”  my  Tara  is  still  “  Tara  ” !  It  is 
not  the  intention  of  the  Sadhaka  to  say  that  the  embodied  character  of 
T5ra  will  be  lost  in  Her  unembodied  presence.  He  means:  “  My  embodied 
Tara  will  then  drown  me  in  the  sea  of  Her  unembodied  presence.  I  shall 
lose  my  own  self,  and  be  completely  merged  in  Hers.”  Just  as  a  child 
sleeps  in  its  mother’s  arms  under  the  fold  of  her  dress,  so  I  shall  be  lost  in 
the  formless  liberating 1  womb  of  my  Mother  who  is  possessed  of  form, 
and  holds  the  infinite  universe  within  Herself.  Beyond  this,  in  his  state 
of  Sadhana,  he  did  not  perceive  this  unembodied  presence.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  he  has  distinedy  stated  that  it  is  impossible  for  even  Yogis  (not  to 
speak  of  himself  or  common  folk)  to  perceive  an  unembodied  presence. 
Referring  to  that  aspect  of  DevatS  which  is  Mantra,  Rimaprasada  has 
said: 

“  DoubUess  Kala  *  destroys  the  infinite  universe. 

But  the  terrible  mouth  *  grasps  that  KfUa. 

For  this  reason  Thou  art  called  Kali,  O  NarayapI! 

And  yet  Thou  art  called  the  Lady  of  Klla.* 

All  Jlvas  meditate  on  the  Guru  in  the  Brahmarandhra,6 

And  Sadaiiva  •  is  a  great  Yogi  through  meditation  on  the  form 
of  Kali. 

Truly  the  fifty  letters  7  form  the  substance  of  Veda  and  Agama. 

But  it  is  hard  for  even  a  Yogi  to  contemplate  the  formless 
aspect. 

Thou  hast  no  form,  Aksara  8  is  Thy  form. 

O  Thou  whose  substance  is  Gunas!  Thou  has  taken  forms  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  different  Gupas. 


1  Kaivalya. 

•Of  Kali. 

8  That  is  here,  the  head. 
7  Varnas. 


*  Death,  time. 

4  Siva. 

•  Siva  as  the  Guru. 

8  Written  characters. 


656 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Veda  says  that  Kaivalya  is  attained  by  wonhipping  the  formless. 
Deity. 

To  me,  this  notion  seems  wrong,  and  the  effect  of  lightness  of 
intellect. 

Prasada  says  the  mind  ever  seeks  the  Black  Beauty. 

Do  as  Thou  dost  wish.  Who  wants  Nirvana  ?  ”  1 
At  this  point  the  critic  opens  the  chest  of  his  learning  and  intellect* 
and  becomes  senseless  and  restless  with  brimming  joy  on  hearing  the  verse: 
“  Veda  says  that  Kaivalya  is  attained  by  worshipping  the  formless  Deity.” 
The  words,  however,  “  Veda  says  that  Kaivalya  is  attained  by  worshipping 
the  formless  Deity,”  are  not  Ramaprasada’s.  We  have  here  merely  a 
worthless  vociferation  of  arrogant  men  wanting  in  all  Sadhana.  R&ma- 
prasada  has,  in  fact,  protested  against  it,  and  said:  “  To  me  this  notion 
seems  wrong,  the  effects  of  lightness  of  intellect.”  This  portion  only 
contains  Ramaprasada’s  own  view.  To  those  who  say  that  there  can  be 
no  liberation  without  absorption  *  in  the  formless  Deity  (why  to  them  alone, 
to  even  Her  who  grants  liberation?),  Ramaprasada  replies  with  a  frown: 
“  Prasada  says,  the  mind  ever  seeks  the  Black  Beauty.  Do  as  Thou  dost 
wish.  Who  wants  Nirvana?  ”  If  Nirvana  liberation  cannot  be  attained 
without  a  realization  of  Thy  unembodied  presence,  never  mind.  What 
harm  if  it  is  not  attained  ?  Who  wants  Nirvana  liberation  if  he  gets  Thee? 
“  Do  as  Thou  dost  wish.”  Thou  mayest  or  mayest  not  grant  liberation. 
The  mind,  however,  will  not  seek  anything  besides  the  Black  Beauty. 
Those  who  eagerly  seek  their  liberation  without  Her  have  no  claim  to  Her 
boundless,  infinite,  unfathomable,  deep,  and  pure  love  and  devotion.  This 
is  what  Ramaprasada  has  clearly  said  in  the  following  song: 

“  What  need  have  I  for  Kail? 

Kali’s  lotus-feet  are  the  equal  of  places  of  pilgrimage  innumerable. 

When  I  meditate  upon  these  Feet  in  the  heart-lotus  I  swim  in  a 
sea  of  bliss. 

Just  as  fire  burns  a  mass  of  cotton, 

So  the  name  of  Kali  destroys  all  sins. 

A  headless  man  can  have  no  headache. 

Men  discharge  their  debt  to  the  forefathers  *  by  offering  pin^as  * 
at  Gaya. 

But  it  makes  me  laugh  to  hear  of  the  performance  of  Sraddha  1 
at  Gaya. 

‘See  this  explained  post.  He  loves  the  Mother  so  much  that  he  would 
rather  continue  to  be  Her  worshipper  than  be  that  which  is  worshipped. 

*  Laya.  *  Pitp.  1  Balls  of  food. 

1  Obsequial  rites  done  in  reverence  of  the  Pitre  at  the  town  of  Gaya.  The 
meaning  is  that  the  worshipper  of  Kali  gets  liberation,  and  therefore  it  is  not 
necessary  for  his  children  to  offer  Sr  add  ha. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


697 


For  him  who  ha*  meditated  on  Kali, 

Death  at  K&&  brings  liberation. 

True  this  is  Siva’s  saying, 

But  at  the  root  of  all  is  devotion. 

And  liberation  is  its  maid, 

What  is  gained  by  liberation? 

Water  mingles  with  water. 

I  love  to  eat  sugar, 

But  it  is  not  good  to  become  it 
In  amusement  Prasada  says, 

By  the  strength  of  the  merciful  Devi, 

The  fourfold  fruit 1  fall*  into  the  palms  of  him  who  contemplates 
the  Devi  with  dishevelled  hair.” 

Not  merely  the  seeking  of  Nirvana  liberation,  but  even  its  attainment, 
is  not  desired.  He  has  said :  “  I  love  to  eat  sugar,  but  it  is  not  good  to 
become  it.”  If  by  becoming  sugar  itself  I  am  unable  to  taste  sugar,  then 
why  should  I  become  sugar?  Lest  it  should  be  replied  that  this  is  for  the 
cessation  of  the  sorrows  of  Samsara,  RfimaprasAda  at  once  retorts  that  in 
the  realm  in  which  he  lives  there  is  neither  Samsara  nor  sorrow.  Let  him 
who  is  burdened  with  sorrow  seek  its  cessation.  “  Why  shall  we  speak  of 
liberation  alone?  The  fourfold  fruit  *  falls  into  the  palms  of  him  who  con¬ 
templates  the  Devi  with  dishevelled  hair.”  Only  he  who  has  experienced 
it  knows  what  it  is  to  attain  in  meditation  Her,  the  mere  thought  of  whom 
brings  unasked  the  fourfold  fruit. 

Another  passage  on  which  the  critics  lay  stress  is  the  verse:  “  But  it  is 
hard  for  even  a  Yogi  to  contemplate  the  formless  aspect.”  Rimaprasida 
has  said  it  is  hard  to  contemplate  the  formless  aspect.  The  critic  gives 
high  praise  to  this,  and  asks:  “  Can  it  be  doubted  that  the  higher  the  form 
of  worship,  the  more  difficult  it  is?  ”  meaning  thereby  that  it  was  because 
Ramaprasada  belonged  to  a  low  order  of  worshippers  that  he  found 
himself  in  such  a  plight.  The  matter,  however,  is  not  one  of  insinuation 
only.  The  critics  plainly  say:  “  It  is  a  pity  that  RSmaprasada  did  not 
take  the  right  path  (worship  of  the  Devatft  without  form)  from  the  very 
beginning.  Had  he  in  his  Sadhana  worked  along  this  path  from  the  very 
beginning,  we  cannot  say  what  depths  he  might  not  have  attained  ”  (as  the 
critic  has  done).*  Ah !  how  wonderful !  The  beauty  of  the  temple  of  form¬ 
lessness  is  as  great  as  the  splendour  of  the  formless  steps  which  lead  to  itt 
But  how  could  Ramaprasada  have  had  such  good  fortune?  When  he  came 
to  this  Samsara,  the  mine  whence  this  gem  has  come  had  not  yet  been 

1  Dhanna,  Artha,  KAma,  Mokya  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  S astro). 

1  That  is,  Dhanna,  Artha,  and  Kama  besides  liberation. 

*  Author's  parenthesis. 

42 


658 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


discovered.  0  critic  1  can  you  for  a  single  moment  shake  off  your  heinous 
and  hellish  malicious  propensity  and  sit  still?  If  so,  I  have  one  or  two 
important  questions  to  ask  you.  RamaprasSda  has  said:  “  But  it  is  hard 
for  even  a  Yogi  to  contemplate  the  formless  aspect.”  What  does  he  mean 
when  he  says  this,  and  to  what  class  of  worshippers  does  he  refer?  Are  you 
able  to  understand  it?  The  havoc  you  have  made  of  Ramaprasada’s  song 
surpasses  description.  We  shall  demonstrate  in  detail  that  in  the  sphere 
of  religion  the  preaching  of  a  doctrine  which  it  is  not  in  our  competence 
to  practise  is  nothing  but  a  form  of  covert  robbery. 

“  All  Jivas  meditate  on  the  Guru  in  the  Brahmarandhra,1 
And  Sadaiiva  is  a  great  Yogi  through  meditation  on  the  form 
of  KSli. 

Truly  the  fifty  letters  form  the  substance  of  Veda  and  Agama, 

But  it  is  hard  for  even  a  Yogi  to  contemplate  the  formless  aspect. 
Thou  hast  no  form,  Aksara *  is  Thy  form. 

O  Thou  whose  substance  is  the  Gui^as!  Thou  hast  taken  forms 
according  to  different  Gunas.” 

Have  you  understood  the  meaning  of  the  above?  If  you  had,  you 
would  not  have  made  such  a  mess  of  it  “  All  Jivas  meditate  on  the  Guru 
in  the  Brahmarandhra.1  And  Sadaiiva  is  a  great  Yogi  by  meditation  on 
the  form  of  KSli.”  In  order  to  understand  this,  it  is  necessary  to  become 
initiated  and  instructed  according  to  Sastra  by  a  Guru.  “  Truly  the  fifty 
letters  form  the  substance  of  Veda  and  Agama,  but  it  is  hard  for  even  a 
Yogi  to  contemplate  the  formless  aspect”  It  will  be  many  ages  *  before 
you  can  understand  the  “  but  ”  between  these  two  hemistiches.  This 
formlessness  is  not  the  unsightly  misshapen  formlessness  of  the  nineteenth 
century.  It  is  the  formless  aspect.  This  much  is  the  Sutra.*  In  the  Vjti 8 
on  this  SQtra  the  poet  says:  “  Thou  hast  no  form.  Aksara  *  is  Thy  form  ” ; 
and  he  further  makes  the  comment:  •  '*  O  Thou  whose  substance  is  the 
Gunas!  Thou  hast  forms  according  to  the  different  Gupas.”  This  deep 
super-worldly  truth  7  cannot  be  understood  without  special  power  acquired 
by  Sadhana.  It  is  extremely  ridiculous  for  you,  uninitiated  as  you  are, 
to  try  to  pass  judgment  on  the  play  of  Mantraiakti.  It  is  just  as  though 
a  child  in  the  womb  were  to  make  effort  to  fight  a  battle ! 

O  critic!  had  you  been  initiated  according  to  the  SSstra,  instead  of 
being  an  “  educated  ”  man  of  the  nineteenth  century,  we  might  have 
found  a  cure  for  your  error,  but  as  matters  stand,  things  must  remain  as 
they  are.  It  is  the  command  issuing  from  the  fair  mouth  of  ViivanStha 


1  Vide  aide. 
•Yugas. 

*  Gloss. 


■  Written  characters. 
*  Aphorism. 


*  Tattva. 


*  Bhajy*. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


65? 


Himself  that  this  troth  1  must  not  be  revealed  to  those  who  are  not  com¬ 
petent  to  receive  it.  Hence,  although  RamaprasSda’s  song  is  in  the  form 
of  a  Sfltra,  we  cannot  scatter  abroad  its  Vfti,*  Bha$ya,*  and  Tiki  «  in  the 
market,  the  public  bathing-place,  and  the  fields.  This  much,  however, 
we  tell  you:  Why  do  you  make  yourself  ridiculous  in  the  world  of  S&dhakas, 
■and  bring  ruin  on  the  ignorant  community  by  interfering  (though  you  have 
no  competence  for  S&dbana)  in  matters1  which  can  be  understood  by 
-Sadhana  alone,  and  which,  without  Sadhana,  cannot  be  realized  by  purely 
intellectual  effort,  however  strenuous  it  be  ? 

Ramaprasada  was  a  seeker  of*  the  supreme  object,*  and  the  critic 
seeks  his  selfish  ends.  The  one  is  nectar,  and  the  other  poison;  the  one  is 
heaven,*  and  the  other  hell.*  How  dare  you  desire  to  mix  the  two 
together?  Covertly  you  have  expressed  your  regret.  “  If  only  Ramapra¬ 
sada  in  his  Sftdhana  had  worked  along  the  right  path  from  the  very 
beginning!  "  Oh  the  arrogance  of  it  befitting  an  Asura!  Is  it  because  you 
have  seen  your  own  face  in  the  mirror  that  you  have  come  to  think  that 
Ramaprasada  was  a  Jiva  from  hit  birth  blind,  uninitiated,  puzzled  out  of 
his  wits,  straying  in  a  wrong  path,  and  devoid  of  knowledge  of  the  Sastra  ? 
Being  a  trader  in  Rimaprasada’s  name,  and  partaker  of  the  leavings  of 
his  food,  how  dare  you  presume  to  show  Ramaprasada  the  right  path  of 
Sadhana?  You  are  seeking  a  means  of  livelihood  for  yourself  in  the  Samsara. 
■Continue  to  seek  that.  Why  trespass  on  Sadhana  lying  hidden  in  the 
womb  of  Sastra?  You  have  been  attacked  with  the  disease  of  formlessness; 
you  may  take  a  leap  into  the  air;  but  why  such  braggadocio  on  your  part, 
*ince  Ramaprasada  himself  was  not  so  diseased  ?  The  end  of  your  Sadhana 
and  Bhajana  7  is  malice  against  the  Deity  with  form;  but  the  end  of  Rama- 
prasada’s  Sadhana  and  Bhajana  was  not  malice  against  the  Formless, 
But  why  should  we  mention  Ramaprasada  alone?  No  Sadhaka  can  have 
■such  a  motive.  It  is  precisely  because  Sadhakas  understand  formlessness 
that  they  say  that  it  is  impossible  to  perform  Sadhana  or  Bhajana  *  of  the 
Formless.  But  those,  who  have  on  merely  hearing  the  name  of  the  Form¬ 
less  thought  it  to  be  a  Delhi  Laddu,*  cry  out  for  worship  of  the  Formless 
with  flowers  growing  in  the  sky.  For  this  reason,  Sruti  itself  has  said: 
“  Those  who  say  that  they  know  Brahman,  to  them  it  is  unknown;  and 
•those  who  say  that  they  have  not  been  able  to  know  Brahman,  to  them 

1  Tattva. 

*  Forms  of  commentary  of  greater  or  leu  degree  of  elaboration. 

*  Sadhaka.  4  Paramartha — that  is,  spiritual  life  and  truth. 

*  Svarga.  4  Naraka. 

7  Worship. 

*  A  fabulous  form  of  sweetmeat  (Dead  Sea  apple)  of  Delhi  which,  while 
very  tempting  in  appearance,  is  equally  disappointing  when  eaten.  It  is  said 
that  he  who  has  not  tasted  it  is  sorry,  and  he  who  has  tasted  it  is  sorry. 


660 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


it  is  well  known.”  Brahman  is  undefinable,  because  its  real  aspect  cannot 
be  given  any  particular  definition.  In  fact,  it  is  because  the  name  of  the 
Deity  possessing  form  does  not  strike  such  terror  in  the  heart  of  Brahman 
as  it  does  in  those  of  the  community  who  are  the  standard-bearers  of  the 
Formless  Brahman  that  worshippers  of  the  Deity  possessing  form  can  enter¬ 
tain  no  malice  against  the  Formless.  However  that  may  be,  whether 
Ramaprasada  was  a  worshipper  of  the  Formless  or  of  the  Deity  possessing 
form,  we  have  no  desire  to  hear  from  the  mouth  of  a  dealer  in  ginger 
information  about  ships.1 

Ramaprasada  was  not  an  African,  European,  or  American.  His  life’s 
play  began  and  ended  in  Bengal.  We  are  his  neighbours.  If  men, 
whether  at  home  or  abroad,  want  to  hear  of  him,  they  must  come  to  us 
for  it  We  shall  never  go  to  anybody  else  to  learn  about  him.  The  chief 
part  of  Ramaprasada’s  Sadhana  did  not  consist  of  ringing  in  bands  to  the 
accompaniment  of  musical  instruments,  as  is  the  case  with  the  weekly¬ 
praying  community."  He  sank  into  the  depths  of  the  ocean  of  Sadhana, 
and  it  was  only  at  intervals  of  rest  from  Sadhana  performed  in  fixed  Asanas  * 
that  he  was  now  and  then  moved  by  the  breeze  of  emotion  to  ring  his  songs. 
To-day  the  miserable  plight  of  the  band  of  critics  is  due  to  their  having 
fallen  into  the  waves  of  this  ocean  in  which  they  helplessly  struggle.  Proofs 
of  Rimaprasada’s  Savasadhana,  CitiU5dhana,  Saktisadhana,  rosary  of 
MahSiahkha,  Bilvamula,  and  Paftcamunda,  and  other  Asanas,4  we  still 
possess.  The  community  of  Sadhakas  is  still  resounding  with  the  deep 
trumpet  sound  echoing  from  the  sphere  of  spiritual  competence  in  which 
Ramaprasada  moved,  and  of  the  truth  1  for  which  he  bore  a  madly 
impassioned  love.  If  outriders  could  realize  this  truth  by  the  mere  hearing 
of  one  or  two  simple  songs,  then  thousands  of  critics  could  have  become 
R&maprasadas  in  a  single  day.  Guru  was  his  guide,  Sastra  itself  was  his 
lamp,  the  path  of  Sadhana  was  the  path  he  followed,  and  the  Gintamapi  * 
region  of  the  Mother  of  the  world  was  that  to  which  it  led.  As  in  every 
other  work,  so  in  songs  also  he  followed  the  command  of  Siva,  and  took 


1 A  Bengali  adage  used  with  reference  to  a  man  who  speaks  on  a  subject  of 
which  he  can  have  no  knowledge. 

"The  Brahmos  meet  for  prayer  every  Sunday  in  imitation  of  Christian 
worshippers. 

•  Certain  positions  (Asana)  are  assigned  for  worship. 

"Referring  to  various  Tantrik  Sadhanas;  with  a  corpse;  on  the  funeral 
pyre;  with  a  Sakti;  rosary  of  human  bone;  five  skulk;  under  a  bael-tree;  and 
other  postures  (Asana). 

•Tattva. 

"Etymologically  the  word  means  “gem  of  thought”.  According  to  the 
Bhairavayimala,  the  supreme  Abode  of  Devi  is  built  of  Chintamapi  stone. 
This  is  the  supreme  region. 


OUTER  WORSHIP  66! 

the  name  of  Siva.  Can  one  who  does  not  follow  the  command  of  Siva  in 
practice  presume  to  say  anything  of  authority  in  the  name  of  Siva?  Not  to 
believe  Siva,  not  to  believe  in  Sastra,  not  to  believe  in  Guru,  not  to  believe 
in  Sadhana,  and  not  to  believe  in  the  Devata  who  is  the  object  of  Sidhana, 
but  to  believe  in  R&maprasada  and  his  songs  set  to  music!  not  to  believe 
in  Devata,  and  yet  to  be  mortally  afraid  of  Her  as  if  She  were  tome  wander¬ 
ing  spirit; 1  to  cut  the  root,  and  then  to  pour  water  on  it — such  was  not  the 
Art  which  Ramaprasada  had  leamt.  It  was  because  Ramaprasada  served 
the  Sastra  with  bowed  head  and  worked  according  to  its  dictates  that  the 
superworldiy  Sakti  of  Siddbi  of  which  the  Sastra  speaks  attended  him 
constantly. 

In  another  song  Ramaprasada  says: 

“  O  mind !  you  are  still  labouring  under  this  error 1 * 

You  do  not  clearly  realize  what  Kali  is. 

Although  you  know,  why  do  you,  O  mind!  seem  not  to  know 
that  the  universe,  consisting  of  three  worlds,  is  the  Mother’s 
image  ? 

And  you  want  to  worship  Her  by  building  images  of  clay! 

The  Mother  who  decks  the  three  worlds  with  measureless  gems 
and  gold. 

Her  you  want  to  deck  with  worthless  tinsel  ornaments!— the 
Mother  who  feeds  the  world  with  all  kinds  of  food. 

With  what  face  do  you  think  to  feed  Her  on  Atapa  rice  a  and 
soaked  peas  ?  ”  4 

And  so  on. 

Error  is  taking  a  thing  to  be  that  which  it  is  not  False  knowledge 
or  mistake  is  want  of  true  knowledge.  To  mistake  is  to  understand  a 
thing  to  be  what  it  is  not.  Mistake  is  only  another  name  for  want  of  true 
knowledge.  Like  darkness  at  sunrise,  false  knowledge  flies  of  itself  at  the 
dawning  of  true  knowledge. 

It  is  universally  well  known  that  a  mistake  lasts  only  so  long  as  true 
understanding  is  not  had,  and  that  when  it  appears  there  is  an  end  of  the 
mistake;  but  he  who  says,  “  O  mind,  you  are  still  labouring  under  this 
error,”  understands  that  it  is  an  error  of  his  mind.  Why,  then,  does  he 
express  the  regret  that  he  is  still  labouring  under  the  error?  An  error  ends 
the  instant  we  discover  it.  But  here,  although  he  says  that  his  mind  clearly 
knows  it  to  be  an  error,  he  yet,  at  the  same  time,  regrets  that  the  error  still 
exists.  Let  the  critic  now  understand  what  sort  of  an  error  it  is.®  Unlike 

1  Bhuta,  ghost,  etc.  ‘Bhrama. 

*  Rice  prepared  from  paddy  without  boiling  the  paddy. 

4  Peas  are  thrown  into  water  and  soaked  before  bring  offered  to  the  Devata. 

4  We  may  know  it  in  &  sense  tq  be  M&yi,  but  we  cannot  realize  itso  long  as 
we  are  Jlvas,  to  whom  living  in  a  duahitic  world  it  is  real. 


662 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


you  and  me,  R&mapras&da  did  not  jeer  at  others  for  worshipping  images. 
Before  warning  outriders  he  warned  the  person  within,1  and  addressing 
his  own  mind  said:  “  O  mind!  you  are  still  labouring  under  this  error.” 
Had  it  been  you  or  me,  the  utmost  that  we  could  perhaps  have  done  would 
have  been  to  say,  “  O  Brother!  You  are  still  labouring  under  this  error,” 
meaning  thereby  that  “  I  am  free  from  it,  so  that  I  am  a  much  greater 
man  than  you  are.”  High-soul ed  Digambara,  on  whom  the  merciful  Devi 
showered  Her  supreme  mercy,  touched  the  root  of  the  matter  when  He 
calmly  and  solemnly  said:  “  In  delusion  is  my  peace.”  But  in  the  first 
stage  of  Sidhana,  Ramaprasada,  who  could  not  then  touch  the  root  and 
master  this  weighty  and  solemn  truth,1  said  with  an  impatient  and  restless 
heart,  “  O  mind !  you  are  still  labouring  under  this  error.”  Ramaprasada 
is  eager  and  restless  to  drive  away  the  delusion  which  Digambara  carefully 
cherishes  in  the  inmost  recess  of  his  mind,  and  by  doing  so  feels  the  bliss 
of  the  play  of  the  Mother  of  the  world.  This  restlessness  on  the  part  of 
Ramaprasada  is  merely  the  effect  of  the  immaturity  of  his  Sadhana. 
Because  he  was  at  one  time  thus  restless,  we  must  not  think  of  him  as  being 
a  worthless  man;  for,  where  there  is  possibility  of  rising,  there  is  also  the 
possibility  of  a  fall,  as  the  reverse  also  is  the  case.  The  very  mention  of 
Ramaprasada’s  name  throws  some  people  into  a  frenzy  of  sentiment. 
They  think  that  he  was  a  bom  Yogi  who  had  attained  Siddhi  in  a  previous 
birth,  and  consider  him  to  be  all  in  all  in  the  realm  of  Sadhakas;  but  we 
are  not  of  this  opinion.  For  wc  first  hear  what  he  has  to  say  from  his  own 
mouth  (in  his  songs),8  then  ascertain  its  trustworthiness  by  comparison 
with  the  account  of  his  Sadhana  as  known  to  the  community  of  Sadhakas, 
and  finally  test  it  carefully  on  the  touchstone  of  the  Sastra.  If  even  a  much 
greater  man  than  Ramaprasada  says  what  it  opposed  to  the  Saatra,  we  at 
once  discard  it  as  if  it  were  the  words  of  a  madman;  for  millions  of  Rama- 
prasadas  do  not  count  for  even  so  much  as  the  most  insignificant  insects, 
if  the  command  of  the  Sastra  (by  the  grace  of  which  R&maprasada  is  an 
authority)  is  contravened.  We  shall  show  that  the  song  above  quoted 
was  composed  by  Ramaprasada  in  a  very  immature  state  of  Sadhana. 
We  must  first  understand  that  at  the  time  when  Ramaprasada  composed 
this  song  he  had  passed  the  first  and  entered  the  middle,  and  not  the  last, 
stage  in  the  domain  of  knowledge,  and  had  only  just  entered  the  higher 
domain  of  Sadhana.*  It  was  because  he  wanted  to  unite  Sadhana  with 
Jfiana  (knowledge),  only  without  reference  to  Bhakti  (devotion),  that  he 
was  led  into  inconsistency. 


1  Himself.  '  *Tattva.  •Author’s  parenthesis. 

•AH  sedan  and  worshippers  are  Sadhaiou,  but  here  reference  is  made  to 
high  T&ntrik  Sadhana.  ■ 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


665 


“  Although  knowing,  why  do  you,  O  mind !  seem  not  to  know  that 
the  Universe,  consisting  of  three  worlds,  is  the  Mother’s  image?  ”  The 
idea  expressed  in  this  passage  belongs  wholly  to  the  realm  of  Jfi&na 
(knowledge) ;  but  the  verse,  “  You  want  to  worship  Her  by  moulding 
images  of  clay,”  reveals  a  state  of  mental  restlessness  so  far  as  Sidhana  is 
concerned.  If  everything  in  the  three  worlds  is  the  Mother’s  image,  then 
who  can  say  that  an  image  built  of  clay  is  not  the  Mother’s  image  ?  If  from 
the  point  of  view  of  Jfiina  (knowledge)  the  Universe,  consisting  of  three 
worlds,  is  considered  the  Mother's  image,  then  we  must  admit,  with  bowed 
heads,  that  an  earthen  image  also  is  Her  image.  In  short,  we  must  not 
think  that  Ramapras&da,  in  contravention  of  the  command  of  S&stra,  is 
asking  people  to  abstain  from  moulding  images  of  clay.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  he  is  simply  voicing  his  sorrow  that,  “  although  the  Mother  is  omni¬ 
present  in  the  three  worlds,  I  have  to-day  to  worship  Her  in  single  form 
in  an  earthen  image,  because  I  cannot  see  Her  in  Her  Universe-pervading 
aspect.”  And  what  SSdhaka  does  not  sing  the  same  song  of  sorrow  until 
he  attains  the  final  stage  of  SSdhana  preceding  Siddhi?  It  is  in  order  to 
remove  this  sorrow  that  it  is  necessary  to  worship  Her,  otherwise,  why 
should  one  worship  Her  if  from  the  very  outset  the  sorrow  ceases,  and  the 
Mother  is  realized  as  existing  throughout  the  Universe  ?  It  is  hardly  neces¬ 
sary  to  point  out  what  little  spiritual  competence  such  people  possess  as 
actually  see  earth  instead  of  the  world-pervading  Mother,  and  yet,  taking 
their  cue  from  Rimaprasada,  say :  “  O  mind!  you  are  still  labouring  under 
this  error.  You  want  to  adorn  with  worthless  tinsel  ornaments  the  Mother 
who  Herself  decks  the  world  with  countless  gems  and  gold.”  This,  again, 
is  an  expression  winch  merely  indicates  an  unfulfilled  aspiration  in  the 
realm  of  devotion.1  It  is  foolhardiness  on  your  part  to  want  to  adorn  with 
tinsel  ornaments  the  Mother,  the  R&jar&jeSvariof  the  infinite  Universe,  who 
adorns  the  world  with  countless  gold  and  jewels  1  From  this  it  does  not 
follow  that  the  Mother  cannot  be  adorned  or  that  the  Mother  docs  not 
adorn  Herself;  on  the  contrary,  it  proves  that  the  Mother  can  be  very  well 
adorned,  if  one  has  the  power  to  adorn  Her.1  She  is  the  source  of  all  beauty 
in  the  three  worlds,  so  that  it  is  the  height  of  presumption  to  bring  tinsel 
ornaments,  worthless  as  grass,  near  Her  fair  body.  It  is  difficult  to  restrain 
one’s  laughter  at  even  the  thought  of  putting  tinsel  ornaments  on  the  fair 
body  of  Her  before  whose  feet  the  countless  stores  of  jewels  of  even  innu¬ 
merable  Kuberas 1  disappear  as  does  the  light  of  a  lamp  before  the  sun. 
It  is  because  of  the  pain  of  the  thought  of  this  irremediable  deficiency  that 
Rlmapraslda  has  said:  “  Ah!  that  Mother  you  wish  to  adorn  with  worth¬ 
less  tinsel  ornaments !  ”  Why,  despite  of  th«,  S&stra  has  prescribed  that 


1  Bhakti.  *  That  is,  if  one  u  spiritually  fit. 

*  Kubcra  is  God  of  wealth. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


66* 

She  shall  be  adorned,  we  shall  show  later.  Here  we  say  this  much,  that  a 
person  who  proceeds  to  perform  Sadhana  is  bound  to  satisfy  his  heart’s 
desire  by  adorning  the  Mother.  It  is  the  duty  of  all  Sadhakas,  male  and 
female.  When  the  heart  is  immersed  in  the  depths 1  of  Sidhana,  that 
which  these  depths  arc  overpowers,  according  to  a  law  of  Nature,  the 
Brahmatattva  of  the  Mother  of  the  world.'  To  conquer  that  unconquered 
power  of  the  Sadhana,  even  She  Herself,  who  is  unconquerable,  often  feigns 
Herself  to  be  incompetent. 

Sinking  in  the  sweetness  of  the  Creatrix’s  play  of  love  for  Her  devotees, 
Daiarathi,  great  depicter  of  sentiment,  *  has,  in  picturing  the  love  of  the 
Mother  of  the  world,  well  displayed  this  in  his  poem  entitled  Agamani.4 
When,  for  the  sake  of  the  Sadhana,  which  was  the  Durgapuja  festival  of 
the  Prince  of  devotees,  the  Mountain-King,  his  Daughter  appeared  as  the 
Destroyer  of  Mahisa,  and  stood  in  the  courtyard  in  front  of  his  Man^apa  * 
on  the  evening  of  the  sixth  lunar  day;  when  Menaka  his  Queen,  whose  life 
was  in  Uma,*  ran  out  with  joy  to  welcome  Her  at  the  report  of  Her  coming; 
and  when  startled  and  made  afraid  by  the  sight  of  Her  martial  appearance, 
the  great  Sadhika 7  of  the  Daughter  1  lost  herself  at  view  of  this  other 
form  '—then,  on  her,  Mother  Mahamaya,  the  daughter  of  old,10  cast  Maya 
and  assumed  a  form  of  surpassing  beauty. 

Song 

“  She  appeared  as  Gauri,  the  Two-armed  daughter  of  Mountain, 
Mother  of  Gapda. 

Daughter  of  the  Mountain-King,11  with  the  graceful  gait  of  an 
elephant 

Spouse  of  ASutoja,1*  with  two  little  children,  held  on  Her  two 
hips.18 

Chapdl  appeared  as  though  surrounded  by  moons.14 


'Rasa. 

I  When  the  Sadhaka  becomes  really  full  of  devotion,  then  even  the  Devi 
seems  to  lose  her  non-dual istic  Nirgupa  aspect,  owing  to  the  intensity  of  the 
Sidhaka’s  devotion  to  the  manifested  aspect. 

*  Bhava.  4  On  the  coming — that  is,  invocation. 

4  Temple.  4  Her  daughter,  the  Devi. 

'  Menaka,  Her  Mother.  8  Kanyatattva.  •  Tattva. 

II  The  poem  is  speaking  of  Her  as  Parvati,  or  Uma.  By  “  of  old  ”  reference 
is  made  to  her  previous  manifestation  as  Sati,  daughter  of  Dakfa. 

11  Himalaya.  “  Siva,  the  “  easily  appealed.” 

“  Children  are  so  carried  in  the  east. 

14  That  is,  her  children — namely,  her  two  sons,  Gapefa  and  Kartikeya,  and 
two  daughters,  Lakgml  and  Sarasvad. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


665 


The  beauty  of  the  moon-faced  Uma  surpasses  that  of  a  million 
moons. 

Ten  moons  shone  on  the  nails  of  the  Mother’s  feet. 

Seeing  this,  the  moon  in  the  sky  pales  through  shame. 

Yet,  can  She  be  compared  to  the  moon;  She,  at  whose  feet  the 
moons  roll? 

In  Autumn,  in  the  Himalayas,  it  was  like  a  fair  of  autumnal  moons. 

In  receiving  the  moon-laced  Uma,  the  Queen  took,  as  it  were, 
the  moon  in  her  hand. 

Behind  Uma’s  family  of  moons 1  the  moon  in  the  sky  was 
concealed. 

With  Her  moonlike  mouth  the  moon-faced  Devi  called  out, 
•  Mother!  ’ 

The  Queen  replied:1  ‘Is  it  you,  O  Durga!  the  Dispeiler  of 
sorrows? 

With  weeping,  O  Tara,  Mother!  I  have  lost  the  pupils  (Tara)  of 
my  eyes. 

O  Uma!  to  what  a  plight  have  I  come  since  last  I  bid  farewell 
to  Thee! 

O  Mother!  my  body  remains  in  the  Himalayas  and  ray  life  in 
Kailasa.8 

In  Thy  absence  I  lie  on  the  earth  as  one  who  is  dead. 

To-day  Thou  hast  brought  life  to  my  body,  and  with  it  speech. 

O  Mother!  how  is  it  that  Thou  dost  not  remember  that  Thou 
hast  a  mother  ? 

If  Thy  mother  dies  sorrowing  for  Thee,  Thou  wilt  incur  the  sin 
of  killing  Thy  mother. 

Being  sonless,  what  refuge  have  I  but  in  ray  Daughter  ? 

O  Brahraamayi !  all  my  hope  is  placed  on  Thee. 

Old  age  comes  upon  me  day  by  day,  and  at  any  moment  I  may  die. 

O  Tara!  wilt  thou  not  seek  me  when  my  strength  is  gone? 

What  Thou  doest,  O  Saviour  from  existence!  makes  me  afraid, 

Lest,  O  Mother!  when  I  send  for  Thee  at  the  hour  of  death 
Thou  shouldst  refuse  to  come.’  4 

At  these  words  of  the  Queen,  the  Queen  of  Siva  said  in  sorrow: 


1  Her  children. 

1  What  follows  is  a  conversation  between  the  Devi  as  UmS  and  her  Mother 
Menaka,  Her  daughtership  to  Menaka  was  one  of  Her  spiritual  Avatitras. 

•  The  Mount  and  Paradise  of  Siva. 

‘Blessed,  blessed  are  you,  O  Diiarathi,  devoted  poet!  Rightly  did  you 
arrange  to  bring  Her  to  you  in  due  time.  It  is  concerning  this  that 
there  is  the  saying,  “  In  men  that  is  cleverness  which  secures  both  the  worlds.” 
^Author’s  note). 


666 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


‘When  did  you,  O  Mother!  seek  me?  Whose  father  is  a  King 
and  whose  Mother  is  a  Queen, 

What  if  Her  husband  has,  perchance,  become  a  Sannyasi  ? 

The  bitter  words  of  women  kill  me  with  shame. 

We  hear  them  say  Thou  art  a  King’s  daughter,  but  has  Thou 
no  Mother? 

Father  is  of  stone  and  so  are  you,  0  Mother! 

But  I  cannot  conquer  my  love  for  you,1  and  so  I  have  come  of 
My  own  accord.’ 

The  Queen  replied:  ‘  O  Lady  of  Iflna!  true  it  is  that  I  am  stone,. 

And,  O  Mother!  for  Her 1 *  whose  daughter  Thou  art,  it  was  best 
to  be  of  stone.’ 1 

Saying  this  the  Spouse  of  mountain 4  gready  wept,  and  in  plaintive 
words  again  addressed  her  Daughter: 

‘  As  the  motionless  mountain  is  My  husband,  how  can  I  get  news 
of  you  ?  ’ 

O  gracious  Devi!  I  pray  Thee  forgive  my  offence  on  that  account.. 

Many  arc  the  people,  O  Uma !  who  before  me  call  Thee  miserable, 
and  as  I  hear  them  my  mind  bums  with  fire. 

They  say  to  me,  O  Queen!  your  Daughter,  a  tendril  of  gold,  has 
become  pale. 

Destroyer  of  Tripura  ‘  lives  by  begging. 

Beloved  Uma  is  my  only  treasure,  the  treasure  of  worship. 

I  want  to  keep  my  Son-in-law  in  my  house,  but  Trilochana  •  is. 
not  willing  that  I  should  do  so. 

Then  archly  and  with  pride  Durga  said  to  Menaka, 

Who  has  told  you  of  your  Son-in-law’s  distress? 

My  Husband  is  the  Creator  and  Destroyer,  the  Lord  of  the  three 
worlds. 

Rather  is  it  you,  O  Mother!  who  are  a  poor  man’s  wife,  but 
I  am  a  Queen. 

My  Lord  is  the  Lord  of  Kail,’  and  no  one  can  describe  Him. 


1  Literally,  “  Maya,”  which  here  means  attachment. 

1  That  is,  Menaka. 

•Otherwise,  how  can  She  bear  the  pain  of  separation  from  Thee- 
(Author’s  note). 

4  Himalaya,  the  husband  of  Menaka  and  father  of  Parvatt. 

•  Siva.  1  The  three-eyed  Deva,  Siva, 

1  The  glory  of  luminous  Kafi  is  much  greater  than  that  of  all  the  riches  of 
the  infinite  Universe.  This  is  why  Bhuvaceivara  (Lord  of  the  world),  Para- 
merfvara  (Supreme  Lord),  and  other  epithets  have  been  omitted,  and  the  epithet 
Lend  of  KSa  has  been  used  to  indicate  the  consort  of  KfiB.  The  purpose  is 
more  elaborately  expressed  in  the  line.  “  He  is  King  of  Kings  at  Kiif,  ana  your 
Daughter  is  Qjieen  of  Qyeens.”  (Author’s  note). 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


66r 


O  Mother!  in  the  world  it  is  by  My  Husband’s  riches  that  people- 
become  rich. 

Whoever  with  devotion  begs  of  My  Husband,  to  Him  does 
Trilochana 1  give  the  wealth  ofliberation  at  a  glance. 

He  is  in  want  of  nothing;  but  such  is  His  nature  that  He  yet 
behaves  like  some  poor  helpless  man. 

He  who  grasps  the  meaning 1  of  this  is  filled  with  feeling,*  and  is 
saved  from  the  cares  of  existence. 

Will  your  riches  make  your  Daughter  and  Son-in-law  rich? 

Do  you  want  to  give  riches  to  Her  who  holds  the  Universe  in 
Her  womb  ? 

Can  He  be  poor  in  whose  house  your  Daughter  lives  ? 

As  AnnapQrna  I  give  food  to  the  world. 

And  the  Ocean,  Kubera  *  and  others  guard  the  wealth  of  Siva. 

How  great,  O  Mother!  must  have  been  the  religious  merit4  you 
have  earned 

That  you  were  able  to  give  your  Daughter  to  Him ! 

Such  is  the  power  of  My  Husband  that  I  can  make  you  Indr&pl,*' 

I  am  such  a  Daughter  of  yours  as  is  equal  to  ten  sons. 

It  is  out  of  jealousy  that  neighbours  do  not  speak  to  you  of 
happiness. 

But  wound  you,  O  Mother!  by  speaking  of  sorrow. 

The  Queen  said :  *  O  Brahma  may! !  explain  this  to  me. 

If  Thou  hast  so  much  wealth,  where  is  the  sign  of  it? 

O  Sahkari!  •  does  not  Siva’s  heart  yearn  to  adorn  Thee? 

Why  has  not  my  Son-in-law  given  Thee  jewelled  ornaments  ? 

Of  what  use  is  wealth  if  the  body  of  Uma-moon  is  unadorned? 

Poorly  dressed  and  on  foot  Thou  hast  come.  This  is  what  makes 
me  doubtful  (of  your  wealth).’ 

Playfully  and  with  smiles  Uraa  replies  to  Menaka : 

‘  O  Mother!  Trilochana T  cannot  bear  to  see  Me  with  ornaments, 

For  he  says,  What  ornament  is  there  in  this  world  which  can 
adorn  Thee? 


1  Vide  <mte. 

*  Bh&va;  a  play  on  the  word  Bhfiva,  which  means  both  “  meaning  ”  and 
“  feeling 

*  God  of  wealth.  *  Punya. 

*  Consort  of  the  King  of  the  Devas  India. 

*  Feminine  of  Sankara,  a  name  of  Siva. 

*  The  “  three-eyed,”  or  Siva,  who  in  his  forehead  has  the  eye  of  wisdom 
(Jgjnacakfu). 


«8 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Tariqi,1  Thou  art  My  crest-gem.  Do  gems  become  Thee  ? 

Will  the  moon  look  bright  if  gems  are  placed  on  it? 

My  ample  dress  ever  charms  Aiuto?a’s  *  mind, 

And  what  Pancanana  *  desires  that  I  dp. 

If  this  were  not  so,  innumerable  and  priceless  jewels  would  lie  in 
the  dust  before  Me.’ 

The  Queen  said:  ‘  Why  should  not  ornaments  become  Thee? 

Ivory,  when  set  in  gold,  becomes  more  beautiful. 

To-day  I  shall  bring  all  kinds  of  jewels  and  see  with  my  own  eyes 

Whether,  O  Ilapi!  they  become  Thee  or  not.’ 

Then  in  joy  of  love  the  Queen  of  Mountain  brought  jewelled 
ornaments, 

And  put  them  with  care  on  Uma-jewel. 

Never,  however,  can  ornaments  look  well  on  Uma’s  body; 

She  became  like  the  moon  in  the  grasp  of  Rahu.4 

In  grief  the  Queen  became,  as  it  were,  dead,  and  stopped  the 
maids, 

Saying:  *  Do  not  bring  worthless  ornaments  any  more, 

And  quickly  take  off  those  which  I  have  already  put  on  Uma. 

Let  me  see  the  unadorned  body  of  the  Mother. 

They  do  not  become  Thee,  O  Mother  Sahkari !  Ornaments  do 
not  become  Thee!  ’ 

What  Providence  5  is  it  which  has  made  Thee,  O  Mother!  Spouse 
of  Hara?  • 

How  beautiful  Thou  art,  O  Tara!  O  Tara,  with  face  like  the 
autumnal  moon, 

I  have,  O  Mother!  given  the  moon  the  name  of  Tara  as  I  lost  the 
Tara’s  (pupils)  of  my  eyes.7 

This  beauty  charms  Hara’s  mind,  and  destroys  its  darkness. 

Is  this  the  reason,  O  Mother  Uma!  why  the  Three-eyed  Dcva  *  _ 
does  not  allow  Thee  to  be  ever  out  of  His  sight?  ” 

So  long  as  the  desire  to  adorn  Her  is  not  done  away  with  in  this 
manner,  the  effort*  will  not  be  successful;  this  is  why  Sastra  has  made 


1  Epithet  of  the  Devi  as  Saviour.  *  Siva,  the  “  easily  contented.” 

*  Siva,  the  “  five-headed.”  4  That  is,  the  eclipsed  moon. 

.  *Vidhi.  *  Siva. 

7  A  play  on  the  word  Tira,  which  means  the  “  saviour  ”  (a  name  of  the 
Devi),  and  also  a  “  star  ”  and  the  “  pupil  of  the  eye.”  According  to  the  Bengali 
idiom,  “  pupils  of  my  eyes  "  means  the  “  light  of  my  eyes.”  The  sense  of  the 
verse  is  that  when  Uma  left  MenakS  the  latter  lost  the  sight  of  her  eye,  which  is 
Uma  Herself;  and  so  by  mistake  gave  her  the  name  of  TarS  (in  its  sense  of  star), 
although  her  proper  name  is  “  Moon”. 

*  Siva,  Her  Spouse. 


*  S&dhana. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


669- 

pro  vision  for  Her  adornment.  On  that  day  on  which  She  sees  that  I  am 
tired  out,  discomforted,  and  put  to  shame  in  my  efforts  to  adorn  Her,  the 
merciful  Tripurasundari  will,  in  order  to  end  this  trouble  of  Her  son,  adorn 
Herself  with  Her  own  beauty,  and  of  Her  own  accord  take  Her  seat  on  the 
throne  of  my  heart.  On  the  day  on  which  when  going  to  adorn  the  Mother 
with  my  ornaments,  1  shall  myself  be  adorned  with  Her  ornaments,  on 
that  day,  my  yearning  to  adorn  Her  will  end  for  good  and  alL  Then 
I  shall  throw  up  my  arms  in  joy  and  call  out  to  the  world  to  see  how, 
although  all  efforts  to  adorn  the  Mother  fail,  he  who  makes  the  efforts  is 
himself  adorned  by  virtue  of  the  religious  merit 1  he  thereby  acquires. 
Ramaprasada  has  also  told  us  what  sort  of  an  eye  is  required  to  be  able  to- 
perceive  the  beauty  and  sweetness  of  that  adornment.  We  shall  try'  else¬ 
where  to  make  this  clear.  Here  we  would  say  that,  whether  it  suits  the 
Mother  or  not,  I  shall  adorn  the  Mother  if  my  own  condition  requires  it, 
for  the  Mother  is  as  much  my  Mother  as  She  is  the  Mother  of  Brahma, 
Vi?Qu,  and  Maheivara.  The  Mother’s  mother,  Menaka,  proceeded  to 
adorn  the  Mother  because  it  suited  her  to  do  so,  irrespective  as  to  whether 
it  suited  Uma  or  not.  But  because  Menaka  thought  the  ornaments  which 
were  suitable  for  her  to  be  also  suitable  for  the  Mother,  the  Mother  refused 
to  be  adorned  with  her  ornaments  (vanity),1  and  stood  forth  adorned  with 
such  ornaments  only  as  properly  belonged  to  the  Mother.  And  then  the 
divine  *  beauty  of  Menaka  sank  in  4  the  sea  of  the  indescribable  beauty  of 
Brahmamayi  Uma.  Then,  throwing  off  the  ornaments,  consisting  of  the 
darkness  of  the  vanity  of  individual  existence,  Menaka  herself  shone  with 
the  light  of  the  Sun  of  the  sole  existence  of  the  Mother  of  the  world,  and 
seeing  at  once  the  self-luminous  true  aspect  of  the  Devi,  which  is  conscious¬ 
ness,  cried  out:  “  Do  not  bring  worthless  ornaments  any  more,  and  take 
off  quickly  those  which  I  have  already  put  on  Uma.  Let  me  see  the 
unadorned  body  of  the  Mother."  When,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  yearning 
and  effort 1  of  Her  Mother,  the  perfect  grace  of  existence,  consciousness, 
and  bliss  *  flowed  in  streams  from  the  fair  face  to  the  fair  feet  of  the  Mother, 
all  other  adornments  appeared  as  nothing  before  that  supreme  beauty. 
When  thus  her  yearning  was  satisfied,  Menaka  eagerly  said :  “  Let  me  see 
the  Mother’s  unadorned  body,”  for  the  Daughter,  although  a  Daughter 
in  the  aspect 1  She  had  assumed  for  play,*  was  then  Perfect  and  Eternal 
Brahman  in  its  aspect,*  as  the  Supreme  Unity. 

It  was  the  upward  flowing  current  of  his  spiritual  feeling  which 
pained  Ramaprasada  at  the  absence  of  materials  suitable  for  the  satisfaction 


1Pm>ya. 

*  Daiva. 

4  Sad h ana. 
7  Rupa. 


*  Aharikara.  (Author’s  parenthesis}. 

4  That  is,  dwindled  into  insignificance. 
4  Sat,  at,  and  finanda. 

■  Lila.  *  Kaivalya-rfipa. 


•670 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


-of  that  yearning,  and  led  him  to  say:  "Ah!  you  want  to  adorn  Her 
with  worthless  tinsel  ornaments,”  This  does  not  mean  that  “  the  Mother 
need  not  be  adorned.”  The  burden  of  the  song  of  his  sorrow  was  that  he 
had  not  ornaments  suitable  for  the  adornment  of  the  Mother.  This  must 
be  so;  for  is  there  any  such  luckless  son  in  the  world  as  yearns  to  call  the 
Mother  Mother  and  yet  has  no  desire  to  adorn  Her? 

"  The  Mother  who  feeds  the  world  with  all  kinds  of  food. 

With  what  face  do  you  want  to  feed  Her  on  Atapa1  rice  and 
soaked  peas?  ” 

He  who  can  adorn  others  can  also  be  adorned  himself.  He  who  can 
feed  others  can  also  be  fed  himself.*  He  who  desires  to  adorn  others  may 
also  desire  to  be  adorned  himself.  He  who  desires  to  feed  others  may  also 
have  the  wish  to  eat  himself.  Either  say  at  once  that  the  Dew  neither 
adorns  others  nor  is  adorned  Herself,  neither  feeds  others  nor  cats  Herself; 
or  say  that  She  both  adorns  others  and  is  adorned  Herself;  both  feeds 
others  and  Herself  eats.  Even  if  She  is  not,  according  to  you.  Herself 
adorned  in  Her  aspect  with  form,  yet  in  the  formless  aspect  at  least,  as  you 
understand  and  speak  of  it,  She  appears  undoubtedly  to  adorn  others. 
If  so,  how  do  you  escape  from  the  difficulty?  All  Sastras  and  all  people 
agree  that  the  Formless  aspect  is  eternally  attributeless,  and  that  it  is 
impossible  for  that  attributeless  aspect  to  have  the  desire  (which  is  itself 
an  attribute)  to  adorn  the  world;  but,  then,  such  is  the  virtue  of  the  nine¬ 
teenth  century  that  nowadays  we  frequently  hear  of  a  Formless  Deity 
with  attributes.  We,  however,  understand  this  attribute  to  be  an  attri¬ 
bute  *  of  the  worshippers  of  the  Formless  Deity  instead  of  being  really  an 
attribute  of  the  Formless  Deity;  for  to  admit  the  presence  of  an  attribute 
in  the  Attrihuteless  Brahman  is  tantamount  to  cutting  flowers  from  a 
garden  in  the  air.  Those  who  speak  of  Brahman  as  perfectly  devoid  of 
attributes  admit,  in  order  to  account  for  the  universe  which  is  made  of 
attributes,  the  separate  existence  of  Maya,  composed  of  the  three  Guijas 
or  attributes.  Owing  to  their  not  being  able  to  bear  the  weight  of  the 
■  deep  and  solemn  mental  effort  which  is  necessary  for  the  admission  of  the 
separate  existence  of  MayS,  they  are  placed  in  the  following  dilemmas: 
If)  on  the  one  hand,  they  do  not  admit  the  separate  existence  of  M&ya; 
on  the  other,  they  see  that  in  the  denial  of  all  connection  of  the  world  with 
the  Formless  Brahman  it  is  impossible  to  call  Him  “  Merciful  Father.” 
If)  on  the  one  hand,  It  is  addressed  with  attributes,  shame  will  make  it 


1  See  ante. 

*The  idea  of  eating  is  in  Her,  otherwise  She  would  not  have  fed  the  world; 
-and  when  the  idea  is  in  Her,  the  idea  of  Herself  eating  must  also  be  in  Her. 
‘.When  She  is  saguiia,  she  i*  so  not  only  to  the  world,  but  to  Herself  also. 

•  A  mental  figment  for  which  the  worshipper*  alone  are  responsible. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


671 


difficult  for  them  to  show  their  faces  to  worshipper?  of  the  Deity  in  His 
aspect  with  form,  for  in  order  to  possess  attributes  it  is  necessary  to  possess 
form;  consequently,  they  have  denied  perfect  attributeness  (that  part  of  it 
which  necessitates  the  possession  of  form) 1  and  present  to  view  a  queer 
sort  of  Brahman,  half  of  which  is  with  attributes  and  the  other  attributeless. 
Formless,  yet  with  attributes;  with  attributes,  yet  formless.  This  Brahman 
of  theirs  is  called  “  existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss,”  *  after  the  Ssstra;  * 
■“Merciful  Father,”  after  the  Bible;  “Creator”  (Karta)  and  “Lord” 
■(ISvara),  after  the  Koran;  and  the  “Formless  One,”  through  the  malice 
which  non-Aryas  bear  against  Aryas;  and  He  is  also  called  “  full  of  love  ” 
at  times  for  the  attainment  of  their  selfish  ends.  Because  they  will  not 
allow  their  Brahman  to  be  identified  with  the  DevatS  whom  Aryas  worship, 
it  has  (despite  its  being,  in  fact,  above  name  and  form)  4  name,  though  not 
form,1  otherwise  how  can  It  be  constantly  addressed  with  the  exclamation 
“OS”?  However  that  may  be,  even  if  this  newly  discovered  Formless 
Brahman  without  attributes  suits  their  purpose,  we  are  ourselves  in  no 
wise  bound  to  admit  the  existence  of  this  novel  appearance.1  We  care 
very  little  for  the  Attributcless  Brahman  if  He  does  not  appear  with  form, 
and  much  less  do  we  like  this  Formless  One  with  attributes. 

Who  says  that  She  who  can  feed  others,  as  She  can  adorn  others, 
•cannot  or  will  not  Herself  eat?  T  If  the  will  of  Her  who  is  will  itself  eternally 
exists,  that  will  has  as  much  relation  to  feeding  as  to  eating.1  If  you  say 
that  it  is  impossible  for  Her  to  cat,  we  shall  say  that  it  is  also  impossible 
for  Her  to  feed.  If  you  admit  the  possibility  of  feeding,  why  should  you 
not  admit  the  possibility  of  eating?  You  may  say  She  feeds  the  world, 
but  who  will  feed  Her?  For  you  may  argue  that  it  is  impossible  to  give 
food  to  Her  who  gives  food  to  the  infinite  universe.  To  those  whom  a 
knowledge  of  words  has  robbed  of  their  sense  and  who  cannot  under¬ 
stand  the  truth,1  these  words  appear  very  sweet  and  as  the  final  and 
essential  truth;  for  their  mind  is  naturally  unwilling  to  disturb  the  state  of 
self-intoxication  which  these  delusive  words  produce  in  them. 

“  The  Mother  who  feeds  the  world  with  all  kinds  of  food, 

With  what  face  do  you  want  to  feed  Her  on  Atapa  *  rice  and 
soaked  peas?  ” 

1  Author’s  parenthesis.  1  Sat,  rit,  and  ananda. 

1  That  is,  the  Hindu  Sastra.  4  N&ma  Rupa. 

1  The  Hindu  idea  is  that  the  Brahman  has  neither  name  nor  form  fNirgu^a 
Brahman),  or  has  both  name  and  form  (Saguna  Brahman).  These  “  reformers  " 
put  forward  a  Deity  who  has  name,  but  no  form,  and  is  therefore  neither  Nirguga 
nor  Sagupa.  4  Avatira. 

*  When  the  Sadhaka  eats  or  thinks  of  eating,  She  it  is  who  eats  or  thinks 
of  it.  1  Vide  ante. 


•Tattva. 


672 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


Can  anything  be  said  after  this?  Here,  once  for  all,  is  the  most  final 
decision  which  the  matter  admits  of!  For  these  people  think  (in  consonance 
with  their  mental  trend) 1  that  it  is  utterly  false  that  She  eats  or  will  eat, 
the  only  eisential  truth  being  that  She  feeds! 

If  the  Mother  cannot  be  fed  simply  because  She  feeds  the  world,  the 
reason  for  such  inability  is  that  if  I  want  to  feed  Her  She  would  demand 
repayment  by  me  for  all  the  food  which  She  supplies  to  the  world,*  for  you 
ask  yourself  how  much  She  who  feeds  the  world  can  Herself  eat.  I  say 
She  may  feed  the  world  as  much  as  She  likes.  What  have  I  to  do  with 
that?  I  am  bound  to  give  Her  only  what  She  gives  me  to  eat. 

My  gratification  will  be  in  giving  to  Her  the  enjoyment  *  with  which 
She  has  provided  me  and  then  retiring.  I  am  not  here  to  make  payment 
of  all  Her  dues.  My  responsibility  is  to  pay  Her  only  such  dues  as  I  owe 
Her.  She  is  Brahman  only  so  long  as  I  am  Jiva.  She  is  Mother  only  so 
long  as  I  am  son.  She  is  a  Devata  only  so  long  as  I  am  a  man,  and  my 
worship  of  Her  lasts  only  so  long  as  I  am  “  I.”  My  worship  of  Her  will 
be  at  an  end  the  very  day  on  which  my  “  I-ness  ”  will  be  at  an  end,  or  my 
individuality  will  disappear  the  very  day  on  which  my  worship  of  Her  will 
come  to  a  close.  So  long  as  I  shall  have  to  eat  Atapa  rice 4  and  soaked 
peas,  what  justification  have  I  for  eating  them  without  offering  them 
to  Her? 

Although  She  is  the  Mother  of  the  world,  She  is  also  my  Mother. 
Although  She  is  Bhagavan  of  the  Universe,  She  is  also  my  Lord.1  “  The 
food  which  I  shall  cat,  even  that  food  I  must  offer  to  Pitrs  and  Devas.” 
What  I  shall  cat  even  that  ray  Istadevata  will  partake  of  before  me.  Had 
She  been  capable  of  taking  offence  like  you  and  I  because  the  food  consisted 
of  “  Atapa  rice  and  soaked  peas,”  would  She  have  been  worshipped  by 
the  three  worlds  as  their  Mother,  merciful,  kind  to  the  poor,  Protectress 
of  the  helpless,  easily  attainable  by  devotion  and  loving  to  devotees?  Had 
not  Sri  Krsna  thrown  away  the  food  laid  out  by  Rukmini  •  Herself  (She 
who  was  full  of  supreme  love  and  Mahalak$ml),  and  hurried  to  Dvaita- 
vana  ’  from  Dvaraka 8  in  order  to  eat  the  remnant  of  herb  in  the  cooking- 
pot  left  over  after  Draupadi’s  meal  (when  that  virtuous  woman-friend  of 
His,  frightened  at  the  prospect  of  being  cursed  by  a  Brahma (ia,  sought 


*  Author’s  parenthesis. 

•That  is,  She  feeds  the  world;  but  you  think  that  She  has  such  a  great 
body  that  She  will  not  be  satisfied  with  your  small  offerings. 

•Bhoga.  There  is  a  play  on  the  word  which  also  means  the  food  offered 
to  the  Dcvata. 

*  Vide  ante.  *  Prabhu.  •  His  wife. 

*  The  forest  where  the  PSniJavas  resided  for  same  time  during  their  exile. 

*  Sri  Kjjna’s  capital. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


67S 


His  protection),  would  He  have  been  called  throughout  the  three  world* 
by  the  glorious  name  of  “  Friend  of  Pandavaa  ”  ?  Had  not  Bhagav&n,  in 
spite  of  His  being  the  Master  of  infinite  universes  and  Lord  of  VaikuQtha,1 
assumed  the  form  of  young  Gopala  on  being  moved  thereto  by  the  great 
devotion  of  Prahlada,  and  taken  with  His  own  hand  the  plate  of  poisoned 
food  from  the  hand  of  Prahlada,  who  was  grieved  to  give  it  to  Him;  and 
had  He  not  put  that  food  with  the  fingers  of  His  own  lotus-hand  into  Hit 
fair  mouth,  which  is  wont  to  drink  nectar  *  given  by  Brahma  and  other 
Devas,  would  He  have  been  known  by  the  beloved  title  of  “  Hari  of 
Prahlada,”  in  spite  of  His  being  the  Hari  of  the  world?  Had  He  not  joyously 
taken  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand  the  grains  of  rice  given  by  the  wife  (a 
devoted  Sadhika)  8  of  the  poor  and  destitute  Brahmana  Sudama  and  tasted 
their  sweetness,  greater  than  the  sweetness  of  nectar,  singing  the  greatness 
of  love,  would  anybody  in  this  world  have  called  Him  Friend  of  the  Poor 
and  Merciful  Bhagavan?  Had  not  the  Providence  4  who  dispenses  the  four¬ 
fold  fruit  to  Jiva  considered  sweet  the  fruits  half-eaten  by  herd-boys,  would 
the  sweetness  of  the  name  “  The  joy  of  Nanda  ”  *  have  been  so  much 
greater  than  that  of  “  Sacchidananda  ”  •?  Had  not  the  Mother,  the  Gene- 
trix  of  Brahma  and  other  Devas,  left  Her  bejewelled  throne  in  the  lumi¬ 
nously  resplendent  region  of  Kailasa  7  and  gone  to  the  thatched  hut  of 
Kalaketu,8  the  hunter’s  son,  illuminating  the  house  and  the  surrounding 
woods  with  the  light  of  Her  beauty;  had  She  not  proved  the  fitness  of  Her 
name  “  Candi  ”  by  giving  the  Candala’s  •  son  a  place  on  the  fair  lap  which 
is  ever  sought  by  Guha  and  Gajanana;10  if  Annapurna,11  Charmer  of  the 
mind  of  Kala,18  had  not  blessed  Kalaketu  by  feeding  him  from  the  breast 
which  even  Brahma  and  other  Devas  hardly  gain,  and  eaten  the  food  of  a 
Candala;  had  the  dispeller  of  Kalaketu’s  fear  of  death  shrunk  from  becoming 
a  hunter’s  mother — would  the  distressed  Jivas  of  the  world  to-day  have 
wept  and  cried,  “  Mother  ”  ?  Had  not  the  Mother,  the  Dcvata  whom 
Suratha  and  Samadhi 18  sought  in  S&dhana  gratified  the  two  Sadhakas  by 


I  The  heaven  of  Visnu  {see  anie). 

*  Ampa.  8  Feminine  of  Sadhaka  worshipper.  4  Vidhata. 

5  Nandanandana.  *  Existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss. 

7  The  mount  which  is  Siva’s  abode. 

*  An  incident  in  Kavikankan’s  Candi. 

*  The  hunter.  14  Ortikeya  and  Gapeia. 

II  The  Devi  as  Lady  Bountiful  and  giver  of  food.  u  Siva. 

18  The  King  Suratha  and  the  Vaifya  Samadhi  referred  to  in  Capcft 
(Markandcya  Parana).  When  wandering  in  poverty  in  the  forest  R$i  Medhasa 
spoke  to  them  of  the  Devi  whom  they  afterwards  worshipped:  Suratha  in  order 
to  become  a  great  King,  and  Samadhi  that  he  might  gain  Moksa.  The  Devi 
granted  both  boons,  Suratha  is  to  be  the  Manu  of  the  Savarpika  {the  next) 
Manvantara. 

43 


674 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


accepting,  in  the  woods  on  the  baiik  of  a  river,  their  worship  with  fruits 
and  roots  and  offerings  of  blood  issuing  from  their  pierced  hearts,1 * *  would 
S&dhakas  have  staked  their  lives  in  their  determination  to  perform  Sidhana 
of  the  Mother?  Both  Sastra  and  report  say  that  Maharaja  Suratha  and 
Sam&dhi  the  Vaiiya  King,  whose  life  was  itself  a  great  Samadhi,"  after 
establishing  the  Mother  in  an  earthen  image  daily  for  three  years,  inflicted 
cuts  upon  their  breasts  with  swords,  and  with  the  blood  issuing  therefrom 
made  offering  in  the  great  worship,  that  by  such  intense  devotion  *  they 
ought  speedily  get  sight  of  Her. 

This  puts  me  in  mind  of  something.  The  cutting  of  his  own  breast 
by  a  son  in  the  worship  of  the  Mother  cannot  be  a  favour  of  the  Mother. 
And  why  bring  Mother  should  She  be  so  cruel?  In  my  opinion,  however, 
Suratha  and  Samadhi  did  not  cut  themselves  to  their  hearts  in  order  that 
by  satisfying  Her  with  such  a  sacrifice  the  Mother  might  appear  before 
them.  They  had  heard  from  their  Gurudeva,  Maharsi  Medhasa,  that 
the  Mother  dwelt  and  played  in  the  hearts  of  devotees.  Hence  they  took 
the  terrible  determination  “  to  see  Her  by  bringing  Her  out  from  their 
hearts  by  importuning,  if  not  by  satisfying,  Her.”  And  with  such  intention 
they  inflicted  sword-cuts  upon  themselves.  Otherwise,  what  was  the 
necessity  for  so  intense  a  form  of  devotion?4 * *  People  may  call  the  blood 
which  issued  from  their  hearts  their  heart’s  blood,  but  I  say  that  it  was 
not  merely  the  blood  of  the  heart,  but  also  attachment.  And  because  this 
was  so,  blood  flowed  from  the  hearts  of  the  Mother’s  devotees,  brimming 
with  love  for  the  Mother.  The  moment  such  hearts  were  pierced,  streams 
of  love  flowed  copiously  from  them.  But  that  love  is  transparent,  fair, 
pure,  unsoiled,  thick,  deep,  and  milk-white.  How,  then,  did  it  become 
blood-red?  How  can  I  tell  you?  O  devotee!  you  alone  can  say  whence 
came  that  blood.  To  me  it  seems  that  the  Mother  who  adorns  the  throne 
of  the  Isle  of  Gems  *  in  the  Sea  of  Milk  •  lay  happily  in  that  sea,  which  is 
the  devotee’s  heart,  so  that  all  blows  which  fell  on  it  fell  on  the  sacred  feet 
of  the  Devi,  who  is  so  loving  to  Her  devotees.  Then,  by  the  waves  thus 
raised,  the  bright  red  paint  on  the  lotus-feet  of  the  Mother  of  the  world,7 
which  Sadananda  *  had  lovingly  applied  with  his  own  hand,  was  washed 
off,  and,  mixing  with  the  deep  attachment  of  the  devotee’s  heart,  appeared 
as  blood  to  the  view  of  men.  Otherwise,  when  the  devotee  had  already 


1  They  pierced  their  hearts,  and  blood  flowed  out,  which  was  then  offered 
to  the  Devi.  The  Sadhaka  sometimes  makes  offering  of  his  blood  after 

incisions  in  the  body. 

*  Ecstasy,  communion  with  Brahman.  *  Tapaayi. 

4  Tapaiya.  "Mapidvlpa.  4  K$lra. 

7  Hindi!  women  paint  their  feet  with  red  lac 

"Siva,  the  “ever  joyful”.  . 


OUTER  WORSHIP  675 

■offered  his  body,  senses,  heart,  Atxna,  and  all  he  possessed  at  Her  feet, 
what  was  the  necessity  of  re-offering  that  heart  again  and  again  to  satisfy 
Her?  The  sea,  despite  its  depth,  is  full  of  waves.  Similarly,  notwith¬ 
standing  that  love  is  ever  deep,  it  is  constantly  restless.  Such  restlessness 
is  its  natural  characteristic.  To  Him  whom  1  love  with  all  my  heart,  and 
to  whose  feet  I  have  offered  ray  all,  to  Him,  nevertheless,  I  desire  to  offer 
it  again  and  again,  ten  times  every  half  an  hour. 

I  know  not  whether  it  is  a  quality  of  love  or  of  its  object,  whether  of 
the  devotee  or  of  the  beauteous  feet  of  the  Mother.  But  it  is  a  fact,  that 
as  often  as  Suratha  and  SamUdhi,  urged  by  such  restlessness,  struck  their 
hearts,  so  often  did  the  Mother  of  the  world  move  Her  feet  to  let  them 
know  that  She  was  awake,  and  gave  clear  evidence  thereof  in  ripples  of 
blood  raised  thereby.  At  last,  fearing  lest  MaheSvara  should  take  it  to 
heart  were  all  the  dye  so  lovingly  and  carefully  applied  by  Him  washed 
-off  (lest  Siva’s  words  should  prove  false  by  the  pain  caused  to  the  heart  of 
the  devoted  Sadhakas  were  their  constant  offering  of  attachment  to  Her 
•  spurned  and  rejected),1 * * * * * *  the  Daughter  of  mountain  left  that  comfortable 
■couch  and  showed  Herself  to  the  Sadhaka  by  awaking,  as  one  who  is 
consciousness,  in  the  earthen  image,  the  beauty  of  which  gave  joy  to  their 
eyes.  She  showed  Herself  in  a  manner  as  if  She  knew  nothing  of  all  that 
had  happened  theretofore.  Her  heavy  and  indolent  eyes,  like  those  of 
one  who  has  suddenly  awakened  from  sleep,  were  stirred  by  a  Mother’s 
love,  soothing  the  hearts  of  the  devotees  by  shedding  upon  them  the  nectar 
of  Her  serene  regard;  and  smiling  softly  with  Her  ruddy  lips,  She  said  to 
Suratha,  “  Maharaja,  take  what  you  like,”  and  to  the  VaiSya  also, 
“  Gladdener  of  Kula  (Kulanandana),*  take  what  you  like.”  Ah,  how 
sweet!  The  expression  “  Gladdener  of  Kula  ”  in  the  mouth  of  the  Mother 
was  no  mere  word  of  address.  It  showed  that  the  gate  of  Her  unbounded 
love  was  open.  The  Mother  charms  with  such  sweet  and  soft  address 
those  who  seek  Her  by  becoming  Hers  only.  Maharaja  Suratha  was  an 
interested  8  Sadhaka.  In  spite  of  having  been  robbed  and  driven  away 
•by  sons  and  relations,  the  bitter  thirst  of  his  mind  for  enjoyment  of  worldly 
things  was  not  satisfied,  so  that  he  worshipped  the  Mother  in  order  to 


1  Author’s  parenthesis.  The  passage  is  obscure.  It  has  been  already  said 

that  the  blood  was  not  merely  blood,  but  the  attachment  of  the  heart,  the  meaning 
■  of  which  appears  to  be  that  the  shedding  of  the  heart’s  blood  was,  as  it  were,  the 

shedding  of  the  heart’s  attachment.  As  this  shedding  is  supposed  to  be  caused 

by  the  Devi  living  in  the  heart,  the  Sadhaka  might  think  it  to  be  the  rejection 

by  Her  of  his  offering  of  attachment.  What  the  words  of  Siva  are  cannot  be 

made  out  from  the  context;  unless  it  be  the  Tantra  Sistra  in  general. 

*  See  posti 

8  Sakama; -because  he  worshipped  in' order  that  he  might  gain  the  material 
benefit  to  himself  of  becoming  a  .great  King,  whereas  his  companion  was  striving 
.for  the  spiritual  end  of  liberation. 


676 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


regain  his  lost  kingdom.  This  was  why  the  Mother  who  dwells  in  all 
hearts  addressed  the  Prince  as  Maharaja.  As  for  the  Vaiiya,  his  keen 
dispassion,1  winch  had  comumed  his  worldly  desires  to  their  very  roots, 
was  not  to  be  satisfied  so  long  as  he  did  not  obtain,  the  Mother,  the  Maha- 
maya,  who  is  the  centre  of  all  this  Maya.  This  was  why  the  Mother  very 
fondly  and  very  affectionately  used  the  title  of  “  Gladdener  of  Kula  ”  in 
addressing  this  son  of  Hers  who  had  lost  the  Mother.  Just  as  a  worldly 
mother  affectionately  calls  her  son  “  support  of  his  Kula  (race),  or  ornament 
of  his  Kula  (race),”  if  he  be  great  and  glorious;  so  the  Mother,  in  spite  of 
Her  being  above  the  world,  was,  as  it  were,  over-powered  by  Her  Maternal 
affection,  and  called  the  Vaiiya  “  Gladdener  of  Kula”.  O  Mother,  Thou 
hast  none  in  Thy  Kula  (race),  how,  then,  could  he  become  gladdener  of 
Kula  *  to  Thee?  Perhaps  it  is  because  Thou  hast  appeared  as  Mother  that 
Thy  attachment  to  Kula  has  so  greatly  increased.  That  Thou  hast  none 
above  Thee  in  Thy  Kula  (race)  *  is  no  reason  why  Thou  shouldst  not  have 
descendants.  If  really  Thou  hast  no  descendants  in  Thy  Kula,  then  who 
arc  we  ?  Whether  Thou  hast  a  Kula  or  not,  Thou  art  the  root  of  Kula, 
Kulakundalini  *  Herself.  The  Kula  path,*  O  Mother!  is  for  him  who 
follows  Thy  path.  My  desires  for  Kula  •  have  been  fully  gratified.  Now, 
O  Mother!  take  me  out  of  Kula  *  into  Thy  arms,  so  that  sitting  at  the  root 
of  Kula 7  I  may  penetrate  into  its  mysteries.  Let  the  Kulakula  sound  * 
of  the  river  of  existence*  cease  for  ever.  O  Mother!  it  was  because 
SaraSdhi,  Thy  son  immersed  in  Samadhi,10  gave  lustre  to  this  Kula  11  by 
passing  beyond  the  two  Kulas 11  of  this  river  that  Thou  didst  give  him  the 
endearing  title  of  “  Gladdener  of  Kula”.  Blessed  were  your  devotees,. 
Suratha  and  Samadhi!  How  shall  we,  Jivas  of  the  Kali  age,  penetrate  the 
deep  mystery  of  the  offering  of  sacrifice  by  you  ?  By  you  alone  was  it  offered, 
and  by  the  Mother  alone  was  its  meaning  understood.  O  Sadhaka  of  the 
embodied  Deity! u  be  you  interested  or  disinterested  in  your  Sadhana,14 


i  Vairigya. 

*  Kulanandana.  The  word  Nandana  means  also  son.  There  is  a  play  on 
the  “  Kula,”  which  means  “  race  family,"  as  well  as  a  form  of  Sadhana.  It  also 
means  “  shore  ”  or  “  bank  See  text,  post. 

*  No  one  is  Her  progenitor. 

*  The  name  of  the  Devi  whose  abode  is  in  the  Muladliara.  There  is  a  play 
on  the  word  Kula. 

*  The  Tantra. 

*  Here  "  family  ’’ — that  is,  the  world.  7  Tantrik  worship. 

*  The  sound  made  by  running  water.  Play  on  the  word  Kula. 

•Bhavanadi.  “Ecstasy;  a  play  on  the  Vaiiya’s  name. 

u  Human  race.  “Banks.  “Sahara, 

14  That  is,  be  the  Sadhana  done  with  the  desire  for  personal  benefit  or  not 
as  in  the  case  of  Suratha  and  Samadhi. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


677 


Inquire  now  of  Suratha  and  Sam  ad  hi  what  has  to  be  done  in  order  to 
directly  perceive 1  the  appearance  of  the  Mother  in  an  outer  image.  The 
worship  in  which  men  like  Suratha  and  Samadhi  wounded  their  breasts 
with  their  own  hands  in  order  that  they  might  see  the  Mother  of  the  world 
in  an  outer  image — that  worship  is  called  idolatry  to-day  in  the  Kali  age 
by  the  community  of  infidels  themselves,  confused  by  the  “  learning  and 
science  ”  of  the  nineteenth  century.  How  absurd  it  is  to  say  that 
Maharajadhirajendra  *  Suratha,  the  paramount  Monarch  of  this  earth, 
with  its  oceans,  and  high-souled  Samadhi,  whose  heart  was  under  the  sway 
of  intense  dispassion,8  and  lighted  by  the  fire  of  spiritual  knowledge,4  rent 
their  hearts  and  made  streams  of  blood  flow  therefrom  in  the  course  of  a 
play  with  a  mere  doll.  Such  criticism  against  the  Savarpika  Manu  8  is 
nothing  but  a  dear  sign  of  the  influence  of  the  Kali  age.  However  that 
may  be,  to  Her  who  accepted  even  heart’s  blood  as  sacrifice  from  Suratha 
and  Samadhi  in  order  to  uphold  the  honour  of  the  words  of  Sastra  told  by 
Herself,  “  Atapa  rice  and  soaked  peas  ”  cannot  be  unacceptable;  and  it  is 
because  they  are  not  unacceptable  to  Her  that  the  Sadhaka  has  with 
simplicity  said : 

“  O  Mother!  in  the  Devaloka  Devas  worship  Thee  daily  with  nectar.0 
•O  JagadiSvari!  7  rulers  of  the  earth  worship  Thee  with  delirious  food. 
But,  O  Mother!  Thou  canst  not  for  that  reason  reject  my  offering  of  leaves, 
flowers,  fruits,  and  water.  O  Mother!  does  fire  refuse  to  accept  blades  of 
grass  because  in  the  sacrificial  pit  fire  is  worshipped  with  firewood  along 
with  ghee  ?  ”  Fire  is  called  the  “  all-eater,”  *  because  by  virtue  of  its  power 
of  burning  it  is  capable  of  appropriating  to  itself  all  things. 

Fire  accepts  and  consumes  indiscriminately  anything  which  is  offered 
to  it.  Similarly,  the  merciful  Devi,  who  grants  all  desires,  accepts,  for  the 
gratification  of  Sadhakas,  anything  which  is  offered  in  the  name  of  the 
Almighty,  Omniscient,  and  All-good.  This  acceptance  is  not  to  supply 
any  want  on  Her  part,  but  in  order  that  She  who  bears  great  love  for  Her 
devotees  may  maintain  them  and  their  Vratas.*  Otherwise,  in  the  dominion 
of  Her  who  is  abundance 10  itself  and  is  plenty,11  the  character  of  things 18 
and  power,18  there  can  be  really  no  want.14  If  there  be  any  want  it  is  only 

1  Pra^ynkytkarnnam. 

8  A  compound  of  the  words  MahSrSja,  Adhiraja  and  Indra.  The  word 
Indra  used  as  a  common  noun  means  “  chief”. 

8  Vairagya.  4  TattvajfUna.  *  Vide  ante. 

*  Am  ft  a.  1  Mistress  of  the  universe.  8  Sarvabhuk. 

*  Vows,  religious  rites  (see  Introduction  to  T antra  Sastra). 

10  Mahabhava.  11  BhSva.  11  Svabhava.  18  Prabhava. 

14  Abh&va  is  non-existence.  Mahabhava  and  Bhava  are  translated  as  plenty 
“  because  they  have  been  made  antitheses  of  Abhava  or  want.”  As  for  Svabh&va 
-and  Prabhava,  the  author  appears  not  to  have  been  able  to  resist  the  temptation 
of  using  these  words  for  the  sake  of  alliteration. 


€78 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  want  of  want.  Just  as  She  has  no  want  of  “  atapa  rice  and  soaked 
peas,”  so  also  She  has  no  want  to  sweet-meats,  sweet-rice,1  and  nectar.1 
What  cause  for  sorrow  or  shame  is  there,  then,  in  offering  Her  “  atapa 
rice  and  soaked  peas?  ”  To  Her  the  store  of  nectar 1  churned  out  of  the 
seven  seas  is  as  much  an  atom  as  “  atapa  rice  and  soaked  peas  ”  are  atoms.* 
She  is  as  much  unattached  to  atapa  rice  and  soaked  peas  as  to  nectar.* 
Although  She  is  really  as  free  from  attachment  as  the  water  on  a  lotus-leaf, 
when  playing  at  the  play  of  Samsara,  full  of  MSya,  She,  in  order  to  draw 
devotees  to  Herself,  merely  pretends  to  be  delighted  by  the  receipt  of  all 
these  materials.  Otherwise,  what  form  of  delight  does  the  Devi,  who  is 
all  delight  and  perfect  delight,  want  that  She  should  feel  delight  in  receiving 
offerings  of  food.4 

It  is  ridiculous  to  think  that  offerings  of  food  will  give  delight  to  the 
Anandamayi,8  who  is  present  in  every  atom  of  those  offerings  as  conscious¬ 
ness.*  Her  delight  and  joy  of  which  the  &&stra  speaks  in  dealing  with 
the  subject  of  worship  arc  not  Her  delight  and  Her  joy,  but  the  play  of  the 
delight  of  Sadhana  and  the  joy  of  Sadhana  in  the  Sadhaka.  We  shall  try 
to  explain  this  point  more  clearly  in  its  proper  place.  Here  only  we  would 
observe  that  RSmaprasida  sang  the  story  of  His  heart  with  a  mind  full  of 
sorrow,  a  sorrow  which  attacks  every  Sadhaka  so  long  as  the  supreme 
truth 7  does  not  dawn  in  the  first  stage  *  of  Sadhana.  His  sorrowful  song 
is  not  the  expression  of  a  decision  arrived  at  in  the  domain  of  knowledge,* 
but  the  indistinct  expression  of  an  ungratified  longing  in  the  domain  of 
devotion.1*  Through  their  senseless  interference  in  matters  in  which  they 
have  no  competence,  the  community  of  undcvotces,  who  are  ignorant  of 
the  truth,11  and  without  experience  in  these  matters,  put  on  the  airs  of  wise 
men  before  the  community  of  infidels  11  by  giving  to  words  belonging  to 
the  sphere  of  devotion  a  queer  appearance,  coloured  by  the  sphere  of 
knowledge.1*  But  they  failed  to  see  that  the  sky  was  over-clouded,  and  a 
single  shower  was  likely  to  wash  off  the  fight 14  colour  with  which  they  had 
painted  these  pictures.  It  is  highly  amusing  to  see  people  taking  the  name 
Ramaprasada  and  making  themselves  known  to  others  as  his  followers,  yet 
all  the  time  trying  secretly  to  draw  him  to  their  own  party.  Wc  are  unable 
to  understand  how  such  people  as  hold  so  much  intelligence  in  themselves 1V 


1  Paramanna ;  rice  cooked  with  milk  and  sugar.  1  Amfta. 

*  Paramanu.  To  Her  who  is  Brahmi  one  is  as  insignificant  as  the  other.. 


4  Naivedya. 

*  Citsatta. 

•Adhik&ra. 

“Bhakti. 

14  Psygiji!. 

14  As  opposed  to  fast  colour. 

11  Literally.  “  in  their  stomachs  ”• 


*  Devi,  who  is  bliss  or  delight. 
7  Paratattva . 

*  Jftana. 
llTattva. 

17  JB^nakflnHa 

Bengali  idiom. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


679 


can  have  room 1  to  digest  the  food  left  by  Rlmaprasada.  It  is  during 
life  that  evidence  of  men’s  Sadhana  is  seen.  But  Ramaprasada  gave 
evidence  of  his  SSdhana  in  death  as  well  as  in  life.  By  performing  worship 
the  night  preceding  his  death,  and  placing  the  Mother’s  image  before  him 
even  at  the  time  of  death,  the  high-souled  accomplished  Sadhaka  has  given 
us  full  proof  of  his  faith  in  Brahman  with  form,1  and  of  his  performance 
of  worship  of  the  Deity  with  form.*  During  life  the  Mother  with  form  4 
danced  constantly  in  his  songs  and  his  heart.  If  after  this  a  man  can  find 
it  in  himself  to  say  that  “  Ramaprasada  did  not  worship  the  Deity  with 
form,”  he  may  as  well  also  say  that  Ramaprasada  had  no  soul.* 

We  shall  quote  here  another  of  Ramaprasada’s  songs  of  self- resigna¬ 
tion.  In  this  it  will  be  seen  how  even  his  body  and  senses,  not  to  speak  of 
his  mind,  heart,  and  very  sel£*  were  absorbed  in  the  worship  of  the  Mother. 

“  Of  what  use,  O  brother !  is  this  body  if  it  does  not  melt  in  love 
for  Dakrina?  7 

Oh,  fie,  fie,  to  this  tongue  if  it  does  not  utter  the  name  of  K&li. 

Those  eyes  are  sinful  which  see  not  the  form  1  of  KSli. 

Oh,  how  wicked  is  the  mind  which  does  not  sink  under  Her  feet. 

May  thunder  strike  those  ears  which  do  not  hear  Her  sweet  name, 
making  copious  tears  flow  from  the  eyes.  For  what  purpose 
does  their  existence  serve? 

Oh,  should  we  desire  to  have  the  hands  which  fill  the  belly,  if  they 
are  not  joined  together  to  hold  sandal  paste,  Java  flowers,  and 
bael-leaves  ?  • 

Oh,  of  what  use  are  the  feet,  and  wholly  without  purpose  is  the 
work  they  do  by  day  and  night,  if  they  do  not  willingly  and 
gladly  carry  us  there  where  images  of  K5B  arc  enshrined  ? 

If  a  man’s  senses  are  not  under  his  control,  can  Devata  be  so? 

Ramaprasada  asks:  ‘  Docs  a  Babul  10-tree  ever  bear  mango 
fruits?  ’  ” 

Let  the  Sadhaka  here  ask  the  critic  what  kind  of  Ramaprasida  it  was 
who  wrote  this  song? 

There  are,  again,  many  people  who,  on  hearing  all  this  infidel  talk, 
think  it  to  be  a  novel  and  refined  form  of  criticism,  which  the  brilliant 
genius  of  the  nineteenth  century  alone  with  its  constant  pursuit  of  knowledge 
and  science  has  originated.  But  we  say  that  this  iconoclasm  is  not  a  thing 
of  to-day  only  when  considered  as  a  revolutionary  principle  in  the  sphere 


1  In  those  stomachs.  1  Sakara. 

1  Sahara  Upasana.  *  Mfirtimad.  *  Atxna. 

•  Atmatattva.  7  The  gracious  Devi.  *  Rflpa. 

•  These  are  offered  in  the  two  joined  palms  to  the  Devi  in  worship. 
14  A  wild  tree. 


€80 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


of  worship.  It  has  always  existed  since  the  creation  of  light  and  darkness, 
since  the  beginning  of  the  eternal  quarrel  between  the  race  of  Devas  and 
the  race  of  Daily  as,  and  has  lasted  as  long  as  nectar 1  and  poison  have 
existed  together  in  the  depth  of  the  sea;  as  long  as  there  have  been  light 
and  spots  in  the  moon;  as  long  as  there  have  been  heaven  and  hell,*  sin 
and  virtue,*  Dharma  and  obstruction  thereof,*  Deva  and  Danava,*  man 
and  Pi&ca,"  knowledge  and  ignorance,  faith  and  faithlessness,  Sadhua,1 
and  libertines,  devotees  and  infidels.  Even  those  who  go  to  heaven  fall 
into  hell  *  when  their  religious  merit  *  is  spent  Even  wise  men  are  led 
astray  when  the  attraction  of  sin  becomes  strong,  and  even  Sadhus  7 
hanker  to  eat  and  drink  things  injurious  to  them  when  they  become  delirious 
in  disease. 

Similarly,  non-Arya  proclivities,  the  unhappy  result  of  evil  deeds  in 
previous  births,  move  and  possess  the  hearts  of  Jivas,  in  spite  of  their  having 
been  bom  in  the  Arya  race.  This  it  is  which  gives  rise  to  the  kind  of 
criticism  under  consideration.  Eternally  ignorant  as  we  are  of  the  root 
principle,  we  see  only  the  fruit,  and  think  that  the  branch  alone  is  its  cause ; 
whilst  as  a  matter  of  fact  He  it  is  who  is  at  the  root  of  all  fruits— He  whose 
command  gives  sour,  bitter,  pungent,  and  sweet  tastes  to  the  sap  of  trees 
from  which  fruits  spring  according  to  the  seeds  from  which  they  grow. 
We  therefore  often  find  the  hearts  of  even  Candalas,  who  are  devoted  to 
Bhagavin,  to  be  adorned  with  Sattvik 10  qualities  becoming  Brahmanas, 
whilst  even  Brahmanas  fall  into  a  state  worse  than  that  of  Canvas  if  they 
become  estranged  from  Bhagavan.  When,  in  spite  of  being  the  son  of 
Brahma  Himself,  and  father-in-law  of  Bhagavin,  who  is  perfect  and  eternal 
Brahman,  and  husband  of  Bhagavati  Prajipati,  Daksa  did  that  which 
became  an  Asura,  and  lost  all  devotion  to  the  feet  of  Bhagav&n  and  Bhaga¬ 
vati,  Pafupatl,11  the  Destroyer  of  the  Paiu  bonds 11  of  the  three  worlds, 
attached  to  the  headless  trunk  of  His  father-in-law  the  head  of  a  goat,  the 
worst  .of  beasts.1*  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  incident  on  which  the  Sivaratri 


1  Amj-ta.  *  Svarga  and  Naraia.  *  Papa  and  PuJjya. 

I  Vighna.  *  Enemies  of  the  divine  principle. 

*  A  low,  unclean  form  of  Spirit.  7  Pious  men. 

*  To  work  out  the  effect  of  sin.  Ordinarily,  hell  is  gone  through  first,  then 
heaven,  and  then  earth. 

•Punya. 

w  Good  qualities  due  to  the  predominance  in  them  of  the  Sattvaguga. 

II  Siva  as  Lord  of  creatures. 

11  Bonds  which  bind  Jivas;  as  ropes  bind  paius  or  beasts. 

“  This  was  after  the  sacrifice  of  Dak?a,  at  which  the  latter  had  slighted  Siva. 
Hence  Dak$a  is  represented  as  a  man  with  a  goat's  head. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


681 


Vrata 1  is  based,  we  see  the  same  Paiupati  taking  mercy  on  a  Nisfida  1 
King,  a  killer  of  animals,  delivering  him  from  the  terrible  fear  of  death, 
taking  him  to  the  abode  of  Kailasa,  which  great  Yogis  long  to  attain,  and 
giving  eternal  peace  to  that  Candala,  scorched  as  he  was  by  the  three  fires,* 
setting  him  in  the  cool  shade  of  His  feet.  The  Git&fijali 1  therefore  says : 

Song 

“Ah!  the  Dispenser  of  the  fourfold  fruit  sits  at  the  root  of  the 
bael-tree. 

Hence  the  Vyadha’s*  hunting  has  brought  the  four-fold  fruit  to 
the  hollow  of  his  palm. 

Various  kinds  of  fruits  arc  borne  by  trees — so  people  do  think. 

But  it  is  not  the  trees,  O  brother!  which  really  bear  fruits. 

Fruits  are  borne  by  the  energy  of  its  root. 

O  Vyadha!  the  tree  which  gave  you  shelter  was  no  ordinary 
tree,  but  that  which  gratifies  all  desires.* 

At  the  root  of  that  tree  was  the  Guru  of  the  world,  in  consequence 
of  Sadhana  performed  by  you  in  previous  births. 

Blessed  was  your  initiation  in  hunting,  blessed  was  the  training 
you  had  received  in  archery. 

In  consequence  of  which  the  Destroyer  of  Kama  7  accepted  bael- 
leaves  from  you. 

Blessed  is  the  tithi  *  of  fSivaratri,  in  which  the  Mother,  Protectrix 
of  the  world,  took  a  Vyadha’s  son  into  Her  arms  instead  of 
casting  him  away  as  a  Candala.* 

If  He  who  to-day,  being  bom  in  a  Brahmapa  family,  omits  to 
observe  the  Vrata,  then  whom  would  you  call  a  Candala  ? 

Above  were  you,  O  Vyadha  Candala!  and  under  you  was  the 
Lord  of  the  three  worlds. 


1  On  a  stormy  night  a  hunter  with  game  on  his  back  got  up  on  a  bael-tree 
at  the  foot  of  which  Siva  and  Parvatl  came  and  sat.  As  the  hunter  mounted 
on  the  tree  bael-leaves  fell  on  Siva.  This  satisfied  Him,  and  He  blessed  the 
hunter. 

*  King  of  Nisidas,  or  VySdhas,  or  Candela*,  who  live  by  hunting;  regarded 
as  a  low  and  cruel  caste. 

*The  three  sorrows — adhyatmik,  adhibhautik,  and  adhidaivik — due  to  the 
self,  the  external  material  world,  and  the  world  of  Devas. 

*  The  author’s  volume  of  verses. 

1  See  note,  anit.  *  Kalpa-tree. 

7  Siva  as  destroyer  of  the  Lord  of  Desire.  *  Lunar  day. 

*  One  of  the  lowest  castes. 


682 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


How  can  I  understand  the  meaning  of  this — bom  though  I  am. 
in  a  Brahmana  family  ? 

In  order  to  uphold  the  honour  of  a  devotee,  BhagavSn,  who  is  in 
the  power  of  devotees,  took  His  own  place  below,  and  raised 
the  devotee  on  high. 

If  the  devotee  falls,  it  will  be  difficult  to  save  him. 

This  was  why  the  Lover  of  devotees  sat  at  the  root  of  the  tree,  in 
order  that  he  might  hold  the  devotee  in  His  arms. 

O  hunter!  in  order  to  bow  to  you  to-day  it  is  necessary  to  cross 
the  Lord  of  the  Universe.1 * * 

I  therefore  bow  to  your  feet,  O  Cantfala!  from  a  distance. 

Bless  me,  O  Ni?ada-King!  that  I  may  to-day  lose  my  Br&hmaija- 
hood. 

And,  making  me  your  younger  brother,  give  me,  O  brother! 
a  place  in  Mother  Candi’s  bosom. 

You  have,  O  brother!  taken  me  up  on  the  tree  of  Kula.*  If  I  now 
fall,  there  will  be  an  end  of  me. 

In  the  name  of  Siva,  in  the  name  of  Siva,  I  stretch  out  my  hand. 
Raise  me  to  you.” 

Because  such  fall  is  inevitable  in  human  life,  the  Three-eyed  Bhagavan, 
who  peers  through  the  three  divisions  of  time,*  has,  with  a  view  to  the 
cause  of  this  fall,  warned  the  world  of  Sidhakas  beforehand,  and  Himself 
said  in  the  Yogini  Tantra :  4 

“  Many  celestial 1  and  terrestrial  obstacles  appear  in  pilgrimage,  con¬ 
struction  of  palaces,  and  specially  at  the  beginning  of  any  religious  act, 
Vrata,  or  Yajna.4  The  Devatas  who  bring  about  or  preside  over  these 
obstacles  should  be  worshipped  at  the  very  outset  with  sweetmeats  and 
sacrifice,  otherwise  irremediable  obstacles  will  surely  appear.  Besides  these 
outer  obstacles,  there  are  other  obstacles  which  reside  in  the  body  of  the 
operator  or  Sadhaka  himself.  These  inner  obstacles  possess  the  minds  of 
Jlvas,  and  are  manifested  as  sins  knowingly  committed.  My  Beloved! 
hear  an  account  of  these  obstacles.  O  Devi !  some  of  these  mental  obstacles 
appear  as  restrainers, ’  and  others  as  instigators.*  ”  (As  a  matter  of  fact, 
by'fighting  with  each  other,  both  these  restraining  and  instigating  obstacles 
seem  only  to  waste  the  Sadhaka’s  lifetime,  so  that  instigating  obstacles  also 


1  Viivanatha,  “  Cross,”  because  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  is  between  the 
hymnist  and  the  Vyadha,  for  Siva  was  at  the  foot  of  the  tree. 

*  That  is,  Kulasadhana. 

*  Past,  present,  and  future. 

4  Second  Part,  Eighth  Patala.  s  Daiva. 

4  Vow  and  sacrificial  rite  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

1  Nivarttaka.  4  Pravarttaka. 


OUTER  WORSHIP 


685 


should  be  considered  as  restraining  obstacles  in  a  different  form;  otherwise,, 
an  inclination 1  which  instigates  work  would  never  have  been  called  an 
obstacle  by  the  SSstra.  Such  instigating  inclinations  are  merely  ropes 
from  which  swing  cradles  of  doubt.  Description  of  obstacles  follows:) 
“  Thought  of  sinful  objects,  whether  they  are  near  or  very  far  off,  be  the 
distance  a  thousand  or  hundred  thousand  of  yojanas;  *  detriment  to  religious 
work  through  laziness,  grief,  delusion,  old  age,  and  disease,  which  destroys 
youth  and  wealth  (4,  5);  quarrel  with  wife;  famine;  home  difficulties- 
(quarrels  with  relations,  quarrels  with  members  of  family,  and  so  forth) ; 
anxiety  on  account  of  many  Vratas  *  ”  (undertaking  many  Vratas  at  one 
and  the  same  time,  and  then  being  anxious  for  fear  of  occurrence  of 
omissions  in  their  performance) ;  “  the  vanity  that  *  I  am  a  righteous  man  ’ 
(6) ;  sudden  subjection  to  grief,  in  spite  of  the  absence  of  the  occurrence  of 
any  an  4  during  the  performance  of  a  religious  rite ;  the  occurrence  at  the 
sight  of  Devata  Himself  and  His  manifestations  4  of  such  perverse  ideas 
as  that  Tula*!  leaves  •  arc  mere  leaves  of  a  tree;  myrobalans  7  are  mere 
fruits  of  trees;  Salagrama  *  is  a  mere  stone;  images  of  Devata  are  mere 
pieces  of  wood,  and  a  Brahmana  is  merely  an  ordinary  man;  Svayambhu 
Siva  •  is  merely  a  round  stone;  conch  is  merely  a  kind  of  shell,  and  the  horn 
of  rhinoceros 10  is  merely  flesh  in  a  transformed  state.  These  and  such 
other  notions  as  that  TIrthas  11  are  merely  water,  Ganga  is  a  mere  river, 
and  holy  "places  are  mere  pieces  of  land,  repeatedly  appear  in  the  mind  of 
Jivas  as  obstacles  in  the  form  of  scepticism,  and  obstruct  the  performance 
of  a  religious  rite  (7-10).  It  is  only  when  the  mind  is  drawn  by  the  upward 
attraction  of  Dharma  by  virtue  of  merit,11  acquired  in  previous  births, 
strengthened  by  firm  faith,  and  thoroughly  purified  by  instructions  from 
Guru,  that  it  is  rendered  capable  of  crossing  tins  sea  of  obstacles.  Again, 
a  wicked  mind  is  the  cause  of  the  appearance  of  these  obstacles.  In  fact, 
the  mind  alone  causa  man’s  bondage,  as  well  as  liberation  (n).” 
(Knowing  the  truth  about  these  obstacles,  a  Sadhaka  should  at  the  very 


1  Vjtti.  *  Eight  or  nine  miles. 

I  Religious  rites  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra). 

4  Pataka,  which  most  probably  here  means  sin  caused  by  any  amission  or 
irregularity.  1  Vibhutis. 

*  Used  in  worship  of  Vi$i?u.  The  Tulls  plant  was  originally  a  Gopl,  beloved 
of  Kfsna,  cursed  by  RidhS.  Brahmavaivartta  Pur  ana,  Prakrti  Khanka 

T  Given  at  samkalpa  rite. 

*  Stones  of  peculiar  structure  found  in  the  Gan(JakI  River,  wanhipped  as 
Nar&yaoa. 

*  Anadi,  or  self-sprung  Lihgas. 

10  Used  in  Eastern  Bengal  in  Tarpa^a  as  arghyapStra  (offering  vessel). 

II  Here  sacred  riven.  17  Puiyya. 


«84  PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 

commencement  of  a  religious  work  resolve  to  control  his  mind,  and  should 
seek  refuge  at  the  lotus-feet  of  Mahafakti,  invoking  Her  that  he  may  gain 
power  and  strength  for  himself.) 

Now,  Sadhakas  will  see  that  the  prediction  of  Bhagavan  in  the  Saatra 
is  a  subtle  criticism  of  the  present  time.  But  seeing  we  see  not,  and  knowing 
we  know  not,  that  there  already  visibly  exists  a  viable  root  infinitely  more 
subtle  than  all  these  subde  fruits.  Hence  all  that  we  can  do  is  to  weep 
plaintively  and  pray:  “  Victory  to  Thee,  O  Three-cyed  Mother!  Take  me 
out  of  this  deep,  dark  well  of  one-eyed  criticism,  and,  O  Mother!  give  light 
to  the  eyes  of  Thy  children  of  darkened  vision  by  painting  with  the  eye-paint 
of  Thy  beauty,1  which  is  existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss,2  an  Anjana 
better  than  crushed  Anjana;  so  that,  looking  at  that  fair  countenance  of 
Thine,  soft  with  kindness,  which,  though  black,  is  cool  with  the  coolness 
•of  a  crore  *  of  moons,  and  is  bright  as  though  it  were  a  sun,  we  may,  O 
Mother!  resign  ourselves  as  the  Mother’s  children  to  the  Mother’s  arms.” 


1  The  black  appearance  of  the  Devi  is  here  called  an  Aiijana  (black 
■collyrium),  with  which  the  eyes  are  painted. 

2  Sat,  Cit  and  Ananda. 


*  Ten  millions. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP* 

In  the  authorities  already  quoted  the  Sastra  has  ordained  the  exorcism  of 
Spirits*  and  removal  of  obstacles  even  before  the  commencement  of 
worship,  Japa,  Yajfia,*  or  such  other  thing.  The  reason  for  this  is  that 
through  the  oppressiveness  of  Bhutas,  Pretas,  PiSachas,  Daityas,  and 
Danavas,4  even  auspicious  works  become  beset  with  obstacles,  specially  in 
the  Kali  age,  and  the  nineteenth  century  therein.  This  is  why  we  have 
had  to  write  at  such  length  in  the  refutation  of  the  Kali-daitya  * in  connec¬ 
tion  with  the  subject  of  worship.  Though  every  matter  which  we  have 
discussed  may  not  be  found  in  the  §&stra,  we  have  been  obliged  to  deal 
with  them  because  they  are  relevant  to  the  Sastra  of  which  we  treat.8 
In  order  to  depict  the  scenes  of  the  Ramayaga  and  the  Mahibharata, 
it  is  as  much  necessary  to  introduce  Ravana,  Kumbhakarga,  Duryodhana, 
and  Sakuni,1  as  it  is  to  present  Sugriva,  Vibhisaga,  Bhlma,  and  Aijuna.* 
Similarly,  in  establishing  the  authority  of  the  rites  relating  to  worship, 
it  is  as  much  necessary  to  introduce  the  band  of  wrong-arguers,  who  are  a 
shame  to  the  land  of  Bhirata,  the  Motherland  of  Aryas,  as  it  is  necessary 
to  present  Digambara,  Ramaprasada,  and  DaJarathi  *  who  lived  in  the 
love  of  the  Mother  of  the  world.  The  errors  of  the  non-Arya  community 
arc  daily  accepted,  as  though  they  were  the  sayings  of  the  Sastra  and  the 
words  of  Sadhakas.  It  is  in  order  to  save  the  guileless  Arya  community 
from  this  terrible,  dangerous  situation  in  which  it  is  placed  that  we  have 
been  obliged  to  discuss  the  views  of  the  opposing  party,  and  to  show  that 
they  arc  not  approved  of  by  the  Sastra.  How  tortuous  is  the  course  of 


1  PQjavidhana.  1  Bhutas. 

*  “  Recitation  ”  of  Mantra  and  sacrifice. 

4  Ghosts,  evil  spirits,  the  demoniac  enemies  of  the  Devas. 

8  The  evil  genius  of  the  Kali  age.  4  Upasani-tattva. 

7  All  bad  characters.  The  two  first  are  brother  Danavas.  Duryodhana 
was  the  head  of  the  Kauravas.  Sakuni  was  his  adviser  and  maternal  uncle, 

8  All  good  characters.  Sugriva  was  the  Monkey-King  ally  of  Ramacandra. 
Vibhisana,  though  brother  of  Ravana,  was  ally  of  Rama.  Bhima  was  brother 
of  Yudhi^hira,  second  of  the  Plndavai  and  Aijuna  was  their  third  brother. 

*  Celebrated  Tantriks,  S&dhakas,  and  poets. 


>€86 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


time 1  when  everyone  seek*  a  Dharma  1 *  suited  to  his  liking.  For  those 
who  thus  seek  Dharma*  to  suit  their  individual  tastes,  the  Sistra  is  an 
eyesore;  for  that  is  called  Sastra  by  which  the  wayward  faculties  of  the 
mind  arc  brought  under  control,  and  which  ii,  in  fact,  the  unfailing  instru¬ 
ment  by  which  the  vast  dominion  of  the  Queen  of  Queens  *  of  the  Universe 
is  ruled.  It  is  no  wonder  that  the  §5stra  should  be  an  eyesore  to  unruly 
subjects  who  dishonour  the  commands  of  their  Sovereign.  Subordination 
to  the  commands  of  Sastra  is  nowadays  considered  derogatory  to  freedom, 
and  consequently  extremely  distasteful.  What,  however,  such  persons 
really  think  is  that  their  Dharma  should  be  subordinate  to  their  command, 
for  they  consider  themselves  free  men. 

Idleness  makes  people  semi-omniscient,  for  idle  people  eagerly  seek 
■  opportunities  to  avoid  work;  and  it  is  really  this  eagerness  to  avoid  labour 
which  lies  at  the  root  of  their  unswerving  faith  in  such  Sastra  as  seek  to 
establish  the  superiority  of  Jhana-kii?da  4  of  their  unique  love  for  the 
Yoga  Va&s{ha,  Bhagavadgita,  and  Upanijads,  and  of  their  equally  unique 
repugnance  for  Tantra,  Mantra,  Yoga,  Bhajana  and  S&dhana  Sastras. 
Rising  before  daybreak,  bathing  early  in  the  morning,  performance  of  the 
Sandhya  rite,1 *  cleansing  temples,  collecting  Kuia  grass,  flowers,  Tulo- 
leavcs,  Bacl-Ieaves,  and  so  forth,  fetching  water  from  streams,*  taking  only 
one  meal  a  day,  eating  havi$ya  food  7 * *  without  flesh,  performance  of  religious 
rites,  Sraddha  *  and  Tarpana,*  observing  hospitality  and  continence,10  lying 
on  the  ground,  keeping  up  at  nights,  visiting  burning-grounds 11  and  places 
■of  pilgrimage,11  constant  expenditure  of  money  on  religious  works  in  the 
names  of  Devas  and  Pitris  u— all  these  are  doubtless  troublesome  things. 
Had  not  Sadhana-Sistras  prescribed  them,  we  have  little  doubt  but  that 
these  people  would  have  at  once  abandoned  the  Gita 14  and  Upanisads, 
and  sought  refuge  with  Tantra  and  Mantra.  At  the  foot  of  all  this  over¬ 
insistence  of  knowledge  is  the  desire  to  avoid  work.  Those  amongst  the 
Vaiwavas  who  arc  steeped  in  lethargy  and  laziness  have  for  a  long  time 


1  Time  has  a  degenerating  effect  until  the  renewal  of  the  world  after  disso¬ 

lution  (pralaya).  1  Religion,  duty,  etc. 

*  Rajarajcivari. 

4  Department  of  knowledge. 

*  See  Introduction  la  Tantra  Ssstra.  *  For  worship. 

7  A  pure  kind  of  food  made  with  particular  fruit  and  vegetables,  and 

-cooked  in  a  particular  manner.  See  my  “  Mah&ninr&pa  Tantra  ”. 

*  Obsequial  rites.  •  Oblation, 

10  Brahmacarya. .  “Smaianas.  “Tlrthas. 

^ForcfathersXsee  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdsira). 

M  The  Bhagavadgita  now  so  widely  known  and  preached. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


687 


&een  saying:  “  The  Karmak&nda  1  is  a  jar  full  of  poison.”  The  Siva 
-community  also  says,  through  the  grace  of  Sarikarficarya:  “  Sadfifiva  am  I, 
and  consciousness.”  *  The  Sakta  community  says:  “  Bhairava  am  I; 
Siva  am  I.”  Those  who  are  initiated  and  educated  in  the  polemics  of 
knowledge  and  science  of  the  nineteenth  century  consider  the  chief  and 
final  decision  of  all  Sastras  to  be  that  there  is  no  connection  between 
Dharmk  and  Karma; 1 * *  but  in  the  Bhagavadgita  (which  is  the  basis  for  all 
the  Sastras  on  the  authority  of  which  these  people  seek  to  establish  the 
superiority  of  their  novel,  tasteful,  and  agreeable  views)  the  commands 
which  Bhagavan  Sri  Kj-sna  Himself  gave  to  Aijuna  respecting  work,  when 
the  latter  was  unable  to  decide  for  himself  what  to  do,  clearly  prove  that 
there  is  no  greater  sin  for  a  man  who  is  attached  to  the  world  than  to  give 
up  work.*  But  we  need  not  confine  ourselves  to  ordinary  folk  attached  to 
the  world,  for  the  Bhagavadgita  says  that  the  Yoga  of  work  is  the  highest 
duty  even  of  Yogis  who  are  detached  from  it.  For  instance: 

“  In  this  world  there  is  a  twofold  path,  as  I  before  said,  O  sinless  one ! 
that  of  Yoga,  by  knowledge  of  the  Samkhyas;  and  that  of  Yoga  by  action 
of  the  Yogis.”  4 * * 

“  Man  winneth  not  freedom  from  action  by  abstaining  from  activity, 
nor  by  mere  renunciation  doth  he  rise  to  perfection.”  8 

“  Nor  can  anyone,  even  for  an  instant,  remain  really  actionless;  for 
helplessly  is  everyone  driven  to  action  by  the  qualities  4  bom  of  nature.7  ”  * 
“Who  sitteth  controlling  the  organs  of  action,  but  dwelling  in  his 
mind  on  the  objects  of  the  senses,  that  bewildered  man  is  called  a  hypocrite.* 
But  who,  controlling  the  senses  by  the  mind,  O  Aijuna!  with  the  organs  of 
action  without  attachment,  performeth  Yoga  by  action,  he  is  worthy.”  10 
“  Perform,  then,  right  action,  for  action  is  superior  to  inaction,  and, 
inactive,  even  the  maintenance  of  thy  body  would  not  be  possible.”  11 

“The  world  is  bound  by  action,  unless  performed  for  the  sake  of 
sacrifice.18  For  that  sake,  free  from  attachment,  O  son  of  Kunti!  perform 
thou  action.”  18 

“  He  who  on  earth  doth  not  follow  the  wheel  thus  revolving,  sinful 
of  life  and  rejoicing  in  the  senses,  he,  O  son  of  P|thi! 14  liveth  in  vain.”  18 
Again:  “Janaka  and  others,  indeed,  attained  to  perfection  by 
action.”  14 


1  Department  of  work.  8  CinmJStra. 

8  Karma,  action,  work. 

4  Mrs.  Bcsant’s  translation  is  here  adopted.  8  III.  4. 

4Gugas.  7  Pralqti.  *111.5.  *111.6.  10  III.  7. 

88  III.  8.  18  Yajfta.  »III.9. 

14  Pftha  or  Kunti  was  the  mother  of  the  Pandavaa.  Hence  Aijuna  is  called 

Pfirtha. 

18  III.  16. 


M  III.  20,  first  hemistich. 


688 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  There  ii  nothing  in  the  three  worlds,  O  Partha! 1  that  should  he 
done  by  Me,  nor  anything  unattained  that  might  be  attained;  yet  I  mingle 
in  action.”  * 

“  Who  abides  ever  in  this  teaching  of  Mine,  foil  of  faith  and  free  from 
cavilling,  they,  too,  are  released  from  actions.”  1 

“  Who  carp  at  My  teaching,  and  act  not  thereon,  senseless,  deluded 
in  all  knowledge,  know  thou  these  mindless  ones  as  fated  to  be  destroyed.”  4 
“  Even  the  man  of  knowledge  behaves  in  conformity  with  his  own 
nature.  Beings  follow  nature.  What  shall  restraint  avail?  ”  * 

“  Better  one’s  own  duty,*  though  destitute  of  merit,  than  the  duty  • 
of  another,  well  discharged.  Better  death  in  the  discharge  of  one’s  own 
duty.1  The  duty  *  of  another  is  full  of  danger.”  7 
In  the  fourth  chapter  it  is  said: 

“  However  men  approach  Me,  even  so  do  I  welcome  them,  for  the 
path  men  take  from  everyside  is  Mine,  O  Partha!  ”  8 

“  They  who  long  after  success  in  action  on  earth,  worship  the  Shining 
One's,®  for  in  brief  space  verily,  in  this  world  of  men,  success  is  born  of 
action.”  19 

“  The  four  castes  were  emanated  by  Me  by  the  different  distribution 
of  qualities 11  and  actions.  Know  Me  to  be  the  author  of  them,  though  the 
actionless  and  inexhaustible.”  18 

“  Nor  do  actions  affect  Me,  nor  is  the  fruit  of  action  desired  by  Me. 
He  who  thus  knoweth  Me  is  not  bound  by  actions.”  11 

“  Having  thus  known,  our  forefathers,  ever  seeking  liberation,  per¬ 
formed  action.  Therefore  do  thou  also  perform  action,  as  did  our 
forefathers  in  the  olden  time.”  M 
In  the  fifth  chapter  it  is  said: 

“  Renunciation  and  Yoga  by  action  both  lead  to  the  highest  bliss. 
Of  the  two,  Yoga  by  action  is  verily  better  than  renunciation  of  action.”  14 
“  He  should  be  known  as  a  perpetual  ascetic 19  who  neither  hateth 
nor  desireth.  Free  from  the  pain  of  opposites,17  O  Mighty  Armed!  he  is 
easily  set  free  from  bondage.”  14 

“  Children,  not  sages,  speak  of  the  Samkhya  and  the  Yoga  as  different. 
He  who  is  duly  established  in  one  obtaineth  the  fruits  of  both.”  l* 

“  That  place  which  is  gained  by  the  Samkhyas  is  reached  by  the  Yogis 
also.  He  seeth  who  seeth  that  the  Samkhya  and  the  Yoga  are  one.”  *° 


1  Pritha  or 

Kunti  was  mother  of  the  Pandavas. 

Hence  Aijuna  is. 

called  Partha. 

•III.  22. 

»  HI.  31. 

4  III.  32. 

•III.  33. 

*Dharma. 

7  III.  35. 

•  IV.  11. 

•Devatai. 

“IV.  12. 

11  Gunas. 

“IV.  13. 

“IV.  14. 

“ IV.  15. 

«V.  2. 

“Sannyisl. 

«  Cold  and  heat,  hunger  and  plenty,  etc. 

“V.  3. 

19  V.  4. 

“V.5. 

ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP  $89 

“  He  who  acteth,  placing'  all  actions  in  the  Eternal,1 * *  abandoning 
attachment,  is  unaffected  by  sin  as  a  lotus-leaf  by  the  waters.”  * 

“  Yogis,  having  abandoned  attachment,  perform  action  only  by  the 
body,  by  the  mind,  by  the  Reason,*  and  even  by  the  senses,  for  the 
purification  of  the  self.”  4 

“  Having  known  Me,  as  the  Enjoyer  of  sacrifice  and  of  austerity,  the 
mighty  Ruler  of  all  the  worlds,  and  the  Lover  of  all  brings,  he  goeth  to 
peace.”  * 

In  the  sixth  chapter  it  is  said: 

“  He  that  performeth  such  action  as  his  du'y,  independently  of  the 
fruit  of  action,  he  is  an  ascetic,4 *  he  is  a  Yogi;  not  he  that  is  without  fire 
and  without  rites.”  7 * 

“That  which  is  called  renunciation,  know  thou  that  as  a  Yoga, 
O  Parxjava!  Nor  doth  anyone  become  a  Yogi  with  the  formative  will* 
unrenounced.”  * 

“  For  the  sage  who  is  seeking  Yoga,  action  is  called  the  means;  for 
the  same  sage,  when  he  is  enthroned  in  Yoga,  serenity  is  called  the 
means.”  10 

“  The  Yogi  is  greater  than  the  ascetics.11  He  is  thought  to  be  greater 
than  even  the  wise.11  The  Yogi  is  greater  than  the  men  of  action,  therefore 
become  thou  a  Yogi,  O  Aijuna!  ”  11 

“  And  among  all  Yogis,  he  who,  full  of  faith,  with  the  inner  self 14 
abiding  in  Me,  adometh  Me,  he  is  considered  by  Me  to  be  the  most 
completely  harmonized.”  14 

In  the  eighth  chapter  it  is  said: 

“  He  who  constantly  thinketh  upon  Me,  not  thinking  ever  of  another, 
of  him  I  am  easily  reached,  O  Partha!  of  this  ever  harmonized  Yogi.”  14 
“  Having  come  to  Me,  these  Mahatmas  come  not  again  to  birth,  the 
place  of  pain,  non-eternal.  They  have  gone  to  the  highest  bliss.”  17 

“  The  worlds,  beginning  with  the  world  of  Brahma,  they  come  and 
go,  O  Aijuna;  but  he  who  cometh  unto  me,  O  Kaunteya! 14  he  knoweth 
birth  no  more.”  14 

In  the  ninth  chapter  it  is  said : 

1  Brahman. 

1  V.  10:  a  constant  simile  denoting  the  detached  aspect  of  the  Brahman. 

4  Buddhi.  4  V.  1 1 .  4  V.  29.  4  Sannyasi. 

7  VI.  1.  That  is,  not  he  who  merely  renounces  the  household  and  the 
daily  rites. 

4  Samkalpa.  4  VI.  2.  14  VI.  3.  11  TapasvI. 

“jasnl.  11 VI.  46.  14  Atma. 

14  VI.  47.  “  VIII.  1*.  17  VIII.  15. 

u  Son  of  Kunti,  that  is,  Aijuna.  14  VIII.  16. 

44 


690 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


“  He  who  offereth  to  Me  with  devotion  a  leaf,  a  flower,  a  fruit,  water, 
that  I  accept  from  the  striving  self,  offered  as  it  is  with  devotion.”  1 

“Whatsoever  thou  doest,  whatsoever  thou  eatest,  whatsoever  thou 
offerest,  whatsoever  thou  givest,  whatsoever  thou  doest  of  austerity,  O 
Kaunteya !  do  thou  that  as  an  offering  unto  Me.”  1 

“  Thus  shaft  thou  be  liberated  from  the  bonds  of  action,  yielding  good 
and  evil  fruits,  thyself  harmonized  by  the  Yoga  of  renunciation,  thou  shalt 
come  unto  Me  when  set  free.”  * 

“  The  same  am  I  to  all  beings;  there  is  none  hateful  to  Me  nor  dear. 
They  verily  who  worship  Me  with  devotion,  they  are  in  Me,  and  I  also 
in  them.”  * 

“  Even  if  the  most  sinful  worship  Me,  with  undivided  heart,  he,  too, 
must  be  accounted  righteous,  for  he  hath  rightly  resolved.”  8 

“  Speedily  he  becometh  dutiful,  and  goeth  to  eternal  peace.  O 
Kaunteya!  know  thou  for  certain  that  My  devotee  perisheth  never.”  * 

“  They  who  take  refuge  with  Me,  0  Partha!  though  of  the  womb  of 
sin,  women,  Vaiiyas,  even  Sudras,  they  also  tread  the  highest  Path.”  7 
“  How  much  rather,  then,  (do)  holy  Brahmaijas  and  devoted  royal 
saints;  having  obtained  this  transient  joyless  world,  worship  thou  Me.”  8 
“  On  Me  fix  thy  mind;  be  devoted  to  Me;  sacrifice  to  Me;  prostrate 
thyself  before  Me;  harmonized  thus  in  the  Self,  thou  shalt  come  unto  Me, 
having  Me  as  thy  supreme  goal.”  * 

In  the  twelfth  chapter  it  is  said : 

“  Arjuna  said :  1  Those  devotees  who  ever  harmonized  worship  Thee, 
and  those  also  who  worship  the  Indestructible,  the  Unmanifestcd,  whether 
of  these  is  the  more  learned  in  Yoga?  ’  ”  10 

“  The  Blessed  Lord  said:  '  They  who  with  mind  fixed  on  Me,  ever 
harmonized,  worship  Me,  with  faith  supreme  endowed,  these,  in  My 
opinion,  are  best  in  Yoga.’  ”  11 

“They  who  worship  the  Indestructible,  the  Ineffable,  the  Unmani- 
fested,  Omnipresent,  and  Unthinkable,  the  Unchanging,  Immutable, 
Eternal,”  “ 

“  Restraining  and  subduing  the  senses,  regarding  everything  equally, 
in  the  welfare  of  all  rejoicing,  these  also  come  unto  Me.”  18 

“  The  difficulty  of  those  whose  minds  are  set  on  the  Unmanifested  is 
greater;  for  the  path  of  the  Unmanifested  is  hard  for  the  embodied  to 
reach.”  14 

1 IX.  26.  1 IX.  27.  *  IX.  28. 

1 IX.  30.  8 IX.  31.  7 IX.  32. 

•IX.  34.  18  XII.  1.  11 XII.  2. 

“XII.  3.  18  XII.  4.  14  XII.  5. 


4 IX.  29. 
8IX.  33. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


691 


“  Those  verily  whom,  renouncing  all  actions  in  Me  and  intent  on  Me, 
worship,  meditating  on  Me,  with  whole-hearted  Yoga.”  1 

“These  I  speedily  lift  up  from  the  Ocean  of  death  and  existence, 
O  Partha!  their  minds  being  fixed  on  Me.”  * 

“  Place  thy  mind  in  Me,  into  Me  let  thy  Reason  *  enter;  then,  without 
•doubt,  thou  shalt  abide  in  Me  hereafter.”  * 

“  And  if  Thou  art  not  able  firmly  to  fix  thy  mind  on  Me,  then,  by 
the  Yoga  of  practice,  seek  to  reach  Me,  O  Dhananjaya !  ”  * 

“  If  also  thou  art  not  equal  to  constant  practice,  be  intent  on  My 
service;  performing  actions  for  My  sake,  thou  shalt  attain  perfection.”  • 

“  If  even  to  do  this  thou  hast  not  strength,  then,  taking  refuge  in 
union  with  Me,  renounce  all  fruit  of  action  with  the  aclfcontrolled.”  7 

“  Better,  indeed,  is  wisdom  than  constant  practice;  than  wisdom 
meditation  is  better;  than  meditation  renunciation  of  the  fruit  of  action; 
•on  renunciation  follows  peace.”  * 

In  the  eighteenth  chapter  it  is  said : 

“  Nor,  indeed,  can  embodied  beings  completely  relinquish  action; 
verily  he  who  relinquisheth  the  fruit  of  action,  he  is  said  to  be  a  re¬ 
linquisher.”  • 

“  Good,  evil,  and  mixed— threefold  is  the  fruit  of  action  hereafter  for 
the  non-relinquisher;  but  there  is  none  ever  for  the  renouncer.”  10 

“  By  devotion  he  knoweth  Me  in  essence,  who  and  what  I  am;  having 
thus  known  Me  in  essence  he  forthwith  entereth  into  the  Supreme.”  11 

“  Though  ever  performing  all  actions  taking  refuge  in  Me,  by  My 
grace  he  obtaineth  the  eternal  indestructible  abode.”  u 

“  Renouncing  mentally  all  works  in  Me,  intent  on  Me,  resorting  to 
the  Yoga  of  discrimination,1*  have  they  thought  ever  on  Me.”  14 

“  Thinking  on  Me,  thou  shalt  overcome  all  obstacles  by  My  grace; 
•but  if  from  egoism  thou  wilt  not  listen  thou  shalt  be  destroyed  utterly.”  11 
“  Entrenched  in  egoism,  thou  thinkest,  ‘  I  will  not  fight  \  To  no 
purpose  is  thy  determination;  nature  will  constrain  thee.”  14 

“  O  son  of  Kunti !  bound  by  thine  own  duty,17  bom  of  thy  own  nature, 
that  which  from  delusion  thou  desirest  not  to  do,  even  that  helplessly  thou 
shalt  perform.”  14 

“  The  Lord  dwellcth  in  the  hearts  of  all  beings,  O  Arjuna !  by  His 
illusive  power 14  causing  all  things  to  revolve,  as  though  mounted  on  a 
potter’s  wheel.”  40 

1 XII.  6.  *XII.  7.  ■  Buddhi.  4  XII.  8.  *XII.9. 

•  Siddhi,  XII.  10.  7 XII.  11.  8 XII.  12.  •  XVIII.  II. 

10  XVIII.  12.  11  XVIII.  55.  «  XVIII.  56.  >*  Buddhi-Yoga. 

14  XVIII.  57.  11 XVIII.  58.  14  XVIII.  59. 

17  Karma;  quaere  duty:  rather  effects  of  previous  action. 

»*  XVIII.  60.  »  Maya.  *>  XVIII.  61. 


692 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  Flee  unto  Him  for  shelter  with  all  thy  being,  O  BhsLrata!  By  His 
grace  thou  shalt  obtain  supreme  peace,  the  everlasting  dwelling  place.”  1 

“  Thus  hath  wisdom,  more  secret  than  secrecy  itself,  been  declared 
unto  thee  by  Me;  having  reflected  on  it  fully,  then  act  thou  as  thou 
listest.”  * 

“  listen  thou -again  to  My  supreme  word,  most  secret  of  all.  Beloved 
art  thou  of  Me  and  steadfast  of  heart,  therefore  will  I  speak  for  thy 
benefit.”  * 

“  Merge  thy  mind  in  Me,  be  My  devotee,  sacrifice  to  Me,  prostrate 
thyself  before  Me,  thou  shalt  come  even  to  Me.  I  pledge  thee  My  troth; 
thou  art  dear  to  Me.”  * 

“  Abandoning  all  duties,'  come  unto  Me  alone  for  shelter.  Sorrow 
not;  I  will  liberate  thee  from  all  sins.”  • 

Let  Sadhakas  now  sec  for  themselves  whether  in  the  Gita  Bhagavan 
has  prescribed  abandonment  of  work  7  or  performance  of  it.  We  are  not 
at  all  astonished  or  grieved  to  see  that  a  study  of  Bhagavadgita  leads  to 
an  abandonment  of  Karmakanda 8  by  sentimental  folk  who  feign  devotion 
and  who  go  emotion-mad  at  the  very  mention  of  Bhagavadgita,  though 
they  have  no  devotion  to  Bhagavan  Himself.  What  we  are  sorry  for  is, 
that  even  such  men  as  worship  the  speaker  of  this  Gita  as  their  Igtadevata 
and  call  it  Bhagavadgita,  on  account  of  its  words  having  issued  from  His 
fair  mouth,  say  that  “  the  Karmakanda  is  a  jar  of  poison”.  Who  can 
penetrate  this  mystery?  When  the  fruit  appears  the  flower  dries  up  of 
itself  and  falls. 

But  how  wonderful  must  be  the  intensity  of  the  greed  and  the 
impatience  and  hurry  of  those  who,  on  seeing  this,  understand  the  flower 
to  be  of  no  use  and  proceed  to  destroy  it  the  moment  it  is  blown  ?  What 
sort  of  degree-hunting  malady  •  has  seized  society,  that  it  should  cause  a 
mad  rush  to  secure  the  highest  degree  in  every  department?  10  Even  in  the 
worship  of  DevatS  each  one  aspires  to  be  the  highest  degree-holder.  “  In 
no  department  shall  I  be  inferior.”  This  intensely  devilish  idea  of  the 
nineteenth  century  is  about  to  become  supreme  by  the  defeat  of  the  divine  11 
notions  which  belong  to  the  domain  of  worship.  We  cannot  say  when 


'XVIII.  62.  'XVIII.  63.  'XVIII.  64.  'XVIII.  65. 

•  Dharma.  '  XVIII.  66.  7  Kama. 

•  The  department  of  Scripture  dealing  with  action  and  ritual. 

•  Upadhiroga. 

“  A  very  keen  observation.  ^Everyone  cackles  about,  Kaivalya,  and  would 
be  a  Yogi,  not  because  of  any  inherent  competency,  but  because  pride  will  not 
allow  them  to  take  a  lower  place.  By  the  expression  of  their  view  that  this  is. 
only  for  the  “  ignorant,”  they  swing  a  censer  to  their  supposed  "  knowledge  ”. 
“Sittvik. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP  G93 

Vaidyanatha,1 * *  the  destroyer  of  Tripura,  will  deliver  society  from  the  pains 
of  this  disease. 

Had  the  examination  for  the  degree  sought  for  been  held  at  any  seat 
of  learning  other  than  that  of  Sadhana  of  Mahavidya,  the  number  of 
learned  degree-holders  would  have  been  so  large  that  it  is  doubtful  whether 
place  could  have  been  found  for  them  all  in  Brahmaloka,  Vaikunjha,  and 
KailSsa.  But  we  are  secure  from  this  danger  in  that  Bhagavan  Himself, 
the  dweller  in  all  hearts  and  Creator  of  all  things,  is  the  Examiner.  Unless 
He  gives  the  degree  of  service  to  himself,  who  is  there  who  can  free  himself 
of  servitude  to  the  Upadhis?  *  It  is  the  presence  of  these  latter  pestilential 
Upadhis  which  prevents  the  acquisition  of  the  former.  These  latter 
Upadhis  must  be  shaken  off  before  we  can  obtain  the  former  UpSdhi,  or 
this  Upadhi  must  be  obtained  before  the  others  can  be  got  rid  of.  There 
might  have  been  a  chance  of  bogus  UpSdhis  (degrees)  being  considered 
genuine,  were  it  possible  to  go  elsewhere  after  having  received  them  from 
Bhagavan.  But,  O  pretender  to  devotion,  who  art  so  fond  of  the  Up&dhi 
(title)  of  devotee !  all  this  Universe  is  the  held  of  work  of  that  Rajarajeivari 
alone,  who  is  the  sole  Mistress  of  this  infinite  creation  of  things  moving 
and  unmoving.  Where  in  this  Universe  can  you  go  so  that  you  may 
escape  the  all-penetrating  look  of  Her  whose  eyes  are  infinite  ?  Who  has 
told  you  that  your  bogus  *  Upadhi  will  not  be  caught  in  the  net 4  of  Her 
Maya,  in  which  everything  from  Brahma  to  a  blade  of  grass  is  eternally 
held  ?  Why,  then,  further  trouble  to  create  a  counterfeit  *  in  the  midst  of 
this  net?  He  who  tries  to  snap  the  Karma-threads  of  this  net  by  his  own 
strength  knows  not  that  its  meshes  are  there  only  to  take  him  out  of  the 
water,  and  not  that  he  may  pass  into  it  from  the  net.  The  kind  of  dissatis¬ 
faction  with  the  Samsara  and  Karmakanda  4  which  one  occasionally  feels 
before  entry  upon  the  path  of  spiritual  knowledge,1 *  is  cleared,  is  not  true 
dispassion,8  but  only  passion  in  a  different  guise.  Hence  the  fool  who, 
on  feeling  such  dissatisfaction,  wants  to  forsake  the  Samsara  or  Karma, 
only  sticks  in  the  meshes  of  that  net,  and  resting  half  within  and  half  without 
it  loses  his  life  amidst  unsufferable  pains.  He  neither  remains  in  the  net 
nor  passes  out  into  the  water,  but  failing  both  ways,  “  falling  from  this  and 


1  Siva,  who  is  lord  of  physicians,  for  he  cures  all  human  ills. 

*  The  Upidhis  (apparently  limiting  conditions)  of  name  and  form  spoken 

of  in  the  systems  of  philosophy.  There  is  a  play  on  the  word  Upldhi,  which 
means  also  “  degree  ”  or  “  title  ".  *Jfila. 

4  A  pun  on  the  word  Jala,  which  as  an  adjective  means,  in  Bengali, 

■“  counterfeit,”  and  as  a  substantive  means  “  net  ”. 

*  See  last  note. 

4  With  the  world  and  ritual  worship. 

*  Tattvajftana.  •  Vairigya. 


694 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


losing  that,”  becomes  untimely  subject  to  the  grasp  of  death.  It  therefore 
becomes  an  intelligent  person  not  to  make  futile  efforts  to  tear  the  net, 
but  endeavour  to  move  about  happily  in  the  water  within  the  net  If  by 
the  grace  of  the  Devi,  who  is  will,  you  gain  the  strength  which  will  enable 
you  to  dive  into  deep  water,  if  you  have  grown  fit  to  sink  in  the  fathomless 
infinite  sea  of  the  BrahmamayTs  self,  then  Maheivara,  who  holds  the  thread 
of  this  net,  will  Himself  undo  its  top-knot.  The  tie  of  attachment  to  the 
Samsara  will  be  loosened,  and  then,  finding  his  path  open,  the  JIva,  freed 
from  existence,1 * * 4 * *  will  leap  from  the  net  with  the  cry,  “  Victory,  victory,, 
victory  to  Tara!  ”  and  sink  into  the  sea  of  the  Self  of  the  Mother  of  the 
world;  but  to  take  a  leap  untimely  is  but  the  preliminary  to  a  terrible  fall. 
To  renounce  the  Karmakan^a  at  this  time  is  the  taking  of  such  an  untimely 
leap.  Had  the  talk  of  renunciation  of  Karma  any  reality  in  it,  it  would 
not  have  been  necessary  to  have  said  so  much  as  to  renunciation  of  Karma 
before  renouncing  it.*  Just  as  death  does  not  wait  for  anyone’s  permission, 
so  liberation  does  not  wait  for  anyone’s  comment.  Inspiration  and  expira¬ 
tion  of  breath  go  on  in  a  JIva’s  body  by  a  natural  process.  The  wiseacre 
who  tries  to  renounce  work  *  by  hanging  himself,  and  so  interrupting  this 
regular  function  of  nature,  will,  whether  he  loses  Karma  or  not,  first  lose 
his  body.  Similarly,  in  the  case  of  those  who  arc  ever  eager  to  renounce 
the  Karmakan^a  prescribed  to  them  individually  as  suited  to  the  respective 
castes  *  and  Airamas  *  into  which  they  are,  according  to  their  Gunas  and 
natural  law,  divided,  such  men  first  renounce  their  Dharma,  whether  they 
renounce  Karma  or  not.  It  is  difficult  to  restrain  one’s  laughter  on  hearing 
the  talk  of  renunciation  of  Karma  nowadays,  for  this  renunciation  means 
renunciation  of  the  Sandhya  prayers,*  daily  and  occasional  worship  of  the 
Deity,  Sraddha 7  of  parents,  religious  festivities,  such  as  Dola  and  Durga 
Pflja,  and  so  forth;  but  not  such  things  as  the  maintenance  of  wife  and 
children,  earning  and  spending  money,  eating  and  having  sexual  inter¬ 
course.  The  alleged  justification  for  this  sort  of  renunciation  is  said  to- 
rest,  firstly  in  "  doing  things  which  give  Him  pleasure,”  and  on  the  fact 
that  a  wise  man’s  actions  are  “  like  water  on  a  lotus-leaf.”  Can  Samsara 
ever  bind  a  person  who  is  wise?  Men  like  Janaka  •  are  examples  to  show 


1  Jivanmukta, 

1  They  talk  of  renouncing  Karma,  and  they  talk  so  much  of  it  because  they 

cannot  in  met  renounce  it.  *  Karma. 

4  Varnas  (see  Introduction  to  T antra  Sistra). 

1  Stage  of  life  (see  Introduction  to  T antra  Sastra). 

*  The  rite  done  three  times  a  day  (see  Introduction  to  T antra  Sdstra). 

7  Obsequial  rites. 

*  Rajaffi,  King  of  Mithila,  father  of  Sita,  wife  of  Ramachandra. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP  695 

that  it  cannot.  Taking  this  ideal  of  Janaka,  Bengal,  the  playground  of 
religious  anarchy,  is  nowadays  giving  hirth  to  many  Raj  arms,  Devajsis, 
Mahajms,  and  Upa^is.1  Although  Janaka  or  “  progenitor  ”  was  the  name 
by  which  Maharsi  Janaka  was  known,  he  did  not  make  himself  such  in 
fact.  That  he  and  his  name  might  correspond,  the  Mother  of  the  world, 
whose  attachment  to  devotees  is  great,  Herself  became  his  daughter,  and 
made  him  famous  in  the  world  by  assuming  the  beloved  name  of  JSnakI, 
a  name  made  glorious  by  the  glory  of  the  devotee;  but  in  order  to  make 
the  present-day  Janakas  worthy  of  the  name,  the  Mother  of  the  world 
should  rather  disappear  than  appear.  Being  religious  heroes,1 * 4 * *  they  do 
not  intend  to  show  cowardice,  like  Janaka,  by  abstaining  from  taking  wives 
to  themselves  on  the  way  to  fight  the  battle  of  religion.*  Why  become 
afraid  of  the  Samsara  ?  They  are,  therefore,  in  no  way  inferior  to  Janaka, 
but  rather,  to  a  considerable  extent,  superior,  in  the  character  of  Janaka, 
or  progenitor,  and  Rajarsi.*  We  are  rather  pleased  than  sorry  at  this. 
Our  only  concern  is  this:  Rajarsi  Janaka  had  another  name — namely, 
Videha,  or  Bodiless  * — from  which  Janaki  got  Her  name  Vaidehi.  How 
long  will  it  take  these  men  to  become  possessed  of  this  name?  How  long 
must  we  wait  in  this  Kali  age  to  find  among  ourselves  men  like  Rajarsi 
Janaka  Videha  (bodiless)  of  the  Treta  age?  How  long  will  it  be  before  these 
men  relieve  the  burden  of  the  earth  by  becoming  Videha — that  is,  bodiless 
— upon  it?  * 

Whether  the  ideal  of  Janaka  obliges  us  to  renounce  wealth  and  wife 
or  not,  it  does  not  at  any  rate  require  us  to  give  ourselves  up  to  worldly 
enjoyment.  Moreover,  Janaka  did  not  renounce  Sandhya  prayers,  wor¬ 
ship,  and  the  Karmakanda  suited  to  his  caste  and  Airama;  on  the  contrary, 
he  always  took  care  to  perform  them  as  enjoined  in  the  Sastra.  Just  as 
his  other  actions,  such  as  his  rule  of  his  kingdom,  were  not  based  on  egotism 7 
so  his  Sandhya  prayers,  worship,  and  so  forth,  also  were  not  dependent  on 
it.  This  is  the  story  of  the  Rajayfi.  As  for  the  present  day  Pseudo-Rsis,* 
they,  of  course,  become  liberated  Sannyasis  at  times  of  worship,  prayer. 


1  The  first  three  are  various  classes  of  R$is  (seers),  and  the  last  means 
Pseudo-Rsis. 

*  Dhannavira. 

*  Dharmayuddba. 

4  The  people  whom  the  author  satirizes  claim  not  only  to  be  Rsis,  like 
Janaka,  but  surpass  him  in  that  they  become  progenitors  with  their  wives,  a 
simpler  and  to  most  a  more  pleasant  affair  than  the  search  for  wisdom. 

•Because,  though  with  a  body  the  world  did  not  bind  him.  He  was 
Jivanmukta. 

*  Here  is  a  play  on  the  word  Videha,  which  referred  in  previous  passages  to 
Mukti  and  here  to  death. 

7  Ahankara. 


•Upanis. 


696 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


and  so  forth,  no  matter  whether  they  renounce  anything  else  or  not. 
Why,  brethren,  is  your  love  for  God  so  much  greater  than  your  love  for 
your  wives,  children,  and  relations,  that  when  liberation,  which  loosens 
all  bonds,  is  so  near  at  hand,  the  bond  of  prayer  will  alone  frustrate  it?  1 
How  imprudent  is  the  scepticism  of  those  who,  blinded  by  the  vanity  of 
their  knowledge,  are  keen  for  every  worldly  pursuit,  and  yet  would  renounce 
Sandhya  prayers,  worship,  and  so  forth,  on  the  ground  of  their  being 
Karma?  In  short,  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  throw  dust  in  the  eye  of  Dharraa.1 * 

Bhagavhn,  who  sees  all  things,  has  said:  “  Even  against  your  will  you 
will  be  obliged  to  do  Karma.”  Under  the  severe  pressure  of  the  unrelenting 
law  of  nature  I  am  bound  to  serve  Karma  as  a  slave,  for  there  is  no  means 
of  escape  from  its  close  grasp.  Why,  when  accepting  this  slavish  service 
of  Karma,  should  I  be  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  its  fear-dispelling  hand? 
I  would  have,  with  all  submissiveness,  renounced  Karma,  had  Karma 
renounced  me.  Since  I  have  been  bom  in  the  land  of  Karma,  in  order 
to  perform  it,  I  will  not  renounce  Karma  so  long  as  life  lasts ;  but  if,  on  the 
other  hand.  Karma  renounces  me,  I  will  not  be  sorry  therefore.  I  am  very 
much  afraid  of  doing  my  own  Karma,  but  why  should  I  be  afraid  of  doing 
the  Karma  of  my  Mother,  seeing  that  She  is  the  Dispellcr  of  fear?  I  do  not 
any  longer  belong  to  myself,  so  that,  O  brother!  what  Karma  can  there 
be  which  I  can  call  my  own?  Karma  is  Hers,  whose  I  am.  I  am  the 
Mother  and  the  Mother  is  mine.  The  glory  of  Karma  with  me  lies  no 
longer  in  its  being  Karma,  but  in  the  fact  of  its  bring  the  Mother’s  Karma. 
So  long  as  the  relation  of  Mother  and  son  will  not  end  for  me,  this  joy  of 
Karma  also  will  not  so  end.  Blessed  are  my  birth  and  life  in  that,  by  being 
bom  in  this  land  of  Karma — that  is,  Bharata  * — I  am  to-day  going  to 
sever  the  bonds  of  Karma  with  the  Mother’s  Karma-sword.  Glorious  is 
my  Mother’s  unbounded  mercy  that  IShe,  who  is  beyond  the  range  of 
thought  and  truth  itself,  and  full  of  mercy,  and  whose  Karma  approved 
by  Her  4  is  such  that  even  Brahma,  Visiju,  and  MaheSvara,  find  it  difficult 
of  right  performance,  has,  for  my  sake,  with  Her  own  mouth  dictated  in 
the  Dharmaiastras  that  Karma  is  Her  worship,  replete  with  Her  love  and 
tenderness !  What  can  be  a  greater  good  fortune  for  a  JIva  in  the  world 
than  this?  Wc  know  not  if  there  is  any  other  Jiva  so  unfortunate  in  the 
world  as  he  who  is  deprived  of  this  good  fortune.  O  Mother  of  the  world! 
save  me,  O  Mother!  Rather  may  I  spend  millions  of  lives  in  fearful  Hells 
than  that  I  should  be  deprived  of  the  loving  worship  of  Thee,  O  Mother! 


1  They  say  that  Upasani  is  wrong;  on  which  they  are  asked  whether  they 
save  risen  so  nigh  spintually  that  they  have  shaken  off  all  bondage  other  than 

hat  of  UpSsani,  which  alone  stands  in  the  way  of  their  gaining  Mukti. 

*  True  religion.  1  India. 

4  That  is,  spoken  of  in  the  SSstra. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


697 


See  that  I,  who  have  been  initiated  in  the  great  Mantra,  the  gem  of  spiritual 
consciousness 1  (which  is  of  rarity  to  even  Brahma  and  other  Devas),  and 
who  have  been  upbrought  in  the  S&dhana  of  the  great  Yantra,1 *  which  is 
the  source  of  the  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  of  the  three  worlds, 
may  not  become  Motherless  when  Thou  art  the  Mother!  For  what  have 
I  come  here,  if  it  be  not  to  do  the  Mother's  work?  Bless  me,  O  Mother  1 
by  answering  this,  my  question  to  Thyself!  O  Mother!  the  earth  is  too  small 
to  hold  the  bliss  which  I  feel  to-day  when  I  remember  that,  being  a  Jiva, 
I  have  been  initiated  in  Thy  Mantra  as  uttered  by  Siva  Himself,  O  Daughter 
of  the  Mountain!  Thou  art  bliss  itself.  Thyself  keep  to-day  Thy  own 
bliss,  and  at  the  same  time  take  this  joyless  son  of  Thine  up  into  Thy  blissful 
arms  in  order  to  make  the  words  of  Sadananda 1  true.  I  have  been 
initiated.  Now,  tell  me  how  1  am  to  be  educated?  Thou  hast  Thyself 
promulgated  Thy  commands  in  the  form  of  Ssstra.  Do  Thou  now  Thyself 
explain  the  truth  concerning  Thee  4  by  opening  in  the  form  of  Sidhana 
the  door  of  that  Sastra.  Tell  me,  O  Mother!  what  have  you  said  in  the 
Sastra? 

In  the  Tantra  Samhita  it  is  said:  “  For  him  who  has  received  Mantra 
— that  is,  initiation — worship  is  of  two  kinds,  according  as  it  is  outer  and 
inner.  Inner  worship,  to  the  exclusion  of  outer  worship,  is  prescribed  for 
Sannyasis,  whilst  both  inner  and  outer  worship  are  prescribed  for  all 
•others.” 

In  the  Gautamlya  Tantra  it  is  said:  “This  inner  worship  grants 
liberation  to  Sadhakas  even  during  their  life-time,  but  Munis  alone  who 
are  desirous  of  liberation  4 *  have  the  competence  to  perform  it  Hence, 
such  Sidhakas  as  are  unable  to  perform  mental  worship  in  the  manner 
above  described  should  do  it  with  the  aid  of  mental  elements  similar  to 
those  used  in  outer  worship.”  • 

The  following  are  the  words  of  Siva  in  the  Samhita  quoted  by 
Raghavabhatta:  7  “O  Devi!  whose  face  is  as  the  moon!  by  knowledge 
■only  and  without  gifts,1  Homa,  and  other  like  actions,4  a  householder  can 


1  Tattvacmtamapi. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra;  here  used  in  the  sense  that  She  is  the  instru¬ 
ment  of  creation. 

*  Siva  the  “  Ever  joyful  ”.  4  literally,  4‘  explain  Thy  Tatlva 

*  Mumuksu. 

4  In  outer  worship  articles  (Upacara)  are  used,  such  as  lights,  flowers, 

incense.  In  the  mental  worship  here  spoken  of  ideal  offerings  are  made  which 

correspond  to  the  materia!  articles  of  external  worship. 

7  The  great  Tantrik  commentator  and  author  of  the  commentary  on  the 
Siradktilaka. 

•Dina. 


*  Karma. 


698 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


never  attain  welfare  either  here  or  hereafter.  If  even  a  householder  doe# 
not  make  gift  or  perform  Homa  or  wonhip,  as  enjoined,  then  who  will 
daily  do  these  things?  (a)  O  fair  Devi!  a  Brahraacari1 * *  has  no  right  to 
make  gifts  (for  he  is  destitute).  Who,  then,  will  make  gifts  to  Gurus 
according  to  their  capacity?  Those  who  live  in  forests  *  also  have  not  the 
means  to  make  gifts.  Moreover,  in  the  Kali  Yuga  living  in  forests*  is 
disallowed  ”  (3). 

Hence,  Parivrajakas 4  only  are  able  to  secure  liberation  from  all  pain 
and  sorrows  by  knowledge  alone,  without  making  gifts  and  performance 
of  Homa  and  other  ritual  acts.  O  Devi!  whose  face  is  fair  as  a  lotus,  the 
Parivrajaka 1 *  who  is  not  averse  to  the  performance  of  ritual  action,1  and 
the  householder  who  is  averse  (that  is,  feigns  aversion) 4  to  it,  will  both 
sink  into  Kumbhipaka 7 * *  (5) .  Virtuous  wives  of  the  family  and  householders 
desiring  their  own  welfare  should  daily  perform  worship  with  auspicious 
elements,  and  make  gifts  in  the  names  of  Devas,  Brahma  gas,  and  so 
forth  (6).  If  members  of  the  Vanaprastha  Airama  *  and  Yatis  *  daily  do 
works  of  charity,  and  so  forth,  they  will  never  be  liberated  from  the  Samsara. 
On  the  contrary,  they  become  more  and  more  attached  to  it  Those  who, 
after  having  adopted  the  Sannyasa 10  or  Vanaprastha  Airama,4  become 
attached  to  action,1  like  householders,  fall  from  the  height  which  they  have 
reached,  and  become  subject  to  sorrow  here  and  hereafter  (7). 

In  fact,  such  householders  as  omit  outer  worship  through  sloth,  make 
pretence  to  spiritual  knowledge,  and  say  “  outer  worship  is  useless,  and 
without  spiritual  significance.11  We  perform  mental  worship  only.”  The 
above-quoted  passages  from  the  Sastra  bear  strong  evidence  to  the  fact 
that  this  judgment  of  theirs  is  wholly  opposed  to  &astra,  and  the  result  of 
views  which  are  independent  of  it.  It  is  with  the  mind  that  mental 
worship  must  be  performed;  but  so  long  as  that  mind  is  not  “  under  my 
control,”  with  what  shall  I  perform  mental  worship  ?  So  long  as  “  I  am 
of  the  mind,”  instead  of  “  the  mind  being  of  me,”  I  have  no  right  to  do 


1  The  celibate  student. 

1  That  is,  belong  to  the  third,  or  Vanaprastha  Airama. 

*  The  Vanaprastha  Airama.  There  were  four  Airamas  in  other  ages,  but 
in  the  Kali  Yuga  there  are  only  two — viz.,  the  second  Garhasthya  (that  of  a 
householder)  and  the  last  Bhikpika  or  Avadhfita.  See  “  Mahanirvana  Tantra,” 
chap,  viii,  8.  Neither  the  conditions  of  life  nor  the  character,  capacity,  and 
powers  of  the  people  of  this  age  allow  of  the  first  and  third. 

4  That  is,  ascetics:  Sannyasls.  *  Karma. 

4  Author’s  parenthesis. 

7  One  of  the  Hells.  1  Vide  ante. 

*  Those  who  have  controlled  their  passions :  ascetics. 

14  The  fourth,  ascetic  Airama. 

u  Laukika.  Literally,  temporal. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP  699* , 

mental  worship  exclusively.  This  is  very  true.  If  through  lack  of  mastery 
of  my  mind  I  am  unable  to  offer  mental  flowers  at  Her  feet,  if  I  cannot 
with  independence  settle  my  mind  on  that  which  I  desire,  then  what 
guarantee  is  there  that,  when  engaged  in  mental  worship,  for  which  I  have 
no  competence,  my  mind  will  not  forget  to  contemplate  Her  feet,  and  think 
of  the  happiness  of  Samsara  ?  Milk  is  admitted  by  alt  to  be  the  most  powerful, 
of  means  for  the  preservation  of  human  life.  Curd,  milk,1  butter,  ghee, 
and  so  forth,  are  all  transformations  of  milk.  This  is  why  all  things 
prepared  from  milk  have  the  reputation  of  being  delicious.  But  if  by 
accident  anything  sour  or  bitter  falls  into  milk  and  turns  it,  then,  apart 
from  any  other  test,  even  its  smell  causes  nausea,  and  the  revulsion  which 
it  produces  is  more  lasting  than  that  caused  by  any  other  thing.  The  only 
reason  for  this  is  that  milk  is  the  best  of  delicious  things.  Had  not  milk 
been  so  good,  its  corruption  would  not  have  been  so  bad.  For  instance, 
although  sugar,  sugar-candy,  and  sweetmeats  are  prepared  from  molasses, 
if  molasses  is  not  sufficiently  boiled  and  treated  so  as  to  be  converted  into 
any  of  these  things,  it  will  at  any  rate  remain  what  it  is — molasses — or 
become  moist  sugar.  And  this  molasses  or  moist  sugar,  if  it  cannot  be 
used  in  preparing  Sande?a  *  with  curd,  will  at  least  give  sweetness  to  a 
sour  curry  of  mango,  amda,'  or  plum — a  sweetness  so  attractive  that  the 
remembrance  of  such  a  sweetened  curry  makes  the  mouth  water,  whilst 
the  remembrance  of  sweetmeats  produces  merely  a  sensation  of  their 
absence,  and  nothing  else.  This  is  why  it  has  been  necessary  to  give  a 
name  to  this  mixed  taste,  and  we  accordingly  have  the  adjective 
“  sour-sweet”.  The  reason  why  molasses  is  not  altogether  spoilt  by  mixture 
with  something  sour  is  that  it  is  not  as  superior  a  thing  as  milk  is.  If  a 
person  lives  on  milk  only,  he  may  perchance  meet  with  such  a  difficulty 
through  his  supply  of  milk  becoming  accidentally  spoilt,  as  one  who  lives 
on  sweetmeats  only  can  never  experience.  Similarly,  although  all  admit 
that  mental  worship  is  the  best  of  all  forms  of  worship,  if  the  mind  with 
which  that  worship  is  performed  becomes  corrupt,  polluted,  or  disordered, 
with  what  shall  I  perform  the  worship?  When  the  mind  is  in  this  state,, 
such  a  stench  issues  from  it  as  makes  the  approach  of  even  men,  not  to 
speak  of  Dev  as,  impossible.  We  quite  understand  that  it  is  necessary  to 
take  the  cream  out  of  milk,  but  if  the  milk  itself  is  putrid,  whence  am  I  to 
get  the  cream?  If  I  mix  the  cream  that  was  in  the  milk  with  something  else, 
and  thus  spoil  the  milk  itself,  if  I  mix  the  faculty  of  devotedness  *  that  was 
in  my  mind  with  attachment  to  wife  and  children  in  the  Samsara,  and 
then  try  to  acquire  spiritual  devotion  *  to  Bhagavan  or  Bhagavati  with 


1  K?ira;  that  is,  milk  thickened  by  boiling. 

*  A  sweetmeat. 

*  Asaktiiakti.  Literally,  u  attachment-Sakti 


*  A  sour  fruit. 

*  Parabhakti. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


.  700 

that  mind,  such  an  effort  will  prove  as  futile  both  here  and  hereafter,  as 
if  we  sought  to  drink  milk  where  there  is  only  whey.  Hence,  so  long  as 
I  am  unable  to  bind  at  the  door  of  the  temple  of  my  heart  the  All-good 
.Suravi 1 * * * * *  from  whom  are  drawn,  and  who  fulfils,  all  desires,  the  only  way 
in  which  I  can  preserve  my  life  is  not  to  make  myself  dependent  solely  on 
milk,  but  to  use  milk,  molasses,  sweetmeats,  or  any  other  thing  which  I  can 
procure  at  all  times  without  difficulty.  However  sour  be  the  mango  or 
amda  *  you  may  give  me,  I  shall  mix  with  it  the  molasses  of  lesser  devotion,® 
and  prepare  such  a  sour  curry  as  will  make  the  mouths  of  even  Sannyasis 
and  Sadhus  water,  and  will  bring  back  a  liking  for  food  even  to  a  sick  man, 
to  whom  it  is  repugnant,  so  as  to  render  him  again  capable  of  eating  even 
sweetmeats  and  sweet  pudding.  Of  what  use  is  it  to  tempt  me  with  milk, 
pudding,  and  sweetmeats  if  I  have  a  dislike  for  every  kind  of  food  ?  If  my 
mind  is  not  calm,  of  what  use  is  it  to  give  me,  who  suffer  from  the  disease 
of  Samsara,  instructions  in  mental  worship,  which  is  the  food  for  Yogis? 
So  long  as  I  have  a  dislike  for  food,  I  am  not  only  unable  to  eat  the  food 
you  offer,  but  am  likely  to  suffer  an  untimely  death  by  starvation.  Hence, 
in  the  dispensary  of  Vaidyanatha,*  and  according  to  the  Tantrik  cult, 
food  for  sickness  is  not  the  same  as  food  for  Yogis.  Sannyasis  have  the 
privilege  of  performing  mental  worship  only,  but  as  a  man  of  the  Samsara, 
I  may  always  perform  both  mental  and  outer  worship.  First  of  all,  that 
is  the  most  delicious  thing  for  me  which  will  cure  my  dislike  for  food. 
If  you  want  to  give  me  milk,  give  it;  but  so  long  as  my  dislike  for  food 
remains,  pray  do  not  depend  on  milk  alone.  For  the  moment,  milk  will 
not  give  as  much  gratification  as  sour  things  will  do.  To-day  I  shall  feel 
immense  joy  in  outer  worship  by  illumining  the  Map<japa,®  and  filling  it 
with  the  delightful  fragrance  of  burning  incense,  making  the  quarters 
resound  with  the  music  of  drums,  kettle-drums,  gongs,  and  bells,  and  with 
the  heartfelt  cry,  “  Victory,  victory  to  Thee,  Mother  Tara!  ”  along  with 
recitation  of  hymns  *  which  reach  the  inmost  recesses  of  the  heart,  looking 
with  the  pupils  (Tara)  7  of  these  two  eyes  straight  into  the  pupils  (TirS) 7 
of  the  eyes  of  the  three-eyed  Devi,  I  shall  see  the  Universe  all  full  of  Tara. 
But  if  I  proceed  to  perform  mental  worship  only  without  the  necessary 


1  The  heavenly  cow  which  is  the  mother  of  all  cows,  and  which  came  out 

of  the  sea  when  it  was  churned.  Here  used  metaphorically  for  the  Devi. 

1 A  sour  fruit. 

*  Gaunlbhakti.  Literally,  secondary,  as  opposed  to  Mukhya  or  principal. 

1  The  word  etymologically  means  “  Lord  of  healers  ” — epithet  of  Siva,  as 
the  physician  of  all  human  ills. 

*  House  of  worship.  *  Stotra*. 

7  There  is  here  a  play  on  the  word  Tira,  which  means  the  pupil  of  the  eye, 
mid  u  also  a  name  of  the  Devi  as  Saviour. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


701 


competence,  therefore  I  shall,  owing  to  the  absence  of  Tara  from  the  heart, 
despite  the  power  of  sight,1  see  darkness  only  in  the  three  worlds  as  I  sit  in 
this  temple,  illumined  with  hundreds  of  lamps.  Can  the  simultaneous 
appearance  of  even  hundreds  of  millions  of  suns  and  moons  illumine  the 
place  where  the  Brahmamayi  is  wanting?  In  the  infinite  firmament  of  my 
heart  infinite  numbers  of  planets,  stars,  suns,  and  moons  shine  less  than 
glow-worms  if  the  light  of  Brahmamayi  is  there.  If  it  is  not  there,  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  each  of  such  lights  cannot  make  up  for  even  a  hundredth 
part  of  Her  brilliance.  So  long  as  the  brilliance  of  the  full  moon  does  not 
permanently  exist  in  my  firmament;  so  long  as  my  Mother  dwelling  in 
the  orb  of  Mantra,  full  of  pure  nectar,  does  not  spread  the  lustre  of  Her 
eternally  beaming  smile  on  the  hill  of  dawn  of  my  heart,*  so  long  as  the 
bright  and  the  dark  fortnights  *  exist  for  me;  so  long  as  there  are  for  me  the 
double  path  of  desire  4  and  cessation  of  desire,*  Samsara  and  Sadhana, 
adherence  to  home  *  without  and  homeless  asceticism  7  within;  so  long 
I  must  (if  I  would  sec  the  moonbeams  which  charm  the  mind  of  the  Moon- 
crested  Dcva)  make  the  moon  rise  without,  destroying  the  darkness  within 
with  the  light  of  this  moon,  and  with  the  help  of  that  reflected  light  discover 
the  centre  of  its  emanation.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  gaze  directly  at 
the  sun,  yet  one  may  easily  and  minutely  examine  the  solar  disc  in  its 
reflection  in  the  water  of  some  stone  or  other  vessel.  In  the  same  way 
subtle  manifestations  *  of  Her  real  self  become  truly  visible  without  in 
Yantras,*  Mantras,  images,  and  so  forth.  Pure  mental  worship  has  been 
prohibited  for  householders,  because  they  cannot  achieve  it  without  outer 
worship.  Samsara  Dharma  10  is  the  consecrated  shrine  of  human  worship.11 
It  is  impossible  for  one  who  is  governed  by  it  to  perfectly  accomplish  mental 
worship  of  the  Deity.  Just  as  it  is  not  easy  to  keep  uncovered  milk  fresh 
in  a  cowshed  full  of  cows’  urine,  so  also  it  is  difficult  to  keep  the  mind 
attached  in  love  to  Devata  in  the  Samsara,  with  all  its  attachments  and 
affection  for  wife  and  children.  Hence,  so  long  as  my  mind  is  not  controlled, 
it  is  wholly  useless  to  cry  for  mental  worship. 

Not  to  speak  of  ordinary  folk,  even  of  such  a  renowned  and  accom¬ 
plished  Sadhaka  as  Maharaja  Rama  Krsna,1*  the  following  story  is  told: 

1  That  is,  despite  the  possession  of  pupils  (Tara)  in  the  eyes. 

I  Udayacala  from  which  the  sun  is  said  to  rise. 

*  The  month  is  divided  into  two  halves  according  to  the  waxing  and  waning 
of  the  moon.  4  Pravjtti.  *  Nivftti.  •  Garhasthya. 

7  Sannyfisa.  •  Vibhutis.  •  Diagrams  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Rostra). 

M  The  Dharma  of  the  household  life. 

II  “  Worship,”  in  the  sense  that  the  performance  of  duty  to  fellowmen  is 
such.  The  shrine  of  such  worship  is  contrasted  with  that  in  which  the  DevatA  . 
is  worshipped. 

i*  A  member  of  the  Natore  Raj  family — a  great  Sadhaka. 


702 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


At  a  particular  time  during  the  first  stage  of  S&dhana,  after  initiation, 
when  the  Maharaja,  in  disregard  of  hii  public  duties,  and  with  prohibition 
of  public  access,  used  to  remain  constantly  immersed  in  Piija,  Dhyana, 
and  so  forth,  a  pair  of  gold  bracelets  were  ordered  for  his  wife,  Rapi  Katya- 
yani.  A  few  days  after  the  order  had  been  given  the  Raja,  seeing  the  wrists 
of  the  Rtii)I  unadorned,  asked  her  the  reason  for  it,  and  was  told  in  reply 
that  the  bracelets  had  not  yet  been  prepared.  Next  day,  when  he  was 
engaged  in  Puja,  a  Sannyasi  with  matted  hair  appeared  at  the  gate  of  his 
palace,  and  asked  the  gatekeeper:  “  Where  is  your  Maharaja?  Tell  him 
that  a  Sannyasi 1  has  come  to  see  him.”  They  replied  with  great  humility: 
“  Lord!  the  MaharSja  is  now  in  the  house  of  worship.  No  one  may  go 
there;  and  even  if  we  speak  to  him  now,  there  is  no  chance  of  getting  a 
reply.”  The  Sannyasi  laughed  and  said:  “  I  tell  you,  go”.  The  gate¬ 
keepers  were  afraid  of  disobeying  him,  and  did  as  they  were  told  to  do, 
but  to  no  effect.  Raja  Rama  Kftna  was  at  that  time  immersed  in  mental 
worship  of  his  IstadcvatS,  and  so  made  no  reply,  notwithstanding  the 
.arrival  of  the  Sannyasi.  The  gate-keepers  came  back  and  told  the  Sannyasi 
what  had  happened.  The  Sannyasi  raised  his  eyes  a  little,  smiled,  and 
said  in  a  deep  voice:  “  When  the  Maharaja  comes  out  after  finishing  his 
worship,  tell  him  that  to  think  of  the  Rani’s  bracelets  is  not  to  perform 
mental  worship  of  IstadcvatS.”  Saying  this,  the  Sannyasi  went  away 
hurriedly.  The  gate-keepers  did  not  understand  the  meaning  of  his 
words,  and  did  not  dare  oppose  the  Sannyasi  from  going  away,  for  as  an 
ascetic  he  was  free  to  come  and  go.  Afterwards,  on  coming  out  of  the 
house  of  worship,  Raja  R5ma  Kj^na  asked  the  gate-keepers:  “  Where  is 
the  Sannyasi  ?  ”  In  fear  they  told  him  the  Sannyasi’s  words,  and  of  his 
departure.  “  To  think  of  the  Rani’s  bracelets  is  not  to  perform  mental 
worship  of  Iftadevata.”  With  the  quickness  of  lightning  these  words 
entered  through  the  Raja’s  ears  into  his  mind.  He  shook  with  fear  at  the 
•offence  which  he  had  committed,  and  repeated  the  words,  “  Where  is  the 
Sannyasi?  ”  in  a  voice  choked  with  sorrow  and  trembling  with  fear.  The 
Raja  then  himself  ran  into  the  public  road  to  find  him,  but  as  he  was  then 
in  a  spiritually  unfit  state  to  meet  the  Sannyasi,  he  was  unable  to  discover 
him.  Nevertheless,  what  the  Sannyasi  had  done  and  said  made  the  Raja 
.seclude  himself  from  everybody  after  this  incident.  No  one  could  say  as 
to  where  he  was  or  what  he  was  doing  at  any  time.  He  became  inattentive, 
his  gaze  was  fixed,  and  his  self  ever  immersed  in  a  stream  of  continuous 
SamSdhi.*  Three  years  passed  in  this  way.  Then  one  day,  when,  accord¬ 
ing  to  his  usual  practice,  the  Raja  was  engaged  in  worship  in  his  house  of 
worship,  the  same  Sannyasi  again  appeared.  On  seeing  him,  the  gate¬ 
keepers’ made  obeisance  at  his  feet,  and  respectfully  conducted  him  to  the 


1  Ascetic. 


a  Ecstasy. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


703 


door  of  the  Raja’s  house  of  worship.  On  that  day  also  the  Raja  was  busy 
performing  mental  worship,  but  he  found  himself  in  a  great  difficulty. 
In  order  to  worship  the  Devi  who  is  mind  itself1  with  mental  articles  of 
worship,  the  Raja  had  that  day  adorned  the  brow  of  the  Devi  with  dis¬ 
hevelled  hair  with  a  high-crested  mental  jewelled  crown.  He  then 
proceeded  to  adorn  the  shell-shaped  neck 1  of  the  Devi  who  bears  great 
love  for  Her  devotees  with  a  mental  garland  of  crimson  Jabi  *  flowers. 
But  as  often  as  he  raised  his  hands  to  put  the  garland  on  the  Mother’s 
neck,  so  often  his  effort  was  baffled  by  the  high  crest  of  the  crown.  Having 
repeatedly  failed,  he  became  sorrowful  and  anxious,  and  thought  to  himself. 
“  Perhaps  to-day  I  shall  not  be  able  to  put  a  garland  on  the  Mother’s 
neck.”  In  unbounded  sorrow  his  large  eyes  filled  with  tears,  and  weeping 
he  cried:  “  O  Mother!  what  shall  I  do?  ”  A  voice  from  outside  replied: 

Rama  Kfsna !  why  do  you  weep  ?  It  is  by  putting  a  crown  on  the  Mother’s 
head  that  you  have  to-day  brought  about  all  this  trouble.4  Take  it  off, 
and  then  Garland  Her.”  Rama  Krspa  started,  left  the  Mother  and  Her 
worship,  and  opened  both  the  outer  and  inner  doors  of  the  house  of  worship. 
He  then  saw  before  him  a  Mahapurusa,6  a  Sannyasi  smeared  with  ashes 
and  full  of  Tqas.®  He  recognized  him  as  Punjananda  Giri  the  perfect 
Sadhaka,  who  had  been  his  companion  in  Sadhana  done  by  them  in 
cremation-grounds  7  in  the  previous  birth.  He  bowed  at  his  feet,  and  said 
“  Brother!  this  is  my  condition  to-day!  The  Mother  and  you  know  how 
I  have  passed  these  three  years  since  you  went  away,  after  having  done 
me  the  favour  of  putting  me  to  shame.”  Purijananda  laughed,  and  said: 
"  Have  no  fear,  brother.  It  is  because  I  then  left  that  I  am  able  to 
approach  you  to-day  after  these  three  years.  Being  what  you  were  then, 
the  time  had  not  yet  come  for  me  to  see  you.  Think  what  a  difference 
there  is  between  your  former  thought  of  the  Rani’s  bracelets  and  your 
present  difficulty  about  the  garland.  It  is  because  the  Mother  has  blessed 
you  that  I  am  here  again  to  keep  my  promise  given  in  the  previous  birth.” 
After  this  incident  Maharaja  Rama  Kona  became  a  Bhairava  and 
Maharani  Katyayani  a  Bhairavi,  and  companions  of  Purpananda  Giri  in 
Mahasmaiana-sadhana,8  on  the  banks  of  the  Atrcyi  at  Buxar.* 


1  Manomayi.  1  Kambu-Kaitfha. 

•  Scarlet  hibiscus  used  in  Tantrik  Devipuja.  4  Vide  post,  p.  1047. 

•  Great  man.  4  Spirit,  power,  spiritual  force,  and  lustre. 

7  Smaiana-sadhana. 

•  The  Sadhana  done  by  Tantriks  in  the  great  cremation-grounds . 

•  “  I  hope  some  day  to  be  able,  by  the  grace  of  the  All-good  Mother,  to 
present  Sadhakas  and  Sadhikas  with  a  biography  of  Mahfiraja  Rama  Kopa, 
in  which  his  history  both  previous  to  and  followmg  this  incident  will  be  related  ” 
{Author’s  note). 


704 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Now,  Sidhakas  consider  how  few  fortunate  perfect  Sadhaka  MahS- 
purusas  like  Maharaja  Rama  K^ria  are  born  in  this  Samsira.  How 
many  in  this  world  are  blessed  with  friends  of  previous  birth,  such  as 
Purnananda  Gin,  to  answer  their  questions?  How  many  religious  heroes 
are  there  who,  being  Princes  themselves,  have  yet  the  strength  to  turn 
from  royal  opulence,  splendours,  and  enjoyments,  and  become  Sma&na- 
sannyasis? 1  To  how  many  Sadhakas  does  the  Mother  of  the  world  show 
Herself  in  the  form  of  Guru  at  the  time  of  their  death  ?  Even  such  a  man 
as  Ritma  Krsna,  who  had  already  greatly  practised  Sadhana  in  previous 
births,  in  the  first  stage  of  his  present  Sadhana  forgot  the  Mother  during 
mental  worship,  and  thought  of  the  bracelets  of  his  wife.  Mental  worship 
being  so  difficult,  does  it  not  make  one  ashamed  even  to  think  that  you 
and  I,  steeped  in  worldliness  as  we  arc,  have  perfect  competence  to  perform 
it?  Purnananda  Giri  came  to  remind  RSma  K^ija  of  this.  But  for  you 
and  I  it  is  not  necessary  that  a  Purnananda  Giri  should  so  come,  for  does 
not  the  burden  of  this  joyless  mountain  1 *  of  Samsara  remind  us  of  it? 
Rama  Kysi>a’s  connection  with  the  Samsara  lasted  only  so  long  as  he  did 
not  acquire  full  competence  for  mental  worship,  but  when,  by  the  grace 
of  the  Devi  who  is  perfect  Bliss,  he  met  Purnananda,  and  acquired  such 
competence,  from  that  time  his  connection  with  the  Samsara  ceased. 
Then  was  the  day  on  which  his  mind  became  self-controlled,  leaving  all 
thought  of  the  Raiji  and  her  bracelets.  From  that  day  began  the  dance 
of  the  waves  of  joy  of  the  Devi,  who  is  mind  itself.  She  revelled  in  battle* 
in  the  broad  field  of  his  mind,  and  as  a  result  the  mental  garland  of  Jabi 
flowers  struck  Her  crown  and  was  thrown  back.* 

Can  you  say  that  any  incident  of  such  a  nature  ever  happened  in  the 
course  of  your  or  my  mental  worship?  We  call  the  Mother  into  our  heart 
by  picturing  the  image  of  Her  whole  body  in  our  mind.  We  then  give 
Her  seat,4 * *  welcome,*  water  for  the  washing  of  her  face,*  grains  of  paddy 
and  blades  of  Durva-grass  to  show  the  honour  we  pay  Her,’  water  to  clean 
the  lips  and  throat,*  honey,®  and  other  things,  and  water  again.10  We  next 
bathe  the  Mother  of  the  world,  and  then  adorn  Her  with  clothes  and 


1  Tantrik  ascetics  who  frequent  and  do  Sadhana  on  the  burning  ground. 

’Nirananda  Giri — a  pun.  The  name  Purnananda  Giri  etymologically 
means  "  mountain  of  perfect  joy”. 

*  From  the  day  that  the  Raja  withdrew  his  mind  from  worldly  things  and. 
Bettled  it  on  the  Devi  from  that  day  the  Devi  began  to  dance  with  joy  in  his 
mind.  And  this  dancing  prevented  him  from  garlanding  Her  whilst  She  had 
the  crown  on. 

4  Asana.  *  SvSgata.  *  Padhya. 

f  Arghya.  *  Acamaniya.  *  Madhupaita. 

M  Acamaniya  is  always  given  twice  in  worship. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP  705 

ornaments.  It  was  at  this  time  of  adornment  that  this  trouble  about  Her 
crown  and  garland  happened  to  R&ma  Krana.  Can  the  mind  of  a  Jrva, 
attached  to  worldly  things,  remain  undistracted  during  the  time  which  is 
required  to  do  all  this?  Not  to  speak  of  undistraction  for  the  whole  of  this 
period,  is  it  even  steady  for  the  length  of  time  which  it  takes  us  to  say  these 
few  words  ?  Hari,  Hari !  you  and  I  start  on  journeys  to  Vaikuptha,  Kailasa, 
and  Bpidavana  1  under  the  guidance  of  minds  which  travel  to  the  South 
Pole  from  the  North  Pole  at  every  twinkling  of  the  eye  ten  times  every 
half  an  hour!  You  and  I  will  be  left  on  the  path,  and  the  mind  will  go  to 
its  own  place.1  Thus,  neither  home-life  nor  homeless  asceticism,*  nor 
Vaikuntha,  nor  Kailasa  will  be  for  me.  To  live  at  home  after  that,  with 
life  only,  but  without  the  mind,  is  to  lose  all.  The  learned  of  ancient 
times  have  therefore  said,  “  where  there  is  a  chance  of  losing  all,  a  wise 
man  gives  up  half,”  in  order  that  he  may  save  the  other  half.  The  Sastra, 
also  observing  our  danger  of  losing  all,  has  counselled  the  performance  of 
both  inner  and  outer  sacrifice,4  and  of  both  mental  and  outer  worship. 
He  who  proceeds  to  perform  exclusively  mental  worship  in  dependence  on 
a  mind  untrained  and  unpurified  runs  every  chance  of  losing  all.  At  such 
a  time  I  shall  deem  it  a  great  gain  if,  by  abandoning  half  of  mind,*  I  can 
save  the  half  of  outer  worship.  Hence,  until  non-dualistic  Samadhi  •  is 
attained,  both  Sannyasis  and  householders  must  perform  both  inner  and 
outer  Sacrifice.  A  householder  in  particular  will  be  wholly  ruined  unless 
he  does  so.  A  Sannyasi’s  mind  may,  by  dint  of  his  cultivation  of  discern¬ 
ment  1  and  dispassion,  become  someday  free  from  the  bond  of  attachment 
to  worldly  things,  and  thus  transparent  and  fair  and  pure;  but  for  a  house¬ 
holder,  a  Jiva  ever  bound  by  the  ties  of  love  to  wife,  children,  and  so  forth, 
and  thereby  rendered  without  understanding,*  there  is  no  such  hope 
unless,  by  reason  of  a  Sadhana  performed  in  previous  births,  the  merciful 
Devi  shows  him  Her  utmost  mercy. 

In  the  Gandharva  Tantra  also  Bhagav&n,  the  creator  of  all  things, 
has  clearly  so  commanded  after  speaking  of  inner  sacrifice:  *  “  O  Maheivaril 

1  The  heaven  of  Vifnu  (see  ante),  the  abode  of  Siva  and  the  city  sacred  to 
Knpa. 

*  That  is,  we  shall  never  reach  Kailasa,  etc.  *  Sannyasa. 

‘  Yajfta.  See  as  to  the  extensive  meaning  of  this  term  A.  Avalon’s 
Introduction  to  “  MahSnirvsina  Tantra  ’*. 

*  That  is,  mental  worship. 

*  Monistic  experience  in  Yoga  ecstasy. 

*  Viveka;  between  the  “  real  ”  and  “  unreal". 

*  Literally,  “  made  jada,”  which  means  inert,  senseless.  As  true  under¬ 
standing  is  free  of  such  attachments,  anything  which  produces  them  tends  to 
make  the  mind  to  that  extent  jada* 

*  Yajfta;  see  note  ante. 

45 


705 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


by  performing  inner  sacrifice  in  this  manner  Sadhakas  become  Brahman 
Itself,  and  it  is  in  this  way  that  I  worship  Ilvari.  And  Yogis  and  Munis 
also  constantly  perform  worship  in  this  way.  But  a  householder  can  never 
attain  Siddhi  by  means  of  this  inner  sacrifice1  alone.  He  can  attain 
Siddhi  only  if  he  performs  both  outer  and  inner  sacrifice.” 1 

Here  SSdhakas  should  note  that  Maheivara  Himself  says:  “  It  is  in 
this  manner  that  I  worship  Isvari!  And  Yogis  and  Munis  also  perform 
worship  in  this  way.”  As  to  His  worshipping  Himself  whether  as  Siva  or 
as  Sakd,  we  have  nothing  to  say.  But  speaking  of  Yogis  and  Munis  He 
says  that  they  worship  “  constantly,"  meaning  thereby  that  they,  too,  are 
afraid  of  falling  from  their  station  *  unless  they  keep  up  a  practice  of 
constant  worship.  Now  say,  O  mental  worship!  is  it  not  a  sign  of  impend¬ 
ing  lunacy  to  think  that  to-day  you  and  I,  whose  efforts  at  worship  are  few 
and  far  between,  are  not  competent  to  accomplish  the  form  of  worship  in 
which  Mahefvara  alone  worships  Himself  with  full  competence,  and  in 
which  the  competence  of  Yogis  and  Munis  is  made  to  depend  upon  the 
constant  practice  of  inner  worship?  Had  householders  been  altogether 
free  of  outer  affairs  the  Sastra  would  never  have  bound  them  to  outer 
practice,  nor  should  we  have  had  to  enter  into  this  close  and  sifting  inquiry 
on  the  subject  for  their  sake.  You,  O  householder!  may  easily  consider 
yourself  free  of  all  outer  activities,  but  so  long  as  you  bear  the  title 
“householder”  how  can  I  believe  it?  The  Samsara  consists  of  outer 
activities,  and  household  Dharma  is  the  Dharma  by  which  the  continuance 
of  this  Samsara  is  maintained.  Who  will  then  believe  that  a  person  whose 
title  of  “household”  is  based  on  his  connection  with  this  household 
Dharma  has  nothing  to  do  with  matters  of  outer  concern?  As  for  those 
householders  who  have  acquired  detachment,  discernment,  and  dispassion, 
whom  Bhagavan  has  called  Karmayogis  *  in  the  Gita,  and  who  perform 
outer  work  with  nund?  free  from  egotism,  such  great  men  are  free  from 
attachment  to  outer  concerns,  but  not  out  of  all  touch  with  them.*  We  call 
them  unattached  to  action  because,  although  they  are  in  the  midst  of 
action,  their  mind  is  not  attached  to  it.  The  mental  faculties  of  a  Yogi 
are  for  the  most  part  satisfied  with  mental  objects,  so  that  he  alone  is 
competent  to  perform  exclusively  mental  worship.  As  for  myself,  who  am 
steeped  in  worldliness,  my  mental  faculties  always  seek  outer  objects,  so 
that  it  is  not  possible  that  I  should  have  the  competence  for  exclusively 


1  Yajfia;  see  note  mie. 

*  Adhikara;  that  is,  losing  their  competency. 

*  That  is,  those  who  achieve  Yoga  by  means  of  selfless,  unselfish  action,  by 
which  they  become  partakers  of  the  universal  activity  of  tile  Brahman  for  the 
good  of  the  world. 

*  Though  they  do  actions,  they  axe  not  attached  to  than. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


707 


mental  worship.  A  single  day’s  abstention  from  outer  bathing  males  my 
body  restless  with  the  burning  of  summer  heat ;  a  single  day’s  fasting  weakens 
my  physical  body;  a  single  night’s  waking  robs  me  of  the  power  of  rising 
the  next  day.  These  causes  not  only  make  the  body  unfit,  but  also  exhaust, 
disturb,  and  overpower  its  mental  faculties.  When  thus  my  mind  cannot 
have  peace  and  comfort  for  a  angle  moment  in  the  absence  of  outer  objects, 
it  is  obvious  that  it  cannot  rest  satisfied  with  the  performance  of  exclusively 
mental  worship.  If,  however,  through  continuous  practice  of  inner  worship 
along  with  outer  worship  I  ever  sink  in  the  sea  of  Her  manifestations 1 — 
Her  form,  qualities,  name,  and  love — and  am  overwhelmed  by  them;  if, 
like  a  deeply  intoxicated  man,  who,  though  he  rightly  and  with  safety 
does  all  acts  which  arc  matters  of  daily  habit,  yet  does  not  perceive  that 
it  is  he  himself  who  does  them,  I  can  become  intoxicated  with  the  drink 
of  the  nectar  of  love  and  devotion  to  Her;  and  though  performing  the 
works  of  Samsara  based  on  habit,  yet  do  not  perceive  my  own  agency  in 
such  performance;  and  if  I  thus  mingle  my  individual  existence  with  Her 
existence,  it  is  then  that  1  shall  be  competent  to  give  up  outer  and  to 
perform  exclusively  mental  worship.  And  on  that  day  I  shall  not  only 
give  up  outer  worship,  but  all  outer  objects  will  of  themselves  be  separated 
from  me.  So  long  as  this  does  not  happen,  it  must  be  deemed  a  great 
sin  even  to  desire  to  give  up  outer  worship  by  merely  personal  effort.* 
If  we  suppose  that  we  can  constantly  and  carefully  perform  all  outer 
works  concerning  the  body,  the  Samsara  and  worldly  things,  and  yet  at 
the  time  of  Her  worship  we  can  worship  purely  mentally,  and  then  after 
such  worship  resume  attention  to  our  food  and  other  physical  desires  and 
necessities,  then  let  me  tell  you  that  such  deceit  practised  on  the  Deity  is 
but  the  broad  road  for  a  journey  to  hell.  It  is  truly  astonishing  that  accord¬ 
ing  to  your  religion  I  am  to  continue  to  do  acts  which  have  the  effect  of 
tightening  the  bonds  of  Karma  which  lead  to  worldly  Maya,  attachment, 
and  wrong  action,  making  us  fall,  forgetful  of  inevitable  death,  from  the 
true  path,  baffling  the  purpose  of  human  life,  and  making  us  subject  to 
the  servants  of  death;  but  I  am  to  give  up  acts  which  sever  the  bonds  of 
accumulated  Karma  and  destroy  its  sufferings  by  the  sharp  edge  of  the 
sword  of  knowledge,  dispasoon,  and  discernment,  and  the  effect  of  which 
is  to  carry  us  through  and  beyond  the  Brahmaloka  to  liberation  ia  the 
eternal  abode  of  Brahmamayi.  Just  as  water  is  drained  away  by  water, 
or  one  thorn  is  drawn  out  by  the  aid  of  another,  so  by  Karma  are  destroyed 
tiie  bonds  of  Karma.  Hence,  Bhagavan  Mahtirvara,  who  grants  the  fruits 


1  VibhOtis. 

*  When  the  Sadhaka  is  in  a  position  to  give  up  outer  worship,  he  will  give 
up  all  other  external  activities.  Before  then  it  is  useless  to  give  up  one  and  the . 
most  important  form  of  such  activities — namely,  outer  worship. 


708 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


of  all  Karma,  and  is  the  helmsman  of  the  vessel  which  crosses  the  sea  of 
Karma,  has  said  with  His  own  mouth  in  the  §aktanandatarahgi*u: 1 

“  Through  Karma  jivas  are  bom,  through  Karma  they  die.  After 
destruction  of  body,  through  Karma  they  receive  bodies  in  rebirth  and 
again  become  subject  to  Karma  (i).  Just  as  a  calf  finds  out  its  dam 
amongst  a  thousand  cows,  so  the  good  and  evil  Karma  of  a  jiva  follow 
their  author  among  the  infinite  millions  of  Jivas.  Karma  acquired  in 
previous  births  is  most  powerful  in  this  Samsara.  Who  has  the  power  to 
baffle  its  course  ?  (2)  A  Jiva’s  body  itself  is  made  of  Karma,  and  all  Karma 
has  its  home  in  his  body,  so  that  only  such  pure  ordinances  should  be 
followed  as  are  favourable  to  Karmayoga  (3).  O  Devi!  all  things  moving 
and  unmoving  are  made  of  Karma.  Karma  is  mother,  Karma  is  father, 
and  Karma  itself  is  the  Jiva’s  guide  in  the  spiritual  path  in  the  form  of  the 
Supreme  Guru.2  Through  Karma  a  Jiva  attains  heaven  or  hell 1  (4). 
Controlled  by  their  virtues  4  and  sins,  pregnant  with  happiness  and  sorrow 
respectively,  Jivas  receive  physical  bodies  in  classes  determined  by  such 
Karma  and  merely  enjoy  their  fruits  (5).  O  Parvan!  it  is  only  rarely  and 
after  passing  through  thousands  of  births  in  Samsara  that  a  Jiva  receives 
a  human  body  by  virtue  of  accumulated  Karma  (6).  Eating,  sleeping, 
and  sexual  intercourse — these  are  common  to  all  living  creatures.  Man’s 
superiority  to  all  Jivas  lies  in  his  possession  of  knowledge.  Hence,  he  who 
luring  a  man  is  without  knowledge  is  no  better  than  a  beast  (7).  O  Mistress 
of  Kula!  though  at  the  time  of  death  a  Jiva  loses  his  own  body,  yet  he  does 
not  realize  the  worthlessness  of  all  relations  with  wife,  mother,  brother, 
son,  and  so  forth  (8).  A  man  lives  a  hundred  years;  but  a  very  short 
span  of  life.  But  even  of  these  hundred  years  sleep  usurps  one  half,  and 
the  remaining  half  is  spoiled  by  ignorance  in  childhood,  enjoyment  in 
youth,  sorrow  in  old  age,  and  so  forth  (9).  Samsara  is  the  root  of  sorrow. 
Whoever  is  in  and  belongs  to  this  Samsara  is  sorrowful.  None  is  happy 
but  be  who  has  abandoned  the  Sams&ra  (10).  Man  remains  ever  bound 
to  defecation  in  the  morning;  to  hunger  and  thirst  at  midday;  and  to 
passion  and  sleep  in  the  night  (n).  He  is  unwilling  to  taste  the  Divine  4 
remedy  for  this  great  disease,  but  constantly  partakes  of  all  such  injurious 
food  as  aggravates  it,  thinking  it  to  be  sufficient  medicine  (12).  Knowing 
full  v^cll  that  the  body  exists  in  order  that  his  own  Dharma  may  be  worked 
out,  he  again  performs  evil  Karma  with  that  body.  Being  the  owner  of  a 


1 1st  UllSsa,  discourse  on  knowledge.  A  celebrated  Tantrik  work  by 
Purginanda  Giri. 

1  All  precepts  are  from  the  supreme  Guru.  These  precepts  are  the  Guru 
Himself.  The  Guru  is  these  precepts,  and  His  precepts  when  carried  out  are 
Kama. 

1  Svarga  or  naraka. 


4  Puijya. 


•Divya. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


709 


cow  of  plenty,’ 1  the  fool  seeks  the  milky  juice  of  the  akanda  plant 1 * 4 * * 
(that  is  to  say,  ensting  in  a  human  body  by  the  help  of  which  the  four-fold 
object  of  Dharma,  Artha,  Kama,  and  Moksa  *  may  be  easily  attained,  he 
journeys  down  to  perdition  through  the  pursuit  of  worthless  worldly 
happiness)  *  (13).  The  body  is  transient,  and  so  is  wealth.  A  Jiva’s 
death  is  always  near  him.  Hence,  in  order  that  he  be  saved  from  the 
fear  and  anxiety  caused  by  that  ever  accompanying  death,  let  him  first  of 
all  earn  religious  merit  (14).  Deluded  is  he  who  does  not  earn  the  perma¬ 
nent  wealth  of  Dharma  8  by  means  of  his  transient  body,  which  changes 
at  every  moment  of  time  (15).  Nor  father,  nor  mother,  nor  son,  nor  any 
other  relation  follow  a  Jiva  to  the  next  world  that  they  may  help  him  there. 
Dharma  alone  accompanies  him  to  that  inaccessible  place  to  bear  evidence 
of  his  Karma  (16).  Bound  by  ties  of  affection  to  wife  and  children,  a 
person  cannot  attain  liberation.  Death  exercises  equal  rule  over  all,  be 
they  learned  or  ignorant,  strong  or  weak,  rich  or  poor  (17).  Just  as  the 
wealthy  man  lies  in  constant  dread  of  the  King,  water,  fire,  thieves,  and 
even  wife,  children,  and  relations,  so  sinners  live  in  constant  dread  of 
death  (that  is  to  say,  only  such  men  in  the  world  are  fearless  by  the  grace 
of  the  fear-dispelling  Mother  as  have  prepared  themselves  to  meet  death 
by  acquiring  Dharma)  *  (18).  Hence  an  intelligent  man  should  do  to-day 
and  in  the  forenoon  what  has  been  set  to  be  done  to-morrow  and  in  the 
afternoon,  for  death  does  not  wait  to  see  whether  a  work  has  been  done 
or  remains  to  be  done  (19).  He  alone  can  attain  liberation,  severing  the 
bonds  of  Karma  by  means  of  Karma,  who  does  such  Karma  with  body, 
mind,  and  speech,  with  freedom  from  desire  for  the  fruits  thereof  (20).” 

In  the  Rudrayamala  7  it  is  written;  “  A  Sadhaka  attains  Siddhi  only 
when  the  Mother  of  the  world  is  satisfied.  To  a  Sakama  Sadhaka  *  She 
grants  happiness  and  to  a  Niskama  Sadhaka  •  She  grants  Eberation.  Let 
no  one  think  that  She  should  be  worshipped  only  at  a  certain  period  of 
life,  for  She  is  eternal,  and  Her  presence  is  never  wanting.  It  is  not  also 
as  though  She  were  at  a  distance,  and  some  time  must  elapse  before  She 
can  be  brought  near  to  you,  for  She  Eves  in  all  things  (1).  A  Sadhaka 
should,  therefore,  always  adore  the  daughter  of  the  Mountain-King,  the 


1  Kamadhenu,  the  cow  which  gives  that  which  is  desired. 

*  This  juice  looks  similar  to  milk,  but  is  harmful. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sditra.  *  Author’s  parenthesis. 

4  Religion  and  duty. 

*  Author’s  parenthesis.  Dharma  is  here  merit. 

7  One  of  the  chief  and  oldest  TSntrik  Scriptures. 

*  That  is,  a  Sadhaka  who  does  action  with  desire  for  the  fruit. 

*  Who  acts  wholly  unselfishly;  who  does  good  not  for  the  sake  of  reward, 
but  for  the  sake  of  good. 


710 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


MahSm&yfi,  who  is  eternal  and  true.  He  should  ever  sing  hymns  in  Her 
praise,  and  worship  Her,  and  ever  hear  and  talk  of  Her  name,  Her  qualities, 
form,  and  greatness,  and  so  forth  (2).  A  man  of  sense  should,  instead  of 
wasting  time  in  gambling,  and  the  like  useless  pursuits,  spend  his  life  in 
worship,  Japa,  Yajfia,  Stava,1  and  so  forth,  of  the  Devata  (3).  What  is 
achieved  by  talk  of  other  matters  but  a  useless  waste  of  life?  Hence,  O 
Devi!  a  Sadhaka  will,  on  receiving  knowledge  of  Mantra,  Yantra,  and  so 
forth,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Guru,  happily  attain  liberation  from  the 
terrible  bonds  of  Samsara  (4).” 

The  following  are  Siva’s  words  in  the  Kularnava  *  Tantra:  “  O  Devi, 
I  shall  tell  thee  what  Thou  hast  asked  me.  Listen.  O  Siva-Sasana,* 
a  Jiva  cannot  attain  liberation  except  through  initiation  (in  the  Tantrik 
cult)  *  (1).  Attainment  of  Siddhi  in  Mantra  is  impossible  without  Yoga, 
and  attainment  of  Siddhi  in  Yoga  is  impossible  without  Mantra.  Hence, 
only  the  form  of  Yoga,  in  which  both  are  practised,  leads  to  attainment 
of  Brahman  (2).  Just  as  in  a  dark  room  one  can  see  everything  with  the 
help  of  a  light,  so  a  Jiva  enshrouded  in  Maya  secs  the  true  aspect  of 
Paramatma  with  the  help  of  Mantra  (3).  Hence,  one  should  earnestly 
receive  initiation  immediately  on  the  attainment  of  his  sixteenth  year. 
Just  as  a  piece  of  iron  when  treated  with  juices  of  herbs  and  Mantras 
turns  into  gold,  so  on  being  bathed  in  the  milk  of  Guru’s  mercy  and  initiated 
in  the  great  Mantra  a  Jiva  forsakes  Jivahood  and  undoubtedly  attains 
Sivahood  (4).” 

In  the  Gandharva  Tantra  it  is  said:  ‘  “  Atma  is  Tripunrivari  •  Herself, 
and  is  unattached,  attributeless,  and  pure.  A  Sadhaka  will  in  this  way 
meditate  on  Atma  and  Istadevata  as  inseparable  from  one  another,  and 
become  merged  in  Her  (1).  I  am  She  (my  substance  is  not  different 
from  Hers).  By  this  thought  immersion  in  Her  is  attained.  One  should 
certainly  meditate  on  this  that  there  is  nothing  in  this  world  save  Her  (2). 
The  mass  of  Her  spirit,  fire,  and  energy 7  fills  the  entire  universe.  The 
thought  of  this  will  fill  the  Sadhaka  with  bliss,  He  will  move  freely  like  a 
Devata  while  yet  on  earth  (3).  There  is  nothing  in  the  world  which  a 
Sadhaka  who  practises  the  Yoga  of  meditation  in  this  manner  should 
worship,  for  this  virtuous  great  man  deserves  the  worship  of  all  and  worships 


1  Recitation  of  Mantra,  sacrifice  hymn. 

*  2nd  UllSsa. 

*  She  who  other  instructs  or  is  instructed  by  Siva,  as  in  the  case  of  Nigamas 
and  Agamas. 

1  Author’s  parenthesis. 

1 11th  UUasa,  section  on  Dhyana  (meditation). 

*  The  Devi  as  mistress  of  the  three  (tri)  worlds  (puras). 

TTejas. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


71 1 


none  (4.).  Although  possessing  a  human  body,  this  wise  man  who  is 
proficient  in,  and  whose  Atma  is  in,  Yoga  is  in  reality  not  a  man,  but  a 
Devata.  Such  a  man  alone  is  a  SannySo  (one  who  has  forsaken  Karma).1 * * 
Such  a  man  alone  widens  the  path  of  Karma.*  The  AtmS  of  such  a  man 
alone  is  united  with  the  Deity;  and  such  a  man  alone  is  called  a  Mum  by 
all  Sastras.  There  is  nothing  in  this  world  which  he  cannot  do,  and  he 
alone  is  an  accomplished  great  Yogi  (5).  He  whose  Atma  is  always 
united  with  Devata,  gratifying  and  adorning  his  Atma  with  all  pleasing 
objects  of  sensuous  perception,  and  worshipping  the  Devata  with  a  sense 
of  Her  inseparateness  from  his  Atma,  and  whose  Atma  is  ever  united  with 
Devata,  is  himself  a  Devata  (6).  A  Sadhaka  certainly  will  perceive  the 
presence  of  his  Devata  in  the  work,  the  doer,  and  the  work  done;  in  what¬ 
ever  things — such  as  dance,  music,  and  the  like — he  sees  or  hears;  in 
whatever  dresses  and  ornaments  he  wears;  in  whatever  animals  and  things, 
be  it  elephants,  horses,  carriage,  bedstead,  and  so  forth,  on  which  he  goes 
and  rests;  in  whatever  he  eats,  and,  in  short,  in  whatever  else  he  does  (7) . 
When  in  possession  of  those  objects  of  desire  which  a  worldly  man  enjoys 
for  his  own  self-gratification,  a  Sadhaka  will  perceive  the  Divinity  within 
them,  and  enjoy  them  for  the  gratification  of  the  Devata  dwelling  in  his 
heart  (8).  Everything  that  a  Sadhaka  does,  from  his  awaking  in  early 
morning  to  the  time  of  deep  sleep  in  the  depth  of  the  night,  will  be  done 
with  the  sense  of  the  presence  of  Devata  therein.  The  habit  of  so  doing 
will  arouse  a  divine  disposition  *  in  the  Sadhaka  by  means  of  which  he 
will  attain  Siddhi  (9).  Only  he  who  has  such  disposition  becomes  Siddha  4 
and  none  else  (that  is  to  say,  another  person  may  have  some  other  form 
of  Siddhi,  but  for  want  of  this  disposition 1  that  Siddhi  will  not  produce 
liberation).4  Hence,  such  persons  only  as  seek  Dhyanayoga  practice  and 
liberation,  and  who  constantly  worship  Tripurasundari  the  Devi,  who  is 
bliss  itself,  with  devotion  *  will  truly  attain  liberation  ”  (10). 

Through  the  ill-fortune  of  India,  many  people  have  nowadays  leamt 
by  rote  such  passages  as  “  outer  worship  is  inferior,”  “  outer  worship  is  a 
low  form  of  worship,”  and  “  outer  worship  is  lower  than  the  lowest  form 
of  worship  ” ;  but  most  of  them  do  not  know  for  what  rank  of  worshippers 
outer  worship  is  inferior,  or  low,  or  lower  than  the  lowest,  and  how  these 
passages  should  be  harmonized  with  their  context.  And  some  of  them 
even  desist  from  making  any  inquiry  lest  they  should  lose  the  opportunity 


1  Author's  parenthesis — that  is,  work  done  for  the  sake  of  its  fruits. 

*  That  is,  the  fruit  of  that  Karma  is  dedicated  to  the  Supreme,  and  is  not 
made  to  serve  petty  selfish  ends. 

•Divyabhiva.  4  Perfect.  1  Author’s  parenthesis. 

4  Literally,  “  with  devotion  in  the  Divyabhiva.” 


712 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


of  parading  the '  passages.1 *  Bhagavan,  who  dwells  in  all  hearts,  has, 
however,  ordained  worship  to  be  of  different  classes,  according  to  differences 
in  the  competence  of  worshippers,  and  clearly  said  in  the  Mupdam&la 
Tantra:  “  Mental  worship,  in  which  pure  Sattva  *  alone  operates,  brings 
about  high  Siddhi  and  grants  liberation.  This  form  of  worship,  which 
consists  of  inner  sacrifice,®  destroys  the  Jivahood  of  a  Jiva  and  grants  him 
Sivahood  (i).  Although  outer  worship  is  Rajas!,4  it  grants  all  forms  of 
prosperity,  destroys  all  kinds  of  danger,  secures  enjoyment  in  this  world 
and  liberation  hereafter,  removes  all  evils,  cures  all  diseases,  annihilates 
all  enemies,  and  severs  all  bonds  (2).  Beloved  one!  what  I  have  said  as 
to  outer  worship  being  a  lower  form  of  worship  is  not  intended  to  apply 
to  Sadhakas  following  Viracara,  or  PaSvacara.3  For  Sadhakas  following 
the  DivyScara  *  only  outer  worship  is  a  low  form  of  worship  ’’  (3).  Here 
a  Sadhaka  should  observe  that  even  for  Sadhakas  of  the  Divyacara  outer 
worship  is  not  altogether  prohibited.  It  is  merely  a  lower  form  of  worship 
for  them;  that  is  to  say,  a  person  following  Divyacara  has  perfect  com¬ 
petence  for  inner  worship,  and  therefore  outer  worship  is  not  a  necessity 
for  him.  It  will  not,  however,  do  him  any  harm  if  he  performs  it,  for  a 
worship  of  the  All-good  Devi,  in  whatever  fashion  it  may  be  performed, 
cannot  possibly  injure  anybody.  A  Sadhaka  of  the  Divyacara  is,  in  truth, 
a  permanent  source  of  great  good,  so  that  the  non-performance  of  outer 
worship  does  not  affect  him.  It  is,  therefore,  immaterial  for  him  whether 
he  does  or  does  not  perform  outer  worship.  It  does  not  matter  to  the  sea 
whether  rivers  fall  into  it  or  not.  But  you  and  I  who  follow  the  PaSvacara 
or  Viracara  arc  nothing  but  lakes  of  water  which  we  have  dug  out  ourselves. 
If  we  neglect  the  rivers,  the  result  will  be  that  we  ourselves  shall  turn  into 
deserts.  It  is,  therefore,  nothing  but  a  sign  of  lunacy  to  frown  with  dis¬ 
pleasure  at  outer  worship,  which  is  not  prohibited  to,  nor  worthy  the 
disrespect  of,  even  permanently  liberated  Sadhakas  of  the  Divyacara.  If, 
however,  a  householder  is  intently  eager  to  perform  exclusively  mental 
worship,  there  is  a  path  for  him  opened  by  Bhagavan  Himself,  by  which 
he  may  fulfil  this  desire.  The  Mother  of  the  world  forbade  that  anyone 
should  ever  travel  that  path  in  the  domain  of  Sadhana.  If,  unfortunately, 
anyone  must  travel  it,  the  following  are  the  conditions  which  have  to  be 
observed : 

In  the  Gandharva  Tantra  •  it  is  said :  "  If  a  householder  lives  in  a 
forest,  and  on  any  particular  day  that  forest  is  infested  with  lions  and 


1  .Otherwise  by  comparison  with  the  context  others  might  be  disillusioned. 

1  That  is,  the  Sattva  Guiia  (sec  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

*  Yajfta.  4  That  is,  it  is  the  outcome  of  the  rajas  guna. 

4  Sec  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra.  *  25th  Pafala. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


719 


tigers,  then  on  that  day  he  may  perform  mental  worship.  Or,  if  he  lives 
in  a  village  or  a  town,  and  his  house  is  besieged  by  the  army  of  a  foreign 
Icing,  then  in  such  time  of  political  disorder  he  is  privileged  to  perform 
mental  worship.  Or,  whether  he  lives  in  a  forest  or  in  a  village  or  town, 
if  he  is  imprisoned  by  sentence  of  a  law-court,  then  at  such  time  also  he 
may  perform  mental  worship.  But  even  in  these  three  cases  the  SSdhaka 
is  entitled  to  perform  mental  worship  only  if  he  is  unable  to  obtain  articles 
for  outer  worship.” 

His  privilege  to  perform  mental  worship  in  these  three  cases  depends 
on  his  inability  to  leave  the  place  where  he  is  situated  to  procure  articles 
for  outer  worship.  For,  if  such  articles  are  to  his  hand,  and  nevertheless 
he  omits  to  perform  outer  worship,  then  even  in  the  circumstances  mentioned 
he  will  do  wrong,  because  of  his  initial  incompetence  for  exclusively  mental 
worship.  Now,  if  there  be  anyone  who  desires  to  perform  outer  worship 
under  the  conditions  above  described,  we  think  it  would  be  well  for  him 
were  the  All-good  Mother,  who  grants  all  desires,  to  refuse  to  fulfil  this 
desire  on  his  part. 

In  the  same  Tantra  it  is  said: 1  “  What  is  the  use  of  saying  much? 
This  much  only  I  briefly  say,  whether  it  be  stated  in  the  Sastra  or  not: 
A  devotee  should  always  perform  worship  with  all  kinds  of  both  terrestrial 
and  aquatic  flowers  and  their  leaves.  Worship  should  be  done  with 
leaves  if  flowers  be  wanting;  with  fruits  if  leaves  be  wanting;  with  whole 
grains  of  barley  where  there  are  no  fruits;  or,  at  least,  with  water  should 
there  be  no  whole  grains  of  barley..  Daily  worship  should  never  be 
neglected.  If  even  water  is  wanting,  then  only  should  one  have  recourse 
to  exclusively  mental  worship.” 

In  the  Niruttara  Tantra  it  is  said:  *  “  By  virtue  of  his  worship  of 
Isfadevata  a  Sadhaka  himself  receives  worship  in  the  world  (for  whoever 
in  this  world  worships  Her  is  adored  by  the  world).*  By  Japa  he 
undoubtedly  acquires  Siddhi  (Anima,  and  so  forth),*  and  by  Homa  he 
attains  success  in  all  worldly  things.  Therefore  a  Sadhaka  should  perform 
all  three:  worship,  Japa  and  Homa.  O  KuleSvari !  *  only  Sadhaka*  of 
VIrabhava  and  Divyabhava  *  are  competent  to  perform  mental  worship.” 

In  the  Picchila  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Even  if  a  Sadhaka  has  received 
the  Mantra  of  a  Mahavidya  or  Siddhavidya,'  that  Mantra-vidya  injures 
him  if  he  neglects  to  perform  Japa.  One  can  never  attain  wealth  without 
performing  Homa,  or  Siddhi  without  performing  Japa,  and,  O  ParameSvari! 


1  Gandharva  Tantra,  14th  Patala. 

*  Author's  parenthesis. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sditra. 


*  7th  Patala. 

4  Mistress  of  Rula. 
4  See  post. 


714 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


it  is  impossible  to  receive  worship  anywhere  unless  one  worships  his 
Iftadevata." 

In  the  Mufl^amala  T antra  it  is  said: 1  “  O  Capdii  he  who  worships 
Kalika  with  devotion  and  according  to  the  rites  attains  to  the  state  of  Siva, 
even  though  he  be  a  Jiva.  This  is  true,  true,  undoubtedly  true.  A  Sadhaka 
should  always  perform  the  rites.1  It  is  by  the  performance  of  rites  that 
a  great  Sadhaka  attains  the  highest  Siddhi.  Hence,  one  should  never 
renounce  rites.” 

In  the  Yamala  we  read:  “  Meditation  *  is  of  two  kinds,  according  as 
it  is  gross  or  subtle.  Subtle  meditation  is  the  meditation  on  the  Devata's 
body,  consisting  of  Mantra,  and  gross  meditation  is  meditation  upon  Her 
body,  with  hands,  feet,  and  so  forth.  The  subtle  form  of  Supreme  Prakjti 
is  made  of  pure  knowledge.  It  is  not  possible  for  a  Jiva  to  meditate  on 
this  subtle  form.  By  meditating  on  the  gross  form  does  a  Jiva  attain 
liberation.” 

“  O  Devi!  unless  worshipped,  the  Devata  never  grants  any  fruit  It  is 
only  when  the  Sadhaka,  with  or  without  knowledge,  meditates  on, 
remembers,  worships,  praises  in  hymns,  and  pays  obeisance  to,  the  Dev 
that  She  grants  liberation  to  Her  worshippers.” 

In  the  Gandharva  Tantra  ISvara  said:  “  He  who  devotedly  performs 
daily  worship  in  this  manner  becomes  like  Kandarpa*  to  women,  and 
powerful  like  Siva  in  the  world  of  men  (i).  He  is  truly  fortunate,  and  an 
ornament  of  his  race.  Blessed  indeed  are  his  father  and  his  mother  (a).. 
The  Devi  appears  in  him,1 * * * *  and,  like  myself,  that  person,. possessor  of  great 
knowledge,  undoubtedly  becomes  master  of  the  eight-fold  Siddhi  of  Anima  • 
and  so  forth  (3).  To  his  enemies  he  is  destructive  like  fire,  to  his  friends 
he  is  pleasing  like  the  moon.  In  punishment  he  is  like  death,  and  in  sanctity 
he  is  like  fire  7 * *  {4).  In  speech  he  is  like  Brhaspati,  in  forbearance  like  the 
earth.*  Sarasvati  is  ever  present  on  his  tongue,  and  Lak?mi  in  his  house.*' 
All  Tirthas  are  permanently  established  in  his  body.  He  therefore  has  no 
fear  Of  rebirth  (5).  In  wealth  he  is  the  Lord  of  wealth  (Kubera),10  and. 


1  2nd  Pa{ala. 

1  Kjya.  *  Dhyana. 

4  Kama,  the  God  of  Desire. 

1  Literally,  “  the  angas  (part)  of  the  Devi  appears  in  him  ” — i.e.,  divinity — 

but  not  in  its  plenitude. 

1  See,  as  to  these  powers,  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 

7  For  fire  purifies,  and  is  itself  never  impure. 

*  Brhaspati  is  the  Guru  of  the  Devas.  As  the  earth  bean  every  thing,  it  is 
the  model  of  patience. 

1  He  has  both  wisdom  and  wealth;  two  things  which  generally  do  not  go- 

together.  “  Author’s  parenthesis. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


715 


in  fiery  energy 1  lie  is  like  the  Sun;  in  strength  he  is  like  the  God  of  wind,. 
Pavana ;  in  liberality  he  is  like  Indra;  *  in  singing  he  is,  as  it  were,  Tumburu  * 
himself.  Such  is  the  man  who  daily  worships  the  All-good  Devi,  who- 
grants  all  desires  (6).  O  Mistress  of  Devas!  if  die  worship  of  Mabitripura- 
sundari*  is  omitted  for  one  day,  the  Sidhaka  should  expiate  the  sin 
resulting  therefrom.  He  should  fast  on  the  day  on  which  there  is  thus  no 
worship,  and  perform  preliminary  rites  for  the  next  day’s  worship.  On 
the  day  following  let  him  worship  first  the  Guru  according  to  the  injunctions, 
and  then  after  he  has  finished  the  worship  of  I${adevata,  let  him  feed 
virgins  and  Brahmanas  (7-8).  Such  is  the  expiation  for  omission  of 
worship  for  one  day.  If  it  is  omitted  for  more  than  one  day,  the  defaulter 
should  be  re-initiated  and  perform  Japa  of  his  I?tamantra  *  a  hundred 
thousand  times  (9).  Whoever  omits  to  perform  worship  for  two  or  three 
days  in  the  Sadhana  of  Mahatripurasundari  and  Yoginls  (of  any  Sakti 
Dcvata),*  loses  all  his  Siddhi,  and  is  cursed  by  the  Yoginis  (10).  Life, 
learning,  fame,  and  strength  leave  him,  and  the  Yoginis  destroy  his  flesh,, 
semen,  vital  fluid,7  and  blood,  and  frustrate  all  his  desires  (11).  Bitter 
quarrels  arise  with  friends,  and  especially  with  wives.  His  sin  ruins  the 
crops,  and  he  himself  falls  into  dangers  at  every  step  (ia).  Truly,  truly 
he  is  attacked  with  diseases,  and  being  impoverished,  he  suffers  even  in 
this  world  the  three  forms  of  terrible  sufferings  (adhyatmik,  idhibhautik, 
and  adhidaivik,  and  of  body,  speech,  and  mind) '  (13).  (Sadhakas  know 
that  these  things  constantly  happen  where  the  path  of  Sadhana  is 
obstructed)  .*  Though  a  Sadhaka  cannot,  owing  to  his  neglect  to  act 
according  to  the  Sastra,  obtain  liberation,  yet  by  virtue  of  his  initiation  in 
the  Mahamantra,  he  will  go  to  heaven;*  and  then,  after  enjoyment  of 
such  happiness  as  is  to  be  had  therein,  he  will  fall  again  on  earth  and 
become  the  Lord  of  an  empire.  And  during  life  here  he  will  have 
unparalleled  devotion  to  the  lotus-feet  of  the  Mother  of  the  world  by  virtue 
of  the  initiation  accomplished  in  the  previous  birth.  Thereafter  he  will 
attain  to  Kaivalya  (14).  The  fool  who  neglects  the  worship  of  Igtadevata 
and  sets  himself  to  meditation  on  Brahman  without  having  first  attuned 
the  highest  fruit  of  worship — namely,  cittalaya10 — is  in  this  world  a  murderer 


1  Tejas.  *  King  of  the  Devas.  *  A  Gandharva. 

*  The  Dew;  as  to  Tripurasundari,  see  A.  and  E.  Avalon’s  “  Hymns  to  the 
Goddess 

*  The  Mantra  in  which  he  was  initiated.  '  Author’s  parenthesis.  .  7  Rasa. 
'  Author’s  parenthesis.  The  first  three  classes  of  suffering  are  those  caused 

by  the  self,  the  outer  material  world,  and  the  world  of  Devas. 

*  Svarga. 

10  That  is,  the  absorption  of  the  Jtva’s  dtta  in  the  object  of  worship  called 
Samprajft&ta  SamSdhi. 


716 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


•of  Brahman  (15).  If  a  Sadhaka  who  is  devoted  to  Japa  and  meditation 
is  at  any  time  unable  himself  to  perform  worship  and  so  forth  by  reason 
of  2us  occupation  in  some  work  of  gain  or  benefit  (that  is,  acquiring  some¬ 
thing  new  or  safeguarding  that  which  has  been  already  acquired),  he  should 
-engage  his  own  Guru  to  do  worship  on  his  behalf  (t6)  .  All  forms  of  Siddhi 
are  in  the  hands  of  him  whose  welfare  is  the  subject  of  constant  concern  to 
a  pure-hearted  Guru  who  is  proficient  in  both  knowledge  and  work, 
possessed  of  supcrworldly  power,  and  inspired  with  the  spirit  of  all 
Devas 1  (17).  Not  only  in  the  case  of  worship  of  Istadevata,  but  in  that 
of  every  form  of  Teligious  work  prescribed  in  the  Tantra  Sastra,  none  but 
the  Sadh aka’s  Guru,  Guru’s  wife,  and  Guru’s  son  is  competent  to  perform 
it  if  the  Sadhaka  is  unable  to  do  so  personally.” 

In  the  Pichhila  Tantra  it  is  said :  “  The  Guru  personally  has  the  right 
to  perform  worship  as  prescribed  in  the  Tantra.  It  is  well  accomplished 
if  performed  by  Guru,  Guru’s  son,  or  Guru’s  wife.  O  Mistress  of  Devas! 
in  the  absence  of  Guru,  a  Sadhaka  should  himself  perform  worship  and  so 
forth.”  (Here  by  absence  of  Guru,  Guru’s  son,  and  Guru’s  wife,  is  meant 
that,  though  alive,  they  are  not  available.)  * 

In  the  Varada  Tantra  it  is  said:  *  “  All  the  rites  prescribed  in  the 
Tantra  in  connection  with  the  worship  of  Istadevata  should  be  performed 
by  the  Sadhaka  himself.  In  case  of  his  inability  to  personally  perform 
them,  he  should  have  them  carried  out  by  the  Guru  or  his  wife,  if  she  is  a 
mother  (and  if  the  Mantra  and  DevatS  of  the  husband  and  wife  are  the 
same)  .*  If  performed  in  any  other  way,  everything  will  be  spoiled.” 

In  the  Guptasadhana  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  O  Maheivari!  if  worship 
and  so  forth  through  any  others  than  these  persons  (Guru,  his  son,  or  his 
wife  who  is  a  mother)  * — that  is,  by  any  other  Tantrik  preceptor  * — then 
the  fruits  of  such  worship  will  fall  into  the  grasp  of  Yaksas  and  Rak^asas  *  (1). 
(Hence,  if  a  person  is  himself  unable  to  perform  the  worship  of  his  Istadevata, 
his  Guru  should  take  his  place.) 1  If  the  Guru,  who  is  an  appearance  of 
Brahman,  performs  worship  and  so  forth,  then,  O  hlaheivari!  such  worship 
will  bear  a  hundred-crore-fold  *  fruit  (2).  Or,  O  ParameSvari !  if  the 
Sadhaka  performs  such  worship  and  so  forth  himself  he  should  at  its 
conclusion  offer  to  the  Guru  all  the  things  which  have  been  already  offered 
to  the  DevatS;  for,  on  being  offered  to  Guru  they  bear  crore-fold  *  fruit  (3).- 
■O  MaheSvari!  if  the  Guru’s  wife  performs  the  worship  and  so  forth,  she 
should  carry  out  the  necessary  sacrifice  1  and  the  like,  but  not  the  Homa. 


*  Sarvadevasvarupimaya. 

*  Author’s  parenthesis .  *  10th  Patala.  4  Acfirya. 

4  Demoniac  spirits. 

*  A  erore  is  ten  Bullions. 


’  Bali. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


717 


She  should,  after  collection  of  the  articles  for  Homa,  place  them  before 
the  Dew,  and,  by  repeating  the  Mulamantra,1 * *  offer  them  to  MahSdevi. 
By  doing  this  only,  the  purpose  of  Homa  will  be  accomplished.  A  Sadhaka 
should  never  have  Homa  done  in  fire  by  his  Guru’s  wife.  O  Devi!  worship 
of  I${adevata,  or  whatever  else  is  done  by  a  Guru  for  his  Si?ya  is  productive 
of  undecaying  fruits.  The  provisions  in  the  Sastra  for  the  appointment  of 
various  persons  as  representatives,  such  as  a  Rtvik’s  son  and  others,  where 
the  Yajamana  8  is  personally  incapable,  have  force  only  with  regard  to 
religious  rites,  prescribed  in  the  Sm^ti  Sastra.  Worship  prescribed  in  the 
Tantra  Sastra  should  never  be  performed  by  means  of  such  representatives. 
If  a  Sadhaka  engages  a  Purohita  *  to  perform  T&ntrik  worship  or  other 
rites,  not  only  will  all  his  desires  be  frustrated,  but  even  the  ever-mcrciful 
Mother  of  the  world,  the  Beloved  of  Mahakala,  by  whose  worship  our  aims 
are  attained,  will  become  angry  with  him.” 

Although  the  Sastra  says  that  the  Sadhaka  who  gets  the  worship  of 
his  I$(adevata  and  other  rites  performed  by  his  Purohita  will  reap  fruits 
contrary  to  that  for  which  he  looks,  yet  it  may  be  that  doubts  and  question¬ 
ings  may  arise  as  regards  this  matter.  In  truth,  however,  such  doubts 
are  possible  only  for  those  who  see  no  difference  between  a  Guru  and  a 
Purohita.  He,  however,  who  knows  the  real  nature  of  the  relationship 
between  a  Guru  and  a  Sisya  on  the  one  hand,  and  between  a  Yajamana 
and  a  Purohita  on  the  other,  can  have  no  such  doubt.  A  Purohita  is  a  fit 
representative  of  the  Yajamana  in  the  performance  of  religious  rites,  and 
may  further,  by  the  strength  of  his  own  devotion,4 * * *  advance  the  well-being 
of  the  Yajamana  8  by  his  blessing.  But  a  Guru  is  lord  over  the  Sisya’* 
body,  mind,  life  and  intellect.  He  it  is  who  secures  for  the  latter  shelter 
at  the  feet  of  the  supreme  Devata.  He  it  is  who  kindles  the  beneficial 
-lamp  of  Mantra  in  the  terrible  deep  darkness  of  MSya,  and  is  the  only 
helmsman  who  can  safely  steer  the  vessel  to  the  shore  across  the  boundless 
sea  of  Samsara.  A  Guru  can  never  be  his  Sisya’s  representative;  for, 
so  far  as  a  Sisya  is  concerned,  the  three.  Guru,  Mantra,  and  Devata, 
are  one  and  the  same.  When,  however,  a  Guru  himself  performs  the 
worship,  preliminary  rites  and  so  forth,  which  should  have  been  performed 
by  his  Sisya,  what  happens  is  this:  He  performs  worship  of  himself  in  the 
matter  of  the  worship  of  the  Si?ya,*  and  the  Sisya  is  blessed  by  making  over 

1  The  principal  Mantra  of  the  particular  Devata  worshipped. 

*  He  who  makes  the  sacrifice. 

•Priest.  The  distinction  between  the  Priest  and  the  Guru  is  given  in 
the  text. 

4  Tapas  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra).  *  Vide  ante. 

•  That  is,  the  Sifya  who  wishes  to  worship  the  Devata  through  his  Guru 

causes  the  Guru  to  worship  himself,  because  the  Sisya’s  Guru  and  Devati  are 

the  same. 


718 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


the  worship  to  the  care  of  hit  Guru,  who  is  visible  Brahman.  This  has 
been  clearly  explained  in  the  discourse  on  Guru-tattva.1  Now,  what 
we  have  yet  to  understand  is  how  the  fruit  of  worship  is  increased  a  million' 
fold  by  reason  of  the  worship  being  performed  by  the  Guru  himself,  and 
how  the  benefit  of  such  worship  is  communicated  to  the  person  of  the 
Sisya.  The  fruits  of  the  sacrifice, *  worship,  and  so  forth,  which  a  Purohita 
is  empowered  by  Sastra  to  perform  in  cases  where  the  Yajam&na  *  is  unable 
to  do  so  himself,  are  enjoyable  in  this  world  and  hereafter.  And  it  is 
undoubted  that,  whatever  is  enjoyable,  either  in  this  world  or  in  heaven,4 
is  a  subject  of  sensuous  perception ;  for  all  objects  of  enjoyment  are  appre¬ 
hended  by  the  senses.  From  this  it  conclusively  follows  that  the  work  of 
a  Purohita  is  fruitful  only  as  regards  the  body,  senses,  mind,  and  life 
of  the  Yajamana,*  whether  in  this  world  or  hereafter,  but  has  no  greater 
effect.  But  what  a  Guru  does,  reaches  even  the  Atma  of  the  Sijya.  By 
virtue  of  the  beneficial  work  performed  by  a  Purohita,  the  Yajamana’s 
Atma  may  be  carried  to  heaven4  and  other  regions  of  the  next  world; 
but  its  utmost  effect  is  upon  the  causal  body,*  and  the  Atma  itself  is  not 
directly  reached.  But  the  fruit  of  what  a  Guru  does  goes  beyond  the  next 
world,  and  is  the  cause  of  the  illumination  of  the  superworldly  supreme 
truth  •  in  the  Sisya’s  Atma.  These  supenensuous  truths  are  the  subject 
of  constant  realization,  and  superworldly  wonders  constantly  happen  in 
the  Sisya’s  Atma.  At  the  movement,  in  every  Cakra,  of  Kundalini,  the 
Mistress  of  Cakras  who  plays  in  the  heart  of  the  lotus  in  the  Kula-cave,7 
and  moves  along  the  stem  of  the  Muladhara  lotus,  the  Sadhaka's  Atma 
rises  and  sinks  in  the  sea  of  the  Brahma-bliss  of  Brahmamayi  with  the  playful 
•dance  of  the  waves  of  the  eight  forms  of  Siddhi — viz.,  Anima  and  the  rest* 
It  is  impossible  to  explain  this  by  an  illustration  drawn  from  the  objective 
world.  But  just  as  the  power  of  sight  of  a  Yogi,  although  located  in  his 
•eyes,  reaches  unchecked  the  solar  orb  in  company  with  the  solar  rays,  and 
by  its  keenness  penetrates  its  disc  and  then  views  the  eternal  play  in  the 
eternal  regions  of  Brahmaloka,*  Vaikuptha,10  and  Sivaloka,11  so  the  Atma 
of  a  Sadhaka  who  has  attained  Siddhi  in  Mantra  reaches,  with  the  help 
•of  MantraSakti,  the  true  aspect  of  the  Mother  of  the  world,  the  great  Sakti, 
in  whom  alone  are  centred  all  Mantraiaktis,  and  ever  beholds  the  play  of 
bliss  in  all  the  regions  where  Her  powers u  are  ever  displayed. 


1  On  the  Guru.  *  Yajfia.  '  Vidt  ante. 

*  S varga.  *  KSranadeha;  the  subtle  body. 

*  Tattva.  7  That  is,  the  Muladhara. 

*  As  to  these  powers,  see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistre. 

*  The  three  highest  of  the  upper  worlds. 

“  The  heaven  of  Vifpu  (see  post).  u  The  heaven  of  Siva. 

“  Vibhfltis. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


719 


It  is  only  the  Sakti  by  which  at  the  time  of  initiation  the  Tejas 1  of 
the  Guru  is  communicated  to  the  Sisya;  the  Sakti  which,  like  the  burning 
and  revealing  light,  is  passed  from  the  lamp  of  the  Guru  to  the  wick  of  the 
Sisya’s  body,  moist  with  the  oil  of  the  Guru’s  love;  the  Sakti  which  on 
issuing  from  the  Guru  and  entering  the  Si§ya  brings  the  two  bodies  into 
closer  union  when  worship  is  done;  it  is  that  Sakti  which  alone  is  able  to 
communicate,  directly  and  at  once,  to  the  Sisya’s  body  the  fruits  of  the 
worship  and  other  acts  performed  by  the  Guru.  For  it  is  only  the  Mantra- 
Aakti  of  the  particular  Devata  which  passes  from  the  body  of  a  particular 
Guru  to  that  of  a  particular  Sijya  which  is  capable  of  entering  from  that 
Guru’s  body  into  the  body  of  that  Sisya.  To  no  other  Sakti  is  the  path  of 
communication  open.1 

Just  as  no  one  who  is  not  intimately  related  to  us  is  allowed  entry 
into  the  inner  apartments  of  our  house,  so  the  outer  fruits  of  rites  performed 
by  another  for  the  accomplishment  of  a  Sadhaka’s  happiness  enjoyable  by 
his  external  senses  cannot  enter  into  the  inner  recesses  of  his  heart.  They 
are  acquainted  with  the  outside  only,  and  outside  they  remain.  For  this 
Tcason,  the  effect  which  is  achieved  by  worship  and  so  forth  performed  by 
Guru,  who  is  visible  Brahman,*  or  by  the  Guru’s  wife  or  their  son,  cannot 
be  accomplished  if  even  ten  million  Purohitas  together  perform  them  in 
concert.  Nay,  even  if,  as  a  representative  of  the  Yajamana,4  the  Purohita 
performs  the  worship  of  the  same  Devata  with  the  same  Mantra  (as  is  the 
practice  in  Bengal  in  Syama  Puja,  Jagaddhatri  Puja,  and  similar  other 
Pujas),4  his  worship  is  powerless  to  touch  the  Atm&  of  the  Sadhaka.  For, 
unlike  the  Guru,  the  Purohita’s  AtmaSakti  or  MantraSakti  has  never 
passed  into  the  Yajaraana’s  Atma,  since  there  can  be  no  such  passage 
without  initiation.  Hence,  although  a  Purohita  can,  at  the  time  of 
worship,  make  the  Devata  approach  by  the  force  of  Mantra,  and  thus 
accomplish  the  worship,  the  Merciful  Mother  returns  in  sorrow  because 
She  is  unable,  through  the  fault  of  the  author  of  the  rite,  to  give  him  all 
the  desired  fruits  with  which  She  came  laden  to  his  house  of  worship,  and 
which  She  had  intended  to  give  him  in  fulfilment  of  Her  promise.*  To-day 
the  affectionate  Mother  has  with  all  tenderness  brought  with  Her,  tied  up 


1  Spiritual  energy. 

1  The  Guru  communicates  the  Mantra  Sakti  of  a  particular  Devata  from 
his  own  body  to  the  body  of  the  Sifya.  It  is  the  Mantrasakti  of  that  particular 
Devata  alone  which  can  freely  pass  from  the  Guru  to  the  Si?ya  along  the  path 
established  between  the  two  bodies  by  initiation. 

*  Sfik^St  Brahman.  4  Vide  emit. 

*  The  Kali  Pfija  and  Puja  of  Jagaddhatri.  Author’s  parenthesis. 

*  The  promise  made  in  the  Sistra  that  such  and  such  worship  will  be  pro¬ 
ductive  of  such  and  such  fruits. 


720 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


in  Her  doth,1  precious  gifts  for  Her  son,  who  ever  lives  away  from  home; 
but  on  coming  to  the  son’s  home  She  found  that  he  is  not  there,  and  hence 
cannot  make  over  those  gifts  to  him.  Worse,  however,  than  this,  She  sees 
the  son’s  presents  given  to  Her,  not  by  him  personally,  but  by  a  represen¬ 
tative  of  his.  None  but  a  Mother  in  this  world  can  realize  the  terrible 
pain  which  such  neglect  on  a  son’s  part  causes  to  a  Mother’s  heart.  Hencc^ 
seeing  that  the  son  has  gone  away  to  distant  lands,  the  Mother  sends  him 
a  message  in  the  pages  of  SSstra,  thus : 

“  My  child !  worship  Me  if  you  will,  give  Me  presents  if  you  will,  and 
I  shall  be  present  with  joy  to  receive  the  gifts  of  My  son.  But,  My  child, 
see  that  you  are  not  yourself  absent,  and  do  not  make  your  gifts  to  Me 
through  another.  Otherwise,  your  neglect  and  absence  and  the  sorrow 
they  cause  will  keenly  grieve  My  heart,  and  tears  of  sorrow  will  bedew 
My  face,  chasing  away  all  smiles  of  joy.  My  child,  am  I  nobody  to  you  ? 
Ah,  silly  child!  I  am  the  Mother — I  am  your  Mother,  the  Mother  of  all 
the  millions  of  universes.  What  secret  can  you  have  from  Me  who  dwell 
in  all  things?  And  why  be  secret  with  your  Mother,  My  child?  You  may 
desire  to  keep  a  thing  secret  from  Me,  but  I  come  to  know  of  it  before  it 
even  passes  through  your  mind.  Such  as  I  am,  how  can  you  keep  anything 
secret  from  Me?  Moreover,  the  relation  between  Mother  and  son  is  such 
that  there  can  be  no  secrets  between  them.  But  perhaps  you  keep  away 
from  Me  because  of  your  lack  of  power,  unworthiness,  and  impurity. 
But,  My  child,  have  you  not  heard  that  I  am  all  powers,*  and  am  the 
Saviour  of  the  fallen,  and  Deliverer  of  the  three  worlds?  You  may  be 
lacking  in  power,  but  I  have  all  powers  in  Me.  By  My  own  Sakti  I  create 
universes  from  particles  of  dust  and  turn  them  again  to  dust.  Being  as 
I  am  the  sole  Mistress  of  the  store  of  Saktis,  am  I  not  able  to  make  you 
powerful  by  My  Sakti?  You  may  be  impure,  but  I  raise  the  fallen. 
By  taking  My  name  Jivas  become  pure  themselves  and  purify  the  world. 
Being  what  I  am,  can  I  not  Myself  make  you  pure  ?  How  impure  can  you 
become  that  I  cannot  make  you  pure?  Ah,  My  child!  how  long  does 
impurity  last?  Only  so  long  as  My  name  does  not  enter  your  ears.  It  is 
true  that  Jivas  fall,  but  that  is  only  so  long  as  I,  who  purify  the  fallen, 
do  not  take  them  up  into  My  arms.  You  shirk  My  presence  on  account 
of  your  impurity,  but  no  one  remains  impure  after  he  has  come  to  Me. 
I  am  a  Dweller  in  cremation  grounds,*  because  I  do  not  wish  that  there 
should  be  anything  impure  in  the  world.  Even  My  dead  child  is  not 
impure  to  Me.  As  for  you,  you  are  a  child  vitalized  by  a  great  mantra. 


1  After  the  Indian  fashion. 

•Sakti. 

*  Srrm.t3na.  Fire  purifies  all  things,  and  here  all  bodies  arc  consumed. 
Her  manifestation  is  great  in  the  burning  ground. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


721 


What  should  you  fear?  Hence  I  say,  My  child,  why  have  any  hesitation 
before  your  Mother?  Whatever  you  wish  to  give  Me,  bring  it  to  Me 
yourself,  saying,  “lam  poor  and  impure,”  and  I  shall  not  only  take  your 
gift,  but  purify  you  at  the  same  time.  If  only  I  get  you  to  come  before 
Me,  I  shall  give  you  what  I  have  to  give  you.  This  is  why  I  say,  dear 
child,  do  not  wound  your  Mother’s  feelings  by  charging  another  person 
with  the  care  of  the  Mother.  It  does  not  matter  to  me  whether  My 
worship  is  not  done.  But  it  is  a  sorrow  which  I  cannot  bear  that  I  am 
unable  to  give  you  that  which  I  brought  for  you.” 

It  is  the  great  pain  of  this  sorrow  which  makes  the  merciful  Devi 
wrathful.  The  Tantra  Sastra  has,  therefore,  said:  “  If  a  Sadhaka  engage 
a  Purohita  to  perform  Tantrik  wonhip,  all  his  desires  will  be  frustrated, 
and  Kalika 1  will  become  angry.”  It  is  because  the  Mother’s  feelings  are 
wounded  that  all  the  desires  of  the  Sadhaka  are  frustrated;  otherwise,  why 
should  the  worship  of  Her  who  grants  all  desires  be  productive  of  such 
disastrous  effect?  Why  should  the  ever-merciful  Mother  who  has  assumed 
the  Kala,*-8ubduing  name  of  Kali  in  order  to  destroy  even  the  Sadhaka’s 
fear  of  Kala  *  become  angry  ?  It  must  be  understood  that  this  anger  is  not 
really  such,  but  only  profound  mercy  in  another  form.  None,  however, 
but  the  Mother’s  son  who  has  with  his  own  eyes  seen  the  Mother’s  play  is 
ever  privileged  to  enjoy  the  intense  pleasure  of  seeing  the  play  of  the  waves 
of  this  sweet  and  yet  severe  wrath  of  the  Mother.  This  is  why,  O  Mother! 
we  have  in  the  Invocation  at  the  beginning  of  this  book  begged  of  Thee 
Thy  anger,  which  is  sweeter  than  the  sweetest  of  things  which  looks  a 
complex,*  and  is  yet  a  very  simple  thing;  and  this  is  why  we  have  not 
cared  to  beg  from  Thee  Thy  mercy.  O  Merciful  Devi!  when  wilt  Thou 
show  such  mercy  as  to  bless  me  by  making  me  tremble  at  the  play  on  Thy 
loving  face  of  Thy  pretended  anger,  instead  of  Thy  happy  and  indulgent 
smile?  On  that  day  Thy  name  of  Candl  4  will  be  justified,  and  my  fear  of 
the  Rod  *  will  vanish,  O  Mother!  Does  one  who  experiences  such  anger 
ever  desire  mercy  again  ?  Thy  anger  is  the  hidden  treasure  of  the  secluded 
store  of  love.  Thou  mayst  ask,  How  many  have  been  so  fortunate  as  to 
have  learnt  to  become  angry  •  on  seeing  with  their  own  eyes  Thy  anger? 
But,  O  senseless  Child ! 7  dost  Thou,  being  the  Mother,  not  even  know 
that  the  anger  of  one  who  sayB,  “  I  am  growing  angry,”  simply  makes  one 


1  The  Devi. 

1  Death.  ■  Kutila — that  is,  full  of  designs. 

•Derived  from  Capda,  wrathful:  the  Devi  as  wrathful  Des  true  tress  of 
Demons. 

*  The  emblem  of  Yama,  the  God  of  death. 

*  That  is,  to  show  not  common  anger,  but  such  anger  as  the  Devi  manifests. 
T  Terms  of  endearment  applied  ta  the  Devi. 

46 


722  PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 

laugh?  Glory  to  Thee,  O  Merciful  Mother!  Glory,  glory  to  Thy  anger! 
Glory  to  Thy  mercy!  Glory  to  the  anger  by  which  mercy  is  conquered! 

This  wrath  of  the  Mother  of  the  Universe,  rare  in  the  three  worlds, 
doe*  not  easily  fall  to  the  lot  of  even  Siva,  not  to  speak  of  Jivas. 

Her  anger  and  satisfaction,  of  which  mention  is  made  in  the  Sastra, 
is  not  really  anger  and  satisfaction,  but  a  mere  show  of  them  for  the  good 
of  the  Sadhaka.  Secondly,  such  satisfaction  and  anger  have  reference  to 
the  ordinances  and  prohibitions  of  the  Sastra.  Hence  we  are  afraid  lest 
we  should,  by  failing  to  rouse  that  anger  in  Her  which  is  really  satisfaction, 
call  upon  ourselves  the  terrible  curse  of  Her  pretended  anger,  and  thus 
bring  about  our  ruin.  The  Sastra,  therefore,  ordains  that  we  should  never 
entrust  Her  worship  to  another.  Entrusting,  however,  the  worship  to  the 
lotus-feet  of  Gurudeva  is  not  the  same  as  entrusting  it  to  another,  for  the 
relation  between  a  Gurudeva  and  his  Siaya  is  similar  to  that  between  the 
sea  and  the  river.  Although  they  take  their  rise  from  different  sources, 
such  as  mountains,  springs,  and  so  forth,  yet  rivers  in  the  end  mingle  with 
the  sea  and  become  one  with  it.  So  the  Annas  of  Sisyas,  although  appear¬ 
ing  in  different  bodies,  families  and  races,  mingle  with  the  Guru’s  Atma 
and  become  one  with  it.  Just  as  the  sea  passes  by  the  force  of  the  tide 
into  the  riven,  so,  on  the  rising  tide  of  the  bliss  of  Sadhana  in  the  Atma 
of  the  Gurudeva,  its  nature  passes  from  him  to  the  Sijya’s  body  by  the  force 
of  his  own  Sakti.  The  water  of  the  sea  does  not  really  increase  in  volume, 
but  merely  heaves  forward  under  the  influence  of  the  full  moon.  No  such 
heaving  is,  however,  posable  in  the  waten  of  riven.  Similarly,  no  increase 
or  decrease  of  bliss  is  possible  in  the  Guru  who  is  full  of  perfect  bliss;  but 
bliss  heaves  under  the  influence  of  the  Sakti  (force)  of  S&dhana.  But 
(as  is  the  case  with  the  sea)  such  heaving  is  possible  in  the  body  of  the 
Guru,  which  is  full  of  perfect  bliss,  so  (as  is  the  case  with  riven)  it  cannot 
take  place  in  the  bodies  of  Sisyas.  What  happens  in  the  bodies  of  &?yas 
takes  place  only  through  the  grace  of  the  feet  of  the  Guru,  who  is  a  sea  of 
existence,  consciousness  and  bliss.1  Had  riven  been  unconnected  with  the 
sea,  the  flow-tide  could  never  have  entered  into  them.  Just  as  notwith¬ 
standing  the  water  of  the  sea  merely  heaves  and  does  not  increase,  the 
flow  caused  by  the  force  of  such  heaving  actually  increases  the  water  of 
riven;  so,  despite  the  fact  that  the  perfect  bliss  which  is  in  Guru  does  not 
really  increase  through  the  worship  which  he  performs,  yet  the  motion 
which  is  given  to  it  by  the  force  of  the  Guru’s  mercy  actually  increases  the 
bliss  of  S&dhana  in  the  body  of  the  §i$ya.  This  is  why  the  SSstra  says: 
“  If  Guru,  who  is  the  viable  Brahman,  performs  worship  and  so  forth, 
then,  O  MaheSvari!  such  action  will  bear  a  hundred -crore-fold  *  fruit.” 
This  is  why  wonhip  by  Gurudeva  is  not,  from  the  spiritual  point  of  view, 


1  Sat,  Git  Xnanda. 


*  A  crore  is  ten  millions. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


723 


-worship  by  another,  notwithstanding  that  it  is  from  the  ordinary  standpoint 
performed  by  a  person  other  than  the  Sisya;  for  in  such  case  the  presence  of 
the  Guru  is  the  presence  of  the  Si?ya  for  the  purpose  of  that  worship. 
If  worship  of  the  Sadhaka’s  Is{adevata  is  done  by  a  person  who,  though 
not  his  Guru,  is  a  Tantrik  teacher,  then  also  such  worship  will  be  productive 
•of  bad  fruits;  for  notwithstanding  that  such  a  teacher  is  a  T&ntrik,  he  is  in 
this  matter  in  the  same  position  as  a  Purohita,  since  in  neither  case  is  there 
•the  relation  of  Guru  and  fsijya  between  the  party  officiating  and  him  for 
whom  the  worship  is  done.  The  Sastra  has,  therefore,  said :  “  O  MaheSvari! 
if  one  causes  worship  and  the  like  to  be  performed  not  by  these  persons, 
hut  by  a  Tantrik  preceptor,  then  the  fruits  of  such  worship  will  fall  into 
the  grasp  of  Yaks  as  and  Raksasas.”  1 

All  the  points  of  difference  which  have  so  far  been  shown  to  exist 
between  the  effects  flowing  from  the  appointment  of  a  Guru  and  a  Purohita 
become  operative  only  if  worship  performed  by  him  is  Siddha.1  But 
where  for  want  of  Sastrik  jurisdiction  worship  performed  by  a  Purohita  is 
beyond  his  competency,  it  cannot  be  Siddha.1  No  Tantrik  rite,  and  not 
merely  the  worship  of  Istadevata,  will  be  Siddha  if  performed  by  a  Purohita. 

The  provision  in  the  Sastra  for  the  appointment  of  various  persons  as 
representatives,  such  a  Rtvik’s  son  and  others,  have  force  only  in  regard 
to  religious  rites  prescribed  in  the  Smjti  Sastra.  Worship  prescribed  in 
the  Tantra  Sastra  should  never  be  performed  by  means  of  such  represen¬ 
tatives.”  *  Worship  other  than  that  of  the  Istadevata  will  be  Siddha  if 
performed  by  means  of  any  Tantrik  teacher;  but  in  the  absence  of  Guru, 
'Guru’s  wife,  or  Guru’s  son,  a  Sadhaka  must  himself  perform  the  worship 
•of  his  Istadevata,  or  have  it  performed  by  his  own  wife,  there  being  no 
•  other  course  open  to  him. 

The  Rudra  Yamala  says:  “  Worship  is  of  three  kinds — -namely,  daily,4 
occasional,*  and  performed  for  the  attainment  of  a  desire.”  •  Daily  worship 
is  that  which  a  Sadhaka  must  daily  perform  on  pain  of  incurring  sin,  as, 
dor  instance,  Sandhya  prayers,  worship  of  Siva,  and  worship  of  Istadevata. 
'Occasional  worship  is  that  the  non-performance  of  which  is  sinful,  but 
•which  has  to  be  done  only  on  some  particular  occasion,  as,  for  instance, 
Durga  Puja,  the  illuminated  Syama  Puji,  Sivaratri  Vrata,  Janmas{ami 
Puja,7  and  the  rites  which  must  be  performed  at  the  time  of  an  eclipse. 


1  Evil  spirits.  *  Perfect,  fruitful,  efficacious. 

*  Pratinidhi.  4  Nitya, 

*  Naimittika.  •  Kamya. 

7  Durga  Puja  is  the  Maha vrata  in  honour  of  the  Dad,  as  Durga,  so  greatly 
•celebrated  in  Bengal;  Syama  Puja  is  Kail  Puja  when  there  are  illuminations  in 
honour  of  Devi,  called  the  Dew&li.  JamnSf^ami  is  held  on  Knpa’s  birthday, 
.and  the  Sivaratri  in  honour  of  Siva. 


724 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Worship  performed  for  the  attainment  of  a  desire  is  worship,  the  non¬ 
performance  of  which  is  not  sinful,  but  the  performance  of  which  produces 
special  fruits,  as,  for  instance,  Sinti,  Svastyayana.1 * * 4  The  great  difference 
between  daily  and  occasional  worship  and  worship  performed  for  the 
attainment  of  desire  is  that,  while  daily  and  occasional  worship  must  be 
performed  though  one  may  not  have  any  desire  to  satisfy,  worship  of  the 
third  kind  need  not  be  performed  under  such  circumstances. 

The  Nila  T antra  says:  “  A  Sadhaka  acquires  the  privilege  of  perform¬ 
ing  occasional  worship  when  he  performs  the  daily  worship  of  Istadevata, 
and  he  acquires  the  privilege  of  performing  worship  for  the  attainment  of 
his  desire  only  when  he  has  acquired  Siddhi  *  in  occasional  worship.  The 
ordinance  of  the  Sastra  is  that  it  is  only  when  a  person  becomes  accomplished 
(that  is,  remains  constantly  engaged)  *  in  the  first  two  forms  of  worship — 
namely,  daily  and  occasional — that  he  becomes  competent  to  perform 
worship  undertaken  for  the  attainment  of  his  desire.” 

In  most  parts  of  Bengal  we  find  nowadays  a  class  of  people  who  never 
do  daily  worship,  but  who  perform  once  every  year  with  great  eclat  a. 
ceremony  such  as  the  Durga  Pfija,  or  Syama  Pfija,  or  Jagaddhatri  Puja  * 
and  who  thereupon  think  that  they  have  more  than  sufficiently  compen¬ 
sated  for  the  omission  to  do  daily  worship  throughout  the  year.  They 
ought,  however,  to  open  their  eyes,  which  arc  closed  by  vanity,  and  first 
consider  whether  they  have  any  right  to  perform  such  ceremonies  as  the 
Durga  Pfija.  In  fact,  it  is  not  only  impossible  that  worship  performed  by 
such  men  without  competence  therefor  should  bear  the  fruit  spoken  of  in 
the  Sastra,  but  it  is  to  all  a  matter  of  daily  experience  that  such  perform¬ 
ances  (contrary  to  the  Sastra  as  they  are)  produce  most  baneful  effects  at 
every  step.  Through  the  fault  of  the  performer,  religious  rites  bear  fruits 
contrary  to  that  which  should  follow  them.  But  we  often  hear  critics  say 
that  the  enumeration  of  the  effects  of  religious  performances  mentioned  in 
the  Sastra  is  a  tissue  of  falsehood  intended  to  allure  people.  We,  however, 
reply  that  had  religious  performances  been  incapable  of  producing  any 
effect  at  all,  why  do  these  contrary  effcctB  happen  ?  Whether  we  have  the 
good  fortune  to  be  able  to  see  it  or  not,  every  intelligent  man  ought  to 


1  That  is,  the  rites  of  those  names  to  procure  peace  and  auspiciousness. 
Thus,  special  won  hip  done  with  the  object  of  procuring  the  recovery  of  a  sick 
child  would  be  Kamya.  Neglect  to  perform  such  worship  would  not  in  itself 
be  a  sin,  but  if  devoutly  performed  it  may  lead  to  the  result  desired. 

*  That  is,  becomes  accomplished. 

*  Author’s  interpretation;  for  it  is  only  by  constant  practice  that  success  in 
this  or  any  other  matter  is  attained. 

4  Syamfi  Pttji  is  the  Kafi  Puja,  and  in  the  Jagaddhatri  Pfija  wonbip  is  done 
of  the  four-handed  Jagaddhatri  thrice  on  one  day;  whereas  the  Durga  Puja  is. 
held  for  three  consecutive  days. 


ORDINANCES  RELATING  TO  WORSHIP 


725 


understand  that,  if  the  improper  performance  of  an  act  inevitably  produces 
an  effect  contrary  to  that  spoken  of  in  the  Sastra,  it  is,  if  properly  performed, 
undoubtedly  capable  of  producing,  without  fail,  the  effects  which  are 
promised  by  that  Sastra. 

The  Gandharva  Tantra  says:  “  A  Mahapuja,1 * *  with  all  the  various 
articles  therefor  and  complete  in  all  parts,  should  be  performed  every  month 
of  every  year  on  auspicious  days  (i).  Besides  this,  worship  should  be  done 
daily,  for  worship  of  Iftadevata  is  a  daily  work.  A  Sadhaka  may  perform 
occasional  rites  when  he  is  capable  of  thoroughly  carrying  out  those  of 
daily  obligation.  When  he  thus  becomes  an  adept  in  the  performance  of 
both  the  daily  and  occasional  rites,  then  he  may  think  of  performing  those 
which  are  done  for  the  attainment  of  a  particular  end  *  (a).  Performance 
of  occasional  rites  is  more  imperative  than  that  of  those  last  mentioned, 
and  performances  of  daily  rites  is  more  imperative  than  that  of  the 
occasional  rites.  The  misguided  man  who  proceeds  to  perform  occasional 
rites,  or  rites  to  obtain  some  object  whilst  neglecting  to  perform  the  daily 
rites  and  worship,  reaps  no  fruit  from  the  performance  thereof  (3).  To 
attempt  to  accomplish  occasional  rites,  or  those  done  for  the  attainment 
of  a  particular  desire  whilst  neglecting  to  perform  those  of  daily  obligation, 
is  as  futile  as  it  is  to  cohabit  with  a  barren  woman  (4).  If  all  the  articles 
for  worship  are  not  available,  worship  of  Cakra-devata  (one’s  I$tadcvat& 
in  the  midst  of  the  group  of  five  worshipful  Devatas — namely,  Siva,  Sfirya, 
Ganeia,  Vi?nu,  and  Sakti)  *  should  be  performed  with  flowers,  fruits,  and 
such  other  things  only.  But  where  the  worship  is  performed  in  this  manner, 
notwithstanding  that  other  articles  arc  available,  such  limbless  4  worship 
-cannot  be  productive  of  full  effects  for  the  Sadhaka,  any  more  than  can  a 
limbless  man  be  the  performer  of  a  complete  Yajfia5 *  (5).  Meditation, 
Worship,  Japa  and  Homa  are  the  four  hands  of  the  Yajfia  4  of  worship; 
Matfka,  §oijha,  and  other  NySsas,*  form  its  body;  knowledge  of  the  real 
truth  as  to  I?(adevata  is  its  Atma;  devotion  is  its  head;  reverence  is  its 
heart;  and  the  art  of  performance  is  its  eye.  Knowing  the  body  of  Yajfia  7 
to  be  composed  in  this  manner,  a  good  Sfidhaka  should  perform  it  in  all 
its  limbs,  and  not  divide  and  make  it  limbless  (6).  If  the  Yajfiapurusa  8 
is  made  limbless,  great  evil  is  likely  to  befall  the  Sadhaka.  For  this  reason, 
in  performance  the  limbs  should  not  be  neglected.  If  the  Yajfiapurusa  8 

1 A  great  festival.  Thus  in  Bengal  the  DurgS  Pfijfi  is  a  Mahapuja. 

*  Kamya.  8  Author’s  parenthesis. 

4  Angahina.  That  is,  worship  in  which  all  the  ordinary  articles  of  worship 

.are  not  used. 

8  Sacrifice  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra). 

*  As  to  this  Tantrik  rite,  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstre). 

7  Sacrifice  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

8  Yajfia  considered  as  a  person. 


726 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


is  perfect  in  all  His  limbs,  He  grants  Siddhi  to  the  S&dhaka  in  everything- 
It  is  by  His  union  with  the  supreme  Sakti  which  arises  out  of  the  effort  to- 
accomplish  all  those  limbs  that  the  Yajftapurusa  produces  Siddhi1  (7).. 
The  omission  of  limbs  is  not  so  reprehensible  in  other  worship  as  it  is  in 
that  of  the  perfect  Yajna-body  of  Tripurasundari  (any  Sakti  image)  *  (8). 
For  the  attainment  of  Siddhi  and  Vibhuds  *  a  Sadhaka  should  perform 
worship  according  to  his  means.  If  this  rule  is  transgressed,  not  only 
will  the  worship  be  defective,  but  he  will  incur  the  great  on  of  murder  of 
Brahman;  since  in  that  case  the  body  of  Yajna,  which  is  the  body  of 
Brahman  itself,  is  severed  and  thus  made  limbless.  The  limbs  of  the 
Yajna-body  should  be  accomplished  as  directed  in  the  Sastra,  and  neither 
more  nor  less;  for  both  possession  of  greater  or  of  a  less  number  of  limbs 
by  the  Yajna  produces  sin  in  the  Sadhaka  (9).  A  great  Puja,4  with 
abundance  of  materials  therefore,  should  be  performed  on  a  fourteenth 
lunar  day,  or  an  eighth  lunar  day,  or  a  full  moon  day,  or  between  two 
months  (the  day  between  two  months  or  the  last  day  of  a  month),*  or  on 
a  Mahabhuta  *  day  (10).  If  the  fourteenth  day  of  a  dark  fortnight  be  a 
Tuesday,  that  day  is  called  a  Mahabhuta  day.  Any  special  performance 
on  this  day  causes  Bhutas  (beings  and  things)  to  come  within  the  control  •* 
of  the  Sadhaka.  Again  if  there  is  a  conjunction  of  the  Pu$ya  Naksatra  1 
on  that  day,  performance  on  that  day  is  productive  of  countless  fruits  (n).”- 


1 A  successful  result.  *  Author’s  parenthesis. 

*  Here  powers.  The  powers  of  the  Devata  become,  by  worship  of  the 
Devata,  Vibhutis  of  the  Sadhaka.  For  when  won  hip  is  Siddha  the  worshipper 
and  the  Devata  are  one. 


1  Vide  ants. 


1  Sec  post.  *  Vafikarana. 


*  One  of  the  twenty-seven  “  lunar  mansions”. 


CHAPTER  XIX 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  * 

/ 

In  the  Gandharva  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  A  roan  should  worship  a  Devata 
by  becoming  a  Devata  himself.*  One  should  not  worship  a  Devata 
without  himself  becoming  a  Devata.  If  a  person  worship  a  Devata 
without  himself  becoming  a  Devata,  he  will  not  reap  the  fruits  of  that 
worship.” 

The  VaSistha  Ramayana  says:  “  If  a  man  worships  Visiju  without 
himself  becoming  Vijiju,  he  will  not  reap  the  fruits  of  that  worship.  If  he 
worships  Visiju  by  himself  becoming  Vijnu,  a  Sadhaka  will  become 
Mahavi?i?u.” 

The  Bharata  says:  “  Man  should  not  take  the  name  of  Vispu  without 
himself  becoming  Visnu,  nor  worship  Visnu  without  becoming  Vi?iju, 
nor  remember  Visnu  without  becoming  Vispu.  One  cannot  attain  Visnu 
without  becoming  Visnu.” 

The  Bhavisya  says*:  “  A  man  should  not  remember  Rudra  without 
himself  becoming  Rudra,  nor  worship  Rudra  without  becoming  Rudra, 
nor  take  the  name  of  Rudra  without  becoming  Rudra,  nor  will  he  attain 
Rudra  without  becoming  Rudra.” 

The  Agneya  says:  “  By  worshipping  Rudra  a  Sadhaka  becomes  himself 
Rudra.  By  worshipping  Vispu  he  becomes  Vispu.  By  worshipping  Surya 
he  becomes  Surya.  By  worshipping  Sakti  he  becomes  Sakti,  and  by 
worshipping  GaneSa  he  becomes  Garjesa.” 

The  Bhavisya  says :  “  A  man  should  not  take  the  name  of  a  Devi 
without  himself  becoming  a  Devi,  nor  worship  a  Devi  without  becoming 


JPuja. 

*  Cf.  the  Rudrayamala : 

“  Ye  GuQah  fanti  devasya  paflea-ritya  vidhyayinah. 

Te  gtujih  sadhakavare  bnavantyeva  na  canyatha.” 

The  Tantrik.  Sadhana  is  a  means  of  realizing  the  advaita  tattva,  and  the  first 
step  towards  this  accomplishment  is  the  unification  of  the  Devata  and  the 
worshipper.  The  Nyasas  with  other  ritual  are  intended  to  effect  this. 

1  Apparently  this  and  the  next  two  references  are  Paurapik. 


728 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


a  Devi.1 * *  One  should  worship  a  Devata  by  becoming  the  self  of  that  Devata 
— (that  is,  the  Devata  *  Herself)— by  means  of  Mamra-Nyasa.”  * 

The  Gandharva  Tantra  says:  “It  is  by  becoming  a  Devata  that  a 
person  should  worship  a  Devata.  A  person  should  not  worship  a  Devata 
while  he  himself  is  a  non-Devata.  O  Spouse  of  Siva!  if  Japa  is  performed 
without  Mantra-Nyasa,  it  is  Asurik  (non-Daiva)  *  and  ineffectual.  A  man 
should  worship  a  Devata  by  becoming  the  self  of  that  Devata  by  means  of 
Nyasa.*  By  Pranayama,*  Dhyana,  and  Nyasa,*  a  Sadhaka’s  body  becomes 
a  Deva’s  body." 

The  Gandharva  Tantra  says:  “  BhutaSuddhi,’  Rsyadiny&sa,6 7 * *  Pfyha- 
iaktinyasa,  Karanyasa,  Anganyasa,  Matfkanyasa,  and  Vidyanyasa;  • 
O  MaheSvari !  by  means  of  these  Nyasas  a  Sadhaka  becomes  himself  full 
of  Devata.” 


Bhava  10 

If  I  wish  to  acquire  the  burning  and  lighting  Sakti 11  of  fire,  I  must  be 
fire  myself; 18  or  if  I  would  possess  the  coolness  and  the  Sakti  of  sweetness 
possessed  by  water,  I  must  be  full  of  water  myself;  or  if  I  want  to  acquire 
the  speed  and  the  Sakti  of  touch  possessed  by  air,  I  must  be  full  of  air 
myself;  or  if  I  wish  to  have  the  hardness  and  the  Sakti  of  smell  possessed 
by  earth,  I  must  be  full  of  earth  myself;  so  if  I  wish  to  acquire,  even  in  the 
least  degree,  the  eternal  Sakti  (the  eight  forms  of  Siddhi  and  so  forth),4 * 


1Thm  the  Acarabheda  Tantra  says:  “  Vamacaro  bhavet  tatra  vama 
bhutva  yajet  param.”  The  mental  attitude  is  reflected  in  the  ceremonial 
provision  of  the  Rahasya-puja,  that  the  Sadhaka  should  dress  himself,  like  a 
young  woman,  in  beautiful  garments;  his  forehead  painted  with  vennillion, 
and  his  body  perfumed  and  garlanded  with  flowen. 

*  DevatSmaya.  Author’s  parenthesis. 

'*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  $6stra.  The  object  and  effect  of  Nyasa  is  stated 
later  in  the  text. 

I  Author’s  parenthesis. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistsa. 

*  Breath  control  and  meditation. 

7  Purification  of  the  elements  constituting  in  their  Mahabhuta  form  the 
gross  body  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  bistro,  and  post). 

*  In  this  Nyasa  there  are  five  Nyasas,  of  which  the  Nyasa  of  the  Rji  is 
the  first. 

*  See  as  to  the  various  forms  of  Nyasa  and  their  meaning,  Introduction  to 
Tantra  Ssstra. 

“Idea,  thought,  feeling,  sentiment,  nature,  state.  This  very  important 
term  is  difficult  to  define,  but  the  use  to  which  it  is  put  in  the  text  will  indicate 
its  various  shades  of  meaning  to  the  reader. 

II  Power.  11  Agnimaya. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP 


729 


of  BhagavSn  or  Bhagavati,  I  must  be  full  of  Him  or  Her.  I  must  completely 
sink  my  individual  existence  in  the  existence  of  Him  or  Her  whose  Sakti  is 
to  be  communicated  to  me,  otherwise  it  will  never  be  so  communicated. 
One  person  becomes  full  of  another  to  the  extent  to  which  he  loses  himself 
in  the  Bhava  1 * *  of  that  other  person ;  and  the  Sakti  of  the  latter  is  commu¬ 
nicated  to  him  to  the  extent  to  which  he  becomes  full  of  such  other.  This 
is  the  natural  law  in  the  domain  of  SaktL*  The  nature  of  Bhava,*  by 
means  of  which  men  acquire  the  power  of  becoming  full  of  another  person 
in  the  Sams&ra  and  in  Sadhana  can  only  be  sensed  by  men  of  Bhava.4 * * 
Others  cannot  describe  nor  understand  it.  Nay,  even  Bhagavan,  the 
consort  of  BhavanI  and  creator  of  all  things,  has,  in  trying  to  find  out  the 
nature  of  the  play  of  Bhava,  Himself  become  overpowered  with  his  own 
Bhava,  and  has  said:  “  The  true  form  of  Bhava  cannot  be  explained  by 
words.”  We  have  not  the  power  to  explain  what  it  is.  What  we  can  do 
is  to  quote  what  the  Lord  of  &akti  has  Himself  said  on  the  subject. 

In  the  Kaul&vali  T antra,*  it  is  said:  “  Bh5va  is  quality  *  of  the  mind. 
How  can  it  then  be  expressed  in  words?  It  can  therefore  never  be  spoken. 
Words  can  only  point  out  the  direction  in  which  it  lies.  Just  as  the  sweet¬ 
ness  of  molasses  can  be  realized  only  by  the  tongue,  and  can  never  be 
explained  and  realized  by  even  thousands  of  words,  so  Bhava  and  that 
which  constitutes  it 7 * *  can  be  realized  only  by  the  mind,  and  can  never  be 
explained  by  word  (i).  One  single  MahSbhava  *  appears  in  different 
forms  (devotion,  love,  affection,  and  so  forth)  •  to  express  different  condi¬ 
tions.10  Again,  when  Bhava  deepens,  all  those  differences  in  it  arc 
ultimately  lost  in  the  single  great  Bhava  (a).11 * *  It  is  this  BhSva  which  is 
the  Lord,1*  in  whom  all  bliss  is  confined  and  consecrated.  It  is  this  Bhava 
which  takes  the  Form  of  Prakfti,  and  it  is  this  Bhava  which  is  Atma,  the 
Essence,1*  the  Supreme  and  Great  (3).  As  Bhava,  this  Atma  is  a  thing  to 
he  heard  of,14  to  be  thought  of,  to  be  constantly  meditated  on,  and  to  be 
realized  by  Vlra  Sadhakas  by  means  of  various  forms  of  Sfidhana  prescribed 


I  Vide  ante.  Here  nature.  And  if  he  has  the  nature,  he  has  the  thoughts 

and  feelings  of  that  nature. 

*  If  the  Bhava  of  A  is  transformed  into  the  Bhava  of  B,  it  follows  that  the 

former  acquires  with  such  transformation  the  Sakti  of  the  latter. 

*  Vide  ante.  4  Bhavuka. 

8  1 1th  Ullasa.  *  Dharma. 

7  Vibhkva :  its  various  parts  and  manifestations  as  explained  in  the  next 

sentence. 

*  Great  Bh&va.  *  Author’s  parenthesis. 

10  Upadhi.  11  Mahabhava. 

II  Iivara.  14  Rasa. 

14  That  is,  one  should  live  and  move  in  the  company  of  such  persons  as 

constantly  speak  of  God  and  study  Sruti  (revelation)  (see  post). 


730 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T  ANTRA 


in  the  Tantra  Sastra  (4).  It  is  this  Atma  whose  substance  is  Bhlva  which, 
must  be  heard  in  the  word  of  Sruti;  it  is  this  Bhava  which  must  be  the 
subject  of  thought1  It  is  this  Atma  whose  substance  is  Bhava  which  must 
be  meditated  on  according  to  the  instructions  of  the  Guru  (5).  When  in 
this  way  hearing,*  thinking,1 *  meditation,*  Sadhana,  and  so  forth,  have  been 
performed,  then  that  Atma  which  is  Bhava,  and  which  is  detached  from 
all  things,  is  surely  realized.  When  adorned  by  the  multitude  of  Bhavas, 
Bhagavan  ParameSvara  begins  to  manifest  the  power  of  His  own  play  in 
that  body  of  the  Sadhaka  matured  by  Sadhana,  then  all  the  Bhavas  of  the 
Sadhaka  disappear  in  the  body  of  Bhagavan  leaving  merely  a  feeling  of 
the  presence  of  Bhagavan,  whose  substance  is  one  undivided  Bhava  and 
of  massive  consciousness  and  bliss  (6). 

“  A  cow  eats  various  kinds  of  grass,  but  extracts  from  them  only  one 
essential  thing,4  which  assumes  various  forms  by  connection  *  with  the 
Upadhis 4  of  milk  and  so  forth.  In  the  same  way,  in  whatever  of  its 
constituents  7  Bhava  may  be  cultivated,  in  the  end  all  Bhavas  are  converted 
into  a  single  great  Bhava  in  the  form  of  the  Supreme  Devata,  whose  sub¬ 
stance  is  massive  consciousness  and  bliss  (7).  It  is  the  essence  6  which  is 
produced  in  the  body  of  a  cow  from  grass  which  ultimately  appears  as  the 
chief  essence,4  milk,  and  from  that  milk  is  evolved  that  which  is  but  a 
changed  form  of  it,  the  essence 4  of  curd;  from  curd  comes  ghee,  and  even 
from  ghee  some  other  essence4  unnamed.  But  however  numerous  the 
varieties  may  be,  such  as  milk,  curd,  ghee,  and  so  forth,  due  to  difference 
of  conditions  under  which  they  are  formed,  the  substance  of  them  all  is 
ultimately  the  essence*  derived  originally  from  grass;  all  which  subse¬ 
quently  appears,  being  merely  the  one  thing  in  different  forms.  Similarly, 
in  whatever  Bhava  His  Sadhana  is  performed,  He  is  the  cause  and  effect 
of  all  Bhavas  and  the  root  thereof  as  Bhava,  and  in  the  end  nothing  remains 
but  the  substance  of  perfect  bliss  and  massive  consciousness  in  the  form  of' 
one  single  great  Bhava.*  Viewed  rightly,  there  is  no  cause  or  effect 
which  is  different  from  Him  (8-9).  As  in  the  field  of  Sadhana  His  play  10‘ 
as  Bhiva  is  thus  diversified,  so  also  in  the  domain  of  creation  is  it  so.  He 
is  the  only  one  Paramatma  who  has  been  born,  is  being  bom,  and  will  be 
bom  in  different  matrices,  according  to  the  different  bodies  to  be  assumed. 
After  having  performed  the  work  of  creation  or  manifested  Himself  as  Jiva, 
He,  though  in  reality  undifferentiated,  is,  through  the  effect  of  sinful  and 
meritorious  works,  sometimes  bom,  sometimes  dead,  sometimes  bound,, 

1  Manana.  *  Sravana,  4  Dhyana. 

4  Rasa.  *  Literally,  “  by  communication  to  it  of”  (adhyisa). 

4  Qualities,  apparently  limiting  conditions. 

1  Vibhiva — that  is,  minor  Bhavas,  particular  manifestations  of  Mahabhava. 

4  Paramarasa.  *  Mahabhava.  10  Lila. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP 


7S1 

sometimes  liberated,  sometimes  happy,  sometimes  male,  sometimes  female,, 
sometimes  neuter,  and  sometimes  beyond  the  Upadhis  of  sex  and  bodiles  s- 
though  present  in  an  iniinite  number  of  bodies  (n).  In  this  way  the 
eternal  Paramatmi,  who  is  the  essence 1  and  the  great  Bh&va,8  plays  the 
play  of  His  own  diversity  in  the  meditations,  consisting  of  different  Bhitvas 
of  Sadhakas,  despite  that  He  is  Himself  one  and  without  a  second.  In 
reality  the  play  also  of  Her  who  is  full  of  play  is  the  Sakti,  which  is  Herself, 
and  diversity  in  that  play  does  not  affect  Her  inherent  unity  (12).  The 
Sadhaka  in  whom  appears  the  Divyabhava  or  Virabhava  secs  the  supreme 
Tattva  or  Brahmamayi  in  a  single  life  8  (13).  He  who,  liberated  whilst 
yet  living,4  has  become  Atma  in  its  true  form,  moves  on  the  earth  merely 
to  work  out  the  remaining  portion  of  his  Karma,  which  has  begun  to  bear 
fruits  8  in  his  body.  It  is  such  a  Mahatma,  son  of  the  Devi,  who  is  called 
a  Bhairava.  Of  the  three  Bhavas  spoken  of  above,  two,  the  Virabhava 
and  the  Divyabhava,  are  good  8  Bhavas,  and  are  the  essence  of  Kulatattva;. 
and  are  superior  on  account  of  their  connection  with  Kula,  and  are  direct 
paths  to  liberation.  For  this  reason  the  nature  of 7  these  two  paths  should 
not  be  told  to  all  classes  of  Sadhakas  (15).  The  Sadhaka  who  does  not 
perform  Sadhana  in  the  Bhava  prescribed  for  him  in  the  S&stra  8  for  ten 
days  continuously,  and  whose  worship  of  I$(adevata  becomes  in  consequence 
thereof  defective,  is  fallen  in  the  domain  of  Sadhana  (16).  To  such  a  fallen 
man  the  Guru  should  not  give  instructions  in  any  Bhava  or  worship. 
Such  a  fallen  Sadhaka  will  only  become  pure  in  Bhava  if  he  receives  initia* 
tion  again  from  a  Kaula  Guru.  For  this  reason  a  right-minded  Sadhaka 
should  perform  the  worship  of  his  Istadevata  and  such  other  acts  with 
great  care  and  strict  adherence  to  his  own  Bhava  ”  (17). 

In  the  Kaul&vali  Tantra  it  is  said:  “Just  as  no  Vaidik  Samskara  • 
can  be  fruitful  in  a  twice- bom  who  is  devoid  of  Veda; 10  or  as  devotion 
cannot  develop  without  devotion  to  Visnu;  or  as  liberation  without  a 
knowledge  of  Sakti  is  ridiculous;  or  as  competence  in  the  Tantra  Sastra 
is  by  no  means  possible  without  a  Guru;  or#as  a  woman  without  husband 
has  no  right  to  perform  any  religious  rite;  or  as  a  Virasadhaka  of  the 
Devi  or  of  Myself  is  not  competent  to  perform  his  own  Sadhana  without 


*  Rasa.  *  Mahabhava. 

*  In  other  words,  realizes  Her.  As  regards  these  two  TSntrik  Bhavas  see 
Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

4  Jivanxnukta.  *  Pr&rabdha. 

8  Literally,  “  well  established  ”.  7  Tattva. 

*  E.g.,  if  a  vlra,  he  must  do  worship  with  or  in  Virabhava — that  is,  not  only 
with  the  particular  ritual  enjoined,  but  in  the  mental  and  devotional  state  and 
with  the  intention  prescribed. 

*  “  Sacrament  ”  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

10  Vedahina:  who  has  not  received  instructions  in  Veda. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


732 

Kulatattva; 1  so  a  Sadhaka  devoid  of  Bhava  has  no  competency  for  any 
fonn  of  Sadhana  or  Siddhi.  Hence  a  Sadhaka  should  always  adhere  to 
a  Bhava.1  Competence  in  the  Kula  S&stra  can  in  no  way  be  acquired  in 
the  absence  of  Bhava.  Hence  only  a  Sadhaka  pure  in  Bhava  becomes  a 
true  Kaulika.” 

In  the  Kaulavali  Tantra  it  is  said:  "  I  shall  explain  the  true  form  of 
BhSva  as  it  has  been  told  in  Tantra.  Bhava  is  of  three  kinds— namely, 
Divya,  Vlra,  and  Pasu.  According  to  these  BhSvas,  Gurus  also  are  of 
three  kinds — namely,  Divya-Guru,  Vira-Guru,  and  Pa$u-Guru.  Mantra- 
devata  also  (Devata  presiding  over  Mantra,  Mantra-Sakti) 1  is  of  three 
kinds — namely,  Divya-mantra,  Vira-mantra,  and  Paiu-mantra;  that  is  to 
say,  a  Mantra  issuing  from  the  mouth  of  a  Divya-Guru  is  a  Divya-mantra, 
a  Mantra  issuing  from  the  mouth  of  a  Vira-Guru  is  Vira-mantra,  and  a 
Mantra  issuing  from  the  mouth  of  a  Pahi-Guru  is  a  Paiu-mantra  (i). 
■Of  the  said  three  forms  of  Bhava,  the  first — that  is,  the  Divya-bhava — is 
the  source  of  great  good,  and  grants  all  forms  of  Siddhi.  The  second— 
that  is,  the  Vira-bhava — is  middling;  and  the  third— that  is,  the  PaSu- 
bhava— is  spoken  ill  of  throughout  the  world  (a).  Notwithstanding  the 
repeated  performance  of Japa,  Homa,  and  TapaiyS,  in  the  form  of  numerous 
physical  austerities,  Tantrik  Mantras  will  never  be  fruitful  without 
Bhava  (3).  A  Sadhaka  may  perform  thousands  of  VTra-s&dhanas,4  discuss 
the  extremely  subtle  nature  of  Kula  and  Akula,*  or  perform  Puja,  and  so 
forth,  in  Pith3*;  •  or  feed  Brahmanas,  make  gifts  out  of  love  to  his  own  or 
•other  families,  or  have  control  over  his  senses,  or  perform  the  rites  of 
Kul&cara; ’  but  if,  despite  of  adherence  to  Kulatattva,*  his  Atma  is  not 
pure  in  Bhava,  all  these  acts  will  prove  useless  (4-5}. 


1  The  Kula  articles;  the  Paflcatattva. 

*  That  is,  one  of  the  Bhavas  prescribed  in  the  Sastra,  such  as  PaiubhSva  etc. 
■Worship  cannot  be  done  as  the  worshipper  pleases  but  according  to  the  injunctions 
•of  Sfistra. 

*  Author’s  parenthesis. 

1  Sidhana  of  the  VcracSra. 

*  That  is,  Sakti  and  Siva. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra.  Places  where  portions  of  the  body  of 
Dew  as  Sati  fell. 

’The  Acara  of  the  Kaulas.  Bhaskararaya,  in  his  Connnentaiy  on  the 
words  “  worshipped  by  those  devoted  to  the  Kaula  path  ”  in  v.  93  of  the  Lalita, 
says  that  there  are  three  modes  of  worship  of  Devi— viz.,  Sunaya  (Vaidik,  and 
according  to  the  five  Agamas),  Mifra  (or  mixed,  described  in  the  eight  Tantras, 
Candrakala,  and  others),  and  Kaula,  which  differ  from  the  above  two,  and 
described  in  other  Tantras. 

1  Vide  ante. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP 


73* 


“  It  is  by  virtue  of  Bhava  that  a  return  dating  (Ni^kima) 1  Sadhaka 
attains  liberation.  It  is  by  virtue  of  Bhava  that  a  non-renundating 
(Sakama)  1  S&dhaka’s  family  and  Gotra,*  prosper.  It  is  by  virtue  of 
Bhava  that  the  bodies  of  both  forms  of  SSdhakas  are  purified  (6).  What  is 
the  use  of  an  elaborate  performance  of  Nyasas,  or  purification  of  elements,1 * 4 * * 
or  of  worship,  if  there  be  no  Bhava  in  the  heart  of  the  Sadhaka?  (7). 
Who  is  there  who  does  not  worship  Vidya  (Devata  as  Mantra),*  and  make 
Japa  of  Her?  It  is  only  through  want  of  Bhava  that  performance  is  ever 
fruitless  (8).  I  shall  speak,  first  of  all,  of  the  Divyabhava  according  to 
Tantra.  A  Sadhaka  of  the  Divyabhava  should  meditate  on  the  form,* 
thinking  the  whole  world  to  be  filled  with  a  mass  of  the  light*  of  that 
worshipped  Devata  and  of  the  colour  of  that  Devata.  Establishing  life  in 
all  limbs  of  the  form  of  that  Devata  by  means  of  their  respective  Mantras,7 * * 
let  him  see  his  whole  Atma  and  the  entire  visible  world  to  be  constituted 
of  Her.  Thus  should  the  Istadevata  be  worshipped  by  him  (9-10).  And 
so  forth. 

In  the  Rudrayamala  (6th  Patala)  it  is  said:  “  O  SadMiva!  hear  again 
attentively  of  the  PaSubhava.  Even  a  Paiu  *  can,  by  acquiring  powers 
similar  to  those  of  Nar&yatja  »  by  means  of  S&dhana  in  his  own  Bhava, 
attain  such  Siddhi 10  as  to  be  able,  by  the  grace  of  Mahavidya,11  to  go  to 
the  City  of  Vaikuntha  l*  as  an  embodiment  of  great  Dharma,1*  with  a 
four-armed  body,  bearing  a  conch-shcll,  a  discus,  a  club,  and  a  lotus  in 
his  hands,1*  and  riding  on  Garuda  l*  (1-2).  The  great  Bhava  of  Pa&ubhava 
grants  Siddhi  in  all  Bh£vas;  for  it  is  after  first  attaining  Siddhi  in  the 
Paiu  bhava  that  a  Sadhaka  should  certainly  adopt  the  great  and  superior 
Bhava  of  Virabhava,  and  subsequently  the  very  beautiful  Divyabhava, 
productive  of  great  fruits  (3).  Even  whilst  in  the  Paiu  bhava  a  Mantri 
can  reach  Siddhavidya  w  (4).  If  by  good  fortune  a  Sadhaka  is  bora  in  a 
Kaula  family,  and  receives  initiation  in  the  great  Mantra  of  the  great 


I  Author’s  parenthesis,  That  is,  a  Sadhaka  who  acts  selflessly  without 

desire  for  the  fruits  of  action.  The  Sakama  Sadhaka  is  he  who  acts  out  of 
interest. 

*  Clan,  lineage.  *  That  is,  Bhutaiuddhi;  as  to  which,  see  post. 

4  Author’s  parenthesis. 

*  Murti.  *  Tejas,  and  energy. 

7  That  is,  the  Mantra  assigned  in  Nyasa  to  each  limb. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra:  the  Bhava  in  which  Tamas  predominates. 

*  Vqnu.  10  Powers. 

II  The  Devi.  “  The  heaven  of  Vifpu  (see  ante), 

18  Here  virtue.  14  As  does  Viypu  with  whom  the  Sadhaka  is  united,. 

u  The  Bird-King,  vehicle  of  Vijnu. 

14  Mantrasiddhi. 


734 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Kaulika  Devata  worshipped  in  Kulacara  by  previous  successive  generations 
he  will  surely  attain  Siddhi  without  having  recourse  to  PaSubhava  b; 
travelling  along  the  path  of  Kulacara  only  (5).  But  if  a  Sadhaka  of  tb 
PaSubhava  can  fortunately  gain  the  favour  (consciousness) 1  of  Vidyi 
(MantraJakti),1  then  only  will  he  become  competent  for  the  Vlrabhava 
Subsequently,  by  the  grace  of  the  Vlrabhava,  he  will  attain  Divyabhava  (6) 
‘The  best  of  men  who  take  refuge  in  the  Divyabhava,  and  the  Virabhavi 
become  undoubtedly  masters  of  desire-gratifying  trees  and  creepers  (7) 
Sadhaka  should  live  in  some  great  Pi  {ha  *  as  an  Air  ami  (adhering  to  an; 
of  the  four  Airamas — namely,  Brahmacarya,  and  so  forth),3  devoted  t< 
meditation,  well-versed  in  Mantras  and  Tantras,  and  possessed  of  self 
control.  Such  a  Sadhaka  will  command  the  world  of  Jivas  by  virtue  o 
his  own  power  (8).  If,  fortunately,  a  Sadhaka  succeeds  in  attaining  Bhava 
Mahabhava,  and  so  forth,  it  is  not  necessary  for  him  to  acquire  any  othe 
fruits;  for  the  moment  a  man  attains  to  Bhava  he  knows  My  Tattva  *  (9) 
He  who  has  attained  Siddhi  in  Bhava  very  soon  attains  Siddhi  in  speech 
Sarasvat!  constantly  dwells  within  him,  and  Laksmi  lives  constantly  in  hi 
house  as  his  Mother,  forsaking  even  Narayana*  in  Vaikuptha.4  M; 
perfect  grace  undoubtedly  falls  upon  him,  and  then  the  Sadhaka  surel; 
attains  great  Siddhi.  O  SadaSiva!  true,  true  is  this,  and  indeed  true  (1 1).’ 

In  our  worldly  experience  we  constantly  sec  that  the  more  a  mai 
becomes  foil  of  Bhava  for  wife  and  children,  die  more  he  loses  himself  ant 
becomes  full  of  them.  The  Sakti  of  love  of  the  loved  one,  in  respect  o 
whom  such  depth  of  Bhava  exists,  is  communicated  in  an  equal  measuri 
to  the  body,  senses,  and  mind  of  the  lover.  When  a  lover  becomes  resiles 
and  mad  with  such  an  intense  love,  then  only,  like  one  who  is  overpoweret 
by  wine,  does  he  lose  sight  of  the  Samsara,  despite  his  living  in  it,  ant 
become  free  from  all  bonds  of  worldly  things,  despite  that  he  is  constantly 
immersed  in  them.  He  loves  the  Samsara  because  it  is  necessary  for  hi: 
Sadhana  of  love  for  his  beloved  one.  Otherwise,  why  is  it  that  the  Samsan 
which  a  lover  looks  at  with  great  endearment  to-day  pierces,  as  it  were 
bis  eyes  like  a  poisoned  arrow  to-morrow  if  he  loses  his  beloved  one?  Why 
is  it  that  one  who  loves  a  husband  or  wife,  or  a  son  or  a  daughter,  for  whon 
his  or  her  love  has  reached  its  foil  intensity,  immediately  renounces  th< 
Samsara  and  becomes  a  Sannyasi,  or  attempts  to  end  the  pain  of  separatior 
from  the  loved  one  by  suicide?  The  things  of  the  Samsara  appear  foil  o 
love  to  a  lover  because  they  are  connected  with  the  object  of  his  love 
The  dresses  and  ornaments  and  even  playthings  of  a  husband  or  a  wife  oi 
a  son  or  a  daughter  who  are  absent  become  dear  to  us  because  of  thdi 


1  Author’s  parenthesis. 

*  That  is,  he  knows  the,  or  My,  truth. 


*  Seat  of  the  Devi. 
4  Vide  ante. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP 


735 


•connection  with  the  objects  of  our  love;  otherwise,  why  is  it  that  parents 
keep  with  great  care  things  belonging  to  their  children  who  live  far  away 
from  them?  Such  articles  are  materials  for  the  perfection  1  of  BhJLva  in  the 
domain  of  love.  The  sight  of  even  a  piece  of  cloth  worn  by  a  deceased 
son  fills  his  parents  with  intense  grief.  The  sight  of  a  pair  of  shoes  worn 
by  her  deceased  husband  moves  a  woman  to  tears.  All  these  are  but 
different  forms  of  perfection  1 * * * *  of  Bhava.  Now,  let  S&dhakas  consider 
what  sort  of  a  consummation  *  of  Bhava  there  is  if  this  love  be  centred  not 
in  wife  and  children,  who  are  but,  as  it  were,  persons  seen  in  a  dream  in 
this  transient  Samsara,  but  in  the  beauteous  feet  of  the  Mother  of  the 
world,  who  is  the  centre  of  all  love  in  the  Brahmapda,  full  of  love,  full  of 
Brahman,  and  full  of  bliss  ?  How  intense  will  be  the  climax  of  the  con¬ 
summation  *  of  Bh«iva  of  him  who  has  offered  at  the  feet  of  the  Mother 
all  devotion,  all  love,  and  all  affection  for  parents,  wife,  and  children] 
Worldly  Jiva !  if  the  sight  of  a  toy  which  belonged  to  a  son  or  a  daughter 
of  yours  can  overpower  you  with  Bhava  and  make  you  sometimes  laugh 
and  sometimes  weep,  just  think  what  is  it  that  a  Sadhaka  cannot  do  in  the 
intoxication  of  Bhava  whose  son’s  or  daughter’s  *  plaything  is  this  entire 
Universe?  In  the  sphere  of  his  Bhava  there  is  no  such  thing  as  Abhava 
(want  of  Bhava).8  The  sight  of  everything  in  this  world  moves  him  to 
overflowing  Bhava.  In  whatever  direction  he  turns  his  eyes,  on  water, 
land,  or  space,  he  sees  the  robes  (Ambara)  of  Her  who  is  robed  with  space 
(Digambari).  In  play  the  Mad  Girl*  has  gone  away,  no  one  knows 
where,  leaving  Her  garments  behind.  This  is  the  reason  why  to-day  the 
sky  is  full  of  the  Mother’s  robes  and  the  Universe  is  full  of  the  Mother’s 
ornaments.  Say,  now,  how  can  a  Sadhaka  remain  unmoved  on  seeing 
this?  With  what  heart  can  a  devotee  who  sees  the  Brahmapda  7  form  of 
the  Brahmamayi  remain  unmoved?  Unceasing  tears  of  love  flow  from  his 
eyes  in  the  plenitude  of  his  tender  feeling.  It  is  only  when  perfection  * 
of  such  perfect  Bhava  takes  place  that  one  begins  to  directly  realize  the 
truth  of  the  words  of  Siva:  “  The  Tattva  of  Siva  and  Sakti  is  the  cause  of 
Tattvajfiana.8  O  Devi!  Nirvapa  can  never  be  attained  without  knowledge 
of  Sakti.”  Then  only  does  the  S&dhaka  see  with  a  Divine  virion:  “  She 


1  Siddhi,  or  consummation. 

*  Siddhi.  That  is,  the  wife  has  affection  (Bhiva)  for  her  deceased  husband, 
and  this  is  brought  out  and  intensified  to  its  fullness  by  the  sight  of  articles  which 
belonged  to  him.  The  Bh&va  therefore  becomes  Siddha. 

*  Siddhi. 

1  The  Devi  is  here  called  the  son  or  daughter  of  the  Sadhaka. 

8  Author’s  parenthesis.  Ordinarily  the  world  means  simply  want. 

8  An  expression  of  endearment  used  for  the  Devi. 

7  Universe.  *  Spiritual  knowledge. 


736 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


exists  as  Tejas 1  in  vehicles,  stones,  and  minerals.  O  Mistress  of  DevSsl 
after  this  what  need  be  said  about  Her  presence  in  living  beings?  Nothing 
exists  where  Mahamaya  does  not  exist.”  Then  only  does  the  wave  of 
Siva’s  song,  “  Thou  Kali  art  alone  the  Dispenser  of  good  Spouse  of  GirKa,1, 
and  art  all  things,”  penetrate  with  its  flow  through  the  innermost  recesses 
of  his  heart.  Worship  of  the  Devi’s  playful  *  eternal  forms  is  nothing  but 
Sadhana  for  this  great  Siddhi.  When  by  virtue  of  Siddhi  in  Sadhana, 
by  means  of  the  Sakti  (all  full  of  consciousness),  of  Mahamantra,  the 
Sadhaka  sees  the  Tattvas  of  the  play  of  the  Creation,  Preservation,  and 
Destruction  of  endless  millions  of  universes  shining  in  Her  Fair  body  from 
Her  feet  to  Her  head,  then  only  do  the  great  portals,  which  are  the  loss  of 
oneself  in  Mahabhava  for  Her,  open  before  that  fortunate  Sadhaka.  This 
is  why  to  the  Sadhaka  nothing  is  at  that  time  so  effective  in  awakening 
great  love,  drawing  out  the  feeling  of  attachment,  soothing  the  eyes, 
filling  the  heart  with  bliss,  and  pouring  nectar  into  the  inmost  recesses  of 
the  heart,  as  the  evidence  of  that  vast  play  manifested  as  movements  of 
every  limb  of  the  Mother  in  the  refulgence  of  Her  World-enchanting 
beauty.  It  is  only  when  the  Sadhaka ’s  eyes  arc  painted  with  the  collyrium 
of  this  attachment  that  the  refulgence  of  the  beauty,  resembling  a  mass  of 
crushed  black  collyrium,  of  the  Fair  Spouse  of  Mahakala  shines  in  every 
bank  of  clouds.  The  light  of  Her  who  charms  the  Blue-throated  Deva  4 
beams  through  the  blue  throat  of  the  peacock,  and  the  endless  waves  of 
the  beauty  of  Syama  flow  in  the  deeply  blue  petals  of  fresh  and  full-blown 
blue  lotuses,  and  in  the  soft  and  bright  blue  beauty  of  Aparajita  6  flowers. 
Then  it  is  that  the  Sadhaka  loses  himself  at  sight  of  the  mystery  of  the 
secret  play  of  Mahaprakrti,  the  Genitrix  of  the  Universe,  in  even  the 
Prakrti  *  of  the  Universe. 

Nothing  is  to  me  such  an  object  of  endearment,  pride,  affection,  and 
displeasure,7  as  the  garments,  ornaments,  pastes  for  the  body,  and  other 
things  made  glorious  by  the  glory  of  the  One  at  Whose  feet  I  have  resigned 
myself.  At  the  sight  and  touch  of  these  signs  I  remember  Him  and  am 
filled  with  continuous  ecstasy.  Their  absence  from  the  body  of  a  man 
makes  him  appear  to  my  eyes  as  the  image  of  a  Priaca,8  and  the  Samstra 
as  nothing  but  hell  in  another  form.  Such  signs  of  the  region  of  Kaivalya,8 
rare  even  amongst  Dev  as,  form  the  only  certain  means  whereby  I  may  be 
drawn  out  of  the  sea  of  Samsara  and  then  plunged  into  the  sea  of  Her 

*  The  luminous  energy  of  the  universal  consciousness. 

*  Siva.  *  Lilamayi. 

4  Siva  Nflakaiftha,  whose  throat  is  blue  from  his  having  swallowed,  to  save 
the  world,  the  poison  arising  from  the  ocean. 

1 A  flower  sacred  to  the  Devi.  « Nature. 

7  Abhimana— anger  which  is  felt  at  neglect  by  the  person  one  love*. 

*  A  low  spirit— as  we  should  here  say  “  devil  ”.  8  Liberation. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP 


73 1 


existence  of  consciousness  and  bliss.  For  this  reason  in  the  Sistra  the  Guru 
of  the  world  has  Himself  commanded  that  for  the  attainment  of  the  state 
of  self-loss  in  this  MahSbh&va  such  signs  and  marks  should  be  worn  on  the 
body  not  merely  during  worship,  but  at  all  times.  And  it  is  according  to 
His  command  that  five  different  kinds  of  dress,  forehead  marks,1  and  so 
forth,  have  been  ordained  for  the  five  classes  of  worshippers — namely, 
Saiva,  Vaisnava,  Saura,  Sakta,  and  Ganapatya.  These  are — three  lines 
on  the  forehead,*  trident,  ashes,  matted  hair,  Rudrakga  8  beads,  tiger  skin, 
Damaru,4  human  skull,  and  so  forth,  for  Saivas;  a  high  line  on  the  fore¬ 
head,8  yellow  or  white  dress,  marks  of  conch-shell,  discus,  club  and  lotus, 
rosary  of  Tula4i,  8  dots  of  sandal  paste  on  the  face,7  and  so  forth,  for 
Vaisnavas;  red  circular  forehead  mark,  red  dress,  rosary  of  lotus  seeds, 
and  so  forth,  for  Sauras;  *  yellow  or  red  dress,  three  red  lines  on  the  fore¬ 
head,  Sarpasutra,8  Yogadanda,10  and  so  forth,  for  Gajiapatyas;51  and  crescent 
moon-shaped  mark  with  vermilion  Kunkuma,1*  red  sandal  and  the  rest, 
yantra-shaped  forehead  mark,  dishevelled  hair,  red  dress,  trident,  and  so 
forth,  for  Saktas.  All  these  are  nothing  but  instances  of  ordinances  passed 
in  conformity  with  the  great  saying,  “  A  Deva  alone  should  worship  a 
Deva.”  18  Whether  visibly,  or  in  work,  or  in  body,  or  in  Sakti — in  short, 
in  every  way — a  Sadhaka  must  be  full  of  the  power  and  manifestations  18 
of  the  Devata  he  worships.  It  is  no  wonder  that  such  men  as  disparage 
worship  and  so  forth  of  Devata  should  regard  forehead  marks,  three-line 
marks,18  ashes,  red  dress,  Tulasi,  rosaries  of  Rudraksa  beads,  and  so  forth, 
as  visible  marks  of  hypocrisy.  But  how  regrettable  is  it  that  such  as  daily 
perform  worship  and  so  forth  yet  often  think  that  the  wearing  of  forehead 


,Tilaka. 

*  Tripundra — horizontal  lines  on  the  forehead. 

8  The  seed  of  a  plant  used  in  the  worship  of  Siva. 

4  A  small  hand-drum, 

8  Orddhvapundra — a  single  vertical  line  on  the  forehead. 

8  Seed  of  the  Tulasi  plant  sacred  to  Vijnu. 

7  Gopicandana;  sometimes  made  with  the  dust  of  Brindavan  and  other 
Vaisnava  tirthaa. 

8  Sun-worshippers. 

•  A  thread  made  in  the  form  of  a  serpent  used  as  Uttariya  Vastra  (cloth). 

10  A  staff  of  Yogis  carried  as  evidence  of  their  Yogadikja.  They  hold  it 
until  they  attain  Siddhi.  As  GaneAa  is  the  Guru  of  the  Yogi  sampradaya 
(community),  the  Ganapatyas  carry  this  staff. 

11  Worshippers  of  Ganeia.  18  Saffron. 

11  In  order  to  aid  the  worshipper  to  become  like  the  Devata  he  worships, 
he  adopts  the  signs  of  the  latter.  This  helps  him  to  establish  the  unity  of  con¬ 
sciousness.  So  in  the  Rahasya  Fuji  the  S&dhaka  dresses  like  a  woman. 

14  Vibhuti.  “  Tripupdra. 

« 


738 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


marks,  three-line  marks,  and  the  like,  is  only  another  form  of  accepting 
flowers,  sandal  paste,  and  other  things  offered  to  the  Devati l;  so  that  it  is 
enough  to  wear  them  as  little  as  posrible,  and  wholly  unnecessary  to  make 
oneself  ridiculous  in  the  eyes  of  the  educated  community  by  decking  oneself 
out  as  a  master-stripes,  with  the  body  smeared  all  over  with  ashes  or  sandal 
paste.  Some  people,  again,  think  that  religion  or  worship  of  Iivara  are 
matters  of  the  spirit,*  and  therefore  there  is  no  necessity  for  external  marks. 
Some  believe  that  forehead  marks  and  the  like  are  a  form  of  advertisement, 
in  order  to  tell  people  that  “I  have  become  religious.”  According  to 
another  view,  the  wearing  of  forehead  marks,  rosaries,  and  so  forth,  is  but 
illustration  of  one’s  shamelessness  and  stupidity.  Seeing  different  persons 
hold  such  different  views,  many  people  become,  despite  their  faith,  ashamed 
to  wear  such  marks  in  the  view  of  educated  men.  We  may  praise  such 
people  as  become  so  ashamed  on  the  score  of  their  modesty,  but  we  are 
astonished  at  the  sight  of  the  shamelessness  of  their  sense  of  shame.  Or 
perhaps  the  sense  of  shame  within  them  is  so  greatly  ashamed  that  no  such 
shame  is  expressed  without.  Strange,  indeed,  are  the  religious  faith  and 
devotion  to  Devata  of  these  who  even  in  the  matter  of  the  worship  of 
Istadevata  become  afraid  or  anxious  because  of  what  other  people  may 
think  or  say  about  them.  Why  should  such  shameless  men,  who  have 
neither  the  strength  to  bear  personally  what  others  say  nor  to  remedy  it, 
talk  of  Siddhi  and  Sadhana?  Or  perhaps  it  is  that  Siddhi  and  Sadhana  are 
not  their  object,  and  therefore  they  do  not  perform  Sandhya  prayers  and 
worship.  We  do  not  know  how  to  make  them  understand,  but  wc  ourselves 
are  anxious  to  discover  how  we  can  understand  them.  Why  should  they 
show  such  weakness?  Whom  arc  they  so  much  afraid  of?  We  shall  try 
first  of  all  to  understand  who  the  people  arc  who  frighten  them,  and  why 
they  do  so. 

There  are  many  kinds  of  wild,  ferocious  animals  which  frown,  grunt, 
roar,  and  make  all  manner  of  frightful  appearances  at  the  right  of  meek 
men.  Men  are  not  among  the  creatures  on  whom  they  can  satisfy  their 
ferocious  instincts.  Men  do  not  in  any  way  resemble  the  beasts  with  which 
they  are  in  constant  feud  concerning  home  and  food;  and  yet  if  they  ever 
accidentally  meet  a  man  on  their  path,  they  put  on  a  frightful  aspect. 
The  buffalo’s  reddened  eyes,  and  terrible  glances,  are  aimed  at  us,  so  that 
he  may  strike  with  the  points  of  his  levelled  horns,  and  his  bellowing  makes 
the  heart  tremble.  The  bull’s  curved  neck,  the  hone’s  kicking,  the  snake’s 
loud  hissing  with  expanded  hood,  the  dog’s  howling  and  lashing  of  the  tail, 
the  monkey’s  grinning  and  jumping— what  do  all  these  things  mean?  Do 


*  These  are  offered  first  to  the  Devata,  and  then  accepted  by  the  Sfidhaka 
as  evidence  of  the  presence  of  the  Devati  within  him. 

•  Literally,  “  things  cf  the  inside.” 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP 


759 


-these  animals  really  want  to  satisfy  their  ferocious  instinct  on  men  wherever 
they  meet  them?  If  so,  they  must  have  sotne  interest  in  doing  so.  But 
what  is  this  interest?  Whether  we  see  it  in  a  gross  visible  form  or  not. 
Nature’s  inscrutable  law  is  that  there  must  be  some  interest  which  underlies 
and  prompts  action.  We  cannot,  of  course,  say  that  this  law  explains 
their  action  as  a  means  of  satisfying  their  ferocious  instinct,  but  this  much 
we  can  say — that  it  is  an  effort  at  self-defence  under  the  garb  of  ferocity. 
Ferocity  is  desire  to  kill.  Among  beasts,  birds,  insects,  flies,  and  other 
lower  animals,  and  even  among  men  of  their  nature,  gratification  of  this 
instinct  to  kill  mostly  exists  where  the  killed  is  to  be  the  food  of  the  killer, 
‘Or  where  it  is  possible  that  that  which  is  to  be  killed  would,  if  alive,  have 
affected  any  interest  of  the  killer.  Where  there  is  no  interference  with 
such  interest,  but  there  is  the  possibility  of  personal  safety  being  in  jeopardy, 
there  also  we  may  see  the  gratification  of  such  instinct.  The  sight  of  man 
inspires  birds,  beasts,  and  other  lower  animals  with  fear  for  their  safety. 
Even  if  man  does  not  show  any  intention  of  doing  barm  to  them,  his  very 
presence  fills  their  minds  with  great  fear.  They  therefore  try  to  get  rid 
of  that  fear  by  frightening  him  in  their  turn.  This  is  why  they  leap  and 
jump,  grunt  and  roar,  frown  and  fury  at  his  sight.  This  vast  Universe* 
Kingdom  is  ever  governed  by  the  infallible  rule  of  Dharma.1  Under  this 
.rule  each  one  is  ever  engaged  in  the  performance  of  individual  duty. 
Even  the  heart  of  the  most  ferocious  ruffian,  who  fears  neither  the  punish* 
ment  of  the  King  nor  the  community  in  which  he  lives,  nor  indeed  anybody 
in  the  world,  yet  in  the  end  trembles  with  fear  of  Dharma.  Such  is  the 
incomparably  great  and  universe-subduing  power  of  Dharma  that  before 
it  this  entire  universe,  composed  of  Suras  and  Asuras,*  of  moving  and 
unmoving  things,  ever  bows  its  head.  It  is  matter  for  no  wonder  that  the 
rule  by  which  even  the  world  of  unconscious  things  *  is  ever  imperceptibly 
: governed  should  also  to-day  govern  the  educated  community.  If  one  man 
is  afraid  of  another,  the  sight  of  any  sign  of  the  latter  naturally  rouses 
terror  in  his  mind.  He  who  is  a  constant  server  of  Dharma  is  pleased  by 
the  thought  thereof,  and  is  never  frightened.  But  he  who  is  certain  in  his 
mind,  whether  he  admits  it  to  others  or  not,  that  he  is  a  sinner  against 
Dharma,  becomes  naturally  afraid  at  the  sight  of  marks  of  Dharma  in 
another.  The  cause  of  this  fear  is  the  thought,  “  What  will  be  my  fate?  " 
Again,  such  people  think:  “  One  of  my  race  and  form,  with  hands  and 
feet — a  man  such  as  I  am — is  about  to  leave  me  far  behind,  and  to  become 
a  traveller  on  the  eternal  fear-dispelling  path.”  Jealousy  and  malice, 
prompted  by  this  thought,  then  overpower  that  fear  and  reveal  themselves. 
The  weak  heart  of  the  unrighteous  man  then  loses  all  self-control,  and, 
knowing  he  is  in  the  wrong,  and  yet  not  having  the  strength  to  set  himself 


1  Law. 


*  Devas  and  their  enemies. 


*Jada. 


740 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


right,  thinks  himself  blessed  by  the  service  of  jealousy  and  malice.  Every¬ 
one  in  the  Samsara  is  not  unrighteous,  whether  he  is  able  to  serve  Dharma 
fully  or  not.  On  the  contrary,  Society  and  Samsara  are  full  of  men  who- 
are  truly  sorry  at  their  inability  to  duly  serve  Dharma.  In  the  present 
state  of  society  it  is  difficult  to  find  among  one  hundred  men  even  ten  who 
duly  carry  out  their  religious  duties.1  I  may  not  be  able  to  observe  these 
practices  myself,  but  if  I  see  anyone  doing  so,  as  the  Sastra  enjoins,  I  respect 
and  honour  him,  while  if  I  find  anyone  who  is,  like  myself,  devoid  of  such 
practices,  I  hate  him  with  all  my  heart,  as  I  hate  nobody  else.  In  this 
way  practising  men 1  who  wear  the  sacred  crown  lock,*  and  thread,1 
forehead  marks,1  carry  rosaries,  and  so  forth,  rightly  occupy  a  high  position 
in  society.  The  arrogant  class,  devoid  of  such  practices,  should  fall  low, 
and  are,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  doing  so.  The  true  man  of  practice  never, 
even  in  his  dreams,  thinks  that  his  honour  and  glory  should  be  widespread 
in  Society;  but  the  universe-enchanting  great  Sakti  of  Dharma,  appears  of 
itself  in  the  body  of  a  religious  man,  and  overpowers  by  its  force  even 
beasts  and  birds,  not  to  speak  of  men  and  women.  Men  and  women  bow 
at  his  feet  of  their  own  accord,  and  show  him  honour  and  respect.  At  the 
sight  of  this  honour  and  respect  the  eyes  of  self-willed  men,  devoid  of  good 
practice  are  pierced  as  if  by  an  arrow.  But  while,  on  the  one  hand. 
Nature’s  rules  cannot  be  thwarted,  on  the  other  men  of  beastly  nature 
cannot  bear  the  sight.  It  is  then  that,  finding  no  other  available  means, 
the  community  of  self-willed  men,  proud  of  their  education,  begins  to 
vituperate,  rail  at,  and  ridicule  the  religious  man’s  forehead  marks,  rosaries, 
dress,  and  so  forth.  The  object  of  this  railing  and  vituperation  is  not 
really  to  blame  Dharma  or  the  marks  of  Dharma,  nor  to  establish  their 
uselessness;  what  is  really  unbearable  to  these  people  is  that  another 
person  like  themselves  should  be  honoured  in  the  Samsara  as  a  religious 
man.  They  therefore  endeavour  to  destroy  the  honour  which  he  receives, 
and  to  prove  his  worthlessness  by  speaking  ill  of  Dharma  or  marks  of 
Dharma.  If  for  fear  of  banter  and  ridicule  a  religious  man  gives  up 
wearing  marks  of  Dharma,  or,  though  he  does  not  abandon  them,  people 
consider  him  worthless,  then  in  either  case  the  purpose  of  the  railers  is. 


1  That  is,  religious  practices,  the  saying  of  their  prayers,  etc. 

1  As  we  say,  “  Catholique  pratiquant.” 

•  A  long  lock  of  hair  on  the  top  of  the  head  left  when  the  rest  is  shaved  or 
cut.  This  is  as  it  were  the  Flagstaff  before  the  royal  palace.  For  here  in  the 
Brahmarandhra  is  the  abode  of  the  Supreme. 

1 A  cotton  thread,  with  three  strands  worn  slanting  across  the  chest.  The 
three  strands  are  Kayadaneja,  Vagdanda,  and  Manodanda — that  is,  controllers, 
of  body,  speech,  and  mind.  The  thread  speaks  to  the  wearer  of  the  necessity 
of  these.  They  are  also  emblematic  of  the  three  Gupas. 

*  Tilaia  (sec  ond). 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP 


7« 

■served;  for  theirs  is  the  victory  if  “  all  brothers  ”  become  “  equal ",  They 
are  saved  from  all  fear  if  no  one  by  any  sign  or  acts  reminds  them  of  Dharma 
in  any  way. 

Now,  1  ask  you,  O  Sadhaka!  do  you  wish  to  abandon  that  at  which 
you  aim  in  Sidhana  out  of  fear  of  these  great  heroes?  Do  you  really  count 
as  men  the  cowards  who  lick  the  feet  of  beastly  propensities  and  manifest 
their  meanness  at  every  step  ?  If  a  beast  were  to  threaten  you,  would  you, 
out  of  fear,  give  up  the  wearing  of  dresses  that  befit  a  man?  The  difference 
between  a  man  and  a  beast  is  the  same  as  that  between  a  Sadhaka  and  a 
man  who  is  devoted  to  the  Samsara.  It  is  out  of  consideration  for  your 
human  state  that  the  Ssstra  has  given  you  the  privilege  of  ascending  to 
the  high  step  of  Devahood.  If  to-day  you  spurn  the  good  fortune  which 
is  within  the  reach  of  your  hand,  and  become  a  beast  in  imitation  of  beasts, 
then  why  all  this  trouble  to  attain  that  human  birth  which  is  rare  even  for 
Devas  ?  Why  this  downfall  after  receiving  initiation  in  the  Mantra  of  the 
supreme  Devata?  Why,  being  a  son  of  the  Queen  of  Queens,  do  you  roam 
about  forests  in  the  company  of  beasts  ?  True  it  is  that  you  arc  afraid  of 
beasts;  but  consider  what  we  have  said,  and  say  whether  it  is  really  you 
who  are  afraid  of  beasts,  or  the  beasts  who  are  afraid  of  you?  Everyone 
knows  that  Akrura  was  afraid  of  Karma;1  but  think  just  for  once  whether 
it  was  really  Akrura  who  was  afraid  of  Kamsa,  or  Kamsa  who  was  afraid 
of  Akrura.  It  is  true  that  the  wearing  of  forehead  marks,  rosaries,  religious 
■dresses,  and  so  forth,  by  Akrura  was  insufferable  to  Kamsa,  but  what 
answer  would  you  give  to  the  question,  Why  were  they  insufferable  to 
him?  Had  not  the  daughter*  of  the -King  of  mountains,*  the  sister  of 
Achyuta,4  declared  (as  daughter  of  Nanda,4  dashed  to  the  ground  by  the 
hand  of  Kamsa)  that  the  son  of  Devalu  4  who  was  black  as  a  cloud,  had 
•descended  in  the  house  of  Nanda  in  Gokula  as  death  in.  order  to  hurl  on 
the  head  of  Kamsa  the  fatal  thunderbolt?  Had  not  Bhagavan,  appearing 
as  a  herds-boy,7  holding  the  rod  of  death,  been  constantly  before  die  eyes 
of  Kamsa,  would  the  latter  have  fainted  out  of  fear  of  Kala  (death)  at  the 


1  Kamsa  was  King  of  Mathura  in  the  days  of  the  P&QtUwas,  and  Kona’s 
uncle.  He  sought  to  kill  Kr?na,  but  was  slain  by  the  latter.  Akrura  was  his 
relative,  but  a  very  pious  man. 

*  Parvafi.  *  Himalaya.  *  Vijpu. 

*  The  Devi  MahSmayS  was  bom  as  the  daughter  of  Nanda.  She  was  bom 
at  Brindavan  on  the  same  day  as  Krsna  was  bom  at  Mathura.  Vaaudeva, 
Knna’s  father,  took  Kjjna  to  Narnia’s  house,  and  changed  him  for  Nanda’s 
daughter,  whilst  the  household  of  Nanda  was  made  subject  to  the  Devi’s  miyS. 
Vasudeva  made  over  the  daughter  to  Kamsa,  who  tried  to  slay  her  by  throwing 
her  on  a  stone;  but  she,  assuming  a  heavenly  body,  went  to  heaven,  and  by  this 
■exchange  the  life  of  Kfjna  was  saved  from  Kamsa,  who  was  led  to  this  action 
because  he  had  learned  that  a  son  of  his  sister  would  kill  him. 

*Kjwa. 


7  Gopa. 


742 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


mere  mention  of  Kjila  (blackness)  ?  In  that  case  would  the  terrible  order  of 
Kamsa 1  for  the  oppression  of  Devas  and  Brahmarias  and  the  killing  of 
infants  been  proclaimed  in  Mathura?  Would  he  have  suddenly,  looking 
like  a  madman,  left  his  throne  and  rushed  out,  crying:  “Kill!  kill”?' 
Hence  I  say,  think  for  once  whether  the  frightful  appearance  which 
Kamsa  used  to  display  to  Bhagavan  and  the  devotees  of  Bhagav&n  was 
intended  really  to  frighten  Bhagavan,  or  to  save  himself  from  fear  of 
Bhagavan.  The  Asura  *  knew  and  yet  knew  not  the  Bhagav&n,*  so  that 
in  terror  befitting  an  Asura  he  tried  to  save  himself  from  his  hand.  Kamsa 
was  an  enemy  of  Bhagavan.  Consequently,  devotees  to  Bhagavan  also 
became  objects  of  his  enmity,  for  a  devotee’s  body,  senses,  mind,  and  heart 
arc  marked  and  ornamented  with  signs  of  devotion  to  Bhagavan.  The 
sight  of  these  marks  used  to  make  the  Asura’s  heart  tremble  with  fear. 
But  did  the  right  of  this  fear  of  Kamsa  frighten  Akrura,  the  crest-gem  of 
devotees?  In  order  to  remove  all  causes  for  fear,  either  from  men,  Kamsa, 
or  existence  itself,  Akrura  brought  Bhagavan,  who  is  the  fear  of  fear  itself, 
from  Brindavan  to  the  residence  of  Kamsa,  and  thus  provided  the  means 
of  freeing  Kamsa  from  all  fears  in  this  and  the  next  world.*  Had  Akrura 
been  really  afraid  of  Kamsa,  and  had  there  been  any  malice  against 
Kamsa  at  the  root  of  this  fear  on  the  part  of  Akrura,  would  he  have  brought 
the  Friend  of  the  World  5  from  Brindavan  to  Mathura,  and  thus  performed 
an  act  of  eternal  friendship  to  Kamsa,  both  here  and  hereafter?  • 

Kamsa  may  have  entertained  malicious  feelings  against  forehead  marks 
and  rosaries  and  the  name  of  Kr?pa,  but  it  was  because  there  was  at 
Mathur&  a  person 7  who  had  incurred  his  displeasure  by  wearing  those 
marks  and  rosaries,  and  taking  the  name  of  Kfsna,  that,  notwithstanding 
that  he  was  Asura,  he  attained  a  state  rare  even  to  Devas.*  Hence  I  say, 
O  Sadhaka!  if  in  the  ordinary  worldly  way  you  look  at  the  community  of 
Asuras  hostile  to  marks  of  Dharma,  considering  them  to  be  objects  of 
enmity,  you  cannot  subdue  this  feeling  of  yours  towards  them  by  ceasing 
to  wear  forehead  marks  and  rosaries.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  grace 
of  Bhagavan,  you  have  the  power  to  do  them  mercy,  then  also  you  will 

1  The  incident  is  similar  to  that  of  Herod’s  order  of  the  slaying  of  the 
innocents. 

*  Kamsa  was  an  Asura  in  human  guise. 

*  He  was  in  the  state  of  knowing  that  Knga  was  Bhagavan,  but  could  not 
act  on  that  knowledge. 

4  AkrOra  took  K|^a  to  Brindavan  so  that  He  might  slay  Kamsa,  and 
thereby  save  him  who  had  done  a  Sadhana  of  Kfjtia  as  his  enemy.  For  though 
opposed  to  Kftna,  Kamsa  yet  had  always  his  mind  on  Him. 

‘Kma- 

*  For  Akrura,  by  getting  him  slain,  was  the  cause  of  his  bong  saved. 

1  Akrura. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  74S 

be  able  to  do  so  through  the  influence  of  forehead  maria  and  round, 
and  in  no  other  way. 

Sadhakas  will  doubtless  fully  understand  from  all  that  we  have  said 
so  far  that  forehead  marks,  three  lines,  and  other  signs  of  Dharma  which 
the  Sastra  ordains  to  be  worn  by  Sadhakas  on  different  parts  of  their 
bodies,  are  the  chief  materials  for  the  attainment 1  of  the  state  in  which 
they  arc  merged  in  Mahabhava.  The  wearing  or  non-wearing  of  these 
outer  marks  may  not  matter  to  the  great  man  who  has  sunk  in  the  depths 
of  Bh&va,  but  the  non-wearing  of  them  by  people  whose  minds  have  not 
been  matured  in  SSdhana,  or  who  are  about  to  enter  upon  its  path,  is 
undoubtedly  the  sole  obstacle  which  prevents  the  opening  of  the  door  of 
Mahabhava  for  their  incoming.  It  is  the  mature  state  of  this  Bhava 
which  is  called  the  state  of  merger  in  the  object  of  worship — that  is  to  say, 
self-forgetfulness  at  the  sight  of  the  manifestation  of  the  Self  *  of  the  wor¬ 
shipped  Devata  in  one’s  mind,  heart,  body,  and  Atma,  and  in  all  the 
things  of  this  visible  Universe.  The  sole  cause  of  the  attainment  of  Siddhi 
in  this  state  of  absorption  is  MantraSakti.*  Materials  of  worship,  and  so 
forth,  are  all  means  whereby  we  may  directly  realize  this  Mantra Sakti. 
Sadhakas  acquainted  with  the  principles  relating  to  worship  of  course 
know  how  perfection  of  the  state  of  merger  in  Bhava  appears  in  the  person 
of  a  Sadhaka  through  the  influence  of  MantraSakti.  Nevertheless,  in 
order  to  give  some  knowledge  to  those  who  are  eager  to  perform  Sadhana, 
we  arc  here  bound  to  shortly  indicate  the  lines  along  which  the  system 
works. 

Entrance  into  the  House  op  Worship 

In  the  fifth  Pafala  of  the  Annada  Kalpa  it  is  said :  “  Next  (after 
bathing  and  wearing  of  forehead  marks,  and  so  forth)  *  the  Sadhaka 
should  place  Samanya  Arghya  *  in  front  of  the  door  of  the  house  in  which 
IjtadevatS  is  worshipped.” 

In  the  eighth  Pa^ala  of  the  Kamali  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  A  Sadhaka 
should  enter  the  house  of  Yajna  *  after  first  worshipping  the  Door-dcvata  7 
at  the  door  with  a  handful  •  of  flowers.” 

In  the  fourteenth  Patala  of  the  NigamakalpalatS  it  is  said:  “  A  Sadhaka 
should  worship  the  Door-devati  1  with  devotion  first  at  the  eastern  door 


1  Siddhi.  *  Svarupavibhuti. 

*  Sakti  as  Mantra.  *  Author’s  parenthesis. 

*  That  is,  the  general  and  ordinary  offering  as  opposed  to  the  Viiega  arghya 
or  special  offering. 

'  Literally,  sacrifice;  here  worship  in  general. 

*  The  Dvaradevati — that  is,  the  Devata  presiding  over  the  entry. 

■  Afijali;  offered  in  the  palms  of  the  hands  joined  together. 


744 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


of  the  house  of  worship,  next  at  its  southern  door,  then  at  its  western  door, 
and  lastly  at  its  northern  door,  and  then  worship  his  I?tadevata  inside 
the  Yantra.”  1 

In  the  Gandharva  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  If  the  Sadhaka  is  unable  to 
construct  a  house  with  four  doors  or  perform  worship  at  four  doors,  he 
should  at  one  door  mentally  imagine  there  are  four,  and  there  worship 
the  Devata  of  the  four  doors.” 

In  the  Sivarcanacandrika  it  is  said:  “  A  house  of  Yajiia  should  be 
entered  with  the  right  foot.” 

In  the  Meru  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  A  Devata’s  house  should  be  entered 
by  advancing  the  right  foot  first.” 

In  the  third  Patala  of  the  Sammohana  Tantra  it  is  said:  “Walking 
with  great  care,*  a  Sadhaka  should  enter  a  house  of  worship  with  the  right 
foot  first.” 

In  the  eighth  Chapter  of  the  Gautama  Tantra  it  is  said:  "  Driving 
away  spirits  1  and  meditating  on  Vi?nu  in  his  heart  a  Sadhaka  should 
enter  into  a  house  of  Sadhana  with  his  right  foot  first  and  with  his  head 
bowed.” 

In  another  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  A  Sadhaka  should  enter  a  house  of 
worship  meditating  on  the  lotus-feet  of  the  Devi  in  his  heart,  with  his  left 4 
foot  first  and  touching  the  door  slightly  with  his  left  side;  that  is  to  say, 
leaning  towards  the  right  side  of  the  door,  which  is  the  left  side  of  the 
SSdhaka,  instead  of  passing  just  through  its  middle.” 

In  the  Tripurargava  it  is  said:  “  One  should  enter  a  house  of  Yajfia 
by  advancing  the  left  foot  first.” 

Removal  of  Obstacles 

In  the  Sambhavf  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Next  {after  entering  into  the 
house),1  the  Sadhaka  should  remove  divine  *  obstacles  by  means  of  his 
divine  sight,7  obstacles  in  the  midmost  spaces  of  the  sky  8  by  means  of 

1  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  $5stra. 

*  The  limbs  are,  out  of  devotion,  kept  as  close  together  as  possible;  there 
must  be  no  strutting  or  striding  into  the  place  of  worship. 

*  Bhutas.  4  The  apparent  contradiction  is  explained  post. 

*  Author’s  parenthesis.  This  is,  the  room  in  which  worship  is  to  be 
performed. 

*  Divya.  That  is,  proceeding  from  Devas,  Devayoni,  and  the  spirits. 

7  Divyadnfi.  This  steady  vision  (as  to  which,  see  post),  is  acquired  by  the 
Hatha  Yoga  process  known  as  Trajaka. 

4Antarik*a. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP 


745 


water  sanctified1  with  the  Astra  Mantra,*  and  terrestrial  obstacles  by 
three  taps  with  the  heel  of  his  foot.” 

In  the  third  Patala  of  the  Sammohana  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  On  entering 
into  the  house  a  good  Sadhaka  should  look  at  the  articles  for  worship  and 
next  dispel  divine  obstacles  by  his  divine  look,  obstacles  in  the  middle 
spaces  of  the  sky  by  means  of  water  sanctified 1  with  the  Astra  Mantra,* 
and  terrestrial  obstacles  by  three  taps  on  the  earth  with  the  heel  of  his  foot” 

The  eighth  Papla  of  the  Gandharva  Tantra  deals  with  divine  vision, 
and  says:  “  A  Sadhaka  will  become  of  good  mind  by  looking  with  an 
angry  look.” 

In  the  second  Patala  of  the  Viivasara  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Divine  look  * 
is  the  name  given  to  that  steady  gaze  in  which  there  is  no  twinkling  of 
the  eye.” 

In  the  fifth  Prakaia  of  the  Meru  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Divine  obstacles 
should  be  removed  by  looking  obliquely.”  4 

Taking  these  dicta  together,  we  can  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that 
“  divine  look  ”  is  the  name  for  an  angry,  oblique  look,  without  twinkling 
of  the  eye. 

In  the  Kalikulamrta  Tantra  it  is  said :  “  Terrestrial  obstacles  should 
be  removed  by  three  taps  with  the  heel  of  the  left  foot.” 

In  Somaiambhu,  quoted  by  Raghava  Bhatta,*  it  is  said:  “  Terrestrial 
obstacles  should  be  removed  by  three  taps  with  the  heel  of  the  right  foot.” 

The  two  contradictory  dicta  are  reconciled  in  the  following  way: 
whether  in  entering  the  room  or  stamping  with  the  heel,  worshippers  of 
Devas  should  extend  the  right  foot  first  and  tap  with  the  heel  of  the  right 
foot.  Worshippers  of  Devis*  should  extend  the  left  foot  first  and  tap 
with  the  heel  of  the  left  foot. 

In  the  Tantrasara  it  is  said:  “After  first  removing  the  obstacles  a 
Sadhaka  should  next  assume  the  proper  sitting  posture,*  or  he  may  remove 
the  obstacles  on  taking  his  seat.” 


1  Abhimantrita.  That  is,  on  which  a  Mantra  has  been  put,  or  which  has 
(to  coin  a  word)  been  Mantra-bed. 

*  That  is,  the  “  weapon  Mantra  ”  “  Phat,”  which  is  always  used  for  such 
and  similar  purposes. 

*  Divya-dnti.  *  That  is,  out  of  the  corners  of  the  eyes. 

*  The  great  TSntrik  commentator  on  the  £&rad2ti1aka. 

*  The  Devi’s  position  is  on  the  left  side  of  the  Devata,  and  in  the  Cakra  the 
Saktis  sit  on  the  left  of  the  respective  Sadhaka*  in  the  circle  which  surrounds  the 
Gakre&rara.  Woman  generally  is  the  left  and  man  the  right  side. 

»Asana.  There  are  a  great  number  of  these  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra 
Sistra),  but  the  ordinary  position  for  worshippers  is  “  the  loosened  lotus  seat  ” 
Muktapadm&sana. 


746 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


Seat  1 

In  the  seventh  Pafala  of  the  Gandharva  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Next,, 
the  Sadhaka  should  take  a  seat  neither  low  nor  too  high.  He  should 
never  use  a  seat  or  an  Arghya  vessel 9  which  is  broken. 

“  On  a  seat  made  of  the  skin  of  black  deer  a  Sadhaka  attains  libera¬ 
tion,  and  on  a  seat  made  of  tiger  skin  a  Sadhaka  attains  both  wealth  and 
liberation.  In  a  rite  done  to  attain  some  desire  a  woollen  seat 1  is  the 
best — a  red  woollen  seat  being  particularly  suited  for  the  attainment  of 
the  desired  object.  A  seat  of  KuSa  grass  leads  to  attainment  of  Siddhi  in 
Mantra,  and  in  rites  undertaken  for  the  purpose  of  killing  4  a  black  woollen 
seat,  and  in  the  worship  of  Tripurasundari  a  red  woollen  seat  is  the  best 
seat.  A  seat  for  use  in  worship  must  not  be  more  than  two  cubits  in 
length,  one  and  a  half  cubits  in  breadth,  and  three  fingers  in  thickness. 
As  regards  the  seat  of  deer  skin  and  tiger  skin  which  grant  Siddhi,  as 
spoken  above,  a  Sadhaka  may  use  them  in  any  way  he  pleases,  for  there 
is  no  rule  which  limits  their  dimensions.  A  householder,  even  if  he  be 
initiated,  should  never  sit  on  a  skin  of  a  black  deer  (in  the  Yoginihrdaya 
it  is  said  that  Yatis,  those  belonging  to  the  Vanaprastha  Airama,  Brahma- 
caris,  and  Bik?us,  alone  are  competent  to  sit  on  the  skin  of  a  black  deer).1 
Earthen  seats  cause  sorrow,  and  wooden  seats  bring  ill-luck.  Seats  of  the 
wood  of  mango,  Nimba,*  and  Kadamba 7  trees  in  particular,  bring  des¬ 
truction  of  family.  Seats  of  the  wood  of  Vakula,  Kingiuka,  and  Jack-fruit 
trees,  cause  loss  of  all  property.  Seats  made  of  bamboo,  brick,  wood, 
earth,  grass,  and  twigs,  are  the  cause  of  poverty,  disease,  and  sorrow. 
Hence,  Sadhaks  should  never  use  such  seats.  Nor  should  they  use  scats 
cut  by  weapons,  worn  out,  broken,  unclean,  belonging  to  other  persons, 
or  unwashed.  Among  wooden  seats,  those  made  of  Gambhari  wood  alone 
are  good,  all  others  being  inauspicious.  In  performing  worship  a  Sadhaka 
should  not  take  a  seat  without  discrimination.  Seats  of  wood  and  other 
materials  also  should  be  of  the  dimensions  prescribed  in  the  Sastra.  Wooden 
seats  should  be  twenty-four  fingers  long,  sixteen  fingers  broad,  and  four 
fingers  high.  If  both  earthen  and  cloth  seats  arc  used  together 9  (from 
this  it  appears  that  in  the  absence  of  all  other  kinds  of  seat  earthen)  seats 


1  Aaana.  There  are  a  grot  number  of  these  (see  Introdacton  to  Tantra 
Sdstra),  but  the  ordinary  position  for  worshippers  is  “  the  loosened  lotus  seat  ” 
Muktapadmasana. 

*  For  offering.  9  Kambala.  4  Marana. 

4  Author’s  parenthesis.  The  first  and  last  are  ascetics;  literally  “  those  who- 
have  controlled  their  passions  ”  and  religious  mendicants.  The  second  and  third, 
are  members  of  the  Airamas  of  those  names.  *  Neem-tree. 

7  Nauclea  Cadamba.  9  That  is,  if  one  is  spread  over  the  other. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP 


747 


also  may  be  used),1  and  if  wooden  and  woollen  seats  are  used  together, 
S&dhakas  not  only  fail  to  acquire  future  religious  merit,*  but  also  lose  all 
merits  acquired  in  the  past  Considering  all  this,  a  Sadhaka  should 
secure  as  best  a  seat  as  he  can  for  his  use.” 

In  the  Hamsa-Mahtdvara  it  is  said:  “  If  a  Sadhaka  sits  on  hair,  all 
his  religious  merits*  are  destroyed.  The  very  touch  of  hair  instantly 
spoils  Siddhi.  A  Sadhaka  should,  therefore,  make  his  seat  of  skin  denuded 
of  hair.” 

In  the  Kalika  Purana  it  is  said:  “  One  should  never  use  seats  made 
of  iron,  or  brass,  or  lead.  In  worship  it  is  best  for  a  Sadhaka  to  use  a 
seat  of  stone,  or  gems,*  or  precious  metals.4  Worship  of  Devatas,  even 
when  the  Sadhaka  is  in  water,  should  be  done  when  seated  on  seats,  and 
not  in  a  standing  posture.  In  water,  seats  of  stone,  KuSa  grass,  wood,  or 
metals  should  be  used,  and  of  no  other  material.  In  the  absence  of  a  seat 
of  any  of  these  kinds,  one  should  imagine  such  a  seat  in  the  water  itself; 
consecrate  it  as  a  seat,  and  then  worship  the  Devata  in  the  water.” 

In  the  Kamadhenu  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  All  the  Japa,  worship,  and  so 
forth,  become  fruitless  of  him  who  spreads  a  scat  in  a  Tirtha,  and  performs 
Japa  and  so  forth  sitting  on  it.  The  statement  that  the  hardness  of  earth 
is  due  to  the  mass  of  the  fat  of  Mahijaaura’s  body  *  (and  is,  consequently, 
unclean),1 *  applies  to  places  other  than  Tlrthas.”  (Fat  of  the  body  of 
Mahisasura  is  most  probably  a  clerical  error  for  fat  of  the  bodies  of  Madhu 
and  Kaitabha,  or  it  may  have  been  the  fat  of  Mahisasure  in  some  other 
Kalpa.) 1 

In  the  thirty-first  Pa{ala  of  the  same  Tantra  it  is  said:  “A  good 
Sadhaka  should  never  sit  on  seats  in  Siddha,  Pi{has,  and  Tirthas.1 *  If  he 
does,  he  will  not  only  reap  no  fruit  for  having  visited  such  Tirthas,  but 
will  suffer  the  consequence  of  desertion  of  Tirthas.” 

“  A  scat  is  called  Asana  for  giving  Atmasiddhi  (A)  (Siddhi  of  the 
self);  preventing  Sarvaroga  (Sa)  (all  diseases),  and  giving  Navasiddhi 
(Na)  (fresh  Siddhi).” 

In  the  Goraksa  Samhita  it  is  said:  “  Seated  postures  are  as  many  in 
number  as  Jivas  and  animals.  For  every  one  of  the  eighty-four  lakhs 7 
of  Jivas  a  separate  seated  posture  has  been  spoken  of.  MaheSvara  alone 


1  Author’s  parenthesis. 

*  Puijya.  1  Ma^i. 

1  Ratna.  Mapi  and  Ratna  are  generally  used  synonymously.  Ratna  may 

also  mean  here  precious  stones. 

*  An  Asura  slain  by  the  Devi. 

*  All  the  DevTpithas  and  Pfihas,  where  great  Sadhakas  have  attained  Siddha 
and  other  places  of  pilgrimage. 

7  A  lakh- 100,000. 


748 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


it  aware  of  the  particulars  of  all  these  postures.  Of  the  aforesaid  eighty- 
four  lakhs  of  seated  postures,  two  are  the  best— namely,  the  Siddha  seat 
(Siddhasana)  first  and  the  lotus  seat  (Kamalasana)  next.  (As'  these  scats 
are  not  used  in  worship  and  such  other  rites,  we  desist  from  dwelling  on 
their  characteristic  peculiarities  here.) 1  ” 

Raghava  Bhafta  says:  “  Japa,  worship,  and  so  forth,  should  be  per¬ 
formed  sitting  in  postures,  such  as  Padma,  Svastika,  Vlra,  and  so  forth,* 
otherwise  they  will  be  ineffectual.” 

In  another  Tantra  quoted  by  Raghava  Bha{fa  it  is  said:  “  Place  the 
left  foot  on  the  right  and  the  right  foot  on  the  left,  gird  up  the  loins  and 
heels,  and  fix  the  gaze  at  the  tip  of  the  nose.  To  sit  in  this  way  is  the 
Padma  seat,  adored  of  all  Sadhakas  (i).” 

In  the  eighth  Chapter  of  the  Gautamiya  it  is  said:  “  The  two  feet 
should  be  placed  well  on  the  two  thigh:.  This  is  the  Padma  seat,  beloved 
■of  Yogis.” 

In  the  second  Pafala  of  the  Sammohana  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  A  Yogi 
should  sit  with  a  straight  back,  crossing  his  feet*  This  is  called  Svastika 
seat  (a).” 

“  A  Yog!  should  ait  with  a  straight  back,  keeping  one  of  his  feet  on 
the  ground  and  placing  his  other  foot  on  the  thigh  of  that  foot.  This  is 
called  Vira  seat.”  Although  the  Sastrik  authority  does  not  say  which  foot 
should  be  on  the  ground,  it  has  been  the  practice  among  successive  genera¬ 
tions  of  adepts 1  to  keep  the  left  foot  down  and  place  the  right  foot  on  the 
left  thigh  (3). 

In  the  third  Pa^ala  of  the  Sammohana  Tantra  is  it  said:  “  O  Devi! 
a  Sadhaka  should  sit  on  the  prescribed  scat,*  arranging  his  limbs  in  any 
of  these  forms  of  sitting  posture.  At  the  time  of  worshipping  a  Devata 
it  is  not  proper  to  place  one’s  feet  in  any  other  way.” 

In  the  Yogini  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Placing  a  scat  *  on  the  ground  a 
Sadhaka  should  sit  on  it,  adopting  the  Svastika  or  some  other  form  of 
sittirig  posture,  and  covering  his  feet  with  his  cloth.” 

Rules  Relating  to  Direction  in  Worship  * 

In  the  Yamala  it  is  said :  “  The  space  between  the  worshipped  (Devata) 
And  the  worshipper  (Sadhaka)  should  be  on  the  east.  The  right  side  of 


1  Author’s  parenthesis;  but  as  to  the  lotus  seat,  see  next  passage. 

*  These  are  described  pest. 

*  Literally,  “  putting  his  feet  within  the  folds  of  his  knees.”  *  Acaryas. 

*  Material  seat  Bpoken  of  before.  Asana  is  used  in  the  twofold  signification 
of  the  actual  thing  on  which  a  Sadhaka  sits  and  the  posture  in  which  he  sits. 

*  Dik-nirpaya. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP 


74ft 


the  SSdhaka  should  be  the  south,  the  left  side  north,  and  die  back  west. 
In  every  case  these  directions  should  be  adopted  in  performing  worahip." 
That  is  to  say,  although  the  directions  are  fixed  according  to  the  rising 
and  the  setting  sun,  the  direction  which  the  Sadhaka  faces  in  performing 
worship  is  the  east.  For  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an  absolute  direction 
in  the  world,  all  directions  being  relative  to  the  positions  of  the  individual. 
The  term  “direction”  itself  proves  this  sufficiently.  “That  which  is 
merely  directed  or  pointed  out  is  called  direction.”  For  instance,  that 
which  I  call  my  east  will  be  directed  or  pointed  out  as  west  by  a  person 
who  is  to  the  east  of  me.  Hence  it  is  quite  plain  that  direction  exists  in 
respect  of  an  individual  and  not  absolutely.  But,  blinded  by  the  vanity 
of  philosophic  wisdom,  some  people  do  not  see  this  derivative  meaning  of 
direction,  but  speak  of  the  existence  of  absolute  directions.  Essentially, 
however,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  direction;  but  whatever  direction  is 
pointed  out  at  any  time  is  direction  at  that  time.  If  directions  arc  fixed 
according  to  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun,  they  arc  the  same  for  all 
people,  and  the  pointing  out  of  a  direction  by  one  person  settles  it  for  all. 

For  the  reasons  given  above,  the  Sastra  has  said  in  the  Bhavacuda- 
mani:  “  O  Devi!  according  to  the  desire  of  a  Sadhaka  the  Dcvata  appears 
in  all  directions  (for  Her  who  is  Omnipresent  it  is  impossible  that  there 
should  be  either  front  or  back).  Still,  one  should  perform  a  worahip  1 
and  other  ritual  acts  at  night,  faring  the  north.1  In  worshipping  Siva  in 
particular,  one  should  always  take  care  to  face  the  north,  whether  during 
day  or  in  the  night.  As  regards  worship  and  so  forth  relating  to  Vipju, 
it  is  best  to  face  the  east,  though  it  is  not  improper  to  face  the  north.  As 
regards  Sakti,  it  is  best  to  face  the  north,  although  it  will  not  be  out  of 
order  if  the  Sadhaka  faces  the  cast.” 

In  the  Varahiya  it  is  said:  “  Having  bathed,  one  should  sit  for  worship, 
clad  in  white,  having  duly  done  Acamana  *  and  faring  east.” 

In  the  Gautamiya  it  is  said:  “  A  Sadhaka  with  well-controlled  Atma 
should  sit  on  the  prescribed  seat  facing  the  east. 

“  Bathed,  clad  in  clean,  fine,  and  unsoiled  cloth,  with  face,  hands, 
and  feet  washed,  with  forehead  brightened  by  a  high  white  line,1  having 
duly  done  Acamana; 1  having  performed  the  sacred  hand-mudra;  •  faring 
the  east,  properly  seated  in  the  BaddhapadmSsana 7  or  Svasdka  posture — 
thus  should  a  Sadhaka  worship  with  joined  palms  his  Gurus  and  Ganria.” 


1  Literally,  “  Divine  work”. 

1  This  actual  north  will  be  the  ritual  east. 

*  Ritual  sipping  of  water  for  the  purpose  of  cleansing  the  Ups,  mouth,  and 
throat. 

1  Orddhvapundra.  *  Cleansing  the  Ups  and  throat. 

*  Kara-mudrB.  7  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Ststra. 


750 


PRINCIPLES  of  tantra 


In  Haribhaktivilaaa  it  it  said:  “  A  worshipper  of  Sri  Kjpja  should 
generally  sit  faring  the  east  during  day,  and  in  the  night  a  Sidhaka,  with 
composed  countenance,  should  perform  worship  and  so  forth,  faring  the  north. 

“  Worship  and  so  forth  should  be  performed  sitting,  faring  the  north 
or  east  in  front  of  the  image  of  Devata.”  That  is  to  say,  if  the  established 
Devath 1  is  faring  the  west,  the  Sadhaka  should  face  the  east,  and  if  the 
Devata  is  faring  the  south,  the  Sadhaka  should  face  the  north. 

In  the  K&lika  Purana  it  is  said:  “  Of  all  the  quarters  the  north  pleases 
the  Spouse  of  Siva.  A  Sadhaka  should,  therefore,  always  sit  facing  the 
north  in  the  worship  of  Caijijika.” 

In  the  Saktanandatarangiw  it  is  said:  “  Worship  of  Devas  should  be 
performed  facing  the  east  during  the  day  and  facing  the  north  in  the 
night,  but  worship  of  the  Devi  and  worship  of  Siva  should  always  be 
performed  faring  the  north.” 


Time  for  Worship 

In  the  twenty-eighth  Patala  of  the  Gandharva  Tantra  it  is  said: 
“  After  receiving  initiation  from  Guru  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions 
a  good  Sadhaka  should  daily  worship  the  Devi  in  the  morning  with 
undivided  heart.” 

In  the  second  Pajala  of  the  Yogini  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  He  who  desires 
to  reap  a  full  crop  of  fruits  from  his  rites  should  begin  them  in  the  morning 
and  finish  them  all  by  noon.” 

In  the  eleventh  Patala  of  the  Nigamakalpalata  it  is  said:  “  The  daily 
worship  should  be  begun  after  the  passing  of  the  half  of  the  first  Prahara  * 
,and  finished  at  the  end  of  ten  Dallas.'  If  Japa  and  so  forth  are  performed 
in  the  morning,  it  is  not  improper  to  perform  worship  at  noon.” 

In  the  third  UllSsa  of  the  Mah&nirvapa  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  The  duties 
■of  the  morning  *  should  be  performed  in  the  morning,  Sandhya  prayers 
should  be  said  at  the  three  divisions  of  the  day,1  and  worship  of  Igtadevata 
should  be  performed  at  noon.  This  is  the  general  rule  for  the  initiated 
.in  all  Mantras.” 


Place  of  Worship 

In  the  seventh  Patala  of  the  Gandharva  Tantra  it  is  said:  "  It  is 
prohibited  to  worship  Devata  and  so  forth  in  a  place  which  is  unclean 
with  hair,  insects,  and  the  like,  cold,  very  low,  very  high,  jungly,  very 


1  Prati$thita  Devata;  that  is,  the  permanently  fixed  Devata. 

*  The  first  three  hours  of  the  day.  *  Four  hours  after  daybreak. 

4  Pritahkftya .  *  The  junctions  at  mom,  noon  and  even. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP 


751 


■windy,  infested  with  other  animals,  covered  with  dust  or  mud,  where 
beasts  are  near  by,1  treeless,  at  a  distance  from  water,  open  on  all  sides,1 * 4 * * 
or  unpleasant  to  the  worshipper.*  Worship  should  not  be  performed  in 
even  a  holy  place  if  its  soil  is  saline  or  infested  with  insects.”  The  above 
is  an  account  of  places,  the  use  of  which  for  Yajfia  is  prohibited.  Below 
is  given  an  account  of  places  which  are  recommended  for  use  in  Yajha: 

“  O  Mahadevi!  a  place  for  the  performance  of  Yajha  by  a  Sadhaka 
should  possess  the  following  characteristics:  It  should  be  near  to  a  tank, 
or  well,  in  a  garden  of  flowers,  having  a  beautiful  temple  *  on  it,  with  a 
clean  altar,  furnished  with  articles  for  drinking  and  eating,  perfumed  with 
camphor,  sandal,  incense,  and  so  forth;  bright  red  like  the  rays  of  the 
morning  sun,  pleasant,  delightful  to  the  mind,  containing  all  the  weapons 
of  Devata  and  a  well-furnished  inner  house.* 

“  The  best  places  are  holy  grounds,*  river-sides,  caves,  Tirthas, 
summits  of  mountains,  confluences  of  rivers,  holy  forests,  solitary  gardens, 
at  the  foot  of  bacl-trees,  valleys,  places  overgrown  with  Tulafi  plants, 
pasture  lands,  temples  of  Siva  without  a  bull,  at  the  foot  of  AAvattha,7 * 
Amalaki*  trees,  cowsheds,  islands,  temples,  seashore,  one’s  own  house, 
the  abode  of  Guru,  places  which  naturally  tend  to  generate  single  pointed¬ 
ness  of  mind,  places  free  of  animals  and  solitary.  If  a  Sadhaka  performs 
worship  in  solitude  at  any  place,  the  Devi  Herself  accepts  the  leaves,  flowers, 
fruits,  and  water  offered  by  him.  If  the  Sadhaka  has  sufficient  reverence 
and  devotion,  if  there  are  sufficient  articles  for  worship,  and  if  the  worship 
is  performed  in  solitude,  the  Mother  of  the  world  who  is  attached  to  Her 
devotees  appears  of  Her  own  will  at  such  a  place.” 

Worship  of  Siva 

In  the  fifth  Pa(ala  of  the  Todala  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  A  Sadhaka,  be 
he  a  Saiva,  or  a  Vaispava,  or  a  Sakta,  or  a  Saura,  or  a  Ganapatya,*  should 
worship  first  Siva  and  then  other  Devatas.  If  a  person  worships  another 
Devata  after  having  first  worshipped  Siva,  the  fruits  of  that  worship  are 
truly  increased  a  crorefold.10  If  however,  he  first  worships  another  Devata 


1  Paiuhhirnavilokita.  That  is,  worship  should  be  done  in  a  place  which 
cannot  be  approached  by  beasts. 

*  Anavjtacaturdiksu. 

*  All  such  circumstances  distract  from  the  necessary  tranquillity  of  mind. 

4  Man^apa.  *  GfhSntara. 

*  YSgabhiimi;  where  worship  is  done. 

7  Pipul.  *  Emblic  Myrobalan. 

*  Worshippers  of  Siva,  Vqtju,  Dev!,  the  Sun,  and  Gapeta. 

70  Ten  millions. 


752 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


and  then  worships  Siva,  all  the  fruits  of  that  worship  are  devoured  by 
Yaksas  and  Rilqasas.”  1 

Siva’s  words  in  the  sixty-fourth  Pa|ala  of  the  Utpatti  Tantra  are  as 
follows;  “  How  can  a  Sakta,1  or  a  Vaisnava,*  a  Saiva,*  or  a  Ganapatya,* 
attain  Siddhi  if  he  does  not  worship  Siva?  O  Devi!  if  a  person  worships 
another  Devata  without  first  worshipping  Me,  that  worshipped  DevatS 
does  not  accept  his  worship,  but  returns  to  Her  own  seat,  having  cursed 
him.  O  Devi!  O  Mahe$vari!  *  whatever  in  the  way  of  flowers,  Naivedya  * 
and  so  forth,  from  even  a  mountain  heap  of  sweetmeats  duly  arranged, 
fruits  and  all  sorts  of  flowers  gathered  as  prescribed,  and  of  all  kinds  of 
food  heaped  as  high  as  Mount  Sumeru,  and  quantities  of  curry  and  so 
forth  as  great  as  great  seas,  are  offered  without  first  worshipping  Siva 
will  be  unacceptable  as  excrements.  In  the  Kali  age,  whoever  worships 
another  Devata  without  first  worshipping  Siva  is  guilty  of  a  great  sin.” 

In  the  first  Pafala  of  the  Lirigarcana  Tantra  it  is  said :  “  O  ParameSvari  1 
everyone,  be  he  a  Sakta,  Vai?pava,  or  Saiva,  should  first  worship  Siva 
with  bacl-leaves,  then  pray  for  His  permission  to  worship  other  Devatas, 
and  afterwards  worship  them.  Otherwise,  MahcSvari!  without  worship  of 
Siva  everything  will  be  as  unacceptable  as  excrements.  O  ParameSvari!  * 
so  long  as  one  lives  on  earth,  one  should  daily  worship  Sivalinga,1 * 4  which  is 
Brahman  with  supreme  devotion." 

In  the  twelfth  Pafala  of  the  Matrkabheda  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  The 
Devatas  who  are  within  this  Universe,  as  well  as  those  who  are  without  it, 
are  all  gratified  if  only  Siva  is  worshipped.” 

In  the  MahalingeSvara  Tantra  it  is  said :  “  A  Sadhaka,  whoever  he  may 
be,  belonging  to  the  three  worlds  will  suffer  a  painful  death  if  he  worships 
Kali,  Tara,  and  Tripurasundari 1 *  without  worshipping  earthen  Sivalihga." 

•  In  the  Tripura  Kalpa  it  is  said:  “  So  long  as  a  bad  Sadhaka  does  not 
worship  Sivalinga,  neither  Tripurasundari  nor  Tara  nor  Kali  accept  his 
worship.” 

“  Mahavidyam  pujayitva 
Sivapujam  samacaret 
Anyathakarapat  devi 
Na  pGjaphalamapnuyat.”  7 


1  Evil  spirits. 

1  Worshippers  of  Siva,  Vi$pu,  Devi,  the  Sun,  and  Ganeia. 

*  The  Devi  as  great  Lord  of  the  Universe. 

4  Offerings  of  food. 

*  The  phallic  form  of  Siva.  '  •  Forms  of  the  Devi. 

7  No  translation  of  this  Sanskrit  verse  is  given  in  the  original,  which  in 

English  runs:  “Worship  of  Siva  should  be  performed  after  worshipping 
Mahavidya;  otherwise,  O  Devii  the  fruits  of  worship  will  not  be  reaped." 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP 


753 


In  the  Mem  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  All  Briihmapaa,  Ksattriyax,  VaiAyas, 
Sfidraj,  and  Anuloma 1  half-castes,  should  ever  worship  Sivalifiga  with 
care  and  with  Mantras  special  to  its  worship.” 

In  the  YajBavalkya  Samhiti  it  is  said:  “  By  worshipping  a  single 
B&palinga 1  a  man  reaps  the  fruits  of  worshipping  ten  million  other  Lifigaa. 
Constructing  an  altar  (Gaurfpitha)  *  with  copper,  crystal,  gold,  stone,  or 
silver,  one  should  establish  a  Bapaliriga  on  the  Htha 1  and  then  worship  it. 
Even  liberation,  not  to  speak  of  worldly  gain,  comes  within  the  grasp  of 
him  who  worships  Banalinga  daily  with  devotion.” 

In  the  Viramitrodaya  it  is  said:  “  A  householder  should  not  worship 
a  Banalinga  which  is  very  small,  or  very  large,  or  brown.  A  Bapalihga 
shining  and  deeply  dark  like  a  black  bee  is  the  best  for  worship  by  a  house¬ 
holder.  A  Banalinga,  whether  it  is  with  Pitha  (Gaurlpi{ha) 1  or  without 
Pi(ha,  should  be  worshipped  even  without  purification  or  so  forth  by  means 
of  Mantras.  Every  Banalinga,  whether  it  exists  in  a  palace  or  in  a  Pitha, 
grants  Siddhi  and  liberation  to  the  Sadhaka. 

“  O  great  King!  none  of  the  Banalihgas  existing  on  this  earth  require 
Praoaprati$tha,  *  purification,’  or  the  invocation  or  dismissal  of  DevatS.* 
(In  the  eternally  established  Brahmalinga,  Bhagavan  the  Creator  of  all 
things  is  eternally  present,  so  that  both  invocation  and  dismissal  are 
impossible  in  respect  of  it.)  ” 

In  the  first  Patala  of  the  Lifigarcana  Tantra  it  is  said:  “Beloved 
One !  the  country  in  which  the  Linga  is  not  always  worshipped  is  as  degraded 
as  a  trenching-ground.  If  Brahmanas,  K$attriyas,  and  Vaiiyas  do  not 
worship  the  Linga,  they  will  at  once  become  Candidas.*  And  if  Sudras 
do  not  worship  Siva,  they  prill  attain  the  state  of  swine.  O  Mistress  of 
Devas !  the  house  in  which  Siva  is  not  worshipped  is  Eke  a  pit  of  excrements, 
and  one  should  avoid  the  food  and  drink  of  that  house  just  as  one  avoids 
excrements.” 


Order  or  Worship 

In  the  seventh  Chapter  of  the  Gautamiya  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Worship 
is  of  five  kinds.  Hear  from  Me  the  difference  between  them.  I  shall  one 


1  Bom  of  father  of  higher  caste  and  mother  of  lower  caste. 

1  A  Linga  formed  of  stones  of  a  particular  oval  shape  found  in  the  Gandaki 
River. 

*  Author’s  note.  This  is  the  Yoni  which  encircles  the  Linga. 

1  That  is,  the  Gauripitha.  *  Vide  ante. 

*  That  is,  the  life-giving  rite.  *  Saniskara. 

*  Avahana  and  Visaijana  (see  ante). 

*  One  of  the  lowest  and  most  unclean  castes. 

48 


754 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


after  another  speak  of  the  differences  between  the  five  forms  of  worship — 
namely,  Abhigamana,  Upadana,  Yoga,  Sv&dhyaya,  and  Ijy&.1 * * 

“  To  go  to  the  house  of  Devata,  cleanse  the  place  where  the  Devati 
is  seated,  and  remove  from  the  person  of  the  image  the  pastes,  flowers, 
garlands,  and  so  forth  attached  to  it.  This  is  called  Abhigamana. 
Upadana  U  the  name  given  to  the  cutting  of  flowers  and  the  like  and  the 
collecting  of  materials  such  as  incense,  sandal,  and  so  forth.  Ijyi  is  the 
name  for  the  worship  of  the  I$fadevata,  with  offerings  of  materials  such  as 
Padhya  *  and  so  forth,  accompanied  by  Mantras,  according  to  the  Sastra 
after  Bhutaiuddhi,*  Prapayama,4 * *  Nyasa,*  mental  worship,  and  so  forth. 
Svadhyaya  is  the  name  given  to  the  doing  of  Japa  according  to  the  Sastra 
of  the  great  Mantra,  comisdng  of  the  name  ‘  Kjapa,’  reading  its  Sukta,® 
Stotra,®  singing  the  name  of  Hari,  and  studying  the  spiritual  Sastra,  in 
their  respective  order.  Yoga  is  the  meditation  of  Is(adevata  in  one’s 
mind.  O  man  of  good  deeds !  these  are  the  five  forms  of  worship.  They 
grant  the  fruits  of  Samipya,  Sarupya,  Sadj^ya,  and  Sayujya  in  succession:  7 
Abhigamana  and  Upadana  grant  Samipya,  Ijya  grants  Sadriya,  Svadhyaya 
grants  Sarupya,  and  Yoga  grants  Sayujya.” 

(The  Gautamlya  Tantra  ordains  worship  of  Vispu.  Consequently, 
it  speaks  of  Japa  of  the  Mantra,  consisting  of  the  name  of  Krsna,  and  singing 
of  the  name  of  Hari.  But  this  is  merely  an  indication  of  a  Sadh aka’s  duty 
reladng  to  his  I$?adevata,  be  he  a  worshipper  of  Sakd  or  of  Siva,  or  of  any 
other  Devata.  Sadhakas  other  than  Vai$pavas  will  understand  the  Japa 
of  the  name  of  Krspa,  and  singing  the  name  of  Hari  to  stand  for  Japa  of 
the  names  of  their  individual  Iftadevatas,  and  singing  of  their  names.) 


1  These  are  each  described  post. 

*  Water  for  washing  the  feet. 

*  Purification  of  the  elements. 

1  Control  of  breath. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  S&stra. 

*  Hymn. 

7  These  are  four  qualified  states  (pada)  of  Mukti.  Sadrfya  is  apparently 
Salokya,  which  precedes  and  leads  up  to  Kaivalya,  or  absolute  liberation,  which 
is  the  establishment  of  the  true  form  (SvarGpya)  of  consciousness. 


CHAPTER  XX 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  ( Conid .) 

Purification  of  the  “  Five  ” 1 * * 

In  the  Kularnava  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  O  Devi!  so  long  as  a  Sadhaka  does 
not  carry  out  the  five  forms  of  purification,  how  can  he  perform  worship 
of  a  Devata?  These  arc  Purification  of  self  (Atma$uddhi),  of  place  (Sthana- 
Auddhi),  of  Mantra  (Mantraiuddhi),  of  articles  for  worship  (Dravyaiuddhi), 
and  of  Devata  (Devaiuddhi).  Worship  without  purification  of  the  five  is 
intended  only  for  abhicara.* 

“  i.  Purification  of  the  self  of  the  Sadhaka  consists  of  proper  bathing, 
purification  of  the  elements  (Bhutaiuddhi),  breath-exercises  (Pranayama), 
and  so  forth,  and  Nyasa  of  six  parts  of  the  body  (Sadanganyasa),  and  all 
other  forms  of  Nyasa.* 

“  2.  Purification  of  place  is  making  the  house  of  worship  as  clean  as 
the  centre  of  a  mirror  by  dusting,  wiping,  and  so  forth,  and  adorning  it 
with  auspicious  ornaments,  such  as  powders  of  five  colours,  with  seat, 
canopy,  incense,  lamp,  flowers,  garlands,  and  so  forth. 

“  3.  Purification  of  Mantra  is  the  performance  of  Japa  of  the  letters 
of  the  alphabet  which  compose  the  Matrkamantra,  once  in  their  regular 
order  (anuloma),  and  once  again  in  the  opposite  order  (viloma),4  by  linking 
the  letters  of  the  Mulamantra  with  them. 

“  4.  Purification  of  articles  is  the  sprinkling  on  articles  of  worship  of 
water  sanctified  by  a  recital  of  the  Mfllamantra  and  the  weapon  Mantra,* 

.  and  then  displaying  the  Dhenumudra  (cow-mudra)  over  them.4 


1  Parlcaiuddhi. 

*  Rites  done  for  malevolent  purposes. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

4  That  is,  in  the  first  place  from  A  to  K*a,  and  in  the  second  from  K$a  to  A. 

*  That,  is,  the  Astra  Mantra  “  Pha{ 

•This  manual  gesture  resembles  the  teats  of  a  cow.  Dhcnu  (cow)  is  here 
Kamadhenu,  the  celestial  cow  whose  teats  exude  nectar.  By  displaying  the 
.  Dhenumudra  the  Sadhaka  expresses  the  desire  that  the  offerings  of  food  placed 
.  before  the  DcvatS  may  be  turned  into  nectar  (Amrta). 


756 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


“  5.  Purification  of  Devata  is  the  placing  of  the  image  of  the  Devata 
on  the  Pitha,1  invoking  the  Sakti  of  the  Devata  into  it  by  means  of  Antra- 
mantra,  Pranamantra 1 *  and  so  forth,  tfien  bathing  it  (at  least)  *  thrice 
along  with  recital  of  Mulamantra,4  and  finally  adorning  it  with  garments, 
ornaments,  and  the  like,  and  offering  incense,  light,  and  so  forth.  These 
five  forms  of  purification  must  be  performed  first,  and  then  the  worship 
should  be  commenced.” 

Purification  of  the  "  Twelve  ”  1 * 

In  the  eighth  Chapter  of  the  Gautamiya  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Next  is 
related  the  method  of  purification  of  the  twelve,  as  followed  by  Vaisnavas. 
Purification  of  feet  (2)  •  by  Vaisnavas  is  the  use  of  the  feet  in  such  blessed 
acts  as  going  to  the  house  of  Bhagavan,  following  Bhagavan  in  Yatras  7 
and  festivals,  and  circling*  round  Bhagavan  with  devotion.  The  purifi¬ 
cation  of  hands  (2),  which  is  done  by  taking  leaves,  flowers,  and  so  forth, 
in  the  hands  with  devotion,  for  the  worship  of  Bhagavan  is  better  than  any 
other  form  of  their  purification.  Purification  of  (the  tongue  or)  speech  (1) 
is  produced  by  singing  with  devotion  the  name,  beauty,  and  qualities  of 
Bhagavan  Sri  Krsna.  Purification  of  the  care  {2)  is  caused  by  hearing 
recitals  of  Bhagavan’s  play  and  qualities;  and  purification  of  the  eyes  (2) 
is  produced  by  the  seeing  of  festivals  in  honour  of  His  name.  Purification 
of  the  head  (1)  is  caused  by  placing  on  the  head  water  touched  by 
Bhagavan’s  foot,'  and  flowers,  garlands,  and  so  forth,  offered  to  Bhagavan, 
and  by  bowing  to  Bhagavan’s  lotus-feet.  Purification  of  the  nostrils  (2)  is 
produced  by  smelling  the  fragrance  of  offerings,  scents,  flowers,  and  so 
forth.  Leaves,  flowers,  and  all  else  offered  at  the  lotus-feet  of  Sri  Krsna 
purify  the  thrceworlds,  so  that  the  touch  of  them  instantly  purifies  a 
Sadhaka’s  body,  belongings,  mind,  life,  and  all  else.  (Here  also,  Saiva, 


1  The  seat. 

*  Antra  is  entrail,  intestine.  Pranamantra  is  the  life  Mantra. 

*  Author’s  parenthesis. 

*  That  is,  the  principal  Mantra  of  the  Devata. 

5  Dvadaiaiuddhi. 

*  It  is  by  adding  the  numbers  within  brackets  in  the  text  that  the  numbeT  12 
is  obtained — viz.,  feet  2,  hands  2,  tongue  1,  ears  2,  eyes  2,  head  1,  nostrils 2= 12. 

’Festivals.  Some  festivals  are  specially  so  called,  such  as  Rath  a  Jitra 
(car  festival),  Snana  Jatra  (bathing  festival),  and  Rasa  JStrS  (R5sa  festival). 

*  Pradakjina.  The  worshipper  goes  round  and  round  the  image. 

*  Padodaka-Padya  is  offered  as  the  first  article  of  worship  for  washing  the 
feet  of  the  Devata.  After  the  feet  have  been  so  washed  the  worshipper  sprinkles 
the  water  on  his  own  head. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  {Canid.) 


757 


Jjakta,  and  other  worshippers  should  understand  the  above  as  an  indication 
of  that  which  should  be  done  in  respect  of  their  individual  I$tadcvatas.)  ” 

In  the  sixth  Ullasa  of  the  Salctanandataraftgi^i  it  is  said :  “  After 
performing  purification  of  hands  with  flowm,  sandal  paste,  and  such  other 
things,  one  should  fence  the  quarters 1  by  clapping  the  hands  thrice,  higher 
and  higher,*  saying  the  weapon  Mantra,*  and  snapping  the  fingers  4  ten 
times.  Then,  after  having  removed  all  obstacles  and  purified  the  Sowers 
and  so  forth,  make  obeisance  to  the  three  Gurus  *  on  the  left  side.” 

In  Tantja  it  is  said:  •  “  One  should  make  obeisance  to  Guru,  Parama 
Guru,  and  Parapara  Guru  on  the  left  side,  to  Garcia  on  the  right  side, 
and  to  one’s  Isjadevata  on  the  head.” 

Purification  of  Elements7 

In  the  Gandharva  Tantra  it  is  said :  “  It  is  by  virtue  of  purification 
of  elements  7  Rsi-nyasa,  Pl(hanyasa,  Nyasa  of  six  parts  of  the  body,  Nyasa 
of  hands,  Matrkanyasa,  and  Vidyinyasa,  that  a  Sadhaka  becomes  full  of 
the  Deity,  and  these  are  the  Nyasas1  which  must  be  performed  daily. 
All  other  Nyasas  are  said  to  be  Nyasas  for  the  attainment  of  some  particular 
desired  end.”  • 

In  the  same  Tantra  it  is  again  said:  “  It  is  by  virtue  of  control  of 
breath,10  meditation,11  and  Ny5sa,  that  a  Sadhaka  attains  a  Divine  body. 
Abundance  of  Nyasa  makes  the  worship  bear  abundance  of  fruits. 

_  1  Digbandhana. 

1  The  palm  of  the  left  hand  is  struck  with  the  forefinger  and  middle  finger, 
and  each  time  the  hands  are  raised  to  a  position  higher  than  the  last. 

» •'  Phat.” 

4  The  hands  are  carried  in  a  circle  round  the  person  or  thing  fenced  and 
“  Pha(  ”  is  said.  A  circle  is  thus  established  which  excludes  all  evil  influences. 

*  That  is,  Guru,  Parama  Guru,  and  Parapara  Guru.  The  Guru,  his  Guru, 
and  the  latter’s  Guru. 

4  No  name  is  given  in  the  text. 

7  Bhutahiddhi.  The  elements  (bhuta)  are  the  five  Tattvas,  “  ether,” 
“  air,”  “  fire,”  “  water,”  and  “  earth,"  though  the  reader  must  not  identify 
these  with  the  meaning  of  the  English  words.  Thus,  “  earth  ”  (PfthivI}  is  not 
common  earth,  but  that  universal  movement  (Parthiva  vayu)  which  gives 
solidity  to  matter.  Thus,  ice,  though  it  is  a  compound  of  water,  is  in  the  PSrthiva 
or  solid  state.  See  Author’s  “  Serpent  Power 

8  Nyasa  comes  from  the  root  “  place,”  and  means  the  placing  of  the  tips  of 
the  fingers  and  palms  of  the  right  hand  on  various  parts  of  the  body  accompanied 
by  Mantra.  Its  object  is  to  infuse  each  of  such  parts  with  the  life  of  the  Devata, 
so  that  the  Sddhaka  becomes  Devatamaya  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra) . 

*  That  is,  the  fulfilment  of  some  worldly  end.  Spiritual  desire  is  no  desire 
.(Kama). 

10  Pranayama. 


11  Dhyana. 


758 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


OMaheivari;  ajlva’sbody  constituted  of  five  elements,  and  ever  associat¬ 
ed  with  feces  and  urine,  is  in  its  very  nature  unclean.  In  order  that  this- 
unclean  body  may  be  purified,  it  is  dried  up  by  means  of  Vayumantra,1 * * 
and  burnt  and  reduced  to  ashes  by  means  of  Agnimantra.* 

“  A  shower  of  nectar  *  is  caused  by  means  of  Candramantra,4  and  a 
flooding  of  water  by  means  of  Varunamantra.4 *  The  five  elements  com¬ 
posing  the  body  must  be  purified  by  contact  with  unmanifested  Brahman, 
brought  about  by  means  of  Recaka,  Puraka,  and  Kumbhaka  of  breath,4 
with  the  help  of  the  said  Mantras.  This  is  called  *  purification  of  elements’. 
After  performing  purification  of  elements  in  this  manner,  one  should  place 
Arghyas  7  and  such  other  things,  and  next  perform  Matfkanyasa,  Mantra- 
nyasa,  breath-control,8 *  and  Rsinyasa.”  • 

Purification  of  elements  is  accomplished  by  inner  Yajna  10  and  Prana- 
yama  *  together.  Inner  Yajna  is  accomplished  in  this  way.  Mother  11 
Kulakundalini,  the  World  Consciousness 11 *  living  in  the  womb  of  the 
Muladhara  lotus,  is  awakened.  She  is  taken  along  the  Susumna  path, 
piercing  on  the  way  throughout  the  six  Cakras  Muladhara,  Svadhisthana, 
Manipura,  Anahata,  Vi&uddha,  and  Ajna.  She  and  the  Jivatma  residing 
in  the  heart  are  united  with  the  supreme  Tattva  of  ParamaSiva  residing  in 
the  petals  of  the  thousand-petalled  lotus  Sahasrara.  The  Mayik  elements  18 
of  the  phenomenal  Mayik  world  are  merged  in  the  Parobrahmatattva  of 
Sivaiakti.  The  elemental  products 14  are  the  twenty-four  Tattvas  of  earth, 
water,  fire,  air,  ether,  smell,  taste,  sight,  touch,  sound,  nose,  tongue,  eye, 
ear,  skin,  voice,  hand,  foot,  anus,  genitals,  Manas,  Ahartkara,  Buddhi,. 
and  Prakrti.  The  Sadhaka  thinks  to  himself  that  in  their  Mayik  existence 
they  exist  as  seed,14 *  and  thus  meditating  ofTers  a  full  Ahuti 18  of  the 
Brahmapda  17  in  Brahman  Itself.  Next,  with  the  help  of  purified  Mind- 
Prakrti,18  existing  in  the  form  of  seed  (bija),  Mother  Kulakundalini  must. 


I  That  is,  “  Yang,”  the  bija  of  the  Vayu  Tattva. 

8  “  Rang,”  the  bija  of  the  Tejas  Tattva. 

8  Amrta.  *  That  is  Ung. 

4  That  is,  the  “  water  "  Mantra  “  Vang  ”. 

8  That  is,  expiration,  inspiration,  and  retention  of  breath  in  Prapayama. 

7  Offerings.  8  Pranayima.  •  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  $  astro.  10  See  post. 

II  See  as  to  this  author’s  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra  and  “  Serpent 

Power”. 

18  Jagaccaitanya,  the  vpita  consciousness,  or  consciousness  of  the  world 

as  a  whole. 

18  Prapafica.  14  Vikara.  14  Bija. 

18  Purnahuti— offering  in  fire  in  Homa  in  outer  Yajfla.  But  in  the  Tantrik 

inner  Yajfla  Ahuti  is  the  offering  to  the  Devi  residing  in  the  body  in  the  form  of 

the  Kulakupdalinl  Sakti  or  Sabda  Brahman.  So  when  wine  is  drunk  in 

Rahasyapuja,  the  wine  is  Ahuti  to  Her. 

17  Universe.  18  Manasaprakfti  or  Pralqti  in  the  form  of  mind  as  sensorium^ 


759 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  (Contd.) 

after  re-awaking  the  dualistic  Tattvas  from  their  supreme  union  or  undiffer¬ 
entiated  non-dualistic  Tattva  of  Sakti  and  possessor  of  Sakti  or  Prakrti 
and  Puruja,  be  re-established  in  Her  own  place  in  the  womb  of  the 
Mulidhara  lotus,  and  there  united  with  Svayambhufiva. 

Next,  in  order  to  perform  the  outer  worship  of  Her  as  I?{adevata,  a 
new  and  purified  body  must  be  constructed,  composed  of  Mantra — that  is 
to  say,  illumined  with  the  Brahman-spirit  of  Mantraiakd,  the  substance  of 
which  is  Brahman-vibhutis 1  only.  Finally,  the  outer  worship  of  Is(adevata 
with  Nyasa  end  so  forth  on  that  body  must  be  commenced  after  re-establish¬ 
ing,  in  their  own  places  as  ingredients  and  materials  for  the  worship  of  the 
Mother  of  the  world,  the  five  elements  of  earth  and  so  forth,  and  the 
elemental  Saktis  (force),  all  existing  in  subtle  forms. 

Though  we  know  that  inner  Yajna,  or  penetration  of  the  six  Cakras, 
forms  a  part  of  purification  of  elements,  we  do  not  dare  enter  into  the 
subject  here  in  this  short  Chapter,  which  explains  the  principles  of 
worship.*  Because,  firstly,  the  subject  is  so  extensive  that  even  another 
treatise  of  the  same  volume  as  this  book  would  be  insufficient  for  even  such 
explanation  as  a  person  of  such  insignificant  intellect  as  we  are  could  by 
our  best  efforts  give.  Secondly,  it  is  impossible  to  make  the  public  under¬ 
stand  the  meaning  of  the  six  Cakras,  since  it  is  not  posable  for  anybody 
who  is  not  a  practising  Sadhaka  to  understand  them  with  the  help  of  any 
amount  of  interpretation,  however  great  his  intellect  and  learning  may  be. 
Thirdly,  an  explanation  of  the  subject  of  the  six  Cakras  should  properly 
be  given  by  a  Guru  to  his  Sisya,  for  the  Guru  has,  by  communicating  from 
his  own  body  a  Divine  Sakti  (power)  into  his  Sijya’s  body,  opened  the  path 
for  intercommunication  of  Sakti  between  the  two  bodies.  It  is  possible 
for  him  alone  to  make  his  Sisya  understand  the  account  of  the  path  of 
Mother  Kulakundalini’s  journey  from  Muiadhara  to  Sahasrara  and  back 
in  the  Sisya’s  body.  The  combined  efforts  of  even  thousands  of  other 
interpreters  will  not  succeed  in  explaining  even  a  hundredth  part  of  what 
a  Guru  will  thus  be  able  to  teach  his  disciples.  And  something  may  be 
done  if  that  hundredth  part  is  preached  orally.  It  is,  however,  not  possible 
to  gain  success  by  written  teaching.  We  would,  however,  in  spite  of  the 
impossibility  of  such  an  explanation,  feel  gratified  to  a  certain  extent  if 
we  could  give  a  general  description.  But  that  also  is  impossible,  for  if  we 
were  to  write  an  account  of  even  the  positions  only  of  the  six  lotuses 
it  would  not  be  possible  to  deal  with  the  matter*  without  mentioning, 


1  Brahmavibhfltimaya — manifestations  of  Brahman  power. 

*  See  A.  Avalon's  “  Serpent  Power,"  being  a  translation,  with  Introduction 
and  Commentary  of  Purnananda  Svami’s  $a(cakranirupana,  itself,  forming  the 
sixth  Chapter  of  the  Sritattvacintimani. 

•Tattva. 


760 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


explaining,  and  showing  the  necessity  for  the  Mantras  and  so  forth  of  the 
Devatas  presiding  over  the  pericarps,  centres,  filaments,  stalks,  leaves,  and 
bo  forth,  of  those  lotuses.  Acting  under  the  command  from  our  Gurudcva, 
and  in  accordance  with  my  own  views,  I  have  never  as  yet  publicly  men¬ 
tioned  these  Bijamantras  and  so  forth,  and  shall  never  mention  them 
publicly.  For  this  reason  we  are  obliged  to  desist  from  entering  into  an 
explanation,  although  we  would  have  been  very  glad  to  do  so  if  we  could. 
Fourthly,  even  if  one  is  to  offer  an  explanation,  it  will  not  only  in  no  way 
render  any  help  to  the  community  of  Sadhakas,  but  will  also,  be  likely  to 
greatly  injure  them  both  here  and  hereafter.  For  it  is  the  command  of 
Bhagavan  Bhairavanatha  1  Himself,  the  l£vara  of  the  Tantra  Sastra,  that 
whoever  advances  in  the  path  of  the  six  Cakras  without  the  help  of  the 
shadow  of  Guru’s  fair  feet  is  likely  to  fall  into  great  danger  at  every  step. 
Knowing  all  this,  we  desist  from  doing  a  thing  which  will  lead  to  the  ruin 
of  both  ourselves  and  others.  We  hope  that  Sadhakas  will  realize  that 
we  have  done  this  for  their  good  also.  Of  course,  one  may  try  to  explain 
the  fundamental  principles  of  Bija  Mantras  and  so  forth  by  hints  and 
suggestions,  and  using  symbolical  words,  signs,  and  so  forth.  But,  firstly, 
this  is  throwing  dust  in  the  eyes  of  Dharma;  *  and,  secondly,  it  is  very 
difficult  to  say  what  space  such  an  explanation  would  take.  Now  that  the 
“  Tantratattva  ”  has  come  so  near  its  end,  it  would  be  sheer  madness  to 
undertake  so  uncertain  and  extensive  a  task.  Moreover,  we  do  not  believe 
that  every  subscriber  or  reader  of  the  “  Tantratattva  ”  is  a  true  Sadhaka. 
If  we  learn  that  the  publication  of  such  a  book  is  necessary  for  the  Com¬ 
munity  of  Sadhakas  only  who  receive  their  information  from  trustworthy 
sources  and  successive  generations  of  Gurus;  and  if,  by  the  merciful  glance 
of  the  All-good  Mother  suitable  arrangements  can  be  made,  we  shall  in 
time  proceed  to  cany  out  our  desire  of  explaining  the  principle  of  the  six 
Cakras.  Sadhakas  will  pardon  me  for  not  introducing  the  subject  now 
and  in  this  book.  Further,  according  to  the  advertisement  of  the 
**  Tantratattva,”  an  explanation  of  the  subject  of  the  six  Cakras  is  necessary 
in  connection  with  that  of  Kulacara,*  after  the  Paficamakara  4  and  such 
other  things  have  been  explained.1 

In  the  second  Chapter  of  the  Gautamiya  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Prana- 
y&ma  is  of  two  kinds,  according  as  it  is  Sagarbha  and  Nigarbha.8 

1  Siva,  the  Lord  of  Bhairavas. 

*  Deceiving  Dharma,  for  such  a  course  would  be  injurious  to  religion. 

*  The  way  of  the  T&ntrik  Kaulas. 

*  The  Paficatattva,  meat,  wine,  fish,  parched  grain  (Mudra),  and  woman. 

*  As  these  have  not  been  explained,  the  time  has  not  come  for  dealing  with 
the  subject. 

•These  terms  literally  mean  “ pregnant  and  non-pregnant.”  In  the  same 
way  cleansing  of  the  Nadis  is  called  either  Samanu  or  Nirmanu — that  is,  with 
or  without  the  use  of  Bija. 


761 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  (Contd.) 

Sagarbhaprapayama  is  that  which  is  performed  along  with  Japa  of  Mantra, 
and  Nigarbhapranayama  is  that  which  is  performed  without  any  Mantra, 
and  only  according  to  counts.1  O  man  of  good  deeds !  there  is  no  Tattva, 
no  Tapas,  knowledge,  state,  Yoga,  treasure,  or  other  thing  superior  to 
Prapayama.*  One  is  sure  to  meet  Brahman  by  the  Yoga,  which  consists 
of  the  practice  of  Prapayama  continuously  for  one  year.  It  is  undoubted 
that  by  dint  of  Pranayama  alone  all  the  Mayik  envelope  of  Paramatma 
who  is  consciousness  itself,  is  destroyed.  There  is  no  path  to  liberation 
besides  PrSpayama,  so  that  whatever  S&dhana  is  performed  without 
PranSyama  becomes  fruitless.  It  is  by  having  recourse  to  Pranayama  that 
Munis  have  attained  Siddhi,  and  a  Yogi  who  is  attached  to  Prapayama 
is  no  mere  Yogi,  but  Siva  Himself.  Men  learned  in  the  Yoga  Sastra  have 
given  the  name  Pranayama  to  the  process  which  consists  of  inspiration, 
■expiration,  and  retention  of  the  vital  air.*  The  word  “  Prana  ”  means 
breath,  and  “  Ayama  ”  means  its  control.4  That  is  Pranayama,  the  Yogi’s 
instrument  for  Yoga,  by  which  the  Pranavayu  (vital  air)  is  checked. 
Yogis  practise  this  PrinSySma  by  holding  their  nostrils  at  the  beginning 
as  well  as  the  end  of  Yoga.  Air  should  be  breathed  out  by  means  of  the 
right  nostril,  breathed  in  by  means  of  the  left  nostril,  and  retained  with 
Japa  of  Mantra  thirty-two  times,  by  holding  both  the  nostrils.  This  is 
called  “  Pranayama.”  By  force  of  this  Pranayama  a  Brihmana  can 
speedily  bum  all  sins,  such  as  Brahminicide,  drinking  of  wine,  incest,  and 
so  forth.  Great  sins,  such  as  feticide,  are  destroyed  by  a  practice  of 
Pranayama  for  a  single  month. 

“The  Pranayama-practising  Yogi  who  daily  practises  Prapayama  sixteen 
times  in  the  morning  and  sixteen  times  in  the  evening  destroys  all  his  sin 
within  a  short  time,  just  as  within  such  time  fire  consumes  a  heap  of  cotton. 
Prapayama  is  the  expiation  for  all  sins.  As  when  a  person  puts  off  the  coat 
■of  mail  which  he  was  wearing,  his  body  becomes  free  from  discomfort, 
■so  by  dint  of  Prapayama  a  JIva  throws  off  the  sheath  of  nescience  *  generated 
by  desire  and  Karma,  and  is  converted  into  immaculate  Brahman.  O 
Gautama!  what  is  the  use  of  saying  much?  Listen  to  my  words:  there  is 
no  path  superior  to  Prinayiima  for  Yogis  to  attain  liberation.  Hence  a 
Sadhaka  should,  after  performing  Pranayama  in  the  manner  stated  above, 
place  all  the  Pi{ha-iaktis  of  Istadevata  in  his  own  body  at  the  time  of 
worship.” 

1  Matra. 

•Breath-control  according  to  the  Sastrik  injunctions.  Strictly  speaking, 
it  is  the  development  of  Prina  through  control  of  the  Pranavayu.  It  is  generally 
described  post. 

*  Pranavayu. 

4  Prapo  vayuriti  Khyata  ayamastannirodhanang. 

*  Avidya. 


762 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


In  the  ViSuddhrfvara  it  is  said:  “  A  Sadhaka  should  practise  Prapa- 
yama  thrice  with  Mulamantra.1 * * 4  Of  the  three,  POraka,  or  inspiration, 
must  be  made  through  the  Ida-naqli  *  on  the  left,  and  with  Japa  sixteen 
times  j  Kumbhaka,  or  retention  of  breath,  must  be  made  in  the  middle, 
or  Susumna  naiji,  and  with  Japa  sixty-four  times;  and  Recaka,  or  expira¬ 
tion,  must  be  made  through  the  Pirigala,  or  the  right  nadi,  with  Japa 
thirty-two  times.  The  exercise  should  then  be  continued,  provided  the 
Sadhaka  is  capable  of  doing  so,  in  the  reverse  way — that  is  to  say,  Puraka 
through  Pirigala,  Kumbhaka  in  Susumna,  and  Recaka  through  I<Ja ;  and 
then  again  in  the  opposite  way — that  is,  Puraka  through  Ida,  Kumbhaka 
in  Susumna,  and  Recaka  through  Pirigala,  The  numbers  of  Japa  stated 
above  apply  to  the  case  of  a  Sadhaka  who  is  able  to  do  them.  A  Sadhaka 
who  is  unable  to  perform  so  many  Japas  will  practise  Pranay&ma  with  a 
quarter  of  these  numbers.” 

In  another  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Air  should  be  breathed  in  with  Japa 
done  sixteen  times;  retained  with  Japa  done  four  times  this  number — that 
is  to  say,  sixty-four  times — and  breathed  out  with  Japa  done  half  the 
number  of  that  recited  in  retention — that  is  to  say,  thirty-two  times.  One 
who  is  unable  to  do  Japa  to  this  extent  will  practise  Pranayama  with  the 
quarters  of  these  numbers — that  is  to  say,  eight  *  in  breathing  in,  thirty-two 
in  retention  and  sixteen  *  in  breathing  out.  Again,  if  one  is  unable  to  do 
even  this  much  Japa,  he  will  follow  quartera  of  these  numbers — that  is  to- 
say,  two  in  inspiration,  eight  in  retention,  and  four  in  expiration.” 

The  Sastra  has  thus  ordained  rules  for  the  practice  of  Pranayama, 
varying  with  the  capacity  of  Sadhakas.  And  there  are  even  shorter  methods 
for  those  who  are  unable  to  carry  out  any  of  the  above  numbers  of  Japas. 

“  Air  should  be  breathed  in  through  Ida,  and,  with  Japa  of  Mula¬ 
mantra  done  once,  retained  in  Susumna,  with  Japa  done  four  times,  and 
breathed  out  through  Pirigala,  with  Japa  done  twice.  Pranayama  should 
be  performed  thrice  by  repeatedly  practising  the  above  process.  Puraka 
is  the  name  given  to  the  act  by  which  the  stomach  is  filled  with  air  from 
without,  and  Recaka  is  the  name  for  the  process  of  throwing  out  air  from 
the  stomach.”  * 


1  The  principal  Mantra  of  the  Devata  worshipped. 

*  From  the  Muladhara  to  the  twelve-petallcd  lotus  below  Sahasrara  a  Nadi 
(“  nerve  ”)  runs  which  is  called  the  Susumna,  within  which  are  two  others — viz., 
the  Vajra  and  CStrinl  Na<Jis.  On  each  side  of  the  Susumni  are  the  Ida  and 
Pirigala  Nadis,  the  three  being  “  Sun,"  “  Moon,”  and  “  Fire”.  See  Arthur 
Avalon’s  11  Serpent  Power  ”, 

*  These  are  halves  and  not  quarters  of  the  preceding  numbers. 

4  That  is,  inspiration  and  expiration.  This  is  the  life  of  all  breathing  things,, 
and  it  is  this  which  Pranayama  controls. 


76* 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  (Ccmtd.) 

In  the  Jfianamava  it  is  said:  “  Pragayama  is  the  name  of  the  process 
of  holding  the  nostrils  with  the  thumb  and  third  and  small  fingers  without 
the  help  of  the  first  and  middle  fingers.  O  Devi!  without  Pr&n&ySma  one 
is  not  competent  to  worship  a  Devata.” 

NySsa 
Rfyadinydsa  1 

“  No  Japa  or  Sadhana  will  be  effectual  without  Viayasa,  or  placing 
of  Rsi  (Seer),  Chandas  (metre),  and  Devata.” 

“  He  who  has,  after  receiving  instruction  from  the  mouth  of  MaheSvara 
Himself,  performed  full  Sadhana  of  a  Mantra  of  a  Devata  is  the  Rsi  of  that 
Mantra  of  that  Devata.  His  Nyasa  should  (on  account  of  his  thus  having 
the  posidon  of  Guru)  be  made  on  the  head.  Chandas  (metre)  is  called  so 
on  account  of  its  doing  Chadana,1  or  keeping  together  all  the  parts  of  the 
Mantras.  On  account  of  its  being  composed  of  letters  and  feet,  the 
Nyasa  of  Chanda  should  be  made  in  the  mouth.  And  because  Devata 
constantly  resides  in  the  heart-lotus  of  the  Sadhaka,  Her  Nyasa  should  be 
made  on  the  heart.  A  Sadhaka  cannot  reap  the  fruits  of  a  Mantra  if  its 
Rsi  and  Chandas  are  unknown  to  him.  And  for  those  who  do  not  know 
the  mode  of  application  *  of  the  Mantras  they  practice,  those  mantras  lose 
their  strength.” 

In  another  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  The  Nyasa  of  Rsi  should  be  made  on 
the  head,  that  of  Chanda  in  the  mouth,  that  of  Devata  on  the  heart,  that 
of  Bija  on  the  anus,  that  of  Sakti  on  the  feet,  and  that  of  Kilaka  on  all 
limbs  of  the  body.” 


Mdtrka- Nyasa 1 

In  the  Saktanandatarangini  it  is  said:  “  Nyasas  spoken  of  in  the 
Tantra-Sastra  should  be  performed  after  first  purifying  the  materials  of 
worship  and  so  forth.  Matfka  Sakti  is  of  two  kinds — namely,  Para  and 
Apara.  Para  Matrka  resides  within  Susumna,  and  Apara  Matrka  exists 
in  the  body.”  Outer  Matrka  is  but  another  name  of  Apara  Matrka.* 
The  Nyasa  of  inner  MatfkS  should  be  made  on  the  petals,  pericarps,  and 
so  fotth,  of  the  six  lotuses  comprising  the  six  cakras,  and  the  NySsa  of  the 


1  Nyasa  of  Ftsi  and  so  forth,  as  explained  in  the  text. 

*  Root  Chad,  to  cover.  *  Niyoga. 

1  Nyasa  of  Matfka.  The  external  Matfka  are  the  letters  and  the  sound  they 
connote.  The  inner  Matrka,  of  which  they  are  the  manifestation,  is  subtle 
sound  or  Jivaiakti. 

*  In  the  text  it  is  Para,  but  this  is  an  obvious  mistake;  it  should  be  Apara. 


764 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Mantras  of  Outer  M£tyka  should  be  made,  in  order,  on  the  forehead, 
face,  eyes,  cars,  nostrils,  cheeks,  lips,  teeth,  head,  mouth,  hands,  feet, 
joints,1  sides,  back,  navel,  belly,  heart,  shoulders,  and  from  heart  to  hands, 
from  heart  to  feet,  from  heart  to  belly,  and  from  heart  to  face. 

If  the  Matj-ka  Mantras  *  are  placed  in  the  reverse  order,  then  the 
Matrka  is  called  Samhara  Matrka;  and  if  they  are  set  forth  in  the  order 
■of  the  places  of  their  origin  from  Sri-Kantha  s  downwards,  then  it  is  called 
Sri-Kanthadi-Matrka. 

Moira  for  Nyasa  of  Matrka 

“  The  Nyfisa  should  be  performed  mentally  or  with  flowers,  or  with 
the  thumb  and  the  third  Anger.” 

In  the  Gautamiya  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Matrka  is  of  four  classes — 
namely,  Kevala  (plain)  Matrka,  Matrka  with  Bindu  (■),  Matrka  with 
Visarga  (:),  and  Matrka  with  both  Bindu  and  Visarga.  Kevala  Matrka 
grants  Vidya  (learning),  Matrka  with  both  Bindu  and  Visarga  grants 
Bhoga  (enjoyment),  Matrka  with  Visarga  grants  sons,  and  Matrka  with 
Bindu  grants  liberation.  Whoever  performs  this  Matrka-nyasa,  which 
grants  wealth,  fame,  and  longevity,  and  destroys  the  evils  of  the  Kali 
age,  acquires  the  Vibhutis  4  of  Sadaiiva  Himself.” 

Vtdya-Nydsa  * 

“  Nyasa  of  Vidya  should  be  done  on  the  head,  Muladh&ra,*  heart, 
three  eyes,  two  cars,  mouth,  two  arms,  back,  knees,  and  navel.  Whoever 
performs  Nyasa  in  this  manner  attains  the  state  of  PaSupati,7  even  though 
he  is  in  the  body  of  Paiu  or  Jiva.” 

$odha-Nyasa  • 

In  the  VIra  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  All  the  sins  of  a  Sadhaka  are  destroyed 
if  the  Sodha-Nyasa,  which  is  the  principal  of  all  Nyasas,  is  performed. 
§odha-Nyasa  overcomes  the  poison  of  snakes,  prevents  death  from  acci¬ 
dents,  and  destroys  evil  Grahas  •  and  diseases.  All  harmful  things  are  des¬ 
troyed  by  the  force  of  Sodha-Nyasa,  and  enemies  are  made  thereby  friendly. 

“  The  poems  of  a  Sadhaka  who  performs  Sodha-Nyasa  sweedy  flow  in 
waves  like  streams  of  grape-juice.10  The  eight  forms  of  Siddhi — namely, 

1  Agrabhaga.  1  Letters  of  the  alphabet. 

*  Throat;  “  Sri  "  is  honorific.  4  The  powers,  etc. 

*  Nyasa  of  Vidya,  as  above  described. 

*  The  centre,  between  the  anus  and  root  of  the  genitals. 

7  Siva.  8  Six  kinds  of  Nyasas. 

*  Stars  or  planets  ruling  the  destinies  of  creatures.  M  Dr&k?arasa. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  {Could.) 


769- 

Animi  i  and  so  forth — lie  within  the  hollow  of  his  hands.  Contemplation 
in  the  performance  of  §odha-Ny2sa  destroys  all  sins  of  body,  speech,  and 
mind.  All  lesser  sins  *  are  destroyed  by  recourse  to  §odh&-Nyfisa.  A 
Sadhaka  who  has  attained  Siddhi  in  Soqlha-Nyasa  can,  if  he  desires,  enter 
into  whatever  form  he  sees.  The  life  of  him  to  whom  a  Sadhaka  who  has 
done  §odha-Nyasa  bows  is  shortened.*  Even  Devatas,  not  to  speak  of 
men,  tremble  with  fear  at  the  sight  of  a  Sadhaka  who  performs  §o<jlha- 
Nyasa.” 

Rsyadhi-Nyasa,  MatrkS-Nyasa,  VidyS-Nyasa,  Tattva-NySsa,  fjio^lha- 
Ny&sa,  Jiva-Nyasa,  Atiga-Nyasa,  Kara-Nyasa,  Vyapaka-Nylsa,  K^ha- 
Nyasa,  and  many  other  Nyasas,  have  been  spoken  of  in  many  Tantras. 
It  would  be  extremely  improper  for  us  to  publish  their  application.  All 
that  we  can  do  is  to  refer  to  the  authorities  only.  We  therefore  desist 
from  referring  to  their  application.  These  things,  which  can  be  learnt 
from  Gurus  only,  Sadhakas  will  learn  from  their  own  Gurus.  The  etymo¬ 
logical  meaning  of  the  word  “  Nyasa  ”  has  been  given  in  the  Sastra  as 
follows: 

“Just  as  wealth  acquired  with  Nyaya  or  rectitude,  when  worn  on 
the  body  in  the  form  of  ornaments,  becomes  a  source  of  joy  and  of  security 
in  adversity  and  prosperity  to  its  owner,  so  the  Bijas  of  Devatas,  when  laid 
out  on  the  limbs  of  a  SSdhaka’s  body,  become  to  him  a  source  of  Brahma- 
bliss  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  security,  both  here  and  hereafter,  on  the 
other.  The  word  Nyasa  is  formed  by  the  combination  of  the  initial  syllables 
of  Nyaya  (because  Nyasa  is  like  wealth  acquired  with  Nyaya  or  rectitude), 
and  of  Sarva  (on  account  of  its  capacity  to  secure  Sarva,  or  all  things)." 

There  is  no  means  equal  to  Nyasa  for  attaining  the  state  of  perfect 
absorption  in  Bhava  *  for  Devata.  The  chief  end  of  Nyasa  is  at  first  by 
means  of  particular  Nyasas  to  establish  one’s  Istadevata  as  differentiated 
Mantra  Sakti  *  in  all  parts  of  one’s  body;  and  then  by  means  of  Vyapaka, 
or  comprehensive  Nyasa,  to  feel  the  presence  of  the  Devata  as  one  undivided 
entity  whose  substance  is  Mantra  all  over  one’s  body  from  the  feet  to  the 
crown  of  the  head*  It  is  by  virtue  of  Nyasa  that  Sadhakas  have  been 
able  to  accomplish  their  desired  ends.  It  is  by  virtue  of  Nyasas  that 


lThe  power  of  becoming  very  small,  very  great,  etc. 

*  Upapataka. 

*  It  is  inauspicious  to  be  bowed  to  by  one  who  is  superior  to  oneself. 

4  Vide  ante. 

5  Panccbinna  Mantra  Sakti.  The  Devata,  as  appearing  in  a  particular 
Mantra,  is  thought  of  as  defined  or  embodied  in  that  particular  Mantra.  More¬ 
over,  the  Mantra  is  in  the  first  place  applied  to  particular  parts  of  the  body,  and 
finally  by  Vyapaka  Nyasa  application  is  made  to  the  whole  body. 

*  Brahmarandhra. 


766 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Sadhakas  are  free  and  fearless,  unconquerable  in  the  world  of  Suras, 
Asuras,  and  men.  Fear  itself  flies  away  with  fear  on  hearing  the  name 
■  of  the  Mother  uttered  with  leonine  voice.  Of  whom,  then,  can  a  Sadhaka 
'be  afraid  who  holds  in  his  heart  that  Mother  AbhayS,1  the  frightener  of 
fear  and  di speller  of  the  fears  of  the  three  worlds  ?  How  can  he  fear  who 
sits  on  Her  fear-dispelling  lap  ?  Who  in  the  regions  of  Suras  and  Asuras,1 * 
moving  and  unmoving  things,  Indra,  Candra,  Vayu,  Vanina,  Yama,  and 
Yaksa,®  has  the  power  to  thwart  his  purpose  by  any  weapon  ?  The  thunder¬ 
bolt  4  of  Indra,  the  rod  *  of  Yama,  the  serpentchain  4  of  Rubera,1 * * *  and  the 
the  club  *  of  Vayu — which  of  these  has  the  power  to  cope  with  him  ? 

Does  he  who  has  taken  the  RajarajeSvari  up  on  his  lap,  or  who  has 
seated  himself  on  the  lap  of  the  Rajarajdvarf,  fear  the  soldiers  and  generals 
of  the  State  ?  This  is  why  a  Sadhaka  can  proceed  alone,  proudly  with  a 
fearless  heart,  to  perform  Sadhana  over  a  dead  body,  or  pracdse  Dhyana 
in  a  horrible  cremation  ground  *  in  the  midst  of  a  dense  forest.  Standing 
between  the  world  on  the  one  hand  and  the  Mother  of  the  world  on  the 
-other,  the  S&dhaka  unfurls  the  standard  of  victory,  and  jumps  into  the 
arms  of  the  supreme  Devi  of  Victory.10  “  Fear  ”  is  a  term  never  found  in 
the  dictionary  of  him  whose  life’s  motto  is  “  Victory”.  Hence  a  Sadhaka 
sits  in  worship  of  the  Mother  by  covering  his  body  with  the  indestructible 
armour,11  consisting  of  Mantra,  given  by  the  Mother,  enveloping  his  limbs 
with  the  spirit  and  energy  11  of  the  Mother,  and  becoming  full  of  the  Mother 
-on  the  lap  of  the  Mother.  The  Nyasa  of  Mantras  on  the  Sadhaka’s  body 
in  the  course  of  his  worship  of  the  Mother  is  therefore  nothing  but  keeping 
that  which  is  his  own  thing  (self-hood) 18  as  a  trust  (Nyasa)  with  the  Mother. 
And  it  is  the  interest  accruing  out  of  this  trust  estate  which  is  the  only 
remaining  resource  at  the  last  moment  in  this  Samsara  of  existence. 

Seeing  this  deep  and  solemn  meaning  of  Nyasa,  Gitanjali 14  has  said: 

“  Everything  of  Brahmamayi  is  full  of  Brahman. 

“Ola  Brahmanjali 14  to  Her  is  the  seeing  Her  with  the  eye-Brahman, 
taking  Her  to  the  heart-Brahman  and  the  thinking  of  the  foot-Brahman. 

“  i.  O!  nor  hands,  nor  feet,  nor  can,  nor  eyes  nor  anything  of  Her 
is  made  of  the  elements.  The  substance  of  Her  form  is  Brahman.  From 


1  Fear-dispelling  Dev!. 

1  The  Devas  and  their  enemies. 

*  The  Lord  of  the  Celestials,  the  Moon,  Air,  Waters,  and  Death  Devatis, 
.and  the  class  of  Devayoni  called  Yalua. 

4  Vajra.  *  Danda.  4  NagapSia. 

I  Lord  of  wealth.  *  Gads.  4  £ma&na. 

10  Jayajayanti.  11  Kavaca.  14  Tejas. 

II  AhahkSra.  14  The  author’s  volume  of  poems  of  that  name. 

■u  Afijali  or  offering  made  to  Brahman. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  (Conid.)  767 

tne  toes  of  Her  feet  to  the  crown  of  Her  head,  and  at  every  place  Brahman 
■alone  is  manifest. 

“  2.  The  nature  1  of  Her  body  is  only  truly  known  to  Vi?iju,  the 
pervader  of  the  World,  when  severed  by  His  Sudarfana  Cakra,  every  part 
of  Her  body  gave  rise  to  a  perfect  image  of  Her  in  each  of  the  fifty-one 
Pltha-Cakras.* 

“3.  O !  he  alone  who  worships  Her  knows  how  Her  body  is  formed. 
Alter  the  completion  of  the  chief  worship,  abstruse  truth  concerning  the 
Brahman  isTevealed  during  the  worship  of  the  six  limbs.* 

“  4.  The  land  of  Thy  birth  is  Thyself.  In  Thyself  art  Thou  mani¬ 
fested.  In  Thy  heart  art  Thou  Thyself.  Thy  head,  Thy  crest,  Thy 
Kavaca,  Thy  eyes,  and  Thy  weapon,  are  all  Thyself. 

“  5.  Becoming  Thyself,  with  Thyself,  the  Sadhaka  sinks  His  self  in 
Thyself.  And  again  at  the  conclusion  of  worship  bringing  out  *  Thyself  ’ 
and  '  Myself/  the  Sadhaka  unites  Thyself  with  His  self  and  becomes  One. 

“  6.  At  the  beginning  of  worship  ‘  I  am  He  ’  and  at  its  end  ‘  I  am 
He/  The  ‘  Thou  ’  which  comes  in  the  middle  is  also  made  of  ‘  I  ’;  other¬ 
wise  how  does  Nyasa  on  Thy  limbs  affect  Me  or  Nyasa  on  My  limbs  affect 
Thee?  4 

“  7.  When  love  awakes,  is  Sadhana  possible  between  Thyself  and 
Myself?  *  For  when  relation  is  lost  in  undifferentiation,  the  worshipper  of 
Brahmamayi,  intoxicated  with  the  bliss  of  love,  then  becomes  all  full  of 
Brahman. 

“  8.  Siva  is  disconsolate  with  weeping  at  the  thought  that  Her 
beauteous  feet  no  longer  touch  His  six  limbs.  What  a  mistake  on  the  part 
•of  Siva!  In  all  Thy  limbs  art  Thou,  but  in  Thy  feet  am  I.  Hence  I  say 
My  meditation  on  those  feet  is  no  error  on  My  part”  • 


1  Tattva. 

*  When  Siva,  after  the  death  of  his  spouse  Sati  at  the  Dak^a  Yajfia,  was 
wrought  with  grief,  and  the  world  was  thus,  by  the  loss  of  HU  guiding  and  ruling 
power,  endangered,  Vispu  took  the  dead  body  of  Siva’s  spouse  from  his  arms, 
and  that  He  might  no  longer  nurse  the  remembrance  of  Her  cut  it  into  fifty-one 
fragments,  which  fell  at  various  places  in  India  called  Pfthas,  at  each  of  which 
the  Devi  U  wonhipped.  See  p.  8,  A.  and  E.  Avalon’s  “  Hymns  to  the  Goddess  ”. 

*  Referring  to  the  $adartga  Nyasa  on  the  body  of  the  Devata  before 
pranapratijtha. 

*  They  are  one  and  the  same,  and  therefore  when  the  Sadhaka  does  Nyasa 
on  Himself  he  does  NySsa  on  the  Devata  also. 

1  Love  assumes  union,  alld  SSdhana  is  the  state  which  leads  to  it. 

*  The  verse  refers  to  Siva’s  grief  on  the  death  of  HU  spouse  Sad.  Siva  was 
deluded  in  thinking  that  He  had  lost  the  Devi  because  Sati  had  gone.  For  the 
Devi  U  everywhere,  and  not  only  in  the  feet  of  Sati.  Though  the  Dew  U  every¬ 
where,  yet  the  Sadhaka  fixes  his  mind  on  Her  feet  only. 


768 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


In  Sy&m5rahasya,  Kalltattva,  Syamarcana  Gandrika,  Kamala  Tantra, 
Vira  Tantra,  Mahanirvana  Tantra,  Ann  ad  a  Kalpa,  Tod  ala  Tantra,. 
Gautama  Tantra,  Tararahasya,  and  many  other  T  antras,  there  are  marked 
differences  of  opinion  as  regards  the  order  in  which  Pranayama,  Bhuta- 
Suddhi,  Nyasa,  and  so  forth,  should  be  performed.  Some  Tantras  ordain 
Rhutasuddhi  alter  Pranayama,  and  others  Prapayama  after  Bhutaiuddhi. 
Some  ordain  their  performance  before  placing  of  Arghya,1  and  others  after 
it.  In  view  of  the  existence  of  such  differences  of  opinion,  Bhagavan,  the 
Creator  of  all  things,  has,  in  the  Svatantra  Tantra,  decided  the  question 
when  He  says  “  different  Tantras  ordain  different  orders  of  worship. 
A  Sadhaka  should  follow  any  one  of  them.”  That  is  to  say,  one  should 
perform  worship  and  so  forth  according  to  the  rules  ordained  in  that 
particular  Tantra  which  is  specially  concerned  with  the  worship  of  the 
particular  Ispidevata  whom  the  devotee  may  worship. 

In  the  Kularnava  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  He  who  daily  performs  Nyasa 
according  to  rules  stated  in  the  Agama  Sastra  attains  Divine  Sakti,  and 
acquires  Siddhi  in  Mantra.  O  my  beloved!  from  the  presence  of  the 
Sadhaka  who  performs  Japa  of  his  Ista  Mantra  along  with  Nyasa,  Kavaca,* 
and  Chanda,*  Devatas  of  obstruction  1  fly  just  as  a  herd  of  elephants  flies 
from  the  presence  of  a  lion.  The  misguided  one  who  does  Japa  5  without 
performing  Nyasa  is  beset  by  all  manner  of  obstacles,  as  a  young  deer  is 
beset  by  tigers.” 


Mental  Worship 

The  Sastra  ordains  Dhyana  *  after  performance  of  Nyasa  and  so  forth, 
and  before  commencement  of  mental  worship.  The  plain  meaning  of  the 
word  “  Dhyana  ”  is  a  angle-pointed  meditation.  The  Sastra  also  lays 
down  which  particular  Devata  should  be  contemplated  in  what  particular 
form.  It  is  merely  this  description  of  forms  which  is  known  as  Dhyana 
in  the  society  of  to-day.  Treatises  on  the  rituals  also  give  these  Dhyana- 
Mantras.  The  purpose  of  this  is  that  the  remembrance  of  these  Mantras 
greatly  helps  the  meditation  of  the  Devata’ s  body  from  feet  to  head  and 
from  head  to  feet  in  order.  But  in  course  of  time  this  purpose  has  been 
lost,  and  Dhyana  has  been  reduced  to  a  mere  recitation  of  the  Dhyana- 
Mantras.  Many  people  are  under  the  impression  that  whether  they  actually 
meditate  on  the  form  of  Devata  or  not,  Dhyana  is  performed  if  they  merely 
recite  the  Dhyana-Mantra  after  Pitha-Nyaaa.  But  the  decision  of  the 


1  The  offering.  *  The  protective  Mantra. 

*  Vide  ante .  4  ViggnadevatS. 

*  “  Recitation  ”  of  Mantra  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

*  Contemplation,  vide  post. 


769 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  (Cmtd.) 

Sastra  ii  otherwise.  According  to  the  Sistra,  Dhyana  is  performed  by 
really  meditating  on  the  form  of  the  Devata,  no  matter  whether  the  DhyAna- 
Mantra  is  recited  or  not;  for  the  Sastrik  meaning  of  the  expression 
“  Dhyayet  ”  is  “  should  meditate,”  and  not  “  should  recite  the  Dhyana- 
mantra.”  Hence,  the  DhySna  which  is  performed  by  simply  reciting  the 
Dhyana- mantra  while  the  mind  is  wandering  elsewhere  is  no  Dhy2na  of 
the  Devata,  but  is  rather  a  Dhyana  of  the  worshipper  himself.  We  often 
see  that  worshippers  or  Purohitas  consider  the  time  which  is  occupied  in 
the  recitation  of  the  Dhyana-mantra  to  be  a  period  of  leisure  for  the  mind, 
and  utilize  it  in  thinking  on  any  other  subject.  Of  course,  one’s  Siddhi 
in  the  worship  of  Devata  depends  on  the  manner  of  one’s  Dhyana.  It  is 
therefore  needless  for  us  to  say  anything  on  the  subject.  But  it  is  a  settled 
fact  that  worship  performed  by  this  mode  of  Dhyana  is  no  worship  at  alL 

In  the  Sanatkumara  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Outer  worship1  should  not 
be  done  without  first  performing  mental  worship,  for  without  inner  worship 
outer  worship  is  fruitless,” 

In  the  Bhutahiddhi  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Inner  worship  is  ordained  in 
all  outer  worship.  O  MaheSvari!  a  single  inner  worship  grants  the  fruits 
of  a  crore 1  of  outer  worships.  What  necessity  is  there  for  outer  worship 
for  one  who  has  become  fully  accomplished  in  inner  worship  which,  even 
if  performed  but  only  once,  grants  the  fruits  of  a  crore  *  of  outer  worships? 
An  effort  to  perform  outer  worship  is  senseless  after  inner  worship  has  been 
perfectly  accomplished.  So  also  is  it  where  there  is  want  of  materials, 
for  in  the  absence  of  necessary  materials  outer  worship  is  never  fruitful.” 

In  another  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Even  if  all  articles  necessary  for  outer 
worship  are  available,  it  should  be  performed  after  performance  of  inner 
worship.”  And  nowadays  we  often  come  across  the  class  of  Sadhakas 
arrogating  to  themselves  a  high  religious  competence  of  whom  we  have 
spoken  before  as  the  people  who  consider  outer  worship  as  “  lower  than 
the  lowest.”  They  consider  it  beneath  their  dignity  to  worship  a  Devata 
with  outer  articles  like  flowers,  sandal  paste,  incense,  light,  and  so  forth; 
for,  with  the  notion  “  I  am  He,”  they  perform  worship  by  offering  flowers 
of  mercy,  forbearance,  and  so  on,  and  sacrificing  the  beasts  of  lust,  anger, 
and  so  forth.  Moreover,  they  even  say  that  this  form  of  worship  only  is 
true  worship,  or,  in  other  words,  outer  worship  is  but  useless  trouble  and 
wanton  destruction  of  life.  It  is  not  that  we  accept  or  reject  all  that  these 
people  say.  We  are  bound  to  accept  with  all  submission  whatever  the 
Sastra  approves  of.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  see  once  and  for  all 
what  the  Sastra  says  on  this  subject. 


1  Worship  of  the  Image,  with  materials  such  as  flowers,  lights,  sandal,  etc. 
*  Ten  millions . 

49 


.770 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


In  the  MahJnirvina  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  The  S&dhaka  should,  after 
performing  Dhyana  of  the  Isfadevata  in  this  manner,  put  a  flower  on  his 
own  head,  and  then  worship  Her  with  mental  articles  with  great  devotion. 
First,  he  should  offer  his  heart-lotus  for  Her  scat  and  then  offer  the  Ampta 1 
flowing  from  Sahasrara 1 *  for  the  washing  of  Her  feet.  The  mind  should 
be  offered  as  Arghya,4  and  the  Amjta 1  flowing  from  Sahasrara  for 
Acamana4  and  bathing.  The  element4  Akaia,6  should  be  offered  as 
raiment,  the  sense  of  smell  as  perfume;  the  heart  as  flower;  the  five  Pranas 7 
as  incense;  the  element 4 *  fire 4  as  light;  the  sea  of  nectar  *  as  food  offering 10 * * *; 
Anahata  Dhvani  u  as  a  bell;  the  element  air 14  as  a  Camara,14 *  and  the 
functions  of  the  ten  senses  and  the  restlessness  of  mind  as  the  dance.14 
Next,  in  order  to  perfect  self-absorption  in  the  Devata,  the  Sadhaka 
should  offer  fifteen  handfuls 14  of  mental  flowers  at  Her  lotus-feet. 
These  fifteen  handfuls  of  flowers  in  the  form  of  Bhava 14  consist  of  the  ten 
flowers  of  non-maya,  non-egotism,  non-attachment,  non-vanity,  non-delu¬ 
sion,  non-arrogancc,  non-enmity,  non-perturbance,17  non-malice,  and 
non-covetousness;  and  of  the  five  flowers  of  ahimsa,1*  control  of  the  senses, 
mercy,  forgiveness,  and  knowledge.  Next  should  be  offered  with  the 
mind  14  a  sea  of  a  nectar,  a  mountain  heap  of  flesh  and  fried  fish,  heaps 
of  fried  grain,40  with  clarified  butter,  sweet  rice,  Kula-nectar,  Kula-flowcrs,41 
and  water  used  for  washing  the  Pifria.1*  Next,  after  offering  as  sacrifices, 
lust  as  a  goat,  and  anger  as  a  buffalo,  the  Sadhaka  should  proceed  to 
perform  mental  Japa.44  In  this  Japa  the  fifty  Matrka  letters  will  be  the 
beads  of  rosary,  and  Kulakup<jaliiu  Herielf  will  be  the  thread  on  which 
these  beads  are  strung.  After  offering  Japa  in  this  maimer  and  mentally 


I  Nectar.  4  The  thousand-petalled  lotus  in  the  cranium. 

4  The  ritual  offering. 

‘.Water  which  is  sipped  to  cleanse  the  Ups,  mouth,  and  throat. 

4  Tattva.  4  Ether  and  the  space  at  which  it  appears. 

7  Prana,  Apana,  Vyana,  Udana,  Samana  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra). 

4  Tejas  Tattva.  •  Suda.  10  Naivedya. 

II  The  Bubtlc  sound  which  is  produced  in  the  heart-lotus.  Nada  (sound)  is 

either  Ahata,  which  is  produced  by  the  contact  of  two  substances,  or  the  Anahata 

nada,  which  exists  without  such  contact,  or  the  Ham*4  itself.  At  a  certain 

Stage  of  Yoga  practice  Yogis  hear  a  bell-sound  in  the  AnShata  Cakra. 

14  Vayu.  14  Fly-whisk  made  of  yak’s  tail. 

14  Dancing  is  done  before  the  Image  in  worship.  14  AfijaU.  14  Vide  ante. 

17  Aksobha — that  is,  tranquillity  of  mind.  14  Non-injury. 

14  These  are  all  ideal  offerings.  “  Mudra. 

41  See  A.  Avalon’s  “  Mahlnirvapa  Tantra 

**  Manasa  Japa,  as  to  which  see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  [Contd.)  771 

‘bowing  with  eight  limbs,1 * *  and  thus  finishing  the  inner  Yajiia,*  the  Sadhaka 
■should  prooeed  to  perfonn  outer  worship.  At  the  beginning  of  outer 
worship  there  is  purification  *  of  Special  Arghya,4  concerning  which  listen 
to  what  I  say.  The  mere  placing  of  the  Special  Arghya  greatly  satisfies 
the  Devata.  One  seeing  the  Arghya  vessel  put  in  its  place,  Yoginls 5 *  and 
BrahmS  and  other  Devas  and  Bhairavas  dance  with  joy,  and  grant  the 
fruits  of  the  consummation  of  worship.” 

It  is  true  that  the  Sastra  lays  down  these  rules  for  mental  worship  or 
inner  Yajiia;  and  it  is  clearly  affirmed  that  this  worship  is  more  fruitful 
than  crores 4  of  other  worship;  but  it  must  also  be  understood  that  inner 
Yajfia  or  mental  worship  bears  crorefold  *  fruit  only  if  it  is  thoroughly 
performed.  It  is  all  very  well  to  speak  or  hear  of  giving  the  heart-lotus 
for  a  seat  and  the  nectar  from  Sahasrara  7 * *  for  washing  the  feet;  but  we< 
must  consider  how  many  people  there  are  who  are  able  to  carry  this  out 
practically.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  even  to  hear  for  anyone  who  is  not  a 
Sadhaka  accomplished  in  the  penetration  of  the  six  Cakras.*  Does  it  not 
make  you  ashamed  to  think  of  offering  the  five  elements  Akaia  and  so 
-forth  *  as  raiment,  scent,  flower,  incense,  and  a  light  ?  It  is  true  that  for 
one  who  offers  handfuls  of  flowers  of  non-maya,  non-egotism,  non-attach¬ 
ment,  non-vanity,  non-delusion,  non-arrogance,  non-enmity,  non-per- 
turbance,10  non-envy,  non-greed,  non-injury,  control  of  the  senses,  mercy, 
forgiveness,  and  knowledge,  there  is  no  necessity  for  offering  handfuls  of 
real  flowers.  But  it  is  difficult  to  restrain  one’s  laughter  at  the  mere 
thought  that  a  JIva  of  the  Samsara  who  lives  in  the  womb  of  Maya,  and 
is  wholly  engrossed  in  feelings  oflust  and  anger,  greed  and  delusion,  vanity 
and  envy,  will  offer  non-maya,  non-attachment,  non-enmity,  and  so  forth, 
as  flowers.  You  have  no  doubt  the  right  to  cull  and  offer  flowers,  but 
nothing  can  be  more  foolish  on  your  part  than  to  proceed  to  collect  and 
fill  your  flower-vessel  with  flowers  of  a  kind  of  which  there  is  not  even  one 
plant  in  your  garden.  There  is  the  provision  for  sacrificing  lust  as  a  goat 
.  and  anger  as  a  buffalo.  But  is  it  possible  for  a  Jiva  attached  to  the  SamsSra 
to  offer  such  sacrifices?  Is  it  not  the  height  of  presumption  on  your  part  to 

1  As$anga  pra^iama,  a  form  of  obeisance  in  which  eight  parts  of  the  body 
touch  the  ground,  the  tips  of  the  toes,  the  knees,  the  elbows,  tip  of  nose,  and 

forehead. 

*  Sacrifice  or  rite.  *  Samskara. 

4  Offering  as  distinguished  from  S&m&nya  Arghya. 

*  Avarana  Devat&s  of  Kali,  etc. 

4  Crore=ten  million.  4  Vide  anti. 

*  $a(cakrabhcda  (see  Introduction  to  T antra  Sastra  and  A.  Avalon’s  “  Serpent 

Power.”) 

*  Space  or  ether,  air,  fire,  water,  earth. 

u  Vide  ante— tranquillity  of  mind. 


772 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


proceed  to  offer  as  sacrifice,  and  to  boast  of  having  offered,  the  goat  and 
the  buffalo,  the  oppressions  and  executions  of  which  render  you  restless, 
and  make  you  flee  with  fear  both  day  and  night  ?  You  are  given  to  saying 
in  and  out  of  season  that  outer  offerings  of  leaves,  flowers,  incense,  lights,. 
Naivedya,1  and  so  forth,  are  nothing.  But  we  ask.  Had  these  things  been 
nothing,  could  you  have  known  anything  of  that  which  you  consider  as 
something?  If  there  were  really  no  such  thing  as  leaves,  flowers,  incense, 
lights,  and  so  forth,  whence,  then,  has  come  the  provision  of  offering  by 
analogy  non-m&ya,  non-arrogance,  and  so  forth,  as  flowers,  and  lust,  anger,, 
and  so  forth,  as  goats  and  buffaloes  in  sacrifice?  If  there  is  at  the  root 
really  no  offering  of  flowers,  whence  comes  the  provision  for  the  offering 
of  non-maya,  non-arrogance,  and  so  forth,  as  flowers?  You  say  that  the 
external  offering  of  flowers  and  so  forth  is  nothing.  But  I  ask,  Is  the 
offering  of  flowers  of  non-maya  and  so  forth  something  real?  Can  non- 
maya,  non-arrogance,  and  so  forth,  be  ever  flowers?  Can  real  flowers 
have  anything  to  do  with  the  mind  ?  Do  plants  in  a  garden  ever  bear  flowers 
of  non-arrogance?  Does  lust  ever  really  move  about  in  the  form  of  a  goat? 
Does  anger  ever  approach  you  really  in  the  form  of  a  buffalo?  Can  any 
of  these  things  be  ever  an  object  of  offering?  Now,  ponder  and  say  whether 
it  is  the  outer  worship  or  mental  worship  which  is  truly  real.  All  that 
belongs  to  mental  worship  is  but  the  imagining  of  an  image  of  outer 
worship,  and  is  a  shadow  of  it.  When  a  Jiva  really  attains  the  state  of 
non-maya,  does  he  any  longer  make  any  distinction  between  the  worshipper 
and  that  which  is  worshipped?  What  Brahman  will  he  worship,  and  for 
what  purpose,  he  to  whom  Brahman  is  everywhere  in  the  world,  and  who 
has  become  Brahman  himself?  In  fact,  it  is  because  Maya  has  not  dis¬ 
appeared  that  provision  is  made  for  offering  flowers  of  non-maya.  The 
sole  purpose  of  mental  worship  is  that  haply,  in  consequence  of  repeatedly 
thinking  of  flowers  of  non-maya,  the  bonds  of  Maya  may  be  snapped  in 
course  of  time.  Otherwise,  the  Sastra  would  never  have  permitted  a 
person  who  is  steeped  in  Mayi  to  offer  flowers  of  non-maya.  By  such 
daily  practice  of  daily  meditation  and  concentration  the  cloak  of  Maya 
that  covers  a  Jiva  is  likely  to  fall  off.  This  is  the  reason  why,  notwith¬ 
standing  that  worldly  Jivas  like  ourselves  have  now  no  competency  for 
meditation  and  Samadhi,  which  is  knowledge,  there  is  yet  the  possibility 
that  he  may  be  able  by  constant  practice  of  outer  worship  to  proceed 
along  this  path  in  course  of  time,  by  the  blessing  of  Guru  and  the  grace 
of  the  Supreme  Devata.  This  is  why,  in  dealing  with  the  subject  of  a 
Sadhaka’s  effort  to  achieve  the  impossible  by  offering  things  which,  though 
he  may  wish  at  heart  to  give,  he  has  really  no  power  to  give,  the  Sastra 


1  Food  offering. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  (Ccnld.) 


773 


La*  said:  “  O  Sidhaka!  even  if  you  are  unable  to  make  an  external  offering, 
you  have  at  least  the  right  to  worship  the  Devi  who  is  mind  by  searing  Her 
in  your  mind,  to  the  knowledge  and  lull  contentment  of  your  mind.  Why 
should  you  be  sorry  on  this  account  so  long  a*  the  Mother  who  is  mind 
exists  and  your  mind  is  your  own?  Open  for  once  the  door  of  the  temple 
of  mind,  and,  searing  the  Mother,  who  is  the  Mind  of  the  mind,  on  the 
throne  of  the  mind,  worship  Her  with  all  your  mind,  all  your  heart,  and 
all  your  world.1 * *  The  full  oblation  in  Her  worship  is  completed  with  the 
lull  satisfaction  of  the  mind.*  Fulfil  the  desire  of  your  heart  by  offering 
in  handfuls  at  the  feet  of  the  Devi  seated  on  a  corpse »  all  the  worldly 
objects,  desire,  enjoyments,  and  aspirations,  which  arc  yours.  Finish  the 
mind’s  play  with  the  Mother  to  the  satisfaction  of  your  mind.  If  the 
Mother  who  is  mind  itself  appropriates  to  Herself  the  functions  of  your 
mind,  it  will  no  longer  be  necessary  for  you  to  perform  even  mental,  not 
to  speak  of  outer,  worship. 

So  long  as  outer  worship  endures,  there  is  the  provirion  which  requires 
performance  of  mental  worship  also.  But  even  where  these  materials  for 
outer  worship  are  wanting,  the  Sastra  ordains  that  there  also  mental 
worship  makes  the  Sadhaka’s  worship  complete.  For,  She  for  whom 
worship  is  ordained  is  a  thing  of  the  heart,  and  outer  worship  is  only  an 
expression  of  the  feelings  of  that  heart. 

In  the  Yamala  it  is  said:  “O  Maheivari!  where  outer  worship  is 
impracticable,  the  Spouse  of  Siva  should  be  worshipped  in  the  heart;  and 
from  this  worship  the  Sadhaka  will  reap  the  fruits  of  alk  forms  of  worship.” 

In  the  Gandharva  Tantra  it  is  said:  “The  man  who  offers  mental 
Naivedya  4  to  the  Mah&devi  with  devotion  attains  longevity  and  happiness. 
He  who  places  round  the  neck  of  the  Devi  who  is  mind  itself  a  mental 
garland  of  a  thousand  lotuses,  lives  in  the  City  of  the  Deri  for  hundreds 
and  thousands  of  crores  of  Kalpas,1  and  then  {if  he  has  desires)  *  in  his 
next  birth  acquires  sovereignty  over  the  entire  earth  with  all  its  seas. 
He  who  mentally  walks  round  the  Mahadevi  has,  through  the  influence 
of  such  movement  round  the  Daksina,1  no  longer  to  make  any  journey 


1  The  world  is  considered  the  Sadhaka’s,  and  the  offer  of  it  to  Her  is  seeing 
Her  in  everything  in  the  world. 

*  The  sense  is,  worship  Her  so  long  as  you  are  not  fully  satisfied.  Because, 
if  you  are  not  satisfied.  She  is  not. 

*  She  is  here  thought  of  in  Savasana. 

4  Food  offering. 

6  A  crore  is  ten  millions.  A  Kalpa  is  a  period  between  two  world 
dissolutions. 

4  Author’s  parenthesis. 

1 A  name  of  the  Devi,  meaning  the  Merciful  and  Gracious  One. 


774 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


to  the  South  (Dakjipa).1  Nor  will  he  see  Hell  in  the  Kingdom  of  Yama.. 
He  who  devotedly  bows  to  the  lotus-feet  of  MahadevI  conquers  thir 
Brahma^  a,1  composed  of  three  worlds,  and  sinks  in  Brahma-bliss  in  the 
eternal  abode  of  the  Mother  of  the  world.  He  who,  being  incapable  of. 
such  mental  action,  is  restless  with  the  thought,  ‘  I  shall  worship  Maha- 
mayk,  the  spouse  of  Maheivara,  with  various  kinds  of  Naivedyas,’  *  and 
who  under  the  urgent  promptings  of  this  thought  repeatedly  prays,. 
‘  O  Mother!  give  me  Naivedyas  *  according  to  my  mind.  Let  me  worship 
Thee  to  the  satisfaction  of  my  mind  by  offering  thee  Naivedyas,*  which 
are  Thine’;  or  who,  being  himself  incapable  of  making  the  offering,, 
repeatedly  urges  another  to  do  so,  saying,  *  Offer  Naivcdya  *  to  the  Mother,’ 
he,  too,  conquers  the  three  worlds,  and  enjoys  perfect  bliss  in  the  Devi’s 
abode.” 

In  the  sixth  Ullasa  of  the  Saktanandataradgini  it  is  said:  “Those 
who  seek  the  Devata  without,  forsaking  the  Devata  residing  in  the  heart,, 
are  like  a  man  who  wanders  about  in  the  search  for  glass  after  throwing 
away  a  Kaustubha  gem*  which  he  held  in  his  hand.  After  seeing  the 
Itfadevata  in  one’s  heart,  one  should  establish  Her  in  the  image,  picture, 
vessel,  or  Yantra,*  and  then  worship  Her.  O  Parameivari!  in  the  worship' 
of  Devatas  one  should  think  of  the  particular  ornaments  and  carriers  * 
which  belong  to  them  individually.” 

“  Next,  I  shall  speak  of  inner  Yajria,  by  virtue  of  which  Sadhakas 
become  full  of  the  Divinity.  Sitting  comfortably  with  the  face  towards 
the  east  or  north,  a  SSdhaka  should  meditate  on  the  Sea  of  Nectar  in  his 
heart,  in  that  sea  is  the  Isle  of  Gems,1  with  sands  of  gold.  It  is  wondrously 
adorned  with  Kalpa-trees,*  laden  with  flowers,  and  with  Mandara,  Parijata, 
and  other  celestial  trees,*  which  are  ever  in  bloom  and  fruit;  fragrant  to 
its  farthest  quarters  with  the  sweet  smell  of  various  flowers,  over  which 
hover  swarms  of  black  bees,  gladdened  by  the  fragrance  of  their  gay 
beauty.  The  Isle  resounds  throughout  with  the  sweet  music  of  singing 
cuckoos.10  The  lakes  of  the  island  are  brilliant  with  full-blown  lotuses  of 
gold.  The  island  is,  moreover,  adorned  with  strings  of  pearls,  heaps  of 
flowers,  garlands,  silken  draperies,  and  gates  of  gold.  In  that  island  one 

1  The  region  of  the  dead,  the  Kingdom  of  Yama.  *  Universe. 

*  Food  offering. 

*The  Kaustubha  is  a  great  gem  secured  by  Vi$r>u  at  the  churning  of  the 
ocean. 

*  The  diagram  such  as  the  Srividya  Yantra  on  the  cover  of  this  book. 

•  Vahana.  ’  Manidvipa.  »  Desire-gratifying  trees. 

•  Trees  growing  in  heaven.  These  are  Mandara,  Parijata,  Santana,  Hari- 
candana,  KaTpavyk?a.  The  first  two  and  the  last  are  here  mentioned. 

10  Kolrila— the  Koel,  the  black  or  Indian  cuckoo  (Cucuius  indicus),  which, 
with  the  spring,  black  bee,  the  vernal  breeze,  and  so  forth,  are  the  companions, 
of  the  God  of  Desire. 


775 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  (Could.) 

should  think  of  a  Kalpa-trce.  The  four  Vedas  of  IJA,  Yajus,  Sima  and 
Atharva,  characterized  by  the  three  Gugas  of  Sattva,  Rajas  and  Tamas, 
are  its  four  branches.  It  bears  wonderfully  coloured  flowers — yellow, 
black,  white,  red,  and  of  other  hues.  It  is  full  of  singing  cuckoos,1  black 
bees,  and  many  other  kinds  of  birds.  Thinking  thus  of  the  Kalpa-tree, 
one  should  next  think  of  an  Altar  of  Gems  at  its  foot,  and  of  a  large 
Marujala,*  red  and  full  of  lustre  *  on  that  altar.  This  red  Mao^ala  18 * 
surrounded  by  jewelled  steps  brilliant  as  the  rising  sun,  and  by  four  gates 
with  flying*  banners.*  It  is  encircled  by  walls  of  gems  ornamented  with 
every  kind  of  jewel.  It  is  presided  over  by  Indra,  Yama,  Viyu,  Varupa, 
and  other  Lokapalas,4 * *  in  their  own  respective  places.  It  is  in  every 
quarter  full  of  Siddhas,  Caracas,  Gandharvas,  Vidyadharas,*  great  serpents 
playful  Kinneras,*  and  Apsaras.*  There  are  on  all  sides  fair  women  o 
the  land  of  the  Immortals  dancing  and  playing  music.  It  is  decorated 
with  banners  hung  with  innumerable  little  bells.  It  is  ornamented  with 
gems  of  ruby  *  and  lapis  lazuli 7 * *  and  jewelled  Camaras,*  festooned  with 
garlands  of  large  pearls,  and  coloured  and  painted  with  sandal  and  musk. 

“  O  Devi!  the  Sadhaka  should  think  that  in  the  midst  of  this  Magdab 
there  is  an  altar  made  of  great  rubies.*  Let  him  there  see  in  his  mind  the 
Devi’s  four-sided  throne  on  this  altar  tinted  with  the  hue  of  the  rays  of 
newly  risen  suns  and  moons,  and  which  is  the  three  Devas,  Brahma,  Vijgu, 
and  Mahdvara.’  O  Mahtrivari!  the  Sadhaka  should  think  of  a  flowery 
bed  on  that  throne  and  then,  after  worshipping  the  Pithadcvata’s 10  of  the 
Isfadcvata  therein  according  to  the  injunctions  of  the  respective  Tantras, 
let  him  meditate  on  the  Parameivari,  seated  in  the  posture  of  the  lotus- 
seat*  on  Sadaliva  the  Mahapreta,11  on  that  flowery]  bed.  Next,  the 
Sadhaka  should,  after  meditating  on  his  I${adevata  with  ornaments,  carrier,1* 

1  Kokila— the  Koel,  the  black  or  Indian  cuckoo  (Cuculus  indicus),  which, 

with  the  spring,  black  bee,  the  vernal  breeze,  and  so  forth,  are  the  companions 
of  the  Goa  of  Desire. 

I  The  Yoni  Yantm.  *  Tejas. 

4  Guardians  of  Lokas  or  elemental  or  other  Lords. 

4  Various  classes  of  Devayoni  or  Spirits  produced  from  the  Devas  and  the 
Devas’  abode. 

4  Manikya.  7  Vaidurya.  *  Fly-whisks  made  of  yak’s  tail. 

*  The  altar  is  four-sided,  and  the  Devas  of  which  it  is  said  to  be  made  are 
in  the  text  three.  The  four  supports  are  generally  given  as  Brahma,  Vispu, 

Rudra,  liana.  The  fifth  SadaSiva  forms  the  seat  of  the  bed  on  which  the  Devi 
is  seated.  These  five  Sivas  are  known  as  the  Mabapreta.  Hence  Devi  is  called 

intheLalita  (v.  174)  Paiicapretamaficidhistayim. 

10  That  is,  Purgaiaila  Rfha  on  the  east,  UddiySna  PI{ha  on  the  south, 
J&landhara  on  the  west,  and  KamarOpa  Pith*  on  the  north. 

II  Padxnasana. 

J*  Vahana- — the  vehicle  Vrhkh  bean  the  Devi  or  other  Devata  as  the  Bird 
King  Gaiutja  in  the  case  of  Vfrgu. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  T ANTRA 


m 

weapons,  and  family,1  and  offering  mental  jewelled  shoes  at  Her  lotus-feet, 
take  Her  to  the  bathing  room.*  There  She  should  be  seated  on  a  throne 
and  Her  body  first  cleansed  with  a  scented  unguent  composed  of  camphor, 
musk,  sandal,  Gorocana,*  and  KuAkuma,4  and  then  smeared  with  scented 
oil.  Next,  the  Supreme  Devata  should  be  bathed  with  water  which  has 
been  stored  in  hundreds  of  thousands  of  golden  pitchers,  and  Her  body 
should  then  be  towelled  with  silken  cloths.  Next,  after  clothing  the  upper 
and  lower  parts  of  Her  body  in  two  pieces  of  cloth,  the  hair  of  the  Devi 
with  dishevelled  hair  should  be  combed  and  ded  with  bejewelled  silken 
threads.  Then  mark  Her  forehead  with  a  Tilaka 4  made  of  sandal  and 
such  other  things,  and  paint  the  parting  of  Her  hair  with  Vermillion.1 
Next,  adorn  the  fair  hands  and  arms  of  the  Charmer  of  Sankara  with 
beautiful  ivory  wristlets,  bracelets,  and  armlets;  Her  lotus-feet  and  toes 
with  jewelled  anklets  and  toe-rings,  and  Her  nostrils  with  Gajamukta.7 
The  Sadhaka  having  to  the  best  of  his  ability  adorned  the  different  parts 
of  Her  body  in  this  way  with  ornaments  and  garlands  of  flowers,  should 
anoint  all  Her  limbs  with  scent,  sandal,  and  perfumed  gums.  Let  him 
then  place  a  gold-embroidered  bodice  on  Her  breast.” 

“  Meditating  thus  on  the  Devi  at  the  time  of  Samadhi,  the  Sadhaka 
should  after  performing  Bhutaiuddhi  *  and  NySsas,1  worship  the  Queen 
of  Mahdvara  residing  in  his  heart  with  the  (other)  sixteen  articles  of 
worship.*  First,  after  offering  a  throne  of  gems,10  the  Skdhaka  should 
welcome  Her.*  Next,  he  should,  after  offering  water  to  wash  her  feet,11 
place  Arghya  u  on  Her  head.  Let  him  then  give  the  best  nectar  u  for 
ripping 14  to  Her  lotus-mouth,  and  offer  Her  Madhuparka 14  and  then  again 


1  Pari  vara — each  Devata  has  His  or  Her  family.  Thus,  Durga  has  her  sons 
Kartikeya,  Gan eia,  and  daughters  Laksml  and  Sarasvati. 

•  Snana  man  dir  a. 

*A  pigment  said  to  be  prepared  from  the  body  of  the  cow. 

4  Saffron.  *  The  mark  on  the  forehead  worn  by  pious  Hindus. 

•  A  line  worn  by  married  women. 

7 A  pearl  said  to  be  formed  in  an  elephant’s  head.  *  Vide  arte. 

•  Upacara.  These  are — (1)  Asana  (seat);  (2)  Svagata  (welcome) ;  (3)  Padya 
(water  for  washing  the  feet);  (4)  Arghya  (offering  of  paddy,  flower,  sandal 
paste,  durva  grass,  etc.,  in  the  vessel  or  Ku4i);  (5  and  6)  Acamana  (water  which 
is  offered  twice  and  sipped  to  cleanse  the  lips  and  mouth);  (7)  Madhuparka 
(honey,  ghee,  milk,  and  curd);  (8)  Snana  (water  for  bathing) ;  (9)  Vasana 
(cloth);  (10)  Abharapa  (ornaments);  (11)  Gandha  (scent);  (12)  Pu?pa  (flowers); 
(13)  Dhupa  (incense);  (14)  Dipa  (light);  (15)  Naivedya  (food  offering);  (16) 
Vandana  or  Namaskira  (prayer).  These  are  the  ordinary  sixteen  Upacaras, 
but,  as  appears  later  at  p.  782,  other  numbers  aie  given. 

10  For  Asana,  see  last  note.  11  Svfigata,  see  note  9. 

"Padya  (Vide  ibid.). 

"  Anuta.  14  Acamaniya  ( vide  note  9). 


u  See  note,  arte. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  (Gwtrf.)  777 

•water  for  sipping  thrice.1  Next,  he  should  mentally  offer  excellent  sweet 
rice,  rice  mixed  with  clarified  butter,  with  other  food 1 *  and  condiments, 
-a  sea  of  nectar,  a  mountain-heap  of  flesh,  a  mass  of  fish,  all  kinds  of  fruits, 
edibles,  and  drinks — the  whole  well  arranged  in  golden  vessels — and  then 
betel  with  camphor.*  Next,  he  should,  after  mentally  wonhipping  the 
Avaraga  Devatas  4 * * * * *  of  the  Devi,  perforin  mental  Japa  of  Mantra.*  After 
performing  Japa  a  thousand  times,  the  fruits  of  the  Japa,  along  with 
water  from  the  Arghya  vessel,  should  be  poured  on  the  left  hand  of  the 
Dew.  Brahma,  Vi?iju,  Rudra,  and  livara,  form  the  support  of  the  bed¬ 
stead,  the  upper  portion  of  which  is  Sadafiva  Himself.*  On  this  bed, 
formed  of  Brahma-vibhuti,’  is  spread  a  milk-white  coverlet,  beautifully 
strewn  with  every  kind  of  flower,  and  on  this  flowery  bed  Sure$vari  *  lies 
in  the  enjoyment  of  all  forms  of  happiness.  Thus  should  a  Yogi  SSdhaka 
meditate  upon  Her.  Next,  he  should  entertain  ParameSvari  with  dances 
.and  with  singing  and  playing  of  music,  and  then  perform  Homa  for  the 
accomplishment  of  the  worship  in  all  its  parts.  I  shall  now  speak  of  this 
Homa,  by  means  of  which  a  Sadhaka  becomes  all  consciousness. 

“  The  Homa  should  be  performed  with  the  fire  of  consciousness  in 
the  fire-pit  *  of  the  Muladhara-lotus.  Atma,  Antaratma,  Param&tma, 
and  Jnanatma,  are  the  four  sides  of  that  pit  made  of  consciousness.  The 
half  MatrB  10 — namely,  a  small  Bindu,  with  three  curved  lines  beneath- 
surrounded  by  the  waist-chain  of  bliss,  forms  the  Yoni  Yantra,  made  of 
Brahma-bliss.11  The  Sadhaka  should  daily  perform  the  Homa,  meditating 
■on  Ida  Nadi  on  the  left,  Pingala  on  the  right,  and  Susumna,1*  the  door  to 
Brahman  between  the  two.  Dharma  and  Adharma  ’*  should  be  considered 
to  be  the  Havis,  or  offering  of  the  clarified  butter,  in  this  Homa.” 


1  The  second  Acamana.  See  note  anti. 

*  Vyafijana — that  is,  fish  and  vegetables  boiled  in  water  with  spices. 

*  This  is  the  Naivedya.  See  note,  ante.  Asana,  Abharana,  Gandha,  Puspa, 
have  been  already  described.  Mention  does  not  appear  to  be  made  of  Dhupa 
.and  Dipa.  Now  follows  Vandana. 

4  Attendant  Devatis  who  form  the  suite  of  the  Devi. 

*  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  S astro.  *  The  Mahapreta,  as  to  which  see  ante. 

I  Brahma-power  and  its  manifestation.  •  The  Devi  as  Lord  of  all  Devas. 

*  In  the  Homa  rite,  fire  is  kindled  in  a  pit  (Kuoda)  constructed  for  the 

purpose,  and  then  the  offerings  of  clarified  butter  and  so  forth  are  poured  into 

fire,  the  “  all  eater  ”  who  carries  them  in  their  thus  purified  and  subtle  form 
i*o  the  Devas. 

10  The  Candrabindu,  because  it  is  not  a  full  sound. 

II  The  three  curves  represent  in  one  sense  the  trivali. 

11  See  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sistra  and  A.  Avalon’s  “  Serpent  Power  ”. 

14  Righteousness  and  Unrighteousness. 


778 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 
Invocation 


The  Gandharva  Tantra  says:  “  Next,  after  performing  Praipfyaxna,* 
tlie  Sadhaka  should  take  handfuls  of  flowers.  The  Devi  should  never  be 
invoked  without  handfuls  of  flowers.  The  Sadhaka  who  has  controlled 
his  Pr&na  *  will  meditate  on  the  Paramefvari  as  above  described  in  his- 
heart,  and  seeing  by  Her  grace  that  image  the  substance  of  which  is  con¬ 
sciousness  in  his  heart,  let  him  think  of  the  identity  between  that  image 
manifested  within  and  the  image  without.  Next,  the  energy  *  of  con¬ 
sciousness  within  should  be  taken  without  by  means  of  the  Vayu-Bija 1 * *  4 * * 
with  the  breath  along  the  nostrils,  and  infused  into  the  handful  of  flowcis.* 
Thus,  issuing  with  the  breath,  the  Devata  enters  into  the  flowers.  The 
Sadhaka  should  then  establish  the  Devata  in  the  image  or  Yantra  •  by 
touching  it  with  those  flowers.  So  long  as  the  work  of  establishing  the 
Devi  in  the  outer  image  or  Yantra  is  not  accomplished,  the  Sadhaka  should 
continue  to  hold  those  flowers  of  meditation  in  his  hand.  If  he  does  not 
hold  them,  Gandharvas  7  avail  themselves  of  the  opportunity  to  worship 
the  Devata  inside  that  flowery  Yantra,4  and  even  if  the  Sadhaka  thereafter 
establishes  Divinity  in  the  image,  Yantra,  and  the  like,  by  contact  with 
those  flowers,  he  will  not  reap  the  fruits  of  that  worship.  For  this  reason 
the  Sadhaka  should,  after  drawing  Her  into  the  flowery  Yantra  *  by  means 
of  the  Trkhanda  Mudra,8 *  take  the  Mother  of  the  world,  who  is  all  brilliant 
and  forceful  energy,8  out  of  that  flowery  Yantra  •  by  the  force  of  the 
invoking  Mantra  and  place  Her  within  the  Pitha  (a  general  name  for 
images,  vessels,  pictures,  and  so  forth).”  10 

Those  who  call  the  Arya  Society  idolatrous  because  it  worships  earthen 
images,  and  who  ridicule  it  on  these  grounds,  should  now  open  the  door  of 
their  hearts,  and,  dispelling  the  darkness  of  their  eyes,  consider  whether 


1  Control  of  Prapa  manifesting  as  breath  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Rostra). 

8  The  vital  airs.  The  control  of  these  airs  (vayu)  manifesting  as  breath 

actually  effects  control  of  the  mind. 

8  Tejas.  4  The  Mantra  “  Yang 

8  The  Kurina  Mudra  is  formed  with  the  flowers  within.  The  hands  are 
then  lifted  to  the  nostrils.  The  flower  is  breathed  on  through  the  left  nostril 
with  the  Mantra  “  Yang,”  and  the  Sfidhaka  thinks  that  along  with  that  air  the 
Devata  within  is  brought  out  and  placed  in  the  flowers. 

•  Diagram  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra). 

7Devayoni,  sons  of  Brahma,  belonging,  together  with  the  Apsaras,  their 
wives,  to  Indra,  heaven.  Celestial  musicians  and  choristers. 

8  The  flowers  which  are  for  the  time  being  the  seat  of  the  Devata. 

•  The  gesture  so  called. 

18  Author’s  parenthesis. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  (Contd.)  779- 

the  children  of  the  Arya  race  who  are,  at  it  were,  tens  of  millions  of  Koh-i- 
noors  adorning  the  heads  of  the  community  of  worshippers  in  the  three- 
worlds,  really  worship  a  Devi  made  of  earth,  or  a  Devi  whose  substance  is. 
consciousness.  What  is  the  need  of  Mantras,  Yantras,  Yoga,  meditation, 
concentration,  and  so  forth,  if  we  worship  a  Devi  made  of  earth?  If  the 
earthen  image  be  the  Devi  why  invoke  into  and  establish  life  in  it  again?' 
And  who  in  the  world  is  such  a  fool  as  to  invoke  earth  into  earth  ?  Moreover,, 
if  Gurus,  alter  thorough  investigation  into  the  things  of  the  visible  world, 
and  who  are  unequalled  in  their  power  to  display  the  principles  of  spiritual 
life,  have  egregiously  blundered  in  not  recognizing  that  earth  is  earth,  who- 
is  there  in  the  world  who  can  rectify  such  blunders?  But  we  say  that  they 
realized  it  to  be  the  Mother,  and  not  earth.  They  made  themselves  and 
the  earth  blessed  by  bringing  the  Mother  into  the  earth,  and  by  themselves 
seeing  and  then  displaying  to  others  the  presence  of  Brahmamayi 1  in 
every  molecule  and  atom  of  the  BrahmSnda.1  It  is  therefore  with  a  heart 
rent  with  sorrow  that  we  say  that  it  is  the  descendants  of  these  very  men 
who,  through  the  influence  of  a  pernicious  system  of  non- Arya  education, 
have  lost  all  spiritual  insight,  and  are  themselves  ruined  by  their  thought 
that  Mother  Brahmamayi,1  manifest  out  of  grace  to  devotees,  and  estab¬ 
lished  in  the  form  which  She  has  assumed  out  of  favour  to  Sadhakas,  is  not 
Mother,  but  mere  earth.  How  can  those  who  are  engrossed  in  play  with 
earth  understand  the  play  of  the  Mother?  O  Mother  of  the  world!  what 
trouble  thou  bringest  on  thy  children!  Even  if,  on  account  of  this  trouble, 
wc  are  unable  to  understand  the  truth  concerning  Her  by  our  own  inde¬ 
pendent  effort,  we  have  surely  the  privilege  to  understand  the  account 
which  She  has  given  of  Herself  in  the  form  of  SSstra.  But  of  this  privilege 
also  we  arc  almost  deprived  through  our  ill-fortune.  Through  want  of 
instruction  from  competent  Gurus,  and  of  the  force  of  Sadhana,  we  have 
lost  the  privilege  of  understanding  Her  commands,  even  while  seeming  to 
understand  them.  O  follower  of  the  idol  theory!  how  ridiculous  it  is  for 
you  to  call  the  Devata’s  image  an  idol!  The  Devi’s  substance  is  eternal 
consciousness  appearing  in  Her  earthen  form.  In  Her  eyes  infinite  crores  * 
of  living  forms,  such  as  you,  are  as  dolls,  and  of  no  account.  Know  it  for 
certain  that  to  think  of  Her  as  an  idol  is  not  an  effect  of  an  auspicious 
glance  from  Her.  Even  if  you  find  it  difficult  to  understand  such  things 
as  devotion,  piety,  knowledge,  or  faith,  you,  too,  recognize  with  bowed 
heads  the  Sakti  of  things.4  With  what  heart,  then,  do  you  disbelieve  the 
appearance,  through  the  operation  of  Mantraiakti,  of  a  superworldly 
Sakti,  unseen  by  the  senses  and  minds  of  men  such  as  you  and  I  ?  Disease 


1  The  Devi  as  Brahman  Itself. 

*  The  Egg  of  Brahma,  or  the  Universe. 

*  A  crorc  is  ten  millions. 


*  Vastuiakti. 


780 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


wastes  the  body,  but  medicine  cures  it.  Medicine  defeats  the  law  of 
Nature  according  to  which  disease  destroys  the  body,  and  shows  its  own 
supernatural  or  superworldly  Said.  (power).  By  the  law  of  Nature  water 
is  always  cool,  but  when  in  contact  with  fire  it  becomes  very  hot,  and, 
like  fire  itself,  owing  to  the  communication  of  the  Sakti  of  heat  into  it, 
the  same  water,  instead  of  cooling;  causes  a  terrible  burning  sensation. 
Here  also  the  law  of  Nature,  according  to  which  water  is  cool,  is  defeated 
by  the  Sakti  of  the  thing  we  call  fire.  You,  too,  admit  this.  How,  then, 
do  you  disbelieve  that,  under  the  influence  of  Mantrasakti,  the  Brahma- 
iakti  1  residing  in  the  heart  of  a  JIva  comes  out  with  breath,  and  is 
'established  in  the  outer  image  of  Devata?  Why  do  you  disbelieve  that, 
under  the  influence  of  the  Sakti  of  Mantra,  the  unconscious  state  of  earth 
is  destroyed  and  divinity  is  communicated  into  it  as  heat  is  communicated 
to  water?  In  fact,  it  is  one  of  the  terrible  diseases  of  the  nineteenth  century 
to  raise  at  every  word  the  cry,  “  The  laws  of  Nature  arc  violated.”  It  is 
a  law  of  Nature  that  water  is  ordinarily  cool,  and  it  is  also  a  law  of  Nature 
that  it  will  become  hot  in  contact  with  fire.  Similarly,  it  is  a  law  of  Nature 
that  earth  will  naturally  remain  earth,  and  it  is  also  a  law  of  Nature  that 
it  will  receive  divinity  *  under  the  influence  of  Mantraiakti.  Why,  then, 
raise  the  objection  that  the  law  of  Nature  is  violated?  In  fact,  the  root  of 
this  objection  is  to  be  found,  not  in  the  nature  of  the  Universe,  but  in  the 
nature  of  the  objector.  He  has,  perhaps,  with  the  narrow  notions  which 
are  the  product  of  his  intellect  and  knowledge,  understood  Nature  herself 
to  be  very  narrow.  And  this  is  why  he  understands  Nature  to  consist  of  a 
few  common  rules  belonging  to  the  small  department  of  unconscious  things 
under  the  great  Nature,  Mahaprakrti,  which  is  the  only  source  of  the 
Sakti  which  makes  the  impossible  possible.  And  for  this  reason  they  cry 
■out  at  every  word  that  the  law  of  Nature  is  violated.  But,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  law  of  Nature  is  one  and  inviolable,  and  consequently  the  appear- 
ance  of  the  Devi,  whose  substance  is  consciousness  in  an  earthen  image, 
under  the  influence  of  Mantra,  is  natural  and  self-evident.  Really  this 
appearance  is  but  manifestation.*  For  where  do  you  find  a  place  in  this 
BrahmSflda 1  which  is  beyond  the  presence  of  Brahmamayi?  She  has  not 
to  come  into  image,  Yantra,  vessel,  picture,  flower,  leaf,  or  whatever  else 
you  may  mention;  for  She  is  present  in  all  things,  and  all  things  are  present 
in  Her.  But  devotees  and  Sadhakas  are  not  satisfied  with  Her  presence 
in  a  subtle  form.  This  is  why,  in  order  to  fulfil  the  desires  of  Sadhakas, 


1  Brahman  as  Sakti.  *  Devattva,  the  state  of  Devahood. 

*  Of  that  which  is  already  there.  It  is  foolish  to  talk  of  any  Teal  bringing 
and  going  in  respect  of  that  which  is  always  present,  however  its  presence  may 
be,  owing  to  our  own  unenlightened  consciousness,  veiled  from  us. 

•Universe. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  {Canid.)  78E 

and  in  order  that  they  may  possess  Her  sometimes  as  Bhagavan,1  sometimes 
as  Bhagavatx,1 *  sometimes  as  Father,  sometimes  as  Mother,  sometimes  as 
Lord,*  sometimes  as  Iivari,*  and  so  forth,  the  Devi,  who  is  will  itself^ 
though  the  one  and  only  Iivara  and  Iivari,  appears  in  different  Sadhanas 
and  in  different  forms  of  Siddhi,4  playing  different  plays  in  different  forms 
— as  Syama  and  Syama,  as  Uma  and  RJrna,4 *  as  male  and  female,  as 
Gaijeia  and  Maheia,  as  Lord  of  wealth  and  Lord  of  day,  because  She  is 
the  Iivari  *  of  the  hearts  of  Sadhakas.  This  is  the  reason  why,  despite 
Her  being  ‘the  Iivari,*  who  presides  over  the  Prinaiakti  «  of  the  eternal 
Universe,  Her  Prapaprati$$ha 7 * * 10 II  is  effected  by  the  Sidhaka’s  Prana.*- 
Even  though  She  is  the  Mother  of  the  world,  the  Sidhaka  worships  Her 
as  his  own  Mother.  If  I  perform  Sadhana  of  the  Mother,  it  is  not  because 
the  Mother  is  wanting,  but  because  I  wish  to  make  good  the  wants  or 
deficiencies  in  myself.  Even  though  all  other  beings  of  the  three  worlds 
perform  Sadhana  of  the  Mother,  that  Sadhana  does  not  satisfy  me.  And 
the  Pranapratiftha 7  of  the  Mother  is  for  fulfilling  the  desire  of  my  own  heart. 

In  another  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  PrSpapratiftha 7  in  an  image  of  Siva 
or  Sakti  is  done  by  placing  the  hand  on  its  Brahmarandhra,*  or  forehead, 
or  brow.  According  to  some  divisions  of  Tantrik  teachers,  Prapapratijtha 
should  be  done  by  placing  the  hand  on  the  Brahmarandhra,*  forehead, 
and  brow  at  one  and  the  same  time.  Pranapratif{ha  in  an  image  should 
be  done  by  touching  the  heart  in  the  case  of  the  Vispu  image,  in  the  case  of 
other  Dcvatas  by  touching  the  feet,  and  in  Sivalinga  by  touching  the  head.” 

Articles  used  and  Acts  done  in  Worship  >• 

In  the  Sanatkum&ra  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  The  Istadcvata  should  be 
worshipped  daily  with  sixteen  Upacaras,u  or  with  ten  if  it  is  not  possible 


I  The  Brahman  as  the  possessor  of  all  powers  (Aiivarya)  which  belong  to- 

Iivara,  “  the  personal  God.’*  Bhagavati  is  the  feminine  of  BhagavSn. 

*  l£vara.  *  Feminine  of  Hvara,  or  Lord. 

4  That  is,  particular  Sadhanas  evoke  particular  forms. 

4  That  is,  in  various  masculine  and  feminine  forms.  It  is  a  vulgar  error  to- 

say,  as  does  Professor  Fitzedward  Hall  in  his  notes  on  the  Samkhya,  that  Sakti 
is  only  feminine.  Grammatically  doubtless  it  is  feminine,  but  Sakti  is,  and  is 
the  cause  of  all  forms.  4  Sakti  manifesting  as  the  vital  principle. 

7  The  rite  by  which  establishment  of  Her  life  in  the  image  is  effected. 

*  That  is,  the  particular  PrSna  or  vital  principle  of  the  Sadhaka. 

*  That  portion  of  the  crown  of  the  head  which  is  called  the  “  fontanelfe  ”. 

10  U  pa  car  a.  There  are  ordinarily  sixteen  of  these,  as  to  which  vide  ante. 

II  Articles  used  in  worship.  The  Sanskrit  word  is  kept  in  the  text,  as  the- 
English  term  “  articles  ”  does  not  correctly  describe  Upacira,  which  includes- 
not  only  material  articles  such  as  flowers  and  lights,  but  welcome,  prayer,  etc. 


782 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


to  worship  with  sixteen,  or  with  five  Upacara  if  it  is  not  possible  to  worship 
with  even  ten.” 

The  Jnanamala,  quoted  by  Rlghava  Bhatta,1  says:  “  The  different 
•classes  of  Upacara  in  worship  are  thirty-eight — sixteen,  twelve,  ten,  and 
five.1 *  I  shall  now  relate  what  UpacSxa  are  involved  in  each  of  these 
classes,  and  what  fruits  are  gained  by  the  use  thereof. 

“  The  thirty-eight  Upactra  are — As  ana  (scat),  Avahana  (invocation), 
Upasthiti  (presence),1  Sannidhya  (nearness),4  Abhimukhya  (facing),1 * 
Sthirtkfti  (making  fast),1  Prasadana  (pleasing),7 8  Arghya  (offering),  Padhya 
(water  for  washing  the  feet),  Acamana  (water  sipped  to  cleanse  the  lips, 
mouth,  and  throat),  Madhuparka  (honey,  ghee,  milk,  and  curd),  Acamana 
again,  Snana  (bathing),9  Nirajana  (waving  of  light),1  Vastra  (cloth), 
Acamana  (the  third  time),  Upavita  (sacred  thread),10  Acamana  again 
(the  fourth  time),  Bhusapa  (ornaments),11  Darpapavalokana  (looking  at  a 
mirror), u  Gandha  (perfume),  Puspa  (flower),  Dhupa  (incense),  Dipa 
(light),11 *  Naivedya  (offerings  of  food),  Paniya  (offerings  of  drink),  the 
fifth  Acamaniya  (water  for  sipping  as  above),  Hastavasa  (napkin),14 * * 
Tambula  (betel),18  Anulepana  (unguent),19  Puspanjali  (handful  of  flowers), 
-Gita  (singing),  Vadya  (instrumental  music),  Nrtya  (dancing),  Stud  (reciting 
hymns  in  praise),  Pradalqina  (walking  round),17  Puspanjali  (second  hand- 
fill  of  flowers),  and  Namaskara  (obeisance).11  These  are  the  thirty-eight 
Upacara.” 


1  The  great  Tantrik  Commentator  on  the  Saradatilaka. 

1  As  appears  from  the  text  which  follows,  the  Upacara  are  given  in  numbers 
varying  from  38  to  3. 

1  That  is,  the  coming  of  the  Devata  after  the  invocation. 

4  Her  near  approach  to  the  worshipper. 

8  Facing  the  Sadhaka. 

*  The  Sadhaka  makes  the  Devi  assume  a  fixed  position  before  him. 

7  The  Sadhaka  gladdens  and  propitiates  the  Devi. 

8  The  Devi  is  bathed.  * 

I  That  is,  before  the  Devi. 

10  Placing  of  sacred  thread  on  the  image. 

II  The  Devi  is  adorned. 

11 A  mirror  is  presented  to  Her  that  She  may  regard  Herself  and  toilet. 

11  Which  is  placed  before  Her  and  offered  with  a  Mantra,  as  are  the  rest. 

14  After  eating  and  drinking,  She  cleanses  Her  mouth,  and  then  a  napkin 
is  offered  that  She  may  wipe  Herself  therewith. 

u  This  is  always  chewed  after  eating, 

i*  Sandal  paste,  perfumed  oil,  etc. 

17  The  Sidhaka  walks  round  the  imago— a  sign  of  reverence. 

19  Bowing. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  (Cwrfrf.) 
Thirty-six  Upacara 


783 


In  the  fifty-fifth  Patala  of  Nibandha 1 * *  it  is  said:  “  Asana  (seat), 
Dantaka?tha  4 * *  (stick  for  cleansing  the  teeth),  Udvartana  *  (anointing  the 
body).  Virukjapa  (rubbing  the  body),*  Samm&ijana  (rubbing  off},* 
Abhyafijana  (second  anointing),  Sn&na  (bathing  with  ghee  and  so  forth), 
Avabana  (invocation),  Padya  (water  for  washing  the  feet),  Arghya  (offering), 
Acamaiuya  (water  sipped  to  cleanse  the  mouth),  Snanlya  (water  for 
bathing),  Madhuparka  (mixture  of  honey,  milk,  ghee,  and  curd),  Acama- 
niya  again,  Namaskara  (obeisance),  Nrtya  (dancing),  Gita  (singing), 
Vadya  (instrumental  music  and  offering  of  other  things)  •  Stud  (reciting 
hymns  in  praise),  Homa,7  Fradaksina  (walking  round),  Darpanadariana 
(looking  at  a  mirror),  Camaravyijana  (waving  of  Camara),*  Sayya  (bed),4 * 
Anulepana  (unguent),  Vastra  (doth) 10  Alafikara  (ornaments),  Upavita 
(sacred  thread),  Gandha  (perfume),  Puspa  (flowers),  Dhflpa  (incense), 
Dipa  (light),  Balidana  (offering  of  sacrifice),11  Tarpapa  (offering  libations 
of  water),  Atmasamarpana  (self-dedication),  and  Visaijana  (dismissal). 
These  are  the  thirty-six  Upacara.” 

Eighteen  Upacara 

In  the  third  Patala  of  the  PhetkarinI  Tantra,  quoted  in  the  Sy5mS- 
rahaiya,  it  is  said:  “  Asana  (seat),  Avahana  (invocation),  Arghya  (offering), 
Padya  (water  for  washing  the  feet),  Acamanlya  (water  sipped  to  deanse 
the  mouth),  Snana  (bathing),  Vastra  (doth),  Upavita  (sacred  thread), 
Bhusana  (ornaments),  Gandha  (perfume),  Puspa  (flowers),  Dhupa  (incense), 
Dipa  (light),  Anna  (Naivcdya),11  Tarpapa  (offering  libations  of  water), 
Malya  (garland),  Anulepana  (unguent),  Namaskara  (obeisance),  and 
Visaijana  (dismissal).  A  Sidhaka  should  perform  worship  with  these 
eighteen  Upacara.” 


1  Nibandha  Tantra. 

I  The  Hindus  deanse  their  teeth  with  a  stick. 

*  Rubbing  the  body  with  perfume  and  fragrant  unguents. 

4  That  is  rubbing  the  unguents  in. 

*  Of  the  unguent  which  remains  on  the  body. 

4  This  is  in  text,  and  treated  as  part  of  Vadya. 

7  Sacrifice  into  fire.  *  Fly-whisk  made  of  yak’s  tail. 

*  Offering  of  bed.  It  is  imagined  that  the  Devi  will  repose  Herself  thereon. 

10  Dresses  are  offered. 

II  In  the  case  of  Saktas  sacrifice  of  animals  and  fruits  and  vegetables,  in 
Vaiypava  worship  the  latter  only. 

11  Offerings  of  food. 


784 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


Sixteen  Upacara 

In  the  Sivarcana  Candrika  it  is  said:  "Asana  (seat),  Svigata 
(welcome),1  PSdya  (water  for  washing  the  feet),  Arghya  (offering),  Acarna- 
niya  (water  of  ripping  as  above  stated),  Madhuparka  (mixture  of  honey, 
milk,  ghee,  and  curd),  Acamana  (cleansing  of  mouth),  Snana  (bathing), 
Vasana  (cloth),  Abhara^i  (ornaments),  Gandha  (perfume),  Puspa  (flowers), 
Dhupa  (incense),  Dipa  (light),  Naivedya  (offerings  of  food),  and  Vandana 
(prayer  with  hymns  in  praise).  These  sixteen  Upacara  should  be  used 
and  done  in  worship.” 

Sixteen  Upacara  described  in  Another  Way 

In  the  MantraratDavali,  quoted  in  the  K^narcana-candrika,  it  is 
said:  “  Padya  (water  for  washing  the  feet),  Arghya  (offering),  Acamanlya 
(water  ripped  to  cleanse  the  mouth),  Snana  (bathing),  Vasana  (cloth), 
Bhujana  (ornaments),  Gandha  (perfume),  Pu?pa  (flowers),  Dhupa 
(incense),  Dipa  (light),  Naivedya  (offerings  of  food),  Acamana  (water 
ripped  as  above),  Tambula  (betel),  Arcana-Stotra  (hymns  of  praise), 
Tarpana  (offering  libations  of  water),  and  Namaskara  (obeisance).” 

Twelve  Upacara 

In  the  Svatantra  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Arghya  (offering),1  Padya  (water 
for  washing  the  feet),  Acamanlya  (water  ripped  for  cleansing  the  mouth), 
Madhuparka  (mixture  of  milk,  ghee,  honey,  and  curd),  Acamana  again 
(see  above),  Gandha  (perfume),  Puspa  (flowers),  Dhupa  (incense),  Dipa 
(light),  Naivedya  (offerings  of  food),  Pradakriija  (walking  round),  and 
Namaskara  (obeisance).  A  Mantri*  should  perform  worship  with  these 
twelve  Upacara.” 

Tim  Upacara 

In  the  Kali  Tantra,  quoted  in  the  Syamarahasya,  it  is  said:  “  Arghya 
(offering),  Padya  (water  for  washing  the  feet),  Acamanlya  (water  sipped 
to  cleanse  the  mouth),  Madhuparka  (mixture  of  honey,  milk,  ghee,  and 
curd),  Acamana  (as  above  second  time),  Gandha  (perfume),  Puspa 
(flowers),  Dhupa  (incense),  Dipa  (light),  and  Naivedya  (offerings  of  food). 
These  are  the  ten  Upacara.” 


1  The  Devi  is  welcomed  as  She  appears. 

1  Offering  of  paddy  or  unhusked  rice  (which  is  always  fttapa— that  is, 
sun-dried),  flowers,  sandal  paste,  durvS  grass,  etc. 

*  He  who  has  the  Mantra  or  secret  word  (Mantroguptabhfijanam  yasya 
asti),  or  initiated  devotee. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  (Canid.) 
Seven  Upacara 


785 


In  the  Prayogasara,  quoted  by  Raghava  Bhafta,  it  is  said:  “  Arghya 
(offering).  Gaud  ha  (perfume),  Pu?pa  (flowers),  Aksata  (barley,  or  atapa 
rice),  DhGpa  (incense),  Dipa  (light),  and  Naivedya  (offerings  of  food). 
With  these  is  performed  seven-limbed  worship.” 

Five  Upacara 

m 

In  the  fifty-fifth  Patala  of  the  Nibandha  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  Gandha 
(perfume),  Puspa  (flowers),  Dhupa  (incense),  Dipa  (light),  and  Naivedya 
(offerings  of  food).  These  are  the  five  Upacara.  A  Sadhaka  should 
always  use  these  five  in  worshipping  his  Istadevata.” 

Three  Upacara 

“  The  five  Upacara  less  Dhupa  (incense)  and  Dipa  (light) — that  is  to 
say,  Gandha  (perfume),  Pu$pa  (flowers),  and  Naivedya  (offerings  of  food) 
— are  known  as  the  three  Upacara. 

“  The  different  classes  of  Upacara  above  enumerated  consist  of  items 
varying  from  thirty-six  to  three  in  number.  The  misguided  Sadhaka 
who,  for  the  sake  of  economy,  though  able  to  worship  with  the  first  named 
classes,  proceeds  to  perform  worship  with  the  latter,  never  obtains  the 
fruits  of  the  worship  as  stated  in  the  Sastra.” 

Rules  for  Japa  1 * * 

In  the  Picchila  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  After  performing  Prapayama  thrice, 
one  should  do  the  Rsi  and  other  Nyasas.*  Next,  after  performing  the 
Nyasa  on  six  limbs,  one  should  do  the  Kulluka  Japa.*  Next,  after  perform¬ 
ing  Japa  of  the  Mahasetu  *  and  Setu  Mantras,*  one  should  do  Japa  of  the 
Mulamantra  4  the  fixed  number  of  times.  After  this  Japa,  one  should 
again  perform  Japa  of  the  Setu  and  Mahasetu  Mantras,  and  then  make 
an  offering  of  the  Japas.  Next,  after  performing  Prapayama  thrice,  one 
should  bow  to  ParameSvari,  according  to  the  injunctions  relating  to  bowing 


1  Japa  is  defined  as  Vidhanena  mantroc haranam ,  or  the  repeated  utterance, 
mentally  or  physically,  of  Mantra  according  to  certain  rules.  It  is  of  three 
kinds,  and  is  described  in  the  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sdstra. 

*  Vide  ante. 

*  See  Introduction .  to  Tantra  Sdstra  for  a  short  description  of  this  technical 
aspect  of  Mantra. 

4  The  primary  Mantra  of  the  Devata. 

50 


786  PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 

with  eight  parts  of  the  body  1 * *  and  so  forth,  or  by  touching  the  earth  with 
only  the  head.” 

In  the  fifth  Pa^ala  of  the  Sarasvati  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  J  shall  now 
speak  of  another  kind  of  excellent  purification  of  the  mouth  (purification 
consisting  of  Mantra),*  without  which,  O  high-favoured  Devi!  Japa  and 
worship  will  be  ineffectual.  O  Devi!  he  who  performs  Japa  with  an 
unpurified  tongue  commits  a  sin.  For  this  reason  one  should  purify  one’s 
mouth  with  all  care.” 

In  the  Kularnva  it  is  said:  “  At  the  beginning  of  Japa  a  Sadhaka  is 
affected  by  birth  uncleanness,  and  at  the  end  of  Japa  by  death  uncleanness.* 
A  Mantra  affected  by  these  two  forms  of  uncleanness  is  never  perfect  and 
fruitful.  For  this  reason  a  Mantra  should  be  cleansed  of  the  two  forms  of 
uncleanness  which  attach  to  the  beginning  and  the  end,  and  then  it  should 
be  repeated  in  Japa.  When  freed  from  those  two  forms  of  uncleanness, 
that  Mantra  grants  all  forms  of  Siddhi.4 * * *  Therefore,  for  the  attainment  of 
the  fourfold  fruit 8  one  should  perform  Japa  of  the  Mulam antra,*  commen¬ 
cing  and  ending  with  the  Pranava,’  reciting  it  one  hundred  and  eight  times, 
or  seven  times  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  of  Japa.”  8 

In  the  Yogim  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  The  Japa  which  forms  a  part  of 
daily  worship  should  be  done  with  the  fingers,*  but  not  so  a  Japa  in  a  rite 
undertaken  for  the  attainment  of  some  desired  object.  For,  in  Japas  of 
the  latter  kind,  the  rule  is  that  they  should  be  performed  with  different 
kinds  of  rosaries,  according  to  the  different  kinds  of  desired  objects.  The 
Sastra  does  not  ordain  that  such  Japas  should  be  performed  with  the 
fingers.  But,  O  MaheSvari!  if  rosaries  are  wanting,  then  they  may  be  so 
performed.” 


1  A?(a  ngapran ama — bowing  with  tips  of  toes,  knees,  elbows,  nose,  and 
forehead  touching  the  ground. 

■  Author’s  parenthesis.  This  is  known  as  Mukhaiodhana.  For  this  and 
other  processes,  such  as  Jihvaiodhana,  etc.,  processes  preliminary  to  and  involved 
in  the  right  utterance  of  Mantra,  see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Sastra. 

*  As  to  the  “  birth  ”  and  “  death  ”  defilements  in  the  case  of  a  Mantra, 
see  Tantrasara  75  et  scq. 

4  Success  or  fruit. 

8  Dharraa,  Artha,  Kama,  and  Mok?a  (see  Introduction  to  Tantra  Ssstra). 

•  Vide  ante. 

1  The  Mantra  Orp, 

*  The  Japa  is  of  the  Mulamantra  only.  It  is  preceded  and  concluded  by 
the  recitation  mentioned  in  the  text. 

•  The  counting  is  done  with  the  thumb  on  each-  of  the  three  joints 
(technically  called  "  yoni  ”)  of  the  fingers.  The  order,  however,  in  which  the 

joints  are  touched  in  counting  varies  with  the  Japa  and  worship. 


CEREMONIAL  WORSHIP  (Conld.)  787 

In  the  Sac chanda  MaheSvara  it  is  said:  “  The  rosary  which  is  made 
of  beads  of  Rudrakfa,1  coral,  lotus-seeds,  and  joints  of  Kuia  grass,  is  a 
cause  of  happiness  to  the  three  castes  of  Brahman  a,  Ksattriya,  and  VaiSya. 
Women  and  Sudras  using  rosaries  made  of  these  beads  will  be  guilty  of  sin. 
Rosasies  made  of  other  kinds  of  beads  are  efficacious  for  them. 

“  Rosaries  made  of  beads  of  Rudraksa,1  conch-shell,  lotus-seed,  wild 
olive,*  pearls,  crystals,  gems,  gold,  coral,  silver,  or  roots  of  the  Kuia  grass, 
arc  prescribed  for  householders.” 

In  the  «Vira  Tantra  it  is  said:  “  One  should  carefully  perform  Japa 
with  a  rosary  of  Rudraksa  beads  in  the  night.  But,  O  great  Devi!  a 
rosary  of  Rudraksa  beads  should  never  be  used  in  Japa  during  daytime.” 

In  the  Rudrayamala  it  is  said:  “  A  rosary  of  Rudraksa  beads  should 
never  be  used  in  Japa  during  the  day.  But,  O  fair-faced  Devi!  the  doing 
of  Japa  with  a  rosary  of  Rudraksa  beads  in  the  daytime  will  not  be 
blamable  in  Purafcarapa.”  * 

In  the  Yamala  it  is  said:  “A  rosary,  which  is  Is^adevata  Herself, 
should  be  daily  worshipped  and  daily  used  in  Japa;  for,  if  a  rosary  fasts — 
that  is  to  say,  is  not  used  in  Japa  or  worshipped — dangers  befall  the 
Sadhaka” 

In  the  Kamkalamalini  Tantra  it  is  said:  “Japa  should  be  done  one 
thousand  and  eight,  one  hundred  and  eight,  fifty  and  eight,  thirty  and 
eight,  twenty  and  eight,  ten  and  eight,  twelve,  ten,  or  eight  times.  A 
Sadhaka  who  is  so  able  should  do  Japa  with  the  higher  numbers,  and 
others  who  are  not  so  capable  with  the  lower  numbers.  O  Mahefvari! 
know  that  in  worship  and  other  great  daily  rites  different  numbers  are 
ordained  to  meet  differences  in  the  capacities  of  Sadhakas.” 


1  The  seed  of  a  plant  used  in  the  worship  of  Siva. 

*  Putrafijlva. 

*  As  to  this  farm  of  Sidbana,  see-  lntro<kution  to  Tantra  £dstra. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


THE  TANTRATATTVA  OF  &RIYUKTA  SlVA 
CANDRA  VIDYARNAVA  BHATTACARYA 
MAHODAYA 


WITH  INTRODUCTIONS  BY 
ARTHUR  AVALON 
Afro 

SRlYUKTA  BARADA  KANTA  MAJUMDAR 


EDITED  BY 

ARTHUR  AVALON 


GANESH  &  Co.  (MADRAS)  PRIVATE  Ltd. 
MADRAS— 17 


Printed  at  the  Valanta  Pre»,  The  Thnnophical  Society, 
Adyar,  Madia*  20,  India. 

Published  by  S.  Subbaiya  for  Ganah  &  Co. 
(Madrai)  Private  Ltd.,  Madrai-17. 


4TATI  CENTRAL  LDRAXT,  W.  B. 
Km.  MB.  PJULDt...-.~__M 


1st  Edition  1911 
2nd  Edition  1952 
3rd  Edition  1960 


AGENTS: 

Exoland:  Luzac  &  Co.  Ltd.,  46  Great  Russell  Street,  London,  W.C.  1. 
Holland:  Oriental  Bo  ok  traders,  242  Karel  Doormanlaan,  Hilversum. 

U.S.A.:  Vedanta  Press  &  Bookshop,  1946  Vedanta  Place,  Hollywood-28, 
California. 

Bombay:  Che  tana  Ltd.,  34  Rampart  Row. 

Calcutta:  Oxford  Book  &  Stationery  Co.,  17  Park  Street. 

Nxw  Delhi;  Oxford  Book  &  Stationery  Co.,  Connaught  Place. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Publishers'  Note 

.  . 

viii 

Preface  by  Arthur  Avalon 

•  . 

1 

Introduction  by  Arthur  Avalon 

• 

13 

PART  I 

Invocation  .... 

.  i 

73 

Preface  by  Sriyukta  Siva  Candra  Vidyarnava  Bhattacarya 

Mahodaya  .... 

• 

79 

CHAPTER  I 

Appearance  and  Applicability  of  the  T antra  Scripture 

87 

Necessity  for  the  Scripture  . 

•  » 

87 

Understanding  of  the  Scripture 

■  • 

.  89 

Doubts  Concerning  the  Scripture 

•  a 

9r 

Reasoning  on  the  Scripture 

•  a 

98 

On  Meeting  Sadhakas 

a  ■ 

107 

CHAPTER  II 

What  Is  the  Necessity  for  the  Tantras  when 

THERE  IS  THE 

Veda?  .... 

.  ■ 

"5 

Introduction  of  Tantra  . 

isi 

Monism,  Vedanta,  and  Sankara  carya 

•  • 

*3* 

CHAPTER  III 

The  Ephemeral  and  Modern  Monism 

•  . 

140 

Difference  between  and  similarity  of  Veda  and  Tantra 
Consensus  of  other  Scriptures  as  regards  the  Authority 

1*4 

of  the  Tantra 

.  . 

150 

The  Direct  and  Superior  Power  of  Tantra 

• 

159 

CHAPTER  IV 

GAyatrI  Mantra  and  Image  Worship 

v  • 

172 

Worship  of  GSyatri 

«  • 

179 

The  Vacfa  and  Vacaka  Saktis  of  a  Mantra 

a  • 

182 

VI 


PRINCIPLES  OF  TANTRA 


PAGE 

CHAPTER  V 

Commands  of  Sastra  .  .  .  .  .191 

On  Formlessness  and  Form  .  .  .  .196 

CHAPTER  VI 

Worship  of  Devatas  .  .  .218 

CHAPTER  VII 

What  Is  Sakti?  .  .  .  .  -245 

•  CHAPTER  VIII 

What  Is  Sakti? — Continued  .  .  .  .272 

CHAPTER  IX 

Siva  and  Sakti  ......  303 

CHAPTER  X 

Worship  of  the  Five  Devatas  .  .  .  .  341 

Tantrik  Initiation  .  .  .  .  348 

Loss  of  Tantras  and  Treatises  on  this  Scripture  .  .  353 

PART  II 

Preface  by  Arthur  Avalon  .  .  .  .361 

Introduction  by  Sriyukta  Barada  Kanta  Majumdar  .  .  379 

CHAPTER  XI 

On  Mantra  ......  489 

CHAPTER  XII 

Lettered  and  Unlettered  Sound  ....  505 

CHAPTER  XIII 

ON  the  Guru  .  .  .  .  .  -5*9 

CHAPTER  XIV 

Discussion  Upon,  and  Selection  of  the  Guru  .  .  542 

Women  Gurus  .....  543 
Guru  Family  and  Family  Guru  .  .  .  545 

The  Guru  Profession  ....  555 

The  Characteristics  of  Disciples  .  .  .  563 

The  Time  for  Initiation  .  .  .581 


CONTENTS 

vii 

PAGE 

CHAPTER  XV 

Worship  in  General 

• 

•  587 

CHAPTER  XVI 

The  Play  of  Gunas 

.  61 1 

Adhyatmikism 

•  639 

CHAPTER  XVII 

Outer  Worship  . 

.  645 

CHAPTER  XVIII 

Ordinances  Relating  to  Worship  . 

.  685 

CHAPTER  XIX 

Ceremonial  Worship 

.  727 

Bhava 

• 

•  728 

Entrance  into  the  House  of  Worship  . 

• 

•  743 

Removal  of  Obstacles 

• 

•  744 

Seat  .... 

• 

.  746 

Rules  Relating  to  Direction  in  Worship 

• 

.  748 

Time  for  Worship  . 

• 

•  75° 

Place  for  Worship  . 

• 

•  750 

Worship  of  Siva 

• 

•  75i 

Order  of  Worship  . 

• 

■  753 

CHAPTER  XX 

Ceremonial  Worship — Continued 

a 

•  755 

Purification  of  the  “  Five  ”  . 

•  755 

Purification  of  the  "  Twelve  ” 

•  75® 

Purification  of  Elements 

•  757 

Ny5sa  .... 

•  763 

Mental  Worship 

.  768 

Invocation 

•  778 

Articles  used  and  Acts  done  in  Worship 

781 

PUBLISHERS’  NOTE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 


The  Tantra  Tattva  of  Sriyukta  Siva  Candra  Vidyarnava  Bhattacatya 
Mahoduya  is  the  most  exhaustive  and  clear  exposition  of  Tantra 
Sastra  in  its  various ‘aspects  and  it  is  to  the  credit  of  Arthur  Avalon 
(Sir  John  Woodroffe)  that  this  great  work  was  published  38  years 
ago,  with  his  masterly  introduction  and  with  the  active  collabora¬ 
tion  of  Sri  Jnancndralal  Majumdar  and  Sri  Barada  Kanta 
Majumdar.  Since  then,  Sir  John’s  other  famous  books  on  Tantra 
Sastra  have  gone  into  several  editions  and  there  has  been  a 
growing  demand  from  the  public  for  a  second  edition  of  Tantra 
Tattva,  originally  published  in  two  parts  entitled  “  Principles  of 
Tantra  ”.  The  Publishers  have  great  pleasure  in  presenting  this 
second  edition  to  the  public  (two  parts  together  under  one  cover) 
and  hope  it  will  satisfy  a  long-standing  need. 


