'1k  & 


*  t*  .a  jIi  J 


rs 

,  W 


V 


* 


0 


JUN  1  1917 


Umi  #0 


& 


/P\U 


Seetfoa 


V  .  &0 


I 


I 


TRANSLATION  SERIES 
VI 


MANUAL  OF  A  MYSTIC 


1 


fl>ali  Ze^t  Society 

~  . 

\  r  (Xv^-£>\ol-V  \  QvY  SfcryeA.  Y\6.  (a 

/ 

Manual  of  a  Mystic 

BEING 

A  TRANSLATION  FROM  THE  PALI  AND 
SINHALESE  WORK  ENTITLED 

THE  YOGAVACHARA’S  MANUAL 


F.  L.  WOODWARD,  M.A.  Cantab. 

PRINCIPAL  OF  MAHINDA  BUDDHIST  COLLEGE,  GALLE,  CEYLON 

EDITED,  WITH  INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY,  BY 

MRS.  RHYS  DAVIDS 


ILoutron 

PUBLISHED  FOR  THE  PALI  TEXT  SOCIETY 

BY 

HUMPHREY  MILFORD 

OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  WAREHOUSE,  AMEN  CORNER,  E.C. 

1916 


EDITORS  PREFACE 


In  his  Introduction  to  the  edition  he  published  twenty  years 
ago  of  the  original  of  this  little  work,  my  husband  describes 
that  original  as  follows:  44  The  unique  MS.  on  which  the 
following  edition  is  based  is  at  Bambara-galla  Wihare,  in 
Teldeniya,  Ceylon.”  Its  existence  there  was  ascertained  by 
the  Anagarika  H.  Dharmapala  in  the  spring  of  1892.  Mr. 
D.  B.  Jayatilaka,  now  barrister  of  Colombo,  accompanied  by 
the  late  Mr.  T.  B.  Parnatella,  visited  the  Wihara  and  obtained 
permission  to  borrow  the  palm  leaf  MS.  and  have  a  copy  made. 
A  scribe  was  engaged  by  Mr.  Jayatilaka,  with  the  result  that, 
in  August  of  the  following  year,  H.  Dharmapala  placed  the 
copy  in  my  husband’s  hands  at  a  Kentish  village,  and  went 
on  his  way  to  the  Parliament  of  Religions  at  Chicago.  This 
loaned  copy  was  returned  to  Ceylon  after  the  P.T.S.  edition 
was  published. 

Bhys  Davids  analyzed  the  text  of  the  MS.  and  found  it 
unsatisfactory,  both  as  to  the  copy  and  as  to  its  source.  The 
former  showed  signs  of  hasty  and  inaccurate  work ;  the  latter 
suggested  the  work  of  an  earlier  scribe,  conversant,  no  doubt, 
with  Singhalese,  but  unfamiliar  with  Pali.  To  obtain  from 
other  Wihara  libraries  other  MSS.  of  this  unnamed  and  un¬ 
known  work  was  impracticable.  Nevertheless  my  husband 
thought  it  worth  while  to  bring  out  a  P.T.S.  edition  on  the 
P.T.S.  principle  that,  in  pioneer  work,  not  to  wait  on  counsels 
of  perfection  is  the  more  intelligent  method.  44  There  is  little 
doubt,”  he  wrote,  44  as  to  the  great  interest  and  importance, 
both  from  the  historical  and  from  the  psychological  point  of 
view,  of  the  subject  treated  in  this  manual.  We  have  no 
other  work  in  Buddhist  literature,  either  Pali  or  Sanskrit, 
devoted  to  the  details  of  Jhana  and  Samadhi.  It  is  highly 


v 


vi  Editor's  Preface 

improbable  that  the  incumbent  of  the  Bambara-galla  W iliare 
will  ever  lend  his  unique  MS.  to  Europe.  And  the  passages 
where  the  readings  remain  doubtful  are  not  of  special 
importance.' 

Before  these  words  were  written,  Mr.  Jayatilaka  had  pub¬ 
lished  in  the  Ceylon  magazine  called  The  Buddhist  a  full  account 
of  his  visit  in  quest  of  the  MS.,  and  also  of  the  remarkable 
renascence  of  the  Buddhist  doctrine  and  system  in  Ceylon  in 
the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  during  which  it  is  held 
that,  the  present  work  was  written.  Knowledge  of  this, 
conveyed  by  Mr.  Jayatilaka  himself,  has  only  reached  me 
as  this  work  is  going  to  press.  With  great  kindness,  however, 
he  has  compiled  for  me  an  outline  of  that  renascence  one 
so  full  of  interest  both  in  the  light  it  throws  on  the  probable 
source  of  the  Manual,  and  in  that  it  tells  of  a  little-know  n 
episode  in  the  history  of  religions,  that  I  have  inserted  it  as 

an  Appendix. 

We  have  still,  nevertheless,  no  certain  evidence  of  either 
date  or  authorship  of  the  Manual.  The  final  colophon,  half 
Pali,  half  Singhalese,  consists  of  pious  aspirations  still  in  vogue 
among  authors  in  Ceylon,  and  gives  no  distinctive  enlighten¬ 
ment.  The  Singhalese  diction  throughout,  however,  is  fairly 
modern.  “  It  may  very  well,"  writes  Mr.  de  Z.  Wikrama- 
sinha  in  a  letter,  “  be  that  of  the  seventeenth,  or  even  of  the 
sixteenth  century.  But  at  that  time  Buddhism  in  Cey  Ion 
was  so  decadent  that  there  could  not  have  been  much  samadhi 
and  jhdna  practice  among  the  monks.  The  life  they  led  was 
apparently  so  loose  that  King  Vimala  Dharma  Surya 
(a.d.  1684-1706)  and  his  successors  had  to  get  Buddhist 
theras  from  abroad  (Siam,  etc.)  to  hold  ordination  ceremonies, 
and  thus  impart  new  life  to  the  Buddhist  Sasana.  To  the 
moving  spirit' in  the  reform  of  the  eighteenth  century,  Saranah- 
kara,  “  Prince  of  the  Order,5’1  and  to  his  pupils,  you  will  find 
references  in  my  catalogue  of  the  Singhalese  MSS.  in  the 
British  Museum  (pp.  xxi,  23b,  24a,  27b,  74b,  75a,  95a,and  109). 
MSS.  of  some  of  their  works  are  in  the  British  Museum,  and 
contain  ample  evidence  as  to  the  existence  of  jhdna  practice  in 


1  Sangharaja,  an  honorific  title. 


Editor's  Preface  vii 

the  eighteenth  century.  It  is  therefore  possible  that  the 
Siamese  monks  who  came  over  to  Ceylon  about,  or  shortly 
before,  this  period  had  a  hand  in  the  revival  and  encourage¬ 
ment  of  samadhi  meditation.  And  it  may  well  be  that  either 
Saranankara  himself,  or  a  pious  bhikshu  of  his  time,  probably 
a  pupil  of  his,  compiled  the  Manual  for  the  use  of  those  who 
took  up  such  a  course  for  the  attainment  of  spiritual 
beatitude. 

“  This  is  merely  my  present  opinion.  I  do  not  know  if  it 
is  worth  your  serious  consideration.  ..." 

There  seems  nothing  improbable  in  the  hypothesis  that 
this  Vidarsana-pota ,  or  manual  of  intuition,  as  the  present 
work  would  be  termed  in  Ceylon,  was  compiled  during  or  just 
after  the  above-named  period  of  religious  revival,  accompanied 
by  a  restoration  of  the  ancient  concentrative  culture  among 
the  more  earnest.  But  without  further  evidence,  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  estimate  the  extent  to  which  Siamese  Buddhism  is 
responsible  for  the  curious  elaboration,  in  the  contents  of  the 
book,  of  what  we  may  call  mystic  exercises  and  mystic  faith. 
I  refer  especially  to  the  “  wax-taper  exercise"  and  to  the 
colour-visions  in  the  Singhalese  descriptive  paragraphs.  We 
have,  as  yet,  no  materials  for  connecting  these  with  either 
Indian  or  Burmese  Buddhism. 

And  in  spite  of  the  interesting  tradition,  associating  this 
book  with  a  period  so  vitally  important  to  the  religious  history 
of  Ceylon,  the  publication  of  a  translation  of  it  now,  when  so 
much  important  matter  in  the  Pali  classics  is  still  only 
accessible  to  Pali  readers,  may  seem  untimely.  The  fact  is, 
that  initial  steps  towards  a  translation  had  already  been  taken 
and  placed  in  our  hands  by  that  cultured  nobleman,  a  donor 
to  this  Society,  the  late  Bajarshi  Baja  of  Bhinga.  Becoming 
acquainted  with  Bhys  Davids’ s  edition,  he  secured,  through 
our  late  lamented  contributor,  H.  C.  Norman  of  Benares,  the 
services  of  the  Bev.  Suriyagoda  Sumangala  of  Ceylon  to  make 
a  rough  draft  of  an  English  translation.  He  then  approached 
us,  through  Norman,  with  the  request  that  we  would  consider 
its  publication  in  our  Journal  or  elsewhere,  offering  a  subsidy 
towards  the  expenses  of  printing. 


Vlll 


Editor's  Preface 


It  was  incumbent  on  us  to  meet  the  wishes  of  one  who  had 
shown  the  Society  much  generosity,  and  we  invited  the  dis¬ 
patch  of  the  MS.,  of  which  Norman  wrote  that  it  impressed 
him  “  as  a  conscientious  piece  of  work.”  It  proved  to  be  in 
need  of  revision  at  the  hands  of  a  good  English  writer,  and  to 
require  a  translation  of  nearly  all  the  technical  Pali  terms. 
Combining  proficiency  in  literary  English  with  a  knowledge  of 
both  Pali  and  Singhalese,  Mr.  Woodward  seemed  to  us 
singularly  fitted  to  carry  out  this  difficult  task.  And  we 
reckoned  it  very  fortunate  for  the  Society  that  he  was  so  good 
as  to  consent. 


Mr.  Woodward  has  accomplished,  not  a  revision,  nor  a 
recast  of  the  previous  materials,  but  a  fresh  translation.  And 
to  what  extent  success  in  such  an  undertaking  was  possible, 
we  judge  he  has  succeeded.  The  task  bristles  with  difficulties. 
Success  in  it  means  not  only  a  lucid  English  version  of  a  text 
often  technically  obscure  and  abounding  in  clerical  slips, 
but  much  more.  It  means  a  rendering  not  less,  if  not  more, 
interesting  to  the  general  reader  than  other  practical  manuals 
•of  devotion  have  proved;  and  to  the  student  of  mysticism  a 
positive  contribution,  whereby  he  may  widen  or  deepen  his 
inductions  as  to  the  nature  and  aims  of  the  subject  of  his  study. 
But  here  the  terms,  the  methods,  the  ends,  and  the  associated 
ideas,  are  for  the  general  and  even  for  the  special  reader  so 
unfamiliar,  that  his  interest  may  be  baffled  rather  than  stimu¬ 
lated.  Our  own  religious  ideas  have  grown  along  avenues  of 
language  so  different  from  the  channel  here  presented  that  it 
needs  a  catholic  intelligence  to  see,  in  the  latter,  an  intelligible 


effort  towards  a  desirable  end.  And  the  ambiguities  of  terms 
where  there  is  no  commentary  to  distinguish  for  you  ! 

Talking  of  “  avenues  ”  reminds  me  of  the  ambiguous  term 
okdsa !  recurring  throughout  the  Manual,  and  rendered 
“  Give  leave  !”  In  the  text  there  is  no  verb.  Okdsa  may 
mean,  like  dkdsa,  “  space  it  may  mean  “  place,”  “  oppor¬ 
tunity,”  “occasion,”  “leisure,”  or  “leave.5  If  we  came 
across  the  exclamation,  “  Boom  !  Boom  1”  we  should  under¬ 
stand  either  that  room  is  asked  for,  or  has  been  obtained. 
The  exercises  in  our  Manual  are  scarcely  devotions  of  a  Der- 


IX 


Editor's  Preface 

veeshian  nature  to  be  practised  otherwise  than  in  solitude. 
The  44  Give  leave  !”  when  addressing  the  confessor  (p.  6), 
seems  clear  enough.  But  the  confessor’s  function  ends  at  the 
foot  of  p.  7.  After  that  the  44  Okasa  !”  is  perhaps  rather 
the  self-adjuring  of  a  solitary  practising  the  procedure 
previously  taught  him,  and  muttering,  44  Now  !  Now  !”  when 
the  moment  has  come  to  enter  on  a  fresh  4 4  station  '  of  con¬ 
templative  effort.  The  translator,  on  the  other  hand,  may 
have  caught  the  uncertain  word  by  the  right  end .  The  devotee 
is  represented  as  frequently  44  asking  ”  (ydicdmi)  for  this  or 
that  44  mystic  ”  state,  and  there  is  the  idiom  (e.g.,  Dhamma- 
pada  Commentary ,  i,  101):  okdsay  ydcaii,  even  though,  in  our 
Manual,  it  is  not  quite  clear  of  whom  41  leave  ”  is  asked. 
Quite  clear,  however,  are  the  difficulties  besetting  the  inter¬ 
pretation  of  such  ambiguities,  and  great  is  our  debt  to  the 
translator  for  wrestling  with  them  on  our  behalf. 

The  expression  44  mystic  state  ”  brings  us  up  against  the 
title  for  which  Rhys  Davids  and  myself  are  responsible.  To 
place  the  nameless  visitor  from  Ceylon  in  European  dress 
among  the  Pali  Text  Society  issues,  the  former  called  it  44  The 
Yogavacara’s  Manual  of  Indian  Mysticism,  as  practised  by 
Buddhists.”  44  Mysticism  ”  occurs  not  at  all  in  the  work. 
There  is  no  Pali  equivalent.  14  Yogavacara  ”  does  occur,  and 
is  rendered  “aspirant”  (pp.  67  1).  There  is  no  English 
equivalent.  It  came  into  use  later  than  the  final  recension  of 
the  Pitakas.  We  find  it  in  the  Questions  of  King  Milinda,1 
where  Rhys  Davids  has  the  following  note:  44 .  .  .  Literally 
it  is  4  he  whose  sphere,  whose  constant  resort,  is  Yoga.’ 
Now,  yoga  is  4  diligence,  devotion,  mental  concentra¬ 
tion.  .  .  .’  It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  the  whole  com¬ 
pound  merely  means  one  of  those  4  religious,’  in  the  technical 
sense,  who  were  also  religious  in  the  higher,  more  usual  sense. 
It  would  thus  be  analogous  to.  the  phrase  sangamava- 
caro,  4  at  home  in  war,’  used  of  a  war-elephant  (Jdt.  ii, 
No.  182)2  and  of  a  soldier  (below,  p.  69).”  Again  in  vol.  ii, 

1  Vol.  i,  68:  “Recluse  who  is  devoted  in  effort”  ( S .  B.  East, 
vol.  xxxv).  Pronounce  yo-ga-watch-a-ra. 

2  Translated  there:  “  Whose  home  is  in  the  field.” 


X 


E ditar' s  Preface 

p.  279,  where  we  find  the  intensified  term  yogi  y  o  g  a  v  a- 
caro:  “The  rendering  of  these  words  is  quite  inade¬ 
quate.  .  .  .  Neither  4  yogee  ’  nor  4  devotee  ’  can  be  used, 
for  they  have  acquired  connotations  contradictory  to  what 
was  in  our  author’s  mind.  He  means  the  Buddhist  Bhikshu 
belonging  to  those  bhikshus  (by  no  means  the  majority)  who 
had  devoted  themselves  to  a  life  of  systematic  effort  according 
to  the  Buddhist  scheme  of  self -training.  ...” 

We  also  find  the  term  in  the  Jataka  Commentary  (a  much 
later  compilation  than  the  stories:  i,  303  [trans.  i,  161],  394, 
and  400)  and  in  Buddhaghosa’s  AtthasalinI,  187,1  246,  and 
Kathavatthu  Commentary,  29,  130.  There  was  from  the 
very  outset  of  the  Buddhist  movement  a  large  number  who 
joined  the  Order  from  other  than  the  highest  motives.  They 
were  alluded  to,  before  the  youngest  books  in  the  Canon  had 
been  completed,  by  the  collective  name  of  puthujjana 
kalyanakabhikkhu:  44  hoi-polloi  -  good  -  fellow  -  bhik  - 
khus.”2  Nevertheless,  when  exercises  in  religious  concentra¬ 
tion  are  the  theme,  the  compilers  of  the  Canon  did  not  find, 
in  referring  to  the  44  aspirant,  any  more  specific  term  either 
necessary,  or  ready  to  hand,  than  just  the  common  name 
44  bhikkhu.”  The  specialized  term  belongs  to  the  later  day  of 
a  greatly  developed  and  44  established  church.” 

Now  the  Buddhist  aspirant  of  the  earlier  centuries  would 
not  have  recognized  himself  under  the  name  of  44  mystic  ’ 
in  its  original  sense.3 4  It  is  true  that  his  systematic  efforts 
were  not  for  the  general .  But  neither  were  they  akin  to  the 

esoterically  fraternal  nature  of  mystery-sacraments.  They 
were  not  the  secrets  of  guardian  priests;  witness  the  emphatic 
declaration:  ”  I  have  taught  the  Norm,  making  no  inner  oi 
outer;  in  respect  of  doctrines  the  Tathagata  hath  not  a 
teacher’s  fist  (now  opening,  now  closing).”4  However,  it  would 
seem,  if  the  translator  has  been  rightly  informed,  that  a 

1  Adikammiko  yogavacaro(a  beginner). 

2  Patisambhida-magga  i,  176;  ii,  190,  193. 

3  The  Greek  musis  :  closing  (of  the  lips,  etc.);  mueisthai  :  to  be 

initiated;  musterion  :  secret  rite. 

4  Dialogues  of  the  Buddha,  ii,  107;  cf.  text:  D.  ii,  100  and  note. 


XI 


Editor's  Preface 

practice  of  special  esoteric  teaching  had  grown  up  in  later 
times,  to  which  his  preface  alludes  (below,  p.  xviii). 

But  not  even  the  Manual’s  aspirant  would  recognize,  in  the 
ends  usually  associated  with  mediaeval  mysticism,  any  clear 
identity  of  aim.  And  this  is  particularly  interesting  in  view 
of  the  fresh  influx  of  Yoga  'practices  adopted  by  Siamese  Bud¬ 
dhists,  without  admixture  of  Yoga  (quasi-theistic)  doctrines. 
For  the  later,  as  for  the  earlier  Buddhist  aspirant,  there  was 
no  divine  spirit  or  being  with  whom  he  desired  spiritual  contact 
or  union,  or  in  whom  he  yearned  to  be  merged.  He  did  strive 
to  substitute,  if  only  for  the  briefest  interval,  a  “  divine  ”  or 
deva  consciousness  for  his  earthly  conscious  flux.  But  this 
was  only  as  a  means  to  spiritual  growth.  If  he  was  in  earnest, 
communion  even  with  Brahma  was  a  relatively  poor  thing.1 
“  Oneness  ”  (e  k  a  1 1  a  ij)2  in  thought,  as  opposed  to  the  dis¬ 
tractions  of  difference,  was  desirable,  but  only  as  a  means. 
Had  you  spoken  to  him  of  The  One,  he  would  have  told  you 
he  preferred  The  Empty,  and  why.3 4  Had  you  spoken  of  a 
mystic  union  of  Love,  he  would  have  asked  if  you  meant  the 
filial  devotion  of  pupil  to  teacher,  the  delight  in  truth  and 
the  true  order  of  things,  or  the  tenderness  as  of  a  mother  or 
brother,  with  which  he  surveyed  all  living  things  P 

Had  you  spoken  of  reality,  and  of  insight  into  it  as  an  end — 
as  a  modern  metaphysically  disposed  mystic  might  do — and 
had  you  explained  what  you  meant,  it  is  conceivable,  had  our 
aspirant  also  learnt  his  mediae val  Abhidhamma,  that  some 
kinship  in  goals  might  have  been  disclosed.  Even  had  he  not 
been  philosophically  trained,  he  should  have  realized  through 
his  Dhamma  (“  Law,”  or  Norm),  firstly,  that  he  was  trying 
to  penetrate  ( pativedhati )  past,  or  under  the  multitudes  of 
impressions  of  composite  facts,  experienced  and  named  as 
such  by  multitudes  of  minds,  to  the  bare  sources  of  these 
facts — the  elements  of  things,  the  factors  of  the  thinking, 
naming  organism — on  which  the  mental  constructions  and 

1  E.g.,  Majjhima  ii,  195. 

2  Patisambhidamagga,  i,  108,  163,  etc. 

3  E.g.,  op.  cit.,  ii,  100;  Compendium,  216. 

4  Cf.  Manual,  last  chapter;  Encij.  Religion  and  Ethics  :  “  Love 
(Buddhist).” 


Xll 


Editor’s  Preface 

interpretations  were  based;  secondly,  that  he  discerned  in  all 
living,  in  all  earthly,  infernal,  celestial  rebirths,  one  and  the 
same  continuous  process,  essentially  and  inevitably  a  process 
of  growth  and  decay ;  thirdly,  that  he  was  seeking  to  become 
master  and  not  slave  of  this  process,  rounding  it  off  and 
winning  release1  from  all  its  sorrows, — from  it :  this,  he  would 
say,  is  the  true  or  real  ( saccha )  that  he  sought  to  realize 
( sacchikaromi ).  And  if  you  claimed,  as  mystic,  to  be  seeking 
the  real  (let  us  refrain  from  deifying  the  word  with  a  capital  R, 
&  la  mystique)  as  you  envisaged  it,  to  that  extent  he  is,  with 
you,  a  mystic. 

But  the  mysticism  in  our  Manual  is  chiefly  seen,  not  in 
source  nor  end,  but  in  the  means  and  method.  The  literature 
of  Western  mysticism  testifies  to  abnormal  states  of  intuition 
attained  by  minds  specially  attuned,  if  not  always  specially 
trained,  during  a  more  or  less  severelv  selective  mode  of  life. 
We  have  read  of  the  great  lay-mystic,  Jakob  Boehme,  acci¬ 
dentally  falling  into  self-hypnosis  by  gazing  at  a  surface  of 
shining  pewter.  Thereupon,  so  he  declares,  he  seemed  “  to 
behold  the  inward  properties  of  all  things  in  nature  opened  to 
him.”2  By  certain  similar  “  devices  ”  (k  a  s  i  n  a)  the  Indian 
sought  to  obtain  similar  results  systematically.  Consciousness, 
pinned  down  at  first  to  a  persistent  simple  sensation,  was  freed 
from  inroads  of  momentary  waking  experience,  and  (lightly 
advancing  along  its  wonted  difficult  channel  of  study)  seemed 
“  to  behold  ”  and  to  penetrate  where  hitherto  had  come 
blankness  and  bafflement. 

So,  in  our  Manual ,  systems  of  preparation,  excluding  every¬ 
thing  accidental,  are  set  forth,  with  every  appearance  of  con¬ 
fidence  in  the  results.  Among  these  it  is  stated  that  “  the 
inward  properties  of  things  ” — extensity,  typified  by  earth, 
cohesion,  typified  by  water,  heat,  illustrated  by  flame,  and 
mobility,  essential  property  of  air — will  “  appear  ”  to  him, 
chieflv,  it  would  seem,  as  wonders  in  colour  !  And  within 
him  comes  an  uprush  of  piti3  a  sense  of  keen  interest  or  zest 

1  In  the  Manual  he  usually  calls  it  Nibbana. 

2  Cf.  his  Aurora ,  and  “  Boehme,”  by  G.  W.  Allen,  Ency.  Religion 
and  Ethics. 

3  Cf.  below,  the  ‘Nfeditation  of  the  Fivefold  Zest. 


Xlll 


Editors  Preface 

rising  to  transport,  enthusiasm,  rapture,  as  the  presence  of  a 
part  of  the  reality  of  things  is  unveiled,  and  he  discerns,  not 
many  and  composite  effects,  but  a  cause;  not,  to  quote  an 
admirable  modern  manual  of  mysticism,  ‘‘  the  tidy  world  of 
image,  but  the  ineffable  world  of  fact. "l  Or  is  the  result 
(according  to  the  Manual)  an  untidcy  world  of  image  ? 

The  Western  mystic,  less  confident  than  the  Indian,  lias 
believed  in  cultivating  a  general  predisposition  for  the 
fortunate,  if  formidable,  “conjuncture''  bringing  about  these 
liftings  of  the  veil.  But  his  faith  in  the  infinite  plasticity  and 
wieldiness  and  potency  of  mind  is  less  thoroughgoing  than 
that  of  the  Indian.2  The  latter  expects  no  “supernatural  " 
results  to  the  training  of  such  an  instrument  .  But  he  believes 
that,  as  the  abnormally  developed  left  hand  of  a  great 
violinist  can  be  converted  into  a  voice  saving,  not  words,  but 
things  literally  ineffable,  so  his  own  mental  apparatus  working, 
after  severe,  unfaltering  training,  in  an  abnormal  way,  can 
achieve  an  uprush  of  penetrative,  or  comprehensive  under¬ 
standing,  and  resultant  bliss.  But  the  better  understanding 
will  not  vield  a  new  set  of  ideas.  These,  whether  of  “  inward 
properties  of  things/'  or  what  not,  remain  such  as  the  dis¬ 
cursive  intellect  has  hammered  out  in  judgments  verified,  or 
in  hypotheses  unverifiable.  But  aspects,  values,  relations,  may 
become  modified — can  more  be  claimed  ?  Is  it  not  enough  ? 

Now  in  that  this  Manual  shows  a  belief  in  the  possibility  of 
inducing  abnormal,  ecstatic  consciousness  by  method  and 

0 

effort,  instead  of  leaving  such  visitations  to  possible  but  un¬ 
sought  conjunctures,  it  merits  the  name  of  “  mystic.  The 
Buddhist  has  a  collective  name  for  such  studies,  more  relevant 
to  the  study  and  less  accidental  than  the  word  “  mystic,”  and 
that  is  s  a  m  a  d  h  i,  a  word  meaning  literally  “  collective,  or 
continual  fitting  together."  Exegetically  it  is  defined  as 
“right  (s  a  m  m  a)  placing  of  consciousness  on  object."  Its 
chief  synonym  iscittass’  ekaggata:  one-pointedness 
of  consciousness.  Both  states  are  described  as  “  steadfast¬ 
ness,  continual  and  downright,  of  consciousness,  absence  of 

1  Mrs.  Evelyn  Underhill,  Practical  Mysticism 

2  Cf.  Anguttara ,  i,  9  f. 


XIV 


Editor's  Preface 

distraction,  mental  balance,  imperturbability,  calm.”1  And 
Jhana  meditation  is  a  form  of  samctdhi. 

The  reader  who  wishes  to  go  into  the  interesting  question 
of  the  evidence,  in  the  oldest  Buddhist  books,  concerning  the 
nature  and  extent  of  work  in  s  a  m  a  d  h  i  should  read  Bhys 
Davids* s  introduction  to  the  edition  of  the  Manual  in  its 
original  form.  The  sketch  there  given  might,  with  oppor¬ 
tunity  and  present  materials,  be  expanded,  but  the  con¬ 
clusions  hold  good. 

The  subjects  given  below  for  concentrative  exercise  may 
be  found  either  in  the  Suttas,  or  in  the  Abhidhamma 
Pitaka,  or  in  Buddhaghosa's  Visuddhi-magga  (fifth  century 
a.d.),  with  certain  discrepancies.  Unfamiliar  from  the  point 
of  view  of  these  older  works  is  (a)  the  elaboration  of  the  Yoga 
methods  of  pseudo-physical  localization  of  ideas;  (b)  the 
colour-images  of  subjective  origin  contained  in  the  Singhalese 
descriptive  paragraphs;  (c)  most  of  the  subdivisions,  such  as 
span,  aggregate  of  elements,  heart,  wax-taper  business,  etc., 
grouped  under  each  of  the  first  three  meditations.  We  get  a 
rudimentary  form  of  (a)  in  the  oldest  or  Canonical  commentary 
on  the  Jhana -vibhanga,  where  it  is  said:  “  This  mindfulness 
(sati)  is  well  planted  at  the  tip  of  the  nose  or  about  the  mouth  ” 
(p.  252);  (b),  again,  is  an  elaboration  of  such  colour-imagery 
as  we  get  in  the  “  eight  positions  of  Mastery”  (see  Dialogues 
of  the  Buddha,  ii,  118  f. ;  Bud.  Psy.  Ethics ,  p.  62  f.).  Under  (c) 
“  heart  *’  is  still  presumably  considered  as  the  vatthu  or  basis 
of  mind. 

But  all  the  subjects  of  the  eight  Meditations  and  two  Exer¬ 
cises  are  drawn  from  the  Sutta  Pitaka,  unless  we  except  that  on 
Happiness,  which  nowhere,  I  believe,  forms  a  distinct  item  in 
any  category  for  samddhi,  and  that  on  the  Six  Pairs,  which,  I 
believe,  first  occurs  in  the  Abhidhamma  Pitaka.  The  ten 
heads,  again,  in  the  last  Meditation,  as  compiled,  form  a  post- 
canonical  category,  2-9  constituting  chapter  xxi.  of  the 
Visuddhi-Magga,  and  all  the  ten  appearing  as  a  category  of 

Insight  ”  in  the  Compendium  of  Philosophy  (p.  210  f.). 
Once  more,  the  forty  Kammatthanas,  or  “  occasions  for 


1  Buddh.  Psychological  Ethics,  §§  11,  15. 


XV 


Editor's  Preface 


work/'  in  both  these  classical  manuals  are  reproduced,  in  the 
present  work,  not  under  this  title,  but  under  the  Kasina  or 
Device  section,  and  four  of  the  five  following  sections,  ex¬ 
cluding  that  on  the  Bodily  Parts.  The  last-named  section 
and  the  “  Breathing  Exercise  ”  have  been  ejected  from  the 
older  scheme  of  the  Ten  Recollections,  and  have  been  replaced, 
as  such,  by  the  two,  once  separately  classed  Kammatthdnas  of 
“  The  One  Notion  ”  and  The  One  Element-Discrimination, 
or  Determination. 5 51 

We  see,  then,  that  the  old  Thera vada  tradition  had  either 
survived  in  Ceylon,  or  was  flourishing  in  Siam,  or  both,  when 
this  Manual  was  written.  And  this  venerable  skeleton,  with 
its  incrustations  of  later  thought  and  fancy,  lends  a  quite 
special  interest  to  the  little  work  which,  as  a  work  not  to  be 
read  through,  but  “  thumbed  ”  (as  the  translator  says)  by  a 
student  between  his  oral  lessons,  is  from  a  literary  point  of 
view  so  unsatisfactory.  An  expert  in  mediaeval  and  later 
Christian  handbooks  might  possibly  refer  us  to  equivalent 
writings.  Our  “  Preamble/’  for  instance,  opens  with  a  com¬ 
mentary  in  Singhalese,  phrase  by  phrase,  on  a  sentence  in  Pali 
from  the  Patisambhida-magga,  or  Jhana-vibhanga.1 2  Pali 
sentences  from  the  Canon  (as  shown  in  the  footnotes)  follow; 
then  comes  a  sentence  of  word-myth  (on  Arahan),  followed 
by  a  piece  of  “  mystical  ”  description,  both  in  Singhalese.  In 
the  “  Invocation  ”  we  have  excerpts  from  the  Nikayas  mixed 
with  doxologies  of  a  later  style,  all  in  Pah.  Hence,  to  get  a 
Christian  equivalent,  the  reader  should  picture  himself  to  be 
reading  the  manual  of  a  Siena  mystic,  composed  of  phrases 
from  the  Vulgate  and  passages  from  the  Fathers — all  in  Latin 
— interspersed  with  mystical  descriptions  in  the  Italian  of, 
say,  two  hundred  years  ago.3 

C.  A.  F.  RHYS  DAVIDS. 


Chipstead,  Surrey, 
September ,  1916. 


1  See  p.  93,  and  n.  2.  The  “  determination  ”  is  of  the  “  four  ele¬ 
ments  (of  material  things  in  any  compound).” 

2  For  the  greater  comfort,  I  presume,  of  the  reader,  the  translator 
has  eliminated  the  Commentarial  piecemeal  parsing. 

3  See  Supplementary  Note.  p.  xvi. 


b 


SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTE. 


We  have  called  the  original  of  this  translation  a  “unique  MS.” 
By  this  we  understand  “  the  only  copy  we  have  heard  of.”  We  do 
not  wish  to  assert  either  that  Ceylon  possesses  no  other  copies,  or 
that  no  other  works  of  the  land  are  to  be  found  in  her  libraries.  For 
instance,  Mr.  H.  M.  Gunasekera’s  Catalogue  of  palm-leaf  MSS.  in  the 
Colombo  Museum  Library  (1901)  includes  both  a  Dhyana  Pota: — “  an 
extensive  work  on  concentrated  meditation  .  .  .” — and  a  Vidarsana- 
Pota:  “  a  Pali  work  .  .  .  with  explanations  in  Sinhalese  on  abstract 
meditation.”  The  latter  might  prove  to  be  a  work  closely  akin  to  the 
present  work,  if  not  a  copy  of  it. — Ed. 


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFATORY  NOTE 


The  manual  called  Y ogdracara  was  edited  for  the  Pali  Text 
Society  and  published  in  1896,  being  the  first  Singhalese 
manuscript  printed  in  European  characters.  The  history  of 
this  unique  manuscript  will  be  found  in  the  Editor’s  Intro¬ 
duction  to  this  volume.  In  1914  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids  sent 
me  a  rough  translation  of  the  Manual,  requesting  me  to  re¬ 
translate  the  whole  work,  introduce  the  English  equivalents 
of  the  Pali  terms,  and  prepare  the  book  for  the  press.  In 
doing  this,  I  have  found  two  books  of  the  greatest  assistance — 
namely,  Dhammasangani  (of  the  Abhidhamma  Pitaka),  or 
Buddhist  Psychological  Ethics ,  as  it  is  named  by  its  trans¬ 
lator,  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids;  and,  secondly,  the  Compendium  of 
(Buddhist)  Philosophy ,  by  S.  Z.  Aung,  the  well-known  expositor 
of  Burmese  Pali  Abhidhamma,  and  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids.  1 
have  adopted  the  terms  therein  employed,  and  have  throughout 
received  much  help  from  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids  herself  in  the 
difficult  task  of  selecting  appropriate  terms,  in  the  arrange¬ 
ment  of  the  matter,  and  in  the  shape  of  some  notes  and  refer¬ 
ences,  including  a  translation  of  The  Chant  of  Amity  on 
p.  4. 

The  publication  has  been  long  delayed  by  these  times  of 
war  and  high  prices  of  paper  and  printing,  but  it  is  at  last 
complete.  Western  students  of  Yoga  practices  will  hardly 
venture  on  attempting  the  processes  here  described.  As  to 
the  value  of  the  book  as  a  piece  of  Buddhist  mysticism, 
readers  should  refer  to  the  Introduction,  both  here  and  in  the 
volume  of  the  text.  We  have  no  two  writers  better  able  to 
enlighten  us  in  this  matter  than  Professor  and  Mrs.  Rhys 
Davids.  The  book  is,  of  course,  a  manual,  not  to  be  read 
through  and  cast  aside,  but  referred  to  by  the  scholar  and  the 

xvii 


xviii  Translator' s  Prefatory  Note 

curious,  and  perhaps  thumbed  by  those  who  are  deeply 
interested  in  the  practices  of  Yoga. 

My  knowledge  of  Singhalese  is  quite  insufficient  to  cope  with 
a  translation  of  the  description,  in  that  language,  of  each 
process.  In  this  part  of  the  work  I  have  had  much  valuable 
help  from  Mr.  Gr.  Sagaris  de  Silva,  Singhalese  pandit  of  this 
college,  who  also  gave  me  the  following  account  of  the  last 
bhikkhu  in  Ceylon  to  whom  the  Yogavacara  tradition  was 
known. 

The  bhikkhu  Doratiyaveye,  Thera,  was  incumbent  of  the 
Hangurangketa  Wihara  in  the  Western  Province  of  Ceylon, 
and  was  living  so  recently  as  1900.  He  came  by  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  system  in  the  following  way:  His  guru,  then  an 
aged  monk,  one  day  ordered  all  his  resident  pupils,  or 
samaneras,  to  come  and  kneel  before  him  in  the  court  of  the 
Wihara.  He  then  left  them,  shut  himself  up  in  his  cell  and, 
they  supposed,  went  to  sleej)  for  an  hour  or  more.  On  coming 
out  again,  he  found  that  all  the  pupils  had  disappeared,  except 
the  said  Doratiyaveye,  who  had  remained  kneeling  during  the 
whole  time  of  his  teacher’s  absence.  Questioned  as  to  why 
he  also  had  not  gone  away,  he  replied :  “  You  did  not  order  me 
to  go.”  The  elder  was  well  pleased  with  him,  and,  sending 
for  the  other  pupils,  asked  them  why  they  had  departed 
without  permission.  ££  We  thought  you  were  asleep,”  they 
replied.  “  No  !”  said  the  guru;  “  it  was  a  test  to  see  which  of 
you  was  worthy  to  receive  the  ancient  secrets  which  have  been 
handed  down  to  me,  the  secrets  of  parampard  yoga  (tradi¬ 
tional  secret  meditation  practices  handed  down  by  word  of 
mouth  from  guru  to  sisya). 

He  then  sent  the  others  away,  and  instructed  his  chosen 
disciple  in  the  system,  and  not  long  after  passed  away.  The 
disciple,  it  is  said,  did  not  practise  the  process  himself,  and 
the  reason  for  this  is  rather  quaint.  “  People  said”  he  was  a 
Bodhisattva,  and,  as  such,  destined  for  many  more  births  on 
earth.  Now  had  he  practised  the  process  with  success,  he 
would  have  entered  on  the  Path.  Having  done  so,  he  was 
bound,  according  to  the  teaching  of  the  Buddha,  to  attain 
Arahatship  in  his  seventh  subsequent  birth,  and  would  thus 


XIX 


Translator' s  Prefatory  Note 

pass  away  for  ever,  and  could  not  be  Bodhisattva.  This  is, 
of  course,  tbe  orthodox  view  of  the  disputed  question  as  to 
whether  the  Bodhisattva  has  to  tread  the  path  like  ordinary 
men.1  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  elder  was  content  to  teach  the 
practice  to  one  of  his  pupils,  who  went  mad  and  died ;  which 
would  probably  happen  unless  the  guru  himself  were  fully 
versed  in  the  methods,  and  able  to  see  clairvoyantly  exactly 
what  effect  each  meditation  was  having  on  his  pupil. 

There  is  no  one  now,  as  far  as  I  know,  in  Ceylon  who  either 
knows  or  practises  these  strenuous  exercises.  Still,  Ye  Jceci 
sikkhdkdmd  honti.  .  .  . 

F.  L.  WOODWARD. 


Mahinda  College, 

Galle, 

Ceylon. 

August  7,  1916. 


1  The  question  of  a  Bodhisattva’ s  entering  the  Eightfold  Path  is  one 
of  those  discussed  in  Katha-Vatthu  ( Points  of  Controversy),  lately 
translated  for  the  P.  T.  S.,  by  S.  Z.  Aung  and  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids,  on 
which  see  p.  168  et.  seq. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Preamble  --------  1 

Invocation  -  -  -  -  -  -  3 

Meditation  of  the  Fivefold  Zest  or  Rapture  -  -  6 

The  Order  Due  -  -  -  -  •  6 

The  Six  Sounds  -  -  -  -  ■  16 

The  Span  -  -  -  -  -  18 

The  Aggregate  of  Elements  -  -  -  -  -19 

The  Fourfold  System  -  -  -  -  -  20 

The  Fivefold  System  -  -  -  -  -  21 

The  Heart  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  22 

Self-collectedness  -  -  -  -  -  -  23 

The  Lasting  of  the  Law  -  -  -  -  -  24 

The  Wax  Taper  Exercise  -  -  -  -  -  24 

The  Task  of  Self-control  -  -  -  -  -  27 

Meditation  of  the  Six  Pairs  or  Words  (with  similar  sub¬ 
divisions)  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  30 

Meditation  on  Happiness  (with  similar  subdivisions)  -  -  55 

Breathing  Exercise  for  Mental  Clarity  -  -  -  67 

Exercise  by  “  Devices  ”  -  -  -  -  -  72 

Meditation  on  the  Ten  Foul  Things  -  -  -  -  80 

Meditation  on  the  Bodily  Parts  -  -  -  86 

Meditation  on  the  Ten  Recollections  -  -  -  91 

Meditation  on  the  Immaterial  Realms  -  -  -  94 

Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  (of  Emotion)  -  96 

Meditation  on  the  Ten  Forms  of  Knowledge  -  -  129 

Appendix,  by  D.  B.  Jayatilaka  ....  143 

Indexes  .......  153 

\ 


xxi 


Note. — The  larger  type  ( from  p.  3)  indicates  that  the 
original  was  written  in  Pali.  The  paragraphs  in  smaller 
type  ( from  p.  8  onward )  represent  the  Singhalese  portion. 
The  Preamble  is  also  in  Singhalese,  except  the  first 
paragraph,  which  is  in  both  languages. 


MANUAL  OF  A  MYSTIC 


PREAMBLE 

ARAHAN,1  ARAHAN.  (THE  WORTHY  !  THE  WORTHY  !) 

0  Bhikkhu’s,  under  this  rule  a  Bhikkhu,  one  who  has  truly  felt 
the  dread  of  the  stream  of  becoming,  goes  to  a  solitary  forest, 
to  the  foot  of  a  tree,  or  to  a  lonely  place  far  from  the  haunts  of 
men,  sits  down  cross-legged2  and  holds  the  body  straight. 
Setting  mindfulness  in  front  of  him,  with  Nibbana  as  his  goal, 
not  wavering  nor  turning  thought  to  other  things,  he  breathes 
in  mindfully  and  mindfully  breathes  out.  As  he  draws  in  a 
long  breath  he  knows,  [2]  “A  long  breath  I  draw  in  ;  as  he 
breathes  out  a  long  breath  he  knows,  “  A  long  breath  I  breathe 
out.”  As  he  draws  in  a  quick  breath  he  knows,  "  A  quick  breath 
I  draw  in  ”;  as  he  breathes  out  a  quick  breath  he  knows,  '*  A 
quick  breath  I  breathe  out.” 

Knowing  the  body  in  all  its  parts,  thoroughly  grasping  the 
true  nature  of  this  way,  that  is,  the  indrawal  of  breath  which, 
starting  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  passes  downwards  to  the  navel, 
and  the  outbreathing  which  rises  from  the  navel  and  passes 
upwards  to  the  tip  of  the  nose,  and  the  nature  of  their  rise  and  fall, 
he  fixes  his  sight  on  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  grasps  the  truth  that 
he  sees  the  tip  of  the  nose  with  the  sight-mind,  firmly  fixing  in 
the  heart  the  thing  he  is  attending  to:  such  is  the  preparation 
or  preamble.1 

In  the  word  Arahan,  the  first  letter  “  A  ”  means  the  Treasure 
of  the  Law  (D  h  a  m  m  a);  the  second  RA  ”  the  Treasure  who 

1  P  a  r  i  k  a  m  m  a. 

2  Dlgha  Nikdya,  II,  291;  Majjhima  NiJcaya ,  I,  56;  V'maya  Texts. 

I,  119;  Dialogues  of  the  Buddha,  II,  327  et  seq. ;  Uddna,  21; 
Vibhanga,  252.  ' 


9 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

is  the  B  u  d  d  h  a;  and  the  third  “  HAN  ”  the  Treasure  of  the 
Brotherhood1  (Sangha). 

When  the  meditation  thus  proceeds,  any  blots  or  blemishes 
in  the  induction-artifice, 2  such  as  marks  of  froth  or  scratches  in 
the  mark  of  upholding3  will  look  like  smoke  or  like  white  clouds 
in  the  sky.  Forthwith  the  image  of  the  mark4  arises  in  him  like 
a  mirror  drawn  from  its  case,  like  a  conch-shell  scoured  clean,  like 
the  moon  as  he  slips  from  the  clouds,  or  like  a  flock  of  cranes 
before  dark  clouds.  The  Element  of  Extension5  next  appears,  as 
if  it  had  come  forth  piercing  the  stream  of  sub-conscious  life,6 
reflected  as  an  image  on  the  mind.  The  mark  of  its  ecstasy7  is 
as  the  light  of  the  firefly,  self-lit  by  day  and  night.  The  preamble 
is  like  unto  the  mild  rays  of  the  morning  sun.  The  access8  is 
like  blue  flowers  and  yellow  flowers.9  The  ecstasy  and  pre¬ 
amble  of  the  element  of  extension,  [3]  starting  from  the  tip  of  the 
nose,  should  be  fixed  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel. 

1  Araha n.  The  sound  RHNG,  strongly  breathed  out,  is  used  by 
the  Hindu  \  ogi’s  probably  to  clear  the  lungs,  as  a  preliminary  to  medi¬ 
tation.  Does  not  the  practice  derive  from  this  word-formula,  or  more 
probably  vice  versa  ? 

Kasina-dosa.  On  these  “  artifices  ”  for  inducing  self-hypno¬ 
tism  in  J  h  a  n  a  see  Buddhist  Psychological  Ethics,  43,  n.  4;  57,  n.  2. 
See  also  Visuddhi  Magga,  cap.  IV.  (and  Warren,  Buddhism  in  Trans¬ 
lations,  p.  291);  Compendium  of  Philosophy,  p.  54. 

Bggaha-nimitta,  the  image  of  the  artifice,  visualized  by 
constant  practice  as  a  vivid  reality.  Compendium,  54. 

4  Patibhaga-nimitta,  “  the  after-image,”  an  abstract.  See 
Pali  text,  p.  58. 

Pathavidhatu,  the  abstract  notion  of  “earth.”  Compen¬ 
dium,  3,  154  f.;  268  f. 

h  Bhavanga.  “  organic  continuum,”  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids,  Bud¬ 
dhist  Psychology ,  pp.  171,  178. 

7  Appan  a.  Compendium,  pj3.  55,  64,  129  and  Ti. 

s  Bpacara,  approach”  (?“  outskirts  ”  or  “partial  percep¬ 
tion”);  “upholding  aid.”  Comp.  55.  Wijesinha  in  Childers’  Pali 
Bict.  s.v.  I  ggaha-nimitta  means  the  reflection  of  the  object 
gazed  at  in  the  kasinaparikamma;  parikamma  is  merelv 
the  perception  of  the  object  in  the  mind  when  looking  at  it.  U  g  g  a  h  a 
is  the  taking  up  of  the  image  into  the  mind  so  that  it  is  retained  there 
e\ en  vlien  the  eye  is  averted.  Patibhaga  is  a  more  refined  and 
polished  reflection  of  the  object  produced  in  the  mind  by  a  deeper  and 
longer  contemplation.” 

9  In  Sinhalese,  katarolu-mal  and  hi  r  ikarni  k  a  -  m  a  1. 


INVOCATION 


Glory  to  him,  the  Blessed  One,  the  Worthy,  the  All- 
Enlightened  One. 

(To  be  said  thrice.) 

I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Buddha  so  long  as  life  shall  last, 
even  till  Nibbana. 

I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Law  so  long  as  life  shall  last,  even 
till  Nibbana.  t- 

I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Brotherhood  so  long  as  life  shall 
last,  even  till  Nibbana. 

Behold !  The  Blessed  One,  the  Worthy,  the  All-Enlight¬ 
ened  One,  perfect  in  knowledge  and  conduct,  the  Happy  One, 
Knower  of  the  worlds,  the  Guide  Supreme  of  men  who  would 
be  trained,  Teacher  of  gods  and  men,  the  Buddha,  the 
Blessed  One.1 

h  i 

Again,  I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Buddha  .  .  . 

Again,  I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Law  .  .  . 

Again,  I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Brotherhood  .  .  . 

Behold  !  the  Law  well  proclaimed  by  the  Blessed  One, 
that  bringeth  good  even  in  this  life,  without  delay,  and  good 
that  may  be  seen,  that  leadeth  on  to  bliss,  that  wise  men, 
each  for  himself,  may  know.2 3 

For  the  third  time  also,  I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Buddha  .  .  . 

For  the  third  time  also,  I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Law  .  .  . 

For  the  third  time  also,  I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Brother¬ 
hood  .  .  . 


1  Dialojues,  I,  78  and  'passim;  Majjlmna-Nikdya,  7,  37,  etc. 

Majjhima-Nikaya  ;  loc.  cit.,  etc. 

3 


2 


4  Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Rightly  walking  is  the  Blessed  One’s  Brotherhood  of 
Disciples, 

Upright  is  the  Blessed  One’s  Brotherhood  of  Disciples, 
Justly  walking  is  the  Blessed  One’s  Brotherhood  of  Dis¬ 
ciples, 

Fitly  walking  is  the  Blessed  One’s  Brotherhood  of  Dis¬ 
ciples,  to  wit — 

The  Four  Pairs  of  Men,  the  Eight  Kinds  of  Men;1 
Worthy  of  support  and  worshipful  is  this  Brotherhood  ol 
the  Disciples  of  the  Blessed  One, 

Worthy  of  gifts  and  offerings,  of  hands  in  reverence  clasped, 
A  field  of  merit  unsurpassed  in  all  the  world. 

Thus  the  Triple  Gem  adoring 
To  be  endlessly  adored, 

Fount  abundant  of  rich  merit 
Have  I  won ;  and  by  that  power 
Shattered  are  all  things  that  bar. 

Then  should  be  recited  the  Chant  of  Amity : 2 

He  that  is  proven  apt  for  highest  good 
By  understanding  what  alone  brings  peace , 

What  should  he  do  ?  He  should  be  capable , 

And  straight ,  yea ,  most  upright ;  of  gracious  speech 
And  gentle ,  void  of  all  conceit  of  self, 

Contented'  too,  and  quickly  satisfied, 

And  free  of  cares  and  light  in  worldly  goods, 

Tranquil  in  faculties,  modest,  discreet, 

And  void  of  greed  when  visiting  the  folk. 

Let  him  do  no  mean  thing  such  as  would  cause 
Other  and  wiser  men  to  censure  him. 

Now  let  all  creatures  joyous  be  and  safe  ! 

May  it  be  theirs  to  dwell  in  happiness  ! 

.  Yea,  everything  that  breathes,  weak  [in  the  faith ] 

Or  strong,  or  ivhether  they  be  long  or  short, 

1  Those  who  have  entered  the  Four  Paths,  and  those  who  enjoy  the 
Fruits  (or  Second  Degree)  of  the  Four  Paths. 

2  Sutta-Nipdta,  148  f. ;  Khuddaka-Pdtha,  IX. 


Invocation 


5 


Or  of  a  middle  size ,  filmy  or  fat , 

Or  seen  or  unseen ,  dwelling  far  or  near , 

Or  born  or  such  as  seek,  rebirth, — yea,  all, 

May  it  be  theirs  to  dwell  in  happiness  ! 

Let  none  deceive  another,  nor  despise 
Whoe’er  it  be,  nor  let  him  out  of  wrath 
Or  enmity  desire  another  s  ill, 

E’en  as  a  mother  watcheth  o’er  her  child , 

Her  only  child ,  as  long  as  life  doth  last, 

So  let  us  for  all  creatures,  great  or  small, 

Develov  such  a  boundless  heart  and  mind. 

Ay,  let  us  practise  love  for  all  the  world, 

Upward  and  downward,  yonder,  back  and  forth, 
Uncramped,  free  from  ill-will  and  enmity. 

If  in  this  ecstasy  of  love  a  man  hold  firm, 

Standing  or  walking,  when  he  sits  or  rests , 

So  he  but  banish  slackness  : — men  shall  say  : 

The  perfect  life  is  seen  within  this  Rule. 

Doth  he  but  keep  aloof  from  error’s  vieiv, 

Walking  in  virtue ,  gifted  with  insight — 

If  he  suppress  the  greed  for  sensuous  'joys — 

Ne’er  shall  that  man  come  back  again  to  birth. 

The  Lord  who  crush’d  the  Fivefold  Ills,1  won  wisdom  s  further 

9 

shore, 

And  showed  the  Fourfold  Truth,  that  Mighty  Hero  I  adore; 
By  strength  of  this  true  utterance  may  all  the  Ills  disperse. 
By  this  good  deed  may  those  my  guides,  whose  virtues  I 
rehearse, 

My  teachers,  my  supporters  too,  mother  and  father  dear, 

May  sun  and  moon  that  rule  the  sky,  all  men  that  good  names 
bear, 

Brahma’s,  Mara’s  and  Inda’s,  and  the  gods  that 
guard  the  sphere, 

1  P  a  n  c  a  -  M  a  r  a,  the  Fivefold  Ills,  a  late  category,  are  “  con¬ 
tinued  existence,  sin,  death,  karma,  and  the  sinful  Angel  or  Tempter  ” 
(Childers). 


6 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

[4]  Yama,  and  friendly  men  and  foes, 

And  who  nor  hate  nor  friendship  knows — 

All  beings  be  fulfilled  of  bliss  ! 

And  may  the  merits  that  I  gain 
Give  threefold  bliss,  and  speedily 
May  ye  your  mind’s  desire  attain  ! 

By  this  good  deed  of  mine  and  this  recital  I  aspire 
Quickly  to  cleave  the  bonds  of  birth  and  roots  of  all  desire. 
May  all  vile  states  arising  here,  until  Nibbana’s  goal, 
Perish,  wherever  I  be  born,  whate’er  new  births  unroll. 

M  ith  mind  erect,  thought  fixed  and  wise,  austere,  with  will  alert, 
Ihus  striving,  may  noMara's  find  the  chance  to  do  me  hurt. 
Most  excellent  the  Lords  [I  own];  the  Buddha  and  the  Law, 
And  the  P  accheka-Buddha1  and  the  Brethren  I  adore. 
May  Mar  a’  s  never  win  a  chance,  averted  by  their  power. 


MEDITATION  OF  THE  FIVEFOLD  ZEST 
(OR  RAPTURE). 


THE  ORDER  DUE  (. Patipdti ). 

Glory  to  him,  the  Blessed  One,  the  Worthy,  the  All- 
Enlightened  One. 

(To  be  said  tlirice.) 


1  It  is  rare  to  find  a  Paccheka-Buddha  invoked.  [On  the  title  see 
Puggala-P annatti,  IX,  1,  quoted  by  Warren,  Buddhism  in  Translations , 
p.  515  (Index).  “  And  what  sort  of  an  individual  is  a  Private  Buddha  ? 
We  may  have  an  individual  who,  in  doctrines  unheard  of  before  from 
anyone  else,  acquires  by  himself  enlightenment  respecting  the  Four 
Truths,  but  not  omniscience  in  respect  to  them,  nor  mastery  over  the 
Fruits, — such  an  individual  is  called  a  Paccheka-Buddha.”] 
Sinhalese  Buddhists  mention  them  with  something  of  disrespect  as 
compared  with  the  Supreme  Buddhas.  See  also  Milinda-Pahha,  p.  105 
(Tians.  i,  158),  where  they  are  styled  “  self-dependent,  teacherless, 
lonely  as  the  one  horn  of  a  rhinoceros.” 


Meditation  for  Rapture  i 

Give  leave  !  0  sir,  grant  pardon  for  the  transgressions  we 

may  have  done  in  youthful  ignorance,  with  mind  confused 
through  lack  of  skill,  for  the  sake  of  our  guidance  hereafter.3 

(To  be  said  thrice.) 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  the  teachings  of  the  A'll- 
Enlightened  One,  Gotama,  I  strive  his  teachings  to  fulfil. 

I  ask  for  the  mark  of  upholding,  for  the  image  of  the  mark, 
for  the  way  to  the  access,  for  the  way  to  ecstatic  concentra¬ 
tion,  and  for  the  momentary  rapture  (second  in  degree) 
among  the  Five  Raptures1 2  known  to  the  inmost  shrine  of  my 
being.3 

Nine  are  the  States  Sublime  born  of  the  Buddha,  of  the 
Law,  of  the  Paccheka-Buddha,  of  the  Brotherhood, 
of  the  Eighty  Great  Disciples,  of  those  who  crossed  the  stream, 
more  in  number  than  the  sands  of  the  oceans  four.  I  ask  for 
them  one  by  one,  from  stage  to  stage.4 

[5]  May  that  state  be  manifest  in  me  in  the  Five  Aggre¬ 
gates,5  in  the  door  of  the  eye,  the  door  of  the  mind,  and  the 
door  of  my  sense  of  touch.  When  I  sit  me  down  to  exercise 
meditation,  at  that  very  instant,  by  power  of  this  true  utter¬ 
ance,  may  it  shine  forth.6 

I  ask  as  my  refuge  the  Buddha’s  virtues,  the  virtues  of  the 
Law  and  of  the  Brotherhood.  I  ask  as  my  refuge  my  teacher’s 
virtues,  and  my  exercise  practised  well;  the  virtue  of  all 

1  An  ancient  form  of  confession,  cf.  Majjhima-Nik.,  Ill,  24(5  et  seq., 
Angutt-Nik.,  II,  146,  etc.  The  “  sir,”  bhante,  is  the  confessor. 

2  On  the  Fivefold  P  i  t  i,  zest  or  rapture,  see  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids, 
Buddhist  Psychology,  187  f.  The  momentary  rapture  is  K  h  a  n  i  k  a- 
p  i  t  i,  hereafter  called  the  momentary  flash. 

3  An  tog  abb  ha,  cf.  guha,  Dhammapada,  ver.  37,  or  ‘w  cave 
of  the  heart.”  In  Y  o  g  a,  this  is  not  the  physical  heart,  but  a  locus 
conceived  as  existing  just  outside  the  body,  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch 
from  the  front  of  the  heart. 

i  The  Four  Paths,  the  Four  Fruitions  and  N  i  b  b  a  n  a.  Bud. 
Psyc.  Eth.,  266,  §  1027;  Compendium,  91. 

5  Mental  and  bodily  factors. 

6  Dili,  a  Sinhalese  word,  meaning  "  to  shine  forth,  here  replaces 
the  Pali. 


8 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

exercises  I  ask  as  my  refuge.  Now  I  give  my  life.  Tlie 
N  i  b  b  a  n  a  of  the  Triple  Gem  and  of  the  Fivefold  Gem6 
I  11  realize.  Be  it  for  Nibbana's  sake  ! 

He  sits  down  cross-legged  and  holds  the  body  straight  and. 
setting  mindfulness  in  front  of  him ,  he  mindfully  breathes  in 
and  mindfully  breathes  out.  As  he  draws  a  long  breath  he 
knows.  A  long  breath  I  draw  in  99 ;  as  he  breathes  out  a  long 
breath  he  knows ,  A  long  breath  I  breathe  out."  As  he  draws 
a  quick  breath  he  knows ,  “  A  quick  breath  I  draw  in  99 ;  as  he 
breathes  out  a  quick  breath  he  knows ,  c'  A  quick  breath  I  breathe 
out 9  He  says ,  “  With  eye-consciousness  I  look  down  on  the 
tip  of  my  nose,  with  thought-consciousness  fixed  on  the  indrawal 
and  the  out-breathing ,  I  fix  my  thought-form  in  my  heart  and 
prepare  myself  with  the  word  Arahan,  Arahan.1 2 

When  he  has  thus  fixed  his  thought,  alert,  and  keen-minded,  two 
images  appear,  first  a  dim,  then  a  clear,  one.  When  the  dim  image 
has  faded  away,  faded  as  if  by  the  passing  of  the  blemishes,  and  when 
the  clear  image,  cleansed  of  all  impurities,  has  entered  his  whole  being, 
then,  entering  the  threshold  of  the  mind,  the  Element  of  Heat  appears. 
In  this,  the  Ecstasy  has  the  colour  of  the  morning  star,3  the  Preamble 
is  golden-coloured,  the  Access  is  coloured  like  the  young  sun  rising  in 
the  east.  Developing  these  three  thought-forms  of  the  element  of 
heat,  [6]  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  he  should  place 
them  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel. 

Glory  to  him,  the  Blessed  One.  the  Worthy,  the  All- 
Enlightened  One. 

(Thrice.) 

I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Buddha  .  .  .  etc.  (p.  3)  .  .  for 
the  third  time. 

1  Presumably  the  five  named  under  “  Nine  are  the  states.” 

I  believe  this  is  a  physical  exercise  rather  than  an  aspiration  for 
saintship,  p.  1,  n.  2. 

3  Osadhi-taraka.  S  u  k  r  a.  Hesper-phosphor  ?  The  Sin¬ 
halese  say  that  not  Venus  is  meant,  but  another  very  small  star  that 
appears  in  the  west  (?  Mercury).  Clough  (Sin.  Diet.),  quoted  by  Chil¬ 
ders,  has,  “Osadhitaraka  (osadhi,  medicine,  t  a  r  a  k  a, 
a  star),  the  star  that  presides  over  medicine;  the  morning  star.”  No 
doubt  the  colour  odatavanna,  white,  is  meant.  Cf.  D  i  glia  - 
N  ilc  dy  a,  ii,  111. 


Meditation  for  Rapture  9 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  the  teachings  of  the  All- 
Enlightened  One,  Gotama,  I  strive  his  teachings  to  fulfil. 

I  pray  for  the  mark  of  upholding,  for  the  image  of  the 
mark,  for  a  way  to  the  access,  for  a  way  to  ecstatic  concen¬ 
tration,  and  for  the  flooding  rapture1  known  to  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  (p.  7). 

He  sits  down  cross-legged  .  .  .  (p.  7  f. ). 

When  he  has  thus  fixed  his  thought  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  then,  entering 
the  threshold  of  the  mind,  the  Element  of  Cohesion2  appears.  In  this, 
the  Ecstasy  has  the  brightness  of  the  full  moon  with  his  sixteen  parts- 
complete,  the  Preamble  has  the  colour  of  a  lotus,  and  the  Access  has 
the  colour  of  a  yellow  flower.3  These  thought-forms  of  the  element 
of  cohesion,  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  he  should 
place  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel. 

Glory  to  bim,  tbe  Blessed  One,  the  Worthy,  the  All- 
Enlightened  One. 

[Thrice.) 

I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Buddha  .  .  . 

For  the  third  time  also  I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Buddha  .  .  , 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  . 

I  pray  for  the  mark  .  .  .  and  for  the  transporting  rapture4 
known  to  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being. 

When  he  has  thus  fixed  his  thought  .  .  .  then,  entering  the  thres¬ 
hold  of  the  mind,  the  Element  of  Mobility5  appears.  In  this,  the 
Ecstasy  is  like  the  midday  sun,  the  Preamble  is  light-red  like  madder,6 
and  the  Access  has  the  colour  of  the  rain-cloud.7  These  thought- 
forms  of  the  element  of  mobility,  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of 
the  nose,  he  should  place  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel. 


1  Okkantika-piti,  joy  or  enthusiasm  that  comes  like  a  sudden 
wave.  See  above,  p.  7. 

2  Apodhatu,  the  essential  element  in  water,  its  salient  feature 
being  cohesiveness. 

3  Kinihiri-mal  (pterospermum  acerifolium). 

4  Ubbega-plti.  See  above,  p.  7 . 

6Vayodhatu,  or  vibration,  the  essential  element  in  air. 

6  M  a  h  j  e  1 1  h  i,  or  orange. 

7  Indigo  (or  blue-green,  nlla). 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Glory  to  him,  the  Blessed  One,  the  Worthy,  the  All- 
Enlightened  One. 

(Thrice.) 

I  take  my  refuge  in  the  Buddha  .  .  . 

For  the  third  time  also  I  take  my  refuge  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  . 

[  pray  for  the  mark  .  .  .  and  for  the  all-pervading  rap¬ 
ture1  known  to  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being. 

v\  hen  he  has  thus  fixed  his  thought  .  .  .  then,  entering  the  thres¬ 
hold  of  the  mind,  the  Element  of  Space2  appears.  In  this,  the  Ecstasy 
is  like  i  d  d  a,  jasmine  and  lotus  flowers.  The  Preamble  is  like  a  sheaf 
of  peacock  s  feathers,  and  the  Access  black  as  a  beetle.  These  thought- 
forms3  of  the  element  of  space,  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the 
nose,  he  should  place  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel. 


[7]  Having  fulfilled  the  duties  of  preparation  with  fit  worship  and 
offerings,  let  him  aspire  to  the  Five  Raptures  at  one  and  the  same 
time. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  the  teachings  of  the  All- 
Enlightened  One,  Gotama,  I  strive  his  teachings  to  fulfil. 
I  pray  for  the  mark  of  upholding,  and  for  the  image  of  the 
mark,  for  the  way  to  the  preamble,  for  the  way  to  the  access, 
for  ecstatic  concentration,  and,  among  the  Five  Raptures 
known  to  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  for  the  lesser  thrill, 
the  momentary  flash,  the  flooding  rapture,  the  transporting 
rapture,  the  all-pervading  rapture.  Nine  are  the  states 
sublime.  .  Be  it  for  Nibbana’s  sake  ! 

\He  sits  down  cross-legged  .  .  .  ( saying ) :  “  With  eye- 

consciousness  I  look  down  .  .  .  and  prepare  myself  with 
the  word  Arahan  !  Arahan  !”] 

To  him  thus  meditating  both  the  mark  of  upholding  and  the  image 
.  °f  mark  appear.  As  if  penetrating  the  mark  of  upholding,  cleansed 


1  Pharana-piti.  2  A  k  a  s  a  d  h  a  t  u. 

3  Ecstasy,  Preamble,  Access. 


Meditation  for  Rapture  .  H 

of  all  impurities,  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  times  better  than  that  same 
mark  of  upholding,  and  entering  the  threshold  of  the  mind,  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  Five  Raptures  appear.  Developing  in  them  one  after 
the  other  the  three  thought-forms,1  well  observing  them,  let  him  take 
them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  place  them  in  order  in  the  navel, 
and  carry  them  upward,  clearly  knowing  the  three  thought-forms  of 
the  Five  Raptures. 

Hereafter  let  him  fulfil  the  duties  without  fail,  and,  making  due 
offerings,  let  him  aspire  to  the  insight  of  those  states. 


Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  the  teachings  .  .  .  etc. 

.  .  .  fulfil. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  on  the  lesser  thrill2  in  the 
imnost  shrine  of  my  being,  I  shall  hold  it  fastfin  the  way  of 
right  succession.3  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered 
from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of 
mental  states  arise  in  me. 

[He  sits  down  cross-legged  .  .  .  (saying):  ...  I  will  pre¬ 
pare  myself  with  the  word  Arahan  !  Arahan  !] 

Thus  meditating  and  developing  the  idea  like  the  blue  light  of  a 
taper,  let  him  take  it  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  fix  it  in  the  navel. 
Thereafter,  fulfilling  the  first  duties  without  fail  and  making  due 
offerings,  let  him  aspire  to  the  Five  Raptures  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  and  in  reverse  order.4 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  the  teachings  .  .  .  etc. 

.  .  .  (p.  8)  fulfil. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  .  .  .  etc.  (p.  8)  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

[He  sits  down  cross-legged  .  .  .  (saying):  ...  I  will  pre¬ 
pare  myself  with  the  word  Arahan  !  Arahan  !] 

[8]  To  him  thus  meditating  the  element  of  extension  appears.  Attend¬ 
ing  to  the  Ecstasy,  Preamble  and  Access,  let  him  take  them  from  the 
tip  of  the  nose  and  place  them  in  the  way  of  right  succession  one  inch 
above  the  navel. 


1  Ecstasy,  Preamble,  Access.  2  Khuddaka-piti. 
3  Anuloma.  '  4  P  a  t  i  1  o  in  a. 


12 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  upon  the  momentary  flash  in 
the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  I  shall  hold  it  fast  in  reverse 
order.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease 
bv  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states 
arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  to  and  well  observing  the  element  of  extension,  let 
him  take  it  up  in  reverse  order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right 
succession. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  upon  the  momentary  flash  in 
the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  in  the  way  of  right  succession, 
I  shall  hold  if;  fast.  Even  as  one  that  .  .  .  etc.1  .  .  .  arise 
in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  to  and  developing  the  Ecstasy,  Preamble  and  Access 
in  the  element  of  heat,  well  observing  them  and  taking  them  from  the 
tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the  way  of  right  succession  one 
inch  above  the  spot  of  the  lesser  thrill. 

Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  upon  the  momentary  flash  in 
the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 
arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  to  and  well  observing  the  element  of  heat,  let  him 
take  it  up  in  reverse  order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right 
succession. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  upon  the  flooding  rapture  in 
the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  in  the  way  of  right  succession, 

I  shall  hold  it  fast  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  to  and  developing  the  Ecstasy,  Preamble  and  Access 
in  the  element  of  cohesion,  well  observing  them  and  taking  them  from 
the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the  way  of  right  succession 
one  inch  above  the  spot  of  the  momentary  flash. 


1  The  elided  part  is  always  given  in  full  above  on  the  same  page. 


Meditation  for  Rapture  13 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  upon  the  flooding  rapture  in  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  being  in  the  way  of  right  succession, 
I  shall  hold  it  fast  in  reverse  order.  Even  as  one  that  hath 
of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines, 
may  perception  of  these  things  arise  in  me ! 

Thus  aspiring  to  it,  let  him  place  it  in  reverse  order  where  the  ele¬ 
ment  of  cohesion  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  upon  the  transporting  rapture 
in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  in  the  way  of  right  succession 
.  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  let  him  produce  the  element  of  mobility  and  place  it 
about  one  inch  above  the  spot  of  the  flooding  rapture. 

Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  upon  the  transporting  rapture 
in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  in  reverse  order  ...  etc. 
.  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  let  him  produce  the  element  of  mobility  and  place 
it  upwards  in  reverse  order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right 
succession. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  on  the  all-pervading  rapture 
in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  in  the  way  of  right  succession 
.  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  let  him  produce  the  element  of  space  and  place  it  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  between  the  transporting  rapture  and  the 
heart,  about  an  inch  from  it1  (or  ?  to  occupy  about  an  inch). 


1  The  five  centres  lie  in  a  perpendicular  ABODE  dropped  from 
the  forehead  to  the  navel.  The  “  heart  ”  will  be  about  an  inch  to 
the  left  of  this  line,  at  the  top  of  which  he  places  the  reflex  of  the 
element  of  space.  This  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  Sinhalese 
ubbega  pitiya  ha  h  rad  ay  a  ha  me  deyature 
an  gala  pramane. 

I  add  here  a  note  showing  the  centres  according  to  Yoga,  with 


14 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


[9]  Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  on  the  all-pervading  rapture  in 
the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  in  reverse  order,  I  shall  hold  i  t 
fast.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by 
taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states  arise 
in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  let  him  produce  the  element  of  space  and  place  it 
in  reverse  order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  on  the  lesser  thrill  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc. 

.  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

thus  aspiiing,  the  element  of  extension  will  appear  to  him. 

Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  on  the  momentary  flash  in  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  being  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  . 
etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  heat  will  appear  to  him. 


their  attendant  colours,  etc.,  which  I  have  compiled  from  the  chapter 
on  force-centres,  in  Mr.  C.  W.  Leadbeater’s  The  Inner  Life. 

1.  The  hist  centre,  at  the  base  of  the  spine,  has  a  force  radiating 
in  four  spokes  which  looks  like  a  cross.  Here  dwells  the  k  u  n  d  a- 
1  i  n  i  oi  serpent-fire.  W hen  roused  by  concentration  in  Yog  a 

this  centre  is  a  fiery  orange-red,  like  that  vital  stream  which  comes 
from  the  spleen. 

2.  The  second  centre,  at  the  navel  or  solar  plexus,  has  a  primarv 
force  with  ten  radiations,  like  petals.  It  is  closely  associated  with 

emotion.  Its  predominant  colour  is  a  blend  of  various  shades  of  red, 
and  there  is  some  green. 

3.  The  third  centre,  at  the  spleen,  specializes  the  vital  stream  coming 
bom  the  sun.  It  pours  out  in  six  horizontal  streams,  the  seventh 
being  drawn  in  to  the  hub  of  the  wheel.”  This  centre  has  six  petals 
or  undulations,  radiant  and  sun-like. 

4.  The  fourth  centre,  at  the  heart,  is  of  a  glowing  golden  colour. 
Each  quadrant  is  divided  into  three  parts,  thus  making  twelve  spokes. 

5.  The  fifth  centre,  at  the  throat,  has  sixteen  spokes.  There  is  a 
good  deal  of  blue  in  it,  but  its  general  effect  is  silvery  and  gleaming 
like  moonlight.  It  is  connected  with  vayo-dhatu,  the  element  of 


Meditation  for  Rapture 


Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  on  the  flooding  rapture  in  the 
way  of  right  succession,  I  shall  hold  it  fast.  Even  as  one 
that  hath  recovered  of  late  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit 
medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  cohesion  will  appear  to  him. 

Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  .  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  mobility  will  appear  to  him. 

Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  space  will  appear  to  him. 


mobility,  and,  when  stimulated,  gives  power  to  hear  sounds  at  a  dis¬ 
tance. 

6.  The  sixth  centre  is  between  the  eyebrows  and  has  two  halves,  one 
rose-coloured  (with  some  yellow),  the  other  purplish  blue.  It  is  con¬ 
nected  with  tejodhatu,  the  element  of  heat,  and  gives,  when 
developed,  the  power  of  clairvoyance,  also  of  magnifying  and  con¬ 
tracting  objects. 

7.  The  seventh,  at  the  top  of  the  head,  when  active,  is  called  “the 
thousand-petalled  lotus”;  its  radiations  are  actually  960.  It  gives, 
when  developed,  the  power  of  unbroken  consciousness  on  all  planes. 

It  will  be  noted  that  the  Buddhist  method  (here)  does  not  seek  to 
arouse  the  centres  below  the  navel,  a  process  attended  with  great 
danger. 

The  above-mentioned  centres  of  force  are  visible  of  course  only  to 
clairvoyant  sight  (etheric)  of  radiant  energy. 

It  has  been  suggested  that  probably  the  four  Mahabhuta’s  (great 
elements)  of  antiquity  are  identical  with  the  four  densities  of  modern 
science,  viz.:  Earth  density,  that  of  basalt,  associated  with  the  New¬ 
tonian  velocity  of  sound;  Water  or  fluid  density,  associated  with  mole¬ 
cular  velocity  and  the  equatorial  velocity  of  the  earth’s  rotation; 
Air  density  (blue) ^associated  with  the  maximum  velocity  of  gravity- 
Fire  density  (red) 'associated  with  the  velocity  of  light.  (See  G.  Sut¬ 
cliffe  in  The  Theosophist ,  Sept.,  1914.) 


16 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  entered  on  the  all-pervading  rapture 
in  reverse  order  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  in  the  way 
•of  right  succession,  I  shall  hold  it  fast.  Even  as  one  that 
hath  recovered  of  late  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines, 
may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  space  will  appear  to  him. 

Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  .  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  mobility  will  appear  to  him. 

Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  flooding  rapture  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  cohesion  will  appear  to  him. 

Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  momentary  flash  in  reverse 

order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  heat  will  appear  to  him. 

Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  lesser  thrill  in  reverse 

order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  extension  will  appear  to  him. 

Here  endeth  the  Order  Due. 

THE  GRASPING  OF  THE  SIX  SOUNDS. 

[10]  When  he  lias  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties 
mid  done  the  offerings  due  (let  him  say) : 

Give  leave  ! 

In  reverence  for  the  teachings  of  the  all-enlightened  one, 
Gotama,  I  strive  his  teachings  to  fulfil  (as  above). 


Meditation  for  Rapture  17 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  grasping  of  the  six  sounds1 2 3  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being,  I  aspire  to  attain  the  lesser  thrill  in  the 
way  of  right  succession.  .  .  .  Even  as  one  that  hath 
recovered  of  late  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines, 
may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !  Arahan  !]■ 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  six  words  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  lesser 
thrill  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  flooding  rapture0  ...  in  the  way  of 

right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

© 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  .  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  flooding  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 
arise  in  me  ! 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  six  words  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

the  all-pervading  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  six  words  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

the  all-pervading  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise 

in  me  ! 

1  Clia-sadda-gahana/n .  Sadda  is  “word”  or  sound.  By  the 
six  might  conceivably  be  meant  the  letters  in  Arahan  (see  p.  1),  were 
it  not  that  the  “Six  Pairs”  dealt  with  in  detail  on  p.  31  f.  are 
also  called  the  Six  S  a  d  d  a’ s.  These  are  a  classic  feature  in  Buddhist 
self-analysis;  the  dwelling  on  separate  syllables  in  a  word  is  not  a 
Buddhist  characteristic,  and  the  exception  above  may  be  borrowed 
from  Vedantist  usage.  Of.  Taitt.  Up .,  I.  S;  Brhad.  Up.,  V.  2  f.,  !-, 
and  many  others. 

2  See  p.  1. 

3  Khanik  a-p  1 1  i,  “  the  momentary  flash,”  is  omitted  here 
apparently  by  mistake. 


2 


18 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  momentary  flash  in  the 
way  of  right  succession.  .  .  .  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late 
recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  percep¬ 
tion  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

.  .  .  momentary  flash  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  transporting  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  transporting  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  lesser  thrill  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  flooding  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  all -pervading  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  momentary  flash  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  momentary  flash  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  flooding  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  lesser  thrill  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Here  ends  the  meditation  on  the  Grasping  of  the  Six  Sounds. 


THE  SPAN. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  made 
the  offerings  due  (let  him  say) : 

In  reverence  for  the  teachings  of  the  All-Enlightened  One, 
Gotama,  I  strive  his  teachings  to  fulfil. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  span1  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being, 

1  The  “  span  ”  is,  I  suppose,  the  distance  from  the  navel  to  the 
heart;  each  of  its  an  gala’s  is  the  focus  of  a  concentration.  Cf. 
p.  13,  n.  1. 


19 


Meditation  for  Eajpture 

I  aspire  to  attain  the  lesser  thrill,  the  flooding  rapture,  the 
all-pervading  rapture  [11]  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 
Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking 
of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  prepare  myself  with  the  word 
Arahan  !  Arahan  l]1 

Meditating  on  the  all-pervading  rapture,  the  flooding 
rapture,  the  lesser  thrill  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise 
in  me  ! 

.  .  .  the  momentary  flash,  the  transporting  rapture,  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture,  the  momentary  flash  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  lesser  thrill,  the  flooding  rapture,  the  all-pervad¬ 
ing  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture,  the  momentary  flash  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture,  the  flooding  rapture,  the 
lesser  thrill  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 


THE  AGGREGATE  OF  ELEMENTS.2 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done 
the  offerings  due  ( let  him  say): 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  in  The  Span). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  aggregate  of  elements  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being,  I  aspire  to  attain  the  lesser  thrill,  the 
momentary  flash,  the  flooding  rapture  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  with  the  word  Arahan  ! 
Arahan  !] 


1  See  p.  1. 


2  1)  h  a  t  u  -  s  am  u  h  am. 


20 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  aggregate  of  elements  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being,  I  aspire  to  attain  the  all-pervading  rapture, 
the  transporting  rapture,  the  flooding  rapture,  the  momentary 
flash,  the  lesser  thrill  in  reverse  order.  Even  as  one  that 
hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines, 
may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

Here  ends  the  Aggregate  of  Elements. 


THE  FOURFOLD  SYSTEM.1 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done 
the  offerings  due  ( let  him  say) : 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  Fourfold  System  in  the  inmost  shrine 
of  my  being,  I  aspire  to  attain  the  lesser  thrill,  the  momentary 
flash  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in 
me  ! 

r He  sits  down  .  .  .  with  the  word  Arahan  !  Arahan  !] 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  Fourfold  System  in  the  inmost  shrine  of 
mv  being,  T  aspire  to  attain  the  momentary  flash  and  the 
lesser  thrill  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  momentary  flash  in  the  way 
of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

[12]  .  .  .  the  flooding  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  flooding  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

i  Catu-nayam.  This  and  the  next  section  refer  probably  to 
Jhana.  Bud.  Psy.  Ethics,  pp.  43,  52. 


21 


Meditation  for  Rapture 

Meditating  on  the  all-pervading  rapture  in  the  way  of  right 
succession.  .  .  .  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered 
from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of 
mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

.  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture  in  reverse  order  \  .  . 

.  .  .  the  lesser  thrill,  the  momentary  flash  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  flooding  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  flooding  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  the  momentary  flash,  the  lesser  thrill  in  reverse  order 
.  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 


THE  FIVEFOLD  SYSTEM  (as  above). 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  Fivefold  System  in  the  inmost  shrine  of 
mv  being,  I  aspire  to  attain  the  lesser  thrill  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  ,  .  with  the  word  Arahan  ! 
Arahan  !] 

...  the  lesser  thrill  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

...  the  momentary  flash  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
...  the  momentary  flash  in  reverse  order1  .  .  . 


i  In  the  text  Khanika-pitim  is  put  twice  by  error. 


22 


Manual  of  a  Mystic  ' 

Meditating  on  the  flooding  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession.  .  .  .  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from 
disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental 
states  arise  in  me  ! 

.  .  .  the  flooding  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  lesser  thrill  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  momentary  flash  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  flooding  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

# 

.  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

[13]  .  .  .  the  flooding  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  momentary  flash  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  lesser  thrill  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 


THE  HEART. 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  etc.  ...  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  heart1  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being, 
I  aspire  to  attain  the  lesser  thrill  in  the  way  of  right  succession 
.  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  word  Arahan  !  Arahan  !] 
.  .  .  the  lesser  thrill  in  reverse  order.  .  .  . 


1  When  this  manual  was  compiled,  the  heart  was,  by  the  orthodox 
teaching,  considered  to  be  the  seat  or  basis  (v a 1 1  h u)  of  mind  (man  o). 


Meditation  for  Rapture 


23 


Meditating  on  the  momentary  flash  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession.  .  .  .  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from 
disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental 
states  arise  in  me  ! 

the  momentary  flash  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
the  flooding  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
.  the  flooding  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
the  transporting  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 


sion 


sion 


sion 


sion 


the  transporting  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

the  all-pervading  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes- 

•  • 

the  all-pervading  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
the  lesser  thrill  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
the  momentary  flash  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
the  flooding  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
the  transporting  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes- 

the  all-pervading  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes- 

•  • 

the  all-pervading  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
the  transporting  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
the  flooding  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
the  momentary  flash  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
the  lesser  thrill  in  reverse  order  ... 


SELF-COLLECTEDNESS. 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  Self-Collectedness1  in  the  inmost  shrine  of 
my  being,  I  aspire  to  attain  the  lesser  thrill  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  ...  the  word  Arahan  !  Arahan  !] 

(All  us  in  last  section.) 


1  Samadhi. 


24 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

THE  LASTING  OF  THE  LAW.1 

[II]  When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  etc.  ...  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  Lasting  of  the  Law  in  the  inmost  shrine 
of  my  being,  I  aspire  to  attain  the  lesser  thrill  in  the  way  of 
right  succession.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered 
from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of 
these  things  arise  in  me  ! 

(As  in  the  last  section  but  one.) 


THE  WAY  OF  MAKING  WAX-TAPER  OFFERINGS  FOR  THE 

FIVEFOLD  RAPTURE. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done  the 
offerings  due,  let  him  aspire  to  the  Fivefold  Rapture,  making  offerings 
of  wax- taper  lights. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  the  teachings  of  the  all- 
enlightened  one,  Gotama,  I  strive  his  teachings  to  fulfil. 

I  ask  for  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  (p.  7)  .  .  .  the  lesser  thrill. 

Nine  are  the  States  Sublime2  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  (p.  8) 
be  it  for  Nibbana's  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  (p.  8)  .  .  .  the  word  Arahan  ! 
Arahan  !] 

When  he  has  thus  fixed  his  thought,  alert  and  keen-minded  .  . 
then,  entering  the  threshold  of  the  mind,  .  .  .  the  element  of  exten¬ 
sion  appears.  Developing  these  three  thought-forms  of  the  element 
of  extension,  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place 
them  about  one  inch  above  the  navel,  and  continue  meditating  till 
the  taper  has  burned  about  two  inches.  Then,  made  aware  by  the 
noise  of  the  first  candle-stick3  falling,  let  him  squat  down4  and  say  thus: 


1  Dhamma-tira-tthitika. 

•  • 

2  The  Four  Paths,  the  Four  Fruits  and  Nibbana. 

Candle-stick”  here  means  a  piece  of  wood  stuck  into  the  taper, 
which  falls  when  the  wax  melts  through  the  burning  of  the  wick  ( see 
Intr.  Prof.  Rh.  D.  XIII,  Pali  text). 

4  U  k  k  u  t  i  k  a  y  e  n,  “  sit  on  the  hams,”  without  touching  the 
ground  with  the  seat. 


Meditation  for  Rapture  25 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  candle-stick  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my 
being,  I  shall  hold  fast  the  lesser  thrill  in  the  way  of  right 
succession.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from 
disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental 
states  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  that  same  element  of  extension  appears  to  him. 
Developing  the  three  thought-forms1  therein  and  withdrawing  them 
from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  upwards  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  where  the  access  and  the  preamble  were  placed,  and 
continue  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  one  inch  and  the 
second  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then,  rising  at  that  token,  let  him 
again  squat  down  and  say  thus: 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  momentary  flash 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  for,  and  well  observing  the  element  of  heat,  let  him 
place  it  about  an  inch  above  (the  spot  of)  the  lesser  thrill  and  continue 
meditating  until  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch.  Then,  at  the 
noise  of  the  candle-stick  falling,  let  him  rise  up  and  again  squat  down 
and  say  thus: 

[15]  Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  flood¬ 
ing  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 
arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to  him.  Developing 
the  three  thought-forms  therein,  well  observing  them  and  withdrawing 
them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  an  inch  above  (the 
spot  of)  the  momentary  flash  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  and 
continue  meditating  until  the  fourth  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then, 
rising  at  that  token,  he  should  say  thus: 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  transport¬ 
ing  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  , 
arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  mobility  appears  to  him.  .  .  .  De¬ 
veloping  .  .  .  place  them  an  inch  above  (the  spot  of)  the  flooding  rap¬ 
ture  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  and  continue  meditating  until  the 


1  As  above,  appana,  parikamma  and  upacara. 


26 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

taper  has  burned  one  inch  and  the  fifth  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then, 
rising  at  that  token,  he  should  squat  down  and  say: 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  all-pervading  rapture  in 
the  way  of  right  succession.  .  .  .  Even  as  one  that  hath  of 
late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may 
perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  space  appears  to  him.  Developing 
the  three  thought-forms  therein  and  well  observing  them,  let  him 
place  them  between  (the  spot  of)  the  lesser  thrill  and  the  heart, 
about  an  inch  from  it,  and  continue  meditating  till  the  taper  has 
burned  about  an  inch  and  the  sixth  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then, 
rising  at  that  token,  without  making  the  ardent  aspiration,  let  him 
place  the  element  of  extension,  as  before,  below  the  heart  and  con¬ 
tinue  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the 
seventh  candle- stick  falls  down.  Then,  at  that  token,  aware  and 
sitting  in  the  same  posture  for  the  fixing  of  the  mind,  let  him  develop 
the  element  of  extension  in  that  same  lesser  thrill,  as  before,  and 
continue  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the 
eighth  candle-stick  falls  down ;  by  which  token  he  should  know  the  way 
of  attainment  in  the  way  of  right  succession.  The  way  of  observing 
the  reverse  order  was  said  above.  Beginning  with  the  access  of  the 
element  of  extension  developed  in  the  lesser  thrill  and  going  on  to 
the  preamble  let  him  place  them  upwards  in  reverse  order  where  they 
were  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  and  continue  meditating 
till  the  taper  has  burned  about  two  inches  and  the  candle-stick  falls. 
Then  let  him  squat  down  and  thus  say : 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  candle- stick  within  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  I  shall  hold  fast  the  lesser  thrill  in 
reverse  order.  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  extension  appears  to  him.  [16]  Placing 
it  upwards  in  reverse  order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right 
succession,  let  him  continue  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about 
an  inch  and  the  second  candle-stick  falls.  Then  let  him  squat  down 
and  say  thus: 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  the  momentary  flash 
.  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him.  Carefully  placing 
it  in  reverse  order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession, 
let  him  continue  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  one  inch 
and  the  third  candle-stick  falls.  Then  let  him  squat  down  and  say 
thus : 


I 


Meditation  for  Rapture  27 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  flooding  rapture  in  reverse 
order.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease 
by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states 
arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to  him.  Carefully 
placing  it  in  reverse  order  where  it  was  well  placed  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  ...  let  him  continue  meditating  till  the  fourth  candle¬ 
stick  falls.1  Then  let  him  squat  down  and  thus  say : 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  lesser  thrill 
in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  mobility  appears  to  him.  Carefully 
placing  it  in  reverse  order  where  it  was  well  placed  in  the  way  of  right 
succession,  let  him  continue  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about 
an  inch  and  the  fifth  candle-stick  falls.  .  .  .  Then  let  him  .  .  .  thus 
•say: 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture 
in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  space  appears  to  him.  .  .  .  Carefully 
placing  it  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  sixth  candle-stick  falls. 
Then,  as  above,  observing  the  element  of  extension  placed  below 
the  heart  in  reverse  order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right 
succession,  let  him  continue  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about 
an  inch  and  the  seventh  candle -stick  falls  down.  Developing  this 
element  for  the  sake  of  concentration,  let  him  place  it  in  reverse  order 
where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  and  continue  medi¬ 
tating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  one  inch  and  the  eighth  candle¬ 
stick  falls  down. 


THE  TASK  OF  SELF-CONTROL. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done  the 
offerings  due  (let  him  say): 

\ 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  tbe  teachings  of  the  all- 
enlightened  one,  Gotama,  I  strive  his  teachings  to  fulfil  (as 
above) . 


1  The  fourth  candle-stick  is  omitted  in  the  text. 


28 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  task  of  bodily  control1  in 
the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  I  shall  hold  fast  the  lesser  thrill 
in  the  way  of  right  succession.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late 
recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  per¬ 
ception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  ...  etc.  ..  .  the  word  Arahan  !  Arahan  !] 

[17]  Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  extension  appears  to  him.  On 
the  right  of  the  navel  there  is  a  sinew  extending  about  four  inches, 
called  sarvanga  narah  u,2  which  reaches  downwards  to  the 
knee-joint.  Developing  in  this  element  the  three  thought-forms,  with¬ 
drawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  observing  the  spots  common 
to  the  navel,  let  him  place  them  upwards  about  one  inch  above  it  in 
the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  lesser  thrill  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

J  hus  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  element  of  extension,  let  him 
place  it  upwards  in  reverse  order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of 
right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  momentary 
flash  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in 
me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him.  Let  him  care- 
fully  place  it  about  an  inch  above  (the  spot  of)  the  lesser  thrill  in  the 
way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  the  momentary  flash  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  let  him  place  the  element  of  heat  upwards  in  reverse 
order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  .  .  .  etc.  ...  the  flooding  rap¬ 
ture  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  f 


1  Ivaya-vasivattaij  samaclayitva.  Kaya  is  an  am¬ 
biguous  term  and  may  refer  to  control  of  mental  factors.  See  C'om- 
pendium ,  96,  n.  3,  and  below  (p.  30). 

-  Sarvanga,  “  spreading  everywhere.” 


21) 


Meditation  for  Rapture 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  etc.  ...  let  him  place  the  element  of  cohesion 
about  an  inch  above  (the  spot  of)  the  momentary  flash  in  the  way  of 
right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  the  flooding  rapture  in  the 
reverse  order.  .  .  .  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered 
from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of 
mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  etc.  ...  let  him  place  the  element  of  cohesion 
in  reverse  order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  the  transporting  rapture 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  mobility  appears  to  him.  Let  him 
carefully  place  it  about  an  inch  above  (the  spot  of)  the  flooding  rap¬ 
ture  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  the  transporting  rapture 
in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  etc.  ...  let  him  place  the  element  of  mobility 
in  reverse  order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

[18]  Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  space  appears  to  him.  Let  him 
place  it  in  the  way  of  right  succession  between  the  region  of  the  breast 
and  (the  spot  of)  the  transporting  rapture,  so  that  there  is  about  an 
inch  between  the  two. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  all-pervad¬ 
ing  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  etc.  ...  let  him  place  it  in  reverse  order  where 

it  was  {flaced  in  the  way  of  right  succession.  Henceforth  observing 
the  process  of  ardently  aspiring  for  the  objects  of  meditation  on  the 
Fivefold  Rapture,  developed  in  the  nerve  pervading  the  whole  body, 
let  him  attain  them  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse- 
order. 

\ 

.  .  .  the  lesser  thrill  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  momentary  flash  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 


30 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Meditating  on  tlie  flooding  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession.  .  .  .  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from 
disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental 
states  arise  in  me  ! 

.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  all-pervading  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  transporting  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  flooding  rapture  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  momentary  flash  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  lesser  thrill  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Here  ends  the  Meditation  of  the  Fivefold  Zest. 


THE  GRASPING  OF  THE  SIX  PAIRS.1 

THE  ORDER  DUE. 

After  the  fivefold  zest,  when  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first 
duties  and  done  the  offerings  due,  of  the  six  pairs2  let  him  take  as 
object  of  his  thought  repose  of  mental  factors3  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  the  teachings  ...  to  fulfil. 

I  pray  for  the  mark  of  upholding,  the  image  of  the  mark, 
the  way  to  the  access,  the  way  to  ecstatic  concentration  and 
the  repose  of  mental  factors,  from  among  the  six  pairs,  in  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  heart. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  be  it  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !  Arahan  !] 

1  See  above  (p.  17).  2  See  Buddh.  Psycholog.  Ethics ,  §  40,  p.  23. 

3  Kayapassaddhi  is  a  state  free  from  pain;  “coolness” 
replaces  excitement.  We  have,  as  S.  Z.  Aung  has  pointed  out,  the 
authority  of  Buddhaghosa  ( Atthasalini ,  150)  for  rendering  k  a  y  a  here, 
not  by  “  body  ”  or  “  sense  ”  {Bud.  Psy.  Eth .,  §  40),  but  by  the  three 
middle  aggregates  of  feeling,  perception  and  “  mental  properties,”  esp. 
will  (cetana),  as  contrasted  with  consciousness  as  undifferentiated 
mind  (c  i  1 1  a).  Whatever  may  have  been  the  original  teaching,  this 
has  at  any  rate  been  the  traditional  doctrine  from  Buddhaghosa’s 
time  or  earlier.  See  Compendium,  p.  96,  n.  3. — Ed. 


31 


The  Grasping  of  the  Six  Pairs 

Thus  meditating,  both  the  mark  of  upholding  and  the  image  of  the 
mark  appear  to  him.  As  if  penetrating  the  mark  of  upholding,  cleansed 
of  all  impurities,  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  times  better  than  that  same 
mark  of  upholding,  penetrating  the  stream  of  sub-conscious  life  and 
entering  the  threshold  of  the  mind,  the  element  of  cohesion  appears. 

Developing  in  them,  one  after  another,  the  three  thought-forms, 
and  well  observing  them,  let  him  take  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose 
and  place  them  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel. 

[19]  When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done 

the  offerings  due,  let  him  aspire  for  repose  of  mind. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  the  teachings  of  the  all- 
enlightened  one,  Gotama,  I  strive  his  teachings  to  fulfil. 

I  pray  for  ...  etc.  ..  .  repose  of  mind,  in  the  six  pair& 

in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  for  Nibbana  s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !  Arahan  !] 

When  he  has  thus  fixed  his  thought,  alert,  keen-minded,  the  element 
of  cohesion  appears  to  him.  Developing  the  three  thought-forms 
therein,  let  him  place  them  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel.  When 
he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done  the  offerings 
due,  let  him  aspire  for  buoyancy  of  mental  factors1  as  his  object  of 

meditation. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  the  teachings  ...  to  fulfil. 

I  pray  for  .  .  .  the  buoyancy  of  mental  factors,  in  the  six 

pairs,  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being.  ^ 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  be  it  for  Nibbana’ s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !  Arahan  !] 

Thus  meditating  on  the  word  Arahan,  working  it  into  the  inbreath¬ 
ing  and  the  outbreaking,  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him. 
Developing  ...  in  the  navel. 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  offerings  due  .  .  .  ( let  him  say): 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

Give  leave  !  I  pray  for  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  buoyancy  of  mind. 

in  the  six  pairs  .  .  .  etc. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan!  Arahan  L 

i  Kayalahuta  is  “lightness,”  as  opposed  to  stupor.  It  is 
“the  capacity  of  changing  quickly.” 


32 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Thus  meditating,  the  element  of  heat  appears  as  in  the  case  of  buoy¬ 
ancy  of  mental  factors.  Let  him  develop  its  three  thought-forms 
and  place  them  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel. 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  pray  for  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  plasticity  of  mental  factors  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  ! 

Arahan  ! 

Thus  meditating,  the  element  of  extension  appears  to  him.  Well 
observing  its  three  thought-forms  .  .  .  etc.  ...  in  the  navel. 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  plasticity  of  mind,  in  the 
six  pairs,  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  being. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  ! 

Arahan  ! 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  etc.  ...  in  the  navel. 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  wieldiness  of  mental 
factors,1  in  the  six  pairs. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  ! 

Arahan  ! 


Thus  meditating,  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to  him 
etc.  •  •  • 

Well  observing  .  .  .  heart  .  .  .  navel. 

[20]  When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  wieldiness  of  mind, 
in  the  six  pairs. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  *  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  ! 
Arahan  ! 

Thus  meditating,  the  element  of  cohesion  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  navel. 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  fitness  of  mental  factors,2 
in  the  six  pairs. 

Nine  are  the  states  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !  Arahan  ! 


1  K  a  ill  in  a  n  n  a  t  a,  Dham.  Sang .,  loc.  cit .,  “  workableness,  or 
serviceableness  for  good  action.” 

2  Kayapagunnata,  “  the  antithesis  to  illness  and  diffi¬ 
dence.’  ’ 


33 


The  Grasping  of  the  Six  Pairs 

Thus  meditating,  the  element  of  mobility  appears  to  him.  .  .  .  Well 
observing  its  three  thought-forms  let  him  place  them  in  the  heart  and 
then  in  the  navel. 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  fitness  of  mind,  in  the 
six  pairs. 

Nine  are  the  states  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !  Arahan  ! 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  element  of  mobility  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 
navel. 

Nine  are  the  states  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !  Arahan  ! 

When  he  has  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  rectitude  of  mental  factors,1  in  the 
six  pairs. 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  element  of  space  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 
navel. 

When  he  has  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  rectitude  of  mind,  in  the  six  pairs. 

Nine  are  the  states  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !  Arahan  ! 


Thus  meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  element  of  space  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 
navel. 

When  he  has  .  .  .  etc.  ...  in  the  six  pairs. 


Repose  of  mental  factors. 
Repose  of  mind. 

Buoyancy  of  mental  factors. 
Buoyancy  of  mind. 

Plasticity  of  mental  factors. 
Plasticity  of  mind. 


Wieldiness  of  mental  factors. 
Wieldiness  of  mind. 

Fitness  of  mental  factors. 
Fitness  of  mind. 

Rectitude  of  mental  factors. 
Rectitude  of  mind. 


Nine  are  the  states  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !  Arahan  ! 


Thus  meditating,  two  images  appear  to  him,  first  a  dim,  then  a 
clear  one.  When  the  dim  image  has  faded  away,  faded  as  if  by  the 
passing  of  the  blemishes,  and  when  the  clear  image,  cleansed  of  all 
impurities,  has  penetrated  the  stream  of  sub-conscious  life,  then, 
entering  the  threshold  of  the  mind,  all  the  three  thought-forms  of  the 
object  of  meditation  called  the  six  pairs  appear  to  him.  Well  observing 
them  and  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them 
upwards  in  the  navel.  Developing  all  the  three  thought-forms  of  the 
six  pairs,  and  performing  without  fail  the  first  duties  and  having  done 
the  offerings  due,  let  him  aspire  for  the  perception  of  mental  states.2 

iKayujjukata,  “  the  antithesis  of  crookedness,  deception 
(m  a  y  a)  and  craftiness.”  2  D  h  a  m  m  a  s  a  ii  ii  a. 

3 


34 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

[21]  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  attained  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my 
being  the  repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind,  in  the 
six  pairs,  in  the  way  of  right  succession.  .  .  .  Even  as  one 
that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit 
medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

Thus  meditating  and  well  observing  the  perception  of  mental  states, 
withdrawing  it  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  it  in  the  navel 
and  then  aspire  for  the  six  pairs  as  objects  of  meditation.  The  process 
of  attaining  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order- 
will  follow. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

When  I  have  duly  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

Thus  aspiring  and  well  observing  in  the  element  of  cohesion  the 
three  thought-forms,  let  him  withdraw  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose 
and  place  them  in  the  way  of  right  succession  one  inch  above  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  duly  entered  the  inmost  shrine 
of  my  being,  I  shall  attain  repose  of  mind  and  repose  of  mental 
factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

thus  aspiring  and  well  observing  them  in  the  element  of  cohesion 
from  the  access  to  the  ecstasy,  let  him  place  them  upwards  in  reverse 
order  where  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  etc.  ...  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being  the  repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of 

mind,  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .arise  in  me. 

/ 

thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him.  Develojjing  the 
three  thought-forms  .  .  .  and  well  observing  them,  let  him  place  them 
about  an  inch  above  the  (spot  of)  repose  of  mental  factors  in  the  way 
of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  etc.  ...  I  shall  attain  in 
the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  buoyancy  of  mind  and  buoy¬ 
ancy  of  mental  factors,  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .arise 


m  me. 


35 


The  Grasping  of  the  Six  Pairs 

Thus  aspiring  and  earnestly  meditating,  he  attains  the  element  of 
heat.  Well  observing  the  three  thought-forms  from  the  access  to  the 
ecstasy  in  the  element  of  heat  .  .  .  etc.  ...  let  him  place  them  in 
reverse  order  where  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  plasticity  of 
mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right 
succession.  .  .  .  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered 
from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of 
mental  states  arise  in  me. 

Thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  extension  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  well  observ¬ 
ing  let  him  place  them  about  an  inch  above  the  buoyancy  of  mental 
factors  .  .  .  etc.  ...  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  buoyancy  of 
mind  and  buoyancy  of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

[22]  Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  etc.  ...  the  element  of  extension  .  .  . 
thought-forms  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  ...  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldi- 

ness  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 
arise  in  me. 

Thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to  him.  Well  ob¬ 
serving  it  let  him  place  it  about  an  inch  above  the  (spot  of)  buoyancy 
of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  etc.  ...  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being,  in  the  six  pairs,  wieldiness  of  mind  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me ! 

Thus  aspiring  and  well  observing  them  from  the  access  to  the  ecstasy 
in  the  element  of  cohesion,  let  him  place  them  upwards  in  reverse  order 
where  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  fitness  of  mental 
factors  and  fitness  of  mind,  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

Thus  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  element  of  mobility  .  „  .  developing  its 
thought-forms,  let  him  place  them  about  an  inch  above  the  wieldiness 
of  mental  factors  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 


36 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  fitness  of  mind,  in  reverse 
order.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease 
by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states 
arise  in  me ! 

Thus  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  element  of  mobility  .  .  .  developing  .  .  . 
etc.  ...  in  reverse  order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  ...  in  the  six  pairs,  developed 
rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in  the  way 
of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

Thus  aspiring  and  having  developed  the  element  of  space,  well 
observing  its  thought-forms,  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the 
nose,  let  him  place  them  about  an  inch  away  between  the  (spot  of) 
rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  the  heart. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  ...  in  the  six  pairs,  developed 
rectitude  of  mind  and  rectitude  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

Thus  aspiring  ...  in  the  element  of  space  .  .  .  upwards  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  succession.  Hereafter  let  the  way  of  attaining  in  the  way 
of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order  be  done  while  aspiring. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  etc.  ...  in  the  six  pairs 
.  .  .  repose  of  mental  factors  in  the  way  of  right  succession 
.  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

Give  leave  ...  in  the  six  pairs  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 


37 


The  Grasping  of  the  Six  Pairs 

[23]  Rectitude  of  mind  and  rectitude  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  ( and  so  on  in  reverse  order  to). 
Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by 
taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states  arise 
in  me  ! 

Here  ends  the  Order  Due. 


THE  SIX  WORDS.  * 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done  the 
offerings  due  ( let  him  say) :  » 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  etc.  ...  to  fulfil  (as 
above). 

Give  leave  !  Of  the  six  pairs,  taking  the  six  words  as  object 
of  meditation  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  I  shall  .  .  . 
repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !  Arahan  !] 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mind  and  repose  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 
order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mind  and  plasticity  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mind  and  wieldiness  of  mental  factors 
in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mind  and  rectitude  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 


38 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mind  and  buoyancy  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late 
recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  per¬ 
ception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mind  and  fitness  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mind  and  fitness  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  {and  so  on  in  reverse  order). 


THE  SPAN. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done  the 
offerings  due  ( let  him  say): 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  .  .  .  fulfil  {as  above). 

[24]  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Meditating 
on  the  span  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  of  the  six  pairs 
I  shall  hold  fast : 

....  Repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  .  .  . 
.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind  .  .  . 
.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in 


39 


The  Grasping  of  the  Six  Pairs 

the  way  of  right  succession.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late 
recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  per¬ 
ception  of  these  things  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  ...  etc.  ..  .  Arahan  !  Arahan  !] 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  span  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mind  and  rectitude  of  mental  factors  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mind  and  wieldiness  of  mental  factors  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mind  and  buoyancy  of  mental  factors  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mind  and  repose  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 
order.  .  . 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  span  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mind  and  fitness  of  mental  factors  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mind  and  buoyancy  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order.  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  span  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind  .  .  . 

.  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  .  .  . 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  span  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  .  .  . 

.  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  . 

Fitness  of  miud  and  fitness  of  mental  factors  .  .  . 
Buoyancy  of  mind  and  buoyancy  of  mental  factors  .  .  . 


40 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Give  leave  !  .  .  . 

.  .  *  Rectitude  of  mind  and  rectitude  of  mental  factors 

.  .  .  \\  ieldiness  of  mind  and  wieldiness  of  mental  factors  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mind  and  plasticity  of  mental  factors 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mind  and  repose  of  mental  factors  ...  in 
reverse  order.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from 
disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental 
states  arise  in  me ! 


THE  AGGREGATE  OF  ELEMENTS. 

[25]  When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done 
the  offerings  due  {let  him  say)  : 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  element-group  in  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  of  the  six  pairs  I  shall  hold  fast : 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind 

.  .  .  \\  ieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  element-group  .  .  .  etc. 

.  .  .  of  the  six  pairs  .  .  .  rectitude  of  mind  and  rectitude  of 
mental  factors  .  .  .  (and  so  on)  .  .  .  etc.  ...  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 


The  Grasping  of  the  Six  Pairs 


41 


THE  FOURFOLD  SYSTEM. 

When  he  has  .  .  .  offerings  due  (let  him  say) : 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  four  ways  within  the  in¬ 
most  shrine  of  my  being,  of  the  six  pairs  I  shall  hold  fast : 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  .  .  . 
in  the  way  of  right  succession.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late 
recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  per¬ 
ception  of  these  things  arise  in  me. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  .  .  .  etc.  ...  of  the  six  pairs 
I  shall  hold  fast : 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mind  and  plasticity  of  mental  factors  (as 
above)  in  reverse  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  .  .  .  etc.  ...  of  the  six  pairs 
let: 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  ...  etc.  ...  of  the  six  pairs 
let: 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mind  and  wieldiness  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mind  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

[26]  .  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  in  the  way  of  right 


succession  .  . 


42 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession.  Even 
as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking 
of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states  arise 
in  me ! 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mind  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mental  factors  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 

cession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 

sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mind  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mind  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mind  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mind  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mind  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mind  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  etc. 


.  .  arise  m  me. 


The  Grasping  of  the  Six  Pairs 


43 


THE  FIVEFOLD  SYSTEM. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done  the 
offerings  due  {let  him  say) : 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  fulfil  (as 
above). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  five  ways  in 
the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  of  the  six  pairs  I  shall  hold  fast : 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late 
recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  per¬ 
ception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

[27]  \He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

Give  leave !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  etc.  ...  of  the  six 
pairs  I  shall  hold  fast : 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mind  and  buoyancy  of  mental  factors  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mind  and  repose  of  mental  factors  ...  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mind  and  plasticity  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mind  and  wieldiness  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mind  and  fitness  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 
order  ... 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 


44 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

•  .  .  Rectitude  of  mind  and  rectitude  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from 
disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental 
states  arise  in  me  ! 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mind  and  rectitude  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mind  and  fitness  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 
order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mind  and  wieldiness  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mind  and  plasticity  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mind  and  buoyancy  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mind  and  repose  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 
order  .  .  . 


THE  HEART. 

When  he  has  .  .  .  etc.  ...  in  order  due  ( let  him  say) : 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  heart  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being 
of  the  six  pairs  I  shall  hold  fast : 


45 


The  Grasping  of  the  Six  Pairs 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late 
recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  per¬ 
ception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me ! 

[28]  [He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mind  and  repose  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 
order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mind  and  buoyancy  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mind  and  plasticity  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mind  and  wieldiness  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mind  and  fitness  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 
order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mind  and  rectitude  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 


46 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late 
recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  per¬ 
ception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  reverse 
order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  W  ieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  in  reverse 
order  .  .  . 


SELF-COLLECTEDNESS. 

When  he  has  .  .  .  offerings  due  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  etc.  ...  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  etc. 

(as  above). 

Give  leave !  Give  leave !  Give  leave !  Meditating  on 
self-collectedness  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  of  the 
six  pairs  I  shall  hold  fast : 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  ... 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mind  and  repose  of  mental|factors  in  reverse 
order  ... 

(And  as  in  the  former  section  up  to  the  end.) 


The  Grasping  of  the  Six  Pairs 


47 


THE  LASTING  OF  THE  LAW. 

When  he  has  .  .  .  due  .  .  .  (as  above). 

Give  leave !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Meditating  on 
the  lasting  of  the  law  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  of  the 
six  pairs  I  shall  hold  fast : 

.  .  Repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind.  Even 
as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of 
fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

(As  in  The  Heart.) 


THE  WAY  OF  ATTAINING  THE  SIX  PAIPvS  BY 

OFFERINGS. 

[29]  When  he  has  .  .  .  etc.  ...  due  ...  let  him  earnestly  aspire 
for  the  attainment  of  the  six  pairs. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  ...  etc.  ..  .  fulfil. 

I  ask  to  attain  the  mark  of  upholding,  the  image  of  the 
mark,  the  way  to  the  access,  and  to  ecstatic  concentration, 
and,  of  the  six  pairs,  the  repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose 
of  mind. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  etc.  ...  be  it  for  Nib- 
bana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

'Phus  meditating  and,  in  the  element  of  cohesion,  observing  well  fiom 
the  access  to  the  preamble,  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose, 
let  him  place  them  about  an  inch  above  the  navel,  and  continue  medi¬ 
tating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  two  inches  and  the  candle-stick 
falls  down.  Then  let  him  squat  down  (and  say) : 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  candle-stick,  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my 
being,  of  the  six  pairs  I  shall  attain  repose  of  mental  factors 


48 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

and  repose  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession.  Even  as 
one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit 
medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  and  meditating,  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to 
him.  Observing  its  three  thought-forms  and  withdrawing  them  from 
the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the  way  of  right  succession 
where  they  were  placed  before,  and  continue  meditating  till  the  taper 
has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the  second  candle-stick  falls  down. 
Then  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  etc.  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

Thus  aspiring,  and  developing  the  element  of  heat,  and  observing 
the  three  thought-forms  therein,  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of 
the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the  way  of  right  succession  about  an 
inch  above  the  (spot  of)  repose  of  mental  factors,  and  continue  medi¬ 
tating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the  third  candle¬ 
stick  falls  down.  Then  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind 
.  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

Thus  aspiring,  and  developing  the  element  of  extension  and  the  three 
thought-forms  therein,  observing  them  well,  let  him  withdraw  them 
from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  and  place  them  in  the  w’ay  of  right  succession 
.about  an  inch  above  the  (spot  of)  plasticity  of  mental  factors,  and 
•continue  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the 
fourth1  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  etc.  .  . 

.  .  .  M  ieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion  .  .  .  etc. 

.  .  .  access,  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  .  .  .  above 
plasticity  of  mental  factors  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  fifth  candle-stick  falls 
•down.  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  (and  say):  * 


1  In  text  “  third.” 


The  Grasping  of  the  Six  Pairs  49 

[30]  Give  leave  !  Meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  tire 
way  of  right  succession.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late 
recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  per¬ 
ception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  .  .  .  etc.  ...  the  element  of  mobility  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  access, 
withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  .  .  .  about  an  inch  above 
the  wieldiness  of  mental  factors  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  sixth  candle-stick 
falls  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  then  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 


Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  m 

the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

Thus  aspiring  and  meditating,  the  element  of  space  appears  to  him. 
Developing  therein  the  three  thought-forms,  let  him  observe  them  well 
and,  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  at  a  spot  midway  between  the  (spot  of) 
fitness  of  mental  factors  and  the  heart,  and  continue  meditating  till 
the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the  seventh  candle-stick  falls 
down.  Then,  at  that  token  aware,  sitting  cross-legged,  let  him  go  on 
meditating  to  attain  the  concentration  of  the  heart.  Developing  the 
three  thought-forms  of  repose  of  mental  factors  in  the  element  of 
cohesion,  as  said  above,  and  well  observing  them,  let  him  place  them  as 
before  about  an  inch  above  the  navel  in  the  way  of  right  succession, 
and  go  on  meditating  until  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and 
the  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then  sitting  as  before,  having  developed 
the  three  thought-forms  in  self-collectedness  also,  wrell  obseiving 
them  and  placing  them  as  before,  let  him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper 
has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down. 

Then,  by  that  token  aware,  let  him  grasp  the  way  of  attainment  in 
the  way  of  right  succession.  The  way  of  attainment  in  reverse  ordei 
and  the  observation  of  it  is  thus:  sitting  cross-legged  and  developing 
the  three  thought-forms  of  repose  of  mental  factors  in  the  element  of 
cohesion,  as  said  above,  and  well  observing  them,  let  him  place  them 
in  reverse  order  where  they  were  placed  before  in  the  way  of  right 
succession,  and  let  him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned 
about  two  inches  and  the  first  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then,  by  that 
token  aware,  let  him  squat  down  (and  thus  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

.  Repose  of  mind  and  repose  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 

order  ...  '  , 

4 


50 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Thus  aspiring,  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to  him.  Developing 
therein  the  three  thought-forms,  let  him  place  them  in  reverse  order 
where  they  were  before  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  and  go 
on  meditating  [31]  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the 
second  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then,  by  that  token  aware,  let  him 
squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  in 
reverse  order.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from 
disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental 
states  arise  in  me  !  • 

Thus  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him.  Develop¬ 
ing  therein  the  three  thought-forms,  and  well  observing  them,  let  him 
place  them  in  reverse  order  where  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right 
succession,  and  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an 
inch  and  the  third  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then,  by  that  token  aware, 
let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  aspiring  and  meditating,  having  developed  the  three  thought - 
forms  therein,  and  well  observing  them,  let  him  place  them  in  reverse 
order  where  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  and  go 
on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the  fourth, 
candle-stick  falls  down.  Then,  by  that  token  aware,  let  him  squat 
down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  aspiring  and  meditating,  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to'him. 
Developing  therein  the  three  thought-forms,  and  well  observing  them, 
let  him  place  them  in  reverse  order  where  before  they  were  placed  in 
the  way  of  right  succession,  and  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has 
burned  about  an  inch  and  the  fifth  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then, 
by  that  token  aware,  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  reverse 
order  .  .  . 


The  Grasping  of  the  Six  Pairs  51 

Thus  aspiring  and  meditating,  the  element  of  mobility  ...  let  him 
place  them  in  reverse  order  where  before  they  were  placed  in  the  way 
of  right  succession,  and  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  bums  about 
an  inch  and  the  sixth  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then,  by  that  token 
aware,  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in 
reverse  order.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered 
from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of 
mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  the  element  of  space  .  .  .  etc.  ...  in 
reverse  order  where  ...  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  the 
taper  has  burned  .  .  .  the  seventh  candle-stick  falls  down. 

Then,  by  that  token  aware,  let  him  sit  down  cross-legged  and, 
developing  the  three  thought-forms  in  the  element  of  cohesion  per¬ 
taining  to  the  heart,  place  them  upwards  in  reverse  order  [32]  where 
before  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  and  go  on  medi¬ 
tating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the  eighth  candle¬ 
stick  falls  down. 

Then,  by  that  token  aware,  remaining  as  he  was,  to  attain  self¬ 
collectedness,  observing  the  three  thought-forms  in  that  same  element, 
let  him  place  them  in  reverse  order  ...  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  and  end  the  meditation. 


THE  TASK  OF  SELF-CONTROL. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done  the 
offerings  due  (let  him  say): 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Meditating  on  the  command  of  the  aggregates1  in  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  of  the  six  pairs,  I  shall  attain 
repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  .  .  .  arise  in  me. 

[. He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 


1  K  a  y  a  v  a  s  i  v  a  1 1  a  in,  “  bodily  control  ”  (supra,  p.  40). 


52 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

■ 

Thus  meditating  and  developing  the  element  of  cohesion,  let  him 
develop  the  three  thought-forms  in  the  four-inch  nerve  called  the  all- 
penetrating,  that  rises  from  the  left  of  the  navel  to  the  breast.  Ob¬ 
serving  them  well  and  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let 
him  place  them  in  a  line  with  the  navel,  about  an  inch  upwards,  in 
the  way  of  right  succession-. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  command  of  the  aggre¬ 
gates  .  .  .  repose  of  mind  and  repose  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from 
disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  these 
things  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  same  three  thought-forms,  let 
him  place  them  in  reverse  order  where  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of 
right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  buoyancy  of  mental 
factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

Thus  aspiring  and  meditating,  well  observing  the  three  thought- 
forms  in  the  element  of  heat,  let  him  place  them  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  about  an  inch  above  the  (spot  of)  repose  of  mental  factors. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mind  and  buoyancy  of 
mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  where  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right 
succession. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plas¬ 
ticity  of  mind  ...  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

Thus  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  element  of  extension  .  .  .  buoyancy  of 
mental  factors  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  plasticity  of  mind  and 
plasticity  of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  .  .  .  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldi- 
ness  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 


53 


The  Grasping  of  the  Six  Pairs 

Thus  ...  the  element  of  cohesion  .  .  .  about  an  inch  above  the 
(spot  of)  plasticity  of  mental  factors  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  wieldiness  of  mind  and. 
wieldiness  of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order.  Even  as  one 
that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit 
medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  ...  in  reverse  order  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right 
succession. 

[33]  Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fit¬ 
ness  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

Thus  ...  in  the  element  of  mobility  .  .  .  about  an  inch  above  the 
(spot  of)  wieldiness  of  mental  factors. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  fitness  of  mind  and  fitness 
of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  .  .  .  where  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  rectitude  of  mental 
factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

Thus  ...  in  the  element  of  space  .  .  .  observing  well  and  taking 
them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  at  the  nerve  called  all-pervading,  midway  between  the 
(spot  of)  fitness  of  mental  factors  and  the  breast. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  rectitude  of  mind  and 
rectitude  of  mental  factors  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  ...  let  him  place  it  in  reverse  order,  well  placing  the  three 
thought-forms  of  the  six  pairs  in  the  nerve^  called  all-pervading,  the 
line  whereof  is  like  a  string  adorned  with  pearls  and  jewels  of  divers 
colours,  well  knowing  them  as  before  aspired  for,  let  him  gain  them  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  command  of  the  aggre¬ 
gates  .  .  .  repose  of  mental  factors  and  repose  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me ! 

The  element  of  cohesion. 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mental  factors  and  buoyancy  of  mind 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 


54 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

The  element  of  heat. 

.  .  .  Plasticity  of  mental  factors  and  plasticity  of  mind  in 
the  way  of  right  succession.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late 
recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  per¬ 
ception  of  these  things  arise  in  me  ! 

(Then  observe  the  element  of  extension.) 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mental  factors  and  wieldiness  of  mind 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

The  element  of  cohesion. 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mental  factors  and  fitness  of  mind  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

The  element  of  mobility. 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mental  factors  and  rectitude  of  mind  .  .  . 

The  element  of  space. 

.  .  .  Rectitude  of  mind  and  rectitude  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

The  element  of  space. 

.  .  .  Fitness  of  mind  and  fitness  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 
order  .  .  . 

The  element  of  mobility. 

.  .  .  Wieldiness  of  mind  and  wieldiness  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

The  element  of  cohesion. 

[34]  .  .  .  Plasticity  of  mind  and  plasticity  of  mental  factors 
in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

The  element  of  extension. 

.  .  .  Buoyancy  of  mind  and  buoyancy  of  mental  factors  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

The  element  of  heat. 

.  .  .  Repose  of  mind  and  repose  of  mental  factors  in  reverse 
order  .  .  . 

The  element  of  cohesion. 

Placing  the  three  thought-forms  of  the  six  pairs  in  the  nerve  called 
all-pervading,  let  him  thus  grasp  the  way  of  attaining  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 


Here  endeth  the  Meditation  on  the  Six  Pairs. 


MEDITATION  ON  HAPPINESS. 


THE  ORDER  DUE. 

After  the  Six  Pairs,  when  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first 
duties  and  done  the  offerings  due,  let  him  aspire  for  the  Bliss  of  Sense 
and  Bliss  of  Mind,1  the  Recollection  of  the  Buddha,  the  Access,  and 
Self-collectedness. 

Give  leave  !  I  ask  to  attain,  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my 
being,  the  mark  of  upholding  and  the  image  of  the  mark, 
the  way  to  the  access,  the  way  to  ecstatic  concentration, 

and  bliss  of  sense. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  for  Nibb ana’s 
sake. 


[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

Thus  meditating  both  the  mark  of  upholding  and  the  image  of  the 
mark  appear  to  him,  as  if  penetrating  .  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion 
appears.  Developing  in  them  the  three  thought-forms  and  well 
observing  them,  let  him  withdraw  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  and 
place  them  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel. 

Thus  meditating,  with  Nibbana  for  his  aim,  developing  the  three 
thought-forms  in  these  objects  of  meditation  and  well  observing  them, 
let  him  withdraw  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  place  them  in  the 
middle  of  the  navel  in  the  way  of  right  succession.  When  he  has 
without  fail  .  .  .  due. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  fulfil  {us  cibove). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Having  attained  in  order  due 


1  Here  again  is  kaya  and  citta,  but  with  no  specific  limitation  accord, 
ing  to  Buddhaghosa.  In  view  of  the  usual  rendering  of  such  passages 
as  Kayikasukha,  qetasikasukha,  the  more  obvious  anti¬ 
thesis  of  psychophysical  and  purely  psychical  feeling  has  been  used. 

55 


56 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  the  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss 
of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession.  Even  as  one  that 
hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medi¬ 
cines,  may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

Thus  meditating  and  observing  perception  of  mental  states  like 
the  blue  flame  of  a  torch,  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose, 
let  him  meditate  on  both  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind  in  the  way 
of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  When  I  have  in  order  due  .  .  . 
fulfil. 

Thus  aspiring  and  meditating  the  element  of  cohesion  appears.  De¬ 
veloping  therein  the  three  thought -forms  ...  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  .  about  an  inch  above  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  bliss  of  mind  and  bliss 
of  sense  in  reverse  order. 

Thus  aspiring  let  him  place  the  three  thought-forms  in  reverse  order 
where  they  were  before  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  I  aspire  to  attain  ...  in  the  inmost  shrine 
of  my  being  the  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  and  meditating  let  him  develop  [35]  the  three  thought- 
forms  in  the  element  of  heat,  and,  well  observing  them  and  withdrawing 
them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  about  an  inch  above  the  (spot  of)  bliss  of  sense. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  reverse- 
order. 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  place  them  in  reverse  order  where  they  were 
before  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  I  aspire  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my 
being  the  access  to  self-collectedness  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession. 


Meditation  on  Happiness 

Thus  aspiring  ...  in  the  element  of  extension  ...  let  him  place 
them  in  the  way  of  right  succession  midway  between  the  heart  and 
the  (spot  of)  recollection  of  the  Buddha. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order. 

Thus  .  .  .  navel.  Henceforth,  observing  them  according  to  the 
aspirations  for  them,  let  him  place  the  objects  of  meditation  both  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 

Give  leave  !  ...  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  bliss 

of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking 

•  •  * 

of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  m  me  . 
.  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the  way  of  right 
succession. 

.  .  .  the  element  of  heat  .  .  . 

.  »  .  the  access  to  self-collectedness  in  the  way  of  right 
succession. 

*  .  .  the  element  of  extension  .  .  . 

...  the  access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order. 

.  .  .  the  element  of  extension  .  .  . 

.  .  the  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  reverse  order. 

.  .  .  the  element  of  heat  .  .  . 

.  .  .  bliss  of  mind  and  bliss  of  sense  in  reverse  order. 

.  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion  .  .  . 


THE  GRASPING  OF  THE  SIX  WORDS. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  .  .  .  due  ( let  him  say): 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Meditating  in  the  inmost  shrine 
of  my  being  on  the  Grasping  of  the  Six  Words  .  .  .  bliss  of 
sense  and  bliss  of  mind  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 


[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 


58  Manual  of  a  Mystic 

[37]  .  .  .  bliss  of  mind  and  bliss  of  sense  in  reverse  order. 
Even  as  one  that  bath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking 
of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

.  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness  in  tbe  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession. 

.  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order. 

.  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession. 

.  .  .  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind  ...  in  the  way  of 
light  succession. 

.  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession. 

.  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession. 

.  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  reverse  order. 

.  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order. 

.  .  .  bliss  of  mind  and  bliss  of  sense  in  reverse  order. 


THE  SPAN. 

Wherfhe  has  without  fail  .  .  .  due  ( let  him  say): 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  Span  in  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  being  .  .  .  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of 
mind  and  access  to  self-collectedness  in  the  way  of  right 
succession. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Akahan  !] 

.  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness,  bliss  of  mind  and  bliss 
of  sense  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  »  s 

.  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 


Meditation  on  Happiness  59 

.  .  .  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind,  access  to  self-col¬ 
lectedness  in  tbe  way  of  right  succession.  Even  as  one  that 
hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines, 
may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

.  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness,  bliss  of  mind  and  bliss 
of  sense  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 


THE  AGGREGATE  OF  ELEMENTS. 

When  he  has  .  .  .  due  ( let  him  say): 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  fulfil  {as  above). 

Give  leave!  Give  leave!  Meditating  on  the  Element 
Group  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  I  aspire  to  attain 
bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind,  the  recollection  of  the 
Buddha  and  access  to  self-collectedness  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  . .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

.  .  .  the  access  to  self-collectedness,  the  recollection 
of  the  Buddha,  bliss  of  mind  and  bliss  of  sense  in  reverse 
order  .  .  . 


THE  FOURFOLD  SYSTEM. 

[38]  When  he  has  without  fail  ...  {as  above). 

Give  leave !  Give  leave !  Meditating  on  the  Fourfold 
Way  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  I  aspire  to  attain  bliss 
of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind  and  the  recollection  of  the  Buddha 
in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 


60 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

.  .  .  the  recollection  of  the  Buddha,  bliss  of  mind  and 
bliss  of  sense  in  reverse  order.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of 
late  recovered  from  disease  bv  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may 
perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

.  .  .  the  access  to  self-collected  ness  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind  and  recollection  of 
the  Buddha  in  the  wav  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

%j  o 

.  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha,  bliss  of  mind  and  bliss  of 
sense  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 


THE  FIVEFOLD  SYSTEM. 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  Fivefold  Way  in  the  in¬ 
most  shrine  of  my  being,  I  aspire  to  attain  bliss  of  sense  and 
bliss  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Ahahan  !] 

.  .  .  bliss  of  mind  and  bliss  of  sense  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 


Meditation  on  Happiness  bl 

access  to  self-collectedness  in  tlie  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease 
by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states 
arise  in  me  ! 

.  access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
bliss  of  mind  and  bliss  of  sense  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 


THE  HEART. 

When  he  has  .  .  .  {as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  Heart  in  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  I  aspire  to  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss 
of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

bliss  of  mind  and  bliss  of  sense  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

[39]  .  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  . 

recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

access  to  self-collectedness  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order  .  «  . 

.  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  . 

.  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

access  to  self-collectedness  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  bliss  of  mind  and  bliss  of  sense  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 


62 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


SELF-COLLECTEDNESS. 

When  he  has  .  .  .  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  self-collectedness 
in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  I  aspire  to  attain  bliss 
of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 
Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking 
of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  these  things  arise  in  me  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

(All  as  in  the  last  section.) 


THE  LASTING  OF  THE  LAW. 

When  he  has  ...  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  Lasting  of 
the  Law  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  I  aspire  to  attain  to 
bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

(All  as  in  the  last  section.) 


THE  WAY  OF  MEDITATING  BY  OFFERING  OF  TAPERS. 

When  he  has  .  .  .  offerings  due,  let  him  aspire  for  the  way  to  bliss 
of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind  by  the  offering  of  wax  tapers. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  ask  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  mv  beiim  the  mark 
of  upholding,  the  image  of  the  mark,  the  way  of  access,  the 
way  to  ecstatic  concentration,  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  etc.  ...  be  it  for 
Nibbana’s  sake. 


[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 


63 


Meditation  on  Happiness 

Thus  meditating  both  the  mark  of  upholding  and  the  image  of  the 
mark  appear  to  him.  Then  appears  to  him  the  [40]  element  of  cohesion. 
Developing  in  it  the  access  and  the  preamble,  and  well  observing  them, 
let  him  withdraw  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  place  them  about 
an  inch  above  the  navel,  and  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned 
about  two  inches  and  the  first  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then,  by  that 
token  aware,  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being,  I  aspire  to  attain  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss 
of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession.  Even  as  one  that  hath 
of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit  medicines, 
may  perception  of  mental  states  arise  in  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  and  developing  the  three  thought-forms  in  the  element 
of  cohesion,  let  him  well  observe  them  and,  withdrawing  them  from 
the  tip  of  the  nose,  place  them  in  the  way  of  right  succession  where  the 
access  and  preamble  of  the  same  element  were  placed,  and  go  on 
meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch,  and  the  second 
candle-stick  falls  down.  Then,  by  that  token  aware,  let  him  squat 
down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  .  .  .  etc.  ...  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being  .  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

Thus  aspiring  and  developing  the  three  thought-forms  in  the  element 
of  heat,  and  well  observing  them,  let  him  place  them  about  an  inch 
above  the  (spot  of)  bliss  of  mind,  and  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has 
burned  about  an  inch  and  the  third  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then, 
by  that  token  aware,  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  ...  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  .  .  . 
access  to  self-collectedness  in  the  way  of  right  succession 

a  •  .  etc.  ... 


Thus  aspiring  and  meditating,  let  him  develop  the  three  thought - 
forms  in  the  element  of  extension.  Well  observing  them,  let  him  place 
them  in  the  way  of  right  succession  about  an  inch  from  the  recollection 
of  the  Buddha  and  the  heart,  in  the  middle,  and  go  on  meditating 
till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the  fourth  candle-stick  falls 
down.  Then,  remaining  thus,  to  meditate  on  the  heart,  and  well 
observing  the  three  thoughi-forms  developed  in  the  element  of  cohesion 


64 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

with  regard  to  bliss  of  mind,  let  him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper 
has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the  fifth  candle-stick  falls  down. 

To  attain  also  self-collectedness,  well  observing  the  three  thought- 
forms  in  the  same  element,  let  him  place  them  in  the  same  way  as  bliss 
of  mind,  and  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch 
and  the  sixth  candle-stick  falls  down.  This  is  the  way  of  meditating 
in  the  way  of  right  succession.  The  way  of  the  reverse  order  is  thus: 
Let  him  carefully  observe  the  access  and  the  preamble  developed  in 
the  element  of  cohesion  as  regards  bliss  of  miitd.  Let  him  place  them 
in  reverse  order  where  before  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right 
succession,  and  go  on  meditating  until  the  taper  has  burned  about  an 
inch  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then  let  him  squat  down  (and 
say): 


Give  leave  !  ...  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  .  .  . 
bliss  of  mind  and  bliss  of  sense  in  reverse  order.  Even  as 
one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking  of  fit 
medicines,  may  perception  of  these  things  arise  in  me  ! 

[41]  Then  let  him  place  the  same  thought-forms  in  reverse  order 
where  before  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  and  go 
on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the  candle¬ 
stick  falls  down.  Then  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  ...  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  .  .  . 
recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Then  let  him  place  the  three  thought-forms  upwards  in  reverse 
order  where  before  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession, 
-and  go  on  meditating  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  ...  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  .  .  . 
access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Then  let  him  ...  (as  in  the  last)  .  .  .  For  attaining  the  medita¬ 
tion  on  the  heart  let  him  place  them  in  the  way  of  right  succession, 
and  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the 
candle-stick  falls  down.  Then,  for  attaining  self-collectedness,  let 
him  place  the  three  thought-forms  developed  in  the  element  of  cohesion 
...  .  .  the  candle-stick  falls  down. 


Meditation  on  Happiness 


65 


THE  TASK  OF  SELF-CONTROL. 

When  he  has  without  fail  ...  (as  above). 

Give  leave !  Give  leave !  Meditating  on  the  Task  of 
Bodily  Control  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  .  .  .  bliss 
of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

Thus  meditating  and  aiming  at  Nibbana,  the  element  of  cohesion 
appears  to  him.  Well  observing  .  .  .  and  withdrawing  them  from 
the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the  right  breast  in  the  way 
of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  bliss  of  mind  and  bliss  of  sense  in  reverse 
order.  Even  as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease 
by  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  mental  states 
arise  in  me  ! 

Then  let  him  ...  in  reverse  order. 

Give  leave  !  ...  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  .  .  . 
the  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him  .  .  .  from  the 
tip  of  the  nose  ...  let  him  place  them  in  the  left  breast  in  the  way 
of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  ...  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  beino- 

*j  ©  *  * 

the  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Then,  having  developed  the  three  thought-forms  in  the  same  ele¬ 
ment,  let  him  place  them  in  reverse  order  where  before  they  were  placed 
in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  ...  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  .  . 
self-collectedness  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

Thus  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms  in  the 
element  of  extension,  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let 
him  place  them  in  the  right  breast  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 


66 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

[42]  Give  leave  !  ...  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being 
.  .  .  the  access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order.  Even 
as  one  that  hath  of  late  recovered  from  disease  by  taking 
of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  these  things  arise  in  me ! 

Then,  developing  the  three  thought-forms  in  the  same  element,  and 
well  observing  them,  let  him  place  them  in  reverse  order  where  they 
were  before  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession.  Henceforth,  per¬ 
forming  the  task  of  aspiring  for  the  object  of  thought  fixed  in  the 
breast,  let  him  do  it  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order 
also. 


...  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  .  .  . 

.  .  .  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  recollection  of  the  Buddha  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  access  to  self-collectedness  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  bliss  of  mind  and  bliss  of  sense  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

After  observing  the  jewels  of  the  three  thought-forms  developed  in 
he  objects  of  thought,  to  wit,  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind,  recol¬ 
lection  of  the  Buddha,  and  access  to  self-collectedness,  which  are 
like  unto  mines  of  precious  gems,  here  is  set  forth  the  way  of  placing 
them  in  both  breasts. 


BREATHING  EXERCISE  FOR  MENTAL 

CLARITY. 


Aftei  the  meditation  on  the  bliss  of  sense  and  bliss  of  mind,  when 
he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done  the  offerings 
due,  let  the  aspirant  who  has  truly  felt  the  dread  of  the  stream  of 
becoming  strive  hard  to  win  Nibbana  by  earnestly  meditating  on  the 
way  of  concentration  by  inbreathing  and  outbreathing,  held  by  Our 
Blessed  Lord  to  be  the  chief  aim  of  meditation,  which  is  highly  praised 
^  Him,  and  has  been  of  the  greatest  help  to  countless  Buddhas,  among 
them  the  last  and  latest,  Gotama  the  Buddha,  for  the  winning  of  the 
Wisdom  Supreme. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  ...  etc.  ..  .  fulfil. 

I  ask  to  attain  the  mark  of  upholding,  the  image  of  the 
mark,  the  way  of  access,  the  way  of  ecstatic  concentration, 

and  the  way  of  concentration  by  inbreathing  and  outbreath¬ 
ing. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s 
sake. 

[43]  [He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  ...  the  preamble  for  the  first, 
second,  third,  fourth  and  fifth  time.] 

Thus  closely  practising  the  way  of  inbreathing  and  outbreathing 
the  two  images  appear  to  him.  What  is  the  token  thereof  ?  The 
former  blemishes  of  the  mark  of  upholding  appear  as  water  mixed  with 
foam  and  bubbles  in  the  waves.  The  former  blemishes  in  the  earth 
device,  such  as  finger-marks  or  scratches,  appear  to  him;  or  else  tho 
mark  of  upholding  appears  to  him  as  steam  passing  through  a  tube, 
or  as  white  clouds  in  the  sky. 

Then,  too,  the  image  of  the  mark  appears  to  him  as  a  jewelled  fan, 
as  a  crystal  mirror,  or  the  moon  breaking  through  the  clouds,  or  else 
as  a  flock  of  cranes  before  the  clouds,  as  if  piercing  the  mark  of  uphold¬ 
ing,  and  freed  from  the  blemishes  of  the  earth  device,  and  cleansed  a 
hundred,  nay,  a  thousand  times  therefrom. 

Then  the  element  of  space,  piercing  the  stream  of  the  span  of  life 
and  entering  the  threshold  of  the  mind,  appears.  Its  ecstasy  is  white 
as  purest  cotton-flowers  or  white  lotus  and  the  like.  Its  preamble  is 

67 


68 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

like  a  sheaf  of  feathers  from  a  peacock’s  tail  or  peacock  s  plumage. 
Its  access  is  somewhat  dark  or  black,  as  a  beetle. 

Well  observing  their  three  thought-forms  and  withdrawing  them 
from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the  heart  and  then  in 
the  navel. 

Then  let  him  place  them  in  the  nostril.  Thenceforward,  performing 
without  fail  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  offerings  due  (let  him  say ) : 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  ask  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  the  medi¬ 
tation  on  the  concentration  by  inbreathing  and  outbreathing. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  for  Nibbana  s 
sake. 

|  He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Arahan  !] 

When  the  aspirant  who  meditates  to  destroy  the  thick  darkness  of 
the  passions  of  lust,  illusion  and  the  like  by  the  sunlight  of  wisdom, 
has  thus  meditated  on  the  concentration  by  inbreathing  and  out- 
breathing,  entering  the  threshold  of  the  mind,  the  element  of  space 
appears.  [44]  Well  observing  its  three  thought-forms,  let  him  de\elop 
them  by  following  the  ten  rules.  Of  these,  the  way  of  observing  the 
last  is  this:  let  him  withdraw  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  the  three  thought- 
forms,  observe  them  well  inch  by  inch,  and  let  the  line  of  observation 
be  extended  for  twelve  inches  or  a  span.  Then  let  it  be  extended  to 
two  spans  or  a  cubit.  Thereupon  it  looks  like  a  string  of  pearls  of 
divers  hues  or  else  like  a  wreath  of  flowers.  When  it  has  reached  a 
length  of  seven  carpenter’s  cubits,  it  becomes  a  pole.1  When  it  has 
reached  twenty  poles  it  becomes  a  cast.2  When  it  has  reached  eighty 
easts  it  becomes  a  league.3  When  it  has  reached  a  hundred  or  a  thou¬ 
sand  leagues  it  seems  like  the  ocean.  When  it  has  reached  still  further, 
he  sees  in  thought  the  Seven  Great  Rocks,4  and  further  still  the  Peak 
of  Mount  Meru.5  Let  him  form  an  image  of  them  and  fix  their  three 
thought-forms  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

1  Y  a  1 1  h  i,  ?  two  and  a  half  fathoms. 

2  Usabhain,  about  twenty  yatthis. 

3  Gavutam,  a  quarter  y  o  j  a  n  a  or  a  league.  A  y  o  j  a  n  a 
is  about  twelve  miles. 

4  Assakanna,  one  of  the  seven  circles  of  rock  that  surround 
them. 

5  M  e  r  u  (or  Sineru)  is  supposed  to  be  the  “  Axle  of  achak- 
k  a  v  a  1  a  or  solar  system.  Its  base  is  the  home  of  the  Asura’s  or 
Titans;  its  summit  is  the  heaven  of  The  Thirty-Three  ”  gods.  For 
an  excellent  chart  of  Mt.  Meru  see  Gogerly’s  Ceylon  Buddhism ,  vol.  2. 


Breathing  Exercise  for  Mental  Clarity  69 

Thereupon,  to  attain  them  in  reverse  order,  let  him  take  in  mind- 
consciousness  the  same  three  thought-forms  that  were  placed  on  the 
Peak  of  Mount  Meru;  and  then,  duly  returning  in  order  from  the  Seven 
Great  Rocks,  pass  the  Seven  Great  Oceans,  to  a  distance  of  a  thousand 
leagues.  Then  at  a  distance  of  a  hundred  leagues,  let  him  observe  the 
same  three  thought-forms  and  place  them  there.  Then  let  him  gradu¬ 
ally  return  in  order  due  a  league,  a  cast,  a  pole,  a  carpenter’s  cubit, 
a  cubit,  a  span,  and  then  an  inch.1  When  the  distance  of  one  inch  is 
reached,  developing  the  three  thought-forms  in  the  element  of  space 
and  well  observing  them,  let  him  place  them  in  the  nostril  in  reveise 
order. 

Then  let  him  observe  the  west,  south  or  north,  and  the  four  points 
of  space  between,  to  wit,  north-west,  north-east,  south-west,  south¬ 
east,  [45]  in  the  same  way  as  towards  the  east,  and  practise  them  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 

As  he  will  not  again  see  Mount  Meru  .  .  .  etc.,  he  should  see  the 
Six  Heavens,  first  the  Heaven  of  the  Four  Great  Rulers,  then  the  six¬ 
teen  Brahma  Worlds,  and  then  Endless  Space. 

In  the  downward  way  also  let  him  observe  the  Dry  Land,  four 
million  measures  wide;  the  Sea,  four  hundred  and  eighty  thousand; 
the  Atmosphere,  nine  hundred  and  sixty  thousand. 

Then  let  him  observe  all  the  Ten  Quarters  here  mentioned  in  mind- 
consciousness,  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order, 
and  place  them  in  the  nostril.2 

Inside  is  tlie  Earth,  above  is  Water,  below  is  Fire,  outside 
is  Air,  and  in  the  midst  is  Space.3 

What  are  the  three  thought-forms  of  the  Five  Jhanas  ? 

The  ecstasy  of  the  First  Jhana  is  like  a  fire-fly.  The  preamble  and 
access  are  like  those  of  the  fivefold  zest. 

The  ecstasy  of  the  Second  Jhana  is  like  the  halo  of  the  moon,  and 
the  preamble  and  access  are  like  those  of  the  fivefold  zest. 

The  ecstasy  of  the  Third  Jhana  is  like  the  colour  of  the  medicine 
star,4  and  the  preamble  and  access  are  like  those  of  the  fivefold  zest. 

The  ecstasy  of  the  Fourth  Jhana  is  like  the  halo  of  the  sun,  and  the 
preamble  and  access  are  like  those  of  the  fivefold  zest. 

The  ecstasy  of  the  Fifth  Jhana  is  like  white  flowers,  and  the  pre¬ 
amble  and  access  are  like  those  of  the  fivefold  zest. 

1  Presumably  an  inch  outside  the  locus  of  concentration  (an  inch 
from  the  breast). 

2  We  are  not  told  which  nostril.  I  presume  the  root  of  the  nose  is 
meant,  this  being  one  of  the  centres  in  Yoga. 

3  I.e.,  element  of  extension,  cohesion,  heat,  mobility.  See  Com - 

pendium,  p.  3.  4Osadhi-taraka.  Cf.  supvci ,  p.  8,  n.  2. 


( 


70 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

The  aspirant  who  holds  the  all-yielding  gem  of  concentration  by 
inbreathing  and  outbreathing1  should  fix  these  Five  Jhanas  in  the 
nostril;  and  before  attaining  them  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and 
in  reverse  order,  he  should  first  perform  the  first  duties  and  make  the 
offerings  due  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  fulfil  (as 
above). 

Give  leave !  Give  leave !  Give  leave  !  Meditating  on 
the  First  Jhana  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  I  shall  hold 
fast  the  concentration  by  inbreathing  and  outbreathing  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order.  To  me, 
recently  recovered  from  the  sickness  of  the  passions  by  the 

taking  of  right  medicine,  may  perception  of  the  mental  states 
appear  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  prepare  myself  with  the  word 
first,  second,  etc.2  (sc.  quarter). 


In  this  way,  to  him  who  practises  concentration  by  inbreathing  and 
outbreathing,  doing  it  not  less  than  five  times  nor  more  than  ten 
times,  the  perception  of  the  mental  states  appears,  the  adverting3  of 
the  door  of  the  mind.  [46]  Then,  well  observing  the  perception  of 
the  mental  states  in  the  colour  of  light  blue,  let  him  practise  it  both  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order,  according  to  the  way 
set  forth  above,  “  Inside  is  earth,”  and  so  forth. 

Give  leave  !  Attaining  to  the  First  Jhana  .  .  .  hold  fast 
the  concentration  by  inbreathing  and  outbreathing  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  appear  to  me. 

.  .  .  the  Second  Jhana  ...  in  the  wav  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  Second  Jhana  ...  in  reverse  order  . 

.  .  .  the  Third  Jhana  ...  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  Third  Jhana  ...  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

1  Anapa  nasati  is  here  compared  to  Cintamanik- 
kyaratana,  a  gem  which  gratifies  every  wish  by  its  magic  power. 

2  Sc.  d  i  s  a  m,  quarter. 

3  Awarjjana,  Pali ;  a  v  a  j  j  a  n  a.  Compendium,  p.  85. 


Breathing  Exercise  for  Mental  Clarity  71 


.  .  .  the  Fourth  Jhana  . 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  Fourth  Jhana  . 

.  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  . 

sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  . 

.  .  .  the  First  Jhana  . 

sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  Second  Jhana  . 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  Third  Jhana  . 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  Fourth  Jhana  . 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  . 
sion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  . 


.  in  the  way  of  right  succes- 

.  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  in  the  way  of  right  succes- 

.  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  in  the  way  of  right  succes- 

.  in  the  way  of  right  succes- 

.  in  the  way  of  right  succes- 

.  in  the  way  of  right  succes- 

.  in  the  way  of  right  succes- 

.  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

way  of  right  succession. 


(And  so  on  in  reverse  order  to) 
.  the  First  Jhana  ...  in  the 


Let  wise  beings,  who  have  truly  felt  the  dread  of  the  stream  of 
becoming,  dive  deep  into  the  righteous  mine  of  concentration  by 
inbreathing  and  outbreaking,  and  win  the  precious  gems  of  the  three 
thought-forms  thereof,  and  struggle  for  Nibbana,1  the  endless  peace. 

Here  endeth  the  Breathing  Exercise. 


1  Visesa,  lit.  distinction,  attainment. 


THE  EXERCISE  BY  “DEVICES.” 


1.  THE  EARTH-DEVICE. 

After  the  concentration  by  inbreathing  and  outbreathing  let  the 
aspirant  who  would  practise  the  ten  devices  without  fail  perform  the 
first  duties  and  make  the  offerings  due;  then,  of  the  ten  devices,  let 
him  aspire  for  the  earth-device.1 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  ...  of  the  ten  devices,  tlie  earth 
device,  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  be  it  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[47]  [He  sits  down  .  .  .  prepare  myself  with  the  word 
“  earth-device  !”  “  earth-device  !”] 

Thus  meditating,  beholding  the  twenty  blemishes  of  the  element 
of  extension  and  twelve  of  the  element  of  cohesion,  in  all,  the  thirty- 
two  lands  of  bodily  blemishes2  which  pass  away  at  death,  wTell  observ¬ 
ing  their  emptiness  and  unloveliness,  the  two  images  above  mentioned 
will  appear  to  him.  Then  appears  the  element  of  extension,  breaking 
through  the  stream  of  the  span  of  life  and  entering  the  threshold  of 
the  mind.  Fixing  well  its  three  thought-forms  in  the  heart,  let  him 
then  place  them  in  the  navel. 

Henceforward  when  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  offerings  due  .  .  . 
observing  the  mental  states,  let  him  practise  them  both  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

1  A  description  of  the  Earth-Device  or  K  a  s  i  n  a,  a  frame  of  clay, 
will  be  found  in  Visuddhi-Magga,  ch.  4.  See  Warren,  Buddhism  in 
Translations ,  p.  293;  and  Buddh.  Psychol .  Ethics,  ch.  2,  and  especially 
note  to  p.  57. 

2  The  Thirty-two  Blemishes  or  constituent  parts  of  the  body  (dv  a  t- 
t  i  ni  s  aha  r  a)  will  be  found  further  on.  There  are  twenty  solids, 
twelve  liquids.  See  Khudd.  3;  Blip.  165  (p.  86  f.). 


The  Exercise  by  “ Devices  ” 


73 


Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Attaining  the  First  Jhana  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being 
.  .  .  the  Earth-Device  in  reverse  order  ...  let  him  place 
its  three  thought-forms  in  reverse  order  where  before  they 
were  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

%  ,  * 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  earth-device  !  earth-device  P] 

Thus  meditating  and  well  observing  the  mental  states  and  the  three 
thought-forms  of  the  element  of  extension,  let  him  withdraw  them  from 
the  tip  of  the  nose  and  fix  them  about  an  inch  above  the  navel  in  the 
way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  earth-device  P  in  reverse  order. 

Then  let  him  place  the  same  in  reverse  order  where  before  they  were 
placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Attaining  the  Second  Jhana  in  the  in¬ 
most  shrine  of  my  being  .  .  .  the  earth-device  in  the  way  of 
right  succession. 

Thus  aspiring,  developing  the  element  of  heat,  let  him  place  it  about 
an  inch  above  the  (spot  of)  First  Jhana  in  the  way  or  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  earth-device  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Then  let  him  place  the  same  element  of  heat  in  reverse  order  where 
before  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Attaining  the  Third  Jhana  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being  .  .  .  earth-device  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  .  arise  in  me  ! 

[48]  Thus  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  element  of  cohesion,  let 
him  place  it  in  the  way  of  right  succession  about  an  inch  above  (the 
spot  of)  the  Second  Jhana. 

Give  leave  !  ...  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Then  let  him  place  the  same  element  of  cohesion  in  reverse  order 
where  before  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 


74  Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Give  leave  !  Attaining  the  Fourth  Jhana  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being  ...  the  earth-device  in  the  way  of  right 
succession. 

Thus  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  element  of  mobility  ...  let 
him  place  them  (the  three  thought-forms)  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  about  an  inch  above  the  (spot  of)  Third  Jhana. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  earth-device  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Then  let  him  place  the  same  element  of  mobility  in  reverse  order 
where  before  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Attaining  the  Fifth  Jhana  .  .  .  the  earth- 
device  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Thus  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms  of  the 
element  of  space,  let  him  place  them  in  the  way  of  right  succession  to 
occupy  about  an  inch  between  the  heart  and  the  (spot  of  the)  Fourth 
Jhana. 

Give  leave  !  Attaining  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being  .  .  .  earth-device  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Then  well  observing  the  same  element  of  space,  let  him  place  it  in 
reverse  order  where  before  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Henceforward,  well  observing  the  way  of  aspiration,  let  him  practise 
it  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 

Give  leave  !  May  I  attain  the  First  Jhana  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  .  .  .  and  may  the  element  of  extension  appear 
to  me ! 

.  .  .  Give  leave  !  .  .  .  May  I  attain  the  Second  Jhana  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  and  may  the  element  of  heat 
appear  to  me  ! 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  May  I  attain  the  Third  Jhana  in  the  way 
of  right  succession  .  .  .  and  may  the  element  of  cohesion 
appear  to  me ! 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  May  I  attain  the  Fourth  Jhana  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  and  may  the  element  of  mobility 
appear  to  me  ! 


The  Exercise  by  “  Devices  ” 


75 


Give  leave  !  .  .  .  May  I  attain  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  the  way 
of  right  succession  .  .  .  and  may  the  element  of  space  appear 
to  me  ! 

[49]  Give  leave  !  .  .  .  May  I  attain  the  Fifth  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  and  may  the  element  of  space  appear  to 
me ! 

(And  so  on  in  reverse  order  to  “  element  of  extension  appear 

to  me  !  ”) 

Beginning  with  the  First  Jhana  let  the  aspirant  place  the  Five 
Jhanas,  as  he  desires,  either  above  the  navel  or  around  it,  and  practise 
the  earth-device  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order 
four  times  over. 


2.  THE  WATER-DEVICE. 

After  the  earth-device,  when  he  has  without  fail  performed  the 
first  duties  and  done  the  offerings  due,  let  him  aspire  for  the  water- 
device.1 

Give  leave  !  \  .  .in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  attain¬ 
ing  the  First  Jhana  may  I  hold  fast  the  water-device  .  .  . 
preparing  myself  with  the  word  “  water-device  !  water- 
device  !” 

Thus  meditating,  the  two  marks,  the  mark  of  upholding  and  the 
image  of  the  mark,  appear  to  him.  Then  the  element  of  cohesion 
appears  to  him.  Well  observing  its  three  thought-forms,  let  him 
withdraw  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  place  them  in  the  heart 
and  then  in  the  navel.  Then,  as  above  said  of  the  earth-device,  let 
him  practise  them  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse 
order. 


1  InApo-kasina  a  bowl  of  water  is  the  object  of  meditation; 
also  cf.  Jdt.,  vol.  i.,  p.  313  (Fausboll),  mahanadim  oloketva 
apo-kasinarammanam  jhanam  nibbattetva,  where 
the  sight  of  the  river  gives  the  required  stimulus. 


76 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


3.  THE  FIRE-DEVICE. 

After  the  water-device,  when  he  has  without  fail  performed  .  .  . 
let  him  aspire  for  the  fire-device.1 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  .  .  .  fire-device  !  5 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  the  two  marks  appear  to  him.  Then  the 
element  of  heat  appears.  Developing  its  three  thought-forms  and 
well  observing  them,  let  him  withdraw  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose 
and  place  them  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel.  Let  him  practise 
this  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 


4.  THE  AIR-DEVICE. 

[50]  After  the  fire-device,  when  he  has  ...  let  him  aspire  for 
the  air-device.2 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  with  the  word  “  air-device  !”  .  .  . 


1-4.  THE  ELEMENT-DEVICE. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  ...  let  him  aspire  for  the 
four-element-device  at  one  and  the  same  time. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Having  attained  the  First,  Second,  Third,  Fourth  and 
Fifth  Jhana,  may  I  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  hold  fast 
the  earth-device,  the  water-device,  the  fire-device,  the  air- 
device  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  to  me  ! 

|  He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  “  earth-device !  earth- 
device  !”] 

Thus  meditating  and  developing  the  three  thought-forms  in  the 
four-element-devices,  well  observing  them  and  withdrawing  them 
from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the  middle  of  the  navel 
in  the  way  of  right  succession,  and,  well  observing  the  three  thought- 
forms  of  the  Fifth  Jhana,  let  him  place  them  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  where  before  they  were  placed  in  reverse  order. 


1  Cf.  Pss.  of  the  Sisters,  p.  112. 


2  Vayo-kasina  is  smoke. 


77 


The  Exercise  by  46  Devices  ” 

5.  THE  BLUE-GREEN-DEVICE. 

After  the  element-device,  when  he  has  without  fail  performed  .  .  . 
let  him  aspire  for  the  blue-green  device  of  the  six  colour-devices. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  ask  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  the  blue- 
green-device  of  the  ten  devices. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  blue-green-device  !  blue- 
green- device  !”] 

Thus  meditating,  the  two  marks  appear  to  him,  the  mark  of  uphold¬ 
ing  and  the  image  of  the  mark.  Then  the  element  of  extension  appears. 
Developing  in  it  the  three  thought-forms  and  well  observing  them, 
let  him  place  them  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel.  [51]  Then  let 
him  go  on  further  or  deeper  into  the  practice,  as  said  above,  of  the 
earth-device,  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 


6.  THE  YELLOW-DEVICE. 

After  the  blue-green -device,  when  he  has  without  fail  performed 
the  ...  let  him  aspire  for  the  yellow-device. 

Give  leave  !  Of  the  Ten  Devices  I  aspire  to  attain  the 
yellow  device  .  .  . 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana  s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  “  yellow-device !  yellow- 
device  !”] 

Thus  meditating  ...  the  element  of  cohesion  appears.  Develop¬ 
ing  therein  the  three  thought-forms  .  .  .  (as  above)  .  .  . 


7.  THE  CRIMSON-DEVICE. 

After  the  yellow-device  .  .  .  crimson-device. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  crimson- device. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime,  etc.  ...  (as  above),  the  word 
“  crimson- device  !  crimson-device  !” 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  the  element  of  heat  appears.  Developing 
therein  the  three  thought-forms  .  .  .  (as  in  the  earth-device). 


78 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


8.  THE  WHITE-DEVICE. 

After  the  crimson-device  .  .  .  of  the  ten  devices  let  him  aspire  for 
the  white- device.  Thus  meditating  the  element  of  space  appears  to 
him.  Developing  the  three  thought-forms  therein  let  him  .  .  .  and 
practise  it  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order, 
as  in  the  earth-device. 


9.  THE  SPACE-DEVICE. 

After  the  white-device,  when  he  has  without  fail  performed  .  .  . 
let  him  aspire  for  the  space-device.  Thus  meditating  .  .  .  the  element 
of  space  appears  to  him.  Developing  the  three  thought-forms  therein, 
let  him  .  .  .  [52]  and  practise  it  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession 
and  in  reverse  order,  as  in  the  earth-device. 


10.  THE  LIGHT-DEVICE. 

After  the  space- device  let  him  .  .  .  the  light- device,  i 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  the  element  of  space  appears  to  him.  Develop¬ 
ing  the  three  thought-forms  therein  let  him  ...  and  practise  it  both 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order  as  in  the  earth- 
device. 

Of  the  ten  meditation-devices  here  set  forth,  beginning  with  the 
earth-device,  when  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  ...  let  him 
aspire  for  the  six  colours  at  one  and  the  same  time.2 


Give  leave  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Give  leave  ! 

Having  attained  the  First  Jhana,  may  I  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being  hold  fast,  of  the  ten-device  exercises,  the 
blue-green,  the  yellow,  the  crimson,  the  white,  the  space  and 

1  The  light-device  is  a  circle  of  light  thrown  upon  a  wall. 

Note  that  the  chabbanna  buddharasmiyo,  the  six 
rays  emitted  from  the  Buddha’s  aura  (as  in  next  §)  are  blue-green, 
yellow,  crimson  (or  blood-red),  light-red  or  orange-madder,  white,  and 
radiant  (a  silvery  fringe  of  iridescent  colours).  See  also  note  on  p.  14 
(MS.). 


The  Exercise  by  cc  Devices  ” 


79 


the  light  device  in  the  way  of  right  succession.  To  me, 
recently  recovered  from  the  sickness  of  the  passions  b^  the 
taking  of  fit  medicine,  may  perception  of  the  mental  states 

appear ! 

[He  sits  down  ...  the  word  “  blue-green-device !  blue- 
green-device  l”]1 

Thus  meditating,  let  him  develop  the  three  thought-forms  in  the 
six  colour-devices,  and  well  observing  them  all  let  him  place  them  in 
the  middle  of  the  navel  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  and  then  place 
them  as  said  above  in  the  case  of  the  elements  developed  in  the  Fh  e 

Jhanas. 

Here  ends  the  Meditation  on  the  Devices. 


i  N  il  a.  Cf.  Buddh.  Psychol.  Ethics,  62,  n.  1,  183,  n.  2.  My  experi¬ 
ence  of  the  Sinhalese  is,  that  they  cannot  distinguish  blue  from 
green ;  they  call  all  shades  of  these  colours  n  1 1.  The  river  Nilganga 
at  Matara  is  of  both  colours.  The  blue-green  of  a  young  paddy-held, 
which  is  ever  changing,  is  called  n  i  1.  Can  any  reader  enlighten  me 
as  to  the  derivation  of  the  Egyptian  “Nile”? 


THE  MEDITATION  ON  THE  TEN 
FOUL  THINGS. 


1.  THE  SWOLLEN  CORPSE. 

[53]  After  the  ten  devices,  let  the  aspirant  who,  of  the  ten1  bodily 
foul  things,  would  meditate  on  the  swollen  corpse  that  has  gradually 
become  puffed  up  like  a  goldsmith’s  bellows  with  air,  considering 
that  the  same  thing  will  befall  his  own  body  or  those  of  others,  when 
he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  offerings  due,  let  him  aspire  for  the  medita¬ 
tion  on  the  swollen  corpse. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  acquire  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being, 
of  the  ten  foul  things  regarded  as  objects  of  meditation,  the 
meditation  on  the  swollen  corpse. 

^ine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  ‘ ‘  swollen  corpse  !  swollen 
corpse  !”] 

Thus  meditating  and  alert,  the  two  marks  appear  to  him.  .  .  .  As 
if  penetrating  the  mark  of  upholding,  entering  the  threshold  of  the 
mind,  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him.  Developing  therein  the 
three  thought-forms  and  well  observing  them,  let  him  place  them  first 
in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel.  Thenceforward  let  him  practise 
them  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order,  as  was 
•directed  for  the  earth-device. 


2.  THE  DISCOLOURED  CORPSE. 

After  meditating  on  the  foulness  of  the  swollen  corpse,  let  the  aspir¬ 
ant,  when  he  has  without  fail  performed  .  .  .  aspire  for  the  medita¬ 
tion  on  the  discoloured  corpse.2  After  death  the  body’s  nature  changes 
by  degrees  and  the  parts  where  the  flesh  is  abundant  turn  red  and  the 


'  Dasa  asubha.  See  Budd.  Psycholog.  Eth .,  pp.  69,  70  notes. 

2  V  i  nil  ah  a  m9  black  and  blue. 

80 


The  Meditation  on  the  Ten  Foul  Things  81 

parts  where  matter  gathers  turn  white.  As  a  whole,  the  corpse  turns 
green  and  looks  as  if  a  blue  sheet  covered  it.  Hence  must  the  aspirant 
realize  that  this  earthy  body,  be  it  past,  present,  or  future,  by  nature 
undergoes  such  changes  as  this  discoloured  corpse. 

[54]  Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being, 
of  the  ten  foul  things,  the  meditation  on  the  discoloured 
corpse. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  for  Nibbana's  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  “  discoloured  corpse  !  discoloured 
corpse  !”] 

Thus  meditating  and  alert,  with  Nibbana  as  his  goal,  the  two  images 
appear  to  him.  .  .  .  Then  the  element  of  extension,  entering  the  thres¬ 
hold  of  the  mind,  appears  to  him.  Developing  therein  the  three 
thought-forms,  let.  him  place  and  practise  them  both  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  and  in  reverse  order,  as  was  said  above  of  the  earth - 
device. 


3.  THE  FESTERING  CORPSE. 

After  meditating  on  the  fulness  of  the  discoloured  corpse,  let  the 
aspirant  ponder  over  the  corpse  putrid  and  decomposed.  When  he 
has  without  fail  ...  let  him  aspire  for  the  meditation  on  the  festering 
corpse. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being, 
of  the  ten  foul  things,  the  meditation  on  the  festering  corpse. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana's  sake. 

|  He  sits  down  ,  .  .  “  festering  corpse  !  festering  corpse  !”] 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to  him.  De¬ 
veloping  therein  the  three  N  thought-forms,  let  him  place  them  .  .  . 
and  practise  them  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse 
order,  as  said  above  of  the  earth-device. 

C> 


82 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


4.  THE  FISSURED  CORPSE. 

The  corpse  split  in  two  is  called  the  fissured  corpse.1  When  the 
aspirant  has  without  fail  performed  ...  let  him  aspire  for  the  medi¬ 
tation  on  the  fissured  corpse. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being , 
of  the  ten  foul  things,  the  meditation  on  the  fissured  corpse. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  “  fissured  corpse  !  fissured  corpse  !”] 

Thus  meditating,  keen  and  alert  to  attain  his  goal,  the  two  images 
appear  to  him.  .  .  .  Then  the  element  of  mobility  appears.  [55] 
Developing  therein  the  three  thought-forms,  let  him  place  them  .  .  . 
and  practise  .  .  .  the  earth-device. 


5.  THE  MANGLED  CORPSE. 

After  meditating  on  the  foulness  of  the  fissured  corpse,  let  the  aspir¬ 
ant  ponder  on  a  corpse  mangled  and  torn  by  birds  and  beasts  ot 
prey.  Meditating  on  the  fact  that  every  material  body  is  subject  to 
the  same  fate,  and  disgusted  therewith,  in  order  to  be  finally  released 
from  it,  let  him  without  fail  perform  .  .  .  and  aspire  for  the  medita¬ 
tion  on  the  corpse  mangled  and  torn  by  birds  and  beasts  of  prey. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  ...  I  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  ...  of  the  ten  foul  things,  the  meditation 
on  the  mangled  corpse. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  “  mangled  corpse  !  mangled 
corpse !"| 

Thus  meditating,  for  the  winning  of  his  goal,  the  two  images  appear 
to  him.  Then  the  element  of  space  appears.  Developing  .  .  . 


t  Vicchidak  a  m,  “  fissured  ”  (Childers).  Anto-susirabhavap- 
pakasanato.  Aithasalirii,  199. 


The  Meditation  on  the  Ten  Foul  Things  83 


6.  THE  DISMEMBERED  CORPSE. 

After  meditating  on  the  foulness  of  the  mangled  corpse,  let  him  ponder 
on  the  corpse  scattered  about  after  being  gnawed  by  beasts  of  prey, 
and  which  is  called  a  dismembered  corpse.  When  he  has  without  fail 
performed  .  .  .  offerings  due,  let  the  aspirant  aspire  for  the  meditation 
on  the  dismembered  corpse. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  for  .  .  .  of  the  ten  bodily  foul  things,  the 
meditation  on  the  dismembered  corpse. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  “  dismembered  corpse  ” 
(twice). 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  with  his  face  set  toward  Nibbana  ...  the 
element  of  extension  appears  to  him.  [56]  Developing  therein  ...  let 
him  place  them  .  .  .  and  practise  .  .  .  the  earth-device. 


7.  THE  LIMB-SCATTERED  CORPSE. 

After  meditating  on  the  foulness  of  the  dismembered  corpse,  let  the 
aspirant  ponder  over  a  corpse  the  limbs  of  which  are  severed  from  the 
trunk,  and  which  is  called  a  limb-scattered  corpse.  When  he  has  with¬ 
out  fail  performed  ...  let  him  aspire  for  the  meditation  on  the  limb- 
scattered  corpse. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  “  limb-scattered  corpse  !” 

Thus  meditating,  with  Nibbana  for  his  goal  .  .  .  the  two  images 
appear  to  him.  ...  Then  the  element  of  mobility  appears.  Develop¬ 
ing  them  .  .  .  place  them  .  .  .  practise  .  .  .  the  earth-device. 


8.  THE  BLOODY  CORPSE. 

After  meditating  on  the  limb-scattered  corpse,  let  him  ponder  on 
a  corpse  from  limbs  whereof,  parted  from  the  trunk,  the  blood  is 
flowing,  and  which  is  called  a  bloody  corpse.  When  he  has  without 
fail  .  .  .  the  foulness  of  the  bloody  corpse. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil.  I  earnestly  ask 
for  ...  “  bloody  corpse  !  bloody  corpse  !” 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  tfye  element  of  heat  appears  to  him.  Develop¬ 
ing  therein  .  .  .  place  .  .  .  practise  .  .  .  the  earth-device. 


84 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

9.  THE  WORM-FOUL  CORPSE. 

The  state  of  the  corpse  from  the  nine  doors  whereof  worms  pour  forth 
is  called  worm-foul.  Let  the  aspirant  who  is  disgusted  with  this  aspect 
of  the  physical  body  and  longs  for  absolute  release  therefrom,  when 
he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  [57]  offerings  due  .  .  .  aspire  for  the  medi¬ 
tation  on  the  worm-foul  corpse. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  fulfil.  I  earnestly  ask  .  .  worm-foul 
corpse  .  .  . 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  “  worm-foul  corpse  ” 
(twice). 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  cohesion  .  .  .  earth-device. 


10.  THE  SKELETON. 

After  the  foulness  of  the  worm-foul  corpse,  the  bony  framework  is 
regarded  as  an  object  of  meditation  and  is  called  skeleton.  When  he 
has  without  fail  ...  of  the  ten  foul  things,  the  foulness  of  the  skeleton 
.  .  .  ( let  him  say) : 

Give  leave !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  meditation  on  the 
skeleton. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  “  skeleton  !  skeleton!” 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  space  appears  to  him.  Developing 
.  .  .  the  earth -device. 

After  the  meditation  on  the  foulness  of  the  skeleton,  when  he  has 
without  fail  performed  the  .  .  .  let  him  aspire  for  the  meditation  on 
the  ten  foul  things  at  one  and  the  same  time. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Having  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  the  in¬ 
most  shrine  of  my  being  I  shall  hold  fast,  of  the  objects  of 
meditation,  the  swollen  corpse,  the  discoloured  corpse,  the 
festering  corpse,  the  fissured  corpse,  the  mangled  corpse,  the 
dismembered  corpse,  the  limb-scattered  corpse,  the  bloody 
corpse,  the  worm-foul  corpse,  and  the  skeleton,  in  the  way  of 
right  succession. 

o 


The  Meditation  on  the  Ten  Foul  Things  85 

[58]  In  me,  of  late  recovered  from  the  sickness  of  the 
passions  by  the  taking  of  fit  medicine,  may  perception  of  the 
mental  states  arise ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  “  swollen  corpse  !  swollen  corpse  T'] 

Thus  meditating,  with  his  face  set  toward  Nibbana,  the  two  images 
appear  to  him.  This  is  the  difference  between  the  mark  of  upholding  and 
the  image  of  the  mark.  The  one  is  like  hot  milk-rice  in  a  vessel  kept  in 
an  oven;  it  appears  shaky;  whereas  the  other  is  like  cool  rice-milk 
placed  in  a  dish;  it  appears  calm  and  quiet.  As  if  piercing  the  said 
mark  of  upholding  and  cleansed  a  hundred,  nay,  a  thousand  times, 
piercing  the  stream  of  the  span  of  life,  and  entering  the  threshold  of 
the  mind,  the  elements  of  the  ten  foul  things  appear  to  him.  Develop¬ 
ing  therein  the  three  thought-forms  in  the  way  of  right  succession, 
well  observing  them  and  withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose, 
let  him  place  them  in.  the  middle  of  the  navel,  in  the  way  of  right 
succession.  Observing  the  elements  of  the  Five  Jhanas,  let  him  place 
them  well  in  the  said  spots,  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in 
reverse  order. 

Here  ends  the  Meditation  on  the  Ten  Foul  Things.1 


i  Sayiyutta-Nihdy  a,  vol.  5,  pp.  129-132.  Anguttara-Nik . 

i.  42;  v.  106  give  5  Asubha’s  (foul  or  ugly  things);  ii.  17;  v.  310 
give  6.  Cf.  the  fuller  treatment  in  Majjhima-Nik.  i.  58;  Dlgha-Nik. 

ii. ,  295  f.  ( Dialogues  ii.  331  f.),  filling  in,  for  the  meditant  familiar  -with 
the  texts,  the  mere  heads  supplied  by  the  Manual. 


THE  MEDITATION  ON  THE  BODILY 

PARTS. 


1.  HAIR  OP  THE  HEAD. 

After  the  meditation  on  the  ten  foul  things,  of  the  thirty-two  objects 
of  meditation  on  the  bodily  parts,  set  forth  in  perfection  by  the  Lord 
of  Wisdom,  let  him  aspire  for  the  meditation  on  the  hair  of  the  head, 
when  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  offerings  to  the  Triple  Gem. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil.  I  earnestly  ask 
...  in  tlie  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  of  the  meditations  on 
the  bodily  parts,  for  that  on  the  hair  of  the  head. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  44  hair  of  the  head  !  hair  of  the 
head  !”] 

Thus  meditating,  with  the  taste  of  Nibbana  as  his  object,  keen  and 
alert,  the  two  images  appear  to  him.  Then  the  element  of  extension 
appears.  Developing  therein  the  three  thought-forms  [59]  and  well 
observing  them,  let  him  place  them  .  .  .  practise  .  .  .  the  earth - 
device. 


2.  DOWN  OF  THE  SKIN. 

After  the  meditation  on  the  hair  of  the  head,  when  he  has  without 
fail  performed  ...  let  him  aspire,  from  among  the  meditations  on  the 
bodily  parts,  for  the  meditation  on  the  down  of  the  skin. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  fulfil.  I  earnestly  ask  ...  in  the  in¬ 
most  shrine  of  my  being,  for  the  meditation  on  the  down  of 
the  skin. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

86 


The  Meditation  on  the  Bodily  Parts  87 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  “  down  of  the  skin  !  down  of 
the  skin  !”] 

Thus  meditating,  with  his  face  set  toward  Nibbana,  the  two  marks 
appear  to  him,  the  mark  of  upholding  and  the  image  of  the  mark. 
Then  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him.  Developing  therein  the  three 
thought-forms,  and  well  observing  them,  withdrawing  them  from  the 
tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel. 
Then  let  him  practise  .  .  .  earth -device. 

3.  NAILS. 

The  same  ( with  element  of  cohesion). 

4.  TEETH. 

The  same  ( with  element  of  mobility). 

5.  SKIN. 

The  same  ( with  element  of  space). 

6.  FLESH. 

The  same  ( with  element  of  extension). 

7.  TENDONS. 

[60]  The  same  ( with  element  of  heat). 

8.  BONES. 

The  same  ( with  element  of  cohesion). 

9.  MARROW. 

The  same  ( with  element  of  mobility). 

10.  KIDNEYS. 

The  same  (with  element  of  cohesion). 

11.  HEART. 

The  same  ( with  element  of  extension). 

12.  LIVER. 

The  same  (with  element  of  heat). 

13.  PLEURAL  MEMBRANE. 

The  same  (with  element  of  cohesion). 


88 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


14.  SPLEEN. 

The  same  {with  element  of  mobility). 

15.  LUNGS. 

The  same  {with  element  of  space). 

16.  BOWELS. 

The  same  {with  element  of  extension). 

[61]  17.  MESENTERY. 

The.  same  {with  element  of  heat). 

18.  STOMACH. 

The  same  {with  element  of  cohesion). 

19.  FAECES. 

The  same  {with  element  of  mobility). 

20.  HEAD. 

The  same  {with  element  of  space). 

21.  BRAIN. 

The  same  {with  element  of  space). 

22.  BILE. 

After  the  meditation  on  the  twenty  foul  things  of  the  element  of 
extension,  let  him  aspire  for  the  meditation  on  the  bile,  of  the  twelve 
foul  things  included  in  the  element  of  cohesion. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain,  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being, 
among  the  meditations  on  the  bodily  parts,  the  meditation 
on  the  bile. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  “  bile  !  bile  !”] 

While  he  is  thus  meditating,  keen  and  alert,  the  two  images 
appear  to  him.  Then  the  element  of  extension  appears.  De¬ 
veloping  therein  the  three  thought-forms,  well  observing  them  and 


89 


The  Meditation  on  the  Bodily  Parts 

withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the 
heart  and  then  in  the  navel.  Then  let  him  practise  .  .  .  [62]  the 
earth-device. 

23.  PHLEGM. 

After  the  meditation  on  the  bile,  when  he  has  .  .  .  meditation  on 
the  phlegm. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil.  I  earnestly  ask 
to  attain,  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  .  .  .  the  word 
“  phlegm  !  phlegm  !” 

Thus  meditating,  the  element  of  mobility  appears  to  him.  Develop¬ 
ing  .  .  .  the  earth- device. 

24.  PUS. 

After  the  phlegm  the  same  ( with  element  of  cohesion). 

25.  BLOOD. 

The  same  { with  element  of  heat). 

26.  SWEAT. 

The  same  {with  element  of  mobility). 

27.  FAT. 

The  same  {with  element  of  space). 

28.  TEARS. 

The  same  {with  element  of  extension). 

29.  SERUM. 

The  same  ( with  element  of  mobility).1 

1  For  the  “  Thirty- two  Parts  ”  of  the  body,  see  A  h  u  d  d  a  k  a- 
p  a  th  a,  ed.  Childers  [ J.R.A.S. ,  N.S.,  vol.  4  (1870),  pp.  310-339,  cap. 
2-3],  and  Majjhima-Nik.  i.  57.  Also  Gogerly,  Ceylon  Buddhism , 
vol.  2,  p.  339,  where  the  passage  is  found  in  the  Pirit  recital,  §  xv. 
Here  G.  translates  Kilo  m  aka  m,  “  womb  Childers,  s.v.,  saya 
“  pleural  membrane.”  G.  continues  (after  U  dariy  a  m,  stomach), 
“  paunch,  gall,  phlegm,”  ending  with  “  cranium  and  brains.” 

In  Khudd.,  loc.  cit.,  “  head  and  brains  ”  come  last  of  all.  In 
Majjhima-Nik.  only  31  “  parts  ”  are  given.  If  we  could,  in  Kh-p.  and 
here  take  the  last  two  together — the  brains  in  the  head  (matthake) 
—we  should  have  the  32,  the  deficiency  in  the  M.N.  being  un¬ 
explained.  But  in  our  Manual  Nos.  20,  21  are  treated  independently. 


•90 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


[63]  30.  SALIVA. 

The  same  ( with  “  element  of  heat  ”). 

31.  MUCUS. 

The  same  ( with  “  element  of  heat  ”). 

32.  LUBRICATING  FLUID. 

The  same  ( with  “  element  of  mobility  ”). 

33.  URINE. 

The  same  ( with  “  element  of  space  ”). 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  ...  let  him  aspire  at  one  and 
the  same  time  for  the  thirty-two  objects  of  meditation  mentioned  in 
the  meditation  on  the  bodily  parts. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

Give  leave  !  Having  attained  the  First  Jhana  I  shall  hold 
fast  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  the  meditation  on  the 
hair  of  the  head,  the  hair  of  the  body,  nails,  teeth,  skin,  flesh, 
nerves,  bones,  marrow,  kidney,  heart,  liver,  pleural  membrane, 
spleen,  lungs,  bowels,  mesentery,  stomach,  faeces,  head,  brain, 
bile,  phlegm,  pus,  blood,  sweat,  fat,  tears,  serum,  saliva, 
mucus,  lubricating  fluid,  and  urine  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion.  To  me,  recently  recovered  from  the  sickness  of  the 
passions  by  the  taking  of  fit  medicine,  may  perception  of  the 
mental  states  appear. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  “  hair  of  the  head  !  hair  of 
the  head  !”] 

Thus  meditating,  keen  and  alert,  having  developed  the  three  thought- 
forms  in  the  way  of  right  succession  in  the  thirty-two  objects  of  medi¬ 
tation,  let  him  well  observe  the  same  and,  withdrawing  them  from 
the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the  navel  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  and  then  observe  the  elements  of  the  Jhanas.  Let  the  wise 
earnestly  practise,  of  the  meditations  on  the  bodily  parts,  for  the 
obtaining  of  his  end,  the  thirty- two  occasions  of  meditation. 

Here  ends  the  Meditation  on  the  Bodily  Parts. 


MEDITATION 

ON  THE  TEN  RECOLLECTIONS. 


1.  BUDDHA-RECOLLECTION. 

After  Meditation  on  the  Bodily  Parts,  when  he  has  without  fail  .  .  . 
■of  the  Occasions  of  Meditation  let  him  aspire  to  the  Recollection  of  the 
[64]  Buddha. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  .  .  .  the  recollection  of  the  Buddha  ! 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  ,  “recollection  of  the  Buddha  1”  (twice).] 

Thus  meditating  on  the  virtues  of  the  Buddha  .  .  .  the 
element  of  extension  appears  to  him.  Developing  therein  the 
three  thought-forms  ...  let  him  place  them  in  the  heart 
and  then  in  the  navel.  Then  let  him  practise  it  .  .  .  the 
earth-device. 

In  the  mind  of  him  who  meditates  on  the  recollection  of 
the  Buddha,  the  virtues  of  the  Buddha  will  ever  arise.  So, 
just  as  if  he  were  in  the  presence  of  the  Buddha,  he  feels 
shame  and  fear  to  commit  sin.  Hence  let  the  wise  man, 
with  Nibbana  for  his  goal,  earnestly  practise  this  meditation 
and  without  delay. 


2.  DHAMMA-RECOLLECTION. 

After  the  meditation  on  the  recollection  of  the  Buddha,  when  lie 
has  without  fail  performed  ...  let  him  aspire  for  the  recollection 
of  the  Dhamma. 


91 


92  Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil.  When  I  have 
.  .  .  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  .  .  .  recollection  of 
the  Dhamma  !  recollection  of  the  Dhamma  !" 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him.  Developing 
therein  .  .  .  the  earth-device. 

3.  SANGHA-RECOLLECTION. 

[65]  The  same  ( with  “  element  of  cohesion  ”). 

4.  GOOD  CONDUCT-RECOLLECTION. 

The  same  ( with  “  element  of  mobility  ”). 

5.  GIVING-UP-RECOLLECTION. 

The  same  ( with  “  element  of  space  ”). 

6.  PERFECT  PEACE-RECOLLECTION.1 
The  same  for  “  The  Perfect  Peace.” 

[Here  read  .  .  .  “  preparing  myself  with  the  word  ‘  cessa¬ 
tion  !’  ”  (twice)]. 

Thus  meditating,  with  the  taste  of  Nibbana  for  his  object,  let  him  .  .  . 
the  element  of  extension  appears  .  .  .  earth-device. 

7.  RECOLLECTION  OF  THE  GODS. 

The  same 

[With  .  .  .  the  word  “  faith  !  faith  !”2] 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  element  of  heat  .  .  .  the  earth -device. 

8.  THE  RECOLLECTION  OF  DEATH. 

The  same 

[With  .  .  .  the  word  “  death  !  death  !”3] 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion  appears. 

1  U  p  a  s  a  m  o,  from  upa  :  unto,  s  a  m  :  quiet. 

2  Read  s  a  d  d  h  a,  “ecstatic  confidence  in  the  Buddha,”  etc. 

3  Text  has  mar  a  m  for  marana  m. 


Meditation  on  the  Ten  Recollections  93 


[66]  9.  THE  RECOLLECTION  OP  THE  ONE  IDEA. 

The  same 

[With  ...  the  word  “  disgust  !  disgust  l”1 

Thus  meditating  on  disgust  at  food  .  .  .  the  element  of  mobility 
.  .  .  earth-device  appears. 


10.  THE  ONE  ELEMENT.2 

The  same 

[With  .  .  .  the  word  “  one  element.  ] 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  space  appears  .  .  . 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  ...  let  him  aspire  for  the 
meditations  on  the  ten  recollections  at  one  and  the  same  time. 


Give  leave  !  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave !  Give  leave !  Give  leave !  When  I  have 
attained  the  First  Jhana  I  shall  hold  fast  in  the  inmost  shrine 
of  my  being  the  recollection  of  the  Buddha,  the  Dhamma,  the 
Sangha,  good  conduct,  giving-up,  peace,  the  gods,  death,  the 
one  idea,  the  one  element  in  the  way  of  right  succession.  To 
me,  but  lately  recovered  from  the  sickness  of  the  passions, 
may  the  perception  of  the  mental  states  appear  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  “  recollection  of  the  Buddha  !”] 

Thus  meditating,  having  developed  the  three  thought-forms  in  the 
Ten  Recollections,  well  observing  them,  and  taking  them  from  the 
tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the  navel  in  the  way  of  right 
*  succession.  Then,  well  observing  the  elements  regarding  the  Jhanas 
let  him  place  them  in  the  same  places. 

1  Text  has  p  a  t  i  k  ul  a  ni  for  p  a  t  i  k  h  ul  a  m. 

2  In  the  older  category  of  Anguttara-Nik.  i.  30,  and  in  the  1  isuddlii 
Magga,  ch.  iii.,  these  last  two  heads  do  not  occur.  These  works  give 
the  heads  “  Breathing-recollection  ”  and  “  Recollection  directed  to 
the  Body,”  as  Nos.  7  and  9,  which  are  here  omitted.  Moreover,  they 
place  No.  6  last.  It  is  probable  that  by  the  “one  element”  or 
“  one-element-edness  ”  (see  text,  66,  n.  1),  eka-dhatu-vavatthdnay  is 
meant:  “The  one  element  -  determining  ”  (v.  Childer’s  Diet.  s.v. 
kammatthdnay). — Ed  . 


MEDITATION  ON  THE  IMMATERIAL 

REALMS. 


1. 

’  [67]  After  the  Meditation  on  the  Ten  Recollections,  when  he  has 
without  fail  ...  of  the  Four  Immaterial  Realms,  let  him  aspire  to  the 
Realm  of  the  Infinity  of  Space.1 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  the  teachings  of  the  fully- 
enlightened  one,  Gotama,  I  strive  his  teachings  to  fulfil.  I 
earnestly  ask  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  the 
mark  of  upholding  and  the  image  of  the  mark,  the  way  to  the 
access,  the  way  to  the  ecstatic  concentration  and,  of  the  Jhanas 
of  the  four  formless  worlds,  the  realm  of  infinity  of  space. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  be  it  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  “  boundless  space  !  boundless 
space  !"]2 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  the  element  of  extension  appears.  Develop¬ 
ing  therein  the  three  thought-forms  and  well  observing  them,  let  him 
withdraw  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  place  them  in  the  heart, 
and  then  in  the  navel.  Then  let  him  practise  .  .  .  the  earth-device. 


2. 

The  same  for 

The  realm  of  the  infinity  of  consciousness, 

With  .  .  .  the  word  “  boundless  is  consciousness !  bound¬ 
less  is  consciousness  !”3 

and  .  .  .  the  element  of  heat. 


1  This  is  the  first  Arupa-loka,  or  Formless  Highest  (Heaven) 
World  (of  Abstract  Thought). 

2  Reading  aka  s  o  ana  nt  o  for  .  .  .  ant  o. 

3  The  text,  obviously  corrupt,  reads  a  k  d  s  a  rn  k  i  n  c  i, 

94 


Meditation  on  the  Immaterial  Realms  95 


3. 

The  same  for 

The  realm  of  nothingness, 

With  .  .  .  the  word  “  it  is  nothing  !  it  is  nothing  !” 
and  *  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion. 

•  4. 

The  same  for 

The  realm  of  neither  consciousness  nor  absence  thereof, 

With  [68]  the  word  “  this  is  good  !  this  is  excellent  !,?1 

and  the  .  .  .  element  of  mobility. 

Then,  when  he  has  without  fail  performed  .  .  .,  let  him  aspire  at  one 
and  the  same  time  to  the  Four  Immaterial  Realms. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave !  Give  leave !  Give  leave  !  When  I  have 
attained  the  First  Jhana  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being, 
I  shall  hold  fast,  of  the  four  immaterial  realms,  the  (above 
named)  meditations  in  the  way  of  right  succession.  To  me 
who  have  but  lately  recovered  from  the  sickness  of  the  passions 
by  the  taking  of  fit  medicines,  may  perception  of  the  mental 
states  appear  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  “  boundless  is  space  !  bound¬ 
less  is  space  !”] 

Thus  meditating,  the  three  thought-forms  of  the  Four  Jhanas  appear 
to  him.  Well  observing  them  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and 
withdrawing  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them  in  the 
middle  of  the  navel,  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms  of  the 
Jhanas  let  him  place  them  in  the  same  places. 


1  E  t  a  in  gantam,  e  t  a  ra  panit  a  m.  The  editing  of  the 
titles  in  the  text  has  here  gone  astray. 


MEDITATION  ON  THE  FOUR  HIGHEST 

STATES.1 

The  same  procedure  [as  in  the  preceding  paragraphs ]. 

1. 

...  of  the  Four  Highest  States,  let  him  aspire  to  that  of  Love. 

...  He  sits  down  cross-legged  .  .  .  and  prepares  himself  with  the 
word  “  May  I  be  happy  !  May  I  be  happy  !”  .  .  .  thus  meditating, 
the  element  of  extension  appears  .  .  . 

2. 

...  of  the  Four  Highest  States  let  him  aspire  to  that  of  Pity  [for 
others’  sorrow]  .  .  .  with  the  word  “  Let  me  get  free  !  Let  me  get 
free  !”  ...  the  element  of  heat  appears  .  .  . 

O 

O. 

...  of  the  Four  Highest  States  let  him  aspire  to  that  of  Sympathy 
[with  others’  joy]  .  .  •  with  the  word  Let  me  not  cease  !  Let  me 
not  cease  !”2  .  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  .  .  . 

4. 

...  of  the  Four  Highest  States  let  him  aspire  to  that  of  Equa¬ 
nimity  .  .  .  with  the  word  “  Let  me  inherit  my  deserts  !3  Let  me 
inherit  my  deserts  !”  .  .  .  the  element  of  mobility  appears  .  .  . 

[69]  Each  of  the  Four  Highest  States  is  then  repeated  with  each  of  the 
Five  Jhdnas,  the  Six  Words,  the  Span,  the  Element  Aggregate,  the  Fourfold 


1  B  r  ahmav  ih  dr  a.  ‘ Brahma  (adj.)  here  means  sett  ha, 
“  best,”  also  niddosacitta,  “  having  a  heart  void  of  corruption,” 
op  “  of  enmity,”  like  Brahma-gods.  Atthasdlini,  p.  195.  Mi.  Rajen- 
dranath  Tagore,  in  his  Sddhana,  p.  106,  seems  to  show  unawareness 
of  this  Buddhist  tradition,  calling  the  Buddhist  brahmavihara, 
“the  joy  of  living  in  Brahma  5  ! — Ed. 

2  Text  is  corrupt.  Dele  g  a  ?  Of.  below,  p.  109. 

Text  is  corrupt.  Read  Jc  a  m  m  a  s  s  a  k  o. 

96 


3 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  97 

and  Fivefold  Systems,  the  Heart,  Self-Collectedness,  Lasting  of  the  Law, 
and  Offering  of  Wax  Tapers,  the  formulas  in  each  being  inserted  before 
thus  meditating  ”  ... 

Then  follows  : 

When  he  has  without  fail  ...  of  the  Four  Highest  States,  let  him 
aspire  to  the  Highest  State  of  Love  for,  and  Sympathy  with,  all  beings 
in  the  Ten  Directions,  with  friendly  feelings  to  them,  and,  facing  the 
Eastern  Quarter,  let  him  dwell  on  Love  to  All  Beings. 


1.  LOVE. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  to  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being, 
of  the  Four  Highest  States,  the  state  of  love  for  all  beings. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s  sake.1 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  “May  I  be  blissful!  May  I 
be  blissful  !”] 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to  him.  Develop¬ 
ing  therein  the  three  thought-forms  and  well  observing  them,  facing 
the  eastern  quarter  in  mind-consciousness,  let  him  go  on  meditating 
and,  withdrawing  the  three  thought-forms  from  the  tip  of  the  nose, 
let  him  place  them  in  order  due  in  the  ten  thousand  world-systems, 
the  billion  world-systems,  the  boundless  world-systems,  and  the  sum¬ 
mit  of  Mount  Meru,  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  two  inches.  Then 
let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being,  of  the  Four  Highest  States,  may  I  attain 
the  First  Jhana  of  love  for  all  beings  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  .  may  ...  (as  on  p.  95)  appear ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  the  element  of  extension  appears  to  him. 

When  he  has  developed  the  twenty  ecstasies2  in  one  quarter 
and  given  merit  to  the  five  beings,  after  developing  the  twenty- 
eight  ecstasies  in  one  direction  and  given  merit  to  the  seven 
human  beings  and  gods3  (the  five  beings  in  one  quarter  are 

1  In  the  classic  tradition,  only  one  and  four  of  these  “  Highest 
States  ”  belong  to  strict  Nibbana- training.  Atthasdlini,  217. — Ed. 

2  For  Appana  see  note  on  pp.  53-54,  Buddh.  Psych.  Ethics. 

3  I.e.,  five  classes  of  beings  and  four  quarters;  so  for  the  seven 
classes. — Ed. 


7 


98 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

these:  all  beings,  all  creatures,  all  animals,  all  persons,  all 
that  have  attained  personal  existence.  The  seven  human 
beings  and  gods  are  these:  all  females,  all  males,  all  worthy 
ones,  all  unworthy  ones,  all  gods,  all  human  creatures,  all 
beings  in  the  hells)  let  him  say:  “  May  all  beings  be  friendly, 
healthy  and  unharmed,  and  live  in  happiness.”  [TO] 

The  inner  preamble:  “  May  I  be  happy  !”  (thrice). 

Taking  it  from  the  head:  “  Be  all  beings  happy  !”  (thrice). 

In  the  ten  thousand  world-systems:  May  creatures  be 
happy  !*’  (thrice). 

In  the  billion  world-systems:  “  Be  they  happy  !”  (thrice). 

In  the  countless  world-systems :  “  Happy  !  happy  !  happy  !" 

When  he  has  fixed  the  three  thought-forms  of  the  element  of  exten¬ 
sion  and  well  observed  them,  let  him  extend  friendly  greetings  to  the 
countless  world-systems  in  the  eastern  quarter.  On  the  summit  of 
Mount  Meru  let  him  meditate  in  the  way  of  right  succession  till  the 
taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then 
let  him  squat  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  in  the  inmost 
shrine  of  my  being,  of  the  Four  Highest  States,  may  I  attain 
the  Second  Jhana  of  love  for  all  beings  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  ...  (p.  95)  appear  to  me  ! 

Thus  aspiring  and  developing  the  three  thought-forms  in  the  element 
of  heat  (let  him  say) : 

When  I  have  developed  the  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter 
and  have  given  merit  to  the  five  beings,  and  developed 
twenty-eight  ecstasies  in  one  quarter,  and  given  merit  to  the 
seven  human  beings  and  gods  [the  five  beings  in  one  quarter 
are  .  .  .  (as  above)  .  .  .  the  seven  beings  are  .  .  .  (as  above)] 

.  .  .  “  Happy  !  happy  !  happy  !” 

Then  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms  developed  in  the 
element  of  heat,  by  spreading  love  for  all  beings  through  the  boundless 
world-systems,  let  him  place  the  forms  upwards  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  on  the  summit  of  Mount  Meru,  and  go  on  meditating  till 
the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down. 
Then  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  99 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  tlie  wax-taper  may  I  attain 
the  Third  Jhana  of  love  for  all  beings  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  .  may  perception  .  .  .  appear ! 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion  .  .  .  well  observing 
them  .  .  .  developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  .  “  Happy  !  happy  ! 
happy !” 

When  he  has  in  one  quarter  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  .  the  boundless 
world-systems  .  .  .  Happy  !  happy  !  happy  ! 

In  the  boundless  world-systems  .  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion  .  .  . 
let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  the  Fourth  Jhana  .  .  . 
appear  to  me ! 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  (with  the  element  of  mobility). 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  .  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  .  .  .  appear 
to  me. 


Thus  .  .  .  ( with  element  of  space)  .  .  .  Happy  !  happy  !  happy  ! 

[71]  Having  well  fixed  the  three  thought-forms  and  well  observing 
them,  diffusing  love  for  all  beings  throughout  the  boundless  world- 
systems,  let  him  on  the  summit  of  Mount  Meru  go  on  meditating  in 
the  way  of  right  succession,  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and 
the  candlestick  falls  down.  Then,  for  the  heart,  having  developed 
the  three  thought-forms  in  the  element  of  extension,  and  having 
placed  them  on  the  summit  of  Mount  Meru,  spreading  love  for  all 
beings  throughout  the  boundless  world-systems,  let  him  go  on  medi¬ 
tating  in  the  way  of  right  succession  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an 
inch,  and  the  candlestick  falls  down. 

For  mental  balance  also,  having  fixed  the  same  three  thought- 
forms  on  the  summit  of  Mount  Meru  (as  said  above)  upwards,  let  him 
go  on  meditating  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  till  the  taper  has 
burned  about  an  inch,  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down. 

Thereafter,  the  way  of  practice  in  reverse  order  is  thus:  Let  him 
take  the  access  and  the  preamble  developed  in  the  element  of  extension 
and  well  observe  them  as  regards  love  to  all  beings,  from  the  summit 
of  Mount  Meru  in  the  boundless  world-systems.  Then  let  him  place 
them  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  develop  them  with  the  mind- 
c  onsciousness  gradually  pervading  the  countless  world-systems,  the 
billion  world-systems,  the  ten  thousand  world-systems;  and,  when  he 
has  by  degrees  reached  his  own  head,  let  him  take  them  from  the  tip 


100 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

of  the  nose  and  place  them  in  reverse  order  in  the  navel,  and  go  on 
meditating  until  the  taper  has  burned  about  two  inches  and  the  candle¬ 
stick  falls  down.  Then  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  candle-stick  .  .  .  may  I 
attain  the  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  developed  in  love  to 
all  beings,  of  the  Four  Highest  States  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought -forms  in  the 
element  of  extension  in  the  way  of  right  succession  (let  him  say): 

In  one  quarter  developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  .  the 

five  beings . 4 4  May  I  be  happy !  May  I  be  happy  ! 

May  I  be  happy  !” 

Again  practising  in  reverse  order  let  him  say  Beings ! 
beings  !  beings  !” 

Approaching  the  boundless  world-systems  let  him  say. 
“  Happy !  happy  !  happy  !” 

Approaching  the  billion  world- systems  let  him  say  :  “  May 
they  be  happy  !  May  they  be  happy  !” 

Approaching  the  ten  thousand  world-systems  let  him  say: 
“  May  beings  be  happy  !  May  beings  be  happy  !” 

Approaching  the  head  let  him  say:  “May  all  beings  be 
happy !  May  all  beings  be  happy !  may  all  beings  be 
happy  !” 

Approaching  the  interior  let  him  say:  “  May  I  be  happy  ! 
May  I  be  happy  !  May  I  be  happy  !” 

Well  fixing  the  three  thought-forms  of  the  element  of  extension  in  the 
navel  (as  said  above),  let  him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned 
about  an  inch  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then  let  him  squat 
down  (and  say): 

[72]  Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-tapers  .  .  .  may  I 
attain  the  Second  Jhana  developed  in  love  to  all  beings  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Well  observing  the  three  thought-forms  of  the  element  of  heat  and 
fixing  them  in  the  boundless  world-systems  (let  him  say): 

When  I  have  developed  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  .  May 
I  be  happy  !” 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  101 


2.  PITY. 

Well  fixing  the  three  thought-forms  of  the  element  of  heat,  as  in 
the  way  of  right  succession,  let  him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has 
burned  about  two  inches  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then  let 
him  squat  and  say: 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-tapers  may  I  attain 
in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  of  the  Four  Highest  States, 
the  First  Jhana  of  pity  for  all  beings  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
may  perception  of  the  mental  states  appear  ! 

Thus  aspiring  let  him  fix  the  three  thought-forms  of  the  element  of 
heat  where  before  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  and 
go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch,  and  the 
candle-stick  falls  down.  Then,  for  the  heart,  fixing  the  same  element 
of  hea’t  in  reverse  order,  where  before  it  was  placed  in  the  way  of  right 
succession,  let  him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about 
an  inch  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down. 

Then  for  the  mental  balance  also,  having  fixed  the  same  element 
of  heat  in  reverse  order,  as  before  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  let 
him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the 
candle-stick  falls  down. 

Of  the  Four  Highest  States,  spreading  abroad  the  four  highest 
emotions  to  all  beings  throughout  the  ten  world-systems,  when  he  has 
performed  ...  let  him  aspire  for  the  meditation  on  pity  for  all  beings, 
and  fulfil  the  same. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain,  in  tlie  inmost  shrine  of  my  being, 
of  the  Four  Highest  States,  pity  for  all  beings. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  word  “  May  I  get  free !  May  I  get 
free  !”] 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him.  Developing 
therein  the  access  and  the  preamble,  and  well  observing  them,  let  him 
spread  abroad  pity  to  all  beings,  with  the  mind-consciousness  pervading 
[first]  the  eastern  quarter  of  the  ten  world- systems.  Starting  from  the 
head  and  going  on  step  by  step  to  the  billion  world-systems  and  the 
countless  world- systems,  and  fixing  the  access  and  the  preamble  on 
the  summit  of  Mount  Meru,  let  him  continue  meditating  in  the  wav 
of  right  succession,  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  two  inches  and 
the  candlestick  falls  down.  [73]  Then  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 


102 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  tlie  wax-taper  may  I  in  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  being  attain,  of  the  Four  Highest 
States,  the  First  Jhana  on  pity  to  all  beings  in  the  way  of 
right  succession. 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring,  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms 
of  the  element  of  heat  .  .  . 

In  one  quarter  developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  .  seven 
beings  .  .  .  (let  him  say): 

May  all  beings  be  freed  from  loss,  from  ill-repute,  from 
blame;  may  all  beings  be  freed  from  sorrow;  may  all  beings 
be  peaceful,  be  healthy,  be  free  from  pain  and  preserve  them¬ 
selves  in  bliss. 

For  the  inner  preamble:  “  May  I  get  free  !  May  I  get  free  !” 

Starting  from  the  head,  till  he  reach  the  ten  thousand  world- 
systems,  let  him  say:  “  May  all  beings  get  free  !  May  all  beings 
get  free  !  May  all  beings  get  free  !” 

Thus  spreading  pity  for  all  beings  through  the  countless  world- 
systems,  well  observing  and  fixing  the  three  thought-forms  on  the 
summit  of  Mount  Meru,  then  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  let  him 
continue  meditating  till  the  taper  .  .  .  then  let  him  squat  down  (and 
say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  Second  Jhana  of  pity 
for  all  beings  .  .  .  appear ! 

Thus  aspiring  earnestly  and  developing  the  three  thought-forms  of 
the  element  of  extension  and  well  observing  them  .  .  . 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  .  may  all  beings  be 
happy  !  .  .  . 

For  the  inner  preamble:  cc  May  I  get  free  !” 

Starting  from  the  head  let  him  say:  “  May  all  beings  get 
free  !  May  all  beings  get  free  !  May  all  beings  get  free  !” 

From  the  ten  thousand  world-systems  to  the  billion  world - 
systems,  let  him  say:  “  May  all  beings  get  free  !  May  all  beings 
get  free  !  May  all  beings  get  free  !” 

Thus  fixing  the  three  thought-forms  on  the  summit  of  Mount  Meru 
...  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  103 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  ...  the  Third  Jhana  .  .  . 
appear ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  developing  the  three  thought-forms  in 
the  element  of  cohesion  .  .  . 

In  one  quarter  developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  . 

“  May  all  beings  get  free  !  May  all  beings  get  free  !  May  all 
beings  get  free  !” 

The  same  for  the  Fourth  Jhana  with  the  element  of 
mobility. 

Having  fixed  the  ...  let  him  squat  down  (and  say ) : 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  .  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  .  .  . 
appear ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring,  and  developing  the  three  thought-forms  in 
the  element  of  space,  well  observing  them  ...  [74] 

In  one  quarter  developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  .  May 
all  beings  get  free  !  May  all  beings  get  free  !  May  all  beings 
get  free  !” 

Then  placing  upwards  in  the  way  of  right  succession  the  three 
thought-forms,  and  well  observing  them  on  the  summit  of  Mount  Meru 
let  him  continue  meditating  till  the  ...  (as  below )  falls  down. 

For  the  heart:  When  he  has  well  observed  the  three  thought-forms, 
developed  in  the  element  of  space,  by  meditating  on  pity  for  all  beings, 
spreading  the  same  through  the  ten  thousand  world-systems,  the 
billion  world-systems  and  the  countless  world- systems,  let  him  con¬ 
tinue  meditating  and  fix  the  same  thought-forms  in  reverse  order  on 
the  summit  of  Mount  Meru,  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch, 
and  the  candle-stick  falls  down. 

Then  for  the  mental  balance:  Fixing  the  same  element  of  heat  in 
the  same  way  on  the  summit  of  Mount  Meru  let  him  continue  meditat¬ 
ing  till  .  .  .  falls  down. 

After  the  practice  in  the  way  of  right  succession  the  way  of  the 
reverse  order  is  thus: 

Taking  from  the  summit  of  Mount  Meru  by  his  mind-consciousness 
the  access  and  preamble  developed  in  the  element  of  heat,  formed  by 
the  emotion  of  pity  for  all  beings,  which  was  fixed  in  the  countless 
world-systems,  let  him  in  the  way  of  right  succession  pass  o\er  them  in 


104 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

turn  and  go  back  to  the  billion  world-systems  and  the  ten  thousand 
world-systems  in  reverse  order.  Then,  when  he  has  reached  the  head, 
let  him  take  them  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  fix  them  in  the  navel  in 
reverse  order,  and  continue  meditating  till  the  taper  lias  burned  about 
an  inch  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then  let  him  squat  down 
(and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  .  .  .  First  Jhana  ...  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring,  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms 
developed  in  the  element  of  heat  .  .  . 

In  one  quarter  developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  .  “  live 
in  happiness  P 

The  inner  preamble  is:  “  May  I  be  freed!  May  I  be 
freed  P 

Then  again  in  reverse  order,  starting  from  the  world-systems, 
till  he  reach  the  billion  world-systems,  let  him  repeat :  “  Beings  ! 
beings  !  beings  P 

Starting  from  the  billion  world-systems  till  he  reach  the 
ten  thousand  world-systems,  let  him  repeat:  “May  beings 
get  free  !  May  beings  get  free  !  May  beings  get  free  P 

Starting  from  the  ten  thousand  world-systems  till  he  reach 
the  head  let  him  repeat:  “  May  all  beings  get  free  !  May  all 
beings  get  free  !  May  all  beings  get  free  P 

Starting  from  the  head  till  he  reach  the  navel  let  him  repeat : 
“  May  I  get  free  !  May  I  get  free  !  May  I  get  free  P 

• 

Then,  having  fixed  the  three  thought-forms  well  observed  in  reverse 
order  let  him  continue  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an 
inch.  .  .  .  Then  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  .  .  .  Second 
Jhana  of  pity  to  all  beings  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms 
developed  in  the  element  of  extension,  let  him  well  observe  them  in 
mind-consciousness  and  fix  them  in  the  countless  world-systems  in  the 
way  of  right  succession. 

In  one  quarter  developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  .  live 
happily.  [75] 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  105 

The  inner  preamble  is:  “  May  I  get  free  !  May  I  get 
free  !” 

Then  in  reverse  order  starting  from  the  countless  world- 
systems  and  returning  to  the  billion  world-systems,  let  him 
repeat:  “  Beings  !  beings  !” 

Starting  from  the  billion  world-systems  and  returning  to 
the  ten  thousand  world-systems,  let  him  repeat:  “  May  beings 
get  free  !  May  beings  get  free  !  May  beings  get  free  !” 

Starting  from  the  head  and  returning  to  the  navel,  let  him 
repeat:  “  May  I  get  free  !  May  I  get  free  !” 

Placing  the  three  thought-forms,  well  observed,  upwards  about  two^ 
inches,  let  him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an 
inch  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then  let  him  squat  down  (and 
say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  .  .  .  the  Third 
Jhana  on  pity  for  all  beings  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms 
developed  in  the  element  of  cohesion,  let  him  place  them  in  the  count¬ 
less  world-systems  in  the  way  of  right  succession  by  the  meditation  on 
compassion  for  all  beings. 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter  .  .  . 
“  happy  !” 

The  inner  preparation  is:  “May  I  get  free  !  May  I  get 
free  !” 

Then  in  reverse  order,  starting  from  the  countless  world- 
systems  .  .  .  “  May  I  get  free  !” 

Fixing  the  three  thought-forms  well  observed  at  a  place  about  one 
inch  to  the  right  of  the  navel  in  reverse  order,  let  him  go  on  meditating 
till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down. 
Then  let  him  squat  down  (and  say) : 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  .  .  .  the  Fourth 
Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  which  was  developed  in 
the  meditation  on  pity  for  all  beings  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms 
in  the  element  of  mobility  that  were  placed  in  the  countless  world- 
systems  in  the  way  of  right  succession: 


106  Manual  of  a  Mystic 

In  one  quarter  developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  . 

The  inner  preamble  is:  “  May  I  get  free  !  May  I  get 

free  !  May  I  get  free  !” 

Then  the  reverse  order,  starting  from  the  countless  world- 

systems  .  .  .  May  I  get  free  !” 

Give  leave  !  May  I  ...  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 


Well  observing  the  three  thought-forms  developed  in  the  element  of 
space,  that  were  placed  in  the  countless  world-systems. 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter  .  .  .  May 
I  get  free  F’ 

Then  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  May  I  get  free  ! 


Placing  the  three  thought-forms,  well  observed  and  developed  m 
the  element  of  space,  at  a  spot  about  an  inch  to  the  left  of  the  navel, 
let  him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and 
the  candle-stick  falls  down. 

[76]  Then  for  the  heart :  placing  the  three  thought-forms  developed 
in  the  element  of  heat  and  fixed  in  the  way  of  right  succession,  let  him 
go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the 
candle-stick  falls  down. 

Then  for  mental  balance:  placing  in  reverse  order  in  the  navel  the 
three  thought-forms,  placed  upwards  in  the  way  of  right  succession, 
let  him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and 
the  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then  let  him  grasp  the  way  of  practising, 
both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order,  the  meditation 
on  pity  for  all  beings  that  live  in  the  world,  in  the  eastern  quarter. 
After  the  eastern  quarter,  let  him  practise  both  m  the  way  of  right 
succession  and  in  reverse  order  the  meditation  on  pity  for  all  beings 
in  the  world,  spreading  it  abroad  in  the  ten  quarters,  to  wit,  the  western 
quarter,  the  southern  quarter,  the  northern  quarter,  or,  of  the  four 
intermediate  quarters,  to  the  N.W.,  the  N.E.,  the  S.W.,  and  S.E.,  and, 
as  upwards  there  is  nought  beyond  Mount  Meru,  Mandaro1  and  the 
rest,  even  as  far  as  the  zenith,2  or  downwards  to  the  nadir. 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  offerings  due  (let  him  say) : 


Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  liave  achieved  the  task  of  bodily 
control,  in  the  inmost  sbrine  of  my  being  I  shall  hold  fast,  of 


1  Mandaro:  the  western  mount  behind  which  the  sun  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  disappear. 

2  A  ]  a  t  a  k  a  s  o,  “  the  top  of  the  sky.” 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  107 

the  Four  Highest  States,  the  First  Jhana,  developed  in  the 
highest  state  of  pity  for  all  beings,  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  .  may  perception  of  the  mental  states  appear  j 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preparation,  “  May  I  get  free  !  May  I 
get  free  !”] 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  achieved  the  task  of  bodily 
control,  I  shall  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  .  .  .  the 
Second  Jhana  .  .  .  appear ! 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Third  Jhana  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Fourth  Jhana  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  appear ! 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Fourth  Jhana  .  .  . 
in  reverse  order  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Third  Jhana  .  .  .  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  appear ! 

[77]  Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Second  Jhana 
...  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  First  Jhana  ...  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  appear  ! 

3.  SYMPATHETIC  JOY. 

After  pity  for  all  beings,  of  the  Four  Highest  States,  let  him 
who  would  practise  them  aspire  to  attain  sympathy1  with  all  beings. 
When  he  has  without  fail  performed  .  .  .  observing  perception  of  the 
mental  states  .  .  .  practise  them  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession 
and  in  reverse  order. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the 
First  Jhana,  of  the  Four  Highest  States,  I  shall  hold  fast,  in 

1  M  udit  a,  or  sympathetic  joy,  just  as  Kar  u  n  a  (No.  2)  is  pity 
for  others’  woes. 


108 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  sympathy  with  all  beings  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  the  preparation,  “  May  I  not  cease  ! 
May  I  not  cease  !”] 

Thus  meditating  and  observing  perception  of  the  mental  states, 
which  is  like  a  blue  light,  let  him  place  it  in  the  navel  and  then  practise 
it  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  meditating  and  developing  the  three  thought-forms  in  the 
element  of  extension,  let  him  place  them  in  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Second  Jhana  .  .  . 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  developing  the  three  thought -forms  in 
the  element  of  heat,  let  him  place  them  about  an  inch  above  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Third  Jhana  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring,  and  developing  the  three  thought-forms  in 
the  element  of  mobility,  let  him  place  them  about  an  inch  to  the  right 
of  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Fourth  Jhana  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  developing  the  three  thought-forms  in 
the  element  of  space  let  him  place  them  about  an  inch  below  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  ...  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring,  let  him  place  the  three  thought-forms  of 
the  element  of  space  on  the  left  side  about  an  inch  from  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  appear! 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  109 

[78]  Thus  earnestly  aspiring  .  .  .  thought-forms  in  reverse  order, 
where  they  were  well  observed  in  the  way  of  right  succession  on  the 
left  side  of  the  navel. 

{And  so  on  with  the  other  Four  Jhanas  in  reverse  order.) 

Next  let  him  grasp  the  way  of  well  observing  the  elements  both  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order.  Then  in  order  due 
let  him  practise  them  as  was  said  of  the  Four  Highest  States,  of  that 
of  pity  for  all  beings. 

Index  to  all  these  varieties  follows.  {So  P.T.S.  text.  Cf-  above,  p.  97  /•) 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  ...  he  who  would  develop 
the  Four  Highest  States  should  aspire  for  the  meditation  on  sympathy 
with  all  beings. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  ...  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  of 
the  Four  Highest  States,  for  the  state  of  sympathy  with  all 
beings. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  be  it  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preparation,  “  May  I  not  cease  !  May 
I  not  cease  !”] 

Thus  meditating,  keen  and  alert  in  mind,  the  element  of  cohesion 
appears  to  him.  Well  observing  its  three  thought-forms,  let  him  place 
them  in  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  I  shall  attain 
in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  of  the  Four  Highest  States, 
to  the  state  of  sympathy  with  all  beings  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  .  appear ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  well  observing  ...  in  the  element  of 
cohesion  ...  let  him  place  them  in  the  navel. 

Give  leave!  I  earnestly  ask  .  .  .  sympathy  with  all  beings. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preparation,  “  May  I  not  cease  !”] 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to  him. 
Well  observing  its  three  thought-forms  .  .  .  spreading  abroad  towards 
the  eastern  quarter,  of  the  ten  directions,  and  developing  them  in  the 


110 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

ten  thousand  world-systems  and  the  countless  world-systems,  the 
billion  world-systems  and  the  countless  world-systems,  let  him  place 
them  upwards  in  the  way  of  right  succession  on  the  summit  of  Mount 
Meru. 

[79]  Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  .  .  .  the 
First  Jhana  developed  on  sympathy  with  all  beings  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  ...  in  the  element  of  cohesion  .  .  . 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter  .  .  .  seven 
beings.  44  Never  may  they  cease  from  the  fortune  they  have 
won  !  Never  may  they  cease  from  the  honour  they  have 
won  !  Never  may  they  cease  from  the  praise  they  have  won  ! 
Never  may  they  cease  from  the  bliss  they  have  won  !  Never 
may  I  cease  !  Never  may  I  cease  !” 

Starting  from  the  head,  till  he  reach  the  ten  thousand 
world-systems  (let  him  repeat):  44  May  all  beings  never  cease, 
never  cease  !” 

Starting  from  the  ten  thousand  world-systems,  till  he  reach 
the  billion  world-systems  (let  him  repeat):  44  May  all  beings 
never  cease  !  May  all  beings  never  cease  !  May  all  beings 
never  cease  !” 

Starting  from  the  billion  world-systems  till  he  reach  the 
countless  world-systems  (let  him  repeat):  44  May  they  never 
cease  !  May  they  never  cease  !  May  they  never  cease  !” 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  .  .  .  the  Second 
Jhana  developed  on  sympathy  with  all  beings  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms 
of  the  element  of  heat: 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter  .  .  . 
4 4  beings  !”  44  May  all  beings  never  cease !”  .  .  .  44  Never 

may  I  cease  !” 

Starting  from  the  head  .  .  .  “  Never  cease  !  never  cease  ! 
never  cease  !” 

Starting  bom  the  ten  thousand  world-systems  ...  44  Never 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  111 

cease  !  never  cease  !  never  cease  from  the  fortune  they  have 
won  !” 

Starting  from  the  billion  world-systems  .  .  .  “  Never  cease  ! 
never  cease  !” 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Third  Jhana  .  .  .  sympathy  with  all 
beings  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  element  of  extension  .  .  . 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter  .  .  . 
“  Never  may  I  cease  !” 

Starting  from  the  head  .  .  .  “  Never  may  they  cease  1” 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  Fourth  Jhana  ...  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  element  of  mobility  .  .  . 

\ 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  .  “  Never  may  they 
cease  from  the  fortune  they  have  won  !” 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  Fifth  Jhana  ...  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear ! 

Having  placed  the  three  thought-forms,  thus  observed,  about  an 
inch  above  the  navel,  let  him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned 
about  an  inch  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then  let  him  squat 
down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  Third  Jhana  developed 
in  love  for  all  beings  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  appear  ! 


1.  LOVE. 

[80]  Well  observing  the  three  thought-forms  in  the  element  of 
cohesion,  which  were  fixed  in  love  for  all  beings  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  in  the  countless  world-systems  : 

When  he  has  developed  the  twenty  ecstasies  (as  on  p.  97  f.) 
.  .  .  “  May  I  be  happy!”  (twice). 

Again  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  “  beings  !  beings  !  beings  !” 

Approaching  the  countless  world-systems  .  .  .  “  happy  l” 
(thrice). 


112 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Approaching  the  ten  thousand  world-systems  .  .  .  “  May 
they  be  happy  !”  {thrice). 

Approaching  the  inner  place  .  .  .  “  May  I  be  happy  !” 
(thrice). 

Fixing  the  three  thought-forms  in  reverse  order  about  an  inch  to  the 
right  of  the  navel,  let  him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned 
.  .  .  squat  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  .  .  .  the  Fourth 
Jhana  on  the  highest  state  of  love  for  all  beings  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  may  perception  of  the  mental  states  appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  spreading  abroad  love  for  all  beings 
through  the  countless  world- systems,  when  he  has  developed  the  three 
thought-forms  in  the  element  of  mobility: 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  .  “  May  I  be  happy !” 
{thrice). 

Again  in  reverse  order,  while  approaching,  let  him  repeat: 

Beings  !  beings  !  beings !”  .  .  .  etc.  .  .  . 

At  the  time  of  approaching  the  inner  place  .  .  .  “  May  I 
be  happy  !” 

Well  observing  the  three  thought-forms  in  the  element  of  space, 
that  were  fixed  before,  and  spreading  abroad  love  for  all  beings  through 
the  countless  world-systems: 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  .  “  May  I  be  blissful !” 
{thrice). 

Again  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  approaching  the  inner  place 
(a  nto)  let  him  repeat:  “  May  I  be  happy  !  May  I  be  happy  ! 
May  I  be  happy  !” 

Fixing  well  the  three  thought-forms,  that  were  fixed  in  reverse 
order,  about  an  inch  to  the  left  of  the  navel  .  .  .  let  him  go  on  medi¬ 
tating  till  the  taper  .  .  .  falls  down. 

Then  for  the  heart:  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms  of  the 
element  of  extension,  well  fixed  before,  and  spreading  abroad  love  for 
all  beings  through  the  countless  world-systems,  when  he  has  placed 
them  in  the  navel,  let  him  .  .  .  falls  down. 

Then  let  him  know  the  way  of  practising  the  meditation  of  love  for 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  113 

all  beings  that  live  in  the  eastern  quarter,  both  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  and  in  reverse  order. 

[81]  After  the  eastern  quarter  let  him  practise  .  .  . 

As  there  is  nothing  beyond  it  (p.  106)  .  .  . 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  .  .  .  (let  him  say): 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  medi¬ 
tation  on  the  task  of  bodily  control,  I  shall  attain  the  First 
Jhana  developed  in  love  for  all  beings  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  .  may  perception  of  the  mental  states  appear  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  “  May  I  be  happy  !  May  I  be  happy  ! 
May  I  be  happy  !”] 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  Second  Jhana  in  the  way 
of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Third  Jhana  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  !  ( the  element  of  cohe¬ 
sion)  . 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Fourth  Jhana  in 
the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  !  (the  element  of 
mobility) . 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  the  way 
of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  !  (the  element  of  space). 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  appear!  (the  element  of  space) . 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Fourth  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  appear!  (the  element  of  mobility) . 

Give  leave  !  AVhen  I  have  .  .  .  the  Third  Jhana  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  appear  !  (the  element  of  cohesion) . 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Second  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  appear!  (the  element  of  heat) . 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  First  Jhana  in  reverse 
order  .  .  .  appear  !  (the  element  of  extension). 


2.  PITY. 

[82]  After  the  meditation  on  love  for  all  beings,  which  is 
one  of  the  Four  Highest  States,  when  he  has  without  fail 

.  8 


114 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

let  him  aspire,  of  the  Four  Highest  States,  to  attain  the 
highest  state  of  pity  for  all  beings,  and,  observing  the  per¬ 
ception  of  the  mental  states,  let  him  practise  it,  both  in  the 
way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  .  .  .  fulfil  ( as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  W  hen  I  have  attained  in  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  being  the  First  Jhana,  I  shall  hold  fast, 
of  the  Four  Highest  States,  the  highest  state  of  pity  for  all 
beings  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  perception  of  the 
mental  states  .  .  .  appear  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preparation,  “  May  I  be  freed !”  (twice).] 

Thus  meditating,  let  him  develop  and  observe  the  perception  of  the 
mental  states  that  is  like  unto  a  torch-light,  and  then  go  on  meditating, 
and  fix  in  the  middle  of  the  navel  the  element  of  heat  which  was  de¬ 
veloped  in  pity  for  all  beings.  Then  taking  the  three  thought-forms 
of  the  element  of  extension  from  the  tip  of  the  nose,  let  him  place  them 

in  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Second  Jhana.  .  .  . 
appear ! 

When  he  has  thus  earnestly  aspired,  let  him  thoroughly  observe  the 
three  thought-forms  in  the  element  of  cohesion  and  place  them  about 
an  inch  above  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Third  Jliana  .  .  . 
appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  let  him  fix  the  element  of  mobility  on  the 
right  of  the  navel  about  an  inch  from  it. 

o 

Give  leave  !  WTien  I  have  attained  the  Fourth  Jhana  .  .  . 
appear  ! 

(  '  y  .  ■  ’ 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  let  him  well  observe  the  element  of  space 
and  place  it  about  an  inch  below  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Fifth  Jhana  .  .  . 
appear ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring,  let  him  place  the  same  element  of  space  on 
the  left,  about  an  inch  from  the  navel. 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  115 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Fifth  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  appear ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring,  let  him  place  the  element  of  space  in  reverse 
order  to  the  left  of  the  navel,  where  before  it  was  placed  in  the  way 
of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Fourth  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  let  him  place  the  element  of  mobility  in 
reverse  order  below  the  navel,  where  before  it  was  placed  in  the  way 
of  right  succession. 

[83]  Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Third  Jhana 
in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

The  element  of  cohesion  should  be  placed  on  the  right  of  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Second  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

The  element  of  extension  should  be  placed  above  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  First  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

The  element  of  heat  should  be  placed  in  the  navel. 


The  Order  Due. 

When  he  has  thus  fully  practised  the  Jhanas,  spreading  abroad  pity 
for  all  beings  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order; 
when  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  offerings  due  .  .  .  (let  him  say): 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

Give  leave  !  Give  leave  !  Entering  in  order  due  the  in¬ 
most  shrine  of  my  being,  when  I  have  attained,  of  the  Four 
Highest  States,  the  First  Jhana  developed  in  pity  for  all 
beings  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preparation,  “  May  I  get  free !  May  I 
get  free  !”] 


.  .  .  The  element  of  heat  .  .  . 


116  Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  Second  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  element  of  extension  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  Third  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  element  of  cohesion  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  Fourth  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  element  of  mobility  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  element  of  space  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  Second  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  element  of  cohesion  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  First  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  element  of  heat  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  element  of  heat  ... 

[84]  Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  Second  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
.  .  .  The  element  of  extension  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  element  of  space  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  Fourth  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  element  of  mobility  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  Third  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  element  of  cohesion  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  Second  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  element  of  extension  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  element  of  heat  .  .  . 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  117 


The  Grasping  op  the  Six  Words. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done  the 
offerings  due  (let  him  say): 

t  Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Having  meditated  on  the  six  words  in  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  being  I  shall  hold  fast  the  First  Jhana  in 
the  way  of  right  succession,  developed  in  pity  for  all  beings, 
of  the  Four  Highest  States  .  .  .  appear  !  (as  on  p.  95). 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  element  of  heat.] 

(Then  follows  the  paragraph  marked  omitting  “  He  sits 
down"  .  .  .  repeated  as  follows:) 

Having  attained  the  Second  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  .  the  element  of  extension  .  .  . 

Having  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  .  element  of  heat  .  .  . 

Having  attained  the  Second  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  .  element  of  extension  .  .  . 

Having  attained  the  Third  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  .  element  of  cohesion  .  .  . 

Having  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  .  element  of  heat  .  .  . 

Having  attained  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  .  the  element  of  heat  .  .  . 

Having  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  .  element  of  heat  .  .  . 

Having  attained  the  Fourth  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  .  element  of  mobility  .  .  . 

Having  attained  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  .  element  of  space  .  .  . 

Having  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  .  element  of  heat  .  .  .  reverse  order  .  . 

Having  attained  the  First  Jhana  .  .  .  (no  element  men¬ 
tioned). 

Having  attained  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  reverse  order  (no 
element). 


118  Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Having  attained  tlie  Fourth  Jhana  in  reverse  order  (no 
element). 

Having  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  (no 
element). 

Having  attained  the  Fourth  Jhana  in  reverse  order  (no 
element). 

Having  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  (no 
element). 

Having  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  (no 
element). 

Having  attained  the  Third  Jhana  in  reverse  order  (no 
element). 

Having  attained  the  Second  Jhana  in  reverse  order  (no 
element). 

Having  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  (no 
element). 

[85]  Having  attained  the  Second  Jhana  in  reverse  order 
(no  element). 

Having  attained  the  Second  Jhana  in  reverse  order  (no 
element). 

Having  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  (no 
element). 


The  Span. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done  the 
offerings  due  (let  him  say) : 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

1  Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  span  I  shall  hold  fast  in 
the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  the  Second  Jhana  developed 
in  the  state  of  pity  for  all  beings,  of  the  Four  Highest  States. 

.  .  .  When  I  have  .  .  .  the  Third  Jhana,  the  Fifth  Jhana 
in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preparation,  “  May  I  get  free  !  May 
I  get  free  !”] 


( Then  the  second  paragraph  marked  f  repeated  with  :) 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  119 

.  .  The  First  Jhana,  the  Fourth  Jhana  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  .  .  . 

The  Fourth  Jhana,  the  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
.  .  The  Fifth  Jhana,  the  Third  Jhana,  the  Second  Jhana 
in  reverse  order  ... 


The  Fourfold  System. 

Hereafter  let  him  practise  from  the  Group  of  Elements  and  so  on  up 
to  the  Lasting  of  the  Law,  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in 
reverse  order,  as  said  above  concerning  the  highest  state  of  love  foi 
all  beings. 

Then  let  him  well  observe  the  Eirst  Jliana,  with  the  element  of 
cohesion,  then  the  Second  Jhana  with  the  element  of  extension,  then 
the  Third  Jhana  with  the  element  of  heat,  then  the  Fourth  Jhana  with 
the  element  of  mobility,  then  the  Fifth  Jhana  with  the  element  of 
space,  developed  in  sympathy  wTith  all  beings. 


The  Fivefold  System. 

When  he  has  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  the  element  of  cohesion 
.  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  the  element  of  space  developed  in  the  highest 
state  of  sympathy  with  all  beings. 

(The  same  sentence  for  each  of  the  three  following  :) 

The  Heart. 

[86]  Mental  Balance. 

The  Lasting  of  the  Law. 


Offering  of  Wax-Tapers. 

He  who  would  develop  the  meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States, 
when  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  offerings  due,  should  aspire  for  the 
highest  state  of  pity  for  all  beings,  and  practise  it. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being 
the  mark  of  upholding,  the  image  of  the  mark,  the  way  to 


120 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

the  access  and  to  ecstatic  concentration  and,  of  the  Four 
Highest  States,  the  highest  state  of  pity  for  all  beings. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preparation,  “  May  I  get  free  !  May  I 
get  free  !”] 

Thus  meditating,  keen  and  alert  in  mind,  the  element  of  heat  appears 
to  him.  Fixing  its  access  and  preamble  carefully  in  the  navel,  let 
him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  two  inches  and 
the  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then  let  him  squat  down  (and  say): 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  I  shall  hold 
fast,  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  of  the  Four  Highest 
States,  the  highest  state  of  pity  for  all  beings  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring,  let  him  fix  the  three  thought-forms  in  the 
element  of  heat  and  go  on  meditating  till  the  .  .  .  falls  down.  Then, 
in  the  same  attitude  for  the  heart,  let  him  go  on  meditating,  having 
fixed  the  same  element  in  the  navel,  until  the  taper  has  burned  about 
an  inch  and  the  candle-stick  falls  down.  Then  also  for  the  mental 
balance,  having  fixed  the  same  element  of  heat  in  the  same  place,  let 
him  go  on  meditating  till  the  taper  has  burned  about  an  inch  and  the 
candle-stick  falls  down. 


3.  SYMPATHETIC  JOY. 

Well  observing  the  three  thought -forms  developed  in  the  element 
of  space: 

When  he  has  developed  the  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter 
.  .  .  the  seven  human  beings  .  .  A 

“  May  all  beings  never  cease  from  the  fortune  they  have 
won  !” 

cc  Never  may  they  cease  from  the  honour  they  have  won  !” 

“  Never  may  they  cease  from  the  praise  that  they  have 
won !” 

££  Never  may  they  cease  !  Never  may  they  cease  !  Never 
may  they  cease  !” 

Starting  from  the  head,  till  he  reach  the  ten  thousand 
world-systems  (let  him  repeat :) ££  May  all  beings  never  cease  !” 


1  See  text,  p.  69  (trails.,  p.  97). 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  121 

[87]  Starting  from  the  ten  thousand  world-systems  till  lie 
reach  the  billion  world-systems  (let  him  repeat) :  “  May  all 
beings  never  cease  !” 

For  the  meditation  on  the  heart  and  mental  balance,  let  him  go  on 
meditating,  developing  the  three  thought-forms  of  the  element  of 
cohesion  from  the  head  onwards  up  to  the  countless  world-systems, 
which  were  well  observed  in  the  sympathy  with  all  beings. 

The  way  of  practising  in  reverse  order  is  thus : 

Let  him  well  observe  the  access  and  preamble  of  the  element  of 
cohesion,  just  as  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  I  shall  hold  fast 
in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  the  First  Jhana  in  reverse 
order,  developed  in  the  highest  state  of  sympathy  with  all 
beings. 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms 
of  the  element  of  cohesion: 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter  .  .  . 

“  May  I  never  cease  !  May  I  never  cease  !  May  I  never 
cease  !” 

Again  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  ten  thousand  world-systems  .  .  .  “  May 
all  beings  never  cease  .  .  .  !” 

From  the  head  to  the  navel:  “  May  I  never  cease  !”  {thrice). 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Second  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms 
of  the  element  of  extension  .  .  . 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter  .  .  .  “  May 
I  never  cease  !” 

Again  in  reverse  order  {as  on  p.  104)  with  “  May  they 
never  cease  !*? 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Third  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms 
of  the  element  of  heat  .  .  . 


122 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter  .  .  . 

“  Never  may  they  cease  !” 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Fourth  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  developing  the  three  thought-forms  of 
the  element  of  mobility  .  .  . 

When  I  have  developed  the  twenty  ecstasies  .  .  .  (p.  98). 
Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Fifth  Jhana  .  .  . 
in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  .  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion.  .  .  .  For  the 
meditation  on  the  heart  and  the  mental  balance,  let  him  carefully  fix 
the  three  thought-forms  of  the  element  of  cohesion  in  the  navel  and 
go  on  meditating. 

After  the  eastern  quarter  let  him  practise  both  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  and  in  reverse  order  the  meditation  on  the  highest  state 
of  pity  for  all  beings  in  the  world,  spreading  it  abroad  in  the  ten  quarters, 
to  wit,  the  western  quarter,  the  southern  quarter,  the  northern  quarter, 
[88]  the  four  intermediate  quarters,  the  N.W.,  the  N.E.,  the  S.W., 
the  S.E.,  and,  as  upwards  there  is  nought  beyond  Mount  Meru,  Man- 
daro,  and  the  rest;  likewise  as  there  is  nothing  from  below  upwards, 
even  as  far  as  the  zenith,  or  downwards  as  far  as  the  nadir  :  (p.  106) 
When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  offerings  due  (let  him  say): 

f  Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being 
attained  the  task  of  bodily  control  I  shall  hold  fast  the  First 
Jhana  in  reverse  order,  developed,  as  to  the  Four  Highest 
States,  on  the  highest  state  of  sympathy  with  all  beings. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preparation,  “  May  I  never  cease  !  May 
I  never  cease  !”] 


(The  paragraph  f  with  :) 

.  .  .  The  Second  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
„  .  .  The  Third  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  Fourth  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
.  .  The  Fifth  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  123 

.  .  .  The  Fifth  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  Fourth  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  Third  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  Second  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 


4.  EQUANIMITY. 

He  who  would  practise  the  meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States, 
when  he  has  without  fail  performed  ...  let  him  aspire  to  the  highest 
state  of  equanimity,1  observing  the  perception  of  the  mental  states, 
.and  practise  it  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  I  shall  hold  fast  the  highest  state 
of  equanimity  to  all  beings  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
may  perception  of  the  mental  states  appear  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  “  May  I  know  the  law  !”]2 

Thus  meditating  and  well  observing  the  perception  of  the  mental 
states,  like  unto  a  torch-light,  let  him  carefully  place  the  three  thought- 
forms  of  the  element  of  extension  in  the  navel. 

[89]  Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  Second  Jhana  .  .  .  appear ! 

Thus  aspiring  let  him  carefully  place  the  three  thought-forms  of  the 
element  of  heat  about  an  inch  above  the  navel. 


1  Upekkha,  Compendium ,  p.  66  :  “  This  feeling  of  indifference 
is  fostered  by  the  balance  of  the  mind,  or  equanimity,  which  must  not 
be  confounded  with  U  pekkha,  the  neutral  aspect  of  feeling  or  zero- 
point  between  pain  and  pleasure.” 

2  Dhammassa  kho  homi  in  text.  In  MS.  dhamma.  See 
above,  text,  p.  68,  where  also  the  text  has  kammassa  kho  (?for 
kammassako).  But  see  Buddhist  Psychology ,  p.  356,  n.  3.  Sa- 
k  a  m  means  “  one’s  own.”  Does  the  phrase  here  mean  “  May  I  meet 
my  deserts  ”  ?,  and  above,  “  May  I  experience  the  law  ”?,  or  “  Know 
the  law  ”  (my  d  h  a  r  m  a,  as  a  Hindu  would  say)? 


124  Manual  of  a  Mystic 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Third  Jhana.  .  .  . 
appear ! 

Thus  aspiring  let  him  place  the  three  thought-forms  of  the  element 
of  cohesion  on  the  right  side  about  an  inch  from  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Fourth  Jhana  .  .  . 
appear  ! 

Thus  aspiring  let  him  carefully  place  the  three  thought-forms  of  the 
element  of  space  about  an  inch  below  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Fifth  Jhana  .  .  . 
appear  ! 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  element  of  space  on  the  left  about  an  inch  from 
the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Fifth  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  element  of  space  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Fourth  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  aspiring  the  element  of  cohesion  .  .  .  about  an  inch  below 
the  navel. 

* 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Third  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  element  of  heat  on  the  right  side,  about  an  inch 
from  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  Second  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  the  element  of  extension  .  .  .  above  the  navel  in 
reverse  order  where  before  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession. 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  First  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  the  element  of  mobility  ...  in  the  navel. 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  125 

Then  let  him  master  the  way  of  observing  the  elements  as  regards 
equanimity  to  all  beings;  also  let  him  practise  it  both  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  and  in  reverse  order,  developing  it,  as  said  above 
about  the  highest  state  of  love  to  all  beings. 

The  fivefold  way.  Regarding  pity  for  all  beings  .  .  .  when 
he  has  attained  the  First  Jhana  .  .  .  the  element  of  heat  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  Second  Jhana  .  .  .  the  element  of  extension  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  Third  Jhana  .  .  .  the  element  of  cohesion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  Fourth  Jhana  .  .  .  the  element  of  mobility  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  Fifth  Jhana  .  .  .  the  element  of  space  .  .  . 

The  heart.  Regarding  pity  for  all  beings  .  .  . 

When  he  has  attained  the  First  Jhana,  let  him  observe  the 
element  of  heat. 

.  .  .  The  Second  Jhana  .  .  .  element  of  extension  ... 

.  .  .  The  Third  Jhana  .  .  .  element  of  cohesion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  Fourth  Jhana  .  .  .  the  element  of  mobility  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  Fifth  Jhana  .  .  .  the  element  of  space  .  .  . 

[90]  The  mental  balance  ( the  same  as  the  fivefold  way). 

The  mental  balance  (repeated). 

He  who  would  develop  the  meditation  on  the  highest  states  .  .  . 
when  he  has  without  fail  performed  ...  let  him  aspire  to  equa¬ 
nimity  to  all  beings,  and  practise  it. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  acquire,  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being, 
the  mark  of  upholding,  the  image  of  the  mark,  the  way  to, 
the  access,  to  ecstatic  concentration,  and,  of  the  Four  Highest 
States,  the  highest  state  of  equanimity  to  all  beings. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  be  it  for  Nibbana’s  sake. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  “  May  I  know  the  law  !  May  I  know 
the  law !”] 

Tlius  meditating,  the  element  of  mobility  appears  to  him.  Let 
him  fix  its  access  and  preamble  in  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  I  shall  hold  fast 
in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  the  First  Jhana  developed 


126 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

in  equanimity  to  all  beings  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  . 
may  perception  of  the  mental  states  appear  ! 

Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms 
of  the  element  of  mobility,  let  him  place  them  in  the  navel. 

For  the  heart  and  mental  balance,  let  him  fix  in  the  navel  the  three 
thought-forms  of  the  element  of  mobility,  which  before  were  developed 
in  equanimity  to  all  beings. 

The  way  of  practising  it  in  reverse  order  is  the  same  as  the  way  of 
right  succession;  let  him  also  well  fix  the  three  thought-forms  of  the 
element  of  mobility  in  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

*  a  v 

Thus  aspiring  let  him  place  the  same  three  thought-forms  in  reverse 
order,  where  before  they  were  placed  in  the  way  of  right  succession. 

He  who  would  attain  the  meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States 
.  .  .  when  he  has  without  fail  ...  let  him  aspire  for  equanimity  to 
all  beings  and  spread  it  abroad  in  all  ten  quarters  of  the  universe. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  .  .  .  “  May  I  know  the  law  !” 

Thus  meditating,  the  element  of  mobility  appears  to  him.  Well 
observing  its  access  and  preamble,  facing  the  eastern  quarter  just  as 
said  above. 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  I  shall  hold  fast 
in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  the  First  Jhana  in  the  way 
of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

[91]  Thus  earnestly  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought- 
forms  in  the  element  of  mobility: 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter  .  .  . 
approaching  the  countless  world-systems  let  him  repeat: 
“  May  all  be  knowers  of  the  law  !  May  all  be  knowers  of 
the  law  !  May  all  be  knowers  of  the  law  !” 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  the  wax-taper  light  .  .  .  the 
Second  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

Thus  aspiring  .  .  .  the  three  thought-forms  in  the  element  of 
extension. 


Meditation  on  the  Four  Highest  States  127 

Developing  tlie  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter  let  turn 
repeat:  “  May  all  be  knowers  of  tbe  law  !” 

The  Third  Jhana  .  .  .  element  of  heat  ...  in  one  quarter  .  .  . 

.  The  Fourth  Jhana  .  .  .  element  of  cohesion  ...  in  one  quar¬ 
ter  .  .  . 

The  Fifth  Jhana  .  .  .  element  of  space  .  .  .  in  one  quarter  .  .  . 

For  the  heart  and  the  mental  balance,  well  observing  the  three 
thought-forms  of  the  element  of  mobility  developed  in  equanimity 

to  all  beings,  let  him  go  on  meditating. 

The  way  of  practising  in  reverse  order  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 
way  of  right  succession,  namely:  let  him  place  the  three  thought-forms 
of  the  element  of  mobility  in  reverse  order  above  the  navel,  as  in  the 
way  of  right  succession. 

Give  leave !  Meditating  on  the  First  Jhana  ...  in 
reverse  order  .  .  .  appear ! 

Thus  aspiring  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms  in  the 
element  of  mobility: 

Developing  the  twenty  ecstasies  in  one  quarter  .  .  .  etc. 

.  .  .  from  the  head  let  him  repeat,  “  May  I  have  my  deserts  ! 
May  I  have  my  deserts  !”  till  he  reach  the  navel. 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  the  Second  Jhana  .  .  .  element  of  cohe¬ 
sion  ...  in  one  quarter  .  .  . 

.  .  Third  Jhana  .  .  .  element  of  heat  ...  in  one  quar¬ 
ter  .  .  . 

...  Fourth  Jhana  .  .  .  element  of  cohesion  ...  in  one 
quarter  .  .  . 

Fifth  Jhana  .  .  .  element  of  space  ...  in  one  quar¬ 
ter  .  .  . 

For  the  heart  and  the  mental  balance,  well  observing  the  three 
thought-forms  of  the  element  of  mobility,  let  him  place  them  in  the 

navel. 

Thus  ends  the  way  of  observing  the  eastern  quarter  both  in  the  way 
of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 

# 

After  the  eastern  quarter  let  him  practise  both  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  and  in  reverse  order  the  meditation  on  the  highest  state 
of  pity  for  all  beings  in  the  world,  spreading  it  abroad  in  the  ten  quar¬ 
ters,  to  wit,  the  western  quarter,  the  southern  quarter,  the  northern 


128  Manual  of  a  Mystic 

•quarter,  and  the  four  intermediate  quarters,  the  N.W.,  the  N.E.,  the 
♦S.W.,  the  S.E.,  and,  as  upwards  there  is  nought  beyond  Mount  Meru, 
Mandaro  and  the  rest,  and  likewise  as  there  is  nought  from  below 
[92]  upwards,  even  as  far  as  the  zenith  or  downwards  to  the  nadir: 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  Meditating  on  tlie  task  of  bodily  control  I 
shall  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  hold  fast  the  Jhana 
developed  in  equanimity  to  all  beings,  of  the  Four  Highest 
States,  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  “  May  I  have  my  deserts  !  May  I 
have  my  deserts  !”] 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Second  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  suc- 
•cession  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Third  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Fourth  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  suc¬ 
cession  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Fifth  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Fifth  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Fourth  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Third  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  Second  Jhana  in  reverse  order  . 

Give  leave  !  .  .  .  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  . 


THE  TEN  FORMS  OF  KNOWLEDGE 


1.  KNOWLEDGE  OE  CALM  AND  INSIGHT.1 

After  the  Four  Highest  States,  when  he  has  without  fail  performed 
the  first  duties  and  done  the  offerings  due,  let  him  aspire,  among  the 
ten  forms  of  knowledge,  to  that  of  calm  and  insight.2 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  in  tke  inmost  shrine  of  my  being 
the  mark  of  upholding,  the  image  of  the  mark,  the  way  to 
the  access,  the  way  to  ecstatic  concentration,  to  a  knowledge 
of  calm  and  insight,  in  the  ten  ways  of  knowledge. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  be  it  for  Nibbana’s  sake  ! 

\He  sits  down  .  .  .  preamble,  “  Impermanence  !  Suffer¬ 
ing  !  There  is  no  soul !  Impermanence  !  Suffering  !  There 
is  no  soul  !”] 

Thus  meditating,  keen  and  alert  in  mind,  with  Nibbana  for  his  goal, 
the  element  of  extension  appears  to  him.  Well  observing  its  three 
thought-forms,  let  him  place  them  first  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the 
navel. 

[93]  Then  let  him  practise  it  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and 
in  reverse  order,  as  was  said  of  the  earth-device. 


1  Insight  of  the  real  is  gained  by  realising  “  as  they  are  ”  the 
dreadfulness  and  disgusting  nature  of  all  conditioned  things,  to  which 
the  unenlightened  man  is  absolutely  blind.  “  Insight  of  ”  means  “  by 
means  of,  arising  from  ”  (see  p.  132). 

2  Samatha-dassana.  See  Budd.  Psych.,  pp.  25-95;  355. 
Compendium,  p.  57,  says:  “  Calm  is  so  called  because  it  puts  to  sleep, 
as  it  were,  or  lulls  the  Five  Hindrances  for  the  time  being.”  Of. 
p.  202,  n.  2:  kilese  samathetiti  samatho.  The  more 
usual  word  for  the  twin  term  is  Vipassand. 

1  129 


9 


130 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


2.  INSIGHT  INTO  THE  RISE  AND  FALL  OF  THINGS. 

Then  follows  the  insight  into  the  rise  and  fall. 

Before  the  existence  of  name  and  form  there  is  no  settling  in  one 
place  nor  any  moving  together  nor  collecting  together  of  things  that 
come  into  existence.  There  is  no  dispersion  to  the  ten  quarters  of 
perishable  things;  when  things  have  perished  there  is  no  more  any 
staying  gathered  in  one  place.  For  when  a  lute  is  played,  the  sound 
produced  neither  stays  in  one  place  nor  departs  from  one  place;  nor, 
on  its  dying  away,  does  it  go  elsewhere.  How  then  has  it  been  pro¬ 
duced  ?  Just  as,  owing  to  the  lute,  the  neck  of  the  lute  and  the 
necessary  effort  of  the  lute-player,  a  sound  not  in  existence  was  pro¬ 
duced  and  disappeared  again  after  its  appearance,  so  likewise  all  the 
conditions  of  name  and  form  from  formlessness  take  shape,  and  perish¬ 
ing  pass  away  again.  The  insight  by  which  this  way  is  grasped  is 
called  “the  insight  of  the  rise  and  fall  of  things.”  Yogis  who 
would  acquire  this  knowledge,  when  they  have  without  fail  .  .  .  aspire 
for  the  insight  into  the  rise  and  fall  of  things. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  in  tire  inmost  slirine  of  my  being 
the  mark  of  upholding,  the  image  of  the  mark,  the  way  to 
the  access,  the  way  to  ecstatic  concentration,  and  the  insight 
into  the  rise  and  fall  of  things,  of  the  ten  ways  of  knowledge. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  be  it  for  Nibbana’s  sake  !. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preamble:  “  Impermanence,  suffering, 
there  is  no  soul  !"] 

Thus  meditating,  with  Nibbana  for  his  goal,  the  element  of  heat 
appears  to  him.  Well  observing  its  three  thought-forms,  let  him  place 
them  in  the  navel. 


3.  INSIGHT  INTO  DISRUPTION. 

Next  comes  the  practice  of  insight  into  disruption,  as  follows: 

Just  as  a  clear-sighted  man,  standing  on  a  river’s  bank  or  beside 
a  tank  and  seeing  the  heavy  rain  pour  down,  thus  concludes:  “  The 
bubbles  rise  and  burst  immediately,”  so  also  the  Yogi  concludes  that 
all  complexes  in  like  manner  are  broken  up.  The  insight  thus  prac¬ 
tised  is  called  the  insight  into  disruption. 

[941  When  he  has  without  fail  performed  ...  let  him  aspire  after 
the  insight  into  disruption. 


131 


The  Ten  Forms  of  Knowledge 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask,  of  the  ten  forms  of  knowledge,  to  attain 
the  insight  into  disruption. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s  sake ! 

[He  sits  down  ...  the  word  “  There  is  no  soul !”] 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to  him.  Well 
observing  its  three  thought-forms  let  him  place  them  in  the  navel. 


4.  INSIGHT  INTO  WHAT  IS  TO  BE  FEARED. 

Insight  into  what  is  to  be  feared  is  so  called  because,  to  him 
who  gives  himself  to  meditation,  seeing  the  fearfulness  of  all  condi¬ 
tioned  things,  all  aggregates  in  every  world,  every  sort  of  existence, 
every  seat  of  consciousness  and  every  abode  of  beings  seems  a  source 
of  fear,  just  like  lions,  tigers  and  devils  to  a  coward  who  desires  a 
happy  life. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  .  .  .  let  him  aspire  to  the 
insight  into  what  is  to  be  feared. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being 
the  insight  into  what  is  to  be  feared. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  . 


[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preparation,  “  Impermanence,  suffering, 
there  is  no  soul  T] 

Thus  meditating,  keen  and  alert  in  mind,  the  element  of  mobility 
appears  to  him.  Well  observing  its  three  thought-forms,  let  him  place 
them  first  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel.  Let  him  practise  them 
both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 


5.  INSIGHT  INTO  EVIL.1 

The  insight  into  evil  is  the  name  given  to  that  by  which  a  Yogi 
realises  the  evil  nature  of  all  conditions;  to  him  all  aggregates  appear 
like  a  forest  haunted  by  dangerous  wild  beasts;  like  lions,  tigers,  and  so 
forth;  like  a  tank  haunted  by  evil  water-sprites;  like  an  enemy  with 
drawn  sword  armed,  or  food  with  poison  mixed,  or  like  a  blazing  house. 

[95]  When  he  has  without  fail  ...  let  him  aspire  to  insight  into  evil. 


1  Or  tribulation ;  ad  in  a  v  a. 

\ 


132 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


6.  INSIGHT  OF  DISGUST. 

Insight  of  disgust  is  that  by  which  the  Yogi  conceives  disgust  of  all 
aggregates.  Just  as  a  golden  swan,  living  in  a  fair  pool  nigh  Splendid 
Spur,1  is  loath  to  dwell  in  the  filthy  muddy  pit  of  the  outcast,  so  also 
the  Yogi  is  altogether  disgusted  with  the  world  and  all  conditioned 
things.  When  he  has  without  fail  ...  let  him  aspire  to  the  insight 
by  disgust. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  his  teachings  to  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  .  .  .  the  insight  by  disgust  .  .  . 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  for  Nibbana’s  sake  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  Impermanence,  suffering,  there  is  no 
soul !”  (twice). \ 

Thus  meditating,  with  Nibbana  for  his  goal,  the  element  of  extension 
appears  to  him.  Well  observing  its  three  thought-forms,  let  him 
place  them  in  the  heart,  then  in  the  navel,  and  let  him  practise  them 
both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 


7.  INSIGHT  ARISING  FROM  DESIRE  FOR  FREEDOM. 

Desire  for  freedom  is  so  called  because  the  Yogi  longs  for  emanci¬ 
pation  from  the  world  and  all  conditioned  things.  [96]  Just  as  a  fish 
when  caught  desires  freedom  from  the  net,  as  a  frog  desires  freedom 
from  the  mouth  of  the  snake,  the  bird  from  its  cage,  and  the  snake 
from  the  bill  of  the  garuda  bird,  so  desires  he. 

When  he  has  without  fail  ...  let  him  aspire  for  insight  arising 
from  desire  for  freedom 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  his  teachings  to  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  for  .  .  .  the  insight  arising  from  desire  for 
freedom. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  . 

|  He  sits  down  .  .  .  “  There  is  no  soul !  There  is  no  soul  !”] 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him.  Well  observ¬ 
ing  its  three  thought-forms,  let  him  place  them  in  the  heart  and  then 
in  the  navel,  and  practise  them  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and 
in  reverse  order. 

1  This  is  Chitra-Kuta,  a  peak  of  Himalaya.  Cf.  Jdtaka,  ii, 
74,  123. 


The  Ten  Forms  of  Knowledge 


133 


8.  THE  INSIGHT  OF  REFLECTION.1 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  ...  let  him  aspire  for  the 
insight  arising  from  reflection. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  the  insight  arising  from  reflection. 

Nine  are  the  states  sublime  ...  for  Nibbana’s  sake  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  “  There  is  no  soul !  There  is  no  soul !”] 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to  him.  Well 
observing  its  three  thought-forms  let  him  place  them  in  the  heart  and 
then  in  the  navel,  and  practise  them  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession 
and  in  reverse  order. 


9.  INSIGHT  BY  CONTEMPLATION  OF  ALL  CONDITIONED 
THINGS  WITH  INDIFFERENCE. 


The  same. 


10.  INSIGHT  BY  CONTEMPLATION  OF  ADAPTATION. 

When  he  has  without  fail  .  .  .  offerings  due  (let  him  say) : 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  teachings  to  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  for  .  .  .  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being 
.  .  .  the  contemplation  on  adaptation,2  in  right  succession. 

[97]  Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s  sake ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preparation,  “  There  is  no  soul !  There 
is  no  soul !”] 

Thus  meditating,  with  Nibbana  for  his  goal,  the  element  of  space 
appears  to  him.  Well  observing  its  three  thought-forms,  let  him 
place  them  in  the  heart  and  then  in  the  navel.  Then  let  him  practise 
them  both  in  the  way  of  right  succession  and  in  reverse  order. 


1  Patisankhanupassana-nanam,  in  the  Compendium s 
p.  66 ;  “  Insight  of  re-contemplation.” 

2  See  Compendium,  p.  55.  “  The  moment  of  access  (upacara) 

is  followed  by  adaptation  (anuloma),”  the  moment  during  which  the 
mind  equips,  fits,  or  qualifies  itself  for  j  h  a  n  a.  Cf.  also  p.  66. 


134 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

When  he  has  without  fail  ...  let  the  Yogi  aspire  for  the  ten  ways 
of  insight  at  one  and  the  same  time. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  {as  above). 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  the 

inmost  shiine  of  my  being,  of  the  ten  ways  of  insight  I  shall 
attain : 

Calm  and  insight, 

Insight  of  the  rise  and  fall, 

Insight  of  disruption, 

Insight  of  the  fearful, 

Insight  of  evil, 

Insight  of  disgust, 

Insight  of  longing  for  freedom, 

Insight  of  reflection, 

Insight  of  contemplation  of  all  conditioned  things  with 
indifference, 

Insight  of  adaptation  ...  in  the  way  of  right  succes¬ 
sion  .  .  .  perception  of  mental  states  appear  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preparation,  “  There  is  no  soul !  There 
is  no  soul  !”] 


Thus  meditating  and  well  observing  the  three  thought-forms  of  the 
ten  ways  of  insight  in  order  due,  let  him  place  them  in  the  navel,  and 
do  likewise  with  the  thought-forms  of  the  Jhanas. 

Just  as  a  fisherman,  who  has  waded  into  the  water  and  with  his  hand 
has  caught  a  large  snake  by  the  head,  thinking  it  to  be  a  fish,  is  over¬ 
joyed  at  his  good  luck;  but,  on  pulling  it  out  of  the  water  and  seeing 
the  true  marks  of  the  snake  thereon,  is  frightened  and  realises  the 
danger  he  incurred  by  seizing  it,  and  is  utterly  repelled  thereby  r981 
as  he  plans  to  rid  himself  of  it,  lifts  up  his  hand  and  grasps  it  by  the 
tail  that  had  coiled  around  his  arm,  and  swings  it  round  his  head  to 
weary  it,  then  throws  it  far  away,  and  quickly  regains  the  land  and 
stands  upon  the  bank  gazing  on  the  way  he  took,  and  ponders  on  his 
escape  from  the  poisonous  thing,  even  so  at  first  the  Yogi’s  delight 
at  gaining  this  state  is  like  the  fisher’s  joy  at  catching  a  snake  in  the 
water,  m  mistaking  it  for  a  fish.  The  grasping  of  the  true  marks  of 

all  conditioned  things  is  like  the  grasping  of  the  true  characteristics 
ot  the  snake. 

Insight  into  the  fearful  is  just  like  the  fear  of  that  snake.  The 
realisation  of  the  danger  of  conditioned  things  is  like  the  danger  of 
catching  that  snake.  The  insight  of  desire  for  freedom  from  rebirth 


135 


The  Ten  Forms  of  Knowledge 

is  like  the  wish  to  be  rid  of  the  snake.  The  insight  of  planning  for 
freedom  is  like  the  planning  to  be  rid  of  the  snake. 

Just  as  a  cock’s  feather,  when  put  in  the  fire,  is  shrivelled  up  and 
never  bends  towards  the  fire,  so  does  the  Yogi  obtain  the  insight  by 
indifference  to  the  aggregates. 

Just  as  a  righteous  king,  after  hearing  the  decision  arrived  at  by  one 
and  all  of  eight  judges,  unmoved  by  partiality,  agrees  with  their  judg¬ 
ment  because  he  depends  on  their  unbiassed  decision  and  his  prede¬ 
cessors’  righteous  law,  so  also  the  insight  of  adaptation  approves  of 
the  decision  made  by  the  eight  insights  according  to  the  thirty-seven 
factors  of  knowledge.1 

After  the  insights  above  named,  when  he  has  without  fail  performed 
the  first  duties  and  done  the  offerings  due,  of  the  nine  states  sublime, 
let  him  aspire  for  the  initiation  of  entering  the  stream. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  his  teachings  to  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being 
the  mark  of  upholding,  the  image  of  the  mark,  the  way  of 
access,  the  way  of  ecstatic  concentration,  and,  of  the  four 
paths,  the  path  of  entering  the  stream. 

[99]  Nine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana’s  sake  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  preparation,  “  Impermanence,  suffer¬ 
ing,  there  is  no  soul  !”] 

Thus  meditating,  with  Nibbana  for  his  goal,  the  element  of  space 
appears  to  him.  Developing  therein  the  three  thought-forms  let  him 
carefully  place  them  in  the  middle  part  of  the  roof  of  the  mouth. 
When  he  has  performed  .  .  .  (let  him  say): 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  First  Jhana  in  the 
inmost  shrine  of  my  being,  of  the  four  paths  may  I  attain 
the  path  of  entering  the  stream  in  the  way  of  right  succession 
.  .  .  appear  ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  “  There  is  no  soul  P’] 

1  Bodhipakkhiya  sattatimsa  dhamma  are  the 
Four  Satipatth  ana’s,  the  Four  Sammappadhana’s, 
the  Four  Iddhipada’s,  the  Five  Indriya’s,  the  Five  Bala’s, 
the  Seven  Bojjhanga’s  and  the  Ariyo  Atthangiko 
Mag  go  (see  Dialogues  of  the  Buddha ,  ii,  129;  Vibhanga,  xv;  Com - 
pendium,  179  f. ;  3  ad  fin.,  etc.). 


136  Manual  of  a  Mystic 

When  I  have  attained  the  Second  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  . 

The  Third  Jliana  .  .  . 

The  Fourth  Jhana  .  .  . 

The  Fifth  Jhana  .  .  . 

Give  leave  !  Wien  I  have  attained  the  Fifth  Jhana  in 
reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  Fourth  Jhana  in  reverse  order 
.  .  .  The  Third  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 

.  .  .  The  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order 

(Tim  same  from  “  When  he  has  without  fail  ”...  Text, 

p.  98,  line  -  <  to  p.  99,  line  18,  for  “  Path  of  once  returning,  ” 
but  reading  :) 

.  .  .  The  element  of  heat.  Developing  therein  the  three  thought- 
forms,  let  him  place  them  carefully  in  the  middle  of  the  under-palate.1 
{The  same  for  “  The  path  of  no  return,”  with ;) 

.  .  .  The  element  of  cohesion,  developing  therein  the  three  thought  - 
forms  let  him  place  them  in  the  middle  of  the  heart,  adding  these  to 
the  five  elements  after  the  Five  Jhanas  in  reverse  order. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  done  the 
offerings  due,  let  him  aspire  to  the  Arahat’s  path. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  teachings  to  fulfil. 

I  earnestly  ask  to  attain  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being, 
of  the  four  paths,  the  Arahat’s  path. 

iSine  are  the  states  sublime  .  .  .  for  Nibbana  s  sake ! 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  “  Impermanence,  suffering,  there  is  no 
soul !  Impermanence,  suffering,  there  is  no  soul !”] 

[100]  Thus  meditating,  fixed  on  Nibbana  with  all  his  might,  the 
element  of  mobility  appears  to  him.  Developing  therein  the  three 
thought-forms  let  him  place  them  in  the  middle  of  the  navel. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  .  .  .  (let  him  say): 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  in  the  inmost  shrine  of 
my  being  the  First  Jhana,  I  shall  hold  fast  the  Arahat’s  path, 
of  the  four  paths,  in  the  way  of  right  succession  .  .  .  appear. 


1  ?  at  the  root  of  the  tongue. 


The  Ten  Forms  of  Knowledge  137 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .  Impermanence,  suffering,  there  is  no 
soul !”] 

When  he  has  attained  the  Second  Jhana  in  the  way  of 
right  succession  .  .  .  the  element  of  heat  .  .  . 

When  he  has  attained  the  Third  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  .  element  of  cohesion  .  .  . 

When  he  has  attained  the  Fourth  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right 
succession  .  .  .  the  element  of  mobility  .  .  . 

When  he  has  attained  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  the  way  of  right- 
succession  .  .  .  element  of  space  .  .  . 

When  he  has  attained  the  Fifth  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  . 
element  of  space  .  .  . 

WTien  he  has  attained  the  Fourth  Jhana  in  reverse  order 
.  .  .  vibration  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Third  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  cohesion  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Second  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  heat  .  .  . 

.  .  .  First  Jhana  in  reverse  order  .  .  .  element  of  exten¬ 
sion  .  .  . 

(The  same  for  “  The  fruits  of  entering  the  stream,”  reading  :) 

Thus  meditating,  fixed  on  Nibbana  with  all  his  might,  keen  and  alert 
in  mind,  the  element  of  extension  appears  to  him.  Developing  therein 
the  three  thought-forms  let  him  place  them  carefully  in  the  middle  of 
the  frontal  lobe  of  the  brain  (the  cranial  fissure  of  the  skull). 

(The  same  for  “  The  fruits  of  once  returning,”  reading  :) 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him.  Developing 
therein  the  three  thought-forms,  let  him  place  them  carefully  in  the 
middle  of  the  posterior  lobe  of  the  brain.1 

(The  same  for  “  The  fruits  of  no  return,”  reading  :) 

Thus  meditating,  with  all  his  might  fixed  on  Nibbana,  keen  and 
alert  in  mind,  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to  him.  [101]  De¬ 
veloping  therein  the  three  thought-forms  let  him  place  them  carefully 
between  the  eyebrows,  inside. 


1  The  hollow  wh  ere  the  spinal  column  joins  the  skull.  MS.  dahu  n  u 
w  ale  r  an  s  i  y  a,  “  edge  of  the  right-hand  pit  (called  ‘  lice-pit  ’).” 


138 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

{The  same  for  “  The  fruits  of  arahatship,”  reading  :) 

Thus  meditating,  paying  heed  to  the  taste  of  Nibbana  .  .  .  the 
element  of  mobility  appears  to  him.  Developing  therein  the  three 
thought-forms  let  him  place  them  between  the  nostrils. 

{The  same  for  “Nibbana,”  reading  :) 

Thus  meditating  .  .  .  the  element  of  space  appears  to  him.  De- 
T  eloping  therein  the  three  thought-forms  let  him  place  them  in  the 
middle  of  the  two  nostrils. 1 

{The  same  for  “  The  first  of  the  four  paths,”  reading  :) 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  extension  appears  to  him.  Develop¬ 
ing  therein  the  three  thought-forms  let  him  place  them  carefully  in  the 
middle  of  the  spine.2 

{The  same  for  “  The  second  of  the  four  paths,”  reading  :) 

0 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  heat  appears  to  him.  Developing 
therein  the  three  thought-forms  let  him  place  them  carefully  in  the 
middle  of  the  navel. 

(The  same  for  '  The  third  of  the  four  paths,”  reading  :) 

Thus  meditating  the  element  of  cohesion  appears  to  him.  Develop¬ 
ing  therein  the  three  thought-forms,  let  him  place  them  in  the  middle 
of  the  heart. 

{The  same  for  “  The  fourth  of  the  four  paths,”  reading  :) 

Thus  meditating,  penetrating  the  span  of  life  and  entering  the  thres 
hold  of  the  mind,  the  element  of  mobility  appears  to  him.  Developing 
theiein  the  three  thought-forms  let  him  place  them  carefully  in  the 
middle  of  the  tongue. 

When  he  has  without  fail  performed  the  first  duties  and  made  the 

offerings  due,  let  him  aspire  for  the  nine  states  sublime  at  one  and  the 
same  time. 

Give  leave  !  In  reverence  for  .  .  .  fulfil  (as  above). 

1  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  upper  or  lower  root  of  the  nose  is  meant, 
probably  the  lower. 

2  Which  part  of  the  spine  is  not  clear,  but  the  base  of  the  spine  is 
one  of  the  force-centres  in  Yoga.  Perhaps  that  part  which  is  in  a 
direct  line  with  the  navel  is  meant. 


The  Ten  Forms  of  Knowledge  139 

Give  leave  !  When  I  have  attained  the  First  Jhana  I  shall 
hold  fast  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  my  being  the  path  of  entering 
the  stream,  the  path  of  once  return  [102],  the  path  of  no 
return,  the  Arahat’s  path,  the  fruit  of  entering  the  stream, 
the  fruit  of  once-return,  the  path  of  no-return,  the  fruit  of 
Arahatship  and  the  perfect  peace  (Nibbdna),  the  first,  second, 
third,  and  fourth  in  the  way  of  right  succession  appear  to  me. 

[He  sits  down  .  .  .] 

Thus  meditating,  fixed  on  Nibbana  with  all  his  might,  keen  and 
alert  in  mind,  let  him  develop  and  well  observe  the  three  thought- 
forms  with  regard  to  the  nine  states  sublime,  and  withdrawing  them 
from  the  tip  of  the  nose  let  him  place  them,  as  said  above,  and  in  the 
same  way  as  in  the  Jhanas. 


Thus  ends  the  Brief  Compendium  of  Calm  and  Insight. 


140 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


By  the  merit  of  this  writing  I  approach  Metteyya.1  Fixing 
others  in  the  refuge,  on  the  law  I  take  my  stand. 

May  I  become  an  all-surpassing  Buddha. 

May  all  that  I  desire  be  accomplished. 

May  beauty  be  mine  and  health. 


The  End. 


1  Translated  “  him  who,  or  that  which  may  be  loved.”  These  two 
lines  are  in  Pali.  The  following  three  lines  are  in  Singhalese. — Ed. 


COPYIST’S  NOTE. 

In  the  year  2436  of  our  Buddha  era ,i  in  the  month  of  A  es  ala  ( June - 
July)  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  waxing  moon,  Tuesday ,  on  this  day  the  work 
was  finished  (a.d.  1893). 


1  Taking  the  year  543  b.c.  as  the  (orthodox  Buddhist)  date  of  the 
Parinibbana,  and  623  b.c.  as  the  date  of  birth  of  the  Buddha. 


APPENDIX 


I 


A 


i 


A  DHYANA1  BOOK 

By  D.  B.  Jayatilaka 

44  Some  time  ago,  while  our  esteemed  brother  Dhammapala 
was  making  a  tour  in  the  Central  Province,  he  came  to  hear 
of  a  Dhyana  book  in  an  ancient  temple,  known  as  Bambara- 
gala  Vikara,  about  sixteen  miles  from  Kandy.  It  was  also 
affirmed  that  this  book  contained  an  account  of  the  adepts 
who  resided  at  this  temple  and  acquired  4  iddhi  ’  powers. 
Mr.  Dhammapala,  naturally  anxious  to  get  the  manuscript, 
requested  the  present  writer  to  obtain  it  from  the  incumbent 
of  the  temple.  This  was  no  easy  matter.  For  it  is  next  to 
impossible  to  induce  a  priest  in  the  interior — however  ignorant 
he  may  be  of  its  value — to  part  with  a  single  palm-leaf  of  his 
unused  library,  unless  a  deal  of  external  pressure  is  brought 
to  bear  upon  him.  I  arranged,  therefore,  to  visit  the  temple 
at  the  latter  end  of  May,  with  a  gentleman2  who  commands 
much  influence  in  the  district  and  is  besides  well  known  to 
the  monk.  .  .  . 

44  Bambaragala,  as  the  name  signifies,  is  a  rock  of  huge 
dimensions.  On  one  side  of  it  the  temple  is  cut,  at  some 
considerable  height  from  the  base.  A  flight  of  steps  leads  up 
to  a  narrow  strip  of  open  space,  containing  at  one  end  the 
residence  of  the  bhikshus,  made  of  solid  rock,  and  at  the  other 
a  newly  built  vihara.  From  this  floor  a  second  flight  of 
steps,  rather  steep,  takes  the  pilgrim  into  the  courtyard 
where  the  temple  stands.  In  the  compound  there  are  a 
bo-tree  and  a  young  naga  plant  in  full  blossom,  filling  the 
air  with  the  sweet  fragrance  of  its  beautiful  flowers.  The 
temple  is  neither  large  nor  imposing.  The  walls  of  the  shrine- 
room  are,  nevertheless,  well  painted  with  various  figures  and 

1  Pali:  Jhana.  2  The  late  Mr.  T.  B.  Paranatella,  of  Kandy. 

v  143 


144 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

devices,  and  the  sedent  figure  of  the  Buddha  is  symmetrical 
and  expressive.  It  is  not  the  temple  itself,  however,  which 
centres  attraction.  There  is  an  indescribable  charm  of  calm 
repose  and  holiness  pervading  the  whole  place  and  throwing 
its  spell  at  once  over  the  visitor.  Placed  at  a  distance  from 
the  village,  the  premises  are  filled  with  a  deep  sense  of  silence, 
broken  only  by  the  occasional  note  of  a  bird  or  the  cheeping 
of  a  squirrel.  Trees,  plants,  and  bamboos  in  luxuriant  growth 
afford  a  welcome  shade  to  the  wearied  pilgrim  and  a  pleasant 
contrast  to  the  barren  wastes  lying  on  every  side.  The  verv 
breeze  which  sweeps  across  the  tremulous  atmosphere  of  the 
boiling  valley  below,  mellowed  on  its  approach  to  the  sacred 
precincts,  blows  fresh  and  cool. 

Bambaragala  is  indeed  a  fit  home  for  the  growth  of 
spiritual  culture.  It  is  one  of  those  delightful  spots,  often 
to  be  met  in  the  Up-country,  which  seem  to  invite  the  way¬ 
worn  pilgrim  of  life  from  the  haunts  and  cares  of  the  world 
to  the  sweet  repose  of  meditation  within.  .  .  .”1 

Twenty- four  years  after  making  this  trip  and  recording  my 
impressions,  an  English  version  of  my  treasure-trove  sees  the 
light.  The  editor  has  asked  me  for  a  brief  statement  of  my 
reasons  for  believing  the  original  to  have  been  compiled 
about  a  century  and  a  half  ago. 

The  Manual  of  a  Mystic,  translated  in  the  preceding 
pages,  gives  no  indication  as  to  the  date  of  its  composition. 
But  to  judge  from  its  Sinhalese  passages,  it  is  a  work  of  the 
eighteenth  century.  As  such,  it  affords  interesting  evidence 
of  one  phase  of  lehgious  activity,  resulting  from  the  reforming 
labours,  during  this  period,  of  Pindapatika  Saranankara,  the 
last  of  the  Sinhalese  Sangharajas. 

The  life  and  work  of  this  great  Reformer  are  scarcely  known 
outside  the  narrow  circle  of  Sinhalese  scholarship;  but  both 
are  of  a  character  deserving  of  wider  recognition.2  And 

1  From  the  Buddhist  (Ceylon),  vol.  iv..  No.  30  (July  30,  1892)  and 
No.  32  (August  12,  1892). 

A  sketch  of  the  Sangharaja  Saranahkara’s  life,  by  the  present 
writer,  appeared  in  the  Buddhist  in  1898-1900. 


Appendix 


145 


there  is  no  lack  of  material  either.  Contemporary  writers — 
chiefly  his  own  pupils  have  with  loving  care  preserved  for 
us  details  of  his  life  and  career,  so  that  we  are  enabled  to 
appreciate  the  loftiness  of  his  character  and  the  greatness  of 
his  achievement.  Among  these  contemporary  accounts  may 
be  mentioned  (1)  the  Sanghardja  Sadhucariyava,  by  Ginigat- 
pitiye  Sangharakkhita  Nayaka  Thera,  a  favourite  pupil;  (2)  the 
Syamopasampadavata,  by  Tibbotuvave  Maha  Nayaka  Thera, 
also  a  pupil  and  the  well-known  author  of  the  concluding 
chapters  of  the  Mahavamsa;  (3)  accounts1  of  the  embassies 
to  Siam  by  Vilbagedara  Mudiyanse  and  the  other  Sinhalese 
envoys,  (4)  the  Sangar cijavata  or  Gunaratnamdlaya ,2  by  the 
poet,  Munkotuve  It  ala ;  (5)  the  Kusalahriyanusandesaya ,3  by 
a  grandson  of  Vilbagedara  Mudiyanse.  The  Mahavamsa4 
itself  gives  much  information  as  regards  the  life  and  times  of 
the  Sangharaja, 

The  eighteenth  century,  which  witnessed  the  life-work 
of  Saranankara,  dawned  upon  a  scene  of  intellectual  and 
moral  desolation  in  Ceylon.  The  long  and  prosperous 
reign  of  Parakrama  Bahu  VI.  of  Kotte  (1410-1462)  was 
followed  by  a  period  of  internal  troubles,  which  greatly 
weakened  the  State.  Then  the  arrival  of  the  Portu¬ 
guese5  in  1505  opened  an  era  of  disaster,  which  cul¬ 
minated,  three  hundred  years  later,  in  the  final  extinction 
of  the  Sinhalese  kingdom,  after  an  existence  of  over 
twenty-three  centuries.  These  invaders  from  the  West  were 
utterly  ruthless  in  their  treatment  of  the  people,  and  their 
ferocity  was  equalled  by  their  fanaticism.  In  the  maritime 


1  See  Mr.  P.  E.  Pieris’s  paper  on  “  King  Kirti  Sri’s  Embassy  to  Siam  ” 
m  the  Journal  of  the  Ceylon  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  for  1903. 

2  British  Museum  MSS.,  Or.  6611  (48). 

3  British  Museum  MSS.,  Or.  2702  and  6606  (157).  The  former  is 
included  in  Mr.  Wickramasinghe’s  Catalogue,  where  it  is  styled  the 
Siyam  Sandesa  Varnana.  The  latter  is  in  the  Nevill  Collection,  and 
m  the  list  it  is  named  Kirti  Sri  Caritaya.  Both  these  titles  are  appro¬ 
priate  enough  for  the  subject-matter.  But  Kusalakriyanusandesaya 
is  the  designation  which  the  author  has  given  to  his  work. 

4  See  Wijesinha’s  translation,  chaps,  xcvii.-c. 

For  a  full  account  of  this  period  of  Ceylon  history  see  “  Ceylon: 
The  Portuguese  Era,”  by  P.  E.  Pieris,  M.A.,  C.C.S. 


10 


146 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

districts  which  fell  into  their  hands,  they  destroyed  every 
vestige  of  the  ancient  Sinhalese  civilization,  sacked  and 
pillaged  the  beautiful  temples  and  national  monuments  which 
studded  the  country,  and  passed  severe  laws  forbidding  the 
practice  of  the  Buddhist  faith.  The  religion  of  the  people 
fell  into  decay,  and  so  did  their  learning.  Even  in  the  Kand¬ 
yan  country,  where  the  Sinhalese  for  one  hundred  and  fifty 
years  defended  their  independence  against  the  incessant 
attacks  of  the  Portuguese,  things  were  in  no  better  condition. 
The  powerful  enemy  at  their  very  door  demanded  sleepless 
watchfulness  on  the  part  of  the  king  and  the  people,  and  their 
whole,  energy  was  bent  upon  the  huge  task  of  preserving  their 
national  existence.  The  practice  of  religion  was  neglected; 
the  Order  became  thoroughly  disorganized  and  demoralized, 
and  the  bhikshus — the  spiritual  leaders  of  the  people — lived 
in  slothful  licentiousness,  forgetful  of  their  sacred  calling. 
It  was  indeed  a  time  of  moral  and  intellectual  darkness.  But 
'  ven  as  the  gloom  seemed  to  have  settled  for  good  upon  the 
land,  there  arose  the  man  destined  to  rekindle  the  torch  of 
religion  and  learning  in  the  island. 

Saranankara  was  born  at  Valivita,  a  small  village  in  the 
Tumpane  district,  near  Kandy,  on  Sunday  the  7th  day  of  the 
month  of  Poson  (June- July),  of  the  Saka  year  1620,  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  year  1698  of  the  Christian  era.  He  belonged 
to  a  good  family  of  some  prominence,  his  father,  Kulatunga 
Mudiyanse,  and  a  brother  having  been  chiefs  of  districts. 
In  the  ordinary  course  of  things  Saranankara  himself  would 
have  entered  the  service  of  the  king;  but  from  his  childhood 
he  showed  no  love  for  worldly  matters.  In  his  sixteenth 
year  he  obtained  his  heart's  desire  by  entering  the  Order  as  a 
Samanera  (novice).  But  it  was  not  long  before  he  saw  the 
utterly  corrupt  state  of  the  Sangha  as  it  then  existed — the 
ignoble  lives  of  the  bhikshus,  engaged  in  low  worldly  pursuits, 
wearing,  as  a  contemporary  writer  puts  it,  the  yellow  robes  of 
the  arhats  (holy  ones)  like  apes  parading  in  the  garb  of  lions. 
Saranankara  deplored  the  ignorance  and  worse  than  moral 
stagnation  that  prevailed  around  him  both  in  the  Order  and 
outside  it,  and  young  as  he  was,  he  made  a  solemn  resolve  to 


Appendix  147 

dedicate  himself  to  the  task  of  reforming  the  Sangha  and 
restoring  the  national  faith  to  its  pristine  purity  and  vigour. 
How  he  set  about  this  huge  undertaking  by  mastering  the 
Dharma  by  self-study;  how  he  gathered  round  him  a  band 
of  devoted  pupils,  filled  with  the  same  enthusiasm  as  himself; 
how  they  travelled  throughout  the  country,  teaching  and 
preaching  to  the  people,  raising  them  from  the  depth  of 
ignorance  into  which  they  had  fallen;  how  they  repaired  the 
dilapidated  temples  in  all  parts  of  the  island  and  restored 
religious  practices;  how  they  revived  learning  and  produced 
work  after  work  of  great  value,  enriching  our  religious  and 
secular  literature;  how  these  labours  in  various  directions 
were  continued  with  unabating  zeal  for  quite  half  a  century 
in  the  teeth  of  tremendous  opposition  and  discouragements, 
until  complete  success  crowned  their  efforts — all  this  forms 
a  story,  almost  romantic  and  certainly  inspiring,  which 
cannot,  however,  be  told  at  length  here.  Still,  some  reference 
must  be  made  to  one  aspect  of  Saranarikara’s  manifold  labours, 
for  to  it  we  owe  this  Manual  of  Buddhist  jhana  practice. 

When  Saranankara  joined  the  Order,  it  had  fallen  so  low 
that  the  whole  island  could  not  muster  five  ordained  bhikshus. 
Early  in  his  career  he  realized  that  for  a  real  reform  of  the 
Sangha  a  proper  system  of  ordination  was  essential.  But 
where  were  the  bhikshus  to  be  found  necessary  for  this  im¬ 
portant  purpose  ?  The  occupation  of  the  coast  districts  by 
an  alien  enemy  had  for  more  than  two  centuries  cut  off  the 
Sinhalese  from  all  intercourse  with  the  world  outside.  It 
was,  therefore,  no  easy  matter  to  discover  where  Buddhism 
prevailed  in  a  pure  form.  After  careful  inquiries,  conducted 
under  great  difficulties  for  many  years,  it  was  decided  to 
obtain  bhikshus  from  Siam.  But  to  do  this  the  aid  of  the 
State  was  necessary.  Saranankara  appealed  to  the  king  for 
help,  but  without  success.  Narendra  Sinha,  who  was  then  on 
the  throne,  cared  little  for  such  things.  His  grand  father,. 
Rajasinha  II.  (1627-1679),  had  broken  the  power  of  the 
Portuguese,  and  with  the  aid  of  the  Dutch  driven  them  out 
of  Ceylon.  True  enough,  the  Dutch  remained  in  possession 
of  the  maritime  districts,  from  which  the  Portuguese  had 


148  Manual  of  a  Mystic 

just  been  ousted;  but  they  preferred  to  live  in  peace  with  the 
Sinhalese,  so  that  after  nearly  two  centuries  there  was  tran¬ 
quillity  in  the  country.  Narendra  Sinha  was,  however,  of 
too  easy-going  and  pleasure-loving  a  disposition  to  make  use 
of  this  respite  to  repair  the  shattered  foundations  of  his 
kingdom’s  prosperity.  His  long  reign  of  thirty-three  years 
(1701-1734)  was  little  more  than  a  blank.  He  was  succeeded 
by  his  brother-in-law,  Sri  Vijaya  Rajasinha  (1732-1745). 
Saranankara  appealed  to  him  also  for  help,  at  first  with  no 
better  success;  but  his  perseverance  at  last  prevailed,  and 
in  1743  the  king  undertook  to  send  an  embassy  to  Siam.  Two 
chiefs,  Vilbagedara  Mudiyanse  and  Doranagama  Mudiyanse, 
were  entrusted  with  the  mission.  The  latter  died  on  the  way 
out  in  Batavia.  Vilbagedara  reached  Ayodhya,  the  capital 
of  Siam,  where  he  was  received  with  honour  by  the  king, 
Dhammika,  who,  in  response  to  the  appeal  from  Ceylon, 
agreed  to  send  a  number  of  bhikshus  to  re-establish  upasam- 
pada  ordination  in  the  island.  When  all  preparations  had 
been  made  for  the  despatch  of  this  mission,  news  was  received 
of  the  death  of  Sri  Vijaya,  and  the  Siamase  king  refused  to 
send  the  bhikshus,  not  knowing  the  attitude  of  the  new 
sovereign.  So  this  embassy,  upon  which  Saranankara  had 
built  so  much,  ended  in  failure.  But  defeat  and  disappoint¬ 
ment  never  discouraged  him.  He  now  approached  Sri 
Vijaya’ s  successor  and  tried  to  win  his  sympathy.  Klrti  Sri 
Rajasinha,  the  new  king,  was  of  a  different  stamp  to  his  two 
predecessors.  Like  Sri  Vijaya,  he  was  of  Tamil  origin;  but 
he  identified  himself  with  the  interests  of  the  land  of  his 
adoption,  and  during  his  long  reign  of  thirty-five  years  (1745- 
1780)  he  worked  zealously  for  the  welfare  of  the  people.  He 
was,  therefore,  prepared  to  consider  the  question  of  a  second 
embassy  to  Siam.  In  1750  this  second  mission,  which  was 
on  a  much  larger  scale  than  the  first,  was  despatched.  This 
rime  five  chiefs,  including  Vilbagedara,  were  selected  as  the 
envoys.  They  reached  Siam  in  1751,  and  were  well  received 
by  the  king.  It  was  decided  to  send  to  Ceylon  a  deputation  of 
bhikshus,  headed  by  the  theras,  Upali  and  Aryamuni.  The 
mission  left  Ayodhya  in  November  that  year,  but  it  soon  met 


Appendix  149 

with,  a  serious  disaster.  The  ship  was  wrecked  in  a  storm 
in  the  Gulf  of  Siam,  those  on  board  barely  escaping  drowning. 
They  landed  in  a  corner  of  Siamese  territory,  called  Muanla- 
kong,  where,  having  lost  all  their  possessions  in  the  shipwreck, 
they  suffered  great  hardship.  Ultimately,  however,  they 
returned  overland  to  Ayodhya  in  June,  1752.  In  November 
the  mission  started  again,  this  time  on  board  a  new  veesel, 
which  Vilbagedara  had  specially  constructed  with  the  help 
of  two  Dutch  sea-captains.  At  Batavia  a  bigger  ship  was 
engaged,  which  brought  them  safely  to  Trincomalee  in  May, 
1753 — that  is,  exactly  three  years  from  their  departure  for 
Siam. 

The  news  of  the  return  of  the  envoys  with  the  Siamese 
bhikshus  filled  the  country  with  joyful  excitement.  High 
court  dignitaries  were  at  once  sent  to  Trincomalee  to  welcome 
the  visitors  and  escort  them  to  Kandy,  where  they  were  given 
a  royal  reception,  the  king  himself  proceeding  in  state  to  meet 
them  at  the  entrance  to  the  city.  Soon  after  the  Siamese 
theras  performed  the  ordination  of  the  Sinhalese  bhikshus, 
thus  giving  rise  to  the  Siyam  Nikaya  (the  Siamese  sect)  in 
Ceylon.  Thus  were  the  labours  of  Saranankara,  continued 
with  indomitable  perseverance  for  nearly  half  a  century, 
crowned  with  success.  He  was  now  raised  to  the  dignity  of 
Sangharaja,  which  high  office  he  held  till  his  death  in  1778, 
in  the  eightieth  year  of  his  life. 

A  second  deputation  of  Siamese  bhikshus  came  two  or 
three  years  later,  and  met  with  an  equally  hearty  reception. 
Among  them  were  several  who  were  specially  qualified  to  give 
instructions  in  dhyana  meditations,  and  they  undertook  the 
training  of  Sinhalese  bhikshus  in  these  practices.  The  Maha- 
vamsa1  records  this  fact  thus: 

“  And  when  he  had  visited  the  temple  and  heard  the  holy 
Law  expounded  by  the  great  elders  who  had  come  the  second 
time,  the  ruler  of  Lanka  ordained  that  the  priests,  who  had 
received  ordination  from  the  chapter  of  (Siamese)  priests 
who  had  come  the  first  time,  should  receive  instruction  from 
Visuddhaeariya  and  from  the  other  priests  (his  fellow- workers) ; 

1  Wijesinha’s  translation,  chap,  c.,  verses  171-176. 


150 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 

and  lie  also  caused  many  other  persons  of  good  families  to 
be  ordained  by  these  priests.  Now,  among  the  priests  of 
Lanka  (who  were  placed  under  the  instruction  of  the  Siamese 
priests)  some  who  were  endued  with  virtue  took  lessons  from 
the  elder  Maha  Visuddhacariya  in  (the  method  of)  meditation, 
which  is  the  road  to  Nibbana.  Some  learned  under  his 
fellow-worker,  Varananamuni,  the  interpretation  of  the 
Dhamma  and  the  Vinaya,  and  also  the  science  of  words.” 

Further  details  are  given  in  the  Kusalakriyanusandesaya  i1 

“He  (the  king),  in  his  lofty  desire  to  promote  the  religion 
of  the  Omniscient  One,  and  with  great  loving-kindness,  built 
a  forest  abode  for  the  two  venerable  teachers  of  vidarsana 
meditation,  Mahanama  and  Brahmasvara,  who  were  endued 
with,  manifold  virtues,  such  as  love  of  solitude,  and  entrusted 
to  them  twenty-four  bhikshus  who  had  received  ordination 
under  them  to  be  instructed  in  the  method  of  vidarsana 
meditation,  and  entreated  them  to  train  these  (pupils)  care¬ 
fully  in  the  practice  of  the  forty  karmasthana  meditations.” 

The  Siamese  theras  evidently  gave  instruction  in  Pali, 
equally  known  to  themselves  and  their  pupils.  One  of  the 
latter  very  probably  wrote  down  these  instructions,  adding 
their  translation  for  the  benefit  of  others,  the  result  being: 
our  Manual. 

The  school  of  yoga  practice,  thus  established  by  the 
Siamese  bhikshus,  lasted  but  for  a  short  period.  In  a 
katikavata2  (disciplinary  edict)  issued  by  the  Sangha  Sabha 
in  the  seventh  year  of  Rajadhi  Rajasinha  (1780-1798)  the 
bhikshus  are  exhorted  to  engage  themselves  in  vidarsana 
meditation.  No  later  references  to  this  system  of  meditation 
can,  I  think,  be  found.  The  political  convulsions  of  the  next 
reign,  involving  the  deposition  of  the  king  (in  1815),  and 
the  serious  troubles  which  prevailed  during  the  first  decade 
of  British  rule  seem  to  have  killed  it. 


1  Fol.  khu,  b. 


2  British  Museum  MSS.,  Or.  6606  (163). 


INDEXES 


« 


'{ 


\ 


\ 


\ 

.  • 


I. 

INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS  AND  NAMES 


A 

Access,  7-11  (et  passim) 
After-image,  2  n. 

Aggregate  of  elements,  19,  20,  40, 
51,  130 

Air- density,  15  n.  7 
All-pervading  nerve,  28,  53,  54; 

rapture,  10  (et  passim) 

Angel,  5  n. 

Approach,  2  n. 

Artifices,  2  and  n. 

Aspiration,  26 
Atmosphere,  69 
Aung,  8.  Z.,  30  n. 

B 

Basalt,  15  n. 

Basis  of  mind,  22  n. 

Beetle,  68 

Blemishes,  33,  67,  72 
Bliss  of  mind,  55-62;  of  sense,  55- 
62 

Blue,  70 

Body,  1 ;  bodily  parts  meditation, 
86  (et  seqq .);  control  of,  28,  51  n. 
Brahma-worlds,  69 
Breast,  65-6 
Breathing,  1,  8 
Brotherhood,  4 

Buddha,  The,  titles  of,  3,  5,  6; 
-aura,  78  n. 

Buddhism  in  Translations,  1  n., 
6  n.,  72  n. 

Buddhist  Psychological  Ethics,  2  n. 
2,  7  n.  3,  etc. 

Buoyancy  of  mind  and  mental 
factors,  31-54 

C 

Candle-stick,  24  and  n.,  25,  47,  etc. 
Centres  of  Yoga,  13  n. 

Ceylon  Buddhism,  69  n.,  89  n.  1 


Chant  of  Amity,  The,  4 
Characteristics  of  the  Saint,  4 
Childers,  2  n.  8,  5  n.,  8  n.  2,  89 

n.  1 

Clairvoyance,  15  n. 

Clough,  8  n .  2 

Cohesiveness,  9  (see  “elements”) 
Colour,  8  n.,  9,  10,  14  n.,  15  n. 

(see  “  devices,”  72),  78  n. 
Compendium  of  Philosophy,  1  n. , 
7  n.  3,  28  n.  1,  etc. 
Concentration  of  the  heart,  49, 
70 

Confession,  6  n. 

Coolness,  30  n. 

Corpse,  80-85 

D 

Densities  of  the  elements,  15  n. 
Devices,  72  (et  seqq.) 

Dialogues  of  the  Buddha,  85  n. 
Directions,  the  Ten,  106  (et  seqq.) 
Disciples,  7 
Doors,  7,  70,  84 

E 

Earth,  70;  -density,  15  n.  7 ; 
-device,  67 

Ecstasy,  8,  11,  34,  35,  67,  etc. 
Ecstatic  concentration,  7-10,  30, 
45,  62,  etc. 

Eight  kinds  of  men,  4 
Elements,  of  extension,  2  and  n., 
11-16,  etc. ;  heat,  cohesion,  space, 
mobility,  ibid. 

Eyebrows,  15  n. 

Eye- consciousness,  8,  10 

F 

Fire-density,  15  n.  7;  fire-fly,  2,  69 
Fitness  of  mind,  33-54 ;  of  mental 
factors,  ibid. 


153 


154 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


Five  aggregates,  7 ;  raptures,  7,10, 
24,  29;  -fold  system,  21,  43,  44; 
-zest,  30,  etc. ;  -ills,  5  and  n. 
Flooding- rapture,  9-29 
Force-centres,  14  n.,  18  n. 
Fourfold  Truth,  The,  5;  system 
of,  20,  41 

Four  pairs  of  men,  4;  oceans,  7; 
paths,  4  n.  1 

G 

Gem,  70-1 
Gogerly,  68  n.,  89  n. 

■Gotama ,  67 

Grasping  of  the  six  words,  30-8 
Gravity,  15  n. 

H 

Happiness,  55,  etc. 

Heart,  1,  2,  7  and  n.,  8,  9,  13  n ., 
14  n.,  22,  26,  44-6,  etc. 

Heat  (see  “  elements  ”) 
lies  per- Phosphor,  8  n. 

Highest  states,  The  four,  96-128 
Hindrances,  The  five,  129  n. 

I 

Image  of  the  artifice,  2  n.;  of  the 
mark,  7  (et  seqq.) 

Immaterial  Realms,  meditations 
on,  94-5 
Impurities,  11 
Inbreathing,  31,  67,  70,  72 
Indigo,  9  n'.  7 
Induction-artifice,  2 
Inner  Life,  The,  14  n.  1 

K 

Knowledge,  Ten  forms  of,  129-end 


1  Meditation  on  Happiness,  55,  etc. 
(see  81  to  end) 

Mental  balance  (self-collectedness) , 
46;  factors,  7,  28  n. 

Mind,  22  n. ;  mindfulness,  1 
Mirror,  2,  67 

Mobility  (see  “  elements  ”) 
Momentary  flash,  10,  16,  17  n., 
20-3,  etc.  ;  rapture  (flash),  7,  etc. 
Moon,  9,  67,  69 
Mount  Meru ,  68  and  n.,  etc. 

.N 

Navel,  1,  2,  8,  9,  11,  etc. 

Nerve  (the  four-inch),  52 
Newtonian  velocity  of  sound,  15  n. 
Nibbana,  1,  10,  24  n.,  etc. 

Nine  states  sublime,  7  (et  seqq.) 
Nose,  1,  2,  8,  9,  etc.  ;  nostrils, 
68,  etc. 

.  0 

Observation,  line  of,  68 
Ocean,  68-9 
Offerings  ( passim ) 

Order  due,  10-16,  55  (et  seqq.) 
Organic  continuum,  2  n. 
Outbreathing,  31,  72 

P 

Peacock  feathers,  68 
Perception  of  mental  states,  11 
(et  seqq.) 

Plasticity  of  mind,  32  (et  seqq.); 

of  mental  factors,  ditto 
Pole,  68 
j  Posture,  7 

Preamble,  1,  2,  8  (et  seqq.) 
Preparation,  1  (et  seqq.) 

Psalms  of  the  Sisters,  76  n. 


L 

Law,  The,  6 ;  lasting  of,  24,  47 
Leadbeater,  G.  W.,  15  n. 

Lesser  thrill,  10-29 
Lightness,  31  n. 

Lotus,  9,  10;  the  thousand- 

petalled,  15  n. 

Love,  5,  97  (et  seqq.) 

M 

Madder,  9 

Mark  of  ecstasy,  2  and  n. ;  of  up¬ 
holding,  1  and  n.,  2,  8,  etc. 
Medicine,  11-14,  etc. ;  -star,  8  n .,  69 


Q 

Quarters,  see  “  Ten  Directions  ” 
R 

Rain- cloud,  9 
Rapture,  10 
Rebirth,  5,  6 

Recollections,  The  Ten,  91-3 
Rectitude  of  Mental  Factors,  33 
(et  seqq.)  ;  of  mind,  ditto 
Reflex,  13  n. 

Repose  of  mental  factors,  30  (et 
seqq.)  ;  of  mind,  ditto 
Reverse  order,  11  (et  seqq.) 


Index — 1 


1 55 


RHNG,  the  sound,  2  n. 

Rhys  Davids ,  T.  W.,  24  n.  3 
Rice,  85 

Right  succession,  11  (et  seqq.) 

Rule,  The,  5 
Rulers,  the  four,  69 

S 

Sadhana,  96  n. 

Self-collectedness,  23,  46  ;  (mental 
balance),  49,  66  ( et  seqq.) 
Self-hypnotism,  2  n. 

Serpent-fire,  14  n.  1 
Sight-mind,  1 

Sinew,  the  all-pervading,  28 
Six  sounds,  words,  pairs,  17  n.,  47 
Solar  plexus,  14  n. 

Space  ( see  “  elements  ”),  69 
Span,  The,  18,  39,  69 
Spine,  14  n.;  spinal  column,  137  n. 
Spleen,  14  n. 

Splendid  Spur ,  132 

Star,  morning,  or  medicine,  8,  69 

States  sublime,  24,  31,  etc. 

Steam,  67 

Stream  of  becoming,  1,  67 ;  of 
subconscious  life,  2  and  n.,  31, 
33,  67,  72 
Succession,  11 
Sutcliffe,  G.,  15  n.  7 

T 

Tagore,  R.,  96  n. 

Taper,  ll  (et  seqq.) 

Task  of  self-control,  27,  51 
Tempter,  The,  5  n. 


Ten  foul  things,  The,  80 
Theosophist,  The,  15  n. 

Thought- consciousness,  8;  -forms, 
8-34,  etc. 

Threshold  of  the  mind,  9,  11,  24, 

31 

Throat,  14  n. 

I  Transporting  rapture,  9-29,  etc. 
j  Treasure  of  the  Law,  1;  of  the 
Brotherhood,  1 
!  Triple  Gem,  4,  7 

U 

Upholding  aid,  2  n. 

V 

Vedanta,  17  n. 

Velocity  of  light,  15  n. 

Venus,  8 

Visualization,  2  n. 

W 

Warren,  2  n.,  6  n.  1,  72  n. 

Wax- taper  offerings,  24  and  n., 
27,  etc. 

Wieldiness  of  mind,  32-54;  of 
mental  factors,  ditto 
Wijesinha,  2  n. 

World-systems,  97,  etc. 

Y 

Yoga,  13,  69,  138  n. 

Z 

Zest,  7,  69 


*.  . .. 
*  - 


i  >. 


I 


. 


.  .  •: 


V 


V- 


4 


II. 


INDEX  OF  PALI,  SINHALESE,  AND 
SANSKRIT  WORDS  IN  TEXT 
AND  NOTES 


AA 

Aesala,  140 
Ajatakaso,  106  n.  2 
Angala,  13  n.  1,  18  n. 
Anguttara-Nikdya,  6  n.  2,  85  n., 
93  n. 

Attabhava,  98  n.  1 
Atthasdlirii,  30  n.  2 
Anuloma,  11  n.  3  ;  133  n.  2 
Antogabbha,  7  n.  2 
Appana,  2  n.  7,  25  n.,  97  n. 
Arahan,  If.  (passim) 

Arupa-loka,  94  n. 

Asubha,  85  n. 

Asura,  68  n. 

Assakanna,  68  n. 

Akasa-ananto,  94  n.  2 
Akasaclhatu,  10  n.  2 
Adinava,  131  n. 

Anapanasati,  70  n. 

Apokasina,  75  n. 

Apodhatu,  9  n.  2 

I 

Idda,  10 

Iddhipada,  135  n. 

Inda,  5 

Indriya,  135  n. 

U 

Uggaha-iiimitta,  2  n.  4,  2  n.  8 
Ukkutikayen,  24  n.  4 
Udariyam,  89  n. 

Uddna ,  1  n. 

Upasama,  92  n. 


Upacara,  2  n.  8,  25  n.,  133  n.  2 
Upekkha,  123  n.  1 
Ubbega-piti,  9  n .  4,  13  n.  1 
Usabham,  68  n. 

O 

Okkantika-piti,  9  n.  1 
Odatavanna,  8  n.  2 
Osadhi-taraka,  8  n.  2, 69  n. 

K 

Katarolu-mal,  2  n.  9 
Kamma,  5  n. 

Kammannata,  32  n.  1 
Kammassako,  96  n.  3,  123  n.  2 
Karuna,  107  n. 

Kasina,  72  n -dosa,  1  n.  2; 

-parikamma,  2  n.  8 
Kaya,  28  n.  1,  30  n.  2;  -passaddlii, 
30  n.  2;  -pagunnata,  32  n.  2; 
-lahuta,  31  n. ;  -ujjukata,  33 
n.  1;  -vaslvattam,  51  n. 
Kayikasukha,  55  n. 

Kinihiri-mal,  9  n.  3 
Kilese,  129  n.  2 
Kilomakam,  89  n. 

Khanika-piti,  7  n.  1,  17  n.  3, 
21  n. 

Khuddaka-Pdtha ,  4  n. ,  72  n.,  89  n. 
Khuddaka-plti,  11  n.  2 

G 

Gavutam,  68  n. 

Guha,  7  n.  2 
Gotama ,  7,  8,  27 

157 


158 


Manual  of  a  Mystic 


c 

Catu-nayam,  20  n. 

Citta,  30  n.  2 

Cinta-manikkya-ratana,  70  n. 
Cetana,  30  n.  2 
Cetasikasukha,  55  n. 

Chakkavala,  68  n. 

Chabbanna,  78  n. 
Cha-sadda-gahanam,  17  n.  1 
Chitra-kuta,  132  n. 

J 

Jataka,  75  n. 

Jhana,  1  n.,  20  n.,  69  to  end 
(passim) 

T 

Taittiriya  Upanishad,  17  n.  1 
Tejodhatu,  12  n.,  15  n.  6 

D 

Dakunu,  137  n. 

Dasa-asubha,  80  n. 

Dili,  7  n.  5 
Disam,  70  n. 

Digha-Nikaya,  1  n.,  85  n. 
Dvatimsakara,  72  n. 

Dhamma,  1  (passim);  -tira-tthi- 
tika,  24  n.  1,  -sanna,  33  n.  2 
Bhammapada,  7  n.  2,  72  n. 
Dhammasangaid,  32  n.  1  (see 
Buddh.  Psych.  Ethics) 
Dhammassako,  123  n.  2 
Dhatu-samuham,  18  n.  2 

N 

Nibbana  (passim) 

Nila,  9  n.  7 

P 

Paccheka-Buddha,  6,  6  n.  1,  7 
Panca-Mara,  5 
Patipati,  6,  37  n. 

Patiloma,  11  n.  4 
Pathavi-dhatu,  2  n.  5 
Patikkulam,  93  n. 

Patisankhana,  133  n.  1 
Panltam,  95  n. 

Parikamma,  1  n.,  2  n.  8,  25  n. 
Parinibbana,  140 
Piti,  7  n.  1 

Puggala-Pahhatti,  4  n.  1 


Pramane,  13  n.  1 
Pharana-piti,  10  n.  1 

B 

Bala,  135  n. 

Buddha  (passim) 

Buddhaghosa,  30  n.  3 
Buddharasmiyo,  78  n. 
Bodhipakkhiya  dhamma,  135  n. 
Bojjhanga,  135  n. 

Brahma,  5;  Brahmavihara,  98  n,  1 
Brhad-  Upanishad,  17  n.  1 
Bhante,  6  n.  2 
Bhavanga,  2  n.  6 
Bhikkhu,  1 


M 

Maggo,  135  n. 

Majjhima-Nikdya ,  1  n.,  3  n.,  6 
n.  2,  85  n.y  89  n. 

Mano,  22  n. 

Manjetthi,  9  n.  6 
Matthake,  89  n. 

Mandaro,  106  n.  1 
Maranarn,  92  n. 

Mahanadim,  75  n. 

M a hdpari n ihbdna -Sutta,  8  n.  2, 
135  n. 

Maya,  33  n.  1 
Mara,  5,  6 

Milinda-Pahha,  Q  n.  1 
Mudita,  107  n. 


Y 

Yatthi,  68  n. 

Yama,  6 

Yoga,  7  7i.  2,  13  n.,  14  n.  1 
Yogi,  1  n. ,  etc. 

Yojana,  68  n. 

V 

Vatthu,  22  7i. 

Vayo-dhatu,  9  th.  5;  -kasina,  76  n. 
U  71.  5 

Vicchidakam,  82  n. 

Vinaya ,  1  n. 

Vinilakam,  80  n. 

Vibha7iga,  In.;  96  n.  1 
Vipassana,  129  n. 

Visuddhi-Magga ,  1  n.,  73  n., 

93  n. 


Index — 11 


159 


s 

Sakam,  123  n.  2 
Satipatthana,  135  n. 
Saddlia,  92  n. 

Sadda,  17  n.  1 
Santara,  95  n. 
Samatha-dassana,  129  n.  2 
Samadhi,  23  n.  ( et  passim) 


i  Sammappadhana,  135  w. 
Sangha,  2 
Sarvanga,  28  n.  2 
Sutta-Nipata,  4  n. 
Settha,  96  v.  1 

!  H 

Htradaya,  13  n.  1 


BILLING  AND  SONS,  LTD.,  PRINTERS,  GUILDFORD,  I-.NG1.ANT> 

\ 


PALI  TEXT  SOCIETY 


Translation  Series 

( Extra  Subscription ) 

VOLUMES  ALREADY  PUBLISHED  : 

1.  Psalms  of  the  Early  Buddhists,  Part  I.,  Psalms  of  the 
Sisters,  translated  from  the  Fherl-gdthd.  By  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids, 
M.A.,  Fellow  of  University  College,  London.  Price  5s.  net. 

2.  Compendium  of  Philosophy,  being  a  translation  of  the 
A bhidhammattha-sangaha.  By  Shwe  Zan  Aung,  B.A.  Revised 
and  edited  by  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids.  Price  5s.  net. 

3.  The  Mahavamsa ;  or,  The  Great  Chronicle  of  Ceylon. 
Translated  into  English  by  Wilhelm  Geiger,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of 
Indogermanic  Philology  at  Erlangen  University;  assisted  by 
Mabel  ITaynes  Bode,  Ph,D.,  Lecturer  on  Pali  at  University 
College,  London.  Price  lOs.  net. 

4.  Psalms  of  the  Early  Buddhists,  Part  II.,  Psalms  of  the 
Brethren,  translated  from  the  Theragdtha ,  with  excerpts  from 
the  unpublished  Commentary  by  Dhammapala.  By  Mrs.  Rhys 
Davids.  Price  l Os.  net. 

5.  Points  Of  Controversy,  or  Subjects  of  Discourse,  translated 
from  the  Kathd-Vatthu ,  with  notes  from  the  Commentary.  By 
Shwe  Zan  Aung  and  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids.  Price  10s.  net. 


Date  Due 


