oto a 
SRR LE IED resists te = ; Paes eee i = Si Sis : See 


atale 


ree eee! e-4= 
saree ieeiestg es ertseet 


ae tais ecereee 


ee. 
xy 
3 
ay 
Fh 
% 
2 
2: 
x 
z 


$ 


ji 
righ tp hy ben, ox un thaa ae 


eres es] 


i 


Tt 





eRe. 


Ptabiare i « 








AN OF PRINCE 
, OCT 4 1926 






Section B57 





THE 


INDIAN BUDDHIST 
ICONOGRAPHY 


MAINLY BASED ON 
THE SADHANAMALA 
AND OTHER ‘COGNATE TANTRIC 


TEXTS OF RITUALS 


BY 


/ 
BENOYTOSH ‘BHATTACHARYYA, MA. (Caleutta), 
University Gold Medallist and Prizeman, Government Research Scholar 
in Iconography at the University of Dacca, Editor, 
Gackwad’s Oriental Series, and Librarian, 
Oriental Collection, Baroda State 


(WITH 283 ILLUSTRATIONS) 


1924 
HUMPHREY MILFORD 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS _ 
LONDON NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE 
BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS 


PRINTED BY 
D. N. BANERJEE, 
AT THE BANERJEE PRESS, 
2, MAHARANI SARNAMAYEE ROAD, 
CALCUTTA. 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Princeton Theological Seminary Library 


https://archive.org/details/indianbuddhisticOObhat 





To 
MAHAMAHOPADHYAYA PANDIT 
HARAPRASAD SHASTRI, M.a., c.1.E., 


Honorary Member, Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain 
and Ireland and Professor of Sanskrit in the 
University at Dacca, 


This Volume is Dedicated as a mark of 
Profound Devotion and Respect, 
By his 
Affectionate son, 
Benoytosh Bhattacharyya. 





Samgrahantu priyatvena 

| vistaradvesiné maya } 
Bhariranuttame tasmin ie 
ksantavyam vistarapriyaih | 
Advayavajra. 


PREFACE 


This volume represents part of the work done by me as a Government 
Research Scholar in Iconography for four years from 1920 to 1924. It is an 
attempt to write a comprehensive work on the Buddhist Iconography of 
India, and is mainly based on a Sanskrit text prepared from seven recensions 
of the SAdhanamala alias Sadhanasamuccaya in the libraries of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal, Nepal, and Cambridge University. This text so collated 
I hope to publish as soon as the opportunity presents itself. The text has 
been illustrated by pictures representing images in several museums in India 
and elsewhere and in the collections of numerous Nepalese monasteries. 
Where images could not be obtained or photographing was impossible or 
unsatisfactory the text has been illustrated with the help of drawings prepared 
by Nepalese Citrakaras of Buddhist origin from the ancient albums of their 
forefathers. Where no drawing could be obtained only the original text has 
been quoted with a translation. 


The publication of this work necessitated, on my part, a prolonged 
visit to Nepal whither my father, Mahamahopadhyaya Haraprasad Shastri, 
was proceeding on an invitation from His Highness the Maharaja of Nepal. 
It also necessitated a visit to the museums of Calcutta, Dacca, Patna, 
Sarnath, Lucknow, Mathura, and Ajmere, to the Cave-temples at Ellora and 
Ajanta, to the excavations at Nalanda, and to Vikrampur, the seat of Bengal 


Buddhism. 


In several ways I have been very fortunate in carrying out my 
researches. First, I have had the proud privilege of working under Professor 
A. Foucher, the accredited authority on Indian Buddhist images, during the 
period he was in charge of the Archeological Section, Indian Museum. 
Secondly, through the kindness of the Maharaja of Nepal I was able to secure 
a number of MSS. from the Durbar Library for collation and study. Thirdly, 
through the kindness of Mr. P. J. Hartog, M.A., C.I.E., Vice-Chancellor of 
the Dacca University, I secured the loan of one of the three Cambridge MSS. 
of the Sddhanamala which I had absolutely no chance of getting otherwise. 
Fourthly, during the first two years the most valuable library of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal was thrown open for my use. Fifthly, the Dacca University 
gave me all facilities whenever applied for. Sixthly, the Government granted 


(aaviill ts) 


me, as a special favour, the Research Scholarship for a fourth year, a privilege 


not ordinarily granted under the rules. 


Professor Foucher impressed upon me the fact that of the Buddhist 
Iconography, the most important and illuminating theme was its Indian 
section ; and that this was the fountain-head from which Tibet, China, and 
other countries drew their inspiration, which each amplified according to its 
own genius. The root of Buddhist Iconography is Indian, and Professor 
Foucher asked me to concentrate my attention on Indian images only. This 
advice has been of very great value to me; it has enabled me to grasp some 
of the principles on which the whole fabric of Buddhist Iconography and 
methods of worship in later Buddhism is based. This Buddhist Tconography, 
for instance, is not idolatry ; the images do not represent objects of worship 
but represent the highest Buddhist ideal of Sinya or Void, commingled with 
Vijnana and Mahasukha. 


My grateful acknowledgments are due to His Highness Sir Chandra 
Shamsher Jung Bahadur Rana, Maharaja of Nepal, for rendering me ungrudg- 
ing help in all difficulties in a foreign land and for placing at my disposal the 
services of a Gubhaju and a Citrakara, during our stay in Nepal. 


Tam deeply grateful to Mr. W. W. Hornell) MA. C\lLE., M.7,@amul 
recently Director of Public Instruction, Bengal, for granting me the Research 
Scholarship I have been enjoying for four years ; and I am especially indebted 
to Mr. W. B. Finnigan, Personal Assistant to the Director of Publie Instruc- 
tion, for the interest he has taken in my affairs and for his sustaining 
encouragement. Without his kind help the work of printing would have been 
stopped long ago. 


I have also to record my heartfelt thanks to Mr: P. J. Hartog, C.I.E., 
Viee-Chnacellor, Dacca University, for kindly procuring for collation one 
of the three Cambridge MSS. of the Sidhanamala, and for his unceasing efforts 
to obtain for me Rotograph copies of the two other MSS in  palm-leaf. My 
thanks. are also due to Prof. G. H. Langley, M.A., I.E.S., Dr. S. W. Kemp, 
D. Sc., and Mr. K. N. Dikshit, M.A. for taking a keen interest in my. work 
and for their sound advice. 


‘In compiling the present work I have to acknowledge help from several 
other sources : I am indebted to Rai Bahadur P. N. Mookerjee, I.S.0., Princi- 
pal N. N. Raye, M.A., Prof. M. G. Bhattacharyya, M.A., and Mr. B. B. Mittra, 
M.A. for revising portions of the manuscript and helping me in correcting the 
proofs ; to my friend, Mr. N. K. Bhattasali, M.A., Curator, Dacca Museum, 
for many acts of kindness and valuable suggestions; and to Messrs. S. C. 
Mondol and A. B. Maitra for preparing a number of negatives for my use. 


Cea 


Lastly, it is not merely as a filial duty that I acknowledge the debt I 
owe to my father MahaAmahopadhyaya Haraprasad Shastri, M.A., C.I.E. for 
whose sustaining help in all matters of difficulty, domestic, educational and 
financial, I shall ever remain grateful, and to whom this book is dedicated as 
a mark of profound devotion and respect. 

For various reasons this book had to be hurried through the press. I 
am aware that, in consequence, it 1s not free from errors. I much regret 
these and hope that the book may be so fortunate as to pass through the 
press again, since this will give me an opportunity of removing them. 


BARoDA, 
29th January, 1924. BENOYTOSH BHATTACHARYYA 


SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 
FOREWORD = ots a: i ab 1 
INTRODUCTION 
§ 1. A Brief Historical Survey of Buddhism ae so abs 
§ 2. Evolution of the Doctrines a Seah bay 
§ 3. Evidence of Art no st. ae oa) ess 
§ 4. The Pantheon a a, 1 ay Ody 
CHAPTER I 
Buddhas, Buddhasaktis and Bodhisattvas 
§ I. Dhyani Buddhas ~ SF 1 
Amitabha, Aksobhya, Vairocana, J vayataealele Ratna- 
sambhava, Vajrasattva 
oe Te Divine Buddhasaktis He ae a, 7 
§ III. Divine Bodhisattvas e: ne oy 
§ IV. Mortal Buddhas as . ae or 9 
Gautama Buddha 
Sani Mortal Buddhasaktis ui se me LS 
§ VI. Mortal Bodhisattvas ae Ae wee 2 LZ 
§ VII. Maitreya, the Future Buddha .. ie tay 
CHAPTER II 
Manjusri : ey. mt RACED 
§ 1. Emanations of LENS a ar Sits Gee LE 
Vak, Dharmadhatu-Vagisvara 
§ 2. HKmanations of Aksobhya re ae oo tae bh 
Mahjughosa, Siddhaikavira, Vajrananga, Namasangiti- 
Manjusri 
§ 3. Emanations of the five Dhyani Buddhas he en ee 
Vagisvara, Mahjuvara, Mafijuvajra, Mafhjukumara 
§ 4, Independent Forms  .. ; a hae DME 


Arapacana, Sthiracakra, Vadirat, Mafjunatha 


(hei lie) 


CHAPTER III 
Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara 


1. Sadaksari Lokesvara 


2. Simbanada 

8. Khasarpana 

4. -Lokanatha 

5. Halahala 

6. Padmanarttesvara 

”. Harihariharivahanodbhava Lokesvara 


8. Trailokyavasankara 

9. Rakta-Lokesvara i 
10. Mayajalakrama Avalokitesvara 
11. Nilakantha | 
12. Sugatisandarsana Lokesvara 
13. Pretasantarpita Lokesvara 
14. Sukhavati Lokesvara .. 
15. Vajradharma Lokesvara 


CHAPTER IV 


Emanations of Amitabha 
§ I. Gods rs: 
Mahavala, Saptasatika-Hayagriva 
§II. , Goddesses .. <: 
Kurukulla, Bhrkuti, Mahasitavati 


CHAPTER V 
Kmanations of Aksobhya 
§ I. Gods : ee by 
Candarosana, Heruka, Buddhakapala, Vajradaka 
Hayagriva, Yamari, Jambhala 


CHAPTER VI 
Kmanations of Aksobhya (continued) 
S LES Goddescesane ee: Hs 
Mahacinatara, Janguli, Ekajata, Parnasavari, Prajna- 
paramita, Vajracarcika, Mahamantranusarini, 
Mahapratvyangira, Dhvajagrakeytra Vasudhara, 
Nairatma 
CHAPTER VII 
Fmanations of Vairocana : 
Marici, Usnisavijaya, Sitatapatra-A parajita, Mahasahasra- 
pramardani, Vajravarahi 


32 
33 
35 
36 
38 


4.9 


60 


76 


93 


Gaexiil =) 
CHAPTER VIII 


Emanations of Amoghasiddhi 


Khadiravani Tara, Vasyatara, Sousa Sitatara, Dhanada- 


Tara, Parnasavari, Mahamayutri, Vajrasrnkhala 


CHAPTER, UX 


Emanation of Ratnasambhava 
§ I. Gods oe 
Jambhala, Uechusma Jambhala 
§ II. Goddesses .. 


Mahapratisara, Vasudhara 


CHAPTER X 


Emanations of the five Dhyani Buddhas 
§ I. Gods 
Jambhala, Mahakala, 
Col Ieee GOdUcscece:: By 
Vajratara, Prajnaparamita, Mayajalakrama-Kurukulla, 
Sitatara 


CHAPTER XI 


§ 1. Emanation of four Dhyani Buddhas 
-Vajratara 
§ 2. Emanation of Vajrasattva 
Jambhala, Cunda 
§ 3. The Pancaraksa Mandala at 
Mahapratisara, Mahasahasrapramardani Mahamayuri, 
Mahamantranusarini Mahasitavati. 
See nee Laras 
(i Ordinary. 
(i) Extraordinary 


CHAPTER XII 


Independent Deities 
§ I. Gods r ss Se 
Ganapati, Bighnantaka, Vajrahunkara, Bhitadamara, 
Vajrajjvalanalarka, Trailokyavijaya, Paramésva, 
Namasangiti 
S lly Goddessess we, me a 
Sarasvati, Aparajita, Vajragandhari, Vajrayogini, Graha- 
matrka, Ganapatihrdaya, Vajravidarani, 


106 


113 


116 


1a’) 


123 


135 
136 


14] 


( SEKI Vics) 


CONCLUSION 
APPENDIX A. 


Kincit-Vistara-Tara-Sadhana (Teat with Translation) 


APPENDIX B. 


Descriptions of One Hundred and Hight forms of Avalokitesvara 
appearing in the Macchandar Vahal, Kathmandu, Nepal 


GLOSSARY 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
INDEX 


201 
204: 


LIST OF PLATES 


The image reproduced on the cover is of Mahakala ; 
see page 120, and plate XXXV Ia. 


PAGE 
PLATE T, (a) First page of Sadhanamala. A ‘i Ww 
(b) Another page containing the alphabet. 
(c) Last page of Paficaraksa. 
(d) Guru Padmasambhava, (Bauddh, Nepal). 
(ec) Maya’s dream. 
PATE Ly, THREE CELEBRATED STUPAS OF NEPAL. ee wrt 
Simbhii. 
Bauddh. 
Kathe Simbhu. 
PLATE ITI. THE BupDHIST TRIAD. .. 3 es rae 
Dharma. 
Buddha. 
Sangha. 
PLATE IV. SymBout Worsnuip. By aE sie wHrL 
(a) Bodhi Tree, (Amaravati). 
(b) Buddha’s Headdress, (Bharhut). 
(c) Buddha’s Footprints, (Bharhut). 
(d) The Wheel-of-the-law, (Bharhut). 
PLATE V. Ap1-Buppua, Vasrapuara (After a Nepalese 
Painting). a. ws Sn HS 
PLATE VI. (a) Vajradhara yab-yum, (Nepal). .,  eevrit 
(b) Vajradhara yab-yum, (Side View). 
(c) Buddha in different Mudras, (Java). 
(d) Buddha in different Mudras, (Nalanda). 
a) Amitabha. a 3 


PLATE VII. ( 

| (b) Aksobhya, (Nepal). 
(c) Aksobhya. | 
( 


d) Vairocana. 


BEAT Hay CLE 


PLATE IX. 


PLATE 


PLATE 


PLATE 


PLATE 


PLATE 


PLATE 


PLATE 


Rg 


oO 
et te NEE 


im) 


Q 


a 


2 


Ss 
Dy I 


cS 


= 


Dd 


Te) 
Se, 


~ ee 


Q 


CR I TT a a Rg i ae NE IS N e 
or 


ao eR 
EE SE 


oS) 


= 


& 


aS ae 8 i es er 
=| 


x & 
Ee 


© 


cacti Aer Ro ra a rate 
SO QQ 
~—_—" rl 


>) 


= 


tao 
a, 
Se 


SReses 


ao 


OS 


Oem mmm mu 


Q 
ae SS Ee ae 


Saas) 


Vairocana, (Nepal) 
Amoghasiddhi. 

Amoghasiddhi, (Nepal). 
Ratnasambhava. 
Ratnasambhava, (Nepal). 
Vajrasattva, (Nepal). 
Vajrasattva yab-yum, (Nepal). 
Vajrasattva yab-yum, (side view). 
Vajrasattva yab-yum, (back view). 
Vajradhatvisvari. 

Locana. 

Mamaki. 

Pandara. 

Aryatara. o9 
Samantabhadra, (Nepal). 
Vajrapani, (Nepal). 
Ratnapani, (Nepal). 
Padmapani, (Nepal). 
Visvapani, (Nepal). 
Samantabhadra. 

Vajrapani, (Indian Museum). 
Vajrapani, (Nalanda). 


PAGE 


10 


12 


Seven Mortal Buddhas with Maitreya, (Indian Museum 


Vajrasana, (Indian Museum). 
Maitreya. 

Vak or Vajraraga Manjusri. 
Siddhaikavira, (Sarnath). 
Namasangiti Manjusri. es 
Namasangiti Manjusri ? (Nepal). 
Vajrananga Manjusri. 


Maharajalila Manjusri, (Indian Museum). 


Vagisvara, (Nepal). 

Manjuvara, (Nalanda). 
Manjuvara, (Indian Museum). 
Manjuvara, (Birbhum). 
Manjuvara, (Indian Museum). 
Dharmacakra Mafijusri, (Nepal). 
Manjukumara. 

Arapacana Manjusri, (Nepal). 


14 


23 


24 


26 


PLATE XVII. 


PLATE XVIII. 


PLATE XIX. 


PLATE XX. 


PLATE XXI. 
PLATE XXII. 


PLATE XXITI. 


PLATE XXIV. 


PLATE XXYV. 


—~ 
= 8 
ef 


Sh, 


SS 
SEs! coe AS 


—) 
— 


> 
SSS SSE 


ee ee oe mee O™ ee oe eee 
Oo 
we ee” 


= 


KHASARPANA AVALOKITESVARA, (Vikramur). 


CEEXV1Y Js) 


Arapacana, (Java). 

Arapacana, (Dacca Museum). 
Arapacana, (Nepal). 

Sthiracakra, (Vangiya Sahitya Parisat). 
Sadaksari Group, (Sarnath). 

Sadaksari Group, (Indian Museum). 
Sadaksari Group, (Birbhum). 


Sadaksari Lokesvara, (Nepal). 
Sadaksari Mahavidya, (Sarnath). 
Simhanada, (Megadha). 
Simhanada, (Nepal). 
Simhanada, (Nepal). 


Simhanada, (Nepal)... 
Simhanada, (Mahoba). 
Khasarpana, (Indian Museum). 
Lokanatha, (Mahoba). 


Lokanatha, (Nepal). 
Lokanatha, (Sarnath). 
Padmanarttesvara. 

Halahala Lokesvara, (Nepal). 
Padmanarttesvara, (Nepal). 


Harihariharivahana Lokesvara, (Nepal). 


Harihariharivahana, (Nepal). 
Harihariharivahana. 
Rakta-Lokesvara. 
Mayajalakrama-Lokesvara, (Nepal). 
Nilakantha, (Sarnath). 

Last and first page of Abhisekavidhi. 
Sugatisandarsana Lokesvara. 
Pretasantarpita Lokesvara. 
Sukhavati Lokesvara, (Nepal). 
Vajradharma-Lokesvara. 


Candarosana. 
Buddhakapala. 

Heruka, (Dacca Museum). 
Hayagriva. 


Paar 
28 


35 


36 


38 


40 


44 


49 


60 


PLATE XXVI. 


PLATE XXVIII. 


PLATE XXVITT. 


PLATE XXIX. 


PLATE XXX. 


PLATE XXXII. 


PLATE XXXII. 


PLATE XXXIITI. 


( xvi) 


Yamantaka, (Nepal). 
Yamantaka, (Nalanda). 
Jambhala. 

Ucchusma Jambhala. 


Mahacina Tara. 

Mahacina Tara. 

Jangull. 

Ekajata, (Indian Museum). 


Kkajata. 


Parnasgavari, (Indian Museum). 


Prajiaparamita, (Leiden). 
Vajracarcika. 


Pratyangira. 
Pratyangira. 
Pratyangira, (Nepal). 
Dhvajagrakeyura. 


Nairatma, (Indian Museum). 


Nairatma, (Vangiya Sahitya Parisat). 
Astabhuja-Marici, (Indian Museum). 
Astabhuja-Marici, (Indian Museum). 


Astabhuja Marici, (Lucknow Museum). 


Dasabhujasita-Marict. 


Usnisavijaya, (Indian Museum). 


Usnisavijaya. 
Sitatapatra Aparayjita. 


Vajravarahi. 


Vajravarahi, (Germany). 


Khadiravani Tara, (Indian Museum). 


Khadiravani Tara, (Mohoba). 


( 
Khadiravani Tara, (Dacca Museum). 
Khadiravani Tara, (Indian Museum). 


Bhadrasana Tara. 
Sadbhuja-Sitatara. 
Dhanada Tara. 


Parnasavari, (Vikrampur). 


PAGE 
a7 2 


76 


84 


88 


90 


100 


104 


108 


PLATE XXXIV. 


PLATE XXXV. 


PLATE XXXVI. 


PLATE XXXVII. 


—_~ ~~ 
BS, iS, 
Se 


4 


Q 


Came ~ 
Ce 


PLATE XXXVIII. 


ct 


eee 


Sp 
— 


in) 


—— 


ee 


PLATE XXXIX. 


g 


a 
jp) 
ae ee 


Se) 


Saline CE a 
Se 


PLATE XL. 


~~ 


g 


Wee. Cm gk 
oO 
—_—" J 


© 


Se 


ins) 


—— 


PLATE XLII. 


—) 


~— 


ia ae Ce Foo 
Sr 


QD 


_——"— >. 


Qy 


Aer 
Ses 


PLATE XLII. 


2 


je SSP. 
ee EN eY 


Q 


I a A oat 
ame a A, 


& 


Coax’ p) 


Parnasavari, (Vikrampur). 
Vajrasrnkhala. 

Jambhala, (Nepal). 

Jambhala, (Vikrampur). 
Jambhala, (Vikrampur). 
Ucchusma Jambhala, (Sarnath)... 
Mahapratisara, (Dacca Museum). 


Mahapratisara, (Dacca Sahitya Parisat). 


Vasudhara, (Nepal). 
Mahakala, (Nepal). 
Vajratara, (Indian Museum). 
Prajnaparamita, (Indian Museum). 
Vajratara, (Orissa). 
Vajratara, (Nepal). 

Cunda, (British Muscum). 
Mahapratisara. 
Mahasahasrapramardani. 
Mahamayuri. 
Mahamantranusarini. 
Mahasitavati. 
Prasanna-Tara. 


Mahattari-Tara, (Nepal). 


Bighnantaka, (Vangiya Sahitya Parisat), 


Trailokyavijaya, (Bodh Gaya). 
Paramasva. 

Namasangiti, (Nepal). 
Namasangiti, (Nepal). 
Aryasarasvati. 

Vajrasarada. 

Vajrasarada, (Nalanda). 
Mahasarasvati. 
Vajrasarasvati. 

Aparajita. 

Aparajita, (Nalanda). 
Aparayjita, (Indian Museum). 
Vajrayogini Temple at Sanku, Nepal. 
Grahamatrka. 
Ganapati-Hrdaya. 


Vajravidarani. 


Paar 


112 


116 


130 


134 


144 


148 


156 


\e-peag) 


PAGE 
PLATE XLIII. 1. Hayagriva, Lokesvara. a a 159 
2. Mojaghanjavala (?) Lokesvara. 
3. Halahala Lokesvara. 
4. Harihariharivahana Lokesvara. 
PLATE XLIV. 5. Mayajalakrama Lokesvara. ate AS 159 
6. Sadaksari Lokesvara. 
7. Anandadi Lokesgvara. 
8. WVasyadhikara Lokesvara. 
PLATE XLV. 9, Potapada Lokesvara. oe we 160 
10. Kamandalu Lokesvara. 
11. Varadayaka Lokesvara. 
12. Jatamukuta Lokesvara. 
PATH NL VE 13. Sukhavati Lokesvara. ye hts 162 
14. Pretasantarpita Lokesvara. 
15. Mayajalakramakrodha Lokesvara. 
16. Sugatisandarsana Lokesvara. 
PLATE XLVII. 17. Nilakantha Lokesvara. if re 164 
18. Lokanatharaktaryyavalokitesvara. 
19. Trailokyasandarsana Lokeégvara. 
20. Simhanatha Lokegvara. 
PLATE XLVIII. 21. Khasarpana Lokeévara. ay see 166 
22. Manipadma Lokesvara. 
23. Vajradharma LokeSsvara. 
24. Pupala Lokegvara. 
PLATE XLIX. 25. ~Utnauti (?) Lokeésvara. oF a 169 
26. Vrsnacana Lokesvara. 
27. Brahmadanda Lokeégvara. 
28. <Acata (?) Lokesvara. 
PAs ials 29. Mahavajrasattva Lokesvara. .. ne 169 


30. Visvahana Lokesvara. 
31. Sakyabuddha Lokegvara. 
32. Santasi Lokeévara. 


PLATE LI. 33. Jamadanda Lokesgvara. 5 — 170 
34.  Vajrosnisa Lokesvara. 
35. Vajrahuntika Lokesvara. 
36. Jnanadhatu Lokeégvara. 


PLATE LII. 


PLATE LIII. 


PLATE LIV. 


PLATE LV. 


PLATE LVI. 


PLATE LVII. 


PLATE LVIII. 


PLATE LIX. 


PLATE LX. 


37. 


6.4 ae 


Karandavytha Lokesvara. 


Sarvanivaranaviskambhi Lokegvara. 
Sarvasokatamonirghata Lokesvara. 


Pratibhanakakita Lokesvara. 


Amrtaprabha Lokesvara. 
Jaliniprabha Lokesvara. 
Candraprabha Lokesvara. 
Avalokita Lokesvara. 


Vajragarbha Lokesvara. 
Sagaramati Lokesvara. 
Ratnapani Lokesvara. 
Gaganaganja Lokesvara. 


Akasagarbha Lokeégvara. 
Ksitigarbha Lokesvara. 
Aksayamati Lokesgvara. 
Srstikanta Lokegvara. 


Samantabhadra Lokegvara. 
Mahasahasrabhuja Lokesvara. 
Maharatnakirti Lokeégvara. 
Mahasankhanatha Lokesvara. 


Mahasahasrastryya Lokesvara. 
Maharatnakula Lokesvara. 
Mahapatala Lokesvara. 
Mahamanjudatta Lokesvara. 


Mahacandrabimba LokeSsvara. .. 


Mahastiryyabimba Lokesvara. 


Maha-abhayaphalada Lokesvara. 


Maha-abhayakari Lokesvara. 


Mahamanjubhtta Lokesvara. 
Mahavisvastddha Lokesvara. 
Mahavajradhatu Lokesvara. 
Mahavajradhrk Lokesvara. 


Mahavajrapani Lokesvara. 
Mahavajranatha Lokesvara. 
Amoghapasa Lokesvara. 
Devadevata Lokesvara. 


PAGE 
170 


172 


172 


174 


174 


LG 


177 


178 


| LATE LXI. 


PLATE LXII. 


PLATE LXIII. 


PLATE LXIV. 


PLATE LXV. 


PLATE LXVI. 


PLATE LXVII. 


PLATE LXVIITI. 


PLATE LXIX. 


100. 


LOT: 
102. 
103. 
104. 


105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 


( xxl ) 


Pindapatra Lokesvara. 
Sarthavaha Lokesvara. 
Ratnadala Lokesvara. 
Visnupani Lokesvara. 


Kamalacandra Lokesvara. 
Vajrakhanda Lokesvara. 
Acalaketu Lokesvara. 
Sirisara (?) Lokegvara. 


Dharmacakra Lokeégvara. 
Harivahana Lokesvara. 
Sarasiri (?) Lokesvara. 
Harihara Lokesvara. 


Simhanada Lokesvara. 
Visvavajra Lokesvara. 
Amitabha Lokesvara. 
Vajrasattvadhatu Lokesvara. 


Visvabhtta Lokesvara. 
Dharmadhatu Lokesvara. 
Vajradhatu Lokesvara. 
Sakyabuddha Lokegvara. 


Cittadhatu Lokesvara. 
Cintamani Lokesvara. 
Santamati Lokegvara. 
Manjunatha Lokesvara. 


Visnucakra Lokegvara. 
Krtanjali Lokesgvara. 
Visnukanta Lokesvara. 
Vajrasrsta Lokesvara. 
Sankhanatha Lokegvara. 
Vidyapati Lokesvara. 
Nityanatha Lokesvara. 


Padmapani Lokesvara. 


Vajrapani Lokesvara. 


Mahasthamaprapta Lokesvara. 


Vajranatha Lokesvara. 
Srimadaryyavalokitesgvara. 


PAGE 
180 


180 


182 


182 


184 


184 


186 


186 


188 


PHD Pe 


LIST OF ERRATA 


. 1, 1. 7 from bottom ; for respecftully read respectfully 
. 2, ll. 28 and 31; for Bodhyagri read Bodhyangi 
. 8, footnote + ; for manuscripts read manuscript 


. 4, ll. 18 and 20; for Vairocana read Vairocana 


7, 1. 25; delete while 


. 7,1. 26; for Abhaya read Varada 
. 8, ll. 11-12 ; for and the like read and others 


9, 1. 2 ; for its read his 


. 18, footnote *; for Pantheon read Buddhism 


. 14, footnote * ; for Pantheon read Buddhism 


20, 1.19; for Siddhaikavria read Siddhaikavira 

37,1, 14; for “dharavyvahara® read °dharavyavahara?® 
54, 1. 9 from bottom ; for disguishes read distinguishes 
91, 1. 23 ; for this read his 

114, 1. 8; for right read left 

114, 1. 9; for left read right 


1538, footnote *; for Supra read supra 


. 157, 1. 7 from bottom ; for XLII,e read XLII,c 


Plate XIII, c; for Vajraraga read Vajraraga 


Plate XXXIc,d ; for Usuisavijaya read Usnisavijaya 


TRANSLITERATION 


So many systems of transliteration are in existence that it is almost 


impossible to say which one is the standard. In the present work I have 


generally followed Professor Foucher, and the following examples of trans- 


cription in Roman are noteworthy in it :— 


q represented as weeeG 

7 CHH 
= CCH 

q : 

fT SorS 


FOREWORD. 


All the three great religious systems of India developed well-filled pan- 
theons, and it is not always easy to decide, to which of these three systems a 
particular image should be assigned. The importance of the study of Icono- 
graphy which primarily concerns itself with the proper recognition of images 


will thus become apparent. 


The difficulties of the investigator are again increased by the fact that 
free and frequent interchanges of deities took place among the three religious 
systems. Hindu deities Parvati and Indra are to be found among the 
Jainas* ; the latter, as well as Ganapati, Sarasvati, Mahakala, Nilakantha, and 
the like, are famous in the Buddhist Pantheon. The Hindus are indebted to 
the Buddhists for borrowing gods like Mahacinatara, Janguli and Vajrayogini 
under the names of Tara, Manasé and Chhinnamasta respectively. Thus we 
have evidence that free interchanges of gods actually did take place first at 
the very outset of Buddhism and Jainism as well as in the more promiscuous 
Tantric age. The Jainas and the Buddhists alike borrowed Hindu gods in 
their earlier stages, | but in the Tantric age, the Buddhist gods were commonly 


exploited. 


The problem of correct identification of images, therefore, presents a real 
difficulty, and great scholars have, more than once, attempted solutions. 
Professors Waddel, Grtinwedel, Foucher, Burgess, Miss Getty, and many 
others have written useful works and gathered together a considerable amount 


of information on Buddhist Iconography. 


But unfortunately the Pantheon of the Indian Vajrayanists has not been 
very much explored. Alice Getty and Deniker’s work deals with Tibetan 
gods only, and the purely Indian gods seem to have attracted little notice 
from them. It is Professor Foucher who drew our attention first in 1900 and 
then five years later by the publication of his two parts of ‘‘ Etude sur |’Icono- 
graphie Bouddhique de 1|’Inde,”’ to a fruitful source of research in this direc- 
tion. his curiosity was first aroused by a study of the illustrations given 


* Indra appears in the Jaina Cave Temples at Ellora. For his image in 
Buddhist schools of sculptures, see Griinwedel : Buddhist Art in India p. 140 et sqq. 

+ The Jainas borrowed early Hindu gods like Brahma, Karttikeya, Kuvera, 
Gauri, and Ambika, (See I. A. Vol. XXXII, 459 et sqq.) and Buddhist Tantric deities, 
such as, YakseSvara, Vajrasrnkhala, Gandhari, Bhrkuti, Syama and Aparajita. 


eit ee) 


in many of the Nepal Manuscripts, and then he tried to identify the sculp- 
tures. For this purpose he hunted out Sadhanas from the Sadhanamala 
and was surprised to find that the Buddhist gods tallied most accurately with 
the descriptions given in the Sadhanamala. His second volume embodies 
a scrutinizing, though partial, study of the Sadhanamala, and it was this 
book which first drew the attention of scholars to the necessity of referring 
to such Buddhist Tantric texts of rituals, in order to make or justify any identi- 
fication. When I was working under Professor Foucher in the Indian Museum 
as a Government Research Scholar he asked me to edit and study the different 
recensions of the Sadhanamala and the Sadhanasamuccaya, and I began a 
systematic study, the result of which is embodied in this volume. 


The Sadhanamala, however, does not exhaust the materials. for the study 
of Indian JIconography. The earliest manuscript of the Sadhanamala 
belongs to the year A. D. 1167, and many of the later developments have 
been incorporated in the work, entitled, Dharmakosasangraha by Pandit 
Amrtananada who was the Residency Pandit when B. Hodgson was the 
Resident of Nepal. A manuscript of this work is preserved in the Durbar 
Library, Nepal, and there is also a copy in the library of the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal in the Government Collection. The Nispannayogambara ‘Tantra 
by Pandit Abhayakara Gupta, who flourished in the 12th century A. D., con- 
tains details of no less than twenty-three Mandalas with the descriptions 
of all gods constituting the Mandala, the number sometimes being a very 
large one. Then there are the Heruka and Hevajra Tantras, Candamaha- 
rosana-Tantra, Vajravarahi-Tantra, Kriya-Samuccaya, Vajravali-Tantra, 
Yoginijala-Tantra and numerous other Buddhist Tantric works, the manus- 
cripts of which are to be found either in the Durbar Library of Nepal, or in 
the University Library of Cambridge, or in the library of the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal. Thus there is still an extensive field for research in the direction 
indicated above. 


It is admitted on all hands that the most urgent need of Buddhist Icono- 
graphy is a thorough study and an accurate edition of the Sadhanamala and 
similar collections. It contains about 300 Sadhanas enjoining the procedure 
for worshipping in the Buddhist Tantric fashion, about 300 deities. Some- 
times three or four Sadhanas describe the same deity ; when this is the case, 
we may assume that there is at least some slight difference either in the form 
or in the procedure of worship as elaborated in the different Sadhanas. 
The Sadhanas contained in the Sadhanamala4 vary considerably in 
length. There are several copies of the manuscript, but there is no 
agreement between any two of the manuscripts as regards the number of 


( it ) 


Sadhanas included. There is another similar collection, which goes by the 
name of Sadhanasamuccaya. Though the name is different, a comparative 
study revealed that the two collections were almost identical. For instance, 
if we compare the two lists of Sadhanas, one in the Sadhanamala and another 
in the Sadhanasamuccaya, given on p. 181ff. under No. 112 and p. 179ff. 
under No. 111 in the Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS in the Government 
Collection, Vol. I, Buddhist MSS, by Mahamiahopadhyaya Haraprasad 
Shastri, it will be seen that except the Sadhana for Vajratiksna, a form of 
Manjusri, the Sadhanasamuccaya has no difference from the Sadhanamala. 
Similarly the two lists given by the same scholar on p. 264ff and 200ff in his 
Catalogue of Palm-leaf and Selected Paper MSS belonging to the Durbar 
Library, Nepal, Vol. II, may be compared. The result would be that the 
Sadhanas Nos. 59, 78, 76, 154 in the Sadhanasamuccaya would be different 
from the Sadhanamala. There are also several lists of Sadhanas in the two 
Collections given in pp. 372-299, Vol. I, and pp. 1-66, Vol. IT, of the ‘‘ Cata- 
logue du Fonds Tibetain de la Bibliotheque Nationale’ by P. Cordier. 
A perusal of these lists would show how Sadhanas once extant in India are 
now lost to it and preserved in the pages of the Tibetan Tangyur. Scholars 
knowing Tibetan can do immense service to Indian Buddhist Iconography 
by studying the Tibetan translations of the Sadhanas. 


There are altogether six Sanskrit MSS of the Sadhanamala and Sadhana- 
samuccaya in India. Out of these, three are in the Government Collection now 
under the care of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and three others are in the 
Durbar Library, Nepal. There are three manuscripts also in the University 
Library, Cambridge (Nos. App. 1598, 1648, 1686). Out of these nine, 
seven were used by me in preparing the text on which the present work in based. 
Mr. P. J. Hartog, M.A., c.1.E., Vice-Chancellor of the Dacca University, kind- 
ly obtained for me the loan of MS No. 1593 of Cambridge. I hope to utilize 
the other two MSS also, (if available), before the text of the Sadhanamala is 


finally edited for printing. 


Out of the nine manuscripts referred to, one is as old as 1167 A. D.* as 
the Colophon asserts ; it is in palm-leaf and belongs to the University Library, 
Cambridge. The next important MS also in palm-leaf belongs to the Durbar 


* About this date there is no controversy. There is another Ms. (No. Add. 
1648) which in dated in N.S. 226 or A. D.1106 as given in Appendix IX in Wright’s 
History of Nepal, p. 323. CC. Bendall reads the date as 336 N.S. or 1216 A. D. 
This date also is retouched and therefore doubtful. The date on which we can 
rely is the date on the cover, viz., N.S. 458 or A. D. 1338. Bendall: Cambridge 


Catalogue, p. 154. 


( tw.) 


Library, Nepal and may be assigned to the end of the 13th century on pale«o- 
graphical grounds. It is written in Bengali character and the writing exactly 
corresponds to the writing of the MS of PaficaraksA, which was written 
in the reign of Madhusena, king of Gauda in Saka 1211 * corresponding to 
A. D. 1289. Two pages, (one containing the alphabet), of the Sadhanamala 
and one of Paficaraksa ( Plate I, a-b-c) are reproduced side by side for ready 
reference. Other MSS however, do not call for further comments beyond 
those given in the respective Catalogues of MSS. JI am sure, numerous other 
MSS of Sidhanam§la and Sadhanasamuccaya would be discovered if a thorough 
search is made in Nepal. For, it was at one time so popular that the priests 
of every monastery kept one for constant use and the number of monasteries 
at Kathmandu alone is no less than five hundred. 


We have already described the MS materials that are extant for the 
study of the Sadhanamala, which is a collection of the Sadhanas. I would 
now endeavour to give an idea as to what a Sadhana means. The word 
‘Sadhana’ has been translated by C. Bendall as ‘charm’ + but the real mean- 
ing should be ‘ procedure for worship.’ The Mantra may be translated by 
the word ‘charm,’ but as the Sadhanas contain sometimes many of them 
besides numerous other things, it cannot be translated by the word ‘charm.’ 
Professor Foucher has indeed given an idea in the second part of his Etude 
sur VIconographic Bouddhique de VInde by summarising a Sadhana. Here also 
a Sadhana is translated in Appendix A. Jt will appear from a look at this 
translation that such a long procedure cannot be translated away by the short 
word ‘charm’. The Sadhanas generally begin with a salutation to the 
Tathagatas or to the deity for whose worship the Sadhana is composed or to 
the Guru of the writer. At the end also there is a Mangala Sloka expressing 
the pious wish that all sentient beings may attain salvation. The Sadhanas 
are composed in a very defective Sanskrit t; they contain sometimes old Ben- 


* See description of the ms of Paficaraksaé, A. S. B. Library No. 4078, Cata- 
logue No. 77, in Shastri’s Buddhist Volume p. 117; also his paper entitled, ‘‘ Vangalar 
Purana Aksara ’’ in the Vangiya Sahitya Parisat Patrika, B. S. 1327, p. 9. 

+ See for instance, Bendall : Cambridge Catalogue, p. 154. 


t A word should be said about the language of the Sadhanas, which is full of 
grammatical errors of metre and_ spelling. The defective Sanskrit sometimes 
makes the meaning very obscure. But the Buddhists never cared for correct 
Sanskrit as is evident from the following quotation from the Vimalprabhd, A. S. B. 
Library No. 4727, Cat. No. 66. ‘* Tesafica susabdavadinam susabdagrahavinasaya artha- 
garanatamasritya kvacit vrtte apasabdah kvacit vrtte yatibhangah. Kvacit avibhaktikam 
padam, kvacit varnasvaro lopah, kvacit vrtte dirgho hrasvah, hrasvo’pi dirghah kvacit 
panhcamyar the saptami caturthyarthe gasthi kutracit parasmaipadini dhatau atmanepadam. 
kvacit ekavacane vahuvacanam, vahuvacane ekavacanam....See Shastris Des. Catal. 
Vol. 1 (Buddhist Mss), p. 78. 





(a) First page of Sadhanamala. 
( Palin-leaf Ms. from Nepal! ) 


ctcomcatuamaniemaasaeteemaeemeenntinntieman 















PROGENY 





SSSI TSO 


(b) Another page containing the alphabet. 
( Palin-leaf Ms. from Nepal) 





y 


(c) Last page of Pancaraksa. 
(Ms. in A.S.B.) 


a ‘comment S 
ERAS ERSAT ANA aA, 

RATA BAAS 
SOU mRNGacalenensaT Aa saCys 


Soa aA ec aa a ncaa iN Binsin 


PLATE 





(d) 


( Bauddh ) 


Tava’s 
Guru Padmasambhaya. (v) Maya’s 


Dream. 
(Bharhut ) 


fe 





Cie) 


gali songs of the same nature as those recorded by Mahamahopadhyaya Hara- 
prasad Shastri in his ‘‘ Bauddha Gan O Doha.”’ * 


For the purpose of Iconography, the Dhyanas or the descriptive econcep- 
tions of the deity, are most important. In the specimen Sadhana translated 
in the Appendix, the Dhyana has been omitted as practically all the Dhyanas 
on the types of the deities have been quoted and translated in the body of the 
book. In understanding the Dhyanas one thing must be remembered that 
the Buddhists unlike the Hindus did not believe in the separate existence, or 
the duality, of the worshipped and the worshipper—at least in the time of 
meditating on the form of the deity. The Sadhanamala is always particular 
in saying that the worshipper should meditate (dhyayat) himself (atmanam) 
as the god ( Bhagavantam) or the goddess (Bhagavatim). The Hindus, 
however, so far as the ritual is concerned, generally postulate a separate exis- 
tence of the worshipped from the worshipper. In rare cases, however, they 
regard the non-duality as essential ; but then, the Hindus in such cases must 
be disciples of the Buddhists. , 


Sometimes the Sadhanas state the names of the authors in the Colophons. 
The text that I have prepared contains the names of a good many authors. 
They are :— 


1. Kumudakara, 2. Ratnakaragupta, 38. Padmakaramati, 4. Advaya- 
vajra, 5. Anupamaraksita, 6. Sarahapada, 7. Muktaka, 8. Cintamani Datta, 
9. Harihara, 10. Subhakara, 11. Prabhakarakirti, 12. Nagarjuna, 13. Ratna 
karasanti, 14. Garbhapada, 15. Padmavardhana, 16. Asangapada 
17. Manoratharaksita, 18. Indrabhiti, 19. Sahajavilaésa, 20. Karuna, 
21. Candramakaramati, 22. Kukkuripdda, 23. Kalyanagarbha, 24. Dur- 
jayacandra, 25. Sasvatavajra, 26. Trailokyavajra, 27. Viripaksa, 28. Guna- 
karagupta, 29. Mangalasena, 30. Kumarakaragupta, 31. Abhayakaragupta, 
32. Sujanabhadra, and 33. Sumatibhadra. 


As these authors will have to be dealt with in the forthcoming edition 
of the text, I do not deal with them elaborately here. Suffice it to say, for 
our present purpose, that all these authors are well-known in Tibetan 
Tangyur, that they flourished in the Tantric age in India, and that most of 
them hailed from Bengal. 


* Asin the Sadhana for Mahamaya. Mss. A—254, Na—94, C—199.— 
‘* Phale sahi viasia kamalu paccohiu vajjefi | 
Alalalalahoh mahasuhena arohiu nrtyefi | 
Ravikiranena paphullia kamalu mahasuhena nrtyefi || ”’ 


( vt ) 


In the earlier phases of Buddhism we do not generally meet. with the 
representations of gods. The scenes from Buddha’s life, and the Jataka stories 
were more or less depicted. Sculptures and railings of Sanchi and Bharhut 
are examples of this kind. It is in the Gandhara School of Art that images 
of Buddha and Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara (?) first made their appearance. 
The sculptural remains at Amaravati are contemporaneous with the Gan- 
dhara School. The Mathura School followed closely and then came the sculp- 
tures of Sarnath, Magadha, Bengal, Java and Nepal in the Tantric age. The 
paintings at Ajanta begin from the first century and continue down to the 
sixth century, and the sculptures of Ellora and some other Buddhist Cave 
Temples of Southern and Western India show that the influences of imma- 
ture Tantra had begun to work. It has already been said that vigorous en- 
deavour has been made to study and identify the sculptural remains of the 
Pre-Tantric age, while those of the Tantric age, up to now, have received little 
attention from scholars. Images are daily coming out from the ancient sites 
of Sarnath and Nalanda and we may well expect to discover a good many 
more from the other ancient sites, such as the Odantapuri, Vikramagila and 
Jagaddal monastaries, where Tantric learning flourished most. That Bengal 
in the Medieval period was practically Buddhist is well borne out by the 
still prevalent worship of Dharma, Manjughosa, and by the numerous Bud- 
dhist sculptures that are constantly discovered in both Eastern as well as Wes- 


tern Bengal. 


The Superintendents of the Archaeological Department, especially of 
the Eastern and the Central Circles often find it difficult to identify the new 
Buddhist finds, and in the absence of trustworthy materials, identifications 
are not always happy. Individual cases of what appeared to me to be wrong 
identifications I have referred to in the body of the book. J] am sure that the 
authors themselves would not have hesitated to propose corrections had they 
the benefit of the new materials that are now given to the public. It is quite: 
possible that many more instances of wrong identifications have escaped me. 
But I venture to hope that the work of rectification will now be facilitated 
by a reference to the many Dhyanas and the descriptions given in the present 
work. I do not, however, ask my readers to accept all my identifications, 
which are interspersed throughout the book. In all cases I have attempted 
to give my authorities and I shall welcome different interpretations and sug- 


gestions of new explanations. 


The wealth of sculptural and bronze remains in Nepal have not yet re- 
ceived the attention they deserve. Nepal is the only place which presents an 
abundance of materials for the study of Iconography, especially Buddhist 


(e012. )) 


Iconography. Some of the Buddhist monasteries at Patan are so rich in 
images that they can be said to constitute small museums by themselves. One 
hundred and eight sculptures alone appear in the Stipa of Bauddhanath 
( Vulgo-Baudh) in Nepal, and the art and technique of the sculptures and 
occasional images of Guru Padmasambhava bespeaks the Tibetan character 
of this temple. Out of these one hundred and eight images, forty-seven are 
in yab-yum and the rest are single. About ten of the single images represent 
Siddhapurusas of Tibet,—Mila-ras-pa, Padmasambhava and others. Though 
these images are Tibetan in character, they contain, nevertheless, some of the 
purely Indian Buddhist gods of the Vajrayana Pantheon, for example, the 
images of Sadaksari Lokesvara, Vak, Heruka, Yamantaka, and the like. There 
is a statement in a Tibetan work that in the matter of Art, the Bengal Art is 
the best, next to it is the Art of Nepal and the worst are those of Tibet and 
China. A specimen of Tibetan Art,—an image of Guru Padmasambhava 
from Baudh,—is illustrated in Plate I, d. 


In the present work, endeavour has been made to identify the images of 
Buddhist deities by means of the Dhydanas given in the Sadhanamala. Where 
images could not be procured, we have tried to illustrate the Sadhana 
with the help of sketches or drawings. These drawings have been copied 
from the ancestral albums of the native Citrakaras of Nepal, who are Buddhists. 
We have been able to secure a good number of drawings through the kind 
offices of Gubhaju Siddhiharsa and Viraman Citrakara, both belonging to 
Kathmandu, Nepal. Where the sketches present a wide variation from the 
Dhyana we have not ventured to reproduce them ; thus we had to reject about 
fifty drawings brought from Nepal. 


The great majority of Buddhist deities are believed to have emanated 
from one or the other of the five Dhyani Buddhas, and Iconographists will 
agree with me in holding that the most scientific classification of the Buddhist 
deities is to sort out and classify them according to their parental Dhyani 
Buddhas. As Manjusri and Avalokitesvara, the two most important Bodhi- 
sattvas each have a very large number of Sadhanas applicable to himself, 
they have been treated in separate chapters. The divinities who cannot be 
definitely stated to be emanations of any Dhyani Buddha, have been termed 
as Independent and dealt with in a separate chapter. 


Dhyanas have been quoted from the Sadhanamala and translations 
have been given in each case. Dhydanas of the same deity without any 
marked variation have not been quoted, but the variations have been noted 
in all cases. It is necessary here to point out that Professor Foucher has 
given a number of Sadhanas from the Sadhanamala with translations in French 


( put 5) 


in the second part of his Etude sur VIconographie Bouddhique de VInde. These 
Sadhanas have not been omitted from the present work to ensure complete- 
ness,—also because Prof. Foucher’s work is in French, and English is more 
readily understood in India than French. 


As the complete text of the Sadhanamala as collated from seven manu- 
scripts in different collections is now ready and will be published in due course, 
we consider it useless to burden the present work with different readings 
given in different MSS while quoting the text. Different readings have, how- 
ever, been given in cases where they involve a marked difference in meaning. 
The reading which seemed to me to be correct has always been given in the 
body of the text while the variants have been noted in the footnotes. Folia 
references of the following three MSS only are given when quoting the text 
of Sadhanamala. 


N. MS in palm-leaf belonging to the Durbar Library, Nepal. It 
is divided into two parts with two sets of pagination. In the first part, refer- 
ences are given as * N—I,’ and in the second, as ‘ Na—l.’ 


Jak. MS in paper belonging to the Government Collection in the 
Library of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, serial No. 8051 and Catalogue No. 74. 


C, MS No. App, 1593 in paper belonging to the University Library, 
Cambridge. 


When a Dhyana is quoted all the three references in Folia are given, 
forinstance, N—1, A—1 and C—1. 


When the images do not exactly correspond to the description given in 
the Dhyanas the difference is duly noted. Minor differences do not stand 
in the way of identification, as will be found in the cases of Simhanada Lokes- 
vara, Manjuvara, Uechusma Jambhala, and several others, and they have been 
passed over. 


In the Introduction, an attempt has been made to trace the history of 
Buddhism from the birth of Buddha down to its fall in India with the coming 
of the Muhammadans. This history has been traced in three different aspects, 
—(1) Doctrine, (2) Art, and (8) Literature. 


The photographs in all cases, unless otherwise stated, have been re- 
produced from my negatives. But some have also been taken from the publi- 
cations of the Archaeological Department and similar other publications. 


THE AUTHOR. 


INTRODUCTION. 
$I. A Brief Historical Survey of Buddhism. 


Buddha was born during a period of intellectual ferment. The bold 
speculations of the old seers in the Aranyakas and the Upanisads were confined 
within the circle of the Brahmanical society. But soon after these specula- 
tions were ventilated, there appeared to have grown a large and extensive 
Aryavarta which geographically included nearly the whole of Northern India, 
and no more comprised exclusively of the Brahmins and their followers, but 
included within its fold, some of the nomadic tribes just settling down to an 
ordered and civilized state of existence. 


These tribes were, as they called themselves, the Ksattriyas. They 
were fond of war, and after reducing the original inhabitants into the condi- 
tion of the serfs, they remained there in right royal style, living in splendid 
cities and indulging in all sorts of moral, intellectual and artistic pursuits. 
Their number was very large towards the East and North-East of the old 
Aryan land, and the Sakyas, Vrijis, Videhas and Mallas, all belonged to this 
sort of unincorporated Ksattriyas. The Kurus, the Pafcalas, the Saurastras 
and the Iksvakus were more or less influenced by the culture of the Brahmins. 
As a result of the great upheaval in the domain of intellect and temperament 
mentioned above, some of the choicest spirits sprung from among the Ksat- 
trivas—men who profoundly influenced the subsequent Indian thought. 
Seven names stand forth as the most prominent in the matter of philosophy 
and religion. These are—Buddha, Mahavira, Gosala Mankhaliputtra, San- 
jaya Bellatthiputtra, Kakuda Katyvayana, Pirna Kasyapa and Ajitakesa- 
kambala. We are, of course, here concerned only with Buddha, and the sys- 
tem of philosophy of which he is the founder. 


The ethical system of Buddha was based mainly on the Sankhya, but 
profoundly modified by his own speculations. The boldness of the specula- 
tion, the grandeur of the moral idea set forth, and the strictness of discipline 
gave his system an attractive and engaging character. People of all shades 
of thought came to him and he incorporated them within his own fold and 
kept them in harmony as long as he lived. 


But with the death of Buddha things changed and dissentions crept in, 
and though the Elders for a time succeeded in checking all schismatic efforts 
of the Youngers, it was at Vaisali that they parted company, never to be 


B 


mae te) 


united again, on points which to the modern historian appear exceedingly 
minor and trifling. The Youngers, however, thought, as we learn it from the 
Mahavastu. Avadina, that the difference was fundamental and far-reaching. 


Thus the whole camp was divided into two parties. Those who stuck 
to Ethics and moral discipline were called the Theravadins, and those who 
trifled with Ethics and discipline but stuck to metaphysical and altruistic doc- 
trines were called the Mahasanghikas. One point of difference is very mark- 
ed,—the Youngers were all Lokottaravadins and believed in the superhuman 
character of Buddha. But schisms bring forth further schisms, and in the 
course of a century, the two parties split up into eighteen principal sects; be- 
side a number of minor ones. 


One of the Theravadin sects, the Vaibhajyavadin or the Analytical sect 
was favoured by Asoka, and rose to prominence. They sent missionaries 
to all parts of India and outside and sueceeded in converting a multitude of 
people. But with the dismemberment of the Maurya Empire, the Buddhists 
fell on evil days. The relentless persecution of three successive Brahmin 
dynasties proved too much for the new faith. Young and vigorous, bold 
and speculative as the Mahasanghikas were, they sought new fields for their 
activities beyond the dwindling empire of the Brahmins. They were most 
active amongst the new settlers in India, the’ Sakas, the Yavanas, the 
Pahlavas, and the Kusinas. The Vibhajyavadins, losing their prestige under 
the persecuting zeal of Pusyamitra and his successors, seem to have fled to 


South and made at last Ceylon their home, where their doctrines can even 
now be studied in all their pristine purity. 


The Mahasanghikas made a headway at the time of Kaniska. In the 
Council heid in his time, the Thderivadins were very feebly represented and 
the Vibhajyavadins were not existent. The Mahasanghikas made a commen- 
tary on the sayings of Buddha called ‘‘ Bibhasa.”? The whole literature is 
now lost in the original but fragments exist in Chinese translations. At the 
Council of Kaniska there was a small but pushing sect called the Mahayana, 
but at that Assembly they did not count. But two generations later they 
made a great headway under Nagarjuna and his powerful disciple, Aryadeva. 
Both of them were absolute Sinyavadins. Buddha himself did not go beyond 
Arhatship. He held out to his followers as a reward for their discipline Arhat- 
ship, or an escape from the miseries of birth, old age and death, in other words, 
from the evils of transmigration. All speculations beyond Arhatship Buddha 
discouraged as of no use. But bolder spirits after him could not resist the 
temptation of speculating, and their speculations ended in the time of Nagar- 
juna in Stinyavada. But in a very short time Sunyavada failed to satsify 


(at 3) 


the hancquerings of the Mahayanists and so Maitreyanatha, one or two genera- 
tions after Nagarjuna, added Vandana to it, and founded what developed later 


on as the Yogacara System. 


The Astasdhasrika Prajnaparamita which Nagarjuna is said to have 
rescued from the nether regions became the standard work of the Stnyava- 
dins, and the same work as modified by the ideas of Maitreyanatha became 
the Pancavimsati-sahasrika Prajnapdramitad. This again, became the stan- 
dard work of the Vijnainavadins. The Astasahasrika is divided into thirty- 
two chapters, while the Paficavimsati-Sahasrika is divided into eight only, 


following the chapters of Maitreyanatha’s work. 


The controversy between the Sinyavadins and the Vijfiavadins raged 
for several centuries and many ranged themselves on both sides. But in the 
8th. century people were not satisfied with Vijfanavada. They imported 
into it another element called the Mahasukhavada, so that after ordinary 
Nirvana there were three elements, nemaly, Sinya, Vijiana and Mahasukha. 
It is form Mahasukha that Vajrayana originated, and Vajrayana is the sys- 


tem rich in iconographical ideas. 


To understand the rise of Vajrayana we shall have to go back to the 
teachings of Buddha. He had two Yanas, the Sravakayana and the Pra- 
tyekayana, The Sravakas were to hear from a Buddha, but they had to wait 
till the advent of another Buddha, for their emanacipation. In the mean- 
while the Sravakas could teach, but they could neither attain, nor help others 
in attaining Nirvana. The Pratyekas were eminent men ; they could attain 
Nirvana by their own efforts without the help of a Buddha; but they could 


not impart Nirvana to others. 


Buddhism continued in this state till the rise of the Mahayana whose 
proper name is Bodhisattvayana. The Mahayanist contemptuously called 
the previous Yanas as Hinayanas. They held that they could by their own 
exertion reach Nirvana and even Buddhahood, and help others in attaining 
both. The distinction between the Mahayana and Hinayana is graphically 
described in the first book of the Mahdydnasittradlamkdra attributed to Asanga. 


Thus there were three Yanas in Buddhism about the 2nd. and 38rd. cen- 
turies A.D. But there were four Schools of Philosophy, Sarvastivada 
( Sautrantika), Vahyarthabhanga ( Baibhasika), Vijhanavada ( Yogacara) and 
Sinyavada (Madhyamaka). How these four systems were distributed amongst 
the three Yanas is one of the vital questions of Buddhism. But no light has 
been thrown on it as yet by the extant European or modern Indian literature 
on Buddhism. Happily, the discovery of an ancient manuscript entitled, 


(Party, *) 


Tattvaratnavalt, by Advayavajra has dispelled the darkness. Advayavajra was 
a Bengali and he flourished in the 12th century. He was a Bengali because 
he commented upon the Bengali Dohdkosa by Sarahavajra, who flourished 
in the 11th century. He says :—‘‘ There are three Yanas, Sravakayana, 
Pratyekayaina and Mahayana. There are four theories, Baibhasika, Sautran- 
tika, Yogacara and Madhyamaka. Sravakayana and Pratyekayana are ex- 
plained by the theory of the Baibhasikas. Mahayana 1s of two kinds, Para- 
mitanaya and Mantranaya. Paramitas are explained by the theories either 
of Sautrantika, Yogacara or Madhyamaka; Mantranaya is explained by 
the theories of Yogacara and Madhyamaka only.” * 


So Mantranaya commences with the most abstruse theories of Sinya- 
vada and Vijfanavada. Advayavajra postpones the explanation of Mantra- 
naya in one place, and says,—‘‘ Mantranaya is very abstruse. It concerns 
with men who seek emancipation by deep and solemn methods. It is also 
very extensive owing to the understanding of such theories as the four symbo- 
lie representations. Therefore, we are not fit to explain it”.+ He cites for 
his authority—‘‘ Mantrasastra transcends all other Sastras, because, though 
all Sastras have the same common object, there is no fear of ignorance here. 
The means are many, and they are not difficult of attamment, but it can be 
attained only by men whose senses are sharpened to the highest degree. On 
this point we have written a work, Sekanirnaya.t 


The Sckanirnaya is a short work in the same bundle of manuscripts by 
the same author. It accepts the Mahasukha theory and dilates upon the 
various stages of the development of Mahasukha, which, according to the 


author, is not possible to attain without the Sakti, the embodiment of Karuna. 


* “Tatra trini Yanani, Sravakayainam, Pratyekayanam, Mahayanam ceti. Sthi- 
tayah catasrah, VaibhasikasSautrantika-Yogacara-Madhyamakabhedena. Tatra 
Vaibhasikasthitya Sravakayanam Pratyekayanafica vyakhyayate. Mahayanafica dvivi- 
dham Paramitanayo Mantranayasceti. Tatra Paramitanayah Sautrantika-Yogacara- 
Madhyamakasthitya vyakhyanayate. Mantranayastu. Yogacara-Madhyamakasthitya 
vyakhyanayate,”’ 

Tattvaratndvali in Advayavajrasangraha, Fol. 9. 


¢é ‘ ° . ° = . = - - - . ° 
+ ‘* Mantranayastu asmadvidhairihatigambhiratvat, gambhiranayadhimuktika- 
purusavisayatvacca caturmudradi-sadhana-prakasanavistarattvacca na vyakriyate.”’ 


Ibid, Fol. 14. 
} Ekarthatve’pyasammohat vahipayadaduskarat | 
Tiksnedriyadhikaracca Mantrasastram visisyate 
Krtascaibhiratra Sekanirnayo nama granthah.”’ 
Tattvaratnavali Ibid, Fol. 14. 


nYquUg otjvy 7 ‘yppueg NYQuItY 





“IVdIHN dO SVdOLS C4lVeAdd THO GH AL 


id salva 


: ae z : 
. or 


Caan pa ae oon 
_ aes , 


itl ene 
oe a hats : 


7 
phat Ue bee 





( wit ) 


In another of his short works entitled, Mahasukhaprakasa, he says—‘ from 


? 


the right perception of Sinyataé comes “ Bija.”? From ‘ Bija’’ is developed 
the conception of an icon and from that conception comes the external re- 
presentation of the icon ; * so the entire iconography of the Buddhists pro- 
ceeds from a correct understanding of the doctrine of Sinyata. The yab- 
yum conceptions were an outcome of the dual conceptions of Siinyata and 
Karuna, both of which were conceived and represented, but which ultimately 


proved to be one and the same. 


* « Sanyatabodhito bijam bijat vimbam prajayate | 
Vimbe ca nyasavinyasa tasmat sarvam pratityajam || 
Mahdsukhuprakdga in Ibid, Fol. 32. 


§ II. Evolution of the Doctrines. 


The pivot of distinction between the Mahayana and the Hinayana lies 
in the question of Nirvana or the final goal of a Buddhist, though the actual 
split between the Mahasanghikas and the Sthaviras was originally due to dif- 
ference on ten minor points of discipline.* The Hinayanist, whether a Sra- 
vaka or a Pratyekabuddha, is mean, selfish and always strives towards his 
own Nirvana or emancipation, ignoring altogether all other beings of the 
world. The Mahayanist, on the other hand, takes just the opposite view, 
makes Compassion ( Karuna) his motto, and sets himself to work vigorously 
for the uplift of mankind, nay, ail sentient beings from man to the smallest 
insect. In fact, he seems to be more solicitous about the emancipation of 
the latter than of his own self. 


Both the Hinayanist and the Mahayanist agree in saying that Buddha 
as a Bodhisattva remained in the Tusita Heaven prior to his descent to this 
earth. They agree in holding that Buddha as Sakyasimha was born in the 
womb of Maya, the queen of Suddhodana the king of Kapilavastu,—and Maya 
in her dreams saw a white elephant entering into her womb. They also agree 
that his birth took place at the Lumbini garden, that he obtained his En- 
lightenment under the Bo-tree at Bodh-Gaya, preached his First Sermon at 
Sarnath and entered into Nirvana at Kusinagara. 


But they differ on the question of the divinity of Buddha. The Hina- 
yanist regards him as the Progenitor of the Law, and calls him a super-man, 
but nothing but a man with extraordinary intellect. But the Mahayanist, 
on the other hand, looks upon him as a divinity,f and as such, an eternal 
being coming to earth only for the salvation or deliverance of the beings 
tortured by Mara, the Evil One. The Hinayanist believes in the Buddhist 
Triad and reveres and worships it in the order of Buddha, Dharma and 


* H. Sastri: Bauddhadharma No. 14.—‘‘ Tafihara sakalei Dasgavastur viruddhe 
mat dilen, kramei se mat pracar haila ; yafhara se mat grahan karilen tafthader nam haila 
Sthaviravadi, yahhara grahan karilen na tafihader nam haila Mahasanghik.” (in Bengali.) 


+ Compare Mahavastu Avadana, Vol. I, p. 2.—‘‘ Arya-Mahasanghikanam pathena 
Vinayapitakasya Mahavastuye adi.’’ Kern has taken the Lokottaravadins as a sect of 
the Mahasanghikas. But the fact seems to be that the Lokottaravavadins are the same 
as the Mahasanghikas, who attempted for the first time to establish the divinity or the 
eternity of Buddha. The Mahasanghikas subsequently turned out to be the Mahayanists. 
Manual of Buddhism, p. 3 et sqq. 


( aw ) 


Sangha, that is, the Promulgator of the Law first, the Law second and the 
recipients of the Law last. Every new recruit to the faith had to recite the 
Trisarana in the above order. But the Mahayanist changes the order into 
Dharma, Buddha and Sangha, attributing the first and highest place to the 
Law, and the next higher place to the Promulgator of the Law. According 
to a Mahayanist, Dharma or Prajna is eternal and the highest object in Bud- 
dhism ; Buddha is only the Upaya or the means of obtaining that knowledge, 
which is diffused into the masses through him. This idea bears a close re- 
semblance to the Hindu conception of the Mantras,* which are supposed to be 
eternal and of which only a glimpse was obtained by the Vedic Rsis. It took 
a considerable time, though we cannot definitely say how much, for the idea 
of Prajna and Upaya to evolve from Buddha and Dharma. As a consequence 
the Sangha was also changed to a more dignified designation of ‘ Bodhisattva’ + 
which meant in earlier times all members of the Holy Order, and later on, only 
the higher membersf?, as is current even is now Nepal. 


In the matter of Nirvana, Mahayana has on entirely different develop- 
ment. The Himayanist will be satisfied if he is emancipated from the bond 
of worldly sufferings, from the evil of birth and rebirth. He does not look 
beyond his own salvation. But the Bodhisattva, on the other hand, being 
anxious to do good to the world, acquires a certain state of mind known as 
‘ Bodhicitta’ (Bodhi Mind), which makes him advance higher and _ higher. 
Simultaneously with his advancement he acquires merit and commences his 
march towards the Akanistha Heaven§, where Amitabha Buddha of Bound- 
less Light resides. The Universe according to the Buddhists consists of 
twenty-six Lokas or Heavens divided into three broad divisions, (1) Kama 


* See Peterson’s Handbook to the Study of the Rig-Veda, Part I. pp. 31-24 and Jaiminiya 
Nyaya-Malaé-Vistara, I, 2, 27-32. 


+ The compound word ‘‘ Bodhisattva ’’ may be expounded as Bodhau yatante ye sattvah 
i.e. ‘“ Those who strives for the attainment of Bodhi.’’ In primitive Buddhism, according 
to the Mahayanists, therefore, all members were Bodhisattvas. - See also Sujuki: Outlines 
of Mahayana Buddhism, p. 290 et sqq. 


t As in Beal: Si-yu-ki. Cf. Aryadeva Bodhisattva, i, 189 ; ASvaghosa Bodhisattva, 
ii 75, 100, etc. In Nepal now all Vajracaryyas are called Bodhisattvas. 


§ There is another intellectual movement by which the Bodhisattvas cross the ten 
Bhumis, first enumerated and described in Mahdvastu Avaddana p. 78 et sqq. The word 
‘¢ Vivarta’’ has been taken by Senart to mean “‘ returning back from a higher Bhumi to a 
lower.”’ But this word in Mahavastu always refers to a forward movement. 


( wi ) 


(2) Ripa and (3) Aripa.* When the Bodhisattva remains in the Kama 
Lokas he will be subject to sensuous desires ; in the second group of Heavens 
he will be above these desires but will nevertheless retain his form,—and in the 
third the form of the Bodhisattva will be lost. The Ripa Heavens again 
are divided into four broad divisions ; + in the first of these, the Bodhisattva 
is not subjected to sensuous desires ; in the second, he gains absolute purity, 
in the third, he is freed from the cycles of rebirth ; and in the fourth, he reaches 
the Akanistha Heaven or Sukhavati and becomes a Buddha. 


The Artipa Heavens are fourt in number and in these the form of the 
Bodhisattva is lost ; in the first of these, the Bodhisattva is able to conceive 
the idea of and to merge himself in Infinite Space ; in the second, he attains 
Infinite Intelligence ; in the third, he conceivas the idea of absolute Non- 
entity ; and in the fourth, he abides neither in consciousness nor unconscious- 
ness. This is the highest state,—this is Nirvana.§ 


But here arose a most baffling controversy. On the question whether 
Nirvana meant absolute Void ( Sanya) or a conscious state (Vijfiana)—the 
Mahayanists ranged themselves in two divisions. The Yogacara School could 
not pursuade itself to believe that sentient beings after ages of striving should 
only end in Void. The followers of this School were known as the Vijfianava- 
dins of whom Maitreyanatha in the chief, who held that even in Stnya, the 
Vijhana or consciousness remained. The Madhyamikas were more radical. 
They held that Sinya meant a transcendental state (not annihilation), 
about which neither existence, nor non-existence, nor a combination of the 


two, nor a negation of the two, can be predicated. || 


* Max Muller: Dharmasamgraha, p. 31. The three equivalents in Sanskrit are 
Kamédvacara, Ripavacara, and Aripdvacara. 
+ Morier Williams: Buddhism p. 211 et. sqq. The Rtpavacara heavens are either 
eighteen or twenty-two. See also Dharmasamgraha, p. 31. 
t The four Aripa heavens ere—Akasanantyayatana, Vijfiiananantyayatana, akifi- 
canyanantyayatana, Naivasamjnianasamjfiyayatana. j 
§ Compare Asvaghosa’s conception of Nirvanain Saundarananda. 
“ Dipo yatha nirvrtimabhyupeto naivavanim gacchati nantariksam | 
Disam na kaficit vidisam na kaficit snehaksayat kevalameti santim | 
Evam krti nirvrtimabhyupeto naivavanim gacchati nantariksam | 
Disam na kaficit vidisam na kaficit klesaksayat kevalameti Ssantim’’ |! 
| Sujuki is of opinion that the word, ‘ Stinya’ is used because the language does not 
furnish a more expressive word. C/.—the statement in Madhavacaryyas Sarvadarsana- 
samgraha-—* asti-nasti-tadubhaya-nubhava-catuskotivinirmuktam sanyartipam.’’ pp. 23- 
24. Compare also Advayavajrasamgraha, Fol. 13.— 
‘“ Na san nasan na sadasan na capyanubhayatmyakam | 
Catuskotivinirmuktam tattvam Madhyamika viduh”’ || 


These are in short, the main ideas underlying the divisions of the Maha- 
yana doctrine which is always very abstruse. But Buddhism, we should not 
forget, was a mass-religion and the mass is not expected to be so intelligent 
as to grasp the real philosophical significance of Prajia and Upaya or of Nir- 
vana. The priests found a great deal of difficulty in making the mass under- 
stand the meaning of Nirvana, to the attainment of which every Boddhi- 
sattva strives. They invented a word for Sinya; it was Niratma, that is, 
something in which the soul is lost. The Boddhicitta merges in Niratma 
and there remains in eternal bliss and happiness (Mahasukhavada). The 
word, ‘ Niratma,’ it may be noted, is in the feminine ; the NiraAtma is there- 
fore a Devi, in whose embrace the Bodhicitta remains.* The masses well 
understood the significance of Niratmaé, and this feminine aspect—an out- 
come of Mahasukhavada—in the doctrine of Nirvana, gave rise to what is 


known as Vajrayana. 


The word ‘ Vajrayana’ means the vehicle of obtaining Nirvana through 
the medium of Vajra, which is another name for Siinya, so called because it 
is a thing which cannot be destroyed, cannot be cut, cannot be burnt.t The 
position of the priests, the Gurus and the Vajracaryyas in the Vajrayana 
thus became very much magnified, because they invented other methods for 
the mass to attain an easy salvation. The mass could not master the sac- 
red writings and could not even recite them. The Dharanis, which were 
mostly meaningless strings of words, were composed for them, and the recita- 
tion of these Dharanis{ promised them great merit. These Dharanis were 
later on, shortened into equally unintelligible Mantras and Vijamantras. 
Individual Mantras were assigned to individual deities, who were held to 
take their origin from the Vijamantras or mystic syllables. How the dei- 
.ties originated from particular syllables is a matter for independent investi- 
gation. Those votaries who could not worship their gods in accordance with 
the prescribed procedure ( Sadhana) were promised by the Gurus perfection 


* H. Sastri: Bauddhadharma. (No. 2.) ‘‘ Nirvana ’’—‘‘ Ei Stinyake tafihara valilen 
‘Niratma.’ Sudhu Niratma valiya trpta hailen na, valilen ‘‘ Niratma-devi,’ arthat Niratma 
Sabdati strilinga. Bodhisattva Niratmadevir kole jhafip diya padilen.”’ (i Bengali ) 

t Cf.—-Advayavajrasamgraha, Fol. 16.— 

** Uktafica Vajrasekhare— 
Drdham séram asauSiryam acchedyabhedyalaksanam | 
Adahi avinasi ca Sinyata vajramucyate”’ | 

t The Dharanis, Hrdayasitras and Mantras belong properly to the Mantrayana, about 
which no details are forthcoming. According to H. Tsang the Dharani-or Vidyadhara- 
pitaka belonging to Mantrayana is as old as the time of the Mahasatghikas. Beal. Si-yu-k1, 
II, 165. See also Kern’s remarks in Manual of Indian Buddhism, p. 6. 


Cc 


( wuiit ) 


only through the muttering of the Mantras*, Thus the position of the Gurus 
became paramount and as they showed the easy way or the adamantine: path 
for Nirvana, they were called the Vajracaryyas. 


It was an evil day for Mahayana when Asanga in the sixth century went 
up to heaven and brought the Tantras down to earth and introduced the 
much expected aid of gods, the want of which was keenly felt,—into the 
religion of the Mahayanists of his time ; they had already lost faith in their 
own exertions and required the help of the gods for their salvation, nay more, 
they even stooped so low as to crave for the ordinary worldly perfections 
(Siddhis) and were not satisfied if they could not secure them. 


What the word ‘ Tantra”’ really means is difficult to ascertain. Vari- 
ous scholars have explained the word in various ways. Mahamahopadhyaya 
Haraprasad Shastri says,t “The word Tantra is very loosely used. Ordi- 
nary people understand by it any system other than the Vedas. But it real- 
ly means the worship of Sakti or female energy. The female energy is wor- 
shipped in conjunction with male energy. The union of male and female 
energy is the essence of Tantra.” 


The mentality of the mass and the mentality of the Vajracaryyas was 
in a such a state that it readily grasped and assimilated the doctrines of Tan- 
tra and developed a form of religion, which, according to Bendall,f was brought 
to ‘“‘the level of very thinly veiled Kamasastra.”? Raja Rajendralal, while 
commenting upon the Guhyasamdja,§ says, ‘‘ but in working it out theories 
are indulged in and practices enjoined, which are at once the most revolting 
and horrible that human depravity could think of, and compared to which 
the worst specimens of Holiwell Street Literature of the last century would 
appear absolutely pure.’? Yet nevertheless, the feminine element in the doc- 
trine attracted a large number of followers and made it extremely popular 


and the most exquisite art, which this school developed, made it doubly at- 
tractive. 


Whatever might be the fault of the Vajrayanists it is to them we owe 
the legacy of a rich, varied and extensive Pantheon. The purely Tantric 


*Cf. the statement, ‘‘khede sati Mantram japet’’, very often repeated in the Sadhana- 
mala. 

t H. Sastri: Introduction to Modern Buddhism, p. 10. 

¢ See C. Bendall’s Introduction to Siksdésamuccaya, p. VI. 

§ R. Mitra: Sanskrit Buddhist Literature, p. 261. 


( wie ) 


gods were invariably accompanied with their Saktis, who were sometimes 
given a separate seat in sculptures, sometimes the same seat, sometimes a seat 
on the lap of the gods, and sometimes they were represented in the actual 
embrace of the gods. The sober form of Tantra generally adopted the first 
three courses. But the most thorough-going form worshipped the gods in 
the embrace, in union with their Saktis, or as the Tibetans describe it—in 


Yab-yum. 


§ III. Hvidence of Art. 


The Buddhist Universe is represented by a Sttpa and the Stupas 
received worship from the Buddhists from the life-time of Buddha 
down to the present day (Plate II). Similar is the case with the Three 
Jewels, which came to be represented later, both in symbolic and in human 
form * ( Plate IIL). As Buddhism was originally a religion of tolerance it 
incorporated many of the Hindu deities in the first stage ; when Buddha had 
attained Enlightenment and was about to retire from the world, Brahma and 
Indra approached him suddenly and asked him to stay for a time to deliver the 
people of Magadha. Kuvera, the Hindu god of Wealth, who is usually re- 
presented with a bag of gems in the left hand was also incorporated ; so was 
the case with Vasudhara, who became in later times, the consort of Jambhala, 
the Buddhist god of Wealth. The railings of Bodh Gaya, Sanchi, Bharaut 
and Amaravati dating from the 8rd. to the Ist. century B.C. show unmistak- 
ables signs of worshipping everything that Buddha made sacred by his magic 
touch. For instance, the Bodhi Tree ( Plate I1V,a), his turban ( Plate IV,b), 
his footprints ( Plate IV,c), the Wheel-of-the-law ( Plate IV,d), and similar 
objects were revered by the later Buddhists in the absence of their Departed 
Master. The railings show further, bas-reliefs representing innumerable scenes 
from Buddha’s life as recorded in the Lalita-Vistara or the Mahdavastu Ava- 
dana (e. g. Dream of Maya, Plate I,e) as well as stories from the J&atakas. 
The Nagas and the Yaksas are also to be seen everywhere, but whether they 
received any worship, is difficult to say. 


For several centuries after the Mahaparinirvana of Buddha we never 
meet with any representation of the Great Master himself. Perhaps his per- 
sonality was too great to admit of a representation, or Was it owing to the 
religious bias of the Indian Buddhists ? Whatever might be the cause, it 
so happened that the Indians were not the first to carve out a statue of Lord 
Buddha, one of the greatest celebrities of India. In Mahayana we have seen, 


* From the materials now before us we may safely hold that the Nepalese Buddhists 
were the first to conceive the Holy Triad in human form, in which the Triad is worshipped 
there even in modern days. When representated in art, Dharma shows the Afijali against 
the breast in the first pair of hands and carries the rosary and the double lotus in the second. 
Buddha shows either the Samadhi or the Bhimisparsana Mudra; and Sangha, a male 
divinity, shows the Dharmacakra Mudra in the first pair of hands and the rosary and the 
bookin the second pair, 


“RYLSURY | “eyppug VULTIVY 





CLV Le UALS LE CLG thas at Het 


Ill ALVId 


s 


Path 
oo 





( wei) 


Buddha was assigned a subordinate position among the Three Jewels; time 
obliterated almost everything of his solemn personality, and the Graeco-Bud- 
dhists carved out his first statue in Gandhara.* The intermixture of the 
Greek with the indegenous plastic art gave rise to what we now call the Greco- 
Buddhist Art, popularly known as the Gandhara School of Sculpture. Bud- 
dha was the chief object of representation in this art ; the events and stories 
from his life were represented ; many of the Jataka stories of his previous 
births were also represented. At Taxila, Peshwar, Sahri-Balhol and nume- 
rous other places in the North-West Frontier Province, heaps of stones have 
been unearthed bearing innumerable images of Buddha in different attitudes 
(Asanas) and different gestures (Mudras). Besides Buddhas images, we meet 
with the images of Jambhala, Maitreya, Hariti, the Indian Madonna, and her 
consort, and other Bodhisattva images t in the Gandhara Art, besides nu- 
merous other things. 


There is considerable disagreement among scholars as to be beginning 
of Gandhara Art. Prof. A. Foucher declares that the reign of Menander was 
perhaps most suited for such a school of art to begin. But the date he as- 
signs to Menander is cir. B. C. 160.£ There again, scholars are divided in 
their opinion. Dr. R. C. Mazumdar who has gone deep into the question, and 
has examined all the arguments in favour or against the date, has come to 
the conclusion that a date prior to 90 B. C. cannot be assigned to Menander. 
We take it, that the Gandhara Art began in the reign of Menander in 90 B.C. 
and that no image of Buddha was made before that time. 


This art was carried over to Mathura, where again the Gandhara Art 
coming in contact with the local art took a somewhat different development, 
which has been assigned the name of the Mathura School of Sculpture.§ This 
School also produced numerous Buddha and Bodhisattva images, the image 
of Kuvera,|] the scenes depicting the four principal and the four minor scenes 
of Buddha’s life generally, including other scenes also. The Yaksas and the 


* A. Foucher: Beginnings of Buddhist Art and other essays, p. 127. 


T See V. A. Smith: Fine Art in India and Ceylon, figs. 62, 63, Pl. XXVIII. fig. 
64, 65, also Garuda and Naga images, fig. 70 ; refer also to the image of Kuvara, No. 3912 
of Indian Museum. 


{ Foucher: Beginnings of Buddhist Art, p. 127. 


§ Cf. Vogel: The Mathura School of Sculpture,—‘‘ This explains the mixed character 
of the Mathura School in which we find on the one hand a direct continuation of the old 
Indian art of Barahut (Bharaut) and Sanchi and on the other hand the classical influence 
derived from Gandhara’’ A. S. I. Ann. Rep. 1906-7, p. 145. 


| Ibid p. 144 and V. A. Smith’s History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon, fig. 81. 


(" wett”) 


Nagas which are the common property of the Hindus and the Buddhists, are 
to be frequently met with in this art. The Mathura School is famous for its 
images of the Kusana kings, and. its flourshing period ranges from the first 
century A. D. to the early Gupta period,* for we do not meet here with any 
of the later Buddhist gods, Avalokitesvara, Manjusri, Tara and the like. 


Next to Mathura we come to Sarnath which covers a period from the 
time of Asoka down to the reign of the Palas.+ Itis here that we meet with 
the representations of the varied and extensive Pantheon of the Vajrayana 
Buddhists. The images of Sadaksari Lokesvara, Ucchusma Jambhala, Maf- 
jusri, Tara, Vasudhara, Marici, the five Dhyani Buddhas, Vajrasttva and 
many others,-——-point to a higher and later form of Vajrayana. Though the 
gods are here represented for the first time with their Saktis, they do not, 
nevertheless, belong to the most attractive form in which they are required 
to be represented in Samputayoga, or in union, or as the Tibetans call it, in 


Yab-yum. 


Further downwards the monastaries of Odantapuri, Nalanda and Vik- 
ramasila must have developed the latest form of Vajrayana before Buddhism 
was finally wiped out at the advent of the Muhammadan invader Bukhtiyar 
Khilji and his warlike cavalry, who targetted the shaven heads of the in- 
nocent Buddhist priests mistaking them for soldiers.{ Nalanda is being ex- 
cavated and a large number of images belonging to the higher form of Tantra 
have been unearthed. The Vikramasila monastery has not been identified 
yet ; but if the Odantapuri site be also excavated, it will most assuredly, 


yield innumerable images of Vajrayana gods. 


The most flourshing period of the Bengal school of sculpture ranges 
from the tenth century or even earlier down to the settlement of the Muham- 
madans in Bengal. A large majority of the images that have up till now 
been discovered in Bengal belong to the Hindu form of religion, though Bud- 
dhist images are also to be extensively met with. The products of the Ben- 
gal school are undoubtedly the best specimens of Indian art, but unfortunately 


* Mathura Museum Cat., pp. 27-28. 
1 Vincent Smith: History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon, p. 146. 


t Elliott’s History of India, p. 806. In Tabakat-i-Nasiri, Minhaju-s-Siraj gives a 
graphic description of how Bakhtiyar conquered the peaceful Vihara and massacred all the 
undefended inmates. Ue smelt of plunder and seems to have destroyed the Vikramagila 
Vihara, Jagaddala Vibara and probably the Nalanda Vihara also, which is enly cight miles 
or so away from Odantapuri (mod. Bihar on the Bukhtiyarpur Bihar Light Railway). 
This Vihara contained perhaps the last remants of the Mahasanghikas. 


PLATE IV. 


SYMBOL-WORSHIP. 





b. Buddha’s Head-dress. 


a. Bodhi. Tree. 
( Bharhut ) 


( Amaravat. ) 


‘sabe bebop 





d. Wheel-of-the-Law. 
( Bharhut ) 


c. Buddha’s Foot-prints. 
(Bharhut) 


Sie ay ; 

an & ' 4 if vo : i 

> BaF £0 One " 
fa - PP» a ae 
¥ 7, ® ——y . “ae a - ¥ 
fe 6 ( 

a ‘ ; a i ‘ rar, ' 73s 

a > ve hey p aa 


oie 7 We iy) 


J Ahr ae to ee - 
= 1 ; aie a Pit 3) + Wot avant id 


-_ : oe Peel ie 
—_ “fy Pia." ae y 
. ‘ ry an. | 7 a ee 
{ae Vi, = tanec 
: a f ‘ ise 4% _ 
. i - 4 o> “| 
: w e Z 
' : : : vw 
5 - > 
wh - 7 o> > ? 
a ist ae 
v ‘8 bd 
4 s Puy : 
’ '-» maT 
vir 7 
: oe 7 
ay ~*~ } 
F : ; 
» 
-_ 
‘9 7 
=" : 
. if 
4 > 
“¢ » 
t 4 haar s ' 
~¥ "fe ™ 
‘ 
F ’ i= : i 
7 Zl 
j 
24 ‘ | 
} : 
4 ‘ 
a = Fo ‘ 
+ 
i 
ea ' 
i ‘ a 
1 


‘ ee 
r] Tt a, 
ei 
ol 1 
: 
4 
‘ ' 
Ya 
' 
an i 
Sy “oy, 
i 7 ‘ 
s ; 7 
. 
! ‘ 
t 
j ' 
a 
Lae 2 
9 
: Z el 
4 i « 4" 
. a 4 , ‘ a ay 
oh 4 / 1 
pate . t 
ro i a 2 
_ + s a) * ¥ 
a “rs i 
fi 
ft, 
tt =? , Li 
5 » 
- Vio e + 
' Pa’: ae 
» 
i iy 
‘ “s Db - te re 
pk © fl ’ 
4 bart 7 ee ue 
‘ { “ 94 
‘ é 16 
‘ > © 5 a -.) 
‘ . oS Dy 
~ Ne 7 
| 4 , . ) 
4 ? Fu n ee: 
rust eis w= 
<¢ 
D ' fe : inp 
: 7 7 
(or te. 460 
nt Ad 
4 > o Fi 
wf 7 9 cS at oe 
. - 
7 6 ~ a“ 
; F ‘-. - 6 
, 4 a el @ es 
- e Ae eS 
g eT 
= 7 





( wai ) 


the existence of this school has not even been acknowledged by scholars. 
Many of the specimens of the Bengal School are preserved in the three museums 
of Calcutta, Dacea, and Rajshahi, but a large number of them are scattered 
about in Parganah Vikrampur, and the Districts of Dinajpur and Comilla. 


The images of gods at Ajanta, Ellora, and South-India show signs of 
immature Tantra and may be assigned a time prior to the Bengal School, 
though the paintings of Ajanta and other sculptures have a long antiquity. 
Veteran scholars have asserted Java’s indebtedness to Bengal in the matter of 
Art and religion, and it is quite probable that the art and the later 


Mahayanism was carried over by the sea from Tamralipti to Java by the 
Bengalees. 


In the Jater phase of Vajrayana, after its destruction in India, the priests 
of the celebrated monasteries took refuge in Nepal, and thus kept the torch 
of Budhdism still burning, in India. The art of Bengal was carried over there, 
but it soon degenerated at the hands of the native artists. We need. not 
dwell here on the question as to how the priests fled to Nepal, and how they 
built innumerable monasteries there. Suffice it to say, that the followers 
of Vajrayana, in order to make sure of their existence, converted a good many 
of the natives and carved out innumerable images of gods both in stone and 


in wood, so much so, that a student of Iconography is overwhelmed at their 
wealth and variety. | 


§ IV. The Pantheon. 


The Pantheon of the Northern Buddhists was not built in a day. This 
we have tried to show in the two previous sections from the point of view of 
Buddhist doctrine as well as from the point of view of extant images. Now 
we shall examine the evidence of the Mahayana literature in Sanskrit and 
the accounts of the Chinese Travellers, who were Buddhists and who have 
recorded their observations minutely in their works. From what follows, 
we come to the conclusion that all Sanskrit works mentioning the five Dhyani 
Buddhas or Vajradhara or Vajrasattva or any of the later gods cannot be- 
long to a period prior to the time of Indrabhiuti (cir. 700-750 A. D.) 


There is no mention of the five Dhyani Buddhas in the literature of the 
Mahayana Buddhists prior to the time of Indrabhiti. But it cannot be held 
that they were invented all at once. We meet with none of them in the works 
of Agvaghosa (1st century A. D.), Nagarjuna (2nd century A. D.) and Arya- 
deva* (3rd century). We have evidence that during A. D. 148-170 A. D. 
the Sukhavati-Vyuha or the Amitdyus Sitra was translated into Chinese. 
This Sttra mentions for the first time the name of Amitabha, and his other 
name Amitayus,} who resides in the Sukhdvati or the Akanistha heaven, where 
he remains in constant meditation and where he is believed to have brought 
forth the Bodhisattva AvalokiteSvara into existence.t The smaller recen- 


* It may here be mentioned that as the work Cittavisuddhiprakarana mentions the 
five Dhyani Buddhas and other later Vajrayana gods, the author of the work cannot be the 
same Aryadeva, the disciple of Nagarjuna, who flourished in the third century A.D. He 
must be the later Aryadeva of the Tantric age, not only because he mentions the later 
Vajrayana gods, but also because his work breathes throughout the doctrines of Tantra. 
Furthermore, the Tangyur Catalogue attributes the same work, with a slightly different 
name, Cittasodhanaprakarana, to him, which fact convincingly pushes him forward into the 
Tantric age. It may be noted, however, that the name Cittavisuddhiprakarana has not 
been given in the Colophon of the work published in J. A. S. B. 1898 p. 117 ff. but it was 
given on the authority of C. Bendall. The real name of the work is Cittasodhanaprakarana 
as given in the Tangyur Catalogue. 


Nagarjuna’s Dharmasamgraha likewise mentions the five Dhyani Buddhas. Either 
this Nagarjuna is the later Siddhaciryya, Nagarjuna, or the passage mentioning the 
Dhyani Buddhas is an interpolation. We are more inclined to accept the latter theory. as 
the manuscript of Dharmasamgraha we have been able to find out in Nepal and of which 
we possess a copy—omits the passage altogether. 


t Sukhavatievyttha, pp. 1, 28, 32. 


{ There is however a faint reference to AvalokiteSvara in the word, ‘Avalokita’ in 
Mahdavastu Avadana, Vol. II. p. 294. 


PLATE Ve 





ADI-BUDDHA, VAJRADHARA. 
THE HIGHEST GOD OF THE BUDDHIST PANTHEON. 
( Afler a Nepalese painting ) 








( wav ) 


sion of this Amitdyus Sitra, which was also translated into Chinese between 
A.D. 384-417, mentions two more names, of Aksobhya as a Tathagata and 
Mahjusri as a Bodhisattva. It may be noted, however, that Fa-Hien (394- 
414 A.D.) mentions the names of Manjusri, Avalokitesvara and Maitreya ; 
Hiuen Thsang (A.D. 629-645) the names of Avalokitesvara, Hariti, Ksiti- 
garbha, Maitreya, Mafjusri, Padmapani, Vaisravana, Sakya-Buddha, Sakya 
Bodhisattva and Yama. Besides these, the latter refers to Vidyddharapitaka 
and Vajrapdnidharant belonging to Mantrayana. There is evidence also in 
his work that many of the saints were deified as Bodhisattvas, such as, Asva- 
ghosa, Nagarjuna, Asanga, Sumedhas, and others. He refers to many of the 
previous Buddhas also. I-Tsing, another devout Buddhist traveller, (A.D. 
671-695), came all the way from China to India during the last quarter of 
the seventh century. He mentions the names of Avalokitesvara, Amitayus 
or Amitabha, Hariti, the Caturmaharajikas, Maitreya, Manfjusri and Yama 


besides several Hindu gods. 


Let us next examine the works of Santideva of the Nalanda monastery, 
who has been assigned to the middle of the seventh century by Cecil Bendall. 
This date seems rather doubtful in view of the fact that I-Tsing does not 
mention him in his work. In any case, we cannot assign to him a date later 
than A.D. 800, as his book, Siks4-samuccaya, was translated into Tibetan in 
the reign of the celebrated Tibetan king, Khri-Ide-sron-btsan, who reigned bet- 
ween A. D. 816 and 838.* In this work we meet with the names of Aksobhya 
as a Tathagata, Amitabha as a Tathagata, Gaganagafija as a Bodhisattva, 
and Simhavikridita as a Tathagata. That in his time Tantra had just begun 
to weild its influence is evident from a fairly large number of references to 
Tantric works. It gives the Dharanis for Cunda, Trisamayaraja and Marici. 
The name of the book, Srimala-Simhanada, clearly speaks of Simhanada, one 
of the numerous names of Avalokitesvara. In his Bodhicaryydvatara, Santi- 
deva speaks of Mafjughosa, one of the many forms of Manjusri. 


After Santideva for nearly a century and a half we do not meet with 
dated manuscripts in Sanskrit belonging to the Buddhist faith except the 
Jnanasiddhi of Indrabhiti. But there is no doubt that during this period 
Vajrayana developed in a marvellously rapid degree. Great many works 


* ©, Bendall’s Introduction to Siksa-Samuccaya, p. V. 


It seems to me likely that he flourished at a period prior to the time of Indrabhuti 
(C. 77-750) as he does not mention the five Dhyani Buddhas in any of his works. The 
five Dhyani Buddhas ware invented by Indrabhtti and had Santideva known it, he would 
have mentioned them, inasmuch as his Siksisamuccaya mentions the two among them. 
Amitabha and Aksobhya. 


( wevg ) 


were written, and great many deities were added to the Pantheon. Yantras 
(magic diagrams) and Mandalas (magic circles) were invented, Mantras (charms) 
and Vijamantras (germ-syllables) were assigned to individual deities, and the 
number of deites increased astonishingly. 


In the reign of Rudradeva (1015 A.D.) we find manuscripts of Asta- 
sahasrika Prajiadparamita bearing a large number of miniature pictures of 
Buddhist Tantric deities. Some illustrated manuscripts of Paficaraksda be- 
long to the same period. The various copies of the Sddhanamala that we have 
been able to gather, date from A.D. 1165 and in one of these no less than 
four hundred descriptions or Dhyanas of both minor and principal deities are 
to be found. 


Though Tantrayana was introduced into the Mahayana System, it did 
not. weild a great influence on the minds of the Indians before 700 A.D. Tara- 
nath writing in the 16th century says plainly that the Tantras existed in an 
occult form in the period between the time of Asanga and Dharmakirti (A.D. 
645-71),* for naturally it takes rather a long time to assimilate an entirely 
foreign influence such as the Tantra. Taranath further says that during the 
reign of the Pala Dynasty there were many Vajracaryyas and Siddhapurusas, 
who performed many prodigious feats. It was during this period that the Vik- 
ramasila monastery was famous as a centre of Tantric learning and culture.t 


The very first thing that Vajrayana brought with it was the five Dhyani 
Buddhas and their Saktis along with a number of deities as emanating from 
them in the same way as Avalokitesvara emanated from Amitabha, and as 
Prajfiaparamita emanated from Aksobhya mentioned in a Sadhana attributed 
to Asanga in the Sadhanamala. The creator of all this, in all probability, 
was Indrabhati, the king of Uddiyana, who, according to Tibetan traditionf, 
flourished in the first half of the eighth century A.D. The word Vajrayana 
is first met with in his work, entitled, Jnianasiddhi, in which there is a chapter 
on Paticdkdra giving the origin and the forms of the Dhyani Buddhas. This 


* “ Dharmakirti is not mentioned by Yuan Chwang (travelled through India 629-645) 
but he is spoken of by I-Tsing (671-95). Consequently, Dharmakirti’s palmy days were 
in 645-71 ’’—Ui, Vaisesika Philosophy. p. 17, 

+ Kern: Manual of Buddhism. p. 133. 


t Indrabhuti’s son is Guru Padmasambhava, who went to Tibet in 647 A. D., and his 
daughter is Laksimkara, who is believed to have been the founder and a vigorous exponent 
of Sahajayana. Waddel: Lamaism, pp. 380 ff. Shastri: Buddhists in Bengal, in the 
Dacca Review, Vol. Il, No. 7. p. 98. ‘‘ Sahajayana was preached by one of the Udiya 
chiefs named Indrabhuti and his gifted daughter Laksmi Devi or Laksmimkara Devi.’’ 
See also Tangyur Cat. 2e partie—pp. 55 and 211. 


( waved ) 


work breathes throughout the doctrines of Tantra and betrays the anxiety 
of the author to establish a definite school of Mahayana by means of learned 
discussions and arguments. The theory of Mahasukha also appears for the 
first time in this work with all its various ramifications. There is a_ great 
deal of controversy regarding the identification of Uddiyana ; some hold that 
it is the same as U-Chang-na of Hiuen Tsang or Udyana in the Swat Valley 
in the North-Western Frontier Province, but many others are of opinion that 
it is the same as Orissa. The latter theory seems probable, for Uddiyana must 
be a place where Vajrayana flourished, and a place where we should expect 
to find some Vajrayana images. Sadhanamala mentions four Pithas or sac- 
red spots of Vajrayana, namely, Kamakhya, Sirihatta, Pirnagiri* and Uddi- 
yana, and Uddiyana must be a place not very far off from Kamakhya and 
Sirihatta. Moreover, in the Sadhanamala there is a Sadhana for the wor- 
ship of a four-armed variety of Kurukulla, which goes by the name of Uddi- 
yana Kurukullé, or Kurukulla as worshipped in Uddiyana. Images of this 
deity is extremely rare and if we are to believe the testimony of Mr. N. N. 
Vasu the only image of this variety of Kurukulla has been discovered in 
Orissat. Lastly in Buddhist MSS of the Tantric period the variants, Odda, 
Odra, Udra, Odavisa, Odivana, are mentioned, and all these seem to be the 
variants of Uddivana. All this evidence, combined together, points to the 
identification of Uddiyana with Orissa, where innumerable images belong- 
ing to the Vajrayana School have been discovered. Against the first theory 
identifying Uddiyana with Udyana several arguments may be brought for- 
ward. We have no evidence that Tantra in the form of Vajrayana ever flour- 
ished in Udyana, nor a single Tantric image is reported to have been dis- 
covered there, though much earlier images of the Gandhara School are daily 
coming out from this site. It is, moreover, improbable that Uddiyana _ be- 
ing one of the four Pithas would be two thousand miles away from two others, 
Kamakhya and Sirihatta, which are contiguous. In view of these facts we 
“may conveniently identify Uddiyana with Orissa and set aside its identifica- 
tion with Udyana. 


Alexander Csoma de Koros places the introduction of the conception 
of Adi-Buddhba in Central Asia in the last half of the 10th century. The con- 
ception of Adi-Buddha originated at Nalanda by the first half of the 10th. 
century and no mention of Adi-Buddha is made by Indian writers before 
that time. Adi-Buddha is the Primordial Buddha from whom the five 
Dhvani Buddhas are said to have taken their origin, and homage is paid to 


* Purnagiri has not been identified. 


+ N.N. Vasu: Mayurbhanj Archaeological Survey. 


( wavin _) 


Adi-Buddha in the shape of a flame, which the priests of Nepal consider eter- 
nal. self-born and self-existent. Adi-Buddha first manifested himself in Nepal 
in the shape of a flame of fire, and Mafijusri is said to have erected a temple 
over it in order to preserve the flame.* This temple is known as the Svayam- 
bha Caitya ( Plate II) and the place derives its name from it. 


The conception of Vajradhara in human form presupposes Adi-Buddha 
and therefore later than the first half of the 10th. century. Vajrasattva, be- 
ing a regular development of Vajrapani, the Bodhisattva emanating from 
Aksobhya, might be a little earlier. In Vajrayana, Adi-Buddha is regarded 
as the highest deity, the originator even of the Dhyani Buddhas. When 
represented in human form ( Plate V), Adi-Buddha begets the name of Vajra- 
dhara and is conceived in two forms, single, and Yab-ywm. Vajradhara is 
decked in princely ornaments and garments, sits in the Vajraparyanka atti- 
tude, with his two hands, carrying the Vajra in the right and the Ghanta 
in the left, crossed against the breast in what is known as the Vajrahunkara 
Mudra. When represented in Yab-ywm (Plate VI,a-b-c) his form would be 
exactly the same as described above, with the difference that he should be 
embraced in Yab-yum by his Sakti, whose name, according to Getty, is Prajfia- 
piramita. The Sakti is richly dressed and richly decked in ornaments, and 
carries the Kartri in the right hand and the Kapala in the left. 


The Adi or the Primordial Buddha was accepted mainly in the KaAla- 
cakrayana,t a later development of the Vajrayana, and the Svayambhi 
Purana which deals with the glories of the Svayambhiksettra “‘ the place of 
the Self-born’”’ or Adi Buddha, belongs to the system of Kalacakrayana. This 
Adi-Buddha, it may be pointed out, is a generic name. It signifies Vajra- 
dhara, described above, in the Kalacakrayana; but the Vajrayanists were 
not slow to appreciate the theory of a Promordial Buddha. Some considered 
Aksobhya to be the Adi-Buddha, others considered in the same way other 
Dhyani Buddhas as the Adi-Buddha, after their own fashion. Thus the 
Vajrayanists were divided into so many cults, according as they accepted 


* It is very curious that Mafijusri is connected with this tradition as recorded in the 
Svayambhi Purana. Mafijusri is as old as 4th century A. D. if not earlier and the concep- 
tion of Adi Buddha first originated in the first half of the 10th century. We wonder how 
Mafijusri could ever come to erect a temple over the flame. See Oldfield : Sketches from 
Nepal, Vol. Il. p. 90 and 156 tf. and 188. Hodgson’s Essays, pp. 115 ff. 


+ The conception of Adi Buddha originated at the Nalanda monastery in the begin- 
ning of the 10th century A.D. See J. A. B.S. Vol. II (1833), p. 57 et sqq.; also. my article 
on Vajradhara vs. Vajrasativa in J. B. O. .R.-S.-Vol, IX, p. 114 e¢ sqq. 


PLATE VI, 





a. Vajradhara Yab-yum b. Majradhara Yab-yum 
(Nepal). (Side View). 





c. Buddha in different Mudivas ( Java). 





d. Buddha in different Mudras (Nalanda). 


: 
2 ai = ; 
Sage 8 


Hea sae 
pony ee Mach 
"prs er 


sat a 
Brig Sf ; 


ee 


if 
i 
vi 


eS: 
rel oe - 





( axiz ) 


one or the other of the Dhyani Buddhas as the Adi-Buddha. The followers 
of different cults made their deities bear the image of their own Dhyani or 
Adi-Buddha on their crown, sometimes contrary to the directions laid down 
in the Sadhanas.* We have evidence in a work belonging to the Aksobhya 
eult that even the Dhyani Buddhas themselves bear the image of Aksobhya 
on their head in order to show their origin.t In other words, the followers 
of different cults believed the other Dhyaéni Buddhas to be the offsprings of 
that particular Dhyani Buddha whom they considered as their own Adi Buddha. 


The Hindus say that the number of their deities is thirty-three crores, 
and it seems that the Buddhists can claim a similar figure. One single deity 
may have innumerable forms according to the number of hands, the number 
Ofstaces and #the*number of legs: He will differ, again, according to 
colour, according as he is worshipped in different Mandalas, the 
number of which it is no very easy matter to ascertain. He will differ again 
according as he is invoked in different Tantric rites, according to his. com- 
panions, in accordance with the Asanas, and the different weapons that are 
held in his hands. A permutation and combination of these different cate- 
gories will give innumerable forms to one single deity. Besides these, the 
deity varies according to the whims of the devotees, or the donors, and 
ignorance of the sculptors or the painters. 


* This accounts for the image of Amitabha on the crowns of the Sarnath figure of 
Ucchusma Jambhala and the Lucknow Museum figure of Marici, and also of Aksobhya on 
the crown of the Indian Museum figure of Usnisavijaya. According to the Sadhanas, the 
image either of Ratnasambhava or of Aksobhya is prescribed for Ucchusma Jambhala, 
that of Vairocana for both Marici and Usnisavijaya. See Infra. 

+ Advayavajra, who flourished in the 11th century, was a follower of the Aksobhya 
cult, and he makes all the Dhyani Buddhas except Aksobhya bear the miniature figure of 
the latter, in his work Advuyavajrasamgraha, Fol. 16. 


vat 
Lat 


HE Lat 7 a sit 


r~ eae a x 
oe 4, ae 7 va be 
20 

a el 1 ba 

et a ¥ 
vb; ¢ erat Tee aa Fy 
= gl «env Bath eagle ree 


a7 Ma | 
ay: => ‘ & Phots , 
YP yaa iat nae funn vert ay 
ete at Ret 
rd tai ibeatl a i. alent 

. RT oO 28 





GAP ARE Rel 


BUDDHAS, BUDDHASAKTIS AND BODHISATTVAS. 
I. DHYANI BUDDHAS 


The Buddhists are more scientific than the Hindus in the matter of 
determining the hierarchy of the gods in their Pantheon. They believe that all 
gods emanated from one or the other of the Dhyani Buddhas, popularly known 
as the Divine Buddhas, or four or five of them collectively ; and the images 
of such emanations invariably bear the effigies of their sires on their head, 
crown or on the aureole behind them. 


The Dhyani Buddhas are a peculiar kind of Buddhas who are not required 
to pass through the stage of a Bodhisattva ;* they were never anything less 
than a Buddha. They are always engaged in peaceful meditation, and they 
voluntarily restrain themselves from the act of creation. To create is the 
duty of their emanations, the Divine Bodhisattvas. 


The Dhyani Buddhas are five in number to which a sixth, Vajrasattva 
is sometimes added. Though some of them were known before A. D. 700 
yet the idea of the full five seems to have developed in the first half of the 
eighth century during the time of Indrabhiti, the king of Uddiyana. That 
the five Dhyani Buddhas might have owed their origin to the theory of 
the eternity of the five senses, seems to be borne out by a passage + in the 
Cittavisuddhiprakarana of Aryadeva.t But it may also be possible that the 


* Kern: Manual of Buddhism, p. 64. 


t The passage is :— 
Caksur-Vairocano Buddhah sravano Vajrasunyakah 
Ghranasca paramadyaistu Padmanarttesvaro mukham 
Kayah Sri-Heruko raja Vajrasattvaiica manasam. 
“5 Ree Te Are Sas bel SUS.4 Deb 1. 


t The author of this work is Aryadeva, who has been identified with the famous 
disciple of Nagarjuna of the same name to whom Catuhsatika is attributed, in J. A. S. B. 
1898, p. 176. We respecftully differ from this statement on the following grounds, and identify 
him with the Tantric author Aryadeva or Ayadeva ; the Tangyur Catalogue attributes the 
work, Cittasodhanaprakarana to him; and the mention of Vajradhara, Vajrasattva, 
Heruka, and the five Dhyani Buddhas in this work makes us confident that this Aryadeva 
cannot be so old as the 3rd. Century, but must be later than 700 A. D. in any case. It 
may also be pointed out that the name of the work was not given in the manuscript itself ; 


the name was suggested by C. Bendall. 


(a2 a5) 


five mudras, which Buddha Sakyasimmha made sacred by using on memorable 
oeeasions and which were constantly realized in the Buddhistie figures of the 
different schools of art—gave rise to the five Dhyani Buddhas (Plate VIed). 
Advayavajra who flourished in the 11th century has written in one of his works 
that the five Dhyani Buddhas took their origin from the theory of the eternity 
of the five Skandhas (elements), or rather, that they were the embodiments of 
the Skandhas, which were held by Lord Buddha to be the constituents of a 
Being fused together by action. Vajrasattva,* the sixth Dhyani Buddha who 
is generally regarded as the priest of the five Dhyani Buddhas and is usually 
represented with the priestly symbols, the Vajra and the Ghanta, is an embodi- 
ment of the five Skandhas collectively and undoubtedly a later incorporation 
to the Pantheon of the Northern Buddhists. : 


We have already said that the number of the Dhyani Buddhas is five 
to which a sixth is sometimes added. The order in which the Nepalese 
Buddhists worship them is as follows :— 


lV acsr 0 Giana 

2° “AC Kss i080 bh ya 

3. Ratnasambhava 
eee atl al teacbei ea. | 
DO. Atm Ore has aicdsdihit 
GY 200] ace tal aver 


Excepting the last, they appear all alike, but they vary according to the 
particular colour of their body and the different positions of their hands. 
The following verse in the Sadhanamala gives the colour and the mudra of each. 


Jino Vairocano khyaéto Ratnasambhava eva ca | 
Amitabhamoghasiddhir-Aksobhyasea prakirtitah 1) 
Varnah amisém sitah pito rakto haritamecakau | 
Bodhyagri-Varado-Dhyanam mudra Abhaya-Bhisprsau |! 


‘* The Jinas (victorious ones) are Vairocana, Ratnasambhava Amitabha, 
Amoghasiddhi and Aksobhya, whose colours respectively are white, yellow, 
red, green and blue and who exhibit the Bodhyagri (Dharmacakra or Teaching), 
Varada ( rift-bestowing), Dhyana (Meditative), Abhaya (Assurance) and 
Bhusparsa (Karth-touching) attitudes of hands respectively.” 

When represented, the Dhyani Buddhas closely resemble each other. 
The differences, as has already been said, depend besides their colour on the 
positions in which the hands are held, and on the Vahanas which they ride. 
Kvery Dhyani Buddha is always represented in a sitting posture on a full 
blown double lotus. This attitude is known as the Dhyanasana or the medita- 


* The word, ‘ Vajra’*’ means ‘ Stinya’ or Void and ‘ sattva’ means ‘ essence,’ and 
80 Vajrasattva is a god whose essence is Sinya or Void. 





helt pont 















@ 
* 
* 


an winking = ie 
¢ * 
Pa 4 
‘tix? 
-_ in ae 


~ 


ced 
rf 
- 
‘ 
ak 
+ trl 
Honore mms 0 


> 
‘ 
- 
yy 
Zz. 
a 
« 
< 
- 
¥ 
1 


a _ 2 ’ \ ‘4 a 
ad a Poe 7s - . 
a) s pd ad § 
© \ ° . oe ‘ ; ra 
Aer r) % Uc Eee ' , ity @, i 
7) aye eee ee me Pe e 
alk apt yy hoe sw ° :. 
ae a 2 ed . 
ge ss oat Pa oe ¥ 
we es 1th , Sh Poe 8 pe u.kc at " - 
- — = 4 v a Lea ven Es a 
a5 be Lt a» *, Sef ih a] 
; ’ 3 ae s =* *% 
( * “eS m %* A 
, 4g way 5 
Petar ‘ 
4 a8 72 i 








is 
1 
> 
' i 
4 . 
ue 
- 
> 
> 
_ 
: - 
{ im ' 
: : Bid a » 
i # = ove oan camel aa 2 =o ’ ; — SSE FT Meee nH 3 i 
te - i we a 7 re ata * . + = e 7 ‘ 
~: ch pe 2 Se ; ; 
. ie ee A rh : 4 a, % = 
— te i ; ; i . eee f 
es a 4 J a% 4 ~ & ae Ly s 5 
BS: ‘ ‘ 2 7 & 
e ‘ tod " 
Poe OF 2 . a0 ee P . > . 
eta Cen bart ak eee a ce a * ‘ 
na F a ; roe - ay Li = 3 iS a 
> ‘ at < J oe, a a ~ i 
ee ric Se a oe ; Hu J #. by 
“Se vf me i lie = ahi é | ea 2° : 7 ¢ 
sett. f > pale - > . J ~ > 3s 
hy 4 ie oe: 7m i _ 7 v 7 ' 
"a - Z 
al Pt 3 ‘ : ? ( 
aT, SAT ere PD le : * ’ 
Ss ' Ps r =1 =i aot 
= : a - 
Uw? oe “+ = 
~, - o t 7 
Wee Slike! —. oe a Neely. Ve - 7 
4i4 ay = 9 ' 
i = — } me & Sih 6%" « 2s 
he 2° 3 < ; ; 
w ‘i i iS hat * 7 
Fy Pw “he + 
a Ae ae . - rs ; : 
Pe SP As Lae ' ‘ ze Lal . . 
a mae S { , 7 : = 
. pr > : 
. 
s 





* 
= 


ong 
— 
Ry 
‘* 
. 
> 
Ys 


i: a)*z 
7 £ 
: 
SF 
= 
* 
% > 
, 


- ns e 
sot 
AS: 4 
| Po) . 
an i ee ‘ 
A ‘ort 
bs ¥ 


( 45%) 
2. AKSOBHYA. 


Colour—Blue. Mudra—Bhtparsa. 


Crest—Vajra. Vahana—A pair of elephants. 


Next in importance and antiquity is undoubtedly Aksobhya who is 
first mentioned as a Tathagata in the smaller recension of the Amitayus Sttra, 
which was translated into Chinese between A. D. 884 and A. D. 417. The 
Vajrayana Pantheon shows that a large number of deities, both masculine 
and feminine, have emanated from him. Aksobhya is regarded as the second 
Dhyani Buddha by the Nepalese Buddhists and when represented in the 
Stipas, he always faces the East. His colour is blue. His left hand rests 
on the lap, while the right rests upon the right knee with the tips of the fingers 
touching the ground with palm downwards (Bhisparsa or Bhimisparsana 
Mudra.* (Plate VIIb).f His Vahana is a pair of elephants and his crest 
or cognizance 1s the Vajra. (Plate VIIc). 


8.  VAIROCANA. 
Colour—White. Mudra—Dharmacakra. 
Crest—Cakra. Vahana-——A pair of Dragons. 


Whether the Vairocana mentioned in the Cittavisuddhiprakarana of 
Aryadeva, really refers to the Dhyani Buddha, is difficult to determine, 
but there ters clearly stated that Vairocana presides over the eyes. His 
antiquity is borne out by the fact that a fairly large number of deities emanates 
from him, Marici being their chief, to whom again a large number of Sadhanas 
in the Sadhanamala are devoted. He is regarded as the oldest and the first 
Dhyani Buddha by the Nepalese Buddhists and his place is in the sanctum 
of the stipa, where he is the master of the whole temple and its contents. 
Naturally, therefore, he cannot be represented outside the stupa ; but excep- 
tions to this rule are frequently met with in celebrated Caityas in 
Nepal, where he is represented in the space between Aksobhya in the Kast 
and Ratnasambhava in the South. His colour is white and his two hands 


are held against the breast with the tips of the thumb and _ forefinger 


* Compare Advayavajrasamgraha—‘* Nila-Hum-karanispannadvibhuja ekamukho 


bhisparsamudradharo vajraparyanki...... krsnavajracinhah  suvisuddhadharmadhatu- 
Vijaanaskandhasvabhavah. .. . sisiramadhyahnakatusrutiakasasabdacavargo. Ah Vajra- 
dhrk Hum asya japamantrah’’....Fol. 26. 


+ The reproductions of the three stone images of Aksobhya,,Ratnasambhava and 
Amoghasiddhi are from photographs of a Nepalese caitya. 





Pi hag Oren Set woe pal yn ee 






a Thy ay d tg 7 . 

> & # as Le ~ a = ca an = 

nal a me ity i pats = ue Fe - ‘ , . ' 
7 . 3 sia) 





* 
. 





race 


br 
’ 
2 
- 
7 oy 
Pies Oe dete dts 
s 








ae 
Se 






4] 





ty 


wa nbs aes: 








Pacer 


G8.) 
6. VAJRASATTVA. 
Asana—Vajraparyanka. Symbols—Vajra and Ghanta. 


Vajrasattva, the sixth Dhyani Buddha is regarded, at least by the 
Vajracaryyas of Nepal, as the Purohita or the priest of the group of the five 
Dhyani Buddhas. He is not represented in the Stipa, but independent 
shrines are dedicated to his worship. His worship is always performed in 
secret and is not open to those who are not initiated into the mysteries of 
the Vajrayana, and he is represented in two forms, single and Yab-yum 
(Anuttara-Vajrasattva). 

The most notable feature of this Dhyani Buddha is that he wears orna- 
ments and princely garments instead of the three pieces of rags (tricivara). 
’ Instead of bare head he has a gaudy Mukuta (tiara) over it. These would 
have suited a Bodhisattva quite well but the mere idea of a Dhyani Buddha 
wearing ornaments and rich garments is altogether reprehensible. 
| He sits cross-legged (Dhyaénasana) and carries the Vajra in the right 
hand with palm upwards against the breast and the Ghanta in_ the 
left resting against the left) thigh (Plate siXb).9) sWhen) srepresented 
singly he is exhibited before the public. The Sadhanamala has several 
Sadhanas in which there are short Dhyanas or descriptions of Vajrasattva 
both single and Yab-yum. One of the Dhyanas mentions him as bearing 
the effigy of Aksobhya on the crown, thereby alleging that at least in some 
quarters he was regarded as an emanation of Aksobhya, and his dress and 
ornaments supply ample materials for thinking so; and in that case he 
would be another form of Vajrapani. Whatever might be the fact, the modern 
Buddhists regard him as one of the highest among the gods of the Buddhist 
Pantheon. i 

When represented in Yab-yum he is closely associated with his Sakti 
in embrace. He carries the Vajra and the Ghanta exactly in the same way 
when represented singly ; but the Sakti carries the Kartri in the right hand 
and the Kapala in the left. (Plate [Xcde). 

In identifying the images of Dhyani Buddhas it should always be remem- 
bered that they must and shall be represented in the Vajraparyanka (Ada- 
mantine) pose or the Dhyanasana (meditative pose), and if any image is 


* Cf. Advayavajrasamgraha, Fol. 26—‘‘ Vajrasattvastu Huth-karajanma....dvi- 
bhuja ekavaktro vajravajraghantadharah manahsvabhavah kasayarasaSarirah saradrtu- 
visuddhah yaralavadyatmakah ’’....Cormpare also the description given in the Dharma- 
kosasangraha of Amrtananda—‘' Kkavaktrah suklavarnnah jatamukuti sanmudralan- 
krtah dvibhujah savyena hrdayapradese akuficitena bhujena kulisam bibhranah yasmin 
kulise Satani kotayah agrabhagah santi. Vamena bhujena nabhipradese akuncitena 
ghantam vadayamanah....Marah palayitah. Kamalopari yajrasanah.” 


TABULAR STATEMENT SHOWING THE ATTRIBUTES OF THE FIVE Duy4nit BUDDHAS. 


SS 














| Dhyani Buddha | Colour Mudra Crest Vahana Skandha | Position} Vijamantra | Season Rasa Varga 
| 1. Vairocana White | Dharmacakra | Discus Dragons Ripa Centre | Om Hemanta | Madhura | Ka 
| 2. Ratnasambhava] Yellow Varada Jewel Lions Vedana South ! Tram Vasanta | Labana ita 
| 3. Amitabha Red Samadhi Lotus Peacocks Samjna West Hrih Grisma Amla Ta 
4, Amoghasiddhi | Green Abhaya Visvavajra | Garudas Samskara| North | Kham Varsa Tikta Pa 
5. Aksobhya Blue Bhisparsa Vajra Elephants | Vijiiana | Kast Hum Sisira Katu Ca 


| 5. 


| 





PRAT CS [xe 





b. Vayjrasattva 
(Nepa Ly 


c. Vajrasattva Yab-yum 
(Nepal). 


a. Ratnasambhava 
(Nepal). 





d.  Vajrasattva Yab-yum e. Vajrasattva Yab-yum 
(Side View). (Back View). 


£ 


a ee 


cv 


r 


halt 
oy 





Cs) 


represented otherwise, we may at once reject its identification as a Dhyani 
Buddha.* . : 


The tabular statement in page 7A shows the.colour, position, mudra, crest 
the Vijamantra, the Skandhas, the seasons, tastes and the letters of the alpha- 


bet represented by the five Dhyani Buddhas. 


If. DIVINE BUDDHASARKTIS. 


Next in rank, but not very widely represented is the group of the 
Divine Buddhasaktis, five in number, to which a sixth is added. The Buddha- 
Saktis affiliate themselves to their respective Dhyani Buddhas, whose figures 
or images they generally bear on their crown. Cases in which they are 
represented on the stupas, in full form to the left of their husbands, are 
rare but more often their symbols or the Yantras are represented each on a 
slab in a niche. They occupy the corners intermediate between the four 
cardinal points taken up by the four or five Dhyani Buddhas as the case may 
be.f The Buddhasaktis are :— 


: ae Vajradhatvigvari (Plate Xa). 
2. Locana (Plate Xb). 


8. Mamaki (Plate Xc). 
4. Pandara (Plate Xd). 
5. wAtyatara (Plate XIa). 
6. Vajrasattvatmika. 


Each Dhyani Buddha has a Sakti or consort associated with him through 
whom a Divine Bodhisattva is brought forth. The Buddhasaktis when 
sculptured or painted are represented in a sitting posture, mostly in Lalitasana 
on a full blown lotus. The two hands generally hold a lotus each, while the 
left hand exhibiting the Abhaya pose and the right resting on the right 
foreleg. The figure wears a petticoat fastened round the loins and a tight- 
fitting jacket or a bodice. Each head is decorated with a bejewelled crown. 
Each Sakti has the colour and the Vahana of the Dhyani Buddha to whom 


* In the stone image of Vajrasattva (Plate IXb) from Nepal, he sits in the Paryanka 
attitude instead of the Vajraparyanka attitude. There is an inscription on the pedestal 
purporting the image to be that of Vajrasattva. Nowhere else have we found Vajrasattva 
represented in the Paryankasana. All the images of Vajrasattva in the Indian Museum 
and the Sarnath Museum strictly follow the description given in the Dharmakosasangraha. 
This Nepal image is the only exception to this rule. 


tf See Oldfield : Sketches from Nipal, II, p. 171-72. 


(= (Se) 


she belongs. The Buddhégaktis are so alike in appearance that they can bes 
recognized only by the crests that they bear on thé lotus.* 


Ili. DIVINE BODHISATTVAS. 


The word, ‘ Bodhisattva’ in earlier times was synonymous with Sangha 
or the Holy Order and every Buddhist of the Mahayana faith was entitled to 
be called a Bodhisattva. In the Gandhara School of sculpture we meet with 
innumerable Bodhisattva images, both standing and sitting, and we venture 
to think that these images represented the more influential ones of the Holy 
Order. In Hiuen Tsang’s time the great savants only of the Mahayana 
faith went by the name of Bodhisattva. This is true at least in the case 
of men like, Nagarjuna, Asvaghosa, Maitreyanatha, Aryadeva and_ the 
like. The Buddhist scriptures prescribe certain extraordinary qualities and 
characteristics for the Bodhisattva. The duty of the Divine Bodhisattvas 
however, is to do the duties of a Mortal Buddha during the period between 
the disappearance of one Buddha and the coming of the next. Thus Gautama 
Buddha has disappeared and at least 4000 years after his disappearance 
Maitreya Buddha who is now in the Tusita Heaven would descend to earth. 
During the interval Padmapani Bodhisattva or Avalokitesvara is doing the 
duties of a Mortal Buddha and thus he will continue so long as the Bhadra- 
kalpa or the cycle of Amitabha continues. 


The Divine Bodhisattvas are also five in number to which a sixth is 
likewise added. They affiliate themselves to one or the other of the Dhyani 
Buddhas and their respective Buddhasaktis. They are :— 


1. Samantabhadra (Plate XIb). 
2. Vajrapani (Plate XIc). 

3. Ratnapani (Plate XId). 

4, Padmapani (Plate XIe). 

5. Visvapani (Plate XIf). 

6. Ghantapani. 


They are sometimes represented as standing erect and sometimes in differ- 
ent sitting attitudes (e.g. Plate XIIbc) each on a full-blown lotus and usually 
as holding in each hand a long stem of the same plant on which is placed the 
erest of the spiritual father of each. Each is covered by a robe and the upper 
part is covered by a scarf. The hair is cut short and on the head is a jewelled 


* The illustrations of the five Buddhasaktis have been taken from Wright’s History 
of Nepal, Plate VI. Mr. Wright reproduces in Plate VI several drawings prepared by 
" the native Citrakaras of Nepal. 


PLATE X. 





a. Vajradhatvisvari. c, Mamaki. 





b. Locana. d. Pandara. 


iv 


= 
ee 
~2 
a 
| 
‘ 
‘ 
y 
< «€ 
a? 





<a 


2 © . ‘ens ne 
: i ve 


a 





i JM 


t “oa* Gt be 
tires <tr Ql* 


cies hie taf 


i Fs 
" é > te - 
6 GEIR 0c 0 
eas rite “ cd 
| i! ke’ 7 4 4 - a 
i oe 7 Vu : ~J 
> 1 ae 
/ i ' i= 
i} ° - ' _ 
> ; ‘(> a } 
i i 4117" 
ah say am eal 7 
: # ‘ ms - ‘), : 
.. cd 2 ee eas i Cir ty 
> i , 
bm J - Th 4 ae 


(F950) 


tiara which bears in the centre the effigy of that Buddha to whom the Bodhi- 
sattva owes its existence.* In order to explain more clearly the relation 


between the Bodhisattvas, their Buddhasaktis and the Dhyani Buddhas a 


tabular statement is given below :— 








Dhyani Buddha Divine Buddhaégakti Divine Bodhisattva 
Vairocana Vajradhatvisvari Samantabhadra 
Aksobhya Locana Vajrapani 
Ratnasambhava Mamaki Ratnapani 
Amitabha Pandara Padmapani 
Amoghasiddhi Aryatara Visvapani 
Vajrasattva | Vajrasattvatmika Ghantapani 


| 


The illustrationsf represent the five Divine Bodhisattvas in bronze. They 
are perhaps unique of their kind in India and hail from the U Vahal at Patan 
in Nepal. All these images exactly correspond to the dictum laid down above 
except in the cases of Samantabhadra and Vajrapani. The former shows the 
Dharmacakra Mudra like his spiritual father, Vairocana, while the latter carries 
the Vajra and the Ghanta, the symbols of Vajrasattva, though not exactly in 
the same fashion. But according to the dictum, Samantabhadra ought to have 
carried the stem of the lotus bearing the Cakra, the symbol of his father in 
his two hands, the right palm in Varadamudra being stamped with the same 
cognizance (Plate XIIa). The image of Vajrapani on the other hand would 
have been more consistent if it had carried the stem of the lotus bearing the 
Vajra, the symbol of his spiritual father, Aksobhya and if one of his hands had 
been stamped with it. | The Vajra and Ghanta are the symbols of Vajrasattva 
and Ghantapani carries them. We are likely to confuse the images of the two, 
but the only consolation is that Ghantapani is very rarely represented. 


IV. MORTAL BUDDHAS. 


Both the Mahay4anists and the Hinay4anists hold that a Buddha 1s one 
who is endowed with the thirty-two major and eighty minor auspicious marks. 
These are known as the external characteristics enumerated in Dharmasam- 


bea 
* See also Oldfield: Sketches from Nipal Vol. II, p. 175. 
+ In Plate XI. t See Plate XIIb. 


9 


~ 


(eet 


graha, attributed to Nagarjuna.* He must have in addition three kinds of 
mental characteristics, namely, the ten Balas or forces, eighteen Avenika 
Dharmas or peculiar properties: and the four Vaisaradyas or points of self- 


confidence or assurance.t 


The Hinaydnists recognized in the earliest state twenty-four past Buddhas 
each having a peculiar Bodhi tree. The Mahayanists also give several lists, 
though not systematically, and thirty-two different names have been reco- 
vered. The last seven Tathagatas are well-known and are designated by the 
Mahayanists as Manusi or Mortal Buddhas. These are, Vipasyin, Sikhi, Visva- 
bhai, Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, Kasyapa and Sakyasimha.t It is still to 
be found out whether these Buddhas, excepting the last of course, have any 
historicity behind them. We may be certain, however, that Kanakamuni 
and Krakucchanda were historical personages.§ 


Attempts have been made to establish a fantastic connection between 
the last five Mortal Buddhas with the five Dhyani Buddhas and their Bodhi- 
sattvas by holding that the Divine’ Boddhisattvas discharge their 
duties of creation through the agency of the five Mortal Buddhas. The 
theory may be current in Tibet ; it may ingeniously establish a new connec- 
tion and may find strong support from scholars, but we may rest assured 
that the theory is against all historical sense and traditions. 


When represented, the last seven Mortal Buddhas appear all alike ; 
they are of one colour and one form, usually sitting cross-legged with the 
right hand displaying the earth-touching attitude,** that is, the Mudra of 
Aksobhya and as a matter of fact we are unable to identify a sculpture of the 
latter unless it is coloured or if no other identification mark is present. 
When painted, the Mortal Buddhas generally have yellow or golden colour. 
The only possible chance of identifying them is when they appear in groups 
of seven. 


Sometimes they are represented as standing, in which case they appear 
under a distinguishing Bodhi Tree and with a distinguishing mudra. The 
Indian Museum image No. B. G. 88 (Plate XIId) is an image of this kind. It 
may be noted however that Maitreya, the future Buddha has been added 
to this group. : 


* Dharmasangraha, pp. 53-60. 

+ Kern: Manual of Buddhism, p. 62. 
+ Ibid, p. 64. 

§ Ibid, footnote 1. 


* ** Colossal images of the seven Mortal Buddhas representing them in the Bhaimisparsa 
Mudra appear in one of the Buddhist Cave Temples at Ellora. See Fergusson and Burgess: 
Cave Temples of India, p. 388. 


PLATE XI, 





Spall 
ate 
— 
tA 
jae) 
eames 
So 
a=! 
cs 
aI 


d. b. Samantabhadra c, Vajrapani 


(Nepal). (Nepal). 





d.  Ratnapani e. Padmapani fy Visvapani 


(Nepal). (Nepal). (Nepal). 





(east a) 
GAUTAMA BUDDHA. 


Gautama, the last of the group of the seven Mortal Buddhas, is 
widely represented both in sculptures and in paintings. His images 
date from a period anterior to the birth of Christ and the Indian 
sculptors never seem to have been tired of-this one hackneyed subject. 
Innumerable images of Buddha in innumerable attitudes and expressions 
have been discovered in India and this is true also of countries beyond, where 
Buddhism penetrated. Images of Buddha, therefore, are an independent 
study by themselves. 


The Sadhanamala furnishes us with several descriptions of Buddha 
in Vajrasana, who is represented as sitting in the Vajraparyanka attitude 
with his right hand displaying the Bhimisparsana pose. The Dhyana* as 
given in one of the Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala is thus quoted below and 
translated :— 


Savyakarena Bhisparsamudram-utsangasthitavasavyahastam kasaiyava- 
stravagunthanam nilagauraraktasyamacatur-Maroparl visvapadmavay]rava- 
sthitam santam laksanavyanjanenanvitagatram. Tasya Bhagavato daksine 
Maitreya-Bodhisattvam gauram dvibhujam jatamukutinam savyakarena 
camararatnadharinam avasavyena nagakesarapuspachhatadharinam. Tatha 
vamato Lokesvaram suklam daksinakarena camaradharam vamakarena 
kamaladharam Bhagavanmukhavalokanaparau ca tau bhavayet.... 


Iti Vajrasanasadhanam samaptam.”’ 
Sadhanamala. A—15, N—138, C—5. 


‘“The worshipper should meditate on himself as [Vajrasana] who displays the 
Bhtsparga Mudra in his right hand while the left rests on the lap; who Is 
dressed in red garments and sits on the Vajra on a double lotus placed on the 
four Maras of blue, white, red and green colour ; who is peaceful in appearance 
and whose body is endowed with all the major and minor auspicious marks. 


To the right of the God is Maitreya Bodhisattva who is white, two-armed 
and wears the Jatamukuta, and carries the chowrie-jewel in the right hand 
and the Nagakesara flower in the left. 


Similarly to the left is Lokesvara of white complexion carrying in his 
right hand the chowrie and the lotus in the left. 


These two gods should be meditated as looking towards the face of the 
[principal] god...... 


Here ends the Sadhana for Vajrasana.”’ 
Images of this divinity are found in overwhelming numbers in almost 
all Buddhist centres in India. . The Indian Museum image reproduced is 


an example of this form of Gautama in Plate XIITa. 7 


* See also Foucher: L’Iconographie Bouddhique p. 15 ff. 
+ It may be noted that instead of sitting on the Vajra the seat of the god is 
stamped with a small thunderbolt. 


(12 )) 
V. MORTAL BUDDHASAKTIS. 


Like the Dhyani Buddhas, the,Mortal Buddhas have also their respective 
Buddhasaktis through whom they obtained the seven Mortal Bodhisattvas. 
The BuddhaSsaktis are :— 


Vipasyanti 
Sakth imal ym 
BSP VieSeV ae elen ete 
Kakudvati 
Ke pe ee chanhes: bikaay oi 
Mahidhara 
Wiadesio;dahvatiavasy 


We have not yet met with any representation of these anywhere in 
India. 


VI, MORTAL BODHISATTVAS. 


They were brought into existence by their respective Mortal Buddhas 
and their Saktis. They are :— 


ja 


Mahamati 
Pee Re isi 14h GRLGN day Gah ve 


AkaSsagafija 


Kanakaradaja 
Dharmadhara 


3) 

4. Sakamangala 
) 

6. 

HS MINTY Tah ioh Oy psp 


The names of Yasodhara and Ananda are familiar names, the former 


being the name of Sakyasitnha’s wife and the latter, that of his most favourite 
disciple. 


* See Oldfield : Sketches from Nipal, Vol. Il, 163 and 185 ff. 


+ Ibid. 


PLATE XII, 





si 


a, Samantabhadra b, Vajrapani 


(Indian Museunt). 





d, Seven Mortal Buddhas with Maitreya 
(Indian Museum). 





c, Wajrapani 
(Nalanda). 


$ . 
Pe 
*s 
ad ” 
*. 
. a 
= © 
“ , 
> 
Fs 
«= *° ¢-» 
ee seh 
my 
ae 


- 
s Zz 
. % 
. 
a. 
ee ake 
\ 4 
“>-~" 
? - 
‘ 
2 
nit 
Late 
Poe 
ref 
oe 
* \e 
iF 


F: A 
pa 
= 
j xeya 
e 
r =. 











es 
a 
: By 
- 
a 5 
. ‘ 
ad 
aa 
. 
* 


i ae 
Ma 


















ees 
o cheseaeee Ba ets Ei a 





* 
ee 
. wo « 
5 ¥ ra = 
co. ants ; . 
tii: a. Z ee eee i be : ji. 
\~ ae 7 , yf ¥ sore =. i . ‘a 4 1, Lg i : ye 
. ‘ y ta 
7 Pee v a ‘ ee og Aa 
eae, We Lk eee L-& i at eh. 
3 a i < * we 
% SG ties s ry 
oR ie. ye a : y 
2 ~¥ “ay 8, fat * 
"4. Fee a," ; 
= * aA ie ! 
Te as oF ‘4 , , 
* 9 7 . £2 fxs}; 
} —- :< a : it - 
" Ee + +, 4 , af i] 
> a2? 2 
= : at 
a oe 
i LT » al 
at, Fuck 5 it 


te 
. 
sts 
~ Fi a 44 
esi. 
fj 


—— ¥ 
os oe / 3 ; 
P 5 Ss tee ,; 
% J 7. : i 
> a it 
i Li. &¢ = 2 
P { ye «ft 


— 
- 
. 
Sakegs, 
‘ 


. a iF F ae 
ae al ; : 
. = — a | 
- cy Vt sae = 7 
el a 
’ + ‘ 
ae ae ae - Low 
i, 5 - a 
. 
Z 
toe fm 
i 
‘ 
‘ & 
I 
a i 
f : 
” Ahr 
Te. 
" - go? 
an” 7 ~ 
» ut 2 
7 t 
“we 
,* 
ae = +. 
a, * 
~ 
+ ie 
r - t 
* 






ee | SJ es 
4 


raha ae *) # 
are Winds, Bay Bo 


(SRLS) 


The relation between the Mortal Buddhas, their Buddhasgaktis and Bodhi- 
sattvas may be thus shown in a tabular form :— 








Mortal Buddha Mortal Buddhasakti Mortal Bodhisattva 
Vipasyi Vipasyanti Mahamati 
Sikhi Sikhimalini Ratnadhara _ 
Visvabhi Visvadhara Akasaganja 
Krakuechanda Kakudvati Sakamangala 
Kanakamuni — Kanthamalini Kanakaraja 
Kasyapa Mahidhara Dharmadhara 
Sakyasimha Yasodhara Ananda 


Vii. MAITREYA, THE FUTURE BUDDHA. 


It would not be out of place to mention here the name of Maitreya, who 
partakes of the nature of a Mortal Buddha, though he is not a Buddha yet. He 
is passing the life of a Boddhisattva in the Tusita Heaven, preparatory to his 
descent to the earth in human form. It is said that he would come to earth, 
full 4000 years after the disappearance of Buddha Gautama, for the deliverance 
of all sentient beings. Asanga is said to have visited Maitreya in the Tusita 
Heaven and the latter initiated him into the mysteries of Tantra. He is the 
only Bodhisattva worshipped both by the Hinayanists and the Mahayanists 
alike, and his images can be traced from the Gandhara School down to the 
present time. Hiuen Tsang records the existence of a colossal. image of 
Maitreya in Udyadna (U-chang-na). The sculptor in order to ascertain his 
correct form, is believed to have gone several times to the Tusita heaven before 
carving it. 

Maitreya may be represented as-a standing figure richly decorated with 
ornaments holding in his right hand the stalk of a lotus. __ He is distinguished 
from Padmapani mainly by the figure of a small caitya, which the former 
bears on his crown. Getty remarks * that in Indian sculpture his hands 
form the usual Dharmacakramudra ; in the left there is a vase, round, oval 


* Getty : Gods of the Northern Pantheon, p. 21. 


( 14 ) 


or pointed, or there may be the stems of flowers which support his two charac- 
teristic symbols, the vase and the wheel. Maitreya may also be represented 
seated as a Buddha with legs interlocked or both dangling down. His colour 
is yellow and his images sometimes bear the figures of the five Dhyani Buddhas 
on the aureole behind them. The small caitya on the crown of Maitreya is 
said to refer to the belief that a stipa in the mount Kukkutapada near Bodh- 
Gaya covers a spot where Kasyapa Buddha is lying. When Maitreya would 
descend to earth he would go direct to the spot which would open by magic 
and Kasyapa would give him the garments of a Buddha.* | 


The Sadhanamala furnishes us with only one description of Maitreya 
as a principal divinity and several others in which he is represented as a minor 
god. When as a minor god he accompanies others, he generally carries the 
chowrie in the right hand and the NagakeSara flower in the left.. The Sadhana 
describing the procedure of his worship has the following Dhyana. + 

....Pita ‘Maim’karaparinatam visvakamalasthitam trimukham catur- 
bhujam krsnasukladaksinavamamukham suvarnagauram sattvaparyankinam 
vyakhyanamudradharakaradvayam aparadaksinavamabhujabhyam varada- 
puspitanagakesaramanjaridharam nanalankaradharam atmanam Maitreya- 
rupam alambya...... 

Maitreyasadhanam’’ Sadhanamala, A-307, Na-23, C-236. 

‘* The worshipper should meditate on himself as Maitreya who originates 
from the yellow germ syllable ‘““Maim,”’ who is three-faced, three-eyed and four- 
armed ; whose right and left faces respectively are of blue and white colour ; 
whose complexion is yellow like gold ; who sits in the Paryanka attitude on 
an animal; whose two hands are engaged in exhibiting the Vyakhyana Mudra 
and who shows in his other right and left hands the Varada Mudra and the 
sprout of a full-blown Nagakesara flower ; who is decked in many ornaments. 
Meditating thus ors 


This is the Sadhana for Maitreya.” 


A Nepalese drawing reproduced in Plate XIIIb, represents this form of 
Maitreya, which follows the Dhyana in all its details except the Vahana. 


* Getty : Gods of the Northern Pantheon, p. 22. 


+ Also quoted in Foucher: L’Iconographie Bouddhique, part 2, p. 48. 


PieAT ee a 





on Weneetitey 


(/Judian Mitseittt ) 





c. Vak or Vajraraga Mafjusri. d. Siddhaikavira. 
(Sarnath ) 





CHAPTER IT. 
MANJUSRI. 

There is no doubt, the scholars are agreed, that the place assigned to 
Manjusri in the Buddhist Pantheon is one of the very highest. The Maha- 
yanists consider him to be one of the greatest Bodhisattvas. They believe 
‘that the worship of Manjusri confers upon them wisdom, retentive memory. 
intelligence and eloquence and enables them to master many sacred scriptures ; 
and it is no wonder that his worship was widely prevalent among the Maha- 
yanists. They conceived him in various forms and worshipped him with 


various mantras. Those who could not form any conception of him according 
to Tantric rites, attained perfection by simply muttering the mantras. 


It is difficult to fix the exact date when Mafjusri entered the Buddhist 
Pantheon. His image is not to be found in the Gandhara and Mathura sculp- 
tures, and Asvaghosa Nagarjuna and Aryadeva do not mention him in their 
works. His name occurs for the first time in the Sukhavati Vytha or the 
Amitayus Stitra.* But here also his name appears only in the smaller recen- 
sion of the work. This work was translated into Chinese between A.D. 384 and 
A. D. 417.— Since then we find mention of Manjusri in the subsequent Bud- 
dhist Sanskrit works and in the accounts of the Chinese travellers, Fa-hien, ¢ 
Hiuen Tsang, I-Tsing and others, and his images are to be found in the sculp- 
tures of Sarnath, Magadha, Bengal, Nepal and other places. 


Many details § about Mafjusri are to be found in the Svayambht: Purana 
dealing with the glories of the Svayambhiksettra in Nepal. The Adi-Buddha 
manifested himself here in the shape of a flame of fire and so it is called the 
Svayambhiksettra or the ‘Place of the Self-Born’. This place is consecrated 
with a temple of Adi-Buddha and close to it is the Mafjusri Hill now known 
as the Sarasvatisthana. The information about Mafjusri as cleaned from the 
Svayambht Purana is given below in brief. 


It is said in the Svayambhti Purana that Mafjusri hailed from China where 
he was living on mount Paficasirsa (the Hill of Five Peaks). He_was a 


* Sukhavati-Vyutha, p. 92 App. IT. 
7 Ibid. Introduction. pile ni (1). 


t There is considerable difference of opinion as regards the divinity of Mafijusri men- 
tioned by Fa-Hien. Legge, Travels of Fa-Hien p. 46. 


~ § An account of the story recorded in the Svayambhi Purana with many details will 
be found in (1) R. Mitra; Sanskrit Buddhist Literature, pp. 249—258. (2) Hodgson’s" 
Essays. p. 115 ff. and (8) Oldfield : Sketches from Nipal Vol. II p. 185fl. 


(26 


great saint with a good number of disciples and followers including the king of 
that country, Dharmakara by name. One day Majnjusri received divine intima- 
tion that the self-born Lord, Adi-Buddha had manifested himself in the form 
of a flame of fire on a lotus rising from the Lake Kalihrada in Nepal. 
He forthwith started for Nepal to pay homage to the god and was accom- 
panied by a large number of his disciples, his two wives and king Dharmakara 
of China. When he came to the lake he found the god inaccessible, being 
surrounded by the vast expanse of water. With great difficulty he approached 
the flame of fire and paid his homage. Then he cast about in his mind how 
to make the god accessible, and began to go round the lake. He then with 
his sword cleft asunder the southern barrier of hills and the water rushed 
through that opening, leaving a vast stretch of dry land behind, which is 
known as the Nepal valley. Through that opening the water of the Baghmati 
even now flows down and it is still called ‘ Kot-bar’ or ‘ sword-cut.’? 


Manjusri lost no time in erecting a temple consecrating the flame of 
fire, and very near to the temple on a hillock he made his own habitation. 
On the same hill he made a Vihara (or monastery) still known as the Manju- 
pattana for his disciples. Lastly he made Dharmakara the king of Nepal. 
These and many other pious deeds are ascribed to Manjusri in the Svayambhu 
Purana. Putting everything in proper order Manjusri returned home and 
soon obtained the divine form of a Bodhisattva, leaving his mundane body 
behind. 


From the above it appears that Manjusri was a great man who brought 
civilization to Nepal from China. He had extraordinary engineering skill 
and was a great architect. We are not sure when he came down to Nepal 
from China, but there is no doubt that in the fourth century A.D. he was well-- 
known as a Bodhisattva. He wielded great influence on the minds of the 
Buddhists and the Mahayanists worshipped him in various forms and various 
ways. He is known in almost all the countries in the continent of Asia where 
Buddhism made its way. Various countries conceived various forms of 
Manjusri. But we are here concerned only with the images that are purely 
Indian and not with those that hail from outside the country. 


We have already made it abundantly clear that the Buddhists believe 
their gods as emanating from one or the other of the Dhyani Buddhas or four 
or five of them collectively. But it had not been possible to assign Mafjusri 
to one particular Dhyani Buddha or to one particular group of the Dhyani 
Buddhas. The reason is not far to seek. We have evidence that the list of 
the Five Dhyani Buddhas was completed sometime after Santideva if not 
considerably later, though two or three of them were known prior to him. 
It is after Santideva that the priests of Vajrayana conceived the idea that all 
gods should emanate from one or the other of the Dhyani Buddhas or four 


(78, Bia ) 


or five of them collectively, in the same way as Avalokitesvara emanated from 
Amitabha. 


Mafjusri was introduced into the Buddhist Pantheon long after Avaloki- 
teSvara and nobody has any doubt as to his human personality. But Ava- 
lokitesvara was an abstract idea, and never a man, and it is said that Amitabha 
in his anxiety to create caused a golden ray of light to appear from his head 
and in it originated the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara.* With Manjusri the 
case is otherwise. He was regarded as a Bodhisattva in the same way as 
Asvaghosa, Nagarjuna, Aryadeva, Asanga and many others were regarded 
as Bodhisattvas in the time of Hiuen Tsang. But this is no reason why we 
should not regard Mafijusri as an emanation of any of the Dhyani Buddhas. 
As a matter of fact, some considered him to be an emanation of Amitabha, 
others of Aksobhya, still others of the group of the five Dhyani Buddhas, 
Cases are, however, on record where Manjusri is not affiliated to any of the 
Dhyani Buddhas, i.e., in other words, regarded as independent. 


Thirty-nine Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala are devoted to the worship 
of Mafijusri and forty dhyanas describe fourteen distinct forms of the 
Bodhisattva. In finding out the names of the different varieties, special stress 
has been laid on the mantras rather than on the colophons of the Sadhanas. 
It should always be remembered that in determining the names of gods the 
mantras are the safest guide, especially when one deity has a great many 
forms. The fourteen varieties have each a different name e.g., Vagisvara, 
Mafjuvara, Manjughosa, Arapacana, Siddhaikavira, Vak, Manjukumara, 
Vajrananga, Vadirat, Namasangiti, Dharmadhatu-Vagisvara, Sthiracakra, 
Manjunatha and Manjuvayjra. 


Ordinarily Manjusri carries the Sword and the Book in his right and 
left hands. In representations we sometimes find these two symbols placed 
on lotuses. He is accompanied sometimes by Yamiri, or by his Sakti alone : 
sometimes by Sudhanakumara and Yamari and sometimes again by the four 
divinities, Jalinikumara also called Stiryyaprabha, Candraprabha, Kesini and 
Upakesini. Though the last four are required to be present with Arapacana, 
they are found represented in other places also. 


I. EMANATIONS CF AMITABHA. 


The following two varieties of Mafijusri should bear the effigy of their 
sire Amitabha, one on the tongue and the other on the crown. The former is 
Vak and the latter is Dharmadhatu-Vagisvara. 


* Getty : Gods of the Northern Pantheon, p. 54. 
3 


(ecesay) 
ly VAK, 


Mudra—Samadhi. Asana—Vajraparyanka. 


Special characteristics—Ornaments and dress. 


He is also known as Dharmasankhasamadhi, Vajraraga, and Amitabha- 
Manjusri, and is one faced and two-armed. His two hands are joined in the lap 
forming the Dhyana or Samadhi Mudra. In this respect he is identical with 
his sire whom he bears on his tongue. But he may be distinguished by the 
ornaments he wears and by the image of his sire if represented on the crown. 
The Dhyani Buddhas have no ornaments and being creators themselves they 
have no fathers. Images of this form of Manjusri are extremely rare in India 
with the exception of the one at the temple of Bauddhanath in Nepal. The 
accompanying sketch (Plate XIIIc) gives an idea of what Vak is like. The 
Sadhanamala has the following Dhyana :-— 

‘ Dvibhujaikamukham sitam vajraparyankopari samadhimudrahastam 
asesakumarabharanabhtsitam paficacirakam Manjusribhattarakam......nis- 
padya....vajrajihvopari Buddham Amitabham vicintya....Om Vakyedan- 
namah iti japamantrah.”’ 

Vaksadhanam ”’ Sadhanamala, A-68, N-51.* 

“The worshipper should meditate on himself the form of Mafijusri 
Bhattaraka, who is two-armed and one-faced, has white complexion ; whose 
hands are joined in forming the Samadhimudra ; who is decked in all princely 
ornaments, wears the five pieces of monkish garments....thus meditating.... 


he should conceive the figure of Buddha Amitabha on the adamantine 
tongue....‘* Om Vakyedannamah ” is the mantra for muttering. 


DHARMADHATU VAGISVARA. 
Faces—Four. Hands—Hight. Asana—Lalita. 


The images of Dharmadhatu Vagisvara are by no means common either 
in stone or in bronze. The Citrakaras in Nepal, however, do even now prepare 
paintings of this god. When represented he is of white complexion, has four 
faces and eight arms, and bears the five jewels on his tiara; he is clad in celestial 
garments and displays amorous sentiment. The two principal hands carry the 
bow and the arrow, the second pair the noose and the goad, the third the 
book and the sword, and the fourth, the Ghanta and the Vajra. He may have 
another form + exhibiting the Dharmacakra Mudra in the first pair instead 
of the bow and the arrow, and in the second pair the arrow and the vessel 


*-“QOmitted in CG. 


+ See Foucher: L’Iconographie Bouddhique Il, 47 lines 1—5. This form bears the 
images of the five Dhyani Buddhas on the crown. 


Ru 10g) 


instead of the noose and the goad. The Dhyana describing the former is given 





below: 


66 


....Astabhujam caturmukham milamukham raktagauram daksinam 
kumkumaéarunam pascimam padmaraktam, uttaram pitaraktam, dvabhyam 
hastabhyam dhanurbanadharam, aparabhyam pasankusadharam, punara- 
parabhyam Prajnaparamitapustakakhadgadharam, tathaparabhyam ghanta- 
vajradharam maharagasrngararasojjvalam lalitasanastham visvapadmacandre 
divyavastrabharanam Amitabhajatamukutinam.... 
Dharmadhatuvagisvarasadhanavasyavidhih ”’ 
Sadhanamala, A-67. N-51, C-51. 

The worshipper should meditate in himself the form of [ Dharma- 
dhatu-Vagisvara]| who is eight-armed, four-faced, and of reddish white colour, 
with the right face of red colour, face to the West of lotus-red colour 
and the face to the North of yellowish-red colour; who holds the bow and 
the arrow in one pair, the noose and the goad in another pair, the Prajnapara- 
mita and the sword in another and the Ghanta and the Vajra in the remaining 
pair; who is resplendent with intense sentiment of passion and sits on the 


moon on a double lotus in the Lalita attitude; who is decked in celestial 
garments and ornaments and bears in his crown of chignon the effigy of 


PATYE Gaol abese cn. 


Il. EMANATIONS OF AKSOBHYA. 


No less than four varieties of Mafjusri are distinctly said to bear the 
images of Aksobhya on their crown. Out of these four, Manjughosa and 
Siddhaikavira have four Sadhanas each devoted to their worship. The third 
variety is known as Vajrananga to whom three Sadhanas are ascribed, but 
is not known to have been represented either in stone or in bronze. Similar 
is the case with the fourth one, Namasangiti Mafjusri. 


MANJUGHOSA. 


Vahana—Lion. Mudra—Vyakhyana. 





Characteristic Symbol—Lotus in the left. 


Four Sadhanas in the SAdhanamala describe the form of this variety 
of Mafjusri, which is known by the name of Manjughosa. When represented 
he appears almost similar to Mafjuvara with the difference that the lotus here 
does not bear the book. It may also be pointed out that Manjughosa should 
have the lotus only to his left, but Mafijuvara may have it on either side bearing 
the book. He has golden complexion, rides the lion and is decked in all sorts 
of ornaments. He is two-armed and displays the Vyakhyana Mudra, and to 
his left rises the lotus. He is sometimes accompanied by Yamari in the left 


( 205%) 


and Sudhanakumara in the right. The Dhyana as given in one. of the Sadhanas 
is given below :— 

...°¢Mafijughosaripam Atmanam pasyet simhastham  kanakagaura- 
varnam sarvalankarabhisitam Vyakhyanamudravyagrakaram | vamaparsve 
utpaladharam Aksobhyamukutinam. Daksine Sudhanakumaram vame 
Yamantakam pasyet....mantram japet Om Vagisvara Muh *.... ” 


Sadhanamala, A-56-7, N-438, C-43. 

The worshipper should meditate in himself the form of Manhjughosa 
who is seated on the lion ; whose colour is golden yellow ; who is decked in all 
ornaments ; whose hands are engaged in forming the Vyakhyana Mudra ; who 
has the Utpala in his left side and bears the image of Aksobhya on the crown. 
To his right Sudhanakumara and to the left Yamantaka + should be con- 
ceived....the mantra Om Vagisvara Muh should be muttered.” 

Some of the Sadhanas mention that he should sit in Lalitasana on the 
back of a lion, while others are silent about the particular pose. "We may 
therefore, conclude that he may sit in other attitudes also, for instance the 
Vajraparyanka or the Ardhaparyanka attitudes. His colour is generally 
yellow, but he may have the colour of Kunkuma as well. 


2. SIDDHAIKAVRIA. 


Colour—woite (or) red. Symbol—lotus. Mudra—Varada. | 


Special characteristic—figures of Aksobhya and other Dhyani Buddhas on crown. 


Four Sadhanas describe the form of Siddhaikavira, and in one of the 
them he is said to bear the image of Aksobhya on the crown (Mauli), and 
this fact naturally leads us to conclude that he is an offspring of Aksobhya ;— 
this seems to be more probable when we notice the small figure of the Dhyani 
Buddha on the crown of the standing figure of Manjusri (Plate XIITd), in the 
Sarnath Museum. The same Sadhana again calls him * Paficavirakasekharah ’ 
which means the ‘bearing the five heroic ones (Dhyani Buddhas) on the crown.’ 
This word, therefore, we venture to suggest has nothing to do with the god’s 
origin, but the Dhyani Buddhas, excepting Aksobhya have been used only 
as a part of the ornamentation which may or may not be used in actual 
representations. 


* The Mantra of Manjughosa here is ‘‘ Om Vagisvara Muh,’”’ but in other Sadhanas 
it is ‘‘ Om Dharmadhatu-Vagisvara Muh.’’ Again, the variety of Mafijusri which has been 
named Vagisvara has uniformly the Mantra ‘‘ Om Vagisvara Muh.’’ As there is a great 
deal of difference between the forms of Vagisvara and Mafijughosa, we are inclined to think 
that the Mantra ‘‘ Om Vagisvara Muh ”’ in the case of Mafijughosa is a mistake for ‘‘ Om 
Dharmadhatu-Vagisvara Muh.”’ 


+ For details about the forms of Sudhanakumara and Yamantaka see Foucher: 
L’Iconographie Bouddhique II, p. 41. 


(2) 


When represented he carries the blue lotus in the left hand and exhibits 
the Varada Mudra in the right. The Dhyana describes his form in the follow- 
ing terms :— 

Siddhaikaviro Bhagavan candramandalasthah candropasrayah jaga- 
dudyotakari dvibhujah ekamukhah Suklah vajraparyanki divyalankara- 
bhtsitah pancavirakasekharah....vame nilotpaladharah daksine varadah.... 
tato Bhagavato maulau Aksobhyam devatyah * ptjam kurvanti.t 


Sadhanamala, A-74, N-56, C-57. 

‘“The God Siddhaikavira is on the orb of the moon, is the support 
of the moon, illumines the world, is two-armed, one-faced and of white 
complexion ; he sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude, is decked in celestial 
ornaments, bears the effigies of the five Dhyani Buddhas on the crown....and 
carries the Utpala in the left hand and exhibits the Varada pose in the right.... 
then the goddesses pay homage to Aksobhya who is on the crown of the God.”’ 

In another Sadhana the description of the Mandalat for Manjusri is given. 
The God in the form of Siddhaikavira, painted red, is in the middle, and is 
accompanied by four divinities, Jaliniprabha, Candraprabha, Kesini and 
Upakesini. These four goddesses more often accompany Arapacana, another 
form of Manjusri, as we shall see later on ; but we must not forget that Kesini 
and Upakesini both have equal rights to be represented by the side of their 
common husband, Manjusri. The Sadhanas are not generally explicit as to 
the pose of the God, and we will not be surprised if he is found standing as in the 
Sarnath image. 


A confusion in likely to take place between the forms of Lokanatha and 
Siddhaikavira if they are both represented without companions and without 
the figure of the Dhyani Buddha, Amitabha or Aksobhya as the case may be, 
on their crown ; for both these worthies have the same symbol, the lotus and 
the same Mudra, the Varada pose. In that case the image would generally 
be identified as Lokanatha, who, because of his being a variety of Avalokite- 
Svara, is represented widely. Images of Siddhaikavira, we should add, are 
extremely rare. 


3. VAJRANANGA. 
Asana—Pratyalidha. Colour—yellow. Hands—six or four. 


The third variety bearing the image of Aksobhya on the crown is known 
as Vajrananga, who is worshipped in the Tantric rite of Vasikarana or 
bewitching men and women. He is yellow in complexion, is in the fullness 


* A reads ‘‘devebhyah.”’ + A omits ‘“‘kurvanti.’’ 


t Mafijusri (in the form of Siddhaikavira) should exhibit the Varada pose and carry 
the lotus; Suryyaprabha and Upakesini should hold the lotus and exhibit the Varada 
pose : Candraprabha and Kesini should also have the same symbol and the same pose of 
hand. The four companions of Siddhaikavira should resemble his replicas. 


( 22 ) 


of youth, and bears the image of Aksobhya on his Jatamukuta. The two 
principal hands hold the fully expanded bow of flowers charged with an arrow 
of alotus bud. The four remaining hands carry the sword and the looking- 
glass in the two right hands while the two left carry the lotus and the Asoka 
bough with red flowers. In another Sadhana the Asoka bough is replaced by 
Kankelli flowers. He may have an alternative form with four hands,* in which 
case the arms carrying the mirror and the Asoka bough are dropped. The 
Dhyana describing the six-armed variety of Vajrananga is given below :— 

....°' Vajranangam Arya-Manjughosam pitavarnam sadbhujam mila- 
bhujabhyam  akarnaptritaraktotpalakalikasarayuktakusumadhanurdharam ; 
daksinadvayena khadgadarpanabhrtam vamayugalenendivararaktasokapal- 
lavadharam; Aksobhyadhisthita jJatamukutinam, pratyalidhapadam soda- 
savarsakaram mahasrngaramtrtim pasyet....” 

Sadhanamala, A-64, N-49, C-49-50. 

“..,.The worshipper should conceive himself as Arya-Mafijughosa in 
the form of Vajrananga with yellow complexion, and six arms ; with the two 
principal hands he draws to the ear the bow of flowers charged with an arrow 
of a red lotus bud; the two remaining hands to the right carry the sword 
and the mirror, while the two left hold the lotus and the Asoka bough with red 
flowers ; he bears the image of Aksobhya on his crown of chignon, stands in 
the Pratyalidha attitude, appears a youth of sixteen years, and displays the 
intense sentiment of passion....”’ 

Vajrananga, as the name implies, is the Buddhist God of Love and 
is the prototype of the Hindu God Madana, in the Buddhist Pantheon. 
The flowery bow and the arrow of flowers are strikingly common to both. 
Besides these, unlike the Hindu Ananga, several other weapons are also attri- 
buted to the Buddhist God of Love and below is given an account of how he 
makes use of them. 


It is written in the Sadhanamala that in the act of bewitching a woman, 
she should be imagined by the worshipper as being pierced by him in her bosom 
with the arrow of the lotus bud. The woman falls flat on the ground swooning. 
Seeing this the worshipper should conceive that she is bound down in her 
legs by the chain which is the bow. Then by the noose which is the lotus 
stalk, she is tied by the neck and is drawn to his side. Then he should think 
that he is striking her with the Agoka bough, is frightening her with the sword, 
and subsequently she has only to be shown the looking-glass to be completely 
subdued. <A short text is quoted below from the Sadhana in support of the 
statement. 


Tsuna tu kucham bidhva agokaistadayeddhrdi | 
Khadgena bhisayet sadhyam darpanam darsayet tatah | 


* a4 eee as Sy. ‘ c : < : P 
a Athava caturbhujam darpanasokapallavadharam dvibhujarahitam 
dh yaya Je aa ; 








C. 


Q. 


a> 


—s 


EET OVOS®, 


Vajrananga Majnjusri. 


b. 





Bhp 


PLATE XIV. 


Namasangiti Mafjusri (/) 
( Nepal ) 


Maharajalila Manjusri. 


(Indian Museum ) 


( 23) 


Utpalena padam badhva akarsayet suvihvalam (a) |! * 


Unfortunately no image of this divinity has yet been discovered and it 
is, therefore, that we reproduce a drawing (Plate XIVc) from an ancient 
album, though it does not consistently follow all the details in the Sadhanas. 


4. NAMASANGITI MANJUSRI. 


Colour—reddish white. Attitude—Vajraparyahka. 


Faces—three. ‘-Arms—tour. 


The fourth variety of Manjusri with the effigy of the Dhyani Buddha, 
Aksobhya, on the crown is known as Namasangiti Manjustri, to whom only one 
Sadhana in the SAadhanamala is assigned. In this Sadhana he is described as 
three-faced and four-armed, and as bearing the image of Aksobhya on the crown. 
The first or the principal face is red, the second blue and the third white. Of 
his four hands the first pair holds the bow and the arrow and the second the 
Book and the Sword. He sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude on the lotus. 
The Dhyana describes him in the following terms :— 

.“* Raktagauram padmacandropari 7 vajraparyankanisannah ; 
prathamamukham raktam, daksinam nilam, vame suklam iti trimukham, 
hastacatustayena yathayogam Prajnakhadgadhanurbanayoginam — ratna- 
kiritinam dvatrmsallaksananuvyanjanavirajitam kumaram kumarabharana- 
bhisitam atmanam vibhavya....ttadanu sarva-Tathagatabhisekaptrvakam 
Aksobhyamaulinam atmanam vicintya..... 

Arya-Namasangitisadhanam samaptam.”? Sadhanamala, A-84, C-65 §. 

.“The worshipper should meditate on himself as  Arya- 
Namasangiti, whose colour is reddish white, who sits in the Vajraparyanka 
attitude on the moon over lotus. His principal face is red, the right blue and 
the left white, that is, three-faces ; in his four hands he carries the Prajna 
[paramita], the sword, the bow and the arrow in proper fashion ; he wears a 
bejewelled crown and is endowed with the thirty-two major and eighty minor 
auspicious marks ; he appears a prince with princely ornaments........ then 
the worshipper after offering Abhiseka to all the Tathagatas, should further 
meditate himself as bearing the effigy of Aksobhya on the crown.’ 

We have not come across any image of this form of Manjusri, and the 
illustration (Plate XIVa) is only a copy of a drawing in an ancient Nepalese 
album. The illustration in Plate XIVb with one face and four arms may 
represent this form of Manjusri. 


* Sadhanamala, fol. A-64, N-48, C-49. 
+ C. has paryanka. t A, omits tadanu....vicintya. 
§ Omitted in N. 


( 24 ) 
[{.. EMANATIONS OF THE FIVE DHYANI BUDDHAS. 


Altogether four varieties of Manjusri are said to bear the images of the 
five Dhyani Buddhas on their crown, thereby suggesting that Mafjusri is a 
‘Pafcavirakumara’ or the ‘ offspring of the five Victorious Ones,’ 1.e. the 
five Dhyani Buddhas. Out of these four varieties excepting Vagisvara three 


others are rarely represented. 


Te EV AGISVARA 


Colour—red or yellow. Asana—ardhaparyanka 


Vahana—lion. Symbol—utpala. 


Vagisvara is a tutelary deity of the Nepalese Buddhists and is widely 
worshipped in Nepal; and his popularity is borne out by the fact that innu- 
merable wheels of prayer in Nepalese temples bear in monumental Newari 
characters, the mantra, ‘‘Om Vagisvara Muh.”’ 


One of the Sadhanas describes him as having red complexion, as wearing 
all princely ornaments and as seated on a lion in the Ardhaparyanka attitude. 
He carries the Utpala in his left hand and the right is displayed in an artistic 
attitude. He may have a yellow variety, which is known as the Maharaja- 
lila Manjusri and the Dhyana describing his form has already been quoted 
and translated by Professor Foucher.* Let us now describe the form of the 
red variety of Vagisvara as given in the Dhyana :— 

.“‘Pancavirakasekharam kumaram sarvabharanabhtsitam kunkuma- 


runam “yamenotpalam daksinena lilaya sthitam simhasanastham atmanam 
kumararipena cintayet.. ..Om Vagisvara Muh. if 


Sadhanamala, A-54, N-41, C-54. 

.The worshipper should meditate in himself the form of | Vagisvara]| 

who bears the images of the five Dhyani Buddhas on the crown, appears a 
prince, is decked in all ornaments, has the complexion of Kunkuma ; who 


carries the Utpala in the left hand while the right is displayed artistically ; 
who has his seat on a lion, and appears a prince ....Om Vagisvara 


Muh.”’ 

The Indian Museum image (Plate XIVd) of this divinity carries a ghanta 
in the right hand and instead of sitting on the lion is represented as sitting 
on a lion throne. The other image in bronze (Plate XVa) is a recent one 


and represents the god a little differently. 


* In his L’Iconographie Bouddhique, part II, 438-44. 





c. Manjuvara. 


(Indian Museum ) 


b. 


d. 


Mafijuvara. 
(Nalanda ) 





Manjuvara. 
( Birbhum ) 















' om nw is 
z Ls aay - 
Bucs ‘i 
7 ¢ —— © 
erage =< 


‘ 
fi 
3 : : 7} . 
‘an : i rAe's 
+). : T : : : 4° 
> ae 
ae Tee 4 =, 7 j aor , a. 4, 
+ =e < ; yo ay 
‘ a > < * 7 
i] 
- 


’ 
‘ 
r 
; 
yes 
‘ = 
wa 
= 
Ss oar 
et oe 
oso 
— 
4 
+ 
i 
‘ 
2 
s 
+ e 
~ 
a 


. 
' 
‘ 
‘ 
: 
’ 
’ 
1 
as 
ae 
J . 
-_ 


« 





oe 


. 
io . 
* 
‘ 
‘ait 
% 
: 
‘ 
“ 
»] 
fe 
» 
v4 
‘ 
. 
did § 
ane ee ee 
Poe aX 





; F 
oe? 
wt x 
: % by - = 
. - ; 
= > : 
‘ o + *= 
. , a 
- Z ot See ps : 
< 2 _ " 
¢ | 
{ , 
: feta - 5 
z A : ie « > - 
/ ee = “ ; , : ; 
ee on 7 ‘ ; y . = iL * t- 
; a. : 


#. 


=e: 
- 
e 
+t 
‘ 
wt 
’ 
4 
2 
} 
« 
‘ 
‘ap 
a) 
F 
— 
a} 
& 
- 
me 
_ 
sk 
a Os 
‘ 
x 
ct 
h 
: Sas wanes he 3 
Fd RS 2 A Ne SE poe 
’ 
. 
' 
i 
1 
: 
‘ 
; 
R 
i : 
i 
‘ 
hl 


: 
: 7 . 
| 
Ps 
’ 
j = 
i 
‘ 
4 ; 
4 ee os . 
* -* 
- - 
= J % . 
om * 
bd " 
fe m 
* 
5 
-_- ad > j ; 3 : 
Rs ; rn ; 
: 4 : 
Dy 
ile! « 
i ' 
; » ee ¢ 
+ 
é " Ss i : ‘ 
. Zs 
a + 
i 7 m oe - : 
= = Sa 7 
‘ i t . b 
r a $i : P 
# as 
: i as \/ 
: : . d —_ 4 * 
iz ' 
i a | 
3 ‘ 
+ 
Pe t ys ; Pit 
. > ¥ ; ft 
i . ; . 
° 
ie 5 
5 : y 
‘ i 
t é 


_% 
ed 
’ 


“ 
° 


—_ 
re 
4 aos 
‘ 
Siac Od 


- 
-_ 
' 
. 
i -<y ; 
ee ee 


: y ae 4 “« 
i y & ry ay a4 ‘y J) 
a : Soe ; ‘e 
* 







ie on) 
2. MANJUVARA. 


lion, 





Mudra—-Dharmacakra. Vahana 
Attitude—Lalita or Ardhaparyanka. 
Identification mark—Prajnaparamita on lotus. 

Two Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala describe the procedure of the wor- 
ship of Manjuvara, who is rather widely represented. He is yellow in com- 
plexion, sits on the back of a lion in the Lalita or in the Ardhaparyanka atti- 
tude and displays the sentiment of passion. His two hands are jomed over 
the breast forming the Dharmacakra Mudra, as he eternally instructs the 
people in the secrets of Dharma; he holds the lotus or lotuses on which 
appears the Prajhaparamita Scripture. The text of the Dhyana in one of 
the Sadhanas is given below :— 

.... Taptakancanabham pancavirakumaram Dharmacakramudrasa 
mayuktam Prajhaparamitanvitanilotpaladharinam simhastham lalitaksepam 
sarvalankarabhisitam....Om Manjuvara Hum ”’ 
| Sadhanamala. A-58, N-43-44, C-44. 

....°' The worshipper should meditate on himself the form of Manjuvara, 
whose colour is the colour of molten gold, who is the offspring of the five 
Dhyani Buddhas, whose hands display the Dharmacakra Mudra, who carries 
the blue lotus with the Prajnaparamita (above), sits on a lion in the Lalita 
attitude, and is decked in all ornaments....Om Manjuvara Hum.”’ 

According to a second Sadhana, Manjuvara should have the lotus under 
his left armpit with the Prajnhaparamita on it ; he may sit in the Ardhaparyanka 
attitude and may be accompanied by the fierce God, Yamantaka of blue 
colour with his distorted face terrible with bared fangs. The latter carries 
the staff in one hand and touches the leg of the principal god with another. 


The image (Plate XVd)* discovered at Bara in the District of Birbhum 
probably represents this form of Mafjusri with the miniature figures of the 
five Dhyani Buddhas over head, and of the two divinities, one on either side. 
They probably represent Sudhana in the right and Yamantaka in the left. 
Manjuvara here displays the Dharmacakra Mudra and bears, under his left 
armpit, the stem of the lotus on which appears the Prajhaparamita Scrip- 
ture as required by the Sadhana. The lotus to the right has been sculptured 
simply to keep up the balance with the lotus to the left. 


The lion-vehicle of Mafijuvara is sometimes absent and in later images, 
he may sit in the Paryanka and other attitudes, (Plate XVb).+ The 


* This image was first identified as that of the Hindu goddess, Bhuvanesvari 
in the Birbhum Bibarana, then as that of Simhandda Lokesvara (Vide—-A. 8S. I. Eastern 
Circle, Annual Report, 1920-21, p. 27) and later on as that of Mafijusri (Vide—-Ibid, Pl. [, 
fig. 2). As I have not personally examined the image I am not sure as to the sex of the 
figure. Ifit is a female figure we will have no other alternative than to identify the 
image as that of Prajhaparamita. 


+ A. S. I., Central Circle 1919-20. Pl. V (a). 
4 


( 26 ) 


lotus to the right, which is not expressly required by the Sadhana some- 
times bears the book (Plate XVIa) and sometimes the sword in order to 
keep up the balance more precisely (Plate XVIb).* 


The Indian Museum image (Plate XVec) of Mafjuvara has on either 
side of him two female companions who represent no doubt the two 


wives of Manjusri, Kesini and Upakesini. 


3. MANJUVAIRA. 
Colour—red. Faces—three. Hands—six. Companion—-Prajha. 


The reason why Manjuvajra is dealt with along with the other emanations 
of the five Dhyani Buddhas is this. In the Sadhana describing the procedure 
of his worship we find a word, which means that Manjuvajra ‘“ serves the 
three worlds, being created by the host of the resplendent Buddhas,” + 
apparently referring to the group of the five Tathagatas, or the five Dhyani 
Buddhas ; for, in the Sadhanamalaé the word, ‘‘ Buddha’’ seldom refers to 


anything other than the five Dhyani Buddhas. 


The colour of his body including the principal face is red ike Kunkuma, 
the second face is blue, and the third white. He has six arms, out of which 
the two principal ones are engaged in embracing his Sakti with one hand 
touching her face. The remaining four hands carry the sword and the arrow, 
and the bow and the Utpala. He sits in Vajrasana or in the Vajraparyanka 
attitude on the moon supported by the lotus. The Dhyana isin verse and runs 
as follows :— 

Kunkumarunasammurtirnilasitatrayananah, 
Bhujadvayasamaslista-Svabha- Vidyadharasyadhrk. 
Khadgabanabhujaficapanilotpalaparigrahah, 
Visvadalabjacandrasthah vajrasanasasiprabhah. 

Sadhanamala, A-86, Na-85, C-66. 


His beautiful person is red like Kunkuma; he has three faces of [Kunkuma], 
blue and white colour, embraces his Svabha Prajfia with two arms, of 
which one touches her face, carries the Khadga, the arrow, the bow and 
the blue Utpala, sits on the moon over a double lotus in Vajrasana, and has 
the radiance of the moon.” 


* This bronze belongs to the collection of Pandit Siddhiharsa of Nepal and the 
image is popularly known as Dharmacakra Mafijusri. 
ft The passage in which the word occurs is— 


od Sphurad-Buddhaugha-nirmana-prasadhita-jagattrayah. 
Svatattvodbhavacihnottham Mafijuvajrah svayam bhavet.”’ 


PLATE Vv le 





aq. Manjuvara. b. Dharmacakra Manjusri. 
( Nepal ) 


(Indian Museum ) 





d. Arapacana Manyjus-1. 
( Nepal ) 


c. Manjukumar 


Pon 


She rece 


Eat td 


t 


Pa ee 


spa 


ates 
jae ones 


fe 
E 
a 





Satay 


4. MANJUKUMARA. 


Colour—red. Vahana—animal, 


Faces —three. Arms—six. 


One Sadhana only in the Sadhanamala describes him as three-faced and 
six-armed, and as riding on an animal. In his three left hands he carries the 
Prajhaparamita, the Utpala and the bow, while the three right show the 
sword, the arrow and the Varada pose. The extract is given below :— 

‘ Manjukumaram trimukham sadbhujam kunkumarunam _nila- 
sitadaksinetaravadanam sattvaparyankinam Khadgabanavaradam daksina- 
karatrayam, Prajiaparamitapustakanilotpalacapavadvamakaratrayam sas- 
mgarakumarabharananivasanadikam nanapuspamadhasobhaciratrayaviraji- 
tam Tathagataparamanuparighatitam * 4tmanam dhyatva....”’ 

Sadhanamala, A-79-80, N-61, C-61. 

** The worshipper should meditate in himself the from of Mafijukumara, 
who is three-faced and six-armed, whose colour is the colour of Kunkuma, 
whose right and left faces have (respectively) the blue and white colour ; who 
has his seat on an animal ; whose three right hands show the sword, the arrow 
and the Varada pose, while the three left carry the Prajiiaparamita, blue 
Utpala and the bow ; who is decked in princely ornaments and dress as befit- 
ting the sentiment of passion he displays, wears the three Cirakas, which are 
gaudily decorated with various kinds of flowers ; who is made of the particles 
of the: Tathagatas...5Thus méditating.....% 

It would be apparent from the translation why Manjukumara has been 
assigned to the five Dhyani Buddhas: because his essence consists of the 
‘paramanus ’ or particles of the Tathagatas meaning the five Dhyani Buddhas. 
He is not known to us either in sculptures or in ancient paintings. The accom- 
panying sketch (Plate XVIc), which has been restored from an ancestral 
album of a Vajracaryya, however, gives a true idea of his form. The Vahana, 


it may be noted, is absent in the drawing. 


IV. INDEPENDENT FORMS. 


The reason why we get forms of Manjusri without fathers or the Dhyani 
Buddhas on the crown, is rather difficult to ascertain, nor are we entitled to 
attribute them to the omission of the authors or the compilers of the Sadhanas, 
For the worship of Arapacana alone, there are, in the Sadhanamala as many 
as eight Sadhanas and in none of these there is any faint reference even as to 
the origin of the god. It cannot be a case of omission but is one of deliberate 
commission. What then is the reason of this silence as to the origin of several 
forms of Mafijusri described below? The only reason we can adduce is a 


* A reads “paramanda.”’ 


(c 23a) 


simple historical fact. We know Mafijusri was, in the fourth century, known 
as a distinguished Bodhisattva, when the conception of the five Dhyani Buddhas 
was practically in the air, and at best the name of Amitabha only was 
in existence. But when the conception of the Dhyani Buddhas and their 
emanations was established, some forms of Manjusri, were assigned to Amita- 
bha, some to Aksobhya and a few to the group of the five Dhyani Buddhas 
by the later Buddhists according to their cults and some were left as inde- 
pendent ; and we shall not be surprised if an attempt is made in the sculptures 
to assign the following four independent forms to any particular Dhyani Buddha 
or a particular group of them. 


1. ARAPACANA. 


Colour—white, or red, Asana—Vajraparjanka. Companions—four. 
Identification marks—Book against breast (vame hrdi grhitapustakam) and the 
brandishing sword in the right (daksine udyatakhadgakaram). 

Right Sadhanas in the SAadhanamala describe the form of this divinity, 
who is sometimes white and sometimes red. He sits always in the Vajra- 
paryanka attitude, and when he sits on animal he is called Prajfiacakra. He 
is accompanied by the four divinities, Kesini, Upakesini, Candraprabha and 
Sairyyaprabha, and as the group originate from the five syllables, ‘ A,’ ° R,’ 
‘P,’ °C,’ and * N,’ the principal god is called Arapacana. When represented, 
the four companions of Arapacana resemble the principal god in all respects. 


None of the forms of Manjusri are so widely represented both in stone 
-and in bronze as Arapacana, sometimes withthe four companions (XVIIab) 
* and sometimes without them (Plate XVid). Im one (Plate XVITb) 
of the sculptures, preserved in the Dacca Museum, we find the four Dhyani 
Buddhas, Vairocana, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and Amoghasiddhi (besides 
the usual four companions), sculptured on the aureole behind, the middle 
position at the top being occupied by one of the companion deities namely 
Candraprabha resembling the principal god. The Nepal bronze (Plate X VIIc)t 


does not carry the book against the breast but holds the stem of a lotus, which 
bears the book. 


Arapacana is also called Sadyonubhava-Arapacana, or Sadyonubhava 
Manjusri. He is resplendent like the full moon, has a smiling face, is decked in 
all princely ornaments, and sits on a double lotus in the Vajraparyanka attitude. 


He brandishes the sword in his right hand and carries the Prajnhaparamita 


* First published and identified as Mafijusri in Grunwedel: Buddhist Art in India, 
p. 199 


+ This bronze belongs to the collection of Pandit Siddhiharsa of Kathmandu. 


PLATE 2UVIT: 





Ol Arapacana b. Arapa eana 
(Java) (Dacca Museum) 





c. Arapacana d. Sthiracakra 


(Nepal) (Vangiya Sahitya Parisat) 





ee, 


Book against the breast in the left. Jalinikumara (or Siryyaprabha) is in 
front of him, Candraprabha behind, Kesini to the right and Upakesini to the 
left. All these four divinities are replicas of the principal god. The Dhyana 
in one of the Sadhanas describes the principal god in the following terms :— 

... Khadgapustakadharinam akuncitapafncaciram, raktavastrayuga- 
yutam srngaravesadharinam smitavikasitavadanam Ssasankantitulyasobham 


visvadalakamalasthabaddhaparyankam Sadyonubhavarapacanartupam atma- 
nam iksyeta.”’ 


Sadhanamala, A-68, N-47-48, C-48. 


‘** The worshipper should conceive himself as Sadyonubhava Arapacana, 
who carries the Khadga and the Book, wears the five cirakas which are slightly 
folded, whose garments are of red colour, and befit the sentiment of passion he 
displays ; whose face is radiant with a smile, and whose splendour is like the 
splendour of the moon; who sits on the double lotus in the Vajraparyanka 
CGE LLULC Grete, sel : 

This Sadhana further goes on to say that the principal god should 
originate from the first syllable ‘“ A,’’ Jalinikumara from the syllable 
iver 2drapraohastrom sb)? Kesini frome.(2 and Upakesini from’; N.’’ 
Manjusri should be in the middle, Jalinikumara in front, Candraprabha be- 
hind, Kesini to the right and Upakesini to the left. All of them have white 
complexion and are identical with the principal god in appearance.* 


2. STHIRACAKRA. 
Symbol—sword. Mudra—Varada. Companion—Sakti. 


The Sadhana for the worship of Sthiracakra has a remarkable feature 
unlike other Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala, inasmuch as it does not give the 
Dhyana at a stretch, but the information about his form is intersperesd through- 
out the Sadhana, which is again in verse. From the information about his 
form, as gleaned from the Sadhana, it appears that, in one of his hands he 
earries the sword,} which spreading its rays destroys the darkness of ignorance, 
while the other in engaged in bestowing boons of all kinds,{ or in other words, 
displays the Varada pose. His colour is white § and he is decked in garments 
of the colour of the bee ; || he sits on the moon over a lotus, we know not in what 
what Asana or attitude, and wears the Cirakas which makes his body resplen- 


* The text is quoted—Aadisvaraparinatam....Mafijughosam....tadagre ca Rephajam 
....Jalinikumaram Bhagavadripam pasyet, tatha prsthe tathaiva paficamadyaksarena 
Candraprabham daksine tathaiva Cakarena Kesinim stanabharavirajitam natharupam 
vame copakesinim nakarena tathaiva ca.’’ MSS. A-63, N-48, C-48., 


+ Bibhranam karavalam—MSS., A 46, N-35, C-34. 
t Sarvakaravarapradananipunam—Ibid. 
§ Prodyadgauragabhastibimbavimalam—Ibid. 


|| Candrastham bhramarangabhasuratarair-udbhasuram cirakaih. Ibid. 


( 80 ) 


dent. He wears princely ornaments and displays the sentiment of passionate 
love. He is accompanied by a female or Prajna, who is beautiful, displays 
the sentiment of passionate love and laughs profusely.” 


We have not met with any representation of this form of Mafjusri, unless 
the Bangiya Sahitya Parisad image + No. C (d) 8/16, (Plate XVIId.) 1s indenti- 
fied with this. The sculpture agrees in almost all the details with the descrip- 
tion given above, except that here the sword appears on a lotus, the stem of 
which is held in the left hand of the God, while the right exhibits the Varada 
pose. He sits in Lalitasana on the moon over lotus, and is accompanied by 
his Sakti, who according to the Indian custom, occupies a position to the left 


of her consort. 


3. VADIRAT. 
Asana—Ardhaparyanka. Vahana—Tiger. Mudra—Vyakhyana. 


This form of Mafjusri is rarely to be met with in stone or in bronze. 
One Sadhana only is devoted to the worship of this divinity to show that this 
form was not very popular amongst the Vajrayanists. Vadirat is of medium 
height, neither very short nor very tall and appears a youth of sixteen years. 
He sits in the Ardhaparyanka attitude with the left leg slightly raised, on the 
back of a tiger. He wears all ornaments and displays the Vyakhyana Mudra. 
The Dhyana is in verse and describes the form of Vadirat in the following 
terms :— 
Svaccham sodasavatsarakrtidharam sarddtlaprsthasthitam 
Vyakhyavyakulapanipadmayugalam vamardhaparyankinam | 
Dirgham napi na capi kharvamasamam saundaryarasyasrayam 
Ratnasvarnamaniprakaravividhalankaramalakulam 1! 
....srimad-Vadiratsadhanam samaptam. Krtiriyam Pandita-Ssri-Cinta- 
mani-Dattasya.”’ 
Sadhanamala, A-50. N-37, C-37. 


: Lalityasrngararasabhiramam 
Vyajjrmbhamanambtruhasyalaksmim | 
Viram kumarabharanam dadhanam 
dhyayat padam tasya samihamanah |! Ibid. 


+ This image has been identified as that of Mafijusri and described in the ‘‘ Hand- 
book to the Sculptures in the Museum of the Bangiya Sahitya Parisad ’”’ on page 33. The 
attitude or the ‘‘Asana ’”’ of the God is clearly Lalitasana, but it has been designated there- 
in as the Sukhasana Mudra, in which the word ‘ mudra’ has been wrongly applied after 
‘Asana.’ It must be added that the word, ‘ Sukhasana’ is altogether unknown in the 
Sadhanamala. In the ‘ Handbook’ unfortunately a confusion has been made all through 
between the Sukhasana and the Lalitaksepa attitudes. The author designates uniformly 
the Ardhaparyanka Asana by the term Lalitaksepa Mudra and Lalitaksepa by the Sukha- 
sana Mudra. ‘The figure of the Sakti in the image has been identified as that of Yamantaka 
—an identification for which, I am afraid, it would be difficult to quote any authority. 


(Bie) 


** The worshipper should meditate on himself as [ Vadirat] who is beautiful 
(lit. pure or transparent), and appears a youth of sixteen years ; who sits on 
the back of a tiger ; whose lotus-like hands are eagerly engaged in displaying 
the Vyakhyana Mudra; whose left leg is slightly raised in the Ardhaparyanka 
attitude ; who is neither tall nor very short, is unparalleled by any, is the 
receptacle of all beauties in the world, and is decked in various ornaments 
consisting of jewels, gold, gems and other valuables.....Here ends the 
Sadhana for Vadirat. The author of-this is Sri Cintamani Datta.”’ 


4, MANJUNATHA. 


Faces—three. Hands—six. 


Like Manjukumara he is also endowed with three faces and six arms, 
He carries the Cakra, Vajra, Jewel, the lotus, and the sword.* These five 
symbols are held in five hands but the dhyana does not mention the symbol 
that should be carried in the sixth. It is therefore probable that the sixth 


remains empty. 


Some of the varieties of Manjusri bear such a close resemblance to 
Prajhaparamita that it is difficult sometimes to distinguish between them. 
The only point of difference is that one is male and the other female. The 
iconographist thinks his duty done if he can identify an image as that of 
Manjusri. But what has been said before clearly indicates that Manjusri 
has as many as fourteen varieties, and unless we can definitely mention the 
particular variety, the mere identification as Manjusri would be altogether 


useless. 


* The extract is—‘‘ Vyutthaya Mafijunathasya vahan garvam samahitah 
nee POPE Bice AIR trimukham sadbhujam tatha 
Cakravajramaharatnapadmakhadgadharayudham.”’ 


MSS. A-87, Na-86, C-67-8. 


CHAPTER IIL. 


BODHISATTVA AVALOKITESVARA. 


Avalokitegvara is famous in the Mahayana Pantheon as a Bodhisattva 
emanating from the Dhyani Buddha, Amitabha and his Sakti, Pandara. As 
Amitabha and Pandara are the presiding Dhyani Buddha and Buddhasakti 
of the present Kalpa (cycle) namely, Bhadrakalpa, Avalokitesvara is said to 
be the Bodhisattva who covers the period between the disappearance of the 
Mortal Buddha, Sakyasimha and the advent of the Future Buddha, Maitreya. 
The Gunakarandavytha * gives an account of his character, moral teach- 
ings and miracles. In it we find that he refused Nirvana, until all 
creatures of the Universe were in possession of the Bodhi knowledge, and to 
that end he is still supposed to work and foster spiritual knowledge amongst 
his fellow creatures. One of the passages in Karandavyiiha t characterises 
him as taking the shape of all gods of all religions, nay even the shape of the 
father and mother,—in fact, the form of the worshipped of any and every 
worshipper, to whom he may impart knowledge. By a slow and gradual 
process the people and next the animals and other creatures would advance 
spiritually to obtain salvation. For all these reasons, Avalokitesvara 
is characterised as the best of the Sangha, the Jewel of the Buddhist 
Church or Sangharatna. 


The Sadhanamala gives altogether thirty-one SAdhanas which describe 
Avalokitegvara or LokeSvara in a variety of different forms. Among these 
variations, a good many have been described, though partially, supported by 
quotations from original texts with their translations in French, by M. Foucher 
in his Etude sur L’Iconographie Bouddhique de L’Inde, parte 2, Chapter IT, 
Section 1. 


Besides all the eleven varieties mentioned in Prof. Foucher’s work three 
more have been added in the author’s paper entitled, ‘‘ The Identification of 


* R. Mittra; Skt. Bud. Lit. p. 95. 


+ Extracts from the text is quotes below—‘ Yavat AvalokiteSvarasya drdha- 
pratijia na pariptrita bhavanti sarvasattah sarvaduhkhebhyah parimoksitah, yavat 
anuttarayam samyak sambodhau na pratistapita bhavanti....yena yena ripena vaineyah 
sattvah tena tena ripena dharmam deSayanti. Tathagatavaineyanim Tathagataripena 
dharmam degayanti....Mahesvaravaineyanam Mahesvararipena dharmam deSgayanti.... 
Vayuvaineyanim Vayurtipena dharmam deSsayanti....Rajavaineyanim sattanam Raja- 
rupena dharmam deSsayanti....matapitrvaineyanam sattvanim matrpitrripena dharmam 
degayanti. Yathayathavaineyénim sattvanam tathatatharipena dharmam deégayanti.’’ 
Karandavytha, pp. 21-22. 


PLATE XVIII. 





a. Sadaksari Lokesvara with Sadaksari Mahavidya 
and Manidhar: 


( Sarnath ) 





b. Sadaksari Group. c. Sadaksari Group. 


(Indian Museum ) ( Birbhum ) 





SH eee see ee 







:* é ye et ; 
t y . - 1 ¥ pe i. ae) 
My t oe ‘ PN yr ae a Set has oe of s- 7 may = 
i oer RA a ste Ate aes ee be 
' a, 6 a ° 
£4 rE ? : 4 | i “se “ : i 7 > ty oe a ite 
? 3 k *¥ } ~~ eer - 27 2 : a. Paes 
a = tm it * = os 
ws ~ Z ae = ca eee + ‘ el ek = e"e- Ss 7 2 
si ? Lom EM ah oe a 7 TP. ah) ee Be = 
f il ae 4 Bi Ml <r, f “a >" ee <2 ee 7 
; ; ~~ ae a Behe Aes ic - wo = » 
— po2 ts ae he i a ee te ’ ba 
i on ~~ he, oS ay i, - 
3 i ¢ 3 r aes : $ ae ae = rp 2 bs oe _ a K's i 
# a a . oa 2 - — a tee - rare Lb ’ "i ae i. rad hae w4 os 7 
7 het a: pat ne . 4 7 ’ : a” a e ae we a Ls 
= = «iss ag “a t eR te +! 
i poseaa ree iced tn a te oe sae 





ae 


( 88 ) 


39 


Avalokitesvara [mages ” read before the Second Session of the Oriental Con- 
ference held in 1922 at Calcutta. For the sake of convenience, these two will 
also be dealt with here in their proper places. Pandita Amrtananda’s Dharma- 
kosasamgraha gives the description of another variety of Avalokitesvara, 


which goes by the name of Sukhavati Lokesvara.* 


So the total number of variants goes up to fifteen, but it may surprise 
our readers to learn that the different forms of Avalokitesvara are no less than 
one hundred and eight. The Macchandar Vahal, one of the numerous Viharas 
in Kathmandu has paintings in many colours of one hundred and eight varia- 
tions of the Bodhisattva on wooden panels surrounding the temple on three 
sides. The paintings appear to be at least two hundred years old, and they 
bear inscriptions in old Newari, giving their respective names. Clearly, in the 
point of antiquity, the discovery has a lesser importance than the ones we are 
dealing with at present, but as the overwhelming number of forms will no 
doubt throw a considerable amount of light on the Iconography of Avalokite- 
$vara, and thus facilitate identification, we do not hesitate to give a descrip- 
tion of all these varieties, with the respective sketches, in the Appendix.t 


Fourteen, out of the fifteen different varieties of Avalokitesvara mention- 
ed above, bear the figure of the Dhyanit Buddha Amitabha on the crown, 
showing that they emanate from the latter. The fifteenth, Vajradharma by 
name, is said to bear the figures of the five Dhyani Buddhas on the crown. 
Now, let us take up the varieties one after another. These will be dealt 
with in order of popularity, which, again, will be determined by the number 
of Sadhanas devoted in the Sadhanamala to their worship. 


1. SADAKSARI-LOKESVARA. 


Colour—white. Arms—four. 
Mudra—Ajdjali. Symbols—rosary and lotus, 
Companions—Manidhara and Sadaksari Mahavidya. 


Identification Symbol—the Afijali against the breast. 


Four Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala are devoted to the worship of this 
form of Avalokitesvara ; two of them describe him in a group of three, one in 
a group of two in the company of Sadaksari Mahavidya, and one singly. In 
all these, the form of Lokesvara is the same. Below is quoted the Dhyana of 
the Sadhana describing him in a group of three :— 


....‘Atmanam. LokeSsvararipam sarvalankarabhtsitam suklavarnam 
vamatah padmadharam daksinato’ksastitradharam aparabhyam hastabhyam 


* See below, No, id + See Appendix B. 
5 


( 8% ) 


hrdi samputdfjalisthitam dhyaéyat. Daksine Manidharam tattadvarna*- 
bhujanvitam padmAéntaroparistham. Vame tathaiva aparapadmastham f 
Sadaksarim Mahavidyam....” | ree 
Sadhanamala, A-16, C-6, N-18-14. 
..“ The worshipper should realize himself as [Sadaksari]- -Lokegvara 
dec ked j in all sorts of ornaments, white in colour, four-armed, carrying the lotus 
in the left hand and the rosary in the right. The other two hands j join in form- 
ing the Mudra of clasped hand against the breast. To his right is Manidhara 
with the same colour and the same hands, sitting on another lotus. To the 
left is Sadaksari Mahavidya with identical form sitting on another lotus. q 
The Dhyana of this god has been restored from the ee as 
one of the Colophons asserts.t The mantra assigned to this form of Avalokite- 


99 


§vara is the famous ‘“*‘Om Mani-Padme Hum ”’ consisting of six syllables. 


These six syllables are here deified in the form of Sadaksari Mahavidya. 


A perfect and perhaps unique image § (Plate XVIII, a) of this group 
of three deities hails from the Sanghaérama of Sarnath, and is now preserved 
in the Sarnath Museum with the label bearing the inscription ‘* Unidentified 
Group.’? Mr. Oertel erroneously identified the group as the Tri-Ratna or 
the Three Jewels of the Buddhists,—Dharma, Buddha and Sangha.|| In the 
group, Sadaksari LokesSvara is in the middle; the figure to the right is 
Manidhara and the female figure to the left is Sadaksari Mahavidya. It may 
be noticed that under the seats of lotuses are four miniatures, who represent 
none but the four guardians of the gates of the Sadaksari Mandala, as pres- 
cribed in the Karandavytha.4 

Another artistic but mutilated image (Plate XVIII, b) of the Sadaksari 
group, which was discovered in Magadha by Waddell and illustrated on Plate 
II (2) with his article (J. R. A. S. 1894), depicts the goddess in what is called 
the Virdsana. Waddell calls the central figure as ‘‘ Caturbhuj Lokeswara ”’ 
and Sadaksari Mahavidya as the “* Mother of Six Syllables.”’*** As he proceeded 
to make the identification through Tibetan he missed their actual Sanskrit 
names. The image is now in the Indian Museum, Calcutta. 


The other image tft (Plate XVIII, c) found in the District of Birbhum 
by Mr. K, N. Diksit, is also of the Sadaksari group, though it is mutilated 


* A reads ‘tadvarna’. + ‘Apara’ is dropped in A. 
{ Karandavythamnayena racitam sadhanam. 
§ Sarnath Catalogue, No. B (e) 6, Pl. XIV (b). || Sarnath Catalogue, p. 137, 


{| Karandavytha, p. 74—‘‘tasya ca mandalasya caturdvaresu catvaro maharajah 
kartavyah’’. 


Om he a whee 2OU4, 1, ta(2), 


tt Described in A. S. I. Hastern Circle, Annual Report 1920-21, p. ad and illustrated 
in Pl. I (2). 





PLATHe lene 





a. Sadaksari Lokesvara b. 


Sadaksari Mahavidya 
(Nepal) ; 


(Sarnath). 





e. Simhandada 
(Nepal) 


ati? mmpepatcingti 
RG in: gcnene, 
apse Ao 





c. Simhanada d. Simhanada 
(Magadha) (Nepal) 


( 85 ) 


practically beyond recognition. The central figure depicting Sadaksari Loke- 
Svara has lost two hands bearing the rosary and the lotus at some iconoclastic 
hand, but the marks are still there on the stone. The two hands exhibiting 
the Afijali (wrongly stated as Namahkara) Mudra contains the jewel. 


Images of the Sadaksari Lokesvara, both in groups and singly, abound 
in Nepal and almost every monastary at Kathmandu and Patan has got one 
in it. As far as is known to us, the only coloured image (Plate XTX, a) of this 
divinity appears in the Bauddhanatha Temple, one of the most famous places 


of pilgrimage of the Buddhists in Nepal. 


When he appears in the group of two, according to the Sadhanamala, 
the goddess may have another form depicting ber in Virasana, with yellow 
complexion and a bejewelled crown. In this case she has two hands only, 
of which the left holds the jewel, while the right is empty.* The Sarnath 
Museum image B (f) 4. (Plate XIX, b), though mutilated hopelessly must 
represent this form of Sadaksari Mahavidya, and she can be readily recognized 
by the peculiar Asana, which is absolutely rare in Buddhist Iconography. 


Another alternative is also prescribed in the Sadhanamala for all the 
three deities, and the Sadhana goes on to say—* Sometimes in the Sadhana of 
Sadaksari Mahavidya, Lokesvara holds also the lotus bearing the jewel and 
the book. Manidhara may hold the jewel and the lotus and be without the 
book. Sadaksari may hold the book and the lotus and be without the jewel.’’+ 


2. SIMHANADA. 


Colour—white. Asana—Maharajalila. 
Vahana-—-lion. Special Characteristics—no ornaments, 
t—sword on lotus. 


i) lef 
Identification marks—/! ) ; ; 
\ Gi) right—Trisila entwined by a snake, 


Four Sadhanas also are devoted to the worship of Simhanada, who is 
regarded by the Mahayanists as the curer of all diseases. He is one of the 
most popular forms of the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara and his images are by 


* The text has— 
‘Aryantu cintayet pitim vame ratnacchatabhrtam 
Rikta-savyakaram ratnamaulim vilasanaiaugam.”’ 
‘* Ityarya-Sadaks1rimahavidya-Lokesvara-Bhattdrakopadesa-paramparayatasadhana- 
vidhih.”’ Sadhanamala A—21, C—11, N--17. 
+ SaAdhanama'’a, A—21, C—11, N—17. ‘‘Kvacit Sadaksarisidhane Bhagavan 
samanipustakankitapadmadharah Menidharastu . pustakarahita-manipadmadharah, 
Sadaksari tu manirahita pustakapadmadhara,”’ 


( 86 :) 


no means rare in India. At Patan, in Nepal, all the more important Viharas. 
have two images of Simhanada, either is stone or in bronze, on either side of 
the staircase leading to the sanctum. He appears in many forms with very 
slight differences. The four Sadhanas alike describe him as follows :-— 

«¢ Atmanam Simhanada-Lokesvararipam bhavayet, svetavarnnam trine- 
tram jatamukutinam nirbhisanam* vyaghracarma- “prabhrtam simhasanas- 
tham maharajalilam candrasanam + ecandraprabham bhavayet. Daksine 


sitaphanivestitam trisilam svetam, vame nandsugandhikusumaparipirita- 
padmabhajanam. Vamahastat ft uttham padmopari jvalatkhadgam.”’ 


Sadhanamala, A-35, C-28, N-25. 

‘“The worshipper should conceive himself as Simhanada Lokesvara 
of white complexion, with three eyes, with the crown of chignon, having no 
ornaments, clad in tiger-skin, mounted on a lion in the attitude of princely 
ease, seated on and glowing like the moon. To his right is the white trident 
entwined by a white serpent ; to his left is the lotus-bowl full of fragrant 
flowers. From his left hand rises the (white) lotus on which is the fiery 
(white) sword.”’ — 

Generally, in the images of Simhanada, the bowl of flowers to. his left is 
absent (Plate XIX, c) § and in very rare cases the trident also. Sometimes 
the trident is held in his right hand ||. The pose in which he sits is here 
called the Maharajalila pose, which is another name for the Ardhapar yanka 
attitude ; but in representations, he may sit in the Paryanka attitude also 
(Plate XIX, d),—or is even found in a standing attitude (Plate XIX, e). The 
lion, which is found in almost all the images, may also be absent in ‘bronzes 
(Plate XX, a). The fact that Simhanada wears no ornaments is very 
important because this distinguishes him from some of the varieties of Manju- 
sri. The artistic specimen of Simhanada (Plate XX, b) discovered at Mahoba 
and described by Mr. K. N. Diksit** carries a rosary in his right hand. None 
of the Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala refers to the rosary, but some of the 
Tibetan specimens have got it. 


3. KHASARPANA. 


Colour—white. Symbol—lotus. 
Mudra—Varada. Asana-— Lalita or Ardhaparyanka. 
Companions—Tara, Sudhanakumara, Bhrkuti, Hayagriva. 


Khasarpana also is described in a number of Sadhanas in the Sadhana- 
mala, which fact points to his popularity amongst the Mahayanists. Many 


* C reads ‘vibhtganam’. + dropped in A. T N_reads ‘upasthitam’, 

$ J. RA. 8.1804, Pl. I. || As in the standing image from” as Pl EXT ee 
{| This bronze belongs to Pandit Siddhiharga’s collection. ; 

x* KN, Diksit : ‘* Six sculptures from Mahoba”’ in the A, S. I. Memoir No, 8, 


pl. Ia. p. 2 


PLATE ex, 





a, Simhanada | b. Simhanada 
(Nepal) (Mahoba) 





c. Khasarpana d. Lokanatha 
(Indian Museum) (Mahoba) 


( 87) 


images of this variety of Loke$vara have been discovered and many Museums 
possess one. The peculiar feature of this god is that he is invariably accom- 
panied by the four divinities, Tara, Sudhanakumara, Bhrkuti and Hayagriva. 
The principal! figure is the same as Lokanatha, two-armed and one-faced, carry- 
ing the same symbol and exhibiting the same Mudra. The difference is that 
Lokanatha may be flanked by two divinities, Tara and Hayagriva, whereas 
iKhasarpana must be accompanied by two mere, Bhrkuti and Sudhanakumi§ara. 
He is of white complexion and sits, either in Lalitasana or the Ardhaparyanka 
attitude. Below is given a somewhat lengthy Dhyana describing the god :— 


‘* Atmanam Bhagavantam dhyayat himakarakotikiranavadatam deham, 
trujatamukutam Amitabhakrtasekharam, visvanalinanisannam Sasimandale, 
ardhaparyankanisannam sakalalankaéradharavigraham smeramukham_ dvi- 
rastavarsadesiyam daksine varadakaram, vamakarena sanalakamaladharam, 
karavigalatpiytsadharabhyvahararasikam tadadhah samaropitordhvamukham 
mahakuksim atikrsam atisitivarnam Stcimukham tarppayantam Srimat- 
Potalakacalodaranivasinam karunasnigdhavalokanam srngararasaparyupé- 
sitam atisantam nanalaksanalankrtam. 

Tasya puratah Tara daksinaparsve Sudhanakumarah. 

Tatra Tara Syama, vamakaravidhrtam sanalam utpalam daksinakarena 
vikasayanti ; nanalankaravati abhinavayauvanodbhinnakucabhara. 

Sudhanakumarasea krtafjaliputah kanakavabhasadyutih kumarari- 
padhari vamakaksavinyastapustakah sakalalankaravan. 


Pascime Bhrkuti Hayagriva uttare. 
| Tatra Bhrkuti caturbhujaé hemaprabha jatakalapini, vame tridandi- 
kamandaludharihasta daksine vandanabhinayaksasttradharakara, trinetra. 
--- Hayagrivo raktavarnnah kharvalambodarah irddhvajvalat-pingala- 
kesah bhujagayajnopaviti kapilatarasmasrusreniparicitamukhamandalah rak- 
tavartulatrinetrah  bhrkutikutilabhrikah vyaghracarmambarah dandayu- 
dhah daksinakarena vandanabhinayi. 

Kte sarva eva svanéyakananapreritadrstayo yathasobham avasthitah 
cintaniyah..... | } 


Iti Khasarpanasadhanam’’. Sadhanamala, A-28, C-12-13, N-19. 


‘* The worshipper should conceive himself as the god [Khasarpana]. His 
person is.as resplendent as the rays of a crore of moons ; he wears the crown, 
of chignon, bears the image of Amitabha on head, and sits on the moon over 
the double lotus in the Ardhaparyanka attitude; his body is decked in all 
ornaments ; he has a smiling face, is aged about twice eight years, exhibits 
the Varada pose in the right hand and holds the lotus with a stem in the 
left ; he is expert in bestowing the stream of nectar that flows from his hand, 
while Stcimukha who stands below with an uplifted face, a protruding belly 
and very pale appearance receives the same. [Khasarpana] resides in the 
womb of the mount Potalaka ; looks beautiful with compassion, is full of the 
sentiment of passion, is extremely peaceful and endowed with various auspi- 
cious marks. 


» ** Before him is Tara and to the right is Sudhanakumara. 
‘‘ Here Tara is green ; she causes to blossom with her right hand the 


( 38 ) 


lotus flower with a stem held in her left; she has.many ornaments and is 
oppressed by her breasts caused by her recent youth. 


‘*Sudhanakumara, again, has his two hands joined (anjali), is resplendent 
like gold, has the appearance of a prince ; he carries the book under his left 
armpit and is decked in all ornaments. 


“To the West of the God 1s Bhrkuti and to the North, Hayagriva. 


‘* Here Bhrkuti has four arms, is resplendent like gold, has matted hair, 
carries the staff with three horns and the Kamandalu in the left, and in the 
right, [one is raised] in the attitude of bowing and [the other] carries the 
rosary ; she has three eyes. 


‘“‘ Hayagriva has red complexion, is short, with a protruding belly ; his 
hair rises upwards in the shape of a flame, he has a snake as his sacred thread ; 
his face is recognized by a deep brown pair of moustaches ; his eyes are red 
and round ; his eye-brows are distorted in the act of frowning; he is clad in 
tiger-skin, has the staff as a weapon and his right hand exhibits the act of 
bowing. | 

‘‘All these deities should be meditated as situated in a befitting and 
artistic manner with their eyes directed towards the face of the principal 
leila | 


Here ends the Sadhana for Khasarpana.”’ 


The finest image (Plate XXI)* of Khasarpana has recently been dis- 
covered by Mr. N. K. Bhattasali in the Parganna of Vikrampur in Eastern 
Bengal. The sculpture is one of the best products of the Bengal School of art, 
and will do credit to any art, ancient or modern. 


If the central image is mutilated like the one reproduced in Plate XX, ¢, 
we would still be able identify Khasarpana by noticing the four com- 
panions to the right and left of the God. 


4, LOKANATHA. 


Colour—white. Symbol— lotus, 
Mudra—Varada. 


Four Sadhanas, again, are devoted to the worship of the Lokanatha variety 
of Avalokitesvara, He is single in three Sadhanas, and only one Sadhana 
describes him as accompanied by Tara and Hayagriva. The same Sadhana, 
in one of the Asiatic Society Manuscripts of Sadhanamala adds further that 
Lokanatha should be accompanied also by the eight gods, Maitreya, Ksiti- 
garbha, Vajrapani, Khagarbha, Viskambhin, Samantabhadra, Manjughosa 
and Gaganagafija ; by the four goddesses, Dhuipa, Puspa, Gandha, Dipa ; and 


* T am obliged to Mr. N. K. Bhattasali for allowing me to take a copy of his 
negative for reproduction. 


lana OS 





Khasarpana Avalokitesvara 
(Vikrampur, Dacca). 





a 











* 
+ 
+e 
‘ 
Sg vit oer Ears ere ere = em a 5 
— + me ‘ 4 2.5 hy a : 
chi ¥ ; a ie fo “7 Wy, - Bs 
i Ds od Nok mS ts ee a < ie 
A y Peis i oe i a a tee, 
‘ " = Le x i = ¢: ; als 
“4 : : | 
” 4 ws 
a , ; 
k > si : vie : 
« 7 ~~ 
4 ; . 5" i y & 
r 7 ae Cos Tes re 
ea 
= mt, 
y , i fa e 
tis Gi 
: - “7 é 
i ‘‘ r= 4 
? a a 
iu — 
' ‘s =i ” * ~ : 
; rr a ret - 
x , 
7 7 , . ‘ > : 
r ‘ a ae 
if "4 
* * 
H * 5 
= 
; nd - 
a ' 
: - 7 
4 
‘x 
oe ta A 
Rips ¥ 
: . 
t We . ’ - f ss 
E 2 c 
: 4 
. ? .4 oe 
“ 
y aes 5 
| a » 
x ~ 
>» | ae i 
j 3 ., nw 
r © - 4 * 
a 3 fgets ; 
z ; - % or ea 
s - Aion 
4 . mn 
i ‘ . of / -. 
eta he My 
Dad f 
x 2 5: P - 
9 e “erg ss a 
Se | 
- .% b 1— j 7 
pg SR ggk ae 
‘ . vot m 5 2 
, os 
; ; * Pekan 
ie ' wa 4 
¥ fi : A 
: 1) a 
: ar ‘ 
Sa 
' 2 . | 
Y 7 a0.3 , 
i] i e ' an 
i r io 
4 at 
if inte ihe 
: a i ’ 7 
f - y b 
_ Ps bes ie a 
N . 43 . > oe 
“ F a's ) . ie. eae 
; " wv ale e ‘ = ie) fe p ear 
; : 7 “oe 
' | 4 FY a ; at 
} ie, : Vie Fo ae Ee 
‘% * a 2) «= es i : re A “¢ } Le 
ss aire 5 i 
a ‘y/* oo). es ‘ cit neal ee bar é ; * 
: : bal ee to Yr) aw 
tte : ” ory Tok] 
i ~ a= ‘ a ees 
oe a | " i wat , te ie eh , 
a ~ & a . x i ae ; ae .) ot 
re * *y Poel ~¢ : ‘ - Nee Aree 255. e4 : 
<4 a t , as “ie ow i oe Pe ie 4 
% » yw 3 fo seis & Pine, + wid) - : 
7: a ies ae a > oe 
= ‘ »- tes ' . - hae ee pee 
& iy = Tne? Terao 4 St 9 2) 
v ar « ye > RP as mee iver © Pa 
eat i ~* ; *s $5 eat 
ra £ os ] . G vl 7 77 ) 
Sona : ; 


‘ a wi he ag 


( 68») 


by the four guardians of the gates, Vajrankusi, Vajrapasi, Vajrasphota and 
Vajraghanta. In other words, the manuscript gives the constitution of the 
whole Mandala of Lokanatha. The principal god has two hands, which carry 
the lotus in the left and exhibit the Varada pose in the right,—exactly like 
Khasarpana, previously described. Let us, therefore, take up the Sadhana 
which gives the description of the Mandala. It is in verse and thus describes 
the principal god :— 


‘* Pirvavat kramayogena Lokanatham Sasiprabham | 
Hrihkaraksarasambhitam jatamukutamanditam 1! 
Vajradharma-jatantahstham asesaroganasanam | 
Varadam daksine haste vame padmadharam tatha 1! 
Lalitaksepasamsthantu mahasaumyam prabhasvaram | 
Varadotpalaka saumya Tara daksinatah sthita i! 
Vandanadandahastantu Hayagrivotha vamatah | 
Raktavarnno maharaudro vyaéghracarmambarapriyah W”’ 


Sadhanamala, A-28, N-238, C-17. 


‘* Following the same procedure as before, the worshipper should con- 
ceive himself as Lokanatha, resplendent like the moon, as springing from the 
sacred syllable ‘‘ Hrih ’’ and wearing the crown of chignon. 


‘* He has within his matted hair the figure of the god, Vajradharma,* is 
the destroyer of all diseases, exhibits the Varada Mudra in the right hand 
and carries the lotus in the left. 


‘*He sits in the Lalita attitude, is peaceful and resplendent ; to his 
right is Tara, who has a peaceful appearance, exhibits the Varada Mudra 
and carries the lotus. 


‘To the left is Hayagriva, who exhibits the act of bowing, and carries 
the staffin his two hands; who has red complexion, appears terrible and is 
fond of the garment of tiger-skin.”’ 


The Dhyana in all MSS. goes thus far and no farther, except in the 
Asiatic Society manuscript already referred to, which gives the details 
of how the Mandala for the worship of Lokanatha should be constituted. The 
Ms. A adds further :— | 


‘* Tadvaratakastadale padme Maitreyadi vinyaset | 
Maitreyah pitavarnasca nagapuspavarapradah |! 
Ksitigarbhah syamavarnnah kalasam cabhayam tatha | 
Vajrapanisca Suklabham vajrahastavarapradah 11 
Khagarbho nabhasyamabho cintamanivarapradah | 
Manjughoso kanakabhah khadgapustakadharinah |) 
Gaganaganjo raktavarnnah nilotpalavarapradah | 
Viskambhi tu ksaravarnnah ratnottamavarapradah 1) 
Samantabhadrah pitabhah ratnotpalavarapradah | 
Dhupadicaturddevi ca Vajrankusyadidvaragah 1 
Varnayudhayathapurvah mandalasyanusaratah | 
Evam vidheh samayuktam. Lokanatham prabhavayet 1!” 


Sadhanamala, A-28.+ 


* Vajradharma here stands for.Amitabha. + Wanting in all other Mss, 


( 405 j 


‘On the eight petals of the lotus (on which the god sits) should be placed 
the gods. Maitreya and others. Maitreya is of yellow complexion, 
carries the Nagalkesara] flower and exhibits the boon pose. Ksitigarbha 
has green complexion,:carries the Kalasa and exhibits the Abhaya pose. 
Vajrapani is whitish in complexion, earries the Vajra and exhibits the 
Varada Mudra. Khagarbha has the colour of the blue sky, carries the 
Cintamani and exhibits the Varada Mudra. Manjughosa is of golden com- 
plexion and carries in his two hands the sword and the book. Gaganagafija 
is of red colour, carries the lotus and exhibits the Varada Mudra.  Vis- 
kambhin is ash-coloured,. carries the best jewel and exhibits the Varada 
Mudra. SdAmantabhadra is yellowish in complexion, carries the jewel on 
a lotus and exhibits the Varada Mudra. The four goddesses Dhipa and others 
[accompany Lokanatha] and the [four goddesses] Vajrankusi and others guard 
the gates, their colour and weapons being in accordance with the Mandala. 
In this way Lokanatha should be conceived by the worshipper.” 

When represented, Lokanatha is generally alone and is occasionally 
accompanied by Tara and Hayagriva. But we have never come across an 
image in which all the surrounding deiti+s, Maitreya and others, are represent- 
ed. He may sit in three attitudes according to three different Sadhanas ; he 
may have the Lalita, the Paryanka or the Vajraprayanka attitudes. In the 
fourth the Asana is not mentioned, and it is for this reason that we get 
images of Lokanatha in Ardhaparyanka (Plate XX, d) or even in a standing 
attitude (Plate XXIIa) as well. The standing image reproduced is of pure 
ivory and has silver foliage behind it.* The Sarnath image reproduced on 
Plate XXII, b represents the earliest image of Lokanatha with the miniature 


figure of Amitabha on the crown. 


5. HALAHALA. 


Colour—white. Faces—three. 


Hands—six. Companion—Pra jna. 


Three Sadhanas in the Sadhanamalé are devoted to the worship of 
Halahala LokeSvara. Images of this divinity are rarely to be met with in 
India. But in Nepal we have been able to find some, though they do not 
strictly follow the Sadhana. The distinguishing feature of Halahala is that 
he is generally accompanied by his Sakti or the female energy whom he 
carries in his lap. The Sadhanas all enjoin the presence of the Sakti, though 
at least two images, one in stone, (Plate XXIT, c) another in’ bronze, have 
been discovered in Nepal, where the god has been represented alone. 
According to the Sadhanas, the god should be seated, but the two images 


* Tt belongs to a wealthy Newari merchant of Kathmandu and I had access to it 
through the influence of Pandita Siddhiharsa Vajracaryya. St me * 


ETA Rect: 











ECEEEDO rD 


(a) Lokanatha (b) Lokanatha (c) Padmanarttesvara 
(Nepal) (Sarnath) 





(e) Padmanarttesvara (f) Hariharihari- Vahana 
(Nepal) (Nepal) 





(d) Halahala 
(Nepal) 








( 41 ) 


above referred to represent him in a standing attitude. The Dhyana con- 
tained in one of the Sadhanas runs as follows :— 


‘ Hrihkaravijanispannam Halahalam mahakrpam ! 
Trinetram trimukham chaiva jatamukutamanditam | 
Prathamisyam sitam nilam daksinam vamalohitam | 
Sasankardhadharam mirdhni kapalakrtagekharam lI 
Jatantahsthajinam samyak sarvabharanabhisitam | 
Sitaravindanirbhasam srngararasasundaram || 
Sadbhujam smeravaktranca vyaghracarmambarapriyam| 
Varadam daksine panau dvitiye caksamalikam |! 

Tritiye saranarttanam vame cépadharam tatha | 
Dvitiye sitapadmafnca tritiye stanameva ca || 


Vamajanuna sitam Svabhadevim dadhanam; vamena kamaladharam 
daksinena bhujena Bhagavadalinganaparam kusumasobhitajatakalapam. 
Daksine parsve sarpavestitam trisilam, vamaparsve padmasthakapaélam 
ndnasugandhikusumaih samptrnam. Raktapadmacandre  Jlilaksepasthitam 
bhavayet, | 


Sadhanamala, A-37, N-26, C-25. 


‘* The worshipper should conceive himself as Halahala, the great com- 
passionate, originating from the sacred syllable ‘ Hrih,’ with three eyes, three 
faces and his matted hair rising upwards in the shape of a crown. The first 
(or the principal) face is white, the right blue and the left red. He bears on his 
head the crescent and the Kapala. The Jina Amitabha is within his chignon 
and he is decked in al] ornaments. He is resplendent like the white lotus and 
appears beautiful by the sentiment of passionate love he displays. He has 
six arms, a smiling face and is fond of garments of tiger-skin. He displays 
the Varada Mudra in the first right hand, the second has the rosary, while the 
third flourishes the arrow. The first left hand carries the bow, the second 
the white lotus and the third touches the breast (of his Sakti). He carries 
the Sakti of his own emanation on the left lap. She shows the lotus in the 
left hand and the right is engaged in the act of embracing the god. Her 
chignon is decorated with flowers. To their right is the Tristla entwined 
by a snake and on the left is the Kapala on the lotus, full of a variety of fragrant 
flowers. The god sits in the Lalita attitude on the red lotus.”’ 


6. PADMANARTTESVARA. 


(I) 


Face—one. . Arms—eighteen, Symbol—lotus. 
Asana—Ardhaparyanka (in a dancing attitude). 


Tdentification mark—Double lotus in all hands. 


Three Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala are also devoted to the worship of 
this variant of Avalokitegvara. But the three Sadhanas are entirely different, 
describing three widely different forms of the deity. It is therefore necessary 
that all the three Dhyanas should be quoted and translated. There is no 
difficulty in taking the three to be Padmanarttesvara bacause all doubt is set 

6 | 


( 42’) 


at rest by the fact that the mantras, where mentioned, are the same and 
that the SAdhanas always designate him as Padmanarttesvara. 


Images of Padmanarttesvara are extremely rare even in Nepal. So 
far as is known to us, only one image (XXII, e) of this divinity has up till 
now been discovered. It follows the Dhyana given below :— 

« Padmanarttesvaramnayena Arya-Avalokitesvara-Bhattérakam atma- 
nam vibhavayet ekamukham astaédasabhujam ardhaparyankinam Amita- 
bhajatajitamandalam, sarvakaraih visvapadmadharinam, yoginivrndaparivr- 
tam daksinavamaparsvasthita-Tara-Sudhana-Bhrkuti-Hayagrivam divyalam- 
karavastrabhisanam....”’ 

Sadhanamala, A-39. N-28, C-27. 

‘©The worshipper should conceive himself as Bhattaraka Avalokitegvara 
in the form of PadmanartteSvara, who is one-faced and eightcen-armed, who 
stands in the Ardhaparyanka attitude, on whose crown of chignon is the 
effigy of Amitabha, who carries the double lotus in all his (eighteen) hands ; 
who is surrounded by a host of Yoginis; whose right and left sides are 
occupied by Tara, Sudhana, Bhrkuti and “Hayagriva ; and who is decked in 
all kinds of ornaments. ” 

The Asana that is eee in the Sadhana, we may notice, is the Ardha- 
paryanka. This Asana may have two varieties ; the ordinary, which is also 
called the Maharajalila, as in the cases of Vagiévara and Simhanada and the 
second, the dancing variety, (ardhaparyankena natyastham) as in the cases of 
Heruka Vajravarahi and others. As the word ‘nartteSvara’ means the ‘‘ God of 
dances ’’ or the ‘‘ God in a dancing attitude,” the Asana of Padmanarttesvara 
may, therefore, be taken as the dancing variety cf Ardhaparyanka, and this 
is borne out by the fact that the only image that we have got, shows the god 
in the same attitude. This image hails from the Sarasvatisthan or the Maii- 
jusri Hill in Svayambhiksettra in Nepal. Though the god has here been 
represented with only two of the companion deities, yet the principal figure 
minutely corresponds to the description given in the Sadhanamala. 


(IT) 
Colour—red. Companion—*<akti. 


Mudra— Sai. Symbol—lotus. 


Vahana—an'‘mal. 


Another form of Padmanarttegvara is described in a second Sadhana 
and the Dhyana contained therein runs as follows :— 


a4 
Padmanarttesvaram atmanam  bhavayet sat berated lear teeny 
dvibhujaikamukham raktam sakalalankaradharam Amitabhamukutam, vama- 
parsve Pindaravasinisamaslistam alinganabhinayasthitavamabhujena rakta- 


eames narttanabhinayena Sticimudraya vikasayadaparadaksina- 
karams © 


Sadhanamala, A-29, N-28, C-27. 


(43) 


| ‘“The worshipper should conceive himself as Padmanarttesvara, who 
is seated on an animal, is two-armed and one-faced ; whose complexion is red 
and who is decked in all kinds of ornaments, bears the effigy of Amitabha on 
the crown and is embraced by Pandaravasini in the left ; whose left hand, 
which carries the lotus, is raised in the act of embracing [the Sakti], while 
the right exhibits the Sticimudra in. the act of dancing....” 

The accompanying drawing (Plate XXII, d) is all that we could secure 
in Nepal, of this form of Padmanarttesvara. The right hand which ought 
to have shown the Sicimudra, has been given a lotus in the drawing. More- 


over, the Vahana is a]together absent. 


The same Sadhana from which the Dhyana quoted above has been res- 
tored, contains the description of the Mandala. The Sadhana in question 
further goes on to say that the lotus on which the God sits should have eight 
petals, each of which should contain one goddess. For instance, the East petal 
will have Vilokini, white in colour and carrying the red lotus. The South is 
occupied by Tara of green colour holding the Palasa and the lotus flowers. 
Bhirini who should be in the West, is yellow in complexion and carries the 
Cakra and the blue lotus ; Bhrkuti in the North, whose complexion is white, 
holds the yellow lotus. In the North-East, there should be PadmavaAsini, 
who is yellow in complexion and holds the Manjistha and the lotus. 
South-East is occupied by Visvapadmesvari who is sky-coloured and holds 
the white lotus. The South-West is occupied by Visvapadma, who is white 
and carries the black lotus. The North-West is occupied by Visvavaira of 
variegated complexion, holding the black lotus. 


(IIT) 


Colour—red, Arms—eight. 
Asana—Ardhaparyanka in a dancing attitude. 
Companions—Eight goddesses mentioned in (IT). 

The Nepal Manuscript No. 603 of Sadhanamala, gives a third description 
of Padmanarttesvara, which is not to be found in any other manuscript. As 
the MS. No. 603 is full of mistakes and omissions, the Sadhana in question is 
not altogether free from them. As it is, the Sadhana may be restored as 
follows :— 

**Namah Padmanarttesvaraya. 

Tatra visvapadmopari candre rakta-Hrih-karaparinatam Pedmanart- 
tesvaram raktavarnam ekamukham jatamukutinam trinetram, astabhujem, 
sarvalankarabhisitam sarpayajhopavitam ardhaparyankena  tandavam. 
Prathamabhujadvayena nrtyabhinayanam, dvitiyadaksinabhujena vikasayan 
sucimudra, vamabhujena raktapadmam Sirasi dhrtam, tritiyabhujadvayena 
vajravaddandatrisiladharam, caturthabhujadvayena aksasttrakundika- 
dharam, astadeviparivrtam, evam bhitam Padmanarttesvaram Lokanatham 
bhavayet.”’ 


ey) 


‘¢ Salutation to Padmanarttesvara. 


Here the worshipper should conceive himself as Padmanarttesvara, on 
the moon over the double lotus, springing up from the sacred syllable ‘ Frih,’ 
of red complexion, one-faced, having the crown of chignon, three eyes and 
eight arms ; as decked in all sorts of ornaments, wearing the sacred thread 
of a snake, and dancing in the Ardhaparyanka attitude. ‘The first pair 
of hands exhibits the dancing pose, the second right exhibits the Sicimudra 
against the breast, the second left holds the red lotus over head ; the third 
pair carries the staff and the Tristila, surmounted by a Vajra, while the fourth 
pair carries the rosary and the water-pot. |The principal god is surrounded 
by eight goddesses. In such a manner the god Padmanarttesvara Lokanatha 
should be conceived.” 


” HARIHARIHARIVAHANODBHAVA. 


LOKESVARA. 


Colour 





white. Arms—six, 


Identification mark-—Vahana consisting of Simha, Garuda and Vignu. 


There was a considerable difficulty in recognizing images of this divinity. 
The Sadhana gives the description of the principal god, but is practically 
silent as to why a peculiar name of this kind has been ascribed to this parti- 
cular variety of Lokegvara. India has not given us, up till now, any image of 
Harihariharivahana and it is rare even in Nepal. There is only one sculpture 
(Plate XXIII, a) at Svayambhiksettra, and a bronze (Plate XXII, f) at Patan, 
and both follow the Sadhana precisely. The lion is lowermost, on which rides 
Garuda. On the back of Garuda again, is the Hindu god, Narayana with 
the four symbols, the conch, the discus, the mace and the lotus. Lokesvara 
rides Narayana. The lion, the Garuda and: Narayana, all have ‘ Hari’ as their 
synonym, and as three Haris are there, Lokesvara is said to have the Vahana 
of three Haris and thus to have acquired the name of Harihariharivahana. 
Two Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala are devoted to the worship of this form of 


Arya-Avalokitesvara and the Dhyana in one of them describes the god in the 
following terms :— 


‘ Harthariharivahanodbhavam Bhagavantam Arya-Avalokitesvaram 
sarvangasuklam jatamukutinam santavesam, daksinakarena Bhagavantam 
Tathagatam saksinam kurvantam, dvitiyena aksamaladharinam, tritiyena 
duhkuhakam lokam upadesayantam, vamena dandadharam, dvitiyena krsna- 


jinadharam, tritiyena kamandaludharam, simhagaruda-Visnuskandhasthitam 
atmanam dhyatva....”’ 


* Sadhanamala, A-39-40, N-29, C-27-28. 


‘The worshipper should conceive himself as Harihariharivahanodbhava 
or god Arya-Avalokitesvara white in all limbs, with the crown of chignon, 
clad in peaceful garments, citing the Tathagata as witness with one of his 


POATE eX LI 





G Rakta- 
Lokesvara 
(Nepal) 





a. Harihariharivahana 
(Nepal) 





d. Mayajalakrama-LokeSvara e. Nilakantha 
(Nepal) (Sarnath) 





( 45 ) 


right hands, carrying the rosary in the second and instructing the deluded 
people with the third ; as carrying the staff in one of his left hands, the 
black deer’s skin in the second and the Kamandalu in the third ; as riding on 
the shoulder of Visnu [who rides on] Garuda, [who is again on the back of a] 
lion. Thus meditating....” 

But all the images of this divinity are not made strictly in accordance 
with the directions laid down in the Sadhanas. There is an image of this god 
at Patan with a snake entwining the legs of the lion, like the one reproduced 
in the Appendix. It%s interesting to note that the word ‘ Hari’ is also a syno- 
nym for snake and it is no wonder that the snake is present there; but in 
that case the sculpture cannot be said to- follow the Sadhana precisely. 
Sometimes, in the drawings, instead of the deer’s skin in one of the 


hands of the god, we find an elephant (Plate XXIII, b). 


8. TRAILOKYAVASANKARA. 
Colour—red. Asana—Vajraparyenka. 


This variety of Lokesvara is also known as Oddiyana, Uddiyana or Odi- 
yana Lokesvara, or LokesSvara as worshipped in Orissa, which was, in the 
middle ages, a great centre of Tantric learning. This form of Lokesvara does 
not appear to have been very widely represented. We have met with only 
one bronze of this god in the Kva Vahal at Patan in Nepal. Here also, the 
image of the god does not follow the Sadhana precisely. Two Sadhanas only 
in the SAdhanamala are devoted to the worship of Trailokyavasankara and the 
Dhyana contained in one of them is given below :— 

ae Lokesvaram sarvangamaharagaraktam ekamukham dvibhujam tri- 

netram jatamukutamanditam vajrankitapasankusahastam raktapadme vajra- 
paryankanisannam divyabharanavastravibhtsitam atmanam vicintya....” 
Sadhanamala, A-41, N-30, C-29. 

‘“The worshipper should realize himself as Lokegvara (in the form of 
Trailokyavasankara), whose limbs are reddened by the intense sentimentsof 
passion, who is one-faced, two-armed, three-eyed ; who has the crown of 
chignon over head, carries in his two hands the noose and goad stamped with 
the Vajra; who is seated on the red lotus in the Vajraparyanka attitude ; 
and is decked in celestial garments and ornaments. Thus meditating....”’ 

The Dhyana, it may be noticed, does not give the name of this variety 
of Lokesvara as Trailokyavasankara, but the Colophon* attributes the name 
to him. It further says that the Sadhana is composed by the great Tantric 
savant, Sarahapada, famous in the middle ages as one of the eighty-four 
Siddhapurusas. | 


* “Oddiyanakramena Trailokyavasankara-Lokegvara-sadhenam Sarahapadakrtam,”’ 


( 46 ) 
9. RAKTALOKESVARA. 


(I) 
Colour—red. Arms—four. Companions—Tara and Bhrkuti. 


Two Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala are devoted to his worship. But 
the two Dhyanas describe two widely different forms of the god. It is there- 
fore necessary that both the Dhyanas should be quoted and translated. One 
of the Dhyanas describe him in the terms given below :—~ 

“* Daksinottaraparsve Tara-Bhrkuti-devidvayasahitam Arya-Avaloki- 
teSvara- Bhattarakam raktavarnnam raktamaly amvaranulepanam pasankufa- 


dparhepa age a raktakusumayitasokataroradhastat avasthi- 
tam atmanam vicintayet.. 


Raktalovesvsmeninenan, Sadhanamala. A-43, N731-82, C-81. 

‘“The worshipper should conceive himself as Arya-Avalokitesvara, who 
is flanked in the South and North, by the goddesses Tara and Bhrkuti; who 
has red complexion, wears red garments and is besmeared with red unguents ; 
who carries in his four hands the noose, the goad, the bow and the 
arrow,* and who places himself under the Asoka tree, which has blossomed 
forth red flowers.” 

The Colophon attributes to him the name of Rakta-Lokesvara, and this 
name has been given simply because his complexion is red. The only image 
(Plate XXIII, c) of this form of Lokesvara, again, as far as we have heen able 
to ascertain, appears in the Kva Vahal at Patan in Nepal. This bronze bears 
an inscription in Newari on the pedestal, which designates him as Rakta- 
lokesSvara. It may be noticed that he is not flanked in this image by his 
two companions, Tara and Bhrkuti. As there is no mention of the particular 
Asana of the god, the standing attitude in the bronze is quite in keeping 
with the Sadhana. 


(IT) 
» Colour—red. Arms—two. 
Symbol—lotus in the left hand. Mudra— opening petals of lotus. 


The next Dhyana undoubtedly describes a second form of Rakta- 
lokesvara, of whom no representation has yet been found. The Dhyana 
runs as follows :— 

“Raktavarnnam Amitabhagarbhajatamukutadharam vamakaragrhita- 
raktapadmam tacca  daksinakarena  vikasayantam  vividhdalankdaravi- 
bhisitam. . 

Raktalokesvarasadhanam’’. Sadhanamala. A-48, N-32, C-31. 


* These four weapons are held in the first and second pair of his hands. 


C4) 


‘“The worshipper should conceive himself as [RaktalokesSvara] of red 
com»lexion, having a crown of chignon bearing the effigy of Amitabha, 
carrying the red lotus in the left hand and opening its petals with the right,* 
and as decked in various ornaments....”’ 


A reference may be made to the Dhyana of Vajradharma, equally un- 
presented, whose form will be described under No. 15. The forms of Rakta- 
lokeSvara and Vajradharma are almost identical, with the difference that 
the Sadhana enjoins for Vajradharma the Vahana of a peacock and the five 
Dhyani Buddhas on the crown. 


10. MAYAJALAKRAMA AVALOKITESVARA. 


« Faces—five. Hands—twelve. 


Asana—Pratyalidha. Colour—blue. 


As the Sadhana for the worship of this particular form of Avalokitesvara 
has been restored from the Mayajala Tantra, this peculiar name has been 
given to the deity. This is the only fierce form of LokesSvara known to the 
Indian Buddhists, though fiercer forms are also to be met with in the Tibetan 
Buddhist Iconography. The Dhyana given in the Sadhanamala describes 
him in the following terms :— 


‘* Bhagavantam Arya-Avalokitesvaram krsnavarnnam pratyalidhastham 
siiryyamandalasthitam pancamukham trinetram dvadagabhujam sitarakta- 
daksinamukhadvayam tatha pitaharitavimamukhadvayam daksinabhujaith 
damaru- khatvanga- -ankuga- -paSa-vajra-Saradharam, vamabhujaih — tarjani- 
kapala-raktakamala-mani-cakra-capadharam  damstrakaralasakalavadanam 
sanmudropetam mundamalalankrtasariram nagnam sarvangasundaram atma- 
nam jhatiti pratyakalayya. 


Sadhanamala, A-45, N-33, C-382. 


“The worshipper should conceive himself as Arya-Avalokitesvara, who 
has blue colour, who stands in the Pratyalidha attitude on the orb of the sun ; 
who is five-faced, three-eyed, twelve-armed, with the two right faces of white 
and red colour, and two left of yellow and green colour; who carries in his 
right hands the Damaru, Khatvanga, goad, noose, Vajra and the arrow, and 
in the left hands the raised index finger, the Kap§la, the red lotus, jewel, cakra 
and the bow; whose faces look terrible with bare fangs ; who is endowed 
with the six ‘auspicious ornaments; whose person is embellished by the 
garlands of heads, who is nude and appears beautiful in all limbs. Thus 
quickly meditating... .”’ 


* The word ‘vikasayantam’ may also mean ‘exhibiting’, which wculd have suited 
the centext well in this case. lf that meaning is accepted, the god will have the lotus 
in both of his hands. 


+ These six ornaments have been enumerat-d in the following verse in the 
Sadhanamala :— 
* Koanthikaérucakam ratnamekhalam bhasmastitrakam | 
Sat vai Paramita eta mudidiaipena yojitah \”’ 


Gay} 


The image reproduced (Plate XXIII, d) is perhaps the only one of its 
kind in India, and belongs to the Svayambhiksettra (vulgo-Simbu) in Nepal. 
It is sculptured in an obscure corner, on one of the panels of a miniature caitya, 
and corresponds exactly to the description given in the Sadhanamalaé; the 
only deviation is that the god has not been represented as nude in this image, 


11. NILAKANTHA. 


Co lour—y ellow. Asana—Vajraparyanka. 
Mudra—Sama dhi. Symbol—bowl of jewels. 
Companions—two serpents on either side. Identification mark—no ornaments. 


One Sadhana only is devoted to the worship of this form of Lokesvara 
which is almost the same as that of Amitabha, whom he bears on his head, with 
the difference that here the former wears the sacred thread, and bears the 
effigy of his sire on head. Amitabha being a Dhyani Buddha, has no father. 
Nilakantha, according to the Sadhana, is accompanied by two serpents. The 
Dhyana is given below :— 


‘Bhagavantam pitavarnnam ardhacandrankitajatamukutinam Amita- 

b} iopalaksitagirahpradegam raktapadmoparisthitam; krsnasaéraharinacarmani 
vajraparyankinam ; samidhimudropari nanaratnaparipiirnakapaladharinam, 

eneyacarmakrtayajnopavitinam, vyaghracarméambaradharam nirabharanam 
Nilakantham nilagutikavisistakantham : parasparabhisambaddhapuccha-sama- 
nip 122 Aivisista-Bhagavad Sa ssa hvamukha-krsnasarpadvayopalaksi- 
tam 4atminam evam vibhavayet.. 

Nilakantha-Arva-Avalokitesvara-sadhanam samaptam.”’ 

Sadhanamala, A-44, N-82, C-82. 

‘The worshipper should conceive himself as the god Nilakantha, whose 
complexion is yellow, who wears the crown of chignon decorated with the 
crescent ; on whose head is to be noticed the effigy of Amitabha, who sits in 
the Vajraparyanka attitude on a red lotus, on which is spread the skin of a 
black deer ; who exhibits the Samadhi Mudra with his two hands carrying the 
Kapala (bowl) filled with a variety of gems ; whose sacred thread consists of 
the deer-skin (eneya) ; who wears the tiger-skin, and bears no ornaments [on 
his person] ; whose throat shows the blue pill [of poison] : on either side of whom 
and looking towards him are to be seen two cobras with jewels on their hoods, 
and with tails entwined with each other.’ 

Apparently the model of this god has been taken from the Hindu deity 
Siva, who is said to have saved the world from destruction by swallowing the 
poison that came out from the mouth of Vasuki, the lord of serpents, while the 
gods and demons were churning the ocean together. The poison, if it could 
enter Siva’s stomach, would surely have destroyed him. But it remained in 
his throat, and as the colour of the poison is said to be blue, there is a blue spot 
in the white throat of the god. That is the reason why the name Nilakantha has 


. eS oe , A - 
hada py Bane deeds ' 


eat 





PLATE Le 
















= 


errand aug bsored Saat 





p Saba gerencgrasns aaa ~ 






























LARD ABTA THINS. Cra CA NTA x saciessas > matey 9: 
eS SHD GRAD TT wha or 07 97277 Ba nange a 
FAT saMTMANAR ea” Weare dnaing (edz! wis ba 









re POhUAE HOST wig Rea 
t QARGORR SMA irseing dark Te 
FES AIS A RA AS Glas a ie Cnet sta 


ae 
priett Get 







Bras 


a. Last and first page of Abhisekavidhi 
(Ms in Durbar Library, Nepal). 


(oe ad, 
¥ TOI) 


b. Sugatisandarsana Lokesvara. c. Pretasantarpita Lokesvara. 








i. Sukhavati Lokesvara Vajradharma Lokesvara. 
(Nepal) 


7s 


. ( 49 ) 


been attributed to Siva. As this particular form of Lokeévara has also the 
same name, it is not unreasonable to suppose that the model for this variety 
has been taken from the Hindu god, Siva Nilakantha. 


A confusion is likely to oceur in the identification of the images of 
Nilakantha and Vak, the latter being a variety of Mafjuséri, if their respective 
fathers are not represented. The only point of distinction in that ease would 
be the total absence of ornaments and luxuriant dress in the case of Nilakantha. 
If the image bears princely ornaments and dress, it must be identified as 
that of Mafijusri. 


In the temple of Bauddhanatha (Vulgo-Baudhb) in Nepal, one image of 
this god in colours has been discovered, but here the god appears alone without 
the serpents. The other image (Plate XXITJ,e) hails from the monastery at 
Sarath, though we are not certain how far the identification pap Oecd else- 


where* is acceptible to scholars. 


12. SUGATISANDARSANA-LOKESVARA. 
Colour—white. Arms—six. 


How we came across the two Sadhanas describing the two varieties, 
the Sugatisandarsana and the Pretasantarpita Lokesvara has already been 
narrated elsewhere.* The obverse side of the first leaf of the Abhisekavidhi 
of the Guhyasamaja containing the two Sadhanas along with the last 
page is reproduced herewith (Plate XXIV,a) for ready reference. The 
gos for Sugatisandarsana given there is quoted below :—- 


** Sugatisandarsana- Lokegvara- Bhattarakam suklavarnnam sadbhujam 
varadabhavaksamaladharam daksine, vame padmakunditridandi ca ratna- 
bharanabhisitam vratasiitradharinam jatamukuti[na]m padmopari candra- 
mandale sthitam bhavayet.”’ 


‘‘ The worshipper should conceive himself as Bhattaraka Sugatisandar- 
gana-Lokegvara, white in complexion, six-armed, showing: the Varada and 
Abhaya poses and the rosary in the [three] right hands, and carrying the lotus, 
the water-pot, and the staff with three horns in the [three] left ; as decked in 
ornaments and jewels, wearing the sacred thread, and having a crown of 
chignon over head ; as situated on the moon over lotus, and as peaceful in 
appearance.’ 


* In my paper entitled “The Identification of Avalokitesvara Images ” read before 
the Second Session of the Oriental Conference held at Calcutta, in the year, 1922, -and 
printed in its proceedings. 

t In my paper referred to above an attempt has been made to identify one of the 
Sarnath images with this particular variety of Lokevara. But as there are Gao pens 
of a serious nature, I have since abandoned the identification. 


7 


( 50 ) > 


The Citrakaras of Nepal “still draw pictures of this deity and a 
drawing is reproduced (Plate X XIV.b), to give our readers a fair idea as to his 
form, so that when we actually meet with one of its representations in stone 
or metal, it may readily be recognized. 


18. PRETASANTARPITA LOKESVARA. 
Colour—white. Arms—- six. 


The Sadhana for the worship of this deity, likewise, has been furnished 
by the obverse side of the first leaf of the Abhisekavidhi, which was appended 
to the Nepal -MS. in palm-leaf of the Sadhanamala. We have not met with 
any representation of this deity anywhere except the one at Macchandar Vahal 
in Nepal. The Dhyana has been expressed in the following terms :— 

‘‘ Jatamukutinam sadbhujam prathamabhujadvayena varadau, dvitiya- 
bhujadvayena ratnapustakau, trtiyabhujadvayena aksamalatridandikam, 
sarvalankarabhisitam * vratastitradharinam saumyamiurtim, padmopari 
candramandale sthitam, svetavarnnam bhavayet— 

Pretasantarpita-Lokesvara- sadhanam. se 
pele worshipper should conceive himself as [Pretasantarpita Lokesvara], 
who wears the crown of chignon, is six-armed, exhibits in the first pair of 
hands the Varada poses and carries, in the second pair the jewel and the 
book, and in the third the rosary and the Tridandi; who is decked ‘in all 
sorts of ornaments, wears the sacred thread, has a graceful appearance, stands, 
on the orb of the moon over-the lotus, and is white in complexion.”’ 

The illustration in Plate XXIV,c shows how the Citrakaras of Nepal 
still prepare drawings of this deity, and it is important in suggesting many. 
minor features which the little Dhyana does not mention. 


14. SuKHAVATI LoKESvaARA. 


F'aces—three. Arms—six. 
Asana—Lalita. Companion—fakti (Tara). 


Colour —white. 


We have not been able to find out the Sadhana for this deity in the 
Sadhanamala, but the Dharmakosasangraha of Amrtananda, however, gives a 
description of the god. Nepal abounds in the images of this deity (for 
instance, in Plate XXIV,d) both in stone and in bronze, though he is not 
found anywhere else. The description above referred to runs as follows :—- 

‘Trimukhah svetavarnnah sadbhujah, dakse, mudrah, saraksepajapa- 
malavaradani, vamesu dhanuhkamala-Tarorisamarpanani lalitasanah kama- 
lopari, Vajratara, Visvatara,-Padmatarabhih parivrtah. Upari caityah. 

Sukhavati Lokesvarah.”’ 


* The Ms. has ‘‘akga’’ after ‘‘bhisitam.’’ 


ead 2) 


** Sukhavati Lokesvara is three-faced, white in colour, and six-armed ; 
one of his right hands exhibit the act of shooting an arrow, the remaining 
two have the rosary and the Varada pose; in two of the left hands he 
carries the bow and the lotus and the third is placed on the thigh of Tara ; 
he sits in Lalitasana on the lotus and is surrounded by goddesses, Vajratara, 
Visvatara, Padmatara and the like. Above is the Caitya.”’ 


15. VAJRADHARMA LOKESVARA. 


Colour—reddish white. Vahana—peacock. 


“2 Identification mark—opening the lotus against the breast. 


It has already been pointed out that Vajradharma is the only variety 
of Avalokitesvara who is regarded as the offspring of the five Dhyani Buddhas 
instead of Amitabha only. The distinguishing feature of this god is that he 
rides a peacock. The Sadhana devoted to his worship is almost wholly in 
verse and we give below the portion dealing with his form. This has been 
omitted by Dr. Foucher, and was first pointed out by the present writer in his 
paper on the * Identification of Avalokitesvara Images ”’ :— . 


‘Tam sitam raktavarnnam tu padmaragasamadyutim | 
Pancabuddhamukutadharam harsenotphullalocanam |! 
Vamato spardhaya nalam dhrtva sodasapatrakam ! 
Padmam vikasayantanca hrdi daksinapanina 1 
Mayiropari madhyasthe nisannam candramandale | 
Sattvaparyankamabhujya sagrhgararasotsavam II 
Caityantahstha-mahakarma-kitagara-viharinam | 
Bhavayet Vajradharmagryam nityam Bodhim avapnuyat I” 

Sadhanamala, A——-20, N-—16, C— 10. 


‘** The worshipper should conceive himself as excellent Vajradharma, of 
reddish white complexion with splendour like that of the Padmaraga gem, 
who bears the effigies of the five Dhyani Buddhas on the crown; whose 
eyes beam with delight ; who holds with pride the stem of a lotus with sixteen 
petals and with the right causes it to blossom against the breast ; who sits on 
the moon over lotus on the back of a peacock, enjoys his seat of the animal and 
displays the delightful amorous sentiment ; who moves in the sanctum inside 
the Caitya, the place for great performances. He (the worshipper) certainly 
receives the Bodhi who meditates jupon him] in this manner. | 


The illustration in Plate XXIV,e shows the form of Vajradharma as 
drawn by the artists of Nepal in modern days. The right hand which ought 


to have been empty carries a book. 
* * ** fe 


The conception of AvalokiteSvara is as old as the third century B.C. 
He was first ushered into existence by the Mahasanghikas, about the time of 
Asoka, in their work, entitled Mahavastu Avadana, where he has been charac- 
terised* as the ‘‘ Bhagavan whotakes the form of a Bodhisattva, whose duty 


* Senart ; Le Mahavastu, Vol. II, p. 294. 


(52: ) 


it is to look round (Avalokita) for the sake of instructing. the people and for 
their constant welfare and happiness.” This Avalokita Bodhisattva no doubt 
gave rise to the concrete form of Avalokitesvara, even before the second century 
A. D. and his images can be traced from the Gupta period, onwards. He 
appears in a concrete form first in the Sukhavati-Vyitha*, so far as our present 
information goes. The very great number of forms of Avalokitesvara have 
undoubtedly a bearing on the passaget in the Karanda-vytha, where he is said 
to take all possible forms of godhead in order to instruct the people and to 
put them in the way of salvation. As different people were of different 
religions, this Compassionate Bodhisattva had to assume the shape of all gods 
of all religions, nay even the shape of the father and the mother. As we are 
not sure how far these one hundred and eight forms are authoritative, it is 
desirable that these forms should be treated in an Appendix.{ 


* This work was first translated into Chinese between A.D. 148 and 170 while the 
smaller recension was first translated into the same language between A.D. 384 and 317. 
Max Muller: Sukhavati Vytha. Introduction pp. III—IV. 


+ Quoted above, p. 52, footnote. 
t See Appendix B. 


OEEAT EERIE 
EMANATIONS OF AMITABHA. 
te GODS. 


Besides Avalokitesvara and two forms of Manjusii, only two male divi- 
nities in the Sadhanamala emanate from the Dhyani Buddha Amitabha. One 
is Mahavala and the other is Hayagriva. images of these we have not yet 
come across. So we must content ourselves at present with only the Dhyanas 
and their translations, 


TeeeeVUA TH AVAIL AS 


Asana—Pratyalidha. Colour 





red. Appearance—terrible. 


One Sadhana only is devoted to the worship of this particular emanation 
of Amitabha. The Dhyana is given below :— 


‘*Mahavalam ekamukham caturbhujam sarvangaraktam trdhvapingala- 
sarppavabaddhakegam daksinabhujabhya am sitadandaca imaradharam* vama- 
bhujabhyam vandanabhinayatarjanidharam vyaghracarmanivasanam sarpa- 
Hnaranam pratvalidham damstrakar alavadanam survyamandalaprabha- 
malinam Amitaébhamukutinam dhyay at’ 


Sefton eb A—278, Na—&6, C—216. 


“The worshipper should realize himself as Mahavala with one face, 
four arms and red complexion ; whose brown hair rises upwards and _ is tied 
round by asnake ; who carries in his two right hands the white staff and the 
chowrie, while the two left show the Namaskara and the Tarjani Mudra ; 
who is clad in tiger-skin, wears ornaments of snake, and stands in the Pratya- 
lidha attitude ; whose face looks terrible with bare fangs ; who is resplendent 
like the orb of the sun, and bears the effigy of Amitabha on the crown.” 


2. SAPTASATIKA HAYAGRIVA. 


Colour—red. Appearance—terrible. 





Symbols—Vajra and Danda (staff). 


Tdentification mark—The horse’s head over head. 


He has several other forms, but in only one he is said to bear the 
image of Amitabha on his crown. Another is said to bear that of Akso- 
bhya, and in the third, there 1s no indication as to who should appear 
on his head. So, the three different forms should be dealt with in three 
different places. The particular name by which the third variation of 


* © reads, ‘‘sitacamara ’’ 


Hayagriva goes is Paramasva, while the other two are given the name of 
Hayagriva simply. As the present Sadhana which describes the form 
bearing the Dhyani Buddha Amitabha on the crown, has been, according to 
the Colophon, restored from the Saptasatika Kalpa, we designate this parti- 
cular form of Hayagriva as Saptasatika Hayagriva. In this case also we 
have not met with any representation in stone or bronze, and the drawings 
that have been brought from Nepal present so wide a difference that we do not 
venture to reproduce them here. The Dhyana as presented in the Sadhana 
is given below :— , 
-Raktavarnnam mahabhayanakam trietram kapilasmasrum raudram 
aun damstrakaralinam dantausthakapalamalinam jatamukutinam 
Amitabhasgiraskam, dvitiyamukham nilam hayananam  hihikaranadinam, 
brahmandasikharakrantam, dvitiyena bhavagraparyantam, astanagopetam 
kharvavamanakaram vyaghracarmanivasanam sarvalankarabhtsitam sakala- 
devasuram tarpayantam grhitavajradandam....vicintayet. ‘ 
Saptasatikakalpoktam Hayagrivasadhanam samaptam.”’ 
Sadhanamala. A—279, C—217. 

The worshipper should conceive himself as [Saptasatika Hayagriva] of 
red complexion, who is terribly awe-inspiring, three-eyed, with brown beard ; 
who is angry and has protruding belly ; whose face appears terrible with bare 
fangs; who wears garlands of skulls with teeth and lips, bears on his 
head the crown of chignon, and the figure of Amitabha ; whose second face 
is distorted like that of a horse, which is blue in colour and neighs incessantly ; 
who tramples on the top of the universe with one leg and the end of the world- 
with the other ; who is decked in (ornaments of) eight serpents, is short and 
dwarfish, is clad in tiger-skin and decked in all ornaments ; who pleases all 
the gods and Asuras, and holds the Vaira and the staff (in his two hands).”’ 

It may be noticed that the Dhyana is not clear about the number of 
hands and faces; but it seems from the description that Hayagriva is 
endowed with a principal face, terrible in appearance over which is the 
horse’s head. This horse’s head over the principal one is found only in the - 
ease of Hayagriva, and disguishes him from al] other Buddhist deities. 
But when, as a minor god, he accompanies others, we do not, as a rule, 
notice the horse’s head. In such cases, the Danda or the staff serves as the 
identification mark. From the Dhyana it also appears that he is two-armed 
and carries the Vajra and Danda. The Vajra is generally held in the right 
hand, while the Danda is carried in the left. About the name, however, 
the Colophen is certain, and it asserts that this Sadhana has been restored 
from the Saptasatika Kalpa, meaning a ritual work, consisting of words, 
that can make up seven hundred slokas in the Anustubh metre. 


Ge boy 7 


Il. GODDESSES. 


The feminine divinities that emanate from the Dhyani Buddha Amitabha 
are three in number, the most important and popular being Kurukulla, to whose 
worship no less than fourteen Sadhanas are devoted in the Sadhanamala. 
Two Sadhanas are devoted to Bhrkuti and one Sadhana only to MahAasitavati, 
who is also known as one of the Pafcaraksas or the five Great Protectresses. 
None* of these goddesses we have been able to find out in stone or bronze ; 
but paintings are, however, made by the Nepalese Artists even in modern 
times. Let us take up the goddesses one by one :— 


1. KURUKULLA. 


She is one-faced and may have two, four, six or eight arms. When she 
is endowed with six arms, she bears the effigies of the five Dhyani Buddhas on 
her crown, or in Other words, she is then regarded as the offspring of the com- 
bination of the five Dhyani Buddhas. When two-armed she is called Sukla 
Kurukulla, and when she has four arms, she is called by the names of Tarod- 
bhava Kurukulla, Oddiyana Kurukullé, Hevajrakrama Kurukulla and 
Kalpokta Kurukulla. 


Kurukulla is said to confer success in the Tantric rite of Vasikarana or 
the rite of subduing or bewitching men, women, ministers or even kings. 
Many interesting processes are given in some Sadhanas for bewitching in 
different tases. The mantra of Kurukulla is “Om Kurukulle Hum Hrih 
Svaha’”’. If this mantra is muttered ten thousand times, all men will-be 
bewitched ; thirty thousand would be sufficient for subduing a minister and 
one lakh for aking. Shecaneven confer on her devotees the power of sub- 


duing all ministers and all kings. - 


(i) Sukla Kurukulla. 


Colour—white. — Symbols—rosary and the bowl of lotus. 


Vahana—animal. Asana-—Vajraparyanka. 


Only one Sadhana in the Sadhanamala furnishes us with the manner 
of her worship. The Dhyana contained therein is a long one and runs as 


follows :— 


“Atmanam Bhagavatim aksasttrotpalamrtakundim savyavasavyabhyam 
dadhaénam, trinetram Padmadhrkpramukhaih sarva-Tathagataih Vinadiso- 
dagadevibhih abhisiktam, Amitabhavirajitananapuspasobhitajatamukutam 
Srngaradirasopetam, kificit savyapanipallavasthaksasttram alokamanam, 


* Some Tibetan forms of Kurukulla, however, are noticed in Getty and Deniker’s 
** Gods of the Northern Buddhisim ”’. - 


(95649) boa 
ksirambhodhigvetavarnnabjastham amrtankopari sattvaparyankasanastham, 
kankana-keyira-kundala-ntipura-muktahara-divyavastradivibhusitam, — nil- 
Anantabaddhakesim, piyisavarnna-Vasukikrtaharam, rakta-Taksakakitavarn- 
nograkundalam, dirvasy ama- Karkkotakakrtayajfopavitam, gukla-Padma- 
nagendrakrtaharam, mrnalavarnna- -Mahapadmakrtantpuram, pita- Sankhapa- 
lakrtakankanam, dhamabbravat- Kulkakrtakeytram, subhravarnnam s1ava- 
damrtavigraham karunardracittam bhavayet. 


Sukla-Kurukulla-sadhanam ’’. Sadhanamala. A—191, N—106, C—155. 


‘“The worshipper should conceive himself as the goddess (Kurukulla), 
who carries the rosary and the cup of Utpala full of nectar in the right and left 
hands respectively ; who is three- eyed and is offered bathing water by (the 
Bodhisattva) Padmapani and others, by all the Tathagatas and the sixteen 
damsels beginning from Vina ; ne wears the crown of chignon, which is 
decorated with various Hoe and the miniature figure of Amitabha ; who 
displays the sentiment of passionate love, and other sentiments ; who Aten 
slightly to have a look at the rosary savas she carries in her léaf: like hand ; 
who sits on an animal and rests on the nectar-like lap of the white lotus, 
that rises from the ocean of milk ; who is decked in bracelets, armelts, ear- 
rings, anklets, pearl-necklace, and is clad in celestial garments ; whose hair 
is tied up by tng serpent Ananta of blue colour, whose necklace is formed by 
the milk-coloured Vasuki, and the prominent ear-ornament (Kundala) of red 
Taksaka ; whose sacred thread is the green Karkkotaka ; whose girdle is the 
white Padma, the lord of serpents ; whose Nuipura (anklet) is the seipent 
Mahapadma of the colour of the lotus stalk; whose bracelet is yellow 
Sankhapala ; whose armlet is Kulika of the colour of smoky clouds ; whose 
complexion is white, and who seems to diffuse nectar and ‘possesses a heart 
which is melted with compassion,”’ , 


From this somewhat long description, the form of Sukla-Kurukulla 
would be sufficiently vivid. The other varieties have many features in 
common with the form described above and will now be noticed briefly. 
It is not necessary to quote and translate all the Dhyanas given in the 


Sadhanamala. 


- (1). Tarodbhava-Kurukulla. 


Colour—red. Arms—four. Asana-—Vajraparyanka. 


Vahana—Kamadeva and his wife riding upon Rahu. 


Five Sadhanas describe the goddess with very slight differences. She 
has red complexion, red garments, red ornaments and a seat of red lotus. She 
is four-armed and shows in her two left hands the Abhaya pose’and the arrow, 
while the two right carry the bow and the red lotus. She sits in the Vajra- 
paryanka attitude and under her seat of lotus appears Kamadeva and_ his 
wife riding on Rahu. She has red aureole behind her, wears the effigy of 
Amitabha on the crown and resides in the Kurukulla mountain. She is in the 
fulness of youth and displays amorous sentiments. Sometimes she charges 
an arrow on the bow and is ready ie strike. | me 


ih) 


(ii) Oddiyana-Kurukulla. 


red. 





Appearance—terrible. Colour 


Asana—Ardhaparyanka. Vahana—corpse. 





This variant of Kurukullé may be called the Odiyana or Uddiyana or 
Oddiyana Kurukulla, or Kurukulla as worshipped in Orissa. This form of the 
goddess presents rather a fierce form in as much as she has the garland of 
heads, the five skulls on her head, protruding teeth and tongue, garments 
of tiger-skin, and brown hair rising above her head in the shape of a flame. 
Her eyes are three in number which are red, round and moving. She is four- 
armed; the principal pair of hands is engaged in drawing to the full the 
flowery bow charged with an arrow of red lotus. The second pair holds the 
goad of flowers and the red lotus. She has red complexion and sits in the 
Ardhaparyanka attitude on a corpse 


(iv) Astabhuja Kurukulla. 


Arms—eight. we Colour—red. 


Asana—Vajraparyanka. Mudra—Trailokyavijaya. 


As has previously*been pointed out, Kurukulla may have another form 
with eight arms also emanating from the Dhyani Buddha Amitabha, though 
it is not expressly mentioned in the only Sadhana devoted to her worship. 
This Sadhana is attributed in the Colophon to the great Udiya Siddhacaryya, 
Indrabhiti, who flourished about 700 A. D., and who had a more illustrious 
daughter, Laksminkaraé by name, well-versed in the doctrines of both Vajra- 
yana and Sahajayana. The goddess described in this Sadhana is not of a 
terrible appearance like the six-armed Mayajala Kurukullaé or the four- 
armed, Odiyana Kurukullaé, but is mild, youthful and compassionate. The 
most important feature of the Sadhana is that it gives the description of 
a complete Mandala which comprises of the principal goddess and twelve 
surrounding divinities. For a better understanding of the form of this 
goddess and of the constitution of the Mandala, it is desirable that the 
Dhyana should be quoted and translated :— 

‘* Kurukullam Bhagavatim astabhujém raktavarnnam raktastadalapad- 
masuryye Vajraparyankanisannam kitagaramadhyanivasinim, prathamakara- 
dvayena Trailokyavijayamudradharam, avasistadaksinakaraih ankusam 
Aikarnapuritam Saram varadamudram dadhanam, parisistavamabhujaih pasam 
capam utpalam dadhanam, sakalalankaravatim bhavayet. 

Purvadale Prasannataram, daksinadale Nispannataram, pascimadale 
Jayatairam, uttaradale Karnataram, aisanadale Cundam, agneyadale Apara- 
jitim, nairtyadale Pradipatarim, vayavyadale Gauritarafica dhyayat. Etasca 
sarvah raktavarnnaih Pafica-Tathagatamukutyah vajraparyankanisa nnah, 


8 


daksinabhujabhyam  varadamudra-akarnaptirita-saradharah, vamabhuja- 
bhyam utpalacapadharah. 

Parvadvare Vajravetalim lambodaram vikrtamukhim raktavarnnam 
Aksobhyamukutam, daksinahastabhyam tarjani-ankusadharam, ~vamakara- 
bhyam vajraghantapasadharam. 

Daksinadvare Aparajitam  pitavarnnam Ratnasambhavamukutam 
daksinahastabhvam dandankusadharam, vamahastabhyam  ghantapasa- 
dharam. i 

Pascimadvare Ekajatam krsnavarnnam trdhvakesam lambodaram 
dantavastabdhaustham Amitabhamukutam, daksinakarabhyam vajra-ankusa- 
dharam, vamakarabhyam ghantapaéasadharam. 

Uttaradvare Vajragandharim kanakasyamam Amoghasiddhimukutam 
vikrtamukhim lambodaram, daksinabhujabhyam  khadga-ankusadharam 
vamabhujabhyam ghantapasadharam vicintayet. ’ 


Ktah catasrah. alidhapadasthah ’’. 
Sadhanama’ila. A—183-4, N—101, C—150. 


‘“The worshipper should conceive himself as goddess Kurukulla, 
who is eight-armed, has red complexion,. sits on the Vajraparyanka attitude 
on the dise of the sun over the lotus with eight petals and resides in the sanc- 
tum ; who displays the Trailokyavijaya mudra in her first pair of hands, and 
shows i in the other right hands the ankusa, the arrow drawn up to the ear and 
the Varada pose, and in the other left hands the noose, the bow and the Utpala:;: 
and who is decked in all kinds of ornaments. 


On the east petal is Prasannatara, on the south is Nispannatara, on the 
west Jayatara, on the north Karnatara ; on the north-east petal is Cundaé, on 
the south-east Aparajita, on the south west Pradipatara, and on the north-west 
Gauritara. All these deities have red complexion and five Dhyani Buddhas on 
the crown; they sit in the Vajraparyanka attitude and show in the two right 
hands the boon pose and the arrow drawn up to the ear, and in the two left 
hands the Utpala and the bow. 

In the eastern gate is Vajravetali, who has protruding belly, distorted 
face, red complexion, the effigy of Aksobhya on tiara, and carries in the two 
right hands the Tarjani and ie goad, and in the ee left the Vajraghanta 
and the noose. 


In the southern gate is Aparajita, who has yellow complexion, the effigy 
of Ratnasambhava on tiara, and carries in her two right hands the staff and 
the goad, and in the two left the bell and the lasso. 


In the western gate 1s Kkajata, who has blue colour, hair rising upwards 
over head, and protruding belly ; who bites her lips with her teeth, bears 
the image of Amitabha on tiara, and carries in her two right hands the Vajra 
and the goad, and in the two left the bell and the lasso. 


In the northern gate is Vajragandhari, who has golden complexion, bears 
the image of Amoghasiddhi on tiara, has distorted face, and protruding belly 
and carries in her two right hands the sword and the goad, and in the two left 
the bell and the lasso. 


All these four goddesses stand in the Alidha attitude.”’ 


( 59 ) 


2. BHRKUTI. 
Arms—four. Colour—yellow. 


We are, no doubt, familiar with the name of Bhrkuti, who accom- 
panies, as a minor goddess, some varieties of Avalokitegvara. When she 
accompanies Khasarpana, she is yellow in complexion and _ four-armed, 
carrying in the two left hands the Tridandi and Kamandalu. One of the 
two right hands is raised in the attitude of doing homage, while the other 
cai ‘ries the rosary. 

Bhrkuti 1s also worshipped by the Buddhists as a principal goddess 
and two Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala are devoted to her worship. She is 
described in the following words :— | 

‘“ Caturbhujaikamukhim pitaém trinetram navayauvanam varadaksa- 
sutradaksinakaram, tridandikamandaludharavamakaram Amitabhamudritam 
-padmacandr Asanastham Bhagavatim dhyatva.... 

Bhrkutisadhanam.”’ Ssadhanamala, A—178, Na—38, C—145-6. 

“The goddess (Bhrkuti) should be conceived as four-armed, one faced, 
yellow in complexion, three-eyed, blooming with youth ; as showing the Varada 
Mudra and the rosary in her two right hands and carrying the Tridandi and the 
Kamandalu in the two left ; as stamped with the effigy of Amitabha (on head) 
and as sitting on the moon supported by the lotus. Thus meditating....” > 


Another Sadhana adds that she should have a peaceful appearance and 
should wear the-crown of chignon on head. 

The illustration printed on Plate LXI,b (Sze. correct to ‘a’. ‘b’ is a pie- 
ture of Vasudhara) as that of Bhrkuti in Getty’s Gods of Northern Buddhism, 
is in reality that of Grahamatrka, which deity will be described later. 


3. MAHASITAVATI. 





Arms—four. Colour—red. Asana—Ardhaparyanka. 


All the five goddesses constituting the Mahapancaraksa group are said 
to emanate from one or other of the Dhvani Buddhas. Mahasitavatiis attached 


to Amitabha. The short Sadhana is as follows :— 

** Mahasitavatr caturbhujaikamukhi rakta daksinabhujadvaye aksa- 
siitravaradavati vamabhujadvaye*  vajrankusahrtpradesasthapustakavati 
Hrimbiya Amitabhamukuti ardhaparvankasthita nanalankaravati suryya- 
sanaprabha ceti.”’ 

Sadhanamala. A—-215, Na---17, C—171. 

‘* MahAasitavati is four-armed and one-faced, of er complexion, shows 
in her two right hands the rosary and the Varada pose and in her two left 
hands the goad surmounted by a Vajra and the book against the breast ; 
she originates from the syllable ‘ Hrim,’ bears the effigy of Amitabha on tiara, 
sits in the Ardhaparyanka attitude, is decked in various ornaments, sits on 
the dise of and glows like the sun.” 


A Omits “ vamabhujadvaye....nanalankaravati”’. , E 


CHAPTER V. 
EMANATIONS OF AKSOBHYA. 


Lae OD 


The number of deities that emanate from the Dhyani Buddha, Asksobhya 
is rather large,—larger than the emanations from any other Dhyani Buddha. 
The reason jis that Aksobhya was one of the earliest Tathagatas to enter the 
Buddhist Pantheon. The blue colour of Aksobhya is associated with the 
terrible deities in the Sadhanamala and with the gruesome rites in the Tantra. 
The deities emanating from this Dhyani Buddha have generally the blue colour 
and they are usually terrible both in appearance and in deeds. Except- 
ing perhaps Jambhala all other male emanations of Aksobhya have terrible 
appearance with distorted face, bare fangs, three eyes, protruding tongue, 
garland of heads and skulls, the tiger-skin and ornament of snakes. 


Besides several forms of Mafjusri, male deities emanating from Aksobhya 
are nine in number, each having a large number of Sadhanas devoted to his 
worship. The deities to wit, Candarosana, Heruka, Buddhakapala, Samvara, 
Hayagriva, Raktayamari, Krsnayamari, Jambhala and Ucchusma-Jambhala. 
Let us take them up one by one. | 


» 
1. CANDAROSANA. 


Colour—yellow. Appearance—terrible. 
Symbols—sword and Tarjanipasa. 


Identification Mark—left leg touching the ground (avaninihitajanuh). 


Candarosana is also called Mahacandarosana, Candamaharosana and 
Acala. Four Sadhanas are devoted to his worship and he is always represented 
in yab-yum. Prabhakarakirti is said to be the author of one of the Sadhanas 
a major portion of which is in verse. As there is no mention of the crest of 
Aksobhya in this Sadhana we take up another which is in prose. The Dhyana* 
describing the god runs as follow :— 

“ Sricandamaharosanam Bhagavantam atasipuspasankasam Acalapara- 
namanam dvibhujam kekaraksam damstrakaralamahaghoravadanam ratna- 
maulinam damstranipiditadharam mundamalasiraskam araktacaksudvayam 
daksine khadgadharam  tarjanipasahrdayasthavamakaram sitasarpayajno- 


* According to other Sadhanas, he may have blue colour and the effigies of the five 
Dhyani Buddhas on the crown. The significance of the two symbols is that the noose is 
required to bind the host of the Maras, all of whom should be conceived as nude with hair 
dishevelled and as crying in utter helplessness, while the sword cuts them through. 


PLATE XXV,. 


Si on™ 


ff 





j 





akapala 


Buddh 


b. 


Candarosansa 


a. 





uka 


er 


lek 


(Dacca Museum) 








(e019) 


pavitam vyaghracarmanivasanam nanaratnaviracitabharanam bhumilagna- 
vamacaranam isadunnatadaksinacaranam stryyaprabhamalinam atmanam 
vicintya....Aksobhyamukutinam dhyayat.”’ 


91, Na—20-21, C—70 





Sadhanamala. <A 





. ** The worshipper should meditate on himself as Sri-Candamaharosana, 
whose colour is like that of the Atasi flower, and who is also called Acala ; 
who is one-faced, two-armed, and squint-eyed, whose face appears terrible 
with bare fangs, who wears a bejewelled head- dress, bites his lips with the 
teeth, and wears on his crown a garland of heads, whose eyes are slightly red, 
who earries the sword in his right hand and the noose round the raised index 
finger against the breast, whose sacred thread consists of a white snake, who is 
clad in tiger-skin, whose ornaments consist of various gems ; whose left leg 
touches the ground, while the Deak is Slightly raised, and who has the radiance 
of the sun. Thus meditating... .he should also be conceived as bearing the 
effigy of Aksobhya on his crown. 

It should be noticed that the Dhyana is silent about the Sakti in whose 
embrace the god should remain in yab-yum. But if the Buddhist priests arc 
to be believed and if the testimony of the Buddhist Citrakaras may be held 
to be of any value, we must assume that he is always represented in yab-yum, 
and can never be represented singly. The accompanying sketch (Plate XXYV, a) 
meets all the requirements, but we have not yet succeeded in discovering any 
representation of the deity either in stone or in metal. Candarosana is the 
most important figure in the celebrated Candamaharosana Tantra, His 
worship is always performed in secret, and the god is kept secluded from 
public gaze. Even if there be a bronze image, it is practically inaccessible to 


any one else except the initiated. 


eee leek A. 





Varieties—single or yab-yum. 

Arms—two (single) ; two or four (yab-yum). 

Asana—Dancing in Ardhaparyanka. 

Heruka is one of the most popular deities of the Buddhist Pantheon. 

His name is generally associated with his Saktis, who embrace the god and 
remain in yab-yum. He is also worshipped singly and in that case he will 
have two arms only. When represented in yab-yum, he will have two or four 
arms, No less than five Sadhanas are devoted to his worship. 


(i) Dvibhuja Heruka. 


Colour—blue. Vahana—corpse (not always). 





Asana—Dancing in Ardhaparyanka. Symbols—Vajra and the Kapala. 
Identification mark—Khatvanga with flowing banner hanging from the left shoulder. 
Three out of the five Sadhanas are devoted to this particular form of 
Heruka. Two of these are in prose and one is in verse. His worship ecntfers 
Buddhahood on his worshippers and Heruka 1s said tc destroy all Maras of 


o 


( 62 ) 


the world. His images are extremely rare even in Nepal. We know of only 
two.images ; one appears in the Bauddhanatha Temple in Nepal and another 
has recently been discovered at Comilla and is deposited in the Dacca 
Museum, Dacca. The Dhyana describes his form in the following terms :— 
66 F = ; 
Savastham ardhaparyankam naracarmasuvasasam | 
Bhasmoddhilitagatraficea sphuradvajrafica daksinam 1) 
Calatpatakakhatvangam vame raktakarotakam | 
Satardhamundamalabhih krtaharamanoramam || 
Isaddamstrakaralasyam raktanetravilasinam | 
Pingordhvakesam Aksobhyamukutam karnakundalam lI 


Asthyabharanasobham tu girah pancakapaélakam | 
Buddhatvad Ayinam dhyayat jaganmaranivaranam |I 


Herukasadhanam.”’ 
Sadhanamala. A—258, Na—50-51, C—20. 

‘“The worshipper should conceive himself as (Heruka) who stands on a 
corpse* in the Ardhaparyanka attitude, who is well-clad in human skin ; whose 
body is besmeared with ashes, who wields the Vajra in the right hand ; in 
whose left is the Khatvanga with a moving flag (hanging from his shoulder 
like the sacred thread), and who carries in his left hand the Kapala full of blood ; 
whose neeklace is beautified by a chain of half-a-hundred heads ; whose face 
is only slightly distorted with bare fangs and who revels in his blood-shot eyes ; 
whose brown hair rises upwards and on whose tiara is the effigy of Aksobhya ; 
whose ear-ornament is the Kundala and who is decked in crnaments of bones ; 
on whose head are the five skulls, who bestows Buddhahood and _ protects 
the world from the Maras.” 

In another Sadhana for the worship of this particular kind of Heruka, 
the Khatvanga is described as being surmounted by a Vajra of five thongs and 
as decorated with the flag with moving bells, man’s head and the double lotus, 
the lower half of the Khatvanga resembling the Vajra with one thong. This 
Sadhana does not mention the number of heads in the necklace, but says 
simply that it is sewn by guts. His left leg rests on the double lotus (and not 


on the corpse), while the right is placed on the left thigh in a dancing attitude. 

The image (Plate X XV, c) that has been discovered by Mr. N. K. Bhatta- 
sali and deposited in the Dacca Museum, agrees in all details with the des- 
cription just given. Though the hands are broken it can yet be discerned 
that the right weilded the Vajra and the left carried the Kapala against the 
breast. The attitude in which he stands is called the dancing attitude in 
Ardhaparyanka. His head-dress is decorated with five skulls and the effigy 
of Aksobhya. The Khatvanga has an overflowing banner attached to it and 
the ends of the banner are decorated with small bells. . 


* The corpse on which Heruka dances is prostrate on the ground and _ lies on its 
breast. His €aktis, when represented singly on corpses, will also have this peculiar kind 
of corpse with its face down. As a matter of fact, this serves as a distinguishing symbol 
in the case of Tleruka and his Saktis. ; 


SB) 


(11) 
Variety—yab-yum. ‘Companion-—-Prajiia. 

Only one Sadhana in the Sadhanamala gives the procedure for the wor- 
ship of the two-armed Heruka in yvab-vum, who is also known as Trilokya- 
ksepa. The god varies a little from the description of single Heruka given 
above, He also has two arms, which carry the Vajra in the right and the 
Kapala in the left. The Khatvanga, as usual, hangs from his left shoulder 
and resembles a sacred thread. He wears ornaments of bones and is embraced 
by his Prajna, who is one-faced and two-armed, carrying the Kartri in the right 
hand and the Kapala in the left. He has bare fangs, wears garlands of heads 
and feasts on human flesh, as is evident from the following Namaskara given 
in the Sadhana : 





‘“‘Damstrotkatamahabhimamundasragdamabhiisitam | 
Bhaksyamanam mahamamsam Sri-Herukam namamyaham |) ”’ 


An image in colours of this variety of Heruka appears in the Bauddha- 
natha Temple in Nepal. 


(ii) Caturbhuja Heruka. 
Variety—yab-yum. Arms—four. Companion—Svabha Prajfia. 

One Sadhana also is devoted to the worship of this particular form of 
Heruka ; here he is four-armed and is embraced by his Praja who is identical 
with him in all respects. The four-armed Heruka is similar in all other 
respects to the two forms described above, except that he carries in his four 
hands the black Vajra, the sword, the Khatvanga and the jewel. The 
Khatvanga this time does not hang from his left shoulder but is carried 
in one of his hands. | The Sadhanas in all these three cases are particular in 
saying that they all bear the image of Aksobhya on their tiara. 


3 DbUDDHAKAPALA. 





Variety—yab-yum. Arms.—four. 
Colour—blue. Companion—Prajfia. 
A <i 





Only one Sadhana gives the description of this god, who is, in all proba- 
bility, another form of Heruka. The Sadhana says that when Heruka is 
embraced by Citrasena he gets the name of Buddhakapala. He has one face 
and four arms carrying the Khatvanga, the Kapala, the Kartri and the 
Damaru ; he is embraced by his Praja, Citrasena and remains in yab-yum. 
He is slightly different from the four-armed variety of Heruka as the 
following Dhyana in the Sadhana will show :— 


‘*Mahaviro ghorasamharakarakah nilavarnnah mahavapuh asthyabharana- 
rdhaparyankam nrtyastham mundamalavibhisitam mukute Aksobhy adhari- 


( 64 ) 


nam ekavaktram caturbhujam, vame khatvangakapalam, daksine kartrida- 
marukam, Prajhalingitam ; vame Citrasena matta muktakesi sarvabhayarahita 
devi cumbayanti muhurmuhuh evam atmanam dhyatva.... 
Iti Srimato Buddhakapalasya Sadhanam ”’, 
Sadhanamala, A—275, Na—47, C—214. - 

‘“The worshipper should meditate on himself as (Buddhakapala) who 
is a great hero, the supreme destroyer, of blue complexion and gigantic stature ;_ 
who has ornaments of bones, stands in Ardhaparyanka in a dancing 
attitude, is decked in garlands of heads, holds the effigy of Aksobhyva on the 
crown, is one-faced and four-armed ; who carries the Khatvanga and the 
Kapala in the left hands and the Kartri and the Damaru in the right, and 
is embraced in the left by the Prajna, Citrasena by name, intoxicated, 
nude, and fearless, who with dishevelled hair kisses the’ god incessantly. 
hus med eatin eee, = 

The same Sadhana later on gives the details of the Mandala and further 
goes on to say that Buddhakapala is surrounded by twenty-four goddesses 
arranged in three circles.. The first circle has Sumalini (blue) in the East, 
Kapalini (yellow) in the North, Bhima (green) in the West and Durjaya (white) 
in the South. The next circle has Subhamekhala (east), Ripini (north), Jaya 
(west) and Kauveri (south); WKamini (north-east), Mahodadhi (north-west), 
Karini (south-west) and Marini (south-east). The outermost circle has Bhima- 
darsana (east), Ajaya (north), Subha (west), Ostaraki (south) ; Suraksini (north- 
east), Vikalaratri (north-west), Mahayasa (south-west) and Sundari (south- 
east). Besides these, there are the four guardians of the gates, Sundara (East), 
Subhaga (North), Priyadarsana (West) and Nairatma (South). Excepting 
the four deities of the innermost circle, all other goddesses have blue com- 
plexion, two arms, one face, ornaments of bones, brown hair rising upwards 
but no garland of heads. They carry the Kapala in the. left and the 
Kartri in the right and dance in the Ardhaparyanka attitude. 

g jer 


The accompanying sketch (Plate X XV, b) represents the main god in 
the embrace of his Sakti Citrasena, but without the attendants. The 
remarks made about the yab-yum representations of Candarosana apply to 
this case also, and we shall have to be satisfied in the case of this deity with 


a mere sketch drawn by a Nepalese artist. 


P 4, VATJRADAKA; 





Variety—yab-yum. Companion—Vajravarahi. 

When Heruka is embraced by the Dakini Vajravarahi in vab-yum, he is 
ealled Vajradaka. Vajradaka has three varieties, Samvara, Saptaksara and 
Mahamaya. Samvara is one-faced and two-armed, the second Saptaksara 
is three-faced and six-armed and is surrounded by six goddesses, and the third 
variety, Mahamay4 is four-faced and four-armed and is surrounded by four 


goddesses. 


(nOD =e) 
(1) Samvara. 


Colour—blue. Asana—Alidha. 
Vahana—K4@laratri. Symbols—Vajra and Ghanta. 


Prajia—Vajravarahi. 


_....Qne Sadhana only in the Sadhanamala describes the procedure for the 
worship of this variety of Vajradaka. He is two-armed and one-faced and 
bears the effigy of Aksobhya on his crown. He appears terrible with his 
garment of tiger skin, the garland of heads, a string of skulls round the head, 
three eyes and the Alidha attitude, in which he tramples upon Kalaratri.. The 
DhyAana is in verse and describes the god in the following:terms :— 


. ** Lalatastham kapalamalam candrardham mtrdhni dharayet | 
Sanmudré mundamali ca visvavajri trilocanah | 
Alidhapadavinyaso visvaksaravivartinih | 
Sabhairavam Kalaratrim aridho vyaghracarmabhrt 11 
Aksobhyasekharah krsno vajraghantajatanvitah | 
Viro’sau Vajravarahi vajrasrkptrnakapalabhrt 1 
Khatvangamekhala rakta trinetra mundamalini | 
~Pancamudra muktakesi digvastra Buddhasekhara | 


Dvibhaja- Sam yaroparlesah samaptah.”’ 
Sadhanamala, A--277 C—-214.* 


‘The worshipper should conceive himself as (Samvara) who has a garland 
of heads round his forehead, the crescent on the top of his head, is endowed 
with the six auspicious symbols, wears a necklace of heads, has the Visvavajra 
on his headdress, is three-eyed, stands in the Alidha attitude, originates from 
a combination of all the letters of the alphabet, tramples down the fierce 
Kalaratri, is clad in tiger-skin, has the crest of Aksobhya, is blue in colour, 
carries the Vajra and the Ghanta, has matted hair, displays heroism and is 
embraced by Vajravarahi holding the Vajra, and the Kapala full of blood. 
Her girdle is the Khatvanga, complexion is red, and eyes are three; she wears 
the garland of heads, is endowed with the five auspicious symbols, has dis- 
hevelled hair and nothing but the four quarters as her garment (7.¢. she Is 
nude) and wears the image of Buddha [ Vairocana]| on the crown. 


(i) Saptaksara. 


Faces—tbhre Arms—six. 


Asana—Alidha. Prajiia—Vajravarahi.. 
This variety of Vajradaka is called Saptaksara or the ‘ seven-syllabled ’ 
one, because his Mantra + consists of seven syllables. Like Dvibhuja- 
. . + seul tie Ce ee Tie 
Samvara mentioned above, he is also embraced by Vajravarahi, who 


* Wanting in N. 
t ‘Om Hrih Ha Ha Hum reba Phat.” 


9 


(a66; 5) 


is identical with her consort in all respects. Like Samvara this god also 
tramples upon Kalaratri and holds the Visvavajra on the crown. He has 
also the crescent on his head, is endowed with the six auspicious symbols, 
stands in the Alidha attitude on the orb of the sun. He has three faces of blue 
yellow and green colours and carries the Vajra, the Ghanta and the human 
skin in the three left hands and the Kapala, the Khatvanga and the Tristla 
in the three right hands.* . 


The Sadhana adds further that on each of the six spokes of the wheel 
of the sun on which the god stands, there should be six deities, namely, (com- 
mencing from the right) Heruki, Vajrabhairavi, Ghoracandi, Vajrabhaskari, 
Vajraraudri and Vajradakini. They should have respectively blue, yellow, 
red, green, smoky and white colour. All of them have dishevelled hair, fiercé 
appearance, three eyes, and the quarters as garments. They carry the 
sounding Damaru and the Ghanta in the first pair of hands and the human skin 
in the other pair. They stand on the sun which is on the corpse, their headdress 
is decorated with a row of skulls, and they stand in the Alidha attitude.t 


In another Sadhana devoted to the worship of Saptaksara, a slight varia- 
tion is to be noticed. In it, we find that the god should, in the first pair of 
hands which are engaged in embracing the Prajna, carry the Vajra and the 
Ghanta ; in the second pair, the human skin only ; and in the third pair, the 


* The text of the Sadhana is as follows :— 


‘* Sadbhujam trimukham tryaksam sarvalaksanalaksitam | 
Vyanjanasitisamyuktam alikalyudbhavam prabhum 
Vajraghantasamapannam naracarmardradharinam , 
Vame kapalakhatvangatrisilam daksine kare 
Kapalamalamukutim visvavajrajatadharam | 
Ardhendusekharam caiva ganmudradehabhisanam | 
Nilapitaharitavaktram vyaghracarmambaravrtam | 
Alidhakrantasiryyasthabhairava-Kalaratrikam 
Yatha nathasya tatha Vajravarahyapi bhujadibhih | 
Devi janu samavestya paramanandavihvala \ 

Durjayacandroddhrtam Saptaksarasidhanam Samaptam.”’ 


Mss. Na-60, C-208, A-267. 


+ The goddesses constituting the Mandala of Saptaksara— 


Heruki prathama devi dvitiya Vajrabhairavi | 

Trtiya Ghoracandi syaccaturthi Vajrabhaskari || 
Paficami Vajraraudri ca sasthi syad-Vajradakini 
Nilapitaraktaharitadhtimrasita devyah | 

Muktakesa maharaudra trinetrasca digambarah | 
Ranaddamaru ghanta ca hastetarakaradvaye | 
Dadhana naracarmani pretasirryoparisthitah | 
Kapalamalamukuta alidhasanasamsthitah | : 
Sadaksarabhavabhavya devyah sarvvah yathakramam | 


. Tbid. 


C8OT 2) 


Kapala and the Trigila. The Khatvanga hangs from his shoulder as usual. 
Vajravarahi is identical with the Prajna mentioned before with the difference 
that here she should have in the second pair of her hands the bow and. the 
arrow instead of the human skin. 


(iii) Mahamaya. 





Colour—blue. Prajia—Buddhadakini. Companions—four, 
Arms—four. Faces—four. Appearance—terrible. 
2 Mahamayahvayam devam caturmukham caturbhujam | 


Anke yasya tatha devi catasro diksu caparah tI 


Herne goes by the name of Mahamaya when he Is embraced by Buddha- 
dakini (another name for Vajravarahi) and remains in yab-yum. This 
variety of Heruka has four faces and four arms and is accompanied by four 
goddesses in the four cardinal points. Two Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala 
are devoted to the worship of this deity. One of these is attributed to 
Kukkuripada, celebrated as one of the eight Siddhas who flourished in the 
medieval age in India. Below is given a summary of the description of the 
Mandala * for Mahamaya. — 


Mahamaya has a terrible appearance: his person is besmeared with 
ashes and his hair streams upwards in the shape of a flame. He has blue com- 
plexion and his headdress is decorated with a row of skulls. His four faces have 
blue, yellow, white and green colour and he carries in his four hands the Kapala, 
arrow, the Khatvanga and the bow. He possesses the five auspicious symbols, 
has the torque round the neck and bracelets in his hands. He is clad in 
human skin, has three eyes in each head and fiery flames radiate from his 


* The following Dhyana has been given in the Sadhanamala :— 


** Karunacalvajram nilapitasitaSyamacaturmukham caturbhujam daksinabhuje[su] 
kapalasaradharam vame khatvangadhanurdharam raudrasanastham trinetram sardra- 
mundasragdamamalinam kapalamalabhih sirasi bhisitam asthydlankaravibhisitam 
isaddamstrakaralavadanam pingalordhvakesam....svabha-Prajfialingitam vycmavakasi- 
nam Vajradharabhisekinam....Tatra purvadale Vajradakini nilavarna nilapitaraktasya- 
macaturmukha caturbhuja. Vamabhuje khatvangaghanta daksine vajrakapalahasta.... 
Daksinadale Ratnadakini pitavarna pitanilaraktasyamacaturmukha caturbhuja vamabhuje 
patakakaficukafica daksine trisilaratnahasta....pascimadale Padmadakini  sitaruna- 
varna, raktapitanilaSsyamacaturmukha caturbhujé vamabhuje dhanuhkapalam daksine 
Saravisvapadmahasta....uttaradale Visvadakini syamavarna, syAamapitaraktanilacatur- 
mukha caturbhuja, vamabhuje pasakapalam, daksine khatvanga-(or khadga-)damaruhasta 

..devyah sarvaé raudrasanasthah kapdlamalah sirasi vibhasitah sardramundasragdama- 
malinyah trinetrah, isaddamstrakaralavadanah jvalitorddhvakesah sphuradrasmimalinyah 
.. —Mahamayasadhanopayika samapta.”’ Sadhanamala, A-225, Na—48, C-200. 


( 68 ) 


body. He appears beautiful in his sentiment of mixed anger and delight, and 
stands in the Ardhaparyanka in a dancing attitude. He is embraced by 
Buddhadakini,+ who is red, and carries the same weapons and has the same 
appearance and symbols as those of Mahamaya. Her four faces are -red, 
yeliow, white and green. 


The four petals in the four cardinal directions of the lotus seat are 
occupied by the following goddesses. 


(1) Vajradakini in the East who is of blue colour, with four faces ce 
blue, yellow white and green colour and carries the Khatvanga and Ghanta 
in the two left hands and the Vajra and the Kapala in the two right. 


(2) Ratnadakini js on the South, of yellow complexion, with four faces 
of yellow, blue, red and green colour, She carries the flag and the jackal in 
the two left hands and the Tristila and the jewel in the two right. 


(3) Padmadakini on the West, of reddish-white complexion, who has 
four faces of red, yellow, blue and green colour and who carries the bow and 
the Kapala in the two left hands and the arrow and the hone lotus in the 
two right. 


(4) Visvadakini on the North, of green colour, who has four faces of 
green, yellow, red and blue colour and who carries the Pasa and the Kapala 
in the left and the Khatvanga (or the sword) and the Damaru in the two 
right hands. 7 Bh j 

These four deities display wrathful attitudes, have their heads decorated 
with a number of skulls, have garlands of heads still wet with blood, three 
eyes, protruding teeth, brown hair streaming upwards-in the shape of a flame 
and fiery flames radiate from their persons. | 


5. HaAyaAGRiva. 


Colour—tred. Faces—-three. Arms—eight. 
Asana—Lalita. Appearance—terrible. 


One form of Hayagriva with Amitabha on the crest has already been 
discussed in the previous Chapter. There is another form of the god that 
emanates from the Dhyani Buddha Aksobhya. The Dhyana describing him 
runs as follows :— ee , 


Arya-Havagrivam raktavarnam trimukham astabhujam pratimukham 
trinetram nila asitadaksinctaravadanam sarpabharanam lahtaksepapadanyvasam 


+ The Dhyana for Buddhadakini (Prajha) is given in another Sadhana :— 


Priyatulyayudha rakta tatkanthaslesi dordvaya | 
Sri-Buddhadakini raktapitasvetaharinmukhi | 


( 69 ) 


sakrodhadrstiniriksamanam, prathamamukham smeram lalajjihvam, daksina- 
mukham damstravastahdhaustham, vyaghracarmanivasanam vajradanda- 
karanamudrasarodyatadaksinakaracatustayam tarjanikasvakucagrahapadma- 
dhanurudyatavamakaracatustayam Aksobhyamaulim dhyayat.”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—279, Na—87, C—217,. 


_  **The worshipper should conceive himself as Arya Hayagriva, who has red 
complexion, eight arms, and three faces, each face with three eyes ; whose right 
_and left faces are of blue and white colour, who has ornaments of snake, whose 
legs are so placed as to resemble the Lalita attitude, who has angry looks, whose 
first face has a smiling appearance, the right has a protruding tongue and the 
left bites the lips ; who is clad in tiger-skin ; who shows in his four right hands 
the Vajra, the staff, the Karana pose and the raised arrow. Of the four 
left hands, one has the Tarjani, ‘another hand touches his own breast, and 
the lotus and the bow are in the EN two. He bears the image of 
Aksobhya on his crown. 

- The accompanying drawing (Plate XXV,d) shows how this god is repre- 
sented now-a-days in Nepal. It varies a little from the description given 
in the Sadhana. The hand that ought to have touched the breast displays 
a different Mudra ; and the hand that ought to have displayed the raised index 
finger only, has a noose round it. Nevertheless, the sketch is important as 
it shows a miniature neck of a horse set above the head, to prove that the 
representation is really of Hayagriva, that is, the god possessing the neck 
of a horse. The Karana pose, generally absent in other Sadhanas, of which 
a correct representation has been given, should also be noted. 


6. YAMARI. 
Identification mark—head of a buffalo. Vahana—buttfalo. 


No less than fourteen Sadhanas describe the procedure in which the 
deity should be worshipped. In one of the Sadhanas it is said that in accor- 
dance with the different functions discharged by the deity, he gets different 
colours ; for instance, in the Santikavidhi, he is white and faces the East; in 
Paustika, he is yellow and faces the North ; in Vagyavidhi, he is red and faces 
the West ; and in Akarsana, he is blue and faces the South, and so on. Of 
these varieties, the red and the blue are more popular; in other words, his 
worship is mostly performed with a view to enchanting men and women 
(Vasyavidhi), and to forcibly subduing them and bringing them to the wor- 
shipper (Akarsanavidhi). Yamari or Yamantaka may be worshipped alone 
or in conjunction with the Praja. He should have the head of a buffalo on his 
shoulders and should ride on a buffalo. Getty * records a tradition current 
in Tibet, which gives the origin of this fearful god. 


* Getty : Gods of the Northern Buddhism p. 136. 


(oiGe) 


There was once a holy man who lived in a cave in deep meditation for 
fifty years, after which he was to enter into Nirvana. On the night of the 
forty-ninth year, eleventh month and twenty-ninth day, two robbers entered 
the cave with a stolen bull and slaughtered it there. But when they dis- 
covered the presence of an ascetic, a witness to their crime, they beheaded 
him,—and lo! his body assumed the ferocious form of Yama and taking up 
the bull’s head, he set it up on his headless shoulders. He then killed the two 
robbers and drank their blood from the cup made out of their skulls. In 
his fiery and insatiable thirst for victims he threatened to depopulate the 
whole of Tibet.» The Tibetans appealed to their Tutelary deity, Manfjusri, 
whereupon the latter assumed the fierce form of Yamantaka and defeated 
Yama in a fearful struggle. | 

Whatever might be the truth of the tradition, it sufficiently explains the 
presence of eulogies of Manjusri in the Sadhanas for Yamantaka. It may 
be noted, however, that the Sadhanamala is absolutely silent about Yama, 
both as a principal deity or as an opponent of Yam antaka. 


(i) Raktayamari. 


Asana—Prat yalidha. Variety —yab-yum. 
Appearance—terrible. -Companion-— Prajiia. 


Colour—red. 


Six Sadhanas are devoted to the worship of this variety of Yamantaka. 
He is one-faced and two-armed and is embraced by the Prajfiaé who is identical 
with him in appearance. The Dhyana describing his form is given as 
follows :— 


“Atmanam Yamantakam ekamukham dvibhujam pratyaélidhapadam 
raktaparipurnakapalavamakaram sardrapitamundankitasitadandadaksina- 
karam nagabharanavibhtsanam pingalordhvakesam wvyaghracarmambara- 
dharam Aksobhyamukutinam svabha-Prajnaélingitam mahisopari visvadala- 
kamalastryyastham dhyayat. Bhagavatifica dvibhujaikamukhim, vicitra- 
bharanam, alidhapadasthitam, madavihvalam, skhalatvyaghracarmamsukam, 
Bhagavata saha samputayogena pratyalidhenavasthitam evam vicintya....”’ 


Sadhanamala. ~A—288-9, Na—35, C—224., 


‘The worshipper should realize himself as Yamaéntaka, one-faced and 
two-armed, who stands in the Pratyalidha attitude, carries the Kapala full of 
blood in the left hand and in the right the white staff surmounted by a 
yellow head still wet with blood ; who is decked in ornaments of snakes ; whose 
brown hair rises upwards, who wears garments of tiger-skin, bears the 
image of Aksobhya on the crown, is embraced by his Svabha-Prajna, ane 
stands on the sun over the double lotus on the back of a buffalo. He (the 


(eW1 7.) 
worshipper) should also meditate upon the Bhagavati (Prajfia), who is 
one-faced, two-armed, has variegated ornaments, stands in the Pratya- 
lidha attitude, is intoxicated. with wine, wears garments of tiger-skin that 
are slipping from her waist and remains in yab-yum,-—both standing in the 
Pratyalidha attitude. Thus meditating....” 


(i) Krsnayamari. 
Colour—blue. - Varieties—four. 


Eight Sadhanas in the SAdhanamala describe his different varieties. 
He may have (a) one face and two arms, or (b) three-faces and four-arms, 
or (c) three or six faces and six arms. In all other respects the god is the 
same ; but even when he is two-armed, the symbols are different. He is 
represented singly and also in yab-yum. | 


(a) 


Asana—Pratyalidha. Symbol—the staff surmounted by a Vajra. 
Mudra—Tarjanipasa against the breast. Variety—Single. 


_ This form of Yamari is sometimes met with in representation. He has no 
attendants and the Dhyana describes his form in the following terms :-— 


‘“Yamarim vicintayet atmanam pratyalidhapadasthitam ekamukham 
dvibhujam nilavarnam daksinakare vajrankitodyataniladandam, vamakare 
tarjanipasam hrdi; evam bhitam Yaméarim...-visvadalakamalopari stryyas- 
tham mahisaridham bhavayet. ”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—299, Na—39, C—231. 


** The worshipper should conceive himself as (Krsna)-Yamari who stands 
in the Pratyalidha attitude, is one-faced and two-armed, and is blue in 
colour ; who carries the brandished staff stamped with a Vajra in the right 
hand, and in the left the Tarjani and the Pasa against the breast. In this 
form, Yamari....should be conceived as standing on the sun over the double 
lotus and as riding a buffalo ”’, 


The illustration (Plate XXVI,a) shows a two-armed form of Yamari 
and the image is in the possession of Pandit Siddhiharsa Vajracaryya of 
Nepal. It may be noticed, however, that the right hand which ought to 
have carried the staff according to the Sadhana, carries a Cakra instead. 


(#72) 
(b) | “er 


Appearance—terrible. Variety—yab-yum. 
Faces—three. Arms.—four. Companion—Prajna. 


The form of Yamari with three faces and four arms looks terrible and 
awe-inspiring. He is represented in Yab-yum and the Dhyana describes his 


form. as follows :—- 


ne Yamariratibhisanah | 


oe ©. © © © © © © @ (© @ © 6 e*¢ ©@ @€ ‘ef 0 © B06 *e 


Kathoravarhikanthabho savye suklarunetarah | _ 
Krodhaparyankayogena visvabjaravisamsthitah | 
-Svabha-Vidyadharasvadarasayanamahasukhah 11 
Kathorordhvajjvalatkesah pingabhrismasrulocanah | 
Phanindravrndanepathyo mrnaladhavaladvijah | 
Mudgarasidharah savye vame rajivaratnadhrk 1” 


Sadhanamala, A—297, Na—83, C—229. 


‘* Yamari is terribly fierce, has the deep (blue) colour of the neck of a 
peacock, with his right and left faces of white and red colours (respectively). 
He stands on the sun over a double lotus in an angry attitude. He enjoys 
the bliss of partaking the nectar which, a sip from the lips of the Prajna of 
his own emanation gives. His hair stands on his head in the shape of a 
flame, and his brows, beard and the eyes are of brown colour. His ornaments 
are the host of the lords of twice-born serpents, who are white like the 
stalk of a lotus. He carries in his right hands the Mudgara and the sword and 


in the left the lotus and the jewel.” 


(c) 


Asana—<Alidha. Faces—three or six. 


Arms—six. Variety—single. 


The form of Yamari with three faces and six arms, though equally fierce 
in appearance as the previous one, is not represented in yab-yum but appears — 
singly. As the information given is of a similar character, we refrain from 
quoting the Dhyana. In this case, all the three faces have a protruding 
tongue, canine teeth, three eyes and contortions of the brows. He has a big 
belly, is short and dwarfish and wears a garment of tiger-skin. He carries. the 
Vajra, the sword and the Masala in the three right hands and the goblin . 
(Vetali) the axe and the lasso in the three left, According to a second 
statement in the Sadhana, he is said to carry the sword, the Mudgara 
and the Vajra in the three right hands and the Ghanta, the Vajrapasa 
and the Miusala in the three left. The same Sadhana further says that 


PLAT RAs VIG 





(a) Yamantaka (b) Yamantaka 
(Nepal) (Nalanda) 





(c) Jambhala (d) Ucchusma Jambhala 





( 73 ) 


though he is represented generally as three-faced and six-armed, he may 
also have six faces and six legs with the same weapons. The Dhyana for 
the worship of this six-faced and six-legged variety of Yamantaka runs as . 
follows :— 


Yamantakam kruddham trddhvakesam krsnam sadmukham sadbhujam 
satcarananca mahisaradham pratyalidhasthitam naramundactdairvibhisi- 
tam* atibhayanakakaram vyaghracarmanivasanam daksine khadga- mudgara- 
vajrani, vame ghanta-vajrapasa-misalan dharayantam, mukute Aksobhyam 
vibhavayet.”’ 


Sadhanamala, A—299, Na—39, C—2380. 


‘* The worshipper should realize himself as Yamantaka, who has angry 
looks, ivhose hair rises upwards, who is six-faced, six-armed and six-legged ; 
who rides the buffalo, stands in the Pratyalidha attitude, is embellished 
with severed human heads has a very ferocious appearance, 1s clad in gar- 
ments of tiger-skin ; who carries in the right hands the Khadga, Mudgara 
and the Vajra and in the left the Ghanta, the Vajrapasa, and the Musala 
and who bears the effigy of Aksobhya on the crown.”’ 


Excepting one stone image from Nalanda (Plate XXVI,b)}+ no other 
representation has yet been found of this form of Yamari. 


me JAMBHALA, 


Variety—yab-yum. Faces—three.. 


Arms—Ssix. 


Jambhala has undoubtedly a great antiquity behind him and we have 
evidence that he existed at a time when the conception of the five Dhyani 
Buddhas had not yet been accomplished. This was why: he could not be 
assigned to’ one particular Dhyani Buddha from whom he might have 
originated. In other words, Jambhala is to be taken as a parallel of Mafijusri, 
who, similarly, could not be assigned to one particular Dhyani Buddha. In 
the Sadhanamala we find that he may bear the images of Ratnasambhava, 
Aksobhya, the five Dhyani Buddhas or Vajrasattva on his head. So, Jam- 
bhala will have to be discussed under each of these headings. Images of 
Jambhala are to be met with in the Gandhara, Mathura, Sarnath, Magadha, 
Bengal. and Nepal sculptures. Here we are concerned only with that 
variety of Jambhala which bears the image of Aksobhya on the tiara. He 


* Most of the Mss. read —naramundarundair— ; but I have accepted Prof. 
Fouchers’ reading as it seems to be in keeping with the extant images, in which Rundas 
or headless bodies are absent altogether. 


+ First published in A. S. I., Central Circle, Annual Report, 1920-21, Plate I, and 
described on P. 39. 
10 


(es) 


is here three-faced and six-armed and is represented in yab-yum. Though 
the Dhyana does not mention his colour, we may suggest that this variety 
of Jambhala has the blue colour,—-the cclour of the Dhyani Buddha 
Aksobhya from whom he originates. The Dhyana in the Sadhanamala runs 


as follows :-— 


** Jambhalam trimukham sadbhujam Aksobhyajatamukutinam daksina- 
tribhujaih matulungankusabanadharam prathamabhujena vamaparsvasthita- 
Prajnalingitam aparavamabhuyabhyam sapasanakulakarmukadharam atma- 
nam nispadya is 


Sadhanamala, A—309, Na—25, C—237. 


“The worshipper should conceive himself as Jambhala, three-faced and 
six-armed, whose crown of chignon bears the image of Aksobhya; who 
carries in his three right hands the citron, the goad and the arrow; who 
embraces in one of his left hands the Prajiia situated in his left and in the 
other two carries the mongoose [tied round] with a lasso and the arrow. 
(hes meditatin oe 


The accompanying drawing (Plate XXVI,c) though it does not agree in 
all details with the description given in the Dhyana, shows how this deity is 
pictured in modern days by the Newari artists. 


(1) Uechusma-Jambhala. 


Appearance—terrible. Vahana—Kuvera vomitting jewels. 


Asana—Pratyalidha. Identification mark— nude. 


Uechusma, being a variety of Jambhala, bears also the image of Akso- 
bhya on his crown; he may, however, have the image of Ratnasambhava 
instead. Several Sadhanas are devoted to his worship, and the Dhyana 
describing him with the image of Aksobhya on his crown runs as 


follows :— 


“Atmanam Bhagavantam Ucchusmam _ pancavarsakumarakrtim 
kharvam vigvapadmastham candropari sarpabharanabhtsitam ratnamukutim 
munecadratnamukhapitangasupta-Dhanadasya  [caranadvayam daksinena 
caranena|* vamenakrantamirdhvam pratyalidhapadam ; nagnam arddhva- 
lingam a bniarente hrdi daksinapanistham raktapairnakapalabhimukha- 
drstim ; vamajanghasakt avamakarena ratnacchatodgaryyadhomukhanakulim 
aviddhadhollakarnadvayam ardhendugekharam damstrakaralavadanam 

raktavarttulatrinetram krtabhrkutilalatam pingorddhvakegam bhtsparsa- 
c Ah sacle Resa bhorariin amet ane [dhyay At] a 


sadhanamala, A—217, C—242.+ 


* All the mss. read ‘‘ daksinena caranena caranadvayam,”’ 


+ Wanting in N. 


(toes) 


‘** The worshipper should meditate on himself as the god U echusma, who 
appears like a child of five years, is dwarfish, stands on the double lotus on 
the moon, is decked in ornaments of snakes and a bejewelled headdress ; 
who, standing in the Pratyalidha attitude, tramples with his right leg upon 
the legs of the sleeping Dhanada of yellow complexion with his mouth 
vomitting out jewels, while the left leg rests upon the head; who is nude, and 
whose membrum virile is pointed upwards ; who has a protruding belly, and 
has eyes fixed on the Kapala which he carries in his right hand against the 
breast ; who carries in his left hand touching the left ‘thigh the mongoose 
vomitting out jewels, whose ears are large and unpierced ; w ho has a crescent 
on the crown, whose face is distorted with bare fangs and three eyes red and 
round ; whose forehead is distorted owing to the contortions of the brow, 
whose brown hair rises upwards, and who bears on his tiara the image of 
Aksobhya of blue colour displaying the earth-touching attitude.” 


The accompanying sketch (Plate XXVI,d) shows how this god 1s _ re- 
presented now-a-days in Nepal, though it differs in certain minor details from 
the deseription given above. 


CHAPTER VI. 


EMANATIONS OF AKSOBHYA (Continued). 


* - 


II, GODDESSES. 


Comparatively a very large number of goddesses emanate from Aksobhya. 
Some of the goddesses are well-known and extremely popular, but to none of 
these a large number of Sadhanas is assigned. We have already seen that 
the male emanations of this Dhyani Buddha are always, except in a very 
few cases, of a terrible and awe-inspiring character. Most of the female 
emanations also are blue in complexion and partake of the fierce nature 
of the male ones, though we notice, among others, genuinely peaceful 
forms, such as, Prajniaparamita, Vasudhara and Mahamantranusarini. No 
less than eleven goddesses emanate from the Dhyani Buddha Aksobhya and 
we shall discuss their forms one by one, } 


1. MAHACINATARA. 
"= 
Appearance—terrible. 
Vahana—corpse. Arms—-four. 


Asana—Pratyalidha. 


* Symbols—rt. Sword, Kartri, lt. Utpala, Kapala. 


Two Sadhanas are devoted to the worship of Mahacinatara or Tara of 
Mahacina (Great China), and two Dhyanas, one. in prose and the other in 
verse, describe the goddess in precisely identical forms. She is also known 
in Buddhist Tantric literature as Ugratara and the Vajrayogini temple at 
Sanku in Nepal contains in the sanctum a figure of Ugratara. The 
principal image is always covered under costly garments and with costly — 
ornaments, but when the priests began to recite the Dhyana, we were left 
in no doubt whatever that the image was that of Ugratara.. This Ugratara 
or Mahacinatara of the Buddhists has been incorporated by the Hindus 
in their Pantheon under the name of Tara and the latter count her among 


the ten Mahavidya goddesses. The Dhyana in the Sadhanamala describes 
her form in the following words :—- 


* Pratyalidhapadam ghoram mundamalapralambitam | 
Kharvalambodaram bhimam nilanirajarajitam i - 
Tryambakaikamukham divyam ghorattahasabhasuram | 
Suprahrstam savaridham nagastakavibhisitam 11 
Raktavarttulanetrafica vyaghracarmavrtim katau | 
Navayauvanasampannam paficamudravibhisitam I 


PLATE XXVII. 








(b) Mahacina Tara 





OFTIIAGOO SO ay BES, 


(c) Janguli (d) Ekajata 


(Indian Museum) 





(Ree) 


Lalajjihvam mahabhimam sadamstrotkatabhisanam | 
Khadgakartrikaram savye vamotpalakapaladham | 
Pingograikajatam dhyayat maulav-Aksobhyabhisitam 11 


..,.Mahacinatara Sadhanam.”’ 


psadhanamala, A—112, N—80, ‘C—87 


‘“The worshipper should conceive himself as [ Mahacina-Tara] who 
stands in the Pratyalidha attitude, is awe-inspiring, has garland of heads 
hanging from the neck; is short and has a protruding belly ; who has terrible 
looks, whose complexion is Like that of the blue lotus; . who is three eyed, 
one-faced, celestial and laughs horribly ; who, in an intensely pleasant mood, 
stands on the corpse, is decked i in ornaments of snakes, has red and round eyes, 
wears the garments of tiger-skin round her loins, is in youthful bloom, is 
endowed with the five auspicious symbols, and has a protruding tongue : 
who is most terrible, appears fierce with bare canine fangs, carries the sword 
and the Kartri in the two right hands and the Utpala and the Kapala in the 
two left ; whose crown of one chignon is brown and fiery and. bears the 
image of Aksobhya within it.” 


This is the Dhyana we find in the Sadhanamala, the earliest manuscript 
of which belongs to A. D. 1165. According to the Colophon, the Sadhana for 
Mahacinatara has been restored from the Mahacina-Tantra, which should, 
therefore, be earlier than the earliest extant manuscript of Sadhanamala. As 
the Sadhana in verse is attributed to Sasvatavajra, we may be certain 
that the Dhyana we have just quoted was not in existence before Sagévata- 
vajra. Now, in the Taratahasya of Brahmananda who flourished in the 
middle of 16th century * and in the Tantrasara of Krsnananda Agama 
vagisa we find almost an identical Dhyana describing a goddess of the name 
of Tara.— 


‘ Pratyalidhapadam ghoram mundamalavibhusitam | 
Kharvam lambodarim bhimam vyaghracarmavrtam katau 
Navayauvanasampannam pancamudravibhisitam 
Caturbhujam lolajihvam mahabhimam varapradam |! 
Khadgakartrisamayukta-savyetarabhujadvayam | 
Kapalotpalasamyuktasavyapaniyuganvitam iI 
Pingograikajatam dhavenmaulav-Aksobhyabhtsitam | 
Balarkamandalakar alocanatrayabhtsitam iI 
Jalaccitamadhyagatam ghoradamstram karalinim | 
Savesasmeravadanam stryalankaravibhisitam | 
Visvavyapakatoyantah Svetapadmoparisthitam | 
Aksobhyadevimirdhanyastrimurtirnagartpadhrk |)” 


Tantrasara, p. 415 et sqq. 


- 


- 


* Brahmananda’s direct pupil, Pirnananda Paramahamsa wrote his work, Tattva- 
Cintamani in the Saka year) 14990 7.e. A. D. 1577: Brahmananda has therefore 
been placedin the taiddle of the 16th century. See M. M. Haraprasad Shastri: Notices 
of Sanskrit mss, Second series. Vol. I. p. 189. 


OTS) 


A comparison of the two Dhyanas will at once reveal how the 
original composition of Sagvatavajra has been modified in the Tantrasara 
in the light of a Hindu Tantric Pandit. Some lines have been added to the 
original Dhyana and all the grammatical errors have been rectified : and this 
seems to be the process of Hinduizing a Buddhist Tantric deity. It is remark- 
able that the Hindus retained in their Dhyana the crest of Aksobhya which 
fact at once bespeaks the Buddhist origin of the goddess ; for, we know for 
certain that none of the Hindu gods or goddesses are in-the habit of wear- 
ing a miniature figure of their sires on the crown, Moreover, Aksobhya is 
unknown in the Hindu Pantheon except when he is borrowed from the 
Buddhists,—and the Hindus fail to explain the desirability of putting 


in his figure on the crown of Tara. 


The accompanying sketches (Plate XXVII,a-b) portray the Buddhist 
form of Tara or Mahacinatara and shows in what different forms she is 
represented in Nepal in modern times. It may be pointed out that the 
corpse under the feet of the Hindu Tara is not a corpse properly speaking, 
but it is the form of Mahadeva’s deadbody, to whom she is attached as a 
Sakti, 


De ANG Uli 


Janguli is widely worshipped amongst the Buddhists as a goddess who 
cures snake-bite and can prevent it. According to a Sangiti in the Sadhana- 
mala she is as old as Buddha himself, and the secret of Janguli and the mantras 
for her worship are said to have been imparted to Ananda by Lord Buddha. 
Besides, the Sangiti, four Sadhanas describe the procedure of her worship and 
give elaborate mantras for the extraction of poison from the body of the snake- 
bitten. These four Sadhanas describe three entirely different forms of Janguli, 
two with one face and four arms and one with three faces and six arms, 


(1) 


Colour—white. Identification Symbol— Vina in the two principal hands. 
Symbol—snake. Mudra—Abhaya. 


In two Sadhanas Janguli is described as having one face and four arms. 
In both cases she is alike in all respects except in the matter of the weapons 
she carries in her hands. In one, the Dhyana is as follows :— 


“Atmanam Arya-Janguliripam sarvasuklam caturbhujam ekamukham 
jatamukutinim suklottariyam sitaratnalankarabhisitam suklasarpavibhisitam 


ae? Jee) 


sattvaparyankamavistam, milabhujabhyam vinam vadayantim, aparadak- 
. a + ee. as, is , ay] Oo eee 4 a _ 99 
sinenabhyapradam candramsumalinim dhyayat.... ; 


133, N—97, C---106. 





Sadhanamala. A 


«The worshipper should meditate himself as Arya Janguli who is all 
white in complexion, four-armed, one-faced, has the crown of chignon, wears 
white scarf, is decked in white ornaments of gems and white serpents and 
rests on an animal; who plays on the Vina with the two principal hands, 
carries the white snake in the second left and exhibits the Abhaya mudra 
with the second right and is radiant like the moon.” 

In a second Sadhana she is said to exhibit the Varada Mudra in the 
second right hand. The accompanying sketch (Plate XXVII,c) shows how 


she is represented in Nepal. 


(11) 


green. Mudra—-Abhaya. 





Colour 
Symbols—Trisila, peacock’s tail and snake. 


The second variety resembles the first in many respects. But in the 
Sadhana there is no mention of the animal-seat or the particular Asana in 
which Janguli should stand or sit. The symbols are also different. In this 
ease she will carry the Trisila, the peacock’s tail, the snake and exhibit the 


Abhaya Mudra. 


(iii) 


Faces—three. Arms—six. 


Vahana—snake. Colour-—yellow. 


The third variety of Janguli will have three faces and six arms. Two 
Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala, one in prose and the other in verse, describe 
this form. The Dhyana contained in one of these runs as follows :— 


“ Arya-Jangulim atmanam jhatiti nispadayet, pitam trimukham sad- 
bhujam nilasitadaksinetaravadanam khadgavajrabanadaksinahastatrayam 
satarjanipasavisapuspakarmukavamakaratrayaéam  sphitaphanamandalasirah- 
sarpastham divyavastrabharanabhtsitam kuméarilaksanojjvalam Aksobhya- 
krantamastakam dhyatva....” 


sadhanamala, A—131, N—95, C—104. 
‘“The worshipper should quickly conceive himself as Arya Janguli, who 


is yellow in complexion, three-faced, and six armed ; whose faces to the right 
and left are blue and white ; who carries the sword, the Vajra, and the arrow 


50) 


in the three right hands, and the Tarjani with the noose, the blue lotus and the 
bow in the three left hands; who rests on the expanded hood of the 
serpent, is decked in celestial ornaments and dress, is resplendent with 
the auspicious marks of a virgin and bears the image of Aksobhya on head. 


Mhieenneditatiioun vr as 


The Hindu goddess Manasa or Visahari has a marked resemblance to 
the appearance of Janguli, and some of the Dhyanas in the Hindu Tantric 


works for the goddess distinctly give her the epithet of “ Janguli.”’ 


38. , EKAJATA. 


Colour—blue. : Appearance—terrible. 
Attitude—Pratyalidha. 


Ekajata is one of the most powerful goddesses in the Vajrayanic 
Pantheon. If.a man listens to her Mantra but once, he is at once freed from 
all obstacles and is attended always with good fortune ; his enemies are des- 
troyed and he becomes religiously inclined, even attaining the level of 
a Buddha.* Four Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala devoted to the worship 
of Ekajata, describe four different variations of the goddess. She may 
have one face with two, four or eight arms, or she may be twelve-faced 


with twenty four arms. 


The main features of the goddess are given in one Of the Sadhanas, the 
Colophon of which asserts that the Sadhana has been restored from Tibet by 
Arya Nagarjuna,+ who was famous in the mediaeval ages as one of eight 
Siddhapurusas of India. The general description of the goddess appearing 
in it is quoted as follows :— 

“ Krsnavarnah matah sarvah vyaghracarmavrta katau | 
Ekavaktra trinetrasca pingordhvakesamirdhajah | 
Kharva lambodara raudrah pratyalidhapadasthitah | 
Sarosakaralavaktrah mundamalapralambitah i) 
Kunapastha mahabhima maulav-Aksobhyabhasitah | 
Navayauvanasampannah ghorattahasabhasurah 11 


Visvapadmopari siryya cintaniyah prayatnatah |)’ 


Ssadhanamala.. A-—141, Na—13-14, C—112. 





* Of.—* Devya Ekajatayastu mantrarajo mahavalah | 
Asya Sravanamatrena nirbighno jayate narah | 
Saubhagyam jayate nityam vilayam yanti Satravah | 
Dharmaskandho bhavennityam Buddhatulyo na samsayah \j”’ 


+ The Colophon is—‘‘Arya-Nagarjunapadaih Bhotesiddhrtam iti.” 


(st) 


“All these [three] variations [of Ekajata] are of blue colour, have the 
tiger-skin round their loins, are one-faced, three-eyed, have brown hair rising 
upwards on head, are short, pot-bellied, wrathful and stand in the Pratyalidha 
attitude ; they have faces distorted with anger, and garlands of heads 
hanging from their necks, rest on corpses, have terrible appearance, bear the 
image of Aksobhya on the crown, have youthful bloom and laugh horribly ; 
and they should be conceived on the orb of the sun over the double lotus.”’ 


This general description only applies to the following three varieties of 
Ekajata with one face and two, four or eight arms— 


(1) When two-armed, she will carry the Kartri and the Karota (skull 
cup) in her two hands. (Plate XXVII,d).* 

(ii) When four-armed, Ekajata carries the arrow and the sword in the 
two right hands and the bow and the skull in the two left. In two other 
Sadhanas describing the four-armed variety, she is represented with. slight 
modifications. Here she holds in the first pair of hands the Kapdala and the 
Kartri while the other pair shows the Utpala and the sword ; she may hold 
also the rosary instead of the sword. (Plate XXVIII,a).t_ 

(iii) When eight-armed, she carries the sword, the arrow, the Vajra and 
Kartri in the four right hands and the bow, the Utpala, the Parasu and the 
skull in the four left hands. 


(iv) Vidyujjalakarali. 
Faces—twelve. Arms—twenty-four. 


Colour—blue. Asana—Pratyalidha. 


Vahana—Indra, Brahma, Visnu, and Siva. 


Symbols— 

Right. Left. 
1. Khadga. 7. Dart. 1. Bow. 7. Casaka. 
2. Vajra. 8. Mudgara. 2. Noose. 8. Utpala. 
3. Cakra. 9. Musala 3. Tarjani. 9. Bell. 
4. Jewel. 10. Kartri. 4, Banner. 10. Parasu. 
5. Ankusa. LP. Damaru. 5. Mace. 11. Brahmasirah. ~ 
6. Arrow. 12. Rosary. 6. Tristla. 12. Kapala. 


The fourth variety of Ekajatais known as Vidyujjvalakarali, who is said 
to have originated from the sweat of Buddha. This form of Ekajata with 


* The photograph represents Ekajata as the companion of Khadiravani Tara in an 
image belonging to the Indian Museum (Infra. Pl. XX XIII,c). 


+ A Nepalese drawing of the four-armed variety of Ekajata is reproduced as a 
specimen. 


Il 


( 82 ) 


twelve faces and twenty-four arms is rarely met with in sculptures or 
in bronzes.* The Dhyana is somewhat long and it describe the goddess in the 


following terms :—- 


‘“Dvadasgamukhiam mahakrsnavarnam caturvimsatibhujam caturmarasa- 
makrantam svetakapalopari pratyalidhapadam mahapralayagnisamaprabham 
vivrtasyam hahakaram lalajjihvam sarosam vikrtakotibhimatatabhrinetra- 
caladvartulam, bhayasyapi bhayankarim, kapalamala sirasi bhtsitam, vyadai- 
ralankrtam sanmudropetam, prathamamukham mahakrsnam, tatha daksina- 
mukhapancakam sitapitaharitaraktadhimravarnanea, vamamukhapancakam 
raktasitapitaharitasitaraktanca; trdhvamukham dhtimram, vikrtam, krud- 
dham; sarvamukhani damstrakaralavadanani, trinetrani, jvalitordhva- 
pingalakesani; kharvalambodarim pinonnatapayodharam vyaghracarma- 
nivasanam; daksinadvadasabhujesu khadga-vajra-cakra-ratnacchatankuSa- 
sara-Sakti-mudgara-misala-kartri-damaru-aksamalikafica, vamadvadasabhu- 
jesu. dhanuh-pasa-tarjani-pataka-gada-tristla-casaka-utpala-ghanta-parasu- 
Brahmasirah-kapalanica— 


Suprahrstam savaridham nagastakavibhusitam | 
Navayauvanasampannam hahattahasabhasuram 1}! 
Pingograikajatam dhyayat maulav-Aksobhyabhbtsitam 11 


Iti Vidyujjvalakaralinamaikajatasadhanam.”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—136-37, Na—12, C—108-9. 


“The worshipper should conceive himself as [Vidyujjvalakarali], who 
has twelve faces, deep blue colour and twenty-four arms ; who tramples upon 
the four Maras (Brahma, Visnu, Siva and Indra], stands on the white skulls 
in the Pratyalidha attitude, is terrible like the Fire of Destruction, has a 
wide open mouth from which comes the sounds of ‘ha,’ ‘ha ;’ who has protrud- 
ing tongue, is wrathful, has eyes round and moving, and whose forehead is 
distorted owing to the frequent contortions of the brows ; who is more awe- 
inspiring than Awe itself, whose head is decorated with a garland of skulls, 
who is decked in ornaments of snake, and is endowed with the six auspicious 
symbols ; whose first face is of deep blue colour and the five faces to the 
right have respectively white, yellow, green, red and the colour of smoke, 
while the five faces to the left have red, white, yellow, green and whitish red 
colour ; the face on the top is of the colour of smoke, distorted and displays 
anger; all his faces look terrible with bare fangs and three eyes ; whose 
brown hair rises upwards in the shape of a flame, who is short and has 
protruding belly ; ; whose breasts are full and heaving ; who is clad m tiger- 
skin, carries in her twelve right hands, the sword, the thunderbolt, the discus, 
the jewel, the elephant-goad, the arrow, the dart, the hammer, the pestle, 
the saw, the drum and the rosary, and in the Pel ve left hands the bow, 


* I brought, however, a painting of this goddess from Nepal and published it in tri- 
colour with my remarks, in the vernacular monthly, Masika Vasumati, Vol. I, part 12. 


( 83 ) 


the noose, the raised index finger, the flag, the mace, the trident, the 
bowl, the blue lotus, the bell, the axe, the severed head of Brahma,* 
and. a skull.is... ; who is extremely happy, rides a corpse, is decked in 
ornaments of eight snakes, is youthful, appears resplendent with terrible 
laugh, wears the crown of one chignon, which is brown and fiery, and which 
bears the image of Aksobhya on it.”’ 


Here ends the Sadhana for Vidyujjvalakarali, another form of Ekajata.”’ 


4. PARNASAVARI. 


Colour—yellow. Faces—three. Arms—six. 
Symbols—rt. Vajra, Parusu, arrow ; lt. Tarjanipasa, cluster of leaves, bow. 
Asana—Pratyalidha. Vahana—Bighnas. 


Identification mark-—pleasant smile in the face. 


The worship of Parnasavari, it is believed, is efficacious against the out- 
break of epidemics and it assures safety to the terror-stricken. The epithet 
‘Pisaci ’ given in the Mantra shows that she was regarded as one of the semi- 
human supernatural beings. Two Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala describe two 
forms of this goddess, one with the image of Aksobhya on the crown and the 
other with that of Amoghasiddhi. In one, her faces depict pleasant smile 
and in another she smiles but has an irritated expression all the same. The 
followers of the Aksobhya cult believed her to be an emanation of Aksobhya, 
while the followers of the Amoghasiddhi cult believed her to be an emanation 
of Amoghasiddhi. Curiously enough, the two images that we have been able 
to discover in Eastern Bengal both have the image of Amoghasiddhi on the 
crown. It may also be possible that she has been associated with Amoghasi- 
siddhi because of her green colour; while the form with yellow colour has 
been assigned to Aksobhya. It would have been more reasonable to assign 
the latter to Ratnasambhava, who has yellow complexion and whose emana- 
tions generally have the yellow colour. The Dhyana describing Parnasavari 
with yellow colour and the image of Aksobhya on crown, runs as follows :— 

‘‘ Bhagavatim pitavarnam trimukham trinetram sadbhujam prathama- 
mukham pitam, daksinam sitam, vamam raktam, lalitahasinim sarvalankara- 


dharam parnapicchikavasanam navayauvanoddhatam pinam, daksinabhujaih 
vajraparasusaradharinim, vamabhujaih satarjanikapasaparnapicchikadhanur- 


* Brahma, it may be pointed out, belongs to the Hindu Pantheon, and is endowed 
with four faces. He is one of the three highest gods of the Hindus, and the Buddhists, in 
their hatred towards them, makes sevaral of their deities trample upon Brahma and others, 
or carry his severed head in one of their hands. 


(845) 


dharinim puspavabaddhajatamukutastha-Aksobhyadharinim siryyaprabha- 
mandalinim, adho bighnan nipatya sitapadmacandrasane pratyalidhastham, 
hrdvamamustitarjanyadho bighnaganan santarjya daksinavajramustiprahara- 
bhinayam....bhavayet.... 


Parnasavarisadhanam. ’’ Sadhanamala, A—161, N—122, C—130. 


‘<The worshipper should conceive himself as [Parnasavari] of yellow 
complexion, with three faces, three eyes and six arms.; whose first face is blue, 
the right white and the left red ; who smiles in a pleasing manner, is decked 
in all sorts of ornaments, wears the apron of leaves, is haughty with youthful 
bloom, is stout in appearance, carries in her right hands the Vajra, the Parasu 
and the arrow and in the left the Tarjani with the noose, the cluster of leaves 
and the bow ; whose crown of chignon is decorated with flowers and the image 
of Aksobhya ; who has the effulgence of the sun as her aureole, stands in the 
Pratyalidha attitude on the moon over the white lotus, trampling under her 
feet the Bighnas, threatens the host of [other] Bighnas with the clenched fist 
of the left hand exhibiting the Tarjani against the breast, and who shakes 
her right fist at [the host of the Bighnas]....” 


The mutilated image (Plate XX VIII,b) in the Indian Museum with three 
faces and six arms trampling upon Ganesa probably represents this form of 
Parnagavari as the word “ Bighna”’ in the Sadhanamala often refers to 
Ganesa.* 


The Sadhana, referred to above, further gives us the information that 
Parnasgavari may have an alternative form with four arms and the image of 
Aksobhya on the crown. In that case she will carry the Vajra and the Parasu 
in the two right hands and the Tarjani with the noose, and the cluster of 
leaves in the two left, omitting the bow and the arrow. 


5. PRAIJNAPARAMITS. 


Prajnaparamita is the embodiment of the Mahayana Scripture of the 
same name which was, according to the Buddhist tradition, restored from 
the nether regions by Nagarjuna in the second century A. D. Buddha is said to 
have kept this Book of Transcendental Knowledge under the care of the Nagas 
in the nether regions, as in his time people were not sufficiently intelligent to 
grasp the true meaning of the doctrines embodied in it. The worship of 
Prajhaparamita was very popular among the Buddhists, and Arya Asanga is 
credited to have composed one of the Sadhanas for her worship, which is said 


* See for instance, the image of Bighnantaka (Plate XXXIX,b) trampling upon 
‘‘ Bighna ”’ or Ganesa. 


PLATE XXVIII. 








(b) 


Parnasavari 


(Indian Murseuin) 





(c) Prajhaparamita 
(Leiden) (d) Vajracareika 





{ 83 ) 


to confer wisdom and erudition to her devotees. Nine Sadhanas in the 
Sadhanamala describe the procedure of her worship; and out of these only 
two are assigned to the cult of Aksobhya. Like Manjusri, she has also a long 
antiquity and it is for this reason that she could not likewise be assigned to 
one particular Dhyani Buddha, as the conception of the Dhyani Buddhas 
was not in existence when Prajnhaparamita scripture was restored from the 
nether regions by Nagarjuna. The two Sadhanas describe the white and the 


yellow varieties of the goddess. 


(1) Sitaprajnhaparamita. 


Colour—white. Asana—-Vaj raparyanka. 


Symbols—lotus and book. 


Only one Sadhana in the Sadhanamala describes the form of white Prajfia- 
paramita with the image of Aksobhya on the crown. She is two-armed, one 
faced, sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude on the white lotus and carries the 
red lotus in the right hand and the Prajhaparamita Book in the left. She is 
decked in all sorts of ornaments and has a beautiful and pleasant appearance 
unlike other emanations of Aksobhya. The Dhyana runs as follows :-— 


‘*Dvibhujam ekavadanam sitavarnim manoramam | 
Ardhacarcarakesinca svetambhoruhasamsthitam 1) 
Padmam daksinahaste tu raktavarnam vibhavayet | 
Prajnhaparamitam vame vajraparyankasamsthitam 1) 
Sarvalankaérasampurnnam bhavayennabhimandale | 
Ankarajnanasambhttam paramanandakarinim |) 


...-Aksobhyamudrita ceyam. Sitaprajhaparamitasadhanam.”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—168, N—123, C—132. 


The worshipper should meditate on the form of Sita-Prajfaparamita in the 
navel, as two-armed, one faced, white in colour, and beautiful in appearance, 
with half curly hair; as sitting on the white lotus, carrying in her right hand 
the red lotus and the Prajiaparamita Book in the left ; as sitting in the Vajra- 
paryanka attitude, decked in all ornaments, originating from the knowledge 
of the letter ‘Am’ and bringing in immense delight....This goddess is stamped 
with the image of Aksobhya [on the crown].”’ 


( 86 ) 
(ii) Pitaprajnaparamita. 


Colour—yellow. Mudra-—Vyakhyana. 


Distinctive mark—Book on lotus to the left. 


The yellow variety of Prajiaparamita with the crest of Aksobhya is 
identical in form with the one described above, except with regard to the 
colour andthe Mudra She is yellow in complexion, bears the crest of Aksobhya 
on her crown of chignon, wears celestial ornaments and garments, and displays 
the Vyakhyana pose in her two hands. On a lotus in her left rests the 
scripture, Prajhaparamita. 


The celebrated image of Prajiaparamita (Plate XXVII,c)* of Java be- 
longs to this variety, and tallies in all details with the description given in the 
Dhyana. 


6. VAJRACARCIKA. 


Asana—Dancing in Ardhaparyanka. Arms—six. 
Symbols—right. Vajra, Khadga, Cakra. left. Kapdala, jewel, lotus. 
Colour—red. Distinctive feature—-emaciated body. 


Vahana—corpse. Appearance—terrible. 


Only one Sadhana in the Sadhanamala describe the form of Vajra- 
carcika, and the Dhyana contained therein runs as follows :— 


Vajracarcikam trinetram ekamukhim ardhaparyankatandavam mrta- 
kasanastham krsangim damstrotkatabhairavam narasiromalavibhisitakantha- 
desam Aksobhyamukutinim vvaghracarmanivasanam muktakesim sadbhujam, 
daksine vajrakhadgacakradharinim, vame kapdlamanikamaladharam rakta- 
varnam, karmanurtipatah sukladivarnayuktafica dhyatva....” 


Sadhanamala, A—211, Na—14-15, C—169. 


‘“ The worshipper should conceive himself as Vajracarcika, who is three- 
eyed and one-faced, dances in the Ardhaparyanka attitude on a corpse, is 
emaciated in appearance and looks terrible with bare fangs; whose neck is 
embellished by a garland of human heads, who is decked in ornaments of 
bones, is endowed with the five auspicious symbols, bears the image of 
Aksobhya on the crown, is clad in garments of tiger-skin and has dishevelled 


* Published in Havell: Indian Seulpture and Painting, Plate XIV. 


Cae.) 


hair ; who is six-armed and carries in her three right hands the Vajra, the 
sword and the Cakra, and in the left the Kapala, the jewel and the lotus ; 
who has red complexion but gets white and other colours in accordance with 
the different purposes for which she is invoked. Thus meditating....”’ 


From the accompanying sketch (Plate XXVIII,d) her terrible form 
with emaciated body would at once be apparent. The skeleton of the flesh- 
less body shows through the skin in all! its nakedness. She appears more 
fierce because of her vulture-like claws. 


rh MAHAMANTRANUSARINI. 


Colour—blue. Arms—tfour. Mudra—Varada. 


Symbols—Vajra, Parasu and noose. 


The remarks made in the case of MahA@sitavati, an emanation of Amitabha 
and one of the Pancaraksé goddesses, apply to the case of Mahamantra- 
nusarini also. This goddess is another of the Pancaraksa goddesses and 
as her colour is blue, she affiliates herself to the Dhyani Buddha Aksobhya. 
Only one short Sadhana describe her form and the Dhyana contained therein 
is as follows :— 


Mahamantranusarini caturbhujaikamukhi krsna daksinabhujadvaye 
vajravaradavati vamabhujadvaye paragupasavati Humkaravija Aksobhya- 
kiritini siryyasanaprabha ceti.”’ 


Sadhanamala, A—215, Na—17, C-—-171. 


‘“Mahamantranusarini is four-armed and one-faced, is blue in complexion, 
shows in her two right hands the Vajra and the Varada Mudra and in the two 
left the Parasu and the noose; she originates from the syllable ‘‘ Hum,’ 
bears the image of Aksobhya on the crown, sits on and glows like the 


Since 


\ 
8. MAHAPRATYANGIRA. 


Colour—blue. Arms—Ssix. 
Symbols—right. Khadga, Ankusa, Varadamudra, 


left. Tarjanipasa, red lotus, Tristla. 


One short Sadhana in the Sadhanamala is assigned to Mahapratyangira. 
The Dhyana describing her form is as follows :— 


(988: ») 


‘“Mahapratyangira krsnaé sadbhujaikamukha khadgankusavaradada- 
ksinahasta raktapadmatristlahrdayasthasapasatarjaniyuktavamahasta Hum- 
vijaé’ Aksobhyamukuta sarvalankaravati ripayauvanasampanna....”’ 


Sadhanamala, A—215-16, Na—18, C—172. 


‘* Mahapratyangira is blue in colour, six-armed, one-faced, carries in her 
right hands the sword, the goad and exhibits the Varada Mudra, and in the 
left the Tarjani with the noose against the breast, the red lotus and the trident ; 
she originates from the syllable ‘Hum’, bears the image of Aksobhya on the 
crown, is decked in all ornaments and is young and beautiful.’’ 


The accompanying sketches (Plate XXIX,a-b) represent Mahapratyan- 
gira and answers to the description given in the Sadhana. The Nepalese 
image reproduced in Plate XXIX,c with innumerable heads and arms is 
also worshipped as Mahapratyangira. But we have not yet succeeded in 
finding a Dhyana for Mahapratyangira which corresponds to the image 
illustrated. 


9, DuHvaAsAGRAKEYURS, 


Two Sadhanas in the SAdhanamala describe two widely different forms 
of Dhvajagrakeyira. In one, the crest of Aksobhya is mentioned but 
in another, it is not expressly mentioned. The weapons in both eases are 
different. In one, she is three-faced and in another four-faced. The two 


forms agree, however, in all other respects. 


(1) 
Colour---blue. Faces—three. Arms—four. 
Ap pearance—terrible. Asana—Pratyalidha. 


Symbols—right Khadga and Pasa. left Khatvanga and Cakra. 


The Dhyana describing Dhvajagrakeytra with three faces and four 
arms and with the crest of Aksobhya runs as follows :—- 


« Dhvajagrakeyura krsna trimukhi caturbhujaé raktasyamadaksinavama- 
mukhi khadgapasadharidaksinakaradvaya vajrankitakhatvangacakravama- 
hastadvaya urddhvapingalakesi suskapancamundalankrtasiraska vyaghra- 
jinavasana damstrakaralamukhi pralambodari pratyalidhapada stryyasana- 
prabha pitavastrakancukini Humbijé Aksobhyamukuta.”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—216, Na—18, C—172. 


PLATT Nonlin 





(a) Pratyangiva (b) Pratyangia 





(Gc) Pratyangiva (d) Dhvajagrakeyma 
Nepal ) 





( 89 ) 


‘* Dhvajagrakeyira is blue in colour, three-faced, and four-armed with the 
right and left faces having red and green colour (respectively). She carries the 
sword and the noose in the two right hands, and the Khatvanga surmounted 
by a Vajra and the Cakra in the two left, has brown hair rising upwards on 
her head which is embellished by a row of five shrivelled up heads, wears 
garments of tiger-skin, and has faces distorted with bare fangs. She has pro- 
truding belly, stands in the Pratyalidha attitude, has the seat of and glows 
like the sun, wears yellow garment and jacket, originates from the syllable 
us and bears the image of Aksobhya on the crown.’ 


(ii) 


Faces—four. Arms—four. Colour—yellow. 


Symbols—right sword, Cakra. left Tarjanipasa and Musala. 


As already pointed out, Dhvajagrakeyira may have another form, with 
four faces and four arms. She has yellow complexion instead of blue, 
carries the sword and the Cakra in the two right hands and the Tarjanipasa, 
and the Masala surmounted by a Vajra in the two left. A Tristla hangs 
from her left shoulder. Her first face is yellow, left red, right white and 
the face above is distorted and has the colour of the smoke. Im all other 
respects, she is identical with the one described before. 


The accompanying drawing (Plate XXTX,d) portrays Dhvajagrakeyira 
as she is represented in Nepal in modern times. 


10. VASUDHARA,. 
Mudra—Varada. — Symbol—ears of corn. Colour—yellow. 


Vasudhara figures in the Pantheon of the Mahayana Buddhists as the 
consort of Jambhala, the Buddhist God of Wealth. Only three Sadhanas 
are devoted to her worship, and in one of these only is she said to bear the image 
of Aksobhya. In two others, she is assigned to the Dhyani Buddha Ratna- 
sambhava. It may be noticed by the way that Vasudhara has a greater anti- 
quity than the Dhyani Buddhas themselves.* The Dhyana describing the 
goddess with the figure of Aksobhya on the crown runs as follows :— 


* This is the reason why she has not been assigned to one particular Dhyani 
Buddha. Followers of different cults assigned Vasudhara to different Dhyani Buddhas, 


12 


( 90 ) 


[Atminam] Vasudharam Bhagavatim dhyayat, kanakavarnam sakalala- 
nkaravatim dvirastavarsakrtim, daksinakarena varadam, vAmakarena dhanya- 
manjaridharam, Aksobhvadharinim. Purato Bhagavatim Sri vasum, daksinato 
Vasusriyam, pagcimatah Srivasumukhim, vamato Vasumatigrivam ; ‘etageady: a- 
ksarayijah ‘svanayikasamanarupah cintaniyah.”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—-228, Na—1, C—181. 


‘‘The worshipper should conceive himself as the goddess Vasudhara 
of golden complexion, who is decked in all sorts of ornaments, appears like a 
young girl of twice eight years, exhibits the Varada Mudra in the right hand, 
carries the ears of corn in the left, and bears the image of Aksobhya (on 
the crown).. In front of the goddess should be conceived Srivasu, in the 
right Vasusri, in the west Srivasumukhi and in the left Vasumatisri. These 
four goddesses originate from the first syllables of their names and are 
identical in form with the principal goddess.” 


11. NAIRATM4. 


Asana—Dancing in Ardhaparyanka, Colour—blue. 
Appearance—terrible. Vahana—corpse lying on its back. 
Symbols—Kartri and Kapala. Identification symbol—Khatvanga to the left. 


Two Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala describe her form, which is in many 
‘respects, similar to the form of Vajravarahi with the Kartri and the Kapala. In 
fact we can only distinguish between the two by noticing the corpse only. 
When it lies on its breast we must identify the goddess as Vajravarahi. But 
if the corpse lies on its back the goddess is Nairatma. There are, however, other 
features also for distinguishing between their forms. Vajravarahi, being an 
emanation of Vairocana, should bear the image of Vairocana on the crown ; 
but Nairatma being an emanation of Aksobhya should bear the image of 
Aksobhya on the crown. Moreover, the excrescence near the right ear of 
Vajravarahi must also be absent in the case of Nairatma. In all other 
respects the two resemble edch other remarkably. The Dhyana in one of 
the two Sadhanas describes the form of Nairatma in the following terms :—— 


‘« Savahrecandrasthardhaparyankena natyasthitam Nairatmim krsnim 
ekamukham iarddhvapingalakes4m Aksobhyamukutinim damstrakaralalala- 
jjihvam, daksinena kartridharinim, vame kapalakhatvangadharinim, rakta- 
vartulatrinetram pafncamudravibhtisanaim [dhyayat. | ”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—244, Na—56, C—198. 


‘The worshipper should conceive himself as Nairatma who stands in 
Ardhaparyanka in a dancing attitude on the moon over the breast of a corpse, 


PLATS XXX. 





a) Naivatma b) Nairatma 
(udian Museum) (Vangiya Sahitya Parisat) 








c) Astabhuja Marici (1) Astabhuja Marici 


(Undian Museum) (Indian Museum) 





is blue in complexion, has brown hair rising upwards, and bears the image of 
Aksobhya on the crown ; whose face looks terrible with bare fangs and pro- 
truding tongue ; who carries the Kartri in the right hand and bears the Kapala 
and the Khatvanga in the left ; whose three eves are red and round, and who 
is endowed with the five auspicious symbols.” 


The word ‘ Nairatma’ means ‘ having no soul’ and is another name for 
Sanya in which the Bodhisattva merges when the Nirvana has been attained. 
Gradually the conception of Sanya took the form of a goddess in whose embrace 
the Bodhisattva is said to remain in eternal bliss and happiness. Nairatma 
gets the blue colour, because the colour of Sanya according to the Buddhist 
tradition, is like the colour of the sky, which is blue, 


The Indian Museum image No. 3941 (Plate XX X,a)* is the only image | 
that we know, of this goddess. Here the goddess, in accordance with the 
Dhyana, has a terrible appearance with canine teeth, garland of heads and 
three eyes rolling in anger. She stands on the corpse lying on its back and 
dances in the Ardhaparyanka attitude. Burning flames radiate from her person, 
and her hair rises upwards in the shape of a flame. She is decked in the five 
auspicious symbols, the Kanthika (torque), Rucaka (bracelets), Ratna (jewels), 
Mekhala (girdle) and Bhasma (ashes) or the Siitra (sacred thread) in the 
form of a garland of heads. She bears the image of her sire, Aksobhya on 
the crown, and carries the menacing Kartri in the right hand. The left hand 


* T offer this identification with some diffidence in view of the fact that Mr. B. C. 
Bhattacharyya, M.A. has identified the image differently in this recent treatise on Indian 
Images Part 1, ‘‘ Based on Genetic, Comparative and Synthetic Principles,” published by 
Messrs. Thacker Spink & Co. The Kartri carried in the right hand of the goddess has been 
transformed by Mr. Bhattacharyya as Karnika (not kartrika& ? ) or the branch of a palm 
tree. Jam afraid it is a rather cruel strain on the credulity of the readers to ask them to 
see a palm leaf where nothing else but a clear knife is to be seen. The Dhyanas quoted by 
Mr. Bhat‘acharyyain support of his identification of the goddess as Kali hardly explain a 
single feature of the figure. The attitude, the rod that hangs from her left shoulder, the 
miniature figure on the crown of the goddess—none has been explained by the Dhydanas. 
The failure of Mr. Bhattscharyya to recognize the figure of the Dhyani Buddha Akso- 
bhya on the crown of the image is indeed amazing! In this connection the following 
quotation from his Preface would be of considerable interest to Iconographists: ‘* The 
experience of the author has gone far to confirm this statement. It is not that the layman 
who holds this view has any special penchant for things Buddhist, spiritual or physical ; 
it is simply that he is unable to distinguish a Hindu iinage from a Buddhist image,.... 
The author in the following pages has attmepted a systematic and critical study of those 
images which on fundamental grounds cannot be designated otherwise than as purely 
Hindu or Brahmanic.”’ Preface p. e. pp. 40-41, and Pl. XXV. 


‘he above is only another instance of the danger of working in hurry in a difficult 
field with insufticient materials and training, of the ludicrousness of a pompous display 
of ‘ Genetic, Comparative and Synthelic’ principles, where such mistakes can be committed, 
and of the unavailing vanity of roundly condemning laymen, without oneself being sure that 
he has risen above the level. 


carrying the Kapala is broken. - The Khatvanga as usual, hangs from her 
left shoulder. 


The Vangiya Sahitya Parisat bronze (Plate XX X,b) herewith illustrated 
for the first time, presents an interesting problem to Iconographists. It was 
at first taken to be an image of Vajravarahi,—but as the Kartri is not sur- 
mounted by a Vajra, the exerescence near the right ear is absent, and as the 
corpse on which the goddess stands does not lie on its breast, the identifica- 
tion could not stand. The suggestion that the image might be one of 
Vajrayogini did not also find favour, as the corpse in this case also should 
lie on its breast. Moreover, all the -Dhyanas for Vajrayogini unanimously 
attribute the Alidha attitude, instead of the dancing attitude in Ardha- 
paryanka, which is to be seen in this bronze figure. The fact seems to be 
that the image really represents Nairatma without the crest of Aksobhya, 
and that the Khatvanga which should hang from her left shoulder is lost, 


in the same way as small weapons in Nepalese or Darjeeling bronzes. are 
often found missing. 


CHAPTER VII. 
EMANATIONS OF VATROCANA. 


According to the Sadhanamala, all emanations of Vairocana, are 
feminine and no male deity emanates from him. _ Five goddesses are given 
the image of Vairocana on the crown, thereby showing that they are all ema- 
nations of that particular Dhyani Buddha. Some of these goddesses are 
expressly stated in the Sadhanas to be ‘‘Vairocanakulodbhava,’’ meaning, 
‘born of the family of Vairocana.’’ The goddesses that emanate from this 
Dhyani Bhddha are said to reside in the interior of the Caitya. Vairocana, 
it may be remembered, is the lord of the sanctum of the temples, and it is 
natural for the deities emanating from him to reside therein. Among the 
five goddesses emanating from Vairocana, Marici is most important and popu- 
lar, who is sometimes believed to be the consort of Vairocana. Vairocana is 
distinguished from the other Dhyani Buddhas by the white complexion and 
the Dharmacakra Mudra displayed in his two hands. | 


1. MArici. 


Marici is invoked by the Lamas of Tibet at the advent of the morning, 
showing her connection with the sun. Like the Hindu Sun-god, she has also 
a chariot, but the chariot of Marici is drawn by seven pigs while the chariot 
of the sun is drawn by seven horses. Again, the charioteer of the sun is 
Aruna with no legs, but in the case of Marici the charioteer is either a god- 
dess with no legs or Rahu,—-only a head without a body. 


There is a belief that Marici is the same as Vajravarahi, but there is very 
little basis for the theory. Vajravarahi is actively associated in yab-yum 
with her consort Heruka or Samvara, an emanation of Aksobhya. Marici 
is, on the contrary, regarded as a consort of Vairocana himself and 
not of any emanation of a Dhyani Buddha. She is never known to be 
associated with him in yab-yum, but always appears singly. Heruka 
rides a corpse lying on its breast and accordingly such a Vahana has been 
given to Vajravarahi, but Marici is never known to tread upon a corpse 
or even the prostrate form of aman. The images of Vajravarahi always 
represent her as one-faced with an excrescence near the right ear, but 


( 94 ) 


Marici, though rarely represented as one-faced, is never known to have any 
excrescence anywhere in her body. Vajravarahi, according to the Dhyana, 
may have four arms but Marici can never have four arms: she must have 
either two, eight, ten or twelve arms according to the Sadhanas. M4érici is 
always said to reside in the womb of a Caitya, whereas Vajravarahi being 
an abbess may reside anywhere. The Mantra for Vajravarahi is “Om 
Sarva-Buddhadakiniye Vajravarnaniye hum hum hum phat phat Svaha”’, 
whereas, the Mantras for Marici. are ‘Om Maricyai mam hum Svaha’’ or 
“Om Vajravetali hum phat’. Sintideva gives the Dharani for Marici 
but the Dharani never gives her the name of Vajravarahi. Lastly, the 
conception of Marici has a greater antiquity than the conception of either 
Vajravarahi or Heruka. The union of Heruka and Vajravarahi is the 
subject-matter of the Vajravarahi Tantra but no Tantra is assigned to 
Marici. Vajravarahi stands in the Ardhaparyanka in a dancing atti- 
tude on a corpse, but Marici stands almost always in the Alidha attitude, 
moves in a chariot but never has the dancing attitude. Vajravarahi 
has been called a Dakini, or in other words, an abbess who has attained 
perfection (siddhi), and has become a deified woman ; but Marici is a goddess 
and was never less than a goddess. 


In view of these wide differences in form and character we do not see 
how the identity of the two goddesses, Marici and Vajravarahi, can be estab-_ 
lished. The only points of agreement between them are that both of them 
are emanations of Vairocana, and both sometimes have two arms and 
two legs. 


Sixteen Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala describe six distinct forms 
of Marici. She may have one, three, five or six faces and two, eight, 
ten or twelve arms. She is generally accompanied by her four attendants, 
Varttali, Vadali, Varali and Varahamukhi. She is recognized generally by 
the sow face and the seven pigs that run her chariot. The needle and string 
are her characteristic symbols by which she is believed to sew up the mouths 
and the eyes of the wicked. Images of Marici are rather common in India. 
In her two-armed form of Agokakantaé she accompanies Khadiravani-Tara ; 
among the other varieties of Marici, the form with three faces and eight 
arms are extensively met with in sculptures. 


( 95 ) 


(i) Asokakanta., 


Vahana—pig. Colour—yellow. 
Asana—standing. Mudra—Varada. 
Distinctive feature—left hand touching the Asoka bough. 


Ordinarily Marici has two arms and one face. She is called Agoka- 
kanta when she holds the bough of an Asoka tree in the left hand and exhibits 
the Varada Mudra in the right hand ; but she will be called Arya-M§rici if she 
carries the needle and the string in her two hands. The Dhyana describing 
the form of Asgokakanta is stated below :— 

‘* Hemabhasikararidham taptakaficanabhasuram | 
Lilayorddhvasthitam [caiva] candrambhoruhasamsthitam || 
ASsokavrksasakhagravilagnam vamapanina | 
Bibhrati varadakaram daksinakarapallavam 1 


Diptaratnopasgobhena maulinaé Buddhasekhara | 
Svetavastram namasyami Maricim abhayapradam.”’ 1! 


Sadhanamala. A—-161, N—146, C—180. 


“T bow to Marici who rides the sow of golden colour, whose com- 
plexion is like the colour of molten gold, who stands in a sportive attitude on 
the moon over the lotus, holds with her left hand the bough of an Asoka tree, 
and displays the Varada pose in the right; who bears the image of the 
Dhyani Buddha [Vairocana] on the crown, is decorated with bright jewels, 
wears white garments and bestows assurance [to the world.]”’ 


(ii) Arya-Marici. 
Symbols—needle and the string. 


Arya Marici is identical in all other respects with Asokakanta and can 
only be distinguished by the symbols she bears in her hands. As already 
stated, AsSokakantaé has the Asoka bough and the Varada pose but Arya- 
Mirici carries the needle and the string.* 


* Cf. the description in the Sadhanamala— 
‘‘Cintayet Arya-Maricim suicisitradharam rapam |)” 
Ms. A-—-161. 


(iii) Maricipicuva. 
Faces—three. Arms—eight. 


Maricipicuva is also called Astabhujapita-Marici (or Samksipta-Marici). 
These two names denote two distinct varieties of Marici, but they are 
both endowed with three faces and cight arms and carry similar weapons 
in their hands. One Sadhana only is devoted to Maricipicuva and it 
is not mentioned whether she should be accompanied by the four goddesses, 
as usual. She holds the needle and the string in the first pair of hands, 
the Ankusa and the noose in another pair, the bow and the arrow in the 
third pair, and the Vajra and the Asoka flower in the fourth pair. She has 
three faces, each displaying three different sentiments (Rasa). The Dhyana 
in verse runs as follows :— 


‘¢ Srngaravirasaddharsair-jambtnadasamaprabham | 
Madhyendranilavaranasyam bhayabibhatsaraudrakaih 1) 
Karunadbhutasantaisca sphatikenditarananam | 
Trivimoksamukhaistryakso dharmasambhoganirmitam |! 
Pitaksaranasadvastram mayuikhasukhavasinim | 
Sacyaksasyani sivantim bandhantim mukhacaksusi 1! 
Hrdgale’nkusapasabhyam bindhantim banakarmukaih | 
Vajrena dustahrdbhitvasokenasecanaparam | 


Prajnhopayapadakrantam Maricim bhavayed-vrati i 
Maricipicuvasadhanam.”’ Sadhanamala. A—156-7, N—142. C—126. 


“The worshipper should conceive himself as Marici- -[Picuva], who dis- 
plays the sentiments of Srngara, Vira and Harsa in one of her faces which is of 
the colour of Jambinada (gold) ; in the middle face which is of the colour of 
Indranila gem, the sentiments of Bhaya, Bibhatsa, and Raudra are displayed ; 
and in the third face of crystal colour, the sentiments of Karuna, Adbhuta 
and Sinta appear. She has three eyes in all the three faces, which give 
freedom from the three great evils. Her essence is made up of the Dharma- 
kaya and Sambhogakaya. She is clad in garments of yellow colour and resides 
happily in the mass of rays. She sews up the eyes and the mouths of the 
wicked by the needle and secures them with a string. She strikes their heart 
with the Ankusa, draws them by the neck with the noose, pierces them by 
the bow and the arrow, and by rending their heart to pieces with the 
Vajra, sprinkles water with the leaves of Asoka....she tramples under 
her feet Prajna and Upaya.”’ 


Astabhuja-Marici or Samksipta-Marici is yellow in colour, wears red 
garments, is decked in various ornaments, bears the image of Vairocana on 
the crown and resides within the cavity of a Caitya. Her three faces display 
three different sentiments. The first or the principal face displays amour 
and has the colour of gold. The second or the left face is distorted sow-like, 
has the colour of the Indranila gem, displays wrath and looks terrible with 


(soa, -) 


bare fangs and protruding lips. The third or the face to the right is of deep 
red colour, glows in heavenly splendour and displays the sentiment of Santa. 
She rides the chariot drawn by seven pigs, stands in the Alidha attitude 
and appears as a virgin in the fulness of youth.” Below the seven sows is the 
fierce Rahu who devours the sun and the moon. She is surrounded by the 
four attendant goddesses, Varttali, Vadali, Varali and Varahamukhi. 

(1) Varttali has red complexion, the sow-face, four arms, wears red gar- 
ments, is decked in all ornaments and carries the noose and the Aégoka in 
the left hands and the Vajrankusa and the needle in the right. 


(i) Vadali has many features in common with Varttali with the 
difference that her colour is yellow and she carries the noose and the Vajra 
in the left hand and the Asoka and the needle in the right. 

(ii1) Varali is identical with Vadali in many respects except that the 
former holds the Vajra and the needle in the right hand and the noose and 
the Asoka in the left. 


(iv) Varahamukhi wears the same garments and the same ornaments 
as the two previous ones. But she ts red in complexion and carries the Vajra 
and the arrow in the right hand and the Asoka and the how in the left. 


It is very curious that nearly all the images of Marici we have come 
‘across, up till now, belong to this variety. In actual images instead of Rahu, 
sometimes a lady charioteer without legs may be seen. Some images, again, 
retain the charioteer as well as the Rahu. Two images of the eight-armed 
variety of Marici are in the Dacca Museum, two are in the Indian Museum, 
(Plate XX X,c-d) Calcutta ; and the one (Plate XXXI,a) * that is frequently 
represented in many works of art, was discovered at Sarnath and is now depo- 
sited in the Lucknow Museum ; a sixth has been discovered in Orissa. Besides 
these, several more images of Marici hail from the museums at Rajshahi and 
Sarnath. Ali these images are three-faced and eight-armed, and some of them 
are very fine specimens of art. In the more artistic and accurate images the 
three sentiments have actually been depicted by the sculptors. A study 
of these images will show that though the sculptors generally follow the 
Sadhana in all the details, yet they do not always follow it in the case of 
the four attendant gooddesses. Sometimes they are two-armed, and some- 
times, though four-armed, they do not carry the symbols prescribed by the 


Sadhanamala. 


* The remarkable feature of this image is that it bears on the crown a miniature 
figure of the Dhyani Buddha Amitabha instead of Vairocana, the parental Buddha, as 
required by the Sadhana. The reason for this anomaly is that this particular image 
belongs to the cult of Amitabha, the followers of which considered Amitabha as the Adi 
Buddha and made all their gods emanate from him. . 


13 


CMSs) 


(iv) Ubhayavarahanana-Marici.* 


Faces—-three. Arms—twelve. 


mye > e A e F 
Asana— Alidha. Distinctive mark—two sow-faces. 


She has been given this name as her two faces to the right and left of 
the principal one are both depicted sow-like, unlike any other three-faced 
variation of Marici. She is clad in decent tiger-skin, has red complexion, be- 
jewelled headdress, red scarf and is decked in allornaments. She resides within 
the womb of a Caitya, stands in the Alidha attitude and is endowed with three 
faces and twelve arms. The principal face smiles with delight, is peaceful 
in appearance and displays the sentiment of amour. The two side ones are 
distorted sow-like, all three faces having three eyes in each. The face to the 
left is red and paid homage to by a deity carrying Vajra and Mudgara. The 
face to the right has a reddish effulgence like that of the Saindhava salt and is 
paid homage to by Purandara (Indra) who carries the Vajra and the noose. 
In her six left hands she shows the Tarjani against the breast, the. Asoka 
bough, the Vajrankusa, the Kapala, the head of Brahma and the vessel, and 
in the six right hands the needle, Ankusa, the Bhindipala (spear), the sword, 
the Kartri and the Staff surmounted by a Vajra. She bears the image of 
Vairocana on her crown, and tramples under her feet the Hindu gods, such 
as, Hari (Visnu), Hara (Siva), Hiranyagarbha (Brahma) and, others. 2siihe 
cuardians of the quarters all pay homage to this goddess. 


It may be pointed out here that the Sadhana is reticent about the 
chariot, the seven sows that run it, and about the four attendant goddesses, 
Varttah, Vadali, Varali, and Varahamukhi. 


(v) Dasabhujasita-Marici. 


Faces—five. Colour—white. 


Arms—ten. Legs—four. 


Two Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala describe her form with ten arms, 
which shows that she is one of the white variations of Marici. The most 
important feature of this variety is that she is endowed with four legs. - She 
has five faces and ten arms. The principal face is white, the one to the right 
is blue, the other to the left is red and distorted sow-like, the face behind 
is green and the face above is yellow and bears the Trisikha (three tufts of 


* The name is mine. 


( 99 ) 


hair) and the crown of chignon. The five right hands hold the sun, the blue 
Vajra, the arrow, the goad and the needle. The hands to the left carry the 
moon, the bow, the Agoka bough, the noose with the Tarjani and the string. 
She rides a chariot drawn by seven pigs and tramples under her feet the 
four Hindu gods, Indra, Siva, Visnu and Brahma, and bears the effigy of 
Vairocana on the tiara. 


The Sadhanas further add that she should be accompanied by three 
other goddesses. The first among them is of blue complexion, and rides 
upon a Makara. Her face is distorted like that of a sow and she carries the 
Vajra in one hand and shows the Tarjani in the other. 


The second goddess appears to the right of Marici, wears celestial orna- 
ments, is of red colour with one face distorted sow-like. She carries in her 
four hands, the goad, the needle, the noose with the Tarjani and the string. 

The third goddess appears to the left of Marici. She is also of red 
colour with one face distorted sow-like and four arms. The two principal 
hands are engaged in drawing full the bow charged with an arrow, while the 


rest hold the Vajra in the right and the Asoka bough in the left. 


Below the seven pigs drawing the chariot are the Navagrahas or the 
Nine Planets and various diseases and disasters in human shape lie flat on 


the ground. i 


The Sadhanas do not give the names of the attendant deities, which 
are only three in number. It is possible that these three are the members 
of the Varttali group. The illustration in Plate XX XI,b represents a Nepalese 
drawing of this variety of Marici. 


(vi) Vajradhatvisvari Marici. 


Faces—six. Asana— Alidha. 


Arms—twelve. Appearante—terrible. 


When six-faced and twelve-armed, Mariciis invoked in three different 
varieties, under the three different names, Vajradhatvisvari-Marici, 
Odiyana-Marici and Vajravetali. As there are very slight differences amongst 
the three they have been classed together. The difference, however, lies in 
the different weapons that are held in their hands. Excepting Vajravetali, 
who is represented singly, each of the two others is accompanied by a deity, 
who serves as the charioteer. | 


The features that are common to all the three may be summarised from 
the Sadhanas as follows. They are all endowed with six faces and twelve arms. 
The first five faces have respectively the red, blue, green, yellow and white 


(‘106 ) 


colour. The face on the top is distorted sow-like and has the blue colour. All 
the three are said to reside in the womb of a Caitya, they stand in the Alidha 
attitude and bear the image of Vairocana on the crown. They present 
a terrifying appearance with three eyes, protruding tongue, bare fangs, the 
ornaments of serpents, and garments of tiger-skin. 


Vajradhatvisvari carries in her six right hands the sword, the Misala, 
the arrow, the goad, the Vajra, and the Parasu, and in the six left show the 
noose,* the Kapala, the Asoka bough, the head of Brahma, the bow and the 
Tristila. Odiyana Marici holds the Cakra in the right instead of the goad, 
and the Khatvanga-Kapala in one of the left hands instead of Kapala only. 
Vajravetali in one of her right hands holds the crossed double thunderbolt 
instead of the goad or the Cakra ; and in one of the left, the noose instead of 
Kapala or the Khatvanga-Kapala. All the other hands carry the same 
weapons in all the three cases. 


2. UsNIsAVIJAYA. 


Colour—white. Faces—three. . 
Arms—eighf. Identification mark—Buddha on lotus. 
a Symbols—-right Visvavajra, Buddha on lotus, arrow, Varada Mudra. 


left bow, Tarjani and noose, Abhaya Mudra, Kalaéa. 


Like Marici, Usnisavijaya is also said to bear the image of Vairocana on 
the crown and to reside within the womb of a Caitya. She is one of the most 
popular deities of the Pantheon and almost every temple in Nepal has got 
her image in it. The most artistic specimen, however, belongs to the Indian 
Museum, Calcutta. A miniature Caitya on the top of the image of Usnisa- 
vijaya signifies that she is a presiding deity of the sanctum of the Caitya. 
Several Sadhanas describe her form and we quote below the Dhyana contained 
in one of these :— ig 


‘“Suklam trimukham trinetram navayauvanam nandlankaéradharam 
astabhujam Bhagavatim cintayet ; pitakrsnadaksinetaravadanam ; daksina- 
eaturbhujaih visvavajra-padmastha-Buddha-bana-varadamudradharam, Vama- 
eaturbhujath capa-tarjanipasa-abhayahasta-pirnakumbhah; caityaguhagarbha- 
sthitam Vairocanamukutinim nispadya.... ” 


Usnisavijayasadhanam.”’ 


. Sadhanamala. A—210, Na—14, C—168. 


* She also carries the Tarjani with the noose in one of the left hands instead of the 
noose only. 


PLATE XXXI, 





1 


WIC 


sabhujasita-Ma 


Da 


(hb 


a M 


| 


(Lucknow Museu) 


Astabhu 





‘a A par 


atapaty 


t 


Si 





(Undian Muses.) 








, aS 


a ns 2 eo a 
eb ee Noy J] oot. ; Ton 





= (ae 10 Te) 


‘* The worshipper should conceive himself as |[Usnisavijaya] who is white 
in complexion, three-faced, three-eyed, is youthful, and decked in many orna- 
ments ; whose right and left faces are respectively of yellow and blue colour, 
whose four right hands carry the Visvavajra, Buddha on lotus, arrow and the 
Varada pose, and the four left hands show the bow, the noose with the Tarjani, 
the Abhaya pose and the well-filled water-vessel ; who resides in the womb of 
the interior of the Caitya, and bears the image of Vairocana on the crown. 
(bavi venvera hina tae eis 


The specimen (Plate XOXLC) * of Usnisavijaya in the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta agrees almost in all details with the description given in the Sa- 
dhana. The attitude in which she sits here is the Vajraparyanka attitude. 


The other illustration (Plate XX XI,d) is the reproduction of a painting 
contained in an illuminated manuscript of Pancaraksa. In it, the right hand 
which ought to have carried the Visvavajra or the crossed thunderbolt, carries 
the jewel instead. In all other respects the painting follows the description of 
the Sadhana most accurately. 


8. S1IvTATAPATRA APARAJITA. 


Faces—three. Arms—six. 
Symbols—right Cakra, Ankusa, bow. 


left white Vajra, arrow and Tarjanipasa. 


One Sadhana only is devoted to the worship of this deity. The word, 
‘* Vairocananadyakam ” in the Sadhana shows that she also belongs to the 
family of the Dhyani Buddha Vairocana. She is otherwise of a mild nature 


except for the eyes which display anger. The Dhyana describes her form in 
the following manner :— 


“Sitatapatraparajitam Bhagavatim trimukham sadbhujam, pratimukham 
trinayanam, Suklanilarunadaksinavamamukhim,  cakrankugadhanurdhari 
daksinakaram, Sitavajrasarapasatarjanidharavamakaram sakrodhadrstikam 
sarvagrahavidhvamsinim divyalankaravastravatim Vairocananayakam 
dhyatvarn, a 


Sadhanamala. A—210, Na—14, C—169. 


* The image was first illustrated in Foucher: L’Iconographie Bouddhique de L’Inde, 
parte 2, Fig. 6. The Dhyani Buddha over her head is here Aksobhya instead of 
Vairocana. The reason is that the image belonged to the Aksobhya cult, which did not 
acknowledge the superiority of Vairocana. 


( 102° ) 


‘The worshipper should conceive himself as goddess Sitatapatra Apara- 
jita who is three-faced, six-armed, and has three eyes in all faces ; who is of 
white complexion ; whose faces to the right and left are respectively of blue 
and red colour ; who carries in the right hands the Cakra, the goad, and the 
bow, and in the left the white Vajra, the arrow and the noose with the 
Tarjani; who has angry looks, destroys all sorts of evil spirits (Grahas, lit. 
Planets), wears celestial ornaments and garments, and is looked after by 
Vairocana. Thus meditating... * 


This goddess is called Sitatapatra, meaning ‘‘ of white parasol’, and 
should be distinguished from the other Aparajita,* who has an entirely differ- 
ent form and is represented without the figure of any Dhyani Buddha on 
the crown. The illustration (Plate XX XI,e) represents a Nepalese drawing 
of Sitatapatra. 


A, MAHASAHASRAPRAMARDANI. 


Colour—white. Arms—six. 





Symbols—right sword, arrow, Varada Mudra. 


left bow, noose, axe. 


Mahasahasrapramardani is another of the PafcaraksA group and is 
assigned to Vairocana exactly in the same way as Mahasitavati and Maha- 
mantranusarini are affiliated respectively to Amitabha and Aksobhya. 
Her form is different from the form in which she is worshipped in the 
Pancaraksa Mandala. Here the Dhyana describes her form in the follow- 


ing terms :—-- ; 

‘‘Mahasahasrapramardanim atmanam dhyayat; suklam ekamukhim 
sadbhujam ; daksinatribhujesu. khadgabanavaradamudrah, vamatribhujesu 
dhanuhpasaparasavah; vicitralankaradharam  ripayauvanasrngaravatim 
Vairocanakiritayuktam padmacandrasanaprabham.”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—214-15, Na—17, C—171. 


‘*The worshipper should conceive himself as Mahasahasrapramardani 
who is of white complexion, one-faced, six armed, carries in her three 
right hands the sword, the arrow and the Varada pose, and in the three left 
the bow, the noose and the Paragu ; who is decked in variegated ornaments, 
is young and beautiful, displays the sentiment of passion, has the figure 
of Vairocana on her tiara, sits on the moon over the lotus and has moon- 
like effulgence.”’ 


* See Infra, Chapter XII, (ii), No. 2, 


( 103 ) 


5. VAJRAVARAHI. 


Asana—dancing in Ardhaparyanka. 


Charateristic feature—excrescence near the right ear. 


The union of Vajravarahi with Heruka is the cult of the celebrated 
Cakrasamvara Tantra and the Vajravarahi Tantra. One of the Sadhanas 
give her the epithet of ‘‘ Sri-Herukadevasyagramahisi,” that is, the first 
queen of the god, Sri-Heruka. She is also called a Dakini and in the Buddhist 
Tantra, it signifies any Sakti with whom the Yuganaddha (yab-yum) worship. 
may be performed. It will not be out of place to mention here that Heruka 
is also associated with Vajrayogini and their union is the subject of the great 
Heruka Tantra. But as they differ considerably in form, we do not venture 
to combine them into one. If Vajravarahi is the first queen of Heruka there 
is no reason to. suppose that Vajrayogini may not be another. Vajravarahi 
is represented as nude and as displaying the intense sentiment of amour and 
passion. The word, Vajravarahi means in English ‘“‘ the Adamantine Sow ”’ 
for the simple reason that she had an excrescence to her right which resembles 
the face of a sow.* Getty’s story} regarding the attack of Yun-gar on 
the abbess and the monastery does not, in all probability, refer to Marici, but 
to this Vajravarahi ; for, when Marici has one face it may be distorted sow-like 
but Vajravarahi has an excresence just near the right ear, which is a natural 
one, and for which the Sadhanas give her the epithet of Vajraghona (adaman- 
tine excrescence). Another argument in favour of this is that, while Vajra- 
varahi is called a Dakini, and is associated with four other Dakinis, she may, 
very well, be an abbess, and therefore, an ordinary woman deified, and not a 
goddess. But Marici is decidedly a goddess, she is Vajradhatvisvari, and 


the consort of a Dhyani Buddha. 


Several Sadhanas, long and short, describe the procedure of her worship 
discriminating two distinct forms of Vajravarahi, who is also designated 
as Buddhadakini and Vajravairocani. She is either two-armed or four-armed. 
Even among the two-armed forms, some varieties are noticed. In one Sadhana 
only is she said to emanate from the family of Vairocana, and to bear the 
double Vajra on head, but others are silent as to her crest. 


d * Almost all the Sadhanas give her the epithet of Ghond or Vajraghona. which 
means ‘‘of adamantine excrescence ;’’ and the images of Vajravarahi, whether in 
paintings or in sculpture,—all agree in attributing her a sow-like excrescence near the 
right ear. 


+ Getty: Gods of the Northern Buddhism, p. 117 et. sqq. 


( 104 ) 
(1) 


Colour—red. _  Appearance—-nude. Arms—two. 
Symbols—Vajra-Tarjani and Kapala. Distinctive feature—-Khatvanga to the left. 


‘Asana—Pratyalidha. 


Several Sadhanas describe the two-armed varieties of Vajravarahi and 
_let us take up a specimen Dhyana, which will give a general idea as to her 


tTOrM.—— ’ 


‘“Ktmanam Bhagavatim Vajravarahim dadimakusumaprakhyam dvi- 
bhujam ekananam trinetram muktakesam sanmudramudritam digambaram 
paficajianatmikam sahajanandasvabhavam ; daksinena vajratarjanikakaram 
vamena karotakakhatvangakaram; pratyalidhapadakranta-bhairava-Kala- 
ratrikam sardramundamalalankrtagatram, sravadrudhiram pivantim, bhava- 
WC 


Sadhanamala. A—230, Na—65, C—182. 


The worshipper should conceive himself as goddess Vajravarahi whose 
complexion is red like the pomegranate flower ; who is two-armed, one-faced and 
three-eyed, has dishevelled hair, is endowed with the six auspicious symbols, 
and is nude; whose essence is the five spiritual knowledges,* who 1s of the nature 
of the Sahaja pleasure, who shows in the right hand the Vajra together with 
the Tarjani, and bears the Kapala and the Khatvangain the left ; who stands 
in the Pratyalidha attitude, tramples upon the fierce Kalaratri, 1s decked in 
garlands of wet heads, and who drinks of the blood trickling therefrom.” 


The Sadhana further adds that the four leaves of the lotus on which 
she stands are occupied by Dakini, Lama, Khandaroha and Rupini on the 
four cardinal points beginning from the right. The four companions are 
respectively of blue, green red and white colour and they are all one-faced and 
four-armed and carry the Khatvanga, Kapala, Damaru and the Kartri in the 
right and left hands. 


(11) 
‘Symbols—Kartri and Kapala. Asana—Dancing in Ardhaparyanka. 


Vahana—corpse (lying on its breast.) 


This variety of Vajravarahi is invoked in the rite of_ bewitching 
men or women and is very popular now-a-days in Nepal and other 
Buddhist countries. In all respects she is identical with the one described 


* The five spiritual knowledges are Ripa, Samjia, Samskara, Vedana and Vijnhana, 
or in other words, the five Skandhas. 


PEST SA LL 


Sos 


2 








(b) Vajravarahi (Gc) Khadiravani Tara 
Cndian Museum) 





(1) Khadiravani Tara (oe) Ihadiravani Tara (f) Khadiravani Tara 
(Mahoba) (Dacca Museu) Uudian Muscui) 


Ve Obs en 
od 


i204 OM) ae* - 
ite 


0 : 
- in - ae ~ 
sy At'agh Reb nae SA a 
’ ; 4 - 
7 Pon 





(aL O05 yo 


before, except that here she wields the Kartri in the right hand and carries the 
Kapala in the left. The Khatvanga, as usual, hangs from her left shoulder 
in the same way as Heruka carries it. She stands in the attitude of dancing on 


a corpse. 


The drawing of Vajravarahi (Plate XX XII,a) is quite in keeping with the 
Sadhana ; but the other image (Plate XX XII,b)* now in Germany is some- 
what different. The corpse on which she dances in the Ardhaparyanka 
attitude is lying on its back, instead of, on its breast. We may add that 
the image is a Tibetan bronze and as Tibet had a different iconographical 
development, it does not follow the Sanskrit Sadhana, in all details. 


(iii) ARYAVAJRAVARAHI. ~ ; aes 


Symbols—-right Vajra and Ankusa. leff Kapala and Tarjanipaéga. 
Appearance—terrible. ~ Attitude—a,lidha. 


The four-armed form of Vajravarahi is also similar to the forms men- 
tioned before and is called Aryavajravarahi. The difference lies only in 
the attitude, number of arms and the symbols carried in her hands. She 
carries in the two right hands the Vajra and the goad, and in the two left 
the Kapala and the Tarjani with the noose. She is one-faced, three-eyed 
and appears terrible with contortions of the brows, the adamatine excres- 
cence, and the protruding tongue, teeth and belly. She stands in the Alidha 
attitude on the corpse, unlike other forms of Vajravarahi. The Khatvanga 
hangs from her left shoulder as usual.f 


* Published in Grunwedel: Die Geschichten vierundachtzig Zauberer in Baessler- 
Archiv, Fig. 5. 


+ Extracts from the Dhyana may be quoted as follows :— 


‘“ Pretasanastham dalidhapadim nagnam iddhvakesAim Kapalamukutam....catur- 
bhujim, daksine Vajrankuéadharam, vame Kapalakhatvangatarjanipasadharam...... 
Vajraghonam....”’ 


Sadhanamalia. A—236, 
14 


CHAPTER VILL. 


EMANATIONS OF AMOGHASIDDHI. 


Like the emanations of Vairocana, the deities emanating from Amogha- 
siddhi also are ‘entirely feminine in character. In the whole of the 
Sadhanamala only seven deities are expressly stated to bear the image of 
the Dhyani Buddha Amoghasiddhi on the crown. Amoghasiddhi is dis- 
tinguished from the other Dhyani Buddhas by the green colour of his body, 
and the Abhaya Mudra he displays in his right hand, 


1. KHADIRAVANI-TARA. 


Colour—green. : Mudra—Varada. 


Symbol—Utpala. Companions—Asokakanta and Hkajata. 


Tara is the common name applied to a large number feminine divinities 
in the Buddhist Pantheon. In the Sadhanamala, Janguli, Parnasavari, Maha- 
cinatara, Ekajata and many others are called Taras. Khadiravani is also 
designated as a Tara in the Sadhanamala and is endowed with two hands, 
which show the Varada Mudra in the right and the Utpala in the left. She 
can be recognized by the figures of the two attendant deities, Asokakanta 
Marici and Ekajata. One Sadhana in the Sadhanamala describes her form 
and the Dhyana is quoted as follows :— 


‘* Haritam Amoghasiddhimukutim varadotpaladharidaksinavamakaram 
Asokakanta-Maricy-EKkajatavyagradaksinavamadigbhagam divyakumarim 
Civalvantee os 


Khadiravani-Tarasadhanam.,”’ 


Sadhanamalaé. A—938, N—65, C—72. 


The worshipper should conceive himself as Khadiravani-Tara of green 
colour, who bears the image of Amoghasiddhi on her tiara, shows the Varada 
pose and the Utpala in the right and left hands respectively ; whose right 
and left sides are occupied by Asokakanta Marici and Ekajata, and who 
appears a celestial virgin. Thus meditating....” 


She is commonly known as Syama-Tara because of her green colour, and 
as the Sadhana does not mention the particular Asana, she may be represented 


in any attitude, either sitting (Plate XX XII,d) or standing (Plate XX XII,c). 
The sitting image (Plate XXXII,f) belonging to the Indian Museum,’ repre- 


> 


(S107 


sented with the Dharmacakra Mudra and two companions, Asokakanta 
Marici and Ekajata, may also be identified as Khadiravani. She bears the 
stems of the Utpala and the lotus under her two armpits. The Dharmacakra 
Mudra displayed in the image, however, may point to its identification as 
Prajnaparamita, but in that case, we fail to explain the presence of the two 
companions, Asokakanta and Kkajata. 


The Dacca Museum image of Khadiravani-Tara illustrated in Plate 
XX XII,e is avery interesting specimen. In it we find that the principal 
goddess, in addition to the two divinities ASokakanta and Ekajata, is 
accompanied by eight more goddesses, four to the right and four to the 
left. They are identical in all respects with the principal figure. It seems 
probable that they represents the eight letters of the Tara Mantra exactly 
in the same way as Dhanada Tara is said to be accompanied by eight 
attendant deities in the Sadhana, each originating from a letter of the 
Mantra for her invocation. It may be remarked by the way that the Tara 
Mantra does not consist of eight syllables but ten. When eight goddesses 
are present, it must be understood that Usnisavijayaé and Sumbha originat- 
ing from the last two letters of the Tara Mantra,: “Sva” and ‘‘ha’’, have 


not been represented. 


DT IVASVATARA. 


Asana—Bhadrasana. Symbol—lotus. 


Mudra—Varada. Colour—green. 


Vasyatara is also known by the name of Aryatara, and only one Sadhana 
in the Sadhanamala is assigned to her. There is practically no difference in 
her form with that of Khadiravani-Tara in as much as both display the Varada 
Mudra in the right hand and carry the Utpala in the left. Both have the green 
colour and both bear the image of Amoghasiddhi on the crown. In the case 
of Khadiravani-Tara it is not mentioned in what attitude she should stand or 
sit, but here it is expressly mentioned that Vasyatara should be seated in the 
Bhadrasana, which represents the European fashion of sitting with two legs 
dangling below. This Asana or the attitude of sitting alone distinguishes 
Vasyatara from all other ordinary Taras carrying the Utpala in the left and 
exhibiting the Varada Mudra in the right. The other point of difference 
between Khadiravani-Tara and Vasgyatara is, that the former is accompanied 
by two goddesses, ASokakanta Marici and Ekajata; whereas, the latter is 
absolutely unattended. Khadiravani may have any attitude, but the 
Sadhana prescribes that Vasyatara must show the Bhadrasana only. 


( 108 ) 


The accompanying sketch (Plate XXXIII,a) represents Vasyatara as 
she is pictured in Nepal. The sketch is important in showing the Bhadrasana 
attitude in which the goddess sits. 


3. SADBHUJA SITATARA. 


Faces—three. Arms—six. Colour—white. Asana—Ardhaparyanka. 


Symbols—right Varadamudra, rosary and arrow ; left Utpala, lotus, and bow. 


There are many Sadhanas for Sitataras, or the Taras of white colour, but 
in none of them it is mentioned that they should bear the image of Amogha- 
siddhi on the crown. It is only in this case that the crest of the Dhyani 
Buddha is expressly mentioned. This white Tara is three-faced and six-armed, 
and the Dhyana describes her in the following terms =e) 


‘“Sitataram  trimukhaim sadbhujam _ pitaniladaksinetaramukhim 
pratimukham trinetram varadaksastitrasaradharadaksinatrikaram utpala- 
padmacapadharavamapanitrayam  ardhaparyankanisanném  candrasana- 


candraprabham  jatamukutasthit-Amoghasiddhim pafcamundavibhisita- 
mastakam ardhacandrakrtasekharam nanalankaradharam dvirastavarsakrtim 
astaSsmasanamadhyasthitam....vicintya.”’ 


Sadbhujasukla-Tarasadhanam.”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—115, N—82, C—89-90. 


- The worshipper should conceive himself as Sitatara who is three-faced 
and six-armed ; whose faces to the right and left are yellow and blue in colour 
and are endowed with three eyes ; whose three right hands show the Varada 
Mudra, the rosary and the arrow, and the three left carry the Utpala, the lotus 
and the bow ; who sits in the Ardhaparyanka attitude, sits on and glows like 
the moon, and bears the image of Amoghasiddhi on the crown of chignon ; 
whose head is embellished by the five heads and the crescent ; who is decked 
in many ornaments, is twice eight years old, is situated in the midst of the 
eight cremation grounds. Thus meditating....” 


The accompanying sketch ( Plate XX -XIII,b) shows how she is re- 
presented in Nepal. It tallies in all respects with the description given in the 
Sadhana, except that here she 1s represented in Vajraparyanka instead of 
Ardhaparyanka as required by the Sadhana. 


PLATE XXXIII 





a. Bhadrasana Tara b. Sadbhuja-Sitatara 





Parnasavari 


c. Dhanada-'Tara d. 
( Vikrampur, Dacca ) 


7 
: -—-' % 


we sree sgce: 8 31 chp eens Eee = & 


- 


Aen Pel SA, oes 











« ws Se 36 lay a si aur  o . 7 ~ 
S > ts =e i = i 7 * ie OM , 2 
d 7 + ~ . a ¢ Ss). ° aa 
a ~ ; ; ¥ Pm ks Ye : Tg 
=a -¥ or % : a is a am ea 
.- - < : 
= 16 “ oe aa ae - * om] - 
* - . 7 ls : = 
" — 7 dry ie ’ 
ae. ' “ae P © : “ 4 ao. as rAt =e 
— 7 ~ a . . be ec - yi , : 
+ UF . / “ 2 _ Pie - a 
+= 4 _ he 7 > > : 7 ~ ~ * ya) 7 = 
ses | a 
: 4 -~ PY era - a. 2) 
a > ee ; > . x , o> a - > we if 
y - 7 = ~) “0° 7) pa > 
rs » 7 ‘ = - 9? » 2e@é 
¢ _ . - 
A ve e ; + = + x : : ae a a —- 7 
-_ » ". am 
7 ‘ . ‘ o< 
a) 4 gel a +) 
. : eos 4 oo a 
’ c 7 a ‘ ba = 
f i. 4 a Pons ~~ a ast 
ae f 7 z ’ " . * be ¢ 4 x. » & 
"gen a ~~ z= “ is a - ae a a a 
are e . . fut (at J 
- hf ~s 3 . - . # a 4 4 . > =~ j s OP 
-_ _ cr 7 J im » : + L an 7 
= = on ‘ ae ge ® 
e = >< 7 > © fi 4! —— 
° ~ - é a = ae -_ i , ; a = - 
a _ “elt err Fy i f Hist = — 
= a - r= 
c ‘ : 7 * i : ‘ ep AY i = . Up 
as - « ™t S wa 
- Re a - > - ‘ A i be ai q ro 
4 : ’ a t f = . f-< va 
» " ~ y 7 - 
~ = — - . ” \ 1 7 


a2 maya . ; ? ~ : a = : 
— . - : aa oY ia ms : ‘ b 
; : - Ey: ; ’ r 7 = . 
rai = o ; - 
- - ® vi a 
> - : - : “Fe y 7 
= : ~ - ; = 
4 Sts . : Re : - a - a 7 
wi r r ee i J) 2 : . & 
7 aa A = : = \ ; , c= Us 7 


(7109 ) 
Ae DHANADA— LARA? 


Arms—four. Symbols—right rosary, Varada pose; left Utpala, book. 


Dhanada-Tara is one of the four-armed varieties of Tara. The special 
features of this goddess are that she rides an animal and that, like Vajratara, 
she is surrounded by eight goddesses, originating from the eight syllables 
of the famous Mantra ‘‘Om Taretuttareture Svaha’’. The symbols that are 
held in her four hands are also different from all other varieties of four- 
armed Tara. The Dhyana describing her form runs as follows :— 

“Taram Bhagavatim atmanam bhavayet ; candrasanaprabham saumyam 
sattvaparyankastham haritasyamam ekavadanam dvilocanam caturbhujam 


aksasttravaradotpalapustakadharam vicitravastralankaravatim...... Loca- 
nadibhir-devibhih abhisiktam atmanam Amoghasiddhimukutam dhyayat.”’ 


Dhanada-Tarasadhanam.”’ 


Sad handmala A OMAN =288-45) CLoon, 


The worshipper should conceive himself as goddess Dhanada-Tara, 
who has the seat and the radiance of the moon, is benign in appearance, sits 
on an animal, has green complexion, one face, two eyes, and four arms show- 
ing the rosary, the Varada pose, the Utpala and the book, wears variegated 
ornaments and garments.....The worshipper should further conceive himself 
as being offered homage by the goddesses, Locana and others, and as bearing 
the image of Amoghasiddhi on the crown.”’. 


It is not mentioned in the Sadhana on what animal the goddess 
should sit. The Newari artists represent her as seated on a human being 


(ulate XXXIII.c). 


5. PARNASAVARI. 


Colour—green, Identification mark—-angry laugh. Faces—three. 


Arms—six. Vahana—Diseases (in human form). ‘Asana—Pratyalidha. 


One form of Parnasavari with yellow colour has already been discussed 
under the feminine emanations of the Dhyani Buddha Aksobhya. But 
here her colour is green, which is probably due to the green colour of the 
Dhyani Buddha Amoghasiddhi, from whom she is said to.emanate. The 
Mantra, designates her as a ‘ Pisaci,’ and as ‘Sarvamariprasamani’ or the des- 
troyer of all diseases and epidemics. In form, she is almost identical with 
the form that has been described previously except that here her colour is 


(Sie 


green and that she bears the image of Amoghasiddhi on the crown, instead of 
Aksobhya. She carries the same weapons as the previous one. but her faces 
instead of displaying the pleasant smile, depict angry laugh. As the two 
specimens of Parnasavari discovered in East Bengal both bear the image of 
Amoghasiddhi on the crown, we consider it necessary to quote the Dhyana in 
this case also, for a comparison of the details with the images illustrated :— 

‘* Parnasavarim haritam trimukham trinetram sadbhujam krsnasukla- 
daksinavamananam vajraparasuSsaradaksinakaratrayam karmukapatracchata- 
sapasatarjanivamakaratrayam  sakrodhahasitananam navayauvanavatim 
sapatramalavyaghracarmanivasanam isallambodarim trddhvasamyatakesim 
adho asesarogamaripadakrantam Amoghasiddhimukutim atmanam _ jhatiti 
mISpPady asia 


Sadhanamala. A—161-2, N—121, C—131. 


The worshipper should conceive himself as Parnagavari, who has green 
complexion, three faces, three eyes, and six arms ; whose right and left faces 
have blue and white colour respectively ; who carries in her three right hands 
the Vajra, Parasu and the arrow, and in the three left, the bow, the cluster 
of leaves and the Tarjanipasa ; whose faces depict angry laugh, who is in 
fulness of youth, is decked in tiger-skin and the apron of leaves, has a 
slightly protruding belly, and hair tied up above; who tramples under her 
feet various diseases and pestilences and bears the image of Amoghasiddhi on 
the crown.» Thus meditating... 7.” 


The two images of Parnasavari illustrated in Plate XXXIII,d and 
XXXIV,a have been discovered by Mr. N. K. Bhattasali, Curator of the 
Dacea Museum, and they hail from Parganna Vikrampur in the District of 
Dacca. These two images follow the Sadhana most accurately in all details ; 
the angry laugh has been correctly depicted in the three faces, and the 
belly slightly protrudes. To the right and left are two divinities, who are 
Hayagriva, the Hindu god of Fever, and Sitala, the Hindu goddess of Small- 
pox. They are represented in the images as flying in opposite directions to 
escape the wrath of Parnasavari. The prostrate figures under the feet are 
the Diseases and Pestilences in human shape. The figure under the right 
leg, apparently, is a man attacked with small pox, as we can judge from the 
circular marks all over his body. The other figure under the left foot is 
probably attacked with some fatal disease.. Both the images of Parnagavari 
are decidedly very fine specimens of the Bengal School of Art. 


(ail) 


6. MAHAMAYOURI. 


Colour—green. Faces—three. 


Arms—six, Asana—Ardhaparyanka. 


Mahamayiari is another goddess of the Panearaksa group and is assigned 
to Amoghasiddhiin the same way as other members of the group affiliate 
themselves to one or the other of the Dhyani Buddhas. She is different in 
form when worshipped in the Pancaraksé Mandala which will be described 
later. When she bears the image of Amoghasiddhi on the crown she is three- 
faced and six-armed. But she may have another form with one face, two 
arms and yellow complexion, in which case she will hold the tail of a 
peacock in the right hand and display the Varada Mudra in the left. The 
three-faced and six-armed form of Mahamaytri has been described in the 
Sadhanamala as follows. :— 


“Mahamayutrim haritavarnam trimukham sadbhujam_ pratimukham 
trinetram krsnasukladaksinetaravadana4m ; daksinatrihastesu yathakramam 
mayurapicchabanavaradamudrah ; tathaé vamatrihastesu ratnacchatacapot- 
sangasthakalasah ; vicitrabharanam, srngararasim, navayauvanam, candra- 
sane candraprabhavatim, ardhaparyankinim Amoghasiddhimukutim bhavayet 
atmanam.”’ 


_— 


> Sadhanamala. A—214, Na—17, C—171. 


‘* The worshipper should realize himself as Mahamayuri, who has green 
complexion, six arms, and three faces, each endowed with three eyes ; whose 
right and left faces respectively have blue and white colour ; who shows in 
her three right hands the tail of a peacock, the arrow and the Varada Mudra, 
and similarly in the three left hands the jewel, the bow and the water-vessel 
on the lap; who is decked in wonderful ornaments, displays the sentiment 
of amour, is youthful, has the seat and radiance of the moon, sits in the 
Ardhaparyanka attitude and bears the image of Amoghasiddhi on the crown.” 


7. VAJRASRNKHALLZ, 


Colour—green, Faces—three. 
Arms—eight. Asana—Lalita. 


Identification mark—chain. 


Three Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala are devoted to the worship of 
Vajrasrnkhala. Her colour is green, and as she emanates from Amogha- 
siddhi she bears the image of that Dhyani Buddha on the crown. ‘“‘ Srikhala” 
means a chain, and as the goddess carries the adamantine chain, she is called 


(a2 > 


Vajrasrnkhala. The chain, therefore, is her characteristic sign and should be 
paid particular attention to, in identifying her images, if they ever come to 
light. One of the Dhyanas describes her form in the following manner :— 


“ Haritam trimukhim astabhujam ; prathamamukham isaddhasarasam ; 
daksinam kapilam, kapilalocanam ca; vamam raktam  bhrkutidamstra- 
karalam; daksinesu catuhkaresu. abhaya-vajra-vajrasrnkhala-saradharam ; 
vamacatuhkaraih rudhiraptirnakapala-tarjani-pasa-capadharam ;_ lalitaksepa- 
sanastham, marjjaracarmottariyam, Amoghasiddhibhisitorddhvapingala- 
kesam yicinty ae ene | 


Vajrasrnkhalasadhanam.”’ 


Sadhanamala. A223, Na—s, C—17¥. 


‘‘The worshipper should realize himself as [Vajrasrnkhala] of green 
complexion with three faces and eight arms ; whose first face is gently smiling, 
the right face is of brown colour with brown eyes, and the left is of red colour 
and appears terrible with contortions of the brows and bare fangs ; who shows 
in the four right hands the Abhaya pose, the Vajra, the Vajrasrnkhala and 
the arrow, and in the four left, the Kapala full of blood, the Tarjani, the noose 
and the bow; who sits in the Lalita attitude, has the scarf of a cat’s skin ; 
whose brown hair rises upwards and is decorated with the image of Amogha- 
sidd hive Lhusmmeditating sense He : | 


Vajrasrnkhala may have, according to the Sadhanas, another form with 
three faces and six arms in which case she carries the Vajra, the Vajrasrnkhala 
and the arrow in the three right hands ; and the Tarjani, the noose and the 
bow in the three left hands. The illustration (Plate XX XIV,b) shows this 
form of the goddess as drawn by the native Citrakaras of Nepal. 


PEA XOX OC Vis 





Gee Parmasayvarl 
(Urkrampur, Dacca.) 





d.. Jambhala 


(Vikrampur, Dacca.) 








c. Jambhala e. dJambhala 


(Nepal) (Vikrampur, Dacca.) 





\ 


ea | ‘ 
Oe Tm Ce 
a ' 


’ « 
teats ‘ 
b a 
+ 

if 
ea 

> & 








4 i 
ars avd 





CHAPTER IX. 
EMANATIONS OF RATNASAMBHAVA. 
PaGO DS: 


Ratnasambhava is a comparatively late incorporation into the Pantheon 
of the Northern Buddhists, and this is evident from the small number of deities 
that emanate from him. In the Sadhanama!4 two male and two female divi- 
nities only are affiliated to this Dhyani Buddha. It has already been pointed 
- out that Jambhala and Vasudhara were known long before the Dhyani Buddhas 
were ushered into existence, and it appears therefore, that Jambhala has 
been made an emanation of Ratnasambhava at a very late period. Jambhala 
is connected with wealth and is said to distribute gems, jewels and riches to 
his devotees. Again, Ratnasambhava means ‘born of jewels’ and whom 
else might Jambhala, the god of wealth, call his sire than the Dhyani Buddha 
born of jewels? If one or two forms of Jambhala emanate from Ratna- 
sambhava, it may reasonably be expected that at least one or two forms of 
his consort Vasudhara, should also originate from the same source. In 
spite of all this the Buddhists were divided in their opinion as to the sire 
of Jambhala. The followers of the Aksobhya cult held that he must 
have originated from Aksobhya. 


Mahapratisara, another of his emanations, belongs to the Pancaraksa 
group, and affiliates herself to Ratnasambhava in the same way as other 
members of the group affiliate themselves to one or the other of the five 
Dhyani Buddhas. Curiously enough, we do not see a single god or goddess 
strictly and individually bearing an independent stamp of Ratnasam- 
bhava. The reason, we venture to think, is the very late incorporation of 
Ratnasambhava into the Pantheon as a Divine Buddha. He is distinguished 
from the other Dhyani Buddhas by his yellow colour and the Varada Mudra 
he displays in his right hand. 


The male deities that emanate from Ratnasambhava are Jambhala and 
Ucchusma-Jambhala, the latter being regarded as a terrible form of 
Jambhala. . 


15 


(ea) 


1. JAMBHALA. 
Varieties—Single and yab-yum, 


Several of Jambhala’s forms are noticed in the Sadhanamala, which 
states that the god may emanate either from Aksobhya or from Ratna- 
sambhava or from Vajrasattva or from a combination of the five Dhyani 
Buddhas. The form that emanates from Aksobhya has already been des- 
cribed. The characteristic features of Jambhala emanating from Ratna- 
sambhava is that he carries the mongoose in his right hand and the citron in 
the left. The mongoose is supposed to be the receptacle of all gems and 
jewels and when Jambhala presses the two sides of the mongoose it vomits 
forth the riches. By noticing this mongoose in actual representations 
it 1s casy to recognize the ‘possessor to “be Jambhala:™ As an emana- 
tion of Ratnasambhava he may be represented alone or in the embrace of 
his Sakti in yab-yum. In the Sadhanamala he is described as single in three 
Dhyanas only. When represented in yab-yum he sits on the moon under 
which is the double lotus of eight petals. He wears all sorts of ornaments, his 
complexion is golden yellow and he has a protruding belly. He carries the 
citron and the moongoose in the right and the left hand respectively and 
wears a garland of yellow lotus, and remains in yab-yum with Vasudhara. 
The eight petals of the lotus seat are occupied by the eight Yaksas, to wit, 
Manibhadra, Putrnabhadra, Dhanada, Vaisravana Kelimali, Civikundali, 
Sukhendra and Carendra. These attendant Yaksas, are identical in all res- 
pects with the principal figure. The Yaksas are all accompanied with a 
Sakti with whom they remain in yab-yum in the same way as Jambhala 
remains with Vasudhara. The Yaksinis are eight in number and they are 
Citrakali, Datta, Sudatta, Arya, Subhadra, Gupta, Devi, and Sarasvati. The 
Yaksinis are identical in form with Vasudhara who is yellow in complexion, 
carries the ears of corn and shows the Varada Mudra in her two hands. 


When single, Jambhala is of golden complexion and carries the mon- 
goose in the left hand and the citron in the right.* The illustration ( Plate 
XX XIV,c) represents a stone image from Nepal which is in the possession of 
Pandit Siddhiharsa. Here the god is represented as sitting in the Lalita 
attitude. Two other specimens ( Plate XXXIV,d-e) from Vikrampur in 
Eastern Bengal, depict the god in the same attitude ; and they are some of 
the finest products of the Bengal School of Art. 


* Cf.—“ Sri-Jambhalam pitavarnam dvibhujam, daksinahaste vijapiirakadharam 
yamahastena ratnapravarsamana-nakulidharam....’’ 


Sadhanamala. A—310. 


(ald 5 Ss) 
2. UccHusMA JAMBHALA. 


Asana—Pratyalidha. Appearance—terrible. Identification mark—nude, 





Arms—-two. Vahana—Kuvera. 


One of the forms of Ucchusma Jambhala has already been discussed 
along with the other male emanations of Aksobhya. Even when he 
emanates from Ratnasambhava his form is the same as has been described 
before. When we are on the subject of Ucchusma Jambhala, we should refer 
to a stone image of this god, that was unearthed during the excavations car- 
ried on at Sarnath, and which is now preserved in the Museum of Archaeology 
there. This unique image (Plate XXXV,a) has been described by Rai 
Bahadur Day& Ram Sahni in the Museum Catalogue under No. B (e) 1. 
In terms of the Sadhana the image should bear on its crown either 
the image of Aksobhya or of Ratnasambhava, but neither of them 
is to be found. It 1s Amitabha who is there. We cannot, however, reject 
thesidentification on this) /ground only : for, dressed in- celestial® gar- 
ments and ornaments, the Hindu God, Kuvera, lying flat on the ground, 
is pressed down by the two heavy legs of Ucchusma and vomits out 
all the jewels he had in his stomach. As a matter of fact we notice, 
even in the photograph, a stream of jewels flowing out of his mouth. 
Also in accordance with the Sadhanas, Ucchusma stands in the Pratyalidha 
attitude with his left leg stretched forward on the forehead of Kuvera 
while the right tramples upon his two legs. He has a terrible appear- 
ance with protruding belly, bare fangs and the ornaments of snakes. He 
holds the Kapala full of blood, against his breast and looks eagerly towards 
it with his three eyes. The left hand, though broken, doubtless held the 
mongoose near his thigh, which must have vomitted forth the jewels when 
pressed by the god. We have no means to ascertain why the Dhyani Buddha 
in this case is Amitabha and not Aksobhya or Ratnasambhava. Should we 
explain this anomaly by holding that it is due to a mistake or whim of the 
sculptom/mmOtethat the proper Sadhana has, not been recorded in the 
Sadhanamala ? The latter proposition may be correct, for, in the sculpture 
we notice the headless yet graceful figure of Vasudhara, not required by the 
Sadhanas at all. The existence of a separate cult of Amitabha may be 
responsible for putting in a figure of its supreme Buddha, where the 
figures either of Aksobhya or Ratnasambhava might reasonably have been 


expected. 


(716 4) 
Il. GODDESSES. 


Now that we have done with the male emanations of Ratnasambhava, 
let us proceed to deal with the two goddesses emanating from this Dhyani 
Buddha. Both of them are benign in character, and graceful in appearance, 
and like the Dhyani Buddha himself have yellow complexion. 


1. MAHAPRATISARA. 


Fastte) 1. Three-faced, ten-armed. 
t 2. Four faced, eight-armed. 

Mahapratisara is one and the first member of the Pancaraksa group. 
Her worship is widely prevalent amongst the Tantric Buddhists,* and she is 
represented cither singly or in a Mandala in the company of four other Pafica- 
raksa deities. She is generally yellow when worshipped independently and 
occasionally wh te when worshipped in the Mandala of the five goddesses. 
She may be represented with four faces and eight arms, or with three faces 
and ten arms in accordance with the Sadhanas. But in actual representa- 
tions she may have three faces and eight arms. The form with three faces 
and ten arms, is said to bear the image of Ratnasambhava on the crown. 
The other yellow form may also be assigned to this Dhyani Buddha. 
The Sadhana describes the former in the following terms :— 


Mahapratisara pita trimukhi pratimukhamf trinayana dasabhuja krsna- 
sitadaksinetaravadana daksinapafcabhujesu yathakramam khadga-vajra- 
binat-varada-hrdayasayihastacchatrani tatha vamapafcabhujesu- capa- 
dhvaja-ratnacchata§-parasu-sankhah  Ratnasambhava-mukuti  krsnakanh- 
cukaraktottariya ca  ardhaparyanka-lalitaksepadivyabharanavastrabhi sita 
cetit”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—215, Na—18, C—171. 


Mah4pratisara has yellow complexion, three faces, each with three eyes, 
ten arms with the right and left faces having blue and white colour ; she car- 
ries in her five right hands the sword, the Vajra, the arrow, the Varada Mudra, 
and the umbrella held against her breast, and the five left hands similarly 


* It is perhaps for this reason, Mahapratisara was incorporated by the Tantric Hindus 
in their Pantheon. In the annual worship of Durga oblations are offered to Mahapratisara 
in the beginning and her Mantras are muttered. 


+ A read pitamukham. 
t For -bana A has -paéga. 


§ For -cchata A reads -cchattra. 


PLATE XXXV. 





a. Uechusma-Jambhala b. Mahapratisara 
(Sarnath) (Dacca Museum) 





c. Mahapratisara d. Vasudhara 
(Dacca Sahitya Parisat) (Nepal) 







ny * : q re 
: e. 
| Aas earn Res hie oie a) a ee 
y rk ! ¥ 4 . en mt 
| Por ey ay 





~ 
i A 
| § i k re ia ide an fom be a) to en vie a ds a i " ae Awyri= as 
a 











‘ Veer pa. ea in at Ally 
/ , ‘ a yy Mas * Aye . 4 Mi) Ay He ve ‘is oH ei i : a Rm ~ ae 
b PA WO UR Re RU gin By Fete tc oer | revel. 
» ‘ l { {eo a .* “, ita 
sé a5 , é eps = ‘ Ms if ‘ rs ~*~ , ; , OR AF ksins A = ie feu ‘se : M 
ty a cha yey ay a i a OO ie a pet ty os Se why ler ak 
i j : j : a a ee ae: ‘ ett oh, ei ols My Phe Pat, : an 9 
a | . te, 7 ae y as f * a Py Cay 7 yee ea) ‘ae 8 5 ’ : ay 
oJ esha i,» , a wed 3 f if i i PAD ' é ) 
, j ’ a > © ok Pee) ey | ar Y xe) . Hf 
pa R } iy Wa Te es Pes rab on ' 
3} : wy A » re ; e 
avy ee La HP BEE 
c 9 nm “*\ \d : i ’ 
pe ae ne 
b ' hy ’ ir 4 el bb Ne yer + 
Te PREY WI re tag 
ba j rd * nM pH wry 
4 ay > em eee See 
os Wire rare oF 
% y ‘ 6 J =n = Ny 
: “4 seers 
3 fen i 
d 4 ? ee y ey 
rps > ’ i* 
Bi sige Les Tabs oy 
sé ; v5, x4 * 
/ Jur par “ *) 
Le SVU j u 
* : MRT 
\ j ‘Ff 
¢ . 1 * 4 ‘ “* j 
: ‘ ivy yi : t * 
J j 
} +5 : : vi, yee : 
¥ y ; ‘ é 
bs j : : ark ae y 
y '% i 
aK hohe UNE Daas 
\ Pi i ‘ & 
: "ot 
‘ ' P, \ 
“7 us ’ 
pr ‘ 
¢ ; oes f th, 
j 7 we ’ p x 
*s % vy BAY 4 ef 
' * i Aes + 
ei Be ipa GaN), 
ae | She a4 ee ’ 
, ‘ “ON i mn A? r 
7» <4 > 1 
a a 0 * 7 
€.: re Ze hard 7 
a hy ; 
' i re aa , "AN 
Bt 7 Risw i Cet 4s : it) 
o b ; re as ee fa 
; he ay ; 
a far, % y. oe 
i ‘ ‘ \ — 
' ' ' ; rr 4 A 
‘ ; oy! 
i] ‘ 
j . 
ce 
; ‘ i 
"a Wis 
/ \ ; 
a, 
7 ' 
j ” +. An ’ 
é — 7 
’ 





(Cbhe 4) 


hold the bow, the banner, the jewel, the Parasu and the conch ; she bears the 
image of Ratnasambhava on the crown, has a_ blue bodice and a red 
searf, sits in the Ardhaparyanka or the Lalita attitude and wears celestial 
ornaments and garments.”’ 


The form with four faces and eight arms will be described hereafter 
under the head, Pancaraksa Mandala. But there is another form which is 
worshipped independently, in which case she is almost identical with the 
preceding one in all respects expect that she is endowed with four faces and 
eight arms. The principal face is yellow, the right white, the left red, and the 
face behind blue. She carries in her four right hands the sword, the Cakra, 
the Trisula and the arrow, and in the four left the Parasu, the bow, the 
noose and the Vajra. 


Two photographs (Plate XXXV,b-c) represent this form of the 
goddess and these tally with the Sadhana in all other respects, but that 
instead of four they have only three faces. 


2. VASUDHARA. 
Colour—yellow. Symbols—right Varada pose. left ears of corn and vessel. 


Vasudhara is the consort of Jambhala and bears the image either of 
Aksobhya or of Ratnasambhava on the crown. Several Sadhanas in the 
Sadhanamala describe her form, which is always two-armed. As none of the 
Sadhanas mention the Asana, she may be represented in any attitude standing 
or sitting. She is decently decked in ornaments and is invariably accom- 
panied by her confidents. Her complexion is always yellow and she carries 
in her left hand, the ears of corn with the vessel that showers gems while 
the right hand exhibits the Varada Mudra. The short Sadhana may be 
quoted as follows :— 


** Pita‘vam’karaparinatam dvibhujaikamukhim pitéam navayauvana- 
bharanavastravibhtsitam  dhanyamanjarinanaratnavarsaghatavamahastam 
daksinena varadam anekasakhi janaparivrtam visvapadmacandrasanastham 
Ratnasambhavamukutinim [dhyayat]. 


Vasudharasadhanam.”’ 


Sadhanamala, A—228—9, Na—2, C—181. 


The worshipper should conceive himself as [Vasudhara] who originates 
from the yellow germ syllable ‘ Vam,’ she is two-armed, one-faced, has yellow 
complexion, is in the fulness of youth and is decked in all ornaments and 
garments, carries in her left hand the ears. of corn with the vessel showering 


CML Sn) 


wems, while the right exhibits the Varada Mudra; she is surrounded by 
her various companions, rests on the moon over the double lotus, and 
bears the image of Ratnasambhava on the crown....” 


Images of Vasudhara are not generally to be met with in sculpture. 
She accompanies Ucchusma in the unique Sarnath image already referred 
to. The other image from Sarnath*, is mutilated beyond recognition. In 
both cases, however, she has been represented as standing. 


Vasudhara is sometimes represented as one-faced and six armed, and 
as sitting in the Lalita attitude. In the three right hands she exhibits the 
Namaskara Mudra, and the Varada Mudra and the ears of corn. The 
first left hand has the book, the second the ears of corn, and the third on the 
lap carries the vessel containing jewels. Her hair rises upwards in the shape 
of a flame, she is beautifully decked in ornaments and displays a truly 
peaceful appearance. The image reproduced (Plate XX-XYV,d) represents 
this variety of the goddess and is a fine specimen of Newari art but shows a 
considerable influence of the Bengal School. 


* Sarnath Catalogue Plate X V(b). 


CHAPTER X. 
EMANATIONS OF THE FIVE DHYANI BUDDHAS. 


Pee Ch) 


Vajrasattva is not included in the group of five Dhyani Buddhas. 
He appears to be a later addition. The emanations of the five Dhyani 
Buddhas are said to bear the images of Vairocana, Amitabha, Aksobhya, 
Ratnasambhava and Amoghasiddhi on the crown; but when represented, 
they are either painted or carved on the aureole behind the heads of the 
emanated deities. The five Dhyani Buddhas, as has already* been pointed 
out, are supposed to represent the five Skandhas and the essence of their 


emanations consists of a combination of all the five. 


Besides several forms of Mafjusri and one form of Avalokitesvara, two 
gods only are said to emanate from a combination of the five Dhyani Buddhas. 
The first is Jambhala, (also regarded as an emanation of either, Aksobhya, 


or Vajrasattva), and the second Mahakala. 


1. JAMBHALA. 


Symbols—-citron and mongoose. 


Almost all his different forms mentioned in the SAdhanamala have al- 
ready been described under the emanations of Aksobhya and Ratnasambhava ; 
the form emanating from Vajrasattva will be described later. Jambhala 
as an emanation of the five Dhyani Buddhas is two-armed, carries the citron 
and the mongoose in his two hands and tramples upon two semi-human 
beings Sankhamunda and Padmamunda apparently in the Alidha attitude, 


* Ante, p. 2. 


(“5120 2) 
2. MAHAKALA. 


Appearance—tetrrible. 


Colour—blue. Asana—Pratyalidha. 


The reason why Mahakala has been classified under the emanations of 
the five Dhyani Buddhas is that one of the numerous Sadhanas for the wor- 
ship of Mahakala gives him the epithet of ‘‘ Paticabuddhakiritinam,”’ that is 
‘‘ bearing the images of the five Dhyani Buddhas on the crown.” He may 
have one face with two, four, or six arms, or eight faces with sixteen arms, 
He is one of the many terrible deities described in the Sadhanamala, with 
ornamemts of snakes, canine teeth, protruding belly and garments of tiger- 
skin. At least six Sadhanas describe the two-armed variety of Mahakala. 
One Dhyana from among them is quoted below :—. 


‘“Sri-Mahakalabhattarakam dvibhujam ekamukham  krsnavarnam 
trinavanam mahajjvalam kartrikapaladharinam daksinavamabhujabhyam 
mundamalalankrtorddhvapingalakesopari pancakapaladharam damstrabhima- 
bhayanakam bhujangabharanayajhopavitam kharvaripam  sravadrudhira 
mukhim atmanam jhatiti nispadya....”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—223, C—246*. 


The worshipper should conceive himself as Sri Mahakala Bhattaraka, 
who is two armed, one-faced, and of blue complexion ; who is three eyed, has 
fiery radiance, carries the Kartri and the Kapala in the right and left hands 
bears the five skulls on the hair which is brown, and which rises upwards on 
the head, and is decorated with a row of [severed] heads; who is terrible 
with awful fangs, is decked in ornaments of serpents and the sacred thread 
of a snake; who is short and from whose mouth trickles forth blood. 
Thus quickly meditating....” 


Images of Mahakala abound in Nepal and are found in large numbers 
in Buddhist temples, monasteries and even in the streets. Sometimes 
only the head is represented. The image (Plate XXXVI,a) is the finest 
specimen of Mahakala ever discovered belonging to Pandit Siddhiharsa 
of Nepal. It is carved out from a block of fine black stone, so beautifully 
polished as to be mistaken for metal. Here the god tramples upon two 
human beings representing two dead bodies, as required by some of the 
Sadhanas assigned to him, wields the menacing Kartri in the right hand 
and the kapala full of blood in the left. 


(11) When four-armed he resembles the two-armed variety, with the 
difference that the former variety carries the Kartri and the Kap4la in the 
first pair of hands and the sword and the Khatvanga in the second pair. 


* Omitted in N. 


PLATE XXXVI, 






et f 
guild 


a. Mahakala b. Vajratara 
(Nepal) ( Indian Museuit ) 


ange Sieve e 
bP Be Eh Geb ee ban ta on 





d. Vayjratara 


c. Praymaparamita 


(Indian Murseiuiy) ( Orissa ) 


% 
is 


: 
| 


~<s ‘, 


cet ye eh 
i. shA ‘a ° e ‘ S 
i. ad ‘ an We oo ie ot Pet Sa 
Gtr ait dhe oid Sink DEALS OLA cd rena Rtas a Tinaigast 





(12 1ea)) 


(111) When six-armed he appears like the one previously described, 
with the difference that he carries in his three right hands, the Kartri, the 
ro;ary and the Damaru, and in the three left, the Kapala, the Sila, and the 
Vajrapasa. 


(iv) When sixteen-armed, he is eight-faced and represented in yab- 
yum in the embrace of his Sakti, and what is strange he Is also four-legged. 
The Sadhana describes his form in the following terms :— 

‘“Atmanam Bhagavantam sodasgabhuja-Mahakailam bhavayet ; astava- 
danam caturvimSatinetram catuscaranam sodasabhujam ; daksinakaraih kar- 
tri-vajra-gajacarma-mudgara-trisila-khadga-yamadandah, vamakaraih rakta- 
purnakapala-gajacarma-ghanta-ankusa-svetacamara-damaru-narasiro dadha- 
nam, sesabhujabhyam Prajnhalingitam ; kharvakrsnam hahahihihehepirita- 
mukham maharaudram trikayatmyakam pafca-Buddhamukutinam nara- 
mundamalabharanam bhayasyapi bhayankaram ”’ 


sadhanamala, A—330—1, C—251.* 


The worshipper should conceive himself as Mahakala with sixteen 
arms and eight faces, twenty-four eyes, four legs, sixteen arms, who carries 
in his [seven] right hands the Kartri, the Vajra, the elephant-hide, the Mud- 
gara, the Tristla, the sword and the staff of Yama, and in the [seven] left hands 
the Kapala full of blood, elephant-hide, the bell, the goad, the white chowrie, 
the Damaru and human head: while the two remaining hands are engaged 
inereinoracing the lrajne ;) whoris«short.and blue» in® complexion, ;utters 
laughing sounds such as, ha ha, hi hi, he he; who is terribly fierce, is the 
essence of the Three Kayas, bears the images of the five Dhyani Buddhas on 
the crown, is decked in garlands of heads as ornaments, and who is more 
awe-inspiring than Awe itself.” 


The Sadhana further adds the information that Mahakala should be 


surrounded by seven goddesses, three in the three cardinal points, (fourth 
being occupied by himself) and the other four in the four corners. 


To the East is Mahamaya, wife of Mahegvara, who stands in the Alidha 
attitude and rides a lion, who has four arms, out of which the two left hands 
carry the Kapala and the Damaru, and the Kartri and the Mudgara in the 
two right. She is blue in complexion, has dishevelled hair, three eyes and 
protruding teeth. 

To the South is Yamaditi, who is of blue complexion and has four arms. 
She carries in her two right hands the staff of lotus stalk and the Kartri, and 
in the two left the bowl of blood and the fly-whisk. She stands in Alidha 
attitude, rides the buffalo and has dishevelled hair. 


* Omitted in the Nepai ms. 
16 


( 42) 


To the West is Kaladiti, who carries in her two left hands the Kapala 
and the cow’s head and in the two right the Mudgara and the Trisila. She 
rides a horse and stands in the Alidha attitude, has a red complexion and 


dishevelled hair. 


All these deitics are terrible in appearance with protruding teeth and 


ornaments made of serpents. 


The four corners are occupied by the following goddesses. Kalika in 
the S. E. corner is blue in complexion, has two arms carrying the Kapala 
and the Kartri and stands on a corpse in Alidha attitude. Carcika in the 
S. W. corner has a red complexion, carries the Kartri and the Kapala in 
her two hands and is similar to Kalika in all others respects. Candesvari 
in the N. W. corner has a yellow complexion, rides a corpse and carries in 
her two hands the grass and the deer, and stands in the Alidha attitude. 
Kuligegvari in the N. E. corner has white complexion, carries the Vajra and 
the staff, rides a corpse and stands in the Alidha attitude. These four 
deities are nude, and terrible with bare fangs, three eyes and disheyelled 


hair. 


Surrounded by all these deities Mahakala should be meditated upon 
as trampling upon Vajrabhairava in the form of a corpse. 

Mahakala is a ferocious god who is generally worshipped in the Tantric 
rite of Marana for the destruction of enemies. Mahakala was also regarded 
as a terrible spirit, and was calculated to have inspired awe in the minds of 
those Buddhists, who were not reverential to their Gurus, and did not 
eare much for the Three Jewels ; Mahakala is supposed to eat these culprits 
raw, and the process of eating has been minutely detailed in almost all the 
Sadhanas. The Sadhanas generally states the following Slokas in order to 
show the terrible nature of Mahakala :— 

Acaryye yah sada dvesi kupito Ratnatraye’pi yah | 
Anekasattvavidhvamsi Mahakalena khadyate 1! 
Cchedayet svangamamsani pivedrudhiradharaya | 
Sirasi vinivesyaiva tilamatranca kartayet I* 

He who hates his preceptor, is adversely disposed to the Three 
Jewels, and destroys many animals is eaten up raw by Mahakala. 


He, | Mahakala] cuts his flesh to pieces, drinks the blood, and [after] 
entering into his head breaks it into minute fragments.” 


* Sidhanamala. A—323, C—246 (oniitted in ms. N.) 


( 128 -} 
Il. GODDESSES. 


Four female deities emanate from a combination of the five Dhyani 
Buddhas. They are Vajratara, Sitatara, Prajnaparamita and Kurukulla. 
Excepting Sitatara all other goddesses are widely worshipped. The Sadhana- 
mala shows unusual devotion to Vajratara in as much as five long Sadhanas 
are assigned to her, and in all cases the same details of worship are 
recorded. Her worship is supposed to bring success in all Tantric rites 
including the six cruel ones. One of the forms of Prajnaiparamita and one 
of Kurukulla are said to bear the images of the five Dhyani Buddhas on the 


crown. 


1, VAJBATARA. 


Faces—four. Arms—eight. Colour— yellow. Asana—-Vajraparyanhka. 
Symbols—-right Vajra, Pasa, Sankha and arrow ; 


left Vajrankusa, Utpala, bow and Tarjani. 


We know of at least three images of Vajratara, one, in the Indian 
Museum discovered in the District of Bhagalpore, the second, in Orissa, 
described in N. N. Vasu’s Mayurbhanj Archeclogical Survey, and the third 
in Nepal. The Indian Museum bronze of Vajratara is in the form of a lotus 
and represents the complete Mandala with all the attendant deities. It 
is constructed in such a way as to be opened or closed at will. The petals 
are eight in number and each has‘a deity figured on it. There are several 
Sadhanas describing the form of Vajratara, who is said to bear on the crown 
the images either of the five Dhyani Buddhas or four of them. The Dhyana 
describing her form with the five Dhyani Buddhas on the crcwn is as 


follows == 


‘* Matrmandalamadhyastham Taradevim vibhavayet | 
Astabahum caturvaktram sarvalankarabhtsitém | 
Kanakavarnanibham bhavyam kumarilaksanojjvalém | 
Pafca-Buddhamahamukutim vajrastryyabhisekajéim |! 
Navayauvanalabanyam calatkanakakundalam | 
VisvapadmasamAsinam raktaprabhavibhtsitém || 
Vajrapasatathasankhasaccharodyatacaksindm | 
Vajrankusotpaladhanustarjanivamadharinim | 
Vajraparyankayogena sadhayet bhuvanatrayam |! 


Sadhanamala. A—95, N—67, C—78—4, 
The worshipper should conceive himself as [ Vajra |-Tara who is 


in the midst of the circle of the Eight Mothers, is eight armed, four-faced, and 
decked in all ornaments ; whose complexion is like the colour of gold, who is 


(S24) 


graceful, and resplendent with the auspicious marks of a virgin ; who bears 
the images of the five Dhyani Buddhas on her great tiara, and is born of the 
offerings to the Vajra and the sun; who is effulgent in her blooming youth, 
has the dangling ear-ornaments, sits on, the double lotus, and sends out 
radiance of red colour; who carries in her right hands the Vajra, the noose, 
the conch, and the quick arrow, and in the left the Vajrankusa, the Utpala, 
the bow and the Tarjani. Thus conceiving her as sitting in the Vajra- 
paryanka attitude [the worshipper] may gain the three worlds.”’ 


The Sadhana further goes on to describe the deities constituting the 
Mandala. In the four cardinal points there should be four goddesses on the 
four petals of the lotus on which Vajratara sits.— 


Pirvena Puspataram tu sitavarnam manoramam | 
Omkaraksaranispannam puspadamakarakulam | 
Dvibhujim ekavaktrafica sarvalankarabhitsitam || 


‘*On the East is Puspataraé, who is white and elegant in appearance, 
is born of the syllable ‘ Om,’ carries the garland of flowers, is two-armed, one- 
faced and is decked in all ornaments. 


Daksine Dhtpataram tu krsnavarnam surtipinim | 
Dhipasakhakaravyagram sarvalankarabhtsitam 1: 


On the South is Dhtipatara, who is of blue colour, of elegant appear- 
ance, carries the Dhipa (incense) stick and is decked in all ornaments. 


‘* Pascime Dipatarafnca dipayastikarakuli ! 
Pitavarnam mahabhtsim calatkanakakundalam 1! 


9? 


On the West is Dipatara, who carries the light stick in her hands, is of 
yellow complexion, profusely ornamented and has dangling ear-ornaments, 


“ Uttare Gandhataram tu gandhasankhakarakulam | 
Raktavarnanibham devim bhavayet garbhamandale i’ 


On the North is Gandhatara, who carries in her hands the conch of 
scents, has a red complexion, and all these [goddesses] should be situated in 
the inner circle.’”’ 


The Sadhana further says that the following Guardians of the Gates 
should also be meditated upon round the principal goddess, apparently not in 
the same circle with the four described above. 


(a4 —_ * ~ 5 . an e S= = . © os . — . 4, 
_Parvadvare Vajrankusim ekavaktram dvibhujam vajrankugotpalahas- 
tam vikrtavadanam krsnavarnam....’’ 


vibe the Eastern Gate should be Vajrankusi, who is one-faced, two armed, 
carries the Vajrankusa and the Utpala, has a distorted face and blue colour. 


‘“Daksinadvare Vajrapasi pitavarnim vikrtananim ekavaktram dvi- 
bhujam vajrapasahastam....” 


In the Southern Gate is Vajrapasi of yellow complexion, with oné 
distorted face, and two arms carrying the adamantine noose. 


‘** Pascimadvare Vajrasphotim raktavarnam ekavaktram dvibhujaém 
vikrtavadanam vajrasphotahastam....”’ 


In the Western Gate is Vajrasphoti, who hasa red complexion, one 
distorted face, two arms, and clapping hands. 


*“ Uttaradvare Vajraghantam Ssvetavarnam ekavaktram dvibhujém 
vikrtavadanam vajraghantahastam....”’ 


In the Northern Gate is Vajraghanta, who is white, one-faced, two- 
armed, has a distorted face and carries a bell surmounted by a Vajra.”’ 


All these goddesses stand in the Alidha attitude, with the right leg 
stretched forward, on the seat of the sun. They have sun-like radiance, are 
surrounded with a fiery halo and are decked in ornaments of snakes. The 
upper region is occupied by Usnisavijaya and the lower by Sumbha.* 


The reason why Vajratara is surrounded by these goddesses is that each 
of these goddesses originates from each of the ten letters of the Mantra of 
Vajratara, which is ‘Om Tare tuttare ture Svaha’, consisting of ten syllables. 
Kach syllable brings forth a goddess, and these goddesses are said to be the 
embodiments of the Ten Paramitast of the Mahayana doctrine. 


The following are some of the instances in which the Mantra of Vajra- 
tara might be applied with success. A knot should be tied at the end of the 
cloth over which the Mantra has been recited seven times. If any man wearing 
this cloth goes even to the most inaccessible regions of the Vindhya moun- 
tains he will not be molested. Tigers, thieves, crocodiles, lions, snakes, 
elephants, baffaloes, bears, bulls and _ the like will fly away or even be des- 
troyed at the mere recital of the name of the goddess. If one hundred and 
eight blue lotuses are offered into the fire with this Mantra any woman would 
be subdued. The feather of a crow over which this Mantra has been recited 
thirty-two times, if kept concealed within the house of an enemy, will des- 
troy it mysteriously in course of a week. It is useless to multiply instances, 
In fact, in all matters Vajratara is sure to ensure success to the worshipper 
and that is the reason why she is so popular among the Vajrayanists. 


Among the three extant images of Vajratara the one (Plate XX XVI,b) 
in Calcutta may be identified with this variety of Vajratara. As the Dhyani 


* Cf. ‘‘ Urddhve Usnisvijayam adhah Sumbham Vibhavayet.”’ 


$+ Cf. ‘“* Dasaksarair-dasadevatyo dasaparamitasrayah,”’ 


Buddhas are not given she may, however, be regarded as an emanation of the 
four Dhyani Buddhas also. The Orissa image belongs to the combination 
of four Dhyani Buddhas, while the third also belongs to. another peter si 
of Vajratara also emanating from four Dhyani Buddhas.:. « 


2. PRAIJNAP RAMITA. 


Mudra—Dharmacakra. Distinctive feature—Book on lotus on either side. 


‘Asana—Vajraparyanka. 


This variety of Prajfap4ramita is identical in all respects with one of 
the forms that has been described previously under the emanations of 
Aksobhya, except that here she exhibits the Dharmacakra Mudra with her 
two hands and from under her left and right armpits rise two lotuses bearing 
the Prajhaparamita Scripture. She is of golden complexion and bears the 
images of the five Dhyani Buddhas on the crown*. The form of Prajna- 
paramita described in Plate XXVIII,c, has only one lotus bearing the book 
in her left, but the Indian museum stone image (Plate XX XVI,c) with two 
lotuses on either side bearing the book, belongs most assuredly to this 


variety of Prajnaparamita. 


3, MayAsaALAKRAMA KURUKULL4. 
Asana—Vajraparyanka. Arms—six. Colour—red. 


The form of Kurukulla bearing the effigies of the five Dhyani Buddhas 
on the crown is called Mayajalakrama-Kurukulla as the Sadhana is said to 
have been restored from the now lost Mayajala Tantra by the Tantric authort 
Krsnacarya. Several forms of Kurukullé have already been described under 
the female emanations of Amitabha. The six-armed variety only emanates 
from. the combination of five Dhyani Buddhas. In accordance with the 


* The Dhyana is quoted as follows :— 

‘‘Bhagavati Prajiaparamita pitavarna dvibhujaikamukhi pafica-Tathagatamakuti, 
vyakhyanamudravati, visvadalapadme candrasanasina, sarvalankaravastravati, vama- 
daksinaparsve utpalastha-Prajfiaparamitapustakadharini.”’ 

Sadhanamalé. A—163-4, N—123, C—132. 


+ Cf. the Colophon—-“ Sriman Maya jalamahayogatantrat sodasasahasrikat akrsta- 
Kurukulla-sidhanam samaptam.”’ 


(437 


Sadhana she sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude, on the sun over the red 
lotus of eight petals. She has a red complexion, is clad in red garments, exhi- 
bits the Trailokyavijaya Mudra in the first pair of hands, shows the Abhaya 
Mudra and the sprout of a white Kunda flower in the second, and the rosary 
and the Kamandalu in the third, bears the images of the five Dhyani Buddhas 
on the crown,* and sits on the back of Taksaka. She has another form with 
six arms, which is not expressly called the Mayajala Kurukulla, described 
in a separate Sadhana. According to this Sadhana, she exhibits the Trai- 
lokyavijaya Mudra in the first pair of her hands, the Ankusa and the red lotus 
in the second pair, and the full drawn bow charged with an arrow in the 
third.* We have not yet been able to find out images of any of the 
two varieties of Kurukullé mentioned above. 


4, SITATARA. 


Colour—-white. Arms-—four. Symbol—Utpala. 
Mudra—Utpalamudra in the first two hands and the Varada Mudra in the third. 


Sitatara, as the name implies, is a Tara of the white variety, with one 
face and four arms. She is accompanied by two goddesses, Marici and Maha- 
mayuri. It may be remembered that Khadiravani is also accompanied by 
Marici and Kkajata; but the difference is that Khadiravani is two-armed 
whereas Sitatara is four-armed. The Dhyana contained in the only Sadhana 
in the Sadhanamala describes her form in the following terms :— 


Tarabhagavatim suklam trinetram caturbhujam Panca-Tathagatamuku- 
tim nanalankaram, bhujadvayena utpalamudram dadhanam, daksinabhujena 
cintamaniratnasamyuktavaradam, sarvasattvanam asim _ pariptrayantim, 
vamenotpalamanjarim vibhranam dhyayat. 

Tasya daksinaparsve Maricim pitam candrasanam nilambaram dvibhu- 
jam ; vamena raktasokapallavadharam, daksinena sitacamaradharam ; rakta- 
kancukabharanam. 


Vamaparsve Mahamaytrim priyangusyamam dvibhujam; vamena 
mayurpicchadharam, daksinena camaradharam, evam vicintya....”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—114, N—8s2, C—89. 


* The Dhyana may be quoted as follows :— 


“,... Vajraparyankanisannam,....:adbhujam, savyavasavyaprathamabhujabhyam 
Trailokyavijayamudradharam, dvitiyadaksinavamakarabhyam ankusaraktotpaladharam, 
parisistakaradvayena akarnaptritadhanuhSaram....pafica-Tathagatamukutam.”’ 


Sadhanamala, A—207, N—115, C—162, 


( 128 ) 


‘‘ The worshipper should meditate in himself the goddess [Sita ]-Tara, 
of white complexion with three eyes and four arms ; who bears the images of 
the five Dhyani Buddhas on the crown, is decked in many ornaments, exhi- 
bits the Utpala Mudra in the first pair of hands, displays the Varada Mudra 
along with the Cintamani in the right, and carries the Utpala bud in the left, 
and fulfils the prayers of all beings. 


To her right is Marici, who is yellow in complexion, sits on the moon, 
is clad in blue garments, is two-armed, and carries the bough with red 
Asoka flowers in the left hand and the fly-whisk in the right, and who wears 


red bodice and ornaments. 


To her left is Mahamaytri of green complexion like the Priyangu fruit, 
who is two-armed and carries the tail of a peacock in the left hand and the 
fly-whisk in the right. Thus meditating....’’ 


CHAPTER XI. 
§ 1. EMANATION OF FOUR DHYANI BUDDIIAS. 


VAJRATARA. 


Vajratara is the only emanation of a combination of four Dhyani 
Buddhas, but she has another form emanating from five. Here also 
she is accompanied by the usual eight goddesses (Mothers), in the four 
cardinal points and in the four intermediate corners. While the 
upper regions is occupied by Usnisavijaya, Sumbha remains below. 
Here also the Mantra is the same and each syllable of the Mantra brings 
forth one of the surrounding deities. In essence she is the same as_ has 
been previously described and she performs very nearly the same functions, 
and is invoked in the same rites including the six cruel Tantric ones. 


Several Sadhanas describe two distinct forms of this goddess. In 
one she will be identical with the form described before under the emanations 
of the five Dhyani Buddhas, with the difference that she should have 
the crest of the four Dhyani Buddhas only instead of five. The Orissa image 
( Plate XX XVI,d) of Vajratara belongs to this variety, although all the 
ten goddesses constituting the Mandala are not represented. It has 
four companions only and these probably represent the four deities of the 
four cardinal points, Puspatara, Dhipatara, Dipatara and Gandhatara. The 
deity sitting below to the left of the principal goddess may be identified with 
Gandhatara who is required by the Sadhana to hold the conch-shell full of 
scents ; for, this figure clearly shows the conch over the two hands held 
in the Samadhi Mudra. 


(ii) . The second form differs a little from the above as the weapons are 
not the same, or in the same order either. She carries in her four left hands 
the Utpala, the bow, the Ankusa, and the Tarjanip4sa, and in the four right 
the Vajra, the arrow, the conch and the Varada pose,* 


* Prof. Foucher has quoted the Dhyana of this variety of Vajratara in explaining 
and identifying the Indian Museum bronze (fig. 5) illustrated in Plate XXXVI,b of 
this book. L’Iconographie Bouddhique, I1, p. 70 et sqq. I fail to understand, why the 
learned Professor chose this Dhyana for quotation leaving the one with which the bronze 
accurately agrees. Supra ch. X. 


17 


( #80 25 


One stone image ( Plate XX XVII,a) of this second variety of Vajra- 
tara has been discovered at the Sarasvatisthan close to the Svayambhi 
Temple in Nepal. It represents the goddess in the Vajraparyanka attitude 
with a form and weapons identical with the one described above. Though the 
crest of the four Dhyani Buddhas is not present, yet, as this form agrees 
in all details with the Vajrataraé emanating from the combination of the 
four Dhyani Buddhas, we may reasonably regard the identification as 


correct. 


One of the Sadhanas of Vajratara enumerates the four Divine Buddhas, 
and, it is curious that Ratnasambhava is not one of them. This fact, again, 
points to his late incorporation into the brotherhood of the Divine Buddhas, 


§ 2. EMANATIONS OF VAJRASATTVA. 


That Vajrasattva is the latest incorporation into the brotherhood of 
the Divine Buddhas in amply borne out by the Sadhanamala, in the whole 
of which only two deities are said to bear the image of Vajrasattva on the 
crown. One is a'god and the other a goddess. It is not necessary, however, 
to repeat the description of Vajrasattva, who may be represented both singly 
and in yab-yum. He sits inthe Vajraparyanka attitude, carries the Vajra 
in the right hand with palm upwards against the breast and the Ghanta in 
the left near the waist, ; 


le JAMBHALA: 


Variety—yab-yam. Faces—three. 


Arms—six. Attitude—Vajraparyanka. 


Jambhala is the only male deity who is said to bear the image of Vajra- 
sattva. The Sadhana describes his form with three faces, six arms and 
the image of Vajrasattva on the crown. From a study of the Sadhana we 
gather the following details about his form. He is white in complexion, and 
his two faces to the right and left of the principal one, are red and blue. 
He sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude and embraces Vasudhara, his Svabha 
Prajna. With the two principal arms he embraces the Prajha and remains 
in yab-yum; he carries in his two right hands the mongoose and the jewel, 
and in the two left the citron and the sword. In all other respects he is 
identical with the form discussed under the emanations of Aksobhya. 


EAT eeNoNeNe Vi Je 


ee 








Tay Se Bane Seon 
ajratara b. Cunda 


( Nepal ) (British Museum) 





c. Mahapratisara d.  Mahasahasrapramardani 







“ 
Ot hal 
= 
= 
coll 
- 





ret in 
Dice ray 
2 
— 
< _ 
- 

- 









(ge i 


© 
ere 


i tLe i 
A 
‘ { ; Py 
Fi 
| oe * 
4 
uo 
- y 1 ’ . 
uf 
1 _ 
ad ‘ 
J * 
ay 
i 2 
ray + 
1 i 
A 
4.9 ~ ° 








= i 
- 
- 
’ 2 
i - 
‘ 
” * 
— 
' ‘ r : a ‘ 
5 . we yoda el eT . y oily Be 
rt hae nw > pe ry Mea ot 1 “ ; i _ 
> : y i> ge 7 “= ¥ =} ' ‘ ‘ id 
= , 4 a ; 
2 te Pee es : ar 
won Deer ae a ] 
, 5 + ~~ ma ’ x i i» ‘3 
toe = art ie 0 i z Ae . + 4 me {- & 
a é | 
wnt + 3 * ~ aa Ce » . 
: : ate : t 
i ‘ - } * % =f } 
A L i 
F id : . / Ls 
~ * » 
‘ rr ie ' in 4 ie '. i . ? 
° 7 , : 4 44 P 
’ | 4 » ya | 
7 * <. - . 5 ' > 7 i ¥ 
i F F ’ e 
ty » 2 f 
‘ te I 2 
‘ é os Se ei ‘ 


( 4381} 
2 CuUNDs 


Colour—white. Arms—four. 


Symbols—first pair——-vessel ; right Varada Mudra ; left book on lotus. 


According to the Sadhanamala, Cunda is the only feminine emanation 
of Vajrasattva, bearing the image of this Divine Buddha on the crown. Cunda 
is variously spelt as Cunda, Cundra, and Cundra, to whom three Sadhanas are 
assigned. One of the Sadhanas describes her form in the following words :— 


‘‘ Arya-Cundam Saraccandrabham ekamukham caturbhujam varada- 
daksinabhujam  pustakankitapadmavamabhujam patradharisesabhujadva- 
yam nanabharanavastravibhtsitam Vajrasattvamukutam [dhyayat.]”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—142, Na—6, C—118. 


‘¢ The worshipper should conceive himself as Arya-Cunda, who is radiant 
as the autumn moon, is one-faced and four-armed ; who exhibits the Varada 
Mudra in the right hand and carries the lotus bearing the book in the left, 
while the other two hands are engaged in holding the bowl; who is decked 
in many ornaments and garments, and bears the image of Vajrasattva on the 
crown.” 

Professor Foucher has discovered perhaps the only extant image (Plate 
XXXVII,b) of Cunda& which is the nearest: approach to the Sadhana 
though it does not follow it accurately. The photograph has already been 
reproduced in his l’I[conographie Bouddhique de ’ Inde, parte 1*. In this 
image, Cunda sits in the Paryanka attitude and carries in one of her right hands 
the rosary instead of showing the Varada Mudra as required by the Sadhana. 
Over her head is a parasol and on the aureole are noticed two figures of 
Amitabha. Another Sadhana says that she should sits on an animal on the 
moon over lotus. Another form, not described in the Sadhanamala, with six- 
teen arms is said to have been installed in the Cundavarabhavana at 
Pattikera in Bengal. This has also been reproduced by Prof. Foucher.t 


We cannot agree however with the identification of the Java figure 
given on Pl. XLIV and explained on p. 265-6 in the “ Beginnings of Buddhist 
Art’ as that of Cunda. The stone image does not follow the Sadhana 
in important details. We venture to suggest that the figure is a male 
one and we should search for its identification in the direction of Lokesvara 


or Manjusri. 


BoOny civ. Partol, pes: 


t+ Op. cit. Part 1, fig. 25 is a stone image of Cunda with sixteen arms, 


( 182 ) 


In the same way we cannot agree also with the identification of a 
bronze®* offered by Dr. Coomaraswamy in J. R. A.S. 1909, as it does not fol- 


low the Sadhana in important details. 


§ 3. THE PANCHARAKSA MANDALA. 


The deities constituting the Pancaraks&é Mandala are called Maha- 
pancaraksa deities and are five in number, to wit, Mahapratisara, Maha- 
sihasrapramardani, Mahamantranusarini, Mahamayiri and MahAsitavati. 
They are said to affiliate themselves to the five Dhyani Buddhas and their 
forms have already been described under the feminine emanations of the dif- 
ferent Dhyani Buddhas. When they are worshipped in the Mandala, their 
forms differ to some extent, and we shall presently describe these forms. 


The Mahapancaraksa deities are very popular with the Mahayana 
Buddhists inasmuch as every Buddhist priest keeps a copy of the Pancaraksa 
manuscript, which is neatly written, sometimes in gold and silver and 
with illustrations. That their worship was much in vogue is evident from the 
fact that every Vihaéra in Nepal possesses images of these deities either in 
stone or in bronze.t The miniatures that are reproduced with this have 
been taken from .a manuscript of Paficaraksa which is now in the 
possession of an American Anthropologist, Dr. W. Y. Evans Wentz, 
PheDe Oxtord): 


The reason why the Pancaraksa deities are so popular are enumerated 
in the Sadhana named in the Colophon as “ Paficaraksavidhanam ” in the 
Sadhanamala. The five deities when worshipped grant long life; they 
protect kingdoms, villages, and meadows; and protect men from evil 
spirits, diseases, and famines, and from all possible dangers that may befall 


humanity. 


Prof. Foucher has givent only a general idea about the Paficaraksa dei- 
ties. The following 1s an attempt to describe them more elaborately from the 


* Op. cit, 1909, p. 297, Pl. III, Fig. 1. 


+ In several of the Viharas we made an attempt to photograph a series of bronzes 
but their inconvenient position did not allow us to do so with success. 


{ In his Ptude sur L’Iconographie Bouddhique de L’ Inde, 11, p. 99 et sqq. Prof. Fucher 
has quoted two Dhyanas of Mahasitavati and Mahasahasrapramardani, as emanations res- 
pectively of Amitabha and Vairocana. But it may be pointed out that the two forms, 
such as has been described there, are not worshipped in the Paficaraks&é Mandala. 


( 188 ) 


Dhydanas given in the Sadhanamala, and to give an idea as to their respec- 
tive positions in the Mandala. It may be pointed out that all the five 
goddesses excepting Mahasahasrapramardani, are peaceful in appearance, 
and each of them is distinguished by the foliage of a tree under the shade 
of which she rests. Mahasahasrapramardani, as will be seen from the 
description given below, is terrible and awe-inspiring with bare fangs, three 
eyes rolling in anger and the ornament of human bones and skulls. 


In the middle should be Mahapratisara, who is all white in complexion, 
of twice eight years, has the Caitya on the crown and the moon as her seat. 
She resides in the orb of the sun and sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude. She 
has three eyes, eight arms, dangling ear-ornaments, necklace, Niipura, golden 
armlets, girdle of gold and all other ornaments. She is four-faced ; the first 
face is white, right blue, left red and the fourth behind is yellow. She holds 
in her four left hands the Vajrapaga, the Trisila, the bow and the axe, and 
in the four right hands the Cakra the Vajra, the arrow and the sword. Over 
her head is the foliage of the Bodhi tree with various flowers and fruits* 


( Plate XXXVII,c). 


To the East of Mahapratisaraé is Mahasahasrapramardani, who has blue 
complexion, brown hair rising upwards in the shape of a flame, and is decked 
in garlands of skulls. Her faces look terrible with contortions of the brows 
and canine teeth ; her seat is the burning sun on which she sits in the Lalita 
attitude, and tramples upon the evil spirits, the Bhitas and the Yaksas. She 
has golden armlets, necklace, Ntipura and other ornaments, is. four-faced 
and eight-armed. The first right hand shows the Varada Mudra, and the 
other three carry the Vajra, the Ankusa and the sword. The four left hands 
carry the Tarjanipasa, the axe the bow and the sixteen jewels on the lotus. 
Her principal face is blue, the right white, the left green and the fourth be- 
hind yellow. Over her head is the foliage of the Bo-treet (Plate XX XVII,d). 


* The text is as follows :— 


‘‘ Mahapratisaré gauravarna dvirastavarsakrti caityalankrtamtirdha candrasana- 
stha, suryyamandalalidha vajraparyankini trinetra, astabhuja, calat-kundalasobhita 
haranupura-bhusita kanakakeytramanditamekhala carvalankaradharini. Tasya 
Bhagavatyah prathamamukham gauravarnam, daksinam krsnam prsthe pitam vame 
raktam, Daksinaprathamabhuje cakram, dvitivye vajram, tritiye Sarah, caturthe 
khadgah; vamaprathamabhuje vairapasah dvitiye tristlam, trtiye dhanuh, caturthe 
parasuh ; Bodhivrksopasobhita, nanapuspaphaladyalankrta.”’ 

Sadhanamala, A—217—18. 


+ Compare Text—Tasy& Mahapratisarayah ptrvasyam disi........ Mahasahasra- 
pramardani Krsnavarna pingalorddhvakesa narakapalalankrta bhrabhrkutidamstrakara- 
Tavadanas, <2. . lalitaksepena mahabhtitamahayaksamakramamana...... tasya daksina- 


prathamabhuje varadavajram, dvitiye ankugah trtiye sarah caturthe khadgah, vamapra- 
thamabhuje tarjanipasah, dvitiye parasuh, trtiye dhanuh, caturthe padmopari sodasara- 
CHAMs ek uv. Vatavrksopasobhita. Ibid, A—218, 





‘ 


ast . rapt: 


a oe 
“~ 










Ce 
rete 
i 
4 na 
re 
' cee 
f ee 
i Pe 
j | 
ea 
a | be 
i ‘ 
‘ ‘ 
¢ 
‘ 
"i : 
— 
\ 7 
reg 
' 
é : OF 
‘ i . 
* : 7 4 Ti . Ag 2A Wy 7 
i j , ) . a 
: , j r - cana ee 
¢ , Pa 
‘ ‘ ~ ree Ce) 
‘ i ty) 
ba 
2 hy 4 


a” 
van 








. 
f 


i 


ea Coe a 


ee gt ee ee be 








a] 


ERIS Nake 
‘ a * 


on 
° 
= 
ag 8 


~- 

. 
- 
' 


a 
* 
pte aX 
et: hom, 
& 
ne 
ie 
’ 


tn 
Siz 
® 
a’ 
~* 


-e 


+ 


pit s,). > 
~ 7 teins ol 9 ey 


Y eer 

— . 

ae ’ 
= e § eS @ 
ie 

‘, . ” 
ee ° Vi a L) i 

nm 


tae ets ek lead 


* 
4 
_ 
ae 
7 


(PRLS) 


noose with the Tarjani, the second the bow and the third the bejewelled 
banner. Over her head is the foliage of the Campaka tree* ( Plate 


XXXVIII,¢). 


The illustrations represent all the goddesses in the Vajraparyanka atti- 
tude except Mahasahasrapradani, whose attitude is Lalita. They tally in 
all respects with the descriptions given in the Pancaraksavidhana section of 
the Sadhanamala, referred to before. 


§4. THE TARAS.+ 
ee OFC DNA YS: 


Symbols—right Varada Mudra; left lotus. 


To Professor Foucher we are indebted for the classification of the vari- 
ous Taras in accordance with colour. Strictly speaking, only those should 
be designated as Taras, to whom the Mantra, Om Tare tuttare ture Svaha, 
is assigned, and there are seven different variations of Tara carrying 
the Utpala in the left hand and exhibiting the Varada Mudra in the right. 
Out of these seven, two only bear the image of Amoghasiddhi on the crown 
and the others do not bear any image of a Dhyani Buddha. It is, therefore, 
difficult to identify the representations of the latter especially in stone 
when no colour is present. So a special attention should be paid not only to 
the particular pose in which the Taras sit, but also to their companions 
if present, in order to arrive at a correct identification. In this section 
attempt would be made to indicate the characteristic features of each of the 
seven varieties for correct identification. 


* Compare Text—‘‘ Tato Mahapratisaraya uttarasyam disi....Mahasitavati, hari- 
tavarna suryyamandalalidha trimukha trinetra sadbhuja....; tasya& prathamabhuje 
abhayah, dvitiye vajram, trtiye saram ; vamaprathamabhuje tarjanipasah, dvitiye dhanuh, 
trtiye ratnadhvajam...... Campakavrksopasobhita (sic-Sobhitam), 


Ms. A—220. 


+ In the Sadhanamala a very large number of goddesses has been designated as Taras, 
some with the crest of the Dhyani Buddhas and others without. In order to clearly 
distinguish between their.forms it is necessary that they should be treated separately. 
IL have classifisd them under two heads. The ordinary Taras showing the Varada 
Mudra in the right hand and carrying the Utpala or the lotus in the left ; while the extra- 
ordinary forms of Tara will embrace all goddesses designated as Taras in the Sadhanamala, 


( 186 ) 
(i) GREEN T&R. 


Amongst the green varieties of Tara, Khadiravani and Vasyatara have 
already been noticed under the feminine emanations of Amoghasiddhi. (7) 
Khadiravani can be identified by the presence of Marict and Eka- 
jata. (47) Vasyatara has, as her characteristic feature, the European 
fashion of sitting (Bhadrasana). It may be noticed, however, that she is 
described as single and is not accompanied by any other god or goddess. 
(iit) The characteristic features of Aryatarda are that she sits in the 
Ardhaparyanka attitude and like the aforementioned one, is entirely alone. 
(wv) Mahattari Tara (Plate XXXIX,a) may be distinguished by the 
Vajraparyanka attitude in which she sits and also by the fact of her being 
represented without any companion. (v) Varada Tara sits in the 
Ardhaparyanka like Aryatara, but she can be easily recognized by the 
presence of four goddesses, ASokakanta Marici, Mahamaytri, Ekajata and 
Janguli. 


(i) Wuite Tara. 


Under this head two varieties may be noticed, one is Astamahabhaya 
Tara and the other is Mrtyuvaficana Tara, also called Sitatara or Vajratara. 
(1) The distinguishing feature of Astamahabhaya Tara is that she 
sits in the Ardhaparyanka attitude and is surrounded by the goddesses, 
originating from the ten syllables of the Tara Mantra, identical with 
the principal figure in appearance. (i7) As regards Mrtyuvafhcana 
Tara, the only distinctive feature sof this goddess 1sthatyeshessbeare 
a wheel on her breast. She is absolutely unattended and sits in the 
Vajraparyanka attitude. 


Il. EXTRAORDINARY TARAS. 


The seven different varieties of Ordinary Taras carrying the Utpala in 
the left hand and showing the Varada Mudra in the right have already been 
described. The other varieties of Tara classified according to colour will 
now be dealt with. Their Mantra, however, is not necessarily the famous 
‘‘Om Tare tuttare ture Svaha ” for, in this section have been included all 


the female deities called in the Sadhanamala by the name of Tara. 


( 187 ) 


(1) GREEN Tard. 


1 Durgottarini Tara. She has green complexion, lotus as 
her seat, and garments of white colour; she has four arms carrying in the 
first pair, the noose and the goad, and showing in the second the lotus and 
and Varada Mudra. 


2. Dhanada Tara. She carries the book and the rosary in the 
first pair of hands, while the second pair carries objects similar to those held 
by Durgottarini. She has an animal for her Vahana and is accompanied by 
eight goddesses originating from the eight syllables of her Mantra, and bears 
the image of Amoghasiddhi on the crown. 


38. Janguli. She emanates from Aksobhya and may have three 
different colours, yellow, white and green. When green, she is four-armed 
and carries the Trista, the peacock’s tail, and a snake, and exhibits the 
Abhaya Mudra in the fourth. 


4, Parnasavari. When green, she emanates from Amoghasiddhi, 
and from Aksobhya when yellow, and as such, both of her forms have 
already been described. She is generally three-faced and six-armed, but 
in rare cases may have fourarms. The peculiarity of the green variety 
is that all the three faces are depicted as irritated but smiling (sakrodha- 
hasitananam), 


(ii) Wuirr Tara. 


eeu Dh ae htatata,. As she bears the images of the 
five Dhyani Budhas on the crown, her form has already been described. She 
has four arms which exhibit in the first pair, the Utpala Mudra, and the rosary 
and the Varada pose in the second. She may be recognized by the presence 


of two goddesses, Mahamaytri and Marici. 


2. Sadbhuja Sitatara. Asshe bears the image of Amogha- 
siddhi on the crown, her form has already been described. She is three-faced 


and six-armed and has no companions. 


38. VisSvamata. She has been described in the Sadhanamala as 
one-faced, with the white complexion of the moon, white garments 
and a white serpent as her Vahana. She carries the white lotus in 
the left hand and exhibits the Abhaya pose in the right. She has not been 


described as bearing any image of her sire, 


18 


(188 3) 


4. Kurukulla as an emanation of Amitabha of red colour general- 
ly assumes the red colour. But when she is two-armed, she has accord- 
ing to the Sadhanamala, the white colour, and her form has already been 
described. She carries the rosary and the bowl of lotus, and her Vahana is 
an animal. 


~ 


5. Janguli as an emanation of Aksobhya ought to be of blue 
colour. But according to the Sadhanamala she may have three colours, white, 
yellow or green. When white, she is one-faced and four-armed and plays on 
the Vina in the first pair of hands, and shows the white serpent and the 
Abhaya pose in the second, 


(1) YERLLow Tara. 


1. Vajratara. she is-yellow, has fourifacesmeishtiatmogueaams 
the images of four or five Dhyani Buddhas on the crown. Both the forms 
of Vajratara have been described previously. She is accompanied by ten 
goddesses when worshipped in the Mandala. 


2. Janguli. The yellow variety of Janguli has three faces and six 
arms, and bears the image of the Dhyani Buddha Aksobhya on the crown. 
This form has already been described. 


38. Parnasavari. When yellow, Parnasavari is an emanation 
of Aksobhya, and has three faces and six arms, and a pleasant smile instead 
of the irritated expression in her faces. This form of Parnasavari has also 
been described under the feminine emanations of Aksobhya. 


4. Bhrkutiis yellow and emanates from Amitabha. She is one- 
faced and four-armed, shows the Varada Mudra and the rosary in the two 
right hands and carries the Tridandi and the Kamandalu in the two left. 


5. Prasanna Tara. Sheis also yellow and her form has not been 
described before as she is an independent goddess without the figure of any 
Dhyani Buddha on the crown. The Mantra assigned to her, calls her by the 
epithets of Amrtamukhi and Amrtalocana, and as a matter of fact, except the 
face on the top, all the seven faces are represented as having charmingly 
sweet appearance. She is unlike the other Taras, benign and peaceful ; she 
is more like Vidyujjvalakarali, a form of Ekajata, than anybody else. The 
Dhyana describes her form in the following terms :— 


Hemavarnam mahaghoram Taradevim maharddhikam trinetram asta- 
vadanim bhujasodasabhisitam urddhvapingalakeséam sardrasatardhamunda- 
malakrtaharam jagattranam mahavalam pratyalidhapadopetéam hasantim. 


(CaRLS Ome) 


navayauvanam vicitravastranepathyam pradhanamukham pitam, daksinam 
dvitiyam nilam, tritiyam syamam, caturtham gaganasgyamam, vamam, kunda- 
sannibham, dvitiyam raktam, tritiyam gaganasyamam, trddhvasyam dhimra- 
varnabham mahaghoram vikatotkatam; daksinakaresu. khatvanga-utpala- 
Sara-vajra-ankusa-danda-kartri-abhayadharam ; vamabhujesu sapasatarjani- 
kapala-dhanuh-khatvanga-vajrapasa-Brahmasirah-ratnakalasadharam ; visva- 
padmacandrastham siryyaprabhavibhisitam ; vamapadena Indram, daksina- 
padena Upendram, padadvayamadhye Rudram Brahmanam ca Aakramya 
sthitam, sarvamaravinasinim bhavayet yogi. 


Prasannatarasadhanam.”’ 


Sadhanamala,- A—127-8, N—92, C—101. 


‘“The worshipper should conceive himself as [Prasanna Tara] who is of 
golden complexion, of terrible appearance, bestows prosperity, is three-eyed, 
eight-faced and sixteen-armed ; whose brown hair rises upwards, whose brace- 
let is constituted of half a hundred heads wet with blood, who emanacipates 
the universe and is irresistible, stands in the Pratyalidha attitude, has smil- 
ing faces, is in fulness of youth ; whose garments are of variegated colours ; 
whose first face is yellow, the second to the right is blue, the third green, and 
the fourth blue like the sky ; the face to the left is white like the Kunda 
flower, the second red, and the third blue like the sky ; the face on the top is 
of the colour of smoke, terrible in appearance and is distorted and disfigured ; 
in whose right hands are the Khatvanga, the Utpala, the arrow, the Vajra, 
the AnkuSsa, the staff, the Kartri and the Abhaya pose, and in the left, the 
noose with the Tarjani, the Kapala, the bow, the Khatvanga, the Vajra, the 
noose, the head of Brahma, and the vessel of gems ; who stands on the moon 
over the double lotus, is radiant with the glow of the sun, tramples under her 
left foot Indra, under the right Upendra, and presses Rudra and Brahma bet- 
ween the two, and who destroys all the Maras.”’ 


The accompanying sketch ( Plate XX XVIII,d) shows how she is re- 


presented by the artists of Nepal in modern days, and it agrees with the 


description of the Sadhana in all important details. 


(iv) Buur Tara. 


1. Ekajata. She may have several forms with the blue colour and 
bears the image of her sire Aksobhya on the crown in all cases. All her forms 
have been deseribed previously under the emanations of Dhyani Buddha 
Aksobhya including the terrible form which goes by the name of Vidyujjvala- 
karali with blue colour, twelve faces and twenty-four arms. 


2. Mahacina Tara. She also bears the image of Aksobhya on 
the crown and has already been described under the feminine emanations of 
the Dhyani Buddha. She gets the name of Mahacina Tara as she is believed 
to have come from Mahacina, the place where she was originally worshipped. 


( 140 ) 


She is the subject of the Mahacinakrama-Tantra and has been incorporated 
wholly into the Hindu Tantric Pantheon. 


(v) Rep Tari. 


There are not many red Taras in the Sadhanamala and in fact K uru- 
kulla is the only one that belongs to the red variety. As she bears the 
image of red Amitabha on the crown, she gets also the red colour being one 
of his emanations, though her white forms are by no means rare. Kurukulla 
may also bear the image of the five Dhyani Buddhas on the crown but the 
eolour would be red in that case also. She will be white when two-armed, 
and red when four, six or eight-armed. Only when she is six-armed, she is 
regarded as an emanation of the five Dhyani Buddhas. All her forms have 


also been described. 


CHAPTER XII. 
INDEPENDENT DEITIES. 
Ta GO DS. 


The deities discussed in this chapter are mentioned as Independent, 
and they do not, according to the Sadhanamala, bear any image of the 
Dhyani Buddhas on the crown. It is therefore impossible to classify them 
in the way as we have hitherto done*. The reason why the Sadhana- 
mala is silent about their sires is not known. Either these deities were 
foreign to Buddhism and incorporated later on, as in the cases of Gana- 
pati and Sarasvati, or it may be, that the compilers of the Sadhana- 
mala did not think it worth their while to mention the sires in all cases 
having already described many typical ones. But our ignorance does not 
allow us to find out the secret. Otherwise why should some of the deities 
with the same Mantra ‘Om Taretuttareture Svaha’ bear the image or images 
of the Dhyani Buddhas, while others are without them. It is not proposed to 
deal here with the deities of whom identical parallels have already been dis- 
cussed. But we will take up only those that are absolutely independent and 
have not been described previously. It may be remarked that the images 
and paintings of gods do not generally bear the images of their sires on the 
crown, and when the latter is not present, what does it matter if they are 
emanated or independent ? At least for the purpose of identification it has 
practically no value. 


In the Sadhanamala there are six male gods who could not be assigned 
to their sires. This number is increased by one if we include Paramasva, 
another form of Hayagriva without crest, who emanates from either 
Amitabha or Aksobhya. Not knowing to whom Paramasva may _ be 
assigned, he is dealt with under the independent deities. If we add Nama- 
sangiti from Dharmakosasamgraha of Amrtananda, the number rises to eight. 


* We may, however, suggest a tentative classification in accordance with colour and 
assign the gods or goddesses to the five Dhyani Buddhas with five different colours. 
Thus the deities with blue colour may be assigned to Akgobhya, yellow to Ratnasambhava, 
white to Vairocana and so on. 


+ Paramasva cannot be dealt under the emanations of Amitabha because of his red 
colour, as Hayagriva when an emanation of AkSobhya even has the red colour, 


( 142ae) 
1. GANAPATI. 


Colour—red. Arms —twelve. Vahana—mouse. 


_ 


Asana 





a. 


Only one Sadhana in the Sadhanamala describes the form of Ganapati. 
He is twelve-armed and one-faced and rides his favourite Vahana, the mouse. 
The Dhyana describes him in the following terms :— 

‘ Bhagavantam Ganapatim raktavarnam jatamukutakiritinam sarva- 
bharanabhisitam dvadagabhujam lambodaraikavadanam arddhaparyanka- 
tandavam trinetram api ekadantam savyabhujesu kuthara-gara-ankuga- -vajra- 


khadga- -gtilafica ; vamabhujesu misala- -capa-khatvanga-asrkkapéala-suskamam- 
sakapala-phatkafica raktapadme misikoparisthitam dhyayat.”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—828, C—249* 


‘*The worshipper should conceive himself as god Ganapati of red com- 
plexion, wearing the crown of chignon, who is decked in all ornaments, has 
twelve arms, protruding belly and one face, stands in the Ardhaparyanka in 
a dancing attitude, is three-eyed, and has one tusk ; who carries in his right 
hands the Kuthara, the arrow, the goad, the Vajra, the sword and the Sila, 
and in the left hands the Masala, the bow, the Khatvanga, the Kapéla of 
blood, the Kapala of dried meat and the Phatkayt; and who rides the mouse 


on the red lotus.’’ 


2. BIGHNANTAKA. 


Asana—Pratyalidha. Colour—blue. 


Symbols—Tarjanipasa and Vajra. 


Bighnantaka is closely associated with three other gods, Padmantaka, 
Yamantaka and Prajfantaka, who are generally represented as guardians 
of the gates in Mandalas. Bighnantaka is represented in various forms. The 
name is significant as the word “‘ Bighna”’ or “‘obstacle’’ refers to the Hindu 
god, Ganega. Only one short Sadhana in the Sadhanamala describes his 
form in the following terms :— 

‘ Atmanam pratyalidhapadasthitam ekamukham dvibhujam_ nilavar- 


ham vamakarena tarjanikapasam, daksinakarena udyatavajram bhayanakam, 
pingalorddhvakesam....visvadalakamalopari stryyastham bhavayet 


Bighnantakasadhanam.” Sadhanamala. A—306, Na—45 C—2385. 


* Omitted in Ms. N. 

+ It is not clear, however, what this word ‘ Phatka’ means. The broken tusk in 
one hand is almost compulsory for all images of Ganesa. May the word here stand for the 
broken tusk ? 


( a45 00) 


‘The worshipper should conceive himself as [Bighnantaka], who stands 
in the Pratyalidha attitude, is one faced, two-armed, has blue complexion, 
carries in his left hand the Tarjanipasa, and weilds the Vajra in the right ; is 
terrible in appearance, has brown hair rising upwards,...., whose seat is on 
the sun supported by the lotus.”’ 


This Sadhana is silent about the prostrate figure of Ganesa whom he 
tramples under his feet, thereby giving a significance to his name as already 
indicated. It may be pointed out here that the god Ganesa, whom the Hin- 
dus consider as the remover of all obstacles, is regarded as the most dangerous 
obstacle by the Buddhists. As to the origin of this god there runs a Nepa- 
lese legend* that at a certain time an Odiyana Pandit was performing certain 
Tantric rites on the bank of the Baghmati river near Kathmandu in order to 
obtain a particular Siddhi (perfection). Ganesa, it is said, being strongly 
opposed to the idea, began throwing dangerous obstacles on the way of the 
performance of the rite. The Odiyana Pandit without seeing any succour 
invoked the god Bighnantaka, the destroyer of all obstacles, and lo! Bigh- 
nantaka instantly appeared in a terrible and fierce form, armed with many 
destructive weapons. He gave a hot chase to Ganesa who was, by this time, 


flying in terror, and in no time overcame the latter. 


In the representation it may be seen how Bighnantaka is pressing Ganesa 
with his heavy legs, and the latter in order keep up the reputation of his god- 
head, exhibits the Abhaya pose even in the agony of pain. The form in which 
Bighnantaka is said to have appeared before the Odiyana Vajracaryya has 
six arms. He carries in the two principal arms the Kartri and the Kapala 
against the breast ; the rest carry the Damaru and the goad in the right, and 
the Trista and the noose with the Tarjani in the left ( Plate XX XITX,b). 

This image was bought from Nepal and is now deposited in the 
Museum of the Vangiva Sahitya Parisat at Calcutta. 


3. VAJRAHUNKARA. 


Appearance—terrible. Symbols—Vajra and Ghanta. 
Mudra—Vajrahunkara. Arms—two. 
Asana—Pratyalidha. Vahana—‘ iva. 


Only one short Sadhana in the Sadhanamala describes the form of the 
god Vajrahunkara, who is so-called because his two hands carrying the Vajra 
and the Ghanta exhibit the Vajrahunkara Mudra. The Sadhana says that 
the god originates from the sacred syllable ‘Hum’, which is irresistible like the 


* The story has been recorded a little differently in the Dharmakogasamgraha, 
A. S..B.. Ms. Fol. 106." 


( 144 ) 


Fire of Destruction, is blue in clour and strongly radiant. The Sadhana adds 


further :— 


“Tadutpannam maharaudram Vajrahunkarasamjnakam | 
Attahasam maharaudram ksepayantam tridhatukam |! 
Ghantavajraprayogena mudrabaddhakaradvayam | 
Pratyalidhapadenaiva Bhairavakrantabhikaram 1’ 


Sadhanamala. A—278, Na—31, C—216. 


‘The worshipper should conceive himself as the god of the name of 
Vajrahunkara, who originates from that syllable [Hum], who is terribly 
fierce in appearance, laughs horribly, is wrathful, and disturbs the three 
Worlds ; whose two hands carrying the Ghanta and the Vajra are locked in 
the Vajrahunkara Mudra; who tramples upon Bhairava in the Pratyalidha 


attitude, and inspires awe.”’ 


It may be pointed out that though Vajradhara also displays the Vajra- 
hunkara Mudra and carries the Ghanta and the Vajra exactly in the same way 
as Vajrahunkara does, there are too many differences between their forms. 
Vajradhara sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus and has a peaceful 
and a graceful appearance. But Vajrahunkara stands in the Pratyalidha 
attitude, tramples upon Bhairava, a form of the Hindu god, Siva, and has 
a terrible appearance, No connection can, however, be established between 
the two, 


4. BHUTADAMARA. 


Colour—black as collyrium. Appearance—terrible. 
Arms—four. Symbols—Vaira and Tarjani. 
Mudra—Bhitadamara Mudra. 


Three Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala describe the form of Bhitadamara, 
who is terrible and awe-inspiring with ornaments of snake, canine teeth, and 
garlands of skulls. The Dhyana runs as follows :— 

‘“Atménam pasyet raudram ca jvalamalakulaprabham | 
Caturbhujam mahakrodham bhinnafjanasamaprabham ‘| 
Daksine vajramullalya tarjayan vamapanina | 
Damstrakaralavadanam nagastakavibhisitam 1 


Kapalamalamukutam trailokyam api nasanam | 
Attahasam mahanadam trailokyadhisthitam prabhum 
Pratyalidhasusamsthanam Aadityakotitejasam | 
Aparajitapadakrantam mudrabandhena tisthati 1! 


Bhitadamarasadhanam.”’ Sadhanamala, A—285, C—221, Na—91. 


PANS NOD GD 





a, Mahattari Tara b. Bighnantaka 
(Nepal) (Bangiva Sahitya Parisat) 





c. Trailokyavijaya d. Paramasva 


( Bodh Gaya) 


nate: Pa a ‘ 


ck a eee 





Caikcee 


The worshipper should conceive himself as [Bhitadimara] who is wrath- 
ful in appearance, round whose person radiate fiery flames, who is four-armed, 
terribly angry, and is resplendent like a broken lump of collyrium, weilds the 
Vajra in the right hand and shows the Tarjani in a threatening attitude in the 
left ; whose face appears terrible with bare fangs ; who is decked in ornaments 
SUL Via Sei y aes) A Oe has the garland of skulls on the crown, is capable of 
destroying the three Worlds, laughs horribly, trumpets loudly and is the lord 
of the three Worlds ; who stands firmly in the Pratyalidha attitude, is re- 
splendent like myriads of suns, and tramples under his feet, the god, Apara- 
jita and exhibits (in his two other hands) the (Damara) Mudra. 


So fom the Dhyana it appears that the god in his two principal hands 
exhibits the Bhitadamara or the Damara Mudra, while the other two carry 
the menacing Vajra in the right and exhibits the Tarjani in the left. The 
description of this Mudra appears in the same Sadhana.* 


5. VAJRAJVALANALARKA. 


Colour—bliue. Faces—four. 
Arms—eight. Asana—Alidha. 


Vahana—Visnu and his wife. 


Only one Sadhana in the Sadhanamala describes his form. He is four- 
faced, eight-armed, stands in the Alidha attitude, and tramples upon Visnu, 
who is accompanied by his wife. He has blue complexion and presents a 
terrible appearance. The Dhyana describes him in the following terms :— 


* Vajrajvalanalarkam nilavarnam jvalamalakulaprabham caturmukham 
astabhujam Srngara-vira-bibhatsa-karunaénvitacaturmukham, caturbhir-dak- 
sinakarair-vajra-khadga-cakra-banadharam caturvamakarair-ghantaé-capa- 
pasa-khatvaneasaktavicitrapatakadharam jvaladanalakapilasikhakalapam 
atibhisanamahahivalayakankana-katisttrantpura-kanthika-kundala-mukuta- 
bharanam Mahamayacakravaranacaturam sapatnikam Visnum alidhapadena 
akramya avasthitam bhavayet.”’ 


Sadhanamala. A—342, Na—33, C—217. 


‘¢The worshipper should conceive himself as Vajrajvalanalarka of blue 
complexion, round whose person radiate fiery flames, who is four-faced and 
eight-armed ;_ whose four faces display the sentiments of amour, heroism, 
disgust and compassion ; who carries in his four right hands the Vajra, the 
sword, the Cakra and the arrow, and in the four left the Ghanta, the bow, 


* The description of the Mudra is given in the following verse in the Sadhanamala— 
‘“Anamikadvayamvestya tarjanidvayam kuficayet | 
Kanisthim madhyamaficaiva jyesthangusthena cakramet |\”’ 


19 


( 146 ) 


noose, and the Khatvanga surmounted by the banner of variegated colours ; 
whose brown hair resembles a burning flame ; who is decked in ornaments 
of bracelet, armlet, girdle, nijpura, torque, earing and tiara consisting of the 
[ eight ] great lords of frightful serpents ; who stands in the Alidha attitude 
and tramples upon Visnu with his consort who are expert in choosing the dis- 


cus of Mahamaya.’’* 


6. TRAILOKYAVIJAYA. 


Colour—blue. Faces—four. 
Arms—eight. Asana—Pratyalidha. 


Vahana—Gauri and Siva. 


Trailokyavijaya has also the blue colour, is terrible in appearance, 
and inspires awe. ‘Two images of this divinity have been noticed by Prof. 
Foucher ; one hails from Java,f and the other is preserved in the monastery 
of the Hindu Mohanta at Bodh Gaya ( Plate XXXIX,c)f. The Dhyana des- 


cribes his form in the following words :— 


‘“ Trailokyavijaya-Bhattarakam nilam caturmukham astabhujam ; pra- 
thamamukham krodhasrngaram, daksinam raudram, vamam bibhatsam, prsth- 
am virarasam ; dvabhyam ghantavajranvitahastabhyam hrdi vajrahunkara- 
mudradharam ; daksinatrikaraih khatvangankusabanadharam, vamatrikaraih 
capapasavajradharam ; pratyalidhena vamapadakranta-Mahesvaramastakam 
daksinapadavastabdha-Gauristanayugalam ; Buddhasragdamamaladivicitram- 
barabharanadharinam atmanam vicintya....” 


Sadhanamala. A—341, Na—382—83, C—217. 


‘“The worshipper should realize himself as Trailokyavijaya Bhattaraka 
of blue complexion, four-faced and eight-armed ; the first face displays the 
sentiment of wrathful passion, the right displays rage, the left disgust, and 
the face behind the sentiment of heroism; who exhibits the Vajrahunkara 
Mudra with the two hands bearing the Ghanta and the Vajra against the 
breast ; and carries in his three right hands the Khatvanga, the goad, and the 
arrow, and in the three left, the bow, the noose and the Vajra ; who, standing 


* The expression ‘‘Mahamayacakravaranacaturam’’ seems to establish a connection 
between this god and Mahamaya. 

+ Beginnings of Buddhist Art,- pl. XIII, 2. See also the masterly refutation of 
Dr. Pleyte’s identification by the author on p. 268, which is simply enjoyable. 

t The photograph representing Trailokyavijaya has been taken from M. Foucher’s 
Elude sur L’Iconographie Bouddhique de L’ Inde, parte 2. It may be noticed that the two 
prostrate figures of MahesSvara and Gauri are in yab-yum. 


( 147) 


in the Pratyalidha attitude, tramples upon the head of Mahesvara with his 
left leg, while the right presses upon the bosom of Gauri ; who wears garments 
of variegated colours, and many ornaments and garlands pertaining to (the 


oN 


respective) Buddhas. Thus meditating.... 


7. PARAMASVA. 


Faces—four. Arms—eight. 


Legs—four. Vahana—four gods and four goddesses. 


We have already said that Paramasva is another form of Hayagriva, 
as the word “‘ aSva”’ in Paraméasva indicates. In the Sadhana it is said that 
he should have four faces, but in reality he has seven faces, for one of his faces, 
is said to be Brahmamukha, or the face of Brahma, who is credited with four 
faces. The other peculiar feature of this god is that he has four legs and each 
leg tramples upon two deities. The Dhyana contained in the Sadhanamala 
is quoted below :— 


** Paramasvam raktam caturmukham astabhujam catuscaranam ; pra- 
thamamukham krodhagrngaram trilocanam, daksinam raudram, vamam 
Brahmamukham, mirdhni lalitoddhilitostham haritagvamukham : ekena dak- 
sinatripatakadharakarena vigvavajrasahitenottisthabhinayam kurvantam 
ekena vamakhetakahastena visvapadmam dharayantam ; punardaksinatripa- 
takakarena uttisthabhinayam kurvantam ; punarvamakarena saktim dharay- 
antam ; punardaksinakarabhyam khadgam banafnca, avasistavamakarabhyam 
dandam capanca dharayantam. Pratyalidhena daksinapadaikena Indranim 
Sriyafica akramya sthitam, dvitiyadaksinacaranena Ratim Pritifica, vamapra- 
thamapadena Indram Madhukarafica, vamadvitiyapadena Jayakaram Vasan- 
tafnca, ityatmanam dhyayat.. 


Iti Paramasvasadhanam.”’ 





‘The worshipper should meditate on himself as Paramasva, who has red 
complexion, is four-faced, eight-armed and four-legged. The first face with 
three eyes displays angry passion, the second depicts wrath, the third is the 
face of Brahma, and the fourth on the top is green, distorted like a horse with 
its lower lip beautifully protruding. He weilds the double Vajra, in one of his 
right hands with three fingers erect ( Tripataka ) and in one of his left hands 
carries the staff with the double lotus. Another right hand, with three fin- 
gers erect, is raised upwards, and the other left carries the Sakti (dart). The 
remaining two right hands carry the Khadga and the arrow, and the remain- 
ing left carry the staff and the bow. He stands in the Pratyalidha attitude, 
and tramples with one of the right legs upon Indrani and Sri, and with the 


C148} 


second Rati and Priti; with one of the left legs Indra and Madhukara, and 
with the other left Jayakara and Vasanta.”’ 


Paramasva is illustrated in the accompanying drawing ( Plate 
XXXIX,d) prepared by a native Citrakara of Nepal. Though it does not 
correspond to all the details of the Sadhana still it is important as showing 
many minor details without which the Sadhana becomes practically unin- 


telligible. 


8. NAMASANGITI. 


Asana—Vajraparyanka. Arms—twelve. Colour—white. 


Mudras—two Abhayas, Afijali, Ksepana and Samadhi and two Tarpanas. 


Symbols—right sword on double lotus ; left Khatvanga surmounted by a Vajra. 


Pandit Amrtananda’s Dharmakosasamgraha gives the description of a 
very interesting god, who goes by the name of Namasangiti, and thus enables 
us to identify his images which are scattered about in Nepal in large numbers. 
He should be distinguished, from the Namasangiti Manjusri who has been des- 
eribed before,* as the former seems to us to be the Deification of the Namasan- 
giti literature in exactly the same way as Prajnaéparamita is regarded as a 
goddess. Pandit Amrtananda characterises him as a Buddha, but from the 
description and the illustration given it would appear that he cannot be 
a Buddha but a Bodhisattva, for among other things we cannot expect 
to find the magical instrument, the Khatvanga as also the destructive wea- 
pon like the sword in the hands of any Buddha. As there is no mention of 
the crest in the Dhyana he is dealt with as Independent. Images of Nama- 
sangiti are to be found in large numbers in Nepal either in stone ( Pl. XL,a)t 
or in bronze ( Plate XL,b), and he 1s also extremely popular in Tibet. Gettyt{ 
erroneously designates this divinity as a “‘ Dogmatic Form of Avalokitesvara’’ 
and erroneous also are the names given by her of the series of the Mudras 


* Supra p. 23. 
+ Some of the arms in the stone image are broken; the image hails from the 
Sarasvatisthan in Nepal. The bronze is in the collection of Pandit Siddhiharsa. 


+ The Gods of Northern Buddhism, p. 68. 


PLATOON Ie 





a. Namasangiti b, Namasaneiti. 
( Nepal ). (Nepal). 





C Arya-Saras rat. 





ad. Vajrasarada. e. Vayrasarada 


( Nalanda ). 


% 
& 


Meee Bidet 





( 149 ) 


that are exhibited by the god. The Dhyana as given in the Dharmakosa- 
samegraha is quoted as follows :— 


** Namasangitinama | Bodhisattvah].* 

Kkavaktrah svetavarnah dhyananayanah smerananah jatamukutadharah 
nanalankaralankrtah sanmudralankrtah dvadasabhujah prathamabhyam savya- 
daksabhyam hrdayapradese abhyamudradvayam, dvayabhyam mukutopari 
krtanjalimudram, daksatrtiyena visvavajropari khadgam, savyavamacaturtha- 
bhyam tarpanamudradvayam, savyavama-pancamabhyam patrasthamrtakse- 
panamudram, sasthasavyavamabhyam sapatradhyanamudram vamatrtiyena 
savajrakhatvangam dadhanah, kamalopari vajrasanah.”’ 


Dharmakosasamgraha (A.S.B. Ms.): Fol. 91. 


The [ Bodhisattva] Namasangiti. 


‘* He is one-faced, white in colour, has eyes (half-closed) in meditation, 
smiling countenance, the crown of chignon and various ornaments, is decked 
in the six auspicious ornaments, and twelve-armed. He exhibits in the first 
pair of right and left hands the two Abhaya Mudras against the breast, and 
in the second pair the Afijali (clasped hand) Mudra over the crown. The 
third right hand carries the sword on the double lotus. The fourth pair exhi- 
bits the Tarpana Mudras, the fifth pair shows the Mudra of sprinkling nectar 
from the vessel ( Ksepana) and the sixth pair exhibits the Samadhi Mudra 
on which is the vessel (of nectar); the third left hand carries Khatvanga 
surmounted by the Vajra; and he sits in the meditative pose on the lotus.” 


The image reproduced by Gettyt+ has lost the sword on the double lotus 
and the Khatvanga surmounted by the Vajrat carried in the third pair of 


hands by Namasangiti. 
II GODDESSHES. 


The feminine deities that are not directly or indirectly expressed in the 
Sadhanamala to be the emanations of any Dhyani Buddha or a combination 
of four or five of them, are four§ in number, and if we include the three dei- 
ties mentioned in the Dharmakosasamgraha of Amrtananda, the number would 
be increased to seven. A tentative classification may also be suggested in 


* The A. S. B. and Nepal Mss. both read ‘‘ Buddhah.”’ 


+ Getty and Deniker’s The God of Northern Buddhism, Plate XX bearing the 
label ‘‘ Dogmatic form of AvalokiteSvara.”’ 


t I have seen in some of the paintings of Namasangiti, the Book on lotus instead of 
the Khatvanga topped by a Vajra, in one of the hands of the third pair, which carries in 
that case the sword and book on lotuses—the two symbols of Mafijusri. It is therefore 
not unreasonable to suppose the two to be of a similar nature. We may even go so far as 
to call Namasangiti, a variety of Mafijusri. 

§ Prasanna Tara, as an independent goddess, has been described under section 4: 
Chapter XI. If she is included the number is five. 


( 150 ) 


these cases according to the colour of the Dhyani Buddhas. But in 
view of the insufficiency of materials, it is not proper to have recourse to 
such a classification. To illustrate the statement let us take up a concrete 
example. We know Janguli is an emanation of Aksobhya, and she is credit- 
ed in the Sadhanamala with three different colours, except the blue one, the 
colour of Aksobhya. Supposing for argument’s sake the crest of the Dhyani 
Buddha had not been mentioned in the Sadhanamala in this case, should 
we not be misled by assigning to three different Dhyani Buddhas (excepting 
her own sire Aksobhya), the three varieties of Janguli ? 


1. SARASVATI.* 


Sarasvati is the name of an ancient river now dried up in the sands of 
Rajputana, and on the banks of this river the Vedic Aryans originally settled 
after their migration to India. As the banks of the river were occupied by the 
Vedic Aryans who composed many hymns, and were the scene of many sacri- 
fices, the river was, later on, inthe Pauranic age, deified as the goddess of 
Learning. The Buddhists borrowed this Hindu goddess, incorporated her 
bodily into their Pantheon in the Tantric age, when she was equally popular 
amongst the Hindus as well as the Buddhists,—and modified her form in 
various ways. The Buddhist Sarasvati may have one face with two arms, 
or three faces with six arms. When two-armed, she has four different varia- 
tions. As her worship is widely prevalent among the Buddhists owing to 
the belief that like Manjusri and Prajnhaparamita, she confers wisdom, learn- 
ing, intelligence, memory, etc., a comparatively large number of Sadhanas 
are assigned to her in the Sadhanamala. 


(i) Mahasarasvati. 


Symbols—right Varada Mudra; left lotus. Colour—white. 


She has white complexion and shows the Varada pose in the right hand 
and carries the white lotus in the left. The Dhyana describes her form in the 
following terms :— 


‘ Bhagavatim Mahasarasvatim anuvicintayet ; Saradindukarakaram sita- 
kamlopari candramandalastham ; daksinakarena varadém, vamena sana- 
lasitasarojadharam smeramukhim atikarunamayam svetacandanakusuma- 
vasanadharam muktaharopasobhitahrdayam nanaratnalankaravatim dva- 
dasavarsakrtim muditakucamukuladanturorastatim sphuradanantagabhasti- 
vyuhavabhasitalokatrayam....”’ 

Sadhanamala. A—172, C—128, C—140. 


* The Java image illustrated in Fig. 199, p. 264 and identified as ‘‘ Saraswati 
enthroned ’’ in Vincent A. Smith’s monumental work, A History of Fine Arts in India 
and Ceylon, is in reality an image of Jambhala, for, it shows clearly the mongoose in the 


left hand. 


@ 151e) 


“The worshipper should concieve himself as goddess Mahdsarasvati, 
who is resplendent like the autumn moon, rests on the moon over the 
white lotus, shows the Varada Mudra in her right hand, and carries in the 
left the white lotus with a stalk ; who has a smiling countenance, is extreme- 
ly compassionate, wears garments decorated with white sandal flowers ; whose 
breast is decorated with the pearl-necklace, whois decked in many ornaments, 
appears as a girl of twelve years, whose chest is uneven with half-developed 
breasts like flower-buds ; and who illumines the three worlds with the 
immeasurable light that radiates from her body.” 


This is the general appearance of Sarasvati, and all the other varieties 
unless otherwise stated, are identical in appearance with the one just des- 
cribed. The distinctive feature of this goddess Mahasarasvati is that she 
shows like the ordinary Taras the Varada Mudra in the right hand and car- 
ries the lotus in the left, ( Plate XL,c)* and is accompanied by four deities 
identical in form around her. Prajna is in her front, Medha to her right, 
Smrti in the left, and Mati in the West.f These four divinities may also ac- 
company other varieties of Sarasvati. As the Sadhana is. silent about the 


particular Asana, she may be represented in any attitude, sitting or standing. 


(ii) Vajravinaé Sarasvati. 
Colour—white. Symbol—-Vina. 


Vajravina Sarasvati, like Mahasarasvati, is also white in complexion, 
peaceful and benign in appearance. She is also two-armed, but the distin- 
guishing feature in this case is that she carries in her two hands the Vina, a 
kind of stringed instrument and plays upon it. She may also be represented 
as accompanied by the four devinities as in the previous case. 


(iii) Vajrasarada. 
Symbols—righi lotus ; left book. 


According to the Dhyana in the Sadhanamala she rests upon a pure 
white Jotus, and a crescent decorates her headdress ; she is three-eyed and two- 


* First published in the A. S. I. Central circle : Annual Report, 1919-20, Plate IV, 
ied Bee 


+ Compare Text— 
‘“Tatah purato Bhagavatim Prajiam, daksinato Medham, pascimato Matim, 


vamatah Smrtim—etah svanayika-samanavarnadikih sammukhamavyasthitah cinta- 
niyah.”’ Op. cit. A-—17. 





(f 7 1iae i.) 


armed, and carries the book in the left hand and the lotus in the right. The 
accompanying illustration ( Plate XL,d) shows how she is pictured by Nepa- 
lese artists. She may, however, be accompanied by the four attendants, 
Prajna and others. As the Sadhanais silent about the Asana, she may have 
any attitude. The Nalanda image ( Plate XL,e), which has been identified 
as that of Kotisri (?) is probably a stone representation of this goddess. 
Vajrasarada here sits in Bhadrasana and her companions also have the 
same attitude. All the figures in the group are mutilated, but at least one 
among them carries the Utpala and the book, in the right and left hands. 


(iv) Aryasarasvati. 


Symbol.—left Prajiaparamita on lotus. 


Aryasarasvati is another variation of Sarasvati and is also designated 
as Vajrasarasvati, which seems to be the common name of Sarasvati of the 
Vajrayanists. She appears as a girl of sixteen years, is in the fulness of youth, 
has white complexion, and carries in the left hand the stalk of a lotus on 
which rests the Prajhaparamita Book. The Dhyana is silent about the symbol 
carried in the right hand which may or may not remain empty. The Asana 
is not mentioned also, which fact shows that she may be represented in any 
attitude. In the drawing illustrated, (Plate XLI,a) she holds the stem of a 
lotus in the right hand, 


(v) Vajrasarasvati. 


Faces—three. Arms—six. 
‘Asana—Pratyalidha. 


The name Vajrasarasvati is given to this goddess in order to distinguish 
her from the other four varieties of Sarasvati, with four different names given 
in the Sadhanas. It has already been said that Sarasvati has a form with three 
faces and six arms. In all other respects her form is identical with Maha- 
sarasvati. The difference here is that her hair is brown and rises upwards, 
and she stands in the Pratyalidha attitude on the red lotus. Three Sadha- 
nas in the Sadhanamala are assigned to her worship, and according to these, 
she has the red colour, with the right and left faces of blue and white colour 
respectively. She carries in her three right hands the lotus on which is the 
Prajhaparamita book, the sword and the Kartri, and in the three left the 
Kapala of Brahma, the jewel and the Cakra. Instead of the book on lotus 
and Brahmakapala, she may hold the lotus and the Kapala. The illustra- 
tion ( Plate XLI,b) belongs to the latter variety. 


PLATE XLI. 





EY oO 
“U\\y 





= 
EGECEDOS Dae 


a. Mahasarasvati. b. Vajrasarasvati. 





c. Aparajita. d. Aparayjita. 
( Nalanda). 


' 
' 


ep NS Novi 


. 


Ome me 


Aon 
ir 


rf 


yng 


4 * 
ih 
a aed 
’ 
ra 
"4 
. 
* 
en 





=. - 
Pity ae i 





- i ‘ wd 
; rn See 
' 
» j 
- ah | } F 
s , 
a J ¥ 
* 
. C 
7 . ! . 
© lye « . 
~ el ' 
“ 4 
a bi ‘ 
¥ 4 
: a 
« * A 
- ie all 
> i / L 
Pree | . Pind , 
ee Lm r 
oe ae | s y 
: Fe 
a “ AS - 
es ~ * 3 - 
* * - Baa! 
7 - <a aie 
‘ ea ¢ ’ i 
i~* ' are 
. ‘ | : 
¢ ba Sey 
~ . 
' 
5 ; Fy ’ 
“ : ’ | ‘ i 
Lay | - ' 
« was 
; 
he ¢ oh nh é 
. y % seen J 
; 4 > * ere. _s a¢ 
: i i 
‘ 1 ' 
: bs ‘ = . 
* “ s 4 
a = na ! 
& < 
’ n > S , 
A rh i 
. : - 4 . 
se % 3 ] ¢ 
. ae , 
. 4 « 
- . > ‘ . 
t & “ 
; at ox . : 
. % ad | . 
ees, 
‘ . sas 
4 r oe 
- * . 
bs » <8 
, he) 
o* Pag x 
wt ms : 
' 
© rey > 
ea ertniria B44 . —s 
ae Pen * heat: 











a ‘ Ls ate 
7 4 te 
-] Aah Keb as rey 
’ 









n 63 


( 158 ) 


2 VAPARAJITAS 


Identification mark—trampling upon Ganesa. 


Symbols—Tarjanipasa and Capetadana-Mudra. 


The name of Aparajita occurs in the Dhyana for the Astabhuja 
Kurukulla already quoted and translated.* There she is said to bear the 
image of Ratnasambhava on the crown, and to carry in her four hands the. 
staff and the goad, and the bell and the noose. The reason why this 
Aparajita has not been dealt along with the other emanations of Ratna- 
sambhava will be amply borne out by the description that follows. It 


will be noticed that except the colour, the two Aparajitas have nothing in 
common. 


Aparajita is a very interesting Buddhist goddess. She tramples 
upon Ganesa and one of her hands is raised in the attitude of dealing a 
slap and her parasol, according to the Sadhana, is held by important Hindu 
gods. A very short Sadhana is devoted to her worship and the Dhyana 
contained in the Sadhana describes the form of Aparajita in the following 
Lets <= — 


“Aparajita pita dvibhujaikamukhi nanaratnopasobhita Ganapatisama- 
kranta capetadanabhinayadaksinakara grhitapasatarjanikahrdayasthitavama- 
bhuja atibhayankarakaralaraudramukhi asgesamaranirdalani(am) Brahm§adi- 
dustaraudradevataparikarocchritacchatra ceti.”’ 


Ssadhanamala. A—216, Na—18, C—172. 


“Aparajita is yellow in complexion, two-armed, one-faced, is decked 
in various gems, and tramples upon Ganega. Her right hand is raised in dis- 
playing the attitude of dealing a slap, while the left carries the Tarjanipasa 
against the breast ; her face appears awful, terrible and ferocious ; she is the 
destroyer of all Maras, and her parsol is raised over her head by the host of 
wicked and ferocious gods, Brahma and others.” 


In the Sadhana it may be noticed there is a word Ganapatisamakranta, 
which means “who tramples upon Ganapati.’’ The word ‘ akranta, 
-comes from the original root ‘kram’ to trample.* In the Sadhanamala 
again, the root kram is invariably used in the sense of trampling and not in 
its ordinary sense of attacking. On the strength of this argument the Nalanda 
fragment (illustrated in Plate XLI,d) was identified with Aparajita. In it, the 


“* Supra, Chapter IV, p. 58. 
+ Cf.—Kramu padaviksepe. 


-20 


(e954 ts) 


figure to the right of the principal goddess seems to be Indra, and the rod 
held by him seems to be the handle of the parasol required to be held by 
the gods beginning with Brahma.* The upper part of the Nalanda image 
is unfortunately lost. If it were not so, we could reasonably have expected 
the Capetadana Mudra in the right hand of the goddess and the Tarjanipasa 
in the left, and a parasol above her head in continuation of the broken 
handle. This identification was later on confirmed when a traditional 
drawing ( Plate XLI,c) of Aparajita was secured from the native Citrakaras 
of Nepal. Subsequently, at the Indian Museum, we came across an image 
(Plate XLII,a) slightly mutilated, but complete, which resembled the Nalanda 
fragment in the lower portion while the whole image exactly followed the 
directions given in the Sadhana quoted above. This new discovery, however, 
left no room for doubting the identification. 


8. VAJRAGANDHARTI. 


Faces. six. Arms—twelve. 


Colour—blue. ‘Asana—Praty alidha. 


The name of Vajragandhari has already been mentioned in connec- 
tion with the Mandala of the eight-armed Kurukullé.t There Vajra- 
gandhari is said to bear the image of Amoghasiddhi on her tiara. As the two 
forms of Vajragandhari vary widely, she could not be dealt with under the 
emanations of Amoghasiddhi. She is one of the terrible feminine deities 
without any crest of a Dhyani Buddha, is endowed with six faces and 
twelve arms. A short Sadhana in the Sadhanamala describes her form as 
follows :— 


‘“Vajragandhari krsna sanmukhi dvadasabhuja trddhvapingalakesi 
pratyalidhapada damstrakaralavadana, pratimukham trinetra, daksinasadbhu- 
jesu. yathakramam vajra-vajraghanta-khadga-tristla-bana-cakrani ; vama- 
sadbhujesu. khatvanga-ankusa-dhanuh-parasu-pasa-hrttarjanyah ; prathama- 
mukham krsnam, aparani mukhani paficavarnani visSvapadmasiryyasana 
Celine 

Sadhanamala. A—216, Na—18—19, C—172. 


* The gods commencing from Brahma are four in number, to wit: Brahma, Visnu, 
Siva and Indra, often designated by the Tantric Buddhists as the four Maras or Evil Ones. 
Brahma has four faces and both Siva and Visnu have four arms each. As this figure, at- 
tendant on Aparajita, is endowed with two hands only, I propose to identify it with Indra. 
The identification is further strengthened by the fact that in some Buddha images, it is 
Indra who holds the parasol above the Lord’s head. 

+ The image had long been hidden from public gaze, as it was kept in an obscure 
corner on the left side of the marble staircase leading from the Galleries to the office of the 
Archaeological Section, Indian Museum. The staircase, I may add, is inaccessible to the 
public. 


t Supra, Chapter JV, p. 58. 


( 155 ) 


Vajragandhari is blue, six faced, twelve-armed, with brown hair rising 
upwards, stands in the Pratyalidha attitude and has faces terrible with bare 
fangs and three eyes; she carries in her six right hands, the Vajra, the 
Vajraghanta the sword, the Tristla and the Cakra, and in the six left hands 
the Khatvanga, the goad, the bow, the Parasu, the noose with the Tarjani 
against the breast ; her first face is blue, and other five faces are of five 
different colours ; she rests on the sun supported by the double lotus.” 


The Dharani quoted in the Sadhanamala gives her the epithets of 
Yogini and Bhismabhagini, and she is believed to be the consort of the 
Yaksa general, Candavajrapani by name. 


4, WVAJRAYOGINT. 


(1) She is another of the important and popular goddesses, who do not 
seem to bear the image of any of the Dhyani Buddhas on the crown. Four 
Sadhanas describe her form, which consists of two entirely different types. 
In one case, she has no head on the neck, but carries it in her hand, and 
iInwanothetesheshasshetubead intact.* Injthe former she is identical in 
appearance with the Hindu goddess Cchinnamasta belonging to the group 
of the ten Mahavidyas. Our conclusion therefore is that this Buddhist 
goddess has been borrowed and incorporated wholly by the Hindus into 
their Pantheon.t She is always accompanied by the two Yoginis on either 
side of her, who are called Vajravairocani and Vajravarnani. The Sadhana 
describing her form without head is as follows :— 


‘“Bhattarikam Vajrayoginim....pitavarnam svayameva_ svakartri- 
kartita-svamastaka-vamahastasthitam daksinahastakartrisahitam, tirddhva- 
vistrtavamabahum, adhonamitadaksinabahum, vasasinyam,  prasaritadak- 
sinapadam sankucita-vamapadam, bhavayet. Kavandhannisrtyasrkdharasca 
mukhe pravisati, apare ubhayoh pargvayoginyoh mukhe pravisati iti bhavayet. 


Vamadaksinaparsvayoh syama-Vajravarnani-pitavarna-Vajravairocanyau 
vamadaksinahastakartrisahite, daksinavamahastakarpparasahite, prasarita- 
vamapadaprasaritadaksinapade muktakesyau bhavayet. Ubhayoh parsvayoh, 
ubhayoh yoginyoh madhye antarikse atibhayakulam smasanam bhavayet.”’ 


Sadhanamaéla. A—245, Na—76, C—198. 


* The headless form is designated in the Mantra as Sarvabuddhadakini, while the 
other form is called in the Mantra as Vajrayogini. 


+ The most powerful augment in favour of this conclusion is that the Hindus retained 
the same Buddhist Mantra, though they changed the name of the principal deity and all 
Buddhist flavour into Hindu. But owing to religious fear they did not venture to change 
the Mantra. 


( 156 ) 


The worshipper should conceive himself as Bhattarikaé Vajrayogini.... 
of yellow complexion, who carries in her left hand her own head severed by 
herself with her own Kartri held in her right hand ; whose left hand is raised 
upwards while the right is placed below ; who is nude, and whose right leg 
is stretched while the left is bent down. He, (the worshipper), should also 
meditate on the streams of blood issuing out from the severed body as falling 
into her mouth and into the mouths of the two Yoginis on either side of her. 


He (worshipper) should also conceive the two Yoginis to the left and 
right [ of the principal goddess], the green Vajravarnani, and the yellow Vajra- 
vairocani, both of whom carry the Kartri in the left and right hands respec- 
tively, and the cup of skull in the right and left hands respectively ; whose left 
and the right legs respectively are stretched forward and who have 
dishevelled hair. On all sides between the two Yoginis and in the firmament 
are stretched the awful cremation ground.” 


(ii). The other form is also as terrible as the one described above, and 
she is surrounded on all sides by the terrible burning grounds. She stands 
in the Alidha attitude on the sun, is in the fulness of youth, and has red com- 
plexion. She rides the corpse, is nude, has three eyes, red and round, contor- 
ted brows, protruding belly and tongue, and possesses the six auspicious 
symbols. She carries the Kapala in the left hand and the Vajra in the right, 
while the Khatvanga hangs form her left shoulder. This form of Vajrayogini 
is similar in many respects to the forms of both Nairatma and Vajravarahi 
so much so, that a confusion is likely to occur in the identification of their 
images. If an image shows the dancing attitude in Ardhaparyanka, it may 
be identified as Nairatma or Vajravarahi, but if it shows the Alidha attitude, 
jt must be identified as Vajrayogini. The excrescence near the right ear 
and the corpse lying on its breast is peculiar only to Vajravarahi ; while the 
absence of the excrescence, and the presence of the corpse lying on its back 
point to the identification of Nairatma. The Alidha attitude is peculiar 
only to Vajrayogini. 


She may have a yellow form, and according to the Sadhana, she will 
carry the Kartri and the Kapala, and in other respects she will be indentical 
with the one just described. Another Sadhana adds the information that 
the Kapala should be filled with the blood of the Devas (gods) and the 
Asuras (demons), and that the hand carrying the Kartri may show the 
Tarjani also. 


Vajrayogini is one of the consorts of Heruka, who remains with her 
in the yab-yum, and their union is thé subject of the celebrated 
Heruka Tantra. The temple of Vajrayogini at Sanku (Plate XLII,b) 


Prate XLII, . 





1. Hayagriva Lokesvara. 3. Halahala Lokesvara. 





2. Mojaghanjavala (?) 4.  Harihariharivahana 
Lokesvara. Lokesvara. 


Geis7vh) 


in Nepal does not contain an image of any of these varieties of Vajrayogini. 
It contains, within it, the image of Ugratara or more popularly known as the 
Mahacina-Tara, which is believed to have been carried over there by Bengali 
priests from a place of the same name in the District of Dacca, about A.D. 
1350, when the Muhammadans carried their victorious arms over Eastern 


Bengal. 


** *% *k 8 *% *" 


In the SAadhanamala we do not find any Sadhana for the goddesses that 
are mentioned below. Pandit Amrtananda’s Dharmakosasangraha, which 
embodies later developments than those recorded in the Sadhanamala gives 
us descriptions of some of these deities. We give below descriptions only of 
those that are generally represented in art. The pictures reproduced, were 
photographed from an illuminated manuscript of Pancaraksa, which is now 
in the possession of an American Anthropologist, Dr. W. Y. Evans Wentz. 
The Ms. and therefore the miniatures, may be taken to be four hundred 
years old on Palzeographical evidence. 


5. GRAHAMATRKA. 


Haces—three. AYms six. 


Mudra—Dharmacakra. | Asana—Vajraparyanka. 


She has been deseribed in the Dharmakosasangraha in the following 
terms :=— 


“ Grahamatrka trimukhasvetapitaraktaé sadbhuja dakse dharmacakra- 
mudra-vajra-sara; vame kamalacapa; sahasradalapadme vajrasana.”’ 


Dharmakosasangraha, Fol. 44A. 


“ Grahamatrka has three-faces of white, yellow and red colours, and 
six-arms, displaying the Dharmacakra-Mudra (in the principal pair of hands) 
and carrying the Vajra and the arrow in the two right hands and in the two 


left the lotus and the bow. She sits in Vajrasana on a lotus of thousand 
petals=2 (Plates xX E1I.e). 


6. GANAPATIHRDAYA. 


Asana—dancing. Arms—two. 


Mudras—Abhaya and Varada, 


Like Ganapati himself Ganapatihrdaya, who, in all probability, is his 
Sakti, does not bear any image of a Dhyani Buddha. She is described in the 
work as :— 


( 1587) 


‘* Ganapatihrdaya ekamukha dvibhuja varada abhaya nrtydasana.”’ 


Dharmakosasangraha, Fol. 43. 


‘* Ganapatihrdaya is one-faced, two-armed, exhibits the Varada and the 
Abhaya poses, and a dancing attitude.”’ 


The miniature, ( Plate XLII,d) however, does not tally with the above 
description. In this miniature she has sixteen arms and one face. The 


symbols, beings indistinct, cannot be recognised in all details. 


ibn VAJRAVIDARANT. 


Vajravidarani has been described in the above-named work as follows :— 
‘* Vajravidarani, pancamukhi, dasabhuja; dakse ankusga-khadga-sara- 
vajravarada ; vame pasa-carma-dhanu-dhvaja-abhaya pratyalidhasana.” 


Dharmakosasangraha, Fol. 44A. 


‘** Vajravidarani is five-faced, ten-armed, carries in the right hands the 
goad, the sword, the arrow, the Vajra, and the Varada Mudra, and in the 
left, the noose, the armour, the bow, the flag and the Abhaya pose ; she 
stands in the Pratydlidha attitude.” ( Plate XLII,e.) 


Ae 
a Peed Ses Re 
i 


oe 


= 
: 


eta) 
a 


ee 


y Dy Th 





PLATE XLIV. 





5, Mayajalakrama Lokesvara. 7 Anandadi Lokesvara. 





at SS 
> 
)\ AAs 
SOI GORDO 


6, Sadaksavi Lokesvara. Q Vasvadhikara Lokesvara. 


CONCLUSION. 


There is no evidence to show that the Sadhanas existed before the time 
of Indrabhati (Cir. 700-750 A. C.) who, with the materials now before us, may 
be regarded as the founder of the Vajrayana System. But when the Sadhana- 
malas were cempiled, in about the middle of the 12th Century, we find no less 
than 300 Sadhanas recorded in them. It cannot be denied that after Indra- 
bhuati, during these four hundred years, this System underwent a rapid de- 
velopment, which is due mostly to time, and space, as well as to the tempera- 
ment and idiosyncracies of the followers of that System. 


The Sadhanas of the Sadhanamala were composed by men distinguished 
in the Mediaeval ages as great Tantric scholars, and we have been able to 
find out thirty-three names of such authors. The Dhyanas contained in the 
Sadhanas laid down the essential features of different gods, and the sculptors 
prepared images with the help of those general directions. The Dhyanas 
left much scope for the exercise of imagination on the part of the sculptors 
and the products of their chisels were also very greatly influenced by the spi- 
rit of the age in which they flourished, as well as by the geographical situa- 
tion of the area in which they worked. Ornaments, dress and even the ex- 
pressions of the face in the images reflected local colouring to a great extent, 
over which particular Tantric rites in which the images were used, had also 
a modifying influence. 


We have seen that the most important factor in the identification of 
images is the miniature figure of the Dhyani Buddha on their crown. In rare 
instances, however, the Dhyani Buddhas are absent. In such cases, we have 
to look out for other marks of identification. Even when the Dhyani Buddhas 
are present, there may arise difficulties. Sometimes all the five Dhyani 
Buddhas are carved on the aureole. In cases like these, the principal figure 
may be an emanation of the five Dhyani Buddhas as in the case of the Birbhum 
figure of Mafjuvara, or, it may be, that the principal figure is the emana- 
tion of that particular Dhyani Buddha, who appears right above its head, 
such as, we find in the cases of the Indian Museum standing figure of Khadira- 
vani Tara or the Vikrampur figures of Parnasavari. They are both emana- 
tions of Amoghasiddhi, whose effigy appears right above the heads of the 
goddesses. The figures of all other Dhyani Buddhas are not required either by 
the Sadhanas or for identification. Their presence can only be explained by 
a reference to the Sadhana, prescribing the worship of all the Buddhas before 
the commencement of the offering of oblations, or of the worshipper conceiv- 


( 160 ) 


ing himself as the principal deity, to whom the Sadhana is devoted. Some- 
times again, the Dhyani Buddhas appear on the image only to serve artistic 
purposes ; for instance, in the case of the Dacca Museum image of Arapa- 
cana Mafjusri, who is regarded as independent in the Sadhanamala. Four 
companions, identical in appearance with himself, appear round his image. 
The Java figure of Arapacana is of this kind. But in the Dacca Museum 
image we find four Dhyani Buddhas while the central position above the head 
is occupied by one of the companions of Arapacana. The Dhyani Buddhas 
are not required by the Sadhana and are, therefore, more ornamental than 


otherwise. 


But the most serious difficulty arises when instead of the Dhyani 
Buddha mentioned in the Sadhana some other Buddha appears on the crown 
of any figure, contrary to the prescription of the Sadhanas. For instance, in 
the Sarnath image of Ucchusma Jambhala we could reasonably have expect- 
ed according to the Dhyanas, the figures either of Aksobhya or of Ratnasam- 
bhava on its crown. But we find instead the effigy of Amitabha on the crown 
of Uecchusma Jambhala. Again, take for instance, the Lucknow Museum 
figure of Marici, who ought to have shown, in agreement with the Sadhana, 
the figure of Vairocana on her crown ; but we find instead that of Amitabha. 
Again, we notice over the head of the Indian Museum image of Usnisavijaya, 
the figure of the parental Buddha Aksobhya, instead of her own sire Vairo- 
cana. We leave out of discussion the image of Cunda who bears two minia- 
ture images of Amitabha on her crown instead of the parental Buddha Vajra- 
sattva,—because the figure does not tally with the Sadhana in important 
details. 


It is difficult to surmise the true reason for these discrepancies. The 
most reasonable suggestion seems to be that we have still to discover many 
texts, and that the Sadhanamala is not the only collection of the Sadhanas. 
It is difficult to believe, however, that a new Sadhana for either Marici or 
Usnisavijaya will be forthcoming. In the Sadhanamala itself a large number 
of Sadhanas are devoted to their worship, but nowhere do we find mention 
of any parental Buddha other than Vairocana. When we consider that there 
are existent nine or ten different recensions of the Sadhanamala or Sadhana- 
samuccaya, the hope of discovering further Sadhanas prescribing other paren- 
tal. Buddhas than Vairocana, seems to be far distant. 


The second alternative presupposes the existence of different cults ac- 
cording as one or the other of the Dhyani Buddhas are believed to be the 
principal or the Adi-Buddha. The Buddhists of Nepal, even now are divid- 
ed into so many different cults,—some regard Vairocana as the Adi-Buddha, 


PAE MAND? DAYS 





9. Potapada Lokesvara, 11. Varadayaka Lokesvara., 





10. Kamandalu Lokesvara 12, Jatamukuta Lokesvara, 







v. ‘eo. 


uy , : - H 
- . Rs wT ny Spire! 


Pig, ea So 


4 : 
: 74°) > “a5 ' 
nat la) } i | 
: bof P 1) 
: ° 
e i 
' s 
i 
7 a | 
, t 
) 
j 
Mu \ 
p 
TO das " 
‘ : 5 al 
- e 
’ 
‘ 
7 ‘ 
, : | 
es 
1 
: 
° ' 
m ' 
} 
} 
« ' 
eI 
jae ie ; - rae: 
) ; x rep 
i 2 
a 
3 —— 
‘ / 
| ? 
aPt 
—. 
+ ; , 
/ 
i 4 
: P 
- Brad 
na we! 
I py 
e 
a7e | ue 
’ a 
‘ =f 
~ ae | 6 > i 
i ‘ 
‘ 
~*~ 7) 
i Ls 
j c 
‘ 
© a wv 
‘ y ; \ 
! = 
: ) 
7 i ‘ 
i ae ) 
r @ 
' 
4 ‘ att ss 
ik 
it 
3 
- » ‘ 
; 
« - 
4 @ ® * 
a * 
ey 
i <. 





. 16m a) 


others regard Aksobhya or Amitabha as the Adi-Buddha.* But we have not 
yet been able to find out a single instance where Amoghasiddhi or Ratnasam- 
bhava are believed to be the Adi Buddha. Now, though the Sadhanas pres- 
cribe the figure of the parental Buddha Vairocana for Marici, yet the follo- 
wers of the Amitabha cult are at liberty to make her emanate from the same 
Buddha, whom they consider as the Adi Buddha. Similarly Ucchusma Jam- 
bhala, being regarded as the offspring of Amitabha, is made to bear an 
image of that Dhyani Buddha on the crown of the Sarnath figure already re- 
ferred to, Itis unnecessary to multiply instances. 


In identifying Buddhist images, the student of Iconography should 
guard himself against taking unnecessary figures in the image as principal ones, 
or a necessary one as unnecessary. A full-fledged Buddhist icon shows in 
the first place, the principal god, an effigy of his sire on the crown, and the 
Dhyani Buddhas on the aureole. The icon may show further miniature fi- 
gures of the companions of the principal god, some worshippers, mythical 
figures, and the three, seven or sixteen jewels. The figure of Vajrasattva 
seems to be a favourite device with the artists. He appears on many Bud- 
dhist images, and is perhaps conceived as a sort of general guardian of Bud- 
dhism and Buddhist worship. For the purpose of identification the princi- 
pal figure, the figure of the Dhyani Buddha on the top and the companions 
are the necessary parts of the image. Examine, for instance, the Dacca 
Museum image of Arapacana in which besides the four companions there are 
present four Dhyani Buddhas, Vairocana, Aksobhya, Amitabha and Ratna- 
sambhava, two mythical figures supporting the lotus seat, and two worshippers 
on the extreme left of the pedestal. All these figures are redundant for the 
purpose of identification, and their absence in the Java figure does not affect 
it. But if, for instance, the companions are confused with the worshippers, 
as has been done in the case of the Mahoba figure of Vajrasanat, the identifica- 
tion must be regarded as ingomplete. In it, the figures flanking the princi- 
pal figure of Buddha in the Bhimisparsa Mudra are clearly Maitreya and 
Avalokitesvara according to the Sadhana, but they have been described as 
worshippers. Thus the identification of the whole image has been vitiated. 


* The theory of Adi-Buddha originated in the Nalanda monastery about the 
beginning of the 10th. century and was accepted first in Kdalacakrayana, a later form 
of Vajrayana. See Csoma: The Origin of the Theory of Adt-Buddha, in J.A.S.B. 
Vol. IT (1833) p. 57 ef sqq. See also my paper on Buddhist Iconography in 
J.B. O. R. S., March, 1923, 


+ See K. N. Dikshit, Six Sculptures from Mahoba. 
21 ) 


(162 9) 


Another difficulty arises in identifying images where the letters of the 
Mantra of the god represented are deified and appear on the image. We 
have seen in the case of Vajratara that she should be surrounded by ten god- 
desses, who are the ten Paramitas and originate from the ten syllables of the 
Tara Mantra, ‘Om Tare-tuttare-ture svaha’’; also, we have seen how from the 
the five letters of the name Arapacana originated five deities including the 
principal one, Manjusri. The Dacca Museum image of Kadiravani Tara 1s 
a particular instance of the deification of the Mantra. The main figure, in 
accordance with the Sadhana, carries the Utpala in the left hand and shows 
the Varada Mudra in the right, and is flanked on either side by Asokakanta 
and Ekajataéa. But on the aureole there are eight female figures identical in 
appearance with the principal figure. They represent none but the eight 
syllables: of sthe “Tara Mantra ;Om “laretuttareture, aa thesitwoucothers 
Usnisavijaya and Sumbha being omitted. 


Sometimes in the images of the Buddhist gods and goddesses we notice 
the presence of Ganesa, who is regarded by the Hindus as “ Siddhidata”’ or 
the Bestower of Perfection or success in Tantric rites. The Buddhists in order 
to display their aversion to the followers of the Brahmanical faith, made their 
gods trample upon Ganesa. Thus in the Indian Museum images of Parna- 
Savari and Aparajita, the Vangiya Sahitya Parisat image of Bighnantaka, etc., 
the deities have been represented as trampling upon Ganesa under their feet. 
In the two Vikrampur images of Parnasavari and the Dacca Sahitya Parisat 
image of Mahapratisara,* Ganesa appears below the lotus seat lying prostrate 
on the ground, under the pressure of the Buddhist deities. The Buddhists thus 
showed their animosity against the Hindu god, Ganesa, and gave him the 
epithet of Bighna or Obstacle. Their animosity may be further illustrated 
by the following features of the Sadhanas. The four Hindu gods, Brahma, 
-Visnu, Siva and Indra have been designated uniformly as the four Maras 
or Wicked Beings and several Buddhist gods have been described as tramp- 
ling them under their feet. The Sadhanas of Prasanna-Tara, Vajrajjvalana- 
larka, Vidyujjvalakarali, and the like, are instances in point. Trailokya- 
vijaya has been represented as trampling upon the prostrate forms of Siva 
and Gauri. Narayana has been made a Vahana or vehicle by Hariharihari- 


*Unfortunately, the disadvantageous position of thisimage did not permit me to 


photograph the whole pedestal. The figure of Ganega has therefore been omitted 
in the photograph. 


PLATE 2sLiV 1, 





18, Sukhavati Lokesvara, 15. Mayajalakramakrodha- 
Lokesvara, 





14, Pretasantarpana 16, Sugatisandarsana Lokesvara, 
Lokesvara, 





a " ee =a, 
= 2 as 38 ¥ ere Re AP 
i ; ewe pere} ae r Ase Son ee a A tg Ge RYT § 
= ol = . a rr eke . = ~<_ pied . 
v > = TF See5 SSR tat G4 Sat pe ee 4, a tah ! the TS n ok, ee) ee ee i Ww. Ss eRe - 
= ix are oa, be FP gms o . 
v : Pte 4 ee Se Nadas i al See Ware ie . a 
j . 
= 33 
- i ~ 3 ba ‘ 
, aS aie re 
oa) “ ew ene ~ 
Ke 





} 
- 
i 
ee 
' 
: i 
ii 
: 
‘ 
i 
L 
| 3 
2 
a r 
» 
ray ° i 
+ ¢ 
I 
: 
i iS 
' n 
- t F 
ii _ ' re ” ' 
at E 4 
ia 
ae ’ 
9 She ad 
. 
* 
. ry 7 
x, 
‘ ‘ 
: ‘ 
* . <8 
. ‘ ~4 
ay 
; ‘% A 
4 
‘ oF: 
’ 7 ‘ ad « 


7 Pa 

* a ee ee 4 

‘ Bohs & O 
£ Se he esac. A» 

iB - 
i = ; ig ae Oe 
' ‘a 
e ¥ ' J te aw J 
: a 
L] " ¢ } 





a e 
2 } 
® ‘e a 
7 ¢ 
i e* 
> dA ~*~ é 
t o s) e 
=" # ‘i. 
i t « 
ia e : 


= 


auf 


ae eee 


-s 
' i] 
i : 
. 
' . " ! 
i] } 
7 ) 
=" = ' 
“ 
Sy 
7 on * yy cc 
ie ' ..'7 
geen! = 
a : “et 
val | 
> V4, ; 
ha * 
ce 4 aly 
aX = 7 
5 our, j aaa 
< : vs 
‘ 
; + : @ i * 
~ “yy ‘ a! 
acai , 
- 7 * ie zo a ; 
’ a 
‘ =e * é _ 
x 7 y a es i 4 : ‘ F 
3 ‘i ~_ a 5 
Boe 
aed F ny - ¢ 
nee ‘ a ‘ “V ct 
ie : ; ‘ 4 £ 
8 1. 2 é i : 
Pee ees (4 .. ¥ 
iS = r 
- Vegi a Bi 
Ce ae ioe ~ B & +e) 
ok Oe ra i 
be = d ' ir 
: 5 ‘ : 
ig a ‘ 
- x 
6 ’ = ~ 
eo ae * i . 
T . ~ 
% 
o } 7 
eget ok Se, Hi 
" ie a Lt | 
ao . = 
go 
; rs 42 ae 
7 re 
4 4 - 
re ' 
i" 1 = ‘ 
' 4 
1: We 7? 
hy Fs ah 
Lr tome ry o . 
a z - 
J , 
“he = ti ; it 
“i : ~ LPs 
es 
Can ty ‘ 
« y 


a rr 


' 
F, pew ¢ 
en@atese Seotesy, (Si ee 
€ Soe ee ae 


~ = : : 
be oa eae a i So ids = 






{ 168 ) 


vahana. Poor Brahma has been more severely handled by the Buddhists. 
The severed head of Brahma or the Brahmakapala is carried by a number 
of Buddhist deities. According to the Hindu tradition, Brahma should be 
very old, with grey beards and four heads, and the Buddhist deities merciless- 
ly hold the heads by the matted hair and flourish them in their hands. This 
is how the Buddhists attempted to exhibit the superiority of their gods over 
those of the Brahmanical faith. It is a matter of satisfaction, however, that 
the Hindus never disgraced any gods belonging to the alien faith in this 
manner. On the contrary, they placed Buddha among the ten Avataras of 


Visnu. 


A deep spiritual significance is attached to the colour, the weapons, and 
Asanas of the Buddhist gods, who are represented either singly or in yab-yum. 
The conception of yab-yum images, however, 1s much more complicated than 


the single ones. 


It has been stated in the Sadhanamala that a single deity may take any 
colour according as he is worshipped in different Tantric rites. For instance, 
in Santikavidhi or propitiatory rite the god will take the white or yellow 
colour, in Paustikavidhi or protective rite the yellow colour, in Vasyavidhi 
or bewitching and Akarsana or the rite of forcible attraction the yellow, 
green or red colour, and in Ucatana (destruction of dwelling houses) and 
Marana (destruction of enemies), the god will be generally blue. It may be 
pointed out here that the word ‘ Krsna’ in the Sadhanamala always signifies 
blue colour and not black. Except in very exceptional circumstance, we 
meet with black colour in paintings of gods, but always the blue colour. It 
was not because the Buddhists had no perception of black, but it seems that 
there was some religious prejudice against using the black colour in paintings 
of gods. It may be pointed out here that whenever the deity gets the blue 
colour his appearance becomes terrible with protruding teeth, tongue and 
belly, garland of heads, ornaments of serpents or bones, and the garment of 


tiger-skin. 


The Asanas have likewise a spiritual significance. The Vajraparyanka 
attitude signifies meditation, the Ardhaparyanka and Lalitasana signify 
serenity, the Alidha heroism, the Pratyalidha destruction and loathsomeness, 
and the dancing attitude in Ardhaparyanka signifies wrath and horror. 


A reference here is necessary to the yab-yum_ representations. 
The Tibetan yab means the honourable father, and ywm the honourable 
mother. Therefore the word yab-yum means the honourable father in the 
company of the honourable mother. A yab-yum image has a deep spiritual 


( 164 ) 


significance. It signifies that the god, the embodiment of Stinya represents 
perfection having attained Stnya (Karuna) and therefore the highest 


stage of Nirvana. 


The conception of Siinya in Vajrayana took the conerete shapes of a 
god and a goddess. Siinya took the shape of Heruka when a male divinity, 
and became otherwise known as Nairitmaé when a goddess. That Sinya took 
the form of a deity does not seem strange in Vajrayana where we find concep- 
tions, such as Sangha, Dharma, Prajfiaparamita, the ten Paramitas, and the 
Skandhas,—deified in the Buddhist Pantheon. The conception of Sinya in 
the form of a god or a goddess is therfore quite in keeping with the traditions 
of the Vajrayana System. When the Bodhi Mind attains Nirvana it merges 
in Sinya and there remains in eternal bliss and happiness. And when Sitnya 
was made a goddess, it was easily understood, as to how eternal bliss and happi- 
ness was possible after the attainment of Nirvana. The yab-yum figures, 
representing Stinya in the form of Heruka in the embrace of Sinya in the form 
of Nairatma,* were held up before the mass as ideals, and they readily at- 
tracted them and helped them in their conception of a bright and definite 
spiritual prospect. 


Buddhists of the Vajrayana considered Siinya as the Ultimate Reality, 
and they believed that the host of gods and goddesses including the Dhyani 
Buddhas are Siinya in essence, ¢ that is, are gods about whom neither exis- 
tence, nor non-existence, nor a combination of the two, nor a negation of the 
two may be predicated. The innumerable gods and goddesses of the Vajra- 
yana Pantheon thus, are all manifestations of the Sinya. The gods have 
no real existence, the images have no real existence, and therefore, we may 


* The Nairatm& is also known by the names of Prajfia Sakti, Svibha Praja, 
Vidya, Svabha-Vidya and the like. But Nairatma and Heruka both have their stereo- 
typed forms described before. 

+ The perfected Bodhicitta in the embrace of Sanya or Nairatma as represented in 
yub-yum figures is likened by Saraha as salt and water. As salt cannot be taken out from 
water, so the two yub-yum figures are eternally united into one. This is what the 
Buddhists call ‘‘ Advaya’’ where all conception of a duality ceases. Thisis Heruka 
represented as single. 

t The whole of the Buddhist Tantric literature is full with ideas of this kind ; for 
instance, in Advayavajra we find—‘‘The divinities are manifestations which are naturally 
non-existent. Whenever there is manifestation, it must be Sinya in essence.’’— 

‘*Spurtisca devatakarah nihsvabhavo svabhavatah | 

Yada yada bhavet sphurtih sa tatha Sinyatatmaka , ”’ 


Mahasukhaprakasa in Advayavajrasangraha. Fol, 33. 


PLATE XLVII. 





17. Nilakantha Lokesvara, 19. Trilokasandariana 


Lokesvara. 





18, Lokanatha-Raktary yava- 20. Simhanatha Lokesvara. 
lokitesvara, 






iJ i ae - : oe art - a 
ene e ne mist ya + hha = 


. 2 Mee bi heddrk AG vod bine eh ae 
an ae eS oe} 
: 7 “ Lae : 
s 
7h 
oe as nu 
=f vc s - 
Paks me 
> hs be} ‘ P 
nh : aa ) 
* a 1 Os 





( 165 ) 


be positive in saying, that a true Vajrayanist never worshipped any image 
or god. Because, the images, the paintings, or even the divinities themselves 
have no real existence. They are the different manifestations of the Sinya. 
But that the images had some utility can never be denied. The form present- 
ed in images in accordance with the Dhyanas, no doubt, facilitated the con- 
ception of the deities, who were to be identified with the worshipper himself. 
As they had no real existence, the deities had to be drawn from unknown 
regions in the firmament by the luminous rays of light issuing out from the 
Vijamantras uttered by the worshiper. The Sanya transforms itself in 
the form of a divinity in accordance with the germ-syllable uttered, and exists 
only as a positive idea in the mind of the worshipper who identifies himself 
with that transformation of Sanya. 


The question may be raised as to the necessity of a variety of gods and 
goddesses, when one Stinya would have been sufficient. In answer to this 
we have to consider a number of things. First, that Sinya which was identi- 
fied with Compassion by the Vajrayanists, was concieved as manifesting it- 
self in different forms in accordance with the different functions discharged. 
For instance, if any disease is to be cured, Sinya takes the form of Simha- 
nada; when it is the question of snake-bite, Sinya becomes Janguli; when 
destruction of the wicked is needed the Sinya takes the form of Mahakala. 
When again, diseases and pestilences are to be prevented, Siinya is conceived 
in the form of Parnasavari, for success in love-affairs, Stinya is invoked in the 
form of Kurukulla, and when forcible submission is required in love-affairs, 
Stnya becomes Vajrananga. When finally Buddhahood is wanted by the 
worshipper he should conceive himself as Heruka. From the above it ap- 
pears that the conception of the multitude of Buddhist deities emerges from 
the one grand conception of Sanya according as it is believed to discharge dif- 
ferent functions as a mark of compassion towards the Buddhists. 


Secondly, the number of deities increases according as Stinya is taken 
to depict the different ‘* Rasas’’ or sentiments, numbering nine. For instance, 
Sinya will be Khadiravani or Lokanatha when benign ( Karuna) ; it will be 
Marici when heroic (Vira); Bighnantaka, Heruka or Mahakala when awe- 
inspiring ( Bhaya) Aparajita when wrathful ( Raudra); Vajracarcika in 
disgust and loathsomeness ( Bibhatsa) and Prajnhaparamita when peaceful 
( Santa), and so on. 


Thirdly, the number of deities increases also in accordance with the 
three Kayas, the four Anandas, the five Skandhas, the ten Paramitas, and 
so on, 


( 41667) 


As all these deities centre round the one grand conception of Stnya 
the different weapons held by them also centre round the one grand concep- 
tion of Bodhicitta*, which is also of the essence of Stinya. As these wea- 
pons are required to discharge different functions, the Bodhicitta manifests 
itself into so many different forms. For instance, when the darkness of igno- 
rance is to be dispelled, Bodhicitta becomes the sword, which spreading its 
rays destroys darkness ; when destruction is needed of the host of wicked 
beings it manifests itself also in the form of a sword, which cuts them through. 
Bodhicitta becomes Ankusa when the heart of the wicked is to be wrung with 
pain. It is conceived as the noose when the Maras are to be bound securedly ; 
it becomes the needle and the string when the eyes and the mouths of wicked 
are to be sewn up. Bodhicitta will be the Kartri when chopping, a Bhindipala 
when the Maras are to be destroyed from a distance, the bow and the arrow 


when the distance is much greater, and so on. 


The Mudras also are nothing but the manifestations of the Bodhicitta. 
If protection is needed, Bodhicitta is conceived as the Abhaya Mudra; when 
it is the question of boon, it becomes Varada ; when instruction in Buddhist 
Law is required, it becomes Dharmacakra, and so on. 


The Bodhicitta or the Mind determined upon obtaining the Bodhi is 
that state of Mind which has already acquired the potentiality of dissolving 
itself in Sinya. As a matter of fact, without Bodhicitta Sinya or Nirvana 
cannot be obtained. Like the Sanya, Bodhicitta exists in the mind only and 
therefore has no real existence. It is the Bodhicitta which contributes to 
the attainment of Sanya, and ultimately it is the Bodhicitta which merges 


itself in Sanya. 


The gods of the Buddhist Pantheon are conceived as carrying the Bodhi- 
citta in their hands both being of the nature of Sinya. It is with the help 
of this Bodhicitta that the god is supposed to confer Buddhahood or success 
in Tantric rites upon the worshipper. The yab-yum conception of deities 


* Compare Jnanasiddhi by Indrabhati— 
Bodhicittam bhavedvajram Prajnat ghanta vidhiyate | 
Cakramajnhanacchedat Ratnantu durlabhadapi | 
Bhavadosairaliptatvat Jnanam tat padmamucyate 4 etc. etc. ete. 
Fol. 61 (MS in the possession of M.M. H. P. Shastri). 


PLATE. VIIL. 





21. Khasarpana Lokegvara, 23. Vajradharma Lokesvara. 





22. Manipadma LokeSvara. 24, Pupala Lokesvara (?) 








=f ? a " ; af a t : : i re 
-*% , ‘ 
tet 
{ ‘ aa? { ! : , ‘ e 
' ' ~ i nw 
f ’ + 4 - - 
¢ ~ 
hy 4 ‘ é / iL ‘ ‘ ia 
a , j 
f ‘ 7 a ce | 7 q 
a : ¢ : *: q ‘ 
1 ; i ‘ e ; 
- a ‘ r 
-} P : 7 7 7 
‘ ; : 7 m . : 
- . ; 
uy ’ . 





. “+ 4 a 
7 : - 7 6 5 “ . * : 
‘ - 
¥ = - j > 
= a a ug a 7 aa ° of , a ee bad 7 
j fa fi 7 a : wee y 
2 2 ‘ h } = a a 7 
atl ae ; eag sin Dt 
7 2 as a - y 7 4 ‘ 
e if ¢ a \ 4 : : hoe a? ae ast 
» * - 7 ‘ 
a ne ~4 . 7 : } i =e v are’ : 
_ {-- 2 n , ; F om ogee Ay ua = 
ix S i ¥ i j an) rh 
a a . Lead - a P oa vi ’ ~~ tS ee ; as 
} ay 1 Sf eer aed 
' “ ' d = a 3 (Lee. =f _ . 
pars = - : o* ar - . “ : 2 lyn : 
"4 rs ki ~. 7 x y4 “al Pay, r | 
- - 7 : a 
pe ~§ c- ee - * } roe ne ; “71 z hs obi 4 ¥ : 
= a I CF & 5 a ne F in nf Wes Sind a 
ee Py et hat re 4 bs a ive ie, tet. F Ret 
3 i! < ‘ , : peed AL ‘ 
= ane : a t e . ie id j rf vu . 1 h : t 7 
> 7 , 
‘ : .e af #8 : Aan ay) “5 
4 we see eee a E 
¥ tr! ‘ a Ah oer Pier, 
‘ ee tt as eae eet S i ¥ 
. ‘les bite Oy. 4 Mie ; ‘ 
- nek \z 1s * oe a ‘ 
ae - > | 
ai Si sr" aoe F < 
% Waais : i 6 td A - 
* oy = fey ~ 5 a at i 
2 » si * 
> im 3 ee ae . _— 
My ’ ' ome 2 D. a 
. ® ' . . - ‘| 
= t ’ i" - ’ a3 { fea ri ¢ 
’ te 4° ; > | 
* ; gs ae; 2 : 
‘ ~ PE > 4 ae 3 ; j ‘ 
‘ a0 : Lic 7 ‘ 7 i 
fey Z F ’ Pie zy ie i i | : 
f ’ aw os 2 7 if nt “ ‘ can : 
’ OE ge iS. = ge ake ; 
4 * a Sai = .é wh ; } j ‘ 
' ; L Lt y a 
’ , ! y 7 rf ee ba bs 7 x e »* a + 
jf way as i ar | A may \ oe 
} i - S 7 : ia , - 
7 ig 1b yh see eG ce ae P } ; ; 
a e a i? 0) oe re , ? 
a > + = 7 eae | L % 4 4 
- t ' e “4 re, \ a : * i ’ 
j nea © Ps hs » 7 
3 * - i. ig a | oa i Le 7 2 : 
ae “4 Pes ~ i it 2 7 7 : ‘i 
we” el 2 ws Ne a As 
. 


2) Ean feN) Ge, 


: : } i Ae : _ ee a ph nd gee of ; 





4 A 7 ; 4 <a 7 ‘ 
-_ ’ 7 a ae é . ¢ _ eo 7 bat 4 eal 
o/h a : 7 y 
rN ri , ; ef : \ wt ae 
q@ x = A” iZ *~ ©: 


(oe 16am) 


is still more complicated. The god Heruka, the embodiment of Sinya, 
carrying weapons, the embodiments of Bodhicitta also of the nature 
of Stinya, is embraced by Nairitma, whose essence is also Siinya, carrying 
weapons also of the nature of Sinya. Thus Void with Void commingles, 
This is the highest state—the Anupadhisesa-Nirvana. 


Farewell Mighty Gods! 


Krto vah sarvasattvarthah 
siddhirdatta yathanuga | 
Gacchadhvam Buddhavisayam 


punaragamanaya Muh i 


l Waa qs | 


7 
‘p Ww Vy ire 
co t ; 5 ae 
4 ewe de> ot ie 4 ‘ 
wy | 
oe ~ a) po 
> at é uae s 
eel 


eee vate ie ied 
“ ohne ae “ane gyBT Foket 
Bera Sodates Tot es the His 


5 4) 
4 
CT 
, E 
( ; 
ae te Te 
o ae de 
- Py | 
: 4 
5 4 
1 
. 4 
\ ¢ 
fs j 
a 


im * 
' ial 
‘ - 
4 
at 
-—# 
| ) 
4 
‘ i 
7, i 
~s 
: : 
\ 
' 
1 é 
s 
’ ‘ 
ra | ‘ 
3 : 
’ ry 
t 
if 
i 
@ ‘ . 
yo 
i m j 
i 
h 
i ’ : Bie aye 
: pal 9) le 
: és Ve 
; ye ee 
' Met Y hd ns 
j | fe ae, 
; ’ vr 
‘’ i; a ht a 1 
A d Le 
» 
1. ou ru Ly 
| 3% i 
y : ‘io . 
: 7 5 e ele vn 7 
' _ oe) 
7 Bat ee 
7 - ry, © se eae O he. 


) wren A tebiinie aie 


ach ny 





Shang 


vase on 


ha Lacan bee aes 


a Need ed es 
ec es) a 


[PAE SSG ADS. 





Oa: 
5 er ead OW) 
“—CCTARODOY 


25. Utnauti (2) 27. Brahmadanda 
Lokesvara Lokesvara 





N\ B. : A 
eS 
e_ 


COOL 





26, Vrsnacana 98. Acata Lokesvara (‘). 


Lokesvara 







se 7] \\ , o 
S Y JS = 


(Ios 
V7 TISSY 
Cogesanauy 


29. Mahavajrasattva 81. Sakyabuddha 





Lokesvara LokesSvara 





30. Visvahan;: 


_ 


Lokesvara 32. Sansati Lokesvara 









a r f Se ee 2 ptm a 








; = a oe P p pein FE 8 
x £4 a he seni Mh pee tye eTeet “AE 
‘ ; : is ths ty ? Dy) eee ra ty ir dtd tn Meee oN 
= § ; ae ey C08 f= © * : > ee i 
; ? F ‘ Ad ~— 
‘ ‘ « My : a 
i - sie be ; ¢ 
i 
: 
' / 
‘ ; 
. Y 
\ 
-# 
c 
‘ i 
i 
é 
: 
A ' : rae “ale 
- a” ~ 
— : ve Pang 
2 i oe) ' 
~ ‘ 
: _" : 
oid ‘ > “# ' 
7 Fe y Ta 6 
ae + 'S i “* 
Z ‘ a 
r o s 
a 5 aa 
a Ey rs 
; a % 
if i 
E ] mS Trace 
} 7 
L ‘ re ry ‘ 
‘ ¢ ‘ 1 / : ’ , 
. 4 
4 : ; i 1. 4 
' 7 7 = 
s is 
‘ ; Fl : a ag 4 as 
' ef é 
' 4 rt gfe) 
’ 
‘= 1 ¥ ¢ i@ x « 
tn of Aas 
‘a > y 
3 . : ‘ 
rs iis : Yo ee i 
> ‘ | ye’ ' . 7 
7 . i. “y " i 
- Nak 7 ae - 
; 7 > < 
; L 
‘ P 
' - i 
. ° 
P ® 
‘ \ sf ’ 
* ‘ f J i < c . 
‘- "4 - os « ‘ J f ~ 
tau ne Pie P 
' ‘ an i 2 : ° F 
. 4 \ 
Thee » 
® ' > ~ - 
: i no - 7 4 
‘ 2 ; - 
; 4 7 = 
fi is er hae Jia 2 \ 
‘ + 


- -* F a ‘ a - " ot Oe es ay 
i a a, ¢ . Fie tyke ou 
' 74 A be ao ee me ' 4 " : 
e oo - 
: ; | ee} IIe 
te ahi j i < - a i ) i 
; a : { “| 
, ¥ OV 2 . 
Coe Set ae re e fs 
af ee eae Rae oe sedi 
eons f ¥ % vey) ey oe 


APPENDIX A. 


KINCIT-VISTARA-TARA-SADHANA. 


Text. 


Prathamam tavat mantri mukha- 
caranadikam praksalya pavitribhtya 
vijane mano’nukile sugandhopalipte 
surabhikusumavakirne ca bhtpradese 
sukhasanopavistah svahrdaye pratha- 
masvaraparinatam sitamsumandalam 
vicintya tanmadhye kamaniyanilani- 
rajam tatkinjalke niskalankasasanka- 
mandalam tadupari pita-Tankaravi- 
jam pasyet tato’pi pita-Tankaravijat 
nihsrtya jaganmohandhakarapahari- 
bhih mayakhasamihaih dasasu diksu 
ye ca aparvanta lokadhatavo vidyante 
tan sarvan avabhasya_ tatrasthan 
api asankhyeyan apramevan Budda- 
Bodhisattvamscea akasadese api aniya 
Tadanu 


avasthapyante. tesam ak- 


asadesavasthitanam  mahakarunika- 
nam Buddha-Bodhisattvanam divya- 
puspa-dhtipa-gandha-malya-vilepana- 
curnacivaracchatradhvajaghantapata 
kadibhir-mahatim pujam krtva papa- 
desanaém kuryyat. 

Yatkinicit anidisamsare samsarata 
maya papakam karma kavena va 
manasa api krtam karitam kriyama- 
nam anumoditam va tatsarvam prati- 


22 


Translation. 


The worshipper after leaving the 
bed in the morning, should wash his 
face and feet, and purifying hiniself 
go to a place which is lonely, is 
agreeable to him, is besmeared with 
scents, is strewn with fragrant flowers, 
Then 


he should meditate on his heart the 


and then sit in an easy pose. 


orb of the moon, which is originated 
from the first vowel **A’’ and notice 
a blue lotus which is beautiful ; on 
the filaments of the lotus he should 
meditate on the orb of the spotless 
moon, on which is the yellow germ 
syllable ‘* Tam.”’ Then from the yellow 
pam alae 


which destroy the darkness of ig- 


germ issue rays of light, 
norance of the world, and illumine 
the innumerable worlds that exist in 
the ten quarters, and bring from the 
the firmament innumerable and incon- 
ceivable Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. 
Then after an elaborate worship of 
these great compassionate Buddhas 
and Boddhisattvas [situated] in the 
firmament, by means of celestial 
flowers, incense, scents, garlands, un- 
guents, powders, mendicant dress, um- 
brellas, flags, bells, banners and the 
like, he should make a confession of 
sins in the following manner (by say- 
ing)—-Whatever sinful deeds I have 
done, caused to be done or consented 


(370s) 


degayami ityanena vidhina pratidesya 
punah akaranasamvaram pratigrhya 
punyanumodanam kuryyat. Sugata- 
pratyekasgravakajinanam tatsutanam 
api Bodhisattvanam sadevasa-Brahma 
kalokanim yat kusalam tat sarvam 
anumodayamitl. Tadanu  Ratna- 
trayasaranagamanam— 
Buddham saranam gacchami 
yavadabodhimandatah | 
Dharmam saranam gacchami 
yavadabodhimandatah | 
Samgham éaranam gacchami 
yavadabodhimandatah || 
iti. Pagcat mirgisrayanam margah 
sa ca 


Tathagatoktah asrayaniyam 


maya nanyaiti. Tadanu adhyesanam 
kuryyat. Jagadartham asamsaram kur- 
vanto Bhagavantah Tathagatah tat- 
suta api tisthantu mam _ parinirvantu 
iti. Tadanu yacana. Tadrsim nirut- 
taram dharmadesanim Bhagavantah 
Tathagatah desayantu yaya jhatityeva 
samsarinah sattvah bhavabandhanat 
nirmuktah bhavanti iti, Tadananta- 
ram punyaparinadmanam  kuryyat. 
Sapta-vidh-anuttara-ptija-papadesana 
kugalamilam upajatam tat sarvam 
samyaksambodhaye parinamayami 


iti, Athavaé samasatah saptavidha- 


to be done in this endless cycle of 
creation—everything I confess. Again, 
meditating on the restraint of wrong 
deeds he should give his assent to 
meritorious deeds (of others) with the 
words—TI assent to the virtues of the 
Sravakas, the 
Jinas and their sons the Boddhi- 
sattvas, and of the world with all the 
gods and Brahma. After this refuge 
in the Three Jewels should be taken 
with the words—‘‘T take refuge in 


Sugatas, Pratyekas, 


Buddha so long as the Bodhi essence 
subsists ; I take refuge in Dharma so 
long as the Bodhi essence subsists, and 
I take refuge in Sangha so long as 
the Bodhi essence subsists.’? After 
this, adherence to the path (of the 
Tathagata) should be done with the 
words—‘‘By me should be followed the 
path indicated by the Tathagata, and 
naught else. Then solicitation should 
be done with the words—‘ The gods 
the Tathagatas and their children, who 
have created everything in this world, 
for the benefit of the world, be constant 
Then 
with the 
words,—‘‘ The gods, the Tathagatas 


to me, and emancipate me.” 


begging should be done 


instruct me with such incontrovertible 
advices on Law, by which the beings 
of the world may be freed from the 
Then he 
should meditate on the results of his 


bonds of the world quickly. 


meritorious deeds with the following 
words—‘* Whatever merit I have ac- 
quired by the seven kinds of extra- 
ordinary worship like the confession of 
sins—all that I devote to gain, at the 
end, the final Sambodhi.”’ 


PA helo te 

















Vajrahuntika 


Oo. 


Yamadanda 


Lokesvara 


Lokesvara 





Saacouun®. 


O6, 





Jnanadhatu 


Vajrosnisa 


ok, 


Lokesvara 


Lokesvara 








37. Karandavytha Lokesvara. 39, Sarvasokatamonirehata 


Lokesvara. 





38. Sarvanivarana- Viskambhi 40, Pratibhanakaktta 
Lokesvara., Lokesvara., 








+ oul 

+18 

py, Ctx? oD 
i ae 







: ra . ~ ’ "| bet i , 
“= + ae 
a 2 “ 
= P ie gg ' a ~ 
i 7 US gen or eee ' 
7 i ; ee , \ bom! + ve 
7 v ) ' . i 
‘ F ey oe ees -2 i 
' ‘ i 2 ; a ; 
y . d | ae } ° | : J 
' : & > ve ; 
7 ae PE ih ’ 
{ ae a) : 
qi { i at j ‘ | = . 
j , ; Pu ' 
7% ¢ - ' J . 
’ re ‘ 
¥ ad oe ~ 
; b “wa eee 
= r 2 i 7 
7s ' 
; . ia ; 
- ' 
i i J ! 
1 ul i "7 "y 7 o : : bee ' = oe 
H Ve ' 2 4 ee OP igs 
‘ = * ae | 
F Pa ree , ‘ 
‘ 4 U E 7 
i “ aed 
i \ ; id ’ & 7 : df 
; - ‘ . : 
é \ ] « Oe eee | 7 \ 








j + iS y oa, leg 
’ ae pa - | 
- i p a ee HP 
a i € ) ois ee | 
5 ne 4 ie | : ‘ 
en =) . 4 be | 
=r) a, aa | ' ¥ : 
t ee ey tone er 
ey Bi we A = em Gg 
I, & a i j : 
’ ee paca 2 aha ay ie a2 Pin. Oe: 
' 7 mw Ue roa 
J - wi eid Oe 
* : 1 1 
Ay + i ; ‘ fe 
ist i ay 7 ! oe a 
== | | ie ' z @. 12,508 5 0 " e a ss o z nae 
o gm pl 6s go5,ce pe : be =. 
‘ . ver vt - Soa oa - 
~f 
' » Ay & * ‘ i 
j; -s Pete {4 
j ; 
fs ; =—« 
<f : } 
‘ ’ 
, : 
' 
’ i 
i Pe ; ; _ 
j 
4 \ 
] 7% 
i 
€ : i. . 
an | = = 
' ;? 
4 : 1 | 5 . 
-) 3: . i 
an 4 * } 
~S y 
* i’ Fe 
s } 7 
ri if i i y 
a a | 
F i a i j ; ! 
‘ 
: ; 
7 ' 
a i 
f 
: 
= ia i 
é 
i i : be 
» ‘ “a ¥ 
7 i 
.% : Bs 
x i 
> bs 
~» oF ; . : 
. 
4 Lae eh : 
' 
of 4 ce . | 
’ } Ey _ om : 2 el ® 
~ “2 @ ‘ +“ f _ 
j + See r 
is ae peek ports | ste PX ey 
| : it 4 
* | o, 
a ' ; % Lobe as? 
f ° 4 i ee i" 
m vo 
4 - : 
ao ‘ | Pe aS ie 
- ea 
i i : ba ; 
ne 
” a 
wae ee 
%, i Fim e, 
mo, Seb | ty é 
- ae 
a sf 
ny x 
F : 


Pn ky ? fs 


ee ee 
aie : 


Pl ' 
sit) Mer 
- | oe 





ae! 


uttarapujasicakam slokam enam 
pathet.— 
Sarvam papam aham disgami 
paramam prityanumode subhan 
Najanmasthitaye’rthaye Bha- 
gavatah Saddharmaratnasya ca | 
Ratnanam trayamabhyupaimi 
saranam Bodhau dadhe manasam 
Tanmargafica samasraye 
subhavidhin Sambodhaye namaye || 
Itvanena saptavidhanuttarapujam 
vidhaya Om Ah Muh iti visarjayet. 
Athava.— 
Silaecandanaliptanam dhyAna- 
pravaranavrtah | 
Bodhyangakusumakirnah 
viharadhvam yathasukham | 
ityanena. Tadanantaram CaACurs 
Brahmaviharam.—Maitri-Karuna- 
Mudit-Opeksasamjnakam vaksyama- 
nakramena bhavayet. Tatra keyam 
Maitri ? 
Sarvasattvesu. ekaputrapremata™ 


laksana. Athava  hitasukhopasam- 
harakara iti. 
Duhkhat duhkhahetoh samuddhara- 


Triduhkhaduhkhamaha- 


Karuna punah kidrsi. 


nakamata. 
nalaprajjvalitasamsaralohabhavana- 

pravistan jantun tato’pi samuddhar- 
ami iti adhyasayo va karuna. Athava 
triduhkhacduhkhitanam sattvanam 


amsarambudheh samuddharan- 


) 

Otherwises briefly he should recite 
the following slokas which indicate 
kinds of 
worship. ‘* All sins I confess and gladly 
For 
the reason of not remaining till the 
next birth, I take refuge in the Lord 
Buddha and the jewel of Good Law, 
or the Three Jewels and direct my 
thoughts to Bodhi. I follow His path 
and devote my merits for the attain- 
With this, the 
the seven kinds of extraordinary wor- 


the seven extraordinary 


assent to the merits of others. 


ment of Sambodhi.’’ 


ship should be performed and then 
the (gods) should be dismissed with 
the Mantra “Om Ah Muh” or with 
the following s!oka— Thou movest ac- 
cording to Thy will, being besmear- 
ed with the sandal of the Silas, and 
wearing the garments of Dhyana, and 
strewn with the flowers of the limbs 
of the Bodhi. 


Then he should meditate on the 
four Brahmas consisting of Friend- 
ship, Compassion, Joyousness and In- 
difference. What is meant by Friend- 
ship ? Its indication is the love that 
exists in all beings like the love to- 
wards the only son, or like its fruition 


in their welfare and happiness. Com- 
passion again is of what kind? It is 
the desire to save from misery and 
from causes that lead to misery. The 


desire—-I shall even save the people 
who are burnt with the great fire of 
suffering from the three evils and have 
entered the prison of Samsara—1is 
Compassion. Or it is the desire to 
save from the sea of Samsara the 


beings suffering from the three evils. 


( 172 ) 


eccha. Pramodo 


Mudita. 


Mudita tu idrsi. 
Athava asadrge Buddhatve 
tadupaye ca sarva eva samsarinah 


sattva maya pratisthapayitavya 


ityadhyagayo Mudita. Yadva visve- 
sim yani kusalani tesu tadbhogai- 
Ka 


isvaryadisu. ca Aakrstacittata. 


Upeksa.  Pratighénunaya-nivandha- 
nam apahaya hitahitesu jantusu para- 
Yadva 


mahitacaranam 


Upeksa. 
sarvasmin premanusayarahitapara- 
svarasavahini 


labha- 


hitadharmatayam 


pravrttih Upeksa. Athava 


labha-yasgo’payaso-nindastuti-sukha- 
duhkhetyadya stalokadharma-pramu- 


kha-sakalaprastutavyaparopeksanam 


Upeksa. Catur-Brahmaviharabha- 


vananantaram  sarvadharmaprakrti- 


pariguddhatam bhavayet. Sarva eva 


dharmah prakrtya svabhavena pari- 
guddhih ahamapi prakrtiparisuddha 
ityadikam Aamukhikuryyat. Imanca 


sarvadharma-prakrti-parisuddhatam 


anena mantrena  adhitisthect. Om 


Svabhavasuddhah sarvadharmah 


svabhavasuddho’ham iti. Yadi pra- 
krtipariguddhah sarvadharmah kutah 
tarhi avahati. Grahya- 


samsaram 
grahakadimalavrtatvat. Tadvigamo- 
sanmargabhavana. 


Atah 


pariguddhah sarvadharmah iti sid- 


payah Taya sa 


niruddham = syat. prakrti- 


svabhavasuddho’ham. 


Mudita ( Joyousness ) is of the follo- 
wing nature. Mudita is that desire 
of all beings in this world for the 
attainment of Buddhahood, which is 
unlikely to them ; or it 1s the attrac- 
tion (of the beings) towards the vir- 
tues that exist in this world and to 
and the 
powers arising out of them. What is 
Upeksa ( Indifference) ? Upeksa is the 
doing of great welfare to all beings, 


their enjoyment spritual 


good or bad, by overcoming adverse 
requestes and obstacles ; or, iteisetoe 
desire that comes of its own accord to 
do good to all beings without the least 
craving for their love ; or Upkesa 1s 
the indifference to the eight human 
institutions of gain and loss, fame and 
notoriety, blame or praise, pleasure 
and pain, and all unusual activities 
(deeds). After meditating on the four 
Brahmas the natural purity of all 
Phenomena should be meditated. 
All Phenomena indeed, are by nature, 
pure and therefore he the (worshipper) 
should think himself pure by nature. 
This natural purity of all Phenomena 
should be established by the charm 
“Om svabhavasuddhah sarvadharmah 
If all Pheno- 
mena are naturally pure where then 
is the possibility of the cycle of exis- 
tence ? Because of its being covered 
up with the impurity of the thought- 
categories, such as the Subject and the 
thee Obyect: 
(this impurity) is the meditation on 


The way of purging off 


the good path. By that it is restrain- 
established the 
essential purity of all Phenomena. 


ed. Therefore, is 





41. Amrtaprabha 43. Candraprabha 
Lokesvara. Lokesvara, 





caeaae DOL!” 


42, Jaliniprabha 44, Avalokita 


Lokesvara, Lokesvara, 


* 


i a _? nf ah j 





ta TITAS 





ani 


47, Ratnap 
Lokesvara 


45, Vajragarbha 
Lokesvara 





.) 


ODooL= 





anya 


46, Sagaramati 


cs 
OD 
6 i. 
= Un 
co 
Qn = 
es 
= 

<= 


Lokesvara 


tale » 
3) sae ' 7 
Ph 


= _ % Va oe 4 n a 
S oe > 7 : ; ; 





(178 ) 


dham, 


suddhatam vibhavya 


Sarva-dharma-prkrti-pari- 
sarvadharma- 
Sinyatam 


vibhavayet. Tatreyam 


sunyata. Grahyagrahakadi-sakala- 
kalpana-prapanca-vancitacitradvaita- 
prakaésamatratmyakam sacaracaram 
visvam iti cintayet. Imam eva sinya- 
tam anenapi mantrena adhitisthet. 
Om Stnyatajfanavajrasvabhavatmy- 


ako’ham iti, 


Tadanu purvahrdistham mrganka- 
mandalamadhyavartilasannilotpala- 
kinjalkabhyantarasthitaniskalanka- 
nisanathamandalopari sthitat pita- 
Tankaravijat Bhagavatim Aryatar- 


am....f{ bhavayet ]. 


Evam rupam Bhagavatim yavat 
icchati tavat vibhavayet. Tadananta- 


ram asya eva Bhagavatya hrdis- 
thahimamsumandalamadhyavasthita- 
manjunilasarojakinjalkantargataka- 
lankavarjitakumudabandhava- 
mandala-madhy-avalina-pita-Tam’- 
karavijavinirgatanekamaricimalabhih 
trailokyalokakarinibhih gatva ana- 
disamsiddha Bhagavati jnanasattva- 
ripa api 4kasat aniyate. Aniya tam 
akasadese api avasthapya ratnabha- 
janavasthitasugandhitoyena  surabhi- 
kusumena ca tasyé eva Bhagavatyah 


carandarghyam dattva divyapuspa- 


After meditating on the purity of all 
Phenomenal existence the voidness of 
all Phenomena should be meditated 
He 
should concieve the entire universe 


upon. Heres voidemeans» this. 
with its mobile and immobile crea- 
tions as the clear manifestation of non- 
duality when the mind is devoid of 
all the extensions of such thought 
Subject and Object. 
This very voidness should be estab- 
lished by the charm “Om Sanyata- 
jnanavajrasvabhavatmyako’ham.”’ 


categories as 


Then, as previously stated, on the 
heart should be meditated the god- 
dess Aryatara who originates from 
the yellow germ syllable, ‘Tam’ placed 
Ole UneGm OF sO0le Lhe = spotiess: moon, 
which again is inside the filament of 
a blooming blue lotus, which is within 
the orb of the moon with the deer on 


The goddess of this description 
should be conceived as long as desired. 
ie temeuhie 
Bhagavati should be drawn out by 


eternally accomplished 
spreading rays that illumine the three 
worlds—the rays which issue forth out 
of the yellow germ syllable °‘ Tam,’ 
contained in the orb of the spotted 
moon, which is again within the fila- 
After 


thus discovering her, she should be 


ment of a beautiful blue lotus. 


placed on the firmament and should 
be worshipped with the offerings of 
scented water and fragrant flowers 
contained in the vessel inlaid with 
gems, at the feet of the Bhagavati ; 
and should also be worshipped with 


(°1%4,) 


dhipadipanaivedyagandhamalyavilep- 
anacirnacivaracchatradhvajaghanta- 
patakanionin bahuvidhabhisca tam 
Punah 


eva Bhagavatim putjayet. 


punah samptjya stuttva ca mudram 


darsayet. iii. Anaya mudraya tam 
eva Bhagavatim jhanasattvaripam 
santosya atraiva.. samayasattvari- 


payam Bhagavatyaé mantram bhava- 
yet iti anayor-advaitam adhimuficet- 
Tadanu nisithininathamandalama- 

dhyanivistavikacanilambujakinjal- 

kantarlinaniskalankendumandalopari- 
sthitapita-Tam-karavijavinirgatas-ca 
aparyantah ca Taradevyah daSsadiglo- 
kadhatin samavabhasya  tatsthita- 
nam api sattvanam nanaratnavarsa- 
nena daridryadiduhkhan apanayanti. 
Ksanikanairatmadidharmadesanamr- 
Punah 


jagadartham = krtva 


tena tan  santarpayanti. 
nanaprakaéram 
apl 


tatrapi pita-Tam-karavije tasyantar- 


visvam Tararipam nispadya 


Bhagavati ityevamadisphuranasam- 


haranakramena yavat khedo na 


jayate tavat bhavayet. Bhavanatah 
khinno mantram japet. Tatrayam 
mantrah Om Tare-tuttare ture svaha. 
Mahaprabhava evayam mantrarajah. 
Sarvaireva Tathagatairvanditah puji- 
tah satkrtasceti. Dhyanat vyuthtito 
yogi jagat-Tararipam drstva Bhaga- 


vatyahankarena yathestam  viharet 


various ceremonies, external and in- 
ternal, by means of flowers, incense, 
light-stick, food-offerings, scents, gar- 
lands, unguents, powders, mendicant 
dress, umbrella, flags, bell, banner, and 
and the like. Thus repeatedly wor- 
shipping and praising her, the Mudra 
SHOU DGmex Ube Clem mers fee ee With 
this Mudra after propitiating that very 
goddess of the essence of knowledge 
he should commingle her with the 
goddess of the essence of time, and 
by so doing, the non-duality of the two 
is meditated. Then the rays that 
issue out from the yellow germ sylla- 
ble ‘Tam’ which is on the spotless 
moon (lif. the Lover of Night)—the 
rays illuminating the worlds in the 
ten quarters,—cause the removal of 
the poverty and other miseries of the 
beings that inhabit them, by showers 
of various gems, and satisfy them by 
the nectar of advice on realization of 
temporary Siinya ( Nairatmaé) or void- 
After doing good deeds for the 
world he should meditate on the form 
of Tara which is identified with the 
universe ; again he should meditate 


ness. 


repeatedly, until tired, the yellow 
germ syllable and the Bhagavati con- 
He, who is unable 
to meditate should mutter the Mantra. 
The Mantra in that case is ‘Om Tare- 
This lord of all 
Mantras has great power, and _ is 


contained therein. 


tuttare ture svaha. 


saluted, worshipped and revered by 
all the Tathagatas. Finishing the 
Dhyana he should think the world as 
the form of Tara and should move 
about conceiving himself to be the 





49, Ak&Sagarbha Sl. Aksayamati 
Lokesvara. LokeSvara. 





50. Ksitigarbha 





Lokesvara. Lokesvara., 


7 


: Pas i 
ies BeOS wad © oP 
: *s Ph: - i 7 


+, Dien 








53. Samantabhadra 55. Maharatnakirti 
Lokesvara Lokesvara 








54. Mahasahasrabhuja 56. Mahasankhanatha 
Lokesvara Lokesvara 
























at ae 
; 1 Y ’ 
a ‘ ~~ s s €. 
- Ay dm ‘ . =-% * j ‘ 
) , ’ A Ae e ei ci : eV 4 i y i 
. c ee : a pers ae , ls \ 1 ‘ br te Me ce eh 15 TK agi 
fy 1: Some By Q we; ‘3 Sie OF t le he ae? ee etiy) SP 
1% ( * ieee a “Sah 7 eee de 
* = . + <= 4 . ~~ ( i re 7 ' es Ld ” on eo 
, an a 7 + , i i 4 ad 
Pi tes 5 es RF » oe ( } m . 
q 1 3 i "so ra , ' ORs: f 
wT ‘ i; , ; i 
: a f a P ; airy oe 
: * 
t . i* : iA oT) a? 
3! . P i ‘ } 
4 a ar | ra s jo x Ti 
. ‘ rey wit i v 
, rl ot gl é 
‘ alt * % *< 
E f 4 - » i 
‘ cat 2a a te > a 
~ * - > 
; t ‘ : d 
ate 
of Fi a 
‘ Pree | % oo ‘) 
Ps Te eg P “a > A ; 
~ is 7 7 P ae j 
r on Sh 2% -" 
’ in. ny a ee f u 
< ome re a ied 
: i at ; r rs 
ba ee) ® pi + 
Fy = is 
ae eee ety cas 2 ee . tres 
z a eae iS, ae i; eae ‘ are ES ae ae me ee REP - 
en wrk th AZ OE gae pel : a ie} 
> ‘e —< ys 


vo 
i 
' 
— 
; 
i 
: 3 
, 
7 
a 
; 
} 
i 
é vate 
1 
e / 
4, 
oy aT, 
; 
© 
S” 


aifer 2 ; ae . 


‘A! ' we Ry bi +f. si. 5 


( 175 


iti. Prayah amuna kramena Bhaga- 
vatim bhavayato astamahasiddhayah 
caranayoh 


nipatanti. Kim punah 


anyah siddhayah. Api tu tasca suta- 
ram eva. Yasca vijanagiriguhasinah 
san Bhagavatim bhavayet, sa khalu 
pratyaksatah eva tam _pasyati. 
Svayam eva Bhagavati tasya svasa- 
prasvasadikam dadati. Kimbahu 
vaktavyam, paramadurllabham Bu- 
ddhatvam api karatalagatam, tasya 


avatisthate. 


Iti kincit-vistara-Tara-sadhanam 


samaptam., 


Krtiriyam pandita-sthavira-Anu- 
pamaraksitanam. 

A—106-110, 
N—75-79, C—-82-86. 


Sadhanamala ? 


) 


Bhagavati. 

Generally those who meditate on 
the Bhagavati in this manner all the 
eight great perfections ( Siddhi) fall 
a0 thelnetects 


smaller perfections, which come as a 


Not to speak of other 
matter of course. Whosoever medi- 
tate upon the Bhagavati in the lonely 
cave of the mountains, espies her with 
his own eyes ; the Bhagavati herself 
gives him his breath. Not to say 
more, even the Buddhahood which is 
most difficult to attain, comes to him 
as if it is in the palm of his hand. 


Here ends the somewhat long 


procedure for the worship of Tara. 


The author of this Sadhana is 
Anupama Raksita, the Sthavira. 


PLATE LV 





57. Mahasahasrasaryya 
Lokesvara, 


58. Maharatnakula 60. Mahamafjudatta 
Lokesvara 


Lokesvara 








: ie 
Se ay a 





; rT 
Cer Te ee ; 
: ‘ 
a i ' ie 
4 PF : 
a | 
‘i ' 
ne ab a 
: V! x] ’ 
i SE 





PLATE LVIII. 





61. Mahacandrabimba 63. Maha-Abhayaphalada 


Lokesvara Lokesvara 





62. Mahastryyabimba 64. Maha-Abhayakari 
Lokesvara Lokesvara 


APPENDIX B. 


Descriptions of one hundred and eight forms of Avalokitesvara appearing in 
the Macchandar Vahal, Kathmandu, Nepal. 


( Plates XLITI—-LXIX ) 


1. Hayagriva Lokesvara. The god sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude on 
a lotus. He has four hands, out of which the two principal ones exhibit the 
Vyakhyana pose. The second pair holds the rosary in the right hand and the 
lotus in the left. He is accompanied by six other gods and a dragon. 


2. Mojaghafjavala (?) Lokesvara. He stands in the Samabhanga 
pose on a lotus with his two hands showing the Abhaya Mudra in the right 
and the lasso in the left. 


8. Halahala Lokegvara. He sits in the Lalita attitude on a lotus with 
his Sakti on the lap. He has three faces and six arms. The face above re- 
presents probably the head of the Dhyani Buddha, the effigy of whom he ought 
to bear on the crown. In his three right hands he shows the sword, the rosary 
and the Varada pose. In the three left hands he carries the lotus, the noose 
and the Utpala. The hand holding the noose passes round the Sakti in the 
act of embracing. The Sakti exhibits the Varada Mudra in the right hand 
and the Abhaya in the left.* 


4. Harihariharivahana Lokegvara. Lowermost is the snake, on it 
is the lion ; over the lion is Garuda. Narayana rides Garuda and on his shoul- 
der sits Lokesvara. The Garuda has two hands in the Anjali Mudra. Nara- 
yana has four hands, out of which the first pair is engaged in forming the Af- 
jali against the breast while the second pair has the Cakra in the right hand 
and the Gada in the left. Lokesgvara sits in Vajraparyanka, and has six 
arms ; the three right hands show the rosary, the Cakra and the Varada pose 
while the three left carry the Tridandi, the noose and the Utpala.t 


5. Mayajalakrama Lokesgvara. He has five faces and twelve arms. 
The head on the top probably represents Amitabha. He stands in the Alidha 
attitude, wears the tiger-skin and the garland of heads, but his faces do not 
present a fearful appearance. The six right hands carry the Tridandi, the 


* Described in the Sadhanamala. 


+ Also described to the Sadhanamala. 
23 


C738) 


Khatvanga, the jewel, the Khadga, the Vajra and the rosary, and the six left 
the noose, the Kapala, the Utpala, the fruit, the Cakra and the lotus.* 


6. Sadaksari Lokesvara. He sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude. He 
has four arms and one face. The principal pair of hands are joined against 
the breast in forming the Afijali. The second pair carries the rosary in the 
right and the lotus in the left.t 


7. Anandadi Lokesgvara. He shows a standing attitude in the 
Samabhanga, carries the lotus, the stem of which he holds in his right hand 
while the left displays the Varada pose. 


8. Vasyadhikara Lokesvara. He sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude 
carries the bowl with his two hands arranged in Samadhi Mudra. 


9. Potapada Lokesvara. He sits also in the Vajraparyanka attitude 
and has four arms. The two principal hands exhibit the Afjali against the 
breast while the other pair holds the rosary in the right and the noose in the left. 


10. Kamandalu LokesSvara. He stands in the Samabhanga pose and 
is endowed with six arms. The two principal hands are engaged in drawing 
the bow to its full length. The other four hands carry the Vajra and the Cakra 
in the two right and the Ghanta and the Kamandalu in the two left. 


11. Varadayaka Lokesvara. He is one-faced, six-armed and stands 
on a lotus. The two principal hands join against his breast in forming the 
Anjali. He shows also the rosary and the Varada pose in the two right hands 
and the book and a Mudra (probably Karana) in the two left. 


12. Jatamukuta Lokegvara. He is four-armed and _ one-faced, the 
head on the top representing the head of Amitabha; The two right hands 
show the rosary and the Varada pose while the two left have the lotus and the 
water-pot. He is represented in a standing attitude. 


18. Sukhavati Lokesvara. He is one-faced and six-armed and sits on 
lotus in the Lalita attitude. The first pair of hands exhibits the Dharma- 
cakra Mudra, the second pair carries the rosary and the book and the third 
pair shows the Varada Mudra in the right and the water-pot in the left.t 


14. Pretasantarpita Lokesvara. He is one-faced and six-armed and 
stands on a lotus. In his three right hands he carries the rosary, the jewel 


* Described in the Sadhanamala. 
+ Described in the Sadhanamala. 


t Described in the Dharmakosasangraha of Amrtananda. 





65. Mahamanjubhita 67. Mahavajradhatu 
Lokesvara Lokesvara 





66. Mahavisvasuddha 68, Mahavajradhrk 
Lokesvara Lokesvara 


Gates oel 
Cts 


0 | 


: 8 ots ) te pee 
ry eae 
ud (aueie ea me 








69. Mahavajrapani 71,.. Amoghapasa 
Lokesvara., Lokesvara. 





70, Mahavajranatha 72, Devadevata 
Lokesvara. LokeSsvara., 















er 





i *¥ 


Ly 
F, 
Lee 
' 
ca 
‘ 
s 
i 


Nema a2 
“7 
ae 
, 

’ 
a a b 
’ 
a 
fs 

ae ee 

her’ 


ad 


. 
* 


3 
= 
_ a 
nals 
hn. 
> 
: 
Bs 
. 
* 
a 
Due 
: 
» ioe 
+ ae 
fai 
a 
<< 
=f 






















j i a _*s oye om yee. fies » he 
. 4 Ye 4 iA , . ae j 
ae: = Pins * a : : : ; ; eY 
4 ar & 5 rm” cad = 7 
~ wT p > t a) NW 4 3 = ae i, “4 : 
7 Pe! 44g es » me, \ 
ee j heart aes he Bs cA 
iyo a a en 
z ea Tey eet PU Ap 234i } 
i Le z, eee i ‘ I ; x4 } 
: ; i. VW i a § | 
- 4 5 
--% : i ; 
‘ - 2 ' “ 
, - 
en | | } : 
ous > hee “ty ' 
at b a ‘ 
rm Sa i 7 
eps 
as aes ‘oe , 
= 
j 
a4 i ‘ 
' i] 
| 
| t, i 
j : : 
_ he a ie Oe ae at O0 te. oot ee! Singh Ree Ala G 
pM 7 ies he & oi See Se y 7 : VP % ' an S| au vo ia) Sol bei (ee tay 
= 4 5 ; ree} oe oe, a re . Lease jee ae ; aay ace 
a 4 a 
- i . j _ 
i Ket eee i if ; ae ts aa 
é ; eo ake secs 4 = ‘ er ae a lange roa a PAT < 
{ on See eh ee ’ : an e at cont Fed FN ak =) ra 
og , : rare . i ~ a 
i] 
io ae 
‘ 3 
i] 
« 
j 
/ ety ] 
~ 
my : 
‘ 
' - 
’ 
i 
~ v4 
! 
, 
A aff a 
ie - aN LEE I aes ae 
shgil | .> ye = 
i : = 7 i y 
’ AL i ; ~Y agate! ; 
a j 4 A Orn 43 
; ; pve rte) ee: 
j 7 i 
| ae : ae isa 
f = J an 
; | 7 a 
oan le , 
i ers ey 
, : ‘or * 4 | ¢ ar: 4 
. A BN i, Ta aR 
1 . a’ 
Pa { SA 
: & GAD . 
; fe PS 
:! a — % A, 
3 wea 
i } t Pipe Ane co 
) 
r ev es 
* . a i> € 7. ; 
dey af ; : A) A - 


( 179 ) 


and shows the Varada Mudra, while the three left carry the Tridandi and 
the book and exhibit the Varada Mudra.* 


15. Mayajalakramakrodha Lokesvara. He presents a very fierce ap- 
pearance with five faces terrible with protruding teeth, and eyes rolling in 
anger. His hair rises upwards like flames of fire. He stands in the Pratya- 
lidha attitude and wears the tiger-skin. He has twelve arms, out of which 
the six right carry the sword, the Vajra, the goad, the noose, the Trisila, and 
the arrow. The six left have the shield, the Cakra, the Jewel, the deer-skin, 
the Kapala and the Tarjani with the noose.t 


16. Sugatisandargana Lokesvara. He is one-faced and six-armed and 
stands on a lotus. In his three right hands he carries the rosary and exhibits 
the Varada and Abhaya poses. The three left have the Tridandi, the Ut- 
pala and the water-pot.f 


17. Nilakantha Lokesvara. He is one-faced and two-armed, and sits 
on a lotus in the Vajraparyanka attitude. He carries the bowl of gems in his 
two hands arranged in the Samadhi Mudra.§ 


18. Lokanatha-raktaryyavalokitesvara. He is one-faced and two- 
armed and sits in the Lalita attitude on a lotus. The right hand displays the 
Varada Mudra while the left holds the stem of a lotus on his lap.|| 


19. Trilokasandargana Lokesvara. He is also one-faced and two-arm- 
ed and sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude. His right hand is raised against 
the breast with outstretched fingers and the palm inwards. The other hands 
exhibit exactly the same pose ( Karana ?) as displayed in one of the left hands 


by Varadayaka Lokesvara. 


20. Simhanatha Lokegvara. He is one faced and four-armed and sits 
in Bhadrasana, or the European fashion, on a raised seat placed on 
the lotus. In his two right hands he carries the sword and the jewel while 
the two left hold the book and the noose. 


* Described on the obverse side of the first leaf of Abhisekavidhi, appended to the 
Nepal palm leaf Ms. of the Sadhanamala. 


+ This form seems to have some affinity with the form described under No. 5. The 
Dhyana in the Sadhanamala probably gave rise to two distinct forms in later times. 


¢ Also described in Abhisekavidhi. 
§ Described in the Sadhanamala. 
|| Described in the Sadhanamala as Lokanatha. 


{] This seems to be quite different from the Simhandda described in the Sadhanamala. 


( 180 ) 


21. Khasarpana Lokegvara. He is one-faced and two-armed and sits 
in the Lalita attitude on a lotus. His right hand exhibits the Varada pose 
and the left is raised against the breast and holds the stem of a lotus.* 


22. Manipadma Lokegvara. He is one-faced and four-armed and sits 
in the Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus. His two principal hands are joined 
against his breast in forming the Afijali. The other pair holds the rosary in 
the right hand and the lotus in the left. He is identical in form with no. 6. 
described above. 


28. Vajradharma Lokegvara. He is one-faced and two-armed and sits 
in the Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus. The right hand displays the Abhaya 
pose and the right on the lap holds the stem of the Utpala.t 


24. Pupala Lokegvara. He is one-faced and four-armed and sits in the 
Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus. One of the two right hands carries the 
rosary while the other exhibits the Abhaya pose. One of the two left carries 
the book and the other displays a Mudra with the index and little finger point- 
ed forwards (Karana ?). 


25. Utnauti (?) Lokegvara. He is one-faced and six-armed and sits in 
Bhadrasana on the raised seat of a lotus. His three right hands hold the 
rosary and the Vajra and exhibit the Abhaya pose, while the three left carry 
the Kapala, the noose and the water-pot. 


26. Vrsnacana Lokegvara. He is one-faced and six-armed and sits in the 
Lalita attitude on a lotus. The three right hands show the Utpala, the arrow 
and the Varada pose while the three left show the book, the bow and the 
Abhaya pose. 


27. Brahmadanda Lokegvara. He is one-faced and four-armed, sits in 
the Lalita attitude on a lotus and is accompanied by his Sakti who sits on his 
lap. His two right hands show the Tridandi and the Varada pose, while the 
two left show the Ratnakalasa (vessel containing jewels) and a Mudra with 
the index and little fingers pointed forwards. The Sakti displays the Varada 
pose in the right hand and the Abhaya in the left. 


28. Acata (?) Lokesvara—He is one-faced and six-armed and sits in 
the Lalita attitude. The three right hands carry the sword and the arrow and 
display the Varada pose; while the three left hold the Kartri, the bow and 
display the Abhaya pose. 


* Described in the Sadhanamala. Here the four companions have not been given. 


+ Described in the Sadhanamala ; but the form presented in this figure does not 
agree with the one described in chapter III. 





73, Pindapatra 75. Ratnadala 
Lokesvara LokeSsvara 





rc wane 
F et 
} 4 MoS 
ee eh ag, 
° ¢ 


Ret hed a= we ASD 
7 te 


oo 


Pe Pen heel 
DETER Ts AAC i 
SO wel Hore, er eee 


v pra cs 


“ 
hE 
. 





PrArhe Exch 





PO f is 
77. Kamalacandra 79, Acalaketu 
Lokesvara Lokesvara. 





78, VWajrakhanda 80, Sirisara 
Lokesvara. Lokesvara 





(rf Si°¥9) 


29. Mahavajrasattva Lokesvara. He is one-faced and _ eight-armed 
and sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus. The four right hands 
exhibit the sword, the rosary, the Cakra and the Abhaya pose while the four 
left carry the noose, the Tridandi, the conch and the bowl of gems on the lap. 


30. Visvahana Lokesvara—He is one-faced and six-armed and sits in the 
Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus. The three right hands carry the sword, 
the arrow and the Cakra, while the three left carry the noose, the bow and 
display the Abhaya pose. 


31. Sakyabuddha Lokegvara—He is one-faced and four-armed and _ is 
represented in a standing attitude on a lotus. His two right hands carry 
the arrow and the Khatvanga, while the two left hold the bow and exhibit 
the Tarjani. 


82. Santasi Lokesvara. He is one-faced and six-armed and stands on 
a lotus. The two principal hands join against the breast in forming the 
Dharmacakra Mudra. The other four hands show the rosary and the Varada 
pose in the right and the book and the Abhaya pose in the left. 


33. Jamadanda Lokesvara. He is one-faced and six-armed and sits 
in the Lalita attitude on a lotus. The three right hands carry the sword, the 
lotus and the Vajra while the three left carry the fruit, the bowl of gems and 
exhibit a Mudra ( Karana ? ), 


34. Vajrosnisa Lokesvara. He is one-faced and six-armed and is re- 
presented as standing on a lotus. His three right hands show the rosary, the 
Tridandi and the Abhaya pose, while the three left show the book, the noose 
and the Varada pose. 


35. Vajrahuntika Lokesvara. He is one-faced and twelve-armed and 
stands in Ardhaparyanka in a dancing attitude. He carries the Utpala in 
all his twelve hands.* 


36. Jnhanadhatu Lokesvara. He is one-faced and eight-armed and 
stands on a lotus. Two of his hands join in forming the Anjali against 
the breast ; the second pair exhibit what is called the Ksepana Mudra. The 
remaining hands carry the rosary and the Tridandi in the right and the book 
and the noose in the left. 


* This form may be a later development of the conception of Padmanarttesvara, who 
is also sometinies represented as eighteen-armed, carrying the double lotus in all his hands. 


( 182 ) 


37. Karandavytha Lokesvara. He is one-faced and two-armed and 
sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus. He carries the Vajra in the 
right hand and the book against his breast in the left.* 


38. Sarvanivaranaviskambhi Lokesvara. He is one-faced and two- 
armed and sits in the Vajraparyanka ‘attitude on a lotus. He carries the 
stem of a lotus on which appears the sword in the right hand and the Vajra 
against his breast in the left. 


39. Sarvasokatamonirghata LokeSvara. He is one-faced and four- 
armed and sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus. The two principal 
hands exhibit the Abhaya poses against his breast and the other two hands 
carry the rosary in the right and the Utpala in the left. 


40, Pratibhanakakita Lokesvara. He is one-faced and two-armed and 
sits in Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus. He carries the noose against his 
breast in the right hand and holds the bowl of gems in the left. 


41. Amrtaprabha Lokegvara. He is also one-faced and two-armed 
and sits inthe Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus. He carries the double Vajra 
on his lap in the right hand and the lotus on a water-vessel in the left. 


42, Jaliniprabha Lokegvara. He is also one-faced and two-armed and 
sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus. He holds the sword on a lotus 
in the right hand and the stem of a lotus against his breast in the left. 


43. Candraprabha Lokegvara. He is also one-faced and two-armed 
and sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus. He exhibits the Vitarka 
Mudra in the right hand and carries the stem of a lotus against the breast 
Insbheslelt: 7 


44. Avalokita Lokegvara. He is also one-faced and two-armed and 
sits in the same attitude. He weilds the sword in his right hand and holds 
the stem of a lotus against his breast in the left. 


45. Vajragarbha Lokegvara. He has got also the same number of 
hands and faces like no. 44. He carries the Vajra in the right hand and the 


stem of a lotus in the left. 


46. SAgaramati Lokesvara. He is in all respects identical to No. 44 
with the difference that he carries the double Vajra in his right hand. 


* This form ought to have been the same as the Sadaksari Lokesvara, but it is not so. 


Patient ats 





81. Dharmacakra 83. Sarasirt Lokesvara 
Lokegvara 


iy 
IL 


a 
SSITOVIOLS 





82. Harivahana 84. Harihara 
Lokesvara Lokesvara 


pee bay ee es 
Pw ; 


7 
oe 
& 

Fi : 


7 
, 


1S 
= oe ry 


was ‘ 4 
2 Oh et re 


ee oe 


Bane : Af Cae | : 
Pata aoa ews S| 


AE: 





PLATE LXIV. 





85, Simhanada 
Lokesvara 





86, Visvavajra. 


Lokesvara 


87. Amitabha Lokesvara 










= 





Qi 
AIK Se 
4\() = 





88. Vajrasattvadhatu 
Lokesvara 





( 183 ) 


47. Ratnapani Lokesvara. He is also identical with No. 44 in all other 
respects. The difference les in the fact that he carries the sword in the left 
hand and displays the Varada Mudra in the right. 


48. Gaganaganja Lokesvara. He is also identical to No. 44. in all 
other respects with the difference that he exhibits the Vitarka Mudra in the 
right hand and the book in the left. 


49, AkaSagarbha Lokesvara. He is also identical to No. 44 in all 
respects with the difference that here the god exhibits the Varada pose in the 
right hand and the stem of a lotus in the left. 


50. Ksitigarbha Lokesvara. He is also identical to No. 44 except 
that here the god carries a tray of gems in the right hand and displays the 
Varada Mudra in the left. 


51. Aksayamati Lokesvara. He is also identical to No. 44 with 
the difference that this god carries the rosary in the right hand and holds the 
lotus on a water-vessel against his breast in the left. 


52. Srstikanta Lokesvara. He is one-faced and two-armed and stands 
on a lotus. He displays the Varada pose in the right hand while the empty 
left hand rests near his waist. A large number of four armed gods issue out 
from various points of his body while Amitabha appears over his head. 


58. Samantabhadra Lokesvara. He is one-faced and two-armed and 
sits in the Vajraparyanka attitude on a lotus. He exhibits the Varada pose in 
the right hand and holds the stem of a lotus against his breast in the left. 


54. Mahasahasrabhuja Lokesvara. In all other respects he is identical 
to No. 58 with the difference that here the god weilds the sword in his right 
hand and dispalys the Varada Mudra in the left. 


55. Maharatnakirti Lokesvara. He is three-faced and six-armed and 
stands on a lotus. He carries the fruit, the Utpala, and the conch in the three 
right hands, and shows the bow, the whip and the Namaskara Mudra in the 
three left. 


56. Mahasankhanatha Lokesvara. He is identical in all respects to 
No. 55 with the difference that the symbols carried by him are different. 
Here the god shows the Namaskara Mudra, and the two Vajras in the three 
right hands while the three left carry the noose, the arrow and the Ghanta. 


57. Mahasahasrastryya Lokesvara. He is eleven-faced and_ eight- 
armed and stands on a lotus. The two principal hands exhibit the Abhaya 


( 184 ) 


poses against the breast. The remaining hands show the rosary, the Cakra 
and the Varada pose in the three right hands and the Utpala, the bow 
charged with an arrow, and the vessel in the three left. This form of Loke- 
Svara is very popular in Tibet.* 


58. Maharatnakula Lokesvara. He is three-faced and six-armed and 
stands on a lotus. The head on the top represents that of Amitabha. 
He carries the sword, the Utpala and the rosary in the three right hands and 
the book, the lotus and the Utpala in the three left. 


59. Mahapatala Lokesvara. He is also three-faced and six-armed and 
stands on a lotus. He carries in his three right hands the Vajra, the Vigva- 
vajra and the Utpala and in the three left, the banner, the Ghanta and the 
Kamandalu. | 


69. Mahamanjudatta Lokesvara. In all other respect he is similar to 
No. 59. But he carries the Ghanta, the sword and the Ratnapallava in his 
three right hands and the Vajra, the Ghanta and the Utpala in the three left 
hands. 


61. Mahacandrabimba Lokesvara. He is three-faced and six-armed 
and stands on a lotus. He carries the arrow, the Utpala and the fruit in his 
three right hands and the bow, the Vajra and the Cakra in the three left. The 
head on the top probably represents Amitabha.t 


62. Mahastryyabimba LokeSvara. He is identical in all respects to 
No. 61 except that here the god carries two Vajras, and the Cakra in the three 
right hands and two Utpalas and the bowl of gems in the three left. 


63. Maha-abhayaphalada LokeSvara. He is also similar in form to 
No. 61. except that here the god carries the Vajra, the sword and the Utpala 
in the three right hands and two Ghantas, and the book in the three left. 


64. Maha-abhayakari Lokesvara. He is also similar in form to No. 61, 
but the symbols held by the hands are diffrent. Here the god carries the 
book against his breast in the two principal hands, and holds the Vajra and the 
the rosary in the right and the Ghanta and the Tridandi in the left. 


* Getty’s Avalokitesvara with 22,000 arms is only a development of this form of 
Lokesvara, which appears in the middle of the image. See Getty: Gods of the Northern 
Buddhism. 


+ In the whole of the Sadhanamala we do not find any deity with four faces and six 
arms. The arms are generally double the number of faces. 


PUAT On lave 





89, Visvabhiita 91, Vajradhatu 
Lokesvara Lokesvara. 





90, Dharmadhatu 92. Sak yabuddha 
Lokesvara Lokesvara 






a a « : Pt . 
ena ett : Tie ‘¢f = ae ip ot a a ve e ae : ; 
: 7 Yt =e rere ae ee sell a . b4 a ' ;. ph St ae ke \ iJ " 
* =6 SS Se =e HF act +2 ag ha rok yin be 
Ke ee ; i" 4 ode i” 
‘ ne a en) eee ve ara 
car oh re oar ah oe ; > ee ee in 
" > See RA aes . | ME Bes 4 
° r . ¥ : : ‘ 4 ia 
~ ¥ = : : be hve 
, j 
( i r j 
i] j oS 


: ; ; ; re ; 
P i 7 am | a PAE @ j 
l tay : ipa a ae 
: i} See 

“ ’ ies 


+ [odie 





F i 
1] 
i« 
) \ 
“4; 
’ ‘ 
4 
’ F , I ey : 
ae den 
tke 


| 5 - Pi ’ ox ag 7 ay ¥ 
4 Cm” - taf 
) = ey eRe Ty % 


a 
ok a 





Pi) hein % 
- ™ me 





93. Cittadhatu 
Lokesvara 


PUATES PE X.Ve 





TOLL 


95. Santamati 
Lokesvara 





94, Cintamani 
Lokesvara 


96. Mafjunatha 


Lokesvara 


- 





et games eee! Lactate 4 





(SaLS5 om) 


65. Mahamanjubhtta Lokesvara. He is also similar to No. 61 with 
the difference that here the god carries the sword, the Vajra and the Kaman- 
dalu in the three right hands, and the rosary, the Utpala and the bellin the 
three left. 


66. Mahavisvasuddha Lokesvara. He is four-faced and eight-armed 
and stands on a lotus. He carries in his four right hands the sword, the flag, 
the Vajra and the goad, while the four left hold the Ghanta, the conch, the 


Utpala and the lotus. 


67. Mahavajradhatu Lokesvara. He is identical with No. 66 in all 
respects but the symbols differ. Here the god carries the Vajra, the bow, 
the Tristila and the sword in the four right hands, and the Ghanta, the arrow, 


the Kamandalu and the noose in the four left. 


68. Mahavajradhrk Lokesvara. He is also identical in form to 
No. 66 with the difference that here the god carries the sword, the Vajra, 
the bow and the AnkuéSa in the four right hands, and the Utpala, the Ghanta, 
the arrow and the noose in the four left. 


69. Mahavajrapani Lokesvara. He is also identical with No. 66 ex- 
cept that here the god carries the sword, the goad, the Gada, and the rosary 
in the four right hands, and the Cakra, the noose, the Utpala and the book in 
the four left. 


70. Mahavajranatha Lokesvara. He is three-faced and eight-armed 
and stands on a lotus. He carries the rosary and the noose and displays the 
Abhaya and Varada poses in his four right hands. The three left show the 
book, the Tridandi, and the lotus, while the empty fourth rests near the waist. 


71. Amoghapasa Lokesgvara. He is four-faced and eight-armed and 
stands on a lotus. He carries in his four right hands the Vajra, the sword, 
the goad and the bow, while the three left carry the Ghanta, the Tridandi 


the noose and the arrow. 


72. Devadevata Lokesvara. He is also similar to No. 71 with the 
difference that here the god carries the Vajra, the bow, the Tristla and the 
sword in the right, and the bell, the arrow, the jewel (?) and the noose in the 
lett 


73. Pindapatra Lokesvara. He is one-faced and two-armed and stands 
on a lotus. He carries the Pindapatra (the bowl containing oblations to be 
offered to the Departed Fathers) in his two hands near the waist. 


24: 


(PPES6 te) 


74. Sarthavaha Lokegvara. He is similar to No. 73 in all respects ex- 
cept that here the god displays the Varada Mudra in his right hand and carries 
the PindapAatra (bowl) in the left. ) 


“5. Ratnadala Lokegvara. He is also similar to No. 78 in all other 
respects except that here he displays the Varada pose in the right hand while 
the empty left touches the shoulder. 


76. Visnupani Lokesvara. He is again similar in form to No. 73, 
except that here he carries the Tristila in the right hand and a lotus bud in 
the left. 


77. Kamalacandra Lokesvara. He is also similar to No. 738 except 
that here he displays the Vitarka Mudra in both of his hands. 


78. WVajrakhanda Lokegvara. He is also similar to No. 73 in all other 
respects except that here the god carries the lotus bud in the right hand and 
the book against the breast in the left. 


79. Acalaketu Lokesgvara. He is also similar to.No. 73. But he dis- 
plays the Abhaya Mudra in the right hand and the Pindapatra (bowl) in the 
left. A chowrie rests against his right shoulder. 


80. Sirisara (?) LokeSvara. He is also similar to No. 73 in all respects 
except that here he carries the sword in the right hand and the noose in the 
leit: 


81. Dharmacakra Lokegvara. He is again similar to No. 78 except 
that here he carries the Vajra in the right hand and the axe in the left. 


82. Harivahana Lokeévara. He is identical to No. 73 with the dif- 
ference that here the god carries the Kamandalu in the right hand and the 
echowrie 1n the left. 


88. Sarasiri (?) Lokesvara. He is again identical with No. 73. The 
difference is that here the god carries the Trigila in the right hand and the 
lotus in the left. 


84. Harihara Lokegvara. He is also identical with No. 73 in all other 
respects expect that here he displays the Vyakhyana Mudra with his two 
hands against the breast. 


85. Simhandada Lokegvara. He is again similar to No. 73. But here 
the god carries the chowrie resting against his shoulder in the right hand, 
while the empty left rests near the waist. 





97. Visnucakra 99. Visnukanta 
Lokesvara Lokesyvara 





OS] 


CORT 





98. Krtanjali Lokesvara 


4¢ 


be - 
@« 2 a 
a ae a 
= as 3 7 


ys @ 
ua!) Diath e 





PRAT ES oOV LE 





101. Sankhanatha 103. Nityanatha 
Lokesvara Lokesvara 





Sie 
es aR 
\ . 
WY 
vo S 
1 \) 





102. Vidyapati 
Lokesvara Lokesvara 





(STS aie) 


86. Visvavajra Lokesvara. He is also similar to No. 73 with the diff- 
ference that here the god displays the Varada pose in the right hand and carries 


a snake in the left. 


87. Amitabha Lokesvara. He is again similar to No. 78 in all other 
respect except that here the god carries the chowrie in the right hand and the 
wheel in the left. 


88. Vajrasattvadhatu Lokesvara. He is similar to No. 73 except that 


here he carries the Cakra in the right hand and the conch in the left. 


89. Visvabhita Lokesvara. He is similar to No. 73 in form ; but here 
he carries the rosary in the right hand and the lotus in the left. 


90. Dharmadhatu Lokesvara. He is again identical with No. 73 in 
form except that here the god carries in his two hands the water-pot held near 


the waist. 


91. Vajradhatu Lokesvara. He is identical with No. 73 except that 
here the god displays the Varada Mudra in the right hand and carries the 


lotus in the left. 


92. Sakyabuddha Lokesvara. He is also similar to No. 78 with the 
difference that he carries the Vajra in the right hand while the empty left is 


held near the waist. 


93. Cittadhatu Lokesvara. He is also similar to No. 78 with the dif- 
ference that he carries the image of a Jina (probably Amitabha) in the right 


hand and displays the Abhaya pose in the left. 


94. Cintamani Lokesvara. He is also similar to No. 73 except that 
here he carries the Caityain the right hand while the empty left is held near 


the waist. 


95. Santamati Lokesvara. He is again similar to No. 73 with the dif- 
ference that he exhibits the Varada pose in the right hand, and carries the 


bough of a tree in the left. 


96. Mafjunatha Lokesvara. He is also similar to No. 73; but here 
the god carries the rosary in the right hand and the book against the breast 


in the left. 


97. Visnucakra Lokeévara. He is also similar to No. 73 except that 
here he carries the Cakra in the right hand and the Gada in the left. 


(i880) 


98. Krtafijali Lokesvara. He is also similar to No, 73 with the differ- 
ence that here the god exhibits the Anjali, which 1s held against the breast, 


in his two hands. 


99. Visnukantaé Lokegvara. He is again identical with No, 73 in all 
other respects except that here the god displays the Varada Mudra in the 
right hand and the book against the breast In Lhesletns 


100. Vajrasrsta Lokesgvara. He is also identical with No. 73. The dif- 
ference lies in the fact that here the god earries the chowrie in the right hand 


and the lotus in the left. 


101. Sankhanatha Lokeégvara. He is also similar to No. 73 with the 
difference that here the god carries the conch against his breast in the right 
hand and the lotus in the left. 


102. Vidydpati Lokegvara. He is also similar to No. 73 except that 
here the god shows the empty right hand against his breast while the left car- 
ries the lotus. The chowrie hangs from his right shoulder. 


103. Nityanatha Lokesgvara. He is identical with No. 73 with the 
difference that here the god carries the rosary in the right hand over the book 
held in the left. 


104. Padmapani Lokesvara. He is also similar in form to No. 78 with 
the difference that here the god displays the Varada pose in the right hand 
and earries the stem of a lotus in the left. 


105. Vajrapini Lokesvara. He is again identical with No. 73 in ail 
other respects except that here the god carries the Vajra on his head in the 
right hand, while the empty left is held near the waist. The attitude in which 
he stands is also different. He shows the dancing attitude in Ardhaparyanka. 


106. Mahasthamaprapta Lokesvara. He is similar in all respects to 
Padmapani Lokesvara (No. 104). 


107. Vajranatha Lokesvara. He is also identical with No. 105, Vajra- 
pani Lokesvara, with the only difference that here the god holds the lotus in 
the left hand. Like the previous one, he shows also the dancing attitude in 
Ardhaparyanka. 


108. Srimadaryavalokitesvara. He is one-faced and two-armed and 
stands on a lotus. He holds the Vajra in his right hand, which rests against 
the breast, while the left carries the stem of a lotus held near the waist. 


RAR Cae, J GBS 





105, Vajrapani 107. Vajranatha 
Lokesvara Lokesvara 





106, Mahasthamaprapta 108, Srimad- 
Lokesvara Aryavalokitesvara 





Mg a I: 


£ 


* 
* ~ ~ ; 
~ z 
‘ 
: ¢ 
§ of 4 
pn ee : 
ae ’ * 
’ 
bo ae 
' 4, 5 eee, SE 
‘ % ae a9 
oe & : ~ 
j ‘4 ie sas | 5 
; i 
! yj wo one 
nf ~ rn 
i rt. os lod) i 
a4 es oe 
= el i of 
. Orn ' 
! a)? ae 
* 7 . 
72 
t 
as 7 
- a 
- La - ou ~ 4 
~ ‘ : 
ees by 
5 
- e 
he f Set Br. ie v.% 
7 - vz Se 
Ps , ii 
2 ‘ i 
» 7 wh” * 
7 i . P 7 
» 
¢ Vi 


rhe 


2 ‘ seit pine oes aio 


GLOSSARY. 


Abhaya—Mudra, or the gesture of protection. Any hand showing this Mudra 
should be slightly elevated and bent with the palm turned outward, 
the fingers being outstreched and elevated. This Mudra should be 
distinguished from the Varada Mudra in which case the hand is 
stretched downwards with the fingers, instead of being elevated, pointed 
downwards ; and also, from the Capetadina Mudra, which shows 
the right hand menacingly extended upwards, just as we do in 
dealing a slap. 


Aksamala—or Mal4, is the string of beads such as is carried by the Roman 
A 7 Ral é N aT Ee 1 t r] mA = 
Catholic priests. The beads consist of a kind of dried fruit, called in 
Sanskrit, Rudraksa. 


Alidha-—a particular Asana, or attitude of legs, in all respects similar to the 
attitude adopted in drawing the bow charged with an arrow. The 
right leg is outstretched while the left is slightly bent. This attitude 
should be distinguished from the Pratyalidha attitude, in which 
case the left leg is outstretched while the right is slightly bent and 
placed behind. 


Anjali_name of a Mudra also known as the Sarvardjendra Mudra or the 
Samputanjalt. It is the Mudra in which the two hands are clasped 
palm to palm, both of which are extended upward with all fingers 
erect or slightly bent. This is the characteristic Mudra of Sadaksari 
Lokesvara and is also exhibited by Namasangiti. 


Ankusa—elephant goad. See the weapon, for instance, in the image of Parna- 
savari. When the goad is surmounted by a Vajra, it is called 
Vajrankusa. 


Anuvyanjanas—see Laksanas. 


Ardhaparyanka—also called Mahdrdajalila, is a particular Asana of sitting. 
Both the legs are on the same pedestal; one of the knee is raised 
while the other is bent in the usual position of a Buddha. This Asana 
should be distinguished from the Lalitdsana in which case one of 
the legs is pendent, while the other is bent in the usual position of a 
Buddha. When both the legs are pendent, the attitude is called the 
Bhadrasana. 


( 190 ) 


Asana—The word in Sanskrit may mean a seat, a mystic or any attitude exhi- 
bited in the lower limbs. The word Padmdsana means the seat of a 
lotus. Similarly Simhdsana means the lion-throne or the seat of a 
lion. The word Sukhdsana means any easy attitude of sitting. It 
may be the Paryankasana, the Lalitasana orthe Ardhaparyankasana. 
In fact, in the Sadhanamala, the word Sukhasana has has not 
been used in a technical sense. When used in a technical sense 
Asana always signifies a particular mystic position of the lower limbs 
of the body. This Asana may be of various kinds, such as, the 
Paryankasana, Vajraparyankasana, Lalitasana, Ardhaparyankasana, 
Bhadrasana, Alidhasana, Pratyalidhasana or the Natvasana, a variety 
of Ardhaparyanka. : 

Asoka—the absence of sorrow; but the word is always used to designate a 
particular kind of tree which blossoms forth red flowers. From time 
immemorial, this tree is regarded as sacred in India. It is believed 


that kicks at the tree by chaste women cause it to blossom. 


Bana—see sara. 


Bhimisparga---also called Bhiimispargana or the Bhisparsa is the name of 
a Mudra. The right hand exhibiting this Mudra has the palm turned 
inward and the fingers outstretched with the tips touching the 
ground. This Mudra should be distinguished from the Varada 
Mudra in which case the tips do not touch the ground and the palm 
instead of being turned inward is turned outward. The deity show- 
ing the Bhisparsa Mudra must sit in the Vajraparyanka attitude. 


Bhitas—a class of mischievous spirits or hobgoblins who, without any pro- 
vocation whatever, are supposed to injure men and destroy them 


mysteriously. p 


Bija—see Virja. 


Brahmakapadla—or the Brahmasirah, is the severed head of Brahma who is 
eredited with four faces with grey beards in all of them and the crown 
of grey chignon. The Buddhist gods, carrying triumphantly the 
severed head of Brahma, display the aversion of the Buddhists to- 
wards the Hindus, as well as, the superiority of their gods to the gods 


of the alien faith. 


Brahmamukha—the face of Brahma containing four faces. The Brahmamukha 


is super-imposed on the head of Paramasva. 


(ae toler) 
Brahmasirah—see Brahmakapdla. 


Caitya—or the Stipa, which represents the Buddhist Universe, is the Buddhist 
sanctuary, sometimes square and sometimes round, with spires or 
steps in the capital. Each spire or step represents a heaven, the 
uppermost portion being a point which is supposed to be the highest 
peak of Mount Sumeru, a mythical mountain, whence the Bodhi- 
citta loses itself in Sinya. On the four sides of the Caitya the figures 
of the Dhyani Buddhas appear. Vairocana is sometimes present or 
sometimes absent. The intermediate corners are sometimes occu- 
pied by the figures of the Divine Buddhasaktis or their symbolic 
representations in the form of Yantras. The Caitya may show 
further, in the four cardinal points, the Caturmaharajikas or the 
Guardains of the quarters, namely, Vaisravana, Virapaksa, Virt- 
dhaka and Dhrtarastra. See Stipa and Plate IT. 


Cakra—wheel or disc. It is the characteristic symbol of the Hindu god Visnu 
or Krsna. 


Camara—-Chowrie or the flv-whisk consisting of the tail of a Yak. 


Capa-—also called Dhanu, is the bow. It is generally carried in the left hand. 
With the bow and the arrow Marici inflicts pain to the Maras or wicked 
beings. 


Casaka—the same as Kapdla. See Kapdla. 
Caturmudrd—See sanmudra. 


Cintamani—the gem that satisfies all desires. The jewel is sometimes re- 


presented in the form of small round object and sometimes in the shape 
of a flame. 


dakinti—same as Sakti. See sakti. 


damaru—small drum, such as is carried by the Hindu god, Siva. See 
damaru in the image of Bighnantaka. 


Danda—the stafi or the mace carried by Hayagriva. It cannot be translated 
as the magic wand, as the Khatvanga serves that purpose. When 
the staff is surmounted by a Vaira, it is called a Vajradanda. 


Dharant—meaningless conglomeration of syllables, occasionally containing 
one or two intelligible words, used as a charm or prayer. There are 
Dharani-Samgrahas or collections of Dharanis in the Nepal Library, 


(2 102m} 


with an astonishingly large number of Dharanis devoted to the dif- 
ferent deities. The list given in the Nepal Catalogue, Vol. II, App. 
p. 251 et sqq. may be consulted. 


Dharmacakra—or Vyakhyana Mudra is that gesture of hands exibited by Lord 
Buddha while preaching his first sermon at Sarnath. This pose is 
depicted variously but the most artistic and correct representation 
of this Mudra is to be found in the celebrated Prajfiaparamita image 
from Java (Plate XXVIII,c) See Getty: The Gods of Northern 
Buddhism, p. 168. 


Dhanu—same as Capa. See Capa. 
Dhipa—inecense stick, which when burns, emits fragrance. 


Dhydna—meditation ; it refers generally to that portion of the Sadhana in 
which instruction is given as to the description of the deity with whom 
the worshipper is to identify himself. 


Dhydna—or Samadhi Mudra; the position of hands while in meditation. 
The hands with palm upwards lie one upon the other on the lap with 
all the fingers stretched. This is the characteristic Mudra of Amitabha. 


Dhyandsana—or Vajraparyankdsana, or Vajrasana, is the meditative pose, 
the two legs being firmly locked with both the soles apparent—the 
characteristic sitting attitude of the Dhyani Buddhas. Sometimes 
a small thunderbolt, shown on the seat of the god, indicate the medi- 
tative attitude. Dhyandsana should be distinguished from the Pary- 
anka attitude in which case the legs are placed one upon the other 
with both the soles invisible. 


Dipa—lamp ; the sacred lamp fed with ghee. 
Gada—mace. 


Garuda—mythical bird supposed to be the destroyer of all serpents. 
The Hindus regard him as the Vahana of Visnu. Garuda is represented 
as a huge bird with a human body, two wings and sharp beaks, gene- 

‘rally with hands clasped against the breast. 


Ghanta—bell ; when the bell is surmounted by a Vajra, it is called Vajraghanta, 
which is a symbol of Vajrasattva. 


Jatamukuta—the crown of chignon. The hair is tied up above the head in 


such a way so as to resemble a crown or a tiara. 


(< 1b) 


Kalasa—is the ordinary water-vessel of metal or earth. It is different from 
Kamandalu or Kundika, which is smaller in size and in which there 
is a projecting pipe for discharging water. 


Kamandalu—See Kalasa. 


Kapdla—either (i) severed head of a man, or (ii) the cup made of a skull, or 
(iii) a bowl. The skull cup is of two kinds ; when it is filled with blood 
it is called Asrkkapdla, and when with human flesh it is called Mamsa- 
kapadla. The deities are supposed to partake of the blood or the flesh 
carried in these cups. 


Karana—Mudra. Any hand showing this Mudra is outstretched with the 
index and the little fingers erect, while the thumb presses the two 
remaining fingers against the palm of the hand. 


Karppara—same as Kapdla. See Kapdla. 


Kartri—or Karttari signifies a small knife ; sometimes the edge of it is uneven 
lke the edge of a saw. It is called Vajrakartri when surmounted by 


a Vajra. 


Khadga—sword. The sword in the hand of Manjusriis called the Prajnakhadga 
or the Sword of Wisdom, which is believed to destroy the darkness 
of ignorance by the luminous rays issuing out from. it. 


Khatvanga—magie wand; the stick is generally surmounted either by the 
Vajra, or the Kapala, or the Tristla, or the banner, or all of them. In 
any case, fora Khatvanga the skulls are necessary and it will be so 


called even if nothing else is present. 


Ksepana—The Mudra of sprinkling, exhibited by Namasangiti. The two 
hands are joined palm to palm with fingers all stretched, the tips of 
which are turned downwards and enter into a vessel containing nectar. 


Kundika—-same as Kamandalu. See Kalasa. 


Laksanas—auspicious marks ; the thirty-two special marks of a Buddha, enu- 
merated in Dharmasamgraha attributed to Nagarjuna. The Laksanas 
are also enumerated in Getty: The Gods of Northern Buddhism, 
p. 170 et sqq. Another class of minor marks are called Anuvyanjanas. 
eighty in number, also enumerated in the Dharmasamgraha. 


Mala—same as Aksamdla ; see Aksamala. 


Mandala—the magic circle containing mystic figures and diagrams, and figures 


25 


( 194 ) 


of gods and goddesses constituting the Mandala. In the Nispanna- 
yogambara Tantra, Kriyasamuccaya and the Vairavali-nama-mandalo- 
payika there are descriptions of no less than a score of Mandalas, 
each containing a number of deities. | 


Mani—same as Cintamani ; see Cintdmant. 


Manira—mystic syllables, sometimes containing one or two intelligible words, 
but shorter than the Dhdranis. The Mantras are believed to be a 
contracted form of the Dharanis and are meant for the mass to obtain 
an easy salvation, by simply muttering them. In many instances, 
the Mantra gives the name of the divinity or his attributes, and 
these are most important in determining the names of different gods 
when the Colophons of Sadhanas are not reliable. 


Mayura—peacock ; and Mayirapiccha is the tail or feathers of a peacock. 
Mudgara—hammer ; it may also mean a staff or a mace. 


Mudrad—mystic pose of hand or hands. Some of the Mudras can be shown 
by one hand, such as the Varada, Abhaya, Namaskara, ete. ; others 
require both the hands, such as the Anjali, Dharmacakra and many 
others. In the SAdhanamala there are descriptions of an everwhel- 
ming number of Mndras. But it is very difficult to comprehend them 
unless actually explained by the priests. 


Misala—pestie. 


Naga—serpent. They have the character of water-spirits and are helieved 
to dwell in the springs, lakes and tanks and have the power to yield 
rain. But if they are roused to anger, they hurl down rocks from the 
mountain tops and destroy fair cities. The gods of the Sadhanamala 
are fond of ornaments of eight lords of snakes. For their names and 
ornaments constituted by each of them, see supra p. 56. 


Nakuli—mongoose ; the characteristic animal of Jambhala. The mongoose 
is believed to be the receptacle of all gems and when the god of Wealth 
presses the animal, it vomits forth all the riches. 


Namaskara—the Mudra assumed by the Bodhisattvas when paving homage 
to the Buddhas or Tathagatas, or by the minor deities to the principal 
one. The hand, slightly bent, is raised above in a line with the shoul- 
der with fingers outstretched or slightly bent and palm turned up- 
wards. The description given in Getty, p. 172 is a description of the 
Anjali Mudra. : a 


( 195 ) 


Nipura—anklet ; small bells are attached to the ornament so that when the 
leg moves, it chimes melodiously. 


Padma—lotus, which may be any colour except blue. The blue lotus is 
designated by the word Utpala or Nilotpala. It is regarded as es- 
pecially sacred by all classes of Indians. See Getty: The Gods of 
Northern Buddhism, p. 172. When the lotus shows petals in both 
the upper and lower directions it is called the Visvapadma or the 
double lotus. 


Parasu—axe. 
Paryanka—see Dhydnasana. 


Pdasa—noose or lasso ; when a Vajra is attached at the end of it, it is called 
the Vajrapasa or the adamantine noose. The noose is required to 
bind the host of the Maras and all other wicked beings. 


Patra—begging bowl] or bowl, generally found in the images of the five Dhyani 
Buddhas and of Buddha Sakyasimha. Sometimes the Kapdla is used 
in the Sadhanamala to designate a bowl. See Kapdla. Getty 
records a Buddhist legend as to how a Patra came in the possession 
of Buddha. Op. cit. p. 178 et sqq. 


Pranja—see sakti. 


Preta—or Mrtaka, or sava always mean a corpse in Indian Buddhist Icono- 
graphy. 


Pustaka—book in the form of a Sanskrit Manuscript which represents the 
Prajnaparamita or the Book of Transcendental Knowledge. Nagar- 
juna is said to have restored the Scripture from the nether regions. 
The book is carried by several Buddhist gods, notably, Prajnapara- 
mita, Manjusri and Sarasvati. 


Ratna—jewel ; the word Triratna signifies the three Jewels, Buddha, Dharma 
and Sangha. Similarly there are different groups of jewels, such as 
the seven jewels or the sixteen jewels. For the enumeration of the 
seven jewels, see Getty: The Gods of Northern Buddhism p. 174, 
See also Cintamani. 


Sdadhana-—the procedure of worship for the invocation of Buddhist gods, and 
not ‘charm’ as translated by C. Bendall. For the translation of a 
complete Sadhana see Appendix A. The Sadhanamala or the Sadhana- 
samuccaya is a collection of more than three hundred Sadhanas. 


( 196 °) 


gakti—or Prajia, Vidya, Svoabha Prajna or Svadbha Vidya, the female counter- 
part of a Bodhisattva. All goddesses are regarded as female counter- 
parts of one or the other of the Bodhisattvas. The Saktis are 
either represented singly or in yab-ywm, i.e. in the actual embrace of 
the god to whom she is affiliated as a Sakti. This female counter- 
part may be ‘“‘ Svabha”’ (own shadow) when she carries the same 
symbols and is in all respects similar, unless otherwise stated, to the 
god she embraces. 


Samadhi—meditation ; ‘‘ the deepest form of abstract meditation.”’ Fora 
description of the Samadhi Mudrd see Dhyana Mudra. — 


sankha—conch-shell ; it is especially given as a symbol to the gods as the 
| sound vibrated through a shell penetrates far and wide. The conch- 
shell seems to have been extensively used in wars by ancient Indians. 


sanmudrd—the six Mudras, the meaning of this Mudra being quite different 
from the Mudra meaning mystic gestures. It has been translated 
as auspicious ornaments or symbols. The six ornaments are enu- 
merated in the following verse in the Sadhanamala— 


Kanthika rucakam ratnamekhalam bhasmasittrakam | 
Sat vai paramita eta mudraripena yojitah || 


‘‘ The torque, the bracelet, the jewel, the girdle, the ashes and the 
sacred thread are ascribed to the gods in the form of Mudras 
(ornaments), which represent the six Paramitas.”’ 


These ornaments or symbols are generally of human bones, the 
Khatvanga being the sacred thread. When one of the six is absent, 
they are called Panecamudrad, and Caturmudré, when two. 


sara—or Bana is the arrow. It is generally carried in the right hand, while 
the corresponding left shows the Dhanu. | 


Sava—see Preta. 


Siddhas—or Siddhapurusas are saints who have already attained Siddhi or 
perfection in a Tantric rite and have acquired superhuman powers. 
Two groups of Siddhas are generally recognized, one consisting of 
eight and another of eighty-four. They were famous in the mediaeval 


ages for their magical powers and prodigious deeds. Most of them were 
Bengalees, 


( <197 )) 


Simha—lion. The word Simhdsana means the lion-seat or the lion-throne, 
but does not designate a special attitude of sitting such as the Vajra- 
sana, Ardhaparyankasana, and so forth. See dsana. 


srrkhala—chain, also called the Vajrasrnkhala, or the adamantine chain, 
which is the characteristic symbol] of Vajrasrnkhala. 


Stipa—see Caitya, and pictures of three celebrated Sttiipas of Nepal in Plate IT. 


Suci—Mudra used generally in the act of dancing, though it is to be seen in 
other cases also. All the fingers are stretched with the tips jouuns 
at the end, so as to resemble a needle (siicz). 


Sinya—translated as ‘ Void’ in the absence of a suitable and more expressive 
word. It signifies a stage of the mind after Nirvana, about which 
neither existence, nor non-existence, nor a combination of the two, 
nor a negation of the two can be predicated. This Sanya in Vajra- 
vana is identified with Compassion which transforms itself. in the 
form of divinities, of the nature of Sinya, for the welfare and 
happiness of men (sunyata-karunabhinna). 


Suryya—the sun or the dise of the sun, which is held in one of her hands by 
Marici and which is the seat of many Buddhist gods and goddesses. 
Rahu is said to devour the sun and the moon. 


Svabha Prajia—see sakti. 


Tarjani—Mudra ; the pose of the raised index finger in a menacing attitude. 
In the hand, showing this Mudra, the index finger only is raised while 
the other fingers are locked up in the fist. Ifa pdsa or noose appears 
round thes indexesltinger itis called Tarjanipasa: The ) word 
Vajratarjant signifies the Vajra held in the fist while the index is 
raised in a menacing attitude. 


Tarjanipasa—see Tarjant. 


Tarpana—Mudra of doing homage to the Departed Fathers ; the Mudra of 
Namasangiti. Any arm showing this gesture is bent and 1s raised 
upward in a line with the shoulder. The palm of the hand is turned 
inward with fingers slightly bent and pointed towards the shoulder. 


Tathagatas—the Buddhas who have attained the highest stage of perfection 
according to the Buddhists. In the Sadhanamala, the word is in- 
variably used in the plural number always with reference to the 


( 198 ) 


five Dhyani Buddhas, but does not even signify Vajrasattva or 
Vajradhara. The Buddhas are innumerable and have a hierarchy 
among them; the different orders are, Pratyeka, sravaka, Samyak- 
Sambuddha, Jina, Arhat, Tathagata, and the like. 


Trailokya—pertaining to the three worlds, the terrestrial, the celestial] and the 


infernal. 


Trigala—trident. The Hindu god Siva is believed to carry the trident and 
hence it is popular among the Tantra symbols as most of the Tantras 
are in the form of a dialogue between Siva and Parvatt. 


Utpala—see Padma. 


V dhana—vehicle or the mount of gods; the mount may be any animal 
including men, demons and corpses. Sometimes even the gods of 
an alien faith serve as Vahanas. 


Vajra—thunderbolt. When two thunderbolts are crossed, it is called a 
Visva-Vajra, or a double Vajra. In Buddbist Tantra the word gene- 
rally designates Sinya or Void, which cannot be cut, cannot be 
destroyed, but which destroys all evils. 

Vajradanda—see Danda. 


V ajraghanta—see Ghanta 


Vajrahunkara—Mudra. The wrists are crossed at the breast with twe hands 
holding the Vajra and the bell, both of which are turned inwards. 
But if the two symbols and the hands are turned outward the Mudra 
will be called the Trailokyavyaya Mudra. 


Vajrakartri—see Kartri. 
Virankusa—see Ankusa. 

V ajraparyanka—see Dhyanasana. 
Vajrapadsa—see Pasa. 
Vajrdsana—see Dhydnasana. 
Vajrasrikhala—see srnkhala. 


Vajratarjani—see Tarjani. 


V arada—Mudra ;_ the gesture of hand shown by gods while bestowing boons. 
The hand showing this gesture is pendent with its palm outward and 


(er 199m} 


fingers all stretched. Sometimes a jewel is seen stamped on the hand 
showing the Mudra; it is known as the Ratnasamyukta Varada, that 
is, the gift-bestowing attitude together with a jewel. The Mahoba 
figure of Khadiravani is an example of this kind. 


Vija—also Bua. In Tantra the word means the germ-syllable, the radiance 
of which illumines all the innumerable worlds and the darkest regions, 
and attract the deity which is the transformation of Sinya. See 
Conclusion. 


Vijapuraka—citron ; the characteristic symbol of Jambhala. 
V isvapadma—the double conventional lotus. See Padma. 
V isvavajyra——the double conventional Vajra. See Vajra. 


Vitarka—-Mudra assumed in discussion. This Mudra is altogether unknown 
in the Sadhanamala and seems to be a later development. It is, 
nevertheless, shown by a number of forms of Avalokitesvara treated 
of in Appendix B, all of which are more or less influenced by Tibetan 
art and Iconography. This Mudra is represented with the right arm 
bent and all fingers erect except either the index or the ring finger 
which touches the thumb so as to resemble a ring. The hand is ex- 
tended forward with the palm outward. 


Vyakhyana Mudra ;—see Dharmacakra. 


Yab-yum—lIt is a Tibetan word consisting of two particles, yaband yum. The 
word ‘ Yab’ in Tibetan means the honourable father and * yum’ means 
the honourable mother. The combined word therefore means the 
father in the company of the mother, or in herembrace. For the 
spiritual significance of the conception of yab-yum, see Conclusion. 


Yaksas—The Yaksas are misshapen dwarfs who guard the treasures of the 
northern mountains and their Chief is Kuvera, the god of Wealth. 
They are usually malignant in disposition and they occasionally feed 
on human flesh. But the benign influence of Buddha’s teaching 
makes them forego their cruel habits. 


ie 


Oe af Hee 


S as & Ait 


Vice 
*, Ve 


he ve nyt an, 


me 


Teiae | 


a TA, 


aes ese 
“ ‘ ) 





BIBLIOGRA PHY 


ABHAYAKARA GupTa—Nispannayogambara Tantra (manuscript in the posses- 
sion of the author.) 

ADVAYAVAJRA—A dvayavajrasamgraha consisting of nineteen small works. 
Copied from Nepal Durbar Library palm-leaf MS. TIT. 360 C. Copy 
in the library of M. M. Haraprasad Sastri. 


BEAL (S.)—Si-yu-ki or the Buddhist Records of the Western World translated 
from the Chinese of Hiuen Thsang, London, 1906. 2 Vols. 
BEenpDALL (C.)—Siksd-Samuccaya of Santideva in the Bibliotheca Buddhica 


Series, St. Petersburg, 1897. 


2. Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Library, 
Cambridge. Cambridge, 1883. 


8. A Historical Introduction to H. Sastri’s Nepal Catalogue, Vol. I. Caleutta 
1905 aaa 
Burcess (J.) AND FERGusSON (J.)—-The Cave Temples of India. London, 1880. 


CoomarAsSwAmy (Dr. A. K.)—Mahayana Buddhist Images from Ceylon and 
Java (with three plates). J. R. A. S. April, 1909. 


CorpiErR (P.)—Catalogue du Fonds Tibetain de la Bibliotheque Nationale, 2e 
partie, Index du Bstan-Hgyur (1909), 8e partie (1915). Paris, 

Csoma (ALEX. DE Koros)—-Note on the Origin of the Kala-Cakra and Adi- 
Buddha Systems in J. A. S. B. Vol. TT, 1838, 57{f. 

2. Notices on the different systems of Buddhism extracted from Tibetan 
authorities in J. A. S. B. Vol. VII, 1888, Part J, 142ff. 

Cunnincuam (A.)—The Bhilsa Topes or Buddhist monuments of Central India. 
London, 1854. 

Davips (W. Ruys)—Early Buddhism. London, 1908. 

Dixsuit (K. N.)—Six Sculptures from Mahoba, Memoirs of the ASI No, 8. 

Frercusson (J.)—See Burgess (J.) 

Foucuer (A.)—Etude sur VIconographie Bouddhique de inde 1st. partie: 
Paris, 1900. 2e partie 1905. 


2. The Beginnings of Buddhist Art and other essays in Indian and Central 
Asian Archeology, translated by L. A. Thomas and F. W. Thomas 
with a preface by the latter. Oxford, 1917. 


( 202 ) 


Grunwepew (A.)—Buddhist Art in India, translated from German by Agnes 
Gibson, revised and enlarged by J. Burgess. London, 1901. 


InpRABHUTI—J NR anasiddhi (MS with the author.) 
Kern (H.)—Manual of Indian Buddhism. Strassbourg, 1896. 


Lecce (J.)—-A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms being an account of the Chinese 
monk Fa-Hien of his Travels in India, (A. D. 899-414). Oxford, 1886... « 


Max Muuuer (F.), Kasawara (K.) and WencEeL (H.)—-The Dharma-Sam- 
graha attributed to Nagarjuna, Oxford, 1885. 


Mirra (R.)—The Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of Nepal. Calcutta, 1882. 


Monter Writtrams (Sir M.)—-Buddhism in its Connexion with Brahmanism and 
Hinduism and in its contrast with Christianity. London, 1889, 


OnpFreLp (H. A.)-—Sketches from Nepal. Vol. II. Tondon, 1880. 


Rao (T. A. GortnatHa)—-Elements of Hindu Iconography. Vols. I. and If. 
Madras, 1916. | 


Saunt (D. R.)-—Catalogue of the Museum of Archeology at Sarnath. Caleutta 
1914. 


SamaAsRAmi (S.)—Ed. Kdranda-Vyiha. Calcutta. 


Sastrt (H.)—Eighteen articles in vernacular on “ Bauddhadharma ’ published 
in the Monthly Magazine Narayana. Calcutta. ae 


29. Introduction to N. N. Vasu’s “ The Modern Buddhism and tts Followers 
in Orissa.’ Caleutta, 1911. 


3. A Catalogue of Palm-leaf and Selected paper Manuscripts belonging to 
the Durbar Library, Nepal. Vol. 1 (1905) and Vol. 11 (1915). — Calcutta. 


4. A Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS. in the Government Collection 
under the care of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Vol. I. Buddhist MSS. 
Calcutta, 1917. 


5. Buddhists in Bengal in the Dacca Review, Vol. II, No. 7 pp. 91-104. 
Dacca, 1922. 


6. Discovery of Living Buddhism in Bengal. Calcutta. 


Bauddha Gan O Doha (in vernacular). Sahitya Parisat Granthavali 
INO; 5D... Galcuttar bapeeloce: ion - 


8. Bdngdalar Purdna Aksara (in vernacular) in the Journal of the Vangiva 
Sahitya Parisat. B.S. 1827. eG): 


9. The Discovery of a work by Aryadeva in Sanskrit in. JASB 1898, 
p. 175 foll, | 


Sastri (H. Krisnna)—South Indian Images of Gods and Goddesses. Madras, 1916, 


( 203 ) 


SENART (E.)—Le Mahavastu Vol. 8. Part I, Paris, 1882. 
Smith (V, A.)—A History of Fine Arts in India and Ceylon. Oxford, 1911. 
Susuxt (D. T.)—The Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism, London, 1907. 


Ut (H.)—The Vaisesika Philosophy, edited by F. W. Thomas, Oriental Transla- 
tion. Fund, New Series. Vol. XXIV. London, 1917. 


Vasu (N. N.)—The Modern Buddhism and its Followers in Orissa. Calcutta, 
LO 


2. The Archaeological Survey of Mayiirbhanja. Calcutta. 
VocEL (J. Pu.)—Catalogue of the Archeological Museum at Mathura, Allahahad 
1910. | 
2. Introduction to D. R. Sahni’s Sarnath Catalogue, See—-Sahni (D. R.). 
8. The Mathura School of Sculpture, contributed to the ASI Annual 
Report 1906-7, pp. 137-160. 


WapveLt—(L. A.)—The Indian Buddhist Cult of Avalokita and his Consort 
Tard, the * Saviouress,’ illustrated from the remains of Magadha. JRAS 
1898. 

2. The Buddhism of Tibet or Lamaism. London 1895. 

Wricut (1).)—History of Nepal. Cambridge 1877. 






; AAS 
ri 


INDEX 


A 


Abhiseka, 23. 

Abhisekavidhi ; source of the Sadhana of 
Sugatisandarsana LokeSsvara, 49: of Pre- 
tasantarpita Lokesvara, 50; two pages 
illustrated, XXIV, a. 

Acala, name of Candarosana, 60, 61. 

Acalaketu Lokesvara, described, 186. 

Acata (?) Lokesvara, described, 189. 

Adhyesana, the process described, 170. 

Adi Buddha 15; manifestation of, 16; be- 
comes Vajradbara when represented in 
human form, xxviii ; origin of the theory 
of, 161n, xxvii ; theory accepted in Vajra- 
yana, XXviil. 

Advaya, an advanced stage of Yab-yum 
when all duality ceases, 164n ; meaning 
of the word in Vajrayana, 164n. 

Advayavajra, his time, xxixn ; discovery of 
one of his manuscripts, xiff ; on Nirvana, 
Xvin. 

Advayavajrasangraha, passage on Sanya and 
its manifestations cited, 164n. 

Ajaya, accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 

ae a the process described, 

0. 

Akarsana, a Tantric rite, 69. 

Akasagafija, Mortal Bodhisattva, 12. 

Akasagarbha LokeSvara, described, 183. 

Aksayamati Lokesvara, described, 183. 

Aksobhya, a Dhyani Buddha. 2 ; his antiqui- 
ty, 4; described, 4; Dhyana cited, 4n; 
significance of his blue colour, 60; his 
stone images noticed, 4n ; representations 
of, VII, b, c ; gods emanating from, 60ff ; 
goddesses emanating from, 76ff ; charac- 
ter of his emanations, 60, 76; MafjuSsri 
as an emanation of, 17, 19ff; his effigy 
on the crown of Caturbhuja Heruka, 68 ; 
Dhvajagrakeyura, 89: Ekajata, 81: Ha- 
yagriva, 53,69: Heruka, 62: Jambhala, 
74, 114: Janguli, 80: Mahacinatara, 77: 
Mahamantranusarini, 87: Mahapratyan- 
gira, 88; Mafijughosa, 20: Nairatma 91 : 
Namasangiti Mafijusri, 23: ParnaSavari, 
83, 84, 109: Raktayama4ri, 70 : Samvara, 
65: Siddhaikavira, 21, 20: Sita-Prajfia- 
paramita, 85: Hindu goddess Tara, 78: 
Ucchusma Jambhala, 74, 75: Vajra- 
carcika, 86; Vajrananga, 22: Vajra- 
sattva, 6: Vajravetali, 58: Vasudhara, 
90: Vidyujjvalakarali, 883: Yamari, 73 ; 
significance of his image on the crown of 
the Indian Museum figure of Usnisa- 
vijaya, 101n. 

Alphabet, letters of the ; represented by the 
Dhyani Buddhas, 7A. 

Amitabha, a Dhyani Buddha, 2; described, 
33; Dhyana cited, 3n ; duty and character 
of, 3 ; representations of, VII, a; Bhadra- 


kalpa, the cycle of, 32; his emanations, 
52ff, 55ff ; spiritual father of Avalokite- 
Svara, 32; his image in the Dacca figure 
of Arapacana, 28 ; Mafijusri as an emana- 
tion of, 17; Amitabha and Nilakantha 
distinguished, 48; Amitabha and Vak 
distinguished, 18 ; his effigy on the crown 
of Astabhuja Kurukulla 57: 14 varieties 
of Avalokitesvara, 33: Bhrkuti 59: 
Dharmadhatu Vagisvara, 17, 19: Eka- 
jataéa, 58: Khasarpana, 37: Lokanatha 
40: Mahavala, 53; Padmanarttesvara, 
42, 48: Rakta Lokesvara, 47: Sapta- 
Satika Hayagriva, 53, 54: Tarodbhava 
Kurukulla, 56: on the tongue of Vak, 
17, 18: instead of Vajrasattva on the 
British Museum figure of Cunda, 131: 
instead of the parental Buddha on the 
crown of the Sarnath figure of Ucchusma 
Jambhala, 115: instead of Vairocana on 
the Lucknow Museum figure of Marici, 97. 

Amitabha Lokesvara, described, 187. 

Amitabha MafijuSsri, name of Vak, see Vak. 

‘‘Amitayus Sttra,’”’ see ‘‘“Sukhavati Vytha.”’ 

Amoghapasa Lokesvara, described, 185. 

Amoghasiddhi, a Dhyani Buddha, 5 ; another 
form of Amitabha, 5; described, 5; 
Dhyana cited, 5n; stone image of, 4n ; 
representations of, VIII, b-c; character 
of his emanations, 106 ; his emanations, 
106ff ; his effigy on the crown of Dhanada 
Taras .LOG 2K hadiravante vw laraswl06.s 
Mahamaytri 111: Parnasavari 83, 110, 
109 : Sadbhuja Sitatara, 108: Vajragan- 
dhari, 58: Vajrasrnkhala, 112: appears 
in the Dacca image of Arapacana, 28. 

Amrtalocana, epithet of Prasanna Tara, 138. 

Amrtamukhi, epithet of Prasanna Tara, 138. 

Amrtananda, author of ‘*Dharmakosasan- 
eraha,’’|50, 33. 

Amrtaprabha LokeSvara, described, 182. 

Ananda, disciple of Buddha Sakyasimha, 12 ; 
Mortal Bodhisattva, 12; first recipient 
of the knowledge of Janguli, 78. 

Anandas, four; data for increase in the 
number of deities, 165. 

Anandadi Lokegvara, described, 178. 

Ananga, name of Madana, see Madana. 

Ananta, name of a serpent lord, 56. 

Afijali Mudra, exhibited by Manidhara, 34 : 
Namasangiti, 149 ; Sadaksari Lokesvara, 
33.: Sadaksari Mahavidya, 34 : Sudhana- 
kumara, 38 ; see Glossary. 

Anupadhigesa Nirvana, explained, 167. 

Anupama Raksita, author of ‘* Kificitvistara- 
Tarasadhana,’’ 175. 

Anuttara Vajrasattva, yab-yum form of 
Vajrasattva, 6. . 

Aparajita, an independent goddess, 153ff, 
102 : described, 153 ; Dhyana cited, 153 ; 
her interesting features, 153 ; her Nalanda 
image identified, 153 ; illustrated, XLI, d; 


(= 20606) 


Nepalese drawing illustrated, XLI, ¢; 
discovery of her complete image, 154 ; 
Indian Museum image illustrated, XLII, 
a; accompanies KurukullA as a minor 
goddess, 158, 58; why she is not an 
emanation of Ratnasambhava, 153. 

Aparajita, Sitatapatra see Sitatapatra. 

Apron of leaves, special recognition symbol 
of ParnaSsavari, 84. 

Arapacana ; significance of the word, 28; a 
variety of Mafijusri, 17 ; an independent 
god, 27, 28; described, 29; Dhyana 
cited, 29; origin of Arapacana and his 
four companions, 29; his Sadhanas, 28 ; 
character of his representations, 28 ; 
images illustrated, XVI, d, XVII, a-b-c ; 
peculiarities of his Nepal bronze, 28 3 
Arapacana and Siddhaikavira distinguish- 
ed, 21; called Prajfiacakra when seated 
on an animal, 28. z 

Ardhaparyanka, name of an Asana ; its two 
varieties, 42 ; dancing in, see Dancing. 

Arolika, occurs in the Mantra of Amitabha, 


Sis 

Art, Buddhist ; its evolution with regard to 
time and space, xxiff. 

Arya accompanies Jambhala, 114. 

Aryadeva, 1; a disciple of Nagarjuna, In ; 
regarded as a Bodhisattva, 17; called a 
Bodhisattva, 8 ; author of ‘‘Catuhsatika,”’ 
1 


Arya Marici, variety of Marici, described, 95. 
Arya Marici and Agokakanta distinguish- 

eed 400. 

Arya Sarasvati; variety of Sarasvati, 152 ; 
described, 152; Nepalese drawing illus- 

trated, XL, e. 

Aryatara, Divine Buddhasakti, 7 ; illustrated, 
Eo peke 

Aryatara, variety of Green Tara, 136 ; another 
name of Vasyatara, 107. 

Aryavajravarahi, variety of Vajravarahi, 
105; extracts from her Dhyana cited, 
105n. 

Asanas, all have a deep spiritual significance, 
163 ; for the meaning see Glossary. 

Asanga ; regarded as a Bodhisattva, 17; his 
connection with Maitreya, 13 ; composer of 
a Sadhana for Prajnaparamita, 84 ; intro- 
duces Tantra into Mahayana, xviii. 

Agoka bough, special symbol of Marici, 95 ; 
carried by Vajrananga, 22. 

Agokakanta, variety of Marici, 95 ; described, 
95; Dhyana cited, 95; see Arya Marici ; 
accompanies Khadiravani 91; 106. 

Agoka tree ; RaktalokeSvara appears under, 
46 ; special symbol of Mahamayari, 134. 

Astabhuja Kurukulla, eight-armed variety of 
Kurukulla, 57ff ; described, 58; Dhyana 
cited, 57ff ; Mandala given in the Sadhana, 
57. 

Astabhuja Marici, eight-armed variety of 
Marici, 96 ; described, 96 ; several images 
noticed, 97; see Maricipicuva. 

A Star ue Tara, varietv of White Tara, 

36. 

Agvaghosa ; regarded as a Bodhisattva, 17 ; 
called a Bodhisattva, 8; his conception 
of Nirvana, xvin. 

Avalokita, significance of the word, 52. 

Avalokita Lokesvara, described, 182. 


Avalokitesvara, Bodhisattva, 32ff; emana- 


tion of Amitabha 53; antiquity of the 
conception of, 51; the period of his 
activity, 32 ; his character, moral teach- 
ings and miracles, 32; his refusal of 
Nirvana, 32 ; an abstract idea, 17 ; origin 
of, 17; his functions, 8; Sadhanas of, 
32; his dogmatic form is really Nama- 
sangiti, 148 ; antiquity of his images, 52 ; 
varieties of, enumerated and described, 
33ff; 108 forms of, 33; reason of his 
having 108 forms, 33; his 108 forms 
enumerated and described, 177ff ; illus- 
trated, XLIII-LXIX ; date and character 
of the paintings of 108 forms, 33 ; their 
discovery, 833; importance of the dis- 

#,) COVery, 35. 

Avenika Dharmas, eighteen, 10. 

Ayadeva, another name of Aryadeva, author 
of Ciltavisuddhiprakarana, In. 


B 


Balas, ten, 10. 

Bara in the District of Birbhum, 25. 

Bauddhanatha Temple; coloured image of 
Sadaksari Lokesvara to be found in, 35. 

Bendall, C ; quoted, xviii ; criticized, iv. 

Bengal School of Art ; its existence not yet 
recognized, xxiii; its excellences and 
flourishing period, xxiiff; its excellence 
exemplified, 110. 

Bewitching ; the process described, 22. 

Bhadrakalpa, the cycle of Amitabha, 3, 32. 

Bhadrasana, special attitude of Vasyatara, 
TOs 

Bhairava, name of Hindu god Siva ; trampled 
by Vajrahumkara, 144. 

Bhasma, one of the six auspicious symbols, 
91; see Sanmudra. 

Bhattacharyya, B. C.; his identification of 
Mahakali criticized, 91. 

Bhattaésali, N. K., 38n’'; discoverer of the 
image of Dvibhuja Heruka, 62; of 
Khasarpana, 38; of the two Vikrampur 
images of Parnasavari 110. 

Bhima, accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 

Bhindipala (spear), 98. 

Bhismabhagini, epithet of Vajragandhari, 
P58. 

Bhrkuti, 37; emanation of Amitabha, BIE 
described, 59 ; Dhyana cited, 59 ; Getty’s 
image of Bhrkuti should be identified 
as Grahamatrka, 59 ; a variety of Yellow 
Tara, 138; her description as a minor 
deity, 38; accompanies Avalokitesvara, 
59; Khasarpana, 38, 36, 59 : Padmanart- 
tegvara, 42, 43: Rakta-Lokesvara, 46. 

Bhumisparsa Mudra, described, 4 ; see Glos- 
sary. 

Bhuarini, accompanies Padmanarttesvara, 43. 

Bhitas, trampled by Mahasahasrapramar- 
dani, 138. 

Bhutadamara, an independent god, 144ff ; 
described, 145 ; Dhyana cited, 144. 

Bhuvanegvari, Hindu goddess; Mafijuvara 
identified as, 25n. 

Bighna ;_ significance of the word, 142 ; 
represented by Ganesga, 84; trampled 
by Parnasavari, 84. 

Bighnantaka, an independent god, 142ff ; 


( 

associated with three other ‘ Antaka’ 
gods 142 ; described, 143 ; Dhyana cited, 
142 ; his legendary origin, 143 ; tramples 
upon Ganesa, 84n ; his image illustrated, 
XX ae LX Oe 

Birbhum, image of Mafnjuvara found in, 25 ; 
image of Sadaksari group found in, 34. 

Birbhum Vivarana, 25n. 

Blue, significance of the colour, 60. 

Blue Taras (Extraordinary ); enumerated 
with leading characteristics of each, 139. 

Bodh Gaya, 14; image of Trailokyavijaya 
found in, 146. 

Bodhicaryyavatara, work of Santideva, xxv. 

Bodhicitta, mind which has acquired the 
potentiality of dissolving in Stnya, 166 ; 
is Sanya in essence, 166; has no real 
existence, 166 ; its transformation in the 
form of Mudras, 166 ; its transformation 
in the form of weapons, 166. 

Bodhisattva, derivation of the word and 
meaning, xvn ; significance of the term, 8, 
xv; application of the term in Hiuen 
Thsang’s time, 8; Buddhas, Buddha- 
Saktis and, 1ff. 

Bodhi Tree, characteristic sign of Mahaprati- 
sara, 1338. 

Bodhi Trees, of the 24 Past Buddhas, 10. 

Book, symbol of Mafijusri, 17. 

Bo-tree, special sign of Mahasahasrapramar- 
dani, 133. 

Bowing, attitude shown by Bhrkuti, 38 ; by 
Hayagriva, 38. 

Bowl, foundinimages of Dhyani Buddhas, 


Brahma, Hindu God; his position in the 
Buddhist Pantheon, 83n; trampled by 
DaSabhujasita Marici, 99: by Ubhaya- 
varahanana Marici, 98; disgraced by 
Prasanna Tara 139; his severed head 
flourished by Ubhayavarahanana Marici, 
98: by Prasanna Tara, 139. 

Brahmas, four ; ; enumerated, 171 ; see Catur- 
brahmavihara. 

Brahmadanda Lokesvara, described, 180. 

Brahmakapala (severed head of Brahma) ; 
mercilessly flourished by Buddhist 
deities, 163: by Vajrasarasvati, 152 ; 
see Brahma. 

Brahmamukha, one of the faces of Para- 
masva, 147. 

Brahmananda, author of Tdrdrahasya, 77 ; 
his time, 77n. 

Buddha, Gautama, lliff, 34; his divinity 
acknowledged in Mahayana, xiv; his 
first statue in Gandhara School, xxi; 
see Gautama. 

Buddha, significance of the term used in the 
Sadhanamala, 26; external characteris- 
tics of a, 9; mental characteristics of a, 
10 ; description of a, 9 ;. 

Buddha on lotus, characteristic symbol of 
Usnisavijaya, 101. 

Buddha in Vajrasana, 11ff; described, 11 ; 
Dhvana cited, 11; his image illustrated, 
Dol Lintas 

Buddhas, Buddhasaktis and Bodhisattvas, 
1ff; Manusi or Mortal, 10ff; twenty- 
TOUT Lae, eel Ue: Mortal, see Mortal 
Buddhas ; Dhyani or Divine, see Dhyani 
Buddhas. 

Buddhadakini, name of Vajravarahi, 103 ; 


207) 


Sakti of Mahamaya, 67 ; 
Dhyana quoted, 68n. 
Buddhahood, conferred by Heruka when 

worshipped, 61. 

Buddhakapala, variety of Heruka, 60, 63 ; 
an emanation of Aksobhya, 638 ; described, 
64; Dhyana cited 63ff; his Mandala 
described, 64; his companions described, 


described, 68 ; 


64; his Nepalese drawing illustrated, 
ROC VEL: 
Buddhasaktis, Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, 


1ff ; see Mortal and Divine Buddhasaktis. 

Buddhism, a brief historical survey of, ixff ; 
its condition when Buddha was alive, ix ; 
schisms in, ixff; rise of different schools 
Olsxtt: 

Buddhists, their attitude towards the Hindu 
gods, 162ff. 

Buffalo, characteristic Vahana of Yamari, 70 ; 
Krsnayamari, 71 ; of Yamaduti, a minor 
coddess, 121. 


C 


Caitya, residence of Astabhuja Marici, 96 ; 
on the crown of Maitreya, 13 ; ; what it 
signifies, 14 ; see Stipa. 

Cakrasamvara Tantra treats of the union 
of Heruka and Vajravarahi, 1038. 

Campaka Tree, special tree of Mahasitavati, 
135, 

Candamahdarosana Tantra, 61. 

Candarosana, an emanation of Aksobhya, 
60ff; his alternative form emanating 
from the five Dhyani Buddhas, 60n ; 
described, 61 ; Dhyana cited, 60 ; drawing 
illustrated, X XV, a. 

Candavajrapani, a Yaksa general, 155. 

Candesvari, accompanies Mahakala, 
described, 122. 

Candraprabha, accompanies Arapacana, 28, 
17: Siddhaikavira, 21. 
Candraprabha Lokesvara, 

182. 

Capetadana Mudra, exhibited by Aparajita, 
154; see Glossary. 

Carcika, accompanies Mahakala, 122; des- 
cribed, 122. 

Carendra, accompanies Jambhala, 114. 

Catuhsgatikd, work of Aryadeva, in. 

Caturbhuja Heruka, variety of Heruka, 63 ; 
described, 63. 

Caturbhuja Sitatara, a variety of White 
Taras lots 

‘Caturbhuj Lokeswara,’ name _ given to 
Sadaksari Lokesvara by Waddell, 34. 

Caturbrahmavihara, the process described, 
Lae: 

Chain, see Srnkhala. 

Chhinnamasta, Hindu name of Vajrayogini, 
155; reasons for thinking her to be a 
Buddhist goddess, 155n. 

China, Mafijusri hailed from, 15. 

Cintamani Datta, author of the Sadhana of 
Vadirat, 31. 

Cintamani Lokesvara, described, 187. 

Citrakali accompanies Jambhala, 114, 

Citrasenad, Sakti of Buddhakapala, 
described, 64. 

Citron, symbol of Jambhala, 114, 


122% 


described, 


65. 


Cittadhatu Lokesvara, described, 187. 

Cittasodhanaprakarana, In; see Cittavisu- 
ddhiprakarana. 

Cittaviguddhiprakarana, Vairocana mentioned 
in, 4; its date discussed, 1; mentions 
Dhyani Buddhas and _ therefore later 
than 700 A. D., xxivn. 

Civikundali, accompanies Jambhala, 114. 

Colour, has a spiritual significance, 163. 

Comilla, image of Dvibhuja Heruka found in, 
62. 

Confession of sins, the process described, 
169. 

Coomaraswamy, Dr. A.; 
criticized, 132. 

Corpse lying on its breast, prescribed for 
Dvibhuja Heruka, 62n. 

Cults ; origin and nature of cults in Vajra- 
yana, xxviiiff ; responsible for discrepan- 
cy of parental Dhyani Buddhas in images, 
160ff. 

Cunda, different spellings of her name, 131 ; 
an emanation of Vajrasattva, 131 ; 
described, 181; Dhyana cited, 131; her 
Java figure does not follow Sadhana, 
131; as a minor goddess described, 58. 

Cundavarabhavana, containing a 16-armed 
image of Cunda, 131. 


on Cunda, 1382 ; 


D 


Dacca Museum contains image of Arapacana, 
28; Dvibhuja Heruka, 62; Khadiravani 
Tara, 107 ; Marici, 97. 

Dakini, name of Vajravarahi, 94, 103. 

Dakini accompanies Vajravarahi, 104. 

Damara Mudra, described, 145n. 

Dancing attitude in Ardhaparyanka exhi- 
bited by Buddhakapala, 64 ; his compa- 
nions, 64; Dvibhuja Heruka, 62; Nai- 
ratma, 90; Vajracarcika, 86; Vajrava- 
rahi, 94, 105. 

Danda, characteristic weapon of Hayagriva, 
54 ; 


Dasabhujasita Marici, 98ff ; described, 98ff ; 
her companions described, 99 ; Nepalese 
drawing illustrated, XX XI, b. 

Datta accompanies Jambhala, 114. 

Deification of the letters of the Mantra of 
Vajratara, 125, 129. 

Deities, Buddhist; their scientific classi- 
fication, vii; data for their increase in 
numbers, xxix, 165; are transformations 
of Sanya, 165; how they are attracted 
from the rays of the Vijamantra, 165. 

Deities, Hindu ; how disgraced by Buddhist 
deities, 162ff. 

Devadevata Lokesvara, described, 185. 

Devi accompanies Jambhala, 114. 

Dhanada, name of Hindu Kuvera ; trampled 
by Ucchusma Jambhala, 75. 

Dhanada -accompanies Jambhala, 114. 

Dhanada Tara, a variety of Green Tara, 137 ; 
an emanation of Amoghasiddhi, 109; 
described, 109; Dhyana cited, 109; 
Nepalese drawing illustrated, XX XIII, c. 

Dharanis ; first citation in Siksdsamuccaya, 
x5 Ve 

Dharma, member of the Holy Triad, 34 ; 
described, xxn. 


Dharmacakra Lokesvara, described, 186. 

Dharmacakra Mafijusri, name given to 
Mafijuvara by the Nepalese, 26n. 

Dharmacakra Mudra, described, 4ff, see 
Glossary. 

Dharmadhara, Mortal Bodhisattva, 12. 

Dharmadhatu Lokesvara, described, 187. 

Dharmadhatu Vagisvara, variety of Mafijusri, 
17; an emanation of Amitabha, 17, 18ff ; 
described, 19 ; Dhyana cited, 19. 

Dharmakara, king of China, 16. 

Dharmakosasangraha, a work of Amrtananda, 
6n ; source of the Dhyana of Namasan- 
giti, 149; Sukhavati Lokesvara, 50; 
of three independent goddesses, 157. 

Dharmasangraha, work of Nagarjuna, 10, 9 ; 
its date discussed, xxivn. 

Dharmasankhasamaédhi, name of Vak, see Vak. 

Dhyanas in Sadhanas ; most important in 
identifying images, V; relation between 
Dhyanas and images, 159. For the 
meaning of Dhyana, see Glossary. 

Dhyanasana, exhibited by the Dhyani Bud- 
dhas, 2, see Glossary. 

Dhyani Buddhas, their antiquity, 1ff ; order 
and enumeration, 2; different theories 
about their origin, 2; character of, 1; 
general appearance of the, 2 ; represented 
on the Stupas, 3 ; nature of their represen- 
tations, 2; miniatures of, 3n; hints for 
identifying their images, 6ff; most im- 
portant factor in identifying images, 159 ; 
what their presence in images indicates, 
159; reasons why parental Dhyani 
Buddhas are sometimes different, 160; 
if prescribed Dhyani Buddhas are not 
present in images, 160 ; tabular statement 
showing the relation between Buddha- 
Saktis, Bodhisattvas and, 9. 

Dhyani Buddhas, five ; enumerated, 119, 2; 
their emanations 119ff, 123ff; their 
emanations enumerated, 119, 123; Mafi- 
jusri as an emanation of, 17, 24ff; their 
images on the aureole behind Maitreya 
figures, 14 ; Candarosana as an emanation 
of, 60n; their images on the crown of 
Dharmadhatu Vagisvara, 18n ; Mahakala, 
121; Mafijuvara, 25; Mafijuvajra, 26; 
Jambhala, 114; Mayajalakrama Kuru- 
kulla, 127; Sitataraé, 128 ; Vajradharma, 
57, 47, 383; Vajratara, 124. 

Dhyani Buddhas, four; Vajratara only 
emanation of, 129. 

Dhapa accompanies Lokanatha, 38. 

Dhupatara accompanies Vajratara, describ- 
ed, 124. 

Dhvajagrakeytra, emanation. of Aksobhya, 
88 ; two varieties, 88 ; Dhyana of the Ist. 
variety cited, 88; described, 89; 2nd 
rae Dy. described, 89 ; illustrated, XXIX, 


Dikshit, K. N. ; Mahoba image of Simhanada 
described by, 36; on the Birbhum image 
Be Sadaksari LokeSvara, 34; criticized, 

vo. 

Dipa, companion of Lokanatha, 38. 

Eas accompanies Vajratara, described, 

Diseases ; Simhanada, curer of, 35. 

Divine Buddhas, see Dhyani Buddhas. 

Divine Buddhasaktis, 7; enumerated, 7; 
character of, 7; described, 7; hints for 


( 209 ) 


identifying their-images, 7ff ; illustrated, 
X, XI, a; source of the illustrations, 8n ; 
tabular statement showing their relation 
with the Dhyani Buddhas and Bodhi- 
sattvas, 9. 

Divine Bodhisattvas, 8; their duties, 8; 
enumerated, 8; attempt to connect 
them with the last five Mortal Buddhas 
criticized, 10 ; hints for identifying their 
images, 8; illustrated, XI, b-f; tabular 
statement showing their connection with 
the Dhyani Buddhas and Buddhasaktis, 9. 

Dragons, a pair of ; Vahana of Vairocana, 


Drawings illustrated in this book are ancient 
and therefore authoritative as material 
for study, vii. 

Durga, a Hindu goddess, 116n. 

Durgottarini Tara, variety of Green Tara, 
137, 

Durjaya accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 

Dvibhuja Heruka, variety of Heruka, 61ff ; 
described, 62; Dhyana cited 62; corpse 
lying on its breast prescribed for, 62n. 


i 


Ears of corn, special symbol of Vasudhara, 
1 


Ekajata, 106; an emanation of Aksobhya, 
SOff ; her character and functions, 80; 
described 81; first three varieties dis- 
tinguished, 81; Dhyana cited, 80; 
illustrated XX VII, d, XX VIII a ; a varie- 
ty of Blue Tara, 139 ; accompanies Asta- 
bhuja Kurukulla as a minor goddess, 
58: Khadiravani Tara, 106. 

Elephant, Vahana of Aksobhva, 4 ; appears 
in drawings of MHarihariharivahanod- 
bhava, 45. 

Ellora, images of Mortal Buddhas in the 
Cave Temples at, 10n. 

Evans Wentz, Dr. W. Y., 3n; indebtedness 

. COtS 2D Te 

Excrescence to the right ear ; characteristic 

sign of Vajravarahi, 103. 


FP 


Fa-Hien, Buddhist gods mentioned by, xxv ; 
Mafjusri mentioned by, 15; 

IOUChOD rors. ction Ae se-Lhe OnLy. “Ssys- 
tematic worker in the field of Indian 
Buddhist Iconography, Iff; criticized, 
129n, 131, 132n3 varieties of Avaloki- 
teSvara recorded by, 32 ; on Taras, 135. 

Future Buddha, Maitreya, see Maitreya. 


G 


Gaganagafija accompanies Lokanatha, 38. 

Gaganaganhja Lokesvara, described, 183. 

Gandha accompanies Lokanatha, 38. 

Gandhara Art, its time, xxi; ‘images of 
Mafijusri absent in, 15 ; images of Maitre- 
ya found in, 13. 

Gandhatara accompanies Vajratara, 124. 


Ganapati, name of Ganesa, 153 ; an indepen- 
dent god, 142; described, 142; Dhyana 
cited, 142. 

Ganapatihrdaya, an independent goddess, 
157 ; described, 157 ; Dhyana cited, 158 ; 
illustrated, XLII d. 

‘Ganapatisamakranta,’ meaning of the word, 
153. 

Ganesa, legendary story of his struggle with 
Bighnantaka, 148; his defeat, 143; 
his presence in Buddhist images, 162 ; 

trampled by Aparajita, 153 : Parnasavari, 

84. 

Garuda, Vahana of Amoghasiddhi, 5: of 
Harihariharivahana, 44. 

Gauri, trampled by Trailokyavijaya, 147. 

Gauritara accompanies Astabhuja Kuru- 
kulla, 58. 

Gautama Buddha, liff ; last in the group of 
the Seven Mortal Buddhas, 11; his 
images are an independent study, 11; 
his disappearance, 13, 8. 

Germany, image of Vajravarahiin, 105. 

Getty, Miss Alice, author of The Gods of 
Northern Buddhism ; on the iconography 
of Maitreya, 13; on Vajravarahi, 108 ; 
on the origin of Yamari, 69; criticized, 
59; calls Namasangiti a ‘ Dogmatic form 
of Avalokitesvara,’ 148. 

Ghanta carried by the 
image of Vagisvara, 24. 

Ghantapani, a Divine Bodhisattva, 8; and 
Vajrapani distinguished, 9. 

Ghona, see Vajraghona. 

Ghoracandi accompanies Saptaksara, 66. 

Grahamatrka, an independent goddess, 157 ; 
described, 157; Dhyana cited, 157; 
illustrated, XLII, c ; Miss Getty’s Bhrkuti 
should be identified as, 59. 

Green Taras, Ordinary; 136; enumerated 
with leading characteristics of each, 136 ; 
Extraordinary, enumerated with leading 
characteristics of each, 137. 

Guhyasamaja, Abhisekavidhi part of, 49. 

Gunakarandavyttha ; character, moral teach- 
ings and miracles of Avalokitesvara 
described in, 32. 

Gupta accompanies Jambhala, 114. 


Indian Museum 


H 


Halahala Lokesvara, variety of Avalokites- 
vara, 40ff ; described, 41, 177; Dhyana 
cited, 41; his Sakti, 40; his Sakti des- 
cribed, 41 ; character of his images, 40 ; 
illustrated, XXII, c. 

Hara, see Siva. 

Haraprasad Shastri, 
on Tantra, xviii. 

Hari, see Visnu. 

Hari, different meanings of the word, 44. 

Harihara Lokesvara, described, 186. 

Harihariharivahanodbhava Lokesvara, varie- 
ty of Avalokitesvara, 44ff: significance 
of his name, 44; special characteristics 
of, 44 ; Dhyana cited, 44 ; described 44ff, 
Li. illustrated,. Xeni. eX lhe a-b-; 
special features of his drawings, 45; 
peculiarity of his Patan image, 45. 

Harivahana Lokegvara, described, 186, 


Mahamahopadhyaya ; 


( 210 ) 


Hayagriva, 37, 60; his different forms, 53 
an emanation of Aksobhya, 68ff; des- 
cribed, 69; Dhyana quoted, 68 ; illus- 
trated, X XV, d; as a minor deity, 38; 
accompanies Khasarpana, 36, 38; Loka- 
natha, 37, 38, 39 ; Padmanarttesvara, 42. 

Hayagriva, Hindu God of Fever, 110. 

Hayagriva Lokesvara, described, 177. 

Hayagriva, Saptasatika, see Saptasatika. 

Heruka, In, 42, 60, 93; an emanation of 
Aksobhya, 61ff; varieties of, 61; his 
Namaskara cited, 63 ; becomes Buddha- 
kapala when embraced by Citrasena, 632 
Mahamaya when embraced by Buddha- 
dakini, 67; Vajradaka when embraced 
by Vajravarahi, 64; his union with 
Vajravarahi, 103; his consort Vajra- 
yogini, 156. 

Heruka, Caturbhuja see Caturbhuja Heruka. 

Heruka Tantra treats of the union of Vajra- 
yogini with Heruka, 103. 

Heruki accompanies Saptaksara, 66. 

Ilevajrakrama Kurukulla, variety of Kuru- 
kulla 55. 

Hinayana, see Mahayana. 

Hinayanists, Maitreya worshipped byes: 

Hindu gods ; how disgraced by the Buddhists, 
162ff ; examples 162ff. 

Hindus, their attitude towards Buddha, 163. 

Hiranyagarbha, see Brahma. 

Hiuen Thsang ; famous Buddhists regarded as 
Bodhisattvas in his time, 17; Buddhist 
gods mentioned by, xxv; on the image of 
Maitreya in Udyana, 13 ; Mafijusri men- 
tioned by, 15. 

Horse, Vahana of Kaladuti. 


I 


Icon, its conception and representation in 
Buddhism, xiii ; Buddhist icon analyzed, 
161. 

Iconography, Buddhist ; its importance, i; 
difficulties of the investigator, i ; previous 
workers in the field, 1; materials for 
the study of, ii; dependent upon the 
doctrine of Sunyata, xiii. 

Identification of Buddhist images; hints 
for, 159; grounds of, vii; its pitfalls 
exemplified, 161 ; when parental Buddha 
is different, 160ff. 

Images of Buddhist deities, their antiquity, 
vi; their extent and find spots, viff ; 
hints for their identification, 159ff ; how 
modified, 159; their utility 165; never 
worshipped by a true Vajrayanist 165. 

Independent Deities, 141ff; reasons for 
a separate chapter, 141; their proposed 
classification, 141n; their number, 141 ; 
their nature and description, 141ff. 

Independent Goddesses, 149ff ; their number, 
149; impossibility of classifying them 
according to colour, 150. 

Indian Museum, image of two-armed Ekajata 
deposited in, 81; Khadiravani 106ff ; 
Mafijuvara, 26 ; Marici, 97 ; Seven Mortal 
Buddhas, 10; Nairatma, 91; Sadaksari 
Lokeévara, 34; Usnisavijaya, 100 ; 
Vagisvara, 24 ; Vajrasana Buddha, 11. 

Indra, why the attendant of Aparajita 
should be identified as, 154n ; holds the 


parasol of Aparajita, 154; trampled by 
Dasgabhujasita Marici, 99 ; by Paramasva, 
148 ; Prasanna Tara, 159 ; pays homage to 
Ubhayavarahanana Marici, 98. 

Indrabhiati, king of Uddiyana, 1 ; a Siddha- 
caryya, 57; probably founder of the 
Vajrayana System, 159. 

Indrani trampled by Paramasva, 147. 

I-Tsing, Buddhist gods mentioned by, xxv ; 
Mafijusri mentioned by, 15. 


J 


Jaliniprabha, companion of Mafjusri, 17; 
of Siddhaikavira, 21 ; see Saryyaprabha. 
Jaliniprabha Lokesvara, described, 182. 
Jamadanda Lokesvara, described, 181. 
Jambhala, the Buddhist God of Wealth, 60 ; 
his antiquity, 73 ; a parallel of Mafjusri 
73; discrepancy as to his parental 
Buddha, 73, 113; better antiquity 
than his parental Buddhas, 113; varie- 
ties, 114, 119; an emanation of 
Aksobhya, 73ff; how assigned to 
Ratnasambhava, 113; emanation of 
Vajrasattva, 130; emanation of five 
Dhyani Buddhas, 119; only peaceful 
deity emanating from Aksobhya, 60 ; 
his Dhyana cited, 74; described, 114, 
119, 130; sometimes represented with 
Sakti, 114; his Sakti, 74; hints for 
identifying his images, 114; his images 
illustrated, XXXIV, c-d-e, XXVI, c; 
his image to be found in all schools of art, 
73 ; his Java image erroneously identified 
by Vincent Smith as Sarasvati, 150n. 
Janguli, 106; her antiquity, 78 ; goddess of 
snake-bite, 78ff ; variety of Green Tara, 
137 ; variety of White Tara, 138 ; variety 
of Yellow Tara, 138; an emanation of 
Aksobhya 78; three varieties, 78ff ; 
first variety described, 79 ; second variety, 
79; third variety, 79ff; Dhyana of the 
first variety cited, 78ff; third variety, 
79; first variety illustrated, X XVII, c. 
Jatamukuta Lokesvara, described, 178. 
Java, image of Pita-Prajhaparamita found 
in, 86; Java image of Cunda does not 
follow Sadhana, 131. 
Java Art, indebtedness to 
Xxill. . 
Jaya accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 
Jayakara trampled by Paramasva, 148. 
Jayatara accompanies Astabhuja Kurukulla, 
described, 58. 
Jinajika, name of Vairocana, 5n. 
Jinas, Dhyani Buddhas called as, 2. 
Jnanadhatu Lokesgvara, described, 181. 
Jnanasiddhi, work of Indrabhiti, cited, 166n. 


K 


Kakudvati, Mortal Buddhasakti, 12. 
Kaladati accompanies Mahakala, described, 


Ve e4 
65; by 


Bengal Art, 


Kalaratri trampled by Samvara, 
Saptaksara, 66; Vajravarahi, 104 

Kalihrada, lake in Nepal, 16. 

Kalika accompanies Mahakala, described, 
L225 


Ce 21s} 


Kalpokta Kurukulla, variety of Kurukulla, 
55. 

Kamadeva and his wife appear under the 
seat of Tarodbhava Kurukulla, 56. 

Kamalacandra LokeSvara, described, 184. 

Kamandalu Lokesvara, described, 178. 

Kamini accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 

Kanakamuni, Mortal Buddha, 10. 

Kanakaraja, Mortal Bodhisattva, 12. 

Kankelli flowers, carried by Vajrananga, 
22. 

Kanthamalini, Mortal Buddhasakti, 12. 

Kanthika one of the six auspicious svmbols, 
see Sanmudra. 

Kapalini accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 

Karana Mudra correctly represented in X XV, 
d. 

Kadrandavytiiha, 52 ; characteristics of Avalo- 
kitesvara recorded in, 32; cited 32n; 
Dhyana of Sadaksari LokeSvara restored 
from, 34. 

Karandavytha Lokesvara, described, 182. 

Karini accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 

Karkkotaka, name of a serpent lord, 56. 

Karnatara accompanies Astabhuja Kuru- 
kulla, described, 58. 

Karuna, defined, 171. 

KaSsyapa, Mortal Buddha, 10 ; his connection 
with Maitreya, 14. 

Kauveri accompanies Buddhakapdla, 64. 

Kayas, three ; data for increase in number 
of deities, 165. 

Kelimali accompanies Jambhala, 114. 

Kern, Dr. H.+ criticized, xivn. 

Kesini, accompanies Mafijusri, 17; Siddhai- 
kavira, 21; Arapacana, 28; appears 
in the image of Mafnjuvara, 26. 

Khadiravani Tara, emanation of Amogha- 
siddhi 106ff; a variety of Green Tara, 
136 ; described, 106; Dhyana cited, 106 ; 
illustrated, XX XII, c-d-e; and Sitatara 
distinguished, 127. 

Khagarbha acconipanies Lokanatha, 38, 40. 

Khandaroha accompanies Vajravarahi, 104. 

Khasarpana, variety of Avalokitesvara, 36; 
very popular amongst the Mahayanists, 
36 3; described, 180,37 ; Dhyana cited, 37 ; 
and Lokanatha distinguished, 39; 37; 
illustrated, XX,c, X XI. 

Khatvanga, special for Dvibhuja Heruka, 62. 

Knowledges (Skandhas), five spiritual, enu- 
merated, 104n, see Skandhas. 

Kot-bar, 16. 

Krakucchanda, Mortal Buddha, 10. 

Krsna, significance of the word in Buddhist 
Iconography, 163. 

Krsnayamari, 60 ; a variety of Yamari, 71ff ; 
three varieties noticed, 71 ; first variety 
described, 71 ; second variety 72; third 
variety, 73 ; Dhyana of the first variety 
cited 71 ; second variety 72 ; third variety, 
73 ; illustrated, XXVI, a; third variety 
illustrated, XX VI, b. 

Krtanjali Lokesvara, described, 188. 

Ksepana Mudra, exhibited by Namasangiti, 
149. 

Ksitigarbha accompanies Lokanatha, 38, 40. 

Ksitigarbha LokesSvara, described, 183. 

Kukkuripada, author of Mahamaydasddhana, 
67 


Kukkutapada, mountain marking the place 
of Kasyapa Buddha, 14. 


Kulika, name of a serpent lord, 56. 

Kulissesvari accompanies Mahakala, describ- 
ed 122. 

Kurukulla, name of a mountain ; residence 
of Kurukulla, 56. 

Kurukulla4, emanation of Amitabha, 55; 
variety of White Tara, 138; the only 
red Tara, 140 ; varieties of, 55 ; a resume 
of her different forms, 140 ; Mantra cited, 
55 3; her Tibetan forms, 55n. 

Kurukulla, Astabhuja, see Astabhuja Kuru- 
kulla 

Kurukulla, Kalpokta, see Kalpokta Kuru- 
kulla. 

Kurukulla, Mayajalakrama, 
krama Kurukulla. 

Kurukulla, Odiyana see Odiyana Kurukulla. 

Kurukulla, Tarodbhava, see 'Tarodbhava 
KKurukulla. : 

Kurukulla, Sukla, see Sukla Kurukulla. 

Kuvera, name of a Hindu god ; trampled by 
Ucchusma Jambhala, 115 ; see Dhanada. 

Kva Vahal, a Vihara at Patan in Nepal, 45. 


see Mavajala- 


Ie 


Laksminkara, daughter of Indrabhtti, xx vin, 
57 ; founder of Sahajayana, 57. 
Lama accompanies Vajravarahi, 104. 

Laugh, angry ; indication of ParnaSsavari as 
an emanation of Amoghasiddhi, 110. 
Lion, Vahana of Mafijughosa, 19, 20 ; Mafiju- 

vara, 25 ; Simhanada, 35, 36; Ratnasam- 
bhava, 5; Vagisvara, 24. 
Locana, and others offer homage to Dhanada 


Tara, 109; Divine Buddhasakti, 7; 
illustrated, X, b. 
Lokanatha, 388ff; described, 39; Dhyana 


cited, 59; his companions enumerated 
and described 38ff; illustrated, XX, d, 


XXII, a-b; earliest image found at 
Sarnath, 40; and Khasarpana distin- 
cuished, 37, 39; and Siddhaikavira 


distinguished, 21 ; his Mandala described, 
40, 39 ; constitution of the Mandala, 39. 

Lokanatha-raktaryy-Avalokitesvara, descri- 
bed, 179. 

Lokesvara, companion of Vajrasana, 
see Avalokitesvara, 32. 

Love, Buddhist god of, 22; Hindu god of, 
22; distinction between the Hindu and 
Buddhist gods of, 22. 

Lucknow Museum, Sarnath image of Marici 
in the, 97. 


ile: 


M 


Macchandar Vahal, name of a Vihara in 
Nepal, 50; paintings of 108 forms of 
Avalokitesvara discovered at, 33. 

Madana and Vajrananga distinguished, 22. 

Madhavacaryya on Nirvana, xvin. 

Madhukara trampled by Paramasva, 148. 

Maha-abhayakari Lokesvara, described, 
184. 


_ Maha-abhayaphalada Lokesvara, described, 


One 
Mahacandarosana, see Candarosana. 
Mahacandrabimba Lokesvara, described, 184. 


Mahacina Tantra, source of Mahacinatara 
Sadhana, 77. 

Mahacinatara, emanation of Aksobhya, 76ff ; 
106 ; a variety of Blue Tara, 139; des- 
cribed, 77; Dhyana cited, 76; borrowed 
by the Hindus, 77; illustrated, XX VII, 
a-b. 

Mahakala, emanation of the five Dhyani 
Buddhas, 120; his popularity, 120; his 
terrible functions, 122; varieties, 120 ; 
Dhyana cited, 120 ; four-armed variety 
described, 120; six-armed variety des- 
cribed, 121; sixteen-armed variety des- 
cribed, 121; Prajna accompanies when 
16-armed, 121 ; Dhyanas cited, 120, 121; 
illustrated, XXXVI, a; his Mandala 
described, 121 ff. 

Mahamafnjubhtta Lokesvara, described, 185. 

Mahamanjudatta LokeSsvara, described, 
184. 

Mahamantranusarini, an emanation of 
Aksobhya,ico%1~ (On evi yanamcitedirs 1: 
described, 87 ; a Pancaraksa goddess, 87 ; 
extracts from her Dhyana cited, 134n; 
described, 134 ; illustrated, XX XVIII, b. 

Mahamati, Mortal Bodhisattva, 12. 

Mahamaya, variety of Vajradaka, 64, 67ff ; 
described, 67ff; Dhyana cited, 67n; 
his Mandala described, 67n ; his compa- 
nions described, 68. 

Mahamaya, consort of Mahesvara, 
panies Mahakala, described, 121. 

Mahamayuri, emanation of Amoghasiddhi, 
111; described, 111; Dhyana cited, i Bac 
as a ’ Paficaraksa coddess described, 134 ; 
extracts from her Dhyana cited, 134n ; 
illustrated, XX XVIII, a; accompanies 
Sitatara, 127 ; described, 128. 

Mahapadma, name of a serpent lord, 56. 

Mahapaficaraksa Deities ; their popularity, 
132 ; see Paficaraksa. 

Mahapatala LokeSvara, 184. 

Mahapratisara, emanation of Ratnasambha- 


accom- 


va, 113, 116, 117; varieties ‘of, 116; 
described, 116ff ; Dhya na cited, auhae 
her images illustrated, XXXV, b-c; 


worshipped in Mandala as a Paficaraksa, 
goddess, 116, 133; described, 133; 
extracts from her Dhyana cited, 133n ; 
illustrated, XX XVII, c; worshipped by 
the Hindus in the annual festival of 
Durga, 116n. 
Mahapratyangira, emanation of 
S7ff ; deseribed, 88 ; 
illustrated, X XIX, 
Maharajalila, 
Glossary. 
Maharajalilé Mafjusri, see VagiSvara. 
Maharatnakirti Lokesvara, described, 183. 
Maharatnakula Lokesvara, described, 184. 
Mahasahasrabhuja Lokesvara, described, 183. 
Mahasahasrapramardani, emanation of Vairo- 
cana, 102 ; described, 102 ; Dhyana cited, 


Aksobhya, 
Dhvana cited, 88 ; 
a-b-c. 


same as Ardhaparyanka, see 


102: described as a Paficaraksa goddess, 
133 ; extracts from her Dhyana cited, 


133n ; illustrated 
Mahasahasrasuryya 
183ff 
Mahasanghikas ; forerunners of #he Maha- 
pane, x ; first conceived Avalokitesvara, 
pis 
Mahasankhanatha LokeSsvara, described, 183. 


px XV Ld. 


Lokesvara, described, 


Mahasarasvati, variety of Sarasvati, 150ff ; 
described, 151; Dhyana cited, 150; 
illustrated, XL, c ; her Mandala, 151n. 

Mahasitavati, emanation of Amitabha, 55, 
87; described, 59; Dhyana cited, 59; 
described as a Paficaraksa goddess 134 ; 
extracts from her Dhyana cited, 135n ; 
illustrated, XX XVIII, c. 

Mahasthamaprapta Lokesvara, 
188. 

Mahasukha combined with Vijhana gives rise 
to Vajrayana, xiff. 

Mahastryyabimba Lokesvara, described, 184. 

Mahattari Tara, variety of Green Tara, 
described, 136. 

Mahavajradhatu Lokesvara, described, 185. 

Mahavairadhrk Lokesvara, described, 185. 

Mahavajranatha Lokesvara, described, 185. 

Mahavajrapani Lokesvara, des scribed, 185. 

Mahavajrasattva Lokesvara, described, Ibe b 


described, 


Mahavala, emanation of Amitabha, 53; 
described, 53; Dhyan acited, 53. 
Mahdvastu. Avaddna; first reference to 


Avalokitesvara is found in, 51. 
Mahavisvasuddha Lokesvara, described, 185. 
Mahayana and Hinayana; points of agree- 
ment, xiv; points of difference, xivff. 
Mahayasa accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 
Mahesvara, trampled by Trailokyavijaya, 

147 ; sec Siva ; his consort Mahamaya, 121. 
Mahidhara, Mortal B uddhasakti, 12. 
Mohoba, image of Simhanada discovered at, 

36% 

Mahodadhi accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 
Maitreya, the Future Buddha, 13ff, 32; 

now remains in the Tusita JTleaven, 8; 

described, 11, 14; Dhyana cited, 14; 

his images, 13; illustrated, XIII, b; 

sometimes represented as a Buddha, 14 ; 

appears in the image of seven Mortal 

Buddhas, 10 ; description as a minor god, 

14; accompanies Lokanatha, 38, 40: 

Vajrasana, 11. 

Maitreyanatha Bodhisattva, 8. 
Maitri, defined, 171. 

Makara, Vahana of a companion of Marici, 
60. 
Mamaki, 

Vee 
Manasa, Hindu goddess akin to Janguli, 80. 
Mandala of B uddhakapala, 64; Lokanatha, 

39, 40: Mahamaya, 67ff : Siddhaikavira, 

As 
Manibhadra accompanies Jambhala, 114. 
Manidhara accompanies Sadaksari VLokes- 

vara, 33 ; described, 34. 

Manipadma Lokesvara, described, 180. 

Mafijughosa, variety of Mafjusri, 17; an 
emanation of Aksobhya, 19 ; his Mantra, 
20n ; described, 19ff ; Dhyana, cited, 20 ; 

distinction between Mafijuvara and, 19; 

accompanies Lokanatha, 38, 40. : 
Manjukumara, variety of -Mafijusri, 1 ier 

his parental Buddha, 27; an emanation 
of the five Dhyani Bad thags 27; des- 
cribed, 27 ; Dhyana cited, 27; : illustrated, 

EX VEL ice 
Mafijunatha, independent form of MafijuSri 

described, 31, 17; Dhyana cited, 31n. 
Manjunatha Lokeévara, described, 187. 
Manjupattana, Vihara made by Mafijusri, 16. 
Mafijusri Bodhisattva, 15ff ; his place in the 





Divine Buddhasakti, 7 ; illustration 


(nee loee’ 


Buddhist Pantheon, 15; his antiquity, 
15, 28; his mention in Fa-Hien, 15n ; 
merits arising out of his worship, 15 ; his 
life, 15ff; his activities in Nepal, 16; 
Sadhanas of, 17; his origin and parental 
Buddha, 27ff, 28; varieties enumerated, 
17, as an emanation of Aksobhya 17, 
19ff ; of Amitabha, 17, 53 : of five Dhyani 
Buddhas, 17, 119, 24 ; as an independent 
deity, 17, 27ff; his images in different 
schools of art, 15; their identification 
not properly done, 381; _ distinction 
between Prajfiaparamita and, 31 ; Simha- 
nada Lokesvara and, 36; assumes the 
form of Yamantaka, 70. 

Mafijusri Hill or Svayambhuksettrain Nepal, 
15. 

Mafijuvajra, variety of Mafjusri, 17; an 
emanation of the five Dhyani Buddhas, 
26; his parental Buddha, 26; described 
and Dhyana cited, 26. 

Mafijuvara, variety, of Mafjusri, 17; an 
emanation of the five Dhyani Buddhas 
25, described, 25.; Dhyana cited, 25; 
images noticed, 26; illustrated, XV, 
b-c-d, XVI, a-b; identified as Bhuvane- 
Svari, 25n ;as Simhanada LokeSvara, 25n ; 
distinction between Mafijughosa and, 19. 

Mantras, our chief guide in determining 
different names of Mafjusri, 17; their 
deification,—a_ pitfall in identification, 
162; deification exemplified, 162; of 
Vajratara deified, 125, 129 ; efficacy, 125. 

Mantrayana, its antiquity, xviin. 

Manusi Buddhas, see Mortal Buddhas. 

Maras, four, 154n ; under the seat of Vajra- 
sana, 11; trampled by Vidyujjvala- 
karali, 82; by Prasannatara, etc., 162. 

Margasrayana, the process described, 170. 

Marici, the chief emanation of Vairocana, 4, 
93ff ; her connexion with the Sun-god, 
93; worshipped in Tibet, 93; general 
remarks about her form, 94 ; her Dharani 
given by Santideva, 94; described, 128 ; 
character of herimages, 97 ; accompanies 
Sitatara, 127; distinguished from Vajra- 
varahi, 93ff, 103 ; two different goddesses, 
93. 

Marici, Arya, see Arya Marici. 

Marici, ASsokakanta, see ASokakanta Marici. 

Marici, Astabhuja; images noticed, 97; 
illustrated, XXX, c-d, XXXI, a3 see 
Astabhuja Marici. 

Marici, Dasabhujasita, see 

Marici. 

Marici, Ubhayavarahanana, see Ubhayavara- 

hanana Marici. 

Marici, Vajradhatvisvari, 

$vari Marici. 

Maricipicuva, variety of Marici, 96 ; special 
characteristics. noted, 96; Dhyana cited, 
96 ; described, 96. 

Marini accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 

Mathura sculptures; images of Mafijusri 
absent in, 15. 

Mayajalakrama AvalokitesSvara, the only 
fierce form of LokeSsvara, 47ff ; Mayajala 
Tantra, the source of his Sadhana, 47 ; 
Dhyana cited, 47; described, 47, 177ff ; 
his image illustrated, XXIII, d. 

Mayajalakramakrodha LokeSsvara, described, 
179, 


Dasabhujasita 


see Vajradhatvi- 





Mayajalakrama Kurukulla., fierce form of 
Kurukulla, 57, 126ff; described, 126ff ; 
extracts from Dhyana cited, 127n. 

“Mayajala Tantra,’ source of the Sadhana 
of Mayajalakrama Avalokitesvara, 47 : of 
Kurukulla, 126. 

Medha accompanies Mahasarasvati, 151. 

Mekhala, one of the six auspicious symbols, 
91; see Sanmudra. 

Mirror carried by Vajrananga, 22. 

Mojaghafijavala (?) Lokesvara, described 


Monasteries, Buddhist ; destroyed by Muha- 
mmadans, xxiin. 

Mongoose, characteristic symbol of Jambhala, 
114; Ucchusma Jambhala, 75, 115. 
Mortal Roddhisattvas, 12 ; enumerated, 12; 

tabular statement, 13. 

Mortal Buddhas, seven, 10; enumerated, 
10 ; standing image of, XIJ,d; tabular 
statement , 13. 

Mortal Buddhasaktis, 12 ; enumerated, 12 ; 
tabular statement, 13. 

Mothers, eight ; accompany Vajratara, 129, 
123 ; enumerated and described, 124 ff. 
Mother of Six Syllables, name given by 
Waddel to Sadaksari Mahavidya, 34. 

Mouse, vahana of Ganapati, 142. 

Mrtyuvaficana Tara, variety of White Tara, 
136 ; described, 136. 

Mudita, defined, 172. 

Mudras, five; giving rise to five Dhydani 
Buddhas, 2; are nothing but Bodhicitta 
in essence, 166. 


N 


NagakeSara flower, carried by Maitreya, 11, 
14, 40. 

Nagarjuna, In; regarded as a Bodhisattva, 
17, 8; author of Dharmasamgraha, 10: 
of the Sadhana of Ekajata, 80; Prajna- 
paramita restored by, 84; Manjusri not 
mentioned by, 15. 

Nairatma, significance of the word, 91; 
another word for Sunya xvii ; a goddess 
emanating from Aksobhya, 90ff ; descri- 
bed, 90ff ; Dhyana cited, 90 ; distinction 
between Vajravarahi and, 90; Vajra- 
yogini and, 156 ; images illustrated, XXX, 
a-b 3; accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 

Nalanda, source of the image of Yamari, 73. 

Namasangiti, 141; deification of the Nama- 
sangiti literature, 148; not a Buddha 
but a Bodhisattva, 148 ; an Independent 
god, 148ff ; described, 149 ; source of his 
Dhyana, 149; reasons for thinking him 
to be a variety of ManjuSri, 149n ; images 
illustrated, XL, a-b; Namasangiti— 
Mafijusri is different from, 148. 

Namasangiti Mafijusri, variety of Manjusri, 
17; an emanation of Aksobhya, 19, 
23ff ; described, 23; Dhyana cited, 23 ; 
illustrated, XIV, a-b. 

—-naramundarundair—reading discussed, 73n. 

Narttesvara, meaning of, 42. 

Navagrahas (Nine Planets), 99. 

Needle and string, their function as weapons, 
96. 

Nepal, refuge of Vajrayanists after the 
Muhammadan conquest of Bengal, xviii ; 


( 214 


source of the image of Halaihala, 40: 
Hariharivahana Lokesvara, 44: Heruka, 
63, 62; Mayajalakrama Avalokitesvara, 
48: Nilakantha, 49: Padmanartte- 
évara, 42; Rakta-Lokesvara, 46 ; Sukha- 
vati Lokegvara, 50: Vajratara, 130: 
Vasudhara, 118. = 

Nepal sculptures, wealth of, xxii. 

Nepal Valley, the making of, 16. 

Newari Art, its excellence exemplified, 120. 

Noose, significance of, 60n. 

Nilakantha, significance of the name, 48; 
idea borrowed from the Hindus, 48 ; 
variety of Avalokitesvara, 48ff; des- 
cribed, 48 ; Dhyana cited, 48 ; his image 
illustrated, X XIII, e ; distinction between 
Vak and, 49; between Amitabha and, 
48 ; agreement between Siva and, 48. 

Nilakantha, name of the Hindu God, Siva, 
49 ; see Siva. 

Nilakantha Lokesvara, 179. 

Nirvana, controversy regarding the inter- 
pretation of, xvi; its conception from 
two standpoints, xv; its different mean- 
ings according to different schools, xviff ; 
how obtained by a Bodhisattva, xvff ; 
ASsvaghosa’s conception of, xvin ; refused 
by Avalokitesvara, 32. 

Nirvana, Anupadhisesa, 167 ; 
Sesa. 

Nispanna ‘Tara, 
Kurukulla, 58. 

Nityanatha Lokesvara, described, 188. 


see Anupadhi- 


accompanies Astabhuja 


O 


Odiyana, name of a place ; its identification, 
xxvii; two theories, xxvii; Indrabhuti, 
king of, xxvii ; see Orissa. 

Odiyana Kurukulla, variety of Kurukulla, 
55; fierce form of Kurukulla, 57; des- 
cribed, 57. 

Odiyana Lokesvara, see Trailokyavasankara. 

Odiyana Marici, leading characteristics, 100 ; 
see Vajradhatvisvari Marici. 

Oertel, Mr. ; on the Sarnath image of Sada- 
ksari Lokesvara, 34. 

Orissa, Odiyana to be identified as, xxvii; 
a seat of Tantric learning, 45 ; Kurukulla 
worshipped in, 57; source of the image of 
Marici, 97. 


Ornaments, the six auspicious, see Sanmudra. 


Ostaraki, accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 


P 


Padma, name of a serpent lord, 56. 

Padmadakini accompanies Mahamaya, 68. 

Padmamunda, trampled by Jambhala, 119. 

Padmanarttesvara. variety of Avalokitesva- 
ra, 41ff, In; his three different varieties, 
41; described, 42, 44, 43 ; Dhyana cited, 
42,43 ; his images, 42 ; illustrated, X XII, 
d-e; his Mandala described, 43; his 
companions, 42. 

Padmantaka, 142. 

Padmapani, Divine Bodhisattva, 8, 3; duty 
and character of, 3.; illustrated, XI, e; 
offers Abhiseka to Kurukulla, 56; See 


) 


Padmapani Lokesvara and Avalokites- 
vara. 

Padmapani Lokesvara, 188. 

Padmasambhava, son of Indrabhiti, xxvin. 

Padmavasini, accompanies Padmanarttes- 
vara, 43. 

Pancakara, a chapter in Jnrdnasiddhi of 
Indrabhuiti, xxvi; gives the origin and 
description of the Dhyani Buddhas xxvi. 

Pancaraksa, name of a Buddhist work, 3n. 

Paficaraksa deities, 55,102,116 ; enumerated, 
132 ; merits arising out of their worship, 
132 ; their character, 133. 

Paficaraksa Mandala, 102, 132ff. 

Paficasirsa in China, the native place of 
Mafnjusri, 15. 

Paficavirakasekhara, special significance of 
the term used in connection with Siddhai- 
kavira, 20. 

Pandara, Divine Buddhasakti, 7; Ulustrated, 
X, d; spiritual mother of Avalokites- 
vara, 32. 

Pandaravasini, Sakti of Padmanarttesvara, 
43. 

Pantheon, Buddhist ; its gradual expansion 
xxivff ; evidence of Mahayana literature, 
xxivff ; evidence of Chinese travellers, 
xxv ; of Santideva, xxv. 

Pantheons, frequent interchange of deities 
in the Buddhist Jaina and Hindu, i. 

Papadesana, see Confession of sins. 

Paramasva, name of Hayagriva, 54, 147; 
why comes under the category of Inde- 
pendent deities, 141 ; cannot be classified 
in accordance with colour 141n; an 


Independent god, 147ff; described, 
147; Dhyana cited, 147; illustrated, 
EX EX NSEX E2 


Paramitas, ten ; data for increase in number 
of deities, 165; ten companions of 
Vajratara, the embodiments of, 125. 

Parnasavari, 106; her functions, 833; an 
emanation of Aksobhya, 83ff ; an emana- 
tion of Amoghasiddhi, 109ff; why an 
emanation of two different Dhyani 
Buddhas, 83; a variety of Green Tara, 
137; different varieties distinguished, 
109 ; her four-armed form, 84 ; described, 


84, 110; Dhyana eited, 83ff, 110; 
her images illustrated, XXXIII, d, 
IX XGXGCV.5e. 


Past Buddhas, thirty-two according to the 
Mahayanists, 10. 

Paustika (vidhi), a Tantric rite, 69. 

Peacock, Vahana of Amitabha, 3: of Vajra- 
dharma, 47, 51; its tail, a symbol of 
Mahamayuri, 111. 

Phatka, tentative meaning of the word, 
142n. 

Photographs illustrated in this hook ; their 
source, viil. 

Pindapatra Lokesvara, described, 185. 

Pisaci, epithet of Parnasavari, 109. 

Pitaprajhaparamita, yellow variety of 
Prajnaparamita, 86; described, 86; 
illustrated, X XVII, c. 

Planets, nine, see Navagrahas. 

Potapada Lokesvara, described, 178. 

Potalaka, mount; residence of Khasarpana, 
Bile 

Prabhakarakirti, author of the Sadhana of 
Candarosana, 60. 


Pradipatara, accompanies Astabhuja Kuru- 
kulla, 58. 

Prajha, embraces Caturbhuja Heruka, 68 ; 
Jambhala, 74: Krsnayamari, 72 ; Maha- 
kala 121 ; Raktayamari, 70 ; accompanies 
Halahala, 40: Mafijuvajra, 26; Sthira- 
cakra, 30; trampled by Maricipicuva, 96. 

Praja, accompanies Mahasarasvati, 151. 

Prajnacakra, variety of Arapacana, 28; 
variety of Mafijusri, 28. 

Prajhadhrk, name of Amoghasiddhi men- 
tioned in his Mantra, 5n. 

Prajnantaka, 142. 

Prajhaparamita, 76; deified scripture S84; 
Sakti of Vajradhara, xxviii; a parallel 
of Mafjusri, 85; her resemblance to 
Manjusri, 31 ; an emanation of Aksobhya, 
84ff ; of the five Dhyani Buddhas, 126 ; 
varieties of, 85; Dhyana cited, 126n; 
described, 126; illustrated, XX XVI, c; 
Bara image of Mafijuvara may be identi- 
fied as, 25n. 


Prasanna Tara, variety of Yellow Tara, 
138; described, 189; Dhyana cited, 
138ff; illustrated, XXXVIII, d; an 


Independent goddess, 149n ; accompanies 
Astabhuja Kurukulla as a minor goddess, 
58. 
Pratibhanakaktta Lokesvara, deseribed, 182. 
Pretasantarpita Lokesvara, 50; source of 
his Sadhana, 50; described, 50, 178ff ; 
Dhyana cited, 50; illustrated, X XIV, c. 
Priti, trampled by Paramasva, 148. 
Priyadarsanaé accompanies Buddhakapala, 
64. 


Punyaparinamana, the process described, 
died 


Pupala Lokesvara, described, 180. 

Purandara, see Indra. 

Purnabhadra accompanies Jambhala, 114. 

Purnananda, a Tantric writer; his time, 
77n. 

Purohita, Vajrasattva’s function as a, 6. 

Puspa& accompanies Lokanatha, 38, 
Puspatara. 

Puspatara accompanies Vajratara, 124. 


see 


R 


Rahu, 97; under the seat of Tarodbhava 
Kurukulla, 56. 

Rajendralal Mittra, Raja; quoted, xviil. 

Rajshahi, images of Marici hailing from, 97. 

Rakta Lokesvara, name why given, 463; a 
variety of Avalokitesvara, 46 ; described, 
46, 47; Dhyana cited, 46; illustrated, 
XXIII, c; distinction between Vajra- 
dharma and, 47. 

Raktayamari, 60 ; variety of Yamari, 7Off ; 
described, 70; Dhyana cited, 70; em- 
braced by Prajna, 70. 

Rasas, data for the increase in number of 
deities, 165. 

Rati, trampled by Paramasva, 148. 

Ratna, one of the six auspicious symbols, 
see Sanmudra. 

Ratnadakini, accompanies Mahamaya, 68. 

Ratnadala LokeSvara, described, 186. 

Ratnadhara, Mortal Bodhisattva, 12. 

Ratnadhrk ; name given to Ratnasambhava 
in his Dhyana, 5n. 


215) 


Ratnapani, Divine Bodhisattva, 8; illus- 
trated, XI, d. 

Ratnapani Lokesvara, described, 183. 

Ratnasambhava, Dhyani buddha, 2, 5; a 


late incorporation into the Pantheon, 
113 ; excluded from the group of four 
Dhyani Buddhas, 130; described, 5; 
Dhyana cited, 5n; his emanations, 
1138ff, 116ff ; source of his stone image, 
4n ; illustrated, VIII, d, IX, a; on the 
crown of Aparajita, 58; of Jambhala, 
114; of Vasudhara, 118 ; appears in the 
image of Arapacana, 28. 

Red Tara, 140. 

Rosary carried by the Mahoba image of 
Simhanada, 36. 

Rucaka, one of the six auspicious symbols, 
see Sanmudra. 

Rudra, disgraced by Prasanna Tara, 139. 

Rupini accompanies Buddhakapala, 
Vajravarahi, 104. 


64 ; 


> 


Sadaksari Group; Dhyana cited, 33, 35n; 
described, 34, 35; Birbhum image des- 
cribed and identified, 34ff;. Magadha 
image, 34; Oertel wrongly identifies as 
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, 34. 

Sadaksari LokeSvara, variety of Avalokites- 
vara, 3dff; varieties described, 33; 
described, 34, 178; Dhyana cited, 33 ; 
his Mantra and the significance of his 
name, 34; images illustrated, XVIII, 
a-b-c, XIX, a. 

Sadaksari Mahavidya, accompanies Sadaksari 
Lokesvara, 33: described, 34 ; Dhyana 
cited, 35n; Virasana prescribed only 
for, 35 ; her image illustrated, XIX, b. 

Sadaksari Mandala ; guardians of the gates 
Obwo4: 

Sadbhuja Sitatara, variety of White Tara, 
137, 108 ; described, 108 ; Dhyana cited, 
108 ; illustrated, X X XIII, b. 

Sadhana, meaning of the word, iv ; contents, 
iv, see App. A; language of, ivn; anti- 
quity, 159 ; its composers, 159; authors 
enumerated, v. 

Sadhana, Kificit-vistara, text and translation, 
169ff. 

Sddhanamalad, most important work for the 
understanding of Buddhist Iconography, 
ii ; its extent, 159; contents, ii; extent 
of MS. material, iii; date of MSS. dis- 
cussed, lii, liin. 

Sddhanasamuccaya, 
Sddhanamala, iii. 

Sadyonubhava Arapacana, see Arapacana. 

Sadyonubhava Mafjusri see Arapacana. 

Sagaramati Lokesvara, described, 182. 

Sahajayana ; Laksimkara, founder of, 57. 

Sahni, Rai Bahadur D. R. ; on the image of 
Ucchusma Jambhala, 115. 

Sakamangala, Mortal Bodhisattva, 12. 

Sakti, of Mafijusri, 17: Halahala, 41; re- 
presented on the image of Sthiracakra, 
30 ; of Vajrasattva, 6 ; embraces Candaro- 
sana, 61, see Prajna. 

Sakyabuddha Lokesvara, 
187. 

Sakyasimha, Mortal Buddha, 10, 2, 32 ; his 


another name of the 


described, 181, 


( 216 


disciple Ananda, 12 ; his wife Yasodhara, 

12. 

Samantabhadra, Divine Bodhisattva, 8; 
illustrated, XI, b ; variation in his images, 
9; accompanies Lokanatha, 388. 

Samantabhadra Lokesvara, described, 183. 

Samksipta Marici, see Astabhuja Marici and 
Maricipicuva. 

Samvara, 60, 93; a variety of Vajradaka, 
64, 65 ; described, 65 ; Dhyana cited, 65; 
his Sakti Vajravarahi, 65. 

Sangha, 34 ; a member of the Holy Triad, xx ; 
described, xxn ; illustrated, III.; the term 
Bodhisattva synonymous with, 8. 

Sangharatna, epithet of Avalokitesvara, 
ou. 

Sankhamunda trampled by Jambhala, 119. 

Sankhanatha Lokesvara, described, 188. 

Sankhapala, name of a serpent lord, 56. 

Sanku temple of Vajrayogini, 156ff. 

Sanmudra, six auspicious symbols or orna- 
ments, see Glossary ; explained by quota- 
tion from the text, 47n; prescribed for 
Saptaksara, 66: Vajravarahi, 104 : Vidyu- 
jjvalakarali, 82; group of five Mudras 
enumerated, 91; five Mudras prescribed 

for Nairatma, 91: Vajracarcika, &6. 

Santamati Lokesvara, described, 187. 

Santasi Lokesvara, described, 181. 

Santideva, 16; his date discussed, xxv, 
xxvn; his evidence regarding the 
Buddhist Pantheon, xxv; Dharani of 

_ Marici given by, 94. 

Santikavidhi, a Tantric rite, 69. 

Saptaksara, significance of the name, 65; 
a variety of Vajradaka, 64, 65ff; des- 
cribed, 65ff, 66ff; Dhyana cited, 66n; 
embraced by Vajravarahi, 65 ; his Prajiia 
described, 67: his Mandala described, 
66n ; his companions described, 66. 

Saptasatika Hayagriva, 58ff; an emanation 
of Amitabha, 53ff ; described, 54 ; Dhyana 
cited, 54; see Hayagriva. 

Sy aol? Kalpa, name of a Tantric work, 
54. 

Sarahapada, author of the Sadhana of 
Trailokyavasankara, 45. 

Sarasiri (?) LokesSvara, described, 186. 

Sarasvati ; her antiquity, 150 ; a river deified, 
150; popularity of her worship, 150; 
her functions, 150; an independent 
goddess, 150 ; variety of her forms, 150 ; 
image of Jambhala wrongly identified by 
Vincent A. Smith as, 150n ; accompanies 
Jambhala as a minor goddess, 114. 

Sarasvatisthana, 15. 

Sarnath Museum; contains the _ earliest 
image of Lokanatha, 40 ; image of Marici, 
97; Nilakantha, 49: Sadaksari Loke- 
Svara, 34; Sadaksari Mahavidya, 35: 
Siddhaikavira, 20. 

Sarthavaha Lokesvara, described, 186. 

Sarvabuddhadakini, name _ given to the 
headless form of Vajrayogini, 155n. 

etree ae epithet of ParnaSavari, 
109. 


Sarvanivaranaviskambhi Lokesvara, des- 
cribed, 182. 
Sarvasokatamonirghata LokeSvara, descri- 


Oe egeteles ikewn 
Sasvatavajra, author of the 


Sadhana of 
Mahacinatara, 77. 


“‘Sitatapatra,’’ 


) 
Seasons, represented by the Dhyani Buddhas, 
TA. 


Senses, five; probable origin of the five 
Dhyani Buddhas, 1. , 

Serpent ; its presence in the stone images 
of Amoghasiddhi, 5; appears in the 
image of Harihariharivahana, 45 ; two 
serpents accompany Nilakantha, 48 ; the 
names and functions of the eight lords 
of serpents, 56. 

Siddhaikavira, variety of Mafjusri, 17; an 
emanation of Aksobhya, 19; described, 
20ff ; Dhyana cited, 21; his similarity 
with Arapacana, 21 ; distinction between 
Lokanatha and, 21 ; illustrated, XIII, d; 
his Mandala, 21; his companions enu- 
merated and described, 21n. 

Siddhapurusas, eighty-four; Saraha one of 
the, 45. 

Siddhiharsa, Pandit, 40n. 

Sikhi, Mortal Buddha, 10. 

Sikhimalini, Mortal Buddhasakti, 12. 

Siksasamuccaya, a work of Santideva, xxv. 

Simhandda, variety of AvalokitesSvara, 35ff, 
42; his functions, 35; described, 36; 
186; Dhyana cited, 36 ; his images illus- 
trated, XIX, c-d-e, XX, a-b ; distinction 
between Mafjusri and, 36; Mafijuvara 
wrongly indentified as, 25n. 

Simhanatha Lokesvara, described, 179. 

Sirisa tree, special tree of Mahamantra- 

 nusarini, 134. 

Sirisara (?) Lokesvara, described, 186. 

Sitala, Hindu goddess of small-pox, 110. 

Sitaprajhaparamita, white variety of Pra- 
jhaparamita, 85; described, 85 ; Dhyana 
cited, 85. 

meaning of the word, 
102. 

Sitataparta Aparajita, emanation of Vairo- 
cana, l101ff; described, 102; Dhyana 
cited, 101 ; Nepalese drawing illustrated, 
XX XI, e. 


Sitatara, emanation of the five Dhyani 
Buddhas, 12%7ff; Dhyana cited, 127; 
described, 128; distinction between 


Khadiravani and, 127. 

Sitatara, Caturbhuja, see Caturbhuja Sita- 
tara. 

Sitatara, Sadbhuja, see Sadbhuja Sitatara. 

Siva trampled by DaSabhujasita Marici, 99 ; 
by Ubhayavarahanana  M@arici, 98; 
counted as a Mara, 154n; disgraced by 
Buddhist gods, 162. 

Skandhas, probable origin of the five Dhyani 
Buddhas 2; represented by the five 
Dhbhyani Buddhas, 7A, 119; data for the 
increase in number of deities, 165. 

Smile, pleasant; indication of Parnasavari 
as emanation of Aksobhya, 1110. 

Smith, Vincent A.; criticized, 150n. 

Smrti accompanies Mahasarasvati, 151. 

Sri, trampled by Paramasva, 147. 

Srimadaryyavalokitesvara, described, 188. 

Srivasu, accompanies Vasudhara, 90. 

Srivasumukhi, accompanies Vasudhara, 90. 

Srnkhala (chain), special symbol of Vajra- 
srnkhala, 111. 

Srstikanta Lokesvara, described, 183. 

Sthiracakra, variety of Mafijusri, 17; inde- 
pendent god, 29ff; peculiarity of the 
Sadhana devoted to, 29; described, 29, 


( 
30; illustrated, XVII, d; his image 
identified, 30n. 
Stipa, symbol of the Buddhist Universe, 3 ; 
Dhyani Buddhas represented on the, 3 ; 
three stupas illustrated, II. 
Subha, accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 
Subhadra, accompanies Jambhala, 114. 
Subhaga, accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 
Subhamekhalaé, accompanies Buddhakapala, 
64. 
Stacimukha receives nectar from Lokanatha, 
37; described, 37. 
Sudatta, accompanies Jambhala, 114. 
Sudhanakumara, 37, 20n; described, 38; 
accompanies Khasarpana, 38, 36 ; Manju- 


ghosa, 20; Mafijuvara, 25:. Padma- 
narttesvara, 42. 
Sugatisandarsana Lokesvara, 49ff; source 


of his Sadhana, 49; described, 49 , 179; 
Dhyana cited, 49; Nepalese drawing 
illustrated, X XIV, b. 

Sujuki, D. T. ; on Nirvana, xvin. 

Sukhavati Heaven, the residence of Ami- 
tabha, 3. 

Sukhavati LokeSvara, 50ff; source of his 
Sadhana, 338, 50; described, 51, 178; 
Dhyana cited, 50 ; illustrated, X XIV, d. 

Sukhavativytha, 15; date of its Chinese 
translation, xxv, 52n; Aksobhya men- 
tioned in, 4: Avalokitesvara, 52: Mafn- 
jusri, 15 ; also called Amitadyus-Siatra. 

Sukhendra, accompanies Jambhala, 114. 

Sukla Kurukulla, white variety of Kuru- 
kulla, 55; described, 56; Dhyana cited, 
553; is offered Abhiseka by Padmapani 
and others, 56. 

Sumalini, accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 

Sumbha, 107 ; accompanies Vajratara, 125. 

Sundara, accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 

Sundari, accompanies Buddhakapala, 64. 

Sun-god ;. connection of Marici with, 93. 

Stnya, meaning and significance of the 
word in Vajrayana, 164; or Void, 2n; 
identified with Compassion, 165; its 
two aspects as a god and a goddess, 164 ; 
expressed by the word Nairatma, 91 ; 
all deities are Stinya in essence, 164; 
different kinds of transformation, 165; 
all Buddhist deities are manifestations 
of, 164ff; how it transforms itself in 
form of deities, 165 ; transforms itself in 
accordance with different functions 
discharged, 165. 

Sanyata ; Buddhist Iconography dependent 
upon the doctrine of, xiii. 

Suraksini accompanies Buddhakapdla, 64. 

Suryyaprabha, see Jaliniprabha. 

Sutra, one of the six auspicious symbols, 
see Sanmudra. 

Svayambhuksettra, 15. 

Svayambhipuranam, details about Mafjusri 
to be found in, 15, 16. 

Sword, its significance, 60n3; symbol of 
Manjusri, 17; appears in the images of 
Mafijuvara, 26 ; its function when carried 
by Sthiracakra, 29 ;symbol of Simhanada, 
391 

Syamatara, name given to Khadiravani 
Tara, LOG: 

Sylables, six ; mother of, 34. 

Symbols of Buddha; objects of Buddhist 
worship, Xx. 


917 >) 


Symbols, the six auspicious, see Sanmudra. 


qe 


Tabular statement showing the _ relation 
between Dhyani Buddhas, their Buddha- 
Saktis and Bodhisattvas, 9; Mortal 
Buddhas their Buddhasaktis and Bodhi- 
sattvas, 13; the attributes of the Dhyani 
Buddhas, 7A. 

Taksaka, name of a serpent lord, 56 ; Vahana 
of Mayajalakrama Kurukullé, 127. 

Tantra, meaning of, xvili ; Asanga initiated 
in the mysteries of, 18; introduced by 
Asanga into Mahayana, xvill. 

Tantrasara; the Dhyana of Hindu Tara 
cited from, 77. 

Tantrayana did not exert much influence 
before the time of Dharmakirti, xxvi. 
Tantric deities, how represented in art, 

xviliff,. 

Tara, significance of the name, 106; loose 
application of the term, 135n ; definition 
of , 135. 

Taras, Ordinary; 135ff; Extraordinary, 
136ff ; their classification in accordance 
with colour, 135ff; Blue, see Blue Tara ; 
Green, see Green Tara; Red, see Red 
Tara ; White, see White Tara; Yellow, 
see Yellow Tara. 

Tara Buddhist; as a minor goddess, 37; 
described, 37ff; accompanies Khasar- 
pana, 36; Lokanatha, 38, 39: Rakta- 
Lokesvara, 46 : Padmanarttesvara, 42, 438. 

Tara, Hindu; a purely Buddhist goddess 
wholly incorporated into the Hindu Pan- 
theon, 78; prototype of Mahacinatara, 
78 ; significance of the corpse on which 
she stands, 78 ; see also Mahacinatara. 

Tara Mantra, its deification, 109 ; example, 
Oe 

Taranath, his evidence regarding Tantric 
learning, xxvi. 

Taradrahasya, Dhyana of Mahacinatara to be 
foun dines ie, 

Tarodbhava Kurukulla, variety of Kuru- 
kullé, 56 ; described, 56. 

OTR ene Mudra, exhibited by Namasangiti, 
149. . 

Tastes, represented by the Dhyani Buddhas, 
TA 


Tathagatas, 23; Aksobhya the _ earliest 
Tathagata, 60, 4 ; Manjukumara made of 
the particles of, 27; are cited as wit- 
nesses by Harihariharivahana, 44, 

Tattvacintamani, a work of Ptrnananda, 
(thar 

Thunderbolt; the seat of 
stamped with a, lin. 

Tibet ; Kkajatasadhana restored by Nagar- 
juna from, 80. 

Tiger, Vahana of Vadirat, 30. 

Trailokyaksepa, Yab-yum variety of Heruka, 
63 ; described, 63. 

Trailokyavasankara, a variety of Avaloki- 
tesvara, 45ff; described, 45; Dhyana 
cited, 45. 

Trailokyavijaya, an Independent god, 146ff ; 


Vajrasana 


described, 146; Dhyana cited, 146; 
his images noticed, 146; illustrated, 
KXAN OG TE 


(\2Esoe) 


Trailokyavijaya Mudra, exhibited by Asta- 
bhuja Kurukulla, 58; Mayajalakrama 
Kurukulla, 127. 

Triad, Buddhist Holy ; 
human form, xxn ; 
verential to, 122. 

Tridandi, recognition symbol of Bhrkuti, 
59. 

Trilokasandarsana Lokesvara, described, 179. 

Tripataka, defined, 147. 

Trisaranagamana, the process described, 170. 

Trisikha (three tufts of hair) on the head of 
Dasabhujasita Marici, 98. 

Trisula entwined by a snake; recognition 
symbol of Simhanada, 35, 36. 

Tusita Heaven, Maitreya passes 
of a Bodhisattva in the, 13. 


U 


Ubhayavarahanana Marici, variety of Marici, 
98; significance of the name, 98; des- 
cribed, 98. 

Uechusma Jambhala, 60 ; variety of Jambha- 
la, 74ff ; 113 ; his different forms, 115; 
emanation of Aksobhya, 74ff ; an emana- 


how represented in 
fate of persons irre- 


the life 


tion of Ratnasambhava, 115; described, 
75, 115; Dhyana cited, 74 his stone 
image described and _ identified, 115; 


illustrated XXXV, a, X XVI d; signific- 
ance of the image of Amitabha on the 
crown of the Sarnath figure, 115. 

Uddiyana, see Odiyana. 

Udyana, image of Maitreya in, 13. 

Ugratara, name of Mahacinatara ; 
ted by the Hindus, 76 ; 
Sanku temple, 157. 

Universe, Buddhist ; described, xvff ; 
the symbol of, 3. 

Upakesini, accompanies Arapacana, 28; 
Mafijuvara, 26; Mafnjusri, 17; Siddhai- 
kavira, 21. 

Upaya, trampled by MAaricipicuva, 96. 

Upeksa, defined, 172. 

U pendra, trampled by Prasannatara, 139. 

Usnisavijaya, 107 ; emanation of Vairocana, 


; incorpora- 
her image in the 


; Stupa, 


100ff ; described, 101; Dhyana cited, 
100 ; ’ popularity of her images, 100; 
illustrated, XSNeN Ll Ser - de. accompanies 


Vajratara as a minor goddess, 125. 
Utnauti (?) Lokesvara, described, 180. 
Utpala Mudra, exhibited by Sitatara, 128. 
U Vahal, source of the bronze images of the 

Divine Bodhisattvas, 9. 


V 


Vadali, accompanies 
97, 
Vadirat, a 
Independent god, 
Dhyana cited, 30. 

Vagisvara, 42; a variety of MafijuSri, 17; 
emanation of the five Dhyani Buddhas, 
24ff ; his popularity, 24; described, 24; 
Dhyana cited, 24; his Mantra, 20n; 
illustrated, XIV, d, XV, a. 


Astabhuja  Marici, 


variety of Mafjusri, 17; an 
30ff ; described, 30ff ; 


Vahana, consisting of lion, Garuda and 
Visnu, 44; of Dhyani Buddhas, 3n, 7A. 
Vairocana, Dhyani Buddha, 2, 4, In; his 


antiquity, 4; described, 4ff; Dhyana 
cited 5n; represented on the Stupas, 
3, 4. illustrated, VII, d, VIII, a; his 
emanations, 95ff ; his image on the crown 
of Astabhuja Marici 96; Dasabhujasita 
Marici, 99; Mahasahasrapramardani, 
102; Usnisavijaya, 100, 101; Vajra- 
dhatvisvari Marici, 100; appears in the 
image of Arapacana, 28. 

Vaisaradyas, four, 10. 

Vaisravana, accompanies Jambhala, 114. 

Vajra, meaning of the word in Vajrayana, 
2n, xvii, xviin ; the seat of Vajrasana, 11. 

Vajrabhairava, trampled by Mahakala, 122. 

Vajrabhairavi, accompanies Saptaksara, 66. 

Vajrabhaskari, accompanies Saptaksara, 66. 

Vajracarcika, an emanation of Aksobhya, 
86; described, 86ff; Dhyana cited, 86; 
illustrated, XXVIII, d. 

Vajradaka, yab-yum variety of Heruka, 64ff ; 
varieties of, 64. 

Vajradakini, accompanies Mahamaya, 68 ; 
Saptaksara, 66. 

Vajradhara, name of Adi Buddha ; varieties 
of his forms described, xxviil. 

Vajradharma, see Vajradharma LokeSsvara. 

Vajradharma, name of Amitabha, 69, 39n. 

Vajradharma Lokesvara, 51ff; a variety of 
AvalokiteSvara, 33; described, 51, 180; 
Dhyana cited, 51; his special features, 
51; illustrated, XXIV, e; distinction 
between Rakta-Lokesvara and, 47. 

Vajradhatu Lokesvara, described, 187. 

Vajradhatvisvari, Divine Buddhasakti, 7; 
illustrated, X, a. 

Vajradhatvisvari Marici, a _ variety of 
Marici, 99 ; described, 99ff ; her leading 
characteristics, 100; accompanies Asta- 
bhuja Kurukulla as a minor goddess, 
58 ; also called Vajravetali. 

Vajradhrk, epithet of Aksobhya, 4n. 

Vajragandhari, consort of Candavajrapani, 
155; why not an emanation of Amogha- 
siddhi, 154; an independent goddess, 
154ff ; described, 154ff; Dhyana cited 
154; accompanies Astabhuja Kurukulla 
as a minor goddess, 58, 154. 

Vajragarbha Lokesvara, described, 182. 

Vajraghanta, gate-keeper of the Lokanatha 
Mandala, 39 ; accompanies Vajratara, 125. 

Vajraghona, epithet of NA CRReC ID adoro 103 ; 
its meaning, 103n. 

Vajrahunkara, why so called, 143; an aie 
pendent god, 1438ff; described, 144; 
Dhyana cited, 144; distinction between 
Vajradhara and, 144. 

Vajrahuntika Lokesvara, described, 181. 

Vajrajjvalanalarka, an Independent god, 
145ff; described, 145ff ; Dhyana cited, 
145, 

Vajrakhanda Lokesvara, described, 184. 

Vajrananga, 21ff; variety of MafijuSri, 17; 
an emanation of Aksobhya 19 ; worship- 
ped in the rite of Vasikarana, 21; his 
varieties, 22, 22n; #£=2described, 22; 
Dhyana cited, 22; illustrated, XIV, c; 
distinction between Madana and, 22. 

Vajranatha Lokesvara, described, 188. 

VajrankuSsi, gate-keeper of the Lokanatha 
Mandala, 39 ; accompanies Vajratara, 124. 

Vajrapani, Divine Bodhisattva, 8 ; distinc- 
tion between Ghantapani and, 9; his 


( 219 


similarity to Vajrasattva, 6; variation 
noticed in his images, 9; accompanies 
Lokanatha, 38, 40 ; illustrated, XI, c. 

Vajrapani Lokesvara, described, 188. 

Vajrapasi, gate-keeper of the Lokanatha 
Mandala, 39 ; accompanies Vajratara, 125. 

Vajraraga, see Vak. 

Vajraraudri, accompanies Saptaksara, 66. 

Vajrasana, Buddha in, 11 ; his seat stamped 
with a thunderbolt, lln; four Maras 
under the seat of, 11; described, 11; 
Dhyana cited, 11; illustrated, XIII, a. 

Vajrasarada, a variety of Sarasvati, 151 ; 
described, 151ff ; illustrated, XL, d-e. 

Vajrasarasvati, variety of Sarasvati, 152; 
described, 152 ; illustrated, X LI, b. 

Vajrasattva, In; meaning of the word, 2n; 
Dhyani Buddha, 1,2,6; an embodiment 
of five Skandhas, 2; latest Buddha _ to 
enter Buddhist Pantheon, 130 ; sometimes 
bears the effigy of Aksobhya, 6; agree- 
ment between Vajrapani and, 6; des- 
cribed,6; Dhyana cited, 6n; parental 
Buddha of Jambhala, 114; of Cunda, 
130 ; his stone image illustrated, IX, b; 
his yab-yum figure illustrated, IX, 
c-d-e ; his secret worship, 6. 

Vajrasattvadhatu Lokesvara, described, 187. 

Vajrasattvatmika, Divine Buddhasakti, 7. 

Vajrasphota, gate-keeper of the Lokanatha 
Mandala, 39; accompanies Vajratara, 
125. 

Vajrasrnkhala, emanation of Amoghasiddhi, 
111ff ; described, 112; Dhyana cited, 
112; illustrated, XX XIV, b. 

Vajrasrsta Lokesvara, described, 188. 

Vajrasunya, In. 

Vajratara, varieties, 129 ; emanation of the 
five Dhyani Buddhas, 123ff; of four 
Dhyani Buddhas, 129 ; variety of Yellow 
Tara, 138 ; described, 123ff, 129 ; Dhyana 
cited, 123 ; letters of her Mantra deified, 
125, 129; efficacy of her Mantra, 125; 
images noticed, 129, 1380, 1238; illus- 
traced. es Nek Vio ed, bs) XXX VIT, a: 
her Mandala described, 124ff . 

Vajravairocani, another name of Vajravarahi, 


103; accompanies Vajrayogini, 155; 
described, 156. 
Vajravarahi, emanation of Vairocana, 1038ff 


67, 42 ; varieties noticed, 103 ; described, 
65, 104; Dhyana cited, 104; illustrated, 
XXXII, a-b ; her images show adaman- 
tine excrescence, 1038n; distinguished 
from Marici, 93ff; from Nairatma, 92, 
90: from Vajrayogini, 156; Sakti of 
-Samvara, 65; of Saptaksara 65; Vajra- 
daka, 64; see Aryavajravarahi, Buddha- 
dakini and Marici. 

Vajravaraht Tantra, treats of the union of 
Vajravarahi and Heruka, 94. 

Vajravarnani, accompanies Vajrayogini, 155 ; 
described, 156. 

Vajravetali, see Vajradhatvisvari Marici. 

Vajravidarani, an independent goddess, 
158; described, 158; Dhyana cited, 
158 ; illustrated, XLII, e. 

Vajravina Sarasvati, variety of Sarasvati, 
151 ; described, 151. 

Vajrayana ; the word first met with in the 
work of Indrabhtti, xxvi ; why so called, 
xvii ; a degenerated, but attractive form 


) 


of religion, xviii; its rise, xi; form of 
Mahayana when Mahasukha is intro- 
duced into Vijhanavada, xiiff; Dhyani 
Buddhas first introduced in, xxvi; its 
development after the time of Indrabha- 
ti, 159; origin and nature of cults in, 
xxviliff ; easy methods devised ‘for the 
followers of, xvii. 

Vajrayogini, consort of Heruka, 156, 108 ; 
an independent goddess, 1553; varieties, 
155 ; described, 156 ; Dhyana cited, 155; 
distinction between Nairatma, Vajrava- 
rahi and, 156, 92; incorporated by the 
Hindus in the form of Chhinnamasta, 
155: 

Vajrayogini temple in Nepal, contains an 
image of Ugratara, 76. \ 

Vajrosnisa Lokesvara, described, 181. 

Vak, variety of Mafjusri, 17; emanation 
of Amitabha, 17; described, 18 ; Dhyana 
cited, 18; illustrated, XIII, c; distinc- 
tion between Amitabha and, 18. 

Vangiya . Sahitya Parisat; source of the 
image of Bighnantaka, 143 ; of Nairatma, 
92 ; Sthiracakra, 30. 

Varada Tara, variety of Green Tara, 136, 

Varadayaka Lokesvara, described, 178. 

Varahamukhi, 94; accompanies Astabhuja 
Marici, 97. 

Varali, accompanies Astabhuja Marici, 97. 
4 


Varttali, accompanies Astabhuja Marici, 97, 
a 


Vasanta, trampled by Paramasva, 148. 

VaSikarana, name of a Tantric rite, 
Kurukulla worshipped in, 55; 
nanga, 21. 

Vasudhara, 76; consort of Jambhala, 89, 
117; discrepancy regarding her parental 


OO 
Vajra- 


Buddha, 89; more ancient than her 
spiritual father, 113; emanation of 
Aksobhya, 89ff; emanation of Ratna- 


sambhava, 117; how assigned to Ratna- 
sambhava, 113 ; described, 117ff ; Dhyana 
cited, 90, 117; illustrated, XXXV, d; 
accompanies Ucchusma Jambhala, 115, 
118; embraces Jambhala in yab-yum, 
114, 130; erroneously identified by 
Getty as Bhrkuti, 59. 

Vasuki, name of a serpent lord, 56 ; 
issued out by, 48. 

Vasumatisri, accompanies Vasudhara, 90. 

Vasusri, accompanies Vasudhara, 90. 

Vasyadhikara Lokesvara, described, 178. 

Vasyatara, emanation of Amoghasiddhi, 
107; a variety of Green Tara, 136; des- 
eribed; 107 illustrated, Xxx Il, a3 
see Bhadrasana Tara ; distinction between 
Khadiravani and, 107. 

Vasyavidhi, a Tantric rite, 69. 

Vidyapati Lokesvara, described, 188. 

Vidyujjvalakarali, variety of  -Ekajata, 
81ff ; her legendary origin, 81; described, 
82ff ; Dhyana cited, 82. 

Vighnantaka see Bighnantaka. 

Vighnas, see Bighnas. 

Vijamantras, how their effulgence attracts 
divinities, 165 ; of the Dhyani Buddhas, 
TA. 

Vijnanavada, responsible for 
Vijiana into Mahayana, xi. 

Vikalaratri, accompanies Buddhakapala, 64, 


poison 


introducing 


( 


Vikasgayantam, different meanings of the 
word, 47n. 

Vikrampur, in the District of Dacca in 
Bengal ; source of the images of Kha- 
sarpana, 38; Jambhala, 114; Parnasa- 
vari, LO” 

Vilokini, accompanies Padmanarttesvara, 43. 

Vina, etc., offer Abhiseka to Kurukulla, 56. 

Vipasyanti, Mortal Buddhasakti, 12. 

Vipasyin, Mortal Buddha, 10. 

Virasana, rare in Buddhist Iconography, 
35 ; prescribed for Sadaksari Mahabidya, 
35; exhibited by Sadaksari Mahavidya, 
34. 

Visahari, Hindu goddess akin to Janguli, 
80. 

Visarjana, the process described, 171. 

Viskambhin, accompanies Lokanatha, 
40. . 

Visnu, trampled by Dasabhujasita Marici, 
99; Vahana of Harihariharivahana, 44 ; 
trampled by Ubhayavarahanana Marici, 
98; Vajrajjvalanalarka, 146. 

Visnucakra Lokesvara, described, 187. 

Visnukanta Lokesvara, described, 188. 

Visnupani Lokesvara, described, 186. 

Visvabhui, Mortal Buddha, 10. 

Visvabhtta Lokesvara, 187. 

Visvadakini, accompanies Mahamaya, 68. 

Visvadhara, Mortal Buddhasakti, 12. 

Visvahana LokeSvara, described, 181. 

Visvamata, variety of White Tara, 137. 

Visvapadma, accompanies Padmanarttesvara, 
43. : 

Visvapadmesvari, accompanies Padmanart- 
tesvara, 43. 

Visvapani, Divine Bodhisattva, 8; 
trated, XI, f. 

Visvavajra, symbol of Amoghasiddhi, 5 ; on 
the head of Samvara, 65; Saptaksara, 
66, 

VisSvavajra, accompanies Padmanarttesvara, 
43 


38, 


illus- 


Visvavajra Lokesvara, described, 187. 
Void, see Sunya. 
Vrsnacana Lokesvara, described, 180. 


220) 


W 


Waddel, L. A., on the Magadha image of the 
Sadaksari Group, 34 ; criticized, 34. 

Weapons, are nothing but manifestations of 
Bodhicitta, 166. 

White Taras, Ordinary ; enumerated with 
characteristic features of each, 136; 
Extraordinary ; enumerated with leading 
features of each, 137. 

Worship, difference between Hindu and 
Buddhist forms of, v; merits arising 
Out Ofj as 15: 

Worshipper, his duties, enumerated, 169. 


Y 


Yab-yum, meaning of the Tibetan word, 
163 ; conception is of complicated nature, 
166ff ; ‘Advaya,’ an advanced stage of, 
164n ; character of yab-yum representa- 
tions, 61; spiritual significance, 163ff ; 
ideal of a bright and definite spiritual 
prospect, 164, see Glossary. 

Yaksas, trampled by Mahasahasrapramar- 
dani, 133. 

Yama, Tibetans oppressed by, 70 ; legendary 
story of his origin, 70. 

Yamaduti, accompanies Mahakala, described, 
2d 

Yamantaka, see Yamari. 

Yamari, 142; story of his legendary origin, 
69 ; an emanation of Aksobhya, 69; his 
forms vary according to different rites, 
69; connexion of Mafjusri to, 70; 
accompanies Mafjughosa as a minor 
god, 19, 20, 20n; Mafijusri, 17; Manju- 
vara, 25 ; the Sakti of Sthiracakra identi- 


fied as, 30n; see Krsnayamari and 
Raktayamari. 
Yantras, of Divine Buddhasaktis, 7. 
Yasodhara, Mortal Buddhasakti, 12; wife 


of Sakyasimha, 12. 

Yellow Taras, enumerated with leading 
characteristics of each, 138. 

Yogini, epithet of Vajragandhari, 155. 

Yun-gar, story of his attack on the monas- 
tery of Vajravarahi, 103. 




















sgt, ae 
Barone wore To 











GAYLORD PRINTEDINU.S.A. 





0m ee Re Gimtee 


Heigcal hy elelethre 


at ater 


vigte 
waves 


tlaje 


tt 
eLeeeier +3 
iit bie ay 


tela ofete? 





