--- Page 1 ---
-
BARABUDUR 
f
a


--- Page 2 ---
@
 
" ' 
" 
<SL
BARABUDUR
#
ARCHAEOLOGICAL
DESCRIPTION
b
BY
w
N. J. KROM
PROFESSOR IN THE O N JvS S tS IlV OF LEYD EN
U>j|
IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOLUME II
WITH 2 PLATES IN COLLOTYPE
ji 
'
!OAr
TH E HAGUE
MARTINUS NIJHOFF
1927
(|;
m . 
j
clil 
- 
.
Sr;*
*■


--- Page 3 ---
*
All rights reserved
Printed in the Netherlands
Q55/ :"^ 
^ 
- 
|
/ 
M 4 ]
■ 
3V5 9 2 - 1 - 
/ . j
v - X 
^
Y '2 -
• ’ ’■'if ■
21085
The English edition with 442 plates is strictly limited 
to 100 numbered copies
«
•
i


--- Page 4 ---
'fi fty* <(1 i i f ' > * .* 
t y 
: 
' 
, 
V ’v Vp ? ‘> ?V 
. ’ 
. 
9 0 k § i j 0 4 M
TU’y-fK^i 
, 
■'-v-
<SL
CONTENTS 
J ^ '
CHAPTER VII. THE GANDAVYUHA............................................................ 
1
(,Second gallery, chief wall)
V I I I . MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA . ......................... 
65
{Third and fourth gallery, chief wall)
I X . TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S. 
116
{Third and fourth gallery, balustrade)
X . THE DHYANI-BUDDHA'S AND THE CHIEF STATUE. 
144
X I. BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF HINDU-JAVA­
NESE ART AND CULTURE......................... .
.
.
.
.
 
173
X I I . THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON..............................................246
X I I I . THE BUDDHISM OF B A R A B U D U R ....................... • 
281
BIBLIOGRAPHY............................................................................333
IN D E X ....................................................... ........................./• • 353
SUMMARY
of the 198 plates of parts 8—13 
with reference to the corresponding text (vol. II)
Series 
Plates 
Text
Part 
8 Reliefs of the 2nd gallery, chief wall. The Gart-
(Javyuha 
............................................. 
 
II I—LXIV 1—64
9 View in the 3rd gallery . . . . . . . . . . . 
G
Reliefs of the 3rd gallery, chief wall. Maitreya-
t e x t ...................................................................... 
HI 
I—XLIV 
65—85
ro View in the 4th gallery..................................... 
H
Reliefs of the 4th gallery, chief wall. Samanta-
bh ad ra-tex t........................................................ 
IV 1—XXXVI 
85 115
11 Reliefs of the 3rd gallery, balustrade. Maitreya-
tales................................................................. 
 
III.B I—XIX 
116—130
12 Reliefs of the 4th gallery, balustrade. Maitreya-
and other Bodhisattva-tales............................. 
IV.B 
I—XVIII 
130—143
13 Buddha-images................................................ 
I—XV 
*44 
172


--- Page 5 ---
<SL
CHAPTER VII
1/
THE GANDAVYUHA 
{Second gallery, chief wall)
The text followed in the reliefs of the second gallery is I believe that of 
the Gandavyuha. This work belongs like the Lalitavistara represented 
on the first gallery, to the so-called “nine Dharma’s”, and may therefore 
be considered a most authoritative text *); moreover it is distinguished 
far above the others by being more vivid in description and suitable 
for depicting in sculpture. No printed copy of this text exists 2), and as 
circumstances make it impossible for us to consultthe manuscripts, I 
shall first of all relate in detail what is known about this work from other 
sources.
The first to discover the existence of this text, as well as so many 
other Sanscrit works, was B. H. Hodgson. He announced it in his well- 
known article on the literature of Nepal among the nine Dharma’s 3) and 
gave the following description of it:
“Ganda Vyuha, a Vydkarana Sastra, contains forms of supplication 
and of thanksgiving, also how to obtain Bodhijndna, or the wisdom of 
Buddhism. Prose: speaker, Sakya; hearer, Sudhana Kumdra. The 
Ganda Vyuha is a treatise on transcendentalism by Arya Sanga the 
teacher of the Yogdchdrya.” (p. 16).
And elsewhere: "The second [Dharma] is named Ganda Vyuha, of 
12.000 slokas, which contains the history of Sudhana Kumdra, who 
made sixty-four persons his gurus, from whom he acquired Bodhi- 
jndna” (p. 49).
*) We find it quoted as such in later works; see for instance Qantideva’s Ciksasamuccaya 
in Bendall’s edition (Bibl. Buddh. I 1902) p. 34, 101, 368 and Introduction p. XI; Subhasi- 
tasamgraha (Museon 4, 1903) p. 387; etc.
*) At the beginning of the war there was one being prepared for the Bibliotheca Buddhica.
8) Essays on the languages, literature and religion of Nepal and Tibet (1874), p. 13.
Barabucjur II 
1


--- Page 6 ---
/ ? / —riv\
Burnouf mentions the work too, quoting Hodgson twice 1), the third 
time to controvert the opinion, that sutra’s of this sort should be 
reckoned among the older Buddhist writings and be used as a source of 
information for the study of original Buddhism. He on the contrary 
considers that nothing else will be found in them, "que les d6veloppe~ 
ments d’une doctrine complete, triomphante et qui se croit sansrivale”
(p. 125). Burnouf restricts himself to a review of the character of this 
work but gives nothing more about the contents.
From the manuscript presented by Hodgson to the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal there were published in 1877 and 1882 short and as will appear, 
incomplete lists of contents, respectively by RajendraMla Mitra in the 
preface to his edition of the Lalitavistara 2), and by Haraprasdd £as- 
tri in RajendraMla Mitra’s Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of Nepal s). 
Up to the present, these summaries are all that is known of the contents 
of the Gandavyuha. Neither in BendaU’s Catalogue of the Sanskrit manu­
scripts in the Library of Cambridge university, which describes two manu­
scripts of this work4), nor in the new history of Sanskrit literature by 
Winternitz, are there any further particulars to be found about this 
text. Winternitz restricts himself to the statement that Manju^ri is prais­
ed in this work as the one who can bring to perfect knowledge6). Finally 
Pelliot has given a clear explanation 8) of the unfortunate confusion 
that arose between Gandavyuha and Ghanavyuha and the identification 
of the former with the Avatamsaka7); as regards the contents there was 
no reason for further explanation. As therefore for these contents, we have 
no other sources of information than the abovementioned reviews, it 
will be as well to quote them in extenso. I shall first give that of Hara- 
prasAd £4stri, it being the most complete.
"The history of Sudhana in search of the perfect knowledge. The work 
is reckoned as one of the nine principal scriptures of the Buddhists, and 
held in high esteem. It was taken to China in the 7th century, and was 
translated into the Chinese language by Amoghavajra during the reign 
of the Tang dynasty. Its Chinese name is Ta-shin-mi-yen-king.
"Once upon a time while residing with Samantabhadra, Manjusri and
*) Introduction k l’histoire du Buddhisme indicn, p.54 and 68 of the first edition (1844).
a) Published in the Bibliotheca Indica of Calcutta, no. 51 etc.
3) Page 90—93.
*) Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Library, Cambridge 
(1883) p. 23 and 102.
■*) Geschichte der indischen Literatur II, 1 (1913) p. 242.
*) Notes k propos d'un Catalogue du Kanjur, Journ. Asiat. 11: 4 (1914) p. 118—121.
’) Comp. Chapt. XIII.
I I I 
<SL
THE GANDAVYUHA


--- Page 7 ---
<SL
THE GANDAVYUHA 
A 3
others, lord Buddha showed them the marvellous workings of a certain 
mystic position called Sinha-vijrimbhita, As soon as the lord assumed 
that meditative position, the interior of the room expanded to an indefi­
nite extent, the floor became thickly studded with sapphires and other 
precious stones, and gigantic pillars of solid emeralds supported the roof.
A Bodhisattva, named Rasmiprabha, decorated the sky with clouds of 
various kinds, some showing heavenly flora, some raining nectarous 
perfumes.
“Then Sdriputra, approaching Manjusri, made him acquainted with 
the presence of a host of holy Bhikshus. With them Manjusri started on a 
journey to the southern regions, a.nd settled himself in a grove where 
stood the Vihara of Mdladhvaj avyuha, where he had formerly held his 
meditations. On this the people of the neighbouring town of DanyakAra 
came in crowds to receive his instructions and his benediction. The lord 
taught them, and singled out one young man to be the object of his spe­
cial favour. This young man was named Sudhana from the fact that 
immediately after his birth his father had suddenly become very rich. 
Manjusri narrated to him the marvellous deeds of Lord Buddha. Sudhana 
cha nted the praise of Manjusri in sweet and melodious verses, and declared 
himself a candidate for Bodhi knowledge.
“Manjusri advised him to have the benefit of instruction from Megha- 
sri, who resided at Mount Sugriva in the country called Ramavarta. 
Meghasri shifted the burden of instructing Sudhana to S&garamegha of 
Sdgaramukha, who in his turn advised Sudhana to repair to Supratisthi- 
ta of Sdgara on the way to Lanldt. Sudhana was again disappointed. He 
was directed to proceed to Vajapura, a city of Dravida, to receive in­
structions from a Dr&vidian named Megha. Megha professed his igno­
rance of Bodhi knowledge.
“By his advice Sudhana repaired to Saradhvaja at Milanapurarta, 
the land’s end of Jambudvipa; thence to the Bbikshuni Asa, the wife of 
Suprabha of Samudravelati to the east of Mahdprabhu; thence to 
Bhishmottarasanghesha of Nalapura; thence to Jayashinayatana in the 
country of Isasha; thence to Maitrayam, the daughter of Sinhaketu, 
at the city of Sinhavijrimbhita; thence to Sudarsana of Trin&njana; 
thence to a boy named Indriyasvara of the city of Sumukha in the coun­
try called Sramana Mandala; thence to the Upasika Prabhuta of Sa- 
mudraprasthdna; thence to the patriarch Vidvan of Mahasambhava; 
thence to the banker Ratnachuda of Sinhapoti; thence to Samantane- 
tra, a manufacturer of perfumery, at the city of Samantamukha in Mu- 
laka; thence to Nala of Niladhvaja; thence to the king Mahaprabha of


--- Page 8 ---
/ft',—nV\ 
s~>t
Suprabha; thence to the Updsika Achalasthira; thence to Sarvagr&ma 
of Toshala in Mitatoshala; thence to Utpalabhuti in Prithurashtra; 
thence to the slave Paisa of Kuhigira; thence to the banker Jayottama 
of Nanuhara; thence to the Bhikshum Sinhavyasambhita of Ivalinga- 
vana in Sronapasanta; thence to Bhagavati Sumitrd of Ratnabhijjiha in 
Dnrga; thence to the patriarch Vesthila of Subhapdrangama; thence to 
the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara of Potalaka; thence to Ananyagami of 
Pashatmandala, and finally to Mahadeva of Dviravatl All the places 
mentioned above belong to the region called Dakshinapatha or southern 
India.
"Leaving Dekkan in the south, Sudhana directed his steps by the ad­
vice of Mahadeva towards Magadha. In that country he paid his devo­
tion to eight Ratridevat&s, or goddesses of night. These had different 
names; and dwelt in different localities, two of which Kapilavastu and 
Bidhimanda (sic) are well known in the history of the Buddhist religion.
"But none could afford full satisfaction to Sudhana, and he remained 
unpossessed of perfect knowledge. He then entreated Gopa, the wife, 
and Mayd the mother, of the great Buddha for instruction, and here he 
was partially successful. They recommended him to Surendrabha at the 
house of India, and she, to a young teacher Visvarnitra of Kapilavastu.
At every change of teacher, the amount of his knowledge incr eased, and 
with redoubled zeal he applied himself to the acquisition and perfection 
of knowledge. He received several valuable lectures from the patriarch 
Surendra and the goldsmith Muktasara of Varukutcha, from a Br&hman 
Siviratra of Dharmagrima in Dekkan, from a boy Srfsambhava, and a 
girl Srimati of Sumukha. From Sumukha he travelled to Samudrakatiha 
where Maitreya told him plainly that none but Manjusrf himself would 
be able to make his knowledge perfect. Thus after passing through a 
hundred austerities he went back to Manjusri, who was living in the 
vicinity of Sumana. Sudhana, by the favor of Manjusri at last obtained 
full and perfect knowledge from the holy Samantabhadra.
So far this list of contents. First I must call attention to the fact that 
in two points it somewhat differs from what Hodgson tells us about 
the Gandavyfiha, To begin with he mentions £akya as the speaker in 
this text; this point is not of much importance and will probably be 
explained by the text really beginning with the Buddha himself speak­
ing and the rest of the tale being considered his own words. But the 
second point of difference is very important when the text is being 
consulted iconographically: it is that Hodgson speaks of sixty-four per­
sons who become Sudhana’s guru’s, while Haraprasad £dstrf only gives
((f)) 
§L
THE GANDAVYUHA


--- Page 9 ---
forty-seven. It therefore follows that this summary, at present the 
chief source of our information, is incomplete. We must keep this fact 
in mind when explaining the reliefs; not only do we know for certain 
that some seventeen of the guru’s have been suppressed, but we may 
suppose that the same carelessness can have taken place in other res­
pects as well and all sorts of episodes may have been left unrecorded. 
This will probably add great difficulties to our investigation.
The second summary of contents is as follows l):
'The Gandavyuha is a narrative work in which the disciples and fol­
lowers of Sdkya, in his presence, discourse on practical Buddhism. In the 
first chapter Manjusri explains to Sudhana-kumdra the cardinal prin­
ciples of Buddhism. In the second and the third Sudhana and Meghairf 
discourse on the same topic, and on the descent of Bodhisattvas. The 
fourth is devoted to an exposition, by Supratishthita, a Bhikshu, of the 
manner in which Buddhist faith should be sought. In the fifth, the ca­
reer of Buddha is expatiated upon by one Meghadravida in reply to 
Sudhana. In the sixth, a Sreshthi or banker comes for ward to solve the 
doubts and difficulties of Sudhana relating to certain points of faith.
In the next, Siradhaya expatiates on the glory of Buddha. A female 
mendicant of the name of Ava next explains how a Bodhisattva should 
study the Bodhi religion. Another mendicant of the same sex then ex­
plains the proper course of life for Bodhisattvas. In the ninth, a Rishi 
of the name of Bhishmottara-nirghosha, in reply to Sudhana, explains 
the duties of Bodhisattvas. The discussion of the subject is continued in 
several of the succeeding sections, the interlocutors being successively 
a Brdhmana named Jayoshmayatana, a maiden of the name Maitra- 
yhni, daughter of Maitrdyana, one of the principal followers of Sdkya, 
Sudarsana a Bhikshu, Prabhuta a nun, Vidusa a householder, and 
others. In Section 18, Sudhana expounds the subject to Nala, a king, 
whose kingdom is described at some length, and who is apparently the 
same with the hero of the Naishadha, and king of Berar, whose story 
finds so prominent a place in an episode of the Mahdbhdrata. In the 
next he goes to the town of Suprabhd, and converts to his faith its king, 
Mahdprabha. He next goes to the house of Chhald, a nun, from whose 
head issues a halo of brilliant light; and then goes in quest of an itine­
rant hermit (Parivrajaka) Sarvagdmina by name, with whom he dis­
courses on the maxim, maydnuttardyai: "Nothing by me of the future” 
etc. From Sections 22 to 30 the topic of discussion between Sudhana and 
different hermits is, “How should the Bodhisattva knowledge be taught
*) Introduction to the Lalita Vistara (1877), p. 8— 10.
1(f) | 
%L
W y 
THE GANDAVYCjHA 
v 
5 “


--- Page 10 ---
by a Bodhisattva”. (Kathan bodhisattvenabodhisattvacharydn siksha- 
yitavyam.) The subject of the 31st is an interview of Sudhana with a 
goddess named Vard, who shows him many jewels of rare value. In the 
next Vasanti, a goddess, replies to his query '‘Show me the way to om­
niscience, by which the Bodhisattvas attain their tenfold powers on 
earth." Other recondite questions of this character follow through twen­
ty successive sections, in which Sudhana either instructs, or is instructed, 
by some monk, or nun, or god, or goddess in the mysteries of the Bud­
dhist religion. The work is of considerable antiquity, and is, I believe, 
the same with the Ghanavyuha 3j, which was translated into Chinese 
under the name of Ta-shing-mi-yen-king by Amoghavajra of the Tang 
dynasty in 907-—960 of the Christian era."
This second summary, scanty as it is, still adds something serviceable 
to the first. The variation in the names is of slight importance; the same 
person is evidently meant in the following names: Saradhaya and 
Saradhvaja, Ava and Aga; Bhismottaranirghosa and Bhismottara- 
sanghesa; Jayosmayatana and Jayasfnayatana; Chala and Acalasthira; 
Sarvagamina and Sarvagrama; also it may be noted that in one case 
Maitrayana and in the other Simhaketu is the name of the father of 
Maitrayani. More important, it is that various persons who in the more 
extensive summary are only just mentioned by name, are specified in 
the shorter one; so we find out here that Supratisthita and Sudargana 
are bhiksu’s; Bhismottaranirghosa is a rsi; Jayosmayatana a brahman; 
Nala the king of that name; and Sarvagamina a parivrajaka. We also 
find that the shorter review’ calls a bhiksunl "female mendicant" and an 
upasika “nun"; this deserves attention, because if bhiksuiii is translated 
it must of course be “nun", and the upasika on the contrary is a "lay- 
sister" not a nun 2). Actual differences are that in the shorter summary 
10 a gresthin appears between Megha and Saradhvaja; 2° after Ava 
a second “female mendicant” comes in; 3° the male upasaka Pra- 
bhuta is a nun called Prabhuta. It does not matter, I think, that the 
householder Vidusa takes the place of the patriarch Vidvan, for house­
holder and patriarch are both meant as head of the household. It is not 
to be decided if the goddesses Vara and Vasanti must be included among 
the additions, as it is quite possible that in the more extensive review 
they may be among the Ratridevata's who are not mentioned by name.
The variations here enumerated from both reviews are serious 
enough to justify the supposition that these two summaries have been
l) See the article quoted, in note 6 on p. 2.
a) This is already noticed by Burnout, Introduction p. 279—282.
f(l)| 
' 
(fiT
THE GAN DAVY tJH A 
^ J - ^ J


--- Page 11 ---
■ e<w\
/jf - - - .y\
compiled from different versions of the Gandavyuha, the compilers 
each having consulted a different manuscript. As far as we know, I 
think such an explanation can not be accepted, however tempting it is, 
for both writers could not have had anything else in their hands than 
the manuscript presented by Hodgson to the Asiatic Society of Bengal 
and preserved at Calcutta 1).
We shall have to consider that one, or both of them perhaps, executed 
his task carelessly. There may easily be still more inaccuracies in one or 
both of the summaries than those that have come to light by comparing 
our scanty data; and besides we have no means at all of judging which of 
the two reviews of the contents is the most trustworthy or the least 
unreliable. It is but a weak foundation we have for the explanation of 
these reliefs. When the text there followed seems to differ from what we 
know of the reviews, this can be ascribed first of all to the incompleteness 
of even the more extensive summary as noted above, but it can quite as 
well be the result of inaccurate rendering of the text in these summaries. 
Then there is of course the chance that the text used on the monument 
was another version of the Gandavyuha than the manuscript in Cal­
cutta. Even if we could be sure that Rajendralala Mitra and Harapra- 
sad £hstri used the same manuscript, is it not possible that the manu­
scripts at Cambridge and Paris may disclose other points of difference ?
It is at present impossible for us to investigate if one of these manuscripts 
might be the text used on the monument or if it even had a version of 
its own. 2)
This must not keep us from endeavouring to dig up the truth and per­
haps discovering the direction for further examination. Wherever differ­
ences appear, they will probably be found in the accessory and less 
important episodes of the story, while the chief points and events will 
generally remain the same and recur in various differing versions of 
the text: they will not run so much risk of being overlooked or bungled. 
Setting to work in this way, I shall take three of the most prominent 
scenes in the text at the beginning, end and middle, and try to identify 
them on the reliefs and then arrange the intervening events as correctly 
as possible.
Let us first look at no. 36. In the centre we see the Bodhisattva Man- 
jugrl, already recognised as such for some time; his identity is indis­
putable, for he has his usual distinctive attribute, the book in kropak-form
*) Among the manuscripts of the Hodgson Collection at Calcutta there is only one of the 
Gandavyuha. See Kunja Vihari KAvyatirtha’s Catalogue of printed books and manuscripts 
in Sanskrit, belonging to the Oriental library of the Asiatic Society of Bengal (1904) p. 245.
*) It may be remembered that this work was written during the war.
fisi 
- 
;
THE GANDAVYUHA 
^


--- Page 12 ---
I - V I
I
 / • /' 
THE G A N D A V Y U H A 
' S
 I 
,
on the blue lotus, the stalk of which he holds in the left hand. Judging by 
the gesture of the right hand he is preaching, and he turns towards a 
group of bhiksus seated attentively on his right under a tree (left on 
the relief). On the other side of the Bodhisattva stands a person in the 
dress of high rank, his head surrounded by a halo, accompanied by some 
attendants. The explanation of this scene is I think not difficult, it 
might be entitled: Manju^ri with his attendant bhiksu’s and Sudhana, 
in Maladhvajavyuha, The sculptor in his own way, has given a distinc- 
tiyeTnark to Sudhana who here appears for the first time. We remember 
how it is related in the story that Sudhana’s father becomes suddenly 
rich at the birth of his son; as a sign of this, against the pedestal on 
which the figure representing Sudhana stands, three moneybags are 
depicted. Now we turn to the last part of the story and see on relief 
no. 128 the Bodhisattva Mai trey a, also correctly identified by the 
stupa in his headdress. Among the numerous listeners sitting on both 
sides even naga’s and a garuda are present, but there is no one who is given 
such a prominent position as to be meant for Sudhana. Perhaps for the 
sake of the design in this final scene, it was decided to concentrate all 
attention on the being who is here considered to be expounding the 
Highest Wisdom and .keep the comparatively less important seeker after 
that wisdom out of the limelight. Another reason for so doing may be 
the idea of throwing all the light on Maitreya, in order to make a fine 
transition to the following gallery that is devoted to this Bodhisattva 
Where, up to the very last, the seeker after wisdom is everywhere given 
a chief place, I do not think it possible that this relief should drop 
out of the story and consider its meaning therefore to be: Maitreya at 
Samudrakatiha. If this is correct, then it will appear that the text, so 
far as it is represented on this gallery of the monument, is somewhat 
shorter than that of the summary, according to which at least two 
scenes ought to follow: i. e. Sudhana again with Mahjuyri and Sudhana 
with Samantabhadra. It is of course just as possible that the sculptor 
had a shorter text ending with Maitreya as that for some reason — perhaps 
the transition to the third gallery — he did not think it suitable to put in 
the final scenes. A third possibility, viz. that the same text was con­
tinued on the third gallery, will be discussed in the next chapter. 
Between the two reliefs just reviewed we must look for the striking 
scenes of the visit to Avalokitesvara and to Mahadeva. Indeed we find 
them and what is surprising, they are even twice represented. On relief 
no, 47, Sudhana is seated in front of Avalokitegvara, plainly recognisable 
by the Amitabha image in his headdress and by his usual red lotus; on
•«r 
<


--- Page 13 ---
relief no. 48 Sudhana sirs opposite a Qiva Mahadeva, also certainly 
identified by the Nandi under the throne; the back arms of the four- 
handed god hold his well known rosary and fly-whisk. Some fifty reliefs 
further on we see Avalokitegvara appear again on no. 100—102, always 
wearing the Amitabha-headdress and the red lotus, the latter combined 
with other attributes of this Bodhisattva. Then on no, 104 Mahadeva 
comes again, attended by Nandi, with rosary and fly-whisk, while Ms 
trident can be seen beside him as well. In neither of the two cases, either 
47—48 or 100—104, can there be any doubt about the identification. It 
remains for us to settle the question, apart from the explanation of 
this repetition of the visits to Avalokitegvara and Mahadeva, on which 
of these two places the episodes related in the text are represented.
For two reasons I think the choice must rest on the second series. 
Avalokite$vara of Potalaka is the lord of a far-famed and much-honoured 
sanctuary that is frequently mentioned in Buddhist literature. And all 
accounts agree that the god lived on a mountain in the forest, such as the 
miniatures reproduced by Foucher in his Iconographie bouddhique, shew 
us; they represent the god seated in a rock-temple surrounded by trees1).
Now relief no. 47 gives no sign of different surroundings, but we find on 
no. 100 the Bodhisattva in the midst of the traditional mountain scenery; 
the usual rocks in outline and, above, the trees with various wild creatures 
here and there. The second reason is that whereas the text makes Sudha- 
na visit an ordinary human being between his visits to the divine 
Avalokitepvara and Mahadeva, on no, 47 and 48 these two appear 
consecutively, while in the second series they are actually separated by 
relief no. 103, where Sudhana is conversing with another person. For 
these reasons I am of opinion that reliefs 100—102 should be identified 
as; Sudhana with Avalokitegvara of Potalaka; no. 104 as Sudhana with 
Mahadeva of Dvaravatl, and as the result of this, no. 103 in agreement 
with the text as; Sudhana with Ananyagamin of Pasatmandala,
Let us now go back for a few reliefs to no. 90 and find there too 
something reliable (i. e. as far as our data reach), as Sudhana is being 
taught wisdom by a bhiksunl, easily recognised by her shorn head and 
nun’s garment with the hem hanging over her right shoulder. Behind the 
pavilion in which this figure is seated, stands a second bhiksuni and there
') See 1.1. I (1900) p. 109, 178, 203, 212; to the literature quoted in the first place, may 
now be added Waddell, Lhasa (1905} p. 304 and 388 and the article Avalokite$vara by De la 
VallSe Poussin in the Encycl. of Religion and Ethics II (1909) p, 259. This last looks for the 
sanctuary East of the Malay Mountains, while Foucher places it in the Western Ghats. 
Beal’s opinion that it may have been in Ceylon (see for inst. Buddhism in China, 1884 p.
120— 123) has rightly found no adherents.
fffi 
THE GAIJDAVYtjHA 
^
\% >----^Jk /


--- Page 14 ---
f*( 
)f< 
THE GANDAVYUHA 
v C j
' are some women sitting who wear worldly dress. As there is only one 
bhiksuni scene to be found in the second half of the reliefs and the text 
in this part of the tals only mentions one bhiksuni, relief no. 90 must be 
Sudhana’s visit to the bhiksuni Simhavyasambhita of Kalingavana in 
£ronapasanta. It may not be going too far if we consider the small lions 
under her seat as an allusion to her name put in by the sculptor.
If the above is correct, then it follows of course that also relief 
no. 99 can be identified. Between the bhiksuni above mentioned and 
Avalokitegvara, in the text Sudhana visits two more persons, a man 
and a woman. Among all the intervening reliefs there is only one in which 
Sudhana is talking to a man and that is immediately preceding the 
Avalokitegvara relief. We must therefore conclude that no. 99 represents 
the visit of Sudhana to the ‘patriarch’ Vesfhila of Subhaparangama. 
Then, between the bhiksuni and Vesthila the arrival of Sudhana at 
Bhagavati Sumitra’s ought to be found. On three of the reliefs that must 
here be examined, we find Sudhana in conversation with a woman, no.
91, 92 and 95. The least suitable is no. 95 that is found in the middle of a 
part of the tale, of which the chief incidents do not appear in our review 
ol the text and where among other things an appearance of the Buddha 
and a stupa worship are to be seen.
Nos. 91 and 92 remain. Without placing too much value on the selec­
tion, I consider that no. 91 must shew the visit in question, not only 
because the conversation with Sumitra is then the very next in the text 
to that with the bhiksum, so that then the episode unknown to us would 
begin with 92 and end with 98, but also because the female figure on 91 
has a halo and the one on 92 has not, while a Bhagavati has a right to 
that attribute. I think therefore that relief no. 91 can be picked out as 
representing Sudhana’s visit to Bhagavati Sumitra of Ratnabhijjiha in 
Durga.
We will now turn to the part of the tale that comes between the appear­
ance of Mahadeva and that of Maitreya, between reliefs 104 and 128. 
After his departure from Daksinapatha, Sudhana, according to the sum­
mary of contents, goes to pay homage to eight Ratridevata’s who, as 
expressly stated, lived in different places, so that we must not expect to 
find the eight goddesses on one relief but probably may see a row of eight 
different visits. The reliefs do not disappoint us this time. On eight 
consecutive scenes, no 105— 112, we find Sudhana conversing with a female 
figure. The sculptor, to avoid monotony, is obliged to bring some variety 
into the receptions; so we see the ladies in or in front of pavilions of 
different sorts and Sudhana is sometimes seated, sometimes standing;


--- Page 15 ---
f ( f ) | 
(fiT
THE GANDAVY UHA 
M TF^
and besides, the attendants of both chief persons are varied a little. But 
the lady is always seated and placed higher than Sudhana, who is every­
where respectful in liis attitude and in the scenes where he is seated, does 
her homage with a sent bah, except once where he is holding something 
in his hand. Nowhere is there any sign of equality in the interview, such 
as we find in several other scenes; it is plain that these are no ordinary 
women but beings of a higher sort and as the text tells us, goddesses. 
Reliefs no. 105—112 are to be entitled: visits of Sudhana to the eight 
Ratridevata’s in Magadha.
The following visit according to the text is also to a woman; the three 
next reliefs are therefore not eligible, for they shew respectively, a fight 
next to a seated Buddha, the arrival at a building and a conversation 
with a man. On no. 116 and 117 we find again women who are instructing 
Sudhana and on the authority of the text these might be entitled: no, 116 
Sudhana with Gopa, and no. 117, Sudhana with Maya. But as no. 117 
represents two women seated in a pavilion, it is very probable that this
relief gives Sudliana’s visit to Buddha’s wife and mother together.- in
the text-summary it is not plainly shewn whether these two received 
Sudhana alone or together — in which case no. 116 would belong to the 
piece of text that is unknown to us from 113—115. The reliefs give no 
further indication of who these ladies are; but as the words in the sum­
mary: "they recommended” etc. seem to allude to a joint advice-giving,
I shall for the present keep to the latter supposition and call no. 117 visit 
of Sudhana to Gopa and Maya, the wife and mother of Buddha.
From here the hero moves on to Surendrabha, also a woman, so that 
reliefs no, 118 and 119, both conversations with men, can be passed over. 
Beginning with no. 120 the text and reliefs seem to be quite in agreement 
again. No. 120, where Sudhana is talking to a woman, will then be his 
visit to Surendrabha, "in the house of Indra” the summary says, without 
telling us if the god Indra or someone else is meant. The expression 
“house” makes us think it will not be the god and the relief shews 
nothing that indicates heaven.
After receiving instruction from three more men, Sudhana comes to 
the brahman Siviratra. Quite in agreement with this, the reliefs first give 
three scenes of conversation with a man and then one with a brahman, 
depicted in the usual way and at once recognisable as such. On the 
authority of the text these reliefs can be entitled as follows: no. 121 visit 
of Sudhana to Yipvamitra of Kapilavastu; no. 122, to the “patriarch” 
Surendra; no. 123, to the goldsmith Muktasara of Varukuccha — un­
fortunately the relief gives nothing to shew he is a goldsmith — and no.
/SS ■ Gix


--- Page 16 ---
■ GCW\
/ A ^ —n\ \
124 to the brahman Siviratra of Dharmagrama. The next relief too is 
easily identified. Sudhana here comes to a double pavilion in which two 
evidently quite young persons, male and female, are sitting. These are 
certainly the youth £rlsambhava and the girl £rimat! of Sumukha, 
mentioned in the text between the brahman and Maitreya. No more 
conversations appear, but the two reliefs no. 126 and 127 shew the 
worshipping of a building, the first very distinctly by one chief person, 
in this instance Sudhana; in the second it is more a group of people. The 
latter building has its roof decorated with Maitreya’s emblem, the stupa, 
thereby connecting itself with the last relief of this series no. 128, on 
which we have already seen that Bodhisattva being worshipped. It will I 
suppose represent the sanctuary wherein the events of no. 128 are to 
take place, so that no. 127 can be entitled: arrival at Samudrakatlha.
If we now sum up the results achieved, we see that with more or less 
certainty, reliefs 90—128, so far as we can learn from the summary of the 
contents, represent the second half of the text in the following manner:
90. Sudhana visits the bhiksuni Simhavyasambhita, of Kalinga- 
vana at (pronapasanta.
91. he visits Bhagavati Sumitra of Ratnabhijjiha at Durga.
99. the patriarch Vesthila of Subhaparangama.
100—102. Avalokite5vara of Potalaka.
103. Ananyagamin of Pasatmandala.
104. Mahadeva of DvaravatL
105—112, the eight Ratridevata’s of Magadha.
117. Gopa and Maya, wife and mother of Buddha.
120. Surendrabha in the house of Indra.
121. Vi5vamitra of Kapilavastu.
122. the patriarch Sprendra.
123. the goldsmith Muktasara of Varukuccha.
124. the brahman Siviratra of Dharmagrama,
125. the boy Qnsambhava and the girl £rimati of Sumukha.
127. his arrival at .Samudrakatlha.
128. there he receives instruction from Maitreya.
Before going back to the first part of the tale let us for a moment 
consider the fact we discovered that one of the chief episodes in the text, 
the visit to Avalokite^vara, followed by that to Mahadeva, is represented 
twice. This in my opinion, makes it very probable that the Gandavyuha 
text Haraprasdd Qdstri made an abstract of, must have differed from 
that used by the sculptor; because when slight differences might be
(t(W) 1 
. 
(fix
\ v \ f g f 
THE GANDAVYUHA 
O X J
.■tn’Ap/


--- Page 17 ---
(! 
vCT
, W
^ | f e 7 T 
THE GANDAVYUHA
Ns'\^W? . ■eX^^y'
ascribed to the carelessness of the writer of the summary, this should 
not be done too easily in the case of important and conspicuous incidents 
such as the visit to the Bodhisattva Avalokitegvara and the god Maha- 
deva certainly are. Therefore if we accept the text followed on the monu­
ment to have been a different one to the one known to us, then on the 
other hand it, is remarkable how very much the episode inserted in the 
more extensive text, resembles the one already found in the shorter 
version. It is surely not accidental that in both cases the visit to Mahadeva 
directly follows on that to Avalokitegvara, on the contrary, it looks as if 
we here have to do with a repetition, the counter part of an episode al­
ready given in the shorter text; it is certainly slightly altered (an ordi­
nary building put in place of the forest-scenery, and Ananyagamin 
omitted) but in its principal features the prototype of the new insertion 
is plainly to be recognised. If we here actually have a counterpart before 
us — which I think very probable — then we might inquire if this may 
spread further than the very striking scenes just mentioned. Relief no. 
104 with the Mahadeva of Dvaravatl is followed by eight reliefs on 
which Sudhana is conversing with a woman, which we decided to recog­
nise as the visits to the Ratridevata’s; if we now notice that the Maha­
deva of no. 48 is followed by a series of five visits to women, then natu­
rally it is quite possible that reliefs no. 49 to 53 are a repetition of the 
Ratridevata-episodes, even if they have been reduced to five scenes. The 
same argument, could be applied to what precedes the Avalokitegvara 
reliefs; two reliefs before, we find, as seen above, on no. 98 a stfipa- 
worship and two reliefs before the Avalokitegvara on no. 47, a stupa- 
worship on no. 45 as well. Some variety is introduced by the patriarch on 
no. 99 not being replaced with the same kind of visit, but instead, on no. 
46 is a scene where Sudhana continues his journey, this time in a car­
riage. We shall see that the repetition probably begins a couple of reliefs 
earlier; for the present let us put reliefs no. 45 to 53 aside while we are 
examining the representation of the shorter text.
Next comes another group that can be dismissed for the present be­
cause what it represents, we see at the first glance is not given in our 
summary of the text. I mean the part beginning with relief no. 73. On 
this relief we see nine men, the first holding a lotus; they are preceded 
by two women, and not walking on the ground but on the usual style of 
outlined clouds. No. 74 shews a lotus pond with five lotuses growing out 
of it; on the largest in the centre, a Buddha is seated, on the four others 
persons in full dress, probably Bodhisattva’s. On no. 75 the same Buddha 
sits in the same way on a lotus cushion rising out of a pond, being worship-


--- Page 18 ---
THE GANDAVYUHA 
' j l j
ped by an eminent man with several women, and worship by women 
is also the subject of no. 76, where the Buddha is standing and the pond 
has not yet been carved on the smooth stones evidently meant for it, at 
the bottom. A very similar adoration of a standing Buddha by women 
appears again on no. 78; the intervening no. 77 as well as no. 79 and80, 
shews a woman with a halo and large retinue, as we may suppose a 
goddess or Tara, in converse with a man, probably Sudhana. On no. 81 
once more a Buddha worship; he is sitting again in the middle and the other 
figures are all men, on the left most likely Sudhana with attendants, on 
the right some bhiksu’s. We find that this part too, no. 73—81, is not 
included in the text known to us.
Seeing that we have found the beginning of Sudhana’s journeys in 
relief no. 16, it seems to follow that we must look for the representation 
of the first part of the Sudhana story in the three groups of reliefs 17—44, 
52—72, and 82—89. It is theoretically of course equally possible that we 
may encounter the visits we know of all consecutively, as divided in 
these three groups and interrupted by other episodes.
If we start our search believing both reviews of the contents to be 
correct, that is to say relying on the qualifications given in the shorter 
summary of what are only names in the longer one, then I may as well 
state at once that no agreement is to be found, in the course of the tale in 
the text constructed in this manner, with what is represented on the 
reliefs. In order to demonstrate this we must of course keep to those 
figures mentioned in the text whose identity is beyond dispute, for in­
stance bhiksu's and bhiksuni’s, brahmans, rsi’s etc. We then find, ap­
pearing as such in the text, consecutively: a bhiksu (Supratisthita), then 
after an interval of two (or three) others, a bhiksuru (A$a), another 
bhik?upl, a rsi (Bhlsmottarasanghesa), a brahman (Jayasinayatana) and 
with a woman between, again a bhiksu (Sudar?ana). Now we see that 
on the reliefs these persons do not appear in the same sequence, neither 
immediately after each other, nor with intervening other kind of scenes. 
The text the sculptor used has here not been the same as that of Rdjen- 
draldla Mitra; portions must have been left out or altered besides what 
was added, and if this is established it remains an extremely uncertain 
and thankless task, seeing the fev^ indications afforded by the reliefs 
themselves about the nature of the persons there represented, to attempt 
any ident ification of what may be left on the reliefs of the text known tons.
To begin with the bhiksui.it There is only one relief (except no, 90 
above identified) that represents such a person, and that is no. 43. Even 
here it might be doubtful, for the relief is much damaged and the front
✓£<5  gk&X


--- Page 19 ---
(fiT
THE GANDAVYUHA 
J
of the figure in question has been knocked off, so that all we see clearly is 
only that this person wore a clerical dress; though the sex may not be very 
distinct in the photograph, on the monument I think it is quite plain. This 
is actually proved too by the persons sitting behind as attendants, two 
in ecclesiastic and one in worldly dress. One of the first shews nothing but 
a head, but the two other figures are undoubtedly female. As they would 
be entirely out of place as attendants on a bhiksu, the chief person must 
be a bhiksurn. In the text a bhiksuni is mentioned by name, Aga 
of Samudravelati, after whom according to the shorter summary a 
second bhiksuni comes in to be replaced by a rsi etc. (see above), then 
one bhiksu more appears in the story. On. the reliefs it is quite otherwise; 
the bhiksuni we have seen, is on relief no, 43 and is followed by a scene 
with an ordinary man and then comes the above-mentioned stupa-wor­
ship and the Avalokiteqvara-Mahadeva-reliefs; there is no sign of a rsi 
or a brahman in this part and as for a bhiksu who ought then to follow, 
such a person appears for the last as an individual figure (i.e. not as 
subordinate person in a worship episode) on no, 26. If no. 43 is meant 
really for Aga, then she is in quite another place than where she belongs 
in the text and the second bhiksuni is missing altogether, for when 
the sculptor so conscientiously depicts each interview on a. separate 
relief (think of the eight Ratridevata’s), we cannot suppose that the 
bhiksuni following Aga, not mentioned by name, would be pushed into 
one of the two figures sitting behind Aga on relief no. 43. Therefore 
either Sndhana’s interview with Aga is quite in the wrong place or else 
no. 43 does not represent Aga at all. In the latter case, seeing there is no 
other bhiksunl-relief, Aga may have been left out of the story altogether 
or she may be here not as nun but like an ordinary woman. How then are 
we to account for no. 43 if it does not represent Aga ? The nearness of no.
45 and following group of reliefs, recognised as repetitions here above, 
rouses a suspicion that perhaps no. 43 may belong to the same episode 
repeated with variations and is nothing more than the counterpart of the 
bhiksuni on relief no. 90. If this is actually so — which we can in no way 
prove or shall attempt to — then naturally no. 44, Sudhana’s interview 
with a man, must be part of this episode that would begin with no. 42, 
Sudhana continuing his travels now in a palanquin.
Just as stated about the bhiksuni relief, that because there is but one 
of the kind, it either does not represent the Aga mentioned in the text, or 
that it has been put into another place than it belonged to according to 
the text, exactly the same is the case of the relief with the brahman. In 
this part of the text only one brahman appears and that is Jayasinaya-
v-'". >’>•! :.v : ."■ ■■;. 
:• ^' ’.: -; ■■1 
' 
■'.■■■'•. 
»


--- Page 20 ---
THE GANDAVYUHA 
' j l j
tana; there is only one relief (except the already identified no. 124) that 
shews a brahman, viz. no. 70. Brahmans are everywhere so distinctly 
depicted and in a way that belongs only to them, that mistake is impos­
sible. According to the text, the conversation with the brahman is pre­
ceded by one with a rsi and before that with a bhiksiini, while after the 
brahman, a woman and then a bhiksu must follow. The relief we are 
discussing is no. 70; the bluk§unl is separated from this by 26 scenes, 
no bhiksu appears at all after this and no rsi is to be found in the vicinity. 
Here too our only conchision can be: either relief no. 70 gives the inter­
view between Sudhana and Jayasinayatana and it stands in quite a 
different place, with quite different neighbours than the text we have 
suggests, or it represents something else for which the text has no 
explanation. In neither case do we gain anything for the comparison of 
the Gaiidavyuha-text with the reliefs.
Both the cases shew us how little certainty is to be had in comparing 
text and reliefs. While I shall endeavour in the following argument to 
explain the course of the story on the monument by the summaries of 
contents, I do so without any intention of offering the result as facts 
that are proved, but only to suggest some possibility of explanation, a possi­
bility that will have to be compared with the text itself if the version 
in question exists, or ever comes to light.
We begin our further investigation at the last relief with bhiksu’s. The 
last person, who according to the text was a bhiksu, is Sudargana of 
Trinanjana; and the last relief on which a bhiksu plays a chief part is, we 
found, no. 26. We must therefore again, in accordance with the above 
reasoning, if the sequence of the text is not entirely broken, accept this 
relief no. 26 to be the visit to Sudargana. But whereas in the two cases 
already discussed their position proved that if the bhiksunl or brahman- 
relief depicted the persons indicated by the text, the sequence of the text 
would have to be altered, the case of no. 26 is not so difficult. Let us 
glance at the preceding reliefs. On no. 25 Sudhana stands before a woman 
and according to the text before his visit to Sudargana he went to Mai- 
trSyani, the daughter of Simhaketu at Simhavijrimbhita. The brahman 
should appear before MaitrayanI, but as we have seen he was not there, 
he must have disappeared or been moved to no. 70. Yet the person pre­
ceding him, the rsi Bhismottarasanghesa of Nalapura, is here just in the 
place where we should expect to find him. On relief no. 24, seated on a 
rock among some trees in front of Sudhana, also seated, is a person who 
in my opinions must certainly be a rsi. His beard and moustache, but 
only that, are somewhat like a brahman. As for his clothing it is nothing
r


--- Page 21 ---
THE GANDAVYUHA
.
more than a loincloth, while a brahman is always decently dressed and 
can be recognised by the never-failing upavlta, which the person on 
this relief is not wearing. The hair-dressing too is quite different, not 
at all like the elaborate coiffure of the brahman on no. 70 and no. 124, 
first brushed back smoothly and then twisted into a knot at the back of 
the head, but this is a big mass of hair on top of the head fastened round 
with a band, while loose locks hang out from it on all sides. This can be 
nothing else but a rsi and I shall not hesitate to identify no. 24 as Su- 
dhana’s visit to Rhismottarasanghega.
One relief further back, we find on no. 23 again Sudhana conversing 
with a lady. According to the text, here we ought to find the two bhik- 
suni’s, Aga and the nameless one already mentioned above. The chief 
figure on no. 23 is certainly not a bhiksunx; should we call her Aga, then 
it must be understood that she is not depicted as bhiksuni but merely as 
the wife of Suprabha of Sarnudravelati. The question of course cannot be 
decided. But it is surely remarkable that the six reliefs before this 
woman appears, correspond in number and description to those persons 
whose qualifications have been given. Going back, according to the 
text we must expect to find : I. Saradhvaja, 2. The gresthin, omitted by 
Haraprasad (Astrf and mentioned only by Rajendralala Mitra, 3. the 
Dravida Megha, 4. the bhiksu Supratisthita, 5. Sagaramegha, and 6. 
Meghagrl. Indeed on the monument we find between the last-mentioned 
relief no. 23 and the identified Manjugii-relief no. 16. just exactly six 
reliefs too, on the second of which the chief figure is wearing worldly 
dress and may very well be a cresthin, while the fourth is actually a bhiksu. 
Then we see that no. 1,5 and 6 (still going back) as well represent bhiksu’s 
which is not contradicted by the textsummary, though it is not clear why 
the writer of the shorter summary mentions their qualification only in the 
case of Supratisthita. There seems to be only one objection to reckoning 
these six reliefs in the same sequence as the text, and examined closely, it is 
only a slight one. On relief no. 19 it looks as if the person doing homage to 
the bhiksu is a woman and in that case it can not represent the conversation 
in the text of the bhiksu with Sudhana. However I am convinced that the 
shadows in the photograph are deceptive, for not only the headdress of 
the figure in question is masculine in fashion but the male attendants shew 
that this is a man, and therefore Sudhana, In my opinion there is nothing 
to prevent these six reliefs being entitled thus: no. 17 visit of Sudhana to 
Meghagrl on Mt. Sugriva in Ramavarta; no. 18 to Sagaramegha of Saga- 
ramukha ; no. 19 to the bhiksu Supratisthita of Sagara; no. 20 to Megha 
of Yajapura; no. 21 to the cresthin; no. 22 to Saradhvaja of Milanapura.
Barabu<Jur II 
2


--- Page 22 ---
({(■ W)% 
(ct
THE GANDAVYUHA
We will now return to our startingpoint, the Sudan;ana-relief no. 26. 
and fix our attention on the scenes that follow it. Sudhana in the text 
goes first to the youth Indriye^vara and now we see him sitting on no. 
27 in front of a man, who we notice at once has the crescent behind 
his head. This attribute we find so often given to youthful figures, and is 
here so very appropriate, that no. 27 can safely be considered to represent 
Sudhana’s visit to Indriye^vara of Sumukha in the land of Qramana 
Mandala.
No. 28 gives us the peculiar difficulty that our two reviews of the text 
contradict each other and we cannot be sure whether, as noticed above, 
we might expect an upasaka Prabhuta or a “mm” Prabhuta. First some­
thing about the word "nun’'. A bhiksuni cannot be meant, for a bhiksuni 
is called by RajendralAla Mitra "female mendicant”, but evidently an 
upasika is intended, to judge by the title of the male Prabhuta; this 
supposition is strengthened by the fact that as we saw, Haraprasad 
Qdstri’s "upasika AchalasthirA” is the same person as Mitra’s “Chhala, 
a nun”. In this case the last word is surely wrong, for this lady is not a 
regular nun but a follower of Buddha who has remained in the world, 
here best expressed by lay-sister or something similar. This is icono- 
graphically important, because a real nun can of course be recognised 
by her dress, while a lay-sister wears the ordinary woman’s costume. In 
the case of Prabhuta, it will mean that we must find here not a 
bhiksu or bhiksuni, no monk or nun, but an ordinary man or woman. If 
the female title in the text is correct, then relief no. 28 where Sudhana is 
conversing with a person in ordinary female dress, can be identified as his 
visit to the lay-sister Prabhuta of Samudraprasthana. If the text speaks 
of a man, then we can make no further use of no. 28 and must accept 
that it represents something that does not appear in our reviews of the 
text. We shall discover further on that in connection with the reliefs 
following, the first idea is the most probable.
The next reliefs no. 29—37 must first be examined together. Three of 
them, in comparing the text, must be passed over. First no. 34 that 
only represents Sudhana journeying, this time on foot. Then the two 
reliefs 31 and 32. On the first two men in full dress, each with a halo and 
umbrella above the head, and holding each other by the hand, are 
coming towards a building, where four women are sitting together. On the 
second we see a Buddha standing, with three persons standing on one side 
of him and several kneeling on the other. These two reliefs on being com­
pared with the text, apparently represent some episode not there men­
tioned. There are six reliefs left, on each of which Sudhana is conversing
■ Goix


--- Page 23 ---
with a man. On consulting the text we find that in this part, he visits five 
male persons. Two things are possible: either relief no. 28 is rightly 
assigned to Prabhuta, in which case one of the six following reliefs for 
which we have only five persons must remain unexplained, or Prabhuta is 
a man and then we find him with the five others on these six reliefs, 
but have to leave no. 28, the woman figure, unaccounted for. In case 
the sequence of the text has actually been followed in these reliefs, we 
can find some indication to guide our choice between the two possibilities. 
The two last persons visited by Sudhana in the text, are kings and we 
may hope that they are depicted with some signs of royalty about them, 
no t like ordinary mortals, There is not much difference, but there are two 
consecutive reliefs that shew something like a king. No. 35 because in 
front of the pavilion where the conversation is taking place, an armed 
guard is sitting and no. 36 not only because the building is decorated, with 
cakra emblems, but also because of the female attendants in such numbers 
as becomes a monarch. If we judge by these signs then it follows that if 
no, 35 and 36 give us kings, no. 37 is the relief that mu^! ‘remain un­
explained. The five others would be, always of course taking the se­
quence of the text-summary: 29, visit of Sudhana to the‘'"patriarch”
V id van of Mahasambhava; 30 to the banker Ratnacuda of Simhapoti;
33 the perfume distiller Samantanetra of Samantamukha in Mulaka; 35 
king Nala of Naladhvaja; 36 king Mahaprabha of Suprabha. In this way 
we see there is no chance of leaving the first number open to a male 
Prabhuta and the probability of no. 28 being a female Prabhuta gains 
ground.
On relief no, 38 we now find Sudhana again in conversation with a 
woman, who may quite well be the lay-sister Acaiasthira now following 
in the text. And then comes no. 39 with a picture that may give some­
thing more definite and shews that the tale followed on the monu­
ment evidently does not differ so entirely from what is known to us from 
the reviews of the text. The next person visited in the text is Sarvagrama 
of whom the short summary gives the important definition "itinerant 
hermit (Parivrajaka)”. It will not be a mere chance that relief no. 39 
gives just such a person. The scene is a forest with the usual rocks, birds 
and other animals. The right hand side is taken up by Sudhana with 
attendants and in front of him sits a person who though rather dam­
aged, still shews distinct signs of his quality. He is something between a 
brahman and an ordinary hermit and reminds us as well of his modern 
successors the fakir’s who are also to be seen wandering about with long 
beards and a huge mass of hair tied up on top of their heads. His water-
1(f): 
<SL
THE GANDAVYUHA 
1 9


--- Page 24 ---
' G%X 
i ‘ 
'
s'-----'vs%\ 
.
l ( Z ) i , 
. 
(at
\ V
S W
 
THE GAHDAVYUHA 
U
U
jug and staff are beside him and behind in a cleft in the rock sits a pupil 
or follower with his hair done up in the same fashion and a rosary in the 
hand. I think we can recognise this relief, entirely in accordance with the 
text, as Sudhana’s visit to the parivrajaka Sarvagramin of Tosala in 
Amitatosala1). On no. 40 Sudhana is sitting next to an ordinary man 
who according to our review of the text must be Utphalabhuti of 
Prithurastra. This relief has suffered badly, but the figures have re­
mained distinct.
The first part of relief no. 41 is taken up by a ship, perhaps the vessel 
used for part of Sudhana’s further travels. To the left of this we see a 
small plain building, the upper part of which forms a seat for two persons 
in conversation while the lower part is divided into two parts, in each of 
which three persons are sitting; judging by the style of the whole 
building, it is underground. There is no ornementation in the under­
ground part and very little in the upperstorey. The two men conversing 
are seated, one, apparently Sudhana, on the ground and the other only on 
a mat; there is nothing like a seat. Therefore I think, although the 
otherwise not richly-dressed man wears a tiara, we have reason 
enough to call a person in such a dwelling the slave Paisa. As for the six 
men under the floor, they may have been placed there for want of space 
and are the attendants of the two chief figures, but the entire absence of 
decoration is still unusual and perhaps these apartments are meant to 
shew where the slaves are housed. Whatever surmises we may indulge in 
about what the text says nothing of, the persons seated on the upper floor 
can certainly be considered as Sudhana with the slave Paisa of Kulagara.
After the intervening travelling relief no. 42, we then come to no. 43, 
the above discussed bhiksuni who may be A<;a moved out of her place, or 
it may be the beginning of the repetition. At any rate the regular course 
of the text-summary known to us is here interrupted. Up to this we have 
been able, with reservations, to point out the following:
16. Sudhana with Manju^rf and the bhiksu’s at Maladhvajavyuha.
17. with Meghapri on the Sugriva at Ramavarta.
18. Sagaramegha of Sagaramukha.
19. the bhik§u Supratisthita of Sagara.
20. Megha of Vajapura.
21. the pres thin.
22. Saradhvaja of Milanapura.
23. (A pa, not being a bhiksuni?).
*) For the reading of the names otherwise than is given in the review, see Journ. Asiat.
1923 II, p. 7.


--- Page 25 ---
J
THE GANDAVYUHA 
21
24. the rsi Bhismottarasanghe^a of Nalapura.
25. MaitrayanI, daughter of Simhaketu of Simhavijrimbhita.
26. the bhiksu Sudar$ana of Trinanjana.
27. the youth Indriye^vara of Sumukha in £ramana Mandala.
28. the upasika Prabhiita of Samudraprasthana.
29. the patriarch Vidvan of Mahasambhava.
30. the banker Ratnacuda of Simhapoti.
33. the perfume-distiller Samantanetra of Samantamukha in Mulaka.
35. king Nala of Naladhvaja.
36. king Mahaprabha of Suprabha.
38. the upasika Acalasthira.
39. the parivrajaka Sarvagramin of Tosalain Amitatosala.
40. Utphalabhfiti of Prithurastra.
41. the slave Paisa of Kulagara.
In addition it may be the following are in a different place:
43. Sudhana with the bhiksuni Afa, wife of Suprabha of SamudravelatL 
70. with the brahman Jayasinayatana in I?asa.
All the same there is still one of Sudhana’s conversations that has not 
been identified. I mean that which in the text follows immediately on 
the visit to Paisa, the conversation with the banker Jayottama, that 
could not be found directly after the Paisa visit. As we noticed, no. 42 
gives a journey, 43 another bhiksuni, thus it would not be impossible 
that no. 44 represents the visit to Jayottama. There is a second possi­
bility. In the text Jayottama is followed by the bhiksuni Simhavyasam- 
bhita whom we identified with relief no. 90 and as no. 89 is a visit to a 
man, no. 89 might very well be the Jayottama one. Possibly the money- 
pot decorations on the roof of the pavilion are an indication that way. 
Theoretically we might look for this banker in other places between no. 
41 and no. 90; it does not seem very likely that just this one relief should 
have slipped away so far from the first or perhaps from the second part of 
our tale, so that I prefer to select no. 44 or preferable no. 89 as Sudhana’s 
visit to the banker Jayottama of Nanuhara. In short I think we can 
sum up the result achieved by judging the first part of Sudhana's 
wanderings from Manj u^rl to Paisa the slave inclusive, to be found in 
reliefs no. 16—41 and the second part from Jayottama to Maitreya in 
reliefs 89—128, leaving undecided whether no. 43 and 70 contain 
anything more of the text.
I must again emphasize my statement that I certainly do not consider 
my examination entirely successful, especially in the first part, where it is


--- Page 26 ---
plain that alterations have been made without our being able to judge 
of their extent. It will be understood that I have not achieved this 
explanation without first searching for others or examining, if for ins­
tance in reliefs 53—73, the large piece between the so-called repetition 
and the Buddha-episode, something more from the text could be found.
It is of little use to describe my useless experiments and explain the 
failure of certain reliefs to correspond with some episode in the text. To 
give one instance: the very plainly dressed person sitting on the ground 
in no. 55 might be the slave Paisa, but the surrounding reliefs are entire­
ly different to the visits described in the text before and after Paisa. In 
the same way the surroundings destroy the possibility of the figure sit­
ting in a crevice of the rock on no. 86 being Sarvagramin, even if we see 
no objection to bis being rather fashionably dressed for a parivrajaka.
In short, tiie only view with which text and reliefs agree taliter qualiter, 
is that given above.
The reliefs preceding the Manj ugr!-scene no. 16 must not be forgotten. 
Nos. 1—13 have all much the same character which will be discussed 
later, but I now give them in short as: a Buddha preaching to a mixed 
audience; only on no. 2 the Buddha is not present but the audience is 
there, so that perhaps we might believe the Great Being has made himself 
invisible; all those present are sitting in a most devout attitude. After 
these twelve preaching scenes, on no. 14 comes the worship of a Bodhi- 
sattva who can be recognised by the branch with three round buds at 
the top of it, the same figure to whom nearly the whole of the chief wall 
on the fourth gallery is devoted and who I think can be identified as Sa~ 
mantabhadra 1). No. 15 is in quite a different style, here we see a Buddha 
sitting on a lotus-cushion that rests on a stem and around him twelve 
persons in royal robes seated on similar cushions; they have haloes 
round their heads, evidently they are Bodhisattva's though without the 
usual emblems that distinguish them.
Although Samantabhadra would be quite appropriate at the begin­
ning of the Gandavyuha where our review of the text distinctly men­
tions his presence, yet no. 15 is not to be accounted for. What we should 
expect, in accordance with the scene where Marvjugrl appears, is some 
explanation of the way in which the Bodhisattva Ragmiprabha adorns 
the heaven with clouds, from which heavenly flowers and perfumes are 
falling. Clouds, it is true are to be found on most of the preceding reliefs, 
with heavenly beings rejoicing over the Buddha’s preaching and we 
see flowers here and there used to fill in the open space above the pav-
*) See further in Chapt. VIII.
i l l 
. 
<SL
THE GANDAVYUHA


--- Page 27 ---
( in f f n l 
_ 
( q t
V-V ® / • / 
THE GANDAVYUHA 
^ . 1 ,
•*-/ 
' 
B> m
ilion in which the Buddha is seated. But homage to the Buddha with 
flowers we see so often being paid by heavenly beings that we wonder 
if this really refers to some actual episode in the text and whether this is 
not more likely some stereotyped style of decoration that belongs to 
preaching scenes. The only relief where the flowers may mean something 
more is no. 12; there they are falling as well at the side of the building 
where the Buddha is seated. But the perfumes are here omitted, nor do 
we see any special Bodhisattva brought to the front, and like on the other 
reliefs there is no indication of the building being about to expand into 
limitless space such as the text speaks of — it would be going too far to 
consider the secondary building on no. 11 as anything of that sort — any 
more than the decoration of precious stones. In fact possible clues to 
coincidence in the beginning of the text with reliefs 1 to 14 are very 
vague and unreliable and relief no. 15 is entir ely unlike what the text tells 
us. We might think for instance that the presence of a garuda and naga's 
on no. 11 has possibly some connection with the appearance of these 
creatures on no. 128, but neither at the beginning nor at the end of the 
textsummary are these figures mentioned, therefore we can have no 
idea of their meaning in the story.
What is more, the text gives us nothing to account for the fact that no 
less than twelve scenes are needed for what we may call the prologue to the 
Gandavyuha, before the tale of Sudhana's travels begins, all shewing 
the Buddha with his audience. Added to this, the lack of all distinct indi- 
cation for some of the facts mentioned by the text and the entire diver­
gence of no. 15, brings us to the conclusion that either the prologue of 
the Gandavyuha on the monument is quite a different one and more 
elaborate than that in our review of the text or that perhaps the prologue 
is not represented at all and reliefs 1—15 are intended for something else.
In my opinion the first conclusion is the most acceptable, at any rate 
until anything better appears; the same as with the Lalitavistara on 
the first gallery, we here have on the second a connected text which we 
can identify. Only at the beginning our version of the text is a 
different one to that the sculptors worked by. Still the question on the 
other side arises: what may these first reliefs represent in case they must 
not be ascribed to the prologue of the Gapdavyuha? It is not difficult to 
find an answer to this question, though there is no guarantee for it being 
the right one. When selecting the sacred writings to be depicted on the 
monument, we can easily understand that the first choice would be 
those in the style of a story, being the most suitable for representation 
in scenes. But there would be others equally sacred and worthy to be
»


--- Page 28 ---
\ \ m j - r ' 
THE GANDAVYUHA 
^
 I ,
' * 
k^/JL_J
honoured, although contemplative or metaphysical in character. In what 
way could such a text, for instance, as the famous Astasahasrika-Pra- 
jnaparamita be depicted? It relates how on a certain day the Buddha 
with a great number of followers sat on the Vulture-peak, where a discourse 
took place on more or less profound subjects; abstruse questions were 
asked and the answers given. To shew these questions and replies on a 
relief was of course impossible, so that to give an image of such a text 
could only be done by shewing the persons taking part in the discussion 
and in that way reminding the spectator of the subjects there dealt with. 
The same applies to several texts all beginning in the same manner; if 
they were to be represented, it could only be done in the same way as on 
reliefs 1—13.1) Let me say again that I am not trying in this way to make 
it seem probable that in cases where the sanctity of the text demanded 
representation it was really done in this way, in spite of its abstruse char­
acter, but such a way of treatment was possible and is quite worthy of 
consideration. Yet as above stated, considering everything, I prefer to 
regard these reliefs as belonging to the Gandavyuha-series.
We have now reviewed the whole chief-wall of the second gallery. The 
result we may sum up as follows: Reliefs 1—15 give the prologue to the 
Gandavyuha according to a version of the text not known to us. Reliefs 
16—41 (or 44) follow the first part of Sudhana’s adventures a.nd the 
second part of them is found on reliefs 89 (or 90)— 128. Between the 
two parts a third piece unknown to us is inserted, that begins with a 
repetition of a series of episodes from the second part (to 53) and that 
contains a Buddha episode (73—81). The incidents given in our text after 
the visit to Maitreya are not found on this gallery.
The reliefs not discussed here above, those between 54 and 89, are 
mostly of the same kind as those identified; visits of Sudhana to various 
persons. We can naturally conclude that there he is still pursuing his 
search after the Highest Wisdom. I will just call attention to three re­
liefs in this group because they shew some noticeable peculiarities that 
differ from the rest, and when the time comes, will surely assist their 
identification with some text version now inattainable.
First no. 57. Sudhana is evidently sitting in a park conversing with a 
lady behind whom are placed some large pots with jewels in them; next 
to these sits an armed guard with sword drawn and on the back of the 
lady's chair is a kinnari. These jewels and the kinnarl who is the sign of
') In connection with this we might remember the Mahasamayasutra, mentioned by Fou- 
cher, Lettre d'Ajanta, Journ. Asiat. 11:14 (1921) p. 227 with regard to such kind of scenes 
there represented.
 Gt&X


--- Page 29 ---
heaven, makes this look like the goddess Vara who according toMitra’s 
summary of contents shewed Sudhana costly jewels (p. 5). Then no. 61 
gives no conversation, but on the right hand is a man seated in a pav­
ilion, and on the left an elephant with four sleeping guards; in the air 
are two hovering angels. Finally no. 68 is remarkable. Here we see a 
building inside a palissade; a man and woman are sitting inside it, with 
two attendants on the outside. In the air is a goddess evidently flying to­
wards the couple in the building; this person is not like many other of 
the heavenly beings, only put in as decoration, but evidently takes part 
in the story. Outside the palissade are two more guards, asleep at the gate.
We will now go on to the description of the individual reliefs in this 
gallery.
1. Buddha with his hearers
The Buddha is seated on a lotus-cushion with his left hand on his 
knee and the right raised in vitarka-mudra. The cushion is placed on a 
throne with small lions standing under it and a cloth hanging down in verti­
cal folds. The back of the seat has on each side the well-known ornement, 
consisting of a half elephant, a rampant lion and a makara-head. The whole 
is framed in a building with a storied roof and comer pinnacles and 
crowned by a cushion-shaped top. The Buddha is seated in what looks like 
a large niche, arched at the top and covered with a kalamakara-ornement.
The audience is placed on both sides in three groups one above the 
other. The lowest kneeling on the ground are all in worldly dress; on the 
right four men, the front one in ceremonial costume with hands folded 
in sembah holding a flower; on the left three women. Both top rows are 
heavenly beings on clouds; on the right, two of them female, the rest all 
men. Several carry the usual tokens of homage; it is noticeable that two 
are playing the vlna and that there are a couple of monochord instruments.
2. The audience {of an invisible Buddha ?)
I have already suggested the possibility that these evidently devout 
persons are listening to the Buddha who is present but by the power of 
Ms samadhi has become invisible, so as related in several tales, in 
which case we might remark that though his person disappears, his 
empty seat should have been depicted.
They sit in two rows, placed one above the other for want of space and 
perspective; they all turn towards the centre. Between the front ones 
in the upper row there is nothing, but below there is a vase of flowers
ks.fi 
lei
t h e g a n d a v y u h a 
i J i J


--- Page 30 ---
Iffy i 
. 
(cj
THE GANDAVYUHA 
O j L i
\j% . ——- ^ /
in the middle. They are all men; on the right in the middle, as well as 
above and below, some are bhiksn’s, the rest are laymen, of whom the 
eight in the top row are dressed like men of rank, not those in the bottom 
row, who wear lower tiara's, though this might be only for want of 
space. Several have a flower in the hand. A pendapa-roof covers the 
whole with a cornice decorated with trivia and pendant omements,
3. Buddha with his hearers
The relief has suffered badly and is weatherworn,, several of the faces 
have been knocked off and in the middle six blocks of stone are missing.
The Buddha sits on a lotuscushion that is laid on a. pedestal, in front of 
which hangs a straight cloth. The hands are in the pose of dhyana- 
mudra. The shape of the niche is a trefoil and the roof is decorated at the 
sides and top.with a stupa-ornement. Along the upper edge of the relief 
are clouds with garlands hanging from them.
1 he audience are again arranged in two rows, one above the other, 
all turning to the centre and all men in worldly-dress, several of them 
holding the usual tokens of homage, among wliich an incenseburner 
with fan. Those sitting below on the right, are the most important per** 
sons. Notice the looped style of headdress like that of ascetics worn 
by the men above on the right and by one below on the left.
4. Buddha with his hearers
fhe Buddha is still seated on his lotuscushion. In front of the cloth 
that hangs below it a burning incense-stand is placed, with a rosette 
carved on each side of it. The left hand rests on his knee, the right is 
held up in vitarka-mudra. The niche is a plain rectangular one with a 
wide vase used as decoration.
I be listeners are placed on both sides in two rows, a standing and a 
sitting one. The persons seated on the right are three bhiksu’s; those 
standing are all in full-dress. The front sitting ones on both sides, have 
perfume-vases in their hands. On either side at the top are two heavenly 
beings doing homage.
5. Buddha with his hearers
Fhe Buddha is sitting in the same attitude as on the last relief; the 
hanging cloth has three box-pleats folded in it and is ornemented with 
flowers. The niche is again rectangular with a vase-decoration on the 
roof. Along the top is a row of clouds with garlands hanging from them.
■ ex


--- Page 31 ---
No angels are present, the audience is seated in two rows, one above 
the other. Below (except those on the extreme right) they are all monks, 
above are laymen in full-dress as well as some in the fashion of atten­
dants wearing the looped headdress noticed above. In the bottom row 
we see bhiksu’s on the right and bhiksuni's on the left, the front ones 
hold respectively, a flower and an incense-burner. The persons in worldly 
dress are all men.
6. Buddha with his hearers
The Buddha again in the same attitude, the cloth hangs straight. The 
niche is now arched with kalamakara ornement, the roof is decorated 
with stupa’s.
The audience are again in rows, standing or sitting; below, men 
dressed in the style of people of rank; those standing on the right are 
bhiksu’s, on the left, women. At the top are clouds and four angels on 
each side.
7. Buddha with his hearers
Here the Buddha holds his hands in the dharmacakra-mudra; the 
cloth is omitted but the now-visible pedestal is omemented with 
squares. Tire niche is again an arch finished with makara’s, but the 
kala-head is missing; the roof has the same stupa decoration.
There is only one row of listeners, all seated; on the right men of rank, 
on the left, women, the two front ones are bhiksunl’s. The right, as well 
as the left group are sitting under a tree with garlands hanging from it 
and rosette-shaped and cup-shaped flowers. At the top is a row of 
angels bn clouds; the two front ones on the left wear beard’s and must 
be brahma-angels.
8. Buddha with his hearers
The Buddha sits here again in vitarka-mudra; there is no cloth hanging 
down nor any omemented pedestal. The niche has rectangular comers, 
thereof shews stupa's on top as well as the comer pinnacles. Next to the 
top a small cloud with a bearded angel on it.
The human audience are in two rows, seated one above the other, the 
top row under a tree. On the right are men, left women; the former are 
all dressed like men of rank; among the latter upper row are some bhik- 
suni's, below they are all well-dressed ladies. It may mean something 
for the identification of the whole, that the front person above on the
THE GANDAVYUHA


--- Page 32 ---
right wears no headdress while offering his respectful homage with 
both hands touching the ground. It; looks rather as if the cone-shaped ob­
ject that is held by the man behind him might be the headdress, but pro­
bably it is a heap of the same sort of wreaths we see in the hands of two 
persons in the bottom row.
9. Buddha with Ms hearers
The Buddha in the same way as on the last relief. The roof-decoration 
is in the same style, hut the niche is trefoil-shaped.
The audience is arranged as on no. 7, in one row seated on the ground 
under a conventionalized tree, above which are clouds with heavenly 
beings flying. The hearers seated on the ground are men, on the left 
bhiksu’s, on the right eminent persons, the front one holding an incense- 
burner and a fan to keep it burning. Three of the bhiksu's have flowers in 
their hands.
10. Buddha with his hearers
The Buddha still remains in vitarka-mudra; the throne is rather more 
decorated and the cloth hangs in folds. The same stupa-ornement is on 
the roof but the niche now has a kalamakara-arch; clouds with heavenly 
beings, one of whom on the right is playing the flute. There are two rows 
of listeners, one sitting and one standing. Except the two women stand­
ing above on the right, they are all men and the row on the left at the 
bottom are bhiksu's. The front one has a flower in his hand, out of which 
rises an ornement of perfume.
11. Buddha with his hearers
The Buddha is the same as on the last relief and the cloth hangs in the 
same way. The niche at the top is rectangular and has makara-heads 
below; the treatment of the roof is entirely different. This roof is made in 
three parts; the lowest, which is broken into by the square top of the 
niche has two small lions seated at the side, on which rest the makara- 
heads of the next roof-storey. Above this are two more layers, the last one 
forming the top with in the centre an ornement of curved lines in the 
shape of a horizontal 8 filled round with scroll work.
The small pavilion next to the building has already been mentioned 
(p. 23). Two bhiksu’s are sitting in it and it rather encroaches on the 
space left for the audience. On the left, three .men in the dress of high 
rank are seated on the ground with three bhiksu’s standing behind them.
THE GAEDAVYUHA 
u l i j


--- Page 33 ---
Above these on clouds are two heavenly beings, as well as above the 
pavilion where the monks are. On the right below we see three yaksa’s ; 
above them on a partition supported by clouds are two naga’s with their 
distinctive snake headdress and a garuda with its bird-beak, but other­
wise in human shape. Above in the righthand corner several waving ban­
ners are depicted.
12. Buddha with his hearers
This Buddha resembles his predecessors, the niche is arched, the roof 
finished off with the familiar stupa-decoration. Again there are clouds 
with angels doing homage and as mentioned before (p. 23) flowers are 
falling down to the left of the niche; there are also flowers between the 
top of the roof and the heavenly beings in the sky.
The audience as so often before, is in two rows, a sitting and a standing 
one, below on the left bhiksu’s are seated, the front one with an incensory. 
The rest are men in worldly dress, the most fashionable of them are sitting 
below on the right. Some dishes with wreaths and flowers are being 
offered.
13. Buddha with his hearers
The Buddha is here quite the same as on the last relief, only the cloth 
under the lotus-cushion hangs down in box-pleats. The building still has 
the stupa-roof, the niche is trefoil-shaped with a lion head on top and 
rather indistinct makara's below.
Left and right one low of hearers under a stiff ornemental tree, on the 
right eminent men, left, bhiksu’s, the front one again holding a censer. 
On clouds up above, four angels on each side, both front ones wearing a 
beard. Some flowers between them and the roof.
14. Samantabhadra and his worshippers
For the identification of the Bodhisattva I refer to the description 
of the chief wall of the fourth gallery in the next chapter. He is seated 
on the lefthand part of the relief in a plain pavilion with a rather high 
pedestal, the niche is arched, the roof-profile is shaped like an hori­
zontal accolade. The Bodhisattva in high tiara and ornements is seated 
on the lotuscushion, the right leg folded in the usual way, but the left knee 
raised and the foot pushed against the cushion. The left hand rests on the 
knee, which is in the supporting band and holds the stem of the distin­
guishing emblem wi th the three buds; the right hand is held in front of the
' 6° ^ x
' 
THE GANDAVYUHA


--- Page 34 ---
n ■
({(t)« 
. 
(&T
THE GANDAVYUHA
breast, the palm towards the spectator and the first finger and thumb 
pressed together.
The audience sit in three rows one above the other, all men, below, the 
eminent ones, above, those of humbler sort. 'In front of the bottom and 
middle row is a vase with a spout and flowers in it; and the top row has 
one flower with perfume-ornement.
15. Buddha with Bodhisattva’s
In addition to the short description given above (p. 23) the following 
is to be noted. At the foot of the stem that supports the lotuscushion in 
the centre, we see two small figures sitting evidently in attendance, quite 
human in shape and wearing little omement; in the same style there is a 
figure in the right and lefthand comer below. The Buddha himself is 
seated in dhyana-mudra; above the back of his seat, round the halo that 
adorns his head, we see the leaves and branches of a tree with an umbrella 
in the top of it and an angel on each side. On the right and left of this 
centrepiece, the Boddbisattva’s are sitting in three groups, all on 
lotuscushions with a back, in rows above each other, so that the 
figures in the bottom row sit with their cushions on the ground without 
a stem. These twelve Bodhisattva’s each have a halo in contrast to the 
subordinate figures; of course I only presume they are Bodhisattva’s, for 
though each is holding a flower they have none of the other attribu­
tes by which these beings are generally recognised. Perhaps the sculptor 
here was ordered to depict a part of the text where Bodhisattva’s were 
spoken of in general without indicating any special one.
16. Mahjufti with the monks and Sudhana *)
The Bodhisa.ttva sits on a lotuscushion in a small pavilion. These build­
ings I shall not continue to describe, their details need not be mentioned 
in this part of the tale, though in the unidentified portion they 
might at any time prove useful, and in case anything remarkable appears 
it shall be noticed. The treatment of reliefs that are already identified 
will naturally become less elaborate than those still waiting recognition.
Mahju.gr! sits with his right leg doubled under him, the left with the
!) *n the following reliefs I give the title which I suppose to represent the meaning in 
accordance with the short description given previously, not because I consider their identifi­
cation established but to prevent confusion by shewing clearly which relief there mentioned 
is the one being now discussed.


--- Page 35 ---
knee up, Ms elbow resting on it, the hand, hanging just in front of the 
supporting belt. This hand holds the stem of what is here a very wide 
blue lotus that bears the kropak. The right hand is raised but turned 
back in a sort of abhaya-mudra; it is not likely anything more is meant 
by tliis gesture than just to emphasize the discourse wMch the Bodhi- 
sattva evidently directs towards the bliiksu’s on the left under a tree with 
an incensory beside them. Sudhana stands on the right, in fulldress with 
a halo on a pedestal, with the moneybags mentioned above in front of it; 
behind him stand three companions, men of rank by their dress, next to 
him kneel two servants, one with an umbrella and one with a sword. In 
the air on the same side are two angels on clouds, on the opposite side 
above the tree are a pair of parrots.
17. Sudhana and Meghagri
The latter is seated in a pavilion as a bhiksu in vajrasana and dhyana- 
mudra; right and left are two servants or worshippers with censer and 
flowers sitting under a tree, above on both sides two angels hovering on 
clouds, left bearded men, right, women. On the extreme right stands 
Sudhana with two attendants, one has an umbrella, the other a bowl 
of flowers. Above tMs group rises another tree, so the scene seems to be 
out-of-doors.
18. Sudhana and Sdgaramegha
Sagaramegha too sits as a bhiksu in a pavilion, the left hand rests on his 
side, the right is held against his breast, the palm turned outwards with a 
gesture of explanation. On the left, three servants are sitting under a tree, 
to the right sits Sudhana with arms crossed on his breast; behind him the 
umbrella and a staff with a winged shell on it are fixed up. Near him are 
three sitting and two standing servants, the latter with drum and conch- 
shell. In the air right and left heavenly beings are hovering, those on the 
left are playing on the drum and cymbals, on the right, a tree appears to 
be growing on the clouds between the two angels. The one most to the 
right has a necklace of precious stones in his hand.
19. Sudhana and Supratisihita
This scene is in the open air. The bhiksu is sitting on a bolster with a 
second cushion in the back of his chair, under a large conventionalized 
tree with birds and other creatures in it, his left hand rests onthecusMon, 
his right wr ist is laid on his raised knee. Sudhana is kneeling before him
THE GANDAVYUHA 
3
^


--- Page 36 ---
®
 
r '
THE GANDAVYUHA
(the question of this figure's sex was discussed on p. 17) holding a flower 
in his hands that are raised in serabah. Behind him and behind the bhik- 
su’s seat is a row of followers with flowers and tokens of esteem, all 
seated. Right and left on the clouds two angels are hovering. Below these 
on the right another small tree and two birds.
20. Sudhana and Megha
Another open air scene, Megha sits on a very plain kind of seat under a 
large fig-tree, he is wearing the high tiara of men of rank, but for the rest not 
much ornement; for instance he has no upavita; but then he is a Dravi­
dian who must be distinguished from the Hindu guru's on other reliefs. 
Behind him under a small tree two of his followers are sitting, in front of 
him Sudhana, also on a plain seat, with a flower in his hand, then an­
other tree and Sudhana’s attendants, two standing, the rest sitting. 
Flowers and a wreath are falling from above; on the clouds are two hea­
venly beings on each side of the large tree, on the left they wear beards. 
There is also a pair of kinnara’s in the right hand top corner.
21. Sudhana and the gresthin
The figure who should represent the 9resthin, sits in the centre of the 
relief facing us, the hands resting on its lap with fingers interlaced, in a 
building like a shrine. He wears a halo, which his predecessors have not 
been doing; the text will perhaps reveal the reason of this. On the left 
we see four standing and four sitting women, evidently belonging to the 
gresthin. Sudhana stands on the right, his right hand raised to enforce 
his speech; the three men behind him are dressed as he is and look more 
like friends than servants1), yet the fly-whisk one of them holds indicates 
the office of attendant. No less than four couples of angelic beings have 
put in an appearance at the interview.
22. Sudhana and Sdradhvaja
The latter appears to be a bhiksu, seated on a chair without much 
decoration but with the pleated cloth hanging from it, a back to it and 
placed under a tree; he is conversing with Sudhana sitting before him 
under an umbrella and holding a red lotus in his hand; between the two 
stands a vase with a lid and a pedestal to it. Flowers and wreaths hover
J) This may also remind us of the figures of gods escorting the Bodhisattva on the Lalita- 
vistara reliefs, without any mention in the text.


--- Page 37 ---
in the air, probably strewn by the angelic, beings overhead, and some 
birds are flying about. Sudhana's retinue is similar to that on no. 20. 
Next to Saradhvaja’s seat is a sort of stand made of sticks for his water- 
jug and there is a bundle hanging on it such as that usually carried by 
ascetics, but it may be meant for his almsbowi. Behind him sits another 
bhiksu with an ordinary servant or follower. This side of the relief is 
further filled in with the indications of a wooded, rocky landscape with 
trees, leaves and rocks and a pair of deer. The interview must have taken 
place in the forest.
23. Sudhana and a woman
The possibility of this woman, sitting with her hands in her lap in a 
building, being meant for A$a, was discussed on p. 17. The relief has 
never been completed, neither the woman nor the building are finished 
off and below some of the blocks of stone are even untouched, they shew 
no sign of what w as to be depicted on them. On each side of the woman 
is an incensory and Sudhana kneels on the right, his hands lifted in sem- 
bah. The lady’s retinue as well as that of Sudhana, sit under trees so that 
the scene seems to be in a park. Besides the three heavenly beings on the 
clouds there are three kinnara’s on the right; among the trees are seven 
birds, one of them a peacock.
24. Sudhana and BMsmottarasanghega
The appearance of the rsi was described on p. 16; he is sitting on a ledge 
of rock surrounded by trees and before him, lower down, sits Sudhana. 
Among the young man's partly standing, partly sitting, attendants 
we notice one with a beard, seated in front armed with sword and shield; 
this is hardly likely to have any special meaning .probably only put in as 
variation by the sculptor. It is to be noted that behind the rsi there are 
three waiting-women standing as well as the seated men-servants. 
Angels are in the clouds.
25. Sudhana and Maitrdyani
In a building in the centre of the relief, Maitrayani is seated facing us 
in dhyana-mudra and wearing a halo; under the seat is a vase with a 
spout and flowers in it. On the left a group of women sitting and stand­
ing; one of these stands away from the group. She evidently does not 
belong to the retinue but plays some part in the story, her hand is lifted 
to the height of her breast as if calling attention to something and she is 
Barabutfur II 
3
\ 
THE GANDAVYUHA


--- Page 38 ---
X'X ^5'?
adorned with a halo. Sudhana stands on the right with a flower in his 
hand.; behind him are his attendants, sitting and standing, among them 
a bald and bearded umbrella-bearer. The attendant angels are here giving 
a concert on the drum, monochord and. other instruments.
26. Sudhana and Sudar$ana
A couple of trees as well as the rocks behind Sudaryana’s seat indicate 
the open air. The bhiksu’s seat is on a high pedestal, behind him two 
monks are kneeling,, the front one holding a water-jug. Between the 
two chief persons there is a vase of flowers and a censer. Sudhana sits 
on a lower level with a blue lotus in his hand. Behind his kneeling 
and sitting retinue we see two horses (of one the saddle can be distinctly 
seen) and an elephant with a big bell on its neck and two persons seated 
on its back, the front one holding an angku^a. Angels and birds hover 
in the air.
27. Sudhana and IndriyeQvara
Here is a youth seated in a pavilion not over-decorated, his left hand 
on his lap and the right in the gesture of discoursing; the crescent behind 
the head has already been mentioned above. He has a halo as well; the 
ball-shaped, top of his headdress is very curious. On the wide-spread 
foundation of the pavilion, Indriyegvara’s attendants are on the right 
and Sudhana on the left with an incensory before him. Behind, on the 
ground his retinue are sitting and standing, the front one holding out a 
round dish with wreaths on it. Behind is a fruit-tree.
28. Sudhana and Prabhiitd(l)
In the centre stands a large, richly ornemented building with a small 
niche on either side of the large one. In the chief niche is seated Prabhuta 
or whoever it may be, with a halo behind her head and in the side niches is 
a female servant with a fly-whisk. To the left of the building is her retinue, 
men sitting and women standing; on the right is Sudhana, holding a 
flower with his attendants also sitting and standing behind him. 
Heavenly beings in the clouds.
29. Sudhana and Vidvan; Sudhana continuing his travels
This relief consists of two scenes, separated by a tree. On the right,
(the scene that comes first as to time) we see the haloed Vidvan seated
THE GANDAVYCHA 
n i l 
i


--- Page 39 ---
in a pavilion x); behind him attendants sitting and standing, some armed 
with sword and shield. Sudhana sits before him with three attendants. 
Notice the money pots placed under Vidvan’s seat, surely not without 
some meaning. They may well cause us to hesitate about our identifi­
cation being correct: money is surely more likely to be found at the ban­
ker's who we suppose follows on the next relief. It is not unlikely that the 
sequence of the visits may have been altered, though we find no data to 
enlighten us as to the manner or degree of such alteration. There are pots 
as well on the roof of the pavilion. To the left of the tree, a man is walk­
ing away with his attendants, he is probably Sudhana with his umbrella- 
and fly-fan bearer and two armed guards. The text may, at this point, be 
describing his further journey. In the air are clouds but no angels.
30. Sudhana and Ratnacuda
It is very possible some alteration in the sequence has here too been 
made; the pavilion surro unded by outlines of cloud in which the chief figure 
is seated with a female attendant on each side, has a pedestal with three 
small elephants facing us in small niches and at each side of them a lion 
with his tail curled over his back; such a handsome pedestal is better 
suited to a king than a banker. Separated from the pavilion by a large 
omemented vase with flowers, Sudhana sits with hands folded in sembah,
Ins attendants behind him. In the background two trees, one of them has 
a bell hanging on it. Birds in the air and a flying kinnari.
31. Not identified
To the description already given on p. 18 may be added that the 
building on the extreme left, in which the four women are seated, has 
a high roof in four tiers with a peacock sitting on the edge of it, the pede­
stal has a row of nine moneybags. Both the eminent men approaching 
this building hand in hand, have a halo and an umbrella is held over 
their heads; the ribbons waving from the top of their headdress are very 
curious. On the right of the relief are their attendants standing and sit­
ting. At the back are two trees.
32. Buddha-scene
This scene was also discussed above; it is terribly damaged. The Bud­
dha. standing in the centre on his lotuscushion, has lost his head and his 
left hand, but the cushion, the halo and the umbrella remain to shew
') The makara's below the niche, rest on hares.
THE GANDAVYUHA 
3
^


--- Page 40 ---
■ G°ix
A y--n\ \ 
...
that really a Buddha and not a bhiksu, is intended. A good deal has 
been knocked off the three persons standing on the left; as far as we can 
see, the first was a bhiksu, the others were dressed like men of rank. On 
the right are six kneeling figures, the two first, people of importance, the 
others servants. Heavenly beings are dropping flowers from clouds decor­
ated with garlands; one of them rings a bell with a vajra-ornemented 
handle.
33. Sudhana and Samantanetra
The whole width of the relief is taken up by a large building, divided 
by pilasters into a spacious centre appartment with two side galleries. 
Two persons only are sitting in the middle space; Samantanetra seated 
with a halo behind his head, on a plain sort of throne with Sudhana on 
the ground in front of him. In the side wing behind the former are two 
attendants; those who sat in the right wing behind Sudhana, have been 
broken off.
34. Sudhana on his journey
He is walking with a blue lotus in his hand preceded by three and fol­
lowed by six attendants, all, except the umbrella-bearer, armed with a 
sword. Above are clouds with four angels.
35. Sudhana and Nala
On the left, a richly-decorated pavilion; within, Nala on a throne, 
haloed, and Sudhana are seated; behind each of them is a servant hold­
ing a bowl. To the right, under a fruit-tree sits a guard with a drawn 
sword, he has a thick mass of hair and round earrings like a yaksa. Be­
sides we see two sitting and one standing person plainly-dressed, the latter 
has a cylinder-shaped object on his shoulder, that is partly knocked off.
36. Sudhana and Mahdprabha
A large richly-decorated pendapa divided into three by columns, on 
the roof a large jewel-ornement in the centre with cakra decoration at 
the side, which shew the royal character of the scene. In the side gal­
lery to the right and left, where a bell hangs from the ceiling, only wo­
men are sitting; in the middle on a throne and adorned with a halo, sits 
the king with Sudhana, again seated on the ground. The only figure sit­
ting inside with them, behind the king, is too dilapidated to be distin­
guished for male or female and was probably a servant with a bowl.
ffWm 
. 
(fix
v A j5P 5/ 7 
t h e g a n d a v y u h a 
kjfJL J
— T
v


--- Page 41 ---
37. Sudhana with an unknown person
Both persons are sitting in the middle part of a spacious pavilion, 
between them is a bowl of wreaths on a pedestal. The unknown one 
wears a halo and is seated higher, but on a plain seat with an ordinary 
cushion. Behind both figures are their attendants, in the side wings and 
on the right, outside, as well.
38. Sudhana and Acalasthird
The middle compartment of the pavilion, the roof of which is sup­
ported by small human figures, is divided in two by a pilaster, on each 
side of which Acalasthira and her visitor are seated. In the side-wings 
which look like adjoining pendapa’s, the attendants are sitting as usual, 
left Avalasthira’s women and right, Sudhana’s men. Above on the 
right, a kinnara is flying with a wreath in its claws.
39. Sudhana and Sarvagrdmin
The whole upper part of the relief represents rocks and mountains 
with trees above them and birds, deer and other creatures. The appear­
ance of the pari vraj aka has been described on p. 19, also the fact of 
there being in the lefthand lower corner in a cave a disciple whose hair is 
done in the same high top-knot; he holds in his right hand a rosary and 
the handle of a fly-whisk; his left is resting on his knee and there is an 
object like a water-bottle hanging over his left shoulder. The jug and 
trident have been discussed, a shell on a stand and a square box of 
pyramid shape lie next to the jug. Sarvagramin, whose gesture shews 
he is explaining something, is seated on a stool with open-work sides; 
between him and Sudhana, who sits wi th his hands in sernbah, a bowl 
of flowers is placed, his attendants are seated behind him.
40. Sudhana and Utpalabhuti
The pavilion that takes up the whole width of the relief, has the cor­
ners of the roof decorated with large banners; the middle of it has been 
knocked out and therewith the headdress of Utpalabhuti on Ills seat, with 
a bowl of flowers between him and Sudhana. The usual attendants are 
sitting behind each of them.
41. Travel by sea. Sudhana and Paisa
This relief has been fully described on p. 20. For particulars of the
THE GANDAVYUHA 
J


--- Page 42 ---
xjS* ■ 6°ix
f T t i 
Q t
THE GANDAVYfJHA
N>sv^^? .vx^y'
ship, see^ further the description of ships in general, Chapt. XI; above 
several birds are flying. In addition to what was said about the left half 
of the relief, we see between the two chief figures a bowl of flowers. 
Paisa too has a halo and outside the building, behind Sudhana, is an 
attendant with a sword holding a square box.
Let us notice the tree at the back of the attendant to see the way in 
which these double reliefs are divided. It appears to be rooted on the 
ver y edge of the quay that the ship seems on the point of running into. 
If this was intended, then of course the whole relief would belong together 
and mean that at the same moment the conversation in the pavilion 
was taking place, the ship was nearing the quay. The meaning is evi­
dently quite different; the tree is put there as a partition; it separates 
the conversation from the sea piece. There is not the least connection 
of place between the two halves; the events on the ship may be meant to 
happen at an entirely different time to the conversation and while the 
vessel is in mid-ocean; nor are we obliged to think of the pavilion as 
being at the seaside.
42. Sudhana travelling
Preceded by men of rank on horseback, not riding with legs across the 
horse, but with their feet on the saddle, Sudhana is travelling in a 
palanquin with the broken stalk of a flower in his hand; the vehicle 
looks like a thione with a canopy above it, evidently an awning on four 
pilasters. It is carried by sixteen bearers on two bamboo poles. In the 
background we see two umbrellas, a quiver, a bow and a flv-whisk above 
the heads of the attendants. Two men with swords are walking under, 
that is, at the side of, the palanquin. All these people are very poorly 
dressed, the piocession ends with an armed man of higher class. In the 
lefthand top comer a couple of heavenly beings are hovering; the right 
hand corner is missing.
43 Conversation with a bhiksuni
I he bhiksuni, A 5 a. or someone else, has been discussed on p. 14 sq. 
She is seated in a pavilion next to which two nuns and a waiting-maid 
are sitting. Sudhana seated before her on the other side, has disappeared 
almost entirely, his attendants are still there. In the background, some 
trees, so the scene is out of doors; a row of birds are perched on the 
pavilion roof.


--- Page 43 ---
■ g°5x 
/y--^ Sy.
44. Conversation with a man
Both persons, one of whom has no head, while the other wears a halo, 
are seated in a pavilion with a bowl of flowers between them. Outside on 
both sides their retinue, on the right sitting under a tree. On the left we 
notice one person very awkwardly made with his head turned at an im­
possible angle to his body as if it did not belong to him. This is even 
more than a supple native could accomplish and is very remarkable' 
among these reliefs that usually shew great artistic skill.
45. Stupa-worship
In the centre of the relief is a stupa on a lotus cushion that rests on a 
square pedestal with ornemented panels; the middle of the building is 
hung with a band of garlands and it is crowned by a pinnacle that also 
rests on a square pedestal, it is decorated with five umbrellas, first a 
small one, then a very wide one and after that three, gradually smaller 
one above the other, on the top is a jewel-omement. On each side of the 
stupa kneels a haloed man in ceremonial dress; the whole stupa with the 
two men is within another building, roofed in with a stupa decoration. 
On both sides, attendants are kneeling and standing, holding suitable 
offerings of flowers, and above, two pairs of angels are doing homage. 
Notice the kind of fan one of the standing attendants on the right is 
holding.
46. Journey by chariot
ihe chief person, probably still Sudhana with a halo, sits in a four- 
wheeled carriage that, without the wheels, looks very much like the 
pavilions occupied by the people on other reliefs, only it is not so large. 
The charioteer sits in front, there are two horses wearing a collar with 
bells on it and a saddle, each with a rider with legs down in the usual 
way. The chariot is crowned with a large jewel-ornement. Behind walks 
the escort, among them two armed with bow and arrows. On the left in 
the air, two angels, on the opposite side some traces of clouds can be 
seen but what was above them has disappeared,
47. Visit to Avalokitegvara
The Bodhisattva and his visitor are in a building. The latter kneels on the 
right, his hands in sembah; the Bodhisattva as before mentioned (p.8), 
can be distinctly recognised by the Amitabha-image in his headdress, he
THE GANDAVYUHA


--- Page 44 ---
//>
----- n \ \
sits with legs crossed on his throne, the right hand lifted in the attitude 
of preaching with the stalk of the padma in the left hand laid, on his 
knee. He is here depicted in ordinary human shape. Outside the building 
worshippers are standing and sitting ; on the left women, on the right 
men, among them a bearded man holding a bowl 6f flowers. Right and 
left in the air, an adoring angel.
48. Visit to Mahadeva
The left part of the relief has suffered very badly so that a good deal 
of the pavilion is missing on that side, as well as the head of £iva who is 
sitting in it. But the god is clearly to be identified (as before mentioned): 
for he is depicted in his four armed shape, the left hand resting in Ms 
lap, the right raised in discourse; in the back right hand he holds a ros­
ary, in the left a fly-whisk and. under his seat is the Nandi. Sudhanasits 
on the right outside the pavilion, his hands in sembah, behind Mm sit 
and stand his retinue. Above in the air are angels. A large padma is 
falling from the sky.
49. Conversation with a woman
This scene takes us out of doors again, with four trees spread out in 
the background. Under the largest a woman adorned with a halo sits on 
a stone bench; jars are placed against the tree and next to it; chains of 
jewels hang out of them. Under the seat, five persons, who seem all to be 
women, are squeezed into the space with a box that is shut. Quite to the 
left, under a tree, three armed guards are sitting. In front of the woman, 
but lower, Sudhana (we shall continue to call him Sudhana on the 
unidentified reliefs) is seated, a bowl of flowers between them; then comes 
a row of pots and Sudhana’s attendants, sitting. There are several pieces 
missing on the righthand side of the relief, but apparently nothing of im­
portance to the story.
50. Conversation with a woman
A less elaborate pavilion, with a tree on either side and a pair of an­
gels above. In the pavilion a lady with a halo sits on the left conversing 
with Sudhana seated inside with her; neither have a chair but the lady 
has a sort of mat or cushion. Under the tree on the left are her women, 
under that on the right Sudhana's retinue.
51. Paying homage to a woman
Another open-air scene with four trees, the furthest to the right is
Iffy) 
Qt
THE GANDAVYUHA 
k H L j


--- Page 45 ---
laden with fruit. The same pots that figured on No, 49 also appear, they 
are placed in front as well as behind the lady who is wearing a halo, 
seated on the left of the relief with a bolster at her back, two waiting- 
women standing and a guard sitting behind her. The chief male figure 
is bowing to the ground with his face on his hands before the lady, he is 
on a small terrace decorated with rosette ornement. The halo he 
wears everywhere else, is here omitted. Behind him kneel four attend­
ants, the front one, the umbrella-hearer has a big moustache.
52. Conversation with a woman
On this relief the man and woman in chief, are sitting together with a 
bowl of flowers between them, in a pavilion. Behind her a couple of 
women, under her seat is a closed box (comp. no. 49). Sudhana holds 
something quite indistinct in the photograph, probably it is a flower, 
on his open hands, his retinue sit outside the pavilion under a tree.
53. Conversation with a woman
This is a very small pavilion, there is only room for the lady by her­
self with a halo. Outside, on the left are her sitting and standing ser­
vants, on the right a large tree underneath which Sudhana and his reti­
nue are seated. He holds in his hand an utpala-shaped flower; in the top 
of it is a hole in which something may have been fixed.
54. Journey on an elephant
The procession begins with four men richly dressed on horseback, 
riding in the usual way. Next comes the elephant with his mahaut 
holding the angku$a and the umbrella-bearer walking next to its head. 
The animal’s neck and saddlecloth are plentifully adorned with bells, as 
well as the necks of the horses; it carries an elegant howdah with a 
canopy on pilasters in which Sudhana is seated. Then follow a second 
umbrella-bearer and some servants. Angels with clouds on the left.
55. Conversation with a man
The manner in which this interview is depicted differs somewhat 
from what generally appears. Everywhere else, the person with 
a halo, dressed like people of high rank, whom we have looked upon 
as Sudhana, was the one who came as a visitor; he was placed on 
a lower seat to pay homage and sometimes sat outside the pavilion.
!(g» 
(ei
THE GANDAVY0HA 
M 4 M


--- Page 46 ---
Ay—<V\
l(Wf] 
Qj
THE GANDAVYUHA
Here it seems to be the other way about, the figure that should be 
Sudhana according to his dress, is seated in the pavilion on the left of 
the relief receiving homage from two men sitting under a penthouse sup­
ported by pilasters, with an incensory before them; the front one wears a 
high tiara and a halo, but with that exception they both look like per­
sons of lower rank. Of course it is quite possible that the difference is 
merely superficial and may be ascribed to the wish for variety so that 
the two rnen under the penthouse are Sudhan a with an attendant, while 
the man in the pavilion is the one he comes to visit. The righthand of 
the relief is occupied by standing and sitting attendants bearing rich 
gifts, among which a bundle of clothes and a large rectangular package 
tied round with string, that may be a parcel of books or else a box. On 
the clouds are angelic musicians with drum and cymbals, dropping 
flowers from the sky.
56. Conversation with a woman
The lady, wearing a halo, is seated in a pavilion, the side-walls support­
ed by little human figures and its roof decorated with lions and gargoyles 
of monster heads. Behind the pavilion are waiting-women; in front of 
the lady kneels Sudhana, leaning on the ground with his hands in front 
of his knees. His attendants holding flowers are sitting and standing be­
hind him, a pair of angels hover in the right top comer.
57. I nterview with a goddess (Vat a ?)
This relief was discussed on p. 24 with special reference to the large 
moneypots placed behind the seated lady who wears a halo; they are 
guarded by a seated figure like a yaksa armed with a sword. The kinnarl 
perched on the back of the seat, or on the money-pot, has also been men­
tioned. Two large, trees fill up the background, a third smaller one we see 
just behind the flower vase placed between Sudhana and the goddess, 
— there would be no kinnarl in attendance if the woman was not a 
heavenly being—Sudhana has his hands folded in sembah and is sitting on 
a cushion a little lower. The right lower part of the relief is taken up by 
his retinue, seated; two women attendants stand by their mistress’s 
chair. The relief is not quite finished, neither the leaves nor the stem of 
the tree furthest to the right; only the outlines have been put in. In the 
right hand top comer is some object too dilapidated for recognition.
58. Journey on foot
The chief person is walking in the middle of the scene toweling above


--- Page 47 ---
his attendants, behind him his retinue, before him are ten men of 
distinction, some armed with swords, one of whom has turned round to 
do him homage; the last of the ten has lost the upper half of his body. 
Above are clouds with angels, right and left.
59. Conversation with a woman
A pavilion divided in three parts. In the middle apartment a lady seat­
ed on cushions wearing a halo, on the left waiting-women standing and 
sitting; on the right, Sudhana kneeling with hands in sembah. Behind 
him outside the building, his retinue, some with bow and arrows, above 
are two angels. Under the woman’s seat we see there has been a figure 
now nearly worn away, on the photograph it looks something like a pair 
of animals but this is uncertain.
60. Conversation with a woman
She is sitting on a throne and has a halo; opposite to her on a block sits 
Sudhana, inside her pavilion, holding his hands in sembah. Behind them 
both in the pendapa-like side-wings, sit their attendants, women on the 
left, men on the right. Heavenly beings on both sides, above.
61. Unidentified
This relief was also discussed on p. 24 as one differing entirely from 
the adjacent ones and likely to give points for further identification. The 
right half is taken up by a pavilion in which is seated cross-legged alone, 
the figure of a man with a halo, facing us, the left hand resting in his lap, 
the right in a sort of abhaya-mudra. On the left, four servants asleep, 
the front one with a sword laid across his knees; behind them stands an 
elephant turned to the right and above, in the air, also turning towards 
the pavilion, two female angels, the first with a garland, the second with 
a dish of flowers.
62. Conversation with a woman
This lady is seated on a throne with two large cushions in the middle 
part of her pavilion, she has a halo; in the side-wing behind her are her 
women, in that in front of her, only a large vase of flowers on a pedestal 
between two small incensories. On a low stool outside the pavilion sits 
Sudhana; in his right hand he has an incensory of larger size, in the left 
some half-obliterated object that may have been the fan belonging to the 
censer. Two attendants sit behind him, the second one wears a beard and
‘ G0l^ X
\ v 5
k 7 
THE GANDAVYUHA


--- Page 48 ---
l ( m 
<s l
THE GANDAVYUHA 
I I
holds a sword; a third is standing behind and bends forward with a round 
dish with a lid in his hands. Above on the clouds are angels with flowers.
63. Conversation with a woman
Sudhana is here again seated with hands in sembah outside the pavilion, 
two attendants sitting behind him, one a brahman, and one standing ; 
in the air heavenly beings, one of them ringing a bell On the other 
side of the pavilion are some female servants. The building is divided 
into three niches, on each side in the narrow side-niche, stands a female 
attendant with a fly-whisk, in the centre sits the lady with a halo. The 
roof is decorated with human and with lion figures, at the base of the 
pavilion is a small supporting figure at either side and in the middle 
between turn pillasters a vase with a lid, round and rather flat in shape.
64. Conversation with a man
A wide spacious pavilion in three compartments each having a sepa­
rate roof. In the centre one sits a man in the dress of people of distinc­
tion, on a throne; in that on the right, sits the visitor dressed in the same 
style, with his attendants behind him outside the building; the com­
partment on the left is occupied by three seated attendants of the man 
on the throne. We must notice that only the man who is receiving the 
visit here has a halo, whereas up to this point, the visitor who should be 
Sudhana, with only one exception, has always been depicted with a halo.
Of course it is impossible to decide if this may be Sudhana receiving (as 
possibly on no. 55 is the case), or if it is only carelessness on the sculp­
tor’s part, besides there is the possibility that this relief shews an episode 
in which Sudhana had no share. It is certainly noticeable that in the 
reliefs following this one, the visitor is never given a halo. As he is now 
and then being received by women, the first of the three suppositions 
is the least probable. Above, on the right are clouds with two heavenly 
beings, on the left, three birds. The angels here are embedded in a mass 
of clouds, with festoons of cloth hanging to them.
65. Conversation with a woman
In a spacious pavilion, its roof decorated with lions and human 
supporting figures, a woman with a halo sits on a high throne with a 
bowl of flowers underneath; it rests on two figures of lions sitting on 
their haunches. Next to her throne two waiting-women stand with fly-
/■JS * ■ g°kS x


--- Page 49 ---
whisks, a third is seated. The visitor sitting opposite to her, whose followers 
are behind him in an adjacent appartment, is not only without a halo, as 
noticed above *), but he is not dressed like a man of rank and even the 
umbrella-bearer is missing. Angels hover in the righthand top corner 
and one all alone on the lefthand side.
66. Conversation with a woman
The visitor is now dressed again in fine clothes and has an umbrella 
over his head; he is sitting on the right under a tree with attendants 
standing and sitting. The lady is in a small pavilion on a seat with a 
bowl of wreaths underneath it, she has no halo. Her waiting-women are 
standing and sitting under another tree, left of the pavilion.
67. Conversation with a man
The man is seated on a throne, with a halo behind his head in a small 
pavilion. On the platform outside the building, on the right we see 
some attendants seated, one of whom holds a large curved sword and on 
the left the visitor is kneeling, his hands resting in front of him on the 
ground. Behind him under a tree are two servants, above in the air, only 
clouds without heavenly beings.
68. Unidentified
This relief already discussed on p. 25 appears to have no connection 
with the series of conversation-scenes. The whole of the right side of it is 
taken up by a building in which a man of distinction with a halo, is sitting 
on a seat with a lady; his face has been knocked off. In front of the build­
ing sit a couple of servants, one of them hangs his head as if asleep. 
The whole is surrounded by a palissade that is shewn first going under 
the building, then upwards at right angles and so cutting off that whole 
piece of the scene. Just behind the servants is a gateway, evidently the 
entrance, and outside to the left is a tree, with an umbrella fixed up next 
to it and two servants under it, one a bearded man with a sword, of 
course the guards, sitting asleep. Above the servants within the palissade, 
a flying female with a halo, approaches the couple in the pavilion. The 
palissade continuing on that side of the gateway, goes up to the top of 
the relief right through the clouds in the left top-corner.
') It looks as if there might be some traces of it, but this may be an optical delusion.
1.(0 
%L
THE GANDAVYUHA 
45


--- Page 50 ---
■ G°ix 
T
69. Conversation with a man
The person who receives the visit sits on a throne in the middle niche 
of a pavilion, in the niches on each side, a waiting-woman with a fly- 
whisk is placed, on the left edge, a man with a beard is sitting and a 
woman stands. The visitor holds a large round flower and sits with three 
attendants behind him to the right of the pavilion under a tree. In the 
clouds right and left, a heavenly being.
70. Conversation with a brahman
According to p. 16, it is possible this brahman may be Jayasmaya- 
tana. He is depicted in the usual style and is seated under a low pent­
house, on a plain seat with an incensory before him; in the space under 
his seat is a servant with a closed box. Behind him, under a tree, are 
some attendants in ordinary mundane dress; opposite to him on a cus­
hion placed on a bench, is the visitor with hands in sembah, his followers 
behind him under a tree; the umbrella-bearer is bald. Above are clouds 
with garlands hanging from them and in the middle two angelic beings.
71. Conversation with a woman
A wide and spacious pavilion, room enough for the lady with a halo 
seated on her throne with legs crossed, for two waiting-women seated on 
the left and for the visitor sitting on the right; he holds a flower between 
his hands folded in sembah, his attendants sit in an adjacent compart­
ment to the right. The throne rests on two sitting lions with a bowl filled 
with something between; above the pavilion several birds perch and fly, 
some are peacocks; in the righthand top comer is a cloud with garlands 
to it.
72. Conversation with a man
He is sitting between two women in his pavilion, next to which on the 
right are a couple of attendants. The visitor’s retinue sits on the left, 
they have a standard with a shell as well as the umbrella; above are 
clouds with two heavenly beings. The visitor is here standing between 
his retinue and the building, he is holding his left hand above an 
incensory placed on the ground, probably dropping grains of incense into it
73. Walking on the clouds
The bottom of the whole relief represents clouds. A whole row of people
k sj® 
- 
(ei
THE GANpAVYUHA 
i j l j


--- Page 51 ---
S
THE GANDAVYfJHA
Iking on them towards the left, first two women, one with an oval 
lied with sometliing, the second carrying a fly-whisk. Flowers are 
on to these women and on the whole procession, flowers and 
is seem to descend. Behind these women comes the chief male 
taller than the others, with a red lotus on a long stalk in his right 
followed by eight companions who do not look like servants, car- 
various objects, mostly flowers.
uldha and Bodhisattva’s
scene is a lotus-pond; the bottom of the relief shews water with 
swimming in it and lotus buds and leaves growing in it. Five large 
lutus cushions rise out of the pond, on the largest one in the middle a 
Buddha is seated with an umbrella over his head, he sits in the dhyana- 
mudra. On the cushions right and left of him, men in the dress of high 
rank are sitting, also in vajrasana and with a halo behind the head, 
undoubtedly Bodhisattva’s. The pose of their hands is various, but they
I 
wear no emblems that identify them. The whole background is filled in 
with buds and leaves from the pond; above are clouds with garlands 
hanging from them.
75. Homage to Buddha
Here again the lotuspond. The water is not very clearly shewn, but to 
the right we see the same plants as on the last relief; to the left, aquatic 
beasts, fish, tortoises and a snake. On the extreme right rises the lotus- 
cushion throne of Buddha, an umbrella in the air above his head, flowrers 
falling around him; he sits with the left hand in his lap and the right in 
abhaya-mudra. Next to him is a small tree and then two kneeling and 
two standing women in the dress of servants with various gifts of hom­
age in their hands. Behind them, on the left, is a. dilapidated group of a 
man of rank sitting between two women. These people are not placed on 
lotuscushions but are seated just above the plants and animals. Three 
heavenly beings above, on clouds.
76. Buddha worshipped by women
The bottom edge of the relief consists of smooth stones, that were 
perhaps intended to be turned into a lotus pond. The Buddha is here 
standing on his lotuscushion, the umbrella again above his head, flowers 


--- Page 52 ---
Ay—^ V\
wio are not taking part in the worship but seem to be put in as a sort 
of retinue; on the other side of the lotuscushion, a vase with a spout and 
flowers m it and' a small censer are placed. Behind that, taking up all 
the left of the relief are nine women, kneeling and standing with their 
offerings. An umbrella and standards in the background. On the clouds 
above are many heavenly beings who join in the worship.
77. Conversation with a woman
Here, the same as on no. 79 and 80, it is a question if a conversation is 
really represented , While other reliefs so clearly depict two chief persons 
who appear to be carrying on the conversation, here we have one chief 
person, a woman, so evidently the centre of the picture that it looks more 
like a lecture being given by this central figure to a mixed audience than 
a conversation between her and any of those seated around her. The 
large pavilion takes up nearly all the relief. In the middle of it sits the 
woman with a halo on her throne, the right hand lifted with the gesture 
of speaking, the left resting in her lap. On both sides stands a waiting- 
woman with a fly-whisk; further to the left are women seated and on the 
right two men of distinction, the front one with a flower in his left hand 
who, if this is a conversation, must be the second person speaking.
78. Homage to the Buddha
Again a Buddha standing on a lotuscushion with umbrella and falling 
flowers, the left hand lifted to Iris shoulder, the right in vara-mudra. On 
his left hand, quite to the right on the relief, stand two persons, one man 
oi rank with a halo (Sudhana ?) and a bhiksu. On his other side is a small 
tree and underneath it a vase with a spout and flowers in it, between a 
(damaged) incensory and a dish with a round thing in it.
In the background another tree and a standard; angels are again in the 
clouds, trimmed with garlands. Flowers and wreaths fall on the Buddha.
79. Conversation with a woman
A large pavilion with a side-wing on the right. In the centre sits the 
lady with a halo, her hands laid on her lap; her throne is supported on 
lions, a waiting-maid holding a fly-whisk stands on each side of her. To the 
left, on the ground sits a woman with a branch of flowers and on the 
right, his hands in sSmbah, the man who is visiting her; his followers are 
placed in the side-wing, above which in the top comer are convention­
alized clouds.
\! V m f i j f l Y 
THE GANDAVYUHA 
\ S
 Ij[ .


--- Page 53 ---
KmPi 
(ct
THE GA^DAVYUJIA
80. Conversation with a goddess
We see this is a superhuman being because she is seated on a lotus- 
cushion. It rests on a pedestal; the goddess who of course wears a halo, is 
seated cross-legged, the left hand on her lap, holding the right in abhaya- 
mudra, a servant with fly-whisk is standing on each side of her. Further 
to the left are three women and on the right three men of distinction, 
the front one holding his hands in sembah. All these persons are inside 
a pavilion that takes up the whole of the relief, its roof is decorated with 
ten pots with lotusbuds in them. Notice the curious decoration at 
the top of the relief on both sides, a row of seven flying parrots quite 
uniform in style.
81. Buddha and his hearers
The Buddha is seated facing us on a lotuscushion in a small pavilion, a 
cloth hangs over the pedestal. The left hand rests on his lap, the right is 
raised in discourse. The roof of the pavilion is surrounded by clouds, so 
that it is probably intended to be in the sky. On the right four bhiksu's 
are seated. On the left sits the chief male figure, a halo behind his head, 
an incensory in his hand; behind him his attendants, sitting and standing. 
One of them looks like a brahman. In the air right and left a cloud with 
the upper part of a heavenly being in it.
82. Visit to a woman
This relief is unfinished and is damaged as well. The woman is seated 
in a small pavilion decorated with vases of flowers, she has a halo; next 
to the building, on the left, are three female attendants. On the right 
stands the chief male figure and behind him a number of very much 
damaged attendants, some armed. In the air are angels, but a large piece 
of them is missing.
83. Conversation with a woman
On this and the two following reliefs, the chief person making the visit 
again wears a halo and entirely resembles the Sudhana of the identified 
reliefs. It appears further that in the reliefs where a visit has been identi­
fied from the text, he sometimes has a halo and sometimes not, so that 
evidently the sculptor has been rather careless about tins attribute in the 
latter part of the story. For convenience sake, we shall continue to call 
this person Sudhana on the unidentified reliefs as well; if the halo is 
missing it will be mentioned.
Barabu<Jur II 
4


--- Page 54 ---
The woman is sitting, wearing a halo, on a throne with a round 
cushion, in a small pavilion crowned with jewels and shewing small lions 
at each side of the pedestal. To the left of the building are two standing 
arid three sitting waiting-women. On the right sits Sudhana cross-legged 
with his hands in sembah, an incensory next to him. The smoke of the 
incense rises into a cloud or at any rate touches the edge where a large 
celestial hovers above his head; a smaller angel is to be seen in each top 
corner. Behind Sudhana, his retinue is seated under a tree.
84. Conversation with a man
Again a man with a halo on a throne in a pavilion, behind him three 
servants. He holds the caste-cord in his right hand, under his seat sits a 
small human figure next to an oblong or cylinder-shaped package with 
bands round it, and a pile of dishes with two strings of beads hanging out 
of the top one. On the right is Sudhana and his armed escort; in the back­
ground a large and a small tree and an elephant lifting its trunk, wearing 
only a saddle-cloth.
85. Conversation with a woman
Here just like no. 83 we see a lady with a halo seated in a pavilion, with 
lions carved on the comers of its pedestal, her women next to her on the 
left. Sudhana on the right sits cross-legged with hands in sembah and his 
attendants behind him under a tree. There are no celestials, only a couple 
of birds.
86. Conversation with a cave-dweller
We have no better name for this man who is sitting on a plain seat in 
the niche formed by the familiar schematic rocks. The trees at the side as 
well as overhead, shew the forest scenery. The man is not a brahman nor 
does he wear his hair high and unkempt, or twisted into a knot like the 
rsi's or ascetics, but above his beardless face is a headdress such as is 
worn by middle-class persons on other reliefs and his body is not bare 
but parti}' covered by a garment fastened on his left shoulder. Impos­
sible to say what sort of man he is intended for. The rocks continue into 
the left hand edge of the relief and leave a place for two seated men in 
ordinary worldly dress, one holding a flower; they are evidently followers 
of the chief cave-dweller. On the right sits the male visitor without his 
halo, holding an orchid-like flower with both hands. His retinue, one of 
them with a beard holding up the sinte-leaf, all sit behind him.
f(t)) 
■
THE GANDAYYUHA 
J


--- Page 55 ---
87. Conversation with a man
The two chief-persons sit facing each other discoursing, both without 
halo; the one on a high throne in a pavilion, the other to the right of the 
building. Each has a small group of attendants seated behind him 
under a tree; parrots and other birds flying and in the trees.
88. Conversation with a man
This man as usual, sits in a pavilion, not on a chair but a plain bench 
with a chest in front of it. The visitor, without a halo, wearing a high 
conical headdress is kneeling with his hands leaning on the ground in 
front of his knees, to the right of the building; behind him his retinue 
sitting and standing, among them a bearded umbrella-bearer. To the left 
of the pavilion are the attendants of the man seated within, standing, 
and seated. The front one seated has a beard and maybe is a brahman; 
the two standing ones have thick curly hair. The front one holds a vase 
with a spout, the second a bundle of folded garments or something simi­
lar. On each side above, two celestials.
89. Sudhana and Jayottama (?)
Sudhana, here without a halo, is seated on the right with his escort, 
some of them armed with swords, behind him; he holds in his hands a 
ball-shaped object that looks rather like an upturned bowl. In front of 
him in the pavilion the banker (?) is comfortably seated among cushions, 
his right hand lifted with a gesture of speaking. Under his seat is a space 
with four persons and a box in it. Behind the pavilion, left on the relief, 
some attendants stand and sit with gifts for the guest. In each top corner 
is a celestial. On p. 21, the nine pots that ornement the roof of the 
building have been alluded to. The stones below Sudhana and his attend­
ants have been left smooth but were probably intended to be carved.
90. Sudhana and Sinihavyasambhitd
A sort of veranda is here added to the front of the pavilion and in it 
Sudhana is sitting on the ground, without a halo and with an incensory 
beside him. Behind him quite on the right side of the relief, his armed 
escort are seated under a tree. The bhiksuni seated in the pavilion, lifts 
her hand up to her shoulder, speaking; her seat is quite a plain one. 
On each side in the pedestal of the building is a small lion and in the 
middle space under the lady's seat is a closed box and a pile of dishes,
THE GANDAVYUHA


--- Page 56 ---
1
1
1 
<SL
' 
THE GANDAVYUHA 
II
the top one with something in it. Just at the back of the pavilion on the 
left, stands another bhik§uril holding up a jug in her left hand; beside 
her are three waiting maids in worldly dress with umbrella and fly-whisk, 
under a tree. Above the pavilion hover flowers and wreaths and there is 
a heavenly being on a cloud with a bowl of flowers.
91. Sudhana and Sumitrd
Sumitra with a halo sits on her throne in a pavilion crowned with 
jewel ornements, a bowl of flowers under her seat; the pedestal of the 
building has been left undecorated. On the left is a tree with birds above 
it; her attendants sit beneath it, one standing and three sitting; on 
the right is another tree with Sudhana sitting under it, his hands in sem- 
bah. Behind him his escort seated and standing, the latter in full-dress 
holding trays full of flowers. In the background is another tree.
92. Conversation with a woman
The chief persons are seated together on a wide seat that takes up the 
width of the pavilion, its pilasters resting on lions. The righthand side of 
the seat where the man is sitting without a halo, has a back to it, he is 
evidently receiving homage from the woman kneeling on the left of him, 
holding an utpala in her hands folded in sembah. The gesture of Ms 
light hand looks rather like refusal. Under the seat is a bowl and a 
covered dish. Trees to' the right and left of the pavilion, birds flying 
above. Under the left hand tree the lady’s attendants are sitting, under 
that on the right the man’s escort with a cakra standard.
93. Exercise of charity
The righthand side of the relief shews a canopy resting on pilasters, 
along the top of which a row of birds are perching. Under this in front, 
stands a man of high rank without a halo, evidently distributing gifts 
with his damaged right hand. His standing and kneeling servants behind 
him are holding them ready; one has a bowl of gold rings, another gar­
ments, a third has had his share knocked out of his hand, for this part of 
the relief has suffered badly. On the extreme right, behind these ser­
vants, is a small closed building in the style of small temples such as 
Tjandi Pawon. On the left hand part of the relief the receivers of the dole 
are standing and sitting under two trees, some already have gifts in 
their open hands (rings for instance); they are dressed like attendants, 
not as the poor and needy.
—
< V \


--- Page 57 ---
/,OsV" ■__ 
♦ 
__
/ d f /< -----^-s. % \ 
- 
-
t (
f
l 
■ 
' 
■ 
' 
■ 
( f ix
\v
5
l7
 
THE GANDAVYUHA
94. Worshipping Buddha 
, 
*
l he Buddha is standing on a iotuscushion under a canopy held over 
his 'head by two celestials, his right hand in vitarka-mudra, the left 
holding the hem of his garment at his left shoulder. At his right hand 
stand (left of the relief) two bliiksu’s, the front one holding his garment 
in the same pose as the Master. Next to the Buddha on the right, 
flowers are falling from the' sky and there kneels the chief person 
without a halo, his hands folded reverently in sembah. His retinue, sit­
ting and standing, fill up the rest of the relief, one with a bouquet, others 
with vases of flowers and suchlike offerings of homage; above them is a 
row of heavenly beings on clouds festooned with garlands.
95. Conversation with a woman
On the left a simply-built pavilion in which a woman is seated on a 
cushion. She has no waiting-women. On the right is a pendapa supported 
. by pillars, with birds on the roof, in which six men in the dress of 
distinguishedfcpersons are sitting. The front one, the most distinguished 
looking; sits a bit in front of the others with hands folded in sembah, 
he has no halo. The second has a beard but his hair is not done in brah­
man style and he is wearing an ordinary worldly headdress. The lower 
edge of the relief has not been worked on.
* 
.1.
. \y * r
96. Stupa^worship'
The platform on which the stupa and the two worshippers are placed 
is here also left in the rough. The stupa rests on a lotus cushion, it is 
ornemented-with a band of garlands and has a sharp-pointed pinnacle 
with one-umbrella disk on it; the square pedestal, resting on the figures 
of lions at each side with a bowl of fruit in the middle, stands on another 
rectangular pedestal, on which is carved a dish with sometlung like 
wreaths on it, between two small censers. Next to this are the two 
- worshippers, one on the right standing with hands in sembah, on the left 
one kneeling and offering a dish of fruit a|td a flower. Both are persons 
of distinction, whose attendants seated lower, hold the umbrella over 
their heads; they have no haloes. Flowers are falling round the stupa; to 
the left is a tree and on the right a heavenly being dropping flowers from 
a cloud.
97. Travelling with an elephant
The elephant walks in front; his mahaut is on its neck, but the seat on its
t
«


--- Page 58 ---
back is empty. Bells hang on the neck and saddle-cloth, its tail is unusu­
ally long. The man intended to ride on the animal makes a gesture of 
refusal with his righthand; he is walking, attended by his escort and 
wears no halo. To the right is a tree with birds in it and on the left clouds
and angels.
98. Stupa-worship
Two buildings fill up this relief . In the left one, with a row of crawling 
tortoises round the base, a stupa rests on a lotuscushion above a pedestal; 
it has a band of garlands round the middle and is crowned with 
thirteen umbrella-disks, first larger to the middle and then diminishing in 
size to the top. In the right hand building, a pendapa supported by 
pilasters, with peacocks on the roof, the chief person is sitting, a man 
without halo, his hands, nowr damaged, probably folded in sSmbah, with 
two or three attendants behind him. Above, angels on clouds.
99. Sudhana and Vesthila
In a small pavilion on the left of the relief, Vestliila with a halo, is 
seated facing us in dhyana-mudra on a plain seat. On the left of the 
pavilion, under a tree sits a single attendant rather the worse for wear; 
to the right, first a small incensory, a second tree and then Sudhana 
sitting with what has probably been a flower (now worn away) in his 
left hand, with his escort behind him under a third tree. This part of the 
scene is very much damaged; angels hover above on clouds. In the decor­
ation of the roof, notice the makara-heads stretching after little human 
figures running away.
100. Sudhana with Avalokitegvara of Potalaka
The Bodhisattva is seated under an arch formed by rocks on which 
we see trees and plants and deer with other animals to shew the moun­
tainous forest scenery, such as belongs to Potalaka1). In the top of the 
arch is an umbrella and two jewel-pots. The throne at the sides, and the 
pedestal as well, is decorated with lions and little human figures; those 
at the sides of the seat are resting on half an elephant with its trunk turned 
away, while on the top (not at the side) of the cross beam onthechair-
') For some account of the various beings and objects that were supposed to exist at 
Potalaka, (but are omitted at Barabudur) compare the description in the AryatarabhaftA 
rikilnarnastottara^atafeastotra on p. 48 and 54 of De Blonay’s Mat6riaux pour servir & l’his- 
toire de la deesse buddhique Tara (Bibl. Ec. hant. Etud. 107, 1895).
^
 
‘
THE GANDAYYUHA 
I ^ L


--- Page 59 ---
(fiT
back the makara’s are found. The Bodhisattva with his usual Amita- 
bha-headdress is four-armed, the right hand is held in vara-mudra, the 
left has been knocked off but held the stalk of a padma; in the additional 
hands we see probably, in the right a rosaiy (not very distinct) and left 
an angku$a. He is wearing, also in the following reliefs, a broad band over 
the left shoulder and sits in vajrasana on a lotus cushion. On the left are 
two rows of hearers one above the other, the lower ones very much 
worn-away; the top corner here is altogether missing. On the right on 
level ground, Sudhana is approaching on foot with several attendants. 
Above these is another row of the Bodhisattva's audience, sitting not on 
clouds but on the rocks; as far as we can see, they are all men.
101. Homage offered to A valokitegvara
An actual leader of the people doing homage is not to be discovered at 
first sight; they are all men. The relief is a good deal damaged. The wor­
shippers here sit in two rows one above the other, on both sides of the 
relief; the top row have clouds under them as well as above them and 
must be celestials. The front person below on the left with the small in­
censory and fan, has certainly lost his headdress, but as he is the only 
one who had a halo, we can consider him to be Sudhana. In the centre is 
the pavilion of the Bodhisattva with two angels hovering above it, he is 
here seated on a lion-throne with a lotus cushion in vajrasana; he again 
wears the Amitabha in his headdress and is four-armed; although three 
of the hands have disappeared, it is quite distinct that the right hand 
was held in vara-mudra and the left held the stalk of a padma, while the 
second hand on the same side has a kropak. The pedestal of the pavilion 
is uncut.
102. Sudhana w ith A valokitegvara
Without the text, we are not able to understand why three scenes are 
given to Sudhana’s interview with Avalokitegvara: it may be the course 
of the tale would tell us that the Bodhisattva manifested himself in 
various ways. On this relief he still sits on a lion-throne with a lotus 
cushion in vajrasana in a pavilion, with the Amitabha in his headdress, 
but here he is represented six-armed. The front pair of hands has, 
right, the vara-mudra, the left holds the padma stalk; the second 
right hand is indistinct and the left holds an amrta-bottle; the third 
right hand has the rosary and the left is missing. Sudhana stands on the 
left of the pavilion, Iris hands folded in sfimbah and four attendants
' 
THE GANDAVYUHA 
‘i P - ^


--- Page 60 ---
/ ^ / ^ % \ 
" 
p f l 
:
THE OANDAVYUHA
behind him; on the right stands another man with a plainer head­
dress and no halo, holding up a flower in his right hand, with a 
couple of attendants seated under a tree, Angels on clouds above, on 
both sides.
103. Sudhana and Ananyagdmin
The last-mentioned is sitting in a not very elaborate niche, dressed in 
the ordinary costume of men of rank and wearing a halo ; his attitude is 
vajrasana with the left hand resting on his lap, the right lifted in the 
gesture of preaching; bells hang on each side of the niche and its top is 
edged with clouds out of which rise the figures of two bearded celestials 
such as we have seen several times, the same that are found on the 
doorways of the fourth gallery. In the centre of the arch with its crowning 
lion head, the ornement branches out into a tree spreading wide with an 
umbrella above it and birds among its leaves. Angels of the usual kind 
hover in both top corners, but under the one on the left as a contin­
uation to the tree is a landscape with rocks and a pair of deer; below 
that, three of Ananyagatnin’s followers are sitting with a waterjug on a 
rustic stand between them and their master. Below on the right, on the 
other side of the niche, sits Sudhana, his hands folded in s&nbah, with a 
couple of servants.
104. Sudhana and Mahadeva
Here again a rocky forest landscape with deer and birds is placed 
round the god. He is seated in vajrasana on a lotus cushion that rests 
on a stone pedestal, in front of which lies the Nandi. The god is four­
armed, the first pair in dhyana-mudra, the second holding the usual 
emblems, right the rosary, left the fly-whisk, his trident we see straight up 
at the side of the rock. The serpen t-upavita is plainly to be seen but no 
sign of the crescent or the skull in his headdress. The two standing 
and two sitting persons to the left of the rocks, rather weatherworn, but 
still resembling brahmans, belong most likely to the god; on the right 
there are four standing and two seated persons. Both the latter are 
rather indistinct but seem to resemble those sitting on the left; those 
standing, all men, wear (certainly three, perhaps four) the dress of 
distinguished people. The front one ought to be Sudhana, though he has 
nothing to distinguish him from his companions and wears no halo. 
Three pairs of angels hover overhead.


--- Page 61 ---
(fij
105. Sudhana and the first Ratridevata
The goddess is sitting in the porch of her palace or temple; though the 
side of the building apparently faces us, the porch has been turned towards 
the spectator. She has a worn- off object, like abowl, in her hand. Sudhana 
sits on the right under a tree, his hands in sembah, separated from the 
goddess by an incensory and abowl of flowers, his retinue under another 
tree behind him; this part of the relief is very much worn-away. One or 
two of the goddess’s women are squeezed in behind the palace on the left; 
the top of the relief is filled in with a celestial choir with drum and 
cymbals, in the righthand top corner are two kinnara’s separated from 
the others by clouds.
106. Sudhana and the second Ratridevata
The goddess sits on a throne in a pavilion with tr iy ula-omements on the 
top, an angel hovers on each side of the roof. On the left, the goddess’s 
women are standing, and one sitting, under a tree; on the right stands 
Sudhana with a dwarf umbrella-bearer and three companions or 
attendants.
107. Sudhana and the third Ratridevata
A wide pavilion stretches right across the relief and above is only room 
for one or two treetops and some angels in the sky. All the figures in the 
scene are seated within the five arches of the building. In the centre, the 
goddess on a throne resting on lions with a closed chest or box under it; 
she has her righthand raised. To the right are her women; on the left 
with a censer and a bowl of flowers between them, Sudhana is 
sitting with his hands folded together on his breast and three attendants, 
the last holding a scimitar.
108. Sudhana and the fourth Ratridevata
On an undecorated seat placed in a small pavilion in the centre of the 
relief, with an angel at each side of the roof, the goddess is seated with a 
flower in her lefthand. A tree on each side in the background. On the 
left her women are standing and sitting, one of them holding a fan; on the 
right stands Sudhana with an object in his hand not to be recognised on 
the photograph, and behind him are six attendants, some with flowers.
THE GANDAVYUHA


--- Page 62 ---
/yh—yv\
109. Sudhana and the fifth Ratridevata
A damaged relief with large gaps in it. Though the sculptor has done 
his best to bring variety into these reliefs with such similar land of 
scenes, they are bound to be very much, alike in the main. Here again 
we have a goddess on a seat without ornement in her pavilion, turning 
towards Sudhana seated on the right; on each side their attendants sit­
ting under a tree and above, clouds with angels on them. The front 
woman holds a curious-looking object like a loaf of bread in her hands; 
perhaps it is a worn off dish of some sort.
110. Sudhana and the sixth Ratridevata
This is the only one of the goddesses on these reliefs who does not 
wear a halo; this is, as can still be seen, only the result of dilapidation. 
The pavilion in which she sits is not much decorated except on the 
roof. There are again two angels in the air and trees on both sides of the 
pavilion; on the left are the women attendants, on the right Sudhana 
with his retinue, all seated. Sudhana holds a ball-shaped object in his 
left hand; a small tree stands on his right.
111. Sudhana and the seventh Ratridevata
The goddess, whose face has disappeared, is sitting in her pavilion on a 
cushion with another at her back and a small oblong something (a flower- 
stalk?) in her left hand. Trees and angels figure here too, women attend­
ants stand and sit on the left, Sudhana and his escort are standing on 
the right. As far as we can see, Sudhana here wears no halo, but instead 
has a crescent behind his head; not as generally seen at the back of the 
neck, but behind his headdress. It is not possible to discern if there has 
been anything in his lifted righthand.
112. Sudhana and the eighth Ratridevatd
The scene is entirely out of doors, as we see by the trees all over the 
relief. In the clouds are some angels. The goddess sits in the middle on an 
undecorated seat under what is little more than an awning held up by 
poles. She holds a stalk in her left hand on which there has been some­
thing, now half knocked off, that looks like the familiar jewel emblem. 
This may remind us of what the shorter text-summary tells about the 
goddess Vara shewing jewels to Sudhana, but of course there is no evidence
t(f|| 
(ct
THE GANDAVYUHA 
M
f J


--- Page 63 ---
to prove any connection here1). Sudhana sits on the right, his hands 
folded in sembah, behind him a brahman and then two servants. On the 
ground behind the tent sit two of the goddesses' women and the scene is 
here closed in by a massive small building with no ornement on its 
middle part, but the roof has a decorated cornice with pinnacles at the 
corners and is crowned with a jewel ornement half of it knocked off.
113. Buddha and a battle-scene
This is a very remarkable relief, that is in no way connected with the 
course of tale given by the text. The actual fact of fighting being de­
picted is already something noticeable, it being well-known 2) that as a 
rule the sculptors avoided all agitating scenes even where the text des­
cribed them and there was a chance of the course of the tale becoming 
lost by the omission. The battle on this relief must indeed have great 
importance in the text, when this rule is swept aside for the sake of 
representing it. On the right of the relief a Buddha is seated in 
dhyana-mudra on a lotuscushion and lion-throne; the back of it is 
round with an edge of flames coming out of it, above we see the branches 
of a tree with an umbrella in its top. In the righthand lower corner are 
a standing and a seated female worshipper with a flower and a bowl 
of flowers in their hand. All the rest of the relief is taken up with 
the battle between two groups of warriors with swords and shields. 
There seems to be no difference in the uniform and weapons of the two 
parties. They are fighting fiercely, but the sculptor has been careful not 
to shew any one being wounded or killed. The fight goes on quite close 
to the Buddha, but there is nothing to shew any connection between the 
two parts of the relief, for instance that an attack on his person is being 
driven off or something of that sort. It is of course also possible that this 
is a vision of fighting called up by the Buddha to point the moral of his 
discourse.
114. Unidentified
In the centre of the relief is a closed building that resembles the small 
temples of which so many are found in Java, with a kala-head above 
the double-door, a cornice with antefixes and a roof with the familiar 
crowned pinnacles. Above the building are two angels. On the left is a *)
*) Compare pag. 24 and 42.
*) See I p. 235, note 2. We did only meet with battles between the gods and asura's, 
in the Jatakamala (I p. 342) and the Mandhatravadana (I p. 273).
THE GA lsT DA V YU HA 
J


--- Page 64 ---
(i(W)\ 
(St
\ V ^ 8 0 > / 
THE GANDAVYUHA 
S J |l J
\
^ i ■■vf^y 
' ( r, ' 
J
tree with serving-women standing and sitting beneath it. On the right, 
also under a tree, five men in the dress of distinguished persons are ap­
proaching, the front one like the others has no halo, he holds a blue lotus 
in his hand.
115. Conversation with a man
A scene out-of -doors with trees and angels holding flowers and wreaths 
in the clouds. The relief is worn and damaged here and there, so that we 
cannot be sure if haloes, now in any case invisible, may originally have 
adorned the heads of both the chief persons.
The person receiving the visitor, whose headdress is done up in braids, 
sits on a seat with a back under a tree, with a water jug fixed in a stand 
made from a branch; he has two seated followers. On the right hand of the 
relief sits Sudhana, in front of him is an incensory , he has a flower in his 
hand, and his escort is behind him.
116. Conversation with a woman
The possibili ty of this lady being Gopa has already been discussed on 
p. 11, though ray opinion leans towards the probability of Gopa being 
found on the following relief. In connection with the remarks on no. 112, 
there is also the supposition that this might be the goddess Vasanti, but to 
begin with she has no halo and then the summary of the text gives the 
impression that this goddess should appear much earlier in the story. The 
same can be said about the identification of Vara on no. 112. The lady is 
seated on an undecorated chair in a pavilion holding a flower (?) in her 
hand; to the left are her women standing and sitting, on the right sits 
Sudhana, a flower in his right hand, with his escort under a tree. The stem 
of this tree is richly adorned and it has a tiara placed on a lotus cushion 
in the middle of its foliage. Celestial beings are above in the clouds.
117. Sudhana with Gopa and Maya
1 he two women as mentioned before, are seated together in a pavilion 
that is decorated with lions and crowned with a cakra; an angel hovers 
on either side of it. On the left are the usual female attendants under a 
tree, on the right under another tree, is Sudhana with a couple of attend­
ants. He has no halo on this relief.
118. Conversation with a man
Along the top, a row of celestial beings, among them musicians; a tree
' Gow?X


--- Page 65 ---
. v X & s /
on both sides of the pavilion, two on the right. Sudhana is here with his 
escort on the righthand as usual, now seated with hands folded in sembah, 
and the retinue of the man in the pavilion are on the left with a brahman 
sitting in front. The pedestal is decorated with small elephants fronting 
us. In contrast to Sudhana his host has a halo, he has a tripod in front 
of him on a stand, but whatever was on the tripod has disappeared.
119. Conversation with a man
This pavilion has a curious and remarkable kind of roof-decoration 
with little human figures and pots or bags of valuables. The man is 
seated on a plain cushion with his right hand lifted in front of his breast 
as if preaching, he has a female attendant on each side of him; there is 
an angel above on each side. On the left is his retinue, all women, above 
them in the comer we see a small mass of rocks with two deer couched 
under a tree. Four men dressed like persons of distinction are coming 
from the right, the front one, who should be Sudhana, has an umbrella 
over his head and a flower in his hands that are folded in sembah, 
but like the others he wears no halo. There is a tree in the back­
ground.
120. Sudhana and Surendrabha
The pavilion is divided into three niches, and its roof is ornemented 
with the figures of birds. In the centreniche sits Surendrabha on a 
throne, a dish with a lid under the seat; in the lefthand niche two female 
attendants are seated and next to the pavilion two couples more above 
each other. Sudhana without a halo, sits with his arms crossed over his 
breast with an incensory beside him in the righthand niche. To the right 
of the pavilion is a tree with Sudhana’s retinue under it, only one stand­
ing, the others seated. Angels right and left in the clouds.
121. Sudhana and Vigvdmitra
We now get a different style of building; a separate niche in the centre, 
with a pendapa, supported by pilasters, adjoining it on each side. Above 
the centre compartment appear the branches of a tree. The back of the 
throne rests on small human figures standing on elephant heads and 
under the seat is a dish with a lid to it and a pile of basins; here 
sits Vitjvamitra, 'facing us in dhyana-mudra. On the roof of both 
pendapas are two kinnara’s with a flower, fly-whisk and monochord.
In the one on the right Sudhana is standing with four attendants
(f i ) 1/ 
(&T
THE GANDAVYUHA 
k^LLj


--- Page 66 ---
he has no halo and holds out. his left hand open in front of him as if to 
receive something; in the right he has a flower. The other pendapa is 
filled with Vipvarnitra’s retinue, women as well as men, the first stand­
ing the latter seated; the front one appears to be a brahman.
122. Sudhana and Surendra
The top of the relief is occupied by celestial beings, in whose hands 
drums, cymbals and the vina instrument are seen. The pavilion is in the 
centre with Surendra on a throne; on the right, with an incensory beside 
him and without a halo, is Sudhana, with his escort under a tree 
behind him, all Seated. Another tree is on the left with large jewel-pots 
next to it, on which a kinnara is perched. Four persons are sitting round 
the pots, they are evidently guarding the treasure as well as attending 
on Surendra, especially the one most to the right with a fly-whisk.
123. Sudhana with Muktasdra
Sudhana is here still without a halo and remains so till the end of the 
series; he is sitting with hands folded in sexnbah, his escort behind him, 
as usual on the right of the relief. The left part of the relief is taken up by 
a building with three niches; in the centre one sits Muktasara on a throne, 
and in each of the side ones stands a female attendant with a fly-whisk. 
Above Sudhana and his escort are two masses of cloud, each with a tree 
and an umbrella in its top. Under the righthand tree stand two kin- 
nara’s; above the pavilion hover four angels.
124. Sudhana and Sivirdtra
The paii of kinnara’s are here again on a cloud above Sudhana’s head; 
he sits in his usual place in front of the pavilion with three attendants 
sitting behind him. On the extreme right under a tree four more distin­
guished persons are standing, the front one holding a large ball-shaped 
flower. In the pavilion the brahman sits on an open worked stool 
(he has been discussed on p. 11); the narrow space beside the pavilion is 
occupied by a second brahman seated, a pupil standing and an angel 
above.
125. Sudhana with Qnsambhava and Qrimati
On the left of the relief, the young man and maiden are sitting in a 
double pavilion each on a seat, under the man’s seat is a covered dish
' 6^ 9N\
\-Xjlt■{') 
THE GANDAVYUHA 
j)L


--- Page 67 ---
and a filled bowl. Between the two compartments of the building is a 
small human figure, probably a servant of £rlsambhava, and in the left- 
hand corner Qrimatfs female attendant is crouching. Sudhana is ap­
proaching on foot with a dwarf umbrella-bearer and five attendants; there 
is a tree in the back ground on the right. One of the angels overhead 
seated between two bearded ones, has his hands folded in sembah and 
another seems to be pouring something out of a spouted vase.
126. Worship of a building
The building is in the ordinary temple style with rampant lions on the 
pedestal and closed double-doors; it stands in the middle of the relief. 
Angels hover in the clouds. Some women are sitting under a tree; on the 
right Sudhana kneels before the temple with his hands on the ground 
in front of his knees and his escort behind him. In the background a tree 
with a parrot flying towards it and a peacock sitting on its top.
127. Arrival at Sanmdrakatiha,
It has already been noted that the temple, here again shewn with closed 
doors, has a roof decorated with numerous stupa’s. On the right of it 
seven men are approaching who seem to be of the same well-to-do class; 
the front one holds up an offering of flowers, he might be Sudhana. On 
the left stand four female worshippers, the first with a flower in her 
hands and before them three men in the dress of servants are sitting, the 
front one holding a censer. Above both groups of figures is a line of 
clouds and angels doing homage with sembah’s and with flowers.
128. Worshipping Maitreya
The Bodhisattva is seated in his pavilion in the middle of the relief in 
the attitude of vajrasana, on a lotus cushion that is placed on a throne, 
its pedestal and back ornemented with small lions and human figures; 
the lions on the back are rampant, resting as usual on the figure of 
an elephant. Maitreya can be identified by the stupa in his headdress, 
he holds the right hand in vara-mudra and has a flower-stalk in the left. 
Right and left, in three rows one above the other, the worshippers are 
arranged, they are all men; as no clouds have been put in except along 
the roof of the building, we cannot see if any of them are celestial beings, 
but both top groups and the middle row on the right shew us the musical 
instruments so often seen in angelic hands; drum, cymbals, flute, bells
W ) 
§L
THE GANDAVYUHA


--- Page 68 ---
THE GANDAVYUHA 
kT T ^
and the vina. If Sudhana appears on this relief, he can be no other than 
the front figure in the bottom low on. the left, sitting with hands in sem- 
bah. In the left middle row are some naga’s with their snake headdress, 
but for the rest depicted as ordinary men in the usual way. On the right 
in the bottom row we see three persons, the front and last one with the 
thick beard and unkempt hair of yaksa's; the middle one is agaruda 
with a bird’s beak, eyes and wings, but otherwise like a human being.
' G°^\ 
* ..~ : .


--- Page 69 ---
IH 
‘SL
CHAPTER VIII 
£ ? *) **
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
[Third and fourth gallery; chief wall)
The third gallery is dedicated to Maitreya.
"He is the only Bodhisattva”, so says Koeppen in his well-known 
book 1), "who enjoys an equal popularity among all Buddhist peoples, 
and his name is mentioned much oftener in the simpler and older sutra’s 
than that of any other; his image is found on very old buildings and was 
set up in many different parts of India, often in colossal size, long before 
the arrival of the Chinese pilgrims. Maitreya is the Buddhist Messiah, 
and when this became established as an article of faith, it was natural he 
should come nearer and be more distinct to the community of believers 
than the earlier Buddha's or the candidates for Buddhaship who would 
only attain their sanctity after some immeasurable length of time. He 
is the continuer of £akyamuni’s.work, his spiritual heir; his task is to 
administer the inheritance; the future of the Church is in his hands and 
every believer is under his protection. To him pious souls turn in hope 
and expectation for their comfort in sorrow and suffering and their 
greatest joy and satisfaction would be to meet the all-perfect Buddha 
in a future reincarnation, to adore him and join the company of his dis­
ciples. Through him the harvest now being sown by the individual, 
shall be reaped and the seed scattered by Gautama bear fruit in abun­
dance. The Bodhi-tree will spread its branches far and wide over the 
earth, the Church, in spite of all suppression and persecution shall rise 
victorious and happiness and virtue flourish for ages to come. It cannot 
be said that Maitreya ever became the actual successor of the founder of 
the faith who had departed into Nirvana, or was such a leader and ruler 
of the Church as Avalokitegvara became later on in the Lama church
* ) Die Religion des Buddha I (1857) p. 500—502.
Barabudur II 
5


--- Page 70 ---
K M 
<s l
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA
so as he still remains, but at any rate it was considered that the exten­
sion and prosperity of the Creed was specially under his protection. This 
belief must already have existed 1), when Buddhism extended beyond 
the borders of India, moreover it still exists. We read constantly how 
with the missions when sending the statue of the "now reigning” 
Buddha, it was accompanied by that of his successor, whose image was 
often set up where a new country was being converted. The Chinese 
pilgrims found a colossal statue on the banks of the Indus on the right 
hand side of the river, and one of them was told on questioning the 
natives that according to the oldest tradition, the creed of Buddha had 
crossed the river when the colossus was erected. To this information he 
adds these edifying words "So it may be said that the erection of this 
image gives the date when the exalted Creed began to increase and 
extend itself. Without the help of the great teacher Maitreya, who could 
have continued the work of the Qakya and established his law?, who 
would have been able to spread the knowledge of the three jewels, to 
bring it to the dwellers of distant lands and teach them the origin of 
the mysterious wheel of life ? Human power could never have achieved 
this” 2).
With regard .to the series of reliefs on the third gallery, two points must 
first be settled: first if the chief person here is really meant to be Mai­
treya and secondly if there is anything to be found in the Maitreya- 
tales known to us that agrees with what is shewn on the reliefs.
The first question will be discussed later on in Chapt. XII. In my 
opinion there is no acceptable reason for doubting that the Bodhisattva 
with the stupa in his headdress represents Maitreya, the same opinion is 
stated in the Oudheidk. Rapport of 19103) and was apparently shared by 
vanErp4). To save repetition, the reader is referred tochapt.XIIwherethe 
grounds for identification are described5). My conclusion is, that at any 
rate for Java, apart from other possible signs like the nagapuspa-branch 
that is often omitted or replaced by something else, or the broad band 
that does not belong only to this Bodhisattva, the stupa in the head­
dress is a fast and certain attribute of Maitreya. At the same time we *)
*) For the great age of this Maitreya-expectation, found both in the Hinayana and Ma- 
hiiyana, compare Peri in Bull. Ec. franp, d'Extr. Or. 11 (1911) p. 454 sqq.
*) The translation compared to that of Beal (Si-yu-ki, 1884, I p. XXX) seems rather free, 
but this is of little importance to the argument.
*) On p. 16.
') Tijdschr. Bat. Gen 54 (1912) p. 427—457,
‘) The objections to this identification did not convince van Erp either, see Tijdschr Bat.
Gen. 56 (1914) p.322.
' G0|^X


--- Page 71 ---
must not expect to find only one particular sort of stupa of a special 
shape. On the contrary it everywhere appears that the sculptors not 
only of different monuments, but of the one Barabudur, were allowed 
perfect freedom in this respect, as their work shews. Stupa’s are to be 
found of every sort of shape, size and proportion; moreover they are 
placed in the headdress in all sorts of different ways. But it is always a 
stupa; that is the decisive fact.
On page 106 of Vol. I it has already been noticed that on the one relief 
where Maitreya appears in the Lalitavistara, it happens that he wears no 
stupa in his headdress. This phenomenon I think must not be explained 
by the emblem being unnecessary, i.e. by thinking Maitreya could be 
recognised as well without his stupa in the wellknown sacred text there 
depicted, just as modern archaeologists have been able to identify the 
relief without the help of this attribute. I consider that however justi­
fiable this argument may be of itself, it is here misplaced when every­
where else on the reliefs the principle is followed of depicting the Bo- 
dhisattva’s with their distinctive emblem, that it is to say, the attribute 
which identifies them, their chief emblem, without it being directly 
necessary. I think the only possible explanation is that Maitreya was 
considered to have got his distinctive headdress only after the episode 
in the Tusita-heaven that is given on the relief alluded to, that is to say 
after the Buddha’s descent to the earth 1). It is quite comprehensible 
that only after the authority of the future Buddha had been passed on 
to Maitreya, so as the Lalitavistara relief shews us, was there any 
reason for him to manifest himself in the form which believers began to 
attribute to him; it was only then he became the chief actor in the 
various tales assigned to him.
As regards these stories, the fact that the Maitreya of Barabudur is 
depicted exclusively as Bodhisattva in ceremonial dress with the stupa 
headdress, never in human shape or in the form of a Buddha, is a clear 
indication of the direction in which the texts that have been followed 
must be looked for. Indian texts, so far as they are known to us, give 
nothing ; only the Divyavadana has an actual Maitreya-story 2), which 
occurs again in other sources and was discussed long ago by Schiefner 3); 
it tells about the golden sacrificial post of king Mahapranada. This is 
of no importance to Barabudur, no more than f.i. the well-known story
>) See Chapt. XII.
*) Divyavadana, no. 3; p. 55—66 in Cowell and Neil’s edition.
*) Zur Buddhistischen Apokalyptik, Bull. Acad. Imp. de St. Petersburg 20 (1875) p. 
379—387; reprinted in Melanges asiatiques VII (1876) p. 416—428.
' G°ix
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABITADRA 
\ fn


--- Page 72 ---
A°V"--n\ \
i(Wpi 
Q]
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA
of Ka^yapa and the Kukkutapada l) and others; scattered episodes, 
most of them preserved by the Chinese pilgrims 2). We can expect more 
from the connected Maitreya-texts that are to be found in the canon of 
the Chinese church to which the Japanese author, Matsumoto Bunzaburo 
has given special study in ids Miroku jodo ron3), a work we have no access 
to in the original, but whose contents are known through Peri’s excellent 
review of it 4).
Matsumoto distinguishes the Mahayanistic Maitreya texts in five 
groups, the last of which is the most important to our search. The 
first group is that where Maitreya is an ordinary disciple of the Buddha, 
not in any way superior to the others, in the second group he begins to 
excel his companions and is able to explain a sermon of the Buddha 
which the rest cannot understand. In the third that consists of one tantra, 
Maitreya receives from the Buddha a very powerful dharani and then 
makes a vow promising when he himself has become a Buddha, to confer 
the Perfect Wisdom on all such persons who pronounce that same 
dharani. In the fourth group, the important part is where the Buddha at 
Ananda’s request, explains the way in which his fellow-pupil Maitreya 
has attained such remarkable qualities. Even before (.iakyanruni himself, 
Maitreya had desired to attain the Buddhaship, but the former achieved 
his aim sooner because he qualified himself for it by many deeds of self- 
sacrifice, while Maitreya restricted himself to worshipping the Buddha's 
and praying for the Perfect Wisdom in a prescribed form. Therefore 
Qakyamuni, who had set himself to protect all living beings and purify 
the world, became Buddha while mankind still remained in wickedness; 
Maitreya on the contrary will achieve the same later on when all men 
have become pure and virtuous. In this way he is looked upon as the 
future Buddha of a purified world, free from sin.
This last idea is developed in the fifth group, the so-called “six-books 
of Maitreya”, no. 204—209 in Nanjio’s Catalogue 5). My colleague Prof. 
M. W. de Visser has kindly placed at my disposal a review of its contents
’> See L6vi-Chavannes, Les seize arhat protecteurs de la loi, Journ. Asiat. 11:18 (19-16) 
p. 196 sq. and de Visser, The Arhats in China and Japan (1923) p. 93: Griinwedel, Mytholo- 
gie des Buddhismus in Tibet und der Mcmgolei (1901) p. 124 sq, and the Dutch edition of 
this monograph p. 527 sq.
*) For these tales, consult Beal, Si-yu-ki, 1 p. L XXVIII; II p. 233—228, 313; the same,
A Catena of Buddhist scriptures from the Chinese (1871) p. 140; and Wassiljew, Der Buddhis­
mus (1860) p. 178 (164).
*) Published in Tokyd 1911.
«) Bull. Ec. fr. d’Extr. Or. 11 (1911) p. 439—457.
*) Bunyiu Nanjio, ACatalogue of the Chinese translation of the Buddhist Tripijaka (1883) 
p. 61 sq. Compare L6vi-Chavaimes, 1.1.. p. 14 sq. and 191— 193,


--- Page 73 ---
and I am able to quote concisely some of his remarks. If these scriptures 
could furnish a key to the explanation of the reliefs on the third gallery, 
I should quote the list of contents in extenso. This not being the case, I 
shall give only a short review that will however be valuable for giving an 
impression of the nature and character of many of the texts referring to 
Maitreya.
Nanjio’s no. 204 is a sutra pronounced by the Buddha in answer to the 
question of Upananda about Maitreya’s ascension and rebirth in the 
Tusita-heaven. Maitreya, then living in a brahman family on earth, will 
die after twelve years to be re-born into the Tusita-heaven. There, 500 
koti’s of angels will appear who take off their cintamaiii-diadems and 
promise to sacrifice them to the future Buddha. The diadems then 
change into 5 million koti’s of splendid palaces, glittering with the seven 
jewels on their sevenfold walls that give out 500 koti's of rays of light, 
and in each ray of light are 500 koti’s of lotus-flowers; each flower chan­
ges into 500 koti’s of trees, and each leaf on every tree has 500 koti’s of 
colours, each colour 500 koti’s of golden dishes, each dish produces 500 
koti’s of celestial women, each woman takes her place under a tree and 
holds 100 koti’s of valuables while she makes beautiful music and the 
trees are laden with magnificent fruit. Five hundred koti’s of naga-kings 
will surround each wall and each king causes 500 koti's of trees made of 
the seven jewels, to descend on the walls. A great Spirit makes a vow to 
build a Hall of the Law for Maitreya “if my virtues are powerful enough, 
let pearls appear on my forehead”. Then 100 koti’s of precious stones 
appear on his forehead and wheeling in the air they are changed into 
49 double palaces....
No need to continue the list, it goes on in the same style with angels, 
celestial music, lotusflowers, jewels etc., in enormous quantities. Five 
great spirits follow the first who rain down from their body precious 
stones, flowers, a perfumed sea, cintamani’s and water with flowers in it, 
one after the other. To another question from Upananda, the answer is 
a further description of how on Maitreya’s arrival in the Tu§ita-heaven, a 
lion-throne will be changed into a lotus-throne and his iirna shall radiate 
light. Fifty six kofi and ten thousand human years he shall stay preach­
ing in heaven and then be born again in Jambudvlpa.
No. 205, sutra on Maitreya's descent from heaven and his birth on the 
earth, prophesied by the Buddha in answer to a question asked by 
Cariputra. It begins with a description of the future condition of Jam­
budvipa that has increased in size by the seas becoming smaller; full 
of trees, flowers and fruit it is inhabited by wise, virtuous and powerful
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA


--- Page 74 ---
people who live to be 84.000 years old. There a great city shall be 
found, famous for its splendour; a naga-king at midnight waters it 
with a gentle shower of rain to keep it clean, a yaksa guards it and 
removes all unsightly things. Over this ideal state rules a cakravartin 
who among his treasures possesses a tower built of seven jewels. Here 
in this city Maitreya is born of a brahman family with a body perfect 
in all its parts. There he dwells filled with pity for the beings who 
are doomed to the samsara; the king comes to him and presents him 
with the tower which he accepts and divides among the brahmans.
This reveals to him the instability of all that exists; he leaves his home 
and attains the Highest Wisdom under a Nagapuspa-bodhi-tree. Gods 
and heavenly beings rain down flowers and incense. Then follows a list 
of all those who come to him and become monk: king and queen, crown 
prince, ministers etc., each with 84.000 followers. Maitreya preaches the 
Creed and many attain arhatship. He makes his entry into the city, 
honoured by the gods with £akra and Brahma at their head, by human 
beings, raksasa’s etc., even by Mara. Then Maitreya betakes himself to 
the Grdlirakuta and there sees Maha-Kapyapa, Qakyamuni’s great 
disciple. After living 60.000 years in the world, he attains the nirvana 
and the Dharma rules on in the world for another 60.000 years.
No. 206 gives the same, more concisely. Some of the names are a little 
different; the Buddhaship is not attained immediately, but only after 4 
months and 8 days meditation under the Nagapuspa. Young girls to the 
number of 84.000 lay their ornements at the feet of Maitreya and the 
monks. He then goes with all the arhats into the city, partakes of food 
and drink in the palace and preaches there while the night becomes as 
light as day.
No. 207 gives us very much the same thing, only in stanzas. Maitreya 
is born into the world while his mother stands under a tree in a park; the 
presence of £akra who receives him at birth, the seven steps, the lotus 
flowers bursting forth under his feet, and the bath given by the naga’s, 
are all the same as at the birth of £akyamuni, and other details of his 
youth shew that this part of the story follows the example of his pre­
decessor. Instead of the tower, it is here a canopy that is presented to him 
and divided among the brahmans.
No. 208 is also principally the same. The Great Departure takes place at 
midnight and the Bodhi is attained the same night. In the work of con­
version, Maitreya is assisted by Maha-Kagyapa, the former pupil of 
fakyamuni.
No. 209 again gives the tower as what is divided among the brahmans.
({(f j 
(fiT
MAITREYA a n d s a m a n t a b h a d r a 
J


--- Page 75 ---
Maitreya subdues four sorts of demons on the night of his journey before 
he can achieve the Highest Wisdom. The Kagyapa-episode is given here 
too: his body is anointed and washed by Brahma, he ascends into the air, 
transforms himself several times, expounds one of Qakyamuni's sutra’s 
and then descends to kneel before Maitreya; finally he returns to his 
stupa. To the story of Maitreya’s nirvana after a period of 60.000 koti's 
of years on earth, is added the erection of 84.000 stupa's for his remains 
by a cakravartin.
Thus far Dr. de Visser’s summary1). Matsumoto states that among 
these six books we need only take two of the texts into account; no. 208 
for instance can be put aside as being nothing more than the end of the 
Ekottaragama-sutra, cap. 44 2), 205 is merely a resume of 209, and 206 
is the translation of a resume of the same original text of which both 
209 and 207 are the translation, We have thus on the one side the last- 
mentioned Mi-lei tch'eng fo king, represented by 209 and 207 with the 
description of Maitreya’s Budhaship and on the other side no. 204, called 
Mi-lei p’ou-sa chang cheng Teou-chouei then king, with Ins stay in the 
Tusita-heaven. Apart from this argument, it can be stated that the 
same difference exists from an iconographical point of view. Quite a 
different kind of representation may be expected from the eventual 
rendering of 207—209 to that of 204.
In the first case the main point is surely Maitreya the Buddha; and 
even when we find striking features from the stories are not given on the 
reliefs (such as the gift of the stake, or the visit to Kacyapa) there should 
at least be some indication of the Buddhaship of the future Saviour. There 
is no sign of this on the Barabudur. Right to the end of the text or texts, 
Maitreya is shewn distinctly as the Bodhisattva wearing the ceremonial 
dress of these beings, and not yet even reincarnated as the brahman-son.
What we have before us is undoubtedly everywhere the Bodhisattva 
before his coming human existence, the Maitreya of the Tusitaheaven.
As regards this, Barabudur agrees with no. 204, and if we should 
according to a distinction made by Matsumoto, try to define the creed 
of those who ordered these reliefs to be carved, then we must not reckon 
them among the people who were looking out with longing for the happy 
kingdom of Maitreya expected on earth; they are much more likely to 
belong to those believers whose worship of Maitreya ended in their 
rebirth into the glory of the Tusita-heaven. This desire for Maitreya’s
') The same authority also remarks that the seven pieces about Maitreya in the supplement 
to the Tripitaka (35) are all commentaries on no. 204—209.
*) Possibly it is there inserted; see Levi-Chavannes 1. 1. p. 192.
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
J


--- Page 76 ---
G t
happy kingdom we see expressed in the stories about Asanga and 
Vasubandhu; Hiuen Tsiang fixed his hopes on the same ideal), and ancient 
remains in China prove the popularity of this belief2).
Even if we see the possibility that the founders of the Barabudur may 
have shared these views and though it may be stated that their Mai- 
treya was more the Tusita-Bodhisattva than the future Buddha, still 
text no. 204 with which such views agree, brings us no nearer to an 
explanation of the reliefs. Nor do we gain any light from some other 
tales in which the Bodhisattva figures before his expected incarnation;
I will here give some account of their contents.
Let us first examine the cases in which Maitreya takes a more or less 
important place among the Bodhisattva’s who are listening to the 
Buddha while he expounds some point of the creed, or are joining in the 
discussion. Then it is Maitreya who begins by asking a question about 
a Mahasamaja, who takes part in the Saddharmapundarfka, who pre­
pares a throne for the Master in the Sugatavadana 3). It is a foregone 
conclusion that his name belongs among the Bodhisattva’s who accord­
ing to tradition combined in the founding of the Mahayanistic creed 4).
Whenever Maitreya’s image appears on these occasions, we should of 
course think to see him depicted in the way he is shewn on the reliefs. 
But one glance at the reliefs shews us not to expect anything in that 
direction. Nowhere on this gallery do we find the groups of Bodhisattva’s 
that the above-mentioned texts describe as gathered round the Buddha. 
On the contrary where Maitreya appears on the reliefs, he himself, alone 
or with some other person, plays the chief part. Texts must have 
been represented in which Maitreya was unmistakeably the chief 
figure.
To continue with the further tales in which this Bodhisattva figures 
as chief person before his earthly existence begins: these can unfortu­
nately be called nothing better than 'tales’ or legends, and are not to 
be mentioned as texts. What is known to us of this kind is only from 
separate secondhand sources.
J) Julien, Histoire de la vie de Hiouen-thsang (1853) p. 117. For the same early periods 
compare I-tsing, Memoire sur les religieux eminents qui alldrent chercher la loi dans les pays 
d’Occident, trad. Chavannes (1894) p. 72 and 125.
s) Peri mentions (p, 447) the pilgrim place Wou-t‘ai-chan and the caves of Long Men 
(Chavannes, Mission arch6ologique etc. pi. CLXXXIV no. 308).
’) Comp, list of contents of these works by RAjendral&la Mitra, also Wassiljew 1.1. p. 206 
(188).
*) Wassiljew 1.1. p. 291 (264); the same in T&ran&tha, Geschichte des Buddhismus, iifo. 
Schiefner (1869) p. 300.
' G0|^ \
\% V §B ^ V 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
j


--- Page 77 ---
From Taranatba we hear of someone who sees Maitreya and of an­
other person who receives from this Bodhisattva the order to go to a 
certain monastery 1). We also know the story of the learned arhat who 
through the power of his samadhi was able to leave his body on earth, 
and ascend to the Tusita-heaven to converse with Maitreya; he could 
make effective use of his miraculous power this way whenever questions 
were put to him that could only be answered by a Bodhisattva 2). An­
other arhat., Madhyantika, by the power of his spirit could actually 
cause another man to rise into the Tusita-heaven; in this case it was the 
sculptor who had been commissioned to make a statue of Maitreya and 
was sent up to study his likeness. Three times he ascended to heaven for 
this purpose and created the masterpiece so much admired by the Chi­
nese pilgrims3). There is also the remarkable tale about the image of 
Buddha in the vihara near the Bodhi-tree 4). When this building was 
finished, sculptors were invited to make a statue of the Buddha, but 
years went by without any one daring to undertake the work. At last 
a brahman came and offered himself for the task; he was to be shut 
up alone in the vihara with sweetsmelling clay and a lamp and the 
doors were not to be opened for six months. At the end of four months 
the priests could no longer restrain their impatience; they went inside 
the building and found the brahman had disappeared but there was a 
splendid image of the Buddha seated in the attitude he assumed under 
the Bodhi-tree, only a part above the right breast was left unfinished. 
They saw that a miracle had taken place, but could not understand 
the manner of it. In the night, a vision came to one of the yramana’s who 
dwelt there; the brahman appeared to him and told him he was the 
Bodhisattva Maitreya who had come himself to do what no earthly 
sculptor could perform. Filled with gratitude, the monks covered up 
the unfinished spot with a necklace. In the rest of story that relates the 
adventures of the image at the cutting down of the Bodhi-tree, Maitreya 
plays no part,
On the reliefs we find nothing that could in any way be connected 
with the legends here mentioned, and there is no sign of arhats or sculp­
tors, but there is one story that should be discussed separately, not only
>) 1.1. p. 245 (192) and 139 (108).
*) Beal, 1.1. p. 227 sq; Edkins, Chinese Buddhism (1880) p. 79. Also Beal, Abstract of four 
lectures on Buddhist literature in China (1882), p. 16 sq. and 22. A similar story by Levi- 
Chavannes, 1.1. p. 43,
») Beal, Si-yu-ki I p. XXIX (Fa Hian), 134 (Hiuen Tsiang),
*) 1.1, II p. 119— 121. I shall refer again to this tale in chapt. X.
‘) Kern, Geschiedenis van het Buddkisme in Indie II (3884), p. 413.
f
f
t
l 
< & L
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
T J ^


--- Page 78 ---
because it is the most wide-spread and best-known Maitreya legend, but 
it is the only one about which there is any possibility suggested (in the 
above-quoted article by vanErp),of its being represented on the reliefs.
I mean the tale told about Asahga.
Not so very long ago it would have been considered impossible to 
connect Asahga with the Rarabudur because of the short period inter­
vening between the death of this father of the church and the erection 
of the sanctuary; for it was accepted generally that he lived in the 6th 
century of our era. It did not seem likely that in so short a period, tra­
dition could have invested him with sufficient sanctity to become the 
subject of an authentic text for the use of the founders of the Rarabudur. 
But later research has discovered that Asahga and his brother Vasu- 
bandhu must have lived much earlier; according to the date of their 
works being translated into the Chinese, Takakusu fixes the career of 
Vasubandhu at about 420—500 A.D.x); Wogihara draws attention to 
the fact that one of Asahga’s writings must have been translated already 
between 414 and 421 a), and Peri even came to the conclusion that Vasu­
bandhu, who outlived his brother several years, must have died about 
350 ®), a conclusion that now seems to be shared by Takak usu l * * 4).
Asahga is the founder of the Mahayanistic Yogacara-school and the 
tale in question is written to prove the supernatural origin of the prin­
ciples of that sect. Its origin falls in a period too late for being ascribed to 
the Buddha's own words, so that its principal writings are not considered 
to belong to the famous redaction of the holy scriptures after the death of 
the Master, which according to the Mahayanistic church, saints and Rodhi- 
sattva’s helped to collect. The sanctity of the new sect had to be assured 
in some other way than going back to Buddha himself or to the collec­
tors and editors of the oldest Creed. It can be understood that when the 
old Buddha was of no avail, they would first think of the new Buddha 
and ascribe the creed of the Yogacara to the intervention of Maitreya. 
The story that is possibly depicted on the Barabudur, is without further 
details, this, that Asahga received the creed preached by him, direct from 
Maitreya, not on earth, but in the Tusita-heaven whither he had ascended 
in the night and where he was received by the Bodhisatt va in person 5).
l ) A study of Paramartha’s life of Vasubandhu, Journ. Roy. As. Soc. 1905 p. 33—53.
*} Asahga’s Bodhisattvabbiimi, ein dogmatischer Text der Nordlniddhisten (1908) p. 14
■) A propos de la date de Vasubandhu, Bull. fic. franf. d’Extr. Or. 11 (1911) p. 384.
4) Journ. Roy. Asiat. Soc. 1914 p. 1013.
6) To Asahga’s story see Sylvain Levi in the Introduction to this Mahayanasutraiahkara- 
edition, Bibliothdque de PEcole des hautes Etudes, no.. 190 (1911) p. *1—•*7.
(((■ f )1 
(flT
MAI TREY A AND SAMANTABHADRA 
J


--- Page 79 ---
(hK t 
q
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA
It may seem rather strange that after the life of the Buddha, the 
sacred tradition of ancient times and the Gandavyuha that also belongs 
to the sphere of mysticism, we should suddenly be brought down to the 
merely historic adventures of a father of the church who though pro­
bably very famous, could not be placed on a level with Buddha and the 
Bodhisattva’s. But we need not expect to find the career of an historic 
personage here depicted. We must consider the question whether 
Asanga, the Bodhisattva” Asanga of course, has not been raised out 
of the earthly church-history; just as tradition once brought him into 
the Tusita-heaven, he likewise in later texts may have been given a chief 
place in mystic events of a higher sort. These texts may give therefore 
not the earthly career of Asanga but possibly the figure of Asanga 
translated into another sphere. 1 his is quite credible because there are 
indications that connect the Buddhism of Barabudur with the creed of 
the Yogacara's and to this I shall refer in the last chapter.
Van Erp’s supposition that Asanga appears on the third gallery, is 
founded chiefly on one relief, no. 56. There we see Maitreya seated in a 
pavilion, plainly recognisable by his stupa headdress. On the left of the 
building are his followers, in the clouds are angels; on the right sits an 
eminent man with a halo and his retinue, evidently in conversation with 
the Bodhisattva. This is all quite in the usual style of so many reliefs 
on this gallery. What is remarkable is the very targe book in the shape 
of a kropak that Maitreya holds in his hands resting on his knee. We 
might think this book to be the Yogacaryabhumi^astra, then of course 
the figure sitting on the right would be Asanga and the scene represent 
the Bodhisattva handing over that sacred writing to the teacher.
| 
We might easily be tempted in this way to recognise it as the book 
which plays such an important part in the well-known story. But there
\ is one obvious obj action; is it possible to think that a father of the church, 
the great scholar, founder of a new sect, would be depicted in worldly 
dress like the person on the relief? Is it not imperative that he should 
appear dressed like a monk, such as we see him in Tibetan art? Surely 
the portrait, that is quite conventional, reproduced by Griinwedel, has 
no historic value but according to the same author, Japanese art has 
also preserved a traditional Asanga-portrait that dates from the 8th 
century and shews evident signs of the Gandhara school1). This latter 
would prove that an Asanga type existed already in the art of the 
Indian motherland. On the other side it is possible that the type had
’} Mythologie p. 35 and plate 27.
■ e% \


--- Page 80 ---
been borrowed from Gandhara long before the name of Asahga was given 
to it. Still in the first place the objection must be put aside because not 
only, as we have seen, does the later literature speak of the “Bodhisattva” 
Asahga, but in agreement with what is mentioned above, it is not the 
father of the church, but exclusively the Bodhisattva we must expect 
to see here depicted.
However it may be, it is a fact, that the adjacent reliefs shew us very 
little that can be connected with the Asanga-tales such as we know 
them 1), for instance the entire absence of bhiksu’s compels us not to 
seek for any incidents in the earthly career of the great scholar. Even 
just next to no. 56 we encounter such difficulties as the appearance on 
nos. 55 and 58 of a Buddha who is not mentioned anywhere in the 
legend; while on no. 56 itself there is nothing to shew that Maitreya in­
tends to hand over to his worshiper the book he is holding, and the book 
itself is nowhere else to be seen.
taking everything into consideration, it must be stated that even if 
there is no fundamental objection to considering no. 56 as a conversa­
tion between Maitreya and Asahga, yet nothing appears in the surround­
ing reliefs to confirm the supposition, so that so far I am not able to 
agree with it,
h or the present we must restrict our examination to what can be 
seen on the reliefs themselves.
* 
*
*
bor want of other necessary data, our review of the relief-series on 
tht 3rd gallery chief wall, must entirely depend on outward appearances. 
v\ e see to begin with that the series consists of three parts, first a short 
one in which, with only one exception, Maitreya appears consecutively 
(no. 1 
9), then a part reaching about halfway down the gallery in
which this Bodhisattva does not appear at all (no. 10—39) and finally 
another part that consists of more than half the series, where Maitreya 
appears almost without interruption as chief person (no. 40—88).
It will be understood that such division of the series does not in the 
'xiit imply that the text represented must have been arranged in three 
parts in a similar manner, I do it only to make our examination easier.
I f one complete text has been followed, we can explain it by saying that 
the reliefs indicate that in the whole series representing the Maitreya-
l) Discussed more fully in the Dutch edition p. 533—535.
MAITREYA AND SAMANtABHADRA


--- Page 81 ---
G< \
//>—'\V\
story (no. 1—88), an important episode is depicted in which the Bo­
dhisattva plays no part (no. 10—39).
Before examining these three sections, another possibility must be 
taken into consideration namely, that the beginning of the third gallery 
might be the continuation of what we see on the chief wall of the second 
gallery. It. appeared that the Gandavyuba there depicted on the reliefs, 
ended with Sudhana’s visit to Maitreya, though the review of contents 
of the text we are acquainted with, has something more to tell about 
his adventures i.e. that Sudhana goes from Maitreya to Manju$ri and 
then to Samantabhadra from whom at last he receives the Highest 
Wisdom.
On entering the third gallery, we see first of all nine reliefs on which 
with one exception Maitreya appears in conversation with an eminent 
man accompanied by his retinue, the same sort of person who on the 
second gallery represented Sudhana. We might therefore consider that re­
lief 1—9 in connection with I I 128, gives this person’s conversations with 
Maitreya; by which only no. 6 and 7, where Maitreya does not appear, 
represent some episode unknown to our summary of contents. On no.
10 we then find the same man taking a journey in a palanquin and treat­
ed in exactly the same manner as Sudhana is shewn on his peregrina­
tions in the former gallery. No. 11 remains unidentified, but on no. 12 
the so-called Sudhana is seated respectfully adoring a figure sitting on 
a lotuscushion, in all probability a Bodhisattva; this person has a cres­
cent behind his head. As we shall see later, this is an attribute bestowed 
specially upon Manjugri among the Bodhisattva’s. Though it is possible 
others may wear it and though the figure in question bears none of 
Manjupn’s other emblems, it is not at all impossible that this Bodhisattva 
seated on a lionthrone — the lion too belongs to M mjugrf — actually 
represents this Bodhisattva If we again pass over three unidentified 
reliefs, we find, beginning with no. 16, on three consecutive scenes (perhaps 
even four, the emblem on no. 19 has disappeared) our chief person in 
front of a Bodhisattva who is distinguished by the attribute of a branch 
with three (or four) buds, the same figure who is the hero of the fourth 
gallery, already conjectured to be Samantabhadra and whose identity 
I shall discuss later on, If this proves correct, then we get scenes where 
our chief person interviews first Maitreya, then (perhaps) Manjugri and 
finally Samantabhadra, thus exactly in the same sequence the Ganda- 
vyuha relates Sudhana’s last journeys.
This conclusion is rather surprising. Is it possible the Gandavyuha 
text is continued? On the one side it may be remarked that from ancient
i(W)i) 
Qt
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
G /X J


--- Page 82 ---
times the end of the Gandavyuha, the glorification of Samantabhadra 
known as Bhadracarl, held an important place among the sacred writings 
of the MahayanaT); on the other hand, it seems the most probable thing 
that a new text should begin with a new gallery; and less likely that the 
Ganda vyuha should suddenly break of f at relief no. 19 or 20 and somethin g 
else begin. It is quite a different thing when the whole series of reliefs 
might be considered as the continuation of the Gandavyuha, a. possi­
bility I shall discuss at the end of this chapter. Let us now first finish 
the review of the reliefs.
The first nine scenes give in substance: Maitreya being worshipped by 
and conversing with the chief male person of the story who wears a halo; 
besides this one, there is occasionally a second figure in the dress of a 
distinguished person but without a halo. The Bodhisattva is to be 
recognised everywhere by his stupa, except on relief no. 1 where the 
headdress ha.s been knocked off, but all the same it seems to be the 
same person. On four of the nine reliefs (no. 2, 3, 4, and 9) an elephant 
appears. Then again on five consecutive reliefs (no. 3—7) there is a 
temple. On no. 3 and 5 this building is placed next to the scene of 
Maitreya and his worshipper but without actual connection; on no. 4 
however we see Maitreya himself going towards the building with his 
worshipper following him. Finally the two temple-reliefs no. 6 and 7 
are the only ones where the worshipper alone, not the Bodhisattva 
appears; on no. 6 he is mounting the steps of the building and on no. 7 
is seated respectfully in front of it.
With no. 10 begins the second part of the series, the episode without 
Maitreya. This relief shews as already stated, the chief figure travelling 
in a palanquin. He is followed as well, strange to say, by an elephant, not. 
caparisoned, wearing only a cloth, and the same animal appears again 
on no. 11. The connection of the episode that begins on no. 10, with the 
preceding and following reliefs might very well be that on no. 9 Maitreya 
gives some advice or command to his worshipper who then starts on a 
journey beginning on no. 10, meets with the adventures depicted in this 
episode, and returns finally to Maitreya oh no. 40.
It is not very clear how no. 11 fits into this story. The man seated in 
the high pavilion wears neither the halo nor the headdress of the hero of 
the tale, he is talking to a bearded person and the rest of the scene shews 
a building, a fruit-tree and attendants sitting on the ground. No. 12 has
') See Watanabe, Die Bhadracarl, Eine Probe Buddhistisch-religibser Lyrik (1912),
especially p. 10 sq.
l(lp] 
vfil
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
4JPP^


--- Page 83 ---
/ y m y \ 
C*
\ k
f t y
 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
iJ M L j
.•ey^y'
already been discussed; the chief person, clearly recognisable again, is 
paying homage to a Bodhisattva with a crescent behind his head. Then 
on no. 13 he is sitting before a temple1). The next scene shews us a 
Buddha seated on a lotuscushion in a pavilion in the middle of the relief; 
on the right, with hands folded in seinbah a man, the chief person evi­
dently, is sitting with his retinue; on the left, also with attendants, is a 
Bodhisattva. We can decide this from the fact that this eminent person 
who has a halo is seated on a lotuscushion; the stalk he is holding in his 
right hand has three bud-shaped flowers at the top of it between two 
leaves, probably the same thing as the stem with buds we see two reliefs 
further on, where the so-called Samantabhadra appears. The intermediate 
relief no. IS gives a conversation between a distinguished man who has a 
halo, sitting with a lady in a pavilion and a brahman(?); the elephant 
appears again in this scene. After reliefs 16—18 shewing intercourse 
between our chief person (who wears no halo on no. 17) and the 
budbearing Bodhisattva, probably Samantabhadra, then comes no.
19 where as we have noticed the figure seated on the lion throne 
holds a still-visible stalk, though we cannot see if it ends in the three 
buds.
From no. 20 to the end of this portion comes a series best described as 
a pilgrimage in which the chief person visits various sacred buildings, 
each of a distinct style and distinguished by some peculiarity that 
attracts attention. On the first relief, where the elephant is also to be 
found, we see a high stambha on each side of the building, one bearing 
the trident of £iva and the other the winged shell of Visnu. 1 here are 
flowers on the steps and bells are hanging in the door and windows on 
no. 21, while on no. 22 a smaller building is hung all over with another 
sort of bells2). No. 23 is one of the few scenes where no architecture 
appears; the chief person is conversing with a brahman and above them 
hangs a most artistic design of rosettes, wreaths and garlands. The same 
kind of decoration appears along the top of no. 24, where the building is 
loaded with lotus and other flowers.Then come three temples distinguished 
respectively by incensories (no. 25), flower-vases (no. 26) and mirrors (no.
27) as decoration, not only on the building but in the air as well. The 
temple on no. 28 has a shell on a small stand, it has tribute's on the roof 
and in the air are flowers, a tortoise on a pedestal and other objects. 
Then come two reliefs without any building: on the first (no. 29) the
»} This kind of temple with a facade in two storeys is also found in reality; seeTjandi 
Morangan, depicted in Rapp. Oudh. Comm. 1903 pi. 38 no. 10.
=) Compare the object in the middle of the temple with I b 50.


--- Page 84 ---
chief person is sitting on the ground with some followers, while cloths and 
garments are falling from the clouds; on the second (no. 30) he is seated 
in fron t of a miraculous tree with large bell-shaped fruit. Further on we get 
visits to buildings, with enormous banners (no. 31), lion ornement (no.
32) and banana-plant decoration (no. 33). On no. 34 seven persons are 
sitting in a pavilion-like building, there is a Bodhisattva image put into the 
front of the roof and above it flower vases are hovering; in front of these 
men the chief figure sits with a blue lotus in his hand. Then follows an­
other series of temples, one with birds on the roof, jewels and more birds 
in the air (no. 35), the next with lotuses, inside the temple in a vase, as 
decoration, and also floating in the air (no. 36); then one with globe- 
shaped objects in the same way on the temple facade and on top of 
the building (where there are two peacocks as well), beside this they 
hover in the air (no. 37). It is not quite clear what these objects are, 
they look most of all like enormous pearls. The building on no. 38 is very 
curious, there is a lotuspond on each of its three storeys; then comes 
finally no. 39 with a very wide temple with two wings, in the middle 
a flowervase, stupa ornements on the roof and flowers in the air.
On no. 40 the chief person is again sitting in front of Maitreya, this is 
the beginning of the third part in which the Bodhisattva continually 
appears. More than half the reliefs shew us nothing but conversations 
between Maitreya and the chief person, with or without other important 
hearers and though the sculptors have done their best to introduce some 
variety by different grouping, attitude and gesture, the repetition as 
van Erp remarks 1), becomes rather tiresome, “ we get the impression” 
he says, “as if the sculptor had received orders to fill up the remaining 
panels with the contents of a certain chapter”. Indeed such appears to 
be the case, though we must remember that the artist was perhaps no 
less restricted by the contents of his text that may possibly have consisted 
of an interminable chain of similar discourses. There are not many 
examples of such monotonous repetition to be found in the world’s 
literature as what some of the Buddhist scriptures give us.
It is not worth while here to examine these conversation scenes more 
closely or to discuss the identity of Maitreya, where his headdress is 
missing or worn away. For further details I refer the reader to the des­
cription of the reliefs of the whole gallery in the Dutch edition 2). We 
shall restrict our elves to the scenes that for some reason or other
>) 1.1. p. 450.
*) See page 542—560.
■ ®°ix
I vex
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
U jlL ^


--- Page 85 ---
specially attract attention, i.e. those which appear to offer most assistance 
for later indentification of the text followed.
To begin with, no. 44 that depicts Maitreya’s charity. The top of the 
relief is filled in with clouds and the Bodhisattva stands distributing 
from two basins, one filled with moneybags, the other with rings, 
Carried behind him by his attendants. The receivers of his bounty are 
kneeling and standing with open hands before him; on the extreme right 
stands the second chief figure holding a lotus stalk in his hand, watching 
the proceedings. Then follows a scene in which three men richly-dressed 
with a halo, are kneeling before a Buddha who sits in a small pavilion, their 
headdres is formed of locks of hair (one of them unfortunately has lost 
his head and headdres); here too the spectator stands away on the right 
richly-dressed with a suitable headdress, he has a flower in his hand and 
wears a halo.
On no. 47 Maitreya's curious attitude attracts our notice. He stands 
in his pavilion between two incensories, with his hands clasped against 
his breast, but he is standing on his left leg with the right lifted up and 
the foot held in front of his left thigh; the usual worshippers and atten­
dants are on both sides of the building. This extremely uncomfortable 
attitude is evidently a penitential one, though the BodMsattva's appear­
ance is otherwise as usual, not like that of a tapasvin.
It may be of some importance in connection with the kropak-relief 
discussed above, that on relief no. 49, one of the attendants of the 
worshipper who is turning towards Maitreya, carries an oblong parcel 
that looks like two kropaks fastened together, while on the other side of 
Maitreya two of his four followers are holding palmleaves. On the next 
relief we see the Bodhisattva on a journey; he is walking behind an 
elephant whose howclah is filled, with trays of flowers and wreaths, or 
possibly food, the animal is surrounded by men with banners and musical 
instruments. The spectator sits in the right hand corner, looking on. No. 
51 shews Maitreya doing homage to a Buddha seated in a pavilion with 
some bhik§u's near him, After several reliefs of the usual sort (homage to 
Maitreya), we get another Buddha on no. 55, but as the chief worshipper's 
headdress is missing, it is not possible to decide if this is the Bodhisattva 
himself or someone else. There are a couple of hhiksu’s on this relief too. 
The next scene is the already discussed no. 56, Maitreya with the large 
book resting on his hands.
The fourth and last Buddha relief of this series is no. 58; the Buddha is 
seated in the middle of the scene with Maitreya and the second chief- 
person doing him homage, they are kneeling one on each side of him with
Barabudur II 
5
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA


--- Page 86 ---
their followers. Among the scenes that now follow there are several on 
which the Bodhisattva does not appear, they shew' nothing but a con­
versation between two distinguished men wearing haloes. On no. 59, one 
of them, the one receiving the visit, is certainly a king as we see by four 
of the seven royal jewels behind the pSndapa in which the monarch sits; 
there is the horse, the elephant, the disk and the gem. The three others 
are missing or now indiscernible; we can hardly imagine them to be 
recognisable in the female figure standing behind the king as queen, and 
the minister and general among the seated attendants.
The two last reliefs of this episode, before Maitreya appears again 
continually, are also worth attention. In the middle of no. 65 is the 
pavilion where the two chief persons are sitting; to the left is a second 
pendapa decorated with cakra and trigula’s in which a couple of female 
dancers are displaying their skill. A bearded man is conducting the 
performance and in the corner behind him are the musicians. Notice the 
number of kinnara’s in the air. On no. 66 we find the two chief figures 
again with their haloes; the one who has come to visit the other, is 
holding a sort of disk on the palms of his hands, either shewing it or 
about to present it,
Beginning with no. 67 we return to the real Maitreya-reliefs. On no. 68 
we see the Bodhisattva seated as usual in his pavilion, his usual chief- 
worshipper on the right with attendants, but on the left are three other 
persons in a separate pendapa, all three are well-dressed and wear a halo; 
the front one makes a sembah, the middle one holds a blue lotus. The 
three rows of figures sitting one above the other are remarkable: the 
bottom row, five men with thick beard and curled locks of hair, have the 
appearance of yaksa's. Several in the upper rows have gifts in their 
hands; they wear beards too but their hair-dressing is more sober; 
however those holding gifts must perhaps be considered as the servants 
of the five eminent yaksa’s in the bottom row.
The next relief (no. 69) takes us into hell. Maitreya is seated on the 
extreme left in a pavilion ornemented with triyula's; on the right is our 
spectator with his retinue. In the middle, we see the hell; the tree whose 
leaves are swords x) and beneath a large iron cauldron with the fire under 
it. Some victims are standing near appealing to Maitreya for help, by the 
way they lift up their feet, they seem to be standing on something that 
hurts them; this part of the relief is rather worn away. A couple of hell- 
fiends stand behind them and a third is sitting at the foot of a throne on *)
*) Comp, for this, 1 p. 69; relief 09}, cauldrons 089.
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
l i l L


--- Page 87 ---
' G°^\
wich sits an man with a halo in full dress. This person in authority, with 
the cudgel beside him, will probably be Yama, the king of hell.
Maitreya’s exercise of charity is the subject of the next relief no. 
70. On the right and left is a building, before the one on the right the 
spectator and his retinue are sitting; the lefthand building is closed, 
on each side of the door is a niche with a female figure in it holding a 
fly-whisk. The roof-decoration of stupa's is perhaps intended to shew that 
this is a temple palace for Maitreya. Separated from the spectator by a 
wall, we see a group of miserable starving creatures, probably preta's, 
being fed by the Bodhisattva, who stands in front of them distributing 
large balls of what is probably rice, at least the dinner tables on the 
reliefs in the first gallery shew rice prepared in the same way. The wall 
is continued over the heads of the poor people, that is of course behind 
them, and according to the trees and mountains that appear above and 
at the side of the wall, the scene must be in a mountain forest.
No. 71 has a similar setting and gives us Maitreya preaching to the 
animals, of course in the presence of the indispensable spectator, who 
stands with his attendants on the extreme right while from the clouds 
above jewel pots are showering down valuables. The Bodhisattva seated 
in a pavilion is surrounded by animals, most of them in pairs; lions, ti­
gers, deer, horses, elephants, sheep, several kinds of cattle, goats, pigs, a 
hare and a monkey. Above them is a design of rocks with trees in the 
traditional style and a peacock, a pair of doves and parrots. This 
relief is one of the few in this gallery that is thought to be identified1); 
the animals are then praying Maitreya for rain and on no. 73 he gives 
the order for it to Indra. This explanation has no real foundation and 
I think is not very successful; not only should we expect to see the 
rain, if it was so important to the story, falling down in some of the 
following reliefs, but Indra, or in agreement with these Buddhist 
texts, we should call him Qakra, appears nowhere else on the monument 
to have any connection with the rainfall. Moreover the attitude of 
Maitreya and the animals on the relief itself, does not confirm this 
explanation; in my opinion the sculptor has been most successful in 
shewing the Bodhisattva preaching and the animals listening. I think it 
very likely that no. 69—71 are closely connected and we have here the 
Bodhisattva consecutively, in hell, with the preta's, and among the 
animals, shewing his sympathy. 1'hen we find Maitreya on no. 72 in 
conversation with two men wearing haloes and a third who is evidently
') By Jochim in Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 55 (1913) p. 205.
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHAD.RA 
%


--- Page 88 ---
' GcW\
the faithful spectator. No. 73 is the one alluded to above, where Cakra 
appears. He approaches in the ordinary dress of eminent persons, has a halo 
and holds a flower in each hand, and for himself would never be recognised 
as the king of heaven. But here, as elsewhere when we have no text, he 
can be indentified by his attendant, with the angkuga in his hand, the ele­
phant trunk in his headdress and the elephant ears (here not very dis­
tinct); we have seen him so often and his name is Airavata. The man 
towards whom the god. is turning is not very clearly to be recognised 
on the photo as Maitreya, but van Erp considers it not doubtful1).
On no. 74 the Bodhissattva is discoursing with five naga’s and on no.
75 the audience has become larger. On the left we see consecutively two 
eminent men, two naga’s and a yaksa; on the right again a yaksa, a 
garuda, still recognisable though his beak is damaged, and a man of 
high rank, the spectator probably, with an attendant. The distinguished 
men sitting on the left have very richly-adorned headdresses and orne- 
ments out of the common, so that probably they are not ordinary hu­
man beings but some sort of gods or divine persons. Celestials and kin- 
nara’s in the clouds add to the varied character of the public.
Beginning with the next relief till the end of the series, the Bodhi- 
sattva is generally to be found discoursing with or worshipped, not by 
one person, but a number of distinguished men besides the usual spec­
tator standing or seated on the right of the scene. These men vary in 
number and costume, sometimes they have haloes and sometimes not; 
we cannot be sure they are the same and might indeed think it very 
improbable, if we did not remember the liberties taken by sculptors with 
clearly identified texts. All through these scenes,, it is very evidently to 
them the Bodhisattva addresses his conversation, and occasionally we 
might look upon them as attendants though very magnificent ones; 
however a retinue of Tusita-gods would not be unsuitable for Maitreya.
On most of the reliefs we see plainly that these people undoubtedly 
play a part in the story and are by no means subordinates.
On nos. 35 and 87 an elephant again appears, both times in the 
"spectator’s” retinue. The last relief no. 88 shews no more secondary 
figures. We see the Bodhisattva standing among some trees, his hands 
folded in sembah; behind him kneels another figure with a halo, surely 
the man of next importance in the story, who played the part of worship­
per and spectator. He kneels on his left knee and raises his hands in 
sembah holding a flower between them. A couple of attendants are sit­
ting behind him.
*) 1.1. p. 446,
('(SJ1) 
(£T
m a it r e y a ANI) SAMANTABHADRA 
MflJM


--- Page 89 ---
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
^
[ [ 1
\%2>—^-£#7 
•
Thus ends the series with an act of homage, not only by the second in 
chief, but by Maitreya as well. For what is it intended ? Possibly we have 
here a repetition of what we saw in the second gallery where the last relief 
more or less points towards the beginning of the third. Where else should 
the respectful homage of the Bodhisattva be directed to ; to whom could 
it be more suitable than the many Buddha’s on the remarkable scenes 
with which the fourth gallery begins?
If we compare the reliefs on the chief wall of the fourth gallery with those 
of the preceding one, there appears at once a great resemblance and a great 
difference, which we shall do well to discuss before beginning our exami­
nation. The similarity is, that like Maitreya in the third gallery, one 
particular Bodhisattva plays chief part through the whole tale: he is dis­
tinguished by a stem with three buds at the top of it. The difference 
is, that many Buddha’s appear on the same relief either with or without 
Bodhisattva’s.
Let us first give our attention to the latter peculiarity because it is the 
cause of the only attempt that we know of to explain what is here repre­
sented. I allude to what Foucher gives in his article “Le “grand miracle” 
du Buddha a £ravasti” x).
It is hardly necessary to quote Foucher’s whole argument, a summary 
will suffice. The importance in a canonical sense, of the mahaprati- 
. harya of Qrlvasti is indisputable, the Divyavadana in particular gives 
the oldest and most elaborate account of the miracles by which £akya: 
muni on that occasion overcame his rivals, the six sect-leaders 2). The 
important points are as follows. After a few preliminary small miracles 
and a warning to all others, cleric or laymen, not to shame the Tlrthya’s 
by any show of supernatural power, the Buddha at king Prasenajit’s 
repeated request, performs consecutively two kinds of miracles; first 
he exhibits what is technically called the yamaka-pratiharya that con­
sists of walking about in the air in various attitudes causing flames or 
streams of water to appear alternately out of his upper or lower limbs; 
secondly, he multiplies figures of himself, from earth up to the heavens 
and in all directions, who then preach the Creed. A violent thunderstorm 
caused by the yaksa-king, completes the downfall of the heterodox. Mul: 
titudes of people are converted to the True Creed.
’) Journ. asiat. 10 : 13 (1909) p. 5—78.
*) Divyav. XII. Translated by Burnouf, Introduction k l’histoire du bouddhisme indien 
(1844) p. 162 sqq. For the story itself see Kern, Cechiedenis van het Buddhisme in Indift I 
(1882) p. 143— 153.


--- Page 90 ---
i f ®
6 ) | 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
i C T
• o L j
^r^W Ve should natural!} expect that the yamaka-pratiharya, being the 
most original and picturesque of the two miracles, would appeal most 
to the sculptors for an edifying scene when representation was required, 
but as Foueher demonstrates, the sculptured art, with only one excep­
tion, selects the second, the preaching by innumerable figures of Buddha, 
to represent the Great Miracle of £r avast!. The reason of this Foueher, 
in my opinion very rigtly, considers to be, that according to the texts 
the yamaka-pratiharya had become rather common; it is ascribed not 
only to the Buddha in three other occasions but we find it related as 
being performed by a Praiyekabuddha, a monk, nuns and a converted 
son of a banker, and even by relics of the Master. It could therefore no 
longer be considered sufficient to represent distinctly the Great Miracle 
of £r avast!. It was quite a different thing with the multitude of preach­
ing Buddha’s, a miracle which, as recorded, was only possible for a 
Buddha or the gods. Added to this, the texts themselves shew a certain 
tendency to mix up the two kinds of miracle and put the second in the 
foreground.
By means of some secondary figures mentioned in the texts and 
represented on the reliefs, Foueher has most ingeniously succeeded in 
identifying the Great Wonder of (,'ravast! in a number of divergent 
sculptures spread over a period of twelve centuries and extending from 
Ajanta into China. Without regarding the less important details which 
sometimes appear and are sometimes omitted, the criterion for indentifi- 
cation in general is the appearance of numerous Buddha's performing 
the same act, while a particular laksana consists in the lotus plants rising 
from the water or the ground, with Buddha's seated on their flowers.
The importance of this laksana in the cases, where not the many Bud­
dha’s but only the one preaching £akyamuni with secondary figures is 
depicted we will not discuss here, whatever its value may be for the 
questi on as a whole; on Barabudur it is the numerous Buddha ’s, not the 
single one, we have to deal with. Wherever the repetition of Buddha’s is 
found, they may be supposed, according to Foueher, to depict nothing 
but the Great Miracle. I will add a quotation from his own words 1).
"Nous n’avons pas affaire, comme on pensait, a de simples debauches 
d'imagerie pieusement: decorative: il y faut reconnoitre des represen­
tations sur une vaste echclle, en raison de la place dont disposait 1’ar- 
tiste, du “grand miracle” de £ravasti. Aussi bien est-ce la, si 1’on y 
songe, la seule fagon orthodoxe d'expliquer la presence simultanee de
l) Taken from p. 19 of the articl mentioned.


--- Page 91 ---
plusieurs Buddhas sur un meme tableau, alors qu’une loi absolue veut 
qu'il n’y en ait jamais plus d'un seul a la fois dans chaque systeme de 
monde.
"II s'ensuit que nous devons des l’abord soup^onner l’existence de ce 
motif chaque fois nous serons en presence de multiples images de 
Buddha — non point, a vrai dire, la oh elles sont isolees dans des cadres 
distincts, ou simplement juxtaposes, mais lh ou elles sont visiblement 
associees dans une meme action”.
It becomes evident if we accept this conclusion that the many Buddha’s 
whom we find on the fourth gallery on lotus cushions, taking part in the 
same action again and again, are depicting the Great Miracle of £ra- 
vasti. On this point Foucher is unusually positive. “Nous n’hesiterons 
pas” he says *■) “en rapprocher” (sc. des specimens de Benares et d’ 
Ajanta) “malgre le temps et la distance, les nombreux groupes qui deco­
rent le mur principal de la plus haute galerie sculptee de Boto-Boudour 
(IXe siecle). Toute cette paroi est a peu pres couverte de variations sur 
le theme du "grand miracle” de fravasti, et cette profusion de repliques 
se justifie assez par l’enorme surface que les sculpteurs du monument 
avaient re9u la tache de decorer.” And further on: “Cette reduplication 
symetrique de Buddhas supportes par des lotus et encadres de divinites 
suffit pour etablir non seulement l'indeniable parente des ecoles, mais 
l'identite fonciere des sujets”.
With every respect for Foucher’s otherwise convincing argument, I 
think that as far as Barabudur is concerned it is not acceptable. Let us 
first consider the secondary criterion. Lotus cushions on this monument 
can have no special significance; they are to be found, as the most 
superficial glance proves, nearly all over the sanctuary where a 
Buddha appears, for instance repeatedly in the indentified story of the 
historic Buddha on the first gallery, therefore in cases where it is 
absolutely proved what the subject depicted is, and where the miracle 
of QravastI is quite out of the question. There still remains the “lotus 
a tige”, the lotus cushion that rests on a stalk, just as it is often found 
on the representations of the "Great Miracle” in Further India. There 
is nothing to be learned from this on the Barabudur. I shall state two 
points. First, that just on this first part of the fourth gallery that should 
depict the Great Miracle, nearly all the lotuscushions are ordinary 
ones, very seldom on stalks. In the second place, that cushions on 
stalks are found in places where there is no suggestion of the Great
*) Pag. 23.
\-\ ik 
maitreya and samantabhadra 
Vsjrl j


--- Page 92 ---
^imracle, not only in the surroundings, but in the subject itself that is 
represented. We can for instance recall among the reliefs on the chief wall 
of the second gallery, a Buddha that appears on such a “lotus a tige” 
between four Bodhisattva’s seated in the same way (no. 74) and another 
Buddha sitting on a similar raised cushion being worshipped by one 
man with several women (no. 75). Even if my identification of the 
Gandavyuha should not be accepted as the complete text depicted on 
this chief wall, it must be acknowledged that the reliefs mentioned, con­
sidered separately, cannot possibly be connected with the Great Miracle 
of Cravastl. The laksana of the lotuscushion as far the Barabudur is 
concerned, must be rejected as such.
Then as regards the second criterion, the appearance of many Bud­
dha’s on the same scene, I am not able to see any proof of this either. 
On another series of reliefs, the second half of the balustrade of this 
same gallery, there are several scenes representing the worshipping 
of two, three or four Buddha’s sitting next to each other, sometimes 
all placed in a pendapa (no. 46) or in solid niches (no. 62, 83, 84), once 
even in the rocks (no. 54) and therefore excluding all possible con­
nection with the Great Miracle of Cravastl which takes place in the 
air; while moreover the other persons present shew resemblance to 
those on the adjacent reliefs without Buddha’s, but not to the public 
present at Qr avast I as the text describes them. Taking all this into con­
sideration, I think we cannot avoid the conclusion that on the Barabu­
dur, the appearance of numerous Buddha’s on one scene is no proof 
whatever that the Great Miracle of Cravastl is represented. Yet accord­
ing to Foucher, as quoted above, this is the only orthodox way of 
accounting for the simultaneous appearance of many Buddha’s, because 
a fixed law declares there shall be no more than one at a time in each 
universe. There is actually no contradicting this argument. It depends 
only on what meaning we give to the word “orthodox”, where is orthodox 
to end and heterodox to begin; between the various phases of Buddhism, 
it is a very difficult task to fix the limit. Yet because we actually find 
scenes on the balustrade of this gallery in which numerous Buddha’s 
appear without it being possible to connect them with the miracle of 
fravastl, it follows that Foucher’s law does not reach as far as he 
thinks. Judged by his rule for orthodox Buddhism, we should have to 
consider the Buddhism of Barabudur to be unorthodox. On the other 
hand if Barabudur is to be reckoned among the orthodox monuments 
then the rule laid down by Foucher will not hold. In any case what 
proves to be inapplicable to what is depicted on the balustrade of the
i1. V J P /.J 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
V ^ l


--- Page 93 ---
' Gcw\
fourth gallery, cannot be used for the chief wall of the same gallery. That 
these scenes with the many Buddha’s must represent the mahapratiharya 
of £r avast! only because of the numerous Buddha's, is not acceptable.
Another question is if they could, and if there are perhaps other data 
that might incline us to accept this possibility. Nowhere can we find 
the two naga’s Nanda and Upananda, who according to the text of the 
Divyavadana, cause the lotus to appear and on several of the scenes 
reproduced by Foucher, are holding the stalk of it. Nowhere is any sign 
of the teachers of false creeds that are found at A] anta. Nowhere do we 
find at the side of the Buddha, as we see in other representations of the 
Great Miracle, either Brahma and £akra or other divine worshippers 
with fly-whisks or garlands. We find here and there on. either side of the 
Buddha Bodhisattva’s who might perhaps not be out of place at £ra- 
vastl but whose presence in no way shews any particular connection 
with the Great Miracle. Only the royal worshipper appearing on several 
reliefs of this gallery, might be looked upon as king Prasenajit, though 
there is nothing that indicates he and not another is meant.
All this gives no indication of the Great Miracle. On the contrary there 
are two points that would certainly not coincide with the event at 
Qravasti, On all the pictures of the miracle given in Foucher’s article it is 
easy to detect the one "real” Buddha of which the others are only the 
emanations; he is everywhere much larger than the others and on the 
one plate where that is not the case he is still plainly recognisable by his 
being seated in the middle on a lotuscushion whose stalk is held up by 
the two naga’s. On the reproduction of the Barabudur scene (pi. 5). 
no. CCCLVI, 1 in Leemans, thus no. 1 in our numbering, one Buddha is 
seated in the middle; he is not distinguished in any way from his col­
leagues except by being placed in the middle. In this respect, the relief 
in question is an exception. Nowhere else as a rule do we find on 
the reliefs with the many Buddha's, one seated in the middle who 
might be considered as the chief performer of the miracle. On no. 2 
already we see six in a row, seated and in the air; on no 3 there is none 
in the middle and none on the ground. And so it goes on, for details 
see the following description. The many Buddha’s are everywhere 
arranged symmetrically and treated exactly in the same manner, 
nowhere is there anything like one being the chief person with the others 
as emanations.
The second point that does not agree with a representation of the 
Great Miracle of Qravasti, concerns the presence of the Bodhisattva's, 
also seated on lotus cushions, especially where they are undoubtedly
l(mf] 
(ct
V A ® / 7 
MAITREYA AND S A M ANT A BH ADR A ' 
j S M j


--- Page 94 ---
characterised, as such by their attributes and are not sitting on the 
ground in which place they might be considered as interested spec­
tators, but as for instance on no. 3, in exactly the same way as the 
Buddha’s and among them, hovering in the air on their cushions. 
In such cases we can think that these Buddha's are miraculous 
apparitions, but then it is not possible to separate the Bodhisattva's, as 
being something different. But how can we account for their presence 
if we rely on the Great Miracle of Qravasti. the texts and the famous 
representations of it?
At the same time the most important and in my opinion, conclusive 
reason for considering the front wall of the fourth gallery as quite out of 
question for the Great Miracle of Qravastl, must be looked for elsewhere. 
On the preceding galleries, the texts began, certainly as far as they are 
identified, probably as far as their course was guessed at, with the gate­
way on the East side and continued in accordance with the pradaksina, 
round the monument, so that they ended on the other side of the same 
doorway. It is very unlikely that this manner of arrangement should 
have been altered. Yet we should have to believe that this was done, in 
case we accept the reliefs with the numerous Buddha's for the miracle 
at £ravastl: they appear on the East wall on both sides of the door and 
on the other walls almost not at all. Already with the fifth on the left and 
the third on the right, we find a relief without many Buddha’s, with only 
one seated as usual in his niche ; how is it possible to connect for instance 
no, 7 with a Buddha in the middle, musicians at the side and a rain of 
jewels from the clouds, with the miracle of £ravastl? Or no. 9 with a 
kalpadruma in the middle of it ? Or on the other side no. 69 with a stupa 
in the place of honour, or no. 64 where a distribution of garments is going 
on ? Then we must consider that it will not do to consider a relief further 
removed, for instance no. 18, on which no less than ten Buddha’s appear, 
or no. 53 that has five, as having no connection with the text of the 
remaining reliefs of the numerous Buddha’s. But on the other hand 
it is absolutely impossible to fit these reliefs to the Great Miracle with 
which so many of the intermediate reliefs, as we see by the subjects they 
depict, can have no connection whatever. In such a case the verdict is 
quite clear: these reliefs are certainly connected with each other but 
their connection is not the Great Miracle of £rSvastf,
It is this fact of the connection of the whole series of reliefs that I must 
call attention to, a connection clearly demonstrated by the appearance 
of the chief person of the whole series, the Bodhisattva who is distin­
guished by the stalk with three buds at the top. On the first relief he is
■ G0|^\
\ U
| 1| J-J 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADEA


--- Page 95 ---
already in an important place in the scene reproduced by Foucher to 
illustrate the mahapratiharya; we find him further on play the chiefpart 
in nearly all the scenes, first in these of the many Buddha’s, then in those 
where no Buddha at all appears and finally again in the Buddha scenes 
at the end of the series. His continual appearance, in my opinion, 
makes it impossible to draw a line of separation and select a part within 
arbitrary limits as a representation of the Great Miracle of £rava$tl, by 
which the role this Bodhisattva plays remains unexplained and what is 
outside these limits would have nothing to do with the miracle scenes.
On the contrary I am convinced that undoubtedly we here have before 
us a continuous text from no. 1 to 72 with the Bodhisattva of the branch 
with three buds as chief person.
1 shall not further discuss the Great Miracle of £ravastl. It will be evi­
dent that I am obliged to reject Foucher’s idea, however suggestive it 
appears at first sight, and however much it is recommended by the 
powerful argument and authority of such an eminent scholar.
Before beginning our examination of the contents of these reliefs, we 
must try to establish the identity of the chief person. So far as I am 
aware, no other suggestion has been offered, at least not in print, than 
the one published by the author in his article "The chief-person of the 
fourth gallery on Barabudur” x), the result of which was "that expressed 
with caution, the possibility exists that the chief person on the fourth 
gallery at Barabudur is Samantabhadra”. This manner of expression 
shews at once that the available evidence was not strong and the writer 
carefully avoided the responsibility of making a positive statement2). 
Nevertheless there were indications in a certain direction that made it 
desirable to fix attention on the possibility of the identification alluded 
to, especially as no light had so far been thrown on this point. It is true 
that since then no new evidence has arisen to confirm its correctness, but 
neither has anything appeared to prove it untenable. The question 
remains in the same condition as when the article was written; I shall 
therefore repeat the arguments there brought forward, i n a slightly 
altered form.
As regards the manner of representing the Bodhisattva’s in general I 
refer the reader to Cliapt. XII below, where the data gathered from the 
various series of reliefs on the Barabudur are brought together and it 
will be seen that the best-known Bodhisattva’s, most often represented 
in sculpture in Indian and in Javanese Buddhism, appear with their
*) Bijdr. Kon. Inst. 71 (1916) p. 579—583.
*) Ibid. p. 583. My viewis disputed by Moens in Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 59 (1921) p. 588—-600.
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
^


--- Page 96 ---
ordinary traditional emblems and that among the emblems, those at 
least by which the Bodhisattva must be recognised, as far as can be 
discovered are continually the same. For instance Maitreya’s secondary 
emblem, the nagapuspa branch, might be omitted, as is quite natural, in 
the scenes of some story where he is engaged in actions during which 
he could not easily be holding a branch with flowers; but his chief 
emblem, the stupa on his headdress, is never missing.
We can certainly conclude from this that the Bodhisattva with the 
branch of buds can not represent Avalokite$vara, who is always depicted 
with his own attribute the Amitabha image in his headdress, and in 
most cases, both in his two-handed and several-handed shape, so far as the 
condition of the reliefs allow us to decide, as Padmapani, that is to say with 
the red lotus in the left hand. On the chief wall of the fourth gallery, 
we find him with his Amitabha emblem certainly six, probably seven 
times (no. 3, 8, 16, 20, 47, 50 and 12); moreover he appears on the same 
relief as the Bodhisattva with the branch with buds.
In the same way the personation of Manju^r! on the Barabudur en­
tirely agrees with the representations of him elsewhere; he holds the 
kropak on a blue lotus and will be found on a relief in the second gallery (II 
16) as well as on this fourth (no. 3). The last-mentioned relief also shews 
a third Bodhisattva very distinctly with the emblem from which he is 
named, Vajrapani, with the double vajra standing on the utpala; four, 
perhaps six times more we shall find him on this gallery (no. 8, 12, 17,
47, and perhaps 20 and 50). These three Bodhisattva’s are thus clearly 
distinguished from the one of the branch with buds, and the same can 
be said of two others of whom I shall speak in Chapt. XII, who judging 
by their appearance on the Mendut and as regards the latter, also at 
Plaosan, must certainly be reckoned among the important Bodhisattva’s 
of Java, one with sword erect on the blue lotus and one with an emblem 
of flames also placed on a stalk. Both of these are found on no. 3 of 
this series.
There are still two important Bodhisattva’s of whom something more 
must be said. First Maitreya, The Buddha of the future occupies an 
influential position and so we find him as chief person of the texts on the 
whole of the third gallery and part of the balustrade on the fourth 
gallery. One might think that no other Bodhisattva is worthy to replace 
him on the chief wall of the highest gallery and that it must be Maitreya 
who plays the chief part, though we have no idea why in this text he is 
deprived of his stupa and given the stalk with the three buds instead. 
This supposition is confirmed by a relief on the balustrade of the third
(((£)}) 
(ex
\A J 9k2AV 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
J
i j


--- Page 97 ---
gallery where an authentic Maitreya wearing the stupa in his headdress 
also holds the branch with the three buds in his hand (no. 84).
Meanwhile the idea that Maitreya might be identified with the branch- 
bearer of the fourth gallery becomes less likely when we notice how on the 
chief wall of the third gallery, in the middle of a text where Maitreya con­
stantly appears with the stupa-headdress, a couple of reliefs also depict 
the Bodhisattva with the branch (no. 17—18); we can of course quite 
understand that for some reason or other in some particular story 
Maitreya should be given a different aspect, but it is very difficult to 
find an acceptable explanation for all at once representing him differ­
ently in the same tale. As regards the relief with the stalk with buds 
IIIB 84, Maitreya on this series of reliefs holds sometimes instead of his 
nagapuspa branch, other flower stalks; it most clearly appears that in 
this series the branch held in the hand varies too much to be regarded as 
a distinctive emblem, and besides it was not needed at all because this 
Bodhisattva is recognisable everywhere by his stupa headdress. In 
the same way Maitreya is seen here now and then holding a padma, but 
it would be foolish to identify him with Padmapani, and so I think it 
would be unreasonable to put too much value on the appearance of the 
branch with buds on one occasion. What motive the sculptor had for 
depicting Maitreya sometimes with his own nagapuspa, at other times 
with some other flower and generally without anything in his hand, we 
do not know, but the variation itself proves that it can here be no question 
of a distinctive attribute.
A convincing proof that Maitreya and the Bodhisattva with the 
branch of buds cannot be the same person, we find in no. 16 where they 
appear together; in connection with the above remarks it should be 
noted that Maitreya, plainly recognisable by his stupa headdress, is here 
holding a padma. He hovers with some Buddha's and another Bodhi­
sattva in the air, while the chiefperson with the branch of buds is seated 
in con versation with another, on terra firma. For the present this relief is 
the only one where we can be certain that the two Bodhisattva’s are 
separate persons; there may have been more, because there are some 
on which, besides the chief person with his branch with buds, several 
other indistinct Bodhisattva's appear, among which of course might 
be Maitreya.
The second Bodhisattva who might be identified with the bearer of the 
branch with buds is Ratnapani oi Ksitigarbha. We can notice here and there 
that the buds on the emblem in question resemble the shape of jewels. On 
the Mendut we see a Bodhisattva with this branch twice, once holding
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
j ^ L


--- Page 98 ---
n
the enblem in the budshape and once in the shape of gems 1). As we have 
here two separate figures in a-fixed number of eight, it is just preferable to 
accept them for two individual Bodhisattva’s2), but this does not seem to 
be applicable for the Barabudur. The reliefs on the chief wall of the fourth 
gallery give so strong an impression of a continuous story about one 
chief person that it is imposssible to imagine him a different individual 
because of some variation in the shape of his emblem. Besides, even the 
number of the buds is not everywhere the same, sometimes there are 
four; other variations in shape also appear. That all this sort of thing 
brings very little objection to considering the same Bodhisattva as chief 
person in all these scenes is proved, for instance, on the third gallery where 
Maitreya’s stupa assumes so many different aspects, sometimes 
large, then small again, then with an umbrella, but generally without and 
besides this varying greatly in size. But everywhere the same Maitreya is 
intended, and we see only what great liberties the sculptors were allowed 
with regard to details; they had to put a stupa in the headdress to dis­
tinguish the Bodhisattva, but the exact way in which it was done did 
not matter very much. The same in the fourth gallery, a Bodhisattva 
with the branch of three bunds had to be continually depicted, but how 
the buds were carved did not matter much, or even if sometimes there 
were four instead of three put on the branch.
As regards the variation of bud and gem we can collect the following 
statistics. There are 72 reliefs on the whole wall and only 8 of them are 
without the attribute. Of the others, 9 are too indistinct for us to form an 
opinion, so that we only have to do with the remaining 55, including the 
occasional instances of four gems or buds. Of the 55, two differ in shape 
and there are 16 gems and 37 buds. This proportion is not enough for us 
to consider the gem as the principal sign of the whole emblem, and such 
should be the case with Ratnapani who is even named after the jewel. The 
much greater number of buds in proportion to the jewels, added to the 
fact that the Bodhisattva in question everywhere he appears occasionally 
on other galleries, is shewn holding the branch with buds, plainly proves 
in my opinion, that the buds and not the jewels represent the real 
emblem and the latter must be considered only as a variation of the 
former.
Moreover if Ratnapapi is intended, why should three gems be given 
instead of one ? In the Museum at Batavia there are two small bronze
l ) On the Pawon the same, enblem in the shape of a gem is found; there it is not held by a 
Bodhisattva but a female figure who holds a red lotus in the other hand.
») For this, see further Chapt XII.
S
/ 3
 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
I


--- Page 99 ---
images found at Tjandiredja near Ngandjuk that represent a male figure 
holding a gem is his right hand, while a horse appears in the pedestal; 
the combination of horse and gem makes it very probable that this is 
indended for Ratnapani who therefore has one geml). It is also very 
likely that he appears on this same fourth gallery with only one gem, 
on relief no. 2 where we find a Bodhisattva who holds the emblem of 
an utpala stalk with a gem at the top of it. Considering all this evidence 
I think it impossible that the chief person with the branch with buds 
can be Ratnapani.
As result of our examination so far, we must consider that the Bodhi­
sattva of the branch with buds is not to be identified with any of the 
just-discussed, recognised and more or less iconographically established 
Bodhisattva’s, so he must be looked for further afield. At the same time 
we must acknowledge that he takes a very important place among the 
Javanese Bodhisattva’s for as we know, he appears among the eight 
Bodhisattva’s on the Mendut, and he is also found at Plaosan 3) in the 
company of the most distinguished and important Bodhisattva figures. 
In any case the person who plays chief part through the whole story on 
the chief wall of the highest gallery, cannot be in any way looked upon 
as a second-rate Bodhisattva, but must be one of the highest members 
of the Hindu-Javanese Buddhist pantheon, probably also outside Java 
a well-known figure, for a whole text appears to be dedicated to him 
and we may be sure that this text, like all the others depicted on Bara- 
budur that are known to us, did not originate in Java but was brought 
over from India.
As there are no further authentic iconographical data at our disposal, 
we must endeavour to discover this Bodhisattva's identity in some other 
way, namely by means of the literature. Javanese Buddhism possesses 
very few sources in writing ; most of our kno wledge has been drawn from 
data outside Java. There are however a few specific Javanese Buddhist 
writings and among them one that taliter qualiter gives us a summary 
of the Mahayanist dogmata in Java, even though the work in question 
is of later date and appeared in East-Java in the form known to us. I 
refer to the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan 3). This review, however 
scanty its description of Bodhisattva’s, may perhaps give some atten­
tion to the figure who according to the Barabudur must have occupied 
an important place in the system.
>} See Rapp. Oudh. Dienst 1913 p. 65 and Not. Bat Gen. 1913 p. XLVIII no. 5393; 
1914 p. 187 no. 5494.
*) Ijzerman, Beschrijving der ondheden (1391), plate G.
*) Edited by J. Kats, the Hague 1910.
A,V —-A\
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA


--- Page 100 ---
(i ( 1 ) 1) 
(cy
\'A <P§ / 7 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
r ) l j
Now this short document gives us the names of four Bodhisattva’s but 
without designating them with that title. Two of them do not even 
perform the functions ascribed to these beings, but their names are 
those of well-known Bodhisattva’s, they are Bajrapaui i.e. Vajrapajrti, 
and Loke^vara, i.e. Avalokitegvara; here both officiating as gods who 
appear out of £§kyamuni’s body1). As we have already seen, these two 
appear on this series of reliefs with their usual emblems so they can have 
nothing to do with the Bodhisattva of the branch with buds. But we 
have another passage which is found in the enumeration of various 
Buddha’s. First those of the past are mentioned and the text then 
continues 2): Tatha caivapy anagatah, kunang bhatara buddha sang 
anagata, sang abhimukha mangabhisambuddha kadyanggan, bhatara 
aryya Maitreyadi, Samantaibhadra paryyanta, anagata buddha nga- 
ranira kabeh. ("And then further those of the future": and the Lord 
Buddha’s who are still to come, those who will receive enlightenment 
in the future, such as the noble Lord Maitreya and so on, and finally 
Samantabhadra; the name of them all is Buddha of the Future).
Here we find mentioned, as the principal Buddha’s of the future 
(therefore Bodhisattya’s in the present), the first and the last. Here 
we have the name worthy to be mentioned in one breath with that of 
Maitreya. This too is the Bodhisattva to whom the gallery above Mai­
treya could be assigned, so that he should end the series of which Mai­
treya is the beginning.
We can therefore begin by stating that the Bodhisattva whose iden­
tity we are in search of, is either not mentioned at all in the Sang hyang 
Kamahayanikan, or can be no other than Samantabhadra. Further, the 
important fact, unknown from other sources, that the Javanese Maha- 
yana recognised him as the last Buddha of the Future gives us the key 
to the otherwise puzzling circumstance of another Bodhisattva appear­
ing after the future Buddha Maitreya in the mounting series of Barabu- 
dur texts.
We must now examine what monographic evidence there may be- 
about Samantabhadra. It then appears that this Bodhisattva is repre­
sented in many different ways. In India itself he has not been 
identified with certainty; on the contrary in the Nepal miniatures 
reproduced by Foucher he undoubtedly is to be found 3), he is seated on *)
*) Fol, 53a (p. 60and 108). Also fol. 56 (p. 63 and 111).
») Fol. 9a (p. 17 and 71). My translation differs from that of Kats as regards the meaning 
of a b h i m u k h a .
*) Etude sur 1’iconographie bouddhtque de 1’Inde I (1900) p. 120 and 195 and pi. VI, 2.


--- Page 101 ---
/ n(fiT
an elephant, his hands in dharmacakra-mudra holding a branch with 
an oblong sort of flower at the end of it, which I shall refer to later 
on. To judge by the date of these miniatures, this shape will probably 
be the nearest to the original one of India. In the later Nepal art 
we find him with a flower in each hand and on both flowers a ca- 
kra1), then the Tibetan-Mongolian art gives him in three ways, with 
sun and amrta-bottle, with vajra and lotus or with cakra and bell2). 
The Japanese pantheon also shews forms differing from one another: 
lotus in the right, vitarka-mudra with the left hand, or seated on an 
elephant holding a rolled-up document, or standing, with a small can­
opy in the style of a standard 3). Elsewhere he is distinguished by the 
cmtamani-jewel combined with vitarka-mudra or with the vajra 4). All 
this gives us very little that is reliable. Even for Java there is no cer­
tainty, There exist bronzes of a Bodhisattva who has no other emblem 
than the dharmacakra-mudra of his hands; as the miniature mentioned 
above shews the same gesture of the hands, and besides Samantabhadra 
is the Bodhisattva who belongs to the Dhyani-Buddha Vairocana dis­
tinguishable by this same mudra, there is a possibility that this 
Bodhisattva in dharmacakra-mudra may be Samantabhadra. So this 
name is given by Dr. Juynboli to the two specimens in the Leyden 
Museum, though doubtfully5), and the author, also with hesitation, 
followed his lead for the example at Batavia 6). But later, a Bodhisattva 
figure was found that is sitting on a pedestal from which an elephant 
appears, and that animal already on the miniature, has been appro­
priated by Samantabhadra so that this bronze might be identified with 
him7). This last-mentioned figure shews no sign of the gesture or the 
combination of attributes just described; it has the left hand lying 
open in its lap and the right hand that rests on the knee, holds a vajra8).
>) Bliagvilnlal Indrajt, The Bauddha Mythology of Nepal, published by Burgess, Notes 
on the Bauddha Rock-temples of Ajanta, Arch. Surv. West. India 9 (1879).
*) See Griinwedel, Mythologie des Buddhismus in Tibet und der Mongolei (1900) p. 141; 
Pander, Das Pantheon des Tsangtscha Hutuktu (1890) p. 59 and 77.
*) Comp. Von Siebold, Pantheon von Nippon (1852) p. 56 and pi, X; Puini, Di una singo- 
iare incarnazione di Samantabhadra bodhisattva, Riv. d. Studi Orientali 6 (1913) p. 996 sq. 
and pi. 2.
* ) Getty, The gods of Northern Buddhism (1914) p. 46.
*) Catalogue of the Rijks Ethnographisch Museum, V. Javaansche Oudheden (1909) 
p. 92.
*) Rapp, Oudh. Comm. 1912 p. 46.
’) See article quoted above about the bronzes found at Ngandjuk p. 65; Not. Bat. Gen. 
1913 p. XLVII no. 5388 and 5389.
*) This vajra might indicate Indra who also rides the elephant and has also gained a place
Barabuqur II 
7
V 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
k f X j


--- Page 102 ---
((($)?) 
. . 
vflT
\& S 3§I& / 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA
It seems there is no connect in g-link to be found in Java any more 
than outside of it. Let us now examine again the representation on the 
miniature that certainly is intended for Samantabhadra according to the 
inscription and is, as far as our knowledge goes, the one nearest to the 
original Indian idea of him. It may be quite accidental that in this one 
example the trees in the background have branches that end with three 
buds. But it is surely remarkable that on the branch the Bodhisattva 
holds in his hand, on each side of the flower at the top of it, a small 
shoot can be seen with just the same kind of bud as the well-known attri­
bute on the Barabudur displays. The centre twig of course is different, 
but nevertheless the curious coincidence of the side-shoots gives rise to 
the conjecture that on the miniature of Samantabhadra, the same attri­
bute may be intended as with the Bodhisattva on the Barabudur.
The question now arises, can the Buddhist literature outside Java 
furnish any clues to shew us that such an important part as that depicted 
on the monument is given to Samantabhadra? Such evidence actually 
exists among the texts accessible to us, but not on the surface. Here and 
there we find his name among those of the principal Bodhisattva’s, also 
among those whose task it was to establish the sutra's 1); he also takes 
part in some of the edifying stories 2). Still more important, he appears 
as one of the speakers in the Saddharmapundarika3), so that the Japa­
nese Nichiren-sect which is founded on that text, holds him in high 
honour and among their sacred writings will be found a Samantabhadra- 
dhyanasutra 4). We have already seen (p. 4) that Samantabhadra in 
the Gandavyuha is the one who confers the Perfect Wisdom and it 
is evident this is of importance, when the Gandavyuha is one of the 
texts depicted on Barabudur and the distinguished part he plays in 
that work would be quite consistent with his eminent position on the 
fourth gallery. He takes high rank among the Bodhisattva's of theBodhi- 
caryavatara 6); the Samantabhadracarya, known to us through the
in the Buddhist pantheon. AU the same we have seen that in Tibet too the vajra is an at­
tribute of Samantabhadra.
>) For instance Wassiijew, Der Buddhismus (1860) p. 172 (=* 159) and 291 (=264); the 
same T&ranStha, Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien, iib. Schiefner (1869) p. 300.
a) See also Parana tha, p. 96 ( = 76).
*) Chapt. XXVI, Samantabhadrotsahanaparivarta, on p. 472 sqq. in the edition Kern—» 
Narijio, Bibl. Buddh. X (1908—1912); in Kern’s translation, S. B. E. 21 (1884) p. 431 sqq.
*) Ryauon Fujishima, Le Buddhisme Japonais (1889) p. Ill; Puini 1.1. p. 990.
*) II, 13, 50; X, 15 (text of Minayeff in Zapiski 4, 1889, translation by De La Vall6e Pous­
sin in Musdon 1892).


--- Page 103 ---
«(f)l 
(CT
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA
Ehadracari1), is praised elsewhere 2), and among the many Prajnapa- 
ramita’s there is one dedicated to this Bodhisattva 3). Further, Chinese 
Buddhism knows him as the most important speaker in the Hwa-yen- 
sntra4) and we learn of the great honour in which he was held at Wo-mei- 
shan 5). Then in China, Samantabhadra is recognised as the ‘founder’ of 
the Yogacarya-school6) and in connection with this we may already 
observe through the Sang hyangKamahayanikan,the possible influence 
of that school on Javanese Buddhism. The work mentioned quotes 7) 
an opinion of dang acaryya crl Dinagapada, a verdict that concerns the 
yoga. Kats has already noticed 8) that this name probably means Dig- 
naga of Kanci, one of the disciples of Asanga orVasubandhu and in any 
case a distinguished authority of the Yogacarya-school; Dharmapala 
of Kanci, a contemporary of Hiuen Tsiang, was a disciple of Dignaga 
and after having teached at Nalanda for more than thirty years, 
came towards the end of his life to Suvarnadvlpa, thus probably Su­
matra. This possibly explains the manner in which this pronouncement 
found its way into Java; in any case we must note that this Yogacarya- 
authority prevailed for the Buddhism of the Sang hyang Kamahaya- 
nikan.
Then in the Tibetan literature we find evidence that in a certain 
phase of the Mahayana, the figure of Samantabhadra must have come 
to the front very prominently. It is not possible for me to consult this 
literature itself, therefore I must be satisfied with a quotation from 
Feer’s index to the Analyse du Kandjour by Csoma 9).
"C’est surtout dans le Rgyud (Tantra) que Samanta-Bhadra est cite, 
celebre, exalte. II est invoque cornrne le supreme seigneur de la sagesse *)
*) See above p. 77.
*) Sukhavati-vyuha VIII, 20 (text of Muller—Nanjio in Anecd. Oxon. Aryan series I,
2 (1883); trans. by Muller in S. B. E. 49, 1 (1894).
J) See Walleser, Praj naparamita (1914) p. 23.
*) Edkins, Chinese Buddhism (1880) p. 20. For this sfltra, the Avatamsaka, comp. Was- 
siljew, 1.1. p. 172 
159) and chapt. XIII here below. The coming of various Buddha’s is
prophesied by Samantabhadra, see Beal, Romantic Legend (1875) p. 7.
•) See Foucher 1.1. p. 121. The Samantabhadra of the miniature is perhaps the Wo-mei- 
shan one.
*) Eitel, Handbook of Chinese Buddhism, s.v. As expounder of a yoga-creed, Saman­
tabhadra also appears in the biography of Amoghavajra, see L6vi-Chavaim.es, Les seize 
arhat protecteurs de la loi, Journ. asiat. 11: 8 (1916) p. 49. Comp. Getty 1.1. p. 46.
’) On folio 40a (p. 45 and 96).
8) On p. 10 of his edition.
*) Annales Musee Guimet 2 (1881) p. 455 s. v. Samanta-Bhadra. Comp, also W addell, The 
Buddhism of Tibet or Lamaism (1895) p. 72 and 131, also Samantabhadra Adibuddha in 
Padma Than Yig, Journ. Asiat. 1923, II p. 272.


--- Page 104 ---
(fiT
(Rgyud XXII, 2°); il repond, dit Csoma, au Optimus Maximus des 
Romains, il est le supreme Buddha (!); tout, en quelque sorte, pro cede 
de lui (Rgyud VII, 6°)” etc.
In othe^ parts of the Rgyud he is invoked; a sutra in the Mdo is pro­
nounced at his request1); the Phal-chen tells of his meditation or ecs­
tasy and his transformations as well as his actions 2). As already stated,
I know nothing of the further contents of these works, so it is impos­
sible to say if one of them might be able to throw some light on the 
story of the fourth, gallery. But at any rate this clearly proves that a num­
ber of actual Samantabhadra texts existed, and that in some of them an 
unusually important position must have been given to this Bodhisattva, 
a position that makes it quite comprehensible that the founders of the 
Barabudur should have dedicated the highest gallery to him 3).
Although here above I have collected evidence that appears to me 
sufficiently important'to draw attention to the possibility of the Bodhi­
sattva with the branch of buds being no other than Samantabhadra,
I have plainly stated that I do not consider this sufficient to establish 
his identity. On the other h#nd it will appear when we discuss the further 
data regarding the Buddhism of Java, that \^ a t is known about it, 
or can be deduced, coincides easily with a system that ascribes a high 
position to Samantabhadra and that only through such a system a suit­
able explanation can be obtained. Without anticipating opr further 
examination, we may consider there is reason enough for the present 
. to entitle "the Bodhisattva characterized by the branch with buds" 
as Samantabhadra.
. When we consider the story depicted on these reliefs as a whole, we 
can at once, distinguish some of its general points. First, we see that Sa­
mantabhadra is not the only chief person of this text. On by far the 
. 
greatest number of scenes a second chief figure appears, one in the dress 
of high rank and continually wearing a halo.
Knowing as we do so little about what the reliefs represent, we canqoi 
be certain that this figure is always meant for the same person, though 
to avoid confusion in describing the reliefs, we will call him "the second 
chief person”. The impression we get certainly is that of a continual 
part played by the same person, so as Sudhana on the second or the spcc-
>') DagadigbodhiSattvasamudrasaimipatimahotsavavikricJita (XVIII, 3) 1.1. p . 265.
•) Phal-chen 3 and 32,1.1. p. 209 and 211.
*) For the meaning of Samantabhadra see also Puini 1.1, p. 990, and De Milhoue’.s Intro- 
d 'etion to the Si-do-In-dzou (Ann. Mus, Guitn. 8,1899) p. XIII. It is noticeable that in the just- 
/ mentioned work the name of Samantabhadra is given among the very few Bodhisattva’s 
(p. S4, 99, 126). See further Chapt. XIII.
/
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
) J l 1
%


--- Page 105 ---
i I)? 
(at
\ i \ g E
/ 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADR.A
tator of Maitreya's miracles on the balustrade of the third gallery, but it 
is no more than an impression, seeing the little character or individuality 
the sculptors are in the habit of giving to different persons of the same 
class and standing. The halo being sometimes put in and sometimes 
omitted is of course no objection to the supposition of this being always 
the same second chief person, for we have seen many instances of the 
liberties taken by the sculptors in this respect.
We see further, as already noticed, that the scenes with the numerous 
Buddha's are not divided equally over the whole text, but appear at the 
beginning and end of the relief-series, not in the middle. To be more 
particular: up to no. 23 inclusive, such scenes appear and no. 1—3 might 
be considered as a sort of introduction, while on the other side of the 
East gateway, no. 71 and 72 with respectively fifteen and seventeen 
Buddha-figures, are the closing scenes of this series and at the same time 
form a dignified conclusion to the whole of the Barabudur reliefs. After 
no. 23 the story also in another way, takes a different turn, because up 
to this point Samantabhadra and the chief person on nearly all reliefs 
are offering their homage to various Buddha's and Bodhisattva’s, but 
beginning with no. 24 we find almost uninterruptedly, Samantabhadra 
himself as chief person in the middle of the scene, receiving homage 
from others, among whom is always "the second chief'person”. In the 
whole of this middle part, up to and including no. 46, the numerous 
Buddha's do not appear. They reappear with no. 47, but in the third 
part reaching from this relief to the end, we do not find just as at the 
beginning, Samantabhadra continually offering homage, but mixed with 
such scenes are others resembling those in the second part, where the 
Bodhisattva himself receives the homage. The two closing scenes have 
been mentioned; curiously enough, Samantabhadra does not appear any 
more on these reliefs.
Let us now examine these three parts separately, beginning with the 
introductory reliefs. On no. 1 we find ten Buddha’s 1), and two Bodhi­
sattva’s each with a follower. This relief is very symmetrically designed; 
in the centre a Buddha seated in vitarka-mudra, above one in dhyana- 
mudra, and on each side one standing on a lotus cushion that rises out 
of a pond, with the right hand in vitarka and the left holding the hem 
of the garment. On the right and left space are placed five seated per-
*) This number of ten reminds us of the ten Buddha’s of the quarters, *who appeared in the 
Lalitavistara and are also mentioned by De Groot, Le Code du Mahay&na en Chine, Ver- 
hand. Kon. Acad. v. Wetensch. Afd. Lett. N. R, I. (1893) p. 186; also comp, the ten bhumi’s 
in the beginning of the Dafabhumipvara.


--- Page 106 ---
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
O T L j
V 
5 * ||f 
l/s4') / slfiliii 
; |Ja
sons: above, two Buddha's,.the two inner ones in bhiimisparga-, the 
outer left one in dhyana-, right in vitarka-mudra, below on the outside 
a Buddha in bhumisparga-mudra and. nearer to the centre a Bodhisattva 
with follower; on the right it is Samantabhadra with a distinguished com­
panion, left, a Bodhisattva holding a padma, with an ordinary attendant . 
Foucher, in my opinion on insufficient evidence, calls the one on the 
right Maitreya in the note to plate 5 of his article referred to above, 
though there is no stupa in the headdress and the branch of buds does 
not resemble the nagapuspa that the French scholar ascribes to him; the 
left one is called Avalokitegvara though this is not very likely when the 
Amitabha-image is omitted in the headdress. On no. 2 we see a row of 
Buddha’s at the top and several Bodhisattva’s sitting below; the first 
respectively from left to right in vitarka-, bhiimisparga-, dhyana-, 
dharmacakra- and again dhyana- and dharmacakra-mudrS. The left- 
hand part of the row below is too indistinct to distinguish between the 
Bodhisattva’s and the homage-paying followers, while possibly, the 
‘second chief person’ who appears on the following reliefs is already 
present. Perhaps he is sitting on the right without an emblem but with 
two attendants; left of him sits Samantabhadra with the double branch 
of buds; instead of two it has four side branches with buds. Nearer the 
centre is the above-mentioned (p. 95) Ratnapani with his jewel on a 
blue lotus; quite to the left, someone with only a padma, perhaps the 
same person as on the preceding relief. No. 3 too is not very distinct; 
again we have an upper and lower row, both seated, from left to right 
as follows: above, a Bodhisattva with an emblem of flames (Sarvani- 
varanaviskambhin 1)); then one with a branch of many flowers; a Bud­
dha in vitarka-mudra; a Bodhisattva with a round bud on a stalk and a 
niche in his headdress — on the photo it seems as if there might be a 
stupa in it, but on the original it looks more like a Buddha-image and 
that would of course indicate Avalokitegvara —; a Buddha in dharma- 
cakra-mudra; a Bodhisattva with wom-off headdress, wide sash and a 
nagapuspa in his hand, so possibly Maitreya. Below on the left sits 
the second chief person with his retinue, then a Bodhisattva in dhyana- 
mudra with a long stalk with rosettes on it beside him, and then three 
more Bodhisattva’s; first one with the sword on the padma (Akaga- 
garbha), then ManjugrI with the kropak on the utpala and finally V aj~ 
rapani with the vajra on the same flower.
On the two following reliefs, a Buddha seated in a niche, in dhyana-
' ) For further identifications see chapt XII.


--- Page 107 ---
mudra and vitarka-mudra respectively, is receiving homage on the right 
from Samantabhadra and his escort (on no. 4 three adorned with haloes, 
on no. 5 two without halo); on the left from the second chief person. On 
no. 4 there are two Buddha’s sitting in the air, the one on the left in 
bhumisparga-, right in vitarka-mudra and on no. 5 celestial beings are 
hovering. On no. 6 a figure in the dress of high rank with a halo is seated 
below with a padma in his hand and a large retinue, in front of a group of 
foxir plainer-dressed persons to whom he appears to be speaking, while 
a second figure with a halo to the extreme right, is looking on; above in 
the middle sits a Buddha in dharmacakra-mudra, against a back with 
a border of flames; on both sides a Bodhisattva whose emblem has been 
knocked off (one has also lost his head) and next to these another Bud­
dha, left in vitarka-, right in bhiimisparga-mudra- The next relief shews 
a small pavilion in the middle with a Buddha in dhyana-mudra. On 
the left sitting and standing, is an orchestra with all sorts of drums, 
some cymbals and a bell; on the right a Bodhisattva seated on a lotus- 
cushion with a conch-shell in his hand ; behind him stand musicians with 
wind-instruments, trumpets and flutes and there are two persons 
seated. The first perhaps is the second chief person, the second, seated 
on the extreme right and wearing a beard, is remarkable because he 
holds in the right hand an object that must be a small drum, but at first 
sight resembles the double vajra that Vajrapani carries on the Buddha- 
reliefs at Gandhara, We can notice the same thing elsewhere. In the 
clouds are overturned jars raining down j ewels, while flowers and wreaths 
are falling.
With a background of flowers, Samantabhadra is sitting in the centre 
on no. 8 making a sembah, with very indistinct worshippers on either 
side of him. Above him a Buddha in vitarka-mudra with the circle 
of flames at his back, between Avalokitegvara with his Amitabha-image 
and padma-bud, and a very much worn-away Vajrapani. Dishes on lotus- 
cushions with smoke rising from them hover in the air. Next no. 9 gives 
us Samantabhadra and the second chief person, both with followers, on the 
two sides of a kalpadruma that stands in the centre with jars underneath 
it; above that, four Buddha’s next to whom stambha’s with umbrellas 
are hovering; the one most to the left has had his right hand on his knee, 
the second is plainly in the bhumisparga-mudra, the two others 
have lost their right arm. On no. 10 as well, we see a very much-damaged 
Samantabhadra in the middle, whose stalk apparently has had four 
buds; on the right followers are sitting, left there is again an orchestra 
with drums and cymbals. A Buddha surrounded by celestial beings,
\*A m ) : 
' 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
m
i j


--- Page 108 ---
.
5 in the air in dharmacakra-mudra; on the right on a pedestal with 
garlands hanging from it, we see three stambha's with banners.
On no. 11 there is a pavilion in the centre with a Buddha seated in it, 
whose knocked-off right hand rested on his knee. An angel on a cloud is on 
each side, a tree with an umbrella above it and another cloud in the 
corner, out of which a cloth, appears. Under the tree on the right sits the 
second chief person with the utpala in his right and a round ball, bud 
or jewel, in the left hand, his retinue behind him ; under the lefthand tree 
sits Samantabhadra who is making a sembah, with four companions 
whose headdres is made up of locks of hair. Next we see on no. 12 in the 
middle, a Buddha seated in vitarka-mudra. with a very high usnisa, at 
his back the tablet with a flaming border; beneath him sits Samanta­
bhadra, his hands folded in sSmbah, on each side of him a dish of in­
cense with the smoke rising out of it placed on a little cushion in the 
air. On either side of this group is a Bodhisattva standing on a lotus- 
cushion, on the right Vajrapani with his emblem worn-off, left, one 
with a flower in bud shape and a damaged headdress. Then kneeling on 
the ground, to the right, the second chief person with his escort; left 
another group of worshippers, and up above on clouds, heavenly beings 
with right and left a Buddha in dhyana-mudra.
No. 13 is quite remarkable, the centre being taken up by a large stupa 
on a lotuscusbion but without any umbrella; it forms a niche for a 
Buddha sitting in the dharmacakra-mudra. This naturally reminds 
us of the well-known episode in the Saddharmapundarika, where a 
stupa opens and discloses to the astonished multitude a Buddha seated 
within1). Otherwise, the circumstances are not very similar. On the left 
sits the second chief person with attendants; above them, two Buddha’s 
in dhyana- and in vara-mudra; to the right is Samantabhadra with 
his four companions, also with two Buddha’s overhead in respectively 
bhumispaiya- and abhaya-mudra. On no. 14 there is again a Buddha 
standing in the centre on a lotuscushion, his right hand in vitarka- 
mudra, the left holding his garment hem. The second chief person sits 
as on the last relief, to the left with his followers, he holds a ball-shaped 
object in his hand out of which rises incense-smoke and in front of him 
on a lotuscushion is a pointed stave wound round crosswise with bands, 
probably some sweetscented preparation ready for burning. Samanta­
bhadra sits on the right with three companions who all have haloes. On 
lotuscushions with stalks there are three Buddha’s on each side, left,
>) Chapt. XI, Stupasamdanjanaparivarta (see the edition and translation quoted on p. 
98, n. 4, resp. p. 239 sqq. and 227 sqq).
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA


--- Page 109 ---
- ■ S
\
f( ST1) 
(ej
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA
the first one's hand is missing, the next in dharmacakra-, the third in 
dhyana-mudra; on the right, vara-, dharmacakra- and bhumispar^a- 
mudra respectively. The second chief person on the left, and Sa- 
mantabhadra, now with two followers, on the right, appear on no. 15 
where the centre of attraction is a Buddha seated in dharmacakra-mudra 
in the midst of a flowery omementation on a lofty lotus cushion, his usnisa 
has a sharp point, celestial beings hover in the clouds on both sides as 
well as dishes and censors. A different arrangement now comes on no. 
16; at the top a row of six figures seated, separated by trees; from left 
to right a Buddha in vitarka-mudra, Avalokite^vara with his Amitabha 
image, a Buddha in bhumispar5a-, and one in vara-mudra, Maitreya 
with the stupa in his headdress and again a Buddha in bhumisparga- 
mudra; the Bodhisattva’s sit rather lower than the Buddha's. Then be­
low in the corners, sit Buddha’s with the flame-edged medallion behind 
them, the lefthand one in dhyana-, the right in vitarka-mudra. Sa- 
mantabhadra is seated in the middle with escort and worshippers on his 
right and the second chief person on the left, also with attendants. No. 
17 shews us a pavilion and a Buddha in dhyana-mudra; to the right of 
it, sits Samantabhadra, left, the second chief person with an incense- 
burner in his hand, both with a retinue. Above these two groups on 
each side, is a Buddha with the flame-edged tablet behind him, between 
two Bodhisattva’s; the left one in dhyana-, the right in vitarka-mudra. 
The Bodhisattva’s are very dilapidated, we can only see that the one 
sitting furthest to the right, is Vajrapani.
Now comes a scene with a great many Buddha’s on no. 18, all sitting 
in the top row, one in dhyana-mudra in the centre with the medallion 
at his back unfinished, then four on the left and five on the right of 
him. The left group consecutively in dharmacakra-, bhumispar^a-, dhar­
macakra-, vitarka-mudra; the right centre one in bhumispar^a-, the 
next one on each side dharmacakra-, the outside ones abhaya-mudra. 
The groups are so arranged that the Buddha’s in dharmacakra sit just 
behind the others. Samantabhadra and the second chief person with 
his retinue behind him, are sitting on the ground, doing homage to 
seven Bodhisattva’s seated on lotuscusliions; they all have a halo but 
no further distinguishing attribute. On no. 19 and 20 we have a pavi­
lion in the centre with Samantabhadra sitting in it (the building of no. 20 
is very dilapidated) and on both reliefs the second chief person and his 
retinue is placed on the right. No. 19 on the left shews a distribution to 
bhiksu’s, one brahman and some laymen, but no. 20 has the space divi­
ded in two, underneath are bhiksu’s sitting each side of a large flower-


--- Page 110 ---
vase and above sits a Buddha between two Bodhisattva's under a 
tree, his right arm is broken off; the lefthand Bodhisattva with hands 
folded in sembah, by the Amitabha-image in the headdress, must be 
Avalokitegvara, the other one is only distinguished by the blue lotus 
without any other emblem on it.
The two next panels give no other Buddha’s but only one seated in the 
middle, on no. 21 he is on a lofty pedestal under a tree, on no. 22 in a 
pavilion omemented with stupa’s, his position on both is the vitarka- 
mudra; above on clouds there are some heavenly beings. No. 22 has the 
second chief person on the right and Samantabhadra on the left, both 
with a pair of attendants, but no. 21 has placed all these people on the 
right and the left is occupied by a group of worshipping bhiksu’s and 
laymen with dishes of flowers. On this relief Samantabhadra’s lotus- 
cushion is on a stalk. Now comes no. 23, the last of this portion of the 
series, with four Buddha’s on handsome thrones, of which three above; 
the one in the middle sits in a niche in dharmacakra-, the other two are in 
dhyanamudra. Below in the middle, also in a niche, is the fourth Buddha 
seated in bhfimispar^a-mudra; on his right sits the second chief person 
with attendants, on the left Samantabhadra and two servants. Here 
it is not the Bodhisattva himself but one of his attendants who holds 
the t mblem in his hand.
We now begin the second portion, the one without numerous Buddha’s. 
Here we almost continually find Samantabhadra sitting in a pavilion in 
the centre and the other persons doing him homage. On no. 24 they are 
the second chief person with his servants on the right, left, the same as 
with the Buddha on no. 21, a group of kneeling bhiksu’s and servants 
with dishes of flowers. Heavenly beings appear in the clouds on this and 
all following reliefs up to and including no. 40, except no. 31 and 32. 
The next scene no. 25, gives us Samantabhadra in dhyana-mudra seated 
under a tree, here too receiving homage from both sides; right probably 
is the second chief person, but his face and body have mostly disappear­
ed, his retinue is uninjured; left, we see four men in distinguished dress 
attended by servants. On no. 26 a Buddha is again the chief figure; he is 
seated on a lion throne in dhyana-mudra, in a pavilion omemented with 
stupa’s, receiving homage on both sides from a distinguished person with 
a halo, the one on the right holds a padma, the left one an incense-bur­
ner; both have a large retinue carrying banners and standards. Samanta­
bhadra does not seem to be present here but on no. 27 and 28 he is again 
the chief person, seated in a pavilion and receiving homage from someone 
with a halo and a group of attendants on the right. On no. 28 there is a
(CmPj 
(fiT
V 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
LUAJ


--- Page 111 ---
bhiksu on the left as well, he has a covered dish in his left hand and in the 
right a stick that has an ornement at the top with rings on it. I shall 
refer later on to this object.
Next we have no. 29, one of the few scenes where Samantabhadra, does 
not appear. In the middle is a pavilion in which a monk is sitting on a 
lotuscushion, discoursing with three bhiksu’s seated on the left, attended 
by three servants. On the right sits the second chief person with his 
retinue; the flower he holds in his hand seems to end in a sort of ribbon. 
This and the following relief are noticeable for the large number of 
celestial beings hovering above in the clouds.
In the ten reliefs 30—39 we evidently have a closely-connected group. 
Everywhere Samantabhadra is sitting in a pavilion in the middle; only 
on no. 33 and 37 can his identity be doubtful for want of his emblem; 
everywhere on the right, either sitting or standing, we find the second 
chief person with his retinue and on all the reliefs except no. 31 and 32, 
(as noted) heavenly beings are witnesses of what is going on. On the left 
a variety of different groups of people appear doing homage. I shall 
therefore describe only the lefthand groups, referring the reader to the 
description of the separate reliefs for any peculiarities in attitude or ap­
pearance of the Bodhisattva or second chief person x). On no. 30 the left- 
hand group consists of women only, who are shewn kneeling on clouds 
and therefore must be surely goddesses or heavenly beings. On no. 31 they 
are people from the naga-world, male ones sitting in the front with nagi's 
standing behind them. Then on no. 32 raksasa’s, wild looking creatures 
with prominent eyes and unkempt hair, while the bearded men on no. 33 
whose hair also ends in rough curls, will be yaksa’s 2). On no. 34 a mixed 
group of monks and laymen, all human, are offering respectful homage, 
and on no, 35 is a mixed group of three naga's, one ralcsasa and ayak§a; 
among the celestials here we find two garuda’s and a kinnara. The four 
kneeling figures on no. 36 as far as we can see, are human beings, one of 
whom holds up a tray on a sort of pedestal, with an offering of flowers. 
On the last three reliefs the visitors are women; those on no. 37 kneeling 
in the foreground with musicians behind them, on no. 38 they are four 
sitting in a sort of pendapa. Then no. 39, very remarkable, because 
there is a many-armed figure of a god sitting in front of the group of 
standing women. It is not very distinct, even the sex is now uncertain;
’) The reliefs of the 4th gallery, chief wall, are described fully in the Dutch edition p. 620—635.
*) As already noticed, in. other places no difference is made between the raksasa- and yaksa- 
type but both are represented where the text requires only yaksa’s; so it is here not certain 
in how' far the two types represent different beings.
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA


--- Page 112 ---
■ G0l&x
//>—xV\
f l j 
' 
Qt
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA
but in any case it seems to be ten-armed; with the front pair it rests the 
right hand on the ground holding the left to its breast, in the other hands 
are its attributes. In the right hands I think we can distinguish consecu­
tively a sword, an arrow, a sort of stiletto and an angkuga; in the left a 
dagger, a bow, an object unknown to us that looks exactly like a crack­
nel biscuit and a stick or spear: all, if we see rightly, are warlike im­
plements. Seeing that the front, most important, pair of hands hold no 
weapons, we might perhaps consider this figure if a goddess to be Cunda, 
but this supposition is quite uncertain and is only supported by the 
fact that this goddess seems to have been well-known and worshipped in 
Java, for she appears on the Mendut. It is equally possible that we ought 
to look for the name of this figure among Brahmanistic goddesses and 
that this may be some or other form of Durga. If on the contrary it is a 
god, we might take it to be Mara with his daughters, because of the other 
female figures.
No. 40, that shews a Buddha seated in a pavilion in dhyana-mudra 
receiving homage from Samantabhadra sitting left, and right the second 
chief person holding an utpala, both with attendants, is followed by six 
very striking scenes that should yield important clues for identifying the 
text later on. On no. 41 we find as usual a pavilion in the middle but it is 
empty and there is nothing on the iotuscushion but a large round 
bolster-shaped cushion. To the right sits the second chief person with 
two servants, on the left below are three plainly-dressed persons. Above 
these thr ee, a rocky landscape is introduced in conventional form, planted 
with trees and ending at the top in clouds. In a large irregular niche in 
the mass of rock, representing probably only a hollow in the rock, 
Samantabhadra is seated in dhyana-mudra. The righthand side of no. 42 
shews a space enclosed by a palissade; just in the middle of the relief 
stands the gateway forming the entrance to it. Inside the enclosure we 
get first two fruittrees and to the right we see the hall of a palace, in 
front of which armed guards are sitting, while within the building a 
queen is seated with her attendants; she is holding her left hand, with 
something indistinct in it, above her head and seems to have a mirror in 
tiie right. To the left of the gateway, that is, outside the palissade, 
Samantabhadra and t he second chief person are walking together with one 
umbrella-bearer kneeling between them, towards the left, preceded and 
followed by two very plain-looking servants. They are going away from 
the gate-way. On the two following reliefs Samantabhadra is again seat­
ed in his pavilion and the second chief person stands on the right with 
his retinue. No. 43 is the most remarkable; here the Bodhisattva is


--- Page 113 ---
holding up a bird on the palm of his right hand and appears to be 
watching the scene on the left .The relief is a good deal damaged, but we 
can still see that the front one of the men standing is emptying a bowl of 
fish into a lotuspond and the man behind him is carrying an animal 
that looks like a squirrel. Above the pond is a tree and below, rocky 
ground, with a pair of birds and a couple of deer introduced into the 
design; there are some birds in the air as well. The whole scene evidently 
represents how various kinds of creatures are set free by order of the 
Bodhisattva. The lefthand side of no. 44 has also suffered a good deal. 
We see first in two rows one above the other, three bhiksu’s and three lay­
men doing homage to the Bodhisattva, and then with their backs turned 
on these, are some persons offering something in dishes and jars to two 
groups also one above the other, three brahmans and below two people 
in worldly dress.
Just enough remains of no. 45 for us to see that Samantabhadra was in 
his niche and the second chief person sitting on the right; nothing can be 
made out of the rest. Finally we see on no. 46 a wooden bridge being 
built over a river, its construction is simple but efficient; on the right 
is Samantabhadra who has a sort of adze on his shoulder and the 
second chief person folding his hands in sembah with a couple of 
attendants 1).
We now come to the third portion of the relief-series where we shall 
find again the Buddha’s in the air. No. 47—50 seem to be rather closer 
connected so that the design of 47 is the same as that of 50 and that of 48 
like 49. On the two first-mentioned is above, a Buddha seated between 
two Bodhisattva's and below on the left a group of bhiksu's, on the right 
Samantabhadra also seated with the second chief person and his retinue. 
The details vary; on no. 47 Buddha and Bodhisattva’s are sitting each in 
a niche and on no. 50 they are in the open air; the Buddha on 47 is in 
vara-, the other one in dhyana-mudra. The Bodhisattva’s appear to be the 
same; on the left it is certainly Avalokitegvara with his Amitabha-image 
in the headdress, but the righthand one on both reliefs has a damaged 
emblem which has probably been that of Vajrapairi, Between the 
bhiksu’s and Samantabhadra on no. 47 a vase and an incense-burner are 
placed; on no. 50 the branch of buds is there fixed up. No. 48 and 49 
shew a standing group consisting of Samantabhadra and two companions 
wearing a halo, then the second chief person who also has a halo with his 
retinue, partly sitting. On the left, opposite this group, some worshippers
') For this relief see further Chapt. XI,
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA
xx?


--- Page 114 ---
are kneeling on no. 48 and above them heavenly beings hover in the 
clouds; but on no. 49 we find a crowd of standing and sitting people of 
the lowest class, among them several women with infants. What is hap­
pening to these people is not clear; the front one of the kneeling has 
his hands raised in sgmbah, and the Bodhisattva holds these hands by 
the wrist. This scene shews above the crowd a ridge of rocks with trees 
and animals, among them a snake and a lion; on no. 48 we have nothing 
but falling blossoms in the air.
On no.51 and 52 we find Samantabhadra sitting once more in his pavilion 
with the second chief person and his attendants again on the right.
No. 51 has angels hovering in the air on both sides, and below them on 
the left, a couple of worshippers; on no. 52 there are no heavenly beings 
but we see two peacocks above the pavilion In the last mentioned scene 
on the left a distribution is taking place, the recipients sitting in two 
rows; above three brahmans under a penthouse are receiving bags of 
money and below, laymen are being given small round objects from a 
dish, may be jewels. One of them petitions the Bodhisattva on his 
knees.
Next come two reliefs with numerous Buddha’s. On no. 53 they are 
nine, all sitting in a row at the top and so arranged that the centre 
one shews the dhyana-, the two next to him dharmacakra-, then 
vitarka-, then again dharmacakra-mudra; the two outside ones are in 
bimmisparqa- on the left and vara-mudra on the right. Those in the 
dharmacakra position sit behind the others.
At each end of the row is a person in monk’s dress, according to Bran- 
des x) a Pratyekabuddha and above their head is on the left a sun , on the 
right a moon on a lotus cushion. Considering that elsewhere the 
Pratyekabuddha’s, identified as such by the text, are shewn with the 
usnisa just like ordinary Buddha's2), I think it more probable that these 
figures are only bhiksu’s. Besides Pratyekabuddha’s appear only in 
Buddha-less periods and are therefore quite out of place in this com­
pany. On the ground under this group, Samantabhadra and the second 
chief person are seated, both with several attendants. On no. 54 the 
arrangement of the group below is quite different; here we have one 
Buddha seated in bhumispar<;a-mudra with a water-jug beside him on 
the extreme left, while Samantabhadra and the second chief person are 
turned respectfully towards him, their attendants sitting behind them.
>) Rapp. Oudh. Comm. 1903 p. 4.
*) For instance la 4, IBa 17, 18, 28.
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
§L


--- Page 115 ---
Right and left at the edge of the relief a Buddha is standing on a pedestal 
facing the centre of the scene; the one on the left in abhaya-, on the 
right in a not quite distinct dharmacakra-mudra. Above, there is again 
a row of seven Buddha's, separated by trees, the middle one in dhyana-, 
the outside ones in dharmacakra-mudra, the rest in a kind of vitarka in 
which the two inner ones place respectively the middle and third finger 
against the thumb, instead of the first. Preaching to animals is the sub­
ject of no. 55; it maybe compared with III 71. In the middle is Saman­
tabhadra in a pavilion, to the right the second chief person with atten­
dants. Above them, all kinds of birds come flying towards the pavilion, 
while the whole space to the left is filled up with other animals, con­
tinually in pairs and ail close together; elephants, rhinoceros, horse, pig, 
goat, sheep, cattle, deer, hare, lion, tiger, snake, monkey and jackal are all 
there. Samantabhadra in the centre and the second chief person with his 
retinue, appear again on no. 56 where we get quite a different arrange­
ment of Buddha’s on the left; three Buddha's in vitarka-, vara-, and 
dhyana-mudra above four Bodhisattva's or gods with their headdress 
made up in twists. In the background of both rows are blossoming 
trees.
On no. 57 we see again a sun with a flame on three sides of it and a 
moon on a lotus cushion on either side of the pavilion, now placed to 
the left of the relief, in which a Buddha sits in dhyana-mudra. On the 
right Samantabhadra and the second chief person are approaching with 
their usual attendants; flowers are falling from the sky. Again on no. 58, 
both these persons stand on the right under a shower of blossoms. On the 
left we have above, three seated Buddha’s, the first in bhumisparga-, the 
second in dhyana-, the third in vitarka-mudra (withthe little finger) and 
a circle of flames behind him; below them are six very dilapidated gods 
or Bodhisattva’s with a halo, sitting on lotuscushions. Then again on 
no. 59 two rows one above the other right across the relief; above, three 
Buddha’s with trees between them, the middle one in dharmacakra-, 
the two others in dhyana-mudra; below in the centre is a conventional­
ized tree which Samantabhadra seated on the left with his attendants, 
is watering from a vase with a spout; the second chief person is on the 
right with his retinue.
One of the most remarkable scenes is no. 60, because Samantabhadra 
appears on it no less than three times. First we see him standing on the 
extreme right with the second chief person and his servants; then there 
are two buildings like temples and between these he stands on his lotus- 
cushion rising above the ground; finally on the left he is floating away
t(l)|
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA


--- Page 116 ---
(i( f f ) 
(CT
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA
in the air. It is raining flowers all over the relief. In my opinion, this 
cannot be intended to represent that Samantabhadra makes three appar­
itions of himself, but only that the sculptor in this manner represents 
the Bodhisattva rising into the air and flying away. On the two next 
reliefs we have a pavilion with a Buddha on the left receiving homage 
from Samantabhadra and the second chief person placed to the right. 
No. 61 shews a high, wide pavilion with five small trees like bouquets 
ornementing its pedestal; the worshippers kneel under the trees on the 
right, the Bodhisattva has an incense-bumer and a fan. The Buddha sits 
in dharmacakra-mudra. On no. 62 the worshippers are standing, the 
pavilion is ornemented with stupa's and the Buddha’s usnisa ends in a 
sharp point; as far as we can see, his position is abhaya-mudra.
On the four following reliefs the pavilion in the centre is again occupied 
by Samantabhadra. Heavenly beings hover on either side of no. 63; to the 
right sits the second chief person with his retinue and the same they do in 
the three following scenes but once they are standing. On the left we see 
three well-to-do worshippers in the first scene; no. 64 on this side has a 
distribution of alms, taking place under a canopy to a group of two stand­
ing brahmans with beard and umbrella and three persons kneeling who 
receive garments. No. 65 has the left side divided horizontally into two 
parts; above are seated three Buddha’s in dharmacakra-, vitarlca-, and 
vara-mudra; below in the lefthand comer is a bhiksu holding a vase 
with flowers that has a pedestal, in front of him sits some person of 
distinction whose servant behind him has a branch with many buds in 
his hands; then a second person with a similar branch and next to the 
third who turns his back to us, is another branch with buds exactly like 
Samantabhadra’s emblem. On no. 66 we have on the left a pendapa with 
bells and flowers banging from the edge of the roof and inside, seven 
eminent men are sitting, their headdress being made up by twisted 
locks of hair.
The centrepiece of no. 67 consists of a Bodhisattva with utpala and 
hands folded in sembah, sitting on a lotuscushion between two Buddha’s 
on pedestals, in vitarka-, and abhaya-mudra and a third Buddha above 
him also in vitarka-mudra. Flowers and censers hover in the air. 
Celestial beings are right ancl left on clouds and on the ground left, four 
bhiksu s, right, four worldly spectators. On no. 68 there are two pavil­
ions, left with a Buddha in dharmacakra-mudra, right, four kneeling 
women. Between the two buildings and facing the Buddha, are Saman­
tabhadra, his hands in sgmbah, the second chief person and an umbrella- 
bearer. Two angels above on clouds.
>53* ■ G°ix


--- Page 117 ---
■ e°l&x
//>—xV\
No. 69 is again a relief with two rows one above the other. Below, we have 
Samantabhadra in dhyana-mudra in the middle and on either side six 
men of rank, gods or Bodhisattva’s, those on the right have haloes, on 
the left headdresses of hair *). In the middle of the top row is a stupa and 
on either side three Buddha’s, from left to right in bhumisparga-, 
dharmacakra-, and dhyana-mudra; the middle one each side sits behind 
the others. Then no. 70 gives us for the last time a pavilion with the 
Buddha in dharmacakra-mudra and the sun and moon on either side of 
the building, the same as no. S3 and 57. On the right kneels Samanta­
bhadra with five attendants; on the left three bhiksu's are sitting, with a 
small temple or gateway behind them, and three laymen beside them.
A t the edge of the relief right and left, rocks are indicated; in the clouds 
above are four male angels to the right and four female on the lefthand 
with a pair of kinnara’s.
Samantabhadra does not appear on the two last reliefs. Here we 
find on both only two gods or Bodhisattva’s or whatever they are, 
without the branch of buds, and nothing else but Buddha’s. On no. 71 
the two worshippers are kneeling in the middle, above them sits a 
Buddha in dharmacakra-mudra and next on each side, stands one on a 
lotuscushion with a stalk, the lefthand figure has both hands in the vi­
tarka-mudra, that on the right has only his right hand in the same position; 
his left holds the (now invisible) garment-hem. On either side of this 
centralpiece there are six Buddha’s, three and three one above the 
other; each time the middle one in dharmacakra-mudra sits just behind 
the others, then in the top row, the one next to the standing Buddha is 
in vitarka-mudra, the righthand one at the edge of the relief is in bhu­
misparga-, the one on the lefthand edge is in dhyana-mudra. In the bottom 
row both middle ones sit in bhumisparga- and both outside ones in vi­
tarka-mudra. Altogether there are here fifteen Buddha's and on no. 72 
even seventeen. The last relief gives us two whole rows of Buddha’s 
sitting one above the other. Above in the middle is a Buddha in vitarka- 
mudra on a lotuscushion with a stalk, next to him on each side consecu­
tively, Buddha’s in dharmacakra-, bhumisparga-, again dharmacakra-, 
and vitarka-mudra. In both rows the dharmacakra-Buddha's sit behind 
the others. Below in the middle rises the stalk of the centre cushion of 
the top row; on the right are five Buddha's in dhyana-, dharmacakra-, 
vitarka-, dharmacakra-, and bhumisparga-mudra. To the left we have 
first the two Bodhisattva’s or gods, each holding a flower and the front
*) Here too are some faint traces of a halo to be seen, so that probably they all had them.
Barabudur II 
8
ID 
®L
W
l W
 
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA


--- Page 118 ---
—vV\
one with his hands in sembah; next three Buddha’s, the one furthest to 
the left sits in dharmacakra-mudra, the middle one has lost his right 
arm and the one on his right, both arms. Probably they were in vitarka- 
or abhaya and dharmacakra-mudra respectively.
The absence of Samantabhadra on the two last reliefs might be due to 
the fact that these reliefs are not only the conclusion of the text relating 
to that Bodhisattva but form the closing scenes of all the pictorial reliefs 
on the monument, so that it may have been decided to give these Buddha- 
reliefs a wider significance. It is however more probable that the text 
represented required these final scenes depicted just in this manner.
At the end of this chapter I must mention an hypothesis by Dr. F. D.
K. Bosch that appeared after the Dutch edition of this monograph was 
published, entitled “Iiet Awatamsaka-siitra, de Gandawyuha en Bara­
budur” x). Should this hypothesis prove correct it would furnish the 
explanation for what is represented on the chief wall of both the third and 
fourth gallery. The writer begins by examining the relation between 
the Avatamsaka and the Gandavyuha (alluded to above on p. 2) and 
comes to the conclusion that the last-mentioned text is really the last 
chapter of the Avatamsaka. He argues further that already in Sanskrit at 
least three versions of the Gandavyuha must have existed, represented 
respectively by nos. 87, 88, and 89 of Nanjio’s Catalogue, the third being 
specially elaborate, reaching to no less than 40 parts and bearing the 
title of S a m a n t a b h a d r a c a r y a p r a p i d h a n a s u t r a .
Now the Gandavyuha, although originally belonging to the Avatam­
saka of the Madhyamika-school, is accepted by the Yogacarya’s because 
of the part played by Samantabhadra at the end. On this account it is 
very improbable that on Barabudur, a Yogacara monument (as will 
appear in our final chapter), Samantabhadra should have slipped into 
the background, and as already in the Gandavyuha of the second 
gallery, we came upon a chain of repetitions, it is not impossible that 
something of the same kind on a larger scale was done in the Samanta- 
bhadracaryapranidhanasutra and there the journey of Sudhana to 
Maitreya, Manjucprl and Samantabhadra (see the summary of contents 
p. 4) was considerably extended. This would then be depicted on the third 
and fourth chief wall of Barabudur and the course of the story would be 
concisely as follows. After the prologue (II 1—13) and the wanderings 
pictured on the second gallery, Sudhana goes to Maitreya (II128 and III l
l) Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 61 (1922) p. 268—303.
111 
; ' v;. :■ ^
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
T V ^


--- Page 119 ---
1—9). Maitreya sends him on to Manjuc;ri (?) (Ill 12), who directs him 
to Samantabhadra (III 16—19). But this last Bodhisattva considers him 
still unfitted to receive the Highest Wisdom and enjoins him to make a 
pilgrimage to various sanctuaries (III 20-—39) in order to acquire the 
necessary devout state of mind and after that to put himself under 
the guidance of Maitreya (III 40—88). At last he is judged worthy 
to appear before Samantabhadra and to be initiated by him into the 
Anuttarasamyaksambodhi (IV).
"The correctness of this reconstruction” writes Dr. Bosch x), "may be 
doubted; it cannot be denied that the Sudhana-story as explained in 
this way from the reliefs runs more smoothly and ends more happily 
than in the meeting of Sudhana with Maitreya (II 128), especially if 
looked at from the Yogacarya point of view. Each Bodhisattva receives 
the honour due to him in the work of salvation; Man] uprl the least promi­
nent Bodhisattva, is Sudhana's mentor in his first wanderings; on the 
third chief wall it is Maitreya, the first of the Bodhisattva's of the 
fftture, who personally conducts the young man. The actual salvation 
is bestowed by the last Saviour, Samantabhadra who occupies the highest 
chief wall.”
If this supposition is correct, then undoubtedly the most extensive 
version of the Gandavyuha has been followed and the Samantabhadra- 
caryapranidhanasutra can be accepted as the consecutive text of the 
chief wall on the second, third and fourth gallery.
These last texts are preserved only in Chinese translations; compari­
son of them with the contents of the Barabudur reliefs alone can reveal 
if the correct solution has really been discovered. Though our final 
judgment must be withheld for the present, we must acknowledge that 
the hypothesis appears very attractive.
*} 1.1. p. 292.
MAITREYA AND SAMANTABHADRA 
1 !5


--- Page 120 ---
%$% 
<SL
CHAPTER IX
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA'S
(Third and fourth gallery; balustrade)
The reliefs on the balustrade of the third gallery shew a remarkable 
resemblance to one another, to this van Erp's article has already 
drawn attention 1). The real action of the scene takes place everywhere 
on the righthand side of the relief, varying of course with the events 
represented. On the other side the scene is continually of the same 
character; there we find on the extreme left in the midst of his retinue 
a snanin the usual royal dress and ornaments, and inmost cases with a halo; 
then more to the middle of the relief the Bodhisattva Maitreya, some­
times with attendants. Although the sculptors have done their best to 
bring some variety into the unavoidable monotony by altering the atti­
tude of these two persons or changing the appearance of their attendants, 
not only their presence and position with regard to each other is always 
the same, but the part they have to play can perhaps best be described 
by saying that the Bodhisattva is exhibiting to the other man what is 
represented on the righthand side of the scene, as if he were the compare 
and the latter was the public in the revue being displayed on the right.
Maitreya can be recognised everywhere by his stupa-headdress; he 
wears besides the broad sash and now and then a flower, the nagapuspa 
or some other. He is calling attention to what happens on the right, by 
some gesture of the hand or other sign and these scenes sometimes 
appear as if they were miraculous apparitions called forth at his com­
mand. On other scenes we are not able to distinguish whether the Bodhi­
sattva has created a vision or is only pointing out the meaning of what 
happens. On every occasion the attitude of the other chief person is that *)
*) Compare the article quoted (p. 66 n, 4) p. 442 sq.


--- Page 121 ---
of a spectator attentively watching the events passing before him and 
shewing his surprise or approval by suitable gestures.
This figure, for convenience sake, we shall call the spectator. Further­
more, I shall restrict myself of course in the now following description, 
chiefly to the scenes on the righthand.
Let us first notice the last relief on this gallery, no. 88; it is one of the 
double panels that appear regularly, corresponding with the construc­
tion of the balustrade and occurring in the re-entering angles. On the 
first half sits Maitreya with a flower in his left hand and the spectator 
with five servants, two in front and three behind him. It should be 
noted that the actors in this scene are the same as on the other reliefs 
of this series; I mention this because in my opinion the spectator is not 
missing here in spite of van Erp's remark “on the left side we do not 
find the eminent spectator, only his retinue as well as Maitreya” l). This 
impression is quite comprehensible seeing that the figure in the place 
indicated has no halo and his headdress is not in the spectator’s usual 
style. At the same time this headdress is certainly not that of a servant, 
but one that belongs to ceremonial dress and quite prevents this figure 
being included among the attendants. Furthermore the spectator is 
without a halo on several reliefs and in some scenes his headdress very 
much resembles the one he wears here; on no. 73 it is just the same. 
Added to this, besides Maitreya’s umbrella, there is a second one against 
a tree just behind the person we are discussing; all this it seems to me, 
plainly indicates this figure as the spectator. The righthand of the relief 
shews us first a small building enclosed by a palissade, perhaps the 
sideview of a temple, but then a very plain one with a smooth vaulted 
roof, unlike what is usual on temple buildings. Then there are two men 
in the dress of distinguished persons; one, as we shall see, is the god 
£akra, sitting most to the right on a throne with a canopy and wearing 
a halo; the second who has no halo, kneels before him pointing with both 
hands to the building. Behind him an umbrella is fixed up and a very 
plain sort of servant is seated 2).
With regard to this representation of a building that is being pointed 
to, van Erp gives us the following opinion: “It is quite possible that we 
can here note the phenomenon that has been mentioned above (i. e. the 
final relief of the second gallery chief wall, pointing to the third), so that 
this final scene was intended to shew the buddhist who was making his 
pilgrimage on the stupa, that a series of temples were awaiting him in the
1) 1.1. p. 446.
*) If this figure had no earrings or bangles, we might take it for a bhik?u.
| (1
) 1 
<SL
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S 
IT /


--- Page 122 ---
next row of sculptured texts. It is certainly remarkable how in the sculp­
tures we are about to examine on the chief wall (of the third gallery), a 
sacred building, either a temple or a palace, not only at once takes a 
chief place, but in a great many scenes becomes the object in which and 
around which, new miracles arise 1) ”
Though we may be able to agree with the principle of this argument 
and, as appeared above, the same kind of phenomenon may possibly be 
apparent in the final scene of the third gallery that may be intended to 
point to the beginning of the fourth, yet I cannot quite agree with the rest 
of his explanation. It seems to me not quite certain that a sacred build­
ing so directly takes a leading part on the chief wall of this gallery. As a 
rule, the chief person on these reliefs sits in a kind of pavilion, but that 
is not in the least a special feature of this gallery and will be found just 
as much on the second and fourth; in fact it is the usual way in which 
the sculptors shew that a person of distinction is receiving a visit from 
someone else. Thus as regards these pavilions, there is as far as I can see, 
no reason to point towards the chief wall of the third gallery. It is another 
question with regard to the episode depicted on that gallery which repre­
sents homage being pffered at various sanctuaries (p. 79 sq.), but the 
whole series does not contain more than twenty such reliefs, not even a 
fourth of the gallery. So on the whole of this chief wall, this episode 
in no way takes up such an important place that the whole row might 
be characterized by means of a small temple building.
That the meaning of the building on relief no. 88 must be something 
different, becomes clearer when we examine no. 67. On the lefthand 
panel Maitreya and the spectator appear as usual; the former it is true, 
has lost his headdress, but the place where he sits and the lotus cushion 
are sufficient guarantee of this being the Bodhisattva. The righthand 
scene also shews us a temple-building and one much more like the well 
known style of temples than that on no. 88; it has a person on each side 
bringing offerings of flowers. Here we get a scene in the style of no. 88, 
in a place where any idea of pointing towards the next gallery is out of 
the question.
What then can be the intention of these two reliefs that shew 
no direct connection with the surrounding scenes? In reply to this 
question, some indication may be found at the place where no. 67 ap­
pears. This relief follows immediately on a very distinctly-connected 
group, shewing the story of miracles performed in a lotus pond. The tale
') Also p. 446 of the article.
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S 
c J l J


--- Page 123 ---
__
( n y
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S 
u f t L j
' ifi' 
v * 4 * ) *V)\ * < ^* 
I 
'i1' I Vflt 4 1 
(" '* '$}& 
*( A<‘ ,')'1 P f1 * s >«F 
ends with no. 67, for although the next three reliefs are missing and the 
proof is not available, no. 71 at any rate belongs to an entirely different 
story. It looks as if the scene with the small building is only put in to 
separate these two tales. If that is so, then we should have to consider 
no. 88 only as the termination of the story depicted on the preceding 
panels. Besides it is then quite clear, first of all, that we need not expect 
it to point to the chief wall and secondly that this relief with the small 
temple forms the end of a story but not therefore the end of this whole 
series of tales. In other words, it is possible that the cyclus is continued 
after no. 88, just the same as after no. 67.
This last is important in connection with another singularity, also 
noted by van Erp, though without his drawing the self-evident conclu­
sion. I mean the fact that the first half of the fourth gallery balustrade 
shews quite the same mise-en-scene as that of the third. Here too, 
the lefthand of the reliefs gives us the spectator and the Bodhisattva 
Maitreya, the latter acting as showman to the scenes enacted on the 
righthand of the panel. The resemblance is so striking that if the photo­
graphs of the two relief-series are mixed up, it is impossible to distin­
guish them. In my opinion this whole series of tales belongs together; it 
forms a cyclus of more or less-connected stories all relating to events 
exhibited or created by Maitreya. The single tales that are the links of 
this chain, are separated by reliefs with a small building such as we see 
on no. 67, the same as on no. 88, which therefore must not be considered 
as the termination of the whole lot, but only as the end of a particular 
story that is to be followed by another on the next balustrade. It will 
even appear that the last story on the balustrade of the third gallery and 
the first one on the fourth have some points of resemblance, so that it is 
not impossible the connection between the two series may be closer than 
that of one cyclus and these two parts may prove to be more intimately 
united than the tales on the third gallery are to each other.
The above remarks will make it clear why the tales that take 
up the beginning of the fourth gallery are added to the description 
of the Mai trey a-s tor ies of the third gallery balustrade. It seems to me 
they form a connected series beginning with IIIB 1 and ending with 
IVB 42, altogether 130 reliefs. As noticed already, it is not one continued 
story that is depicted on this series, but as far as we can judge, a 
chain of various tales linked together by the fact of being exhibited 
by Maitreya. More than likely the collecting of these tales into this 
Maitreya-series, was not the work of the founders of Barabudur; they 
probably only followed an existing text, so that the collection of the


--- Page 124 ---
originally unconnected ingredients took place at an earlier date, so 
much earlier that the text then created must have had time enough to 
attain the degree of sanctity that justifies its appearance on this monu­
ment. Such a text must have originated in India and been brought over 
from there. We have not been lucky enough to trace it among the In­
dian Buddhist literature.
Our examination of these reliefs is therefore restricted to what is 
pictured on their panels. The first task will be to consider in how far we 
can discover their general relation to the frame-story which holds them 
together. Let us begin by picking out the reliefs on which Maitreya and 
the spectator do not appear in their usual place but are playing some 
other part in the story. Such scenes we shall find only at the beginning 
and end of the series, in fact just where we might expect them. It might 
have been arranged otherwise, with the connecting link appearing at 
intervals between the separate tales. But as far as the existing gaps 
allow us to judge with any certainty, it may be stated that after the 
introduction, the whole action continues in one piece till just before the 
end, with Maitreya and the spectator taking their usual part everywhere.
Tt is no exception when we find, in a case like no. 6 and 7 on the fourth 
gallery, first no. 6 depicting only the Bodhisattva and the spectator with 
their attendants, without any action, and then on no. 7 only the act, in 
this case stupa-worship, without the presence of Maitreya or the spec­
tator; this is certainly only due to the want of space. The same thing 
occurs on no. 15 and 16 where the arrangement is a little different; the 
spectator with his attendants appear on the first, while the Bodhisattva 
is placed on the second relief. No. 27 and 28 must have belonged as well 
to these very small panels, corresponding with the construction of the 
balustrade, but the first has entirely disappeared and the second is so 
much damaged that it is impossible, to make out how the scene was 
arranged.
Nor has the remarkable relief IVB 30 anything to do with the frame- 
story in my opinion. It is remarkable, because Maitreya appears twice 
on it, first standing in his usual place in the group with the spectator, 
then again a bit more to the right, seated in a small pavilion in conversa­
tion with some people in a pendapa opposite. So we see him first in his 
usual part as showman and then as actor in the scene. This is really quite 
comprehensible when we have to do with apparitions, that can of course 
be called up in any shape required, but it is equally acceptable if we 
consider the scenes depicted as real events; what is to hinder a Bodhi­
sattva from putting in an appearance in two places at once? Maitreya
f(W% 
(CT
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’s


--- Page 125 ---
playing his ordinary part here as well, is evidence enough that his share 
in the action cannot be connected with the frame-story, but is merely 
an episode in the same continued story. Another point is that Maitreya 
exhibiting himself cannot be regarded as an original idea, so that this 
relief it seems to me, indicates the earlier separate existence of the story, 
apart from the fact of being exhibited by the same Bodhisattva who 
plays a part therein.
At the beginning of the series, no. 1 is the only relief that is likely to 
belong to the frame-story, seeing that no. 2 is missing and on no. 3 the 
spectator and the Bodhisattva are already in their usual places. Here with 
this relief, we can see the great difficulty of being ignorant of the text, 
for neither in the relief itself nor in its connection with its surroundings, is 
any solution of the meaning to be discovered. We see, beginning on the 
left, thus on the side from which the relief, like all those of the balustrades 
must be looked at, consecutively; Maitreya standing, with his umbrella- 
bearer; an apartment with three women seated in it; a man with a beard, 
perhaps a brahman, holding something like a club in his hand, standing 
next to a fruit tree with an ox beside him. This tree comes just in the fold 
of the two halves of this comer-panel. The right half shews a man in 
royal dress with two attendants, kneeling before a brahman seated on 
the extreme right under a penthouse, pointing with his hands towards 
the left half of the relief. If there is any connection between this and the 
following scenes, which there surely must be, then the person kneeling 
must be the same who becomes the spectator for the rest of the story; 
he is in fact the only suitable one. Otherwise we are quite in the dark 
about this scene.
Let us now turn to the end of the series. Although owing to such cir­
cumstances as the disappearance of the headdress, relief no. 30 of the 
balustrade fourth gallery, discussed above, is the last of the ordinary series 
on which Maitreya can be recognised with absolute certainty, yet we can * 
safely rely on the manner in which the chief persons are depicted, for 
identifying the Bodhisattva and the spectator taking their usual part in 
the scene, up to and including no. 35. Seven scenes still remain before an 
entirely new tale or series of tales begins with no. 43, in which the design 
varies and Maitreya does not appear.
These seven scenes are as follows:
No. 36 shews a small temple-building in which is a large tray of f lowers; 
next to it stands a person with a halo, in royal dress attended by two 
servants. The headdress is not very distinct, a stupa is not to be seen. As 
the scarf is also missing, this is probably not Maitreya. Then no. 37
(f(f)j) 
(CT
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S 
J


--- Page 126 ---
gives us a conversation between two eminent men; both with haloes. 
The one on the left, folds his hands in sembab and according to his head­
dress, certainly cannot be Maitreya; the one on the right we might doubt 
about, for he wears a headdress of twisted up locks of hair and a wide 
sash; though on the photo nothing can be seen of a stupa, it is quite 
possible there is or has been one on the figure. Next comes the corner- 
panel no. 38 that is divided by a tree, underneath which are some large 
pots, may be it is a sort of kalpadruma. The left part is taken up by an 
eminent person with a halo, standing with his retinue; judging by what is 
left of the headdress and the omission of the scarf, this cannot be Mai­
treya. On no. 39 we have a pavilion surrounded by attendants on both 
sides; inside sits a person with a halo folding his hands in sSmbah; he is 
too dilapidated for us to distinguish the kind of scarf he wears and there 
is no stupa to be seen in the headdress. No. 40 is however quite distinct; 
here on a lotus-cushion sits the Bodhisattva Maitreya with his stupa and 
scarf, conversing with a man and woman who have haloes; a third 
distinguished person, holding up anutpala in his left hand, is seated on 
the extreme left with some attendants. The next relief, no. 41, is again 
doubtful; not the righthand side, where a man and woman in a pendapa 
are being received by another man, none of them having a halo so that 
neither of the men could be Maitreya. But on the left we find an eminent 
man with his retinue, who is adorned with a halo but whose headdress is 
so indistinct that again we cannot decide if he is Maitreya or the other 
chief person with a halo who appears in the preceding scenes. Then comes 
the final-scene no. 42, where there is a pavilion in the middle with a 
figure who though rather worn-away still shews signs of a stupa in his 
headdress; on the left besides female servants, we see a distinguished 
worshipper with his attendants; on the right, as last scene of all there is 
music and what seems to be dancing.
As no text is forthcoming, it is not my intention to build up an 
imaginary explanation of what is here depicted; hut I must call atten­
tion to some few points. No. 36 with the small temple may perhaps be 
considered as the closing scene of the last tale included in this series; in 
which case it is not very important which the person standing there may 
be, the spectator, or one of the chief actors in the story before. In the 
next six reliefs, Maitreya appears once for certain and probably a few 
times more, as one of the actors and a second part is given to a man in 
distinguished dress, generally with a halo, whom I think we may venture 
to recognise as the spectator of the preceding reliefs. Possibly no. 37 
gives us a conversation between him and Maitreya or perhaps with some
|(fJ 
<SL
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S


--- Page 127 ---
other person and we may find him again on no. 38 watching the Bodhi- 
sattva going towards the building next to the wishing tree. Perhaps he is 
the chief figure on no. 39 as well as the eminent man seated with his 
retinue to the left on no. 40, here for certain in the presence of the Bodhi- 
sattva. He may also be one of the figures on no. 41 and finally be found 
again doing homage to Maitreya on no. 42.
All this remains uncertain, but at any rate these reliefs surely belong 
to the Maitreya-series and form no part of that section, where the Bodhi- 
sattva and the spectator stand outside the real action; on the contrary, 
Maitreya now plays an active part in the scene. This of course tempts us 
to look for our former spectator among the figures depicted. Without 
continuing the explanation of these last reliefs any further, I consider it 
better to regard them as the continuation and conclusion of a frame- 
story which forms the connection between the various stories depicted 
on the remaining reliefs; that is to say until some text appears to give us 
more certainty about them. What the nature of the frame-story is we 
are unable to discover, but it is surely of some importance to distinguish 
the reliefs whose explanation must be looked for in that direction, from 
the others we are now about to discuss.
Among the reliefs on the balustrade of the third gallery, as noticed 
above, there are quite distinctly a group of scenes that belong together, 
occurring about the middle. They plainly represent a number of miracu­
lous apparitions called up by Maitreya in a lotus pond. By considering 
this group as a separate unit, the series on the balustrade falls into three 
parts, this division being assisted by a number of reliefs before and after 
the lotus pond episode having disappeared. We will examine consecu­
tively the portion that precedes the lotus pond, consisting of relief no. 
3—-27, the series with the pond being no. 33—67 and the third remaining 
piece no. 71—38. As a fourth group we might add that on the balustrade 
of the fourth gallery no. 1—35.
Should the conjecture prove correct, that the appearance of a relief 
with the small temple-building shews the end of a. story, then each of 
these portions would contain one tale. Only we must not use such conjec­
tures to form theories with, but examine the reliefs themselves for the 
character and connection of the scenes there represented. The temple 
building that would eventually terminate the first story, would occur 
in the gap from no. 28—32.
Looking at the first group no. 3—27 as a whole, it at once appears that 
the characteristic of the Bodhisattva (and the spectator) taking no part in 
the action is not invariable. I mean that Maitreya’s part is usually that
f(f)| 
(CT
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S


--- Page 128 ---
■ ®°*&X 
1
1 
I
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S
of showman to the action, but that does not prevent him from some­
times interfering with the persons acting on the righthand side of the 
panel. There are scenes enough to prove this, where the Bodhisattva is 
the one to whom the figures on the right direct their attention. Again 
there are others where the action has nothing to do with him, in which 
action the spectator apparently never takes a share.
As regards the people who are acting in the scene on the right, the 
series now under discussion shews great similarity from beginning to 
end, so as to justify the conjecture that all these scenes must belong to­
gether. I he resemblance consists in the appearance on most of these 
reliefs of several male figures dressed alike. In most cases there are six,
. 
sometimes five or sometimes more. They look a little different on some 
reliefs to others, here with a halo and there without, there are all kinds 
of variations, it is surely quite unlikely they are meant everywhere for 
the same persons, even when we allow for the usual liberties taken by 
the sculptors with the appearance of the same personage. The identity 
of the individuals is however not of much importance to the question 
whether the reliefs belong together or not, for it is clear that in any case 
the similarity of these scenes is an indication that they somehow 
belong together.
On no. 3 these persons, ten in number *), are walking to the right; 
wearing (not all of them) a wide scarf and a plain headdress. On no. 4 
they are seven and seated; the scarf is still there, but the headdress is 
arranged in looped-up tresses. We find them again on no. 5 with the 
same coiffure though the sash is not to be seen, the relief being rather 
damaged; here there are five of them in a pendapa conversing with a 
sixth person. In the same manner, five in a pendapa, we see them again 
sitting on no. 6 in a pavilion, in discourse with a sixth, but the sixth man 
now has a halo and a lotus cushion that were not given him on no. 5, 
while the five are wearing a different headdress, more like that qn no. 3.
We see already how difficult it is to make out from this partial resem­
blance where the same persons are intended and where not, even if this 
could be of any use in a case like this when there is no text at our disposal.
I he three next reliefs are rather different. No. 7 shews an eminent man 
with a halo distributing something out of a dish to a couple of men sit­
ting before him. His attendants sit behind, one is holding an oblong 
rectangular object, perhaps meant for a book. This has probably some
') If we reckon the two on the adjacent decorative panel; this is the more justified, because 
the front one on that panel shews a distinct halo.


--- Page 129 ---
f( f ]?, 
(fiT
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA'S
connection with the two next scenes, where on no. 8 three persons sit 
conversing with a fourth seated on a lotus cushion and no. 9 shews 
five persons sitting in a pfindapa; in both scenes some of the people 
are holding this sort of object and there is one placed on a small 
pedestal. The adjacent decorative panel also shews such persons with 
books.
After no. 10 which has disappeared, and no. 11 very dilapidated, no. 12 
again gives us five seated persons doing homage to a sixth; as the front 
one wears a more elegant headdress than the others, this may be an 
eminent man with four attendants, but judging by the figures on 
the other reliefs it seems very likely that these too are meant for 
people of the same standing; moreover none of them have any of those 
attributes of attendants we are accustomed to recognise. On no. 13 we 
find seven kneeling with the headdress in twists of matted hair and 
no. 14 another seven sitting in a pendapa, here wearing the usual tiara 
and halo. They are four again on no. 15, now without a halo, seated 
with banana trees behind them. Then comes no. 16 with six of them 
sitting with pots in their hands and no. 17 the same number, three 
holding up a small tree or flowering branch, the others with flowers in 
their hands.
No. 18 is very much damaged, no. 19 shews again six persons now 
standing; then we get no. 20 with no less than eleven umbrellas to be 
seen above the group of eight seated figures, three of them with a more 
distinguished headdress than the others. It looks rather as if these per­
sons might be sitting in front of a much larger group placed behind those 
we see and only indicated by their umbrella. It is quite possible that 
the figures on other reliefs too represent larger groups than the sculptors 
could find room for on the panel.
The damaged no. 21 gives us five persons sitting with branches 
above them with a jewel laid on a lotus cushion. On no. 22 there are 
only three people, one of high rank with two attendants, behind 
them three poles that branch out at the top like a trident into three 
flowers. Then comes no. 23 with five figures in the headdress of twisted- 
up hair with a halo and holding dome-shaped bells in their hands; 
there are four similar figures, two of them with censers, on no. 24. 
Finally it is apparent that the three last reliefs exhibit the same sort 
of people; they continue to wear the headdress of hair and a halo 
but are further distinguished by long necklaces of jewels. There is a 
curious variety in the way of wearing them; no. 25 and 27 shew the 
necklaces worn over the left shoulder and on no. 26 they are held in


--- Page 130 ---
the hand; no. 25 has nine, the other two have seven of these
people.
Then comes a gap of five reliefs which may have included the end of 
this first story. Though without any text this supposition cannot have 
much value I consider we are justified in regarding the scenes up to this 
point under discussion, as one story with various persons appearing in 
groups.
The second tale is of quite a different sort. It takes up at least 35 
reliefs (no. 33—67) and as we find the action in full swing on the first 
of the number remaining, we can only suppose the beginning must have 
been in the missing portion. The story as noticed in short, represents 
miraculous scenes in a lotus pond. This pond is always found on the 
right part of the relief and is indicated by lotus plants rising out of the 
water; the figures who appear in the course of the tale are placed on 
large cushion-shaped padma’s, either sitting or standing.
For convenience sake I here give a summary of the apparitions.
First on no. 33, a female figure holding a flower and two male figures 
not to be specified because the block of stone with their heads has dis­
appeared. Next (no. 34) four figures of children with the band crossed 
over the breast and the crescent behind the head; as we have often seen, 
this is no actual evidence of what they are intended for, this attribute 
being generally given to young people of high rank. Then comes on no.
35 the figure of a god with a lotus flower on a stalk in his hand, evidently 
the god £akra as we see by the figure of Airavata rising half out of the 
water with his elephant trunk headdress and ears and the angku^a in his 
hand. Then four male figures (no. 36) perhaps gods, holding utpala's and 
padma’s, five hovering celestial beings (no. 37), three naga’s with their 
usual snake-headdress (no. 38) and four beings with wide unkempt mass of 
hair (no. 39) round earrings and moustaches, therefore a raksasa type or 
yak§a without a beard. No. 40 shews a heavenly orchestra, divine be­
cause the musicians wear royal dress; they are probably gandharva’s. 
After no. 41 that is a good deal damaged, with three yaksa’s and no. 42 
with the remains of five kinnara’s, we get a gap of three reliefs on one 
of which according to a fragment that is left, there must have been some 
garuda’s. Then comes no. 46 shewing two monks and three laymen 
and no. 47 three Buddha’s, the middle in vitarka-, the other two in 
dhyana-mudra. No. 48 is missing; no. 49 gives five eminent men holding 
flowers, one being a naga; no. 50 three more Buddha’s. In contrast to no.
47 the middle one is in dhvana- and those at his side in a sort of vitarka- 
mudra. The next relief, a piece of which is missing, gives us the celestial
H i 
<sl
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S 
I I I B


--- Page 131 ---
bodies, we see a sun between two half-moons on the lotuses, while other 
constellations appear in the air. Next no. 52 with five female figures 
and no. 53 with five jewels on the lotus cushions; above them hovering 
on clouds that are joined together by garlands are eight balls, perhaps 
pearls. No. 54 gives us four (or more, for there is a piece off) figures of 
gods, here sitting on lotus cushions only, for nothing can be seen of the 
pond. On no. 55 we get three Buddha's for the third time, very much 
damaged so that only the pose of the hands is visible of the two outside 
ones in dhyana-mudra, but not of the one in the middle; no. 56 is mis­
sing entirely and there is little left of no. 57; all we are sure of is that 
here too was a lotuspond. On no. 54 the disappearance of the usual lotus- 
pond was only due to the damaged state of the relief, the remaining part 
plainly shewing that it belonged to the miraculous scenes; but on the now 
following two reliefs no pond appears because the series is interrupted 
by a couple of scenes of a different sort: no. 58 gives an eminent man 
sitting on a low seat with a canopy, with a woman and another figure 
that has been knocked off; six attendants are kneeling before him and 
in the background an elephant, a horse and a pole with the disk appear. 
It is probable that the object (very indistinct on the photo) lying on a 
lotuscushion in front of the horse’s head may represent the jewel and 
that we have before us the gems of the ruler of the world; but his general 
and minister are missing or else hidden among the kneeling figures. In this 
case the man on the throne must be a cakravartin. No. 59 is terribly 
damaged, we can only see that the subject must have been an interview 
between an eminent man accompanied by a lady and three personages 
with a halo, and a man sitting in front of him with hands folded in 
sembah.
With no, 60 the lotus pond apparitions reappear. This relief again 
shews us three children with their crescent and the band crossed over 
their breast; the two next, a seated god or Bodhisattva in dhyana-mu­
dra. Then no. 63 gives us again the three children with crescents. On no. 
64 the lotus pond is missing and in its place we have a conventionalized 
tree with chains of jewels hanging on it, underneath some treasure-jarS 
and on each side of it an armed guard. There are five figures of children 
on the lotuspond of no. 65, they wear the band crossed over their breast 
but apparently no crescent; in their hand they hold a flower-stalk 
with a jewel lying on a lotus at the end of it. The last relief with the 
pond, no. 66, is a disappointment, for the upper part of the pond has 
disappeared and with it the miraculous apparition. It is noticeable 
that on the part remaining there is no trace of the lotuscushions that
■ co^Sx
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA'S


--- Page 132 ---
r \
i i i 
<$[.
TALES OF MAI TREY A AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S 
IIIB
supported the apparition elsewhere, therefore possibly this last scene 
shewed only a pond. We now come to no. 67, the already discussed 
scene with the temple and its offering of flowers, with which the second 
portion of the series ends. There can hardly be any doubt that this 
chain of apparitions in the lotuspond forms a complete whole.
It also again appears evident, if it might still be doubted, that here 
too an actual text has been followed. We might think for a moment 
that this part of the balustrade was intended to be filled with a demon­
stration of how this Bodhisattva in the presence of an interested spec­
tator, created all kinds of beings, and that the series originated in this 
way. If such was the case, we should consecutively see many different 
beings appear, but there would of course be no sense in calling up figures 
that had once appeared, for a second time. It is just the repeated 
apparition of the same figures, as we have several times noticed in 
this series, that shews how the sculptor was bound to depict what an 
actual existing text demanded.
We now turn to the third portion of the reliefs, no. 71—88.
In this series it is much more difficult than in the preceding one to 
define the connection and I shall not venture to make any statement. 
Nor can we he certain that this whole portion represents one story, 
though there are details which seem to point that way. Such features 
are the following characteristics common to the whole series: the conti­
nual appearance of brahmans; numerous pictures of gifts and distribu­
tions; the appearance of £akra four times.
A short summary wall make this clear. Brahmans we find directly on 
the two first reliefs, two on no. 71 and one on no. 72, in both cases sitting 
under a penthouse in discourse with a man in distinguished dress; on the 
first relief he wears a halo and sits on a throne with his hand up to his 
head, on tlx second he is standing with his hands raised. A similar 
personage appears on nearly all the reliefs, sometimes without a halo 
but generally with this attribute and he usually has some attendants, 
one of them holding his umbrella. For the sake of convenience we shall 
call this man the "chief actor” in the scene, although it remains quite 
undecided if he is always the same person or different ones that appear 
consecutively.
On relief no. 73 this chief actor is respectfully approaching the god 
£akra who is seated in a pendapa, here as elsewhere to be identified by 
Airavata with the elephant trunk in his headdress and his elephant’s 
ears; owing to a crack in the stone, it is impossible to see if he had the 
angku^a in his hand. The chief actor seems to be handing something
■ Goix


--- Page 133 ---
over to the god whose hand is open to receive it; the relief is too much 
worn away for us to discover anything more. Then on no. 74 the chief 
actor is speaking to two persons who stand before him, the one behind 
has hardly anything distinctive left, but the front one is plainly dressed 
and has a beard, not so well trimmed as usual with brahmans; it is not 
to be seen whether his hair was done in brahman style but in any case 
these two seem to be meant for brahmans. No. 75 gives an interview 
between the chief actor and another eminent person in the same style; 
the one is offering the other a dish with an oblong object. This is 
probably the same object which the chief actor presents to four seated 
brahmans on no. 76.
Again on no. 77 he appears to be giving away something on a dish, 
but the dish and contents are different. The recipients here are two 
seated men with beard and moustache and hair hanging in locks; be­
hind them sits a man much better-dressed, with the same cut of beard, 
but his headdress is made of hair tied up in loops and he is evidently a 
person of rank with an umbrella-bearer. On no. 78 there is nothing 
at all left of the righthand side of the panel, on no. 79 we find the chief 
actor ready, dish in hand, for the benefit of some people kneeling be­
fore him; they are very much damaged; their heads are gone and we 
cannot see what kind of men they were. The dish does not appear on no.
80 but the chief actor is present on a throne in dhyana-mudra between 
five yaksa’s holding up an indistinct object in their hands, perhaps 
they are drinking.
The next reliefs shew him again bringing gifts; on no. 81 to the seated 
god £akra, always identified by his faithful follower Airavata wearing 
his elephant trunk and ears, on no. 82 to a seated brahman ; the dish, per­
haps only by accident, is rounder in shape. Then on no. 83 he is sitting 
on the same seat with another eminent man who has no halo, to whom he 
offers something, what, the damaged state of the relief prevents us find­
ing out. No. 84 is very curious, here the chief actor appears with the 
figure of a small child in his hands, wearing the usual crescent behind its 
head; this little creature he evidently means to present to the brahman 
seated under a tree with his two followers and holding out his hands to 
receive the gift. On no. 85, the same man probably who has presented the 
child, now gives away a woman whom he gently pushes forward towards 
her destiny. The lady wears a halo as befits her who is given to the great 
god £akra seated in a pendapa with his attendant Airavata, who here 
holds his angku^a (that was missing on no. 81) as well as his usual ele­
phant coiffure and large ears.
Barabuijur II 
9
■ G°S>\
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA'S 
N2M. J


--- Page 134 ---
No. 86 is again a scene of gift-giving; the chief actor here seated on a 
throne with his dish, is distributing to a number of persons kneeling and 
standing before him; they are very indistinct, but certainly very plainly- 
dressed people. No. 87 seems to be the only relief where the ‘chief actor’ 
does not appear; the panel is taken up by a building open in the front. 
Most of it has unfortunately disappeared, but inside there are figures of 
children, or perhaps they are not meant for children but the sculptor 
could find no other way of getting the whole house on the relief and 
placing people inside it. Next to the building a man and woman are 
standing; the former to judge by his waistband and loincloth (the head­
dress is missing), is probably not the chief actor.
Between no. 87 and 88 another no. 87a has been inserted (a decorative 
panel belongs here), that is also very much damaged; it shews a brah­
man conversing with a person who kneels before him; this figure as well 
as the four seated behind, has lost the upper part of his body, but seeing 
he is attended by an umbrella-bearer it is a man of rank, so possibly our 
chief actor. Finally comes no. 88 with the small building enclosed by a 
palissade, already discussed on p. 117; possibly the left one of the two 
persons here depicted may also be the chief actor of the preceding reliefs. 
The figure sitting in the pavilion is undeniably £akra who can be 
recognised l) as usual by Airavata his third attendant, with elephant 
headdress and angku?a. As it happens the figure so needed for this 
identification has been placed on the adjacent decorative panel, which 
in this case ought to be reckoned among the pictorial ones. On the whole 
series of this balustrade, the same as on those of the fourth gallery, the 
decorative panels are no longer separate from their surroundings, but 
become a link or transition to the pictorial ones. But just at the end of 
this third gallery it is very remarkable that the decorative panel we 
expect to see between 87 and 88, is replaced by a pictorial one and the 
one following no. 88 has been used to place Airavata on. It looks as if 
the sculptor here had not room enough for his pictorial reliefs and was 
obliged to manage in this way.
We now go on to the fourth portion at the beginning of the fourth gal­
lery (no. 1—35), where we shall see that considered as a whole, there is a 
certain resemblance to those just discussed. Here wTe find the "chief ac­
tor” again on most reliefs with brahmans and distributions, and £alcra 
too appears twice. In contrast to these similarities, this portion has a 
character of its own: it shews more of the Buddhist spirit in the continual
») As was done by Jochim in Tijdsehr. Bat. Gen. 55 (1913) p. 207.
/> / ^
\ \ \
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S 
I i p L


--- Page 135 ---
appearance of bhiksu’s, twice a scene of stupa-worship and once homage 
to a Buddha. We can quite imagine that the story at the end of the third 
gallery could just as well be placed on some non-Buddhist sanctuary 
without any one unacquainted with the text, noticing that it did not 
belong there, but such would never be the case with these first 35 reliefs 
on the fourth gallery. Here a distinctly Buddhist text has been followed. 
It is of course impossible for us to discover in spite of all this, whether 
on the strength of the resemblance just mentioned, there is here a closer 
link with the third story than that which connects the third with the 
second or the second with the first.
We shall restrict ourselves again to a concise summary.
On the first relief we find in the centre a pavilion in which sits a lady; 
to the left are a disk and a jewel both on lotuscushions; on the right an 
elephant, a horse and three men seated. Undoubtedly we here have the 
gems of the cakravartin. On the right stands the chief actor point­
ing with both hands to the woman; next to him are two damaged brah­
mans with beards, the front one leaning on a stick. The centre piece of 
no. 2 is an empty throne with a large cushion on it; in the left the chief 
actor is kneeling with his retinue and on the right three bhiksu's are 
seated on a ledge. In the next relief f akra appears, sitting in a pgndapa 
with Airavata who here has all his attributes, elephant’s trunk, ears and 
the angkuea. In front of £akra stands a woman with hands folded in 
sembah; behind her kneels the chief actor and three more women are 
seated. The woman standing in front of the god is noticeable in connec­
tion with the similar IIIB 85.
On no. 4 we see a curious building, it shews no entrance but consists of 
two storeys. On the three sides visible in the upper part there are three 
square windows with a sun-blind sloping above them and suppor­
ted by slanting pilasters. On the left is a garden enclosed by a palissade 
and on the right we see the chief actor kneeling before two hermits who 
wear a loincloth, large beard and moustache with their hair in the usual 
ascetic style, twisted up into a knot. The one behind carries a fly-whisk 
and is evidently the attendant of the front one with the big necklace. Those 
on no. 5, before whom the chief actor throws himself humbly on the 
ground, are different sort of people; they look like brahmans but their 
hair is twisted up into a bow-shaped knot, not like ordinary brahmans 
wear it, and their beards are trimmed in horizontal layers. It is strange 
to see no less than six umbrellas fixed up in the background. No. 7 (to 
which no. 6 belongs, see p. 120) shews us among other people, the chief 
actor worshipping at a stupa.
TALES OF MAITEEYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA'S


--- Page 136 ---
•(f)? 
VflT
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA'S 
I\H e>
We see him again on no. 8, going with some banners towards three 
bhik$u’s seated under a tree; then follow four reliefs where our chief ac­
tor is busy distributing in most cases, food. On no. 9 it seems to be wreaths 
to persons in servants dress; no. 10, soup to three bearded men, probably 
brahmans; on no. 11 he is serving something out of a dish to emaciated 
persons of the lowest class and on no. 12 it looks like large balls of rice, 
but this relief is very much damaged. Then there is a relief missing and on 
no. 14 we find the chief actor with a censer in his hand sitting in front of a 
building that stands on pillars, and looks like the well-known grain-sheds.
No. 16 (with no, 15, see above) is again a scene of distribution, here 
three bhiksu’s sitting in a pSndapa are being served with balls of rice 
(or round dishes perhaps). Then on no. 17 £akra appears again; he stands 
on the right, Airavata kneeling beside him with all his elephant attri­
butes; in front of him kneels the chief actor with a covered chariot and 
pair behind him ready for a journey.
Whether the journey was undertaken does not appear, for no. 18 shews 
nothing more than a building of t wo storeys, perhaps the same as on no.
4 though rather different in design, with only one of the roofed over 
windows and more decorated. On the right stands the chief actor holding 
in his hands a long thing like a stick, that he is shewing or going to pre­
sent to two brahmans who stand before him; they are ordinary brah­
mans, one has a beard and an umbrella and both wear their backhair in 
the usual style. Next comes another scene of almsgiving, on no. 19, 
where the chief actor is handing out drink to persons of low degree; he is 
serving the front one himself. These may be the same people who are 
walking on no. 20 with the chief actor through a rocky wooded landscape, 
indicated by an outlined rock put on the middle of the group with a tree 
and a couple of animals on it.
We now come to the two most interesting scenes of this series.
No. 21 gives us a scene of rescue in a flood. A building, plainly a wood­
en one built on stone pillars, stands on the left; possibly they are not 
meant for pillars but this part of the relief was left unfinished. It has a 
roof sloping over the windows of the upper storey like that on no. 4 and 
14. Between the pillars some very small people are standing and sitting, 
one of them stands with ball-shaped objects in his uplifted hands. On 
the extreme right in the background, as well as two trees, there is a 
second building, actually nothing more than a large steep roof resting 
on pillars that bend outwards ; here too at the corner of the roof on each 
side, there is a very small human figure, while three of ordinarysize are 
sitting in the foreground. Between this group on the right and the build-
Xjtf* ' G“i>\


--- Page 137 ---
ing on the left and in front of its wide pillars, streams the flood in which, 
just between the two buildings, stands a man in the water up to his 
knees1), who is possibly the chief actor. His arms are lifted up and in 
both hands he holds the same ball-shaped object just now mentioned. 
There are several smaller figures clutching his arms, apparently to save 
themselves from drowning.
No. 22 shews us another rescue from the water; above the lines that 
indicate the stream we see several men sitting or hanging on to a horse, 
with others hanging on to them. Evidently this is a rescue from the 
flood by a miraculous horse. In this scene Oldenburg has discovered the 
story of the horse B alah a2). The tale in outline is this3): some merch­
ants having been shipwrecked, reach an island inhabited by rak^asl’s, 
where they are welcomed by their hosts who have changed themselves 
into young women with the intention of devouring their guests later 
on. One of the victims is warned or his suspicions are aroused and he 
persuades the others to try and escape with him by means of the mirac­
ulous horse Balaha who according to the most popular version is no 
other than the Bodhisattva Avalokite^vara. There is also a version, 
that makes the. horse an apparition of Maitreya 4), so that the placing of 
this episode among the Maitreya stories seems to indicate this being the 
version followed on Barabudur. The end of the tale is considerably varied; 
one relates that all are rescued in this way, while another describes how 
those who disobeyed the order to keep their eyes closed and to take no 
notice of the cries of their wives when mounted on the horse, fell off and 
were devoured by the raksasf s and only a few, or even only one, the leader, 
escaped. The rest of the tale, how he is followed by one of the raksasl’s, how *)
*) If this is inten tional, the water being represented to the height of the knees, it resembles 
the story iu the Chinese Tripitaka (Chavannes, Cinq cents routes et apologues extraits du Tri- 
pifaka chinois II, 1909 no. 173, p. 33 sq.) that tells of a nearly-drowned man, who is rewarded 
for feeding a Pratyekabuddha by being given in his next incarnation, a body so large that no 
water reaches higher than his knees.
*) On p. 219 of his article quoted above. See Kern's translation, Bijdr. Kon. Inst. 6 :3 (1897) 
p. 56; Verspreide Geschriften IV (1916) p. 231.
’) Found also in the Kararxjavyuha, 52—59 (see Bumouf Introduction etc. p. 223), Mahu- 
vastu (ed. Senart III, p, 67—90) and Rasfrap lapariprccha (ed. Finot) no. 45. Similar tales 
are found as well in the Pali Valihassa-J at aka, no. 196 Fausboll, and a Tibetan version in 
journ. Roy. As. Soc. N. S. 20 (1888) p. 503—511; 21 (1889) p. 179; see also Beal, Romantic 
Legend (1875) p. 332—340, Si-yu-ki I (1884) p. 242, Chavannes, Cinq cents contes etc. 1 no.
37, p. 122—124.
*) Divyavadana (ed, Cowell and Neil) p. 423—528, comp. Huber, Bull. Ec. fran^. d'Extr.
Or, 6 (1906) p. 22—24. In the Lalitavistara (ed. Lefman p. 169) and elsewhere (Chavannes,
1.1. I no. 59, p. 224—226) it is the Buddha himself who was the horse Balaha in a former exis­
tence.
(((&! 
Cl
W
v f f l y 
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BOPHISATTVA S 
O G L j


--- Page 138 ---
he exposes her real identity, but nevertheless she manages to befool 
the king of the country, is here of no importance. The Bataha story is 
elaborately depicted in Cave XVII at Ajanta1), and is also found in the 
Mathura art2) and in Pagan3).
Undoubtedly some story of this kind is depicted on this relief, even if 
it is not quite the same as known from the sources available to us. Noth­
ing is given of the secondary episodes, the shipwreck or the tricks of 
the rak§asfs or the end of the adventure. This scene stands by itself 
entirely and however grateful we remain for Oldenburg’s correct identi­
fication of this one episode among so many quite unknown scenes, 
we know nothing more than that here the famous Balaha-story was de­
picted from some version or other. So far, this identification has been of 
no help whatever for recognising any of the other reliefs.
Next we see on no. 23, the chief actor conversing with some very much 
damaged persons, then a scene without our chief actor on no. 24 where a 
hermit, of the kind found on no. 4, is speaking to four similar ascetics 
sitting before him; then comes a gap of three reliefs. On what is left of 
no. 28, someone is discoursing with a bhiksu, on no. 29 six monks are 
seated in a pendapa, without any sign of a chief-actor, nor is he to be 
found on no. 30 where five richly-dressed men are sitting opposite Mai- 
treya; this is the relief on which (see above p. 120) the Bodhisattva ap­
pears twice and also takes part in the action. Then on no. 31 the chief 
actor (?) appears again talking to two brahmans, while on no. 32 (where 
a tree with jewel-pots stands between Maitreya and the spectator) the 
chief actor or someone else, — the headdress is different — is holding 
his hands in sembah before a bhik§u.
The last reliefs shew us: a stupa worship on no. 33, and the chief actor 
doing homage to a Buddha who sits in dhyana-mudra on a lotus cushion 
in a pavilion on no. 34. On the right part of this relief there are several 
worshippers, very dilapidated ones, but evidently some sort of atten­
dants. Finally on no. 35 we see a bhiksu — evidently a distinguished one, 
for lie has an umbrella-bearer — giving a lecture to five ordinary coll­
eagues seated opposite to him.
The series of reliefs so-fardiscussed, comes to an end on no. 36, shewing a 
temple-building and a man in royal dress, either our chief actor of 
this last story or the spectator of the whole series. The following scenes
’) Foucher, Lettre d’Ajanf , Journ. Asiat. 11: 17 (1921) p. 212 sq., with reference to 
Griffiths, Paintings, plate 67—79 and fig. 75, and Herringham. Frescoes pi. XVII sq.
*) Vogel in Ann. Rep Arch. Surv. 1909— 10, p. 72 and pi. XXVIc.
’) Duroisclle, Ann. Kep. Arch, Surv. 1912—13, p. 104 and pi. HV no. 24.
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S 
iV iM ^


--- Page 139 ---
have a different character and have been discussed above (p. 121) 4).
In our examination of what is represented on the first half of the 
fourth balustrade, though without any knowledge of the text, we had 
some foundation to rely on in the continual appearance of the Bodhi- 
sattva Maitreya and the spectator to whom he is displaying the scene on 
the right hand side of the panel. In this way the connection running 
through this group of reliefs could be established; but the second half of 
this balustrade offers not even the most slender clue to assist our inves­
tigation.
If I now venture to make some attempt at explaining, with the help of 
the reliefs themselves, the character of what is here depicted, it must be 
understood I do so with the utmost reserve. Just because we are con­
tinually confronted with so many inexplicable or only partially revealed 
solutions, I am only too well aware of the unsatisfacory results and am 
not likely to place too high a value on my own opinion, but set to work in 
the hope that my efforts may prove of some assistance to the readers, 
who are about to examine the reliefs, without previous study.
We notice first of all that the first nine of these forty scenes (no. 43— 
51), are of a separate sort and must be considered either as a separate 
story or a distinct episode in a larger one. On these reliefs, a most impor­
tant part in the tale is played by a figure with a crescent behind the head 
and a band crossed over the breast. As we know, the crescent is found 
as an attribute of the Bodhisattva ManjuyrI and of youths of high rank. 
The figure here is nowhere found on a lotus cushion, wears only once a 
halo, and shews not the least sign of Bodhisattva's in general, not to 
mention any special emblem of Manjuyri. Evidently some other young 
person is meant, though on the reliefs he does not look so very young; 
on no. 44 he is actually bigger than the worshipper kneeling before him.
He never appears any more after no. 51; for that reason these first reliefs 
may be considered as a separate story or episode.
There is not any lively action in this piece. On all the reliefs where 
this figure with the crescent appears, he is chief person, seated on a 
throne in the middle of the scene and with only one exception, in a separ­
ate pavilion. On no. 43 he is in conversation with a man wearing a halo 
who sits in front of him and has a royal retinue, while to the right under 
a tree some more persons of lower rank are sitting. This is of some 
significance when compared with the next relief, where on the left of the
') For detailed description of the reliefs see Dutch edition of this work p. 574—588.
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S 
O
i J


--- Page 140 ---
small pavilion the visitor is seated wearing no halo and not so grand a 
headdress, but he still has his royal retinue, while a similar company of 
attendants has taken the place of the men under the tree. This second group 
must belong to the chief person with the crescent, who is possibly a prince.
On no. 45 the retinue on the right is still there, but the visitor with his 
attendants on the left has been replaced by eight men who all seem to be 
of the same high rank and wear a headdress made up of locks of hair 
fastened together.
Then follow several reliefs on which the figure with the crescent does 
not appear. No. 46 shews a man in distinguished dress worshipping four 
Buddha's seated next to each other on lotuscushions in a pendapa, all 
with their right hand lifted in the act of argumentation. To the right of 
the pfindapi some bhiksu’s should be sit ting but as there was no room for 
them here they are placed on no. 47. A tree separates them from the real 
scene of no. 47, that depicts an interview between two eminent men, each 
with a retinue; one sits in a small pavilion, the other is kneeling respect­
fully before him, his hands touching the ground. Again there was no 
room for those most to the right, so that no. 48 has become rather a 
curious composition and actually has no scene of its own; on the left it 
accommodates the attendants belonging to no. 47, and on the right several 
persons who form part of the escort of an eminent man with a halo on 
no. 49, who is walking, preceded and followed by a great number of ser­
vants.
Finally the young man of the crescent reappears on no. 50 and 51. The 
first relief shews him seated in a pavilion with a servant, and discour­
sing to a distinguished visitor who has no halo; there is an incense- 
burner between them. Right and left there are attendants and we see 
behind those on the right, a richly-laden fruit-tree next to a grain-shed, 
while on the left is a tree whose construction is not clearly visible; it 
appears to bear large ball-shaped fruit on its lower part and bananas on 
its upper branches. On no. 52 we find the chief person with the distin­
guished visitor in a pendapa, both adorned with a halo. Here too they 
have a large group of attendants.
Let us now examine in how far what is depicted on the remaining 
reliefs may be connected with the preceding group or to what extent it 
can be considered as a separate unit. We have already noticed that the 
figure of the crescent who up to this point played an important part, 
does not appear at rill any more and in that respect the first nine reliefs 
form a distinct group. If on the other hand we look for some agreement 
with what the remaining reliefs represent, there is at least one scene that
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S 
I W ^ L J


--- Page 141 ---
is noticeable: the worship of the four Buddha’s. Though no other four 
appears further on, we find the worship of three on no. 54 and several of 
two (62, 64. 83 and 84). We shall discuss this later on.
First we fix our attention on the possible connection in the group no. 
52—84. Let us try to pick out scenes that represent something charac­
teristic such as we may expect would not appear accidentally in two 
or more quite separate tales. As long as we have no text, this is of course 
never impossible, but a certain amount of probability exists that when 
striking or curious incidents of some particular sort are found in various 
places in a series of reliefs, they may actually point to a continued story. 
On the other hand we cannot be too careful of drawing conclusions from 
the frequent resemblance to one another that appaers in the commonplace 
scenes. On the very first relief no. 52, we see in the middle of the 
scene under a tree, an eminent man with a halo seated in dhyana-mudra; 
on one side of him a royal retinue and on the other a group of worshippers 
all dressed alike with an umbrella-bearer among them. A very similar scene 
we see again on one of the last reliefs, no. 81. Yet I think it would be 
too risky to decide, on the very striking resemblance between these two 
scenes, that they must belong to the same continued story because the 
scene here shewn is so very commonplace; it might equally appear in 
tales that have no resemblance at all to each another. Besides this the 
sculptors have a way of treating the chief subject of corresponding designs 
in the same schematic style, in spite of all their variations in the details.
Although at the first glance it appears that there would be no chance 
of finding any connected series of special episodes such as the appar­
itions in the lotus-pond on the balustrade of the third gallery, yet 
there are a few reliefs that point in a particular direction. No. 73—75 are 
undoubtedly very remarkable and certainly belong together, whatever 
their relation to the adjacent ones may be. They all display a miraculous 
tree. On the left, on each of them is an eminent person, possibly a 
Bodhisattva, with attendants; on the right some spectators are seated. 
Between the two groups is a tree, in which and under which on no. 73 
there are a great number of incense-burners. On no. 74 it has jewel pots 
standing and lying at its foot and cloths, probably garments, hanging 
out of its flowers Then on no. 75 it is hung all over with instruments of 
music, especially drums, but flutes and bells as well. Even if these reliefs 
with the miraculous trees were not consecutive, they would surely belong 
together and form part of the same tale.
We know now there must have been a text with this kind of miracu­
lous tree in it, and when apparitions are found on other reliefs in the
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA'S


--- Page 142 ---
■ G°ffcX
f / y —' \ \ 
■' 
'
(((1 )i) 
, 
(fiT
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BOD1IISATTVA S 
lY JlA ^l
vicinity, we are naturally inclined to connect these last scenes with the 
same story. There are a couple of such scenes which in my opinion, in any 
case belong together, and in fact are only separated by two intervening 
reliefs. They agree so far in composition with those above discussed, that 
on the left we find an eminent man with his attendants, who is evidently 
working a miracle or pointing to one, while on the right is a group of 
spectators.
On the first of these reliefs, no. 63, we see an apparition of jewels. One 
very large one lies on a lotus cushion on the ground in the middle of the 
scene, and on both sides of it and above hovering in the air on conven­
tionalized cushions, with garlands hanging iron; them, are others, round, 
oblong, heart and diamand shaped ones. This display of jewels is surr­
ounded by a notched border that very likely indicates rocks, above 
which trees appear. On the other relief, no. 66, the rocks and trees are on 
the ground and the apparition is displayed entirely in the air; an enorm­
ous sun and equally overlarge half-moon, both lying on a cushion of 
clouds, andbetween the two seven small balls .undoubtedly meant for stars.
If these heavenly bodies play a part in the story, then no. 62 surely 
must have belonged to it. In a double niche in the middle of the relief, 
two Buddha’s on a lotus-cushion are seated, both in dhyana-mudra; on 
the right sit three bhiksu’s with three standing servants; on the left four 
distinguished worshippers, each with a halo. Above these four, the sun 
and moon are again displayed lying on their cushions. There appears to 
be some connection between the apparition of these celestial bodies and 
the worship of the two Buddha’s sitting side by side.
Now there is still one more relief with which we might suppose a similar 
connection. No. 54 shews us an eminent man with a halo and retinue doing 
homage to three Buddha’s sitting in a row in niches that are not built, 
but formed by outlines of rock with a tree spreading its branches above 
each of them; the one in the middle sits in dhyana-mudra, those on each 
side in vitarka-mudra. Between the niche of the middle one and the 
Buddha on the right, there is a ball and to the right of him, a smaller 
one. It would be easy to think that here too, suns or stars are intended, 
but we are checked by what appears between the centre and lefthand 
niche: a large utpala. This gives reason for quite a different opinion, i. e. 
that the two balls were not intended to remain as such, but to be worked 
up into large round padma-flowers. However it may be, it will be wiser 
not to use them for an argument in favor of celestial bodies. Let us 
notice however that the decorative panel between no. 83 and 84 also 
shews a sun and moon, again between Buddha scenes. So we can pass over


--- Page 143 ---
no. 54 and state only the possibility that the connected ones no. 62—66 fit 
into the same tale with which the miraculous trees on no. 73—75 can be 
combined. Then we see that the worship of two Buddha’s sitting side by 
side on no. 62, not only occurs again on no. 64, but reappears on the two 
last reliefs of the whole gallery, no. 83 and 84. Therefore we are perhaps 
justified in supposing that these scenes too belong together, so that from 
no. 62, up to the end one story may be depicted.
The intervening nos. 52—61 have nothing striking to offer. Worship of 
a Buddha appears on no. 55 and that agrees with similar scenes on nos. 
70, 72, 77 and 80; but in Buddhist texts, the worship of a Buddha is a 
much too frequent occurrence to be of any use for distinguishing a par­
ticular story, they are quite as likely to belong to several different tales. 
The V orship of several Buddha's at the same time is quite another thing. 
In a t ext where we see continually the worship of two Buddha’s, a scene 
with three Buddha’s like the one just discussed no. 54, would not be out 
of place. Should this conclusion prove correct, then the connection 
between the three Buddha’s on no. 54 and the four on no. 46 in the first 
part of the reliefs, must not he overlooked. In this case not only the whole 
series no. 52—84 would belong to one story, but the history of the figure 
with the crescent might form an episode in the same text and for instance 
depict the youth of the chief person, so that in this way on the whole 
second half of the fourth gallery balustrade only one story would be 
represented. It will however not profit us to indulge in further suppos­
itions which nothing but the discovery of the text can prove to be right 
or wrong. For the moment we must leave the question unsolved and 
turn to make a short summary of what is depicted on reliefs no. 52—84.
The two first scenes are very similar. The chief figure is an eminent 
man with a halo, seated on a throne in dhyana-mudra, a tree spreads its 
branches over his head; on no. 52 he sits on a lotuscushion wearing a 
broad belt, on no. 53 we see an ornemented belt round his body between 
the chest and navel. The other persons on both reliefs are differently 
grouped; on the first, left a large retinue, right, under a tree, eight people 
kneeling, the front one with hands folded in sSmbali; on no. 53, a 
double panel, there are only two people on the left but a very large 
group of attendants on the right.
No. 54 is the scene already discussed, an eminent man with a halo 
doing homage to three Buddha’s, then on no. 55 one Buddha is being 
worshipped; he sits in the middle on a lotuscushion in a small pSndapa, 
his now injured right hand was probably in vitarka-mudra. On the right 
several bhiksu’s are sitting; left, behind a tall incensory, sits the wor-
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA'S


--- Page 144 ---
.•>>—xV\
Qi
shipper who has a halo, with his retinue. His curious headdress terminates 
in something that resembles a little round jar with a flowershaped lid. The 
next scene no. 56 also resembles no. 52; again a distinguished man with 
halosittingin dhyana-rrradra with a tree spread out over him in themiddle 
of the relief. He also wears a belt like the chief person in the last relief. 
Left and right worshippers and attendants are sitting, the front one on 
the left makes a sembah, on the right he is holding a censer. The last of 
those sit ting on the right are placed on no. 57, that, is very much damaged, 
but evidently shewed a conversation among a few persons. No. 58 gives 
us a distinguished man walking with a large company of attendants; 
a very plainly dressed man is kneeling before him. This relief has also 
suffered a great deal. Next, no. 59, again a scene of conversation and 
homage where the chief figure who has a halo, wears a scarf and sits in 
a pendapa; the sculptor has attempted to depict this man facing side­
ways on his throne, but it looks as if he were slipping off this seat. Up in 
the lefthand top-comer we notice a servant holding a bowl with three 
pots or tied-up bags in it. The people seated on the extreme right of this 
relief and separated by a tree from the rest, belong to the scene following.
On the two next reliefs we find as chief actor, the figure distinguished 
by the stalk with the three buds, which I think represents the Bodhisa- 
ttvaSamantabhadra. In any case it appears that heisaBodhisattvafrom 
the lotuscushion on which he is seated in a small pavilion on no. 60; on 
each side is a pdndapa with several worshippers and attendants, the two 
front ones on the right have their hands folded is s&mbah, the first on the 
left holds a censer and a fan. On no. 61 the Bodhisattva is not in the 
middle of the relief, but there is an empty throne behind which rises a tree. 
The throne on which a large cushion is laid is of the usual style, ornem- 
ented on both sides with a lion standing on an elephants head and on top 
of the lion themakara-ornement. On the left stands the Bodhisattva with 
his brancli of buds surrounded by attendants, one of them who is kneel­
ing between him and the throne, holds in his hands an object we have not 
met with hitherto, it seems to be a cylinder-shaped jar with a lid and 
two handles. On the right is a group of kneeling worshippers offering 
bowls of flowers; in the background, the. roof of a pendapa can be seen.
The next two scenes have already been discussed: no. 62 the worship 
of two Budhda’s with the sun and moon above the heads of four seated 
adorers, and no. 63 the miraculous apparition of jewels. Then on no. 64 
we have another worship of two Buddha’s who are distinguished by a 
border of flames at the back of their seat. The one on the left has a flame 
above his head as well, the one on the right has lost his u§pi§a. Both sit
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’s 
1 ^ 3 - ^


--- Page 145 ---
on lotuscushions, the righthand figure in vitarka-mudrS with the hem of 
his garment falling over the left shoulder, the other without the garment 
hem in bhumispar^a-mudra. The lefthand group of worshippers and 
attendants are of the ordinary kind, but on the right six persons are 
sitting who wear their hair fastened up in locks, while the front one has a 
halo and a sash. The eminent man with a halo standing in the middle of 
no. 65 is receiving homage on both sides; on the right from a procession 
on their knees who bring offerings of bowls of flowers and some branches 
of blossom; there are several banners fixed up behind them in the back­
ground. The lefthand group are sitting with one man in front who wears 
a beard and is probably a brahman making a sembah; two horses are to 
be seen above in the corner. After the already-discussed no. 66 with the 
celestial orbs, comes a scene where an eminent person with a halo and a 
retinue is conversing with no less than nine figures seated on a dais, they 
ail seem to have a halo though those to the right have rather-damaged 
heads; some of them have a sash over the chest and shoulder and the 
only two whose headdress remains uninjured wear the tied-up locks of 
hair. Behind the attendants on the left, stands an elephant as in the 
preceding relief.
There are now two reliefs missing and then come two very dilapidated 
ones. On no. 70 is a Buddha seated in a niche with two bhiksu's on his 
right and a group of worshippers on his left; on no. 71 we see a pavilion 
in the centre of which the Bodhisattva — so we must call the chief figure 
with the belt round his waist — is sitting, the same we have noticed on 
no. 53 and on no. 66. To the right of the pavilion a group of worshippers 
and armed attendants are seated with an elephant behind them; what­
ever was on the left has disappeared entirely.
No. 72 is intact. In the middle is a Buddha in dharmacakra-mudra on 
a lotuscushion with a circle of flames at his back; on either side of him 
stands a man in the dress of high rank. Behind the one on the left is his 
retinue on their knees with two horses in the background; the man on 
the right who holds a flower between his hands folded in sSmbah, is 
standing at the head of a row of seven seated persons, some with scarves; 
above their heads, flowers are falling from the clouds. The next thxee 
scenes have already been described; they are the miraculous trees (no. 
73—75).
Perhaps from the two horses that appear behind the retinue of the 
eminent man with a halo who stands to the left on relief no. 76 we may 
conclude that he is meant for the same person as on no. 72; he is going 
to receive, (making a sembah), six distinguished men who approach, the
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S 
{ 5 1 j


--- Page 146 ---
front one having a halo. The right of this relief is taken up by a small pavili­
on in which a woman is sitting. No. 79 is another worshipof a Buddha; he 
has been rather damaged but the position of the hand is still recognisable 
as dharmacakra-mudra, and he sits in a pavilion on a lotuscushion. His 
worshippers are no less than ten men with a halo in royal dress, seven 
of whom are sitting in a pSndapa on the right and three on the left 
under a tree. At the left edge of the relief there is an eleventh also with 
a halo and one attendant; this man takes no part in the homage.
Now we get two reliefs small in size, and shewing something quite 
different to those so far discussed. No. 78 is a hell-scene; on the left it 
shews an eminent man with the belt round his waist, whose head is 
missing, standing with some attendants, his hands lifted in disapproval 
towards the scene before his eyes: a hell-cauldron on a fire of logs with 
four victims standing in it (one has one leg outside); in the background 
we see the tree whose leaves are swords, or rather on this relief the 
swords are hanging among the leaves. The top edge of this relief as well 
as the one following, is missing. On no. 79 we have first an enclosure with 
several animals, among which an elephant, horse, cow, pigs and a tree 
with a bird in it; above and at the side, rocks are indicated within 
which are two nearly-naked figures with loose hair, their faces turned 
towards the animals and at the same time towards the chief figure in the 
last relief. There appears to be no connection with the group on the right, 
three women or one man between two women, turning towards an 
eminent man on the extreme right who stands between two kneeling 
attendants, but the upper part of whose body has entirely disappeared. 
There is some foliage on each side of this figure. The sequence of hell, 
animals and human beings with loose hanging hair, makes that these 
scenes resemble those we have seen on the chief wall of the third gallery1) 
representing the visit of a Bodhisattva to hell, the animal world and 
thepreta’s. Another Buddha worship on no. 80; he is seated on a lotus- 
cushion in a pavilion, the righthand probably in vitarka-mudra. On 
each side of him are worshippers under a tree, left, in the front three 
bhiksu's; further back stands a distinguished man with a halo and atten­
dants, his hands in s&nbah. No. 81 has already been described above; a 
person of high rank with a halo sits on a throne under a tree, his hands 
laid on his knee; worshippers and servants on either side of him, in the 
background on the extreme left is an elephant, the same as in the follow­
ing scene. No. 82 shews a pfindapa, on the right in which sits a Bodhisattva *)
*) See above p. 82—83.
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER EODHISATTVA'S 
I ^
L


--- Page 147 ---
with a halo on a lotuscushion and a few attendants behind him; in 
his left hand he holds a flowering branch and with his right he touches 
the headdress of an eminent man also with a halo, who is kneeling before 
him with hands folded in sembah; the rest of this relief on the left is 
taken up by the large party of servants and attendants belonging to the 
last scene.
Finally no, 83 and 84 can be treated together. On both of them we see 
two niches with a Buddha on a lotuscushion receiving homage right and 
left from worshippers sitting under trees. On the first relief the lefthand 
Buddha is in vitarka-, the right in bhumispanpa-mudra; on the second 
the positions are respectively dhyana- and vitarka-mudra. 1)
l) For detailed description of IVB 43—84, see Dutch edition, p. 595—600.
' c°!feX
: 
TALES OF MAITREYA AND OTHER BODHISATTVA’S


--- Page 148 ---
|( f ) | 
(si
*- / 
.
I 
:,; ■ 
■ 
'; 
■ ' 
■
CHAPTER X
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE
When on approaching the Barabudur, we come near enough to distin­
guish the details, what first catches our eye before the rows of reliefs 
become visible, are the many Buddha-imagesin their niches all round the 
monument. They rise in five rows, one above the other, and the first 
impression the monument makes on the mind of the modem visitor, 
must be the same received by the pilgrim of ancient days: that his eyes 
beheld a sanctuary of Buddha’s. This impression grows stronger on ent­
ering the monument and contemplating the Buddha’s seated in their 
dome-shaped stupa's on the terraces, where the severe rejection of all 
ornement reveals that, whatever the lower-placed Buddha-figures may be 
meant to signify, here the designer of the sanctuary in any case must have 
intended the beholder to concentrate his thoughts on the Buddha’s, with­
out allowing them to be distracted by other objects. Another thing which 
proves what great significance must have been attached to these Buddha- 
figures 1) in the plan of the whole monument, is the reverent devotion 
with which the sculptors evidently worked on them, moulding them into 
noble forms of the finest conception. These Buddha's of Barabudur are 
undoubtedly among the finest creations achieved by Hindu-Javanese art.
It is to Wilhelm von Humboldt we owe the discovery that these 
Buddha’s are not to be considered individually, but must be explained 
as forming part of one system. This system he recognised as that of the 
Dhyani-Buddha’s, made known shortly before from the Buddhism of 
Nepal by Hodgson. That von Humboldt judged correctly as regards 
the main-pointa} —in details his explanation needed some revision — is
*) Such series of Buddha's in niches are not specially Maliayamstic; see for instance Hiuen 
Tsiang (Beal, Si-yu-ki, II, 1884, p. 46 sq,}, the description of the Mj-gadava-monastery of the 
Sarpmatiya's.
*) ttber die Kawi-Sprache auf der Insel Java I (1836), p. 127—137. Comp. Burnouf, In­
troduction A l'histoire du Buddhisme indien (1844), p. 347.


--- Page 149 ---
• G0X\
vfwf] 
Qj
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA'S AND THE CHIEF STATUE .
now proved beyond doubt, since other sources have revealed that the 
Dhyani-Buddha's were actually worshipped in Java 1). The first task 
for us is to examine what is known elsewhere of these beings and the man­
ner in which they were depicted.
To give an actual definition of what is meant by a Dhyani-Buddha, 
is impossible; I retain this term, now universally accepted, though 
the name J in a is more correct and was the only one used in Java. 
What the original conception was, is not revealed by any of the sources 
available. What is found there seems to be a mixture of originally 
differing forms of thought, among which it is not easy to pick out the 
integral parts. Some more or less distinct theistic or atheistic opinions 
are to be distinguished, even though it can not be discerned which 
are the older and more original. Dhyani-Buddha literally translated, 
means Meditative-Buddha, in the sense of one who manifests himself 
only in meditation, either, taken personally, created by dhyana and 
exercising his creative power in dhyana, or revealing himself to the mind 
of man as a transcendental, an ideal Buddha.
The theistic view is best known from what Hodgson relates of the 
ideas of the Aigvarika’s of Nepal2). They believe in the existence of a 
primeval Buddha who is the origin of everything, the Adi-Buddha, self- 
created, eternal and omniscient, having a five-fold gnosis (jnana). By the 
power of this jnana he created through the corresponding five-fold 
meditation (dhyana), five Meditative Buddha’s, not for eternal existence 
but intended to begin and end with the present universe, each having 
the enjoyment of that special kind of jnana from which he received his 
being. The Adi-Buddha’s creative work here comes to an end, but neither 
do the Dhyani-Buddha’s take any active part in the creation and control 
of the universe. In the same kind of way they themselves were called into 
being, they each create a Bodhisattva by the power of their own dhyana 
and these Dhyani-Bodhisattva’s become each in turn the guardian of 
the universe. The present world is the work of the fourth Dhyani-Bodhi­
sattva Avalokiteyvara, which explains why this one at our time is held 
in such special honour.
On the other hand the atheistic view does not recognise any Adi- 
Buddha. The five Dhyani-Buddha's are considered as tlie five elements, 
the five senses and what is comprehensible to the senses. The existence
') See here below the remarks on Sang hyang Kamahayanikan and the images of Jajaghn.
In Kem’s Geschiedenis van het Buddhisme II (1884), p. ! 74, the question is considered to be 
still uncertain.
*) Essays on the languages, literature and religion of Nep41 and Tibet (1874), p. 27 sq. 
and 58 sq.
Barabudur II. 
10


--- Page 150 ---
■ G°ix 
—<V\
of the Bodhisattva's is recognised and everywhere they are found, their 
names and sequence as well as those of the five Dhyani-Buddha's, appear 
to be identical. The Buddha’s names are consecutively Vairocana, 
Aksobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and Amoghasiddha (or °siddhi), 
the Bodhisattva’s are Samantabhadra, Vajrapani, Ratnapani, Padma- 
pani, (i.e. Avalokiteyvara) and Vigvapani.
In bothsystemsthe Dhyani-Buddha’s come into direct relation with the 
human Buddha's in such a way that every Buddha who appears on the 
earth and is therefore restricted by his human existence, reveals himself 
at the same time in the world of forms and in the formless world has 
neither name nor existence. The image of the earthly, mortal Buddha is 
reflected in the sphere of the dhyana in glorified radiance; imprisoned in 
material form he is no more than a shadow of the real Buddha in the 
transcendental world, the real existence. Thus a Manusi- and a Dhyani- 
Buddha are continually placed together and for instance the Dhyani- 
Buddha of the present universe, Amitabha, coincides with the earthly 
incarnation of Qakyamuni. The Dhyani-Bodhisattva is created by the 
Dhyani-Buddha to be the guardian of his creed after his earthly image 
has disappeared.
This is not the place to indulge in further investigation of the various 
theories about these beings. Let us only notice that a system of Dhyani- 
Buddha’s is possible both with and without the belief in an Adi-Buddha.
We shall now examine what is iconographically known about the 
Dhyani-Buddha’s. It appears then for example in Nepal and Tibet, 
that a special heavenly region is given to four of them. We shall not dis­
pute the originality of this system; perhaps the generally followed placing 
of Amitabha in the far West, also known from Indian sources, may have 
caused his colleagues to be ascribed to other fixed points of the compass. At 
any rate it can be stated that wherever the four quarters are mentioned 
in Nepal, the position of the Dhyani-Buddha’s is always the same and 
we find them represented turned in the same directions on the Nepal 
caitya's; Aksobhya to the East, Ratnasambhava to the South, Ami- 
tabha to the West and Amoghasiddha to the North. These four are 
distinguished by the position of their hands and these mudra’s seem too, 
where described or depicted, to be fixed for the four Dhyani-Buddha’s 
abovementioned; consecutively as bhumisparga-, vara-, dhyana- and 
abhaya-mudra. In Tibet the point of the compass and position of the
‘) For this Kama-, Rupa- and Arupa-dhatu, comp. I p. 77; for the whole argument see 
Koeppen, Die Religion des Buddha II (1859) p. 26.
l(t)l 
<SL
THE DHYANT-BTJDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE


--- Page 151 ---
hands varies1); the reason for describing what is done in Nepal, is that 
evidently the same way was customary in Java. The four names with 
the positions according to the Nepal system, are clearly given in the 
Sang hyang Kamahayanikan 2), the images, identified by their inscrip­
tions as Ratnasambhava and Aksobhya at Jajaghu shew the identical 
vara- and bhumisparga-mudra3), and when we find on Barabudur 
Buddha-images in bhumisparga- to the East, vara- to the South, 
dhyana- to the West and abhaya-mudra to the North, surely no other 
conclusion is possible than that we have before us the Dhyani-Buddha’s, 
represented according to the system of Nepal.
I have not yet mentioned Vairocana as some doubt exists about him. 
Generally his place is in the middle of the four others on a higher level, he 
is of course the most important of the group and is besides usually con­
sidered as the ruler of the zenith. He also sometimes appears on the 
East. His position is always the dharmacakra-mudra, but the peculiarity 
occurs in Java that the above-quoted Old-Javanese text does not speak 
of dharmacakra- but of dhvaja-mudra. The Vairocana image of Jajaghu 
that might here be of great authority has unfortunately disappeared. 
The term dhvaja-mudra is not known to us elsewhere; it is very possible 
that by this is meant the position in which the right hand is clasped 
round the left and the lifted up first finger of the lefthand is held by the 
first finger of the righthand, a position that continually appears in Java, 
and is also a characteristic of the Mahavairocana-Adi-Buddha of the 
Japanese Shingon sect 4).
Let us first see what the monument itself shews us. First we find the 
Buddha's sitting in niches in five rows placed in the upper part of the 
outer walls of the galleries and further in dome-shaped open-worked 
stupa’s on the terraces in three rows. Except for the varying mudr&'s, all 
the Buddha’s of these eight rows are represented in the same manner; 
seated on a lotuscushion in the so-called vajrasana, i.e. with legs crossed 
Indian fashion, the right leg placed in front of the left and the soles of 
both feet turned up. Their dress is the monk’s garment that hangs close 
to the body leaving the right shoulder bare; everywhere the edge of it 
can be seen going from the left shoulder under the right arm, but other­
wise the garment clings so close to the body, that the left breast and 
navel are shewn as plainly as if the figure were actually naked. An edge
’) Griinwedel, Mythologie des Buddlusmus in Tibet und der Mongolei (1900) p. 99.
*) Edition Kate, fol. 52a, see p. 59 and 107.
*) Plate 5 and 6 of Brandes’ monograph (1904).
*) Moens, Tijdschr, Bat. Gen. 58, p. 524 sq.
■ e° ^ x
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE 
J


--- Page 152 ---
—nV \ 
i
i s i 
Qt
W - M E '/ 
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE
of the garment can be discerned from the left wrist downwards and then 
along the right ankle beneath which it lies in conventional folds; occasion­
ally a double edge is to be seen that indicates the upper and under 
garment of the monk’s dress. The head rests on a neck with the three 
creases of happiness in it, the lobes of the ears are lengthened, the eyes 
down cast as becomes a meditative-Buddha. On the forehead, j ust above 
the root of the nose a small round lump is placed, the urna, one of the 
signs of the Buddha- (and Bodhisattva-) ship. The head is not shaved like 
the monk’s, but arranged in the form of small curls twisted to the right 
close to the head. In the middle of the skull rises a round protuberance, 
covered too with hair, the usnlsa, that is also a certain sign of every 
Buddha. Besides their beautiful proportions, these images are noticeable 
for the "Aryan” character of their features, entirely unlike the native 
style of countenance. With the exception of a few less-noticeable speci­
mens, the sculptors have succeeded in investing all these figures; singly, 
as well as in their grouping, with an immense dignity of spiritual dis­
tinction and tranquillity of mind, a serenity lifted far above the things of
this world, into godlike and majestic composure. Divine calmness___
“Apparet divum numeri sedesque quieta/, as we read in the famous 
lines of Lucretius 1), atheist as any Buddhist with regard to the gods of 
his own universe, who troubled themselves just as little as the Dhyani- 
Buddha’s about what happened on earth. Here indeed, beneath the skies 
of Java where “semper innubilis aether integit et large diffuso lumine 
rident”, in the Buddha's of the Barabudur, we can recognise the same 
immutable beings whom “nulla res animi pacem delibat tempore in ullo”.
The individual beauty of these figures of Buddha is enhanced by the 
way in which they are placed, first in the rows of niches with their won­
derful effects of light and shade, then hardly visible, in the open-work 
stupa’s on the terraces. This is so finely appreciated by Rouffaer 2) who 
says, in his well-known article on the art of the Javan monuments: “The 
lattice-worked Dagob's, these domes built of X shaped stones whose 
massive trellis-work encloses the seated Buddha partly-hidden, partly- 
revealed, are one of the original and marvellous ideas of the Barabudur 
that distinguish its unknown designer as a builder of the greatest genius. 
How deeply felt is it all; first the believer is led along the several 
ascending terraces, past the many images oi the Master in the open 
niches with their mystic light ancl shade, past walls covered with scenes 
depicting his life, his previous lives and his triumphs, and then brought
’) I)e natura deorum III, 18—24.
*) De Gids 1901, II, p. 248.


--- Page 153 ---
ID? 
%,
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE 
1 4 9 ^
out on to the highest pinnacle, open to the four winds, where in three 
round tiers the first Meditative Buddha with his symbolic gesture reveals 
to him the Highest Law, his sacred form within the dome half-hidden 
from the eyes of his worshippers."
The great value of these works of art lies undoubtedly in the esoteric 
meaning signified by the way in which they are placed. As regards the 
details it might be possible to differ from Rouffaer’s opinion; but no one 
could dispute the devout meaning of this sequence and the climax 
achieved thereby. Whatever else may be included, the original intention 
of the builder remains unmistakeably clear, i.e. to lead the mind of the 
worshipper gradually higher into purer spheres and greater sanctity.
As we have noticed, it is only the position of the hands that distin­
guishes these Buddha’s from one another. By this I do not mean that 
there is absolutely no difference in other points; they are not machine- 
made, the sculptors who carved these figures one by one, could not of 
course make a hundred similar, uniform specimens. Fortunately not, but 
the intentional variation is only in the rnudra. In the four lowest rows on 
the East side of the monument, the left hand is laid open in the lap, the 
right hand, palm down, laid on the right knee with fingers hanging just 
over it: bhumispa^a-mudra, not very suitably named, for it is intended 
to recall £akyamuni touching the earth when he appealed to her as a 
witness 1), and in sculpture the fingers are never depicted touching the 
ground. The Buddha’s in the four lower rows on the South side also have 
the left hand lying in the lap and the right resting just below the knee, 
but now with the palm turned up, forming the vara-mudra, the bestowal 
of favour. On the West side, the four rows of figures have both hands 
open in the lap with the thumbs touching; the attitude of meditation, 
dhyana-mudra. Finally in the four rows on the North, while the left 
hand remains open in the lap, the right is turned up, fingers close together 
with the palm facing us and the wrist resting on the left foot, the position 
that signifies „be not afraid", abhaya-mudra. Each of these groups 
consists of 92 Buddha-images.
Above in the fifth row the position is the same to all the four points 
of the compass; these Buddha’s, 64 in all, shew an attitude differing 
only from the one just-described by the fingers of the up-lifted right hand 
being not all close together, but the first finger being bent and touching 
the top of the thumb. This is vitarka-mudra, the gesture of preaching 
or discussion.
*) See above I page 201.


--- Page 154 ---
• GOl^X
On the terraces in each of the bell-shaped stupa’s, 72 in number, there 
is a Buddha seated in dharmacakra-mudra, the position of revolving the 
wheel of the Law, that is, the attitude of preaching the Creed. Both 
hands in front of the body, the left palm upwards, the right held up in 
profile in such a way that the tips of the third fingers touch, while the 
thumb and middlefinger of the left hand also touch at the top. As noticed 
before, the Buddha's in the three rows of stupa’s are similar, but there is 
some difference between the stupa’s themselves, by the two lower rows 
being larger in size and by the openings in the lattice-worked sides being 
diamond-shaped in the two lower, and square in the higher row.
The top row encircles the central-stupa of the whole monument and in 
this stupa a Buddha image was found too; it differs in two things from 
the others. First, it was entirely hidden from sight, the chief stupa being 
closed. Secondly, it is unfinished. We can see, that in the main it is 
intended to resemble and agree with the other Buddha’s, but the surface 
of the whole figure is rough, the details unfinished; for instance the hair 
is not yet carved or the fingers and toes worked out. The position of the 
hands shews the attitude to be bhumisparpa-mudra.
What can be the explanation of all this, so evidently closely-connected ? 
We shall do well to begin with what stands undoubtedly proved, the 
Buddha’s in the niches of the four lower rows.
Taking it as an accepted fact that these figures, both in position and 
gesture are quite in agreement with the system of the Dhyani-Buddha’s 
that rules in Nepal, we must conclude that the same system was followed 
in Java. We must therefore reject Yule’s theory that they may be var­
ious Manusi-Buddha’s 1); it is true that other Manusi-Buddha’s than 
Cakyarrmni and Maitreya are sometimes depicted, but they are nowhere 
arranged in an established system in Buddhism nor is any rule fixed for 
their attitudes or position to the points of the compass. Where on the 
other hand an actual Dhyani-Buddha system with fixed mudra’s agrees 
with what is found on the Barabudur, I think it would be utterly 
unreasonable to overlook this striking coincidence. It is in my opinion, 
proved that in the four lower rows, on the East, Aksobhya, on the South, 
Ratnasambhava, on the West, Amitabha, and on the North, Amogha- 
siddha are to be found.
We may then expect to see in the middle and higher placed than 
these, Vairocana. But it appears that we find more than we expected;
*} Journ. Roy. Asiat. Soc. New Series 4 (1870) p. 421.
|(SJ 
<SL
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE


--- Page 155 ---
first the fifth row of Buddha’s seated in the niches, turning to all sides, 
in the vitarka-mudra, and then the three rows of Buddha’s in dhar- 
macakra-mudra within the domes. It is plain that one of the two kinds of 
Buddha’s must personify Vairocana; but which of the two? And what 
do the Buddha's in the other mudra represent ?
Leemans’ monograph approves of the opinion that Vairocana is seat­
ed in the bell-shaped stupa's, and the attitude of the dharmacakra- 
mudra strengthens this view, for it is often given to him. On the other 
hand the explanation offered for the Buddha’s in vitarka-mudra, not 
without hesitation J), is not very convincing i.e. that on account of the 
slight difference between the attitude of these figures and that of the 
Buddha's on the North side below, the fifth row should represent Amo- 
ghasiddha, who for some unexplainable reason is given precedence over 
his colleagues. This suggestion I consider quite unacceptable, not only 
because neither in Java nor elsewhere do we find any greater importance 
given to Amoghasiddha above the other Dhyani-Buddha's, but also for 
the indisputable fact that although the abhaya- and vitarka-mudra do 
not differ much in appearance, they are very distinctly separated in 
the whole Buddhist iconography and each have their special meaning. 
It is impossible to overlook this.
Nor is IJzerman’s view more satisfactory, that the four lower rows 
may represent the four Dhyani-Buddha’s, the fifth the Manusi-Buddha’s 
and that Vairocana is placed on the terraces 2). Not only in that case 
no distinction whatever would be made between the seven (or eight) 
Manusi-Buddha’s so that it would be impossible to see how the seven 
or eight are divided among the 64 images, but the exactly similar appear­
ance of these Manusi- and the Dhyani-Buddha's is quite unlikely to give 
the spectator any clear idea which of these different beings he has before 
his eyes. Another great objection to this theory is that it is impossible to 
imagine that on a monument in all respects so systematically designed, 
these figures could be arranged in such a way; first four of the Dhyani- 
Buddha’s, then quite another sort of Buddha and then the fifth 
Dhyani-Buddha that belongs to the first four.
Fouclier offers another explanation 3). If four of the Dhyani-Buddha’s 
are placed in the four lower rows, he argues, then it is plain that the fifth
*) Pag. 453 and 469.
*) Versl. Meded. Kon. Acad. v. Wetensch, Afd. Lett. 3de Reeks: 4 (1887), p. 209—211; 
and also in Tijdschr. Aardr. Genootsch. 2de Serie: 16 (1899) p. 313. That the Buddha in vitar- 
ka-mudra may be £akyamuni was also suggested in the Guide to the Paris Exhibition of 1900 
(Guide a travers la section des Indes Ne6rlandaises) p. 271.
a) Notes d’Arch6ologie bouddhique, Bull. Ec. fran£. d’Extr. Or. 9 (1909) p. 44 sq.
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE


--- Page 156 ---
• G°t^X
frlj 
' (ey
THE d h y a n i-b u d d h a ’s a n d t h e c h ie f st a t u e
Dhyani-Buddha must follow them, thus the Buddha in vitarka-mudra 
is Vairocana, even if we must allow that the position of his hands is 
generally the dharmacakra-mudra. The list of five Dhyani-Buddha’s 
being completed by the figures in the niches, the images on the terraces 
as well as that in the chief stupa will represent f akyamuni. According to 
Foucher’s view therefore, the Buddha’s under the domes all represent 
the historic Buddha, but there is no further evidence to prove it being 
correct. This is rather similar to Von Humboldt’s suggestion, afterwards 
withdrawn, that under the domes would be Maitreya, the Buddha of the 
future x).
With the first part of Foucher’s opinion I am entirely able to agree. It 
seems quite evident that the fifth Dhyani-Buddha should immediately 
follow the fourth without something else being first pushed in between, It 
is in favour of this view that all the five Dhyani-Buddha’s who belong 
together are placed in the same manner in niches at the top of the chief 
walls and that in accordance with the regulation four of them face their 
own point of the compass, the fifth being in the middle on a higher level. 
On the other hand the mudra is not an overruling objection; the meaning 
of “instruction” and “argument” are sufficiently alike to make a transi­
tion from one to the other position of the hands quite comprehensible. 
But it is only natural we should inquire why here in the case of Vairo­
cana the elsewhere usual mudra is omitted? The reason of this may 
be that in the system here followed, this mudra was already reserved 
for another Buddha and therefore the vitarka-mudra was given to 
Vairocana. This other Buddha is then the one placed under the domes, 
so that if this reasoning is correct, the fact of Vairocana not having the 
dharmacakra-mudra seems to imply that the Buddha who does shew 
this attitude is also connected with the system of Dhyani-Buddha’s as 
a whole.
Yet this is not the special reason why I am not able to agree with the 
second part of his supposition, the recognition of Qakyamuni as the 
Buddha in the bell-shaped stupa’s. The chief objection to this is the way 
in which the necessary climax in the majestic conception of the Bara- 
budur would be lost. The higher we ascend, the wider rises our spiritual 
horizon. At the foot of the monument we contemplate the misery caused by 
the wheel of life and the unavoidable, inevitable law of Karmanis brought 
before our eyes in impressive scenes. Following on this we are shewn how 
the Buddha preached the Law of Salvation; how in this his last earthly *)
*) Kawi-Sprache 1,1. p. 133.


--- Page 157 ---
fW 
(CT
THE DHYANI-BUBDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE 
1 6 * 1 ^
existence he attained Buddha-ship for which task he qualified himself 
by many deeds of self-sacrifice through innumerable former incarnations. 
Next comes the famous story of the seeker after the Highest Wisdom, 
the symbolic meaning of whose wanderings, the artist who conceived the 
design of the Barabudur must surely have discerned and rightly estimat­
ed, though in choosing the text he must also have been attracted by its 
suitability for representation in sculpture. Then comes a gallery dedicat­
ed to the Saviour of the Future, the next so anxiously awaited 
Buddha, and as we ascend higher our vision reaches wider, and our gaze 
is fixed on the Bodhisattva who shall appear as the last Buddha to be 
honoured as highest of all. All this stretches from an ancient past into a 
still further removed future. Throned above all these exemples of former 
and expected salvation, not influencing, yet guarding them, and as it 
were uniting them in one mighty universal plan, the Buddha’s of the 
Dhyana are seated round, with eyes closed, each in the direction ascribed 
to him, the fifth above in the centre. We rise still higher, pass through 
the last doorway and stand in the severe simplicity of the terraces, 
leaving all the shifting scenes behind us. Can we imagine that after 
having been shewn the uttermost future we are to be drawn back again 
to the toiling earth, to the things that held our thoughts on the first gal­
lery, the preaching of £akyamuni? Without doubt the now-existing 
world looks upon this Buddha as the pre-eminent one, the preacher of 
salvation, but in that system of the Buddhist cosmos which the Bara­
budur reveals to our mind, so much greater in time and extent, the preach­
ing of Qakyamuni, however important at the present day, is lost in the 
magnitude of the whole conception. Our attention has already been 
drawn to what is to come, to what lies beyond earthly appearance, so 
that to place his image above the eschatological Samantabhadra-texts 
and the Dhyani-Buddha’s, would be a falling-back of the greater to 
the less, from a higher to a lower sphere.
The same can be said of Maitreya, who is also supposed to be the 
Buddha under the bell-shaped domes; quite appropriate on the third 
gallery, he would be out of place above the fourth and surely above the 
Dhyani-Buddha's. If the Barabudur means to represent ascension — 
and everything we see on the monument gives that impression -— then 
the Buddha’s on the terraces can be nothing less than a Being greater 
than the five Dhyani-Buddha's.
For this reason I am compelled to look for the explanation in another 
direction than Foucher has done. A Buddha such as we may here expect, 
an ideal, not an earthly one, akin to the Dhyani-Buddha's yet raised


--- Page 158 ---
■ 6°ifeX
//>—<‘V, 
S^\
f(f)| 
(ct
\ x S v / 
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’s AND THE CHIEF STATUE 
J
. ■ 
-':i. •' 
1 
>
above them, is not unknown. Let us first turn to the Buddhism of Nepal 
that has already shewn such importance for the Dhyani-Buddha system 
also in force in Java, and see how according to Hodgson, next to the 
group of five, there is one of six by the addition of the Buddha Vajra- 
sattva, who is described as the highest and most powerful; so as to the 
others are ascribed the elements, the senses and the objects of the senses, 
so to him is given the intellect, the understandingand the subjects of com­
prehension Jj ; just as the material world is under the control of the five, 
the spiritual world emanates from the sixth, who is the creator of the 
mind, of the power of thought and feeling 2). This series of six Dhyani- 
Buddha’s is found in the sacred scripture of what according to Csoma, is 
the oldest Buddhist sect in Tibet 3), and in the Kanjur it is Vajrasattva 
who acts as president of the Dhyani-Buddha’s 4). He is also mentioned 
as the first of the celestial beings worthy of honour among the Svabha- 
vika’s5), he is considered as the highest Intelligence8) in Tibet, and in 
China he is known as the sixth Dhyani-Buddha, specially honoured by, 
even considered as the founder of the Yogacarya sect7), a fact the 
importance of which I shall discuss later. There is evidently no doubt, 
that according to the views of some Buddhists, Vajrasattva. was regarded 
as the sixth Dhyani-Buddha and at the same time as a being of special 
importance among them, even as a kind of Highest God.
In this last mentioned quality he is identified with another of the 
most exalted Buddha-figures, Vajradhara, though in other places he is 
given a separate personality. For instance the two are represented con­
versing together8), or their relation can be described as being that 
Vajrasattva appears as vice-president and Vajradhara as president of 
the Dhyani-Buddha’s 9), while the latter is then considered as the Adi- l
l) See Essays etc. quoted above p. 29, comp. p. 94.
■*) Note on the list of contents of the Naipaliya Devata Kalyana, Journ. Asiat. Soc. 
Beng. 12 (1843), p. 400.
*) See note Hodgson Essays, p. 29.
*) Rgyud XX, 1, according to Feer, Analyse du Kandjour, Annales Mus. Giiim.2 (1881), p.
473. Also Griinwedel, Mythologie etc. p. 98; Padma Thang Yig, Journ. Asiat. 203 (1923)
p. 293.
*) Hodgson, Essays, p. 73. As speaker in Nepal sutra’s he is mentioned Essays p. 19 sq.
*) Rgyud III, 6 ; Feer 1.1. Cf. Si-dfl-In-dzou (Ann. Mus. Guim. 8, 1899) p. XIII, 72, 103, 
115—118.
*) Eitel, Handbook of Chinese Buddhism (1888) p. 191; Edkins, Chinese Buddhism (1880)
p. 169.
«) Rgyud XXI, 3; Feer 1.1.
•) Pander, Das Pantheon desTschangtscha Hutuktu, Veroffent. Kon. Mus. f. Volk, Berlin
I (1890) p. 59.


--- Page 159 ---
■ 
\«&y
Buddha of Nepal Buddhists1). In other cases the two names seem to be 
used for the same being 2), the highest of all Buddha’s. The ideas about 
these two Buddha’s are very much mixed, nowhere do we find any fun­
damental distinction stated, such as is clearly shewn between Vajra- 
sattva and the five other Dhyani-Buddha’s. We get the impression that 
Vajradhara is secundary to the more original Vajrasattva; for we meet 
with the last named in places where Vajradhara is unknown, while on 
the other hand Vajradhara is only mentioned in systems in which 
Vajrasattva also figures.
The fact being thus established that the Buddha Vajrasattva appears 
on the one hand as sixth and most important of the five Dhyani- 
Buddha’s and on the other hand as a kind of highest Buddha of the uni­
verse, in some actual Buddhist views the most exalted of divine beings, 
I consider we are justified in supposing that Vajrasattva is the figure 
placed in the bell-shaped stupa’s above the five Dhyani-Buddha’s on the 
terraces of Barabudur; so it will appear that a fixed system has been 
followed, the climax is preserved and in the highest position we find the 
most sublime Buddha. There is just one objection to this identification 
and that we must bear in mind. It is the iconographical fact that every­
where Vajrasattva is seen depicted, he is never represented as a Buddha 
but in the full dress of a Bodhisattva with two fixed attributes, avajra and 
a temple bell. This representation of him appears to be accepted generally, 
in India itself •) and as well in Nepal and Tibet4) as in Java 5). Even in 
his more complicated forms the Bodhisattva costume is adhered to 6).
’) Pander 1.1. and Das Lamaische Pantheon, Zeitschr. I. Ethnol. 1889 p. 61; Waddell, The 
Buddhism of Tibet or Lamaism (1895) p. 130. Comp. Mem. As. See. Beng. I, 1 (1905) p. 21.
*> Feer, Analyse 1.1. p. 473; Schlagintweit, Le Bouddhisme au Tibet, AnnalesM is6eGuimct 
3 (1881) p. 34. The shifting of the personality shews clearly in the last-mentioned place. The 
first of the Buddha’s is called both Vajradhara and Vajrasattva; later on it appears as if 
Vajradhara is too sublime to take interest in anything and Vajrasattva is in the same condition 
towards him as a Manusi- to a Dhyftni-Buddha. In Grilnwedel, Mythol. 1.1., both are spoken of 
as forms of the same being. See also Wassiljew, Der Buddhismus (1860) p. 205 (188) and comp. 
Getty, The gods of Northern Buddhism (1914) p. 3— 6 and 26—28,
*) Foucher, Etude sur 1’iconographie bouddhique de l’lnde I (1900) p. 123; Hodgson, Es­
says p. 136.
*) Bhagv&nl&l Indrajl, The Bauddha Mythology of Nep&l, Appendix to Arch. Surv. West. 
India 9 (1879) no. 23; Pander, Zeitschr. f. Ethn. 1.1, fig. 1, Pantheon p. 59; Grilnwedel, My- 
thologie p. 98 sq.; Schlagintweit 1.1. p. 2; Getty 1.1. p. 5.
e) Groeneveldt, Catalogus der Archeologische Verzameling van het Bat. Gen. v.’Kunst. en 
Wet. (1887) p. 175 sq.; Juynboll, Catalogus v a n ’s Rijks Ethnogr. Mus. V, Jav. Oudheden 
(1909), p. 86 sq.; the author in Rapp. Oudh. Comm. 1912 p. 42—44. These are all in bronze; 
two stone Vajrasattva's are preserved in the Museum at Madjakerta under no. ] 16 (Oudheidk. 
Versl. 1913 p. 35) and no, 542.
*) Lulius van Goor, Oudk. Versl. 1918, p. 33—39; Moens, ibid. p. 86—93.
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE


--- Page 160 ---
/ s'--
If we examine first of all the Tibet representations, it then appears 
that no argument can be drawn from them against Vajrasattva being 
portrayed in Buddha-form. Difference between him and the five other 
Dhyani-Buddha’s exists only where they are depicted alone. But the 
most usual form of representation is that where all six are holding a 
gakti on their lap and in that case the five others also hold various emb­
lems and they are all in the dress of Bodhisattva’s. Thus Vajrasattva 
and the five other Dhyani-Buddha’s are treated in the same manner 
and strangely enough all these Buddha’s lay aside their Buddha-form.
On looking carefully, we can see elsewhere that the difference between 
Buddha and Bodhisattva is not always strictly preserved and that is 
quite comprehensible; for a Buddha has been a Bodhisattva and can 
therefore be pourtrayed in his former condition, and a Bodhisattva is 
intended to become a Buddha and can be shewn as he is to be in the 
future. It need not appear strange for us to find Maitreya depicted as 
a Buddha 1), Avalokitegvara as Buddha 2), or other Bodhisattva’s 
in Buddha-form; but it is the more surprising to see the Dhyani- 
Buddha’s who are just the only ones who have never been Bodhisattva’s, 
represented in that .shape. It is thus very important that in this case we 
have no special Tibetan custom before us. There exists a striking exam­
ple from Java itself.
In the Museum at Leiden is a small bronze figure 4), that represents a 
person in the full dress of a Bodhisattva seated beside a gakti who also 
holds her hands in dharmacakra-mudra. On the inside of the pedestal is 
an inscription in Old-Javanese, We roc a n a, which identifies this figure 
in Bodhisattva-dress as no other than the Dhyani-Buddha Vairocana. 
Another indication in the same direction can perhaps be found in the 
Old-Javanese poem N agarakrtagama, where an Aksobhya image wearing 
a makuta 5) is spoken of, also one evidently not in the usual appearance 
of a Buddha. When we see that Vairocana, who is continually represented 
as a Buddha, was also depicted as Bodhisattva, it will not seem 
strange that we find Vajrasattva, generally shewn as Bodhisattva, was 
also represented in the form of a Buddha.
') Schlagintweit, Bouddhisme, pt. 9, Getty 1.1. pi. 14 and 15.
!) Foucher, 1.1. p. 94 sq.
3) Daya Ram Sahni, Catalogue of the Museum of Archaeology at S3.math (1914) p. 34. 
Comp. Bosch in Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 57 (1916) p. 114 sq,
*) Juynboll, Catalogue p. 80 no. 2862, and plate XI, 2.
6) Nag. 56 : 2. Comp. Poerbatjaraka in Oudh. Versl, 1917, p. 143— 147 and the author's
notes on p. 282—-285 of Kem’s edition (1919) .
(
(
(
'
 
vfiT
\ V ^ 5 ^ .y 
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE 
D
l J


--- Page 161 ---
We have already learned how in Nepal and Tibet he was regarded 
actually as "Buddha” and we shall see that it was the same in Java. For 
this we must again consult the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan.
It appears at once that Vajrasattva was not only known in the 
Buddhism of Java 1), but held a very important position. The vow that 
was made by the disciple consecrating himself to the secret creed, was 
called Vajrasattva and opened the path to the Highest Wisdom, the 
vajrajnana; it is Vajrasattva who is the all-seeing one, the Master in 
the opening of the eyes; Vajrasattva the pure, the unsullied, the imm­
aculate one is in the heart of the faithful disciple. These are quotations from 
Sanskrit verses2) and the Old-Javanese text explains them. Vajrasattva is 
expressly called in the verse the Lord of all Buddha’s, sarvabuddhd- 
dipah and in the prose text the same statement will be found that he is 
taken as Head of all Buddha’s, tuwi ta pinaka pradhdna sang sarbwa 
taihdgata sir a. Another remarkable fact is the appearance of the name 
Vajradhara, not in the Sanskrit verses but exclusively in Old-Javanese, 
in two places where the name Vajradhara is evidently meant only as an­
other name for Vajrasattva. After Vajrasattva as we have seen, being 
mentioned as the one who opens the eyes of the disciple, and described 
as patron and helper, comes the statement that when the scholar has 
given his attention to the samaya and his heart has been freed of all 
ignorance, he has been "cultivated” by the exalted Lord Vajradhara3). 
Not quite similar to the two just quoted, but certainly not negligible, there 
is a third place in Sanskrit verse, where Vajradharah are spoken of, in the 
plural, according to the context intended as a synonym for the Buddha's 
who protect the neophyte, while the prose text relates in explanation 
that it is the Lord Vajrasattva who becomes his protector 5). In this 
way, it is shewn plainly that while both the names Vajrasattva and 
Vajradhara were known to the Old-Javanese commentator, he knows of 
no special distinction between the two beings, so that their personality 
is mixed and both may be regarded as Buddha. In the second of the two
l) This appears too from several mantra’s that begin with an invocation to Vajrasattva, see 
Juynboll, Supplement op den Catalogus van de Javaansehe en Madoereesche handschriftten 
der Leidsche Universitejts-Bibliotheek II (1911) p. 349 no. MCMXLVII and p. 373 no. 
MMLVI; comp. p. 367 no. MMXXVI.
*) They are to be found in fol. 13b, 14a, 16a (p. 21 and 23 in the text, 75 and 77 in the 
translation). For the Sanskrit verses see Speyer, Ein altjavanischer mahayanistischer K&te- 
chismus, Zeitschr. d Deutsch. Morgenl. Gesellsch. 67 (1913), p. 349, 356—358. I shall refer 
again to the whole work in chapt. XIII.
*) Fol. 15a, p. 22 and 76.
*) Fol. 16b, p. 23 and 77.
‘) Fol. 17a-b, p. 24 and 78; Speyer 1.1. p. 358.
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE 
l ^
L


--- Page 162 ---
*(£)! 
VGT
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE
pieces of which the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan consists, Vajrasattva 
is even incorporated with the Dhyani-Buddha's; that is in a Sanskrit 
verse that mentions five, reckoning Vajrasattva as one of them and 
omitting Aksobhya; the Javanese expounder then leavesout Vajrasattva 
and replaces him again by Aksobhya x),
All this makes it easy to understand, how Vajrasattva may have come 
to be represented on the Barabudur monument in the form of a Buddha, 
even while he is found elsewhere in an other form. Besides it seems so 
appropriate to depict him as Buddha where he was to appear in connec­
tion with the five ordinary Dhyani-Buddha’s; the union of the whole 
group into one system is brought clearly to notice in this way and at the 
same time, by placing Vajrasattva on the terraces and under the domes, 
it is shewn that although belonging to the Dhyani-Buddha’s, he is all 
the same distinguished from them, and placed high above them, impers­
onating a more exalted idea.
There was thus every reason when deciding to place Vajrasattva on 
the terraces, to give him the form and quality of a Buddha and take 
away his Bodhisattva-emblems, — by which I do not mean to say that 
this must have been a Javanese innovation; the whole system will have 
been adopted with a Vajrasattva in Buddha-form, — and so he would 
have to be distinguished from the other Dhyani-Buddha’s by the mudra. 
One special position was the most appropriate. We learned, from the 
Sang hyang Kamahayanikan that it is Vajrasattva who opens the eyes 
of the novice, dispels his ignorance and guides him into the path 
towards the Highest Wisdom, thus he is the great Teacher. In this qual­
ity he was regarded in Nepal as the instructor of all2). If this were not 
evidence enough, then the Old-Javanese text speaks in actual words 
of Vajrasattva's Wheel of the Law, dharmmacakra bhatara fti Bajra- 
dhara. Obviously the only position possible must be the dharmacakra- 
mudra. To portray Vajrasattva as Buddha, it became necessary to 
change Vairocana’s usual position for another similar one.
Taking everything into consideration, the most likely explanation of 
the six kinds of separate Buddha’s on the Barabudur, seems to be that 
they represent the five Dhyani-Buddha’s and Vajrasattva. But we 
must not overlook the fact that the figure of Vajrasattva gradually lost 
precedence in Java and was obliged to yield place to Vairocana. Though 
we may find him on this monument whose Buddhism, as proved by the 
texts identified on the galleries, was derived directly from Indian sources,
‘) Fol. 58b, p. 66 and 113.
*) Bhagvanlal Indraji, 1.1. p. 102.


--- Page 163 ---
«\
and though we find him in the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan, being partly 
a commentary on Sanskrit mantra’s, yet on the other hand in a popular 
work like the legend of Kuhjarakarna1), there is no trace of Vajrasattva 
to be found; here Vairocana is the great Teacher, seated in a palace 
with the significant name of Bodhicitta, and the same view is retained 
in the second part of the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan, that is a step 
further removed from the Sanskrit original than the first-mentioned. In 
our last chapter, which treats of the place the Barabudur takes in 
Javanese Buddhism, and describes the Java Mahayana in general, I shall 
speak more fully on these points, to which it is here necessary to allude.
We now come to the image in the chief stupa, the unfinished Buddha 
in bhilmisparga-mudra. Before discussing its probable meaning, let us 
give an account of the way in which this remarkable image was dis­
covered.
Before 1842, no one had any idea of its existence. Cornelius examined 
the inside of the central stupa, so that among the plates of Raffles’ second 
edition there is a section shewing the temple chamber 2); Raffles himself 
speaks of the “Dome” and its ruined condition, for the pinnacle had coll­
apsed, but not of anything being inside the chamber3). Crawfurd is more 
explicit, he distinctly states three times, that there was nothing in the 
central stupa and that it appeared never to have contained anything; 
he gives a short description of the opening on the South side, through 
which the interior of the originally quite-closed-up dome could be seen, 
the inside space being small because of the thickness of the walls; then 
he relates how the floor of it forms a cavity to the depth of five feet 
below the level of the foundation on the outside, and that there is no image 
or trace of any image having been there 4). The statement of the cavity 
five foot deep must not lead to the conclusion, that in Crawfurd’s time the 
floor had been further excavated than the original floor of the chamber, 
that is just above the level of the highest terrace; for in his time the lower 
part of the central stupa outside was still hidden in the sand so that 
Crawfurd naturally reckons the outside base a good bit higher than the 
level of the terrace, possibly about the height where the sidewalls on the
*) For this work already referred to in the description of the hells in chapt. II, see further 
chapt. XIII.
*) Plate 55 in the atlas of 1844.
*) History of Java II* (1817) p. 29; II* (1830) p. 30.
*) History of the Indian Archipelago II (1820) p. 198; On the ruins of Boro Budor in Java, 
Transact. Lit. Sac. of Bombay II (1820) p. 158 (= p. 167 sq. of re-print 1876); Descriptive 
Dictionary of the Indian islands (1856) p. 66.
7 
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE 
ISeL j


--- Page 164 ---
r % .
outside begin to rise straight up. The condition appears to be the same 
in 1840, for which year we possess the evidence of two eye-witnesses. 
Valck states that the Chief-Deity seems to have disappeared from the 
dome in which the temple culminates1). The second piece of information 
comes from Van Hoevellin the same year 1840, though the description 
was only published in 1858. The dome, he says, is quite closed; only one 
side of the square part at the top of it is not damaged entirely, the others 
have collapsed. The stupa can be entered at the side which has fallen in, 
where one reaches the floor ten feet below. He cannot imagine what kind 
of statue was placed in this space, but thinks it must have been some 
very large image of Buddha, judging by the similarity of shape between 
this large stupa and the small ones that also contain Buddha’s. Thus it 
seems that at %e time of his visit the breach did not reach to the bottom, 
but the opening by which he entered was about 10 ft. above the floor 
of the chamber, the upper-part having fallen in.
After a couple of short statements in 1844 and 1850 which have nothing 
special to say about, the central stupa, we hear something again in 1853 
about its condition., and it then appears there is an unfinished image, 
spoken of as if ithadbeen therefor a longtime. In this year an article was 
published by Wilsen who after having been at Barabudur for a short time 
in 1847, was at work there continually from 1849. In this article we read 
that a Buddha image, which with some metal objects had been found in 
the dome, is still there. Then follows a short description of the figure, 
the only noticeable fact being that its position is said to be the same as 
that of the Buddha’s in the lowest rows on the North side4). That would 
then be the abhaya mudra. This becomes more curious in connection 
with remarks by Brumund written in 1857 or 1858 during a visit to the 
spot; here again we are told that an image of Buddha was found in the 
interior of the stupa, and that it is still there, but in the description of 
the unfinished statue which follows, it is said that the hands are folded 
together in front8): this is of course the dhyana-mudra.
How the image came there can be read in Leemans’ monograph 6). In *)
*) Tijdschr. v. Nederl, Indie, 3, I (1840) p. 184.
'■) i ijdschr. v. Nederl, Indie 1858, II, p. 113 sq. The article was published anonymously; 
that Van Hoovell was the author is shewn by Rouifaer in Bijdr. Kon, Inst. 79 (1923) p. 591—
597.
*) Tijdschr. v. Nederl. Indiii 6, II (1844) p. 357 sq. and 1850, II, p, 226.
*}■ Tijdschr. Bat, Gen. 1 (1853) p. 254 sq.
*1 Tijdschr. v. Nederl. Indie 1858, II, p. 282.
•) Pag, 96 sq.
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA'S AND THE CHIEF STATUE


--- Page 165 ---
1842, Hartman (i.e. Hartmann) l) the ‘resident’ of Kedu, had the 
interior of the dome examined. "It then appeared that the floor, entirely 
or partially broken up and dug out to a considerable depth below into 
the hill itself, had afterwards been filled in with the debris. On removing 
some of this, a large Budd ha-image was brought to light resembling those 
under the small bell-sliaped stupa’s and in the niches, but -not so well- 
finished. It lay backwards in a slanting position, its head still some feet 
below the surface of the pavement and therefore lower than the level of 
the terrace. In loosening the ground, one of the workers struck the head 
with his pick axe and broke it off”. In accordance with Brumund, Lee- 
mans thinks that the statue stood originally on the paved floor, but 
treasure-seekers broke into the stupa, took up the pavement and dug a 
hole under it, so that the image fell or was thrown down and buried 
under the earth and rubbish.
Then doubt set in. As early as 1854, on adding remarks to Wilsen’s 
article, Friederich inquires if the Buddha statue may not have been 
placed inside there post festum and in a note of later date he states, 
on information received afterwards, that when in Mm2 the large stupa 
was opened a) in the presence of the ‘resident’ and the commissioner for 
landrent and agriculture, Loudon, no Buddha-image was found inside 
but only a small ‘fivaltic* figure and some small gold coins. Next Hoe- 
permans in 18643), gets the same sort of information from some old 
natives who had helped at the digging, and relates it in rather melo­
dramatic style. The quotation follows an indignant attack on what 
Buddingh had said about the unfinished image 4) :
"Did the Rev. Buddingh not know (for he pretended to know all and 
knew really nothing) that there were still old people in 1864 at Bara- 
budur who had helped to dig out6) the temple, and that Sri Kantjing 
Padoeka Resident himself took away something from under the dome, 
and concealed it in a handkerchief held on his knee in the carriage. What 
was it, sir?
"They say it was a Buddha image of solid gold and to distract peoples' 
attention, Rhaden Adipatti of Magalang gave orders that the first *)
*) See above I p. 35.
») This ‘opening’ must be the enlarging of the breach that had to be extended in order to 
examine the interior.
*) Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 2 (1854) p. 3 sq.
*) In Us Neerlands Oost-Indie I (1859) p. 180 sq.
*) Resident Hartmann also had the sand and rubbish cleared from the topgallery.
Barabu(Jur II 
11
• G° ^ X
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AMD THE CHIEF STATUE 
^ 6 ^ J


--- Page 166 ---
Buddha that was handy, there being hundreds of them lying about, 
should be put in its place inside the dome” 1).
We can of course here reject the insinuation against the resident. But 
without that there is nothing improbable in the story. When an enthusi­
astic archeologist like Hartmann finds something in the stupa which 
he thinks of importance, it is quite natural that he should fold it up in his 
handkerchief and take it away in his carriage. It is quite natural too that 
talk among the natives should develop this object of the high-placed 
official’s special regard into a costly gold figure and so the incident is 
explained in a way comprehensible to the native community. The state­
ment of the large statue being placed inside by order of the regent of 
Magelang is important specially in connection with the fact that. Friede- 
rich as well, ten years before, relates there was originally no image there.
On what is Leemans story now founded? At any rate not on a clear, 
circumstantial, and unequivocal account of the discovery. There is far 
too much uncertainty in what is told about the small objects said to have 
been found at the same time. Collected together as sources, are2) Wil- 
sen, whose first article dates from 1853, Brumund, who made his notes 
in 1855 and — the regent of Magelang. This last name, added to the 
story told by the old natives to Hoepermans, may have some significance. 
Did this native official really have a hand in the business ? Not that we 
need for a moment believe the alleged motive of screening the resident 
from the public eye: it does not seem as if such an action would have 
been efficient. Neither need the .story of the discovery as related by 
Leemans be incorrect. It would be inconsiderate on the other hand to 
reject the evidence of eyewitnesses who said that there was at first no 
statue, but that the regent caused one to be put there. How can these 
two accounts be reconciled? This will not be so very difficult if we betake 
ourselves into the region of supposition.
The two statements of 1840 shewed a supposition, that the chief-stupa 
had been intended for an image.
Especially Van Hoe veil is important on this point for he was Hart­
mann's guest andhis pupil among the antiquities. Is it not probable the resi­
dent himself shared this suspicion ? It did not seem impossible something 
more might be discovered if the stupa were to be thoroughly searched. The 
plan was arranged, the regent of course asked to supply the necessary 
workers, tools etc. What could be easier for the obliging native than to
*) Hindoe-Oudheden van Java, 186*1— 1867, published in Rapp. Oudh. Dienst 1913 p.
132.
*) Onp. 97.
|(I)| 
<SL
t h e DHYANI-BXJDDHA’s AND THE CHIEF STATUE


--- Page 167 ---
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA'S AND THE CHIEF STATUE
lay a plan for letting the Kandj eng find the thing he desired so much ? 
It would not indeed be the first excavation where the lordly discoverer 
was rewarded with unusual success; fortune sometimes accepts a helping 
hand 1). The great lord hoped to find an image, so there should be one. 
The regent then has one secretly placed there; only it must not be one of 
the ordinary images of which there were hundreds, but one of the un­
finished ones of which there were only some few specimens. So the statue 
is buried under the debris, the resident comes to, excavate and behold, 
one of the workmen strikes the head of the statue with his pick axe etc. 
So the information repeated by Leemans is in agreement with the 
facts, but the rumour may also be wellgrounded; the workmen who had 
assisted knew that the image had not always been there but was put in 
by the regent’s orders.
By this I do not mean to say that the course of events was actually as 
above-described, but merely suggest the possibility of such a combina­
tion. The point must be made clear that the greatest uncertainty exists 
about the way in which this statue came into the stupa. It was not 
found ‘in situ’ but lay among the fragments and rubbish in a space that 
had been accessible as early as 1814. Even if there is not a word of truth 
in the reports of Friederich and Hoepermans, then it is still possible that 
the statue does not belong there and wus put in among the rubbish per­
haps even before 1814. The story of the discovery was written at least ten 
years later and at the same time the suspicion arose that there was 
something wrong about it. I shall refer later to the small objects about 
which there is too some difference of opinion. All this fills us with 
distrust. The position of the hands being twice wrongly-described is also 
very strange. Friederich’s and Hoepermans' information cannot be 
unconditionally rejected; at the same time can they be implicitly be­
lieved ? fn attempting a combination of the various data, I of course ac­
cepted only the main point of the rumour as credible, not the accessory 
story of the statue being introduced after the excavation. If this also 
were true, we might well wonder what reason there could be for dragging 
the image into the opened stupa. The account given by Leemans would 
then be nothing but a made-up story, which it does not seem to be.
After all, our examination of the sources relating to the discovery of 
1842, if we do not absolutely reject one of them, ends with the verdict 
“non liquet”. Besides this, the fact that the stupa was never known to 
us without the breach in its wall, deprives us of any certainty that the
*) F°r a similar ..Byzantine-Javan” case in Singasari, see Rcmffaer p. 72 of the monograph 
about that sanctuary (1909).
' G° ^ x


--- Page 168 ---
image was not put in from, outside any time before our news in 1842, In 
this case I think the only thing left to us is to turn to the image itself 
and examine it thoroughly.
Nowadays it stands at the foot of the monument, placed on piled-up 
stones. When leaving the stupa, filled with the majestic and beautiful 
impressions it leaves on the mind, we pause to examine this statue, the 
first effect it gives most of us, must surely be one of disappointment. We 
long to see something as exalted as the rest, a fitting culmination of 
their sublimity. It was to be placed in the highest and most sacred spot; 
and should be worthy of adoration as something divine. Instead of that, 
here sits a Buddha, in dimension the same as the hundreds of others, but 
in appearance far inferior to them. For if laying aside all secondary con­
siderations, we forget that the statue has been removed from the chief- 
stupa and become famous in Barabudur-literature, and then compare 
it with any of the Buddha images in the niches and domes, every unpre­
judiced observer must judge it to be inferior. I am convinced that only 
an observer who allows himself to be influenced by the real or supposed 
sanctity of this image, may fancy to feel some admiration.
It is useless to argue that it did not matter much what the image 
looked like, because no one would see it in the closed-up dome; for 
whatever was placed in such a holy of holies would have to be of the 
very best workmanship. That no Indian would attempt to fail in this 
duty towards the all-highest, is proved by the works of art that have 
been brought to light in the stupa’s of Hindustan, where they were 
just the same intended to be concealed for ever and ever1).
Nor can it be argued that the image was left unfinished intentionally, 
for some special reason; such a reason may have existed, but the statue 
being unfinished did not in the least imply that it would remain rough 
and ugly. On the contrary, the great height the art of this Barabudur 
monument attained,is a surety that it was quite possible to make an image 
with intentionally indistinct form into a masterpiece.
But it seems to me there are signs that the statue was not intentionally 
left unfinished, but on the contrary, was actually meant to be completed. 
An order for leaving the human form undefined would not account for 
the mass of stone below, in the middle under the legs, at the place where 
otherwise the folds of the monk’s dress are arranged. This rough lump, 
thicker at one side than the other, has no sense as part of the design, 
but is quite comprehensible when it was to be left till the time came for 
it to be carved into folds. If this were an intentionally unfinished image,
*) Not always was such care bestowed on them; see Foucher A. G. B. II p. 542.
(f(W)| 
(gL
THE DITYANI-BUDDHA’ s AND THE CHIEF STATUE


--- Page 169 ---
% M i 
. 
*SL
t h e d u y a n i-b u d d h a ’s a n d t h e CHiEf st a t u e 
165
why should the hands be left one with the thumb carved separate and 
the other with thumb and fingers in one piece? If it was going to be 
finished, we see that the sculptor had got further on one side than the 
other. The same with the way in which the hair is left, just what might 
be expected if we knew the putting in of the curls was to follow; some 
of the Dhyani- Buddha’s whose curls are not quite finished-off, look 
just the same.
Ail this, added to the similarity in size between this image and the 
1 )hyani-Buddha s, makes it difficult for me to think this statue any­
thing else than an unfinished Aksobhya intended for the niches in the 
lowest row on the East side. There were several unfinished Buddha- 
figures found; the so-called "statue of the chief-stupa'’ is by no means 
unique, a fact that also goes to prove it had no special character. Si­
milar specimens were found in various places in the neighbourhood, at 
Gondangan (Muntilan), Mrangen (Salam), Ngaran (Salaman) *), and 
quite near to the Barabudur as well. This can easily be explained; it is 
known that the sanctuary was never entirely completed, as appears 
from some of the reliefs and for instance the lions; in the same way when 
the work stopped, some of the Dhyani-Buddha’s may have been left 
unfinished. It probably also happened that some of the figures had to be 
lejected, when half or nearly completed. This image has lost apiece of 
its right thumb, perhaps the injury was done when it got buried in the 
rubbish under the floor or when it was dragged out ; but it may just as 
well have been an accident caused by a slip of the sculptor’s hand, so 
that the work was refused a place and never finished off.
Judging by the statue itself, we are now coming to the conclusion 
that it seems unlikely the founders of the Barabudur would ever have 
placed this figure in the most sacred part of the sanctuary 2). And seeing 
that the evidence as to its discovery is so unreliable, we need not try 
to reject this impression. If we consider the image as an unfinished 
Aksobhya from the East side that was never intended to be set up in 
the chief-stupa, then it is of little consequence whether it was put in 
tnere either before 1814 or by means of some shady transaction in 1842.
’) See Inventaris der Hindoe-oudheden I, Rapp. Oudh. Dienst 1914, p. 246 no. 803 p 267 
no. 862, p. 273 no. 886.
!) Brandes too seems to have shared this view. See Sewell (Antiquarian Notes in Java, 
Journ. Roy. Asiat. Soc, 1906, p. 423): "There is a statue now in the chamber, but Dr. Bran- 
des thought that it was one that had been removed from outside and placed within at a sub­
sequent period". Sewell had visited Barabu4ur with Brandes and was probably relating a 
conversation with him.
' G0lfcX


--- Page 170 ---
It. will be understood that I make no attempt to decide between the 
various theories regarding the meaning of the unfinished image of the 
chief-stupa. All the same while leaving the question problematical, we 
should take proper notice of it.
It will not be of much use to relate all the different opinions that have 
been given about this statue; a good many have only historic value to 
shew what was thought about it at a certain time x). I shall restrict 
myself to the most, important, that is to say to those, who if the image 
is finally proved to have belonged to the chamber in the chief stupa, 
will be able to give some real explanation about it.
Let us begin with the idea of no less an authority on Buddhist mat­
ters than Kern, who without setting up an actual theory, explains the 
point as follows: “The large central stupa contains an unfinished, it may 
be said an embryonic Buddha, just as the Great Mother, the divine 
Maya, the Magna Dea carried the Bodhisattva in her wombJ’ 2). The 
idea is not further developed but the expression "embryonic” and com­
parison to the Bodhisattva, makes us think that according to this scho­
lar's view, the statue is meant to indicate the future, a sort of promise 
that even when this universe shall pass away, a new Buddha will reveal 
himself so that the continuance of the Creed of Salvation is assured3).
In this way the statue has no actual connection with the preceding 
Buddha’s on the terraces.
The existence of such a connection is a recommendation of Groene- 
veldt’s theory, also a merely-suggested one, in his introduction to the 
Buddhist, statues in the Batavia Museum 4). Taking his argument from 
the Buddhism of Nepal, from which source we draw our knowdedge of 
the Dhyani-Buddha's, he states that there the origin of all existence is 
Adi-Buddha. There is a representation of this being to be found in 
Bhagvanlal5)> standing on a lotus in the shape of a man of very undevel­
oped form. “If this is not accidental”, Groeneveldt continues, ‘'then it has 
a remarkable resemblance to the statue in the central dagoba of Bara- 
budur that is also undeveloped, in such a way that the limbs are indicated 
but not worked out, a subtle manner of shewing the abstract existence of 
this deity. In my opinion there is no doubt that this statue represents l
l) Among such I reckon Leemans’ attempt (p. 461—471) to combine several opinions,foun­
ded partly on imagination.
!) Geschiedenis van bet Buddhisme in Indie 11 (1884) p. 179.
’) Compare Wilsen in Leemans p. 459,
*) Catalogus der Archeologische Verzameling (1887) p. 75.
*) On pi. XXII, 1 of the above quoted work.
f(fl) 
(fil
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE 
X j i—i


--- Page 171 ---
Adi-buddha; when we observe how the bas-reliefs on the walls of the 
galleries in this monument, shew us consecutively scenes of the world 
(the earthly life of £akya) and the various heavens (loka's), ascending 
in a spiritual sense always higher, how along the sides and around the 
top of the sanctuary, the 5 Dhyani-Buddha's are seated in their fixed 
places in the system, nothing could be placed above them but the 
Adi-buddha."
Setting aside the representation in Bhagvanlal, which does not at all 
resemble a Buddha1), while its incompleteness seems to me more in the 
drawing than the conception of the figure, this theory is quite attractive. 
The spiritual ascension is undoubtedly there and can hardly culminate 
in anything lower than a supreme being such as Adi-buddha. It is of 
course in favour of this view that it comes from Nepal, where the system 
of Dhyani-Buddha’s revealed such striking resemblance with that of 
Java. It will not matter much that there is no trace of the term Adi- 
Buddha being known in Java — the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan speaks 
only of an ambek adibuddha, i. e. an adibuddha spirit, with the name of 
m ah am uni v aracin t a mani s am adhi 2) — for this exalted being may na­
turally have been called by another name; Vajradhara for instance as 
we have seen was known in Java and elsewhere is often identified 
with Adi-buddha; as “Lord of Mysteries”, Guhyapati4), lie is of course 
withdrawn from sight.
All this does not of course prove Groeneveldt’s theory to be correct; 
in consequence of the invisibility of what was hidden in the temple 
chamber of the chief-stupa, we might ask whether the “ascension” did 
actually reach that far; besides we know too little of the views held by 
the Javanese Mahayanists to be able to decide if they acknowledged a 
supreme Buddha, an Adi-Buddha in this form, But I see no reason for 
considering Groeneveldt’s view incorrect, allowing of course that the 
unfinished Buddha was really set up in the chief-stupa.
Foucher’s ingenious explanation of the unfinished statue is of quite 
another sort5). Setting aside all apocalyptic explanation, he sets out to 
inquire if the Buddhist iconography in India, which we know was the 
recognised model of the Javanese, may possess a Buddha-type with
J) An Adi-Buddha as Vajradhara, with vajra and bell (the usual representation of Vaj- 
rasattva) is found in Tibetan art; for inst. Mem. Asiat. Soc. Beng. I, 1 (1905) p. 21.
!) Fol. 50a, p, 57 and 105.
•) See for instance Pander, Zeitschr. f. Ethn. 1889 p. 61, Pantheon p. 59, Waddell, La- 
maism p. 130 sq. and the article quoted in note 1.
*) Griinwedel, Mythologie p. 98.
8) Le Buddha inachevft de B6ro-Budur, Bull. Ec. fr, d’Extr. Or. 3 (1903) p. 78—80.
f(f)| 
§L
THE d h yANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE 
RW


--- Page 172 ---
■ ®°*Sx
/vaSfc'vlK'
the same position of the hands and the same peculiarity of being un­
finished. This question is easily answered: there is actually such a 
type and the Buddha we look for is no other than the famous statue of 
£akyamuni on the vajrasana of Mahabodhi, the one made with divine 
help, the authentic image of the Master, near the spot where he attained 
the Buddha-ship. It is certain that this statue represented the Buddha 
at the moment when he called on the earth as witness, therefore in 
bhurnisparya-mudra. Different versions of the making of the image are 
given by Taranatha and HiuenTsiang 1), but they agree in saying that 
it was left unfinished because the divine sculptors were prematurely 
interrupted in their work; according to one, the toes of the right foot, 
the hair and the garment were not finished, according to the other it 
was the part above the right breast. Foucher himself has elsewehere a) 
given a brilliant explanation of these legends, shewing how the parts 
left unfinished, to be completed later on, are just the characteristic 
points of difference between a Buddha-type of the Gandhara school and 
one of the Hindu-Bengalese of the 5tli century, so that may be, the 
story indicates, how an original Gandhara image was conformed to the 
taste and requirements of later times.
For the Barabudur however it is of no importance if the statue was 
in reality incomplete, the main point being that it was generally con­
sidered to be unfinished. It must have been extremely difficult to decide 
this point, for according to Hiuen Tsiang’s description, it stood in a dark 
chamber and was only to be seen properly with the help of a mirror that 
reflected the sun’s rays on to it. The statue at Barabudur would be a 
facsimile of this said-to-be unfinished statue of Mahabodhi in the 
bhumisparya-mudra. This seems the more probable because Mahabodhi 
from the 7th to the 11 th century was the greatest centre of pilgrimage in 
India; the statue was the most famous that existed and therefore its 
copies the most frequently chosen for export, for instance to China 3).
It then becomes quite comprehensible how a more or less faithful copy 
of this statue could be thought holy enough to be enshrined by the 
Javanese architects in the sacred chamber of their great stupa.
This is Foucher’s theory. At first sight it shews a great deal of prob-
') Taranatha, trans. Schiefner (1869) p. 20—22 (» 16 sq.); Hiuen Tsiang, trails. Beal, Si- 
yu-ki I (1884) p. 120—122. Comp, above p. 73.
*) Revue de l’histoire des religions 30 (1892) p. 344—348.
s) The article here-quoted, by Chavannes, Les inscriptions chinoises de Bodh-Gay5, Revue 
de l’histoire des religions 34 (1896) p. 1—58, shews plainly how famous t he Mahabodhi- 
temple wi: h its statue was, but only gives one instance (on. p. 56) of a replica of this statue 
being taken ever to China.
\ X W ^ > J 
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE 
u
l j
'sniffy .• stf& y'


--- Page 173 ---
ability enhanced by its fine and persuasive style of argument. But 
one or two objections must be brought against it. The argument would 
be stronger if there was any possibility that the Barabudur statue was 
made at Mahabodhi and brought over to Java as an object of great 
sanctity. But that is out of the question; the statue is made of the same 
stone as the others and must have been carved on the spot.
How then can it have been such a sacred copy? What other reason 
can have existed for concealing it in the stupa if it did not possess the 
sanctity of a relic transported from the motherland, while on the other 
hand the supposed original at Mahabodhi was accessible to everyone? 
My principal objection however is the following. After the story of the 
statue of the vajrasana being left unfinished, we are told in actual words 
that it was completed later on. Therefore it was looked upon by those 
who saw it in the 7th century etc. not as still unfinished, but as an 
image that had not been entirely completed by its original divine 
sculptors and received the finishing touches from human hands, but was 
for that reason certainly at that time a finished statue.
It is too a fact that all copies known to ns of the Mahabodhi-image are 
quite finished off and without any trace of incompleteness. How then 
can we account for the copy in Java being the only one with this pecu­
liarity, and that so strongly-marked?
If therefore the unfinished statue was really set up as chief image in 
the central-stupa., it is in any case very far from certain how it is to 
be explained. Should it not belong there then we are besieged by all 
sorts of surmises as to what, could have been there. If we judge by the 
state of other stupa’s, such as those examined in India, then our 
conclusion would be this: probably there was nothing placed there but a 
relic-casket, possibly containing some coins or perhaps a small inscrip­
tion. 1 have already discussed these relics in Chapt I where it appears 
that no actual relics were found at Barabudur1). It only remains to 
be told what else was discovered in and near the chief-stupa. First of all 
there is the fragment of a stone image that was, it is true, found on the 
temple ground, thus outside the monument and about 6 Meters from the 
East staircase, but it was lying among all sorts of stones belonging to 
the first clearing out by Cornelius. In mentioning the discovery, Van 
Erp 2) thought it not unlikely this fragment was carried down from the 
temple with these stones. It is the lower part of a figure seated on a lotus-
*) See I page 9 sq.
s) In the (unpublished) report of the work at Barabudur in the third quarter of 1908.
the dhyani-buddha’s and the chief statue


--- Page 174 ---
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA’S AND THE CHIEF STATUE 
u i L /
cushion; only the legs, crossed Indian-fashion, a hand, the left one, laid 
on the lap and hiding an object that Van Erp takes for a gem but is 
not distinct in the photograph; the lotuscushion is a double one of 
the usual form on an oblong pedestal. The stone, very much worn- 
away, is not the ordinary kind but an inferior porous quality. If 
this fragment belongs to Barabudur of course we cannot say; if so, 
then the only possible place for this small-size statue whose pedestal 
is only 84 c.M. long, would be the small chamber above in the chief- 
stupa 1), the floor of which is 120 c.M. in length and breadth; therefore 
the small statue according to its presumable height, would not be out of 
place. There is no place for figures of this small size elsewhere. The 
great question of course is if the fragment really originally belonged to 
the monument and on this point we are absolutely without data. In 
this case we can do nothing more than announce the discovery and 
acknowledge the possibility of Van Erp’s supposition 2), which remains 
no more than a possibility.
Under the floor of the large chamber in the chief-stupa, it is proved 
there were small objects found in 1842, but they were in a place that had 
already been turned-over, a hole filled up with fragments of masonry.
We mentioned already3) that Wilsen speaks of "metal obj ects” without 
further specification, and that Friederich mentions a small Cnvaitic figure 
and several small gold coins, later on he speaks vaguely of “gold obj ects” 4). 
Brumund 5) was told that a small metal "Buddha-image” was found 
and a vase-shaped box with a lid in which were some small silver coins 
of unimportant impress, concave on one side, convex on the other; the 
regent of Magelang could only remember a gold coin. The silver coins 
by their description, must have been the socalled ma-coins which would 
be nothing strange. The "fivaitic” and the. "Buddha’’-image may quite 
well mean the same specimen; every old image in Java is called a ‘ Buddha’ 
by the gossips of the community and on the other hand, in Friederich’s 
day, all figures with extra arms etc. are ascribed to £ivaism. The little 
image in question is very likely to have been a many-armed figure, the 
Buddhist character of which was not understood by Friederich’s in­
formant. In connection with this it is important that according to a
*) For this chamber see architectural part of this monograph.
*) He calls attention to the fact of the fragment being found on the East side and the breach 
in the central stupa being on the same side, also that during the first excavation everything 
found on the East front of the temple was carried down the East stairways.
*) Pag. 161.
*) Tijdschr. Bat, Gen. 19 (1870) p. 416.
*) See p. 99 of Leemans' monograph.
: VT'ii


--- Page 175 ---
report1) concerning three objects found in the same place, a four-armed 
figure is mentioned. These objects were presented by Mr. Heyligers, late 
secretary in Kedu, to the Leyden Museum with the information that 
he had received them himself from the regent of Magelang who said 
they had been dug up "in the hole at the temple of Barabudur” in 1843. 
One of these objects is a large round bronze dish with an upstanding 
edge turned outwards, 48 c.M'. in diameter and ornemented on the bot­
tom. with a leaf-shaped design round a wide vase, it has a serrated bor­
der and is in fact a tray a); the other an iron "kris-Madjapahit's, handle 
and straight blade in one piece, 28.3 c.M. long, rather streaked, the handle 
being a roughly-shaped figure of a man standing, very stivf in design, 
eyes and nose given only with a line 3). Leemans has already noticed 
that such daggers are not worn by the figures on the relief-scenes of the 
monument and therefore this weapon will not have been found on the 
spot mentioned or later got mixed up with the rubbish. The figure is 
described4) as wearing an Amitabha image in its high Qivaltic head­
dress; this, combined with the four-armed shape makes it plain that 
it is an Avalokitegvara. This figure probably had a halo, it is 15.4 
c.M. high, the front pair of hands are described as holding, right, the 
handle of some object that is broken-off, left, the stalk of a lotusflower, 
while the emblems in the second pair of hands are not to be recognised. 
The lower part of the body is clothed in a wide under-dress hanging 
down to the feet and tied round with a sash; it has the upavita as well. 
Although the date of its discovery 1843 is not that of Hartmann’s exam­
ination, it is not improbable that this Avalokitegvara is the Buddha- 
image of Brumund and the Qivaitic one Friederich speaks of. In that 
case all the evidence agrees that it actually came out of the chief-stupa 
and was found in the rubbish below the original floor.
Finally I must mention a discovery in one of the bell-shaped stupa’s 
on the terraces, that was reported to the Batavia Society in 1909 5). In 
stupa no. 7 on the top terrace there was found a small Buddha-image 
and two Chinese coins, while three similar coins were discovered inside 
some of the other stupa’s. The little figure is 12.4 c.M. high, standing 
with its right hand in abhaya-mudra. The lefthand is broken off and 
a small rod, fastened into the back, has probably supported the halo.
l) Leemans p. 98—100.
“) Juynboll, Catalogue p. 213 no. 1842.
*) Catalogue p. 198 no. 1843.
a) Catalogue p. 96 no. 1841.
•) Notulen Bat. Gen. 1909 p. 140 sq.
III 
. : , 
<SL
THE DHYANI-BUDDHA S AND THE CHIEF STATUE 
171


--- Page 176 ---
■ G°^N\
On the bottom it can be seen that it has been fixed on a pedestal. As 
regards proportion and finish it is of inferior make; below the knee it 
has been broken and put together again. It is now in the Museum at 
Batavia1). The oldest of the five coins3) belonged to the Tang-dynasty 
(beginning 618 A.D.), the most recent to the Yang Loh period (AD.
1403..-1425). The three others also date from the period when Barabudur
was already deserted (Hi-Neng, 1068—1078; Kien Tsung 1101—1102; 
Ching Hwo, 1111—1118), by which we see that no evidence as to the 
monument can be drawn from the image At any rate, it does not belong 
to the classical Middle-Javanese art. Besides it was found in a stupa that 
was almost entirely a ruin, and had been ransacked by treasure-seekers 
like so many others. There is evidence enough of their sacrilegious 
deeds, nor did they hesitate to break off a dome, drag the image out 
of its place and dig a hole sometimes several feet deep.
However with some of these domes that had remained intact, Van 
Erp was able to prove that they contained nothing. The bell-shaped 
stupa's had therefore no other significance than that of being details in 
the monumental design, and were not used for preserving treasure or 
ashes of the dead or perhaps both. Small monuments erected for this 
purpose are not missing at Barabudur and were found at the foot of 
the hill3); here in the pure air of the high terraces, round the most 
sacred precincts of the stupa, was no place for the treasures or the 
remains of earthly beings.
>) Notulen U p. CVI no. S96e, Inv. 5000.
*) The identification was made by Mr. Moquette, keeper of the Numismatic Collection at 
Batavia, Not. 1.1. p. 141.
’) See I p. 11.
/fU —<V\ 
^
. 
Q
i
the dhyani-euddha’s and the chief statue 
J


--- Page 177 ---
III 
<SL
CHAPTER XI
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE
After describing in regular sequence what the Barabudur has to 
shew us in its galleries, in its niches and on its terraces, let us now con­
template it as a whole and try to form some idea of what this monu­
ment signifies as a creation of the Hindu-Javanese community, espe­
cially as a work of art. Later on we shall consider what it has to teach us 
* as an expression of religious faith.
The architectural conception of the building, the masterly manner 
in which the designer of this sanctuary has embodied the idea of the stupa 
and retained its type, succeeding nevertheless in giving it new and 
wonderful characteristics while leaving scope for the system of his reli­
gious creed to rise to such full and sublime expression; all this belongs 
to the architectural part of this monograph and need not be intro­
duced here. Everything more directly concerning the decoration must 
also be treated of as belonging to the architecture and will be found in 
the other volume. Here, we need only deal with its plastic forms.
In examining these, I must refer to my remarks here above about the 
way in which the artists worked when covering the galleries and balus­
trades with series after series of reliefs. Let me first recall what I said 
in the introduction to the reliefs that are filled up with jataka’s and 
avadana’s 1), especially in reference to Toucher's opinions; remarks 
there used to explain how the identification of the edifying tales illus­
trated by the reliefs, is hindered by the idiosyncrasies of the sculptors’ 
way of working. To begin with, the enormous extent of the space avail­
able for reliefs made it utterly impossible to depict only the striking 
or picturesque episodes of their stories; the events that the pilgrims 
would understand at once and from which they could see directly which *)
*) Vol. 1 p. 235 and foil.
' G<W\


--- Page 178 ---
\ * i S 74-j 
. 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
1
of the sacred tales they knew so well was set before their eyes. Pictures 
of this kind, the few there are, form but a very small part of the great 
mass of meaningless scenes, receptions, audiences, conversations and the. 
like, which is quite comprehensible, because the space had to be filled; 
therefore every bit of the tale that would form a scene was made use of, 
whether it assisted the course of the story or not. “The few there are”
I repeat, for it is remarkable that really striking scenes appear far less 
often than might be expected; and in cases where the text followed 
is known to us and we can keep watch on the sculptors, it often strikes 
us that far from representing the meaningless scenes only when obliged, 
they evidently prefer them and spin them out as much as possible on 
purpose; while on the other hand they pass over the chance of depic­
ting some dramatic incident that seizes the attention. As regards tech­
nical skill, it is very unlikely that this can be ascribed to their inability 
to represent dramatic scenes Not only other monuments (for inst, the 
Ramayana reliefsl) of Prambanan) shew plainly enough how skillful 
the Hindu-Javanese artists could be in depicting striking episodes, 
but on Rarabudur itself we can find examples to prove this, for instance 
on the buried base. There must be some other reason and that we must 
look for in their intention to preserve the solemn character of the sanct­
uary. The believer who literally and figuratively was led upwards, 
must not be interrupted in his pious contemplation by the sight of 
scenes that could in any way excite the senses. That was of course 
essential; to attain the highest state of bliss, in whatever form it might 
be conceived, as Nirvana, as future Buddha-hood, or as being absorbed 
into the Spirit of the Universe, the first condition in every kind of 
Buddhism, was the subjugation of the senses; therefore the great sanct­
uary, that in a way was to demonstrate the tenets of the Creed of 
Salvation, must also cooperate in all' details of its structure to achieve 
that aim. Thus it became necessary to avoid everything that might 
rouse thoughts of unholy deeds of violence, and so we get no sight of 
Ksantivadin’s mutilation or the murder of Rudrayana, however im­
portant these events were to the story in which they happened. For 
the same reason also there is no trace whatever to be found of anything 
indecent, not even where it obviously belongs, as in the well-known 
scene of £akyamuni awaking in the women's apartment on the night 
before the Great Departure. In arranging the manner in which the 
various texts were to be depicted, it was evidently carefully decided
’) This series is specially treated of by Dr. W. F. Stutterheim, Ramalegenden und Rama- 
reliefs in Indonesien (1924).
/Ctf* • G<w\


--- Page 179 ---
K^JzkJsJ 
HINDU-JAYANESE ART AND CULTURE 
1 ^ 1 j
what should be brought into the picture and what should be rejected as 
unfit for representation.
If this principle was followed — and that such was the case is plainly 
shewn by the omission of episodes so important as those mentioned 
above, an omission that surely cannot be ascribed only to the fancy of 
the sculptor, but to some deliberate intention — then we can understand 
how the veto was extended to what seems to us an exaggeration of 
censure, so that not only exciting or unedifying scenes were deleted but 
much that might have been quite decorously entertaining. The result 
is a superfluity of very dull episodes, the space that had to be filled was 
immense, all the too-exciting incidents had to be left out, and this quite 
accounts for the innumerable scenes of the same kind of receptions and 
monotonous conversations. We must not reproach the designers of the 
relief-decoration for this; their chief aim was not to illustrate some or 
other text as clearly and dramatically as possible, but to lead the pious 
beholder into the contemplative and serene state of mind that was the 
condition required for preparing him to receive the Creed of Salvation. 
The dear course of the story might be, actually must be, sacrificed to 
the claims of religion.
This in no way disagrees with the fact that one of the relief-series 
does not conform to this principle. We remember that they did not 
hesitate to depict some rather sensational episodes on the buried base 
of the temple, as well as the elaborate execution of the torments- of 
hell and the crimes which lead to its punishments; we there saw a 
graveyard with skeletons and bones, attacks with a drawn sword, victims 
with a rope round their neck and such like horrors. Here indeed the in­
tention was quite different. This series on the outside of the real sanct­
uary illustrates the misery of life’s circle in all its good and evil deeds, 
rewards and punishments; therefore to impress the beholder’s mind 
effectively with the hopeless and disgusting repetition of existence, the 
representations of all its horrors could not be overlooked as a drastic 
means of preparing his mind for the influence of higher thought.
But when the beholder had completed the circuit of the base, had 
received the desired impression and was ready to mount the steps 
to the galleries, filled with disgust for earthly life and longing for sal­
vation from it, there was no more need for such emotional scenes, 
nothing was wanted but the peaceful sense of calmness and meditation 
suitable for those who seek the way of salvation. Therefore on the 
galleries themselves, even when the course of the story makes it una­
voidable, any representation for instance of fighting or hell is merely
' GokJx


--- Page 180 ---
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
O
l j
indicated, just enough to make it plain, without going into details, 
that either a hell or a fight is intended. It is also remarkable how in the 
reliefs round the base where details are intentionally not neglected, the 
Buddhist spirit is still active and restrains the realism even of the most 
horrid and bloody scenes, preventing the sculptors from giving any 
more than the exact amount of influence needed to produce the moral 
effect required, This singularity is the more noticeable because else­
where the artists enjoy adding slight details to the outlines given by the 
text, so as to enliven the scene and make it more natural.
This peculiarity in the design of the separate reliefs is also due to 
their oblong shape, in some series the length being three times that of 
the height or even more. The result is that in many cases the chief inci­
dent was obliged to be added to, so as to complete the artistic balance 
of the design -1). That accounts to begin with for the large groups of 
followers, necessary in the case of royal or very eminent persons, but also 
put in on all sorts of occasions where they were not obliged to appear. 
Their presence is not of the least importance to the story; they are only 
used to enhance the beauty of the scene. In the same way the mise- 
en-scene is often more elaborate than is necessary or even advisible for 
tlie understanding of it; a woodland or mountain scene for instance, in 
which there are only a few actors, is often crowded, up with rocks and 
trees enlivened with various animals, actually filled in with detail to 
such an extent that it is sometimes difficult to make out whether it is an 
animal story with a slight human interest, or a drama of human life 
with an episode that takes place in a wooded landscape.
This characteristic appears everywhere, in the private apartment or 
the hall of audience, on land or water, it always seems as if the acces­
sories predominate; they often come so much to the front and encroach 
on the real action of the scene that they cannot be regarded any more 
as details.
So as already remarked, the sculptors were more or less condemned 
to this manner of work by the great space that had to be filled in on each 
relief, \ et this does not explain everything. They have actually done 
more than fill up the available space, and given more than if their only 
aim was to use up the so-many inches of surface that remained after 
the chief persons had been finished off, by putting in suitable surroun­
dings.
Even looked at from this point of view, they have still executed an
*) With regard to the rythmic composition of the Barabutfur-reliefs see With, Tava (1920) 
p. 36—-6>6.
X-5*' Goix


--- Page 181 ---
enormous amount of unnecessary work, quite superfluous even if they 
were naturally inclined to dislike a vacuum, which, judging by the 
many unworked spaces and other things, was not the case. The open 
places here and there, could have been filled up with a reception-pavil­
ion, wooded landscape and suchlike; but it was not necessary to put 
jars and boxes under the seats of the pavilion, or when a tree was placed 
as decoration in the landscape, to add birds among the branches. It is 
plain that besides the need for filling in the large spaces left open in 
panels of too great a size, these artists evidently loved to spin out and 
elaborate the details of their scenes. We can see this even where neither 
the space left over nor the episode being handled, requires it, how eagerly 
they seize on any chance of putting in clever touches; a separate little 
scene added to the chief incident, the graceful arrangement of secondary 
figures, a suggestive bit of still-life, all executed with artistic care. It 
is such a typical feature of this art that we may well wonder if the 
wide shape of the panels intended for reliefs may not be as much the 
origin as the result of the peculiar design of the scenes. Maybe the 
shape of these panels was purposely planned of such length to shew 
Oif the sculptors skill at this kind of thing. The fact of course 
remains that the size of the reliefs depended first of all on the dimension 
of the galleries and the plan of the whole stupa, but that would 
not prevent the division of the space into panels of a different shape; 
while on the other hand we can easily imagine that the designers of 
the monument might want to give scope to what was quite evidently 
a special talent and hobby with the artists who were to carry out the 
work.
Even when the shape of the reliefs had been fixed by the design of 
th e monument, there was still a way of filling them up without over­
loading them with details. In accordance with a traditional custom of 
Indian art, more than one episode could have been put on the same 
relief. It is quite comprehensible that this was only occasionally done: 
the tales are often so long-drawn out that there is plainly more incli­
nation to spread one episode over several reliefs than to condense the 
material, by which some panels would have been crowded up with a 
whole story and most likely not leave anything for the remaining ones.
Not that Hindu-Javanese art altogether rejected whole-story reliefs; 
for instance at Mendut, Barabudur’s contemporary, we find the well- 
known story of the tortoise and the geese so depicted that on the same 
relief we see the tortoise being carried through the air on a pole and just 
below, on the ground, being killed by his captors. But examples of such
Barabutjur II
HI N DU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
|t / 
J


--- Page 182 ---
composition are not common; from this we might perhaps conclude that 
the evolution of Hindu-Javanese art from that of the continent took 
place at a period when the latter had already, though perhaps not quite 
entirely, discarded the old-fashioned style. In Java we no longer find 
the peculiarity of the one figure acting two parts on the same panel and 
having to be reckoned as belonging to both episodes; sometimes two or 
more episodes are put on one relief, but they can always be distinguished 
from one another and no figures are common to both. At Mendut we 
i!)wl two episodes one above the other, at Barabudur they are always 
placed side by side, which is obviously due to the shape of the reliefs. 
Besides, as noticed, the cases are rare on this temple and then the epi­
sodes are so carefully separated from each other in all parts and details 
that no impression of combination is left and they stand next to each 
other quite separate scenes, that require only the frame of ornement that 
separates other reliefs, to make them distinct pictures.
Another peculiai ity of the figures on the reliefs has been mentioned 
already in chapt. IV as one of the factors that increase the difficulty of 
identifying the reliefs; i.e. the want of individuality in the actors. The 
sculptors make use only of representation types, they distinctly portray, 
Aith fixed attributes, a king, a brahman, a monk or a hermit but 
till distinction between individuals of the same type is wanting, and 
it is saying a good deal if they sometimes express an emotion in their 
attitude or gesture, 1 he number of types is always more or less restricted 
and often have to serve for several kinds of people; thus a god has the 
same appearance as a king; he usually has a halo behind his head, but 
when the king who figures as the hero of some sacred tale is a Bodhi- 
sattva as well, he can also wear this distinction. This gives every chance 
for mistakes, but even when the actual types are kept distinct, there is 
the difficulty that if two kings or monks etc. appear in the story, not the 
ica&i attempt is made to distinguish one individual from another.
e rni§bt think that if it was not possible to make individual per­
sons of them, the sculptor might have managed, even with the simi- 
ariiy of royal costume, to distinghuish them bij giving some detail of 
dress to one of the kings and leaving the other without it. But this has 
not been done anywhere. The sculptors do make some variation in the 
style of figures belonging to the same type, so that we get the king 
sometimes with a wide and sometimes with a narrow band across the 
breast and the shape of the tiara or details in the ornements of the 
dress often vary a good deal, but there is never the least attempt made 
m the same tale, to introduce one special characteristic into the dress
b a r a b u d u k a s a m o n u m e n t OF 
J
l j


--- Page 183 ---
|( I ) | 
§ L
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
l / /
of any one individual of the general type. This very simple means of 
distinction, as useful to the pious worshipper of olden times who con­
templated these stories, as for archaeologists of the present day is 
absolutely ignored. The sculptors in depicting their figures have done 
literally nothing more than represent the type required; within that 
type they put in as much variety as they wanted by varying the details, 
but beyond that they never tried to distinguish one person from another 
either in features or stature, not even by the slightest touch of differ­
ence in dress or anything of that sort. We might think these sculptors 
were incapable of putting any personal trait into a figure. But the 
splendid portraits of the Hindu-Javanese kings in the form of gods 
proves the contrary, or if another instance is wanted besides that of 
East Java, there is the striking head of a monk at Tjandi Sewu :1) in 
Middle Java. It may be true that it is quite another thing for a clever 
artist to make a likeness of an individual head, than when single persons 
must be characterized in an endless series of reliefs, but it must be 
acknowledged that the Hindu-Javanese if they wanted were quite able 
to make a portrait. That they have done nothing of the kind here makes 
us suppose they considered, it quite unnecessary to distinguish clearly 
their persons, not even by the obvious and technically quite easy 
means of varying some detail in their dress.
Still more strange it is that where the same persons or things appear 
in the same tale, there is no trace whatever of consistency.
In explaining the reliefs we found remarkable instances of this, al­
most incredible to Western ideas. The most evident were of course 
those for which we possess the text followed and could therefore be 
quite sure what episode was represented. Repeatedly, in fact as a rule, 
we found the same person on two consecutive reliefs looking quite diffe­
rent, that is to say the type was preserved, the king was always a king, 
the hermit a hermit etc., but the details were totally dissimilar; the tiara 
for instance though still high as ceremonial dress required, was more 
pointed or broader or differently adorned, the scarf across the breast 
was left out, ornements looked different and so on. In short, the figures 
were often not a bit like each other, only that they were both kings; and 
this occurred in cases where the text plainly shewed that it was exactly 
the same person; sometimes the episodes followed so closely as to leave 
no time for him to have changed his costume in between. There is an 
instance of a man who managed to grow a beard during the course of a *)
*) Comp, description on photo of this head in Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 54 (1912) p. 129— 134.
/ s # * - ' e° ^ X


--- Page 184 ---
conversation! It is not only secondary personages who were treated in 
this manner, but the chief actors as well whom we expect first of all 
to see properly attended to; they are always executed with care and 
devotion, not the least trifle in the details was slurred over, only there 
is not the least sign of any attempt to make the figure look like the same 
person on the preceding relief. This is most noticeable with the royal 
personages who give the most opportunity for variation in dress and 
accessories, but we can find it in all the types; a hermit for instance is 
given a wider or narrower headband, larger or smaller loops in the hair 
and even with the monk, whose shaven head and garment was pres­
cribed by canonical rule, the artists were able to put in touches of 
variety, as we can see by the Lalitavistara reliefs. Everywhere in then- 
work we can notice how eager the sculptors were to vary and elaborate 
the details, while they never troubled to preserve any individuality in 
their figures.
With the figures of less importance to the course of the story they 
took still more licence and it is quite common to find some person­
age attended by a suite of particular sort and number on one relief, 
who in the very next scene appear quite different in appearance and 
are more or fewer in number. The mise-en-scene is treated in the same 
way. A conversation begins in a pavilion, but when the next scene de­
picts a later phase of the same discourse, the building has disappeared. 
The landscape in a tale changes its aspect in the same way. All this sort 
of thing might be ascribed to indifference or carelessness on the sculp­
tors’ part but it gets worse when the surroundings have some special 
significance for the incidents in the story or if some object in the scene 
calls for particular attention because of what the text says about it.
To give an example: a separate scene is given to the incident where $a- 
gara's daughter offers a seat to £akyamuni; this seat is of course im­
portant to the story, therefore it looks very queer when the next scene 
shews us the future Buddha sitting on quite another kind of seat. The 
most flagrant example is surely the throne of Bodhimanda and the 
Bodhi-tree that spreads its branches above it, the most sacred spot 
where Qakyainum attained the Buddha-ship; not even this has escaped 
their careless manner of execution, at least according to our way of think­
ing. In the scenes that follow, shewing the consecutive phases of the 
Sambodhi with all fulness of detail, the sculptors have not hesitated to 
alter both tree and seat just as they pleased. Even the personality of the 
Master is not duly preserved nor that of the Bodhisattva’s who are the 
chief figures on the upper galleries; at the first glance we notice the
(? ( X J 
vfil
\*A § § 3 8 0 / 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
r ) l j
fl 
IS 
,


--- Page 185 ---
Va M ' J ■j 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
o
L
A''—
A ^ / . f l i ^ / 
: . 
. 
. V, "■
variation in the shape of the usrusa and on closer examination there 
are more slight deviations, for instance as to the proportion, between 
one figure of Qakyamuni and the other as he developes into a Buddha.
It is not enough to dismiss the subject by ascribing all this to care­
lessness. There is too much consistency in this "carelessness", and we 
might reasonably expect that such a highly important episode as the 
attainment of the Highest Wisdom by the historic Buddha would have 
been executed with the care that the subject demands. Instead of that, 
the defect is so common that it begins to look like an intentional feature. 
We begin to inquire if these variations, incomprehensible to us, might 
not be put in on purpose and the artists have made a point of not allow­
ing these same persons and things to look the same in the same circum ­
stances. If that is so, then we must certainly seek some other motive 
than the desire to introduce variety at any cost into a series of scenes 
which were likely to become monotonous and inartistic. The artistic 
value of a religious monument like Barabudur can not have been the 
principal aim its founders had in view, and if in the many series of reliefs, 
as we noticed, they sacrificed the clearness of the story to the religious 
elements in the scene, it would be futile to imagine that only for the 
sake of improving their work by adding variety, they should have exe­
cuted the most sacred episodes so carelessly. On the contrary, if we ac­
cept the variations as being intentional, their reason must have been to 
create a religious state of mind or emotion and in agreement with what 
we shall find out in chapt XIII about the creed this temple embodies, it 
becomes clear that the impression the beholder is intended to receive, may 
have been the instability of all earthly things. Whatever the eye looked 
upon, it was only appearance, the beholder thinks what he sees is real, 
but it is not so, for here there is no reality; and so the form in which 
being is embodied is of little worth. The appearance of these chief per­
sons, even that (pakyamuni should be as he is here represented, does not 
matter very much, because he may just as well look like the figure on 
the next relief; form has no meaning, it is only a makeshift to bring 
home to the believer the eternal truths that are offered to him; it is an 
ineffective expedient and its unreliability must be kept before the eyes of 
the worshipper. Looked at in this way the variation in form of the "same” 
person or thing, takes on a deeper meaning and becomes at last no less 
than a symbol of the £unyatavada!
But there is another explanation of which I have already suggested 
the possibility, at various places, when the characteristic just discussed 
shewed itself in a very remarkable manner. What I mean is that after


--- Page 186 ---
(fiT
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
L a L J
all it may be nothing but the natural result of the peculiar way in 
which the Barabudur sculptors carried out their work. It stands to rea­
son that the sculptors were not just set down in front of the smooth 
blocks of stone text in hand, and then left to do as they liked, to choose 
their own subject, the number of panels required for it, and their own 
way of depicting it. Quite the contrary, there must have been a plan for 
the long rows, by which the material was divided among the number of 
available reliefs; otherwise it is inconceivable that for instance, the Lalita- 
vistara could have been exactly fitted into the 120 panels, allotted to 
it. We must therefore suppose that there was a fixed plan according to 
which certain episodes were apportioned to certain reliefs. Next came the 
execution; the enormous number of reliefs and the painstaking manner in 
which they have been executed, piece by piece, makes it probable that 
no small number of sculptors were employed. Without debating whether 
the work was carried on in several galleries at the same time or if they 
were executed one by one, there is so much skill and labour lavished on 
each separate series, that it naturally appears to be the work of several 
craftsmen. It is a matter of course that they could not all work together 
on one relief, but must each have had his appointed place to begin1). 
There could be no objection to that ; according to the existing plan, they 
received instructions everytime what episode to portray, and most pro­
bably, to avoid mistakes, a word or two was cut in the stone at the 
top of the panels to indicate what the subject of the relief was to be; 
this inscription was intended to he obliterated when the scene was 
finished and it had served its purpose. Such was the obvious explanation 
of the short inscriptions found above a number of the reliefs round the 
buried base of the monument2). In this way they could make sure that 
the subject of each panel and the connection of the various sculptors’ 
work, would fit in correctly. It was quite another thing with the details.
It is hardly credible that the sculptors received such precise instructions 
for each relief, that every possible trifle of dress or surroundings was 
prescribed.
So there was the possibility, almost the certainty, that each artist
») It would not be impossible I believe judging by some details in the craftsmanship of 
the reliefs, to point out the places where each new sculptor took up the work. The photos are 
not sufficient to prove this; at the monument itself I think I have succeeled in recognising the 
portions in which the rows of reliefs were divided. All in regular sections (on the chief walls) 
of from four to six reliefs; also it can be seen on the chief wall of the first gallery th at the 
portions in the top and bottom row have been executed by the same hand.
*) See I p. S5.


--- Page 187 ---
would treat these details in a different way to the others. The sculptors 
could of course be made familiar with the stories and it was possible to give 
an exact description of each relief, but it could never be made so accu­
rate as to leave no point open to variation. The founders must have 
been quite as well aware of that as we are. Complete unity of conception 
among all those at work on such rows of more than a hundred scenes, 
was practically unattainable. The designer's of the relief-decoration 
must have restricted themselves to describing the chief episode, relying 
on the general knowledge of the traditional types for the accuracy of 
the scene as a whole.
They would thus give directions that on such a relief, a conversation 
bet ween a king and a hermit was to be depicted, and then say what kind 
of a retinue or a building there must be, or the apartment or' the land­
scape in Which the interview must take place; but whether the king's 
tiara was to be high or wide, or the hermits coiffure must be done up in 
large or smaller loops and that kind of thing was left to the taste and 
fancy of the sculptor. That such was their manner of work and the art­
ists of the separate reliefs were only bound by instructions for a few 
chief points and left almost entirely free as regard the details, I have 
repeatedly been able to demonstrate in describing the reliefs. If this was 
the way of working, the variation in the details of the same persons and 
things, is quite accounted for. As a natural consequence the panels given 
to one sculptor could keep the same character in the details; but it 
would have been far more deceptive if these for the time recognisable 
figures, were suddenly to change their aspect where sculptor A’s work 
joined on to that of B. It would be better to do away with consistency 
altogether even in the scenes that were executed by the same A or B.
In this way it became practically impossible to find any uniformity in 
the accessories and so that would lead to the decision for a more or less 
systematic variation, while the dogma of the unreality of all forms of 
appearance will have helped to reconcile the community to the confusion 
and unaccountable variations that seem so strange to us. Of course we 
can have no idea how this all came about and how they thought about it, 
the above argument is no more than conjecture; but judging by the 
reliefs themselves, we can be pretty sure that whatever their reason was, 
the designers controlled no more than the general outlines of the chain 
of episodes and left the sculptors to cany out the details in their own 
way.
I have already mentioned that as a matter of course tiie subject would 
be selected beforehand and its material apportioned to the reliefs; with
HINDU JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
%


--- Page 188 ---
the long series of reliefs we must certainly consider that instruction for 
the subject of the scene was given on each successive relief.
Only in those cases where a great number of small separate tales had 
to be arranged on a relief-series consisting of many small panels, there 
seems to have been another plan followed. Separate tales, that is only 
in the sense of each being a story in itself, for as we had every oppor­
tunity of noticing, they were already collected together in one or 
more texts before they came to be illustrated on Rarabuclur; in the 
series of jataka’s and avadana’s to which I refer, the artists were only 
following an existing collection, they did not make a new anthology. 
We are quite ignorant of how these collections were put together, there­
fore we are not able to follow the way in which they are di vided over the 
available space; there may have been a few very large or several smaller 
ones. In the case of large panels such as there are on the chief wall of 
the first gallery, bottom row, the same as the Lalitavistara ones above, 
we can make sure that the subject for each scene was carefully fixed 
before the sculptors set to work; here the stories often take up many 
reliefs, sometimes twenty or more. It was different on the balustrades, 
especially the top row of the first gallery where a large number of stories 
were put on to a few reliefs in such a way that about one hundred ja­
taka’s were fitted into 372 panels, larger and smaller ones. There is a 
noticeable inequality in the treatment of these tales, some are squeezed 
into one relief, though the story as we know it, could easily have fur­
nished subjects for several other scenes; others on the contrary are un­
reasonably spun out without in the least improving it. This is also in my 
opinion to be accounted for by the sculptors’ manner of working. Here 
the subjects of all the 372 reliefs have not been arranged beforehand 
scene by scene, but after deciding which text was to be depicted in that 
series, the subject as well as the space was divided into equal parts, for 
each of which one (or more) of the artists was appointed so that each 
had to fill a certain number of reliefs with a certain number of tales.
In such a way we can easily understand how it might happen that one 
of them had suddenly nearly completed his subject with room to spare 
and began to spin out the last tales, while another had used up most of his 
panels and had to squeeze the remaining stories into one or two reliefs each.
Whether this explanation is the right one or not, at any rate the fact 
remains clear that inequality of treatment is found only in these series 
of short stories, reaching over a great number of reliefs where this 
manner of working was obviously the most practical; in contrast to 
the long series representing a connected text.
((( f J 
(fiT
b a k a b u d u r a s a m o n u m e n t OF 
k X L j


--- Page 189 ---
Should ray conclusion be correct that judging by the appearance of 
the reliefs in general, the artists who executed them only received strict 
Instructions for the chief points in the scene, but were left entirely free 
as regards the details, then this fact is of importance in another way. The 
sculptors although undoubtedly instructed as to the outlines of the stor­
ies, are not likely to have had the text itself in hand to which they could 
refer. It was the designer, or designers of the monument as a whole, 
who selected and divided the texts; the sculptors would have to go by 
the more or less elaborate instructions about what was to appear on 
each relief.
If this was not so and we had to suppose that every craftsman worked 
at his panel with the text beside him it would follow that we must 
suppose these sculptors to be Sanskrit scholars, therefore all or nearly 
all of them, natives of India. These texts, at least those that have 
been identified, are all original Sanskrit texts; no trace has been dis­
covered of any Javanese translations or adaptations. Besides it is quite 
natural that the texts to be depicted on a sanctuary like Barabuclur 
would be taken straight from the canonical sacred scriptures in the 
original language. That Buddhist Sanskrit with its complicated con­
struction and elaborate imagery should be used to assist the sculptors 
in their work, implies a degree of culture in the native artists at the 
Middle-Javanese period which cannot be ascribed to them. The Bara- 
budur would then owe its edifying decoration to craftsmen from In­
dia and the art of its reliefs would not be a Hindu-Javanese product, 
but really Indian grown on Javanese soil. However such has not been 
the way. The man of genius who designed the sanctuary, he it was, im­
bued with the text and tenets of the Mahayanistic creed that is here set 
forth, who selected what he thought suitable for the design of the relief- 
decoration ; an exalted spirit whose learning must have been as great as 
his religious zeal. It is equally conceivable that this genius came to Java 
from India as that he was a Javan; in either case he must have 
been a very remarkable figure, distinguished far above his contem­
poraries; it would be foolish to judge him by the standard of an average 
Hindu-Javanese. The sculptors on the contrary, however gifted they 
were and certainly worthy of the name of artist, should be judged by 
this standard and cannot be regarded as anything but skilled craftsmen 
if only on account of their number; we must not fail to inquire what 
humanly speaking, can be expected from them.
If they were not competent to consult the Buddhist Sanskrit text 
for themselves and were guided in their work by precise instructions for
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
l S
^


--- Page 190 ---
t(f|| 
vfiT
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF
each scene, then there is no objection to supposing that 1 
^ artists
were recruited from Java and were Hindu-Javanese.
In my opinion, the short inscriptions that have remained on the 
buried base also furnish evidence to support this supposition, for they 
are clearly instructions to the sculptors ; Sanskrit words probably taken 
from the text, but in Kawi writing. This script is only accounted for 
if it was intended for native craftsmen. Hindu artists would naturally 
have used their own script for the instructions that were only intended 
for these who were working on the reliefs. The use of native Javanese 
characters shews that the sculptors who carried out the carving must 
have been natives. The language being Sanskrit and not the so-called 
Old-Javanese, is no objection. The Hindu-Javanese language contains 
many Sanskrit words, in particular of course those referring to things 
and ideas belonging to the culture introduced by the Hindu’s and which 
are foreign to the original Malay-Polynesian element. All Buddhist ex­
pressions of course belong to this; for most of them probably no other 
word but the Sanskrit one was ever used. Instructions like those on the 
buried base were therefore surely in many cases the only possible way 
to make the meaning clear; they were sure to be comprehensible to the 
educated Hindn-Javanese, and it would seem to be the easiest way to 
take them from the text that was to be illustrated. We might even in­
quire if these words are exclusively "Sanskrit” and could not equally be 
reckoned as “words borrowed from the Sanskrit in the new Hindu-Java­
nese language”. That they were intended for native workmen is also 
to be proved by the fact that unlike the Sanskrit, but agreeing with 
the custom of the Kawi-language, the terminations of the declensions, 
almost without exception, are left out.
But the most convincing proof that the art of Barabudur was not a 
foreign import but a product of Java itself, is its pure Hindu-Javanese 
type both as to form and character. This of course does not mean to 
deny that Hindu-Javanese art as a whole, including that of Barabudur, 
found its origin and being in India, but it stands in Java as a separate 
unit that combines the originial Indian elements with Javanese char­
acteristics in a masterly manner.
I shall pass over the question as to how far these characteristics must 
be attributed to the former inhabitants of this island or to some other 
source, and restrict myself to stating that what we call Hindu-Javanese 
art is not a Hindu-art in Java even though the possibility exists of it 
having developed therefrom; it is a type found in this form only in 
Java, an expression of art composed of foreign and native elements, in
xS* ■ G°Sx


--- Page 191 ---
which the Javanese element gradually becomes more important. In this 
Hindu-Javanese art Barabudur occupies a special place, but not such, 
that what is found on this monument must be separated from that art 
as a whole and reckoned as of different nature. Let me express more 
definitely what I mean: Barabudur is without doubt an extraordinary 
monument; in its unusual form, its majestic conception, the vast 
quantity of subjects represented on its reliefs; in fact in every respect 
it is unique. This inclines us to begin with, to expect something quite 
extraordinary in the conception and execution of its art and prevents 
us from sufficiently keeping in mind that from the typically Indian un- 
Javanese character of the texts illustrated on the reliefs, nothing follows 
as regards the manner in which these texts were executed.
When we consider the Barabudur sculptures by themselves, there is 
no reason to doubt that they agree entirely with the other Hindu-Java­
nese statues and reliefs of the Middle-Javanese period. We find every­
where the same method and the same rules. They are essentially Indian 
in so far placing the chief point not in the beauty of form but in the 
spirit they endeavour to.represent by means of these forms, thus Hindu- 
Javanese art appeals more to feeling and imagination than to the intellect 
and to be properly appreciated, should be felt rather than understood.
Its aim is to awaken some special state of mind and way of thought; 
discernment or comprehension is not demanded except as a means of 
helping towards its ulterior aim. The evident neglect of anatomical detail 
probably belongs to this old-Indian patrimony as well as several other 
technical peculiarities. Yet in what we must ascribe to the original Indian 
art and to its own Javanese quality, the Hindu-Javanese art of Middle- 
Java everywhere retains its own character; in its single statues and the 
design of its reliefs, the chief figures and their attitudes, the living and li­
feless secondary persons, the want of perspective apparent in the arrange­
ment of the figures among the trees and buildings and the consequent 
disproportion in things on the same relief; but on the other hand the 
extraordinary naturalness in the grouping; the loving care expended on all 
details with a touch of reality and humor in all sorts of unimportant 
trifles. It is just this last quality, the addition of a few touches not ordered 
by the text, that does so much to give life and interest to the scene, like 
the little groups of animals in a forest, the decoration of the pendapa’s 
and pleasurehouses; these are the signs by which we learn to know the 
sculptor himself, who when not tied to instructions or canonical rules, 
shews his personality in the accessories. What impresses us still more 
and what could never have been achieved by rules or regulations, is the
(f( g)}j 
(fij
W
S W
 ■ 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
m F ^


--- Page 192 ---
devotion which permeates everything in the sculptors* work; over and 
over again we see unmista kable signs that reveal the spirit of the art­
ists and shew this was far more than only the performance of an allotted 
task.
This is true at the same time of all Hindu-Javanese art., though more 
apparent here or there, and more convincing the more skilled the sculp­
tor may be, not only at Barabudur; from this point of view it is really 
absurd to consider the "Barabudur art” as something apart; a Barabu­
dur art does not exist, there is only Hindu-Javanese art in general and in 
that Barabudur figures equally with Prambanan and so many other 
monuments. May be we shall always place Barabudur at the top of the 
list as the finest exponent thereof ; but there is no warrantable diffe­
rence.
However.... even when the evidence before us shews that Barabu­
dur represents nothing more than ordinary Middle-Javanese art, we are 
still aware that this great stupa possesses a wonderful individual quality 
not to be found elsewhere. The Dhyani-Buddha of Barabudur can be 
recognised at once among all other Javanese Buddha statues, the same 
with the reliefs from this sanctuary, wherever they might be placed. No 
one with any knowledge of Hindu-Javanese art, will deny this fact, 
but the reason of it is not easy to discover. When we come to analyse 
this art, it is obvious that every peculiarity we find, does not exclusively 
belong to Barabudur, but also appears in the rest of the Middle-Javanese 
art even if perhaps less evident or distinct.
Nor is there any superiority in the execution of the sculpture; the re­
liefs at Prambanan for instance, in their continual series most suitable 
for comparison with Barabudur, are also the creation of a masterhand 
and in some respects can boast of more delicacy and greater skill.
In my opinion the striking quality in the Barabudur sculptures is 
not to be explained by any evident quality in the workmanship or artis­
tic conception. It is the spirit that permeates it all, and ennobles every­
thing in some indefinable manner, a feeling of devotion, the Buddhist 
"bhakti”.
I do not mean by this that there is a special Buddhist]avanese art. Apart 
from the question, whether in the historic evolution of what we know as 
Hindu-Javanese art, distinct Buddhist elements were at work — which 
is not improbable — this art when it comes to our knowledge has an 
individual form which finds expression equally on Brahmanistic and on 
Buddhist monuments. This characteristic, which is possibly connected 
with the well-known syncretism in the religious tenets of the two great
(i( J O 
VfiT
VA §1! 8 9 / 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
T j JL j
j $ y 
. '*■ 
■•.■.' /‘l/yt’f
' f
, :r '


--- Page 193 ---
creeds established in Java, ^ivaism and Buddhism, need not be further 
discussed; I shall only allude to cases such as the guardians of the quarters 
round the £iva temple of Prambanan who have the appearance of Bodhi- 
sattva’s and were long thought to be such, and call special attention 
to the fact that it is impossible to say of any temple in Java from which 
the statues of the gods have disappeared, which creed it belonged to; 
neither the design of the building nor the decoration give the least indic­
ation and the same applies in the further developed East-J ava form, to the 
rows of reliefs, which purposely represent popular stories without much 
regard to their tendency. Such texts are thus evidently neutral; they have 
no particular religious meaning and can be viewed merely as an enter 
taming and effective kind of decoration. Thus if the subjects of the 
sculpture shew no distinction between the denominations, it is useless 
to seek for points of difference in the design, artistic conception or crafts­
manship in the Buddhist or non-Buddhist art.
On Barabudur however the texts were certainly not of a neutral sort, 
and that alters the question on this point. The distinct Buddhist char­
acter of what is depicted, we have already seen gives nothing special 
to the execution that might place it outside ordinary Hindu-Javanese 
art, yet we can notice that other monuments whose Buddhism is above 
suspicion, are still without that something which distinguishes Barabu­
dur. Even a sanctuary like the Mendut, in many respects so closely con­
nected with this stupa and possessing very superior art of its own, taken as 
a whole does not make that extraordinary impression on the mind which 
we receive from Barabudur; only when we stand in the solemn shadows 
of the adyton, before the majestic statue of the Master seated between 
the two grand Bodhisattva figures, do we feel something of the same 
spirit that radiates from Barabudur in the full light of the sun.
It is quite impossible to define or analyse this mystic, fervid devotion 
to the ideal. It cannot be grasped by the intellect, it is a frame of mind, 
a feeling, that must be yielded to with gratitude at being permitted to 
share in the revelation of this divine spirit of Barabudur, to experience 
something of the reverent adoration for the highest ideal that inspired 
the founders of this sanctuary; for them it was the embodiment of 
Buddhism, for us the meaning may be different, yet in a spiritual sense 
the same.
However, this is beyond archaeology or art criticism. We must touch 
on this subject only so far as to note how the Barabudur art, in its widest 
sense was used as a means of awakening such feelings, how the artists 
collectively and the designer in particular, consciously or unconsciously
(M Mil) 
yCT
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
IcM . i
'xy, - 
\ 
' 
,


--- Page 194 ---
(l(W% 
CfiT
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF
laboured to accomplish this revelation of the spirit of Barabudur. I can­
not overlook, even in an archaeological description, the wonderful in­
spiration that sustains and exalts the art of this sanctuary and makes it 
a monument for all time.
This feeling or mood was intended to influence the beholder and 
prepare his mind to receive the message of Salvation. It was principally 
through his samadhi that he would attain the goal he was to strive after 
and it is entirely in sympathy with this view that the Buddha's of Medi­
tation surround and preside over the monument “in affecting mono­
tony’' — the expression is Rouffaer'sl). "If ever,” he continues, "the 
Hindu conception of religion has been expressed in sculpture, it is in 
these personifications”. And truly these wonderful figures with their 
sublime composure, their purity, their serene dignity, radiate something 
of their own solemn, peaceful meditation; thus these Buddha's, quite 
apart from their position in the Mahayanistic system embodied in the 
Barabudur, represent to the worshipper the only comprehensible form 
in which the Spirit of the Universe manifests itself, and at the same time 
the image of what he himself may hope to attain. A noble ideal indeed, 
that must have struck deep into the soul of the believer; to achieve for 
himself the Sambodhi, the perfection of which the Jina's of Barabudur 
were the appearance-in-form.
The sacred writings that pave the way towards this ideal, unrolled 
themselves before the pilgrim's eyes as he paced along the galleries.
Various peculiarities, noticed in examining the many series of reliefs, 
have already been discussed; I shall now only say a word about their 
value as a whole. If we begin by inquiring if they served their purpose, 
then we must first find out what their aim, was. If we consider that the 
reliefs were only chiefly intended to give as clear and definite idea as 
possible of the texts, then we shall have to confess that they only very 
slightly accomplish their supposed task; the objections already men­
tioned, especially their avoidance of all sensational incidents, thus the 
more dramatic actions, and the inconsistency with which they treat the 
same persons and things, make the study of what is represented far 
more difficult and we can be sure that the pious pilgrim of olden times 
— except of course the scholars well-versed in the sacred texts — would 
have had as much trouble in identifying them as the archaeologists of 
the present day, unless someone living on the spot had enlightened 
them; there were probably people for this duty belonging to the temple.
■) DeGids, 1901, II, p. 246.


--- Page 195 ---
Even then it is more than likely the texts underwent a good many 
changes in the words of the possibly little educated monks who acted as 
guides.
We can also regard the reliefs from another point of view, not so much 
as illustrations of the texts but as a means, with the help of the sacred 
scriptures, of awakening the devout state of mind described above, ab­
sorbing the attention with each ascending circuit till the spirit of the 
monument and the lesson of salvation it preached, was revealed to the 
worshipper. The neglect of what we should think was needed in the 
first place to make the text clear, seems to indicate that their intention 
was in this direction. The object in view was not to make a certain 
sequence of occurrence comprehensible, but to point out the inner truth 
that lay behind these contingencies. The text, in script or in sculpture, 
being but a makeshift, the spirit of Buddhism, as understood by the 
founders of Barabudur, was their aim and object.
Undoubtedly the art on the reliefs of Barabudur does prepare the 
mind to receive the Highest Wisdom. Western people like ns after so 
many centuries as we wander about the monument, now partly in 
ruins and partly restored, are deeply impressed by the compelling 
influence of these long rows of scenes, and it is riot our intellect that is 
moved, for the meaning of more than half of them is lost to us. Yet this 
marvellous art of Barabudur affects us so powerfully that we feel by 
intuition what the sanctuary means to say. How much more this must 
have been to those by whom and for whom the stupa was erected and 
who lived in so much closer relation to the sphere of Buddhist thought.
The reliefs of this temple found a warm admirer in E. B. Havell, whose 
books have done so much to rouse more interest among the general 
public for Indian art of all kinds; he continually praises the natural­
ness, vigor and grace of these reliefs. “The Borobudur sculptors”, he 
writes1), “have known how to convey the essence of truth as it is found
‘) Indian sculpture and painting (1908), p. 127. Though I share the author’s admiration for 
the art of Barabudur, I cannot conceal that I think he makes a mistake by ascribing to the 
reliefs all sorts of things the sculptors never intended. On plate XXXV without any proof of­
fered, relief la 86, £akyamuni’s bath in the Nairaiijana before the journey to Rodhimanda, is 
described as "the conversion of the Javanese to Buddhism in the beautiful legend (invented 
by Havell ?) that Buddha himself came over the sea floating on a lotus-flower to give his 
divine message to the people.” Relief I I 30 (plate XXXVIII) gives the quite fantastic state­
ment that tills must be Buddha preaching before Maya in heaven; and this when the "prea­
cher” is not a Buddha and the person listening is a man! Quite amusing is the description of 
lb 16 (plate XXXVI) where we know prince Sudhana throws his identity ring into the jar 
of one of his ladylove’s servants; the explanation is given as, one of a group of women drawing 
water from the village pond, "leaving her household cares a while, kneels at the feet of the
HINDU-J AVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
J
' : 1 :


--- Page 196 ---
~~ in Nature without obtruding their own personality or relying on any of 
the common tricks of their craft. Their art, used only in the service of 
truth and religion, has made their hands the obedient tools of a heaven­
sent inspiration; and their unique power of realising this, with a depth 
and sincerity unsurpassed in the art of any land, or in any epoch, gives 
them a right to rank among the greatest of the symbolists in the whole 
history of art.” Even if I cannot altogether share in this unlimited 
praise — the examination of the many relief series shewed us plainly 
enough how the sculptors were not always up to the mark in their work 
and often fell short of artistic taste — yet we certainly must acknow­
ledge the statement to be true in the main. The Barabudur reliefs do 
more than illustrate the texts; their art leads to the contemplation of 
higher truth.
However we may attempt systematically to explain how Barabudur 
art achieves its quite unique position, it has we see nothing to do with 
a difference in technique or composition between this sanctuary and 
other Hindu Javanese art of the Middle Javanese period. There is no 
“Barabudur art” to be discussed, it is entirely identical with the rest 
of Middle Javanese art.
It must not be expected that such a complicated subject as the 
characteristics of Hindu Javanese art can be combined with a description 
devoted to one monument however richly endowed with examples of 
this style. To do this thoroughly would carry us far beyond the compass 
of our monograph. But the chief point of objection is something else;
I do not believe this subject can at present be treated with any chance 
of reliable results. We are still busy collecting material that in time will 
yield the general and special knowledge required.
So as Brandes, the best authority on Hindu Javanese art, writes at 
the close of his great monograph on Tjandi Djago: "Real; actual study 
of the building in all its details was impossible; that can only begin where 
this description ends” 1). Nor must this be ascribed to modesty on the 
author’s part, it only shews plainly how well aware this scholar was 
that the scientific knowledge of this monument so carefully examined 
and described could be called after all nothing more than an “intro­
duction”. How much more does this applyto the many other works of art
Master, listening with rapt attention to words full of tenderness and divine compassion such 
as man never spake before. ' Compare this with the matter-of-fact statement the Divyavadana. 
gives of this episode! In spite of all this sort of thing in explaining the reliefs, there is much 
that is valuable in Havell’s aesthetic opinions.
!) Rapp. Oudh. Comm. 1902 p. 2. Comp, with monograph itself p. 114.
111 S
92:1 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
\ S I .
\
V
^
5
^
W
 
‘ 
J


--- Page 197 ---
(’ V H
I N D U - J A V A N E S E ART AND CULTURE 
f ^ T ;
whose data are still less complete and unclassified. All we can expect is 
to discover the origin of a single ornement, the type of some accessory, 
and that is only successful when taken in hand by a scholar like Bran- 
des. But any profitable research as to the whole meaning of Hindu-Ja- 
vanese art has so far been inadequate.
This also applies to the question of how far it is possible to distinguish 
the Javanese additions to the elements brought over from India. 
Nothing is easier than to enumerate motifs or technical details which 
either directly or in a roundabout way can be traced to the old Indian 
art of their original home. But as soon as the question becomes compli­
cated by the various factors that may have influenced them — for in­
stance the Chinese element — then we are in the dark altogether, not 
only because neither the Javanese nor other sections of Indian art, fur­
nish sufficient data, but chiefly because it is very uncertain in what 
way Hindu art became established in Java ').
Besides in the transplanting of such easily-recognised characteristics 
as the above (for which no special knowledge of Indian art is needed, 
for it can be seen at once by placing some photos from Java beside 
those from other parts, that for instance the schematic treatment of rocks 
and similar subjects, is copied from India) in some particular cases ano­
ther connecting link with the rest of Indian art appears and that is, the 
following of an existing tradition in representing very famous or impor­
tant episodes. For instance in the chief incidents of Qakyamuni’s life- 
story it could be pointed out several times that the scene was arranged 
in a certain manner, not because so prescribed by the Lalitavistara 
text but evidently only to agree with a tradition of the sculptors; the 
scene was represented in this fashion, because it was the style approved 
of by Buddhist art in general. The cases where the continuous art trad­
ition could be noticed were all the same very few, and on the other hand 
there were other scenes whose importance and popularity would have 
justified some sort of traditional arrangement, yet the Javanese sculp­
tor, within the limits set down by the text, seems to have followed his 
own fancy. The Barabudur artists shew generally a good deal of inde­
pendence in this respect.
This freedom of idea may in itself be a sign of fine artistic taste, but 
also in another respect it has greatly influenced the reliefs. As the sub­
jects of the scenes to be depicted were borrowed from Hindu, non Ja- *)
*) In the 4th chapt. of my Introduction to Hindu-Javanese art some information onthis 
subject has been put together.
Barabudur II. 
13
’ G° ^ \


--- Page 198 ---
' 
C '
l( W94! 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
VfiT
XMsS ^ / 
; 
O XJ'
- vanese texts, it would have been quite natural if the sculptors had done 
their best to retain the Hindu character of the scene and for instance 
attempted to depict the life story of £akyamuni in what they thought 
suitable to the date and locality of Buddha's earthly existence. The ja- 
taka’s and avadana’s and other texts just the same, as most of them 
are given as being told by the Master himself; in this way we should 
find all over the monument, the results of an attempt doomed before­
hand to failure, in fact a misrepresentation of former times. Just as the 
“primitive” artists of our schools of painting, Indian art takes no trouble 
to preserve any historical exactitude in depicting their sacred stories, 
and fortunately Hindu-Javanese is no exception to this. The Sanskrit 
texts laid before them are transposed into Javanese by their sculptors.
This applies to Hindu-Javanese art in general, but for Barabudur art 
in particular, for this sanctuary more than any other with its endless 
rows of reliefs, gives occasion for an unusual display of such numbers 
and variety of persons, things and surroundings.
From these scenes we get a living picture of the Java of those days.
The king’s palace as well as the poor man’s hut, the women’s apartment 
or the monastery; their daily work, the handicrafts, agriculture, and sail­
ing vessels, there are few things these texts do not touch on. We have here 
lighted on a store of details for the life of the Hindu-Javanese and the 
conditions in their community, that are sure to prove valuable when 
they come to be sorted and explained.
Befoi*e beginning with this I must first put in a proviso. We must not 
accept unconditionally everything we see on these reliefs to be just as 
it was among the Hindu-Javanese. There must have been instances 
when the text described things that belonged to the Hindu people from 
the continent, but were unknown to Java and in such cases of course the 
• sculptors could not resist putting them into the picture. This is sure to 
have occurred, but we have no means of tracing their whereabouts and 
on this account let us be careful in drawing conclusions.
In addition to this I consider that some curtailing will be necessary 
on account of the enormous amount of material before us. To begin 
with we shall only examine what has to do with human society. No 
doubt there is much to be learned from a more elaborate study; inter­
esting knowledge might be gleaned for instance by examining the ani­
mals and plants depicted that would perhaps furnish new data as to 
the spread of fauna and flora. This should of course be left to zoologists 
and botanists and even if the help of such experts were attainable, 
would I think be misplaced in the archaeological description of an an-


--- Page 199 ---
cient monument. I merely note the fact that these reliefs may be found 
to yield information of scientific interest. Therefore though in my 
description of the reliefs, I have not refrained to make remarks about 
the animals and plants as well, where they become obvious in the 
story or the composition of the scene, I shall make no attempt, to des­
cribe or classify what the reliefs have to shew us of this sort.
Though we shall confine our attention to the pictures of human society 
in the widest sense including the supernatural incidents that may 
be j udged entirely by a human standard 
we have seen so many times 
how impossible it would be to distinguish a god with his attendants from 
an earthly king — we must keep in mind that this monograph cannot 
make any attempt to reconstruct a picture of Hindu-Javanese culture 
in its social life. A most attractive subject this would be if the valuable 
material here at hand could be profitably exploited, but it is in the pre­
sent state of our knowledge quite hopeless of reliable results. We know 
actually too little of the n ature of Hindu Javanese culture in Middle Java; 
so the solid basis for such reconstruction is entirely wanting. It would be 
foolish to deceive ourselves on this point. We are only just able to dis­
cern some outline of its forms in what we can learn from the monuments, 
images and inscriptions; something of the religion and language and the 
chief points of the kind of government is known to us, but it all remains 
superficial chiefly on account of there being almost nothing in the way of 
lirerature belonging to the Middle-Javanese period. Now will all this 
mass of material that Barabudur has to offer, help to supply us with the 
means of understanding the life and thought of this period ? Not at all; 
no more than we can expect to understand the character of a foreign 
people by gazing at a representation of their manners and customs in 
the cinema.
I am not depreciating the importance of the material itself; my meaning 
only is that we are not in a position to appreciate its real value, and 
quite unable to judge of the comparative relation of one fact to an­
other as long as we have no real knowledge to guide us, the indispen­
sable factor that will give us the right insight to the actual meaning of 
all this passing show of varied life. We are still a long way from this.
The very first chief point is lacking almost entirely, i.e. the way in 
which the Hindu element combined with the Javanese; how much re­
mained individual and how much was lost of each, their influence on 
one another, their gradual transformation into what at first sight ap­
pears so curiously fantastic but on closer examination becomes the har­
monious union of Hindu-Javanese culture. It is neither Javanese with a
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
1 ^ 0 1 j


--- Page 200 ---
Hindu varnish nor Hindu merely transplanted into a foreign land, but 
exactly what the'name indicates, a combination of two dissimilar pow­
ers, in value also unequal, and therefore the more remarkable it is that 
they created a perfect whole.
We need not however despair of finally achieving this insight. With 
the help of East Java, whose Hindu culture has left us so much more data 
in a rich though so far little known literature, it will in time be made 
clear to us; there are remnants of manners and customs, habits and insti­
tutions still alive in Bali and parallel instances of other places, where 
as in Cambodia and Campa, a similar combined culture was formed by 
the amalgamation of native with Hindu elements, that will make it 
possible for us to discern the real nature and being of that community 
whose spirit found expression in the sublime structure of Barabudur. 
But up till now this knowledge remains the aim and object of endless 
labour and research.
All we can do at present is to accumulate material, bearing in mind 
that by drawing conclusions prematurely we should only mislead our­
selves and others. This applies to the material in general and to Barabu- 
dur’s extensive store in particular. We can register and arrange in some 
degree in the hope by so doing, of somewhat lightening the task of those 
who will be able later on to give these units their right value, and on the 
other hand even this short review may be qualified to give some idea 
of the special importance the subjects of these Barabudur reliefs pos­
sess both in quantity and value, as pictures of Hindu-Javanese so­
ciety.
The figures displayed before us on the reliefs of Barabudur belong to 
all classes of society, from the cakravartin, the king who is ruler of the 
world, to the most simple dweller of the desa. No wonder then, if we 
begin with the dress, that we find it in all possible variety.
The most primitive sort of costume used by the lower class partic­
ularly in country districts, appears specially in the reliefs on the buried 
base which represent mostly scenes of humble life. This dress is nothing 
more than a loin-cloth. We might think such to be the costume of the 
original inhabitants, that is the Indonesian people of the island before 
the Hindu's appeared there and who we might suppose paid little at­
tention to dress and would be content with a loin-cloth. Such a conclu­
sion would be rash, for in the present day many villagers in India 
can be seen going about in this apparently primitive garment and maybe 
it was imported into Java and supplanted some still more scanty attire.
r. V iM /a-l'' 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
\ K I 
,


--- Page 201 ---
f ( l l 
<SL
X% I^ T
 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
i 97
The cloth, actually a loin-cloth, that only more or less covers the legs 
but never reaches further than the knee, is folded round the body so 
that a corner of it always hangs down in front. In some cases it can be 
seen that this corner is pulled through a belt which keeps the garment 
in place, in others the cloth is only folded in a way something like an 
infants napkin and there is apparently no belt.
It is impossible to say whether the latter fashion is really another sort 
or only that the bel t is not visible but must be considered as present. Some­
times when one of these folk is sitting with his back to the spectator, 
do we see a corner sticking out behind. This short cloth is worn by the 
women as well; but with the females it is often replaced by a longer gar­
ment reaching to just above the ankles, that evidently resembles the 
sarong.
The hairdressing of these people is also very plain. The hair is brushed 
back smoothly and then sometimes hangs down loose, but generally 
it is twisted into a knot at the back of the head. It is possible there are 
people with bald heads among them, though more likely not, because 
those figures whose back hair is plainly to be seen, often have the front 
part of their head smooth-shaven just like the monks. There can be no 
doubt about those whose back hair is visible, but those who do not shew 
the back of their heads might be taken for people with shorn crowns, 
though the resemblance to the others that are quite visible makes it less 
probable. Sometimes the line where the hair begins is cut so that it 
looks as if the figure was wearing a smooth cap. This I think is due only 
to indistinct work, because many of the persons with such “caps” still 
wear the ordinary style of hair on the middle of their head. It is quite 
another thing of course where some of the more elaborate head- and hair­
dressing fits round the head with a flat edge, which is of course intended 
for a cap-shaped frame. Those people who have no further sort of head­
dress and are to be recognised by the loin-cloth as of the lowest class, 
we can consider to be wearing their own hair brushed back. Very occas­
ionally we find a turban worn, folded narrow and knotted round the 
head so that one comer sticks up at the top and another hangs down; 
see O 2 and 118.
The first sign of a better class is a polished necklace and a pair of 
earrings with a plain flower-omement. The hair too is dressed differ­
ently with a thick band, probably a wreath, round it and the back hair 
if not hanging loose, is twisted up into a small knot that hangs in the 
neck under the wreath . But we must not imagine these variations are 
enough to distinguish one class of persons from another; on the contrary
■ G°^ X


--- Page 202 ---
n
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
c LLj
' 
1 s ' 
^ 
1' 
1l, a 
M k jl 
1 
1
as far as we can j udge they represent the same kind of desa-people, 
only sometimes better dressed than usual. When anything of their work 
is to be seen, they appear to be labourers, street-vendors, handicrafts­
men, musicians, fishermen, in short ordinary village folk.
Very gradually we rise from these people of the lowest class, those 
without caste and (judra’s, by a little more ornement, and more costly 
outfit, till at last we reach the kings and their attendants. There is no 
very distinct separation between the one group and another, we see the 
desa-folk talking with men a little more well-to-do, their burgerinasters 
(as we know from the records) and their landlords who again appear in 
higher company in various gradations, and so on. Possibly the difficulty 
of setting strict limits is not only the result of the actual conditions of 
their community but may be owing a good deal to the above-mentioned 
efforts the sculptors made to bring variety into their work even in de­
picting the very same person. However it may be, the changes of the 
various classes in appearance are very gradual on these reliefs.
Still worn with the short loin-cloth, the necklaces begin to be hand­
somer; they are made of beads or shew a widening on the breast evi­
dently of gold or silver work. At the same time the headdress gets more 
elaborate; the hair sometimes combed up on the middle of the head into 
a tuft which is kept in place by an ornemented band round it, or it may 
be left smooth and a diadem-shaped headdress worn on it, with a tri- 
gular ornement in the centre, above the brow, and often smaller ones on 
each side. The next step is a diadem, not loose on the hair but forming 
the border to a cap which covers the hair and that begins to have a rath­
er pointed shape; here we already have a simple kind of tiara, low in 
form but already shewing resemblance to the lofty pointed tiara's of 
kings and royal persons. Probably as a remainder of the loose-diadem- 
style with combed-up hair, the higher centrepiece of these plain tiara’s 
often has a spiral twisted-up shape, a kind of headdress we find among 
the people of the desa but is also seen among the servants and atten­
dants of kings. In the same way we see the supporting band, the loose 
belt round the waist in which the seated persons like to lean one knee 
and so ease their position, as much used by the chief men of a village 
as by the king himself.
After the earrings and necklace, we get rings on the wrists, ankles and 
upper arm, especially the latter become elaborately ornemented with 
wide, always triangular plates of metal. The girdle, at the same time as 
the headdress, is more richly adorned and the caste-cord appears; with 
the women the so-called woman’s girdle, a double band going over both


--- Page 203 ---
shoulders and under both arms and fastened with a handsome clasp 
on the breast. These two kinds of belt are of course seen with all sorts of 
variations, the caste-cord for instance varies from a plain band to a 
splendid piece of workmanship apparently of gold links. But the head­
dress is always the most elaborate work of art.
There is no need to enumerate all the varieties of costume especially 
as their gradual transitions into one another prevents us being able to 
recognise certain classes of people by a certain style of dress; there are 
a few exceptions to this rule which I shall point out later on. The royal 
costume requires separate mention, though it must be concise, because 
what is found on Barabudur does not actually differ from what other 
Middle-Javanese sculpture shews us and is only remarkable for the great 
number of monarchs depicted and the astonishing diversity the sculp­
tors have managed to introduce.
# ^ ie onJy reaJ garment is still the loin-cloth, only altered by the mate­
rial being more ample so that it can be folded differently and for in­
stance while it hangs on the one side only to the knee, on the other it 
is longer, sometimes to the ankles; in other ways too this garment can 
be altered but it seems to be always a long arrow cloth. People who are 
h i a huri y, of course not of the leisured clas. vjs, make it easier for them­
selves by "girding up their loins” and tying the rest of it into a bunch in 
front of their middle, the ornement above-mentioned becomes a mag­
nificent display of precious stones and goldsmith’s skill; then we see 
richer adornment of another kind by a second necklace that hangs rather 
lower than the first, more of a breast ornement. Then another belt is put 
on just below the breast and above the hips, generally flat and with a 
pearl-shaped ornement. T he girdle that holds the garment together can 
always be discerned, it has now become an important piece of the decor­
ation, always fastened in front of the body with a splendid clasp, often 
with the two ends of the garment hanging down on either side. Under the 
girdle can be seen, across the thighs, the wide scarf-like band used when 
seated to support the knee; when standing it is tied in a big bowr at 
the side of the figure; the ends of this garment do not hang in front but 
down the side of the leg. In the simpler style of this dress (clearly to be 
seen lb 59) comes first the girdle and then the sash, one under the 
other, f iris can be enriched by a second girdle below the first one and by 
winding the sash twice round the thighs: then we get four bands one 
below the other. On many reliefs it is not very easy to distinguish 
the two girdles and sashes, the girdles with their ends hanging down in 
front and the sashes with ends at the side of the legs, but fortunately
11): 
<sl
X ^ , .,*g5U 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
199


--- Page 204 ---
there are examples enough (f.i. la 16) where the various pieces can easily 
be distinguished.
The high pointed tiara to judge by its shape must have originated in 
the diadem or is at least connected with it; the lowest part of it, the 
band that goes round the head, is the same thing as that of the diadem, 
with an ornament in the middle and one on each side above the ears. 
Inside this rises the conical-shaped headdress in all sorts of styles, often 
built up of rings gradually smaller and more or less adorned with jew­
els and similar ornements. The ladies prefer a less-pointed shape; 
above the band there is often a second circle that is decorated with little 
twists as if in imitation of the natural curls. The whole headgear is often 
crowned with a flower ornement and hanging ribbons for both sexes. 
The rest of the women's costume differs very little from that of the men; 
the caste-cord being replaced by the women's girdle and the dress 
reaching down to their ankles.
Children are dressed in various ways. Sometimes they wear nothing 
at all, at least those of the lower classes; they are carried in the slendang 
which is still in use (O 38, 44). Infant princes on the other hand often 
wear minature royal dress; they can often be recognised by the crescent­
shaped ornement behind the neck that has already been described *), and 
a double band in the style of the womens’ girdle, generally with a large 
clasp in front on the breast, sometimes without a clasp but then made 
of links like a chain (II B 24). The chief person on IV B 43, with a plain 
band and crescent has a wonderful headdress; a broad band with twist­
ing figures rising from it, that may be are snakes. It is quite possible 
this is some supernatural being; the story is an unidentified one. The 
crescent and band over the breast evidently represent official costume; 
the ordinary dress of upper-class children will be that of the small boy 
on 0 32; rings on wrists and ankles, a necklace and a little cap with orne- 
mented border on the head. The ends of the garment hanging down at the 
side of the head do not distinctly belong to the child, but may just as 
likely be part of the father’s dress to whom it evidently clings in fright.
I will mention a few reliefs separately. For the most primitive dress of 
the desafolk 0 34 has very good examples; here we see very distinctly 
the single loincloth or sarong with a belt. 0 111 shews a bit of headgear 
not seen anywhere else; that is if the wide round, pointed object one of 
the women is holding is really a sun-hat such as is still used for work in
*) I consider this crescent entirely as an ornement; according to Pleyte (Buddha-Legende 
p. 179) it is the ends of a turban.
i n 
<§L
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF


--- Page 205 ---
the fields at the present day; of course it might be a basin or a rice dish. 
Among the poor people in series O we noticed there were some wearing 
a sort of wreath on their head, the same thing appears continually in 
other places without it being possible to make out what kind of people it 
really belongs to; there are brahmans (for inst. IBa 71, IIB 35, 80), but 
also female servants (II80), and merchants (lb 67). In the last case foreign­
ers appear in the story and we might think this sort of dress was spe­
cially meant to distinguish them; but comparison with the text shews 
us that though this may hold good for some of the reliefs it is not gene­
ral 1). On lb 58 however the men in this dress who nearly all have beards, 
and curious rolled-up earrings, are very foreign-looking, on lb 59 
the same sort of persons are in attendance on a yaksa. They appear in 
this series continually 2), especially as attendants and servants, never as 
chief persons. It cannot be some special costume for solemn or festive 
occasions, it is not general enough for that and besides it is wanting just 
where the text describes feasts and ceremonies. We fail to discover what 
rules have guided the sculptors in this respect; it is perhaps better not to 
attach too much importance to what may be only a longing for variety 
or the fancy of some particular artist.
For the headdress, I mention the reliefs where a loose tiara is held in 
the hand or being offered to someone so that we can see it is a quite sep­
arate object, not something that has to be fixed up every time or is ar­
ranged with the hair. These reliefs are la 6, 36, 37, lb 9, 37, IBa 275. On 
III 12 the chief person is wearing a remarkable headdress with three 
standing-up loops on the second band, that is above the diadem band. 
We must not forget that this person is a Bodhisattva, therefore not bound 
by earthly fashions; a similar sort of headdress is worn by some atten­
dants on III B 22 and 83. Probably also Bodhisattva's are represented 
by the men who in the story IIIB 23 and following wear tiara's made up 
with locks of hair; we have already noticed Avalokite£ vara’s similar 
style of hairdressing. Hair twisted into loops above a diadem-band ap­
pears in other scenes, III 14, 30, 84; these figures too may be heavenly 
beings, the person on the first-mentioned one whose tiara ends in a 
flame is certainly another Bodhisattva, the same as on IV 36. Locks of 
hair above a plain headband we get on IBa 147, men with moustache 
and hair hanging down in locks who look like foreigners. Then there 
is a tiara with a large rosette-ornement in front (lb 57), one entirely of 
flower-ornement (IBb 116), elaborate decoration of foliage and gold-
*) Comp. I p. 287.
*) See also lb 67, 94, 101, 102, 105, 115, 116.
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE


--- Page 206 ---
<SL
smiths work, also on the breast-necklace and bracelets (III 75, undoub­
tedly heavenly beings). Among the attendants there are some such as 
on lb 60 and 74 with a high sharp triangular ornement in front of a 
thick round band, or on IVB 56 with large spiral curls on both sides of 
a pointed centre-ornement; on lb 24 with a thick band at the back of 
his head inside which there is a crown-shaped ornement, i.e. lines bent 
outwards and then turned together into the centre and finished with a 
pointed ornement on top. It is noticeable that one of the chief persons 
on IIIB 71 wears a headdress that has the shape of a tiara but has no 
sign of ornement, this however may be the result of wear and tear. Fi­
nally there is a style in which the hair is not brushed up but drawn smooth­
ly back with only a flower above the forehead and behind the ears; this 
is shewn on lb 26, 34 and others. Shoes are only to be found on 0 116 
where a pair of sandals are put ready, wide soles with a couple of straps 
to fasten them to the feet. Generally everyone, even royal persons, go 
barefoot.
The women — I here just mention the curious chainlike girdles on lb 
21, IBa 316 or I I 127 — often hold some object in their hand, not exactly 
part of the costume but worthy of notice. First there are mirrors, round 
with an arched surface and fastened at the back to a long or short 
handle.
These are to be seen on O 144 and 151 and with a surface still more 
arched, much too convex for a looking-glass, but that may be the sculp­
tor’s fault, on O 17, 69, 139, 148, la 54, IBa 51; in one case O 32, it is a 
man who has it in his hand. Another kind of shape with flat surface 
seems to be in use on IIB 92, but this relief is somewhat damaged. If 
these objects are really intended for mirrors then it is remarkable that 
they are not like the looking-glasses we know as Hindu-Javanese, with 
the handle always fastened to their edge, not at the back, and v e rjr 
slightly convex. The large oblong things that look like flat empty 
trays and are held in both hands on O 12 or lb 120, we might also take 
for mirrors but perhaps they are the same objects that appear on O 
70, la 98 and II 73 and seem to be only dishes or trays arranged with 
valuables. Another object continually seen in the hands of female ser­
vants is the fan, made of feathers fixed in fan-shape and sometimes fast­
ened to a handle at the bottom (O 72, lb 26, IBa 281), sometimes with­
out a handle an$ held through a hole in the centre (la 13, 16, IBa 217,
II 108; held by a man II 45). A variation (also held by a man) we see on
‘) For Indian mirrors compare Laufer, Dokumente der Indischen Kunst 1 (1913) p. 174.
BAEABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF


--- Page 207 ---
^ j ' 
^
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
203
II 31; here the fan is very small, made of much smaller feathers and fast­
ened to a very long handle. This object does not seem to be meant for 
practical use, it is carried by an attendant in the retinue of an eminent 
person, the same as another one holds the fly-whisk, more as a sign of 
dignity than use.
Among the separate categories of people the first are the members of 
the Congregation whose appearance is easily recognised.
Their heads are always shaved and they wear nothing on them, their 
dress is the same monk’s garment worn by the Buddha, such as will be 
described in the next chapter. We find one relief (la 110) with monks of 
a different sort where, according to the text, the Buddha is conversing 
with an Ajrvaka (on the relief there are three of them). There is no 
reason to believe that there were such sort of people in Java; probably 
these were invented by the sculptor. The appearance of these three men 
is certainly rather strange; the head quite smooth in front, either shaved 
or the hair brushed back, has a bunch of hair on the top twisted into a 
bow in the style of ascetics with a long lock hanging down on the should- 
der; the upper part of the body is bare except for a cloth that goes over 
the left shoulder and under the right arm, the rest of it hanging down; 
the lower part of the body is covered with a garment reaching to the 
ankles fastened with a girdle and clasp; they have bracelets round the 
upper arm and a sect-mark resembling an urria on their forehead. It 
looks very doubtful if this costume is anything real.
Bhiksuni’s also appear on the reliefs though not so frequently as the 
monks. We see them first among the Buddha’s hearers, IBa 329, II 
5 and 8; but also playing an active part, lb 73 and 74, IBb 117,127, 128, 
I I 43 and 90. Three of these scenes, lb 74 and IBb 117 and 127, evidently 
depict the ordaining of a nun, with the novice seated in front of the 
members of the order; further details are given in the description of the 
reliefs 1), which must also be consulted for the question whether IBb 10 
represents a scene of nuns 8). Finally in the wellknown story of Cudda- 
bodhi, there is a woman in the complete dress of a nun, IBa 73—76, 
where there is no question of taking the vows, only of a woman follow­
ing her husband who has become a hermit, into a life in the wilderness. 
The nuns all wear a garment corresponding to the monk’s dress and like 
them a shaved head. The garment is worn, so that the whole upper part 
of the body is covered; the sculptor’s habit of distinctly shewing the
') See I p. 291 and 455.
3) See I p. 443.


--- Page 208 ---
m
human form under the garment gives the appearance of nudity, but 
the edge of the dress round the neck is always visible and shews it is 
meant to be there. Both hands appear outside the dress that can be seen 
to hang down from the wrists. This garment reaches to above the ankles 
and an edge of the under-garment can be distinguished below it; one corner 
is thrown over the shoulder, generally the left, but sometimes the right. 
On one occasion, a secondary figure on II 90, the sculptor gives us an 
under-garment worn like a sarong and fastened with a girdle, but we 
may remark that the only other standing figure of a nun — that on IBa 
76, as we saw was not actually a nun — does not wear the same kind of 
thing. 1 he seated nuns — all the rest are sitting—do not shew any under­
garment so that the dress of their sister on II 90 remains unique *),
It would be useless to enumerate all the scenes where monks appear, 
their costume is always the same. Nor need we examine those where 
brahmans are to be found, they are everywhere and mentioned in nearly 
every text. Not that their appearance is always the same; the members 
of this caste move in all kinds of surroundings and their dress is that of 
various classes of society, the needy brahman who accepts alms is not 
in the same costume as the elegant, important purohita, the Court chap­
lain. Brahmans always wear a beard and moustache; never any head­
dress but the hair always brushed smooth to the back and then twisted 
into a knot tied round with a more or less ornemental band. They are 
often seen with the wreath already- mentioned round the head, occasion­
ally with a flower, either a real one or some floral ornement, in the front 
and at the sides, just the same place where the ornements are put on. a 
diadem; sometimes the hair in front is quite smooth and a flower put in 
the band that fastens the back hair. The rest of this dress in its simplest 
form consists of only a loincloth with a plain girdle, besides of course the 
caste-cord; as the brahman rises in the social scale he wears the usual neck­
laces, bracelets and rings round the arms and ankles etc.Let us take an ex­
ample from the most typical of them. First the brahman who is a wanderer 
in the forest in the Cagi-jataka, IBa 23—25; he wears a loincloth and 
wreath, has a bundle on his shoulder, an umbrella in one hand, his staff 
in the other, nearly as plainly dressed, without the wreath and staff but 
carrying the umbrella and wearing bracelets, we see the man who is 
being received with high honour on IIB 13. The brahmans who are 
among the desa-folk have no other ornement than a pair of earrings 
and often carry an umbrella, in such scenes as O 16, 54, 55 and 122.
' ‘^s regards nuns in general, a store of information has been, collected by miss Lulius van 
Goor, De Buddhistische non (1915).
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF


--- Page 209 ---
There is a brahman plainly dressed at the beginning of series IIIB; he 
is seated on a cushion in conversation and elsewhere, for instance I IB 
14, sitting on an undecorated chair. In this last scene he has a disciple 
with him without a beard but with the same style of hair, who carries the 
umbrella and a square tray with necessaries. There are two disciples on 
IIIB 84, each with tray and umbrella, and the brahman sits on a curious 
stool with latticed sides, evidently of basket-work; this is the usual seat 
of these people. When money and clothing is being distributed, brah­
mans are always among the first to receive the dole, and it is thereby 
noticeable that not only the poor and needy but evidently the well-to-do 
present themselves, as can be seen by their style of dress. Of course we 
know that this performance of benevolence is principally under­
taken for the benefit of the donor i.e. to increase the number of his 
good deeds; in the Indian community, bestowing alms on a brahman is 
specially virtuous because he is a brahman, not because he is poor; in 
the same way, in the texts it is often the most eminent brahmans who 
get the most gifts. This custom being maintained as well on Barabudur 
is remarkable in so far that we should not expect to find it so in a spe­
cially Buddhist community where a brahman was of no more impor­
tance than any other person and on the contrary the law of charity to the 
poor and needy was in force. It looks to me as if the sculptors were here 
drawing from real life, for in Hindu-Javanese society with its strong Qi- 
vaitic element and powerful syncretism, brahmans must have remained 
people of importance even as regards the Buddhists. Such so to say 
un-Buddhist benevolence towards anything but poor brahmans must 
have been in accordance with the custom of the time. One distribution 
in particular must be noted, on 026, where the brahmans have an unus­
ual style of hair, not twisted into a knot, but coiled into loops.
Then a few examples of brahmans in the higher circles with their more 
elegant appearance, such as those on 0 111, who have handsome earrings, 
IBa 148 the ornemented clasp on the girdle, IIB 88, IVB 56, with other 
noticeable adornments.The brahmans in this last scene have very curi­
ous square-cut beards. We have noticed the distinguished brahman who 
draws the horoscope on la 18 and 19; another on IIB 33 is teaching and 
on II 70 and 124 learned brahmans are being consulted; in both cases 
they wear a wreath round their head; one is sitting on a plain chair, 
the other on his stool. Brahmans are continually met with as advisers 
and ministers of the kings; among others, very distinctly on lb 10 or 
IBa 76; on the latter we see the wreath is replaced by a band with flow­
ers on it. The text shews us that the brahman on lb 7 is the court-
/ 
%\
HINDU'JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
J


--- Page 210 ---
chaplain and the one on lb 100 is undoubtedly the same kind of emi­
nent man with his handsomely decorated headband and the retinue of 
royal emblem-bearers. Taken in the aggregate, Barabudur has a fine 
collection of brahmans, shewing their importance in the community, 
from the highest to the lowest class.
Though as we have seen, persons in brahman dress are sometimes 
found in the wilderness and other persons (such as the already-mention­
ed Cuddabodhi) perform their “tapa” in the dress of a bhiksu, still most 
of the ascetics or hermits have an easily recognised aspect, According to 
the texts, hair twisted up and a garment of fibre is the proper dress for 
the tapasvin, and the first characteristic certainly distinguishes these 
on Barabudur; the hair is twisted up on the top of the head into a loop 
with or without an unornemented band and then hangs loose.
The rest of the costume is nothing but a belt, of course as plain as 
possible, with a piece of cloth fastened to it in front just large enough to 
pass between the legs and cover the privy parts, this cloth may also 
be made of bark, but that cannot be distinguished. This dress is always 
finished off with a necklace of coarse beads, sometimes a sort of sash is 
worn over the left shoulder that can be used to support the knee when 
sitting. The hermit always has a beard, he often holds a rosary in his 
hand and when depic ted in the place where he lives, he has always a water- 
jug at hand. The loops of hair are sometimes smaller or larger, or less 
carefully dressed and the loop is not always distinct so that it looks only 
like a bunch of hair just tied up; this is evidently of no importance as 
can be noticed on the consecutive reliefs la 75—77 and elsewhere, the 
identity of the hermits is made clear by the text but in the middle scene 
they have no loops in their hair and on the other two the style is quite 
different. Ascetics such as above-described continually appdhr; for 
* examples see O 16, 26, 28, 52, la 40,71,72, 102, 117, lb 40, IBa 26, 65 — 
68, 180, 372, IBb 79 (here we see as well as the water-jug, a dish and a 
trident), IIB59—60 (also with staff etc.)1), IVB4. In the story IIB39—42, 
hermits play a chief part; there (on no. 40) we see persons with hair just 
twisted together but not in loops, whose costume plainly shews they are 
no ordinary hermits. What they really are we cannot tell, and the same 
is the case with a third type (on 39) who wear their hair in stuck-out 
loops 2). We must wait for enlightenment until the text is discovered.
At the same time I call attention to the fact worth considering, that the 
ascetic on lb 5 has no loops in his hair, neither when he appears again
*) See further I p. 474.
2) Compare I p. 468.
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
k^JL J


--- Page 211 ---
on no. 15, but Ms followers have and the same is the case with the party of 
hermits on IVB24, the lea der withou t, his disciples with the looped up hair.
A few of these hermits are somewhat less plainly dressed and wear a 
bracelet or a belt with ribbons. Those on 037 look handsomer too and 
on IBa 3—4 we see very richly worked girdles; IBa 127 and II 86 are 
much the same. Still better-dressed and only shewing their ascetic na­
ture in the looped style of hair, are the figures on IBa 82—85, 108—109,
II 115, and O 75; they wear full-dress decorations and the looped up 
coiffure stands up above a correct diadem band. Compared with the 
hrst these are real fasMonable ascetics and we wonder if they are some 
other kind of people altogether; but fortunately these tales on the first 
balustrade have been identified so that we know for certain these men are 
only ascetics. Thus we can judge how well these renounces of all 
worldly things were able to accommodate themselves to circumstances 
and at least on the reliefs, as is here shewn, to appear in the royal 
presence in court attire. But the eminent person who wears the looped 
up hair of an ascetic above a diadem, with unkempt locks at the side 
of it, IBa 152, we are not able to identify; he is dressed like a 
person of distinction and exhibitions of wrestling and dancing are 
being performed for his benefit.
In one place in the life history of £akyamuni, la 70, we find female 
ascetics who are mentioned in the text as belonging to the brahman 
caste. Their hair and necklace is just the same as that of the men; 
the band over the left shoulder is sometimes as narrow as a string 
at the top, but under the right arm looks like the usual width of 
the supporting belt. These women also wear bracelets on the upper 
arm and the rest of their dress seems to be a sarong with a plain 
girdle. It is still unknown whether nunneries actually existed in Java 
such as those described in the Buddha story; though we know for 
certain that women also practised tapa and descriptions have been 
found of communities with male and female hermits like those frequently 
mentioned in Indian literature; therefore it must be left undecided 
if this relief represents what the sculptor was used to seeing in his 
own surroundings. Perhaps the girl who on lb 34 brings a refreshi ng dri nk 
to a tired man with a wreath of flowers on her head, her hair tied with a 
band and hanging down at the back, as I remarked before1), may belong 
to a hermitage in the style of the idyllic Sagara whose praise is sung in 
the N agarakrtagama2).
’) See 1 p. 266.
a) Canto 32—34.
(: ( |j| ) !j 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
J


--- Page 212 ---
' e°$X 
’■ :
' 
n
V § 8 • /' 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
\ S I ,
Another class of persons, ascetics in a kind of way, but not to be 
identified as such, are the rsi’s; they have a somewhat different 
aspect. The distinction is not very important because in the days of 
Barabudur there were no more living rsi’s to be found either within or 
outside the community 1), so the sculptor either followed, some impor­
ted tradition or was obliged to draw on his own invention for their 
appearance. Unfortunately the only scene where we are certain of having 
a rsi before our eyes, I a 31, where the great seer Asita is uttering his 
prophecy about the new-born Buddha, is not. very distinct; the rsi whose 
nephew and companion is dressed as an ordinary hermit, seems only to 
differ from the ascetic type in his hairdressing, wearing instead of the 
looped-up style, a large round bunch of hair tied up on the top of his head, 
with hanging locks arranged on either side. Another very dilapidated 
figure on la 29 with a mass of unkempt hanging hair, is possibly also a 
rsi although he is wearing a handsomer kind of belt. In the series on the 
chief wall of the second gallery, those on 24 and 29 may be the same 
kind of seers, they are not quite the same but both resemble Asita in 
their style of hair, fastened into a bunch on the top of the head, not in 
loops, with locks hanging down at the side, while they have further the 
appearance of an ascetic. They both waer a broad headband without 
omement, the latter (no. 39), actually a parivrajaka, is sitting on a brah­
man stool, he is living in the wilderness with a disciple and a waterjug; 
a jar with a lid, a shell on a pedestal and a trident are beside him.
Before leaving the subject of costume and hairdressing, I must call at­
tention to a couple of noteworthy scenes. O 36 is very curious, we see 
curling locks of hair that hang from a chignon at the back of the head; 
horizontal stripes in the beard such as the brahmans wear on IV B 56, 
we find again with some very simple folk on O 35 and IV B 11. In con­
trast to this a couple of men on O 148 have their beards divided in verti­
cal lines as if it were a row of imperials. Finally let us notice the widow, 
identified as such by her single plait, on lb 107, and then the negro or 
Papuan slave with his woolly head on I IB 33. He is proof positive of a 
custom known to us from the inscriptions, but being unique of his kind 
among all these reliefs, he shews that in the time of Barabudur the keep­
ing of such slaves must have been very exceptional.
Weapons on the whole seem to have been little worn; they certainly 
do not belong to the ordinary kinds of dress and only very seldom do we
l) I use rsi here in the same meaning as th at of the tex ts i.e, the old Seers, not as 
came into use later, for instance in the N agar akr tag am a, in the sense of brahm an herm its.


--- Page 213 ---
NSsX^?. ■
see any person engaged in peaceful conversation who is armed, one ins­
tance being the chief figure on II B 80, a man who looks like a brahman, 
seated on a stool and wearing a short broad dagger at his side. They 
only seem to have weapons when occasion may require, but of course the 
soldiers, palace guards etc. are always armed, The later-Javanese custom 
when every man of any importance wore a kriss in his belt, seems to be 
quite strange to the society of Barabudur. The kriss itself, this is notice­
able at once, does not appear at all.x)
If we begin by examining the simple folk in the series on the buried 
base, we find at once on O 2 a man with bow and arrow, the arrow having 
a triangular barbed point and feathers at the top. Then on nos. 4 and 8 
there are executioners with large flat swords, the blade of which is 
slightly curved, becoming wider and ending in a point; further on we 
see on Tb 79, the royal executioner using the same kind of sword, only 
straighter; so it looks as if this is the proper weapon for executions. No.
10 shews an attack with a dagger and on no. 24 there is a fight going on 
with the same swords as well as a spear, a club and a blow-pipe, the two 
last, as we see on no. 91, being the usual weapons for small-game hunting. 
Big game, as will be described later on, was hunted with bow and ar­
rows. The spear is very seldom seen., it is foimd in the hands of a hell- 
fiend on no. 92. These are the various kinds of weapons in use among the 
people who appear in these scenes; I may mention that another shape of 
sword with a long straight blade that we see so frequently on the higher 
galleries, seems to be much less used by the lower classes than the flat, 
curved, broad shape. A warrior's dance is being performed on no. 5 by 
four men, three of whom hold a small round shield in the left hand and 
in the right a dagger, a curved sword and a spear respectively; the 
fourth has the same kind of sword and a large square shield 2).
Turning to the higher classes we find a different scene but not any 
other sort of weapon. Armed guards and soldiers are to be found on near­
ly all reliefs in the retinue of kings and persons of importance on their 
journeys and at the doors of the palace etc., but the weapons are always 
the same; straight swords, large oval shields, bow and arrows and the 
flat curved swords, but the last are much less common than the straight 
shape. The back of the shield is sometimes ornamented with a circle 
with a square point at the four sides or perhaps only top and bottom, 
sometimes with nothing but a square. I give a few examples, most from the
l) T hat the word kriss was known, appears from the inscriptions, but we cannot tell what 
it signified a t this period.
«) Both sorts of shield (tameng) still exist, for instance at the beksan-ceremony
Barabudur XI 
14
IIINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
E m L i


--- Page 214 ---
large distinct scenes on the chief wall of the first gallery , but there are 
many more to be found. Both kinds of sword are present , separately or 
together, with and without bow and arrows; the straight with the round 
shield is seen with a large troop of soldiers on lb 10, together with bow 
and arrows la 32, lb 28, II B 16; both kinds of sword la 13, the flat 
swords with round shields and bow and arrows la 39. The four-cornered 
emblems on the shield are seen la 8,25, IBa 14, the two-pointed on la 19,
22, the square, I Ba 254. The arrows are found tied in sheaves (Ia32, lb 
33), or kept in a quiver (lb 37); also a closed up quiver such as we see 
on lb 76 may have arrows in it.
As regards the straight sword, la 67 shews us the sheath held loose 
in the hand, therefore the shape is here very distinct. Shields are found 
in some variety. Besides the ordinary round ones, we see on lb 44 (in 
combination with a dagger, as in some very rare instances elsewhere) 
a large rectangular shield with slightly curved long sides; on la 9 the 
edge of the round shield is adorned with tassels. A smaller kind of 
oblong shield is to be seen on lb 40, a rectangular one, narrower in 
shape and curved, on la 31 and lb 104. The same in smaller size is on lb 
6 and 97, still smaller, only a hand-shield, on la 56. Of course it is not 
certain that there is actually any difference in size, possibly the variation 
is only due to the sculptor.
The pictures of fighting are few and must be cautiously treated. Those 
on reliefs la 94, lb 47, IB a 47a, we know do not take place on earth; 
they represent battles between celestial armies, but the same weapons 
are used as above-mentioned, the two kinds of sword, round and square 
shields, bow and arrows as well as a club and blowpipe (la 94), a battle 
axe and spear. The warriors in the fourth bat tle I I 113—we do not know 
whether they are earthly or celestial soldiers — are fighting with both 
kinds of sword and shield and some with daggers as well; the shields here 
are very small but this the sculptor must have done purposely to gain 
space for the combatants. The cuirass too that is being presented on lb 
69 is far too small for use.
In addition to their armed followers, kings and people of importance 
were always accompanied by emblems skewing their rank and position. The 
most general attribute, common as well to persons of lower rank, was 
the umbrella and likewise the bearers (male and female) of fly-whisks 
are not always in the company of persons of the highest class. There is 
no distinct style of umbrellas according to the rank of the official they 
belong to; possibly the color shewed this as it did in later Java. Sometimes 
they are ornamented with ribbons or a tuft of hair on the handle like
f(S)1 
VCT
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
O - L J


--- Page 215 ---
the camara's, but this adornment is added quite casually here or there. 
Some few other emblems belong chiefly to royalty as the large fan in the 
shape of a sinte leaf and a feather fan also with a long handle; it is narrow 
at the bottom but spreads out very wide at the fop. As fourth attribute 
sometimes a very large fly-whisk appears; on relief lb 1 and 12 we see the 
four objects placed next to each other. It is not possible to discern exactly 
what the feather fan is made of, it is sometimes longer and narrower (lb 
22), and then shorter and wider (la 62); the „feathers" are rather wide, 
rounded at the top and the centre-spot , occasionally added in the lower 
part (lb 22, 105), makes them look like peacock feathers; on II B 50 
where they are more finished off it seems very likely, but on the whole 
these objects are not shewn with much detail. We can only see they 
consist of about three to seven rows. In some cases the fan is left quite 
smooth and can only be recognised by its shape (lb 94).
Such attributes are always carried behind the people they belong to, 
there are others, standards, banners and the like, often taken along in 
the same way but also fixed into the ground by way of ornament. It 
stands to reason that these objects and emblems just described would 
sometimes be set up when the eminent person was resting, and we can 
often see plainly that this was done with the umbrellas. Those I now 
speak of serve sometimes as fixed, unmoveable ornaments or if placed in 
a temporary position, they do not follow any special person. The least 
important are the banners that appear of two sorts. The first consists of 
a narrow strip of stuff, fastened to a pole so that part of the long edge is 
stuck to it and the rest waves loose ; these can be seen for instance on 
buildings (I a 35) or next to them (III 3), behind a seat of honour (la 87) 
or in a pendapa (la 84, compare IB a 80). They can also be found borne 
by a procession that is paying homage as on la 12 *) and IV 26. The sec­
ond sort can be seen on la 91 and IVB 65; here the banner is only fas­
tened with its end to the pole where it curves at the top and streams out 
all its length. The flag-staff is sometimes split in two with a banner on 
each; instances of this are found on la. 93 fixed up, and carried in the 
hand on 0 141, their identhy being given by the inscription pataka. Even 
split in three with triple pennons on the same pole it can be seen, and 
that as decoration to a templebuilding on III 20 and 31. Perhaps 
the objects on IBa 11 and IVB 8 must be reckoned as banners, though 
they are not very distinct.
l) This relief gives as well some fans in the shape of a large flat gem decorated with flowers, 
but these objects appear only in this scene and are in the hands of gods, so we m ust not 
, suppose they existed in reality.
i w
k
 
Q
i
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
T P * 'J


--- Page 216 ---
ingf}} 
(ct
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF
The triple banners on III 20 just, mentioned, are four in number; they 
are set up next to two stambha’s placed on either side of the temple, one 
bearing a trident, the other a winged shell, both having a broad cushion­
shaped pedestal; the banners below their triple branch are fixed into 
the same kind of pedestal. Next to another temple on III 32, there are 
stambha’s on each of the four sides with small lions on them, also fixed 
on a pedestal and therefore belonging to the building; at the side we see 
two more simha-stambha's. Shell and trident are also carried on separate 
poles, the trident only once, IB a 206, the shell several times: with 
wings on lb 65 and II 18, without wings on lb 83, II 72 and lb a 166. In 
this last scene we may remember next to the seated Garuda there is a 
pole set up bearing the figure of a bird1). The cakra is quite a favorite, 
found on la 91, lb 68, 0 33, IBb 101, II 92, III 59, III B 58, and once or 
twice at the top of a banner IB a 47 a, where it is apparently an ensign of 
battle and IBb 11 2). A staff bearing the jewel is also not uncommon, as 
we see on la 73, 91, lb 75, IBa 168, 260 and III 59.
Beside these we have standards that are not meant to carry some spe­
cial emblem but have a cushion-shaped top with a small ornament on 
it; these appear in various forms, set up as a fixture next to a building 
as well as carried in the train of a distinguished personage. We find 
them on O 29, III 47, IV 10, 20, at the top of a banner, and further on 
la 73, lb 70, IBa 292,369, I I 76, IV 26. There is a round ball-shaped top 
to a standard on O 132, lb 63, IB b 118, II B 92 and probably IB a 359, 
but most of this has been knocked off. The curious broad top to the 
banner on lb 33 we must not give too much attention to, it may be no­
thing more than a suitable finish to the banner. Finally let us notice on 
lb 83 a couple of standards with a clasp shaped like a shamrock leaf by 
being bent inwards at each side, like the frame of a lamp; they are finely 
ornamented. Though much plainer, the staff a monk has in his hand on 
IV 28 is very much like these, it also has the same sort of clasp with bells 
hung on it to attract attention 3). Such kind of objects are among those 
that have actually been found in Java.
There was a pole with a small box at the top on IBa 175. The text 
there shewed us that this was not an emblem or an ornament, but the 
box contained a sum of gold to be carried throughout the land as a 
reward to the person who should fulfil the king's wishes. *)
*) See Ip . 403.
«) Cakra. and tr iv ia are still carried in the retinue of Javanese princes. Comp. Groneman, 
Ind. Gids 9, I (1887) p. 136.
*) Compare Foucher A. G. B. II p, 270; De Visser, Arhats, p. 189.


--- Page 217 ---
Also belonging to the emblems, though very fictitious ones, are the 
seven royal attributes the saptaratnani, the „jewels” belonging to the 
ruler of the world, the horse, elephant, disk, gem, spouse, general and 
minister (or pater-familias). These are depicted in several scenes where the 
cakravartin appears. They are partly easily identified, cakra and cinta- 
mani hovering in the air on lotuscushions as well as horse and elephant, 
but the rest of the seven are not always to be found, especially the male 
figures. On Q 129 we get the first calcravartin-scene, the „spouse” is 
evidently the queen seated beside the monarch with a halo behind bet- 
head; then on the ground are seated six male attendants all alike, none of 
them being recognisable as “general” and “minister”. 0 132 shews five 
similar attendants and here it is even impossible to distinguish which of 
the ladies near the king is really his “jewel of a queen”. In contrast to 
this on O 159 we see on a separate seat, next to the group of the king him­
self, on one side a woman and on the other a man, the queen and one of the 
male jewels, but where is the other? Relief lb 44 is no better; the sapta­
ratnani are here flying through the air, the four objects are distinct 
enough, so is the queen, then comes the yaksa who according to the talel) 
acts as herald or if need be as general or minister — he advises the king 
continually to start new wars—but behind this group there is nothing but 
an umbrella-bearer, and in any case the seventh jewel is missing entirely. 
On the first balustrade there is a story twice shewing the saptaratnani; 
in the scenes IRa 285—287 the queen can easily be recognised but not 
the male jewels, and on reliefs 290 —291, behind the four other jewels 
in the air, there is a chariot in which the queen sits beside a man in cere­
monial dress; this person might be one of the male jewels and then 
the other is missing; but most likely it is the cakravartin himself. 
The queen with the four ordinary jewels is found on IV B 1; then 
III 59 is noticeable because jewel and disk are not on cushions but plac­
ed at the top of standards, and here we look in vain for the queen. On 
III B 58 again the disk is at the top of a standard but the (very in­
distinct) jewel seems to be hovering on a lotus cushion. The male “jewels” 
here are not indicated at all, the queen not very clearly. To sum up it 
looks very much as if the Baiabuclur sculptors were not familiar 
with the saptaratnani and perhaps are shewing us the pancaratnani 
— only in a single instance do they give us one of the male jewels- 
and sometimes also lose sight of the queen. At a later period the 
saptaratnani were really known in Java as we see by their represen-
V v J i t w 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
& I L
*) See Vol. I page 262 and 271.


--- Page 218 ---
tation on the Amoghap^a-statue sent to Sumatra by Krtanagarain 1286 
and their mentioning on its inscription 1).
The ceremony of consecrating a king, the abhiseka, appears to be 
depicted in a few scenes where a brahman is sprinkling someone with 
a brush in one hand and a shallow basin with holy water in the other. 
The most indistinct are IBa216, where the brahman is coming towards 
a royal personage but there is no sign of what happens, and la 50, 
the marriage of £akyamuni, where at any rate the new garments and 
wreaths suitable for a consecration are put ready. On IBa 275 we can 
see that a servant is bringing the royal tiara; but IIB 18 is by far the 
most remarkable. The king is sitting in the middle without any adorn­
ment, his hair hanging loose, between two standing officials one of 
whom performs the sprinkling with water out of a shell, the second, a 
brahman (the others are too indistinct to be classified), holding ajar 
which he is emptying over the royal head. A third person standing holds 
another long-shaped jug and a fourth has some object in his hand too 
worn-away to be identified. Courtiers kneeling at the side hold ready the 
garments on trays with all the ornaments that belong to the dress of 
kings. This scene should be certainly noted as an authentic picture of 
the abhiseka of a Hindu-Javanese king 2).
Brush and bowl we saw too on la 114, but there the brush is thicker 
and is not in the hand of a brahman but of one of the important ci tizens of 
a town where £akyamuni is being entertained at a banquet. Every 
where else the sprinkling is done by brahmans with a brush like a shav­
ing-brush. We see them on IBa 116 at the homage of a stupa and again 
on IBa 1 performing some rite to a young child. There again are two of 
them, one with the brush and shell, the other pouring some liquid over 
the child’s head from a jug.
Nunes for small children in many cases are in no way distinguished 
from ordinary women; but there are scenes where they seem to be indi­
cated by a curious headband in the style of a diadem with thick round 
pompons on it. This sort of nurse can be seen on O 44, IBa 145, IIB 10,21,
32, 76. There are many more nurses who do not wear this headdress, but 
the fact remains that this kind of costume is only found on nurses in 
charge of small children. It is impossible to make out why there are so *)
*) Pleyte in Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 49 (1907) p. 175 and plate 2; the author in Versl. Meded. 
Kon. Acad. v. W et. 5de reeks: 2 (1916) p. 326 and 330 sq.
2) For the abhiseka consult the article in Goldstiicker’s Dictionary on this subject (1856) 
p. 274—287; Weber in Abliandl. Bed. Akad. der Wissensch. 1893; Law in Ind, Antiq. 48 
(1919) p. 84 sq.
(#f% 
' 
Qr
V
i W
- / 
- 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
GUL j


--- Page 219 ---
(fil
many of them on the second balustrade; if this is not due to any fancy 
of the sculptor the coincidence should be; noted. Sometimes, not always, 
a double band that looks like beads is worn with this headdress (IBa 
145, II B 76); a thinner kind of necklace is worn on IBb 53 and 100, but 
the headdress is now indistinct., The same with IIB 24, where the women 
ha ve a very thick necklace with a sort of fringe to it; the children on this 
relief are too big to be nursed. I will here just mention the few instances 
of children’s playthings; relief lb 36 shews a miniature standard with a 
cushion-shaped top, very likely a rattle; IBa 120 probably a rattle of 
simpler shape, and IIB 32 looks like some sort of bell unless it is meant 
for a flower. I also suggested the possibility that the little kinnara’s 
being made on lb 51 might be intended as playthings for the small boy 
who appears in the scene. Children playing in the water seems to be the 
subject of lb 95. School where lessons are being given first by a brah­
man, then a monk, we find on IIB 25 and 26; in that on relief 25 the 
scholars have books in their hands, but at the other school they are 
listening most respectfully to the master. In the school where Cakya- 
muni receives his first lessons, or rather proves that he requires none, la 38, 
the scholars who seem to be older, also have books; further scenes of ins­
truction-giving are the whole series that begins with O 79, then IIB 33 
and 34; in this last scene the scholars are no children but grown-ups, 
some with beards. The same with the instruction in the Veda’s given by 
the sons of the gods before the birth of Buddha, relief la 3.
Eating and drinking takes up a very small place, less perhaps than we 
might expect though it is hardly a subject for edifying tales. A few times 
we see food being prepared. First on 0 2 where a cauldron is fixed on 
to a trivet over a, wood fire, which a man is blowing up with a blowpipe; 
another sits next to him cleaning fish to be cooked in the pot. The knife 
he is using is just the shape of the present day wedung 1). On O 15 we see 
a wide flat pan also on a trivet and some-one blowing up the fire; another 
man stands by, stirring with a spoon and holding a smaller dish in his 
hand. A third time we find something similar on la 84 where the rice 
is being cooked for the future Buddha; here too a large cauldron on a 
trivet over a woodfire and two women, one with a spoon, the other with 
a blowpipe. In conclusion may be mentioned 0 89 where fishes and tor­
toises are being boiled by two evildoers, who will soon receive the same 
treatment themselves in the infernal regions. *)
*) This is remarked by miss Tonne* in Elsevier’s Maandschrift 1907, p. 87.
■ G° i x
V ^ ^ S / , 7 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
u liL J


--- Page 220 ---
r S J 
(si
BARABUDIJR AS A MONUMENT OF 
k X L j
; 
' ' 
'=!.; ■ 
* ■ 
■ !; ' . ■' 
! 
I1 
) 
k t ,
The meal itself we find ten times (O 12, 14,20,97, 122, 144, la 29, 112, 
lb 66, IBb 15), the bill of fare appears to be always the same, the well- 
known "rijsttafel”. There is always a large ball of rice in the middle 
with small dishes of various viands all round it, more or less in 
number and distinctness. Unusually elaborate and by good luck unusu­
ally well-preserved are the “rijsttafels” on la 112 and lb 66; on the hit­
ter we can plainly see the fishes and the sate just as on the famous Prarn- 
banan relief1). Sometimes the fish are served on top of the ball of rice. 
Drink is not always given, but we see drinking cups of rather wide or 
bowlshape being filled from a jug with a spout, while relays of food are 
being brought to the table; the large bowl that is being served on lb 66 
might perhaps be intended for a sayuran. On very rare occasions we are 
shewn a drinking-party with its attendant dissoluteness: they drink out 
of wide bowls and the spirituous liquor is poured out of a jug with spout 
so as just-mentioned, or a small-sized martevan such as we see being 
brought to the table {0 97) or a jug narrow in shape with a long neck, 
pointed spout and large handle, the same as used for water-carrying at 
the well on lb 16. A smaller scene of this kind we find on 0 90 as a pre­
lude to hell-punishment; again more circumstantial, on O 20 andIBa 59; 
what makes this affair still more disgraceful according to the Buddhist 
sculptors, perhaps intentionally, these offenders are brahmans.
As regards buildings I must here be very concise. Brandes has already 
remarked several times that their chief importance consists in the data 
they afford for Hindu-Javanese architecture and later Parmentier has 
called attention to the same thing though so far provisionally 2). On this 
account it was considered better to discuss this section of relief-subjects 
in the architectural part of this monograph, where such data are treated 
with the architecture of the whole building. I shall merely enumerate 
the scenes where these buildings chiefly appear. The greater number of 
them are palaces, temples, reception-halls and such splendid,richly-decor­
ated buildings, with which in many cases the sculptor though he may 
have been ruled by the general principles of construction and ornament, 
has often given rein to his fancy and designed monuments of ideal 
form, such as did not exist in reality. Buildings of this kind are found 
specially on O 24, 31, 33, 43, 100, 103, 124, 131, 140, 141, 143, 147, 149, 
152,155, la 6, 10, 15, 19, 25, 26, 35, 37, 53, 54, 55, 61,62, 64, 73, 81, 109,
*) Reproduced in Rapp. Oudb. Comm. 1902 plate 20.
*) L ’architecture in terp re ts dans les bas-reliefs anciens de Java, Bull. Ec. Franp. d'E xtr.
Or. 7 (1907) p. 1—60.


--- Page 221 ---
12, lb 1, 11, 16,25, 29, 33, 37, 50, 79, 81,82, 84, 87, 91,96, 100,106,107,' 
112, IRa 16, 26, 346, IRb 10, 15, 16, 22, 28, 33, 40, 42, 45, 52, 61,68, 72, 
84,93,95,97,99, 104, 110, 113, 114, 119, 125, 127, IIB 7,8, 81,1131,38, 
68, 93, 105, 112, 114, 126, 127, III 3—7, 11, 13, the temple series that 
begins with 20, 69, 70, IlIB 67 , 88, IVB 36, 38, IV 42 and 60. Besides 
these there are buildings which are evidently mostly copied from what 
the sculptor saw7 around him and are therefore valuable evidence for the 
architecture of that time, and for their ethnological importance would 
be worth comparing with what is found now-a-days in Java and other 
parts of the Archipelago. Besides plain pendapa’s on 0 7, 14 etc and 
probably some of those in the series above enumerated, in particular 
gateways and small temples, there are specimens of this kind to be seen 
on O 30, 47, 65, 119, 123, 158, la 23, 116, lb 54, 86; IBa 271, IBb 106, 
IHB 87, IVB 4, 14, 18, 21, 50., What a courtyard looked like, we see 
something of on III 11; on the left of this scene is a palatial-looking 
house, in the centre is a pendapa where the owner- of the estate receives 
his guests and on the right is the rice-shed. Between the house and 
pavilion in the background there is a fruit tree. A fruit garden enclosed 
in a. fence, but with no house near it, we find on O 61 1).
How the buildings are arranged inside does not appear. Whenever a 
scene takes place indoors, the sculptor shews us one hall or apartment be­
tween the outside walls, sometimes with a smaller side-apartment or 
gallery next to it or on both sides; but never anything more, so that the 
addition is intended probably only to explain the situation, not as a 
section of the building as it actually would be.
In this way we do not learn much. Take for example the large hall on 
II 36, that is divided into three parts by pillars, each part being roofed 
with a double arch omemented with a design of foliage turned inwards 
(conventionalized makara's), hanging flowers and bells; it is impossible 
to imagine this to be the section of any real building. It might be true 
that the roof is supported by columns (probably wooden ones) , but the 
loose foliage under the roof is practically impossible. How the sculptor 
arrived at this is quite evident; by dividing the space into three with 
the pillars, he obtained three niche-shaped compartments in a row; these 
he treated like the niches we so often find on the temples with the same 
sort of arch and foliage-ornament. The effect is very fine, the design into
l) Ponds are depicted on O 147, la 82, lb 3, 5, 97, IBa 115, 148, 221, IBb 36, 38, 39,
IIB 61, II 74, 75, III 38, IV 43. They are rectangular, enclosed in a border, evidently made by 
hand, even those found in the wilderness. It seems that the sculptor manufactured a 
conventionalized pond wherever it was needed, without regard to surroundings.
r
(tffjl) 
(fiJ
V A jS f / 7 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
Z M J


--- Page 222 ---
,.niches” is very artistic, but it does not give us the impression of a hall.
Let us not blame the artist for this, we have not the least right to expect 
from him an architecturally correct section of the apartment and he is 
perfectly justified, as long as he gives the spectator the idea of the inci­
dents taking place in a hall, in giving his further attention to producing 
an artistic relief. So the spectator must be satisfied with this as a work of 
art, while he knows it shews him nothing of what such a hall: is like in 
reality.
This is the case not only with this relief which I selected as a very 
clear demonstration of what is to be found on innumerable others and 
can be accepted generally for all sections of this kind; even those 
which I note as possibly being taken from reality we must judge as 
adapted more or less to the sculptors artistic requirements. To achieve his 
aim he may often have introduced some detail from his own time and 
surroundings, it is not likely he would intentionally avoid doing this, but 
unfortunately we have no criterion by which to test the real or fantastic 
elements here put before us; except in such cases as the one just discussed 
where any one can see at a glance the practical impossibility of such 
kind of ornament or construction. Everything remains in general very 
uncertain and can only be guessed at, for instance whether decoration 
of garlands that is so usual with the pendapa's, and is also found in the 
roofs of halls should have actually existed and whether they might be 
attached to flower shaped ornaments in the way we see on 1137 and others. 
Another kind of roof decoration is made with semi-circular cushions that 
hang down as if the whole surface were upholstered; this too is seen in 
pendapa’s (f.i. IV 66 where bells hang from the centre of the cushions) 
and in halls of audience (see, with others IIB 20, where rosettes are 
attached to the cushions). Sometimes we see only one of these omements 
right in the middle of the apartment (lb 63, IIB 50). It is quite reason­
able to suppose that this sort of decoration existed in reality, but how 
can we make sure of it ?
Then added to this is the restricted space available on the reliefs for 
the buildings. The figures acting in the scene must have the first place 
and are therefore generally represented in apartments quite out of pro­
portion to their size, in which if they stood up their heads would touch 
the roof. The result is that the sculptor can only find room for his persons 
and the mostneeded of the larger pieces of furniture; with the small ones 
that take up less space it is another case, as we shall notice later on. There 
was of course no chance for any interior decoration of the apartments. In 
Maya’s sleeping-room on la 13, we see only the recumbent queen with
: 
barabudttr a s a MONUMENT OF 
n
i j


--- Page 223 ---
her women and one dish; the famous scene of £akyamuni’s awakening 
in the night on la 63, shews only the Bodhisattva on a bench and the 
sleeping women * there was no room for a proper couch. In the hall of the 
palace on lb 74, the band of garlands round the ceiling is all we see of 
decoration to the apartment, the same with the cushion-ornament we 
noted in the roof on IIB 20; a large couch and a lamp is all the furniture 
in the room except some small objects put away under the couch. It is 
the same everywhere; nowhere is there any decoration on the walls. All 
the same we can get some idea of what the walls look like on reliefs such 
as O 32 and 73. There the chief person is seated on a wide throne behind 
which a beautifully decorated wall can be seen. The rest of both scenes 
takes place in the open air, so that this cannot be meant for the wall of a 
room, but at any rate it is a large space that has to be decorated. In the 
first scene this is done with small pillars on each side of a flat panel un­
der a cornice of garlands and rosettes; the second shews a wall covering 
in the design of a cross and rosette with four lobes, and a row7 of round 
vases above 1). Though it is quite uncertain if the walls of a room were 
decorated or even if the whole ornament Is not due to the sculptor’s 
fancy, it seems suitable to make mention thereof.
As regards furniture first comes the couch, the bale-bale of the pre­
sent day. In its most primitive form we find it, for instance on O 13; a 
plank on four legs, quite rough and without ornament. The beginning 
of improvement was by decorating the legs, so as can be seen in the next 
scene O 14. Next, when the bench is placed out of doors, a roof supported 
by four columns is fixed over it and that becomes the beginning of the 
pendapa. We can notice as described above, how the sculptors tried to 
give the best place to the chief actors in the scene and keep the rest sub­
ordinate, so that the bale-bale when occupied by several figures is made 
the right size for them, while the pendapa cannot possibly be stretched 
beyond the narrow limits of the relief and must be made too small in 
proportion, only large enough for one or two persons, far less than a pavi­
lion in real life would accommodate; in fact about as many as might find 
room on a simple couch. As the distinction between the roofed-in couch 
and pgndapa we can see that the first stands on legs and the other on a 
foundation; should the lower part be out of the picture then it is not pos­
sible to distinguish one from the other, their design and decoration being so 
much alike. On the other hand, the couch being sometimes made with
') Another similar instance is found on IBa 35; there it seems as if an actual building can 
be seen in the background behind the seat.
(f(Wfi 
(St
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
iD K L j


--- Page 224 ---
a back, is easily mistaken for a chair, especially when only one person is 
seated on it and it is made rather shorter. The real couch is of course one 
on which a person reclines and then this piece of furniture often takes 
up the whole apartment. This we see on IIB 81. There is a still more 
curious one on IIB 20; at the head it has arms like an easy-chair, the 
back is high but it slopes down to the sides and rests on four legs, 
cushions are arranged on the back and within the sides that support the 
sleeping figure. On IBb 19, there is nothing but a stone bench on which 
a mattress is laid with a bolster; in this case we can see the resemblance 
to a pendapa foundation. Sometimes not even a foundation or bench of 
any sort is given and the sleeper merely laid down on a mat; this is act­
ually done on la 13 to queen Maya, the future mother of the Bodhi- 
sattva.
Thrones and seats there are plenty of, in all shapes and sizes. The sim­
plest kind is the square undecorated pedestal we find very often, which 
even when it is improved with some ornament so as on IBa 191 or II 30 
and 51, is nothing more than a block of stone or wood with the figure 
seated on it cross-legged. It can be made more comfortable by adding a 
mattress and bolster as the woman in no. 51 does; the chief-person on II 
89 does not even require the pedestal but sits on the floor of his pavi­
lion with just a mattress and bolster. Out-of-doors it may be necessary 
to give this kind of seat a small roof supported on pillars; the roof is in 
most cases flat but occasionally in the shape of an arched niche (0 42) 
or finished with a three-cornered pediment (0 79),
Both kinds of seats, pedestal- or chair-shaped, can have a back 
which is nearly always without arms. The construction may be quite 
simple, merely a cross-piece ending in a couple of knobs supported 
by two straight legs, more or less ornamented, and generally in the 
design of makara-heads at the ends. In this last style is the empty 
throne prepared on la 87 for the Buddha, with a large bolster on it; 
further on, la 105, he is seated on one of a plain shape with a back and 
a very elaborate pedestal so we see that chair-back and legs and pede­
stal are not always equally decorated. Examples of distinctly handsome 
seats on a pedestal are found among others, on lb 118 and 57, both in 
makara-design; on the first-mentioned it has become conventionalized 
into tendrils; the throne on legs, lb 79, has a bold rich makara decor­
ation, where we see behind the elephant-heads the same spiral or ten­
dril ornament familiar to us with staircase and gateway makara’s. On 
lb 13, seats are to be seen with a pedestal and with legs, side by side. 
Sometimes no pedestal at all can be seen and the back seems to rest on
(l( f )? 
(CT
' BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
k J i^ J


--- Page 225 ---
(f& i 
%
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE
the ground so as lb 79 shews us. In such cases both mattress and bolster 
are desirable, see II 62; there are many instances of this sort. Here are 
nearly always bolsters at the back, though little can be seen of the mat­
tress or cushions; notice one special instance on III 41, where a pat­
tern of squares is discernible. In front of the pedestal there is often a 
cloth hanging down.
There are very few examples of arm-chairs. OnIIB9and89 both seats 
are empty, placed ready with a cushion; possibly such chairs were in 
more general use than would appear by these two instances, and the 
sculptors preferred to. shew their figures more distinctly without arms to 
the chair. A cushion by itself without any chair appears on IBb 92, and 
on IV 41 there is a cushion laid on top of a lotuscushion, therefore evi­
dently intended for a Buddha or Bodhisattva. Sometimes on the top of 
the chairback there is a semicircle (IV B 2) or a niche (IB a 167) intro­
duced; in one case (O 27) a separate decoration is seen behind the whole 
seat, apparently not attached to it; columns at the side and roofed over 
by an arch shaped like an accolade, with a kala head in the centre 
and makara ornament turned outwards at the side above the columns.
There are some seats of a different shape worth attention. The empty 
chair on IIB 27 shews a chairback with open work in squares on the 
back between two pillars; on the top of the chairback in the middle is a 
threecornered omemerit in the shape of an antefix, while the usual orna­
ment at the ends has the character of acorner antefix. On la 49 the pede­
stal is not rectangular but hexagonal. No. IV 21 is a veiy remarkable one, 
where the pedestal is made like a small temple, it belongs to a Buddha and 
therefore is not subject to human requirements; the same with the 
hexagonal throne ornamented with lions, occupied by Qakyamuni on la 
111. Lion-thrones are quite common, used not exclusively by a Buddha 
as on IV 26 or a Bodhisattva (II 127, III 12), but also by a woman(II 65,
71,79,107, in the last it is goddess). They are always designed with lions 
supporting the seat or as smaller figures against the foot of the 
throne. There is one instance where (lb 113) a man in royal dress is seat­
ed on an otherwise ordinary seat with legs, while a small lion appears 
underneath in the centre. On II 128, already-mentioned, there is a figure 
mounted on two of the four lions under Maitreya's throne; the back is 
ornamented at each side with the favorite design of a rampant lion on 
the recumbent elephant’s head, while the lion supports the back of the 
chair with its makara ornament. Such thrones are made specially for the 
Buddha (la 100, 113, II 1) ; in one instance £akyamuni’s throne is sup­
ported by a human figure instead of the lion (la 101) and the same vari-


--- Page 226 ---
ation appears in the empty chair probably intended for a Bodhisattva 
on IV B 63 and the throne for a human being on II 121.
Besides the large seats and thrones, there are smaller stools and foot­
stools and benches. We have already noticed the low brahman-stools 
made in reality of cane; a very plain kind with only one twisted line be­
tween the top and bottom, is found on IIB 25, but as a rule it is a curve 
between two uprights (see for inst. IIB 56, 79, 80, II 124, IIIB 72, 82, 
84), sometimes angles instead of curves (II 39). On O 156 a stool of this 
basket work is being offered as a gift; IIB 83 shews us a very fine speci­
men, One of the three brahmans on IIB 32 is sitting on a stool like this, 
the other two on a bench the legs of which are twisted, and turn inwards 
in a point. A similar kind of bench can be seen on Ib36; the three-legged 
footstool on IIB 21, used by a nurse with a child, is much the same. Be­
sides these uncommon specimens there are some very ordinary ones, 
just a plank on legs, these can be found on lb 35 and 38, but there is no 
reason to mention everything of the kind.
Under the thrones and couches the space is continually used for 
stowing away small objects. Boxes and chests, square or rectangular, 
sometimes open, sometimes closed with a more or less arched lid *) or 
fastened round with bands; long cylinder-shaped packages tied round 
with fla*t bands, high jars with wide bottoms, pots and martevans, jugs 
with and without a spout, flat basins often piled up together, cups and 
.goblets of earthenware with and without lids, dishes with wreaths on 
them, round boxes and all sorts of things. They are to be seen on nearly 
all reliefs where there is a chance to put them in and we may consider 
that in such details the sculptors probably depicted reality, only the 
place may be due to the fact that the space under the seats was very 
appropriate for such paraphenalia. The contents are seldom definable, 
when it can be seen they hold something. The most distinct are the 
chests, bowls and trays holding valuables, rings and coins for instance on 
O 113, 127, and IBb 20; on the last scene they are not under the seat 
but being offered as a gift. On lb 39 leaves are hanging out of the 
opened box with a lotusflower here and there among them; on O 73 
we see an open dish with a comb on it, next to this is a basin with a 
lid and a couple of balls; la 54 has wreaths and O 30 fruit on it. For 
further utensils of this kind placed under the seat see O 6, 11, 3 8, 27,
*) I here is a very large chest being carried by four men with yokes on IIB 53. The chest on 
IBa eo6 is of monumental shape; th e lid with its ornam ent of stupa's looks more like a roof 
with its antefix border, the whole chest is probably a reliquary.
f r o ) 
(ST
V V ^ P r'-/ 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMEN X OF 
i j l ^


--- Page 227 ---
■ g°5x
V & /'* /' 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
' a | J ,
\«C—'^Jry 
. 
'
43, 65, 70, 116, 125, la 60, lb 71, but they can be found almost 
everywhere.
Dishes and bowls besides those found on the ground, are seen in the 
hands of persons who appear in the scenes, first of all the small bowl 
carried by one of the attendants in the retinue of all persons of distinc­
tion, just in the same way as the sirih-utensils at a later period. This 
vessel is nearly always as if folded in shape, rather narrow at the bottom, 
and widening out at the top, in a few instances (IV 55 and others) it is 
high and narrow. It is also to be seen in unfolded form, like a flat bowl 
rectangular or round. The contents is seldom to be seen, but sometimes 
there is something sticking out over the edge, not always the same. We see 
things like leaves and also loops either separate or together; in every case 
where the contents are visible, we see also two rather pointed hook-like 
pieces bent over the edge and in most instances these objects are the 
only ones discernible or far more distinct than the others. 1 give some 
examples: hooks III 23 and 43; leaves, lb 76; leaves and hooks 
II 23; loops and hooks IV 56, loops and leaves (square ones) IIB 
54 and 55. Notice IIIB 23, where as well as leaves and hooks, a kind of 
rosette with loops at the four sides appears. We might think that in 
spite of the variation in the contents of these vessels, they are all in­
tended to hold the same ingredients, one or other of which happens to 
shew over the edge. IIIB 44 is quite an exception, there a necklace 
is hanging out of the bowl.
I have just alluded to the set of sirih utensils; it has actually been 
suggested 1), that these folded vessels contain betel-leaves and that be­
tel-chewing was already a custom in Java at this period. This is cer­
tainly not impossible, for already in the fourth century in Further India, 
pinang with chalk and betel was being used2); but on the other hand in 
the seventh century, the part of Sumatra visited by I-tsing only made 
use of pinang mixed with spices 3) and sirih-chewing in Java is first re­
ported in 1416. The exact truth therefore can not be established and the 
varying contents of these vessels on the reliefs, makes it advisable to 
leave the question undecided.
*) Huyser in Ned. Ind. Oud en Niemv, 1 (1916— 17) p, 134— 137. Pleyte too seems to 
have been of the same opinion; he labels these utensils "Sirihbeh&lter” and "Spucknapfe" 
under the reliefs on which they appear (Buddha-Legende p. XV)vTonnet 1.1. p. 92, con­
siders the vessel to be the forerunner of the sirih-leaf utensil but is of opinion that this object 
made of fine basket-work on Barabudur is intended for some other use.
*) According to De Groot in Feestbundel Veth (1894), p. 266 sq,
*) A record of the Buddhist religion as practised in India and the Malay Archipelago, trans. 
Takakusu (1896) p. 45 and 48.


--- Page 228 ---
" All other bowls and dishes, either held In the hand or placed beside or 
among the figures are nearly always, when the contents are discemable, 
filled with flower^ and wreaths. Examples can be seen on la 74, 78, 81, 
107, 120, tb 27, 55, 85, 103, 120, IBb 117, 127, IIB 32, II 27, 37, 44, 
49, 52, 57, III 8,43, 68, IVB 36,65. These flowers and wreaths appear on 
every possible occasion, paying homage, receiving audience, religious 
ceremonies, and in Bali at the present day it can be seen how this tradi­
tion has been preserved, even to the way of piling up the wreaths into 
a pyramid such as those on la 109, lb 39, I I 8. jeweled ornaments, especi­
ally bracelets for the upper arm are to be seen, held ready or offered as 
gifts, on trays, forinst. Ia 9, 16, 17, 26, IBa 1. The flat dishes being held 
slantwise as on O 70, la 98, II 73, is probably due to the wish for letting 
the contents, some sort of ornamental figure with a frame round it (is 
it a cake ?) be plainly visible. At distributions as will be seen later on, 
there are trays with jewels, rings, moneybags, garmenij^ and such like, 
prepared for distribution. Jugs with a spout are also quite common. For 
peculiarities that appear only once like the dish with the bowl full of 
something between two small objects on O 43 or la 9, see the description 
of the reliefs themselves. A pot or bag of peculiar shape like a paper bag 
is shewn on O 54 and IBa 326 b.
Vessels that appear continually either in the hands of persons or stand­
ing about, axe lamps and incense-burners, which are not very easily distin­
guished from one another; the waving line seen above them may just 
as well be a flame as the smoke of incense. They must generally be meant 
for incensories, as the scenes nearly always represent daylight. When held 
in the hand, the person very often has a little fan in the other hand to 
rouse the flame. These objects are of all sorts ; small and elegant (la 5,
21, III 43), rather larger and of an elaborate model (II4, 5, 13, III B6, IV 
26, 36), then very plain (la 100), with a flat top (IBa 232), a heavier top 
(lb 83, IV 17), a short squat shape (O 81, IV 33). Occasionally there is 
one without any stem lb 85, or in contrast, a very tall thin one like a 
torch (Ia 59). Sometimes there is an incense-burner with a handle at the 
side for carrying it, as on Ia 114, IIB 68, II 81. The standing incense- 
burners are generally the same shape as the above-mentioned, except 
those with the handle (see Ia 18, 24, 69—71, 74, 92, 106, Ib74, IBa 80, 
167, 235 etc. II 99, III 14, 47, IVB 72, 73); as they are not intended 
to be carried, we find also larger (O 125, IBb 33, 128), taller (II 83) 
and thicker ones (III 21, IVB 50, IV 15); besides these there is now and
l) Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago and Malacca, compiled from Chinese sour­
ces, Verh. Bat. Gen. 39 (1876) p. 49. See also Encycl. v. Ned. Indie (1st ed.) IV p. 386.
^(m%\ 
P i !
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF


--- Page 229 ---
then one, not in use and closed with a lid, as on II 22. Very curious in 
shape is the incensory on III 61, with a wide square ornemented top on 
a slender stem and the one on IVB 55, with a large censer in the centre and a 
smaller one at each side. Large lamps with branches for several lights 
are found occasionally near buildings as on 0 24 and 155; let me here 
recall, attention to the extraordinary temple with lamps or incense-burn­
ers on III 25, which of course cannot represent any real building. 
Finally IIB 20 is important; it shews us a sleeping room, and on each 
side a hanging-lamp with its oil-vessel in a bracket, the very same as 
specimens that have been dug up in java; here we have undoubtedly 
before us an existing example of the means of lighting. On that same re­
lief there is a bracket hanging to the ceiling of the room containing a 
bowl with a scalloped edge, attached to a centre piece and shewing a 
point on each side that looks as if it might be a flame and the whole ob­
ject a lamp, though we cannot be certain of i t 1).
Vases are also very important utensils, used for flowers, especially 
for lotuses both red and blue. These are often very simple in shape, 
round and undecorated as on O 78 and la 91; in the same style as 
when used as roof-ornaments (II 80, 82). The round-bodied shape is also 
found decorated, with a band round the middle as on IV 65, moreover or­
namented on the side of neck and foot as II 30. A taller, more slender 
shape is less common, see la 6, 88, just as the very high narrow' sort on 
III 68. The most ordinary shape is a vase that widens out right below 
the neck and then goes narrower to the foot, see O 66, la 54,11 2, III36, 
IVB 44, I V 20; with ornamented band round the middle II 62. These are 
ail without spout; but cases with a spout are quite as numerous. Among 
them as well the shape just-mentioned is more common, wider at the top 
and going narrower at the bottom, such as la 97,107, lb 73, IBa 80, 269,
II 25, 76, III 3, IVB 24. But there is also a slenderer kind of these, see 
IBa 193, II 14, and a fat-bodied sort, I I 78. Flowers are often placed in 
shells (turbinella’s) fixed on a trivet as on la 92, 96, 108, lb 1, IBa 290,
III 26; these are also to be seen empty, f. i. IBa 85,1139, or used as holy- 
water font as seen above. Basins of a shell shape without a stand also 
appear, as on O 150; trivets with an ordinary vessel, IBa 118.
O tiier domestic utensils have mostly already been described, such as 
are used for cooking, at meals and drinking-bouts; I shall only mention *)
*) The numerous perfume-ornaments, mostly in the hands of celestial beings on the higher 
galleries, need not be mentioned separately. As an exception notice the tall, pointed object 
wound round with crossed bands on IV 14, evidently copied from an earthly model; the one 
on IV 40, seems intended to be burnt into odoriferous flames.
Barabm jur II 
lb
l-V M )-J 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE


--- Page 230 ---
--XV\
here some peculiarities of shape etc. We have noticed martevan shaped 
pots among the vessels placed under seats; the same sort of thing, good 
examples of which can be seen on O 2 and 19, are the large jars in which 
valuables are kept, more or less varied in form . Jewelpots are found on IBa 
60, III 15, IVB 32,74 and especially III B 64, where the lids are furnished 
with large rings as handles. There are some very large jars of valuables 
on IBa 267, and though only partly visible, on IBb 24; in this last case 
the contents are not disclosed. Various kinds of vessels are placed to­
gether on O 80 and 128 and a large round one with a lid that is ornamented 
on la 84. Small hasin-like dishes are used on 0 10 and 42, little bowls 
O 154; small round basins with a lid on. IBa 29, little round pots on O 37 
and with round stoppers lb 88, a bottle shape, II 25, an ordinary gendi 
on 0 80 and 82; besides these the hermit's water jug that has already 
been mentioned. Vases with a spout of curious shape can be found on 
O 32 with a very bulky body, lb 37, with a very wide mouth, IBb 83 of 
extremely large size. For a teapot shape though the spout is not visible, 
see IIB 21, this may be just a pot without a spout. A dish in the shape of 
a boat we see on III 52; with scalloped edge on IVB 61, tall and narrow, 
IBa 207. Among the standing vessels we see one with a very fine pedestal 
on II 49 and on IIB 15 another handsome specimen with sides in a 
design of narrow upright leaves. The jug with a lid rather like a beer- 
mug with two handles, is quite unique on IVB 61. As for spoons, be­
sides with the cooking pots, they can be seen on O 19, IBb 79, and IVB 
10, in this last scene it is being used to serve from a plate with.
There are still a few uncommon objects the reliefs shew us that must 
be noticed; the real use of some of them is difficult to define; some at­
tempt to do so was made in describing the separate reliefs. The contents 
of the tall jar on O 2, a stick or handle, the top part of a cylindrical ob­
ject fastened by a knob and a round dish with a lid, are three things that 
seem to belong together and perhaps have something to do with the sick 
child on the couch above them .There is an undefinable object being pre­
sented on O 150; it seems to consist of two round dishes fastened to­
gether, each having a lid, possibly the same thing as the double cocoa-nut 
so popular in Java and elsewhere; nor can we identify the object with 
loops to be seen on IIB 59 above the hermit’s waterjug, it looks like an 
areca-pincher, if it were not for the little bag hanging to it, a sort of butter­
fly net. Large corded bales shaped like a sugar-loaf on IBb 83, and round 
ones on IIB 11, are put away in a store-room, evidently provisions of 
some sort. Not as mysteries but unique curiosities, I recall attention to 
the parcel tied up with cross-bands on IBb 12, and the extraordinary
Vs. V 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
V * I .
\ v ^ = ^ 7 
’ 
k 7 1 j


--- Page 231 ---
manner in which someone on IV 36 is making an offering of flowers on a 
tray resting on a long handle.
Next we come to the various trades and occupations represented. 
There is not much to be learned about them from scenes among the 
higher and highest class of people as most of these are. Agriculture, to 
begin with, only appears in a few scenes. Two of these shew us ploughing, 
IBa 336, and (unfortunately very dilapidated) IBb 2. The plough 
is drawn by a pair of bulls, the yoke resting on the shoulder in front of 
the hump, with a collar round each beast’s neck. The plough itself is the 
ordinary primitive square shape, by which one side scrapes along the 
ground and forces the ploughshare into the earth; the other side sticks 
up with the top bent over to the back and guided by the hand of the 
ploughman who walks behind and directs it with his left hand, holding a 
stick in his right1). On the first of these reliefs we can see plainly the 
bands that hold the ploughshare. There are no other scenes of ploughing; 
a man with an ox but without any plough appears on IIIB 1. In connec­
tion with agriculture O 65 should be noticed, where a couple of men 
are keeping guard under a grain-shed next: to a field of maize that is 
ravaged by rats.
As for craftsmanship the most remarkable scene is the bridgebuilding 
on IV 46. The bridge is being laid over a swiftly-flowing river, and is 
apparently made of bamboo; though the relief is rather damaged and the 
bridge is far too small in proportion to the men who are working at it, 
yet the sculptor shews clearly how he intends to construct it. It must be 
taken from life, for in the interior of the country it can be seen at the 
present day that these kind of bridges are still used. It is three-cornered in 
shape; bamboo-poles, fixed into the ground on both banks of the stream 
and bound firmly together at the top, form the two sides and hold the 
base that is the actual bridge. The workmen are just fixing it at the top; 
the tools that some of them have near them are not distinctly to be seen, 
but the pickaxe on the Bodhisattva’s shoulder is quite clear. The square 
tools carried by the men on O 5, 118, 122, and IBa 154 have been taken 
for ploughs, but most likely they are the beams for the carpenter; if this 
is correct, — the relief at Prambanan where workmen are making the 
scaffold for a cremation makes it probable 2) —, then the tools that *)
*) For the primitive sort of plough, compare plate X in J uynboll’s Catalogue Rijks Ethno- 
graphisch Museum XVI (Celebes, 1922) and description of same plate.
*) See Stutterlieim, Rama-legenden und Rama-reliefs in Indonesien (1924) p. 155 and 
pi. 22.
(• ( S / . l 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
^ S J ,
\ 
n. 'N-4 m3 y . / 
^
■ 
‘ 
. 
1


--- Page 232 ---
‘ G°S*X 
:
t(IJf) 
■ 
(ST
b a r a b u d u e a s a m o n u m e n t OF 
I j l J
look like crow-bars, carried by the men on IBa 154, together with the 
beams, probably also belong to the carpenter’s work.
Another example of work that can be clearly understood is the pot­
ter’s on IBb 107. On one side we see the jars already made, on the other 
side the potter is at work, using a flat stick to get a good shape. Bearers 
with carrying-poles are bringing large round, balls, it may be clay or gourds 
with water. Women and children are looking on just as natives always 
do. The same is to be seen on lb 98, but it is not possible to make out 
distinctly what is going on. An old man with a square hammer is hitting 
a small object that he holds between his thumb and forefinger on a 
kind of carpenter’s bench; another man has a tool like a chisel in his 
hand and seems to be working at some small objects that are laid in 
front of him on a broad flat block. On lb 51 craftsmen are probably making 
the little kinnara’s that seem to figure in the story; one of them is work­
ing at these images with a straight stick, another has a bow-shaped tool in 
his hand, a third is hacking at a long piece of wood with a sort of 
pickaxe. In another scene, O 30, a man is sitting with a tool on his 
shoulder that looks like a hammer, perhaps an adze to judge by one 
edge being blunt the other sharp; he is not using it so that we cannot 
see what work it is made for.
In describing lb 2 I remarked that the man who walks in front of the 
troop going into the forest, holding a peculiar kind of knife first bent in­
to a right angle and then having a broad curved point, must be there to 
cut out a path: the same kind of knife with the name “siwah” is still in 
use in the Lampongs1) and found in Madura as well, while several kinds 
of kudi shapes shew unmistakeable resemblance to it. Grass cutters are 
always easily recognised by their tied-up bundles of grass and their tool, 
on O 117 a reaping-hook, on IBa 21, a sickle. For la 90, we must rely7 on 
the text that the man is a grass-cutter, for he is pulling it with his hands, 
not cutting, supposing the relief is correctly identified.
In the series on the buried base, twice we come across a man whom we 
are in doubt about, whether he belongs to the handicrafts or trade. He 
appears on 0 39, 50 and 97, with a stand made of bamboo that has a 
semicircular lump of something on it, and legs formed by poles that split 
into prongs at the bottom so that it can be carried on the owner’s back 
or fixed up in the ground. Such portable stalls are not uncommon; they 
are still found in use nearly the same in construction, for instance in 
Middle-Sumatra. What there is on them is not very distinct; on O 39 *)
*) Illustrated in Ned. Indie Oud en Nieuw, 8 (1924) p. 48.


--- Page 233 ---
there seem to be a couple of fishes hanging at the side, on 0 97 a pair of 
birds are next to it. In the first case we might take the man to be a travel­
ling food-seller and the round object would be the basket-cover kept 
over the food, but neither of the reliefs shew anything to confirm this 
idea, and the birds make us think they may have been the objects pre­
served under the cover. Moreover the "basket” on 50 is so flat that it 
does not look like a basket, but more like a whetstone. In short, it is 
better not to guess about it; possibly these are not always meant for the 
same kind of traders.
A real merchant or trader is certainly to be seen in Maitrakanyaka 
on lb 106 and 107. In the first scene he is not actually shopkeeping but 
just handing over the profits to his mother, but the jars standing near to 
her may of course contain some of his wares. No. 107 however certainly 
represents a shop, only we are not able to make out which of his contin­
ually flourishing businesses it is meant to be. As far as the damaged 
state of the relief allows, we may take it to be the goldsmith's. The pur­
chaser seated opposite to the merchant, is holding a pair of scales, in one 
scale there is a ring and in the other there seems to be a bag of money. 
Between the two persons there is a bundle of something like sticks and a 
round bulk]’ pot. A few pieces of stuff are hung over a rail, out of place 
in a goldsmith’s, shop as we must hesitate to call it.
According to the text the chief person on II 118 should also be a mer­
chant but here he seems to be dispensing only edifying discourse with little 
attention to business; in front of him. is a small table on legs that surely 
would have given us some information, if its whole top had not been 
knocked off. Though lb 56, the (pbi-jataka, is not by any means a shop­
keeping scene, it must be mentioned in this place for its large weighing 
machine, a cross-beam resting on two posts to which the actual weigh­
ing-instrument is fastened in the centre, a balance with two scales. It is 
ornamented here and there, as befits a thing in royal use; some examples 
that have been dug up are also finely-worked.
The men we see carrying various things in a yoke may often be street- 
vendors, but sometimes they are on other errands, as for instance the 
man on lb 41 who is taking home the corn that fell from heaven in a 
miraculous shower1) and the one O 1, who is carrying away the fish 
caught in the tunnel-traps2). Then again O 50 where a man is carrying
’) These miraculous showers generally consist of jewelled ornaments, lb 43, IV 7; with 
coins as well, lb 82, IB a 259—262; even garments lb 42, III 29. The lexis generally relate a 
succession of various showers, compare above Vol. I p. 414 note.
*) As regards fish on carrying-poles it is interesting to notice the sim ilar custom in Further 
India, for instance Le Bayon d'Angkor Thom II (1914) gal. ext. face Sud aile Est. pi. 22.
K
&
i 
fir
K X W S y 7 
HINDU-J AVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
I $ L j


--- Page 234 ---
/ 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
u
L
his goods in this way, while another bears a load on his head; on this 
relief notice the sort of little roof that is fastened to the carriers yoke to 
protect him and his wares from the sun. Then look at the little round pots 
on O 37, or the square trays with feet and conical cover on O 43. Water- 
bearers carry their jar in their hand or on the head, as shewn Ih 16 or 
IBa 221, but in the last scene we see the larger jars are being carried in a 
yoke.
There were of course literary men and artists in the society here 
depicted, as some of the scenes shew. Reliefs have already been described 
where teaching is going on; I will now mention scenes where books ap­
pear, 0 77, 79—82, 84', 85, la 3, 38, IBb 72, 110, 126, 128, IIB 7, 8, 25,
33, 34, III 56, IIIB 8, 9. The books correspond to the well-known kro- 
pak shape; they open into loose leaves held in the hand, and when clos­
ed are bound round in the usual way with bands; three straight ones at 
both ends or across the middle or slantwise across the whole book. Some­
times a rosette can be seen, probably an ornament on the cover. When 
necessary, books are laid on stands or trays or maybe, if IBb 10 really 
shews a book l), on a small three-legged table. Once or twice at homage- 
paying ceremonies, objects are being carried which look like two books 
tied together with cross-bands; they are really larger than ordinary books, 
so perhaps only meant for oblong boxes; there is of course no reason why 
only books should be tied together in this way. These things are found 
on II 55 and III 49. An unfolded letter, oblong in shape with an edge to 
it, is to be seen on lb 65.
We see that portraits were not unknown, by lb 22 and 23, and lb 70 
where a portrait of the Buddha though rolled up and not visible is being 
escorted with due honor and respect by a procession. There is a small 
carved Bodhisattva image in a niche on the roof of a building on III 34; 
lb 54 probably shews us a picture in painting also fixed on the upper 
storey of a building 2).
Hunting and fishing, however much forbidden by the Buddhist creed 
and included in the crimes punishable by hell, as we see by the reliefs on 
the buried base, were naturally common enough in the not altogether 
Buddhist Java; we need not be surprised to find scenes of this kind often 
enough on Barabudur, where several of the jataka’s are stories of the 
chase. In contrast to these there are a few instances where animals that 
have been caught are set free again, as on O 9 and IV 43.
Fishing is done in various ways. On 0 1, only tunnel-traps are being used;
’) Vol. I page 443.
’) Compare I p. 243.
• gO[^Nv 
'


--- Page 235 ---
__v
the traps are just being emptied, they are the same as what we use now- 
a-days with a wide opening, then narrowing to the end. The same thing 
is in use on O 118, but at the same time two other ways of fishing are 
going on, the fishing-rod at any rate is plainly to be seen. The second 
way seems to be with a scoop; the man stands ready with a round wood­
en scoop open at the end which he manages with his left hand, holding 
in his right a rope that runs through two holes in the sides of the scoop 
close to the open end; the way of fishing is evidently to steer the scoop 
with the left hand so that it comes under the fish and then pull the rope 
up suddenly so that it cannot get away. An apparently simple manner 
of fishing that requires considerable skill. On O 109 two men are at work 
with a large draw-net. they are pulling through the water.
Hunting of the simplest kind can be seen on the reliefs of the buried 
base; smoking out rats on 087, bird-killing, with club and blow-pipe, of 
small birds on 0 91; of larger birds with bow and arrow on 0 118. OnIBa 
79 a swan is being caught with a snare as we know from the text, but 
there is nothing to be seen of it on the relief. But on IIB 64 it is very 
distinct how the hunter is laying snares to catch a peacock.
Monkeys on IBa 102 and 199 are hunted with bow' and arrow as well 
as with blow-pipe, but bow and arrow is always the favorite weapon. The 
hunters on lb 3 and IBb 4 have no other weapon, and kings who go 
hunting use nothing but bow and arrows. So the kings on lb 89 and IBa 74, 
each with a small retinue, both have bow and arrows as well as the mon­
arch on IBa 97 and the one who is on horseback on IBa 90—93 ; in the 
case of these two last we can see what they are hunting; a deer and a 
^arabha respectively There is often a whole hunting party depicted en ter- 
ing the forest; the men on IBb 71, who are chasing the deer and those 
on IIB 57, who are after deer and wild hoars, have bow and arrows as 
their chief weapon, though in the last scene there are one or two with 
swords, who might belong to the guard and therefore probably are not 
meant for hunters. With a royal hunting-party we may of course find 
an armed escort sometimes, but bow and ar rows are never missing, they 
are evidently the weapons of the chase. The king himself is often seen on 
horse-back, the animals he hunts are either deer and wild boar or only 
deer. The royal hunting parties alluded to are found on lb 93, 99, 114 and 
IBb 111. Archery was undoubtedly held in high honor and we can easily 
understand that when the hero of some of the stories has to give proof of 
his accomplishments, shooting with the bow is one of the tests, for the 
great Siddhartha on la 49, and for others on lb 17 and 119.
As to animals used for riding, the famous horse Kanfhaka who carries his
t ( j ^
) 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
^
i L


--- Page 236 ---
master, the future Buddha, at the Great Departure, is to be found on Ta 
64—67. This horse is treated in the usual careless manner of the Bara- 
budur sculptors; on relief 64 and 67 it is quite bare, on 65 it has nothing 
but a band round its forehead and the Boddhisattva is sitting without 
any bridle, his legs drawn up on a saddle that also appears to be quit e 
unattached to the animal’s back and is flat in shape; on 66 however the 
horse has a bit and biidle as well as a saddle with a high back, the sort 
that can only be ridden astride. Both styles of riding are found else­
where; with legs drawn up on lb 2 and IBa 90, astride on lb 93, while the 
saddles on the horses standing ready on IBa 169 and IBb 111 are also 
for the ordinary way of riding; lb 36 is too indistinct to decide about. 
Besides saddle and bridle horses generally wear an ornamented band with 
bells round their neck. Judging by the best-preserved and most care­
fully finished animals on IBa 91, 93 and IBb 111, there were various 
styles of harnessing a horse; the saddle fastened with a belly-band, a strap 
across the chest and under the tail, and moreover a collar, intended only 
for ornament and trimmed with bells, we see on IBa 93; but the bells are 
put on the strap in front of the chest and behind the tail, while there is no 
separate collar, on IBb 111. The horse on IBa 91, the very same as the 
one on 93, has bells on the chest-strap, no collar and no strap at. all un­
der the tail; in other scenes as well the crupper is not to be seen. Armed 
horsemen often appear at the head of an important procession when the 
chief person is carried in a palanquin or on an elephant, as on lb 33, II 
42, 54; and there are postilions on the horses of a carriage on la 39 and 
II 46.
The animal of state and ceremony is of course the elephant. Horses 
and elephants are seen together in a royal procession (I IB 17), or stand­
ing in readiness in the retinue of distinguished persons (la 31,39, lb 91, 
II 26); the mahout with his angku^a often sitting on its neck. In the same 
way elephants without horses are found la 16, III 85, IV B 82. They gene­
rally wear a band round the forehead with a three-cornered ornament in 
the centre of it, and very often a cloth thrown over their back. The ele­
phant on la 16 has a bell round its neck and two other bells hanging on. 
either side of its body; but the one on lb 39, 91, has bells all round its 
collar and along the strap that goes round its chest and body and under 
the tail; there is also a collar with bells on IBa 37.
All-these various kinds of bell-ornaments, the single one on the collar, 
the collar with bells all round it, the crupper as well, the side straps with 
single bell hanging from, it, are also to be seen when the elephant has a 
seat or a liowdah on its back and then sometimes there are bells along
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF


--- Page 237 ---
the bottom of the seat. The usual way of fastening the seat is either by 
two straps both passing under the animal’s belly or by three, the middle 
one round the belly and the others going in front of the chest and under 
the tail. The chair is generally nothing but a seat with back and arms, 
sometimes open so that a cushion can be seen in it, as on I I 97 and III 87, 
or else closed, with higher back and sloping arms as on I II 3; or a sort of 
tray, with sides more or less ornamented, see lb 14,20,92, III 9. A higher 
shape of the open sort, fixed on to a separate bottom piece, is shewn on 
III 20; something different is on lb 70: here the man riding on the 
elephant is sitting in a box closed on all four sides and ornamented with 
pilasters, while the seat has back and arms as well. Another on III 50 is 
square and has a roof supported by pilasters; this is used for carrying 
dishes filled with what looks like wreaths and flowers. On II 54 we find 
the most handsome specimen of the seat on an elephant's back; first the 
bottom part made in framework with pilaster ornament on it, then the 
back resting on curved feet and then the slender delicately-shaped pilas­
ters that support the roof with a ridge and a bell at each end
Palanquins are also used for travelling; several times when describing 
the reliefs in detail we noticed that even where the text required some 
other vehicle, the sculptor has depicted a palanquin, a fact that may be 
due chiefly to the lesser space it would require in the picture, but also 
because he was accustomed to seeing these vehicles in use around him.
The most primitive kind of palanquin is shewn on IBa 75; it is no 
more than a piece of cloth fastened to two poles and borne on the shoul­
ders of four men, the person carried sitting only on the cloth hanging 
between the two poles. The kind most commonly used is rather differ­
ent ; a flat board on two carrying poles with a back to it that is not al­
ways distinctly shewn; there are generally eight bearers to this. On the 
reliefs the person carried is always placed facing the spectator while the 
palanquin is left in profile; the result is that the back of the seat behind 
the figure is fixed on the side, not on the back of the vehicle. It is difficult 
to believe that this was so in reality; probably the sculptor, to do justice 
to his figures, ignored the construction of the palanquin. The back, like 
that of other chairs, is more or less ornamented; the design is chiefly 
makara at the ends of the cross-piece. This style is to be seen on 0 150, 
lb 33, 81, IBa 39, 51, 123,1TB 17. An empty palanquin without a back 
is standing ready on IIB 86, it is nothing hut a seat with a back and 
front edge with holes for the bamboo carrying poles. Occasionally we 
find handsomer specimens than the ordinary sort, these have arms as 
well as back and often twelve bearers, see IIB 83,88, III 10. No less than
jl) 
(CT
\ ^
, 7
 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
JOBLJ


--- Page 238 ---
sixteen men are needed to carry the splendid large palanquin on II 42, it 
has high sides at the front and back of the seat, decorated with a panel 
and pilaster, and the roof has an edge of antefix-omament round it, If 
these panels belong in reality to the front and back or to the sides, we 
cannot be sure.
The carriages drawn by horses are all four-wheeled and with only one 
exception there are a pair of horses (having collars with bells as well as 
saddles); the wheels have always eight spokes. Besides this there is some 
further variety. One sort of vehicle looks just like an armchair with 
wheels fixed under it; this is to be seen la 56 and 57. It does not look 
very serviceable and we can see that the sculptor got into difficulties 
with the coachman. The whole carnage is only a seat for the chief person, 
therefore no room was left for the driver on the vehicle itself; he has 
been placed behind the horses, that is the upper part of his body appears 
there and only because no legs are to be seen do we realize that he is not 
standing but supposed to be sitting on something. On other reliefs where 
evidently the same kind of carriage is represented, the seat is fixed on a 
wide body that ends in a shaft, there is room on this for a servant to sit 
behind the seat and for the coachman, with another servant if required , in 
front. This sort will be found on la 58, 59 and IBb 38; on the two first 
reliefs the end of the shaft is ornamented with a small lion and on the 
last there is a banner fixed on it. All the scenes mentioned so far shew the 
chief person seated facing the spectator and the carriage in profile.
The chariot shewn on IBa 290, without horses and flying through the 
air, is nothing more than a square box on four wheels. The one on la 27 
has a large high body decorated on the outside with panels of beautiful 
trigula-cakra design and on this reclines the queen to whom the carriage 
belongs among her cushions, with a higher back and lower arms to her 
seat. The shaft ends in a curved flowerbud; the coachman is mounted on 
one of the horses.
The carriages next to be discussed are covered and all have the coach­
man riding as postilion, except la 34 where he drives his four in-hand 
sitting on the shaft. This shaft has a flag on it, just like la 39; in both 
cases the vehicle is the same sort found on IYB 17; a flat body with pil­
lars at the four corners supporting the canopy; the back of the seat has 
ornamental balusters round it. In the first two scenes an armed guard is 
sitting at the back of the carriage.
There are one or two examples of something again different. First that 
on IIB 65, where a peacock is being carried to its destination, and where 
the whole affair perhaps has nothing to do with reality ; the cart has a
f®7 
’’ % /
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
i j l j


--- Page 239 ---
(ci
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
E jo L i
^ 
v " 
, , 
' * ll 
Jil‘ ', 
' 
i 
i 
i
wide high body in frame-work and on that are the massive pilasters that 
support the roof; the peacock is sitting just in the middle but there is no 
sign of any back or arms as might be expected if it were intended for 
human beings. The one on II 46 also looks anything but real; it is in 
fact a pavilion, such as eminent persons so often sit in on these reliefs, 
put on wheels. The sides are unnecessarily thick and set on a founda­
tion like that of a building, the roof with antefixes and crowned with 
a gem is all quite out keeping with a travelling carriage; maybe the . 
artist has been tempted to give the Bodhisattva. something worthy of 
him for the journey, a sort not used by ordinary mortals. There is a 
carriage with very strong sides on IBb 46 as well, though the top of it 
has disappeared.
We now come to the conveyance by water, the ships; for this I shall 
refer to an article by van Erp on the subject1).
The simplest vessel, the djukung, is nothing more than a hollo wed- 
out tree trunk; this is shewn on two reliefs, la 115, and lb 82, in the first 
scene it is being used as a ferry-boat. There it has a characteristic curved 
stem flattened horizontally at the top ; the line of the stem is vertical, 
with a sloping flattening, a shape that is still seen in the Archipelago 
with this kind of boat. There is a projecting piece under the stern that 
must not be regarded as a keel, —boats like this have a more or less round 
bottom, not a keel •— it is nothing more than a strengthening of the stern to 
support the pressure of the rudder. The rudder itself is the old double 
sort slung at the head and lashed on each side of the stern. An awning on 
four poles is fastened to the vessel and on the roof of this is a. long pole 
■with what seems to be a forked end (the relief is there damaged); another 
pronged pole is fixed in the river-bank; to this the boat is fastened with 
a rope. The prong might be intended to lean on while punting, but more 
likely it is meant to prevent the pole from getting stuck. The djukung on 
lb 82 is drawn up on land and being loaded with valuables. The bow of 
this one is pointed, the rudder is not seen outside the stern, it has prob­
ably been pulled up because the boat is not in the water; this part of 
the relief is too much damaged to see distinctly. The ‘'strengthening” can 
be seen here as well.
The outrigger ship can be seen on five reliefs. This type with its 
high stem and stem resembles the kura-kura of the Moluccas that are 
mentioned in the earliest descriptions of European travellers; thej? were 
built there in large size already before the arrival, of Europeans.
') 
Indig Oud en Nieuw 8 (1924) p. 227—-255; see also Encycl. van Ned. Indie s. v. 
Yaartuigen, with Supplement (1923).


--- Page 240 ---
First the one shewn on lb 86. The outriggers are made of a compound 
float, held in position by three straight and three curved booms, on the 
top of the float are crossrails, maybe to hold them in the sloping position 
or perhaps intended as seats for the crew in a strong wind to give the 
vessel more stability, as is still the custom at the present day. There are 
openwork bullwarks fore and aft made of round spars sloped upwards 
as if to break the force of the waves. There is a gallery built out over the 
stern with a sailor on it, a construction that also appears at Ajanta, used 
by the crew when cargo fills up the boat as well as for working and storing 
the anchors. At stem and stern we see the wings with the peculiar “eyes” 
under them, the one possibly as symbol of speed, the other keeping watch 
over the water — these are also found at Aj anta and are quite common in 
the Archipelago on the kura-kura’s in the East corner of Java, the prahu’s 
at Batavia, the Chinese junks etc. The rudder is placed on one side of the 
stern, perhaps there was another at the other side. A deck-house with 
an awning is between the two masts; the front mast is the largest, both 
consist of two spars raked forward, rigged by ropes fore and aft; on other 
reliefs shewing outrigger ships it can be seen that the masts have rungs 
for going aloft. The top of the mast where the two points join and where 
the ropes run through, is bent back and has a tuft-shaped ornament that 
resembles the bundles of coloured string or fibre on the pedukawangs of 
Macassar. Both masts have a square-sail, at the bow is another sail, 
something like the “blinde” on old Dutch vessels; it seems to be three- 
cornered, fastened at the top to the washstrake with one brace to the 
bowsprit and the other on the portside.
After this detailed description, the other outrigger ships may be 
treated concisely. On lb 88 they are rowing, the six oars can be seen, the 
rowers are evidently Tween decks. The wings are only visible in front 
where the washstrake has a curious buffer; the second mast seems to be 
a single spar; the tops of the masts are ornamented with carving2). In 
lb 108 there is a small boat in front of the big vessel, probably meant for 
landing the passengers and crew.
The outrigger of the large ship has four pairs of booms, while the top of 
the float to which some one is holding, is single; besides the oars some of the
“) Mookerji, A history of Indian shipping and maritime activity from the earliest times 
(1912) p 39; Warington Smith, Boats and Boatbuilding in the Malay peninsula, Joum. Soc, 
of Arcs 1902 p. 572 sq.
“) On this same relief a round figure drawn by Wilsen on the poop, caused Mookerji to 
think there was a compass on board (1.1. p. 47). This round object however proves to be the 
remains of a human figure. The poop was the best place for working the anchors and hauling 
in the rudder-blades.
( t f w
f i 
(cy
\ V - ® V 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
T ^ I j


--- Page 241 ---
rowers heads can be seen. At the foremast the coupling block of the two 
spars with the holes for the ropes is quite distinct, Notice the flags at 
bow and stern and the pennant in the top of the larger mast, it shews the 
direction of the wind, the same as the puffed-out sails. The sail at the bow, 
fastened on two yards, is square and required two bowsprits, at the end. of 
the one in sight sits a sailor holding one of the braces j here is also some 
circular object with a sort of rosette not yet identified. The little boat 
looks very like the djukungs but has a higher deck; the ship is one- 
masted, with a square sail, and sailors are holding the braces attached 
to the end of the yards. The ‘‘eyes" can be seen too on the bow of the 
vessel.
We get a smaller outrigger ship on lb 53, without a deckhouse and with 
no t such elaborate washstrakes; they are made of single curved booms and 
a double latticed floating. The wings and eyes are very distinct; there is a 
man at t he helm. Notice the rowlocks, the railing leaning inwards, the bam­
boo washstrakes at bow and stern and the gratings fixed on them. The 
masts consist of two poles and the rungs can be seen; there is an ornament 
like a four-leaved clover in front of the bowsprit, the same sort of object 
which appeared on. the preceding relief. Ihe sailors are taking in sails, the 
one at the bow has evidently been taken down. The last of the outrigger 
ships is on II 41, a one-masted ship, the deck house very distinct; oars 
and heads of the rowers here also to be seen, the position of the head 
shews that the rowing is done by pushing not pulling. The coupling of 
the mast has a cushion shaped block on it; something different are the 
short derricks or round poles on the deck fore and aft, the latter with a 
flag on it. There is no bowsprit, perhaps there was no room for it. Here 
too the sails are being lowered, the washstrakes fore and aft are re­
markably high on this boat.
hinally we get three vessels, strong enough to do without outriggers; 
they are something like the djanggolan’s of East Java, e.g. in the row of 
small blocks (or beam heads?) on the outside. The line of the bow is 
sloping, the stern vertical, the same as in the djukungs; they are all one- 
masted and the mast is not compound. The rudder is not shewn. On lb 
23 part of the crew are hoisting or lowering the sails on the mast, others 
are fishing. Below the blocks is some circular decoration. The ship on IB 
a 54 is very much damaged, it has one mast and a bellying square sail 
with a sailor sitting on its lower yard. The vessel on IBa 193, where a 
drowning man is being hauled on board, seems to be a little different to 
the others, there is evidently a gallery built out over the stern, on which a 
man is standing who might be the helmsman. The bow also seems to have
'r. v |j§> / f) 
HINDU-Ja v a n e se: a r t a n d c u l t u r e 
U M 7j


--- Page 242 ---
a gallery, the beam heads are missing. The mast has a square sail, is 
raked forward and rigged fore and aft.
Mr. van Erp concludes in his review that evidently the largest kind of 
seaboats were built with outriggers and these were principally used for 
traffic. In contrast to Hornell’s l) view that the winged vessels on Bara­
budur represent a local Javanese type, he considers these vessels in 
general have a Hindu character, but the compound masts shew Indone­
sian influence, perhaps to be traced to Mongolian origin.
Taking all together the boats on Barabudur offer a notable contri­
bution to our knowledge of the shipping of those times, the more valu­
able because the larger-sized outrigger vessels with rowlocks and high- 
sloping stem and stem have not survived in the present, day Archipelago.
We shall now see what Barabudur has to shew us about the religious 
observances in Hindu-Javanese life, such as belong to homage, public- 
worship and that kind of thing. Passing over the homage-paying to 
stupa’s, we need not be surprised at there being so few data to be 
gathered. The following of the Five or the Ten Commandments was all 
that was required from the believer, he might give further proof of 
his devotion by respectful homage, preferably offerings of flowers, at 
stupa’s or other sanctuaries; but church-services or officiating priests 
did not exist. Tantristic practices such as will be described in the last 
chapter, must have been in use in the Java of those days, but they 
are essentially the opposite of public worship. £ivaism too exacted 
chiefly from the believer only the paying of homage to the temple-gods, 
that is if we may consider the conditions in Middle Java to be the same 
as those in the Maj apahit-kingdom. In the Nagarakrtagama when king 
Ilayam Wuruk visits Buddhist or Qivaistic temples he does noth­
ing more than pay homage to the god of the sanctuary; even in the 
elaborate description of a religious solemnity like the £raddha of 1362 
we are struck by the casual manner in which the priestly ceremonies are 
treated in comparison with the other festivities that appear to be of a 
very worldly character.
What we see on Barabudur is quite in keeping with this. On relief la 
35 we find what would be Siddhartha’s homage to the gods but, as the 
story tells, it is they who spring from their pedestals and do honour to the 
future Buddha. Other instances of sacred buildings being visited by 
worshippers shew only how they approach with every sign of respect,
J) Indian boat; designs, Mem. As. Soc, Beng, VII, 3 (1920) p. 218—221; he considers the single 
outrigger of Polynesian and the double of Malay-Indonesian origin.
\K Msi&.-J 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
' Q
j j


--- Page 243 ---
/ W m ^ \ 
C*
K 
/? ) 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
' g f e l .
\ 4 \\_ f‘M4v -W'J y ^ J 
_j i
—i^yy/ 
1 
~yy
their hands often folded in sembah, bringing gifts of incense, flowers 
and wreaths. One that is identified by its inscription, is O 124, the caitya- 
vandana and others are the same; flower-offerings are brought on 
O 29 and 152, incense is being burnt as well on IBb 106 and IV B 14. 
There is a woman performing her devotions inside a building on Ib27; 
she lays flowers on an altar next to which stands an incense-burner. 
Honour and homage to sacred buildings it may be remembered take up a 
large part of the chief wall on the third gallery, reliefs 4—7 and in parti­
cular the whole series that begins with 20, where all sorts of curious 
temples are being visited. Although these temples are not supposed to 
be found on this earth, their worship should be mentioned, but they seem 
not very much like the ordinary human structure.
Homage-paying to a stupa is of course a typical Buddhist ceremony; 
it takes up such an important place in the sacred literature that it is only 
natural it should so often appear on the Barabudur reliefs. As regards 
the form of the stupa, the reader must consult the architectural part of 
this work, I shall describe only the way in which homage was paid. In 
most cases it is just the same as for other sacred buildings, sembah’s 
with incense, flowers and wreaths, occasionally with fruit as well. See 
lb 85, ]20, IIB 43, II 45, 96, 98 IVB 7, 33. On lb 83 we find there is 
music added, not without reason, for the text1) speaks of a special feast 
that was connected with the erection of the stupa; IBa. 115 as we know 
shews a brahman sprinkling holy water with his aspergillum.
When describing the series of reliefs on the bottom row of the first 
balustrade, I called attention to the number of those shewing stupa- 
liomage and the many different ways in which it was performed 2). For 
the details I refer the reader to that description; we must now notice 
that besides the variations — again with music on IBb 66 and 90, filled-up 
dishes (?) on 60, round objects (perhaps cakes ?) on 62—, the greater num- 
uei still keep to the usual manner of doing it with incense and flowers 
(26, 54, 69, 102, 109, 118, while 73 and 112 are damaged).
A small kind of stupa on IBa 366 is being sprinkled with water from a 
flower vase with a spout, a still smaller one on IBa 274 honoured with in­
cense and sembah. These small stupa's we expect may contain the ashes 
ox the deaa 3); and it would appear' from IBa 244 and 325 that urns were 
also used for this purpose, but on comparing these with IBa 272, it seems 
that the vessel so much like an urn with a lid, is really an open dish with
*) Compare Vol. I pag. 284 and 297.
‘) See I pag. 447.
') 1 he ordinary graveyard, the cmagana of the texts, is also to be seen, on Q 4.


--- Page 244 ---
something ballshaped on it. The miniature stupa’s on IBb 13 do not appar­
ently receive any homage; perhaps these are the small stupa’s that, as we 
know from, the texts, were made because their manufacture conferred 
benefits on the maker; such little stupa’s have actually been dug up 
in Java. Also worthy of notice is the curious, very much damaged altar 
with an urn or whatever it may be, on IBa 233b. There is an altar with 
fire on IIB 85 apparently being worshipped; this is the only instance, 
but the same kind of altar can be seen at an adjuration on lb 3; ready 
for the selfsacrificing Bodhisattva to immolate himself, at the court on 
lb 59, where it is erected for this special reason according to the text, and 
finally with the hermits on IBa 25 and IIB 60. It is always a square 
pedestal with blocks of wood on it and a big flame.
Connected with stupa-homage in so far that its object was the same, 
being one of the means of acquiring special merit, is the distribution 
of valuables, money, garments and food to the needy. The scenes 
are not specially striking; the chief person himself distributes from the 
trays and dishes held by his servants, or the distribution is done by 
them under his supervision. Instances of this will be found on 0 11, 26, 
70—73, 100, 102, 103, la 19, 22, 23, 29, lb 20, 31, 32, 64, IBa 202, 210, 
218, IIB 27, 45, II 93, III 44, 70, IIIB 76 and following, IVB 8—12, 19, 
IV 19, 44, 52.
At the first glance we might think that music was a favorite pastime 
among the Hindu-Javanese, it is so often depicted on the reliefs. But we 
change our opinion on closer examination. In many of the scenes the 
music is nothing more than an accompaniment, generally to the dancing; 
when that is not the case, then the performers are nearly always heaven­
ly beings and although this divine music is of course only a repetition 
of the earthly orchestra, it will not be mere chance that so very few 
concerts take place in this world. Music does not seem to have played a 
very important part in Hindu-Javanese society l).
Let us first take the music given by itself, not as an accompaniment. 
There are to begin with a few instances in the pictures of desa-life. 
On 0 117a man is playing on the suling (flute); another next to him 
has no music. But on O 39 in the righthand scene there are some street- 
musicians who evidently belong together. One of them has an ins­
trument in his hand that looks like an oblong wooden frame with small *)
*) For Javanese music in general, see Brandts Buys. Praeadv. Congr. Jav. Inst, te Bandoeng, 
1921, p. 76—81 (comp. Grandidier, Madagascar IV, 1908, p. 66).
l ( J k d t , 
BARAB0DUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
V f iT
\ 
y ^ 
_a
----4F
/


--- Page 245 ---
/& ^ \% \
"staves of metal across it that are struck with a stick. The other holds 
up an object not easily described, it seems a sort of flat cymbal with three 
little rods, that have knobs at the end of them, lying on it. It is not being 
played, so possibly it may not be a musical instrument. The head only of a 
third man can be seen. There is another group like this on O 48, a man 
who most distinctly has the same oblong instrument just-mentioned, a 
second holding something quite unrecognisable under his left arm and a 
third who again shews nothing but his head.
As for the music among the higher classes, we shall begin with the 
heavenly sort of which there are so many more examples. The first scene 
on the first gallery begins with a full orchestra for the benefit of the fut­
ure Buddha in the Tusita heaven. It consists of wind, string and thump 
instruments. These last are represented by cymbals and drums. Drams 
are numerous of both sorts, that were also common in India and need 
not here be described; the cylinder shaped sort, and the tub shaped 
thicker in the middle ; the first is carried round the neck and beaten 
with the hand or a drumstick, the second is always of a large size and 
stands on the ground, it is only beaten with the hand, but it is also seen 
in smaller size carried round the neck. We know that only the barrel sha­
ped one, the kendang, remains in use in java at the present day1). The 
only wind instrument is the german flute; now-a-days this is not found 
in ordinary use, but only with the soldiers at the court of the princes. 
There are several kinds of string instruments, unfortunately this part 
of the relief is rather damaged; what we see in the first place is a kind of 
stick with a round soundboard at the side of one end, such an instrument 
can hardly be anything but a pionochord; then there are some like lutes, the 
ancient vina, with three and with four strings 1 2) which can be seen by the 
number of screws for regulating the strings in the same way as our violins 
etc. All these instruments are played with the fingers. A sort of cither 
semicircular in shape is very indistinct, it can only be identified with the 
help of another relief (the only other one where this instrument is 
shewn, la 52).
These same instruments will be found in the hands of heavenly musi­
cians on other reliefs, sometimes with a pair of little bell-shaped chelimbi 
that are held one in each hand and belong specially to dance music.
1) For these drums compare also Sachs, Die Musikinstrmnente Indiens und Indonesiens 
(1915) p. 68 and 74, and for Indian instruments Day, Music and musical instruments of 
Southern India (1891) and Gupte in Ind. Ant. 55 (1926) p. 41—43.
2) Perhaps this type of lute, especially with three strings, was imported from Further 
India; see Kunst in Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 65 (1925) p. 465 foil.
Barabucfur II. 
j6
(•A S
 );] 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
' o
L


--- Page 246 ---
v A $ t& 2 •). 
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
O L j
Among the drams sometimes there are some that go narrow in the 
middle into a sort, of hour-glass shape and some that look like a round- 
bellied pot with its mouth covered over with drum-skin.
Orchestras of this kind, more or less complete, are shewn on II 1, 55, 
105, 128, IV 10,37. On the last-mentioned and on II 1, there is also some 
one blowing on a conch-shell, as is very likely the case in other scenes, 
but we are not always able to see exactly what the instrument is they are 
holding with both hands. It can certainly be identified in the procession1) 
on lb 70 and by comparison with this, probably also on III 50. A re­
markable scene is that on IV 7; on one side of the Buddha seated in the 
middle, there is an orchestra like the one above described, in which a 
new instrument appears, a bell hung on a curved stick and played on 
with a stick; on the other side sits a Bod hisattva with a conch-shell, some 
persons blowing large and small trumpets and one beating with his 
hand a very small drum of the hour-glass shape. A bell, this time held in 
the hand, is being played by one of the gandharva’s who miraculously 
appear on III B 40; there is a curious combination of two instruments, 
the chelimbi and a. lute very long and narrow in shape, to be found on 
O 102. An extraordinary kind of wishing-tree, shewn on IVB 75, besides 
bells and flutes bears quite a number of drums.
Kinnara’s are often represented playing on the flute and often hold­
ing the instrument that we have just supposed to be a monochord. The 
way in which this same object appears among the attendants in scenes 
on earth where there is no question of music (see O 143, 157, IBb 
65) might incline us to think it must there be something else; but it 
is quite certain, as the reliefs still to be discussed will prove, that this 
monochord instrument was also used at earthly concerts, quite apart 
from the question whether an object of this shape should be identified 
everywhere as a musical instrument. Among the scenes in the human 
world 0 131 deserves special notice with its large bell hanging on a beam 
supported by two pillars. Then on la 52 there is the music being perform­
ed before the future Buddha in the women’s apartment; we can recog­
nise lute and cither, flute and chelimbi. On O 125 music is going on 
for the benefit of an eminent man possibly at the dinner-table, the dishes 
being brought in look very much like food. Here there are two instru­
ments, both very distinct, a monochord and a lute, this time three-
‘) Still five centuries later, conch-shells and drums were in use at a ceremonial procession 
for Hayam Wuruk, according to Nagarakrtagama 84 :2.
*) In Further India a similar sort of instrument was known, but with two sounding-boards. 
This is illustrated in Le Bayon d’Angkor Thom I (1910) pi. 120. (gal. inter, face Nord aile Est) 
and 335 (id, face Est aile Nord),
' GoSjX


--- Page 247 ---
stringed. Twice, a band plays at a stupa-homage; drums and cymbals 
on lb 83. drums and flute on IBb 66. These two last instruments with a 
monochord make up the orchestra on IVB 42, where the attitude of one 
of the drummers and the man next to him shew the possibility that the 
music may be only an accompaniment. Drums and cymbals are the 
chosen instruments for festive processions, see IBa 266, IBb 30, III 50 x), 
also announcements and proclamations are made with beating of drums, 
see 0 1, IBa 42, IIB 53. A hammer shaped drumstick can be seen in use 
several times.
As accompaniment the music is used chiefly for the dance; every­
where dancing is depicted we find musicians, with the exception of the 
instance mentioned here above 2), the sword-dance on O 5; even the im- 
promptue dance of the intoxicated persons on O 20 takes place to an 
accompaniment of drum and monochord. O 39, left, brings us again to 
the desa; two men stand blowing an instrument that consists of a gourd 
with three flat pipes fitted into it, evidently the mouth-organ still used in 
Borneo and elsewhere 3). A third man with the same kind of instrument 
has begun to dance; on the ground we see the cymbal (above-mentioned4) 
with the rods that terminate in a knob, as well as a globe-shaped object 
that has a semi-circular opening, which I am not able to identify. The 
mouth-organ appears again on O 53, with a flat lengthening piece stick­
ing out under the musician’s arm.
The music that accompanies some men dancing on IBa 152 is very in­
distinct, only the drum and flute are distinguishable. In the same scene a 
wrestling-match is going on, the music maybe does for both, as we see 
on O 52 that drum and cymbals are being played at an acrobatic per­
formance. IBb 89 deserves special attention; there is a dance going on, 
performed by men, to the sound of three instruments. One of these is the 
gambang so important in connection with the later gamelan, a wooden 
stand on legs with broad sounding staves on it, played, with two sticks, 
the points of which are wound round 8); the second is a bell on a curved 
stand played on with a rod; the third, also beaten on with two sticks, 
that have thick ends, looks like two gongs one above the other or per­
haps one gong on a stand. In this way we have here before us the still
1) Here probably with monochord and a wind-instrument.
*) See p. 209.
*) Brandts Buys, Praeadv. p. 77; in Borneo the instrument is called klfidi. Variations are 
known in Siam, Laos, Tonkin, and in China and Japan,
*) See p. 241.
*) On the evidence of these two pieces we must prefer to consider this a gambang rather 
than a saron. Comp. Djawa 3 (1923) p. 28, where this instrument is called calung-gam bang.
V \ B
 / •) 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
2 S T ,
vSC;—


--- Page 248 ---
/r X X $ \
very primitive gamelan; this relief giving data for the original form 
of the later Javanese orchestra may I think prove of real importance 
for the history of music in Java. A parallel to the gambang is probably 
to be found on another much later relief, i.e. on the p6ndapa-ter- 
race of Panataran *) dated in A.D. 1375. At any rate this gamelan is 
not of much importance in the Barabudur-period and what the reliefs 
shew us about it, quite agrees with the Chinese report at a somewhat la­
ter date, that the principal music instruments in Java were the (german) 
flute,drum and “wooden boards’'; by the last may be meant wooden 
C3'-mbals or some other kind of instrument 2).
The numerous scenes in which dancing girls are performing, are very 
similar and in no way remarkable. The dancer (sometimes there are seve­
ral together) is often placed on a platform in the well-known dancing 
attitudes, she is richly-dressed, wearing the slendang which she fre­
quently holds with her hand, and has a wreath or diadem-shaped head­
dress. The music consists always of drams, mostly the pot-shaped ones; 
occasionally these are the only accompaniment, but sometimes the tub­
shaped and once the hour-glass sort are to be seen as well as flute and 
cymbals. There are generally more women present, probably other danc­
ing girls, with chelimbi and often there is also a man in brahman dress 
who seems to be beating time with his hands; in some cases he also has 
the chelimbi. These dancing reliefs are: O 72, 149, la 95, lb 19, IBa 
45—46, 233, 300, 318, IBb 1, 43, 51, IIB 44, III 65.
As far as we are able to judge there are no religious dances among 
them, they appear to be performed for the amusement of eminent per­
sons3). There is one relief shewing the game of backgammon, this is IBb 
80; it is fully discussed in the description of that relief 4).
I shall restrict my review to these main points. It may be sufficient to 
give an idea of the wealth of material the Barabudur reliefs possess for 
the study of details and at the same time how little we really know which 
points among what we see before us, are those that should form the data 
for further investigation and which are of minor importance. For this 
reason I have refrained from mentioning all kinds of particulars and
*) Illustrated by Van Kinsbergen, no. 322 and 323 of the large series. Comp. Van Stein Cal- 
lenfels in Not. Bat. Gen. 1919 p. 191—193; Brandts Buys in Djawa 2 (1922) p, 34— 40, 
Kunst ibid, p, 136.
*) Groeneveldt, Notes p. 17. According to Kunst (1.1. p. 126) this is meant to b e the gam- 
bang.
*) Stutter heim, Rama-Iegenden p. 153, remarks that they may still have some religious
origin.
*) See Vol I pag. 449 and 461.
f( f )! 
%
BARABUDUR AS A MONUMENT OF 
C X L J


--- Page 249 ---
\\ $ky-p M 
HINDU-JAVANESE ART AND CULTURE 
' M
j
V s ^ / / .7 ' :
■ 
,•■ 
i'. 
; 
_
given only the general outlines. Leemans treats the matter diffe­
rently as will be seen on referring to pag. 562-—652 of his monograph, 
where all the minute details found on the reliefs — or rather all those 
that appear on Wilsen’s drawings, which is not at all the same thing — 
are carefully enumerated. I have thought it better to avoid crowding 
out the general view with too much detail and in a work of this kind 
I consider a comprehensive review will be more to the purpose, antici­
pating that future research will be able to give the data gathered from 
Barabudur their right value for our knowledge of the Hindu-Javanese 
community.


--- Page 250 ---
IH 
§L
c-2 ^ l4 ? 
;■?§?*■:;?
CHAPTER XII
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON
Before collecting from the various relief-series the data for the 
form of Buddhism represented on this monument, it will be advisable 
to take a review of the various divine, semi-divine and super-divine 
beings who are depicted in its sculptures. By so doing an important part 
of the material for our next examination will become clear, and ready 
for systematic arrangement; at the same time the particular details 
that Barabudur can contribute to our knowledge of Buddhist icono­
graphy will be most effective in a review of this kind.
Let us begin as is only fitting, with the figure of Buddha. Besides the 
Dhyani-Buddha’s on and round the monument, discussed in a pre­
ceding chapter, we find the Buddha on no less than 164 reliefs, the num­
bers of which are as follows: la 4, 69—91, 92-—120; IBa 17, 18, 28, 235,
239, 243, 252, 256, 264, 303, 311, 316, 320, 324, 328, 342, 343, 345, 347,
349, 353, 357, 362; II 1,3—13, 15, 32,74—76, 78, 81, 94, 113; III 14,45,
51, 55, 58; III B 47, 50, 55; IVB 34, 46, 54, 55, 62, 64, 70, 72, 77, 80, 83,
84; IV 1—18,20—23, 26,40, 47, 50, 53, 54, 56—59, 61, 62, 65, 67—72 *).
A very large mumber for discussion.
As a general rale all these Buddha’s are depicted in the way, such as 
I have described in Chapt. X, wearing the monk’s garment, the head 
identified by the little round curls, the usnlsa like a protuberance of the 
skull on the occiput, and the urna as a small round knob on the forehead ; 
it can be easily understood that this last mark of identification though 
distinct on the separate statues is often wom-away on the reliefs, so that 
practically the small curls and usnisa form the distinction between Bud­
dha’s and monks. On the reliefs, Buddha’s always have a halo as well.
') Another on IBb 16 is uncertain as the figure in question has a broken head and. it is 
impossible to see if it wears the usnlsa. The fact of there being a halo however indicates a 
(Pratyeka ?-) Buddha.


--- Page 251 ---
~~ I shall begin by stating that all the distinguishing marks of a Buddha 
are also given to the Pratyekabuddha’s. On four of the reliefs for instance 
we know for certain from the texts represented that we have Pratyeka- 
buddha's before us; when they ascend to heaven at the beginning of the 
Lalitavistara (la 4) and in a couple of the Jatakamala-tales (IBa 17,
18 and 28). These Pratyekabuddha’s are absolutely identical with the 
other Buddha’s; in three of these four reliefs they even have the lotus- 
cushion that is generally (not always) given to the Buddha as seat or 
pedestal. As the result of this conformity it naturally follows that there 
may be Pratyekabuddha's among the Buddha’s in other parts of the 
reliefs without our being able to identify them. On the other hand, the 
two figures in monk's dress on IV 53, as we have seen, are considered by 
Brandes to be Pratyekabuddha’s : if his opinion is correct — though I 
am not. able to share it r) —- there would always be the chance of think­
ing the “monks” that appear in any of the tales to be really Pratyeka­
buddha’s. Nor is flying through the air any criterion for such persons, 
for not only Pratyekabuddha’s but any of the monks who have attained 
the rank of arhat can also accomplish this. As long as nothing to the 
contrary is proved, I believe we can be sure that a Pratyekabuddha is 
represented only as a Buddha; but even if this might be doubtful, the 
fact that in the one or two cases where we know for certain that Pratyeka­
buddha’s are intended they exactly resemble the Buddha’s, compels 
us to consider the possibility of their being represented in the same form 
in other places.
We must now endeavour to find distinctive marks among this large 
number of Buddha’s and if possible to recognise actual types; to do this 
we must of course fix our attention on the details which in spite of the 
general likeness may exist between the various Buddha-figures. There 
are naturally four points to be examined for possible divergence, i.e. the 
manner in which the monk’s garment is worn, the shape of the usnlsa, 
the position of the hands and possible additions not belonging directly to 
a Buddha-figure but in close connection with it, such as thelotuscushion, 
umbrella etc.
Fortunately there is an established point for us to work from; we are 
not left to gather up peculiarities for comparison at random. We know 
with absolute certainty that on the reliefs 69—120 in the top row of the 
chief wall of the first gallery, we see before us the “historic” Buddha 
Qakyamuni, whose story we can follow step by step with the help of the l
l) Seepag.TlO.
(:{ Mk ) f h 
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
V W |
* 
K j i . j


--- Page 252 ---
y5& ■ e°5x 
■ 
:n ■
V \ , 1 W * A 
THE BARABODUR PANTHEON 
H
l J
Lalitavistara. By carefully studying these more than fifty Buddha- 
ligures it may perhaps be possible to fix some special way of representing 
CSkyamuni, that may be used as the criterion for the Buddha’s on other
relief-series.
Let us first examine the dress. This part of our task is made easier by 
the fact that Dr. F. D. K. Bosch has already made a study of this sub­
ject with the title “Eene Onderscheiding van staande en zittende Buddha 
figuren op de Reliefs van de Borobudur en elders" 1). The first result of 
his examination which applies not only to this series of reliefs but to the 
whole monument, he thus sets forth: “All the seated Buddha-images on 
Barabudur have the right shoulder bare, and all the standing ones have 
both shoulders covered by the garment". AH Buddha’s conform to this 
rule regarding their dress, and those that are damaged help to prove it, 
for on the seated ones, even when the stripe that shews the edge of the 
garment across the breast has become indistinct, we can often see by the 
right arm that no garment has been over that shoulder; and in cases 
where the standing figures shew nothing more of the folds round the neck, 
the absence of any separating line across the breast or the fold of the gar­
ment hanging round the wrist of the right hand, sufficiently indicate 
that the right shoulder has been covered. One exception only will be 
found on no. HO where a separating edge of the garment is plainly to be 
seen across the breast of the standing Buddha, while the folds of the dress 
that hang round the right wrist here certainly shew that the right shoul­
der was meant to be covered. The line across the breast I can only as­
cribe to the sculptor’s carelessness, who in this one instance gives this 
peculiarity of the seated Buddha by mistake to a standing figure. Other­
wise Dr. Bosch’s rule holds good everywhere.
Another special feature noted by the same writer is that in this relief- 
series the standing Buddha’s all hold a tip of their garment with the 
left hand, with one exception (relief 82), where he has to hold some ob­
ject in that hand. While of course the fact that all seated Buddha’s are 
represented with bare and all standing ones with covered right shoulder 
prevents us from using this as a means of distinguishing between the 
various figures, Dr. Bosch 2) considers the tip of the garment held in 
the left hand as a characteristic of the standing Qakyamuni, with one 
reservation that I shall refer to later on. In connection with these re­
marks he makes a noticeable statement concerning the history of the 
Buddha-garment in Indian art and arrives at the conclusion that the
*) Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 57 (1916) p. 97—116. 
a) See p. 103 of the article referred to.


--- Page 253 ---
Tiem in the left hand though quite in keeping with the monk's dress of 
the Gandhara-art — from which of course all Buddha-types originate — 
is entirely out of place with the garment worn on Barabudur and must 
only be regarded as a remnant of the original Buddha figure that has 
been retained through all the centuries of changes and imitation.
This part of the statement, very important to the meaning of the 
garment-tip, I am not able to agree with. We observe that the garment- 
tip is held by a monk just as well as by the Buddha (II 94) and there­
fore does not belong exclusively to a Buddha, but much more to the 
monk's dress in general. Dr. Bosch sees in the fact that standing monks 
may have the right shoulder bare but standing Buddha's never, a proof 
that the monk's dress was not subject to the same rule as that of the 
Buddha 1). This does not prove the case to my mind. It is well known 
that uncovering the right shoulder was a token of respect. That is why, 
as a matter of course it seems to me, in the relief la 119 referred to by Dr. 
Bosch as an example, the monks who are pouring water over the Master 
have uncovered their right shoulder for that act of ceremony 2). In con­
trast to this, Buddha, the most exalted being that exists on earth, has 
no cause ever to shew respect to another person in this way. People in 
the monk’s garment stand and walk about generally with the right 
shoulder covered, this is most clearly proved by the places in the texts 
where the shoulder always has to be bared as a sign of respect, which 
shews that it was covered; thus most of the Barabudur monks, either 
standing or walking, have both shoulders covered. It is quite evident 
that when the hem of a garment could be thrown over the shoulder or 
not at will, it was very likely to be worn over the shoulder when walking 
or standing, so as to be out of the way instead of letting it hang or being 
obliged to bold it or tuck it in somewhere, while on the contrary when 
seated it was more comfortable to let it slip off and leave the right arm 
and hand quite free8). This to me seems the simple explanation why 
everyone who wore this dress, monk or Buddha, on the island of Java or 
beyond Java4), covered his shoulder when walking — except when 
bound to uncover it as a sign of respect — and when seated, if he requi­
red to use his right arm, naturally slipped the garment off his shoulder.
') 11. page 102 sq.
a) The monk in the other example mentioned IBb 72, is evidently in the company of a la.dy 
of high rank.
“) That monte actually often uncovered their shoulder is evident from the story in Agva- 
ghosa’s Siltralahkara no. 11 {ed. Huber p. 66), in which it can be decided that naked monks 
are ?ramana’s and not nirgrantha’s because their right shoulder is sunburnt.
*) See p. 108—-110 in Dr. Bosch’s paper.
\!\ S ) h 
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
Vm 4!
\ 
WMM-S -W y x / 
.JAk «■


--- Page 254 ---
■ Goix
/ / s
'-------N * V \
In my opinion there is no reason whatever to imagine that the sculp­
tors should have treated the monk's garment in any other way than 
that of the Buddha.
If therefore the garment of the Buddha is not meant to have any more 
signification than the usual monk’s dress, it follows of course that any 
chance of confusion, or imitation of unknown tradition is very slight. 
The Barabudur sculptors must have had the monk’s dress before their 
eyes every day and been familiar with its details as to the manner of hav­
ing the right shoulder bare or covered, just in the same way as the beg­
ging-monks in Further India or Ceylon can be seen at the present day.
I am convinced that the garment of the Buddha’s on the Barabudur is 
nothing else but what Dr. Bosch thinks impossible, a more or less faith­
ful copy of the kind of dress worn by Buddhist monks in Java about a 
thousand years ago1).
The arguments that must prove this impossibility are three, as fol­
lows: first the garment of the seated and the standing Buddha figures 
would not be the same kind, secondly the tip held in the right hand could 
not be accounted for in the shape of the monk’s frock we learn to know on 
the reliefs, and thirdly the hem of the garment that hangs over the left 
shoulder 2) on some of the figures would also become unexplainable. 
These three points are closely connected and all three depend on the 
way in which Dr. Bosch explains the upper garment of the Barabudur 
Buddha’s. There can be no difference of opinion about the undergarment, 
the antaravasaka; it is plainly to be seen on la 68, where Qakyarnuni is 
about to put on the upper garment; it there appears, as the text leads us 
to expect, like a skirt wound round the lower part of the body. There 
seems to be some confusion in the text about the two upper garments, 
the uttarasahga and sanghati, so that it is not at all clear in what way they 
differ from each other 3), Possibly the sanghati is simply a repetition of 
the uttarasahga4); however it may be, the question has no icono- 
graphical importance for on the figures there is never anything more to be 
seen than the hem of the undergarment and only one upper garment that 
may go by the name of either sahghafi or uttarasahga. As with the pre-
>) 1.1. p. n i .
*) There right shoulder, evidently a misprint.
*) See the literature quoted on p. 106 of Dr. Bosch’s article, also eighth chapter of the 
Mahavagga, and Sp. Hardy’s Eastern Monachism (1860) p. 114 sqq. Parts of the Vinaya- 
rules concerning the dress have now also been discovered in the Sanskrit redaction, see 
Finotin Journ. Asiat. 11 :2 (1913) p, 465 sqq. Comp. Fducher A.G.B. II (1918) p. 314—-316.
4) The opinion of Dr. Vogel, see Lulius van Goor, De Buddhistische non (1915) p. 34.
f( Era 
(ct
VA fSBP 7 
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
T j l J
- - - - - v
y
 
‘ 
•«’ 
•


--- Page 255 ---
sent day bhiksu’s when we see them walking, only the hem of the under­
garment appears below the one visible frock.
Now on Barabudur we see the undergarment of the standing Bud­
dha's hangs down to the ankles parallel to the ground. The upper gar­
ment is shorter and covers the whole body except the head, neck, lower 
arms and hands; the top edge of it can be seen round the neck. Accord­
ing to Dr. Bosch “the lower edge of the upper garment hangs down into 
a point or flap; sometimes it is cut off straight, parallel with the hem of 
the undergarment . On either side there are deep slits up to the height of 
the hip, through which the hand and lower arm can be thrust and move 
freely”. Elsewhere2) it is mentioned as being like a sort of shirt 
fitting rather close at the neck and hanging straight and loose down the 
sides of the figure, with a slit up to the height of the hip. In fact, if the 
monk's frock may be described in this way, the evidence is further cor­
rect, such a garment is not suitable for uncovering the shoulder unless 
it is first taken off, in which case both the hem held in the hand and 
that over the shoulder are* altogether out of place.
But is there no other explanation of the Buddha-garment on Barabu­
dur to be found? In my opinion there is, most certainly, and one that 
makes it possible to consider the garment worn standing as identical 
with that of the seated Buddha’s and monks while at the same time the 
two hems are accounted for. Besides, one objection to the shirt or waist­
coat theory is I think, that it would be impossible to understand why 
the shoulder hem if we are to consider it as a rudiment retained by tradi­
tion, is so often left out and appears again on other occasions in the 
same Qakymuni-series. If tradition ascribes this feature to the historic 
Buddha, then we ought to find it here always; but if there was no tradi­
tion about it, how must its appearance on some of these figures be 
accounted for ? Nor is it clear why the garment has such a curious pointed 
or round shape at the lower edge.
In my opinion it is nothing but a large oblong rectangular piece 
of stuff, just what the upper garment is described to be by the texts3).
To begin with, one end is wound round the left arm or held in the 
left hand, the stuff is passed in front of the body; under the right arm 
round the back and again over the left shoulder where the comer held in 
the hand can if desired be tucked in to make it all firmer. The rest of the 
piece, that is very wide, is now thrown over the right shoulder letting the
l) u . p. 99.
*) U p . 112.
*) Length and width are as 9 to 6 according to the text; Finot 1.1. p. 524.
THE BARABU9UR PANTHEON 
g l X J


--- Page 256 ---
folds hang down in front, while the two hands are kept free by pushing 
up the edge above the wrists. The end thrown over the right shoulder 
is allowed to hang down the back, or it is pulled on a little further till the 
last corner reaches the left shoulder. Described in this way it may seem 
a rather elaborate business, but on experimenting with a large sheet, the
trick is soon learned. 
,
In this way the Buddha and the monk of Barabudur both walking and
standing may be explained. The line across the breast is not the neck of a 
shirt cut in the shape described, but the top edge of a piece of stuff going 
from the left over the right shoulder; this appears more evident by the fold 
in front that is quite in keeping with the piece thrown over, but unaccount­
able in a shirt of that sort. The garment is pushed up on both sides oi 
the wrist and the lower edge naturally hangs down again but there is no 
sign of a slit or a notch made in it. Also the natural result of taking up 
the garment at both sides, is that a flap (either round or pointed) hangs 
down back and front. The tip in the left hand is the key to the whole 
drapery, it can be tucked in, or when everything is folded round firmly 
it can be left loose, but in the movement of walking it is better to keep 
hold of it. Finally the comer on the left shoulder is the other end of 
the garment which can hang behind at the back or be bi ought on to that 
shoulder; it can therefore sometimes be seen in front and sometimes not.
It may be said that it would be easy enough to see from the back how it 
is all fixed up, but unfortunately not one of these Buddha’s turns his 
back to the spectator.
If the right shoulder is to be uncovered, it is easy enough. The piece 
of the drapery that goes across the breast over the right shoulder (with 
or without the comer that comes from behind over the left shoulder), 
needs only to be pushed off and folded under the right arm instead of 
over it. The end can be left hanging — especially when seated —- or it 
can be tucked in at the back in the first folds, or again left hanging at 
the back or brought round on to the left shoulder as before. This ex­
plains why with seated Buddha’s and monks with bare right shoulder, 
the end over the left shoulder can sometimes be seen (plainly for ins. 
on la 93) and sometimes not. In the first instance the end, instead of 
being left to hang in a point, can be folded flat so as to cover the shoulder 
altogether, which makes something that looks at first sight like a shoul­
der cape '}: this is to be seen frequently in the beginning of the second 
gallery from 8 to 15. This then is nothing new or extraordinary, mere-
3) 
The possibility of a loose cloth carried on the shoulder is recommended by a notition 
in I-tsing’s Record, p. Ill; however on Barabudur it seems to be part of the garment.
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
o L
j


--- Page 257 ---
ly the folded shape of what is elsewhere the corner hanging over the shoul­
der- As regards further the tip held when standing in the left hand, 
after being first wound round the arm or not, this can of course when 
seated also either be left loose altogether or allowed to hang round the 
lower part of the arm. It is not necessary that it should continually be 
held in the hand. We can see on the reliefs either nothing, or a corner 
wound round the lower arm.
In the above way, it seems to me, all the variations in the garment of 
Buddha’s and monks can be explained in a simple and natural manner 
and it is unnecessary to seek after any theory of vague rudiments of 
dress, merely on the strenght of tradition. I have given rather more at­
tention to this subject, because of course the clothing of the Buddha is in 
itself a matter of importance; we must now return to the data that may 
be gathered from this examination for distinguishing between the various 
Buddha’s. We have seen that ^akyamuni standing, has always the right 
shoulder covered and the tip of his garment in the left hand, with the 
end over the left shoulder visible or not; we find him when seated al­
ways with the right shoulder uncovered, and again the end over the left 
shoulder visible or not, never with the hem held in the left hand but here 
and there with the end wound round the lower arm 1). The right should­
er being covered on the standing and bare on seated figures of the Bud­
dha is the same all over Barabudur as we have noted already and is there­
fore no distinctive mark; the only thing that might identify the Buddha,
—in so far I can agree with Dr. Bosch — is the tip of the garment held in 
the left hand. This hem to which Dr. Bosch attaches great importance as 
being intentionally preserved by tradition, to him remains an inexpli­
cable detail with the clothing worn on the monument ; it seems to me 
to be a quite ordinary and natural peculiarity of the monk’s dress to 
which in a general way no particular importance can be attached. If it 
has any value as a mark of identification for £akyamuni will appear 
on comparison with other relief-series; I shall here merely note that at 
any rate if it identifies Qakyamuni it is only in the standing figures and 
therefore only partly fulfils its task, especially because there was noth­
ing to prevent the seated £akyamuni’s from being given a similar cor­
ner to hold.
This ends the discussion about the clothing. The other points for 
examination mentioned above can be treated more concisely.
__ If we examine first the usnisa we see at once that it is by no means
*) The wound tip must of course not be confused with the edge of the garment itself 
that always hangs round the wrist.
V V S/ -I 
THE BARABUDUR. PANTHEON 
J


--- Page 258 ---
consistent, but shews the greatest variation with this same f akyamuni. 
Sometimes it is not quite distinct, but there are instances enough where 
doubt is impossible. Sometimes it has the shape of a simple, rather low 
dome, as on 76; generally the usnisa ends in a kind of knob, rather small 
as on 86, or of somewhat different shape, 71, or rather larger, something 
like a gem as on 91, or even quite twisted as on 94. This protuberance 
is made very high on 95, but with a point on 104, 108 and 112. The last- 
mentioned is rather worn-off; but the two others shew the point very 
plainly, and curiously enough it has the shape of a tongue of flame. I 
have here mentioned only the most-striking instances; there are all 
kinds of vaiiations in between. On comparing these reliefs with the 
Lalitavistara we can be quite sure that the text followed did not in any 
way prescribe such variations in the usiiisa — on the contrary we should 
think there was every reason for safe-guarding the appearance of the 
hero of the story. I do not believe that any particular or mysterious rea­
son need be sought for to account for these variations, and consider they 
are merely due to the imagination of the sculptors, who as I have fre­
quently demonstrated, were allowed, what seems to us an unaccount­
able liberty with regard to details. Just as a chair that is expressly stat­
ed in the text to remain the same, looks quite different on two con­
secutive reliefs, and like the same person who in two pictures of the same 
episode in his story is given two different headdresses, so is it I think with 
the Buddha’s; the sculptor of such a relief knew of course that he was 
to depict a Buddha in a certain place and a Buddha of course must be 
characterised by the monk’s garment, the uspisa and the small curls, 
but how these were represented exactly did not matter. This is the rea­
son of the fanciful variations in the uspi^a’s. It need hardly be mentioned 
that the curls are of all sizes, though they do remain as prescribed, al­
ways turned to the right. However it may be, whether the variations in 
the usnisa may correctly be ascribed to the sculptor’s fancy or that the 
protuberance on the crown of the head was intentionally represented in 
some special way on each separate relief, in any case, our conclusion 
must be that there is no particular style of usnisa. that identifies £akya- 
muni; so there is no question of any distinctive mark of that kind for 
this Buddha,
The same applies to the various objects used by £akyamuni or placed 
near him. He is generally represented sitting or standing on a lotus- 
cushion of the familiar double sort, but sometimes it may be single 
(86, 87) and often it is omitted altogether (77, 78, 81—85, 109). The 
little mat on 94 we must probably consider as the spread-out grass
m
m
d ; ) 
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
O J L j
, 
V ' ; ' ; 
1 , 
i 
4 
, 
' 
1


--- Page 259 ---
of the Bodhi-seat, 114 shews an ordinary cushion. We have seen in the 
description, of these reliefs that the Buddha further makes use of all 
kinds of different seats, thrones and other chairs, even sometimes the 
rocky ground; in the same way various sorts of trees spread themselves 
over his head,f or even in depicting the Bodhi-tree there is no attempt made 
at consistency. Sometimes worshippers are kneeling with incense- 
burners and many other marks of homage, but there is never a sign of 
any attribute that appears more or less regularly as specially belonging 
to Qakyamuni. In particular the umbrella may be noticed, as entirely 
missing on most of the reliefs, but sometimes set up next to the Buddha 
or near to (81, 99, 101, 109, 112), often carried, behind him (82, 91, 100, 
102, 110, 111, 113, 114, 116, 119), or hovering over his head (106—108, 
120). Once or twice the back of the Buddha’s seat ends in a triangle sur­
rounded by flames (93, 103), and once (118) he is entirely surrounded 
by a ring of flames. The never-omitted halo, prabhamaiidala, is larger 
or smaller in size and varies in shape, being more or less round or oblong.
In no respect whatever is anything to be found in the Buddha’s sur­
roundings that recurs regularly and can serve as a means of identifi­
cation.
We m ust now consider the mudra’s. On one relief (82) £akyamuni, as 
the text prescribes, holds a garment in his hand, then a few times his 
alms-bowl, but in the rest of the scenes his hands are empty except for 
the tip of his garment in the standing figures. As well as the traditional 
mudra’s, we find all sorts of attitudes suitable to anyone preaching, argu­
ing, meditating and speaking, among them five of the six positions 
ascribed to the Dhyani-Buddha's in a preceding chapter and therefore 
certainly not belonging exclusively to Qakyamuni. The one entirely omit­
ted is the dharmacakra-mudra; this is extraordinary as regards the last 
relief that represents the very famous first preaching at Benares 1), the 
preaching that elsewhere, in Java as well, is specially characterised by 
the dharmacakra-mudra of the chief person. We do not know what is 
the reason for this peculiarity, but none would presume to take this 
as a proof that a distinctive mark of £akyamuni on the Barabudur is 
that he never assumes this mudra, so that as everywhere else in this se­
ries he appears with hands in all kinds of attitudes, we are to conclude 
that the Buddha’s seated in dharmacakra-mudra on other parts of the 
monument are on no account to be identified as fakyamuni. The folly 
of such a conclusion becomes evident when we consider how the very 
fact that ^akyamuni set the wheel of the Law in motion, has revealed the
») See Vol. I p. 228.
\ % s 5 '/ V 
THE BARABU?'UR PANTHEON 
g
i j


--- Page 260 ---
__
(at
Creed of Salvation to the present world; therefore to him above all the 
dharmacakra-rnudra belongs. The art of all India proves this and it is 
plainly to be seen in the neighbouring sanctuary of Mfendut1).
The result of our examination of the reliefs that represent £akya- 
muni’s story is: that neither the objects placed near the Buddha, nor the 
position of the hands, nor the dress, furnish us with any data for identi­
fying this Buddha; there is only the tip of the garment being held in the 
left hand that might just possibly be a distinctive mark for only the 
standing £akyamuni.
When we look for more Buddha’s, we find that the four series of ava- 
dana's and jataka’s have very few Buddha figures; with the exception 
of the already mentioned Pratyekabuddha’s it is only in the last quar­
ter of the top row on the balustrade of the first gallery that we find, three 
times, an episode where a Buddha appears a). In the first group (235, 
239, 243,252,256, 264) only seated Buddha's on lotuscushions are foundl 
without anything remarkable about them; in the second (303, 311,316, 
320, 324, 328) there is one standing with an almsbowl in his left hand 
(316) while among those seated one for certain (328) and one most prob­
ably (320) has a usnisa with a flame at the top of it. The third group 
(342, 343, 345, 347, 349, 353, 357, 362) contains four seated and four 
standing Buddha's. Among the first, 349 shews the peculiarity of a 
great circle of flames round the Buddha; there is no flame on the usnisa, 
Ihe standing one on 353 is not very distinct, as regards the left hand; 
the one on 343 carries an almsbowl, the one on 347 has both hands emp­
ty. Between these two the figure on 345 is holding his roughly-carved, 
possibly very-much-worn lefthand round some unrecognisable object; 
it certainly is not a garment tip. The presence of attendant monks with 
these Buddha's shews they are real, not Pratyekabuddha’s. The seated 
ones shew no sign of the dharmacakra-rnudra.
On the chief wall of the second gallery we find first on relief 1—15 
(except 2 and 14) a series of seated Buddha’s and among them, for the 
first time one in dharmacakra-rnudra (7). Some are distinguished as I 
have described by the flap in shoulder-cape shape formed by the corner 
shewing over the left shoulder, a curiosity found hardly anywhere else. 
One or two of them also have a pointed usnisa, the most pronounced are 
on 13 and 15. The Buddha-relief no. 32 stands alone; the chief-figureis 
standing writh an umbrella above the head (that has completely dis­
appeared), and certainly no tip of the garment is held in the hand.
*) Inleiding Hindoe-Javaansche kunst (1923) Ip . 318.
2) See Vol. I page 401.
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON


--- Page 261 ---
From 74 onward we get several Buddha scenes near together. On 74 and 
75 the throne on which the Buddha sits rises with its lotuscushion out of 
a lotus-pond; the first of these scenes shews a very pointed usnisa with, 
an umbrella overhead; on75 the usnisa is damaged but was evidentlynot 
so sharp-pointed, while the Buddha standing on 76 has one of the usual 
style as, also standing, has the figure on 78, Neither of the two last hold the 
tip of their garment. On 75, 76 and 78 an umbrella hovers above the 
Buddha’s head; I call attention to this fact because Dr. Bosch seems to 
attach special importance to the combination of umbrella and pointed 
headdress in this gallery 1) and from what he tells us, we might be in­
clined to think that all Buddha’s with an umbrella have this pointed 
shape of head. As we have seen, this is not the case so that I think we 
may without hesitation consider the coincidence of umbrella and pointed 
uspisa as being quite accidental. After a seated Buddha on 82 without 
any thing special about him, we find one standing on 94 holding his gar­
ment tip with the lefthand. On this account Dr. Bosch considers that 
only 94 of the standing Buddha’s of this series represents ^akyamuni2). 
Not knowing the text followed I do not venture to dispute the statement 
directly ; but it is noticeable that next to this Buddha stands a monk 
who is also holding a hem of his garment with the left hand, as it were 
to shew that this peculiarity does not belong exclusively to a Buddha 
or to the one Buddha. A Buddha seated on a lion-throne on 113 is the 
last one in this gallery; he is encircled by flames and his usnisa also ends 
in a flame at the top. The combination of these two, the circle of 
flame and the usnisa with a flame at the top, we find here for the first 
time, though already met with separately (on £akyamuni as well); but 
this does not imply that any particular importance need be attached to it,
1 he chief wall of the third gallery only gives us five seated Buddha’s 
(14, 45, 51, 55, 58). One of them (55) has the garment hem like a cape 
over the left shoulder. The usmsa’s vary, larger or smaller, particularly 
large on 55; none of them have a sharp point. There is nothing remark­
able about any of these Buddha’s or of those on the balustrade of the 
same gallery where they appear three times sitting on a lotus, in the tale 
of the miraculous apparitions called up by Maitreya (47, 50, 55). The 
first time they have an ordinary usnisa, the second a pointed one; the 
third is too much damaged for recognition.
On these three reliefs, we get for the first time several Buddha's in the
l) See note on p. 101 of the often-quoted article. Dr. Bosch considers this pointed headpiece 
to be a headdress, not an u^rilsa,, an opinion I cannot share.
») 1.1. p. 103.
Barabudur II 
j 7
; 
the barabudur pantheon 
' ^ 1 ,


--- Page 262 ---
: 
f
v - v f iB B .l'.jf 
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
n
l i
X%?? .-sS^y 
. 
.
same scene just as we shall find them frequently in the fourth gallery. 
On the balustrade of that gallery there are only seated Buddha figures 
{one on 34, 55, 70, 72, 80, several on 46, 54, 62, 64, 83, 84). Those on 64 
have the flame-topped usnisa and flame-circle, while the one on 72 sits 
with only the circle of flame, but has an ordinary-shaped usnisa, the 
same as those on the whole of this gallery with a small knob on it. Two 
of these Buddha's on 72 and 77 have their hands in dharmacakra-mudra 
of which we have so-far found only one instance.
The last series of reliefs, those on the chief wall of the fourth gallery, 
has as noted, a great number of Buddha's and as many as seventeen on 
one relief. Those where only one appears (5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 15, 20—22, 26, 
40,47, 50, 57, 61, 62, 68, 70) are all seated. No. 5 and 68 wear a pointed 
usnisa without a flame at the top, 8 has a circle of flame, but the face is 
knocked off and the usnisa destroyed. Several of them, 11, 15, 21,22 and 
62, have the flame on the usnisa but tins flame itself varies in several 
ways. In connection with what was noticed in the second gallery, only 
two of these five have an umbrella above their head. There is a great 
variety of thrones and pavilions on which and within which these Bud­
dha’s are found; notice the lotusplants on 15, the high throne on 21, the 
lion-throne on 26. A remnant of the wide flap over the left shoulder can 
be seen on 57. There are three, 10, 68 and 70, who shew the dharmacakra- 
mudra.
Among the many Buddha's on the same reliefs (1—4, 6, 9, 12—14, 16 
—18, 23, 53, 54, 56, 58, 59, 65, 67, 69, 71, 72), the dharmacakra-mudra 
appears quite often and need not be always mentioned. Here too most 
of them are seated; the usnisa’s are the usual round sort, or with a knob 
at the top or pointed; among the last, several are too indistinct on the 
photo to be able to decide if the point ends in a flame. At any rate the 
flame seems to be present on 13, 14,53 without and on 12 and 16 with the 
circle of flames round the whole Buddha; this circle is also to be seen on 
6 and 17, where the shape of the usnisa is not distinct and on 58, where 
there certainly seems to be no u$nlsa with a flame. So again there are all 
kinds of combinations. A new variation is the quite smooth oval back­
ground on 18 as it might be a second very large halo behind the whole 
figure of the Buddha; maybe it is only that the flames are not worked 
on to it. No. 67 is another exception, where a similar oval background is 
edged, not with flames, but with a sort of floral ornament. Finally 
must be noticed the Buddha sitting in the middle of a stupa on 13.
Standing Buddha's we find on 1, 14, 54 and 71, all in scenes together 
with seated Buddha’s; on each of these reliefs there are two standing


--- Page 263 ---
^
 / -7 
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
i
except on 14, where there is only one. This last figure as well as the two 
on .1, holds the garment tip with the left hand; one of them on 54 is evi­
dently holding the garment, Just as one of the Buddha’s on 71 who is 
rather an indistinct figure. The Buddha's on 1,14 and the one on 54 and 71 
might therefore be £akyamuni's — although I consider it very doubtful 
as long as there is nothing to prove the identity of the seated Buddha’s. 
Besides Dr. Bosch himself has already put in a proviso 1), that on the 
Nepal miniatures published by Foucher, it is the Buddha Dipangkara 
who holds the garment tip with his left hand; the two miniatures that 
depict this Buddha, so as he was worshipped in Java, shew him with 
his right hand in abhaya- and vara-mudra respectively2); neither of these 
positions are found on Barabudur with standing Buddha's who hold their 
garment tip with the left hand. For this reason Dipangkara according to 
Bosch is most probably not the one meant on these reliefs which "almost 
certainly” represent Qakyamuni. Indian art in general characterises Di­
pangkara with the abhaya-mudra; on the other hand it is rather re­
markable that such special mention is made of his worship in Java so 
that we are inclined to think that a place would have been given to him 
in the greatest Buddhist monument on this island, in the sanctuary that 
offered the best opportunity for honouring other Buddha’s than £akya- 
muni.
Taking all together it seems most reasonable to conclude that there 
are not sufficient data for identifying the Buddha’s by means of pecu­
liarities in the way they are depicted. In the two cases we are certain 
of, their identity was not established by anything particular in their 
appearance; Qakyamuni has been recognised on the chief wall of the 
first gallery only because various episodes of his life were found there, 
and the Buddha’s in the niches we know to be Dhyani-Buddha's sim­
ply because the whole system here followed coincides with the one al­
ready known of Nepal.
There is possibly another way of recognising some of the Buddha's on 
the fourth gallery, those eight who are attended on by two Bodhisattva’s. 
They are found on the reliefs 6, 8, 12, 17 (twice), 20, 47, 50. Unfortu­
nately so many of the Bodhisattva’s are indistinct to such a degree 
that it is impossible to identify them, let alone find anything in their 
personal, details that might help as regards the Buddha they are escor­
ting. I hose on 6 and one of the group on 17 must be put aside at once 
as these Bodhisattva figures are too much damaged or worn away to
l) 1.1. page 103 sq.
a) Etude sur 1'iconographie bouddhique de 1’Inde I (1900) p. 79.


--- Page 264 ---
p
 I I
be of any use; a, curious position of the hands remains on 6, a kind of 
vara-mudra with the third finger bent inwards, but this cannot be relied 
on where all other attributes are missing. The only really distinct one is 
8; here the Buddha has on his right hand Avalokitegvara, on his left 
Vajrapani, I shall return later on to these figures when discussing the 
Bodhisattva’s and here merely note their presence. Very likely these 
same two appear on 12 and the second group on 17; Vajrapani can be 
easily recognised on both, but Avalokitegvara’s headdress is too much 
damaged for us to see if his emblem, the Amitabha-image, was there. On 
47 it is just the other way; there Avalokitegvara is undoubtedly pre­
sent, but the object on top of the blue lotus held, by the other Bodhi- 
sattvais too battered for us to make sure it is a vajra and identify h i m 
as Vajrapani. We find Avalokitegvara certainly again on 50, the other 
figure has nothing left but a broken stalk but it still looks as if the stem 
had belonged to an utpala, on which probably something was placed. In 
both instances what is left of the emblem may have been part of a 
vajra. The result is so far that the Bodhisattva on the Buddha's right- 
hand seems to be Avalokitegvara, wherever he can be identified, and 
the one on the other side is, or may be, Vajrapani1). But we find an 
exception on 20 as regards the leftside Bodhisattva; the right hand one 
is Avalokitegvara, but the one on the left has only the blue lotus with­
out anything on it. Unless this is an instance of the sculptor's carelessness 
in omitting the vajra, we must wonder which Bodhisattva is here meant.
1 he choice falls naturally on Manjugri who is distinguished in the Bud­
dhist art of India by the utpala2); just as on Barabudur he there 
often has a book on the lotus but this is not insisted on, so the utpala may 
in this case be sufficient; even if we do not feel sure about the identifi­
cation it must be allowed that no other Bodhisattva is more likely to be 
meant here than Manjugri,
According to one of the just-mentioned miniatures 3) it is on java that 
the Buddha Dipangkara is placed between Avalokitegvara and Mah- 
j ugri. This is not quite convincing for in the illustration mentioned, Mari- 
jugri is on the right and Avalokitegvara left, while on the monument it 
is the other way about. On the contrary the Buddha between Avalo- 
ki teg vara and Vajrapani may certainly be £akyamuni, as we can learn
’) With this combination compare also the three caitya’s at Vieng Sa, dedicated to Padma- 
pani, Buddha and Vajrapani, see Coedbs, Bull. Ec. fr. d'Extr. Or. 18, 6 p. 31. In China and 
Japan on the contrary the Buddha is placed between Samantabhadra and Manjucri; De 
Visser Arhats, p. 43, S3 foil., 137, 139, 159, 167.
J) Voucher 1.1. pag. 119.
*) Ibid. p. 79,
W U 
THE BAEABUDUR PANTHEON 
j
l
 j


--- Page 265 ---
THE BARABUDtJR PANTHEON 
,
* 
Mk A
■
from a place in the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan1), where it plainly men­
tions Avalokitegvara on £akyamuni's righthand, Vajrapani on his 
left. Even here unfortunately there is still room for doubt, for the text 
on the one side ascribes to them a position of the hands, dhyana- and bhuh- 
spar^a-mudra respectively, that does not agree with the monument, and 
on' the other side we find from the miniatures, that in Ceylon Dipang- 
karais actually represented between these two Bodhisattva’s, The doubt 
thus is justified and if we decide to suppose the possibility that the Bud­
dha on 20 (and perhaps 50) may be Dlpangkara and the Buddha’s in the 
other instances here discussed, (j'akyamum, it will not be because I am 
personally of this opinion, but only because in the midst of all our dark­
ness the least spark of light must be kept alive.
As regards the representation of several Buddha’s together, it may be 
useful to draw attention to the fact that in the old Chinese art of the 
cave-temples, two Buddha’s seated side by side are always £akyamuni 
and Prabhutaratna a).
We will now turn to the B o d h is a ttv a ’s3). As already noted, their 
dress is always shewn the same as that of the gods, the usual dress of 
ceremony, the result of which is that unless some distinctive attributes 
are found as well, it is not possible to distinguish a Bodhisattva from a 
god or even in the cases where the halo is missing and the Bodhisattva 
not placed on a lotuscushion, from an earthly king. This we have noticed 
already on various reliefs in the story of £akyamuni’s life, where more 
than once (as on la 1 1, 12, 93) according to the text Bodhisattva’s were 
present, but where it would have been quite impossible without that text 
to decide if these figures are Bodhisattva’s or gods or kings. It thus ap­
pears that in cases where the text to be represented spoke of "Bodhisatt- „ 
va’s”, without saying what sort they were to be, the sculptors did not 
think it necessary-to add any special details that would make clear to the 
spectator the figures were intended for Bodhisattva’s. Similar groups 
are. not uncommon among the reliefs of the higher-placed series and 
though of course it can never be stated with any certainty whether they 
are Bodhisattva’s, gods or even kings — except where a halo or lotus- 
cushion prevents them being monarchs — it is very likely that some of
l) Fol. 53a, p. 60 and 108,
’) Chavannes, Mission archeologique dans la Chine septentrional^, Ftibl, Ec. frang., 
d’Extr. Or XIII, 2 (1915) p. 550 and 368.
3) A short discussion of the Barabuclur Bodhisattva’s will be found in Rapp, Oudh. 
Comm. 1910 p. 10—17.
•ft


--- Page 266 ---
j f t l 
<SL
W < c f 6 2 / 
THE BARABUIWR PANTHEON
these groups, probably most of them,, must be considered to represent 
Bodhisattva's. I will mention for instance, the Buddha’s hearers on the 
first reliefs of the chief wall second gallery; several groups in the Mai- 
treya texts, as III 45, 68, 72 and specially 77-—87; the persons who play 
such an important part in the first story of the balustrade on the third 
gallery (IIIB 3—27); in the same wray it will be Bodhisattva’s that ap­
pear in Maitreya’s exhibition of magic on IIIB 54. Such groups we find 
also on the balustrade of the fourth gallery, as IVB 45, 64, 67, 72, 76, 77. 
Finally they are to be seen on the chief wall of the fourth gallery as well; 
at the beginning and then for instance on 18, 56, 58, 66, 69.
On four other reliefs, two on the second gallery and two on the fourth 
gallery, the Bodhisattva’s are treated more individually. On II 15, all 
round the Buddha rising on a lotuscushion who is the central figure, there 
are eleven Bodhisattva’s each placed on his separate lotuscushion; al­
though some attempt at variation is made in headdress and ornaments 
as well as the position of the hands, with a flower in the hand of a few 
of them, these figures are not distinguished from each other by actual 
emblems or attributes; we quite get the impression that it is only the 
text having stipulated each of them was to be placed upon a separate 
lotuscushion, which prevented the sculptor from making these just such 
an ordinary group as those we have discussed above. The same with the 
four Bodhisattva's on I I 74, who are seated two on each side of the Bud­
dha, all five on lotus cushions rising out of a pond; there is nothing charac­
teristic about them, the figures have no emblems and vary only in the 
position of the hands. If we were acquainted with the text, it might 
be possible to recognise them by the mudra’s but now we are quite in 
the dark because Bodhisattva’s cannot be identified generally by the 
mudra. This is not only that we have not sufficient knowledge of the 
mudra’s, but because Indian art as a whole deems it always necessary 
to distinguish the Bodhisattva's by their emblems.
There are now only two more scenes on the fourth gallery where seve­
ral Bodhisattva’s with attributes are together. Before we discuss them 
it will be advisable to decide which Bodhisattva’s may be considered to 
be identified by means of other reliefs.
The best identified of them is the most popular Bodhisattva of the 
Mahayanistic Church as a whole, the Lord and Guardian of the present 
universe, A valokit*egvaraor Padmapani. 11is now generally under­
stood that these two names signify one and the same being; but as the 
name Padmapani can only correctly be used for this Bodhisattva when 
he actually holds a padma in his hand, I prefer to make use of the more
--<V\
■ ,4!"'


--- Page 267 ---
(' ( $k ) ■) ■ 
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
2 ^ § I ,
x%w.waS5y 
■■■;■■ 
. 
.
usual one Avalokite^vara of as the Javanese like to call him, Loke- 
?vara. I do not believe there is any doubt that this is the Bodhisattva 
who is recognised by a red lotus in his left hand and the little image of 
his spiritual father Amitabha in his headdress, while the right hand is 
generally held in vara-mudra, Elsewhere, for instance in the bronzes that 
depict him, the Amitabha image is sometimes omitted *) but never on 
the Barabudur. Besides on this monument he is the only Bodhisattva 
who is also represented in a many-armed shape; with only one exception2) 
this holds good for him in the whole of Hindu-Javanese art. On the re­
liefs where his headdress can be seen distinctly, it appears to be made of 
coiled up tresses of hair.
Although this headdress with the Amitabha image in it seems to be 
the mark of distinction for Avalokite^vara at Barabudur, there is 
sometimes variation to be found in the hands. If we examine the reliefs 
on which we saw him with Vajrapani or another at the side of the 
Buddha, it appears that IV 50 answers in every way to all characteris­
tics given by Indian Buddhist art as a whole as well to what Javanese art 
in particular shews as his ordinaiy type: the righthand in vara-mudra, 
in the left the red lotus on a long stalk. In this instance the flower is more 
of a round shape, like a peony. On no. 8 the padma, now a bud with a 
short stalk, is held in the right hand and the left rests on the knee in a 
kind of vara-mudra, his first finger seems to bend inwards. On 47 the 
left hand is laid in the usual vara-mudra but the flower is omitted; in­
stead of it the right hand is lifted with thumb and first finger touching 
as in the vitarka-mudra, but also the middle and third finger are bent 
into the palm of the hand. The Avalokitetjvara on 20 is holding his 
hands together in a sembah in front of the breast, possibly they still 
hold the stem of a flower that shews next to the Bodhisattva’s 
left ear; but it is all very indistinct. On the two reliefs 12 and 17, 
the headdress is quite worn off, yet evidently Avalokitegvara was de­
picted in both instances as we have seen, the pendant of Vajrapani; he 
has the padma in his left hand, on 12 it is ball-shaped, on 17 like a ros­
ette, while on both reliefs the right hand is held in front of the breast in 
some quite unrecognisable mudra.
Not as companion to a Buddha, though on the same relief with seve-
*) See for inst. the review of the Buddhist bronzes in the Museum at Batavia, Rapp, Oudh. 
Comm. 1912 p. 23—37, where some of those in stone axe also discussed.
!) The only exception is Vajrasattva ; comp, above p. 155 note 6 and Juynboil, Catalogus 
Leiden (1909) p. 86. According to Chapt. X it seems to be very doubtful i f Vajrasattva may 
really be considered as Bodhisattva, although he is represented in Bodhisattva costume.


--- Page 268 ---
rat| Buddha’s and Bodhisattva's, we find Avalokitegvara again on IV 
16 in his most ordinary, his classical form, vara-mudra right and padma 
left. The first time we saw him in the story of Sudhana on the chief-wall 
of the second gallery, I I 47, we found him also two- armed, his headdress of 
locks of hair with the little Amitabha image and the padma held in his 
• left hand; with the right, he here enforces his argument for the benefit of 
his visitor 1).
Now reliefs I I 100—102shewamany-armed figureof this Bodhisattva, 
a fact which is the more remarkable because according to the Gan- 
davyuha-text we here have before us the famous Avalokitegvara 
of Potalaka2) who on the miniatures several times quoted, is actually 
depicted two-armed3). We find consecutively twice a four- and once 
a six-armed Avaioki teg,vara., always with the well-known headdress and 
always seated on a lion-throne. In all three instances the position of the 
front pair of hands is the same; the right laid on the knee in vara-mudra, 
the left holding the stem of the padma. On 100 in the left hand at the back 
an angkuga can be seen; the object in the right hand of the back pair 
however is very indistinct, perhaps it was a fly-whisk, hut more likely it has 
been a rosary. The latter would be quite in keeping with what is fre­
quently seen on the bronzes, on which the angkuga also appears in the oth­
er hand at the back, but rather seldom 4). The Avalokitegvara we find 
on 101 is quite usual in Java. The Bodhisattva here holds in the left hand 
of the back pair a book in the form of a kropak; the right hand is knoc­
ked off but will undoubtedly have held the rosary. This may be decided 
not only from analogy to the bronzes but also because an entirely similar 
standing Avalokitegvara will be found on the back wall of theMendut.5) 
The stalk of the lotus this one has in his hand rises from a plant growing 
at the Bodhisattva’s left side, and a second flower sprouts out of it and 
serves as a cushion for an amrta-bottle. This bottle is not found on the 
Barabudur figure, otherwise the whole personification is the same as 
that on the Mendut.
The six armed Avalokitegvara on 102 is rather damaged as to his 
attributes. The front hands, as already noted, shew padma and vara- 
mudra in the ordinary way, the second left hand holds an amrta-bottle 
and the third righthand a rosary, but the two other hands have lost
l) This position of the hands is also given to Avalokitefvara in India, see Foucher 1,1, p.
98 and comp. Rapp. Oudh, Comm. 1910 p. 14,
’) See above p. 39 and 54 foil.
*) Foucher 1.1. p. 109.
*) .See Rapp. p. 27—31.
5) Kersjes and Den Hamer, De Tjandi MSndoet (1903), plate 16.
\!v ^ 6 4 ? ) 
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
V S | ,


--- Page 269 ---
their emblems. Perhaps one of the bronzes r) can. help us to complete the 
figure; the bronze that corresponds shews the book in the third left 
hand and a handle in the second right. What this last may have been, 
must be left undecided but considering the resemblance between the 
relief and the bronze as to the first and third right hand preserved on 
both of them, it seems evident that the book belongs to the back left 
hand of the six-armed Avalokitepvara of Barabudur.
Until a few years ago the identity of our next Bodhisattva was gene­
rally considered established and it would have been unnecessary to bring 
up arguments to explain it: I refer to the Buddha-elect, Mai tre y a, 
distinguished by the little stupa he wears in his headdress. However it 
appeared from an article by E. F. Jochim 2) published in 1914, that this 
identification was not generally accepted and objections were made. 
For this reason I think it advisable to discuss this Bodhisattva more ela­
borately than would otherwise be necessary.
Let us begin by stating where he is found and which is his appearance. 
Some details on the subject are included in a study by van E rp 3), 
referred to already in Chapt V III; as he has made a close examination of 
this Bodhisattva’s appearance and the result is published in a clear and 
concise form, it will be quite unnecessary to repeat any description. It will 
be sufficient for me to say that in connection with my own examination of 
the separate reliefs I am in general entirely in agreement with the con­
clusions presented in that article. The Bodhisattva in question is found, 
as noted, on the last relief of the chief wall second gallery (II 128), then 
he appears among the first reliefs and on the whole of the second half of 
the chief wall third gallery as chief person (III 1—9 and 40—88), also 
on the balustrade of that gallery and on the first part of the balustrade 
fourth gallery where he plays also chief part (IIIB and IVB 1 —42). Finally 
we found him certainly on one but piobably on two reliefs of the chief- 
wall, fourth gallery (IV 16 and possibly 3). The one always-present em­
blem of this Bodhisattva is the stupa in his headdress; although this 
stupa varies here and there in shape, it need not for a moment be doubt­
ed that in the above-mentioned connected portions of reliefs one 
and the same chief person is meant; there is no question of various 
Bodhisattva’s with various kinds of stupa's as their attribute. Some­
times this Bodhisattva holds a branch of the nagapuspa-plant in his 
hand, but sometimes quite other sorts of flowers, generally lotus, once a
’) Rapp. p. 32.
a) Bijdr. Kon. Inst. 69 (1914] p. 11—30.
8) Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 54 (1912) p. 427—457.
THE BARABUDUR p a n t h e o n 
%
L


--- Page 270 ---
branch with three buds (III B 84) and several times nothing at all. A 
third peculiarity that often appears but by no means in general, is a flat 
band, sash, shawl or scarf of some sort hanging down from the left 
shoulder.
The question is this: is the Bodhisattva described above to be identi­
fied as Maitreya or not? We have seen already that on this point the 
one relief on which we know by the text for certain that Maitreya is 
represented, the scene where the tiara is being handed over in the story 
of £akyamuni, gives no decisive answer to this question 1). On this relief, 
la 6, we found one seated and one standing Bodhisattva, the first with 
a tiara on his head and holding his hands up, the second bare-headed, 
holding his tiara in his hand. According to the text we have here £akya- 
muni on his departure from the Tusita- heaven, handing over his tiara 
to Maitreya who is to take over the position of future Buddha. Putting 
aside the question which of the two is Maitreya, we must give our 
attention only to the tiara that is held in the hand; it is of course the 
one Maitreya is to wear in future, whether the standing Bodhisattva is 
Maitreya who has just received the headdress, or Qakyamuni who is 
on the point of presenting it. The tiara on the head of the seated figure 
on the other hand is either the new headdress with which Qakyamuni will 
descend to earth or the old one that Maitreya still wears but will lay 
aside the next moment. Now the tiara in the hand has lost its lower front 
piece, but I can easily agree that even when whole, there was no stupa on 
it. Here above I have already stated that the omission of this emblem must 
not be explained by its being unnecessary but in my opinion its absence 
merely shews that Maitreya received his stupa in connection with some 
event that occurred later than what is here depicted, and after he 
assumed the office of Buddha elect. Besides, for the sculptors there was a 
practical objection to putting a stupa into this tiara; if it were put there 
it would then follow, either that Qakyamum when he wore the headdress 
must also have had a stupa in it (nothing of this sort is known, on the 
contrary in the preceding reliefs he wears an ordinary tiara) or that the 
stupa appeared in it at the moment of presentation; and this is equally 
unacceptable when the text makes no mention of it. From one thing and 
another it seems to me that the stupa would in no case have been appro­
priate here, therefore its omission proves nothing as regards the quest­
ion whether the Bodhisatt va with the stupa emblem is Maitreya or not.
Now it is an established fact that Maitreya in Tibet and Nepal has a *)
*) See Vol. I p. 106 sq. and II p. 67.
f(f)| 
<SL
THE BARABTjpUR PANTHEON


--- Page 271 ---
stupa in his headdress; this is proved by examples that bear an in­
scription. Jochim does not doubt this; his objection principally is that 
other Bodhisattva's also wear such a stupa, so that there is no certainty 
that on Barabudur actually Maitreya and no other is meant. 1 will men­
tion to begin with that the nagapuspa branch is in general a very im­
portant attribute of Maitreya, so much so that this Bodhisattva's name 
in Tibet is connected with this flower. We see this nagapuspa in Java as 
well in the hand of the Bodhisattva with the stupa, for instance in the 
Mendut; in the Barabudur sanctuary as I have noted, other flowers 
appear in his hand but among them quite often the nagapuspa, while 
it is not found anywhere as an attribute to any one but the stupa Bodhi­
sattva. This already proves there is more chance of his being Maitreya 
than a Bodhisattva who is not so closely connected with the nagapuspa. 
When we consider further which other Bodhisattva's are represented 
with the stupa we find Jochim gives1), specially on Burgess’ authority, 
Padmapani, Vajrapani, Mahasthamaprapta and Manjugri. Apart from 
the question whether these are all authentic — Burgess’ identification was 
made thirty years ago, and it would not. be surprising considering the 
data then available, if the result requires revision ■— as regards Barabudur 
we can at once reject Padmapani, notwithstanding the fact that the 
Bodhisattva of the stupa sometimes carries a padma. We have seen 
plainly that Padmapani-A valokilegvara is distinguished on this monu­
ment by the Amitabha image, the emblem that identifies him in all 
Indian art ; it is not very likely the sculptors would^ depict him in quite 
another form as well. What settles the question is that on IV16 the 
Bodhisattva of the stupa and Avalokitegvara in his usual headdress 
both appear; it is remarkable that both have the right hand in vara- 
mudra and in the left a red lotus. Vajrapani gets his name from the 
vajra emblem which as far as I know is seldom omitted in the whole Ind­
ian art; Mahasthamaprapta is iconographically not of much importance 
but in Japan he rose to more honour with his stupa; the few times he 
appears he has also a vajra. On Barabudur we have Bodhisattva's with 
a vajra, but the one who wears the stupa headdress never has a vajra. It 
is the same with Manjugri. I have already suggested the possibility 
that a Bodhisattva with only an ntpala might quite well be Manjugri, 
at least where he appears as companion to the Buddha; the Bodhisattva 
of the stupa very seldom carries anutpala. Moreover we possess a Manju- 
gri identified by an inscription, who has sword and book as his emblems;
‘) 1.1. pag. 19.
•) 
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
j


--- Page 272 ---
the monument does not shew one of this same kind, it has a Bodhisattva 
with a book and also one with a sword, but then again, these t wo Bodhi- 
sattva’s wear no stupa in their headdress and the Bodhisattva with 
the stiipa never has a book or a sword. All the evidence, in my opinion, 
points to the stupa-Bodhisattva being no other than Maitreya. We are 
justified in asking who, in case the stupa-Bodhisattva is not Maitreya, 
is to be selected as the representative of this famous, high-honoured 
Buddha-elect? Where so many are portrayed, Maitreya first of all 
would be given an important place. Outside Java besides the stupa and 
nagapuspa, the amrta bottle *) is one of Maitreya’s principal emblems; 
in Java this only appears with Avalokite?vara. How then is Maitreya 
to be identified if not by the stupa and nagapuspa? In short, taking all 
together, I consider the objections made to identifying the Bodhisattva 
of the stupa as Maitreya are not justified. I am firmly convinced that 
his emblem is exclusively the stupa and the rest was evidently of so little 
importance that the Bodhisattva when once distinguished by his stupa, 
might have the padrna and vara-mudra of Avaloldtepvara (IV 16) or 
Samantabhadra’s branch with buds (III B 84) put into his hand without 
any fear of losing his identity.
As we have just been obliged to include Manj uc.rl in our examina­
tion, I will now discuss this Bodhisattva. Because of his appearing in 
India, I thought it possible to suggest, that he might be recognised as 
the figure with only an utpala, seated beside the Buddha on IV 20 2). If 
this is correct, it in any case only holds good for Manjugri as companion 
of the Buddha, therefore in a position, where a mark of distinction 
was sufficient that would not be adequate elsewhere, or maybe a 
tradition brought over from India was followed. But besides this 
the utpala by itself is not a sufficient characteristic to identify a Bodhi­
sattva such as Mahju^ri; in the various series of reliefs we found in­
stances enough where all sorts of persons, even those who were not 
Bodhisattva’s appeared with this flower in their hand. Manjugri there­
fore must have other attributes. I have already stated that we have an­
other image of this Bodhisattva a few centuries later in date 3), with 
an inscription, giving the name and shewing as emblems a book and a 
sword. We may look in vain on Barabudur for a Bodhisattva depicted 
like this, although both these emblems are to be found; for there is a 
Bodhisattva with a book resting on an utpala as well as one with an up-
l) Griinwedel, Mythologie p. 124; Foucher 1.1. p. 113.
*) See above p. 260.
s) Set up in 1343 at Jagaghu. See also Rouffaer in Brandes’Tjandi Singasari (1909) p. 101 sq.
i f f W
% 
p
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
^ L i


--- Page 273 ---
i v S
) \ 
The BARABU9UR pantheon
'h .p v..;
standing sword on the same flower. These two figures cannot be meant 
for the same Bodhisattva, for they are sitting side by side in the same scene 
(IV3). It is evident that one of them, is Mahjuprl, but which one? Theo­
retically as much can be said for the one as for the other, but practically it 
is clear that Mahjugrl must be the one with the book, not with the sword. 
It is quite evident that among Javanese Bodhisattva’s the one with the 
book takes a very important place; he appears even quite often among 
the Bodhisattva’s of Plaosan T) where only the principal Bodhisattva’s 
are represented; at the same time in the very typical collection of 
bronzes belonging to the Batavian Society there are rather a good num­
ber of figures of this Bodhisattva, quite as many as there are of Mai- 
treya2), while the Bodhisattva with the sword is very rare. Seeing that 
Manjuprl is one of the most popular- Bodhisattva’s in the whole Bud­
dhist church, we may expect to see him frequently represented. On the 
chief wall of the second gallery we found at the beginning of the Gan- 
davyuha, II 16, the Bodhisattva with the book where the text leads us 
to expect Manju^rL Another peculiarity helps to justify this identifi­
cation; I mean the crescent-shaped decoration placed behind this Bodhi­
sattva’s neck, an adornment, as already stated, given generally only to 
young persons, especially those of high birth 3). Manju^ri is very often 
called by the epithet Kumarabhuta, in great Mahayanistic works like 
Saddharmapundarika and Amitayurdhyanasutra, as well as, for in­
stance, Nagarjuna’s Mulamadhyamakakarikas4), Iris Letter referred to 
in Chapt I I 5), or the Catuska-nirhara6) preserved in the Kanjur. And in 
the list of Bodhisattva’s in the Mahavyutpatti7) he is named in full, 
Manju<pi Kumarabhuta; we see in this same list that some other 
Bodliisattva’s bear the same epithet and we shall notice the fact later 
on. Kumara to begin with can be translated as “prince" with the mean­
ing of youthful in age as well as of noble birth; thus Kern in his Sad- 
dharmapundarlka,-translation gives “still a youth” as alternative to "the
») See IJ zerman’s Besehrijving der oudheden nabij de grens der residenties Soerakarta and 
Djogdjakarta (1891) p. 125—127 and plate H and I.
4) Rapp. Oudh. Dienst 1912 p. 37—39.
*) Jocliim gives several examples on p. 27 of Ms article. According to Moens, Oudh. Versl. 
2919 p. 34 seq. it may be originally a crescent-shaped piece of the monk’s dress.
‘) Ed. De La Vallee Poussin, Bibl. Buddh. IV (1913). On p. 1 there is a note to Ary amahju- 
friye Kumarabhutaya namah; „formule commune & tom les ouvrages de cette section du 
Tandjour”.
») Above, Vol. I p. 64, (Journ. Pali Text Soc. 1886 p. 1—32).
*) See Feer, Annales Musee Guimet 5 (1883) p. 199—220 ; also in the dharaijT’s, ibid. p. 
43$_-44\.
') Ed. Meronov, Bibl. Buddh, XIII (1911) p. 11.


--- Page 274 ---
v i S 0 ' 7 ‘1 
THE EARABU9UR PANTHEON 
^ S f
prince royal” x). We can leave it undecided what the original sense of the 
word is2); Javanese iconography has evidently felt the meaning of 
youthfulness and therefore adorned this Bodhisattva with the well- 
known attribute of young persons. In this way I think we can account 
on the one hand for the presence of this ornament and at the same time 
find another proof for the identification of this Bodhisattva as Manju- 
frl 3).
The vajra and blue lotus are the usual Indian emblems for Vajra- 
p a n i 4) and on Barabudui the Bodhisattva with the vajra is undoubted­
ly Vajrapapi; Jochim’s objection5), that £akra also has a vajra on 
lb 62, does not hold good as here on the Barabudur there is a very dis­
tinct difference between f akra and Vajrapani; Qakra holds the vajra in 
his hand while Vajraparii has it on the utpala, which with £akra is al­
together missing. If more proof were needed than his agreement with the 
representation in India to establish Vajrapani ’s identity, it surely is 
conclusively fixed by his appearance as companion to the Buddha, 
where the figure with the vajra can hardly be any one but Vajrapani. 
He is to be seen only on the chief wall of the fourth gallery, on relief IV 3 
(to be discussed later) and next to his Master as we have noticed on 8,12, 
17, possibly 47, perhaps 50 as well. On 12 the vajra is worn away, that on 
8 and 17 is small in size and the several points that should go upwards 
and downwards cannot be distinguished; instead of that we see one large 
point standing up and two downwards partly disappearing into the ut­
pala. On 3 we find a much larger and quite distinct vajra on which can 
be seen three separate points up and down as well. Both forms of vajra 
are found elsewhere in Java, there is one very long specimen of the first 
sort at Mfendut, where the Bodhisattva is holding this emblem in his 
hand and where it looks more like two lance points joined together 
than a vajra; here he has no blue lotus.
When describing what is represented on the chief wall of the fourth 
gallery it was necessary to find out who was the chief person in the text 
there depicted; this I have already discussed with the result that 
we may consider it probable that the chief person who bears the em­
blem of the branch with three buds, is the Bodhisattva Samanta- 
b h a d r a 6). We shall not need to discuss him any further, only to re-
*) Sacred Books of the East, 21 (1884) p. 4.
s) The Aryamaiijuijnnamastafatakam (ed. Von Stael Holstein, Bibl. Buddh, XV, 1913) 
takes it as yuvaraja (p. 99 and 104).
>) In Bijdr. Kon Inst. 74 (1918) p. 424 this question has already been concisely treated,
*) Foacherl.1. p. 121 sq.
s) In his article above mentioned.
*) See above p, 91—300.
X5* ' G°iX 
''V-"-


--- Page 275 ---
member that we found him, besides on the chief wall mentioned, in
other places, II 14, III 16.-18, IVB 60, 61. There is a doubtful instance
on IBa 179, where a figure with the three bud branch sits without halo 
or lotus cushion; again on IVB 82 and III 14, where halo and lotuscushion 
both appear and indicate a Bodhisattva, but where the emblem is not 
precisely the same. On the first relief the branch has four buds, more like 
flowers, and on III 14 the three buds or flowers each apparently branch out 
again into stems, so that the flower looks something like ahalf-vajra. As 
this Bodhisattva also has a flame at. the top of his tiara, there is every 
reason to suppose that something extraordinary is here represented and 
the figure is perhaps not Samantabhadra at all.
In the hero of the Gandavyuha-text on the second gallery, we dis­
covered the Bodhisattva Sudhana, a figure otherwise unknown to 
iconography, unless we may identify him with Sudhanakumara who is 
found chiefly as the follower of Amoghapaga x); in this quality in 
Java as well, he has a statue guaranteed by an inscription, on which 
the same as in other places, his distinctive attribute seems to be the 
book 2). At any rate it must be noted that the Sudhana of Barabudur has 
no mark of distinction, and the sculptor has evidently been allowed the 
liberty of occasionally putting various objects or flowers into his hand 
without violating any tradition. Besides these, there are various simi­
lar figures in the several series of reliefs that we recognise or suppose to 
be Bodhisattva’s without knowing their name. It is quite probable that 
in the Maitreya and Samantabhadra texts the attendant or worshipper 
who accompanies the chief person may himself be a Bodhisatt va and there 
are probably also Bodhisattva’s among the haloed figures such as we 
saw several times on the chief wall first gallery, bottom row. There 
what is depicted is chiefly £akyaimmi’s former lives; but on the higher 
galleries the Bodhisattva’s of the present and the future are certainly 
often represented. In Maitreya’s miraculous apparitions on the balu­
strade of the third gallery Bodhisattva’s also appear (see especially 
It IB 61 and 62). On the whole it seems to me, there is every chance that 
men seated on lotus cushions, in the dress of distinguished persons 
with a halo are Bodhisattva’s. Let us give attention to one or two 
of them. The scene on IV 7 shews us one of these Bodhisatt va’s holding 
a shell that he is using as a musical instrument and he is accompanied by
») Foucber, Etude sur l'iconographie bouddhique de 1'Inde II (1905) p. 26 sq., 37, 40 sq.
(as follower of Mafiju§ri); Grunwedel, Mythologie des Buddliismus in Tibet und der Mongolei 
(1901) p. 129 and 132.
s) Brandes, Tjandi Dja&o (1904) p. 101 and plated; Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaamche 
kunst (1923) II p. 124 and plate 63.
’ Gc% X
v ' it> '■ 
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
k


--- Page 276 ---
a whole orchestra. On IV 67 we find a figure with an utpala and his 
hands in sembah; he not only has a halo and a lotuscushion but his 
position among three B uddha's very plainly marks him as a Bodhisattva, 
though as I stated before not all who hold the utpala can be reckoned 
as such. A similar distinction applies to the figures with the crescent be­
hind their neck, when they are not children. There was one on II 27 
with a halo (therefore most likely intended for the Buddha-ship) but 
not a lotuscushion; according to the text this was a youth to whom 
the Bodhisattva Sudhana paid a visit1). One of the chief persons on the 
balustrade of the fourth gallery (IV B 43—-51) had the same ornament both 
with and without a halo 2); neither can this one it appears be recognised 
for certain as a Bodhisattva. On the contrary we can be sure of the fig­
ure on III 12, seated on his lotuscushion on a lion throne with the 
crescent behind him; his headdress is peculiar, not a tiara, but a diadem 
ornamented with what seems to be something in loops 3), We do not 
know who this represents, but of course he must be looked for among the 
Kumarabhuta's 4). Finally let us recall the Bodhisattva figure set up in a 
niche in the pavilion on III 345); it is not very distinct undsaems to wear 
an Amitabha-image in the headdress, in which case it would be of 
course Avalokite^vara. The lefthand rests in its lap, the right is held in 
front of the breast in a mudra.
Now remain for discussion the two reliefs with a group of Bodhisatt- 
va's, all distinguished by emblems, therefore treated as individuals, on 
IV 2 and 3. It is lamentable they are so damaged and have lost a good 
deal of their importance, but several peculiarities have been saved.
A description of their general appearance will be found above ), I shall 
only deal with the Bodhisattva's. On IV 2 there are only two visible, 
Samantabhadra with his branch of buds, here a double one, and a Bodhi 
sattva whose emblem is a jewel on a blue lotus. We can recognise the 
lotusbud and apadma of two others, but everything is too indistinct for 
us to come to any conclusion about them. Besides these four, there are 
two other persons in official dress, but they do not seem to have either 
lotuscushion or any sort of emblem. 1 he next scene shew- as far as I 
can see, nine similar figures, eight of them apparently Bodhisattva’s, for
’} See above p. 34.
*) Seep. 135.
*) See p. 77 where the possibility of this being Manju$ri is discussed.
*) The Mahavyutpatti mentions on p. 11 as other Kumarabhuta's: Menifikharadhaxa, 
Varunamati, Sumati and Durdharsa.
*) See p. 80.
*) Pag. 102.
(f( «)#) 
(fil
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
k J J L j


--- Page 277 ---
*' w V Vir' 
s' 
* i 
.'V' *. *' 
'' , ; 
V ' . O ' H , J'' ’U ' •
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON
the ninth is not sitting on a lotuscushion and probably does not belong to 
them. There is no difficulty in recognising Vajrapani with his vajra and 
Manjtiyri with his book on the utpala; whether the latter here has the 
crescent-ornament is not any more to be seen. Both have the right hand 
in vara-mudra. Then we see a Bodhisattva with a sword pointing up­
wards on a padma and another with his hands in dhyana-mudra, at 
whose side there is a branch bearing small rosette-shaped flowers. These 
four are seated below; in the middle of the upper row, between two 
Buddha's, is a Bodhisattva with a niche in his headdress, holding a lotus- 
bud on a stalk in his left hand. We are not able to discern if there has 
been a stupa or an Amitabha-image in the niche and if this Bodhisattva 
is Maitreya or Avalokiteyvara. Two others hold a branch with different 
flowers, one of these branches, in the hand of a Bodhisattva whose 
headdress is completely worn-away, looks very like the nagapuspa, in 
which case this would lie Maitreya and the one just described Avaloki- 
te^vara. Then quite on the left there is a Bodhisattva whose emblem is 
a stalk with a padma cushion, out of which incense smoke is rising. It is 
impossible to venture an opinion about the indistinct flower-emblems, 
but I will say a few words about the three other Bodhisattva’s who bear 
respectively jewel, sword and smoking emblem. Just as the vajra on the 
utpala identifies the Bodhisattva who holds it as Vaj rapani, I consider the 
jewel (ratnam) on the utpala identifies R atn ap an i, even though he is 
sometimes found holding the jewel only in his hand Jj — we have seen 
that Vaj rapani too does the same wi t h his emblem. Nor is it impossible 
that this figure might be K s i t i g a r b h a, a Bodhisattva who also appears 
with a jewel8) ; there seems to have been some connection between him 
and Ratnapani, which it is not advisable to discuss here. The same applies 
to the Bodhisattva with the sword on a lotus. According to a particular 
Tibet representation 3), this emblem belongs to Akafjagarbha, alias 
Khagarbha, while Nepal data indicate the Bodhisattva Vigvapani 4) 
as bearing the sword combined with the double crossed vajra, the so- 
called vigvavajra,. In this form it is also found in Java 5) and it is quite
*) See Rapp. Oudh, Dienst 1913 p. 65 sq.; Not. Bat. Gen. 1913 p. XLVIII no. 5393 and 
1914 p. 187 no 5494.
3) Griinvvedel, Mythologie p. 141 and in particular De Visser, Ostasiatische Zeitschrift 2 
(1913.—14) p. 189—196.
8) Griinwedel ibidem.
*) Oldfield, Sketches from Nipal (1880) If p. 377; comp. Groeneveldt, Catalogus Batavia
(1887) p. 79.
6) Rapp. p. 67, Not. Bat. Gen. 1913 p. XLVIII no. 5395, 1914 p. 187 no. 5497.
Barabaqlur II 
18


--- Page 278 ---
1 
p
possible that this Bodhisattva may be intended without the vi^va- 
vajra, characterized only by the sword l). In this case too the same being 
may perhaps be hidden under various names.
This Akapagarbha as well as the Bodhisattva with the burning em­
blem will be found among the eight .Bodhisattva’s in the side panels on 
the outside walls of the M6ndut. I have made a short study of these 2), 
which though founded only on. a hypothesis, seems worth considering. 
My supposition was that the eight Bodhisattva’s of Mendut might be the 
same as the eight that are found in the cave-temples of the Western 
Ghats, also grouped round the Buddha and these two groups would cor­
respond to the eight Great Bodhisattva's continually mentioned in the 
Mahayanistic literature, the same whose names head the list of Bodhi­
sattva’s in the Mahavyutpatti. On comparing the figures placed on 
different sides of the Mendut with the statements in the Pancakrama B), 
which apportions the eight Bodhisattva’s there mentioned to the our 
points of the compass i), it appears that the Bodhisattva’s known to us 
by their emblems are actually placed according to a regular sequence 
just as we might expect to find them. This made it seem very 
likely that the same might be the case with the unknown Bodhisattva 
figures; but it was impossible to verify the accuracy of the results ob­
tained. In case the supposition is correct, it would follow in course that 
the Bodhisattva with the sword is actually Akagagarbha and at the 
same time what is of importance to Barabudur, the identity of the 
Bodhisattva with the burning emblem would be established and his 
name b eS arv a n iv a ra n a v isk a m b h in . I shall not give more place 
or importance to the theory in this veiy early stage of research, but 
consider it worth mentioning.
After the Buddha’s and Bodhisattva’s we come to theT ara’s.They do 
not appear in the texts that have been identified and though here and 
there in the relief series on the higher galleries we find women with haloes 
who might be intended for Tara’s, they would do just as well for 
goddesses or other heavenly beings; there is nothing whatever to distin­
guish them as Tara’s. It must be stated that sofar not a single 1 ara has *)
*) See Juynboll, Catalogus Leiden (1909) p. 103 no. 1630/14 and plate XIII, 2.
>) Bijdr, Kon. Inst. 74 (1918) p. 419 —437.
») Ed. De la Vallee Poussin, Receuil de travaux publies par la faculty de philosophie et 
lettres de I’Universite de Gand, 16idme fascicule (1896), I vs 31 sq., 62—65, 154— 157.
4) The verses are to be found 131 sq.
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
U
l j


--- Page 279 ---
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON
been discovered on Barabudur and that we possess no data that enable us 
without the help of texts to distinguish the figure of a Tara from a godd­
ess or any woman of high position; so nothing but the discovery of the 
texts followed can shew whether Tara’s are represented on the monu­
ment and if there, of what kind they are. It is quite plain that in any 
case there is no elaborate system of Tara’s with fixed emblems, like that 
of Nepal, in what is here depicted.
On the whole the gods and goddesses of the Buddhist pantheon are more 
clearly specified, though not altogether free from conf usion. This is parti­
cularly noticeable in the groups of gods such as continually appear in 
the lifestory of Qakyamuni; if the text did not specify that persons de­
picted on the panel in question were gods, we might just as well fake 
them for Bodhisattva’s. Again where some particular gods are intended, 
there is seldom any attempt made to give them an individual character. 
The four divine guardians of the winds on la 104 wear the ordinary dress 
of high rank and are not even supplied with a halo. The same with godd­
esses, apsarasas and similar divine beings; in instances where we know by 
the text that a goddess is depicted, so as Vimala on la 36, the goddess of 
the tree la 82, the earth-goddess la 94, the city goddess lb 83, the night 
goddesses II 105—112, to mention a few, we find nothing more than 
figures of women in more or less elegant attire, the same as ordinary 
queens, not even always wearing a halo.
Only a few of the gods can be recognised by special emblems. The first of 
these is £ a k r a alias In dr a, who in Buddhist stories is called generally 
£akra, king of the gods. But even this figure the sculptor has often pas­
sed over without, clearly indicating him in this position. In the Lalita- 
vistara £akra is repeatedly mentioned by name among the gods who 
appear on special occasions, while the relief that illustrates the incident 
merely gives us a group of gods, as on la 10,20, 28,52,64, 106,120; even 
on the Great Departure, la 65, where Chakra and Brahma according to the 
text shew the way, we do see two gods going in front but neither of them 
has any distinctive marks. Nor is Qakra clearly indicated on lb 46 and 
49, where he appears in the story of Mandhatar or in the Jatakamala 
tale there is about him, where he comes in on IBa 44J). But on the other 
hand there are numerous scenes in which his identity is clearly proved 
by the presence of his satellite who wears the elephant’s trunk in his
') Other reliefs where Qakxa may be expected, IBa 22 and 47a, are too much damaged for 
us to decide if the god i$ actually depicted.
xjS* ■ 
■


--- Page 280 ---
( g T
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON 
O J L j
; 
V ( V O V 'M . ‘’■ "f } V ' '! V '.?'■/' V
V
■,£ 1A ■ 3A V iT} A
I ||',: -VAA'^ .7 '- ■ 
:'• - -:' • ^; A\-.' '■;" ■ 
': '-'t' ',^.'/
Iress, large elephant ears and often has the angku^a in his hand as 
well. It was I Jzerman who first called attention to this curious personage 
identifying him as Vigvakarman *); then Pleyte made a closer exami­
nation and proved that this figure must rightly be called Airavata, for his 
elephant trunk and ears plainly shew he actually personates fakra's 
usual mount, the elephant2). In a special article devoted to Airavata, 
Jochim has shewn that he was to be found in more places than had so- 
far been discovered 3), and in my description of the reliefs it will be 
seen that I was able to add a few instances to the number. The collected 
result is that Airavata is to be found in the following scenes: la 67, 82, 
89; lb 38, 62; IBa 29, 56, 68, 211, 212, 230,232, 248, 249,253; III 73; 
M R 35, 73,81,85,88 (decorative); IVB3,17, twenty three times in all4). 
The king of the gods can only be recognised by his companion, he has no 
real emblem of his own, except in one scene lb 62, where he holds the 
vajra in his hand, the attribute that belongs to him everywhere as In- 
dra in the Brahmanistic pantheon. This symbol of the lightning has 
three points on each side; therefore the same kind of thing that Vajra- 
pani is holding on IV 3.
Next to fakra, B rah m a plays a rather important part in the Lalita- 
vistara as lord of a still more exalted heavenly group; he is generally not 
distinguished in any way from the others. The text introduces him in the 
episodes represented on la 13, 14, 28, 52, 65, 91, 106, 107, 120. Only on 
one of them, 91, does he shew something individual. Not that he is de­
picted like the famous, four-headed Brahma of Brahmanism, but the 
sculptor has made him the curious headdress from which he gets the name 
£ikhin i. e. with the headdress of high. form. Some of the other divine 
figures wear the same kind of headdress, which is quite in keeping with the 
figure known to be Brahma kneeling in front; the others are of course 
Brahmakayika’s, dwellers in Brahma's heaven, in this way distinguished 
from other gods. I have intentionally passed over no, 14 because 
the meaning of it is not quite certain B); if my explanation of its being 
a performance of homage by Brahma and his followers is correct, then 
the high hairdressing seen in the left hand group, in contrast to the tiara's
*) Tijdschr. Aadr. Gen. 2 : 16 (1899) p. 327—330,
a) Die Bucldha-Legende in den Skulpturen des Tempels von B6r6-Budur (1901) p. 183.
*) Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 55 (1913) p. 202—208.
•) On one of the reliefs a t the sides of the staircase at MSndut Qakra is also to be recognised 
by Airavata's presence. See Kersjes & Den Hamer, De Tjandi MSndoet voor de restauratie 
(1903) plate 13. 
j See Vol I p 117.


--- Page 281 ---
on the right hand, will not be accidental. Then we see among the gods on 
35 who have stepped off their pedestals to honor the Bodhisattva when 
he visits the temple, there is one without a tiara, who has his hair combed 
up high; maybe in this instance as well, it is intended to distinguish 
Brahma from the other gods. Should this prove correct, then there is 
no doubt about a scene on the balustrade of the second gallery, IIB 12, 
although there the text is unknown to us. The figure seated at the head 
of a group of very richly-dressed men, I think must be no other than 
Brahma presiding over a company of gods.
£iva, as far as we can discover, is only twice represented on the monu­
ment, both times in the Gandavyuha on II 48 and 104. He is shewn in 
the form of Civa-Mahadeva, four-armed with Nandi, his riding-animal, 
couched at the foot of his master’s throne. In the back pair of hands in 
both instances he holds in the right a rosary, left, a. fly whisk; of the pair of 
front hands on 48, the left rests in Ms lap, the right is held in the atti­
tude of preaching; on 104 both front hands are laid on his lap in dhya- 
na-mudra. Next to him on this relief is his usual emblem, the trident; 
the serpent-upavita can also be seen. In the text this last figure is 
specially mentioned as Mahadeva of DvSravatL
We cannot be certain about Vi§nu, who appears perhaps on IBa 166 
and Yama who possibly is to be found on O 110 and III 69. Neither of 
them has any sort of distinctive attribute. The first-mentioned figure 
has a Garuda seated behind him and next to him there is a shell on a 
pedestal; this coincidence of a Vxsnuistic symbol with one of Visrm’s 
attendants gives some support to the idea of the figure representing that 
god. The Garuda has a stand next to him with a bird on it. The so-called 
Yama is only suspected to be such because he seems to be in command of 
one of the scenes in hell. The two Yama's are not very much alike. The 
least likely is the one on O 110; his beard, poor clothing and water jug 
make him look as much like a hermit and he is perhaps not taking any 
share in the hellish business; but the one on III 69 is more of a god, he 
sits there in full-dress with a halo, evidently giving orders to the hell- 
fiend who kneels before him. Behind his throne we see sometMng like 
an arrow and a club, the latter undoubtedly one of Yama’s weapons. The 
figure on IBa 260 with its jewel-pots and jewel on a pedestal reminds us 
of K u v e r a 1).
As for the gods, we must notice some few groups of four persons such 
as we have seen on IBa 166—168 (where Visnu and Garuda are sitting 
opposite a couple of unknown persons) as well as on 222—224, 292 in
*)■ See Vol. I p, 413 sq.
t h e b a r a b u d u r p a n t h e o n


--- Page 282 ---
t(f)l) 
(fil
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON
the same series of reliefs and TIB 87x). Finally there is still one very pecu­
liar figure: the ten-armed god or goddess on IV 39. This being is sitting on 
the ground, leaning on its first right hand; the left held in front of its 
breast. In the other hands we see, more or less distinctly, on the right 
consecutively sword, arrow, stiletto and angku$a; on the left, dagger, bow, 
a looped-shaped object that may possibly be a slanting disc, and a stick. 
The whole figure is somewhat; damaged, and the headdress very indistinct; 
moreover we cannot be sure if the creature is a god or a goddess. If it is 
a lady she does not quite correspond to any of the statues or descrip­
tions of Buddhist goddesses that we possess. The combination of terrible 
and loveable qualities is ascribed to the goddess Cunda2) who was 
also worshipped in Java; but this is not exactly what this goddess at 
Barabudur reveals with her eight fearful weapons and two hands that 
hold nothing. I have already suggested 3) that this may be meant for a 
Brahmanistic figure. Moreover it is not impossible, if this is a man we 
may have Mara before us surrounded by his fascinating daughters as 
we saw them on the chief wall of the first gallery. On relief la 95 the god 
really looks like an ordinary royal personage, but on the contrary la 94, 
shewing the famous attack of Mara’s army against Qakyamuni when he 
is becoming Buddha, seems to support the above view: among those 
warriors we find there and nowhere else on Barabudur, figures with twelve 
or more arms, all bearing terrible weapons so that we are inclined to 
think the relief mentioned may be connected with IV 39. On the other 
hand it should be noted that Mara himself is only two-armed in the fray. 
He is mounted on an elephant and armed with bow and arrow.
As for the semi-divine creatures that still await description, I shall 
only mention those who are introduced in some characteristic manner, 
Asura’s, heavenly nymphs, gandharva’s, vidyadhara’s, divine musicians 
and all suchlike, differ in no way from human beings except that they 
hover in the air when required.
N a g a ’s, i.e. snakes represented in human form, who play such an 
important part in the Buddhist texts, can always be recognised by their 
hood with three, five, (or even more) cobra-heads. They are found on 
reliefs O 94; la 85 (?), 87—89, 91, 101, 111, 113, 119; lb 3—5, 97; IBa 
161, 169, 187—190, 273; IBb 6; II 11, 128; III 74, 75; IIIB 38, 49; IV
J) See descriptions Vol. I p. 403, 409, 416 and 472.
!) Also to Kurukulla, see for instance Griinwedel LI. p. 152; Foucher 1.1. II (1905)
p. 72—75.
3) Page 108.


--- Page 283 ---
f p ) 
Q\
J^ J 
THE BARABUDUR PANTHEON
3!, 35. The sculptor has been so consistent in his manner of depicting 
them that in the case of la 101 he lias overlooked his text. The episode 
for illustration relates how a naga king protected the Buddha with seven 
coils of his body and sheltered him with his hood '), a performance only 
achievable by a real snake. Keeping the naga in his human shape he 
presents the incident merely as the naga-king paying homage to the 
Buddha, thereby ignoring the most striking point of the text.
K i n n a r a ’s, the human birds that appear so frequently, are not 
treated with the same uniformity. In the pictures of the Sudhana- 
kumaravadana that describes the love of an earthly prince for a kinnarl, 
the sculptor has rightly judged it better not to display the beloved one as 
a half-bird creature which would certainly make the tale less edifying. 
Consequently through the whole story (lb 1—20), not only the kinnarl 
herself but. the members of her family and servants, in fact all kinnara’s 
are shewn in human form. Elsewhere we find the kinnara’s represented 
in two ways; either with a bird body and human head and breast or 
with the whole upper body human and the lower part as a bird. The great 
difference of course is that in the latter case they have a pair of arms at 
their disposal and can take hold of things. Kinnara’s are found on the 
following reliefs: 0 10i, 102, 126, 130, 137, 143, 147, 149, 151 (?), 160; 
lb 51,39, 90, 112; IBa 214, 371; IBb 22, 36, (38,) 39; IIB 62; II 20, 23, 
30, 38, 105, 116, 121—124; III 2, 5, 14, 22, 24, 26—28, 30, 38, 49, 51, 
52, 55, 65, 66, 75, 76, 80, 86; IIIB 19, 42; IV 35. Especially in the series 
on the buried base they are used to indicate a scene in heaven, when 
they are placed either on each side of a wishing-tree or among its 
branches. O 155 is a remarkable instanceinstead of bird legs they have 
ordinary human legs with feet, which are however much too short in 
proportion; so they are evidently meant for kirmara’s but the sculptor 
may have been careless about them. The “kinnara’s” on O 151 also seem 
to have a human leg. Generally kinnara’s are depicted standing, only 
in very few instances they are shewn flying.
G a r u d a’s are much more rare and have much less of a bird about them. 
They can be seen on seven reliefs, O 94, IBa 166, II ! 1, 128, III 75, 
IIIB 42, IV 35. They appear entirely in human shape except for a bird’s 
beak and rough stiff or hanging hair that ends in short curls; occasion­
ally the hair is twisted up in a knot. Bird’s eyes, more or less distinct 
from human eyes and large round earrings also distinguish some of 
them; wings are only once distinctly seen (II 128) and once doubtful 
(IB a 166). Thus the only certain sign on Barabudur is the bird beak.
*) See Vol. I p. 210.


--- Page 284 ---
__ _
(CT
THE BARABUDITR PANTHEON
This is not without importance for the history of the Garuda-type in 
Java, for which Brandes has given the outlines 1).
Yaks a’s or raksas as, the man-devouring demons that figure in so 
many of the tales, are to be recognised by their wild aspect; they usually 
have big round eyes, moustache, hair sticking out all round their heads 
ending in little curls, but sometimes hanging loose and unkempt, and 
round earrings. On the Barabudur no actual difference is made between 
the bearded type that may be called yaksa and the beardless raksasa; 
even in the same tale these creatures are shewn with and without a 
beard. Not all those answering to the above description must be put 
down as yaksa’s however, for occasionally we find one of them in a king’s 
retinue or as guard at the gate, where evidently no such being as a yaksa 
is intended but more likely a foreign soldier. See for instance on reliefs 
O 18, 100 (comp. 64, 82); la 8,52,53, 55, 61; lb 75, 95; IBa 153; IBb 87, 
IIB 25, 36, 81; II 35. In contrast to these there are a great number of 
instances where the text or the rest of the scene shews that real yaksa’s 
are intended. Such are reliefs O 10, 96; la 65, 66; lb 9, 44, 45, 52, 59, 
112; IBa 31—32, 34, 47a, 67, 117, 119, 130, 132, 176, 178, 236, 267, 347, 
364; IIB 39( ?); II 11, 57, 128; III 68, 75; III B 39, 41, 64, 80; IV 32, 
33,35. The hell-fiends who have the same appearance as yaksa’s must be 
mentioned separately, they are called “raksasa’s of Yarna’ , and found 
on O 86, 88—89, 92, 110; III 69; IV B 78. This last sort just as the first 
mentioned, are generally armed. On O 109 there is one wearing an ordi­
nary tiara, with a club in his hand.
To complete the list of such creatures there are the p re ta ’s, one of 
whom I expect to be the frightful figure on 095 with a distended belly 
and sunken chest and cheeks 2). There are probably some morepreta’s 
elsewhere, very likely on III 70, where Maitreya is giving food to some 
emaciated starving people. The picture is so horrible that it reminds us of 
the always hungry, ever thirsty preta’s much more than of ordinary 
poor folk. If this be correct, then the same sort of creatures appear on 
IVB 79, though they are not nearly as horrid looking. As both these 
reliefs follow on a picture of hell, there is the more likelihood of pre- 
ta’s being intended,
f
l) In Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 47 (1904) p. 559—563.
«) See Vol. I p. 74.


--- Page 285 ---
§ L
f A
CHAPTER XIII
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR
The last part of our task will be an attempt as far as the data available 
allow, to establish the position Barabudur occupies in Buddhism in gene­
ral and in the Mahayana of Java in particular. The results obtained 
above in the several chapters, sufficiently prove that our knowledge 
with regard to this point is very slight and incomplete. When all details 
are collected, it is not to be expected that any complete system will be 
revealed. All the same it will be useful to review the results gained and 
consider what indications they shew for further research and in which 
direction they point.
On the series of reliefs round the buried base of the monument we 
found first of all scenes of daily life on earth and it was often easy to 
understand how side by side with various good or evil deeds, their 
reward or punishment was set forth, in rebirth on earth, in heaven or 
hell. Taken as a whole, this series may be regarded as an illustration of 
the laws of Karman and by what was brought before his eyes, the beholder 
on the one hand was urged towards the good and frighted from evil, but 
at the same time the hopeless eternal circle of life was vividly impressed 
on his mind. Seeing that in all this, cosmological and metaphysical ques­
tions predominate, it seems not unlikely that what is represented may be 
founded on some Abhidharma treatise, but the comparatively general 
value of the Abhidharma combined with the fact that we have so little 
knowledge of the separate Abhidharma texts, makes it almost impossible 
to deduce from this any indication of the particular system followed by 
the founders of Barabudur.
The first gallery shewed us in the top row on the chief wall the life- 
story of the historic Buddha, from his dwelling in the Tu§ita-heaven be­
fore his descent to earth, until the first preaching in the Deer-park at 
Benares. The text here followed proved to be the Lalitavistara, with a


--- Page 286 ---
few trifling exceptions in exactly the same form as the redaction that 
exists. In the bottom row began a series of edifying tales, avadana’s and 
jataka’s, that are continued along the balustrade of the first and second 
gallery, jura’s Jatakamala gave the text for part of these tales, again 
with quite unimportant variations; as for the rest, no consecutive series 
has been identified. Some few have been recognised singly or in some 
other context. Several of the most important, judging by the great 
number of reliefs they take up, were stories which have been preserved 
in the Divyavadana, among them, some that followed the Divyavadana 
text in the most minute details, but others that differed widely 
from it. Then there were some out of the Avadanacataka and curiously 
enough only out of the fourth decade of that work; finally a few more 
were recognised by means of the collection of Pali-jataka’s, the Chinese 
Tripita'ka or in some other way.
Next, on the chief wall of the second gallery came the Ganclavyuha> 
in another edition than the list of contents we possess; this however may 
be due to its inaccuracy. It is possible that the continuation and end of 
Sudhana’s search after the Highest Wisdom is represented on the third 
and fourth gallery; the third gallery in any case shews a tale in which 
the Bodhisattva Maitreya plays chief part, he also seems to be the hero 
on the balustrade of the same gallery and the first half of the fourth.
On the chief wall of this fourth gallery we found a remarkable number 
of reliefs shewing groups of Buddha’s together; then again there was one 
particular Bodhisattva acting as chief person whom I thought maybe 
recognised as Samantabhadra, the last Buddha of the Future, just as 
Maitreya is the first-expected Tathagata.
1 n the niches above all these galleries were seated the D hy ani-B uddha ’ s 
in five different mudra’s. Four of them were each turned to one point of 
the compass, the fifth were seated in an upper row facing all sides. These 
five could be, identified as the famous five Dhyani-Buddha’s of the Nepal 
system, Amitabha, Ratnasarabhava, Aksobhya and Amoghasiddha to 
the points of the compass and Vairocana placed above them as ruler of 
the zenith. As regards the Buddha with a sixth kind of mudra, seated 
within the latticeworked domes on the circular terraces, who is generally 
thought to be the historic Buddha, I have suggested the possibility of 
this being intended for a sixth Dhyani-Buddha, who was worshipped by 
various sects under the name of Vajrasattva.
At last in 1842 an unfinished Buddha statue was discovered in the 
chief stupa, the same size and appearance as the Dhyani-Buddha’s. I 
was not able to agree with the statement that this was a copy of the also
W
w
$ \ 
(ci
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
T j l J


--- Page 287 ---
l(tfj 
WT
t h e b u d d h is m o f b a r a b u d u r
unfinished image of the historic Buddha that once stood in the temple of 
Mahabodhi. On the contrary I consider there was every reason to doubt 
if this image had originally belonged to the chief-stupa; it was more 
likely brought in from outside. Fortunately this question is not of such 
great importance to the right estimation of the monument as a whole. .
Most probably relics were buried in the heart of the stupa; nothing of 
this sort however has been found and it seems not impossible that they 
are still there deep under the centre of the chief-stupa. It is of course 
quite uncertain what they consist or consisted of.
Before continuing to consider what is found on Barabudur, let me 
call attention to something which is noticeable by its absence. We have 
been able to follow step by step the story of £akyamuni’s life, up to the 
first preaching of his Creed. Later on we still get some scenes of a Buddha 
preaching or being worshipped, but evidently these are merely intro­
ductions to or episodes taken from the great sutra’s which are represent­
ed further on. Actual well-known incidents in the Buddha's later life on 
earth are not to be found and though it is true the legend concerning the 
period after he became Buddha is far less elaborate and has fewer events 
to relate than the history of hisBodhisattva-ship, still there are a certain 
number of fixed incidents known of the later period such as the conversion 
of the Kayyapa’s, of the black snake, the episode of Nanda, of Ugrasena, of 
the yaksa Atavika, the submission of the naga Apalala, the visit of Indra 
king of the gods and that of Elapatra the naga, the entry into Rajagrha, 
and the visit to the £akya's, the preaching in the heaven of the Trayas- 
trimyas and the descent from that heaven, the donation of the Jetavana, 
the presentation of Amrapali and of the handful of dust, the worship 
of the ape, the rage of the white dog, the measuring of the Buddha, the 
comforting of Ananda, the rescue of Jyotiska from fire, Devadatta’s 
various plots and what must not be forgotten, the Great Miracle of 
£ravastl; all these are important incidents in the story of the Buddha's 
further life, moreover they are plainly depicted elsewhere which makes 
the omission more conspicuous1). None of these episodes are found at 
Barabudur 2); among those mentioned are several that would have notice­
able features for recognition either in the arrangement of the scene or 
the peculiarities of the persons or animals depicted, so that we can be
’) See Foucher, L’art gr£co-bouddhique du Gandhara, I (1905) p. 440—553.
*) Comp, what is said above about the Miracle of £r&vast! p. 85—-91.


--- Page 288 ---
—o y \ 
✓s .
sure they cannot have been passed over or left hidden in some out-of-the- 
way corner.
Still more remarkable than the omission of all that, is the fact that we can 
seek in vain for a thing so important as the Nirvana and the scenes which 
group themselves round it in all Buddhist art and legend. The Nirvana 
is one. of the four Great Events in the life of the Master that were so 
often pictured together, and its site had always remained a favorite place 
of pilgrimage. The most peculiarly strange fact that on a monument so 
richly-illustrated as Barabudur the end of the Buddha’s career should be 
entirely ignored, has already been noticed by Erandes who offers an 
explanation of i t 1). Accepting the idea that after the first part of the 
life-story on the first gallery, the chief-walls of the higher galleries should 
he given to the most important incidents of Qakyamuni’s preaching, he 
considers that the end of the Buddha’s career might be looked for above 
the fourth gallery on the smooth outer walls of the circular terraces. The 
explanation of the Nirvana scenes being omitted is simply this, "that 
the rich and beautiful series was not completed when the work stopped 
or was obliged to be stopped” 2),
To refute the argument that these terrace walls as we see them now 
could have been intended for a decoration of reliefs, I shall refer to Brandes 
himself. It is to him we owe the knowledge that relief decoration placed 
on a smooth wall without an upper and lower cornice to form the frame 
that it requires, is an absurdity in Middle Javanese art, besides the. 
knowledge that had it been intended to put in such cornices either with 
or without ogives etc., this would have been visible in the first plan of 
that part of the building, even before the decoration was completed. For 
in the method of building followed by the Hindu-Javanese, all the parts 
that are to be used afterwards for decoration must already be set in place 
during the construction 3). All the same the question is not as easy to settle 
as it looks. We have already 4) heard that an alteration was discovered 
on the circular terraces which shewed that originally they were built on a 
profiled base. How that would have altered their appearance is not here 
the question; but it is quite possible it may have been intended to put a 
row of reliefs along their base. In this way, though it does not seem very 
probable, that the existing terraces could ever have been meant for reliefs, 
the possibility remains that something like the following took place: the
’) In Not. Bat. Gen. 1903, Bijl. II p. VI—IX. Comp. Bijl. VIII and Not. 1902 p. XXXVIII.
») 1.1. p. IX.
*) See Not. Bat. Gen. 1902, Bijl. XV, p. CXLVII—CL.
*) Vol. I p. 28.
1(f)! 
Qt
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
^
A J


--- Page 289 ---
's^Sfi§inal Intention of the builders of Barabudur was to give the terraces 
a profiled line and decorate them with reliefs, perhaps depicting the fur- 
thtti histoiy of the Buddha as preacher, but in any case the Nirvana, 
For some or other reason, the meaning of which we cannot discover, it 
was decided to make an alteration, build the terraces quite straight, and 
probably because they were forced to do so, leave out the portrayal of 
such highly important events.
This explanation of the matter seems not altogether improbable; all 
the same we ought not to accept this view any more than that of Bran­
dos. It is I think in opposition to the design of the monument as a whole, 
,n ot that I should attempt to bring my own opinion forward as the only 
right explanation but I venture to offer the following suggestions. When 
we leave the richly-decorated galleries and stand suddenly on the austere 
unornamented terraces, the mind receives a deep and beneficent impres­
sion; the turmoil of this world of appearances slips away from us as we 
come into the world of meditation. If this touches the modem spectator, 
how much more powerfully must it have moved the believer of ancient 
times who was so much closer related to all that was represented on 
Barabudur and the ideas to which its images give expression. To me it 
seems impossible that such an impression was not deliberately intended 
by the designer of this temple.
I Ms is however partly a question of feeling which is not easily proved, 
but there is further evidence available. Brandes himself remarks that in 
the sequence of the chief walls of the galleries there is a climax to be 
noted, “an increase of metaphysical insubstantiality” ; “the visions of 
trance here presented to us become gradually nobler, deeper in meaning, 
richer, wider, more exalted.”1) As already stated2), lam also convinced 
that this climax is certainly apparent and intentional; not only on the 
chief walls but partially also in the series of reliefs on the balu­
strades "), According to Brandes the climax is this, the first gallery rela­
tes the story of the Buddha up to his first preaching, the second, 
third and fourth illustrate the cliief points of his teaching in a 
series of continually ascending and more exalted ideas, till finally 
the terraces are to reveal the Nirvana. It is of course true that tradi­
tionally the great sutra's of the Mahayana belong to the teaching 
of the Buddha and according to their preface, most of them axe given as
l) U page VI and V III.
*) Pag. 152 sq.
-Braudes’ statement that the balustrades only illustrate "jataka’s, jataka’s and still more 
jatakas or similar stories” (p. IX) applies only to the first and second gallery.
(* ( S
 / 1 / 
THE BUDDH1SM OF BARABUDUR 
(


--- Page 290 ---
-£akyamuni’s own words. But. the actual contents prove that no great 
emphasis is laid on the personality of the historic Buddha. This is evi­
dently the same on Barabudur. On the first gallery fakyamuni is the 
hero. The second shews the search after the Highest Wisdom by an 
entirely different person, who achieves his aim by the help of three Bodlii- 
sattva’s. Then Maitreya is the chief figure on the third gallery; he is 
the Buddha-elect who is to proclaim the Creed of Salvation after fakya- 
muni; the fourth gallery gives us Samantabhadra whose great mission as 
the last Buddha of the future removes him still f urther from the present. 
The texts have now left £akyamuni. When Samantabhadra is reached, 
from whom in the last instance Salvation is to come and whose position 
according to certain sects, differs very little from that of aSupreme Being 
— this was shewn in chapt. X and will also appear later on — then 
fakyamuni has been left behind. To return to him again would be an 
anti-climax, a falling off and the very same reason which prevented me 
from expecting to find the figure of gakyamuni among the Buddha’s on 
the terraces makes it seem improbable that the same terraces should 
have been intended for the Parinirvana. If that was to be represented, 
the place for it would be the first or at most the second gallery, not 
higher.
In my opinion it has never been intended to depict the Buddha’s 
end on Barabudur and certainly not on the terraces. Nevertheless its 
omission is a most remarkable fact and Brandes very rightly called 
attention to it. But when he argues “the Parinirvana is too important 
to be missing on this richly-decorated sanctuary, where will it have been 
placed?”,I must put the question in another form:what can have been 
the reason that such an important event was not represented on this 
richly-illustrated monument ?
The answer I think, can only be the following: becauseQakyamuni’s 
Nirvana was not such an important fact to the designers of Barabudur. 
The more value is put on what can be expected from the future of Mai­
treya or Samantabhadra, the more we adjust our conception of the world 
to the lofty Dhyani-Buddha system that soars far above and beyond our 
world and time, the less becomes the importance of Qakyamuni’s person­
ality. He is but one of many; he has of course a particular value for us 
because we live just in the period and the world in which he preached, but 
the importance of that is more or less accidental; its great interest to us 
is not the same to the whole system of world-cycles, in the midst of which.
Ms career is but an episode. He has revealed to us the Creed of Salvation, 
for that we owe him gratitude and reverence; but what becomes of him
M w j ' 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
H
i ;


--- Page 291 ---
former matters comparatively little to us. For the Hlnayana this is 
quite different, there £akyamuni is the one, who has shewn us the way of 
deliverance from the misery of life’s eternal circle through this very 
Nirvana; the extinction of the Master is the great and splendid example 
that all believers struggle to attain. But the Mahayanistic church has more 
lofty ideals. It is not Nirvana that all must aim at, not even were it 
within our reach; we must resign that and placing the happiness of our 
fellow-creatures above our own, undertake the laborious life of a Bodhi- 
sattva, if possible, to become a Buddha who attains the Highest Wis­
dom and reveals it to the world. This creed of a Bodhisattva-ship open 
to all believers, puts our own Nirvana as well as that of £akyamuni 
into the background. His great deed that attracts all eyes, which we all 
must undertake to imitate is the teaching of the Creed of Salvation. This 
was his Task and that of the future Buddha's. After completing this task 
£akyamuni as his life-story shews us, disappeared into the Nirvana. 
This was of course quite possible, even though soon the idea that Nirvana 
was not a reality seemed more worthy of this exalted being, so that the 
reverence paid to the Buddha began to resemble the worship of a living 
God. But with regard to the Task itself that was now completed, the extinc­
tion of the Master was no more of any importance. In this way the result 
of one of the fundamental principles of the Mahayana was the inevitable 
neglect of Qakyamuni’s Parinirvana and the omission of its representa­
tion brings us to the conlusion that the sect who founded Barabudur 
followed the creed described above in a logical and consistent manner.
As far as 1 am aware of only one attempt has been made to define 
the Buddhism of Barabudur and that is by Foucher. He draws atten­
tion 1) to the fact that four of the tales in the bottom row on the chief 
wall of the first gallery have been identified from the Divyavadana, 
a work that is known to be mostly borrowed from the Vinaya-pitaka of 
the Mulasarvastivadin’s 1 2). From a Chinese source we know that the 
Lalitavistara belongs to this same school3), Then the Chinese traveller 
I-tsing in about 700 AD states that the Mulasarvastivadanikaya was 
the almost generally accepted creed in the islands of the Southern Ocean4).
1) Notes d’archeologie bouddkique, Bull. Ec, Franc. d’Extr. Gr. 9 (1909) p. 42 sq.
2) See Huber, Les sources du Divyavadana, Bull. Ec. Fran9. d’Extr. Or. 6 (1906) p. 1—3; 
Levi, Les elements de formation du Divyavadana, T ’oung Pao, 2 : 8 (1907) p. 105—122.
•) Beal, The Romantic Legend of Qakya Buddha (1875) p. 386 sq.
■*) A Record of the Buddhist Religion as practised in India and the Malay Archipelago, 
translated by J. Takakusu (1896) p. 10.
l F: !V ^
 );y 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
^ % |


--- Page 292 ---
X#1 ' GcV\ 
: -
/w ^r< S\
ll( fo!) 
(cl
\ 0 8 $ £ 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
k
. 
. 
'
This, in Foucher's opinion, authorizes the supposition that in Java the 
canons of this school were most generally practised.
The Mulasarvastivadin’s are originally Hlnayanistic, hut this is no 
great objection, as it appears that in I-tsing's time the same school held, 
in one place the Hinayana and in another the Mahayana form of creed1). 
But there is a definite objection in another statement by I-tsing that 
the HInayana was chiefly adhered to in the islands of the Southern 
Ocean, with the exception of Malayu where there were a few Mahaya- 
nists 2). As far as applies to Java in the time of Barabudur, this is cer­
tainly wrong. No trace of Hinayana has been found in any of the Middle 
Javanese Buddhist sanctuaries, on the contrary there are numerous indi­
cations of Mahayana. It is not easy to believe that I-tsing who though 
he never came to Java, spent several years in Sumatra, was misinformed 
and I think it very probable that a change took place after his stay in the 
Archipelago. This is confirmed by chronological evidence;the oldest dated 
Buddhist temple in Java is about eighty years after I-tsing. Perhaps the 
few Mahayanists of Malayu having increased in numbers had a hand in 
the business; Malayu, in those days the name of the present Djambi in 
Sumatra, had become politically dependant on the rising kingdom of 
£rivijaya in Palembang 3) whose kings evidently encouraged the Maha­
yana in Java as well, so that the originally predominating Hinayana 4) 
was entirely supplanted. However it may be, I-tsing’s statement that 
only Hinayana was practised, does not apply to Java in the time of 
Barabudur, and if we are obliged to reject this information then there is 
every reason not to accept unreservedly the information regarding the 
Mulasarvastivadin's that is evidently connected therewith.5)
An equally-inadequate proof is the reference to the Lalitavistara, *)
*) See Takakusu's Preface p. XXII sq.
») L.I. p. 10 sq., see also p. 14. The first part of the statement agrees with that of Parana (.ha 
(p. 264 = 200), who relates that on the small islands, among them Yavadvipa and Suvarna- 
dvipa., there were exclusively £ravaka's, i. e. Hinayartists
*) Comp. Coedes, Le royaume de £rivijaya, Bull. Ec. Fr. d’Extr. Or. 18, 6 (1918) andFer- 
rand, L’empire sumatranais de £rtvijaya, Journ. As 11 : 20 (1922) p. I and 161.
«) This oldest Hlnayanistic Buddhism according to a certain tradition was introduced by 
Ginjavarman who died in 431 and belonged to the Dharmagupta. sect; see Pelliot, Deux 
itindraires de Chine en Inde, Bull. Ec. Franf. d’Extr. Or. 4 (1904) p. 274 sq. and Levi-Chavan- 
nes, Les seize arhat protecteurs de la loi, Journ. Asiat, 11: 8 (1916) p. 46. Fa ITien in 414 
seems to have found almost no Buddhism. See, as regards the change under the political in­
fluence of grtvijaya, the author’s inaugural oration De Sumatraansehe periods der Javaan- 
sche geschiedenis (1919) p. 23—26.
&) As regards this it is very noticeable that what I-tsing relates about the Buddhism of 
Camps, does not agree with the inscriptions, which are Mahayanistic, while the Chinese scholar 
mentions two Hinayanist schools. See Finot in Bull. Ec. Fr. d’Extr. Or. 20,4 (192Q),p. 146 sq.


--- Page 293 ---
Wliich though originally Hinayanistic was adapted to the Mahaya- 
.na l) and alieady existed under other titles in several older sects a), 
not in later times either was it restricted to the Mfilasarvastivadin 3) ; 
besides on Barabudur we discovered that it does not entirely agree with 
the version known to us. Then as regards the four tales identified from 
the Divyavadana we must remember only one of them, the Sudhanaku- 
maia.yadS.na, agreed completely with the text mentioned; in two, the 
Rudrayanavadana and the Maitrakanyakavadana, there were points 
of difference and the f ourth, the Mandhatravadana even shewed consi­
derable variations 4); this fact is important to us because on examining the 
Divyavadana tales it appears they agree entirely with the corresponding 
part of. the Miilasarvastivada vinaya. On looking further into the place of 
these tales in the MulasarvSstivadavmaya we learn from Levi’s article 
quoted above that one of the four is not found at all in this Vinaya 
(Maitrakanyaka) and the three others, each taken from a different part 
of the Vinaya mentioned, appear both, in the Chinese and Tibetan trans­
lation in a different sequence to that on the monument6). Now when of 
three similar tales in a whole series, two differ (one. rather considerably) 
and besides their mutual sequence is different, 1 think there is no other 
conclusion we can come to but that in whatever way the resemblance is 
to be explained, there can certainly be no question of direct derivation 
■from the Mulasarvastivadavinaya. Of course all the same the writer of 
the text followed on Barabudur may have borrowed something, among 
others, from the Vinaya mentioned, just as the editor of that part of the 
Vinaya in collecting his specimens may ha ve borrowed from an older text 
which afterwards was to be illustrated on Barabudur. But there is no 
closer connection and it seems to me we are quite unjustified in suppo­
sing, on the strength of these few points of agreement, that the Mula- 
sarvastivadavinaya was followed in Java.
Therefore I think, taking all together there is not sufficient evidence
>) According to Winternitz, Beitrage zur Buddhistischen Sanskritliteratur, Wien Zeitschr 
f. d. Kunde der Morgen). 26 (1912) p. 242- 245 the Lalitavistara is compiled from older and 
late; elements; originally the Buddha biography of the (Hinayanistic) Sarvastivadin's, but 
developed in Mahayanistic spirit; part of it is founded on the Lokottaravada..
*) Kern> Oeschiedenis vahhet Buddhistnein Indie II (1884), p. 405.
3) It belongs to the nine great Vaipulyasfitxa’s of the Mahayina.
*) See Vol. I p. 246—275, 282-4301, and 304—311.
At Barabudur the series opens with Sudhanakumara, then comes (with a tale in between) 
Mandh&tar and last with another interval. Hudraya^a. In the Chinese translation (Tokyo 
edition) the sequence is reversed; in the Tibetan Kafijnr, Dul-va, again Sudhanakumara conies 
before the two others, but the two last have also changed places. See Levi pag.. 107, 109__
in, M3,
Barabu4ur.II 
lrIV
\\ ( H; 
t h e buddhism of harabudue 
v£jj
\
■ J 
Mi A


--- Page 294 ---
ftjl 
(ci
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR
left for connecting Barabudur with the Muiasarvastivadin sect more 
than any other. We must search in another direction to discover some­
thing more about the opinions of the founders of the monument in the 
hope of being able to define them more exactly.
Let us first see if it is possible to combine the data from the stupa 
itself, with others that we get from Java. Examination in this direction 
shews promise of reward; even if the collection of these data about the 
Mahay ana in Java are not of much use to us for Barabudur, it will still 
be worth while, to find out something about the views that spread most 
generally in Java.
In arranging these data we must begin by making a distinct division 
between the data of the Middle- and the East-Javanese period. The first 
are of course the most important to our object, not only because they 
stand nearer to Barabudur in time, hut also because in this period we have 
the most chance of hitting on the form of Buddhism as it was imported 
from India, which would of course be the nearest to what we know of 
the sects on the continent. In East-Java Buddhism had already lost a 
good deal of its purity; it was, as we can see specially by the texts, 
insiduously mixed with Civaismand other indigenous Javanese influence, 
so that although of course something was left of its original form, it is. a 
much less reliable source for our knowledge of the Mahayana introduced 
into Java, the religion that created the Barabudur.
The information from Middle-Java is rather scanty; there are no 
texts at all, we have only the monument itself and a few inscriptions 
to rely on. But all the data that exist point in the same direction. The 
oldest-known Buddhist sanctuary in Java, the temple of Kalasan 
founded in 778 is remarkable, being not dedicated to the Buddha but 
to the exclusively Mahayanistic Tara, a fact that should surely be noted 
in connection with the statement by I-tsing discussed-above. The image 
of the goddess herself has disappeared as well as the other statues the 
temple possessed; but fortunately a few Buddha’s remain in the niches 
on the roof and the position of their hands as regards the points of the 
compass, prove that the system of the Dhyani-Buddha’s was foil owed 
on this oldest sanctuary. The Sanskrit inscription of consecration, from 
which we learn the fact that this temple was dedicated to Tara, announ­
ces in addition that a dwelling aryabhiksunam vinayainahayanavi- 
dam was erected; if more evidence were needed, this is an over­
whelming proof that the founders considered themselves followers of 
the Mahayana. The monks who here set up house as we see knew all 
about the Vinaya, but we should like to have been told which V in ay a


--- Page 295 ---
p
# 
1 
# 
■ 
+ t
it was! Meantime we might gather from the omission of any further 
indication that this Vinaya was considered quite a matter of course 
because only one was followed in Java and only one school was esta­
blished there 1),
The vihara of Sari probably about the same date as Kalasan, yields no 
father information; the statues which stood there have disappeared, and 
the figures in the reliefs on the outside walls have not yet found satis­
factory identification 2). Both these sanctuaries may be older than Bara­
budur, but the Mendut must have been erected about the same time 
and this temple is also important for another reason; it is placed in. the 
immediate neighbourhood of Barabudur and appears as a kind of supple­
ment to it3); for this reason I shall here give some account of it. The chief 
figure of the Mendut is £akyamuni preaching; he is depicted making the 
first revelation of the Creed in the Deer Park of Benares as is to be seen 
by the cakra between two couching deer on the pedestal on which the 
throne stands. The Buddha is seated in the middle of the temple cham­
ber between two Bodhisattva’s, one of whom is certainly Avalokitefjvara 
and the other Vajrapam or Manjuprl. Above the door that gave entrance 
to the temple chamber there was the well-known so-called Buddhist con­
fession of faith. In the porch we find on one side a relief shewing the god 
of riches Kuvera, who also figures elsewhere as keeper of the gate; in the 
opinion of o thers this figure is the yaksa Pancika, On the other side is a 
corresponding female figure, perhaps Hariri, the converted plague-de­
mon, now a reformed character figuring as goddess of fruitfulness; pos­
sibly she is someone else, but a goddess in any case, e vidently intended as 
a, spouse for Kuvera. On the outside of the building besides jataka’s and 
animal-stories on the wings of the staircase and the base of the actual 
temple, there is a fine series of decorative reliefs round the monument, con­
sisting of a wide panel between two narrower' ones, while in front the 
place of the wide panel is taken up by the projecting front porch whose 
ornament has disappeared. On the wide panels we see each time a chief
*) For the inscription see Brandes in Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 31 (1886) p. 240—260 and for 
the temple the author’s Inleiding tot de Hindoc-Javaanschekunst (2d.ed. 1923) I p. 257—264.
*) Inleiding p. 264 sq. There is another sanctuary, possibly Lumbung, where the record of the 
foundation in 782 has been preserved; it begins with an invocation to the Three Jewels, 
while further according to Brandes images of Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are mentioned. 
If this last statement proves correct — the inscription is not yet published — then we may 
possibly suppose the Dharma being represented as goddess and Sangha as Bodhisattva (comp. 
Oldfield, Sketches from Nipal, 1880, U p. 157—161), or according to the later Javanese custom 
(Sanghyang Kamahtiyamkan 53 f p , 60 and 108) Buddha between Avalokitefvara and 
Vajrap&pi,
5) See Vol. I p. 16 sq.
W & ) 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
V M i|


--- Page 296 ---
1 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDIJR 
V k [
\x ^ S s f/ 
* 
O X j
figure between two followers with some worshippers in the air. On the 
back wall of the temple the chief figure is the Bodhisattva Avalokiteg- 
vara standing, in his four-armed shape; on both side-walls it is a seated 
goddess. The first is eight armed, holding mostly terrible weapons, the 
second is four-armed and has only peaceful emblems. The details need 
not be discussed, we shall only inquire who it is that is here represen­
ted. Unfortunately that has not been decided; Brandes thinks she may be 
Avalokitegvara’s Tara in two shapes, Foucher two forms of the goddess 
Cunda, According to my view they are both right in a certain way. 
Brandes is surely correct in connecting the second figure, rising out of a 
pond on a lotus-cushion, with the famous story of the birth of Tara 
from a tear of compassion Avalckitegvara let fall upon the earth; it be­
came a pool and from the middle of it Tara appeared on a lotuscushion. 
Foucher also correctly remarks that the attributes and position of the 
hands of these goddesses agree with those given to Cunda in India. 
The question can be explained as follows: either that in Java the part of 
Avalokitegvara’s Tara in her fearful and her beneficent form was assign­
ed. to Cunda, or that the Tara of Java has usurped the aspect and attri­
butes of Cunda; in either case the root of the matter remains the same, 
there is a combination of Tara and Cunda. On each side of the wide 
panels and the projecting porch, as mentioned, there is a narrow panel 
and on each of these a standing Bodhisattva is portrayed. In these eight 
figures as already mentioned above *), we find a group of the eight fa­
mous Great Bodhisattva’s which following the pradaksina, I named suc­
cessively Sarvanivaranaviskambhin, Maitreya, Samantabhadra, Ksiti- 
garbha, Vajrapani, Manjugri, Akagagarbha, and Padmapani (now 
missing). Bearing in mind that the last-named has only a hypothetical 
character we may sum up the result of our search on the Mendut as fol­
lows: in the temple-chamber £akyamuni between Avalokitegvara and 
Vajrapani or Manjugri, in the porch Kuvera and Hariti, on the middle 
panels of the monument at the back Avalokitegvara, at the sides Tara 
in a beneficent and a terrible form, both having the aspect of Cunda in 
India; on the side panels, most likely the set of eight Great Bodhisatt­
va’s just named2),
The Mgndut gives us by far the most information. The somewhat later
J) Pag. 274.
*) For this see Brandes, Not, Bat. Gen. 1902 Bijl. X III; Foucher. Notes etc. p. 46 sq,; 
the author in Bijdr. Kon. Inst. 74 (1918) p. 419—437 and chapt. VIII of the Inleiding.
A different explanation is given by Moens in Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 59 (1921) p, 529—600.


--- Page 297 ---
temple at Tjandi Sewn must have possessed a large Buddha statue in its 
principal chamber but it has disappeared like the other images that have 
adorned the sanctuary. The Buddha's found in and near the adjoining 
small temples shew us only that the system of Dhyani-Buddha’s was also 
followed in this group of temples. Among the front-temples only the 
Southern one, Bubrah, partly remains; it has a few seated Buddha’s, 
according to their mudra's, Dhyani-Buddha’s; Asu, the East temple, 
placed in front of the chief-entr ance, was to judge by the Kuvera-images 
found there, evidently dedicated to that god. Sadjiwan and Plaosan belong 
to the latest sanctuaries of the Middle-Javanese period. From the first 
of these with its animal-fables and a few loose images we learn nothing 
more than the fact that the object of worship was a group of three sta­
tues with at least one Buddha and that in one of the side niches a. Bodhi- 
satt va was placed; at Plaosan there were three chambers each having a 
Buddha placed between two Bodhisattva’s. A few of the latter still 
remain, among whom we can recognise Manjugrl, Maitreya, Avaloki- 
tegvara, Samantabhadra and — if my arguments as regards the Menciut 
are correct — Sarvani varanavi§kambhin. Several Dhyani-Buddha’s 
and Prajhaparamita’s are also found there 1).
To sum up therefore, we find in the sanctuaries of Middle -Java that 
the creed of the Dhyani-Buddha’s was recognised and special honour was 
paid to Bodhisattva’s and Tara. The loose images confirm this. Among 
the bronzes as well as many Buddha’s there are also Avalokite^vara, 
Mahjugri, Vajrapani, Maitreya, TarS, Cunda, Prajnaparamita, and 
somenot yet found on our monuments, Halahala-Loke^ara, Vajrasattva, 
Trailokyavijaya, and the goddesses Marfci, Vajravarahi and Vasudhara 2), 
in short, the Mahayanistic pantheon as known in Indian Buddhist 
iconography, is almost entirely represented. Bronzes of course are not 
the most reliable material because they are so easy to remove, but the 
stone images give quite the same Mahayanistic impression. As well as 
Dhyani-Buddha’s and Bodhisattva’s there are Tara’s; I call special 
attention to the female figure with the stupa in its headdress and with 
an Amitabha-image on a lotus-stalk, a figure that also appears at 
Prambanan and is represented in the Calcutta Museum ®) by a Javanese
l) Inleiding I p. 274—293; II p. 4—24.
*) See RaPP' Oudh. Comm. 1912 p. 1— 83; Juynboll, Catalogus Leiden (1909) p, 77— 
108; Not. Bat. Gen. 1914 p. 179— 183; Oudh. Versl. 1915, p. 33—36.
") Anderson, Catalogue and Handbook of the Archaeological Collection in the Indian 
Museum (1883) II p. 195; IJzerman, Beschrijving tier oudheden nabij de grena der residenties 
Soerakarta and Djogdjakarta (1891) p. 37 and fig. 68.
H g
 J:j . 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
W
I


--- Page 298 ---
n
image of unknown origin. Whether my identification as Usmsavijaya [) 
is correct or not, in any case we find already in Middle-Java the products 
of a very elaborate Mahayana,
These are our Middle-Javanese data. The case is different in East 
Java, because in judging the data found there we have to allow for the 
’ 
centuries of development and degeneration that Buddhism may have 
undergone in Java. Although we can suppose that the connection with 
India and Further India was never entirely broken off, there appear 
as far as we know, no further signs of any new and powerful influence 
from outside in the religion and culture of Java; on the contrary East 
Java seems in all respects to be a continuation of the evolution in Middle- 
Java. As for its Buddhism, one of its chief characteristics I have already 
remarked, is a movement in the direction of a continually growing 
syncretism that penetrated the consciousness of the Javanese themselves 
and became gradually more pronounced. This phase is certainly to be 
discerned in Middle-Java as well (and also in India and Further India) 
but it has not yet developed into such a powerful combination of Qivaism 
and Buddhism as that found in East-Java especially during the rule of 
the kings of Singhasari and Majapahit. In monum ental art this syncretism 
found expression in the erection of a combined Civaitic-Buddhistic 
sanctuary like king Krtanagara’s mausoleum at Jajawa, where fiva was 
enthroned below and Aksobhya 2) above. However important this build­
ing may be for the study of Javanese Buddhism in general, in the search 
of data for the Buddhism, of Barabudur we need not pause to examine 
this curiosity which is far-removed from the history of Mid die-Java; we 
must keep our attention fixed on the more purely Buddhist sanctuaries. 
When we look for the Buddhist remains to be found in East Java, there ap­
pears only one temple that merits more detailed examination; the mauso­
leum built about 1268 for king Vi$nuvarddhanaat Jajaghuin the present- 
day Tumpang. A couple of other temples which we know or surmise to 
have been Buddhist, have lost all their images, in the cave of Sela-Mang- 
leng, important in itself, there are only Buddha-figures and a few j at aka's 
to be recognised. In other parts only one or more Buddhist images are 
left to shew where a sanctuary has probably stood. Thus Jajagbu is the 
only temple which we are able to judge as a whole and fortunately we
'} Rapp, p, 73.
*) Comp. Canto 56 and 57 of the Uaga.rakj-tagama, and p, 282—285 of the author's notes 
to Kern’s edition (1919).
• 60te\
X
v 8 ^ / 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
^
L


--- Page 299 ---
have here before us one of the largest Buddhist foundations and also one 
of the most important in the East-Javanese period1).
The temple of Jajaghu was not dedicated to the Buddha but to 
Amoghapaya, one of the forms in which the Bodhisattva Avaloki- 
teyvara appears; the deceased monarch was here immortalized as 
Amoghapaya and figures connected with this Bodhisattva were grouped 
round the chief-image. It is quite probable that Amoghapaya was looked 
upon as a being of a higher order than a Bodhisattva; the Nagarakrta- 
gama calls the chief statue of Jajaghu a Jina-image 2) and Jina is the ordi­
nary name for what we call a Dhyani-Buddha. Amoghapaya himself was 
represented eight-armed with the usual image of his spiritual father 
Amitabha in his headdress. Though it is often difficult to identify Bud­
dhist images, there can be no doubt about those at Jajaghu, the sculp­
tors having preserved the identity of their creations by inscriptions at the 
back; we see the large statue is marked Bharala Aryamoghapaya Loke- 
yvara and the small image bears its name Bharala Amitabha on each 
side of the headdress. Amoghapaya has of course been set up in the 
temple-chamber; how his companions were arranged is not certain but 
the principal point is that the four followers ascribed to him in all Bud­
dhist art were all present; Sudhanakumara, Qyama-Tara, Hayagriva 
and Bhrkuti, all furnished with inscriptions, their aspect entirely in 
keeping with what the Indian sadhana leads us to expect. Besides • 
these there were some still smaller figures found; Dhy ani-Buddha’s 
and Tara’s, viz. Aksobhya, Ratnasambhava, Locana, Mamakhi and 
Panduravasim. We might suppose that all five Dhyani-Buddha’s with 
the Tara's belonging.to them have been there; however it is pretty 
certain this was not the case. On the bronze replicas that king Krta- 
nagara had made of the statue in his father’s mausoleum we see Amo­
ghapaya with his little Amitabha image and his four usual followers and 
then raised above on lotus cushions, foiir Dhyani-Buddha’s and four 
Tara’s. Just the same arrangement we find on a stone Amoghapaya 
made by order of the same Ivrtanagara and sent to his Sumatra tribu­
tary state, Malayu; on the pedestal of that statue the god is called catur- 
dayatmika, therefore “with thirteen companions”. It. is easy to under­
stand how there are thirteen and why only four pair of Jina’s and Tara’s 
and not five are depicted: the Amitabha in the headdress is reckoned as 
one of the companions and because one of the Tara’s, the £yama-Tara, *)
*) See Braudes’ monograph Tjandi Djago (1904) and Inleiding II p. 95— 135.
*) Canto 37 : 7. In 41 : 4 the same image is called a "Sugata-image”,
V D M J y 
THE BUDDHISM 0F BA.RABUDUR


--- Page 300 ---
■ G°^\
already appears among the four followers, it was not necessary to depict 
her a second time. As we know, the system arranges one Dhyani-Buddha 
with one Tara in pairs; as it happens that Amitabha and Qyama-Tara do 
not belong together, the four others could not be paired off in the way 
usual in the Nepal system. It is possible that this fact is connected with 
what we learn from the literature, that an alteration in the system actu­
ally took place in Java; so Vairocana and Locana belong here together 
which they do not elsewhere.
However it may be, it is evident at Jajaghu, that Amoghapa$awas the 
principal figure and his four usual companions were around him, then 
that the system of Dltyani-Buddha's with their Tara’s was familiar, and 
besides, what is of significance for Barabudur, it is a system of five, not 
six, Dhyani-Buddha’s.
It is not only its images that make Jajaghu important to us; round the 
terraces of the sanctuary and round the temple itself we find a number 
of texts illustrated. But in this appears the great difference between 
Jajaghu and a monument like Barabudur, where all the texts illustrated , 
as was to be expected, are pure Buddhist ones; moreover so far as 
they have been identified, they are all sacred texts belonging to the 
canon of the sect or school who founded the sanctuary, demonstrating in 
their ascending sequence, though perforce inadequately, the tenets of 
that collection of sacred books most venerated by its founders. Their 
meaning is so clearly set forth, to lead the mind of the beholder up to 
higher thought and, as we have noted, the first and chief aim of these 
illustrations on Barabudur is undoubtedly religious. The series of reliefs 
on Jajaghu on the contrary have distinctly a decorative character; the 
intention has evidently been to make the sanctuary as beautiful as 
possible and this was accomplished by depicting suitable tales i. e. tales 
that fitted into the decorative scheme. The moral of the tales was of less 
importance and it did not actually matter very much if they were really 
Buddhist. So Jajaghu gives first some jataka's or animal-fables and then 
the legend of Kunjarakarna. The latter is certainly Buddhist — I shall 
discuss it later — but this appears to be accidental, for what follows is of 
quite a different sort and illustrates consecutively the Parthayajna, the 
Arjunavivaha and (partly) the Krsnayana! The selection is extremely 
neutral; the material taken from the Mahabharata, in particular the 
adventures of Krsna who was of course an incarnation of Vi?nu, we 
might sooner expect to find on a temple dedicated to him than on a 
AmoghapS^a sanctuary. We see here again that however remarkable 
this phenomenon may be for Javanese Buddhism in general, it throws no
' 
n |p
i*. V ® 6 / . 7 , 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
' H I 
,


--- Page 301 ---
' c0^\ 
,
'u ( ^
 ) f | 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
j
light on the pure Mahayana of Barabudur. So we pass over the texts at 
Jajaglm and take only into consideration what we noticed the images 
of this temple can teach u s1).
When we come to examine the data gathered from the Buddhist ima­
ges found loose, we find the state of things agrees mostly with what was 
observed in Middle-Java. Buddha's, also Dhyani-Buddha’s, are naturally 
numerous. Bodhisattva’s and Tara's on the other hand are fewer in 
number and variety; but this is perhaps only accidental seeing that a 
rare appearance like Vajrasattva, not found in stone at all in Middle- 
Java, has at least two examples in East-Java a). The comparatively- 
frequent appearance of the Prajnaparamita, personification of the 
Highest Wisdom is remarkable. Among the bronzes we notice that some 
of the figures well-known in Middle-Java are here missing, while others 
are found only in East-Java, among them a wonderful eight-armed form 
of Hayagriva, on which the horse’s head is placed above the head-with- 
three-faces, a representation which is described in the sadhana's but 
outside Java had never yet been found in the whole region of Bud­
dhist art. Still more important than these solitary figures are of 
course the instances of groups of bronzes belonging together; such 
collections enable us to form a better judgment about the relation 
and mutual value of the component parts, at least if it is possible to 
identify them sufficiently. How large was the gap in our knowledge 
of the Mahayanislic pantheon, was proved by the remarkable find 
of bronzes at Ngandjuk in Kediri. Nearly a hundred small Buddhist 
bronzes were there discovered, from their size and style of execution 
all belonging to one group. The first noticeable fact about this group 
is that not one “Buddha” is found among them, only Bodhisattva’s, 
gods and goddesses. The next that in that great number only a sadly 
small part can be recognised, and among the figures identified, fami­
liar Bodhisattva’s like Avalokite$vara and Maitreya do not appear, that 
is in their usual form. There is one large chief-figure; the others in 
various sizes are all smaller. Among these Marijupri (with book and 
sword), Vajrasattva and Ratnapani are certainly identified and very 
likely Khagarbha and Sarasvati as well. All the rest we can only guess 
at; but most of them were too strange to us even for that. It is not worth 
while to describe all these unknown beings. Besides the remarkable fact 
of our ignorance of so many of the group, we must note the peculiarity *)
*) For the literature about Jajaghu see the two works given in. note 1 on page. 29S.
a) Seep. 155 note 5.
a . 
- 
r


--- Page 302 ---
X X — S\
that the vajra and the so-called vigvavajra, the crossed vajra, appear 
very frequently. The chief-figure too is holding a vajra in front of his 
breast with both hands; the pedestal is ornamented with vajra’s and the 
half-body of a lion protrudes from the front of it. This lion and the Brah­
ma-like four faces of the Bodhisattva seem to suggest his being a form of 
Mafijugrl, even though it is not as yet possible to call him by his special 
designation. So the collection of bronzes found at Ngandjuk seems to 
consist of a group of still-unknown Bodhisattva’s and suchlike beings as 
attendants on a supreme being in the form of Mafij ugrl1), The high rank 
bestowed on him is not specially Javanese; the same thing appears in 
Nepal as well2).
We can in general assume from what is found in Jajaghu as well from 
the loose statues and bronzes, that in East-Java, the same as in Middle- 
Java, the worship of Bodhisattva’s (and Tara’s) was very much to the 
fore and that the system of the (five) Dhyani-Buddha’s remained in prac­
tice. The bronze-find at Ngandjuk points specially to the important 
part played by a manifestation of Mafij ugrl and the preference shewn to 
vajra emblems.
In Middle-Java there was no literature by which the evidence of mo­
numents and sculpture could be tested, but in East-Java the case is 
different. There are a number of writings, Buddhist-minded, written by 
Buddhists and some actually promulgating Buddhist opinions. Of these 
I will discuss concisely the Purusadaganta, Kufijarakarna, and Sang 
hyang Kamahayardkari as undoubtedly Buddhist 3), and the Nagara- 
krtagama, written by a Buddhist poet, on account of the historic data 
to be found therein. There are also some inscriptions that may add to 
our knowledge. On a record as early as 950 if my reckoning is correct, a 
Buddhist priest is praised as Vairocanatmaka4). *)
*) For the bronzes see the two general reviews mentioned on p. 293 note 2. also the articles 
in Bijdr. Kon, Inst. 67 (1913) p. 383—392; Rapp. Oudh. Dienst 3913 p. 59—72 (on p.
64 the possibility of identifying the chief figure as DhaxmadhStu is discussed); Lulius van 
Goor in Not. Bat. Gen. 1920 p. 81—87.
a) Oldfield 1.1. p. 185— 191; Levi, Le Nepal (Ann. Mus. Guim. Bibl. d’et. 17— 18, 1905) I 
p. 330 sqq., II p. 328; Moens in. Oudh. Versl. 1918, p. 86—93.
*) Besides the works mentioned, Brandes gives (Tjandi Djago p. 98) aspure Buddhist the 
Viglmotsava and Buddha pamutus, and as shewing traces of Buddhism the Cantakapar- 
va,, Tantri-adaptations, Arjunavijaya, Variga and Bubuksah. I restrict myself to discussing 
only such works concerning which published data exist.
4) Kern, Versl. en Meded. Kon. Acad. v. Wetensch. Afd. Letterk. 2 : 10 (1881) p. 81 and 
95; Verspr. Geschr. VII (1917) p, 22 and 34. For the date comp. Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 56 (1914) 
p. 477—484.
((% )}, 
' 
(fiT
J 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUBUR 
k j l J


--- Page 303 ---
The Purusddaganta, alias Sutasoma1), describes the well-known adven­
tures of the Bodhisattva Sutasoma 2); it was written by Tantular in 
the reign of RSjasanagara (Hayam Wuruk, 1350—1389) but goes 
back to an earlier source, the Bauddhakavya. The poem as was to 
be expected, is entirely Mahayanistic; and the word mahayana (thus 
spelt) is used with evident predilection. Syncretism is extolled in words 
that leave no room for doubt. “The god Buddha differs not from f iva 
the king of gods" we find on fol. 120a, and again “the nature of Jina 
and the nature of fiva are one; they are distinguished and yet the 
same being" 3), It is not necessary for our examination to go further into 
this question of coordination between £iva and Buddha, but I will call 
attention to another expression in the same passage: wara-Buddha. 
wigwa, “the exalted Buddha is the universe”. In accordance with this, at 
the beginning of the poem, Buddha is extolled as Sarwadharmmangga- 
raksa, "keeper of the whole body of the Law” and declared to be no 
other than Bralmia-Visriv-Igvara, that is the Hindu Trimurti. If needed 
he incarnates himself as a king in the human world in order to break the 
power of evil; the chief person of the story Sutasoma is such an embodi­
ment, an avatara it might be said, of the Buddha. Here we have a pro­
found difference to the general opinion elsewhere, that regards Sutasoma 
as a former incarnation of Qakyamuni; instead of a Buddha elect, a 
being that is on the way to perfection in the hope of finally attaining 
Buddhaship, Sutasoma has become a manifestation of the already per­
fect Buddha, the highest omniscient Being. Possibly in this new aspect 
we may see suggestions of Brahmanism that found a chance of influen­
cing the syncretism of East-Java to such an extent. But the principle on 
which this creed is founded, the Buddha considered as the eternal 
Supreme Being, may very likely have evolved itself gradually from the 
well-known dogma of the Buddha’s eternity that already existed in the 
Mahayana of the continent. In the XVth chapter of the Saddharma- 
pundarlka, the Tathagata himself announces that he has lived already 
for innumerable aeons, and will continue to live and that Nirvana is but 
a phantom, a concession to the weakness of humanity 4). Javanese syn-
T I quote from Kern, Versl. en Meded. Kon. Acad, v. Wetensch. Afd. Letterk. 3 : 5 (1888) 
p. 8—43; Verspr. Geschr. IV (1916) p. 149— 177.
a) Comp. Vol.T p. 384—387.
3) 
See Kern, 1.1. pag. 37 (Hyang Buddha tanpabi lawan £iwa rajadewa — M&ngka Jinatwa 
kalawan £iwatatwa tunggal, fckinneka tunggal ika; in this way the passage should be
corrected).
*) Ed. Kern-Nanjio in Bibl. Buddh. X (1908—1912) p. 315—326; trans. Kern in S. B. E.
21 (1884) p. 298—310 and Introduction p. XXV sq.
A A & )•) 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
' 3 « j
\ 
n. w* n.<e y < / 
• 
4
\%>-----yA/ .


--- Page 304 ---
cretism so as Tantular presents it, does nothing but draw logical con­
clusions from this creed1).
It is remarkable how ingeniously this view of Sutasoma as a revelation 
of the Buddha as Supreme Being, is combined again with the system of 
the Dhyani-Buddha’s. It is repeatedly stated that Sutasoma is one with 
Vairocana2). Thus it is clear that Vairocana, the first of the Dhyani- 
Buddha's is also regarded as a manifestation of the Supreme Being and 
must be considered the same as the eternal Buddha incarnated in Suta­
soma. In this manner Vairocana can be in a certain sense put on a par with 
the Trimurti and that this view is correct we can gather from the fact 
that the four other Dhyani-Buddha’s are identified with the component 
parts of the Trimurti, so that Aksobhya appears as Igvara, Ratnasam- 
bhava as the Creator (Dhaia, i.e. Brahma), Amitabha as Mahamara 
(Mahadeva) and Amoghasiddhi as Visnu3). The peculiarity of this 
arrangement is that £iva is represented twice, evidently an expedient 
to fit a set of four into a set of three. This does not leave it quite clear 
how their mutual relation was adjusted because in another place 4) 
they are all five called the Five Pitamaha's and thus actually con­
nected with Brahma Pitamaha. This is also quite correct as the 
Dhyani-Buddha’s are (indirectly) also Creators. All the same we 
must not push the mutual coordination too far in this arrange­
ment, for though the four Dhyani-Buddha’s correspond to the mem­
bers of the Trimurti, and the Trimurti as a whole represents Buddha, 
who again is Sutasoma, it is just Sutasoma’s enemy and later convert 
Saudasa, who is mentioned as the equivalent of Aksobliya-Ifvara. 
This however becomes comprehensible if we remember that Saudasa, the 
maneating monster, is the same being as Mahakala, one of Civa’s incar­
nations, and that Darkness and Death as personified by this same Sau­
dasa, are inferior to and yet contained in the eternal unfathomable 
Light, the creative element of the Universe. 5)
Further discussion of these combinations would carry us away from 
our subject, therefore I refer the inquirer to Kern’s masterly review for 
more information. It is of special importance to us that the Dhyani- 
Buddha Vairocana is particularly prominent, appearing as hero-in­
chief, incarnation of the highest omniscient Being, guardian of the eter­
nal system of Worlds. No special worship of Bodhisattva's is to be
*! For all this consult Kern, p. 32-—35.
2) Kern, p. 40.
*) Fol. 120a; Kern, p. 39.
*) Kern ibid.; the place is fol. 44a.
*) See Kern p. 36.
f( f 1 
(flT
THE BUDDHISM OF BAKABUDUR
X ^ r? . - e s ^ y 
;‘ 
' * . » , '- . ■ .


--- Page 305 ---
noticed; only two names are mentioned and that almost casually, When 
the converted Saudasa is about to become a monk, Sutasoma advises him 
to hold in the element of Vajrapani, the breath, with all steadfastness 
of mind and to place the Lokeyvara-word and the Qakyamuni-spirit at 
the head of his meditation1 * I); an encouragement to "japa yoga siddhi” in 
which Vajrapani is only mentioned as lord of the air which by right 
belongs to his father Aksobhya, and Lokey vara’s name is evidently only 
used to indicate the pranava, the sacred syllable om 2).
Again in the story of Kunjarakarna 3) we- shall next discuss, a prose 
work dating probably from the twelfth century which has already served 
us in the examination of the scenes in hell4), we find great resemblance 
to the views held in the Purusadayanta. On the first page Vairocana 
appears as chief teacher of the Holy Law and he proclaims it to "all the 
gods"; when these gods are named, we find that beside the guardians of 
the four winds, they are no other than Aksobhya, Ratnasambhava, 
Amitabha, Amoghasiddhi, Lokeyvara and Vajrapani, thus the four 
other Dhyani-Buddha’s and the two Bodhisattva’s who were the only 
ones of their kind also mentioned in Sutasoma’s story. All these did. 
honour to Vairocana af ter his proclamation of the Law in his dwelling 
Bodliicitta and then returned each to his own heaven. To the writer of 
this work as well, the chief persons in the Buddhist pantheon are the 
Dhyani-Buddha’s and the two Bodhisattva’s named, while Vairocana is 
acting as Supreme Being.
The story itself is as follows. The yaks a Kuhj arakarna after morti­
fying himself comes to Vairocana and begs to be instructed in the Law, 
which is promised to him after he has paid a visit to hell. Kunjarakarna 
goes there and receives all sorts of information from Yama king of hell, 
he also sees that a hell-cauldron is being prepared for his friend the 
vidyadhara Purnavijaya who is expected there in a few days. Filled with 
horror, Kunjarakarna. rushes off to his friend’s house and tells him 
of his coining fate; they then set out together to ask Vairocana for help 
and protection. First Kunjarakariia is initiated into the Law so 
that his yaksa body disappears; then Purnavijaya draws near to the
l) Fol. 124b. Tatwa fri-wara-Bajrapani sira bayu pegengen i kadhiran ing manah, mwang 
Lokefwara-^abda £aky amuni-citta gawayaken i tungtung ing hnjep.
a) See in particular Kern p. 40 sq. where in explanation he calls attention to the fact that 
the pranava om is the Brahma word, and Lokeyvara among other things is supposed to be 
brahmasvarupin.
s) Edited by Kern in Verhand. Kon. Acad, v Wetensch. Afd. Letterkunde, NieuweReeks
III no. 3, (1901).
*) SeeVol. Ip. 71—73.
r. ( ^
 /':/ 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
i


--- Page 306 ---
AA^~<S\
Lord who initiates him also and then explains that he can not be freed 
altogether from punishment for his sins, but it shall take another form.
He must return to his house and sink into a pure samadhi, upon which 
after ten days and ten nights his punishment would be fulfilled. This 
Piirnavijaya does; he lays himself down, his soul leaves his body and is 
thrown into the hell-cauldron, During this he does not neglect his sa­
madhi and when the ten days and nights are completed, by the grace of 
the Lord, the cauldron is suddenly changed into a kalpataru and his 
body becomes young and beautiful again, invulnerable to the weapons 
of the hell-fiends. He explains the affair to Yama and returns to his 
home; at the same moment he awakes from his ten-day sleep. His first 
act is to go and pay homage to Vairocana who in reply to a question by 
Yama relates how this is the result of former incarnations that Purna- 
vijaya and Kuhjarakarna have undergone. They both establish them­
selves at the foot of the Meru and practice mortification and samadhi, 
till after twelve years they attain the perfect beatitude of siddhaship v).
The might and importance of Vairocana in the system of the universe 
and the power which emanates from the samadhi are thus two points 
that dominate this stoiy. “Be constant in thy self-mortification'' says 
Yama 2), “let thy thoughts be steadfast, not subject to change and wan­
dering; such is the exercise of self-mortification”. Thus self-mortification 
is the same as the samadhi. But in another p art8) it is described as 
follows: “what is cold must be made colder; that which is hot, hotter; 
a handful of rice, a drop of water, a grain of salt and even without 
the taste being satisfied”. This agrees with the practice of the 
yoga, and it need not surprise us to hear Vairocana, who enjoins this 
penance, entitled YoglQvara 4). The initiation into the Law is actually 
the disappearance of the body’s contamination;" a pure mind’' is the real 
divine knowledge 8). In this sense the pure mind is the same as what is 
called Bhatara Vidlii, the Ruler of all; “for he directs the true know­
ledge and therefore he is called the highest knowledge; for the Bhatara 
rules thy body; as it is said, thou art I and I am thou” 6). “The root of
’) This tale evidently enjoyed great popularity. We have seen that it was depicted on the 
temple of Jajaghu; there is also a Sundanese version, edited by C. M. Pleyte, inTijdschr.
Bat.. Gen. 56 (1914) p. 365—441. Comp, van der Tuuk, Kawi-Balineesch Nederl. Woordenb. 
s. v. Kufijara (II p. 329).
*) Kern, p. 30.
“) 1.1. p. 48.
4) 
Kem, p. 38. It is not impossible that this passage was inserted later; comp. ibid. p. 53 
note 92.
“) 1.1. p. 40.
a) 1.1. p. 38.
■ 
(ct
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABIJDUR 
j
l j
i 
.' 
./■ 
''.'7 
, 1 ;


--- Page 307 ---
the creed", thus concludes Prof. Kern 1), “is as regards its philosophic 
part, a monistic pantheism, in which the sovereign Ruler of all, Vidhi, who 
is also the highest Reason, corresponds to the p ar am B rahm a of the 
Vedanta and the formula" thou art X; I am thou" comes to the same 
thing as the famous formula ta t t vam a si". Such a Buddhism is any­
thing but original and pure, consequently we find, next to familiar 
Buddhist terms like dosa, Mesa, pancagati, samsSra a), a theory so radi­
cally non-Buddhist as the composition of the body from fiveatman’s3).
The writer of the Kunjarakarpa of course also identifies £iva and 
Buddha. Buddhapada is the name of the dwelling of the god Maha- 
deva 4); and Vairocana himself announces when at a remarkable point 
he puts the five Dhyani-Buddha’s {here called Sugata's), one by one in 
a line with one of the fivaitic Ku^ika's: “We are £iva, we are Bud­
dha' ’5). He himself is frequently honoured with the cry "Namo Bhatara, 
namah (yvaya” . It is remarkable that the name Buddha is hardly ever 
mentioned and only very seldom the “Buddha" Vairocana is spoken of6).
Putting aside various metaphysical and physiological theories, to 
which it is unnecessary to give attention and some of which are quite 
Javanese in tone 7), we may draw' from the opinions of the Kufij arakarna 
that while the Supreme Ruler alias the True Knowledge, corresponds to 
the human “pure mind", £akyamuni plays no part at all and the Bodhi- 
sattva’s a. very small one; but on the other hand Vairocana, chief of 
the Dhyani-Buddha’s is head-teacher of the Law and in his hand the 
exercise of this Law becomes the practice of the yoga.
After considering these two works, let us now turn to the Ndgarakrtd- 
gama, in order to discover the position of Buddhism in the Javanese 
community when the Majapab.it kingdom was at the height of its 
power. Here we enjoy the benefit of an absolutely authentic source, for 
the poet Prapahca who wrote his work in 1365, held the office of dharm- 
madhyaksa ring kasogatan, head of the Buddhist clergy. Almost un­
necessary to state, the union of £iva and Buddha — he even speaks of 
(jhva-Buddha, — is to him an actual fact; to this supreme being he 
unites whatever is the highest object of worship in every religion, system *)
*) 11. pag. 16.
a) 1.1. p. 14 sq,
J) Kern, p. 29 and 36, comp. p. 18, where the difference to the Buddhist system of the five 
sk&ndha’s is discussed, as well as the five prana’s in Chandogya-Upanisad II, 7, 1.
*) U. p. 24.
s) LI. p. 38.
5) See Kern, p. 15-
7) See Kern, p. 18 sq.
' G<W \
V a J K y •/ 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR


--- Page 308 ---
or sect known to him, and as earthly representative of this exalted combi­
nation, he acclaims king Rajasanagara. All this we are told in the first 
verses of the first canto. The Ruler of the Universe hyang Vidhi, who 
figures in the previous work, is here also mentioned but only casually as 
the one who instituted the castes1). It also appears that theDhySni- 
Buddha’s were acknowledged without further particulars of them being 
given; the king’s father is compared to Ratnasarnbhava 2), then in some 
royal mausolea statues are set up of Amoghasiddhi, Aksobhya and Vairo- 
cana respectively3). It does not in any way appear that Vairocana is 
rated higher than the others, but neither is there any opportunity of 
bringing him to the front. When the image of Vairocana. is mentioned 
it is stated that this represented Locana at the same time 4); thus 
the Tara’s were evidently well-known, for this Locana also gives her 
name to a dharma that was erected during this reign, called Locana- 
pura s). The one who now comes more to the fore than in either of the 
other two works, is the historic Buddha; he is considered to be still 
existing and ruler of the world, thus in agreement with what is noted 
above6). Sang hyang Sadabhijnadharaka <), "the highest being who 
possesses the six abhijna's” protects the world with his divine ma­
jesty 8); for this reason one of the former kings worships at the feet 
of $ri-£akyasingha 9). The reigning king himself is said to resemble in 
appearance the son of £uddhodana just descended from the magnificent 
Jinapada10). Here too certainly fakyamuni is meant, who is supposed to 
dwell in that Buddha-heaven.
It is plainly stated that nothing is more important in the practice 
of Buddhism than yoga. The king’s grandmother is "utsabeng yoga 
buddiiasinarana gineng iran clwari wrddhamundi”11), "zealous in the 
yoga and meditation on the Buddha, which she performed as an old 
nun in the conventual dress,” a striking instance of a royal person 
renouncing the world, such as was not unusual at that period. Puja, 
yoga and samadhi are the things to which the Buddhist-minded
*) Canto 84: 4.
") Canto 3:2.
*) Canto 48: 3; 56: 2 and foil.; 43: 6.
*) Canto 43:6. 
e) Canto 82:2 
*) Seep. 299.
’} Called elsewhere Sarvajfla (64: 3).
*) rumaksang loka dewaprabhu; 43: 1.
>) Canto 43 : 2.
10) Canto 84 : 3. 
u) Canto 2 : 1 .
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUft 
o
L


--- Page 309 ---
^
 
'
Tr
King Krtanagara devotes himself, with a view to the welfare of the 
whole world x). At a great $raddha-offering the sacred Puspa is summon­
ed by yoga (yinoga, as written) and this result is the consequence of 
dhyana, samadhi and siddhi2), the last word pointing to the pi actice of 
magic. Thus at the end of the poem it is stated that the practice of the 
lessons from the Mahamuni consists in the exercise of asceticism, by 
which the senses are subdued *).
In the same way the Mahayanistic saint Bharada is entitled yoglgvara; 
further on he is “wodha ring atitadikalapageh”, "skilled in the knowledge 
of the periods of which the first is the past” and. pegat ning tantra, 
"accomplished in the learning of the Tantra” 4). Tantra by itself may of 
course mean nothing more than a text-book; but here we are justified in 
considering it as the creed known as Tantrism or Mantrayana. On a 
inscription of 1289 this same Bharada is called mahayoglgvara, he 
is said to have attained the jnanasiddhi, "the perfect higher knowledge”, 
he is entitled siddhacarya, "master of magic” 5), and it appears he 
can walk on the water and fly through the air. In other parts it is not so 
clear what is meant by tantra; an old scholar is called tantragata 8), 
which may mean his learning in the textbooks just as much as in the 
Tantra-creed; so we might wonder if in another p art7) "sang wiku boddha- 
tantra” will not just mean simply, monks of the Buddhist creed. But 
further on a mandala is spoken of, in which they are standing and this is 
the current phrase for “magic circle”, their chief is imbued “ring $astra 
tantratraya”, with the creed of the three tantra’s8), and the cere­
mony appears to consist of mudra, mantra and japa, “gestures of the 
hand, magical formulas and murmured prayers.”
Tantristic influences can also be traced in the frequent use of the word, 
vaj ram names, l£anabajra, Bajraka, Bajrasana, Bajrapura, Bajralaksmi, 
Joyanabajra, are all names of places that appear in the poem. And when 
a list of sanctuaries is given9), another remarkable thing is to be noted:
>j Canto 43 : 3.
“) Canto 64 : 5.
a) Canto 95 : 2—3.
*) Canto 68 : 2.
‘) Kern in Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 52 (1910) p. 100 and 103, Verspr. Geschr. VII (1917) p. 190 
and 192; comp, the same in Bijdr. Kon. Inst. 68 (1913) p. 410, V. G. VIII (1918) p. 73, and 
Poerbatjaraka in Bijdr. 78 (1922) p. 432 foil. The Siddhayogi9vara above all is elsewhere 
Avalokite^vara (see Nilakanthadharapi, Journ. Roy. Asiat. Soc. 1912 p. 643).
*) Canto 69 : 1.
7) Canto 64 : 3.
*) The three kinds of tantra axe kriyS-, carya- and yoga-tantra.
') Canto 76 : 3.
Barabu^ur II 
20
\! ( 5
 ) h 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
®


--- Page 310 ---
: 
P
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUD UR 
O J L j
A.V,. 
1 
1 
, ' 
, f, /
first we get the dharmma kasogatan kawinayan, the free monas­
teries of the regular Buddhist clergy, who keep the strict rules of the Vi~ 
naya, but afterwards follow the kasugatan kabajradharanx). As Kern 2) 
rightly observes, this can be nothing else than the followers of the Tan- 
tristic Vajrayana, the secular clergy who are called in Nepal and Tibet 
vajracarya’s. The same difference between two kinds of Buddhist 
- 
sanctuaries also applies to Bali3).
Finally some important points are touched on, where the poet 
describes the history of king Krtanagara (1268—1292). 4) First he 
relates that this king, known from other sources to be a zealous Buddhist, 
underwent a Jina-consecration (jinabhiseka), at which he received the 
name of J nan abajre^ vara 5). We cannot tell exactly what was meant by 
such a consecration, but evidently the monarch was identified in some 
way or other with the Jina’s or Dhyani-Buddha’s; at any rate during 
his life a statue of him was set up in the form of Aksobhya 6). The name 
is found on inscriptions with slight variations Jhana^ivabajra, JhSne?- 
varabajra, but bajra is never missing from it. On the before-mentioned 
bronze replicas of the Amoghapa^a statue in his father’s mausoleum, 
where the king styles himself in addition: pravaramahayanayayinah 
paramaratnopasakah, "follower of the excellent Mahayana, lay-brother 
of the Highest Jewel,” the name Jnanavajra is even placed among the 
king’s titles 7).
Another important point is the statement that the king specially devo­
ted himself to the study of a tantra Subhuti8). Probably we here have to 
do with a very authoritative text belonging to the school then followed 
in Java, that would possibly prove of valuable assistance, did we but 
know what is meant by this Subhuti-tantra. We must not look for any 
connection with the Prajnaparamita, although Subhuti, fakyamimi’s 
disciple is there the speaker; this becomes clear when in. the introduction 
to the Sanghyang Kamahayanikan, next to be discussed, we find a sang 
hyang tantra bajradhatu Subhuti is quoted. It is evident that this 
Subhuti-tantra is the work in which Krtanagara was absorbed and the
•) Canto 77 : 1,
“) Bijdr. Kon. Inst, 69 (1914) p. 37; or p. 175 of ed. 1919.
*) Canto 80 : 1. Bajradliara's form here the majority.
*) On king Krtanagara's Buddhism see now Moans in Tijdsc.hr. Bat. Gen. 64 (1924) 
p. 521—558.
8) Canto 43 : 2.
*) The statue, on whose pedestal is the above-mentioned inscription of 1289. See note 5 
on preceding page and the articles there mentioned.
’) Speyer, Versl. en Meded. Kon. Acad. v. Wetensch. Afd. Lett. 4 : 6(1904) p. 255 and 257.
») Canto 43 : 3.


--- Page 311 ---
addition of bajradkatu sufficiently indicates its tantristic character- 
besides on examining the contents of the Sang hyang Karaahayanikan 
i t a iso appears that the views therein extolled are not those of the 
Prajnaptramita1). Subhuti does not seem to appear as a person in 
the tantra, but to be the author thereof; we might think of Dharmika 
Subhuti to whom three works in the Tanjur are ascribed 2) if it were not 
that as far as we can judge, nothing of a tantristic nature is found there. 
On the other hand I aranatha speaks of an acarya Subhutipala, who was 
a teacher of yogatantra's in Bhangala and whose more famous pupil 
Anandagarbha was skilled in all kinds of siddhi 3). Such a person (even 
if not the same one) we should like to connect with the Javanese work.
The Sang hyang Kamahdydnikan as published by Kats, consists of 
two parts that each form a separate tract; the first is further discussed 
by Speyer in his article: Ein altjavanischer mahayanistischer Katechis- 
mus ). This first part consists of a connected series of Sanskrit strophes 
with a more or less elaborate old-Javanese commentary attached; at the 
end Sang hyang Kamahayanan Mantranaya is given as the title. By 
this is evidently meant what is called in the verses mantracaryanaya, 
and generally known as the Mantrayana, The second part, a real cate­
chism in Old-Javanese with a few quotations from the Sanskrit of a 
much less pure sort, belongs as the contents prove, to the same school as 
the first part. The distinction between the original Mahayana and the 
Mantrayana (also called Vajrayana or Tantrayana) is this: the first 
exhorts every believer to take the Bodhisattva vow with the aim 
of finally in the distant future along a tedious difficult road attaining 
Buddha-ship; while the second points out that this ideal may be achieved 
in the present life by means of incessant yoga, as well as worship of the 
Buddha's and implicit obedience to the guru. This transition is ac­
counted for by the Buddha-idea being gradually merged — thesymptoms 
we have already clearly discerned — into the idea of the Supreme Being 
as Spirit of the Universe 5). It does not alter the matter that for the 
attainment of the ideal the old terminology of the realm of nirvana 
remained in use«).
h On the other hand in Tijdschr. Bat, Gen. 61 (1922) p. 257 foil. Dr. Bosch considers 
there is reason tor identifying; the Subhuti-tantra with the Vajracchedikaprajnaparamita 
, 
> 
, see rhomas« The works of Aryafura, Triratnadasa, and Dharmika-Subhuti, Al-
Dtim Kern (1903) p. 407 sq. Thomas offers the supposition .that this scholar may be the same 
as the one whom Ihuen Tsiatig met and who belonged to the Mahasaiighika’s.
*) Page 226 (172). See also Journ. Buddh. Text Soc. I (1893) p. 22.
*) Zeitschr. d. Deutsch. Morgenl. Gesellsch. 67 (1913) p. 347—362.
#) See Speyer 1.1. p. 353.
) To!. 9b, p. 18 (nibananagara); 24a, p. 30 (nirbanapura).
r s
(fC S y -7 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR


--- Page 312 ---
i(Wfi 
Gt
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR
Here of course, is not the place for any extensive treatment of this 
work, although it is of such particular importance to our knowledge of 
Javanese Buddhism, I must restrict myself to a short survey of the 
contents with special reference to what is of most value to our 
examination.
I shall instruct you in the Mahayana according to the method of the 
Mantracarya’s. By the knowledge of this “vajra”, this highest mantra- 
rule, did all Buddha’s past or future attain omniscience and f akyasingha 
by the power of these mantra’s put Mara the Evil one to flight. Therefore 
do thou also strive to gain omniscience follow this path, then shalt 
thou belong to the Tathagata’s, the seif-created (svayambhu). For 
thee, if thou art faithful to thy vow, shall the vajra-water be' changed 
into vajra-amrta-water of magic power that leads to the height of per­
fection. The sacred vajra, bell and mudra must thou keep secret and 
reveal only unto him that knoweth the magic circle (mandala). The 
vow thou hast taken upon thee hath the power of the vajra and is 
called “Vajrasattva” *); through this shall the vajrajnana called High­
est Wisdom enter into thy being. Vajrasattva himself the All-seeing 
one,shall open thine vajra eye2). Behold the sacred mandate I, now 
art thou bom into the kindred of the Buddha’s, equiped with all 
the mantra’s; all magic, every state of perfection lies within thy grasp. 
Hold fast to thy vow, exercise thyself in magic incantations, in the 
murmuring of prayers and worship (mantra, japa, puja). The Jina’s 
have removed the scales of ignorance from thine eyes, thou art prepared 
by Bhatara Vajradhara. Learn that the dharma’s (the world of appear­
ances) are unsubstantial. Vajrasattva, the pure, the highest of all 
Buddha’s rules in thy heart; from this time forth, set thouVajradhara’s 
Wheel of Law in motion before all people. Doubt not, reveal the 
most exalted method of the mantracarya’s, all vajradhara’s (the 
annotator says, Vajrasattva) preserve thee. For him who possesseth 
the Highest Wisdom is nothing forbidden; therefore enjoy the pleasure of 
thy senses — the commentator says just the opposite and forbids this. 
Thou hast seen and entered the sacred mandala; now art thou pure and 
freed from all sin. Be ever faithful to thy sacred vow, maintain the 
Bodhicitta (the Bodhisattva-vow) which through the mudra hath be­
come vajra; by the power of its creation thou shalt indoubtedly become
J) Vajra and bell are also Vajrasattva’s attributes in sculpture; see above, p. 155.
2j Also Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet or Lamaism (1895) p. 145: the doctrine of the 
Buddhaship being attainable in this life of the body, is said to be proclaimed by "the 
fictitious Buddha, Vajrasattva”.


--- Page 313 ---
/>>—xV\
a Buddha. Though thou must sacrifice thine own will, do not subdue it 
by self-mortification, bear in mind that it is a future Buddha. Vajra, 
bell and mudra must thou never forsake, nor be disobedient to thy 
teacher, for he, the vajracarya, is equal with all Buddha's. Shew thyself 
ever dutiful to the teacher, serve him in all things, with money and pos­
sessions, thy wife and child, thy life if need be. For he it is who hath 
brought the Buddha-ship within thy reach during thy mortal life, that 
were otherwise only attainable after the toil of countless aeons. This day 
thy birth is accomplished, thou art elected king of kings by all Buddha’s 
and vajra-bearers; to-day thou hast overcome Mara and attained thy 
Buddha-ship. Be faithful to thy vows and walk in the ways of the Man- 
tranaya; now and forever art thou become equal with all Buddha’s.
This is the first part of the text, The second does not lend itself so 
easily to a concise summary. It begins with some instructions for the 
conduct of the adept, in which we again note the order prohibiting self- 
mortification, a well-cared-for body is better suited for the samadlii 
that brings salvation. The buddharsi’s, the hermits, are distinguished from 
the upasaka’s, the lay-brothers. The aji to be followed for the attain­
ment of Buddha-ship is further taught in the form of a dialogue. The 
six paramita’s are then discussed at full length (the well-known group 
of dana, glia, ksanti, virya, dhyana and prajna), and in treating the 
gfla and virya-paramita it is related consecutively what must be done 
by kaya, vak and citta. It then appears that all kinds of puja, muttered 
prayers, exercise of yoga, pronouncing of mantra’s, meditation on the 
salvation of all creatures etc., is meant thereby, while the contents of the 
prajna-paramita is shewn as the dogma of the giinyata. To these six four 
other paramita's are added, the states of mind known elsewhere as bha­
vana; they are maitri, karurta, mudita and upeksa 1). The six and four 
together form the ten paramita’s and these are personified in the five 
devi's: Baj radhat vigyari, Locana, MamakI, PandaravasinI and. Tara. 
The six paramita's are ascribed to the first mentioned, to the others, 
each one of the four. After the ten paramita’s as principal means to­
wards the higher Wisdom, comes the Mahaguhya, declared to be "the 
means of meeting the Lord”, that consists of yoga and bhavana, each 
of., four kinds. The yoga on the authority of Dignaga is divided into 
mula-, madhya-, vasana- and anta-yoga, the bhavana into gasti-, us mi-, 
urddha- and agra-bhavana, by which every time one of the bhavana's 
leads to one of the yoga’s. Next come the well-known four aryasatyani,
») The definition of the first named virtue is: ‘‘The love of thy fellow creatures without 
thought of advantage therefrom, is called maitri” (fol. 36b, comp. p. 93).
\% 
)'.l) 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
( ^ 1


--- Page 314 ---
l* V, £
q) .*).' 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
v j T ,
\ 
ww/ * / 
■ .k./, Mb #
very shortly treated of and then it is stated that yoga, bhavana, the 
four aryasatyani and the ten paramitas make up the Mahaguhya. 
Finally there is the Paramaguhya, the embodiment of the Lord, the 
Bhatara Vigesa and this exalted secret creed is expounded in the rest of 
the work. The aji called yogacara, refers to advaya and advaya- 
jnana, the knowledge that has no doubt concerning being and not-being 
with the mystic syllables am ah. The combination of advaya and advaya- 
jnana creates Divarupa, thus the advaya, otherwise am ah, is the same 
as the father of Bhatara Buddha, the advaya-jnana is the goddess Prajna- 
paramita, the Buddha’s mother and Divarupa is the Buddha himself. 
The short epitome of am ah and advaya-jnana is contained in the aji 
advaya and this aji is the quintessence of aji tarkka (or prakarana) and 
ajivyakarana. Of these two last the aji tarkka gives knowledge of the 
advaya-jnana alias Prajnaparamita, the ajivyakarana of the advaya, am 
ah. Their combination causes the aji tantra to appear, the embodi­
ment of the Buddha. This theory is made clearer by directions for pro­
nouncing these two mystic syllables and an argument on the name of the 
Supreme Being, here called Vigesa, among various religions and sects. 
Through advaya and advaya-jnana the body of the believer becomes 
“as bright as day”, it has then become Divarupa, the embodiment of 
the Deva Vigesa. The attainment of the Bucldha-ship is thus here clearly 
explained as union with the Universal Spirit. The means for acquiring 
advaya and advaya-jnana, which last is also called bajra-jnana, are 
then further expounded. Seven kinds of samadhi (jambhala-, vagig- 
vara-, lokegvara-, vajrasattva-, munivaracintamani-, gvetaketu- and 
kumaranir bapa-samadhi) are enumerated and further the letters of the 
alphabet as well as the formula namah siddham connected with various 
parts of the body.
Another description of the samadlu's mentions five different sorts of 
breathing, that are named after the five Dhyani-Buddha’s. The breath­
ing on the right and left side causes four chief-mandala’s to appear 
viz. — the text is not quite distinct but the meaning is clear — the three- 
cornered, red, agni-mandala, with a trident in the middle; the square, 
golden-yellow (or white) mahendra-mapdala, with five vajra's (or one 
vajra) in the middle; the shapeless, black, green and yellow vayu- 
mandala with a banner as emblem, and the round, white varuna-man- 
dala with a small mapdala in the middle as pure rock crystal. Then 
finally the motionless breathing, the pure and formless parama- 
vigesa, is called Vairocana-samadhi. At this point the pupil asks the 
question: Divarupa is called the embodiment of Buddha, how then can


--- Page 315 ---
'C*
otlier pandita’s consider the Ratnatraya and the five Tathagata’s to be 
the embodiment of Buddha? This point is explained in a very remark­
able way. Out of the body of the white-coloured £akyamuni who assu­
mes the dhvaja-mudra, appears from the light side the red Lokegvara 
in dhyana-mudra; from the left the blue Vajrapani in bhuhsparga- 
mudra. Tliree-in-one they form the Ratnatraya and the two last become 
respectively Dharma and Sahgha. Lokegvara again divides into Aksobhya 
and Ratnasambhava; Vajrapani into Amitabha and Amoghasiddhi, while 
from £akyamuni’s face springs Vairocana. Here we have the five Tatha­
gata’s and Vairocana further gives life to the gods, Igvara, Brahma and 
Visnu. The meening of the five Tathagata’s is then set forth and 
they are brought into relation with the five skandha’s (rupa, ve- 
dana, samjiia, samskara, vijnana), five blja’s (mystic sounds, i. e. ah 
or aunt, hum, tram, lirfh, ah), the trikhala (raga, dvesa, moha), the 
trimala (artha, kama, gabda), the trikaya, (fcaya, vak, citta), the tripa- 
rartha (asih, punya, bhakti), the five elements (earth, water, fire, wind, 
aether), the five forms of skandha (kalala, arvuda, ghana, pegi, 
pragakha) and five kinds of insight (gagvata-,ornisprapanca-, adargana- 
or prabhSsvara-, akagamata- or grahyagrahakarahita-, pratyaveksana- 
or sarvadharmanairatmya- and krtyanca- or krtyanusthana-jnana).
In one of these cases as already noted 1), Vajrasattva appears in the 
Sanskrit verse, but this name is left out in the old-Javanese text and 
replaced by Aksobhya. Finally the five devi’s, just-mentioned., are fur­
ther discussed and each of them ascribed to one of the Tathagata’s; it is 
expressly stated that Dhatvlgvarl and Locana are one being and the 
devi's are therefore only four in number; as assistants to Vairocana 
they are named Satvavajri, Ratnavajrl, Dhannavajti and Karmavajrl. 
Each also has her bija and as meaning one of the four previously-men­
tioned paramita’s, maitrf, karuna, mudita and upeksa. This is the Para- 
maguhya of the Tathagata’s: the tnahabodhi, samadhi, all the mudra’s, 
mantra’s, yoga’s, bhavana’s and wisdom (kavicaksanam) are the embodi­
ment of the four devi’s and the yoglgvara will not find the Buddha if 
he has not achieved the embodiment of the four devi’s. Here endeththe 
whole text.
It certainly is quite unnecessary to argue by means of this summary 
that the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan is a real tantristic work. Even 
without its literally revealing itself as the method of the Mantracarya’s, 
no doubt would be admissable because its whole exposition sets forth
' G°i&X 
.
’ ( 1
 J Ip 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
,
*) See page 158.


--- Page 316 ---
P
 '
\j% / ■—
/
. -nv^X
the Buddha-ship as being attainable in this life by means ofpuja, japa 
and the mantra’s; the terminology too, as fax as we Know it, is tantristic 
on the whole. We have in fact no need to question its genuine tantristic 
elements, but we may for a moment consider whether we here have to do 
with views generally accepted in Java, or if, — as in itself is quite pos­
sible — this work might perhaps be the product of a school that is out­
side the pale of real Javanese Buddhism. It might for instance in 
this form be an adaptation from the Sanskrit for the purpose of 
propaganda in a new creed that failed to meet with success and 
chance might have preserved this foreign imported text, while the 
genuine authoritative texts of the Javanese Mahayana were lost to us. 
This last supposition may theoretically be justifiable, but how incorrect 
it would be is most plainly proved by what we have already collected 
from other cources regarding the Buddhism of East Java. Let us recall 
the Nagarakrtagama, that commentary on the living Buddhism prac­
tised when the Majapahit kingdom was at the height of its power; 
we not only found the vajradhara’s, but the whole terminology is that 
of the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan and we are doubly fortunate in 
the fact that the author of this poem occupied the post of head 
of the Buddhist clergy; to this we owe the certainty that all these 
terms are used in their right place and with their correct meaning. A 
writer who was merely a poet might easily have deprived us of these 
specially Buddhist data; here they are not only presented to us, but 
their authenticity is guaranteed by the official position of the author.
I shall not repeat the poin ts of interest, already noted to be found chiefly 
in the description of the £radd.ha and the reign of king Krtanagara 
but refer to what is said above on the subject; I must however 
point out how much clearer many things in the poem become when view­
ed in the light of the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan. To begin with, the 
opening strophes and their, at first sight, rather strange enumeration 
of all sorts of names by which the Supreme Being is known in various 
sects; this list now appears almost in the same form in the Kama­
hayanikan !). The second canto praises the Buddhasmarana of the 
king’s grandmother, also a term found in the text a). And so it continues. 
We need not be surprised that king Krtanagara chose to exercise tarkka 
and vyakarana, these are just the two aji’s which in the catechism 
together create the aji tantras). In short, in every respect, the Buddhism
’) Nag. canto 1 : 1—2; S. h. Kam. fol. 44, p. SO.
*j Nag- 2 : 1; S. h. Kam. fol. 44a, p. 49.
3) NSg. 43 : 2; S. h. Kam. fol. 42b—43a, p. 48.
• GoX\
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
k l L j


--- Page 317 ---
Dime N agarakrtagama agrees with that of the Sang hyang KamahS- 
yanikan.
This also applies to the other works mentioned above, although with 
them there was less cause for it being apparent. But what is found there of 
the views most prominent, also agrees entirely with the system unfolded in 
the Kamahaytnikan, especially what is sef forth on the being of the 
Dhyani-Buddha’s, the mention of the two Bodhisattva’s Loke^vara 
and Vajrapani, and the prominent place given to Vairocana, who we 
saw in the catechism figures as creator of the gods. All this breathes the 
spirit of the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan, thus of Tantrism. The ima­
ges of the great sanctuary at Jajaghu, Axnoghapaya and his companions, 
correspond exactly with this and it can be added that some of the mystic 
syllables mentioned in the text, have been found inscribed on tablets 
of gold 1).
In short, unless all the signs deceive us, it can be stated with certainty 
that the Mahay ana of East Java, during the palmy days of the Maja- 
pahit kingdom, is no other than the Tantrism of the Sang hyang 
Kamahayanikan.
But what about the earlier periods? Three centuries before the Naga- 
rakrtagama, king Airlangga was reigning and under his rale lived the 
famous saint Bharada, and we have already heard 2), how he was cele­
brated on an inscription of 1289 as a master of siddhi and yoga. On 
the same inscription we read, that he divided the Javanese kingdom into 
two parts, and. how he performed this -4 the details are not very clear 8)
— by means of kumbhavajrodaka. Vajrodaka we met with as a tech­
nical term in the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan 4). It may of course be 
true that what we know of Bharada all comes from later sources and 
therefore gives no certainty about the condition of things in Airlangga’s 
time; on the other hand it may surely be regarded as improbable that 
everything handed down to us about the tantristic magical powers of 
this historic figure, is altogether unfounded.
We can go back still further. In the introduction to the Sang hyang 
Kamahayanikan to be found in only one manuscript 5), the work is 
connected with a Javanese king, who fortunately belongs to the best- 
known monarchs of the inscriptions. He is king Sindok, by his abhiseka- 
name (pi I9a.ua, who must have ruled at least from 929 to 947. There-
*) Brandes in Groeneveldt, Catalogue Batavia (1887), p, 226.
a) See p. 305.
*) Comp, pag. 291 sq. ol the author’s Notes on the Kern edition of the Nagarakrtagama.
4) FoL 12b, p. 20.
B) See on p. 118 sq. of Kats’ edition.
W m %\: 
■ O
I * ( . §
 J h 
THE BUDDHISM OF BASABUDUR 
v d
\ 
\ 
.i'p. / x / 
M 
a


--- Page 318 ---
fore if the statement in the introduction is correct, the period of 
Javanese Tantrism is brought up in any case to the beginning of the 
tenth century x). Unexpectedly this is in a way confirmed by evidence 
from Further India, where in an inscription on the occasion of the 
foundation of sanctuaries in 908 and 911 it is recorded that two 
pilgrimages to Java, Yavadvlpapura, were undertaken to learn the 
siddhiyatra, which is magic 2). This quite proves how the practice of 
magic flourished in the island already in those times and although the 
magic is not actually spoken of as Buddhist (the sanctuaries founded are 
Civaitic as well as Buddhist), we may certainly consider that Buddhism 
will have had its share therein.
The mention of Sindok is also remarkable in another respect because 
he has lived at the court of the last king who appears to have ruled over 
both East and Middle Java 3). With him begins the period of East Java’s 
glory which was at the same time just the close of the Middle-Java 
period- Thus with the name of Sindok the question arises: in how far can 
the Tantrism connected with that name by .the Sang hyang Kamahaya- 
nikan be ascribed to Middle-Java as well.
First we consider that in East Java the texts were able to put us in 
the right direction and that the images and remains there found agreed 
with them, yet had these been our only source of information we should 
not have had sufficient evidence to recognise the Buddhism represented 
by these remains. Compared to this it is no wonder how poorly we are 
equiped for the search in Middle-Java where no texts at all have been 
preserved. It was possible, as already stated, to find connection to a 
certain extent between the images etc. of East Java and their represen­
tation in Middle Java, and this co-incidence points somewhat to a con­
tinuous series, not to any new influence from outside. Among the small 
figures in Middle Java , there are some of distinct Tantristic learning to be 
found, as for instance the Trailokyavijaya and similar ones. Perhaps 
more positive indication in this direction is the fact that on the Mendut 
sanctuary, if I am right4), the group of the eight Great Bodhisattva’sis 
depicted. In his study of the Bodhisattva Ti-tsang (Ksitigarbha) in 
Cliinaand Japan 5), DeVisser has also given his attention to these eight
l) Gotris, Bijdrage tot de kennis der Oud-Javaansche en Balineesche theologie (1926) p. 
151-156 has made a successful attempt to ascribe portions of this work to an even older period,
*) Huber, Etudes indochinoises XII, Bull. Ec. Fran£. d’Extr. Or. 11 (1911) p. 303 and 309.
s) Not without importance to the subject we have under examination, is the fact that this 
monarch writes Bahubajra among his titles.
4) See p. 228.
5) Ostasiatisehe Zeitschrift 2 (1913—14), p. 189— 196.
(: V 
i - 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
' S
I ,


--- Page 319 ---
• gO^Nv
(¥W% 
Qj
U ® y ■) 
THE BUD!>HISM 0 F BARABUDUR
v ^€trbat Bodhisattva’s, and he thereby observes that the regular list of 
the same eight he so fax has only found in sutra’s of the tail trie school 
and although the appearance of a group of eight in the cave-temples of 
Eluia. seems to indicate a general Mahayamstic view, the Tantra school 
at any rate made a special propaganda of them, and in the Lamaistic 
church the Eight Rodhisattva’s held an important position 1), What is 
generally called the Tantra-school, as we shall see, in all respects agrees 
w ith the practice of the Yogacarya’s) it is not always possible to sepa­
rate them clearly, but even with the inadequate proofs we possess, it is 
at once apparent that we have to do with a continuous development or 
evolution from Asanga to the present day Lamaism. The Mantranaya 
°! Ja va is of course not a spontaneous system, as is plainly to be seen from 
the Sang hyang Kamahayamkan itself, where its origin from the tenets 
of the Yoga-school is acknowledged. We have already met with the 
term aji yogacara2), but still more important is the point of dang acaryya 
fri I>i(g)nilgapada being cited as authority for the classification of the 
yoga 3). I have already noted above 4) that the name of Asanga’s famous 
disciple (of whose pupil it is told5) how after being professor in Nalanda, 
he betook himself to Suvarriadvipa), is perhaps an indication of the 
way in which the Mahayana came to Sumatra and from there to Java 6) ; 
here we must lay special emphasis on the fact that for our fundamentally 
tantristic Sang hyang Kamahayanikan, the influential authority, actu­
ally the only one mentioned in the whole work, is the great fifth-century 
logician of the ancient Yoga school.
Let us add this fact of the Tantra of East Java being derived from the 
system of Asanga and Dignaga, to what has just been stated about the 
evidently direct connection between the religious ideas of Middle and 
East Java, and the traces of a Bodhisattva-worship that agrees with 
Yoga and 1 antra-tenets on such a monument as the Mendutj we then 
come to the obvious conclusion that there is every probability Middle- 
Java Buddhism just as much as that of East Java, ought to be ascribed
J) 1.1. pag. 194.
’) Fol. 41b, p. 47.
3) Fol. 40a, p. 45.
*j See p. 99.
') Taranatha, p. 161 (= 124).
") Dignaga must have lived before the sixth century (see Peri in Bull. Ec, Fraftp. d’Extr. Or. 
11, 1911, p. 387) and the activities of Ms disciple may therefore have preceded the time of 
I-tsing, who already found some Mahayanists in Malaya (see p. 288). Sumatra remained in con- 
!lC. n !Ll the outside W°tw of Mahayanists through the pilgrims who visited this island in 
their journey between China and India. See for instance Chavannes, Les inscriptions 
enmotses de Bodh-Gaya, Revue de 1'Hist. des Rel. 34 (1896) p. 34 and 52.


--- Page 320 ---
to a Yoga-school already deeply coloured with Tantric dogma. We can 
imagine how the creed in a more original, less Tantristic form than that 
of East Java, was introduced into Middle-Java and during the centuries 
of its further development on the island shared in the changes which 
the tenets of the creed underwent on the continent, especially in 
the practice of its views, for we can believe the intercourse with India 
would be continued as much as possible and chiefly with regard to 
religion. We can also assume that the Mantranaya was introduced in 
very much the same form as known to us from the Sang hyang Kama- 
hayanikan and therefore remained much the same during the period of 
the Middle and East Javanese kingdom. There is no authentic account 
of the state of affairs from Javanese sources owing to the lack of texts 
connected with the Buddhism of Middle-Java; it is impossible to form 
any idea of its developement or decline, except by careful study of the 
coinciding changes in the Yoga-creed on the continent, and of this too 
our knowledge is very scanty.
We shall do well not to go too far into this question but rather con­
tinue our search in another direction. Seeing the probability is proved of 
Javanese Buddhism being a Yoga-creed with Tantric views — apart from 
the question whether they were the same as those on East-Java or were 
originally less Tantristic — we ought to ascertain in how far what is 
found on the Barabudur agrees with this probability, or disagrees with it. 
Let us first examine what data the monument has to offer in this respect.
As regards the various texts, that of the buried base throws very little 
light on the subject. I have already noted, that as far as we can discover., 
in the whole Buddhist church the cosmological and metaphysical 
theories of the Abhidharma were chiefly the same 1) ; and this makes 
it difficult to discern any particular school or opinions, besides which 
the actual text followed on Barabudur has not yet come to light. 
We do not kno w if the Tantric school had a separate Abhidharma of its 
own as regards the practice of the Law of Karman, on which point it 
had no reason to differ from the generally-accepted view. At any rate, 
the series of reliefs on the buried base in the present state of our know­
ledge shews no positive indication of the particular doctrine they may 
represent.
I have already gi ven some account of the Lalitavistara, which shews 
that this text was also very famous and widely-spread 2). It must special-
^~See Vol. I p. 61.
*) Pag. 289. The translator of the Chinese version made known by Beal in his Romantic 
Legend (1874), begins with a tribute of homage to Vairocana (p. 2) which is not without 
importance to this point.
k
 M
M 
vct
\v\ © 6 / • 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
J^j


--- Page 321 ---
iybe noted that theTibetan version of C^aky am uni's life-history is founded 
on this text and in Nepal it belongs to the nine great Vaipulyasutra's; in 
both these countries we find a Buddhist community holding Tantric 
views. For example1), the vajracaryas of these countries, the married 
priests, are the same as the Javanese vajradhara’s; which indicates 
analogous conditions. From the validity of this text among present-day 
Tantric sects, we may readily conclude that its promulgation in Java 
may quite well be connected with the Tantristic-coloured Buddhism't hat 
we judge to be the probable doctrine of the Javanese Mahayana. Later 
on we come upon a closer proof pf this,
Next we have the Jatakamala. As we are aware 2), very little is 
known about the poet filra. But it is very important how his name, 
according to a statement by Taranatha 3), is mentioned by Dharma- 
kirti. Asked by a certain king who he was, the great logician replies:
In wisdom a .Dignaga, in purity of language a Candragomin,
Skilled in the metric, that originates from the poet £ura,
What am I else but the vanquisher of all quarters?
Dignaga we have met with already in the East-Java tantra, he is 
cited as the authority tor a Yogacarya dogma. Candragomin is the 
famous champion of Asanga's idealistic views 4). The great part played 
by lara in the story of his life has perhaps some importance in connec­
tion with the fact that a Tara-worship was found in the oldest Buddhist 
sanctuary of Java. It may possibly be more than chance that in one of 
the stories about Candragomin, it is told how on one particular occasion 
he carried nothing with him but his garment and a copy of the Astasa- 
hasrikaprajnapa ramita 5), and that it is a maxim from this very text, that 
is found engraved on an old bronze image of Lokegvara in Sumatra ®). 
Dharmakirti himself, pupil of one of Dignaga’s disciples, writer of essays 
on logic, among which is a commentary on a work of Dignaga, is one 
of the shining lights of Asanga's idealistic school7). In his biography we 
read that he received consecration from the Vajracarya of the mantra- *)
*) See above p. 306. 
a) Vol. I p. 3)4.
a) On p. 181 (139). Comp. Thomas in Alburn Kern (1903) p, 405.
*) f&ranatha p. 148—158 (= 115— 122), Wassiljew p. 227 (= 208); comp. Winternitz, 
Geschichte der Indiscken Literatur II, 1 (1913) p. 269.
*) Taranatha p. 157(121).
*) See Kern in Not. Bat. Gen. 1889 p. 15 and 1890 p. 16, or Verspr. Geschr. VII (1917) 
p. 144. I he maxim says: imani kujalamulani sarvvasatvasadharapi kftva anuttarayam 
samyaksambodbau parinamam yami.
•) iaranatha p. 175-—188 (134— 144); Wassiljew p. 228 (208).
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUBUR 
' S 4 |
■\ & \ ’btoiS ,/ ^ / 
k y > 
i


--- Page 322 ---
7 
t h e BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
□
l j
' 7 
■ 
■ v ■' 
1 .7 ;y'7 ■' ■■■'■;■; ■/■ '•'■:•■
professing school and managed to exorcise the Adhideva1). This cer­
tainly already reveals Tantric practices, in the style of those met with 
in Java. In any case all three were great men of the Yogacarya-school, 
therefore when the last-lived mentions £ura as an example with the two 
others, it probably follows that the poet of the Jatakamala must also 
be considered as belonging to the Yogacarya’s.
I have already made it plain that the results to be gained from the 
tales identified from the Divyavadana are negative and actually 
do not prove that the Mulasarvastivadanikaya is followed2), We 
must also give some attention to the other great work that has helped 
us to identify a number of the edifying tales, the Avadana^ataka, 
not that this Hlnayanistic source can, throw much light on the 
Buddhism of Barabudur, but because what we find on the monument is 
important to the history of this text. The seven {or eight) stories recog­
nised are all found in the four th decade and this decade takes up a very 
special place in the work. It consists entirely of actual jataka's3), 
which are referred to in a separate colophon as Bodhisattvajataka’s. 
Feer has already noted 4), that in the three avadanama la's that contain 
the numbers 1—2, 3—4, and 10 respectively of each Avadanagataka- 
decade (Kalpadrumavadanamala, Ratnav0, Agokav0) the expected 
stories are omitted each time from the fourth decade; he therefore sur­
mises that this decade did not belong to the original version of the work, 
or more likely, formed an appendix to it. On Barabudur we found only 
tales from this fourth decade but not one of the ninety other stories, and 
the seven or eight out of the fourth decade appeared not only in an 
entirely different sequence to that of the text, but scattered over several 
relief-series, a couple in the bottom row of the chief wall, first gallery, 
two more in the top row of the balustrade and some others in the bottom 
row of the same balustrade r>). Enough is known of the manner in which 
the Barabudur sculptors worked, to make sure that they followed autho­
rized texts and did not collect tales from all kinds of sources to sculpture 
a sort of new avadanamala of their own. The authentic text which they 
used in this case is of course not the Avadana^ataka, which besides is 
Hlnayanistic, from which they would have selected the fourth decade,
*) Taranathap. 176 (135).
*) See p. 289.
3) Cf. Speyer on p. V of the preface to his edition in Bibl, Buddh. Ill (1909).
*) Ann. Musee Guimet 18 (1891), Introduction p. XXII.
s) They are consecutively no. 38 on lb 59—60, no. 36 on lb 106—112, no. 34 on IBa 
159—160, no. 35 on IBa 175- 178, no. 31 on IBb 74—76, no. 37 on IBb 79 and no 39 on 
IBb 80.


--- Page 323 ---
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
V sjsl
v % 
‘.w-* •I'Ji y x / 
_a
leaving the rest and then casually scattered the tales into various relief- 
series, among those gathered from entirely different sources. The monu­
ment therefore proves that the greatest part of the tales which now form 
the fourth decade of the Avadanagataka, and possibly all the ten — for 
the few other ones may easily have been among the many missing 
reliefs particularly those of the bottom row on the balustrade *) — 
have formed part of a very large collection of avadana’s and jataka’s 
illustrated on Barabudur. Such a collection must have been in con­
formity with the school to which the founders of this sanctuary^ 
belonged, and as far as we can tell, the other nine decades of the 
Avadanagataka as it now is, were not represented. We do not know 
exactly how the author of the Avadanagataka or one of liis predecessors 
arranged the fourth decade in the sequence now known to us, and joined 
it to the other stories, to which it did not originally belong; but it appears 
very plainly by what is found on Barabudur that the fourth decade 
occupies a special and peculiar position with regard to the rest. With 
reference to the text followed on the monument, we can learn nothing 
for the moment but for later research it may be useful to note the fact 
that in the avadana and jataka collection of Barabudur, out of the 
whole Avadanagataka only those tales have been found that belong to 
the "Bodhisattvajataka's” of the fourth decade.
The stories identified with the help of .Pali jataka\s of course give no 
chance for direct conclusions regarding the arrangement and origin of the 
collection. It is plain that the agreement in these cases is very slight. It is 
very noticeable how among this great mass of stories several are omitted 
that certainly might have been expected in it, for example the Saddanta- 
jataka, so well-known, in Buddhist literat ure and art and so-frequently 
depicted; it is of course possible it may also have been among those 
that are lost. In any case it has not occupied the place of honour on 
the chief wall.
The text of the second gallery, the Gandavyuha, as already noted, 
was ascribed to Asaiiga himself2), It is doubtful whether this is correct, 
but we need not bother ourselves about this, when we know that 
Paramartha who lived in the sixth century, thus long before the 
erection of Barabudur, held the same opinion 3); the work at any rate
l) A river in the wilderness that should form the scene of no. 40, actually appears on a few 
fragments. The mise-en-sctoe of the two other tales is very ordinary and has no features that 
might assist identification.
*) See p. 1,
*) Takakusu, The Life of Vasubandhu by Paramartha (AD. 499—569), T’oung Pao 2 ; 5 
(1904) p. 269—296.
y y ^ ■ G° i x


--- Page 324 ---
belongs to Asafiga’s school and in the fifth century the idea prevailed 
that it was the work the master himself Paramartha does not use the 
name Gandavyuha, he only relates that among the texts which Asahga 
received from Maitreya in the Tusita-heaven, there was also the Ava­
tamsaka and according to what Takakusu x) tells us, the Gandavyuha 
is a subdivision of this Avatamsaka, while Pelliot thinks both names 
indicate the same text 2). From what Wassilj ew relates about the con­
tents of the Avatamsaka, it is impossible to discover that any connec­
tion with the Gandavyuha existed3); another proof of how little we can 
actually rely on these tables of contents. Vasubandfau is the commen­
tator of the Avatamsaka; it holds a very important place now-a-days in 
Japanese Buddhism. One of the twelve great sects, the Ke-gon-sect, 
even considers it as the original sutra of the Buddha’s creed and founds 
its tenets thereon 4). If we may accept Bosch's hypothesis (discussed 
above onp. 114 sq.), then the Barabudur sanctuary would also agree with 
this view; should his idea prove incorrect and the Gandavyuha, howe­
ver important and considered worthy to occupy the whole of the 
second chief wall, be followed in its turn by texts of still more exalted 
views, we should look elsewhere in Japanese Buddhism fox' corres­
ponding appreciation of the Avatamsaka; and then we have to turn 
to the Shin-gon-sect, for whom it is quite the most comprehensive 
sutra of the exoteric doctrine, but still does not initiate in the esoteric 
dogma. This Shin-gon sect is no other than the Mantra-school and it is 
certainly not by chance that we find in this sect the most points of agree­
ment with what we know of the Javanese Mahayana. It gives us Vairo- 
cana and Vajrasattva placed in a prominent position and the theo­
ries about kaya, vSk, citta and the same five jnana's whom we saw in 
the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan connected with the Dhyani-Buddha’s 5).
It is again noticeable that the Mahavairocanabhisambodiiisutra. also 
repeatedly mentions the eight Great Bodhisattva’s 6).
Though we were not able to follow the actual texts illustrated on the
») El. p. 292.
'*) Notes a propos d'un Catalogue du Kanjur, Journ. asiat. 11:4 (1914) p. 120.
°) Pag. 171—173 (157—159). See also above, p. 114 concerning various more or less exten­
sive redactions.
4) 
As Nanjid’s Twelve Japanese Buddhist Sects (1887) was n<jt at my disposal, I have 
made use of Ryauon Fujishima, Le Bouddhisme Japonais (1889), p. 81—99. Comp. DeGroot,
Le code du MahAyana en Chine, Verh. Ron. Acad. v. Wetensch. Afd, Letterk. 2de reeks, I, 2 
(1893),'p. 5.
’) Fol. 59a—60b. It is the same in Nepal, see Hodgson, Essays on the language, literature 
and religion of Nepal and Tibet (1874) p. 27.
•) De Visser 1.1. p. 192 coll. Fujishima p. 81.
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
U l J


--- Page 325 ---
higher galleries, we saw that they were chiefly dedicated first to Mai- 
treya and then to Samantabhadra. In a few places it would perhaps be 
possible to recognise some famous episode or scene, but the want of 
acquaintance with the context makes it just as impossible to verify the 
correctness of our guess as to make use of it for getting any nearer to the 
adjacent scenes and the meaning of the whole representation. Even in a 
text that is comprehensible as a whole, we may suddenly come to epi­
sodes that are a riddle to us; we can make an attempt at solution but 
that is all. So we found on the second gallery in the middle of the 
wanderings of Sudhana described in the Gaiidavyuha, on II 74 a very 
curious scene of a Buddha seated in dhyana-mudra, on a throne placed 
upon a great lotus on a lotus pond and on each side of him two 
Bodhisattva’s with various positions of the hands, who are also seated 
on smaller lotuses, while above the whole group are clouds adorned with 
garlands. The Buddha’s mudra and the lotuses rising out of the pond 
at once make 11s think that this is Amitabha in Sukhavati, his Western 
land of happiness and even apart from this we need not be surprised to 
find on Barabudur traces of belief in this lovely paradise; in a large part 
of the Mahayanistic church this idea obtained wide-spreading influence 
and thousands of believers died with the prayer on their lips that their 
merits might be rewarded by rebirth into Amitabha’s paradise. It is 
quite reasonable to imagine that the hero of the Gandavyuha, who in the 
version of the text here followed, entreats so many goods and mortals to 
assist him in his tireless search after the Highest Wisdom, should also 
implore help from the Lord of the Western paradise. It is therefore very 
likely that Sukhavati is actually here depicted, but to prove the cer­
tainty or even the probability of this supposition is entirely beyond our 
power. It can also be objected that in the ordinary Sukhavati tales, only 
two Bodhisattva’s are placed beside Amitabha x) and one of the two is 
Avalokitecvara, alwaj^s easily recognisable, — also at Barabudur — 
while among the four Bodhisattva’s on this relief, who are distinguished 
only by mudra’s, not by emblems, there is not one who shews any like­
ness to Avalokitecvara. This remark is not without value, but it is equally 
possible that it may do away with the guess at Sukhavati as that we 
should merely state that on Barabudur a somewhat different version is 
given to the usual picture of Sukhavati, In a case like this nothing but 
the recovery of the text can produce the desired certainty. *)
*) See for instance Sukhavativyuha, ed. Max Mtller and Nanjio, Anecd. Oxon., Aryan 
series I, 2 (1883).
Barabudur II. 
21
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
|^ fc jj


--- Page 326 ---
So there is all the more reason for caution with attempted recognition 
of episodes in the higher galleries, of which we actually know no 
more than the name of the chief figure. On the fourth gallery the relief 
IV 13, on which a Buddha is sitting in the middle of a stupa, reminds 
us at once of the eleventh chapter of the Saddharrnapunda rika, in 
which too on the opening of a stupa the person of a Buddha of days 
long past reveals himself to the astounded beholders '). Now we know 
well that this passage from the Lotus is not what is meant on Barabudur, 
because the details are not at all the same and the surrounding reliefs 
can in no way be connected with what is further related in the 
Saddharmapundarika. And yet this resemblance would be of importance 
for fixing the meaning of this relief, if only we had some indication to 
direct our search. As it stands now we can get no further.
We shall do better to give up all attempts that are useless and fix our 
attention on what we know, or fancy we know, which is after all but 
little. The third gallery, which possibly with the fourth represents the con- 
tlnuation and end of the Gandavyuha is, in any case the greater half, devo­
ted to Maitreya ; almost the whole of the fourth is dedicated to Samanta- 
bhadra. Their mutual connection has been explained in the Sang hyang 
Kamahayanikan, according to which Samantabhadra is to become the 
last Buddha of the future. It is therefore clear why the text relating to 
him occupies a higher and more important place than the one about the 
Buddha-elect. It will now be our task to find out where in Buddhist litera­
ture this place of distinction is given to Samantabhadra. This is the 
first condition to which the system that we think was followed on 
Barabudur must comply. The second condition required is the recog­
nition of a system of six Dhyani-Buddha’s, or we might say, the ordinary 
system of five, with a sixth, who belongs to the five but yet stands above 
them and who if all the signs are true, would be called Vajrasattva,
The combination of these two conditions actually proves to be some­
thing belonging not only to Barabudur. In Chinese Buddhism we find 
directly the group of six Dhyani-Buddha’s by the addition of Vajra­
sattva, mentioned as belonging to the Yogacarya school of which 
Samantabhadra is said to be the founder2). Elsewhere Vajrasattva him­
self is stated to be the founder 3); there is evidently an inclination to 
identify these two beings just as the Lamaist church sometimes com- *)
*) Comp. p. 104.
*) Eitel, Handbook of Chinese Buddhism (1888) s. v. Yogacarya and Vadjrasattva. He is 
also considered to be the author of aBodhihrdayapladanasutra, see ibid, s. v. Samantabhadra.
J) Edkins, Chinese Buddhism (1880) p. 169.
1(93, 
(ct
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR


--- Page 327 ---
bines the Adi-Buddh^ with Vairocana but also with Vajradhara, Vajra- 
sattva or Samantabhadra; the Nying-ma-pa sect considers its creed to 
be inspired by the Buddha Vajrasattva, who in his turn received it from 
the highest being, Samantabhadra, and in other places again the supreme 
Being is worshipped as Dharmakaya Samantabhadra1). In this last ins­
tance Samantabhadra may quite well have been originally used simply 
as an adjective, the use of the term has then certainly helped towards the 
unification.
In India as well we find the system of the Adi-Buddha with 
the five or six Dhyani-Buddha’s combined with that of Vajradhara- 
Vajrasattva; this creed strives to assist the believer to regain his real, 
nature, and to become Vajrasattva by means of the guru, the vajra- 
guru, vajrScarya, the personified Vajrasattva. In that system the bod}'’ 
of Adi-Buddha is called “samantabhadra”, and one of his other names 
is Viqvampa a). This view is fundamentally the same as that of the 
Sang hyang Kamahayanikan, therefore we are not surprised to find in 
an old-Javanese text Samantabhadra simply as synonymous with Bud­
dha 3), and it is not by chance that the Buddhist-minded prince who 
caused an Amoghapa^a-image to be sent from Java, to Sumatra, bore 
the name of Vigvarupa.4).
In identifying the eight Great Bodhisattva’s on the Mendut I have as 
will be seen above s), made use of the Pancakrama and this small text 
gives us other important data. It is a manual for the anuttarayoga and 
as such in its Tantric opinions very much resembles the creed of the 
Sang hyang Kamahayanikan. The word vajra has here too a special 
meaning and occurs in all kinds of terms, among which are of course 
those we know from the Javanese text, vajrajnana, vajradhara, vajra­
sattva with bodhicitta as well. To Vajrasattva homage is continu­
ally paid 6), Buddhatva and Vajrasattvatva are the ideal for the 
yogin 7). Elsewhere Vajradhara again is mentioned as imparting the
‘I Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet or Lamaism (1895) p. 73, 130 sq. and 349.
J) See the article Adibuddha by De La Valltie Poussin in Encyclopaedia of Religion and 
Ethics I (1908); Hodgson, Essays etc. p. 83.
*) - This text is the Candakaraiaa, the quotation is to be found in Kern, Verspr. Geschr. IX 
p 278. On the work itself see Meded. Kon. Akad. 58 (1924) p. 203—206. Comp. Hodgson 
1.1. p. 47.
*) Eersl, Med. Kon. Akad. 5: 2 (1916) p. 326 sq. The same name bears aTantric acarya 
according to Taranatha p. 215 (164).
*) P. 274.
*) Bor instance, I 206, II 60, III beginning, IV 27, 41, V 1, 38, where always the name 
Vajrasattva is used. Comp. De Visser, Arhats p. 151.
’) VI 25.
1 
C *
V \ S / •) 
Tm: BUDDHISM 0F BARABUDUP 
lk{


--- Page 328 ---
(Si
V 
&
 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
V ^ l
• v^U~~—
: ' • ■' • / 
' 
» 
> i 
1 i I. 
, , ™ )
^ y/ 
' ■ ■ ■ - , 
. ‘ ',■ y' ’
highest yoga x) and the commentator defines, “svayambhur bhaga- 
van” as: iti vajradharah 2). No definite line is here either to be drawn 
between Vajrasattva and Vajradhara, the Supreme Being, the Buddha 
and the believer now become his equal. Again we get an elaborate treat­
ment of the five Dhyani-Buddha’s and the Devi's who are called else­
where Tara's. It is also noticeable that among their forms of appearance, 
the Dhyani-Buddha’s are supposed to be six-armed and supplied with 
emblems3), and Vajrasattva also appeal's six-armed with his attributes4). 
This may be an indication that they are meant to be the same kind 
of beings, and it seems likely when all six are here presented in the same 
six-armed form, they might also have been depicted or. Barabudur in 
the same way, though there they have all retained their Buddha-shape.
Samantabhadra, except where he is mentioned among the eight Great 
Bodhisattva’s, is named only once, but the manner in which he is spoken 
of shews plainly enough the important place he occupies. The passage 
is as follows:
yac cittam Samantabhadrasya Guhvakendrasya dhlmatah 
mamapi tadrgam cittam bhaved vajradharopamam 5).
These words speak for themselves. Guhyakendra, lord of the mysteries, 
represents the same idea as Guhyapati and this is as shewn above °), 
another name for Vajradhara. Here again we get a weakening of defi­
nition and are inclined to connect the name of Samantabhadra with the 
Supreme Being.
I shall not go into details about the Pancakrama and consider it suffi­
ciently proved in what is said above, that in spite of all deviation in 
details, the main conceptions coincide on the one hand with the Mantra- 
naya of the Sang hyang Kamah5yanikan, on the other with what is 
depicted on Barabudur. I shall only call attention to a few points. 
First the fact that this document quotes the Lalitavistara 7); in con­
nection with what has just been said 8) about the influence this text 
exercised in various parts of the Mahayanistic church and the danger *)
*) II 7.
*) Tippani V 2, p. 44.
J) I 107 sqq.
*) I 53.
5) 
I 89. In vs. 206—209 where in four consecutive couplets Vajrasattva, Vajrakaya, 
Vajravaca, and Vajrakama are invoked, the third is addressed as samantabhadra.
“) See p. 167. Also Wassiljew, 1.1. p. 7 (7), 135 (126); Waddell, Lamaism, p. 352,
') The sources mentioned are cited in note 3 on p. XIII of De La Valllse Poussin’s edition. 
The mention of the Lalitavistara is found III 57.
“) See p. 289 and 316.


--- Page 329 ---
‘ GcW\
wS%\ 
C*
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR
of confining the founders of Barabudur within the narrow boundary of 
the sect to which the Lalitavistara originally belongs, merely on the value 
of that document, it is certainly important to notice that this text is 
authoritative in a work that manifests an utterly different view from 
that of the sect we refer to. Let us also take notice that in this case it is 
actually a Tantric work in which the quotation occurs.
Another question has already been touched on in the preface to his 
edition, by De La Vall6e Poussin T). It concerns the relation this work 
bears to the two great schools of the Mahayanistic church, the Madhya- 
mika's and Yogacarya’s. Tradition ascribes this text to none less than 
Nagarjuna, the founder of the Madhyamika-school and the Pancakrama 
can actually be taken as a compendium of Nagarj una’s nihilistic opinions. 
On the other hand £akyamitra is said to be the editor of part of the book; 
he is a scholar of a later date than Dhannakirti and belongs in Wassil- 
jew's opinion,, to the Yogacarya's, to the particular sect which under 
Dignaga’s influence separated themselves from the real followers of 
Asahga2), the logical party of the Yogacarya’s in contrast to the 
Vijnanavadins or idealists. But further on Qakyamitra is said to belong 
to the Prasahga-school3), the pre-eminently nihilistic one which corres­
ponds directly to Nagarjuna’s theories and forms part of the Madhya- 
mika’s. The Pancakrama, is undoubtedly nihilistic too, but the general 
spirit of the work, the practical instructions that it gives, agree however 
with the Yogacarya views. The explanation De La Vallee Poussin gives 
of this incongruity seems to me the only possible one; a very close union 
of Tantric practices and Tantric spirit such as the Yogacarya-school 
encouraged, on the one hand, with the more efficient and logical dogmas 
of the Madhyamika’s, the ^unyatavadin’s in particular, on the other 
hand. All kinds of conflicting elements evidently became blended 
together as the result of mutual encroachment on the part of differing 
systems; and in this way of necessity when the fundamental ideas of 
the Tantrayana were being followed, the theoretic points of difference 
between the schools would slip into the background.
From this we may draw conclusions for Barabudur. According to the 
evidence collected in the above, I think it may be decided that in the 
case of Barabudur we need not seek for any other sort of Buddhism than 
the one which we have learned to know as the prevailing doctrine in East 
Java. What we found there was the Yogacarya-creed with a Tantric
*) P. VII—XI.
’) Pag. 318(290).
*) Pag. 358 (326).


--- Page 330 ---
®
 
- : ■: 
__■
(ST
THt; BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR 
.
spirit in it, and now it appeal's plainly that all the data we could extract 
from what is depicted on the stupa, yield indications that agrees with 
this. The Gandavyuha, the important position of Samantabhadra, the 
system of the Dhyani-Buddha’s with a sixth added, all these taken 
separately and combined, pointed in only one direction; in Yogacara and 
Tantra we found the points of resemblance and fust as C-ura and part of 
the jataka’s seemed connected with the Y ogacarya’s, so the Lalita- 
vistara proved itself to be influential with the 1 antra schooL*Unless all 
the signs deceive us, it may be stated as the result of our examination, 
that the Buddhism of Barabudur does not differ in its essentials from 
that of East Java. The Javanese Mahayana, from the yaileudra s, who 
erected Kalasan, to the downfall of Majapahit, is one and the same 
thing, it is a Yogacarya- creed, imbued with the spirit of TantrisnCother- 
wise a Tantrism founded on the Yogacarya’s.
Bali received its Buddhism from East Java, therefore it is to be 
expected that what, is found on that island at the present day must be 
the continuation of what existed ages ago in Java. In the above discus­
sion I made no use of data available from Bali, partly on account of the 
possibility that outside influences of later date m ay have c rept in and 
partly because Balinese Buddhism has been so little studied as yet and 
we have nothing but a confused mass of unsifted and partly unreliable 
material. Now we have achieved by other means some result concer ning 
■ the Mahayana of Java, I must add to it the statement that a cursory 
examination of the data regarding Buddhism in Bali sufficiently proves 
that notwithstanding all the corruptions, it fundamentally agrees with 
that of East-java. It is one unbroken tradition.-So the manuscripts 
for our chief source about Java, the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan come 
from Lombok-, which as regards this question is no more than a part 
of Bali. In the "padanda Buddha” of the Balinese worship we should 
find in his latest form Asanga’s disciple,-though of course not recog­
nized as such by himself. 
;
I have already alluded to corruption in Bali. It. is there very clear 
how little Buddhism remained true to itself, but then there is a power­
ful factor at work to bring about changes; and that is the complete igno- * 
ranee of those cahipg themselves Buddhists, as regards the most elemen ­
tary principles of their creed. In Java, as we saw when comparing East 
and Middle Java, its course of developement appears to have been much 
more restricted; at this distance of time we might almost say, ^Slccediqg- 
ly gradual. Ail the same it was not inanimate; Buddhism in Java was 
not without vigor, it lived and therefore must have undergone changes,
III lb
" ;11 I' ' :1 y


--- Page 331 ---
K 
{sj 1
/ 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR
though we are not able to trace them, and though they do not seem to 
have affected the main principles. Perhaps one of these phases may be the 
resumption of the system of five Dhyani-Buddha’s, after the six found 
on Barabudur, a change that appears to indicate a difference in the 
position of Vajrasattva as if now he was rated less as highest Dhyani- 
Buddha and more as a separate being that ought to be distinguished 
from the five as a personification of the Buddha-ship the believer must 
strive to attain. It is yet impossible for us to discover in how far such an 
alteration was brought about under the direct influence of what happened 
in India or by parallel changes taking place in Java.
To connect Barabudur with Tantrism is something that would have 
been regarded as foolish not so very long ago. Everyone interested in the 
subj ect, looked upon the sanctuary of Barabudur as expressing Buddhism 
in its highest form, embodied in the noble serenity of meditation. Tan­
trism on the contrary was considered to be a mixture of wild demonology 
and sinister practices of magic, hardly worthy the name of Buddhism.
In fact these two extremes could have little in common. This view was 
founded on a misapprehension arising from the fact, that we first learned 
to know Tantrism from its worst side and in a state of corruption, i he 
real nature of the Tantra-creed has only been discovered and rightly 
valued within the last few years.
To give a summary of this creed would be far beyond the scope of this 
work, even were I efficient for the task. I shall here touch on a few points 
that may be useful for the understanding of Barabudur’s significance. I 
have previously pointed out that the acceptation of Tantra would cause 
the theoretic points of difference between the schools of philosophy to drif t 
into the background. Javanese Buddhism is an example with its combi­
nation of such various elements: the same Sanghyang Kamahayanikan 
that quotes Dignaga as an authority, shews traces of borrowing from the 
Madhyamika’s in the theories it expounds, and within the authority of the 
Yogacarya school, next to the quotation of the logician Dignaga can be 
placed the indications found on Barabudur pointing to Asahga, thus in 
the direction of the Vijnanavadin’s. We need not expect to find the 
Buddhism on Barabudur reduced to a distinctly prescribed system.
If this collective and eclectic influence holds good for the schools of 
philosophy, how much more that will be the case as regards the original 
sects. The masters of the Yogacarya had already given the example; not 
following one system but drawn from all creeds, was the doctrine ex­
pounded by Asanga, so that the yravaka’s (Hmayanistic monks) be-
' G° i x


--- Page 332 ---
came believers 1), and it is expressly related of Vasubandhu that he had 
studied the ?astra’s of the eighteen sects, the points of difference be­
tween sutra’s and vinaya of the various schools and even the chief works 
of the Tfrthya’s 2). We have already seen above 3), that according to I- 
tsing the same sect belonged in one place to the Hlnayana and in another 
to the Mahayana 4), while the same author further mentions as the only 
systems of the Mahayana the two great schools of philosophy, Madh- 
yamika and Yogacarya6). It is thus clearly proved how much the 
distinctions between the sects had been pushed aside by the schools of 
philosophy in the Church. The particular tenets of the sects lost their 
meaning except in so far as they found a place as fundamental principles 
in one of the systems of philosophy 6).
In the Buddhism to which Barabudur belongs, the difference between 
the sects has become of altogether secondary importance. It had first 
made way for the question whether one should belong to the Hinayana or 
the Mahayana, and within the pale of the Great Vehicle if one should fol­
low the Madhyamika or the Yogacarya system; then finally the points of 
difference between these two were also weakened. Not of course that they 
ceased to exist, but they gradually lost all practical meaning. That being 
the case, a search for the school which founded Barabudur will not 
mean one for the sect to which the founders can be ascribed. It is even 
questionable if one particular sect could be pointed out. The followers of 
the Tantric Yogacarya here represented, we know were not bound to 
one sect, what could be more likely than that all those who acknow­
ledged this system, who believed it would bring about their own salva­
tion and that of the whole world, should together have undertaken the 
erection of a monumental building in honour of that Creed, without any 
regard to which of the old sects they happened to belong. If therefore
l) Taranatha p. 117(91). 
a) The same p. 119 (93).
») Seep. 288.
*) It must not be imagined there was a very distinct separation between the two Yana’s.
I a®fee 
L6vi-Chavannes’ statement in his article referred to on p. 288 note 4. On p. 28 
we find: “D’ailleurs il faut se garder d’opposer dans un contraste brutal les deux V6hicules.
Petit et Orand Vfehicule tiennent 1’un k l’autre par des liens nombreux et subtils",
*) See Takakusu on p. XXII of the introduction to his translation.
*) Kern, Gsschiedenis van het Buddhisme II (1884) p. 391.1 will quote two more state­
ments by laranStha: “Obwohl es in jeder der achtzehn Schulen bis jetzt Grundwerke, An- 
weisungen und Biicher giebt, so giebt es doch niemand mehr, welcher sich ohne alle Bei- 
mischung zu den Ansichten einer derselben bekermen wiirde” (p. 273 sq. = 208). And "Seifc 
der Verbreitung des Mahayana bekannten sich alle Geistliche des .Mahayana, obwohl sie 
zu einer dieser Schulen gehort batten, doch nur zum Mahayana-System, ohne sich den 
frtiheren verschiedenen Systemen anzuschliessen” (p. 274 = 208 sq.).
f ( f g j 
( f i l
\V - ^ 2 p / 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR
X jHg 
V 
1 .'■ 
' . ' o ' . „ v : ■ 
o 
' 
oo'.


--- Page 333 ---
• ill
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR
data should come to light, shewing some particular idea or text to belong 
to one of the old sects, for instance that in agreement with what I-tsing 
relates of an earlier period1), the Mulasarvastivadanikaya had remain­
ed in honour, this would be a fact of great importance, for it would prove 
that the Mulasarvastivadanikaya was still authentic among these Yoga- 
carya’s or Tantrists. But even then we should not be justified in 
concluding that the founders of Barabudur belonged exclusively to 
the Mulasarvasti vadin sect.
Anything strictly systematic we must not expect to find on Bara­
budur. Neithercould it be feasible,because the founders had always to con­
sider the plastic representation of their texts. We can easily imagine how 
there will have been scriptures most sacred in their eyes, which before 
all they wished to see immortalized on the monument, yet by reason of 
their abstract ideas were utterly unsuitable for depicting in relief-form. 
Such an objection would specially apply for instance to the Prajnapara- 
mita, that we have good authority for believing to be one of the sacred 
texts belonging to this creed, annotated as it is by the Bodhisattva 
Maitreya, by Asariga and Vasubandhu, while a writing by Bignaga is 
connected with i t 2); it is the very thing we should expect at Barabudur. 
But the contents are very unsuited for illustration. It may have been 
the same with other texts ; in deciding what should and what should 
not be depicted on the stupa, next to its degree of sanctity, the practic­
ability of its representation had to be considered.
As ruling school of Javanese Buddhism in general and Barabudur m 
particular, we found a YogScarya or Tantra-creed. Since the researches 
of Kern, Minayeff, Senart, Oldenberg and De La Valtee Poussin, of whose 
,,Bouddhisme” I have gratefully made use3) have thrown light on the 
origin of Mahayana and Tan tray ana, it has become clear how difficult 
it is in practice to draw the line between the two. No one will regard the 
Mahayana any more as a sort of second-rate Buddhism in contrast to 
the “pure creed” of the Pali canon of the Southern Church : the Great 
Vehicle, designed to be a vehicle for all, throwing open its doors, not 
restricting itself to an order of monks or a clergy, and preaching a 
conduct of life that was acceptable to all kinds of people, was certainly 
not inferior in its intrinsic value and only little in date, to the Hina- 
yaanistic sects. •)
•) See p. 287 sq.
s) Walleser, PrajMp&ramitS (1914) p. 28—30.
J) Etudes et Mat&iaux. Memoires cotironn^s etc. par l’Academie Royale de Belgique, LV 
4 (1898). Especially p. 61—93.


--- Page 334 ---
/§#>—<Si\
Tantric practices more or less distinct, are found already from the 
beginning of the Mahayana; no wonder when they existed in some form 
or other long before and outside Buddhism. This applies of course spe­
cially to the yoga. The yogin whether he is Buddhist or not, endeavours 
to attain the Higher Wisdom in whatever form he may imagine it. And 
one ingredient of the Higher Wisdom is super-natural power, so that 
every yogin strives to subdue the natural and human in order to lay hold 
of the supernatural and superhuman, though in reality he does not come 
farther than the unnatural and inhumanl). Fundamentally therefore tan- 
tristic practices are a part of every yoga. What iantrisni actually does 
is to make the secondary part into the main point; in the Mantrayana 
the practice of yoga is no longer a means but has itself become the manipu­
lator of the Bodhi. In agreement with this the Bodhi has changed its 
character and the attainment of Buddha-ship coincides with what is the 
ideal of non-Buddhist theosophy: the absorption of the yogi?vara into 
the Supreme Being 2). Perhaps we might formulate as follows: there is 
no intrinsic, but only a gradual difference in the practical exercise of the 
yoga between Mahayana and Tantrayana; their aim can in both cases 
be described as "attainment of the Buddha-ship”, but where the yoga 
of the Mahayanist serves for achieving such high wisdom as shall at last 
make him worthy to become t Buddha, the Tantrayanist’s yoga brings 
about directly incorporation with the Supreme Being called Buddha.
The distinguishing difference lies in my opinion in the aim of the yoga, 
not in the way it is exercised; incantations and the practice of magic 
though specially characteristic of Tantrism, are also ascribed to the 
great masters of unalloyed Mahayana 3). I do not believe there is suffi­
cient reason to doubt Taranatha’s statement4), that Mantra-tantra’s were 
practised ever since the dissemination of the Mahayana, although for a 
time they maintained the character of a secret creed. In the period from 
Asariga until Dharmaklrti there lived great mantra-magicians; the 
Anuttarayoga was however revealed only to those deemed worthy 
thereof and never performed daily. After that time the Ariuttarayoga- 
tantra’s continually became more widespread and under the Pala kings 
(850—1050) there were many mantra-vajracarya’s6). The practice of
>) Kern, Geschiedenis II p. 420.
a) Comp, above p. 307. As regards the value of dharairi's and mudra s to believers, see 
Wassiljew 1.1. p. 153— 156 (142-—145).
») It is known that the Hlriayilna also had its yoga; a Singalese manual of this, the V;oga- 
vacara lias been published by Rhys Davids (Pali Text Soc. 1896} trans. by Woodward, 
Manual of a mystic (P. T. S. 1916).
*) Pag. 104 (32); cf. 275 (209).
*) T aranathap. 201 (154).
f(S)| 
%L
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUS


--- Page 335 ---
^ 
' 
THE BUDDHISM OF BA.RAF,l'l)lJR 1
these mantra performances had therefore already existed for a long time, 
but when may we begin to speak of Tantrism? The vajracarya’s of the 
ninth century were of course Tantrists; can we regard the contem­
poraries of Asaiiga and their predecessors as such, and where are we to 
draw the line?
If we now turn to Java we find in the East-Javanese Buddhism of the 
Sang hyang Kamahayanikan the authentic Mantrayana. The period be­
fore that, during which Barabudur was erected, is in direct connection 
with East Java as I have described, We have no texts for this period, 
but the monuments are there. The stupa itself yields data that turn 
partly in the direction of the Yogacarya, partly towards the Tantrayana.
Are the limits here already overslept and does Barabudur represent 
exactly the same phase as the Kamahayanikan, a Tantrayana that is 
based on the Yogacarya-creed? Or are we not yet quite as far as that 
and is the Mahayanistic point of view still maintained, even if there 
are sufficient indications of transition towards the Tantrayana being 
about to take place ?
When putting questions like these, we are aware they can only be 
of relative value. The evolution of religion and philosophy does not take 
place in such a way that at some given moment we can draw a line at the 
point where an old opinion is unanimously dropped and a new one taken 
up. The one glides unperceived into the other and gradually the belie­
ver’s mind becomes ripe for new ideas, accepted first by a few, then by 
more and finally by the majority. When we consider how the doctrine of 
Islam gained power in Java, we see how first it appeared in the coast 
places as early as the twelfth century, how it spread among the inland 
people in the beginning of the fifteenth, and how it took more than another 
century to gain the upper hand; this shews how slowly new opinions 
take root, though we can realize that the similarity between the Maha­
yanistic and the Tantristic dogma would considerably quicken the pro­
cess, Their resemblance however on the other hand makes it so much 
more difficult to fix the boundaries, nor would each individual believer 
be aware of the exact moment when he stepped from the one Vehicle 
into the other.
It is therefore impossible for the present to give any closer definition 
of Barabudur’s Buddhism. As the result of our examination, we see in 
the stupa the embodiment of a Mahayana founded on the Yogacarya- 
school but with a leaning towards the Tantrayana and possibly already 
merged in it. At any rate we must retain the term Mahayana when the 
tantristic Sang hyang Kamahayanikan regards the "Mantranaya” ex-
x jS * ■ c%
x 
;;


--- Page 336 ---
pounded therein as belonging to the Mahayana; a view moreover that 
agrees with the whole Buddhist-Tantristic literature. It is not for 
us to deprive Javanese Buddhism of the name of Mahayana, because 
as far as we can see the aim and composition of the creed here 
professed no longer agrees with what we recognise as forming the 
actual Mahayana; they considered themselves followers of the Great 
Vehicle and that we must acknowledge, We shall do best to speak 
of a Tan trie Mahayana based on the Yogacarya-school.
The scarcity of available data gives our research for the present only 
a temporary character. When later on the Buddhist documents from 
Tibet and China have shed light on unknown texts, in particular those 
of the higher galleries, and the study of the Mahayana especially in rela­
tion to Tantrism, has been pursued in the direction already indicated; 
when besides, later research has given us clearer insight into the special 
condition of Java; then only will the investigation of Barabudur’s 
Buddhism, here begun, have a chance of satisfactory completion.
It is chiefly from outside Java that new light may be expected as to 
the signification of Barabudur. On the other hand this monument that 
brings before us (though incompletely), texts and tenets followed at 
a certain period by a certain group of MahSyanists, will in itself form 
a valuable source for the study of Buddhism in general.
|
H
 
<
S
L
K ^ T 3 p Z 
THE BUDDHISM OF BARABUDUR


--- Page 337 ---
__
Sl
.
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR
In the following list books and papers on Barabudur are placed in chro­
nological order. As regards the older sources, the author has striven to be 
as complete as possible; since the end of the 19th century the monument 
has become so well known and was so much visited, that it would be of no 
use to record all the descriptions. Only those will be mentioned, which are 
of any value for the history or the interpretation of the sanctuary.
1814. Cornelius (H. C.)> Beschrijving van de zeer merkwaardige; Rubles, bij den 
Inlander bekend onder de benaming van Borro-Boedoor, voorgesteld in de 
hoogste Indiaansche Architecture, waarin een groot aantal van kleine Hindo- 
stansche tempels met verschillende Beelden aaneengeschakeld als een heilige 
plaats, welke jongst is ontdekt geworden in de environs van het dorp Boemi 
Segorro, geleege in de provincie de Cadoe, aan de Noorder Lemieten van het 
district Bagalleen, omtrent 36 Engelsche mijlen afstand in het Suid-Westen 
van de Residentie in de Cadoe, deMagallaangenaamd. Ms. of 236 pages (copy 
of the original), being the explanation of the drawings and plans, made during 
the first survey of Barabudur; it goes no further than the fourth gallery. This 
Ms, formerly in the Leyden Museum of Antiquities, is now lost (see Leemans’ 
monograph p. NLVIII of the Preface, and Not. Kon. Inst. 1917—1918 p. 
XVIII). A copy of this copy is to be found in the Archaeol. Department at 
Batavia, with reproductions of the plans. For the plans themselves see: 1885 
Leemans.
1817. Raffles (Tb. S.), History of Java, II p. 29-30_ (=* 30-32, second edition 
1830), Short description, with reproduction of a kinnari, from the neighbour­
hood of the monument, on a plate opposite p. 44 (fig. 1) and two Buddha- 
heads on a plate opposite p. 54 (fig. 2 en 3).
1819. Gouv. Besl. *) of 1 October no. 25. Besides the desa Bumi-Segara, also the 
desa Bumin is exempted from landtax, on condition that they furnish suf­
ficient people to keep the ruins of Barabudur in order.
1820. Grawfurd (J.), On the rains of Boro Budor, in Java {Transactions of the liter­
ary Society of Bombay; II p. 154-166 (= 163-176 in the second edition 
of 1876). Detailed description, dated Batavia, 10 March 1817. With seven 
plates (view of the monument, Buddha in niche, lion and four basreliefs).
1820. Grawfurd (J.), History of the Indian Archipelago, II p. 197—198. Short 
description, with nine plates (the same as above, and two more reliefs).
■} By Order of the Governor-General.


--- Page 338 ---
1822. See 1842.
1823. Resolution of the Minister of Education, Industry and Colonies of 13 March 
no. 29. The stone images, collected by Prof. Dr. G. C. C. Reinwardt in Java 
are placed in the Archaeological Cabinet of Leyden University. For the sculp­
tures from Barabudur see 1909 Juynboll.
1826. Reuvens (C, J. €.), Verhandeling over drie groote steenen Beelden, in den 
jare 1819 uit Java naar de Nederlanden overgezonden; Gedenkschr. Derde 
Kl. Kon. Ned. Inst. v. Wetensch., Letterk. en Sch. Kunsten, III p. 121, 131 
sq., 135 etc. Name and meaning of the monument.
1830, Raffles (S.), Memoir of the life and public services of Sir Thomas Stamford 
Raffles etc. p. 159. On the name.
1836. Von Humboldt (W.), Ueber die Kawi-Spracbe auf der Insel Java, I p. 120 
171 and 189-190. Description (120—124); the Buddha-images in connection 
with the system of Dhyani-Buddha’s (124-139); ornament and reliefs (139—
343); the monument as „dagop” (143—170); relation to theenvirons (171): 
the name (189—190).
1838. Buddingh (A. S.), Djandi Mundut in 1839 (sic) ; Tijdschr. v. Neerl. Indie I,
2, p. 401 sq. Legend on the foundation.
1840. Valck (F. G.), Gedachten over de Rumen van de Hindoesche Godsdienst, 
welkeop Javagevonden worden; Tijdschr. v. Neerl. Indie III, 1, p. 183-184. 
Short mention.
1840. See 1858.
1842. Kronijk van Nederlandsch-Indie, loopende van af het jaar 1816; Tijdschr. 
v. Neerl. Indie, IV, 1, p. 198. Second visit of the Governor-General Van der 
Capellen in 1822, after a first one in 1817, and description of the clearing in 
the meantime and the discovery of a fifth gallery.
1842. Sieburgh (H. N.), List of paintings in De KopiLst I, p. 384, no. 7-11 (no. 7 
view from one of the corners ; no. 8 view from a neighbouring hill, with the 
landscape; no. 9 view on one of the galleries; no. 10 view of one of the gate­
ways with staircase; no. 11 two basreliefs).
1842. Leemans (G.), Beredeneerde beschrijving der Asiatische en Amerikaansche 
momimenten van het Museum van Oudheden. See for the antiquities from 
Barabudur described here: 1909 Juynboll.
1844. Junghuhn (F.), Ruinen van Java, Tijdschr. v. Neerl. Indie VI, 2, p. 357—
358. Mention. 
F
1844. Raffles (Th. S,), Plates for the second edition of the History of Java, no. 45 
-55 (no. 45 plan; no. 46 view on the temple; no. 47 Outer Elevation of the 
hirst Gateway and Facade of the 3 terrace; no. 48 Elevation of ditto of the 
4 terrace; no. 49 Interior Elevation of ditto of the 4 terrace; no. 50 of the 5 
terrace; no. 51 of the 6 terrace; no. 52 Elevation and Facade of the Gateway 
supporting the 7 terrace; no. 53 Interior Elevation of the Gateway and Fa­
cade of the 7 terrace; no. 54 Elevation and Section of one of the Bell-shaped 
or conical Temples surrounding the large Central one; no. 55 Elevation and 
Section of the large Central Temple).
1845. Miinnich (J,), Eenige bijdragen tot het onderzoek der oudheden op Java; 
Indisch Magazijn, Tweede twaalftal no. 1 and 2, p. 178-179. On an image 
(compared with the guardians at Tjandi Sewu) on the hill Daghi.
1847. Vau lloevell (W. R.) and Friederich (R. H. Th.), Beredeneerde beschrijving 
dei Javaansche monumenten in het kabinet van oudheden van het Batavi-
f(W)| . 
(fiT
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR 
0 - 1 ^


--- Page 339 ---
aasch Genootschap; Verhand. Bat. Gen, XXL For the images from Barabu­
dur described here, see 1887 Groeneveldt.
1849. Gouv. Besl. of 31 March no. 4, ordering drawings to be made of all bas- 
reliefs and images, to be reproduced by lithograph. With this work were charged 
the draughtsman in the Engineers F. C. Wilson and the non. Com. officer 
Sclionberg Muller.
1850. Bleeker (P.), Fragmenten eerier Reis over Java; Tijdschr. v. N.-Indie, se­
cond part, p. 226-—228. Short account.
1852. Javasche Oudheden, opgedragen aan Z. K. H, Prims Hendrik der Neder- 
landen. Very inaccurate drawing of a staircase and a gateway; and onp. 1 
of the text a basrelief as illustration.
1853. Wilsen (F. C.), Boro Boedoer; Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. I p, 235- 300 and 302- 
303. General description (235—255); considerations on art (255-260); de­
cay (261-267); meaning of the sanctuary (267-283); worship at the present 
day (284-291); legends on the foundation (291-300) ; the image tfndagieor 
Tukang (302-303).
1853. Cohen Stuart (A. B.)> Bezoek aan den Boro-Boedoe; Bijdr. Kon. Inst. I, 
p. 76—77. From a letter; specially on the representation of daily life and 
customs on the reliefs.
1854. Friederich <R. H. Th.), Eenige aanteekeningen op het stuk over Boro- 
Boedoer door F. C. Wilsen; Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. II, p. 1-10. Criticism on some 
points of Wilsen’s paper.
1854? Wilsen (F. €.), Bord-Boedoer verklaard in verband met Brahmanendom en 
Buddhisme. Manuscript, formerly in the Leyden Museum of Antiquities, 
now lost, like Cornelius (1814).
1854. Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. II, p. VIII. Discovery of gold rings in the neighbour­
hood of the monument.
1856. Crawfurd (J.), A descriptive dictionary of the Indian islands and adjacent 
countries, p; 66: Boro Budor. Short description,
1856. Pfeiffer '(Ida), Meine zweite Weltreise II, p. 114—118. Visit in November 
1852.
1856. GouV. Besl. of 30 December no. 10. Rev. J. F. G. Brumund is charged with 
the composition of a critical description of Barabudur, as an explanation of 
the lithographic plates (see 1849).
1857. Wilsen (F, C.), Korte omschnjving van de groote basreiiefs, welke zich op de 
eerste rij van de eerste galerei bevinden. Manuscript, formerly in the Leyden 
Museum of Antiquities, now lost.
1857. Brumund (J. F, G.), Beredeneerde beschrijving van Boro-Boedoer. Manu­
script, formerly in the Leyden Museum of Antiquities, now lost, like the 
manuscripts of Cornelius and Wilsen.
1858 Van Hoevell (W. R.), De tempel van B oro B oedoer in de residentie Radoe; 
Tijdschr. v. N. Indie, second part, p. 105—115. Visit in 1840, published 
anonymously 1).
1858. Brumund (J. F. G.), Te Boro-Boedoer; Tijdschr. v. N.-Indie, second part, 
p. 252 -260,273—284 and 353—396. Only a part of this paper concerns Ba­
rabudur; description (280-284) ; legends on the foundation (353—362); data
l) The author has been discovered by Rouffaer in Bijdr. Kon. Inst, 79 (1923) p. 591—597.
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR


--- Page 340 ---
(CT
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR 
^
for the changes in the life of the Javanese people (362 -364); view from the 
top (382-388).
1859. Buddingh (S. A.), Neer I ands- Dost -Inciie I, p. 179-182. Short mention.
1861. Lassen (C.), Indische Alterthumskunde IV, p. 511—513. Some general re­
marks.
1862. Yule (H.), Notes of a brief visit to some of the Indian remains in Java; 
Journ. Asiat. Soc. of Bengal XXXI, p. 20-24, with fig. 4 en 5 (small stupa’s). 
Compares Mengiin in Burma; both monuments represent Meru.
1863. Notulen Bat. Gen. I, p. 242-248, with Gouv. Besl. of 8 Augustus no. 22. 
Retroacta on the care for the building.
1863. See 1868 Brumund.
1864. Notulen Bat. Gen. II, p. 22—23, with Gouv. Besl. of 35 January no. 43. The 
rules of 1819 for keeping the monument in order are maintained.
1864. Notulen Bat. Gen. II, p. 167. Two Buddha-heads in the Museum at Batavia. 
1866. Notulen Bat. Gen. IV, p. 5. Discovery of an unfinished Buddha-image at 
Ngaran, a half mile from Barabudur.
1866. Hoepermans (N. W.), Hindoe-oudheden van Java, published in Rapp. 
Oudh. Dienst 1913; p. 131-145. Especially on the chief image and the Bud- 
dha-legeuds.
1868. Notulen Bat. Gen. VI, p. 36 and 47. The care of the monument entrusted
to the keeper of the pasanggrahan.
1868. Brumund (J. F. G.), Bijdragen tot de kennis van het Hindoeisme op Java; 
Verhand. Bat. Gen. XXXIII, p. 265-266 on the foundation; p. 279-285 on 
the character of the art of the reliefs. Written before or in 1863. On p. 291 
foil, considerations on art by Wilsen are cited, dating also from before 3863.
1868. See 1870 en 3876 Friederich.
1870. Wilsen (F. C.), in Notulen Bat. Gen. VIII, p. 22-25, on the portfolio of pla­
tes for the monograph.
1870. Friederich (R. H. Th.), Aanteekeningen over de hoofdtempels in Kadoe en 
Djokjakarta; Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. XIX, p. 416—423 (also Tijdschr. XXIII, 
1876, p. 366—371). Place of the relics (416-418); concealed dates (419-423). 
Dated May 1868. French translation in Annales de l’Extreme Orient 1 (1878 
—'79), p. 124—128.
1870. Yule (H.), Remarks on a paper of E. H. Sladen on the Senbyu Pagoda at 
Mengun; Journ. Roy. Asiat. Soc., New Series IV, p. 411-422; with half of 
the plan from Raffles, and section, prepared for Raffles’ History but not pu­
blished. Further development of the idea about Meru (see 1862); the Bud­
dha's in the niches explained as the former Buddha’s of this kalpa, the Bud­
dha’s in the stupa’s as Maitreya.
1871. Millies (H. C.), Recherches sur les monnaies des indigenes de l’Archipel in- 
dien et de la Peninsule malaie, p. 10-11 and plate I no. 4en 5. Two gold 
coins found near the temple.
1872. Notulen Bat. Gen. X, p. 40-44. Desirability of charging mr, J. van Kins- 
bergen with the photographing and casts of Barabudur.
1872. Gouv. Besluitof 13 August no. 20, published Notulen 1.1. pag. 91-92. The 
Bataviaasch Genootschap is authorized to sign a contract with Van Kins- 
bergen. Comp. Notulen XI, 1873, p. 19.
1873. Leemans (C.), Bord-Boedoer op het eiland Java, afgebeeld door en onder


--- Page 341 ---
toezicht van F. C. Wilsen, met toelichtenden en verklarenden tekst, naar de 
geschreven en gedrukte verhandeJingen van F. C. Wilsen, J. F. G. Brumund 
en andere bescheiden, bewerkt en uitgegeven, op last van Zijne Excellence 
den Minister van Kolonien. With 17 illustrations in the text and 393 large 
plates of basreliefs, plans etc. Description (3—105); basreliefs (106—382); 
meaning (383—445); the Buddha-images (446—471); foundation and decay 
(472—522); art (523—580) ; manners and customs (581—655). French trans­
lation by A. G. van Hamel in 1874,
1873. Notulen Bat. Gen. XI, p. 102-113. Complaints of C. Leemans regarding Van 
Kinsbergen’s work, answer of the Society; p. 131-136, letter of F C. Wilsen 
pn the accuracy of his drawings; p. 162-166, new complaints of Leemans, 
with the Society’s answer.
1873. Notulen Bat. Gen. XI, p. 113 and 143—144. Proposal and resolution for the 
excavation and clearing of the monument, to be entrusted to Van Kinsbergen.
1874. Leemans (C.), Eenige opmerkingen over de uitgaaf van het werk: Boro- 
Boedoer op het eiland Java; Versl. Meded. Kon. Acad, van Wetensch. Afd. 
Letterk., 2de Reeks IV, p. 216—226. Also about the work of Van Kinsbergen.
1874. Notulen Bat. Gen. XII, p. 42—50, New remarks of C. Leemans on the work 
of Van Kinsbergen and the Society’s answer.
1874. Van Kinsbergen (J,), Report on his work at Barabudur, Notulen Bat. Gen. 
XII, p. 71-74; with remarks by the Society, p. 74—76.
1874, Van Kinsbergen (J,), Catalogue der photographieen naar de tempel-rume 
Roro-Boedoer, Notulen Bat, Gen. XII, Bijlage F, p. XXV-XXVIII. Comp. 
1914 Oudh. Versl.
1874. Meinsma (J. J.), Babad Tanah Djawi. I, p. 576 (in the second edition of 
1899: II p. 238-239). Earliestest mention of Barabudur, under Pakubuwa- 
na I. See 1901 Brandes.
1875. Quarles van Ufford (J. K. W.), Koloniale Kroniek; De Economist I, p. 
303-331. On the monograph of Leemans and the work of Van Kinsbergen.
1876. Busken Huet (€.), Nationale Vertoogen II, p. 20—22. De ..Economist" over 
den Boro-boeddhoer. Criticism of the foregoing.
1876. Friederich (R. H. Th.), Rapport over reizen gedaan op Java; Tijdschr. 
Bat. Gen. XXIII, p. 66-67. On the name and the survey by Hoepermans in 
1864. Dated June 1868.
1876. Fergusson (J,), History of Indian and Eastern Architecture *), p. 643-650. 
With the two wood-cuts mentioned 1870 Yule (fig. 362—-363), section of 
a small stupa and view of the central stupa from Raffles (fig, 364-365), and 
view on staircase and gate, taken on smaller scale from J avasche Oudheden 
1852 (fig. 366). The monument dated in 656; explained as a dagoba with vi~ 
bar a, also related to the Gandhara-monasteries. Comparisons with other 
buildings, but no positive conclusions. Second impression in 1893.
1876. Burnell (A. C.), Literary work in Java; Ind. Antiquary V, p. 316 (also 
Not. Bat. Gen. XIV, p. LII—LIII). A very developed Northern Buddhism 
and some jataka’s are x'ecognised.
1877. Notulen Bat. Gen. XV, p. 122-129. Newremarks of C. Leemans criticising the 
work of Van Kinsbergen, answer of Van Kinsbergen and of the resident of 
Kedu (p. 128 on the name of the sanctuary; p. 127-128 on the watersupply). l
l) Being the new edition of an older ,,Handbook of Architecture”, here not available.
Barabudur II 
22
l A
S
 J 4 
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR


--- Page 342 ---
(ifw f\ 
(ct
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR 
i j l j
■ ' 
' 
'••'■ ' 
. 
■"■. 
!,i
1877-1878. N o tu le n B at. Gen. XV, p. 158 and X V I, p. 18. Replacing of B uddha-
heads.
1878. V eth (P . J .), Jav a, geograplrisch, ethnologisch, historisch; II p. 79—83.
Good description, exclusively m orphological.
1880. H o se (G . F .), The ruins of Boro B udur in Jav a, Journ. S traits B ranch Roy. 
A siat. Soc. VI, p. 203-223. On th e book of Leem ans, th e w ork of R affles and 
the Buddha-1 egend.
1880. C o ra (G .), Descrizione di B 6r6-B udur nell’isola di Giava, Cosmos V I, p. 216 
-219. On Leem ans’ m onograph, w ith reproduction of W ilson’s view and a 
m ap of th e environs 1).
1881-1882. F e e r (L .), Boro-B oudour dans File de Jav a, Ann. de 1’E x tr. Or. IV , p. 
72-82, 105—115, 145-150, 191. D etailed description, following Leem ans’ m o­
nograph.
1882. N o tu le n B at. Gen. X X , p. 99 and 118-119. Proposition of J. H . F. Sollewijn 
Gelpke to dem olish B arabudur and to p u t th e reliefs in a m useum .
1883. N o tu le n B at. Gen. X X I, p. 98. A stone axe found in the vicinity.
1863-1885. N o tu le n B at. Gen. X X I, p. 7 1 -7 2 ,8 3 ,9 8 , 134; X X II, 1-2, 11; X X III,
p. 87, 122. Com plaints on the condition of B arabudur; W . P. G roeneveldt is 
com missioned to m ake an exam ination.
1884. K e rn (H.), Geschiedenis van h et B uddhism e in Indie, I I p. 174 and 179. On 
th e D hyani-B uddha’s and the chief image.
1885. L e e m a n s (C .), B eschrijving van de Indische oudheden van het Rijks-M u- 
seum van O udheden te Leiden. Drawings and plans no. 42-83 (p. 118-120) 
m ostly by Cornelius; no. 125 (p. 124) photographs of four reliefs, a B uddha 
a nd the guardian; no. 142-156 (p. 125-126) draw ings of details, presented by 
the resident P. Le Clercq (1821-1825); no. 158 (p. 126) and 186 (p. 128) view 
on the m onum ent an d guardian, both by F. C. Wilsen. For the sculptures 
see 1909 juynboll. A n oil-painting by A. Payen was in th e same M useum(now 
in th e E thnogr. Mus.),
1885. N o tu le n B at. Gen. X X II, p. 156. D iscovery of the buried base by IJzer-
m an.
1885. See 1887 Leem ans.
1886. I J z e r m a n ( J . W .), le ts over den oorspronkeliiken voet van Boro Boedoer; 
Tijdschr. B at. Gen. X X X I, p. 261-268, w ith plate and 3 w ood-cuts of in­
scriptions (taken from papercasts by J . Scheffer, comp. N ot. B at. Gen. X X IV , 
p. 113).
1886. R ra n d e s (J. L. A .), On th e inscriptions of th e buried base; N otulen B at.
Gen. X X IV , p. 27-29 and 160-165.
1886. Y ule (H .) and B u rn e ll (A . C.), H obson-Jobson, being a glossary of Anglo- 
Indian colloquial w ords and phrases, p. 81. A rt. B oro-Bodor or -B udur. Short 
description. (R eprinted in the second edition, 1903, p. 107).
1886. I J z e r m a n (J . W .), H et K inara J a ta k a op Boro Boedoer; Bijdr. K on. Inst.,
5de Reeks I, p. 577— 579. On the tw o kinnara-reliefs lb 89-90.
1887. L e e m a n s (C .), A ccount (in D ecem ber 1885) of th e discovery of the
J) The same view is to be found in a review by D. Bordier in 1881 (Soci&te Languedo- 
cienne de Geographic). In other learned societies too tire monograph of Leemans has been 
the object of discussions or dissertations.
■ e° 5 x


--- Page 343 ---
buried base; Versl. Meded. Kon. Acad, v. Wetensch. AM. Letterk., 3de Reeks 
III, p. 93-94.
1887. Groneman (J.), De B&r&boedoer op Midden-Java; Indische Gids IX, first 
part, p. 99-125. Introduction and description; specially Buddha-legend and 
Buddha-images.
1887. IJzerman (J. W.), On the Buddha’s and Bodhisattva’s; Versl. Meded. Kon. 
Acad. v. Wetensch. Afd. Letterk., 3de Reeks IV, p. 209-215.
1887. Lee mans (C.), Verslag over een verzoek der Oudheidkundige Vereeniging 
te Jogjakarta; Versl. Meded, Kon. Acad. v. Wetensch. Afd. Letterk,, 3de 
Reeks IV, p. 248-252. On the excavation of the buried base.
1887. Rouffaer (G. P„), in Notulen Bat. Gen. XXV, p. 160-162. On newly found 
reliefs of the base.
1887. Groeneveldt (W. P.), Catalogus der Archeologische Verzameling van het 
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen. Pag. 75-76 
on the chief-image. No. 224-227 (p. 85) Buddha's; no. 236-245 (p. 87) Bud- 
dha-heads; no. 328 (p. 110) lion. Further from the vicinity no. 23 (p. 19) Qiva 
and no. 127 (p. 47) Durga.
1887-1890. Notulen Bat. Gen. XXV, p. 34-45, 60-61; XXVI, p. 156-157, 187; 
XXVII, p. 90-91; XXVIII, p. 40. Projects for the excavation and reproduc­
tion of the reliefs on the buried base. Comp. Indische Gids 1887, II, p. 1637- 
1640.
1888. Notulen Bat. Gen. XXVI, p. 61-62. 175. Complaints on the damaged con­
dition of the monument; a bambu-enclosure is set up.
1888. Cotteau (E.), En Oceanic, p. 95-97. With view on the monument (photograph 
Van Kinsbergen).
1890. Gouv. Besluit of 3 September no. 2, printed Notulen Bat. Gen. XXVIII, 
p. 100-101, Authorization to sign a contract with K . C ephas for photogra­
phing the reliefs of the buried base.
3890. Meyer (W.), in Notulen Bat. Gen. XXVIII, p. 129. On the excavation of 
the base.
1891. Verbeek (R. D. M.)* Oudheden van Java; Verhand. Bat. Gen. XLVI, p. 
144-147; no. 256. Detailed bibliography. Also p. 30 no. 10, on two Buddha- 
heads at Rumpin (Buitenzorg).
1892. Groneman (J.)» De tjandi Birtiboedoer op Midden-Java. Guide for visi­
tors. Third edition in 1900, fourth in 1902; English translation in 1901 and 
second edition in 1906. See also 1907.
1893. Griinwedel (A.), Buddhistische Kunst in Indien, p. 127 on the Buddha's, 
with plate 52, (head). In the new redaction of 1900 (second edition in 1919) 
p. 144 with pi. 76, and p. 116 on the composition of the reliefs; in the English 
translation by B urgess (1901) p. 124 and 167 with pi. 115; and p. 193 oil 
Avalokite9vara.
1893-1894. Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXI, p. 65, 127; XXXII, p. 9, 93, 103-104. On 
the enclosure.
1894. Louw(P. J, F.), De Java-oorlog van 3825-30,1 p. 494-495; II (1897) p. 217, 
403. Barabudur during the war.
1895. Oldenburg (S. F.)„ ZamStki o Buddijskom iskusstvfi, in Vostocnyja ZartRt- 
ki, p. 353-359. Recognition of Jatakamala and other stories. Translated by 
H . K e rn , Een Russiseh geleerde over de beeldhouwwerken van den Boro-
%
'J 
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR 
^
1
 i


--- Page 344 ---
boedoer, Bijdr. Kon. Inst., 6de Reeks III (1897), p. 49-56 (= Verspreide 
- 
Geschriften IV, 1916, p. 226-231); and by L . W ien er, Notes on Buddhist 
art, Journ, Americ. Orient. Soc. XVIII (1897), p. 196-201.
1896. Kern (H.), Over de bijschriften op het beeldhouwwerk van Boro-boedoer; 
Versl. Meded. Kon. Acad. v. Wetensch. Afd. Letterk., 3de Reeks XII, p. 119 
-128. See also 1911 Kern, and 1917 Kern.
1896. Encyclopaedic van Nederlandsch Indie, I p. 263. Art. Boro-Boedoer.
Very short description,
1896. Veth (P. J.), Java, geographisch, ethnologisch, historisch; second edition 
by J. F. Snelleman and J. F. Niermeyer, I p. 121-142. With 5 plates (sec­
tion of the base, view on the base, relief of the base, half groundplan and half 
section). Description as in the first edition, but with all new data.
1896. Brandes (J. L. A.), in Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXIV, p. 106—107. On J5ta.~ 
kamala-tales.
1896. Tissandier (A.), Cambodge et Java, p. 115—123. With pi. 27, gargoyle at 
the base; 28, relief of the first balustrade; 29, gateway; 30, stupa’s of the 
terraces, and in the text section and half gr oundplan, also niche with Buddha. 
Superficial description and bad drawings.
1896. Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXIV, p. 108. Proposition to bring a Buddha-image 
from the monument to the museum at Batavia, considered a violation of 
Barabudur by the authorities.
1896. Groneman (J.), Een Boeddhisten-koning op den Baraboedoer; Tijdschr.
Bat. Gen. XXXIX, p. 367-378. The monument explained in HinaySnistic
sense. ,
1896-1897. Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXIV, p. 53-54,80, 89; XXXV, p. 36,50. On the 
survey of reliefs, omitted in the drawings.
1897. Van Aalst (J.), Opgave van de hasreliefs van den Boroboedoer, die geheel 
of gedeelteiijk gespaard zijn en niet. zijn afgebeelcl in het werk van Dr. Lee- 
mans; Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXV, Bijlage II, p. XVII-XXIII.
1897. Griinwedel (A.), Buddhistische Studien, Veroffentl. a. d. Konigl. Mus. f. 
Volkerk. V., p. 92-94 with plate 71 and 72 on Kinnara-jataka; p. 97 -99 with 
plate 76 en 77 on Maitrakanyakavadana.
1897. Gallois (E.), Ruines et antiquities religieuses javanaises; Revue generale 
Internationale VI, p. 43-47. Short description with bad drawing of a corner, 
view in a gallery, half section and quarter groundplan.
1898. Leclercq (J.), Un sejour dans File de Java, p. 133-144. Impressions. With 
view in the fourth and relief of the second gallery r),
1898-1899. Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXVI, p. 119-120, 142-146; XXXVII, p. 50- 
52. On glass-negatives of Van Kinsbergen.
1898-1899. Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXVI, p. 200; XXXVII, p. 84-85, 158. On the 
condition of Barabudur.
1898-1899. Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXVI, p.200; XXXVII, p. 158-159,215,229, and 
Bijlage XX, p. CXXXIII no. 18 d. £iva-image in the vicinity.
1899. Serrurier (L.), Nota over den toestand waarin eenige voorname monurnen- 
ten van Midden-Java verkeeren; Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. XLI, p. 4-7.
>) The work published by the same author in 1907. „Les restes de la civilisation hindoue
k Java”, was not available.
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR 
O
l J


--- Page 345 ---
1899. Van Aalst (J.), Opgaven omtrent verschillende Hindoe-oudheden, voor- 
komende in de Controle-afdeeling Prabalingga, regentschap Magelang, resi- 
dentie Kedoe; Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. XLI, p. 397. Unfinished Buddha, destined 
for Barabudur, near Gondangan. (Reprinted in abridged form by /. K nebel, 
Besehrijving der Hindoe-oudheden in de residentie Kedoe, Rapp. Oudh. 
Comm. 1911, p. 238).
1899. IJzerman (J. W.), Over Boro-Boedoer; Tijdschr. Ned. Aardr. Genootsch., 
2de Serie XVI, p. 307-334. General remarks; history of the Buddha; repre­
sentations of Indra; the hells.
1899 Encyclopaedic van Nederlandsch lndie, II p. 327. Article Kunst (beel- 
dende), by G. P. Rouffaer. On drawings and photographs.
1899. Voorloopig verslag en Memorie van antwoord on the Indian Budget for 
the year 1900; p. 8 and 27. It is reported that some Buddha-images, taken 
from the niches of Barabudur, have been presented to the king of Siam.
1899. Notulen Bat. Gen, XXXVII, p. 218-219. J. Groneman protests against the 
above mentioned report.
1899. Catalogus der Tentoonstelling van bouwkundige en ornamentale fragmen- 
ten van eenige Hindoe-monumenten op Midden-Java; no. 4-10, 17-32, 35- 
37, 41,51,62 and 63.
1900. Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXVIII, p. 37. Enclosure.
1900. Gouv, Besluit of 21 Juli no. 17, printed Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXVIII, 
p. 72-73. Nomination of a Committee, consisting of Dr. J. L. A. Bvandes, T. 
van Erp and B. W. van de Kamer, in order to consider what measures should 
be taken for the preservation of Barabudur, and whether .it would be advi­
sable to replace the reliefs at the base by other stones and to bring the reliefs 
themselves to the museum at Batavia.
1900. Exposition Universelle a Paris. Guide a travers la section des Indes Neer- 
landaises, p. 269—273. Reproductions de statues et de bas-reliefs du sanc- 
tuaire bouddhique Bdro-Boudour.
1900. Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXVIII, p. 73 and 123. Plan to cover the whole monu­
ment by a roof.
1900. Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXVIII, p. 95- 96. New examination of the foun­
dation.
1900. Von Saher (E. A.), De versierende kunsten in Nederlandsch Oost-Indie, 
p. 69-83. Specially architectural description; in particular the buried 
base and the system of Buddha's etc. In the text: view on the monument, 
groundplan, section, section .of the base, photograph of the base, five bas- 
reliefs, the stupa’s of the terraces, view of the landscape. Of the large plates 
no. 6, 7, 16, reliefs; no. 17, one of the gateways; no, 18, ornament.
1900. Brandes (J. L. A.,), in Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXVIII, p. 108. On mudra of 
the Buddha’s at the highest balustrade.
1900. Patijn (J. A. N.), Over het verdwijnen van den Boeroeboedoer; De Kroniek 
VI, p. 323-324 (also abridged in Tijdschr. v. N.-Indie 1900, p, 719-720). The 
neglect of the monument in every respect; also the giving away of sculptures 
to the king of Siam.
1901. Dispute in Tijdschr. v. Ned. Indie on the question of the king of Siam being 
presented with sculptures from Barabudur. J. Groneman, De Baraboedoer- 
bouwval, p. 316—319, defends himself; J. A. N. Patijn, p. 386—389, main­
tains his opinion; J. F. Niermeyer, Javaansche Hindoe-oudheden te
m
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR
s


--- Page 346 ---
•X^V—< \\ 
vvft y—«
Bangkok en elders, p. 470-473, with note by Patijn; J. Groneman, Nog 
eens de BAr&boedoer, p. 710-712, again a self-defence.
1901. Poensen (C.), Mangkubumi, Ngajogyakarta’s eerste Sultan; Bijdr. Kon. 
Inst., 6de Reeks VIII, p- 287. Barabudur mentioned ± 1758.
1901. Rouffaer (G. P.), Monumentale kunst op Java; De Gids II, p. 246-251. On 
the Buddha images, the open stupa's, the gates, the art of the reliefs in gene­
ral.
1901. Pleyte (C. M.), Die Buddha-legende in den Skulpturen des Tempels van 
Boro-Budur. The series of the first gallery compared with the Lalitavistara- 
text. See also review of this book by H. Kern in Tijdschr. v. N. Indie 1902, p 
42-53 = Verspr. Geschr. IV, 1916, p. 189-199; by A. Barth in Bull, des rel. 
de Unde 4-5 (1902) p. 73; and by J. S. Speyer in Onze Eeuw 1902, p. 77- 
95, partly translated in Le Museon, N. S. IV (1903) p. 124-134; comp, H. H. 
Juynboll in Ind. Gids 1902,1, p. 102-104; and further ibidem Up. 1118 sq. 
and Globus 82 no. 9, p. 146 sq.
1901. Brandes (J, L, A.), Twee oude berichten over de Baraboedoer; Tijdschr. 
Bat. Gen. XLIV, p. 73—84. On the information dating from ± 1709 (see 
1874 Meinsma) en 1758 (see 1901 Poensen).
1901. Pleyte (G. M.)» Gids voor den bezoeker van de Indische tentoonstelling in 
het Stedelijk Museum te Amsterdam, p. 13-39. Casts etc., from the Paris ex­
hibition.
1901. Brandes (J. L. A.), in Notulen Bat. Gen. XXXIX, p. 140. On the condition 
of the terraces.
1901. Haeckel (E,), Aus Insulinde, Malayische Reisebriefe, p. 162-165. (Dutch 
translation, 1902, p. 189-193). Short and superficial description.
1902. Rapport over de werkzaamheden verricht naar aanleiding van het Gouver- 
nements Besluit d.d. 21 Jnli 1900 no. 17, met een voorstel ter restauratie van 
de Boroboedoer (= the report of the Barabudur-Committee). Not published.
1902. Brandes (J. L. A.), Het gevaarvolle van het verklaren van de relief-tableau's 
aan de oude ruinen op Java te vinden, als men den betrokken tekst niet kent; 
Notulen Bat. Gen. XL, Bijlage III, p. XXXVIII—XL. On the sequence of 
the relief series, and the way to read them.
1902. Brandes (J. L. A.), De hoofdbeelden op de voorsprongen van den teerling 
der Tjandi Mendoet; Notulen Bat. Gen. XL, Bijlage XIII, p. CXXV, note, 
on the Bodhisattva’s. Pag. CXXVI-CXXIX on the Qarabha-jataka.
1902. Brandes (J. L. A.), in Rapp. Oudh. Comm. 1902, p. 15. On the makara's.
1902. Brandes (J. L. A.), Notice sur une esp&ce de draperie ornementale des an- 
ciens monuments hindous de Java Central; Hommage an Congres des Orien- 
talistes de Hanoi, p 11—12, with three plates. On trif.ula-cakra-ornament 
and makara’s.
1902. Glesenhagen (K.), Auf Java und Sumatra, p. 100-103. Short description, 
with view of the monument, relief and view from the top. Also in Les tem­
ples du centre de Java; Bull, de la Soc. d’etudes coloniales IX, p. 449-454
1903. Foucher (A.), Le Buddha inacheve de Boro-Budur; Bull. Ec. Fran?, 
d’Extr. Orient III, p. 78—80.
1903. Brandes (J. L. A.), in Rapp. Oudh. Comm, p.' 1-5,16-17,26,67, with plates 
32, 33 and 38 on the ornament, p. 75-76 on the way to Barabudur and the 
river-crossing.
f
t
)
)
 
<
S
L
342 
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR


--- Page 347 ---
■ 
r y
1903. Braudes (J„ L. A.), Verbetering en aanvulling van de aanteekening (in Not. 
1902 p. CXXV, see above); Notulen Bat. Gen. XLI, Bijlage II, p. V—XI,
The Bodhisattva’s, the climax in what is represented, omission of the Nir­
vana,
1903. Braudes (J. L. A.), Het nirvina-tooneel en de Baraboedoer; Notulen Bat. 
Gen. XLI, Bijlage VIII, p. LVI-LX.
1903. Van Asperen van der Velde (P. A.), De voornaarnste bonwvalleri nit den 
Hindoetijd op Java, Theos. Maandbl. v, Ned.-Indie III, p. 6-11. Theosophi- 
cal explanation of the monunent and the ornamentation.
1904. Groneman (J.), Oudlieidkundige Aanteekeningen I, p. 3-7 on the sixth 
Buddha; p. 37-39 on the roof.
1904, Brandes (J. L. A.), De verzameling gouden godenbeelden gevonden bij het 
gehucht Gemoeroeh, bij Wanasaba; Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. XLVII, p. 560 and pi.
9. On Garuda.
1904. Groneman (J.), ’t Behoud van den Bdraboedoerbouwval; Weekbl. voor 
Indie I no. 31, p. 437-439. The proposed restoration, and the great roof.
1904. See 1906 Brandes and Jochim.
1905. Groneman (J.), Oudheidkundige Aanteekeningen II, p. 14-18 and 31-44. On 
the great roof.
1905. Groneman (J.), Voorname bezoekers van den B&r&boedoer; Weekbl. v. 
Indie I no. 45 and 46, p. 748-651 and 768-770.
1905. Foucher (A,), L’art greco-bouddhique du Gandhara, I p. 271,292 -294,305, 
308, 310, 319, 348, 355, 364, 371,380, 402, 414, 425, 439, 444, 617. Compari­
son of Gandhara- and Barabudur-reliefs.
1905. Notulen Bat. Gen. XLIII, p. 9 and Bijlage XIII, p. XCIV no. 238a. A Bud­
dha-head in the Museum at Batavia.
1905. See 1913 Brandes.
1905-6. Brandes (J. L. A.), in Rapp. Oudh. Comm. p. 1-4 and plate 71-78. On 
the old form of the lowest staircase.
1905-6. Pleyte (C. M.), Uit Soenda’s voortijd; Het Daghet I, p. 488. Buddha- 
heads at Rumpin near Buitenzorg.
1906. Brandes (J. L. A,), De makara als haartressieraad; Tijdschr. Bat. Gen.
XLVIII, p. 24-26 and plates 1-2. Makara’s on thrones. Dated March 1904.
1906. Brandes (J. L . A.), Een Buddhistisch rnonniksbeeld, en naar aanleiding 
daarvan het een en artder over eenige der voornaarnste mudra's; Tijdschr. 
Bat. Gen. XLVIII, p. 40-49 and plate 1. The mudra’s of the Dhyani-Bud- 
dha’s. Dated April 1904.
1906. Jochim (E. F.), Aanteekeningen naar aanleiding van een bezoek aan den 
Boroboedoer; Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. XLVIII, p. 13-20. Notes to Pleyte’s Bud- 
dha-legende. Dated 1904.
1906. Speyer (J. S.), De koopman, die tegen zxjne moeder misdreef; Bijdr. Kon. 
Inst., 7de Reeks V, p. 181-206. The Maitrakanyakavadana.
1906. Huber (E.), Recognition of an episode of the Rudrayanavadana, according 
to Bull. Ec. Fran?. d’Extr, Or. IX (1909) p. 23.
1906. Sewell (R.), Antiquarian notes in Java; Journ. Roy. Asiat. Soc. p. 423- 
428. Short description, especially with respect to the meaning of the sanc­
tuary. With plate III (view on the monument, and building on a relief).
(! 1;? 
(fii
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR 
3 4 A ^


--- Page 348 ---
f ( M ) i 
VCT
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR 
yJ-L J
1906. Groneman (J.), Een Karma-legende, Relates Speyer’s paper above-cited 
with 5 photographs of the Maitrakanyaka-reliefs.
1907, De Beylie (L.), ^architecture hindoue en Extreme Orient, p. 340-349 and 
fig. 301. view on Barabudur (VanKinsbergen’s photograph), 311,319-324,344, 
reliefs and parts of reliefs. On the style of the buildings, represented on the 
reliefs.
1907 Parmentier (H.), L’architecture interpreted dans les bas-reliefs anciens de 
Java; Bull. Ec. Fran?. d’Extr. Or. VII, p. 1-60. Remarks, with illustrations, 
on the buildings, represented on Javanese reliefs; of the 119 specimens, 90 
are to be found on Barabudur.
1907. Groneman (J.), Oudheidkundige aanteekeningen III, p. 9—12 Additions 
to the guide for the monument.
1907. Gouv. Besluit of 25 April no. 51, printed Notulen Bat. Gen. XLV, p. 49. 
Authorization to make photographs of Barabudur and to take the measures 
for preservation, suggested by the Barabudur-Committee. Both works are 
entrusted to T. van Erp, captain in the Engineers.
1907. Tonnet (M.), Oude vormen in nieuwe Nederlandsch-Indische K . nst; Else- 
viers Maandschrift, p. 84-97, On forms of objects represented at Barabudur 
to use in the present day, with illustrations from the reliefs of the base.
1907. Notulen Bat. Gen. XLV, p. 52. Instruction for the keeper of the pasang- 
grahan.
1907. Groneman (J.), Boeddhistische tempelbouwvallen in de Pr&g&-vallei, de 
tjandi’s Bdr&boedoer, Mendoet. en Pawon. New edition of the guide for visi­
tors. English translation in 1912.
1907-1911. Van Erp (T.), Quarterly reports on the „Herstellingen aan en photo- 
graphische opname van den Boroboedoertempel.” Not published.
1908. Tonnet (M.), Het werk der Commissie in Nederlandsch Indie voor Oudheid- 
kundig Onderzoek op Java en Madoera; Bull. Ned. Oudh. Bond, 2de Reeks 
I, p. 27 on kalamakara-ornament with plate of a gateway; p. 90 sq. on reliefs, 
i. a. Jatakamala, with plate first gallery.
1908. Notulen Bat. Gen. XLVI, p. 2 and 18 -19. On the advisability of replacing the 
chief image.
1908. Notulen Bat. Gen. XLVI, p. 36 and 65. Authority is given to mr. Van Erp 
for further architectural survey.
1908. Foucher (A.), Sur le stupa de Boro-Boudour; Journ. Asiat, lOme serie 
XI, p. 137-137. Short account of his visit and the results.
1908. Foucher (A,), Une liste indienne des actes du Buddha; (Ecole prat. d. 
haut. efcud. sect. d. scienc. religious.), p. 4—15. Texts and representations of 
the chief incidents in the life of Buddha; those on Barabudur are also enu­
merated.
1908. Van Erp (T.), Nota naar aanleiding van de noodzakelijkheid van eerdge aan- 
vullende herstellingen en de wenschelijkheid van eenige zich verder uitstrek- 
kende restauratien aan den Boroboedoertempel. The advisability of a f arther 
restoration. Not published. Comp. Notulen XLVI; p. 98.
1908. Van Hinloopen Labberton (D.), Wat de B&nlboedoer ons leert; Theos. 
Maandbl. v. Ned. Indie VII, p.514-527 and557-565 (comp. 507-513). Theo- 
sophical explication, with symbolism of the numbers.
1908. Havell (E. B.), Indian sculpture and painting. On Barabudur p. 110-131,
X' £X -7 X X X X :' XX> .v 7 ' - 7 
.-X- X 7 7 
: j
. ;X'"::X,X^ 37. : XXXXX 
:


--- Page 349 ---
with pi. 2, Dhyani-Buddha; 33-37, reliefs of the first; 38, of the second gallery;
42, Buddha-head. Discussion of the character of Barabudur art; the details 
often inaccurate.
1909. Van Erp (T,), in Notulen Bat. Gen. XLVII, p. 2—8. Information on the 
restoration and the photographs.
] 909. Foucher (A.), Notes d’archeologie bouddhique; Bull. Ec. Fran?. d’Extr. Or. 
IX, p. 1—8, with fig. 1-4 (view of the monument, quarter groundplan, half 
section and gate) on the meaning of the building; p. 9-43, with fig. 5-24 (re­
liefs) on the tales, represented on the chief wall first gallery lower series; and 
p. 43-45 on the Dhyani-Buddha’s. With correction on p. 831.
1909. Van Erp (T.), Hindu monumental art in Central Java; Twentieth Century 
Impressions of Netherlands India, p. 150-157. With view on the monument, 
view on a staircase, gargoyle, view of the covered base, corner of the monu­
ment, Buddha-head, types of Buddha’s, gateway of the fourth gallery, 
quarter groundplan, half section and view of the stupa’s on the terraces.
1909. Foucher (A.), Le ..grand miracle” du Buddha a Cravast 1; Journ. asiat. lOe 
serie XIII, p. 23 and 52-53, with plate 5. The Great Miracle on the chief wall 
of the fourth gallery.
1909. Juynboll (H. H.), Catalogus van’s Rijks Ethnographisch Museum; V, Ja~ 
vaansche oudheden. Pag. 37-38, no. 1607-1608,2071-2072, 1690, 2924, heads 
of Buddha’s; no. 1609-1611, one left and two right hands of Buddha's from 
Barabudur. With plate on p. 38. Pag. 42 no. 1907 and 3261, fragments of 
reliefs; p. 151 no. 2402 (with plate), bronze bell; p. 198-199 no. 1843, so called 
Majapahit-kriss; p.213no, 1842, bronze tray; p. 96 no. 1841, bronze image of 
Avalokitesvara. These last objects found probably in the central stupa.
1909. Rouffaer (G. P.), in the Beschrijving van Tjandi Singasari by J. L. A. Bran- 
des, p. 52 and 83. On the sculptures presented to the king of Siam in 1896.
1909. Notulen Bat. Gen. XLVII, p. 140-141 and Bijlage XV, p. CXI no. 596 e. 
Bronze Buddha-image and five Chinese coins, found in the stupa’s of the 
terraces; the first named now in the Museum at Batavia. Account of the fin­
ding by T. van Erp, and report on the coins by J. P. Moquette.
1910. Fergusson (J.), History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, revised etc. 
by J. Burgess and R. Rhen6 Spiers, II p. 422-429. Rather poor description 
of Barabudur, with the same illustrations as in the edition of 1876, and a 
plate with photographs of three reliefs. See the review by the present author: 
Een protest, Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. LI1I (1911), p. 364 and 368-369.
1910. Gouv, Besluit of 18 Januari no. 19, printed Notulen Bat. Gen. XLVIII, 
p. 14. Mr. Van Erp is authorized to extend measures for the restoration.
1910. Van Erp (T.), Verklaring van eenige Jataka-tafereelen van Boroboedoer; 
Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. LII, p. 82-98, with three plates.
1910. Krom (N. J.), in Rapp. Oudh. Comm. p. 5-17. On Jatakamala-reliefs (with 
addition in Rapp. 191 I p. 26 and correction Oudh. Versl. 1912, p.58) and on 
Bodhisattva’s.
1910. Knebel (J.), Beschrijving van de Hindoe-oudheden in de Residence Sa- 
marang; Rapp. Oudh. Comm. 1910, p, 213. Two Buddha’s from Barabudur, 
now before the regents house at Demak.
1910. Groneman (J,), Oudheidkundige Aanteekeningen IV, p. 4-31 and 50-59. 
Additions to the guide for the monument.
f t )? 
vST
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF B ARAB (ID UR 
£ 4 6 ^


--- Page 350 ---
z f e x \ \ 
/ n
hS
) 1 
(st
w J § | & / 
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR
1910. Notulen Bat. Gen. XLVIII, p. 6 6 -6 9 and 82. On rar. Van Erp continuing 
the restoration-work at Barabudur.
1910. Notulen Bat. Gen, XLVIII, p. 62, 105, 125-132, 139. On a new Barabudur- 
monograph.
1910. See 1917 Van Erp.
1911. Krom (N. J.), Restaureeren van oude bouwwerken; Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. 
LIII, p. 11. On the restoration.
1911. Kern (H.), Het Hindoeisme; in Colijn, Neerlands Indie I, p.234-236. Short 
remarks, with plate op p, 201, Dhyani-Buddha; 227, view (photo-Van Kins- 
bergen); 230-231, reliefs of the first balustrade.
1911. Smith (V. A.), A history of fine art in India and Ceylon, p. 261-266. Spe­
cially on the character of Barabudur-art With fig. 198, relief; and pi. 52, 
Buddha-imagc,
1911. Van Eerde (J. €.), Hindu-Javaansche en Balische eeredienst; Bijdr. Kon. 
Inst. 65, p. 22, note. The relation between Barabudur arid Mendut.
1911. Van Erp (T.), Oudheidkundige Aanteekeningen I; Tijdschrift Bat. Gen. 
LIII. A. De onderlinge ligging van Borobudur, Mendut eri Pawon en hunne 
orienteering, p. 582 -585 with plate 1 (situation); B. Eenige beschouwingen 
omtrent de beteekenis der scuipturen, deel uitmakende van Tjandi Pawon’s 
uitwendige versiering, p. 593-595, with plate 6-8 (reliefs). On the wishing- 
trees.
1911. Referring to three articles on the Barabudur-restoration in the „Java- 
Bode”, the Indische Gids II p. 1376-1378 treats the unfinished chief image, 
and the Koloniaal Weekblad XI, no. 43 p, 3, the preservation of the monu­
ment, with photographs of the restoration-work,
1911. Ha veil (E. B.)r The Ideals of Indian Art, p. 113, 130 sq.
1911. Notulen Kon. Inst. 1911-’12 (Bijdr. 67), p. Ill sq. On a new monograph.
1911. Notulen Bat. Gen. XLIX, p. 117-118. Replacing of Buddha-heads.
1913. Kern (H.), De bijschriften op de beeldhouwwerkeri van Boroboedoer's be- 
doiven voet; published by T. van Erp in Notulen Bat. Gen. XLIX, Bijlage V, 
p. XLVII-L. Corrections and additions to the legenda of 1896.
1913. Krom (N. J.), in Rapp. Oudh. Comm., p. 25-26, 29-30. Examination of the 
road between Barabudur and Pawon.
1911. Lijst van fotografische opnamen van de Oudheidkundige Commissie, 
1901-1911; Rapp. Oudh. Comm., Bijlage 60. No. 277 (p. 82) reproduction 
old photo; no. 398-440 (p. 86-88) ornaments; no. 441-448 (p. 88) views on the 
monument; no.904 and 905 (p. 104) reliefs with thrones; no.969-976 (p. 107) 
views on the monument; no. 986-999 (p. 108) reliefs and ornaments; no. 1007 
-3105 (p, 108-309) reliefs; no, 1106-1 111 (p. 109) lowest staircases; no. 1122—
3135 (p. 110) panorama, reliefs, etc.
1911-1912. Notulen Bat. Gen. XLIX, p. 134 and L, p. 27. On the condition of the 
glass-n.egatives Van Kinsbergen.
1912. Notulen Bat. Gen. L, p. 23-24 and Bijlage V, p. CXXXVIII no. 1760 i and 
1774a, Bronze spoon and tray, found near Barabudur, now in the Museum 
at Batavia.
1912. De Vink (J. J.), Report on an excavation at the East side of the monument, 
in Notulen Bat. Gen. L, p. 24-26, with 2 plates (view of the site, and re­
construction of an urn and of the border of a circular cavity). With note by 
the present author.


--- Page 351 ---
1912. Oudh. Verslag. First quarter, p. 3; all photographic material brought from 
Barabudur to the Archaeological Depart, at Batavia. Third quarter, p. 58; 
condition of the monument.
1912. Scheltema (J. F.), Monumental Java, p. 231-284. Impressions. With plate 
1, view or the monument; 28, base; 29-33, galleries; 34, Buddha in niche; 
35, relief; 36-37, galleries; 38, gateway; 39-40, terraces with stupa’s and cen­
tral-stupa.
1912. Scheltema (J. F.), The late King of Siam as traveller and antiquary; The 
Antiquary, New Series VIII, p. 289-290. Hlnayanistie explanations by H. 
M-, and the history of 1896.
1912. Van Erp (T.), Oudheidkundige Aanteekeningen II, Over den toekomstigen 
Buddha Maitreya en het voorkomen van Maitreya-Iegenden op de Borobu- 
dur-stupa; Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. LIV, p. 427—454. With pi. 4-9, Maitreya-re- 
liefs.
1912. Lijst der foto’s van het Bat. Gen.; Notulen Bat. Gen. L, Bijlage IX, no. 
303-466 (p. CLXXVIII) reliefs buried base; no. 519 (ibid.) and 636 (p. 
CLXXX) views on the monument; no. 719 (p. CLXXXII) gate; no. 721-722 
(ibid.) reliefs; 751-753 (ibid.) Buddha, Buddha-head and lion.
1912. Mookerji (R.), Indian Shipping, p. 45-49, 15!, 157 and plates: frontispiece 
and six other representations of reliefs with ships. („Indian adventurers sai 1- 
ing out to colonize Java”!),
1912. Notulen Kon. Inst. 1912-M3 (Bijdr. 68), p. X. On the new monograph.
1913. Brandes (J. L. A.), Slecht werk aan de Hindu■oudheden op Java; Rapp. 
Oudh. Dienst, p. 15-23. On lowest series of reliefs balustrade first gallery, 
ornament balustrade second gallery, and gateways to the third gallery. 
Written before or in 1905.
1913. Brandes (J. L. A.), Fout of finesse? ; Rapp. Oudh. Dienst, p. 25 -26, on the 
,.recalcitrant spiral”-ornament on Barabudur. Written as above.
1913. Jochim (E. F.), Airawata. Ihdra's witte olifant in menschengedaante aan 
den Boroboedoer; Tijdschr. Bat. Gen. LV, p. 202-208.
1913. Van Erp (T.), De restauratie van den Boroboedoer. Account of a lecture in 
Bull Kol. Mus. te Haarlem, no. 52, p. 46-48.
1913. Vogel (J, Ph.), The Borobudur restored; Joum. Roy. As. Soc., p. 421-422. 
Short report on the finished restoration.
1913. Krom (N. J.), Korte gids voor den Boro-Budur. Second edition in 1914; 
Javanese translation in 1915; third edition in 1921 ; English translation in 
1921; fourth edition in 1927,
1913. Van Erp (T.), Het makara-motief aan den Boroboedoer; Het Ned. Ind. 
Huis, Oud en Nieuw I, p. 195-205. With 7 plates of this ornament.
1933. Oudh.. Verslag. Fourth quarter, p. 90; the glass-negatives send to Holland. 
Ibidem, p, 92; condition of the monument.
1914. Jochim (E. F.), Determineeren van Bodhisatwa's; Bijdr. Kon. Inst. 69, 
p. 10—30. On the Bodhisattva’s, including those at Barabudur.
1914. Huyser (J. G„), De naga in de Javaansche kunst; Het Ned, Ind. Huis, Oud 
en Nieuw II, p. 13-16. On naga’s and serpents, with plate of a relief.
1914. Oudh. Verslag. First quarter, Bijlage E, p. 27-28. New list of photographs 
of Barabudur by J. van Kinsbergen.
1914. Oudh. Verslag. First quarter, Bijlage F; List of photographs in the Arch. De-
t
i
l
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR


--- Page 352 ---
<SL
part., series A no. 9-10 (p. 29) excavation in the vicinity (see 1911 De Vink) 
and corner first gallery; no. 241-243 (p. 33) inscriptions of the buried base.
1914. Oudh. Yerslag. Third quarter, p. 188 and fourth quarter, p, 210. The 
subsidence of one of the walls of Barabudur, with photographs, no, 1882-188S.
1914. Inventaris der Hindoe-oudheden I, Rapp. Oudh. Dienst. Pag. 28 no. 56, 
Buddha-heads at Rumpin; p. 192-193 no. 613, Buddha’s at Demak; p. 246 
no. 803, unfinished Buddha at Gondangan; p. 273 no. 887, objects found 
near Barabudur.
1914-1915. Notulen Ron. Inst. 1913-’14 (Bijdr. 69), p. XXXIX and 1914-’ 15 
(Bijdr. 70), p. VI and XXI. On the new monograph.
1915. Luiius van Goor (M. E.), De Buddhistisdie non gesehetst naar gegevens 
der Pali-Iiteratuur, p. 237-238. The nuns in the Rudrayanavadana, with 2 
plates.
1915. Van Eerde (J. G.), Reliefs van den Boro-boedoer; Gids voor de ten tooti- 
ling betreffende Oud-Javaansch en hedendaagsch Balisch Hindoeisme, p. 
35-47. Buddha-legend.
1916. Bosch (F. D. K.), Eene onderscheiding van staande en zittende Buddha- 
figuren op de Reliefs van de Borobudur en elders; Tijdschr. Bat. Gen, LVII, 
p, 97-116.
1916. Huyser (J. G.), Het sirihstel in deri loop der eeuwen; Ned. Indie Oud en 
Nieuw I, p. 133-137. Possibility that on Barabudur the use of sirih is repre­
sented, with plate of a relief.
1916. Krom (N, J.), De hoofdpersoon der vierde gaanderij van Boro-Budur; Bijdr. 
Kon. Inst. 71, p. 579-583. Samantabhadra the chief person on the fourth 
gallery.
1916. Oudh. Verslag. Third quarter, p. 72-73; measures against moss on the 
walls. Fourth quarter, p, 127-128; on the wall that has given way.
1916. Notulen Kon. Inst. 1916 (Bijdr. 72), p. X, XXVIII-XXXI. Onthenewmo- 
nograph,
1917. Van Erp (T.), De Boroboedoer-tempel op Java; De Ingenieur 32, p. 113- 
123. Description of the monument. With plate I, section; 2-3, groundplans;
4, view on the monument; 5, entrance; 6, base; 7, gallery; 8, Buddha in ni­
che; 9, gateways; 10-11, gargoyles; 12, spiral-ornament; 13, terraces with 
central-stupa.
1917. Vogel (,J. Ph,), Two notes on Javanese archaeology, I The ship of Boro- 
Budur; Journ. Roy. As. Soc., p, 367 371. On the wrong interpretation of re­
liefs with ships.
1917. Oudh. Verslag. Second quarter, p. 38; damage by lightning on the central- 
stupa.
1937. Kern (H,), Over de bijsehriften op het beeldhouwwerk van Boro-budur; 
Verspr. Geschriften VII, p. 145-156. Combination of the articles of 1896 and 
1911, with two facsimile’s.
1917. Encyclopaedic van Nederlandsch-IndiS, second edition, I p. 381-383. 
New article Boroboedoer.
1917. Krom (N. J.), Beschrijving der Hindoe-oudheden in de Verzameling Indo- 
nesische en Chineesche kunst te Leeuwarden; Ned. Indie Oud en Nieuw II, 
p. 123-124, with pi. 1. On Buddha-head from Barabudur. (Reprinted in 
the guide for this collection, p. 25-27),
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR


--- Page 353 ---
1917. Van Erp (T.), Eenige mededeelingen betreffende de beelden en fragmenten 
van Boroboedoer in 1896 geschonken aan Z. M. den Koning van Siam; Bijdr. 
Kon. Inst. 73, p. 285—310; as appendix an index of the condition of the 
Buddha-images. With plate 1, Buddha-types; 2, lion-types; 3, view on the 
monument of 1873 ; 4, gate with lions in the highest balustrade; 5, makara- 
gargoyle; 6, lower staircases; 7, kila-head from staircase; 8, kala-head from 
niches; 9, kala-head from gate. Written in 1910.
3918. Krom (N. J.)t De Bodhisattwa’s van den Mendut; Bijdr. Kon. Inst. 74, p. 
420--421,423,429,435-436. On Bodhisattva’s, including those at Barabudur.
1938. Gudh. Verslag. First quarter, p.2-3; endeavour to demolish a relief. Second 
quarter, p. 497; on the environs. Third quarter, p. 96; in the wall that had 
given way no further change is observed:. Fourth quarter, p. 167; on Budur 
as the old name of the sanctuary.
1918. Notulen Kon. Inst. 1918 (Bijdr. 74), p. XXXI sq., XXXVI and XLII. On 
the new monograph.
1918. Foucher (A.), L’art greco-bouddhique du Gandhara, II, 1, p. 24, 34, 43, 
258,264-265, 267-268," 276, 333. Comparison with Gandhara.
1919. De Groot (J. J. M.), Der Thupa. On the stupa in general; especially p. 
48-49 on Barabudur.
1919. Krom (N. J.), De Sumatraansche periode der Javaansche geschiedenis, p. 
23-29. Relation to the Cailendra’s.
1919. Mahn (G.), Der Terrtpel von Boro-Budur, p, 9 sq. on the symbolism; p. 
79-89 description (errors in the details). With pi. 1 and 2, view of the monu­
ment ; 3-7, 13,14,19, 21,22, 24, galleries; 8-11, 15, 16, reliefs; 12 base; 17,18 
niches; 20, gateway; 23, central stupa; 25-28, small stupa’s.
1919. Notulen Kon. Inst. 1919 (Bijdr. 75), p. XIII, XVIII, XLIV.on the new mo­
nograph; p. XXVI on the architectural description.
1920. With (K.), Java. Specially p. 28433, 56-66 and plate 1, view of the monu­
ment; 2, detail; 3, gargoyle; 4, gallery; 5, gateways; 6, 7, terraces;8-12, 
Buddha’s; 13-33, reliefs.
1920. Krom, (N. J.), De Buddha-beelden van Boroboedoer; Ned. Indie Oud en 
Nieuw, 5, p, 307-320, with 10 plates.
1920. Hornell (J.), The origins and ethnological significance of Indian boat-de- 
signs. Mem. As. Soc. Beng. VII, 3, p, 2I8L-221 with plate 28 and 29. The ships 
of Barabudur.
1920. Gudh. Verslag. First quarter, p. 22-23. List of photographs Arch. Depart, no. 
4526, 4527, 4573, views; 4537-4562, 4564-4568, 4572, reliefs and galleries; 
4563, gate; 4569, ornament; 4570,4571,4572, Buddha’s. Third quarter p. 78; 
on a way to Barabudur.
1920. Notulen Kon. Inst. 1920 (Bijdr. 76), p. XIII on monograph; XXXVI on 
architectural description; XXXIV and XLII on old drawings.
/ • 1920. Much (J.), Boro Budur. Ein Buch der Offenbarung. Not in print.
1920. Havell (E. B.), A handbook of Indian Art ; p. 35 affinity with Sanclii art, 
comp. p. 161 and 199. With pi. LVIIIA, Buddha-head1). •)
•) Buddha-hoacb from Barabudur are also reproduced elsewhere; for instance Examples of
Indian sculpture at the British Museum (India Society, 1923) pi. II (Raffles-collection), and 
’ Indissche Beeldhouwkunfit I (Yer. Vrienden Aziat. kunst, 1923) pi. XII and X III (collections
Scheurleer).
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR


--- Page 354 ---
1920. Krom (N. J,), Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche kunst, Chapter IX andX. 
Second edition 1923. Detailed description, with plate 25, groundplan; 26,
section; 27, view; 28, gallery; 29, gateway; 30 terraces and chief stupa; 31, 
relief; 32 Buddha.
1920. Bosch (F.D. K.)„Het steenen zuiltje vanKadiloewih; Not. Bat. Gen. LVIII, 
p. 53-55. Connection with the name Budur in Nag, 77.
1920. Finot (L.), Review of the Barabudur-monograph; Bull. Ec. Fran?. d’Extr. 
Or. XX no. 4, p, 138-149.
1923. Elliot (Ch,), Hinduism and Buddhism, III p. 165-167.
1921 Bosch (F. D. K.)y Een hypothese omtrent den oorsprong der Hindoe-Ja- 
vaansche kunst, Hand. 1st Congr.Taal-, Land-enVolkenk., 1919, p. 134-138 
and pi. 11, 13-15, reliefs and Buddha in niche. On asana and torana.
1921. Poerbatjaraka, Een hypothese ter verklaring van den naam Boroboedoer; 
ibid. p. 287-290.
1921. Krom (N. J.), Verbetering en aanvulling der reliefbeschrijving van Barabu­
dur; Oudh. Versl. second quarter, p. 65-68.
1921. Brandts Buys (J. S.), De ontwikkelingsmogelijkheden van de muziek op 
Java; Praeadv. Congr. Bandoeng p. 77. On musical instruments.
1921. Cohn (W.), Indische Piastik. Second edition 1922, p. 83—85 and pi. 147, 
detail with niches; 148, 149, Buddha’s; 150-156, reliefs. On Buddha’s and
reliefs.
1921. Oudh. Verslag. Second quarter, p. 43. Damage done to the monument.
1921. Notulen Kon. Inst. 1921 (Bijdr. 77), p. IV, on monograph; XXVIII, on ar­
chitectural description.
1921. Krom (N. J.), Een nieuwe Boroboedoer-tekst; Djawa 1, p.85-88. The 
Gandavyuha.
1921. Van Erp (T.), De Boroboedoer. Vacantiecursus voor geografen te Amster­
dam, no. 3. 
4
1922. Bosch (F. D. K.), Review of the monograph; Tijdschr. Bat Gen. 61, p. 223- 
267.
1922. Bosch (F. D. K.), Het Awatarosaka, de Gandawyuha en Barabudur; Tijd­
schr. Bat. Gen. 63, p. 368—303.
1922. Die Buddha-Legende auf den Flachreliefs der ersten Galerie des Stupa von 
Boro-budur, Java; Verkleinerte Wiedergabe der Umrisszeichungen von F.
C. Wilsert.
1922. Foucher (A.), L’art greco-bouddhique duGandhara, II, 2, p, 575, 579, 587, 
622—626, 684, 688, 694, 701,704, 707, 708, 710, 732, 751,767-770,786. With 
plate512,513, 516, 517, reliefs; 561,580, Buddha’s. On the composition of 
the reliefs, the Buddha's, the art of Barabudur.
1922. Oudh. Verslag. Second and third quarter, p. 45- and 47. Control of the » 
walls.
1922. Notulen Kon. Inst. 1922 (Bijdr. 78) p. IX. On architectural description. Al­
so Not. 1924 (Bijdr. 80), p. XIX and Not. 1925 (Bijdr. 81), p. XI.
1923. Van Erp (T.), Hindu-J avaansche beelden, thans te Bangkok; Bijdr. Kon. 
Inst. 79, p. 492-507 and 515, With plate 1, lions; 2, gargoyles; 3, guardian;
4, relief.
I jr l 
' 
Qt
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR 
J


--- Page 355 ---
• 
i 
> 
, , >, 
j
, 
>> 
, 
y < a i' jd 
iffia h f * a !r a 
» , 
' 
t> t «• J 4* 
' ' y 
1 
> 
I 
i V - d S P t J t ’ > 
• • a g f
^
 
I 
(fiTf
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BARABUDUR 
3& J1-4
1923. Van Erp (T.), Voorstellingen van vaartuigen op de reliefs van den Boroboe- 
doer; Ned. Indie Gud en Nieuw 8, p. 227—255. With 10 plates.
1923. Notulen Kon. Inst. 1923 (Bijdr. 79}, p. V. On English translation of the mo­
nograph. Also Not. 1925 (Bijdr. 81), p. XXIV.
1923. Van Erp (T.), De leetiwen van den Barabudur; Oudh. Versl., first and se­
cond quarter, p. 39-54. With groundplan and 2 plates.
1923. Cammerloher (H.), Die Pflanzendarstellungen auf den Reliefs des Boro- 
budur; Natur 14, p. 222-229.
1924. Hoenig (A.), Das Formproblein von Borobudur. With plate 1, view; 7-10, 
plans and sections. The building was originally intended to become a temple 
on a large scale.
1924. Karny (H. H.), Ein Besuch beim Borobudur; Zeitschr, f. Buddhismus 5, p. 
183-199. Specially on the chief image and on Pleyte’s Buddha-legende. With 
pi. 1, view from a gallery; 2, the chief image; 3-6, reliefs.
1924. Ijiri (S.), Bar&boedoer. Japanese translation of introductory chapter and 
Buddha-legend from the monograph. With plate 1, view; 3 groundplan and 
section; 4, 5, Buddha's; 6, gateway and gargoyle; 9, gallery and terrace;
8-12, reliefs.
1925. Vogel (J. Ph.), The relation between the art of India and Java, in The in­
fluences of Indian art (India Society), p. 55-65. With plate 1, view; 2, ground- 
plan ; 3, gateway.
N25. Kunst (J.) and Kunst—Van Wely (C. J. A.), De toonkunst van Bali, p 
71,82,113,124,125,151,154sqq., 172,215,241-244. On musical instruments.
With pi. 15, 45, 47, 50, reliefs with instruments. Additions in Tiidschr. Bat.
Gen. 65, p. 465-467.
1925. Poerbatjaraka, Het Borobudurprobleem; Bijdr, Kon. Inst. 81, p. 523-537. 
Refutation of Koenig's idea.
1926. Karny (H. H.), Neues vom Borobudur; Zeitschr. f. Buddhismus7, p. 92-103.
On the studies of Cammerloher and the theory of Hoenig. With pi. 1-3, 5, 
reliefs; 7, birds-eye-view; 8, 9, sections from Hoenig.
1926. Krom (N. J.), Sculptuur, tekst en traditie op Barabudur; Gedenkschr. Kon.
Inst. p. 110-128. With 4 plates of reliefs.
1926. Krom (W. J.), Die Barabudur-Funde; Zeitschr. f. Buddhismus 7, p. 340- 
343. With plate 1, Lokecvara-bronze; 2, tray; 3, kriss; 4, Buddha-bronze. On 
the objects, found in the central stupa.
»


--- Page 356 ---
®
 
<SL
" ? i X
I N D E X
Aalst (van), 39, II 340, 341. 
272, 273, 282, 293, 295, 296, 301, 311, 321
Abh&svara, 76. 
Araitatosala, II 20, 21.
Abliidhanaciptamapi, 53. 
Amitayurdhyanasutra, II 269.
Abhidharma, 56, 61, II 281, 316. 
Amoghapaga, II 214, 271, 295, 296, 306, 323
Abhidharmako9a, 61. 
Amoghaaiddha, I I 146,150,151, 282,300,301,
Abhidharmako9avyakhya, 63. 
304, 311, 313.
A9&, II 3, 6, 14, 15, 17, 20, 21, 33, 38. 
Amoghavajra. II 2, 6, 99,
Acalasthira, II 4, 6, 18, 19, 21, 37. 
Amrap&li, II 283.
A9okavadanarnala, 231, 404, II 318. 
Anabhraka, 76.
Afvaghosa, II 249. 
Anala, 220.
Aijakavatl, 170. 
A nan da (patriarch), 57, 58, II 68, 283,
Adhideva, II 318. 
Ananda (£akya-prince), 151, 152.
Adi-Buddha, 77, II 99, 145, 146, 147, 154, 
Anandagarbha, II 307.
166, 167, 323. 
Ananyag&min, II 4, 9, 12, 13, 56.
Agastya-jataka, 330. 
Anathapindada, 461.
Agni, 349 
Anderson, II 293.
Agnikorova, 71. 
Angga, 423, 424.
Agnitorana, 71. 
Angkor Thom, II 229, 242.
Aifvarika, II 145. 
Angkor Vat, 64, 65.
Air&vata. 173, 188, 194, 216, 244, 279, 281, 
Anuvaineya, 172.
332, 334, 349, 408, 410, 413, II 84, 126, 128, 
Apalala, II 283.
129, 130, 131, 132,276. 
Apramanabha, 76.
Airlangga, II 313. 
Aprarnana9ubha, 76.
Ajanth, 106, 115, 120, 121, 128, 132, 136, 142, 
Apntra-jataka, 352.
145, 153, 160, 174, 180, 131 191, 202, 204, 
Xrada Kalapa, 177, 178, 182, 218.
205, 215, 277, 285, 315, 321, 322, 334, 335, Arjuna, 150.
339, 341, 349, 363, 369, 370, 372, 375, 377, Arjunavijaya, II 298.
380, 382, 384, 387, 393, 422, II 86, 87, 89, 
Arjunavivaha, II 296.
134, 236. 
Arupadhatn, 76, 77, II 146.
4ka9agarbha, II 102, 273, 274, 292. See also 
Aryarura, see £ura.
Khagarbha. 
Aryamafiju9rinamasta9atakarn, II 270.
Akanistha, 76, 77, 
Aryatarabhattarikanamastottaragata.kasto-
Aksobliya, II 146, 147, 150, 156, 158, 165, 
tra, II 54.
282, 294, 295, 300, 301, 304, 306, 311. 
Asangga, II 1, 72, 74, 75, 76,99, 315,317, 319,
Amaravatl, 105, 112, 114, 115, 120, 131, 157, 
320, 325, 326, 327, 329, 330, 331.
171, 173, 203, 204, 206, 210, 229, 277, 338, 
Asanggisattra, 76.
478. 
Asipatatra, 72.
Amitabha, II 8, 9, 39, 55, 92, 102, 103, 105, Asita, 121, 134, 135, 136, 184, II 208.
106, 109, 146, 150, 171, 260, 263, 264, 267, Asperen van der Velde (van), II 343.


--- Page 357 ---
\%>-— 
x^? .-*y^y
A§tas&hasrik&-PrajMpHramitft, II 24, 317 
BhadrakalpavadSnamala, 231, 401
Asti, 17, 18, II 293 
Btagvanlal tndraji, 334, 1197, 155, 158, 166,
Atapa, 76, 77. 
167
AJavika, II 283, 
Bhaliatiya-j3.taka, 240, 245, 301.
Xvi, II 5, 6. 
Rhallika, 212, 214.
Avad&na^ataka, 59, 60, 230, 231, 239, 243, 
Bhangala, II 307.
244, 246, 278, 310, 403, 405, 417, 422, 424, BharSida, II 305, 3l3.
446, 447, 448, 449. 450, 457, 458, 459, 461, Bharadwaja, 4.
463, 470, 473, II 282, 318, 319. 
Bharhut, 115, 171, 173, 206, 239, 303, 304,
Avalokitesvara, 80, II 4, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 
338, 356, 364, 366, 369, 374, 377.
39, 54, 55, 65, 92, 96, 102, 103, 105, 106. 
Bhiru, 283, 284, 29.2, 296, 300.
109, 133, 145, 146, 156, 171, 201, 260, 261, Bhirukaccha, 284, 300.
262, 263, 264, 265, 267, 268, 272, 273, 291, Bhismottaranirghosa, II 5, 6.
292, 293, 295, 297, 305, 321, 339, 345. 
Bhisffiottarasangghe?a, II 3, 6, 14,16, 17,21,
Avatamsaka, II 2, 99, 114, 320. 
33.
Avici, 66, 68, 80. 
Bhtkati, II 295.
Avidurenidana 99, 137, 229. 
Bhumipattami, 71.
Avisahya-jataka, 326, 327. 
Binm, 32.
Avflia, 76, 77. 
Bimasvarga, 74.
Axon, 245. 
Bimbisara, 179, 180, 181, 220, 223, 237, 282,
Aymonier, 64. 
283, 285, 286, 287, 288, 292.
Ayogfha-jataka, 387. 
Bisa-jfitaka, 354.
Ayomaya, 305. 
Bleeker, 36, II 335.
Blonay (de), II 54.
Babad tanah Djawi, 3, 31. 
Bodh-GayS, II 168.
Bahubajra, II 314. 
Bodiucary avatar a, II 98.
Bajradhatvi^vari, II 309. See also 
BodMcitta, II 301.
varl. 
Bodhihrdayasilad&nasutra, IF 322,
Bajraka, II 305. 
Bodhimanda, 194, 195, 197, 199, 200, 203,
Bajralaksmi, II 305, 
206, 209, 219, 220, II 4, 180, 191.
Bajrapura, II 305. 
Bodhisattvabhumi, I I 74.
Bajr&sana, II 305. 
BodhisattvajStaka, I I 319.
Bal&ha, II 133 134. 
Bodiu s at t va vad arm kalpalata, 231, 239, 241,
Bali, 67, 68, 74, 342, 454, II 306, 326. 
243, 261, 266, 314, 406, 447.
Bangkok, 406. 
Bordier, II 338.
BaratSngah, 7. 
" 
Borneo, I I 243.
Barth, 117, 231, II 342. 
Bosch, 7, 24, II 114, 115, 156, 248, 249, 250,
Batavia, 18, 37, 277, II 97, 166, 172, 236, 333, 
251, 253, 257, 259, 307, 320, 348, 350.
336, 340, 341, 343, 346, 347. 
Bradjanalan, 17.
Baud, 37. 
Brahma, 76, 113, 114, 116, 117, 129, 130, 131,
BauddhakSvya, II 299. 
132, 138, 139, 140, 156, 170, 172, 179, 187,
Beal, 63, 64, 73, 75, 76, 77, 196, 310, 401,443, 
196, 197, 198, 212, 215, 216, 217, 218, 227,
448, II 9, 66, 68, 73, 99, 133, 
144, 168, 287, 
466, II 70, 71, 89, 275, 276, 277, 298, 299,
316. 
311.
Benares, 103, 104, 186, 219, 220, 224, 226, 
Brahmadatta, 475, 476.
301, 305, 361, 362, 363, 364, 424, 457, 461, 
Brahma-jataka, 380.
475, 476, II 255, 281, 291. 
Brahmakayika, Brahma-heaven, 76, 107,116,
Bendall, II 1. 
192, 380, 381, 448.
Berar, II 5, 
Brahmana-jitaka, 343.
Berlin 40. 
Brahmapar^adya, 76.
Beylie (de), 64, II 344. 
Brahmapurohita, 76.
Bhadracari, II 78, 99. 
Brahmottara, 305, 309.
Barabudur II 
23
/ • / ' 
INDEX 
.


--- Page 358 ---
<SL
INDEX 
K J-K J
< < 
m
Brandes, 7, 14, 15, 16, 19, 22, 23. 24, 31. 32, Caturmaharajakiyika, 76, 77.
35, 42, 43, 44, 45, 49, 51, 57, 58, 59, 73, 74, Cattiskanirhfira, II 269.
312, 386, 433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 439, II 
Celebes, 299.
110, 147, 165, 192, 193, 216, 247, 268, 271, Cephas, 26, 41, 49, 58, II 339.
280, 284, 285, 286, 291, 292, 295, 298, 313, Ceylon, II 9, 250, 261.
337, 338, 340, 341, 342, 343, 345, 347 
ClialS, II 5, 6, 18.
Brandts Buys, II 240, 243, 244, 350. 
Chalmers, 195.
Bj-hatphala, 76. 
Chandaka, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174,
Brill, 38. 
175,
Brumund, 1, 19, 21, 35, 38, II 160, 161, 162, 
Chandogya-Upanisad, II 303.
170, 171, 335, 336, 337. 
Chavannes, 61, 132, 136, 153, 157, 160, 165,
Bubrah, II 293- 
168, 172, 203, 214, 234, 277, 339, 
401, 407,
Bubuksah, II 298. 
427, 446, 448, II 68, 71, 72, 73, 99, 133,
Buddhacarita, 172. 
168, 261, 288, 315, 323.
Buddhaghosa, 232. 
Ching Hwo, II 172.
Buddhanusmrtisamadhisutra, 73. 
Clercq (le), 37, II 338.
Buddha parnutus, II 298. 
Coed6s, 30, 64, II 260, 288,
Buddhavamsa, 232. 
Cohen Stuart, 7, 23, II 335.
Buddingh, 19, II 161, 334, 336. 
Cohn, II 350.
Budha, 5. 
Colijn, II 346.
Budur, 7, I I 350. 
Cora, II 338.
Buitenzorg, I I 339, 343. 
Cornelius, 33, 34, 37, II 159, 169, 233, 335,
Bukit Gombah, 19. 
338.
Bumin, II 333. 
Cotteau, II 339.
Bumi-sSgara, 33, II 333. 
Cowell, 231, 232, II 67, 133.
Burgess, 19, 105, 112, 115, 131, 136, 153, 
Crawlurd, 4, 6, II 159, 333, 335
160, 171, 203, 204, 206, 210, 229, 321, 334, 
Csoma, 61, 234, II 99, 100, 154.
338, 339, 364, 369, 375, 380, 393, 478, I I 97, 
Cuddabodhi-jataka, 359, 391, II 203, 206.
267, 339, 345. 
Culanandiya-jataka, 407, 428.
Burlingame, 232. 
Cullan&iada-jataka, 448.
Burma, 13, II 386. 
Cullavagga, 14.
Burnell, II 337, 338. 
Cunda, II 108, 278, 292, 293.
Burnouf, II 2, 6, 85, 133, 144. 
Cunningham, 115, 145, 203, 218, 303, 338,
Busken Huet, II 337. 
356, 364, 366, 369, 374, 377.
Calcutta, II 7, 293. 
^a^a-Jataka’-s, 326, 449, 459, 470, 473, II
Callenfels (van Stein), 450, II 244. 
204.
Cambodia, 132, 136, 202, II 196. 
$ail&, 283, 290, 291, 301,
Cambridge, II 2 , 7. 
£ailendra, 29, 30, II 326, 349.
Cammerloher, II 351. 
C.akI, 176.
Campa (India), 423, 424. 
Qakra, 18, 76, 110, 116, 117, 122, 129, 130,
Campa (Annam), 174, II 196, 288. 
' 131, 138, 140, 156, 169, 170, 172, 173, 187,
Campeyya-jataka, 404, 423, 424. 
188, 193, 194, 212, 216, 217, 218, 227, 241,
Candakarana, II 323. 
242, 243, 244, 263, 268, 272, 273, 274, 275,
Candakinnara-jataka, 240, 245, 303, 304. 
276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 319, 320, 321,
Candra, 138, 212. 
326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 334, 336,
Candragomin, 63, II 317. 
338, 341, 342, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 354,
Candraprabha, 283, 291, 301. 
355, 356, 401, 405, 406, 408, 410, 412, 413,
Cantakaparva, II 298. 
422, 423, 425, 449, 460, II 70, 83, 84, 89,
Capellen (van der), 34, II 334. 
117, 126, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 270, 275,
Cariyapitaka, 232, 360. 
276.
Cat u d vara-j ataka, 308. 
fakra-j ataka, 341.


--- Page 359 ---
fflkya, i, 124, 125, 128, 132, 133, 134, 137, 
149, 150, 153, 154, 158, 163, 164, 165, 175,
139, 140, 143, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 
II 304.
151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 160, 164, 165, 166, 
QiinyatavSda (“din), II 181, 325,
172,447,11283. 
Qura, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 320, 321, 327,
gakuntala, 266 . 
335,360, 371,380,440, I I 282,317,318,326,
fakyamitra, II 325. 
fySmSka, 284, 285, 297, 298, 301, 397.
fakyamuni, 107, 132, 230, 301, 411 II 1, 4, 
fyamatSra, II 295, 296 
5, 65, 66, 68, 70, 71, 85, 96, 146, 149, 151,
152, 153, 167, 168, 174, 180, 181, 191, 193, 
Da^abhumifvara, II 101.
194, 207, 214, 219, 221, 247, 248, 250, 251, 
Da^adigbodbisattvasamudrasannipatima-
253, .254, 255, 256, 257, 259, 260, 261, 266, 
hotsavavikrlijita, II 100.
271, 275, 278, 283, 284, 286, 287, 291, 292, 
Daghi, 42, II 334,
299, 301, 303, 304, 306, 311, 316. 
Daguerre, 37.
fakyasingha., II 304, 308. 
Daksinapatha, II 4.
falmali, 68. 
Damamuka, 231.
f&ntamati, 168. 
Dana, 31, 34.
Vantideva, II 1 
Dancjapani, 146, 151, 152, 153.
farabha-jataka, 370, II 342. 
Danoeningrat, 6.
farad Candra, 63, 69, 75, 76. 
Danyakara, II 3.
fariputra, II 3, 69. 
Day, II 241.
fatapattra-j ataka, 394. 
Daya Ram Sahni, II 156.
fibi- and fivi-j&taka’s, 236, 239, 243, 275, 
Delaporte, 64.
276, 277, 319, 320, 321, 335, 336, 337, 
338, 
DSmak, II 345, 348.
343, 403, 422, 423, II 229. 
' 
Devadatta, 148, 149, 151, 152, II 283.
fi. khan din (brahman), 214 
Devakusuma, 19.
fikhandin (king), 237, 283,284, 292,293,294, 
Dhammapada, 232.
301. 
Dhana, 237,
fikliin, 139, 466. 
Dharmacarin, 166.
fiksasamuccaya, II 1. 
Dharmadhata, II 298.
f isyalekha, 63. 
Dharmagavesin, 278.
fiva, 3, 13, 138, II 9, 40, 79, 161, 170, 171, 
Dharmagrama, II 4, 11.
180, 238, 277, 294, 299, 300, 303, 339, 
340. 
Dharmagupta, II 288.
f lvi, seefibi. 
Dhamakirti, II 317, 325, 330.
frainanamap<Jala, II 3, 18, 
21. 
Dharmapala, II 99.
fravasti, 285, 300, II 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 
Dhaxraapma, 7 
91, 283. 
Dharmavajrf, II 311.
fresthi-jataka’e, 324, 356. 
Dharmika-Subhuti, II 307.
frlgarbha. 111. 
Dharmoecaya, 102.
friguptasutra, 475. 
Dh&ta, II 300.
yrirnati, II 4, 12, 62, 63. 
DhatvI^var!, II 311. See also Bajradhatvl$-
frisambhava, II 4, 12, 62, 63. 
vari
frivijaya, 30, II 288. 
Dhrtarajya, 309.
fronapasanta, II 4, 10, 12. 
Dhrtaristra (palace), 109.
f ubhafubhakarmavipakanirdepa, 62. 
Dhftarastra (god), 214,
f vibhapubhaphalapariksa, 62. 
Digniga, II 99, 309, 315, 317, 325, 327, 329.
fubhakrtsna, 76. 
pihyang, DiSng, 30.
fubhSngga, 141. 
Pinaya, 24, 25.
f uddhavasa(kayika), 76, 103, 136, S60, 166, 
Dlpangkaru, 184, II 259, 260, 261.
174,189,218.’ 
Divkkara, 57.
fuddhodana, 104, 108, 109, 118, 121, 122, 
Divarupa, II 310.
123, 125, 126, 128, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 
Divaukasa, 261, 262, 272.
137, 138, 139, 140, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 
Divyavad&na, 63, 230, 231, 233, 234, 238,
in d e x 
^
[ L


--- Page 360 ---
■ GcW\ 
•'
m
 
§ l
INDEX 
J
239, 240, 241, 244, 246, 251, 261, 266, 267, 
399, 422, II 9, 24, 85, 86, 37, 88, 89, 91 96,
268, 270, 282, 285, 292, II 67, 85, 89, 133, 
99, 102, 134, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156, 164,
102 282, 287 289, 318. 
167, 168, 173, 2i2, 250, 259, 260, 264, 268,
Djago, II 192 See also Jajaghu. 
270, 271, 278, 283, 287, 288, 292, 342, 343,
Djanihi, II 288. 
344, 345, 349, 350.
Dong Duong, 174. 
Foumereau, 64, 326, 350, 456.
Dravicja, I I 3, 5,17, 32. 
Frankfurter, 210.
Dresden, 40. 
Friederich, 6, 10, 19, 21, 22, 35, II 161, 162,
Drama, 237, 249, 257, 260. 
163, 170, 171, 334, 335, 336, 337.
Dulva, 234, 235, II 289.
Dundubhisvara, 60. 
Gallois, II 340.
Durdharsa, II 272. 
Gamjavyuha, II 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 12, 16, 22, 23,
Durga, II 4, 10, 12. 
24, 75, 77, 78, 88, 98, 114, 115. 264, 271,
Durga, II 108, 339. 
277, 282, 319, 320, 3217322, 326, 350.
Duroisell'.-, II 134. 
GandhSra, 14, 71, 105, 114, 115, 121, 131,134,
Dvaravati, II 4, 9, 12, 13, 277. 
135, 142, 145, 148, 149, 152, 1S3, 157, 167,
D va. vim <;at y a va dan a ma 1&, 231, 447. 
168, 169, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 177, 181,
183, 187, 196, 197, 198, 200, 203, 205, 214,
Edkins, II 73, 99 154, 322. 
215, 218, 228, 229, 338, II 75, 76, 103, 168,
Eerde (van), 17, II 346, 348. 
-,.t, ,,o., 
34q
Eitel, II 99, 154, 322. 
Ganges, 220, 221, 302.
Ekcttar&gamasfltra, II 71. 
Garmja, 51,59, 60,399, 403, 404, I I 212, 277,
Ela, 2 
279, 280.
Elapatra, II 283. 
Gautama, 177, 178, 182, 183, 185, 211, 220,
Elliot, II 350. 
223. 225' 226< n 65
Elura, II 3 5. 
Gautami, 133, 134, 137, 139. 140, 165.
.Erp (van), 10, 13, 14, 15, 1/, 18, 22, ^8,33, 36, 
* iqo ia \ 
ooi
42, 43 45, 46, 49, 96, 100, 396, 406, 407, 
® 
82 183
421, 430, 431. 441, 449, 460. 462, 471, II 
172 * * * * * * * * * 182’ 183-
172723552380,265 Ml’ 344 34s’ I f ’ 347 
11 97' " • 155* i56'
n c f ' 34 ' 344’ 345’ 346’ J47' 
Ghanavyuha, II 2, 6. 
o48, 349, 340, 351 
GhanlagaL't, 205.
Fa Hien, 232, II 73, 288. 
Ghats, 18, II 9, 274.
Fa-kiu-pi-yu-king, 420, 431. 
Giesenhagen, I I 342.
Fausboll, 232, II 133. 
Goldstiicker, II 214.
Feer, 61, 63, 64, 67, 75, 76, 77, 79, 231, 232, 
Gondangan, II 165, 341, 348.
234,414,461,1199, 154, 155,269,318,338. 
Gopd, 146, 147, 153, 154, 155, 157, 159, 163,
Fergusson, 19, 105, 136, 277, 338, 339, I I 337, 
164, 167, 168, 169, II 4, 11, 12, 60.
345. 
Gorris, II 314.
Fexrand, 30, 468, II 288. 
Grandidier, II 240.
Finot, 6, 63,232,11 133,250, 251,288,350. 
Griffiths, 106, 115, 120, 136, 142, 160, 180,
Fog Koug Ki, 64. 
204, 215, 277, 321, 339, 364, 393, 422,
Foucaux, 100. 
II 134.
Foucher, 1, 8, 11, 12, 71, 76, 105, 106, 114, 
Groeneveldt, 13, 18, 40, 49, II 155, 166, 167,
115, 120, 121, 128, 131, 132, 136, 142, 145, 
224, 244, 273, 313, 335, 338, 339.
160, 171, 174, 
175, 180, 182, 191, 195, 196, 
Groneinan, 6, 45, 421, II 212, 339, 340, 341,
202, 203, 204, 206, 214, 215, 218, 228, 229, 
342, 343, 344, 345.
233, 235, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, Groot (de), 8, 9, II 101, 223, 320,349.
249, 251, 253, 255, 257, 259, 267, 268, 269, 
Grunwedel, 76, 131, 132, 203, 229, 238, 311,
272, 273, 275, 277, 282, 285, 290, 291, 293, 
325, 347, 350, 351, 387, 393, 456, II 68, 75,
300, 305, 310, 321, 338, 339, 341, 349, 364, 
97, 147, 154, 155, 167, 268, 271, 273, 278,
369, 372, 375, 377, 380, 382, 384, 387, 393, 
339, 340.


--- Page 361 ---
Q t
INDEX
Guhyaka. 116, 
Ipana, 
I I 313.
Guhyakendra, II 324. 
T^anabajra. II 305.
Guhyapati, II 167, 324. 
I$asa, II 3, 21,
. Gunadharma, 26. 
Tpvara, II 299, 300, 311
Gupavarman, II 288. 
Ijiri, I I 351.
Gupte, II 241 
Indra (god), 76, 197, 398, II 83, 275, 283, 341.
Guttila, 408. 
Indra (human), II 4, 11, 12
Indriyepvara, II 3, 18, 21, 34.
Hackin. 107, 132, 210, 301. 
I-tsing, 59, II 72, 223, 252, 237, 288, 290, 315,
Haeckel. II 342. 
329.
HalShala-Lokecvara, II 293. 
Ivanovski. 231, 315, 397, 398, 399.
Halaka, 247, 248, 250, 251, 252.
Hamel (van), II 337. 
Jajagliu, 73, 74, II 145, 147, 268, 294, 295,
Hamer (den), II 264, 276. 
296,297, 298,302,313. See also Djago.
Haipsa-jataka, 342, 361, 363. 
Jajawa, II 294
HaraprasM £3,stn, II 2, 4, 7, 12, 17, 18. 
Jambudvipa, II 3.
Hardy, II 250. 
Janmacitraka, 246, 247, 250, 251, 252.
Haritl, II 291, 292. 
Jatakamala, 82, 230, 232, 233, 244, 312,
Hartmann, 34, 35, 36, 
II 161, 
162, 171. 
313, 314, 315, 321, 334, 335, 364, 369, .>80,
Hasti-jafcaka, 382. 
393, 396, 397, 398, 399, 400, 401, 421, 423,
Hastings, 221. 
433, 440, 449, 470, 471, II 59, 247, 275, 282,
Havell, II 191, 192, 344, 346, 
349. 
317, 318, 339, 340, 344, 345.
Hayagrlva, II 295, 297. 
Jatakamalapaftjik;*. 314.
Hayam Wuxuk, 30, 386, 451, I I 238, 242, 299. 
Jayasmayatana, II 3, 6, 14, 15, 16, 21, 46.
See also Rajasanagara. 
Jayosmay at ana, II 5, 6.
Hemacandra, 53. 
Jayottama, II 5, 21, 51.
Herringham, 321, 339, 364, 422, II 134. 
J6nggi, 468.
Heyligers, II 171. 
Jetavana, 447. II 283,
Himalaya, 125, 134, 302, 349, 367, 420, 429, 
Jinapada, II 304.
430, 
Jnanabaj re^vara, II 306.
Hi-Neng, II 172. 
jfianapivabajra, II 306.
Hinloopen Labberton (van), II 344. 
Jflanavajra, II 306.
Hiru, 283, 284, 292, 296, 299, 300, 301. 
Jfianepvarabajra, II 306.
Hiruka, 284, 299. 
Jochim, 100, 268, 408, II 83, 130, 265, 267,
Hitien Tsiang, 401, 443, II 72, 73, 99, 144, 
269, 270, 276, 343, 347.
168, 307. 
Jogjakarta, 18, 23, 32.
Hodgson, 232, II 1, 2, 4, 7, 144, !45, 154, 
JoySnabajra, II 305.
155, 320, 323. 
Julten, 420, 431, II 72.
Hoenig, II 351. 
Junghukn, 35, II 334.
Hoepermans, 2, 20, 35, II 161,162,163, 336, 
Juynboll, 34, 71, 74, II 97, 155, 156, 15j, 171, 
337. 
227, 263, 274, 293, 334, 338, 342, 345.
Hoemle, 221. 
Jyostiska, IT 283.
HoSvell (van), II 160, 162, 334, 335
Hornell, 347, II 238, 349. 
Kacchapavadana, 406, 427.
Hose, II 338. 
Ka^i, 219, 220,
Hrideva, 157, 158. 
Xafisundari, 57, 58.
Huber, 203, 231, 239, 275, 282, 284, 297,420, 
KILpyapa, II 68, 71, 283.
II 133. 249, 287, 314, 343. 
KaiMsa, 475, 476.
Hultzseh, 205, 304, 366, 369. 
Kalasan, II 290, 291, 326.
Humboldt (von), 4, II 144, 152, 334. 
Kalasutra, 65, 67.
Huyser, II 223, 347, 348. 
Kalika, 196, 197, 198.
H ,va-yen-sutra, II 99. 
l Kalingavana, II 4, 10, 12.


--- Page 362 ---
Kalm£sapada, 335, 386, 387. 
Ks&ntivadin, 377, 378, 379, 380. II 174.
Kalpadruma, 63. 
Kseniendra, 231, 241, 265, 266, 314, 406, 447.
Kalpadrumavad ana,mala, 231, II 318. 
K^itigarbha, II 273, 292,314.
Kamadhatu, 76, 77, 109, II 146. 
Krodya, 172.
Katnavacara, 123, 129, 195, 206, 207. 
Ku$ita, II 303.
Karner (van de), 43, 44, II 341. 
KukkutapSda, II 68.
Kaflcanakkhanda-j3.1 aka, 441, 455. 
Is"ulagara, II 4, 20, 21.
Kafici, II 99. 
Kulmasapindl-jataka, 322,
Kaniska, 10, 11. 
KumSrajlva, 275.
Kafijnr, 61, 64, 234, 241, 471, II 99, 154, 
Kumbha-jataka, 350,
269, 289 
Kimjarakarna, 71, 72, 74, 80, II 159, 296,
Karrtbaka, 168, 169, 170, 172, 173, II 231. 
298, 301, 302, 303.
Kapila(vastu), 11, 109, 123, 124, 125, 134, 
Kufija Vibari K&vyatlrtha, II 7 
136, 146, 148, 168, 171, II 4, 11, 12. 
Kunst, II 241, 244, 351.
Karan da vy Cilia, 80, II 133. 
Kurukulla, II 278.
Kara Shalir, 178. 
Kusumapura, 8.
Karmafataka, 59, 231. 
Knvera, 17, 18, 19, 138, 326, 413, II 291, 292,
Karmavajrf, II 311. 
293.
Karmavibkdga, 79.
Karny, II 350. 
Laditavyuha, 198.
Karimapundurika, II 72, 
Lalitavistsra, 56, 76, 99, 100, 101, 103, 104,
Kathavatthu, 63. 
107,112,134,137,142,150,154,169,170.
Kats, II 95, 96, 99, 147, 307, 313. 
171, 208, 221, 229, 232, II 1, 2, 23, 32, 67,
Kau^ika, 216. Sec Qakra. 
101, 133, 180, 182, 184, 247, 248, 254, 275,
KaumudI, 344, 388. 
276, 281, 287, 288, 289, 316, 324, 325, 326,
Kaurava, 384. 
342.
KMiri, 7, II 297. 
Lalitavyflka, 168, 199.
KMu, 2, 3, 18, 22, 32, 34, 37, 40, II 161, 171, 
Lampong, II 228.
337. 
Landresse, 64, 67, 70.
Ke-gon, II 320. 
I.angka, II 3.
Kern, 3, 19, 23, 24, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 39, 61, 
Laos, II 243.
62, 71, 73, 195, 206, 239, 312, 313, 314, 316, 
Lara Djonggrang, 21.
386, 451, II 73, 85, 98, 133, 145, 156, 166, 
Lassen, II 336.
269, 289, 294, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 303, 
Laufer, 221, II 202.
305, 306, 313, 317, 323, 328, 329, 330, 338, 
Law, II 214.
339, 340, 342, 346, 348. 
Leclercq, II 340.
, 
Kersjes, II 264, 276. 
Leemans, 1, 17, 20, 33, 37, 38, 99, 236, II 89,
Khagarbha, II 273, 297, See also Aka?a- 
151, 160, 161, 162, 163, 166, 170, 171 244,
garbha, 
333, 334, 336, 337, 333, 339.
Khara., 284, 297, 301. 
Lefmann, 100, 101, 150, 232, II 133.
Khuddaka-nilcaya, 232. 
Legge, 232,
Kien-Tsung, II 172. 
L6vj, 61, II 68, 71, 73, 74, 99, 287, 288, 289,
Kinsbergen (van), 18, 24, 25, 26, 39, 41, 122, 
298, 328.
II 244, 336, 337, 339, 340, 344, 346, 347. 
Leyden, 34. 37, 38, II 97, 156, 171, 333, 334, 
KIrti, 212. 
335.
Knebel, II 341, 345. 
Locana, II 295, 296, 304, 309, 311.
Kofala., 322, 446, 447. 
Ixicanapura, II 304.
Koeppen, 77, II 65, 146. 
Lokaprajfiapti, 61.
ICj'sna, II 296. 
Lokefvara, II 96, 263, 293, 295, 301, 311,
Krsn&yapa, II 296. 
313, 317, 351. See also Avalokitefvara
Kftanagara, II 214, 294, 295,305, 306, 312, 
Lokottaravada, II 289.
Ksanti-jataka, 335, 377. 
London, 40.
I ® | 
' 
§L
^ g |g $ f 
i n d e x


--- Page 363 ---
Long-men. 132, 277, 389, II 72. 
Mahlsa-jataka. 391, 393.
Loudon, II 161. 
Malm, II 349.
Louw, 34, II 339, 
Maineya, 172,
Lucretius, II 148. 
Maitrakanyaka, Maitiakanyak&vadana, 239,
Liiders, 335, 380. 
240, 246, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310,
Iulius van Goor, 282, 291, II 155, 204, 250, 
II 229, 289, 340, 343, 344.
298, 348. 
Maitrayana, II 5, 6.
Lumbini, 120, 126, 127, 128, 134. 
MaitrayanI, II 3, 5, 6, 16, 21, 33.
Lumbung, II 291. 
Maitreya, 47, 106, 107, 228, II 4, 8, 10, 12, 21,
24, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 
Macassar, II 236. 
74, 75, 76, 77 78, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 92,
Madhyamika, II 114, 325, 327, 328. 
93, 94, 96, 101, 102. 105, 114, 115, 116, 117,
Madhyantika, II 73. 
118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 133, 134, 13S,
MadjakSrta, II 155. 
152, 153, 156, 221,257, 262, 265, 266, 267,
Madura, II 228. 
268, 271, 273, 280, 282, 286, 292, 293, 297,
Magadha, 131, 178, 182, 219, 229, 423, 424, 
320, 321, 322, 329, 336, 347.
11 4* 1 L 12. 
Maitrlbala-j&taka, 332, 334, 335, 380, 398.
Magelang, 2, 4, 6, 7, 17, 33, 34, 35, 36, 40, 43, 
M japahit, II 238, 294, 303, 312, 313, 326, 
II 161, 162, 170, 171. 
345.
Mahabbarata, II 5, 296. 
Majjhima, 63.
Mahabhiniskramanasutra, 196, 246, 310. 
Miladbvajavyuha, II 3, 7, 20.
MahSbodhi, 11, 145, 202, 206, 218, 229, II 
Malay Mountains, II 9.
168, 169, 283. 
Malayu.. II 288, 295, 315.
Mahabodhi—ji,taka, 364, 365, 366, 367. 
Malla, 172.
MababrahmSua, 76. 
Mamak(h)i, II 295, 309,
Mahadeva, II 4, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, IS, 40, 56, 
Manasa, 361, 362.
277, 300, 303, See also £iva. 
Mandhivt ar, Mandhatravada.ua, 236, 239, 241,
Mahaguhya, II 309, 310. 
242, 261, 262, 263, 266, 268, 269, 270, 271,
MahakSfyapa, 57, II 70. 
272, 273, 274, 275, 408, II 59, 275, 289.
.Vlahakala, II 300, 
Manjufri, II 2, 3. 4, 5, 7, 8, 17, 20, 21, 22, 30,
Mahfikapi-jStaka's, 367, 369, 375 , 
77, 92, 102, 114, 115, 135, 260, 267, 268,
MahakStyayana, 283, 284, 285, 289, 290, 295, 
269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 291, 292, 293, 297,
296, 297, 298, 299, 300, 301. 
298.
MahSmara, II 300. 
Manohara, 234, 236, 247, 248, 249, 252, 253,
MahSmora-jataka, 471. 
256, 257, 259, 260.
Mahaprabha, II 3, 5, 19, 21, 36. 
Mantranaya, II 307, 309, 315, 316, 324.
MahSprabhu, II 3- 
Mantray&na, II 305, 307, 330, 331.
MahSprajapatl GautamI, 133, 139, 165. 
Mara, 156, 171, 185, 186, 188, 197, 200, 201.
Maitapranada, II 67. 
202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 209, 210, 324, 325,
Maharaurava, 66, 68, 324 . 
327, II 70, 108, 278, 308.
Mahasarnaja, II 72. 
MarlcI, II 293,
Mahasamayasutra, II 24 
Ma.tali, 341.
Mahasambhava, II 3, 19, 21. 
Mataram, 29, 32.
Mahasangghika, II 307. 
Matliura, 145, II 134.
:»laha»th&raapr&pta, II 267. 
Mfttiposaka-jataka, 401, 421.
Mahavagga, II 250. 
Matsumoto Bunzaburo, II 68, 71.
Mahavairocana, II 147. 
Matsya-jataka, 348.
Mahavairocan&bhisambcxlhisutra, II 320. 
Maya, 104, 107, 108, 109, 110, 113, 116, 117,
Mahavastu, 63, 65, 68, 70, 231, 233, II 133. 
118, 119, 120, 122, 123, 126, 127, 128, 129,
MahSvyutpatti, II 269, 272, 274. 
131, 133, 184, II 4, 11, 12, 60, 166, 191, 220.
Mahayanasutralangk5ra, II 74. 
Mdo, 61, 62, 79, 314, 471, 475, II 100.
Mahefvara, 136, 
Megha, II 3, 5, 6, 71, 20, 32.
i n d e x


--- Page 364 ---
' G°w\
. 
' 
INDEX 
O J L j
Meghafri, II 3, 5» 17, 20, 31. 
Nairarljana, 163, 184, 186, 191, 192, 194, 195,
Meinsma, 3, 31, II 337, 342. 
211, II 191.
M£ndut, 3, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 25, 228, 
Nais&dha, II 5.
II 92, 93, 95, 108, 177, 178, 189, 256, 264. 
Nala, II 3, 5, 6, 19, 21, 36,
267, 270, 274, 276, 291, 292, 293, 314, 315, 
N&ladhvaja, II 3, 19, 21.
323, 346. 
NSiandS, II 99, 315.
Mengun, II 336. 
Nalapura, II 3, 16, 21.
MSrapi, 3, 30. 
Nanda, 129 II 89, 283.
Merbabu, 3. 
Nandana, 305, 309.
Meronov, II 269. 
Nandi, II 9, 40, 56, 277.
Meru, 76, 180, 184, 201, 206, 262, II 302, 336. 
Nandika, 189.
Merii-.jikharadhara, II 272. 
Nandiya, 428, 429, 430.
Meyer, 27, II 339. 
Nanjio, II 68, 98, 99, 114, 299, 320, 321
Milanapura(pa), II 3, 17, 20. 
Nannhara, II 4, 21.
Mi-lei p’ou sa chang cheng Teou-chouei t’ien 
Naradatta, 134, 135.
king, II 71. 
Narayapa 138.
Milrei tch’eng fo king, 1171. 
Neil, 231, II 67, 133.
Milirtdapajnha, 81, 408. 
Nepal, 232, II 1, 96, 97, 144, 145, 147, 150,
Millies, II 336. 
154, 155, 166, 167, 259, 266, 273, 275, 282,
MillouS (de), II 100. 
296, 298, 306, 317, 320.
Minayeff, 63, II 98, 329. 
Ngandjuk, I I 95, 97, 297, 298.
Ming-Oi, 178. 
Ngaran, II 165, 336.
Minoreh, 3, 26. 
Nickiren, II 98.
Mitatosala, II 4. 
Nidanakatha, 232.
MitkiM, 408. 
Niermeyer, II 340, 341.
Moens, II 91, 147, 155, 269, 292, 298, 306. 
MiakanthadharanI, II 305.
Moluccas, II 235. 
Nimi, 408.
Mookerji, II 236, 347. 
Ninnfmarati, 76, 77.
Moqnette, II 172, 345. 
Nor-Bzangs, 234,
Mora-j&taka, 471. 
Noto Soeroto, 2.
Morangan, II 79. 
Nying-ma-pa, II 322.
Morris, 232.
Mrangen, II 165. 
Oldenberg, 14 ,11 329.
Mpgadava, II 144. 
Oldenburg, 230, 231, 232, 239, 260, 312, 313,
Muck, II 349. 
314, 315, 406, 421, 422, II 133, 134, 339.
Mucilinda, 210, 211. 
Oldfield, II 273, 291, 298
Muller (E.), 417.
Muller (Max), 312, II 99, 321. 
Padang, 299.
Miinnich, 42, I I 334. 
Padrna, 176,
Muktasara, II 4, 11, 12, 62. 
Padmaka, 457, 458,
Mulaka, II 3, 19, 21. 
Pa.dmapSni, II 92, 93, 146, 260, 262, 267, 292.
Mfilamadkyamakak3rika,s, 56, II 269- 
See also Avalokite$vara.
Mu 1 asarv&st.iv ad in (“vadanikaya), II 287, 
Padtna Thang Yig, 57, II 99, 154.
288, 289. 290, 318, 329. 
Pagan, 99, 106, 110, 115, 117, 120, 127, 128,
Muntilan, II 165. 
132, 136, 137, 145, 153, 158, 160, 161, 164,
166, 168, 169, 172, 174. 178, 180. 181, 182, 
Magarakrtagama, 1, 7, 30, 89, 451, II 156, 
183, 186, 191, 192, 193, 196, 200, 203, 205,
207, 208, 238, 242, 294, 295, 298, 303, 312, 
206, 229, 311, 321, 326, 347, 350, 351, 387,
313, 350. 
393, 456, II 134.
Nagarjuna, 56, 63, 64, 65, 67, 68, 70, 75, II 
Pagarruyung, 19,
269, 325. 
Paisa, II 4, 20, 21, 22, 37, 38.
Naipaiiya Devata Kalyana, II 154. 
! Pakubuwana, 31, II 337.


--- Page 365 ---
INDEX 
x i i L
■: 
.wgy^1 
"
PSla, II 330. 
| Prajflapararaita (goddess), II 293, 297, 310.
Palembang, II 288. 
j PrajMparamita (text), II 99, 306, 307, 329.
Panataran, II 244. 
Prajflapti^astra, 61.
PaUcagiksaaifamsasiitra, 64, 65. 
! Prambanan, 18, 21, 33, 55, II 174, 188, 189,
Paftcagati(dlpanam), 63,64, 67, 68, 75, 77. 
216, 227, 293.
Paficakrama, II 274, 323, 324, 325. 
Ptapafica, I I 303,
Paficala, 246, 247, 249, 250, 260, 446. 
Prasangga, IX 325.
P&iicika, 248, 255, II 291. 
PraSenajit, IT 85-
Pancjava (Mt.), 178, 179, 180. 
Prat&pana, 66, 68.
Pandava’s, 450. 
Prityaharavyuha, 208,
Pander, II 97, 154, 155, 167. 
Prthurastra, II 4, 20, 21.
Pa^rjuravasini. II 295, 309. 
Puini, II 97, 100.
PSr?ini, 49. 
Punyaprasava, 76.
Pafinasa-jataka, 232. 
Puramdara, 194. See Qakra.
Papua, 468. 
Purnavijaya, II 301, 302.
Paramaguhya, II 310, 311. 
Purusada$anta(ka), 386, II 298, 299, 301.
Paramartka, II 74, 319, 320. 
Pfirvavideha, 262.
Paranirma.11ava.9in, 76. 
Puspa, II 305.
Paranirmitavagavartin, 76, 77. 
Pusya, 283, 284.
Paris, 64, II 7, 151, 341, 342. 
Quarles van Ufford, 11337.
Parlttabha, 76.
Paxittapubha, 76. 
Ra^miprabha, II 3, 22.
Par j any a, 348. 
R&dk3,, 187.
Parmentier, II 216, 344. 
Raffles, 4, 5, 32, 33, II 159,333, 334, 336, 337,
PSrthayajfia, II 296. 
338, 349.
Pa§atmapdala, II 4, 9, 12. 
Raivata, 177
Pa.tijn, 11341, 342. 
Rajagrha, 178, 179. 181, 182, 224, 282, 283
Pawon, 3, 15, 17, 18, 19, II 52, 94, 346, 
285, 287, 292, II 283.
Payen, II 338. 
R&jasanagara, II 299, 304. See also Hayam
Pegu, 338. 
Wuruk.
Pelliot, II 2, 288, 320. 
RSjendralala Mitra, 57, 100, 401, 404, 407,
Peri, II 66, 68, 72, 74, 316. 
427, I I 2, 7, 14, 17, 18, 25, 72.
Peshawar, 10. 
RSma, 181, 182, 218.
Petavatthu, 232. 
Ramanaka, 305, 307,
Pfeiffer, II 335. 
RSmavarta, II 3, 17, 20.
Phal-chen, II 100. 
RamSyana, II 174.
Phen6 Spiers, 19, I I 345, 
Rasfrapalaparipjxcha, 232, II 133.
PitSmaha, II 300. 
Katnabhijjiha, li 4, 10, 12.
Plaosan, 13, II 92, 95, 269, 293. 
Ratnacuda, II 3, 19, 21, 35
Pleyte, 99, 100, 104, 108, 109, 116, 122, 126, 
Ratnapani, II 93, 94, 95, 102, 146, 273, 297.
127, 140, 143, 144, 145, 155, 166, 169, 172, 
Ratnasainbbs.va, II 150, 282, 295,300,301,
186, 198, 200, 202, 204, 207, 209, 213, 217, 
304, 31*.
220, 223, 226, II 200, 214, 223, 276, 302, 
Ratn§.vadanam§.la, 23!, II 318.
342, 343, 350. 
Ratnavajri, II 311.
.Poensen, 32, II 342. 
Rat.ridevata, II 4, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 57, 58.
Poerbatjaraka, 6, II 156, 305, 350, 351. 
Raurava, 66, 68.
Potalaka, I I 4, 9, 12, 54, 264. 
Rea, 205.
Prabhuta, II 3, 6, 18, 19. 
Reinwardt, II 334.
Prabhuta, II 5, 6, 18, 19, 21, 34. 
R6musat, 64.
Prabliutaratna, II 261. 
Reuvens, II 334.
Pracaijda, 57, 58. 
Rgyud, II 99, 100, 154.
Praga, 2, 3, 14. 
Rhys Davids, 14, II 330.


--- Page 366 ---
(* ) 
<SL
W ^if& gk/ 
INDEX
Rochussen, 37, 
Samant&netra, II 3, 19, 21, 36,
Rockhill, 471, 475. 
Sam hula-jataka, 244, 279, 280, 281, 282.
Router (von), 81. 
Samghata, 65, 67, 68, 72.
Roeske, 65, 68. 
Sammatfya, II 144.
Rohita, 457, 
Samudrakatiha, II 4, 8, 12, 63
Rohitavastu, 220. 
Samndraprastha.ua, II 3, 18, 21.
Roorda, 5. 
Samudravelatl, I I 3,15, 17, 21
Roruka, 282, 283. 284, 285,287,288,297,301. 
SSncht, 76, 115, 132, 160, 171, 373, 174, 206,
Rouffaer, 39, II 148, 149, 160, 163, 
190, 266, 
229, 338, 349.
335, 339, 341, 342, 345. 
Safijaya (in jataka), 335, 336.
Rsipatana, 103, 219, 224. 
Safijaya (of Java), 3.
Rudraka, 181, 182, 218. 
Saftjlva, 65, 67.
Rudrayana and RudrayanSvadS.na, 237, 239, 
Sang hyang Kamahayanikan II 95, 99, 145,
240, 244, 245, 282, 283, 284, 285, 
286, 287, 
147, 157, 158, 159, 167, 261, 291, .298, 306,
288, 289, 291, 292, 293, 301, 307, 454, II 
307, 31!, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 320, 322,
174, 289, 343, 348. 
323, 324, 326, 327, 331.
Rumpin, II 339, 343, 348. 
Saptakuniarikavadana, 404.
Rupadliatu, 76, 77, II 146. 
Sarabhangga-j&taka, 153.
Riipavacara, 207. 
Sfiradaya, II 5, 6.
Rriru-jataka, 372. 
S&radhvaja, II 3, 6, 17, 20, 32, 33.
Ryauon Fujishima, II 98, 320. 
Sarasvatl, II 297.
Sarathi, 220.
Sachs, II 241. 
Sari, 13, II 291
Sadamatta, 305, 308. 
Sarnath, 11, 115, 132, 145, 174, 204, 210, 229,
Saijdanta-jataka, 399, II 319. 
II 156.
Saddharmapvindarika, II 72, 98, 104, 269, 
SarvagSmina, II 5, 6.
299, 322. 
SarvagrSma, II 4, 6, 19, 20, 21, 22, 37.
Saddharmasmj'ty upasthanam, 61 
Sarvanivaranavi^kamblun, II 102, 274, 292,
Sadhlna-jataka, 408. 
293.
Sadjiwan, II 293. 
Sarvarthasiddha, 134.
Stgara (India), II 3, 17, 20. 
Sarvastivadin, 56, 61,64, II 289.
Sagara (:iaga), 193, 194. 
Satvavajrl, II 311.
Sagara (java), II 207. 
Saudasa, II 300, 301.
Sagara,megha, II 3, 17, 20, 31. 
SautrSntika, 61.
Sagaramukha, II 3, 17, 20. 
Scheffer, II 338.
Saher (von), II 341. 
Scheltema, II 347.
Salam, II 165. 
Scheurleer, II 349.
Salaman, 4, II 165. 
Schiefner, 234, 241, 314, II 67, 72, 98, 168,
Samadhiraja, II 72. 
Schlagintweit, II 155, 156.
Samantabhadra. 47, 405, I I 2, 4, 8, 22, 29, 77, 
Schmidt, 231, 449.
78, 79, 91, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102. 
Schdnberg Muller, 37, 39, II 335.
103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 11 1, 
Schreve, 65.
112, 113, 114, 115, 140, 146, 153,260,268, 
Seidenstiicker, 99, 106. 110, 115, 117, 120,
270, 271, 272, 282, 286, 292, 293, 321, 322, 
127, 128, 132, 136, 137, 145, 153, 158, 161,
323, 324, 326, 348. 
164, 166, 168, 169, 172, 174, 178, 180, 181,
Samantabhadracarya, II 98. 
182, 186, 191, 192, 193, 196, 200, 203, 205,
Samantabhadracaryapranidhanasutra, II 
206, 229.
114, 115. 
Selagriya, 3, 34.
Samantabhadradhyan.asutra, II 98. 
Sela Mangleng, II 294,
Samantabhadrots&hanaparivarta, II 98 
Sfimarang, 32.
Samantakusuma, 208, 209. 
Senart, 63, 231, II 133, 329
Samantamukha, 113, 19, 21. 
Senbyu, II 336.
‘ G0i&X 
■ v-.


--- Page 367 ---
INDEX
S&idara, 3. 
Sudar^ana (gods), 76.
Serindia, 132, 142, 152,172,183,192,203, 229. 
Sudar$ana (monk), II 3, 5, 6, 14. 16, 18, 21, 
Serrurier, II 340. 
34.
Sewell, II 165, 343. 
Sudarfapa. (naga), 221.
Sewn, 17, 18, 21, II 179, 293, 334. 
Sudhana and Sudhanakumarfivadana, 233,
Shaefer, 37. 
234. 237, 239, 240, 246, 247, 248, 249, 253,
Shah-jI kl-Dheri, 10. 
254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 302, 404,
Shin-gon, II 147, 320. 
II 191, 279, 289.
Siam, 42, 210, 311, 326, 456, II 243, 341, 345. 
Sudhana (Gaptfavyuha). II 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 
Siddhartha, 175, 184, II 231, 238. 
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,20,
Siddhayogujvara, II 305. 
21, 23, 24, 25, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37,
Si-dd-In-dzou, II 100, 154 . 
38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 55,
Siebold (von), II 97 . 
56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 77, 100,
Sieburgh. 37, II 334. 
114, i 15, 264, 271, 272, 282, 321.
Sigala-jataka, 396, 420, 421 
Sudhanakumara, II 271, 295.
Simhahanu, 152. 
Sudharma, 102.
Simhaketu, II 3, 6, 16, 21 
Sudrpa, 76.
Simhapoti, II 3, 19, 21. 
Sugat&vadana, II 72.
Simhavijirmbhita, II 3, 16, 21. 
Sugriva, 113, 17, 20.
SimhavyasambhitS, II 4, 10, 12, 21, 51. 
Suh-ki-li-lih-kin, 64.
Sindhu, 285. 
Suhrllekha. 56, 64, 68.
Sipdok, 30, I I 313, 314. 
Sujata, 212.
Singasari, II 163, 294. 
Sujata, 187, 189, 190, 191, 193.
Sipat-iman-akung, 240. 
Sukhavati, II 321.
Sisantana, 72. 
Sukhavatlvyiiha, II 99, 321.
Sivir&tra, II 4, 11, 12, 62. 
Sukhodaya, 326, 350, 456.
Skanda, 138. 
Sumana, II 4.
Sladen, II 336. 
Sumati, II 272.
Smith, II 346. 
Sumatra, 6, 13, 19, 30, II 99, 214, 223, 228,
SneUeman, II 340. 
288, 295, 315, 317, 323.
Sollewijn Gelpke, 40, II 338. 
Sumbing, 3,
Somendra, 314. 
Sumitrfi, II 4, 10, 12, 52.
Sottliisena, 279, 280, 
Sumukha (hatnsa), 361, 362,363.
Spaan, 6. 
Sumukha (town), I I 3, 4, 12, 18, 21.
Speyer, 100, 151, 231, 232, 239, 243, 246, 308, Supija, 30.
310, 312, 313, 314, 316, 370, II 157, 306, Sundarananda, 148, 149, 151, 152.
307, 318, 342, 343, 344. 
Sung Yun, 448.
. Spooner, 10, 183. 
SupS.raga-jS.taka, 345, 346, 347, 348.
Sta6l Holstein (von), II 270. 
Suprabha (land), II 4, 5, 19, 21.
Stein, 107, 115, 132, 142, 149, 152, 157, l6l, Suprabha (man), II 3, 17, 21.
168, 171, 172, 174, 178, 183, 192. 
Supratisthita, I I 3, 5,6, 14,20,31.
Stein, see Callenfels. 
Surendra, I I 4, 11, 12,62.
SthSvarS, 201. 
SurendrabhS, II 4, 11, 12, 61.
Stfipasarndarpanaparivarta, II 104. 
Suriipa, 424, 425.
Stupavadana, 447. 
Sutya, 138, 212
Stutterheim, 56, II 174, 227, 244. 
Susvara, 60, 90.
Subhap&rangama, I I 4, 10, 12. 
Sutasoma(-jataka), 384, 385,386,387, I I 299,
Si!bhasitagave?in, 278 . 
300, 301.
Subhasitasamgraha, II 1. 
Sutralangkara, 231, 243, 275. 420, II 249.
Subhuti, II 306, 307. 
Suvarnabha, 59.
Subhutipala, II 307. 
Suvarnadvipa, II 99, 288, 315.
Subhutitantra, II 306, 307. 
Suvarnaprabh&sa, 471, 475 476, 477.
/^?%\ 
■ 
n


--- Page 368 ---
@
 
S l
Suvanjavarpa, 51, 57, 58, 59, 90. 
TJecadhvaja, 104.
Su varna varnft, 59. 
Ugrasena, II 283.
Siyama, 110. 
Ugrateja, 107, 108.
Svabhavika, II 154. 
TJndagi, 42, II 33S.
Svastika, 194, 195, 196. 
Unna&dayan ti-jataka, 343, 344, 345.
Upalisutta, 414.
Takakusu, 56, 59, 61, II 74, 223, 287, 288, 
Upananda, 129, II 69, 89.
319, 320, 328. 
Uposadha, 241, 261, 263, 266, 268.
.rakkanya-jStaka, 245, 304. 
UravilvS, 183, 186, 189, 191.
■ ang, II 2, 6, 172. 
Uruvilvakalpa, 222.
Fafljur, II 269, 307. 
Ustusavijaya, IT 294.
Tantra, TantraySna, II 305, 306, 307, 313, 
Utpalabfuiti, II 4 20 21 37 
314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 323, 325, 326, 327, 
Uttard, 190.
328,329, 330,331,332.
I antri, 394, II 298. 
Vapavartin, 196.
I antular, 386, II 299, 300. 
Vadavamukiia, 346, 347.
Tapana, 66, 68. 
Vaifali, 177, 262.
fapoda, 179. 
Vaigravana, 138, 212, 214.
T5ra, II 14, 290, 292, 293, 295, 2%, 297, 298, 
Vaijayanta, 122.
304,^509, 317, 324, 
Vaipulyasutra, II 289, 317.
f&ranStha, 314, 315, 396, 397, II 72, 73, 98, 
Vairocana, 71, 80, II 97, 146, 147, 150, 151.
168, 288, 307, 315, 317, 318, 323, 328, 330. 
152, 156, 158, 159, 282, 296, 298, 300 301
Ta-shin-mi-yen-king, II 2, 6 . 
302, 303, 304, 311,313, 316, 320. 323.
i heragatlia, 232. 
Vaitararil, 70.
Therlgatha, 417. 
Vajapura, II 3, 17, 20.
I homas, 314, II 307, 317. 
VajraccfaedikaprajMpSramitri, II 307.
ridar' 2, 
Vajradhara, II 154, 155, 157, 167, 308, 323,
figawangi, 7,8. 
324.
rissandier, II 340. 
Vajrakama, II 324.
.1 isya, 283, 284. 
Vajrakaya, II 324.
Ti-tsang, I I 314. See also Ksitigarbka. 
Vajrapaiii, 116, 171, 177, 187, 196, II 92, 96,
TjandirSdja, II 95. 
102, 103, 104, 105, 109, 146, 260, 261, ’263!
Tonkin, II 243. 
267, 270, 273, 276, 291, 292, 293, 301, 311.
Tonnet, It 215, 223, 344, 
313,
losala, II 4, 20, 21. 
Vajrasattva., II 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159,
I railokyavijaya, II 293, 314. 
167, 263, 282, 293, 297, 308, 311, 320, 322,
Trai Phura, 65, 68, 70, 311. 
323, 324, 327.
J rapusa, 212, 214. 
Vajrasimha, 314.
Irayastrim^a, 76, 77, II 283. 
Vajravaea, II 324
Trimiirti, II 299, 300, 
; VajravarSfaI. il 293.
Trinafijana. II 3, 16, 21. 
1 Vajrayana, II 307.
Tripitaka, 234, 407, 446, 448, II 71, 133, 282. 
Valahassa-jataka, II 133.
Tu!o<3ong, 29, 30. 
Valck, II 160, 334.
I umpang, 73 II 294. 
Vall6e Poussin (de la), 56, 61,63, 76, II 9, 98
Tun-Huang, 115, 132, 142, 149, 152, 157, 161, 
269, 274, 323, 324 329.
168, 171, 172, 174, 183, 192. 
Var5, II 6, 25, 42. 58, 60.
Turkestan, 107, 174. 
Variga, II 298.
J usita, 76, 77, 101, 102, 104, 105, 106, 111, 
VartakSpotaka-jaialca, 349.
112, 116, 306, 309, 310, II 67, 69, 71, 72, 73, 
Varukuccha, II 4, 11, 12.
7f> 242, 266, 281, 320. 
Varupamati, II 272.
Tapitakayika, 141, 157. 
j VasantJ, II 6, 60.
funk (vandel), 240, 394, H 302. 
< Vasubandhu, 51,1172,74,99,320,328,329.


--- Page 369 ---
' GOt^Nv
'/ 
IHDEX 
3 ^ I j
VasndWW. II 293. 
Waileser, II 99, 329
Vedanta, II 303. 
Waringtcm Smith, II 236.
Venuvana, 57, 
Warren (I), .232
Verbeek, II 339. 
Warren (II), 303, 305.
Vesthila, II 4, 10, 12, 54. 
Wassiljew, II 68, 72, 98, 99, 155. 317, 320,
Veth, II 338, 340. 
324, 325, 330.
Vicitrakarnika vadana, 231. 
Watanabe, 386, II 78.
Vifesa, II 310. 
Weber, II 214.
Vifvakarman, 275, 276, II 276. 
Wenzel, 56, 64,
Vicvamitra (Gapd.), II 4, 11, 12, 61, 62. 
Wiener, 239, it 340.
Vi$vamitra (Lalit,), 141, 142. 
Wilsen, 6, 17, 20, 21, 35, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 99,
Vicvamtara-iataka, 334, 335, 336, 338. 
100, 127, 133, 162, 165, 175, 191, 198, .-.00,
Vi$vap&ni, II 146, 273. 
209,239,312, IIjl60,161,162,166,170,236,
Vi^vartipa, II 323. 
245 335, 336, 337, 338, 350.
Videha, 380. 
Winter, 6.
Vidlii, II 302, 303, 304. 
Winternitz, II 2 289, 317.
Vidhurapandita-j3.taka, 404. 
With, II 176, 349.
Vidusa, II 5, 6. 
Wogihara, II 74.
Vidvah, II 3, 6, 19, 21, 34, 35. 
Wo-mei-shan, II 99.
Vieng Sa, II 260. 
Woodward, II 330.
Vighnotsava, II 298. 
Wou-fai-chan, II 72,
Vijft&nav&din, II 325, 327. 
Wnkir, 3.
Vimaia (part of the universe), 199.
Vimala (goddess), 139, 140, I I 275. 
Yajomitra, 61
Vimalaprabha, 189. 
Yajfla-jStaka, 339.
Vtmalaprabhasa, 199. 
Yama, 67, 71, 72, 73,391, II 83, 277, 280,301,
Vimalavyuha, 139. 
302.
Vinaya(pitaka), II 287. 
Yama, 76, 77.
Vink (de), 11,11 346, 348. 
Yang Loh.’II 172.
Virudhaka, 214, 
Yavadvlpa, II 288.
Virupaksa, 214. 
Yavadvipapura, II 314.
VJryabala, 431. 
Yid-Hphrog-Ma, 234.
Visnu, 403, II 79, 277, 297, 299, 300, 311. 
Yogacar(y)a, II 1, 74, 99, 114, 1 IS, 154, 315,
Visnuvarddhana, II 294. 
316, 317, 318, 322, 325, 326, 327 328, 329,
Visser (de), II 68, 71, 212, 260, 273, 314, 320, 
331, 332.
323 
Yogacaryabhumiyaatra, II 75.
Visuddbi-magga, 232. 
Yog&vacara, II 330.
Vogel, 404, II 134, 250, 347, 348, 351. 
Yogifvara, II 302.
Vokkana, 285, 298, 301. 
Yule, 1, II 150, 336, 337, 338.
Vratavad&nam&la, 51, 
Yun-kang, 132, 153, 157, 160, 165, 168, *72,
Vreede, 243. 
203. 214.
Vyaghrl-jataka, 316. 
IJzerinan, 17, 27.. 41, 48, 62, 238, 239, 245,
408, I I 95, 151,269, 276, 293,238, 339, 341.
Waddell, 77, 240, II 9, 99, 155, 167, 308, 323,
324. 
Zachariae, 313.
21085
«
a y*


--- Page 370 ---
y \ ©' )*) 
'•
• 'fl'."’^' s' 
, 
.a 
», ,* 
i 
is«ii.^, 
-.5
M ij/ 
'fB f ^ W
H S r ^ m $TW 
jj,® ^ « ,?V 
rfv <4'** tf.** »* 
%/,«. 
I iy? /A 
^ |s w ^ # U\ ’t ' 
W$i IfpL P ^ 
*
INSCRIPTIONS ON INNER-8 EMTN'T.
HKUOTYPfc, VAN LEtH AM STERDAM
■$ 
/§ 
s> 
.'. I’:/; 
v;.> 
■ y/:' 
s 
j 
. .^
,?
y |ft/
j
 t 
i!?
i,sM\^i>i-r ^ ^ v 
? ;|f 
^ 1 vi ^ 
\ 
■ 
■■* 
1


--- Page 371 ---
/ 
I 
I ; 
* 
/Plate ft.
I ® ? 
<SL
v 
.'«v^>^' ■; 
si 
} J J t \ 
‘A^isJ’/ ^ i ,f'$!$ 1 jj, 
t ’ i f, 'h >.k ^ V* ' 
v * ‘'V ! < 4.11' 
'< 0 \ t ^ * ff f 
<4.rHi-* . 1 v,,‘ 
j 
^
^
 1 *« 
^*4 
' 
|
f
' 
1
v, 
■»;!#««MMiwaBiwir' '^:-mm ■ %£ 'gs ■» aag|Haisacsi*
|
•4 :i 
.v.'.'".",' •■ 
■ ■ 
•■'. 
<.;'y:y-.. 
,■'.. 
' 
'; 
. 
"" 
j '. 
■ 
.'■■.■:'.■■■ .V. 
'■ 
•,;■ 
.y;/'
INSCRIPTIONS ON INNER-BASsMENT.
**' 1$ 
* 
'}: - 
■' ■v-1 
,,; 
HELiOTYPE, VAN LEER, AM STERDAM .
