PRIZE  PUBLICATION  FUND 
VOL.  X 


THE 

PALI  LITERATURE 
OF  CEYLON 


a.  P.  MALALASEKERA.  PAD.,  M.A.  (London). 

LBCTUQBR  IN  RAX8XMT,  PALI.  AMD  81XIIAI.UK, 
UNIVERSITY  OULLEG1.  COLOMBO. 


?P!-'5lOct 

MouL_ 


PRINTED  AND  PUBLISHED  BT  THE 
ROYAL  ASIATIC  SOCIETY  or  GREAT  BRITAIN 
and  IRELAND 

LONDON 

1928 


■  •-  iiM ,  .•  I 


/ 


i°r 

c 


1 

o 

0 


To 

MALLIKA 

(M.H.R.) 

Whatever  the  touchet  the  tramfermt  into  Music,  into  Beauty,  title  Joy.'’ 


PREFATORY  NOTE 


I  am  deeply  beholden  to  the  Council  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society  of  Qreat  Britain  and  Ireland  for  having  accepted  this 
little  volume  to  be  issued  under  the  aegis  of  their  Prize 
Publication  Fund.  My  obligations  are  due  to  the  numerous 
scholars  who  have  gone  before  me  and  explored  the  fields  of 
Pili  Literature  in  Ceylon.  Their  pioneer  work  has  made  my 
efforts  pleasanter  and  more  fruitful  than  they  would  other¬ 
wise  have  been.  I  wish  also  to  express  ray  thanks  for 
guidance  and  inspiration  to  my  teachers  at  tho  School  of 
Oriental  Studies,  Professor  R.  L.  Turner,  Dr.  L.  D.  Barnott, 
Dr.  W.  Stcdc,  and  Mr.  M.  dc  Z.  Wickremasinghe,  and  to 
Mrs.  A.  de  Z.  Elliot  for  various  assistance  received.  I  have 
no  words  sufficient  to  convoy  my  heartfelt  gratitude  to  my 
Acariya,  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids,  but  for  whom  this  work  would 
never  have  seen  the  ligfy  of  day.  The  two  years  I  spent  in 
London  as  her  anfet&uta  have  been  one  of  the  happiest 
periods  of  iny  life,  and  I  am  indebted  to  her,  more  than  I 
can  express,  for  the  very  great  honour  she  has  conferred  on 
me  by  revising  this,  the  result  of  my  first  researches. 
Ciram  jl vatu  ! 

0.  P.  M. 

COLOMSO, 

Jan  nary,  1918. 


CONTENTS 


CHAP.  PAGE 

Introduction . 1 

I.  The  Conversion  of  Ceylon  .  .  .  .18 

II.  The  Writing  Down  of  the  Books  .  .  2G 

III.  The  Development  of  Buddhist  Culture  .  48 

IV.  The  Beginnings  of  Literary  Activity  .  65 

V.  Budduauhosa . 79 

VI.  Buddhaohosa’s  Successors  .  .  .  .102 

VII,  The  Pi li  Chronicles . 130 

VIII.  The  Dawn  of  the  Golden  Era  .  .147 

IX.  Tub  Auqu8tan  Age . 175 

X.  SIriputta’s  Circle . 196 

XI.  The  Age  of  Pajjdita  Parakrama  .  .  .  220 

XII.  Tub  Twilight  Glow  . 

XIII.  The  Dare  Age  . 

XTV.  The  Modern  Period  . 


§  §  § 


The  Pali  Literature  of  Ceylon 

Introduction 

rpHE  Pali  Literature  of  Ceylon  is  of  great  extent  and 
^  importance  and  also  of  multifarious  interest ;  it  is 
of  value  alike  to  the  historian  and  the  student  of  folklore, 
to  the  philologist  and  the  student  of  comparative  religion. 
Broadly  speaking,  it  may  be  classified  under  three  main  heads  : 
first,  the  Buddhist  Scriptures,  or  Tipilaka,  which  form  the 
PJLli  Canon ;  second,  the  Commentaries  (of  Buddhaghosa, 
his  contemporaries  and  successors),  cxegctic&l  expositions  of 
the  text  of  the  Tijritaka,  compiled,  as  wo  have  them  now, 
only  after  the  fifth  century  of  the  Christian  era,  but  alleged 
to  be  based  upon  records  of  distinctly  greater  antiquity ; 
and  third,  historical,  grammatical  and  other  works  on  secular 
subjects,  which  have  been  produced  by  scholars  at  various 
times  from  about  the  fifth  century  to  Die  present  day. 

Pali  had  probably  ceased  to  be  a  spoken  language  by  the 
time  it  was  introduced  into  Ceylon ;  but  that  does  not 
seem  in  any  way  to  have  lessened  the  interest  which  it  evoked 
in  the  minds  of  the  scholars  of  the  island.  To  them  it  was  of 
no  pagan  stock ;  they  had  no  difficulty  in  assimilating  the 
philosophic  culture  of  a  religion,  which  hod  come  into  birth 
and  attained  to  power  in  a  country  which  they  themselves 
claimed  as  the  motherland ;  they  were  onua-jala  (bosom- 
born)  spiritual  children  of  India,  their  lives  and  minds 
nourished  on  her  age-long,  yet  living  and  growing,  traditions. 
When  Buddhism  was  introduced  into  the  island,  under  the 
aegis  of  the  Emperor  Asoka,  they  found  in  its  teachings  the 
development  of  essentially  thoir  own  genius.  Pali  was  the 
language  consecrated  as  the  instrument  of,  as  it  is  colled,  “  the 
Buddha’s  word,"  and  in  order,  therefore,  to  realize  to  the 
fullest  extent  the  value  of  the  heritage  which  the  blaster  had 
bequeathed  to  them,  they  devoted  their  attention  to  the  study 

1 


2 


THK  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


of  that  language.  To  a  nation  little  accustomed  to  traffic, 
and  therefore  free  from  the  endless  difficulties  and  anxieties 
which  trade  produces  on  society  in  general,  the  cultivation 
of  letters  was  not  only  an  indispensable  pursuit,  but  a 
delight.  In  the  Scriptures  of  the  religion  which  thence¬ 
forward  became  the  national  faith  Ceylon  found  material  for 
endless  contemplation  ;  each  succeeding  sovereign,  interested 
in  the  people’s  welfare  and  in  the  development  of  hi*  own 
spiritual  nature,  rendered  them  essential  service  in  this  respect, 
extending  his  munificent  patronage  to  all  whose  lives  were 
engaged  in  the  pursuit  of  literary  study. 

Within  a  moderate  period  men  of  the  Sinhalese  race  had 
acquired  proficiency  in  the  use  of  the  Pali  tongue ,  its 
phraseology,  at  once  soft  and  sonorous,  smooth -flowing  and 
capable  of  employment  as  a  language  of  culture  and  science, 
appealed  to  tbeir  imagination  and  kindled  their  power  of 
expression.  Pali  became  their  literary  dialect,  raised  to  a 
position  of  dignity  which,  in  spite  of  many  vicissitudes,  it 
still  retains.  Quito  soon  afterwards  scholars  began  to  compose 
works  in  Pali,  so  that  the  knowledge  which  they  hud  garnered 
in  the  course  of  their  studios  might  be  recorded  for  the  benefit 
of  generations  yet  unborn. 

The  earliest  attempt  at  such  writings  that  has  come  down 
to  us  is  the  Dipa-wiinta,  a  work  generally  assigned  to  the 
fourth  or  fifth  century.1  From  that  time  onwards  there  was 
a  succession  of  authors  of  literary  compilations,  who  wrote 
unremittingly,  though  there  were  periods  of  special  activity. 
The  Pali  language  continued  to  be  assiduously  cultivated ; 
kings  and  princes,  nobles  and  statesmen  vied  with  one  another 
in  Pali  composition,  and  laymen  and  monks  contributed 
Pali  works,  some  of  which  can  rank  among  the  notable 
productions  of  the  literature  of  the  world.  Rooks  were  written 
on  all  conceivable  subjects :  exegesis  and  law,  medicine  and 
poetry,  religion  and  folklore,  history  and  philosophy,  prosody 
ar.d  rhetoric — an  array  of  extensive  volumes  on  all  that  in 
1  Sco  diaconkm  on  Uio  Dip a-nuque  in  Chap.  VII. 


INTRODUCTION 


3 


their  day  chiefly  engaged  the  attention  of  mankind.  The 
high  degree  of  the  intellectual  attainments  and  the  culture  and 
refinement  to  which  the  Sinhalese  had  reached  in  the  hey-day 
of  their  prosperity  is  fairly  indicated  by  what  now  remains  of 
the  art  displayed  in  the  design  and  decoration  of  their  religious 
edifices,  the  science  exhibited  in  the  conception  and  execution 
of  their  stupendous  irrigation  works,  and  in  the  beautiful 
ideals  of  love  and  service  and  devotion  which  appear  to  have 
been  the  staple  of  their  best  poetry. 

Unfortunately  for  us,  however,  a  large  part  of  this  ancient 
literature  has  been  irretrievably  lost. 

The  Sinhalese  have  ever  been  a  domestic,  not  a  political 
people.  Lulled  by  a  sense  of  security  in  their  ixlund-home, 
set  in  the  silver  sea,  the  people  did  not  provide  sufficient 
safeguards  for  the  protection  of  their  possessions  and 
industries.  Having  but  few  needs  of  their  own,  they  lavished 
their  wealth  upon  their  religious  edifices,  which  they  decorated 
with  a  profusion  of  precious  metals  and  valuable  gems,  such 
os  were  highly  prised  and  could  easily  be  carried  away.  They 
thus  attracted  the  attention  of  their  rapacious  neighbours,  who 
from  time  to  time  swooped  down  upon  their  defenceless  coasts, 
ravaging  and  plundering  the  wealth  of  the  land.  On  several 
occasions  these  marauders  succeeded  in  establishing  them¬ 
selves  on  the  throne  of  the  island,  and  in  exercising  supreme 
power.  Their  rule  was  marked  by  much  cruelty  and  oppression, 
and  not  the  least  of  the  damage  they  perpetrated  was  the 
systematic  destruction  of  whatever  literary  records  fell  into 
their  hands. 

But  the  country’s  foes  were  not  nil  from  without.  More 
than  once  in  the  course  of  its  history  the  Saiigha  in  Oeylon 
was  rent  asunder  by  violent  schisms,  resulting  from  the 
propagation  of  heresy  within  its  ranks.  Like  a  hydra-headed 
monster,  the  V aiiuiya  vada  every  now  and  then  showed 
signs  of  vitality,  until  its  final  destruction  by  Parakrama- 
Bahu  the  Great,  in  a.D.  1165.  And  sometimes  it  came  to  pass 
that  the  heretics  gained  the  confidence  of  the  ruling  monarchs, 


4 


THE  TAI.I  LITERATURE  OF  CEYI.ON 


who,  to  show  their  hatred  of  the  recusant  Thtriya  NihSya, 
because  of  their  obstinate  adherence  to  the  orthodox  religion, 
commanded  that  their  temples  should  be  confiscated  and 
demolished,  and  their  books  be  collected  and  a  bonfire  made 
of  them.  Of  the  literature  of  the  Vaituhja-vSdint  themselves 
not  a  trace  is  left ;  for  the  kings  of  Ceylon,  in  the  excess  of 
their  seal  for  the  preservation  of  the  purity  of  the  faith, 
born  of  their  passionate  attachment  to  the  Thcra-vuda 
fraternity,  saw  to  it  that  not  a  vestige  of  their  heretical 
teachings  should  survive.  And  finally,  towards  the  close  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  ltfja  Sift  ha  I  of  Sltavaka,  embittered 
against  Buddhism,  because  of  the  treachery  of  certain  members 
of  the  Seiigha,  openly  embraced  a  foreign  faith,  became 
virulently  hostile  to  the  Buddhist  priesthood,  drove  them  from 
their  temples  and  destroyed  their  librarios. 

Amidst  all  these  ravages,  however,  a  good  deal  of  the  Pali 
literature  of  Ceylon  has  survived,  due  mainly  to  the  pious 
caro  of  its  loyal  custodians.  Regardless  of  personal  danger 
and  steadfast  in  their  devotion  to  all  learning,  humble 
and  ascetic  in  garb,  the  monks  have  preserved  for  us  through 
the  ages  something  of  that  heritage  of  wisdom  which  drew 
to  Ceylon’s  shores  in  ancient  times  men  from  Burma  and  Siam 
and  distant  China  in  search  of  her  intellectual  treasures  far 
more  valuable  than  her  pearls  and  rubies,  her  elephants  and 
peacocks.  And  it  happened  that  these  soekors  of  knowledge 
carried  back  with  them  into  their  native  lauds  copicR  of 
the  books  which  they  had  come  across  in  their  travels ;  and, 
when  Ceylon  had  lost  many  of  her  books  of  priceless  value, 
the  Sinhalese  were  able  to  restore  them  from  copies  collected 
elsewhere.1 

Ever  since  the  advent  of  the  Portuguese  into  the  island  in 
the  sixteenth  century  European  scholars  had  evinced  a  certain 
amount  of  interest  in  the  literature  of  the  Sinhalese, 

1  Thu*  OMenbcrg  My*  that  aJl  the  copic*  of  the  Dlpaiaiqua  which  Ice 
mw  boro  auric*  of  being  copies  from  one  Burmese  original .  (Dip..  Introd., 
P-  H.)  Awl  Tumour  ( Jmtm.  As.  8<x.  Btngol.  ri.  p.  700)  «nyi  that  hi* 
copy  w»»  obtained  from  MSS.  brought  to  Ceylon  from  Siam. 


INTRODUCTION 


5 


particularly  in  the  books  dealing  with  the  history  of  Ceylon. 
But  for  quite  a  long  time  it  was  believed  that  the  Sinhalese 
annals  were  devoid  of  materials  of  historical  value  ;  that  their 
roligious  literature  contained  nothing  but  the  ravings  of 
fanaticism  ;  that  their  other  works  were  all  myth  and  romance, 
wearisome  in  thoir  monotonous  inanity.1  It  was  not  till  about 
1826  that  the  discovery  was  made  that  Ceylon  was  in  posses¬ 
sion  of  continuous  written  chronicles  in  Pali,  not  only  rich  in 
Authentic  facta  about  the  history  of  the  island,  but  also 
yielding  valuable  materials  for  unravelling  the  meshos  of 
Induin  chronology.  A  young  civil  servant,  George  Tumour, 
in  charge  of  the  administration  of  the  district  at  the  foot  of 
Ceylon’s  holy  mountain,  Samanta-kfita  (Adam’s  Peak),  had 
been  studying  P&li  under  the  guidance  of  a  Buddhist  monk  ; 
and  the  investigations  which  he  mode  into  certain  rare  and 
valuable  manuscripts,  led  him  to  publish  a  series  of  articles 
in  the  Journal  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  under  tho  heading 
of  "  The  Pali-Buddhistical  Annals  Therein  he  demon¬ 
strated  that  Ceylon  possessed  a  connected  history  of  over 
2,300  years,  authenticated  by  the  concurrence  of  every 
evidence  which  could  contribute  to  verify  the  annals  of  any 
country.*  At  the  moment  Frinsop  was  endeavouring  to 
decipher  the  mysterious  Buddhist  inscriptions  of  “  Piyadassi  ”, 
scattered  over  Hindustan,  and  the  identification  of 
“  Piyadassi  ”  with  Aaoka,  made  possible  by  the  discovery 
of  the  Ceylon  chronicles,  proved  to  be  to  him  of  the  utmost 
importance. 

The  value  of  the  Buddhist  records  in  the  scholarship  of 
the  East  was  thus  brought  home  to  research  students  more 
than  ever  before  ;  and  a  new  seat  was  added  to  their  greater 
and  closer  scrutiny.  In  1833  Edward  Upham  made  at  the 
request  of  Sir  Alexander  Johnston,  Chief  Justice  of  Ceylon, 
translations  of  the  Maha-vatrua,  together  with  two  chronicles 
in  Sinhalese  (the  Raja-ratndkara  and  the  R&j&vati)  and  published 

1  &e  e.g.  Valcntyn,  Oud  «n  .Vic cue  Oa»l- 1 nditn,  172ft,  It,  p,  SO. 

•  V,  p.  <121  j  rt.  pp.  200.  700,  1049. 


6 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


them  in  three  volumes  under  the  title  The  Sacrtd  and  Historical 
Books  of  Ceylon.1  Upbam’s  translations  included  eighty -eight 
of  the  hundred  chapter#  of  the  Mahd-vamta.  It  was  found, 
however,  that  hi#  pioneer  work  was  full  of  inaccuracies  ;  and 
in  1837  Tumour  made  a  fresh  translation  of  the  MaAd-vamta. 
Only  thirty-eight  chapter#  of  thi#  work  were  published, 
accompanied  by  the  Pali  text,  Tnrnour  dying  before  his 
task  was  completed.*  In  the  Introduction  to  this  translation 
Tumour  gave  a  r4sum£  of  the  contents  of  his  articles  written 
for  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society's  Journal,  and  added  a  short 
dissertation  on  the  Pali  language  and  a  few  of  its  more 
important  grammatical  works.  In  addition  to  this  he  gave,  in 
an  Appendix,  a  detailed  account  of  the  Tiptiaka,  as  to  its 
arrangement  and  divisions.  He  also  drew  the  attention  of 
scholars  to  the  fact  that  in  no  port  of  the  world  were  there 
greater  facilities  for  the  study  of  Pali  than  in  Ceylon,  and  that 
in  addition  to  the  historical  material  in  that  language,  the 
importance  of  which  had  been  hitherto  but  little  understood 
and  imperfectly  illustrated,  there  existed  many  doctrinal  and 
metaphysical  works  on  Buddhism  still  extensively  and 
critically  studied  by  the  monks  of  Ceylon* 

The  missionaries  who  had  come  to  the  island  had  already 
addressed  themselves  to  the  task  of  learning  both  Pali  and 
Sinhalese,  so  that  they  might  ascertain  the  nature  of  the 
religion  which  they  were  attempting  to  displace ;  and,  in 
order  to  facilitate  the  work  of  their  fellow-labourers 
in  the  field,  they  published  translations  in  English  of  several 
of  the  books  which  had  come  under  their  notice.  But  for  many 
year#  to  come  no  attempt  was  made  by  scholars  at  a  systematic 
study  of  the  literature  of  Ceylon,  whereby  their  books  and  their 
authors  might  be  placed  in  some  sort  of  chronological  sequence. 
The  meagreneaa  of  the  published  materials  made  the  task 
doubly  difficult. 

1  London.  Psrbery,  Allen  Jt  Co.  (1633). 

1  Ceylon,  Cotta  Oureti  Minion  Press  (1837). 

*  Introd.,  p.  xxv. 


]  tf"fE  0  DUCTl  i>H 


7 


The  (inst  attempt  to  prepare  a  Catalogue  of  the  literary 
works  of  Ceylon  was  made  by  the  Rev.  Spence  Hardy,  who, 
in  the  course  of  a  residence  of  twenty  years  (E  825-15)  in  the 
inland,  had  made  a  collection  of  whatever  manuscripts  he 
happened  to  come  across.  At  a  meeting  of  the  Ccykwi  Erftnch 
of  the  Boyfd  Asiatic  Society,  held  in  Colombo  on  the, 
Sftth  February,  JL&lfi,  he  rend  ouG  &  Jist,  compiled  hy  him,  of 
“  Rooks  in  tho  Fuli  arid  Sirih&Lcee  Languages •  this  list  WAS 
published  in  tho  Society1*  Journal  in  the  aomc  year.1  It  was 
a  hate  enumeration  of  names  of  hooka,  often  wrongly  Hpelt  \ 
n.0  mention  was  mad  a  of  their  Authors,  or  of  the  dates  of  their 
compilation,  and  the  listwuS  necessarily  incomplete.  In  1652 
James  D'Alu-fcS,  one  of  the  most  erudite  HChoEArA  of  Ceylon 
during  tho  laRt  century,  published  his  monumental  work,  an 
English  translation  of  Vcddra'is  SiablkH  grammar,  the 
Sidat-sal\ga™.  In  a  masterly  Introduction,  extending  to  over 
two  hundred  pagfcft,  he  traced  tire  development  of  Sinhalese 
And  gave  a  continuous  history  of  tho  books  written  in  that 
language  froui  the  earliest  time*  to  his  own  day.  Unfortunately 
for  09,  however,  L'AJwis  confined  himself  tlierem  exclusively 
to  compilations-  made  in  Siultaleae,  and,  beside  a  hare  mention 
of  n  few  Pali  work*,  no  particulars  were  given  of  scholars  who 
wrote  in  Pali. 

In  ■JSflSh  during  the  regime  of  Sir  Hercules  Robinson, 
Governor  of  Ceylon,  was  os-tab  Els  hid  the  Government  Oriental 
Library  of  Ceylon,  containing  a  collection  of  hooks  in  Pali, 
Sinhahme,  and  ftanskrifc.  D'Alwis  was  invited  by  t  he  Governor 
to  undertake  to  compile  a  catalogno  of  the  hooks  contained  tn 
the  Library,  and  &uch  other  valuable  and  unknown  manu¬ 
scripts  as,  were  nnt  available  therein,,  but  were  to  bo  found  in 
the  Temple  Libraries  of  the  island.  Ho  very  public -spiritedly 
accepted  the  invitation.  Rut  before  tho  work  could  be  oven 
fairly  completed  IVAlwis  departed  this  life.  He  had  written 
descriptive  accounts  of  twenty-three  books,  eleven  of  which 
were  compilations  in  Pali,  and  these  were  published  in  1970, 
1  JRAS.  (dtjika  fMSfllJ,  vet,  1,  Hi  3,  jip.  ISC  HI, 


8 


THE  PALI  UTRJUTURK  OP  CBYIX5N 


os  vol.  i  of  A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  Sanskrit,  Pali,  and 
Sinhalese  Literary  Works  of  Ceylon.1  D’Alwis  did  not  satisfy 
himself  with  merely  giving  a  list  of  books  with  their  titles 
and  author’s  names,  and  specifying  tho  subject  of  which  they 
treated  ;  he  gave  detailed  descriptions  of  the  books  themselves, 
illustrating  his  statements  with  oopious  quotations. 

The  work  so  well  begun  remained  in  abeyance  until  the 
appointment  of  Louis  de  Zoysa,  Chief  Interpreter  Mudaliar, 
to  pay  official  visits  to  the  temple  libraries  of  tho  island  And  to 
find  particulars  of  the  literary  treasures  they  contained.  In 
a  report  submitted  to  the  Government  in  1876  he  mentions 
that,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  he  was  a  Christian,  on  the  whole 
he  had  met  with  a  very  favourable  recaption  from  the  heads  of 
the  various  Buddhist  monasteries.  Only  in  three  or  four 
instances  docs  he  seem  to  have  been  received  with  a  good  deal 
of  distrust,  the  monks  evidently  suspecting  Government  of 
some  design  upon  their  collections  t  The  results  of  his  mission 
were  not  inconsiderable ;  he  carried  out  his  task  with  great 
tact  and  energy,  and  his  report  is  interesting  reading.  Perhaps 
the  greatest  find  was  a  copy  of  the  Sinhalese  gloss  on  the 
Dhamma-pada,  which,  excepting  the  Mihintale  Inscription, 
is  the  oldest  known  specimen  of  Sinhalese  prose.  A  strange 
fate  seems  to  have  been  ordained  for  all  those  who  undertook 
to  make  catalogues  of  the  temple  libraries,  and  De  Zoysa 
too  fell  a  victim  to  this  unrelenting  decree,  for  he  died  before 
his  work  could  be  finished.  However,  the  Government  issued 
as  much  of  the  catalogue  as  had  been  completed.*  The  works 
were  included  under  several  heads :  the  Pali  MSS.  being 
divided  into  Canonical  works.  Commentaries,  filed  or  Scholia, 
General  Religious  Works,  Historical  Works  and  Grammatical 
uud  Philological  Works.  In  regard  to  most  of  the  MSS. 
mentioned  no  further  details  were  given,  except  the  title  of 
the  book,  sUe,  place  of  deposit,  author,  date  (hypothetical  in 
many  cases)  and  subject. 

*  Government  Printing  Proas,  1886. 

*  Colombo.  Government  Printing  Prom.  1870. 


JKTRODOOfJON 


E> 

Mr,  M,  i.l  i-  Z.  Wickrcmasi  ughe,  then  AbsLvtMlt  Librarian 
□f  the  Colombo  Mumi  Library,  was  appointed  to  complete 
the  work  that  had  been  assigned  to  Be  Zoyaa.  He  paid  visit* 
t&  juftay  of  tha  temptaa  which  Lad  hitherto  been  neglected, 
a  slid  the  results  of  his  researches  were  embodied  in  the 
Administration  Reports  of  the  Colombo  Museum  ISSO-S. 
These  were  later  put  together  wilder  tbo  title  of  the  Catalogue 
of  the  Colombo  Museum  Government  Oriental  Library.1 

Meanwhile  the  British  Museum  had  been  enquiring  by 
purchase  and  pcWKliation  a  collection  of  Sinhalese  AL3S., 
and  in  1S9&  the  Trustees  invited  Mr.  Wiekreiuasinghe  to 
compile  a  Catalogue  of  Sinhalese  MSfj.  i  n  the  British  Museum, 
03  jjnrt  of  tins  serin  of  the  catalogues,  of  I, he  MSH.  in  the 
languages  of  India,  which  Were  then  in  course  of  publication. 
Thia  catalogue  waa  finally  published  by  the  British  Museum 
in  1900,  Tiro  historical  Introduction  to  this  Catalog  lift,  though 
it  contains  Only  twenty-five  pages,  forms  by  far  the  moat 
authentic,  account  Of  the  literature  of  Ceylon  hitherto 
published  By  the  very  nature  ef  his  work  Air..  Wickrenuitunghe 
was  precluded  from  giving  more  than  the  names  of  the  Ceylon 
scholars  who  wrote  in  Fair,  and  the  titJw  of  their  compositions  ", 
hut  ha  has  dong  valuable  service  in  firing  tha  periods  of  several 
scholars  whose  works  had  till  then  been  floating  dateless  on 
the  sea  of  chronology. 

Sometime  later  the  library  of  Hugh  Novtll  waa  acquired 
after  his  death,  by  the  British  Museum  and  joiued  to  their 
Oriental  Collection.  Nevill  was  for  many  yeans  in  the  Ceylon 
Civil  Service ,  and  during  his  stay  in  the  island  had  travelled 
extensively  in  Search  of  rare  and  unknown  M&£>.  Hie  waa 
immensely  interested  in  the  literature  of  Caylmn,  and  at  the 
time  of  bis  death  was  engaged  in  the  preparation  of  a  catalogue, 
of  his  collection,  prefaced  by  a  historical  survey.  Ills  catalogue 
now  farms  part  of  the  Nevill  Collection  of  the  Oriental  Section 
of  the  British  Museum  Library  ;  and  it  is  hoped  that  aUps 


1  Gevornuem  Rceerd  Oflioe,  ISM. 


10 


THK  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


may  be  taken  soon  to  publish  some  of  the  works  included  in 
it  which  are  at  present  not  known  to  exist  elsewhere. 

No  account  of  the  attempts  to  give  a  continuous  history  of 
the  PAli  Literature  of  Ceylon  would  be  complete  without  a 
reference  to  that  monumental  work,  Childers’s  Pali  Dictionary, 
first  published  in  1875.  There,  in  his  Introduction,  besides 
giving  an  account  of  the  books  of  the  Tipitaka  and  of 
Buddhoghosa’s  Commentaries,  Childers  made  brief  mention 
of  one  or  two  other  works  in  Pali,  such  os  the  Sara-sahgaha 
and  the  Abhidhammattha-sangaha.  Reference  has  also  to  be 
made  to  the  article  published  in  the  Indian  Antiquary  by 
the  Rev.  Thomas  Foulkes  on  the  Vicissitudes  of  Ceylon 
Literature} 

Among  the  Pali  compilations  themselves  but  two  works 
devote  any  attention  to  chronicling  the  history  of  literature. 
The  first  is  the  Saddhamma-safigaha,  by  an  author  named 
Dhammakitti,  who  lived  probably  at  the  end  of  the  fourteenth 
century.  It  is  a  history  of  Buddhism  in  Ceylon,  and  one  of 
its  chapters  (ix)  is  devoted  to  making  a  record  of  the  books 
that  had  been  written  from  the  earliest  times  down  to  the 
end  of  the  reign  of  Parakraraa-Bahu  the  Great  (a.d.  1164- 
97).  This  account  contains  several  inaccuracies,  and  the 
author  follows  no  chronological  sequence  ;  but  it  is  of  value 
in  showing  what  works  were  recognised  as  authoritative  at 
the  period  in  which  it  was  written.  The  other  is  a  much  later 
composition,  by  Acariya  Vimalasara  Them,  who  completed 
and  published  his  poem  in  a.d.  1880.  It  is  called  the  Sdsana- 
vamsa-dtpa,  and  is  a  history  of  the  Buddhist  church  in  the 
island.  The  eleventh  chapter  gives  a  list  of  the  authors  who 
flourished  in  Ceylon  from  the  time  of  Buddhaghosa  to  the 
reign  of  Papd'ta  Parakrama-Bdhu  (a.d.  1240-75),  together 
with  the  names  of  their  compilations.  This  list  also  contains 
several  works  of  Burmese  authors  which  were  introduced  to 
Ceylon  from  time  to  time. 

Apart  from  these  SubhQti  Them,  in  the  Introduction  to  hia 
*  Inti.  A* Uq.,  xrii,  pp.  100,  128. 


IKTHQBtKmOlf 


n 


jVajHH-MtdJiflj  published  iu  1 876,  ga yc  a  very  valuable  historical 
survey  of  the  Pljli  grammatical  literature  of  Ceylon,  A  similar 
account  is  contained  in  DlisrntHMnmii'ii  J  fitted  uciic-ti  U>  I  lift 
edition  Of  RahuhCft  published  in  1S13S.1 

With  fhiMO  two  work?  and  the  Qlsaiia-vanisa-dipa,  and  the 
Nikayasafigraha 1  as  his-  basis,  hlcdbsnanda  Theta  wrote  a 
historical  Introduction  to  bis  TMi  pc«mt  the  Jffefl.-ixiuisso- 
rfipniiT,  published  in  191V  giving  an  account  of  tbs  Buddhist 
Sjingha  in  Ceylon  and  of  ths  works  of  Buddhist  monks. 

Short  biographical  roe  mo  ire  of  individual  authors,  together 
with  descriptions  of  their  compositioni,.  OH  a  ho  to  be  found 
in  the  various  editions  of  them  published  by  scholars  both 
in  the  East  and  the  West,  and  in  essays  dealing  with 
particular  bonks  that  have  appeared  in.  variotu  journals  and 
periodicals,  in  this  connexion  mention  must  he  made  of  the 
Life  coisT  Work  tf  tiuMheghasa,  by  Bimaia  CharAn  Lftvr.* 
Thtrfi,  with  commendable  energy,  the  author  baft  gathered 
together  a  large  imrs  of  valuable  material  concerning  the  great 
Commentator,  which  will  be  of  the  utmost  help  in  any  study 
of  Pali  literature. 

After  these  preliminary  observations  a  word  may  also  he 
said  about  the  method  of  treatment  adopted  in  this  present 
dissertation,  The  earliest,  Pali  work  that  kaa  come  down  to  our 
times  dates  only  from  the  fourth  century  a.O.  Perhaps  at 
drat  sight,  it  might  appear  as  if  too  much  space  has  been, 
allotted  in  the  earlier  chapters  to  a  consideration  of  the  hifltMy 
of  Ceylon — apart  from  any  liMrury  productions — dining  the 
period  prior  to  that  date.  BthotlM  ba  borne  in  mind,  however, 
that  the  literature  of  a  country  cannot  bs  separated  from 
the  life  of  its  people  ;  books  are  bat  an  index  to  the  intellectual 
development  to  which  men  have  attained  in  their  reaction 
to  tbo  environment  in  which  they  live  And  mnvaand  have  their 
being.  Tn  the  literature  of  an  country  in  the  world  doci  tbift 
observation  apply  more  forcibly  than  to  that  of  Ceylon, 


3  l$7ti  ;  lUDrenlw,  IBBfl. 

T  Colombo,  1H7, 


fl.v. 

CJulnaM*.  nil. 


12 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


where  literary  productivity  has  been  mainly  a  result  of  tho 
sedulous  attention  and  the  munificent  patronage  of  kings  and 
rulers  and  the  support  extended  to  the  monks  by  an  ever 
generous  and  grateful  lay  community.  Pali  literature  grow 
only  with  tho  advancement  of  Buddhist  culture,  and  some  idea 
of  the  development  of  that  culture  and  civilization  is  essential 
to  enable  us  to  ace  its  literature  in  a  true  perspective. 
The  same  holds  true  of  the  period  of  the  decay  of  literary 
activity,  which  the  last  three  centuries  have  witnessed  and 
which  is  a  result  of  tho  neglect  of  Ceylon’s  spiritual  heritage, 
and  an  unduo  attention  to  a  civilization  extraneous  to  the 
genius  of  the  people. 

This  attempt  to  give  a  continuous  and  oonnectcd  history 
of  an  intellectual  movement  which,  in  spite  of  the  many 
vicissitudes  it  has  undergone  during  tho  course  of  twenty- 
four  centuries,  will  yet  come  to  bo  included  in  the  annals  of 
the  scholarship  of  the  world,  is  inevitably  full  of  deficiencies 
and  imperfections.  The  searchlight  of  modern  critical  research 
has  only  of  late  been  directed  to  tho  study  of  PAli  literature. 
Instances  are  numerous  where  scholars  are  not  agreed  os  to 
the  date  and  origin  of  particular  books,  and  in  the  absence  of 
direct  evidence  conclusions  must  necessarily  be  uncertain. 
Bat,  os  time  goes  on  and  our  knowledge  of  the  subject  grows, 
there  is  reason  to  believe  that  there  will  come  a  gradual 
narrowing  of  issues  and  an  approximation  to  concurrence  of 
opinion.  Such  is  the  cherished  hope  in  which  this  effort  has 
been  made — the  hope  that  it  may  serve  as  an  unpretentions 
stepping-stono  to  a  fuller  and  a  closer  study  of  the  history  of 
the  PAli  literature  of  Ceylon. 


CHAPTER  I 

Tilt  Cohtbesioh  of  Cryj^ok 


TflOR  all  practical  purpose*  H.h-e  lLlstcisfy  of  Buddhism  in 
Ceyloa,  and,  therefore,  the  history  of  the  Puli  literature 
which  records  the  results  of  thnt  grout  spiritual  movement, 
begins  from  the  earlier  (mrt  of  the  third  century  it.c-  Ic  Htorta 
with  the  arrival  of  the  mi6aioii.aries  sent  from  India  by  the 
Buddhist  Bra  pe  Hi  I  Asoka.  It  wonld,  nevertheless,  be  incorrect 
to  suppose  that  prior  to  that  event  Eho  Boddha  end  his 
teachings  were  altogether  unknown  to  Use  inland.  Indeed, 
there  is  evidence  to  the  contrary. 

The  primitive  history  of  Ceylon,  like  the  ancient  histories 
of  all  nations,  3a  mvalejicd  in  fable  f  and,  although  latter-day 
chroniclers  have  r&fiOrded  for  0»r  benefit  events  extending 
far  down  tlift  vista  of  time,  their  accouuts  a  fiord  Uft.  very 
little  ul  historical  importance  concern  li)|j  the  earliest  times. 
It  would  almost  fleem  from  tlneir  mariner  of  describing  those 
remote  happenings  that  they  were  not  jKrepared  to  vouch 
for  their  Htrlet  accuracy,  and  that  they  did  not  regard  it  ns  their 
puipoee  to  record  anythin#  (Ulterior  to  the  advent  of  the  last 
Buddha,  Gotama. 

Far  to  these  011101)1010™  the  history  of  Ceylon  was  the  h  istory 
of  the  Stnhaltao  people ,  anrl  tho  Si  nliubsc  people  wore,  above 
ftil  else,  the  custodians,  appointed,  it  was  believed,  by  the 
Master  himself,  of  that  subtime.  body  of  teaching  which  bt 
gave  to  mankind.  To  give  to  the  Sinhalese  their  authority 
for  carrying  out  the  mission  that  had  been  entrusted  to  them 
the  Buddha  is  said  to  have  visited  the  Island  thrice,  so  that 
he  might  honour  and  purify  with  bin  holy  presence  the  fond 
which  was  to  ha  the  future  home  of  the  Sinhalese  lute.  Tim 
old  chronicles,  such  as  the  dfafld-™  own  and  fJijw-Uflttisiff, 
give  vivid  descriptions  of  these  visits — made  in  the  fifth  month, 
the  fifth  year,  and  the  eighth  year  after  the  Enlightenment. 
How  much  of  truth  there  ie  in  these  descriptions  we  h&vc  no 


u 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


way  of  ascertaining  at  this  distant  date;  but  that  the  tradition 
was  a  very  old  one,  there  is  no  doubt  at  all.  The  oldest  of  the 
Ceylon  chronicles,  the  Dipa-vayua,1  written  in  the  fourth 
century  a.d.,  mentions  it.  The  SamarUa-patadUo, 
Buddhagboea’s  commentary  on  the  Vinaya-Pifaka,  records 
it  in  the  historical  section,1  and  the  Mahd-vamta,  Ceylon’s 
beat  known  chronicle,  gives  a  graphic  account  of  the  visits, 
with  a  wealth  of  detail.1  (The  Samania  pdsadHa  belongs  to 
the  latter  half  of  the  fifth  century,  and  the  Maha-vamsa  to 
the  earlier  part  of  the  sixth  century  a.d.)  There  exist  to  the 
present  day  the  remains  of  a  monument,  erected  in  164  B.c. 
by  King  I>utthagamani,  on  the  spot  where  the  Buddha  was 
supposed  to  have  touched  the  earth  on  his  first  visit.4  It 
is  quite  probable  that  the  Dipa-mmta  account,  the  earliest 
record  which  we  have  at  present,  was  borrowed  from  an 
even  earlier  source.  For  the  author  tells  us  that  his  work 
was  based  on  earlier  redactions,  the  Sihala-AUhokatha  (the 
Sinhalese  commentaries),  which  contained  besides  exegetical 
matter  on  the  Pilaka,  also  material  of  a  historical  character 
“twisted  into  a  garland  of  history  from  generation  to 
generation  like  ilowere  of  many  kinds  It  is  significant 
that  the  Pali  canon  itself,  which  gives  a  fairly  complete 
account  of  the  Teacher’s  doings  during  the  first  few  years  of 
his  ministry,  does  not  make  any  mention  of  a  visit  to  Ceylon.1 
We  may,  therefore,  bo  justified  in  concluding  that  the  story 
first  gained  currency  soon  after  the  officialjntroduction  of 
Buddhism  into  Ceylon  owing  to  the  religious  enthusiasm  of  the 
early  converts  and  their  national  sentiment,  which  oo-operatod 
in  producing  a  belief  associating  the  foundor  of  their  new 

>  Chip*.  I  and  II. 

*  P.T.R.  Ed.,  pp.  1  foil. 

*  If .  V.,  chap.  i.  vv.  10  fl. 

*  Ibid.,  i.  tv,  40-3. 

»  Dfp.,  f.  t.  4. 

'  It  Is  interesting  to  note  that  tho  Burmese  claim  a  visit  of  tho  Buddha 
to  Burma.  He  is  supposed  to  have  stayed  at  a  place  now  known  as  tho 
Lohitacandana  Viliira  (&4soim-«h»sj,  In  trod.,  p.  1J). 


THE  COKVKHfllOt?  Ow  CEVlQN 


16 

faith  with  the  dawn  uf  history  ill  their  ialand  homo,  which 
was  thus  made  for  CVor  Oftercd  to  them  by  the  touch  of  the 
Muster's  feet. 

Whatore?  ho  the  truth  underlying  the  accounts  of  these 
visits,  there  exists  other  evidence  which  makes  it  passible 
to  belt  by  a  that  prior  to  the  arrival  of  A&nka's  mins  ions  lies 
Buddhism  was  not  unVaown  to  Ceylon. 

The  known  history  of  the  Sinhalese  begins  wit] l  the  landing 
in  Ceylau  af  Yijayu  with  his  700  followers  in  S-13  b.q.,1 
according  to  the  Strict  orthodox  tradition  on  the  very  day 
of  the  Buddha's  death.' 

'fhore  is  room  for  suspecting,  as  Tumour  remarks  m  his 
Introduction  to  the  MaAa-WUH&a,*  that  sectarian  seal!  hail 
led  to  the  assignment  of  the  same  date  for  the  lauding  of 
Yijaya  as  to  the  cardinal  Buddhistical  event — the  death  of 
the  Buddha,  But  wo  may  confidently  hold  that  Vijaya  landed 
in  Ceylon  about  the  middle  of  the  eijith  century  nx3-  Ha  wus 
a  headstrong  Jind  hupetlKHUS  youth,  «ion  of  a  royal  rdra,  which 
lield  sway  over  the  country  of  Lfl|a  {or  Lata),  whose  capital 
was  Si hhupura,*,  Being  banished  from  hame  because  of  their 
misdeeds,  lie  slid  hia  fnllowere,  after  many  adventures  on  the 
way,  landed  in  Ceylon,  and  energetically  set  about  colonising 
tho  country. 

Day  Ion  was  inhabited  by  a  race  of  men  whom  Vijaya  and 

s  Accoidin^  la  Ccy]fln  (J?f,  %*y„  1,  pp-  l&S  fall.)  Wcitcm 

h:.1m:?1ilIv  iirLVi;  jnr  r  butd  (liii  data  vrwii;  bj  mini"  iMSiy  yi;ft.r*,  Out  riicriLt 
HMtrcfa,  wjwlIOIJy  a  new  and  rnnrs  critical  4tl><ty  ct  tlw  K  liir,,  tc-Ib 
IiiarrijitiM  in  tkn  HlEtii^urtiplia  (.'avc-,  Or  it.---,,  hu  ftiffiidicd  ‘  V  ►,  L  p  rui  p 
STnlrnni  that  l|u-  Ilivliika  mi  cnnEcmpomry  With  both  JSimknii.is  Mill 
Aj&Cp  'Tliii  la*  j  ipliuii  fixe*  tLo  lalLtr  at  aWut  S5i  P.C.,  aifcl  Jlicn- 

biiira,  tl»  XaUiar,  ftt  C,  WflE  ac~,  thus  supporting  the  Oyluri  clMri.  ViUn 
JJiAot  rcmt  Oriita  Rtma*tk  S^ktg  Jouru..  vnl.  tik  iiji-  42&-507  .  J HAS. 
IMS,  pp.  543-7\i  Ctyfv*  A*tty,  Lis.  Iitg.T  July.  1BK5,  jip.  00-7. 

■  Thru  t<H  M.  Jr..  V3r  v.  47.  I'ltfi  D.  V..  I*,  v.  S]r«-(Dni  tha  cvi-nt  to  Urn 
Uoi*  at  the  /WiisiMana.  The  iroAjtfajf.  a*sl(tii4  it  ta  tho  tiiu  year 
M  lli*i  4loatlL  al  tilt  Buddha  (bee.  eLUy. 

*  M.V.,  Transl.,  Intml,,  p.  li. 

4  yTflOifr  the  eoujilry  no*  (in  city  Fins  jvt  bet'll  tUHOls Fully  kJcnUlW- 
Fhitotofibta]  o villi! rui ci  ti-nrti  La  the  view  Ihit  Llw  original  iiOMA  of  VrJajf*. 
ms  in  X.  Et'U{ n-1  j  Et  It  not  iitj  purpose  to  Jiscusa  tt»  (jm'sliOii  Jmto. 


16 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


hia  companions  called  Yakkhas,  and  who  evidently  belonged 
to  an  earlier  colony  of  settlers  that  had  migrated  from  South 
India.1  For  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  Vijaya's  band  was 
only  one,  perhaps  the  best  known  and  the  most  powerful, 
of  colonists  who  had  gone  over  from  India  in  their  southward 
course. 1  Only  a  few  mile*  of  water  separate  Ceylon  from  the 
mainland.  Even  to-day  people  cross  over  in  kaUamarana, 
the  moat  primitive  of  all  modes  of  boat  save  that  of  the 
hollowed  log. 

Tho  country  already  possessed  a  certain  degree  of 
civilisation.  The  Yakkhaa  had  their  own  cities,  social 
institutions,  a  fairly  well-developed  language,  and  indubitable 
signs  of  accumulated  wealth.  Spence  Hardy  tells  ns  that 
Ixdkkapura,  the  Yakkha  capital,  which  Vijaya  visited  soon 
after  ho  had  landed,  is  no  mere  city  of  imagination,  as  its 
site  can  still  be  pointed  out  in  tho  district  of  Mutalc,  in  the 
Central  Province.*  One  of  Vijaya’s  first  acts  was  to  marry, 
under  romantic  circumstances,  a  Yakkha  princess,  by  name 
KnvSi>i.  Divested  of  obvious  exaggerations,  she  appears 
before  us  as  a  very  real  and  fascinating  lady,  whose  ideas, 
tastes,  and  language  harmonised  with  the  princely  character 
of  Vijaya.  And  she  had  charms  sufficiently  real  and  refine¬ 
ments  sufficiently  captivating  to  win  him  and  to  obtain  the 
honour  of  being  his  wife.  It  is  true  that  she  was  later  discarded 
in  favour  of  another ;  but  that  was  under  the  stress  of  political 
expediencies.  After  the  marriage  Vijaya  founded  the  city  of 
Tambapapoi  and  settled  down  there,  while  his  ministers 
set  about  to  form  separate  establishments,  each  for  himself, 

“  that  the  country  might  be  rendered  habitable  for  men,"  4 

*  Tfcnnent.  Ccyfaa,  i.  pp.  3X7  foil. 

•  8ir  W.  Jane*  aaid  that  lUma  "  oonqnorod  Silin  in  1810  ao.,"  Using 
hia  authority  on  tlic  Mm&ytna.  However  that  may  be.  there  ia  no  doubt 
that,  invited  by  tta  elephant#  and  pearl*,  the  fertility  of  tho  toll,  and  the 
aalubrity  and  the  rkhocaa  of  ita  prodneta,  tho  Indiana  aottlod  there  quite 
early,  even  if  their  oocupation  vM  not  cooval  with  that  of  India.  D'Alwk, 
Sidal  taAfarA,  Intred.,  p.  xi. 

•  JtUS.  (C.B.y.  i.  No.  3,  p.  101. 

*  Mja  ml,,  chap,  i,  If.K.,  vti,  v.  30. 


THE  OF  CEYLOif 


17 


in  parts  widely  dbtAnt  from  ouch  other.1  It  may  inferred 
that  the  places  were  well- pop  ul&tsd  and  that  the  people  Were 
of  A  peaceable  character,  else  the  anwilt  party  would  not  have 
dared  to  npinta.  Besides,  the  marvellous  nature  of  the  worts 
executed  hy  the  Sin  West  And  the  rapidity  with  whteh  they 
W^arc  finished  in  the  first  century  and.  i  half  after  the  conquest 
(flUCti  AS,  for  cx&mplo,  the  irrigation  trunk  of  AJlutudha  con¬ 
structed  less  tlum  forty  years  after  Yijayafs  landing),’  fteem 
to  show  that  the  Yakkhaa  had  a  high  degree  of  civilizationT 
It  is  Most  improbable  that  i  nto  a  community  so  cultured  and 
well-established  some  trsuoa,  at  least,  should  not  have  found 
their  way, of  that  great  Buddhist  Spiritual  movement,  which 
Was  making  rapid  Etridca  in  tho  EUudnlfitnd,  and  whose 
missionaries,  with  that  enthusiasm  which  invariably  Marks 
allegiance  to  n  new  cause,  were  carrying  the  glad  cid  ingH  even 
into  regions  hitherto  unexplored.  It  h  true  that  Vijays'e 
own  attention,  was  fully  engruesed  with  the  consolidation  of  his 
newly-acquired  power,  But  the  others  who  came  soon  after 
hhn,  in  evci-MCf  easing;  numbem,  were  from  countries  where 
Buddhism  was  the  dominant  faith.*  This  becomes  ah  the  more 
probable  when  wo  are  told  that  Vtjaya  obtained  bis  consort 
for  his  coronation  from  among  the  daughter*  of  the  BandiyaU 
king,  who  reigned  at  Madhuri  in  South  India,  and  that  she  wu$ 
accompanied  by  harts  of  others,  among  them  being  a  thousand 
families  of  the  eighteen  guilds.*  How  thole  Fandiyans  were 
originally  a  Ksatriyi  race  of  Aryan*  from  the  Madhya-deSa, 
tbo  seen*  of  the  Buddha's  lifelong  ministry. a 

Altar  they  had  left  their  original  hotuc  in  their  wandorings 
southwards  they  kept  in  touch  with  those  wJuam  they 
bad  loft  behind.  It  is,  therefore,  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  tho  PSudiyan  families  carried  over  with  them  to  Ccyleji 
some  knowledge,  of  the  Buddha  and  his  teachings, 

1  JT.y.,  TU.  tv. 

■  I  hid.,  tif,  V,  Ur 

1  Trnnrtnt^,  j,  ,  53U,  And  Hiuaii-Tjn^g,,  eh»]i,  jv, 

*  Jtfy,  vti,  rf,  G7  tot]. 

*  &,  It,  BbuidaTkir,  t'GT.vikbitl  Ltilbrit,  J  !>l  H,  pji,  Q  JyJ|. 

3 


18 


THK  PAU  LITERATURE  of  CEYLON 


Hugh  Nevffl,  in  the  Introduction  to  the  Catalogue,  which  ho 
prepared  for  publication,  of  hi#  collection  of  Pali  book*  now 
in  the  British  Museum,  says  that  when  he  was  in  Ceylon  ho 
was  informed  of  a  tradition  among  the  Tamila  there, 
that  Vijaya  had  actually,  after  settling  down  in  Ceylon, 
introduced  a  colony  of  persecuted  Buddhists  from  Magadha.1 

In  his  Introduction  to  the  J MillsfthSni  James  Gray  ascribes 
that  work  to  a  monk  named  Buddharakkhita,  born  of  a 
distinguished  family  in  Ceylon  in  426  b  c.  “  With  tho  induce¬ 
ments  to  missionary  work  in  Vijaya *s  domain  our  author  must 
have  joined  the  Church  and,  as  an  outcome  of  his  devotion 
to  Pali  studies,  composed  the  Jinulahkara  "  “  And  he  was  at 
the  head  of  a  congregation  of  monks  in  Co]ika-tamba-ratfha, 
the  maritime  western  division  of  Ceylon,  where  the  Co}as  of  the 
Coromandel  coast  originally  settled."  *  Though  there  is  no 
historical  evidence  to  support  the  very  great  antiquity 
attributed  to  this  work,*  yet  the  Burmese  tradition,  which 
Gray  has  followed  in  making  these  statements,  serves  to  show 
that  long  before  Mahinda’s  arrival.  Buddhism  was  known  in 
Ceylon. 

In  this  connexion,  there  is  one  more  fact  worthy  of  notice. 
Vijaya  died,  leaving  no  heir  to  the  throne.  Before  his  death 
he  sent  on  embassy  to  his  younger  brother  Sumitta,  inviting 
him  to  take  charge  of  his  domain  in  Ceylon.  Sumitta,  having 
been  already  crowned  king  as  his  father’s  successor,  accepted 
the  invitation  on  behalf  of  his  youngest  son  Panduvasudeva, 
who  came  over  and  succeeded  Vijaya.  His  queen  was  a  Sakya 
princess,  BhaddakaccAni,  of  great  beauty.  Suitors  from  many 
lands  sought  her  hand,  and  her  father,  to  escape  unpleasant 
complications,  put  her  in  a  boat  with  a  few  friends,  and 
launched  it  upon  the  Ganges.  The  boat,  with  its  precious 
cargo,  reached  Ceylon,  and  Bhaddakaccana  became 
Pagduvisudeva's  queen.4  She  and  her  companions,  all  scions 

1  Rritiih  Museum.  Oriental  Catalogue. 

1  Ji*Ala%IAra.  In  trod.,  pp.  7-8. 

*  Sec  my  remark*  on  the  JinilaAlcSra  further  on. 

4  Af.r.,  THi.  tt.  U  toll. 


TUB  CO»VKIi£lQS  or  CR109 


19 


of  the  Sakya  clan,  were  undoubtedly  Buddhists,  because  the 
P-imiaj  bear  ample  testimony  to  the  whole-hearted  adherence 
find  (he  loyal  devotion  of  the  Side yens  to  the  new  faith  taught 
by  their  great  kinsman.  It  would  he  strange  if,  with  Such  intar- 
cowise  with  the  motherland,  the  Sinhalese  people  of  that  day 
WOM  not  brought  into  touch  with  the  religious  move  merit 
which  was  then  growing  and  spreading  in  power  in  the  volley 
of  the  Gauge!). 

Doth  Vijaya  and  his  successors  treated  all  religions  with  a 
perfect  equality  of  royal  favour,  a  policy  evidently  dictated 
by  their  eagerness  to  taocurnge  immigration,  Yahkha  temples 
were  respected,  and  even  annual  offerings  were  provided  for 
them  ;  holla  were  built  for  the  Brahmins ;  residences  were 
erected  for  them  at  public  expense,  one  of  them  being-  tlio 
Titthararua  (the  monastery  for  foreign  religions),  built  by 
Pauulnkahhoya,  on  the  Hpot  where  Abbayagiri  no1,''  stands  at 
Anur&dbajnutl..1  Mention,,  however,  is  uladc  of  a  Slagle 
edifies  having  boon  built  for  the  us*  of  the  Buddhists—*  silence 
probably  due  to  a  nutiSrol  tendency  uu  the  part  of  Buddhist 
chronidets  to  conoeotraw  alt  attention  on  Mahioda  and  thus 
connect  the  introduction  of  Buddhism  into  Ceylon  with  the 
most  distinguished  person  conceivable,  the  great  Asuan.* 
BanduknbhAya  was  followed  by  his  son  Afutasiva,  And  he 
ill  turn  by  Dev ii na m j j iya -T im  (Tim  Beloved  of  the  Gods). 
He  was  Miitasiva's  second  son,  hut  was  chosen  because  he  was 
foremost  among  all  his  brothers  in  virtue  aud  intelligence.”  * 
At  tho  time  of  his  coronation  many  miracle*  came  to  paaa. 
"  In  the  whole  foie  of  laflka  trenaures  and  jewels  that  had 
been  buried  deep  nose  to  tho  surface  of  the  earth  .  .  .  pearls 
of  the  eight  kinds  .  .  .  came  forth  nut  of  the  ocean  and  lay 
upon  the  shone  in  b&affl.”  4 

So^n  after  his  accession  'I'issa  j^nt  envoys  to  hia  friend 
Dhom-maaoka  with  costly  presents — an  act  of  friendly  homage , 

1  Jf.V„  *.  vv,  54-10*. 

*  OLdcntcr^  Fiflfiya,  laLred.,  p.  III. 

*  if.F„  xi,  t.  ft 

4  JbW„  3d,  w.  S-15. 


20 


THE  PAU  LITERATURE  OF  CBVLON 


further  evidence  of  the  free  intercourse  which  existed  between 
the  two  kingdoms.  The  great  emperor  returned  the  courtesy. 
He  sent  an  embassy  of  his  chosen  ministers,  bearing  gifts 
marvellous  in  splendour,  that  Tissa  might  go  through  a  second 
coronation  ceremony,  and  the  messengers  were  directed  to 
give  this  special  message  to  the  king  :  "I  have  taken  refuge 
in  the  Buddha,  his  Doctrine  and  his  Order.  I  have  declared 
myself  a  lay  disciple  of  the  religion  of  the  Siikya  son ;  seek 
then,  even  thou,  0  best  of  men,  converting  thy  mind  with 
believing  heart,  refuge  in  these  best  of  gems."  1  Thus  was 
the  ground  prepared  for  Mahinda’s  mission.® 

In  the  meanwhile,  between  the  landing  of  Vijaya  in 
543  b.c.  and  the  arrival  of  Mahinda  about  243  b.c.,  many 
changes  had  come  over  India,  north  of  the  Vindhya 
Mountains.  In  the  middle  of  the  seventh  century  B.c. 
the  paramount  power  was  the  great  kingdom  of  Kosala, 
then  at  the  height  of  its  prosperity,  under  the  great  Kosalan 
(Mahakoeala).  His  dominions  extended  from  the  mountains 
to  the  Ganges,  and  from  the  Kosala  and  Ramognftga  rivers  on 
the  west  to  the  G&od&k  on  the  cost.  But  already  in  the  time 
of  the  Buddha’s  boyhood  a  new  star  was  rising  on  the  political 
horizon.  This  was  Magadhn,  a  petty  kingdom  on  the  South  of 
Kosala.  The  exact  course  of  events  which  mode  Magadha 
triumph  over  all  her  rivals  it  is  impossible  to  follow.  But  one 
fact  stands  out  clearly  :  before  more  than  a  century  and  a  half 
had  elapsed  from  the  date  of  the  Buddha’s  death, 
Candragupta,  a  scion  of  the  Narnia  race,  and  a  youthful 
adventurer,  effected  a  revolution  at  Pufaliputra  (Patna),  the 
capital  of  the  Magadhon  monarchy,  exterminated  the  Nanda 
family,  which  was  then  holding  sway,  destroyed  the 
Macedonian  garrison  in  the  Indus  basin,  and,  having  thus 
secured  his  position  against  all  enemies,  worked  his  way 

»  31.  V.  xi,  vv.  34-«. 

*  For  thu.  Mid  the  rat  of  the  historical  portion  about  Asoka  in  this 
chaplor,  see  Rhys  Davids,  Buddhitt  India,  pp.  *72  foil. ;  Vincent  Smith's 
A  tola  (Oxford  Unlv.  Pits*),  Ruler*  o 1  India  Scries,  purim  ;  sad  Tk*  Oxford 
HxMory  of  India  (1923),  pp.  72  foil. 


TH.E  MNYiiESlON  OF  CEYLON  2J 

to  a  dominion  equaling  the  mightiest  then  existing. 
He  made  of  Mag  ml  ha  &  gigantic  empire  and  became  I  ho 
firet  genuinely  historical  cmpCrOr  of  India-  He  was  succeeded 
by  his  SOU,  Hindus*™,  whose,  title  Amitmglinta  falayar  of 
foes)  StlggC-sta  a  martial  career.  TbaiiRh  nothing  definite  is 
recorded  of  big  military  achievements,  it  seems  almost  certain 
that  the  conquest  of  the  Dekkhan  was  effected  during  his  reign.1 
When  the  retgu  of  Eindmwira  terminated  after  a  duration  of 
twenty-eight  years,  he  was  succeeded  by  one  of  his  sons, 
commonly  called  Asoka,  then  Hie  Mngadha  Viceroy  at  Uj jeri. 
Hie  a  access  inn  was  contested ;  hut,  in  the  and,  ha  asserted  bis 
righta  and  wa*  crowned  emperor-  He  inherited  a  kingdom 
which  was  strong  and  rich  and  extensive,  protected  by  a  Larga 
army,  administered  by  ft  government  with  elaborately 
organised  departments,  and  carefully  graded  officials  with 
well-defined  duties.  Asoka  was  u  nmn  of  peaceable  disposition, 
and  did  everything  in  his  power  to  make  kia  subjects  happy 
and  contented.  His  imjpeiishftble  records,  in  the  shape  of  those 
wonderful  inscriptions — the  meet  remarkable  of  thair  kind  ill 
the  work],  and  apparently  written  for  the  most  part  to  his 
own  dictation— enable  us  to  form  a  fairly  connected  and  vivid 
picture  of  his  life-  Ha  waged  but  OltC  w*t,  and  that  a  war  of 
annexation,  upon  the  kingdom  of  K&linga,  eight  years  after 
his  consecration.  Thb  war  is  made  to  appear  the  turning- 
point  in  his  career ;  for  to  this  war  was  due  not  only  the 
gradual  development  of  the  emperor's  character  and  policy 
which  converted  b  ini  to  the  Buddhist:  faith,  bub  aleo  that  move* 
meat  which  he  later  initiated,  whereby  Buddhism,  from  being 
a  local  sect,  grow  to  be  one  of  the  world  rel  igtGlM)-  The  K&liiga 
war  thus  became  one  of  the  decisive  events  in  the  hi&tory  of 
the  world. 

Anoka  himself  tells  in  the  Thirteenth  Hock  Edict1  how 
repentance  Game  upon  him  when  he  contemplated  tha 
miseries  and  the  auEerings  which  the  indulgence  of  his 

1  !?ii:hh,  OjfvriS  !Iitiiryt  p.  76, 

4  St-nsrf.,  Jiwtrij.  de 


22 


THK  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


ambition  had  involved,  and  bow  he  was  driven  to  seek  in  the 
Good  Law,  which  he  elsewhere  identifies  with  the  teaching  of 
tho  Buddha,  refuge  from  the  hauntings  of  a  remorse-stricken 
conscience. 

There  were  three  stages  in  this  conversion.  The  Rupnuth 
Edict,1  written  about  the  thirteenth  year  after  his  formal 
coronation,  mentions  that  he  had  been,  for  two  and  a  half 
years,  a  lay  disciple  (updaoia),  but  had  not  developed  much 
real,  but  that  one  year  before  the  date  of  the  Edict  he  had 
entered  the  Order  *  In  the  Eighth  Edict  he  tells  us  that  in 
the  thirteenth  year  after  his  anointing  he  had  set  forth 
on  the  path  to  SambodJri  (towards  the  attainment  of 
Arahantship).  Thenceforward  he  devoted  his  whole  energy 
and  all  the  extensive  resource*  of  his  vast  empire  to  the 
realization  of  the  noble  ideals  which  the  new  faith  had  given 
him.  With  unbounded  real  and  a  high  and  lofty  devotion, 
such  as  was  worthy  of  so  great  a  cause,  Anoka  devised  ways  and 
means  of  bringing  about  a  change  of  heart  in  all  men — 
whom  he  considered  as  his  childron — so  that  they,  44  hearing 
his  Ordinance,  based  on  the  Law  of  Piety,  and  his  instruction 
in  that  Law,  may  practise  the  Law.'*  *  He  taught  not  merely 
by  precept,  but  also  by  personal  example.  In  the  thirteenth 
edict  he  describes  how  he  had  already  won  success  in  his 
ambition  in  this  direction  among  the  people  of  Egypt,  Syria, 
Macedonia,  Epirus,  Kyrene,  among  the  Colas  and  Paodiyas 
in  South  India,  and  in  Ceylon. 

Thi9  last,  the  only  one  that  may  be  called  historically 
successful,  is  the  achievement  with  which  we  are  at  present 
concerned.  That  Asoka  had  a  special  warmth  of  regard  for 
Ceylon  is  clear  from  the  message,  referred  to  earlier,  which  he 
sent  to  Devanampiya-Tissa.  According  to  the  statements 

1  Smart,  op.  cit 

■  What  exactly  this  *  Entering  the  Order  "  mean*  1*  not  cloar.  Perhaps 
it  refers  to  the  incident  where  Asoka  consent*  to  hi*  children  Mulunda  and 
SanghamiUA  entering  tho  Sangha,  which  act  mode  him  a  Sltatta-dSydda 
*'  the  inheritor,  heir,  or  kinsman  of  tho  Buddha’s  religion  ",  to  the  spreading 
o <  which  teachings  ho  thenceforward  dedicated  his  life. 

»  Edict  xiii. 


THE  CONVEHBlQSf  QB  CKYLOS 


23 


made  by  the  Coylon  Chronicles,  which  there  ls  nn  valid  reason 
for  disbelieving— especially,  in  view  of  the  evidence,  brought 
to  light,  by  Cunningham  in  and  near  tha  Sanchl  Topes,  which 
corroborate,  in  a  very  remarkable  manner,  many  of  the  facta 
therein  mentioned— Asoka  dispatched  bia  son1  Mahiuda, 
with  six  Others,  to  C-arry  the  glad  tidings  of  the  Good  Law 
over  to  Caylpn. 

The  JfnAa-uujeh&?  describes  w  ilb  ccabitw  rapture  tic  advent 
of  MAhilsda  to  the  island,  hia  aerial  flight,  his  descent  to 
Ainbatthala,  the  loftiest  peak  of  Mibintalcj  where,  rising 
suddenly  from  the  plain,  the  mountain  overlooks  the  city  of 
Anuradhapura .  Tha  fctOry  proceeds  to  relate  haw  the  king, 
who  whs  hunting  the  elk,  was  miraculously  allured  to  tho  spot 
where  Mahinda  was  standing,  and  how  the  latter  propounded 
the  Doctrine  ta  the  ruler  of  the  land,  who,  together  with  his 
forty  thousand  followers,  embraced  the  new  faith.*  Thus,  on 
the  full  moon  day  of  Poson  (Juna-Julyl,  5t8G  years  after  the 
passing  away  of  the  Buddha,  the  new  religion  gained  official 
recognition  in  the  island.  Mahinda's  arrival,  and  the  con¬ 
sequent  conversion  of  the  king  and  his  royal  retinue,  was  the 
culminating  event  in  a  [tfOOess  which  had  been  going  OH 
gradually  and  without  doubt  tolerably  rapidly  for  well  nigh 
two  eenturlea. 

Ko  time  could  have  been  more  opportune  for  the 
promulgation  of  tile  new  and  liviug  religion.  The  two  hundred 
years  which  had  elapsed  after  Vijaya's arrival  had  been  Spent 
in  initiatory  measures  for  the  organization  of  the  country. 
Encouraged  hy  tka  facilities  held  out  to  Settlers,  fresh  colonists 
had  been  pouring  into  the  land  in  evcedncreuHing  numbers. 
Towns  had  been  built  and  arrangements  made  bo  keep  them 
clean  and  healthy ;  suburbs  had  been  laid  out  and  measures 

1  mL  /Lwjkft'ei  ynflcjpir  irotbrr ,J  u yi  Smith  Hitt,,  p.  S4)  feUevfag 

ike.  Indian  1rftd>Uo»  duS  aUc  the  nvtdcnco  [arnuavd  b/  tlv:  Chlcv-iij. 
IliarHL.Ttang  la^iLtjAM  tho  name  of  M&hiirfin,  but  rnJls  b-im  ,4fa!iA'a 
yonc^or  Ijrttlifir  {B««d,  JZvMhitl  JitcarAt  of  Ifc  Wafer*  [t'frfil,  vo],  U, 
pp.  UH].  Ust  1  de-flat  ■«  nty  rwari  foT  accepting  tin?  CkiHeefl  Yflttioa 
in  proEcrcDr*  to  the  §isll*l*». 

*  if.y  ,  jiv.  tt.  i  f*u. 


24 


the  Pali  literature  op  cbyloh 


adopted  to  provide  tie  inhabitants  with  the  necessary  com¬ 
forts  of  life ;  gardens  planned,  parks  constructed,  and  fruit- 
bearing  trees  introduced.  The  production  of  food  had  been 
secured  by  the  construction  of  canals  and  public  works  for 
irrigation.  Every  one,  from  the  king  downwards,  took  a 
personal  interest  in  adding  to  the  fruitfulness  of  the  land. 
Carriage  roads  facilitated  communication  between  the  various 
settlements ;  village  boundaries  had  been  fixed,  and  the 
cultivation  of  art  and  science  encouraged.1  The  people  were 
contented  and  happy,  and  they  were  at  the  dawn  of  a  new 
era  of  peace  and  prosperity.  By  the  earlier  infiltration  of 
Indian  culture  the  ground  had  already  been  prepared  to  receive 
a  doctrine  of  life  which  gave  a  now  purpose  to  existence  and 
furnished  an  opportunity  for  noble  endeavour.  The  seed  bad 
only  to  be  sown  for  it  to  take  root  and  blossom  with  amazing 
vigour. 

As  a  fitting  climax  to  the  conversion  of  Ceylon,  which  was 
the  most  successful  and  meet  productive  of  the  missionary 
efforts  of  Asoka,  he  sent  his  daughter  Safighamitta;  carrying 
with  her,  as  a  token  of  the  king’s  cordiality  and  goodwill,  a 
branch  of  the  Pipul  tree  at  Buddha-gaya,  where  the  Teacher 
had  attained  enlightenment.  And  the  honour  thus  paid  to 
Ceylon  was  well  deserved.  "  It  is  doubtful  if  any  other  single 
incident  in  the  long  story  of  their  race  has  seized  upon  the 
imagination  of  the  Sinhalese  with  such  tenacity  as  this  of  the 
planting  of  the  aged  tree.  Like  its  pliant  roots,  which  find 
sustenance  on  the  face  of  the  bare  rock  and  cleave  their  way 
through  the  stoutest  fabric,  the  influence  of  what  it  represents 
has  penetrated  into  the  innermost  being  of  the  people  till  the 
tree  itself  has  become  almost  human.  The  loving  care  of  some 
pious  observer  has  left  on  record  in  sonorous  Pali  and  with 
minute  detail  the  incidents  of  the  day  when  the  soil  of  Ceylon 
first  received  it,*  and  to-day  the  descendants  of  the  princely 
escort  who  aceompanied  it  from  India  continue  to  be  its 

*  X.V..  *,  TV.  88  fell. 

1  ifate-Bodki-vamM>,  q  r. 


THE  COS  VERSION  OP  CHYLOlf 


EG 

guard  kun.  Tho  axe  of  the  ruthless  invaders  who  for  bo  many 
Centuries  to  conic  were  destined  to  spread  ruin  throughout  the 
country  was  revarentiy  withheld  from  its  basic .  And  even  now, 
on  the  stillest  night,  it*  boart-nhftped  leaves  on  their  slender 
stalks  ceaselessly  quiver  and  sigh,  as  they  have  quivered  and 
sighed  for  twenty-three  centuries-,” 1 

The  spiritual  movement  introduced  under  suefa  weh- 
ftUguring  tuipiua  found  a  permanent  abode  in  the  little 
island  home-  If  the  criterion  of  the  greatness  of  such  a  move¬ 
ment  he  the  beneficial  influence  it  hofi  exerted  On  the  cbttfaOter 
of  those  towards  whom  it  was  directed,  then,  certainly,  the 
mission  of  King  Aeoka  to  Ceylon  was  amongst  the  greatest 
civilising  influences  of  the  world,  for  it  bequeathed  to  the 
Sinhalese  people  a  gentleness  of  disposition  and  a  nubility  and 
refinement  of  character  of  which  neither  the  ravages  of  time* 
not  centuries  of  ruthless  warfare,  nor  the  insidious  attacks  of 
modern  commercialism  have  succeeded  in  depriving  them. 
But  by  no  moans  the  least  of  its  results  ™  the  impetus  it 
gave  to  a  fresh  study  of  the  prohibits  of  Mankind  in.  the  light 
of  its  new  philosophy— a  study  which  resulted  in  the, 
production  of  A  voluminous  literature,  which  for  centuries 
commanded  the  vane  nation  of  the  whole  Eastern  UrOrLd,  nud 
the  remnants  of  which  even  to-day  excite  our  wonder  and 
ad Klira tion.  "Po?  there,  in  that  beautiful  Land,"  as  Rhys 
-Davids  reminds  us,  ”  the  province  most  fruitful  of  any  ill 
India  or  its  confines,  in  continuous  and  successful  literary 
work  Hud  effort,  there  have  never  been  wanting,  from  that 
day  to  this,  the  requisite  number  of  earnest  scholars  and 
Students  to  keep  olive,  and  hand  down  to  their  successors 
and  to  us  that  invaluable  literature  which  has  taught,  lie  so 
much  of  the  history  of  religion ,  nut  on  Ly  in  Ceylon,  but  also  iu 
India  itself.”  3 

It  is  the  story  of  that  Irterstuie,  unique  in  IMOy  respects, 
that  we  propose  to  unfold  ill  the  following  chapters. 

1  P-  E.  Pierlfl.  (Jqran  and  Farfu^wH,  pp.  3-1, 
i  StJ.WuJ  India,  pji.  3Lv5— j. 


CHAPTER  II 

The  Writino  Down  of  tmk  Books 

vylTH  tho  arrival  of  SaftghamittA,  and  the  planting  of  the 
”  sacred  Bo- tree  in  Sinhalese  soil,  the  establishment  of 
Buddhism  in  the  island  was  complete.  Great  rejoicings 
marked  the  event.  A  festival  of  fourteen  days,  the  like  of 
which  Ceylon  had  never  before  witnessed,  was  held  in  honour 
of  the  occasion.  From  tho  sea  to  the  city  gates  the  road  along 
which  the  holy  sprig  was  conducted  to  Annradhapura  was 
decorated,  “  sprinkled  with  white  sand,  bestrewn  with  various 
flowers,  and  adorned  with  planted  pennons  and  festoons  of 
blossoms.'' 1  Sanghamitta  was  accorded  all  the  honour  due  to 
so  distinguished  a  visitor.  When  tho  ceremony  of  the  planting 
of  the  tree  was  over,  a  state  function  was  held,  where  the  royal 
princes  and  other  leading  men  who  had  escorted  the  Bodhi- 
tree  were  duly  presented  to  the  king  by  Ari^ha,  the  Sinhalese 
envoy,  who  had  been  specially  dispatched  to  Asoka’s  oourt, 
to  bring  over  Sabghamitta  and  the  sacred  Plpul  branch. 
Titles  and  honours  were  conferred  on  the  distinguished 
ambassadors,  and  arrangements  were  made  for  tho  custody 
of  the  holy  tree  and  for  the  due  performance  of  religious 
ceremonies  in  its  honour. 

Meanwhile  day  after  day  the  great  Thera  Mahinda,  on  the 
invitation  of  the  king,  visited  the  palace  in  the  forenoon  and 
after  being  entertained  with  his  companions  to  the  midday 
meal  preached  tho  Good  Dhamma  to  the  multitudes  who 
continually  flocked  to  the  palace  gates  to  see  the  Thera  and 
listen  to  his  message.  Day  after  day  the  concourse  grew  larger 
and  larger,  and  thousands,  hearing  the  teaching  of  the  Great 
Elder,  became  converted  and  were  admitted  into  the  new 
faith. 

A  large  number  of  the  converts,  both  high  and  low,  finding 
the  householder's  life  uncongenial  to  the  practice  of  the 
«  If.  V.,  xix,  rr.  37  foU. 


tel  I-,  muting  of  thc  books  27 

Buddha's  message,  renounced  the  world  find  entered  the 
Order  of  the  Sftrtgha.  The  Prime  Minuter,  Aritfba,  who  was 
the  kiflg’H-  nephew,  and  the  king's  younger  brother, 
MaUahhsya,  wore  iimong  the  very  first  Of  the  Sinhalese 
Bbikkhus  to  be  ordained  ,l  For  the  residence  of  the  Bhikkhus 
the  "king  amide  &n  offering  of  the  royal  park,  Mahn-Lecgha-vana 
{the  pbumce  of  the  Great  Shower),  Extending  southwards 
from  the  city  to  the  banks  of  the  Kadumba  rfvers  According 
to  the  Chronicles,  many  were  the  miracles  ttuit  accompanied, 
its  consecration.  The  vary  elements  manifested  tbttr'  joy  at 
thc  glorious  event;  for  on  the  extensive  grounds  thus 
dedicated  to  thc  u&C  of  the  new  religion  was  destined  to  rise  ft 
little  while  later  the  Mahii-Yikftm,  the  Great  Minster,  which 
for  many  centuries  held ,  ai  a  Temple  of  Learning,  ft  prominent 
jAaeC  in  the  Eastam  world-  Monasteries  Wire  built  with  *11 
possible  speed  for  tho  accommodation  of  the  monks,  and 
Siim  {boundaries)  were  marked  out  for  tlio  holdisig  of  the 
VjXW&ra  end  Other  Vinaya  acta  of  the  Snflgbft.  The  women 
were  by  ac  means  second  to  the  mon  in  their  SCfll  for  the  new 
religion,  Iudwd,  thc  very  first  of  thc  COttvarts  to  attain  to 
the  Fruits  of  the  Path  were  Anuta,  the  wife  of  thc  Sub-king 
MftLanaga,  and  the  tftdiea  of  the  court  who  formed  her  retinue. s 
A  few  days  later,  on  attaining  to  the  second  Stage  of  salvation 
(suJtod-dpmm),  they  expressed  a  desire  to  receive  thc  jmMojJs- 
ordirmtion  and  enter  the  Sisterhood  of  Nuns,  They  were 
informed  that  the  Vinaya  rules  did  not  allow  Maliinda  to 
admit  women  to  the  Order,  and  it  was  to  make  their  ordination 
possible  that  Arittha  waa  aent  to  Ffttftliputra,  to  As  oka's 
court,  that  he  might  bring  £a  fig  ha  mitts.  Soon  after  her  arrival 
the  Then  admitted  Anuli  and  five  hundred  Other  women  into 
tha  Order,  thus  founding  the  EhikthUJlE-Sasana  {the  Sister¬ 
hood  of  Uoim)  in  Gayl&n,  They  had  already  retired  from  the 
world  and  gone  into  residence  in  a  nunnery  which  came  to 

*  ir.y..  si*r  t.  eiK 

*  Ttm  pre#cnt  JI*l<r*tu  Oja  t*  the  Knife  of  jtnurfdhfcpnr*. 

*  if.V.,  X5v,  t.  US. 


28 


THE  I'ALl  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


be  known  as  the  Upasika-Vihara  (the  Vihiira  of  the  lay  sinters).1 
8ai'»ghamitta  herself,  wishing  for  greater  seclusion  and 
pleasanter  remoteness,  took  up  her  abode  in  the  HatthiUhaka 
(the  Vihara  near  the  Elephant  Post),1  which  the  king  built 
for  her  special  use.  There  she  remainod  till  the  end  of  her 
days, 4<  working  for  the  progress  of  the  Doctrine  and  mindful 
of  the  good  of  the  Bhikkhunl9.”  * 

The  monks  and  nuns  who  had  thus  retired  from  household 
life  were  not  actuated,  in  taking  this  step,  by  a  desire  to  live 
in  indolent  devotion,  supported  by  the  generosity  of  the  rest 
of  the  community.  Buddhism  demands  from  its  votaries 
ceaseless  activity  in  the  service  of  their  fellow  men  and  women, 
and  pamada  (indolence)  is  the  greatest  of  all  sins.  Tho  members 
of  the  S&hgba  could,  if  they  felt  so  inclined,  go  for  a  while  into 
some  woodland  retreat,  or  mountain  cave,  and  there  meditate 
on  tho  traruitorinces  of  life,  and  the  sorrows  of  this  never- 
ending  cycle  of  birth  and  death.  But  their  rightful  place  was 
in  the  midst  of  men  and  women,  preaching  and  discoursing, 
exhorting  them  to  lead  the  good  life,  which  alone  could  bring 
them  to  salvation.  From  its  very  inception  Buddhism  was 
a  missionary  religion.  Quite  early  in  liis  career  as  Teacher  and 
Sago  the  Buddha  took  a  momentous  step  in  bidding  his 
disciples  go  forth  and  preach  the  Dhamma  to  the  whole  world. 
“  Go  ye,  monks/’  he  said,  “  and  wander  for  the  good  of  the 
many,  the  happiness  of  the  many,  out  of  compassion  for  the 
world,  for  the  good,  for  the  happiness,  and  for  the  welfare 
of  devas  and  men.  Go  not  alone,  but  by  twos.  Preach, 
monks,  the  Doctrine  which  is  lovely  in  the  beginning, 
lovely  in  the  middle,  lovely  in  the  end,  in  the  spirit,  and 
in  the  letter ;  proclaim  the  consummate  life  of  holiness,  perfect 
and  pure."  4  Thus  was  the  trumpet-call  sounded,  for  the 
first  time  in  the  world’s  history,  for  the  establishment  of  a 
religion,  which  knew  no  distinctions  of  colour  or  race,  but 

'  M.V.,  xvill.  rr.  11-12. 

•  Ibid.,  xlx,  rv.  77-M. 

•  Ibid.,  xlx.  v.  7*. 

•  JTsMwwa.  i.  10  (Kinaya  Tati.  S.B.K..  i,  112). 


THE  WRITING  DOWN  OF  THE  HOOKS 


29 


which  was  meant  for  the  salvation  of  all  mankind.  It  was  thi* 
command  of  the  Master  that  had  sent  Mahinda  and 
Sanghamitta  over  to  Ceylon,  and  they  and  those  whom 
they  admitted  into  the  fraternity  of  the  Buddha’s  disciples 
in  the  island  considered  it  their  self-appointed  task  to  make 
the  message  of  the  Dhamma  known  in  every  hearth  and  home 
throughout  the  land.  Until  missionaries  trained  from  amongst 
the  sons  of  the  soil  could  themselves  carry  aloft  the  light 
of  the  Dhamma  amidst  all  the  people,  Mahinda  did  not  con¬ 
sider  the  Sasana  firmly  and  securely  established.1  The 
Buddhist  missionaries  sought  no  advantage  for  themselves 
or  for  their  own  nationalities.  It  was  their  endeavour  to 
establish  in  every  land  whither  they  carried  the  Teacher's 
message  a  Safkgha  having  its  own  national  character,  free 
to  develop  along  its  own  lines,  untrammelled  by  external 
control,  temporal  or  spiritual.  Indeed,  when  on  one  occasion 
King  Devanampiya-Tissa,  after  having  done  all  that  he  thought 
was  necessary  for  the  permanent  establishment  of  the  Sasana 
in  Ceylon,  asked  the  great  Thera  Mahinda  whether  the  religion 
of  the  Buddha  was  well  established  in  the  island,  the  reply 
he  received  was  :  “  The  Sasana  has  been  established,  but  it 
has  not  yet  taken  deep  root.”  “  When  will  it  bo  docply  rooted, 
Sir  ?  ”  asked  the  king.  "  On  the  day  when  a  son  born  in 
Tambapanni  (Ceylon)  of  parents  resident  in  that  island 
bas  entered  the  Order  in  this  island, and,  having  studied  the 
Vinaya  in  this  island  itself,  expounds  it  in  this  island,  then, 
0  King,  will  the  Sisana  have  taken  deep  root,”  *  was  the 
memorable  reply. 

For  this  purpose  and  for  the  purpose  of  disseminating  a 
knowledge  of  the  Dhamma  amongst  the  people  a  careful  study 
of  the  religion  was  necessary.  And  Mahinda  had  provided 
for  this  by  bringing  with  him  over  to  Ceylon  the  traditions  of 
the  orthodox  Thera-vadin  school,  contained  in  the  canon 
which  had  been  handed  down  by  the  Thera-voda-parampara 
(the  succession  of  Elders),  and  which  had  been  completed 
1  Samanta-piMilv  (P.T.8.  Ed.),  p.  102.  *  Ibid. 


W  THE  PAH  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 

and  sanctioned  by  the  Three  Councils  or  Recitals  held  after 
the  Buddha’s  death. 

DevanAmpiya-Tissa's  reign  lasted  for  forty  years.  It  was 
a  period  of  unbroken  peace,  devoted  entirely  to  the  social  and 
moral  welfare  of  the  country.  The  king  had  lived  sufficiently 
long  to  see  the  accomplishment  of  the  task  upon  which  he  had 
his  whole  heart — the  permanent  establishment  of  Buddhism 
as  the  national  faith.  This  work  well  done,  he  passed  away 
in  the  fullness  of  time,  leaving  behind  him  a  name  whose 
lustre  the  lapse  of  centuries  lias  failed  to  dim  in  the  memory 
of  a  grateful  people.  The  whole  island  had  become  the  scene 
of  ever-increasing  religious  activity  from  Rohar>a  in  the  south 
to  Pihiti  in  the  north.  By  the  time  of  Tissa’B  death  the  new 
religion  had  spread  into  every  town,  village,  and  hamlet, 
and  Viharas  and  other  religious  edifices  dotted  the  land  from 
end  to  end.  Some  of  them  soon  acquired  fame  os  centres  of 
learning,  and  chief  among  them  was  the  Dlghasauda-senapati- 
parivena,  built  by  the  king’s  commander-in-chief ,  Dighasancja, 
who  gave  it  to  Mahinda.1  In  later*  times  it  became 
famous  as  the  residence  of  the  author  of  the  Mahd-vamta.* 
The  desire  for  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  was  also 
greatly  encouraged  by  the  presence  of  material  prosperity. 
The  disposition  of  the  Qangetic  population  which  had  taken 
possession  of  Ceylon  with  Vijaya’s  arrival  was  essentially 
adapted  to  agricultural  pursuits,  and,  helped  by  tho  zeal  and 
vigour  of  the  rulers,  the  people  easily  secured  all  tho  material 
comforts  necessary  for  a  happy  life. 

Tissa  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Uttiya,  and  daring  his 
reign  the  great  Apostle  Mahinda  passed  away  on  the  8th  day 
of  the  bright  half  of  Assnyuja  (October),  "  the  light  of 
Laftki,  the  teacher  of  many  disciples,  he  who,  like  unto  the 
Master,  had  wrought  great  blessing  for  the  people  In  the 
following  year  the  saintly  8afigliamitta  herself  passed  to  her 

*  M.V.,  XT,  TT.  212-1*. 

*  q.v. 

'  U.V.,  XX,  TT.  30-3. 


TUB  WRITING  DOWN  OF  THR  BOOKS 


31 


rest.  She  had  worked  strenuously  for  the  religion  during 
twenty-nine  long  yearn,  and  her  remains  were  cremated  in 
sight  of  the  Bodhi-trcc  which  she  had  brought  over  from 
Jambu-dlpa.1  Uttiya  was  followed  by  Maha-Siva  and  the  latter 
by  Sftra-Tissa,  who  was  an  ardent  devotee  of  the  religion,  and 
is  said  before  and  after  his  accession  to  have  built  five  hundred 
monasteries  in  all  parts  of  the  country.  His  pious  career, 
however,  came  to  a  tragic  end.  From  among  the  large 
concourse  of  foreigners  who  had  come  to  Ceylon  from 
Jambu-dlpa,  two  Tamils,  sons  of  a  horse-dealer,  seized  the 
kingdom  and  slow  the  king*  Thus  began  those  periodical 
invasions  of  the  Tamil  hordes  from  the  continent  which  later 
rendered  desolate  the  greater  part  of  the  island  and  all  but 
completely  destroyed  its  culture  and  civilisation.  It  is  true 
that  the  Tamils  (or  the  Malabars,  as  they  arc  frequently 
colled)  brought  with  them  a  certain  amount  of  civilising 
influence  in  the  form  of  Hindu  culture ;  but  the  destruction 
they  wrought  was  immense.  They  pulled  down  all  public 
buildings,  put  to  death  the  monks,  and  burnt  whatever 
literary  records  fell  into  their  hands.  The  ultimate  dis¬ 
appearance  of  the  greater  part  of  the  literature  and  learning 
of  Ceylon  was,  as  we  shall  see  later,  directly  or  indirectly 
due  to  the  results  of  these  invasions. 

The  usurpers  were  driven  out  after  nearly  twenty-five  years  ; 
but  very  soon  others  appeared  on  the  scene,  with  greater 
strength  of  arms,  under  the  leadership  of  E]ara  from  tho  Coja 
country.  They  killed  the  reigning  king,  and  EJ&ra  ruled  the 
kingdom  for  forty-four  years,  administering  "  even  justice 
towards  friend  and  foe  ’*.*  E|ara  himself  was  a  good  friend  of 
Buddhism  and  the  Buddhists,  and  he  was  one  of  the  most 
popular  rulers  of  the  country ;  but  bis  followers  were  not  so 
scrupulous  in  their  behaviour.  In  the  meantime  many  of  the 
Sinhalese,  unwilling  to  bow  the  knee  to  the  invader,  had  gone 

»  M.V.,  xx,  w.  01-4. 

*  Ibid.,  xxi,  tv.  10-1S. 

•  Ibid.,  xxi,  r.  14. 


32 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


south  to  Roha^a,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Mahav*!i-gaAga, 
and  the  Sinhalese  capital  was  established  at  Mahngfuna,1  where 
the  ruling  prince  was  Kakavanoa-Tissa.  He  was  a  devout 
Buddhist  and  proved  to  be  a  great  patron  of  that  faith.  In 
this  he  was  assisted  by  his  consort  Vihara-Mahadcvi,  whose 
enthusiasm  excelled  even  that  of  her  husband.  Under  their 
auspices  the  religion  was  firmly  established  in  Rohaiia, 
which  later  was  destined  to  become  the  birthplace  of  many  of 
Ceylon’s  most  distinguished  sons  and  daughters  in  all  spheres 
of  life.  More  than  a  half  of  the  best  known  names  in  Ceylon 
literature  come  from  this  province,  and  even  to-day  the 
inhabitants  of  Rohana  are  reputed  for  their  learning  and  their 
ability.  The  patriotism  of  the  Sinhalese  could  not  tolerate 
a  foreign  invader  in  their  midst.  No  government,  however 
just,  if  based  upon  alien  domination,  could  placate  national 
feeling  or  satisfy  national  aspirations.  Talcs  of  oppression, 
rumours  of  the  supercilious  contempt  with  which  the 
conquerors  treated  the  country’s  holiest  possessions,  reached 
the  Sinhalese  hand  in  their  exile.  Youths  of  strength 
and  valour  and  ardent  patriotism  flocked  to  Magama, 
their  hearta  burning  to  avenge  their  country’s  insults.  But 
the  time  was  not  yet  ripe.  The  old  king  realized  that 
the  expulsion  of  the  Tamils  was  a  task  of  no  small  difficulty, 
and  his  army  and  his  resources  were  yet  too  weak  and  limited 
to  undertake  the  reponsibility.  But  he  could  help  towards 
that  end,  so  that,  when  the  propitious  day  dawned,  the  hated 
oppressor  would  no  longer  be  supreme  in  the  land.  With  this 
in  view  he  gathered  round  him  at  his  court  all  the  bravest 
and  the  strongest  of  his  subjects.  Martial  ardour,  however, 
was  not  hiB  predominant  characteristic.  It  was  otherwise 
with  his  queen,  the  noble  lady,  Vihara-Mahadevl.  She  was 
cast  in  a  much  more  heroic  mould  than  her  husband.  The 
presence  of  a  Tamil  usurper  on  the  throne  at  the  sacred  city 
of  Anuradhapura  was  a  humiliation  which  she  resented 
deeply.  Her  ardent  faith,  too,  strengthened  her  resolve  to 
*  ii.V^  chap.  »dl,  vv.  II  U. 


THE  WRITING  DOWN  OF  THE  BOOKS 


S3 


see  the  emancipation  of  her  motherland,  and,  when  the  time 
came,  this  noble  and  sagacious  woman  played  no  small  part 
in  the  national  movement  to  Bweep  the  infidel  foe  into  the  sea. 

And  the  hoar  produced  the  man.1  To  the  king  and  queen 
was  born  Gamajii-Abhaya,  who  was  to  rid  Lahk&  of  the 
Tamil  oppression  and  help  her  to  regain  her  lost  honour.  The 
omens  that  attended  his  conception  and  his  birth  indicated 
that  he  was  no  ordinary  man.1 

When  he  was  twelve,  his  father,  lest  his  son  should  ruin 
his  chance  by  any  attempts  of  rash  impetuosity,  had  asked 
him  to  take  an  oath  that  he  would  never  fight  with  the  Tamils. 
The  brave  lad  promptly  and  indignantly  refused.1  We  may  be 
sure  that  the  old  king  secretly  rejoiced  at  having  so  courageous 
a  son,  and  the  queen-mother  openly  oncouragod  the  lad’s 
ambitions.  He  was  trained  in  all  the  arts  and  sciences  that  he 
might  be  fit  to  be  a  ruler  of  men.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  was 
given  a  separate  establishment,  and  he  gathered  round  him  a 
famous  band  of  giant  warriors  whose  names  have  become 
household  words  to  this  day.  The  prince  excelled  all  others  in 
manly  accomplishments — versed  in  archery,  dexterous  in 
swordsmanship,  and  skilled  in  guiding  elephant  as  well  as 
horse,  he  soon  showed  himself  a  born  leader  of  men.  Soon  he 
sent  forth  his  gallant  bodyguard  to  sound  the  call  to  arms,  and 
.  the  nation  manfully  responded.  In  a  few  months  the  Sinhalese  • 
army,  compact,  thoroughly  equipped  and  eager  for  the  fray, 
assembled  in  Maguma,  and  Giirnani  demanded  permission  to 
cross  the  river  and  attack  the  foe.  He  met  with  a  blunt  refusal. 

44  Be  not  rash,"  wrote  the  aged  king,  “  and  desist  from  any 
precipitate  action.  The  Tamils  are  over  a  million  men.  The 
region  on  this  side  of  the  river  sufficeth  at  least  for  the 
present."  *  But  Gamapi  chafed  at  the  restraint.  He  sent  to 
his  father  a  pair  of  bangles  and  other  female  ornaments, 

•  I  have  dealt  with  the  career  of  Gimaqi  et  noo  length  beceuee  it  forme 
the  central  theme  of  the  greateet  of  Fill  epic*,  the  IfaU-wswa  (q.v.h 

•  U.V.,  xxti,  w.  42  foil. 

•  Ibid.,  xxii,  tv.  82-S. 

4  Ibid,,  xxiv,  ▼.  4. 

8 


34 


TUB  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


declaring  “  My  Royal  Sire  u  a  woman,  not  a  man  ”,  and  hid 
himself  to  escape  the  royal  anger.  Soon  afterwards 
Kakav&ppa-Tissa  died,  and  within  a  few  months  of  his 
coronation  Gdmani  got  ready  in  earnest  for  the  campaign 
which  had  been  his  dream  and  ambition.  With  the  blessings 
of  the  Sahgba  and  the  good  wishes  of  the  people  he  set  out 
northwards  with  his  army.  Vihdra-Mahadcvl  accompanied 
her  brave  son  and  by  her  sagacity,  enthusiasm,  and  encourage¬ 
ment  kindled  him  to  greater  and  greater  achievements.  Fort 
after  fort  fell  under  the  charge  of  the  brave  Sinhalese  band, 
and  after  a  long  siege  at  Vijitapura  the  Tamils  were  completely 
routed.  A  little  while  later  Gamapi  engaged  E]ara  in  a  hand-to- 
hand  fight  near  the  south  gate  of  Anuradhapura.  E(ara  was 
no  match  for  his  adversary,  and  soon  fell.  Gamapi’s  victory 
was  complete,  and  in  the  hour  of  his  triumph  he  made  a 
gesture  which  brought  honour  not  only  to  himself  but  also 
to  the  nation  which  produced  him.  For  he  decreed  that  his 
royal  adversary  should  be  accorded  all  the  honours  due  to 
a  king,  and  further  declared  that  no  man,  prince  or  peasant, 
should  pass  the  spot  where  the  remains  of  the  Tamil  hero 
lay  buried  riding  in  palanquin  or  litter  or  with  beating  of 
drums.1  It  is  to  the  credit  of  the  peoplo  of  Ceylon  that  during 
two  thousand  years  and  more  they  obeyed  this  decree  and 
continued  to  pay  their  homage  to  one  who  was  a  brave  man 
and  a  just  and  humane  ruler. 

In  a  few  days  the  king  was  crowned  as  supreme  ruler  of  a 
united  Lafika  (the  three  Sinhala  provinces),  and  great  were 
the  rejoicings  thereat.  But  the  king’s  outlook  on  life  had 
changed,  the  great  and  glorious  success  for  which  he  had  lived 
and  dreamed  gave  him  no  real  joy.  He  thought  of  the 
thousands  of  human  lives  on  whom  suffering  had  been  wrought 
to  encompass  this  end,  and  he  was  filled  with  poignant  grief. 
For  he  had  always  been  deeply  religious  in  mind  and  com¬ 
passionate  at  heart,  and  the  memory  of  these  miseries 
caused  him  great  pain.  He  determined  to  start  a  new  chapter 
1  M.V.,  xxr,  yt.  71-6. 


THE  WRITING  DOWN  OF  THE  BOOKS 


35 


in  ha  life.  Hitherto  material  conquest  had  been  his  one  and 
dominant  ambition  ;  henceforth  he  would  be  a  man  of  peace, 
governing  his  people  like  onto  a  father,  and  devoting  himself 
to  the  sacred  cause  of  the  Buddha’s  compassionate  teaching. 
Thus  was  initiated  an  era  of  peace  and  joy  and  contentment, 
an  age  pre-eminently  of  faith,  beautiful  in  its  simplicity, 
yet  illumined  by  knowledge  and  imbued  with  an  extraordinary 
moral  earnestness.  It  was  an  age  when  (fetus  walked  on  earth 
and  in  their  heavenly  abodes  declared  their  wish  to  be  born 
in  L&Aka  as  men  and  women.  There  was  happiness  in  the 
land  and  prosperity.  Many  are  the  tales,  enshrined  in  tradition, 
of  the  saintly  personages  that  flourished  during  this  period, 
and  some  at  least  of  them  undoubtedly  deal  with  historical 
characters.  But  the  accounts  of  their  doings  are  enveloped  in 
myth  and  fable,  and  it  is  impossible  to  separate  truth  from 
Action. 

Gama  pi's  munificence  was  especially  directed  to  the  erection 
of  religious  edifices,  chief  among  them  being  the  Lov&-Mah&- 
Paya  (the  Brazen  Palace,  so  called  because  of  its  being  roofed 
with  metal  plates),  a  nine-storied  monastery  elevated  on 
sixteen  hundred  columns  of  monolithic  granite,  resplendent 
with  gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones,  furnished  with  costly 
beds  and  chairs,  a  gem-palace  designed  and  constructed  after 
the  reputed  model  of  a  devata'a  abode  in  heaven.1  This  was 
dedicated  to  the  use  of  monks  of  all  ranks  and  positions,  and 
there  they  studied  and  preached  the  Sacred  Scriptures.  This 
was  a  great  service  rendered  by  the  king  to  the  growth  of 
literature,  the  providing  of  a  place  where  scholars  could  meet 
and  discuss  various  problems.  The  Ptijavaliya  *  tells  us 
that  books  were  supplied  and  all  manner  of  comforts  provided 
for  the  preachers. 

But  the  greatest  of  his  works  was  the  MaM-ThQpa,  the 
Ruvanv&li  Diigoha  (the  Relic  Chamber  of  the  Golden  Sands, 
so  called  from  its  magnificence),  the  most  stupendous  and  the 

>  if.r,  nv  u.  rr.  lo-so 

a  Colombo  Ed.,  p.  176. 


36  THIS  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 

most  venerated  of  those  at  Amiradhapura.  It  was  a  labour  of 
love,  and  the  king  took  special  precautions  that  no  hardships 
fell  upon  the  people  in  consequence  of  his  great  enterprise. 
**  No  work  is  to  be  done  here  without  reward,”  he  caused  to 
be  proclaimed,  and  no  labourer  was  allowed  to  go  away 
unrequited.1  We  are  not  here  concerned  with  the  building  of 
the  glorious  edifice,  except  for  one  circumstance  connected 
with  it.  We  are  told  that  on  tho  day  when  the  foundation- 
stone  was  laid  for  the  Mahd-Thflpa,  on  the  full-moon  day  of 
Vesakha  (April-May),  144  B.c.,  the  assemblage  of  monks  for 
the  auspicious  occasion  included  not  only  the  bhMJiut  of 
Lafika,  but  also  large  numbers  from  tho  principal  Viharaa 
and  monasteries  of  India.  The  MatiS-vamaa 1  gives,  with  a 
wealth  of  detail,  the  names  of  many  of  the  eminent  visitors 
from  India;  Candagutta  from  the  Vanavasa  country, 
Cittagutta  from  Buddha-gaya,  Dhamnmsena  from 
Isipatfana,  Indagutta  from  Rajagaha,  Manadeva  from 
Pallavabhogga,  Mittinoa  from  Pataliputta,  Piyadassin 
from  Savatthl,  Suriyagutta  from  Keldsa,  Urubuddharakkhita 
from  Vea&li,  Unidhammarakkhit*  from  KosambI,  Uru- 
saAgha-rakkhita  from  Ujjcnl,  Uttara  Maha-Thera  from  the 
Vindhyas,  Uttiwja  from  Kaimlr,  and  Maha-Dhammnrakkhita 
from  Alasanda  of  the  Yooa  country  (probably  near  Kabul). 
The  Maha-vamta  was  here  only  following  an  older  tradition, 
and,  whatever  we  may  feci  about  the  chroniclers’  statements 
as  to  the  mode  of  travel  adopted  by  these  distinguished  visitors 
and  the  numbers  of  the  disciples  that  formed  their  respective 
retinues  (sixty  thousand,  etc.),  there  is  no  gainsaying  that  thiB 
points  to  a  historical  event,  that  these  eminent  theras  did 
come  to  Ceylon  at  the  time  and  th&tthey  wero  men  of  influence 
in  their  various  dioceses. 

During  the  period  of  commotion  which  existed  at  the  time 
of  the  Tamil  supremacy  it  is  not  probable  that  learning 
made  much  progress,  nor  is  there  much  evidence  that  Gamaui 

»  M.V.,  xxvti,  t.  S3,  sod  xxx.  ▼.  17. 

•  IWd.,  Mix.  rr.  30  foU. 


s 

! 

1 


i 

i 

\ 


m 

I 

* 


THE  WRITING  DOW  OF  THE  BOOKS 


37 


during  the  earlier  years  of  bis  reign  had  time  left  for  the 
promotion  of  intellectual  attainment  amongst  his  subjects  ; 
for  he  was  completely  engrossed  in  erecting  a  series  of  monu¬ 
mental  structures.  But  with  the  firm  establishment  of  domestic 
peace  and  prosperity  learning  must  have  proceeded  apace, 
and  the  arrival  of  these  eminent  therat  from  India,  from 
regions  as  far  apart  as  the  Dekkhan  and  Savatthi,  together 
with  their  followers,  must  undoubtedly  have  given  a  fresh 
impetus  to  the  study  of  the  religion  of  which  they  were  the 
exponents.  A  hundred  years  had  elapsed  between  Mahinda’s 
mission  and  the  visit  of  these  holy  and  learned  men,  and  many 
things  had  happened  in  Ceylon  during  that  period.  In  India, 
too,  after  the  expulsion  of  the  dissentient  monks  from 
Moggaliputta-Tissa’s  Council,  many  developments  had 
probably  taken  place  in  the  doctrine,  and  these  visitors  were 
able  to  acquaint  the  Ceylon  Bhikkhus  with  such  occurrences. 
No  records  exist  of  any  literary  productivity  at  this  period, 
becauso  the  chroniclers  were  concerned  only  with  accounts 
of  royal  munificence  in  the  erection  and  endowment  of  religious 
structures  ;  but  chance  references  to  events  such  as  this  visit 
and  tho  circumstances  connected  with  them  justify  such 
conclusions  as  we  have  arrived  at  above. 

The  thirty-second  chapter 1  of  the  Mahn-vanvui  contains 
also  certain  references  to  several  of  the  chief  monks  of  Gamani's 
time.  Among  them  we  find  Maha-Malaya-Deva  of  K&lavela, 
who  was  in  close  connexion  with  the  Bhikkhus  dwelling  on  the 
Samsnta-kflt*  (Adam’s  Peak),  Dhammagutta,  tho  Earth- 
shaker,  of  the  Kajyani  Vih&ra,  Bhaggari-vasin  Maha-Tissa, 
and  Tissa  the  Short,  who  dwelt  at  Mafigana  in  the  highest 
mountains  of  Ceylon.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  some  of 
these  names  occur  in  the  list  of  the  thcra-parampara  (succession 
of  Elders)  taken  from  the  old  Sinhalese  Maha-vainta  and 
preserved  in  the  Parivdra  *  and  also  in  the  list  quoted  in  full 
by  Buddhaghosa  in  the  Samanla-pasadika.1  Professor  Rhys 

»  if.  K.,  xxxil,  TT.  40  foil. 

*  Older  Urg,  J'lnojio,  iii,  pp.  313-14. 

»  P.TA  Ba.,  pp.  32  foil. 


38 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


Davids  has  identified  some  of  them  with  certain  thorn 
mentioned  in  the  Jataka  commentary,1  and  the  conclusions 
he  has  drawn  are  optimistic.  “  It  is  evident,”  says  he,  "  that 
these  Theras  are  real  personages.  In  the  few  scraps  of  the  early 
Ceylon  text*  that  have  already  been  published  we  have 
sufficient  information  as  to  their  opinions  and  as  to  their 
character  to  warrant  the  hope  that,  when  the  texts  are  com¬ 
pletely  before  us,  wo  may  be  ablo  to  reconstruct,  to  a  very 
considerable  extent,  the  literary  and  intellectual  history  of 
Ceylon  in  the  second  century  b.c.”  *  May  his  hopes  be 
fulfilled) 

There  is  one  more  fact  in  Gamani’s  career  worthy  of 
attention  for  our  purpose,  before  we  pass  on.  So  great  was  the 
king’s  zeal  for  the  propagation  of  the  religion  that  he  even 
assumed  the  rile  of  preacher  himself,  his  audience  being  none 
less  than  the  monies  of  the  Brazen  Palace.8  He  seated  himself 
in  the  preacher’s  chair  in  the  centre  of  the  spacious  hall  and 
made  ready  to  give  the  august  assembly  a  discourse  on  some 
religious  topic  from  the  Maftgala-StUia.  But,  although  he  was 
quite  familiar  with  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  he  could  not 
proceed ;  he  descended  from  the  pulpit  “  perspiring 
profusely  ” ;  he  had  realized  how  difficult  was  the  task  of 
the  teachers,  and  his  munificence  towards  them  was  made 
greater.  From  that  period  he  instituted  “  the  preaching  of 
religious  discourses  to  be  kept  up  in  the  viharaa  in  various 
parts  of  LaUki,  supporting  the  ministers  of  religion  who  were 
gifted  with  the  power  of  preaching  From  that  day  the 
custom  of  regular  bano-preaching  at  the  village  temple  became 
an  established  institution,  continued  uninterruptedly  to 
the  present  day.  In  ancient  times  the  temple  was  the  village 
school  as  well ;  but  with  the  disappearance  of  state  endow¬ 
ments  and  the  decay  of  old  institutions  the  function  of  the 
schoolmaster  has  been  gradually  taken  away  from  the  village 

*  JRAS-,  Oct.  2001.  pp.  889  foil. 

*  Itrid.,  pp.  892-1. 

*  Pijitalxya,  Col.  Ed.,  p.  ITT. 


THE  WRITINO  DOWN  OF  THE  BOOKS 


39 


monk.  However,  at  do  time  in  the  history  of  Ceylon  was  the 
Sinhalese  peasant  deprived  totally  of  education  in  the  wider 
sense  of  the  term.  The  monk  in  the  village  temple  continued 
to  relate  to  him  passages  from  the  Scriptures  which  he  stored 
up  in  his  memory.1  In  every  instance  stories  were  adduced  to 
illustrate  the  subject  under  discussion,  and  morals  were  drawn 
from  such  tales.  Even  to-day,  when  a  large  percentage  of  the 
population  labours  under  the  ban  of  “  illiteracy  ”,  the  peasant 
cannot  be  considered  totally  un-oducated  ;  for  the  traditional 
lore  which  he  has  inherited  from  the  temple  teachers  continues 
to  furnish  him  with  ideals  of  sagacity,  of  loving  service  and 
good  fellowship,  and  this  is  ultimately  a  real  education. 
To  the  historian  of  literature  the  institution  of  these  temple 
discourses  has  another  significance.  To  them  may  directly 
be  traced  the  origin  of  the  Kalha-vaUhu  books  of  religion  and 
folklore,  which  in  later  days  formed  the  most  cherished 
possession  of  the  villsgera'  scanty  library.  Of  this  more  later. 

Gamatu  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Tissa  (Soddha- 
Tissa,  as  he  was  called,  because  of  his  devotion  to  the  religion). 
His  reign  of  eighteen  years  was  a  period  of  unexampled 
prosperity.  There  is  one  story  related  of  him  which  illustrates 
how  deep  was  the  interest  evinced  in  Ceylon  even  by  royal 
personages  in  the  pursuit  of  wisdom  and  what  great  humility 
marked  their  acquisition  of  learning.  Whatever  literary 
achievements  were  accomplished  by  the  Sinhalese  were  due 
very  largely  to  the  patronage  extended  to  them  by  men  of 
position  and  power,  kings  and  queens  not  excluded.  Several 
of  Ceylon's  monarchs  were  themselves  distinguished  authors, 
but  they  all  had  a  love  of  literature  and,  what  was  more, 
showed  it.  One  day  it  was  announced  that  the  great  Thera 

1  Parker  tell*  ua  in  one  o l  hi*  in  lei*  •ting  volume*  on  Coy  km  that  he 
knew  of  instances  where  the  riling* r*  used  to  travel  12  mile*  up  and  12  mile* 
down  every  full  moon  day  to  the  noarcet  temple,  carrying  with  them  thoir 
meagre  prorwion*  for  the  journey.  At  the  temple  under  tho  palm-treee, 
with  tho  light  of  the  tropic*]  full-moon  ahining  on  the  eaad,  they  would 
listen  throughout  the  night  to  preacher*  who  diacooraed  to  thorn  one  after 
another.  The  whole-night  preaching  atilt  continue*  in  certain  part*  where 
the  bustle  of  modern  life  lia*  not  penetrated. 


40 


THE  PA U  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


Buddharakkhita  would  preach  that  night  at  Mihintale.  The 
king,  unannounced  and  without  any  ceremony,  came  to  hear 
the  sermon.  Having  arrived  late  and  being  reluctant  to  disturb 
the  audience,  he  stood  outside  the  hall,  listening  with  rapt 
attention.  The  discourse  lasted  the  whole  night,  and  at  dawn 
the  Thau  concluded  the  sermon  with  the  usual  benedictions. 
The  king’s  cry  of  acclamation  revealed  his  identity.  The 
Thera  asked  him  when  he  had  come.  “  When  you  were  just 
commencing.  Sir,"  said  he.  “  You  are  king,  sire,  and  not 
accustomed  to  such  discomfort.  How  was  it  possible  for  you 
to  remain  standing  outside  throughout  the  night  ?  ”  “  Not 
one  night,  Venerable  Sir,  but  many  nights  in  succession  would 
I  willingly  stand  listening  to  a  sermon  such  as  yours.  Let  me 
assure  you  on  my  honour,  I  never  missed  one  syllable  of  your 
discourse.”  Then  he  entered  into  a  discussion  with  the  Elder 
on  the  Dhamma,  at  the  conclusion  of  which  he  offered  the 
throne  to  the  Teaching.  But  the  Thera  returned  it,  saying  : 
”  Do  thou,  0  King,  rule  the  country  on  behalf  of  the  Dhamma.” 1 

For  some  time  after  Tissa’s  death  there  was  internal  trouble 
in  the  land.  The  monks  made  an  unfortunate  intervention  in 
politics  in  an  attempt  to  place  their  favourite  on  the  throne 
in  violation  of  the  law  of  succession.  This  attempt  ended  in 
failure  and  brought  disaster  upon  them.*  The  rightful  heir, 
dissatisfied  with  their  conduct,  discontinued  the  various 
offerings,  the  cost  of  which  had  regularly  been  borne  by  the 
Royal  Treasury  down  to  that  time,  and  which  had  provided 
the  monks  with  all  the  necessaries  of  life,  thus  enabling  them 
to  carry  on  their  work  of  study  and  teaching  in  comfort. 
This  withdrawal  of  the  royal  favour  greatly  inconvenienced 
the  monks,  and  brought  upon  them  slight  and  neglect  which 
interfered  with  the  progress  of  the  religion.  But  a  reconciliation 
was  soon  effected,  and  the  king,  anxious  to  atone  for  his 
erstwhile  neglect  and  remissness,  wen€  to  the  other  extreme 
of  lavish  expenditure  and  unbounded  munificence.  A  few 

1  SaddiamilanlcAraya,  Colombo  Ed.,  p.  123. 

•  M.V.,  xxxiii,  tt.  17-11. 


THE  WRITING  DOWN  OF  THE  BOOKS 


41 


yean  later,  when  his  successor  was  on  the  throne,  a  com¬ 
mander  of  troops  in  the  army  raised  the  standard  of  revolt 
and  slew  the  king.  But  another  figure,  more  powerful  than  he, 
appeared  on  the  scene.  This  was  Vat-tagamani,  whose  reign 
is  of  immenso  interest  in  the  history  of  Pali  literature.  Within 
twenty -four  hours  of  the  revolt,  the  usurper  was  no  more, 
and  Vatt&gamapi  had  consecrated  himself  as  king.  But  quite 
soon  the  peace  of  the  land  was  disturbed  by  rebellion  within 
and  invasion  without.  Taking  advantage  of  the  internal 
troubles,  a  large  army  of  the  Malabars  made  another  of  their 
periodic  incursions,  their  object  being  plunder  and  the  capture 
of  the  throne.  In  a  great  battle  fought  to  the  north  of  the 
capital  the  Sinhalese  were  completely  defeated,  and  the  king 
was  compelled  to  mount  his  chariot  and  seek  safety  in  flight. 
During  fourteen  years  the  king  remained  in  concealment, 
befriended  by  a  Thera,  Mahi-Tissa,  and  a  chieftain,  Tanasiva.1 
In  the  meanwhile  the  people  bowed  to  the  inevitable,  and 
accepted  the  Tamil  domination,  confident  that  soon  their  own 
royal  line  would  be  restored  to  them.  In  the  hill-oountry  the 
remnants  of  the  Sinhalese  army  stoutly  maintained  their 
independence,  and  after  an  interval  of  over  fourteen  years 
Vattagamani  slew  the  Tamil  ruler  and  liberated  the  country 
from  its  oppressors. 

Quite  soon  after  his  restoration  Vattagamani  built  the 
Abhayagiri  Dagoba  on  the  site  of  the  Tittharama,  the 
monastery  of  the  Nig&nthas,  whose  leader,  unmindful  of  the 
munificent  hospitality  which  his  fraternity  had  enjoyed  at 
the  hand  of  the  Buddhist  kings  of  Ceylon,  had  gloated  over 
Vattagamaoi’s  misfortunes  and  openly  expressed  his  delight 
at  the  king’s  defeat.*  After  the  victory  the  king  avenged  the 
ingratitude,  and,  where  the  Tittharama  stood,  he  con¬ 
structed  tho  Abhayagiri  Dagoba,  the  mightiest  of  its  kind, 
which,  rising  from  a  square  platform  of  nearly  eight  acres  in 
extent,  exceeded  400  feet  in  height.  The  Vihara  attached  to 

»  U.V.,  xxxUI,  it.  30  loll. 

*  Ibid.,  uxtli,  TV.  44-0  and  81-3. 


42 


IMS  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


it  ho  gave  over  to  hia  benefactor,  the  Thera  Maha-Tissa.  Thin 
Vihara  was  destined  later  to  be  the  scene  of  events  which  were 
of  great  consequence  both  to  the  religion  and  to  the  literature 
connected  with  it. 

For  it  happened  that  the  Thera  Maha-Tissa,  who  had 
accepted  the  gift  of  the  Abhayagiri  Vihara,  but  actually  lived 
elsewhere,  was  credited  by  general  repute  with  living  in 
domestic  intercourse.  Thereupon  the  pious  monks  of  the 
Maha-Vihara,  custodians  of  the  purity  and  the  reputation 
of  the  faith  in  Ceylon,  assembled  together  and  interdicted 
him.  One  of  the  Thera' t  pupils,  who  was  present,  obstructed 
them,  and  the  tribunal  of  monks,  adjudging  the  obstructor 
guilty  of  misconduct,  expelled  him  from  the  Order.  He, 
burning  with  resentment,  left  with  a  large  body  of  his 
followers,  and,  breaking  away  from  the  Maha-Vihara  fraternity, 
lived  at  Abhayagiri  Vihara.  Soon  their  band  was  strengthened 
by  the  arrival  in  Ceylon  of  a  body  of  monlcB  from  Pallararama 
in  India,  who,  though  professedly  Buddhist  monks,  were 
regarded  as  heretics  by  the  orthodox  monks  both  of  India 
and  Ceykm.  They  belonged  to  the  Vajjiputta  Nikaya,  one  of 
the  Beets  descended  from  those  that  had  refused  to  recognize 
Moggaliputta-Tissa’s  Council.  Their  teacher  was  the  Acariya 
Dhammaruci,  and  on  their  arrival  in  Ceylon,  finding  no  favour 
with  the  Maha-Vihara,  they  joined  the  Abhayagiri  fraternity, 
which  quite  readily  welcomed  them  and  soon  accepted  also 
their  doctrines  and  tenets.  The  dissentient  Bhikkhu  who  had 
attempted  to  defend  Maha-Tissa,  and  who  was  now  living  at 
the  head  of  the  Abhayagiri  monks,  took  to  himself  the  name 
of  Dhammaruci  Acariya,  and  thenceforward  the  Abhayagiri 
fraternity  became  known  as  the  Dhammaruci  Nikaya, 
established  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  Vaftagamagi  and  454 
years  after  the  Buddha's  death.1  This  was  the  beginning  of 
the  first  schismatic  division  among  the  Safkgha  in  Ceylon. 
It  was  originally  a  seceding  movement,  due  purely  to  personal 
and  disciplinary  reasons ;  bat  in  the  course  of  time  doctrinal 

1  Si Mya-jotyroAo,  pp.  11  4nd  IS. 


THE  WRITING  DOWN  07  THE  BOOKS 


43 


differences  came  to  be  associated  with  it.  For  nearly  twelve 
centuries  it  continued  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the  Ceylon 
monks,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  during  its  period  of  existence 
its  adherents  produced  literary  works  setting  forth  their  point 
of  view.  But,  unfortunately  for  us,  kings,  in  the  excess  of  their 
real  for  the  preservation  of  the  purity  of  the  Dhamma, 
took  it  into  their  heads  to  persecute  the  heretics  and  burn  their 
books,  so  that  none  of  their  doctrinal  works  have  come  down 
to  us.1  It  is  significant,  however,  that  for  quite  a  long  time 
the  Abhayagiri  and  the  Maha-Vihara  fraternities  existed  side 
by  side,  sometimes  on  quite  friendly  terms. 

During  Vattagamaoi’s  reign  there  took  place  another  event 
which  marked  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  the  Pali  literature 
not  only  of  Ceylon,  but,  we  may  say,  of  the  whole  area.  The 
Maha-vanua  has  but  a  brief  reference  to  it :  "  The  text  of  the 
three  Pilahu  and  the  AtthaJcathd  thereon  did  the  most  wise 
Bliikkhus  hand  down  in  former  times  orally ;  but,  since  they 
saw  the  people  were  falling  away  (from  religion)  the  Bhikkhus 
came  together,  and,  in  order  that  the  true  doctrine  might 
endure,  they  wrote  them  down  in  book*.”  1 

We  gather  from  other  sources,  which  give  more  details  of 
this  important  event,  that  this  solemn  act  of  recording  the 
teaching  in  books  was  the  result  of  a  council  in  which  500 
Elders  participated  under  the  patronage  of  a  certain  chieftain. 
The  venue  of  the  Council  was  Alu-vih&ra  (Aloka-Vihara), 
a  rock  temple  a  few  miles  from  the  town  of  Matale  in  the 
Central  Province.* 

During  nearly  four  and  a  half  centuries  the  Buddha’s 
message  had  been  preserved  and  propagated  mainly  by  oral 
tradition.  Tho  ancient  chronicles  of  Ceylon  give  us  the 
names  of  the  ciders  who  formed  tho  most  important 
link*  in  this  tradition.  At  the  head  of  the  list  appears 


*  Several  other  works,  however,  attributed  to  member*  of  this  eect. 
exist  even  now.  They  will  be  noticed  in  their  place*. 

'  if.K.,  xixtii,  vv.  100-1,  also  Dlpewiua,  xx,  20,  21. 

*  See  XikAya  txrhjraXa,  pp.  10  and  11. 


44 


tub  pau  literature  op  obylon 


Upali,  probably  the  eminent  Nigaot-ba,  but  later  one  of  the 
moat  prominent  of  the  Buddha ’a  disciples  and  the  chief 
exponent  of  the  Vinaya.  Then  in  succession  follow  Diusaka, 
Sonaka,  Siggava,  Moggallputta-Tissa  (Presidont  of  the 
3rd  Council),  and  Mahinda  and  his  fellow-missionaries  to 
Ceylon  (Ittiya,  Uttiya,  Samb&la,  and  Bhaddasila,  all  of  them 
Tissa’s  pupils).  First  in  the  line  of  Sinhalese  thcras  is  Maha- 
Arittha,  Mahinda’a  pupil.  Then  follow  a  number  of  names 
whose  places  in  the  history  of  this  succession  it  is  difficult  to 
fix  with  any  degree  of  certainty,  the  last  being  Siva,  who, 
perhaps,  presided  over  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred  responsible 
for  the  systematic  writing  of  the  Dhamma  in  books.  How  far 
the  Alu-vihara  redaction  agreed  with  or  differed  from  the  canon 
and  commentaries  settled  by  the  3rd  Council  and  introduced 
into  Ceylon  by  MAhinda’s  mission,  whether  after  their  introduc¬ 
tion  into  the  island  any  passages  previously  considered  unor¬ 
thodox  had  crept  into  the  orthodox  scriptures  and  whether 
the  Alu-vihara  council  separated  such  interpolations,  and  how 
far  the  Tipitaka  and  its  commentary  reduced  to  writing  at 
Alu-vih&ra  resembled  them  as  they  have  come  down  to  us 
now,  no  one  can  say.  This  much,  however,  is  certain,  that  in 
the  fifth  century  of  the  Christian  era  the  present  Pitakas, 
etc.,  were  considered  orthodox  both  on  the  continent  and  in 
Ceylon,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  visits  of  Buddhaghosa 
and  Fa  Hsian  ;  and  in  view  of  the  great  care  with  which  the 
orthodox  monks  attempted  to  preserve  the  purity  of  the 
Word  there  is  not  much  probability  that  the  canon  underwent 
any  material  changes  in  the  interval. 

There  is  no  reason,  however,  to  believe  that  the 
writing  of  the  Dhamma  was  unknown  before  this  time. 
Mr.  Wickremasinghe  1  even  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  a  written 
literature  existed  in  Ceylon  at  least  a  century  earlier  than  the 
Alu-vihara  Council.  He  cites  many  incidents  from  the  Maha - 
vamsa  to  prove  that  writing  was  common  long  before 
Vattagaraani’s  period.  Books  are  mentioned  as  early  as 

1  Catalogue,  p,  z. 


THE  WRITING  DOWN  OF  THE  BOOKS 


45 


150  b.c.  in  the  reign  of  Gamani.  The  SihalaUhakalhS  Mahi- 
varnsa,  so  often  referred  to  in  the  Maha-mmsa-ttkd,  must  have 
been,  he  says,  a  written  document.  Elsewhere  ho  asserts, 
in  reference  to  the  Vessagiri  Inscription 1  (which  he  fixes  at 
161-137  B.C.),  that  the  Sinhalese  at  the  time  were  acquainted 
with  the  Brahml  alphabet  in  a  form  complete  enough  for 
writing  even  Sanskrit.  Thus  the  statement  that  until 
Vattagamani  Abhaya  the  whole  Buddhist  canon  was  trans¬ 
mitted  orally,  is  an  exaggeration.  Probably,  as  to  some  extent 
even  now,  the  monks  as  a  body  knew  the  whole  canon  by 
heart.  With  regard  to  tho  Sinhalese  commentaries,  said 
to  have  been  compiled  by  Mahinda,  their  very  nature  precludes 
the  possibility  of  having  been  handed  down  orally.  It  may  be 
that  in  Vattag&mapi’s  time  they  were  still  unarranged, 
rare,  imperfect  and  full  of  inaccuracies,  as  even  now  in  manu¬ 
scripts.  At  Alu-vihara  the  text  was  rehearsed  and  com¬ 
mentaries  revised  and  distributed.*  Writing  was  known  even  in 
the  lifetime  of  the  Buddha.*  There  is  also  the  well-known 
common tarial  story  of  King  Pukkusati,  to  whom  tho  King  of 
Kosala  sent  a  letter  containing  an  exposition  of  the  Dhaimna.* 
However,  it  is  safe  to  assume  that  writing,  save  for  contract* 
and  probably  letters,  had  not  very  long  been  in  voguo  and 
was  not  extensively  known  or  cultivated.  And  it  is  very 
probable  that  lack  of  suitable  writing  material  largely 
restricted  its  use.  And  there  was  also  a  high  degree  of  sanctity 
attached  to  the  saying  of  religious  truths,  so  that  it  was  con¬ 
sidered  most  important  to  receive  them  direct  from  a  teacher’s 
lips.  Even  to-day  great  respect  is  shown  to  the  man  who  carries 
all  his  learning  in  his  head  ;  for  “  who  knows  whether  books 
may  not  get  lost  or  destroyed  and  become  not  easy  to  lay 
hands  on  1  ”  And  the  person  who  trusts  to  hooks  for  reference 
is  contemptuously  referred  to  as  “  he  who  has  a  big  book  at 

*  Ep.  Zty.,  i,  p.  14. 

*  Wickrc  m*uii£  lie,  Catal.,  p.  xi. 

*  i,  43,  and  a$»in  ibid.,  I,  40  ("  kho  Up4li  lekha&i 
likkluuati  ").  Oldwiberg,  voL  i,  p.  75  and  p.  77. 

*  EapaiUc-tida.nl,  Col.  Ed.,  p.  234  j  alao  JPTS.  1883,  pp.  47-0. 


46 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


home,  but  does  not  know  a  thing.”  Anyone  visiting  a  village 
monastery  in  Ceylon  at  the  present  time  will  find  the  ola 
leaf  books  carefully  wrapped  np  in  costly  silk  cloths  and 
reverently  packed  in  beautifully  carved  bookcases,  that  the 
faithful  devotees  may  ofier  to  them  flowers  and  incense  and 
thus  pay  honour  to  the  Buddha's  word.  The  monk  is  expected 
to  carry  all  his  learning  in  his  head. 

Such  circumstances  as  these  made  oral  teaching  at  first  the 
sole,  and  later  the  chief,  means  of  preserving  and  spreading  the 
knowledge  of  the  religion.  From  the  information  at  our 
disposal  we  can  form  a  fair  idea  of  how  this  was  made  possible. 
Buddhaghosa  tells  us  that  at  the  Rajagaha  Council,  when  the 
Vinaya-Pitaka  had  been  recited,  Upali  was  entrusted  with  the 
work  of  teaching  and  preserving  it.1  Similarly  other  sections 
of  the  Teaching  were  given  in  charge  of  other  Great  Elders 
and  their  disciples.  These  several  schools,  in  their  combination, 
preserved  the  Teaching  in  its  entirety,  so  that  at  any  given 
time  there  were  Bhikkhus  who,  while  conversant  with  the 
rest  of  the  Doctrine  as  well,  specialized  in  the  knowledge  of 
&  particular  section  of  it.  Such  were  the  Ihgha-bhanakas 
(reciters  of  the  Uigha-Nik&ya),  Majjhima-bhanakas,  etc. 
We  also  hear  of  V  inaya-dharas  and  Tipetakis  in  the  com¬ 
mentaries.  This  practice  of  learning  up  portions  of  the 
Scriptures  continued  quite  ordinarily  for  a  very  long  time. 
Thus  we  find  at  Mihintale  in  the  tenth  century  an  inscription 
of  King  Kassapa  V,  recording  that  special  honour  was  paid  to 
monks  for  reciting  certain  sections  of  the  Scriptures  by  heart,* 
What  the  500  monks  of  the  Alu-vihira  Council  did  was  to 
arrange  systematically  the  canon  and  the  commentaries, 
so  that  what  was  till  then  known  only  to  the  few  might  become 
the  possession  of  the  many.  Theirs  was  a  definite  step  forward. 
Till  then  each  scholar  learnt  a  part  of  the  canon  by  heart, 
taught  it  to  his  pupils  and  explained  it  in  Sinhalese.  Each 
was  a  walking,  living  edition  of  a  certain  text.  To  assist  in 

1  Sunsilpalo-Bil&iiaf,  P.T.S.  Ed  ,  p.  IS. 

*  Sp.  Zey.,  i,  pt.  la.  p.  SS. 


THE  WRITING  DOWN  OF  THE  BOOKS 


47 


remembering  the  explanation  mnemonic  verses,  often  doggerel 
in  nature,  were  made  use  of.  Books,  such  as  we  know  now, 
were  not  then  in  existence.  But  the  action  of  the  Alu-vihara 
monks  changed  all  this.  They  systematized  the  canon  and 
arranged  it,  so  that  the  study  of  it  became  easier  and  simpler. 
And  this  writing  down  of  the  literature  helped  its  advance  in 
great  measure  ;  for  a  written  literature  can  develop  in  a 
shorter  time  than  one  that  is  handed  down  by  word  of  mouth, 
when  each  single  text  requires  generations  of  teachers  and 
disciples  to  be  preserved  at  all.  The  service  done  by  the 
Alu-vihAra  Council  in  this  respect  was  invaluable.  **  For  you, 
as  for  me,”  said  Sir  Robert  (now  Lord)  Chalmers,  Governor 
of  Ceylon,  speaking  in  Colombo  some  years  back,1  "  the  rocky 
gorge  of  Alu-vihara,  impressive  though  nature  has  left  it, 
must  be  always  more  impressive  still  as  the  scene  of  the 
fruitful  laboure  of  those  600  Bhikkhua — labours  that  mark 
an  epoch  in  the  history  of  the  scholarship  of  the  world,  and 
that  several  centuries  later  drew  that  very  encyclopaedic 
scholar  Buddhaghosa  to  the  same  venerable  scene,  there  to 
study  the  authentic  tradition  of  the  Thera-vadins,  which 
writing  had  safeguarded  and  preserved  amidst  wars  and  the 
ravages  of  time  in  Ceylon.” 

Manuscripta  of  the  Alu-vihara  edition  were  soon  made 
and  were  deposited  in  the  Maha-vthara  and  other  principal 
temples  of  the  island.* 

»  Public  Hall,  Colombo,  27th  February,  1915. 

■  PejAcatiya,  Col.  Ed.,  p.  198. 


CHAPTER  III 

The  Development  or  Buddhist  Culture 

\T ATTAGAMANI  was  followed  byaseriesof  undistinguished 
rulers  in  rapid  succession.  First  came  Mahu-Culi  Maha- 
Tissa,  famed  for  his  extreme  piety  and  his  ardent  devotion 
to  the  saintly  Thera  MAha-Summa.  The  latter  part  of  his  reign 
was  troubled  by  the  lawlessness  of  his  cousin  Naga,  known 
to  history  as  Cora-N&ga  (Naga  the  rebel  or  robber).  This  prince 
was  in  all  respects  the  worst  of  the  earlier  kings  of  the  Sinhalese 
dynasty,  a  man  of  loose  character  and  of  cruel  disposition. 
In  spite  of  the  munificence  showered  on  the  Buddhist  religion 
by  various  monarchs  and  the  devotion  which  most  of  them 
showed  towards  it,  its  tale  is  not  one  of  uniform  prosperity. 
And  the  first  of  its  domestic  enemies  was  Cora-Naga,  who 
harrassed  the  monks  because  they  had  refused  to  help 
him  during  his  marauding  career.  He  spared  nothing  sacred 
or  profano,  and  when, after  twelve  yean  of  oppression,  he  was 
poisoned  by  his  Queen  Anula  the  people  heaved  a  sigh  of 
relief.  But  Anula  was  equally  libidinous  and  licentious,  a 
profligate  woman  whose  passions  knew  no  bounds,  of  iron 
will,  shrinking  from  nothing  to  gain  her  ends,  a  firm  believer 
in  the  efficacy  of  poison  to  remove  the  unfortunates  who 
incurred  her  disfavour.  This  “  infamous  woman  ",  as  the 
Mahd-mmsa  calls  her,  the  Mcssalina  of  Ceylon,  was  before 
long  put  to  death  by  Prinoo  Kutakappa-Tissa,  who,  seeing 
the  horrified  people  without  a  leader,  left  the  monk’s  life  to 
place  himself  at  the  head  of  the  movement  against  the 
licentious  queen.1  His  son,  Bha(ika  Abhaya,  succeeded  him 
and  reigned  during  twenty-eight  years,  a  period  of  un¬ 
interrupted  happiness  to  the  people.  He  was  a  just  ruler, 
truly  humane  and  piouB.  One  of  his  earliest  acts  was  to  remit 
all  the  taxes  due  to  himself.1  His  devotion  to  religion  was 

»  Jf.F..  XXXiT,  YV.  16  foil. 

1  Ibid.,  xxxiv.  y.  3a 


THU  DEVELOPMENT  OF  BUDDHIST  CULTURE 


49 


extraordinary,  and  the  chronicles  dwell  at  length  on  the 
religious  festivals  which  he  held  from  time  to  time.  His 
offerings  to  the  Maha-Thupa  were  enormous,  and  some  of 
them  read  to  us  now  like  fairy  tales.  Once  he  ordered,  at  his 
own  expense  of  course,  the  Cetiya  to  be  strewn  from  the  stops 
to  the  parasol  on  the  top  with  jasmine  flowers,  and  thus 
covered  it  with  a  mass  of  blossoms  which  he  kept  from 
withering  by  means  of  water  carried  by  machines  from  the 
Abhaya  tank.1  On  another  occasion  he  had  a  net  of  coral 
prepared  and  cast  over  the  Cetiya,  and,  when  he  had  given 
orders  to  fasten  in  the  meshes  thereof  lotus-flowers  of  gold  as 
large  as  wagon-wheels  and  to  hang  clusters  of  pearls  to  the 
lotus-flowers  beneath,  he  worshipped  the  Great  Thilpa  with 
this  offering.  But  what  is  more  important,  from  our  point  of 
view,  is  that  in  five  places  in  the  capital  he  constantly  enter¬ 
tained  monks  devoted  to  the  acquirement  of  sacred  learning 
and  maintained  them  with  the  requisites  of  life. 

The  next  hundred  years  was  a  period  of  great  internal 
commotion,  kngs  succeeding  one  another  with  great  rapidity 
as  a  result  of  the  varying  fortunes  of  rival  claimants  to  the 
throne.  SOmet-raes,  as  in  the  case  of  Kanirajauu-Tissa,* 
the  monks  attempted  to  interfere  in  these  political  upheavals 
with  disastrous  consequences  to  themselves.  The  Lambs - 
kapnas  (long-eared  ones),  descended  from  the  princes,  who 
came  over  from  India  along  with  the  branch  of  the  sacred 
Bodhi-tree,  had  multiplied  in  numbers  and  acquired  much 
influence  in  the  country.  They  became  a  perpetual  source  of 
trouble,  ultimately  supplanting  the  ancient  line  of  kings. 
During  the  whole  of  this  period  the  only  monarch  of  any 
importance  was  Vasabha,  who  reigned  from  about  a.d.  65-109. 
The  chronicles  describe  him  as  “  delighting  perpetually  in  well¬ 
doing  ”  ;  he  made  lavish  gifts  to  the  monks  and  supported 
especially  those  who  undertook  to  go  about  os  preachers  and 
teachers.’  It  is  also  recorded  of  him  that  he  restored  ruined 

1  U.V^  XXXIT,  TT.  44  (oil. 

*  Ibid.,  XXXV,  TT.  10,  11. 

*  I  tod.,  xxxv,  tt.  #2-3. 


4 


50 


TICS  PALT  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


and  dilapidated  buildings  in  various  parts  of  the  island  where 
monks  carried  on  their  studies,  and  an  inscription  informs  us 
of  a  gift  made  by  him  to  a  Thera  named  Majibvka  who  lived 

near  Anuradha-pura.1  . 

In  the  reign  of  the  next  king  a  small  army  of  Cobans  invaded 
Ceylon  and  carried  off  much  booty  and  a  considerable 
number  of  prisoners.  This  insult  was  avenged  by  his  son  and 
successor,  Gaja-Bahu  (the  Elephant-armed),  who  invaded 
Tanjore  with  a  large  army.  The  king  of  Tanjore,  intimidated 
by  the  sudden  attack,  acceded  to  all  demands  without  a  single 
act  of  hostility.*  It  was  the  first  expedition  of  the  Sinhalese 
outside  their  island  home,  and  their  success  brought  about 
several  important  and  interesting  results.  Twelve  thousand 
Coxian  prisoners  accompanied  Gaja-Bahu  on  his  return  home, 
and  they  were  settled  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  where 
they  quite  soon  became  part  of  the  permanent  population. 
Their  descendants  are  scattered  in  many  district  yjven  at  the 
present  time,  and  their  language  has  influent  V  Sinhalese 
speech  in  no  small  measure.  A  large  number  ,f  Cojjian  words 
found  their  way  even  into  the  literary  dialect  >f  the^5‘nhalese. 
The  king  of  Cbja  also  presented  Gaja-Bahu  .viti^bc  jewelled 
anklets  of  the  Hindu  goddess  Pattini  and  tW-  insignia  of  four 
Hindu  deities,  Vi$ou,  Kartikeya,  Natha,  snd  Pattini.  The 
cult  of  these  gods  and  goddesses  was  thus  introduced  into  the 
island  ;  an  extensive  literature  and  folklorS^ew  up  around 
these  names ;  special  families  dedicated  themselves  to  their 
service,  and  observances  and  ceremonies  connecftff  with  these 
deities  continue  to  this  day.  A  large  number  of  books  dealing 
with  the  cult  of  Pattini  are  still  available.* 

No  event  of  importance  happened  till  nearly  a  hundred  years 
later,  when  Vohiraka-Tissa  ascended  the  throne  in  A.D.  204. 
He  was  so  called  because  of  his  skill  in  the  law  and  of  his 
enactments  forbidding  and  abolishing  bodily  injury  as  a 
punitive  measure.  He  was  a  great  patron  of  learning  and 

*  Sp.  Z*y,  rol.  i.  pt.  U,  p.  Sfl. 

•  Pie  ria,  op.  elt.,  p.  0. 

»  JKAS.  (C.8.),  to).  riH  (10),  442  ;  ix  (32>,  321  ;  x  <*4).  *3. 


TUB  DEVELOPMENT  OP  BUDDHIST  CULTURE 


51 


helped  the  monks  in  all  their  difficulties.1  Two  T keros  are 
mentioned  as  his  special  favourites,  the  Thera  Deva,  a  gifted 
preacher  living  at  Kappukagama,  and  Mahatissa  of  Anur&r&ma 
in  Roharia.  His  gifts  to  tho  priesthood  were  immense,  but 
among  them  is  one  worthy  of  special  notice.  We  are  told  that 
after  his  accession  he  ordered  the  book  called  the  Ariya- 
vamsa  to  be  read  frequently,  and  commanded  that  on  each 
occasion  of  such  public  recital  there  should  be  held 
over  the  whole  island  a  regular  almsgiving  of  reverence  for 
the  true  doctrine.*  Now,  this  Ariya-vamta  was,  as  its  name 
implies,  a  "  book  of  the  holy  ones  ”,  probably  life-histories 
of  men  and  women  eminent  in  the  Buddhist  religion,  which 
were  read  aloud  for  the  edification  of  the  people.  It  is  obvious 
from  the  king’s  order  that  the  habit  existed  before  his 
time,  and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  this  custom  has  con¬ 
tinued  down  to  this  day  even  in  the  remotest  parts  of  the 
island.  Every  full-moon  day,  when  the  villagers  assemble  in 
the  tcmplo  precincts  to  perform  their  religious  observances, 
the  monks  relate  to  them  stories  of  eminent  men  and  women 
from  the  books  of  a  bygone  age,  the  chief  among  them  being 
the  J atakatthakatha  and  the  Dhamma-pada  commentary. 
We  cannot  say  now  whether  the  Ariya-vamsa  was  written  in 
Sinhalese  or  in  Pali,  or  perhaps  in  both,  whether  the  audience 
were  able  to  follow  tho  stories  as  they  were  being  read,  or 
whether  they  had  to  bo  explained  And  expatiated  upon  by  the 
monks  who  read  them. 

In  this  reign  the  Buddhist  Saftgha  was  once  more  faced 
with  the  problem  of  a  violent  schism.*  We  have  already  seen 
bow  the  formation  of  the  Dhammaruci  sect  with  its  head¬ 
quarters  at  Abhayagiri  in  the  reign  of  V&ttag&maoi  was  the 
first  serious  blow  to  the  authority  of  the  Thera-vadins  in 
Ceylon,  since  the  establishment  of  the  religion  by  Mahinda. 
The  division  thus  originated  continued  all  along;  but 

*  if.V.,  XXJtTi,  TT.  28  (oil. 

*  Ibid.,  nni,  r.  38. 

*  iV<Wyi*-*sMyn*to,  pp.  12-13. 


52  THE  PALI  LITERATURE  Of  CEYLON 

apparently  the  bitterness  of  the  controversy  had  disappeared. 
The  two  fraternities  at  Maha-Vihara  and  at  Abhayagiri  lived 
independently  of  each  other,  and  there  does  not  seem  to  have 
been  any  kind  of  communion  between  them.  Both  had  become 
centres  of  learning,  and  already  in  the  time  of  Bhatika  Abhaya 
differences  of  opinion  in  regard  to  the  text  of  the  canon  had 
begun  to  manifest  themselves.  The  Samanta-p&tadikS 1 
gives  us  an  account  of  a  dispute  which  arose  regarding 
a  reading  of  a  certain  passage  in  the  Vinaya.  When  the  disputo 
had  dragged  on,  the  kingoppointed  his  minister  Dighakar&yaoa, 
a  man  well  versed  in  scriptural  loro,  to  settle  the  matter.  After 
an  exhaustive  inquiry,  he  upheld  the  view  of  the  Maha- 
Vihara  community. 

The  were  evidently  not  quite  discriminating  in  the 
zeal  they  exhibited  in  lavishing  gifts  on  the  monks,  and  the 
people,  too,  partly  ignorant  and  partly  unconcerned  with  the 
individual  or  general  disagreement  over  particular  points  of 
the  Doctrine,  maintained  an  attitude  of  laieter  fair*.  The 
result  was  that  tho  Dhammarucians,  though  they  had  not 
made  much  headway  in  securing  adherents  to  their  way  of 
thinking,  yet  had  grown  rich  in  material  possessions ;  and  we 
find  that  the  monarch*  one  after  another,  anxious  to  maintain 
the  goodwill  of  both  parties,  were  equally  generous  to  both 
fraternities.  Thus  Subha  built  beautiful  rows  of  cells  both  at 
Abhayagiri  and  at  the  Maha-Vihara.*  Gajabahu  raised  the 
height  of  the  Abhayuttara  Thflpa  and  caused  vestibules  to 
be  built  at  the  gates  thereof,  and  constructed  the  Gftmaui- 
Tiasa  Tank  for  the  maintenance  of  the  Abhayagiri  monks.* 
Kanittha-Tissa  caused  to  be  built  a  splendid  structure, 
named  Ratana-pisada,  at  Abhayagiri,  for  the  Thera 
Mahitiiign  ;  bo  constructed  twelve  great  and  remarkably 
beautiful  pdtadat  at  the  Maha-Vihara,  and  made  a  road  leading 
from  the  grounds  to  the  Dakkhiga-Vihara.4  The  two  parties 

*  Colombo  Ed.,  p.  169. 

*  M.V.,  XX XT,  y,  S7. 

*  Ibid.,  xx xr,  tt.  119-22. 

*  Ibid.,  xxxvl,  tv.  7-U. 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OV  BUDDHIST  CULTURE 


53 


had  thus  been  existing  side  by  aide,  the  Haha-Vihara 
fraternity  more  or  less  tolerating  their  unorthodox  rivals. 
But  in  the  reign  of  Vohiraka-Tiaaa  the  quarrel  broke  out 
anew.  "  In  the  days  of  this  king,”  the  Niiaya-sangraha 
tells  us,  “  the  monks  of  Abhayagiri  of  the  Dhammaruci 
sect  adopted  the  Vaitxdtja  PiUiia,  which  certain  infidel 
Brahmaoas  called  Vaitulyas,  who  had  assumed  the  garb  of 
monks  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  religion,  had  composed 
in  the  time  of  Dhammasoka  Maharaja,  and  proclaimed  it  as 
the  preaching  of  the  Buddha.  Thereupon  the  priests  of  the 
Theriyo-Nxkayo,  having  compared  it  with  the  authentic 
text,  rejected  the  Vaitulya  doctrines  as  being  opposed  to 
religion.”  1 

It  is  surmised  that  the  reference  here  to  the  events  of  Asoka’s 
reign  relates  to  the  beginning  of  the  form  of  Buddhism 
known  to  us  as  the  Mahiiyuna.  The  close  resemblance  of  the 
name  Vaitulya  to  the  Vaipulya-Sutrat  belonging  to  that  school 
is  very  suggestive.*  The  origin  of  the  Mahiiyana  sect  is 
generally  assigned  to  the  first  centuries  of  the  Christian  era. 
It  is  quite  possible,  however,  that  it  had  a  much  earlier 
beginning,  but  came  into  prominence  only  about  the  time 
referred  to,  because  of  the  works  of  scholars  like  Aivaghoga, 
who  flourished  in  that  age. 

The  action  of  the  Maha-Vihara  resulted  in  a  great  con¬ 
troversy,  which  produced  such  bitterness  that  the  king 
himself  intervened.  He  entrusted  the  investigation  of  the 
matter  to  one  of  his  ministers,  named  Kapila,  “  a  man  who 
had  exhaustively  studied  all  branches  of  knowledge.”  Kapila 
reported  in  due  course  that  the  Vaitulya-Vada  was  opposed 
to  the  strict  teaching  of  the  Buddha,  whereupon  Vohiraka- 
Tissa  burnt  all  the  available  Vaitulyan  books  and  disgraced 
the  monks  of  the  Abhayagiri,  who  had  tacitly  or  overtly 
adopted  the  heresy.* 

>  p.  12. 

>  See  a !*o  Geiger,  M  V.,  p.  250,  footnote  2. 

1  .ViJhlya-naS/raAa,  p.  12. 


54  THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CBYI.ON 

This  was  a  most  unfortunate  act  of  intolerance.  Not 
a  single  book  of  tho  Vaitulynns  has  come  down  to  us,  and  we 
Are  not  able  to  Ascertain  the  ways  wherein  their  opinions 
differed  from  those  of  the  orthodox  Thera- viidins. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  Buddhist  monks,  while  they  were 
perfectly  tolerant  with  regard  to  other  systems  of  belief 
professed  by  other  religionists,  were  ever  vehement  in  their 
persecution  of  schism.  In  the  Vinaya  An  attempt  to  bring 
about  disunion  among  the  Saiigha  is  put  in  the  same  category 
as  shedding  the  blood  of  the  Buddha.  Boldly  confident  in 
the  superiority  of  their  own  religion,  they  bear  without 
impatience  the  errors,  to  them  glaring,  of  open  antagonists, 
and  even  seem  to  exult  in  the  contiguity  of  competing  systems, 
as  though  theirs  would  derive  strength  by  comparison.  To 
the  assaults  of  open  opponents  the  Buddhist  displays  the 
calmest  indifference,  convinced  that  in  its  undiminished 
strength  his  faith  is  firm  and  inexpugnable ;  his  vigilance  is 
only  excited  by  the  alarm  of  internal  dissent,  and  all  his 
passionR  arc  aroused  to  stifle  the  symptoms  of  schism.  The 
intolerance  shown  in  this  instance  by  the  Maha-Vihara 
Bhikkhus  brought  its  own  retribution  in  due  time,  r.il™ 
mushrooms  that  grow  by  night,  the  heretics  secretly 
strengthened  their  numbers  and  waited  for  an  opportunity 
to  assert  themselves.  Their  chance  was  not  long  in  ita  arrival. 

Next  in  our  rapid  survey  of  this  early  period  we  come  to 
tho  Saint-King  Siri  Safighabodhi,  one  of  the  moat  revered 
names  in  Ceylon  history.  He  embodied  the  spirit  of  self- 
renunciation  and  self-sacrifice  which  marked  those  whose 
feet  were  set  in  the  path  to  Sambodhi  (Enlightenment).  He 
was  a  visionary  and  an  idealist,  "  a  man  on  earth  devoted  to 
the  skies,”  and  from  a  worldly  point  of  view  his  career  as 
king  was  a  disastrous  failure.  Yet  he  was  loyal  to  his  principles, 
which  he  maintained  at  the  cost  of  his  kingdom  and  his  life. 
The  Ilatiha-  VanayaUa-vanxm  (q.v.)  gives  us  a  vivid  de¬ 
scription  of  the  man  and  his  ideals.  Born  at  Mahiyangana, 
under  the  shade  of  the  ThOpa,  which  stands  on  a  spot  hallowed 


THK  DEVELOPMENT  OF  BUDDHIST  CULTURE 


55 


by  the  tradition  of  the  Master's  visit,  he  was  trained  by  his 
maternal  uncle,  the  Thera  Maha-Nando,  who  made  him  an 
accomplished  scholar  and  a  perfect  man.  Later  on  he  was 
raised  to  the  throne,  and  we  are  told  that  his  piety  and  com¬ 
passion  were  such  that  they  moved  the  very  heavens.  But 
his  novel  methods  of  government  and  administration  of  justice, 
amidst  a  people  unaccustomed  to  such  measures,  brought 
about  a  state  of  anarchy  in  the  land  ;  and,  when  one  of  the 
ministers,  Gothibhaya,  raised  the  standard  of  revolt,  he  gladly 
renounced  the  throne  and  retired  to  the  forest  to  lead  an 
ascetic’s  life.  But  the  usurper  felt  his  position  insecure  as 
long  as  Sanghabodhi  was  alive,  and  he  therefore  B«t  a  price  on 
the  head  of  the  fugitive  king.  Many  murders  were  committed 
by  unscrupulous  men  who  ooveted  the  reward.  Meanwhile 
the  king  himself,  in  the  course  of  his  wanderings,  had  come  to 
Attauagolla,  where,  in  a  beautiful  woodland  grove,  the  eye 
could  linger  with  delight  on  the  **  pillared  shade*  ”,  thick  with 
their  dense  green  foliage  and  laden  with  their  pendant  fruits 
and  flowers.  Finding  thia  an  ideal  spot,  ho  remained  there, 
leading  a  life  of  seclusion  and  meditation.  Sometime  later 
he  met  a  peasant  travelling  through  the  forest,  who  on  being 
questioned,  not  recognizing  the  king  in  his  disguise,  related  all 
that  was  happening  in  the  land.  Being  excessively  glad  at 
the  opportunity  of  making  the  supreme  sacrifice,  the  king 
revealed  his  identity  and  pressed  upon  the  peasant  to  accept 
ha  head.  This  offer  met  with  a  positive  refusal;  but 
Saiighabodhi  proceeded  to  immolate  himself,  and  the  man, 
apparently  paralysed  by  thia  sudden  development,  could  not 
prevent  it.  The  head  was  ultimately  produced  at  the  court ; 
and  when  Gothibhaya  saw  it  he  was  struck  with  sudden 
remorse.  His  very  first  act  was  to  hurry  off  to  Attanagalla, 
where  he  found  also  the  dead  body  of  the  queen,  who  had  lost 
her  life  while  searching  for  her  husband.  The  royal  pair  were 
cremated  with  all  the  honours  due  to  their  rank,  and 
Gothabhaya  immediately  set  about  making  all  possible 
amends  for  his  misdeeds.  He  built  a  number  of  monuments 


56 


THE  PAlil  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


in  memory  of  the  departed  king,  on  sites  associated  in  some 
manner  or  other  with  the  latter's  brief  hermit  life.  The  most 
remarkable  of  them  was  the  Vata-d&gc  ("  Circular  Relic- 
house  ”),  a  rotunda-shaped  building  constructed  over  the 
king's  ashes.  His  munificence  to  the  monks  was  great,  and  by 
these  acts  he  gradually  regained  his  lost  popularity.1 

This  eSort  on  the  part  of  the  king  to  win  the  people’s 
goodwill  was  greatly  helped  by  another  opportunity  of 
upholding  undiminished  the  purity  of  tire  faith,  which  was  to 
them  then,  as  now,  the  greatest  possession  on  earth.  In  the 
fourth  year  of  his  reign  the  old  Vaitulyan  heresy  raised  its 
head  again,  the  scene  of  trouble  being  once  more  the 
Abhayagiri  Vihara.*  The  monks  launched  a  campaign  of 
vigorous  propaganda.  We  are  told  that  one  of  their  number, 
the  Thera  Ussiliya-Tiasa,  recalling  to  their  minds  the  disgrace 
which  had  befallen  the  heretical  monks  in  Vohilraka-Tissa's 
reign,  refused  to  be  associated  with  the  new  enterprise. 
Finding  dissuasion  of  no  avail,  he  left  Abhayagiri  and  with 
some  three  or  four  of  his  followers  went  over  to  Dakkhioagiri 
Vihara.  There  they  accepted  as  their  leader  a  Maha- Thera 
named  Sigala,  and  were  thenceforth  known  as  the  Sagaliyas, 
an  offshoot  of  the  Dhammaruci  sect,  but  not  wholly  believing 
in  the  traditions  of  that  community.  When  reports  of  these 
dissentient  movements  reached  the  king,  ho  made  up  his 
mind  to  win  by  one  stroke  the  everlasting  gratitude  of  the 
true  followers  of  the  religion.  As  patron  of  the  Buddhist 
church  in  the  island,  he  assembled  the  monks  of  the  five 
chief  monasteries  which  constituted  the  orthodox  Sangha  of 
Ceylon — the  Maha-Vihara,  TliOparama,  Isaarasamauar&ma, 
Vessagiri  Vihara,  and  the  Cetiya  Vihara.  After  having  satisfied 
himself  by  a  searching  inquiry  that  the  Vaitulyana  were 
heretical  in  thoir  views,  he  lost  no  time  in  having  the  books  of 
the  VaUulya-vdda  collected  and  burnt.  And  in  order  to  teach 
a  lesson  to  the  others,  he  picked  out  sixty  of  the  principal 

1  Haltka Mitapa lit. rcnpM  ( concluding  ch/ipfort), 

■  .VtJUys-Mflffrata,  p.  13. 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OP  BUDDHIST  CULTURE 


57 


offenders,  branded  them,  and  expelled  them  from  the 
country.1 

For  a  time  all  went  well.  The  exiled  monks  settled  down  at 
Kavira,  in  South  India,  and  there  they  soon  made  themselves 
powerful.  To  them  came  a  young  and  shrewd  adventurer, 
who,  noticing  the  favours  lavished  upon  them  by  their 
followers  at  KAvira,  joined  the  band  os  a  monk.  After  his 
ordination  he  went  by  the  name  of  SaAgkamitta.  It  is  said 
that  one  day,  while  the  monks  were  changing  their  clothes 
preparatory  to  bathing,  SaAghamitta  saw  the  brand-marks 
on  their  bodies  and  questioned  them  about  it.  Having  learnt 
of  all  that  had  happened,  he  offered  them  his  services,  if  ho 
could  be  of  any  use.  He  was  told  that,  if  he  could  go  to 
Lanka  and  openly  and  boldly  interest  himself  on  their  behalf, 
they  might  still  be  able  to  return  thither  and  wrest  power  from 
their  enemies,  now  in  triumph.  SaAghamitta  had  unbounded 
confidence  in  his  abilities  and  he  gladly  entered  into  the 
adventure.  "  I  will  go  and  will  see  that  cither  the  monks  of 
the  Mnhii-Vihara  adopt  the  Vaitulya  doctrines,  or  that  the 
Vihara  itself  is  uprooted  and  destroyed.’'  So  said  he,  and  sailed 
in  a  few  days.  On  his  arrival  he  took  residence  at  Abh&yagiri 
and  began  his  insidious  campaign. 

Meanwhile  the  Sagaliya  sect,  which  had  seceded  from  the 
Dh&mmarucians  &  few  years  previously,  had  not  been  idle. 
They  had  attempted  by  every  means  in  their  power  to 
propagate  their  views  and  had  met  with  a  certain  measure  of 
success.  The  people  were  perplexed  by  these  varied  views  con¬ 
tending  for  acceptance  and  were  unable  to  decide  for  themselves 
which  were  the  true  teachings  of  the  Buddha.  The  king, 
wishing  to  come  to  some  sort  of  settlement  of  these  disputes, 
summoned  another  meeting  of  the  different  factions,  and  a 
solemn  assembly  was  held,  this  time  at  the  ThQpirima.  The 
king  himself  was  present.  Here  Sa&ghamitta  denounced  the 
views  of  the  Theriya  Nikaya  and  the  practices  of  the  Maha- 

1  The  scoooaU  of  these  schisms  an  taken  mainly  from  the  .ViiSyo- 
$a*graho. 


53 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


Vibara  fraternity,  and  he  put  forward  his  case  with  such  great 
force  of  argument  that  the  king  was  convinced.  Tho  king’s 
uncle,  Thera  Gothabhaya,  after  whom  tho  king  had  been 
named,  belonged  to  the  orthodox  party  ;  but  his  attempts  to 
win  over  the  king  were  of  no  avail.  Saftghamitta  triumphed, 
and  thus  began  a  period  of  great  calamity  to  the  Mahii- 
Vihara  monks. 

It  was  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  Buddhism  in  Ceylon 
that  a  reigning  Sinhalese  sovereign  had  accepted  and  publicly 
taken  tho  side  of  a  heretical  sect  in  opposition  to  the  orthodox 
church.  For  over  five  and  a  half  centuries  the  Mahft-Vihara 
had  been  looked  upon  as  the  lawful  custodian  of  the  purity  of 
the  faith,  and  this  secession  of  the  king  therefore  caused  great 
consternation  amongst  them.  We  arc  told  that  they  held 
many  and  frequent  meetings  of  their  followers  to  decide 
upon  a  course  of  action. 

Safighamitta  soon  became  a  great  favourite  of  the  king, 
enjoying  his  friendship  and  confidence.  He  was  appointed 
tutor  to  the  king’s  two  sons,  and  it  is  said  that  when  he  found 
the  elder  son  too  clever  to  be  deceived  by  his  false  doctrines, 
he  paid  greater  attention  to  the  younger,  Maha-Sena. 

Although  Gothabhaya  bad  thus  taken  the  heretics  under  bis 
wing,  his  old  attachment  to  the  Maha-Vihara  was  too  great 
to  allow  him  to  harm  them,  as  Saiigkamitta  desired.  On  the 
contrary,  he  continued  to  support  them,  though  perhaps  not 
with  the  same  zeal  and  devotion  as  before.  On  his  death  his 
elder  son,  Jettha-Tissa,  came  to  the  throne.  He  was  a  proud 
and  arrogant  man,  and  his  barbarity  towards  hiB  nobles, 
whom  he  suspected  of  disloyalty,  won  for  him  the  surname  of 
“  the  Cruel  On  his  accession,  SaPghamitta,  realizing  that  the 
king  was  by  no  means  his  friend,  after  consultation  with  the 
younger  prince,  who  was  his  favourite,  hurriedly  loft  tho 
country,  to  wait  patiently  at  Kavira  for  the  day  of  his  triumph, 
when  Maha-Sena  should  sit  on  the  throne  of  Ceylon.  Jettha- 
Tissa  proved  himself  later  to  be  a  staunch  friend  and  patron 
of  the  orthodox  party  and  showered  his  favours  upon  them 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  BUDDHIST  CULTURE 


59 


during  the  fourteen  years  of  his  reign.  He  was  succeeded  by 
his  brother  Maha-Scna,  one  of  whose  first  acts  was  to  send 
for  his  erstwhile  tutor  and  friend,  Safighamitta,  who  was  also 
asked  to  preside  at  bis  coronation.  This  act  of  preference 
showed  quite  clearly  what  the  king’s  disposition  was  towards 
the  Maha-Vihara  sect. 

From  the  day  of  his  return  SuAghanutta  tried  his  best  to 
persuade  the  monks  of  the  Thcriya  Xikaya  to  accept  the 
Vaitulya-  Vada.  But  thoy  were  loyal  to  their  faith  and 
remained  adamant.  At  lost  he  pointed  out  to  them  what  their 
refusal  would  mean  for  them,  by  way  of  the  king’s  wrath. 
Such  threats  were  of  no  influence,  and  SaAghamitta  was 
determined  to  have  his  revenge.  “  The  dwellers  in  the  Maha- 
Vihara  do  not  teach  the  true  V inaya,"  he  told  the  king ; 
“  we  of  the  Abhayagiri  are  those  who  teach  the  true  Vinaya." 
But  Mahu-Sena,  weak-minded  though  he  was  and  devotedly 
attached  to  his  tutor,  shrank  from  the  suggestion.  The 
traditions  which  he  had  inherited  from  his  ancestors  of  many 
centuries  proved  too  strong  for  him  to  resist  them,  and  perhaps 
the  fear  of  the  people’s  indignation  at  so  dastardly  a  crime 
as  that  prompted  by  Saflghamitta  weighed  with  him  as  well. 
But  Safighamitta  would  not  be  easily  baulked.  Again  and 
again  he  pleaded  and  entreated,  he  argued,  "  the  Devil  quoted 
scripture  for  his  purpose  ”  and  Moha-Scna  yielded  at  last  to 
his  importunities.  His  reluctance  and  weak  resistance 
broke  down  before  the  ceaseless  intriguing  of  the  crafty 
Safighamitta. 

Then  followed  a  series  of  events  which  formed  the  darkest 
chapter  in  the  early  history  of  Buddhism  in  Oeylon.  A  Royal 
Edict  went  round,  **  whoever  gives  elms  to  a  Bhikkhu  dwelling 
in  the  Maha-Vihara  is  liable  to  a  fine  of  a  hundred  pieces  of 
money,”  and  no  one  dared  disobey.  Three  days  the  monks 
went  their  usual  round  in  the  city,  begging-bowl  in  hand, 
each  day  they  returned  with  empty  bowls.  For  the  first 
time  in  six  centuries  the  Maha-Vihara  starved.  On  the  fourth 
day  the  monks  of  the  Theriya  Nik&ya  assembled  in  solemn 


60 


tub  pau  utkratuke  of  ceylon 


conclave  at  the  Brazen  Palace.  Their  decision  was  manly : 
“  Even  though  we  starve  to  death,”  said  they,  “  we  cannot 
concede  that  heresy  is  true  doctrine.  Should  we  do  so,  many 
others  would  follow  us  and  suffer  evil,  and  the  guilt  would  be 
upon  us.  Let  our  lives  and  our  asceticism  be  imperilled,  we 
persist  in  refusing  to  adopt  the  Vadulya  doctrines.”  Thus 
by  their  courageous  resolve,  by  their  steadfast  loyalty  to  the 
faith,  whose  purity  they  valued  more  than  their  very  lives, 
by  their  self-sacrificing  zeal,  did  they  win  for  Ceylon  what  has 
ever  remained  its  proudest  boast,  that  “  Laftka  is  the  home  of 
a  Buddhism  whose  teachings  are  pure  and  unsullied  and 
untainted  by  heresy  Leaving  their  vihiras,  their  abodes 
of  sanctity  and  their  seats  of  learning,  they  journeyed  out 
of  Anuradhapura,  some  to  the  Maya  Province  and  others  to 
Rohapa,  there  to  await  the  day  of  their  deliverance  from 
persecution. 

Sahgbamitta’s  joy  was  unbounded ;  this  was  the  hour  of 
triumph  for  which  he  had  yearned  and  planned  throughout 
his  life.  Things  had  happened  exactly  as  he  desired,  and  his 
success  was  complete.  11  Ownerless  land  belongs  to  the  king, 
he  whispered  in  Maha-Scna’s  ear,  when  the  orthodox  monks 
had  deserted  their  viharae.  Thus  it  happened  that  all  the 
abandoned  monasteries  and  their  possessions  were  seized  in 
the  king's  name  and  appropriated  by  the  Dhammarucians 
now  in  power.  A  campaign  was  started  in  dead  earnest,  led 
by  SaAghamitta  and  his  friend,  a  minister  named  Soa*.  to 
extirpate  the  Theriya  monks.  They  carried  on  apace  the  work 
of  spoliation  and  destruction  of  all  that  erstwhile  belonged  to 
their  rivals.  Stately  structures  were  demolished  and  plundered, 
one  after  the  other ;  the  Maha-Vihara,  the  Brazen  Palace, 
and  all  such  religious  edifices,  built  by  the  generosity  of  devout 
kings  and  pious  noblemen  for  the  use  of  the  orthodox  SaAgha, 
were  razed  to  the  ground.  Some  three  hundred  and  sixty-four 
colleges  and  great  temples  were  uprooted  and  destroyed, 
says  an  ancient  chronicle 1 ;  and  the  spoils  gathered  from  them 
1  Sik&y*-t&Kjn\a,  p.  14. 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OP  BUDDHIST  CULTURE 


61 


went  to  enrich  and  adorn  the  home  of  heresy,  the  Abhayagiri, 
which,  now  splendid  in  ornaments  and  rich  in  possessions, 
stood,  pre-eminent  over  all,  as  the  greatest  and  the  wealthiest 
monastery  in  LaPka.  During  nine  years  Saighamitta  lived 
in  glory.  In  the  tenth  year,  however,  the  popular  indignation 
against  the  religious  activities  of  the  king  and  his  two  evil 
counsellors,  came  to  a  head  in  an  open  rebellion  led  by  a  noble 
named  Meghavapnabhaya,  one  of  the  king’s  own  ministers. 
Mahu-Sena  marched  with  his  forces  to  quell  the  uprising,  and 
the  two  armies  met  near  Mahagima.  There  an  interesting 
thing  happened.  The  rebellious  minister,  anxious  to  indicate 
that  he  bore  no  personal  ill-will  against  the  king,  although  he 
was  determined  to  fight  and  even  slay  him  in  defence  of  the 
religion,  proceeded  into  the  royal  camp,  taking  with  him  choice 
food  and  drink  that  he  might  partake  of  it  with  the  king.  He 
was  duly  recognized  and  led  before  Mali  a -Sena.  The  king, 
who  always  bore  a  great  regard,  even  affection,  for 
Meghavapnabhaya,  questioned  him  as  to  the  motives  of  his 
coming.  He,  setting  the  food  and  drink  on  a  table,  invited  the 
Ung  to  partake  of  it  and  talk  to  him  in  confidence.  In  perfect 
trust  Maha-Sena  sat  down  and,  when  the  meal  was  over,  asked 
«  What  has  made  thee  to  become  a  rebel,  Meghavapnabhaya  ?  ” 
«  Because  the  Maha-Vihara  has  been  destroyed,  sire,”  said 
he,  with  tear-filled  eyes.  “  I  will  make  the  Vihira  to  be  dwelt 
in  yet  again,  Abhaya ;  forgive  me  my  fault,  replied  the 
conscience-stricken  king,  who  evidently  was  sick  himself  of 
the  destruction  wrought  by  his  evil  geniuses.  The  two  were 
reconciled  on  the  spot,  and  the  two  armies  marched  back 
to  the  capital  in  the  friendliest  possible  intercourse.  Tout 
comprendre  e'ett  tout  pardonner.  At  Anuradhapura,  meanwhile, 
the  people  had  taken  the  law  into  their  own  hands,  and  they 
broke  out  into  wild  demonstrations.  The  lead  for  violence  was 
given  by  one  of  Maha-Sena’s  own  queens.  She  had  long  and 
bitterly  wept  over  the  destruction  of  the  Maha-Vihara,  and 
she  had  never  forgiven  the  evil-minded  SaPghamitta,  who  was 
responsible  for  this  savage  act  of  vandalism  and  for  the 


62 


THK  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


expulsion  of  the  Theriya  monks.  Sattghamitta  was  slain  by 
a  carpenter,  m  he  attempted  to  obstruct  the  building  of  the 
ThQparama,  which  this  queen  had  undertaken  to  restore. 
The  people  Burrounded  Soija’s  houBe,  killed  him  and  flung  his 
body  on  to  a  dung-heap.  When  order  was  somewhat  restored, 
the  angry  queen,  who  had  procured  SaAghamitta’s  death, 
did  what  Gothabhaya  had  done  thirty-seven  years  earlier- 
collected  the  heretical  VaituU/a  books  and  made  a  bonfire 
of  them. 

Maha-Scna,  true  to  his  word,  began  to  restore  the  Maha- 
Vihara,  and  in  a  abort  time  the  monks  of  the  Thoriya 
fraternity,  their  nine  years’  exile  ended,  returned  to  the 
capital.  The  royal  Edict  which  had  necessitated  their 
departure  was  recalled,  and  for  a  time  peace  and  quiet  reigned 
in  the  land. 

But  it  was  not  for  long.  The  king  was  particularly 
susceptible  to  heresy.  Two  years  later  another  dissentient 
monk,  Kohon-Tissa  by  name,  of  the  Sagaliya  sect,  living  at 
Dakkhinarama,  succeeded  in  gaining  the  king’s  confidence, 
and  soon  began  fresh  trouble  for  the  Maha-Vihara.  The  king 
was  anxious  to  construct  a  stately  Vihara  for  his  new  friend, 
and  for  this  he  wished  to  encroach  upon  the  precincts  of  tho 
Maha-Vihara.  Against  this  the  latter  strongly  protested,  and 
left  the  Vihara.  But  the  king  was  obstinate  and  he  sent  men 
to  uproot  their  boundary  marks.  Legend  has  it  that  a  Rak$asa 
(demon)  with  an  iron-club  uplifted  in  his  hand,  appeared  on 
the  scene  and  frightened  away  the  workmen.  He  then  ran 
amok  in  the  dty,  and  the  king,  alarmed,  undertook  to  repair 
the  damage  done  and  restore  the  Vihira  to  its  rightful  owners. 
Later,  however,  in  spite  of  strenuous  opposition,  he  built  for 
his  friend  Kohon-Tissa  the  majestic  Jetavana  Vihara  on  the 
Maha-Vih&ra  premises.  The  latter,  refusing  to  be  thus 
inveigled,  brought  against  Kohon-Tissa  a  charge  involving  one 
or  more  of  the  extreme  offences,  punishment  for  which  was 
expulsion  from  the  Order ;  and  at  a  full  meeting  of  the  SaUgha 
Kohon-Tissa  was  adjudged  guilty  after  a  long  trial  and  ordered 


THK  DRV ELOPM  ENT  OP  BUDDHIST  CULTURE 


63 


to  be  disrobed.  The  king,  apparently  dissatisfied  with  this 
decision,  appointed  the  Chief  Justice  of  his  court,  Dhammtka, 
to  investigate  the  charge  afresh.  In  this  the  king  was  dis¬ 
appointed  ;  for  Dhammika  was  too  upright  and  fearless 
to  let  his  decision  be  influenced  by  the  king’s  wishes.  After 
a  thorough  investigation  he  ordered  Kohon-Tissa  to  be  dis¬ 
robed  forthwith  and  expelled  from  the  Order.  Maha-Sena 
owned  defeat,  and  sincerely  repented  of  his  folly.  During  twelve 
years  thenceforward  he  became  an  ardent  friend  and  supporter 
of  the  Theriya  Nikaya,  and  the  Mahd-vanwa  mentions  that 
"  There  is  no  record  of  his  gifts  of  food  and  drink  ”  :  they 
were  too  numerous.1  He  helped  all  those  who  wished  to  devote 
their  lives  to  learning  and  literary  pursuits  and  became  their 
great  benefactor. 

With  the  death  of  Maha-Sena  in  a.D.  302  ended  the  “  Maha * 
txntua  ”,  or  the  "  Great  Dynasty  ”  of  Sinhalese  kings.  The 
sovereigns  of  the  “  Cula-varrua”  (or  the  Lesser  Dynasty),  says 
the  RajavaK,  were  no  longer  of  the  unmixed  blood,  but  the 
offspring  of  parents  only  one  of  whom  was  descended  from  the 
Sun,  and  the  other  from  those  who  had  brought  the  Sacred 
Bodhi-tree  or  the  Sacred  Tooth  ;  on  that  account  the  fertility 
of  the  land  was  diminished,  and  the  kings  who  succeeded 
Maha-Sena  were  no  longer  reverenced  as  of  old.* 

At  the  time  when  the  Great  Dynasty  became  extinct  the 
material  prosperity  of  the  country  was  quite  sound  and 
auspicious.  The  people,  though  occasionally  disturbed  by 
minor  civil  commotions,  were  able  to  carry  on  their  pursuits 
in  peace  ;  there  was  contentment  all  round.  The  attention 
which  the  kings  bestowed  on  the  irrigation  of  the  country 
had  made  the  food  of  the  people  abundant ;  and  the  sums 
expended  on  the  adornment  of  the  city,  the  multitude^  of  its 
sacred  structures,  the  splendour  of  its  buildings,  and  the  beauty 
of  ita  lakes  and  gardens,  bear  ample  testimony  to  the  wealth 
of  the  kingdom.  The  accounts  left  to  us  by  the  traveller, 

1  M.V.,  zzzvii,  v.  4S. 

*  Rij&vall  (Upturn),  p.  239. 


64 


THE  PAU  UTKRATtnUt  OF  CEYLON 


Fa  Hsien,  who  visited  the  island  a  little  while  later,  fully 
corroborate  the  descriptions  given  in  the  MaAd-Vamso. 
It  waa  crowded,  he  says,  with  nobles,  magistrates,  and  foreign 
merchants ;  the  houses  were  beautiful,  the  public  buildings 
richly  adorned ;  the  streets  and  the  highways  were  broad  and 
level,  and  halls  for  preaching,  teaching  and  reading  fcano  were 
erected  in  all  the  thoroughfares.  He  was  assured  that  the 
island  contained  no  less  than  fifty  to  sixty  thousand 
ecclesiastics,  all  of  whom  ate  in  common,  and  of  whom  from 
five  to  six  thousand  were  supported  by  the  bounty  of  the  king.1 
In  such  a  community  literary  genius  was  bound  to  sprout 
in  full  vigour.  Men  and  women,  free  from  the  cares  of  the 
material  needs  of  the  body,  were  able  to  devote  their  attention 
to  the  cultivation  of  the  mind.  They  studied  assiduously  not 
only  the  text  and  the  commentaries  of  the  P&li  canon,  which 
formed  their  sacred  scripture*,  but  also  all  branches  of  know¬ 
ledge.  There  waa  constant  and  free  intercourse  with  the  main¬ 
land  of  India,  and  many  other  parts  of  Asia  as  well.  Moorish 
traders  from  Arabia  travelled  hither,  selling  their  wares; 
Pliny  records  that  early  in  the  fourth  century  a.d.  four 
ambassadors  from  Ceylon  made  their  way  to  Rome  on  a 
complimentary  mission  to  a  state,  the  intercourse  with  which 
is  still  evidenced  by  large  finds  of  Roman  coins  in  the  island.1 
Along  with  the  intercourse  in  goods  must  have  existed  inter¬ 
course  in  views  as  well ;  and  the  people  of  Ceylon,  then  as 
now,  were  always  prepared  to  learn  and  assimilate  the  culture 
of  other  nations.  The  era  of  contentment  and  prosperity  gave 
a  fresh  impetus  to  this  desire  for  the  development  of  the 
intellect.  Whatever  literary  works  were  produced  at  this 
time — and  there  must  have  been  many  such — are 
unfortunately  irretrievably  lost,  leaving  behind  them  no 
records  at  all,  and  we  have  to  satisfy  ourselves  with  but 
vague  surmises.  What  such  surmises  lead  us  to  assume  will 
be  more  evident  in  the  next  chapter. 

1  Gilt*'  trtmiaticn,  pp.  00-70. 

*  Fieri*.  CejA»  owJ  fJW  Porlugwtn,  j>.  0. 


CHAPTER  IV 

Tire  Beginnings  or  Literary  Activity 


jy^AHA-SENA'S  son  and  successor,  Siri  Meghavappa,  did 
all  that  lay  in  his  power  to  make  amends  /or  the  mis¬ 
chief  which  his  father  hod  committed.  He  assembled  all  the 
monks  of  the  Mahi-vih&ra,  who  had  been  scattered  abroad 
by  the  measures  of  Maha-sena  and  reverentially  asked  them 
how  best  he  could  moke  up  for  the  sacrileges  of  which  his 
father  had  been  guilty.  Acting  under  their  advice,  he  rebuilt 
the  Brazen  Palace,  which  was  the  proudest  building  in  the 
capital ;  he  reconstructed  all  the  parivciiat  (the  temple- 
schools)  which  had  been  demolished  and  restored  all  the  lands 
that  had  been  endowed  for  their  maintenance.  Meghavappa 
was  evidently  a  student  of  history,  and  when  he  learnt  of 
Mahinda,  who  had  converted  the  island  to  Buddhism,  he 
caused  an  image  of  the  Then  to  be  made  and  held  a  great 
festival  in  his  honour.  For  the  ceremony  of  dedication  ho 
sent  messengers  and  summoned  to  the  city  all  the  monks  from 
the  various  parts  of  the  country ;  the  Mahd-vamsa  gives 
a  glowing  description  of  the  rejoicings  that  marked  the  event.1 
He  also  decreed  that  a  similar  festival  should  be  held  annually 
at  the  conclusion  of  the  rainy  season.  This  order  was  for  a 
very  long  time  carried  out ;  but,  like  many  another  institution, 
it  has  now  perished.1  But  the  most  outstanding  event  of  the 
reign  was  the  bringing  over  to  Ceylon  of  the  Right  Eye-Tooth, 
the  Dathndhatu,  from  Kalirtga.  In  the  introductory  verses  of 
the  Datha-vamsa  the  author  tells  us  that  his  work  was  based 
on  an  ancient  poem  in  Sinhalese  (Elu)  verse,  called  the 
Dalado-tximsa.  And  this  poem  appears  to  have  been  com¬ 
posed  in  the  ninth  year  of  Meghavappa's  reign — the  very  year 
of  the  arrival  of  the  tooth  relic  in  Ceylon — by  the  king’s 
express  command.  It  is  said  to  have  contained  a  history  of  the 

‘  U.V.,  xxttU,  vt.  M  ML 

*  An  attempt,  however,  has  recently  been  made  to  revive  It. 

5 


60 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


relic  from  the  death  of  the  Buddha  to  Ha  arrival  in  Ceylon. 
There  seems  to  have  been  another  work,  called  the  D6thi- 
dhalu-vamsa,  composed  either  at  this  tune  or  shortly  after 
and  mentioned  in  jtfaAo-wawtsa  XXXVII.  In  a  foot¬ 
note  to  his  translation  of  this  chapter  Turnour  mentions 
that  the  work  was  still  extant  at  the  time  (1837).!  In  spite  of 
diligent  search  I  have  not  been  able  to  see  a  copy. 
Major  Forbes  identifies  the  Dalada-vamsa  with  this  work,  but 
gives  no  reason  for  his  conclusions  * 

Whatever  information  we  have  at  present  is  based  on  the 
Datha-variua,  written  by  Dhnmmakitti  in  the  twelfth  century 
a.d.  There  we  learn  that  the  relic  was  introduced  into  Ceylon 
from  Dantapura  in  the  ninth  year  of  Siri  Meghavanua's  reign 
by  Hematnola,  daughter  of  Guhaslva,  king  of  Kalihga,  and 
her  husband,  Danta  Kumars,  a  prince  of  the  Ujjcni  royal 
family.  During  more  than  eight  centuries  the  relic  had 
remained  undisturbed  at  Dantapura ;  but  Guhastva,  when 
he  became  a  convert  from  Brahmanism  to  Buddhism,  paid 
homage  to  the  Tooth  and  thereby  incurred  the  implacable 
wrath  of  the  Brahman  priests.  They  complained  to  his 
suzerain  lord  of  Pandu  at  Pataliputra,  who  ordered  it  to  be 
brought  to  his  capital,  and  there  by  the  wonders  it  exhibited 
he  himself  was  converted.  Shortly  afterwards  the  Icing  of 
SavaUhi  assembled  an  army  and  demanded  the  relic.  War 
ensued,  and  Pandu’s  army  was  defeated.  The  relic  was  restored 
to  Guhaslva.  Sometime  later  the  son  of  the  king  of  UjjenI, 
who  was  a  zealous  Buddhist,  came  to  Dantapura,  bringing 
tokens  of  homage  to  the  relic, and  there  he  married  Hemamala, 
daughter  of  the  Kaliiiga  king.  A  large  army  from  Savatthi 
appeared  at  Dantapura,  demanding  the  relic  once  more,  and 
Guhaslva,  apprehensive  of  the  power  by  which  he  was  assailed, 
directed  his  daughter  and  son-in-Uw  to  escapo  from  the  city, 
taking  the  relic  with  them.  They  disguised  themselves  as 
members  of  the  Buddhist  Order,  and  after  many  adventures 

1  Tumour,  i/aiil-ra^ua,  p.  241,  footnote. 

*  See  XWfAd-rawra  diattuuon. 


THE  RECINXIXC.S  OF  1JTKRARY  ACTIVITY 


67 


came  to  Ceylon  (which  is  said  to  have  been  foretold  as  its 
final  resting  place),  and  delivered  it  to  the  king.  There  they 
were  received  with  all  the  honour  due  to  their  exalted  rank 
and  the  precious  object  which  they  eaoorted.  On  the  arrival 
of  the  relic  at  Anuradhapura  the  king  took  charge  of  it  himself 
and,  rendering  thereto  the  greatest  homage,  deposited  it 
in  a  casket  made  of  phalika  (steatite)  stone  and  lodged  it  in 
an  edifice  called  the  Dhammn-cakka,  built  by  Devanampiya- 
Tissa.  In  the  height  of  his  felicity  the  king,  so  the  Mahd- 
vimsa  tells  us,1  spent  9  lakhs  in  celebrating  the  Du(hudh&tu 
festival  and  made  proclamation  that  the  relic  should  be 
annually  honoured  by  taking  it  in  a  procession  to  the 
Abhayagiri  Vihara.  A  century  later  Fa-Hsien  saw  the 
ceremony  performed,  and  he  has  described  it  in  his  memoirs.* 
Dhammakitti 1  mentions  in  his  work  a  rubric  written  by 
Mcghavagna  for  the  observances  to  be  performed  before  the 
Tooth  (Caritla-kkham  abhilckkayi).  There  is  a  copy  of  this 
ancient  ceremonial  manual  still  extant  in  the  Miiligiva  at 
Kandy,  where  the  relic  is  now  deposited. 

The  Tooth  Relic  from  the  time  of  its  first  arrival  in 
Ceylon  obtained  among  the  Sinhalese  the  position  which  the 
Palladium  held  in  ancient  Rome,  for  the  sovereignty  of  the 
country  belonged  to  the  possessor  of  the  venerated  object. 
Even  to-day,  after  the  vicissitudes  of  many  centuries,  no 
relic  commands  more  veneration  than  this.  The  wealth  of  the 
country  was  freely  poured  out  in  its  honour.  Wherever 
the  palace  of  the  king  had  to  be  erected,  by  reason  of 
the  incursions  of  invading  foes,  by  its  side,  within  the  royal 
precincts,  rose  the  Dalada-Maligava  (the  Palace  of  the  Tooth 
Relic),  smaller  but  incomparably  more  beautiful  than  the 
royal  residence.  Entire  villages  were  dedicated  to  the 
maintenance  of  those  whose  business  it  was  to  supply  offerings 
of  rice  and  flowers  and  incense  and  oil,  and  one  king  at  least 

»  J I.V.,  xxxvii,  ▼.  oe. 

*  Gilts'  TmoaUtion.  pp.  6®-70. 

*  D&lKi-ramta,  p.  10. 


68 


the  paja  literature  op  ckvlon 


offered  up  all  his  personal  ornaments  as  a  mark  of  humble 
devotion.1 

Siri  Meghavamia’s  contemporary  in  India  was 
Samudr&gupta,  whose  brilliant  reign  saw  the  establishment  of 
a  mighty  Indian  empire,  second  only  to  that  of  Asoka.  Though 
a  Vai-?navaite  himself,  he  was  tolerant  towards  other  faiths, 
and  we  are  told  that  in  his  youth  he  was  a  friend  of 
Vasubandhu,  the  Mahiyinist  teacher  of  great  repute. 
Reference  should  be  made  to  him  here,  because  of  one  single 
event  connected  with  him,  which  for  govern!  reasons 
is  of  much  interest  to  us.  It  is  recorded  by  a  Chinese  writer 
that  Siri  Meghavanna,  king  of  Ceylon,  sent  an  embassy  to 
Samudragupta  and  obtained  bis  permission  to  build  a 
Sahgharama  near  the  Mahftbodhi  Vihara.  Iliuan-Tsang,’ 
who  saw' this  monastery  two  and  a  half  centuries  later,  gives 
n  full  description  of  it  and  adds  many  details  about  its 
foundation.  According  to  him,  a  certain  disciple  of  the 
Buddha,  a  monk  from  Ceylon,  went  forth  to  wander  through 
India,  but  at  all  the  convents  he  visited  he  was  treated  with 
disdain  as  a  foreigner.  He  came  back,  and  in  great  sorrow 
reported  his  experiences  to  the  king.  The  latter,  who  seems 
to  have  held  the  monk  in  high  esteem,  asked  what  there  was 
that  should  be  done  to  remedy  matters.  He  was  advised 
to  build  convents  throughout  India  for  the  benefit  of 
travelling  monks.  A  minister  was  accordingly  dispatched  to 
the  Emperor  with  costly  presents  and  jewels  to  ask  permission 
for  the  purposo.  Samudragupta  was  pleased  at  this  cordiality 
shown  towards  him,  and  granted  leave  to  “  take  one  of  the 
places  in  which  the  Tathagata  has  left  traces  of  his  holy 
teaching ”.  The  Bodhimapdnla  was  chosen  as  the  most  suitable 
spot,  and  there  an  imposing  edifice  was  erected  to  entertain 
all  monks  coming  over  from  Ceylon.  The  king,  Meghavaooa, 
had  the  following  inscription  engraved  in  copper  :  “  To  help 
all  without  distinction  is  the  highest  teaching  of  all  the 

1  KIrti  Sri  Rijs-SiAhs.  Firm,  op.  cit.,  p.  11. 

*  Mtmotrt,  (I,  pp.  133  foil.  (Brol). 


TH2  BEGINNINGS  OF  LITERARY  ACTIVITY 


69 


Buddhas ;  to  exercise  mercy  as  occasion  offers  is  the 
illustrious  doctrine  of  former  saints.  And  now  I,  unworthy 
descendant  in  the  royal  line,  have  undertaken  to  found  this 
Sahgharama  to  enclose  the  sacred  traces,  and  to  hand  down 
their  renown  to  future  ages  and  to  spread  their  benefits 
among  the  people.  The  monks  of  my  country  will  thus  obtain 
independence  and  be  treated  as  members  of  the  fraternity 
of  this  country.  Let  this  privilege  be  handed  down  from 
generation  to  generation  without  interruption.*’*  In  an 
inscription  of  a  stone  pillar  at  Allahabad,  Samudragupta gives 
an  account  of  his  reign,  and  among  the  alliances  he  formed 
with  foreign  powers  occurs  mention  of  ’’the  Saimhalakos, 
who  propitiated  him  with  presents 

At  the  time  of  Hiuan-Tsang's  visit  there  were  over  1,000 
monks  in  this  convent,  studying  the  "  Great  Vehicle  ”  and 
belonging  to  the  Sthavira  (Shang-tso-pu)  school.  "  They 
carefully  observe  the  Dbarma  and  Vinaya,”  he  wrote,  “  and 
their  conduct  is  pure  and  correct.”  * 

The  circumstances  connected  with  the  founding  of  this 
Satigharoma  allow  us  to  infer  that  at  this  timo  Ceylon  monkB 
were  not  held  in  high  esteem  on  the  continent,  the  reason 
being  perhaps  the  ascendancy  of  Brahmanical  power,  or  more 
probably  because  the  views  of  the  Ceylon  school  were  not 
acceptable  even  to  the  Buddhist  monks  of  India.  The  cleavage 
between  Hina-  and  Mahu-yuna  had  grown  wider  and  wider.  The 
disfavour  with  which  Ceylon  kings  and  monkB  viewed  any  en¬ 
croachment  by  Vaitulya  doctrines  on  the  Thera-v&da  Buddhism 
of  the  island  had  made  it  impossible  for  much  exchange  of 
scholarship  to  take  place  between  the  two  countries.  But 
this  establishment  of  a  Thera-vada  community  near  the 
BodhimaixJuht,  which  was  undoubtedly  then  as  now  the  chief 
centre  of  Buddhist  pilgrimage,  must  have  facilitated  such 
interchange  of  views.  As  far  as  we  know,  there  do  not  seem 

*  Tk*  BuddXiti,  vol.  rill.  No.  20,  poblmlvrd  in  Colombo,  1922. 

•  Hittory  of  tl*  SanyKa,  by  D-  B.  Jayattlaka,  in  coune  o<  publication 

'  Mmwirt,  toI,  ii,  p.  133  (Beal). 


70 


THE  FAU  LITERATURE  OE  C KYI-ON 


to  have  been  any  restrictions  as  to  who  should  make  use  of 
the  convent.  Nominally,  of  course,  the  chief  power  was  vested 
in  the  hands  of  the  Maha-Vihara,  and  we  may  well  assume 
that  monks  of  the  Abhayagiri  fraternity,  for  instance,  who 
wished  to  study  in  greater  detail  and  at  much  closer  distance 
the  doctrines  which  distinguished  them  from  other  schools, 
took  advantage  of  the  opportunity  thus  created  for  the 
pursuance  of  their  purpose.  I  believe  also  that  the  familiarity 
thus  brought  about  with  the  Mahdyaniata,  as  we  may  safely 
call  the  dissenters  from  the  Thcra-v&ia,  was  in  large  measure 
responsible  for  the  convergence  that  later  seems  to  have  come 
about  between  the  Maha-Vihara  and  the  Abhayagiri 
fraternities.  The  Maha-Vihara  community  seems  to  have 
treated  the  Abhayagiri  sect  with  much  toleration  through¬ 
out,  and  their  doings  were  interfered  with  only  when 
glaring  attempts  were  made  by  them  to  tarnish  the  purity 
of  the  Dhamma.  It  was  also  most  probably  in  this  Saftgharama 
that  the  young  Brahman  Buddhaghoaa  met  Revata  Thera, 
who  converted  him  and  admitted  him  into  the  Order.1 

Passing  over  Meghavaprui's  brother  and  successor, 
Jettha-Tissa,  who  was  a  skilful  carver  and  a  clever  painter,* 
we  next  come  to  Buddhad&sa,  according  to  the  Maha- 
vamsa  “  a  mine  of  virtue  and  an  ocean  of  riches  “  This 
monarch  exemplified  to  the  people  in  his  own  person  the 
conduct  of  the  Bodhisattas  ;  and  he  entertained  for  mankind 
as  large  a  compassion  as  a  parent  feels  for  his  children.  Tho 
indigent  he  made  happy  by  distribution  of  riches  amongst 
them,  and  he  protected  the  rich  in  their  property  and  life.”:l 
In  addition  to  all  his  other  qualifications  of  wisdom,  piety  _ 
and  virtue,  he  possessed  in  supreme  measure  a  knowledge  of 
surgery,  and  many  are  the  miraculous  cures  attributed  to  this 
royal  surgeon.  One  case,  for  example,  was  that  of  a  man  who 
hod  drunk  water  containing  the  spawn  of  frogs  in  it,  and  an 

*  See  oext  chapter. 

•  Jtf.r,  xxxvii.  r.  101. 

■  Ibid.,  xxxrii,  r.  100-110;  Geiger  *  tfana.,  p.  xxxix;  207,  ».  I. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LITERARY  ACTIVITY 


71 


egg  entering  the  nostril,  ascended  into  the  head  and  being 
hatched  there  became  a  frog.  There  it  attained  its  full  growth, 
and  in  rainy  weather  it  croakod  and  gnawed  the  head  of  the 
man.  The  king,  splitting  open  the  head  and  extracting  tho 
frog  and  re-uniting  the  several  parts,  quickly  cured  the 
wound.1  He  provided  hospitals  all  over  the  island,  not  only 
for  men  but  also  for  birds  and  beasts.  To  every  ten  villages 
a  royal  physician  was  appointed,  and  for  their  guidance  he 
compiled  a  work  called  the  Sarartha-mtigraka ,  a  compendium 
of  medical  science.*  By  way  of  the  encouragement  of  learning, 
he  sought  out  ministers  who  could  expound  the  doctrines  of 
the  faith,  patronized  them,  devotedly  attended  to  their  needs, 
and  provided  all  facilities  for  carrying  on  their  work.  At  the 
Maha-Vihara  he  built  a  Parivena  called  Mora  or  MayQra 
(the  remains  of  which  still  exist)  and  made  large  endowments 
for  its  maintenance. 

It  was  during  this  reign  that  a  certain  monk  named  Maha- 
Dhamraakathl  translated  the  Suttas  of  tho  PHaiatUtya 
into  Sinhalese.*  Who  this  DhammakathI  was  and  what  was 
the  nature  of  his  translation  it  is  impossible  to  say,  because 
no  records  of  him  or  his  work  exist  at  the  present  time.  The 
Maha-vamta  gives  but  the  name  of  the  man  and  the  barest 
account  of  his  work,  dismissing  the  subject  with  only  one  verse. 
Mr.  Wickremasinghc 4  identifies  him  with  Dharmagupta 
mentioned  by  Fa  Hsien  in  the  account  of  his  visit  to  Ceylon. 
According  to  him  Dharmagupta  lived  at  Mihintale  at  the 
head  of  about  two  thousand  monks.  He  was  "  a  Jsramaua  of 
great  virtue,  honoured  and  looked  up  to  by  all  the  kingdom. 
He  has  lived  for  more  than  forty  years  in  an  apartment  of 
stone,  constantly  showing  such  gentleness  of  heart  that  he 
brought  snakes  and  rata  to  stop  together  in  the  same  room, 
without  doing  one  another  any  harm”.  The  identification, 
ingenious  as  it  is,  has,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  nothing  but 

•  If.K..  uxvti,  r.  144. 

1  Now  publixhed  with  a  tnuuUUon  by  *  lstor  *utkor,  Colombo,  1899. 

•  U.V..  xxxrii,  v.  17ft. 

•  Ep.  Zeyt.,  voi.  i,  J*.  111.  p.  S3. 


72 


7HS  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLOV 


conjecture  to  support  it.  Legge  1  in  his  translation  of  Fa  Hsien 
adds  a  footnote :  “  Eitel  says  (p.  31)  a  famous  ascetic,  the 
founder  of  a  school  which  flourished  in  Ceylon,  a.d.  400,” 
and  adds  further :  "  But  Fa-Hsien  gives  no  intimation  of 
Dhormagupta’s  founding  a  school.”  Little  as  we  know  of 
Dhammakathl  {and  there  is  hardly  any  probability  of  our  ever 
being  able  to  learn  much  more),  his  work  is  of  great  significance 
as  showing  the  outcome  of  a  steady  tendency  on  the  part  of 
the  Sinhalese  language  to  assert  itself  over  the  Pali. 

Whatever  be  the  origin  of  Sinhalese  as  the  language  of  the 
people  of  Ceylon— whether  it  was  brought  over  by  Vijaya 
and  his  followers  from  some  part  of  the  Indian  peninsula, 
or  whether  it  was  derived  from  the  same  source  as  classical 
Sanskrit  and  Pali,*  or  was,  as  the  Mahd-vamta 3  puts  it, 
indigenous  (dipa-hhasd),  “  the  language  of  the  land,”  and  later 
modified  aud  developed  by  the  Aryan  settlers— within  two 
and  a  half  centuries  after  Vijaya  *s  arrival  the  language  was 
found  sufficiently  rich  and  copious  in  its  terms  and  regular 
in  its  structure  to  have  been  capable  of  the  enunciation  in  it 
of  matter  so  varied  and  so  abstract  as  that  contained  in  the 
commentaries  brought  over  by  Mahiuda  from  the  Council 
at  P&taliputta.  With  the  advent  of  Pali,  as  the  language  of 
the  sacred  Scriptures,  Sinhalese  borrowed  and  derived  from 
it  various  terms  and  expressions  with  all  their  specific  con¬ 
notations.  The  steady  and  constant  intercourse  kept  up 
with  tho  mainland  enabled  all  the  advances  made  in  various 
branches  of  knowledge  in  India  to  find  their  way  into  Ceylon ; 
and  the  numerous  colonies  of  Brahmanas  and  others  that 
from  time  to  time  settled  down  in  tho  island  contributed  to 
enlarge  the  vocabulary  of  Sinhalese  by  the  addition  of  words 
from  their  literatures.  The  frequent  invasions  of  Tamil 
marauders — each  one  of  whose  attacks  is  sure  to  have  left 
behind  some  of  their  number  as  permanent  settlers,  even 

*  p.  107,  footnote  2. 

'  Fat  »  daouanoa  of  this  question  to*  D'Alwis,  Introduction. 

•  Cbap.  X,  tt.  2-3. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  07  LITERARY  ACTIVITY 


75 


After  they  had  been  repelled — provided  another  source  of 
enrichment  for  the  language.  Thus  Sinhalese  steadily  and 
quickly  grew  up  to  be  a  language  capable  of  expressing  the 
most  varied  ideas  and  emotions,  rich  in  its  vocabulary  and 
supple  in  its  structure.  From  the  time  when  Pili  was  intro¬ 
duced  into  Ceylon  its  Btody  was  assiduously  cultivated,  but, 
as  Sinhalese  grew  in  power,  monks  and  laymen  alike  tended 
more  and  more  to  use  this  medium  for  the  exposition  of  the 
Buddhist  faith.  Mahinda  gave  the  lead  to  this  tendency  not 
only  by  preaching  in  “  the  language  of  the  land  ”,  but 
more  so  by  translating  into  it  the  commentaries  on  the  Pitahu.1 
The  very  nature  of  the  Atthakalhdt  demanded  that  they  should 
be  compiled  in  a  manner  to  be  easily  understood,  and  the  choice 
of  Sinhalese,  which  was  mainly  the  people’s  tongue,  is  there¬ 
fore  no  matter  for  surprise.  We  shall  sec  later,  how  eagerly 
scholars  availed  themselves  of  this  concession  to  conduct  their 
expositions  in  their  own  language,  by  the  number  and  variety 
of  the  works — histories,  poems,  etc.,  comraentarial  and  other¬ 
wise — which  they  produced  in  that  medium,  with  a  line  or 
two  of  Pali  verse  being  introduced  here  and  there,  at  salient 
points,  to  emphasize  certain  things,  or  to  sum  up  the 
narrative. 

But  from  the  very  commencement  it  seemed  to  have  been 
agreed  upon  that  the  text  of  the  canon  itself,  the  Pilaka- 
Uaya,  was  to  remain  intact  in  Puli ;  that  no  attempt  should 
be  made  to  have  it  in  any  other  language.  The  reason  for 
this  was  obviously  the  preservation  of  the  purity  of  the 
doctrine,  so  that  whenever  doubt  arose  on  some  doctrinal 
matter,  as  variously  expounded  by  the  commentators,  there 
was  always  the  resource  of  appealing  to  the  Scriptures  them¬ 
selves  for  the  correct  interpretation.  This  understanding 
Beems  to  have  been  respected  for  quite  a  long  time,  and  the 
first  attempt,  as  far  as  we  know,  to  violate  it  was  that  made  by 
Maha-Dhammakathl  in  Buddhadasa’s  reign. 

*  See  next  chupAt-r  on  Boddh»ghoe*’«  work,  which  tu  bwed  on 
hmliHii 


74 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  Of  CBVLON 


The  reason  for  Dhammakatht’s  enterprise  is  not  difficult 
to  guces.  Most  probably,  as  the  Sinhalese  language,  by  the 
accretion  it  received  from  many  sources,  grew  in  force  and  in 
extent,  and  as  writers  exercising  themselves  in  its  composition 
acquired  greater  and  greater  facility  in  expressing  their  ideas 
in  that  medium,  they  began  to  cultivate  it  even  more 
assiduously  than  before,  and  Pali  soon  became  of  secondary 
importance,  its  use  being  restricted  to  mnemonic  purposes. 
Fewer  and  fewer  became  those  who  specialised  in  Pali,  and 
Dharnmakathi  probably  felt  himself  justified  in  the  belief  that, 
if  the  canon  were  to  be  mode  more  widely  known  amongst  the 
people,  it  should  be  put  into  the  form  most  easily  intelligible 
to  them.  And  a  beginning  was  made  with  the  translation  of 
the  Sutias. 

We  are  not  told  that  the  work,  thus  commenced  by 
Dharnmakathi,  was  continued  by  others.  Probably  the  con¬ 
servatism  of  the  monks  in  this  matter  stopped  any  further 
attempts.  Clear  evidence  of  the  neglect  of  Pali  studies  at  this 
time  is  afforded  by  the  fact  that  when  scholars  did  come  to 
write  in  that  language,  such  as,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  the 
Dljpa-vamsa,  which,  according  to  Oldcnberg,1  was  begun  about 
this  period,  the  languago  was  unnatural,  weak  and  stilted, 
lacking  in  subtlety  and  virility  of  expression.  The  reaction 
against  this  lamentable  state  of  decline  came  when 
Buddhaghosa’s  works  gave  fresh  impetus  to  the  study  of 
Puli,  and  a  definite  attempt  was  made  to  supersede  the 
“  language  of  the  land  "  by  means  of  Pali. 

It  is  interesting  to  observe  that,  side  by  side  with  the 
ascendency  of  Sinhalese  over  Pali,  another  language  was 
gradually  coming  into  vogue  in  Ceylon.  This  was  classical 
Sanskrit,  which  had  rapidly  become  the  medium  of  expression 
for  learned  works  on  the  mainland  of  India.  Scientific  and 
secular  works  in  that  language  had  found  their  way  into  Ceylon, 
and  were  studied  with  care.  And  when  the  surgeon- 


1  OkUnWg.  Dipa-taifLMi,  p.  0. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  Of  LITERARY  ACTIVITY 


75 


king,  Buddhadiisa,  compiled  his  memorable  work,  “  the 
Sarartha-tangraha  ’’—the  first  of  ita  kind  in  Ceylon— it  was 
neither  Pali  nor  Sinhalese  that  he  used,  but  Sanskrit.  We  shall 
have  occasion  to  refer  to  the  influence  of  Sanskrit  on  Ceylon 
literature  later  ;  but  the  compilation  of  Buddhadiisa ’s  book 
in  a  language  so  far  not  used  in  Ceylon  to  any  large  extent 
is  worthy  of  notice  here. 

Buddhadisa'a  elder  eon,  Upatissa,  succeeded  him.  During 
his  reign  the  island  was  afflicted  with  drought,  disease,  and 
distress,  and,  acting  on  the  advice  of  the  monks,  he  requested 
a  body  of  them  to  walk  about  in  the  streets  of  the  city 
throughout  the  night,  chanting  the  Ralana-suUa  and  sprinkling 
water.  We  are  told  that,  as  a  result,  at  sunrise  great  clouds 
poured  down  rain  upon  the  earth  ;  all  the  sick  and  crippled 
disported  themselves  with  joy,  and  the  king  issued  the 
following  decree :  "  Should  there  at  any  time  be  another 
affliction  of  drought  and  sickness  in  tho  island,  do  ye  observe 
the  like  ceremonies.”  1 

This  account  of  the  ceremony  given  in  the  Maka-vamsa  is 
interesting,  in  that  it  is  the  first  recorded  instance  of  the 
Parittam  having  been  recited  for  the  public  weal,  the  only 
other  occaaion  being  the  one  on  whioh  the  Buddha  himself 
is  traditionally  said  to  have  preached  the  Raiana-Sutta  to 
banish  a  deadly  plague  from  Vesali.  Ever  since  this  time  the 
ceremony  of  chanting  the  Parittam  has  taken  fast  hold  of  the 
imagination  of  the  Sinhalese,  and  is  extensively  obeerved, 
even  at  the  present  day.  The  Suttas  most  often  chanted  are 
the  M angola,  the  Ratana,  and  the  Karanbja-Mdta  Suttas 
of  the  Khuddaka-patha ;  and  the  Pirit-pola,  or  the  book  con¬ 
taining  the  suttas  for  such  recital,  forms  part  of  the  meagre 
library  of  every  Sinhalese  household.  Such  recital  is  believed 
to  ward  off  all  evils  and  danger,  and  to  bring  about  health 
and  prosperity.  Most  Sinhalese  know  some  part  of  these 
suttas  by  heart,  and  every  child  is  taught  to  recite  at 


l  if.  v.,  xxxvii,  vr.  189-198. 


76 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


least  a  portion  of  thorn  every  morning  and  before  retiring 
to  bed.1 

Several  translations  of  these  PariUa-sutlat  have  been 
written  in  Sinhalese,  some  of  them  most  elaborate,  but,  most 
of  them  being  more  difTicultof  comprehension  than  the  original 
Pali,  not  much  use  is  made  of  them,  and  the  efficacy  of  the 
recital  is  believed  to  remain  unaffected  whether  the  reciter 
understands  or  not  the  meaning  of  what  he  chants  ! 

Upatissa  was  killed  by  his  queen  consort,  who  was 
infatuated  with  his  younger  brother  Mabanama,  at  that  time 
a  member  of  the  Order.  On  his  brother’s  death,  however,  he 
threw  off  his  robes,  became  king  and  married  Upatissa ’s 
consort.  His  approval  of  the  queen’s  treachery  was  evidently 
viewed  with  disfavour  by  the  Maha-Vih&ra  fraternity, 
lor  we  find  both  him  and  his  queen  actively  supporting  the 
Abhaysgiri  establishment  of  schismatic  priests.*  It  was  during 
this  reign  that  there  arrived  in  Ceylon  the  greatest  of  the 
Buddhist  commentators,  Buddhaghosa,  whose  works  arc  of 
monumental  importance. 

To  this  period  arc  traditionally  ascribed  two  short  works 
in  Pali,  the  Khudda-SHJJtd  and  the  Mula-Sikkha,  supposed 
to  have  been  written  prior  to  the  advent  of  Buddhaghosa. 
Both  works  arc  alluded  to  by  name  in  the  great  inscription 
of  Parhkrama  Bahu  at  Galvihiira,  Polonuaruva  (a.d.  1065),* 
and  the  grammarian  Moggalliina,  who  lived  at  that  time,  is 
said  to  hove  written  a  commentary  on  the  Khudda-SikkkcL* 
This  commentary  no  longer  exists,  but  it  was  apparently 
based  on  an  older  Sinhalese  commentary.  The  two  works 
are  short  summaries  of  Vinaya  rules,  a  kind  of  metnoria 


*  I*  “  interesting  to  recnll  that,  when  I  left  Cejfon  foe  Rnglsnd,  AEOOBg 
the  tokens  of  retneznbrsnoo  given  to  too  wtn  nerersl  editions  it  lux*  of 
nxh  Piril-Polai. 

'  M.V..  xxzvli,  V.  212. 

*  Muller’s  Ancient  / uteri p.  of  Ceylon,  No.  137.  11  (1922). 

*  Flyer’s  SuixxilaUtAt&ra.  p.  4,  note  on  KnccAysns  j  too  stso  under 
MoggslUn*  lit  the  present  tnstise. 


THE  BEGINNINGS  Of  LITERARY  ACTIVITY 


77 


technica  of  the  Vinaya.  The  works  are  for  the  greatest  part  in 
verse,  with  only  a  few  passages  in  prose.  The  verses  are  put 
together  in  a  rough  and  ready  manner,  appropriate  for  the 
mnemonic  purpose  they  are  intended  to  serve.  A  colophon 
at  the  end  of  the  Khudda-Sikkha  ascribes  that  work  to  a  monk 
named  Dhammasiri,  who  was  “like  unto  a  banner  in 
Tambapapni  ”  (Ceylon).  Though  no  mention  of  an  author's 
name  is  made  in  the  Mula-Sikkha,  tradition  agrees  to  ascribe  it 
to  Mahasami.  Thetwo,  being  both  monksof  Anuradhapttra  who 
lived  in  the  same  period,  were  probably  confreres.1  Nothing  more 
is  known  about  these  authors  and,  from  the  evidence  at  our 
disposal,  it  is  very  difficult  to  form  any  opinion  as  to  the  age 
of  the  books.  Dr.  Edward  Muller,  basing  his  arguments  on 
the  language  and  certain  forms  of  words  used  to  meet  the 
exigencies  of  metre,  is  inclined  to  think,  that  they  are  later 
than  the  Maha-vamsa,  and  are  not  earlier  than  the  sixth 
or  seventh  century  a.d.*  D'Alwix,  in  his  Introduction  to  the 
Sidal'tafufard,  assigns  a  rather  early  date,  viz.  a.d.  350.* 
The  language  of  both  compilations  is  simple  and  free  from 
artificiality  and  all  Sanskritisms.  Rhys  Davids  agrees  to 
confirm  the  traditional  date,  viz.  about  a.d.  300,  and  is 
convinced  that  both  belong  to  the  memoriter  period  of  Pali.4 
Most  of  the  extracts  given  in  the  works  are  from  the  text  of 
the  Vinaya- PitaJca,  but  a  few  passages  remain  unidentified. 
Dr.  Milller  thinks  such  passages  are  quotations  from  the 
Vinaya  commentaries.6  A  Sinhalese  sarnie  or  translation  of 
the  Khudda-Sikkha  exists,  a  work  of  great  scholastic  merit, 
written  in  very  elegant  and  archaic  language,  the  author 
of  which  is  not  known.  It  is  generally  assigned  to  the  eleventh 
century',  and  two  (ik&t  were  written  in  Pali  based  on  this,  the 
Poraria-(ikd,  by  Revata  or  Maha-Yasa,  the  author  of  a  /U’d 

1  JPTS *  1883,  pp.  80-7 ;  a  bo  Da  Zovta,  Cotoiopa*. 

*  Ibid. 

1  Introduction  to  Siiai-tahfard,  p.  cl. 

*  JPTS..  1883.  p.  xiiS. 

*  JPTS.,  lot.  rit. 


78 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  07  CEYLON 


on  Buddhadatta’s  Vtnaya-wntccAaya,*  and  the  other  by 
SaAgharakkhita,  author  of  the  Subodhdlahkara  and  several 
other  valuable  works,  whose  date  was  the  latter  half  of  the 
twelfth  century.  The  works  are  used  in  Ceylon  and  Burma 
at  the  present  day  by  novices  of  the  Order  as  a  handbook  of 
Vinaya  rules. 


CHAPTER  V 

Buddhaghosa 


/CONSIDERING  that  Buddhaghosa  ranks  in  the  Buddhist 
^  church  as  its  greatest  commentator  and  exogetist,  and 
that  the  service  which  he  rendered  to  the  cause  of  the 


Buddha’s  religion  was  of  the  most  useful  and  enduring  kind, 
the  information  we  have  about  his  life  is  very  meagre.  Very 
little  is  known  about  him,  except  through  his  own  writings ; 
we  have  nothing  to  go  upon  except  his  commentaries,  and 
a  few  traditions  and  legends.  And  these  very  traditions  and 
legends  arc  so  much  coloured  by  the  imagination  of  their 
creators  that  much  reliance  cannot  be  placed  upon  them. 
Circumstantial  details  are  so  interwoven  with  fictitious 
elements,  that  it  is  difficult  to  separate  strict  truth  from  mere 
romance.  Facta  of  historical  value  occupy  comparatively 
little  space  in  these  narratives. 

The  Buddhagho»'-uj)jxMi 1  is  the  longest  account  of  his  life 
and  is,  in  its  entirety,  a  work  highly  diverting  as  well  as 
instructive.  But  its  author  had  evidently  little  authentic 
knowledge  of  the  subject  of  his  study,  and  his  collection  of 
legends  is  mostly  valueless  from  the  historical  point  of  view. 
It  reads  too  much  like  a  romance  and  does  not  help  us  much 
in  elucidating  Buddhaghosa ’s  history.  Gray,  in  his  translation 
of  the  work,  gives  *  a  list  of  other  sources  which  contain 
accounts  of  the  commentator's  life — a  list  of  what  he  considers 
the  most  trustworthy  Burmese  records.  Besides  these,  the 
earliest  connected  account  of  his  life  is  that  contained  in 
the  Alahd-vairua  (chapter  xxxvii),  which,  though  it  is  con¬ 
sidered  by  some  to  be  by  a  later  writer  of  the  thirteenth  century, 
is  by  far  the  most  authentic  source  of  our  information,  and  is 
itself  probably  derived  from  very  much  older  material. 


*  Edited  and  trsnslstcd  by  J.  Or»y,  Ijusac  Sc  Co.,  1 892. 

*  lb id~,  p.  9  foil,  c  ace  also  that  Tory  ralaaUc  book,  Tht  Lift  amt  Work 
of  IMdiojKoto,  by  Bimal*  Charon  Law,  Calcutta,  1923. 


80 


TBS  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


The  whole  narrative  bears  upon  it  the  impress  of  truth,  and 
our  only  regret  is  that  it  contains  so  very  little.  It  fixes  for 
us  quite  definitely  the  period  of  Buddhaghosa’s  activities, 
and  this  fact  is  in  itself  most  useful. 

The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  MaJta-vanisa  account : 
“  A  Brahman  youth,  born  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Great 
Bodhi-tree,1  accomplished  in  arts  and  sciences,  one  who  had 
mastered  the  three  Vedas,  was  well-versed  in  knowledge, 
skilled  in  all  disputes,  himself  &  schismatic  wanderer  over 
Jambu-dipu,  Assuming  the  character  of  a  disputant,  lived 
in  a  certain  monastery  and  was  in  the  habit  of  rehearsing  by 
day  and  by  night  with  clasped  hands  a  discourse  which  he  had 
learnt,  perfect  in  all  its  parts,  and  sustained  throughout  in 
lofty  strain.  A  certain  Elder,  Rcvata  by  name,*  becoming 
acquainted  with  him,  thought  ‘  This  being  is  one  of  great 
wisdom;  he  should  be  converted (So  thinking)  he  inquired : 
4  Who  is  this  that  brays  like  an  ass  ?  ’  The  youth  replied : 
'  Dost  thou  know,  then,  the  meaning  of  the  ass’s  braying  1  * 
4 1  do,’  rejoined  the  Elder,  and  the  youth  exhibited  the  extent 
of  his  knowledge.  The  Elder  explained  each  of  his  statements 
and  pointed  out  their  fallacies.  Being  thus  refuted,  the  youth 
exclaimed,  4  Come  now  and  propound  thy  creed,’  and  the 
Elder  recited  to  him  a  passage  from  the  Abhidhamma.  The 
Brihmon  could  not  understand  the  meaning  of  that  text,  and 
inquired :  4  Whose  manta  (teaching)  is  this  ?  *  4  It  is  the 
Buddha’s  manta.’  On  his  exclaiming  4  Impart  it  to  me  ’,  the 
Elder  replied  :  *  Enter  the  Recluses’  Order.’  And  he,  being 
desirous  of  acquiring  knowledge  of  the  Three  Pitakas,  and 
being  convinced  that  4  This  is  indeed  the  Way  took  the 
vows  of  a  Recluse. 

*  According  to  Burmese  tradition  be  m  bora  in  North  Indie  in  tho 
fifth  century  a.j>.  in  tho  Megedhs  country  (m«  Gray,  op.  cit.).  Tbo 
Sduxa-nuftAa  (p.  SO)  eeys  that  ho  waa  the  ion  of  a  /’aroAifu  named  Kete 
and  that  hit  mother  waa  KciL 

*  I  hew  tuggetted  in  the  preceding  chapter  that  this  Rcvata  may  hare 
boon  an  Eklcr  of  tba  SeAghArima  built  for  Ceylon  monies  by  Kitti  Siri 

hlogharapoa. 


BL'DDHAOHOSA 


81 


“  Because  he  was  as  profound  in  his  eloquence  &s  the 
Buddha  himself,  they  called  him  Buddhaghoea  (the  voice  of 
the  Buddha) ;  and  throughout  the  world  he  became  as 
renowned  as  the  Buddha.  Having  there  (in  Jambu-dlpa) 
composed  an  original  work  called  the  ifanodayaw,  he  at  the 
same  time  wrote  the  chapter  called  ‘  Auha-tdiinx ’  on  the 
Dhamma-satyani.  Revata  Thera  then,  observing  that  he 
was  desirous  of  undertaking  the  compilation  of  a  PariU- 
aUhakath&  (a  concise  commentary  on  the  Pitnka-Uaya), 
thus  addressed  him :  '  The  text  alone  (of  the  Pitaka-tUuja) 
has  been  preserved  in  this  land :  the  Auhakalh&'i  are  not 
extant  here  ;  nor  is  there  any  complete  version  of  the  different 
ttd d&  (schools).  The  Sinhalese  AuhakathSs  ore  genuine  ;  they 
were  composed  in  the  Sinhalese  language  by  the  inspired  and 
profoundly  wise  Mahinda,  who  had  previously  consulted  the 
discourses  of  the  Buddha,  confirmed  at  the  three  Convocations, 
and  the  dissertations  and  arguments  of  Sariputta  and  others ; 
and  they  exist  among  the  Sinhalese.  Repairing  thither,  and 
studying  the  same,  translate  them  according  to  the  rules  of 
the  MagndhI  grammar.  It  will  be  an  act  conducive  to  the 
welfare  of  the  whole  world’.1  Having  been  thus  advised,  this 
eminently  wise  man,  rejoicing  therein,  departed  thence,  and 
visited  this  island  in  the  reign  of  this  monarch,  Mahan&ma  * 
On  reaching  the  Mahivihora  he  entered  the  Mahd-Padhina 
Hall,  the  most  splendid  of  the  apartments  in  the  Vihdra, 
and  listened  to  the  Sinhalese  AUhakatha  and  the  Thera-vdda, 
from  beginning  to  end,  propounded  by  the  Elder  SaAghapaU. 
He  became  thoroughly  convinced  that  they  contained  the 
true  meaning  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Dhammaraja.  Thereupon, 
paying  reverential  respect  to  the  priesthood,  he  thus 

*  The  &l«sna -rattia  (p.  20)  m.v*  fc*  wu  seat  to  make  amends  (or  baring 
thought  hi  rose  Li  cleverer  than  hi*  teacher. 

•  'the  Ceyio*  Antiquary  and  Lit.  RtgiHir  (roL  i.  pt-  U,  pp.  W  ioU.)  gives 
over  a  score  o(  different  dates  fixed  upon  by  different  scholars  ;  tome  as 
early  as  043  m.  i  Moat  oi  them  centre  round  the  name  o i  MahinAma, 
long  ol  Ceylon.  Sinhalese  tradition  assigns  his  arrival  to  005  years  after 
the  Parmibfcina. 


C 


82 


THE  PAL]  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


petitioned :  'I  am  desirous  of  translating  the  Auhaktdha  ; 
give  mo  access  to  all  your  books.’  The  monks,  to  test  his 
qualifications,  gave  only  two  stanzas,  saying  :  ‘  Hence  prove 
thy  ability ;  having  satisfied  ourselves  on  this  point,  we  will 
then  let  thee  have  all  our  books.’  From  these  stanzas,  and 
consulting  the  Pxtaka-tUiifa  together  with  the  Auhakalhd, 
and  condensing  them,  he  composed  the  commentary,  the 
FtyudrfAt-t»a£?a.  Thereupon,  having  assembled  at  the 
Bo-tree  the  monks  who  had  acquired  a  complete  knowledge 
of  the  Buddha’s  doctrines,  he  commenced  to  read  out  his 
work.  The  devaa,  in  order  to  make  his  wisdom  celebrated 
amongst  men,  rendered  that  book  invisible.  He,  however, 
for  a  second  and  a  third  time,  recomposed  it.  When  he  was 
producing  his  book  for  the  third  time  the  devas  restored 
the  other  two  copies  also.  The  monks  then  read  out  the  three 
books  simultaneously.  In  the  three  versions,  neither  in  a 
signification  nor  in  a  single  misplacement  by  transposition, 
nay,  not  even  in  tho  Thera  controversies,  or  in  the  text  was 
there,  in  the  measure  of  a  verse  or  in  the  letter  of  a  word, 
the  slightest  variation.  Thereupon  the  monks,  rejoicing  again 
and  again,  fervently  shouted,  Baying  :  '  Moat  assuredly  this 
is  Metteyya  himself,’  and  gave  him  the  books  where  the  three 
Pilakas  were  recorded,  together  with  the  commentaries. 

*'  Taking  up  his  residence  in  the  secluded  Ganthakara- 
Vihara,1  at  Anuradhapura,  he  translated  according  to  the 
grammatical  rules  of  the  Magadhaa,  the  root  of  all 
languages,  the  whole  of  the  Sinhalese  Atthakathd.  This  proved 

>  Lord  Chalmers  aay* ;  “  I  venture  on  the  confident  opinion  that, 
although  it  wa*  probably  at  the  MahAVihlra  in  Anurldhapura  (where 
he  would  meet  Ceylon'*  moat  accomplished  eoboiara)  that  Buddhaghoaa 
began  liia  work  by  writing  three  edition*  of  hi*  own  expository  Vinddki- 
moifja,  it  ia  aurely  an  impeccable  tradition  that  make*  his  journey  for  hi* 
authentic  copy  of  the  Pitabcu  and  AUhatatkA*  to  Ala-vihira,  renowned 
aa  the  venerable  birthplace  and  (till  the  faithful  custodian  of  the  written 
record*  ho  had  cocao  ao  far  to  teak.  For  in  these  things  aent  intent  counts 
for  much  and  to  none  more  than  to  a  xealoua  and  reverent  scholar  aoch  aa 
Buddhnghooa  undoubtedly  waa.”  (Cryion  Antiq.  and  Lit.  Rtf.,  to),  i, 
pt.  i,  p.  2  foil.) 


BUDDHA0H08A 


83 


an  accomplishment  of  the  utmost  benefit  to  all  languages 
spoken  by  the  human  race.  All  the  Theriya  teachers  held  this 
compilation  in  the  same  estimation  as  the  Txpitaka.  There¬ 
after,  the  objects  of  his  mission  having  been  fulfilled, 
he  returned  to  Jambu-dipa  to  worship  at  the  Bo-tree.” 1 

So  much,  then,  for  Buddhaghosa's  life,  as  far  as  may  be 
gleaned  from  the  information  at  our  disposal.  The  monks 
of  the  Mahi-Vih&ra  in  Ceylon  were  by  no  means  slow  to 
recognize  his  genius,  and  they  provided  him  with  every 
facility  for  carrying  out  his  work.  One  monk  after  another 
requested  him  to  enter  upon  new  fields  of  scholarship,  and 
he  responded  gladly.  Buddhism  was  at  this  time  on  the  wane 
in  India.  Various  new  sects  had  arisen  on  the  continent, 
each  claiming  to  possess  the  authentic  tradition  of  the  Buddha. 
We  saw  in  the  last  chapter  that  the  Ceylon  monks  were  not 
held  in  high  esteem  by  members  of  these  dissentient  schools. 
The  only  place,  perhaps,  where  the  Thcra-vada  yet  had  a 
foothold  was  in  the  Sinhalese  Safighiirama  at  the  Bodhi- 
mapdftpa.  But  even  there  the  Pilakat  and  their  commentaries 
were  not  being  studied  in  their  entirety.  It  may  be  that  no 
exegetical  works  were  available  to  them  in  a  language  easily 
understood  by  their  disciples  on  the  spot.  Buddhaghosa 
evidently  felt  this  keenly  himself ;  for,  according  to  tho 
AlahS-vanua  account,  the  desire  to  compose  a  concise  com¬ 
mentary  on  the  Pifakat  (PitakaUhalalhS)  was  expressed 
by  him  spontaneously  to  his  teacher,  Rcvata,  and  the  latter 
wus  only  too  glad  to  encourage  this  ambitious  project  and 
devise  ways  and  means  of  helping  its  accomplishment.  When 

>  Kora  at 71  that  otter  completing  his  work  tn  Ceylon,  Buddhaghota 
went  over  to  Burma  to  propagate  the  Buddhiat  faith  (Jlnitaal  of  Btddhim, 
p.  1M),  whil*  Spence  Hardy  mention*  th*t  tbe  Burmete  ttcribo  the  new 
or*  in  their  religion  to  the  time  whon  the  greet  exegetut  reached  their 
country  from  Coy  ton  (B  nddkitm,  p.  532).  The  BtMAafhosuppaUt  state* 
<pp.  05-4)  that  ho  wa*  bom  in  tho  Tualta  heaven  alter  hi*  death.  Tho 
Cambodian  Buddhist*  have  a  tradition  that  Buddhaghoaa  died  in  their 
country,  in  a  monaatcry  called  alter  him  Buddhagho*a-Vihira.  He  wa* 
cremated  there,  hi*  relict  collected  and  tlupa*  bnUt  over  them  (Law, 
Lift  and  Work  of  Bvddkagh om,  p.  42). 


84 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


Buddhaghosa  mentioned  lxia  wish  to  the  Maha-Vihara  monks, 
they  realized  well  the  importance  of  his  works,  and  the  fruitful 
results  that  would  follow  therefrom.  Once  the  commentaries, 
which  contained  a  full  exposition  of  the  Dkammo,  were 
available  in  a  language  understood  by  the  monks  of  India, 
a  new  impetus  would  be  given  to  the  study  of  the  orthodox 
teaching,  and  the  glory  of  the  religion  would  thereby  be 
increased  in  manifold  measure.  We  find  them,  therefore,  most 
eager  in  their  encouragement  of  his  work.  The  king  himself, 
though  not  very  favourably  disposed  towards  the  Maha- 
Vihara  fraternity,  for  reasons  given  in  the  preceding  chapter — 
extended  to  Buddhoghosa  his  royal  patronage,  and  we  And 
this  acknowledged  by  Buddhaghosa  himself.  Thus  in  the 
epilogue  to  the  Samanta-paiadikd  he  says  that  he  completed 
his  work  in  the  twenty-first  year  of  King  Sirinivaaa  of  Ceylon, 
who  was  his  benevolent  patron.1 

But  the  work  he  undertook  was  by  no  means  an  easy  one, 
and  it  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  learned  Sinhalese 
monks,  before  they  gave  their  consent  to  his  being  assigned 
this  Herculean  task,  thought  it  prudent  to  test  his  talents 
beforehand  by  giving  him  a  text  from  the  sacred  canon  as 
a  subject  for  a  thesis  ;  and  it  was  a  natural  tradition  that 
armed  him  with  Sakka’B  iron  stylus  that  he  might  be  possessed 
thereby  of  speedier  penmanship. 

While  already  in  India,  according  to  the  Maha-vamsa, 
he  had  composed  a  work  called  “  fianodaya  ”,  about  which 
nothing  further  is  known.  We  may,  I  think,  assume  that  it 
was  not  preserved  among  his  permanent  compilations,  probably 
because  it  was  incorporated  in  hia  later  and  more  substantial 
and  better-informed  works.  The  name  of  the  book,  however, 
lends  colour  to  the  assumption  that  it  was  a  treatise  on  some 
philosophical  subject.  His  first  work  in  Ceylon  was  the 
Vuvddhi-magga,  set  him,  as  we  saw  above,  as  a  test-subject 
for  a  disquisition  by  the  Maha-Vihara  monks.  In  the  Niddna- 
hatha,  or  Introduction  to  the  book,  he  gives  in  detail  the 

1  Abo  Dkamma  pada  Commentary,  toL  ir,  p.  235. 


BUDDHAOHOSA 


85 


circumstances  in  which  he  made  this  compendium,  and  again 
repeats  them  towards  the  close  of  the  work.1  It  is  an 
encyclopedia  of  the  Doctrine,  containing  the  whole  of  the 
Buddha’s  teachings  in  a  connected  volume,  and,  us  Gray  says 
in  his  Introduction 1  to  the  Buddtoghot’-vppaUi,  "  If  he  had 
written  nothing  else,  it  alone  would  have  secured  for  him  un¬ 
dying  fame.”  The  <Sd*ana-ea«wa-dipon»  *  summarises  it 
thus :  "  In  short,  the  work  deals  with  kusald,  aktualo, 
avyakata-dhamma,  ayalana,  dk&tu,  sati-patlkana,  Icammo, 
paiati,  and  many  other  topics  of  Buddhist  philosophy,  aud 
is  the  only  book  in  which  the  whole  of  the  Buddha’s  system  is 
well  depicted  in  an  abridged  compilation  of  the  three  Ptiabu, 
together  with  quotations  from  the  commentaries  on  the 
passages  from  the  Pitaias  mentioned  therein.” 

No  mention  is  made  in  it  of  any  of  Buddhaghosa’s  other 
works,  whence  it  is  concluded  that  it  was  the  first  permanent 
work  of  his  pen.  The  work  is  a  masterly  production,  and 
Buddhaghosa  undoubtedly  took  gTeat  pains  over  it ;  for  we 
are  told  that  he  made  three  editions  of  the  work,  before  it 
was  put  into  final  shape.  The  work,  as  we  have  it,  is  divided 
into  three  parts :  Conduct,  Concentration  (or  Mental 
Training),  and  Wisdom.  The  quotations  mentioned  in  it 
arc  plentiful  and  varied,  and  bestrew  tho  work  from  beginning 
to  end.  They  have  been  taken  from  nearly  every  work  in  the 
earlier  Buddhist  literature  ;  the  three  Pilakas,  the  Sinhalese 
commentaries,  notably  the  Maha-AUhakatha  of  the  Maha 
Vihara  community,  the  Milinda-paftha,  and  the  PtJakopadeta.* 
The  result  is  an  extraordinary  book,  written  with  admirable 
judgment  as  to  the  general  arrangement  of  the  matter  and  in 
lucid  style  (though  at  tunes  long  words  are  used  and  the 
language  is  difficult  to  understand),  free  from  argument  and 
discussion — a  book  of  which,  according  to  Mrs.  Rhys 

•  Vo!.  !,  p.  2 ;  toI.  ii,  pp.  711  (Pali  Tort  Soc.  od.). 

•  SI. 

•  pp.  30-1. 

•  See  V.M.  (P.TA),  pp.  7S3  loll. 


86 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  OEYXOM 


Davids,1  “  we  might  say,  within  limits,  what  is  said  of  the 
Divina  Commedia  and  of  the  Shakespearean  plays :  in  its 
pages  may  be  found  something  on  everything — i.o.  in  the  earlier 
Buddhist  literature  ...  a  closely  packed  microcosm  ...  of 
macrocosmic  range.” 

Mr.  Nagai,*  in  a  very  learned  article,  draws  attention  to  the 
extraordinary  similarity  that  exists  between  the  Vituddhi- 
maffffa  and  a  Chinese  Pali  work  called  the  V \muU\-magga, 
and  seems  inclined  to  conclude  that  they  ore  one  and  the  same 
work  appearing  in  different  attire.  The  V imutti-magga  was 
translated  into  Chineae  in  a.d.  505  by  a  Cambodian  (Funan) 
priest  whose  name  (according  to  M.  Nagai)  was  SaAghapala, 
and  it  is  an  “  encyclopaedia  of  Buddhist  theology  ”.  Legend 
aayB  it  was  composed  by  Araha  Upatissa,  usually  identified 
with  Sariputta  ;  but  Mr.  Nagai,  baaing  bis  conclusions  on  the 
internal  evidence  of  the  Bija-vamsa,  assigns  him  to  the 
first  century  a.d.  The  translator,  Sartghapila,  came  from  Mid- 
India,  and  stayed  in  China  during  fifteen  years.  His  master, 
Ourui-bhadra,  had  visited  Slhnhi-dlpa,  and  other  southern 
countries,  and  brought  with  him  copies  of  various  works. 
Wc  do  not  know  whether  the  VimxMi-magga  was  among  the 
books  so  brought,  or  whether  it  was  of  Mid-Indian  or  oven 
Cambodian  origin.  The  V  imuUi-wagya  is  an  Abhidhamma 
exegesis,  serving  as  a  compendium  for  that  portion  of  Buddhist 
literature.  A  comparison  of  the  two  works  shows  that,  though 
they  resemble  each  other  very  much  in  form,  inasmuch  as 
both  divide  the  contents  according  to  Sxla,  Jkana,  PaRila, 
and  Vimutti,  yet  they  differ  greatly  in  the  way  of  explanation, 
the  arrangement  of  the  materials,  etc.,  those  portions  which 
are  curtailed  in  one  being  given  fully  in  the  other  or  vice  versa, 
and  in  some  points  the  Chinese  work  seems  to  have  been 
influenced  by  the  Mahayana  doctrine. 

There  is,  I  feel,  no  need  to  conclude,  therefore,  that  “  the 
Viiuddhi-tnagga,  which  has  been  considered  to  be  entirely 

•  F.lf.,  p.  763. 

•  JPT8.,  1917-10.  pp.  GO  foil. 


BCDDHAGHOSA 


87 


Buddhaghosa 's  own  work  is  in  reality  s  revised  version  of 
Upatisaa's  VimuUi-magga  ”.  If  we  suppose  that  the  Fmutft* 
magga  was  the  result  of  books  brought  by  Gupa-bbadru  of  Mid* 
India,  from  his  travels  in  Ceylon  and  other  Hinayana  countries, 
the  solution  of  the  problem  seems  clear.  Both  authors  drew 
their  inspiration  from  the  same  sources.  A  close  examination 
of  the  two  works  shows  that  their  greatest  resemblance  lies 
in  the  treatment  of  philosophical  ( Abhidhamma )  matter. 
We  saw  that,  in  the  school  where  Buddhoghosa  first  received 
his  knowledge  of  Buddhism,  the  special  subject  of  study  was 
the  Abhidhamma.  It  was  by  the  recital  of  an  Abhidhamma 
text  that  Buddhaghosa’s  attention  was  first  drawn  to  the 
Buddha’s  teaching,  and  Buddhaghosn’s  first  work  was  the 
ffdnodaya,  apparently  a  treatise  on  that  particular  aspect  of 
Buddhist  lore.  Buddhaghosa  is  sent  to  Ceylon  to  get  a  com¬ 
plete  edition  of  the  Commentaries  because,  as  bis  teacher 
tells  him,  “  There  is  no  complete  version  of  the  different  schools 
{tada)  with  us.  The  Sinhalexe  Atthakalhd  art  genuine  ;  the 
text  alone  (of  the  PitakaUaya )  is  preserved  in  this  land ; 
the  AUhakalhS  arc  not  extant.”  This  docs  not  mean  that 
some,  at  least,  of  the  commentaries  were  not  studied  in  India, 
especially  in  view  of  the  existence  of  the  Sinhalese  Saiigharama 
at  the  Bodhi-mapdapa  As  long  as  the  text  was  extant  the 
traditional  interpretation  thereof,  in  various  degrees  of 
authenticity,  at  different  times,  existed  as  well,  handed  down 
through  the  centuries  by  a  line  of  teachers  who  aimed  as  far 
as  was  possible  at  consistency  in  doctrinal  interpretation. 
Buddltagkosa  makes  reference  in  the  Visuddh i - magga  1  to 
the  commentaries  on  the  A  it  guitar  a,  Majjhima,  and  Saniyutla 
Nikayas.  This  reference  may  well  be,  as  Maung  Tin  suggests* 
not  to  Buddhaghosa ’s  own  commentaries,  but  to  the  original 
Ceylonese  Commentary  from  which  he  later  made  his  redaction, 
and  in  which  he  was  so  deeply  steeped,  oven  at  the  time  when 
he  wrote  the  Vixuddhi-magga.  If,  then,  it  is  assumed  that 

1  See  index  to  the  VinuUki-nofftf 

•  PaiA  of  Purity,  Preface,  pp.  t  and  vi. 


88 


THB  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CBYLON 


the  VimuUi-magga  found  its  way  to  China  by  way  of  some  of 
the  schools  which  flourished  in  India  at  the  time,  And  which 
studied  the  canon  in  the  more  or  less  traditional  method, 
it  would  not  be  difficult  to  conclude  thAt  the  V isuddhx-mngga 
and  Vimutii-magga  are  more  or  less  independent  works, 
written  by  men  belonging  to  much  the  same  school  of  thought 
— the  Thera  vSda. 

But  by  far  the  greatest  service  rendered  by  Buddhaghosa 
to  the  progress  of  Buddhist  knowledge  was  his  series  of 
masterly  commentaries.  The  Auhakatha'i  (or  "  talks  about 
the  contents,  meaning,  or  purpose  of  various  parts  of  the 
doctrine”,  as  the  word  itself  implies)  represented  the  most 
ancient,  orthodox,  and  traditional  interpretations  of  the 
Buddha’s  teachings.  They  were  not  so  much  creative  as 
explicative  and  interpretative.  Such  talks  go  back  to  the  time 
of  the  Buddha  himself.  Law,  in  his  book  on  Buddhaghosa,1 
has  a  very  interesting  chapter  on  the  origin  of  these  com¬ 
mentaries.  He  says  that  the  need  for  an  accurate  interpretation 
of  the  Buddha’s  words,  which  formed  the  guiding  principle 
of  life  and  action  of  the  members  of  the  SaAgha,  was  felt  from 
the  very  earliest  day*  of  the  Older.  When  the  Master  was  alive 
there  was  always  the  possibility  of  referring  disputed  questions 
direct  to  him.  But  even  during  the  Master’s  lifetime — at  the 
Buddhist  centres  formed  at  various  places  under  the  leader¬ 
ship  of  one  or  other  of  the  famous  disciples — discussions, 
friendly  interviews,  and  analytical  expositions  used  to  take 
place,  and  the  raison  d'ftn  of  the  commentaries  is  to  be  traced 
to  these  discussions.  Sometimes  it  happened  that  accounts 
of  these  discussions  were  duly  reported  to  the  Teacher,  and 
some  of  them  were  approved  by  him,  and  he  would  then  ask 
the  monks  to  bear  the  particular  expositions  in  mind  as  the 
best  that  could  have  been  given.  The  utterances  of  the 
disciples  that  won  such  approbation  were  treasured  by  the 
members  of  the  community,  and  especially  of  their  respective 
groups,  and  held  in  high  esteem,  honoured  as  much  as  the 

1  Law,  op.  aits,  pp.  48  foil. 


BUDDIIAOHOSA 


89 


words  of  the  Buddha  himself.  These  formed  the  nucleus  of 
the  commentaries.  Often,  when  the  Buddha  preached  a  sermon 
in  concise  form  on  some  aspect  of  the  doctrine,  the  monks  used 
to  repair  to  one  of  the  chief  disciples  and  get  the  points 
explained  in  greater  detail.  Such  was  Mahii-Kacsci[ya]na,  for 
example,  who  was  foremost  in  reputation  for  his  power 
in  giving  detailed  expositions  of  what  the  Buddha  said  in 
brief.  When  later  the  text  of  the  canon  came  to  be  compiled, 
arranged,  and  edited,  some  of  the  expositions  found  their  way 
into  the  Pilakas  and  were  given  a  permanent  place  therein. 
Thus  we  have  the  Sahgili-ruUanta  1  of  the  Digka-Nikaya, 
ascribed  to  SAriputta  and  forming  a  complete  catechism  of 
terms  and  passages  of  cxegetical  nature.  Such  was  also  the 
Socca-vibhaiiga  *  (an  exposition  of  the  Four  Noble  Truths) 
of  the  Majjkima,  which  later  found  its  proper  {dace  in  the 
second  book  of  the  AbhidJiamma-Pilaka,  and  also  the 
Madhu -pindika-tuUa  of  Maha-Kaccayana,  included  in  the 
Majjhima-NikSya*  It  sometimes  happened  that  for  a  proper 
understanding  of  the  text  explanations  of  a  commentarial 
nature  were  quite  essential ;  and  in  such  cases  the  commentary 
was  naturally  incorporated  into  the  text  and  formed  part  of 
the  text  itself.  Thus  we  have  an  old  commentary  embedded 
in  the  Vittaya  and  the  Parivara  added  as  a  supplementary 
examination  paper  to  the  whole.  Then  there  is  the  Niddtsa, 
a  whole  book  of  commentary  on  texts  now  included  in  the 
Sutta-nipata;  and  there  aro  passages  clearly  of  a  com¬ 
mentarial  nature  scattered  throughout  the  Nikdyas.  Lastly, 
there  are  the  interesting  fragments  of  commentaries,  tacked, 
the  one  on  to  the  Dhamma-taiigani  and  the  other  to  tho 
Vibhanya.  We  saw  in  an  earlier  chapter  how  the  canon,  in 
order  to  facilitate  the  learning  and  the  retention  of  it,  was 
divided  into  sections  and  entrusted  to  various  groups  of 
disciples  to  form  their  special  study.  There  is  a  very  old 

>  Vol.  ill,  p.  207  foil. 

»  Ui.  pp.  248  foil. 

•  Ibid.,  1.  pp.  110  Ml. 


90 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


tradition  which  tells  us  that  the  commentaries  on  all  the 
principal  canonical  books  were  handed  down  by  these  schools 
along  with  the  texts  themselves.  This  probably  explains  how 
it  was  that  parts  of  the  commentaries  came  later  to  be  attached 
to  the  texts  which  they  interpreted,  e.g.  in  the  case  of  the 
Dhamma-saAganl.  This,  however,  docs  not  moan,  as  Mrs.  Rhya 
Davids  points  out,1  that  all  the  commentaries  were  so  handed 
down  in  all  the  schools,  or  that  each  of  them  was  exactly 
the  same  in  each  of  the  schools  where  it  was  taught.  But, 
where  the  commentaries  were  so  handed  down,  tradition  tells 
us  that  they  were  compiled  and  subsequently  written  in  the 
dialect  of  the  district  where  the  school  was  situated.  They 
were,  therefore,  not  the  work  of  one  single  author,  but  of  a 
community  of  brethren. 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  these  commentaries  were  not 
compiled  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word,  nor  did  any  com¬ 
mentaries,  such  as  Bnddhaghosa  himself  wrote  later,  exist  in 
the  Buddha’s  lifetime  or  immediately  after  his  death.  So  that, 
when  Buddhaghosa  mentions,  in  the  opening  stanzas  of  the 
Sumafigala-vil&tinl,  that  the  commentary  to  the  Digka- 
Nikdga  was  at  the  first  council  rehearsed  by  600  holy  Elders, 
we  may  assume  that  he  means,  that  at  this  meeting  the 
meanings  to  be  attached  to  the  various  terms — particularly 
to  those  that  appear  to  have  been  borrowed  from  Hindu 
philosophy — were  discussed  and  properly  defined.  This 
removes  the  difficulty  of  conceiving  the  contemporaneous 
existence  of  the  commentaries  and  the  Pitakas  from  the  very 
earlieat  times.  Such  definitions  and  fixations  of  meaning 
formed  the  nucleus  of  the  later  commentaries.  The  Elders 
had  discussed  the  important  terras  at  the  First  Council, 
and  had  decided  on  the  method  of  interpreting  and  teaching 
the  more  recondite  doctrines. 

Later,  when  schisms  arose  within  the  Buddhist  Church, 
they  were  caused  mainly  by  differences  of  opinion  as  to  the 
correct  interpretation  of  certain  rules  of  the  Order,  and  of 
*  Bud.  Pif.  Klkicj,  2nd  «L,  In  trod..,  j*.  xxvi 


BUDDHAGUOSA 


91 


the  meaning  to  be  Attached  to  various  points  in  the  Doctrine. 
With  the  lapse  of  time  the  philosophical  notions  implicit  in 
the  Dhatnraa  had  grown,  new  ideas  had  developed  and  earlier 
conceptions  been  elaborated ;  the  simpler,  archaically 
expressed  Sulla  teachings  had  been  expanded  and  widened 
in  their  scope,  and  various  schools  of  thought  had  arisen 
within  the  Order  itself.  Some  of  them  were  obviously  heretical 
in  their  views.  When,  at  the  Second  and  the  Third  Councils, 
the  custodians  of  the  orthodox  tradition  met  together  to 
condemn  such  heresies,  we  may  be  sure  that  they  determined 
with  even  greater  preciseness  and  clearness  than  before  the 
connotations  and  the  applications  of  the  Buddha’s  teachings. 
By  the  time  of  the  Thjrd  Council  such  commentarial  literature 
(using  the  word  in  the  wider  sense)  had  been  more  or  less 
fully  developed  ;  and  when,  after  the  conclusion  of  that 
Synod,  Mabinda  came  to  Ceylon,  he  brought  over  with  him 
the  expositions  of  the  teaching  which  had  been  sanctioned 
by  tho  Elders  at  that  meeting.  Very  soon  after  Mahinda's 
arrival  he  translated  them  into  “  tho  language  of  the  land  ”, 
and  there  they  continued  to  be  studied  and  pondered  upon 
and  further  developed  by  the  monks  of  Ceylon. 

At  the  time  when  Buddhaghoaa  arrived  in  the  island — 
in  tho  early  part  of  tho  fifth  century  a.d the  commentaries 
so  handed  down  in  the  schools  at  various  times  and  places 
had  already  been  put  together  into  treatises,  and  books  had 
been  made  of  them,  written  in  the  native  dialects.  And  wo 
know,  at  least,  the  names  of  several  of  those  which  existed  at 
this  period.  They  arc 1 : — 

1 .  The  Mula-  or  Maha-Atthakathu,  or  simply  the  A Uhokatka, 
of  the  dwellers  of  tho  Mahi-Vihora  at  Anuradhapura. 

2.  The  commentary  of  the  dwellors  of  the  Uttara-Vihaxa, 
also  at  Anuradhapura. 

3.  The  Mahu-paccari,  or  “  Great  Raft  ”,  so  called  because 
it  was  composed  on  a  raft  somewhere  in  Ceylon. 

»  J/amol  a/  Bud.  Ptf.  EtXiu.  pp.  xxtu  sod  xxrlli.  Also  VijAyamahs, 
JRAS.,  1870,  rol.  r,  pp.  29S  folL,  N-S. 


92 


THE  PALI  UTKKATUKB  OF  CEYLON 


4.  The  Andha-Atthakatka,  handed  down  at  KMcIpura 
(Conjevaram),  in  South  India. 

6.  The  Kuruydi-AUhakatha,  to  named  because  of  its  having 
been  written  at  the  Kururujnvelu  Vihara  in  Ceylon. 

6.  The  SafJchcpa-Auhaiatha,  or  "  Short  Commentary **, 
which  was  also,  possibly,  of  South  Indian  origin.1 

Buddhaghosa  thus  found  a  largo  moss  of  material  at  his 
disposal.  These  commentaries  doubtless  embraced  various 
shades  of  opinion,  and  represented  different  schools  of  thought. 
It  is  difficult  to  decide  whether  each  one  of  them  dealt  with 
the  canon  as  a  whole,  or  only  with  separate  portions  of  it, 
but  the  former  is  not  probable.  The  ttkds  themselves  give  but 
very  imperfect  accounts  of  them,  because,  judging  from  the 
meagre  information  they  contain  with  regard  to  them,  at  the 
time  when  the  (iJcds  came  to  be  compiled,  almost  all  traces  of 
the  older  commentaries  had  disappeared.  In  the  Sammoha- 
vinodani  on  the  Vibhanga  *  Buddhaghosa  tells  us  that  he 
composed  it  "  by  taking  the  substance  of  the  old  com¬ 
mentaries  ”  (pormiaUhakaihanam  sdram  adaya).  Thus,  it  is 
pretty  clear  that  at  least  the  first  three  of  those  mentioned 
above  were  separate  works  on  the  entire  Ti-gntaka,  and  that 

1  In  Addition  to  these  Buddhnghoaa  often  quote*  the  Authority  of  whet 
he  nail*  the  PorA *4.  Mm.  Rhya  David*  suggests  (Law,  op.  cit.  Foreword) 
that  three  PorApAt  represented  an  evolving  aehool  of  philosophical  thought. 
It  is  diatinetly  elated  in  the  Oandha  toifua  (pp.  65-9)  that  the  PorAnA- 
foriyrt  are  a  Lao  the  AlthabUkAeoriyA,  Law  (p.  04)  consider*  that  tho  name 
refore  to  eminent  and  revered  teacher*  of  tho  Order,  who  were  often  naked 
to  interpret  question*  ariaing  among  the  Sarighn,  and  whocc  interpretation* 
were  embodied  in  tho  great  AUhakalUt ;  and  he  *ogge*ta  that  these  were 
pieeervcd  in  the  Great  Sinhalese  Commentaries*,  and  distinguished  by  being 
quoted  hi  the  original  Fill  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  PorAp&t  merely  refer 
to  teacher*  whose  exposition*  were  not  neocoarily  embodied  in  the  Com¬ 
mentaries,  but  handed  down  in  Tariom  school*  by  oral  tradition,  someUmea 
with  mnemonic  verse*  to  help  the  memory  and  that  Buddhaghosa  refer* 
to  each  traditional  explanation*  as  the  anonymous  PorApA.  Often,  in 
Sinhalese  books,  when  tho  author  quoting  from  an  ancient  work  either 
does  not  know — or  dose  not  think  it  necessary  to  give — tho  eouroe,  he 
introduces  it  merely  by  eAejria  pur&lamyi  HA u  (“  therefore  the  encienle 
said 


Vijayssanha,  loo.  cit,,  p.  *99. 


BUDD1IAQ1I0SA 


93 


all  of  them  were  more  or  less  directed  to  the  elucidation  of  one 
or  more  of  the  Pitakas,  and  that  they  purported  to  be 
separate  and  independent  commentaries. 

The  task  before  Buddhaghosa  was,  therefore,  by  no  means 
an  easy  one.  The  very  copiousness  of  the  material  was  an 
embarrassment.  When  he  set  out  from  India  to  make  his 
“  Concise  Commentary  ”,  his  idea  was  merely  to  study  the 
Sinhalese  AUhakalM's  and  translate  them  into  Pali.  But  now, 
faced  often  with  conflicting  views,  contradictory  assertions, 
and  sometimes  incompatible  doctrines,  he  had  to  expunge, 
abridge,  enlarge,  and  make  new  a  commentary  of  his  own. 
The  author  of  so  systematic  and  coherent  a  synopsis  os  the 
V iJtuddhi-maqga  could  not  rest  content  with  a  mere  translation  ; 
for  that  no  great  ability  was  required,  and  certainly  far  less 
extraordinary  talent  than  he  possessed.  He  wished  to  collect 
and  systems  tire  the  knowledge  which  the  various  works  con¬ 
tained,  to  garner  the  criticism  of  ancient  scholarship  for  the 
use  of  future  generations  of  scholars  ;  and  therefore  he  did 
not  shrink  from  rewriting  them  so  os  to  expand  what  he  found 
into  a  fuller  and  richer  form,  embodying  in  the  old  material 
whatever  he  found  elsewhere,  to  illuminate  and  elucidate  the 
text  of  his  comment.  He  approached  his  task  with  no 
iconoclastic  desire  to  supersede  the  earlier  scholiasts ;  on 
the  contrary,  he  studied  with  great  assiduity  what  his 
predecessors  had  written  and  incorporated  with  pious  core 
in  their  works ;  he  had  always  one  great  object  pre¬ 
dominantly  in  view,  namely,  to  inspire  reverence  for  what 
be  considered  supreme  authority. 

Ho  himself  describes  what  he  did  in  the  metrical  introduction 
to  the  Samanta-jtasadikd 1 :  “In  commencing  this  com¬ 
mentary — having  embodied  therein  the  Maha-AUhaialha, 
without  excluding  any  proper  meaning  from  the  decisions 
contained  in  the  AfaAa-paccari,  as  also  in  the  famous  KurunAl 
and  other  commentaries,  and  including  the  opinions  of  the 
Elders — I  Bhall  perform  my  task  well.  Let  the  young  and 
>  FTS.  ed„  p.  2.  rr.  10-16. 


<H  THE  PAU  LITEBATUKK  OF  CEYLON 

the  middle-aged  and  the  elderly  monks  who  entertain  a  proper 
regard  for  the  doctrines  of  the  Tath&gata,  the  Luminary  of 
Truth,  listen  to  my  words  with  pleasure.  The  Dhamma, 
as  well  as  the  Vinaya,  was  declared  by  the  Buddha  and  his 
sons  understood  it  in  the  same  sense  as  it  was  delivered; 
and  inasmuch  as  in  former  times  they  (the  Sinhalese  com¬ 
mentators)  composed  the  commentaries  without  disregarding 
their  (sons’)  opinions,  therefore,  excepting  any  error  of 
transcription,  everything  contained  therein  is  an  authority  to 
the  learned  in  this  Order,  who  respect  ecclesiastical  discipline. 
Prom  these  commentaries,  after  casting  off  the  language, 
condensing  detailed  accounts,  including  authoritative 
decisions,  without  overstepping  any  Pali  idiom  (I  shall 
proceed  to  compose  my  work).  And,  as  this  commentary  will 
be  explanatory  of  the  meanings  of  words  belonging  to  the 
Suttas  in  conformity  with  the  sense  attached  to  them  therein, 
therefore  ought  it  the  more  diligently  to  be  studied. 

Thus  Buddhaghosa’s  work  formed  a  synthetic  unity, 
deliberately  planned  as  a  consistent  scheme  for  dealing  with 
the  traditions  which  had  come  down  through  the  centuries, 
handed  down  by  distinguished  members  of  tho  Order  and  ever 
growing  in  the  scope  of  their  expositions  of  the  canon.  He  was 
a  critical  scholar  in  some  ways ;  there  is  evidence  of  this  in 
almost  every  passage  of  his  commentaries ;  he  consulted 
manuscripts  of  various  schools,  and  faithfully  recorded  the 
variant  readings  which  he  found  in  the  same.  Often,  especially 
in  the  case  of  narratives,  he  found  different  versions  of  the 
same  incident,  and  preserved  them  for  the  information  of 
later  generations.  Working  in  this  manner,  he  wrote  the 
following  commentaries  which  have  come  down  to  our  day  : 
The  Samania-patadtka,  regarded  by  some  as  his  most 
important  work.  It  is  a  voluminous  compilation,  dealing  with 
the  Vinaya  texts,  and  he  says  he  wrote  it  before  all  others 
because  the  Pinaya  forms  the  foundation  of  the  Buddhist 
faith.1  Apart  from  its  value  as  a  commentary  to  explain  tho 
'  »  F.T.8.  Ed.,  p.  1,  v.  «. 


8UDPHAGHOSA 


9& 


rules  of  morality,  etc.,  embodied  in  the  Vinaya,  it  contains 
a  great  mass  of  social,  political,  moral,  religious,  and 
philosophical  history  of  Ancient  India.1  The  work  was  trans¬ 
lated  into  Chinese  quite  soon  after  it  was  written,  and  the 
Chinese  translation,  made  by  a  monk  named  Sa&ghabhadra 
in  a.d.  489  (according  to  Nariman),*  exists  to  this  day.  In 
Ceylon  itself  several  (UcSs  have  been  written  on  this  work  at 
various  times,  and  they  will  be  referred  to  in  their  proper 
placer ;  several  of  them  still  survive. 

His  other  commentary  on  the  Vinaya  is  the  Kahkha- 
vitarani  on  the  Patimokkha,  which  forms  one  of  the  books  of 
the  Vinaya-Pitaka,  and  contains  certain  rules  of  discipline 
for  members  of  the  Order,  in  such  form  as  could  easily  be 
committed  to  memory  by  them.  There  exists  a  Sinhalese 
glossary  on  this  work,  written  several  centuries  ago.* 

These  books  were  followed  by  commentaries  on  the  four 
JVt kayos  iu  succession :  the  SumaityaJa-wldstnl  on  the 
Digha-Nik&ya,  written  in  three  parts,  showing  us 
Ruddhaghos&’s  encyclopedic  learning  at  its  best,  and  com¬ 
posed  in  language  less  confused  than  that  of  his  other  com¬ 
mentaries,  the  Papaika-tudam  on  the  Majjhima,  the 
SdraUha-ppak&tinx  on  the  SamyuUa  and  the  Manorcrfha-puram 
on  the  AAffuUara-Nikaya.  In  tho  introductory  verses  to  each 
of  these  books  he  gives  the  circumstances  in  which,  and  names 
the  scholars  at  whose  instigation,  he  undertook  and  carried 
out  the  work.  In  addition  to  these  he  is  also  said  to  have  com¬ 
piled  commentaries  on  three  books  of  the  Khuddaka-Nikoya — 
the  Khuddaka-palha,  the  Sulla-nipata,  and  the  Dhamma-pada. 
The  commentary  on  the  first  two  divisions  is  called  the 
Paramattha-jotika . 

Some  doubts  have  been  expressed  by  various  scholars  as 
to  the  authenticity  of  the  tradition  which  ascribes  the 
Dhamma -pada -aUhakalha  to  Buddhaghosa.4  Not  a  few  scholars 

>  Lew,  p.  77. 

»  Kerimen,  Buddhist  LiUntturt,  lodes. 

»  Dc  Zov*».  p.  7. 

•  c.g,  Borliogsiae  in  hie  tn&iUtion  (Y»k  Univenitjr  Serin). 


96 


THE  PALI  LfTERATUB*  OF  CEYLON 


are  of  opinion  that  the  work  is  modern  and  that  the  author  was 
a  later  Buddhaghosa  (Culla-Buddhaghosa),  who  obtained  his 
materials  from  the  same  source  as  the  Sinhalese  Saddhamtm- 
rofcmdtoB,  written  by  Mah&  Thtra  Dhammascna  in  the 
thirteenth  century.1  At  the  end  of  the  commentary  we  find 
the  following  colophon  :  **  Ftpuio  -  vituddha  -  buddhina 

BuddAayhoto ’  <t  garUhx  gahila  -namadkeyyena  katayam 

Dhamma-padaita  aUha-var>*o*o."  C‘  This  commentary  on 
the  Dhamma-pada  was  written  by  Buddhaghosa  of  emin¬ 
ent  and  lustrous  knowledge.”)  This  may  well  refer  to  the 
great  commentator.  In  a  Sinhalese  work,  the  Puj&mliya, 
it  is  mentioned  that  he  wrote  the  work  at  the  request  of  King 
Sirinivasa  and  his  minister  Mahanigama.1  This  Siriniv&sa 
was  undoubtedly  Mahanama,  and  the  Samanto-pdsddika  tells 
us  that  Buddhoghosa  wrote  in  the  Ganthakara  Pari  vena  built 
by  the  great  Minister  Mahanigama  and  that  on  other 
occasions  he  lived  in  the  palace  built  by  the  king  himself  ,  this 
palace  forming  part  of  the  monastery  at  the  Maha-Vihara 
where  Buddhaghosa  came  to  study  the  Sinhalese  commen¬ 
taries.  Attheendof  the  Dhammapadatthakathi  is  a  stanza 
“  FiAdre  adMrqjena  kantamhi  katannund 
Pasadc  Siribi/ldosaa  ranfio  viharatd  mayd." 

("  By  me  residing  in  the  palace  of  King  Sirikudda  in  the 
monastery  built  by  the  grateful  king .  ” )  Sirikudda  is  apparently 
only  another  name  for  Sirinivasa  (Mahanama).1 

The  ch«d  stumbling  block  is  the  difference  in  language  and 
style  between  this  work  and  the  other  commentaries  which 
undoubtedly  belong  to  Buddhaghoaa.  Compared,  for 
instance,  with  the  commentary  on  the  Majjhima  Nik&ya,  the 
DhammapadaUhakalhd  resembles  more  the  Jatnka  com¬ 
mentary  than  anything  else.  At  best  it  seems  to  be  the  work 
of  a  compiler  who  collected  and  edited  sermons  and  stories, 


*  WtcknmMln(be.  p-  11« 

*  Colombo  Ed,  1887.  p.  1C.  .  .  _ _ _  .  . 

»  vide  D.  B.  J*y sUlAka,  lutrod.  to  tho  SilAopolanda  (Colombo  w., 

1823).  p.  tU. 


BUDDHAC1HO.SA 


97 


not  inventing  new  one*,  but  merely  presenting  in  literary 
Pali  what  existed  already  as  folklore  ;  and  the  arrangement 
is  different  even  from  the  SuUa-mpala  commentary.  But 
this  difference  may  possibly  be  due  to  the  difference  in 
the  subject-matter  of  the  various  texts  taken  up  for  comment. 
“  The  Dhammapada,  unlike  the  great  Xik&yas,  which  consist 
of  prose  and  gathis,  is  entirely  made  up  of  gathas  without 
the  prose  setting,  which,  in  the  Nikayas,  is  supplied  in  the 
text  itself.  Here,  therefore,  was  the  necessity  of  bringing  it 
into  line  with  those  canonical  works.” 1  Hugh  Nevill  in  the 
Introduction  to  his  Catalogue  ventures  upon  the  view  that 
this  work  did  not  belong  to  the  three  great  uUhakathat  (Mafia, 
Paccori,  and  Kurundi)  which  Buddhaghoaa  studied,  but  merely 
represented  the  popular  legends  accepted  before  the  Alu- 
v ih ira  redaction,  and  were  either  not  then  treated  as  of 
canonical  value,  or  accepted  by  rival  sects  without  dispute, 
and  therefore  not  found  necessary  to  be  specially  set  down  in 
writing.  In  Buddhaghosa’s  time  they  had  acquired  con¬ 
siderable  authority,  and  they  were  translated  by  him  and 
arranged  at  his  discretion.  It  may  be  quite  possible,  Nevill  says, 
that  the  legends  had  their  origin  in  India  or  elsewhere  and  that 
they  did  not  belong  to  Mahinda’s  school ;  this  may  account 
for  the  different  method  of  treatment.  Where  different  versions 
are  given  of  the  same  story,*  the  responsibility  belongs  not 
to  Buddhaghosa,  but  to  the  different  accounts  from  which  he 
obtained  his  information. 

A  translation  of  the  Dhammapadatthakalhd,  called  the 
Saddhamma-raianawti  was  made  during  the  thirteenth 
century  a.d.  by  an  Elder  named  Dhammascna.*  All  the  stories, 

1  Law,  op.  oil.,  p-  81. 

*  See  Hardy,  JR  AS-,  1808,  pp.  741-94,  lor  example*  o(  such  different 
▼oraioiv*.  That  different  receoaiona  ol  ercu  the  Dhaxtma- jaAa  oxiated  ia 
ahown  by  a  comparison  of  the  P1H  work  with  the  Chiatae.  See  Herman, 
Dbamma-pada  Commty.,  i,  pt.  ii.  pp.  15-10. 

*  lyhameanaena  ia  mentioned  in  tho  .Viidyo-rsaprohi  with  aothora  auch 
aa  Vitgammula  Anuruddha,  who  liTed  in  tho  reign  of,  or  )uat  before, 
PaixJita  ParSkrama  Bihu  (A.D.  1230-71).  See  Wickremaainghe,  Calclojue, 
far  fuller  daaonptton,  Sot.  13  and  14. 


7 


98 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


save  quite  a  few,  are  taken  from  the  Dhamma-pada  com¬ 
mentary  and  follow  more  or  less  the  same  order.  The  greater 
part  is  merely  a  translation  of  the  Pali  original,  though,  as  is 
stated  in  the  Introduction  to  the  book,  it  does  not  follow  the 
text  throughout.  Unlike  the  author  of  the  Pali  commentary, 
the  translator  does  not  quote  the  actual  words  of  the 
Dhamma-pada,  but  in  most  instances  gives  the  substance  of 
the  aphorisms  by  way  of  introductions  to  each  illustrative 
tale. 

Besides  these  works  Buddhaghosa  also  wrote  a  series  of 
commentaries  on  the  books  of  the  Abhidhamma-Pitaka.  The 
best  known  of  them  is  the  AUha-sdlinl  on  the  Dhamma- 
roAflanl,  said  to  have  boon  composed  in  India.1 * * 4  The  work 
contains  more  than  one  distinct  reference  to  the  Samanta- 
jnsadikd  *  showing  that  it  was  written  or  at  leaat  completed 
after  the  Vtnoya  commentary.  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids  suggests  * 
that,  though  it  was  written  at  Gaya,  it  was  later  subjected  to 
a  complete  revision  by  the  author  after  his  studies  in  Ceylon. 
This  supposition  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  in  the  body 
of  the  work  he  quotes  from  or  refers  to  many  works  including, 
as  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids  has  shown,  the  Ceylonese  AUhahUftaa 
and  the  Visuddhi-magga.  The  commentary  on  the  VxbhaUga 
is  named  Sammoha-vinodam,  and  the  exegeses  on  the  other 
five  books  are  collectively  called  the  Pailca-ppakaran- 
aUhakaihd  (sometimes  also  Paramattha-dxpanT).* 

Such  in  brief  was  the  nature  of  Buddhaghosa 's  vast  labours, 
accomplished  single-handed  with  a  talent  aa  wonderful  as 
his  industry  was  extraordinary.  The  BuddhaghosvppaUi 
tells  us  *  that  when  Buddhaghosa  had  completed  his  recension 
of  this  whole  library  of  books  expository  of  the  Tipitaka, 
a  bonfire  “  as  high  as  seven  average-sired  elephants  ”  was 


1  JI.V.,  xxxvi,  v.  its,  sad  S<L>ano  t«m*s  (P.T.S.),  p.  31. 

'  pp.  07  tad  OS. 

•  Mania!  H*d,  Piy.  EU.,  p.  zxvii. 

4  Dp  Zoyat,  Catalog**,  p,  3,  tad  NeriD'*  Catalog**.  , 


BUDDHAQH08A 


99 


made  of  the  Sinhalese  translations  which  Mahinda  gave  to 
Oey Ion  three  centuries  earlier,  and  which  had  later  been  added 
to  in  that  land.  We  need  not  take  this  statement  as 
being  literally  true.  All  that  it  probably  means  is  that  in 
his  own  time,  and  certainly  to-day,  they  were  completely 
superseded  by  Buddhaghosa's  compilations  ;  he  bad  eclipsed 
all  others.  As  a  stanza  in  the  BuddhaghosuppaUi  has  it : 1 

“  Buddhaghote  patiitkarUe  pan&avantd  pi  ye  jand 
Tetam  paUfuipabhd  n' alt  hi  Rdhu-mukhe  va  candiwd." 

(“  When  Baddhaghosa  is  by,  even  wise  men  lose  the  lustre  of 
their  wisdom,  like  the  moon  in  the  Dragon's  mouth.”) 

It  is  a  hopeless  task  to  inquire  into  what  has  become  of 
the  old  Sinhalese  commentaries  ;  no  trace  of  them  now  exists. 
“  The  early  diffusion  of  Pali  among  the  priesthood  and  the 
learned  laity,  and  the  subsequent  introduction  of  Sanskrit 
literature  and  Sanskrit  verbiage  into  the  once  pure  Elu,  must 
have  so  choked  that  language  that  it  died  out  early  and  its 
memory  was  cherished  only  by  the  lovers  of  Parnassus.  For 
all  religious  and  philosophic  purposes  Pali  and  Sanskritized 
Sinhalese  began  to  be  used  from  a  very  early  period  and 
continue  to  be  used  to  this  day.”  * 

So  much  has  been  written  on  the  value  of  Buddhaghosa's 
labour*  that  very  little  need  be  Baid  here.  Perhaps 
Buddhaghosa’s  greatest  value  to  the  modern  historian  lies  in 
the  very  limitations  of  his  mental  powers,  such  os  originality 
and  independence  of  thought,  which  were  imposed  upon  him 
by  his  extreme  reverence  for  all  that  was  traditional.  For  him 
there  was  no  development  in  the  doctrine  and  all  the  texts 
were  the  words  of  the  Master  himself.  For  the  correct  under¬ 
standing  of  that  doctrine,  however,  Buddhaghosa’s  work  is 
indispensable.  Many  points  of  Buddhist  teaching  and  many 
cruccs  of  philosophy  would  be  unintelligible  to  us  but  for  his 


1  p.  60. 

*  JRAS.  (Ni.),  rot  v,  p.  *01. 


100 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


expositions.  Though  his  philology  is  sometimes  crude  1  and 
often  fanciful,  yet  his  notes  on  rare  words  are  invaluable  and 
often  conclusive.  “  For  nearly  fifteen  centuries,”  said 
Sir  Robert  (now  Lord)  Chalmers  on  one  occasion, 
“  Buddhnghoaa  lias  remained  the  unchallenged  expounder 
of  Buddhism  for  the  Thera-vadin,  or  Southern  School.  In 
the  evolution  of  Buddhist  thought  he  marked  an  epoch  ; 
he  restated  thought  for  his  own  day  and  stereotyped  it  ever 
since  for  the  orthodox  . . .  Viewed  as  a  scholar  rather  than  as 
a  philosopher,  there  is  amplo  evidence  in  his  writings  to  show 
that  he  was  a  critical  scholar  .  .  .  From  the  point  of  view  of 
textual  criticism  his  help  is  invaluable  to  modern  editions 
of  Pilaka  texts  ;  for  through  Buddhaghosa's  records  they 
can  base  their  text  on  the  best  manuscripts  which  existed 
1,500  years  ago ;  and,  where  Buddhaghosa’s  reading  is 
certain,  it  is  an  almost  unerring  guide  in  these  later  days.  We 
have  to  get  back  through  Buddhaghosa’s  commentary  to  his 
text  of  the  canon  and  beyond  this  we  can  never  hope  to 
penetrate  in  restoring  the  Pilaka  texts  as  first  written  down 
at  Alu-vihara.”  * 

It  is  true,  no  doubt,  as  Professor  Rhys  Davids  has  told  us, 
“  that  the  method  adopted  in  his  commentaries  follows  very 
closely  the  method  of  those  much  older  ones  preserved  in  the 
canon,  but  the  literary  skill  with  which  he  uses  it  is  a  great 
advance,  more  especially  in  lucidity,  over  older  documents.’.’  * 
The  storios  he  gathered  together  in  his  writings  from  various 
sources  and  the  expositions  he  gave  with  the  help  of  his 

>  It  ia  sometime*  naked  whether  Buddhasrhosa  knew  Sanskrit.  A 
JloW-fcit'jvj  in  Sanskrit  on  the  life  of  the  Buddha,  called  the  Padya- 
e  i.il  mo  hi  ia  sometimes  attributed  to  the  great  oxogeto  (Law,  p.  85  foil). 
Perhaps  hi*  reluctance  to  use  Sanskrit  in  hia  etymology  waa  due  to  tbo 
suspicion  with  which  that  language  ia  Tie  wed  in  defining  terms  of  Buddbiat 
philosophy  and  its  traditional  taboo  lor  scriptural  purposes.  But  the 
evidence  yielded  by  hie  etymological  exegeses  is  heavily  against  his  having 
known,  or  at  least  bean  proficient  in  it.  Cf.  Dr.  Stede,  Pali  Dictionary, 
Afterword. 

*  Cty.  Antiq.  and  Lit.  R*f.,  vol.  i,  pt,  i,  p.  2. 

>  Enc.  Rti.  Elk.,  vol.  ii,  p.  887. 


EUDDHAGHOSA 


101 


very  wide,  if  not  profound,  erudition  constitute  a  thesaurus, 
preserving  for  later  generations  invaluable  information  of  the 
social  customs,  commercial  values,  folklore,  ceremonies,  and 
beliefs  of  the  ancient  world.  “  It  may  readily  be  granted," 
observed  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids,  in  a  critical  study  of  one  of  his 
works,1  “  that  Buddhaghosa  must  not  be  accepted  en  bloc  . . . 
to  me  his  work  is  not  only  highly  suggestive,  but  also  a  mino 
of  historic  interest.  To  put  it  aside  is  to  lose  the  historical 
perspective  of  the  course  of  the  Buddhist  philosophy.” 

But  even  greater  than  this,  for  Ceylon,  was  tho  immense 
influence  which  his  writings  exerted  on  the  development  of 
the  literary  faculty  among  the  Sinhalese  Buddhists.  The 
impetus  he  gave  to  Pali  learning  was  very  great,  and  we  shall 
see  in  our  next  chapter  how  it  resulted  in  enriching  the 
literature  of  the  island. 

»  Op.eii.,  p.xxxi.  Cf.hcrtd.  VUwUKi-ntaffa.  Aftcnrord ;  *cd  Foreword 
to  Dr.  B.  C.  Law'i  Buddiuiyltota. 


CHAPTER  VI 
Euddiiaghosa’s  Successors 

description,  quoted  from  the  Maha-vamsa  in  tho  last 
chapter,  of  the  life  and  work  of  Buddhaghoaa  might 
cause  us  to  think  that  he  wrote  commentaries  on  the  whole 
Tijntaka  ;  but  we  know  now  that  this  statement  is  a  poetic 
exaggeration.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Buddliaghoea’s  ambition 
was  to  write  a  complete  recension  of  Buddhist  commentarial 
literature,  but  he  waa  unable  to  achieve  his  aspirations  com¬ 
pletely.  He  was  compelled  to  leave  Ceylon  before  his  task 
could  be  finished ;  the  reason  for  his  departure  we  do  not 
know ;  it  may  have  been  failing  health ;  he  had  laboured 
ceaselessly  for  years,  engaged  in  hard,  strenuous  work,  and 
his  spirit,  indomitable  as  it  was,  had  to  give  way  to  his  weaker 
body  ;  or  it  may  be  that  his  teacher  was  dying— Revata, 
who  bad  shown  the  young  enthusiast  the  way  to  a  most  fruit¬ 
ful  life— and  Buddhaghosa  was  summoned  to  his  bedside  ; 
or  after  many  years  of  exile  undertaken  for  a  noble  cause  the 
motherland  may  have  called  to  him  with  u  voice  that  would 
accept  no  denial j  he  was  growing  old,  and  he  felt  it  was  but 
right  that  India  should  see  the  fruits  of  his  work  before  he 
died  ;  for  it  was  in  India's  cause  that  he  first  went  out  to 
Ceylon,  that  he  might  make  a  summary  of  the  Sinhalese 
Auhakathi  for  the  use  of  Indian  monks,  who  were 
handicapped  for  want  of  such  help  in  understanding  the 
Dhamma. 

Whatever  the  reason  may  have  been,  Buddhaghosa  left 
Ceylon  while  some  of  the  commentaries  remained  yet  unedited 
and  untranslated  into  Pali.  But  others  were  forthcoming  to 
complete  the  task  thus  left  unfinished.  Even  in  his  own  time 
Buddhaghosa  was  but  one.  the  greatest,  it  is  true,  but  only  one, 
of  several  who  were  labouring,  fired  by  the  same  purpose, 
enthusiastic  in  the  same  cause— that  of  writing  the  com¬ 
mentarial  literature  in  Pili. 


buddhachosa’s  successors 


103 


Buddhaghosa 's  fame  spread  far  and  wide,  quite  soon  after 
the  compilation  of  his  monumental  Vuuddhi-magga ;  in  his 
own  lifetime  his  works  were  being  assiduously  studied  in  more 
than  one  country — in  mid-India,  in  Ceylon,  in  unlettered 
Thaton,  and  lastly  in  Burma,  where,  as  some  believe,  ho 
spent  the  latter  part  of  his  life.  He  established  the  pre¬ 
eminence  of  Ceylon  over  all  other  countries  in  the  genuineness 
of  its  traditional  heritage  of  the  Buddha’s  religion,  and  justified 
her  claim  to  be  the  home  of  the  orthodox  Thera-vdda  of  his 
day.  Scholars  were  thus  attracted  to  the  island  for  purposes 
of  study  in  even  larger  numbers  than  heretofore,  and  their 
visits,  os  wc  shall  see  later,  resulted  in  the  production  of  works 
of  much  value. 

But  above  all  stands  the  service  which  Buddhaghosa 
rendered  to  the  development  of  the  Pali  language.  In  plaoe  of 
the  archaic,  stilted,  sometimes  halting  Sutla  speech,  almost 
Puritanical  in  its  simplicity,  groping  about  often  for  want  of 
words  to  express  ideas  and  conceptions  then  fresh  to  the  minds 
of  the  users  of  this  or  that  dialect,  Buddhaghosa  left  behind 
him  in  his  many  works  a  language  rich  in  its  vocabulary, 
flexible  in  its  use,  elegant  in  structure,  often  intricate  in  the 
verbiage  of  its  constructions,  and  capable  of  expressing  all 
the  ideas  that  the  human  mind  had  then  conceived.  Sonorous, 
long-winded  sentences  took  the  place  of  the  direct  simple 
composition  of  the  SuUas.  The  Oriental  mind,  fascinated  by 
the  ornamentation  of  its  structure,  soon  began  to  use  much 
more  extensively  than  before  the  Pali  language  now  grown 
into  adolescence.  And  we  find  one  author  after  another 
beginning  his  works  with  the  proud  boast  that  he  was  compiling 
his  works  for  the  benefit  of  learners  in  Pali ;  in  Magadhi, 
that  language  “  which  is  the  root  of  all  speech,  sweet  to  the 
taste,  pleasant  to  the  ear,  and  delightful  to  the  heart  ”.1 
In  Ceylon  itself,  where  so  far  the  native  writers  of  the  island 
had  contented  themselves  with  composing  their  books  in  the 
language  of  the  land,  they  now  deliberately  sought  to  super- 
1  Mipa-mUAt,  Introduction. 


104 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


aedc  that  language  by  the  cultivation  of  their  now  love — 
Magadhl  or  Pali.  They  were  also  undoubtedly  attracted  by  the 
prospect  of  appealing  to  a  wider  public  through  Pali  than  was 
possible  through  Sinhalese.  It  seems  to  have  caught  their 
fancy :  they  were  like  children  fascinated  by  a  new  and  clever 
toy,  in  the  manipulation  of  which  they  had  acquired  more 
than  average  proficiency.  Pali  made  rapid  strides  as  the 
cultivated  literary  language  of  the  wise,  and  mastery  over 
its  form  grew  with  use  till  it  resulted  in  such  limpid,  lucid 
verso  as  we  find  in  the  Maha-vai/tm. 

Material  prosperity  is  the  handmaid  of  literary  development, 
as  of  all  artistic  work  ;  and  the  century  that  followed 
Buddhaghosa’s  arrival  was  an  era  of  peace  and  happiness  to 
the  people.  Tike  Malabar  invasions  had  ceased,  at  least  for  the 
time  being,  and  the  islanders  were  left  free  to  devote  them¬ 
selves  to  the  pursuits  of  industry  and  skill.  The  annals  of  this 
period  are  replete  with  accounts  of  Anuriidhapura's  growth — 
its  rich  endowments  of  temples,  lands  and  gardens,  main¬ 
tained  at  the  nation  s  cost,  of  hospitals  and  playgrounds,  of 
granaries  and  storehouses,  of  aqueducts  for  carrying  water 
into  the  city,  and  numerous  other  works  for  the  public  benefit. 

The  city  had  grown  in  strength  and  power  and  splendour. 
Fa  Hsien,  who  visited  the  island  during  this  period,  has  left 
us  a  graphic  account  of  what  he  saw  and  heard  during  his  visit. 
He  tells  us  of  royal  residences,  monastic  edifices  and  dagobas, 
all  enclosed  within  walls  of  great  strength  and  abut  in  by 
massive  gntes,  and  of  the  outer  city,  set  upnrt  for  the  common 
people,  who  carried  on  the  business  life  of  the  capital,  divided 
into  various  quarters,  and  inhabited  by  provision  dealers 
and  drapers,  artisans  and  goldsmiths,  with  shops  for  the  salo 
of  every  description  of  goods.  The  parks  were  maintained  for 
the  growth  of  innumerable  flowers,  solely  for  the  decoration 
of  temples  and  dagobas,  and  for  the  ornamentation  of  the 
streets  of  the  great  city  on  festal  days,  when  the  entire 
population  gave  themselves  up  to  rejoicing  and  merry-making. 
They  presented  a  brilliant  spectacle,  one  unbroken  vista  of 


buddhaghosa’s  successors 


105 


holiday-makers  in  their  hundred*  and  thousands,  garbed  in 
festive  attire,  walking  along  the  long,  winding  highways 
bestrewn  with  black  and  white  sand,  and  flanked  by  festoons 
of  bright-huod  flowers,  while  the  huge  forms  of  gaily 
caparisoned  elephants  passed  in  slow  procession  to  the  chief 
diigoba  with  its  myriad  garlands  of  the  gayest  blossoms, 
resplendent  in  the  tropical  sunshine.1 

In  the  presence  of  such  contentment  and  prosperity,  con¬ 
fined  to  their  island-home,  and  therefore  free  from  endless 
frontier  wars  and  from  the  difficulties  and  anxieties  that  trade 
produces  upon  society  in  general,  the  people  found  in  the 
cultivation  of  letters  not  only  a  necessity,  but  also  their  chief 
delight.  Each  succeeding  sovereign  interested  in  the 
people's  welfare  rendered  them  most  valuable  service  in  this 
respect,  and,  whilst  their  own  intellectual  development  was 
nearest  to  their  hearts,  that  of  their  subjects  was  not  neglected. 
The  monasteries  served  as  schools  for  the  growth  of  Buddhist 
cnlture,  and  the  monks  and  the  nuns  acted  as  the  religious 
instructors. 

By  this  time  the  art  of  writing  had  been  fully  developed ; 
the  difficulty  of  finding  a  cheap,  easily  accessible  material, 
durable  enough  for  writing  had  been  solved  by  the  discovery 
of  the  ola-Icaf,  made  of  the  dry  shoots  of  the  talipot  palm, 
and  we  need  therefore  not  be  surprised  that  a  notable  array 
of  authors  followed  in  the  footsteps  of  Buddhaghosa,  and 
carried  on  the  work  which  he  had  begun  and  continued  in  so 
masterly  a  manner. 

First  among  them  in  chronological  order  was  Buddhadatta. 
The  Gandha~vatn$a  *  puts  him  next  in  order  to  Buddhaghosa. 
There  is  an  interesting  account  given  in  the  Budd/tar/hoi- 
uppatti  *  of  a  meeting  between  the  two  scholars.  Buddhadatta 
was  already  in  Ceylon  before  Buddhaghosa  had  made  up  his 
mind  to  make  a  summary  of  the  Sinhalese  commentaries  ; 

1  Tkt  Trault  of  Fa  Hritn,  Giles,  pp.  «  foil. 

*  O.V.,  p.  89. 

*  Ed.  Gray,  pp.  49-81. 


106 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


but  he  had  to  leave  the  island  without  accomplishing  the  object 
which  had  brought  him  there.  And  on  the  very  day  when 
Buddhadatta  left  Ceylon  Buddhaghosa  is  said  to  have  taken 
ship  for  AnurMhapura.  After  three  days  the  two  ships 
passed  near  each  other,  according  to  the  legend,  through 
the  influence  of  Sokka ;  the  meeting  of  the  monks  was, 
therefore,  a  dramatic  one.  They  introduced  themselves  to 
each  other.  Buddhaghosa  announced  the  purpose  of  his 
journey.  "  I  am  returning  from  there,”  said  Buddhadatta, 
‘‘after  having  written  the  JinalaixJcdra,  and  the  Danta- 
dhatu-bodhi-vamsa,  but  not  the  cUthakatha  s  and  the  (xka  s ; 
if  you  render  the  teachings  of  the  Master  into  Magadhl  from 
Sinhalese,  write  out  the  commentaries  of  the  three  Pitahu.” 
lie  also  gave  Buddhaghosa  his  iron  stylus,  myrobalan  and  a 
stone,  and  added  :  ”  If  you  have  trouble  in  the  eyes  or  pain 
in  the  back,  rub  this  myrobalan  on  the  stone  and  apply  it 
and  your  pain  will  assuredly  disappear.”  Buddhaghosa  had 
evidently  already  heard  of  Buddhadatta ;  for  he  is  said  to 
have  praised  the  Jinalahtara — “  Your  book  is  very  docp  and 
dif&cult  for  the  unwise  to  understand.”  **  I  came  to  the 
island,”  replied  Buddhadatta,  “  to  write  out  the  teaching  of 
the  Master  from  Sinhalese  into  Magadhl ;  but  I  shall  not  live 
muoh  longer.  Do  you  therefore  accomplish  the  task  ;  and, 
when  your  commentaries  are  finished,  send  them  on  to  me, 
that  I  may  summarize  your  labours.”  Whatever  we  may 
think  of  this  description  of  the  meeting  of  the  two  teachers 
in  mid-ocean,  there  is  no  reason  to  disbelieve  the  statement 
that  a  meeting  did  tako  place. 

The  facts  known  about  Buddhadatta  are  very  few.  At  the 
end  of  his  book,  the  Ftnaya-tn'ntccAaya,  we  are  told  that  it 
was  written  by  Buddhadatta  of  Uragapura  (Uragapurena 
Uuddhadattena  radio' gam),  and  the  same  appears  at  the  close 
of  the  Abhidhamnxdvaldra .  The  V inaya-vinicchaya  colophon 
gives  us  the  further  information  ”  by  the  great  exegetist  of 
Tamhap&uoi”  (Tambapanniyma  parama-veyydkaragena). 
In  explaining  this  the  author  of  the  tlid  tells  us  that  Uragapura 


BUDDHAGHOSA’8  successors 


107 


was  a  city  in  the  south  of  India  and  that  Buddhadatta  was 
born  in  the  Cola  kingdom  situated  in  the  Kaveri1:  but  he 
entered  the  Order  at  the  Maha-Vihara  at  Anuradhapura, 
and  therefore  belonged  to  the  Mahd-Vihara  fraternity.1 
Both  the  A  bhidhamrnavatura  and  the  V inaya -vinicchaya , 
however,  were  written  in  India,  probably  after  his  return 
there  ;  for  the  colophons  tell  us  that  he  wrote  in  tho  country 
of  Co]a,  at  BhQta-maftgaLa-gama  in  tho  monastery  built  by 
Yephudasa,  and  that  the  author's  royal  patron  was  king 
Accutavikkama.1  It  thus  appears  that  he  resided  for  some 
time  in  Ceylon,  and  longer,  perhaps,  in  South  India. 

His  chief  works  arc  the  Abhidhamsnavaldra  and  the  Vinaya- 
viniccfiaya.  Tho  Vinaya -vinicchaya  (ika  confirms  the  account 
given  in  the  BuddhaghosuppaUi  of  the  meeting  of  the  two 
scholars  and  adds  that  Buddhaghosa  kept  his  promise  to 
send  Buddhadatta  copies  of  his  commentaries.  It  also  says, 
further,  that  Buddhadatta  read  them  and  summarized  the 
Abhidhamma  commentary  in  the  Abhidhammavalara  and  the 
Finn (/o  exposition  in  the  Finaya-wma^cjya. 

As  its  name  implies,  the  Abktdhamm&vatara  is  an  intro¬ 
duction  to  the  study  of  Buddhist  philosophy.  There  is  much 
similarity  between  it  and  the  F isuddh  i - magga ,  and  this  lends 
colour  to  the  tradition  which  makes  it  a  concise  summary  of 
Buddhaghosa's  works.  At  any  rate,  we  are  quite  safe  in 
assuming  that  they  drew  their  materials  from  the  same 
sources.  “  It  is  probably  right  to  conclude,”  says  Mrs.  Rhys 
Davids,  “  that  they  both  were  but  handing  on  an  analytical 
formula  which  had  evolved  between  their  own  time  and  that 
of  the  final  closing  of  the  Abhidhamma-Pitaka." 4  They 
often  use  the  same  similes  (e.g.  the  simile  of  the  blind  man  and 
the  lame  helping  each  other  to  walk,  to  define  noma  and  rdpa). 

In  one  respect,  at  least,  his  exposition  of  the  Abhidhamma 

1  Aong  (JPTS-,  1910,  p.  133)  pot*  the  Co)*  province  in  Ceyloe,  en«t  ot 
Anuridhspur*.  bat  givci  no  reuoe  (or  doing  w>. 

*  dt&UAammSMiSSra,  P.T.S.  Ed..  Introd.,  pp.  xii.  toll. 

*  Ibid.,  colophon  *nd  F iaaya-victbaya,  colophon. 

*  HuddJkut  ftycKolcw.  p.  179. 


108 


THB  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLOK 


is  better  than  that  of  Buddhaghosa.  Thus,  whereas 
Buddhaghosa  oxpountls  his  psycholog}’  in  terms  of  the  five- 
aggregate  division,  Buddhadatta  opens  his  scheme  with  the 
fourfold  division  of  the  Compendium :  mind,  mental  properties, 

material  quality,  and  Nibbana - His  work  is,  mostly,  in 

metrical  Puli,  but  he  stops  at  times  to  supply  his  own  prose 
commentary.  Already  in  his  works,  in  place  of  the  usual 
numerical  and  often,  to  us,  arid  analyses,  we  detect  traces  of 
an  advance  in  synthesis,  e.g.  the  doctrine  of  function 
(&nra)  and  of  process  (pavaiti).'1 

There  is  no  doubt  that  Buddhodatta’s  work  marked  a 
further  advance  in  many  ways  in  the  study  of  the  Abhidhamma. 
His  diction  is  very  often  less  involved  and  ambiguous  than 
Buddhaghosa 's,  his  stylo  lees  discursive  and  more  graphic, 
hi*  vocabulary  is  extraordinardy  rich,  and  he  obviously 
profited  by  the  labours  of  the  earlier  and  yet  in  many  ways  the 
greater  commentator.  The  work  has  been  hold  in  high 
esteem  from  ancient  times  and  is  extensively  used  both  in 
Ceylon  and  in  Burma.*  Two  fikG*  on  it  exist  in  Ceylon, 
the  older  by  Viicbs&ra  Muhitatmi,  of  the  Maha-Vihara,  and  the 
later  by  Sumnngula,  pupil  of  the  scholar  numed  Sinputta. 

Buddhadatta 's  other  book  on  the  Abhidhamma,  the  Rupd- 
ripa-ribhaga,  docs  not,  nt  present,  exist  in  Ceylon.  His 
well-known  work  on  the  Vinaya,  the  Vinaya-xnnicchaya,  ia 
sometime*  (e.g.  in  the  Saddhamma-saitgaha,  ix,  30)  attributed 
to  an  author  named  Buddha-Sfha.  But  the  colophon  to  the 
book  definitely  states  that  Buddhadatta  was  the  author  and 
that  he  dedicated  it  to  his  pupil  Buddha-Siha.*  It  is  a 
moderately  large  work  and  a  glossary  has  been 
published  in  Sinhalese  in  quite  recent  years  by  a  monk  of 
the  South  of  Ceylon,  Dhlrananda  by  name.4  The  Vxnaya- 
nnicchaya  is  now  usually  found,  bound  together  with  its 

>  Cf.  iUUKilt  S’/yrVVo? y,  p.  179. 

•  Tlu«  and  the  ftiptripaciUtogn  form  two  of  the  nino  claaateal  •umraarl«a 
of  the  AtAManma  in  Burma  (Little  Fitter  Manual*  or  Lt- tea). 

*  So  doe*  the  GaadAatantM,  p.  40. 

«  Oalle,  1MU. 


buddhaohosa's  successors 


109 


supplementary  volume,  the  Utlara - tnnicchaya  (also  a  com¬ 
mentary  on  the  Ftnaya)  dedicated  (according  to  the  Qandha- 
vamsa,  p.  40)  to  another  pupil,  Sankhapala.1  Vacissara  wrote 
a  commentary  to  both  works  in  tho  thirteenth  century ;  but 
both  Vinicchayas  and  their  Cikat  have  been  largely  superseded 
by  Sariputta’s  monumental  work,  the  Vinaya-tangaha, 
written  in  the  twelfth  century  a.d.  (q.v.).  An  older  ftka  on 
the  V inaya -vin iccfutya  also  exists,  by  one  Revata  Thera, 
who  wrote  a  commentary  on  the  Sinhalese  Khuddha-Stkkhi, 
and  who  lived  probably  towards  the  end  of  the  eleventh 
century  a.d. 

A  Ceylon  tradition  attributes  to  Buddhadatta  the  author¬ 
ship  of  two  other  works — the  MadhwraUha-vH&tinx ,*  and  the 
Jinalankara.  The  former  is  a  commentary  on  the  Buddha- 
vatnta,  one  of  the  books  of  the  Khuddaka-Nikaya,  and  is  a 
compilation  of  legends  dealing  with  the  lives  of  Gotama, 
when  he  practised  the  Paratniia  during  the  regimes  of  twenty- 
four  previous  Buddhas.  The  commentary  follows  very  closely 
the  method  of  Buddhaghoea’s  works,  showing  that  the 
author  was  quite  familiar  with  the  great  exegetist's  writings. 
Mr.  Wickremasinghe,  perhaps  struck  with  this  similarity 
in  the  method  of  treatment,  seems  inclined  to  believe  that  the 
author  of  the  Buddha-vamxa  commentary  was  distinct  from 
the  Buddhadatta  under  discussion.*  But  we  saw  above  that 
Buddhadatta ’s  expositions  resemble  Buddhaghosa’a  in  many 
ways,  and  I  therefore  can  see  no  reason  for  separating  the  two 
authors.  The  Pujavaliya  of  the  thirteenth  century  4  mentions 
the  BuddhavanuatthakathS  as  among  Buddhadatta ’s  works,* 
and  the  Ceylon  tradition  is,  I  find,  supported  by  the  Burmese 
authors  as  well.* 

»  Ed.  by  Rev.  A-  P.  Buddhailalta,  foe  the  P.T.8. 

*  Sometime*  alao  called  MadAuraUM-paLUrial  (Do  Zoyta,  P-  2). 

1  Catalogue,  )>  xli. 

4  Colombo  Ed.,  p.  ICO. 

»  Tho  A bJkMamrnirlha-satprabo  Artto-batto  given  in  the  lirt,  evidently 
refer*  to  the  JiipAripa-riiMja.  See  *Uo  AiltdAomroiratara  (P.T.S.). 

4  Lour,  J3*d<i havktua,  p.  00,  and  Sotaao-eaijun,  p.  33. 


no 


THK  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


Even  more  obscure  is  the  authorship  of  the  JinalanJcara. 
It  is  a  Pali  poem  of  250  verses,  containing  a  narrative  of  the 
Buddha's  life,  written  in  brilliant  rhythmical  cadences  and 
elegant  language,  with  a  large  variety  of  versification.  Some 
of  the  stanzas  show  traces  of  artificiality  in  construction,1 
with  internal  rhymes,  alliterations  and  other  such  rhetorical 
devices.  Gray  attributes  its  authorship  to  Buddharakkhita, 
"  who  is  stated  to  have  been  born  in  Ceylon  in  the  117th  year 
of  the  Nirvana  of  the  Buddha,  i.e.  426  B.c.  His  birthplace  waa 
Kohana,  and  it  appears  that  he  was  at  the  head  of  a  con¬ 
gregation  of  priest*  in  Cojikatambnrattha  (afterward* 
Tambamaui),  the  maritime  western  division  of  Ceylon  .  .  . 
With  the  inducements  to  missionary  work  in  Vijaya’s  domain 
our  author  must  have  joined  the  Church,  and,  as  an  outcome 
of  hw  devotion  to  Pali  studies,  composed  the  Jinalarik&ra  ”  * 
Ho  further  states  that  a  fikd  on  the  work  exist*  written  by 
Buddhadatta,  “  contemporary  of  Buddhaghosa,  the  great 
commentator,"  with  which  the  text  has  been  embodied,  and 
“  which,  as  a  storehouse  of  much  information  in  connexion 
with  the  life  and  teachings  of  the  Buddha,  is  held  in  high 
appreciation  by  native  scholars  The  Gandha-vam*a,  how¬ 
ever,  attributes  the  Jinalaiikara  itself  to  Buddhadatta  and 
its  (lid  to  Buddharakkhita.*  Dc  Zoysa  follows  the  Gandha- 
tanua  with  regard  to  the  authorship  of  the  work.4  It  is  very 
rare  in  Ceylon  and  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  of  the  old  Temple 
libraries ;  whatever  copies  do  exist  in  tho  island  are,  in  my 
opinion,  importations  from  Burma.  I  have  not  heard  whether 
it  is  studied  to  any  extent  in  Ceylon.  Nor  is  it  referred  to  in 
the  passage  from  the  P&javaliya  mentioned  above.  The  Ceylon 
tradition  regarding  Buddhadatta  docs  not  seem  to  make  any 
mention  of  such  a  work  by  him.  The  language  of  the  book 
makes  the  date  assigned  to  it  by  Gray  preposterous.  Gray 

1  Gray,  JinAlaAkAra,  InUod,  p.  10. 

•  p.  7  foil. 

•  pp.  00  72. 

4  P-  7. 


buddhaghosa’s  succsssors 


111 


evidently  feels  so  himself  ;  but  he  tries  to  explain  it  away. 
**  It  contains,”  he  «ay»,  "  stanzas  in  the  style  of  K&lidiUa, 
Bhiravi,  and  Magha.”  But  nothing  could  destroy  his  faith 
in  the  author's  existence  four  centuries  before  Christ.  '*  If  he 
(the  author)  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  an  imitator  of  Sanskrit 
writers,  the  authors  of  Ragtm-vamsa  and  KirSidrjwtiya  must 
have  flourished,  not  after  the  commencement  of  the  Christian 
era,  but  at  least  four  centuries  before.  Several  parallels 
may  be  noticed  between  the  artificial  stanzas  in  their  works 
and  those  occurring  in  the  Jindlaiikdra." 1 

Some  of  the  varieties  of  versification  found  here  are  not  met 
with  in  Pali  books  till  a  quite  lute  period,  when  the  study  of 
Sanskrit  hod  come  to  influence  Pali  to  a  large  extent.  Nor  is 
there  any  justification,  except  the  postscript  which  Gray  found 
attached  to  the  copy  of  his  (ika*  for  believing  that 
Buddhadatta  wrote  the  fil'd.  Bo  that  as  it  may,  it  is  quite 
certain,  if  the  evidence  of  language  and  construction  be  of 
any  value  in  determining  the  date  of  an  author,  that  the 
Jincdahk&ra,  as  we  have  it  now,  was  a  work  not  earlier  than 
the  sixth  or  seventh  century  A.D.  We  do  not  know  who  wrote 
it,  nor  who  was  the  author  of  its  iiJcd.  It  is  quite  possible 
thAt  there  was  a  much  earlier  work  by  the  same  name  ;  the 
life  of  the  Buddlia  was  a  favourite  subject  for  verse  (e.g.  the 
Buddha-vamsa  itself) ;  but  such  a  work,  if  it  existed,  is  now 
irretrievably  lost,  and  only  a  traditional  reference  to  it  remains. 
I  sm  inclined  to  believe  that  the  confusion  between 
Buddhadatta  (if  that  waa  his  name),  who  wrote  the  com¬ 
mentary  on  the  Jinalatikdra,  and  Buddhadatta,  the  con¬ 
temporary  of  Buddhaghosa,  waa  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
latter,  too,  had  written  a  commentary  on  the  life  of  the 
Buddha,  namely  the  MadhuraUha-vildtini  on  the  Buddha- 
vamsa*  The  author  of  the  Jin&iankdra-fikd  was  comparatively 

‘  pp.  10  and  11. 

*  Mandalay  MS. 

»  1  am  rtrengthened  In  tbl*  opinion  by  another  fact  mentioned  by  Gray, 
via.,  that  tbe  JtiuUsAUra  it  regarded  in  Burma  at  an  altioialM,  a  com¬ 
mentary.  Iotrod.,  p.  10. 


112 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


unknown,  and  his  work  was  grafted  on  to  the  more  famous 
scholar.  Such  instances  are  not  unknown  in  the  history  of 
literature.1 

To  this  period  also  undoubtedly  belongs  Dhammapala, 
author  of  a  large  number  of  commentaries.  It  has  sometimes 
been  suggested  that,  as  the  name  is  a  very  common  one  among 
Buddhists,  ancient  and  modern,  there  has  possibly  been  con¬ 
fusion  of  several  authors  of  the  same  name  by  writers  on 
Buddhist  ecclesiastical  history.  In  the  Gandha-van\sa  four 
scholars  of  the  name  of  Dhammapala  are  enumerated  in  a 
chapter  entitled  “  On  the  native  places  of  the  scholars  ” 
(pp.  66  scq.).  Two  of  them  arc  mentioned  in  a  series  of  ten 
scholars,  all  natives  of  India.  Tho  first  is  distinguished  by  the 
name  of  Acariya  (the  teacher),  and  is  said  to  have 
written  fourteen  books  (p.  69).  His  name  follows  that  of 
Buddhadatta  and  that  of  Ananda,  the  author  of  a  It kd  on 
Buddhnghosa’s  Abhidhamma  commentaries.  The  second  is 
called  Culla-Dhammapala  (Dhammapala  the  Lesser)  to 
distinguish  him  from  his  greater  namesake  ;  he  was  the  senior 
pupil  of  Ananda,  and  is  tho  author  of  Sacca-xanlAcpa.  A 
third  b  mentioned  between  Sangharakkhita,  author  of  the 
Vuttoday a  {O.V.,  pp.  61,  and  70,  and  Sat.,  p.  34),  and 
Anuruddha  (author  of  the  AbhidhammaUha-sangaka),  and 
therefore  belongs  to  about  the  twelfth  century.  A  fourth 
Dhammapala  belongs  to  a  group  of  scholars  who  ore  said  to 
have  written  at  Arimaddana  in  Burma  (G.  V.,  p.  67,  and 
Mrs.  Bode’s  Introd.,  p.  3).  It  b  the  first  with  whom  we  are 
concerned  here,  distinguished  as  tho  Acariya  Dhammapala. 
The  others  will  bo  dealt  with,  each  in  hb  proper  placo.  The 
SaMina-vamsa  *  records  that  he  dwelt  at  Badaratittha  *  in  the 

*  *£.  the  JiUtkaUlnkalte.  It  it  interesting  that  in  tho  |j«t  el  works 
at  ISuddhadatU  given  in  O.  V.,  p.  SO,  no  mention  it  made  at  tho  JmilaAt&ro  ; 
on  p.  72  ocean  the  ntmo  BuddhadslU,  author  at  a  ((id  to  tbo  JtndlaaUra, 
alto,  apparently,  called  the  JinHadiira.  I  suggest  thst  the  contusion  in 
authorship  Is  doe  to  tho  identity  of  the  two  names,  and  that,  what  wo 
hare  now  Is  a  test  extracted  from  tho  (IU. 

•  It  ». 

1  Sometimes  spelled  Padaratitiia,  r.g.,  In  tho  Sdsonu-raqija. 


buddhachosa’s  successors 


113 


Damila  kingdom  near  Ceylon.  He  was,  therefore,  very 
probably  Tamil  by  birth,  and  wrote  in  S.  India.  Badaratittha 
is  on  the  south-east  coast  of  India,  just  a  little  to  the  south  of 
Madras.  His  works  show  that  ho  was  a  native  of  Kaftci-pura 
(Conjcvarum).  We  cannot  be  sure  as  to  the  time  in  which  he 
flourished,  but  it  is  generally  agreed  that  he  was  slightly 
posterior  to  Buddhaghosa.  Neither  scholar  makes  any 
reference  to  the  other  by  name 1  or  by  their  works ; 
but  considering  that  Buddhaghosa 's  works  cover  the  chief 
portions  of  the  Buddhist  scriptures,  the  Four  Nikayas, 
the  Abhidhamma-Pitalui,  and  the  Vinaya-Pitaka,  it  is  most 
probable  that  Dhammapala  came  later.  Else  he,  by  no  meanB  of 
lesser  intellect,  would  surely  have  attempted  the  exposition 
of  the  more  important  works  of  the  canon,  e  g-  the  Four 
Nikdycu.  The  Khudd&ka  NikSya,  which  formed  the  special 
subject  of  Dhamma  pain’s  study,  was  admittedly  of  minor 
importance  compared  with  the  rest  of  the  SuUa  Pitaka. 
This  supposition  is  further  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  he 
is  credited  with  having  written  a  tika  (called  the  Paramatiha- 
maftjusa)  on  Buddhaghosa’s  Visuddhi-magga*  He  also  wrote 
a  sub-commentary  on  Buddhaghosa’s  exposition  of  the 
four  Nikdyat. 

That  he  studied  at  the  Maha-vihara  in  Ceylon,  whether  he 
wrote  his  books  there  or  not,  is  undoubted,  because  be  states 
in  bis  works  (e.g.  the  Introduction  to  the  commentaries  on 
the  Pda-vaUhu)  that  he  follows  the  traditional  interpretation 
of  texts  as  handed  down  in  the  Maha-vihara,  and  we  know 
from  Buddhaghosa 'a  mission  to  Ceylon  that  the  Thera-vada 
commentaries,  then  studied  by  the  Maha-vihara  fraternity 
in  Ceylon,  were  not  available  in  India.  It  is  quite  likely  that 
he  had  the  advantage  of  studying  the  Tamil  commentaries 
(of  which  we  know  that  at  least  two  existed)  as  well.  In  a 

1  But  then  arc  trice*  in  PhammapAla's  works,  of  severs)  borrowings, 
evidently  from  Buddhsghois — especially  the  AUkasihni  sod  the  Dkp.A. ; 
eee  Hardy*  In  trod,  to  the  xv-xvii. 

'  Aung.  JPTS.,  1910.,  p.  121.  Thi»  fiki  is  not  much  a  ted  in  Ceylon, 
bat  seem*  to  be  extensively  used  in  Burras. 


8 


114 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


transition  of  a  book  of  travels  by  the  Chinese  traveller 
Hiuan-Taang,1  some  interesting  details  are  given  of 
Dhammapola’s  life.  Hiuan-Taang  visited  Kafici-pura,  the 
capital  of  the  Tamil  country,  in  a.d.  640.  The  monks  then 
told  him  that  the  famous  Dhammapala  was  born  there. 
"  He  was  a  boy  of  good  natural  parts,  which  received  great 
development  as  he  grew  up,  and  when  he  caine  of  age  a 
daughter  of  the  king  was  assigned  to  him  as  wife.  But  on  the 
night  before  the  ceremony  of  marriage  was  to  be  performed, 
being  greatly  distressed  in  mind,  he  prayed  before  an  image 
of  the  Buddha.  In  answer  to  his  prayer  a  god  bore  him  away 
to  a  mountain  monastery,  some  hundreds  of  li  from  the 
capital.  When  the  brethren  there  heard  his  story,  they  complied 
with  his  request  and  gave  him  ordination."  There  is  good 
reason  to  believe  tliat  this,  very  probably,  refers  to  our  author.* 
The  Gandha-vamsa  gives  a  list  of  the  works  ascribed  to 
Dhammapala.*  Seven  out  of  his  fourteen  commentaries  are 
on  the  principal  books  of  poetry  preserved  in  the  canon 
{Thera-  and  Theri-gdthd,  Udana,  Vimdna-tulMu,  and  Peta- 
rutthu,  ItivuUaka  and  Cariyd-pitaka).  His  other  works  are  a 
commentary  on  the  Afett»  (with  a  fil'd  on  the  same),  the 
ParamaUha-maiijusa,  referred  to  above  (a  commentary  on  the 
Visuddki-magga)  and  the  LtnaUJut-vannana  (also  called  the 
LmaUha-pakdttui  til'd)  on  Buddhaghosa’s  commentaries  to 
the  Four  Nika  gas,  and  another  by  the  same  name  on 
Julakatthakathd .*  The  Gandha-vama  also  mentions  a  fikd 
on  the  BuddhavaimaUkakatha  and  an  Anu-fild  on  the 
Abhidhammatlhakathd}  These  last  two  works  are  very  rare  ; 
in  fact,  I  do  not  know  of  any  copy  existing  in  Sinhalese 

1  Ed.  by  RJiy»  Darid*  and  Wat  term,  London.  1808,  voL  ii,  p.  228  »q. 

1  Sec  »L»o  Hasting*’  EntyrUtjmtdia,  vol.  v,  p.  701. 

»  p.  «0, 

*  0.1',  00  and  ISO.  The  corancntarira  on  Vii l««,  ItivuUaka,  Ftmda a- 
and  PtSa-raUku,  and  Cariyti-pitaka  a re  collectively  failed  Paramattka- 
dfjmal,  or  aomftimea.  at  in  Burma,  (De  Zoyaa,  p.  2,  and 

I  Air,  Uuddka.jlu.ta,  p.  80). 


BUDDHACIHOSa’S  Sl'CCBSSOHS 


ns 


characters  ;  and  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  they  are  the 
result  of  the  labours  of  a  Later  author,  probably  an  Indian  or  a 
Burmese  Dhammapilla. 

Dhammapiln’s  works  show  great  learning,  much  exegetical 
skill,  and  a  good  deal  of  sound  judgment.  There  are  many 
resemblances  between  him  and  Buddhaghosa.  44  It  would 
seem,”  says  Rhys  Davids,1  44  that  Dhammapdla  was  educated 
in  the  same  university  as  Buddhaghosa  ...  the  two  writers 
hold  very  similar  views.  They  refer  to  the  same  authorities  ; 
they  have  the  same  method  of  exegesis  ;  they  have  reached  the 
same  style  in  philological  and  etymological  science  and  they 
both  have  the  same  lack  of  any  knowledge  of  the  simple 
rules  of  higher  criticism.*’  Yet  Dhammapdla  shows  much 
individuality  in  the  treatment  of  his  subject.  He  confines 
himself  rigidly  cither  to  questions  of  meanings  of  words  or 
discussions  of  ethical  import  in  his  texts  ;  ho  is,  however, 
not  so  ethically  insistent  as  Buddhaghosa  ;  his  style  is  simpler, 
less  garrulous,  leas  diffuse,  and  shows  more  of  the  grammarian 
and  the  academician  than  of  the  exegetical  compilerand  fanciful 
etymologist.  His  explanation  of  terms  is  quite  clear,  and  shows 
an  advance  over  Buddhaghosa ;  though  ho  was  evidently 
well-read  and  quite  well-informed,  Buddhaghosa ’s  knowledge 
was  more  widely  diffused  and  more  encyclopedic  ;  and  the 
information  we  derive  from  his  works  with  regard  to  the  social, 
religious,  philosophical,  and  moral  ideas  of  his  time,  though 
considerable,  is  far  less  than  that  afforded  by  Buddhaghosa’s 
writings.  44  Dhammapala's  chronicles  are,  for  the  most  part, 
unduplicated  in  any  other  extant  work,  but,  not  seldom, 
they  run  on  all  fours,  not  only  with  parallel  chronicles  in 
Buddhaghosa’s  commentaries,  but  also  with  the  prose  and 
framework  of  poems  in  the  Sutta-nipala  or  the  Samyutta- 
Nikarja,  not  to  mention  the  J&taha .”  *  Often  his  explanations 
of  episodes  and  their  characters  are,  it  is  true,  but  legends 
woven  out  of  legends,  yet  they  represent  the  most  ancient 


1  Hojtingi'  SncycL  Jlel.  oxd  Sitott,  toL  It,  pp,  701  foil. 

•  Mrs.  Rhyi  Deride,  Ptalwu  of  tic  Srtthnn,  lot  rod.,  p.  xxv. 


116 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


orthodox  tradition,  and  help  us  immensely  in  understanding 
the  more  archaic  idiom  of  the  original  Pali.  Dhammapala’s 
work  was,  as  he  states  in  the  colophon  to  several  of  his  books, 
compilations  from  already  existing  commentaries,  and  shows 
the  importance  attached  at  this  period,  in  the  history  of 
orthodox  Buddhism,  to  the  work  of  re-writing  in  Pili  the 
traditional  interpretations  so  far  handed  down  in  local  dialects, 
namely  Sinhalese  or  Tamil. 

In  his  commentaries,  especially  to  the  poetic  work  of  the 
canon,  Dhatnmapala  follows  a  regular  scheme.  First 1  comes 
an  introduction  to  the  whole  collection  of  poems,  giving  the 
traditional  account  of  how  they  came  to  be  thus  put  together 
as  one  whole,  then  each  poem  is  taken  separately  and  the 
words  explained  philologically  and  exegetically.  And  this 
presentation  of  verses  in  a  groundwork  of  prose-narrative  is 
essentially  the  historical  Buddhist  way  of  imparting  canonical 
poetry.  Much  of  Dhammapola’s  work  is  but  a  recast,  a 
re-compilation  in  scholastic  Pali,  of  the  older  Sinhalese  or 
Tamil  commentarial  literature.  Thus  we  need  not  be  surprised 
if  the  narratives  contain  much  hagiographical  myth ;  the 
exegesis  is  coloured  by  later  developments  of  doctrine,  and 
twisted  by  professional  exigencies  of  edification.  Yet,  as 
Mre.  Rhys  Davids  tells  us,  these  commentaries  "  have  a 
venerableness  of  their  own,  bridging  over  the  seas  of  time 
between  Asoka  and  the  days  of  the  greater  scholastics  to  a 
greater  extent  than  at  first  appears  They  contain  the  old 
“  talks  on  meaning  ”,  os  they  came  down  to  him  unbroken, 
if  varied  in  diction,  from  tho  earlier  age  of  his  faith,  and  are, 
to  that  extent  at  least,  of  immense  value.  Such  defects  as 
he  had  were  but  the  shortcomings  of  his  age,  when  higher 
criticism,  as  we  now  know  it,  was  yet  unborn,  and  when  faith 
took  the  place  of  historical  and  scientific  investigation . 

Mr.  Wiclcremasinghe 1  includes  in  this  period  also  Upasena, 

1  t(.  Peta  vaUhv  commentary. 

*  P tains  of  ikt  Brtlkrtn,  Introd.,  p.  xxv. 

*  Catalogue,  p.  xii. 


buddhachora's  successors 


117 


author  of  a  commentary  on  the  Maha-Niddesa  (which  is 
itself  a  commentary)  called  Saddhama-ppajjolika.  Nothing 
further  is  known  about  him.  The  Gandha-vamsa  includes  him 
in  the  list  of  Ceylon  authors,1  and  the  Sdsajva-uamxa  * 
merely  states  that  he  was  the  author  of  this  volume. 

His  name  does  not  occur  in  the  list  of  writers  who  succeeded 
Buddhaghosa,  given  in  the  Niltit/a-tafigraha  *  A  colophon 
to  the  Saddhamma-ppajjotika  states  that  it  was  written  by 
"  Maha  Thera  Upasena,  like  unto  a  banner  in  Tambapanoi  ", 
and  that  he  followed  the  tradition  of  the  Maha-vihira.  It  is 
u  fairly  long  work,  but  distinctly  inferior  to  the  achievements 
of  Dhammapala  or  Buddhaghosa.  The  author  was  merely 
retranslating  into  Pali  what  he  found  in  the  Ceylon  com¬ 
mentaries  and  makes  no  attempt  at  originality. 

Another  work  of  much  importance,  which  was  composed 
during  the  period  under  consideration,  is  the  J atakaithakalha 
(the  commentary  on  the  Jalakat).  The  Jalabfu  1  xlong  to  the 
Akhgana  type  of  Indian  literature,4  out  of  which  the  later 
epic  poems  evolved.  Their  chief  characteristic  was  that  the 
entire  story  was  not  yet  rigidly  established  in  form,  but  only 
certain  parts  were  metrically  fixed  and  thereby  secured  from 
further  departure  from  the  tradition.  Such  parts  were, 
especially,  passages  of  direct  narrative.  They  were  bound 
together  by  a  framework  of  prose,  where  the  details  of  the 
situation  were  described,  and  the  names  of  the  characters 
of  the  story  were  told,  the  secular  prose,  which  held  the  sacred 
verses  intact,  forming  with  them  “  a  picture,  as  it  were,  of 
wooded  slopes  of  verdant  growth,  clothing  the  hills  that  tower 
relatively  unchanging,  abovo  them.”  4 

The  telling  of  legends  of  virtuous  monarchs,  valorous  men 
and  holy  hermits  was  a  very  early  custom  in  India.  It  was 
supposed  to  remove  evil,  and  in  tbc  A ilartyi-Brahmnna 

'  pp.  04-7. 

•  p.  33. 

•  p.  23,  Colombo  Ed. 

4  Oldenbwg,  JPTS..  1010.  pp.  19  loll. 

'  Un.  Rhys  Davids,  Brethren,  p.  ur. 


118 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


we  are  told  that  "  if  those  who  are  longing  to  have  a  son  bom 
to  them  will  have  the  legend  of  Sunahiepa  related  to  them, 
their  wishes  would  be  gratified.”  1  And  the  tendency  to  relate 
a  story  in  order  to  inculcate  a  moral  has  always  been  a 
characteristic  trait  of  the  Indian  temperament.  Tradition  tells 
us,  therefore,  that,  as  occasion  arose,  the  Buddha  was 
accustomed  througliout  his  long  career  of  teacher,  to  explain 
and  comment  on  events  around  him  by  relating  similar  things 
that  hod  occurred  to  him  in  his  own  previous  births ;  the 
experience  of  many  lives  was  always  present  to  him,  and  he 
used  this  “  to  point  a  moral  and  adorn  a  tale  The  stories 
bo  told  were  treasured  by  his  disciples  and  later  gathered 
together  to  form  tho  Jataka  book,  on  which  a  commentary 
had  been  handed  down,  first  in  India  and  then  in  Ceylon. 

Whether  we  believo  these  details  or  not,  it  is  recorded 
that  the  Jatakas  or  birth-stories  were  recognized  by 
the  Master  himself  for  purposes  of  teaching.  Several  of  them 
occur  in  the  canonical  books  (eg.  the  Tiliira  Jala  la  in 
CttUavagga,  vi,  C,  3-5,  Mahiisudattana  Jataka  in  Digha, 
vol.  ii,  1).  The  CariyA  Pilaka  is  in  reality  a  Jataka  book  giving 
in  verse  accounts  of  previous  births  which  the  Bodhisat 
had  to  pass  through  in  order  to  acquire  tho  ten  perfections 
necessary  for  the  attainment  of  the  Enlightenment.  So  was 
the  Apadana,  another  of  the  Kftuddaka-NiJkAya  volumes, 
containing  metrical  episodes  in  the  lives  of  recluses,  resembling 
very  closely  tho  introductory’  talcs  of  the  Jataka  commentary. 
So  too  was  tho  Buddha-vavua  (the  history  of  the  Buddhas), 
giving  an  account  of  the  life  of  Gotama,  when,  os  Bodhisat,  he 
had  to  receive  vivamna  (the  declaration)  at  the  hands  of  the 
twenty-four  previous  Buddhas. 

By  the  third  century  n.c.  most  of  tho  Jatakas  were  well 
known,  as  we  can  be  sure  from  the  numerous  representations 
of  the  8 tones  on  the  bas-reliefs  at  S&uclu  and  Amar&vati, 
and  especially  at  Bh&rhut,  which  show  that  at  that  time  the 
Jatakas  were  widely  known  and  were  considered  part  of  tho 
1  Wioteraitx,  Calcutta  fteriew.  Nor..  1923,  p.  130. 


buddhaghosa's  successors 


119 


sacred  history  of  the  religion.  From  India  they  came  over  to 
Ceylon,  and  there  took  firm  hold  of  the  imagination  of  the 
people.  When  Fa  Hsian  visited  Ceylon  in  the  fifth  century,1 
he  witnessed  the  annual  procession  of  the  Tooth  Relic  being 
carried  from  Anuradhapura  to  Mihintalc,  and  he  describes 
how  on  both  sides  of  the  road  were  hung  pictures  of  the 
500  different  births  of  the  Buddha,  painted  in  different  colours, 
and  “  executed  with  such  care  as  to  make  them  appear 
living 

Even  to-day,  among  the  Sinhalese,  the  relating  of  the 
Jalaka  stories  is  a  very  common  practice.  In  the  Sinhalese 
homes,  it  is  true,  the  fireside  with  which  those  of  harsher 
climes  associate  story-telling,  is  absent,  but  it  finds  its  repre¬ 
sentative  in  the  little  verandah  or  on  the  roadside ;  and  often, 
when  the  family  have  retired  to  rest  for  the  night  in  the 
single  room  or  verandah  which  generally  forms  the  house  of 
the  Sinhalese  peasant,  one  member,  frequently  the  grand¬ 
father,  relates  stories  from  the  JHaka  book  till  the  dull  god 
of  sleep  has  drawn  away  his  audience.  In  the  night,  as  the 
villagers  sit  guarding  tho  ripening  grain  of  the  paddy-fields 
from  the  inroads  of  the  elephant  or  the  wild  boar,  these  stories 
servo  to  pass  pleasantly  what,  otherwise,  would  be  a  weary 
vigil,  and  on  numerous  occasions  story-telling  plays  an 
important  part.* 

We  cannot  say  how  tho  Jdtakas  were  originally  handod 
down.  No  one  who  mails  them  can  fail  to  recognize  that  the 
verses  constitute  the  essential  element  in  the  form  adopted 
by  the  compilers  of  these  stories ;  but  they  are  not  verses 
which  aro  given  as  quotations,  extracted  from  some  treasures 
of  old  lore — they  are  seen  to  have  their  home  in  the 

*  Pa  Hairn,  Ollea'  Trattl.  p.  71.  The  73rd  chap.,  r.  73.  of  t ho  MaU- 
WMwo  >UIM  that  ParUcrame ■  Bihu  the  Great  erected  at  Potonna.ru  va 
a  circular  house.  In  which  ho  might  listen  to  tho  recitation  of  the 
Jitakat. 

*  Moat  of  the  existing  book*  of  poem  in  Sinhalese  are  verse  transla¬ 
tions  of  J&taka  stories ;  *.g.  Sotad&  mla,  GaMila-Mrya,  K*sa  j&Utko, 
A'Aeja-tetAsru,  and.  perhaps  the  most  popular,  the  Vtua%larajAlaka. 


120 


TBS  PA U  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


narrative  itself,  they  have  their  value  because  the  characters 
in  the  story  and  the  Bodhisat  are  made  to  say  them. 
But  was  the  proee  narrative,  too,  handed  down  or  was  it  left 
to  the  judgment  and  the  discretion  of  those  who  related  the 
story  ?  We  cannot  say,  but  certainly  the  essential  points  of 
the  story,  as  well  as  the  verses,  were  handed  down,  for  most 
often  the  latter  contain  no  indication  of  the  persons  who 
figure  in  the  narrative. 

The  Jatakas,  as  we  have  them  now,  consist  of  551  stories, 
in  twenty-two  nipatas  or  groups,  roughly  divided  according 
to  the  number  of  verses  in  each  story.  Each  story  opens  with 
a  quotation  of  part  of  a  verse,  followed  by  a  preface  (called 
paccvppanna-vaUhu,  or  story  of  the  present),  giving  the 
particular  circumstances  in  which  the  story  was  related  by 
the  Buddha,  and  this  leads  the  Buddha  to  recall  some  past 
event  (atHa-vatlhu)  in  the  long  series  of  hiB  previous  lives  os 
Bodhisat.  It  ends  always  in  a  short  summary  where  the 
Buddha  identifies  the  different  characters  in  the  story  showing 
the  parallelism  which  runs  between  the  two  stories,  and  which 
constitutes  their  connexion  (a«u*an<ttt).  Every  story  is 
illustrated  by  one  or  more  gcUhat,1  uttered  usually  by  the 
Bodhisat  or  sometimes  by  the  Buddha  himself,  in  which 
case  they  are  called  Abhisambuddha-gdihd  ^  [stanzas  after 
enlightenment).  This  is  followed  by  a  series  of  short  comments 
on  the  words  of  the  stanzas. 

The  whole  collection  is  prefaced  by  a  long  introductory  essay 
called  the  Niddna-katha  (History  of  the  Lineage),  giving  the 
Buddha’s  history  before  his  birth  as  Siddhattha,  and  also 
during  his  last  birth  before  he  became  the  Awakened  One  * 

Even  the  moat  orthodox  Buddhist  will  admit  that  the 

1  *  la  the  midst  of  the  unmeasured  indcfinitencas  at  the  prose  diction 
appear  formations  of  another  kind,  welded,  rounded  off,  and  gathering 
into  themselves  the  essence  of  the  whoM."  Olden  berg,  loc.  dt. 

*  For  a  fuller  and  more  detailed  account  of  the  suture  of  the  J&tabattSa 
talAA  are  Rhys  Davids'  excellent  introduction  to  hie  BuddkuA  /Firth  Storiu. 
now  re-odited  by  Mr*.  Rhys  Davxis  in  Broadway  Translation  Series, 
London,  1034, 


BCDDHAOHOSA’8  successors 


121 


present  collection  contains  some  fables,  fairy-tales,  “  Joe 
Millers,”  and  records  of  everyday  experience,  such  as  are  in 
no  way  peculiar  to  Buddhism,  but  are  the  common  property 
of  the  world,  floating  down  the  ages  1  But  not  even  the  most 
critical  scholar  will  deny  that  some  of  the  stanza*  and  all  the 
central  Btoriea  are  genuinely  Buddhistic,  and  that  some  of  the 
narratives  of  the  Paccuppanna-vaUhu  contain  genuine 
fragments  of  the  life  of  the  Buddha,  and  that  another  con¬ 
siderable  portion,  if  not  distinctly  Buddhistic,  is  Indian  and 
local,  and  has  it*  origin  and  application  within  a  limited 
range.  The  stories  inculcate  pointed,  allegorical  leasons  of 
morality,  most  of  them  Bpecific  point*  of  Buddhist  teaching, 
and  arc  fables  only  in  the  moat  general  sense  of  the  term ; 
they  are  full  of  feeling  and  genuine  admiration  for  high 
standards  of  self-sacrifice,  perseverance,  justice,  and  correct 
valuation  of  pleasure  and  sagacity.  Some  have  called  them 
“  artistic  sermons  *  ready  to  hand,  and  to  bo  preached  to 
mixed  audiences.  Professor  Kunte,  in  a  very  interesting  paper 
read  before  the  Ceylon  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatio  Society,* 
described  how  such  an  artistic  sermon  is  made  to  work.  "  A 
part  of  a  gatha  ia  first  recited.  Faith  in  the  Buddha  is  thus 
awakened,  and  a  good  basis  for  the  chant  of  the  gatha  in 
full  ia  thus  prepored.  Then,  in  explaining  the  gatha  the 
preacher  showB  his  power  of  erudition.  The  ordinary  audience 
listens  on,  half-puzzled  and  half-struck  by  what  the  mind 
considers  to  he  profound  and  mysterious  and,  moved  by  the 
incomprehensible,  it  works  up  into  the  marvellous  and  obtains 
from  this  a  passive  intellectual  enjoyment.  The  preacher 
proceeds  with  an  energy  of  his  own.  The  strain  on  the  mental 
power  of  the  audience  is  now  at  its  height-,  when  abstruse 
comments  upon  the  gatha  arc  abstrusely  but  eloquently 
explained.  This  is  succeeded  by  the  narration  of  the  simple, 
but  popular,  a(\ta-vatthu.  There  is  thus  a  sudden  transition 

»  t.g.  Tkt  Taltaliee  Tortoitt  Sift),  and  TU  Ait  *»  tkt  Lion'* 

Skin  (FkudeU,  186). 

•  C.B.R.A.8.  Journal,  vol.  rill,  PP-  103  loll. 


122 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


from  the  mysterious  to  the  simple,  from  the  more  religious  to 
the  popular  element.  Such  a  transition  produces  a  contrast, 
and  the  parallelism  which  runs  between  the  two  stories  and 
which  constitutes  the  anutandhi  is  thus  combined  with  a 
contrast.  And  parallelism  and  contrast  are  the  foundation 
upon  which  all  aesthetic  pleasure,  whether  intellectual  or 
emotional,  is  built.  The  transition  from  the  comments  on 
a  gatha  affords  relief  to  the  minds  of  the  audience.”  And 
further  on  he  gives  the  reasons  for  such  procedure.  M  An 
audience  cannot  bo  trifled  with — pleasure  it  must  have.  The 
number  of  lay  ladies  and  gentlemen  attending  a  convent  gave 
it  importance.” 

Quite  interesting  and  ingenious,  but,  I  am  afraid,  rather 
fanciful. 

It  is  quite  uncertain  as  to  when  the  Jatakas  were  put 
togetlier  into  a  systematic  form.  They  were  probably 
first  landed  down  orally  and  dlsjointedly,  but  their  growing 
popularity  necessitated  n  more  permanent  form,  at  least  of 
the  kernel.  Rhys  Davids  has  shown  quite  conclusively  that 
the  Jdtaka  book  existed  at  a  very  early  date  as  a  separate 
compilation,1  and  we  have  the  evidence  of  the  Ceylon  tradition 
of  the  history  of  Buddhism  that  a  collection  caller!  the  Jatalxu 
existed  at  the  time  of  the  Council  of  Vesdli,  for  that  formed 
one  of  the  portions  of  the  TipifaJca  rejected  or  altered  by  the 
dissentient  Vesalian  monks.*  Tho  Ceylon  tradition  is  that  the 
original  Jataka  book  consisted  of  gathas  alone,  and  a  com¬ 
mentary  on  these,  containing  the  stories  with  which  they  were 
connected,  was  written  in  very  early  times  in  Sinhalese.  This 
was  translated  in  the  fifth  century  by  Buddhaghosa,  and  the 
Sinhalese  original  was  afterwards  lost.  The  verses  are 
undoubtedly  very  much  older  than  the  prose  narrative,  as 
st  has  come  down  to  us.  Their  language  is  distinctly  archaic, 
and  they  contain  archaic  forms  and  forced  constructions, 
and  the  corrupt  state  in  which  some  of  the  verses  are  found, 

•  Op.  eit.,  Introd.,  pp.  lv  (oil. 

•  JJlpa  va*$a,  vr.  36  Mid  tall. 


BUDDHAflHOSA’s  SUCCESSORS 


123 


as  compared  with  the  regularity  and  simplicity  of  the  prose 
parts,  shows  that  the  verso  was  much  older.  Rhys  Davids 
thinks  1  that  the  vast  majority  of  the  stories  were  earlier  still, 
that  in  most  cases  the  verses  were  added  after  the  stories 
became  current,  that  the  stories — about  one-tenth  of  the 
collection — without  the  verses  at  all  (the  verses  being  found 
only  at  the  conclusion)  are  probably  the  oldest,  and  that 
they  were  handed  down  in  Ceylon  in  Sinhalese  while  the 
verses  remained  intact  in  Pali,  as  they  were  received.  It  is 
probable,  however,  that  the  verses  form  the  older  kernel  of 
the  work,  and  that  in  its  original  form  the  Jataka  book,  like 
the  Cariyd-Pitaka,  consisted  only  of  verses.  But  the  verse* 
are,  most  of  them,  quite  unintelligible  without  the  story. 

Who  was  the  author  of  the  present  Jdtakatlkakalhd  f  Most 
Western  scholars  deny  that  it  was  the  work  of  the  great 
commentator,  Buddhaghosa,*  as  do  also  the  most  advanced 
of  scholars  in  Ceylon.*  More  direct  evidence  is  necessary  before 
we  can  come  to  any  definite  conclusion.  It  Is  very  probable 
that  the  book  is  the  work  of  one  author  ;  in  the  paccuppanna- 
vatthu  references  are  made  backwards  and  forwards,  the 
comments  on  later  gdthSs  are  abbreviated,  and  direction* 
about  such  abbreviations  are  given,  and  the  same  system  is 
followed  of  fitting  in  all  the  elements  of  the  story  and  its 
commentary — port  of  g&thS,  paccuppanna-valthu,  gathd  in 
full,  comment,  allta-vatthu,  and  conclusion.  And  the  Pali 
work  is  not  necessarily  to  be  considered  as  a  translation  of  a 
Sinhalese  commentary ;  for  the  author  refers  several  times 
to  a  previous  Jataka  commentary,  which,  probably,  was  a 
Sinhalese  work,  and  in  one  case  (i.e.  in  discussing  the  age  of 
Rahula  at  the  time  of  Siddhattha’s  renunciation)  mentions 
what  it  says  only  to  overrule  it.4  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose 

*  Op.  cit.,  p.  Ixxvlis. 

*  ChiVlcta  saiignrd  It  to  BuddluglUMa  (Dictionary.  Vn  inert,  p.  ix.  !*>U>). 

*  o.g.  H.  SumxiignU,  the  grentort  »ebol»r  in  Ceylon  in  ih*  U»t 
century. 

*  Rhyi  Davids,  op,  fit.,  p.  lx. 


124  THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 

that  it  belonged  to  the  three  Sinhalese  commentaries  which 
Buddhaghosa  translated  ;  it  may  equally  have  belonged  to  the 
Dhammaruci  fraternity  of  Abhayagiri.  A  very  old  glossary 
to  the  Pali  commentary,  of  unknown  date,  exists  in  Sinhalese, 
certainly  older  than  the  Sinhalese  translation,  made  in  tho 
thirteenth  century,  and  there  the  work  is  assigned  to  tho 
great  cxegetist. 

In  the  SuUa-nipdta-aUhakatha,  which  n,  admittedly, 
Buddhaghosa ’s,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  Niddna-katkd 
of  the  J  at  aka  commentary1;  but  Buddhaghosa  does  not 
say  he  wrote  it.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  commentaries 
attributed  to  Buddhaghosa,  there  appears  at  the  end  an 
eulogy  of  himself  (parama-triiuddha-saddhd-buddhi-tririya-guna- 
paUmandilena  ,  .  .  Buddhaghoso'ti  garu-gahila-ndmadheyycna 
katd).  No  such  mention  is  made  in  the  Jataka  commentary  ; 
Buddhaghosa  gives  a  separate  name  to  each  of  hi*  com¬ 
mentaries — Samanta-pdsadikd,  Kankhd-vitarani,  Sumahgala, 
etc. — but  no  such  name  is  given  to  the  Jutaka,  though  it  is 
larger  than  the  above-mentioned.  Tho  usual  aspirations  of 
Buddhaghosa,  expressed  at  tho  end  of  his  work*  (“  may  all 
beings  enjoy  the  taste  of  the  Dhamma  of  the  Omniscient 
One,  may  the  good  Dhamma  lost  long  ’’),  have  in  the 
JatakaUhakatkd  given  place  to  a  personal  ambition  :  “  May 
I  be  bom  in  Tusita  heaven,  and,  when  Metteyya  comes,  may 
I  receive  nomination  to  become  a  Buddha,  and  after  having 
perfected  the  Paramxtda  may  I  become  Buddha.”  Tho 
adoration  of  Buddhaghosa  of  the  Buddha,  Dhamma,  and 
Saiigha,  and  of  his  scholarly  predecessors,  etc.,  given  at  the 
beginning  of  the  commentaries  which  are  undoubtedly  his, 
are  charming  in  their  stylo  and  captivating  in  their  sentiment. 
The  same  cannot  be  said  of  the  verses  at  the  outset  of  the 
Jataka  commentary,  which  begin : — 

"  Jali-koli-$aJtawJti  pamdna-rahilarn  hitam 
Lokcusa  loka-ndlhma  katam  yena  mahetind." 


*  Colombo  £d.  (Hihibodki  Fren),  p.  2. 


bdddhaohosa's  successors 


125 


In  the  introduction  to  Buddhaghoaa’s  commentaries 
he  gives  the  names  of  those  at  whose  special  request  each 
work  was  compiled,  and  in  all  the  other  books  they  are  Thera* 
of  the  Maha-vihara,  distinctly  stated  as  such.  Throe  Thera*, 
however — AUhadatti,  Buddhamitta,  and  Buddhadeca—am 
mentioned  in  the  JataJca  commentary,  and  in  introducing  one 
of  them  it  is  said  that  he  belonged  to  the  Mahitpsasaka  sect 
( ma A » rntaiaia - vanuomA » tambhulena  uaijaununa),  which  is  one 
of  the  unorthodox  sects,  then  separated  from  the  Tkoravada.1 
Nothing  is  said  about  the  others,  but  we  may  presume  that 
they  belonged  to  the  same  schoot.  It  is  true,  nevertheless, 
that  he  states  his  intention  of  compiling  the  commentary  in 
conformity  with  the  exposition  current  among  the  Maha-vihara 
fraternity.  As  Rhys  Davids  points  out,*  it  is  noteworthy  that 
there  is  not  the  slightest  allusion,  either  to  Buddhaghosa ’s 
conversion,  or  to  his  journey  from  India,  or  to  the  high  hopes 
he  entertained  ;  there  is  no  mention  of  Revata,  his  teacher 
in  India,  or  SaAghapali,  his  teacher  in  Ceylon ;  this  silence 
seems  “  almost  as  convincing  as  such  negative  evidence  can 
possibly  be  After  reading  a  great  deal  of  Buddhaghosa's 
works  ono  feels  that  the  language  of  the  Jalaha  commentary 
und  its  method  of  treatment  are  not  characteristically 
Buddhaghosa’s — it  is  a  mere  matter  of  subconscious  inference, 
but  it  is  there  all  the  same. 

So  much,  then,  for  what  might  be  said  both  in  favour  of 
and  against  assigning  the  work  to  Buddhaghosa.  If  not  by 
Buddhaghosa,  the  work  must  have  been  composed  after  his 
time,  and  soon  after :  otherwise  his  name  would  not  be  con¬ 
nected  with  it.  It  is  significant  that  the  whole  of  the/ltnduro- 
Ntddna  up  to  the  conversion  of  the  Sakyas  agrees, 
almost  word  for  word,  with  the  account  given  in  the 
Madhurattha-viidsinx,  Buddhadatta’s  commentary  on  the 
Buddha-vamsa.  Could  they  have  been  the  work  of  the  same 
hand  ?  Or  were  they  drawn  from  one  common  source  ? 

*  Cf.  M.  r,  rr.  0  foil. 

*  Op.  cit.,  p.  sr. 


120  THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 

Wc  cannot  conclusively  say.  In  the  list  of  Buddhaghosa's 
works  given  on  page  59  of  the  Gandha-vamsa  the  Jdtaka 
commentary  is  included.  On  the  other  hand,  a  treatise 
called  the  Jataltagl-niddnam  is  attributed  to  a  Cnlla 
Buddhaghosacariyn  (p.  63),  a  native  of  Lahka  (p.  67).  Could 
he  have  been  the  author  of  our  work  ?  Nothing  more  is 
known  about  him  except  the  very  meagre  details  given  in  the 
Gandha-vamsa.  If  Culla  Buddliaghosa  was  reponsible  for  the 
present  Jdtaka  commentary,  he  must  have  lived  very  soon 
after  the  older  and  greater  Buddhoghosa.  For  it  is  clear  from 
the  J/aAd-wwwa,  as  Rhys  Davids  points  out,1  that  beforo 
Buddliaghosa  s  arrival  no  Sinhalese  commentaries  had  been 
turned  into  Pali,  and  it  is  certain  that  his  good  example  was 
quickly  and  most  enthusiastically  followed  by  others,  and  it 
was  impossible  that  so  important  a  work  as  the  Jdtaka* 
could  have  been  for  long  left  untranslated.  Once  this  proximity 
of  time  between  the  two  authors  is  assumed,  it  is  easy  to 
understand  how  the  lesser  author’s  individuality  got  merged 
in  that  of  his  greater  and  more  glorified  namesake. 

We  may,  however,  I  think,  be  quite  certain  that  the 
Jdtakatthakathd,  as  we  have  it  now,  is  the  work  of  a  Ceylonese 
author.  There  is  no  doubt  that  after  the  Jdtaka*  had  been 
brought  to  Ceylon  certain  talcs  were  added  to  them  there. 
In  two  of  the  Jdtaka t  (Hatthipdla,  Fausboll  509,  and 
Miigapakkha  538)  occur  the  names  of  six  Ceylon  Thera s 
(Mdhavamsaka  Tissa,  Phuttade to  of  the  Mountain-Side 
Gloom,  Upartmaitdalaka  Malaya-vatl  Mahd  Sangharak- 
khita,  Bfiaggari-vd*i  Mahdtitta,  Mahdtiva  of  Vamanta  Hill, 
and  Hahd-M aligadna  of  Kdlavda),  famous  for  their  learning 
and  held  in  high  esteem  by  the  monks  of  the  Theravada- 
parampara.*  As  already  mentioned,  a  very  old  glossary  to 
the  Jdtakatthakathd  exists  in  Sinhalese,  written  perhaps  about 


1  Op.  tit,  Jntrod.,  pp,  lxr-lxri. 

1  For  th/fir  description  Me  Rhy»  Deride,  JRA8.,  1901,  pp.  890  foil. 


BUDDHAOHO.«A’S  8UCCKSSOX8 


127 


the  thirteenth  century,  and  attributed  to  an  nuthor  named 
Rajamurari,  of  whom  nothing  further  is  known.1 

The  existing  Sinhalese  version,  called  the  Pansiya  paws 
Jdtak-a,  is  a  translation  of  the  Pali  work  made  in  the  reign 
of  King  Pandit*  Parakrama-Bahu  IV  ( circa  a.d.  1305), 
according  to  the  Maha-vanisa,*  by  the  king  himself,  who  had 
learnt  them  from  a  Cojian  monk,  but  more  probably  by  several 
compilers  at  the  instigation  of  the  king,  and,  as  the  Sinhalese 
Introduction  tells  us,  at  the  personal  request  of  the  minister 
Parakrama-  Though  a  faithful  translation,  it  is  not  servile, 
and  in  several  instances  has  avoided  the  defects  of  the  P&Ji 
commentary.  Some  of  the  stories  are  told  in  indifferent 
Sinhalese,  and  many  provincialisms  are  to  bo  detected  ;  a 
few  Tamil  expressions  and  words  are  also  to  be  found,  as  was 
to  be  expected.  After  the  translation  was  completed  the  king 
had  it  read  before  a  learned  assembly  of  monks  and  distributed 
copies  all  over  the  island.  The  charge  of  its  preservation  was 
entrusted  to  a  learned  Thera,  named  Mcdhnhkara  and  the 
pupils  who  became  bis  successors.1 

What  were  the  monks  of  the  Abhayagiri  fraternity  and  their 
confederates  doing  during  this  period  under  review  I  It  is 
impossible  to  believe  they  were  idle,  for  ceaseless  activity  in 
the  propagation  of  their  views  had  been  their  characteristic 
ever  since  they  gained  a  foothold  in  Ceylon.  The  wave  of 
great  literary  activity  which  swept  over  the  island  could  not 
have  left  them  unaffected.  The  Chronicles  do  not  record  any 
attempts  on  the  part  of  the  orthodox  Thera -vadins  to  persecuto 
them  or  suppress  their  activities  ;  the  glory  of  the  MahavihAra 
had  blossomed  in  all  its  brilliance ;  its  fame  had  spread  far 

1  It  W»J  published  (badly  edited,  unfortunately)  in  the  JR  AS.  (Ceylon 
Branch),  toL  rii.  pp.  ISi  loll. 

*  Chap,  xc,  w.  WMS. 

*  For  a  fuller  and  more  detailed  description  o<  tbs  work,  »**  Mr.  Wickrvna- 
ainghe,  Calaloyu*.  pp.  118  fotL  Other  i  ode  pendent  rerwont  of  tingle 
Jala  Wat,  in  proae  aa  well  aa  in  poetry,  made  both  before  and  after  tbit 
work,  and  baaed  probably  on  the  Puli  text,  are  to  b*  found  mattered  through- 
out  the  island. 


128 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  Of  CEYLON 


and  wido ;  scholars  came  to  it  from  many  climes  in  pursuit 
of  wisdom,  in  their  search  for  the  true  unadulterated  doctrine 
of  the  Buddha.  In  the  hour  of  their  triumph  we  may  presume 
they  were  content  to  leave  the  Dhammarucikas  free  to 
go  on  their  way.  Wc  saw  that  both  Mahanama  and  his  queen 
were  lavish  in  their  gifts  to  the  Abhayagiri  community,  and 
we  may  be  sure  that,  thus  endowed  with  material  prosperity, 
they  and  their  followers  produced  works  of  merit.  In 
discussing  the  authorship  of  the  Jotaka  commentary  it  was 
suggested  that  the  work  was  a  compilation  of  the  Abhayagiri 
school. 

Unfortunately  for  us,  such  a  state  of  tolerance  of  heterodox)' 
did  not  last  long,  and  in  the  holocaust  of  book-burning,  which 
followed  a  few  centuries  later,  and  through  the  gradual 
absorption  of  the  dissentient  Nikayas  into  the  State  Church, 
their  works  were  either  completely  destroyed  or  gradually 
fell  out  of  use.  There  is,  however,  one  incident  on  reoord  which 
shows  that  they  were  not  unmindful  of  the  importance  of 
literary  development  in  the  progress  of  religion.  In  the  account 
of  Fa-Haien’a  travels  wc  are  told  that  he  lived  in  Ceylon  for 
two  years,  and  continuing  his  search  for  the  sacred  Scriptures 
“  he  obtained  a  copy  of  the  Vinat/a  Pitaka  according  to  the 
school  of  the  Mahisiisakas.  He  also  obtained  a  copy  of  the 
Oreat  Agama  (Dirghagama),  the  Miscellaneous  Agama 
( Samguktagama ),  and  also  a  collection  of  the  Miscellaneous 
Pitaka  ( Sannipdta  (Sutta-nipata  ?)> — all  being  books  unknown 
in  the  land  of  Han.  Having  obtained  these  Sanskrit  works, 
be  took  passage  in  a  large  merchantman  ".l  From  the  names 
of  the  books  we  are  led  to  conjecture  that  they  did  not  belong 
to  the  Theravada  school.  The  late  Hugh  Nevill,  in  his 
Catalogue  of  his  manuscript  collections  now  in  the  British 
Museum  (No.  115),  suggests  that  the  Sahassa-vattku-ppakararta , 
still  extant  in  Burma,  which,  in  his  opinion,  formed  the  basis 

1  Legge.  Tnrd‘.  p.  111.  8e*  »l»o  Beal,  Records  of  (At  Witten  World, 
vot.  ii,  pp.  247  loll.,  lor  a  description  of  the  Abhejagin  eeet  in  the  eeTenth 
century. 


buddhaohosa’s  successors 


129 


for  the  Pali  Raaa-vahin *  (q.v.),  by  Vedcha,  in  the  fourteenth 
century,  was  also  ft  work  of  the  Dhammaruci  sect.  As  far  as 
I  can  see,  there  is  nothing  in  that  work  itself  to  justify  our 
assigning  it  to  the  Abhayagiri  Nikiiyn,  but  a  more  careful 
perusal  than  I  have  been  able  to  give  it  might  bring  forward 
more  definite  evidence.  The  Maha-winna-tikd  refers  to  it  as 
an  aUhalcatha.1 


1  Geiger,  J/aAdraqiM  and  Dipamtma,  p,  48. 


CHAPTER  VII 


Th*  Pau  Ckroniclks 

WHILE  Buddhagbosa  and  his  fellow-labourers  were 
exploring  the  field  of  commentarial  literature,  and 
compiling  the  result  of  their  researches  ao  that  the  word  of 
the  Buddha  might  be  known  in  what  they  held  to  be  its  pristine 
purity,  not  only  by  the  people  of  Ocylon-who  were  specially 
favoured  by  the  presence  in  their  midst  of  a  genuinely  orthodox 
and  traditional  interpretation  of  the  Dhnmma,  handed  down 
in  their  own  vernacular-but  also  by  the  many  millions  in 
other  countries,  another  type  of  literary  effort  was  slowly 
evolving  in  the  shape  of  Pali  chronicles,  recording  the  history 
of  Laftka,  and,  what  was  much  more  important  to  the 
chroniclers  themselves,  the  vicissitudes  and  the  triumphs  of 
the  Buddhist  faith.  Many  centuries  later,  after  the  labours  of 
these  historians  had  been  almost  forgotten  and  had  sunk  very 
largely  into  oblivion,  a  great  stir  was  caused  among  students 
of  historical  research,  when  about  the  year  1826  the  discovery 
was  made  and  communicated  to  Europe  that,  whilst  the  history 
of  India  was  only  to  be  conjectured  from  myth*  and  elaborated 
from  dote*  on  copper  grants,  or  from  fading  inscription*  on 
rock*  or  columns,  Ceylon  wo*  in  possession  of  continuous  and 
written  chronicles,  rich  in  authentic  facta,  not  only  presenting 
a  connected  history  of  the  island  itself,  but  also  yielding 
valuable  materials  for  elucidating  that  of  India.  At  the 
moment  when  Prinsep  was  deciphering  the  then  mysterious 
inscriptions  of  Hindustan  and  Western  India,  and  when 
Csoma  de  KOro*  was  unrolling  the  Buddhist  record*  of  Thibet, 
and  Hodgson  those  of  Nepal,  a  fellow-labourer  of  kindred 
genius,  indefatigable  in  his  energy  and  distinguished  equally 
by  his  abilities  and  by  his  modest  display  of  the  same,  was 
successfully  exploring  these  Pali  chronicles  of  Ceylon.  He  was 
George  Tumour  of  the  Ceylon  Civil  Service,  and  the  annals 


THE  PALI  CHRONICLES 


131 


of  historical  research  in  later  years  bear  ample  testimony 
to  the  remarkable  evidence  his  work  furnished  in  elucidating 
the  earlier  history  of  Southern  Asia.  Since  Tumour’s  day 
many  scholars  of  repute,  both  in  the  East  and  in  tho  West, 
have  devoted  their  time  and  energies  to  tho  task  of  learning 
more  about  these  chronicles,  testing  the  accuracy  of  their 
statements  and  trying  to  unravel  with  tlieir  aid  something  of 
the  earlier  history  of  the  Indian  Peninsula.  What  is  attempted 
here  is  merely  to  give  a  brief  outline  of  tho  researches  of  such 
scholars.1 

The  two  chief  chronicles  of  Ceylon  are  tho  Dipa-vamsa  and 
the  MahS-vamsa,  the  former  by  an  unknown  author  in  the 
fourth  century,  and  the  latter  by  an  Elder  of  the  Buddhist 
Church,  Ma liana ma  by  name,  and  written  in  the  fifth  century 
a.p.  We  saw,  in  tho  second  chapter  of  this  treatise,  that 
members  of  the  Sartgha  had  been,  from  the  earliest  times,  in 
the  habit  of  recording  noteworthy  events  in  the  Order,  and 
attempting  to  keep  a  continuous  history  of  their  activities. 
Such,  for  example,  are  the  records  of  the  last  two  chapters  of 
the  Cullavaggo.  When  Buddhism  was  introduced  into  Ceylon 
and  ft  branch  of  the  Saftgha  established  in  the  islsnd,  the 
Ceylonese  Bhikkliu*  followed  the  example  of  their  predecessors 
in  JambudvTpa  and  handed  down,  in  succession  in  the  Church, 
historical  accounts  of  the  Order.  The  seal  for  keeping  such 
records  of  their  doings  does  not  seem  to  have  been  confined 
to  the  Order  alone  ;  from  time  to  time  archeologists  have 
discovered,  amongst  the  cherished  possessions  of  distinguished 
families  of  the  Sinhalese  gentry,  authentic  accounts  of  their 
doings  handed  down  from  father  to  son.  faithfully  preserved 
and  brought  up  to  date  by  each  succeeding  generation.  Thus, 
in  a  copy  of  tho  RajaraR -tangraha  (which  is  an  abridged 
Rajdvaluja)  written  down  to  the  reign  of  Klrti  Sri  Rujasiipha, 
and  now  forming  part  of  the  library  of  the  late  Hugh  Nevill, 

•  For  fuller  detail*  and  critical  diaeuaion  »ee,  eapccially.  Oiger, 
IHpauinxia  cad  J/oMroifua  s  i/oJU  nuuc  (P.T.8.)  i  Otdenbrrg.  Dipa 
mnim  j  JKAS.  pauim  and  Indian  Antiquary  pauim. 


132 


THB  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLOK 


there  is  attached  to  the  end  of  the  book  a  separate  account 
of  the  family  of  one  Yatihdagala  Polvatte  Viditne,  in  whose 
possession  the  copy  was  found.  The  Vidane*s  family  holds 
descent  from  the  Bodhidkara  princes  who  accompanied  the 
branch  of  the  Sacred  Bo-tree  to  Ceylon,  and  settled  down 
there.  The  present  account  is  composed  in  much  later 
language,  but  it  is  clearly  based  on  older  records  and  contains 
accounts  of  the  doingB  of  the  family  from  quite  early  times.1 
It  is  useful  as  showing  the  nature  of  personal  records  kept  by 
the  Sinhalese,  from  which  the  various  histories  were  after¬ 
wards  compiled,  suppressing  matter  of  private  interest  alone. 

The  Dipa-m>nsa,  as  was  mentioned  above,  is  not  associated 
with  the  name  of  any  special  author,  and  represents  the  earliest 
of  the  chronicles  now  extant.  It  is,  as  we  shall  sec  presently, 
the  outcome  of  a  fairly  large  number  of  previous  works,  no 
one  of  which  had  any  special  author,  and  is  the  last  of  the 
literary  works  of  Ceylon  which  can  be  assigned  to  a  period 
during  which  no  books  had  special  authors.  Every  ancient 
country,  at  the  beginning  of  its  literary  activity,  has  such  a 
period,  and  the  Dipa-mmsa  marks  the  close  of  a  very  important 
epoch— important  for  us  in  settling  the  literary  chronology — 
an  epoch  of  universal  anonymity,  when  every  work  was 
the  outcome  of  the  literary  industry  of  a  whole  school.  After 
the  date  of  the  Dtpa-vanua,  books,  as  a  rule,  were  written 
by  one  man,  and  his  authorship  was  openly  acknowledged. 

There  is  an  interesting  passage  in  the  introduction  of  the 
Maka-vatnsfi'lika  *  which  sheds  considerable  light  on  how  the 
chronicles,  as  we  have  them  now,  came  to  be  composed  in 
Pali  verse.  The  author  tells  us  that  up  to  the  time  when  the 

1  It  conclude*  with  an  Interesting  section  on  a  dispute  in  1862,  when 
a  relation  of  the  VldAno  (headman  of  the  Tillage),  one  Angoda  Saitghinandt 
SAmtpcra,  ordained  in  1M2.  preached  tana.  The  other  worthies  of  the 
plaoc  objected  for  an  unknown  canto,  and  tho  matter  came  up  before  the 
Polioo  Magistrate  of  Made  wait  tenor,  who  said  that  under  the  EngHah  law 
there  waa  perfect  freedom  in  all  inch  matters,  and  diamiaard  tho  case. 
The  volume  it  included  in  the  Nerill  collection  of  the  Britiah  Museum. 

*  Colombo  Ed.,  pp.  22,  31-2  j  ace  alao  Geiger,  Dtp.  and  M.Y.,  pp.  43  B. 


THE  PALI  CHRONICLES 


133 

Mahd-vamaa  was  compiled  there  existed  in  tho  Mahavihara, 
written  in  Sinhalese,  a  Sihala-Mah&mmtaUhakathd ,  beginning 
from  “  the  visits  of  the  Buddha  to  Ceylon,  accounts  of  the 
arrival  of  the  relics  of  the  Bodhi-tree ;  the  histories  of  the 
convocations  and  of  the  schisms  of  the  Thera* ;  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  Buddhism  into  the  island,  the  colonization  by 
Yijaya  and  all  that  vras  known  and  recorded  by  the  pious  men 
of  old  (Foraoa)  connected  with  tho  supreme  and  well-defined 
history  of  those  unrivalled  dynasties".  And  the  A/aAa-txznua 
itself  was  an  attempt  at  “  an  imitation  of  the  history  composed 
by  the  Mahavihara  fraternity  ...  In  this  work  the  object 
aimed  at  is — setting  aside  the  Sinhalese  language  (in  which 
the  former  history  was  written) — to  write  in  M&gadhi.  What¬ 
ever  the  matters  may  be  which  are  contained  in  the 
Atlhakatha,  without  suppressing  any  part  thereof,  rejecting 
the  dialect  only,  this  work  is  composed  in  the  supreme 
Magadhi  language,  which  is  thorouglily  purified  from  all 
imjierfections  ...  I  will  celebrate  the  dynasties  (wrwtsa) 
perpetuated  from  generation  to  generation  ;  illustrious  from 
the  commencement  and  lauded  by  many  bards ;  like  unto  a 
garland  strung  with  every  variety  of  flowers  ”.1  The  main 
record  on  which  the  Bijra-vatma  (and  later  the  htahd-vamta) 
were  based  was  this  Srhala  MahavamsatthahUha,  sometimes 
referred  to  as  the  SlhaLatlhakaihd  and  the  PoronaUhalcalhd, 
sometimes  referred  to  simply  as  the  Atthakalha .* 

Besides  this  the  Maha-vavtta-fikd  mentions  also  the 
following  works  which  contained  historical  materials :  (1) 
Uttaravihdra-allhakathd  and  the  Utlaravihdra-mahdvamsa, 
(2)  Vinayatlhakntha,  (3)  DipavanuaUhakatha,  (4)  Simd-kathd, 
(0)  Cctiya  and  Mahd-ceiiija-ivnnsa-aUhakathd,  (6)  Mahdboihi- 
vamsakalha,  (7)  Sumedha-kalha,  and  (8)  Sakusavatthu- 
atlhakathd.  As  far  as  we  know,  none  of  these  works  arc  now 
extant,  but  their  names  give  some  indication  of  the  nature 
of  their  contents.  The  first  were  the  chronicles  of 

1  Chap.  i.  opening  stanza*. 

'  Geiger,  Dlparattua  and  MatonujM,  pp.  43  foil. 


134 


THE  PALI  L1TEJIATURE  OF  CEYI.ON 


the  Uttaravihara  fraternity,  the  third  a  commentary  on  the 
mpa-vamta,  the  fourth  evidently  a  description  of  the 
boundaries  of  the  Mahhviharu,  the  fifth  accounts  of  the 
d&gobas  erected  in  Ceylon,  especially  the  MahathQpa  of 
Dutthagamaol,  and  the  last  a  collection  of  legends  and  folk 
tales.  The  SumedJut-kalM  was,  perhaps,  a  life-history  of  the 
Buddha,  from  the  time  when  he  received  vivaratia  as  the  ascetic 
Sumedha  at  the  hands  of  the  DipnAkara  Buddha  many, 
many  aeons  before. 

If  that  surmise  be  correct,  the  later  BuddhammsaUhakaihd 
was  evidently  based  on  tho  Sumedha-kathd.  The  presence  of 
an  Uliaravihara-mahdvamm  in  the  list  is  very  interesting, 
because  it  shows  that  each  of  tho  SnAgba  communities  was 
in  the  habit  of  preserving  special  records  of  their  own 
community.  Judging  from  the  quotations  given  of  it  in  tho 
Mahd-vatnsa-Cikd,  the  UUaravihdra-mahavamsa  seems  to  have 
differed  from  the  Mahavihurn  chronicle  not  so  much  in  its 
general  schcmo  as  in  matters  of  detail,  and  it  also,  apparently, 
contained  much  historical  material  not  found  in  the  other.1 
The  numerous  references  made  in  the  M akn-va inta-(\kd  to 
these  works  lead  us  to  conclude  that,  even  at  the  time  of  tho 
composition  of  the  (ikd,  there  was  still  in  existence  a  rich 
literature  of  collected  worka,  carefully  preserved  in  the 
different  monasteries,  most  of  them  forming  part  of  the 
AUhakathd,  the  commentaries  to  the  canonical  scriptures. 
Ami  quite  early  in  the  literary  history  of  Ceylon  a  secondary 
literature  had  sprung  up,  where  single  subjects,  such,  for 
example,  as  the  history  of  the  Bodhi-trco  or  the  erection  of  the 
th&pas,  were  taken  out  of  the  original  works,  and  made  the 
theme  of  connected,  continuous  chronicles. 

Tho  Dipa-vanua  represents  the  earliest  attempt,  so  fur  os 
we  know,  to  treat  of  these  subjects  in  a  compact,  concise 
manner,  forming  one  continuous  story.  It  is  a  conglomeration 
of  myths,  legends,  tales,  and  history,  and  the  further  we  go 

*  The  story  o£  (be  Nine  N'mAv  prtnoco.  If.  (iii,  p.  1 17,  end  the  romantic 
kietory  ot  PaiyJulcAbhaya  and  the  Yakkhi<il  Cetiyil,  ibid.,  p.  208. 


TUB  PALI  CHRONICLES 


130 


back  in  time  the  more  mythical  it  becomes,  put  together  from 
various  traditional  sources,  in  an  unaided  struggle  to  create 
a  composite  whole  from  materials  existing  scattered  in  various 
places .  This  accounts  for  the  outward  form  of  the  Dlpa-vantsa, 
its  clumsiness  ami  incorrectness  of  language  and  metre, 
its  repetitions,  omissions  and  general  fragmentary  character. 
And  this  very  incompleteness  of  its  composition,  and  its  want 
of  stylo  help  ns  in  fixing  the  date  of  its  compilation.  It  contains 
whole  series  of  verses  giving  the  main  parts  of  the  story, 
arranged  as  mnemonics  and  inart  isticaliy  put  together, 
called  by  Geiger  Memory  Verses  (Memorial  verse).1 

Often  different  versions  arc  given  of  the  samo  story,1 
showing  that  they  were  derived  from  different  sources  and  also, 
possibly,  because  of  a  desire  to  keep  the  various  traditions  as 
they  had  boon,  mono  or  less  authorized,  with  due  reverence 
for  their  antiquity,  and  to  hand  them  on  unaltered  to  later 
generations.  The  Dipa-txnfua  was  not  the  work  of  a  single 
author,  but  of  several  generations,  a  succession  of  rhapsodies, 
added  to  by  succeeding  authors,  as  the  Introduction  tells  us, 
"  twisted  into  a  garland  of  history  from  generation  to 
generation,  like  flowers  of  various  kinds.”  It  w&s,  perhaps, 
originally  meant  for  oral  recitation,  and  so  arranged  that 
several  of  the  more  important  subjects  came  up  before  the 
listener  again  and  again,  gradually  impressing  the  full  facta 
on  his  memory.  If  that  were  so,  what  appears  inartistic  and 
clumsy  in  the  written  work  would  appear  highly  natural  when 
it  was  banded  down  orally.  There  was  also,  evidently,  a  com¬ 
mentary  to  the  Dipa-vamsa,  giving  details  of  the  points  raised 
in  the  mnemonic  verses,  for  the  MaM-vamsa-tUi  refers  to  a 
Dipavamsatthakatha,  and  mention  is  made  of  it  by  the 
Maha-vamsa  author  himself,  as  having  been  recited  for  him 
by  order  of  king  Dhitusena  at  the  festival  of  Mahinda.1 

Nevill,  in  his  Manuscript  Catalogue  referred  to  above, 

1  Ocljrr.  /Jiparanta  and  J/atoramm,  p,  8. 

1  r|.  the  Kiret  Council  in  I.  vr.  1-20 ;  and  again,  6,  tt.  1-15. 

*  Slaki  iyjijmo,  xxxriii,  p.  173. 


136 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


draws  attention  to  the  "  unique  consequence  given  to  nuns  ” 
all  throughout  the  Dipa-vainaa,  and  is  of  opinion  that  it  seems 
to  afford  a  clue  to  its  authorship.  "  It  can  scarcely  be  a  record 
of  the  Thcrnvada  fraternity  of  the  Mahavihiira,  because  in 
the  very  reign  in  which  it  was  put  forward  by  royal 
patronage  (Dhntusena’s)  Mnhunfuna  set  about  to  supersede 
it  by  his  MahS-vamsa.  It  certainly  is  not  a  record  of  the 
Dhammaruci  sect  of  the  Abhaysgiri  community,  because  it 
passes  over  the  history  of  that  wealthy,  royal  foundation  with 
a  well-calculated  but  short  notice  that  could  offend  no  one.  But 
it  dilates  on  a  third  society,  the  community  of  Themvidin 
nuns.  It  would  seem  that  Mahiinama  was  jealous  of  their 
fame,  for  he  tells  us  nothing  even  of  the  stQl  famous  Mahila, 
daughter  of  Kavantissa  and  sister  of  Gcmupu,  ...  In 
chapter  xv  there  is  a  detailed  account  of  original  missionary 
nuns  coming  from  India,  learned  in  the  Lhamma  and  the 
Finery® ;  in  chapter  xvii  unusual  stress  is  laid  on  previous 
Bo-trees  brought  by  Rucananda,  Kannkadattu,  and 
Sudhamma,  although  Mahdnama  pays  them  no  attention. 
In  chapter  xviii  there  was  evidently  a  list  of  Bhikkhus 
preceding  that  of  the  Bhikkhunis.  If  this  was  recited  by  the 
monks,  it  could  scarcely  have  dropped  out,  while  it  would 
naturally  be  omitted  by  the  nuns  who  wished  to  impress  on 
the  audience  the  importance  of  their  Order. 

“  The  poem  goes  on  to  describe  how  the  missionaries  from 
India  taught  Vinaya,  Sutta,  and  Abhidhamma.  In  the  reign 
of  Abhaya,  however,  Sumani  taught  Saddhamma-varpsa 
(religious  history),  and  Mahila  was  also  learned  in  it.  In 
Saddhatissa’s  reign  no  historian  is  mentioned  among  the 
Bhikkhunis ;  but  in  Vajagamba’s  reign  tho  nuns  boasted 
of  Sivala  and  Maharuha  from  India,  who  were  both 
historians.  In  the  reigns  of  Kutikappa  and  his  son  Abhaya 
they  were  proud  of  K&gamitto,  ordained  in  La&ka,  and  also 
described  as  well-versed  in  religious  history.  After  her  and 
before  the  conclusion  of  tho  poem  in  Mahasena’s  reign  thoro 
flourished  among  tho  nuns  Sanha  and  Samudda,  distinguished 


TIIJJ  TALI  CHRONICLES 


137 


for  their  knowledge  in  tho  SacWAamma-wmaa.  The  book 
SaddJtamma-vatHM  gives  the  names  of  eight  historians  and 
rhapsodists  among  a  list  of  seventy-two  nuns  who  taught  the 
Dkamma  and  the  T’innya.  I  take  it  as  almost  certain  that,  in 
the  reign  of  Gcumnu,  Sumnnii  taught  the  vamsa  for  the  first 
time  among  the  nuns.  Princess  MahilA  embodied  the 
Sinhalese  tradition  of  her  family  with  other  traditions  handed 
down  from  Sanghamitta  and  her  companions.  Siva  hi  and 
Mah&ruha  from  India  revised  this,  and  very  probably  formed  it 
into  the  unpolished  almost  aboriginal  Pali  we  now  possess, 
to  which  additions  were  made  by  Nogamitta,  and  later  by 
Sanlia  and  Samuddii.” 

This  suggestion  about  the  authorship  of  the  Dipa-mmsa  is 
very  ingenious  and  deserves  careful  consideration.  I  am  not 
aware  of  its  having  been  published  anywhere  yet,  and  hence 
I  have  quoted  it  in  full.  It  is  not  possible  with  tho  information 
at  onr  disposal  to  come  to  any  definite  conclusion.  There  arc 
certain  minor  points — which  do  not  affect  the  main  argument 
at  all — in  NeviU’a  statements  which  are  not  strictly  correct, 
e.g.  that  Mahanaraa  composed  the  MaMa-vmjua  out  of  jealousy 
of  the  reputation  of  the  nuns.  Mahinama  lived  in  an  age  when 
tho  clumsy,  inartistic  diction  of  tho  Dipa-vairua,  with  its  faulty 
arrangement,  would  not  suffice  for  tho  edification  of  tho 
learned,  and  he  set  about  to  compile  a  work  which  was  more 
in  keeping  with  the  literary  development  of  his  time. 

The  JJijM-vamta,  like  the  Maha-vamta,  finished  its  record 
with  the  death  of  king  Mnhiisena.  Whether  this  was  due  to 
the  Maha-mmsa  having  superseded  it  after  that  date,  or 
whether,  as  Oldeuberg  suggests,1  the  authors  stopped  at  tho 
epoch  of  Muhuscnu's  reign,  where  the  past  destinies  of  their 
spiritual  abode,  the  Muha-vihara,  were  divided  from  the 
present  by  the  success  of  a  hostile  party  in  obtaining  the  king’s 
sanction  for  destroying  the  Maha-vihara,  we  cannot  say. 
I  am  inclined  to  the  former  view.  Tho  Maha-vamsa  fulfilled 
all  the  purposes  of  the  Dipa-vanua,  and  hotter,  and  there  was 

>  bipa-uuiua.  p.  8- 


138 


TUB  PALI  LITKRATCRE  OK  CEYLON 


no  reason  (or  it*  further  continuance  in  the  old  form.  I  agree 
with  Oldenbcrg 1  in  assigning  some  time  between  the  beginning 
of  the  fourth  and  the  first  third  of  the  fifth  century  as  the  date 
of  the  completion  of  the  Dipa-vamsa  in  its  present  form.  It 
could  not  have  been  closed  before  the  beginning  of  the  fourth 
century,  because  its  narrative  extends  till  about  a.d.  302. 
Buddhaghosa  quotes  several  times  from  the  Dipa-vamsa, 
but  his  quotations  differ  in  some  details  from  our  version.* 
In  the  Maha-vamsa  we  are  told  that  Dhatusena  (459-77) 
ordered  the  Dipa-vamta  to  be  recited  in  public  at  the  annual 
Mahinda  festival,  so  that  by  that  time  the  Dipa-vamsa  had 
been  completed.*  After  that  date  it  fell  into  disuse,  ita  glory 
outdone  by  the  more  brilliant  work  of  Mahanama ;  but  it 
scorns  to  have  been  studied  till  much  later,  because 
Dhnmmakitti  III  of  the  Araovakavasi  sect,  quotes  it  in  his 
Saddhamma-Mttgaha  with'  great  respect  as  a  work  of  much 
merit  and  immense  importance.4 

The  begmning  of  the  fifth  century  saw  an  important 
development  in  the  literary  life  of  Ceylon  through 
Buddkaghosa’s  activity.  Pali  was  once  more  definitely 
established  as  the  ecclesiastical  and  literary  language  of  tire 
Buddhists.  Buddhaghosa  himself  mastered  the  language 
fully  and  wrote  in  it  fluently  and  voluminously.  His  works 
soon  found  their  way  into  every  monastery,  where  they  were 
assiduously  perused,  portions  of  them  being  learned  by  heart. 
Buddhaghosa ’s  works  marked  the  turning  point  between  the 
ancient  and  the  modem  epochs  of  Pali  literature  in  Ceylon, 
and  with  his  compositions  as  their  model  his  successors  were 
soon  able  to  master  Pali  grammar  and  stylo  with  perfect 
ease,  and,  with  his  compilations  as  their  background,  even 
to  improve  upon  them.  Many  fruitless  attempts  at  Pali 

•  Ibid..  p.  ». 

1  <•■*.  we  Oldenbrrg,  Dtp.,  xii.  note  2 ;  snd  aUo  nolo  on  Dip.,  8.  SO. 

»  Thu  would  mnlcr  the  interval  between  tho  two  wocka  about  100-180 
rear*,  aaflfcient  lor  the  diScrenee  in  point*  of  their  atyto,  remembering 
that  Buddhaghoaa  came  in  between  them. 

4  S*U*amma  aoapaAa,  pp.  47,  t.  7  j  49.  rr.  8  foil. 


THE  PAM  CHRONICLES 


139 


composition  must  have  marker!  the  transition  from  the 
inartistic  stilted  metre  of  the  Dijia-tsantsa  to  the  elegant, 
literary  fluency  of  the  Matta-mmsa  verses.  And  once  the 
mastery  over  literary  form  had  been  attained,  its  possessors 
were  anxious  to  use  it.  Materials  for  the  exercise  of  their 
powers  were  at  hand  in  plenty.  Pali  had  once  more  gained  its 
ascendency  over  Sinhalese,  and  it  was  their  ambition,  as  so 
many  authors  of  this  period  tell  us,  in  the  process  of  tlicir 
works,  to  set  aside  the  Sinhalese  language,  reject  the  dtpa-bhatn, 
and  compose  their  works  in  the  “  supreme  Magmlhi  language, 
which  is  the  mother  of  all  tongues,  sweet  to  the  ear  and 
delightful  to  tho  heart,  and  cooling  to  tho  senses  They  found 
the  works  of  the  old  authors  full  of  imperfections ;  defects 
as  well  of  prolixity  os  of  brevity  and  inaccuracies  of  detail. 
They  had  all  respect  for  the  old  wine,  but  it  was  contained  in 
primitive  jars,  antiquated,  out  of  fashion,  ami  covered  with 
cobwebs,  and  they  desired  to  put  it  into  new  bottles,  polished 
and  shining  and  full  of  artistic  decoration.  But  it  was  old  wir.c 
all  the  same,  and  a  certain  flavour  of  conservatism  remained 
for  quite  a  long  time.  Thus,  when  Molianama  came  to  write 
his  work  the  Maha-vanua,  “  replete  with  information  on  every 
subject,  comprehending  the  amplest  details  of  all  important 
events,  like  unto  a  splendid  and  dazzling  garland  strung  with 
every  variety  of  flowers,  rich  in  colour,  taste  and  scent  .  .  . 
avoiding  the  defects  of  tho  ancients,"  we  find  that  he  could 
not  quite  rise  above  bis  material.  He  strove  to  confine  him¬ 
self  to  his  sources  to  the  best  of  his  power.  Often  he  adopted 
the  Pali  verses  of  the  originals  unchanged  in  his  work, 
especially  when  they  appeared  to  him  to  be  of  an  authoritative 
character.  He  went  to  the  same  sources  as  the  Dipa-vamsa, 
and  in  many  passages  the  two  works  agree  word  for  word.1 

Very  little  is  known  of  the  author  of  the  Maha-wtnim.  Iu 
the  concluding  passage  of  the  Maka-vatnsa-ttka*  he  is  named 
Makanama,  and  it  is  said  of  him  that  he  lived  in  a  cell  built 

1  See  Uciger,  op.  ciC,  pp.  14  toll. 

•  p.  503. 


HO 


THE  PAH  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLOX 


by  the  General  Dlghasaitda  who  was  the  commander  of  the 
army  in  Devanampiya-Tissa’s  reign,1  and  the  vihira  founded 
by  him  bore  the  name  of  Dlghasapda  -senapat  i-parivepa ,  and 
belonged  to  the  M&havihiira.  Ceylon  tradition  assumes  that 
this  Mahanama  was  the  uncle  of  king  Dhatuscna,  who  is 
said  to  have  lived  in  the  habitation  of  Dlghasapda*  Tumour 
(Introduction,  Iiv)  accepts  this  tradition,  bat  Geiger  *  is 
convinced  that  Tumour  was  mistaken.  "  I  am  fully 
convinced,"  Bays  he,  "that  we  must  entirely  separate  the 
Mahanama,  author  of  Mahd-vamsa,  from  the  uncle  of 
Dhutusena." 

I  am  not  so  "  fully  oonvinced  Geiger’s  chief  argument  is 
chronological.  Dhatuscna  entered  the  monastic  life  under  the 
protection  of  his  uncle  (Mah&nama)  in  the  reign  of  Damija 
Papdu.  Tho  uncle  was  "  at  that  time  a  Thera  ”  (italics  are 
mine),  and  “  thus  in  all  probability  conaiderably  older  than 
his  nephew".  Dhatuscna  came  to  the  throne  in  436.  The 
transference  of  Slhagiri  Yihira  to  Mahanuma,  presbyter  of 
the  Dighasanda  Vihira  ( M .  V.,  xxxix,  42)  was  early  in  tho  reign 
of  Moggallana  I  (497-616).  Geiger’s  objection  is  that  the 
reign  Mahanuma  to  whom  the  Sihagiri  Viliam  was  transferred, 
and  who  was  onr  author,  cannot  be  the  same  as  Dhitusena's 
uncle,  because  the  latter  oould  not  have  lived  so  long.  Why  ? 
Because  he  was  already  a  Thera  when  Dhatuscna  entered  the 
Order  somewhere  between  a.d.  436  and  441,  and  must  there¬ 
fore  have  been  comparatively  old.  I  bcliove  that  this  inference 
is  unjustified,  for,  though  Dhatuscnn’s  uncle  is  referral  to  as 
Thera,  that  does  not  prove  he  was  then  a  Thera.  When  tho 
verses  came  to  be  written  ho  had  come  to  the  Thera  age  and 
was  naturally  referred  to  as  such.  (If  we  say  that  when 
King  George  was  five  years  old  he  was  a  boy  of  sweet  temper, 
it  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  he  was  king  at  the  age  of 
five.)  If  Mahanama  had  been,  say,  thirty  years  old  at  the 

1  AM*.,  xr,  TT.  212-13. 

'  AM'.,  xxxviii,  ▼.  10,  sod  xxxix,  v.  42. 

*  Dtpevcwa  and  JialUlvatfuu,  pp.  41  folL 


TMR  FAI.I  CHRONICLES 


141 


time  of  DhAtusena’s  Ordination,  he  would  have  been  about 
ninety,  at  tho  moat,  when  SThogiri  VihAra  was  transferred  to 
him,  an  age  by  no  means  impossible.  So,  while  I  agree,  there¬ 
fore,  that  the  ovidcncc  at  our  disposal  is  not  sufficient  to 
establish  the  identity,  I  hold  that  tho  Ceylon  tradition  has 
not  yet  been  proved  false. 

Nothing  further  is  known  about  the  AfaAd-tomsa  author.  An 
inscription  at  Buddhagaya  1  mentions  a  Mahanama  among 
Ceylon  teachers  in  the  following  succession  :  Bhaia,  Rahula, 
Upascna,  Mahanama,  Upasena  (II),  Mahanama  (II).  The 
first  Upascna  may  well  refer  to  tho  author  of  the  Alahd- 
Niddtsa-AUhalalha,  and  the  first  Mahanama  to  our  author. 
The  date  of  this  inscription  is  not,  however,  definitely  known.* 
Of  Mahanama's  work  Geiger  says :  *  “  Tho  Mahd-txtrtua  is 
already  worthy  the  name  of  a  true  epic.  It  is  the  recognized 
work  of  a  poet,  and  we  arc  able  to  watch  this  poet  at  work 
in  his  workshop.  Although  he  is  quite  dependent  on  his 
materials,  which  he  is  bound  to  follow  as  closely  as  possible, 
he  deals  with  them  critically,  perceives  their  shortcomings  and 
irregularities,  and  seeks  to  improve  and  to  eliminate.''  But 
though  the  level  of  epic  poetry  was  reached  with  the 
Mahu-vamta,  the  process  of  literary  development  had  not  yet 
come  to  its  highest  attainment.  It  was  still  too  early  for  that 
to  be  possible,  so  soon  after  Buddhaghosa’s  work  had  given 
fresh  impetus  to  Pali  studies.  Even  the  materials  of  the  old 
chronicles  yet  remained  unexhausted,  and  later  authors 
seized  upon  them  and  continued  what  Malianamu  had  begun 
so  well.  Mahanama  was  no  genius,  he  was  too  much  hide¬ 
bound  by  tradition,  and  his  work  cannot  rank  as  a  literary 
performance  of  the  first  order ;  yet  his  services  to  the  cause 
of  Pali  literature,  and  to  historical  studies  of  later  generations, 
were  immense,  and  to  us  invaluable. 

After  Mahanama’s  death  the  chronicle  was  continued  by 

1  Fleet,  Gupta  Jntcripliotu,  pp.  274  loti. 

1  RAjandraUl  Mitr*.  liuMAa  paya.  pp.  190  «q. 

*  para  qua  and  MaMuamta,  p.  2. 


142 


TUK  PAU  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


later  authors.  The  history  of  the  island  from  tlie  reign  of 
Mahasena,  a.d.  302,  to  the  time  of  Paodita  Parakrama  bdhu 
of  Dambadeniya  (1240-75)  was  compiled  by  Dhammakitti  II 
under  royal  patronage.1  Rhys  Davids  questions  the  accuracy 
of  this  statement.1  "  Each  new  chronicler  hurried  over  the 
kings  preceding  the  one  under  whom  he  wrote,  and  then 
enlarged  at  length  on  the  events  of  that  monarch’s  reign.  There 
seems  to  be  a  break  at  the  eventful  chapter  of  Parakrama  the 
Great's  reign,  while  the  following  kings  are  hurried  over  until 
Parakrama  of  Dambadeniya,  who  occupies  seven  chapters. 
Perhaps  there  is  some  confusion  between  tho  two 
Dhammakittis,  the  one  tho  author  of  Daiha-txunsa  in 
Parakrama  the  Great’s  reign,  and  the  other  the  author  of 
a  part  of  the  Maha-vanisa  in  the  reign  of  Parakrama  of 
Dambadeniya.  The  latter  seems  evidently  later  in  style.” 
There  is  no  evidence  to  support  this  contention,  and  until 
such  evidence  is  forthcoming,  wc  shall  have  to  rest  content 
with  tradition.  The  name  of  the  author  by  whom  the  history 
of  Ceylon  wus  written  from  the  reign  of  the  Dambadeniya 
king  to  that  of  Papd^*  Pardkrama-Bahu  of  Hastisailapura 
(modern  Kurunegala)  lias  not  yet  been  ascertained.*  The 
chronicle  from  that  date  until  a.d.  1758  to  the  death  of 
Kirti  Sri  Rijasirpha  was  compiled  by  Tibbotuvave  Sumangala 
Thera,  and  it  has  since  been  continued  to  1815  (tho  date  of 
the  cession  of  Ceylon  to  the  British)  by  the  lato  Hikknduvt*  Sri 
Sumailgala  and  Batuvantudavo  Patjdita.* 

There  is  extant  a  (ika  1  on  the  Maha-vamsa,  written  by  an 
author  of  whom  we  know  nothing.  In  the  closing  words  of 
his  work  he  calls  it  the.  VaituaUha-ppakasim.  The  Ceylon 
tradition  assigns  it  to  Mahanama,  author  of  the  Maka-vanua 


1  Wijeainba.  ifaAri  nitnm,  p  2H4,  and  WkrenHkBngbc,  JRAS.,  1896, 
pp.  202  foil. 

*  JRAS..  vll,  p.  354  and  footnote. 

*  Dc  Zoyia.  p.  18. 

*  Colombo,  1877. 

*  Printed  in  Colombo  and  edited  by  Sumangala  and  Baturanlud&v*. 


THK  PAU  CHRONICLES 


143 


itself.1  But  it  is  improbable  that  the  two  authors  were 
identical.  On  the  other  hand,  Geiger  assigns  it  to  the  tenth 
oentury.*  The  author  of  the  flid  distinguishes  himself  quite 
clearly  from  the  older  writer  by  calling  the  latter  acariyo.3 
It  is  clear  that  many  years  had  elapsed  between  tho  original 
work  and  its  ftt»,  sufficiently  long  to  allow  the  name  of  a  village 
to  have  undergone  change.4  The  Ola  also  mentions  the 
king  Dathopatissn  II  (“  the  nephew  ”  to  distinguish  him  from 
the  older  king  of  the  same  name),1  and  it  cannot,  therefore, 
have  been  composed  earlier  than,  roughly  speaking,  A.D,  670. 
But  I  cannot  agree  with  Geiger  in  saying  that  the  Mahti-vaitisa- 
Oka  belongs  to  the  period  between  tho  years  1000  and  1250  * 
In  my  opinion  the  date  is  far  too  late.  Geiger's  one  argument 
for  so  late  a  date  ia  a  quotation  from  tho  Mahdbodhi- 
vamsaUhakatkS  (the  only  one  so  far  traced)  found  in  the 
Maha-eainsa-Oka.7  He  identities  this  atikakalkS-  with  the 
Mahabodhi-wtmsa  of  Upatissa,  which  he  assigns  to  the  tenth 
century.  Now  the  Mahabodhi-vamsa,  as  wc  have  it,  is 
admittedly  a  translation  of  an  original  work.  Upatissa  says 
so  definitely  in  his  proem ,*  and  there  is  no  means  of  ascertaining 
whether  the  Slliala  Mahahodhi-vamsa  referred  to  there  was 
identical  with  the  atthakathd  mentioned  in  the  M.V.  Oka, 
or  whether  it  was  not  itself  a  later  compilation  in  Sinhalese  of 
an  earlier  Mahabodhi-vaitua-aUhakatha.  There  is  no  need  to 
deny  that  the  Pali  Makabodhi-vamsa  is  a  later  work,  written, 
perhaps,  as  late  as  tho  tenth  century,  and  the  language 
certainly  points  to  some  such  date,  as  we  shall  see  later.  It 
is  quite  possible  that  both  the  quotation  in  the  M.V.  Oka 
and  the  passage  in  the  Mahabodhi-vanua  were  drawn  from  tho 

1  Dc  Zoya.  p.  IS. 

4  Gtifirr,  U:para<ntn  ailil  J/aMra^ta,  pp.  33  foil. 

•  o  k.  p.  23,  lino  1  and  II.  34-3  ;  p.  28.  line  IS. 

*  Senwgall*  in  the  ,\l.  V.  botanic  Mora^aUa  at  the  time  of  the  fttd,  il.T. 
p  427.  line  M. 

•  456,  27. 

*  Dip.  an d  U.V.,  p.  34. 

*  J/.r„  2W.  8. 

•  T.TJi.  Ed.,  p.  2. 


144  THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CBVLON 

same  source  directly  or  indirectly  (if  indirectly,  through  the 
Sinhalese  M ahabodki-vanita) .  I  think,  therefore,  that  the  date 
assigned  to  the  M.V.  tiled  by  Geiger  rest*  on  very  ((lender 
evidence. 

And  not  this  alone.  A  perusal  of  the  M.  V.  filed  shows  that 
it  adds  to  the  Maha-vatrua  a  not  inconsiderable  amount  of 
material  of  legends,  as  well  os  of  folklore,  and  these  were  drawn, 
as  we  saw  in  our  discussion  of  the  Maha-vairua  originals,  not 
only  from  the  sources  whence  the  author  of  the  Moha-vamaa 
derived  his  materials,  but  from  others  equally  old  1 — like  the 
MahaanfuaUltalealho,  DipavQHUwUftaktUhd,  and  the  Uttara- 
vikaraUhakalhd.  We  saw  how  very  Boon  after  Buddhaghosa 
compiled  his  commentaries  in  Pali  from  the  materials  he 
gathered  out  of  the  cxcgctical  works  written  in  Sinhalese  the 
original  Sinhalese  commentaries  fell  into  disuse,  and,  before 
long,  completely  disappeared,  because  it  was  found  that  they 
no  longer  served  any  usoful  purpose,  their  function  Laving 
been  taken  up  by  Buddhaghosa ’s  works.  Now  the  Maled-vainsa 
bore  to  the  Sinhalese  tw nsatthainfha  exactly  the  same  relation 
as  Buddhaghosa 's  commentaries  did  to  the  scriptural 
aUhakathd.  It  was  a  concise  and  relatively  accurate  com¬ 
pilation  from  various  sources,  avoiding  their  imperfections 
and  containing  practically  all  their  details. 

We  may,  I  think,  legitimately  presume,  therefore,  that  the 
Sinhalese  vamsatlkakathds  did  not  long  survive  Mahdnama’s 
work.  And  in  view  of  the  fact  that  at  the  timo  the  author  of 
the  filed  compiled  his  work  the  original  sources  wore  still 
being  studied,  or,  at  least,  were  extant,  his  period  could  not 
have  been  as  much  as  five  centuries  later  than  Mahanama’s. 
Since  Mabindma  lived  in  the  sixth  century  a.d.,  I  would 
assign  the  author  of  the  (ikd  to  the  seventh  or  eighth  century. 
I  am  also  supported  in  this  by  the  name  of  a  second  Mahdndma 
appearing  in  the  Buddhagaya  inscription  referred  to  above, 
in  the  succession  Upasena  I,  Mahdndma  I,  Upa&ena  II, 
Mahdndma  II ;  I  believe,  also,  that  the  later  Mahdndma  was 
1  See  »I»o  Geiger,  op.  eft.,  pp.  47  Mid  4$. 


THE  PALI  CHRONICLES 


140 


identical  with  the  author  of  the  Paluambhidd-maggailhaJcathd.1 
The  identity  of  the  name,  and  the  proximity  in  time,  of  the 
two  authors  would  account  for  the  Ceylon  tradition  which 
regards  tho  VamsaUha-ppakasint  (if.  V,  fil'd)  as  a  work  of  the 
AfahS-vamta  author  himself. 

Much  has  been  written  on  the  value  of  the  Dipa-vanita 
and  the  Maha-vamta  as  work*  of  historical  accuracy  and 
on  their  usefulness  in  unravelling  the  history  of  Southern 
Asia.  The  greater  the  care  and  the  attention  that  have  been 
given  to  the  statements  in  these  works  tho  more  evident 
has  it  become  to  students  of  historical  research,  that  they 
are  of  immense  importance  in  arriving  at  a  correct  under¬ 
standing  of  the  mysterious  mares  of  Indian  chronology. 
Vincent  Smith  early  in  his  career  called  both  works  “  silly 
fictions  of  mendacious  monks  ”,  and  wrote  of  them :  “  I 
reject  absolutely  the  Ceylonese  chronology  prior  to  the  reign 
of  DuU  bags  mini  in  about  160  B.C.  The  undeserved  credit 
given  to  the  statements  of  the  monks  of  Ceylon  lias  been  a 
great  hindrance  to  the  right  understanding  of  ancient  Indian 
history. ”  *  But  he  was  sufficiently  convinced  before  his  death 
to  write  about  the  date  of  the  Buddha's  death,  which  forms 
one  of  the  most  important  crucea  of  Indian  chronology : 
“  The  new  reading  of  the  Kharavela  inscription  ...  if  correct, 
obliges  us  to  move  back  all  the  Suisunaga  dates  more  than 
fifty  years,  and  therefore  supports  the  Ceylon  date  for  the 
death  of  the  Buddha,  viz.  544  or  M3  B.c.  It  may  be  argued 
that  traditions  preserved  in  Magadha  should  be  more  trust¬ 
worthy  than  those  recorded  at  a  later  date  by  monks  in 
distant  Ceylon  ;  but  there  is  amjtlc  evidence  of  the  fact  that 
Gautama  Buddha  was  contemporary  with  both  Bimbisara 
or  Srcuika  and  his  son  Ajiitasatru  or  Kuijika,  and,  this  being 
so.l  feel  compelled,  until  further  light  is  thrown  on  the  subject, 
to  accept,  tentatively,  the  earlier  date,  543  B.c."  ’ 

1  9-v. 

*  Aioba,  preface,  p.  0. 

*  JSatig  theory  of  India,  p.  50,  1924  ed. 

10 


146 


THB  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


Geiger,  in  hu  invaluable  Introduction  to  his  translation  of 
the  Alaha-vamsa,  lias  brought  together  ample  evidence  from 
external  sources  to  justify  the  faith  which  later-day  scholars 
have  been  induced  to  place  in  the  Ceylonese  chronicles.1  In  their 
details,  it  is  true,  they  manifest  the  same  love  of  the 
marvellous,  the  same  credulity  and  superstition,  the  same 
exaggeration  in  description,  the  Bame  adulation  of  kings  and 
princes,  as  is  met  with  in  the  annals  and  religious  history  of 
nations  called  civilised,  Christian  and  non-Christian,  of  ancient 
and  modern  Europe.  Their  chief  defect.,  in  my  opinion,  ia 
that,  while  they  inform  us  of  the  history  of  monarchs  and  their 
deeds,  and  their  endowments  for  the  glorification  of  the 
religion,  they  make  no  mention  of  the  everyday  lives  of  the 
people,  the  many  millions  who  made  history  in  those  ancient 
times.  But  that  would  not  permit  us  “  to  throw  away  the 
child  with  the  bath  ".  With  all  their  drawbacks,  common, 
however,  to  annals  and  religious  histories  of  all  nations,  their 
chronology  is  admirably  accurate,*  and  neither  Brahmanism 
nor  even  the  Sanskrit  language  can  show  any  work  of  an 
unquestionable  date  with  the  shadow  of  a  claim  to  their 
honesty  of  intention  and  their  accuracy  of  chronological 
record. 

*  AfoAir.,  Iatrod.,  pp.  it  (oil.  Also  Norman,  JRAS.,  1008,  pp.  1  foil. 

'  See  Geiger,  Iutrod.,  pp.  xx  foil. 


THE  DAWN  OF  THE  GOLDEN  ERA 


147 


CHAPTER  yin 
The  Dawn  of  the  Golden  Era 
rpHE  history  of  Ceylon  from  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  to 
about  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh,  is  but  a  narrative 
of  the  decline  of  the  power  and  prosperity  which  had  been 
matured  under  the  old  dynasty  of  kings  and  of  the  rise  of  the 
Malabar  marauders,  whose  ceaseless  forays  and  incursions 
eventually  reduced  authority  to  feebleness  and  the  bland  to 
desolation.  The  accounts  given  of  the  royal  imbeciles  who  filled 
the  throne  during  this  period  contain  hardly  any  events  of 
sufficient  importance  to  relieve  the  monotonous  repetitions  of 
temples  founded,  and  dagobas  repaired,  of  tanks  constructed, 
and  monks  endowed  with  lands  for  their  maintenance. 
Civil  dissensions,  religious  schbms,  royal  intrigues  and 
assassinations  contributed  equally  with  foreign  invasions  to 
diminish  the  influence  of  the  monarchy  and  exhaust  the 
strength  of  the  kingdom. 

Intimate  relations  existed  between  the  Tamils  of  the 
Dckkhan  and  the  Sinhalese  settlers  from  quite  au  early  period. 
Vijaya’s  second  wife  was  the  daughter  of  a  Paodysn  king  and 
her  companions  were  married  to  Vijaya’s  ministers  and  other 
officials.  Similar  alliances  arc  frequent,  and  the  Sinhalese 
annalwt-s  allude  on  more  tlian  one  occasion  to  the  D*mi]a 
(Tamil)  consorts  of  their  sovereigns.  Intimate  intercourse  and 
consanguinity  were  thus  established  from  the  remotest  times  ; 
high  employments  were  given  to  the  Tamils,  their  sendees 
made  use  of,  and  privileges  given  to  them.  Thus  encouraged, 
the  Malabars  first  came  over  to  Ceylon  as  settlers  and  later  as 
invaders.  As  early  as  237  B.c.  Sena  and  Guttika  seized  the 
throne,  and,  as  they  ruled  righteously,  the  people  seem  to  have 
acquiesced  in  their  sovereignty.1  The  first  regular  invasion, 
however,  was  under  Ela|a,  who  ruled  for  forty-three  years,  with 
characteristic  justice  and  impartiality.  These  earlier  bands  of 
immigrants  brought  with  them  a  certain  amount  of  civilizing 
»  J/.K,  «i.  tt.  10-12. 


148 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


influence  in  tho  form  of  Hindu  culture,  which,  as  we  have 
aheady  seen,  the  Sinhalese  were  quick  to  assimilate.  The 
Tamils  of  South  India,  then  aa  now,  were  earnest  students  of 
Sanskrit  literature,  and  wc  may  well  presume  that  their 
presence  in  the  island  helped  much  in  encouraging  the  study 
of  Sanskrit  in  Ceylon.  The  Tamil  colonists  became  one  with 
the  people ;  they  settled  down  peacefully,  pursuing  their 
different  vocations  unmolested  in  the  observance  of  their 
religious  rites,  because  of  the  broad-mindedness  of  the 
Sinhalese  rulers. 

Settlement  and  intermarriages  had  all  along  been 
encouraged,1  and  many  Sinhalese  families  of  rank  had  formed 
connexions  with  the  Tamils.  The  schisms  among  the  Buddhists 
themselves,  tendiug  as  they  did  to  engraft  Brahmanical  rites 
upon  the  doctrines  of  the  purer  faith,  seemed  to  have  matured 
the  intimacy  that  existed  between  the  two  peoples  ;  some  of 
the  Sinhalese  kings  erected  temples  for  the  Hindu  gods,* 
and  the  promoters  of  the  Vaitulyun  heresies  found  refuge  from 
persecution  among  their  sympathizers  in  the  Dckkhau.* 

But  the  majority  of  the  subsequent  invasions  by  the 
Mala  bars  •were  not  regular  conquests  nor  were  they,  by  any 
means,  attempts  at  peaceful  penetration.  They  were  of  a 
predatory  character,  periodic  forays  made  by  a  restless  and 
energetic  race,  into  a  fertile  and  defenceless  country.  From 
time  to  time  successive  bands  of  marauders  would  swoop 
down  upon  some  place  of  debarcation,  gather  together  as 
much  spoils  us  they  could  from  the  uuwarlike  Sinhalese  of 
the  coast,  and  retire  into  their  fortified  strongholds  on  the 
continent.  Once,  in  a.u.  113, 4  Gaja-Buhu  avenged  their  out¬ 
rages  by  means  of  a  punitive  expedition  into  the  Cola  country 
and  inflicted  upon  them  so  severe  a  defeat,  that  the  lesson  was 
long  remembered,  and  from  that  time  till  about  the  middle  of 
the  fifth  century  them  was  an  interval  of  respite  from  their 

1  Tumour'*  Epitome,  p.  19. 

*  KAja-rainAtara,  p.  78. 

*  JJ.  f\,  xxx vu,  *rut  Epitome,  p.  25. 

*  Tcnnrot,  i,  p.  397. 


THE  DAWN  0?  THE  GOLDEN  ERA 


149 


depredations.  In  a.d.  433,  however,  a  large  army  landed  in 
Ceylon  and  seized  the  capital,1  and  for  twenty-seven  years, 
till  Dhatuscna  recovered  possession  of  the  north  of  the  island, 
five  Tamil  rulers  in  succession  administered  the  government 
of  the  country  north  of  the  Mahuvilligariga.  But  Dh&tuscna 
was  followed  by  his  son  Kisyapa,*  and  the  country  was 
thrown  into  a  Btate  of  chaoa  once  more.  In  the  succession  of 
assassinations,  conspiracies  and  civil  wars,  which  distracted 
the  kingdom  during  the  next  several  centuries,  and  during  the 
struggles  of  the  rival  branches  of  tho  royal  house,  each 
claimant,  in  h»  adversity,  betook  himself  to  the  Indian 
continent,  and  Malabar  mercenaries  from  P&odiy*  and  Cola 
enrolled  themselves  indifferently  under  any  leader,  and 
deposed  or  restored  kings  at  their  pleasure.  Tho  RajdvaK 
in  a  single  passage,  enumerates  fourteen  sovereigns  who  were 
murdered,  each  by  his  successor,  between  a.d.  523  and  &48.J 
For  nearly  four  hundred  years,  till  the  beginning  of  the 
eleven tli  century,  the  Sinhalese  annals  are  filled  with  these 
exploits  and  escapades  of  the  Malabars ;  they  filled  every 
office,4  and  it  was  they  who  decided  the  claims  of  competing 
candidates  for  the  crown.  At  last  tho  island  became  so  infested 
with  them  that  tho  feeble  kings,  finding  it  impracticable  to 
oust  them  from  the  capital  city  of  Anuriidha-pura,  began  to 
move  southwards  to  escape  their  attentions  and  transferred 
their  residence  to  Polonnoruva,  which  eventually  became  the 
capital.  It  is  remarkable  that  these  later-day  Malabars  never 
identified  themselves  with  any  plan  for  promoting  the 
prosperity,  and  for  the  embellishment  of  Ceylon  ;  they  aspired 
not  to  beautify  or  enrich,  but  to  impoverish  and  to  deface ; 
their  influence  tended  not  to  exalt  and  civilize,  but  to  ruin 
and  debase  all  that  was  worthy  in  the  culture  of  Ceylon. 

The  Sinhalese  were  either  paralysed  by  dread,  and  made 

>  U.  V.,  xxxriii,  rr.  11  «. 

*  Ibid.,  vr.  84  B. 

»  lajavoli,  p.  Wi. 

*  Epitome,  p.  S3. 


150 


THB  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


but  feeble  efforts  to  rid  themselves  of  their  invaders,  or  were 
fascinated  by  their  military  pomp,  and  endeavoured  to  con¬ 
ciliate  them  by  alliances,  or  sometimes  purchased  the 
evacuation  of  the  island  by  paying  huge  ransoms.  Every  now 
and  then  the  more  patriotic  among  the  Sinhalese  (especially 
the  sturdy  mountaineers  of  Rohana),  impatient  of  foreign 
domination,  made  determined  efforts  to  resist  the  encroach¬ 
ments  of  the  luted  Malabar  oppressors,  but  the  brave  high¬ 
landers  were  helpless  against  the  numerical  superiority  of 
their  foe.  In  the  reign  of  Mahinda  III  (circa  a.d.  997),  the 
king  married  a  Kalihga  princess,  and  in  a  civil  war  that 
followed  during  the  regime  of  his  son  and  successor  the  island 
was  reduced  to  extremes  of  anarchy  and  oppression,  and 
finally  in  1023,  when  the  Cojians  again  invaded  Coylon,  they 
succeeded  in  establishing  a  Malabar  viceroy  at  Polonn&ruva 
(the  capital  city),  who  held  sway  over  the  kingdom  for  neatly 
thirty  years,  protected  by  a  foreign  army  of  mercenary  soldiers. 
The  rightful  sovereign  had  been  taken  captive  and  cast  on 
the  coast  of  India,  where  he  died  in  exile.1 

Meanwhile  in  Rohana,  stern  and  rugged  mother  of  many  of 
Ceylon's  noblest  sons,  a  brave  and  heroic  band  had  striven  to 
maintain  their  sturdy  independence  in  the  only  remnant  of 
free  territory  left  unmolested  by  the  oppressors.  From  out  of 
the  gloom  and  despondency  of  anarchy  and  intrigue,  and 
amidst  the  terrible  confusion  of  these  conflicts,  there  suddenly 
arose  in  Rohaiia’s  mountain  fastnesses  the  hero  destined  to 
rescue  the  kingdom  from  alien  domination,  deliver  it  from 
the  luted  sway  of  the  Mala  bars  and  bring  it  back  to  its  ancient 
wealth  and  tranquillity.  It  was  a  stupendous  task,  this 
restoration  of  national  independence,  but  the  new  leader  was 
equal  to  it.  Kitti  was  his  name.  With  indomitable  courage 
and  aided  by  the  steadfast  loyalty  of  his  mountaineers,  he 
Achieved  victory  after  victory  over  all  his  enomies,  and 
re-united  the  severed  kingdom  of  Ceylon  under  one  national 
banner.  When  his  position  was  thus  consolidated,  he 

1  Rija  rat.,  pp.  84-S,  and  M.V.,  It,  tt.  18-33. 


THE  DAWS  or  THE  OOI.DBX  ERA 


151 


proclaimed  himself  king  under  the  name  of  Sirisaftghabodhi 
Vijaya-Bahu.  Thus  was  peace  given  once  more  to  the 
stricken  land. 

During  the  troublous  times  that  intervened  between 
Dhatusenn  and  Vijaya-Bahu,  the  study  of  the  Dhamma,  as 
well  as  of  the  secular  branches  of  learning  that  had  been 
cultivated  to  a  high  degreo  in  earlier  times,  had  perforce  to 
be  abandoned,  owing  to  the  alien  occupation.  But  during 
these  four  hundred  years,  of  bitter  gloom  and  despondency, 
it  was  their  common  religion  that  held  the  people  together 
and  sustained  them  in  their  adversity.  Their  rulers  recognized 
this  fact,  and,  whenever  a  chance  arose,  the  rival  claimants 
to  the  throne  attempted  to  earn  the  goodwill  of  the  populace 
by  munificent  gifts  to  the  SnAgita. 

A  few  of  them — indifferent  to,  or  happily  unembarrassed 
by,  any  questions  of  external  policy  or  foreign  expeditions, 
and  limited  to  the  narrow  range  of  internal  administration- 
devoted  themselves  to  intellectual  pursuits.  The  accounts  of 
their  reigns  refresh  the  records  of  this  period  like  oases  in  a 
desert  tract.  Some  of  them  were  ardent  lovers  of  literature. 
Such  was  Culla  Moggallana  :  "  There  was  no  one  like  to  him 
as  a  poet,”  says  the  A/oW-cotrwa.'and,  *'  being  a  man  of  great 
talent,  he  composed  many  sacred  Bongs,  which  he  caused  to 
be  recited  by  men  seated  on  elephants  at  the  end  of  discourses 
at  the  temple  services  ",  He  made  ”  unusual  ”  offerings  to 
those  that  preached  the  Doctrine  and  caused  them  to  read  the 
TipUaka  with  its  commentaries.  So  was  also  Kumara- 
Dhutusena,  also  called  KumAradasa,  author  of  a  melodious 
Sanskrit  poem,  the  Jamki-harana*  and  so  passionately 
attached  to  his  bosom  friend  Kalidasa,  that,  in  despair  at 
his  death,  he  flung  himself  into  the  flames  of  the  poet's 
funeral  pyre*  Another  was  Aggabodhi  I,  patron  of  the  arts, 

*  C!>.  xli,  tt.  65-61.  (Wijwinhs's  trsnsl.) 

•  \VicluTMBA»iCkgkie,  p.  xiii. 

»  Alwia,  SidattatfarA,  p.  cliv.  This  KAlidi*  was  not  tbs  Ssnskrit 
dx»m*tbrt,  but  sppsrentl)  t  Sinbsleso  pact,  ooc  octwo  ol  who*  vunei  hsvs 
beon  pprservwL 


152 


TUB  PALI  UTKJUT0KE  OF  CEYLON 


surrounded  by  twelve  talented  poeta,1  of  whose  works, 
unfortunately,  we  know  nothing,  and  Silamigha  Sena  or 
Matvala  Sen,  author  of  the  Siyabas-iakara,  the  standard  work 
on  Sinhalese  prosody.  Others  patronized  the  Saftgha,  the 
repository  of  all  religious  and  secular  learning,  by  providing 
them  with  alms,  and  dwelling  places  and  extensive  lands  for 
the  maintenance  of  their  monasteries.  Some  of  them  were 
actuated  in  their  generoAity  by  a  desire  to  make  amends  for 
their  misdeeds,1  and  we  find  the  orthodox  monks  of  the 
Theriya  Nikaya  more  than  once  disgraced  because  of  their 
reluctance  to  accept  gifta  from  those  of  whose  actions  they 
could  not  approve.* 

The  annals  of  this  period  are  full  of  records  of  gifts  to  the 
heretic  sects,  possibly  because  of  their  connivance  at  the  crimes 
of  their  patrons.4  The  Abhayagiri  fraternity  seems  to  have 
benefited  most  by  such  royal  favours ;  but  even  they  suffered 
from  the  cupriciousness  of  their  benefactors,  who  would  not 
hesitate  to  undo  all  the  good  they  bad  done,  pull  down  their 
monasteries,  and  remove  from  them  all  objects  of  value.* 
Tbo  activities  of  the  schismatics  in  carrying  on  their 
propaganda  were  much  in  abeyance  during  this  period,  and  we 
hear  of  only  one  attempt  to  spread  heresy,  which,  however, 
proved  abortive,*  being  put  down  with  a  firm  hand  by  the 
ruling  prince  of  the  district  where  it  reared  its  head.  Some  of 
the  more  broad-minded  among  the  rulers  attempted  to  bring 
about  a  reconciliation  between  the  various  sects  by  making 
them  endowments  to  be  held  in  common.  Thus  Aggabodhi  I 
gave  the  Sanghikagiri  Vihara  with  200  fields  to  all  members  of 
the  Order  and  dedicated  the  Kunioda  Vihara  to  all  the 


*  Xibiya-ta^taha,  pu  17. 

*  o.g.  the  parricide  KUyrnpa.  U.V..  xxxlx,  rr.  8  foil.;  chap,  xliii. 
rr.  28  foil. 

*  Ibid.,  xxxix,  rv.  11  folL 
4  Ibid.,  paxtim, 

*  Ibid.,  xllv,  rr,  139-42. 

*  Ibid.,  x.'ii.  rv.  35-40. 


THE  DAWS  OE  THE  GOLDEN  ERA 


153 


fraternities.1  Perhaps  the  repeated  invasions  of  the  island  by 
the  fierce  Tamils  did  much  to  foster  the  feeling  of  brotherhood 
among  the  monks,  who,  in  spite  of  all  their  dissensions,  were 
yet  patriotic  Sinhalese  and  faithful  sons  of  the  Buddha.  But 
the  old  feud  between  the  Mahavihira  and  the  Abhayagiri 
Vihara  continued,  and,  when  SiUmeghavapoa  requested  the 
two  communities  to  observe  the  uposaihi  ceremony  together, 
the  former  promptly  refused,  and  thereby  earned  the  wrath 
of  the  king.*  And  later,  when  Dathopatissa  II  built  the 
Ivappura  Parivcua  for  the  Abhayagiri  monks  on  land  which 
encroached  upon  the  sacred  boundary  of  the  Theriya  brethren, 
the  latter  showed  their  great  disapproval  by  performing 
towards  him  the  paita-niklcujjana-kamma  *  (inversion  of  the 
alms  bowl  on  their  begging  rounds,  thus  indicating  their  refusal 
to  accept  his  alms,  a  kind  of  excommunication). 

The  gifts  thus  indiscriminately  given  to  members  of  the 
Saftgha  and  the  want  of  proper  supervision  brought  dis¬ 
organization  within  the  Order  itself,  and  attracted  into  its 
fold  many  undesirables  who  were  actuated  merely  by  desire 
for  gain.  So  low  was  the  degeneracy  into  which  the  monks 
had  fallen  whon  Yijaya-Bahu  came  to  the  throne  that,  as  we 
shall  sec  later,  he  had  to  obtain  help  from  Ramafiftadcsa 
in  re-establishing  ordination  in  Ceylon. 

But  even  before  Vijaya-BAhu  two  attempts  were  made  to 
prevent  moral  worthlessness  among  the  Saftgha.  The  first 
was  by  Dalla  Moggnllana  (a.d.  608-14),  who  proclaimed  a 
Dhatnma-l-amma  *  The  second  was  by  SilA  Meghavmooa 
(614-23),  who  was  a  staunch  adherent  of  the  Abhayagiri 

»  U.r..  chap,  xlii,  vv.  »-22. 

»  Ihtd..  xliv,  tv.  80-2. 

*  Ibid.,  sir.  vv.  32  ft. 

*  The  expevaion  often  oeeura  in  the  M.V.  to  denote  the  manner  in  which 
(lie  earlier  hinge  interfered  to  carry  out  reform*  in  the  Buddhiat  Church. 
It  mean*  literally  a  l*gal  net.  The  act  teem*  to  hare  coa*i*ted  in  tho 
promulgation  by  the  kin*  of  a  decree  enforcing  the  observance  of  diwipUiw 
among  the  priesthood,  and,  in  *ome  caw  a.  empowering  one  or  more  of  it* 
Order  to  carry  the  decree  into  effect  by  mcani  of  an  cccle*ia*tical  court, 
Wljeainha,  U.  If,  p.  ti.  footnote. 


164  THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 

fraternity.  Thin  Nikaya  had  become  quite  degenerate ; 
prosperity  had  corrupted  the  members  of  the  community, 
whoso  lives  were  now  unworthy  of  their  high  calling.  A  young 
and  zealous  bhikkhu,  Bod  hi  by  name,  realizing  the  immediate 
necessity  for  reform,  approached  the  king  personally  and 
requested  him  to  issue  a  decree  for  enforcing  discipline  in  the 
Order.  The  king  readily  acceded  and  entrusted  the  execution 
of  it  to  the  young  reformer  himself.  The  latter,  armed  with 
the  royal  authority,  proceeded  to  hold  a  thorough  investigation, 
as  a  result  of  which  a  large  number  of  bhikkhus  were  expelled. 
This  zeal  for  reform,  however,  cost  him  his  life.  The  men  who 
were  thus  driven  out  of  the  Order  conspired  together  and 
murdered  him.  The  king,  in  righteous  indignation,  had  all  the 
leading  conspirators  arrested,  cut  off  their  hands  and  made 
them  tank-keepers.1  Many  others  were  banished.  And, 
appreciating  the  zealous  efforts  of  the  murdered  bhikkhu, 
he  carried  out  the  reforms  which  had  been  initiated,  and 
purified  the  Order.  His  attempts,  however,  to  unite  the  Malm- 
Vihara  and  Abhayagiri  fraternities  ended,  as  we  saw  earlier, 
in  complete  failure. 

And  every  now  and  then  some  of  the  monarchs,  more 
enlightened  than  others  and  more  anxious  for  the  welfare  of 
the  religion,  strove  to  keep  alive  the  study  of  the  Dkamma. 
Thus  Dathopa-Tina  I  (circa  640-52)  gave  a  special  parivena 
to  the  Elder  Nagasala  at  Maricavatti  and  prevailed  upon  him 
to  teach  the  Abhidhanma  with  the  AUhakatha,7  and  his 
successor  Kassapa  U  made  great  offerings  to  the  holy  monk 
Mahudhummakathl,  and  made  him  teach  the  Dhamma. 
Tot  the  monk,  who  dwelt  at  Katandhakdra  in  the  monastery 
built  by  the  king’s  brother,  he  caused  the  whole  Pali  scripture 
to  bo  written,  together  with  the  lesser  books  or  “  epitomes  " 
(Sa-sangaham). 

The  extant  inscriptions  of  this  period  reveal  to  us 

1  JT.F.,  xKv,  w.  75-83. 

•  Ibid.,  vv.  149  B. 


THE  DAWN  Of  THE  GOLDEN  ERA 


155 


the  great  care  with  which  the  monastic  rules  were  drawn 
up  with  a  view  to  securing  the  independence,  the  exalted 
prestige,  and,  above  all,  the  purity  of  the  Buddhist  Church. 
No  kind  of  corruption  was  tolerated  in  the  management  of 
temple  property,  no  slackness  in  the  observance  of  religious 
ceremonies.  No  monk  of  questionable  character  was  allowed 
to  remain  in  the  Vihara,  and  for  anyone  who  desired  to  enter 
the  Order  a  minimum  knowledge  of  the  Dkamma  was  insisted 
upon.  Thus  from  an  inscription  of  Kassapa  V  (929-39),  who, 
it  is  interesting  to  note,  expounded  the  Abhidhamms  himself 
and  caused  it  to  be  written  on  plates  of  gold  (A/.  K.,  lii,  vv. 
49-50),  wo  learn  that  no  one  was  allowed  to  join  the  Order 
unless  he  knew  (probably  by  heart)  at  least  four  sections 
(bhdnaeSm)  of  the  PariUa.1 

Mahinda  IV  (circo  975-91)  encouraged  the  study  of  the 
Dhamma  by  decreeing,  in  an  inscription  which  is  still 
preserved,  that  the  monks  who  read  aloud  and  explained  to  an 
audience  the  Vinaya-pilaka  should  be  assigned  five  tasag  *  of 
food  and  raiment,  for  the  SuUa-pitaka  seven  vasag,  and  for  the 
A  bhidha  mma-pilaka  twelve  vasag  *  He,  moreover,  caused 
Dhammamitta  to  expound  the  Abhidhamma,  and  Dithin&ga, 
"  who  dwelt  as  a  recluse  in  the  forest  and  was  like  an  ornament 
unto  La  Aka,  to  discourse  thereon."*  Sena  IV  (c.  972),  on  one 
occasion  sat  in  the  Lohapas&da  and  expounded  the  SutlarUa 
to  the  brethren  of  all  the  three  fraternities  assembled  therein.* 
The  great  attention  pakl  to  the  AbhMamma  is  significant. 
As  a  result  of  these  activities  of  enlightened  rulers,  the  torch 
of  learning  was  prevented  from  being  totally  extinguished, 
and  even  this  dark  chapter  of  Ceylon’s  history  is  not  completely 
barren  of  literary  productions  concerned  with  P41i  literature. 

To  this  period  may  be  assigned  the  K htttna -ppakara  no 

‘  Kp.  Zty..  toL  i.  pt.  If,  pp-  42-3. 

*  Vtuaj.  a  rutg  i»  five  cell*  with  food  *nd  raiment.  Up.  Z* jr .  rol.  I, 
p.  100.  n.  4. 

'  Ibid.,  rot.  i,  p<.  Ui.  p.  100. 

•  JJ.  V;  liv,  tv.  33-7. 

»  Ibid.,  liv.  v.  4. 


156 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  Of  CEYLON 


(olso  called  the  ParamaUha-dipa 1  by  the  Elder  Khema).  The 
book  is  now  not  widely  known  in  Ceylon,  and  whatever  copies 
there  are  at  present  have  been  introduced  from  Burma. 
The  Gandha-vamsa  ascribes  it  to  a  Khema  Thera  of  Ceylon.1 
According  to  the  Saddhamma-saiigaha,1  it  is  a  work  expository 
of  the  Abhidhamma,  and  it  is  extensively  studied  in  Burma 
as  one  of  tho  nine  mediaeval  compendia  of  Abhidhamma, 
known  as  Let-Than  or  “  little  finger  manuals  It  is  more 
often  called  in  Ceylon  Numa-rUpasamata,  and  this  title  is 
more  appropriate  to  the  contents  of  the  work.  It  contains 
short  descriptions  of  tire  citta,  a  discourse  on  citta-cetasika, 
defining  kusala  and  akutala  dhamma,  and  concludes  with  a 
list  of  twenty-eight  mnemonic  verses,  giving  in  brief  the 
meanings  of  such  terms  as  mahabhuta,  indriya,  etc.,  which 
occur  in  Abhidhamma  literature.  That  the  book  was  held  in 
high  esteem  in  Ceylon  from  ancient  times  is  evident  from  the 
references  to  its  author  in  the  Nikuya-sa ityraha  and  the 
Saddhamma-rainakara,1  and  in  the  latter  he  is  spoken  of  as 
Tipitaka-pariyatti-dhara  (versed  in  tho  text  of  the  Tipitaka). 
There  is  a  commentary  on  it  by  Vacissara  Mahaaami  of  Ceylon 
(q.v.),  written  in  the  twelfth  century*  Both  text  and 
commentary  were  published  in  Sinhalese  characters  by  a 
monk  named  Batapola  Dbammapala  in  Ceylon  in  1908,  and 
an  English  transliteration  of  the  text  alone  has  appeared  in 
the  Journal  of  the  Puli  Test  Society.1  The  short  disquisitions 
on  the  various  subjects  are  concisely  written  in  simple,  easy 
style  and  the  whole  work  forms  a  little  handbook  for  the  study 
of  mediaeval  Abhidhamma. 

Mr.  Wickremasinghe  agrees  with  Professor  Geiger  in 
accepting  the  tenth  century  as  the  date  of  the  compilation  of 

1  v.  1232. 

*  O.V „  p,  01  and  71. 

»  p.  63.  JPTS.  Bd. 

*  Aan«.  Compendium.  preL,  p.  Till. 

*  p.  307,  Colombo  Ed. 

*  Do  Zoyes  ascribed  tbe  Kktma  ppatarana  itself  to  Vieiasara.  Calaloyu*. 
p.  6. 

*  1016,  pp.  1  foil. 


THE  DAWN  oy  THE  GOLDEN  ERA 


157 


the  Pali  MaMbodJii-vatnta.1  S.  Arthur  Strong,  who  edited  it 
for  the  Pali  Text  Society  (1891),  assigned  the  author  to  the 
same  period  as  Buddhaghosa,  his  reason  being  that  the 
Gandha-vamta  mentions  it  as  having  been  written  at  the 
instigation  of  one  D&thanaga,  whom  he  identified  with  another 
named  D&ttha,  who  is  said  (in  the  Gandha-tanua)  to  hove 
requested  Buddhaghosa  to  write  the  Sutnahgala-vtlasini. 
Strong  was  wrong  in  assuming  that  Dattha  ami  Datfhanaga 
were  one  and  the  same.  Besides  the  Gandha-vamsa,  the 
Sinhalese  version  of  the  Pili  work,  written  by  Saranaftkara 
Salsgharaja  in  the  eighteenth  century,  and  named  the 
Madhurariha -prakd i  ini,1  mentions  that  tho  Bodfti-vamsa  was 
written  at  the  instigation  of  a  Dathaniga.*  Both 
Wickzemasinghc  and  Geiger  identify  Dithanaga  with  the 
(he ra  of  the  same  name,  whom  Mahinda  IV  (975-91)  appointed 
to  discourse  on  the  /fWidAamma.4  If  that  supposition  be 
correct,  tho  Mahdbodhi-mtma  must  have  been  written  in  the 
last  quarter  of  the  tenth  century. 

It  begins  with  a  history  of  tho  Buddha  Dlpahkura,  gives  in 
a  short  summary  an  account  of  the  existence  of  the  Bodhisatta 
under  previous  Buddhas,  the  life  of  Gotama,  bis  enlightenment 
at  tho  foot  of  the  Bodhi-troc,  the  planting  of  the  Bodhi-tree 
at  Jetavana  by  Ananda,  providing  the  occasion  for  the  Buddha 
to  preach  the  Kaliftga-bodhi-jataka,4  the  Parinibbona,  the 
Three  Councils,  Mahinda ’s  mission,  the  establishment  of 
Buddhism  in  Ceylon,  the  introduction  there  of  the  relics  and 
a  branch  of  the  Bodhi-tree,  the  planting  of  tho  sacred  tree 
and  the  establishment  of  the  Bodhi-pOjh,  or  ceremonies  in 
connexion  with  it. 

The  book  itself  sayB  nothing  about  its  authorship,  except 
that  it  waa  a  translation  from  a  Sinhalese  original.  The 

*  Ctttal.,  p.  sir,  and  Ucigcr.  ZJ.I'.  *nd  If.  I'.,  p.  7®. 

*  Wickro  nuuuighc,  p.  xxi 

*  Do  Zoyas,  p.  1ft. 

*  U.V.,  Hr.  v.  >0. 

*  FausbOil,  It,  p.  2SS  toll. 


158 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


Gandha-vamsa  (p.  61)  mentions  the  work  by  name,  but  in  a. 
group  of  five  works  assigned  vaguely  to  unnamed  authors. 
The  S&tana-vamsa-dipa  (v.  1262)  calls  Upa-Tissa  the  author  of 
tho  Bodki-vamsa,  but  says  nothing  more  about  him.  The  Elu- 
Bodhi-txiJMo,'  which  is  an  enlarged  Sinhalese  translation  of 
the  Pali  work,  done  by  Vilgammftla  Mahathcra,  in  the 
beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century,  ascribes  the  Pali 
Bodhi-wtnta  to  Upatissa  and  so  does  SaranaftJcarn’s  later 
translation  referred  to  above,  written  at  the  beginning  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  Guru]ugGmi,  who  lived  about  the  latter 
half  of  the  twelfth  century,*  author  of  the  Amavatura,  wrote 
a  masterly  commentary  in  the  Sinhalese  of  his  period  on  the 
Pali  Bodki-vamsa,  called  the  Bodki-vamm-parikaiha,  but  better 
known  as  the  Dkarma-pradipika,  and  there,  too,  the  work  is 
assigned  to  Upatiasa.  An  Upatissa  of  Ceylon  is  mentioned 
in  the  Gondha-vamta  (p.  67),  but  we  know  nothing  more 
about  him. 

In  tho  whole  of  the  first  chapter  the  close  dependence  on 
the  Nidana-kathd  is  unmistakable.  Even  verbal  identity  is 
not  rare.*  Usually  the  Maltabodhi-vamta  account  is  shorter 
and  more  like  an  epitome.  It  is  interesting,  however,  to  note 
that  the  story  of  the  Kalihga-bodhi-jataka  as  given  in  the 
Bodki-vamsa  differs  from  Fausboll’s  version  of  it ;  among  other 
peculiarities  in  the  former  version,  being  a  long  description  of 
dibba-cakkhu  (clairvoyance)  ard  the  seven  gems  of  a  cakkavaUi 
king.  The  later  chapters  show  direct  dependence  on  the 
Samanla-pdsddikd  and  the  Makd-vanua,  chiefly  the  former. 
Thus  the  description  of  Mahinda’s  activities  after  his  arrival 
in  Ceylon  agrees  almost  word  for  word  with  that  in  the 
Samanta-pdtidikd,  so  much  so  that  we  are  led  to  the  con¬ 
clusion  that  the  whole  passage  was  directly  borrowed  from 
Buddbsghosa’s  commentary.  The  concluding  versos  of  some 
of  the  chapters  are  the  same  as  the  closing  chapters  of  the 

1  Wickrcnwanghc,  p.  22. 

*  Wieltrrnminglip,  p.  31, 

•  Cl.  31.B.V.,  31-4,  with  J.V.K.,  17,  52. 


TUX  DAWN  07  TUB  GOLDEN  ERA  15$ 

A/flAd-wwa.1  In  our  discussion  in  ft  previous  chapter  of  the 
dat®  of  the  Maha-vxntita-Cika,  we  presumed  that  the 
Bodhi-vanuaUhakathi  referred  to  there  was  different  from 
Upatissa's  work,  and  was  more  probably  the  earlier  Sinhalese 
source  of  our  MahatxMi-vainta.  But  the  quotations  from  later 
works  such  as  the  Alaha-vainta  and  the  Samcmla-pdsddikS 
would  lead  us  to  believe  that  Upatissa  did  not  merely  translate 
the  Sinhalese  text  directly,  but  also  improved  upon  it  in 
the  translation,  supplementing  it  with  quotations  from  works, 
which,  in  the  meantime,  had  attained  great  authority.  We 
shall  soc  later  that  this  was  the  case  with  other  historical 
works  of  a  similar  type,  e.g.  the  TAtipa-eamso. 

Even  where  the  Mahahodhi-vamta  borrows  from  other  works 
its  style  is  different  from  theirs,  more  artificial  and  affected  ; 
the  stanzas  are  written  in  sonorous  Pali,  the  ornamental 
epithets  are  plentiful  and  the  author  is  fond  of  long  periods. 
There  are  distinct  traces  in  the  language  of  the  influences  of 
Sanskrit  on  the  Pili,  and  we  may  regard  this  book  as  marking 
the  beginning  of  the  period  of  Sanskritized  Pili.  Sometimes 
Pali  words  are  used  in  their  Sanskrit  sense,  sometimes  Sanskrit 
words  not  found  perhaps  elsewhere  at  all  in  the  old  Pili 
literature,*  and  long  compounds,  possibly  derived  from  an 
acquaintance  with  Sanskrit  Kivyas,  arc  employed  ;  the  whole 
tone  and  manner  of  his  work  betray  a  tendency  to  use  a  kind 
of  Sanskritized  Pali. 

Somewhere  about  A-D.  1300  an  umplified  Sinhalese  version 
of  the  Pili  Mahabodhi-vamsa  was  made  by  Vilgammula 
Mahathera,  chief  monk  of  the  Kitsirimevan  Kalani  Temple, 
at  the  request  of  Paijdita  Parikrama-Bihu  of  Kurunegala 
(c.  1295-13-17).  The  author  is  probably  the  one  mentioned  in 
the  Nikat/a-saAgrahn  (p.  24)  as  haring  made  a  Sinhalese 
paraphrase  of  Mayflra’s  Sanskrit  poem  SUnja-iaUika  in  the 

i  o*.  U.V.,  xir,  05;  p.  122  ;  J/.V.,xri,  18;  p.  139; 

U.V.,  xriB,  98  ;  Af.B.r.,  p.  153.  Xw  Gcigtr.  U.Y.  sod  D.Y..  p.  77. 

•  «•■*.  uiit*  Ukttrana-MiJiani.  p.  5;  pl*lpaSa-cara*ap&tala  Tig<,  p.  81, 
to  give  but  two.  See  aUo  RUya  Davids,  JHAS..  1909,  p.  393. 


160 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


ioign  of  DaiLbadeuiya  Parakiama-Bahu  (c.  123G-71).1 
Tlii*  is  written  in  almost  pure  Elu,  which  evidently  made  it 
difficult  to  be  understood  in  later  years,  when  Elu  had  come 
to  be  regarded  as  too  archaic  for  ordinary  usage  ;  for  we  find 
that  early  in  the  eighteenth  century  Saranaftkara  SaRgharaja 
compiled  an  interverbal  paraphrase  of  the  Pali  work  into  the 
Sinhalese  of  hi*  own  period*  It  is  curious  that  SaranaRkara 
makes  no  mention  of  Vilgammilla’s  translation.  There  also 
exists  a  Sinhalese  glossary  of  the  Puli  terms,  of  extreme 
philological  value,  judging  from  the  language,  written  about 
the  fourteenth  century  by  a  scholar  of  unusual  attainments 
of  whom  nothing  is  known.  Both  this  and  the  other  less  famous 
work  on  the  Bodhi-tree— the  Sulu-lodhi-vayisa  (the  lesser 
Bodhi-varua)  are  still  in  manuscript  form.® 

The  Gandha-vamta  4  also  mentions  an  Upatissa,  a  native  of 
Ceylon,  os  author  of  the  Anagata-vamta-oUhakaihd.  According 
to  the  Gandha-vamta,  the  original  A  ndgata-vairua  was  the  work 
of  an  Elder  named  Kassapa,*  who  also  wrote  Moha-vtcchedant, 
Vimati-crhedani.nni]  thbBuddha-vamsa .  The  Sdtana-varnsa-dtpa 
(v.  1204)  says  that  ho  was  a  poet  who  lived  in  tike  Coja  country, 
but  we  know  nothing  cither  of  his  date  or  of  hia  other  works. 
It  is  certain  that  the  Buddha -vanita,  which  he  is  supposed  to 
have  written,  was  different  from  the  canonical  work  of  the 
same  name.  Ceylon  tradition  supports  the  Qandha-vamsa  in 
ascribing  the  til'd  on  the  Anagato-vayisa  to  an  Upatissa,  but 
nothing  more  is  known  about  him.  A  copy  of  this  which  is  in 
the  library  of  the  Dajadil  Maligava  at  Kandy  in  Ceylon,  quotes 
the  Andgata-vamsa  in  full,  and  then  proceeds  to  explain  it. 
The  style  of  the  (lid  inclines  rue  to  the  view  that  we  may  be 
justified  in  identifying  its  author  with  Upatissa  of  the 
Bodhi-tamsa,  but  I  would  not  venture  any  opinion  until  more 
definite  evidence  is  forthcoming. 

1  Wickrcmaaingbr,  p.  23. 

>  Ibid.,  p.  100. 

*  See  Lte  Zopu,  p.  20. 

4  p.  72  and  p.  07. 

*  p.  61. 


THE  DAWN  OF  TUB  GOLDEN  ERA 


161 


The  Anagala-vomaa  1  itself  is  a  poem  of  about  150  stanzas 
(the  number  varies  in  different  copies)  on  the  future  Buddha 
Metteyya.  It  is  remarkable  that,  so  far  as  we  know,  there  does 
not  seem  to  be  any  mention  of  Metteyya’s  name  in  the 
Nikdga*  except  in  the  CakkamU i-Sihanada -s utla  of  the 
Dlgha  (vol.  iii,  p.  76),  quoted  also  in  the  Milinda 
(p.  159),  where  the  Buddha  speaks  of  the  glorious 
spread  of  the  Dhamma  under  Metteyya’s  regime.  The  name 
occurs  also  in  the  last  stanza  of  the  Buddha-vamsa.  By  the 
time  of  the  Maha-vasiu  the  legend  is  in  full  vogue,*  but  it  is 
in  the  A nagctia-vatrita  that  we  find  thefullestand  most  complete 
account  of  the  tradition.  That  it  is  a  late  work  there  is  not 
the  slightest  doubt ;  many  in  Ceylon  regard  it  a*  a  spurious 
work  altogether.3  It  is  regrettable,  however,  that  we  cannot 
got  any  definite  information  as  to  the  date  of  the  origin  and 
the  subsequent  growth  of  the  belief  held  by  the  Buddhists 
in  their  future  Buddha,  Metteyya.  In  earlier  times  it  was 
enough  to  say  that  many  future  Buddhas  would  come  to  be 
born  in  the  world,  and  then  a  few  details,  one  after  the  other, 
were  added  about  the  Buddha  who  was  to  come  immediately 
after  the  last  Gotama,  until  the  legend  grew  as  we  have  it 
now.  There  are  several  points  of  analogy  between  the  belief 
in  Metteyya  and  the  Western  idea  of  a  Messiah,  though  they 
are  not  the  same.  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids  has  found  one  reference 
to  the  Andgata-vamaa  in  Buddhaghosa's  V ituddhi-magga ,A 
but  whether  the  work  referred  to  there  is  the  same  as 
ours,  there  is  no  possibility  of  saying. 

Personally,  I  am  inclined  to  the  view  that  Upatissa's  corn- 
mentary  is  based  on  a  much  older  work,  just  as  the  Bodht-vamsa 
goes  back  to  an  earlier  Bodhi-vaintaUkaktUha  referred  to  in  the 
Mahd-vamaa-fikd.  Both  works  are  now  lost,  and  wc  shall 

*  For  the  text  with  extracts  from  the  commentary  tee  JPTS \  IsSO, 
pp.  33  toll. 

•  Rhyt  David*,  llattinji  Encyclopaedia,  1,  p.  4U. 

»  r.|£.  De  Zoyee,  p.  0. 

4  VunddMi-mayga,  U,  p.  701. 

li 


162  THK  PALI  LITERATURE  07  CEYLON 

probably  never  Lave  a  chance  of  knowing  more  about  them. 
The  introductory  verse*  of  the  present  Anagata-vatrua  mention 
that  it  was  preached  by  the  Buddha  at  the  request  of 
SAriputta,1  who  wished  to  know  about  the  future  of  the 
Buddha’s  religion.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  statement  goes 
back  to  an  old  tradition.  To  the  tenth  century  or  the  earlier 
part  of  the  eleventh  also  belongs  the  small  but  delightful 
Pali  poem  of  ninety -eight  stanzas,  known  as  the  Tda-kalSha 
g<ith&— the  stanzas  of  the  Oil  Cauldron.  They  purport  to 
be  the  religious  exhortations  of  a  great  Elder  named 
Kajyioiya  Thera,  who  was  condemned  to  be  cast  into  a  cauldron 
of  boiling  oil  on  suspicion  of  his  having  been  accessory  to  an 
intrigue  with  the  Queen  Consort  of  king  Kiilatii-Tisaa,  vrlio 
reigned  at  Kelaijiya  (306-207  B.C.).  The  story  is  related  in 
brief  in  the  22nd  chapter  of  the  Maha-vamsa*  but  it  omits  the 
fact  that  the  thera  was  killed  by  being  placed  in  a  cauldron 
of  boiling  oil.  Wo  are  told,  instead,  that  both  the  thera  and 
his  attendant  were  slain  and  thrown  into  the  sea.  The 
Rata-vdhinx,  written  by  Vedcha  in  the  first  half  of  the  fourteenth 
century,  give*  us  greater  details  of  the  story.*  There  we  are 
informed  that  the  kings’  attendants  placed  a  cauldron  of 
oil  on  tho  hearth  and,  when  the  oil  was  boiling,  hurled  tho 
thera  into  it-  The  thera  at  that  instant  attained  vipaetand, 
and,  becoming  an  Arahat,  rose  up  in  the  boiling  oil  and 
remained  unhurt,  “  like  a  royal  haipsn  in  an  emerald  vase,” 
and,  in  that  position  reciting  a  hundred  stanzas,  looked  into 
the  post  to  ascertain  of  what  sin  this  was  the  result.  He  found 
that  once  upon  a  time,  when  ho  was  a  shepherd,  he  cast  a  fly 
into  boiling  milk,  and  this  was  the  punishment  for  his 
former  misdeed.  Ho  then  expired,  and  the  king  had  his  body 
cast  into  the  sea.  A  vihara  seems  to  have  been  built  later  on 
the  spot  where  the  thera  was  put  to  death,  for  the  Sdlalihini- 
tandeia,  written  in  A.D.  1462,  refers  to  it  as  still  existing. 

»  JPT8..  1886,  p.  41,  vr.  1-8. 

*  If.  7.,  xxii,  tt.  13-20. 

'  See  Alwia,  Siiat  taegarii,  pp,  dxxx  And  cclxxi. 


TUB  DAWN  OP  THE  GOLDIN  EKA 


163 


•  "  The  decorated  hall,  which  in  their  zeal 

The  merit-seeking  people  built  upon 
The  spot  where  stood  the  cauldron  of  hot  oil 
Into  which  King  Kela^i-Tissa  threw 
The  guileless  sage,  a  mere  suspect  of  crime.”  1 
The  present  text  purports  to  contain  tho  stanzas  uttered 
by  the  Elder  in  the  boiling  cauldron,  but  their  language  and 
style  moat  definitely  point  to  a  very  much  later  date.  The 
verses  as  we  have  them  now  arc  only  ninety-eight  in  number ;  * 
possibly  the  “  hundred  ”  mentioned  in  the  Jt<ua-vdkini  is  only 
a  round  figure.  Neither  the  author  of  our  version  nor  his 
date  is  known.  There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  ho  was  a 
member  of  the  Order,  well  versed  in  the  PiTaA-cn  and  com- 
mentarial  literature. 

The  stanzas  show  great  depth  of  religious  and  metaphysical 
learning.  The  verses  embody  in  them  the  fundamental  tenets 
of  Buddhism  and  are  an  earnest  exhortation  to  men  to  lead 
the  good  life.  They  open  with  a  blessing  upon  the  king,  apt 
beginning  for  the  utterances  of  a  holy  man  before  hie  murderer. 
Their  setting  i9  exquisite,  and  the  style  of  the  poem  clearly 
shows  that  it  was  written  by  a  man  who  also  know  Sanskrit 
quite  well.  Only  such  a  man  could  have  constructed  in  the 
elaborate  and  beautiful  metro  of  the  poem,  so  delicate  a 
specimen  of  mosaic  work  in  Sanskritired  Pali.  Yet  the  Pali 
is  not  overladen  with  Sanskritisms,  which  shows  tliat  the  work 
is  earlier  than  the  twelfth  century.  It  is  a  fine  specimen  of 
the  literature  of  what  might  be  called  the  Piili  Renascence 
period,  before  the  language  became  contaminated  by 
Sanskrit  influences  and  lost  its  pristine  purity  of  diction  and 
simplicity.  I  give  below  the  first  verse,  which  ha  good  example 
of  the  stylo  of  the  poem : — 

Lafdissaro  jaijatu  vdroiiarajagiimi 
BfmgindabftogarvdragtriapincAShu 
Sadhupacaranirato  gunasannivdso 
Dhamme  thilo  vigatakodha  maddvalepo . 

1  Uncr**ily‘«  renion.  wise  70, 

•  See  the  text  in  JPTS..  1884.  p.  05  roll. 


J54  THK  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 

Such,  then,  are  the  Pali  works  of  which  we  have  any  know¬ 
ledge  that  wore  written  during  the  four  centuries  previous 
to  the  accession  of  Vijaya-Bahu.  Vijaya-Bihu  succeeded  to  a 
kingdom  torn  by  strife  and  completely  overrun  by  foreign 
enemies.  Just  previous  to  him  Sena  V  had  reigned  (e.  991), 
a  lad  of  12  years  at  the  time  of  his  coronation.  Because  of  his 
evil  companions  hi*  ministers  rebelled,  and  the  young  king 
in  despair  handed  over  hi*  capital  to  the  Tamils  and  fled  south. 
In  his  adversity  he  took  to  drink  and  became  so  addicted  to 
the  vice  that  he  was  nicknamed  Matvala  Sen  (the  mod  tiger). 
lVhen  ho  died  after  ten  years,  he  was  succeeded  by  his  brother 
Mahinda  V,  who  was  fitted  neither  by  character  nor  by 
capability  to  rule  a  kingdom.  Sena  h  misrule  had  plunged  the 
country  into  confusion.  Strangers  from  across  the  seas, 
belonging  to  diverse  races,  had  become  *o  numerous  and 
powerful  in  Anuridhapura,  that  the  king  found  it  difficult 
to  maintain  his  position  there.  The  weakness  of  his 
administration  led  to  insubordination  ;  the  people  refused  to 
pay  taxes,  and  the  king  had  not  the  wherewithal  to  pay  his 
army.  The  Cola  king,  seizing  the  opportunity,  sent  over  a  large 
army  and  conquered  the  country  north  of  the  Mahavaliganga. 
In  a  few  years  the  Tamil  domination  extended  even  beyond 
the  river.  The  Co]as  became  masters  of  both  Anuridhapura 
and  Polonnaruva.  This  was  the  last  of  the  glory  of 
Anuradha-puia,  which  for  twelve  centuries  had  been  the  centre 
of  all  the  activities  of  the  Sinhalese,  religious,  social,  and 
intellectual.  Robbed  of  its  ancient  splendour,  this  noble  city 
ceased  henceforward  to  be  the  pride  of  La&ka  and  gradually 
fell  into  decay  and  ruin. 

Iu  the  thirty-sixth  year  of  his  reign  Mahinda  himself  and 
he  queen  were  captured  anti  taken  away.  The  Tamils  were 
masters  of  all  Ceylon.  They  sacked  all  the  Yiharas  and  the 
Dago  Ins,  anti  destroyed  whatever  they  could  not  carry  away. 
They  had  been  taught  by  the  earlier  Sinhalese  royal  imbeciles 
who  hired  them  1  that  wealth  was  to  be  found  in  plenty  in 

*  c.g.  bjr  Kuna  pa  II  and  Dilliopa-Ti«*  I. 


THE  DAWN  OF  THE  COI.DSN  ERA 


165 


the  monasteries.  "  The  Tamils,  like  unto  Rakkhasas 
(demons),”  says  the  Uaha-vatnm,1  “  began  to  oppress  the 
country  and  take  by  force  whatever  belonged  to  the  people.” 
Mahinda’s  capture  was  in  a.d.  1001.  Till  Vijaya-Bnhu  was 
crowned  as  king  of  all  Ceylon  in  a.d.  1065  there  was  no  peace 
in  the  land.  The  interval  was  one  long  period  of  war  ami 
persecution.  ”  Thus  did  these  kings  war  with  one  another,” 
bemoans  the  Maha-vnnxsa ;  and  "  drive  each  other  away  from 
the  throne  ;  and  by  reason  of  this  continual  warfare  the  people 
we  c  sore  oppressed  and  suffered  greatly,  and  the  country 
was  brought  to  great  poverty.”  1 

When  he  had  driven  out  the  enemy  who  had  been  completely 
tyrannizing  over  the  island  for  over  a  century,  Vijaya-Bahu 
turned  his  mind  to  the  task,  equally  colossal,  of  repairing 
the  feorful  damage  that  had  been  inflicted  upon  the  national 
life  during  that  period  of  alien  domination.  Ho  resided  at 
Polonnaruva,  which  now  becarno  tlic  capital  of  the  kingdom. 
The  century  of  Coja  supremacy  was  much  more  than  a  political 
evil.  Its  devastating  effects  were  felt  in  every  fibre  of  the 
national  being,  but  nowhore  so  disastrously  as  in  that  of 
religion.  The  destruction  of  the  great  religious  edifices,  the 
Yiharas,  parivepas,  and  monasteries,  resulted  in  the  dissolution 
of  the  groat  fraternities  that  formed  the  Satgha,  and  the  con¬ 
sequent  decay  of  that  high-souled  institution  and  of  tho 
national  learning,  of  which  it  had  been  the  faithful  enstodinu. 
The  most  significant  evidence  of  the  complete  disorganization 
of  the  Safigha  under  the  Tamil  rule  lies  in  the  total  dis¬ 
appearance  of  the  Bhikkhuni  Order  during  this  period.  Hence¬ 
forward  wo  find  no  reference  to  nunneries  in  tho  Maha~vant*a 
Up  to  this  time  they  had  continued  to  flourish  unaffected  by 
persecutions  consequent  on  schisms,  though  there  is  evidence 
that  among  the  Bhikkhunis,  too,  there  were  heretical  schools* ; 

»  Af.V,  Ut,  tt.  56-8. 

»  Ibid.,  vt.  34  foil. 

*  Thun,  e-g.  MotwillSn*  I  (407-515)  Is  add  to  har»  built  *  »|»cUI  coormt 
esllrtl  RAjinl  and  ipvrn  It  to  tbo  SigallU  Mtorhood,  M.V.,  xxxlx,  r.  43. 


166 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  OEYLON 


but  we  do  not  hear  of  their  having  been  persecuted  at  any 
time.  The  BhikkhunI  Order  had  been  fostered  and  cherished 
by  successive  rulers  for  over  twelve  centuries,  and  why  it  was 
now  allowed  to  die  out  completely  without  any  attempt  at 
resuscitation,  it  is  difficult  to  understand. 

Vijaya-Bahu  found  that  no  ordination  of  bhikkhus  had  been 
held  for  long  years,  because  the  whole  island  could  not  muster 
fire  ordained  monks.  He  therefore  sent  an  embassy  to  liis 
friend  and  ally,  King  Anuruddha  of  Ramafifta-dcsa,  soliciting 
bis  help  in  restoring  the  Sasana  in  Ceylon.  A  number  of 
eminent  Thera* ,  masters  of  the  TipUaia,  were  sent  over,  who 
re-established  the  ordination  in  the  island  and  helped  in 
the  resuscitation  of  learning  by  instructing  a  large  number 
of  bhikkhus  in  the  three  Pitaka*  and  the  commentaries.1 
King  Anuruddha  was  then  fresh  from  vigorous  measures 
against  heresy  in  his  own  country,  and  it  is  said  that  he  con¬ 
sulted  Vijaya-Bahu  and  came  to  an  agreement  with  him  as 
to  the  Pili  texts  which  were  to  be  accepted  as  representing  the 
true  teaching  of  the  Buddha.  (Mr*.  Bode,  PSli  Lit.  *n  Burma, 
p.  11.)  The  three  fraternities  wore  restored  to  their  ancient 
homes,  and ,  although  they  reappear  os  distinct  bodies,  they  seem 
to  have  lost  much  of  the  sectarian  spirit  which  had  kept  them 
disunited.  A  Tamil  inscription  of  Vijaya-BAhu  records  that 
he  brought  about  a  reconciliation  of  the  three  Nikayaa,* 
and  we  find  that  they  consented  to  accept  in  common  a 
Yihira  he  built  for  them  at  Polonnaruva.* 

This  religious  revival  was,  as  might  be  expected,  accompanied 
by  a  great  intellectual  re-awakening.  The  king  himself  was  a 
scholar  and  a  poet  of  no  mean  order  ;  the  pursuits  of  literature 
had  a  great  attraction  for  him.  Amklst  his  multifarious 
duties,  he  found  time  every  morning  to  seclude  himself  for  a 
few  hours  in  his  religious  library  (dAajnma-nwndjro)  and  there 
he  composed  a  Sinhalese  translation  of  the  Dhamma-tangani* 

«  JJ.V.,  lx,  T.  5-7. 

*  •  Epy.  Z* >[..  vol.  li.  p4.  ri.  p.  2il. 

»  Jf.P.,ta,  v.  13. 

•  1UJ.,  v.  17. 


THE  PAWN  Or  THE  GOLDEN  ERA 


167 


■Unfortunately,  this  work,  as  well  sb  the  Sinhalese  poems  which 
the  Maha-vamsa  says  he  composed,  are  now  lost.  Ho  was  a 
generous  patron  of  learning ;  the  young  noblemen  attached  to 
his  court  wore  encouraged  by  suitable  presents  to  engage 
themselves  in  literary  pursuits,  and  the  king  himself  acted  as 
judge  of  them.  He  cuused  the  three  Filakas  to  be  written  and 
given  to  the  monks  who  desired  copies.  Scholars  from  abroad, 
especially  from  Indin,  brought  Ceylon  once  more  into  touch 
with  the  culture  and  the  intellectual  movements  of  other  lands. 
Sanskrit  and  Tamil  were  assiduously  studied,  and  several 
works  of  merit  in  PAli  too  were  produced. 

Chief  among  these  was  the  AbhidhammaUha-tangaha  of 
Anuruddha.  Earlier  in  this  chapter  attention  was  drawn  to 
the  fact  tlint  during  this  period  (soventh-cleventh  century) 
much  care  was  bestowed  on  the  study  of  the  Abhidhamma. 
Special  teachers  were  appointed  to  give  instruction  in  the 
subject.  Generous  endowments  were  made  to  those  who 
devoted  themselves  to  ylWmJAoswta  learning  and  recitals. 
More  than  one  king  studied  it  himself,  and  we  now  find 
Vijaya-Buhu  translating  the  Dhamma-sattgani.  We  need  not 
be  surprised,  therefore,  that  the  works  of  this  time  deal  mostly 
with  the  Abhidhamma  Pitaka } 

It  was  mentioned  earlier  that  one  of  the  influences  of  the 
migration  into  Ceylon  of  large  numbers  of  Tamils  from  South 
India  was  the  greater  attention  devoted  to  the  study  of 
Sanskrit.  Already  in  the  fourth  century  Buddhadaaa  had 
composed  a  medical  treatise  (the  Sarartha-tangraha)  in  that 
language.  At  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century  Kumaradiisa 
had  written  an  exquisite  Sanskrit  poem,  the  Janaki-harana, 
and  in  the  Siyabax Ankara,  a  work  on  Sinhalese  prosody, 

»  When  King  JcMha-Tissa  (a.o.  «»)  woe  losing  grow"!  in  Hi*  fight  with 
the  T«saU».  the  mcanip  he  sent  to  hie  queen  wee  thet  eho  ehouhl  botaka 
herself  Into  a  convent,  learn  the  Doctrine  and.  having  preached  the 
riMidAemau).  give  hint  tho  merits  thereof ;  and  sre  are  told  that  tho  queen 
did  as  she  was  asked,  and  perfected  herself  in  the  riMwfAemwsa  and  the 

rittAaiatli _ *  striking  illustration  of  the  great  reoeralioo  ia  which  tho 

HMiidhommo  waa  held  (If.F..  xliv,  tv.  I07-17K 


168 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


Already  noticed,  written  by  Silimegha  Sena  (846-66),  the 
influence  of  the  Sanskrit  rhetoric  is  clearly  to  be  seen.  Some¬ 
where  about  the  tenth  or  eleventh  century  lived  an  Elder 
named  Ratna&rij liana,  also  called  Ratnamatipada,  author  of 
two  works  on  Sanskrit  grammar,  the  C&ndragomi-vyakaraiia- 
panjikS,  and  the  Sabddrtha-cintd.1  The  Pali  language,  which 
had  reached  the  height  of  it«  development  with  Buddhaghoea 
and  his  successors,  Dhammapdla,  Mahanama,  and  others, 
remained  os  the  cultivated  literary  language  of  Oeylon,  used 
by  those  who  had  a  clear  mastery  over  it,  for  about  three 
centuries.  With  the  incursions  of  the  Tamils  and  the  con¬ 
sequent  general  disorder  in  the  kingdom  circumstances  were 
incompatible  with  much  literary  effort  and  the  cultivation  of 
Pali  generally  dwindled.  More  attention  began  to  be  given 
to  secular  subjects  than  heretofore,  and  Sanskrit  came  to  bo 
regarded  as  being  of  the  first  importance  for  that  purpose. 
Already  in  the  Mahabodhi-vanua  the  influence  of  Sanskrit 
studies  was  plainly  perceptible  in  the  loss  of  the  simplicity 
of  its  Pali,  in  the  restriction  of  its  freedom,  in  its  long  com¬ 
pounds,  and  its  intricate  versification.  Mention  was  made  of 
the  fact  that  Vijaya-Bahu  I  encouraged  learned  men  from  other 
Lunds  to  conic  and  settle  down  in  Ceylon.  They  were  par 
excellence  Sanskritists,  and  set  up  a  faction  tor  Sanskrit 
modes  of  literature.  Sanskrit  forms  of  expression  became  the 
vogue.  This  process,  however,  did  not  reach  its  culmination 
till  about  a  century  or  two  after  Vijaya-Bahu ;  but  we  see  its 
clear  workings  even  in  the  literature  of  the  period  now  under 
review. 

The  author  of  the  AbhidhammaUhasangaha  was  an  Elder 
named  Anuruddha.  His  name  is  mentioned  in  the  colophon  of 
that  work,  and  there  he  is  stated  to  have  been  an  incumbent 
of  the  MOlasfima  Vihira.  The  style  of  his  language  shows  that 
he  did  not  live  before  the  tenth  or  eleventh  century,  most 
probably  the  latter,  and  the  fact  that  Sariputta,  who  lived  in 
the  reign  of  Parakrama- Balm  the  Great  (1164-97),  compiled  a 

1  WickrcmoiiQgUr,  p.  xiU. 


THE  DAWN  OF  THE  GOLDEN  ERA 


16$ 


paraphrase  to  the  Abfndkiamniattha-sangaha — coupled  with 
the  fact  tlint  no  mention  is  made  in  Anuruddba's  work  of  the 
exploits  of  Parfikrama,  whose  greatness  was  extolled  by  all 
the  writers  of  his  period-  would  lead  u»  to  place  the  author 
before  that  monarch.  Scholars  agree  in  ascribing  him  to  the 
beginning  of  the  twelfth  century.1  Not  much  more  is  known 
about  him.  According  to  the  Burmese  tradition  Anuruddha 
was  an  Elder  of  Ceylon  and  wrote  the  compendium  at  the 
(MOksOma)  Vihara  founded  by  SCmadevI.  Queen  of 
Yattagiiruaoi  (88-70  B-C.)  and  the  minister  MOla,  at 
Polonnaruva.*  The  statement  that  he  lived  at  MuksCma 
Vihara  is  supported  by  the  Oolophon  to  the  Compendium 
mentioned  above. 

The  Sdsana-twjita  merely  calls  him  “  Anuruddha  Acariya 
of  Ceylon  Tlio  Saddhamma-tangaha  of  the  fourteenth 
century  gives  him  as  the  author  of  the  AbhidhammaUha 
gaitgaha,  and  states  also  that  Anuruddha  (most  probably 
identical  with  our  author)  also  wrote  another  work  on 
Abhidhamma,  the  Paramattha-vinrcchaya ;  but  he  is  there 
mentioned  as  having  lived  at  Kancl-pura  (Conjcvaram), 
reputed  as  the  abode  of  the  commenUtor  Dhammapula  4 
In  his  edition  of  the  Buddhaghosuppatti  J.  Gray  gives  a 
chronological  list  of  saintly  and  learned  men  of  Southern 
India,  taken  from  the  Talaing  records,  and  there  we  find 
Anuruddha  mentioned  »  after  authors  who  are  supposed  to 
have  lived  later  than  the  seventh  or  eighth  century.  The 
Gandha-vamso  (p.  01)  gives  him  as  author  of  three  treatises 
on  the  Abhidhamma,  the  Compendium,  PaTamattha-vimc- 

fAoya.aiidA'MMtfl-rupo-poriw/ferfa.andmentionshimamongthe 

Ceylon  authors  (p.  67).  The  evidence  before  us  would  lead  to 
the  conclusion,  therefore,  that  Anuruddha  lived  al>out  the 
beginning  of  the  twelfth  century,  that  he  was  a  native  of 

•  Comp,  of  Phil.,  p.  vil  sad  footnote. 

*  ComprndSuoi,  p.  vti. 

»  p.  04. 

«  P.T.S.  Ed.,  p.  <tt. 

»  p.  SS. 


170 


THB  PALI  UTBJIATUKK  OP  CEYLON 


Ceylon,  but  spent  part  of  his  time  at  KAficI-pura,  in  South  India, 
and  that  he  was  the  author  of  three  works  on  the  Abhidhamma. 
Such  is  also  the  universal  belief  in  Ceylon.1  In  the  printed 
edition  of  the  Anuruddha-iataka,  a  Buddhist  devotional  poem 
of  101  stanzas,  in  elegant  Sanskrit — one  of  the  few  Sanskrit 
works  now  extant  in  Ceylon — Pandita  Batuvantudive,  one 
of  the  most  erudite  of  Oriental  scholars  in  Ceylon  in  the  last 
century,  states  that  the  Saddhamma -m iigaha  mentions  the 
Anuruddha-ialaka  and  the  Abhidhammattha-satigaha  as  works 
of  the  same  author,  Anuruddha.1  D’Alwis,  in  Ids  catalogue, 
reiterates  the  same  statement.*  The  Pali  Text  Society  edition 
of  the  Saddhamma-mttgalxa,  however,  makes  no  such  mention. 
The  statements  of  these  two  responsible  scholars  ahow  that 
they  had  a  variant  reading  of  the  passage  before  them.  At 
any  rate,  that  both  the  Salaka  and  the  Compendium  are  the 
works  of  tho  same  author  is  universally  believed  in  Ceylon.4 
Now  the  Sataka  tells  us  in  its  concluding  stanzas  : — 

“  idam  vtjadhaUottaram  ula  n  at  ha  - 
ratnauhiropaxlhavtranuruddhih  " 
that  “  it  was  done  by  Anuruddha,  Upaathavira  (or  Anunavaka), 
who  was  like  unto  a  gem  in  the  necklace  of  the  Uttaramftla 
(Xikaya)  ”,  This  is  tho  first  time,  as  far  as  we  know,  that  this 
new  Nikiiya  comes  into  sufficient  prominence  for  notice  to  be 
taken  of  it.  There  is  no  doubt,  to  my  mind,  that  the  Uttardla 
monastery  referred  to  in  the  Maha-vamta  *  was  the 
headquarters  of  the  new  fraternity.  It  was  built  by 
King  Manavamma,  son  of  Kiisyapn  II,  who  ascended  the 
throne  in  091,  and  ruled  at  Anurodha-purn,  according  to  the 
Pujavaliya,  for  thirty-five  years.*  It  was  an  offering  of 
gratitude  by  him  to  the  monks  of  the  Abh&yagiri  Vikara 

1  Dr  Zoya,  p.  ir. 

*  Colombo  Ed.,  1866.  p.  U. 

*  p.  170. 

*  See  it l*o  Wkkrrmaiinghc,  jx.  xir. 

*  Chap,  lril,  v.  iO. 

*  Wijeanha.  A/aW-roijiaa,  pt.  n.  p.  xx  (table). 


THE  DAWN  OP  THE  OOLDEN  ERA 


171 


for  having  consented  to  take  into  the  Order  hU  elder  brother 
in  spite  of  the  loss  of  one  eye,  which  he  had  suffered  in  some 
yoga  practices.1  The  first  chief  of  the  UttarOla  was  the  king  s 
brother  himself,  and  he  was  in  charge  of  600  monks ;  he  was 
granted  great  honours  and  privileges  together  with  five 
classes  of  servants  to  minister  unto  him.  Ho  was  appointed  to 
supervise  the  guardians  of  the  tooth  relic,  and  from  that  time 
the  monks  of  the  Abhayogiri  became  the  king’s  counsellors, 
and  we  arc  told  that  "  hearkening  unto  their  counsel  he 
governed  righteously”.1  Manavamma  was  Vijaya-Bahu’s 
paternal  ancestor,  according  to  the  Mahd-vamsa,  and  from  a 
Tamil  inscription  of  this  king  we  find  that  he  kept  up  his 
patronage  of  the  UttaramOla  Nikaya,  for  it  is  recorded  that 
he  himself  gave  over  the  custodianship  of  the  tooth  relic, 
which  was  the  most  precious  horitage  of  a  Ceylon  king,  to  a 
monk  named  Moggallfina,  of  this  fraternity.*  Probably  thia 
same  Moggallana  was  the  Maha-Nayaka  of  tho  Nikaya 
during  Anuruddha's  time,  for  wo  find  Anuruddha  describing 
himself  as  Upasthavira  (tho  second  chief).  In  later  times  the 
Uttaramula  Nikaya  gave  birth  to  many  an  illustrious  star 
in  Ceylon’s  literary  firmament,  Moggallana,  VQgammflla, 
and  Sri  Rahula,  to  mention  but  threo.  Successive  kings 
extended  to  them  their  patronage  and  made  munificent  endow¬ 
ments  for  the  maintenance  of  the  Nikaya.  Of  these,  each  in 
its  proper  place. 

For  nearly  nine  centuries  the  Abkidhammatba-saiigaha 
has  stood  at  the  head  of  workn  on  Abhidhamma,  held  in  the 
highest  esteem  by  all  Buddhists  of  the  Southern  school.  It 
gives  in  outline  what  the  teaching  of  th»  part  of  the  Doctrine 
meant  to  the  ancient  Buddhists,  but  it  is  no  systematic  digest 
of  the  Abhidhamma  Canon.  Its  style  is  unattractive,  with  its 
dry,  terse  categories,  elliptical  mnemonic  summaries,  its 
endless  catalogues  and  analyses.  *'  Compared  with  the  older 

»  U.V.,  Nil,  TV.  7-11. 

•  Ibid.,  vr.  tS-80. 

•  SpiprapMa  Ztfianita,  vol.  U,  p.  *1,  PP-  2S0 


172 


THE  PALI  LfTERATCRK  OF  CEYLON 


and  the  more  famous  classic,  Buddhaghosa’a  FwiaWAt-tMOflpa, 
the  Compendium  covers  very  largely  the  same  range  of  subject- 
matter  as  that  work,  though  without  the  same  amplitude  of 
treatment.  But  the  object  of  each  work,  and  hence,  to  some 
extent,  the  order  and  emphasis  of  treatment  in  each,  is 
different.  The  Compendium  is  a  concise  statement  of  a  view 
of  things,  with  purely  theoretical  analysis.  The  H  oy  of 
Purity  is  ethical  in  its  end,  and  is  psychological  only  in  order 
the  better  to  teach  ethics,  and  the  way  to  Baintship.  The 
two  works  arc  thus  to  some  extent  mutually  complementary.” 1 
The  curt  and  dry  method  of  ita  treatment,  and  the  numerical 
characters  of  its  psychological  analyses,  required  a  great  deal 
of  patient  study  before  they  could  be  mastered.  But  here  we 
have  a  “  famous  and  venerable  digest  of  that  mere  abstract, 
analytical  teaching  which  the  Buddhists  called  Abhidhamma, 
or  *  ultra-doctrine  wherever  tho  narrative  and  the  homily 
of  the  Suttanta  discourses  found  no  place  and  the  very 
nature  of  the  work  made  perhaps,  a  simpler,  more  attractive 
treatment  of  the  subject  very  difficult.  Words  were  yet 
wanting  to  express  certain  ideas  ;  the  crystallised  experience 
of  tho  ages  had  not  yet  become  sufficiently  familiarised 
with  the  fundamental  question  of  philosophy,  for  such 
subjects  os  mental  phenomena  to  be  talked  of,  except  in  crude 
and  bizarre  numerical  analyses.  Anuruddha’s  work,  however, 
was  in  gTeat  measure  an  advance  on  what  hail  gone  before 
him 1 ;  yet  the  subjecta  he  treated  of  wero  abstruse  and  difficult 
to  understand.  Everyone  had  not  the  high  gifts  to  unravel 
the  cobwebbed  structure  of  this  little  manual,  these  subtle 
psychological  analyses.  Hence  grew  up  around  it  a  mass  of 
oxegctical  literature,  explanatory  of  its  difficulties.4  In 

1  Mr*.  Rhy*  Davids,  Compendium,  p.  x. 

*  Ibid.,  p.  xvii. 

*  c.g.  in  Ibc  treatment  of  the  hAaraftpa  and  the  ciltat  [  the  method*  of 
introspection  employed  with  regard  to  tho  theory  of  rttarihu.  For  a  fuller 
description  h<  Compendium,  preface,  pp.  xix  foil.,  and  Mr*.  R.hya  Da  rids. 
Suit.  fry..  2nd  ed.,  1021. 

‘  The  fifakaUlka-nmiM  (a  Burmese  bibliography  of  Burmese  Buddhist 
worlu)  mentions  twenty-three  different  Burmese  m'wayiu  on  this  worlc. 


THE  DAWK  OF  THE  OOI.DBN  ERA 


173 


Ceylon  itself  Sariputta  Mahasiimi  (also,  apparently,  called 
in  Burma  Navavimalabuddhi)  and  his  pupil,  Sumaftgnla, 
wrote  fiia4  on  the  work,  the  first  of  which  is  now  hardly  ever 
used.  Sumartgala's  ft id,  AbhiJhammaUha-vMdcam,  still 
remains  in  favour  both  in  Burma  and  in  Ceylon.  Sariputta 
also  wrote  an  interverbal  paraphrase  in  Sinhalese.1  Several 
commentaries  on  the  book  have  been  written  in  Burma,  some 
in  Pali  and  others  in  Burmese,  and  the  Compendium  continues 
to  be  studied  with  great  seal  and  earnestness  in  Burma  even 
to-day.* 

Two  other  work*  of  Anuruddha,  the  Nama-rUpa -partcchcda 
and  the  Paramottka-vimcchaya,  arc  included  among  the  nine 
Little  Finger  Manuals  ( Let-than )  of  the  Burmese,*  Both  works 
were  written  while  the  author  was  residing  at  Kaflcl-pura,  in 
the  Tambarattha,  as  he  says  in  the  colophon  or  nipamana  of 
the  ParamaUha-vinicchatja.  They  arc  composed  in  galha 
verse,  and  show  him  as  a  poet  of  much  ability,  with  more 
scope  for  his  metrical  gifts  than  was  possible  when  he  was 
composing  the  analyses  of  the  Compendium.  It  is  interesting 
to  note  what  he  say*,  in  the  N&ma-rufa-pariccheda,  that  he 
composed  the  work  according  to  the  commentaries  of  the 
Moh&vihara  4 ;  in  the  colophon  he  makes  affectionate  reference 
to  Ceylon,  showing  his  connexion  with  the  island  (w.  1849- 
60).  The  treatment  of  tho  subject  in  the  SSma-rupa-pariccheda 
is  much  simpler  than  in  the  Compendium  ;  it  is  meant  to  be 
an  introduction  to  the  study  of  the  Abhidhamma,  divided  into 
thirteen  chapters,  giving  a  general  klca  of  tho  subjects  that 
would  come  before  the  student  as  he  read*  the  Abhidhamma 
books,  and  thus  familiarising  his  mind  with  the  chief  lines  of 

All  the  Bnrmeao  authora  o£  the  seventeenth  century  took  St  In  hand,  and  it 
fcoa  been  carefully  edited  by  modern  Haayfis  (Mrs.  Bode.  Mlt  LiL  in  Burma, 
pp.  01— S). 

»  I)o  Zoyia,  p.  Sr. 

•  Compendium,  pp.  !*-*•  .  .  . 

•  Tho  othcre  being  Buddbadatta'a  dfcAicfAamnwHotara  and  KupA- 
rflpo  riiWja,  DluunmapiWa  Saeta  taMthtpa,  Kaaaapa’a  J/oAu  r.ccAedonf, 
Khema’a  Khtna  ppabarava.  and  Chapnta’a  Kimt eAradipat*. 

•  JPTS.,  1023,  p.  5,  v.  2. 


174  THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 

thought  he  would  have  to  follow  out  later  in  greater  detail. 
Two  flkat  exist  on  the  work,  one  by  Viicissara  (thirteenth 
century)  and  the  other  by  Sumahgala,  author  of  the 
F*Wa«mI-/7Jto  oh  the  Compendium. 

The  Paramatlha-vinicchaya  is  a  much  shorter  work  in 
twenty-nine  sections,  dealing  with  ciUa,  cetasika,  rupa,  and 
nibb&na,  by  no  means  so  comprehensive  as  the  Nama-rGpa- 
pariccheda  ;  nor  is  it  as  extensively  used.  A  commentary 
exists,  written  by  a  Mahi-Bodhi  Tlura,  of  whom  nothing  moie 
is  known  except  that  he  was  an  incumbent  of  tho  Mnha- 
vihara  at  Anuradha-pura.1  Both  works  are  notable  specimens 
of  mediaeval  Pali  verse. 

i  Aung,  JPTS.,  1910.  p.  180.  The  iSatMJkommaHWwgaia  al*o  mention* 
him  m  tho  oath  or  of  a  SSoea-*oaM«pa*flwtt<ii5«i  oc  Dh*mmapiU'« 
Sttc<M  (q.T.). 


THE  AUGUSTAN  AOE 


175 


CHAPTER  IX 

The  Augustan  Age 

YIJAYA-BAHU’S  death  in  a.d.  1120  was  Again  the  signal 
for  internal  discord,  which  threatened  to  dissever  the 
unity  of  the  kingdom.  But  in  this  emergency  a  mighty  figure 
appeared  on  the  stage  and  all  other  claimants  to  the  throne 
were  overruled  in  favour  of  Parukrama,  a  prince  of  great 
accomplishments  and  of  energy  ao  unrivalled  aa  to  secure  for 
him  the  goodwill  of  his  kindred  and  the  admiration  and  loyalty 
of  the  people.  High  thoughts  welled  within  his  breast.  M  If 
I,  who  am  bom  of  a  princely  race,  should  not  do  a  deed  worthy 
of  the  heroism  of  kings,  my  life  would  be  of  no  avail,’* 1  he 
had  said  while  yet  a  child,  and  it  had  been  his  ambition  to 
rescue  his  motherland  from  foreign  dominion  and  consolidate 
the  monarchy  in  his  own  person.  Ho  completed  by  foreign 
travel  on  education  which,  according  to  the  Alaka-unnsa,* 
comprised  ever}’  science  and  accomplishment  of  the  age  in 
which  he  lived,  including  theology,  medicine  and  logic, 
grammar,  poetry  and  music,  the  training  of  the  elephant  and 
the  management  of  the  horse.  With  consummate  skill  and 
unsurpassed  power  of  organization,  with  an  originality  which 
always  stood  him  in  good  stead  and  with  unremitting  care  for 
details,  he  soon  became  master  of  the  kingdom  and  in  A.n.  11G4 
crowned  himself  “  sole  king  of  Lanka 

There  is  no  name  in  all  the  annals  of  Sinhalese  history  which 
commands  the  veneration  of  the  people  in  such  measure  as  that 
of  this  prince  of  the  “  mighty  arm  ",  Parikrama  Bahu,  since 
he  united  in  his  jterson  the  piety  of  Devanampiya-Tissa  and  the 
chivalry  of  Ihitthagamani.  Once  jieacc  was  assured  within 
his  dominions,  lie  would  not  rest  content  with  the  inglorious 
ease  of  his  predecessors.  His  was  the  ambition  to  combine  the 
renown  of  foreign  conquests  with  the  triumphs  of  domestic 
policy.  In  pursuance  of  the  former  he  carried  his  arms  even 

»  v.  40. 

*  Ibid.,  Ixiv,  tv.  SO  9. 


176 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


into  such  distant  couutries  as  Cambodia  and  Aranunana, 
which  had  offered  him  insult  or  inflicted  injury  on  hia  subjects.1 
To  secure  the  prosperity  of  the  land  he  devoted  himself  most 
earnestly  to  agriculture  as  his  first  task  and  constructed  as 
many  as  fourteen  hundred  and  seventy  tanks,  three  of  them 
of  such  vast  dimensions  that  they  were  known  as  the  “  seas 
of  Parikrama  By  a  careful  organization  of  a  splendid 
civic  service  ho  suppressed  all  lawlessness  with  a  firm  handi 
and  in  one  of  his  inscriptions  it  is  recorded,  that  “  the  security 
which  he  established  as  well  in  the  wilderness  as  in  the 
inhabited  places  was  such  that  even  a  woman  might  traverse 
the  island  with  a  precious  jewel  in  her  hand  and  not  be  asked 
what  it  was.”  * 

But  all  his  energies  he  made  subservient  to  the  restoration 
and  the  embellishment  of  his  religion,  and  the  encouragement 
of  the  fine  arts.  In  spite  of  Vijaya-Bahu's  efforts  to  purge  the 
Buddhist  SaAgha  of  undesirables  there  still  remained  within 
its  fold  members  who  were  unfit  to  lead  the  monastic  life, 
fattening  on  the  endowments  given  to  various  monasteries  by 
monarchs  whose  zeal  for  generosity  was  not  tempered  by  any 
discrimination.  “In  the  villages  that  were  given  to  the 
Order,"  says  the  Maha-vamsa  with  scathing  sarcasm,  “  purity 
of  conduct  among  monks  consisted  only  in  that  they  supported 
their  wive*  and  children.  Verily  of  purity  there  was  none 
other  than  this.  Neither  was  there  any  unity  in  the 
performance  of  the  office  of  the  Church ;  and  those  monks 
that  walked  the  blameless  life  cared  not  even  to  see  each 
other.”  « 

The  king  determined  to  end  this  lamentable  state  of  affairs, 
and,  being  a  just  man,  impartial  and,  resolute  withal,  lie 
proceeded  with  great  tact  and  skill.  He  decided  to  hold  a 
council  of  the  Elders  of  the  three  fraternities  and  appointed 
ilahn  Knssapa  of  Udumbaragiri  Vihiira,  a  man  learned  in  the 

«  J/.F,  Uxri.  TV.  II  foil. 

1  HAjn  ratnAearl,  p.  88. 

*  Tt-tncnt,  i,  p.  109. 

«  A t.V^  Ixxviii,  tv.  3-4. 


TUB  AUOUSTAU  AGE 


177 


three  Pitaku,  who  knew  the  V'inaya  wholly,  as  the  head  of 
the  assembly.  He  first  invited  the  leaders  of  the  dissentient 
schools,  who  lived  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  to 
Polonnaruva  and  then  requested  the  Mahuvih&ra  monks  to 
be  reconciled  to  them.  But  they  were  unwilling,  *'  inasmuch 
as  the  lewd  brethren  prevailed  in  the  church  und  the  breach 
was  from  old  time.” 1  Some  departed  to  countries  over 
the  seas,  others  took  of!  their  robes  and  many  wished  not 
even  to  sit  in  the  same  judgment  hall.  Then  began  the  great 
trial  to  see  whoso  teachings  were  correct,  and  very  hard  were 
the  questions  that  had  to  be  determined.  “  Verily,  it  seemed 
as  if  the  endeavour  to  accomplish  this  unity  was  like  unto  tho 
effort  to  raise  Mount  Meru.”  But  the  king  was  not  to  be 
baffled  in  his  purpose.  Ho  secured  the  assistance  of  great 
doctors  learned  in  the  three  Pitakat,  and  with  their  help  solved 
the  questions  that  arose  for  judgment.  He  was  convinced  of 
the  righteousness  of  tho  claims  of  the  Mahavihara,  and  ended 
by  becoming  their  patron.  He  upheld  their  decisions  and 
decreed  that  their  teachings  should  be  accepted.  With  great 
care  and  patience  he  made  investigation  into  the  members  of 
the  schismatic  schools  ;  many  of  them  he  caused  to  return  to 
the  life  of  novices,  others  he  persuaded  to  leave  the  Order, 
giving  them  lands  and  offices  for  their  maintenance.*  Where 
persuasion  was  of  no  avail,  he  used  force  and  compelled  them 
to  disrobe  themselves.  The  triumph  of  the  Mahavihara  was 
complete,  the  three  fraternities  *  were  united  and  from  this 
time  we  hear  no  more  of  the  power  of  dissentient  bodies.  This 
unification  of  religion  was  succeeded  by  the  erection  of 
numerous  buildings  for  the  benefit  of  its  votaries.  Dagobaa 
and  statues  of  the  Buddha  were  multiplied  without  end, 
temples  of  every  form  erected  in  Polonnaruva  and  elsewhere 
throughout  tho  country.  Halls  for  the  reading  of  bana, 


*  M.V.,  Ixxviii,  V.  It. 

*  Ibid.,  chap,  lxxviii,  w.  17-20. 

1  Tbs  Abbayaglrl.  tho  JcUvano,  sad  tbs  Moh4vihi.ro. 

19 


178 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  0?  CEYLON 


image-rooms,  residences  for  tlie  priesthood,  ambulance  halls 
and  rest-houses  for  their  accommodation  when  on  journeys 
were  built  in  every  district,  and  rocks  were  hollowed  out  as 
dwellings  for  those  more  inclined  to  solitude-' 

The  MaAS-tanua  devotes  several  chapters  to  describing  the 
various  activities  of  the  king.  Even  now  the  ruins  of 
Polonnaruva,  the  most  picturesque  city  in  Ceylon,  attest  to 
the  care  which  he  lavished  on  his  capital.  Ramparts  were  built 
and  fortresses  erected  ;  palaces  for  his  own  use,  schools  and 
libraries,  magnificent  halls  for  music  and  dancing  and  drama, 
tanks  for  public  baths,  parks  and  flower-gardens. 

The  bare  enumeration  of  such  worla  conveys  an  idea  of  the 
immense  prosperity  which  must  have  made  their  performance 
possible.  With  this  perfect  internal  tranquillity,  undisturbed 
by  oppression,  encouraged  in  their  activities  by  the  great  and 
devout  interest  taken  by  the  head  of  the  State  himself,  and 
working  amidst  congenial  and  beautiful  surroundings,  there 
arose  during  this  period  a  band  of  scholars,  who  made  this 
epoch  the  Augustan  age  of  Ceylon  literature. 

Oldest  among  them  was  Maha  Kassapa  of  Dimbulagala. 
(Udumboragiri)  Vihara,  who,  as  we  saw  above,  was  appointed 
by  the  king  to  preside  over  the  great  council  of  Etdcrs  in  order 
to  decide  the  Vinaya  rules.  He  was  especially  proficient  in  the 
Vinaya  Law,  and  his  services  were  of  great  use  at  the 
Assembly.1  He  was  the  author  of  a  Sinhalese  a  para¬ 

phrase,  to  the  Samanta-pasadika,  which  is  no  longer  extant. 
He  was  a  Sanskrit  scholar  as  well,  and  wrote  a  grammar 
in  that  language,  called  Bnl&vabodJianci,  on  the  lines  of  the 
Candra-vyalarano*  He  is  also  reputed  to  havo  written  a 
por&nS  Itka  on  tho  AbkidhammaUha-*aHgaha.  Whether  he  is 
identical  with  the  Elder  Kassapa,  whomthe<So.«ina-ttinwa-dipo4 
calls  a  poet  of  the  Coja  country,  but  who  is  regarded  in  Burma 

»  U.  F.,  chap,  lxxvlii,  tv.  31  B. 

*  XI.  V.,  Uxviii,  r.  7. 

1  Wieki* tnaxingho ,  p.  xr. 

*  ».  12bt. 


THE  AUGUSTAN  AGE 


179 


as  a  native  of  Ceylon1  and  author  of  a  treatise  on  the 
Abhidhamnux  called  the  Moha-vicchedanl  (which  forms  one  of 
the  little-finger  manuals),  a  (Ikd  on  the  same,  a  Vinava  com¬ 
mentary  called  the  Vimati-m'nodani,  and  also  according  to 
the  Qandha-wnita*  of  two  other  treatises  called  Buddka-vamsa 
and  Anagata-vamsa,  we  cannot  say.  Of  these  the  Ft'nw/i- 
t nnodani  commentary  on  the  Vinaya,  though  now  hardly 
known  in  Ceylon  itself,  has  been  held  in  great  esteem  in  Burma. 
It  was  one  of  tho  authorities  appealed  to  when  Dhammaccti 
carried  out  his  reforms  in  the  fifteenth  century,  and  is 
mentioned  in  tho  KaJyaiji  inscriptions.  It  was  largely  used  by 
the  Parupaoas  in  their  debate  with  the  Ekarpsikns,  which 
ended  in  the  defeat  of  the  latter  by  the  clover  Saijabhivarnsa 
at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century.1 

Contemporaneous  with  Kassapa  was  the  Elder  named 
Moggallana,  author  of  the  MoygdlUina-Vyakaraya.  He  is, 
perhaps,  to  bo  separated  from  the  lexicographer  of  the  same 
name,  who  also  lived  at  this  time  and  wrote  the  AbhidMnappa- 
dl piled.  But  of  this  more  presently.  Moggallana  s  work  was  an 
attempt  to  start  a  new  school  of  P&li  grammar  in  Ceylon.  The 
influence  of  extensive  Sanskrit  studies  during  this  period 
undoubtedly  had  something  to  do  with  it,  as  we  shall  see  later 
on.  Up  to  this  timo  the  vade  mtcum  of  Pali  writers  in 
determining  their  grammatical  form  had  been  Kaocayana- 
v yakarana,  which  was  held  in  very  high  esteem.  This  work 
consisted  of  eight  divisions,  each  division  comprising  suttas 
or  rules  expressed  with  sententious  brevity  ;  r utli  or  supple¬ 
mentary  comments  to  explain  the  deficiencies  in  the  suUas  and 
render  them  intelligible  ;  payoga  or  grammatical  analyses  with 
examples,  and  the  nydsa  or  scholia,  giving  explanatory  notes 
on  some  of  tho  principal  grammatical  forms  in  the  shape  of 
questions  and  answers.  The  Nyata  often  exists  as  a  separate 
book  called  M ukha -matt a -dtpa « t. 4  Tradition  has  it  that  all  the 

1  Anna.  JPT8.,  1010,  p.  120,  and  Bode,  op.  eit.,  p.  33,  note. 

*  OsadAa-rastM,  p,  61. 

*  Bode,  op.  cit.,  p.  76. 

*  Bode,  op.  eit.,  p.  37 


180  TUB  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 

tut  tat  or  aphorisms  were  written  by  one  and  the  same  person 
Maha-Kuccayana .  In  the  Kacc&yana-bheda,  written  by 
Mah&yasa  Thera  of  Thaton  about  the  thirteenth  century,1 
there  occurs  a  memorial  verse  :  “  The  aphorisms  were  made 
by  Kaocayana,  the  Vutti  by  SafighAnandi.  The  illustrations 
by  Biahinadatt*.  And  tho  Nyasa  by  Vimalabuddhi.”  From 
the  distinct  mention  of  different  names  for  the  authors  of  tho 
different  parts,  it  would  seem  that  Sahghanandi  was  different 
from  Kaccliyana.  In  the  (US  to  hia  work,  written  by  Mahayasa 
himself,  he  tries  to  justify  tho  tradition  that  both  rule*  and 
supplement*  were  written  by  Kacciyana,  on  the  hypothesis 
that  Kaccayana  may  also  have  been  called  SaUghanandi.  That 
tho  tradition  continued  to  be  accepted  os  being  authoritative, 
however,  is  shown  by  the  fact  that,  in  the  liaccayana-wnnana 
or  commentary  on  the  Sandhi-kappa  (section  treating  of 
euphonic  combination  of  letters)  of  Kacciyana,  Mahavijitivi 
of  the  Abhayagiri  Parvata  at  Panya  (Vijaya-puia),  who  lived 
about  the  sixteenth  century,*  still  assigns  the  whole  of  tho 
grammar  and  the  Mahd-Ntrutti  and  the  Netti-ppaklarana  to 
Mahu-Kaccayana.  In  the  commentary  to  Buddhappiya's 
Rupa-tiddhi,*  a  grammar  based  on  the  Kacciyana,  the  author 
of  tho  older  grammar  is  identified  with  the  Great  Elder 
Maha-Kaccana,  one  of  the  eighty  chief  disciples  of  the  Buddha. 
••  Who  is  this  Kaccayana  ?  Whence  his  name  ?  It  is  he  who 
was  selected  for  the  important  office  (of  compiling  the  first 
Pali  Grammar)  by  the  Buddha  himself,  saying  ‘  Bhikkhus, 
amongst  my  disciples  capable  of  elucidating  in  detail  what 
is  expressed  in  the  abstract,  the  most  eminent  is  Maha- 
Kaccana According  to  tho  Rupa-tiddhi,  KaccAyana's 
purpose  was  that  44  men  of  various  nations  and  tongue*, 
rejecting  the  dialects  which  have  become  confused  by  its 
disorderly  mixture  with  Sanskrit  and  other  languages,  may' 
with  facility  acquire,  by  conformity  to  the  rule*  of  grammar 

»  Bnrtr,  p.  37. 

*  p.  40,  Dodo. 

»  q.T. 


THE  AUGUSTAN  AGS 


181 


propounded  by  the  Tathagala,  the  knowledge  of  the  word  of 
the  Buddha  In  the  Angvltara  Auhakalha,  Knccayana  is 
represented  as  “  a  thera  who  was  able  to  amplify  the  concise 
words  of  the  Buddha  both  by  means  of  letters  and  by  showing 
their  sense.  Others  could  do  it  only  one  way  or  the  other. 
Therefore  was  he  called  the  chief 

It  is  quite  possible  that  the  great  Elder  Maha-Kaccana, 
a  chief  disciple  of  the  Buddha,  did  compile  a  set  of  rules  in  the 
languages  in  which  the  Canon  was  handed  down.  There  is 
evidence  to  show*  that  Maha-Kaccana  was  the  head  of  a  school 
at  Avantl.  The  Maha-vastu  *  says  that  he  was  the  nephew  of 
Asita  or  Kaladevala,  seer  of  Vindhyacala.  Acting  under  the 
seer’s  advice,  he,  together  with  his  companions,  visited  the 
Bnddha  and  there,  impressed  by  the  Buddha’s  erudition,  they 
became  monks  and  later  attained  Arahatship.  Kaccana 
(or  Kalaka,  as  he  was  called,  Kaccana  being  the  gotta  or 
gotra  or  gens  name),  is  said  to  have  been  the  son  of  the 
minister  of  Caijdappajjota  of  Avantl.  He  returned  with  his 
followers  from  Savatthl  and  founded  dirawuw  in  the  Avantl 
country  at  Kururaghara-papita  and  Makkara-kata  The 
Thera-  and  Then-gathA  contain  several  names  of  monks  and 
nuns  of  this  Avantl  fraternity,  e.g.  Xanda  Kumaraputta, 
Isidatta  son  of  a  caravan-guide,  Dhammap&la,  and 
Soqskutiknuoa-* 

Though  the  Avantl  school  never  grew  to  he  large  in  numbers, 
yet  they  had  an  important  voice  in  matters  of  dispute  with 
regard  to  changes  of  doctrine  and  in  the  rules  of  discipline, 
for  we  find  that  in  the  Council  of  Vesali  they  had  to  be  called 
in  to  take  part  in  discussing  the  questions  raised  by  the 
Vajjian  monks.4  The  Vinayo,  in  the.r>th  book  (18)  of  the  Maha- 
vagga,  mentions  Avanti  as  a  place  difficult  of  access,  and  in  the 
SuUa-nipala  the  names  of  the  halting  stations  are  given  from 

*  Tumour,  Mak&tvirtto.  introd.,  p.  xirli. 

*  JVnU-whr,  rol.  ii.  p.  3S2. 

*  See  I'talmj  of  fJU  flrtlkrtn.  under  these  name*. 

4  Kern.  Manual  of  BtuUkiam,  p.  107. 


182 


TUB  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CKYLOX 


Patitthona  to  SavatthI  through  Avanti,  in  describing  the 
journey  of  Bavari’s  ten  disciples  when  they  came  to  see  the 
Buddha.  In  the  Culla-vagga  (ii,  p.  299)  it  is  said  that 
the  Avanti  BhiklchuB  laid  special  stress  on  ascetic  practices 
allowed  in  the  Buddhist  code  which  are  known  as  the 
dhuta-vada  practices.  It  is  significant  that  the  Neiti-ppaiarana, 
which  is  a  special  work  of  doctrinal  interpretation  by  way  of 
exegetical  analysis,  should  also  be  ascribed  to  Maha-Kacciina, 
who  was  reputed  to  be  the  greatest  analytical  exponent  in  the 
Buddha's  time.  Living  in  comparative  isolation,  the  school 
at  Avanti  may  quite  possibly  have  developed  a  system  of 
analysis  and  of  grammar — two  more  or  less  related  subjects — 
and  the  traditional  assertion  that  Maha-Kaccana  himself  was 
the  author  of  the  terse  aphorisms  would  therefore  be  justified 
to  this  extent  that  he  was  the  founder  of  the  school  in  whose 
parampard  the  subject  was  banded  down  and  further 
developed.  And,  just  as  in  sanctioning  the  Vinaya  rules 
os  authoritative  declarations,  the  words  **  anujanami 
bhikkhave  ”  were  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Buddha,  so  quite 
possibly  the  grammatical  rules  were  upheld  by  directly 
attributing  them  to  the  founder  of  the  school  himself. 

That  the  Grammar  was  the  work  of  a  south  Indian  school 
is  further  supported  by  the  fact  that  when,  after  Moggallana’s 
grammar  had  superseded  Kaccayana’s  authority,  the  reaction 
set  in  a  century  later  in  favour  of  the  elder  author,  it  was  led 
by  a  south  Indian,  Buddhuppiya  or  Dipankara,  with  his 
grammar,  the  Rupa-tiddhi.  It  seems,  therefore,  reasonable 
to  conclude  that  there  existed  a  set  of  grammatical  rules 
going  back  possibly  to  Maha-Kaccana  himself,  and  quoted  on 
his  authority,  and  that  they  were  developed  apparently  in 
India,  probably  by  members  of  the  Avanti  school, 
SaAghanandi,  Brahmadatta,  and  lastly  by  Vimalabuddhi.  The 
text  now  known  to  us  may  be  considered  a  revised  edition  of 
what  were  traditionally  known  as  the  Mahd-Kaacdyana  Sutias, 
arranged  and  enlarged  by  SaAghunandi.  This  would  also 
account  for  Mahayasa’s  surmise,  mentioned  earlier,  that 


THE  AUGUSTAN  AGE 


183 


Kacciina  and  Saftghanandi  were  one  and  the  same.  It  is  the 
generally  accepted  theory  in  Ceylon  that  the  Kaccdyana- 
vtjakarana  has  extensively  borrowed  its  terminology  from 
Sanskrit  grammar  and  that  there  is  much  resemblance  between 
the  works  of  Kuccayana  and  those  of  tho  Katantrics  rather 
than  those  of  Papini  and  his  school.  The  Katantric  grammars 
do  not  labour  under  the  studied  brevity  and  obscurity  of  the 
Punioians,  and  this  perspicuity  and  method  of  treatment  bear 
close  affinity  to  those  adopted  in  Kaccayana's  work.  It  is 
clear  however  that,  except  in  the  examples  drawn  from 
Buddhist  canon  and  texts,  most  of  the  others  are  adapted 
from  the  well-known  and  common  examples  of  all  Sanskrit 
grammarians.1 

D’Alwis,  in  tho  scholarly  Introduction  to  his  edition  of  the 
Kaccdyana ,*  has  shown  that  either  BuddhaghoBa  was  not 
familiar  with  the  work  of  Kacciyana,  or  the  grammar  had  not 
in  bis  time  acquired  the  authority  which  it  certainly  exercised 
a  few  centuries  later.  Sinco,  however,  Buddhaghoaa  does  make 
reference  to  Kaccayana  in  his  A ngutlara  Atlhakaihd  as  the 
chief  of  the  Neruttikas  and  mentions  the  Kaccdyano-pakarana 
in  the  Suila-Niddeta,  tire  first  supposition  falls  to  the  ground. 
If  in  Buddhaghosa's  time  Kacciy ana’s  work  had  been  widely* 
known  and  accepted  as  the  chief  authority,  he  certainly 
would  liuve  used  Kaccayana’s  terminology.  That 
Buddhaghosa's  terms  were  different  from  Kaccayana's  will 
be  clear  from  the  following  tabulated  list  of  cases  *  : — 
Buddhaghota  Kaccdyana 

Paccattarp  Panama 

Upayogam  Dutiya 

Karnnam  Tatiya 

l  foe  details  seo  D'Alwis'  Introduction  to  his  edition  of  tho  grammar, 
Colombo.  ISM. 

*  pp.  XXV  loll. 

»  There  is.  however,  a  Burmese  tradition  that  KaccAyana's  grammar  was 
brought  to  Burma  by  Buddhaghoae,  and  tho  Burmese  translation  and 
commentary  an  aacribed  to  him  («J»  Grammar,  by  Francis  Meson,  introd.. 


184 


THE  FA  LI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


Buddhaghosa 

Kaccayana 

Sampadana 

Catutthi 

Nissakka 

Pa  Ream! 

Sami 

Chafthl 

Bhurnma 

Saturn! 

Alapana 

Alapana 

When,  however,  we  come  to  the  Author  of  the  (Udi  written 
during  aivd  soon  after  the  reign  of  Parakrama  Bahu  I  (a.d. 
1164),  we  find  that  their  terminology  tallies  with  that  of 
Kaccayana.1  We  may,  therefore,  reasonably  conclude  that 
the  Kaccayana  came  to  be  put  into  its  present  form  and 
recognized  in  Ceylon  as  an  authority  on  Pali  grammar  some¬ 
where  between  the  century  after  Buddhaghoaa  and  the 
eleventh  century.  Edmund  Hardy  has  shown  us  in  his 
introduction  to  the  NcUi-ppakaraiyi  *  that  that  work,  too,  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  well  known  to  Buddhaghoaa.  Possibly 
both  works  were  introduced  to  Ceylon  during  the  time  when 
scholars  from  South  India  migrated  to  Ceylon  in  large 
numbers  to  study  at  the  MaM-vihara  and  other  centres  of 
learning  in  Anurldha-pura,  soon  after  Buddhaghosa’s  works 
proved  to  them  the  richness  and  the  genuineness  of  the  Ceylon 
Tkcra-cSda  tradition.  It  is  now  generally  accepted  that  the 
Kaccayana  came  into  vogue  in  Ceylon  about  the  seventh 
century  of  the  Christian  era  * 

In  the  eleventh  century,  when  Vijaya-Bahu  of  Ceylon 
appealed  to  Anuruddha,  king  of  Burma,  for  help  in  re¬ 
establishing  the  Sahgha  ordination  in  the  island,  the  inter¬ 
course  between  the  two  countries  became  closer  and  more 
intimate.  We  saw  in  the  last  chapter  how  the  two  monarchs 
co-operated  in  arranging  a  common  authoritative  canon  for 
both  countries,  and  how  Anuruddha  obtained  from  Ceylon 

1  D'Alwie,  loc.  rit. 

*  P.TA  Ed.,  pp,  xiv-xv. 

•  Thu*  lira.  Rhye  David*.  Compt»4ium,  Preface,  p.  viil.  See,  however, 
Pttfi  Grammar,  by  VidyAbJiutanm  publlehed  by  tha  Mahi  Bodhi  Society, 
Calcutta,  where  Kacciyana'e  period  it  given  ae  third  (votary  a.d.  at 
Mathuri  (Introd.,  p.  xxviii). 


TUB  AOdUSTAJf  AQB 


18& 


copies  of  the  Pali  Tipitako,  which  he  examined  and  compared 
with  the  Thaton  collection,  aided  by  the  Talaing  monk 
Aiahanta.  Anuruddha  died  in  1057  without  being  able  to 
sec  the  firstfruit*  of  lib  husbandry,  but  during  the  reigna 
of  his  immediate  successors  Pali  learning  took  firm  root  at 
Pagan,  and  the  work*  of  this  period  show  that  the  Burmese 
monks  specialised  in  the  study  of  Abhidhamma  and  Nirutti 
(grammar).  In  1154  the  monk  Aggavamsa  completed  the 
Sadda-niti,  a  grammar  baaed  on  the  Tipitaka,  and  described  it 
as  the  most  comprehensive  in  existence.1  It  established  the 
reputation  of  Burmese  scholarship  in  that  age,  and  of  the 
author  to  the  present  day,  for  the  Sadda~n\ti  is  still  regarded  in 
Burma  as  a  ckaaic.  The  Sadda-niti  formed  the  first  return  gift 
of  Burma  to  Ceylon.  A  few  years  after  its  completion,  the 
Thera  UttarajSva  left  Pagan  for  the  Mahavihara,  taking  with 
him  a  copy  of  the  work,  which  immediately  evoked  enthusiastic 
admiration  and  was  declared  superior  to  any  work  of  the  kind 
written  by  Sinhalese  scholars.1  Uttarajiva  was  accompanied 
by  his  pupil,  the  novice  Chnpata,  who  lived  amidst  the  Ceylon 
Snhgha  for  several  years,  received  ordination  at  their  hands, 
and  later  became  one  of  the  most  famous  of  the  Burmese 
literati  under  the  name  of  Sadd hamma jotipAla,  author  of  many 
books,  including  several  grammatical  treatises  based  on  the 
Kaccbynna,  to  which  we  shall  refer  later.* 

The  intimate  association  with  grammarians  of  such 
eminence  as  these  was  bound  to  inspire  their  colleagues  in 
Ceylon  until  a  teal  for  the  study  of  the  nirutti-aattha 
(grammatical  science).  A  new  zest  waa  given  to  the  perusal 
of  such  works  as  they  had  already  with  them.  Chief  amongst 
such  was  undoubtedly  the  Kaccayana,  which  they  regarded 
as  their  manual.  But  since  Kacciiyana’s  day  other  influences 
had  been  at  work,  shaping  and  moulding  Pali  grammatical 

i  Bode.*'  A'orfy  Oremmarutm  in  Burma,"  JPTS..  1808.  An  edition 
by  Mr.  Hrlrocr  Smith  m  now  bcbi«  publUhtd. 

*  Sil*o*«-roJtuo,  p.  74. 

•  Bode,  op.  eit.,  pu  89. 


186 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


forms.  In  Ceylon  the  great  attention  given  to  Sanskrit  by 
the  learned  monk*  had  brought  about  the  birth  of  a 
Sanskritizcd  Pali,  which  was  recognized  a*  good  literature.  The 
need  waa  therefore  felt  for  a  more  up-to-date  treatise  on  Pali 
grammar,  and  an  Elder  named  Moggallana  came  forward  to 
supply  that  need. 

Of  the  man  himself,  apart  from  hi*  work,  we  know  little. 
He  was  a  pupil  of  Maha-Kaasapa  of  Udumbaragiri,  and  it  is 
stated  in  the  colophon  of  the  grammar  that  he  wrote  it  in 
the  reign  of  Parakrnmabahu  the  Great,  after  the  king  had 
purged  the  Suhgha  of  all  heretical  and  sinful  Bhikkhus,  Le. 
after  a.d.  1165.  Sri  Rahula,  author  of  the  Pafijikd-pradipa  on 
AfoggaUana-vyakararyi  states  that  Moggallana  was  an  incum¬ 
bent  of  the  ThOparama  Yihara  at  Anuradha-pura.1  Ho  was 
perhaps  identical  with  the  Moggallana  Thera  mentioned  in  the 
Tamil  inscription  of  Vijaya-Bahu,J  as  having  boon  entrusted 
with  the  custodianship  of  the  Tooth-relic,  in  which  case  he 
was  the  head  of  the  Uttaramdla  Nikaya,  of  which  fraternity 
the  author  of  the  AbhidhnmmattJiasatiyaha  was  onundyaka. 
Ho  was  doubtless  a  distinguished  scholar,  for  he  is  very  highly 
spoken  of  by  his  contemporary,  the  learned  MedhaPkara  1 
of  Udumbaragiri  Vihara,  a  pupil  of  Sariputta  and  author  of 
several  works  of  note.  He  is  also  mentioned  as  one  of  his 
teachers  in  most  eulogistic  terms  by  Saiigharakkhita,4  another 
of  Sariputta’s  pupils,  who  wrote  no  less  than  five  com¬ 
prehensive  works  on  Pali  grammar  and  prosody. 

As  has  been  already  mentioned,  there  ure  several  points  of 
diJTerence  between  MoggallAna's  grammar  and  those  of  the 
Kaccayniut  school.  Aggavarpaa's  Sadda-niti,  introduced  into 
Ceylon  from  Burma,  had  followed  the  terminology  of 
Kaccayana.  Moggallana  differs  from  them  both.  His 
aphorisms  are  differently  worded.  He  disputes  the  correct- 

1  See  >ko  Do  Zovsa,  p.  24. 

*  Up.  Zt yt.,  eel.  ii,  pt.  vi,  pp.  240  foil. 

*  In  (he  KiaaydrrAo-Mmtoorays  (q.v.). 

*  In  hi*  Sambandha-cinUl  (q.v.). 


THE  AUGUSTAN  AGE 


187 


ness  of  the  very  first  sutta  in  the  Kaccayana — that  there  are 
forty-one  letters  in  the  Pali  alphabet — and  contends  that  the 
number  is  forty-three,  including  short  <  and  o.  Kaccayana, 
in  his  second  chapter,  mentions  that  the  three  inflexions, 
dya,  a,  and  i,  are  used  optionally  with  nouns  for  sa  (dat. 
sing.),  ima  (abl.  sing.),  and  smim  (loc.  sing.)  respectively,  and 
that  they  are  never  used  with  pronouns.  Moggalluna  denies 
this,  and  quotes  examples  from  the  Tipitaka  to  support  his 
contention.  He  takes  exception  to  the  Kaccayana  definition 
of  the  dative  case  os  "  that  which  expresses  a  wish  to  give, 
that  which  pleases  or  holds  ”,  and  states  that,  though  words 
of  giving  govern  a  dative  case,  and  though  the  forms  of  the 
two  cases  are  identical,  yet  words  expressing  pleasure  and 
bidding  govern  a  genitive.1  The  work  is  divided  into  six 
chapters  :  terminology  and  sandhi,  declensions,  compounds, 
nominal  derivations,  verbal  derivatives,  and  verbs. 
Moggallana  himself  calls  his  work  Sadda-saUha  (work  on  verbal 
science),  and  mentions  in  the  colophon  that  not  only  did  he 
write  the  aphorisms,  but  also  composed  to  them  a  Vutti 
explanatory  of  the  rules  in  detail.  He  also  wrote  a  pailcikd 
or  commentary  on  hia  Vutti,  and  called  it  the  VuUi-vannana- 
pailcikd  dealing  with  the  haraka  (syntax)  only.  This  work  is 
well  known  because  of  the  Paitcikd-pradxpa  written  on  it,  by 
5ri  Rahula  Saiigharaja,  mentioned  above.  Moggslliino’a 
work  started  a  new  school  of  Pali  grammar  in  Ceylon,  which 
included  such  luminaries  of  learning  as  Sai'igharakkhita, 
Piyadsssi,  author  of  the  Pada-sddhana,  Ananda,  Vsnaratana 
Medhankara,  and  Sri  Rahula.  Their  works  will  be  dealt  with 
in  their  respective  places. 

A  Moggallana  was  also  the  author  of  the  Abkidhanap- 
padipika,  written  at  the  same  time  as  the  above,  in  the  reign  of 
Par&krama  the  Great.  Whether  ho  was  identical  with  the 
grummarian  or  with  theMoggallanareferrcdtoin\  ijaya-Bahu’s 
inscription,  it  is  at  present  impossible  to  say.  A  Sinhalese 
tanne  or  interverbal  paraphrase  of  the  work  says  that  it 
1  AUo  D'AlwU,  Catalogue,  p.  184. 


188 


THE  PAU  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


was  composed  by  the  author  of  the  Yydkarana,  but,  though 
the  ranne  is  undoubtedly  an  ancient  and  a  valuable  work,  we 
know  neither  ita  author,  nor  the  date  of  its  compilation.  The 
same  statement  is  made  in  a  fi ka  or  commentary  which  is 
certainly  later  than  the  »anne,  for  referenoe  is  made  there  to 
the  latter  work.  The  tradition  in  Ceylon  is  that  the  author  of 
the  Abhidhana -ppadipiJca  is  different  from  the  grammarian.1 
The  work  belongs  to  the  latter  part  of  Parakrama’s  reign, 
for  the  author  speaks  in  high  praise  of  the  king  and  of  the 
works  done  by  him  for  the  adornment  of  his  capital  and  as 
“  having  long  extended  his  protection  to  the  united  Safigha 
of  the  Three  Nikdyos  Moggallana  calls  himself  “  the  special 
object  of  the  King’s  wish -conferring  patronage  and  a  dweller 
amongst  the  SarG-gama  fraternity  He  composed  his  work  at 
the  Maha  Jctavana  ViliAra  in  Pulasti-pura  (Polonnaruva).* 
The  seventy-eighth  chapter  of  the  Maha-vamta  speaks  of 
Moggallana  as  having  attended  the  Convocation  of  Maha- 
Kassapa  from  the  country  of  the  Upa-raja  or  sub-king.* 
The  headquarters  of  the  SarG-g&ma  fraternity  were  at 
Seruvavila  near  Trincomali,  and  this  community  came  into 
prominence  in  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries,  when 
one  of  its  members  became  head  of  the  Kitsirimevan  Kalagi 
Temple  and  compiled  several  works  of  merit.4  Even  in  the 
twelfth  century  they  must  bnve  constituted  an  important 
body  of  monks ;  otherwise  they  would  not  have  been  repre¬ 
sented  in  the  Convocation.  The  Jetavana  VihorR  was  built 
by  Pardkrama  to  rival  in  splendour  Anuthapindika’s  gift  to 
the  Buddha.  We  are  told  that  it  consisted  of  520  dwelling- 
houses,  apart  from  other  buildings,  and  was  replete  with  every 
means  of  comfort.4 

The  A bhidftana-ppadtptkd  is  the  only  ancient  Pali  Dictionary 
in  Ceylon,  and  it  follows  the  style  and  method  of  the  Sanskrit 

a  See  SubMti's  tuition,  Coloabo,  1865,  and  alao  ace  De  Zoya*,  p.  21. 

1  Subfaati'i  edition  •  colophon. 

>  M.V.,  Uxv.ii,  v.  9. 

*  Wipkrr-BUitnghr,  p.  23. 

•  J I.V..  be.  til.,  rr.  31-48. 


THE  AUGUSTAN  ACE 


1P9 


Atnara-koxa.  As  the  name  implies,  it  is  meant  to  throw  light 
{padtpa)  on  the  meanings  of  nouns  (Abkidhana).  In  the  opening 
stanzas  Moggallaua  tells  ns  that  his  work  was  written  because 
“an  intimate  acquaintance  with  noun*  and  their  genders 
is  ymoutial  for  those  desiring  to  learn  the  correct  significance 
of  words  and  is  a  help  to  those  wishing  to  master  the  word  of 
the  Buddha'*.  In  the  colophon  lie  saya  that  the  lexicon 
“  interprets  the  names  of  all  objects  in  the  Dev*,  Munu?a, 
and  Saga  worlds  The  work  is  divided  into  three  parts, 
dealing  with  celestial,  terrestrial,  and  miscellaneous  objects 
respectively,  and  each  {art  is  subdivided  into  several  sections, 
which  are  by  no  means  mutually  exclusive.  The  whole  book 
is  a  Dictionary  of  Synonyms,  all  the  names  given  to  one 
particular  thing  being  grouped  together  and  put  into  verse 
to  facilitate  memorizing  them.  The  last  two  sections  of  the 
last  part  are  devoted  to  homonyms  and  indeclinable  particles. 
The  work  is  held  in  the  highest  esteem  both  in  Burma  and 
Ceylon.  In  Burma  an  important  officer  of  state  under 
King  Kittisfhasura  (a.D.  1361)  wrote  a  Sameannand  on  it  and 
the  Elder  Siuavara  of  Pagan  translated  the  lexicon  into 
Burmese  in  the  eighteenth  century,  thus  completing  a  task 
which  had  been  begun  by  his  predecessors  in  the  seventeenth 
century.1  In  Ceylon  itself  a  tonne  and  &  fTW  were  written, 
to  which  reference  has  already  been  made. 

Mrs.  Bode  mentions*  that  in  the  Ekarpsiks-Parupana 
controversy  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
the  Ekaipsika*  quoted  in  support  of  their  arguments  a  treatise 
called  Cula-$anihi-pado ,  which  they  attributed  to  the  Arabat 
Moggallana,  one  of  the  two  chief  disciples  of  the  Buddha. 
They  explained  that  it  was  embodied  in  a  text  known 
as  the  Pilaka-Uayo-lakkhana-gandha,  brought  to  Burma 
by  Buddhaghoaa.  But  the  Furupanas  maintained  that  the 
text  on  which  the  Ekaipsikos  depended  was  a  treatise  called 
the  Vinaya-gartfhi-pada,  of  the  twelfth  century,  and  was  written 

>  Bode,  PAH  i til.  Burma,  p.  67. 

*  Ibid.,  p.  70. 


190 


TUB  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


in  Ceylon  by  the  them  Moggallana  in  Parakrama-Bahu’s  reign. 
The  title  of  the  book  would  suggest  that  it  was  a  dissertation 
on  the  Ptflayo,  but  no  such  book  is  known  in  Ceylon  at  the 
present  day,  and,  so  far  as  I  am  aware ,  Moggull&na  did  not  write 
any  compilation  on  the  Viiuxya  and  the  only  work  bearing  the 
name  of  Vinaya-gantki -pada  extant  at  present  in  Burma  is 
ascribed  to  a  Sinhalese  monk  named  Joti,  of  whom  nothing 
more  is  known.1 

Perhaps  brightest  among  the  constellations  that  adorned 
Ceylon’s  literary  firmament  during  Parukrama-Bohu’s  reign 
was  Sari  putts,  called  also  Sigaramati,*  "  like  to  the  ocean 
in  wisdom.”  He  was  one  of  the  prominent  members  of 
ParAkrama-Bahu’s  convocation,  and  we  are  told  that  the  king 
built  for  him  “  a  mansion  of  great  splendour  containing  many 
halls  and  chambers  ”,  attached  to  the  Great  Jetavana  Vihara 
at  Polonnaruva.*  Like  all  the  other  learned  men  of  his  period, 
he  was  a  clever  Sanskrit  scholar  as  well,  and  wrote  a  fik&  on 
Ratnafrijiiana’s  pailjikA  to  the  Ctindmgomi-vy&kmna.  This 
was  called  the  Ratnamati-panjikd-tlkd  or  PaKjikSlaftk&m.  He  is 
also  credited  with  having  written  a  concise  grammar  in 
Sanskrit,  called  the  Pad&vat&ra,  dealing  mainly  with  words, 
their  forms  and  meanings,  but  this  work  is  now  apparently 
lost.4 

Another  of  his  works  is  tire  Vxnaya-saitgaha,  a  summary  of 
the  Vinaya  Pitaka,  divided  into  various  sections,  giving 
concise  explanations  of  Vinaya  rules.  Thus :  div&seyya  It 
divanibbajjanam,  tatrayam  vinicchayo  :  anujandmi,  bhikkhavc, 
divSpaiualliyaxxiena  dvaram  samvaritvd  patisallayitun  ti 
vacanato  diva  nippajjante  dvaram  samvaritva  nibbajjitabbam. 
(Dii'ascyya  means  “  sleeping  by  day  This  is  the  decision 
with  regard  to  it,  “  Bhikkhus,  I  rule  that  ho  who  rests  in 
sleep  by  day  should  have  ha  door  closed,”  from  this,  "  if  one 

1  Dr.  Forchhimraer'i  Iiit  pubUritcd  by  Qio  Go  remanent  of  India,  1879. 

*  S.-raKgaka,  p.  83. 

»  if.V.,  hexvrii.  t.  $4. 

*  See  preface,  p.  xvl,  printed  ed.  of  Ifoppafldao-paajitd  yfitfa. 


THE  AUGUSTAN  AGE 


191 


sleeps  by  day  the  door  should  be  closed/1)  In  the  colophon 
Sariputta  mentions  that  it  was  written  by  him  at  the  request 
of  King  Parakrama.  The  work  acems  to  have  been  known 
under  various  titles.  The  Mandalay  MS.  in  the  India  Office 
Library  has  the  title  Mah&vitiatja -aaugaka-pakarana,  by 
Sariputta,  and  in  the  colophon  the  work  is  called  Pdlmutlaka- 
Vinaga-vinicckaija.  The  MS.  in  the  Colombo  Museum  Library 
bears  the  title  Palimullaka-Vinaya  ;  D’Alwis  in  his  Catalogue 
(p.  170)  gives  a  Pali  3/it/iaJto- Kinaya-rmibcAaya  as  one  of 
S&riputta’s  works,  and  Weatergaard  has  the  same  in  Ilia 
Catalogue  (p.  48).  Forchhammer’s  list  contains  Vinaya-makd- 
saiigaha,  by  Sariputta.  The  Gandha-vamsa  calls  it  Pt'nnya- 
ttaiigaha  (p.  61),  and  so  does  the  Sdsana-vamsa  (p.  33).  In  Burma 
the  work  is  known  as  the  Pmnya-raujaAaand  Vtnayasaiigaha- 
pakarana ,l  and  is  mentioned  in  the  Kaly&pi  inscription,* 
among  several  works  of  Sinhalese  authorship.  It  formed  one 
of  the  chief  works  consulted  by  King  Dhammaccti  of  Pegu 
in  the  fifteenth  century,  when  he  instituted  his  reforms  for  the 
Safigha,1  and  the  Pilaka  Uha-main  (p.  43)  mentions  a  com¬ 
mentary  on  it  by  the  Acariyo  of  King  Sin-gu  of  Ava.  It  has 
been  suggested  in  view  of  the  variety  of  the  titles  under  which 
the  book  is  known  that  Viruvja-tangaha,  or,  to  give  it  ita  full 
name,  PahmuUaka-Vinayu-vinicchaya-tafigaha,  was  only  part 
of  a  much  larger  Maha-Vinayasangaha-jnkaraoa*  hut  I 
see  no  reason  to  accept  this  suggestion.  It  is  only  too  well 
known  that  the  work  of  ancient  authors  often  bore  more  than 
one  title — sometimes  confusedly  so — and  it  is  quite  likely  that 
Sariputta’*  work  was  no  exception  to  this  custom  and  that 
whatever  ita  full  and  original  name  was,  it  was  generally  called 
the  Vinaya-saugaha.  Two  (tins  •  are  extant  on  it  in  Ceylon, 
one  old  (porawa)  and  the  other  new  (warn),  but  the  author  and 
the  date  of  neither  is  known.  The  Gandka-tanrsa  (p.  61)  says 

»  Bode,  p.  38,  and  p.  39.  footnote*. 

*  M.  Anligvary,  rol.  xxti. 

*  Bode.  p.  38. 

•  *  e.g.  Faueboll,  JPTS-,  1866,  p.  18. 

*  Do  Zojnt,  p.  16. 


192 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


that  Sariputta  wrote  a  Aid  on  it  himself.  He  also  wrote  a 
Sinhalese  sonne  to  the  A bkulhammaUha-*a figaha. 

Sariputta’*  most  comprehensive  work,  however,  i*  the  Sar- 
attha-dipam,  his  masterly  sub-commentary  on  Buddhaghosa's 
Samante-pdaddiidon  the  Vinaya-Pitaka.  The  immense  amount 
of  valuable  information  he  has  collected  therein  shows  that  his 
knowledge  was  extensive  and  profound,  and  that  he  was  not 
second  to  the  great  commentator  himself  in  exegctical  ability. 
The  language  betrays  the  influence  of  Sanskrit  learning  on  tho 
author's  Pali.  Many  of  the  illustrative  stories  given  are  of 
Ceylonese  Thenu  and  laymen,  and  the  work  contains  a  very 
valuable  historical  account  of  the  eighteen  schools  into  which 
the  Buddhist  Sahgha  were  divided  at  the  time  of  the  Third 
Council,  and  givos  much  information  not  available  at  present 
anywhere  else.  The  work  is  divided  into  two  sections— 
COfa  and  Mahd,  and  follows  closely  the  lines  laid  down  by 
Buddhaghosa,  thus  suffering  from  the  same  weakness  of  being 
tied  down  too  much  to  orthodox  interpretations.  Sariputta  is 
also  sometimes  credited  with  having  written  two  other  l lids,  the 
SdraUha-mafyusd  on  the  AOguUara,  baaed  on  Buddhaghosa’s 
Manoralha  -pura ni,  and  the  Linattha-ppakasini  on  the  Papanca- 
Sudani  of  the  Majjhima.1  To  this  time,  most  probably,  also 
belong  thefttos  on  the  other  three  Nikaya s  of  the  SuUa-Pitaka 
collectively  known  as  the  SdraUha-maOjOsd  (ikd* 

The  fiifcds  were  sub-commentaries,  that  is  to  say,  works 
containing  expositions  of  points  in  the  Atlhakaihd  or  com¬ 
mentaries  which  needed  further  elucidation  for  their  correct 
interpretation  ;  or  sometimes  they  merely  gave  additional 
information  regarding  the  discussions  in  tho  commentaries, 
e.g.  raoTe  illustrative  stories.  The  Cikdt,  unlike  the  com¬ 
mentaries,  wore  purely  of  Ceylonese  origin,  compiled  and 
written  by  Ceylonese  scholars,  and  the  (ikds  on  tho  Canonical 
texts  and  commentaries  were  composed  soon  after  the 
Convocation  held  under  the  patronage  of  Payakrama-Bahu 

1  WickremMinghp,  p.  it. 

'  De  Zoyn,  p.  3. 


THE  AUGUSTAN  AOB 


193 


with  Mahn-Kassapa  as  President.  The  Saddhamma-tatigaha 1 
has  an  interesting  chapter  on  how  they  came  to  be  written. 
Thus : — 

“After  the  three  fraternities  of  Ceylon  monks  had  been 
reconciled  and  monasteries  and  places  of  learning  had  been 
built  for  their  uso,  Mahii-Kassapa,  head  of  many  thousand 
monks  at  Jetavana  Vihara,  assembled  there  and  made  tho 
following  declaration  :  “  Whatever  commentaries  have  been 
compiled  by  teachers  of  old  on  the  AtlJutkalha  of  the  three 
Pitakas  are  now  of  no  use  to  monks  living  in  the  various 
countries .  Many  of  them  are  written  in  the  Sinhalese  language, 
and  the  others  in  Magadhi  mixed  with  various  languages 
(ukulam)  and  unintelligible.  Let  us  therefore  remove  such 
faults  and  compose  exegctical  commentaries,  complete  and 
clear  in  exposition."  The  Bhikkhus  agreed  and  requested  him 
to  obtain  the  royal  sanction.  That  having  been  secured,  they 
reassembled  in  the  hall  (at  Jetavana)  built  by  the  king,  and 
composed  (Has  (BwatfAa-Kmip«Mfl)  on  the  Kiwiya-Pitoia 
(Sarattha-dlpant),  the  four  chief  A'l'iuyas  of  the  Sutia-Pitahi 
(the  Sarattha-manjusa  divided  into  four  parts)  and  on  the 
Abhidhamma-Pxtaka  ( ParamaUha-dxpanl  in  three  parts)." 

To  the  Abhxdhamma  (ikds  more  detailed  reference  will  be 
made  later.  It  is  significant  that  Sariputta's  name  is  not 
mentioned  in  this  connexion,  and  that  no  special  works  are 
assigned  to  him  by  the  author  of  the  Saddha n\ma-tangaha. 
Unreliable  as  the  information  of  the  Saddhamma-saitgaha  is 
in  many  respects,  as  we  shall  see  when  we  discuss  it  later, 
there  is  no  doubt  that  the  account  of  the  (US  compilation,  as 
given  here,  contains  more  than  a  germ  of  truth.  It  lies  to  be 
remembered  that  for  several  centuries  preceding  Parakrama’s 
reconciliation  of  the  communities  the  Saiigha  had  been  tom 
by  various  schisms.  The  different  sects,  while  they  accepted 
the  authority  of  the  common  canon  and  of  Buddhaghoea’s 
commentaries,  interpreted  various  points  of  teaching  in  their 
own  way,  to  support  each  in  their  claims  to  orthodoxy.  These 
»  JPTS.  Ed.,  pjx  M  fell. 


IS 


194 


TUB  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


interpretations  were  written  and  handed  down  in  tiids  or 
additional  commentaries,  and,  as  the  author  of  the  Saddhamma- 
tangaha  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Kaasapa,  they  were  variously 
written,  some  in  Sinhalese,  others  in  Puli,  others  in  a  mixture 
of  dialects,  due  to  the  conglomeration  of  the  many  elements 
that  constituted  the  SaAgha.  The  flies  contained  much 
valuable  information  and  often  the  correct  traditional  inter¬ 
pretations  that  would  be  of  great  assistance  in  a  correct 
understanding  of  various  points  of  the  Dhamma  teaching. 
Much  matter  must  have  accumulated  since  Buddhaghosa 
compiled  his  works,  especially  after  scholars  began  to  come 
over  to  Ceylon  from  Burma  and  China,  South  India  and 
Cambodia.  And,  just  as  Buddhaghosa  felt  the  necessity  of 
making  a  concise  compilation  of  tho  different  atthakathas  that 
had  come  down  to  his  day,  the  need  was  realized  of  bringing 
these  various  (i kd$  together  and  making  a  synthetic  summary 
of  them  all.  It  was  impossible,  however,  to  accept  all  or  even 
most  of  what  they  contained,  nor  was  it  politic  that  the  works 
of  any  particular  school  should  supersede  those  of  the  others. 
There  were  yet  in  the  Sahgha  those  who  were  not  quite  whole¬ 
heartedly  reconciled  to  the  victory  of  the  Mahavih&ra  over 
the  other  schools  ;  thus  unity  of  the  fraternities  had  been 
secured  only  with  gTeat  tact  and  patience  and  labour,  and  a 
wise  man,  such  as  Kassapa  undoubtedly  was,  would  have 
shrunk  from  doing  anything  fresh  to  rekindle  dissatisfaction. 
We  may  well  believe,  therefore,  that  he  consulted  his  colleagues 
at  Jetavana  and  obtained  their  help  in  settling  the  (ikns. 
These  (ikat  may  be  regarded,  therefore,  as  the  work  of  a 
school,  rather  than  of  single  individuals  ;  they  were  rehearsed 
in  solemn  conclave  and  completed  after  discussion. 

What,  then,  about  Sariputta’s  part  in  this  task  ?  He  was 
an  important  member  of  the  Jetavana  monastery  and 
undoubtedly  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  proceedings. 
He  may  possibly  have  been  appointed  to  supervise  certain 
sections  of  the  work— tho  Pinaya,  AfiguUara,  and  the 
Majjhxma  portions.  It  may  even  be  that  after  consultation 


THE  AUGUSTAS  AGE 


195 


with  his  taddhi-viharika*  he  was  authorized  by  them  to 
write  those  sections  which  now  bear  his  name.  The  custom  of 
single  authors  making  compilations  was  then  quite  well- 
established,  and,  as  long  as  the  matter  which  they  contained 
won  their  approval,  the  ft M  compilers  would  have  had  no 
objection  to  any  one  of  their  number— and  Sariputta  was 
certainly  one  of  the  most  emineut  amongst  them — writing 
the  work.  This  supposition  would  account  also  for  Sariputta 
having  written  a  I'inaya-MtigaJia,  apart  from  the  ft id  on  the 
Vinatja  associated  with  his  name.  The  first  was  purely  bis, 
the  second  the  work  of  an  assembly  (or  a  committee,  we  may 
call  it),  of  which  he  was  the  head.  The  likas  on  the  Vinatja 
Pitaka  and  on  the  Aitgvttara  and  the  Majjhima  Nikitjatt 
of  the  Suita  Pitaka  are  definitely  attributed  to  Sariputta.  As 
to  the  authorship  of  the  likas  on  the  other  two  portions  of  the 
Sutta  Nika/ja,  nothing  is  known.  The  common  name  borne 
by  all  the  ttkds  of  each  Pitaka  woold  seem  to  strengthen  the 
hypothesis  that  they  were  the  work  either  of  one  person  or 
of  a  wholo  community,  and  we  know  that  Sariputta  is  not 
credited  with  having  written  them  all  himself.  In  this 
connexion  it  is  significant  that  Dhammakitti,  author  of  the 
Datha-vanxsa,  who  was  one  of  Sariputta’s  immediate  disciples, 
also  mentions  only  the  Samanta-pasddikd  tiki  and  the 
A  iiguttarafikd  as  his  teacher’s  works.1 

•  Colophon  ;m.  Edition,  p.  131,  to.  in  addition  to  tho  fUa  on 
CAmtrafomi-paAjitA  and  tho  T’iiwpa  «ai*p*Ao. 


CHAPTER  X 
SiaiPUTTx’S  Circle 

VXTHILE  Maha-Kassapa,  assisted  by  Sariputta  and  others 
of  equal  eminence,  was  labouring  for  the  glory  of  the 
religion  in  Ceylon,  an  event  took  place  which  drew  Burma  and 
Ceylon  together,  oven  more  intimately  than  before,  and  which 
had  far-reaching  consequences  in  the  lAter  history  of  the 
Buddhist  Saftgha  in  both  countries.  Ever  since  the  time  of 
Buddhaghosa,  Burmese  monks  were  in  the  habit  of  coming 
over  to  the  Mahuvihara  that  they  might  there  imbibe  the 
orthodox  Theravada  tradition  and  bring  it  back  with  them 
to  their  own  land.  The  intercourse  between  the  two  countries 
was  undoubtedly  interrupted  to  some  extent  during  the  foreign 
invasions  of  Ceylon,  and  its  internal  discords ;  but  after 
Vijaya-Bahu  obtained  the  help  of  King  Anuruddha  in  re¬ 
establishing  the  ordination  in  his  own  country  it  revived, 
and,  in  the  prosperous  reign  of  Parukrama  the  Great,  increased 
to  a  very  large  extent.  It  was  about  this  time,  somewhere 
about  the  beginning  of  Parakrama’s  regimo  in  A.D.  1165, 
that  the  Elder  Uttarajlva  left  Pagan  to  visit  the  celebrated 
MaluVvihira,  taking  with  him,  as  we  saw,  a  copy  of  Aggavaqisa’s 
great  work,  the  Pali  Grammar,  Sadda-niti.  Uttarajlva  was 
accompanied  by  his  pupil,  the  novice  Chapala,  known  in 
religion  os  Saddhammaj&tipala,1  whose  fame  surpassed,  for 
a  time,  at  least,  even  that  of  Aggavatpaa.  He  received  the 
ujnsampadd  from  the  Safiglm  in  Ceylon,  and  lived  with  them 
for  several  years,  studiously  lenming  the  Dhamma  as  handed 
down  in  the  Mahavihara,  and  perhaps  mastering  many  texts 
which  were  os  yet  unknown  in  Burma.  He  was  a  man  of  great 
skill  and  ability,  and  bis  stay  in  the  sacred  island  was  of 
great  importance  to  the  literary  history  of  Burma.  He  returned 
to  his  country  deeply  imbued  with  the  conviction,  that  the 
Muhavihitra  alone  had  preserved  the  legitimate  line  of 


*  &Uano-va<n fa,  p.  74. 


SARiurrrA’s  circle 


197 


t/icra-Buccession  from  the  time  of  the  Buddha,  and  that  the 
upasamjxtdd  would  be  valid  only  if  it  were  conferred  by  the 
Mabavihara  fraternity.  He,  therefore,  brought  with  him  into 
Burma  four  Sinhalese  monks,1  and  this  little  group  formed  the 
nucleus  of  a  Slhala  Sahgha  in  Burma,  the  rightful  heirs  of  the 
legitimate  tradition.  We  are  not  concerned  here  with  following 
the  vicissitudes  of  that  community.  It  was  well  that  the 
Slhala  Saftgha  did  gain  a  foothold  in  Burma  and  rise  into 
eminence  there,  for,  in  later  years,  when  the  uptuampodd 
was  again  lost  in  Ceylon,  during  a  period  of  great  adversity, 
it  was  the  Burmese  Safigba  who  helped  in  large  measure  to 
make  good  the  lo«*  and  re-establish  the  ordination.* 

Cbapafa  was  the  author  of  several  works,  eight  in  all, 
according  to  the  Gandha-vanua*  only  ono  of  which  was  written 
in  Ceylon,  the  Safiichepa-tannand,  a  commentary  on  the 
Abhidhammatiha-saiujaha,  divided  into  nine  chapters,  closely 
following  Anuruddha 's  work . 4  Meanwhile  Sariputta  was  head 
of  a  large  school  at  Jctavana,  in  a  splendid  monastery  built 
by  the  king  for  his  special  use.  He  was,  perhaps,  more 
responsible  than  anyone  else  of  this  period  for  the  spread  of 
learning  in  Ceylon.  Famed  far  and  wide  as  Sagara-mati, 
“  like  to  the  ocean  in  wisdom,"  he  left  behind  him  several 
disciples  of  profound  learning  and  great  abilities,  at  least  six 
of  whom  have  come  down  to  posterity  as  authors  possessed 
of  high  literary  erudition. 

Among  them  wss  Sartgharnkkbita,  who  specialized  in  m'rutti 
(grammar),  rhetoric,  and  prosody.  In  the  VuUodaya  he  speaks 
with  great  respect  of  the  grammarian  Moggallina,  and  calls 
him  one  of  his  teachers.  He  also  mentions  among  his 
preceptors  a  certain  Selantarayatana  (Oalaturu-mQU)  Thera, 
and  in  the  colophon  to  the  Sambandha-cinta  calls  himself  a 
pupil  of  Mcdhankara  “  who  purified  the  religion”,  evidently 

*  SAm.,  p.  06. 

*  Bode,  op.  c4t.,  pp.  16-20. 

•  O.V.,  p.  74. 

•  FhujIxJII,  India  Offiea  Catalofut,  JPTS-,  1896.  p.  28. 


198 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


Udumbaragiri  Medhartkara,  pupil  of  Kasaapa  and  Sariputta. 
Perhaps  the  Selautarayatana  Thera  and  Medhahkaia  were 
one  and  the  same.  In  the  Canda-*5raUha  Ilia 1  to  his 
Sambandha-cint&  he  is  called  a  grandson  of  King  D&thOpatissa, 
which  is  undoubtedly  a  mistake,  because  DathCpatissa  lived 
about  three  centuries  earlier.  Perhaps  the  author  was  mis¬ 
taken  for  another  earlier  writer  of  the  same  name  of  whom 
nothing  is  known.  In  the  colophon  to  the  Sambandha-cintii 
Sangharakkhita  tells  us  that  he  also  wrote  the  Vultodaya, 
Susadda-s\ddhi,  Yoga-vintcchaya,  SubodhUaAkara,  and  a 
Khudda-sikkha-txM.  Chief  among  his  works  ranks  the 
Vu tlodaya,  the  only  original  work,  so  for  os  we  know,  extant 
on  Pali  prosody ;  it  is  of  moderate  length,  divided  into  six 
chapters  and  written  partly  in  prose  and  partly  in  verse. 
The  author  tells  us  in  his  introductory  stanza,  that  *'  the  works 
on  prosody  composed  in  earlier  times  by  Pi&gala  and  others 
are  not  in  a  manner  satisfactory  to  those  studying  pure 
Magadhi.  Therefore  for  their  easy  comprehension  do  I  now 
commence  in  the  Magadhi  language  this  Vuttodaya  adapted 
to  popular  prosody  and  divided  into  Mutt&  and  Vauua, 
composed  in  language  pleasing  and  abounding  in  sense  and 
embodying  both  rule  and  example  It  is  wholly  based  on 
works  dealing  with  Sanskrit  prosody,  the  terms  of  which  it 
has  borrowed  and  adopted  and,  in  some  instances,  whole 
sentences  are  incorporated  from  Pihgala  and  other  authorities 
with  no  more  alterations  than  are  necessary  when  Sanskrit 
is  turned  into  Pali.1  It  is  divided  into  six  chapters  dealing 
with  prosodial  feet  (8  ganas)  and  technical  terms,  metre 
(different  types  of  metre  and  their  rules,  chiefly  the  Ariya), 
Samavutta  or  verses  where  every  lino  is  alike,  Addha- 
samavutta  (where  every  half-gatha  is  alike),  Visanaa-vutta 
(the  four  lines  of  a  githa  are  unequal),  and  the  last,  on  the 

1  By  Seddhamiaina  o{  Pagin,  in  the  fourteenth  century  (PtfaJkaltia-maiti, 
ja74). 

*  Colombo  Ed.,  p.  7. 

*  e-g-  the  laet  ten  vent*  of  the  firet  chapter  on  Pada-exheda  (eaeeera], 
which  are  taken  directly  from  Haliyudha. 


sarifutta's  circle 


199 


six  kinds  of  knowledge  essential  to  good  poetry  (e.g.  spreading 
of  rhythm,  ascertaining  the  tone,  symbols  of  rhythm,  etc.). 
There  is  a  Sinhalese  Sonne,  written,  probably,  by  the  author 
himself,  and  a  Pali  tlkd  by  an  unknown  hand.1  It  bos  been 
made  the  subject  of  several  commentaries  and  glosses  in 
Burma,  notably  the  V uUodaya-paiicihl  of  Saddhammafia^a 
and  the  (ikd  of  Vepullabuddhi  of  Pagan.* 

Another  of  Saiighnrakkhita's  works  is  the  Sambandha- 
cinld,  dealing  with  the  Pali  verb  and  ha  use  in  syntax. 
It  also  give*  a  description  of  the  six  Karakas  or  Cases 
used  with  the  verb  in  the  sentence.  This  treatise  is 
based  on  the  grammar  of  Moggallana,  whom  1ms  mentions  as 
his  teacher,  along  with  Medhartkara,  both  of  whom  he 
eulogizes  in  the  opening  stanzas  as  having  assisted  in  the 
suppression  of  heresy.  There  exist  a  Pali  (ika  by  an  unknown 
author  (see  below),  and  a  Sinhalese  Sanne  by  Gotama  Thera,3 
both  of  whom,  judging  from  their  comments,  were  undoubtedly 
well-versed  in  the  principle*  of  Pali  grammar.  Mahiiyaaa’s 
Koccuyanasara  of  the  thirteenth  century  quotes  extensively 
from  the  SatnbandJux-cinta,  showing  that  Sartgharakkhita’s 
work  became  famous  after  it  was  written.  Abhaya,  a  Burmese 
author  of  Pagan  of  the  fourteenth  century,  also  wrote  a  flka,* 
which  is  probably  the  one  extant  in  Ceylon  at  present. 

The  Subodhdlaiikara  is  a  work  on  the  art  of  poetry,  as  the 
following  table  of  contents  shows,  apart  from  the  technique 
of  prosody,  which  is  dealt  with  in  the  VuUodaya.  It  is  a  learned 
and  important  work,  and  treats  chiefly  of  the  Gatha  verse. 
It  is  divided  into  five  chapters :  (1)  Incongruity  of  sense 
and  tautology  ;  (2)  the  art  of  avoiding  such  fault* ;  (3) 
elegance  of  words  and  phrase*  ;  (4)  the  elegance  of  sense  and 
how  it  can  be  acquired ;  (5)  the  elegance  of  sound  and  the 
art  of  making  verso  pleasant  to  the  listener.  The  work  is 
much  used  in  Ceylon  and  in  Burma,  where  a  Sittaya  or 

*  Wtckromutaghr.  p.  *»iM. 

‘  F*u»Ui!l,  Cat.  Mandalay  MSS..  P  00. 

•  De  Zoyta.  p.  20. 

‘  Bodt,  p.22.  Mid  O.V.,  Ot-7-t.  pp. 


200 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON' 


scholiast  has  been  written  on  it  as  late  as  1880  called  the 
A  lafikdra-nutaya.1 

Of  Sailgharakkhita’s  two  other  known  words  :  (1)  Sxuadda- 
siddhi  or  S&raUJta-vildsini,  a  (ikd  on  the  MoggaU&na-paiijikd, 
and  (2)  the  Kh\iddasikkkd-tikd,  mention  has  already  been 
made  in  connexion  with  the  works  on  which  they  are  baaed. 

Contemporary  with  Sartgharakkhifca  was  Sumartgala, 
another  of  Sariputta’s  pupils.  He  specialized  in  the  study  of 
Abhidhamrna,  and  wrote  (ik&t  on  several  Abhidhamma 
works.  His  (ikd  on  Buddhadatta's  Abhidhamm&vatdra  is 
entitled  AbhidhammaUha-vikdtin  I  (the  Blossoms  of 
Philosophy).  He  also  wrote  a  Nava-(ikd  on  Dhammap&k's 
Sacca-sankhepa,  called  Sdrattha-sdlini  (the  Essence  of 
Meanings).  But  by  far  the  best  known  work  is  the  Abftidham- 
maUha-vibkdvam  (Philosophy  made  clear),  on  the  Compendium. 
It  was  once  known  in  Burma  as  the  Jikd  Ida  (the  Beautiful 
JTtfci),  because  the  comments  in  it  aro  so  very  apt  to  the 
subject  of  discussion.  But  when,  in  the  fifteenth  century, 
Ariyavarpsa  of  Ava  became  proficient  in  the  Buddhist 
Scriptures,  the  T’kd  kla  changed  its  name  to  J\kd  gyau 
(the  Famous  7*ii'd). 

The  Sdsana-tanua  *  gives  us  some  interest  ing  details  of  this 
change  of  name.  Ariyavaipsa  was  a  member  of  Chapata's 
Sihala-sailgha,  and  went  to  Sagaing  to  study  grammar  under 
a  learned  Thera  called  Ye-din  (the  water-carrier).  Either  to 
restrain  his  own  inclination  for  talk,  or  because  he  found  his 
companions  too  talkative,  this  monk  was  in  the  habit  of 
keeping  his  mouth  filled  with  water.  When  Ariyavarpsa 
first  came  to  him,  there  seemed  little  hope  that  the  silent 
water-carrier  would  discourse  to  him  on  any  subject.  But  he 
was  not  discouraged.  He  came  daily  to  the  Vihiira,  performing 
all  the  services  of  a  pupil  to  Ye-din,  till  the  latter  asked  him 
his  reasons  for  these  visits.  Ariyavamsa  begged  permission 
to  study  with  the  famous  Acariya  because,  though  he  had 

*  Bode,  p.  PS. 

*  pp.  95  loti. 


sariputta’s  circle 


201 


studied  texts,  he  had  not  grasped  their  meaning,  and  till  then, 
the  expositions  of  his  teachers  hod  not  been  of  help  to  him. 
Ye-din  consented  to  give  him  some  instruction  and  explained 
this  AbhidhammaUfta-vibhCtcaui.  In  a  short  time  Ariyavarpsa 
had  grasped  all  the  knowledge  he  had  missed  till  then.  The 
Acariya  charged  him  to  help  other  students  of  the  subject 
by  writing  a  commentary  on  the  text  ho  folt  fitted  best  to 
expound,  and  the  result  was  the  J/ant*dra-maftjid*d,  his  (lk& 
on  the  AbkicLha  tumult  ha- vibhSvam.  We  are  told  that,  while 
writing  it,  Ariyavarpsa  submitted  his  work  chapter  by  chapter 
to  the  criticism  of  his  fellow-monks,  reading  it  aloud  to  them 
as  they  assembled  on  upo&atha  days  at  the  Vihara.'  Because 
of  Ariyavaipsa’s  masterly  exposition  of  the  book  Sumnrt  gala's 
work  henceforth  came  to  be  known  as  the  Famous 
and  now  forms  part  of  the  regular  course  of  Abhidhamma 
studies  in  Burma,  duipwta,  who  also  wrote  a  fil’d  on  the 
Compendium  (the  Sa  filhcpa - tw  w na jtd) ,  in  referring  to  the 
earlier  fikas,  compares  Sumaitgala’s  work  to  “  the  moon  which 
cannot  shine  within  bamboos  ",  and  his  own  work  to  the 
"  firefly  which  can  ".  A  pretty  and  modest  simile,  but  by  no 
means  flattering  to  those  who  read  his  book. 

To  the  group  of  S&riputU's  disciples  also  belongs 
Buddhanaga,  who  wrote  the  V inayallha-ma Hjusd,  a  fild 
on  Buddhughosa’a  Kaukha-vitarani.  He  mentions  in  the 
colophon  that  he  wrote  the  work  at  the  request  of  an  Elder 
named  Sumedha,  “  wise  and  clever  and  anxious  for  the 
furtherance  of  the  Religion.” 

Another  was  Medhaitkara  of  Udumharagiri,  first  of  four 
Medhaiikuras  2  famous  in  Coylon  literature.  Perhaps  there  was 
a  fifth,  oldest  of  them  all,  whom  Saiigharakkhita  refers  to  by 
name  ns  one  of  his  teachers.  Our  Medhaitkara  mentions  both 
Sariputta  and  Moggnlhina  as  lib  preceptors;  but, though  he 
belongs  to  the  Udumbaragiri  fraternity,  no  mention  is  made 

1  Bode,  pp.  41-2  sad  01. 

*  The  other  thrrn  wen  :  (1)  Artftfteka  Mc  dhanknr*  ;  (2)  the  tnnaUtor 
of  the  JiUltat  into  Sinhalese  ;  (3)  author  of  the  Jima-carila. 


202 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  0RVI.0N 


of  Kiusaapa.  Ho  doc*  not  Appear  to  Lave  written  any  works 
in  Pali,  or,  if  ho  did,  they  were  later  superseded  by  other  works, 
for  tho  only  one  of  his  compilations  which  has  come  down  to 
us  is  a  work  in  Sinhalese  prose.  It  is  called  the  I’tnayarfAa- 
satnuccaya,  a  compendium  of  Vinaya  rules  translated  into 
Sinhalese  from  the  original  Pali  with  explanatory  notes  taken 
from  the  Commentaries. 

Sariputta  had  another  pupil  named  Vncisaara.  I  agree  with 
Mr.  Wickremasingho  in  his  suggestion  1  that  there  were  two 
Vacissaras,  both  of  whom  lived  before  the  end  of  the  thirteenth 
century,  the  one  slightly  senior  to  the  other.  Considering  the 
number  of  works  assigned  to  Vacissara  in  the  Gandha-wtnsa,* 
one  would  almost  be  inclined  to  the  belief  that  there  were 
even  more  than  two,  not  all  of  them  from  Ceylon,  but  living 
about  the  same  period. 

The  Qandha-vanua  attributes  even  the  Bdlavatara  to 
Vacissara,  but  we  know  now  that  the  author  lived  after  the 
thirteen tli  century.  It  was  the  younger  Vacissara  that 
describes  himself  as  the  pupil  of  Sariputta.  The  elder  I  would 
consider  to  have  been  either  a  contemporary  of  SAriputta,  or, 
more  probably,  slightly  anterior  to  him.  To  the  senior  monk, 
I  would  attribute  the  Khema-ppaJcnTana-fika,  two  fiias  on 
Buddhadatta’s  works  (one  called  simply  the  Uttaravinicc/iaya- 
fUd  on  the  Utlara-vinicchaya,  and  the  other  on  the  Vinaya- 
vinicehaya  called  Yoga-vinicchaya),  and  an  original  work  on 
the  Abhklhamma  called  Ruparupa-vibhaga.  He  also  wrote  a 
treatise  called  tho  Simalaiiitira  on  boundaries  and  sites  for 
religious  ceremonies,  to  which  Chapata  compiled  a  ftta.* 
A  porana  txka  on  Anuruddhs’s  Nama-rGpa-pariccheda  is 
likewise  to  be  assigned  to  him,  together  with  a  (ika  on  the 
Sacca-tahkJupa.  There  seems  to  be  some  uncertainty  as  to 
the  authorship  and  the  date  of  the  Sacca-taitkhepa.  The 
Saddhatnma-aa  ngaha  4  assigns  it  to  Ananda,  but  we  know  that 
1  Cut.,  p.  xri. 

'  p.  03. 

*  Bode,  p.  IS. 

«  Chap.  0. 


SARIPUTTA’8  circle 


203 


the  Saddhamma-sangaha  in  not  always  reliable  in  its 
information.  The  Gandha-vamsa 1  ascribes  it  to  Culla- 
Dhammapala,  and  the  colophon  of  the  work  agrees  with  this. 

The  author  of  the  Sacca-sa fykkepa  is  to  be  distinguished  from 
the  commentator  of  the  same  name,  who  is  usually  called 
Acariya  to  differentiate  him  from  his  less  illustrious  namesake, 
Culladhammapala.  The  Gandha-vainta  calls  him  tlte  eldest 
pupil  of  Ananda.  Nevill,  in  his  Manuscript  Catalogue,  takes 
this  Ananda  to  be  the  same  as  the  teacher  of  Vedeha  and 
Buddhappiya,  and  fixes  hut  date  as  early  os  the  seventh 
century.  But  Buddhappiya  and  Vedeha  certainly  lived  very 
much  later,  os  we  shall  see  when  wc  come  to  consider  those 
authors. 

The  Ananda  who  was  Culla-dhammnpula's  teacher  was 
undoubtedly  older  than  Buddhappiya**  teacher,  for  Culla* 
dliamnmpiila  lived  before  the  twelfth  century  at  the  latest. 
Chapala  *  mentions  the  Sacca -sa  fi Utepa  in  his  Sankhepa- 
rapriarul  commentary  on  the  AbhidhammaUha-tafvjaha,  and, 
if  Mr.  Aung  *  is  right  in  his  information,  Dhammapola  lived 
even  earlier  than  Anuruddha,  for  we  arc  told  that,  when 
Anuruddha  wrote  his  work,  the  Sacca-sa  iikhepa  was  as  a  wide 
mecum  superseded  by  it  in  the  twelfth  century.  The  work — 
Summary  or  Outline  of  Truth,  as  its  name  implies — is  a  short 
treatise  in  five  chapters,  dealing  with  such  Abhidhnmma 
matters  as  RQpa,  Vcdana,  Citta,  Khandha,  and  Nibbana.  It 
forms  one  of  the  Lct-Than  or  Little  Finger  Manuals,  and,  as 
such,  is  extensively  studied  in  Burma.  In  his  commentary 
on  the  Compendium,  Chapala  points  out  certain  differences 
between  that  work  and  the  Sacca-taitkhepa,  and  acts  as  an 
apologist  for  the  former,  going  into  very  minute  details. 
**  Thus,  while  the  Sacca-mukhepa  begins  with  an  exposition 
on  the  body,  Anuruddha  sets  out  with  an  inquiry  into  the 
mind.  Why  1  Because  lie  had  the  /Mamma-sawyani  instead  of 

»  OT>.  60,  70. 

*  JVT. 8.,  1010,  pw  135. 

*  Ibid.,  1017,  p.  3. 


204 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


the  Ytbhahga  in  hi*  mind  when  he  wrote  the  Compendium.”  * 
There  i*  no  doubt,  I  feel,  that  it  was  the  elder  Vacissara  who 
wrote  the  first  or  Porann-dki  to  the  Sacca-tahJchcpa,  and  not 
the  younger,  who  describes  himself  in  the  Sambandha-cintd- 
(ikd  as  a  pupil  of  Sariputta.  For  wo  find  that  another  of 
Sariputta 's  pupils,  SumaPgaln,  also  wrote  a  (tied  on  the  same 
work,  called  the  Abhinava-filed,  and  it  is  not  probable  that 
two  pupils  of  the  same  teacher  would  have  written  on  the 
same  work. 

If  the  elder  Vacissara  specialized  in  the  Abhidhamma  and 
the  Vinatfd,  the  younger  gave  most  of  his  attention  to  the  study 
of  grammar.  Ho  was,  evidently,  one  of  Sariputta’s  youngest 
pupils,  for  among  his  works  several  are  (ikat  on  books  written 
by  Saiigharakkhita,  one  of  Sariputta’s  chief  disciples.  They 
are  the  Sambandha-cintd-Ciid,  SubodhSlahJedra-fUcd,  and 
VtUtodaya-vivarana.  He  also  wrote,  at  the  request  of 
Sumatigala,*  a  Nava-filed  on  the  Khudda-tikkh/t,  to  which 
Saiigbarakkhita  had  already  written  a  sub-commentary. 
Vacissara  called  his  work  the  Sumangala-paeadanl,  as  a 
compliment  to  his  colleague  who  incited  him  to  write  it. 
Another  of  his  compilations  was  a  Moggalldna-vydkarana- 
filed.  Perhaps  it  was  this  same  Vacissara  who,  according  to 
the  Maha-vanua,  left  Polonnaruva  during  the  invasion  of 
Magha  and  went  over  to  the  Paodu  and  Cola  countries,  to 
seek  for  protection  for  Lafika.*  The  authorship  of  the 
Thupa-vamta  is  also  ascribed  to  him  (see  below). 

Apparently  contemporary  with  the  elder  Vacissara  was  a 
Thera  named  Vimalabuddhi,  author  of  the  oldest  tiled  on  the 
Compendium.4  His  work  was  quite  recent  during  the  time  of 
the  senior  Vacissara,  and  that  was  why  the  latter  wrote  his 
filed  only  on  Anuruddha's  Ndma-rupa-pariccheda,  and  why, 
a  few  years  later,  Sariputta  contented  himself  with  writing 

•  JPTS.,  1010,  p.  1S5. 

'  Colophon  to  thitl  work. 

»  Cft.  Ixxsl,  re.  17-*l. 

*  Do  Zoyoo.  p.  4 


SARIJUTTA’S  CIRCI.K 


206 


only  a  Sinhalese  tonne  on  the  Compendium.  But,  some  time 
afterwards  Sumaiigalu  felt  himself  at  liberty  to  write  a 
Nava -ilia.  Vimakbuddhi's  work  is  now  unknown  in  Ceylon, 
and  considered  quite  superannuated  even  in  Burma,1  where  it 
has  been  completely  replaced  by  Sumaiigala’s  “  famous  (ikd  ” 
(TVcd-gyau).  To  Sdriputta’s  period  also  belongs  Piyadassi, 
pupil  of  the  grammarian  Moggallana. 

He  wrote  the  Pada-tddftana,  on  abridged  Pnlt  grammar 
based  on  Moggallana's  work.  He  tolls  us  in  his  colophon  that 
he  was  a  pupil  of  the  great  Nirutti-acariya,  and  that  he  wrote, 
at  the  request  of  a  village  chieftain  named  Knppinna.  The 
author  of  the  Sinhalese  sanne  tells  u»  that  Piyadassi  was 
incumbent  of  tho  Dovarnja  Viliara  in  Doloedus-rnta  (Giriva- 
pattu)  on  the  Valave  River  in  Ruhtirm,  South  Ceylon. 
Kappmna  was  his  maternal  uncle,  and  was  in  charge  of  the 
Rumbha  Vihara  land*  of  which  Devaraja  Yihara  formed  a  part. 

The  work  is  divided  into  six  section*  dealing  with 
Saflilii,  Sandhi,  SamJLsa,  Prefixes,  Suffixes,  and  Verlw.  The 
author  called  it  Pada-sadhana  or  Aloggalldna-SaddaUha- 
ralnakara,  but  posterity  has  refused  to  accept  the  longer 
name  I  Vanaratniui  Anamla  wrote  a  Sinhalese  ranne  on  it, 
which  we  shall  notice  presently,  and  there  also  exist*  a  Pali 
(ik'd  called  tho  Buddhi-ppasddani  by  Sri  Riihula  of  the  fifteenth 
century. 

Possibly  to  the  same  period  belongs  Mahubodhi,  author  of 
a  Pordna-Cika  (Mukha-maUakd)  on  Anumddha’s  Pammattha- 
vinicehaya*  He  seems  to  havo  written  a  Oka  on  the 
Khema-ppakarana  a*  well  and  also  according  to  the  Saddhamma- 
taitgaha*  a  Saccn-taAkhepa-mnnatid,  entitled  Nxssaijattha- 
kathd. 


Parnkmma-Bahu  the  Great  died  in  a.d.  1197.  He  was  a 
noble  king,  just  and  tolerant  and  a  nebular  of  deep  learning 

1  Compendium,  p.ii. 

•  JPT8.,  1910.  p.  125. 

»  Cfc*p.  ix.  W.  25. 


1 


206  '  the  pau  literature  op  cbylon 

withal,  the  greatest  figure  in  the  annals  of  the  island.  Ccvlon 
was  never  to  produce  his  like.  Hi*  death  was  the  signal  for 
fresh  internal  strife ;  his  family  were  unable  to  sustain  the 
honours  which  he  had  won  for  the  land  of  his  birth.  After 
several  conspiracies  and  assassinations  among  his  heirs  and 
relations,  his  widowed  queen  ascended  tho  throne  under  the 
name  of  LilAvatl,  only  to  be  deposed  in  less  than  three  years. 
Within  a  short  time,  however,  she  was  restored,  and  for  a 
while  all  went  well.  But  the  ignominious  and  selfish  schemings 
of  rival  aspirants  to  the  tluone  brought  disruption,  discontent 
and  disunion  in  the  land,  and  within  thirty  years  after 
Parikrama’s  death  the  kingdom  had  been  reduced  to  such 
an  extremity  of  weakness  by  their  contentions,  that  the 
Main  bare,  ever  vigilant  for  an  opportunity  to  carry  out  their 
projects,  landed  in  Ceylon  in  a  large  band  of  24,000,  led  by 
Miigha,  and  in  a  short  time  reconquered  the  whole  island. 
Mogba  was  crowned  king  and  his  reign  was  marked  by  extreme 
cruelty.  His  merciless  brigands  swept  through  the  country, 
plundering,  ravishing,  mutilating  and  slaughtering.  Not  even 
the  modest-looking  yellow  robe  of  the  pious  bhikkhu  would 
afford  any  protection  from  the  cruelties  of  the  Malabar 
Mercenaries.  The  holiest  shrines  were  violated  and  over¬ 
thrown.  The  MaM-vanwa 1  and  tho  Raja-nUnakan  describe 
with  painful  elaboration  tho  gradual  extinction  of  Buddhism, 
the  plundering  of  the  temples,  the  expulsion  of  the  monks, 
and  the  desecration  of  all  that  was  holy.  No  outrage  appeared 
too  heinous  to  the  plunderers,  no  torture  too  cruel ;  with 
sheer  wantoness  they  broke  the  cords  that  hold  together  the 
valuable  and  rare  palm-leaf  books  and  scattered  the  leaves 
to  tho  winds.  All  books  and  literary  records  such  as  fell  into 
their  hands  were  piled  up  and  burnt,  and  the  whole  island 
resembled  a  dwelling  in  flames  or  a  house  darkened  by  funeral 
rites.1 

After  an  interval  of  twenty  years  Vijaya-Bihu  III  collected 

»  U.V.,  Ch.  lxxx.  vv.  M  IT.,  sod  Rijaral.,  pp.  *3  toll. 

*  JMjd well,  p.  264  <Upham). 


8ARIPUTTA’s  circi.k 


207 


as  many  Sinhalese  soldiers  as  he  could  and  with  their  aid 
succeeded  in  winning  for  himself  a  portion  of  the  kingdom. 
While  the  Malabars  were  holding  sway  over  the  rest  of  the 
island  from  the  capital  city  at  Polonnaruva,  Yijaya-Bnhu 
established  himself  at  Dambadeniya,  CO  miles  to  the  north 
of  the  present  Colombo.  From  there  he  governed  the  Province 
of  Maya  ;  but  it  was  not  till  the  time  of  his  son  and  successor, 
Pundit*  Pardkrama  Baliu,  that  the  people  succeeded  in  com¬ 
pelling  the  invaders  to  abandon  Polonnaruva  and  retreat 
towards  the  mainland  of  India. 

During  the  earlier  port  of  these  internal  conflicts  and  foreign 
invasions,  the  generality  of  the  people  were  left  free  to  follow 
their  own  pursuits,  and  the  monks,  supported  by  a  generous 
laity,  devoted  their  energies  to  the  service  of  literature.  Thus 
except  when  Mugha's  ruthless  campaign  completely  destroyed 
the  peace  of  the  land,  the  period  that  intervened  between  the 
death  of  Pardkrama  the  Great  and  the  accession  of  Fatbits 
Pardkrama,  was  not  wholly  devoid  of  literary  productions. 

Vijnya-Bahu,  who  succeeded  Pardkrama  the  Great,  waa 
himself  a  man  of  some  education,  and  we  are  told  that  he  wrote 
with  his  own  hand,  in  the  Pali  tongue,  a  letter  of  great  merit 
and  sent  it  to  the  Burmese  king  at  Arimadduna.1  The  contents 
of  the  letter  we  do  not  know,  nor  did  the  king  live  long  enough 
to  achieve  any  work  of  literary  importance.  When  Lilavatl 
was  restored  to  the  throne  with  the  help  of  her  faithful 
minister,  Parakrama,  she  became  a  generous  patron  of  art ; 
she  had,  also,  a  minister  Kittisenapati,  mentioned  in  a 
Sinhalese  poem  of  this  period,*  who  evinced  a  deep  interest 
in  literary  work. 

During  her  reign  was  compiled  the  Pali  poem  DSlhi-vamta. 
The  author  was  Dhammakitti,  the  first  of  four  scholars  bearing 
the  same  name  and  famous  in  Ceylon  literature.*  He  was  a 
pupil  of  the  celebrated  Suriputta,  and  he  speaks  most  respect- 

»  M.V.,  Ixxx,  v.  0. 

*  SutaMra  Cotejsko*. 

•  For  tbe  other  thwo  wo  Jndes. 


208 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


fully  of  his  teacher  in  the  colophon  to  the  present  work.  We 
are  told  that  the  DtUhi-vaihsa  was  composed  at  the  request 
of  the  minister  Parukrama  of  the  Kalanagara  race,  for  whom 
the  author  seems  to  have  entertained  the  highest  regard, 
because  of  his  exertions  on  behalf  of  the  religion.1  Dharrunakitti 
speaks  highly  also  of  Liluvatl,  “  spotless  as  the  moon  .  .  . 
sweet-worded,  just,  like  a  mother  unto  her  subjects,  possessed 
of  great  intelligence,  giving  whatever  was  asked  of  her." 
He  tells  us  that  the  Pali  Datha-vamsa  is  based  on  an  older 
Da\ada-vamsa,  "  written  in  the  language  of  the  land  by  the 
poets  of  Sihala,”  and  that  it  was  composed  in  Magadhi  for 
the  benefit  of  those  living  in  other  lands.  We  can  infer  from 
the  ilahd-txansa 1  that  this  Dafada-vaiftfa  was  written  in  Elu 
verse  in  the  ninth  year  of  Kitti  Siri  Meghavappn  by  his  orders 
soon  after  the  tooth  relic  was  brought  over  to  Ceylon.  It  is  said 
to  have  given  the  history  of  the  relic  from  the  death  of  the 
Buddha,  to  the  time  of  its  arrival  in  Ceylon,  as  predicted  by 
the  Buddha.  By  the  time  of  Dliammakitti  the  Sinhalese  poem 
had  become  almost  unintelligible.  Tumour,  in  his  translation 
of  the  Mahd-vamta?  remarks  that  the  original  Sinhalese  poem 
was  still  extant  in  1837,  but  I  have  not  been  able  to  see  it. 

The  D&lha-vamsa  is  a  very  elaborate  work,  and  rightly  ranks 
among  the  Pali  classical  poems.  It  is  written  in  sonorous 
language,  and  gives  vivid  descriptions,  in  the  manner  of 
Sanskrit  poets.  The  earlier  chapters  givo  a  minute  account  of 
the  great  struggle  between  the  Buddhists  and  the  Brahmans 
of  India  for  religious  supremacy  (in  the  third  century),  and 
may,  perhaps,  have  been  taken  from  a  very  old  and  almost 
contemporary'  record  of  the  eventa  described  therein.  Except 
where  the  author  attempts  vivid  descriptions,  the  poem 
presents  one  of  the  finest  specimens  of  the  stern  simplicity, 
chasteness,  and  beauty  of  rhythm  of  Pali  poetry,  clothed  in 
elegant  diction,  free  from  high-flown  metaphors  and  ornately 

*  tv.  5-6. 

*  CU»j>.  sxxrjj. 

*  p.  241,  footnote. 


sarifutta’s  CIRC  lb 


209 


elaborated  ideas.  Coomiraswamy,  who  has  translated  it  into 
English  prose,1  compares  it  to  tho  NalopSihyuna  in  its  sweet¬ 
ness  of  rhythm  and  unaffected  flow  of  words.  Tho  Datha-vcnnsa 
does  not  contain  the  history  of  the  relic  beyond  the  period  of 
its  arrival  and  reception  in  Ceylon.  Tumour  mentions  that 
the  Ddtha-dhalu-unnsa,  referred  to  above,  liad  two  more 
chapters  than  are  found  in  our  work,  relating  the  vicissitudes 
of  the  relic  up  to  the  eighteenth  century.  A  Sinhalese 
paraphrase  was  written  by  Dhummakitti  himself  for  the  benefit, 
as  he  tells  us,  "  of  less  educated  and  local  readers.”  In  tho 
Introduction  to  the  Sinhalese  sanne  he  calls  himself  a  rajagvru 
(royal  preceptor)  in  addition  to  his  other  titles.  There  are 
several  works  in  Sinhalese  on  the  history  of  the  tooth  relic, 
to  which  reference  will  bo  made  iu  so  far  as  they  come  within 
the  purview  of  this  dissertation.* 

After  Vijaya-B&hu  III  established  his  capital  at 
Dambadcniyo,  he  helped,  as  much  as  lay  in  his  power,  those 
who  were  labouring  in  tho  cause  of  religion  and  literature. 
Thus,  the  Nikdyasanyraha  tells  u»  *  that  under  his  auspices 
two  of  Sariputta’s  pupils,  Saiigharakkhita,  the  head  of  the 
Church  of  his  day,  and  Udumbarogiri  Medhatikara,  held 
a  synod  at  tho  Vijavasundarar&ma  built  by  Yijaya-Bahu, 
and  there,  after  much  effort,  settled  various  dispute*  which 
had  arisen  amongst  tho  priesthood,  formulated  a  new  code  of 
Vinaya  rules,  and  "  did  great  service  to  religion  ”.  Tho  king 
also  gave  shelter  to  all  tho  monks  who  were  fleeing  from 
Polonnaruva,  “leaving  their  books  and  other  nccessari« 
wherever  they  chanced  to  be,”  and  provided  them  with  such 
comforts  as  were  possible  to  obtain.4  But  the  country  was  too 
distracted  for  peaceful  pursuits  to  bo  possible.  Magha  was 
carrying  ou  his  campaign  of  destruction  "  like  unto  a  wild 
fire  that  consumeth  the  tender  plants  of  the  forest  of  charity, 

*  Publ.  TrOboer,  1874.  Iatrod.,  p.  Is. 

*  8«e  Wickre mMinghe ,  Catalogue,  peunn.  lot  further  pMtieeUrm. 

*  p.  22. 

*  M.V*  Lusi,  41-6J. 


14 


210 


THI5  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


like  unto  the  sun  when  he  closeth  up  the  petals  of  the  sacred 
lily  of  justice,  and  the  moon  when  she  obscureth  the 
splendour  of  the  lotus-pond  of  patient  endurance  ”.1 

At  thiH  time,  however,  there  existed  in  Ceylon  a  school  of 
monks  who  were  left  undisturbed  by  any  political  upheavals. 
They  belonged  to  the  VanavisI  or  ArofiftavisI  fraternity 
and  owed  allegiance  to  tho  MahavihAra.  They  differed 
from  each  other,  perhaps,  only  in  the  degree  of  rigour  of  their 
religious  life,  while  they  agreed  on  all  doctrinal  matters. 
Thus  we  find  them  acting  together  quite  harmoniously  at  the 
Council  of  Pandit*  Pardkruma.  We  hear  of  this  sect  first, 
at  the  beginning  of  tho  sixth  century,  when  during  the  reign 
of  Aggabodhi  II  (a.d.  598-G08)  the  King  of  Kaltoga,  having 
resolved  to  lead  the  life  of  a  recluse,  came  over  to  Ceylon  and 
joined  the  Order  under  the  famous  Elder  Jotip&la.  Vedeha, 
author  of  the  Kata-tdhim,  has  given  us,  in  the  colophon  to 
that  work,  an  account  of  tho  beginnings  of  the  VanavasI  school 
to  which  he  belonged. *  It  had  onoe  at  its  head  an  elder  named 
Ananda,  who,  according  to  the  Gandha-vantsa  (p.  66),  was  a 
native  of  India.  We  do  not  know  tho  date  of  his  reign,  but 
he  probably  lived  about  tho  eighth  or  the  ninth  century. 
He  it  was  that  composed,  at  the  request  of  Buddhamitta,* 
the  Mtila-fika  to  the  seven  books  of  the  Abhidhamma,  which, 
according  to  the  Saddhamma-satigaha  account  mentioned 
in  the  preceding  chapter,  was  revised  by  Maha  Kassapa 
and  his  colleagues.  This  work  now  exists  in  three  sections, 
one  each  for  tho  AU/ia-salini  and  the  Sammoha-vinodanl 
and  the  other  for  the  Paflea-ppakaraiui.  Probably  the  original 
edition  was  in  one  volume — the  SaUa-ppakarana,  as  it  is  still 
in  Borina.  He  was  also  known  as  Vanaratana-Tissa,  because 
of  his  connexion  with  the  Vanavosi  school.  The  Mulct- Gkd 
were  based  on  Buddhaghosa’s  commentaries,  but  their  author 
occasionally  dissents  from  the  great  exegetist.  Thus,  in 

»  M.V.,  Ixxx,  y.  Si. 

*  Printed  Ed.,  Colombo,  cad. 

•  O.V „  p.  89. 


sariputta's  circle 


211 


discussing  the  life-term  of  matter  he  disputes  the  existence  of 
a  static  phase  of  thought,  and  regarded  it  as  merely 
hypothetical.1  Tho  VanavUsi  sect  seems  to  have  been  closely 
associated  with  the  Buddhists  of  Kalihga,  for  we  find  even 
at  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century  Vcdeha  mentioning  the 
name  of  a  Kalihga  Mahti-Thera,  an  Elder  of  great  eminence, 
who  acted  as  sponsor  at  Vedeha’s  Ordination  by  Ananda  ; 
and  later,  Buddhappiya  of  Coja  belonged  to  thesamefraternity. 
This  connexion  with  Oo)a  and  Kalihga  may  possibly  also 
account  for  tho  special  attention  members  of  the  school 
devoted  to  the  study  of  the  Ahhidhamma. 

I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  it  was  the  same  Ananda  that 
had  as  his  pupil  Culla  Dhammapala,  author  of  the  Sacca- 
tankhepa,  noticed  earlier  in  this  chapter,  and  also  of  an 
Anv-fika  on  Ananda’s  Mida-tlkd,  called  iAnaltha-vannand. 
Whether  he  was  the  author  of  several  other  (ikas  mentioned 
in  tho  Gandha-vamsa  (p.  60)  as  well,  we  cannot  say  with  any 
degree  of  definiteness. 

The  ArnMavasI  sect  continued  to  flourish  even  during  the 
troublous  times  of  tho  twelfth  and  the  thirteenth  centuries, 
and  when  Vijaya-Bahu  was  reigning  at  Dambadcniya  it  was 
presided  over  by  another  Elder  named  Ananda,  who  was  a 
disciple  of  Udumbaragiri  Medhaiikara,  pupil  of  Sariputta  * 
One  of  his  pupils,  Buddhappiya,  speaks  of  him  as 
“  Tambapapoi-ddhajAnam  ”  (a  banner  unto  the  island  of 
Ceylon).*  He  and  bis  school  lived  in  seclusion  and  were  able 
to  carry  on  their  pursuits  undisturbed.  Ananda  himself  wrote 
a  Sinhalese  intcrverbal  translation  to  Piyadassi's  Pali  grammar 
the  Pada-tSdhana,  and  another  to  tho  Khudda-txkkhd. 

The  authorship  of  the  Abhidhamraa  MHa-ftkd  is  also 
generally  ascribed  to  him,4  but,  as  I  have  endeavoured  to  show 
above,  that  work  was  evidently  composed  prior  to  the  Council 

1  Compfndiwi*,  p.  20. 

1  Pada  tidhana  njnnt  eolopfeoo. 

*  IiGpa-mdtihi  rolopfcoo. 

*  Wickremaaicghc's  CAUL,  p.  xrU. 


212 


THE  FALX  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


of  Kaasapa  in  a.d.  1160  ;  for  wo  find  that  Culla  Dh&mmapala, 
who  certainly  lived  before  the  twelfth  century,  wrote  an 
Anv-fikd  on  it. 

Probably  to  the  same  period,  but  not,  perhaps,  to  the  same 
author,  belongs  the  religious  poem  SadeUtammepayana  In 
tho  colophon  to  the  Sinhalese  paraphrase  and  in  the  intro¬ 
duction  to  a  commentary  on  it  called  tho  Saddham>nop5gana- 
viggaha,  the  work  is  assignod  to  a  great  Elder  of  the  Order, 
named  Abhayft-giri  Kavi-cakravarti  Ananda  M aha -Thera.1 
Whether  he  is  in  any  way  connected  with  Vanaratann  Ananda, 
we  have  no  means  of  finding  out.  Tho  Saddharrwuyayana 
itself  gives  no  clue  to  its  authorship,  except  in  the  introductory 
stanzas,  where  we  are  told  that  it  was  composed  to  be  sent 
as  a  religious  gift  to  tho  author’s  friend  and  companion 
Buddhasoma.*  Ncvill,  in  his  manuscript  Catalogue,  has 
recorded  a  tradition  that  Vanaratana  Ananda  and 
Buddhasoma  were  contemporaries  and  great  friends,  and  that 
the  Saddhammopatjana  was  written  to  dissuade  the  latter 
fiora  renouncing  his  life  as  a  monk.  It  is  a  treatise  in  nineteen 
chapters,  dealing  with  such  subjects  as  the  difficulties  of 
obtaining  birth  as  a  human  being,  a  tendency  to  sin  and  the 
severe  penalty  attending  it,  the  misery  of  existence  as  Pretas 
and  lower  animals,  the  advantages  of  being  righteous,  and 
the  rewards  it  brings  (such  as  birth  in  the  Deva  worlds), 
the  merits  of  charity,  chastity,  piety,  meditation,  listening 
to  the  Doctrine,  preaching  it,  etc.  In  one  of  the  concluding 
stanzas  the  author  expresses  the  wish  that  he  might  himself, 
ono  day,  become  a  Buddha.  It  is  written  in  simple  and 
beautiful  language,  and  parts  of  it  are  very  frequently  quoted 
by  monks  in  the  course  of  their  sermons.  It  is  held  in  very  high 
estimation  in  Ceylon  up  to  the  present  time. 

There  is  a  Sinhalese  paraphrase  by  a  later  writer,  also  called 
Ananda,  and  a  commentary,  the  Saddhammopdyana-viggaha, 
by  an  anonymous  writer. 

«  Coiombo  Ed  ,  1874. 

•  JPT8..  1 8S7,p.  38,  t.  A 


sariputta’b  circlk 


213 


ParnkrA  in  a  -  Bf»  1  iu  III  came  to  the  throne  in  *.D.  1235  ; 
he  was  a  mighty  prince,  endowed  with  all  the  qualities  of 
leadership,  and  ho  Boon  succeeded  in  ridding  the  country  of 
its  foreign  invaders.  Once  more  the  Sinhalese  flag  floated 
over  the  ryhole  of  Ceylon,  and  the  king  set  himself  vigorously 
to  create  order  out  of  tho  chaos  which  the  Malabars  had  left 
behind  them.  With  its  wonderful  elasticity  and  richness  of 
natural  resources,  the  island  soon  recovered  from  the  effects 
of  the  Tamil  occupation,  and  the  people  were  once  more  free 
to  follow  their  pursuits  of  peace.  It  was  a  miracle  exhibited 
by  the  tooth  relic  that  had  given  Parokrama  confidence  in 
his  ability  to  overthrow  his  enemies,  and  had  shown  him 
that  he  was  destined  to  advance  the  welfare  of  tho  Religion  and 
the  land  of  ita  adoption,1  and  as  soon,  therefore,  as  the  country 
had  settled  down,  ho  devoted  all  his  energies  to  the  glorification 
of  the  Faith.  The  Datiibadcni-asana  and  the  Raja-ratndhara 
are  full  of  glowing  accounts  of  his  numerous  accomplishments, 
and  because  of  his  extensive  and  profound  knowledge  of 
religious  and  secular  subjects  he  was  styled  Kalikala  Sihitya 
Sarvajfia  Pandit*— “the  all-knowing  sage  of  the  dark 
(hah)  age  of  literature.”  Ho  was  of  an  intensely  religious 
disposition,  and,  hearing  that  there  prevailed  much  misconduct 
in  the  Sangba  calculated  to  damage  the  religion  among  those 
who  entered  the  Order  to  lead  lives  of  idleness  and  impurity, 
ho  called  together  a  synod  under  the  leadership  of  Arailfiaka 
MedhaAkara*  of  the  Udumbaragiri  succession,  chief  pupil 
of  Buddha va ipsa  Vanaratana  Ananda.  With  their  help, 
he  held  ou  inquisition  and  expelled  those  who  were  found 
guilty  of  misconduct  and  unsuited  to  the  office  of  monkhood. 
He  also  drew'  up  a  Katikavata  (code  of  monastic  law) 
formulating  rules  for  the  monks  who  devoted  themselves  to 
study  or  to  meditation,  so  tluit  their  religious  observances 
might  be  maintained  in  strict  conformity  with  Vinaya 

*  31.  V.,  lxxxii,  tt.  I  (MO. 

•  The  second  Medhahkara  in  our  list.  The  Elder  Buddharaipsa  *“ 
ovtdnntly  also  a  mem l*r  of  the  Vaiiaviei  fraternity. 


214  THE  FAU  LITERATURE  OP  GKYLOX 

regulations. 1  We  aro  also  told  that  he  obtained  from  the  Cola 
country  monks  of  great  eminence,  learned  in  the  Tipitaka, 
endued  with  piety  and  great  purity  of  life.1  The  Arufifiuvisi 
sect  came  in  for  his  special  favour,  and  he  built  for  their  use, 
on  a  mountain  in  the  forest,  the  Putabhatta-sela  (P^jabatgala) 
monastery,*  which  later  became  famous  os  the  abode  of  many 
monks  of  great  learning  and  severe  austerities.  Ho  obtained 
teachers  from  India  to  teach  the  Ceylon  bhikkhus  such  secular 
subjects  as  logic  and  grammar  and  the  various  sciences,  and  he 
persuaded  his  younger  brother,  the  sub-king  Bhuvaneka- 
B&hu,  to  acquire  much  wealth  of  knowledge  and  become  a 
teacher  to  many  thousands  of  Elders.4  Several  authors  of  this 
period,  including  Vcdcha,  speak  most  highly  of  the  patronage 
extended  to  them  by  the  king’s  minister  Dcvapattrnja,  who, 
according  to  the  Maha-vamsa  (chapter  86),  was  a  man  of  great 
wisdom  and  devotion. 

Such  encouragement  given  to  learning  could  not  fail  to 
be  productive  of  great  literary  achievement,  and  Parakrama’s 
reign  is  renowned  as  a  period  of  numerous  scholars  of  high 
repute.  The  king  himself,  towards  the  latter  part  of  his  life, 
handed  over  the  reins  of  government  to  his  son  Vijaya- 
Bahu  who,  to  judge  from  the  Maha-vamta  account,  was  a 
priuce  extremely  well-beloved  of  his  subjects.  The  leisure 
thus  obtained  Parikrama  used  in  prosecuting  such  studios 
as  were  not  possible  to  him  amidst  the  responsibilities  of 
government,  and  he  also  wrote  several  works  of  merit : 
Sinhalese  translations  to  the  Visuddhi-magga  and  tho  Vinaya- 
vinicchaya  (the  latter  of  which  he  called  Nissandeha),  and  a 
Sinhalese  poem,  Kar-siiuvu'^a,  which  is  a  masterpiece  of 
beautiful  Elu,  melodious  in  its  strains  and  sublimo  in  its  ideas. 
The  Sinhalese  DaUtda-tirila  ( History  of  the  Tooth  Relic)  is 
also  attributed  to  him.4 

*  A’iidjmartyroAa,  p.  S3. 

*  31.  V.,  Ixxxiv,  T.  10. 

*  Ibid..  V.  U. 

*  Ibid.,  TT.  20-31. 

*  WteloxmMinghe,  p.  jcvli. 


8AR1P0TTA’S  circus 


215 


At  hi*  request  Dhnmmnkitti  compiled  the  Mahi-vamta 
from  the  date  nt  which  Mahanama  left  off  down  to  his  own 
times.  This  Dhammakitti  is  usually  identified  with  the  author 
of  the  Dd/hd-vamsa.1  If  this  identification  be  correct,  then 
Dhammakitti  must  have  lived  in  retirement  at  TambamWha 
in  South  India,  whon  he  was  invited  by  Parakmma.  The  king 
had  heard  that  a  lotus  had  once  sprung  up  in  tho  path  of  the 
Elder  as  ho  went  on  his  alms-rounds,  and,  being  greatly 
astonished,  sent  gifts  and  offerings  to  the  Tamba  country, 
and  persuaded  him  to  come  back  to  Ceylon,  where  ho  was  held 
in  tho  highest  esteem.* 

An  author  whoso  name  we  do  not  know,  but  who  is  referred 
to  as  the  Pafica-parivena-adhipati  (Pas  mu|a  Mahasami) 
composed  in  Pali  a  medical  work— tho  only  one,  so  far  as  we 
know,  of  its  kind  extant — called  the  Bhesajja -me nj Ota  (tho 
Casket  of  Medicine).  The  Maha-txnnsa  *  says  it  was  written 
in  the  time  of  Parikrama-Bahu  of  Dambadcniya,  by  “  the 
learned  and  benevolent  Elder,  chief  of  the  monks  at  tho 
Pafica-pariveca,  to  the  intent  that  all  who  strive  to  fulfil 
their  religious  duties,  may  thereby  become  free  from 
disease.  Of  tho  author  nothing  more  is  known.  In  a  Sinhalese 
medical  work,  Yoga-ratndkara,*  compiled  about  the  end  of 
the  fourteenth  century,  a  verse  in  the  colophon  state*  that 
that  work  was  arranged  on  the  plan,  “  of  tho  ilanjdti, 
a  medical  work  in  Pali  stanzas,  composed  by  Atthadaaai  Thera 
about  the  year  a.d.  12G7."  1  If  this  information  be  correct, 
the  author  is  undoubtedly  our  Paftca-muk-pariveoa-Adhipati. 
The  Bhttajja-mafijuta  is  mentioned  in  a  Burmese  inscription 
in  Pagan,  dated  a.i>.  1442  •  Sarapaitkara  Sajigharaja  wiote  a 
Sinhalese  paraphrase  to  it  in  the  eighteenth  century,  and  it  is 
stated  there  that,  having  found  his  original  defective,  he  added 

>  WickromaMnglw,  Jmi  an«l  footnote  4. 

»  If.r-  luxxiv.  TV.  U-lft. 

»  xcvtt,  VT.  C0-G2, 

*  Wiclatmaungbe,  p.  5S. 

»  Dr.  Kywy’o  report  on  Psrangi.  Crylcn  SrMional  Paper,  I8S1. 

•  Bode,  p.  109. 


216 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


eighteen  section*,  making  them  sixty.  The  author  of  the 
Afaityusa  also  wrote  a  (ika  on  hia  work,  but  copies  of  it  are 
rare.  The  Ma&jusa  once  enjoyed  great  repute,  but  it  has  later 
been  superseded  by  Sanskrit  works  on  the  subject  and  is 
now  hardly  ever  consulted. 

To  the  same  Thera  is  also  generally  ascribed  the  author¬ 
ship  of  the  Sikkhd-pada- vala tljan i ,  the  Pali  translation  of  the 
Sinhalese  Sikha-valailda.1  It  is  a  code  of  monastic  rules, 
drawn  up  for  the  guidance  of  monks  by  an  unknown  author, 
who  also  wrote  a  commentary  on  it,  called  the  Sikhavalafida- 
vinisa  (the  exegesis  of  the  SiAAa-eafaffda).  Both  works 
contain  quotations  from  the  Samanla-pdsSdilca  and  other 
works  on  the  Vinaya.'  In  an  inscription  of  Mahinda  IV 
(circa  a.d.  947)  mention  i*  made  of  a  chapter — the  Sikha- 
karani — of  the  Sikha-valafUla,  a  fact  which  proves  that  the 
work  was  in  existence  prior  to  that  date.  On  linguistic 
evidence  the  Sinhalese  Sikha-vapuula  is  assigned  to  the  earlier 
part  of  the  tenth  century.  The  author  of  the  PiUi  Si/rAAa-pada- 
valaiijani  tell*  us  in  his  introductory  veraea  that  it  was  a 
translation  of  the  Sinhalese  original,  but  an  examination  of 
his  work  shows  that  it  is  an  abridged  compilation  made  from 
the  two  Sinhalese  texts  rather  than  a  literal  translation.  The 
author  gives  no  clue  to  his  identity,  but  in  copies  of  his  work, 
made  by  latter-day  scribes,  is  usually  found  the  subscription  : 
"  The  Siktha-pada-valanjani  of  Pafica-mGlu-parive^adhipati 
Mahft  Thera.” 

About  this  time  was  composed  the  Pali  Thupa-vamsa.  It 
resembles  the  Mahabod/n-vatrua  rather  closely  and  follows  the 
conventional  form  of  the  Pali  epic  tradition  in  beginning  with 
the  history  of  the  earlier  Buddhas,  passing  on  to  that  of 
Gotama,  the  story  of  the  missions,  the  collecting  of  the  relics, 
the  arrival  of  tho  Bodhi-tree,  and  then  on  to  its  special  subject, 
the  erection  of  ThQpas  in  the  island.  The  last  eight  chapters 
(there  are  sixteen  in  all)  are  devoted  to  a  description  of  the 

1  Sikka-va'.aUa.  Ed.  Colombo,  Prvfcot,  1923. 

•  IWd.,  p.  118. 


sariputta’s  circle 


217 


activities  of  king  Dutthftgamani,  and  of  these  two  whole 
chapter*  deal  with  the  erection  of  tho  Maha-Thupa  at 
Anuradha-pura.  In  the  colophon  to  the  work1  the  author 
calls  himself  Vacissara,  and  says  that  he  wa*  a  relation  of 
king  Parakrama,  employed  by  him  to  supervise  the 
Dhammagura.  He  professes  to  havo  been  well-versed  in  the 
Tipifaka  (Pitaka-Uaya-pdragu),  and  mentions  that  ho  was  the 
author  of  several  other  works  which  ho  had  written  in 
Sinhalese :  A  Linatiha-dlpanx  fika  on  the  P at isambhidd-magga , 
two  glossaries,  one  called  Auha-dxpctnci  on  the  Socca-taiikhtjxi, 
and  the  other  Attia-ppakdtand,  on  the  ViauddM-tnagga.  It  is 
now  generally  agreed  that  this  Vacissara  is  identical  with  the 
younger  Vacissara,  referred  to  earlier  in  this  chapter,  pupil 
of  Sariputta.*  no  was  ono  of  tho  lieods  of  the  Church  under 
Vijaya-Bahu  III,  anti  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  that  he 
should  still  liavo  been  working  under  his  successor.  The 
Rdja-ratn&kara a  enumerates  a  list  of  learned  monks  and  laymen 
who  flourished  between  Buddha  ghoao  and  tho  year  1809, 
after  the  Buddha  (a.d.  1206).  It  mentions  a  Valiisvara 
third  from  the  end,  who,  evidently,  is  our  author. 

In  the  introductory  verses  to  his  work  Vacissara  acknow¬ 
ledges  obligation  to  two  older  compilations  of  tho  history  of 
tho  ThOpas.  One  was  written  in  Sinhalese,  and,  therefore, 
was  of  use  only  to  the  inhabitants  of  Ceylon  ;  and  the  other, 
though  in  Pali,  showed  many  defects  which  made  a  revision 
very  necessary.  The  old  Pali  work  referred  to  is  perhaps 
tho  Cetvja-iamsa-Allhakatha  mentioned  in  the  Maha-va>nsa 
fllo.4  The  author  has  also  borrowed  extensively  from  the  usual 
sources:  the  Jdlala-Xidfina-kathd,  the  Samanta-puddikd, 
the  Mahd-wmsa,  and  the  J/.F.  flW.  The  language  of  the  poem 
is  the  SanakrituMxl  Pali  of  this  period. 

A  Sinhalese  version  of  the  Thlpa-ramsa  also  exists,  written 


1  Ed.  Dhatn  nvxraUnn .  Colombo,  1890. 
•  WickiemMinghc.  p.  xti.  Geiger. 


W f.  and  A/  I  -.  p.  M.  P«*<- 


Colombo  Ed. 

•  p.  4«,  Colombo  Ed. 

•  Geiger,  op.  fit.,  p.  49. 


218 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


by  a  **  Sakala  \  idya  Cakravarti  ",  Pariikrama  Pao4>ta.  Some 
maintain  that  this  was  the  Sinhalese  original  to  which 
Vacissara  refers  in  his  introductory  verses,1  and  that  its  author 
was  a  nephew  of  Parikrama-Bahu  the  Great,  who  later 
came  to  the  throne  as  Vijaya-Buhu,  and  whom  the  Mahd-vaijvta 
(chap.  80,  v.  1)  describes  as  a  great  scholar  and  a  poet  of  much 
renown.  Mr.  Wickrcmaainghe  has  shown  this  statement  to  be 
inaccurate.1  Besides  the  language  of  the  Sinhalese  version, 
which  is  certainly  later  than  the  twelfth  century,  and  there¬ 
fore  would  not  agree  with  the  date  of  Parakrama-Bahu’s 
nephew,  there  are  other  objections.  Parakrama  Paodita 
evidently  wrote  his  Sinhalese  version  very  soon  after  Vacissara 
wrote  in  P4li.  In  the  R&ja-ratnakara  list  mentioned  above  his 
name  appears  last  among  tho  learned  laymen,  showing  that  ho 
lived  before  A.D.  1266.* 

The  Sinhalese  version  is  not  a  translation  of  the  Pali ;  it 
is,  on  the  whole,  broader  and  contains  more  details  than  the 
Pali,4  (showing  that  it  was  a  later  expansion  of  the  Pali  text.* 

Another  historical  treatise  belonging  to  tho  same  period 
is  the  H<titha-vtmagaUa-vihdra-vain$o.  It  is  a  history  of  the 
Vihara  erected  at  Attanagnlla  on  the  spot  where  the  ex-king, 
the  pious  Siri  Saiighabodhi,  decapitated  himself,  lest  others 
should  be  compelled  to  sutler  on  his  account.  The  story  of 
Siri  Saiighabodhi  has  already  been  related  in  brief  in  an  earlier 
chapter.  Attanogalla  is  a  village  situated  a  few  miles  away 
from  Colombo.  The  remains  of  the  temple  and  some  of  the 
other  religious  edifices  erected  by  Goth&bhaya,  in  repentance 
for  the  death  of  the  good  Saiighabodhi,  are  still  to  be  seen  on 
a  hill  at  the  confluence  of  two  rivulets  amidst  some  of  the  most 
beautiful  scenery  that  could  be  imagined.  The  work  itself 
is  divided  into  eleven  chapters,  mostly  in  verse,  but  inter¬ 
spersed  with  prose  narrative.  Eight  of  them  are  devoted  to 

1  e.g.  I>laiaiairnt*n»,  Colombo  Ed..  18S0. 

1  Cataloyuc,  p.  HI. 

*  Abo  -V lid ya-ta  *  yroia.  p.  24. 

*  e_j.  tho  history  of  Ike  Plrsnili.  vhkh  is  not  loved  at  all  in  Ike  Pili. 

*  For  a  fuller  description  tet  Wioknmasinghe,  pp.  130  loll. 


sariputta’s  circle 


219 


a  history  of  Saiighabodhi,  tho  remaining  three  dealing  with 
account*  of  the  erection  of  the  various  monumental  and 
religious  edifices  on  the  spot  where  tho  king  had  died,  and  the 
endowments  mado  for  their  maintenance  by  successive  rulers 
of  Cteylon.  It  resembles  more  or  less  a  historical  novel 
into  which  the  author  has  interwoven  much  material  of 
varying  interest— graphic  descriptions  of  forest  scene*, 
nearly  a  whole  chapter  (chapter  2)  on  the  art  of  good  govern¬ 
ment,  a  comprehensive  moral  code  and  a  great  deal  of  matter 
of  historical  importance.  It  is  written  in  elegant,  but  simple 
Pali,  and  is  one  of  the  first  works  in  Pali  to  which  a  Btudent 
is  introduced  in  Ceylon  monasteries  with  a  view  to  familiarizing 
him  with  Pali  grammatical  forms  and  constructions.  It  is 
generally  assigned  to  a  pupil  of  Anomadossi  Satigharaja,  who 
lived  in  the  reign  of  Paqditn  Parakrama  Bahu.  The  author 
states  in  liis  introductory  verses  (stanza  3)  that  it  was  written 
at  the  request  of  his  teacher  Anomadossi,  who  was  tho  authorof 
a  Sinhalese  work  on  astrology,  the  DaivajHa-kajna-dfwnu.1 
The  events  which  tho  history  records  are  brought  down  to  this 
period,  and  the  writer  conclude*  his  work  abruptly  by 
expressing  tho  hope  that  “  the  annals  of  Attanagulk  may 
thonceforward  bo  continued  by  later  historians  Tho 
Anomadossi  mentioned  hero  is  identified  with  the  Elder  for 
whom,  according  to  the  MahS-vairua,*  the  minister 
Patirajadeva,  following  tho  king’s  orders,  built  a  temple  of 
three  stories  and  a  lofty  pinnacle,  during  the  latter  port  of 
Parakrama’s  reign.  A  Sinhalese  paraphrase  was  written  by  an 
anonymous  author  during  the  reign  of  Bhuvanoka-Bahu  \ 
(c.  1378-96)  by  a  pupil  of  Maitrl  Mahaaimi.3  In  the  eleventh 
century  Sianaratnna,  abbot  of  the  Attanagolla  \  ihara,  wrote 
a  Sinhalese  poem*  based  on  this  work.  In  18GG  that 
indefatigable  scholar,  James  D’Alwis,  published  in  Colombo 
an  English  translation  of  the  original  Pali,  prefaced  with  a  very 
valuable  Introductory  Essay. 

1  D'AIwU,  Atlanagalu  in^ta,  p.  7,  0.  *  Ixxxvi.  rr.  37-9. 

>  Dr  Zoym,  p.  17.  4  WlcfcwasastagM,  P-  xxil. 


CHAPTER  XI 

The  Age  of  Pandit  a  Pakakrama 

Y^ANARATAN'A  ANANDA,  of  the  ArafifiavasI  sect 
*  mentioned  in  the  last  chapter  and  pupil  of  Dimbulagala 
Mcdhartkara,  left  behind  him  several  disciple*  who  were 
scholars  of  note  and  authors  of  important  compilations.  One 
of  them,  Gotama  Thera,  wrote  a  Sinhalese  translation  of 
Saiigharakkhita’s  Pali  grammar,  the  Sainbandha-cinld,  on 
syntax.  Two  others  are  much  better  known  as  distinguished 
writers — Cojiya  Dipaiikara  and  Vedeha  Thera.  The  first, 
Coliya  Dipaiikara,  more  commonly  called  Buddhappiya, 
was,  as  his  namo  implies,  a  native  of  the  Co]a  country  in  south 
India.  He  probably  formed  a  member  of  the  oommunity 
of  monk*  whom  Paodito  Parakrama-B&hu  persuaded  to  oome 
over  from  the  Co]a  country  to  re-establish  the  Sdsana  firmly 
in  Ceylon.1  Buddhappiya  was  the  author  of  two  books — 
Rupa-sxddki  and  the  Pajja-madhu.  In  the  RCjM-nddhi colophon  * 
he  describes  himself  as  follows  :  “  This  perfect  Rupasiddhi 
was  composed  by  that  monk  who  received  the  title  of 
Buddhappiya  and  was  named  Dipaiikara — a  disciple  of 
Ananda,  the  eminent  preceptor  who  was  like  unto  a  standard 
in  Tambapanni — he  (Dipaiikara)  was  renowned  like  a  lamp 
in  the  Dami|a  country,  and,  being  the  resident  Superior  there 
of  two  monasteries  including  Boladicca,*  caused  the  Religion 
to  shine  forth."  At  the  conclusion  of  the  Pajja-madhu  *  he  gives 
his  name  and  pupilage :  "  May  they  drink  deeply  of  these 
nectar-like  verses  ( Pajja-madhu ) — made  by  the  beo 

Buddhappiya,  delighted  with  the  Buddha’s  virtues — who 
constantly  attends  upon  that  lotus,  the  Venerable  Elder 


>  M.V.,  Ixxxiv,  r.  10. 

1  Colombo  Ed.,  end. 

*  The  commentary  eaye  that  the  other  monastery  vii  called. 
Cutjimlcikys. 

*  JPTS..  1*87,  p.  16,  r.  103. 


THE  ACE  OT  PANDIT  A  I’AKAKRAMA 


221 


Ananda  Vanaratana  (Jewel  of  the  Forest),  heavy-laden  with 
the  perfume  of  hi*  virtues  and  always  in  bloom.” 

Both  works  were  evidently  written  while  the  author  waa 
residing  in  the  Co}a  oountry,  where,  at  this  period,  Buddhism 
was  flourishing  and  where  Buddhappiya,  as  we  learn  from  the 
RQpa-siddhi  verse,  hold  the  incumbency  of  two  monasteries 
and  had  achieved  eminent  renown  for  his  abilities. 

The  Rupa-siddhi  is  a  Pali  grammar  on  the  model  of  the 
Kaocayana.  Its  proper  designation,  as  the  author  tell*  ua  in 
the  opening  stanzas,  ia  Pada-rQpa-siddhi— Etymology  of  the 
Parts  of  Speech.  Although  it  follows  the  Kaccdyana 
Sandhi-kappa  in  his  general  outlines,  tho  Rupa-siddhi  is  a  much 
fuller  and  more  exhaustive  work,  supplying  many  deficiencies 
in  the  Kaoodyana ;  and  even  the  division  of  sections  differs 
in  some  degree  from  that  adopted  in  the  older  grammar,  as 
will  be  seen  from  the  following  list  of  contents.  It  is  divided 
into  seven  chapters :  Sandhi  (five  classes  safiM,  sara,  pakati, 
vyaHjana,  niygahita),  declension  (masculine,  feminine,  neuter, 
pronominal*,  and  numerals,  personal  pronouns  having  no 
gender,  indoclinablca,  and  inseparable  particles),  karaka 
(syntax),  samasa,  taddhila  (nominal  derivatives),  dkhy&ta 
(verbs),  and  kitaka-unidi  (verbal  derivatives  and  particles). 
The  book  and  its  divisions  were  subjected  to  very  strong 
criticism  by  Medbaiikara  in  his  Payoga-siddhi,  written  a  little 
while  after,  and  because  of  its  great  length  and  the  abstruse 
nature  of  its  treatment  was  later  superseded  by 
Dhammakitti’s  Bdldvatdra,  written  in  the  fourteenth  century. 
It  is,  however,  much  studied  in  Ceylon  oven  at  tho  present 
day  and  retains  it*  former  prestige  to  some  extent.  The 
Burmese  grammarian,  Maha  Yasa,  in  hi*  Kaccayana-sam, 
written  about  the  fourteenth  century,1  quotes  with  approval 
many  extracts,  from  the  Rupa-siddhi.  A  Oka  on  it  is  usually 
assigned  to  Buddhappiya  himself,*  and  an  old  Sinhalese 
paraphrase  exists,  written  by  an  anonymous  author,  but 

>  Bode,  p.  37. 

•  O.V.,  pp.  00snd70. 


222 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CBYLON 


evidently  compiled  soon  after  the  Rupa-nddfti  itself,  because 
it  is  quoted  in  RAhula’s  Pafyika-pradxjn  (a.t>.  1457). 

Buddhappiya’s  other  work,  the  Pajja-madhu,  is  a  beautiful 
Pali  poem  of  Sanskritized  Pali,  couched  in  ornate  language  ; 
it  contains  104  stanzas.  Tho  first  sixty- nine  verses  describe 
the  beauties  of  the  Buddha’s  person,  dwelling  on  each  detail, 
from  the  nails  of  his  toes  to  the  i ctu-mala,  or  garland  of  rays 
over  his  head.  Every  feature  is  extolled  with  a  wealth  of 
poetical  imagery ;  thus,  the  single  curled  hair  between  the 
Buddha's  eyebrows  is  like  the  moon  in  its  circuit  from  which 
fall  drops  of  ambrosia  upon  the  lotus-blossoms  of  bis  toes,  the 
nails  of  which  are  their  petals.  The  rest  of  the  poem  is  token 
up  with  praising  the  “  unfathomable  wisdom  ”  of  the  Buddha, 
a  panegyric  upon  his  disciples  tho  Saftgha,  and  several  verses 
describing  tho  glorios  of  Nibbana.  There  is  a  Sinhalese 
paraphrase  by  an  anonymous  writer,  which  is  of  very  little 
use,  being  more  intricate  in  its  explanations  than  the 
original  Pali. 

Tho  GandAa-vamsa  1  ascribes  to  Buddhappiya  another  book 
colled  the  SdrOUha -sa rigaha .  Mr.  Wickremasinghe  1  calls  it 
"  a  religious  work  ”,  but  I  do  not  know  of  any  copies  existing 
in  Ceylon. 

A  Sarattha-safigaha  is  includod  in  the  list  of  books  in  the 
Pagan  Inscription  *  (a.d.  1412).  Mrs.  Bode  thinks  it  refers  to 
Buddhadasa’s  medical  work  of  the  same  name  written  in  the 
fourth  century. 

There  is  a  Sinhalese  work  on  Buddhism,  the  SarSrtha- 
taftgraha,*  but  the  author  makes  no  mention  of  its  being  a 
translation  from  the  Pali  original.  There  are  extensive 
quotations  from  various  Pali  works,  and  the  nature  of  its 
contents  suggests  that  it  was  an  original  work  by  Saranafikara. 

Ananda's  other  pupil  was  Vedeha,  of  the  Arnnnavasi 
fraternity,  author  of  two  Pali  works,  the  Rasa-vdhini  and  the 

1  pp.  60  and  70. 

*  Cclalojut,  p.  xviii. 

•  Govt.  Printing  rre»»,  Rangoon.  1899.  and  Bode,  p.  109. 


THE  AOE  OF  PAKDITA  I’ARAKHAMA 


223 


Satnanla-ktUa-vavinonS,  the  first  in  prose  and  the  second  in 
verse.  He  ia  also  generally  credited  with  having  written  the 
most  authoritative  Sinhalese  grammar  extant — the  Sulat- 
sahgarS 1  Vedeha  give*  us  some  account  of  himself  in  the 
Colophon  to  the  Rata-vahim,  where  ho  says : "  The  Rata-vcMni 
was  composed  by  Vedelia  Thera,  author  of  the  beautiful 
Samontfl-W/a-tanncmu,  and  the  Sinhalese  Grammar,  who,  bom 
of  the  Brahma  m  caste,  was  a  banner  to  the  three  divisions 
of  Ceylon.  His  tutor  was  tho  Venerable  Ananda  of  the  Forest 
Hermitage,  leader  of  a  large  Chapter  of  monks,  and  one  who 
has  crossed  over  the  Ocean  of  Knowledge.  His  preceptor  was 
tho  Great  Elder  Mafigala,  skilled  in  all  learning,  chief 
supervisor  of  boundaries  (Sima)  and  the  Great  Kalifiga 
Thera.”  In  the  Samanta-kHla-vannana  Colophon  he  mentions 
only  the  Sihala -sadda-lakkha >ia  os  his  work,  so  that  the  order 
in  which  his  books  were  written  was:  first,  the  Sihala- 
tadda-lakkhana  (said  to  be  tho  same  as  the  Sidat-taiigara), 
second  tho  Samatxla-kuta-vannand,  and  lastly  the  f?a*a-raAtni. 
In  tho  Sidat-saUgarS — which  was  composed  at  tho  request 
of  the  minister  Pratirajadeva  Paodita,  identified  with  the 
minister  of  that  name  dispatched  by  Parakarama-Bahu  to 
South  Ceylon  to  repair  dilapidated  religious  edifices  *— the 
author  describes  himself  as  head  of  the  Pratirija-parivena  in 
south  Ceylon.1 

Of  Vedeha’s  workB  the  Saman/a-iuta-rortnaiw  is  a  Pali 
poem  of  about  800  verses,  written  at  the  request  of  a  monk 
named  RahuLa,  belonging  to  the  same  Vanavaai  fraternity 
as  the  author  himself.  As  the  name  implies,  the  poem  purports 
to  be  a  description  of  the  beautiful  peak  on  which  the  Buddha 
is  said  to  have  imprinted  the  mark  of  biB  loft  foot  on  his  third 
visit  to  Ceylon.  The  story  is  related  in  the  first  chapter  of  the 
Maha-wmsa.  But  the  account  of  this  particular  event  occupies 

»  DAtwi*.  Si<UU-M*t orS  prvfucc.  md  Catalog**,  p.  21.  D*  Zojs*. 

p.  18.  \V>ckrcm*ilE>ghf .  p.  9®. 

•  D'Alwia,  Catalog**,  p.  125. 

*  Sidat  *a*tar&,  p.  43. 


224 


T1IB  PALI  LITER ATUHK  OP  CEYLON 


only  a  few  verses  of  tho  book.  The  rest  of  it  contains  the  life 
of  the  Buddha  from  the  time  of  his  birth  in  the  Tuaita  deva- 
world,  prior  to  hia  being  born  in  the  world  of  men,  and 
continues  down  to  his  third  visit  to  Ceylon  after  having 
attained  Enlightenment.  Vedeba  has  described  in  great  detail 
many  incidents  of  the  Buddha's  lifo,  and  in  the  course  of  the 
narrative  of  the  Master's  journeying**  to  Lanka  tho  poet  makes 
use  of  the  opportunity  to  describe  in  languago  at  once  graceful 
and  elegant,  and  replete  with  chaste  and  beautiful  imagery, 
many  p&rtB  of  the  island,  little  known  or  explored  at  that 
time — its  hills  and  dales,  mountains  and  rivers,  especially  the 
Kelaui  and  the  Mahavaligahga,  the  exquisite  splendour  of 
their  scenery,  the  beauty  of  tho  landscapo  and  the  matchless 
variety  of  its  forests,  with  their  delicately  tinted  foliage  of 
luxuriant  verdure,  apt  abode  for  woodland  nymphs  paying 
homage  to  the  Holy  Shrine.  His  vivid  pen  pictures  of  cities 
and  their  inhabitants,  show  that  Vedeha  was  deeply  imbued 
with  the  lore  of  Sanskrit  writers,  but  there  is  no  trace  of 
slavish  imitation.  On  the  contrary,  the  Sama«fa-iuhii-iMi*tt»a«d 
is  undoubtedly  the  work  of  a  poet,  rich  in  his  gifts  and  inspired 
with  love  and  reverence  for  the  subject  of  his  poem.  The 
opening  verses  of  adoration,  enchantingly  sweet  in  their 
beautiful  cadences,  are  sung  even  to-day,  by  many  thousands 
who  have  never  heard  his  name  and  know  nothing  of  lus 
work.  A  Sinhalese  paraphrase  of  the  Pali  poem  has  been 
published,1  in  1890,  by  two  Buddhist  monks,  Dhammananda 
and  Is  auiasara ,  two  of  the  greatest  Oriental  scholars  of 
their  day. 

The  Rasa-vdAini  is  a  collection  of  stories  in  easy  Pali  prose, 
embodying  legends  historical  and  otherwise.  In  the  opening 
stanza  the  author  tells  us  that  his  work  is  a  revision  of  on  old 
P&li  translation,  made  from  an  original  compilation,  by 
Ratthapala  Thera  of  the  Taixgutta-Vahlca  Pantxtia  of  the 
Mahavihara.  We  do  not  know  anything  more  about 
Ratthapala,  except  that  he  is  supposed  to  have  made  his 
1  Printed  at  the  Government  Prrm,  Colombo,  IS90. 


THE  AQB  OF  TAHD1TA  PARAKRAHA 


225 


translation  from  a  number  of  legends  then  extant  in  the 
“  language  of  the  land  "  and  said  to  have  been  related  by 
Arahats.  Vedeha  found  Ratthapala's  translation  confused  in 
its  constructions  and  corrupted  by  repetitions,  and  he  there¬ 
fore  revised  it  and  put  it  into  a  new  form,  naming  it  the 
Rasa-whirii.  Perhaps  RaUhapola’s  translation  was  drawn  from 
the  ancient  Sohassa-vaUhu-atthakaihd  (Commentary  of  the 
Thousand  Stories),  quoted  four  times  in  Mafui-vamsa-fikd, 
which  Geiger  considers  to  ho  a  collection  of  legends  and 
folic-talcs.1  It  contained  among  others  tales  of  the  former 
lives  of  the  heroes  who  fought  under  king  Dutthagnma^i, 
and  also  the  romantic  tale  of  the  love  of  prince  Soli, 
Dutthagamairi’s  son,  for  the  Candida  maiden. 

Ratthapala  evidently  selected  a  number  of  sacred  legends 
which  had  acquired  sanctity  from  the  belief  that  they  had  been 
handed  down  by  Arahats.  He  naturally  would  not  tamper  with 
them  and  prune  them  into  an  elegant  work,  because  each 
story  had  its  own  self-centred  and  venerated  existence  cither 
at  his  time  or  before.  The  legends  were  nover  made  to  form  o 
series,  but  each  grew  up  of  itself.  Sometimes  certain  wide¬ 
spread  myths,  such  as  the  inexhaustiblo  rice-pot  and  the 
wishing  gem,  had  clusters  of  stories  which  had  grown  round 
them  as  local  legends,  and  they  were  written  down  con¬ 
secutively,  containing  clumsy  repetitions.  Vedeha,  who  was 
of  a  poetic  temperament,  and,  therefore,  loved  beauty  of 
diction,  was  not  satisfied  with  such  an  inartistic  presentation 
of  these  homely  stories,  and  he  proceeded  to  clothe  them  in  a 
new  garb.  The  result  is  the  Rasa-vahinii,  exquisite  in  its 
simplicity,  charming  in  its  naivete,  and  delightful  in  its 
innocence.  It  is  worth  noticing  that  a  large  number  of  the 
stories  are  grouped  round  the  days  of  Ya]agam-aba,  in  whose 
reign  the  Tipitaka  and  their  commentaries  were  committed 
to  writing  in  Ceylon.  Were  they  accretions  to  an  old  nucleus, 
or  do  they  show  that  the  original  collection  was  made  soon  after 
that  date  1 


Dip.  ind  Jf.r..  p.  4$. 


16 


226 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CBYLOJf 


The  stories  are  103  in  number,  the  first  forty  relating  to 
incidents  which  happened  in  Jambu-dvlpa  and  the  rest  in 
Ceylon.  They  illustrate  the  benefits  that  accrue  to  those  who 
do  good  deeds,  chiefly  by  making  offerings  to  the  Satlgha. 
They  arc  useful  to  us  now,  in  that  they  throw  new  and 
interesting  light  on  the  manners,  customs  and  social  con¬ 
ditions  of  ancient  India  and  Ceylon.  Perhaps  some  of  them 
contain  materials  of  historical  importance  hidden  in  their 
half-mythical  talcs. 

The  book  is  very  widely  used  as  an  elementary  Pali 
reader  in  temple-schools  even  to  this  day.  The  free  and  easy 
flow  of  language  makes  it  pleasant  reading,  while  the  wealth 
of  its  descriptions  furnishes  the  student  with  a  copious 
vocabulary. 

In  tho  fourteenth  century  a  monk  named  Dhammakitti, 
belonging  to  the  Gadaladcpi  Vihara,  made  a  compilation  in 
Sinhalese  of  Indian  and  Ceylon  Buddhist  legends.  His  work 
is  called  the  Saddharmalaiikara,  and  the  last  twenty-one  of  its 
twenty-four  chapters  contain  all  the  stories  of  the  Rasa-vdhim, 
To  them  are  subjoined  two  other  stories,  one  of  which,  the 
McUtyya-wslu,  is  evidently  derived  from  the  Cariya-pitaka ; 
the  source  of  the  other,  Radm&vaCi-vatlu,  is  not  known.  The 
greater  part  of  the  book  is  undoubtedly  a  translation  of  the 
Rasa-va)iin I,  though  Dhammakitti  does  not  say  bo.  In  the 
colophon,  however,  he  takes  his  pupillage  back  to  tho  Chief 
Elder  of  the  AraSlfiava&I  sect,  showing  that  he  belonged  to  the 
same  fraternity  as  Vedcha.1  In  Burma  the  work  is  known  as 
Madhura-Rtua-vahim,  perhaps  by  a  misconception  of  the  words 
in  one  of  the  opening  stanzas :  vakkham'  aham  sumadhuram 
ratavahininlam.  Sometimes  tho  section  dealing  with  Ceylon 
stories  is  copied  separately  and  called  the  Sihala-dipa-vatthu. 
The  Rasa-vahini,  however,  forms  only  one  part  of  a  much  larger 
collection,  called  the  Sahatta-vaUhn-ppakarana,*  which  seems 
to  have  been  lost  in  Ceylon. 

1  For  a  fuller  description  ten  Wickromasinghe,  Cot/.,  pp.  126  fell. 

1  British  Museum  Or.,  4674.  See  also  Bode,  p.  106. 


THE  AGE  Or  PANDITA  PARA IC RAMA 


227 


There  is  a  tradition  in  Oeylon  that  a  pupil  of  Ananda 
Vanar&tana  also  wrote  a  commentary  on  fonr  Bhanavaras 
of  the  T  i pi  taka  in  Sinhalese  at  the  request  of  another  monk 
named  Anomadossi.1 

To  about  this  time,  or  perhaps  to  a  slightly  earlier  period, 
I  would  also  assign  the  Ke*a-dhalu-vanisa,  by  an  anonymous 
author.  Dhammalritti,  who,  in  the  reign  of  Paodita 
Parakrama,  wrote  a  continuation  of  the  Maha-vamsa,  mentions 
it  by  name.  It  relates  the  story  of  the  Buddha’s  hair  relio 
(ktta-dhalu),  which  was  brought  to  Ceylon  in  the  reign  of 
Moggallana  I  (a.d.  497— CIO)  by  a  novice  named  Ambit 
Somanera.  He  was  a  man  of  the  Lambakapoa  race,  Silakala 
by  name,  and  had  fled  to  India  with  Moggallana  through  fear 
of  the  patricide  Kassapa.  There  he  became  a  recluse  at  the 
Bodhimnnda  Vihara,  and  because  of  his  having  served  a 
mango  to  the  Elders  ho  was  given  the  nickname  of  Amba 
Samancrn  (Mongo-novice).  When  Moggallana  ascended  the 
throne  a  few  years  later,  Silakala,  now  no  longer  a  monk, 
returned  to  Ceylon  with  the  Kcsa-dhtitu.  Moggallana  received 
it  with  great  honour,  and  kept  it  in  the  Dlpaiikara  Image- 
house,  in  o  special  casket,  beside  the  statues  of  the  two  chief 
disciples  of  the  Buddha.  Silakala  was  appointed  guardian  of 
the  relic,  and  made  sword-bearer — hence  hi*  name  Aaiggaha 
Silakala  (Silakala  the  Sword-Bearer).  Later  he  married  the 
king's  sister.  Such  is  tlte  account  given  in  the  39th  chapter 
of  the  Maha-vamsa.  Of  the  later  history  of  the  Relic,  we  know 
nothing  at  all.  The  Kcsa-dhalu-vama  itself  is  extremely  rare, 
and  I  have  heard  of  only  one  copy  in  Ceylon.  De  Zoysa  does 
not  mention  it  in  his  Catalogue,  and  Mr.  Wickrcmasinghc 
makes  but  a  passing  reference  to  it.* 

Pandita  Parnkrama’s  eldest  son  and  successor,  Vijaya-B4hu, 
who  was  entrusted  with  the  supervision  of  the  state  during  the 
very  lifetime  of  the  king,  was  an  enlightened  prince,  extremely 

>  McdlfLnwMU,  J\no-WM-4!pa»t,  1017,  p.  17.  A  MdnatCrs  i*  equal  to 
250  r*r tei  of  Uiirty.tvo  syllable*  each. 

*  p.  xriii. 


228 


THE  TAU  LITERATURE  OF  CETLOX 


devoted  to  the  cultivation  of  the  arts.  He  was  a  man  of  great 
religious  fervour,  and  was  called  Bodhisatta  (Buddha- 
Aspirant)  by  the  people.  The  ilaha-vama 1  gives  glowing 
descriptions  of  the  measures  he  adopted  to  beautify  the  capital 
city  of  Polonnaruva,  and  we  see  there  evidence  of  on 
ascetic  mind  belonging  to  a  wise  statesman,  a  just  ruler  and 
a  man  of  broad  views.  Wo  are  told  that  he  made  the  city  of 
Pulatthi  “like  unto  the  city  of  India,  so  that  by  the 
magnifiocnce  thereof  it  surpassed  Mithiia,  discomfited  Kafici, 
laughed  atSavatthi,  vanquished  Madhura,  despoiled  Borinas!, 
robbed  oven  Vesali,  and  made  the  city  of  Campa  tremble  It 
was  this  that  perhaps  gave  Vedeha  his  material  for  the 
picturesque  description  of  cities  in  the  Samanla-kula- 
mnitand  He  encouraged  learning  among  the  monks  by  con¬ 
ferring  dignities  and  offices  on  such  of  thorn  as  brought  glory 
to  the  Order.  They  were  given  title*  of  Maha-sami-pada, 
Mula-pida,  Maha-Thcra-pada,  Pativcna-Thera-pida,  etc. 
Ho  held  a  great  ceremony  of  Ordination  at  Sahassatittha,  the 
Mahavali-gahga,  lasting  for  a  fortnight,  to  which  monks 
came  from  every  monastery,  leaving  none  behind  them,  “  not 
even  a  monk  in  charge  of  the  stores.”  *  He  sent  gift*  to  the 
monks  of  Cola  and  Pandu  as  well.  The  influence  of  an 
enlightened  ruler  is  bound  to  be  reflected  in  the  life  of  his 
subjects,  and  the  large  number  of  literary  works,  mostly  in 
Sinhalese,  written  during  this  period,  are  an  index  to  the 
prosperity  and  the  contentment  which  he,  acting  under  his 
great  father,  achieved. 

His  brother,  Bhuvaneka-Bahu,  who  succeeded  him 
(a.d.  1277-88),  was  no  leas  a  patron  of  learning.  He  “  caused 
all  the  Three  Piiakat  to  be  written  by  learned  scribe*  of  the 
Scriptures,  rewarded  them  liberally  and  placed  copies 
in  the  diverse  Viharas  of  Laflka,  and  thus  spread  the  Pali 
scriptures  throughout  the  land  During  his  reign  Siddhattha 

»  U.V..  1***1*. 

*  Ibid,  vr.  47-50. 

*  If.P.,  80.  tt.  37-8. 


THS  AO*  Of  PAJTP1TA  PARAKRAMA 


229 


Thera  compiled  the  SdraUha-taUffaha.  The  author  describes 
himself  as  a  member  of  the  VanavasI  fraternity,  and  pupil  of 
Buddhappiya,  author  of  Rtipa-tiddhi,  “  famed  throughout 
Coji  and  Lahka  for  his  vast  learning  and  great  piety.”  He  also 
has  a  panegyric  on  Bhuvaneka-Bahu,  whoso  patronage  he 
seems  to  have  enjoyed.1 

The  work  is  divided  into  forty  sections,  written  partly  in 
prose  and  partly  in  verse.  The  first  chapter  deals  with  the 
Buddhabhinihura,  the  preliminaries  necessary  for  aspiring 
to  Buddhahood,  and  several  verses  are  quoted  from  the  Sutia- 
nipato  commentary ;  it  then  pnsseB  on  to  the  wonderful 
feature*  of  the  Buddha’s  life,  quoting  extensively  from  the 
commentaries  accounts  of  such  Suttas  as  the  M  aha-Sihanada , 
and  the  Culla-naUhi-padopama.  This  is  followed  by  a 
description  of  the  gradual  disappearance  of  the  Buddha’s 
teaching,  the  appearance  of  cakkavatti  kings,  the  enshrine¬ 
ment  of  the  relics  of  Holy  Men,  the  protection  of  such  Bhrincs. 
illustrated  with  stories  of  men  who  reached  salvation  thereby, 
a  discourse  on  the  threefold  Sdtana  (PariyaUi,  PalipaUi, 
and  Pativedha),  and  a  condemnation  of  heresies  and  of 
heretics  who  entered  the  order  in  Anoka’s  reign  attracted  by 
gain.  Many  stories  are  given  of  the  virtues  of  piety  and 
devotedness  of  heart  and  self-denial,  especially  in  the  matter  of 
giving  alms. 

One  instance  is  given  of  a  man  who  sold  firewood  and 
prepared  alms  for  some  novices  (Samaperas),  which  they 
refused  to  accept  because  it  was  not  well  prepared.  He  then 
pawned  his  daughter,  bought  a  oow,  and  prepared  alms  with 
milk.  Later  he  worked  at  a  sugar  mill  to  get  money  for  his 
daughter’s  release,  but,  as  lie  was  coming  home  with  it,  he  met 
Piodapatika  Tissa  Thera,  whom  he  found  starving  for  want 
of  food.  Paying  an  exorbitant  price  to  the  only  man  who  had 
food  in  the  place,  he  gave  it  to  the  Thera  who  thereby  became 
an  Aiahat.  To  this  is  added  a  chapter  on  dreams— 

1  Pretax  to  printed  edition  oi  the  dr*t  eight  oh*p<*»  :  Colombo,  1801, 
•d.  DhsmmtrsUn*. 


230 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CETLOK 


Siddhatthtt’s  dream  on  the  day  of  Enlightenment,  the  dream  of 
king  Kosola,  etc.,  the  efficacy  of  the  Refuges,  the  various 
kinds  of  $!la,  methods  of  meditation,  foods  suitable  for  various 
classes  of  beings,  the  reproduction  of  living  things,  including 
a  story  of  how  two  eggs  laid  by  Ambapdlft  Gapika  gave  birth 
to  two  Thcxas.  The  author  Rays  that  this  is  contained  in  the 
Apadana,  but  no  such  story  is  found  there.  The  book  also  has 
a  very  ungallaut  chapter  on  the  nature  of  woman,  and  the 
concluding  chapter  deals  with  cosmology. 

As  will  be  Been  from  the  above  brief  list  of  its  contents, 
it  is  a  curious  medley  of  matter  of  diverse  interest,  jumbled 
together  anyhow,  with  no  attempt  at  arrangement.  I  am 
inclined  to  believe  that  the  book,  as  we  have  it  now,  has  been 
greatly  tampered  with  by  later  editors,  and  many  spurious 
additions  have  been  made  to  it.  Else  it  would  be  difficult 
to  acoount  for  its  admixture  of  religion  and  demonology  and 
medicine.  Copies  of  it  ore  rare,  and  though  au  attempt  was 
made  in  1891  to  have  the  book  printed,  only  a  few  chapters 
have  so  far  been  published. 

The  Rev.  Medhonnnda  in  his  recent  work  the  Jina-vam- 
sa-dipam  says  that  it  was  this  same  Siddbattba  who  wrote  a 
M aha-nipata-va^nana,  the  Dampiyd-sanne,  and  the  Rata - 
I'dAtnI-rihJ.1 

Another  author  of  the  same  period  was  Vnnaratana 
Medhankarft  (the  third  of  that  name  famous  in  the  Buddhist 
Church  of  Ceylon),  who  wrote  the  Jina-carita  and  the 
Payoga-siddhi.  In  the  colophon  to  the  latter  work  he  tells  us 
that  he  was  the  pupil  of  Sumafigala  Mahu  Thera  of  the 
Jambuddoni  Vihara  and  was  Niyamaka  or  director  there.  The 
Jina-carita,  however,  is  said  to  have  beon  written  at  the 
Vijaya-Bahu  Pari  vena,  built  by  Vijaya-Bahu,  of  which  the 
author  was  incumbent  at  the  time.1  This  probably  refers  to  the 
Vihara  built  at  Yattalagama  by  Vijaya-Bahu  III,  who  ruled 
at  Dambadeniya.1  The  Jina-carita  is  a  short  Pili  poem  of 

1  Medhinasda,  J ina-vawa-dSpami  (Colombo,  1017),  P ttlkC*,  p.  19. 

*  JPT8 ,  1904,  pc  31. 

•  if.  V.,  bum.  t.  54. 


THE  AOE  OF  PANDIT  A  PARAKRAMA 


231 


472  stanzas  dealing  with  the  life  of  the  Buddha.  The  first 
hundred  verses  describe  briefly  his  birth  as  Somedha  in  the 
time  of  the  Buddha  Dipaftkara,  and  tells  us  how  in  one  birth 
after  another  he  strove  to  fulfil  the  Ten  Puramiti  necessary 
for  Buddhahood.  The  greater  part  of  the  work  deals  with  the 
Renunciation  and  with  the  visit  paid  by  Gotama  to  his 
relations  after  he  bad  attained  Enlightenment.  The  author 
gives  vivid  descriptions  of  Suddhodana’s  city,  and  the  Twin 
Miracle  which  the  Buddha  performed  at  the  foot  of  the 
Gapdabba  Tree  to  convince  his  relations  and  win  their  con¬ 
fidence.  He  then  proceeds  to  paint  little  cameo*  about  the 
various  spots  where  the  Buddha  lived  during  his  long  ministry 
of  service  to  bis  fellow-men. 

The  poem  concludes  with  the  author’s  aspirations  to 
become  a  Buddha  himself,  “  Giving  my  flesh,  blood,  and  eyes 
with  calm  mind,  fulfilling  all  the  P&ramitu  (Perfections)  and 
Virtues,  all  self-abnegation  and  wisdom,  attaining  to  the 
highest  pinnacle  of  Perfection,  may  I  become  Buddha 
incomparable ;  having  preached  the  sweet  doctrine  which 
brings  happiness  to  men,  and  having  freed  all  the  world  of 
men  and  devas  from  the  fetters  of  Sarpsara,  may  I  reach 
the  noble  city  of  Peace  and  Joy.” 

There  is  an  old  Sinhalese  paraphrase  to  the  J ina-carita,  which 
is  usually  ascribed  to  Medhaiikara  himself.  Towards  the  end 
of  last  century  the  Rev.  Dhammiinanda,  Principal  of  the 
Paramadhammaoetiya  Pariveija  at  Ratmalana,  published  a 
new  paraphrase  written  by  himself.  An  English  translation 
of  it  has  been  published  in  the  Pdli  Text  Society  Journal 
(1904-7)  by  Dr.  W.  H.  D.  Rouse,  of  Perse  School,  Cambridge. 

Medhartkara’s  other  work,  the  Payoga-siddhi,  is  a  grammar 
written  on  the  lines  of  the  Moggallana  school.  It  bears  the 
same  relation  to  Moggdllana-vydkarana  as  the  Rupa-riddhi 
docs  to  the  Kaccayana.  The  author  follows  Moggall&na 
closely,  while  supplying  the  deficiencies  of  that  work  which  are 
criticized  by  Buddhappiya  in  his  Rupa-siddhi.  The  scope  of 
the  Moggallana  is  thereby  greatly  increased,  and  Medhafikara 


232 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


makes  some  caustic  remarks  on  Buddhappiya’s  criticisms. 
"  Many  of  bis  rules  are  mere  figments  of  imagination/’  he  says 
in  one  place. 

The  Payoga-tiddhi  is  not  now  much  used  in  Ceylon.  It  doea 
not  seem  to  have  found  its  way  to  Burma  at  all,  for  no  mention 
is  mado  of  it  in  any  history  of  Burmese  literature.  The 
Gandha-vamta  and  the  Satana-vamsa  are  both  silent  about  it. 
A  Sinhalese  paraphrase  exists  by  a  later  anonymous  writer, 
but  neither  paraphrase  nor  original  has  found  much  favour. 

A  few  years  later,  in  1296,  Parakrama-Bahu  IV  ascended  the 
throne  at  Knrunegala.  He  was  a  wise  and  mighty  prince, 
and  after  he  hAd  obtained  a  semblance  of  peace  in  the  kingdom 
(for  the  Malabar  peril  was  ever  present  like  Damocles’  sword) 
he  assembled  the  monks  together  and  caused  the  ceremony  of 
ordination  to  be  performed  many  times.1  He  was  imbued  with 
a  great  love  for  learning,  and  the  books  written  during  bis 
reign  are  profuse  in  their  admiration  for  his  accomplishments, 
which  were  varied  and  numerous.  He  was  specially  devoted 
in  his  attentions  to  the  tooth  relic,  and  made  to  it  many 
offerings  and  held  many  feasts  in  its  honour.  In  order  that 
similar  ceremonies  may  be  performed  daily,  wc  are  told  that 
he,  of  his  own  free  will,  wrote  a  book  in  Sinhalese  called 
Daladd-sirita  (the  Ceremonial  of  the  tooth  relic),  according  to 
the  tenets  of  which  the  rites  were  to  be  held  daily.* 

The  MaM-vamsa  (90,  w.  80-4)  also  tells  us  that  he  appointed 
as  his  teacher  a  certain  Great  Elder  from  the  Co{a  country,  a 
self-denying  man,  conversant  with  many  languages  and  skilled 
in  the  science  of  logic  and  in  religion.  The  king  read  all  the 
Jdtakas  with  him,  and  constantly  heard  them  expounded, 
learnt  them  all,  and  kept  in  mind  their  meaning  also.  There¬ 
after  he  translated  in  due  order  the  entire  collection, 
551  in  number,  from  Pali  into  Sinhalese.  He  caused  them  to 
be  read  in  an  assembly  of  Elders  who  were  well  versed  in  the 

*  Jf.  V.,  xc,  tt,  64-5. 

■  lbtd.  tt.  76-8.  But  see  Wicltremaaisghe,  p.  xrli,  r«  aulhonhip  of 
Arfcdd-ririta.  I  belie  t*  that  here  we  have  to  do  with  two  different  worka, 
oae  of  which  eTideatly  has  been  lost  in  later  yean. 


THE  AGE  07  FANDITA  PARAKRAMA 


235 


Tipitaia,  and  having  purified  his  translations  of  their  faults, 
he  caused  them  to  bo  transcribed  and  spread  them  throughout 
the  whole  of  Laiika.  Later  he  visited  an  Elder  of  great 
eminence  called  Medhaftkara,  and  gave  these  Jatakat  into  his 
charge,  so  that  they  might  be  preserved  in  the  line  of 
succession  of  his  pupils. 

This  Medhabkara  probably  refers  to  the  author  of  the 
Jina-carita  noticed  above. 

According  to  the  Mahd-vamta  account  the  translation  of  the 
Jatakatthakatha  was  done  by  King  Parakrama  himself.  The 
introduction  to  the  existing  Sinhalese  version  is  silent  as  to 
its  authorship.  It  merely  states  that  the  work  was 
accomplished  by  the  exertions  of  the  minister  Virasirpha 
Pratiraja.  The  translation  does  not  always  follow  the  Pali 
text :  sometimes  whole  sentences  being  left  out,  which  may 
perhaps  be  due  to  the  carelessness  of  later-day  scribes.  Some¬ 
times  attempts  have  been  made  to  add  embellishments  to  the 
Pali  version.1 

The  late  Ven.  H.  Siri  Sumangala,  Nayaka  Thera,  stated  in 
the  courso  of  an  article  to  the  Journal  of  the  Ceylon 
Branch  of  the  Royal  Atiatic  Society  (vol.  viii.  No.  28),  that 
°  provincialisms  are  to  be  detected  in  the  J dlakas.  Some  of 
them  arc  written  in  indifferent  Sinhalese,  some  contain  a  few 
Tamil  expressions  and  words.”  From  these  facto  he  concluded 
that  the  Sinhalese  version  must  have  been  made  by  several 
persons.  The  language  of  the  translations  is  ocrtainly  not 
worthy  of  the  king,  if  the  5/aA5-wwisa  account  of  his  having 
been  the  author  of  the  Daladd-sinta  is  oorrect.  It  is  inter¬ 
spersed  with  many  Sanskrit  and  Pali  words,  and  is  decidedly 
colloquial  in  style.  On  the  other  hand,  could  the  oolloquialisms 
have  been  duo  to  a  deliberate  desire  to  make  the  translation 
comprehensible  to  the  ordinary  layman  1  The  Jatakat 
formed  hiB  chief  spiritual  sustenance,  as  they  do  to  this  day, 


•  See  aUo  WlekremAidnghe,  p.  110.  D'Alwu,  Sfiat-*a*farA,  Jntrod., 


234 


Tire  PAM  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


and  it  vu  necessary  that  he  should  understand  as  clearly  a* 
possible  the  lessons  they  inculoated- 

From  this  period  a  distinct  tendency  is  to  be  observed  among 
the  authors  of  books  towards  using  Sinhalese  as  their  medium 
of  expression  in  preference  to  any  other  language  then  used 
for  literary  purposes  in  Ceylon.  This  was  due  to  several 
reasons ;  greater  attention  than  ever  before  was  being  paid 
to  subjects  of  secular  interest.  Pali  was  pre-eminently 
the  language  of  sacred  literature  or,  at  leaat,  of  literature 
having  some  definite  connexion  with  the  religion — the  history 
of  religious  movements,  the  chronicles  of  the  doings  of  the 
Order,  the  measures  adopted  by  various  sovereigns  and 
distinguished  members  of  the  community,  for  the  maintenance 
of  tbe  national  faith. 

It  is  true  that  Sanskrit  was  there,  available  for  use  where 
Pili  would  not  suffice  ;  but  Sanskrit  never  became  the  favourite 
language  in  Ceylon  at  any  time  to  the  extent  that  Pali  did. 
Perhaps  there  was  a  prejudice  against  it  from  very  early  ages 
because  of  its  having  been  the  language  of  the  Tirthakas 
(unbelievers)  and  of  the  Vnitulya-vadins,  who  sought  through 
their  writings  to  interpret  the  doctrines  of  Buddhism 
in  a  manner  contrary  to  the  traditions  of  the  Theravada 
monks.  Besides,  Sanskrit  was  par  excellence  a  literary  dialect, 
not  to  be  easily  understood,  nor  to  be  used  with  any  degree  of 
proficiency  except  by  the  very  learned.  Any  work  written  in 
it  would  find  circulation  only  within  a  narrow  circle,  for  not 
even  all  the  monks  knew  Sanskrit,  while  they  were  all 
acquainted  with  Pali,  and  there  was  not  much  chance  of  its 
gaining  currency  in  the  neighbouring  continent,  unless  it 
should  prove  to  be  of  remarkable  merit,  such  as  was 
Kumaradasa’s  Jdnaki-harana. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  Vedeha’s  comprehensive  Sinhalese 
grammar,  the  SidcU-taAgard,  gave  great  impetus  to  the 
attention  paid  to  Sinhalese  studies.  There  he  had  made  an 
attempt  to  keep  Sinhalese  as  a  special  language  apart  from 
PJLli  and  Sanskrit,  though  it  contained  many  words  derived 


THE  AOB  OF  PANDIT  A  PARAKRAMA 


235 


from  them.  In  such  grammatical  factors  as  gender,  for 
instance,  he  showed  how  Sinhalese  differed  from  its  ancestors. 
But  it  was  too  late  to  stem  the  tide.  The  influence  of  other 
languages,  especially  of  Sanskrit,  had  already  proceeded  apace. 

We  saw’  how  the  sweet,  soft  rhythm  of  old  Pali  gradually 
gave  place  to  a  more  sonorous,  vigorous  Sanskritized  Pali ; 
it  was  the  same  with  Sinhalese.  The  language  was  enriched 
first  on  the  side  of  ita  religious  vocabulary  by  word*  derived 
from  Pali,  while  words  and  phrases  and  turns  of  expression 
now  began  to  be  borrowed  bodily  from  Sanskrit.  The 
contiguity  of  Tamil,  too,  for  several  centuries  has  had  its 
effect.  Sinhalese  thus  once  more  came  back  to  ita  own, 
though  it  was  a  language  in  many  ways  different  from  that 
used  prior  to  the  eleventh  century.  Hitherto  Ceylon  authors 
had  written  their  most  important  works  in  Pali ;  henceforward 
Sinhalese  comes  to  assume  that  position ;  most  of  the 
important  compositions  are  in  the  “language  of  the  land’’1; 
no  attempts  are  made  now  (such  as  the  authors  of  the 
Maha-vanua  and  the  Daiha-vamta  made)  to  supersede  it  by 
any  other  medium  of  expression ;  occasionally  an  author  is 
found  using  Pali,  ambitious  perhaps  to  reach  a  wider  audience 
than  that  confined  to  Ceylon,  or  because  the  very  nature  of 
his  treatise  was  such  that  Pali  seemed  its  pre-eminently 
fitting  garb. 

From  the  fourteenth  century  onward*  until  the  nineteenth 
the  island  never  enjoyed  perfect  peace  for  any  length  of  time  ; 
the  Malabar  hordes  were  ever  waiting  to  swoop  down  upon  it, 
and  later  came  enemies  from  countries  further  away.  Rival 
claimants  to  the  throne  were  constantly  at  war  with  each  other, 
and  it  was  only  on  rare  occasions  that  a  sovereign  was  found 
sufficiently  strong  and  powerful  to  hold  them  in  check. 

*  For  information  about  them  reference  should  bo  made  to  ruefa  work* 
u  D'Alwfe'  Sidol  tatyara.  Introduction;  Wickremaainghc's  Caiaiopus  oj 
SinHaltM  JtSS.  in  Ou  BrititX  iiuMvm,  and  IXj  Zoysa's  Caiahgxt  anoog 
other*.  In  tbo  present  treatise  n*  Titian  wtlJ  bo  mado  of  Sinbalcan  works 
only  in  so  tar  as  they  are  translations  or  oommentariss  of  Pill  books  or  are 
in  some  way  connected  with  them. 


236 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


Alarmed,  by  this  want  of  security,  the  influx  of  scholars 
from  other  lands  gradually  diminished  and  finally  ceased, 
or  perhaps  they  felt  they  had  now  obtained  all  the  learning 
that  Ceylon  could  give  them.  This  diminution  in  the  traffic 
of  learning  also  may  have  been  in  some  measure  responsible 
for  the  adoption  of  Sinhalese  in  preference  to  Pali,  and  it  is 
worth  noticing  that  very  few  of  the  books  written  in  Ceylon 
after  the  fourteenth  century  have  gained  currency  in  other 
lands.  The  golden  age  of  Pali  literature  in  Ceylon  had  ended 
perhaps  never  more  to  come  back. 

Several  authors  of  eminence  flourished  daring  the  time  of 
Parikrama-Bahu  IV,  chief  among  whom  was  fsri  Parakrama- 
Babu,  Mali  a  Thera  of  the  Yilgnmmula  fraternity,  chief 
incumbent  of  the  Kitsirimevan  Kiilapi  Temple.  He  made  a 
Sinhalese  translation  of  live  Maha-Bodhi-vavuo  in  twelve 
chapters.  It  is  an  amplified  version  of  the  Pali  original, 
interspersed  with  numerous  quotations  from  P4li  works, 
both  canonical  and  otherwise,  and  from  Sanskrit  works 
such  as  K&lidJLsa’s  Paghu-vamsa.1  In  the  colophon  the  author 
tells  us  that  the  translation  was  made  at  the  request  of  the 
king  himself.  Ho  was  a  Sanskrit  scholar  as  well,  and  made 
a  Sinhalese  paraphrase  of  Mayura’s  SQrya-iataka.*  In  the 
preface  to  the  Bodki-vamta  translation  mention  is  made  also  of 
the  following  works  in  Sinhalese,  composed  during  the  same 
period  :  a  translation  of  the  Dkamma-jxtdaUhakaUtd  and  the 
Peta-vat  {Pda-vaUhu),  the  Viman-vat  (Vtmana-vatlhu)  and 
tho  Buddha- wntita,  which,  judging  from  their  titles,  were 
either  translations  or  compilations  from  the  Pali  works  of  the 
same  names. 

Turnour*  makes  out  that  a  portion  of  the  Maha-vamtct 
was  written  during  the  reign  of  this  king,  bringing  the  history 
down  to  his  own  times. 

Mr.  Wickremasinghe  assigns  also  to  this  period  a  Pali 

1  Far  a  fuller  description  Wickrcmaai&gbe,  pp.  22  and  23. 

*  Ibid. 

*  Epitome  o i  the  History  of  Ctylo*,  p.  47. 


THE  AGE  O?  l’ANDITA  PARAKKAMA 


237 


work  called  the  Dkdtu-madjwid  (casket  of  radical*),  or  the 
Kaccdyana  Dhatu-mafijusd,  as  it  is  more  often  called,  a 
compilation  of  verbal  roots  in  Pali  and  founded  on  the 
Kaccdyana.  It  is  a  kind  of  metrical  vocabulary  on  the  same 
lines  as  the  Abhidhd txa-ppadipikd ,  but,  unlike  the  latter,  it 
contains  only  lists  of  verbal  roots.  The  Abhtdhana-ppadipikd 
did  not  contain  any  lists  of  verba  at  all.  The  author  of  the 
Madjdsd  was  a  monk  named  Silavaipsa.  In  the  colophon  he 
says :  “  The  DhaXu-manjitid,  rendered  clear  and  easy  by  its 
alphabetical  arrangement  (twww-H-amd,  arranged  according 
to  letters),  has  been  compiled  for  the  edification  of  the 
uninitiated  by  the  learned  Sllavamsa,  a  monk,  who  like  a 
swan  to  the  lotus  of  the  Scriptures,  resided  in  the  Temple  of 
Yakkhaddi  Lena, 1  with  aspirations  that  Buddhism  may  con¬ 
tinue  long."  In  the  introductory  stanzas  he  acknowledges 
his  obligation  to  various  Pali  grammars  and  lists  of  roots 
(Dhdtu-pdtha)  which  had  been  compiled  earlier.  No  date  of 
composition  is  given  and  as  yet  we  have  no  clue  which  will 
enable  us  to  determine  the  period  with  any  definiteness. 
Sttavam*&  divided  radicals  into  seven  classes,  each  class 
typified  by  a  single  word  (bhd,  rudha,  diva,  td,  ki,  tanu,  and 
ctira).  The  148  stanzas  contain  over  400  radicals  arranged  in 
alphabetical  order.  Usually  only  one  meaning  is  assigned  to 
each  root.  Thus  "  hda  -  chcdana  (cutting)  ”  (under  the 
bhvddi). 

The  late  Don  A.  de  S.  Batuvantudave  Papdita,  of 
Colombo,  one  of  the  foremost  of  Orientalists  in  Ceylon  in  the 
last  century,  prepared  and  published  a  scholarly  edition  of 
the  work  with  a  Sinhalese  and  an  English  translation,  giving 
an  alphabetical  list  of  the  radicals,  the  class  to  whioh  each 
belongs  and  the  number  of  the  stanza  in  which  the  particular 
radical  occurs  in  the  Pali  original.1 

*  Probably  YtUdcnigmU  in  Kuruncgtl*  District  (Wickxem*«io*b«, 
p.  xrlii). 

*  Colombo,  1872,  pp.  1.  SS. 


CHAPTER  XII 
The  Twilight  Glow 

TT'ROM  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  centum  up  to  the  extinction 
of  the  Sinhalese  dynasty  in  the  eighteenth  Ceylon  paused 
through  one  long  period  of  unrest  punctuated  only  by  very 
short  intervals  of  peace.  During  tho  whole  of  this  time  the 
island  cannot  be  said  to  have  been  ever  entirely  freed  from  the 
presence  of  the  Malabar*.  Even  when  temporarily  subdued 
by  some  strong  Sinhalese  monarch,  they  continued  to  exercise 
their  influence  in  divers  ways,  and  by  frequent  intermarriages 
the  royal  line  was  almost  as  closely  allied  to  the  ruling  princes 
of  South  India  os  it  was  to  the  blood  of  the  Sinhalese  king*  of 
old.  The  effects  of  their  ever-present  influence  are  to  be  seen 
to-day  in  every  department  of  life  among  the  Sinhalese,  in 
their  language,  their  domestic  and  social  observances,  and 
in  their  very  national  religion,  so  much  so  that  to  this  day 
the  Devalas  for  Hindu  worship  are  found  either  within  the 
prccincta  of  tho  Buddhist  religious  edifiocs  (riAdras)  themselves 
or  in  close  contiguity  with  them.  The  Malabar*  now  exercised 
undisputed  dominion  over  the  northern  coasts  on  both  sides 
of  the  islsnd.  The  two  ancient  capitals,  Anursdhapura  and 
Polannaruva,  with  the  rich  fertile  and  well-watered  plains 
surrounding  them,  fell  into  their  hands ;  tho  country  from 
Chilaw  in  the  West  to  Batticaloa  on  the  East  owed  allegiance 
to  the  foreigners,  even  adopting  their  language  as  the 
vernacular.  In  the  thirteenth  century,  with  the  establishment 
of  a  Tamil  colony  in  the  sandy  plains  of  Jaffna-pattanam  at 
tho  northernmost  extremity  of  tho  island,  their  power  became 
firmly  rooted,  and  it  irresistibly  extended  itself.  One  after 
another,  each  capital  city  in  the  kingdom  had  to  be 
abandoned  to  them,  and  the  scat  of  government  carried 
further  and  further  south  ;  from  Anuradhapura  it  moved  to 
Polonnaruva,  thence  to  Dambadepiya  in  the  thirteenth 
century ;  from  there  to  Yapahuva,  Kurunegala,  and  Gampola, 


THE  TWILIGHT  GLOW 


239 


thence  to  the  lofty  plateau  of  the  Hill  country,  with  He  little 
town  of  Senkatfagala  and  to  lovely  Peradepiya  on  the  banka 
of  the  Mahaviiligahga,  and  finally  in  the  fifteenth  century  to 
Jayavardbana-pura,  now  known  aa  Kftttc,  6  miles  away 
from  modern  Colombo. 

Occasionally  the  Sinhalese  would  make  desperate  attempts 
to  regain  their  lost  independence,  with  casual  successes  ; 
but  the  odds  were  greatly  against  them ;  the  Tamils  could 
always  rely  for  help  on  the  bands  of  marauding  allies  from  the 
neighbouring  continent  and  the  Sinhalese  were  unable  to 
offer  effectual  resistance  to  their  overwhelming  numbers. 
Whilst  the  north  of  the  island  was  thus  almost  entirely 
abandoned  to  the  Tamils,  the  Sinhalese  provinces  were  sub¬ 
divided  into  several  petty  kingdoms,  the  chiefs  of  which  often 
acknowledged  nominal  supremacy  to  someone  who  held  sway 
over  the  capital  city  ;  but  they  were  almost  always  involved 
in  internecine  struggles,  because  of  their  rivalry  and  jealousy 
and  hostilities  provoked  by  the  withholding  of  tribute.1 

Amidst  such  conditions  of  alarm  and  despondency,  when  the 
power  of  the  people  was  being  steadily  destroyed  and  foreign 
influence  was  gaining  the  asoendancy  at  the  Court,  there  was 
little  to  fire  the  enthusiasm  of  men  of  letters.  They  depended 
for  their  encouragement  not  so  much  on  the  meritorious  praise 
of  their  reading  public  as  on  the  patronage  extended  to  them 
by  their  rulers,  who  themselves  were  scholars  and  lovers  of 
literature.  The  monks,  who  because  of  their  dissociation  from 
worldly  interests  had  so  far  been  able  to  devote  their  attention 
to  literary  pursuits,  had  to  depend  for  their  maintenance 
on  the  generosity  of  the  lay  community  ;  that  support  was 
not  always  forthcoming ;  the  people  were  too  much  engrossed 
in  the  protection  of  their  property  and  persons  to  have  time 
for  anything  else.  Literature  thus  fell  into  decay:  the 
fraternities  of  monks  were  disorganized,  yet  it  was  they  who 
amidst  all  adversity  kept  alive  the  torch  of  learning  in  Ceylon — 
all  honour  to  them,  therefore — and,  whenever  a  patron  of 

1  Tennont.  History  oj  Ctylax,  Tot.  i,  p.  410. 


240 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


letters  arose  in  the  ranks  of  the  princes  or  of  their  ministers, 
willing  to  extend  to  them  a  helping  hand,  they  once  more 
roused  themselves  to  activity  and  produced  works  of  merit, 
worthy  of  holding  rank  alongside  with  the  productions  of 
their  predecessors. 

One  such  prince  was  Bhuvaneka-Bahu  IV  ( circa  a.d.  1347), 
"  a  man  of  great  wisdom  and  faith  and  a  mine  of  excellent 
virtues,”  who  ruled  at  GaOgasiripura  (now  Oampola).  He 
had  on  enlightened  minister,  Senalankodhikara  Senerat,  born 
of  the  Mehcgavara-vaipaa  (the  descendants  of  those  who  had 
accompanied  Sanghamitt-u  and  the  branch  of  tho  sacred 
Bodhi-tree).  With  the  consent  of  the  king,  he  armed  himself 
with  royal  authority  and,  in  order  to  purge  the  Order  of  the 
misconduct  among  its  members,  held  a  council  of  monks  under 
the  leadership  of  the  Great  Elder  Vanaratana  of  Amaragiri, 
and  caused  an  inquisition  to  be  held  into  the  characters  of 
those  suspected  of  wrong  living.* 

At  this  time  a  monk  named  Dhammalatti  was  Safighariija 
(Primate).  He  lived  in  a  monastery  called  Saddhamma-tilaka, 
in  the  village  of  Gadalidcoiya.*  According  to  the 
Saddharmdia A kdra  colophon,’  he  was  the  pupil  of  another 
Dhammalatti,  who  seems  to  have  flourished  during  the 
latter  part  of  the  thirteenth  century.  He  was  a  member  of 
the  Putabhatta-sela  (Pal&batgala)  fraternity  and  lived  at 
Gangasiri-pura.  Dhammakitti  Sa&gharaja  was  evidently 
a  man  of  great  learning,  considered  quite  worthy,  os  later 
events  show,  of  tho  high  office  he  held  at  tho  head  of  the 
Buddhist  Church. 

Bhuvaneka-Bahu  was  succeeded  by  Farakrama-Bahu  V, 
and  the  latter  (circa  1366)  by  Vilcrama-Bahu  III.  His 
minister  was  Ntssnnka  Alakeivara,  or  Alagakkonar,  as  he  is 
often  called,  who  perhaps  forma  the  most  noteworthy  figure 
in  the  days  of  the  decline  of  the  Sinhalese  monarchy.  He 

1  NibAyatatgraha,  j>.  24. 

*  Ibid.,  p.  31,  aad  Wkkrc  tuning  be,  p.  six. 

1  Wicktemuiagbc,  JRA8.,  1800.  p.  202. 


TUB  TWIUOHT  OU)W 


241 


belonged  to  a  noble  family  in  the  hill  tribes  of  South  India,  and 
was  allied  by  marriage  to  Senalahkadhikara  Senarat  mentioned 
above.  Ho  rose  from  power  to  power ;  a  governor  of  the 
province  of  which  Pcradeniya  formed  the  capital,  he  had 
already  distinguished  himself  as  a  capable  administrator  ; 
later  in  the  reign  of  the  next  king  we  find  him  as  the  Viocroy 
of  the  Low  Country,  with  his  seat  of  government  at  Bay i-gama. 
Making  that  his  headquarters,  he  huilt  a  fortification  at 
Jayavardhana  -purs ,  so  that  he  might  attack  the  Tamils 
when  the  time  was  ripo  for  such  an  enterprise.  His  noble 
patriotism  would  not  brook  allegiance  to  a  foreigner,  and  as 
soon  as  his  plans  were  ready  he  challenged  the  authority  of 
the  Tamil  king  at  Jaffna  by  hanging  his  officers.  War  was 
immediately  declared,  and  under  the  competent  generalship 
of  Alake£vara  the  Tamil  strongholds  one  after  another  fell 
before  the  onslaught  of  the  mighty  Sinhalese  warriors.  At 
the  close  of  the  campaign  the  Tamils,  in  spite  of  the  aid  they 
had  received  from  India,  were  thoroughly  beaten,  and 
Alakcitvara,  his  triumph  complete,  was  the  hero  of  the  day. 
He  had  dored  to  cross  swords  with  the  dreaded  foe,  and,  what 
was  more,  had  won  in  the  fight.  His  achievement  fired  the 
imagination  of  his  subjects  os  no  other  event  hud  done  for 
many  a  long  year.  Panegyrics  were  sung  in  his  honour : 
"  There  flourishes  that  valiant  lion,  AlakeAvara,  very  strong 
in  breaking  open  the  frontal  knobs  of  elephants,  represented 
in  the  person  of  his  enemies,  and  ever  in  his  place  on  the 
grand,  beauteous,  golden  rock  of  Laiikii,  tho  home  of  untold 
and  fascinating  wealth."  1  Tho  Nikaya-saitgraba,  written  soon 
after  this  date,  devotes  several  pages  to  a  description  of  his 
exploits,  and  other  works  of  the  period  bear  witness  to  tho 
importance  of  tho  place  he  occupied  in  the  nation’s  esteem. 

Alakesvara  was  not  only  a  great  warrior,  but  also  a  wise 
statesman,  and  an  enlightened  ruler,  devoted  to  the  arts  of 
peace.  He  was  a  devout  Buddhist  ss  well,  and  his  attention 
was  soon  occupied  by  measures  to  be  adopted  for  thorough 
1  tfittya-aatyrota,  pp.  26  (oil. 


18 


242 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


reform  of  the  Safigha.  “  In  the  manner  of  the  cultivators  of 
paddy,  who  protect  the  corn  by  rooting  out  the  tarea  and  the 
weeds  from  amongst  the  corn  blades,”  1  he  held  a  synod  of 
the  church  and  empowered  the  pious  monks  to  inquire  into 
the  state  of  religion  in  the  land  and  disrobe  all  sinful  members 
of  the  Order.  The  work  of  holding  the  inquiry  was  entrusted 
to  the  Saftgharaja  Dhammakitti,  mentioned  above,  lineal 
representative  of  the  Vanavasi  fraternity  at  Pu(abhatta-scla, 
‘‘whose  fame  and  glory  were  spread  over  the  ten  directions, 
and  who  was  possessed  of  great  virtue  and  influence,  the 
home  and  abiding-place  of  a  mountain  of  moral  precepts.”  2 
Thus  was  tranquillity  obtained,  at  least  for  a  short  while. 

Dhammakitti  composed  a  Pali  poem  called  the  Para- 
mi-mah&-tatoka,  and  in  the  colophon  he  pays  well-deserved 
tribute  to  tho  high-mindedness  of  Nwsatika  Alakcivara  of 
Amara-giri.  The  poem  itself  consists  of  a  hundred  verses, 
divided  into  ten  sections,  dealing  with  tho  ten  Pdranti/d 
(Perfections),  which  the  Bodhisatta  had  fulfilled  before 
he  attained  Enlightenment.  The  material  for  the  poem  is 
derived  from  the  Jataka*  and  from  the  Carvja-pitaka,  and  tho 
verses  are  well-written  in  chaste  and  elegant  language.  Copies 
of  the  poem  are  rare  in  Ceylon. 

Dhammakitti  had  a  pupil  and  successor  of  the  same  name, 
who  held  the  office  of  Sa/igharnja  in  the  reigns  of  Bhuvaneka- 
Biihu  V  and  Vlra-Bahu  II  ( circa  1372-1410).  In  the  reign  of 
the  latter  king,  in  collaboration  with  his  colleague 
Galaturumula  Maitri  MaJul-TJtcra,  ho  held  a  synod  of  Buddhist 
monks,  and,  by  suppressing  unorthodox  doctrines,  is  said  to 
have  rendered  great  service  to  the  purification  of  the  religion* 
He  was  a  man  of  great  literary  achievements,  and  is  the 
celebrated  author  of  several  works  in  Pitli  and  Sinhalese.  In 
tho  colophon  of  his  own  Nikaya-ta ngraha  he  tells  us  that 
“  This  brief  history  of  tho  religion  was  composed  by  the 


1  XiUya-Miigrnlia.  p.  27. 


THE  TWTLTOHT  CLOW 


213 


learned  monk,  Devarakkhita,  known  and  renowned  over  the 
world  as  Jaya-Bahu  and  celebrated  as  the  Maha  Thera 
Dhammakitti,  who  attained  the  rank  of  SaAgharaja  and 
glorified  the  religion  A  set  of  Pali  verses  in  the  Saddharmd • 
lauk&ra 1  gives  some  more  particulars:  “Dhammakitti 
compiled  this  Saddharmalahkara.  He  was  the  atijdta  (more 
renowned)  pupil  of  Dhammakitti;  of  tho  fraternity  of 
monks  at  Putabhatta-se]a,  who  lived  in  the  reign  of 
Bhuvaneka-Bahu.  He  was  also  the  anujata  (taking  exactly 
after  his  master)  pupil  of  the  Sahgharaja  Dhammakitti 
the  author  of  Pdraml-mahd-talaka,  who  resided  at  Gadaladepi 
Vihiirn.  He  composed  the  works  Sankhepa,  Nikaya-taiigaha, 
Baldvatara,  and  Jina-bodhaval t.” 

No  information  is  available  os  to  the  nature  and  contents 
of  two  of  these  compilations,  the  SaAkhepa  and  the 
Jina-bodhavali.  The  Nikdyn-saitgraha  is  a  very  important 
work,  written  in  Sinhalese,  containing  the  history  of  Buddhism 
from  the  time  of  its  founder  to  the  twentieth  century  of  its 
existence.  It  gives  much  valuable  information  about  schisms 
in  the  Buddhist  chnrch,  and  is  an  authentio  record,  specially 
of  events  which  took  place  in  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth 
centuries,  where  the  Mahd-vatma  accounts  are  often  unreliable 
and  seem  to  want  supplementation.* 

Dhammakitti 's  Bdldvatdra  is  a  work  on  Pali  grammar, 
and  is  the  most  extensively  used  handbook  in  Ceylon  on  the 
subject.  It  is  the  smallest  grammatical  work  extant,  based 
on  the  Kaccdt/ana,  and  forms  an  extremely  good  summary 
of  tho  older  grammar.  Though  it  closely  follow*  the  Kaccdt/ana 
in  it*  method  of  treatment,  yet  the  arrangement  is  somewhat 
different.  The  book  is  divided  into  seven  chapters,  dealing 
with  Sandhi,  Noma,  Samdsa,  Taddhita,  Akhydla,  Kitaka, 
and  Kdraka  (in  two  sections  UudnuUa  and  VtbhaUi-bkeda) 
respectively.  The  section  on  Kdraka  or  syntax,  especially, 

1  The  SibiJAarmA/a* iti ru  hu  already  been  noticed  la  the  dweuaiion  of 
Veda  Ha  THera'i  Jtaaa-tdAiai,  of  which  it  is  a  translation. 

*  For  a  fuller  description  ice  Wiefacmanngho,  pp.  72-3. 


244 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


is  here  more  clearly  and  comprehensively  dealt  with  than  in 
any  other  grammar,  and  the  work  thus  forms  an  important 
addition  to  the  Sandhi-kappa  of  the  Kaccayanavtjdkarana . 
D'Alwis  says  1  that  the  author  seems  to  have  been  familiar 
with  the  Sanskrit  grammar  Laghu-Kaumudr,  as  the  arrange¬ 
ment  of  both  works  is  largely  similar.  Neither  the 
name  of  the  author  nor  the  date  of  its  compilation  is 
given  in  the  book  itself,  but  the  Saddha rmdla »i kara  colophon, 
quoted  above,  helps  us  to  fix  both  with  certainty.  The 
Mandalay  MSS.  in  the  India  Office  Library  and  the 
Gandha-vamsa  assign  its  authorship  to  Vacissara,*  but 
Forchhn miner’s  List*  agrees  with  the  Saddharmdlaukara 
colophon  in  calling  its  author  Dhammakitti.  In  1824  the  Rev. 
B.  Clough,  of  the  Wesleyan  Mission  in  Ceylon,  published  an 
English  translation,  copies  of  which  are  unobtainable  at 
present.  Later,  in  1892,  L.  Lee  published  an  English  trans¬ 
lation  with  copious  notes  in  the  Orientalist,  vol.  ii. 

The  Balavatdra  forms  the  nucleus  lot  a  cluster  of  Sinhalese 
grammatical  works  on  Pali.4  Beat  known  amongst  them  is 
the  Gadalddetpi  Sanne  (paraphrase),  so  called  because  it  was 
compiled  by  an  incumbent  of  the  Gadalidooi  Vihara,  who  is 
usually  identified  with  the  author  of  the  Balavatdra  himself.4 

It  is  a  very  large  work,  and  is  held  in  the  same  high  esteem 
as  the  original  of  which  it  forms  a  paraphrase,  adding  many 
detailed  explanations  and  examples,  so  that  the  short  aphorisms 
of  the  Balavatdra  may  be  more  thoroughly  understood. 
Another  well-known  paraphrase  is  the  Liyana-ranne  or 
Okandapala-sanne,  or  Pada-siddM-sanne,  composed  at 
Okandapala  Vihara  by  Sitinamaluv6  Dhammajoti,  pupil  of 
Saflgharija  Saraoankara,  in  the  eighteenth  century.  It 
contains  explanations  in  Sinhalese  of  the  examples  given  in 
the  Balavatdra,  chiefly  in  the  chapter  on  compounds  (samasa). 

1  Calalofut,  p.  78. 

*  F»a»boJI,  JPT3.,  lftOC,  pp.  46-6,  and  O.Y.,  p.  62. 

*  Bode,  p.  22,  footnote. 

*  Dc  Zovitt,  p.  22. 

*  /Mllraid™,  pristed  od.,  Colombo,  1866,  preface. 


THE  TWILIGHT  GLOW 


245 


In  1894  Hikkaduve  Siri  Sumafigsla  published  a  scholarly 
edition  of  the  Bdldvatdra,  complete  with  a  did  in  Pali,  which 
forma  one  of  the  moat  important  works  of  that  distinguished 
Orientalist.1 

To  Dkammakitti  is  usually  assigned  the  authorship  of 
another  important  work  in  Pali,  the  SaddMmma-iaAgaha .* 
I  cannot  agree  to  this  ascription ;  the  colophon  of  the 
S.-santfaha  is  against  it.  There  *  the  author  tells  ua : 
"  There  is  a  Thera  named  Dhammakitti,  who  Bhincs  like  the 
moon  in  Sihala  in  the  sky  of  religion,  causing  to  blossom 
by  his  rays  of  wisdom  the  lotuses,  the  people  of  Oeylon. 
He  is  a  mine  of  good  conduct  and  virtue  and  is  famed  in  the 
land  of  the  Slhalas  like  the  moon  in  the  sky ;  thoroughly 
versed  in  the  Pitakas  and  in  all  scicnocs,  a  man  of  wisdom, 
delighting  the  Island  of  Lahka.  His  pupil,  known  as  the 
Dhammakitti  Mali  foil  mi,  desirous  of  coming  to  Lahka, 
having  come  to  that  beautiful  country,  amassed  much  merit. 
After  receiving  the  higher  Ordination  of  an  Elder  he  went 
back  to  his  own  land  and  there,  having  reached  the  city  of 
Yodaya  (Ayodhya  ?),  while  living  in  the  great  abode  of 
La&karama,  built  by  the  King  named  Paramaraja,  by  him, 
Dhammakitti  Mahasami,  well  controlled  and  wise,  was  com¬ 
posed  this  Saddhamma-taAffaha,  complete  in  every  way.” 
We  are,  I  think,  right  in  conjecturing  that  the  work  belongs 
to  some  time  within  or  about  the  period  under  consideration. 
The  Dhammakitti  referred  to  a$  the  author’s  teacher4  is 
very  probably  one  of  the  two  Saftgharaja’s  mentioned  above, 
but  the  author  is  obviously  a  native  of  India  and  wrote  bis 
work  in  that  country. 

It  contains  an  account  of  Buddhism,  its  history  and 
development  in  eleven  chapters,  commencing  with  the 
history  of  the  three  convocations.  A  fourth  convocation  is 
mentioned,  it  is  interesting  to  note,  where  M&hinda  held  a  synod 

*  Colombo,  1804. 

*  Wfekret&aaiagbc,  p.  six,  and  De  Zovia.  20. 

*  JPT8.,  1890-3,  p.  90. 

4  D»  Zoj m  up  that  Dhammadinna  *u  the  teacher'*  naroo  (p.  201. 


246 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  07  CEYLON 


under  the  presidency  of  the  first  Sinhalese  Thera,  MahiriUha, 
on  which  occasion  the  latter  recited  the  Vinnya  1  with  great 
solemnity.  We  then  pass  on  to  the  reign  of  Dutugiimupu 
and  the  writing  of  the  scriptures  under  the  patronage  of 
Vajagam-abii.  The  author  gives  a  long  description  of 
Buddknghosa's  labours  and  continues  to  the  time  of 
Parakrnma-Bahu  the  Qreat,  when  the  (ikas  were  written  by 
Kas&apa  and  his  colleagues.  The  ninth  chapter  is  devoted  to 
a  notice  of  some  of  the  principal  works  then  known,  giving  the 
names  of  authors  and  their  compilations.  The  next  two 
chapters  deal  with  the  merits  that  accrue  from  setting  down 
the  Pitakaa  in  writing  and  from  listening  to  the  Doctrine. 
The  author  quotes  from  the  Kosala-Bimba-rarxiianu  the  merits 
of  making  images,  and  in  his  last  chapter  gives  several 
illustrative  stories,  some  of  which  are  from  Ceylon.  The 
work  is  partly  in  prose  and  partly  in  verse,  and  is  profusely 
interspersed  with  quotations  from  older  compilations.  The 
last  chapter  especially  is  a  sort  of  anthology  of  odds  and  ends 
of  old  verses,  of  rare  excellence  and  beauty.  The  historical 
sections,  particularly  the  chapter  (ix)  on  books  and  their 
authors,  contain  many  imperfections,*  and  the  accounts  given 
are  not  always  reliable.  Some  of  these  have  already  been 
dealt  with  ;  but  on  the  whole  they  aid  us  to  some  extent  in 
our  attempts  to  put  together  whatever  little  information  we 
have  at  present  on  the  history  of  the  religion  and  of  the 
literature  of  Ceylon.  The  fact  that  the  author  was  away  from 
Ceylon  when  he  wrote  the  work  might  possibly  account  for 
the  deficiencies  to  be  found  therein.  The  chapter  on 
Dhammanisarpaa  has  been  the  source  of  inspiration  for  several 
later-day  works  in  Sinhalese  on  the  B&rae  subject.  The 
stanxas  which  it  contains  are  frequently  quoted,  and  the 
illustrative  stories  ore  quite  well  known. 

*  JPTS.  Ed.,  p.  44. 

*  c-s-  the  AlKdtumnjtUia  iangaiui  is  attributed  to  SArijrotu  and  tho 
Sacca-tanbbepa  to  Anaoda ;  the  list  gmn  of  Dhamine  pile's  work  is 
incomplete.  The  name*  of  authors  follow  no  chronological  order. 


Tit*  TWILIGHT  GLOW 


247 


Two  other  works  which  probably  belong  to  tills  period  are 
tho  Sadku-caritodaya  and  the  An&paUi-<t\pan\.  Tbe  first  is 
a  short  work,  written  in  Pali  verse,  containing  selections  of 
stories  of  pious  Buddhists  who  obtained  merit  by  worshipping 
and  making  offerings  to  the  Buddha,  the  Oetiyos,  relics,  etc. 
The  author  gives  hiB  name  as  Sumcdlia  Thera,  of  CGtagguma 
(Ambogamuva  ?).1  The  stories  are  taken  from  various  sources, 
and  some  of  them  from  the  Rata-vahini.  Several  of  them  are. 
included  in  a  Sinhalese  didactic  poem,  LdoSda-taiigarS, 
composed  by  Vidagama  Thera,  in  the  fifteenth  century. 

The  AnapaUi-dxpani  is  a  little  tract,  very  rare,  which,  as 
its  name  implies,  discusses  cases  where  the  infringement 
of  Patiinokkha  rules  does  not  result  in  sin,  because  the  actions 
are  unintentional.  The  author  does  not  give  his  name,  but 
calls  himself  a  pupil  of  Bhuvancka-Bdliu  Thera  of  the 
Pamsu-pabbata  Vihara  in  Ceylon.  There  is  a  Bhuvaueka-Bahu 
Thera  mentioned  in  tho  Vutln-iuSla  (q.v.)  written  in  the  fifteenth 
century.  Ho  comes  in  a  list  of  Buddhist  monks  of  eminence 
whom  the  author  praises  for  their  learning  and  their  services 
to  the  cause  of  religion,  and  his  name  appears  between 
Dhammakitti  and  Sahgharaja  (possibly  the  Safigharuja 
Dhammakitti  III). 

About  tho  year  a.d.  1412  Parakrama-Bahu  VI  came  to 
the  throne.  He  was  tho  eon  of  Sunctrft  Devi  of  the  Giri-varnsa, 
and  in  hiB  earlier  years  was  befriended  by  an  Elder  named 
Vidagama  Maha  Sami ,  who  dwelt  in  a  monastery  at  Rayi-gama. 
Legend  has  cast  a  halo  round  the  youth  of  this  hero-king,  and 
many  stories  are  told  of  his  miraculous  escapes  from  death 
at  the  hands  of  the  Dictator  Alakcivara,  who  was  reigning 
at  Jayavardhana-pura  (KOtte),1  and  who  sought  to  strengthen 

*  De  Zoyas,  p.  20. 

1  Tho  hiitory  of  the  few  yean  preceding  the  acotsdon  of  Perllcratna- 
B&hu  VI  ii  &  tangled  web,  difficult  to  unravel.  Speculation  is  rife  at  to  lu» 
ancestry  and  the  identities  of  tho  Alaltc*  vsre  here  referred  to  anxl  the  Elder 
V Mi jims  MahiaArai.  Then  teornt  to  have  been  a  Chine te  invasion  of 
Ceylon  at  this  time,  after  which,  foraoveral  years  at  hast,  tbc  king  of  Ceylon 
paid  tribute  to  China.  For  further  detailed  discussion  see  JRA8.  (Ceylon 
Branch),  vol.  xxii,  Nos.  63  and  65. 


248 


THB  PALI  UTERATtTRK  OK  CBYLON 


his  position  by  extirpating  all  possjhlc  claimants  to  the  throne. 
When  he  was  sixteen  years  old,  the  prince  slew  Alake^vara 
and  was  crowned  king  at  Kotte.  His  long  and  glorious  reign, 
covering  over  half  a  century  (1412-67  ?)  was  the  brightest 
period  in  tho  national  annals  nearest  to  the  advent  of  the 
Portuguese  ;  ho  was  the  last  great  monarch  of  a  single  Lanka  ; 
and  his  reign  marks  an  epoch  in  Ceylon 'b  island  story ;  it 
was  the  last  gleam  before  the  darkness,  which  saw  the  Sinhalese 
engaged  in  a  death  struggle  for  their  independent  national 
existence,  only  to  succumb  to  the  sword  of  their  invaders 
and  bend  their  knee  in  subjection  to  foreign  domination. 

Alakdvura  had  made  of  Kotte  a  magnificent  city,  with 
stone  baths,  spacious  streets,  and  beautiful  buildings. 
P&rakrsma  embellished  it  with  fine  edifices  of  solid  bine- 
stone,  five-storied  palaces  and  temples,  shrine  rooms  and 
monasteries.  He  appointed  as  his  Safigharuja  Mahii  S&mi 
Vanaratana,  and  built  for  him  a  spacious  monastery  and  a 
large  ordination  hall  (pdyage)}  In  memory  of  his  mother  he 
built  a  magnificent  shrine  and  a  college  for  monks  os 
Pitpiliyana.  called  after  her  the  Sunetra  Devi  Parivcga.  Here, 
by  royal  command,  the  Tiptiaka  with  the  Atthakalhd  and 
(ikd  were  inscribed,  and  lands  allotted  to  the  scribes  who  were 
daily  engaged  in  the  work.  He  made  endowments  for  other 
educational  establishments  as  well,  and  we  hear  of  several 
ecclesiastical  colleges  during  this  period,  the  Pudmdvati 
Pari  vega  at  Karagala,  under  the  presidency  of  Rajaguru 
Vanaratana  Sanghordja,  the  Woodland  Cloister  (Aranyaka) 
at  Pajabatgala,  the  Vijaya-Bahu  Parivcoa  at  Totagamuva 
under  Sri  Rflhula,  the  Irugalkula  Pari  vena  at  Mulgirigala, 
the  &rl  Gunauanda  Pari  vena  at  Rayi-gama  under  the  Great 
Elder  M&ittreya  Malm  Thera  of  the  Maha  Netra  Vihara,  and 
the  Sunetra  DovI  Pnrivona,  already  mentioned,  presided 
over  by  Maftgala  Safigharija,  learned  in  the  TxpUaka.1  With 
the  help  of  hiB  foster  son.  Sapumal-kumara,  he  was  able  to 

*  RAjuvaiiya  (0*im>mAoto),  p.  68. 

*  E.  W.  Psr*»,  J&AS.  <C3-h  No.  63,  p.  18. 


THE  TWILIGHT  GLOW 


249 


drive  the  Tamils  under  Arya  Cakravarti  away  from  the  island 
and  to  consolidate  the  kingdom.  Soon  afterwards  we  find 
him  successfully  organizing  a  punitive  expedition  against  an 
insolent  Malabar  prince  of  South  India  in  retaliation  of  an 
act  of  wanton  aggression  upon  some  Sinhalese  merchants.1 
By  means  of  his  skilful  generalship,  combined  with  rare 
administrative  ability,  by  his  far-reaching  state mansliip  and 
great  genius  and  capacity  for  organization,  he  made  of  Ceylon 
once  more  a  united  island,  respected  by  her  neighbours  and 
inhabited  by  a  people  enjoying  peace  and  tranquillity  and  well- 
earned  prosperity. 

Inspired  by  this  feeling  of  security  and  contentment,  men 
again  turned  their  attention  to  the  cultivation  of  the  finer 
arts,  and  nowhere  else  do  we  see  the  benefits  of  his  mild  and 
beneficent  sway  more  than  in  the  great  literary  activity  which 
he  called  forth  among  the  people.  They  began  to  sing  of  the 
dawn  of  a  new  golden  age,  when  the  world  would  be  ruled  by 
righteousness  and  justice ;  they  loved  to  dwell  on  the 
achievements  of  the  king  and  extolled  the  beauties  of  the 
country  over  which  he  ruled  ;  they  told  of  the  splendour  of 
his  court  and  the  blessings  the  Gods  hod  showered  down  upon 
them  because  of  the  piety  of  the  rulers.  The  poems  of  Sri 
Rahula,  for  example,  glow  with  an  intense  patriotism  and  a 
deep  affection  for  the  royal  family  whose  patronage  he 
enjoyed.  It  was  an  ago  of  much  literary  productivity,  and, 
fortunately  for  us,  in  spite  of  the  Portuguese  invasion  and  the 
fanatical  vandalism  which  came  along  with  it,  much  of  that 
literature  has  come  down  to  us  undestroyed.  The  king  himself 
was  imbued  with  a  deep  scholarship  and  a  great  love  for 
culture  in  all  ita  variety.  He  possessed  a  wide  knowledge  of 
Sanskrit,  and  was  probably  much  struck  by  the  sacred  works 
of  the  Hindus  which  he  had  read.  These  arc  unmistakable 
traces  of  the  great  influence  which  Hinduism  exercised  during 
this  period,  chiefly  due  no  doubt  to  the  close  connexion  which 
existed  between  the  courts  of  Ceylon  and  South  India. 

1  Rij&vaUy*.  p-  W. 


250 


THE  PALI  LtTKRATUXR  OF  CEYLON 


Brahmans  came  thither  in  large  numbers,  and  we  find  them 
studying  under  the  monks  and  sometimes  being  converted  to 
the  Buddhist  faith.1  Temples  were  erected  in  the  capital  to 
Hindu  Qods  such  as  Natha,  Sumanu,  Vipmi,  and  Siva,  rivalling 
in  excellence  the  Buddhist  shrines.  Sri  Rahula  Sangharaja 
was  deeply  skilled  in  all  the  lore  of  the  Hindus  and  seems  to 
have  entertained  very  liberal  notions  on  the  question  of 
religion.  This  epoch  shows  in  a  marked  degree  the  compromise 
between  Hinduism  and  Buddhism  which  existed  from  very 
early  times. 

Parfikramu-Bohu  was  patron  of  a  brilliant  bond  of  men  who 
shed  the  lustre  of  their  learning  upon  this  period.  So  were  his 
daughter  Ulakudaya  Devi  and  her  husband  N&UQrutuu. 
Unfortunately,  little  is  known  about  their  lives,  except  what 
we  can  gather  from  the  records  in  their  own  workB,  and  in  the 
compilations  of  other  contemporary  writers.  The  king  was  the 
author  of  a  Sinhalese  metrical  vocabulary,  the  Ruvan-mala, 
composed  on  the  model  of  the  Amarasin/ta.  His  son-in-law 
NnllOrutun  Minisanhas  also  made  a  similar  compilation,  the 
Namawlitja,  but  not  so  complete  as  the  king’s  work.  But 
brightest  in  this  constellation  was  Sri  Rahula  Vacissara, 
Safigharfija  and  President  of  the  Vijaya-Bahu  Pariveoa  at 
Tofagamuvn,  and  probably  a  member  of  the  royal  family. 
He  belonged  to  the  UttaramClla  Nikaya,  and  tells  us  that  at 
the  age  of  15  he  received  a  boon  at  the  hands  of  the  God 
Karttikeya,  which  enabled  him  to  become  Sad-bhdyi- 
parameivara  (Master  of  six  languages),1  in  addition  to  his  own, 
Sinhalese.  All  his  works  are  in  Sinhalese,  and  he  ranks  among 
the  highest  of  the  poets  of  Ceylon.  Hw  Kdvya-ieUtara, 
appropriately  so-called  (“  Crown  of  Song  '*),  brought  him 
immortality,  and  to  this  day  he  is  regarded  as  the  chief 
exponent  of  rhymed  verse,  and  his  works  are  adopted  by  all 
Sinhalese  poets  as  their  model.  It  was  during  this  time  that  the 

*  o.g.  Sri  lUmaettndr*  Bhirtui,  Author  of  the  BhaUx-iotaba. 

*  8&la-Ukt*i  SanitAa  colophon ;  tho  *ix  lingu*gea  being  S*rjkrU, 
MAgvihi  (PilU,  Ap*Uir*ipi*,  Pniiict,  Sounaenf.  and  Tamil. 


THK  TWILIGHT  GLOW 


251 


Sinhalese  Sandesa  (message)  poem  came  to  the  forefront  as 
a  work  of  ert.  Such  a  poem,  as  its  name  im|d>es.  is  hosed  on 
Kalidasa's  Mcylta-dvta  ((loud  Messenger),  and  uabodics 
a  message  to  be  conveyed  by  some  bird  to  the  shrine  of  a 
deva,  invoking  his  blessings  on  the  king  or  on  some  mrwibcr  of 
the  royal  family,  or  imploring  the  help  of  the  divinity  for  the 
victory  of  the  royal  arms.  The  route  taken  by  such  a 
messenger-bird  is  described  in  the  poem  and  the  description 
affords  ample  opportunity  for  the  jioet  to  display  his  genius. 
Sri  Kahula  wrote  two  such  SatuUga  poems :  the  Srtfalihi»i- 
and  the  Paravi-sandesa,  and  probably  also  the  Pdriikuwbd- 
sirxtn,  a  panegyric  on  the  king.  Other  work*  ascribed  to  him 
are  the  Slnuj-aaiikara  rhedanl,  on  tho  choice  of  boundaries  for 
tho  performance  of  Upoealha  ceremonh*s,  tlio  Tnfayamu- 
nimitta,  n  work  similar  to  Napoleon's  Bonk  of  Fair,  and  the 
Calur-drya-satya-kavya,  a  religions  poem.  He  is  also  credited 
with  having  written  several  works  on  Demonology.1 

To  students  of  Pali  literature,  however,  interest  in  Sri 
Rnhulu’s  works  lie*  chiefly  in  two  very  elaborate  and  imjtortant 
treatises  which  he  wrote  on  Pali  grammar,  vix.  the  Mogyullana- 
■pafijikd-pradipa  and  tho  Pada-sadhntui-fikd. 

The  first  of  these,  the  Pafijikd-pradipn,  is  one  of  the  most 
comprehensive  works  on  Pali  grammar  extant  in  Ceylon, 
or  anywhere  clue.  It  is  written  partly  in  l’sli  and  partly  in 
Sinhalese,  and  is  a  commentary  to  the  Pnujika  written  by 
Moggallana  himself  on  the  Pali  grammar,  which  Iwars  his 
name.  The  author  of  the  Pradlpa  has  made  use  of  his  extensive 
reading  and  profound  scholarship  to  enrich  the  volume  with 
detailed  expositions  of  nil  Moggallana  s  rides.  It  bristle* 
with  references  to  and  quotations  from  numerous  Sanskrit, 
P&li,  Sinhalese,  and  Tamil  works,  many  of  which  are  no  longer 
to  be  found  in  Ceylon.  When  the  Moggallana  school  differs 
from  the  older  Kuce&ynnn  and  his  commentators,  Sri  Itnhula 
examines  their  claims  to  accuracy,  and  the  conclusions  ho 

*  Hash  No  Till'*  MS.  Catalog**  »“d  J&A3.  (C.B.),  pattern. 


262 


THK  PAU  LITERATURE  OF  CBYLOM 


Arrives  at  show  a  great  deal  of  critical  acumen,  unhampered 
by  tradition  and  free  from  prejudices. 

SubhQti,  in  his  Ndma-mala,'  has  drawn  up  a  list  of  the  works 
quoted  by  Rahula,  which  I  give  below,  becuuse  of  it*  interest 
in  enabling  us  to  know  at  least  the  names  of  some  of  the 
works  studied  during  this  period.  SubhQti’s  list  includes  : 
Kaccdyana,Nydta,Nyd*(i-pra<Rpa,Niruili-md)ljusd,Rupa-nddh% 

and  its  tonne-  (paraphrase)  and  gUtapada  (glossary),  BdldvalSra 
aud  tanne  jSadda-niti,Cula-ninUli ,  N  irutti-pUaka,  SuUa-niddesa, 
Sambandha-cinta,  Pada-tadhana  and  tanne,  Panjikd-Gkd, 
Payoga-tiddhi ,  Dik-saiigt-tikd  (Ctka  on  the  Digha-Nikfiya), 
Bhctajja-mafljuta  and  tanne,  Abhidhdna-ppadipikd,  Candra- 
vyd-katana,  Mahd-bhdjya,  Bhdpja-pradipa,  Laghu-vpli, 
Durgatimha  ■  vjtti  -  pafljikd,  Paftjikdlaukaro,  Kdtantra, 
Sabddrtha-cinid,  Sdrasvata,  Kaiika,  Kaiik&-vfUi,  Vdrlikd, 
Bh&gavitti,  Sdra-sangraha,  PaddwUara,  Sndhara,  VaijayarUl, 
Abhidharma-kofa,  Prdkrla-prak&ia,  Veda,  Ramayana,  Bahaia, 
Bharala-i&tlra,  Amara-kofa,  Medirii-kofa,  Jdlaka-sanne, 
Umanda-gdlapada,  Ratana-sutta-gtUapada,  Dctmla-jdlaka- 
gOtapada,  and  Virita-tannc.  This  list  gives  some  idea  of  the 
vast  amount  of  trouble  which  the  author  must  have  spent  in 
the  production  of  his  voluminous  work,  and  the  result  has 
been  a  compilation  in  every  way  worthy  of  the  active  intellect 
of  Sri  Rahula. 

For  many  years  the  work  had  been  sadly  neglected  for  want 
of  authentic  copies,  and,  when  the  late  Siri  Dhammarama, 
Principal  of  the  Vidyalankara  Pari  vena,  Colombo,  brought 
out  his  scholarly  edition  in  1896,  he  thereby  did  a  distinct 
service  to  Pali  learning  in  Ceylon. 

Sri  Rahula's  other  grammatical  work,  the  Pada-tadhana 
(ika,  is,  os  it*  name  implies,  a  commentary  on  Piyadassi’s 
Pada-tadhana.  The  (ikd  js  also  called  Buddhi-ppasadant,  and 
oopies  of  it  are  very  rare  in  Ceylon,  the  work  having  been,  in 
fact,  unknown  to  Pali  scholars  for  many  years  until  De  Zoysa, 
in  1873,  discovered  a  MS.  in  the  RidI  Vihara.*  The 

>  Subhdti.  jVdmo-trwUd,  Colombo,  167C. 

'  IV  ZoyM,  Calaiof**,  p.  SO, 


THE  TWILIGHT  GLOW 


253 


BuddJti-ppasddahi  was  evidently  a  production  of  the  latter 
part  of  Rahula’s  life,  because  here  he  call*  himself  Safigharaja, 
while  in  the  other  works  his  name  is  mentioned  only  a*  the 
Head  of  the  Vipyabaliu  Pari  vena.  The  work  suffers  very 
much  by  comparison  with  hia  masterpiece,  the  Paficiki- 
pradlpa,  and  that  may  have  been  the  reason  for  ita  having 
gradually  fallen  into  disuse  at  the  bands  of  Pali  students— 
the  greater  light  had  dimmed  the  less,  and  made  it  hide  its 
head  in  shame. 

Other  authors  who  lived  during  this  period  or  slightly 
posterior  to  it  and  composed  work  in  Sinhalese,  besides  those 
mentioned  above,  are  the  President  of  the  Irugalkula  Parri  cna 
at  Mulgirigala,  author  of  the  Kovul-tandesa  ;  V&itlva  7  hero, 
author  of  the  GuUUa-jaiakaya ;  the  anonymous  writers  of  the 
Gira-tandeta  and  Titara-sandesa — both  evidently  poets  of 
Jayavardhana-pura  (Kotte>— on  anonymous  pupil  of  fsri 
Maitri  Mahasami  of  Rayi-gama,  who  made  a  Sinhalese  para¬ 
phrase  of  the  AUanarjalu-vantta  at  the  king  s  request , 
Dhamraadinna  Vimalakitti  Thera  (also  called  Siddhattha), 
author  of  the  Saddharma-ratndkara  ;  Mahi-Netra-prasada- 
mflla-VJdagama  Thera,  a  monk  renowned  for  his  piety,  and  a 
poet  in  the  excellence  of  his  composition  almost  equal  to  Sri 
Rahula,  and  author  of  the  Budu-yun&laxkara  (a  poem  in 
praise  of  the  Buddha,  composed  in  2016  of  the  Buddhist  Era), 
the  didactic  poem  LduJda-sa u gard,  and  of  the  K ivilakunumini- 
■m&la,  a  treatise  on  Sinhalese  proaody  ;  and  Ranasgalli 
Thera  of  Totagamuvihara,  author  of  an  ethical  poem,  the 
Lokdpakdraya.1 

To  the  Pali  compilations  of  this  time  belongs  the 
Vidta-m&la — or,  to  give  it  it*  full  name— the  Vuita-mala- 
sandera-sataka ,  a  Pali  poem  of  102  stanzas  in  various  ctegant 
metres,  composed  by  a  monk  named  Gatari  Parivena 
Upatapa*si.  In  the  colophon  the  author  calls  himself  the 
nephew  of  Sarasi-gama-MOla-Maha-SAmi,  incumbent  of 

»  For  farther  description  of  these  writ*™  usd  U*lr  works  so* 
Wlckismssioftbs  s  Calalofu*.  pMtm. 


254 


THE  rA.Lt  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


the  Jiti-gama  Monastery  (Sarati-gfivia-mtila-mahd-aamitio 
bhagineyya-bhuicna  raataynm ) . 

The  Sarasi-fjdma-tndla  is  the  Sinhalese  Vtlgant-mGl/t,  the 
Kttyarn  being  Serucdtrila,  the  modern  Thopur.  The  author, 
therefore,  undoubtedly  belonged  to  the  Saro-giima  fraternity, 
which  counted  many  scholars  of  repute  amongst  its  members. 
The  work  was  evidently  composed  in  the  reign  of  Parakrama- 
Bihu  VI  (1415— <57  1),  for  the  writer  first  describes  the  beauty 
of  a  city  styled  Jati-giima,1  and  then  extols  King  Pnrikrama 
and  his  mother  Sunetra  Dcvf.  This  is  followed  by  a  description 
of  the  chief  Buddhist  monastery,  and  encomiums  on  several 
monks,  all  of  whom  arc  scholars  and  probably  belong  to  the 
same  Acariya-parampara  as  the  author.  The  monks  so  lauded 
are :  (1)  Upalantara-mGla-Thcra  (Solantaru*  or  Galaturu- 
mula) ;  (2)  Scnapati-mfda- ;  (3)  Malta  Nctta-passda-milla- ; 
(4)  Saro-gama-mOla  ;  (5)  Vanaratna- ;  (6)  Dhammnkitti- ; 
(7)  Bhuvancka-Bahu  Thera  (probably  the  teacher  of  the 
author  of  the  AnapaUi-dxpani) ;  (8)  the  Sangha-raja  or 
Primate  of  tho  time;  und  (9)  Gatora-upatapassi -Thera , 
pupil  of  the  Sangha-raja  who,  both  Nevill  and  Wickremosinghc 
think,  is  probably  identical  with  the  author  himself.  Nevill 
takes  Upatapassi  to  mean  the  same  as  Anu-N&yaka. 

These  laudatory  verses  are  followed  by  a  description  of 
Kalaniya  and  its  presiding  deity  Viblujana,  whose  blessings 
the  author  asks  for  Parakrama  and  his  kingdom.  The 
Vutta-maJa  is  supposed  to  have  been  composed  for  tho  purpose 
of  teaching  students  the  right  pronunciation  of  sounds  and 
the  proper  modulation  of  the  voice  in  reciting  verse  ,*  and,  as 
such,  is  largely  used  in  temple  schools.  There  exists  an  inter* 
verbal  paraphrase  in  Sinhalese  by  an  anonymous  writer,  who 
perhaps  is  identical  with  the  author  of  the  poem  itself.  Both 
the  poem  and  the  paraphrase  have  been  published.1 

1  Probably  Dcdtguna  in  BeligaLKoralc,  though  the  king  is  not  known  to 
hat's  reigned  there.  See  Bell  i  ArtJkaological  lleyjrt  on  Iht  KtgniU  Vittrict, 
C>[x.  81-6. 

*  D’Atvis,  Sidat~m*gaTli,  p.  226. 

•  Colombo.  1871-06. 


THK  TWIMOHT  OUIW 


255 


Wiekrcmasinghe  assigns  to  this  period  the  Sinhalese 
Dkatu-vatnaa.1  The  author,  iu  tbo  last  strophe  to  hiB  work,  gives 
his  name  os  the  Thera  Kakusandha,  but  no  further  particulars 
are  available  about  him,  nor  does  he  say  whether  the 
Sinhalese  version  is  an  original  composition  or  a  translation 
from  the  F&li.  I  am  inclined,  however,  to  agree  with 
Profeasor  Qeiger  *  in  considering  that  the  Dkftu-vainta  is 
only  a  Sinhalese  translation  like  the  Ma/ta-Bodhi-mtnta  and 
the  Tkupa-vatrua,  and  that  its  Pali  counterpart,  to  which, 
curiously  enough,  is  given  the  fuller  title  of  the  Laldta-  (or 
Naiala-)  dhafu-vamsa -,  or  simply  the  lM]aia-vamsa,  is  an  older 
compilation.  The  author  of  the  Pali  work  and  ils  date  arc 
unknown,1  and  copies  of  it  are  difficult  to  obtain.  There  seems 
to  have  been  a  commentary  on  it,  called  the  Txtldfa-dhatu- 
eanua-ratitiana,  but  I  do  not  know  of  any  copies  of  it  extant 
in  Ceylon.  Rhys  Davids  tells  us  that  the  Biblioth£que 
Nutionalc  at  Paris  jHissessea  a  copy  written  on  twenty-seven 
ola- leaves. 4  The  La jul'i  dhalu-xxunM  is  a  history,  in  live 
chapters,  of  the  frontal  bone  relic  of  the  Buddha.  It  is  a  work, 
undoubtedly,  of  great  antiquity,  and  evidently  belongs  to  the 
cycle  of  sagas  and  legends  of  Roliana  and  Malaya.  It  there¬ 
fore  contains  many  popular  traditions  not  found  elsewhere, 
especially  grouped  round  the  family  and  the  contcmiiorarics 
of  the  KikavatwA-Tissa,  father  of  Dutugamupu.  The  work  was 
unknown  to  the  authors  of  the  Mahd-vamsa  and  its  fika, 
for  wo  find  no  reference  to  it  in  their  compilations.  It  follows 
the  general  outline  of  all  vamsa  books  in  its  mode  of  treatment, 
beginning  with  Dipankara,  and  passing  on  to  the  three  visits 
of  the  Buddha,  the  ParinibbunA,  and  the  distribution  of  tho 
relics.  The  third  chapter  gives  the  history  of  the  frontal  bone 
relic,  from  the  time  of  its  falling  to  the  share  of  the  Mallos 
at  the  distribution  to  its  arrival  in  Ceylon  when  Mahaniiga 
reigned  in  Mahd-gama.  It  was  first  honoured  by  a  wealthy 

*  p.  XX. 

1  Dipa  zam/a  and  ilaSA-vamw,  p.  01. 

'  The  Q.  F.,  p.  62,  mentions  the  A’aJdte-dMi*  ra«  n<5,  but  give*  no  author. 

•  JR  A3.,  HS..  roJ.  vii.  p.  in. 


256 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  07  CEYLON 


man  named  Mahakala,  and  then,  later,  by  tho  king,  when  he 
heard  of  it.  It  seemed  to  have  remained  for  ft  long  time  in  the 
hands  of  the  Rohajja  princes  who  did  honour  to  it  in  succession. 
The  last  two  chapters  contain  acoounts  of  Kukavapua-Tissa’s 
family,  the  history  of  tho  erection  of  a  special  Diigoha  at 
Seruvila  for  the  reception  of  the  relic  and  its  dedication  and 
the  enshrinement  of  the  relics.  The  accounts  in  these  two 
chapters  were  undoubtedly  derived  from  popular  sources 
and  local  traditions,  and  were,  therefore,  unknown  to  the 
Maha-van\sa  author,  else  he  surely  would  have  made  mention 
of  them.  The  descriptions  of  the  erection  of  the  d&goba,  etc., 
are  entirely  based  on  the  Maha-vamsn,  and  follow  them  almost 
word  for  word.  The  similarity  of  treatment  between  the 
Laldla-txunsa  and  the  Maha-Bodhi-vanua  leads  me  to  assign 
both  works  to  the  same  period  of  Pali  literature,  namely  to 
the  tenth  or  the  eleventh  century  a.d. 

The  Sinhalese  version  of  Kakusandha  is  more  or  loss  a 
translation  of  the  Puli,  but  contains  several  details  not  found 
in  the  Pali  compilation,  e.g.  in  the  description  of  the  third 
visit  of  tho  Buddha  to  Oeylon.1  The  Sinhalese  work  has 
already  been  published  in  Ceylon,  edited  by  Gintota 
Dhammakkhanda  (DodandOva,  1890),  and  I  understand  that 
tho  Pali  version  is  in  course  of  publication. 

It  was  about  this  time,  in  the  reign  of  King  Bhuvancka- 
Bahu  VI  (a.d.  1464-71 1)  that  Dharamaccti,  or  R&modhipati, 
King  of  Pegu,  brought  about  a  great  religious  revival  in  his 
own  land.  Dhammaceti  reigned  from  1460-91,*  and  his 
regime  was  a  memorable  on©  for  Burma.  His  fame  for  wise 
statesmanship  and  munificence  has  spread  fAr  beyond  the 
confines  of  his  own  country,  and  he  is  renowned  throughout 
the  Buddhist  world  for  his  extreme  piety.  He  was  an  ex-monk, 
and  for  some  time  was  the  minister  ol  the  famous 
Queen  Shin-«au-bu.  Later  he  became  her  son-in-law  and 
successor.  He  was  not  only  a  high-minded  monarch  and  a 

1  Foe  fuller  description  see  Geigtr,  op.  dL,  pp.  91-3. 

*  Fhtyn,  liitiory  of  Burma,  p. 


THE  TWILIGHT  Cl  LOW 


257 


protector  of  the  Order  he  had  quitted,  but  was  an  enthusiastic 
reformer  as  well.  Emulating  the  example  of  such  kings  as 
Asoka  and  Farnkr&ma-Bahu,  he  made  the  purity  of  Buddhism 
ono  of  the  objects  of  his  earnest  solicitude.  Diming  the  four 
centuries  that  preceded  his  accession,  Burma  bad  scarcely 
enjoyed  peace  for  any  length  of  time,  and  matters  pertaining 
to  religion  had  been  greatly  neglected.  He  found  that,  because 
of  the  violent  political  convulsions  which  the  country  had 
suffered,  the  succession  of  teachers  (T hera-vSda-parampara) 
had  been  interrupted  in  Raman 5a.  In  order,  therefore,  to 
secure  for  the  Burmese  monks  direct  continuity  of  apostolic 
succession  from  the  spiritual  descendants  of  Maliinda,  and  also 
to  establish  for  the  monks  of  Ramafina  a  duly  consecrated 
place  for  the  performance  of  their  ecclesiastical  cere  monies, 
he  sent  a  mission  to  Ceylon,  consisting  of  two  ministers  and 
twenty -two  monks  and  their  pupils,  with  costly  presents  to  the 
king  of  Ceylon  and  the  chief  monks  and  with  a  letter  inscribed 
on  a  tablet  of  gold.  They  were  welcomed  with  every  mark  of 
friendship  and  civility,  and  their  request  was  granted.  They 
received  their  vpeuampadd  ordination  at  the  hands  of  the 
Mahavihara  fraternity  within  the  consecrated  boundaries 
(litnd)  of  the  Kajyaoi  river,  near  Colombo.  On  their  return 
they  consecrated  the  enclosure  in  Pegu,  henceforth  known 
as  Kalyani-simi.  Dhammaceti,  in  the  celebrated  Ka|yai)i 
inscriptions  at  Zaingganaing,  near  Pegu,  set  forth  in  detail 
the  account  of  this  mission  and  laid  down  for  the  use  of  future 
generations  the  proper  ceremonial  of  oonsccrating  a  Sima 
The  stone  slabs  containing  the  inscriptions  were  broken  up 
by  the  vandalism  of  Portuguese  adventurers,  but  have  later 
been  restored  to  somo  extent.  The  records  in  the  inscriptions 
had  been  compiled  in  book  form,  copies  of  which  are  to  bo 
met  with  in  many  of  the  monasteries  in  Ceylon — especially 
those  belonging  to  the  Amara-pum  Sect,  under  the  title  of 
“  Kajyioi-ppakaraoa  ”•  One  point  of  literary  interest  in  the 
Kalyani-ppakaraoa  lies  in  the  mention  made  in  it  of  the 

standard  authorities  on  Vinaya  subjects  at  the  time,  such 

17 


258 


the  PALI  LIT  ERA  TURK  OK  CEYLON 


as  the  VinnyatihoJuitha,  Sarattha-dipani,  Vimali-vtnodani, 
Vinaya-mnicchaya,  Yinaya-*ahtjaha,  Simalankttra-tafigaha, 
and  Vajirabuddhi  (Ved,  practically  all  of  them  of  Sinhalese 
authorship-1  The  Kalyaui-ppakaraon  ia  noteworthy  because 
of  ita  significance  in  showing  us  to  what  degree  a  religious 
superiority  over  the  rest  of  the  community  was  claimed  by 
those  who  had  received  their  ordination  direct  from  the  monks 
of  Ceylon.  In  spite  of  the  many  vicissitudes  which  the  Safigha 
in  Ceylon  had  passed  through  in  their  chequered  career  their 
claim  to  be  the  guardians  of  the  genuine  Thera-vada  was  still 
recognised  in  the  fifteenth  century. 

»  For  more  information  »bcral  the  Kaly*i>t  Inoonptiooi  too  PnUmimry 
Study  by  T*»  Sc  in  Ko  ia  tbc  Indian  Antiquary,  vol.  xxii. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

Thb  Dark  Aoe 

^pHE  two  centuries  following  the  death  of  Parakr&mn- 
Bahu  VI  constitute  the  darkest  chapter  in  the  history 
of  Ceylon.  The  political  condition  of  the  country  was  at 
its  lowest  ebb,  the  whole  of  the  sea  coast  was  virtually  in  the 
hands  of  foreigners,  chiefly  Moors ;  the  interior  regions, 
including  the  remains  of  the  ancient  capitals,  woro  divided 
into  &  number  of  petty  fiefs  uncontrolled  by  any  paramount 
central  authority  and  governed  by  chieftains  holding  mimic 
courts  at  various  centres.  These  petty  tyrauta,  even  more 
degenerate  in  their  character  than  they  were  humiliated  in 
station,  no  longer  manifested  the  patriotism  and  the  zeal  for 
the  public  welfare  which  had  bo  significantly  characterized 
the  former  sovereigns  of  Ceylon.  They  had  ceased  to  occupy 
their  attention  with  the  advancement  of  religion  or  with  the 
development  of  institutions  calculated  to  benefit  the  people. 
The  history  of  the  period  contains  very  little  besides  accounts 
of  their  feuda  and  jealousies,  their  ceaseless  intrigues  and 
insurrections.  Even  the  food  supply  of  tho  country,  to  the 
maintenance  of  which  the  earlier  and  more  enlightened 
princes  had  devoted  the  greater  part  of  their  energies,  had 
now  failed,  and  Ceylon  bad  become  dependent  on  India  for 
the  very  necessaries  of  life.  Such  was  the  sad  plight  of  the 
country  when,  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century, 
in  tho  course  of  their  discoveries  and  conquests  in  the  East, 
and  in  the  pursuit  of  their  Eastern  trade,  the  Portuguese 
came  upon  Ceylon.1  Dhanna  Parakrama  IX  was  then  reigning 
at  Kotte,  a  weak  and  irresolute  prince,  at  the  head  of  an 
insignificantly  small  extent  of  territory.  By  promising  him 
military  aid  against  any  assaults  by  his  ambitious  relatives, 
and  by  holding  out  to  him  hopes  of  great  riches  to  bo  derived 

1  For  further  portico Wn  of  tho  Portuguese  period  in  Coylo®  sec  Emerson 
Torment.  Cojrfoa,  yoj.  U,  chop.  1.  and  thot  excellent  book,  Pierin,  Ceylon 
and  U Is  PortuyvtM  (1920),  piurim. 


260 


the  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


from  the  trade  which  they  proposed  to  establish,  the 
Portuguese  first  gained  a  foothold  in  Colombo  and  erected  a 
fortress  on  the  rocky  beach.  Onoc  their  guns  were  thus  set 
up,  and  their  formidable  galleons  had  found  shelter  in  the 
adjoining  natural  harbour,  they  were  able  to  overawe  the 
Sinhalese  king,  whose  capital  now  lay  almost  within  range  of 
the  Portuguese  cannon.  On  the  other  hand,  his  own  subjects, 
dissatisfied  with  the  favour  he  had  extended  to  the  foreigners, 
threatened  him  with  revolt  and  invasion.  The  Portuguese, 
with  characteristic  duplicity,  persevered  in  maintaining  an 
internecine  warfare  in  the  country,  which  enabled  them  at  last 
to  make  the  king  their  vassal,  and,  finding  him  incapable  of 
refusing  any  of  their  arrogant  demands,  they  wrung  from  him 
every  sort  of  concession.  Within  a  short  time  after  their 
arrival  they  had  established  permanent  trading  settlements 
in  various  parts  of  the  island,  and  for  one  hundred  and  fifty 
years,  till  they  were  driven  away  by  the  Dutch,  they  carried  on 
a  ceaseless  warfare  against  the  Sinhalese  people,  who  were 
now  perforce  compelled  to  abandon  the  maritime  provinces 
to  the  hated  foreigner.  The  capital  of  the  Sinhalese  king  was 
kept  in  a  state  of  almost  incessant  siege  ;  to  the  minor  chiefs 
who  owed  him  allegiance  were  held  out  every  inducement  to 
break  themselves  ofi  from  their  rightful  sovereign ;  it  was 
part  of  the  Portuguese  policy  to  inflame  their  apprehensions 
one  against  the  other,  and  excite  their  jealousy.  Thus  for 
many  years  the  maritime  provinces  were  devastated  by  civil 
war  in  its  most  revolting  form.  By  A  D.  1640  their  treachery 
had  so  far  succeeded  in  estranging  the  Sinhalese  monarch 
from  the  sympathies  of  his  own  countrymen,  that  he  found 
himself  now  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  his  foreign  allies  and 
appealed  to  them  to  ensure  the  succession  of  his  family  to  the 
throne.  To  give  solemnity  to  their  acquiescence,  an  image  of 
liiB  grandson,  Dharmap&la— who  was  the  only  male  repre¬ 
sentative  of  the  royal  household— was  made  of  ivory  and  gold 
and  silver,  and  this  statue  was  dispatched,  with  a  jewelled 
crown  studded  with  Ceylon’s  finest  gems,  to  Lisbon,  where  a 


THE  DARK  AOK 


261 


coronation  of  the  effigy  was  held  by  the  Portuguese  Emperor. 
In  return  for  this  recognition  of  Dhormapula  as  heir  to  the 
Sinhalese  kingdom,  the  prince  himself  eventually  abjured  the 
national  faith  and  professed  himself  a  baptized  convert  to 
Christianity  under  the  name  of  Dom  Joss  Periya  Bandar*. 
The  King  of  Portugal,  who  was  a  pronounced  fanatic, 
controlled  by  peculiarly  aggressive  ecclesiastical  advisers, 
exacted  a  further  concession.  A  party  of  Franciscans  accom¬ 
panied  the  Sinhalese  ambassadors  back  to  Colombo  from 
Lisbon,  licence  was  claimed  to  preach  the  Gospel  of  Christ 
in  all  parts  of  the  island,  and  the  first  Christian  communities 
were  organized  in  various  places  in  the  maritime  district*.1 
Thm  began  the  gradual  destruction  of  Buddhism,  the  “  only 
organization  which  existed  for  the  spiritual  and  intellectual 
education  of  the  people  Meanwhile  the  Portuguese  had 
been  busy  extending  their  power  os  far  inland  as  possible ; 
and  by  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  the  territory 
under  their  direct  government  embraced  the  whole  of  the 
maritime  circuit  of  the  island,  including  tho  Peninsula  of 
Jaffna,  and  extended  inland  right  up  to  the  base  of  the  lofty 
zone  which  encircled  tho  little  kingdom  of  Kandy.* 

Every  stage  of  their  progress  was  marked  by  a  rapacity, 
bigotry,  cruelty,  and  an  inhumanity  unparalleled  in  the  annals 
of  any  other  European  colonial  power.  Their  ferocity  and  their 
utter  indifference  to  all  suffering  increased  with  the  success 
of  their  army  ;  their  inhuman  barbarities  were  accompanied 
by  a  callousness  which  knew  no  distinction  between  man, 
woman,  and  child;  no  feeling  of  compassion  was  strong 
enough  to  stay  their  savage  hands  in  their  fell  work.  To 
terrify  their  subjects  and  to  bring  home  to  them  the  might  of 
the  Portuguese  power,  they  committed  atrocities  which,  had 
they  not  been  found  recorded  in  the  decades  of  their  own 
friendly  historians,  seem  too  revolting  to  be  true.  Babes  wore 

•  Tnnnent,  CkriMianily  »'•  Cttfon.  ohap.  t 

*  Pinria,  op.  cit ,  p.  7S. 

»  Tonnent,  Ccyfow,  toL  ii.  p.  $6. 


262 


THE  pa U  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


spitted  on  the  soldiers’  pikes  and  held  up  that  their  parents 
might  “  hear  the  young  cocks  crow  ”,  Sometimes  they  were 
mashed  to  pulp  between  millstones,  while  their  mothers  were 
compelled  to  witness  the  pitiful  Bight  before  they  themselves 
were  tortured  to  death.  Men  were  thrown  over  bridges  for  the 
amusement  of  the  troops  to  feed  the  crocodiles  in  the  river, 
which  eventually  grew  so  tame  that  at  a  wliiatle  they  would 
raise  their  heads  above  the  water  in  anticipation  of  the  welcome 
feast.1  The  officials  who  acted  as  administrators  had  almost 
absolute  power,  and  the  people  were  ground  down  by 
oppressive  taxation,  and  laws  of  terrible  severity.  The 
Sinhalese  who  remained  loyal  to  their  rightful  sovereign  were 
deprived  of  all  their  possessions,  if  they  escaped  with  their 
lives,  and  refugees  who  by  necessity  or  by  choice  joined  the 
Portuguese  ranks  were  received  with  open  arms ;  wealth 
and  rank  and  lands  were  conferred  on  them,  and  they  were 
placed  in  positions  of  command  over  the  rest.  They  thus 
obtained  an  undesirable  influence  over  their  countrymen,  who 
became  only  too  ready  to  rise  in  revolt  at  the  bidding  of  every 
renegade.  The  success  of  any  one  chieftain  only  served  to 
arouse  intense  jealousy  among  his  fellows ;  war  to  them  was 
only  an  excuse  for  peculation  ;  they  were  guilty  of  all  manner 
of  excesses,  abuse  of  authority  and  exactions.  The  tenants  of 
village  lands  were  so  oppressed  that  they  were  frequently 
obliged  to  sell  their  children  to  procure  the  necessaries  of  life. 
The  Portuguese  officials  themselves  were  never  better  than 
brigands,  bent  on  their  own  aggrandisement  during  their 
tenure  of  office,  and  their  administration  was  a  colossal  failure. 
The  whole  of  the  country  under  their  control  suffered  from 
their  cruel  oppression ;  whatever  produce  their  soil  was  made 
to  yield  was  misappropriated ;  the  kingdom  was  thus 
depopulated,  and  the  lands  moetlv  left  uncultivated  ;  the 
Sinhalese  were  left  entirely  disorganized  and  decadent, 
without  a  proper  king  and  without  leaders  of  ability.  But 

1  Farit  Y  Souza,  Alia  Pori*gwua  (LUbon,  1680-78),  BUnni'  tranzlatioo, 
▼ol.  iii,  pt.  iii.  chip.  x»,  p.  ire. 


THE  DARK  AGE 


263 


worse  than  these  were  the  results  of  the  measures  tho 
Portuguese  adopted  to  destroy  the  national  religion  of  Ceylon. 

Dom  Joao  HI,  who  was  Emperor  of  Portugal  at  this  time, 
was  a  staunch  supporter  of  the  church,  fanatical  in  his  seal 
for  the  conversion  of  hi8  heathen  subjects.  The  Church 
itself  was  in  a  particularly  aggressive  mood.  In  1534  Ignatius 
of  Loyola  had  founded  the  Society  of  Jesus  at  Paris,  and  two 
years  later  the  Inquisition  was  established.  The  first  Auto  da 
Ft  was  held  in  Portugal,  presided  over  by  the  king,  in  the 
very  year  when  Bhuvaneka-Bahu  had  sent  the  effigy  of  his 
grandson  to  be  crowned  at  Lisbon.  When  Bhuvaneka-Biliu’s 
application  for  recognition  of  Dharmapala  as  heir  to  the 
Sinhalese  throne  was  granted,  one  of  the  conditions  laid  down 
was,  as  we  saw  above,  that  permission  should  be  given  to 
preach  the  Christian  gospel  anywhere  in  the  Sinhalese  king’s 
dominions.  A  band  of  Franciscan  monks  accompanied  the 
Ceylon  ambassadors  on  their  return  from  Lisbon  to  Colombo. 
They  immediately  set  about  their  work  of  converting  tho 
Sinhalese,  who  had  so  far  found  consolation  in  Buddhism. 
.The  Portuguese  had  as  their  ostensible  motto  "  Amity, 
Commerce,  and  Religion  ”,  and  nowhere  were  they  more  zealous 
than  in  the  propagation  of  the  gospel.  Their  instructions  were 
**  to  begin  by  preaching,  but,  that  failing,  to  proceed  to  the 
decision  of  the  sword  ”.1  In  1546  the  King  of  Portugal  sent 
a  remarkable  letter  to  his  Viceroy  in  India :  “  We  charge 
you  to  discover  all  idols  by  means  of  diligent  officers,  to  reduce 
them  to  fragments  and  utterly  to  consume  them,  in  whutever 
place  they  may  be  found,  proclaiming  rigorous  penalties 
against  such  persons  as  shall  dare  to  engrave,  cast,  sculpture, 
limn,  paint,  or  bring  to  light  any  figure  in  metal,  bronze, 
wood,  clay,  or  any  other  substance,  or  shall  introduce  them 
from  foreign  parts ;  and  against  those  who  shall  celebrate 
in  public  or  in  private  any  festivities  which  have  any  Gentile 
taint,  or  shall  abet  them  ...”  *  His  instructions  were  carried 

»  Faria  V  Souia,  op.  cit..  roL  i,  pt  i.  oh.  ▼,  p.  53. 

*  Fieri*,  op.  cit.,  p.  53. 


264 


T1IK  PALI  LITERATURE  07  CEYLON 


out  to  the  very  letter.  Whosoever  dared  to  interfere  with  the 
work  of  proselytize tion,  action  was  to  be  taken  against  him  with¬ 
out  delay,  so  that  the  displeasure  of  the  Emperor  of  Portugal 
upon  those  who  had  the  impudenoc  to  hinder  the  conversion 
of  the  heathen  might  be  inode  plain  to  all.  The  success  of 
the  Franciscans  reached  its  climax  when  Dharmapala  was 
baptized  as  a  Christian  along  with  his  queen,  who  took  the 
name  of  Donna  Catcrina,  after  the  Queen  of  Portugal.  Even 
the  Pope  found  time  to  send  the  royal  convert  hi*  Apostolic 
benediction,  and  to  recommend  him  to  the  special  protection 
of  the  King  of  Portugal.1  Dlmrmapala’s  thank-o Soring  to 
the  missionaries  who  had  led  him  from  out  of  the  darkness  into 
the  light  was  a  tannas  (deed  of  gift)  transferring  to  them  the 
Da|ada  Maligava  (the  holiest  possession  of  the  Ceylon  kings), 
the  two  great  shrines  at  K&]apiya,  and  all  the  temple  revenues 
in  the  island  for  the  maintenance  of  the  missionary  establish¬ 
ments.  The  strongest  inducements  were  held  out  to  the 
people  to  embrace  the  new  religion ;  no  office  could  be  held 
by  anyone  who  did  not  profess  Christianity,  and  all  civil 
rights  were  denied  to  the  heathen.  In  the  letter  of  the  King> 
of  Portugal  to  the  Viceroy  mentioned  above,  he  had  added  : 
"And,  because  the  Gentiles  submit  themselves  to  the  yoke  of 
the  Gospel,  not  alone  through  their  conviction  of  the  purity 
of  the  Faith  and  for  that  they  are  sustained  by  the  hope  of 
Eternal  Life,  they  should  also  be  encouraged  to  with  some 
temporal  favours,  such  os  greatly  mollify  the  hearts  of  those 
who  receive  them ;  and  therefore  you  should  earnestly  set 
yourself  to  see  that  the  new  Christians  from  this  time  forward 
do  obtain  and  enjoy  all  exemptions  and  freedom  from  tribute, 
and  moreover  that  they  hold  the  privileges  and  offices  of 
honour  which  up  till  now  the  Gentiles  have  been  wont  to 
possess.’’ 1  This  appeal  to  the  baser  side  of  human  nature 
was  eminently  successful;  it  became  the  fashion  to  profess 
Christianity ;  the  example  set  by  the  King  Dharmapala 

1  Fieri*.  op.  elt,,  p.  T7. 

•  Ibid.,  pp.  OS-9. 


TOE  DARK  AGE 


265 


wa»  toon  token  up  ;  biblical  names  began  to  abound  in  the 
Sinhalese  Coprt  and  outside  it,  while  the  language  and  manners 
of  the  Portuguese  were  rapidly  adopted  by  those  who  wished 
to  earn  the  goodwill  of  those  in  power.  When  the  Portuguese 
gradually  gained  complete  ascendancy  over  the  country  below 
the  Kandyan  Hills,  they  replaced  the  gentler  mean*  of 
persuasion,  inducement,  temptation,  and  blandishments  by 
more  rigorous  methods.  The  missionaries  now  applied  them¬ 
selves  with  reckless  ardour  to  the  task  of  pulling  down  the 
structure  which  it  had  taken  twenty  centuries  to  build.  “  The 
missionary  could  see  in  Buddhism  nothing  but  the  abhorrent 
creation  of  the  devil ;  ho  did  not  stop  to  inquire  what  were  the 
principles  which  were  taught  by  its  sages,  nor  what  the  ideals 
after  which  its  lofty  philosophy  struggled.  Buddhism  was  not 
Christianity,  and,  since  by  Christianity  alone  could  souls 
escape  damnation  and  hell  lire,  it  was  his  duty  to  God  to 
destroy  Buddhism  by  every  means  in  this  power.  He  did  not 
ask  whether  the  people  were  prepared  to  receive  his  new  wine 
or  whether  the  destruction  of  the  ancient  beliefs  might  not 
.  mean  the  destruction  of  all  spiritual  life  ;  his  every  idea  was 
centred  on  the  one  thought  that  Buddhiam  must  be  wiped 
out  of  existence.”  1  No  trouble  was  spared  to  achieve  that 
object ;  monasteries  were  razed  to  the  ground,  and  thoir  price¬ 
less  treasures  looted  ;  libraries  were  set  fire  to,  or  the  leaves 
of  the  books  they  contained  scattered  to  the  winds  ;  whosoever 
dared  to  worship  in  public  or  wear  the  yellow  robe  of  the 
ascetic  was  visited  with  death ;  the  great  institutions  at 
Totogamuva  and  Karagala,  which  bad  long  carried  on  the 
traditions  of  Taxila  and  NSlanda,  were  destroyed  and  their 
incumbents  put  to  the  sword.  The  land  groaned  in  agony 
as  one  after  another  there  fell,  before  the  fierce  onslaughts  of 
the  fanatic  missionaries  and  their  dastardly  colleagues,  the 
Buddhist  religious  edifices,  those  lovely  structures  which  the 
piety  of  generations  had  strewn  broadcast  over  the  country. 
Never  was  a  glorious  civilization  and  a  noble  culture  more 
‘  Pieris,  Op.  eit.,  p.  80. 


266 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


brutally  destroyed.  The  work  of  centuries  was  undone  in  a 
few  years — all  that  was  noblest  and  best  in  the  heritage  of 
Ceylon  was  lost,  and  the  damage  thus  wrought  was  irreparable. 

But  it  was  not  to  be  expected  that  the  Sinhalese  would 
accept  tamely  this  subserviency  to  a  hateful  foreign 
domination.  More  than  once  they  made  a  stern  struggle  to 
win  back  their  lost  freedom  and  stem  the  tide  of  destruction 
that  was  sweeping  over  the  land.  The  a  posts  cy  of  Dhannapala, 
who  was  a  traitor  alike  to  his  country  and  to  his  faith,  aroused 
the  indignation  of  the  people  as  no  other  single  event  of  this 
period,  and  the  first  to  organize  armed  obstruction  to  the 
intrusion  of  the  European  adventurers  were  the  inhabitants 
of  the  forest-dad  heights  of  Scnkadagala  (Kandy)  and  the 
neighbouring  villages,  who  from  the  earliest  times  have  been 
distinguished  by  their  sturdy  patriotism  and  ardent  resistance 
to  every  foreign  invader.  Their  determination  to  be  rid  of  the 
enemy  in  their  midst  was  such  ab  no  blandishments  could 
divert  and  no  reverses  quench,  and  their  efforts  were  never 
relaxed  or  suspended  till  the  Portuguese  were  driven  away  from 
Ceylon,  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  their  first  landing. 
Exasperated  by  the  pusillanimity  of  their  kings  and  their 
faithlessness  to  their  country  and  the  national  religion, 
gallant  leaders  were  forthcoming  to  guide  the  people  in  their 
insurrections  of  protest.  Such  was  Mayadunne  of  Ritavaka, 
himself  of  royal  blood,  and  liis  youngest  son,  Tikiri  Bandura, 
who  first  joined  the  forces  at  the  age  of  thirteen.  The  exploits 
of  the  young  prinoe  soon  won  him  fame,  and  his  ability  as  a 
leader  enabled  him  to  gain  the  confidence  of  his  followers, 
who  saluted  him  on  the  field  of  battle  with  the  title  of  Raja- 
Simha  (the  Lion  King),  a  name  which  for  many  years  to  come 
caused  the  blood  of  the  Portuguese  in  Ceylon  to  run  cold.1 
His  fiery  audacity  and  his  iron  will,  coupled  with  the  devoted 
courage  of  bis  men,  won  for  him  one  victory  after  another, 
and  by  1686  he  was  not  only  master  of  the  lowlands,  but  was 
able  to  invade  successfully  the  territory  of  Kandy,  whose 

1  Rifivaii  (npham),  p.  207. 


THE  DARK  AGE 


267 


king,  Jayavira,  bad  invited  Franciscan  monks  in  ha  dominions, 
permitted  a  church  in  his  capital  and  even  expressed  a 
desire  openly  to  embrace  Christianity.1  But  Baja-Sitplia’s 
triumph  was  brief.  The  Maka-VQttisa  *  tells  us  tluit  being 
puffed  up  with  victory,  this  great  fool,  in  the  wickedness 
of  his  heart,  slew  his  father  with  his  own  bond,  and  took 
possession  of  the  kingdom.”  Later,  being  seized  with  the  fear 
of  his  crime,  he  inquired  of  the  great  Buddhist  Elders  bow  he 
could  absolve  himself  of  his  sin.  When  they  explained  to  him 
that  patricide  was  too  great  a  sin  for  absolution,  1  he  was 
provoked  to  anger,  like  unto  a  serpent  full  of  poison,  when  it 
is  beaten  with  a  stick.”  Other  accounts  make  no  mention  of 
the  patricide  :*  according  to  them  some  of  the  Buddhist  monks 
were  involved  in  a  conspiracy  against  the  king,  whereby  they 
sought  to  set  up  another  in  his  place.  The  fact  remains,  how¬ 
ever,  that  Raja-Siipba  visited  his  anger  in  terrible  measure 
against  the  priesthood.  He  abjured  the  Buddhist  faith  and 
became  a  follower  of  the  Saivites.  The  Chief  Buddhist  Elder 
was  stoned  to  death,  many  of  the  monks  were  buried  up  to 
their  necks  in  the  earth  and  their  heads  ploughed  off  ;  many 
others  were  put  to  the  sword  ;  a  large  number  of  sacred  edifices 
were  pulled  down  ;  and  be  burnt  whatever  sacred  books  fell 
into  his  hands.  Many  valuable  works  were  thus  irretrievably 
lost.  Just  before  this  time  Vlra  Vikkama  (in  1542)  had  caused 
copies  to  bo  made  of  religious  books  at  great  expense  . 
they  were  now  reduced  to  ashes.  Most  of  the  monks  who 
escaped  death  disrobed  themselves  and  fled  from  the  king’s 
wrath.  The  lands  which  had  been  endowed  in  ancient  times 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  temples  were  taken  away  from 
them,  and  the  king,  to  crown  all  hia  acts  of  impiety,  deprived 
the  Buddhists  of  all  control  of  their  most  venerated  spot, 
the  graceful  Pinnacle  of  the  Sacred  Foot  Print  of  the  Buddha, 
and  placed  it  in  the  hands  of  ash-daubed  Indian  fakirs. 

1  Tencent,  CtyUn,  ii,  pp.  20-1. 

•  Chapter  xciii. 

•  See  JJIAS.  OJB.  toI.  xriU.  No,  85.  pp.  K2  foU.  and  Plori*,  op.  oit.,  f.  94, 

•  M.V.  xcii,  rv.  1A-15. 


268 


THR  PA U  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


Kaja-Simba  died  in  1592,  deserted  by  all  authority  and 
success  ;  the  last  port  of  his  life  was  a  series  of  reverses,  where 
he  lost  all  that  he  had  gained  for  himself  before. 

In  the  hour  of  Raja-Siipha’s  triumph  patriotism  and  the 
pride  of  their  raee  once  more  revived  in  the  hearts  of  the 
Sinhalese,  and  there  was  a  brief  interval  of  literary  activity. 
From  the  king’s  capital  at  Sltavaka  arose  the  national  poet 
Alagiyavanna  Mohott-dla  (or  Mukavati),  son  of  the  learned 
Dharmadhvaja  Pn edits,  a  man  of  great  scholarly  attainments. 
He  wrote  (in  Sinhalese)  of  the  glory  of  Raja-Siipha’a  Court, 
and  fired  the  imagination  of  his  country  in  their  fervour 
to  rally  round  the  monarch  in  his  conquest  of  the  Parang  is 
(foreigners).  Alagiyavanna  still  remains  one  of  Ceylon’s  most 
popular  poets ;  his  Kuaa-jatako  and  the  Subhdfilaya  (a  didactic 
poem)  are  recited  wherever  the  Sinhalese  language  is  known, 
while  his  S&ml-sand&a,  in  spite  of  its  lack  of  originality,  ranks 
in  its  elegance  of  diction  along  with  the  work  of  Sri  Rahula. 
Others  composed  poems  dealing  with  the  exploits  of  the 
Sinhalese  in  their  struggles  with  the  Portuguese — Katana 
poems,  or  poems  of  war,  the  language  of  which  is  a  curious 
admixture  of  Sanskrit  and  Sinhalese.  Most  of  them  were 
panegyrics  on  R&ja-Siipha.  This  period  also  saw  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  erotic  poem,  its  chief  exponent  being  the  half- 
Portuguese  courtier  and  gallant  Gascon  Adigar.1  Shortly 
before  this  period,  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century, 
a  monk  named  Dhammaratana  wrote  a  Sinhalese  interverbal 
paraphrase  to  the  M ahdsudassana-suUa  of  the  Digha-Nikaya. 
In  the  colophon  he  tells  that  he  completed  it  in  the  year 
2048  after  the  death  of  the  Buddha  (a.d.  1505-6).* 

Rija-siipha’a  successor  at  Kandy  was  Vimala-dharma- 
sflriya,  who  reigned  for  twelve  years  till  1604.  He  was 
originally  known  as  Dom  Joao,  and  had  been  a  Christian,  who 
lived  amongst  the  Portuguese.  When  the  hour  for  action  came, 

1  Sec  D'Alwir,  Introduction,  tnd  Wicknmaaingb*'* 

Catalog**  lor  deuib  »bout  tfccm  work*. 

*  Wkkremajingbc,  p.  4. 


THE  DARK  AOK 


269 


be  discarded  the  faith,  which  never  seems  to  have  appealed 
to  him,  and  ascended  the  throne  at  Kandy  under  the  name  of 
Vimala-dharma-sttriya.  Both  he  and  his  queen  had  strong 
European  sympathies,1  the  influence  of  which  soon  began 
to  be  felt  even  in  the  court.  Portuguese  names  were  common 
among  the  nobility,  and  their  manners  soon  prevailed  over  the 
simpler  customs  of  the  Sinhalese.  The  Portuguese  language 
was  freely  used  in  all  matters  of  state,  the  Portuguese  jacket 
and  the  barrette  (or  cap)  were  adopted  as  the  ceremonial  dress, 
and  still  obtain  as  such  in  the  Kandy  and  provinces ; 
Portuguese  ideas  moulded  the  fashions  at  the  Kandyan  Court 
and  their  influence— not  always  for  the  best— baa  come  down 
as  a  legacy  even  to  the  present  day.  But  Vimala-dharma 
did  not  allow  these  external  manifestations  of  sympathy  to 
cloud  his  vision  ;  he  was  ever  responsive  to  the  call  of  country 
and  carried  on  an  incessant  warfare  against  her  enemies. 
Whatever  leisure  was  left  to  him  he  employed  in  repairing 
the  damage  done  by  RAja-Sirphft.  The  attitude  of  hostility 
which  the  latter  had  adopted  towards  the  Buddhist  priest¬ 
hood  had  resulted  in  there  being  hardly  a  single  monk  left 
in  the  country  who  had  been  properly  ordained.  Much  grieved 
thereat,  Vimala  Dharma  sent  an  embassy  to  the  country  of 
Rahkhahga  (Arakkan)  to  bring  a  Chapter  of  monks  ordained 
in  the  sacerdotal  succession.  The  mission  was  successful  and 
several  monks  led  by  the  Elder  Nandicakka  came  over  to  the 

island.*  . 

In  1597  in  the  Cdakukkhcpa  Sima  at  Gutambe  on  the 
Mahav&ligaiiga,  near  Kandy,  an  ordination  was  held  and 
many  men  of  good  family  entered  the  Order,  to  the  delight 
of  the  people.  The  Tooth-relic,  which  had  suffered  many 
vicissitudes,  was  once  more  installed  at  the  capital  in  a  three¬ 
storied  edifice,  and  the  control  of  Sripada  (Mount  of  the  Sacred 
Foot  Print)  handed  over  to  the  Buddhists,  its  legitimate 
custodians. 

1  Fieri*,  op.  dt,  p.  1*2. 

»  M.V.,  xciv,  rr.  18-21. 


270 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


On  the  death  of  Vimala-dharmA  his  wife,  Donna  Ca  terms, 
as  queen  in  her  own  right,  assumed  the  sovereignty,  but  she 
was  soon  set  aside  by  a  shrewd  man  zealous  in  religious  works 
and  beloved  by  his  followers,  Senerat  by  name,  who  killed 
rival  aspirants  to  the  throne  and  married  Donna  Caterina. 
He  was  a  ruler  of  strong  personality,  and  under  his  r6gime 
the  country  enj oycd  a  brief  interval  of  comparative  tranquillity. 
But  he  did  not  oease  to  wage  continual  warfare  against  the 
Portuguese,  and  in  August,  1630,  dealt  a  crushing  blow  to  their 
forces,  which  resulted  in  the  death  of  tho  Portuguese  general, 
Don  Constantine  de  Say  Norofla,  and  in  the  slaughter  of  bis 
army.  Senerat's  son  and  successor  was  Raja-Siqoha  H,  who 
was  destined  for  the  last  time  to  kindle  the  smouldering  fires 
of  Sinhalese  patriotism  into  a  blaze.  Portentous  omens  had 
attended  his  birth,  which  took  place  at  Mahiyangana,  close  to 
the  spot  whore  the  Buddha  had  first  touched  ground  in  his  visit 
to  Ceylon.  On  the  very  night  when  he  was  bom  the  commandor 
of  the  Portuguese  fort  at  Colombo  had  dreamed  that  he  saw 
a  tiny  spark  no  bigger  than  a  glow-worm,  travelling  towards 
him  from  the  West  and  increasing  in  size  as  it  reached  him, 
until  it  flamed  into  a  great  fire  over  the  fort  of  Colombo, 
destroying  everything  that  lay  there.  Nor  were  these  portents 
unjustified  ;  for  it  was  during  his  reign  that  the  Portuguese 
were  eventually  driven  from  Ceylon,  and  the  people  were 
enabled  to  breathe  a  sigh  of  relief  that  the  bloodstained  land 
was  entirely  rid  of  their  presence.  On  the  28th  March,  16S8, 
amongst  the  mountain  fortresses  of  GannoruvA,  by  the  edge  of 
the  Mahaveligafiga,  was  fought  tho  last  great  battle  of  the 
Sinhalese  race.  An  anonymous  poet  has  left  us  a  Sinhalese 
description  of  the  fight,  as  given  by  an  eyewitness.  This  work, 
the  Paraiigi-hatanc  (the  fight  with  the  ParaLgis  or  Portuguese), 
is  tho  greatest  martial  poem  in  the  Sinhalese  language  extant, 
the  most  spirited  piece  of  literary  composition.  “  It  is  no  mere 
medley  of  tinkling  bells  and  scented  flowers,  of  lovely  women 
and  precious  gems.  It  rings  with  the  passion  of  Pindar ; 
it  is  Miltonic  in  its  resounding  roll  of  names ;  it  lauglw  with  the 


the  dark  AOE 


271 


gleo  of  Chevy-Chase.”  1  The  destruction  of  the  Portuguese 
army  wjis  complete,  and  their  power  to  menace  tho  dominions 
of  tho  Sinhalese  King  was  finally  taken  away  from  them.  From 
this  time  onwards  till  their  expulsion  from  tho  island  in 
June,  1658,  they  made  but  feeble  attempts  to  win  back  tboir 
lost  glory.  Tho  ensuing  period  of  pc&oe  was  a  great  comfort 
to  tbo  people,  who  were  utterly  weary  of  devastation  and 
slaughter.  They  settled  down  once  more  to  cultivato  their 
fields  and  reconstruct  the  villages  which  had  been  destroyed 
duringthc  war.  Raja-Supha  himself  was  more  a  man  of  martial 
prowess  than  a  hero  of  peace.  Of  overbearing  demeanour  and 
haughty  disposition,  fastidious  in  his  habits  and  studied  in 
disdain,  he  spent  his  leisure  hours  in  tho  wilds  of 
Bmtenna,  delighting  in  the  chase,  hawking  being  one  of  his 
favourite  forms  of  amusement.3  His  popularity  among  his 
subjects  was  due  solely  to  his  achievements  on  the  field  of 
battle  ;  beyond  confirming  tho  grants  of  land  made  to  the 
temples  by  his  predecessors  he  did  nothing  else  for  tho 
promotion  of  the  national  faith  9 ;  his  thank-offering  after  the 
victory  at  Gannoruva  was  a  gift  to  the  god  of  war,  who  presided 
over  Dodauvala  Devala,  of  his  headdress  of  gold  and  his 
sword  of  steel. 1  His  rule  often  savoured  of  handiness. 
When  (in  1664)  s  the  Kandyans,  their  endurance  giving  way, 
attempted  a  revolt  and  proclaimed  ns  his  successor  his  son, 
a  lad  of  12  years  of  age,  he  had  no  scruples  in  having  the  boy 
poiBoncd  to  prevent  a  recurrence  of  such  treason.*  It  is  not 
surprising  therefore  that  his  reign  was  not  productive  of  any 
literary  works. 

In  order  to  effect  the  final  expulsion  of  the  Portuguese 
from  the  island,  Raja-Simha  had  invited  to  his  aid  the  Dutch, 


*  Piero*,  op.  oit.,  p.  223. 

*  Temvet,  Ceyian,  toJ.  it,  pp.  47  folL 

*  JfnM  ra^ta,  xevi,  ▼.  41. 

*  Picrif,  op.  oiU,  p.  223. 

*  IVanent,  op.  dt.,  p.  43. 

*  Knox,  Ili*tory  oj  CVyion,  p.  ii,  eh.  6,  p.  58. 


272 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


•who  were  then  cruising  near  the  shores  of  Ceylon.1  It  was  in 
1595  that  they  had  formed  their  **  Het  Maatachappy  Van 
Verre  Landes  ”  (company  for  distant  lands),  and  in  the  same 
year  Cornelius  Houtman  conducted  the  first  fleet  of 
merchantmen  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  in  order  to 
capture  tho  Portuguese  monopoly  of  trade  in  the  East.  Other 
expeditions  followed  in  rapid  succession,  and  in  the  course  of 
their  travels,  on  the  30th  May,  1602,  the  first  Dutch  ship 
commanded  by  Admiral  Spilbcrg  touched  the  Port  of 
Batticaloa  on  the  east  coast  of  Ceylon.  Vimala  Dharma 
Sdriya  was  reigning  at  Kandy  at  this  time.  At  first  the 
strangers  were  given  but  a  jealous  and  reluctant  reception ; 
but  when  Spilberg  produced  his  credentials  from  the  Prince 
of  Orange,  which  contained  the  offer  of  an  alliance,  offensive 
and  defensive,  Vimala  Dharma  received  him  with  a  guard  of 
honour  of  a  thousand  men.  The  proposal  of  an  alliance  was 
accepted  with  great  ardour  and  alacrity,  and  permission  was 
given  to  the  Dutch  to  erect  a  fortress  in  any  part  of  the  Icing’s 
dominions.  But  it  was  not  till  1 612,  when  Senerat  and  Donna 
Catcrina  were  on  the  throne  of  Kandy,  that  the  terms  of 
the  treaty  were  fully  agreed  upon.  Marcellus  dc  Boechouwer 
brought  a  letter  from  Prince  Maurice  of  Nassau,  then  King  of 
the  Low  Countries,  sending  his  friendship  to  the  "  Emperor 
of  Ceylon  ”,  The  result  was  a  treaty,  whereby  the  Dutch 
undertook  to  assist  the  Sinhalese  king  with  ships,  forces,  and 
munitions  of  war,  in  case  of  a  renewal  of  Portuguese  aggression 
by  land  or  by  sea.  In  return  for  the  promised  military  aid 
they  were  given  permission  to  erect  a  fort  at  Cottiar,  on  the 
Bay  of  Trincomali,  and  the  monopoly  of  the  trade  in  cinnamon, 
gems  and  pearls  was  secured  for  them.  It  was  in  pursuance 
of  this  agreement  that  Raja-Siipha,  in  his  attempt  to  expel 
the  Portuguese  from  Ceylon,  addressed  himself  to  the  Dutch 
at  Batavia  and  solicited  their  active  co-operation.  The 
invitation  was  promptly  accepted,  and  in  1638  began  tho 

1  The  folloviag  account  o t  the  Dutch  is  taken  from  various  loorcea,  chief 
among  thorn  being  Tennent'e  Ceylon,  roJ.  ii,  chap.  u. 


THE  DARK  AGE 


273 


conflict  between  the  two  European  nations,  which  terminated, 
as  we  have  already  seen,  twenty  years  later,  in  the  complete 
retirement  of  the  Portuguese  from  the  island,  and  in  the 
installation  of  the  Dutch  in  the  parts  formerly  occupied  by 
the  Portuguese. 

The  policy  of  the  Dutch  in  Ceylon  was  in  marked  contrast 
to  that  of  their  predecessors.  Throughout  their  regime  their 
possession  of  the  island  was  a  military  tenure,  and  not  a  civil 
colonization.  They  regarded  it  as  an  entrepot  in  East  Indian 
trade  ;  no  attempts  were  made  to  leave  a  permanent  impress 
of  their  influence  on  the  people  ;  they  had  no  lust  for  conquest ; 
the  fanatical  zeal  of  the  Portuguese  for  the  propagation  of  their 
faith  gave  way  to  the  earnest  efforts  of  the  Dutch  traders 
to  secure  their  trading  monopolies  ;  extension  of  commerce  was 
their  only  aim,  and  for  this  purpose  peace  was  essential  at 
any  cost.  Even  when  provocation  was  caused  to  them,  as 
happened  more  than  once  by  outrages  on  tbe  part  of  tbs 
Sinhalese  rulers,  or  by  their  bad  faith,  they  attempted  no 
retaliation  ;  by  blandishments  and  presents  they  allayed  the 
irritation  of  their  ally  and  endured  with  subdued  humbleness 
and  meek  patience  whatever  insults  and  contumely  were 
hurled  at  them,  so  long  as  they  were  able  to  extract  the  utmost 
possible  amount  of  profit  from  their  trade.  Tho  Sinhalese 
in  the  dominions  of  the  King  of  Kandy  were  therefore  left 
unmolested,  and  were  free  to  follow  their  own  pursuits  in 
peace. 

Kaja-Siipha  II  was  followed  by  his  son  Vimala  Dharma 
Suriya,  who  ascended  the  throne  in  1679  (?),  and  reigned  for 
over  twenty  years.  The  MaJid-va tjt$a 1  tells  ua  that  “  he  was 
adorned  with  faith  and  the  like  virtues  and  regarded  the  Threo 
Sacred  Gems  os  his  own  In  addition  to  the  manifold  honours 
paid  to  the  Tooth-Relic  he  made  a  pilgrimmage  on  foot 
to  Samanta-kQta  (the  Srlpada  mountain),  an  act  considered 
to  be  of  great  merit,  even  at  the  present  day.  Finding  that 
the  condition  of  the  priesthood  was  very  unsatisfactory, 
*  M.V.,  Knrii,  ▼.  I. 

IS 


274 


THE  FAU  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


ho  determined  to  hold  a  festival  of  ordination  (upasampadd). 
And  indeed  the  need  was  very  pressing,  for  it  was  discovered 
that  not  more  than  five  upasampada  monks  were  to  be  found 
in  the  whole  of  the  island.  He  accordingly  sent  an  embassy 
of  his  ministers  to  Rakkhafiga  (Arakkan),  and  obtained  thence 
thirty-three  monks,  led  by  the  Elder  Santana.  The  ordination 
ceremony  was  duly  held,  at  which  thirty-three  persons  of 
**  good  families  ”  were  ordained,  and  we  arc  told  also  that  he 
persuaded  one  hundred  and  twenty  persons  to  be  invested  with 
the  robe  of  the  novitiate  1 — a  significant  contrast  to  the 
thousands  who  (under  previous  sovereigns)  entered  the  order 
on  such  occasions. 

This  pious  king  was  succeeded  on  his  death  by  his  son, 
Sri  Vlra  Pur&kxanw  Narendra-Sirpha,  suruamed  Kuncjasila, 
after  the  suburb  of  the  city  of  Kandy  which  he  built  in  a  large 
coconut  grove  by  the  beautiful  bank  of  the  lilahavaligaflga. 
He  ruled  twenty-three  years.  Among  his  numerous  acts  of 
piety  was  the  construction  of  a  two-storeyed  building  for  the 
Tooth-relic,  on  the  walls  of  which  were  painted  scenes  from 
well-known  Jatakas.  But  he  was  lukewarm  in  his  supervision 
of  the  priesthood,  and  in  his  reign  their  old  scandalous  practices 
revived.  “  So  far  from  begging  from  door  to  door,  as  they  were 
expected  to  do,”  says  a  chronicler  who  wrote  a  Bhort  while 
after  this  period*  ”  they  regarded  even  the  eating  out  of  their 
alms-bowl  a  disgrace.  Their  food  was  cooked  in  the  same 
fashion  as  that  of  the  great  nobles  amongst  the  laity,  and  it 
was  eaten  out  of  plates  !  In  fact,  they  were  monks  in  nothing 
but  the  use  of  the  name.”  Narendra-Simha’s  successor  was 
Sri  Vijaya  Raja-Siipba,  a  man  “  diligent  and  wise,  who  always 
loved  to  associate  with  good  and  virtuous  men.”  Following 
the  custom  of  his  predecessors,  he  obtained  his  consorts  from 
the  city  of  Madhura.  But,  unlike  the  queens  of  the  monarch# 
who  immediately  preceded  him,  they  manifested  great  intercat 
in  the  religion  of  the  land  of  their  adoption,  and  hearkening 

»  U.V.,  xc»U,  tv.  S-l*. 

•  Tnuulstioa  of  tie  Virndita-tvattAti  (*.».  1770),  ste  below. 


THE  HARK  AOB 


275 


unto  the  Good  Law,  became  Buddhists.  With  the  zeal  of  new 
converts  they  gave  themselves  up  to  continuous  devotion 
and  to  ceaseless  acts  of  merit,  and  vied  with  one  another  in 
their  piety  and  generosity,  “like  mines  of  virtue,  showing 
much  kindness  and  affection  towards  the  inhabitants  of 
Lafika,  bestowing  upon  them  as  much  love  as  mothers  do  upon 
their  children.” 1  They  joined  the  king  in  persuading  young 
persons  to  be  robed  os  novitiates  and  causing  them  to  be 
properly  instructed  in  the  doctrine,  and  they  spent  money  on 
getting  religious  books  written.*  The  king  himself  held  many 
religious  festivals,  in  one  of  which  lamps  were  lit  in  all  the 
shrines  throughout  the  country.  “  Thus  did  the  king  make 
the  face  of  the  Island  of  Lanka  look  bright  with  shining 
lights,  like  the  sky  that  is  spangled  with  stars.”  •  He  caused 
preaching  halls  to  be  built  in  divers  places,  and,  we  an  told, 
procured  “  with  great  trouble  ”  many  preachers  of  the  law. 
In  such  manner  did  he  attempt  to  bring  about  a  revival  of  the 
faith  and  to  provide  even  a  scanty  measure  of  religious  know¬ 
ledge  for  his  people,  whose  minds  had  been  starved.  When  he 
discovered  that  the  Order  of  the  Sangha  was  almost  extinct 
in  the  land,  he  was  immensely  grieved,  and,  learning  from  the 
Dutch  that  Buddhism  flourished  in  Pegu,  Arakkan,  and  Siam, 
he  sent  an  embassy  to  Ayodhyi  in  Siam  to  fetch  a  chapter  of 
priests.  The  Dutch  helped  this  mission  by  lending  a  ship 
for  the  voyage.*  But  the  expedition  proved  disastrous,  all 
except  one  person  perishing  in  the  sea.  The  survivor  made  his 
way  to  Pegu,  whence  he  returned  home  to  relate  the  sad  news.* 
But  the  king  was  not  disheartened  ;  he  sent  a  second  embassy, 
and  this  time  too  with  the  help  of  the  Dutch.  The 
ambassadors  were  provided  with  suitable  presents  to  the 
Siamese  monks.  At  Batavia  they  left  behind  the  presents  and 
proceeded  to  Siam  to  inquire  if  monks  were  available  to  be 

1  J t.V.,  chap.  JCCTili,  t.  IS. 

•  Ibid.,  tt.  tt-17. 

•  Ibid.,  xeT«l,  v.  64. 

4  Tanscnt,  rol.  U,  p.  01. 

•  Tumour'*  Bpilomt,  pp.  63-6. 


276 


THU  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


taken  to  Ceylon  ;  the  answer  was  in  the  affirmative,  but  on 
their  return  to  Batavia  they  were  told  by  their  Dutch  hosts 
that  their  good  king  was  dead.  They  were  advised  not  to 
convey  the  monks  without  first  ascertaining  the  wishes  of  the 
ruling  sovereign.  They  were  compelled,  therefore,  to  set  sail 
for  Ceylon  reluctantly,  their  purpose  unaccomplished. 
Unfortunately,  however,  on  the  voyage  they  were  overtaken 
by  a  storm  in  which  the  majority  of  them  perished,  and  only 
A  handful  of  survivors  were  left  to  tell  the  doleful  tale.  Kirti 
Sri  Raja-Siipha,  who  was  now  on  the  throne,  was  a  man  of 
great  wisdom  and  ability,  imbued  with  great  enthusiasm  for 
the  reform  of  all  abuses.  He  studied  the  Dhommo  with  great 
care  and  assiduity,  and  caused  it  to  bo  preached  throughout 
his  dominion.  So  anxious  was  he  that  the  knowledge  of  the 
religion  should  be  broadcast,  that,  we  are  told,  he  gathered 
many  scribes  together  and  had  the  whole  of  the  Dlgha-N ikdya 
copied  in  one  day.1  Whenever  copies  of  books  were  brought 
to  him  accurately  and  neatly  made,  he  bought  them  and 
distributed  them  amongst  the  various  monasteries.  But  the 
crowning  glory  of  his  work  in  the  revival  of  Buddhism  was 
the  re-establishment  of  the  ujxuampadd  (ordination)  in  Ceylon. 

At  the  time  of  his  accession  to  the  throne  there  was  not 
even  a  single  upasampada  monk  in  the  whole  of  the  island.* 
There  were  plenty  of  novices  or  sdmaiicras,  some  of  whom 
were  good  men  and  skilful,  but  owing  to  want  of  proper 
supervision  the  bulk  of  the  priesthood  were  in  a  state  of 
degeneracy.  Batanapala  Thera,  who  wrote  a  Sinhalese 
translation  of  the  Vimana-vaUhu  during  the  period  (in  the 
&aka  year  1692,  i.e.  a.d.  1770),  has  left  us  a  short  sketch  of 
the  condition  of  the  monks  before  Raja-Siqaha  carried  out  his 
reforms*  " Eversincethetimeof Devanampiya-Tissa.thefaith- 

*  J IT.P.,  Ki*.  v.  81. 

*  Ibid.,  v.  ITS. 

*  ThU  tranalatioa,  with  a  few  modification*.  U  taken  from  a  paper  on 
Kirti  Sri'e  Kin  Wav  to  Siam,  read  before  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Ceylon 
Branch,  by  Dr.  Paul  E.  Piero,  and  publiabcd  in  their  Journal,  rol.  xriii. 
No.  5t.  pp.  17  foU. 


THE  DARK  AGE 


277 


ful  and  wise  kings  who  have  reigned  from  time  to  time — aided 
by  their  great  ministers  and  the  efforts  of  pious  priests,  learned 
in  the  Law — had  carefully  swept  away  all  schisms  that  had 
sprung  up  and  preserved  the  doctrine  inviolate.  But  in  recent 
times  the  disappearance  of  such  kings  and  ministers,  followed 
by  the  oppression  of  the  unbelieving  Paraftgis  and  Damilaa, 
had  robbed  the  pious  priests  of  the  Four  Necessaries  ;  and,  ns 
the  religious  young  men  of  good  families,  who  assumed  the 
robe,  had  not  the  learning  to  study  with  care  the  three 
Pitakaa — which  contain  the  Vinaya,  Suita,  and  Abhidhamma, 

_ and  to  order  their  lives  in  consonahce  with  the  precepts 

contained  therein,  by  degrees  power  fell  into  the  hands  of  low¬ 
born  priests  of  profane  life,  to  the  great  injury  of  the  Church. 
And,  as  for  the  priestly  succession,  beginning  from 
Upali  Them  (whom  the  Buddha  himself  had  named  as  the 
first  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Vinaya),  and  continued  in  the 
persons  of  Dasakn,  Sonaka,  Siggava,  Moggaliputta,  Mahinda, 
etc.,  and  recruited  from  all  pious  folk  who  assumed  the  robe 
without  any  distinction  of  family,  in  proper  and  perpetual 
succession  of  master  and  pupil,  this  they  ignored.  Confus¬ 
ing  physical  with  spiritual  kinship,  they  refused  to  allow  pious 
young  men  of  good  family  to  assume  the  robe,  and  treated  all 
the  estates  and  wealth  which  generations  of  godly  kingB  and 
ministers  had  dedicated  to  the  service  of  the  priesthood  as 
if  they  had  been  dedicated  to  the  use  of  their  private  families. 
Accordingly,  for  the  sake  of  this  wealth  they  had  members 
of  their  own  families  ordained,  so  that,  bemg  robed,  they  might 
receive  the  due  raja-kariya,  pretending  that  this  was  the 
succession  appointed  by  the  church.  But  indeed  that 
succession— which  was  maintained  immaculate  by  disrobing 
all  priests  who  had  violated  their  oaths  and  by  the  ordination 
of  religious  and  well  born  youths— was  reduced  to  a  mockery  ; 
and,  save  for  a  few  holy  priests,  the  majority  were  as  men 
fouling  themselves  with  hot  ashes,  while  the  gems  lay  before 
them.  And,  while  the  Dhamma  and  the  Fiuaya,  subject*  for 
unending  study,  lay  in  their  path,  they  preferred  the  study 


278 


TUB  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CKYLO.V 


of  such  profane  matters  os  astrology,  medicine,  and  devil- 
worship,  all  of  which  they  practised  in  unbecoming  fashion 
within  and  without  the  capital ;  and,  thus  winning  the  good¬ 
will  of  kings  and  powerful  ministers,  they  obtained  much 
wealth  and  high  office.  They  led  scandalous  lives,  and,  ignoring 
tho  precepts  of  the  Law,  they  betook  themselves  to  cultivation 
and  trade,  accumulating  jewellery  and  clothes,  and  making 
tho  support  of  their  brothers  and  nephews  an  article  of  their 
faith.  When,  through  the  increase  in  the  number  of  these  shamo- 
less  priests  and  tho  oppression  of  the  unbelieving  Parangis 
and  Damilas,  the  Faith  was  on  the  brink  of  destmetion,  it 
came  to  pass  that  a  valiant  and  powerful  king  of  the  name  of 
Raja-Si  rp  ha  succeeded  to  tho  throne  of  Laiika.”  Raja-Siipha 
was  determined  to  put  an  end  to  this  state  of  affairs.  In  the 
third  year  of  his  reign  he  sent  an  embassy  to  8iam  to  bring  a 
body  of  monks  from  there,  that  he  might  reinstitute 
ordination  in  the  island.  The  Dutch  helped  the  mission  by 
a  loan  of  one  of  their  sailing  ships.  The  embassy  was  eminently 
successful.  The  King  of  Siam  at  the  time  was  Dhammika, 
41  a  wise  man  who  had  devoted  his  whole  life  to  the  support 
of  religion.”  Ho  welcomed  the  Sinhalese  ambassadors  with  all 
cordiality.  Having  heard  their  purpose,  he  held  an  assembly 
of  monks,  presided  over  by  the  Sartgharaja  (Hierarch)  of  Siam, 
and  after  due  deliberation  a  chapter  of  more  than  ten  monks 
was  chosen  for  dispatch  to  Ceylon,  at  the  head  of  them 
being  Upali  Maha-Thcra.  Along  with  them  King  Dhammika 
also  sent  copies  of  books  on  the  Dhamma  and  the  Vinaya, 
such  as  were  not  ortant  in  Ceylon.  Great  wore  the  rejoicings 
that  attended  the  arrival  of  tho  Siamese  monks  in  the  Sinhalese 
capital.  The  king  himself  proceeded  to  greet  them  at  the  head 
of  the  whole  army,  with  elephants  and  horses  and  other 
equipage*.  Thus  in  due  time,  2,299  years 1  after  the 
Parinibb&na  (a. i). 1756),  in  the  month  of  Asa|ha  (July- August), 
the  ceremony  of  upeuampadd  was  held  in  Kandy  amidst 
scenes  of  unparalleled  pomp  and  ceremony.  All  tho  principal 

*  if.K-,  cb*j>.  c,  YT.  00  /oU. 


THE  DARK  AGE 


279 


S&maixerai  received  the  higher  ordination,  and  provision  was 
made  for  their  proper  instruction  by  the  monks  who  had  come 
from  AyodhyR-  Very  soon  afterwards  the  king  had  drawn  up  a 
Katikd-vcUa  or  Code  of  Conduct  for  the  guidance  of  the  monks, 
so  that  they  might  live  in  conformity  with  the  rules  of  the 
Ftnoya. 

In  all  these  measures  of  reform  Kirti  Sri  Raja-Siipba  was 
assisted  and  inspired  by  the  unflagging  enthusiasm  and  most 
whole-hearted  oo-operation  of  a  monk  named  Vulivita 
Sarapapkara,  who  was  destined  to  revive  the  glories  of  the 
faith  for  the  benefit  of  future  generations.  Like  a  lonely  star, 
he  illumined  this  dark  period  of  the  history  of  the  Ceylon 
Sahgha,  and  the  after-glow  of  his  presence  is  fek  even  to-day. 
Born  in  the  hamlet  of  Vftlivita,  near  Kandy,  in  the  Saka  year 
1620  (a.d.  1698-9),  he  entered  the  Order  as  a  .Samarium  at  the 
age  of  16,  as  a  pupil  of  SOriyogoda  Them.  With  commendable 
energy  he  addressod  himself  to  the  study  of  the  Pali  language, 
so  that  he  might  learn  and  understand  the  sacred  scripture*. 
But  Pali  learning  was  then  at  such  low  ebb  that  no  person 
could  be  found  competent  enough  to  teach  him  ;  no  complete 
copy  of  any  Pali  grammar  was  available  in  spite  of  diligent 
search.  Making  the  best  of  his  opportunities  and  unbaffled 
by  the  difficulties  that  beset  his  path,  the  young  Samayera 
travelled  about  from  place  to  place,  to  allay  his  thirst  for 
knowledge,  collecting  one  drop  of  learning  here  and  another 
there.  Thus  he  studied  the  B&l&valdm  up  to  the  chapter  on 
nouns  under  a  layman  called  Leuke  Ra|ahimi,  and  completed 
it  under  Palkumbure  Atthadassi,  himself  a  Samarium  and 
known  as  Samanera-guru  (novice  teacher) .  Cherishing  a  strong 
desire  to  re-establish  the  priesthood  in  its  full  vigour,  he 
wandered  from  place  to  placo,  preaching  the  Dhamma  and 
exhorting  his  audience  to  rise  up  to  their  responsibilities. 
The  fame  of  the  young  reformer  spread  like  wildfire,  and 
student*  flocked  to  him  from  all  parts  of  the  island.  Always 
simple  in  his  habits,  he  gave  himself  up  to  austerities, 
depending  for  sustenance  only  on  what  he  received  in  his 


280 


TUB  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CKYLON 


begging  rounds.  He  thus  came  to  be  known  as  Pinrjapatika 
Sarnpankara.  Already  in  the  reign  of  Vimaladharmn 
successor  to  Rija-Siipha  II,  he  had  received  recognition  at 
the  hands  of  the  king,  who,  we  are  told,  caused  to  be  made 
a  gilt  casket  of  one  and  a  half  cubits  in  height,  and  set 
it  with  seven  hundred  gem*,  and  presented  it  to 
Sarapshkara,  together  with  many  sacred  books.1  Later  it 
was  at  his  request  that  King  Vijaya  Raja-Sizpha  had  sent  two 
embassies  to  Siam  to  bring  ordained  monks  from  that 
country,  And,  when  Ktrti  Sri  Raja-Sirpha  came  to  the  throne 
it  was  the  inspiration  and  the  encouragement  of  Saranankura 
that  guided  him  in  his  reform  of  the  Sangha  and  enabled  him 
to  earn  glory  as  a  supreme  benefactor  of  Buddhism  in  Ceylon. 
It  was  he  that  had  written  in  Pali  the  message  that  was  to  be 
taken  to  the  King  of  Siam  and  the  letter  addressed  to  the 
Sat’igharija  of  that  country.  The  ministers  who  were  to 
constitute  the  embassy  were  chosen  on  his  advice,  and  the 
success  of  the  mission  was  mainly  due  to  his  exertions.  And 
after  the  re-establishmcnt  of  the  upasampadd  in  Ceylon,  when 
the  king  was  conferring  honour  on  those  who  had  helped 
to  achieve  it,  Saratiaftkara's  services  received  their  due 
recognition.  He  stood  pre-eminent  among  those  who, 
according  to  the  Mahd-vam&a}  had  striven  to  u  maintain  the 
religion  of  the  Conqueror,  and  had  endeavoured  long  to  restore 
to  its  former  splendour  the  religion  of  the  Sage,  which  had 
for  a  long  time  been  often  brought  nigh  unto  the  gate  of 
destruction  He  was  regarded  as  the  *'  one  who  was  diligent 
by  day  and  night,  and  according  to  the  measure  of  his  wisdom 
and  ability  threw  light  on  the  doctrines  and  the  precepts  of 
the  religion  of  the  Sage ;  one  who  shed  light  on  religion  by 
duly  instructing  many  of  his  own  pupils,  and  those  of  others 
also,  in  the  doctrines  and  precepts  of  the  religion ;  one  who 
was  engaged  in  doing  good  to  himself  and  to  others,  and  who 
earnestly  wished  to  maintain  the  religion  of  the  Buddha  for  a 

«  If.F,  xci-ii,  rr.  U- 7. 

■  Chap,  e,  rr.  102-8. 


THIS  DARK  AGE 


EE1 

long  time  ]  one  who  waa  constant  in  demotion  to  A  life  of 
purity J,  one  who  i  n  virtue  ind  piety  and  austerity  was  like 
UlrtO  a  mirror  to  all  the  anna  of  Buddha  in  Coy] on  who  sought 
to  improve  themselves ,l.  Hie  was  appointed  Saflghnraia  of 
IaAki,  the  highest  office  that  obtained  amount  the  pricsthood- 
In  that  os'EitJS,  ac  the  Inst  rcpretcntfitive  o£  &  long  And  glorious 
line  of  Hicnuehs  who  had  devoted  their  energies  to  the 
welfnro  of  the  nationud  faith.  Jus  remained  for  fflUJ  yearn 
leading  a  very  active  and.  uselul  lifo^  till  hta  death  in  1775  at 
tht  ripe  age  of  81, 1  He  was  cremated  on  the  grounds  of  the 
Ampitiya  Viba hi,  near  Kftndy,  where  ft  monument  to  hi* 
memory  still  exists. 

Tlie  new  IdH  of  life  thus  given  to  the  Saiigh*  by  tho  united 
effort;  of  Baiaiiafikara  nitd  Kfrfci  £ri  Rija^Silftha  resulted 
as  wu  might  expect— in  a  renewal  of  literary  nativity  aa  well. 
SftWaahkarn  himself  was  tho  author  of  several  important 
works.  In  order  to  facilitate  tha  stsldy  of  Pali,  which,  as  we 
saw  above,  had  been  greatly  neglected,  ho  write  this  fttipi- 
wnfdh  a  abort  treatise  on  the  declcnainn  of  Pali  noun*  with 
paradigm*  fttld  examples  ■  anothor  of  his  original 
Pali  works  la  the  j!  lifi  zrii  n  d*od A  f  -a la Aia  rfl „  a  poem  in 
100  stanzas,  treating  of  the  Ilf*  «f  the  Buddha  Gotarun  fmm 
tho  time  of  htE  birth  n$  the  hermit  Sumedhs  during  the  rtginw 
Of  liEpafikam  to  his  last  birth  as  Siddhatthn,  when  ha  attained 
to  Enlightenment.  The  language  and  form  of  the  poem 
show  that  it  waa  not  the  work  of  A  master  hand  ;  the  style  ia 
weak,  the  simile*  and  metaphors  are  borrowed  from  older 
works,  and  there  is  little  originality-  The  following  is  tho 
opening  Stanza  : — 

-BtefcHirtiB.  $uddho$V»Hkaram  dfljfliHzIflin  datdfwlftujij  ^t'nowt 
U^ifkfflan  tenA  swiesi'fam  dufctAnjHAan  iritJUftfliani 

SvAghaft  cafi  mra  j'lgasftm  iHunwisfA^t  vandam  oAai«  ittuiJdAnud 
Buddho  &hamma$ald  TatflfgMimri  jMlcntw  U  mam  jodd, 

■  It™  materia  !i  for  (he  *b*TC  ikt-let  aJ  Samuaiiknw  am  <fe*#n  dhkfly 
ham  th*  ^aJi^a-fAja-nAtl*.  p»ci|  *hd  Lin 

prow],  both  written  in  Sl&akm  by  Iwf  hli  pupil*.  7a  doUil*  ft  thrir 
worka  nrr  Wkkn;niaEn&lror*  CateJoyiit  UJVfer  tfauo  Wtl», 


282 


THB  PALI  LITERATCRE  OF  CEYLON 


There  U  an  interverbal  Sinhalese  paraphrase,  written  by 
Saranm'ikara  himself.  His  other  works  are  in  SinhalcAc  :  the 
Madhurartha-prakaianx,  a  paraphrase,  a  commentary  to  the 
Pali  MahH-Bodhi-vamta  in  tire  Sanskritised  Sinhalese  of  thiB 
period  ;  the  Sarartha-taiigraha,  a  treatise  on  various  doctrinal 
teachings  in  Buddhism ;  a  paraphrase  of  several  Suttas  used 
in  the  Partita  ;  the  Muni-gunulah kdra,  a  Sinhalese  poem 
in  praise  of  the  Buddha  ;  and  an  exhaustive  Sinhalese  sanne 
to  the  Bhtsajja -ma  rijtlta.  The  last  was  perhaps  inspired  by 
the  measures  adopted  by  King  Klrti  Sri  to  ensure  the  physical 
well-being  of  the  monks.  "  For  in  this  world,”  says  the 
Maha-vamsa,1  “there  are  two  kinds  of  diseases  to  which 
novitiates  and  monks  are  liable,  vit.  those  of  the  body  and 
those  of  the  mind.  Of  these,  for  the  cure  of  diseases  of 
the  mind,  the  Buddha,  the  greater  of  men,  has  provided  the 
Vtnaya  rules  and  the  Suttanta  discourses.  But  the  monks, 
after  they  are  instructed  in  the  Vimya  and  the  Suttanta — 
remedies  that  are  effectual  in  destroying  hist  and  diseases 
of  the  mind — are  liable  to  be  afflicted  with  bodily  diseases, 
by  reason  of  which  it  is  hard  for  them  to  practise  the 
doctrines  and  precepts  of  religion.”  And  we  are  told  that,  thus 
reflecting,  King  Kirti  $ri  devised  ways  and  means  to  combat 
disease  amongst  the  priesthood.  The  new  interest  displayed 
in  medicine  may  have  prompted  Saravahkara  to  revive  a 
study  of  the  Bhctajja-mailjusa,  the  only  book  on  the  subject, 
so  far  as  we  know,  written  by  a  Ceylon  monk.  Sarapaftkara 
gathered  round  him  a  galaxy  of  brilliant  scholars,  both  laymen 
and  monks,  who  studied  under  him  and  continued  the 
revivsd  of  learning  which  he  had  so  well  begun.  They 
established  Parivcoos  (or  places  of  instruction)  in  various 
parts  of  the  country  and  imparted  knowledge  to  whoever  was 
imbued  with  love  for  it.  Thus  did  they  rescue  from  destruction 
whatever  little  of  Sinhalese  Buddhist  culture  had  escaped  the 
ravages  of  foreign  invaders. 


1  Chap.  xeix.  tv.  170  toll. 


The  dark  a0& 


263 

Of  Sarannfikaras  pupils,  Attamgmmv  Ba|lHi5ra  Pt&jagmu,, 
a  layman,  wrote  throe  works  on  Pali  grammar.  Of  these  the 
^u^7r-ii-!iiuitAiMnfl>MiirjJLrr  is  n  abort  treatise  dealing  witb 
SbfndKi  or  compounds.  It  in  meant  to  be  used  an  a  handbook 
in  studying  this  flection  of  Pali  ^raruniar,  aiul  the  rules  arc 
illustrated  with  copious  examples.  TEm  KdmhfpUppha- 
■wi-B  wjftr?  deali,  as  its  name  implies,  with  the  Karaka  (or  case 
relations),  i.e.  Poli  syntax.  In  the  introductory  eUuua  the 
author  tells  ua  r — 

Kriyakd mbat  a raido ndAd  in  ye  net  jananii  manned 
pombhis  $ahn  f?  fufya  .fcWwflpflW^ViA 
f“  Those  persona  who  da  not  know  syntax  are  like  beasts, 
without  hOrM  and  hoof;s  hence  the  purpose  of  tliiM  book, 
to  give  Hnch  knowledge. 

The  author  quotes  Extensively  from  both  Pali  and  Sanskrit 
grammars.  rChc  text  ia  accompauisd  by  a  Sinhalese  inter¬ 
pretation  which  was  written  by  fta^iira  himself-1  His  other 
work,  the  Sadda-mdld,  is  a  comprehensive  Pali  grammar, 
based  on  the  Aaoetysnci,  Tlie  author  follow  closely  the 
method  adopted  in  the  1i5pa-&ittdhi,  and  tin:  work  is  divided 
into  Huvcn  sections  or  fcajidos  ;  honied  and  Santto'ia,  Aranao, 

j&tmfiw,  TadriAttfi,  Akhtfdto ,  Kib-Jiidhdna  (aikxcft),etM:l  Kdtfxktu. 
A  auction  of  VydUi  (prefixes)  is  amalgamated,  as  in  the 
Itiipasiddhi,  with  the  Kiit-btdJidtia,  and,  whereas  both  in  the 
2&£pfr-rf£d&  fcnd  the  KoecaytijUs  the  Ki’mfot  section,  follows 
immediately  after  the  chapter  on  A’iwifl,  in  the  Sa^da-mdld 
it  is  placed  last  of  all,  probably  because  the  author  felt  it 
tm  the  most  difficult  of  them  all!  The  work  contains, 
according  to  its  colophon,  725  rules,  and  each  of  them  1b 
accompanied  by  a  Sinhalese  interpretation,  written  most 
probably  by  tbe  author  himself.  The  principal  aphorisms  arc 
taken  over  from  the  AnocayttFUi,  while  n  number  of  secondary 
rules  are  also  given  to  explain  the  aphorisms  and  some¬ 
times  to  supply  their  deficiencies.  These  latter  arc  mainly 
from  the  Rtipa-siddki.  Several  references  are  made  to  the 
1  See  SulibuEi,  iVils’Ka-rTli.Mi  f  ,  xdv. 


234 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


grammatical  works  of  SaAghamkkhita — the  Sambandha-cintS 
and  the  Susadda-stddhi.  The  Sinhalese  colophon  at  the  end  of 
the  work  tells  us  that  it  was  completed  in  the  month  of 
Aile$a  in  the  year  of  $aka,  1701  (July- August,  a.d.  1779-80). 
To  Attaragama  Bapdara  is  sometimes  assigned  also  the 
authorship  of  a  medical  work  in  Sanskrit  stanzas,  the 
Sdra-tahkfepa}  Of  Sarapahkara's  other  pupils  Tibbotuvave 
Siddhattha  compiled,  at  the  king’s  request,  the  Maha-vamsa 
from  the  reign  of  Parakruma-B&hu  IV  of  Kurunegala  down 
to  his  own  day*  Sitinamaluve  Dhammajoti wrote  the  Bdld- 
valarasa ngraha  and  the  Balavatara-liyana-sanne  (or  the 
Okohdapola-tanne),  which  have  been  referred  to  already  in 
discussing  the  Baidvalara.  Siddhattha  Buddharnkkhita  com¬ 
piled  Siyamopasampadd-vata,  giving  a  description  of  the 
mission  to  Siam  in  search  of  the  upasampadd  (ordination), 
and  the  £rl  Saddharmov&da-sa  n yraha ,  a  popular  work  on 
Buddhism,  exhorting  men  and  women  to  lead  the  good  life, 
that  they  may  cscupe  the  round  of  rebirth,  ftaparatana 
Thera,  incumbent  of  the  Attanagalla  VihAra,  composed  a 
poem  based  on  the  AUanagaUa-vavua.  At  the  king’s  special 
request  Hinatikumbure  Su  man  gala  made  a  Sinhalese  version 
of  the  Milinda-pafiha,  called  Sri  Dharmdddsaya  ( The  Mirror 
of  the  Sacred  Doctrine).  The  author  tells  us  in  the  colophon  that 
he  was  the  chief  pupil  of  Attaragama  Bapdara,  himself  a  pupil 
of  Sarapahkara,  and  that  he  wrote  at  the  Upoaatha  Arama 
of  the  Maha-vihara  at  Sirivaddhana-pura  (Kandy)  in  the  year 
2320  of  the  Buddhist  era  (a.d.  1777-8).*  The  Sinhalese 
translation  follows  the  Pali  throughout,  except  that  here  and 
there  it  adds,  by  way  of  gloss,  extracts  from  various  Pali 
works.  It  also  puts  into  the  mouth  of  the  Buddha  a  prophecy 
not  found  in  the  Pali  original — that,  a a  the  Buddha  lay  on  his 
deathbed,  be  saw  by  his  power  of  clairvoyance  that  the 
discussion  between  Milinda  and  Nigasena  would  take  place 
about  five  hundred  years  after  the  ParirubbAna. 

>  SnbhSti.  .Vdma-mdM.  p.  xciv. 

'  M.V.,  xeix  tt.  80-83,  and  WIckrtmMiaghe.  Caiahffvt,  p.  xxi. 

*  Colombo  Edition,  187$. 


THK  DARK  AOE 


285 


Daramitipola  Dhamroarakkhita  wrote  a  Sinhalese  Sannc 
to  the  Maha-Sali-paUhana-sulta  of  the  Digha-Nikaya,  and 
several  other  writers  produced  numerous  works  in  Sinhalese, 
some  of  which  aro  still  held  in  high  esteem.1 

Probably  to  this  period  belongs  the  Akkhara-mala,  a  short 
treatise  on  Pali  and  Sinhalese  alphabets.  The  uuthor  states 
that  the  alphabet  which  formed  the  basis  of  the  Pali  was 
composed  by  a  certain  teacher  of  men  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Kalpa,  and  this  consisted  of  the  present  Pili  vowels  and 
twenty-five  consonants  in  five  classes.  The  work  is  written 
in  Pali  stanzas,  which  are  accompanied  by  a  Sinhalese  Sonne. 
Nogasena  is  given  in  the  oolophon  as  the  name  of  the  author, 
but  nothing  else  is  known  about  him. 

To  the  same  period  I  would  also  assign  the  Kuya-virati- 
gatha  and  the  Srngdra-rasa-ratna-mdla.  The  former  is  a 
Pali  poem  of  274  verse*  by  an  anonymous  writer,  divided  into 
two  sections,  the  first  describing  the  formation  of  the  body, 
its  foulness,  and  the  folly  of  bestowing  any  care  on  so  worthless 
an  object,  the  second  dealing  with  the  mind  and  the  advantages 
of  developing  it  regardless  of  the  body,  so  that  man  may  attain 
the  emancipation  of  Nibb&na.1  A  Sinhalese  translation  made 
by  the  author  himself  usually  aocompanies  the  Pali  poem. 
Spence  Hardy  mentions  the  K dyo- wVttf i -gatha -tonne  as  one  of 
the  books  which  he  consulted  and  translated  in  the  preparation 
of  his  Manual  of  Duddhum,  and  tells  us  that  it  was  read  to 
condemned  criminals  “  that  they  may  not  grieve  at  being 
obliged  to  leave  a  state  that  is  connected  with  so  many  evils 
The  Srhg&ra  rasa-ralna-mala  is  a  treatise  on  the  eight  forms 
of  dancing.  It  is  written  in  Puli  stanzas  and  is  accompanied 
by  a  Sinhalese  translation.  It  iB  the  only  work  of  its  kind 
extant  in  Ceylon,  written  in  Pali.  The  eight  forms  of  dancing 
are  tp'igdra  or  lascivious,  hatya  or  comic,  torund  or 
mournful,  rudro  or  passionate,  tuna  or  athletic,  bhatjdnaka 

i  See  Wlckremuingbc,  Cattlofiu,  p.  «U,  introduction  usd  text.  psurim. 

1  PabliilM^  in  Colombo,  1&S1. 

>  Manual  of  BuddMism*  2nd  cd..  p.  540. 


286 


TUB  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


or  intimidating,  bibhatta  or  horrible,  and  adbhula  or  extra¬ 
ordinary  feats  of  skill.  The  author  say*  that  some  have  a 
ninth  division  called  Syanta  or  diverting,  but  he  thinks  that 
this  last  is  included  in  the  eight  already  mentioned.  It  is 
written  in  several  metres,  and  is  a  ‘most  interesting  work, 
if  for  nothing  else,  at  least  for  its  uniqueness. 


CHAPTER  XIV 
The  Modern  Period 

J^ING  KlRl'I  &Rl  was  followed  by  his  brother,  Rujadhi- 
raja-Sirpha.  He  evinced  the  same  interest  ns  hia  pre¬ 
decessor  had  shown  in  the  cause  of  religion  and  of  learning, 
and,  finding  that  the  Katika-vata  drawn  up  by  his  brother 
needed  revision,  he  summoned  an  assembly  of  monks  and 
formulated  a  new  KatikH-vata  1  He  was  a  scholar,  well-versed 
in  Pali  and  Sanskrit  and  Sinhalese,  and  collected  round  him 
a  band  of  brilliant  literary  men,  whose  obiter  dicta,— apart  from 
their  original  compositions — uttered  most  often  in  extempore 
verses,  form  very  interesting  reading.1  The  king  himself  was 
a  poet  of  great  merit,  and  his  beautiful  Sinhalese  poem,  the 
Asadtsa-J atala,3  is  an  elegant  composition,  full  of  melody 
and  teeming  with  a  wealth  of  poetic  imagery. 

It  was  during  this  reign  that  the  British  in  1782  first  declared 
war  against  the  Dutch  in  Ceylon,  and  in  that  very  same  year 
they  captured  Trincomali.  British  trade  in  India  had  grown 
during  the  preceding  two  centuries,  and  now  the  seizure  of  the 
Dutch  possessions  became  essential  to  them,  both  for  the 
protection  of  their  own  territory  and  also  for  the  humiliation 
of  the  only  formidable  rival  who  then  competed  with  Great 
Britain  for  the  commerce  of  the  Indian  seas.  Already  in 
1763  the  Engliah  had  sent  an  embassy  to  Klrti  Sri  in  Kandy, 
to  negotiate  for  an  amicable  treaty;  the  Sinhalese  king 
received  the  overtures  favourably,  hut  nothing  came  of 
it.4  In  1795  Holland  found  herself  helplessly  involved  in  the 
great  war  which  was  then  agitating  Europe,  and  the  Engliah 
in  India  eagerly  seized  the  opportunity  to  capture  the  Dutch 
dominions  in  Ceylon.  Kajudhirija-Sirpha  entered  into  an 
alliance  with  the  English  Governor  at  Madras,  and,  when, 

1  Wiclcrcsnaainf  he,  p.  xxii. 

'  Thcac  bare  been  published  in  various  anthologies  of  Sinhalese  poetry 
(jTari-aanpard). 

•  JI.V.,  Supplement  to  chapter  r,  rr.  13-14. 

*  Tennent,  to],  ii,  p.  46. 


288 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


early  in  1796,  Colonel  Stuart  appeared  before  the  Dutch 
garrison  at  Colombo  and  demanded  their  submission,  they 
marched  out  without  striking  a  blow.  The  capitulation  of  the 
Dutch  was  completed  by  a  convention  between  the  Dutch 
Governor  and  Colonel  Stuart,  and  on  the  16th  of  February, 
1796,  the  British  flag  waved  over  the  walls  of  Colombo.1 

Two  years  later  Rajadbirija-Siipba  died,  and  the  Adigar, 
or  Prime  Minister,  nominated  as  his  successor  a  nephew  of  the 
queen,  on  eighteen-year-old  boy,  who  ascended  the  throne  as 
Srf  Vikrama  Rija-Simha.  The  Adigar,  whoee  name  was 
Pilima  Talauve,  was  a  traitor  of  the  deepest  dye,  whose 
“  vaulting  ambition  oft  overleapt  itself  He  was  fired  by 
a  treacherous  desire  to  procure  the  death  or  the  dethronement 
of  the  king  and  ascend  the  throne  himself.  With  this  end  in 
view  he  spared  no  pains  to  spread  disaffection  among  the 
king's  subjects  and  ceaselessly  plotted  against  his  life.  He 
entered  into  secret  negotiations  with  Frederick  North,  who 
had  come  as  the  first  British  Governor  of  Ceylon,  and  the 
latter,  instead  of  disclaiming  any  participation  in  the 
treacherous  designs  of  Pilima  Talauvd,  disgracefully  lent 
himself  to  “intrigues  inconsistent  with  the  dignity  and  the 
honour  of  his  high  office  When  the  Adigar  disclosed  his 
plans  for  the  ruin  of  the  young  king.  North  did  not  consider 
it  unbecoming  to  discuss  with  him  a  matter  so  revolting  and 
to  enter  into  a  bargain  with  the  traitor.  From  this  time 
onwards  the  life  of  Sri  Vikrama  was  in  continual  danger ; 
he  was  dimly  aware  of  the  plots  that  were  being  hatched 
against  him,  but  found  himself  helpless  to  arrest  their 
progress.  He  was  deprived  of  all  peace  of  mind ;  on  the  advice 
of  his  evil  associates  he  had  recourse  to  intoxicating  drink, 
that  he  might  thus  drown  his  sorrows. 

There  is  extant  a  Pali  poem,  written  about  this  period,  by 
a  monk  named  Sumafigala  of  Kunkunava,  in  the  Kandyan 
district.  The  author  calls  himself  a  pupil  of  Rambukvellc 

1  Tennent,  ii,  p.  68. 

•  Ibid.,  pp.  76-8. 


THH  MODERN  PERIOD 


289 


Thera,  and  mentions  that  he  had  studied  under  Saraoankara. 
The  names  of  several  of  the  eminent  Elders  of  the  time  aro 
given :  Moratota  Dhammananda,  Malvatte  Sirinivaaa, 

Kaduvela  Thera,  Dhammapula,  Dhammananda,  Siddhattha, 
and  Sonanda.  The  poem  ia  called  Raim-sandr.ta,  and  is 
written  in  elegant  Pali  stanzas.  It  purports  to  be  a  letter 
(Sandesa)  addressed  to  the  God  Rama  (Vi$iju)  at  Rama 
Dcvnlu  in  Ilonguranketa,  praying  to  the  god  to  shower  his 
blessings  on  Sri  Vjkrama  RAjn-Simha.  The  poet  praises  the 
beauty  of  the  capital,  its  palace  and  temples,  and  the  river 
at  Kandy.  He  then  goes  on  to  eulogiza  the  king.  From  this 
account  of  the  king’s  character,  written  before  he  began  his 
downward  career,  which  ended  in  sorrow  both  to  himself  and 
to  his  country,  we  gather  that  he  was  a  man  of  artistic 
temperament— witness  his  efforts  to  beautify  the  capital  with 
a  lake,  which  yet  remains  its  chief  attraction — and  that  he  was 
a  great  lover  of  learning. 

But  the  feeling  of  insecurity  and  helplessness,  which 
ceaselessly  dogged  his  footsteps,  hardened  his  heart  against 
all  finer  emotions,  and  he  gave  himself  up  to  savage  excesses, 
unsurpassed  by  any  recorded  example  of  human  depravity. 
North  now  openly  began  to  assist  Pilimatalauv6  in  exciting 
insurrections  all  over  the  country,  and  in  forcing  the  king  to 
commit  an  act  of  44  sufficient  aggression  ”  which  would 
serve  as  a  pretext  for  the  British  to  declare  war  upon  the 
Kandyans. 

North  left  Ceylon  in  1805  and  was  succeeded  by  Robert 
Brownrigg.  The  traitorous  Pilamatolauve  was  beheaded  in 
1812,  detected  in  an  attempt  to  assassinate  the  king.  His 
nephew,  Ehalcpola,  became  Adigar,  and,  taking  advantage  of 
the  universal  horror  with  which  the  king’s  atrocities  were 
regarded  by  his  subjects,  organised  a  general  rebellion. 
The  attempt  proved  abortive,  and  the  king’s  vengeance  knew 
no  bounds.  Ehalcpola 'a  wife  and  children  were  tortured  and 
put  to  death  with  appalling  cruelty.  This  awful  occurrence 
was  followed  by  promiscuous  executions  of  all  who  were 


290 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  Of  CEYLON 


suspected  of  implication  in  the  conspiracy ;  at  length  the 
limit*  of  human  endurance  being  passed,  revolt  became  rife 
throughout  the  kingdom  and  Eh&lepola  again  appealed  to  the 
British  for  help.  In  January,  1815,  an  army  was  on  its  march 
to  the  capital,  and  within  a  few  weeks  the  king  was  taken 
captive.  On  tho  2nd  of  March,  1815,  at  a  solemn  assembly 
of  the  Kandyan  chiefs,  the  king  was  deposed,  and  his 
dominions  were  vested  in  the  British  Crown — contrary  to 
what  Eb&lepola  was  given  to  expect,  when  the  English  lent 
him  their  support. 

In  their  helplessness  the  chiefs  acquiesced  in  the  British 
Raj,  and  a  convention  was  drawn  up  whereby  the  Kandyan 
dominions  were  ceded  to  Great  Britain.  The  Sinhalese  nation, 
which  had  remained  free  for  2,858  years,  now  finally  lost  their 
independence  and  became  subject  to  a  foreign  power.  It  is 
significant  that  in  the  treaty  by  which  the  island  was  handed 
over  to  the  British  one  article  laid  down  that  the  rites  and 
ceremonies  of  the  Buddhist  religion  should  be  declared  sacred 
and  inviolate,  and  that  the  Government  should  undertake  to 
maintain  and  protect  them.  The  safeguarding  of  the  national 
religion  was  emphatically  pat  forward  as  a  condition  of  their 
voluntary  submission.  The  unmitigated  despotism  of  £ri 
Vikrama  had  so  dazed  his  subjects  that  they  regarded  the 
transfer  of  the  kingdom  to  an  alien  power  with  almost  perfect 
indifference.  The  chiefs  had  submitted  to  the  inevitable 
force  of  circumstances  with  admirable  grace,  leaving  to  time 
the  development  of  the  result.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore, 
that  before  long  attempts  were  made  to  regain  their 
independence,  os  soon  as  they  realized  the  true  state  of  affairs. 
But  all  such  attempts  ended  in  failure,  the  country  was  too 
disorganized  for  a  general  insurrection  and  the  sudden  and 
premature  rebellions  which  broke  out  proved  abortive. 
Within  a  few  years  tranquillity  was  restored,  and  tho  people, 
too  tired  to  fight,  were  contented  under  a  mild  and  indulgent 
government.  They  returned  to  their  ordinary  avocations, 
and  there  was  peace  in  the  land. 


THE  MODERN  PERIOD 


291 


Once  the  consummation  of  Acquiring  possession  of  the 
oountry  had  been  aohieved,  the  British  Government  applied 
with  energy  all  its  resources  to  develop  the  land.  Roads  were 
constructed,  commerce  encouraged  in  its  utmost  freedom, 
mountain  forests  felled  to  make  way  for  the  plantation 
of  coffee,  etc.,  civil  organizations  matured,  revenue  reformed, 
and  measures  adopted  for  the  advancement  of  agriculture 
and  industry. 

Stepa  were  also  taken  for  the  promotion  of  religion  and 
education.  The  Portuguese  had  been  freebooters  and  fanatics. 
Commerce  was  not  their  only  object ;  they  wiahtd  to  oonvert 
the  people  to  Christianity  by  every  means  in  their  power. 
For  this  power  they  had  devised  some  sort  of  education, 
which — though  proaelytism  was  its  chief  aim — had  served 
a  useful  purpose.  The  Dutch,  though  they  occupied  them¬ 
selves  less  with  conversion,  manifested  no  disinterested  concern 
at  all  for  the  elevation  and  happiness  of  their  subjects,  and, 
where  care  was  bestowed  upon  the  spread  of  education,  their 
motives  were  such  os  to  detract  from  the  grace  and  the 
generosity  of  the  act.  The  avowed  object  of  their  schools 
was  to  wean  the  youug  Sinhalese  from  their  allegiance  to  the 
king  and  to  impress  upon  them  the  might  of  Holland.1  The 
great  feature  of  their  rule  was  the  utter  neglect  of  the  oountry 
and  its  interests  owing  to  the  selfishness,  egotism,  folly,  and 
want  of  energy  of  the  general  government.*  Their  religious 
policy  was  much  more  insidious  than  that  of  the  Portuguese 
and  much  more  useless.  It  was  inspired  more  by  a  fury  against 
the  Church  of  Rome,  which  was  in  the  island  already,  than 
by  a  desire  for  conversion.  Iu  1658  a  proclamation  was  issued, 
forbidding,  on  pain  of  death,  the  harbouring  or  concealing  of 
a  Roman  Catholic  priest.3  The  Presbyterian  converts  whom 


•  Tennont,  ii,  ji.  67. 

•  M.  Burnand, "  The  Dutah  in  Ceylon,”  Anatic  Journal,  1821,  p.  All. 

•  TeiMVtnt,  Chrittianilf  in  Ceylon,  pp.  41  foil. 


552  THB  t'AXl  utehatuiib  qt  cEi'LOir 

they  th  erase  IycS  nyule  W8f0  not  looted  a^fer  at  till  jp  regard 
to  either  elementary  teaching  or  spiritual  instruction.  In 
Jafinft  jlons  there  wem  180,000  "  Christian^  "  under  thiCo 
clergymen  I  Yet  Jill  the  time  baptism  wn  being  carried  on 
a  pace  at  every  Tillage  sehnoIhouSC,  where  attendant,  was 
compafazy,  The  UQQUUt  of  education  given  in  those  schools 
m  infinitesimally  a  ninth  It  seldom  went  b«yond  teaching 
their  pupils  to  read  and  write  in  the  language  of  their  district, 
and.  oven  this  was  discouraged  by  the  authorities  at  llatavia. 
In  a  communication  addressed  to  the  missionaries  of  Coylon 
they  strongly  expressed  their  opinion  that  'reading  and 
writing  are  things  not  so  absolutely  MMMKy  for  the 
edification  Of  these  poor  wretches  BS  teaching  them  the 
fundamentals  of  the  religion  which  cue  contained  in  a  very 
few  point*;  and  to  pretend  to  propagate  Christianity  by 
reading  and  writing  would  l»  both  tedious  and  chargeable, 
to  tho  Netherlands  East  India  Company ,1-1  And,  id  order  to 
facilitate  the  work  of  wnvaraiott,  proclamation  WM  publicly 
made  that  no  one  oauld  aepiro  to  tba  rank  of  hloduliar  (chief) , 
or  be  even  permitted  to  farm  land  or  hold  it  under  the  Govdrli- 
mulit,  who  had  not  first  undergone  baptism,  become  a  member 
of  the  Plotefitaut  Church,  and  aahscribcd  to  tile  dcKJtrinca 
of  the  Helvetic  confession  of  faith*  Tha  number  of  nominal 
ChrifttiauB  was  thus  greatly  increased.  Tim  system  ol  political 
bribery,  to  encourage  conversion,  produced  organised 
hypocrisy,  whose  results  wen;  pernicious  and  whose  recoil 
Bud  reaction,  when  it  did  eome,  was  dcstruetive  of  the  object 
for  the  furtherance  of  which  it  had  been  resorted  to  unwisely. 
When  the  Dutch  retired  from  Ceylon,  they  left  behind  them 
a  fluperatiuctuio  of  Christianity,  prodigious  in  its  outward 
dimensions.,  it  is  true,  hut  SO  internally  tanwimd  and  so  unsub¬ 
stantial,  that  within  a  few  years  it  had  disappeared  utmost 
from  the  memory  of  the  people  of  Ceylon.  A  religion  which 

1  Lertil  ef  Hie  frSTVTJiior  tltncrij  <i(  15*4*™  ttt  nSnHulri,  fetfi  6cp&-, 
toi52.  SM  Bfeitou*,  Iktcrip,  of  dl^yfeq,  fJ?-,  J>.  fell. 

*  TbnDOIlt,  lot.  cit*  p.  4ft. 


THE  MODERN  PERIOD 


293 


required  coercion  and  persecution  to  enforce  it*  adoption 
vnu  doomed  to  failure. 

During  the  early  years  of  the  British  regime  but  little  was 
done  to  remedy  this  lamentable  state  of  affairs,  brought  about 
by  the  artifice  and  corrupt  inducement  of  the  Portuguese 
priesthood  and  the  alternate  bribery  and  persecution  of  the 
clergy  of  the  Church  of  Holland.1  In  1800  Governor  Maitland 
published  a  emulation  abolishing  the  Roman  Catholic  dis¬ 
abilities  imposed  by  the  Dutch,  and  later  an  Act  for  the  relief 
of  the  Roman  Catholics  was  passed  in  1829.*  But  even  as  late 
as  1860  nothing  had  been  done  to  remove  the  difficulties 
under  which  the  Buddhist*  were  labouring.  Even  at  that  time 
no  child  could  be  legally  registered  without  previous  baptism 
by  a  Christian  minister,  and  the  clergy  refused  to  solemnize 
the  marriage  of  unbaptized  individuals.*  The  people  were 
made  to  understand  that  baptism  conferred  upon  them  some 
sort  of  civil  distinction,  and  this  resulted  in  the  production 
of  prodigious  numbers  of  "  Government  Christians  ,  who 
ostensibly  professed  Christianity,  and  we  are  told  that  “  in 
point  of  character  and  conduct  they  were  notoriously  the  most 
abandoned  and  reckless  class  of  the  community  ”.4  They  were 
mode  to  sec  in  Christianity  not  only  happiness  in  the  world 
which  is  to  come,  but,  what  was  more  important  to  them,  the 
promise  of  this  life  as  well  1 

With  the  proclamation  of  liberty  of  worship  to  all  sects  of 
the  Christian  faith  the  island  soon  became  a  busy  scene  of 
the  activity  of  various  missionary  bodies.  The  Baptists  had 
already  formed  a  colony  in  1792 :  they  were  followed  by  the 
Wesleyan  Methodists  in  1814,  the  Americans  in  1816,  and  the 
Church  of  England  in  1818.  They  received  every  encourage¬ 
ment  from  the  Government,  both  in  the  island  and  at  White¬ 
hall.  When  in  1808  Sir  Thomas  Maitland  attempted  to  remove 


•  Tennont,  ibid.,  p.  77. 
»  Ibid.,  pp.  75  mxI  01. 

•  Ibid.,  pp.  88-0. 

•  I  bid.,  p.  80. 


294 


THE  TALI  LITERATURE  OF  OQS10H 


the  regulation  which  hod  rendered  Christianity  an  tS-veuiini 
qualification  for  office,  he  was  prOta]?tly  censured  by  the 
Secretary  of  State,  and  the  nwstsity  was  urged  upon  him  of 
“  devoting  every  energy  to  the  prom-osion  of  education,  us 
eHsencial  to  the  extension,  if  net  ultimately  identified  with  the 
existence,  of  Christianity  itself  ”,1 

The  mifleiOMficti  noon  realized  that  the  mere  sprinkling  of 
water  &3X  tho  law  and  the  repetition  of  the  formula  of  the 
baptismal  rite  were  not  sufficient  to  moke  the  RimMcm  n 
Christian  and  sever  him  from  his  deep  and  tenacious  attach' 
meat  to  hia  own  national  traditions  ■  They  therefore  busied 
tbemEelvas  with  establishing  schools  in  various  parts  of  the 
island,  manned  and  managed  by  missionary  bodies.  Thera 
the  children  were  instructed  in  the  principles  of  Christianity 
and  the  rudiments  of  elementary  knowledge.  Hitherto  the 
temple  had  been  the  village  school  ns  well,  and  the  monks  had 
acted  as  the  national  instructors  both  in  Secular  learning  and 
Spiritual  wisdom.  But  in  the  chaotic  conditions  that  prevailed 
during  the  preceding  two  centuries  this  system  of  education 
had  become  disorganized  ;  and,  although  here  and  tliuro  the 
temple-schools  yet  maintained  n  precarious,  existence,  the 

missionaries  now  launched  forth  a  campaign  for  superseding 
the  Buddhist  priesthood  in  the  department  of  education. 
These  schools  were  supported  by  mission  funds  and 
subsidized  by  Government  grunts.  Inmost  of  them  no  formal 
declaration,  of  Ghr.ist.um  belief  was  insisted  upon  as  a 
preliminary  to  admission,  but  each  Htudent  was  required  to 
be  present  at  tbe  morning  and  evening  devotions  of  the  school, 
and  go  through  a  course  of  instruction  in  the  Christian  faith. 
They  hud  no  opportunity  of  participating  in  their  own 
religious  observances, 

The  instruction  imparted  to  them  in  these  schools  was 
arranged  with  a  viow  to  undermining  tbe  superstitions  of  their 
beliefs  fas  the  missionaries  wore  pleased  to  call  alf  religions 
except  their  own),  “to  destroy  the  polypus  vitality  of  their 

1  TcEiDcrat.  sji.  flit,,  p.  SS. 


THB  MODERN  PERIOD 


296 


faith,”  “to  demonstrate  the  subtle  errors  of  their  idolatry, 
to  expose  the  absurdities  of  their  religion,  and  bring  home  to 
them  tho  civilizing  influences  of  Christian  life.”  1  It  was  to  bo 
a  gradual  process  ;  the  mind  of  the  student  was  to  be  stirred, 
his  inert  faculties  set  in  motion,  his  previous  habits  of  thought 
disturbed  ;  doubts  made  to  assail  his  spirit,  the  deception  of 
his  original  faith  pointed  out,  followed  by  ft  displacement  of 
unsoundness,  the  rejection  of  error  and  tho  dawning*  of  a 
desire  for  the  substitution  of  truth.  For  this  purjHiac  men 
were  imported  with  years  of  laborious  exj)erience  nmongBt 
“  heathens  of  every  hue  and  in  every  quarter  of  the  world 
Tho  OKtablishment  of  vernacular  schools  was  soon  followed 
by  the  organization  of  schools  and  seminaries  for  the  study  of 
English,  and  these  followed  the  same  lines  of  policy.  The 
education  of  girls  was  not  neglected,  and  the  earliest  efforts 
of  tho  missionaries  were  directed  to  the  establishment  of 
girls’  schools,  especially  of  hoarding  schools,  "  where  the  girl* 
could  be  domesticated  in  childhood,  and  kept  pure  and 
uncontaminated  till  married  with  the  appreciation  of  their 
Christian  guardians.”  *  Buddhism  was  held  up  to  them  a* 
an  object  worthy  of  nothing  else  oxcept  ridicule  and  con¬ 
tumely,  and  every  effort  was  made  to  defeat  the  influence 
of  parents  and  relations  in  the  matter  of  religion  by 
condemning  their  idolatry  and  laughing  to  scorn  their  liabita 
and  pursuits  of  life. 

As  a  result  of  all  this,  a  cleavage  and  an  estrangement, 
more  deadly  than  had  ever  risen  out  of  the  institution  of 
•  caste,  began  to  creep  in  among  the  Sinhalese.  The  schools 

provided  no  access  to  their  own  literature  :  possibly  it  was 
recognized  that  national  "superstition*  ''  have  ever  found 
their  surest  allies  in  a  national  literature,  with  which  their 
traditions  and  their  tenet*  were  almost,  imperceptibly  blended. 
Instead  their  intellectual  advancement  was  sought  to  be  based 

*  Tenor  nt,  op.  cit.,  pp.  142  »ixl  270. 

*  Ibi<)..  p-  143. 

»  IbiO..  p.  159. 


£96  THE  [A[,I  LITEHATHEE  OP  0EYL01I 

OH  hooka  which  were  almost  unavoidably  adaptations  from 
European  titcreturea,  abounding  in  idcaa  totally  foreign  to 
tbtit  customs  and  their  habits  of  thought,  and  teeming  with 
forms  of  expression  neither  familiar  nor  intelligible  to  them, 

Other  means  were  also  adopted  to  ensure  the  grand  con¬ 
summation  of  the  ultimate  triumph  of  Christianity  ;  the 
instrumentality  of  preaching  and  the  printing  press — 
education,  exhortation,  and  the  book,  Fkdres  went  about 
preaching  throughout  iho  scattered  villages,  And  the  preaa 
looked  after  the  universal  distribution  of  the  scriptures  and 
script uial  tracts  Mid  p  it  bl  Seat  Eon  a  designed  to  expose  the 
delusions  of  the.  peopled  HH  idolatrous  faith  11  and  to  exhibit 
the  Hf  supremacy  and  the  divine  origin  of  Christianity  Tho 
violence  done  to  tile  Sinhalese  language  in  these  tracts  and 
publications  is  extraordinary.  The  pliant  dialect  of  Use 
Sinhalese. — so  artistically  i  ufUetsd  that  by  the  variations  of  a 
single  pronoun  the  speaker  is  cabled  to  supply  it  with  delicate 
propriety,  SO  as  to  convey  HO  teas  than  ten  or  twelve  degrees 
of  rospeot — ia  replaced  in  them  by  an  artificial  jargon  lacking 
jn  nicety  or  hone  or  grace  of  style. 

For  the  successful  demon  Atretic  a  of  their  errors  to  the 
.Buddhists,  to  assail  their  code  of  etkEcs  and  to  point  out  to 
them  the  fallacies  of  the  metaphysical  subtleties  of  their 
faith,  the  missionaries  now  began  to  Study  Sinhalese  and 
Pali  and  to  read  the  Buddhist  scriptures-  Their  researches 
hoou  convinced  them  that  the  subjects  of  their  study  wen;  full 
of  literary  treasures,  whose  value  hud  not  so  far  been 
AufEcieirtty  realized  ;  this  added  a  new  jte$t  to  their  work,  and 
scholars  like  Charter,  rjarubrujk,  Clough,  Spence  Hardy,  and 
Gegcrly  began  to  devote  their  attention  more  and  more  to  the 
task  of  mastering  the  hooka  which  they  found  in  Ceylon.  They 
wrote  gremuu'iTft  far  the  systematic  study  of  these  languages, 
and  compiled  dictionaries  for  the  benefit  of  future  students.1 

s  e  g.  -ChiTtEr'*  £lhAiIw(  C?ram*t^r  (LAI 5)  i  Glougb1*  iSra-nnn*? 
(ISSI)  and  _? i  n i*uiJ tj t  IHtltentatji  { )  6£J)  ;  Lamtiffcik'*  ffintafr-M  ffromrmii' 

|  1434). 


THE  MODERN  PERIOD 


297 


They  made  translations  of  such  books  as  would  be  useful  to 
them  in  preaching  against  the  Buddhists,  and  published  them 
that  they  might  be  better  known.  Some  of  these  books  reached 
Europe  and  America,  and  there  aroused  in  the  hearts  of  various 
scholars  a  desire  to  learn  more  about  the  religion  which  the 
missionaries  sought  to  condemn  and  the  literature  of  which 
these  books  formed  a  part.  The  fervour  which  inspired  the 
publication  of  such  books  was  great.  Spence  Hardy  in  his 
Manual  of  Buddhism,  which  is  a  compilation  from  the  sacred 
books  of  the  Sinhalese,  said  :  “  This  Manual  will  be  received, 

I  doubt  not,  aa  a  boon  ;  and  it  will  enable  them  (the  messengers 
of  the  cross)  more  readily  to  understand  the  system  they  are 
endeavouring  to  supersede  by  the  establishment  of  Truth.  1 
see  before  me,  looming  in  the  distance,  a  glorious  vision,  in 
which  the  lands  of  the  East  are  presented  in  majesty  ;  happy, 
holy,  and  free.  I  may  not,  I  dare  not,  describe  it  \  but  it  is 
the  joy  of  my  existence  to  have  been  an  instrument,  in 
dcgroc,  however  feeble,  to  bring  about  this  grand  con¬ 
summation."  ( Manual  of  Buddhism,  Prefaoe,  p.  x.) 

But  tho  worm  had  already  began  to  turn.  The  bewildering 
variety  of  religious  beliefs  which  had  been  presented  to  tho 
Sinhalese  for  acceptance  by  the  various  missionary  bodies, 
under  the  regimes  of  tho  Portuguese,  the  Dutch,  and  now  the 
English,  had  left  them  dazed,  and  later  produced  in  them  a 
listlessness  aud  an  indifference  to  all  religion.  The  ostensible 
connexion  whi-ch  the  churches  had  with  the  Governments  of 
the  day  was  associated  in  their  minds  with  patronage  and 
power,  and,  being  allured,  as  all  ordinary  men  are,  by  the 
prospect  of  obtaining  wealth  and  rank  under  the  Government, 
they  had  changed  from  one  faith  to  another  as  the  expedience 
of  circumstances  had  dictated  to  them.  This  had  encouraged 
falsehood  and  brought  about  a  certain  debasement  of 
character.  They  designated  themselves  the  followers  of  the 
"  Sopromid-ugama  "  (Government  religion),  and  they  formed 
a  "  whose  reputation  and  whose  practice  were  alike  an 


THE  PAM  LITERATURE  or  OETLUJi 


outrage  del  the  religion  :u  which  they  were  bom  and  an  insult 
to  that  which  they  professed  to  have  adopted  "} 

Education  had,  CM  we  saw  earlier,  been  neglected  for  several 
generations.,  and  this  bad  produced  Hit  obtU&fiHeSS  And  a  torpor 
of  intellectual  faculties ;  it  had  smothered  alt  emotions  of 
enterprise,  emulfl-tdonj  and  ambition,  such  as  supply  a  stimulus 
to  tho  intellect  and  organise  the  march  of  improvement.  The 
Christianity  which  was  imposed  upon  them  was  not  made  to 
appear  as  an  institution  of  the  land,  to  bo  cherished  and 
supported  as  such ;  its  exatio  natmro  was  patent ;  the 
missionary  did  not  effectuality  accommodate,  his  nuniatfUtion 
to  the  habits  of  bia  flock,  so  as  to  gain  upon  their  confidence, 
or  to  ertert  a  sufficiently  strong  influence  over  their  opinions 
and  habits  of  thought.  The  "  civilization  ”  which  it  had 
brought  in  its  trail  and  which  meant  chiefly  the  adoption  of 
European  wayH  and  modes  of  life  created  artificial  needs ; 
it  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  under  its  i nfluenee  no  art 
of  a  ay  hi  nd  was  developed,  and  no  achievements  of  the  mind, 
in  the  shape  of  literature,  were  produced. 

But  half  a  century  of  British  rule  worked  remarkabto 
changes  ;  it  brought  peace  and  tranquillity  into  the  island, 
whore  strife  and  domestic  discontent  and  despotism  had  reigned 
for  nearly  two  centuries.  British  capital  and  enterprise  helped 
in  the  development  of  the  land  And  secured  the  enjoyment  of 
certain  personal  comforts  which  had  not  been  possible  under 
the  Portuguese  or  the  Dutch  ;  new  careens  of  occupation  were 
Opened  up,  and  new  energies  called  into  exertion  ;  which 
resulted  in  the  industrial  aud  the  material  i  mproveinent  of  the 
people.  The  British  followed  a  policy  of  general  religious 
tolerance  ]  and  though,  for  quite  a  long  time  yet,  the  Buddhists 
Suflcred  from  many  disabilities,  the  more  Courageous  of 
them  Were  now  able  to  profcHfl  their  faith  without  fear  of 
being  openly  persecuted.  Governor  North,  in  spite  of  hia 
ignominious  participation  in  the  conspiracy  to  depose  the  last 
King  cf  Ceylon,  was  a  IQAU  of  btoAd  views,  and  in  a  statesman ■ 

1  Tcmient*  CArittinnily  in  Cey fos,  p.  to. 


THE  MODERN  PERIOD 


299 


like  manner  be  adopted  various  measures  to  conciliate  the 
people.  Tcnnent  tells  us  that  his  administration  was 
characterized  by  signal  success  in  the  organization  of  civil 
government ;  the  promotion  of  religion  and  education  and 
commerce  ;  the  establishment  of  Courts  of  Justice  ;  the 
reform  of  the  revenue,  and  the  advancement  of  native 
agriculture  and  industry.1  In  pursuance  of  this  policy  of  the 
promotion  of  education  he  increased  the  number  of  parochial 
schools  to  170  in  various  parts  of  the  Island,  and  founded  a 
“  Seminary  ”  at  Colombo  for  the  Sinhalese  youths  who  wished 
to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  English.1  This  "  Seminary  was  the 
first  English  school  in  Ceylon.  Other  schools  soon  followed, 
giving  instructions,  some  in  the  vernacular  and  others  in 
English,  opened  by  various  missionary  bodies.  Their  avowed 
object  was  proeclyzation ;  but,  if  the  measure  of  their  success 
be  judged  by  the  number  of  converts  thoy  have  made,  their 
efforts  cannot  be  called  productive  of  great  results. 

The  grand  consummation,  which  Hardy  and  his  colleagues 
so  dovoutly  prayed  for,  of  Christianizing  Ceylon  seems  yet 
as  far  off  as  ever.  Apart  from  this,  however,  these  schools 
served  to  diffuse  over  a  wide  area  that  general  information 
which  is  the  first  essential  of  all  knowledge.  The  English 
schools  provided  their  students  with  facilities  for  the 
acquisition  of  English,  and  opened  for  them  the  door  to  a 
familiarization  with  the  advances  of  modern  science  and 
modern  education ;  these  schools  gave  them  the  ability  to 
investigate  the  problems  that  were  put  before  them  ,  the 
students  learned,  like  the  Jews  of  Beroea,  to  examine  things 
for  themselves  and  “search  the  Scriptures  whether  these 
things  are  so”.  In  many  instances  the  ofuisni  of  these 
institutions,  instead  of  returning  the  care  expended  on  them 
by  the  missionaries  by  socking  conversion  to  Christianity, 
became  devout  Buddhists,  whose  desire  was  the  propa¬ 
gation  of  their  own  faith.  Their  education  had  given  them 

*  Tnnuent,  Ceylon,  U,  p.  96. 

»  Cty.  Antiq.  and  Lit.  R«q.,  i*.  pt.  ii,  p.  146. 


300 


TUB  PALI  IJTKRATURB  OT  CBTLON 


exercise  of  thought  and  exertion  of  intellectual  power  sufficient 
to  realize  the  value  of  their  own  national  faith,  and  now,  by 
a  strange  Nemesis,  they  came  forward  as  its  strong  adherents 
against  the  onslaught  of  the  missionaries. 

Meanwhile  the  missionaries  themselves,  more  especially 
the  Methodists,1  had  been  studying  the  doctrines  of  Buddhism 
and  the  literature  connected  with  it.  The  information  they 
thus  acquired  was  sedulously  used  by  them  in  the  preparation 
of  tracts  in  Sinhalese,  demonstrative  of  the  errors  of  the 
Buddhist  religion  and  illustrative  of  the  evidences  and 
institutes  of  Christianity.  They  acquired  a  command  over  the 
Sinhalese  language,  and  their  preachers  went  from  village  to 
village,  distributing  these  tracts  by  the  thousands,  and 
questioning  the  truth  of  Buddha's  teaching.  The  monks  in 
their  village  temples,  in  the  course  of  their  sermons  to  the  con¬ 
gregations  that  assembled  at  the  Vihara  on  the  UposatJia 
days,  attempted  to  refute  the  arguments  adduced  against 
Buddhism  by  the  itinerant  Christian  preachers.  Many  of  them, 
with  characteristic  broad-mindedness,  invited  the  missionaries 
to  their  temples  and  gave  them  opportunities  of  addressing 
assemblies  of  monks,  at  the  conclusion  of  which  they  would 
ask  questions,  relative  to  the  proofs  and  principles  of 
Christianity.1  But  the  denunciation  of  Buddhism  went  on 
apace,  till  a  young  monk  named  Mohoftivatte  Gupananda, 
appeared  on  the  scene  and  Hung  the  gauntlet  down  in  a 
challenge  to  the  Christians  to  meet  him  in  open  debate.  The 
Christian  clergy  at  first  treated  him  with  indiflercnce,  even 
with  contempt ;  but  the  young  samanera  (novice)  assiduously 
studied  the  Christian  scriptures  and  read  with  avidity  such 
Rationalist  Literature  as  he  could  obtain  (printed  in  Europe) 
dealing  with  the  fallacies  of  Christianity.  He  possessed 

1  TIk  Mothodtat*  have  at  all  time!  been  the  oleueal  students  of  Buddhism 
and  its  sacral  literature,  and  they  produced  men  of  groat  scholarship 
both  in  the  classical  and  the  modem  languages  of  Oyioo,  eg,  Clough, 
OogorlT,  and  Spence  Hardy. 

>  Tennent,  CKriiUnily  <a  Ceylon,  pp.  307  and  312. 


THE  MODERN  PERIOD 


301 


tremendous  energy,  and  a  masterful  personality ;  his  voice 
was  compared  to  the  roar  of  the  ocean,  deep  and  far-reaching ; 
his  flood  of  eloquence  was  unceasing.  Well  versed  in  the 
Buddha’s  teaching  and  armed  with  information  against  the 
Christians,1  he  weut  with  meteoric  rapidity  from  village  to 
village,  carrying  the  war  into  the  enemy’s  camp,  often  at  great 
personal  risk.  The  fame  of  the  young  orator  spread  like  wild¬ 
fire,  and  his  meetings,  whioh  were  generally  held  in  the  open, 
wero  attended  by  thousands  who  flocked  to  hear  him ;  he 
stormed  several  Christian  strongholds,  always  throwing  down 
his  challenge  to  them  to  meet  him  in  open  debate,  where  the 
relative  merits  of  the  two  religions  could  be  discussed  face 
to  face.  The  challenge  was  at  last  accepted  and  debates  took 
place  at  Udanvifa  (in  the  Four  Korol cs)  in  18G6  and  at 
Gampola  in  1871.  But  the  culmination  of  his  efforts  was  the 
great  Panadura  Controversy  in  August,  1873,  which  lasted  for 
a  week.  Against  him  were  ranged  the  foremost  missionaries 
of  the  day ;  at  the  end  the  victory  naturally  lay  for  the  people 
with  Mohottivatte.  The  orderliness  of  the  assembly  was  a 
great  credit  to  all  concerned,  and,  when  the  Christians  retired 
from  tho  conflict  discomfited,  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Buddhist 
comp  was  unprecedented.  It  was  an  epoch-making  event ; 
the  enthusiasm  it  awakened  amongst  the  Buddhists  was 
immense  ;  festivities  were  held  in  every  temple  in  the  Island 
to  mark  Gunanondn’s  triumph,  his  effigy  was  carried  in 
procession  in  every  village,  and  he  was  the  hero  of  the  hour. 
From  1873  began  the  Buddhist  Renaissance  movement.  Now 
that  the  truth  of  their  religion  hod  been  vindicated,  the 
Buddhists  were  determined  to  fight  their  Christian  adversaries 
with  their  own  weapons — “  education,  exhortation,  and  the 
Press.” 

The  attention  of  Colonel  Henry  Steele  Olcott,  President- 
Founder  of  the  Thcoeophicol  Society,  was  first  drawn  to 

*  Hr  waj  a  bo  an  accomplished  scholar  in  Sinhalese.  Vid*  hit  edition  of 
the  KOrya-iMara  (Colombo,  1&T2). 


302 


THE  PALI  LITERATURE  OP  CEYLON 


Buddhism  by  a  report  of  the  Panadura  Controversy,  which  he 
happened  to  come  across  in  a  public  library  in  the  United 
States.  He  was  a  seeker  after  the  truth  in  all  religions,  and, 
realizing  the  importance  of  the  teachings  of  the  Buddha 
in  the  development  of  man's  spiritual  nature,  he  came  over 
to  Ceylon  to  study  Buddhism  at  first  hand.  His  researches 
soon  convinced  him  of  the  sublimity  of  tho  Buddhist  faith, 
and,  avowing  himself  a  follower  of  the  Teacher,  he  thence¬ 
forward  became  a  staunch  friend  of  the  Sinhalese  Buddhists, 
and  to  the  beet  of  his  ability  helped  them  in  the  tasks  that 
awaited  their  attention. 

Under  his  guidance  in  1880  was  started  the  Buddhist 
Theosophical  Society  at  Colombo.  The  presence  of 
Col.  Olcott  was  an  invaluable  acquisition  to  the  Buddhist 
forward  movement ;  the  Buddhist  leaders  rallied  round  him, 
and,  acting  under  his  counsel,  they  began  establishing  schools 
all  over  the  Buddhist  provinces.  The  enthusiasm  thus 
awakened  in  the  cause  of  Buddhist  education  still  remains 
unabated ;  to-day  the  number  of  Buddhist  schools  in  the 
Island,  both  English  and  vernacular,  reaches  nearly  600, 
and  tho  instruction  they  impart  compares  favourably  with 
that  of  schools  maintained  by  missionary  educational 
organizations  in  Ceylon. 

Funds  were  wanted  to  carry  on  tho  campaign  of  educational 
propaganda.  Volunteers  were  immediately  forthcoming  to 
act  as  itinerant  preachers.  They  went  from  village  to  village, 
appealing  for  subscriptions  to  maintain  the  schools.  The 
Buddhists,  always  generous  in  the  support  of  religion,  readily 
responded.  Their  devotion  to  the  national  faith,  though 
submerged  for  a  time  under  tho  flood  of  persecution,  was 
inveterate,  hereditary  and  insurmountable,  and,  os  soon  as 
their  helplessness  was  removed,  it  found  immediate  expression. 
There  are  men  and  women  still  alive  who  have  vivid  memories 
of  the  tremendous  enthusiasm  that  prevailed  at  these 
collection  meetings. 

The  Christian  Missions  had  been  flooding  the  country  with 


THE  MODERN  PERIOD 


303 


many  tract*  1  dealing  with  the  fallacies  they  had  discovered 
in  Buddhism.  To  counteract  their  influence,  and  also 
to  educate  the  Buddhists  themselves  in  the  knowledge 
of  their  own  religion,  the  Buddhist  leaders  turned  their 
attention  to  the  publication  of  books.  Printing  was  to  them 
as  yet  quite  a  new  art.  It  was  unknown  in  Ceylon  till  about 
the  year  1737,  when  the  Dutch  introduced  printing  in 
Sinhalese  character  for  the  purpose  of  translating  and 
publishing  Christian  works  in  the  language  of  the  people. 
The  Colombo  Auxiliary  Bible  Society  followed  in  the  same 
lines  about  1813  ;  the  Wesleyaus  established  a  press  in  1815  ; 
the  Church  Missionary  Society  in  1822 ;  the  Baptist  Mission  in 
1841  ;  and  the  Roman  Catholics  in  1849.  The  Buddhists  were 
too  poor  to  afford  a  press  of  their  own,  and  they  appealed  to 
the  King  of  Siam,  ns  the  only  Buddhist  King  of  the  time,  for 
help  in  their  enterprise.  The  king  gladly  responded,  and  the 
first  printing  press  controlled  by  the  Sinhalese  Buddhists 
was  established  at  Gallo  in  1862,  under  the  name  of  the 
LatikOpakura  Press.* 

Mohottivntte  Gunananda,  in  his  determination  to  fight  the 
enemy  in  their  own  camp,  had  established  his  headquarters 
at  Kotahena,  then,  as  now,  a  stronghold  of  the  Roman 
Catholics;  thare,  with  the  help  of  his  lay-supporters,  he 
established  in  1862  the  Sarvaj  ila-sisanabhivjddhi-dsy oka 
Press.  The  example  thus  set  was  soon  followed  by  others : 
the  Lakrivikirana  Press  in  1863  and  tho  LaAkAbhinava- 
viAruta  Press  in  1864.  The  most  important  work,  and  the 
most  considerable  in  the  point  of  size,  among  the  first 
publications  of  these  printing  establishments  was  the  Mtlinda- 
prainaya  (tho  Sinhalese  translation  of  the  Milanda-pafiha). 
It  was  felt  that  the  book  would  be  most  useful  in  refuting  the 

1  It  ii  •  regrettable  fact  that  the  language  uarel  both  in  there  tract*  end 
in  the  rejoinder*  ireued  by  the  Buddhiit*  wa«  far  from  being  refined  or 
urbane.  The  vlkat  term*  of  a  bare  were  tometime*  employed  in  the  dkcuftftdoo 
of  tlie  raoet  ftocred  eubjeeta  of  religion*  belief. 

*  1  am  indebted  for  thi*  information  to  the  Hon.  Mr.  W.  A.  d»  Silva,  of 
Colombo. 


304 


THE  paw  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


arguments  hurled  at  the  Buddhists  by  their  adversaries. 
The  expenses  of  the  publication  were  borne  by  five  Buddhist 
gentlemen,  whose  names  deserve  to  be  mentioned  here 
because  their  munificence  paved  the  way  for  the  right  exercise 
of  philanthropy  later.  They  were  Karolis  Plris,  Abraham 
Livera,  Luis  Mendis,  Nandis  Mcndis  Amara-Sekara,  and 
Charlis  Arnolis  Mendis  Vijayaratna  Amara-Sekara.  The  work 
was  issuod  from  the  Buddhist  Press  at  Ko(ohena  in  1877-8, 
under  the  editorship  of  Gtmananda.1 

The  Buddhist  Renaissance  movement,  thus  inaugurated, 
found  its  pioneers  in  the  foremost  scholars  of  the  day.  The 
system  of  temple  education  which  existed  in  ancient  Ceylon 
had  gradually  fallen  into  decay  and  disorganization,  and  was 
now  being  slowly  superseded  by  the  schools,  manned  and 
managed  wholly  by  laymen.  The  monasteries  confined  their 
attention  mainly  to  the  education  of  the  monka.  Secluded  in 
their  cloisters,  and  now  happily  free  from  persecution,  and 
supported  by  an  ever  generous  laity,  they  had  been  sedulously 
devoting  their  energies  to  the  study  of  the  old  books,  both 
sacred  and  secular,  still  preserved  in  places  where  the  ravages 
of  the  persecutors  had  not  penetrated.  When  men  of 
learning  were  required  to  guide  the  destinies  of  the  new 
Forward  Movement,  they  came  forth  and  offered  their  services. 

Foremost  among  them  was  Hikkadnve  Siri  Sumaftgala. 
Born  in  1827  in  a  small  village  near  Golle,  he  entered  the  Order 
while  yet  quite  young.  With  remarkable  assiduity  he  mastered 
the  books  of  the  T ipilaka  along  with  their  commentaries 
under  various  teachers,  and  made  himself  very  proficient 
in  Sanskrit  as  well.  In  his  boyhood  he  had  witnessed  the 
disabilities  under  which  bis  co-religionists  were  labouring  at 
tie  time,  and  while  yet  a  samanera  he  did  all  that  ho  could  to 
encourage  their  adherence  to  the  national  faith  and  to  foster 
heir  devotion  to  it  in  adversity.  His  fame  as  a  preacher 
and  an  erudite  scholar  with  a  vast  wealth  of  knowledge  soon 

1  Ko(ahrn*,  B.S.  2420  (1877-$  A.B.)  pp.  628,  12, 


THE  MODERN  PERIOD 


305 


spread,  and  he  was  one  of  those  that  helped  Gupanonda  at 
the  P&nadura  controversy,  where,  it  is  said,  his  speedy 
penmanship  was  especially  of  the  greatest  use  in  taking  down 
the  arguments  addressed  by  the  Christian  spokesmen.  Quite 
soon  after  that  event  some  of  the  more  prominent  of  the 
Buddhists  in  Colombo,  impressed  by  his  abilities  and  by  his 
versatility,  requested  him  to  come  over  to  the  Metropolis 
and  found  a  place  of  learning  where  both  monks  and  laymen 
could  acquire  a  thorough  knowledge  of  Sinhalese,  Pali,  and 
Sanskrit.  The  invitation  was  accepted,  and  in  June,  1874, 
was  started  the  Vidyodaya  Parivepa,  over  whose  destinies 
the  Venerable  MaJvl-Thera  presided  till  his  death  in  May, 
1911,  The  Vidyodaya  Parivepa  became  a  miniature  of  the 
old  Maha-Vihara  at  Anuiidhapura,  one  of  the  foremost  places 
of  learning  in  the  East.  Students  flocked  to  it  from  all  parts 
of  the  Island,  and  after  having  gone  through  a  course  of 
residence  there  they  carried  back  with  them  the  torch  of 
knowledge  which  they  had  kindled  at  the  feet  of  the  Great 
Elder.  It  was  a  matter  of  common  belief  that  no  one  who  had 
had  the  good  fortune  of  being  taught  by  the  Venerable  Mahd- 
Thera  would  fail  to  achieve  renown  in  the  world,  and  amongst 
the  last  two  generations  of  Ceylon  Buddhists  hardly  a  single 
person  of  eminence  is  to  be  found,  either  amongst  the  monks 
or  amongst  the  laity,  who,  at  some  time  or  other  in  his  life, 
had  not  received  instruction  at  the  hands  of  the  President  of 
the  Vidyodaya  Parivepa.  Many  of  Siri  Sumafigala’s  students 
established  Porivep&s  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  and  thus 
began  once  more  the  revival  of  learning  which  had  remained 
in  abeyance  from  Sarapaixkara’s  day.  The  fame  of  the 
Institution  soon  spread  abroad,  and  thither  came  men  in 
search  of  knowledge,  not  only  from  India,  Burma,  and  Siam, 
but  also  from  distant  China  and  Japan  and  Europe  and 
America.  Siri  Sumangala  himself  was  a  hardworking  student 
to  the  end  of  his  days,  and  it  is  said  that  besides  many 
languages  of  Asia  he  was  able  to  read  and  understand  several 


20 


3D6  thU  PaLI  literature  OF  GEVLOxf 

languages  of  Europe  as  well,  and  that  at  the  time  of  hie  death,, 
aged  00,  he  was  studying  Russian.  On  hi*  death,  in  1 9 1 1,  his 
chief  pupil  Mahageda  ffiri  Na^dM&Tfc1  succeeded  him  as 
PtiDCLpjil  of  the  Farivfcpa,  and  most  ably  continued  the  work 
which  had  heefl  begun  by  hiu  teacher.  During  hie  regime 
asvotftl  improvement*  W«6  effected  in  the,  courses  of 
instruction,  end  English  was  made  a  regular  auhjeCt  of  *tudy. 
Ongiri  Niuissara's  death,  in  1922,  the  reins  of  office  were 
taken  over  by  its  present  Principal,  the  \  ememhic  Kahave 
Siri  Suiriangaia  Rat*™*,  MaJiti.-Ndtjaka-'Ffcra,  an  Elder 
of  wide  scholarship,  profound  erudition  and  great  ability. 

Tbis  brief  account  of  the  literary  revival  in  Ceylon  during 
the  last  century  would  bo  incojnplEte  without  some.  reference,, 
at  leant,  to  tho  exertions-  of  the  Europeans  in  the  Island, 
missionaries,  civil  servant*  and  Others,  whose  nmnbes  it 
wsS  that  drat  brought  home  to  the  Ceylonese  the  glories  of 
their  own  literature,  when  many  of  them  had  begun  to  treat 
it  with  neglect.  Beside*  clergymen  lika  Clough,  Qogerly, 
Hafdy  and  Qoplestoa,  who  always  evinced  a  deep  interest  in 
the  languages  and  the  literatures  of  Ceylon,  there  has  been  a 
succession  of  civil  servants*  who,  having  sympathy  with  the 
institutions  and  the  learning  of  the  people  among  whom  their 
lot  was  cast*  found  in  the.  garnering  i  n  of  the  harvest  of  know- 
ledge  which  Jay  at  their  doors  the  greatest  respite  feoia  the 
tedium  of  their  official  duties  ‘  men  1  iko  Armour,  Xotfcroy, 
Tumour,  Biodic,  Tenuent,  Upbam,  Childers,  D'Alwia  and— 
greatest  of  them  all — Rhys  Davids,  who  realised  the  splendid 
opportunities  they  had  of  advancing  their  own  inner  and 
Spiritual  nature  and  at  the  same  time  being  of  immeuse  service 
to  the  scholarship  of  the  world.  The  results  of  their  labours 
are  too  Iresb  jn  man's  mind*  to  need  elaboration  here.  On  the 
7th  February,  1345,  was  Started  the  Ceylon  Branch  of  the 
Eoyftl  Asiatic  Society,  "  to  institute  and  promote  inquiries 

i  Hf.iMlni  jirepariaij  •ohjolallj'  n4i(fci,0  -of  (tTaraL  PlLi  tazt*,  3?S9iiM#.T4 
na*,i,'  4  SjnltiliK  t.wi^ilaLion  al  Vwfch*rt  jJMiu. — nuiJlJljHmiil  ■ 


TIIE  MODBUS  PEIUOD  $07 

Into  the  History,  Religion,  literature,  Arts,  and  Natural 
Philosophy  of  Oeyloo,  together  with  the  sooial  condition 
0-f  its  present  nnd  former  inhabitants,"  and  the  hist  number  of 
the  Society’s  Jownwl  was  published  t ho  Mias e  year. 

Along  with  the  restoration  of  learning  and  the  introduction 
of  tin.1  printing  preOS.  an  impetus  was  given  to  fresh  literary 
activity.  The  book-burnings  and  the  persecutions  of  the 
preceding  two  centuries  bad  brought  about  a  scarcity  in  the 
number  of  boots  available  for  study.  The  first  labours  of 
scholars,  therefore,  were  directed  to  the  task  of  editing  and 
publishing  such  books  aa  were  of  immediate  necessity  to 
students  in  the  pnHentku  of  their  studies.  The  Sinhalese 
had  long  been  accustomed  to  have  the  benefit  of  the  patronage 
of  their  kings  in  matters  of  this  kind,  hub  it  was  found  that  HO 
such  help  could  bo  expected  from  their  present  wtera,  Printing 
was  to  them  Quito  a  novel  thing  ;  there'  had  no  experience  in 
the  art  of  collating  manuscripts  and  editing  them  iu  a 
scientific  mannor ;  often  the  copies  of  the  na&nuseripta  that 
were  accessible  to  them  were  defective  and  full  of  errors 
made  by  unlettered  scribes.  There  was  no  proper  organisation, 
and  the  editors  were  not  all  men  of  learning.  The  result  was 
that  many  of  the  books  issued  are  replete  with  errors  both  of 
printing  and  of  editing.  TllC  texts  were  often  printed  in  parts 
of  about  eighty  pages  and  published  at  irregular  intervals, 
and  several  of  them  begun,  perhaps,  thirty  years  ago,  yet 
reEnain  to  be  completed  1 

In  the  J&umal  of  f/rc  Pali  Text  Society 1  Mr.  W,  A.  de  Silva 
has  given  a  list  of  the  books  issued  by  the  Sinhalese  Press  up 
to  the  year  1910.  There  we  find,  as  he  himself  points  out,  that 
two  classes  of  work  have  been  published  with  a  certain  degree 
of  abundance,  namely  Grammars  for  the  Study  of  Pali  and 
a  large  number  of  translations  into  Sinhalese  of  isolated 
Suttas  from  the  Five  Nithyaa  of  the  Pali  Canon.  The  reason 
for  this  preference  ia  nob  fat  to  seek.  The  study  of  Pali  had 


J.S1D-12,  pp.  134  H. 


303 


TUL  PALI  LJTO!AT!IftE  OP  CEYLON 


beau  long  neglected,  wad  when  it  waa  now  revived,  simple 
werkfl  on  gTCLumoar  were  found  necessary,  The  laity  were  more 
or  ires  completely  ignorant  of  Pali,  end  hence  the  contents  of 
their  Sacred  Literature  were  mostly  unknown  to  them, 
except  for  what  little  they  heard  from  the  expositions  of  the 
monks  in  the  village  temples.  It  wm  to  remedy  this  latter 
disadvantage  that  the  translations  were  made  and  issued  of 
some  of  the  more  welt-known  Suttos.1  Both  i  11  Mr.  da  Silva's 
list  and  in  the  Gaiaio^ite  of  the  Temple  Libraries  of  Ceylon, 
prepared  i  n  1835  at  the  request  Of  the  Ceylon  Government  by 
the  Into  Louis  He  Zoysa,1  these  U  another  feature  worthy  of 
notice — the  Largo  number  of  books:  from  Burma  and  Siam 
which  seem  to  have  boon,  introduced  into  Ceylon  during 
the  nineteenth  century 5  we  do  not  hear  of  the  existence 
of  many  of  them  in  the  Island  earlier.  We  have  seen  that 
from  the  time  of  Yijaya-Bahu  in  the  twelfth  century ,  there 
had  beta  frequent  intercourse  between  the  countries  above- 
mentioned  and  CeylOB,  and  echelons  were  in  the  habit  of  paying 
visits  to  eaoh  other  across  the  seas.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt 
that  one  of  the  results  of  these  visins  was  the  exchange 
of  books.  But  during  the  political  upheavals  of  the 
seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  such  intercourse  had 
very  largely  ceased  fe>  exist,  and  the  SUSO-  of  imported  hooks 
does  not  seem  to  have  at-  any  time  been  prevalent  to  A  large 
atari* 

With  the  re-estaWishment  of  the  Uputompadd  by 
Saxanaiikara  and  Kitti  S-irj  Raja-fiimba,  however,  the  connexion 
with  Siam  VOS  revived.  When  the  Sinhalese  embassy  returned 
to  Ceylon  with  the  Upasampoda.  monks*  we  nre  told  that  they 
brought  with  them  jls  a  present  from  the  King  of  Siam 
"  books  of  diverHB  kinds,  which  were  not  extant  in  the  Island 

1  It-  tvc j  jel  be  tnleneitiufi  tc  snLrr  is  vIl-w  nj  wKil  I  Lir^  9tstod  in  Ml  e*-uiur 
cba]ri«r,  Ihst  imsing  the  coilkat  nd  eLa4o  btorlatirtiu  »4  a  tetspiLaUML  Of 
tbs  Guttai  used  i  n  !bn  ctu.slui£  c-f  JPi.rtt'i. 

*  Offrt.  Friasloft  Ofiie,  Colombo.  1S35-. 

■*  Vt.  151-3. 


THE  MQDKKK  FETtlQD 


309 


The  friunMwp  thus  renewed  with  Siam  liss  fiver  ainca  been 
maintoifled,,  and  vc  saw1  how,  when  the  Ceylon  Buddhists 
desired  to  establish  (V  press  of  their  own*  they  appealed  to  the 
King  of  Stem  for  funds,  and  received  a  gefieroua  response. 

Early  in  the  nineteenth  OftHtury  certain  events  toot  place 
which  drew  Emma  and  Ceylon  close  together  onoe  wore  and 
freshened  their  bonds  oE  affection.  The  Kandyan  Kings  were 
atE  strongly  imbued  with  the  prejudices  of  the  Brahmans  and 
upheld  the  doctrines  of  polytheism  and  CMtcb  and,  when 
King  Eitti  Siri  re- established  the  Upatampadtt  from  Siam, 
ht  decreed  that  none  brtt  members  of  a  particular  eaSteP  the 
Gahapatd  (Goigtuna)  should  be  admitted  to  the  higher  order 
of  monks.  The  monks  of  the  maritime  province^,  who  belonged 
to  the  other  castes,  were  justifiably  indignant  at  this 
unrighteous  eJtcUlSLOH  and  this  maladministration  of  tbc 
religion.  In  17DS  therefore,  as  a  protest,  they  organized,  an 
expedition  to  Burma  to  introduce  the  ffjKw&nijwda  from  tliftt 
Country,  The  cmboaay  was  led  by  Ambagalmpitaye 
Naflavimftla-Tissa ;  hts  was  accompanied  by  five  jqma*rTfl-f, 
Thetr  mission  was  eminently  successful ;  the  SaftghfttAjft 
at  Amanvpura  received  them  with  singular  favour.  The 
Emperor  caused  their  ordination  to  be  celebrated  with  all 
the  pageantry  of  royalty,  and  five  Burmese  mocks  accom¬ 
panied  them  on  tbeir  return  in  1602  to  Ceylon,  where  they 
became  the  founders  of  the  Amara-puta  sect,  which  oOW  forma 
a  very  influential  body,  with  a  large  number  of  adherents. 
Seven  years  ttttftr,  in  ffl09,  a  second  expedition  was  led  by 
DadalfaDbcuumarakkhita,  who  with  four  colleagues  received 
the  Upatiimipadd  in  Burma. 

Aa  ft  result  of  thia  close  association  between  the  two 
COUPtria,  several  of  the  Ceylon  monks  wont  over  to  Burma, 
and  there  specialized  in  the  study  of  the  Abhidhausma.  On 
tbeir  return  they  brought  with  them  0  large  number  of  works 
written  in  Tali  by  Burmese  authors.  Many  of  these  they  edited 
and  published  in  Sinhalese  characters,  and  MOW  cf  the  more 
important  were  translated  into  Binb&kflOr 


310 


THE  FiOJ  LITEKATUTIE  OF  CEYLfnr 


Besides  these  translations,  etc.,  to  which  reference  has 
already  been  made,  several  or;  qiu->l  works  liftve  fc  ccn  written 
la  Pali  daring  the  Cut  century . 

In  1855  the  Wesleyan  Mission  Pre&s  issued  a  Pali  translation 
of  tb$  New  Teetarnent,  At  tlie  time  of  its  publication  there 
was  a.  certain  amount  of  misgiving  ift  the  minds  of  the 
Buddhists,  because  it  was  believed  that  one  or  two  of  the  well- 
known  Buddh^t  iBooks  bad  a  .dure  in  the  work  of  translation, 
and  that  their  action  was  ill-advised.  These  fears  were  soOn 
laid  to  neat.  It  was  found  that  the  language  of  tko 
translation  was  auifieient  evidence  agai.nnt  any  such 
assumption.  The  book  was  not  favourably  received  by  the 
Christians,  because  they  could  not  understand  a  word  of 
what  it  contained,  nor  by  the  Buddhists,  who  would  have 
nothing  to  do  with  it ! 

In  1876  Vaskaduva  Siri  Subhiiti  published  the  NdBWWtrdlB, 
a  work  on  Pali  grammar,  compiled  at  Che  suggestion  of  bis 
eiatwbiie  pupil,  E.  C.  Childers  (Professor  at  University 
College,  London,  after  leaving  Dayton,  in  the  last  few  years 
of  Ills  abort  life),  author  of  tbc  well-known  Pdii-EngUih 
Dictionary.  The  work  wai  dedicated,  by  permission,  to 
Edward  YU,  then  Prince  of  Wales,  who  visited  Ceylon..  It 
is  accompanied  by  prefaces,  in  1-Ingli  sh  and  Sinhalese,  the  latter 
containing  A  most  Valuable  historical  account  of  works  OB 
Pali  grammar  either  written  in  Ceylon  itself  or  used  there. 
Subhiiti  bad  already  published  in  ISC 5  an  edition  made  by 
him  of  OggaLbina'a  A hhtcUidna  -ppodipilii,  wErh  English  end 
Sinhalese  interpretations.  Later,  in  1893,  lie  followed  it  up 
With  a  complete  index;  of  all  the  Pali  words,  giving  their 
meanings  in  Sinhalese. 

In  1&77,  at  the  request  Of  the  Governor,  Sir  William  Henry 
Gregory,  Siri  Sumai'igala,  assisted  by  Pamdita  DcvarakkhiCa 
Batuvautudave,  brought  out  the  edition  of  the  HJaAo-UflyrSm, 
completed  from  the  time  of  Kitti  Bin  to  the  eeaaima  of 
the  Island  to  the  British  in  1SI.G.  A  few  years  fatar, 
in  1883,  they  made  a  Sinhalese  translation  Of  the  whole 


THE  MODERN  PERIOD 


311 


work,  and  published  it  in  two  volumes.1  Siri  Sumafigala 
also  brought  out  an  edition  of  the  Balavat&ra,  accompanied 
by  a  comprehensive  original  tlku  in  Pali. 

In  1880  Acuriya  Vimalasaia  Thera  published  the 
Siuana-varnM-dipo,  a  **  history,”  as  the  author  tolls  us, "  of  the 
Buddhist  Church,  written  in  Pali  verse  and  compiled  from 
Buddhist  Holy  Scriptures,  Commentaries,  Histories,  etc.” 
He  had  published  earlier  another  Pali  work,  the  Siwto-laM^ana- 
dipani,  dealing  with  the  oft-disputed  question  of  the  consecra¬ 
tion  of  Simd  or  boundaries  of  ordination.  TbeSdsano-romsa-dipa 
is  written  in  twelve  chapters.  It  begins  with  the  birth  of  the 
last  Buddha  as  Sumedha,  describes  the  twenty-four  Vivarapas, 
and  gives  a  history  of  his  last  life  up  to  the  time  of  the 
Parinibbana.  Chapters  v-viii  deal  with  the  three  convocations 
and  the  establishment  of  Buddhism  in  foreign  lands ; 
chapter*  ix  and  x  deal  with  the  establishment  of  Buddhism  in 
Ceylon  and  the  writing  down  of  the  Pifakas  and  the 
Commentaries.  Chapter  xi  is  by  far  the  moat  important, 
because  it  gives  the  names  of  authors  who  lived  from  the  time 
of  Buddhaghosa  to  the  reign  of  Paodita  Parakrama-Bahu, 
together  with  the  works  they  produced.  In  spite  of  its  faulty 
arrangement— because  it  follows  no  chronological  order — 
this  chapter  is  of  great  value.  The  last  chapter  deals  with 
the  measures  adopted  by  various  monarohs  to  re-establish 
the  when  it  died  down  at  various  periods  of  its  history 

for  want  of  proper  care  and  attention.  It  ends  with  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  the  Amara-puxa  Nikaya  into  Ceylon.  In  1893  Siri 
Siddhattha  Dhammananda,  Principal  of  the  Parama  Dhamma 
Cetiya  Parivcna  at  Ratmaln.ua,  published  the  Txikopakdra,  a 
didactic  Pili  poem  of  107  stanzas,  written  in  gdikd  verse, 
accompanied  by  a  Sinhalese  translation  by  the  author  himself. 
It  is  based  on  the  Saddftammopayana,  and  deals  with 
practically  the  same  subjects. 

In  1902  S.  M.  Burrows,  Director  of  Public  Instruction, 


>  8*cny»  Ppm*.  Colombo,  1SSJ. 


m 


The  fjlli  literature  <5 f  gEVi.oii 


established  the  Committee  on  Oriental  Studies  to  systematize 
the  instruction  given  at  the  various  Paiiveqas,  make  them 
conform  t*  oiic  common  standard,  if  possible,  and  hold  ana- 
petitive  examinations  to  encourage  the  students.  The  Govern - 
meet  t.7;lr  to  give  uU  annual  Subsidy  to  Such  Paiivenaa  as 
appeared  to  them  to  deserve  it.  The  policy  of  cho  Committee 
WSS  set  forth  as  follows To  make  the  Paziveijaa  more 
attractive,  progressive  and  useful,  while  zealously  guarding 
their  indigeoflQB  and  independent  character,  without  turning 
thom  into  government-subsidized  high,  schools.” 

The  examinations  have  not  been  an  umuiied  blessing.  The 
encouragement  of  competition  hoi  produced,  Cram-work  in 
placn  o£  erudition,  and  it  is  s.  lamentable  fact  that,  even  among 
the  monks  the  Winning  of  a  medal  or  diploma  has  proved  a 
greater  inceptive  to  worlc  tliftn  disinterested  love  of  knowledge. 
Knowledge  for  its  own  Hake  has  given  way  to  knowledge  for 
recognition.  There  is  also  norioeable  ft  tendency  to  pay  far 
more  ateeiition  to  Sanskrit  that  to  Pali,  which  is  bound  to 
have  an  adverse  influence  on  the  growth  of  Pali  Literature. 
In  T5>09  there  arose  a  bitter  controversy  among  the  Buddhists 
as  to  whether  it  was  right  for  audiences  to  he  seated  on  chairs 
or  benches,  while  listening  to  the  preaching  of  tho  Dhftmmft. 
The  rnOtc  educated  among  the  Buddhist*  had  found  it  mere 
advantageous  to  adopt  European  costume,  because  it  seemed 
to  them  to  bring  greater  regard  from  their  rulers.  It  Wafl, 
however,  discovered  that  European  clothes  did  not  conduce- 
to  comfort  when  the  wearer  sat  on  the  floor— as  had  been  the 
custom  ftt  the  village  temples  for  centuries — kentc  the  con¬ 
troversy.  Much  rancour  was  shown  on  both  sidea  and  an  appeal 
was  made  to  the  usage  in  Burma.  One  of  the  strongest 
opponents  of  the  uHc  of  scats  was  MoratuVd  Mcdhananda 
Thera.  He  had  hetn  to  Burma  to  study  the  Abhidhamina,  and 
in  19 10  he  published*  book  tailed  the  jmjiT, 1 

written  in  Fiii  gaihii  veme,  giving  a  history  of  the  controversy 
*nd  lus  own  observations  on  the  subject,  together  with  the 

1  Woi#luT.i,  15J0. 


THE  MODERN  PERIOD 


SIS 


opinions  expressed  to  him  by  various  eminent  Theraa  of  Burma 
■whom  he  had  consulted.  The  controversy  gradually  died 
down ;  a  compromise  seems  to  have  been  brought  about 
whereby,  if  the  preaching  of  the  Dhamma  was  at  the  Vibara 
itself,  the  audienoe  should  sit  on  the  floor — while  if  the  sermon 
be  given  at  some  place  other  than  on  the  Vihira  precincts, 
the  listeners  may  use  seats  at  their  option. 

In  1911  Kodagoda  Upasenn  Thera  wrote  the  Sammoha- 
nasani,  on  certain  rules  on  the  Vinaya  connected  with  such 
subjects  as  the  use  of  the  begging-bowl,  the  modern  umbrella, 
leather  covering  for  the  feet,  etc.  It  is  composed  in  Pali  verse, 
and  divided  into  seven  chapters.  Two  other  works  remain  to 
be  mentioned,  to  bring  this  history  up  to  date.  In  1917 
Morafuve  Medhanaada  Thera ,  author  of  the  Dhamma-gdrava- 
dipan*  referred  to  above,  published  the  Jina-vamta-dipani 
(also  called  Pabandha-siromani).  It  is  an  extensive  Pali 
poem  of  two  thousand  verses  in  thirty  chapters.  The  author 
declares  in  his  preface1  that  it  is  hiB  ambition  to  write  a 
Maha-kavya  on  the  model  of  the  Sanskrit  Raghu-vamta  and 
Kumara-tambhava,  giving  not  only  the  life  of  the  Buddha 
but  also  dealing  with  the  cardinal  points  in  his  teaching.  In 
this  he  has  achieved  remarkable  success ;  the  verses  are 
written  in  several  metres,  some  of  them  intricate  and  all  of 
them  composed  with  sedulous  core.  Medhinanda  Thera 
has  drunk  deeply  of  the  works  of  Sanskrit  poets,  and  his  com¬ 
position  abounds  in  metaphors  and  similes  which  bear  close 
resemblance  to  their  best  productions.  Tho  language  of  the 
poem  shows  the  Btrong  impress  of  Sanskritic  influence,  and  it 
is  significant  of  the  times  that  the  dedicatory  verses  are 
written  in  classical  Sanskrit.  There  is  a  Sinhalese  paraphrase 
to  the  whole  work  by  the  author  himself,  and  the  book  is 
prefaced  by  a  very  valuable  historical  introduction,  dealing 
with  some  of  the  salient  points  of  the  history  of  the  Sangba 
in  Ceylon.  He  also  gives  a  brief  survey  of  Ceylon  authors  and 
their  works.  The  Jina-vamsa-dipctni  has  brought  the  learned 
>  p.  il  (Colombo.  1917). 


314  t US  PALI  LfXEElATL'IiE  OP  CEYL02T 

author  recognition  for  hii  scholarship  in  liis  own  lifetime^  add 
it  was  do  insincere  compliment  that  Ilia  lay  supporters  paid 
to  Lifll  whoa,  on  the  day  of  its  publication,  they  tarried  the 
book  in  procession  round  the  town  id  which  the  great  .Eldar 
bad  taken  his  residetiec.  They  wctc,  iu  their  own  bumble  way, 
attempting  to  pay  tbeir  respects  and  espieaa  their  gratitude 
to  Cb&  distinguished  author  who  Lad  laboured  in  the  eauae 
of  religion  and  literature,  two  things  which  h&vo  always  been 
closest  to  tbeir  hearts. 

Tbe  Other  work  is  the  jkfnahet- ItsH C pa-£fl nfr,  published  10 
1,934  by  Vidurupola  Piya-Tiisa  ^hynka  Thsra^  ft  Pali  poem 
of  ljSOO  verses  arranged  ID  twenty  cantos,  TllO  learned  poet 
was  bom  in  1660,  and  already  at  the  ago  of  thirty  had 
distinguished  himself  as  a  brilliant  scholar  at  the  J^nai 
Examination  of  the  Committee  on  Oriental  Studies-  This 
work  bom  bis  pen  hftft  fulfilled  tbe  hopes  of  earlier  years  and 
Isold*  out  the  promise  of  greater  achievement*  in  tbe  future. 
The  language  of  the  Kassapa-f&rifa  19  forceful  and  elegant, 
and  the  subject  matter  is  well  arranged.  The  materials  for  the 
biography  of  the  great  Elder,  who  WlflB  hdd  in  esteem  only 
second  to  the  Buddha  himself,  boa  bean  taken  from  the 

oi i? iy itttx - allh a kttftt  and  U.i*  A  vgutfara-aUJiiikcdiS. 

Ill  1613  &ir  Robert  {now  Lord)  Chalmers  tame  ca  Governor 
of  Ceylon,  fie  had  far  soma  time  ptat  evinced  great  interest 
in  Tali  literature,  and  hftd  edited  A  portion  of  tbe  Mc^jhirtvX^ 
Sikaija  for  the  Fall  Test  Society,  Ilia  contributions  to  the 
Journal  of  [fie  Royal  A eiaiic  Society  on  subjects  connected 
with  Buddhism  bad  been read.  with  i ntCKSSC,  and  his  translation 
of  a  part  of  the  afaicJfcoj  tor  the  Cambridge  University  Tress 
had  been  studied  with  aridity.  The  people  awaited  bis  coming 
with  eagerness  and,  when  h  e  arrived,  ho  was  greeted  with  the 
utmost  cordiality.  Soon  after  he  assumed  office  be  declared 
in  the  Course  of  a  public  speech  bis  desire  to  bring  out  ad  edition 
of  the  Ceylonese  Commentaries,  which  bo  propossd  to  call 
tho  Alu-vihata  Edition,  “  I  have  had  the  practical  esporioaoe,  ” 
■  tetoeibo,  L92  5,  l3i»nHll-jTtJ1‘  Pira,  ISL,  ISM,  S  ’. 


THE  MODERN  PERIOD  315 

Its  said  ,  “  of  colLatin  g  far  my  edition  of  the  .1? ajjh  lhm- jV'ibuyo 
not  only  Sinhalese  MS3-..  hut  also  the  Mandalay  MSS.  from  the 
Royal  Library  iu  Burma,  and  the  King  *f  Siam's  printed 
edition,  and,  as  a  result  of  this  experience,  I  have  no  hesitation 
ill  affirming— as  I  know  the  most  dhstiiigmahfld  of  Pali  scholars 
in  Europe  will  also  affirm— that  it  is  in  the  best  Sinhalese  MBS, 
that  the  soundest  fcraditioas  of  Pub  scholarship  will  be  found. 
...  It  has  always  seemed  to  mo  that,  with  this  unique  trad  itioo 
of  scholarship  on  her  part.  Ceylon  has  failed  in  modern  times 
to  assert  her  historic  claim  to  leadership  in  her  own  proper 
field.  For  instance,  Siam,  under  the  auspices  of  the  lata  King, 
bus  taken  the  lead  in  issuing  the  TiptiaJtfr,  in  the  printed 
yelloW'hound  yo1uidC3  which  many  of  ms  know,  and  Slam 
has  made  it  least  I  beginning  with  the  printing  of  the 
AithakaiJid'a  in  Siamese  character.  .  .  .  CcylftU  must  follow, 
but  in  fallowing  ought  to  improve  upon  Siam's  example. 
Here,  in  Ceylon,  WC  must  have  in  Sinhalese  characters,  an 
edition  both  ol  the  Canon  and  of  the  Commentaries,  which 
wilt  be  worthy  of  the  pre-eminent  tradition  ©£  Pali  scholar¬ 
ship  in  Ceylon. hf  1 

It  was-  with  this  noble  ambition  that  the  Alu-vihara  Edition 
was  [lunched.  But,  alia  1  "  the  beet  laid  schemes  of  mice 
and  men  gang  aft  sgley ' and  Sir  Robert's  scheme  was  no 
exception.  The  Great  Wax  in  Europe  engaged  all  his  attention, 
and  latex,  in  May,  1915,  an  unfortunate  religious  riot,  which 
bEOke  out  between  the  Musi  ims  and  the  Ruddbista  in  Kandy, 
led  to  many  a  falsa  move  on  the  part  of  the  officials,  wliieli 
plunged  the  country  in  gloom,  Martial  law  was  proclaimed, 
and  under  ita  regime  many  excesses  were  committed.  All 
Sir  Robert's  constructive  plans  for  the  re-establishment  of 
Cevlon'a  pre-eminence  for  Rail  scholarship  had  to  be 
abandoned,  and,  when  he  left  the  Island,  only  one  book,  the 
JPci jvi  fi-cYi  -  judo  p  i  ?,  on  the  MajjAimat  had  been  published.  The 
work  had  been  entrusted  to  the  two  foremost  scholar*  of  the 


1  CelMlIjO,  Pnbfla  Hit],  27  th  Feliiruny,.  1ft  15. 


0]  6  TFfK  FAlT  LITERATIM!  C5F  qEYLGit 

day,  "NiV-oasaFLTft  and  Dhcunmiii£mfi,h  and  the  result  fulfilled  all 

expectotioDfl. 

Bnt,  fortunately,  the  work  began  Under  the  inspiration  of 
Sir  Robert  Chatmere  was  not  destined  to  he  left  uncontinued,, 
though  by  other  hands  and  in  other  mays.  On  the 
17th  January,  19U,  died  Simon  Alexander  HowB-vitanue, 
memher  of  the  well-known  Hjewh-vitame  family,  Hu 
had  been  a  pupil  of  the  Van,  fjiri  Bumaeigala,  and  was  an 
earnest  Student  of  Abltidhamm  a.  He  had  conceived  the  idea 
originally  of  printing  the  complete  text  of  the  JYpidaic. 
but,  on  the  advice  of  Professor  Lanman,  of  Harvard,  later 
decided  to  bring  out  an  edition  of  the  Commentaries. 
Following  thin  idea,  he  began,  in  191],  to  publish  the  Com¬ 
mentary  on  the  S&ii\tjvita-N\katja.  The  wort  waa  in  prog  res  a 
when  he  died.  Ill  bin  win  he  left  ample  provisions  for  lain  plans 
to  he  carried  oat  in  their  entirety,  11 1  give,  devise,  aud 
bequenth,"  it  ran,  “  ail  such  monies  as  may  he  found 
necessary  for  printing  the  Tali  text  of  the  Commentaries 
which  ia  being  printed  now,  and  all  monies  needful  for  bringing 
out  a  neat  edition  of  the  text  of  the  Tipiflfat."  His  executors 
have  lost  no  time  in  carrying  out  his  wishes.  In  1S17  appeared 
the  first  volume,  DbainmapEda’aCoromenlary  oh  ikt  Peta^txMhu.1 
Several  others  have  appeared  since  then.  The  Work  of  editing 
is  in  the  hands  of  the  moat  distiugnished  scholars  of  Ceylon, 
and  the  results  Of  their  labours  have  won  utyrfci  nted  approval 
from  all  quatters.  it  is  a  matter  of  great  regret  that  do 
arrangements  have  so  fnr  been  made  to  bring  out  carefully 
revised  editions  of  the  other  Pali:  worts  of  Ceylon  and  the 
numerous  valuable  works  written  in  Sinhalese,  which  form 
the  national  heritage  of  the  people.  The  rulers  of  Qeyton  in 
ages  past  have  a E ways  extended  their  munificent  patronage 
in  the  Cause  of  literature,  and  it  is  to  he  hoped  that  the  British 
Government  wit!  Dot  fail  to  emulate  the  example  uf  their 
predecessors  in  the  sovereignty  of  the  island.  The  incomes 
derived  from  the  endowments  mad*  in  former  times  for  the 
«  UsM-BmUiL  rnM,  Colombo,  ]!>]7, 


the  mo&hrn  ranion 


317 


maintenance  of  tic  men,'! storks  arc  L-tir.c  either  wasted  or 
laisupproprluteth  for  want  of  suitable  1-egldlottl-cm .  If  means 
are  devLsicrl  for  the  proper  utilization  of  such  funds  as  may  be 
derived  freen  them,  the  question  of  setting  aside  a  sufficient 
yearly  sum  for  the  editing  and  publication  of  a  liter* tore  of 
such  great  historical  Value  OS  that  of  Ceylon,  Will  be  easily 
solved.  A  few  hundreds  a  year  for  ten  yean  would  probably 
suffice — on  the  system  followed  by  the  Pali  TeM-  Society — 
for  the  editing  and  publication  of  the  wholeL  The  conclusion 
of  the  war  bos  ushered  in  a  new  ora  of  prosperity,  and  it  Ifl 
fervently  hoped  that  attention  will  be  paid  to  tins  mutter 
of  urgency  for  the  reputation  of  Ceylon  in  the  scholarship  of 
the  worldL 


31B 


THE  PAH  LITERATURE  OF  CEYLON 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Aiursiciixi.AJt  (Sir  Potuuunbalan]) :  Sketches  of  Csylon  History,  Colombo, 

MOt. 

Bajitja  (B.  M.) :  A  History  of  Pre- Buddhistic  Philosophy,  Calcutta 
University.  1021. 

Beat.  (Samuel) :  Buddhist  Record*  of  Ike  Western  World,  2  Tola.,  Trtbnar, 
London,  1884. 

Bods  (Mr*.  Mabel  H.) t  Tie  PAli  Literature  of  Burma,  R.A.S.,  London,  1009. 
Besuxoaxs  (E.  W.) :  Buddhist  Legends,  part*  1-3,  Harvard  Oriental 
Seek*.  1921 ;  Buddhist  Parables,  Yale  University.  1022. 

CATALOOraa  j — 

Catalogue  c f  PAli  XtSS.  in  Mx  Oriental  Department,  British  Museum. 
„  „  „  „  „  „  India  Office  Library. 

„  „  „  „  „  „  BMiothsgus  Xationale,  Pari*. 

See  also  nude*  D'AIwm,  Be  Zoy**,  and  WickrwnaaiEgh*. 

Child  ms  (Robert  Oaear) :  A  Dictionary  of  the  PAli  Language,  Trtibner. 
London,  1876. 

Coomasa  Sttaxy  (Mata) :  Datbli  Vaipsa,  Trainer,  London,  1874. 

D*ALint  (James)  i  <?»dal-.Sa  apart,  Colombo,  1862  ;  A  Descriptive  Catalogue 
of  Sanskrit,  PAli,  and  Sinhalese  Literary  Works  of  Ceylon,  Colombo, 
1870  ;  Attanagalueainea,  Colombo,  1870. 

Ds  Zona  (Louie)  s  A  Catalogue  of  the  Temple  Libraries  of  Ceylon,  Colombo, 
1866. 

Durr  (Sukaaar) :  Early  Buddhist  Monackism,  TMbcecr,  1924. 

Flkst  (J.  P.) :  Inscriptions  of  the  Early  Oupta  Kings,  Calcutta,  1888. 
Foschiuxmk*  (Dr.  Emil)  t  Report  on  the  PAli  Literature  of  Burma,  Govern¬ 
ment  o I  India  Publication.  1870. 

Fxankt.  (Dr.  R.  Otto)  t  PAli  and  Sanskrit,  Stramburg,  1902. 

Gnosn  (Wilhelm)  i  The  Dlpavagtsa  and  hlah&eamsa  (English  tranelation), 
Colombo,  1908 ;  MahA-renpsa  (P.T-8.)  and  Cilaratpsa  (P.TB.). 

Gils*  (H.  A.) :  The  Trartls  of  Pa*Hstin,  Cambridge,  1923. 

Gray  (Jame*) :  Buddhaghosuppatti,  Luxac,  London,  1892;  JinAlankAra, 
Lttiac,  London,  1894. 

Hardy  (K.  Spence) :  Eastern  Monackism,  William*  and  Norgate,  I860 ; 
Legends  and  Theories  of  Ike  Buddhists,  William*  and  Norgala,  1860  ; 
Manual  af  Buddhism,  William*  and  Korgate.  1880. 

Habtccos  ( Jamea) ;  ed.  Encyclopaedia  of  Religion  and  Ethics,  T.  and  C. 
Clark  (12  vob.),  1910-18. 

JAtaha  :  ed.  by  V.  Fa  can  on.,  7  vola,  Trdbner,  18T7-97. 

J  Atoka  Tales  ;  H.  T.  Fsaxci*  and  E.  J.  Tboxai,  Cambridge,  1910. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


319 


J/Uaka  Tales  (translation)  j  published  by  Cambridge  Uni  v,  Press,  7  vol*., 
1899-1013. 

Joujixals  i — 

fah  Text  Society. 

Koyal  Asiatic  Sot. i tty.  London. 

„  M  „  Ceylon  Breach,  Colombo. 

Bengal  Asiatic  Society.  Cnkutta. 

Indian  Antiquary.  Bomboy. 

Tit  Ceylon  Antiquary  and  Library  Register,  Colombo. 

Calcutta  Htvittr,  Calcutta. 

Journal  Aetalique,  Pari*. 

Zeitschrift  Air  Deutsckeu  Horgenldndischen  OtseBschaf *.  Leijutig. 

Kwuc  (H.) :  if  on  uni  o/  Indian  Buddhism,  Straasburg.  1899. 

Lew  (Bimnla  Cerea) :  Tie  Lift  and  Work  of  Duddhaghoea,  Calcutta,  1023. 

LsOOB  (.Tunes) :  A  Bacon l  of  Buddhistic  Kingdom,  Oxford,  1880. 

Macnoxmx  (A.  A.) ;  Sanskrit  Literature,  Heioemann.  London,  1890. 

AfoAd-raquo :  PAU  Text,  ed.  SnmaAgala  end  Batuvantud&re,  Colombo, 
1903 ;  fthi,  ed.  Sumangala  end  BatorentudATe,  Colombo,  1899. 

Mmu  (IUjendra  Lila) :  Buddha  Oayi.  Calcutta,  1888. 

NammaX  (G.  K.) :  Library  Hietory  of  Sanskrit  Buddhism,  Bombay,  1920. 

NUdys-uznyraha  i  Text,  Government  Printing  Proaa,  Colombo,  1907 ; 
translated  by  C.  M.  Faux a* DO.  and  oditad  by  W.  F.  Goxawardilaxa, 
Colombo,  1908. 

Oldexuxilo  (Hermann):  The  Vinoya  Pifakam.  3  vole.,  WIDlams  and 
Norgata.  London,  1879-83  :  Dfpa-oaqssa,  William*  and  Xorgate,  1879. 

Pam  T*xt  Soot  nr  :  All  publication*.  including  tbo  Journal  and  the  .Vcir 
Pdli  Dictionary. 

Pin*:*  (Paul  E.) :  Ceylon  and  the  Portuguese,  Ceylon.  1920. 

Pjvidham  (Charlea)  t  Ceylon  and  its  Dependencies,  2  rola.,  T.  and  W.  Boone, 
London,  1849. 

BUja  ratn&kara  :  ed.  by  Susox  ns  Silva,  Colombo,  1907  ;  me  also  Upham. 

BajAcaliya:  Translated  by  B.  GcSasxxaua,  Colombo,  1900;  aao  also 
Uplvam. 

Ruts  Davids  (Mia.  C.  A.  F.)  t  JJaddAim  (Homo  Univeraity  Library), 
2nd  sdltion ;  Buddhist  Psychological  Ethics,  2nd  edition,  R.AA, 
London,  1923  ;  Buddhist  Psychology,  2nd  edition,  Lumo,  London.  1924. 

Rtrrs  Davids  (T.  W.) :  Buddhist  Birth  Stories,  vol.  i.  Trtboer.  1880,  and 
Rout  ledge,  1924  (revised  by  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids);  Buddhist  Suites 
{Sacred  Books  of  tie  East,  xi),  Frowdo,  1881 ;  Vinaya  JYrie  (Sacred 
Books  of  the  Bast,  xiii,  xvii,  xx).  Frowdo,  1881-5 ;  Dialogues  of  the 
Buddha,  3  vols.,  Frowdo,  1900-21;  Buddhism :  lb  History  ant 
Literature  (American  Leeturo a),  Putnam,  1890;  Buddhist  India 
{Story  of  the  Nations),  Fisher  Unwin,  1903. 

Sktavkuatjca  (John  M.) :  TAs  Story  of  the  Sinhalese,  2  vol*..  Colombo, 
1923. 

Smith  (Vincent  A.) :  Early  Hietory  of  India,  Cleroodon  Preea,  1st  and 
4th  editions,  1904  and  1924;  Atoka  (Rulers  of  India  Series),  1900; 
Oxford  Hietory  of  India  (Oxford  Cnlv.  Press),  1st  and  2nd  *d.,  1919 
and  1923. 


320 


THE  Fill  UTEKATUEE  OF  CEYLON 


Tmur  (Si  Jim...  EiflGESPiJi  CMtiianaiy  in.  Otyltal,  Jcin  Hnxtjr, 

Lflodco,  1£H  ;  iWv  2  vek-,  LdqiJsjte  1&57. 

■TmTfPim  (Ctorgcl :  Epiiom*  «f  t&t  Hi*##!)  *>/  Ciyloji  (C^tan  Altaians}, 
CflJoULhs^  1-853 1  r it i r_  : I ■  i ;  i -.: rj  id  "  h i.i  Ar,\  'Vi  IV-27.4-2,  vaL  j,  CPttA,  C^'LaB, 

iesT. 

L'PILOt  (E-ri-WATiiji  i  Sacrtd  anil  JrtiiSfifirl  [Ifnltuf  Ccyltmr  3  Train.  (AfaAdMBrT, 
ftfijd-JSJitoltiLrt,  arx!  liiJli'ToiiJii  riubiiU'Jfj  A!t*rci  ft-nd  On. 
WlSEXI.EJfjlPnf-mrE-  (I1-  ^E.  <1®  Z.) :  A'ltbliM  M&S-.  i"  1^4  fitilM  JJ'jm'jm, 
Locdfifl,  tSOO-f  fa&hvue  Efts  ftjtomi#  Jfwwum,  Oprammcot  OnnataL 
Likmcj'i  Osloabo,  ISDfl  i  SfitAafan  Printed  tfwJfc)  14  li*  Arifi-iA 

JfuKlIBt,  /X-inn'iVri. 

Wi  II  ,  (L,  C.) ;  UoAil  Yrt[u«i  [Ep^LijJi  trail  pin-lion  l.,  CoLatfibo,  l&Qfl. 
TYnnciuirnS  (Ur.  M.) ;  tk-ttAi'c&V  <Jt.r  Li'-iftrafur,  ZivriUr  Btm i, 

Lniprig.  iD!0. 


INDEX 


A 

Athaya  (Ihfra),  199 
Abbayagiri,  10,  41.  62,  56,  SI,  60, 
70.  70,  127,  152,  154,  178,  212 
Abbayuttarn  (lAupa).  52 
Abhidhamma,  HO,  08,  108 
Abhuthamm/i-aUkakatha,  114 
Ab\idhammattka-Mi*&i>ui,  108, 187  ff., 
178, 102, 107, 203, 
20)5 

„  -n&Adiemf,  173,  200 

„  -nkd$i»t.  200 

Ahhidham mApaiirc,  108-7,  200 
Abhidhina^ppadtpilA,  170,  187  f!., 
237,  310 

M  -i<iQtva*nand, 

180 

AHiiamtorfAi-aJanldni,  281 
A  AAiia  mbuddka  120 

Aecutavikkama  (king),  107 
Aggabodhi  (king),  152,  210 
Arcavaqm  monk),  185,  106 
Ailartya-BrAhmatut,  117 
AtMoro-mAld.  285 
Alagakkooir  (Alakeivara),  240.  247 
Alagiyavanna-mohottila.  288  ff. 
AlaAk&ra-Hiiioya  (on  dubodAd- 
b*Mro),  100,  200 
Alu-vihiLra  Edition,  314  ff. 

Aloka  VibAra  (Alu-vlhAral.  43 
Amaimgiri,  240 

Amoro-AoM  (Amaratiipha},  180,  250 
Amivahxra,  158 
Amba-Stma^era.  227 
Ampitiya  VibAra,  281 
AnSgaia-»an*af  160  S,  170 
Ananda  (Mens),  author,  112,  187, 
202  a.,  205.  210,  213.  220,  227 
An4thn-p'.o4ika,  247 
Andhra-ailhaluitM,  02 
Anomnda«i,  210,  227 
AnuU,  27,  48 
Anv-ndyefo.  254 
Anuridba-pura,  downfall  of,  164 
Anuri-rama,  51 
Anurnddba  (tAiro),  168  ff.,  203 
„  (king),  158,  184 
Anuruddha-iatala,  170 
Anu-tfAd,  114,  212 
AfttdAna,  118 
Arahanta  (monk).  186 


Araiia-viai  fraternity,  138,  210, 214, 
228,  220 

Arapyaka  Vihira,  248 
Arittha  (Mabi-k  27.  44,  248 
Aripa-wtua  (book),  61 
Ariyavamia  of  A»a  (fJUm),  200 
Ataiita-j&laka,  287 
Aaoka.  10,  21 
Aivagbofa,  63 
AUanagaUa,  56, 218 
Attanaqaiu-vayMa,  253,  284 
Attaragama-bapdAra,  rijl-gurn,  283 
0. 

Atthadaaii,  125.  215 

„  Palkumbur*,  270 
AMAa-dtyniid,  217 

AUhahethi,  43.  46,  73,  81,  88  ff.. 

91  fl „  120,  154,  103,  248,  314,  318 
AUAa-ppuiuianil,  217 
„  .<dlini,  08,  210 
Avaoti,  ichool  of.  181 
Avidiri-niMna,  125 
Ayodbyi  (Siam),  embaaxy  to,  275, 
270 

B 

Badaran  Padara-  )  tiitha,  112-3 
Bilidieca-ViMra.  220 
BdilKi&orfAana,  178 
ittJ trottra,  202,  221,  243  ff..  270 
„  -Jiyaaa-ieaiu.  284 

„  -la  ngra\a,  284 

M  40t d,  311 

Zlana- preaching.  imitation  of,  38 

Batuvnntudive.  142,  170,  237 
Bhadda-KaccAni,  181 
Bhaggari-Tiaa,  128 
Ukaiit-taiaka.  250  n. 

Bhira  (there),  141 
BbAratt  Riroacandra,  250  n. 
Bbltika-abbaya,  48 
Bhuajja-maAjiM,  215,  282 
Bbikkh un I-tAjana,  in  Ceylon,  27, 
136,  185 

Bh&tamadgala-gAnja-TihAra,  107 
BbaTancka-BAbu  (fkra),  214,  247, 
254 

..  »  (king).  228,  240 

Bodhi  (monk),  154 
„  dhara,  princea,  132 
Bodh  i  mapda-nhara,  83,  87,  227 
21 


322 


INItBX 


BodhirotndaU,  OS.  00 
Bodhi-tree,  introduction  to  Ueyion, 
24.  20.  136 

Btdki-wpm  (we  J/a,WS-) 

„  -varjuattkahtikA  (see  Make-), 
160 

„  -winwo  -parilatkA,  158 

British  in  Ceylon,  the,  267  9. 
Brahrnadatta  (monk),  180 
Buddha's  Visits  to  Ceytoo,  13-  4 
Buddha-diss  (king),  70 
Baddhadstta,  106  9..  200 
Buddhadrva.  125 

Euddhagbosa,  48,  76,  70  9..  113, 
138,  183,  189,  194, 
246 

„  Culls,  120 
Baddhafkaiuppatti,  70.  85.  08.  160 
Buddhamitta.  126,  210 
Buddbaaiga.  201 

Boddbappiya,  180,  182,  203,  211, 
220  9.,  220 

Buddharakkhita,  18,  40,  110 

..  S'.ddbattha,  284 

Buddhas  tha.  76, 106 
Buddhasoma,  212 

Budika  vamta,  109  9.,  160,  161,  170, 
236 

„  aukahuka.  114.  134 

Boddhataqua  Vanarataaa  Anaoda 

213 

BvUki-ppaMini,  206.  262 
Buddhism,  Manual  of,  297 
Budufiipilanlctn,  253 

C 

CaHaratJi-tikanAJa  tuita,  161 
ComBuOrattka-fitk,  108 
CdisdnspoiM-fjiiMarBtis.paftytfd,  168, 
100 

CAndra-vyihtrapo,  178 
CandracupU,  20 
Can^-pilaka,  118,  242 
Crtur&rya-talya-hkoya,  261 
C*(ijra-«ii>taoUA«iofii.  133,  217 
Chalmers,  Lord,  47,  100.  314 
Chapala,  186,  196  9.,  201-3 
Childers,  R.  C.,  10 
Cojiani,  the,  50 

110 

Collya  Dlpahkars,  >m  Buddhappiya 
OOdamipiltya  Vihira,  220  a. 

Ctfa-gonlki-pad. e,  100 
COla-raipsa,  (dynasty),  63 
Culla-kailkt-paiUpoma-rulta,  229 

n 

D'Alwts,  7,  77.  183 
/iaivajKa-ldnudkeasi,  210 


Dakkhipa  vihira,  62,  66,  62 
Daladi  coiligi  va,  67,  267 
Jialadk-iirtta,  214,  232 
,.  -us mao,  66,  208 
Dambadeci-asaa,  213 
.Danj»yd-M«t*4,  230 
Dancing,  treatise  on,  286 
IMnla-dkktu-boiki-vaipta,  106 
Danta-kumara,  66 
Difki-dkHu,  66-7 

,,  .000140,  66,  200 

Dithiniga,  163.  157 
XW/LJ-tonwo.  66.  142,  196,  207 
Dithopa-Tisea,  (king),  143,  164,  108 
Dittha,  167 
Deva  (tiers),  61 

Ddrinampiya-Tissa.  10.  20,  29,  67 
Dera-pratlriia,  214,  210 
Petard)  a  vihira,  205 
Dcrmrakkluta,  243 
Dhamma-eakka-mandira,  67 
Dbammacrti  (king).  170,  190.  286 
Phammadinna  Vimalakitti  i  Sid— 

dhattha;.  263 
Phammigtra,  217 
Dkamma-firava-diptnil,  312 
Phammagutta.  37 

Dbammaioti.  Sitinimaluvf,  244,  284 
/lAdnsHM-ltimma,  163 
DbammakathL,  71  9..  164 
Dhammakitti.  06.  138,  142,  106,  207, 
215.  226-7,  240,  242.  264 
Dbammakkhanda,  Gtntota,  266 

TlhMTI^TTlM.Tnjjt4w  1&5 

DbimmAiunda,  ‘'24.  231.  2*!>.  3U 
JlkammajMxItiUkatnikk,  8,  05,  236 
Dbanunapila,  (Acariyai,  112  9..  317 
BaiapoM,  156.  289 
„  Colla,  112.  203  9.,  211 
Phammarakkhita,  Dadalld,  300 

Phammirima.  262,  316 
t  266 

Dbammaruci  N'tkAya,  42,  62,  60,  60, 
124,  129,  136 

PAainma-MSgoai,  81,  89,  98,  187 

T^>t8wimi.0^m  06-7 

Dhimmtiirt  77 
Dhammilct  iking),  278 
„  (minister).  63 

Pharmidisaya,  Sri,  284 
Dharmadhraja-paodita,  268 
Pbaimagupta,  77 
Dharmapiia  (prince),  260 
Dk&tu-ntakjlM,  237 
„  -p&lka,  237 

Pbituseoa,  136,  138,  140,  140 
PUrv-ssimso,  265 


INDEX 


323 


Dhtrinanda.  108 
DIghakaryapa  (minister),  52 
D  Iitliauu;  -  *enip»ti  -  porivcpa,  30, 

140 

DimbuUgala,  ««  Udumbaragiri 
dipa-bkA jA,  12,  130.  235 
Dlpahkara,  m<  Buddliappiya 
DSpaakara  nbkra,  227 
Dfpo-KJiruo,  74,  131  ft. 

„  -t<imja-aithalcath<i,  133,  135,  144 
DiraS&gam*,  128 
Dofanvala,  DAvale,  271 
Dutch  to  Ceylon,  272  0. 
Duttha-gimapi,  14,  33  9.,  217,  246 
K 

Bltaiptlkas,  the,  179,  180 
EWK  31.  34.  147 
£U-jMM  tatp$a,  158 
F 

Fa-Hsirn.  03.  67.  71,  104,  110,  128 
Forbes,  Major,  66 
Fciullc re,  the  Rev.  T_  10 
Franciscans,  the,  261  0. 

O 

Oa4al&d*vi-mnne,  244 

Gadattdenl-viharo,  226.  240,  243 
Gaja-Bihu  (kins),  60,148 
GalaturumOla,  ***  Selantariyatana 
Gal  viMra,  76 

GtmaQi-ahhaya,  *tt  Duttha-c4mai)l 
Ganinanda-panra?*,  248 
Ganlhakara  vih&ra,  82,  106 
GetAri-pAnvrc*,  253 

Oir&*ar\dtia,  253 
Oiri-vatfiMa,  247 
Go  Lem*  (Urns),  199,  220 
Gothibhsy*  (king),  55  9.,  218 
fiAera'i.  58 

Gray,  James.  18.  70.  100 
Oupa-bhwlx*,  86 
Gun&nanda,  Mobottivattt.  300  fl. 
Gnrnlugomi,  158 

OuUim-JUaia,  253 
H 

Hardy,  Edmund,  184 
Hardy,  Spence,  7,  16,  285,  287 
katana  (mr)  ponies,  268 
Hatthdlhaka  viMrft,  28 

UatAa-vanafaUa-anjun  54,  218  9. 
Utma-mAUL,  66 

Hcwi-Vttirar,  Simon  Alexander,  316 
Hiuan  Tsane,  66,  114 
I 

Irugalkula-pariveoa,  248,  253 
J 

Jambuddopi  nhirs,  230 


Jdnalf-Aarn  pa,  161,  234 
jAtakaUkakalkA,  38,  114, 117  9.,  242, 
314 

JdtakaUkalatkA,  Siahalese  transla¬ 
tion,  232  9. 

JataUag  t-aiidnam,  126 
J&ti-lima-Vih&ra,  254 
JayabdJbu  (Mem).  243 
Jayavaidhaoi-pnra,  «<  Kotte 
Jetavana  nbira,  62,  188 
JeKka-Ttssa  (king).  58 
J  i»a-bodkAval(,  243 
M  -canto,  230 

JiitAlakkAra,  18,  106,  100  9. 
Jina-varn*a~iipani,  11,  290,  313 
Joti  |  monk).  190 
Jotipila,  210 

K 

KaacAyana-itktda,  180 

„  Mdtu-maAHM,  237 

„  -tAra,  109,  221 

„  mnposd,  180 
Aaocapiiid-t'ySiunisa,  179  9.,  221. 

243,  283 
Kaduvcla  (Tktra),  280 
Kikavanott-Tissa,  32,  265-6 
Kakntandha  ( 2*A*ro),  255  9. 

Kdlarela  (monastery),  120 
Kilidisa,  151.  230 
K&li-kila-sdhitya-paolita,  213 
Kiliriga  (king),  210 
»  (kingdom),  66 
„  fAero.  211,  223 
KAjikgabadii-iAtelax,  168 
Kalydm  Inscription,  179.  191.  257 
A'rtiyiiin-ppoinrattnm.  257 
Kaiyioiya  ((Arm),  162 
Kanakadata,(«iin).  136 
Kidcl-pura,  113, 100 
K akikA-  vitara  pi,  95,  201 
Kapila  (minister),  53 
Kappinna,  205 
KappOm-PariTepa.  153 
KAraia-pKppka-txtaijarS,  283 
Kintala-Panvtpa.  248,  265 
Kassupa  (Hah*-).  160.  176,  176  9„ 
186,  103,  202,  314 
„  (king),  46,  140,  154-5 
Ka|andhakfira  Vihira,  154 
Jtdtantro,  183 
JCothi-vatiAM,  30 

Antiid-uain  (code  of  conduct),  213, 
270,  287 

Xar-ri/umiea,  214 
AdiydicAior*,  250,  301  0. 
A'liyaiiVan-jpIlAd,  285 
Kalapi-T-js*  (king),  162 


324 


INDEX 


A'mu^AAIu-oouwo,  227 
Kbrroa  (monk),  184 
KKtma  ppal-arana,  154,  202,  205 
KMda  tikkhi,  70,  109.  108,  211 
Kitti-aenipati,  207 
KiUmmeran  -  Kalarii  Yihlra,  169, 
189.  234 

KittuDi»-«ar*.  180 
Klrti-lrt-riianipha,  270  fl. 
Kimlakuytv-nint-nili.  263 
Kobon-TVua  {  monk),  02 
KoManndtb,  253 
Ao<aIa-6i  wfKi  ro»rMi»0,  244 
Koltt,  247  ft. 

KumJLra-diUa  I'dkituicui,  101 
Kupflaifca.  274 
Kunte,  Protestor,  121 
Karen 4*  vihirt,  153 

KvJtttuii  aUkakatka,  02 
Kanin-thara-papHa,  181 
KttM-j&faia,  260 

Karen!,  10 

L 

aio-bttmWl,  244 

Ija-tUdld-niTua  (.«»o<n»4),  285 

Lambakappaa,  49,  227 
Labki-jiur*,  10 

240 

Lti-tKan,  160,  173 
Lenka-ritabJLmi,  270 
liQ&rat!  (queen).  800-7 
LinatlXa4Spa»t  tlt4,  217 
„  -ppab&mni,  114,  192 
„  ■tvssiea"'*.  114,  311 
£t  pa  tin -maim.  244 
lolopoHfdi  253,  311 
Lov&ja-miAgori,  247,  263 
Lovi-niAbi-plya,  35,  166 

M 

Uadhv-piQ'iibt-tMtUi,  $9 
ttodkw<4-ra*a-t&hini,  220 
Madi*rirtka-fir«kM'*t.  157,  282 
109  IT.,  126 

Marsdha.  20-1 
Mlrama.  32 
KAshA,  200 

Mahi-bodba  (Ikera).  174,  206 
JlaUiaJli.nifUit,  143.  167,  230, 

256-6,  202 

„  -attlalufAa,  133.  159 

Mabi-kaoeiyasa,  89, 180 
jU.MVila  250 
Moh&-Ka**apa-carita,  314 
Mahamerba-viioa,  27 
MlalU  (tktia),  52 
h  <kin«>.  *« 


Mahinima  (author),  131,  130  139  9., 
144 

„  (king),  70,  81,  94 
Muhin Aiula  (fkern),  35 
Mahi-neUa-pitada-mQla,  283-4 
Mahi-netr*  viMra,  248 
Maki-niMt*a,  117,  141 
MabAnigaraa,  94  a 

J/a*4  s>pilu-t«3!»(ian6,  230 
„  -nindti.  180 
„  .pattori-^ttkakalki,  91 
Mahlriflbt,  AriUha 
Mabiruhi  [nun),  136 
u»M««nt  iking),  00  If.,  137 
MahisAini.  77 

l/tU  MlifuffUM'ltllti  286 
„  ailun/idonUa,  229 
MahAriva  :hera).  126 

il aka- tudatMna-tvtia,  268 

Mahatuinma  ((Aero),  48 
MabitbOpa,  35,  40,  217 
Habatiisa  |iA*ra),  37,  41,  42,  51,  126 
MakH-vaifua,  6,  131  ff.,  ISO,  230, 
265,  2*4,  310 
Mabavaipaa  (dy  natty),  08 
JJaM-vamtaUkakatkA,  133,  144 
Mah&vaipsaka-Tissa  {>kaa),  126 
UakA-vaiua-ftkil,  46,  132,  134,  139, 
142,  S.  217,  226,  256 
101,  161 

Mahk-vihira,  62,  67  If.,  06.  69,  70, 
76,  91,  118,  134,  153,  177, 
185,  104,  100,  210,  224, 
267,  204,  306 
„  -TijWivI  (l*m»).  180 
JUaM-niwya-4aA9<iAii-.pil'ar<i(ia,  101 
Mab&yint,  63 

MnhA-yaia  (or  Revatal.  180,  190,  221 
MahUA  (non),  130 

Mahmda.  20-1,  23,  20,  06,  130,  138 
MahimJ-vuta.  125,  120 
Maitrl-mahA-timi.  219,  242,  248, 
263 

Majtbika  (lAera),  00 
M»Mtinh|t,  181 
Malabar*,  the.  206.  230,  249 
Maliyadeva,  37,  126 
M&navasima,  170 
Mabgala  (rtero),  223.  248 
204 

JfaitonaMa  ptrroni,  08,  192 

Maricav&tuparivopa,  151 
Mattibhaya,  27 
Matrala-MO.  152,  164 
M&ykdunne,  206 
Mayura  (poet),  180,  236 

(Moral  Parirepa,  71 
Mrdb&oanda,  11.  230,  312 


INDEX 


325 


iltgki-Jula.  281 
Megharawa.  65.  68.  208 
Meghavaopibliaya.  61 
iltj  ktiuiuara-Mitua,  240 
Mrttryym  ;  Buddha1.  161 
.Wdfryya-t.jjlu,  226 
Mihint.l.  Inscription,  46 
Urtinda  pathi,  86,  101.  284,  303-4 
MoKsallina,  CoHa  (king),  1 61.  227 
„  D&lla  (king),  140,  153 
_  (tArro),  70.  171,  17»  f., 
186  107.  109.  208 

UogyaUAna-saddattka-ratnlitMTa,  205 
J/«V^ili<lv«na  ryaiara(wi.  170  9-.  186 
fl..  204,  731 

„  -paiiim-pradipo,  251 
Moka-vUckeianl,  100,  170 
MukJka-mMa-dlpani,  170 
MukhamattaJca,  205 
MOla  (  minuter  I,  160 
Uula-tikkM,  70 
MOlaaoma-vlMra,  168 
Afdla-llU  (on  AbbidUamm*),  210 
Mulgirigala  vihAra,  253 
MiUter.  Edward,  77 
Jtfaw^iilidbtUra,  283 
Motatlra  (king),  10 

N 

Kfisa.  Cora  (king),  48 
Kkgamittt  (nun),  136 
ft&gasila  ((Arm),  154 
ftAgatena,  285 
JJalaka  Kactkna),  181 
^afl|a4kUn*rai|iM  (also  see  L&lata-J 
255 

NaUOrutun  (minkter),  250 
Ndma-mili,  252.  310 
A'Ama-rfijM-jiariccAegte,  160  fl.,  173, 
202,  204 

M  -tomAsa,  156 
A'dmAuaiijnt,  250 

fikpibhi-raqua.  170 
ftknantana,  210,  284 
fjlpavAra,  189 

fjioawmala-Tuaa,  AmbagahapttiyA, 

309 

Sa«kaara,  Mahngoda,  224,  306,  816 
Nandicaklca,  260 
fianodaya m.  81,  84 
Narendra-isipha,  374 
Nava-vimala-buddhl,  173 
NtU’-ppakcra(ta,  114,  180,  182,  184 
NMUan-iotbO,  120,  158 
New  Tutamtnl,  Pili  translation,  310 
tfiddssa  (see  also  Mabk-Nlddcta!,  80 
Nigaothas,  the,  41 
Nikiya,  Ansarapura,  300 


Nikirai,  reconciliation  of,  166 
.Vikyo-Mii^ak,  241-2  0. 

Nisundeha,  214 

Nlnanka  Alakdraru,  tts  Alakes- 
vara 

Jiissaya-UkokaM,  206 
Ntyixvika  (director),  230 
Nun*.  the,  136,  165 
Ny Asa,  179 

0 

Okandapola  nhara.  244 
Oktndapola-SQHne,  244,  284 
Olcoti,  Ool.  Henry  Steele,  301  9. 
Oriental  Studies,  Committee  on.  312 

P 

PaUnMasirowani,  313 
Pada-r&pa-siddMi,  set  Jlipa-siddM 
„  -tUdh ana,  187,  £08,  211,  281 
Padasiddii- Ktnm,  244 
PeufdMttfW,  180 
Padmlvatl-pariveoa.  248 
PadmataU-mstu,  226 
Padya-cid&wni,  100  n. 

Paifa-madhu,  220,  222 
Pmlibatgala  vihAra  >«  Putabhalta- 
nil) 

PAhmettaka-rinatfa-vinioehaya,  101 

PallirAma,  42 
Parpsupabbata  vihAra,  247 
PAnadura  Controveny,  301 
Pafica-parivepa-adhipati.  215 
Paftca-ppakaraoa,  210 
Pa&j\k&-pradlpa,  188,  222,  251  fl. 
Paodiyans.  the,  17 
Fagdukibhaya,  19 
Pawuviandeva,  17-8 
Piiivriyu-paiuu^dtaJhj,  127 
Papaiea-stdant,  96,  102,  315 
Parikrama  (minkter),  127,  208 
„  Papdlta,  218 
ParAkrama-BAhu,  iVuM-dtra,  236 
the  Great,  176  fl. 

„  ,,  ol  Dambadenlya, 

207.  213 

„  „  of  Kott*.  247 

,,  „  of  Kttiupegala, 

127,  232 

PdrrfkuftM-sirita,  251 

Paramadhamma  -  cetiya  -  parivega, 

231,  311 

Paramaiiia,  (king),  248 

Paranaltha-dlpa,  166 

„  - dipanS ,  98,  114  n. 

„  -jatikA,  06 

„  -nwAjiUl.  113 

„  -riniccAoyo,  169,  173  fl., 

206 


326 


INDEX 


Pirani-matA-sataka,  242 

Paracm-batane.  270 

251 

paritta\n,  78,  282,  30#  n. 

Parittat lUkalkA,  81 
Parker,  39 

Pirupaaas,  the,  1*8,  180 
Pae-mula-mahiiian,  218 
Pilimokkha.  247 

Pati-taniiK-.JA-maMO,  148,  217 
Patta-nikkujja  no in  m  mo,  1S3 
Pattini,  worihip  at,  80 
PayofasUUt.  £21,  £30  fl. 

PdaiopaicKi,  88 

Ptia  mt  [Ptta-vattku),  238,  318 
PiiuiapiUlca,  280 
Phussadevs,  128 
Pilimatalanve,  288 
PiadapUika-Tiis*  (tf«ro),  229 
Pint-pota,  78 

PtptkaUoya,  Sinhalese  trnmlnticn 

71,  73.  81 

„  Maya-lalcltka^a-gandla,  188 
Pijaka  Ma-main,  181 
Piyadassi  (lAera),  187,  206 

Piyatiaja,  Vidurupola,  314 
Pliny,  84 
PoloanaraTa,  178 
Port**,  82  n. 

Poetoguwe  in  Ceylon,  269  ff. 
Pratirijadera-papdita.  233 
Pratl  rijapanvopa,  223 
Prinseji,  5,  130 
Pristine  in  Ceylon,  303  0. 
Pij&voUyo,  38,  88,  100,  170 
Pu{abhattaeela  vlhlra,  214.  240, 
242-3,  248 


R 


KatKu  vomia,  230,  313 
Rlhola.  141,  233 

..  $rt  171,  188,  205,  248-9, 
260  II. 

Ri)Mtirij«-si:pha,  287 
Ri)agaha  Connell,  46 
Kita-g%n i,  200,  283 
Rijaxuru-Vanaratana  Sangharlja. 

248  . 

Miamurari,  127 


llit'roliiLbn,  213 
RAjaairpha  I,  4,  200 
„  II.  270  B. 

Jt&jAva. U,  03.  131,  140 
,.  -mjtfraka,  131 
Rahkhanca  lArakkan),  208,  274 
RAma-devali,  289 
Mma-sandcso,  288 
Rimid hi  pa.il  (  kin*),  280 


R&mafifia-desa,  108,  287 
Rambhi  Vihira,  206 
RambukTelld  Tm ro,  288-9 
Rasasanlle  Tktta,  253 
J?«M  eOAint,  120,  162,  210,  223  fl., 
230,  247 

RatanapAia  (tktra),  278 
Raiana-pasida.  52 
Ratanas&ra,  Kahive,  308 

Ratana-tvUa,  chanting  of,  78 
/lainawab-jMiiJiM-iria,  190 
RntnafotjOion.  106.  190 
Ratna-matipida,  108 
RaRhapUa,  224 

Rennaisaaaoe,  the  Buddhist,  301  fl. 
Retata  ox  Mabilma,  77 
Revata,  80.  83,  100 
Rayi-gama  (Riiagima)  Vihira,  247 
Ridl-vihira,  282 
Robapa.  22 

„  legends  of,  280 
Rome,  84,  07 

Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Ceylon  Branch, 

300-7 

Rucanandk  (non),  130 
Rtijxi-mdU,  281 
PSpirSpa-vUrXioo,  108,  202 
Bepa-sMAi,  180,  182,  220,  231,  263 
Kueon~mala,  280 
Ruvan-vUi-di*oba,  38 

S 

AaAtUrtks-cintd,  106 
Sacca-saAihepa,  112,  205,  217 
„  „  200, 202  fl. 

..  -tikhaAaa.  69 

Sacred  and  Historical  Boots  of 
Ceylon,  0 

Sacred  Tooth,  03,  65  fl. 
Sad-bhAjd-paramcivara,  250 

Sadda-n&lA,  283 
„  -ntli,  185,  197 
„  .sattJta,  167 

Saddhamma-1  otipdla  iChapata'i,  185 
-Mpa,  199 

Saddhamna-ppajjotihA,  117 

,,  sat^ha.  10,  138,  160, 
170,  183.  245  fl. 
Saddhanuns-tilaka  vibirn,  240 
SaddkomnopAyana,  212,  311 

„  - 1 1  Mm  fl  i  .  Ill 

Saddtamvsa-ratan&vali,  97 
M  -tuinw,  K  36-7 
SaddharmAlaAk&raya,  220,  240, 
243-4 

Saddhorma-ratn&iara,  06,  283 
Saddhanaovida-salkyTata,  284 


INDEX 


327 


Saddhi-Tissa,  30 

HAdkitcaritodaya,  247 
SAgala  TArra,  56 
Siigaliki  Sisterhood,  105  n. 

Sagahyas,  the,  50  fl..  62 
Sdgaramatl  iSAriputU),  100  ft.,  197 
Sabassa-tittha  Ordination,  228 
Salkaua-vailku-attMaliatM,  183,  220 
„  ,,  -npaJtarava,  128,  226 

Sairphalakas,  toe,  69 
Sakala-vidyi-cakravarti,  218 
iMalihini-tondtte,  102,  261 
SAli,  Prince,  226 
Samanta  kitv  vrrnnanA  228,  233 
„  plMJikA,  14,  52.  84,  03-4, 
00,  95,  158,  178,  102.  215 
Sanlandha-cinli.  107,  100,  204,  284 
Samudragupta,  08 
NanmoAa-nOsinf,  313 

N  -vfaxfoaf.  02,  08,  210 
Samudda  (non),  136 
•Samyit&OpaiM,  128 
Saoiyuim-aihaya-allAaAetAd,  316 
Sendtka  poems,  261 
Sotidki-kappa,  180,  244 
■SaAyAorajatnbJ,  281  n. 
Sangar&joUawt  ■  t&dhu  ■  nmtayn, 

281  n. 

Safigha,  Ranks  in  Ceylon,  228 
Sanghabadm.  95 
SaTlghabodhi.  King.  52  ff.,  218 
Sanghamitta  (monk),  67 
SaAghamitiA  (tAerf).  24,  137,  240 
Sa&Kb&nandi.  180 
Sa&gfaapila,  88 
SahghapdU,  81 

SaAgharakkhtta,  78,  126,  186,  107, 

BOB 

SaAgtalkagirl  VibAra,  152 

&sfty{fi'*w(!eaa(ii,  80 
SapbA  (nun),  186 

SaAkhapilt,  100 

SanLhtpa,  243 

„  ^itlknkatkA.  02 

„  -wssand,  107,  201 

Sannipiita,  128 
Santina  (<A«ro),  274 
Sanskrit  in  Ceylon,  74-5,  148,  168, 
234 

Sapum&l-ku mira,  248 
Saxapahkara,  Vilmta,  167,  160,  216, 
222,  224.  244,  279  fl. 
SAratthadipanf,  102-3,  268 
Sarasi-gima-miUa  («<  also  Viix&m- 
Btfila).  263 

SAraUha-maijCtA,  102 
SdrAriKa-*atpra\a,  7 1,  222,  282 
Sira  tatkjtpx,  284 


Sarnifka-adliaf,  200 

„  -tan^alui,  222,  220 

„  -tnUsial  (5«so<fda-W<UA»), 

200 

S&ripntta  (author).  106,  168,  173, 
186,  189  9.,  103-5,  20(3,  207 
Sisana,  dirinoos  in  Ceylon,  229 
Sasann-caetso,  85 

„  -rainsa-dtea,  10,  811 
Samt-HTniinn,  208 
Selantar&yatana  iCalatu  rum  dial 
Thtrx *,  107,  242.  264 
Sena.  King,  165,  164 
SeniUdki  dlukaxa,  Sen? rat,  240 
SenApati-mflla,  254 
Serurila  ISeruvivilal.  188,  254,  266 
Shln-eau-hu,  Quern,  256 
Siam,  Hint  of,  303,  300 
Siamese  monks  in  Ceylon,  278 
Siduf-softpord,  223,  234 
Siddbattha  (lAero),  ««  oho  Dhamma- 
dinna,  220,  253,  280 
,.  Tibboturive,  284 
Slhagiri  vikira.  140 
Slhaia  althakaM,  14,  133 
„  •mU-miiu?,  46 

„  -dfpa-rattAu,  see  Ttoeo-sdAint 
tA/THfl.  223 

Slhala-sahgha,  in  Burma,  197,  200 
SikSa-tara*f,  216 
SilcHipada-valaAytni,  218 
BilM-volatda  sad  -Visiso,  216 
StldkAla,  227 
Silimeghasena,  152,  168 
„  -vappn,  163 
SCavamsa  (monk),  237 
StmA  (boundaries),  257,  260 
..  -jfcofAd  133 
„  -iatiAatia-ilfponi,  311 
•SfmibrAJtdra,  202 

„  -raUpoAa,  268 
„  202 
Sfisd-taaiani-cAcdanf,  251 
Sin  gu,  King  of  Ava,  101 
Sinhaicee  language,  72,  234 
SiriniTisa,  king,  K4,  06 
„  Kahratte,  280 

Sirikudda,  King,  96 
SipaJxu-lataro,  152,  167 
Sirali  (nan).  136 
SiyAmopatampadA-vata,  284 
8cmadevi,  109 
Sosa,  61 

.SrApdro-rUM-rtUsa-Judil,  285 

Siva  Maha- ,  44 
SivalA  (nun),  136 
Stbanra  School,  69 

SuMdpiWyo,  268 


328 


INDEX 


Subbfiti  (TArru),  10-11,  252.  310 
SutxdkAUAkAra.  78,  100.  204 
Sadhammi  (nun).  136 
Sudklra-tmutht-tnamlaiut,  283 
juln-tod.ltiomia,  190 
Surnani  (nun),  136 
Unm.Ay.u,  108,  173,  300  ff.,  204, 
230 

HiklBdUT*.  142.  233, 

246.  304  ff. 

Ttbbocuvivt,  142 
„  H  Ins  (■»  Ini  mbu  rtl ,  284 

Kodkunlve,  288 
8una*guh-pa*adan{,  204 
„  nldst  ni,  00,  OS 
Sumedha  (Thora)  of  Cuttagima,  247 
..  201 

Sa»erfhah itfd.  133 
Sunanda  Then,  289 
Sanecridevi  Par.vrga.,  247-8,  264 
Sdntian.31 
Sflriyagoda  Thera,  270 
SCrya-ialabi,  ISO,  236 
SamuUaeUJki,  200,  284 
Sottas,  translations  of,  308  ff. 
S'vrfts-aiy&ftJ-artiaAntAA,  124 


Tamba*(madi)pabAi.  16,  110 
Tamils  in  Ceylon,  31,  147,  164 
Tinaslva  (minister),  41 
Tangutta-vaAkn-parivegn,  224 
Tda-hafAha^HM,  162 
Theoeorhieal  Society,  302  ff. 
Thera-vida-panuapari,  20,  37,  267 
Thera vfida  Kuna,  136 
Tbenya  Nikiya,  4,  63,  60.  182 
Thfigdrima,  66,  62, 186 
Thtpa  nwua,  204,  216  ff..  285 
TOA,  102  ff.,  210,  248 
ffM-oyou,  200 
TitohU,  200 
flUri  Bahdira,  266 
T.pilaka-pariyattt-dhara,  166 
TiUbiriraa,  10, 41 
Tipa/tM*,  46 
Ttsaru-saW&eo,  263 
Totagamu-nlnntta,  251 
Totagamnv*  Vihira,  253,  265 
Turaour,  George,  8-8,  66,  130,  131 


U 

Udalra-kkhepa-slmi,  260 
Udumbara-giri,  176.  188,  201  ff„  213 
Ulakudaya-den,  260 
Upalaatara-mdla  then,  254 
Upili  Mahd  lhera,  44.  46,  278 
Upasampadi,  revival  of,  257,  269, 
274,  276  ff.,  308  ff. 


Upaaena,  1 17,  141,  144 
Kodagoda,  313 
Upisiki  vihira.  28 
Upatapaaai  (Gatiri  Parlve^a),  263 
Upatusa  (Arahi).  86 

„  (author).  143,  160,  160 
„  (king).  76 
Vpharu,  Edward,  5 
Upoaatha-irima,  284 
Uracapura,  106 
Ussiliya-Tisaa,  56 
Uttarajlva,  188, 107 
Uttar*  rihira,  91,  134 
VUan-uihin-aUhakatM,  133.  144 

.^U.umjs.  133.  134 


„  -t nniechaya,  100 
_  .,  (Ska,  202 

Uttaramftla  Nikiya.  170, 186,  280 
Uttaroja  Monastery,  170  ff. 
Uttiya,  30 


V 

Vlhisvara  Vicisaara  7 ).  217 

Vicissara.  108-0,  161.  174,  202,  217, 
244,  250 

I'ejirtlidlli^ffd,  258 
Vaitulya-pifaka,  53,  62 
Via'.olya-vid*.  3.  66.  147,  234 
Vajjiputta  Nikiya,  42 
Vimanta-pabbat*.  126 
Vam«atlAa.y>j»idtiN(,  142,  148 
Van  era  tana  ol  Amaragiri,  240 
„  Mahisdmi,  248,  264 
a»  -TilSi,  J tt  AZUOdi 

Vans  l  Arafidu-  van  fraternity  210  ff., 

223 

Vasabba,  40 
1'aMp,  165  n. 

Vawbandho,  68 
Vata-dfigi,  66 

Vaftagimagi  (Vajagam-abi),  41. 160, 

225,  246 

Vattila-gama,  230 

Vedeba  Then,  129,  203,  210,  214, 
222  ff. 

VepuUa-boddbi  o!  Pagan,  109 
Vesaagtri  Inscription,  45 
Veghudiaa,  107 
VesdJI  Council,  122 
Vitttvi  Thera,  263 
VibhaOoa.  80 
Vidigama  Then,  247 
V  idyiUs  Akira-  pari  vega,  252 
Vidyodaya-parivega,  305 
Vihira- mabidevl,  32 
Vijaya  (king),  16-16,  18 

,.  Bihu,  151,  164.  184,  186,  207. 
220-30,  300 


INDEX 


329 


Vljaya  B*bn-pariw>a,  230,  248 
„  Rijwuplm  (kin*),  274  0. 
VljayMundamima,  200 
V ikiama-Rij  aaiip  ha,  288 
ViIcam-m<UA*mab&*tbeta,  158-0, 
171,  238,  253 
Vimalabuddbi,  180.  201 
Vimala-dhamma-aOriya,  268 
Vtmalas&ra  (liere),  10,  311 
Vimala-vil&nnt,  114  n. 

Vtma»-BtU  (VimdiM-nilllM),  235 
KimAwr-oa/lAu  translation,  276 
Yiroatiechalani,  100 
„  -tnWaaf.  179,  268 
1'imatrti-mapya,  87 
Vinaya-dkara,  10 

Vinaf/a'ifatilK\pada,  188 

,,  -MoiA-JaftpaAa,  191 
„  -Mftfafo,  100,  105,  266 
„  „  .paLurtifta,  101 

I'inayiUlafailiii,  133,  268 


Vi  naj/allha-naAjitA.  201 
KinaydrtAa-aiKdteatM,  202 
Fiaaua-iiinlceAaya,  78 

.,  -JIM,  202, 214 

„  „  •jonae,  106,  268 

VIrasimha-praliriJa-  (mitu»u»),  233 
Vlrankkama  (ktaf).  267 
Fifixlitli'iwifii,  82,  84-5,  113,  161, 
172,  214,  217 
Voharaka-Tusa,  60 
Vutta-t»AIA,  247 

VuMonAM-JantlMii-HtaJhi,  263  (I. 
Ful/oJay o.  107  ff. 


W 

Wntisi  in  Ceylon,  44-5 
Y 

Ynkkhaddi  Lena,  237 
Y c-din  (monk),  300 

Yoffa-ratnukara,  216 
,,  -riat-cc-loya,  202 


Sltyhtn  Amlin  ami  Son*,  tJd.,  Printtrt,  HtHfort i. 


central  archaeological  library, 
NEW  DELHI 


Catalogue  No.  Otl,370i/Mai.  *3154 


Author-»»alala,#kc*ra 


pall  Litaratura  » t  Caylan 


GOVT.  OF  INDIA 
Department  of  Archaeology 

NEW  DELHI. 


