GAEKWAD’S  ORIENTAL  SERIES 


Published  under  the  authority  of 
the  Government  of  Mis  Highness 
the  Maharaja  Gaekwad  of  Baroda. 


No.  XLI 

sadhanamAla 

Vol  II 


Rftttfllyiosh  Bhattacharyya,  M.A.,  Ph.D. 

General  Editor 


A SPECIMEN  PAGE  OF  MS  B. 


SADHANAMALA 

Vol.  II 


Rditkd  with  an  rNTKonrrnnN  ami  inih:\  bv 

BENOYTOSH  BHATTACHAHYYA,  M.A..  Pli.l) 

fjifh  member,  Asiatic  Society  oj  Bengal,  Ordinary  member,  Kem  l ml i fate,  10,]? 
Holland,  Bihar  and  Orissa  Research,  Society,  Patna , Genera { Editor, 
GAEK.  WAD'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES,  and  Director 
Oriental  Institute,  Baroda,  Author  of  INDIAN 
BUDDHIST  ICONOGRAPHY,  etc.,  etc. 


1928 

Oriental  Institute 
Baroda 


Published  by  Benoytosh  Bhattacharyya  at  the  Oriental  Institute, 
Baroda  on  behalf  of  the  Government  of  H.H.  the 
Maharaja  Gaekwad  of  Baroda. 

Printed  by  P.  Knight  at  the  Baptist  Mission  Press, 

41,  Lower  Circular  Road,  Calcutta. 

Price,  Rs.  9. 


&.C.L. 

S~r  02*^33 


PREFACE. 


* 

The  second  and  the  concluding  volume  of  the  Sadkana- 
maid  is  now  presented  to  the  public  as  No.  XLI  in  the 
GaekwacTs  Oriental  Series.  The  first  volume  published 
in  1925  contains  170  Sadhanas  while  this  embodies  142 
making  a total  of  312  Sadhanas.  These  are  all  short 
works  of  Tantric  authors  the  names  of  whom  in  some 
cases  only  are  known,  while  in  others  they  are  not 
known.  This  volume  contains  in  accordance  with  our 
promise  an  introduction  dealing  with  the  problems 
connected  with  Vajrayana  and  a general  index. 

The  second  volume  opens  with  a series  of  Sadhanas 
(Nos.  171-190)  devoted  to  the  worship  of  Kurukulla  in 
a variety  of  forms.  Kurukulla  is  followed  by  Usnisa- 
vijaya  (191),  Sitatapatra  (192),  and  Vajracarcika  (193). 
Then  come  the  five  great  protectresses,  or  Paficama- 
haraksa  deities  as  they  are  called,  beginning  with  Maha- 
pratisara,  to  whom  three  Sadhanas  (194-96)  are  ascribed. 
She  is  followed  in  quick  succession  by  the  other  great 
protectresses,  namely,  Mahamayurl  (197),  Mahasahasra- 
pramardanl  (198),  Mahamantranusarinl  (199),  and  Maha- 
sitavatl  (200).  These  deities  are  very  popular  even  now 
in  Nepal  and  every  devout  Buddhist  is  required  to  keep 
a MS  of  Pancaralcsa  in  which  directions  to  worship  these 
goddesses  along  with  their  appropriate  Mantras  are  given. 
The  next  Sadhana  (201)  is  also  devoted  to  the  Maha- 
rak§a  deities,  but  this  is  in  a shorter  form  than  the  one 
that  comes  after  under  No.  206.  The  intervening  Sadha- 
nas are  ascribed  to  Mahapratyangira  (202),  Dhvajagra- 
keyura  (203),  Aparajita  (204),  and  Vajragandhari  (205). 
Three  Sadhanas  are  then  reserved  for  the  worship  of 
Vajra^hkhala  (207-09).  Her  Sadhana  is  followed  by 


VI 


PREFACE. 


one  of  Dhvajagrakeyura  (210),  and  two  of  U^nl^avijaya, 
one  in  prose  (211)  and  the  other  in  verse  (212).  < Vasu- 
dhara  the  consort  of  Jambhala  comes  next  and  the 
popularity  of  the  goddess  is  shown  by  the  attribution  of 
no  less  than  four  Sad  lianas  (213-16)  to  her  worship. 
Vauidhara  is  closely  followed  by  another  most  powerful 
and  popular  goddess  known  as  Vajravarahi  who  forms 
the  subject-matter  of  an  authoritative  Buddhist  Tantra. 
No  less  than  eleven  (117-127)  Sadhanas  are  attributed 
to  Vajravarahi  who  is  recognized  also  by  the  names  of 
Parjnaloka  and  Jvalamukln  when  worshiped  in 
different  Mandalas.  Nairatma,  an  emanation  of  Ak§o- 
bhya,  then  appears  and  to  her  four  Sadhanas  (128-131) 
are  ascribed.  Vajrayogini  the  next  goddess  is  also  a 
powerful  and  awe-inspiring  deity,  and  she  is  the  subject- 
matter  of  an  authoritative  Buddhist  Tantra  known  as 
the  V ajrayogimtantra ; to  her  worship  there  are  seven 
Sadhanas  (132-138)  in  the  Sadhanamala . JThen  follows 
a series  of  Sadhanas  devoted  to  the  worship  of  Heruka 
who  is  probably  the  mightiest  god  in  the  whole  pantheon 
and  is  the  subject  of  a popular  Tantra  entitled  the 
Herukalantra.  Heruka  is  conceived  in  a variety  of 
forms  and  to  each  of  these  forms  several  Sadhanas  are 
attributed.  Mahamaya  or  the  four-faced  and  the  four- 
armed Heruka  has  two  Sadhanas  (239-240) ; the  two- 
faced  Heruka  with  or  without  the  6akti  has  nine  (241- 
249) ; while  Vairadaka  or  the  three-faced  and  six-armed 
Heruka,  who  is  also  called  Saptakgara,  because  of  the 
seven-syllabled  Mantra  ascribed  to  him,  has  the  two 
next  Sadhanas  (250-251).  The  two  subsequent  Sadhanas 
(252-253)  deal  with  the  processes  of  Bdhyapujd  (external 
worship)  and  Hastajmjd  (worship  with  hand)  of 
Cakrasamvara  a form  of  Heruka  who  is  so  called 
when  he  takes  the  Sakti  Vajravarahi ; the  union 
of  the  two  is  the  subject-matter  of  the  Cakrasamvara - 
tantra » The  next  Sadhana  (254)  is  devoted  to  the 


PREFACE. 


worship  of  Buddhakapala  who  is  none  but  Heruka  himself 
with  four  arms  and  represented  as  united  in  Yoga  with 
his  Sakti  Citrasena.  This  also  is  the  subject-matter  of 
yet  another  Tantra  by  name  BuddhakajvX laiantra.  The 
last  Sadhana  (255)  in  the  Heruka  series  is  ay  m devoted 
to  the  worship  of  Cakrasamvara  or  Heruka  who  is 
associated  with  his  Sakti  Vajravaw  he  The  next 
Sadhana  (256)  gives  four  onc-syUabh-d  Mantras  and 
explains  the  results  obtainable  therefrom.  Then 
come  Vajrahuhkara  (257)  and  Mahabala  (258)  to  each 
of  whom  one  Sadhana  is  ascribed.  To  Havagri  v;.  also 
called  Paramasva,  no  less  than  three  Sadhanac  r25i)~ 
6i  ) are  ascribed,  while  the  two  subsequent  ones  Yrai - 
lokyavijaya  (262)  and  Va jrai valanalarka  (265)  get  only 
one  Sadhana  each.  Several  Sadhanas^theu  follow  for 
the  worship  of  a rather  fearful  but  popular  deity  mine  d 
Bhutadamara  (264-67;  who  in  his  turn  followed  in 
another  popular  Vajrayana  deity  known  as  Yamari  or 
Yamaiitaka  with  a red  or  blue  form : to  the  latter  no 
less  than  thirteen  (268-280)  Sadnanas,  some  in  j)re  » 
end  a large  majority  in  verse,  are  devoted.  The  deity 
who  follows  next  is  Vighnantaka  and  is  rather  unfortu- 
nate to  get  only  one  Sadhana  (281)  squeezed  in  between 
a Sadhana  of  Yamaiitaka  and  his  Balimantra  (282). 
Maitreya  the  future  Buddha  to  whom  only  one  Sadhana 
(283)  is  given  shows  vividly  the  apathy  displayed  towards 
this  mighty  personality  of  primitive  Buddhism  by  the 
Vajrayanists.  ^ The  ease  of  Jambhala  the  god  of  wealth, 
however,  is  different,  and  the  eagerness  with  which 
this  Buddhist  Mammon  was  worshipped  is  indicated  in 
the  sixteen  Sad  lianas  (284-299),  some  in  prose  and  other 
in  eloquent  verse,  contained  in  the  book.  Then  follow 
seven  Sadhanas  (300-306)  for  the  worship  of  a fierce  cod 
MahakiUa  who  is  also  conceived  in  a variety  oi  forms 
Mahafc&la  is  followed  by  Ganapati  who,  though  orig 
11  ally  Hindu,  readily  found  a place  in  the  Vajrayana 


V1U 


PREFACE. 


). 


pantheon;  to  him  one  Sadhana  is  awarded.  / Raja; 
Tara  comes  next  (308)  and  the  subsequent  Sadhana  (309) 
contains  a panegyric  of  the  same  goddess.  She  is 
followed  by  Pitha  Tara  in  one  Sadhana  (310),  while  the 
next  (311)  gives  the  Malamantra  of  the  same  deity. 
The  last  Sadhana  (312)  in  this  volume  and  in  the 
Sadhanamala  is  ascribed  to  Mahahala  whose  Mandala 
with  all  attendant  deities  is  described  in  detail. 


This  volume  presented  the  same  peculiarities  of 
language  as  the  previous  one,  but  the  work  of  editing 
the  present  volume  was  rendered  more  difficult,  as  fpr 
the  most  part  we  had  to  depend  on  the  worst  MSS 
among  the  lot.  The  Sadhanamala  itself  is  difficult  and 
when  handicapped  with  very  incorrect  MSS  the 
difficulties  are  naturally  augmented.  This  is  one  of 
the  reasons  for  the  delay  in  bringing  out  the  present 
volume  and  for  its  imperfections.  Only  two  examples  are 
here  quoted  as  specimens  showing  the  difficulties  of  the 
editor  in  arriving  at  a correct  reading  especially  without 
the  help  of  Tibetan  Lamas  or  the  voluminous  Tangyur. 
While  editing  Sadhana  No.  165  two  readings  offered 
themselves  as  wrw:  ft  sprier  etc.  and  toepc«, 
and  it  was  a problem  to  choose  one  from  the  two  as 
both  appeared  to  be  quite  in  order.  It  took  us  a few 
days  before  we  could  arrive  at  the  correct  reading  as 
•mpnco  and  reject  the  reading  as  incorrect.  It 

can  be  seen  that  the  Sloka  in  question  represents  a 
Mantra  of  Vajravlna  Sarasvati : Om  Picu  Picu  Prajna- 
vardhani  Jvala  Jvala  Medhavardhani  Dhiri  DhiriBuddhi - 
vardhani  Svaha.  The  words  wvx  and  wane  there- 
fore stand  for  the  symbol  # in  the  beginning  of  the 
Mantra  before  Picu . Vajradhara  is  either  the  Adibud- 
dha  or  the  Dhy&ni  Buddha  Akgobhya  who  has  the 
jra  as  the  recognition  symbol.  Now  both  Vajradhara 
arid  Akeobhya  originate  from  the  Bfj mantra  (germ-sylla^ 


PREFACE.  1A 

ble)  Hum.  Therefore  the  reading  4 Vajradhaxa  ’ be- 
comes out  of  the  question  as.  the  first  symbol  of  the 
Mantra  above  stated  is  Om  and  not  Hum.  But  who  is 
this  Cakradhara  (holder  of  the  disc)  ? The  disc  as 
might  be  remembered  is  the  recognition  symbol  of 
Vairocana  whose  other  name — and  it  is  a rather  peculiar 
■one — Cakradhara,  is  here  given  in  order  to  conform  to 
the  exigencies  of  metre.  Nowt  when  we  turn  to  the 
Advayavajrasangraha  (p.  41, 1.  8)  we  find  # as  the  germ- 
syllable  of  the  Dhyani  Buddha  Vairocana,  and  thus 
one  query  is  settled. 

The  other  is  also  quite  peculiar.  In  a Sadliana 
(No.  296)  for  Jambhala  we  meet  with  a passage  where 
all  the  three  available  MSS  present  the  preposterous 
reading  WTcRi  i In  this  there  are  two 

letters  in  excess  of  those  required  by  the  metre.  It 
presented  what  seemed  to  us  in  the  beginning  an  un- 
surmountable  difficulty  but  ultimately  we  solved  it  in  the 
following  manner,  and  we  do  not  know  whether  our  solu- 
tion is  correct  or  incorrect.  The  copyists  especially  the 
modern  ones  in  Nepal  have  certain  bad  habits,  one  among 
them  being  the  introduction  of  the  letter  jt  between  h and 
^ making,  for  instance,  as  I In  the  present  pas- 
sage depending  as  we  did  on  their  bad  habit  the  two  3T 
letters  were  omitted  ; and  as  H is  often  written  as  3 the 
letters  ocfffff*  were  changed  into  i This  gave  us  a 

little  more  intelligible  passage  as  wtftfcnffaw  , 

May  he  protect  you  who  are  afraid  of  the  horrors  of 
rebirth.” 

Before  closing  this  Preface  we  have  to  express  our 
gratitude  to  a number  of  distinguished  persons  and  schol- 
ars. Our  grateful  thanks  are  due  first  to  His  Highness 
the  Maharaja  Sir  Chandra  Shamsher  Jang  Bahadur  Rana, 
Prime  Minister  of  Nepal  for  kindly  lending  us  a beauti- 
ful and  well-written  MS  of  the  SddhanamUld  from  the 


.V 


FRET  VCE. 


Da  Mam  Library  ; to  Sir  plidip  Hartog,  Rt.,  M.A.,  C.I.E., 
for  k I i i i/ly  procuring  a rptograph  copy  of  an  invaluable 
mum-leaf  M.S  from  (Ann  bridge;  to  Sir  John  Marshall 
Ax  Ph.D.,  D.Litt  Messrs,  R.  D.  Banerji,  M.A.  and 
iv  x.  Dikshit,  Mm,  three  officers  of  the  Archeological 
Department  for  .-applying  us  with  photographs  which 
a i*c  **e  prod  need  hi  the  introduction ; to  Mahuinaho- 
p adhvav v.  Or.  Ifara prasad  Shastri  of  Calcutta  for  help 
re! idr-red  to  us  in  many  directions;  to  Dr.  »S.  K.  Das  of 
Door  i ,Mr  iu  Ipiiig  us  in  collation;  and  Mr.  N.  K.  Bhatta- 
sih.  M.A.  M the  Dacca  Museum  for  allowing  us  to 
i f ro  l m e some  of  his  photographs  in  the  present 
edition.  We  continued  to  receive  the  same  gener- 
ous and  ungrudging  help  from  our  esteemed  assistant 
Pnidit  Lalchand  Bhagwandas  Gandhi  as  in  the  first 
\ o hmic,  in  proof  reading  and  in  valuable  suggestions. 
Another  assistant  Mr.  Mahadeva  Ananta  Joslii  prepared 
the  index  for  which  we  record  our  cordial  thanks. 

EDITOR. 

Baroda, 

8/ h -July,  1927. 


INTRODUCTION. 

§ 1.  Magic  in  ancient  India. 

^The  belief  that  man  is  able  by  his  exercise  to  con- 
trol the  unseen  powers  and  force  them  to  act  in  accord- 
ance with  his  own  will  has  been  prevalent  in  all 
countries  and  in  all  times.  This  is  by  far  the  most 
primitive  belief  of  humanity  and  on  this  perhaps  rests 
the  mighty  foundations  of  science,  religion  and  magic, 
Magic  may  be  said  to  be  present  whenever  power  ovei 
the  unseen  is  believed  to  be  inherent  in  some  meaningless 
ritual;  and  such  belief  becomes  a religious  concept  when 
the  seat  of  power  is  considered  to  be  resting  outside  the 
sphere  of  man’s  deliberate  control.  Made  in  the  opinion 
of  the  leading  anthropologists  must  necessarily  be  false 
and  barren,  for  were  it  ever  to  become  true  and  fruitful 
it  would  no  longer  be  magic  but  science.  Magic  on 
analysis  resolves  itself  into  a mistaken  application  of  the 
laws  of  the  association  of  ideas  by  similarity  and  conti- 
guity. Legitimately  applied  these  same  principles  yield 
science  and  illegitimately  applied  they  yield  magic.1  We 
can  see  therefore  that  between  science  and  magic  there 
exists  a very  thin  veil,  and  we  can  venture  to  suggest 
that  from  magical  speculations  primarily  science  springs 
into  existence.  The  fundamental  difference  that  seems 
to  exist  between  science  and  magic  is  that  while  in 
science  we  always  get  the  expected  result  from  a given 
cause,  magic  either  fails  to  show  any  results  or  shows 
them  only  occasionally.  Religion  is  opposed  to  botli 
magic  and  science  because  it  is  dependent  on  the 
assumption  that  the  course  of  nature  and  human  life  k 
controlled  by  personal  or  hypothetical  beings  superior 
to  man. 


1 See  Hasfciqg’s  Encyclopaedia  qf  Religion  and  Ethics  : article  on  Magic . 


INTRODUCTION. 


xii " 

Belief  in  magic  is  another  name  for  superstition. 
If  materials  were  available  this  superstition  could  be 
traceable  right  up  to  the  beginning  of  the  creation ; and 
superstition  exists  now  in  more  or  less  aggravated 
form  in  almost  all  civilized  countries.  \Superstition 
may  therefore  be  called  the  basic  weakness  of  the  human 
race.  India  is  therefore  no  exception,  and  the  three 
principal  religions  of  ancient  India,  Buddhism,  Jainism 
and  lliiiiluisw  alike  shared  belief  in  magic.  In  India  the 
course  m the  development  of  magical  conception  can  lie 
tinn  ed  - : n rough  a continuous  literature  without  a break 
for  o' . *■/  ?hree  thousand  years,  and  the  different  phases  of 
development  find  expression  in  the  Rgveda,  the  Brah- 
man a--.  Atharvaveda,  Kalpasutras,  Dharmasutras,  Pura- 
nas.  die  Tantras  and  the  Pancaratras.) 

Rebellion  against  Nature  on  the  part  of  the  Indians  of 
hoary  antiquity  is  manifest  in  two  diametrically  opposite 
ways;  they  will  please  her,  pacify  her,  coax  her  and 
obtain  from  her  their  own  necessities.  This  has  been 
more  or  less  the  attitude  of  the  Vedie  Aryans  towards 
Nature  ; when  the  desired  results  were  obtained  they 
were  attributed  to  the  mercy  of  the  gods  who  are  none 
but  the  manifestation  of  Nature  herself;  in  case  of 
failure  they  could  do  nothing  but  to  offer  further  pane- 
gyrics or  oblat  ions  with  a view  that  they  may  be  pleased 
ultimately  to  grant  their  desires.  But  in  the  event  of 
their  prayers  not  being  granted  attempts  were  made  to 
coerce  Nature  by  rituals,  sorcery  and  necromancy.  These 
first  made  their  appearance  in  tiie  Atharvaveda  which 
though  popular  among  one  section  of  Hindu  community, 
continued,  nevertheless,  to  exercise  its  influence,  and 
culminated  in  the  full-fledged  magical  system  of  the 
Tantric  age.  Even  Kautilya  recommends  to  the  king  to 
geek  the  help  of  magicians  to  avert  calamities  to  the 
StaM  The  Puranas  abound  in  stories  relating  to  the 


INTRODUCTION. 


xiii 


success  of  magic.  Later  on  Sukracaryya  warns  the  kings 
not  to  trifle  with  those  who  handle  Mantras  and  Tantras. 
But  at  no  time  in  the  history  of  India  did  the  Indian 
mind  display  more  symptoms  of  disease  verging  almost  on 
lunacy  than  was  shown  during  the  mediaeval  period,  espe- 
cially from  the  latter  part  of  the  seventh  century  down  to 
the  advent  of  the  Muhammadan  power  in  India.  This 
period  of  Indian  culture  may  justly  be  called  the  period 
of  Tantric  culture  or  more  properly  the  Tantric  Age.  In 
their  attempt  to  coerce  Nature  the  Indians  of  mediaeval 
times  brought  ruin  on  themselves  as  if  by  reaction. 
They  grew  over-enthusiastic  over  what  they  thought  to  be 
psychic  culture,  and  went  on  with  their  multifarious 
practices  for  training  their  mind  and  for  developing 
psychic  power,  with  ceaseless  regularity  and  devotion. 
During  this  Tantric  Age,  practically  nothing  but  Tantras 
and  works  on  allied  subjects  were  committed  to  writing. 
This  literature  assumed  gigantic  proportions  with  the 
contributions  of  two  mighty  religious  sects  of  India,  and 
they  wove  round  them  a veil  of  nefarious  awe  and  mys- 
tery. The  extent  of  the  literature  created  by  them  can  be 
gauged  by  the  fact  that  only  a nominal  catalogue  of  all 
Tantric  works  of  the  Buddhists  translated  into  Tibetan 
alone  comprises  three  big  volumes.  The  influence 
created  by  the  magicians  of  the  Tantric  age  is  even  now 
paramount  in  India,  and  throughout  the  length  and 
breadth  of  this  country  people  are  steeped  in  supersti- 
tion. The  might}7  Western  civilization  has  not  been  able 
to  lift  this  veil  of  superstition  from  the  Indian  mind 
during  the  century  and  a half  of  British  administra- 
tion. The  magicians  of  the  present  day,  however, 
do  no  longer  wield  that  sort  of  magical  power  which 
their  ancient  confreres  are  believed  to  have  done 
in  the  past,  but  nevertheless  they  are  making 
capital  of  the  old  reputation  of  Tantrism,  and  because 
the  Indian  people  are  very  superstitious  an  extra- 


XIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


ordinarily  large  number  of  Tantric  impostors  and  vaga- 
bonds are  allowed  to  live  on  public  charities:";  They  wear 
a mystic  dress  and  talk  in  a mystic  manner  calculated  to 
mystify  the  hearers.  Superstition  has  such  a strong- 
hold on  the  Indian  mind  that  it  will  readily  believe  in  an 
absurd  storv  if  it  is  connected  with  a Sadhu,  or  a temple 
or  a god,  or  in  a highly  imaginative  and  magical  story, 
rather  than  in  an  actual  happening  which  may  be  a little 
outside  every  day  experience.  It  is  impossible  to  say 
indeed  whether  the  literate  or  illiterate  people  are  more 
superstitious  but  there  is  no  gainsaying  the  fact  that  the 
womenfolk  as  a class  are  superst  itious  to  an  extent  hardly 
conceivable. 

Magic  as  it  finds  expression  in  the  Tantric  literature 
of  India  has  some  unique  features  unlike  similar  litera- 
ture in  other  countries.  Whatever  was  best,  ennobling 
and  beautiful  in  ancient  India,  in  the  Pre-Tantric  age, 
was  incorporated  by  the  Tantras.  ^ Tantric  litera- 
ture contributed  a great  deal  to  such  pseudo-sciences  as 
Astronomy,  Astrology,  Medicine,  Alchemy,  Chiromancy, 
Horoscopy,  Divination  and  Prognostics.  It  is  an 
admixture  of  religion,  philosophy,  science,  superstition, 
dogmas  and  the  five  Makaras.  It  is  a pity  this  wonderful 
literature  in  which  is  locked  up  the  cultural  history  of 
India  during  the  whole  of  the  Tantric  age  has  not  received 
adequate  attention  from  scholars  engaged  in  Indological 
research.  Some  partial  exploration  of  the  Hindu  Tantras 
has  indeed  been  made  in  the  recent  years  but  the  literature 
of  the  Buddhist  Tantras  has  been  greatly  neglected  and 
left  alone.  Let  us  therefore — the  Sadhanarnalft  being  a 
Tantra  devote  our  attention  to  this  branch  of  Indian 
literature  and  try  to  find  out  what  light  the  study  of  this 
and  other  cognate  works  throws  on  the  condition  of 
India  and  Indians  of  the  Tantric  Age. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XV 


§ 2.  The  Tantras. 

, Both  Hindus  and  Buddhists  wore  alike  prolific 
writers  of  Tantras  and  the  literature  extant  on  them  is 
wonderfully  extensive.  One  of  the  reasons  why  the 
word  ‘Tantra*  cannot  be  defined  but  can  only  be  des- 
cribed is  because  of  the  fact  that  an  astonishing  number 
of  subjects  come  within  its  purview,  not  to  speak  of 
its  own  numerous  subdivisions.  The  Buddhist  Tantras 
in  outward  appearance,  are  similar  to  the  Hindu  Tantras 
but  in  reality  there  is  no  similarity  between  them  neither 
in  subject-matter,  nor  the  philosophical  doctrines 
embodied  in  them,  nor  in  religious  principles. 
This  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  since  the  aims 
and  the  objects  of  the  Buddhists  are  widely  different 
from  those  of  the  Hindus.  It  is  difficult  to  determine 
when  and  under  what  circumstances  the  word  s Tantra  ’ 
came  to  be  employed  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  used  in  this 
literature,  nor  is  it  possible  to  trace  the  origin  of  the 
Tantras  or  the  people  wrho  first  introduced  them.  To 
any  careful  student  of  Sanskrit  literature  it  will  be 
evident  that  when  the  magical  practices  become  extreme- 
ly popular  with  one  section  of  the  Indian  population, 
the  other  section  takes  them  up  and  incorporates  them  in 
its  religion,  mostly  in  a modified  form  so  a*s  to  suit  its 
own  requirements  and  tenet  s ; and  this  process  of  emer- 
gence and  relapsing  goes  on  continually.  The  Vedic 
sacrifices  as  performed  by  the  orthodox  Brahmanic 
society  in  the  very  earliest  times  attracted  a large 
number  of  converts  on  whom  the  orthodoxy  laid 
down  its  foundation,  and  it  can  very  easily  be  imagined 
from  what  we  find  now  that  people  in  those  days 
looked  upon  these  sacrifices  and  the  Brahmins  perform- 
ing them  with  superstitious  awe  and  reverence.  The 
sacrifices  were  at  one  time  very  popular,  especially  in 
the  pre-Buddhistic  period,  and  as  a matter  of  fact,  no 
undertaking,  of  any  consequence  was  hazarded  without 


XVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


a sacrifice  immediately  preceding  it.  Sacrifices  were 
performed  mostly  for  obtaining  happiness  in  this, 
the  next  and  future  lives.  The  results  of  these  sacrifices 
could  never  be  ascertained  with  scientific  regularity,  and 
it  appears  therefore  all  the  more  strange  that  sacrifices 
even  at  the  present  day  should  be  so  popular  in  Southern 
India,  especial lv.  in  Iravaucore,  and  that  we  should  hear 
even  now  of  sacrifices  being  performed  on  a gigantic 
scale  and  at  enormous  cost.  Buddhism  came  in  when 
sacrifices  were  the  order  of  the  day  and  when  numer- 
ous animals  were  immolated  and  eaten  in  monster 
assemblies.  Tn  Asoka’s  time  also  we  find  sacrifices  and 
the  free  use  of  meat  in  the  assemblies  very  popular. 
That  the  very  first  of  a long  series  of  rock  edicts  of 
Asoka  should  deal  with  the  stoppage  of  such  assemblies 
displays  the  great  influence  sacrifices  with  their 
cooked  meat  exercised  on  the  minds  of  the  Indian  people. 
On  the  dismemberment  of  the  Maurya  Empire,  the 
sacrifices  prohibited  by  the  great  Buddhist  Emperor 
revived  with  great  vigour  under  the  Samavedi  Sungas, 
and  two  sacrifices  were  performed  on  a grand  scale  in  the 
very  capital  of  the  king  who  insulted  the  orthodox 
sacrifice. 

Though  Buddha  was  antagonistic  to  all  sorts  of 
sacrifices,  necromancy,  sorcery  or  magic1  he  nevertheless 
is  credited  with  having  given  instructions  on  Mudr&s, 
Mandalas,  Yogas,  Tantras,  etc.,  so  that  prosperity  in 
this  world,  by  virtue  of  these,  could  be  attained  by  his 
less  advanced  disciples  who  seemed  to  care  more  for  this 
world  than  for  the  Nirvana  preached  by  him.  India  in 
Buddha’s  time  was  so  steeped  in  superstition  that  any 
religion  which  dared  forbid  all  kinds  of  magic,  sorcery 
and  necromancy  would  hardly  be  able  to  withstand 

t-  3 8ee  for  instance  Brahmajalasvtta  (in  Digha  Nil&ya)  whore  Buddhft 
condemns  all  kinds  of  ‘ Yijja's  ’ which  are  tiracchina  ’ or  crooked.  In  pp.  9 ft 
nuch  kinds  of  knowledge  are  enumerated  and  condemned. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xvii 

popular  oppositions.  A clever  organiser  as  the  Buddha 
was,  he  did  not  fail  to  notice  the  importance  of  incorporat- 
ing magical  practices  in  his  religion  to  make  it  popular 
from  all  points  of  view  and  thereby  attract  more 
adherents,1  though  it  does  not  appear  that  he  himself 
ever  believed  in  their  efficiency.  So  long  we  were 
ignorant  about  the  Buddha's  attitude  towards  the  Tantric 
practices  excepting  a few  meagre  references  in  Pali 
literature  and  were  unable  to  determine  the  time  of 
their  introduction  in  Buddhism  but  Santarak^ita  and  his 
disciple  Kamalaslla  brought  out  this  connection  very  for- 
cibly in  the  Tattvasangraha  and  its  commentary,  stating 
fully  the  reasons  which  made  the  Buddha  to  incorporate 
them  in  his  system.2  The  Tantras  and  Mantras  have 
been  practised  by  the  Buddhists  since  the  time  of  the 
Buddha,  but  unfortunately  we  do  not  possess  any  con- 
nected account  of  them  except  a few  works  on  the  Dharanls 
which  were  translated  into  Chinese  early  at  the  beginning 
of  the  Christian  Era.  These  Dharanls  are  only  unmean- 
ing strings  of  words  which  are  said  to  confer  great  merit 
when  muttered  repeatedly  for  a number  of  times.  Then 
comes  the  worship  of  Buddha  in  the  Prajhaparamita 
with  all  the  paraphernalia  of  worship  such  as  we  find 
in  Tantric  worship  for  obtaining  worldly  happiness. 
Then  follows  the  different  recensions  of  Prajnaparamita, 

1 A clear  proof  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  his  doctrine  of  Iddhis  which  were 
obtained  by  the  more  advanced  disoiples.  The  means  of  attaining  Iddhis  or 
Iddhipado  are  also  indicated.  The  number  of  Iddhipadas  are  four.  Viz., 
Chando,  Viriyam,  Cittam,  VimamsS.  Pali  Dictionary,  p.  157.  In  Cullavaga  V.  8. 
Buddha  condemns  BharadvSja  for  wantonly  showing  his  miraculous  power  for 
a bowl  of  sandal  wood. 

2 Tattvasangraha,  p.  905— 

W 7f PP*  II 

rtxfa  *wi  fV r?y  i 

Karoaladila  adda~$*  Uw  \ 

ynfir:  i t 


xviii  introduction. 

its  Sutra,  Hrdayasutra,  its  Dharanl,  the  recitation  of  all 
of  which  confers  the  benefit  of  reading  the  whole  of  the 
Prajnaparami  ta. 

Side  by  side,  the  Pauranic  literature  attracted  a 
large  number  of  people  by  their  wonderful  stories  hold- 
ing out  a promise  of  an  award  of  merits  to  be  gained  by 
hearing  the  Puranas  and  practising  the  rites  and  observ- 
ances recommended  therein  and  worshipping  the  gods 
described  in  them.  The  Puranas  in  a very  popular  form 
continued  vigorously  to  wield  their  influence  on  the 
minds  of  the  superstitious  people  of  India  right  up  to  the 
time  of  the  Muhammadan  conquest  and  after  that 
in  a more  or  less  acute  form  up  to  the  present 
time.  The  flood  of  the  mighty  Western  civili- 
zation may  generally  be  held  responsible  for  the  total 
annihilation  of  public  discourses  on  the  Puranas  and 
allied  literature  in  many  parts  of  Eastern  India; 
the  same  forces  are  now  at  work  everywhere  in  other 
parts  of  India  also. 

[Moreover,  the  conception  of  gods  and  goddesses 
in  the  Pauranic  literature  was  so  very  attractive 
that  the  Buddhists  in  later  times  could  not  help 
incorporating  the  idea  of  godhead  in  their  religion  ; and 
when  they  actually  did  this  they  deified  all  important 
personalities  of  Buddhism,  together  with  the  deification 
of  a large  number  of  Buddhistic  ideas  and  philosophical 
concepts  along  with  a few  purely  Hindu  gods  such  as 
Ganesa,  Saras  vati,  etc.  The  Buddhists  busied  them- 
selves with  producing  a variety  of  literature  on  the" 
Tantras,  and  during  the  Tantric  age  thousands  of  works 
were  written.  These  works  were  readily  transmitted 
through  the  Himalayan  passes  to  Tibet,  Mongolia, 
and  thence  to  China  and  Japan  and  their 
influence  made  a large  section  of  the  population 
in  these  countries  believe  in  gross  magic  and 
superstition.  The  Tantric  works,  especially  of  the 


INTRODUCTION. 


XJX 


Buddhists,  whose  originals  in  Sanskrit  are  lost,  are  how 
preserved  in  translations  in  the  pages  of  the  Tibetan 
Tangyur.  The  developments  on  Tantra  made  by  the 
Buddhists  and  the  extraordinary  plastic  art  thev 
developed  did  not  fail  again  to  create  an  impression  on 
the  minds  of  the  Hindus,  and  they  readily  incorporated 
many  ideas,  doctrines  and  gods,  originally  conceived 
by  the  Buddhists  in  their  religion  and  literature.1  The 
bulk  of  the  literature  which  goes  by  the  name  of  the 
Hindu  Tantras  arose  almost  immediately  after  the  Bud- 
dhist ideas  had  established  themselves,  though  after  the 
Tantric  Age,  even  up  to  the  last  century,  Tantric  works 
were  continued  to  be  written  by  the  Hindus. 

Having  thus  given  a survey  of  the  history  of 
Tantric  literature  and  the  mutual  interchange  of  ideas, 
doctrines  and  concepts  in  this  branch  of  literature,  we 
will  now  proceed  to  give  a definition  or  rather  a descrip- 
tion of  what  is  ordinarily  meant  by  the  w ord  ‘Tantra.’ 
Many  scholars  have  tried  to  show  what  the  Tantra  con- 
tains, but  each  and  every  one  of  their  descriptions  are 
partial  and  insufficient ; they  are  bound  to  be  so 
because  the  writers  of  Tantras  were  most  erratic,  and 
never  followed  any  definite  plan.  Moreover,  the  defini- 
tion which  holds  good  in  the  case  of  the  Hindu  Tantras 
is  not  found  adequate  when  applied  to  the  Buddhist 
branch  of  this  literature.  Therefore  the  definitions  of 
Tantra  as  given  by  critical  students  are  not  unlike 
the  description  .of  an  elephant  given  by  a number  of 
blind  men. 

The  Hindus  will  not  call  any  work  a Tantra  which 
does  not  include  the  following  subjects  among  many 
others,  for  instance,  the  stories  of  the  creation  and  the 
destruction  of  the  world,  the  mystic  charms,  a descrip- 
tion of  the  abode  of  the  gods,  and  of  holy  places,  the 

1 Hindu  goddemal  like  MMdMttil,  Chmnomwt*,  Kilt,  etc  , 

origm»H,  Sf»  Iffa. 


XX 


INTROD IT  CTI  ON. 


duties  of  men  in  the  four  stages  of  life  and  of  the  posi- 
tion of  the  Brahmins,  a description  of  the  abode  of  ghosts 
and  other  nocturnal  beings,  of  the  mystic  figures,  the 
origin  of  magicians  and  celestial  trees,  of  the  position  of 
the  stars,  and  discourses  on  old  stories,  meanings  of 
technical  terms,  description  of  vows  and  observances, 
distinctions  between  purity  and  impurity,  enumeration 
of  the  characteristics  of  males  and  females,  account 
of  the  duties  of  the  king,  the  customs  of  the  age, 
and  of  the  rules  of  law  and  of  spiritual  subjects.1 
The  Hindus  distinguish  this  Sastra  from  two  others 
of  a similar  kind  which  go  by  the  names  of  Agama 
and  Yamala.  They  treat  of  certain  subjects  which  are 
not  covered  by  the  description  of  the  Tantra  given 
above.  The  Agama  to  be  called  an  Agama  must  include 
besides  the  stories  of  the  creation  and  the  destruction  of 
tiie  world,  the  mode  of  worshipping  gods  and  goddesses 
and  the  way  of  obtaining  perfection  and  Purascarana 
(repetition  of  Mantra  according  to  a definite  number)  of 
mystic  charms,  the  practice  of  six  cruel  rites  and 
four  kinds  of  meditation  and  austerity.2  The  literature 

«*? rr=rr  tpermw  faw-  8 
tow  * a 

KWWT  tpraitaq*  ^ l 

V*SWXV*,  art.  on  wm  I 

ssraw*  ^unsri  j 

gvqxw  * # 

**fr^*i*  Wm  a I 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxi 


which  is  known  as  Yamala  contains  an  account  of 
creation,  astronomical  speculations,  daily  ceremonies, 
the  order  of  ceremonies,  aphorisms,  division  of  the  four 
castes  and  various  sub-castes  and  of  the  customs  and 
manners  of  the  time,1 

The  characteristics  of  Tantra,  Yamala,  and  Agama 
are  given  in  almost  every  important  Hindu  Tantric 
work.  The  definitions  are  not  all  alike  and  rarely  give 
a complete  idea,  and  all  the  definitions  taken  together 
will  not  suffice  to  give  a true  account  of  the  entire 
contents  of  this  enormous  literature.  In  the  defini- 
tion given  above  it  will  be  seen  that  speculations  on  ^ 
alchemy,  medicine,  divination,  astrology,  horoscopy  and 
many  similar  pseudo-scientific  subjects  are  not  included 
in  it  though  they  frequently  make  their  appearance  in 
Tantric  literature. 

Similar  features  present  themselves  in  the  Tantras 
of  the  Buddhists  and,  the  range  of  the  numerous  subjects 
treated  of  in  this  literature  will  be  evidenced  by  the  two 
volumes  of  the  Catalogue  of  Tibetan  Tangyur  in  the 
* Bibliotheque  Nationale’  in  Paris  so  far  published  by 
P.  Cordier.  To  understand  the  bulk  of  the  Tantric 
literature  of  the  Buddhists  we  must  first  take  into 
account  that  it  is  distributed  among  the  three  grand 
divisions  into  which  later  Buddhism  was  divided, 
namely,  the  Vajrayana,  Sahajayana,  and  Kalacakrayana. 
Besides  these  there  were  other  minor  Yanas  with  no 
marked  individuality,  such  as  the  Tantrayana,  the 
Bhadrayana,  etc.,  which  may  be  said  to  have  originated 
from  the  Vajrayana,  the  principal  Yana  among  the  three 
mentioned  above.  Moreover,  wo  must  also  consider  the 

nwpyiqyr,  art.  on  I 


XX II 


introduction. 


numerous  divisions  of  each  of  these  three  powerful  Yanas 
and  many  less  powerful  sj^stems  in  all  of  'whom  the 
Buddhist  Tantric  literature  showed  its  great  interest. 
The  Tan  trie  literature  was  mainly  written  by  the 
Vajrayanists  called  Vajracaryyas,  and  the  Siddhas 
whose  n limber  is  reputed  to  be  eighty-four. 


§ 3.  Origin  and  Development  of  Vajrayana. 

: The  Buddhist  Tantras  belong  more  properly  to 
Mali  avail  a and  not  Hinayana  with  its  subdivisions  of 
Sravakavana  and  Pratvekayana,  though  it  is  quite 
possible  that  their  followers  had  also  some  sort  of  magi- 
cal practices  current  amongst  them.1  The  Sadhanamala 
seems  to  lead  us  to  infer  that  the  Tantras  were  a devel- 
opment of  the  Yogaeara  school  which  evolved  out  of  the 
&unvavada  of  the  Madhyamakas ; but  the  form  or  the 
branch  of  the  Mahayana  that  was  directly  responsible  in 
this  matter  seems  to  be  a tertium  quid  which  is  known 
as  Vajrayana,  and  about  which  very  little  is  known  to 
the  students  of  Buddhism,  The  Sadhanamala  belongs 
to  the  Vajrayana  proper  and  throws  immense  light 
on  the  aims,  objects  and  practices  of  the  people  profes- 
sing this  peculiar  religion  ; we  shall  therefore  attempt  to 
give  a connected  account  of  Vajrayana  which  we  have 
been  able  to  piece  together  from  the  Sadhanamala  and 
other  Tantric  texts  discovered  by  us. 

[in  the  Sadhanamala,  the  word  Mahayana  occurs 
twice  2 and  from  these  references  we  can  assume  that  the 

1 In  Makavafjfjn  SITE  vi,  34,  1 , 2 wo  road  of  the  magical  powers  of  the  whole 
family  of  ft  layman,  and  of  spec  ml  hldhis  obtained  by  more  advanced  Buddhists 
by  the  practice  of  JUlyadan  (v.  1 , 5,  7 ; vi,  15,  R).  We  read  also  of  the  Bhikkhn* 
carrying  bowls  made  of  hurrmn  skulls  and  carrying  odd  bits,  bones  and  dirty!; 
water.  (Gullavagga  v,  10,  .1).  In  the  JirahmujalasuUa  there  is  a long  list  of 

superstitious  and  magical  practices  which  must  have  been  then  in  exist 
(P.  Off).  : 

a P.  4,  99I414T9  ; l*.  225,  99  9C9  99*  XI 


1JNTKUUUUTION. 


XXlll 


T^ntric  jelipon  was  only  an  outcome  of  Mahayana  and 
that  the  Vajrayana  acknowledged  its  suzerainty,  The 
Mahayana  in  the  opinion  of  the  Vajrayanists  is  co- 
extensiy^.  with . what,  they  called  Dharma1 2 *  which  they 
considered  as  eternal  and  to  which  was  given  a more 
important  place  in  later  Buddhism,  than  was  assigned 
to  Buddha  himself.}  The  word  feunya  occurs  almost  on 
every  page  in  the  present  work,  but,  so  far  as  it  can  be 
ascertained,  this  feunya  does  not  represent  the  fenny  a as 
conceived  by  the  Madhyamaka  school  and  which  is 
defined  as : — 

or,  in  other  words, 

ar  *n3T*r?I  I 

mwfiFr^rr  lit 

To  the  Madhyamakas  both  the  subject  and  the 
object  are  feunya  in  essence  ; there  is  no  reality  either  of 
the  mind  or  of  the  external  world.  Obviously,  this  is  a 
position  which  is  not  desirable  for  the  Vajrayanists 
because  to  them  a positive  aspect  in  the  Vijnana  is  ab- 
solutely necessary.  Moreover,  the  Madhyamaka  school 
is  not  referred  to  anywhere  in  the  book  except  in  one 
place  where  it  is  in  the  form  of  an  epithet,  Madhyama- 
karucehy  to  one  of  the  authors  of  the  Sadhanas,  namely, 
Dharmakaramati.  But  if  the  Sadhana  is  analysed 
ample  evidence  will  be  found  to  prove  that  it  belongs 
more  to  Yogacara  than  to  Madhyamaka*  The  word 
Yogacara  occurs  in  the  Sadhanamala  twice  only4  but 
the  Vijnanavada  as  formulated  in  this  school  of  thought 


1 s&dhanamms,  p.  225— I 

2 SarwdarvancMtfigraha,  p.  23. 

8 AdwyavQQratoihQraha,  p.  19, 1L  21-22.  (G.O.S.  edition  Xo.  XL.) 

4 p.  2ie~J«ra  f ncfafW  1 


xxiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


is  explained  in  many  places  in  the  book,*  and  this  leads 
us  to  infer  that  the  Vajrayana  is  a direct  development 
of  the  Yogacara  school  and  the  Vijfianav&da  it  inculcates. 

The  word  Vajrayana  occurs  twice8  in  tbe  Sadhana - 
m&la  and  it  is  characterised  as  * the  path  which  leads  to 
pel  feet  enlightenment  ’ or  what  they  call  in  Sanskrit 
Anuttarasamyaksamhodhi.  Vajrayana  literally  means 
the  ‘ adamantine  path  ’ or  vehicle,  but  its  technical 
meaning  is  the  “Sunya  Vehicle”  wherein  Sunya  is  used 
in  a special  sense  to  represent  Vajra.  The  reason  why 
Sunyata  is  called  Vajra  is  given  in  the  undernoted  couplet: 

^Tfr  v TCipro  i5 

“Sunyata  is  designated  as  Vajra  because  it  is  firm,  and 
sound,  and  cannot  be  changed,  cannot  be  pierced,  cannot 
be  penetrated,  cannot  be  burnt,  and  cannot  be  des- 
troyed.” 

The  Mahayanists  differ  from  the  Hinayanists  in 
several  important  points,"  though  for  both  of  them  the 
realization  of  Sunyata  which  leads  to  the  cessation  of 
sufferings  is  imperative.  But  the  methods  followed  by 
the  two  branches  of  Buddhism  are  widely  different,  if 
not  altogether  antagonistic.  The  Hinayanists  are  very 
keen  on  obtaining  liberation  for  themselves  by  their  own 
efforts,  without  looking  into  the  condition  of  suffering 
humanity.  They  obtain  Nirvana,  and  freedom  from 
sufferings  and  the  consequential  repetition  of  births  and 
rebirths,  and  virtually  an  extinction  of  self  altogether. 
But  it  must  be  remembered  that  even  if  they  are  able  to 


1 For  instance,  p.  73,  ; pp.  93-4,  Hlft 

fawini  VTOViTOPrefara . . ; p;  uo,  ©to. 

t p.  225,  p.  4*h 

8 Quoted  from  Y ogaratnamala  in  the  Dauddha  G3n  0 Doh&>  p.  8.  Abo  from 
\ yratekhara  in  Advayavajrasaihgraha,  p,  23,  U.  234, 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXV 


gain  Nirvana  they  cannot  know  the  perfect  truth  or 
remove  the  veil  whioh  conceals  the  transcendental  truth, 
nor  can  they  impart  the  knowledge  of  salvation  to 
others. 

j The  Mahayanists  on  the  other  hand  do  not  care  for 
their  own  salvation;  they  are  more  solicitous  about  the 
deliverance  of  their  fellow  creatures  who  are  in  the  grip 
of  constant  suffering  than  about  their  own.  They  are  not 
afraid  of  the  Sathsara  or  the  cycle  of  birth  and  rebirth  in 
the  same  sense  as  the  Hlnayanists  are,  but  they  are 
always  ready  to  undergo  any  troubles  and  sufferings  if 
these  lead  even  in  a small  measure  to  the  spiritual  up- 
lift of  all  beings.  Their  compassion  for  the  sufferings  of 
humanity  actuates  them  to  renounce  their  merits  or 
even  their  salvation ; but  they  are  able  thereby  to  re- 
move the  veil  covering  the  transcendental  truth  and 
become  omniscient.1  This  ideal  of  a Mahayanist  finds  1 
expression  in  the  Karandavyuha  where  the  example  ofj 
Avalokitesvara  Bodhisattva  is  set  up,  who  refused  toi 
accept  his  Nirvana,  though  fully  entitled  to  it,  until  all! 
creatures  of  the  world  were  in  possession  of  the} 
Bodhi  knowledge  and  obtained  freedom  from  the  world-  \ 
ly  miseries.2  They  therefore  keep  their  chain  of  Vijhana 
ever  active  for  the  benefit  of  all.  It  is  said  that  the 
Mahayanist,  or  more  properly  a Bodhisattva,  obtains 
omniscience  only  after  he  has  crossed  the  ten  Bhumis 
such  as  are  described  in  the  Dasabhumika  fcastra. 

This  then  may  be  considered  the  goal  of  every 
Bodhisattva  and  can  be  obtained  either  by  following  the 
tenets  of  the  Stinyavada  or  the  Vijnanavada.  The 
Madhyamaka  theory  of  Nirvana  is  Sunya  or  a state 

B.  Bh*ttaoharyy& : Foreword  to  the  Tattvaeahgraha  (G.O.S.  No.  XXX) 
P*  xlvii  ff. 

* SSmilmmi'e  Rdition,  p.  21~*t(*r  ?)***tff*%*TO  WVftTOT 


XXVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


about  which  neither  existence,  nor  non-existence,  nor  a 
combination  of  the  two  nor  a negation  of  the  two  can  be- 
predicated.  But  in  V ogacara  which  seems  to  be  only  a 
later  development  of  the  original  Sunyavada  the  element 
of  Vijilana  or  a positive  element  is  present  in  addition  to 
Stfnya  or  the  Naira  tmya  or  non -Ego.  The  Bodhi  mind 
is  a chain  of  Vijnana  which  is  changing  every  moment, 
the  Vijnana  of  the  previous  moment  giving  rise  to  the 
Vijnana  of  the  next  moment  with  the  same  memory, 
quality,  conformations,  etc.,  and  this  process  goes  on 
until  the  Vijnana  attains  either  omniscience  or  extinc- 
tion or  Nirvana  after  having  eliminated  all  impurities.1 
But  once  omniscience  has  been  attained  the  chain  of 
consciousness  will  not  strive  further  for  Nirvana 
(extinction)  but  will  .engage  itself  in  the  spiritual  uplift 
of  all  beings ; it  can  only  get  rest  or  extinction  when  the 
whole  world  is  delivered. 

Now  this  is  the  sort  of  Nirvana  to  which  the 
Vijnanavadins  will  lead  their  followers.  In  this  Nirvana, 
as  we  have  already  pointed  out,  there  are  two  elements : 
Vijnana  and  Sunya.  The  Vajrayana  which  is  the  direct 
outcome  of  the  Vijnanavadin  school  introduced  a new 
element,  or  the  element  of  Mahasukha  or  ‘eternal  bliss  9 
and  happiness.  It  introduced  further  the  theory  of  the 
five  Dhyani  Buddhas  each  presiding  over  one  of  the  five 
Skandhas  or  ‘elements,’  and  formulated  the  theory  of 
Kulas  or  families  of  each  of  the  Dhyani  Buddhas  emerg- 
ing out  of  them  in  times  of  need.  It  introduced  the 
worship  of  Saktis  in  Buddhism  for  the  first  time,  and  a 
host  of  other  things  including  a large  number  of  gods 
and  goddesses,  their  Sadhanas,  panegyrics,  etc.  Let  us 
now  try  to  trace  the  origin  of  this  new  type  of  religion 
by  a reference  to  all  available  materials. 

1 Taftvasofigraha  (G.O.S.JNo.  XXX),  p.  75— 


INTB0DUCT10N. 


XXV11 


Taranath  is  probably  right  in  saying  that  Tantrism 
existed  from  very  early  times  and  was  transmitted  in 
the  most  secret  manner  possible  from  the  time  of  Asariga 
down  to  the  time  of  Dharmakirti.1  Asahga  who  was  a 
brother  of  Vasubandhu  (280-360)  must  have  flourished 
in  the  first  half  of  the  4th  century,  and  Dharmakirti, 
who  is  not  referred  to  by  Hiuen  Thsang  but  is  referred 
to  by  I-Tsing  very  probably  belonged  to  a period  between 
600-650  A.J).  So  it  can  be  seen  that  during  a long 
period  of  nearly  three  hundred  years  Tantrism  was 
handed  down  from  Gurus  to  disciples  in  the  most  secret 
manner  possible  before  its  followers  could  swell  in  number 
so  as  openly  to  declare  themselves ; and  it  seems  quite 
possible  that  Saraha,  Nagarjuna,  Luipada,  Padmavajra, 
Anahgavajra  and  finally  Indrabhuti  weje  the  chief 
masters  to  boldly  and  publicly  preach  their  doctrines  and 
exhort  people  to  follow  their  tenets  and  practices, 
though  the  names  of  some  other  Gurus  are  also  heard  in 
the  period  intermediate  between  Asahga  and  Dharma- 
kirti. 

It  is  indeed  very  difficult  to  point  our  finger  to  the 
scripture  from  which  Tantrism  drew  its  inspiration ; but 
a perusal  of  Padmavajra\s  Quhyasiddhi , a grossly  Tantric 
work,  leads  us  to  infer  that  it  was  the  Guhyasamaja 
which  was  regarded  as  the  most  authoritative  work  of 
the  school.  Padmavajra  not  only  advocates  the  doc- 
trines, tenets  and  theories  embodied  in  the  Guhyasamaja 
in  all  matters  but  also  gives  a succint  digest  of  the  work 
which  he  designates  &ri$amd,ja  in  his  treatise.  Other 2 
writers  also,  for  instance,  Indrabhuti  in  bis  work  en- 

1 T&rSnStha's  Gtechichte,  p.  201. 

2 For  instance «T  favjf*??  I 

finrfrj  ww  fir  finfor  « 

* _ * t 

iff  im  h 

{Oriental  Institute  MS  13,124,  fol.  4.) 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxviii 

titled  the  Jnanasiddhi  acknowledges  the  Guhyasamaja  as 
a work  of  great  authority  and  gives  a summary  of  some 
of  the  chapters  and  topics  dealt  with  in  this  work.1 
Thus  it  appears  to  us  quite  probable  that  this  was  the 
original  work  from  which  Tantrism  drew  its  inspiration. 
It  is  believed  to  have  been  delivered  in  an  assembly  of 
the  faithful  by  the  Sarvatathagatakayavakcitta.  The 
work  which  is  written  in  the  form  of  a Sangiti  is  consi- 
dered as  highly  authoritative,  even  now,  amongst  Vajra- 
vanists  and  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  Nine  Dharmas  of 
Nepal.-  This  is  probably  the  first  work  of  the  Tantra 
school,  and  Asanga  quite  conceivably  may  have  had 
something  to  do  with  it,  as  it  is  commonly  believed  that 
the  Tantras  were  introduced  by  him,  from  the  Tusita 
heaven  where  he  was  initiated  in  mysticism  by  Maitreya.3 
But  of  course,  this  view  cannot  be  said  to  be  definite,  or 
to  be  based  on  sufficiently  strong  evidence,  and  it  is 
very  doubtful  whether  we  will  ever  be  in  a position  to 
trace  the  origin  of  the  Tantra  in  the  most  precise  manner 
possible. 

It  cannot  be  denied  that  in  the  very  beginning  of 
early  Buddhism  and  even  when  Mahayanism  sprang  up 
in  later  times,  a very  strict  discipline  was  enjoined  on 
the  followers  of  the  faith.  On  the  Bhik^us  the  rules 
were  very  strictly  put  into  operation  ; for  instance,  they 
must  not  have  anything  to  do  with  women,  must  not 
take  any  food  that  is  forbidden.  # Wine,  flesh,  fish* 
appetisers  and  many  similar  objects  of  enjoyment  were 
specially  forbidden.  The  rules  were  indeed  good  and 

...  j — 

1 Here  the  Tantra  is  chary  ' terised  ns  Srimm&joUara,  meaning  probably  the 
Second  Part  of  the  Uuhyammaja.  The  J ftnnasiddhi  is  in  the  course  of  pubt  oa- 
turn  in  G.O.S.  ‘ 

* Bendall  : Catalogue  of  Buddhist  Sanskrit  MSS.  p.  70.  '4 

8 See -for  instance,  Wadclel : Lumatsta , p.  128.  Evidence  of  Hindu  Ttttfrat  * 
alio  favours  the  theory  that  the  Tantras  were  imported  fTWtytijhteide.  See  J# 
Catah DfMf>  Vol.  II,  Preface,  p.  xviii. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXIX 


were  very  attractive  in  the  time  of  Buddha  but  inas- 
much as  they  were  unnatural  their  followers  could  be 
expected  to  follow  them  only  for  a certain  time  but  not 
always  or  for  centuries.  It  was  wholly  absurd  to  expect 
obedience  to  such  strict  disciplinary  measures  from  all 
members  of  the  Sangha  even  in  Buddha’s  lifetime,  if 
not  for  centuries  after  his  Mahaparinirvana.  And  after 
all  what  would  be  the  result  ? Freedom  from  births  and 
rebirths  is  only  a possibility,  and  the  success  at  best  is 
only  questionable.  The  members  of  the  Sarigha  must 
have  revolted  from  time  to  time  against  these  unnatural 
rules  of  discipline  and  party  quarrels  on  such  points 
were  already  in  evidence  in  the  second  great  Council  when 
the  Mahasanghikas  were  expelled  from  the  Church  by  the 
Sthaviras  because  the  latter  were  unwilling  to  make  any 
concessions  on  ten  minor  points  of  discipline.  Rebellion 
against  the  rules  on  broader  and  more  importaint  mat- 
ters of  discipline  must  have  been  in  existence  amongst 
the  monks,1  but  they  could  not  create  a party  of  their 
own  which  would  sufficiently  be  able  to  cope  with  the 
orthodox  section  which  was  sure  to  go  against  them  and 
denounce  them  as  heretics.  Those  monks  who  saw 
salvation  only  in  leading  a natural  life  went  on  devising 
plans  and  probably  by  writing  what  we  call  the  original 
Tantras  which  were  secretly  handed  down  through  their 
trusted  disciples  who  could  practice  the  rites  only  in 
secret.  These  Tantras  are  in  the  form  of  Sangltis 
and  are  said  to  have  been  delivered  by  the  Buddha  in 
an  Assembly  of  the  Faithful.  It  is  in  this  Sangiti  form 
that  all  new  ideas  were  introduced  into  Buddhism  and 

1 In  the  VinayapUaka  SBE  we  hear  of  monks  who  used  to  send  wreaths  of 
flowers  to  wives,  daughters,  young  women  and  female  slaves,  to  sit  on  one  seat, 
lie  on  one  bed,  one  mat,  one  coverlet  with  the  wives  and  daughters  and  young 
women  and  female  slaves,  to  eat  food  any  time,  to  drink  strong  drinks,  to 
<i*nce,  to  sing,  |ad  play  music  and  all  these  together  in  every  combination. 
Buddha  h&ard  of  thiiand  sent  some  of  his  trusted  disciples  to  carry  Pabbfijanlya- 
CvUomgga,  1-13. 


\ \ X 


introduction. 


the  SangUis , we  must  remember,  were  very  powerful 
agencies  in  the  introduction  of  innovations. 

The  orthodox  ft>! lowers  of  the  faith  were  sure  to 
challenge  anything  ■ had  not  been  said  by  the  Buddha 
and  that  seems  to  bo  the  reason  of  the  great  popularity 
of  the  Sangh'i  literature.  The  original  Tantras  of  Bud- 
dhism were  a ho  therefore  in  the  Sangiti  form  wherein 
were  inculcated  doctrines  which  were  diametrically 
opposed  to  the  teachings  of  Buddha.  Easy  methods 
lead  in  ii  to  happiness  in  this  world  were  held  out  in  this 
literature  ; easy  paths  leading  to  salvations  were  shown ; 
great  parade  was  made  of  the  merits  to  be  gained  by  the 
repetition  of  the  Mantras,  Dharanls,  panegyrica  and 
worship  of  gods.  But  everywhere  any  casual  reader  can 
detect  a desire  on  the  part  of  the  authors  to  thwart  all 
unnatural  rules  and  regulations  imposed  on  the  followers. 
These  disciplinary  regulations  gradually  slackened  down 
one  after  another,  and  ultimately  when  the  Vajrayanists 
gained  in  power  and  got  an  overwhelming  majority  a 
general  revolution  was  declared  against  the  Mahayana 
orthodoxy  which  in  course  of  time  dwindled  to  nothing- 
ness as  it  was  powerless  to  fight  against  the  growing 
disorder  amongst  the  Tantrics. 

The  Vajrayanists  were  however  conscious  that  they 
were  doing  something  which  was  against  religion  and 
morality,  and  covert  hints  to  justify  their  action  are  not 
altogether  infrequent  in  their  literature.  Indulgence  in 
five  Makdras  cannot  be  said  to  be  conducive  to  the  good' 
of  anybody  in  any  religion;  to  gain  emancipation 
through  the  agencies  of  women  such  as  was  advocated 
in  Vajrayana  did  not  also  fail  to  create  a baneful  im- 
pression on  the  minds  of  their  followers.  Hence  we  find 
on  their  part  a keen  desire  to  justify  their  broad  ptinoi- 
pies,  and  examples  of  this  kind  may  prove  interesting. 
The  responsibilities  of  the  Bodhisattva  indeed 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxxi 

heavy  entailing  untold  sacrifices.  They  have  to  sacri- 
fice everything  for  the  good  of  suffering  humanity, 
they  have  to  sacrifice  their  family,  children,  worldly 
enjoyments  for  the  benefit  of  all  beings  in  order  to 
lead  them  to  the  path  of  salvation.  The  Bodhisattvas 
cannot  obtain  their  salvation  even  if  they  are  entitled  to 
it.  But  they  must  remain  in  existence  and  must  strive 
for  the  uplift  of  all.  If  these  Bodhisattvas  commit  little 
mistakes  such  as  taking  wine,  being  in  the  company 
of  women,  indulging  in  good  food,  fish,  meat,  etc., 
certainly  these  should  not  be  taken  into  account  in  view 
of  the  colossal  sacrifices  the  Bodhisattvas  were  daily 
making  for  the  good  of  others.1 

Later  on  this  idea  changed,  and  the  Vajrayanists 
gave  a blank  charter  by  boldly  declaring  Unit  there  is 
nothing  in  the  world  that  cannot  be  done  by  the 
Bodhisattva  who  has  taken  a vow  to  emancipate  the 
world.  It  is  of  course  very  interesting  to  note  in  this  con- 
nection that  ultimately  in  the  Tan  trie  literature  the  vow 
to  emancipate  the  world  was  reduced  to  a mere  conven- 
tion, and  though  every  Vajrayanist  had  to  express  this 
pious  wish,  indulgence  in  all  actions  for  which  common 
men  are  ordinarily  doomed  to  hell  were  the  only  things 
practised  by  them  to  attain  Siddhi.  Indrabhuti  who 
was  one  of  the  greatest  diffusers  of  Tantrism  says  in  his 
Jnanasiddhi  that  by  those  identical  actions  which  make 
ordinary  men  rot  in  hell  for  hundreds  of  crores  of  cycles, 
the  Yogis  obtain  emancipation.®  They  went  a degree 


1 Compare:  Cittaiodhanaprakarana  in  JASB,  LXVII,  p.  178  : 

*WTf % i 

* p.  32.  d,  15. 


XXXii  INTRODUCTION* 

still  further  and  in  an  authoritative  Tantric  work  we 
find  the  following  still  holder  declaration:— 

^rrv^rprt  frwrir  | 1 

“These  three  worlds  as  a whole  have  been  created 
by  Vajranatlm  for  the  enjoyment  and  the  good  of  the 

worshippers." 

But  the  >Sad:  '!y  ' lias  to  see  that  his  mind  is  not 
troubled  or  that  lie  i-  not  attached  to  anything,  meaning 
thereby  to  any  s pee  i d food  or  special  woman.  If  the  mind 
is  troubled  once  the  emancipation  will  be  difficult  to 
obtain.2  The  crowning  remarks  were  given  by  Ananga- 
vajra  where  sanction  for  hideous  immorality  is  given 
in  apparently  very  harmless  words.  He  says  “without 
Prajnaparamita  emancipation  is  not  possible,  and 
Prajnaparamita  resides  in  every  woman.  Emancipation 
can  only  be  obtained  by  coming  in  contact  with  any 
woman  whether  of  low  origin  or  high  or  whether  mother, 
sister  or  other  near  relatives.” 3 Vajravanists  went 
beyond  due  limits  in  their  spite  against  the  strict  rules 
of  morality,  and  they  violated  all  of  them  and  plunged 
headlong  into  the  worst  immorality  and  sin,  and  practised 
a religion  which  has  been  characterised  by  RajaRajendra 
Lai  Mitra  in  the  following  most  significant  words:— 

“Seeing  however  that  the  work  in  which  they 
occur  is  reckoned  to  be  the  Sacred  Scripture  of 

1 PrajAopayavinijicaijftsuldhi,  p.  23,  41.  31. 

2 Ibid , p.  24,  61.  40 

tot  ?rar  93%'rt  w i 

3 Cf.  Prajfiopayaviniirsiyajiiddhi,  pp.  22  ff. - 

farai  vf t wmi  i ^ i 

I } , . . . „ 

'wmtifat  w*  fro  wrw  t $1 1 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxxiii 

million8  of  intelligent  human  beings,  find  their 
counterparts  exist  in  almost  the  same  words  in 
Tantras  which  are  held  equally  sacred  by  men  who 
are  by  no  means  wanting  in  intellectual  faculties  of 
a high  order,  we  can  only  deplore  the  weakness  of 
human  understanding  which  yields  to  such  delusions 
in  the  name  of  religion,  and  the  villainy  of  the 
priesthood  which  so  successfully  inculcates  them.” 

Probably  in  the  course  of  time  the  Vajrayanists 
would  have  stepped  back  and  brought  in  a more  healthy 
tone  in  their  religion,  but  by  the  time  a reaction  could  set 
in  the  Muhammadans,  were  already  up  and  doing,  and 
with  one  stroke  of  their  sword  purged  India  for  good  of 
these  horrible  priests  of  immorality  and  lawlessness  by 
killing  every  monk  they  could  meet  on  the  streets  and  by 
looting  the  rich  monasteries  which  were  the  strongholds 
of  mysterious  and  highly  objectionable  hosts  of  priest- 
hood engaged  in  still  more  objectionable  rites  and 
practices.  It  is  indeed  a pity  that  the  Hindus,  and  also 
the  Jainas  to  a certain  extent,  could  not  throw  off  the 
worthless  and  immoral  practices  enjoined  in  the  Tantras 
even  when  Buddhism  was  stamped  out  of  India.  The 
reason  for  this  is  not  far  to  seek.  The  attractive  practices 
enjoined  in  the  Tantras,  combined  with  the  scandalously 
superstitious  nature  of  the  Indian  people  proved  very 
lucrative  for  the  unscrupulous  priests  who  continued 
to  fan  the  fire  all  along.  All  Sampraduyas  as  they  are 
called  are  nothing  but  organisations  for  feeding  worthless 
and  idle  priesthood.  They  are  supposed  to  minister  t< 
those  householders  who  are  constantly  practising 
impious  actions  and  daily  gaining  in  sins.  These 
gigantic  organisations  therefore  are  more  or  less  the 
outcome  of  superstitious  belief  on  the  part  of  ordinary 
mortals  and  in  these  alone  the  residue  of  the  once 
popular  Tantrism  mm  finds  its  expression. 


XV  MV 


? XT  V ( ) DTIt/TION* 


Further,  the  V'af.  ■ • uia  incorporated  many  leading 
tonefcs  of  Mautrayan  t which  was  » form  oi  Mahayana 
Buddhism,  where  '•  eu  as,  Madras,  Manila las.  and  gods 
were  given  the  ereete-u  prominence  for  the  attainment 
of  Siddhis  or  ebr  V.ivana  or  ommsoience.  The  earliest 
book  of  this  cm  m tlio  V idyadhara pita ka  which  has 
been  ehann-twnr  / »:>y  Hiuen  Thsatig  as  belonging  to  the 
canonical  iitcmu.-e  of  the  Mahasanghikas.  But  this 
u n fort;. mat dy  is  not  available  to  us  in  original  Sanskrit 
and  v>v  cannot  say  anything  with  regard  to  its  subject 
matter  or  the  particular  tenets  inculcated  therein.  But 
the  case  ot  the  other  work  entitled  the  Manjusrlinulatalpa 
discovered  by  the  world  famous  scholar  the  late  Maha- 
nahopadhyava  T.  Ga  na path  Sastri  is  otherwise.  The 
text  of  the  book  which  forms  a part  of  the  Vaipulya- 
sv/o/s  of  the  Ala hayana. school  is  decidedly  the  earliest 
work  of  Mas  it  taya  na  at  present  available.  It  is  written 
in  the  Saiigiti  form,  and  in  the  same  style  as  other 
Mahayai  a>una>  aio,  in  prose  and  verse,  and  in  an 
archaic  style  very  closely  resembling  the  Gatha  style* 
Tins  book  must  have  been  very  popular  even  after  the 
;i  arm  Tom  of  BuddhDm  in  India  as  will  be  evident 
b-oca  the  ja-jf.  tlu.il  the  book  was  copied  only  about  four 
hiauhvd  years  buck  in  a monastery  of  Southern  India  by 
Bavicjiiido*  the  hc-d  of  the  monastery  called  the 
Aiulagho>,.  Vdiunv  The  Mahji^rimulalcalpa  deals  with 
the  formula  e ! m a-uccs  which  lead  to  the  material 
prosperity  of  the  t/lov- rx  of  Mahayfina,  and  probably 
belongs  to  the  •'  wiy  uvaurks  A/D.  but  decidedly  after 
the  time  oi  U;c  co:apo-irion  of  the  Amitayus  SfUra  or  the: 
Sukhuvah  l yv.fta  which  ushered  in  the  conceptions  of 
Amitabha  or  Av.ro n ms,-,  tuwi  Avalokitesvara  for  the  first 
time  in  Maimyana.  .» he  AmiiiXyus  Sutra  was  first 
translated  into  (I.iuea*  at  a period  between  AJA  14Band 
A.D.  170  and  hence  the  dine  of  its  composition  may  be 
/ fixed  at  about  100  A/D  or  a little  later*  the 


XXXV 


INTRODUCTION. 


in  that  case  would  be  only  about  a hundred 
years  later  than  the  Amitayus  Sidra.  If  we  take  the 
QuhyMam&i*  a8  the  veiT  first  and  the  most  authorita- 
tive work  of  the  Vajrayana  School  we  must  admit,  also 
that  much  time  must  have  elapsed  between  the  ave  ot 
ManjuSrlmtitokalpa  and  the  age  of  the  Qukyamui.oja, 
which  cannot  be  very  much  later  than  the  time  of 
Asanga  who  is  traditionally  regarded  as  the  author  of 
the  new  introduction. 

The  beginning  of  the  Sangiti  in  the  Mulakalpa  is  in 
the  orthodox  style  in  opposition  to  the  Tantric  style 
which  is  decidedly  later  and  where  in  the  very  opening 
scene  Buddha  is  introduced  in  the  company  of  a large 
number  of  women  instead  of  an  assembly  of  pure  and 
pious  Bodhisattvas  as  in  the  case  of  the  eadier  Sahgltis. 
The  doctrine  of  the  five  Dhyani  Buddhas  or  even  their 
names  and  Mudr&s  and  their  families  are  all  absent  in 
the  Mulakalpa  while  all  these  are  present  in  the  Guhya- 
sam&ja.  Moreover,  the  Mantras  and  Mudras  which  were 
later  on  systematised  in  the  Vajrayana  book  are  found 
scattered  in  the  body  of  the  text  of  the  Mulakalpa  in  a 
disorganised  manner.  The  Mantras  of  some  of  the 
Dhy&ni  Buddhas  themselves  are  found  in  the  Mulakalpa 
though  not  exactly  with  the  same  meaning  or  form  in 
which  they  are  met  with  in  the  Quhyasamaja.  Further- 
more, the  example  of  a Bodhisattva  disobeying  all  rules 


of  mprality  and  discipline,  and  obtaining  emancipation 
by  the  five  Mak&ras  and  other  prohibited  rites  and 
practices,  has  not  made  its  appearance  in  the  Mulakalpa. 
The  Midakalpa  indeed  speaks  of  the  Mantrayana  but  it 
does  notrefer  lo  Ynjreyina  which  is  mentioned  for  the  first 
time  in,  the  ^ Under  these  circumstances 

very 


XXX  VI 


INTRO  0 UCTION. 


carefully  will  not  fail  to  notice  that  it  is  the  product 
behind  which  there  is  a history  of  development  of 
several  centuries.  And  probably,  if  we  could  go  to  the 
root  of  this  Mantrayana,  we  would  have  voiced  the 
opinion  of  Santaraksita  and  Kamala6lla  that  instruc- 
tions on  Tanlras,  Mantras,  Mudras,  and  Mandalas  were 
delivered  by  Buddha  himself  for  the  benefit  of  such  of 
his  followers  who  cared  more  for  the  material  prosperity 
than  the  spiritual. 

We  can  thus  see  that  the  Vajrayana  took  into 
account  all  the  good  things,  tenets,  philosophical  notions 
and  theories,  and  incorporated  all  that  was  best  in 
Buddhism  and  probably  in  Hinduism  also,  and  it  was 
owing  to  this  that  it  attained  great  popularity.  It 
satisfied  everybody,  the  cultured  and  the  uncultured,  the 
pious  and  the  habitual  sinners,  the  lower  and  the  higher 
ranks  of  people  and  devotees.  The  Vajrayana  which 
was  in  essence  a very  demoralising  religion  and  went 
against  all  the  teachings  of  Buddha  and  of  the  great 
patriarchs  of  Buddhism,  could  be  popular  only  because 
it  could  cater  for  all  tastes  and  because  it  was  cosmo- 
politan in  character./ 

It  is  difficult  to  suggest  the  exact  place  where 
Tantrism  originated.  The  introduction  of  Sakti  worship 
in  religion  is  so  un- Indian  that  we  are  constrained  to 
admit  it  as  an  external  or  foreign  influence.  Some  of 
the  Tantras  also  support  this  view.1  But  these  Tantrica 
who  incorporated  Sakti  worship  into  their  religion  had 
some  strongholds  of  their  own  from  where  the  Tantraa 

l For  instance  Nepal  Catalogue,  Vol.  II,  p.  14S  under  the  description  of  til# 
$odaAaniiy&  Tmtira : 

wit  fkvm&t  g \ 

M.M.  Haraprasad  Shoatri  informed  us  that  he ' had  ■ 

£iv4  give*  iftstcuetion  to  P&rvatl— jpq  y HTtft  • 
her  ip  pteaefr  the  Tutitra  to  all  and  then  i 


XNTKODtrCTION. 


XXXVll 


|were  dfo&emi^^  amongst  the  Indian  public  and  became 
popular.  In  the  8^dhanamil& 1 we  find  mention  of  four 
Pfyhas  or  sacred  spots  of  the  Vajrayanists,  namely, 
KSmakhya,  SirihatK  Pttr^agiri  and  Uddiyana.2  The 
identification  of  the  first  two  is  certain.  Both  are 
jsituated  in  the  province  of  Assam.  Kamakhya  is  now 
'known  both  as  Kamakhya  or  Kamarupa  which  is  a few 
miles  off  from  Gauhati.  Sirihatta  is  modern  Sylhet. 
The  identification  of  the  two  others  has  given  rise  to 
much  speculation  and  theorizing.  Purnagiri  is  some- 
times identified  with  modern  Poona  but  this  is  very 
doubtful,  though  at  this  stage  it  is  extremely  difficult  to 
suggest  any  new  identification.  Uddiyana  is  by  far  the 
most  frequently  mentioned  among  the  four  Pithas  and 
its  exact  situation  has  been  a matter  of  great  contro- 
versy. L.  A.  Waddel  identified  this  Uddiyana  with 
Udyana  in  the  Swat  Valley.  M.  Sylvain  Levi  will  place 
U<Jcliyana  somewhere  in  Kasbgarh.  M.M,  Haraprasad 
Shastridefinitely  placed  it  in  Orissa.  We  supported  the 
third  theory  in  several  instances  and  assigned  our 
grounds,3  Indrabhfiti  is  described  as  a king  of  Ud- 
diyana* and  Guru  Padmasambhava  as  his  son.4  Padma- 
sambhava  married  a sister  of  Santarak§ita  in  the 
latter’s  native  plaoe  in  Zahor.5  (Modern  Sabhar  in  the 
District  of  Dacca.)  S&ntarak^ita  belonged  to  the  royal 
family  of  Zahor,  and  therefore  it  is  hardly  possible 
that  the  king  of  this  place  would  allow  his  daughter  to 


be  married  to  a vagabond  who  comes  from  such  a 
long  distance  as  Kashgarh  or  Udyana  in  Swat,  being 
Out  Of  the  kingdom  by  his  father  Indrabhfiti.8 

• ' * . -v  . v — — « — 

«6.  ' 

OtiljNucfcek,  ■ OdrySna. 

* rnrffan  BuddfUst  Iconography,  Intro,  p.  xxvii,  and  Olimp 
t^PrWftaertinyi  pt  the  Madraa  Oriental  Conference),  p.  U3. 

T fiinuiiiw,  p - 

W«M«1  With  Lahore  with  a query 


XXXV111 


INTRODUCTION. 


We  can  explain  this  marriage  only  if  Uddiyana  and 
Zahor  are  believed  to  be  nearer  to  eaoh  other.  More- 
over, Uddiyana  is  mentioned  along  with  Kamakhy&and 
Sirihatta  which,  as  we  can  see,  are  very  near  each  other, 
and  it  is  hardly  possible  that  Uddiyana  should  be  asso- 
ciated with  the  other  two  even  though  the  distance  may 
be  very  considerable.1 

Uddiyana,2  according  to  the  authority  of  Pag  Sam 
Jon  Zan , is  the  place  where  Tantric  Buddhism  first 
developed.  In  the  history  of  the  eighty-four  Siddhas 
Uddiyana  is  described  as  containing  500,000  towns  and 
divided  into  two  kingdoms.  In  the  one  called  Sambhala 
Indrabhuti  ruled,  and  in  the  other  Lankapuri8  Jalendra 
ruled,  whose  son  had  for  his  wife  Indrabhfiti’s  sister 
Lak^mimkara  who  became  a Siddha  after  which  Indra- 
bhuti handed  over  the  kingdom  to  his  son.4 


This  also  does  not  clear  up  our  difficulties  but  the 
identification  of  Uddiyana  becomes  dependent  on  that 
of  Lankapuri  which  is  generally  identified  with  either 
(1)  a peak  in  the  Amarakantaka  mountain,  or  (2)  a place 
in  Assam,  or  (3)  Central  India,  or  (4)  Ceylon.5  But 
Lanka  is  never  taken  to  the  Northernmost  and  Western- 
most part  of  India  such  as  either  Kashgarh  or  Swat 
even  in  a remote  fashion.  Now  if  we  accept  the  identi- 
fication of  Lafika  in  Assam  then  Uddiyana  will  have  to 
be  located  in  the  same  country  probably  in  the  Western 
part  of  it,  and  this  seems  to  be  more  likely  as  Kamakhya 
and  Sylhet  are  both  situated  in  Assam  which  was  till 
recently  formed  part  of  the  province  of  Bengal. 


Moreover,  the  first  Siddhacaryya  Luipa  in  the  Pag 
Sow  J on  Zan  is  described  as  sprung  from  the  fisherman 

* Compare  W addel,  op.  cit  p.  182  “ and  to  the  cemetery  of  Lahkft  (Crfcsege-pa) 
in  the  cotmtry  of  Zfihor,  where  he  was  named  ‘ Padmaaambhav*.”  Not#  thil 
Utiktwt*  a pert  of  th®  kingdom  of  UtfdiySna. 

Jg  * wrongly  writes  Udytaa  for  Uddiytaa  m h#  might  have 1 

Ink  Mb*  dflflsiteiy  identical.  ' . 

*4r  * JflNm  Whddd,  op,  cit,  p.  182,  Lancia  < " 

um  * IH4  ipiiH 


introduction. 


XXXIX 


caste  of  Uddiyana  who  rose  to  be  the  writer  m the 
employ  of  the  king  of  Uddiyana  and  was  then  known  as 
Samantasubha.  He  met  Savarlpa  who  initiated  him 
into  the  mysteries  of  Tantrism.1  But  in  the  Tamjyur 
Catalogue  he  is  characterised  as  a Mahay  ogl  Avar  a and 
what  is  important  as  a Bengali J M.M.  Haraprasad 
Shastri  has  discovered  some  Bengali  songs  composed  by 
him  and  published  them  in  his  now  classical  work 
Bauddha  Gan  0 Doha  with  a short  account  of  the  author 
and  his  songs  in  the  introduction.3  Luipa  seems  to  have 
composed  a book  of  songs  entitled  Luhipadagltika , which 
is  now  preserved  in  Tibetan  translation  only  and  from 
which  only  a few  songs  are  extant  in  the  original  language. 

There  is  then  an  apparent  discrepancy  in  the  two 
statements  about  the  native  place  of  Luipa,  Idle  testi- 
mony of  Pag  Sam  Jon  Zan  will  take  it  to  be  Uddiyana 
whereas  the  Tangyur  Catalogue  will  have  it  in  Bengal. 
There  is,  however,  in  our  opinion  no  discrepancy  in  the 
two  statements,  because  Luipa  can  belong  to  UddiyUna 
and  still  be  a Bengali.  The  identification  of  Uddiyana 
not  being  settled  under  the  circumstances  enumerated 
above  it  is  quite  possible  to  locate  it  in  Bengal.  If  how- 
ever Lankapura,  the  counterpart  of  Uddiyana,  is  located 
according  to  Prof.  Jacobi  in  Assam,  then  Uddiyana  also 
will  have  to  be  located  in  Assam  possibly  in  the  Western 
part  of  it  which  is  also  a part  of  Bengal.4 

It  is  then  in  Uddiyana  that  Tantrism  first  developed 
and  was  probably  transmitted  to  the  other  Pithas 
K&makhya,  Sirihatta  and  Purnagiri  (which  must  be 
somewhere  near)  and  thence  to  the  rest  of  India. 

1 Op.  cit.  Index,  oxv. 

* P.  Cordier  i Catalogue  du  Fonda  Txbttain  da  la  Bibliotheque  Nationals , 2« 
P«tief  p.  S3  undar  No.  adi,  8. 
ftf*  Op.  cit,  p.  30. 

$ £ top  Bmmantito,  pp.  80  and  83  SarahapS  ia  also  associated  with 
kwytoa.  Sarah*  wrote  a number  ol  Bengali  songs.  Buddha  OSn  0 Dohd 
M*o.  p,;  28,  He  i,  fttid  to  have  been  bom  in  the  kingdom  of  Rajflr  (0  w 


xl 


INTRO  D V CT  TON. 


§ 4.  Chronology  of  Vajrayana. 

From  the  foregoing  ir  will  appear  that  it  is  indeed; 
very  difficult  to  trace  rim  origin  of  this  strange  religion, 
but  it  is  much  mure  difficult  and  hazardous  with  the 
present  maim;,  ; to  attempt  to  build  a chronology  of 
Vajrayana.  a beginning  has  to  be  made  some- 

where. Lot  ua  attempt,  therefore,  to  make  out  a 
begin*  mm  in  a way  which  may  be  above  adverse  criti- 
cism. f t has  already  been  pointed  out  that  Vajray&na 
in  a held  of  literature  entirely  unexplored,  and  any 
research  made  in  the  beginning  is  bound  to  be  faulty 
and  not  altogether  free  from  error ; and  this,  especially, 
when  we  have  to  depend  for  information  on  works  of 
highly  questionable  authority  like  the  Pag  Sam  Jon  Zan 
or  Taranath’s  Gesckieste. 

The  Buddhists  generally  believe  that  the  Tantras 
were  introduced  into  Buddhism  by  AsaAga,  the  elder 
brother  of  Vasubandhu,  who  flourished  as  we  have 
shown  elsewhere1  between  A.D.  280-360.  But  what 
he  taught  and  what  he  introduced  the  history  does  not 
tell.  We  may  however  hold  that  he  introduced  some- 
thing very  questionable  into  Buddhism.  The  accounts 
of  T&ranath2  point  unmistakably  to  the  fact  that  the 
Tantric  knowledge  was  handed  down  in  secret  in  a 
period  between  AsaAga  and  Dharmaklrti;  but  the 
material  to  construct  the  chronology  of  the  Vajray&na 
literature  consists  in  some  important  GuruparamparOs 
or  the  succession  lists  of  Gurus  and  disciples  through 
whom  a particular  Tantra  has  been  handed  down. 
Two  such  lists  prove  very  valuable  in  determining  tfce 
chronology  of  Vajrayana:  one  given  in  tba  Tangyuxf 
Catalogue  of  P.  Cordier  and  another  in  tho  Pag  Sam 
Jon  Zan  quoted  in  the  edition  of  the  Chabea 

1 Formrtrdtoibe  Tatlvaaamgraha  (GOS  No.  XXX)  p, 


INTRODUCTION.  xli 

f'sic)  Tantra  by  the  late  Kazi  Dawasam  Dup.1  The 
•first  gives  the  succession  as  follows:— 

1.  Padm&vajra,  2.  AnaAgavajra,  3.  Indrabhuti, 

4.  Bhagavatl  LaksmI,  5.  Lllavajra,  6.  Darikapa, 

, , Sahajayogiiii  Cinta,  8.  Pombi  Heruka. 

The  second  succession  list  on  which  we  can  rely 
for  the  present  is  the  list  of  Gurus  and  disciples  through 
whom  the  Cahrasamvara  Tantra  was  handed  down, 
namely : 1.  Saraha,  2.  Nagarjuna,  3.  Savaripa,  4.  Luipa, 

5.  Vajraghanta,  6.  Kacchapa,  7.  Jalandhar!,  8.  Krsna- 
caryya,  9.  Guhya,  10.  Vijayapa,  11.  Tailopa  (or  Tilipa), 
12.  Naropa. 

It  is  natural  to  assume  that  the  Tan  trie  Gurus  were 
very  particular  about  their  succession  lists  and  each 
important  Tantra  may  be  believed  to  have  a list  of  this 
kind.  When  these  Tantras  were  translated  into  Tibetan 
the  translators  occasionally  noted  down  the  tradition  of 
the  Tantras  as  it  was  handed  down  through  a succession 
of  Gurus  and  disciples.  It  is  in  this  way  some  lists 
have  been  preserved  and  at  present  constitute  our  only 
authentic  material  in  determining  the  chronology  of 
this  extensive  literature. 

The  two  lists  above  stated  are  pretty  long  and 
cover  a considerably  long  period,  and  seem  to  be  fairly 
authentic.  Inf  these  two  lists  the  point  of  contact  is 
represented  by  Jalandhar!  who  in  the  second  list  was 
the  first  to  profess  the  Hevajratantra  and  to  compose  a 
work  on  the  subject.  The  Hevajratantra  was  introduced 
by  Padmavajra  who  must  therefore  be  earlier  than 

1 la  determining  the  chronology  importance  has  been  laid  on  the  sequence 
of  works  composed  by  each  author  and  on  ascertaining  from  the  titles  or  actual 
works  how  far  one  is  indebted  to  the  other.  When  such  information 
cannot  be  had,  help  from  TSrSaSth  and  such  other  authorities  has  been 
fwe*y  taken.  Mo  reliance  has  however  been  placed  on  the  mere  words  of  these 
TIb*tan •“ttl.WI.rulieu  anrideoe.©*  borrowing  i.  manifested  in  the  actual  worke 


xlii 


INTRODUCTION. 


Jalandharl  by  at  least  one  generation  The  second 
point  of  contact  is  that  Kamalaslla  whn  was  remove^ 
by  one  generation  from  Indrabhuti  wr*>te  a book  ir* 
which  he  closely  followed  a commentary  composed  b;* 
Saraha.  The  third  point  of  contact  ie  that  DarikajL 
one  of  his  songs  reverentially  mentiobo  the.  aame  of 
Luipa  who  must  therefore  be  earlier. 

Now  in  the  first  list  the  name  of  Indrabhuti  is  by 
this  time  quite  familiar;  he  was  the  father  of  Guru  Pad- 
masambhava  who  was  invited  by  a king  of  Tibet  and 
who  along  with  $antarak§ita  the  author  of  the  Tattva - 
saitgraha  erected  a monastery  at  Samye  in  the  year  749 
A.D.  We  have  elsewhere  8 discussed  this  question  and 
have  shown  that  the  time  when  Indrabhuti  lived  can  be 
fixed  to  a period  between  A.D.  687-717  onwards.  If  we 
take  A.D.  717  as  the  starting  point  and  12  years  be- 
tween each  succession  of  a Guru  and  his  disciple  then 
the  approximate  time  of  the  first  succession  list  will  be 
as  follows : — 

1.  Padmavajra  . . cir.  693  A.D. 

2.  Anangavajra  . . cir . 705  A.D. 

3.  Indrabhuti  . . cir . 717  A.D. 

4.  Lak^mimkara  . . cir.  729  A.D. 

5.  Lllavajra  . . cir.  741  A.D. 

6.  Darikapa  . . cir.  753  A.D. 

7.  Sahajayoginf  Cinta  . . cir . 765  A.D. 

8.  Pombi  Heruka  . . cir.  Ill  A.D. 


Now  if  Jalandharl  is  taken  to  be  removed  by  only 
one  generation  from  Padmavajra  who  introduced  the 
Hevajrataritra  for  the  first  time,  and  an  interval  of  12 
years  is  ti  ken  between  each  succession  the  chronologioal 
Order  of  th^  second  succession  will  be  as  follows  :—  ; ; 


V * |f  hpurjiVer  we  believe  in  the  story  that  he  along  with  Gorak**,  XI 
a^kd  Oo ptewfa*  belonged  to  the  reign  of  Devaplla  {cir.  820  A.D.},  thafc  j 
oa  A.D.  784  will  have  to  bemigned  to  Mp*wbo  if* 


INTRODUCTION. 


xliii 


1. 

Saraha 

..  cir.  633  A.D. 

2. 

Nag&rjuna 

. . cir.  645  A.D. 

3. 

Savaripa 

. . cir . 657  A.D. 

4. 

Luipa 

..  cir . 669  A.D. 

6. 

Vajraghanta 

..  cir.  681  A.D. 

6. 

Kacchapa 

..  cir.  693  A.D. 

7. 

Jalandharipa 

. . cir.  705  A.D. 

8. 

Krijnaoaryya 

. . cir.  717  A.D. 

9. 

Guhya 

. . cir.  729  A.D. 

10. 

Vijayapa 

* * 

. . cir.  741  A.D. 

* i 

11. 

Tailopa  (or  Tilipa) 

..  cir.  978  A.D. 

12. 

Naropa 

. . cir.  990  A.D. 

When  we  fix  the  time  of  Saraha  we  practically  go 
to  the  root  of  the  Buddhist  Tantra  or  Tantrayana,  be- 
cause Saraha  is  reputed  to  be  one  of  the  chief  promul- 
gators of  the  Tantrie  religion.  Both  Taranath  and  the 
author  of  the  Pag  Sam  Jon  Zan  admit  that  Saraha  was 
one  of  the  earliest  writers  and  diffusers  of  Tantrie  doc- 
trines and  practices.  While  mentioning  the  origin  of 
some  of  the  most  important  Tantras,  Taranath  gives  us 
the  information*  that  Saraha  (633  A.D.)  introduced  the 
Buddhakapala  Tantra , Luipa  (669  A.D.)  the  Yogini 
Sancarya , Kambala  and  Padmavajra  (693  A.D.)  the 
Hevajratantra,  Kr$nacaryya  (717  A.D.)  the  Samputatilaka , 
Lalitavajra  (693  A.D.)  the  three  divisions  of  the  Kr$m - 
yamaritantra , Gambhiravajra  the  Vajr&mrta , Kukkurl 
(693  A.D.)  the  MaMmayiX,  and  Pi  to  (?)  the  K&lacakra. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  name  of  Saraha  has 
also  been  placed  on  the  top  of  the  succession  list  of  a 
Tantra  of  no  less  oelebrity  than  the  Cakrasamvara  Tan - 


„ *t  **4*0*!  * big  gap  before  TailopS  and  all  the  intermediate 

..  fcxantiflned,  TilipS  wee  * contemporary  of  MahipSla,  probably 

«•  - • 


of  VikramatfUa.  Pag  Sam  Jan 


INTRODUCTION. 


xliv 

tra  and  that  the  names  of  at  least  four  among  the  Gi^us 
in  Taranatha’s  list  are  in  chronological  order,  namely* 
Saraha,  Luipa,  Padmavajra,  and  K^nacftrya  in  aoc^d" 
ance  with  the  proposed  calculation. 

Let  us  now  see  bow  the  account  of  Saraha  as  given 
by  Taranath  is  corroborated  by  the  author  of  the 
Sam  Jon  Zan.  According  to  him  Rahulabhadra  01 
Saraha  was  the  name  of  a Buddhist  sage  born  of  a Brah- 
min and  a Dakinl,  in  the  city  of  Rajni(?)in  the  Eastern 
country.  He  was  an  adept  both  in  the  Brahmanical  and 
the  Buddhist  lores  and  flourished  during  the  reign  of 
King  Candanpala  of  Pracya.  He  worked  some  miracles 
in  the  presence  of  king  Ratna  Phala  and  his  Brahmin 
minister  and  thereby  converted  them  to  the  Buddhist 
faith.  Afterwards  he  became  the  high  priest  of  Nalanda. 
It  is  also  related  of  him  that  he  visited  Orissa  where 
from  one  Covesa  Kalpa  he  learnt  the  Mantrayana,  and 
from  there  proceeded  to  Maharaja..  There  he  united 
in  Yoga  with  a female  ascetic  who  had  approached  him 
in  the  guise  of  an  archer’s  daughter.  Having  performed 
the  Mahamudra  ritual  of  mysticism  with  her  he  attained 
to  Siddhi.  He  was  thenceforward  called  Saraha.  He 
used  to  sing  the  Doha  (hymns)  of  mysticism  and  there- 
by converted  5,000  people  and  their  king  to  Buddhism, 
He  is  characterised  as  the  earliest  diffuser  of  Tantric 
Buddhism.  He  composed  a large  number  of  works 
in  Sanskrit  and  several  among  them  are  preserved 
in  the  Tibetan  Tangyur, 


All  our  authorities,  namely,  Taranath,  the  author 
of  the  Pag  Sam  Jon  Zan  and  the  Cakrasamvara  succes- 
sion list  are  agreed  on  one  point  at  least  that  Sarahapfi- 
da,  also  known  as  Sarahap&,  Sarahabhadra  and  Rihtd* 
was  one  of  the  earliest  Buddhists  responsibly 
fusing  the  Tantric  knowledge  and  popuIarM^|li 
H noteworthy  that  our  calculation  makes 


INTRODUCTION. 


xiv 


temporary  of  Dharmakirti  (600-650  A.D.)  during  or  after 
whose  time  according  to  Taranath  the  Tantras  got 
publicity. 

The  next  author  of  importance  is  Nagarjuna  (A.D. 
645)  who  is,  of  course,  different  from  the  author  of  the 
same  name  who  is  regarded  as  the  founder  of  the 
Mad  h yam  aka  school  of  Buddhist  philosophy.  Absurd 
accounts  are  recorded  about  the  life  of  this  Nagarjuna 
and  wild  stories  are  told  of  his  stupendous  magical 
feats.  M.  Walleser,1  after  a thorough  investigation  of 
the  accounts  of  Nagarjuna  from  Tibetan  and  Chinese 
sources,  has  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  was  no 
such  person  as  Nagarjuna  existent  on  the  face  of  the 
earth.  From  his  learned  and  scholarly  observations  it 


can  be  easily  seen  that  the  Tibetan  sources  have  hope- 
lessly mixed  up  together  the  accounts  of  the  Nagarjuna 
the  disciple  of  Asvagho§a  with  the  Nagarjuna  who  was 
a disciple  of  Saraha.  One  flourished  in  the  first  and 
second  quarter  of  the  second  century  and  was  the  Guru 
of  Aryadeva,  while  the  other  flourished  somewhere  in 
the  middle  of  the  seventh  century,  the  two  names  thus 
being  separated  by  nearly  five  hundred  years.  But  as 
these  two  are  taken  erroneously  to  mean  one  and  the 
same  person  a serious  confusion  has  arisen.  The  Chinese 
version  which  does  not  take  into  account  the  Tantric 
Nagarjuna  is  less  confusing  though  it  also  abounds  in 
absurd  stories  about  his  life.  We  are  not,  however,  here 


concerned  with  the  accounts  of  Nagarjuna,  the  founder 
of  the  Madhyamaka  school,  but  we  can  easily  prove  the 
second  or  the  Tantric  Nagarjuna  to  be  a historical 


person  and  a follower  of  Vajrayana.  Two  Sadhanas  of 
his  are  recorded  in  the  S&dikanamala , one  for  the  wor- 
s ip  of  Vajratara, 3 while  the  other  relates  to  the  wor- 
ship  of  Ekajata. 8 In  the  colophon4  of  the  latter 

4 H 


xlvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


it  is  distinctly  said  that  Nag&rjuna  rescued  this  S&dhana 
from  the  country  of  Bhota  which  may  be  identified 
with  Tibet.  The  worship  of  Ekaja$&  appears  to  have 
been  current  in  Tibet,  and  the  goddess  probably  be- 
longed to  the  primitive  Bon  religion  of  that  country* 
and  it  was  Nagarjuna  who  for  the  first  time  introduced 
this  goddess  into  Buddhism.  We  can  thus  see  that 
Ekajata,  variously  known  as  Ugratara,  Makaclnatara, 
etc.,  is  comparatively  a recent  introduction  in  Indian 
religions,  and  definitely  say  that  any  work,  Buddhist 
or  Hindu,  which  may  refer  to  this  goddess  must  be 
later  than  the  time  in  which  Nagarjuna  flourished. 
Nagarjuna  was  quite  famous  and  ,vrofce  a large  number 
of  Tantric  works  the  translations  of  many  of  which 
are  still  preserved  in  the  Tibetan  Tangyur.1 

Savaripa  (657  A.D.)  is  our  third  author  in  chrono- 
logical order.  In  the  Pag  Sam  Jon  Zan 2 he  is  des- 
cribed as  having  belonged  to  the  hill  tribe  called  the 
Savaras  or  huntsmen  in  Bahgala  where  he  met 
Nagarjuna  during  the  latter’s  residence  in  that  country, 
and  embraced  Tantrism,  and  after  being  initiated  by 
him,  along  with  his  two  wives  Loki  and  Gun!  attained 
to  sainthood.  This  Savaripa  was  also  a historical  per- 
son and  has  composed  a Sadhana  of  Kurukulla  which 
is  published  in  the  Sadhanamala,  for  the  first  time. 8 He 
is  also  the  author  of  a number  of  melodious  songs 
in  the  vernacular  of  his  country  which  according'  to 
the  authority  of  Pag  Sam  Jon  Zan  was  Bang&l&.  This 
S&dhana  above  referred  to  has  been  found  in  only  one 
manuscript,  namely,  the  one  from  Cambridge  which 
bears  a date  in  Newari  Era  equivalent  to  A.D.  1165. 
In  this  Sadhana  also  there  is  a Doha  in  vernacular. 4 

Luip&  (A.D.  669)  is  our  next  author  in  chronological 

y Soe  Infra . 2 Op  cit,  Iod«x,  p.  cxxxi. 

■ 4 Infn  SMKttnamMtjf  jgtfc- 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlvii 


order.  He  is  termed  the  first  Siddnaearyva  or  magi- 
cian and  is  even  now  respected  by  the  Tibetan  Buddhists, 
]n  the  Tangyur  Catalogue  v>  P.  Oordier,  he  is  distinr f • 
iy  called  a Bengali.1 * *  He  is  further  said  to  have 
sprung  up  from  tlie  fisherman  caste  of  I’ddiyana  nu\ 
was  very  fond  of  the  eat  rails  of  fish.  He  was  formoiK 
a clerk  in  the  employ  of  the  king  of  Uddiyana  and  a i- 
known  as  Sarnantasubha.'*5  Several  Doha*  of  las  are 
recorded  in  the  ^ ary  da tryavini^caya :i  which  has  been, 
published  in  Bengali  characters  by  Mahamahopadhyaya 
Dr.  Haraprasad  Shastri  of  Calcutta. 

Leaving  aside  the  next  two  Gurus  such  as  Vaj- 
raghanta  and  Kacchapa  about  whom  we.  have  practically 
very  little  historical  information,  we  pass  on  to  another 
great  name  in  Tautrie  Buddhism.  This  is  Padmavajra 
(A.D.  693)  the  first  name  in  the  fiist  succession  list 
above  refer! ed  to  and  the  author  of  a large  number  of 
works  out  of  which  only  two  are  extant  in  Sanskrit 
while  many  others  are  preserved  in  translations  in 
Tibetan  Tangyur.  According  to  Taranath  he  was  the 
firs!;  to  introduce  the  Hevajratantra  in  Vaj  ray  an  a, 
which  he  did  along  with  his  collaborator,  Kambalapada. 
Padmavajra  is  also  said  to  be  a contemporary  of  ludra- 
biiutb  Lalitavajra  and  Kukkunpa.4  This  Lalitavajra 
is  probably  the  senior  Lalitavajra  who  is  said  to  have 
introduced  the  three  divisions  of  the  Krmayamariian - 
lra,R  and  therefore  should  be  distinguished  from  the 
Utei-  Lalitagupta  who  was  a disciple  of  Advayavajra.* 
fviikkurlpada  another  contemporary  of  his  is  believed  to 
have  introduced  into  Vajrayana  the  M aha maydlanlra . 

Padmavajra  was  a historical  figure  and  we  have 
discovered  a very  interesting  work  of  his  entitled  the 

1 Op.  Cit.,  Vol.  IIt  p.  33.  2 Png  Sam  Jon  Zan,  index,  p.  cxv.- 

5 Bauddha  G&n  0 DobS,  p.  1-76.  * T&r&nath,  p.  188. 

6 T&rfcnath,  p.  2751  a see  below. 


xlviii 


INTRODUCTION, 


Guhyasiddhi,1  which  seems  to  have  been  a work  of 
great  authority  in  Tibet  even  so  late  as  1747  AJD.  when 
Pag  Sam  Jon  Zan  was  written.2 3  The  whole  work  is 
written  in  what  is  called  the  twilight  language  but 
still  it  can  be  easily  seen  that  he  advocates  mystic  and 
objectionable  rites  and  practices,  which  he  terms  secret 
rites.  According  to  Padmavajra  such  practices  and 
rites  were  first  formulated  by  the  Buddha  and  were  first 
recorded  in  the  Srlsamaja  which  is  only  another  name 
of  the  Guhyasamaja . Beyond  the  Srisamaja  he  says 
there  is  no  better  treasure  in  the  three  worlds.*  Fur- 
ther, he  says:  how  wonderful  are  the  teachings  of 
Vajrayana  which  is  the  most  secret  of  all  secrets,  and 
is  without  Svabhava  (real  nature)  and  is  pure  and  in- 
comparable.4 He  advocates  the  meditation  on  the 
Prajna  (wisdom)  and  the  Upaya  (means)  and  the 
remembrance  of  the  adman  tine  mind,  all  of  which  are 
more  secret  than  all  secrets  and  which  are  not  possible 
of  attainment  without  the  female  element  or  the 
6akti.5  He  asks  his  followers  to  enjoy  the  Maha- 
mudra  conjoined  with  the  Upaya  which  is  in  his  own 
body.  The  knowledge  of  Mahamudra  which  is  most 
auspicious  is  of  a peculiar  nature  which  can  be  realized 
by  one’s  own  self.6  Padmavajra,  in  accordance  with  the 


1 One  copy  exists  in  the  Oriental  Institute  MSS.  Library  and  another  is 
with  MM.  H.P.  Shastri  of  Calcutta. 

2 See  op.  cit.,  p.  lxiii,  index. 

3 VT  *rrf*  i 

4 piffcp*j  tontto  i 
fVSTWTOfl  13W  fro*  to  ifrour  i 

1 p i 

fimTO  pm  pw*  vvn  a 
* m wrwfa  w u*  i 

flit  fir  w **  fpl  to*  s 

*Wf  it  firttir  i 

to  w § 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlix 


teachings  of  Ouhyasamaja,  follows  the  doctrine  of  the 
five  Dhyani  Buddhas,  and  says  that  by  these  five  forms 
alone  Sambodhi  can  be  attained  in  accordance  with  the 
pronouncement  of  the  Tathagatas.  The  five  forms  are: 
Sasvata  (Vairocana)  Aksobhya,  Ratna,  Ayus,  (Ami- 
tabha)  and  Kul&dya  (Amoghasiddhi).1  Siddhi  or  per- 
fection is  indeed  very  difficult  to  attain  in  one  life;  but 
those  who  so  desire  should,  according  to  Padmavajra, 
take  up  the  secret  rite  which  is  the  destroyer  of  all  dual 
thoughts.  If  he  is  initiated  in  the  Tantra  of  Srisamaja 
which  is  the  cause  of  all  happiness  he  may  obtain 
divine  perfection  by  coming  in  contact  with  the  Maha- 
mudra. But  in  order  to  do  so  the  initiation  (Abhi$eka) 
must  be  taken  from  a Guru  without  whose  kind  assist- 
ance no  success  can  follow.2  Throughout  Ouhyasiddhi 
similar  ideas  occur  and  it  is  useless  to  enumerate  the 
practices  inculcated  therein.  The  long  and  short  of  the 
whole  work  is  that  without  Mahamudra  (great  woman) 
no  emancipation  or  success  in  any  rite  is  possible.  But 
if  you  are  initiated  into  the  Mahamudra  cult  success  is 
assured  even  if  you  do  things  which  are  against  all 
laws,  social  or  religious.8 

Jalandharipa,  also  known  as  Hadipa  (7u5  A.D.), 
whom  we  place  one  generation  after  Padmavajra  or 
Saroruhavajra  is  made  by  Taranath 4 a contemporary  of 

1 wwrcrfn:  tfiwutronw  i 

wr^myfT$:  ***%***  « 

2 spirm  ffrfar  y i 

ifir  i 

» 5^wrftrf*i:w  h 

* iw  m wt  *h**ihrT  i 

; 3 k 

4 


1 


INTRODUOTIOK. 


several  important  personalities  such  as  Bhartybarf, 
Vimalaoandra,  Krsnacaryya,  Tantipa  and  even  Dharma- 
kirti.  In  the  Pag  Sam  Jon  Zan1 * *  it  is  said  that  be  was 
buried  in  a hole  underground  by  the  order  of  the  King 
Qoplcandra  of  Catigaon,  who  was  afterwards  converted 
to  mysticism  by  the  Acarya. 

It  is  indeed  very  difficult  to  place  him  correctly 
from  the  above  accounts  and  all  that  can  be  said  now  is 
that  Jalandhar!  was  regarded  as  a very  ancient  Siddhft- 
caryya  as  may  be  evidenced  by  Taranath’s  making 
him  a contemporary  of  Dharmaklrt!  whose  time  is  defi- 
nitely known  to  be  the  first  half  of  the  seventh  cen- 
tury A.D.  His  other  contemporaries  are  mostly  myste- 
rious persons  and  none  can  say,  with  any  measure  of 
accuracy,  as  to  the  time  when  they  flourished.  The 
very  fact  that  J&landbarl  wrote  a commentary  on  a 
work  of  Saroruhavajra  * and  followed  the  Hevajratantra 
introduced  by  him 8 places  him  one  generation  after 
Padmavajra  who  flourished  at  the  end  of  the  seventh 
century. 

Anangavajra  (705  A D.),  the  disciple  of  Padmavajra, 
is  characterised  in  the  history  of  the  Eighty-four 
Siddhapuru^as,  as  the  son  of  King  Gopala  of  the  Eastern 
India.4  The  time  of  Gopala  has  been  fixed  by  V.  A. 
Smith5  as  cir  730  A.D.  But  S.  C.  Vidyabhf^ana  places 
him  between  095and7O5  A.D.*  Dr.  S.  Krisnaswami  Iyen- 
gar also  doubts  this  date ; and  in  the  absence  of  any  insorip- 
tional  or  monumental  evidence  we  are  more  in  favour  of 
v accepting  the  earlier  date.  Anaflgavajra’s  date  will  there- 

i Op.  Index,  p.  xcvii.  game  story  It  repeated  in  Sufctxr  Mtihanv 

mad’s  GopieSnder  Samyfoa,  edited  by  N.  K.  Bhatteeati  o i Dacca.  See  pp,  11  f. 

* .:0m.' duFonds  Tibetain,  II,  p.  18.  - 

9 TSHtofttb  p.  275f. 

Anadgavs^ra  in  op.  oit. 


INTRODUCTION. 


li 


fore  be  in  consonance  with  the  theory  advanced  in  thehis- 
tory  of  the  Eighty-four  Mahasiddhas.  Anaiigavajraseems 
to  be  a fairly  well-known  author  as  can  be  seen  from  the 
number  of  works  written  by  him  whose  translations  now 
find  place  in  the  Tibetan  Tangynr.  One  of  his  famous 
compositions  is  the  PrajnopayavinUcayasiddhi , copies 
of  which  are  available  in  the  Nepal  Durbar  Library1  and 
the  Library  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal.2  The 
work  is  characterised  by  its  boldness  of  spirit  and  by 
the  lucidity  of  his  teachings.  It  is  now  in  the  course  of 
publication  in  the  Gaekwad's  Oriental  Series.  Like  Jalan- 
dharipa  who  is  probably  his  contemporary,  he  also 
wrote  several  works  on  the  Hevajratantra 3 which  was 
for  the  first  time  introduced  into  Buddhism  by  his 
Guru  Padmavajra. 

The  next  author  of  importance  is  Indrabhuti,  (717 
A.D.),  the  King  of  Uddiyana,  which  is  generally  identi- 
fied with  Orissa  but  which  may  also  conceivably  be  a 
part  of  Bengal.4  He  was  the  father  of  Padmasambhava 
who  conjointly  with  the  famous  logician  Santarak^ita 
erected  the  monastery  of  Samye  in  Tibet  in  the  year 
749  A.D.fi  His  sister  was  Lak?minkara  who  was  married 
according  to  the  History  of  the  Eighty -four  Siddbas*  to 
the  Prince  of  Sambhala  and  attained  Siddhi.  Indra- 
bhuti was  regarded  as  an  authority  on  Vajrayana  and 
Tantra  long  after  his  time.7  He  has  written  a large  num- 
ber of  works  and  at  least  twenty-three  among  them  are 
preserved  in  the  pages  of  the  Tibetan  Tangyur  in  transla- 
tions.8 We  have,  however,  been  fortunate  to  discover 

1 Nepal  Catalogue,  Vol.  II,  p.  64f . 

* Beeceiptfve  Catalogue  Govt.  Collection,  vol.  I,  p.  110. 

. * Ai  wekgow  from  the  index  to  Bauddha  G8n  O Doha,  p.  v. 

4 See  Supre,  p*  anndx  j see  also  B.  Bhattacharyya ; Glimpses  of  VajrayQna. 
(in  the  Prooeedhlf^XIadres  Oriental  Conference),  p.  133. 

6 w*aiem,p.m.  ' 

. 0 DoM,  epp.  p.  14.  . 


lii 


INTRODUCTION. 


at  least  two  of  his  works  in  original  Sanskrit)  namely,  the 
Kuntkullasadhana  which  appears  in  the  S&dkanamfilii  it- 
self, while  the  other  is  called  Jnanasiddhi}  This  latter 
has  been  taken  up  for  publication  in  the  Gaekwad9  s Orim 
enial  Series  and  we  hope  to  publish  it  at  no  very  distant 
date.  The  Jnanasiddhi  * is  an  extremely  interesting 
work  in  twenty-two  chapters,  giving  in  a nut-shell  many 
leading  doctrines  and  rites  of  Vajrayana  which  throw 
immense  light  on  this  obscure  religion. 

As  the  title  indicates  the  thesis  of  the  Jnanasiddhi 
is  that  emancipation  or  perfection  can  only  be  attained 
through  the  medium  of  knowledge  which  is  nothing  but 
the  knowledge  of  the  five  Tathagatas  or  the  Dhyani 
Buddhas.  In  the  first  chapter  which  is  entitled  Tattw- 
nirdesa  the  author  says  that  Vajrayana  is  the  essence  of 
all  Tantras,  and  those  who  do  not  know  it  move  about 
in  the  sea  of  Saihsara.  Emancipation  cannot  be  obtain- 
ed either  by  Mudra  or  Mantra,  or  Mandala  or  by  the 
learned  or  by  the  fools,  or  by  any  one  who  is  devoid  of 
knowledge.  Those  who  are  conversant  with  the  kind  of 
knowledge  which  is  preached  here  can  attain  Bodhi 
even  if  they  indulge  in  actions  which  are  against  law 
and  morality,  such  as,  animal  food,  strong  drinks,  etc. 
The  knowledge,  the  author  says,  cannot  be  obtained 
without  the  kind  offices  of  the  Guru  or  the  preceptor 
whose  characteristics  he  describes.  The  knowledge  is 
then  defined  as  the  knowledge  of  the  Tathfigatas  which  is 
also  known  by  the  three  terms  VajrajMna  * admantine 
knowledge,’  Samantabhadra  ‘auspicious  all  round’  or 
Mahamudra  * great  woman’ . This  knowledge  is  aoijhdivid- 
edinto  five  Adarsajnana,  Samatajfiana,  Pratyaveksa^ft- 
jnana,  Kftyanu§thanajiiana  and  SuviSuddhatfMna  each 

* Oneoopy  is  in  the  possession  of  MM.  Hor»prss*d  Shastrf 
ami  in  thaBsfod*  Oriental  Institute. 

*W * *umm«y  w.  Wimp," c&ffym#*., 


INTRODUCTION. 


liii 


of  which  is  represented  by  one  of  the  five  Dhyani  Bud- 
dhas. Armed  with  these  five  kinds  of  knowledge  the 
ascetic  should  think  himself  as  Sanya  in  essence  and  all 
else  as  Sunya,  and  with  all  the  paraphernalia  of  worship 
should  worship  none  but  himself.  There  is  no  restriction 
of  food  nor  is  any  class  of  women  forbidden.  Women 
of  the  lowest  classes  such  as  the  Can<Jalas  or  the  Dombis 
are  epecially  recommended  for  the  purposes  of  Ma- 
hamudra  perfection,  though  daughters  of  higher  castes 
such  as  Brahmins  are  also  recommended  with  the  re- 
mark that  the  worshipper  must  take  care  that  hf>  mind 
is  not  in  any  way  troubled,  always  bearing  in  mind  that 
there  is  no  better  truth  than  that  which  is  experienced 
by  himself. 

The  next  author  in  chronological  ofcder  is  Krsna- 
caryya  (717  A.D.).  InTangyur1 *  we  meet  with  several 
Krenacaryyas,  and  it  is  indeed  difficult  to  differentiate 
between  them  in  the  absence  of  more  definite  materials. 
Taranath  makes  Kr§nacaryya  contemporary  of  Jalan- 
dhar!, Bhartrhari,  Gopicandra  and  even  Dharmaklrti. 
Taranath  is  probably  wrong  in  making  ^im  a contempo- 
rary of  Dharmaklrti  who,  as  we  defir1^6^  know,  flour- 
ished in  the  first  half  of  the  seventh  century.  Kr§na- 
caryya  seems  to  be  a contemporary  oi  Jalandhar!  and 
Gopicandra  8 both  of  whom  in  all  pro^^dity  flourished 
in  the  first  quarter  of  the  8th  century. 

According  to  the  Pag  Sam  Jon  Zan  Krsna  was 
born  of  a Brahmin  family  of  Orissa  ii1(^  was  initiated 
into  the  mystic  cult  by  Jalandharipa.  disciple  was 
a weaver  (Tantipa).3  Kr$na  is  credit ed  *n  ,san)e 
work  with  having  introduced  the  Tanti  ^ *n  which  the 
male  and  female  divinities  sit  claspi^  eac*1  ofc^er*4 

1 toiuddha  mn  O DM,  app.  p.  21ff. 

1 Q*pica*d*r  S^ny fisa,  intro,  f 2’  n% 

* ****&:%  ♦ Indax.  o.  Ivi L ' 


iiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


Kr^paearya  wrote  ip  Dohas  also,  in  bis  own  vernacular, 
which  was  probably  Uriva  and  had  great  affinity  to- 
wards the  old  Bengali  language.  Twelve  songs  of  his 
are  available  in  the  original  vernacular  and  are  printed 
in  the  Bauddha  Gan  0 Doha . The  following 1 is  only  a 
specimen  showing  his  language: — 

f*w  fsrar  3ffnnT  few 

# SI 

fWT  | U I 

/’  In  the  history  of  Vajrayana  the  name  of  Lak^mim- 
kara  (729  A.D.)  is  interesting  not  only  because  she  is  a 
Ionian  but  also  because  of  the  novel  doctrines  she 
preached  without  reserve  and  with  great  confidence  and 
emphasis.  Born  in  a royal  family  of  Uddiyana  as 
sister  of  Indrabhuti  she  showed  remarkable  boldness  in 
preaching  her  own  peculiar  theories  in  a small  but  inter- 
esting work,  Entitled,  JOie  Advayasiddhi*  This  work 
was  long  lost  in\he  otiginal  Sanskrit  but  was  preserved 
in  the  Tibetan  -Ts ngyur  in  translation.*  To  this  work 
attention  of  schola^  wag  grst  (jrawn  by  MM.  Haraprasad 
Shastri  in  one  ^e  stray  numbers  of  an  extremely 
irregular  journal  ^hjch  goes  by  the  name  of  the  Dacca 
■Review.  We  hav^  sjnce  ^a(j  an  opportunity  of  studying 
this  book  more  cf^ref ully  and  the  leading  ideas  revealed 
by  its  study  are  summarised  below.  Throughout  this 
work  the  influence  0f  Indrabhuti’s  Jh&nasiddhi  is  very 
perceptible  and!  ^ris  jg  jjue  probably  to  the  fact  that 


Lak^miihkara  i 
also  one  of  his  ) 

ras  not  only  a sister  of  Indrabhuti  but 
avourite  disciples.4 

l Op.  cit,  p.  18.  l 
* One  copy  of  tj 

iis  MB  is  in  the  Oriental  Institute  while  the  original  i* 

, * °°*  c°Py  of  1 iis  MB  is  in  the  Oriental  Ins 
Harapreaad  ghaJltri 

Tibetam, 2«  partie,  p.  211. 
vd*  Tibetain.  II,  p.  21  i. 


INTRODUCTION. 


lv 


In  the  Advayaaiddhi  a most  remarkable  and  bold 
innovation  has  been  introduced  by  the  authoress.  Hither- 
to the  Vajrayanists  advocated  the  worship  of  the  five 
Dhyani  Buddhas  and  their  innumerable  emanations, 
but  what  Laksmfmkara  advocated  was  quite  out  of  the 
way  and  strange,  even  though  since  her  time  this  new 
teaching  has  gradually  won  for  it  many  adherents  who 
are  styled  Sahajayanists,  and  who  are  still  to  be  met 
with  among  the  Nadha  Nadhls  of  Bengal  and  especially 
among  the  Bauls.  Laksmlhkara  declares:  “ There  is 
no  need  of  undergoing  suffering;  no  fastings,  and  no 
rites,  nor  bathing  nor  purification  and  other  rules  of 
society.  Nor  do  you  need  to  bow  down  before  the 
images  of  gods  which  are  prepared  of  wood,  stone  or 
mud.  But  with  concentration  offer  worship  only  to 
your  body  where  all  the  gods  reside.”  1 

She  explains  later  on,  without  however  openly 
declaring  the  truth,  that  when  the  truth  is  known 
there  is  no  restriction  for  the  worshipper.  He  can 
eat  anything,  he  can  drink  anything,  violate  any 
laws,  human  or  divine.  Towards  women,  she 
specially  declares,  no  hatred  should  be  displayed 
because  they  are  the  embodiments  of  the  Prajiia  in 
restraint.2 


*r  ynHumf  f*fm  »frqrwre\  * firem  i 
wnr  i?N  ir  « 


13WT  frt  \ 


INTRODUCTION . 


Ivi 

Later  on,  she  says,  that  the  instructions  on  Nirvaim 
should  always  be  obtained  from  the  preceptor.  In  the 
whole  of  the  moveable  and  immoveable  world  there  is 
nothing  better  than  a Guru  through  whose  kind  offices 
the  wise  obtain  many  kinds  of  perfections.1 

Bhagavati  Laksmi  or  Lak§mlmkara’s  direct  disciple 
was  Lilavajra 2 (741  A.D.)  who  was  also  a Vajracaryya 
of  great  repute  and  wrote  a large  number  of  authorita- 
tive works.  So  far  as  we  know  none  of  his  works  is 
existent  in  the  original  Sanskrit  but  some  are  indeed 
preserved  in  Tibetan  translation  in  the  Tangyur  collec- 
tion. The  following  is  a list  of  books  written  by  Llla- 
vajra and  translations  of  these  in  Tibetan  are  still 
extant 3 : — 

1.  Sri  Sahajaguhyasamajasadhana. 

2.  Sri  Sahajasiddhi. 

3.  Aryanamasangititlka. 

4.  Yamantakamantramulartha  Vajraprabheda. 

5.  Dakimvajrapanjara-pancadakinlsadhana. 

6.  Kr$nayamaritantrasya  panjika. 

7.  Mahatilakakrama. 

8.  Guliyasamajatantranidana  gurupadesa  bha$ya. 

9.  Vajrasattvasadhananibandhana. 

From  these  titles  it  can  easily  be  seen  that  both 
Vajrayana  and  Sahjayana  were  in  a flourishing  condi- 
tion and  that  the  Ouhyasamajatantra  and  the  Krsna- 
yamaritantra  were  regarded  as  very  authoritative.  It 
appears  from  the  Tangyur  that  he  also  acknowledged 
another  Guru  by  name  Vilasavajra 4 besides  the  one 
already  mentioned.  In  the  same  way  besides  Ddrika* 

» TOrwfir  WnS  I 

W swfltnj  STO**  flntftfhwT  < foi.  74. 

t Catalogue  du  Fond*  Tibetuin,  II,  p.  212. 

* B^uddha  Gfdn  O I>ohS,  app.  p.  75. 
i du  Fonds  Tibetain , II,  p,  87.  " 


INTRODUCTION. 


lvii 


pada  lie  had  another  devoted  disciple  who  called  him- 
self Karun&cala.  This  latter  was  a poet  of  a high  x^rder 
and  several  of  his  compositions  appear  in  the  Sadhkna- 
mQla,  His  compositions  are  distinguished  by  easy-flow- 
ing diction  and  devotional  language.  In  the  end  of  the 
Sadhana  of  Vajramahakala  he  has  mentioned  the  name 
of  his  Guru  Lilavajra.1 

The  name  of  Darikapada  (753  A.D.),  the  disciple  of 
Lilavajra,2  is  fairly  well  known  through  the  publication 
of  MM.  Haraprasad  Shastri’s  Bauddha  Gan  0 Doha. 
From  this  work  it  appears  that  Darika  was  a Bengali 
and  wrote  a number  of  songs  in  his  vernacular  some 
of  which  are  recorded  in  the  work  above  referred  to.3 
In  one  of  his  songs  he  offers  his  obeisance  to  Luipa  4 
and  this  leads  the  editor  MM.  Shastri  to  think  that 
Darika  was  a direct  disciple  of  Lui.5  Luipa,  as  we  have 
shown,  belonged  to  an  earlier  age  and  as  such  any  close 
connection  between  the  two  is  hardly  admissible.  We 
can,  however,  explain  this  by  holding  that  Darika  prob- 
ably mentioned  Lui  as  he  was  the  first  Siddliacaryya, 
and  this  seems  to  be  a more  reasonable  explanation.  A 
specimen  of  his  song  is  given  below  : — 

faros  Jwro  info?  jsf  n 
*T«TT  3TUT  t 

is  UTO  w ST  ft*  STSW  srcn  D 

Darika  composed  a pretty  large  number  of  works  in 
Sanskrit  but  none  of  them  is  found  to  be  existent  in  the 


1 SfarnijO-’  to  vfa  ror  iwenrnrff 

*T%t  lifa  wwr  froi  i 

row*#*  wfawT  i etc. 

2 CMaioguedu  Fond*  fibrtain,  II,  p.  212. 

8 Op.  cit  intro.,  jp.  30,  * Op.  cit.,  p.  53. 


* 0P-olt- i«K»„  JR-I*; ; : 


9T  V?  «TTfu*  nwm  rot  I 


INTRODUCTION. 


lviii 

origina/Sanskrit  at  the  present  time.  He  has  written 
uookf  on  the  Cakrasamvara , hcilacqkra  and''  VajTCi- 
yogiyt  Tantras.  Several  of  his  works  were  translated 
inti/ Tibetan  and  the  following  among  them  are  now 
extant  1: — 

1 (Sri  Kalacakrat-antrasya  Sekaprakriyavrtti. 

2.  Tathagatadrsti. 

3.  Cakrasamvarasad  liana  tattvasangraha. 

4.  Oakmsamvaramandalavidhi  tattvavatara. 

5.  Cakrasamvarastotra  sarvarthasiddhi  visuddha 

chfidamani. 

6.  Yoganusarinl  nama  Vajrayogini  tlka. 

7.  Vajrayogini  pujavidhi. 

8.  Kamakala  tarana  sadhana. 

9.  &ri  Oddivanavinirgata  Mahaguhyatattvopa- 

desa. 

10.  Praj/iaparamita  hrdayasadhana. 

Next  comes  Sahajayogini  Cinta  (765  A.D.)  a female 
ascetic  and  a disciple  of  Darikapada  who  is  known  to  us 
as  the  authoress  of  the  Vyaktabhdvdnugata-tattm-siddhi  a 
a small  work  in  Sanskrit.2  A translation  of  this  in 
Tibetan  also  exists/* 

It  appears  from  her  work  that  she  was  a follower  of 
the  Vijnanavadin  school  and  laid  particular  stress  on  the 
Universe  being  nothing  but  the  creation  of  the  cilia  or 
mind.  It  is  the  mind,  she  says,  which  begets  miseries 
and  in  consequence  creates  all  the  external  objects. 
The  Prajna  and  Upaya  are  also  creations  of  the  mind 
and  when  they  combine  give  rise  to  Mahasukha  in  the 
mind  which  fancies  the  whole  external  world  to  be  the 
forms  of  Mahasukha.  The  mind  has  its  vagaries  and 
its  own  ways : sometimes  it  is  sleeping,  sometimes  it  is 

1 Op.  cit.,  pp.  39,  40. 

2 This  MS.  was  discovered  by  us  and  a oopy  is  preserved  in  the  Oriental 

Institute.  • *4* 

* Bauddha  Gdnt  index,  p.  96. 


INTRODUCTION 


iix 


awake  and  active,  sometimes  it  begets  desires,  some* 
times  it  is  pure  and  sometimes  it  is  impure,  sometimes 
it  has  many  forms  and  sometimes  it  is  in  an  undescrib- 
able  state.  The  Yogin  who  is  able  to  realize  the 
voidness  of  the  external  world  and  keep  his  mind  free 
from  reflection  in  all  its  different  states  and  in  all 
its  vagaries  and  ways,  is  really  the  emancipated,  and 
Buddhahood  for  him  is  easy  of  attainment.  At  the 
end  of  the  work  the  authoress  describes  Vajrasattva  in 
most  eloquent  language  and  characterises  him  as  one 
who  is  realized  by  self  alone,  who  defies  comparison,  is 
omnipresent,  all-pervading,  who  is  the  creator,  destroyer 
and  the  lord  of  the  Universe  and  who  brings  into 
prominence  the  manifestations  of  the  mind.1 

Next  comes  Dombi  Heruka  (777  A.D.)  the  disciple 
of  Sahajayogini  who  like  Darika  is  well-known  to  many 
through  the  publication  of  the  Buddha  Gan  0 Doha 
already  referred  to.  He  was  a king  of  Magadlia  but 
became  an  ascetic.2  In  the  Tibetan  Tangyur  he  is 
sometimes  called  Acarvya  or  Mahacaryya  or  Siddha- 
earyya.  Dombi  Heruka  is  recognized  as  one  of  the 
eighty-four  Siddhas.  He  wrote  books  on  Sahajayana 
and  Vajrayana,  and  composed  a book  of  songs  entitled 
the  Dombi-GUikd.  The  songs  given  in  the  Bauddha 
Gan  0 Doha  are  taken  probably  from  this  Dombi  Gilikd 
composed  by  him.  The  following  is  a characteristic 
sample : 

m i 

srWt  amnft  i 

X(Tm  THOC  9TTT?  $3  fw^CT  n 8 

***•.  * wifi  vri  « 

2 TSrSnSfch,  p.  323  ; Pag  Sam  Jon  Zan,  index*  p.  extiii. 

8 Op.  oit.  p,  25, 


Ix  introduction, 

Pombi  Heruka  composed  a Sad  ban  a of  the  goddess 
Nairatma  and  this  is  recorded  in  the  S&dhanamal#, 
Tt  appears  from  the  very  opening  lines  of  this  Sadhana 
that  be  followed  the  Hemjra  Tdntra : 

* rein  *rf*rai  t 

*rf^?zr  to  n 

He  wrote  a fairly  large  number  of  works;  the 
Tibetan  translations  of  the  following  among  others  are 
extant." 

1.  Dasat-attva. 

2.  Yogivogim  nama  sadharanarthopadesa. 

4.  Nairatmayogini  sadhana. 

o.  Ganacakravidhi. 

6.  Ekavlrasadhana. 

7.  Namasangltivrtti. 

8.  Guhyavajratantraraja-vrtti. 

Besides  these  he  wrote  another  work,  entitled,  the 
Sahajasiddhi which  we  have  discovered  in  the  original 
Sanskrit.  This  is  a highly  interesting  work  even  though 
it  is  short  and  consists  of  three  small  chapters,  and  prob- 
ably does  not  exceed  even  a hundred  slokas  in  all.  In 
it  there  are  certain  topics  of  absorbing  interest  , and  we 
take  this  opportunity  of  recording  some  of  the  views 
expressed  by  the  author. 

Dombl  formulates  that  the  worship  of  Kula  is  the 
most  important  in  Tantric  religion.  Without  it  no 
success  can  be  achieved,  but  with  it  great  success  is 
poasible  of  attainment.4  While  explaining  the  word 
Kula , he  says,  they  are  five  in  number  and  they  origi- 
nate from  the  five  Dhyani  Buddhas,  Ak$obhya,  Vairo- 
cana,  Amitablia,  Ratnasambhava  and  Amoghasiddhi 

1 SMhanarnZlZ,  Vol.  II,  p.  44fl.  2 Bauddha  Q&v,  app.  p.  &4. 

* Copy  o f thin  is  preserved  in  the  Oriental  Institute. 

♦ wtif  fafr  wrn?sr<T  xjvt  j 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixi 


and  this  is  the  reason  why  they  are  called  Kulem a or  the 
Lords  of  the  Kulas  (families).  The  thunderbolt  family 
originates  from  Ak$obhya,  the  Lotus  family  from  Ami- 
tabha,  the  Jewel  family  from  Ratnasambhava,  [the  Disc 
family  from]  Vairocana  and  the  Action  family  from 
Amoghasiddhi.1 

From  the  word  Kula  the  words  Kulacara,  Kaulika 
are  derived.  The  Kaulas  declare  themselves  to  be  Tantric 
Hindus.  From  the  literature  of  the  extant  Kaulaism 
the  meaning  of  the  word  Kula  is  not  clear.  Moreover, 
in  some  instances  a large  number  of  interpretations  of 
the  word  appear  which  shows  definitely  that  Hindus 
were  not  certain  about  the  meaning  of  the  word.2  But 
the  meaning  in  the  Buddhist  sense  is  quite  clear  and 
unequivocal ; they  gave  not  more  than  one  interpretation 
to  the  word.  The  Kaulas  according  to  them,  mean  the 
worshippers  or  the  followers  of  the  originators  of  the 
five  families,  namely,  of  the  live  Dhyani  Buddhas.  The 
question  will  then  arise  as  to  whether  the  Kaulas  are 
really  Hindus  or  Buddhists.  We  are  not  here  to  discuss 
this  great  question  which  should  remain  open  until 
sufficient  materials  are  at  hand  to  prove  either.  There 
is  indeed  very  little  difference  between  the  Kaulacara 
and  the  Tantric  Bauddhaeara,  because  in  both  the 
desire  to  do  improper  and  illegal  things  in  the  fullest 
extent  is  present. 

Dombl  Heruka  has  written  about  the  theory  of 
Mahasukha,  and  the  happiness  obtainable  therefrom  has 
been  fully  dealt  with.  The  happiness  which  can  best 
be  obtained  by  one’s  own  experience,  according  to  him, 
has  four  successive  stages : Ananda,  Paramananda,  Vira- 


yyfiwm  imw  nn**  * i 
irww  « 


INTRODUCTION. 


mananda,  and  Sahajananda.  By  the  combination  of 
the  two  elements  Prajna  and  Upaya  these  four  stages 
of  great  happiness  can  be  obtained.1  It  can  only  be 
experienced  by  one’s  own  self  and  when  so  realized 
then  only  emancipation  or  perfection  can  be  obtained.* 
In  the  lltli  century  Advayavavajra  also  voiced  the 
same  opinion.'  PombI  Heruka  was  also  responsible 
for  the  introduction  of  certain  new  elements  into  the 
Vajrayana  system. 

The  next  period  of  the  development  of  the  Tantric 
culture  amongst  the  Buddhists  is  probably  represented 
by  a set  of  most  powerful  writers  and  popular  gurus 
like  Dipankara  (980-1053),  Advayavajra  or  Avadhutipa, 
his  disciple  Lalitagupta,4  Tilopa  of  Catigaon,  Ratna- 
karasanti,  Prajnakaramati  and  Naropa  all  of  whom 
were  contemporaries  of  King  Mahipala  I of  the  Pala 
Dynasty  who  according  to  V.  A.  Smith  flourished 
between  A.D.  978  to  1030. 5 

§5.  Leading  Tenets  of  Vajrayana. 

(i)  Conception  of  Guru. 

In  ancient  India  for  all  kinds  of  religious  and 
secular  knowledge  the  necessity  of  a Guru  or  preceptor 
was  always  felt,  but  nowhere  is  reverence  to  the  Guru 
80  much  in  evidence  as  in  Vajrayana.  Nothing,  they 
affirm,  can  be  achieved  without  a preceptor.  It  is 

i ’■irTw^r  55*  fafag  tojtto  1 

fwxnr  *rrg  g t**;  a 

- ihfTita  VTKwmTr*  *?vnsv[  1 

utg  fofir  f*  a 

'3  Cl  p.  32,  Gob,  No.  40. 

* ffNwmrei  ^T*j*n*  i 

8*  TTKTurvyyqt  a 

; * For  detaital  ^formation  see  N.  K.  Bhattetali  \ «d  ■;  Gofi&hder  £<m*yB#C 
aD  i Jadia i Tmofon  ef  Buddhist  Universities,  p.  f ^ : ' 


INTRODUCTION. 


lxiii 

impossible  to  follow  mystic  doctrines  and  practices 
without  a preceptor.  What  particular  Mantra  or  mystic 
practice  is  suitable  to  a person  who  is  already  initiated 
must  be  told  by  the  preceptor  whose  duty  it  is  also  to 
inform  him  of  the  way  in  which  it  should  be  repeated 
and  the  number  of  times  it  should  be  muttered  in  order 
to  obtain  the  different  kinds  of  perfections  (Siddhis). 
The  Buddhists  always  had  preceptors  practically  since 
the  time  of  Buddha,  but  the  more  Buddhism  became 
mystified  in  its  later  stages  the  greater  was  the  necessity 
of  preceptors  that  was  felt,  and,  in  Vajrayana,  we  find  the 
position  of  the  Guru  altogether  paramount.  He  is 
idolized  as  the  Buddha,  he  is  the  Sugata,  he  is  Dharma- 
kaya,  and  the  bestowal  of  emancipation  lies  in  bis  power ; 
he  is  omniscient  and  without  his  kindness  nothing  can  be 
achieved.  In  every  Tantric  work  there  is  an  evidence  of 
the  high  esteem  in  which  the  Gurus  were  held  1 and,  in 
many  works,  the  characteristics  of  the  Guru  and  the 
disciple  are  enumerated.2  Simply  because  a Mantra  is 
known  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  by  muttering  it 
one  can  attain  perfection.  It  is  impossible,  and  it  is 
against  the  principles  of  Vajrayana.  The  worshipper  is 
first  to  be  initiated  by  a Guru,  and  he  must  obtain  the 
different  kinds  of  Abhiseka  from  the  Gum,  and  then,  if 
all  his  instructions  are  followed  in  the  most  precise 
manner  possible,  then  and  then  alone  Siddhi  or  perfection 
is  possible  of  attainment.  6?«rwship  is  a position  which 
is  very  difficult  to  attain ; and  unless  one  answers  to 
the  characteristics  laid  down  in  Vajrayana  literature  he 
is  no  Guru  but  a cheat.8 

1 See>  for  instance,  the  prayer  to  the  Gum  by  the  disciple  in  the  PrajftopHya- 
viniScayasiddhi,  QOS,  p.  12,  *lokas  9-10. 

“ See,  for  instance,  Jf&na*iddhi  GO S,  chapters  13  and  14,  on  pp.  71  ft- 

3 Of.  «/riananddft»,  GOS,  p,  72— 

rnfcn  vthj  * 


lxiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


(ii)  Regulations  for  worshippers. 

In  view  of  the  conflicting  statements  regarding  the 
restrictions  imposed  on  the  worshippers  in  the  Sadhana- 
mdte,  it  becomes  difficult  to  say  as  to  how  the  lives  of 
the  worshippers  were  regulated  in  those  times,  and  what 
mandates  of  the  Church  they  had  to  follow.  We  find, 
for  instance,  that  the  worshippers  must  abstain  from 
taking  non- vegetarian  and  all  objectionable  items  of  food? 
such  as,  onions,  oil,  salt,  etc.,  and  must  not  violate  the 
rules  of  strict  celibacy.1  In  other  places  it  is  said  that 
the  offerings  should  consist  of  flesh,  wine  and  other 
objectionable  articles.2  In  one  place  it  is  said  that 
worship  should  be  done  after  purifying  the  body  by  bath 
and  by  observing  the  rules  of  celibacy.3  In  other 
places,  again,  contrary  to  the  above,  ho  restriction  is 
laid  down  either  of  place  or  of  any  particular  food.4 
Again,  we  also  meet  with  a general  rule  that  the  worship- 
per obtains  perfection  by  the  muttering  of  the  Mantras 
only,  even  without  drawing  the  Mandala  (magic  circle) 
or  purifying  himself  by  fasting.5 

The  reason  for  this  contradiction  seems  to  be  that 
the  Vajrayanists  recognized  the  existence  of  different 
grades  among  the  worshippers,  and  legislated  for  the 
different  classes  beginning  from  a strict  observance  of 
Vinaya  rules  in  the  lowest  ranks  to  the  stage  of  no 
restriction  in  the  highest  ranks.  Indrabhiiti  recognized 
threeelasses  of  disciples,  as  Mrdii,  Madhya &nd  Adhimdtra , 
who  had  different  degrees  of  mental  development,  and 


' i ».  25i  ffrsfwrSt 

* v# 

p.  333  i 


a p,  585  l vqfHfrqtf  etc. 

336  Wrwflwi  fqrft*  i ^ 

- < j>.  3ss  w*  wtfq  wtsrt  faw  * w* 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixv 


prescribed  for  them  according  to  their  mental  capacities 
different  regulations  for  their  spiritual  uplift.1  Advaya- 
vajra  classified  the  Buddhists  as  Saiksas  and  Asaiksas 
and  prescribed  the  strictest  rules  for  the  Saiksas  who 
were  less  advanced.2 *  The  Asaiksas  being  much  more 
advanced  in  the  matter  of  spiritual  progress  were 
allowed  to  follow  such  advanced  practices  as  are 
prescribed  in  the  Anuttarayogatantras. 

Our  late  lamented  friend  Kazi  Dawasam  J)up  has 
given  us  also  a classification  of  the  Vajrayana ; he 
divides  it  into  six  stages,  though,  of  course,  he  regarded 
the  different  divisions  as  pertaining  to  Mantr*vana.B 
The  aforesaid  divisions  are: — 

1 . Kriyatantrayana. 

2.  Carya(Upaya)tantrayaiia. 

3.  Yogatantrayana. 

4.  Mabayogatantrayaua. 

5.  Anuttaray-gatantrayaua. 

6.  Atiyogatantrayana. 

We  do  not  know  on  what  authority  this  dela- 
tion is  based  and  there  is  little  hope  of  knowing  y 
the  reverend  Kazi  is  now  no  more.  It  is  to  bej**ln t( 
out  in  this  connection  that  this  elaborate 
was  unknown  in  India  where  only  the  (jp/^riyatant 
(2)  Caryatantra,  (3)  Yogatantra  and  {fit  Anuttarayog 
tantra4  were  known.  These  four  ^ms  aro  mure 
less  frequently  met  with  in  Buck*1**8*'  Tantric  literatu 
and  as  such  they  make  $Uelr  appearance  in  the  Sadhan 
mala  also.  BeginnerX  and  initiates  into  the  iuysten 
of  Vajrayana  were,  of  course,  admitted  111  ^oue 
r&nks,  for  instance,  in  the  Kriyatantra  j/nere  stri 


1 JMnasiddki,  chapters  18,  19  and  20,  pp.  95ff.  /' 

ddvayapatfttiwt chapter  1,  p-  1.  / 

Vokrmm. tfWHnitarara (TEntric  texts),  intro.,  p /xxu 


lxvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


rules,  discipline,  and  celibacy  were  enjoined  on  them 
until  they  were  considered  fit  to  be  raised  to  the  higher 
class.  The  Yogatantra  appears  to  have  been  reserved 
for  those  who  were  considered  fit  to  come  in  contact  with 
the  Sa ktis,  while  the  Am.ttarayogins  belonged  to  the 
highest  class  and  were  immune  from  all  laws,  human  or 
divine  They  were  called  Siddhas  and  were  believed, 
to  be  in  possession  of  extraordinary  powers  of  working 
miracles  and/performing  prodigious  feats.  The  tradi- 
tional number  of  the  Siddhas  is  recognized  as  eighty- 
four  and  /hey  mostly  belonged  to  the  Pala  period  of 
Bengal  /fistory.1  The  Tibetans  are  supposed  to  have 
prese^/ed  a history  of  these  eighty-four  Siddhas  and 
this /as  been  translated  into  German  by  A.  Grunwedel 
published  as  Die  Geschichten  der  V ierundachtzig 
(Afahasiddhas)  in  the  Baessler  Archiv,  Band  V, 


(ni)  Mantras . 

The  Mantras  or  mystic  syllables  constitute  the 
bone  of  Tantric  worship  and  of  Vajrayana ; they 
of  innumerable  varieties,  such  as,  Blja,  Hrdava, 
alirdaya,  Puja,  Arghya,  Pu§pa,  Dhupa,  Dlpa,  Naive- 
ya>  Netra,  Sikha,  Astra,  Rak$a,  and  so  forth.  Thes" 
antru,  are  mostly  unmeaning  words  but  they  some- 
me8  disoose  distinctly  the  influence  of  a language  now 
aknown. 2 Tt  is  however  impossible  to  say  how  these 
[antras  were  lu^oduced  in  ancient  India;  the  Vedic 
ymns  were  indeed  called  Mantras  but  they  had  their 
Leaning.  But  these  Tanvcic  Mantras  are  in  most  cases 
leacingless  strings  of  words,  sometimes  giving  absolute- 
no  feense.  The  Vajrayanists,  of  course,  in  several 
stances,  attempted  to  trace  the  origin  of  certain  Man- 
as which  point  unmistakably  to  Buddha  himself  as 


Manual  >f.Buddhi*m,  p.  133.  \ 

Mantra  of  JWiguU  for  p^^ion  of 

::  §0%  * ...... 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixvii 


their  originator.1  The  Mantras  of  Vajrayana  seem  to 
be  a development  of  the  Dharanis  contained  in  the 
Vidyadharapitaka  to  which  a reference  has  been  given 
by  Hiuen  Thsang.  These  Dharanis  according  to  Kern 
existed  in  Buddhism  from  very  ancient  times.2  and 
seemed  to  have  been  introduced  into  Buddhism  for  the 
benefit  of  the  less  advanced  followers  who  did  not  care 
so  much  for  their  Nirvana  as  they  did  for  their  material 
prosperity  in  this  world.  Such  recruits  to  Buddhism 
were  enjoined  to  read  some  of  the  Sutras  which  how- 
ever proved  to  be  beyond  their  intelligence.  For  their 
benefit  these  had  to  be  shortened  into  Dharanis  and 
they  had  to  commit  them  to  memory.  This  seems  to 
be  the  process  in  which  the  Sutras  underwent  a change 
in  very  ancient  times,  and  ultimately  when  they  were 
further  reduced  they  gave  rise  to  Man  fra.  Take  for 
instance,  the  example  of  Asiasdhasrikd  Prajndparamita 
which  in  itself  is  too  stupendous  for  any  tolerably  learn- 
ed Buddhist  to  read  through  and  understand,  not  to 
speak  of  the  illiterate  mass  which  were  mostly  respons- 
ible for  the  great  popularity  of  Mahayana.  They  can- 
not indeed  read  this  vast  literature  for  acquiring  merit; 
for  them  something  shorter  was  necessary.  Prajnapar - 
amitd  with  its  eight  thousand  stanzas  was  therefore 
reduced  to  a hundred,  and,  ultimately,  to  a very  few 
stanzas  which  became  known  as  the  Prajnaparamita 
Hrdaya  Sutra  which  was  further  reduced  to  make  room 
for  the  Prajnaparamita  Dharani.  The  next  step  in  this 
chain  of  evolution  is  in  the  formation  of  a Prajnapar  a - 
mita  Mantra  which  makes  its  appearance  in  the  Sadhma - 
mala*  and  this  again  led  to  the  conception  of  her 
Bija  in  one  syllable  Pram  in  response  to  which  the 
Sunya  may  transform  itself  in  the  form  of  the  god- 

1 Cf.  p.  334  SFwftrilpg  i 

p-  w v*  < 


Ixviii  INTRODUCTION. 

dess  Prajnaparamita,  a veritable  metamorphosis  of  the 
Prajft&p&ramita  literature  The  origin  of  the  Tantric 
Mantra  thus  can  be  traced  through  the  successive  stages 
Of  the  Buddhist  literature;  when,  however,  we  turn  our 
attention  to  Hindu  literature  we  are  surprised  to  find 
that  the  Tantric  Mantras  suddenly  make  their  entry  in 
the  Hindu  Tantric  literature  without  showing  even  a 
faint  trace  of  the  earlier  and  crude  stages  of  development. 
To  our  mind  this  seems  to  be  a sufficient  reason  for 
believing  the  Hindu  Mantric  system  to  be  later  than 
the  Buddhist  Vajrayana  and  for  holding  that  they  were 
incorporated  into  Hinduism  bodily  from  Buddhism. 

Tn  the  Sadhanamala  the  sadhana  for  J&nguli  which 
is  in  the  form  of  a Sanglti  is  said  to  have  been  delivered 
by  Buddha  himself.1  In  the  sadhana  of  Vajrasarasvatl  it 
is  said  that  this  sadhana  has  been  composed  in  accordance 
with  the  instructions  of  the  Sugata.2  With  reference  to 
the  Mantra  Om  picu  picu  prajnavardhani  jvala  jvala 
mehamrdhani  dhiri  dhiri  buddhivardhani  svaha  the 
sadhana  says  that  this  Mantra  was  delivered  by  Buddha 
himself.3  The  famous  logician  Santarak^ita  and  his 
erudite  disciple  Kamalasila  both  of  whom  belonged  to 
the  eighth  century  are  of  opinion  that  the  Buddha 
instructed  the  people  in  the  Mantras,  Mandalas,  etc. 
so  that  they  might  obtain  prosperity  in  this  world.4 
From  these  facts  we  can  easily  maintain  that  Buddha 
introduced  some  sort  of  mysticism  into  his  religion  which, 
in  later  times  owing  to  a variety  of  influences,  developed 


1 See  p.  248£L 

« p.  334.-  | 

* p.335 : mtvm-  s vw  ywfay  wfawrhpfc  i 

4 TaMw*Hkgraha> p.  906 : | etc. 

adds: — . 


INTRODUCTION.  Jxjx 

a full  fledged  mystic  system  in  the  form  of 
Vajray&na. 

The  Vajrayanists  maintain  that  the  Mantras  are 
endowed  with  great  powers  and  blindly  believe  in 
them.  In  the  Sadhanamala , passages  showing  this  blind 
faith  on  their  part  are  too  frequent  and  eloquent.  In 
one  place  it  is  said:  What  is  there  impossible  for  the 
Mantras  to  perform  if  they  are  applied  according  to 
rules?  1 In  another  place  it  is  said  that  through  the 
repeated  mutterings  of  the  Mantra,  so  much  power  is 
generated  that  it  can  astonish  the  whole  world.2  The 
Mantras  by  their  power  can  even  confer  the  Buddha- 
hood  3 ; the  merits  that  accrue  from  the  mutterings  of  the 
Mantra  of  Mahakala  are  so  numerous  that  ail  the  Buddhas 
taken  together  cannot  count  them  even  if^they  were  to 
count  without  cessation  for  a number  of  days  and 
nights.4  The  five  greatest  sins  according  to  Buddhism 
are  the  five  Anantaryas  but  these  can  be  easily  washed 
away  and  perfection  can  be  gained  if  the  Mantra  of 
Lokanatha  is  repeated.5  By  the  repetition  of  the 
Mantra  of  Khasarpana  the  Buddhahood  becomes  as 
easy  of  access  as  the  Badaraka  fruit  on  the  palm  of  the 
hand  6 By  the  Dharani  of  Avalokitesvara  even  an  ass 
can  keep  three  hundred  stanzas  in  memory.7  The 
Mantra  of  Ekajata  is  said  to  be  so  powerful  that 
the  moment  it  is  muttered  a man  becomes  free  from 
danger,  he  is  always  followed  by  good  fortune  and  his 
enemies  are  all  destroyed  and  without  doubt  he  becomes 

1 p.  575 : fqur^rwr  inwrwt  i 

2 P 334:  wfk^in^frqari^  i 

8 p.  270:  mfrciwt  faw  i ^ 

4 p.  6uo : viyra  jmrcufqr  swn  *r  v* 

6 p.3i:  qfrfoaufof  ffrgfk  i 

* p«  TCiriflrs J*r  i 

7 p*  37 » winHf  i 


Ixx 


INTRODUCTION. 


as  pious  as  the  Buddha.1  Examples  of  this  kind 
easily  multiplied  from  the  SadhanamMa . Lest  the  people 
prove  doubting,  which  they  are  always  apt  to  do,  the 
S&dhanamdlft  gives  from  time  to  time  the  assurance 
that  the  power  of  the  mind  is  extraordinary  and  one 
should  not  doubt  what  is  said  about  the  efficacy  of  the 
Mantras.2 

It  is  said  that  the  Mantras  are  only  powerful  when 
they  are  applied  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  rules. 
The  rules  are  so  strict  and  minute,  and  so  numerous 
that  it  is  extremely  improbable  that  any  Mantra  is 
capable  of  being  applied  in  strict  conformity  to  rules,  and 
this  is  a factor  which  is  apt  to  discourage  enthusiasts 
and  new  recruits.  But  whether  the  Mantras  which  are 
not  recited  according  to  the  letter  of  the  rules,  but  in 
conformity  with  them  as  far  as  is  possible,  can  give  any 
results,  is  answered  in  the  Sadhanamala  probably  in  token 
of  encouragement  to  new-comers  and  enthusiasts.  “ You 
should  not  be  sorry,”  says  Kumudakaramati,  “ because 
you  are  not  able  to  apply  the  Mantra  in  accordance  with 
the  rules  stated  before.  At  least  you  should  perform 
the  rite  of  self-protection  and  thinking  of  the  closure  of 
the  boundary  (Slmabandhana)  and  of  worship  you  should 
repeat  the  Mantras  as  long  as  you  can  and  aim  at 
perfection.  In  accordance  with  your  powers  and  actions 
you  will  certainly  obtain  results.  The  testimony  of  the 
Tantras  in  this  connection  is  that  such  a worshipper  can 
alone  give  protection  to  the  world.8”  The  repetition  of 
the  Mantras,  however,  has  to  be  done  with  the  greatest 
care  and,  in  several  instances,  the  S&dhanamald  gives 

i p.  262 : fwr  wnrowg  vrrwv  I etc. 

1 ,s  i vw  wumsuwt  mm 

w ipinwTipm}  vrwftr^f  wmlfr  i 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxi 


directions  for  proper  repetition.  For  instance,  they 
should  not  be  recited  too  quickly,  nor  too  slowly.  The 
mind  at  the  time  of  recitation  should  be  free  from  all  bad 
thoughts  and  completely  concentrated  on  the  letters  of 
the  Mantra  which  should  be  repeated  so  long  as  there  is 
no  tired  feeling.1 2 

The  Mantras  are  considered  most  sacred  by  the 
Vajrayanists  and  the  accuracy  of  these  Mantras  were 
zealously  guarded  by  them,  in  much  the  same  way  as 
the  Vedic  Mantras,  by  means  of  several  devices.  These 
Mantras  are  composed  usually  in  ordinary  prose  but 
occasionally  in  an  enigmatic  language  the  meaning  of 
which  sometimes  becomes  very  difficult  to  understand. 
The  Mantras  are  done  into  prose  as  well  into  mnemo- 
nic verses  for  the  obvious  purpose  of-  memorising. 
These  verses  are  extremely  curious  and  give  practically 
no  meaning  to  ordinary  readers.  Let  us  take,  for  ins- 
tance, the  verse : 

*TT<^  TOWTOa:  TSfa  1 

ottw  irtw  ^ 2 n 

At  first  sight  it  gives  no  meaning  unless  you  know  that 
it  is  the  statement  of  a Mantra  done  into  verse  which 
when  translated  will  give  the  following  meaning.  “ In 
the  beginning  there  is  Cakradhara,  who  is  followed  by 
two  Picus  and  Vardhani  joined  with  Prajnct ; after  that 
are  two  Jvalas  which  are  followed  by  Vardhani  after 
Medha ; even  at  the  end  there  are  two  dhiris , Buddhi 
and  Vardhani  ending  in  Svaha.  This  Mantra  which  has 
power  to  confer  the  cleverness  of  a poet  was  introduced 
by  the  Sugata.” 

1 p.  10.  w p m wpnrwwftnr  wmwanfcni 

w wwfH  i 

2 p.  w. 


lxxii 


INTRODUCTION. 


Now  the  above  is  nothing  but  the  statement  of 
the  Mantra  of  Vajravinasarasvatl  which  runs  as : Om 
picu  picu  prajnavardhani  jvala  jvala  medhavardhani 
dhiri  dhiri  huddhivardhani  svaha. 

Another  example  of  a similar  nature  is  the  Blja- 
mantra  of  Sarasvati  which  is  stated  in  the  Sadhana - 
mala  as : 

arg  *f*^**i 1 g 

“ It  stands  on  the  second  syllable  of  the  seventh  ; and 
is  the  fourth  of  the  eighth,  it  is  accompained  by  the 
fourth  of  the  first  and  decorated  with  the  spot.”  The 
explanation  seems  to  be:  the  second  syllable  of  the 
seventh  class  (Antahstha)  is  R,  fourth  of  eighth  (U^ma) 
is  H,  fourth  of  the  first  (Svara)  is  I,  the  spot  is  M and 
therefore  the  resultant  Blja  is  HRlM,  (^f)  the  Bija  of 
SarasvatL 

Let  us  take  up  a third  interesting  example  of  this 
kind  where  the  Mantra  of  Ekajata  is  expressed  in 
mnemonic  verse 2 : — 

Tim  *cfUK«usi  y h 

inn  n 

fktiti  ssa  htwnh  i 

NRi  i 

■iwfw^wnsiii  fWtar  v&fn  i 

araW  g iprofci  qravifr  tort:  i 

Tm  i 

3*  wwnwm  b 

1 TPTT  fa>T  I 

1 p.  335.  2 p.  261f. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxiii 


g rejaw  R 

“It  ends  in  H placed  on  Fire,  is  pierced  b\  ee  fourth 
vowel  and  is  accompanied  by  the  head  of  a spm  rid  the 
half  moon.  This  first  Bija  is  a great  Biju.  Now  hear 
of  the  second  which  ends  in  T with  Fire,  is  . k reed  by 
the  same  and  is  accompanied  by  Nadabindv  i ho  third 
also  I state  carefully  which  ends  in  H tramp: log  on  the 
sixth  vowel  and  is  accompanied  by  Nadabindu.  This 
Bija  is  the  most  powerful  and  is  able  to  ,v.?i  the  three 
worlds  on  fire.  I state  now  as  was  done  before  by  the 
Buddha,  the  fourth  syllable  which  ends  in  PM  A and 
gives  all  kinds  of  perfections.  In  order  to  complete  the 
Mantra  hear  the  half  syllable  ending  in  T which  is 
devoid  of  A and  by  mere  utterance  saves  all.” 

The  first  Bija  consists  of  H,  R (fire),  I (fourth 
vowel),  H (spots)  and  M and  the  resultant  syllable  is 
H R I ]ft  H (j?f :).  The  second  Bija  includes  T,  R (fire), 
I and  ift  which  together  makes  TRIM  (^pf ).  The  third 
has  H,  U (sixth  vowel),  and  M,  which  together  give 
HUlft(f).  The  fourth  is  PHA  while  the  fifth  letter  is  T 
which  is  deprived  of  its  A and  therefore  considered  as  a 
half  letter.  The  last  two  will  give  PH  AT.  So  the  whole 
Mantra  stands  as  jfi  « *2  (Hrlms  Trirh  Hum  Phat). 

(iv)  Bodhicitta . 

The  Vajrayanist  conception  of  the  Bodhi  mind 
appears  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  Yogacara  School 
started  by  Asaftga  and  the  literature  of  which  included 
among  others  such  excellent  works  as  the  Tattva - 
sangraha  of  &antarak§ita.  The  human  mind,  or  as  it  is 
called  in  Buddhism,  the  Bodhi  mind  is  something  like  a 
continuous  stream  of  consciousness  which  changes  every 
moment,  the  consciousness  of  the  previous  moment 
givingrise  to  the  consciousness  of  the  succeeding  moment, 


lxxiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


the  first  being  the  cause  of  the  next.  This  chain  of  mo- 
mentary consciousness  is  without  a beginning,  or  at  best, 
its  starting  point  cannot  be  traced,  and  Buddhism,  more 
or  less,  is  not  so  much  concerned  with  the  beginnings 
of  things  as  it  is  with  the  future  or  the  emancipation 
o£  the  chain  of  Vijnana.  This  chain  of  momentary 
consciousness  operating  in  unison  with  the  all  powerful 
act-force  leads  the  chain  either  to  degradation  or  emanci- 
pation according  as  the  actions  done  are  good  or  bad.  The 
Bodhi  mind  is  by  nature  surcharged  with  bad  conforma- 
tions, memory,  desires,  etc.,  which  consequently  make 
it  impure.  To  purify  this  chain  of  Vijnana  there  should 
be  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  its  owner  to  remove  the 
many  impurities,  and  until  the  impurities  are  not  so 
removed  the  Bodhi  mind  will  be  subject  to  a series  of 
transmigrations,  not  neoessarily  in  the  world  of  men, 
but  in  one  of  the  numerous  heavens  if  the  actions  done 
are  good  or  in  the  world  of  animals,  ghosts,  etc.,  if  the 
actions  done  are  bad.1 

According  as  are  the  impurities  removed  one  after 
another  from  the  Bodhi  Mind  the  mind  commences  an 
upward  march  in  the  different  spiritual  spheres  named  by 
the  Mahayanists  as,  the  Bhumis,  and  stays  in  the  different 
spheres  only  so  long  as  he  is  not  qualified  enough  to  rise 
still  higher.  The  number  of  these  Bhumis  is  recognized 
generally  as  ten,  and  the  Sutra  which  describes  these 
ten  Bhumis  is  the  famous  DaSabhumikasutra  of  which 
we  have  just  got  a magnificient  edition  from  Dr.  J. 
Rahder.  The  Bhumis  are  named  on  page  5 of  this 
book,  and  their  names  are  Pramudita,  VimalS,  Pra- 
bhakari,  Arcifmatl,  Sudurjaya,  AbhimukhI,  Durafigama, 
Acala,  Sadhumati,  and  Dharmamedhya.  When  the 
Bodhi  Mind  obtains  emancipation,  or  in  other  words, 
when  it  crosses  the  ten  BhOmis  mentioned  above,  it  is 
rewarded  with  Omniscience.  Now  then  the  question 

IB.  Bfef&tftaharyyft : Foreword,  to  ffe  TattoasaAgraha,  p.  radar; 


INTRODUCTION, 


Ixxv 


arises  as  to  the  place  where  the  Omniscient  Bodhi  Mind 
can  reside  in  the  real  cosmological  structure  as  conceived 
originally  by  Buddha.  The  Bhumis,  it  may  be  remem- 
bered, were  not  meant  for  the  Hlnayanists  but  were 
exclusively  meant  for  the  Mahayanists  whose  followers 
went  by  the  name  of  the  Bodhisattva.  No  Buddhist 
will  be  called  a Bodhisattva  who  has  no  compassion 
for  suffering  humanity  or  who  will  not  be  prepared  to 
sacrifice  his  Nirvana,  even  though  entitled  to  it,  until  all 
the  creatures  of  the  universe  are  in  possession  of  the 
Bodhi  knowledge.  Thus  we  can  see  how  the  Sravaka 
and  Pratyekas  are  not  entitled  to  the  name  of  a 
Bodhisattva  which  also  accounts  for  their  being  called 
Hlnayanists  because  they  selfishly  look  forward  for 
their  own  benefit  and  are  not  at  all  moved  by  the  intense 
sufferings  of  other  less  advanced  brethren. 

The  Hlnayanists  before  obtaining  their  Nirvana,  have 
a place  in  the  world  structure,  but  their  individuality  is 
lost  when  they  actually  obtain  Nirvana.  They  have  not 
to  wait  for  the  emancipation  of  others  and  as  such  their 
continuing  to  hold  on  to  existence  is  not  at  ail  necessary. 
But  the  Bodhi  Mind  of  a Bodhisattva  is  entirely  different. 
Even  when  he  is  entitled  to  his  Nirvana  he  has  to 
continue  for  the  benefit  of  all  living  beings  and  work 
vigorously.  But  to  the  question,  where  do  they  live 
after  their  attainment  of  Omniscience  ? — a satisfactory 
answer  has  been  given  by  &antarak§ita  in  his  famous 
work  the  TaUvasangraha  where  he  says  : 

Akanisthapure  ramye  suddhavasavivarjile ! 

Buddhyante  yutra  samhuddha  nirmitastviha  Bud - 
dhyate  /! 

“ In  the  excellent  Akani^ha  heaven  which  leaves 
aside  the  Suddhav&sa  gods,  the  Bodhisattva  attains 
Ooroiaoietioe  and  (under  his  influence)  a Buddha  is 
Mmin  thubyrorid.” 


INTRODUCTION. 


Lwa 


K -■  i malasila  while  commenting  on  this  passage  says 
that  above  the  Akanistha  heaven  there  is  the  Makes  vara - 
hkavana  or  the  abode  of  Mahesvara  where  the  chain  of 
consciousness  of  the  compassionate  Bodhisattva  attains 
Omniscience. 

The  Vajrayanist  conception  and  definition  of  Bodhi- 
citta  is  in  accordance  with  the  tenets  of  the  Bodhisattva- 
yana,  and  was  first  promulgated  in  the  Gukyasamaja. 
According  to  this  authority  the  Bodhi  Mind  is  there 
where  voidness  and  compassion  work  in  unison.1 

At  this  stage  it  is  necessary  to  explain  the  concep- 
tion of  the  external  objects  from  the  viewpoint  of  Vajra- 
yana. In  the  eye  of  a Vajrayanist  the  external  world 
has  much  the  same  significance  as  it  appears  in 
Yogacara.  In  the  Sadhanamaia  also  there  is  ample 
evidence  to  show  how  the  external  world  is  treated  in  the 
philosophy  of  Vajrayana.  In  one  place  it  characterises 
the  external  world  with  its  movable  and  immovable 
objects  like  the  pot,  picture,  carriage,  house,  bouse  of 
statues,  mountains,  etc.,  as  reduced  by  reason  to  mere 
appearances  in  much  the  same  way  as  magic  and  dream 
are  considered  as  appearances.2  Therefore  the  Vajraya- 
nists  held  that  external  objects  have  no  more  reality  than 
magic,  mirage,  shadow  or  dream  and  that  their  reality 
could  not  be  proved  by  reason. 

(v)  Ahamham . 

A peculiar  feature  of  Vajrayana  worship  lies  in  its 
doctrine  of  Ahamkara  or  identification  of  the  Bodhicitta 

l p.  11 1 ‘UK. ted.  from  the  Gukyasamaja — 

See  also  Jfianatiddhi  p.  75  where  the  identical  iloka  is  also  quoted. 

* p.  1S0:  mi  sftwnmnf 

flrer**  miwmuvH,  ^nrfv  Snuwr  writ**  fai 

mn  r*te- 


INTRODUCTION. 


lxxvii 


with  the  deity  worshipped.  The  Sadhanamdla  explains 
this  doctrine  of  Ahamkara  clearly  in  several  places  and 
the  word  occurs  in  almost  every  Sadhana.  It  is  explain- 
ed as  “ I am  the  goddess  and  the  goddess  is  in  me.”  1 
After  Ahamkara  the  worshipper  should  conceive  himself 
as  the  deity  with  the  same  complexion,  form  and  limbs 
as  described  in  the  Sadhana  and  should  instead  of  wor- 
shipping any  external  object  worship  himself.  It  was 
suggested  elsewhere  that  this  identification  of  the 
worshipper  with  the  deity  worshipped  was  a new  feature 
introduced  by  the  Buddhists  into  Tantrism.  This  has 
met  with  a general  criticism  from  a number  of  noteworthy 
scholars  and  journalists  including  Dr.  A.  C.  Coomar- 
swami  of  Boston  and  Mr.  0.  C.  Ganguli  of  Calcutta.  It 
has  been  urged  that  in  view  of  the  great  antiquity  of  the 
Yoga  Philosophy  the  view  that  the  doctrine  of 
Ahamkara  is  a new  introduction  is  untenable.  To  this  it 
may  be  said  here  that  the  theory  of  the  absorption  of  the 
individual  self  with  the  Primordial  Matter  or  union  of 
the  self  w ith  a Personal  God  by  the  practice  of  Yoga, 
and  thereby  the  attainment  of  perfect  knowledge  and  the 
consequential  freedom  from  the  bondage  of  transmigra- 
tion, was  started  in  India  from  very  ancient  times,  and 
traces  of  it  can  be  found  in  the  Upanisads  of  very  great 
antiquity,  even  greater  than  that  of  the  Yoga  System. 
Nothing  therefore  can  be  said  to  be  a new  introduction. 
But  still  we  say,  for  instance,  that  the  Vedanta  doctrines 
originated  with  Sankara  though  previous  to  that  there 
was  a school  of  Aupani§ada  philosophers ; that  Sankara 
systematised  the  doctrine  of  Maya  though  Buddhists 
from  Nagarjuna’s  time  all  acknowledged  and  wrote 
about  the  same  doctrine  in  their  works.  When  it  is  said 
that  this  element  of  Ahamkara  was  introduced  by 

* Be*  WtoiUao*  p.  mi  WT  wrwflt  ywwxfom  ^ensHf 


■ - Ml  INTRODUCTION. 

Vaiuwaua  for  the  first  time  it  was  said  with  refewfe<»  to 
the  identification  of  the  worshipper  with  the  deity  who 
is  a transformation  of  the  great  Reality  known  as  Sanya 
not  only  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  emancipation  as  is 
found  in  Yoga  but  also  for  bewitching  women,  destroying 
men  and  their  dwelling  houses  and  even  for  the  extraction 
of  snake  poison  or  for  relieving  a woman  of  the  pains  of 
labour-  The  Ahamkara  in  fact  is  imperative  in  the 
Vajrayana  form  of  worship  and  this  introduction  is 
considered  to  be  new  in  view  of  the  multifarious  purposes 
i t was  called  upon  to  serve. 

In  some  of  the  HinduTantras  the  doctrine  of  identifi- 
cation or  Ahamkara  is  indeed  to  be  met  with,  and  this 
fact  gives  rise  to  the  controversy  as  to  which  Tantras, 
those  of  Hinduism  or  Buddhism,  are  older.  We  have 
sufficient  reasons  to  hold  that  the  Hindu  Tantras  were 
introduced  on  the  model  of  the  Buddhist  Tantras  and 
the  Hindus  among  other  things  borrowed  many  Buddhist 
customs,  practices,  deities,  and  Mantras.  The  very 
Kulacara  seems  to  have  been  originally  conceived  by 
the  Buddhists  and  probably  the  forefathers  of  a large 
number  of  Kaulas  to-day  were  direct  disciples  of 
Buddhists  in  the  Tantrik  Ag8. 

(vi)  Advaya . 

To  understand  the  significance  of  the  Vajrayanic 
conception  of  Advaya,  the  theory  of  Sunyata  and 
Karuna  will  first  have  to  be  taken  into  consideration. 
V’oidness  and  compassion  together  constitute  what  is 
called  the  Bodhicitta  or  the  Bodhi  Mind.  This  idea 
probably  for  the  first  time  makes  its  appearance  in  the 
' rihyasamaja.  The  mixing  up  of  the  two  elements 
Hunyata  and  Karuria  is  what  is  known  as  Advaya. 

, Tbe  ^finyata  as  conceived  by  the  Vajray&aista  ifc 

foeeibly  expressed  in  the  8&dkanamiUa,  f||§ 


INTRODUCTION . 


lxxix 


Here  it  is  mentioned  that  Silnyata  consists  in  thinking 
or  realizing  all  Dharmaa  (elements  or  objects)  as  transi- 
tory, momentary,  non-ego,  mistaken  (as  realities)  by  the 
mind,  similar  to  objects  seen  in  a dream  or  magic, 
endowed  with  a beginning  and  end,  and  natural  purity, 
non-existent,  unborn,  and  void  like  the  place  of  Ta- 
thata.1 

The  conception  of  Karuna  or  compassion  of  the 
Vajrayanists  finds  also  a lucid  expression  in  the  Sadhana - 
mala : Compassion  is  defined  as  the  determination  on 
the  part  of  the  Bodhisattva  to  lead  and  finally  to  place 
all  beings  in  Nirvana  including  beings  bom  from 
eggs,  uterus,  perspiration,  or  beings  endowed  with 
shoes  like  horses  (Aupapaduka)  or  endowed  with  a form 
or  formless,  or  endowed  with  consciousness  or  uncon- 
sciousness, or  beings  who  abide  neither  in  consciousness 
nor  unconsciousness.2  In  another  place  Karuna  is  ex- 
pressed as  a strong  determination  to  diffuse  right 
knowledge  among  the  people  who  owing  to  desire  (trsna) 
are  blinded  by  ignorance  and  cannot  realize  the  con- 
tinuous transmigration  as  caused  by  the  act  force,  in 
order  that  they  may  lead  a life  in  accordance  with  the 
law  of  Dependent  Origination.8 

The  commingling  of  Sunyata  with  Karuna  is  what 
is  designated  by  the  Vajrayanists  as  Advaya  and  it  is  a 
theory  which  is  very  important  for  understanding  the 
underlying  features  of  Vajrayana,  for,  on  this  alone,  the 
foundation  of  Sakti  worship  is  based.  The  Sadhana - 

i p.  m : 

*mnrr  srirfNvfbcnu  wt*t  wr 

Wnf:  etc. 

i p.  26 ; *W*TT%*  *TT 

WT  WT  vrfwt  WT  flfipfT  IT  «r 

rr  etc,  1 «wtt  sifii«iqf«i»nfT  i 

wrrarT 


lxxx 


INTRODUCTION. 


mdlSL  also  quite  clearly  explains  the  theory  by  charac- 
terizing the  effects  of  Advaya  by  means  of  a simile:  as 
copper  leaves  its  dirty  colour  (and  becomes  gold)  when 
it  comes  in  contact  with  the  magic  tincture,  similarly 
the  body  leaves  off  its  attachment,  hatred,  etc.,  when  it 
comes  in  contact  with  the  tincture  of  Advaya.1  This 
Advaya  is  a form  of  cognition  which  is  all  important  in 
Vajrayana  and  in  many  instances  the  craving  for  this 
knowledge  finds  expression  in  the  Sadhanamala . In  the 
same  way  as  other  ideas  were  deified  in  Vajrayana, 
Advaya  was  also  deified  and  wc  find  two  deities  Heruka 
and  Prajiia,  the  embodiments  of  Sunyata  and  Karuna. 
commingled  in  Advaya,  and  fused  together  in  embrace 
in  the  Yuganaddha  or  the  Yab-yum  form.  The  duality 
merges  into  one  even  as  salt  commingles  with  water. 

§6.  Aims  and  objects  of  the  Tantrics. 

The  Sadhanamala  is  a collection  of  S&dhanas.  The 
word  Sadhana  is  closely  connected  with  the  word 
Siddhi  and  the  Sadhana  is  a procedure  by  which  Siddhi 
or  perfection  can  be  obtained,  provided  the  directions 
therein  given  are  practised  with  patience  and  zeal.  The 
Hindus  generally  recognize  eight  Siddhis  though  occa- 
sionally eighteen  and  twenty-four  Siddhis  are  also 
acknowledged.  The  eight  Siddhis  are : Animd , Mahima , 
Laghima , Prapti , Prakamya , liitva , Vasitva,  Kamava- 
s&yitva. 

In  the  Brahmavaivarta  Purana 2 mention  is  made  of 
thirty-four  kinds  of  Siddhis,  including  the  eight  already 
cited.  Some  of  them  are:  Durairavana , Parak&ya- 
pravesa,  Manoyatitva , Sarvajhatva,  V ahnistambha,  Jalas - 
tambha,  Girajlvitva , Vayustambha , K§utpip&8(lnidr&8- 


i p.  82:  w faffcw  fir*  wni  iwraf  awfir  wm  yfotaFwrcgff  ft* 

* Ol  78,  St*  20-29. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxxi 


tambha , KayavyuhapraveSa,  Vaksiddha , Mrtanayana, 
Pranakarsana,  Pranad&na,  Indriyastambha,  and  Buddhis- 
tambha.  One  who  is  able  to  attain  by  a particular  pro- 
cess many  of  the  foregoing  powers  is  called  a Siddha- 
puru$a  “ Perfected  Man.”  In  the  mediaeval  times  it  is 
said  there  were  many  Siddhapuru$as  in  India,  and  the 
Buddhists  recognize  their  number  as  eighty-four.  Pic- 
tures of  these  are,  still  prepared  in  Nepal  and  Tibet 
and  they  are  even  now  venerated  in  these  countries. 

The  Siddhas  again  are  of  three  varieties  according 
to  Tantras&ra  : 1 TJttama , Madhyama , and  Adhama . The 
characteristics  of  each  class  are  also  given  in  the  same 
work  ; and  a Siddha,  for  instance,  will  be  recognized 
as  belonging  to  the  first  class  when  he  is  able  to  fulfil 
all  his  desires  by  mere  wish,  or  in  other  words,  as 
soon  as  a desire  arises  in  his  mind  that  very  moment  it 
is  fulfilled.  The  second  class  Siddha  is  able  to  conquer 
death,  commune  with  gods,  enter  unperceived  into  the 
bodies  and  homes  of  others,  move  in  the  air,  hear  the 
gods  talk  in  the  firmament,  understand  all  terrestrial 
truths,  obtain  conveyances,  ornaments,  etc.,  and  a long 
life,  bewitch  people,  perform  miracles,  remove  diseases 
by  a mere  glance,  extract  poison,  obtain  erudition  in 
the  Sastras,  renounce  all  wordly  enjoyments,  practise 
Yoga  in  all  the  eight  divisions,  show  compassion  to  all 
beings,  obtain  omniscience,  etc.,  etc.  The  third  or  the 
lowest  class  of  Siddha  obtains  : fame,  long  life,  convey- 
ances, ornaments,  familiarity  with  the  king,  popularity 
with  royal  personages  and  the  people,  power  of  bewit- 
ching, wealth  and  prosperity,  children  and  family. 

It  can  be  easily  seen  from  the  above  that  the  third 
class  of  Siddhas  were  never  designated  as  Siddhapuru$as ; 
those  were  attached  either  to  the  first  or  the  second 

1 ViHakota.  (Beogtti)  i arte.  <m  fa*  and  ffcfa  I 


lxxxii 


INTRODUCTION. 


olass.  In  all  Tantras,  Hindu  or  Buddhist,  general  direc- 
tions are  always  given  as  to  the  manner  of  obtaining 
Siddhi  by  muttering  the  mantras.  In  case  legitimate 
mattering  of  the  mantras  and  the  conformity  to  the 
regulations  do  not  bestow  the  desired  Siddhi,  the  Tan- 
tras also  give  directions  as  how  it  can  be  obtained  by 
seven  different  processes.1 

Having  thus  described  the  nature  of  the  Sadhakas 
or  Magicians  let  us  now  proceed  to  characterise  the 
different  Siddhis  or  perfections,  the  possession  of  one 
or  the  other  of  which  entitles  a man  to  be  called  a 
Siddha  or  a Magician.  The  word  Siddhi  may  be  defined 
as  the  attainment  of  superhuman  powers  of  the  mind, 
body  or  the  sense-organs.  The  Siddhi  is  generally 
known  to  be  of  five  varieties : 2 (1)  Janmaja . co-existent 
with  birth,  (2)  Ausadhija , due  to  some  drug,  (3)  Man - 
traja,  due  to  the  agency  of  magic  syllables,  (4)  Tapojci- 
due  to  austerities,  (5)  Samadhija , due  to  intense  medita- 
tion. The  mind  is  compared  to  a river  in  the  rainy 
season  with  all  the  exits  closed  except  one  through  which 
the  water  rushes  with  tremendous  vigour.  When  mind 
in  the  same  way  is  concentrated  on  one  particular 
thought  it  is  able  to  acquire  great  strength  which  we 
call  Siddhi  (Perfection). 

Siddhis  are  of  various  kinds  and  range  from  success 
in  love  affairs  to  the  attainment  of  the  highest  emanci- 
pation. But  the  Siddhis  with  which  we  are  concerned 
in  the  Sadhanamala  owe  their  origin  to  mantras  or 
magic  syllables.  If  we  examine  the  kind  of  Siddhis  for 

1 wftwi'-  WVWftWT:  I 
smuf  frefy  ira;  fWt  irtwy  « 

8tibdahslpadruma  from  Tantrae&ra : see  art.  on  fw  \ 

2 fwy.  1 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxxiii 


obtaining  which  the  Buddhists  of  the  Tantric  Age  busied 
themselves  in  muttering  mantras  and  executing  Tantric 
practices,  we  will  be  able  to  understand  the  aims  and 
objects  of  the  people  and  their  mentality.  Hence  a 
study  of  these  practices  is  not  considered  redundant  as 
it  is  capable  of  throwing  a flood  of  light  on  the  state 
of  Tantric  culture. 

In  the  Sadhanas  great  anxiety  is  shown  for 
averting  and  curing  diseases,1  and  for  the  extraction 
of  snake-poison.2  Next  in  importance  to  the  above 
desire  is  the  longing  for  acquiring  a knowledge  of  the 
Sastras  without  study  but  only  through  the  agency  of 
the  mantras . Another  characteristic  feature  of  the 
Sadhanas  is  presented  by  their  craving  for  the  Bodhi 
which  again  is  to  be  obtained  only  through  the  help  of 
the  mantras .8  Then  come  the  six  cruel  rites  and  the 
attainment  of  the  eight  great  perfections  {Astamahasid- 
dhayah).1.  Great  anxiety  is  also  shown  for  the  attain- 
ment of  Sarvajnatva,6  or  omniscience,  or  emancipation, 
or  the  position  of  a Buddha— all  signifying  one  and  the 
same  thing, — namely,  emancipation.  The  Tantric  Bud- 
dhists also  possessed  a great  desire  to  have  the  mighty 
Hindu  gods  as  their  servants,  whom  they  believed  to 
be  conquerable  by  mantras , and  willing  to  do  menial 
work  for  the  magician.6 


1 A good  example  of  thia  is  the  group  of  three  S&cLhanas  No.  17, 84,  and  312 
Expressions  like  the  following  are  very  common : I 

inrnjw  i 3*,  etc. 

1 All  the  Sldhanas  of  Jfihgull  and  some  of  fcurukulla  are  examples  of  this 

kind.  ^ 

t Of.  for  instanoe,  ywvfc  ftuiliWfW  I 

unftwyrct  a 

* As  in  Nos.  71, 144,  etc. 

* For  isstonee  in  8.  81. 

* *»!*■.  in.no. 


Jxxxiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  Tantric  Buddhists  also  believed  that  the  benign 
act  of  protection  could  be  granted  by  divine  agencies 
and  also  secured  by  mantras ,l  Curiously  enough,  the 
aid  of  the  mantras  was  widely  availed  of  by  the  Tfintric 
Buddhists  for  vanquishing  their  opponents  in  public 
discussions. 2 From  this  it  appears  clear  that  religious 
discussions  in  public  assemblies  were  very  common,  and 
victory  in  these  assemblies  was  eagerly  sought  by  all 
classes  of  people  including  the  Buddhists,  and  it  is  no 
wonder  that  gods  and  mantras  were  invented  in  order 
that  the  Sadhaka  may  easily  obtain  victory  in  learned 
discussions  without  being  qualified  for  it.  This  leads 
us  to  believe  in  the  stories  recorded  in  the  Pag  Sam 
Jon  Zan  that  in  public  assemblies  disputants  of  different 
religious  sects  used  to  assemble  and  take  part,  either 
staking  his  own  religion.  Thus  people  were  converted 
and  reconverted  to  different  religions.  A great  desire 
is  also  shown  for  performing  miracles3  probably  for 
creating  an  impression  on  the  public  mind.  In  spite 
of  acquiring  such  spiritual  powers,  however,  the  monks 
were  habituated  to  go  out  for  alms,  as  is  evident  from 
the  devices  invented  by  them,  which  miraculously  in- 
duced people  to  offer  alms  of  their  own  accord.4 

Their  conception  of  future  happiness  was  also  of  a 
strange  character.  In  one  of  the  Sadhapas  a wj^h  is 
expressed  for  a Siddhi  which  will  enable  the  worshipper 
to  remain  in  a state  of  rapture  in  the  company  of  num- 
berless Aos^rsas,  in  the  land  of  the  Vidyadkaras  where 


1 Cf.  S No.  206. 

2 cf.  s.  i5i— faro  i s.  155  vqfocfrr  ftnprflr 

i s.  218  VT^t;  s.  256  fh  vr*  fkmfwm; 

etc.  t 

3 8.  222-^Pf  wfa,  - sarwonrfff  I ..'IQKnW  *4^,  .TOWN? 
fRT  WWfk,  etc. 

* s.  235 -w*  faro  irm  ** 

fmur  vmm  rg%  if  i 


INTRODUCTION. 


lxxxv 


the  Lord  of  Heaven  will  hold  the  parasol  over  his  head, 
Brahma  acting  as  councillor,  Vemacitri  as,  the  army- 
commander,  Hari  as  the  gate-keeper,  and  the  naked  God 
Sankara  discoursing  on  the  different  virtues.1  The 
monks  usually  led  a poor  life  but  they  were  nevertheless 
anxious  for  wealth,  and  believed  that  wealth  could  be 
obtained  by  the  muttering  of  mantras  alone.  Jam- 
bhala,  the  God* of  Wealth,  was  created  by  them  and 
different  images  and  mantras  were  invented  and  a 
large  number  of  Sadhanas  were  devoted  to  his  wor- 
ship. These  and  similar  instances  are  evidence  of  the 
attraction  the  poor  monks  had  for  wealth.2 

The  Buddhists  also  acknowledged  the  eight  great 
Siddhis  though  they  were  somewhat  different  from  the 
eight  Siddhis  acknowledged  by  the  Hiridus.  With  the 
Buddhists  the  eight  Siddhis  are : (l)  Khadga,  (2)  Anjana, 
(3)  Padalepa,  (4)  Antardhana,  (5)  Rasa-Rasayana,  (6) 
Khecara,  (7)  Bhucara,  (8)  Patala.3  It  is  difficult  to  get 
an  explanation  of  the  nature  of  these  perfections  cor- 
rectly from  any  Buddhist  work.  But,  evidently,  the 
first  signifies  the  perfection  which  enables  a man  to 
conquer  a battle  with  the  help  of  a sword  on  which 
mantras  have  been  muttered.  The  second  evidently 
means*  the  magic  unguent  which  enables  the  wearer  to 
perceive  the  treasures  buried  under  earth  or  otherwise 
hidden  from  the  eyes.  The  third  refers  to  the  mysteri- 
ous ointment  which  when  applied  to  the  legs  enables 
a man  to  move  about  everywhere  without  his  body 

1 s.  260—  qfanp  gcgW  fasmfXWT*  TOUlJWyfW 

**  wwft  wrftr,  jtot  1 

. . wirmr$:  i etc. 

*£%  for  instance,  & 293— I' 

nm  g algo  8.  296— tfwffKW  I 

1 etc. 

3 p.  360— 


Ixxxvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


being  perceived  by  anybody.  The  fourth,  similarly,  refers 
to  the  mysterious  power  which  enables  a man  to  dis- 
appear miraculously  before  the  very  eyes  of  other  people. 
The  fifth  refers  probably  to  the  magic  solution  which 
turns  baser  metals  into  gold,  or  the  medicine  which 
gives  immunity  from  death.  The  sixth  is  the  power 
which  enables  one  to  move  in  the  firmament.  The 
seventh  gives  one  power  to  go  at  will  anywhere  in  this 
world  in  a moment,  and  the  eighth  refers  to  the  power 
of  going  to  the  nether  regions.  Such  feats  were  consi- 
dered superhuman  and  the  monks  of  the  Tantric  Age 
directed  their  attention  to  executing  such  superhuman 
feats  through  the  agency  of  the  mantras  which,  they 
thought,  develops  psychic  power. 

The  most  important  among  the  different  rites  of  the 
Tantrics  are  probably  what  are  known  as  the  Satkarma 
or  six  rites,  and  it  is  necessary  here  to  give  some  idea 
of  the  different  rites  with  which  the  old  monks  always 
busied  themselves.  These  six  rites  are:  &anti,  Vasl- 
karana,  Stambhana,  Vidve$ana,  Uccatana  and  Marana. 
The  first  rite  is  the  one  which  is  calculated  to  remove 
diseases  and  save  men  from  the  terrible  consequences 
of  evil  stars,  or  of  bad  actions  done  in  the  previous 
births.  The  second  Vasikarana  is  the  rite  which  when 
performed  gives  the  performer  the  power  to  bewitch  all 
other  men  or  women  or  even  animals  and  gods,  and  get 
work  done  by  them.  The  third  Stambhana  is  the  rite 
by  the  performance  of  which  power  is  conferred  on  the 
worshipper  for  stopping  all  actions  of  others,  and  even 
when  a cause  is  operating  to  stop  its  effect.  Thus  the 
burning  power  of  fire  can  be  stopped;  so  that  even  if 
the  fire  be  there  it  will  not  burn ; it  is  the  rite  by  which 
all  actions  of  human  beings  can  be  stopped  at  will. 
The  fourth  Vidve§apa  is  another  interesting  rite  which 
gives  the  power  to  separate  two  friends,  relatives,  lovers 
from  each  other  and  so  forth.  The  fifth  Uoe&iana  is  the 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxxvii 


rite  which  when  performed  gives  the  performer  special 
power  to  make  his  enemy  flee  from  the  country  with  all 
attendant  disgrace.  From  the  Sadhanamala  it  may  be 
inferred  that  Uccatana  was  employed  in  destroying  the 
dwelling  houses  of  enemies  by  incantations  of  mantras 
and  by  other  means.  The  sixth  is  Marana,  which  is 
perhaps  the  most  cruel  among  the  six  cruel  rites  of 
Tantrism.  This  consists  in  killing  enemies  by  means 
of  apparently  harmless  practices.1 

These  are  known  as  Satlcarma  and  it  is  said  that 
experienced  Tan  tries  get  results  immediately  these  rites 
are  performed.  It  is  nevertheless  difficult  for  ordinary 
laymen  to  obtain  any  successful  result  because  the  rites 
have  to  be  performed  in  accordance  with  Time,  Star, 
and  the  appropriate  gods  and  mantras  which  are  known 
only  to  specialists. 

The  mantras  are  of  primary  importance  in  all  cruel 
rites  and  no  less  than  six  methods  of  application  are 
generally  formulated: — 

(1)  Grathana  consists  of  reciting  mantras  on  each 
of  the  letters  of  the  name  of  the  medium  (Sadhya) — 
generally  required  in  Santi  or  protective  rites. 

(2)  Vidarhha  consists  in  writing  the  letters  of  the 
name  of  the  medium,  between  the  letters  of  the  Mantra 
used  mostly  in  Vaslkarana  or  bewitching. 

(3)  Samputa  consists  in  writing  the  mantra  in  the 
beginning  and  at  the  end  of  the  name  of  the  medium — 
mostly  required  in  Stambhana. 

(4)  Rodhana  consists  in  applying  the  mantra  in  the 
beginning,  middle  and  the  end  of  the  name  of  the 
medium — necessary  in  Vidve^ana. 

(5)  Yoga  consists  in  reciting  the  name  of  the  medium 
at  the  ead  of  the  mantra— -required  in  Uccatana. 


i Vidvakow,  article  on  I 


Ixxxviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


(6)  Pallava  consists  in  applying  the  mantra  at  the 
end  of  .the  name  of  the  medium,  and  this  is  required  in 
the  Marana  or  destructive  rite.1 

Many  more  technical  matters  of  absorbing  interest 
to  those  interested  in  Mysticism,  may  be  brought  in 
and  discussed  here,  but  want  of  space  prevents  us  from 
entering  into  the  subject  more  in  detail.  So  before 
closing  this  Section  it  is  necessary  to  give  a few  refer- 
ences to  the  text  of  the  Sadhanamala  itself  which  will 
provide  more  information  on  this  subject.  These 
observations  contained  in  the  Sadhanamala , are  of  special 
value  because  there  are  at  present  only  a few  people 
who  are  acquainted  with  the  purely  Tantric  doctrines 
and  practices  which  were  current  amongst  the  Buddhists 
in  the  Tantric  Age. 

If  page  368ff  of  the  Sadhanamala  on  the  Sadhana 
of  »Sukla  Kurukulla  is  referred  to,  it  will  be  seen  that  a 
number  of  general  rules  for  the  different  practices  have 
been  given  there.  Some  of  these  details  may  be  of  general 
interest.  For  instance,  the  Tantra  insists  that  the  men- 
tal condition  in  different  rites  should  be  different.  “ In 
Santi  the  mind  should  be  peaceful,  in  Pau§tika  it  should 
be  thriving,  in  Vaslkarana  it  should  display  anxiety, 
and  in  Marana  it  should  be  in  a greatly  troubled  state.”2 
“Santi  should  be  performed  on  the  first  day  of  the 
lunar  fortnight,  Pau$tika  on  the  full  Moon  day,  Abhi- 
cara  (Marana  on  the  14th  day  of  the  Moon  and  Vasi- 
karana  on  the  eighth  day.”:5  The  worshipper  should  sit 
with  his  face  Northwards  in  Santi,  Eastwards  in  Paus- 


i Ibid. 

TO  3 HTTO  n p.  368. 

a srfkTO  mfw  g ftfoiq  i 

*m\  TO*4f*  i p sea 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxxix 


trika,  Southwards  in  Abhicara  and  Westwards  in  the 
rites  of  attraction  and  Uccatana.”1  “Santi  should 
be  performed  in  Autumn,  Pau^tika  in  Hemanta  and  the- 
Abhicaras  in  the  Summer  season.”  2 “ Santi  slioulu 

be  performed  in  the  evening,  Paustika  in  early  morning, 
and  the  Abhicaras  in  the  noon  or  at  mid-night.” 3 

It  is  unnecessary  to  point  out  in  this  connection 
that  the  deity  worshipped  in  the  different  rites  may  be 
the  same,  but  the  same  deity  will  have  different  colours, 
weapons  and  forms  in  accordance  with  the  rules  guiding 
the  rites,  and  it  is  precisely  in  this  way  that  the  deities 
were  multiplied.  >J 

§ 7.  Authors  of  Sadhanas. 

Arranged  alphabetically . 

The  Sadhanas,  as  has  already  been  said,  are  short 
works  of  different  authors  where  the  procedure  for  wor- 
shipping Buddhist  gods  and  goddesses  are  given.  The 
Sadhanas  are  mostly  of  anonymous  authors,  but 
amongst  the  total  of  312  Sadhanas,  quite  a large 
number  of  names  of  authors  are  mentioned.  Out  of 
these  many  are  known  in  the  Tibetan  Tangyur,  but 
there  are  also  many  who  were  unknown  to  Tangyur. 
In  the  following  pages  attempts  have  been  made  to 
arrange  the  names  of  authors  alphabetically  (as  chrono- 
logical arrangement  is  fairly  impossible)  and  to  indicate 
their  literary  services  and,  if  possible,  to  give  their 
approximate  time. 

3 w v«r  3 ii 

g tot  « P 369. 

2 irrfans  3 tot  i 

f ^ *1W  R p.  369. 

8 TOjN  ^ffc*  TOT  I 

, tokt* wt  u p 369. 


xc 


INTRODUCTION. 


1.  Abkayakaragupta  (No*  295). 
cir.  A.D.  1084—1130* 

This  author  was  well-known  both  in  India  and 
Tibet.  He  was  well-versed  in  Tibetan  and  translated 
many  works  in  that  language.  He  hailed  from  Bengal, 
got  his  training  from  Magadha  and  made  himself 
famous  in  the  Vikramasila  Monastery.  Mr.  P.  N.  Bose 
in  his  Indian  Teachers  of  Buddhist  Universities 1 has 
given  good  ground  for  placing  him  in  the  reign  of 
Rama  Pala  of  Bengal  who  according  to  the  latest 
authorities  flourished  between  A.D.  1084-1130. 

Abhayakara  was  a great  writer  and  translator  into 
Tibetan,  and  the  following  list  from  Tangyur 2 will  show 
how  many  works  he  wrote  and  how  many  he  transla- 
ted : — 3 

T 1.  Kalacakravatara. 

2.  Sri  Cakrasamvaramahabhisamaya. 

\ 3.  Abhisekaprakarana. 

4.  Svadhisthanakramopadesa. 

5.  Cakrasamvarabhisamayopadesa. 

6.  Amnayamanjari,  a commentary  on  6rl  Sampu- 

tatantraraja. 

7.  Jnanadakinlsadhana. 

8.  Jnanadakimmantra. 

9 Abhayapaddhati,  a commentary  on  $ri  Buddha- 
kapalamahatantraraja. 

T 10.  Sri  MahakaJasadhana. 

T 11.  Sri  Mahakalantarasadhana. 

12.  Candraprabha,  a commentary  on  Pancakra- 

mamata. 

1 3.  Raktayamantakani$pannayoga. 

14.  Vajrayanapattimanjari. 

15.  Ga^acakravidhi. 

* p.  * Banddha  (Ian  ODoha,  npp.  p.  9. 

5 T indicates  books  composed  and  translated  by  him. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XC) 


16.  Vajravali  nama  Mandalopayika. 

17.  Ni§pannayogavali. 

18.  Jyotirmanjari  nama  Homopayika. 

In  Tangyur  he  is  sometimes  called  Pandit  a,  Maha- 
pandita,  Acaryya,  Siddha  and  Sthavira.  He  is  des- 
cribed in  the  Tangyur  as  a resident  of  Magadha, 

2.  Advayavajra  (Nos.  17,  217,  251). 
cir.  978-1030  A.D. 

, Advayavajra  popularly  known  as  Avadhutipa  is 
here  represented  as  the  author  of  three  Sadhanas:  for 
Simhanada,  Vajravarahl  and  Saptaksara,  but  curiously 
enough,  he  is  also  mentioned  in  one  of  the  Sadhanas 
(No.  128)  composed  by  Lalitagupta  who  "calls  himself  a 
disciple  of  Advayavajra.  We  have  no  means  to  as- 
certain whether  the  Advayavajra  mentioned  in  this 
latter  Sadhana  is  the  same  as  the  author  of  the  three 
Sadhanas  above  referred,  but  in  all  probability  the  two 
Advayavajras  seem  to  be  one  and  the  same  person. 
And  this  gives  a good  clue  to  fix  his  date  with  some 
reasonable  probability.  Now  the  Cambridge  MS  in 
which  the  Sadhana  of  Lalitagupta  has  been  found  is 
already  known  to  have  been  written  in  the  year  1165 
A.D.  We  can  thus  take  1100  A.D.  as  the  probable 
date  of  Lalitagupta,  and  Advayavajra  about  one  gene- 
ration earlier.  But.  as  Taranath  mentions  him  as  a 
contemporary  of  King  Mahlpala  the  Pala  King,  Dipaii- 
kara  the  great  reformer,  Naropa  and  several  others,  nis 
time  should  be  approximately  taken  to  be  the  time  of 
Mahlpala  who  reigned  between  A.D.,  978  to  1030. 
Advaya  wrote  a large  number  of  works  and  twentv- 
one  among  them  have  been  recovered  by  MM. 
Haraprasad  Shastri  in  original  Sanskrit,  and  these  short 
works  axe  now  published  in  the  Gaekwad’s  Oriental 
Series  {No;  ^ 


XCil 


INTRODUCTION. 


In  the  Tibetan  Tangvur’  Advayavajra  stands  as 
the  author  or  translator1  2 of  the  following  works. 

1.  Sri  Kalacakropadesa-sadangayogatantra-pan- 

jika. 

2.  Sapta  ksarasad  liana. 

3.  &ri  Cakrasain  varopadesa. 

4.  Sri  Cakrasain varaprati§fcha. 

5.  Sa  v va-r  th  asidd  h isadhan  a. 

6.  Vajravaralnsadhana, 

1.  Vajravfirahikalpasarvarthasadhana. 

8.  Vajrayoginfsukhottarasamvara  - nirnayasvar 

tkakamandala. 

9.  Hevajrasadhana. 

10.  Visuddhanidhi  nama  Hevajrasadhana. 

11.  Nairatmaprakasa. 

12.  Smahomavidhi. 

T 13.  Mahamayasadhana. 

14.  P^aktaikajatasadhana. 

15.  Sri  Mahakalastotra. 

16.  Namasangltyupasaiiiharavitarka. 

17.  Ai  v amanjusri-namasangititika  saropayika. 

18.  Ai  yajnanasattva-inanjusri-upayika. 

19.  Jnanasattvamanjusriupayika. 

20.  .!  natiasatt - vamanj  usri-vimalaratnamudravidhi. 

21.  vS  vabhavavasamantracaryadasaka. 

22.  Svapneksa. 

23.  Buddhabodhisamadhivisaghatadipa. 

2 4 . Jnanasat  t v am  an  j usr  isarasi  ddhi. 

25.  Kudrstinirghiita. 

26.  Kudrstinirghatacinta. 

27.  JSvapnanirdesa. 

28.  Mayanirukti. 

29.  Aprasahaprakasa. 

30.  Tattvadasaka. 


1 Bauddha  Gun,  app.  p.  3. 

2 T indicate  books  composed  and  translated  by  1 


INTRODUCTION. 


xciii 


3 1 . Yuganaddhaprakasa. 

32.  Mahasukhaprakasa. 

33.  Tattvaratnavalf. 

34.  Tattvaprakasa. 

35.  Pancatatkagatamudravivarana. 

36.  Sevakarthasangraha. 

37.  Samksiptasekaprakriya. 

38.  Pancasvabhava. 

39.  Prajnopayodayapancaka. 

40.  Dohanidhi  nama  Tattvopadesa. 

41.  Mahayanavimsati. 

42.  Amanasikara. 

43.  Tattvamakayanavimsati. 

44.  Dohako$apanjika. 

45.  Dohanidhikosaparipumagiti  nffrna  nijatattva- 

prakasatlka. 

46.  Dohakosahrdayarthagita  tlka. 

47.  Caturmudropadesa. 

48.  Sarvadkarmaprasalia-desaka-tattvartha-gatha- 

vrtti. 

49.  Abodkabodkaka. 

50.  Caturavajragltika. 

51.  Prajnarambhavadlii-parikatha. 

T 52.  Sevarthanirukti. 

53.  Jnanasattvamaiijusri  Adibuddha  nama  sadha- 

na. 

54.  Pindlkrtacaityasadhana. 

In  the  Tangyur  various  epithets  are  given  to  kirn, 
such  as,  Pandita,  Mahapandita,  Brabmana,  Acarya, 
Mahacarya,  Avadhuta,  Upadhyaya,  etc.  He  is  defi- 
nitely said  to  be  a Bengali. 

3.  Ajitomitra  (No.  55). 

Only  one  Sadhana  of  kis  is  recorded  in  the  Sadhana- 
n&Pk  It  is  devoted  to  the  worship  of  Arapacana,  a 
of  Ma£juj§rf,  but  the  verses  are  remarkable  by 


XC1V 


INTRODUCTION, 


reason  of  their  sweet  and  melodious  language  and  by 
their  artistic  adjustment  of  words.  The  following  works 
are  ascribed  to  him  in  the  Tibetan  Tangyur.1 

L Srlyaksabhratrdvayasadhana. 

2.  Sugatasasanaratnavohittha. 

3.  Arapacanasadhana. 

4.  Pratisthavidhi. 

The  epithets  given  to  him  in  the  Tangyur  are: 
Acarya,  Mahapandita,  Siddha,  and  Siddhacaryya.  His 
time  is  unknown  but  as  the  Sadhana  appears  in  the  MS 
Ab  the  time  of  the  author  may  be  taken  to  be  some- 
what earlier  than  the  12th  century. 

4.  Anupamaraksita  (Nos.  24,  98). 

This  writer  stands  as  an  author  of  the  two  most 
elaborate  Sadhanas  for  Khasarpana  and  Tara.  His 
Sadhanas  are  very  learned  and  informing  with  details  on 
the  different  doctrines  of  the  Vajrayana.  In  Tangyur2 
he  is  reputed  to  be  the  author  of  the  following  works: — 

1.  Sadangayoga. 

2.  Aryatarabhattarikasadhana. 

3.  Arya  Manjusri  namasaiigltivrtti. 

4.  Saraksacakradhi^t'hanaprsthopadesa. 

5.  Khasarpana-Lokesvara-vistara-sadhana. 

He  is  given  in  the  Tangyur  the  epithets  of  Sthavira, 
Siddha,  Mahapandita,  Upadhyaya,  Pandita  and  is  des- 
cribed as  an  Indian.  Nothing  definite  is  known  about 
his  time. 

5.  Asanga  (No.  159). 
eir.  270-350  A.D. 

In  Tangyur  he  is  mentioned  as  the  author  of  only  one 
work  Dharmakayasraya-Samanya-Qunastotra,  and  the 
titles  given  to  him  there  are  Acaryya  and  Arya.  In  the 
S&dhunam&la  he  stands  as  the  author  of  one  Sadhana  of 

* ha  Gim  0 Dchfi,  app.»  p.  3.  * Loq,  oil.,  app.,  p*. 


INTRODUCTION. 


rev 

Prajnaparamita  and  we  are  inclined  to  i< notify  this 
Asanga  with  the  famous  Asanga  the  grea  t expounder 
of  the  Yogacara  School  who  was  the  brother  of  the 
celebrated  monk  and  scholar  Vasubandhu  (A.D.  280 
360). 1 The  theory  that  all  deities  should  be  stamped 
with  the  miniature  of  the  parental  Dhyani  Buddha  was 
already  current  in  the  beginning  of  the  4th  century,  and 
by  that  time  the  theory  of  the  five  Dhyani  Buddhas 
as  presiding  over  the  five  Skandhas  was  also  well- 
established.2  This  shows  at  least  that  the  Sadhana  in 
question,  its  author  and  the  Guhyasarndja  where  the 
Dhyani  Buddha  theory  was  definitely  systematized, 
were  very  likely  contemporaneous. 

6.  Cintamani  Datta  (No.  47). 

From  the  materials  at  our  disposal  it  is  not  possible 
to  say  whether  this  author  is  unknown  in  Tangyur,  but 
so  far  it  has  not  been  possible  to  trace  him  in  Tangyur 
through  the  catalogues.  But  the  Sadhana  of  Vadirat 
composed  by  Cintamani  Datta  exhibits  his  aptitude  as  a 
poet.  He  has  introduced  a variety  of  metres  in  com 
posing  the  few  stanzas  he  devoted  to  the  Sadhana  of 
Vadirat.  From  all  this  it  is  evident  that  he  was  a poet 
of  no  mean  order. 

7.  Dharmakaramati  (Nos.  97,  210). 

The  name  of  this  author  likewise  could  not  be 
traced  in  the  catalogue  of  Tibetan  Tangyur.  He  stands 
as  the  author  of  two  Sadhanas,  one  of  Tara  and  the 
other  of  Dhvajagrakeyura.  One  colophon  characterises 
him  as  a Mahapandita  and  Sthavira,  while  the  other 
designates  him  as  a Pandita  and  as  Madhyamakaruchih 


1 T attvasamgraha,  Foreword,  p.  lxviii. 

2 Thin  is  evident  from  the  elaborate  PujQ  offered  to  all  the  five  Dhyani 
Buddhas  and  their  Sektia  and  the  manner  in  which  their  place  has  been  fixed 
m the  hierarchy* 


XCVI 


introduction. 


or  as  * one  who  believes  in  the  Madhyamaka  system  of 
Philosophy.5  It  is  not  correct,  therefore,  to  say  that 
the  Madhyamakas  or  the  earlier  Mahayanists  did  not 
believe  in  gods  and  goddesses,  and  at  least  we  find  one 
instance  here  where  a Madhyamaka  composes  Sad  lianas 
for  the  worship  of  Tantric  deities.  The  Vajrayanists 
must  have  included  in  their  folds  the  Mahayanists 
of  all  sorts. 

8.  Durjayacandra  (No.  250). 

He  is  reputed  to  be  the  author  of  a large  number 
of  works  and  the  following  among  others  are  mentioned 
in  Tibetan  Tangyur 1 : — 

1.  Dakinlvajrapanjarapancadaka-Sadhana. 

2.  Sadanganama-Sadhana. 

3.  Sarvabhutabali. 

4.  Nairatmadevipancadasastotra. 

5.  Saptak$arasadhana. 

6 Sricakrasamvarasadhana-Amrtak^ara. 

7.  Kaumudi  Hevajrapanjika. 

8.  Ratnacchata  nama  panjika. 

9.  Suparigraha  nama  Mandalopayikavidhi. 

10.  Nairatmasadhana. 

11  Mayavati  Mahamayatantrasya  Panjika. 

In  Tibetan  Tangyur  he  is  differently  styled  as  Acar- 
ya,  Pandita,  Mahacarya,  Mahapandita,  and  Vandya. . 
From  the  Sadhanamala  he  appears  to  be  a follower  of 
the,Heruka  cult,  and  of  the  Anuttarayoga  division. 
This  god  is  called  Vajradaka  and  Saptak^ara;  the 
latter  name  is  given  to  him  because  of  his  seven-syl- 
labled Mantra.  Saptaksara  is  here  associated  with  his 
Sakti  Vajravarahi  whose  form  and  weapons  are  the 
same  as  those  of  the  principal  deity. 


1 hoc.  oil.,  app.,  p.  46. 


iJNTJtlUJJUVyl  lUJM  . 


xcvu 


9.  Garbha  (No.  142). 

In  Tangyur  he  is  styled  as  Mahacarya  and  is  reputed 
to  be  the  author  of  only  one  work,  viz. : Vajrayana - 
mulapattitlkd.  But  in  the  Sadhanamala  he  appears  as 
an  author  of  the  Maricisadhana  which  is  in  accord- 
ance with  the  Kalpa . This  Marie!  is  tbrce-faced  and 
eight-armed,  which  is  by  far  the  most  common  type  of 
MarlcI  up  till  now  found.  Nothing  further  is  known 
about  the  author  or  his  time. 

10.  Gunakaragupta  (No.  272). 

This  author  is  called  in  Tangyur  both  as  Gunakara 
and  as  Gunakaragupta  and  the  following  works  are  as- 
cribed to  him  1 : — 

L Bodhicittavivarana. 

2.  Guhyasamajabhisamaya-nama-Sadhana. 

3.  &rl  Mahakala  Sadhana. 

4.  Mandalavidhi. 

He  is  styled  as  Upadhyaya,  Pandita,  Acarya,  Malia- 
carya,  Paindapatika  and  is*  definitely  said  to  be  an 
Indian. 

In  the  Sadhanamala  he  stands  as  the  author  of  a 
Sadhana  devoted  to  Raktayamari  and  in  the  colophon 
designates  himself  as  a Paindapatika  Bhiksu  which  is 
also  corroborated  by  Tangyur.  His  Sadhana  is  in  verse 
and  the  stanzas  are  written  in  a lucid  and  forceful  style. 
They  are  written  in  several  different  metres  and  show 
at  once  the  devotion  and  skill  of  the  author  in  compo- 
sition. 

11.  Harihara  (No.  53). 

He  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Tibetan  Tangyur  but 
in  the  Sadhanamala  his  name  stands  as  the  author  of  a 
very  short  and  solitary  Sadhana.  This  is  devoted 


i Ibid,  p.  41. 


INTRODUCTION. 


\eviii 

to  the  worship  of  Vadirat,  a form  of  Marijusri,  and  it 
contains  a verse  which  gives  the  Bijamantra  of  the 
deity  ( : ). 

12.  Indrabhuti 1 (No.  174). 

In  Tangyur  he  is  reputed  to  be  the  author  of  the 
following  works  ~ : — 

1.  &ri  Cakrasamvara-tantraraja-samvara-samuc- 

caya  nama  vrtti. 

2.  Sri  Cakrasamvara-stotra. 

3.  Cakrasamvaranubandha-samgraha. 

4 . Si  d d i i a - Vaj  ray  ogi  n Isa  d h a na . 

5.  Vajrayogml-mantratattva  - svadhisthana  - nir- 

desa. 

6.  Sukla-Vajrayoginisadhana. 

7.  DakinivajrapahjaramahatantrarajasyaPanjika 

Prathamapatalasukhabandha  nama. 

8.  Kulikamatatattvanirnaya. 

9.  Sri  Samputatilaka  nama  Yoginitantrarajasya 

tika  Smrtisandarsanaloka. 

10.  &ri  Anandapuspamala. 

1 1 . Sri  Tattvamrtopadesa. 

12.  Mahamaya  Sadhana. 

13.  Sri  Sarvabuddhasamayoga  nama  Tantrapan- 

jika. 

14.  Sri  Sarvabuddhasamayoga-Pakinljalasamva- 

ratantrarthatika . 

15.  Sarvabuddhasamayoga-ganavidhi. 

16.  Vajrasattvopayika. 

17.  &ri  Sarvabuddhasamayoga-  Dakinijalasamva- 

ramahatantraraja  nama  mandalopayika. 

18.  Jnanasiddhi  nama  Sadhanopayika.8 

19.  Sahajasiddhi. 

20.  Tattva^takadr^ti. 

1 For  hie  time  and  other  details  see  Supra,  § 4,  p.  U. 

2 Log,  til.,  app.,  p.  14. 

8 In  the  course  of  publication  in  the  Qaekwad's  Orient#  Smee, 


INTRODUCTION. 


XC1X 


r\ 

21.  Ratnacakrabhi^ekopadesa. 

22.  Arya  ManjusrI  namasaiigitivrtti. 

23.  Kurukulla  Sadhanam. 

He  is  styled  as  Mahacarya,  Odiyanasiddhi,  Acarya, 
Avadhuta,  etc.,  and  is  definitely  mentioned  as  the  king 
of  Uddiyana  or  Odiyana. 

13.  Kalyanagarbhci  (No.  242). 

His  name  is  not  mentioned  in  Tangyur,  bat  in  the 
Sadhanamala  he  stands  as  the  author  of  a Sadhana  of 
Heruka  of  the  two-armed  single  variety.  He  calls  him- 
self as  “one  who  is  afraid  of  being  too  elaborate.” 
Nothing  tangible  is  however  known  about  this  author. 

14.  Karuna  (Nos.  187,  303). 
cir.  753  A.D. 

This  author,  who  is  also  known  as  Karunacala,  seems 
to  be  an  author  of  considerable  parts,  but  none  of  his 
works  is  preserved  in  translation  in  Tibetan  Tangyur. 
Here  Karuna  stands  as  the  author  of  two  Sadhanas,  one 
of  Kurukulla  and  the  other  of  Mahakala.  He  was  a 
follower  of  the  Hevajratantra  and  he  twice  called  Lila- 
sani  or  Lllavajra  as  his  preceptor,  who,  as  has  already 
been  pointed  out,  flourished  about  A.D.  741.  If  Karuna, 
his  disciple,  is  taken  to  be  twelve  years  his  junior  then 
his  time  will  fall  somewhere  near  753  A.D. 

15.  Kokadatta  (No.  218). 

In  the  Tibetan  Tangyur  he  stands  as  the  author  of 
the  following  works 1 : — 

1.  Sukla  Vajravarahi  Sadhana. 

2.  Sri  Vajrayogini  manasagopya-homavidhi. 

3.  Sri  Vajrayoginyabhipretahomavidhi. 

Vajravarahipraj  nalokakrtyastotra. 

I ZtOCt  oit.,  app.,  p.  23. 


c 


INTRODUCTION. 


He  is  styled  as  Acarya  or  Mahacarya  and  was  also 
known  as  Konkanapada. 

In  the  Sadhanamala  he  stands  as  the  author  of  one 
single  Sadhana  which  is  devoted  to  the  worship  of 
Vajravarain  who  is  designated  as  Prajnaloka.  It  is 
rather  an  elaborate  Sadhana  where  instructions  are 
given  for  reciting  Mantras  while  sitting  on  a corpse.  The 
Mantra  of  Prajnaloka  according  to  him  is  so  powerful 
that  the  ‘ careless  repetition  of  the  same  only  two  lakh 
times  enabled  him  to  compose  the  Sadhana  even  though 
he  never  made  any  efforts  to  learn  the  Sastras.’ 1 This 
Sadhana  is  included  in  the  MS.  B which  shows  that  the 
author  cannot  be  later  than  1100  A.D.2 

16.  Krsimpada  (No.  181). 

In  Tangyur  the  following  works  are  attributed  to 

him3: — 

1.  Vajragiti. 

2.  Ganacakravidhi. 

3.  Krsnayamarismahomavidhi. 

4.  Sarvabhutabalividhi. 

5.  Hevajrasadhanatattvoddyotakara. 

6.  Arya-Dakinivajrapahjara  naina  Mahatantra- 

ra j a-kaipam  ukhaband  ha. 

7.  Stupa  vidhi. 

8.  Mrtyuvidhi. 

9.  Guhyapativajrapani-Sadhana. 

10 . G uhy  apat  i v a j ra-Sadhan  a. 

1 1 . Ki^nayamar  ibuddhasadhana . 

12.  Dharmakayadlpavidhi. 

1 cf.  p.  431— RNrfr  f*rf%rwreT  w fir?* 

xi  i 

2 If,  however,  this  Konkana  is  identified  with  Kahkana  of  the  school  of 
Kambala  who  in  collaboration  with  Padmavajra  (in  693  A.D.)  introduced  the 
Hevajratantra,  Kokadatta’s  time  will  fall  somewhere  in  the  beginning  of  the 
gth  century.  Cordier,  op.  eit,  p.  231. 

2 Loc.  tit.,  app.,  p.  23. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Cl 


In  Tangyur  a large  number  of  Krsnas  are  men- 
tioned, and  it  is  very  difficult  to  distinguish  one  from 
the  other.  The  works  above  stated  are  definitely  as- 
cribed to  Kr^napada  and  not  to  Kr$na,  Kahnu,  or 
Kr$navajra.  This  author  is  styled  as  Acarya,  Maha- 
carya,  Mahapandita  and  Yogi. 

In  the  Sadhanamala  he  stands  as  the  author  of  a 
Sadhana  of  Kurukulla  who  is  described  as  six -armed 
and  decked  in  ornaments  of  snakes.  The  author  in  the 
colophon  further  gives  the  information  that  the  Sadhana 
has  been  taken  from  the  Mayajala  Tantra  which  ex- 
tends to  sixteen  thousand  granthas.  The  Sadhana  also 
gives  some  directions  for  the  extraction  of  snake-poison. 


17.  &ri  Krsnaraja. 
cir.  717  A.  D. 

Krsnaraja  is  mentioned  in  S.  161  and  is  there  stated 
as  having  introduced  the  goddess  Vajrasarasvati  in  the 
Kr§nayamari  Tantra . It  is  very  difficult  to  say  which 
Kr§na  among  the  many  mentioned  in  the  Tangyur  really 
composed  this  work  and  what  other  works  are  ascribed 
to  him.  But  he  seems  to  be  different  from  the  Kr$na  who 
composed  the  Kurukulla  Sadhana  because  the  latter 
appears  to  be  only  an  humble  follower  of  the  Krsnaya - 
mart  Tantra . The  Krsnayamaritantra  was  introduced 
according  to  Taranath  by  Lalitavajra  who  was  a contem- 
porary of  Padmavajra  (693  A.D.).  Krgnacarya  (717 
A.D.)  who  also  introduced  the  Samputatilaka  Tantra 
might  have  introduced  the  worship  of  Vajrasarasvati, 
and  we  are  tempted  to  take  this  K^naraja  as  identical 
with  Kys^acarya.1 


* See  Supra  { 4 p.  liii. 


INTRODUCTION. 


cii 


18.  Kukkuripada  (No.  240). 
cir,  693  A.D. 

In  Tangyur  he  is  also  known  as  Acaryya,  Kukuraja 
or  Kukkuraraja  and  a larger  number  of  works  are  attri- 
buted to  him.  The  following  works  are  said  to  have 
been  composed  by  him.1 

1 . Sri  Vajrasattva-guhyartha-dharavyuha. 

2.  Sri  Vajraheruka-guhyarthadharavyuha. 

3.  Sri  Padmanarttesvara-guhyarthadharavyuha. 

4.  Sr!  Vajraratnaprabha-guhyarthadharavyuha. 

5.  Sri  Sugliotalalita-guhyarthadharavyuha. 

6.  Sarvamandalanusarena  pancavidhi. 

7.  Sri  Sarvabuddha-samayoga-mandalavidhi. 

8.  MahamayatantranusarinI  Herukasadhanopay- 

ika. 

9.  Vajrasattvasadhana. 

10.  Mohataruna-Kalpa. 

11.  Mahamaya  sadhana  mandala  vidhi. 

12.  Sri  Mahamaya  mandala  deva  stotra. 

13.  Sri  Mahamayatattvasukhabhavananusari  Yo- 

gabhavanopadesa. 

14.  Sravaparicchedana. 

In  the  Sadhanamala , he  stands  as  the  author  of  the 
Mahamayasadhana  where  Mahamaya  represents  Heruka 
in  the  embrace  of  BuddhadakinI  as  four-armed  and 
four-faced  and  surrounded  by  four  Yoginis.  In  this 
Sadhana  the  word  Heruka  is  analysed,  dissected  and  each 
particle  thereof  explained.  It  contains  also  one  song  in 
Vernacular  which  is  very  probably  Bengali.  Some  of 
his  songs  are  also  recorded  in  the  Bauddha  Gan  0 Doha . 

According  to  Taranath  he  introduced  the  Maha- 
mayatantra  and  was  a contemporary  of  Kambalapada, 
Padmavajra  and  Lalitavajra.  We  have  already  shown 


1 hoc.  rAt,,  app.  1811. 


INTRODUCTION. 


ciii 

that  Padmavajra  flourished  in  cir . A.D.  693  and  there- 
fore the  time  of  Kukkuri  also  should  be  placed  some- 
where near. 

19.  Kula  [datta]  (No.  154). 
cir.  A.D.  1100. 

He  is  the  son  of  Sanghadatta  and  in  the  Tangyur, 
where  he  is  styled  as  Acarya  and  Mahapandita,  only 
one  work  entitled  Kriyasamgraha  is  ascribed  to  him.  1 

In  the  Sadhanamald  he  also  calls  himself  as  the  son 
of  Sanghadatta,  and  stands  as  the  author  of  a Sadhana 
devoted  to  the  worship  of  Prajnaparamita — a deifica- 
tion of  the  Prajnaparamita  literature.  As  this  Sadhana 
is  found  in  the  MS.  B which  bears  a date  correspond- 
ing to  A.D.  1165  his  time  cannot  be  latef  than  A.D.  1100. 

20.  Kumarakaragupta  (No.  293), 

His  name  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Tangyur,  but  lie 
stands  in  the  Sadhanamald  as  the  author  of  a parti- 
cularly interesting  Sadhana  in  verse  devoted  to  the  wor- 
ship of  Ucchusma  Jambhala,  a fierce  form  of  the  Bud- 
hist  God  of  Wealth,  Jambhala.  This  Sadhana  also  des- 
cribes the  Mantra  of  the  god  in  three  stanzas.  The 
author  calls  himself  as  a Pandita  and  Sthavira,  but 
nothing  else  unfortunately  is  known  about  him. 

21.  Kumudakaramati  (No.  1). 

In  the  Tangyur 2 he  is  styled  as  Mahapandita  and 
is  credited  with  only  one  Sadhana  namely  the  one  which 
heads  the  list  in  the  Sadhanamald.  The  Sadhana  com- 
posed by  Kumudakaramati  is  a pretty  long  one  and  is 
taken  from  the  Trisamayarajatantra.  It  serves  more  or 
less  as  an  introduction  to  the  whole  book  because  of  its 
treating  many  preliminary  and  elementary  subjects  in- 
cluding descriptions  of  a number  of  Mudras  and  their 


1 Cordier : op.  oit.  p.  20C. 


2 Ibid,  p.  371. 


CIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


Mantras.  From  an  obscure  reference  on  p.  13 1 it  ap- 
pears very  probable  that  Trisamayaraja  was  only  an- 
other name  of  Amoghasiddhi  one  of  the  five  Dhyani 
Buddhas.  This  same  Sadhana  holds  out  some  hope 
to  the  beginners  where  the  author  confidently  declares 
that  in  accordance  with  the  intensity  of  concentration, 
some  amount  of  psychic  culture  is  bound  to  follow.2 

22.  Lalitagupta  (No.  128). 

cir.  A.D.  1050. 

He  calls  himself  a direct  disciple  of  Advayavajra 
and  in  the  Tangyur 2 he  is  credited  with  only  one  work, 
the  same  in  fact,  which  appears  in  the  Sadhanamala. 

This  Sadhana  is  devoted  to  a peculiar  form  of  Eka- 
jata  with  two  arms  carrying  the  rosary  in  the  right  and 
the  blue  lotus  in  the  left.  The  goddess  is  an  emanation 
of  the  Dhyani  Buddha  Ak^obhya  and  naturally  presents 
a very  fierce  appearance.  This  Sadhana  is  found  only 
in  the  MS.  B which  bears  a date  corresponding  to  A.D. 
1165,  and,  therefore,  the  time  of  Lalitagupta  should 
not  be  taken  as  later  than  A.D.  1100.  But  it  will  be 
more  reasonable  to  place  him  approximately  in  A.D. 
1050  as  Advayavajra  belonged  to  circa  A.D.  978-1030. 4 

23.  Mahgalasena  (No.  273). 

Though  the  name  of  this  author  cannot  be  traced 
in  the  Tangyur  catalogue,  he  stands  in  the  Sadhanamala 
as  an  author  of  a Sadhana  of  Krsnayamari.  He  has 
employed  a variety  of  metres  in  the  composition  of  the 
Sadhana  which  is  almost  wholly  written  in  verse  except 
for  the  Mantras.  In  this  Sadhana  Yamari  is  associated 
closely  with  Manjusri  to  whom  a panegyric  is  addressed. 


1 IX  13  I 2 See  p.  13. 

* Cordier,  op.  cit„  p.  122.  4 Supra,  p.  xci. 


INTRODUCTION, 


CV 


It  also  contains  another  Stotra  for  the  five  D . mj 
Buddhas.  Nothing  else  is  known  about  him  or  his  time. 

24.  Manor atha  Raksita  (No.  164', 

This  name  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Tibetan  Tang- 
yur,  but  he  stands  as  an  author  of  a Sadhana  of 
Vajrasarasvati  written  wholly  in  verse.  The  author 
seems  to  be  a follower  of  the  Avalokitesvara  cult,  and 
did  not  belong  to  the  higher  strata  of  Vajrayana,  as  we 
understand  from  his  advocacy  of  Brahmacarya  “celi- 
bacy” and  discouragement  of  drinking  habits.  He 
shows  himself  a firm  believer  in  the  efficacy  of  the 
Mantra  as  is  evident  from  the  line  : — 

25.  ManjughomT 

His  name  is  mentioned  in  S.  28  and  the  way  in 
which  the  reference  is  given  clearly  shows  that  Manju- 
gho§a  represented  the  author’s  Guru  and  not  the  god 
Manjusrl.  In  the  Tibetan  Tangyur  we  find  an  author 
of  the  same  name  to  whom  the  undernoted  works  are 
ascribed 1 : — 

1.  Samadhibhatsatika. 

2.  Aryaparimitayurjnana  sadhana. 

He  is  styled  as  Upadhyaya,  and  Pandita  and  is  des- 
cribed as  an  Indian.  This  author  should  be  distin- 
guished from  the  author  Manjughosaklrti  who  wrote  a 
work  on  Grammar.2  Our  Manjughosa,  however,  is  the' 
Guru  of  Prajnapalita  who  composed  a Sadhana  of  Hala- 
hala  Lokesvara. 

26.  Muktaka  (Nos.  45,  56,  172). 
cir.  1 100  A.D. 

His  other  "name  appears  to  be  Padmakara  as  can 
be  understood  by  a reference  to  the  Sadhana  No.  06. 


i hoc.  cit.,  app.  p.  64. 


2 Cordier  op.  cit.,  p.  20. 


CVi 


INTRODUCTION. 


Muktaka  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Tibetan  Tangyur  but 
to  Padmakara  the  following  original  works  and  transla- 
tions are  attributed1:— 

1.  Aryanilambaradhara  YTajrapa$i  Sadhanopayi- 

ka  Tika. 

2.  Guhyapatrika 

3.  Vajravidarani  nama  dharani  vyakhyana  Vajra- 

loka  nama. 

4 Alimanmatha  Sadhana. 

T 5.  Hevajratantradvikalapatika. 

T 6.  Tattvapradipa  nama  Vajrapani  sarvasadhana 
nispannalankara. 

T 7.  Sugatapahcatrimsat  stotra  nama  ratnamala. 

He  is  styled  as  Aearya,  Mahacarya,  Mahopadhyaya, 
Pandita  and  Upadhyaya.  His  Sadhanas  in  the  Sadha- 
namala  are  to  be  found  in  the  MS.  B and,  therefore,  the 
time  of  Muktaka  cannot  be  later  than  A.D.  1100. 

Out  of  the  three  Sadhanas  included  in  the  present 
work,  one  is  for  Sthiracakra,  the  second  is  for  Arapa- 
cana  and  the  third  for  Tarodbhava  Kurukulla. 

27.  Nagarjuna , (Nos.  96,  127). 
cir.  645  A.D. 

Though  the  Sadhanamala  only  records  two  Sadha- 
nas of  Nagarjuna  he  must  be  regarded  as  a prolific 
writer  of  Sadhanas  and  other  Tantric  works,  and  the 
Tibetan  Tangyur  records  a large  number  of  works  com- 
posed by  him.  A list  of  his  works  is  given  below  2 : — 

1.  Mantralahkarasadhana. 

2.  Kak$aputa. 

3.  Pindikrtasadhana. 

4.  Sri  Guhyasamajamandalavidhi. 

5.  Sekacaturaprakarana. 


1 Loo,  cit.y  app.  p.  32.  T represents  works  translated  by  the  author, 

2 See  loc.  cit,  app.  p.  49. 


INTRODUCTION.  cvj, 

6.  Bodhicittavivarana. 

7.  Paiieakrama. 

8.  Aryanllambaradhara  Vajrapnnisarva  m.-nidaia 

nispannavidhi. 

9.  Svabhavasiddhyupadesa. 

10-  Vajrayanasthulapatti. 

1 1 . Prajnaparam itahrdaya  aadh ana. 

12.  Aryanllambaradhara-  Ynj  rapan  ikal  pa  n an , , 

dharani  tika. 

13.  Lokesvara  sadhana. 

14.  Nilambaropasiddhi. 

15.  V a j rapanima  ndal  a v i d h i . 

16.  Hayagrlvasadhana. 

17.  Dharmadhatu  Stotra. 

18.  Nirupamastava. 

19.  Lokatita  stava. 

20.  Cittavajra  Stava. 

21.  Paramartha  Stava. 

22.  Kalatraya  Stotra 

23.  Sattvaradhana  stava. 

24.  Prajnaparamita  stotra. 

25.  Aointyastava. 

26.  Stutyatitastava. 

27.  Niruttarastava 

28.  Arya-Manjusn-Bhattaraka-paramartlua-stuti. 

29.  Arya-Mahjusribhattaraka  karuna  Stotra. 

30.  A§tamahasthana-caitya-stotra. 

31.  Dvadasakaranyayastotra. 

32.  Vandanastotra. 

33.  Narakoddhara. 

34.  Samadhiblia§atika. 

35.  Mahakarunika  Arya-tara  sadhana  man va, bln- 

samaya. 

36.  Saprajfia-Sri-Mahakala-sadhana. 

37.  6n-Mahakalasya  stotra  a^tamantra. 

38.  Sri  Mahakalasya  stotra-pada^aka. 


cviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


39.  Bodhicitta-Vivarana. 

40.  Aryasahasrabhujavalokitesvara  sadhana. 

41.  Arya  Lokesvara  sadaksara  sadhana. 

42.  Saptanga  sadhana. 

43.  Arya  Pratisara,  Mahavidya-cakranibandhana. 

44.  Vajramahakala§taka  stotra. 

45.  Sri  Guhyasamaja  tantrasya  Tantratika. 

46.  Sri  Guhyasamajamahayogatantrotpatti-Kra- 

ma-sadhana-sutra-melapaka. 

47.  Kalyana-Kamadhenu. 

48.  Tarasadhana. 

49.  Tarasadhana-samksepa. 

50.  Sri  Mahakala-sadhana. 

51.  Krodhavajra  Candadeva-panea  nama  mandala- 

vidhi. 

52.  Vajrapani  margastaka. 

53.  Tattvapradipa  nama  vajrapani  sarva-sadhana- 

ni^pannalankara. 

54.  Prati^thapanalahkara. 

55.  Prayascittamrta. 

56.  Sri  Mahakalasya  stotra  Bhavasancara. 

57.  Vajrapavitra-Karmasambhara. 

58.  A^tadasa-pa  tala- vistar  a-  vyakhya, 

59.  Manjusrl-prajna-vardhana. 

He  is  styled  as  Acarya,  Mahacarya,  Arya,  Bhik$u, 
and  Bhattaraka. 

Out  of  the  two  Sadhanas  composed  by  him  one  is 
devoted  to  the  worship  of  Vajratara  who  exhibits  the 
Varada  Mudra  in  the  right  hand  and  the  Utpala  in  the 
left,  and  sits  in  the  Vajraparyanka  attitude.  The 
second  is  devoted  to  Ekajata  and  according  to  a state- 
ment in  the  colophon  the  Sadhana  was  restored  from 
Bho$a  country  by  Nagarjuna.1 

* » For  other  detail*  au  Supra,  p. 


INTRODUCTION. 


cix 


28.  Padmavardhana , (No.  155.) 

This  author  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Tibetan  Tangyur 
but  his  name  stands  in  the  Sadhanamala  as  an  author 
of  a sadhana  of  Prajnaparamita,  who  ‘ when  manifested 
makes  the  lotus  face  of  the  disputant  (in  discussion) 
sleep  in  peace.’1  Nothing  else  is  known  of  this  author. 

29.  Padmakaramati , (No.  14). 

The  name  of  Prajnakaramati  appears  in  the  Tibetan 
Tangyur  where  only  one  sadhana  is  attributed  to  him.2 
In  the  Sadhanamala  he  stands  as  the  author  of  one 
sadhana  only,  and  the  Tangyur  sadhana  is  very  pro- 
bably the  translation  of  the  same  thing. 

The  sadhana  refers  to  the  worship  of  Khasarpana, 
a form  of  Lokesvara  who  is  accompanied  by  four 
deities:  Sudhanakumara,  Hayagrlva,  Tara  and  Bhrkuti. 


30.  Prahhakarakirti , (No.  85). 

A.D.  1100. 

Prabhakarakirti’s  name  is  mentioned  in  the  Tibetan 
Tangyur  and  only  one  sadhana  is  attributed  to  him. { 
In  the  Sadhanamala  also  one  sadhana  is  attributed  to 
him.  The  latter  seems  to  be  the  Sanskrit  original  and 
the  former  represents  its  Tibetan  translation. 

This  sadhana  refers  to  the  ritual  of  Candamaharo- 
§ana,  and  gives  directions  for  the  application  of  the 
mantra  in  different  functions.  The  sadhana  appears  in 
MS.  B and  therefore,  the  time  of  Prabhakarakirti  can- 
not be  later  than  A.D.  1100. 


Cordier  i op.  oit  p.  373. 


# Ibidp.  m 


CX  INTRODUCTION. 

3L  Prajnapalita.  (No.  28.) 

This  author  wrote  a large  number  of  sadhanas  and 
the  following  among  others  are  preserved  in  translations 
in  the  Tibetan  Tangyur J : — 

1.  Raktayamari  karraavali  sadhana  cintamani. 

2.  Ratipriya  sadhana. 

3.  Yaksa  natanatl  sadhana. 

4.  Yaksim  parthivi  lak$ml  sadhana. 

5.  Yaksa  Nandikara  sadhana. 

6.  Yaksaraja  Kilikila  sadhana, 

7.  Pidana  mahayaksasenapati  sadhana. 

8.  Sri  Candradevi  nama  sadhana. 

9.  KundaladharinI  Harltl  sadhana. 

10.  Ratnamala. 

11.  Nagi  sadhana. 

12.  Nagi  Vasupalamukhi  sadhana. 

1 3.  Nagyaphunamopaya. 

14.  Manohari  sadhana. 

15.  Subhaga  sadhana. 
lb.  Visalanetri  sadhana. 

17.  Ratiraga  sadhana. 

18.  Aparajita  nama  sadhana. 

19.  Adhijayajita  sadhana. 

20.  Purnabhadra  sadhana. 

21.  Bhutisundari  sadhana. 

22.  Sri  Jayasundarl  sadhana 

23.  Vimalasundari  sadhana. 

24.  Pisaca  Pilupala  sadhana. 

25.  Pisaca  Munidhara  sadhana. 

26.  Kr$na  pisaca  sadhana. 

27.  Pisaca  Kr^nasara  sadhana. 

28.  Pisacihana  sadhana. 

29.  Aluka  nama  sadhana. 

30.  Alagupta  nama  sadhana. 


1 loc.  cit,  app.  p.  55. 


INTRODUCTION. 


OKI 

31.  Kharamukhi  sadhana. 

32.  Alumbini  pisaci  sadhana. 

33.  Ucchusma  narna  sadhana. 

34.  K^uksusri  kundali  sadhana. 

35.  Pisaci  Karnagrhya  sadhana. 

36.  Pisaci  Kr^namukhi  sadhana. 

37.  Yamaricintamani-mala  nama  sadhana-. 

38.  Prati$tha-vidhi. 

He  is  sometimes  styled  as  Acarya  in  the  Tibetan 
Tangyur.  Prajriapalita  appears  in  the  Sadhana  amid  as 
the  composer  of  a solitary  sadhana  of  llaiaiiala  which 
is  found  only  in  MS.  Ab.  From  the  concluding  verse  it 
may  be  surmised  that  he  accepted  one  Mah  jiigliusa  as 
his  guru.  In  the  sadhana  a long  Dharam  of  flalahala 
is  a distinguishing  feature. 

32.  Ratnakara  Sdnti.  (No.  110.) 
cir.  978-1030. 

He  should  be  distinguished  from  Ratnakara  the 
author  of  the  sadhana  No.  73,  as  there  are  no  grounds 
to  suppose  that  they  were  one  and  the  same  person. 
The  following  works  are  attributed  to  Ratnakara  Sa.nti 
in  the  Tibetan  Tangyur1 : — 

1.  Khasama  nama  tika. 

2.  Hevajra-pahjika  (Muktikavali  nama). 

3.  Bukha-duhkhadvaya-parityagadrsti. 

4.  Bhrama  hara  nama  sadhana. 

5.  Sahaja  rati  samyoga. 

6.  Sahaja  yoga  krama. 

7.  Pindikrta  sadhanopay  ika  vrtti  Ratnavali  nama. 

8.  Kr^nayamari  sadh  ana  Protf  ulla-kumuda  nama. 

9.  Vajrabhairava  ganacakra. 

10.  Sri  sarva  rahasya  nibandha  pradipa. 

11.  Pratisara-rak^acakra-lekhopaya. 

12.  Pancarak?a-vidhi. 


1 loo.  cit.  app.  p.  72. 


cxii 


INTRODUCTION. 


13.  Vajratara  sadhana. 

14.  Gunavati  sri  Mahamaya  tlka. 

15.  Mahamaya  sadhana. 

16.  Sr!  Krsnayamari  mahatantraraja-paiijika- 

ratnapradipa. 

17.  Abhiseka-nirukti. 

18.  Kusumahjali  nama  Guhyasamaja-nibandha. 

He  is  styled  as  Acaryya  and  Mahapandita.  He 

is  also  known  by  the  name  of  Santi  only.  In  the 
Sadkanamala  his  name  appears  as  the  author  of  a 
sadhana  devoted  to  the  worship  of  Vajratara  and  con- 
taining a large  number  of  applications  of  the  mantra  of 
Vajratara : Orh  Tare  tuttare  ture  svaha.  All  these  applica- 
tions refer  mostly  to  the  enchantment  of  women  and 
similar  other  purposes.  In  another  sadhana  of  an 
anonymous  author,  probably  composed  by  one  of  his 
disciples,  his  name  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  the 
diffusion  of  the  worship  of  Trailokyak§epa,  a form  of 
Heruka  (page  474). 

Ratnakara  Santi  was  a fairly  well-known  scholar 
and  he  is  said  to  have  been  in  charge  of  the  Eastern 
gate  of  the  Vikramasila  monastery.  King  Mahlpala  I 
(A.D.  978-1030)  Dlpankara  Srijnana,  Avadhutipa  or 
Advayavajra,  Prajnakaramati,  and  Naropa  were  all  his 
contemporaries.1 

33.  Ratnakara , (No.  73.) 
dr.  1100  A.D. 

He  should  be  distinguished  from  both  Ratnakara- 
santi  and  Ratnakaragupta  whose  names  are  separately 
mentioned  in  the  Tangyur  where  separate  sets  of  books 
are  ascribed  to  their  authorship.  In  the  Tibetan  Tan- 
gyur the  undernoted  works  are  attributed  to  him.2 

1 See  Supra  § 4,  p.  xci.  Also  P.  N.  Bose,  Indian  Teachers,  p.  55. 

* loe.  eit.  app.  p.  72.  T indicates  translations. 


INTRODUCTION. 


■cxiu 

1.  Nairatma  sadhana  pau§tika  nirdesa. 

T 2.  Simhanada-sadhana. 

T 3.  Trailokyavasamkara  Lokesvara-sad  liana. 

T 4.  Padmanarttesvara-sadhana. 

He  is  styled  as  Acaryya,  Pandita  and  Mahapandita. 
He  appears  in  the  Sadhanamala  as  the  author  of  a 
sadhana  of  Alimanmatha  also  known  as  Bhrriganahga 
who  is  regarded  as  a form  of  Mafijusrf  as  well  as 
Heruka.  At  the  end  of  the  sadhana  a couplet  in  verna- 
cular appears  and  from  Rayanamkarena  raiarn  we  under- 
stand that  he  was  its  author. 

The  sadhana  is  found  in  MS.  B and  therefore  the 
author  cannot  be  later  than  1100  A.D. 

34.  Ratndkaragupta , (Nos.  2 and  255). 
cir.  1100  A.D. 

He  should  be  distinguished  from  Ratnakara  and 
Ratnakara  Santi  as  they  seem  to  be  different  persons. 
In  Tangyur  the  following  works  are  attributed  to 
Ratnakaragupta1 : — 

1.  Arya  Marijusri  Namasangiti-panjika  sangraha. 

2.  Trisamayasadhana. 

T 3.  Khasarpana  sadhana. 

He  is  styled  as  Mahapandita.  His  name  appears 
in  the  Sadhanamala  twice  as  an  author  of  the  Trisa- 
mayaraja  sadhana  as  also  for  the  sadhana  of  Sambara. 
In  the  first  he  gives  elaborate  directions  and  rules  of 
discipline  to  be  observed  by  all  followers  of  the  Trisa- 
mayarajatantra,  though  in  the  second  the  author  talks 
of  things  which  pertain  to  the  highest  class  of  Yoga  tan- 
tra  which  cannot  be  practised  without  the  assistance  of 
Saktis. 


i Ibid.  p.  72. 


< XiV 


1'NTKODI’OTION. 


The  sadhana  of  Siatnhara  is  found  in  MS.  B 
and  therefore  the  ruitnor  cannot  be  later  than  A.D. 
1100. 

35.  Rarigwpta  (No.  7S). 

The  name  of  the  author  is  not  mentioned  in  the 
Tibetan  Tangyur.  but  he  appears  in  the  Sadhanamala 
as  the  author  of  a snort  sadhana  where  directions  are 
given  for  miraculously  increasing  knowledge  by  mut- 
tering continuously  the  Bijamantra  of  ManjusrI  which 
is  Ham.  Nothing  tangible,  however,  is  known  about 
him. 

36.  Sahara  (Nos.  185,  235). 
cir.  A.D.  657. 

Sabarapada  who  is  styled  in  the  Sadhanamala  as  a 
Siddha  (one  who  has  attained  perfection)  is  represented 
in  the  present  work  as  the  author  of  S.  185,  and  he 
seems  to  have  been  the  originator  of  the  Vajrayogini 
cult  where  this  particular  deity  with  red  colour  is  wor- 
shipped as  we  understand  from  the  colophon  of  the 
sadhana  No.  235.  In  the  Tibetan  Tangyur  he  has 
several  names  such  as  Tabari,  ftabarlsvara  or  &abare&- 
vara.  He  is  one  of  the  eighty-four  Siddhas  famous  in 
Buddhist  Tantrism,  and  the  authorship  of  the  following 
works  is  attributed  to  him  in  the  Tibetan  Tangyur1 : — 

1.  Vajrayogini  sadhana. 

2.  Kurmapadasiddhi  sadhana. 

3.  Aryamiambaradhara  Vajrapanirudra-trivimta 

nama  tantravrtti. 

4.  Si§yanugrahavidhi. 

5.  Vajrayoginyabhi§eka  samksepa. 

6.  Vajrayogini  ganacakra  vidhi. 

7.  Sunyata  drsti. 

8.  Adhisthana  Mahakala  sadhana. 


1 lor,  riK  upp,  p.  £6. 


INTRODUCTION. 


ex  v 


9.  Vajravidarani  nama  dharani  vrtti  Ratnamala 
nama. 

10.  Vajravidarani  nama  dharani  mandalavidhi 

Ratnadyuti  nama. 

11.  Krodhavajramaranakrama  sad  liana. 

12.  Vajravidarani  nama  dharani  Candamaharosana 

sadhana. 

13.  Sadangayoga. 

14.  Citta  guhya  gambhlrartha  giti. 

15.  Mahamudra  vajra  giti. 

16.  Raktavajrayogini  sadhana. 

He  is  styled  as  Aoaryya,  Mahacaryya,  and  Siddha.1 

37.  Sahajavilasa  (Nos.  183,  231). 

Only  three  works  are  attributed  to  this  author  in 
the  Tibetan  Tangyur2: — 

1.  Samasta  mukha  pravesa  rasmi  vimalosnlsa- 

prabhasa  sarvatathagata  hrdaya  samaya 
vilokinl  nama  dharanl>vivrti. 

2.  Sri  Heruka  sadhana. 

3.  Hevajrodbhava  Kurukulla  sadhana. 

He  is  sometimes  styled  as  Mahacaryya.  Sahaja- 
vilasa appears  in  the  Sadhanamala  as  the  author  of  two 
sadhanas,  one  for  the  worship  of  Kurukulla  and  the 
other  for  that  of  Nairatma.  In  the  first  sadhana  he 
gives  two  slokas  in  vernacular  describing  Mahasukha. 
It  appears  probable  that  he  followed  the  Hevajra 
Tantra. 

38.  Sanghadatta. 
cir.  1075  A.D. 

Safighadatta’s  name  is  mentioned  in  the  sadhana 
No.  154  composed  by  his  son  Kula  or  Kuladatta  in  the 
praise  of  Prajnaparamita.  He  was  very  probably  an 


CXV1 


INTRODUCTION. 


author  of  no  consequence  as  his  name  is  not  to  be  found 
in  the  Tibetan  Tangyur.  His  son  Kuladatta  however 
outshone  his  father  by  composing  a fairly  large  number 
of  important  books. 

Kuladatta’s  sadhana  is  to  be  found  in  the  MS  B. 
and  therefore  he  cannot  be  later  than  A.D.  1100. 
Saftghadatta’s  time,  therefore,  can  be  placed  in  cir. 
1075  A.D. 


39.  Sarahci. 
cir . A.D.  633. 

The  name  of  this  author  appears  in  the  two 
Sadhanas  for  Rakta  Lokesvara.  These  Sadhanas  were 
very  probably  written  by  one  who  followed  Saraha’s 
teachings  or  belonged  to  his  school. 

In  the  Tibetan  Tangyur  the  undermentioned  works 
ire  attributed  to  Saraha 1 : — 

1.  &ri  Vajrayoginl  sadhana. 

2.  Kayako^a-amrtavajratika. 

3.  Vakko§arucirasvaravajragita. 

4.  Trailokyavasankaralokesvara  sadhana . 

5.  Cittako§a  Ajavajraglta. 

6.  Sarvabhutabalividhi. 

7.  Sri  Buddhakapala  nama  mandalavidhi  krama- 

pradyotana. 

8.  Sri  Buddhakapala  sadhana. 

9.  Sri  Buddhakapalasya  panjika  Jnanavatl  nama. 

10.  Dohako§agiti. 

1 1 . Tattvopadesa-sikharadohagiti. 

12.  Dohako$a  nama  caryaglti. 

13.  Dohako^a  upadesa  giti. 

14.  Kakhasya  Doha. 

15.  Svadhi§thana-krama. 


1 loc.  tit,  app.  p.  94. 


INTRODUCTION. 


CXVIT 


16.  Kakhasya  Dohatippana. 

17.  Mahamudropadesavajraguhyagiti. 

18.  Dvadasopadesa  gatka. 

19.  Dohakosa  nama  Mahainudropadesa. 

20.  Bhavanadrsticaryaphala  dohako$a-gitika. 

21.  Kaya-vak-citta  manasikara. 

He  is  styled  as  Acaryya,  Mahacaryya,  Siddha,  Yogi, 
Makayogi,  Yoglsvara,  Mahabrahmana,  Makasavara,  etc.1 

40.  S as vata vaj ru  (No.  101). 
cir . A.D.  1100. 

Sasvatavajra  is  well-known  as  a great  author  and 
the  following  works  are  attributed  to  him  in  the  Tibetan 
Tangyur.2 

1.  Sri  Sam  vara- vrtti  tattvavisantda. 

2.  Sam  vara  Luhipadabhisamaya  vrtti. 

3.  Tarasadhana. 

4.  Cakrasamvarasekakriya. 

5.  Aryogratara  sadhana. 

6.  Ekajata  sadhana. 

7.  Krodha-tarabalyupahara. 

8.  Ekajata-taramativardhana. 

9.  Taradevi  pahca  sadhana. 

10.  Karunatara  sadhana. 

11.  Prsthacakra. 

12.  Taraguhya  sadhana. 

13.  Karuna-tara  visva-karma  sadhana. 

14.  KakasyatulakotT  kali. 

15.  Adarsaprasada  nama  Tarabhattarikopadesa. 
He  is  styled  as  Acaryya,  and  Mabapandita.  He  is 

mentioned  in  the  Sadhanamtild  as  the  author  of  three 
Sadhanas:  one  refers  to  the  worship  of  Mahacinatara 
while  the  two  others  refer  to  the  worship  of  Cakra- 
samvara,  the  hero  of  the  famous  Cakrasamvara  7 antra. 

For  further  details,  «ee  supra  § 4.  pp.  xlivff.  2 loc . cit.  app.  p- 


INTRODUCTION. 


cxviii 

The  first  Sadhana  which  is  in  verse  appears  in  the  MS. 
B and  therefore,  the  time  of  iSasvatavajra  cannot  be 
later  than  cir.  A.D.  1100. 

4 1 . Sarvaj  namitra. 
cir . 1050  A.D. 

In  the  Tibetan  Tangyur  there  is  none  who  is  styled 
as  Sarvaj  namitra  but  there  is  one  with  a similar  name, 
Sarvajna-sri-mitra.  In  the  Sadhanamald  Sarvajna- 
mitra  is  associated  with  a Sadhana  (S.  109)  of  rather  a 
peculiar  deity  by  name  Sragdhara,  and  in  the  Tangyur 
Sarvajhasrimitra  stands  as  an  author  of  certain  stotras 
in  the  praise  of  the  same  deity  Sragdhara.  It  is  there- 
fore, highly  probable,  if  not  certain  that  the  two  names 
represent  one  and  the  same  person.  In  the  Tangyur  he 
is  credited  with  the  following  works.1 

L Sragdharastotra. 

2.  Aryatara  Sragdhara-stotra. 

3.  Devltara  kuvakyadhyesana  nama  stotra. 

4.  Aryatara  sadhana. 

He  is  styled  as  Acaryya,  Mahacaryya,  and  Maha- 
pandita  and  it  is  definitely  stated  both  in  the  Sadhana - 
mala  and  in  the  Tangyur  that  he  hailed  from  Kasmir. 
It  is  stated  in  the  Sadhanamala  that  Sarvaj  namitra 
when  once  in  great  difficulty  wanted  death  to  overtake 
him  and  addressed  his  last  prayer  to  his  favourite  god- 
dess Tara  with  his  face  upwards  and  a garland  in  his 
hands,  Sragdhara  miraculously  appeared  before  him. 

42.  feridhara  (No.  161). 
cir.  A.D.  1100. 

In  the  Tibetan  Tangyur  he  is  credited  with  the 
undermentioned  works 2 : — 


l loc,  cit.  p.  95. 


a loc.  cit,  p.  92. 


INTRODUCTION. 


CX1X 


1.  Krodhavarahl  VajrayoginI  sadhana. 

2.  Sri  Yamaritantra-panjika  Sahajaloka. 

3.  Kr^nayamari  sadhana. 

4.  Ki^nayamarimaiidalopayika. 

5.  Vajrasarasvatistotra. 

6.  Mahi$ananasya  sadhana. 

7.  Raktaricatuhsaktiprthak  sadhana. 

8.  Raktayamari  samadhividhi. 

9.  Raktayamari  balividhi. 

10.  Svacittodhva-samkramanopadesa.  \ 

1 1 . Devlprabhadharadhisthana. 

12.  Raktayamari  mandalopayika. 

13.  Raktayamaryadhisthana  kraraopadesana. 

14.  Caturyogatattva  nama  Svadhisthanopadesa. 

15.  Raktayamari  sadhana. 

16.  Aloka-caturatika. 

17.  Raktayamari  mantra  sangraha. 

He  is  styled  as  Acarya,  Mahapaiidita,  MahayogI, 
Brahmana,  Mahacarya,  Siddhacarya,  Mahopadhyaya, 
etc. 

In  the  Sadhanamala  he  is  mentioned  as  the  author 
of  a Sadhana  written  wholly  in  verse  for  the  worship  of 
Vajrasarasvatl.  The  whole  Sadhana  shows  the  author’s 
mastery  over  the  language  and  brings  forcibly  to  the 
mind  of  the  reader  that  he  was  a great  adept  in  the  art 
of  versification.  This  Sadhana  appears  in  the  MS  B 
and  therefore,  the  author  cannot  be  later  than  cir . 1100 
A.D. 

43.  Sujanabhadra  (Nos.  66,  296). 
cir . A.D.  1100. 

Sujanabhadra’s  name  appears  in  the  Tangyur  cata- 
logue more  or  less  as  an  insignificant  author  and  only 
one  Sadhana  is  attributed  to  his  authorship.1 


1 Cordier  P : op.  cit. 


cxx 


INTRODUCTION. 


In  the  Sadhanamala  he  stands  as  an  author  of  two 
Sadhanas,  one  for  Vak,  a variety  of  Mafijusrl,  and  the 
other  for  Jambhaia.  From  the  first  it  can  be  easily 
seen  that  he  possessed  rare  powers  of  composition  and 
of  versification  and  his  language  is  always  sweet,  melo- 
dious and  forcible.  The  Vaksadhana  appears  in  the 
MS  B and  therefore,  he  cannot  be  placed  later  than 
cir.  1100  A.D. 

44.  Sumatibhadra  (No.  306). 

In  the  Sadhanamala  only  one  Sadhana  of  four  lines 
for  the  worship  of  Mahakala  is  attributed  to  this  author 
whose  name  is  not  expressly  mentioned  in  the  Tibetan 
Tangyur,  unless  however,  he  is  identified  with  Sumati 
or  Sumatiklrti,  but  this  identification  is  doubtful. 

45.  Trailokyavajra  (No.  266). 
cir . 1100  A.D. 

This  author  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Tibetan  Tangy- 
ur but  he  stands  in  the  Sadhanamala  as  the  author  of  a 
Sadhana  which  refers  to  the  worship  of  Bhutadamara,  a 
fierce  deity  of  the  Buddhist  Pantheon,  who  is  believed 
to  confer  great  powers  to  his  devotees.  The  Sadhana  is 
found  in  the  MS  B and  therefore,  the  time  of  the 
author  cannot  be  later  than  cir . 1100  A.D. 

46.  Vairocana  EaJcsita  (Nos.  264,  271). 
cir.  A.D.  728-764. 

Several  Vairocanas  figure  prominently  in  the  Tangy- 
ur list.  The  Sadhanamala , for  instance,  mentions  one  as 
Vairocana  and  the  other  as  Vairocana  Rak$ita,  and  in 
the  Tangyur  there  is  a third  Vairocana  Vajra.  It  is, 
however,  quite  possible  to  identify  the  first  two  names 
because  the  works  V ajrabhairava  man4alavidhi  prakdSa 
and  Doh&kosa  are  ascribed  in  one  instance  to  Vairocana 


in  ruor-m  no  \\ 


and  in  another  to  Vairoemia  Raksita  r ^ u1 

catalogue  itself,1 

The  following  original  works  and  fcra-i  • are 

attributed  to  Vairocami 


T 1. 

Sri  g u h y as ; i t n i \ , 1 1 ; 

uUraajatika . 

T 2. 

Sukla  Vai. avo^in 

• sad  ban  a. 

T 3. 

ftrivajrabbain;  « 

mandu-iavidrii  prakas  - 

T 4. 

Bhagavad  iipv, 
krama. 

ijrasiid  liana  udiva  c 

at  nr,, 

5. 

Kalpasaptaka  v y\ 

Lli. 

T 6. 

Sri  Vajrabhah  ava  sad  liana  vajrapn 
nama. 

ika-sn 

T 7. 

Dohakosa  nama  ■ 

\] ahamudrop  uiesa. 

T 8. 

Pra  j ha  para n > i la ! 

rdayasadhaua. 

. 9. 

Raktayamari  s.nl 

kana. 

T 10. 

Mahisananasya  si 

tdha  na. 

He  is  styled  as  Guru,  Pandita,  Ij  padhy.  ty a,  Panda,,,. 
Mahapandita,  and  Mahacarya. 

In  the  Sadhanamala  he  appears  as  the  author  of 
two  Sadhanas:  one  for  Bhutadamara  and  the  other  for 
Raktayamari.  Vairoeana  Raksita  is  said  to  have  been 
a disciple  of  guru  Padmasambhava  who  vent  to  Tibet 
to  reform  the  Buddhism  of  that  country  when  king 
Khri  Sron  lde  Btan  was  reigning  in  Tibet.  This  king  is 
believed  to  have  reigned  between  A.D.  728  to  764  and 
as  Vairoeana  Raksita  was  his  contemporary  he  must 
have  flourished  in  the  second  and  third  quarters  of  the 
8th  century.3 

47.  Virupaksa  (No.  312). 

This  author’s  name  does  not  appear  in  the  Tangyur 
Catalogue  unless  of  course  he  is  identified  with  the 

1 See  loo,  cit,  app.  p.  85. 

* Ibid , p.  85.  T indicates  works  translated  by  him. 

8 P.  N.  Bose : Indian  Teacher/)  in  Indian  Universities,  p.  42. 


cxrfi  INTRODUCTION. 

$ddhacaxwva  Virupiiksa  nicknamed  Virupa  who  stands 
as  an  authoi  of  the  following  works 1 

1.  CVhinnamunda  sadhana. 

2.  f aid  i van  a srl  .yogiyogim  svayambhu  sambhoga 

.smasanakalpa. 

3.  Karmacandall  dohakosa  glti. 

4.  K aktavamari  sadhana. 

5.  Dalividhi. 

6.  Prabhasodaya  krama. 

7.  Siuusprapanca  tattvopadesa. 

8.  Yamari  y an  travail. 

1).  Amrtadhisthana. 

10.  Sri  Virupapada  eaturaslti. 

11.  Dohakosa. 

12.  Margaphalanvitavavadaka. 

13.  Amrtasiddhimula. 

He  is  styled  as  Mahacaryva,  Yogis  vara,  and  Maha- 
yogl.  In  the  Sadhanamala  he  appears  as  the  author  of 
the  last  Sadhana  which  refers  to  the  worship  of  a very 
furious  form  of  Mahakala  with  eight  faces  sixteen  arms 
and  four  legs.  In  the  Sadhana  a whole  Mandala  of 
Mahakala  with  attendent  deities  is  described  in  detail 
and  numerous  applications  are  mentioned  of  the  mantra 
of  Mahakala  for  a variety  of  purposes  beginning  from 
relieving  the  pain  of  a woman  in  labour  and  ending  in 
the  scaring  of  animals.  Virupak^a  was  a native  of 
Tripura  and  wrote  many  songs  in  his  vernacular  some 
of  which  are  published  in  the  Bauddha  Gan  0 Doha . 

§ 8.  Vajrayana  Deities. 

(i)  Their  significance . 

The  deities  of  the  Vajrayanists  are  all  manifesta- 
tions of  &unya.2  Advaya vajra  says  in  a very  characteris- 


1 loo.  tit,  p.  83. 

” For  a diaoufaion  see  Indian  buddhist  Iconography,  p.  166, 


INTRODUCTION. 


exxiii 

tic  stanza  that  the  deities  are  nothing  but  manifesta- 
tions of  Sunya  and  are  by  nature  non-existent  and 
whenever  there  is  manifestation  it  must  be  Sunya  in 
essence.1  In  the  Sadhanamala  the  process  of  evolution 
of  deities  from  Sunya  is  explained  m another  very  in- 
teresting stanza  which  is  also  found  in  one  of  the  works 
of  Advayavajra.  The  process  of  evoht  e,  bee  four 
stages:  the  first  is  the  right  perception  o;  ; * -Sm-vota 
or  voidness,  the  second  is  its  connection  with  tie  <.u*rm 
syllable,  the  third  is  the  conception  of  an  icon  and  the 
fourth  is  the  external  representation  of  the  deity.* 
This  statement  which  occurs  both  in  the  Sndkanam.ala 
and  in  Advayavajra  is  a very  strong  argument  agnnst 
the  theory  that  later  Buddhism  was  nothing  but  gross 
idolatry.  This  shows  on  the  other  liayd  that  their  con- 
ception of  godhead  was  philosophically  most  profound, 
a parallel  to  which  is  scarcely  to  be  met  with  in  any 
other  Indian  religion. 

Occasionally  the  Sadhanamala  gives  us  in  Con  nation 
as  to  the  residence  of  the  Vajrayana  deities  and  as  far 
as  it  can  be  gathered  from  some  stray  references  we  can 
definitely  say  that  the  abode  of  these  gods  was  in  the 
Akanistha  heaven  which  is  the  topmost  of  the  Rupa 
heavens.8 

As  has  been  pointed  out  before,  the  deities  of  the 
Vajrayana  system  represent  the  Sunya  and  they  are 
Sunya  in  essence  with  the  three  element.  Sunva,  Vijnana 
and  Mahasukha.  They  are  rather  the  voluntary  mani- 


1 Advayavajrasaihgraha  (CJOS),  p.  5!  - 

«\ 

w wr  nta  m u 

z op.  oit.  p.  60— 

*dar  Hsiiffwr  swiitf  \ 

etc.  I! 

8 pp.  47,  64. 


'* vi  v INTRODUCTION, 

festations  of  the  S tiny  a in  accordance  with  the  Bljaman- 
tras  uttered  by  the  worshippers,  with  an  appearance 
suitable  for  the  function  he  has  to  discharge.  In  the 
Sadhanamala  in  one  instance  while  characterising  Man- 
jusrl  it  gives  us  a piece  of  very  important  information 
and  calls  him  as  equal  to  all  Tathagatas  who  are  none 
but  the  live  Dhyani  Buddhas.1  This  implies  that  the 
deity  is  an  embodiment  of  the  five  Skandhas  over  each 
of  which  one  Dhyani  Buddha  presides,2  such  as  Aksobhya 
for  Vij fiana,  Vairocana  for  Rupa,  Ratnasambhava  for 
Vedana,  Amitabha  for  Samjna  and  Amoghasiddhi  for 
Samskara.  When  one  element  among  the  five  predo- 
minates the  deity  is  considered  to  be  the  emanation  of 
that  Dhyani  Buddha  who  presides  over  the  element  in 
question.  When  such  deity  is  represented  in  art  he 
bears  on  his  head  the  same  Dhyani  Buddha  and  is  con- 
sidered as  his  offspring  and  as  belonging  to  his  family. 
The  five  Dhyani  Buddhas  are  generally  represented  on 
the  aureole  over  the  head  of  the  principal  deity. 

(ii)  Their  appearance. 

It  may  be  noticed  that  the  Sadhanamala  is  very 
particular  in  having  a colour  applied  to  all  the  deities. 
This  colour  has  a deep  significance  and  is  a thing  which 
should  not  be  passed  over  unnoticed.  The  Dhyani 
Buddhas,  it  may  be  remembered,  have  each  a different 
colour  and  they  preside  over  one  or  the  other  of  the 
Skandhas,  also  five  in  number.  The  deities  emanating 
from  each  of  these  five  Dhyani  Buddhas  constitute  the 
family  of  each.  Ordinarily  the  whole  family  of  a parti- 

1 p.  in  etc. 

2 J Hanaaiddhi,  op.  cit.  p.  41  — 

also  SSdhanamula,  ; p.  391 


INTRODUCTION. 


cular  Dhyanj^kiddha  should  have  the  sa.r.e  coion  r as 
that  of  their  spiritual  father.  Thus  the  i-'.miJy  of  Ak .-o- 
bhya,  the  embodiment  of  Vijnana  Skandlia,  should  hav  e 
the  blue  colour  because  it  is  the  colour  of  the  j>;  ui 
Buddha  Ak^obhya.  This  is,  of  course,  the  genera  - : ; o 
but  numerous  exceptions  are  also  met  with.  Take,  for 
instance,  a deity,  who  is  very  popular  and  has  the  pou  er 
to  grant  success  in  a variety  of  protective  and  destruc- 
tive rites.  The  deity  cannot  have  the  same  colour  in 
all  the  rites  because  the  difference  in  rite  demands  a 
difference  in  form  and  colour,  posture,  and  so  forth.1 
In  the  Sadhanamala 2 it  is  said  that  the  colour  of  the 
deities  vary  in  accordance  with  the  functions  they  have 
to  discharge  but  we  refrain  from  saying  more  on  the 
point  as  details  such  as  these  should  be  learnt  from  the 
Gurus  and  the  comprehensive  Tantras  because  these 
are  beyond  the  scope  of  the  Sadhana. 

It  may  be  frequently  seen  from  the  text  of  the 
Sadhanamala  that  the  deities  sometimes,  present  a very 
fierce  appearance  and  are  invoked  in  terrible  rites  such 
as  for  the  destruction  of  men  (Marana)  and  their  houses 
(Uccatana)  and,  so  forth.  This,  perhaps,  the  authors  of 
Sadhanas  considered  incompatible  with  the  theory  of 
compassion  and  a few  indirect  explanations  to  clear  up 
the  point  are  not  wanting  in  the  Sadhanamala . Two 
characteristic  passages  are  quoted  below,  one  with  refer- 
ence to  the  fierce  form  of  Yaivari  and  the  other  in  res- 
pect of  Ucchu$ma  Jambhala : 

1.  Srimantam  autahkarunainayam  tarn 
Sattvarth ahetor  vah  i rug  rarij  pai  i t 


1 See  for  instance  the  details  prescribed  ior  the  different  rites  in  which 
YamSri  is  worshipped  with  different  attributes,  p.  533  ff. 

2 p.  556,  I 

ftp*?  || 

also  p.  395,  eto. 

p.  582,  ’qwwifftirfoiprji  wft  I 


(XXVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


Nath  a rn  Yamarim  pranipatya  murdhna 
Likhami  tafcsadhanam  i^tahetoh.1 

6i  After  making  my  obeisance  by  my  head  to  Lord 
Yamari  who  is  of  dignified  appearance,  internally  com- 
passionate but  externally  terrific  for  the  good  of  all 
beings,  I write  this  procedure  of  worship  for  the  benefit 
of  all/’ 

2.  Daridryaduhkhahatamanasanam 
ka  cittavrttih  Sugatasya  krtteh 
Atasca  kopad  iva  Jambhalo’  sau. 
Ucchusmarupam  bhayadam  cakara.2 

“People  who  are  stricken  down  with  the  misery  of 
poverty  what  desire  can  they  have  for  the  rites  laid  down 
by  Sugata  ? It  is  for  this  reason  it  seems  that  Jambhala 
in  his  anger  assumed  the  terrific  form  of  Ucchu^ma.” 

Mah aka-la  is  another  very  terrible  deity  with  terri- 
ble appearance  and  is  invoked  to  discharge  terrible 
functions.  Neither  his  appearance  nor  his  functions 
are  in  keeping  with  the  doctrine  of  Karuna  or  compas- 
sion. But  a very  excellent  explanation  to  clear  up  the 
point  has  been  offered  by  the  author  of  the  Sadhana. 
He  says : 

Acaryye  yah  sada  dvesl  kupito  ratnatraye’pi  yah 

Anekasattvavidhvaiiisl  Mahakalena  khadyate.8 
“ One  who  is  persistently  a hater  of  the  preceptor  and 
is  adversely  disposed  towards  the  three  Jewels  (Buddha, 
Dharma  and  Sahgha)  and  immolates  many  animals  is 
eaten  up  raw  by  Mahakala.” 

Now  in  a case  like  this  we  can  easily  understand 
that  the  conception  of  the  fierce  form  of  Mahakala  is 
quite  in  keeping  with  the  doctrine  of  Compassion  be- 
cause such  a man  is  incorrigible  and  he  alone  and  un- 


ip.  550. 


2 p.  570. 


8 p.  586.  f- 


IN  TROD  FCTION.  ( N\vi  I 

accompanied  does  harm  to  many  beings  and  a mis- 
chievous man  like  him  ought  to  be  removed  l>y  c ■■■-<- 
deity  like  Mahakala  for  the  good  of  many.  Wc  mu 
see  however  the  necessity  ot  eating  the  poor  oim  A o 
raw  unless  of  course  it  is  assumed  that  his  mental  con- 
dition will  change  in  the  next  birth  by  undergoing 
a transformation  in  the  compassionate  stomach  of 
Mahakala. 


(iii)  Budslhi;  l worship  and  idolatry . 

Idolatry  means  wovship  of  idols.  It  has  many 
drawbacks  but  it  m > my  useful  for  society  as  a whole. 
The  formless  a os* : -ml  unseen  power  which  we 

characterise  as  Gm{  is  a .*  lung  very  difficult  to  be  con- 
ceived even  by  great  a ties,  not  to  spe&k  of  the  com- 
mon people,  who  !*  . v-  as  to  what  attributes 

God  actually  represent-  . if  t course,  as  we  generally 
do,  through  the  medium  1 in -.ages,  we  can  make  the 
mass  believe  in  the  gyca»  power  and  his  un- 

bounded compassion  <>r  -.m-bug  I . fay  and  make 
them  fear  sin  and  lev*  m.-.  / ti  n m-  must  necessarily 
admit  that  idol  wor*hh-  a ;.  t ■ " H g cat  v,\ i.hty 

and  is  of  great  social  • m-v  Hm-  m no  rra  on 

why  we  should  call  id  ] -wmlm  .altic  unless  wr 

can  definitely  prove  the  u » v* a tii  bongo 
by  God  when  a few  y;.  ;umHv  m mm:;. -mm  ;.I.!  UF  ;i.r 
are  uttered  for  the  all-  ; mmho;  in  ,2c  villi, 

life*  This  is  indeed  very  m belh.vo  in 

scientific  age,  and  l.t  i-  oi**-  -o  > he  u asms  why  image 
worship  has  been  eh.  me icri-wd  us  g sujmim.mmm.. 
'and  the  image  worshipped  : violators.  idol, 
has  its  utilities  hi  us  own.  sphere  Bun  has  in  b ? 

considered  as  a ncc-uu  from  very  ancient  n mm, 
on  the  ground  of  pmffie  utility  as  sue]5,  urn  m*  nav.  no 
scientific  value  because  we  nave  .never  am  imntadveiy 
known  that  a deity  ever  actually  entm  v-4  j mm  iia  imairc 


f V ! V;-M>U0TION. 


i ■:  a vi ii 

prepared  for  the  pu -nose.  The  Hindus  worship  idols 
in  this  way  and  believe  that-  their  Mantras  can  infuse 
the  image  with  life  and  therefore  they  are  for  all  intents 
and  purposes  violators. 

The  Jains  regard  the  images  as  remembrancers 
(smarakas).  By  seeing  the  images  of  the  Tlrthankaras 
they  call  to  mind  their  noble  lives,  good  deeds,  their 
lofty  preachings  and  high  ideals,  and  to  their  memory 
they  offer  various  articles  of  worship,  in  token  of  rever- 
ence. Their  idol  worship  is  not  exactly  what  is  known 
as  idolatry  in  so  far  as  these  Tlrthankaras  are  concerned, 
but  the  moment  they  leave  this  sphere  and  offer  objects 
of  worship  to  hypothetical  beings  such  as  the  Yak§as 
and  Yaksims  with  four  faces  and  eight  arms  and  with 
strange  vehicles,  they  are  relegated  to  the  sphere  of 
idolatry,  for  here  also  we  cannot  prove  that  these 
strange  creatures  ever  existed  on  the  face  of  the  Earth. 

But  the  Buddhist  mode  of  worship  as  can  be  seen 
from  numerous  Sadhanas  in  the  present  work  is  entirely 
different  from  that  of  the  Hindus  or  of  the  Jains.  To 
the  Buddhist  the  external  world  has  no  existence,  the 
body  with  the  sense  organs  are  unreal;  the  real  nou- 
menon  is  only  Sunya  which  together  with  Karima, 
constitute  the  Bodhicitta.  The  Bodhi  Mind  then  is  also 
a reality;  in  fact  it  has  the  same  reality  as  that  of 
Sunya,  and  beyond  the  mind  there  is  nothing  in  the 
external  world.  The  body  as  such  being  external  does 
not  exist  and  it  has  no  reality.  This  is  the  conception 
about  the  mind  and  the  external  world  in  the  Vajra- 
yana.  To  the  followers  of  Vajrayana,  therefore,  how 
can  there  be  reality  in  an  image,  a grossly  external 
object,  to  which  worship  may  be  offered.  The  Vajra- 
yana theory  of  godhead  is  so  peculiar  and  had  such 
successive  stages  of  development  traceable  through 
Buddhist  literature  for  several  centuries  that  when*- 


INTRODUCTION. 


CXX1X 


ever  similar  conceptions  or  theories  are  met  with  in 
the  literature  of  other  sects  we  can  easily  put  our 
finger  on  them  and  characterize  them  as  borrowed 
from  the  Vajrayana. 

Bodhisattva  after  following  the  prescribed  proce- 
dure according  to  the  instructions  of  the  Guru  or  accord- 
ing to  the  Sadhana  should  regard  himself  as  nothing  but 
as  a chain  of  momentary  consciousness  full  of  compas- 
sion for  suffering  humanity,  and  invoke  the  aid  of  Sunya 
the  ultimate  reality  with  the  three  elements,  Sunya, 
Vijnana  and  Mahasukha.  This  aid  can  only  be  invoked 
when  the  Bodhi  Mind  of  the  Bodhisattva  is  also  identi- 
fied with  the  Sunya ; and  only  when  this  is  done,  the 
Sunya  responds.  In  accordance  with  the  Bljamantra 
or  in  accordance  with  the  purpose  for  which  the  aid  of 
the  Sunya  has  been  invoked,  the  .Sunya  transforms 
itself  in  the  form  of  a divinity  with  which  the  Bodhi 
Mind  is  identified.  When  the  commingling  of  the 
Bodhi  Mind  with  the  deity  takes  place,  the  former  deve- 
lops great  power,  and  is  able  to  do  the  work  for  which 
the  deity  has  been  invoked  until  he  is  dismissed  from 
the  mind  with  the  proper  formula.  A glance  at  the 
list  of  deities  and  the  aims  and  objects  of  the  Vajraya- 
nist  will  show  how  many  multifarious  duties  the  &unya 
had  to  perform  and  into  how  many  forms  it  had  to 
transform  itself. 

(.It  can  indeed  be  pointed  out  that  because  a large 
number  of  images  of  gods  and  goddesses  of  the  Vajra- 
yana Pantheon  were  made  and  subsequently  discovered 
from  under  the  earth,  therefore  the  Buddhists  must  be 
considered  as  idolators.  Against  this  we  can  point  out 
that  it  is  not  an  easy  task  to  conceive  the  outward 
appearances  of  gods  and  goddesses  of  an  extensive  Pan- 
theon for  the  purpose  of  meditation,  without  the  help 
of  images  or  pictures,  and  it  is  in  order  to  supply  this 


oxxx  .5NT;;i  . 1 ' ■ .n. 

most  important-  aid  to  the  numerous  worshippers  that 
innumerable  images  had  W Jv*  carved  out  01  stone.  We 
have  also  evidence  fnai  pi- stores  v*'ere  painted  for  the 
.same  purpose  and  -'voi  oou  in  Nepal  the  Vajraearvas 
is f > a large  stock  *.  f p on:  mgs  and  pictures  of  numer- 
oi’  - deities  for  then  mo-  clients.  It  must  be  doth 
nitely  understood  Ha*  - attempt  is  here  made  to 
represent  f he  o.i.o  of  ’ h Buddhist  with  regard  to  the 
(.](;;.riie  of  id  obit  rv  * ( ' --madly  levelled  at  them.  .From 
a study  or  dfoir  lh 'a-  fuv*  we  can  definitely  proclaim 
Vajra v.-ms  mss  ;o  idolatry  hut  if  some  ignorant 
lav  i maple.-  in  imitation  of  the  Hindu  and  Jain  customs 
I * 1 1’.,  -w  , lev,  ii owe  os  at  i }je  feet  of  an  image  need  not 

th.'  pure  doevri||e  of  the  Sa  straw  ‘ 

fivO  Hindu  gods  versus  Buddhist  gads, 

rj ’ i i u V a j 1 a ea  n ■ s t-s  die  pi ; lyod  a great  h a 1 red  t o war*  I s 
th«*  gods  of  the  Hindu  religion  and  a large  number  of 
non  e ."  made  by  a number  of  Vajrayana  authors  on 
che  Hindu  gods  in  the  Sadkanamald  fully  bears  us  out. 
Th*  \ -wore  not  only  hostile  to  the  Hindu  gods  but  their 
bos* ; • t v towards-  the  Hindu  gods  prove  further  that 
they  had  a great  hatred  towards  the  mem  hers  of  other 
religions  also.  Tins  fact  was  for  the  first  time  pointed 
out  in  the  Indian  Buddhist  Iconography  hut  it  met  wit!.: 
violent  criticism  horn  eminent  scholars  especially  Horn 
the  famous  art  critic,  1 >r.  A.  < *oo  mars  warn  i of  the  Boston 
Museum  1 who  did  not  relish  the  idea  mainly  on  the 
ground  of  sentiment.  This  bias  necessitated  farther 
comment  on  be-  pond;  and  wo  shall  here  enumerate  a 
number  of  passages  from  the  body  of  the  text  Horn 
which  it  will  he  possible  to  judge  whether  we  were  not 
justified  in  saying  that  the  Vajrayanista  displayed 
great  hatred  tow  arms  the  gods  of  the  Hindu  faith.  Hr. 


AOS.  Vol.  46,  p.  187. 


INTRODUCTION. 


cxxxi 


Coomarswami  maintains  that  the  Brahmasiras  which 
is  carried  by  a number  of  gods  of  the  Buddhist  Pan- 
theon has  a very  deep  spiritual  significance.  This  of 
course  sounds  very  ingenious  but  is  a little  out  of  point, 
and  uncorroborated  by  facts.  It  shows  nothing  but 
that  the  Buddhist  gods  are  so  powerful  that  they  des- 
troy the  Hindu  gods  and  carry  their  heads  in  their 
hands  thereby  displaying  wonderful  hatred  towards 
the  Hindu  gods  in  particular  and  Hinduism  in  general. 
This  can  also  be  proved  by  various  other  examples 
from  the  Sadhanamala  itself.  Take,  for  instance,  the 
description  of  Harihariharivahanodbhava,  a form  of 
Avalokitesvara,  the  all  compassionate  Bodhisattva, 
and  it  will  be  found  that  his  Vahana  or  favourite 
animal  is  Visnu,  the  second  God  of  the  Hindu  Trinity.1 
The  latter  cannot  be  mistaken  for  an£  other  god  or 
thing,  because  here  his  own  favourite  animal,  the  my- 
thical bird,  Garuda,  is  also  present.  In  another  place 
while  describing  Candaro^ana  the  author  of  the  Sadhana 
says  that  the  god  carries  the  noose  in  order  to  bind  the 
enemies  who  cause  sufferings  to  humanity,  such  as 
Vi^nu,  Siva,  Brahma  who  are  terrified  by  the  raised 
index  fingers  of  the  god.2  Further  on,  in  the  same 
Sadhana  the  author  says  that  Candaro^ana  should  be 
conceived  as  looking  towards  the  miserable  people  who 
are  subjected  to  constant  revolution  in  the  cycle  of 
existence  by  the  wicked  gods  such  as  Vi$nu,  Brahma 
and  Siva  and  Kandarpa  the  god  of  love.8  By  Candaro- 
§ana5s  intervention  the  hosts  of  Maras  who  are  ter- 
rified, weeping,  nude,  with  dishevelled  hair,  hopeless 
and  in  despair,  are  hacked  to  pieces  with  the  sword. 
Candaro?ana  gives  their  life  back  and  places  them  near 
his  feet  so  that  they  may  perform  pious  duties  in 

* p.  77,  *m*T,  etc. 

* p.  174,  etc. 

8 p.  175,  i 


cXXXIl 


INTRODUCTION. 


future.1  Further  on,  while  enumerating  the  benefits 
that  accrue  from  the  worship  of  Mptyuvancana  Tara 
the  author  says  that  the  worshipper  conquers  death  as 
though  emancipated,  and  even  the  ends  of  his  hair  can- 
not be  destroyed  by  Hindu  gods  like  Brahma,  Indra, 
Vi$nu,  Moon,  the  Sun,  Siva,  deities  of  the  quarters, 
Yama  and  Manmatha.2  Again,  while  describing  Marie! 
the  principal  Hindu  gods  are  brought  to  the  humiliating 
position  of  making  obeisance  to  Marlci.  Some  of  them 
are  actually  trampled  under  her  feet  while  others  obey 
her  orders  like  her  servants.3  In  another  place  the 
author  of  a Sadhana  says  that  the  ascetic  who  pleases 
the  goddess  Ivurukulla,  to  him  Brahma,  Rudra,  Indra 
Narayana  and  others  come  and  meet  his  wants  what- 
ever they  may  be,  like  servants.4  While  describing 
Vajrajvalanalarka  he  is  characterised  as  trampling 
under  his  foot  not  only  Vi§nu  but  also  his  consort 
Lak§ml.5  Bhutadamara  is  described  as  one  who  is 
an  expert  in  destroying  the  pride  of  Indra,  Brahma, 
Kuvera  and  others/  Ucchusma  Jambhala  is  described 
in  one  place  as  pressing  Kuvera  under  his  feet  so  that 
he  vomits  blood  (or  jewels).7  The  severed  head  of 
Brahma  is  carried  by  Marlci,  Vajrasarasvati,  Prasannas 
tara  and  several  others.  Trailokyavijaya  trample- 

i P.  its, 

*i*WTwr5[ 

B p-  ..  nf^?TT: . 

1 p-  35,  ••  ■r-r>rii'm  mtmzr-  ffranpw 

f w m f hj  r^^rf ^ i 

• 512,  | 

*>  o,  5i-  vw i 

7 p.  .071 *»!  XW'W 


INTRODUCTION. 


upon  the  head  of  Siva  and  the  bosom  of  Gaun  who  t 
on  the  ground  in  opposite  directions.1  PrasaimaUra  m 
described  as  trampling  upon  Indra  and  Upend m and 
pressing  Rudra  and  Brahma  between  the  two/;  Para- 
masva  is  described  as  four-legged  and  as  trampling 
with  the  first  right  leg  on  IndranI  and  Lak$mi,  with 
the  second  Rati  and  Priti,  with  the  first  left  Indra 
and  Madhukara,  and  with  the  second  Jayakara  and 
Vasanta.8  While  describing  the  merits  and  advantages 
to  be  gained  by  worshipping  Hayagriva  the  author  of  a 
Sadhana  holds  before  us  an  exceedingly  attractive  pros- 
pect but  not  without  calumniating  Hindu  gods.  It  says, 
when  perfection  is  attained  in  this  Sadhana  the  ascetic 
goes  to  the  Vidyadhara  land  and  enjoys  all  sorts 
of  pleasures ; Devendra  becomes  his  parasol  bearer, 
Brahma  his  minister,  Vemacitri  (Kartfka)  his  general, 
and  Hari  his  gate-keeper;  all  the  gods  flock  together; 
Sankara,  the  nude  preceptor,  lectures  on  the  different 
virtues,  and  so  forth.4  Aparajita  is  described  as  a god- 
dess whose  parasol  is  raised  over  her  head  by  wicked 
and  mischievous  gods,  like  Brahma  and  others.5 

Now  the  above  are  a few  among  many  instances 
where  Hindu  gods  are  insulted  and  made  subservient 
to  Buddhist  gods.  But  these  are  instances  met  with  in 
writing;  in  practice  also  they  did  the  same.  A large 
number  of  images  were  carved  by  the  followers  of  Vajra- 
yana  where  the  Hindu  gods  were  represented  in  stone  and 
in  pictures  as  humiliated  by  Buddhist  gods.  Readers 
who  are  interested  in  the  subjects  may  refer  to  our 
remarks  in  the  Indian  Buddhist  Iconography  on  page 

1 p.  511  wniffcw  ^nr*rr^TTO%^riTO  i 

a p.  241  ^nnwfiim  i 

» P.  510  fa*  3tfif 

op.  eifc.  § 6. 

••  p.  403  w f rqfic^fi^r^T  ^fir  i 


cxxxiv 


(:odt:^ttov. 

162  and  tin  -ivc  plates  rciorred  to  therein.  From 
the  above  let  us  hope  that  our  critics  will  be  able  to 
derive  ample  materials  for  revising  their  opinion  with 
regard  t<  the  relation  of  later  Buddhism  towards  Hindu- 
ism and  Hindu  gods  and  not  lightly  throw  overboard 
w el i-ec n sidered  opinions  as  though  suggestions  of  a 
“ Victorian  Missionary.”  No  matter  what  attitude  ear- 
lier Buddhism  might  have  shown  to  the  Hindu  faith, 
che  later  Buddhists  maintained  an  aggressively  hostile 
attitude  against  Hinduism  and  the  Hindu  pet  theories 
of  emancipation  and  this  is  conclusively  proved  by  a 
very  interesting  passage  in  the  Cittasodhana-prakarana 1 
of  Aryadeva.  The  passage  in  question  contains  a 
scathing  indictment  of  the  Hindu  belief  that  bathing  in 
holy  places  can  confer  merit  and  proves  its  futility 
in  forcible  but  unequivocal  language— - 

uroifq  ?hn^t  ’srr  i 

wf  . 

g wi  wm  « 

^ f . f* - ...  --  ^ t r*  _ _ _ 

^Tcrt  pnt  crtwt^rm  & 

“ A dog  swimming  in  the  Ganges  is  not  considered 
pure,  therefore  bathing  in  holy  places  is  futile  for  pious 
men.  If  bathing  can  confer  merit,  the  fishermen  must 
be  most  meritorious,  not  to  speak  of  fish  and  other 
aquatic  animals  who  are  always  in  water  day  and 
night.  It  is  certain  that  by  bathing  even  sin  is  not 
dissipated,  because  people  who  are  in  the  habit  of 
making  pilgrimages  are  full  of  passion,  hatred  and  other 
vices.” 


1 This  work  was  first  brought  to  the  notice  of  Scholars  by  MM.  H.  P.  Shastri 
in  JASB,  1898,  pp.  117  £f.  It  was  written  by  the  TSntric  Buddhist  writer 
Ayadflva  or  Aryadeva,  but  was  wrongly  attributed  to  the  earlier  Aryadeva,  the 
pupil  ol  NSgSrjuna. 


INTRODUCTION. 


CXXXV 


§ 9.  Iconography. 

(1)  Importance  of  the  study. 

^The  study  of  Iconography  has  revealed  certain  im- 
portant facts  of  primary  importance,  and  here  it  is  pro- 
posed to  deal  with  one  aspect  of  the  importance  of  the 
study  of  Iconography,  namely,  how  Buddhism,  especially 
Tantric  Buddhism,  influenced  other  religions  of  In^ia, 
especially  Hinduism.  It  is  well-known  that  the  Paura- 
nic  pantheon  of  the  Hindus  likewise  influenced  Tantric 
Buddhism,  which  was  led  to  accept  such  gods  as  Ganesa, 
Sarasvati,  etc.,  as  gods  in  their  own  pantheon,  but  the 
point  we  want  to  emphasise  here  is  that  in  purely  Tantric 
matters  it  was  Buddhism  which  took  the  lead.  From 
the  discussion  below  it  will  be  clear  that  the  weight  of 
evidence  is  in  favour  of  Buddhism,  stad  that  Tantric 
Hinduism  drew  its  inspiration  almost  wholly  from  Tan 
trie  Buddhism.  With  the  text  of  the  Sadhanarnala  in 
hand  it  is  now  easy  to  track  this  vexed  question.  / 

It  is  well-known  that  the  Hindus  recognize  a set 
of  ten  Siddkamantras  with  ten  deities  presiding  over 
them.  One  of  these  goddesses  is  known  as  Tara  whose 
Vidya  or  Mantra  is  stated  to  be:  Oiii  Hriih  Suite  Hum 
Phat.  The  Hindus  claim  this  deity  as  their  own  and 
in  the  Tardrahasya  of  Brahmananda  who  flourished  in 
the  middle  of  the  16th  century  and  in  the  Tanirisdm * 
a still  later  authority,  we  meet  with  the  following 
Dhyana  in  which  the  form  of  Tara  is  given  in  detail : 

wrwttri 

*rS|el  | 


. V V r>;«  ' : O f ION. 

w Wi  rawifwrw  ; 

T75I i r TH  Ti 3f; ) 4 ■ • > J ■’■•■  : -i->' e: f*r ^T*r  !! 

j :,i*  ip  fwo^-tTf 

rj I^  ll ^<32  ¥,i  <frJy ■■•■■'  v : ■ 1 : i ': ! ™ H 

■ T;- ': j; vw i '■•  f«3H'w  i 

c .! *p  I*; T *Ti II 

Prmv.  this  it  w.mM  ■>■;  p^'-  that  Tara  is  a fairly  awe- 
r^c:-,  r< i v i • ; i * -.  i rg  m IVatyalidha  attitude  with 
• r ,; f : ,ri  m v: « _ i ; i j r u hi  her  neck,  having  a fierce  face, 
♦.red:  in.  - cm*  mac  tangs.  She  is  four -armed 

i.i,,;  .e-rc.-  u (Is  two  principal  hands  the  Kartri  and 
< hi  f\ i ! ». ' . i i . ■ ••.«].,';•  *n  i-wv.  others  she  carries  the  sword 
iu  i-.;k  iyxh;  a:  d the.  nine  lotus  in  the  left.  She  is 
decked  in  On  c Madras.  has  one  tuft  of  hair  on  her  head 
which  is  ornamented  v rth  Aksobhya. 

Nw  tor  the  purpose  of  comparison  three  points 
are  of  special  came  : Tara  is  Ekaiata  {lit.  one  tuft  of 
hair),  is  decked  in.  five  Madras  ( ^g*rif^fa<UiT ) and  has 
Aksobhya  on  her  crown.  Why  is  she  called  Ekajata, 
what  the  five  Madras  are,  and  who  is  Aksobhya? 
These  are  three,  questions  which  e an  not  be  explained  in 
accordance  with  Hindu  traditions. 

The  Hindus  have  ho  deity  known  as  Ekajata,  but 
they  have  a Tara  who  is  regarded  as  a different  form  of 
Ekaj fin.  They  have  a variety  of  Madras  but  no  Mudra 
can  be  employed  as  an  ornament-,  much  less  the  five 
Madras  or  six  Mud  ms  winch  are  unknown  to  them. 
The  deifies  recognized  by  the  Hindus  are  divided  into 
two  great  divisions  as  Saivaite  and  Vis  quite-  Even  as 
early  as  Megawlher.es' s thee  the  Hindus  of  India  were  di- 
vided into  two  mighty  s^  hocs,  Visnuites  and  Saivaites; 
and  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  deities  who  are  completely 


1 See  for,  msfcaaci  "c  itiasura,  Bengali  edition,  415  ff. 


INTRODUCTION, 


at  the  mercy  of  the  imagination  of  their  iJevo  s!  o-lj 
Jose  their  universal  character  and  beveme  >!  , : n 
two  sections.  As  the  hostility  between  these-  two 
r .ions  increased.  their  gods  also  were  rcpresentc-;  a 
possessing  hostile  nature.  Hindu  deities  thus  divided 
weic  never  known  to  have  any  other  deity  on  * a 
'neads.  This  is  not  in  the  least  necessary  for  Homo 
r»  presentation  of  deities,  but  why  should  this  Tan 
rro  discussing  have  Aksobhya  on  her  crown?  None  o‘ 
the  points  raised,  therefore,  is  explained  according  h 
Hindu  traditions. 

Let  us  try  to  explain  the  three  points  with  the  Jielyj 
of  Buddhist  traditions.  The  Buddhists  have  a deity 
called  Ekajata  and  the  Sadhanas  Nos.  100,101,123,124, 
125,126,127,  and  128  all  relate  to  the  worship  which  is 
offered  to  this  deity  who  is  conceived  in  a variety  of 
different  forms.  In  the  Sadhanamala  this  deity  is 
variously  known  as  Ugratara,  Mahacxnatara,  Ekajata, 
Vidyujjvalakarall,  etc.  Out  of  these  the  form  known 
as  Mahacinatara  agrees  in  all  details  with  the  descrip- 
tion of  Tara  quoted  previously.  As  regards  the  second 
point  concerning  the  ornament  of  five  Mudras,  the 
Sadhanamala  offers  a solution.  According  to  a sloka 
the  Buddhists  recognized  six  Mudras  or  ornaments  all 
made  of  human  remains  representing  the  six  Paramiids 
well-known  in  early  Buddhism.  It  says  1 : — 

“The  Torque,  the  (two)  Bracelets,  a bejewelled  gird; 
ashes  and  the  sacred  thread  represent  the  six  Paramu  - 
and  are  applied  in  the  form  of  Mudras/’ 

It  might,  therefore,  be  inferred  that  the  adjevt  v 
stands  for  “a  goddess  decked  in  live  one- 

* 1 Sad}janaaml5,  p.  48ft. 


iNTEODI  TION. 


cxxxviii 

ments  (made  of  human  bones)  and  this  explanation  is 
quite  in  keeping  with  the  form  and  nature  of  the  deity 
under  discussion.  The  third  point  about  the  goddess 
having  Ak$obhya  on  her  head  can  easily  be  explained  by 
a reference  to  Buddhist  Iconography.  The  Buddhists 
recognize  five  Dhyani  Buddhas  as  presiding  over  the 
five  Skandhas  which  are  responsible  for  creation.  The 
names  of  the  five  are  given  in  the  following  couplet 1 

fwrft  frhnt  mvft  **  i 

The  Bodhisattvas  emanate  from  the  five  Dhyani  Bud- 
dhas, Vairocana,  Ratnasambhava,  Amitabha,  Amogha- 
siddhi  and  Aksobhya,  and  do  the  work  of  creation,  pro- 
tection and  destruction.  All  Bodhisattvas  and  Buddha- 
saktis  emanating  from  a particular  Dhyani  Buddha  are 
required  to  bear  a small  figure  of  the  parental  Dhyani 
Buddha  on  their  heads.  In  a large  number  of  Sadhanas 
the  deities  are  described  as 

fnxm,  etc.,  and  those  who  have  carefully  ex- 

amined the  sculptures  of  Buddhist  deities  preserved  in 
different  museums  must  have  noticed  the  very  interest- 
ing miniature  of  the  parental  Dhyani  Buddha  appearing 
on  the  heads  of  most  of  the  sculptures.2 

Thus  we  can  explain  all  the  three  points  raised  in 
connection  with  the  Hindu  deity  Tara  by  means  of 
Buddhist  traditions.  Let  us  now  try  to  find  out  whe- 
ther the  identical  deity  can  be  found  in  the  Buddhist 
Tan  trie  literature.  In  a Sadhana  composed  by  Sasvata- 

1 Sadhanamala,  p.  568. 

2 But  an  absurd  explanation  of  this  phenomenon  of  keeping  the  figure  of 
Aksobhya  on  the  crown  is  given  in  the  Toi^alatantra : — 

tfa  wn&fe  qgfwnj  i 

Yrqnrvi  i . 

3*  iTfmrqr  tfrfoft-  w i 


INTRODUCTION. 


C XXX*  ' 


vajra  we  find  the  description  of  a deity  identical  in  f 
and  nature  as  our  Hindu  deity  Tara.  There  we  read 

«ft^rwTf5rara  o 
^fr*  ;^uiuht^tu  i 

^ :r  luf^-ir  I 
C-c,  '..^T^rTTiT  II 

waP-rot  *r^nl  i;  i 

*n>i  . : •.  w I 

K'.T ’ - f ' ; i || 

This  Mahacinatara  at  r H indu  deity  Tara,  pre- 
sents a fearful  app<  ■-.  Ida  legs  arranged  in  the 

Pratyalldha  attitude  garland  of  skulls,  and 

her  face  is  rendered  < - ;,u o ;•  udnig  tongue  and 

fangs.  She  carries  i i ; ! t * : i, i hum Is  t fie  Kartri 

and  the  Kapala,  who  / . mmuc  oo  carries  the 

sword  in  the  right  an  * ■ - i ; * he  left.  She 

is  decked  in  five  Mink  cbm  < t ceure  of  Akso- 
bhya  on  the  crown.  The  :•*  c - < a 1;  > u between  the 
two  is  clear  and  oomph  - ‘ • is  a c y the  time  of 

Sasvatavajra  is  not  known  •✓.■pi:  Hr  he  must  be  earlier 
than  A.D.  1100,  as  his  S.  cum  .s  ■:  » be  found  in  the 
MS  B which  was  written  in  I)  1 105.  But  fortunately, 
there  is,  however,  another  .v  o-  finding  out  when  the 
deity  Ekajata,  entered  the  Buddhist  pantheon,  in  the 
colophon  of  the  Sadhana  No  127  of  Ekajata  we  meet 
with  a remarkable  sentence 

«n^«irjrT3i*nii^uT^Br  i 

■•>  ■*  ^ v 

“ Restored  by  Arya  Nagarjunupada  from  the  country  of 
Bhota.” 

This  fact  points  to  Nagarjuna  as  the  pioneer  to 
bring  to  India  the  worship  of  Ekajata  from  the  country 


1 Sadhanamala,  p.  210. 


2 livid,  p.  267. 


Cxi  rsrT;-. . " r-jTION. 

of  Bhota,  also  known  as  Mahacina,  which  accounts  for 
the  name  of  the  :otf  v Mahaclnatara.  We  may  be  pretty 
certain,  thereto,**,  that  before  the  time  of  Nagarjuna 
India  knew  of  in.-  deity  as  Bkajata.  The  accurate  time 
of  X • o rjuna  for  the  present  remains  an  open  question 
he!  ?; oiii  what  has  been  >nid  about  him  in  §4  we  can 
a .!'  him  clr.  A.D.  61  a. 

h;  this  connection  another  fact  is  to  be  noticed, 
nan — X . the  mention  of  the  tradition  in  connection  with 
the  o on  of  Mahaclnatara  according  to  purely  Hindu 
* , nh-  >■  •»(.-  in  the  Taratantra  Bhairavi  asks  Bhairava 
! th  n on  re  of  the  Mantra  by  which  Buddha  and  Vasi^tha 
om.-tined  p ifection  (Siddhi)  and  Bhairava  in  reply  gave 
n:  i < ' ' o ret  Tantra  to  her — a Tantra  belonging  to  the 
'«  wee  oh; a class  perscribing  revolting  practices.  In 
hi  ilnitnytiniala  again  we  read  of  Vasi$tha  being  asked 
h.  go  o Cinabhumi  where  the  Buddha  was  residing,1 
Vasistha  went  there  and  saw  the  Buddha  surrounded 
>y  m large  number  of  women  drinking  wine  and  engaged 
m obscene  rites.2  At  this  Vasistha  had  great  fears  and 
asked  the  Buddha  to  clear  up  his  doubts.  He  even- 
tually got  his  doubts  cleared  up  and  ultimately  obtained 
perfection  by  muttering  the  Mantra  and  by  the  free  use 
of  the  five  Malcaras .3 

In  the  Brahmayamala  also  the  same  story  is  repeat- 
ed with  some  modification.  Vasistha  went  to  Mahacina 

1 gfsm:  WT  B 

sun*  ipr  *f?riw  i 

2 Jr  b 

f^i  i 

**  1%TT:  5HCT  | 

i 

3 irsi  ^ i 

3*1  sw-  w- 1 


and  v,:? massed  the  .same  soene%<  ■ ‘m  --'U  ■ 
ye : * la  la  V as  i s t h a.-  a a t v u - ’ i ol  i • v *■  ; i ,.- 
'.:»>[  bo  Tiff'd  and  was  on  tin-  com,.  .:  ;.- • 

'V  * * * • * * / i f . was  a mysterious  voice  : yv>  ■ ’vu 
n vr-sanied  tii esc  strange  rites  u - I'imw.  ■ s m ! -. 
to  »ohov-.  the  same  for  the  attaimnnn ».■  it?  » v 
V as*./!  ha  was  pleased  -in- 1 eventually  cemn  v 
dha  vht :■*  lie  v-  as  in  .,  b:  may  drunken  state.* 

:l!-  ; hearing  In m r.tr,  v ( ?tJia  all  lie  des-.rnb 

■ !l  Ibndmsm  'in  ! ‘ aydmala  and  Bro.li rnayn m a 'a 
are  regaiM.-n  ••■■.  ddniw.  •:  the  greatest  authorif  v.  The 
evidence  ol  tiuen  i v.  . 1 in  ms  as  well  h>  of  -no  /’••',  • ••- 
tanln;.  u a is  u-i  ve  s;;  >no.-«»  that  this  Tara  was  eomhy  ped 
in  Ms  lyv  the  mi  dv  r inhabitants  who  nrme  wed 

prohatsy  m : a i » . * .•  fion  religion  of  Tibet  a nd  diet 
the  Hinds?:--.  >;  j - . • : AitfU  pom  the  Be  Idler  *>v  in  o-  hr  r 

\ve,;u'  • ernnibst.s.  It  is  very  nr  ltd  ay  ilat 

Nagmmna  eh..  ; ‘tuTed  in  the  middle  of  I he  V?  •.  cen- 
tury. w..w  ' to  introduce  the  worship  of  Ai  a ha- 
emal ; m : i hw.,-  The  Mantra,  Om  I Iriiii  Strim  Hum 

Pha* . (!  > : . ;.  - eU'd  by  the  Buddhists  and  the 

Hindus  euiri  tv  v it  mid  found  it  to  be  a powerful 
( lh &r e i ? i \ ; < d « b ■ v : e.  i n b > S iddhi,  . m<  1 that  is  probably 
the-,  n asOJi  why  rh-  Mm.dra  was  designated  as  one  of  the 
8 iddtMi  ma  n o a> 

i\\  this  ,:ei  ! - ; ■ -houhf  w borne  in  mind  that 

the  ancient,  own  : l •.  -v  non  the  Mantras  with  super* 

sb  turns  v f ■ I ••  i it  if  the  .Mantra  were 

changed  nr  ills  turfed  u-  vro?dd  either  give  no  result  or 

f.f.XM  i.rC-  ’ *1"  : ' ' -r  ly/^fyqn  j 
•; ' •( i < i • ■ -n-!  -r  ■■  a 

vur  ve-r  “-  vwu;  | 

^ i • 1 e-  ■■(•)  « 0 ;-W  ^ff  |( 

saM  *<&■■  mv.  lafiR’ffnnr.  ii 


cxlii 


INTRODUCTION. 


produce  great  harm.  Thus,  though  Ekajata’s  name  was 
changed  to  Tara,  her  Dhyana  was  changed  from  the  un- 
grammatical Buddhist  language  to  grammatical,  the 
Hindus  did  not  change  the  Mantra,  which  remained  the 
same.  This  is  a very  important  factor  for  all  who  will 
take  up  this  line  of  investigation,  because  by  comparing 
the  Mantras  alone  it  will  be  possible  to  detect  the  com- 
mon deities  in  different  religions,  to  trace  their  origin 
and  to  know  how  they  entered  into  the  different  pan- 
theons. 

Taking  the  similarity  of  Mantras  as  a guiding  factor 
let  us  proceed  to  examine  another  deity  who  is  included 
by  the  Hindus  in  the  ten  Mahavidya  group  and  who  is 
called  by  them  Chinnamasta.  She  is  described  in  the 
Tantrasdra 1 and  Chinnamasta  Kalpa 2 in  the  following 
words : — 

*r3r  5 err  i 

fwtff  wi  i 

( ^ ^UT^rf^f^cTTU  ) \\ 

wfewiwnra  ii 

orf  i 

wtc;  snt  i 

^frcTT  II 

m ^riTT^rrsf  n 

m i 

qtiffildMqlUKTil  II 

1 ^r*  ^n8t*  MS.  No.  4995,  iol  309  £f.  Quoted  from  an  earlier  work  called 
the  Bhairavatantra. 

* Ohirmamaetakalpa,  Or.  Inst.  MS.  No.  W2,  Col.  3b  fl. 


JNTROmr*  TXON. 


exJin 


inrrarCT  , 

si^f^OTPTcp  i 
^ft3T^T%^^Tf'TM|it  ugpyftw  II  ' 

From  this  Dayana  the  principal  goddess  Chinna- 
raasta  may  he  imagined  to  have  a very  awe-inspiring 
external  appearance.  She  holds  her  own  severed  head 
in  her  left  hand  and  from  her  severed  neck  issues  forth 
a stream  of  blood  fail  mg  into  the  mouth  of  the  severed 
head.  She  is  nude,  of  fierce  appearance,  with  leg'- 
arranged  in  the  Rvatyaiidhn  attitude.  She  wears  a gai 
land  of  heads  and  carries  in  her  right  hand  the  Karin, 
and  according  to  sons  stands  on  Rati  and  Kama. 
She  is  accompanied  by  two  alt*  ndargts,  Hakim  and 
Varnmi  on  the  right  and  the  left  sides  respect i veiy. 
They  are  identical  in  form  and  a p peat  a nee  and  carry 
the  Kartri  in  the  right  hand  and  the  Ka  pa  la  in  the  left, 
and  drink  the  blood  which  issues  in  a stream  from  the 
severed  neck  of  rate  principal  deity 

Now,  that  wo  ha  ve  a.  doinui  e idea  about  the  form 
of  this  powerful  goddess  from,  the  Hindu  sources  let  as 
turn  to  the  Sadhannwafa  and  see  if  we  can  find  a deity 
identical  in  appearance  and  form  with  the  Hindu  god 
dess  Chinnaoiarsfa  The  Sudhmmmfiid  contains  the  des- 
cription of  a dei. tv  who  is  named  Vajrayogim  and  resem- 
bles in  all  respects  the  form  of  Chirmamasta  we  have 
been  discussing.  There  the  Dhyana  is  1 : — 

Tftcr<*jTiT 

«rat  ott K>n 

ufrofar,  ^nwf:  sfasrf?*  i 

WVRtm ^t«  ?rf wvwicf =wft??r  ?rmn- 


1 Satlhanamula , p.  462. 


cxliv 


INTRODUCTION . 


wifefTWM  is  P*h  mt%  ^srf^T^n^ 

*mtcj  a 

According  to  Buddhist  tradition,  therefore,  the 
deity  should  be  nude  and  should  carry  her  own  head 
severed  by  herself  with  lier  own  Kartri  which  she  carries 
in  her  right  hand.  She  stands  in  the  Pratyalidha  atti- 
tude with  her  left  hand  raised  and  the  right  lowered. 
She  is  accompanied  by  VajravarnanI  and  Vajravairo- 
canl  who  carry  the  Kartri  and  Karpara  (skull)  and  stand 
in  the  Pratyalidha  attitude.  From  the  neck  of  the 
principal  deity  issue  forth  streams  of  blood,  one  falling 
into  her  own  xuouth  and  two  others  into  the  mouths  of 
the  two  companions. 

It  is,  therefore,  apparent  that  the  two  deities 
though  designated  by  two  different  names,  Chinnamasta 
and  VajrayoginT,  are  remarkably  similar.  And  yet  one 
is  Hindu  and  the  other  is  Buddhist.  There  thus  arises 
the  necessity  to  explain  the  origin  of  the  deity  and 
to  ascertain  whether  she  was  originally  Hindu  or  Bud- 
dhist. The  Tantrasara  is  very  late,  and  the  Bhairava - 
tantra  from  which  the  Dhyana  is  quoted  is  of  uncertain 
date.  Therefore,  these  dates  will  not  help.  The 
Sadhanamala  however,  gives  valuable  data  in  ascertain- 
ing the  antiquity  of  this  deity.  First  of  all,  the  sadhana 
appears  in  the  MS  B which  shows  that  the  sadhana 
must  have  been  composed  at  least  before  1100  A.D. 
The  remarks  contained  in  the  Sadhanamala  \ — w* 

i show  further 

that  Siddha  Sabarapada  was  the  ascetic  responsible 
for  the  introduction  of  a new  cult  of  Vajrayoginl. 
This  fact  shows  that  the  cult  of  Vajrayoginl  ex- 
isted even  before  the  time  of  Siddha  Sahara  who  very 
probably  flourished  in  Gir.  A.D.  657  as  shown  before 
in  § 4.  The  origin  of  the  deity  may,  therefore,  be  dated 
still  earlier.  At  this  stage  it  is  also  necessary  to  refer 


introduction* 


■ cxlv 


to  the  Mantras  in  question,  which  are  likely  to  throw 
decisive  light  on  this  point.  But  unfortunately  as  much 
time  has  elapsed  since  the  introduction  of  the  Vajrayo- 
gini  cult  many  copies  of  MSS  containing  the  ritual  of 
her  worship  have  failed  to  bring  out  the  original  accu- 
racy of  the  Mantras  and  the  practices.  Very  probably 
owing  to  this,  errors  and  modifications  are  noticeable  in 
the  MSS  now  extant  in  the  Mantra  of  the  goddess  in 
Hindu  literature,  but  it  is  still  to  be  hoped  that  there 
remains  enough  to  prove  that  the  cult  was  originally 
Buddhist. 

Quite  naturally  the  Mantra  given  in  the  Sadhana - 
mala  runs  as  : — 

we  w?  OTST  i 

The  three  letters  are  given  to  the  three  deities  so 
also  the  three  ^ letters  and  three  wzs.  The  principal 
deity  is  called  in  the  Mantra  Sarva-Buddhadakinl,  while 
the  attendant  to  her  left  is  Vajravarnani  and  to  her  right, 
Vajravairocani.  The  prefix  “Vajra”  shows  that  the 
deities  belong  to  Vajrayana.  Thus  we  can  see  that  the 
Mantra  is  the  natural  consequence  of  the  form  of  the 
deity  according  to  the  canons  of  Vajrayana.  The  epi- 
thet clearly  shows  the  Buddhist  character  of 

the  Mantra.  In  the  Buddhist  tradition  the  principal 
deity  is  Dakin!  and  the  companions  are  Vajravarnani  and 
Vajravairqcani.  In  the  Hindu  literature  the  principal 
deity  is  designated  Chinnamasta  while  the  companions 
are  named  Dakin!  and  Varnam  with  the  prefix  w drop- 
ped altogether.  But  the  difficulty  arises  when  we  take 
up  the  Mantra  of  the  deity  as  given  in  Hindu  Tantras. 
Different  MSS  show  different  Mantras ; the  Chhinna - 
maatakalpa 1 enumerates  several  Mantras  as  alterna- 
tives. The  Mantra  given  in  Tantraaara  is  wfafiwiwH 

i Oriental  Institute  MS.  No.  4905  foL  812a, 


cxlvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


whcfcrelfr  tt r<nr  ttitt  etc/  In  this  also 
the  three  names  Dakini,  Varnanl,  and  VairocanI,  all 
appear,  but  why  the  prefixes  are  changed  from 
in  the  first  two  instances  to  ^ in  the  third  instance, 
we  fail  to  understand.  The  change,  however,  appears 
to  be  more  or  less  deliberate  as  will  be  evident  from 
the  Mantra  given  in  the  Chhinnamastakalpa , namely, 
srf  g £ mz  i 2 

From  this  it  can  definitely  be  said  that  the  original  of 
srffafe  was  as  is  evident  from  of  the  Chhinna- 

mastakalpa. If  the  original  is  taken  in  view  of  the  cir- 
cumstances noted  above  to  be  ^ g there  remains  very 
little  to  show  that  the  origin  of  the  goddess  is  Buddhist 

Tlius  we  can  realize  the  importance  of  the  study 
of  iconography,  especially  in  determining  the  origin  of 
certain  deities  and  certain  Mantras.  In  this  connection 
there  are  more  facts  which  are  noteworthy.  It  may 
be  remembered  that  the  Vajrayanists  described  the  idea 
of  Mahasukha  as  a state  when  Bodhicitta  merges  itself 
in  Sunyata  as  salt  melts  in  water,  and  to  symbolize  this 
the  followers  of  Vajrayana  conceived  the  idea  of  Yab- 
yum  (or  Yuganaddha)  deities,  or  deities  in  embrace. 
So  Yabyum  deities  are  an  outcome  of  purely  Vajrayanic 
idea,  which  was  unknown  to  Hinduism  before  the  Tan- 
tric  Age,  and  even  now  does  not  fit  in  well  with  Hindu 
ideas  or  traditions.  If  there  be  any  deity  of  a Yab-yum 
character  in  the  Hindu  pantheon,  there  is  a strong  sus- 
picion that  the  deity  may  be  of  Buddhist  origin.  When 
Kali,  for  instance,  is  described  as  V ipantarataturam  we 
have  at  once  to  regard  the  deity  as  of  Buddhist  origin. 
Kali  according  to  Buddhist  traditions  is  Kadi  or  Kakd - 
radi,  or  in  other  words,  all  consonants  of  the  alphabet, 
as  the  vowels  were  designated  srrftr  or  WRUOfe,  and  it  is 

' * Oriental  Institute  MS.  No.  4995  fol.  312  a. 

8 Oriental  Institute  MS.  No.  1692  fol.  2 b. 


INTRODUCTION. 


cxlvii 


not  to  be  wondered  at  if  a deity  is  conceived  by  the 
Buddhists  as  Kali  belonging  to  the  Yogatantra  class  and 
in  whom  all  the  consonants  of  the  alphabet  are  deified. 
In  the  Yogatantra  and  Anuttarayogatantra  all  gods 
are  represented  as  embracing  their  oaktis  and  feeling 
the  bliss  of  Nirvana. 

Another  important  fact  to  be  noticed  in  fixing  the 
origin  of  deities  is  their  Dhyana.  If  the  names  of  the 
deities  end  or  begin  with  the  word  Vajra  in  ninety  per 
cent,  of  cases  we  may  rest  assured  that  they  take  their 
origin  in  Buddhism  and  where  gods  and  goddesses  are 
described  as  nude  and  lustful  their  origin  also  may  be 
regarded  for  certain  as  Buddhistic.  When  deities  are 
described  with  ornaments  of  Mudras  representing  the 
Paramitas  and  composed  of  human  borfes  such  as 

or  etc.,  they  may  taken  to 

have  sprung  from  Buddhism  And  lastly,  whenever 
gods  and  goddesses  are  described  as  bearing  a miniature 
figure  of  one  of  the  following  deities,  Amitabha,  Vairo- 
cana,  Amoghasiddhi,  Aksobhya  and  Ratnasambhava — 
on  their  crown  they  must  be  taken  to  be  Buddhist  in 
origin. 

*jc  * * 

II.  Some  Identifications . 

How  potent  the  Sadhanas  are  in  determining  the 
identification  of  images  in  stone  or  metal  or  in  paintings, 
has  already  been  shown  by  Professor  A.  Foucher  of  the 
Paris  University  in  his  two  volumes  of  Etudes  Sur 
V Iconographie  Bouddhique  de  VInde  and  subsequently 
by  the  present  writer  in  his  Indian  Buddhist  Icono- 
graphy. Now  that  the  text  of  the  Sadhanamala  is  pub- 
lished it  is  likely  to  offer  fuller  details  and  render  fuller 
assistance  in  correcting  identifications  already  proposed 
in  the  earlier  works  on  the  subject.  To  show  how 
Sadhanas  and  images  mutually  help  to  explain  each 


cxlviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


other,  we  shall  take  up  the  identification  of  a few  images 
including  some  unique  specimens  from  the  State  Museum 
and  Picture-Gallery  at  Baroda,  and  demonstrate  the 
picture  correspondence  as  fully  as  possible  within  this 
limited  space. 

1.  Vajrasana  (PI.  I).1 

This  beautiful  sculpture  is  now  preserved  in  the 
Indian  Museum.  Calcutta.  The  main  figure  wears  the 
monkish  dress  of  the  Buddhists,  the  Tricivara,  with  the 
right  arm  bare  and  left  covered.  The  pose  of  sitting 
is  usual  in  meditation,  cross-legged  in  the  Indian  fashion 
with  the  soles  of  both  feet  turned  upwards.  The  finger 
tips  of  the  right  hand  touches  the  lotus  seat  in  what  is 
called  the  Bhumi^parsa  mudra  and  the  left  hand  rests 
on  the  left  lap.  The  seat  of  the  deity  is  on  the  double 
conventional  lotus  placed  on  a pedestal  supported  by 
three  lions  and  two  elephants,  showing  that  the  seat 
may  represent  a simhasana  or  a lion  throne.  The  head 
of  the  deity  is  covered  with  wavy  hair  and  ear-rings 
adorn  the  ears.  Behind  the  head  is  the  circular  halo 
(Prabhamandala)  over  which  is  seen  the  effigy  of  the 
Bo-tree,  the  symbol  of  the  Buddha.  On  the  top  and  on 
the  two  sides  two  Vidyadharas  are  seen  flying  in  the 
air,  each  holding  a garland  in  his  hand.  The  principal 
figure  is  accompanied  by  two  more  figures,  one  on  either 
side,  in  a standing  posture.  The  figure  to  the  left  of 
the  principal  figure  carries  a chowrie  in  the  right  hand 
resting  against  his  shoulder,  while  the  left  rests  against 
the  hip  holding  the  stem  of  a lotus  which  appears  above. 
The  figure  to  the  right  carries  in  the  left  hand  the 
chowrie  against  the  shoulder  while  the  right  carries  very 
probably  a bunch  of  flowers.  Both  are  richly  decora- 
ted with  a bejewelled  tiara,  torque,  bracelets,  armlets 
and  ear-ornaments. 


i From  a photo  purchased  from  the  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta. 


■MjMi 


,81  LOKESVARA  <W^0r-#«WC) 


I Mum 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlix 


To  identify  this  figure  we  turn  to  page  22  of  the 
text  of  Sadhanamald  and  find  the  following  description 
which  agrees  completely  with  the  sculpture  in  question. 
There  we  read  of  a god  designated  Vajrasana  and  describ- 
ed  in  the  following  terms : — 

...  t 

^ I wr^TORfHft^nTTJD  ^I^eT  I 

^ Nl  ^ 

This  Dhyana  shows  that  the  principal  figure  in  the 
sculpture  may  be  identified  with  Vajrasana,  and  the  two 
companions  with  Maitreya  on  the  right,  and  with  Loke- 
svara  oil  the  left.  The  pose  of  sitting  is  called  the  Vajra- 
paryanka  attitude  and  the  posture  of  the  right  hand  is 
the  Bhumisparsa  mudra.  The  description  of  the  image 
and  the  description  contained  in  the  Sadhana  corres- 
pond in  a way  which  makes  the  identification  certain. 

2.  Sadaksarl  Lokesvara  (PI.  II).1 

Here  the  picture  represents  a goddess  sitting  in  the 
attitude  of  Samadhi,  with  legs  crossed  and  the  soles  of 
the  feet  turned  upwards.  The  deity  is  endowed  with 
one  face  and  four  arms  and  is  decked  with  many  orna- 
ments, such  as  the  girdle,  necklace,  bracelets,  armlets, 
ear-ornaments  and  a richly  bejewelled  tiara.  The  eyes 
are  half  closed  in  token  of  meditation  and  the  whole  face 
presents  a peaceful,  benign,  and  graceful  appearance. 
The  two  principal  hands  are  joined  together  against  the 
breast  in  anjali.  The  second  right  hand  carries  the 
rosary  while  the  second  left  carries  a lotus.  This  metal 

1 From  a photo  purchased  from  the  Baroda  Museum. 


el  INTRODUCTION. 

figure  is  a product  of  the  Nepalese  art  and  the  execution 
of  the  image  is  of  no  ordinary  merit.  From  the  appear- 
ance oi  the  image  it  looks  as  though  it  were  about  three 
hundred  years  old. 

For  the  identification  of  the  image  let  us  again  turn 
to  page  29  of  the  text  of  the  first  volume  and  quote  the 
relevant  Dhyana  which  is  expressed  in  the  following 
words : 

wr4r:  irfaxiw 

’reigirew:  orrsnilfaww 

W4  i.  •••  I 

The  principal  figure  presented  in  the  image  can  thus 
be  definitely  identified  with  Lokesvara,  who  isthe  pre- 
siding deity  of  the  famous  mantra  or  vidya  or  formula 
of  the  Buddhists  Om  Mani  Padme  Hum  consisting  of 
six  syllables  only.  The  Lokesvara  here  described,  there- 
fore, has  another  name,  of  Sadaksarl-Lokesvara.  He  is 
an  emanation  of  the  Dhyani-Buddha  Amitabha  and  that 
is  the  reason  why  he  has  to  wear  on  his  crown  the  minia- 
ture figure  of  Amitabha.  But  as  in  art  sometimes  this 
super-imposition  is  made  optional  no  miniature  appears 
on  the  head  of  this  metal  figure.  The  mudra  of  clasped 
hand  is  here  called  the  Sarvarajendra-mudra.  Thus 
from  the  accurate  correspondence  of  form  and  symbols, 
it  can  be  seen  how  the  image  and  the  Sadhana  mutually 
explain  each  other. 

3.  Sadalcsari  Mandala  (PI.  III).1 

The  word  mandala  in  Tantric  usage  means  a magic 
circle  which  contains  within  it  the  figures  of  deities  or 
their  symbols  in  the  form  of  letters  of  the  alphabet  or 

1 From  a photo  purchased  from  the  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta. 


INTRODUCTION. 


cli 


their  geometric  figures  ( Yantra ).  The  ma^dalas  may 
contain  from  a minimum  of  two  to  a considerable  num- 
ber of  deities  or  their  symbols.  In  the  present  sculpture 
three  figures  of  deities  are  to  be  seen,  though  one  to  the 
right  seems  to  be  much  mutilated.  The  principal  figure 
has  . all  the  characteristics  of  the  previous  figure  identi- 
fied as  Sadaksarl-Lokesvara.  But  this  time  it  is  accom- 
panied with  two  other  figures  and  is  not  alone  as  in  the 
previous  case.  The  two  principal  hands  are  joined  to- 
gether and  they  rest  against  the  breast.  Two  other 
hands  hold,  the  rosary  in  the  right,  and  the  lotus  in  tlie 
left.  The  lotus,  however,  is  much  mutilated  but  it  can 
be  traced  by  following  the  stalk  which  is  clearly  seen  on 
the  stone.  The  figure  to  the  right  of  the  principal  god 
is  entirely  broken,  but  the  Sadhana  will  show  what  it 
was  and  what  symbols  it  had  in  its  hands.  The  figure 
to  the  left,  however,  is  intact  and  presents  a goddess 
sitting  on  a lotus  in  what  is  called  the  Vlrasana,  with 
one  face  and  four  arms  showing  in  the  two  principal 
hands  the  anjali  mudra  and  in  two  others  the  rosary  in 
the  right  and  the  lotus  in  the  left.  To  identify  the 
mandala  thus  presented,  and  to  determine  the  form  and 
character  of  the  broken  figure  let  us  again  turn  to  page 
27  of  the  text  where  the  following  description  is  pre- 
served : — 

«rrwT«i  tow  uspn: 

UTTfTOTU  i 

Lokesvara  is  here  described  as  four-armed  with  two 
hands  carrying  the  rosary  in  the  right  and  the  lotus  in 
the  left  and  showing  the  anjali  in  the  remaining  two 
hands.  He  is  accompanied  by  Manidhara  on  the  right 
whose  colour,  hands  and  symbols  are  the  same  as  those 
of  the  principal  god,  seated  on  another  lotus.  On  a 


clii 


INTRODUCTION. 


third  lotus  is  seated  Sadaksarl  Mahavidya  who  in  appear- 
ance, colour  and  symbols  in  the  four  hands  resembles 
the  principal  god.  There  lore,  on  the  strength  of  the 
Sadhana  we  can  definitely  describe  the  broken  figure  to 
the  right  of  the  principal  figure  on  the  stone  sculpture 
as  that  of  Manidhara,  four-armed  carrying  the  rosary 
in  the  right  hand  and  the  lotus  in  the  left  with  the 
remaining  two  showing  the  anjali  against  the  breast. 
It  has  to  be  pointed  out  in  this  connection  that  though 
the  principal  figure  sits  in  the  Vajraparyanka  attitude, 
the  companions  whose  forms  ought  to  agree  entirely 
with  the  principal  figure  show  the  Virasana  instead.  In 
Sadhana  No.  11  the  goddess  Sadaksari  Mahavidya  is 
indeed  described  with  the  Virasana,  but  there  her  sym- 
bols are  different  from  those  met  with  in  the  present 
image.  Here,  however,  the  different  attitude  of  sitting 
must  be  ascribed  to  the  liberties  taken  by  the  artist. 

I.  Khasarpana  Lokesvara  (PL  IV).  1 

The  image  represented  is  one  of  the  finest  the  Ben- 
gal School  of  mediaeval  art  produced  and  the  nature, 
technique,  and  execution  of  the  sculpture  compare  favour- 
ably with  those  of  the  best  specimens  of  Indian  art  of  any 
other  school.  All  the  figures  in  the  sculpture  are  well 
balanced,  neatly  carved  and  present  a most  graceful 
appearance.  The  execution  of  details  is  excellent  and 
the  workmanship  is  of  a very  high  order.  In  this  image 
also  a mandala  is  represented  with  the  principal  figure  in 
the  middle  who  is  accompanied  by  four  figures  standing 
on  double  conventional  lotuses  on  the  two  sides.  On 
the  arch  over  the  head  of  the  principal  figure  there  are 
seven  niches  each  containing  a small  figure.  Right  on 
the  top  is  the  figure  of  the  parental  Dhyani  Buddha  who 
is  distinguished  further  from  the  other  Dhyani  Buddhas 
by  the  two  attendants  appearing  on  the  two  sides. 

From  a photograph  kindly  supplied  by  Mr.  H.  D.  Banerjee,  M.A. 


INTRODUCTION.  ciiii 

Mow  and  ail  rpund  the  niches,  a1. thick  foliage  is  re- 
presented and  within  this  are  seen  lively  figures  of 
monkeys,  peacocks  and  other  animals.  On  the  pedestal 
below  are  to  be  found  several  sacred  symbols  of  the 
Buddhists. 

The  principal  figure  sits  on  a double  conventional 
lotus  with  its  right  leg  unsupported  and  the  left  resting 
on  the  seat.  He  is  profusely  adorned  with  a variety  of 
ornaments,  and  presents  a benign  and  peaceful  appear- 
ance with  eyes  half-closed  in  meditation.  He  wears  a 
Jatamukuta  and  on  the  crown  there  is  the  miniature  figure 
of  a Dhyani  Buddha  represented  in  the  Samadhi  mudra. 

Tn  the  right  t wo  more  figures  appear,  one  in  a sitting 
and  the  other  in  a standing  attitude.  The  standing  figure 
represents  a goddess  with  the  blue  lotus  in  the  left  hand. 
This  figure  has  also  a calm  and  peaceful  appearance  and 
the  mode  of  standing  has  a grace  of  its  own.  The  sitting 
figure  represents  a male  deity,  with  ornaments  and  a 
tiara  and  hands  clasped  against  his  breast  and  a book 
in  the  left  arm-pit. 

There  are  similarly  two  figures  to  the  left  of  the 
principal  deity,  one  in  a sitting  and  another  in  a standing 
attitude.  Here  also  the  sitting  figure  represents  a god 
and  the  standing  figure  a goddess.  The  sitting  figure 
has  a fierce  countenance  with  bare  fangs  and  eyes  rolling 
in  anger.  It  carries  a mace  in  the  left  hand  and  shows 
a corpulent  belly.  The  standing  figure  represents  a 
goddess  with  one  face  and  four  arms,  showing  the  namas- 
kara  mudra,  and  the  rosary  in  the  two  right  and  the 
Tridandi  and  the  Kamandalu  in  the  two  left  hands. 

For  the  purpose  of  identifying  this  sculpture  with 
the  principal  and  the  attendant  deities  let  us  again  turn  to 
page  43  of  the  Sadhariamald  where  we  have  the  following 


cliv 


INTRODUCTION. 


description  of  Khasarpana  Lokesvara  with  four  attendant 
deities : — 


^u^^dR'T  yiTy^m^grf  ^iRuffavsrN’rr  ^r^- 


^JTfasR-*  (?)  I 

cT^f  mZTqffzft  *lti  ^RfjjTNT  ^^fft^TWT  UfR^wrfU- 

ut*tt  stj^r  f^f^DT  wv^wrejflwraTT 


^3  rmfrt 

mtsifoct  3nsrn*f«re:  ?wz*xi:  i 


ufliwf 


When  this  description  is  compared  with  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  sculpture  given  above  it  will  be  seen  that 
they  correspond  most  remarkably.  And  as  a result  of 
this  we  can  identify  the  principal  deity  as  Khasarpana, 
one  of  the  many  forms  of  Lokesvara — an  emanation  of 
Amitabha,  whose  effigy  appears  on  his  crown  in  the 
sculpture.  Though  the  right  hand  of  the  image  is  broken 
we  can  definitely  say  on  the  strength  of  the  Sadhana 
that  it  showed  the  Varada  or  the  gift-bestowing  attitude. 
The  standing  figure  to  the  right  according  to  the  Dhyana 
is  Tara  while  the  sitting  figure  represent  Sudhanakumara. 
The  standing  figure  to  the  left,  of  course,  represents 
Bhrkuti  as  we  can  assert  from  her  characteristic  Kaman- 
dalu,  while  the  sitting  figure  represents  the  fearful  god 
Hayagriva.  In  the  niches  of  the  arch  are  represented 
the  five  Dhyani  Buddhas  with  Amitabha  and  hiB  two 
attendants  in  the  middle,  while  the  two  lowermost  figures 
very  probably  represent  the  Pretas  (like  Sucimukha) 
whom  Avalokitesvara  seems  to  have  saved  from  eternal 
miseries. 


INTRODUCTION. 


civ 


One  thing  noticeable  in  this  Sadhana  is  that  the 
principal  deity  is  here  described  as  sitting  in  the  Lalita 
attitude  on  a sattvaparyanka. . The  attitude  of  sitting 
adopted  by  the  principal  figure  in  lettirig  down  the 
right  leg  while  the  left  is  placed  on  a pedestal  is  what 
is  called  the  Lalita  attitude  of  sitting.  What  the  Sattva- 
jjaryanka  is,  is  a matter  of  longstanding  controversy. 
It  was  pointed  out  once  that  the  Sattvaparyanka  may 
represent  the  animal  seat  but  Professor  Foucher  mis- 
trusted this  interpretation.  From  the  present  image  it 
appears  very  probable  that  by  sattvaparyanka  is  meant 
the  seat  on  which  are  carved  the  figures  of  animals 
other  than  the  lion,  because  if  the  lion  was  there  it 
would  no  longer  be  called  the  Sattvaparyanka  but  an 
actual  Simhdsana. 

5.  Lokarmtha  (PL  F).1 

This  picture  represents  the  stone  image  of  a god 
seated  on  what  is  called  the  Ardhaparyahkasana  attitude 
with  the  right  knee  raised  up  and  the  left  leg  placed  on 
the  seat.  The  figure  is  exceedingly  artistic  with  a well- 
balanced  body,  a round  face,  pointed  and  well-shaped, 
and  eyes  completely  but  artistically  closed  in  token  of 
meditation.  He  wears  a Jatamukuta , the  ear-rings,  the 
deer-skin  and  the  sacred  thread  besides  the  bracelets  and 
the  armlets.  The  left  hand  rests  on  the  seat  behind  the 
left  thigh  and  holds  the  stem  of  a full-blowm  lotus  which 
appears  above.  On  the  right  also  a full-blown  lotus  is  to 
be  seen.  On  the  whole  the  figure  presents  a most 
pleasant  and  mystic  appearance  and  brings  to  the  mind 
of  the  observer  an  atmosphere  of  serenity  and  peace. 

For  the  purpose  of  identification  we  have  to  notice 
the  two  lotuses  on  the  two  sides  which  are  the  well-known 
symbols  of  Padmapani,  the  emanation  of  Amitabha. 

1 From  a photograph  kindly  supplied  by  Mr,  Prayag  Dayal  of  the  Lucknow 
Museum. 


clvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


Lokanatha  is  that  form  of  Padmapani  in  which  he  may 
or  may  not  be  associated  with  any  other  deity  of  the 
Khasarpana  mandala,  such  as,  Sudhana,  Hayagrlva, 
Tara  and  BhrkutI ; but  when  all  the  four  are  present  he 
is  to  be  recognized  as  Khasarpana.  Moreover,  Khasar- 
pana generally  is  described  as  sitting  in  the  Lalita  atti- 
tude, but  Lokanatha  may  take  any  attitude  such  as  the 
Ardhaparyanka * attitude  in  the  present  figure  ; even 
standing  figures  of  Lokanatha  are  not  at  all  uncommon 
in  art. 


The  figure  represented  in  Plate  Xlb  from  a metal 
image  in  the  Baroda  Museum  responds  to  the  description 
contained  in  the  Sadhana  in  as  complete  a manner  as 
could  be  expected  and  shows  the  Varada  Mudra  in  the 
right  and  holds  the  stalk  of  a lotus  in  his  left  hand.  The 
lotus  to  the  right  in  the  present  figure  may  be  ascribed  to 
the  vagaries  of  the  artist  and  the  addition  may  be  due  to 
the  desire  on  his  part  to  have  a lotus  parallel  to  the  one 
on  the  left. 

b.  Simhawxda  Lokesvara  (PL  VII).1 

The  present  picture  represents  a sculpture  of  wonder- 
ful beauty,  and  its  execution  in  art  is  perfect.  This  can 
be  pronounced  to  be  one  of  the  very  best  specimens  of 
Oriental  Art  and  represents  one  of  the  treasures  of  the 
Lucknow  Museum.  The  calm,  dignified  and  mystic 
expression,  the  superb  grace  in  the  attitude  of  sitting  on 
a lion,  and  the  beautiful  delineation  of  a well-balanced 
figure,  all  contribute  to  the  greatness  of  the  unknown 
artist  who  shaped  the  lifeless  stone  into  this  exquisite 
image.  The  figure  wears  the  Jatamukuta  on  the  crown 
and  several  tufts  of  hair  are  shown  on  the  shoulders  in  the 
most  artistic  fashion  ; it  has  no  ornaments  except  perhaps 


1 From  m photograph  kindly  supplied  by  Mr.  Prayag  Dayal  of  the  Lucknow 
Muaeum. 


mmm 


lH 


INTRODUCTION. 


clvii 


the  Yajnopavlta  if  it  can  be  called  an  ornament.  The 
left  hand  rests  on  the  seat  behind  the  thigh.  Probably 
the  stalk  of  a lotus  is  held  in  his  left  hand  and  by  follow- 
ing the  stalk  we  come  to  the  full  blown  lotus  above,  near 
the  left  shoulder,  and  the  small  sword  which  appears  on 
the  lotus.  To  the  left  appears  the  trident  or  the  trisula 
on  to  which  a snake  is  entwined.  In  the  right  hand  the 
figure  carries  a rosary.  The  seat  is  on  the  back  of  a 
roaring  lion  who  holds  up  his  head  towards  the  rider  in 
the  most  life-like  fashion. 

For  the  purpose  of  identification  let  us  refer  to  page 
63  of  the  present  text  where  the  description  of  a deity 
similar  in  appearance  is  described  in  the  following 
words : — 



With  the  help  of  this  Sadhana  we  can  identify  the 
present  image  as  of  Sirhhanada  Lokesvara  because  the 
description  of  the  image  and  that  of  the  deity  in  the  Sa- 
dhana correspond  in  all  possible  details.  Only  in  two 
details,  however,  the  present  image  does  not  agree ; the 
rosary  carried  by  the  figure  in  the  right  hand  is  not  men- 
tioned in  the  Sadhana,  and  the  lotus  vessel  contain- 
ing various  fragrant  flowers  mentioned  in  the  Sadhana 
does  not  appear  in  the  image.  But  in  spite  of  these  two 
discrepancies  it  is  easy  to  testify  to  the  correctness  of 
the  identification. 

7.  Arapaama  Manjv^rl  (Pl.  VII).1 

The  picture  represents  a figure  with  one  hand  and 
the  tiara  broken.  It  does  not  present  a satisfactory 

1 From  a photograph  kindly  supplied  by  Mr.  N.  K.  Bhattasali  of  the  Dace* 
Museum. 


clviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


impression  because  of  the  mutilation.  The  image  is 
however  rich  in  details  and  in  workmanship  but  poor  in 
execution.  The  sunken  eyes,  a clumsy  hand  and  femi- 
nine narrowness  of  the  waist  do  not  redound  to  the  credit 
of  the  sculptor.  The  sculpture,  therefore,  connot  be 
designated  as  a good  specimen  of  art.  The  central 
figure,  however,  is  richly  decorated  with  all  Bodhisattva 
ornaments  such  as  the  mukuta,  ear-rings,  torque,  neck- 
lace, armlets,  bracelet the  girdle  and  the  anklets;  the 
upper  part  of  the  body  is  bare  though  there  is  a fashion- 
able scarf  which  can  be  recognized  by  the  overflowing 
ends  shown  on  the  aureole  on  both  sides.  The  lower 
part  of  the  body  is  covered  by  thin  loin  cloth  which  is 
rendered  most  beautiful  by  means  of  stripes.  The  legs 
are  arranged  in  the  meditative  attitude  like  that  of 
Vajrasana  and  Sadaksarl  previously  described.  The  right 
hand  is  gone  and  it  is  not  possible  to  say  at  present 
what  symbol  it  held.  But  the  left  hand  which  lies 
against  the  breast  carries  a book. 

But  on  the  sculpture  there  are  many  more  figures 
besides  the  principal  one.  Below'  the  lotus  seat  and  on 
the  pedestal  in  front  two  figures  are  seen  supporting  the 
seat  with  all  their  might ; behind  them  there  are  figures 
on  the  left  and  the  right  who  represent  some  unknown 
devotees  or  perhaps  the  donor  and  his  family.  But 
between  the  two  demons  there  appears  a figure  as  if  set 
up  against  the  lotus  seat.  Similar  figures  are  also  seen 
to  the  right  and  the  left  of  the  principal  deity  and  one 
on  the  top  of  the  sculpture  just  above  the  crown  of  the 
principal  figure.  Besides  these  four,  some  more  figures, 
sculptured  on  the  upper  part  of  the  aureole  behind,  are 
to  be  seen  representing  the  five  Dhyani  Buddhas  except 
Ak^obhya, — the  Dliyani  Buddha  with  the  Bhuspar6a- 
mudra — whose  place  has  been  taken  by  one  of  the  four 
mysterious  figures  surrounding  the  principal  deity  in  the 
front  and  the  rear  and  on  the  right  and  the  left.  All 


IKTEODTJ  OTION. 


clix 


these  four  figures  present  the  same  appearance  with  legs 
arranged  in  the  Samadhimudra  and  carrying  a raised 
sword  in  the  right  hand  and  a book  in  the  left.  They 
all  wear  ornaments  and  in  other  respects  resemble  the 
principal  deity  in  appearance  and  character. 

Here  also  the  sculpture  represents  a Mandala  or 
magic  circle  and  for  its  identification  let  us  turn  to  page 
118  of  the  text  where  we  meet  with  a description  of  a 
deity  by  the  name  of  Arapacana  who  is  accompanied  by 
four  minor  deities.  It  runs  as  follows : — 

nvcxim 

f^*rTf*rps  ..... 

fn^wncfa^ii  ucft 

ftrcrt  iffawhiTt  

fafw^cr  ti 

According  to  the  dictum  laid  down  in  the  Sadhana 
the  whole  sculpture  may  be  identified  as  that  of  the 
Arapacana  .Mandala.  The  principal  god  represents 
Arapacana  ManjusrI,  the  figure  in  front  Jaliniprabha, 
the  one  behind  Oandraprabha,  that  to  the  right  KesinI, 
and  the  one  to  the  left  Upakesini.  The  principal  as  well 
as  the  minor  deities  of  the  Mandala  should  present  the 
same  appearance  and  symbols  as  we  find  in  the  Dacca 
specimen  now  before  us.  The  Sadhana  further  says  that 
the  principal  deity  originates  from  the  germ  syllable  «r, 
Jaliniprabha  from  x,  Candraprabha  from  if,  KesinI  from 
% and  Upakesini  from  *r,  and  this  probably  accounts 
for  the  name  of  the  deity,  Arapacana  (^owr). 

8,  Buddhakap&la  (Pl.  VIII).1 

The  present  image  which  is  now  preserved  in  the 
Baroda  Museum,  though  coarse  in  execution  is  unique  in 

1 From  a photograph  supplied  by  the  Baroda  Muaeum. 


c lx  introduction. 

character  from  an  iconograpber’s  point  of  view.  Here 
we  find  that  the  figure  presents  a fierce  appearance  with 
three  blood-shot  eyes  rolling  in  anger,  distorted  face, 
canine  teeth,  ornaments  made  of  bones,  a garland  of 
severed  heads  and  an  attitude  of  menacing  dance.  The 
right  leg  rests  on  the  pedestal  while  the  left  is  placed  on 
the  right  thigh.  The  hair  on  its  head  rises  upwards  like 
a flame  of  fire.  The  figure  is  four-armed  and  in  the  two 
principal  hands  are  shown  the  Kartri  and  the  Kapala 
against  the  breast,  and  in  the  two  remaining  hands  it 
carries  the  Damaru  (drum)  in  the  right  and  the  Khatv- 
anga  (magic  wand)  surmounted  with  a trident  in  the  left. 
In  order  to  identify  this  figure  let  us  again  refer  to  the 
text 1 where  we  find  the  following  description  which 
corresponds  with  the  picture  presented  in  the  image 
now  under  discussion : — 

wfafir**  i 

The  image,  therefore,  may  be  identified  with  Bud- 
dhakapala who  represents  a different  form  of  Hcruka, 
the  most  popular  deity  of  the  Vajrayana  Pantheon. 
But  it  must  be  remarked  that  Buddhakapala  is  describ- 
ed in  the  Sadhana  as  associated  with  his  Sakti  Citrasena 
in  close  embrace.  Images  of  Buddhakapala  are  ex- 
tremely rare,  and  probably  wherever  found  will  be  of 
the  Yab-yum  type.  The  image  preserved  in  the  Baroda 
Museum  is  peculiar  because  it  represents  Buddhakapala 
without  the  Sakti,  and  as  such  it  is  unique. 

9.  Jambhala  (PL  IX). 2 

From  the  fierce  presence  of  Buddhakapala  let  us 
pass  on  to  the  pleasing  figure  of  Jambhala  who  is  repre- 

1 pp.  *01 -2. 

f From  a photo  kindly  supplied  by  Mr.  N.  K.  Bh&ttaeali,  M.A.  of  the 

Dace*  Museum. 


B I I1!1 

- ■ ---_*-•  3 

■■  ■ ; . : ■ ■ ; j 


INTRODUCTION. 


clxi 


sented  as  a typical  land-holder  with  some  financial  resist- 
ance. The  figure  presents  an  easily  excitable  tempera- 
ment with  a flabby,  phlegmatic  constitution  and  a 
bulging  belly,  but  it  is  well  decorated  with  jewellery  and 
costly  ornaments  and  dress.  The  figure  is  one-faced  and 
two-armed  and  holds  very  peculiar  symbols  in  the 
hands,  namely  the  citron  in  the  right  and  the  mongoose 
in  the  left ; the  mongoose  vomits  jewels  as  the  result  of 
the  pressure  exerted  by  the  hands  of  the  master.  For 
the  identification  of  the  image  let  us  again  open  the  text 
where  the  following  description  is  given  of  a god  who  is 
called  Jambhala 1 

wpisr?  ujmn  wrcfayan 

The  image,  therefore,  represents  the  Buddhist  god 
of  wealth  who  is  well-known  amongst  the  Vajrayana 
ascetics  as  the  deity  possessing  extraordinary  powers  of 
conferring  wealth  on  his  devotees.  He  must  have 
been  extensively  and  eagerly  worshipped  by'  the 
poor  ascetics  to  whom  wealth  was  denied  by7  Providence. 

10.  Her uka  (PL  X).~ 

Tliis  plate  in  which  a Dacca  Museum  image  is  repre- 
sented shows  the  figure  of  a slender,  well-built  deity 
dancing  in  the  Ardhaparyanka  attitude  with  the  right 
leg  placed  on  the  left  thigh.  The  face  is  rendered  fero- 
cious by  the  gaping  mouth,  canine  teeth,  blood-shot 
eyes  and  an  angry  expression.  The  hair  rises  on  the  head 
in  the  shape  of  a flame  of  fire  and  forms  the  back -ground 
for  a tiny  little  figure  sitting  on  the  head.  The  right  hand 
is  broken  from  the  shoulder  and  the  arms  together  with  the 
symbols  have  disappeared.  But  from  the  marks  remain- 
ing on  the  stone  it  can  be  seen  that  the  right  hand  was 
raised  above  menacingly  in  the  attitude  of  throwing 

1 p.  560. 

2 From  a photo  kindly  supplied  by  Mr.  N.  K.  Bhattasali,  M.A. 


clxii 


INTRODUCTION. 


something.  The  left  hand  is  also  injured  but  it  can  be 
easily  inferred  from  the  marks  on  the  stone  that  it  rested 
against  the  breast  and  held  something  like  a vessel. 
The  figure  wears  a garland  of  severed  heads  and  orna- 
ments made  of  bones.  From  his  left  shoulder  hangs  a 
Khatvanga  with  flowing  banners  and  small  bells  attach- 
ed to  the  extremities  of  the  flags.  The  workmanship  of 
the  whole  sculpture  is  simple  but  expressive,  but  the 
beauty  is  somewhat  marred  because  of  mutilation. 


To  identify  this  sculpture  let  us  turn  to  page  469 
of  the  text  where  we  find  a description  of  a god  Heruka, 
which  corresponds  exactly  with  the  descripton  just  given. 
There  he  is  described  as  : — 

q^,srTftin 


By  comparing  the  two  descriptions  we  can  definitely 
say  that  the  miniature  figure  on  the  crown  in  the  sculp- 
ture represents  Ak$obhya ; in  the  right  hand  which  is 
broken  Heruka  wielded  the  Vajra,  and  in  the  left  hand 
the  Kapala  [full  of  blood]  was  held  against  the  breast. 
The  figure  wears  garments  of  human  skin,  and  ornaments 
made  of  human  bones,  and  the  Khatvaflga  is  composed 
of  bones  and  a human  skull.  The  garland  is  made  of 
severed  human  heads  and  they  are  held  together  by 
means  of  guts.  Thus  the  whole  sculpture  is  identified 
by  means  of  the  Sadhana  and  now  it  is  possible  to  see 
how  the  Sadhana  and  the  sculpture  mutually  throw  light 
on  each  other. 


. ri 

Wmam 

■ ■'  B# 


INTRODUCTION. 


clxiii 


In  plate  XI 1 2 is  represented  a metal  figure  of  Heruka 
preserved  in  the  Baroda  Museum.  In  this  figure  the 
hand  to  the  right  holds  a Kartri  instead  of  the  Vajra 
but  in  all  other  respects  presents  the  same  features  as  in 
the  previous  figure. 

11.  Vajrardga  Manjusrl  (PL  XII  a).“ 

The  male  figure  represented  from  a metal  specimen 
in  the  Baroda  Museum  is  a unique  and  rare  specimen 
from  the  point  of  view  of  iconography.  The  figure  sits 
on  a double  conventional  lotus  in  the  meditative  attitude 
with  the  soles  of  both  feet  turned  upwards.  It  is  fully 
adorned  with  costly  upper  and  under  garments  and  ricii 
ornaments  such  as  the  tiara,  torque,  necklace,  ear-rings, 
bracelets  and  armlets.  The  hands  are  -placed  one  upon 
the  other  on  the  lap  over  which  a vessel  is  placed.  The 
image  is  not  very  old  and  though  some  serenity  of  ex- 
pression has  been  given  to  the  face,  it  cannot  be  other 
than  the  product  of  an  ordinary  artisan.  For  its  iden- 
tification see  page  157  8 of  the  text  where  the  description 
of  a deity  is  given  who  is  variously  referred  to  as  Vak, 
Vajraraga  Manjusri,  and  Dharmasankha-samadhi. 


In  the  image  under  discussion  the  remarkable  feature 
is  the  Samadhi  mudra  and  that  serves  as  a distinguishing 
factor  for  identification.  Amitabha,  the  Dhyani  Buddha, 
it  may  be  remembered,  exhibits  the  Samadhi  mudra 
when  represented  in  art.  Nilakantha  when  represented 
also  shows  the  Samadhi  mudra,  and  Vajraraga 
Manjusrl  is  the  third  two-armed  deity  exhibiting  the 
same  Samadhi  mudra.  The  Dhyani  Buddha  Amitabha 
has  a peculiar  ascetic  appearance  and  dress  without  any 
ornaments  or  embllishments  of  any  sort.  Nilakantha  is 


1 From  a photo  supplied  by  the  Baroda  Museum. 

2 From  a photo  supplied  by  the  Baroda  Museum. 


8 

| 


■trevTgpg* 


elxiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


described  as  completely  shorn  of  ornaments  and  as  accom- 
panied by  two  serpents.  Thus  we  can  say  that  the 
present  image  cannot  represent  either  the  Dhyani  Buddha, 
Amitabha  or  Nilakantha  who  is  another  form  of  Loke- 
svara.  Therefore,  as  the  image  is  decorated  richly  from 
head  to  foot  it  is  to  be  identified  with  that  of  ManjusrI 
who  is  described  as  a prince  (Kumara),  and  always  wears 
costly  garments  and  ornaments  whenever  represented 
in  stone  or  metal.  The  bowl  is  placed  in  accordance 
with  an  artistic  convention  current  amongst  the  Nepalese 
artisans  who  place  the  bowl  on  the  hand  whenever  they 
exhibit  the  Samadhi  tnfidra  in  art. 

12.  Mahattarl  Tara  (PI.  XII.  by 
This  also  represents  a metal  figure  of  a goddess  pre- 
served in  the  State  Museum  and  Picture-Gallery  at 
Baroda.  The  figure  wears  elaborate  ornaments  and  sits 
on  the  conventional  lotus  with  one  leg  placed  above  the 
other  (paryankasana).  The  right  hand  exhibits  the 
Vara  da  or  the  gift- bestowing  attitude  and  in  the  left  she 
holds  the  stalk  of  a lotus  against  the  breast.  The  lotus 
appears  just  above  the  shoulder,  but  there  is  another  to 
the  right  which  is  placed  there  in  conformity  with  an 
artistic  convention  with  favoured  parallelism.  For  its 
identification  we  turn  to  page  176  where  a deity  by  the 
name  of  Mahattarl  Tara  is  described.  There  we  read  : — 

mTT  urrof  -anri 

fw^cT  n 

13.  Mdricl  (PI,  XIII)* 

This  picture  is  the  representation  of  one  of  the  most 
artistic  sculptures  now  preserved  in  the  Indian  Museum, 
Calcutta.  It  delineates  a goddess  standing  in  the  atti- 
tude of  an  archer  with  the  right  leg  bent  and  the  left 

1 From  a photo  obtained  from  the  Baroda  Museum, 
a From  a photo  obtained  from  the  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta. 


• ..  ■ ■ 


INTRODUCTION. 


clxv 


straight.  The  principal  figure  has  three  heads  out  of 
which,  the  one  to  the  left,  has  the  appearance  of  a sow. 

It  has  eight  arms  and  ornaments  everywhere.  In  the 
four  right  hands  the  figure  shows  the  needle,  the  elephant 
goad,  the  arrow  and  the  thunderbolt,  while  the  four  left 
hands  carry  the  string,  the  Asoka  leaves,  the  bow  and  the 
raised  index  finger  with  a noose.  On  the  top  of  the 
sc  ulpture  there  is  a figure  of  a Dhyani  Buddha  exhibit- 
ing the  Dharmacakra  mudra.  There  are  five  more 
figures  in  the  four  corners  with  one  in  the  front.  Below 
the  figure  in  the  front  is  the  fierce  figure  of  Rahu  trying 
to  devour  the  sun  and  the  moon  and  below  him  are 
sculptured  seven  figures  of  sows  in  a most  life-like  fashion. 
Behind  the  principal  figure  on  the  back-ground,  lines  are 
drawn  to  show  flames  of  fire.  On  the"  whole  the  sculp- 
ture is  remarkable  for  its  boldness  of  expression  and 
accuracy  of  delineation,  but  the  face  in  the  front  being 
somewhat  mutilated  much  of  its  merits  is  at  a discount ; 
obvious  mistakes  of  technique  are  also  noticeable,  where 
beauty  has  given  place  to  ugliness. 

To  identify  this  sculpture  let  us  turn  to  page  282  of 
the  text  where  a deity  called  Marie!  is  described,  and 
this  description  agrees  most  accurately  with  the  descrip- 
tion just  given  of  the  sculpture  in  question.  There  we 
read  of  Marie  I as  : 


I ^ 


^ 


ighff  itfft  sfro 

^rrorrt  i 


Clxvi  INTRODUCTION. 

;;ruT%^fgrff  %f*e$w 

m gMjTift aw  ^ utowstw  i 

trf^  mj&t  «rr<5rt^^jr  s*JrnP*i  sfBjro 

r^f  vm«W«MT 

Tig^rf  ^f^5r  ^^urr  '4iR  ^miirfauTiSfTurrw  n 

According  to  the  Sadhana,  therefore,  the  principal 
deity  Ls  installed  on  a chariot  drawn  by  seven  sows.  dust, 
above  Ihe  sow  in  front  there  appears  the  fierce  head  of 
Raliu  trying  to  devour  both  the  sun  and  the  moon.  The 

principal  figure  represented  as  the  goddess  Marlci  agrees 
in  all  details  with  the  description  just  cited  from  the 
Sadhana.  She  has  three  faces  one  among  which  in  the 
left  is  distorted  sow-like.  She  stands  in  the  Pratyahdha 
attitude  with  the  left  leg  stretched  and  the  right  bent 
showing  the  archer’s  attitude.  On  the  top  of  the  sculp- 
ture there  is  the  figure  of  the  Dhyani  Buddha  Vairocana 
-the  parental  Buddha  of  the  deity.  She  is  accom- 
panied by  four  goddesses  all  one-faced  and  four-armed, 
namely,  Varttali,  Vadall,  Varali,  and  Varahamukhi.  in 
this  sculpture  in  addition  to  the  companions  mentioned 
in  the  Sadhana  there  appears  over  the  figure  of  Rahu  in 
the  front  a female  figure  as  charioteer  very  probably  in 
imitation  of  Aruna  in  the  images  of  the  Hindu  Sun-god. 
But  for  this  the  correspondence  between  the  image  and 
Sadhana  is  remarkable. 

14.  Usmsavijaya  (PI.  XIV).  1 
We  next  pass  on  to  another  delightful  sculpture 
now  preserved  in  the  Indian  Museum  representing  a 
female  figure  with  three  faces  and  eight  arms  sitting  in 
the  V ajraparyanka  attitude  in  meditation.  In  spite  of 


1 From  a photo  purchased  from  the  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta. 


INTRODUCTION. 


clxvii 


the  obvious  signs  of  vandalism  on  the  sculpture  there  is 
sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  it  is  one  of  the  finest 
products  of  Indian  art.  It  is  tastefully  decorated  with 
all  possible  ornaments,  the  under-garment  and  a jacket. 
The  Vlukuta  is  worth  studying ; it  is  rich  in  details  and 
represents  one1  of  the  most  artistic  specimens  by  virtue 
of  its  grandeur  of  execution  and  details.  The  Mukuta 
is  highest  in  the  centre  which  is  surrounded  by  smaller 
Mukutas  over  the  three  remaining  heads  of  the  figure.  It 
shows  in  its  three  right  hands  the  Buddha  on  a lotus, 
the  arrow  and  the  Varada  pose.  The  fourth  right  hand 
is  gone.  The  four  left  hands  carry  the  bow,  the  noose 
with  the  raised  index  linger  and  show  the  Abhaya  mudra 
and  the  water- vessel.  On  the  top  of  the  figure  the 
miniature  of  Aksobhya  is  to  be  seen,  under  a small 
Oaitya.  The  whole  sculpture  is  characterised  by  bold 
and  clear  outlines  and  sharpness  of  details,  and  skill  in 
imparting  to  the  stone  a divine  expression  on  all  the 
tin  ee  faces  especially  on  the  two  at  the  sides. 

To  identify  this  image  let  us  again  refer  to  the  text 
of  the  Sadhanamala  where  we  meet  with  several  descrip- 
tions of  a deity  known  as  Usnisavijaya  which  corresponds 
in  all  respects  to  the  description  just  given.  There  the 
following  Dhyana  is  given : — 

faphrt 

fiscal  an%  fyrawmrc- 

vgs-*rc*Ww-«i*Pro»[- 

'WT  i 

Thus  as  the  two  descriptions,  one  in  the  Sadhana  and 
the  other  of  the  image  under  discussion  correspond  in 
all  details  there  cannot  be  any  doubt  regarding  the 


clxviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


correctness  of  the  identification  of  the  image  as  that  of 
Usnlsavijaya.  On  the  strength  of  the  description  con- 
tained in  the  Sadhana  we  may  assume  without  any 
hesitation  that  the  broken  right  hand  in  the  original 
condition  held  the  double  conventional  thunderbolt  or 
the  Visvavajra. 


The  Buddha  on  a lotus  is  a symbol  peculiar  to  this 
goddess  and  this  symbol  alone  may  be  taken  as  the 
recognition  symbol  of  Usnlsavijaya.  The  three  minia- 
ture Caityas  one  on  the  top  and  two  others  on  the  two 
top  corners  symbolise  that  the  abode  of  the  deity  is  in  the 
sanctum  or  the  middle  of  the  Caitya.  But  in  this  connec- 
tion it  may  be  remarked  that  the  presence  of  the  Dhyani 
Buddha  Aksobhya  on  the  top  of  the  goddess  is  contrary 
to  the  description  of  the  Sadhana;  because  there  Usui§a- 
vijava  is  regarded  as  an  offspring  of  Vairocana  with  the 
Dharmacakra  mudra  instead  of  Aksobhya  with  the 
Bhumisparsa  Mudra.  To  understand  this  anomaly  we 
have  to  enter  into  the  question  of  the  different  cults 
and  subdivisions  of  the  Vajrayana.  Some  sections 
hold  that  one  of  the  five  Dhyani  Buddhas  is  the  Adi  or 
the  Primordial  Buddha  and  more  powerful  than  the 
others ; others  again  say  that  the  Adi  Buddha  is  the 
creator  even  of  the  five  Dhyani  Buddhas.  Some  again 
take  the  Bodhisattvas  such  as  Samantabhadra,  Vajrapani 
and  others  as  the  Adi  Buddha  and  make  the  Dhyani 
Buddhas  subservient  to  them.  Those  who  take  Ak$o- 
bhya,  for  instance,  as  the  Adi  Buddha  make  all  their 
deities  emanate  from  him  and  from  none  else,  though 
this  is  contrary  to  the  Sadhanas. 


In  the  present  image  as  it  belonged  very  probably 
to  some  one  professing  the  Aksobhya  cult,  we  find  also 
the  Dhyani  Buddha  Aksobhya  installed  as  the  parental 
Buddha  instead  of  Vairocana. 


mil 


INTRODUCTION. 


clxix 


15.  Nairdtma  (PL  XV).1 

In  this  plate  a small  sculpture  in  red  sandstone, 
preserved  in  the  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta,  is  represented. 
The  image  is  much  mutilated  and  part  of  the  stone  in  the 
right  upper  corner  is  gone,  but  the  figure  of  the  deity  in 
the  centre  is  an  image  of  unique  importance  from  the  point 
of  view  of  iconography.  The  principal  figure  is  represented 
in  a dancing  attitude,  m a way  similar  to  Heruka’s  previ- 
ously described,  on  the  chest  of  a dead  body  placed  on  a 
double  conventional  lotus.  The  figure  of  the  goddess 
presents  an  awe-inspiring  spectacle  with  three  blood-shot 
eyes,  protruding  tongue  and  canine  teeth.  The  garland 
of  severed  heads  add  grandeur  to  the  spectacle  while 
the  flames  of  fire  that  radiate  from  her  body  make  the 
■scene  more  terrible.  The  hair  of  herliead  rises  up  in 
the  shape  of  a flame  of  fire  and  with  this  as  background 
appears  the  tiny  little  figure  of  the  Dhyani  Buddha  with 
the  Bhusparsa  mudra  as  the  parental  Buddha.  The 
right  hand  carries  a knife  held  in  a threatening  attitude. 
The  left  hand,  as  appears  probable  from  the  broken 
marks,  carried  something  like  a vessel  against  the  breast. 
From  the  left  shoulder  hangs  a rod-like  thing. 

To  identify  this  interesting  sculpture  let  us  again 
refer  to  the  text  on  page  451  where  we  meet  with  the 
description  of  a deity  called  Nairatma  which  corresponds 
pretty  accurately  with  the  description  just  given.  There 
we  have  the  following  description : — 

The  dead  body,  the  dancing  attitude  in  Ardha- 
paryahka,  the  miniature  figure  of  Ak§obhya  on  the  crown, 
the  fearful  face  with  blood-shot  eyes  and  the  Kartri  in 

1 From  a photo  obtained  from  tha  Indian  Muse  vim,  Calcutta. 


INTRODU  CTION . 


clxx 

the  right  hand  and  the  Khatvanga  (magic  stick)  in  the 
left— all  these  are  present  in  the  image  and  in  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  deity  in  the  Sadhana  and,  therefore,  the 
image  is  to  be  identified  as  that  of  Nairatma.  On  the 
strength  of  the  Sadhana  also  we  may  affirm  that  the 
broken  left  hand  carried  the  Kapala  or  the  skull  cup 
against  the  breast  in  the  original  image. 

16.  Parmtmmn  {PI  XVI,1  XVII).  * 

In  plate  XVI  an  old  and  much  damaged  image  now 
preserved  in  the  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta,  is  represented. 
Here  the  actual  figure  is  six-armed  and  apparently  three- 
faced as  we  can  understand  from  the  remains  left  of  the 
head  and  faces  on  the  original  stone.  The  face  in  the 
centre  has  entirely  peeled  off,  leaving  the  remnants  of  the 
nose,  eyes,  the  temple  just  visible  in  the  right  face,  while 
only  the  nose  and  the  lips  are  visible  of  the  left  face. 
In  the  three  right  hands  are  carried  the  thunderbolt, 
the  arrow  and  the  axe.  Out  of  the  three  left  hands  one 
on  the  top  is  broken,  the  second  holds  the  bow,  part  of 
which  is  gone,  and  in  the  third  against  the  breast  there  is 
the  noose  with  the  raised  index  finger.  The  principal 
figure  stands  in  the  Alidha  attitude  with  the  right  leg 
stretched  and  the  left  bent.  The  left  leg  presses  on  the 
prostrate  figure  of  Ganesa  with  his  corpulent  belly, 
elephant  trunk  turned  towards  the  left  and  face  hidden 
under  the  foot  of  the  deity.  Towards  the  right  of  the 
goddess  on  the  same  pedestal  there  is  the  figure  of  a female 
attendant  holding  a rod  which  represents  probably  the 
handle  of  a parasol  which  must  have  been  destroyed 
along  with  the  upper  portion  of  the  sculpture.  Though 
the  image  is  much  mutilated  and  much  corroded,  there 
is,  however,  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  originally  it 
was  an  artistic  specimen  of  a high  order  as  can  be  seen 

1 From  a Phofco  obtained  from  the  Indian  Museum  Calcutta. 

2 From  a photo  kindly  supplied  by  Mr.  N.  K.  Bhattasali,  M.A.  of  the 
Dacca  Museum. 


INTRODU  CTION. 


clxxi 


from  tlm  » u j(^i  i<  pose  of  standing  with  hands  which  show 
diilvivn!  w;i  y > n handling  different  instruments  of 
destruction.  Hi-  stature,  the  pose  and  the  outlines  of 
the  body  all  u ■ proportionate  and  add  to  the  beauty 
of  the  image. 

The  next  iigui  represented  in  plate  XVII  also  shows 
the  same  symbols  m the  hands  and  is  endowed  with  the 
same  number  of  fares,  arms  and  legs.  Here  the  figure 
of  Ganesa  appeals  below  the  lotus  seat  instead  of  being 
directly  under  the  feet  as  in  the  previous  figure.  Under 
the  legs  in  this  image  are  shown  human  beings  apparently 
suffering  from  deadly  diseases  as  is  evident  from  the  cir- 
cular marks  of  small-pox  on  one  of  the  persons.  Instead 
of  the  female  attendant  holding  the  parasol  we  find  in 
this  two  creatures  running  away  to  two  opposite  direc- 
tions, one  apparently  mounting  an  ass  and  another  to  the 
right  having  the  head  of  a horse.  On  the  top  of  the 
image  the  miniature  figures  of  the  five  Dhyani  Buddhas 
appear  with  Amoghasiddhi  with  the  Abhaya  mudra  in 
the  middle  showing  that  the  principal  deity  is  one  of  his 
emanations.  The  attitude  of  standing  in  the  previous 
image  is  Alidlia  while  in  the  second  it  is  Pratyalidha. 
Though  between  the  two  images  there  are  apparent 
discrepancies  such  as  are  noted  above  both  present  similar 
characteristics  regarding  their  weapons,  number  of  faces, 
hands  and  legs.  The  second  also  shows  marked  artistic 
peculiarities  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  previous 
sculpture.  Here  the  figure  is  more  subdued  in  fierceness 
and  all  the  faces  show  the  two  opposite  sentiments  of 
anger  and  joy.  The  belly  is  corpulent  and  the  limbs  are 
thick  and  clumsy  and  the  different  portions  of  the  body 
seem  to  be  less  proportionate  than  in  the  previous  one. 

In  order  to  identify  the  two  images  let  us  again  turn 
t°  page  208  of  the  text  where  we  meet  with  the  descrip- 
tion of  a goddess  named  Parnasavari  which  corresponds 


clxxii 


INTBO  DTJ  CTION . 


pretty  accurately  with  the  details  given  in  the  two 
sculptures.  She  is  described  as 

xrcrireffi  Tfcri 

qr r*c?f^f: ■Pfaw Bwfci- 

Tfa^PRt  * q^wr*T«inr**f  ff 

On  the  strength  of  this  Sadhana  we  can  easily 
identify  the  Vikramapur  image  as  that  of  Parnasavaru 
as  she  is  three-faced,  six-armed  and  carries  the  Vajra, 
axe  and  the  arrow  in  the  three  right  hands,  and  the  bow , 
the  cluster  of  leaves  and  the  noose  round  the  raised 
index  finger  in  the  three  left.  Further,  it  shows  the 
angry  laugh,  slightly  protruding  belly  and  hair  rising  up- 
wards, trampling  of  diseases  and  pestilences  in  the  form 
of  men  suffering  from  both,  and  the  miniature  figure  of 
Amoghasiddhi  on  the  crown  strictly  in  accordance  with 
the  Sadhana. 

The  Indian  Museum  image  has  all  the  symbols  of  the 
one  just  described.  Such  as  the  Vajra,  axe  and  the 
arrow  in  the  three  right  hands,  and  the  bow  and  the 
raised  index  finger  with  the  noose  in  two  out  of  the  three 
left  hands  in  accordance  with  the  Sadhana.  Had  the 
sixth  hand  been  intact  we  could  easily  expect  to  see  the 
cluster  of  leaves  which  is  one  of  the  characteristic  sym- 
bols of  the  goddess.  To  identify  this  specimen,  therefore, 
we  avail  ourselves  of  the  help  of  another  Sadhana  of 
Parnasavari  where  she  is  described  as  an  emanation  of 
Ak§obhya.  And  it  is  this  latter  which  is  responsible  for 
all  the  differences  noticeable  in  the  two  images  of  the 
same  deity.  Here  we  do  not  find  the  diseases  and  pesti- 
lences under  the  feet  of  the  goddess.  She  is  described 
instead  as : — 


INTRODUCTION. 


n 

clxxiii 

or  in  other  words — as  trampling  on  the  Vighnas  and  after 
tlireatening  them  with  the  Tarjam  about  to  hurl  the 
Vajra  held  in  the  right  hand.  Ganesa  it  may  l>e  remem- 
bered in  the  Buddhist  Pantheon  was  regarded  as  Vighna 
or  obstacle  personified  ; according  to  the  Hindus  he  is  the 
Yighnesa  or  the  lord  of  all  obstacles.  In  order  to  repre- 
sent Vighnas  over  which  the  goddess  is  triumphant,  a 
prostrate  figure  of  Ganesa  is  placed  below  the  foot  of 
Parnasavarl  while  representing  him  as  an  emanation  of 
the  Dhyani  Buddha  Aksobhya. 

17.  Khadiravanl  Tara  (PI.  XV III),1 
In  Bus  picture  a female  figure  is  represented  as  sit- 
i , tfie  Vajraparyanka  attitude  on  the  seat  placed  on 
a double  conventional  lotus.  The  figure  wears  an  under- 
oarmenl  tied  by  a girdle  with  the  upper  part  of  the  body 
entirely  bare.  It  is  decorated  with  all  known  ornaments 
a nd  ail  elaborate  head-dress  ; their  placing  and  workman- 
ship add  to  the  beauty  of  the  sculpture.  It  has  thin 
waist,  deep  navel  and  heavy  breasts  all  of  which  are  con- 
sidered to  be  signs  of  beauty  in  India.  The  figure  shows 
t iie  Varada  mudra  and  on  the  palm  is  marked  a jewel. 
The  left  holds  the  stem  of  an  Utpala  which  may  be  con- 
tra sit'd  with  an  ordinary  lotus  which  appears  in  the  right 
as  h parallel  to  the  Utpala  in  the  left  and  to  embellish 
the  sculpture.  Towards  the  right  of  the  principal  figure 
appears  a female  figure  holding  a \ajra  in  the  right 
ba  ud  and  the  Asoka  leaves  in  the  left.  To  the  left  theie 
is  mother  female  figure  fierce  and  awe-inspiring  with 
blood-shot  eyes,  protruding  teeth,  and  holding  the  Kartri 
and  the  Kapala  in  the  two  hands.  Over  the  head  of  the 
principal  figure  there  are  sculptured  the  five  Dhyani 
Buddhas  with  Amoghasiddhi  with  the  Abhaya  mudra 
right  in  the  centre  showing  that  the  principal  deity  is  one 

1 From  a photograph  kindly  supplied  by  Mr.  Prayag  Dayal. 
ft  This  form  of  Varada  mudrS  is  technically  called  the  I 


clxxiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


of  his  emanations.  But  for  the  clumsy  and  somewhat 
coarse  face  of  the  main  figure  the  sculpture  will  pass  as 
one  of  the  first  class  specimens  of  Indian  art.  The  exe- 
cution of  proportions,  details  and  the  placing  of  the 
different  deities  at  regular  distances  are  some  of  the 
features  of  the  image  worthy  of  appreciation. 

To  identify  let  us  again  turn  to  page  176  of  the  text 
where  we  meet  with  the  description  of  a goddess  known 
as  Khadiravani  Tara  which  corresponds  with  the  present 
figure  in  all  details.  There  we  read  of  Tara  described 
as  : — 

T-cjiu  Twf^wnrt  I 

Thus  the  figure  under  discussion  must  be  identified 
with  Khadiravani  Tara,  one  of  the  many  varieties  of 
Tara  because  she  bears  the  miniature  figure  of  Amogha- 
siddhi  on  her  crown,  as  also  because  she  shows  the 
Varada  mudra  in  the  right  hand  and  carries  the  Utpala 
in  the  left  hand  and  is  accompanied  by  two  goddesses 
Asokakanta  Marie!  and  Ekajata  on  the  two  sides.  The 
distinguishing  symbol  of  Asokakanta  is  the  Asoka  while 
the  Kartri  and  Kapala  point  to  Ekajata. 

18.  Mahusrl  Tara  (PL  XIX).  1 
This  picture  and  the  last  one  in  this  series  presents 
a very  interesting  specimen  of  Indian  sculptural  art.  In 
this  image  a goddess  is  represented  as  sitting  in  the 
Lalitasana  with  the  right  leg  dangling  below  and  resting 
on  a lotus  the  left  remaining  on  the  lotus  seat.  The 
figure  shows  the  Dharmacakra  mudra  against  the  breast 
and  from  under  the  two  armpits  rise  the  blue  lotus  in 
the  left,  and  an  ordinary  lotus  in  the  right.  The  figure 

i From  a photo  supplied  by  the  Indian  Museum.  Calcutta. 


INTRODUCTION. 


clxxv 


is  profusely  decorated  with  rich  ornaments,  such  as  a 
lovely  tiara  on  the  head  and  the  necklace,  bracelets, 
armlets,  anklets,  etc.,  arranged  artistically  in  their 
appropriate  places.  It  is  clothed  in  beautiful  and  rich 
muslin  made  more  attractive  by  the  stripes  at  intervals, 
and  held  fast  by  the  richly  bejewelled  girdle.  The  upper 
limbs  are  covered  by  a jacket  to  match  the  cloth  of  the 
undergarment.  The  principal  figure  is  accompanied  by 
two  more  figures  on  the  two  sides;  below  the  lotus 
seat,  again,  there  are  two  more,  and  as  all  of  them 
have  lotus  seats,  they  must  be  taken  as  companion  god- 
desses. On  the  top,  arranged  in  a semicircle,  are  to  be 
seen  the  five  miniature  figures  of  the  five  Dhyani  Bud- 
dhas the  central  place  being  occupied  by  Amoghasiddhi 
to  show  that  the  principal  goddess  is^one  of  his  emana- 
tions. The  whole  piece  of  sculpture  is  an  admirable  pro- 
duct of  Indian  art ; it  is  profusely  but  delicately  orna- 
mented. All  figures  have  clear  and  bold  outlines,  the 
symbols  are  definite  and  clear  cut  and  the  execution  in 
these  matters  may  be  said  to  be  perfect.  The  principal 
figure  has  a sharp  but  serene  and  peaceful  appearance 
and  is  pervaded  with  a divine  dignity.  The  limbs  are 
delicate,  fleshy  but  not  flabby  or  fat  and  therefore, 
symbolize  perfect  health.  The  slender  beauty  of  form, 
the  forcible  but  delicate  expression  and  the  superb  dig- 
nity of  the  goddess  make  the  image  one  of  the  finest 
productions  of  Oriental  art  and  a worthy  rival  of  the 
celebrated  image  of  Prajnaparamita  from  Java. 

To  identify  the  sculpture  which  represents  the 
Man<}ala  of  a goddess  let  us  again  turn  to  p.  244  of 
the  text  where  we  meet  with  a description  of  MahasrI 
Tara  which  corresponds  in  every  detail  with  that  of  the 
present  image.  There  she  is  described  as : — 

vrt  <wp|  wifmriiqfwat  wittftavvfint 


clxxvi 


INTKODU  CTION. 


tskt  snffhd'  wterf  fa#^2Tf%»if*re!T  i 

TTT%r  asrsrm^^t  iffaw  TW 5ff2^f  I 

TJ*T3f%  amfsTTtfsft  S?TH?IDT  *nt^C^V**rriT  I 
^fi^rSj  JTTTHTVCt  I 

Thus  when  we  compare  the  description  with  the  image 
we  find  that  the  Vyakhyana  mudra,  the  two  lotuses 
on  either  sides,  the  parental  Dhyani  Buddha  Amogha- 
siddhi  and  four  companions  are  common  to  both  and 
therefore,  the  identification  is  definite  and  unquestion- 
able. To  the  right  of  the  goddess  we  see  the  familiar 
figure  of  Asokakanta  carrying  the  Vajra  and  the  Asoka 
flowers  in  the  right  and  left  hands  respectively,  and  to 
the  left  likewise  is  seen  the  fierce  figure  of  Ekajata 
carrying  the  Vajra  and  the  Kapala  in  the  two  hands, 
and  sitting  in  the  Ardhaparyanka  attitude.  In  the  two 
figures  below,  the  symbols  unfortunately  are  not  properly 
distinguished,  but  they  represent  according  to  the 
Sadhana  the  goddesses  Mahamayuri  in  the  right  and 
Aryajanguli  in  the  left,  carrying  the  peacock’s  feather 
and  the  serpent  respectively. 

These  few  examples  will  show  the  potency  of  the 
dh ana  in  elucidating  the  meanings  of  the  images  and 
identifying  them.  But  these  are  not  all,  and  there  are 
many  more  Dhyanas  hidden  in  the  Tantric  sculptures  of 
the  Buddhists  as  well  as  of  the  Hindus,  and  to-day  there 
are  hundreds  of  unidentified  images  amongst  those 
hitherto  discovered.  Many  Sadhanas  are  lost  in  the 
original  Sanskrit  and  their  translations  are  preserved  in 
the  Tibetan  Tangyur.  It  is  extremely  necessary,  there- 
fore, that  the  attention  of  scholars  should  be  drawn  to 


INTRODUCTION. 


clxxvii 


this  branch  of  study  which  may  at  first  seem  very  un- 
interesting, but  is  likely  to  yield  great  historical  in- 
formation, because  we  should  not  forget  that  the 
cultural  history  of  India  for  the  whole  of  the  Tantric 
period  from  the  7th  century  to  the  advent  of  the 
Muhammadans  in  India  is  locked  up  in  this  mass  of  un- 
interesting and  apparently  much  neglected  and  much 
hated  literature  of  Tantrism. 


vl*71. 

, 4*72. 
vf73. 

474. 

475. 

476. 

477. 

478. 

479. 
v480. 

481. 

482. 

183. 

184. 

485. 

486. 

487. 

488. 

189. 

190. 

191. 

192. 

193. 

194. 

195. 
>96. 

197. 

198. 


... 


jrcjstrannm 
WHI  *to<?t  f 

>wqnsf®T«ra=f«  ... 
gre$srrerre>ra  (<umT^?ra!nrr?Tsrt-«TTrsiw- 
wrnffTra’WKTWw ) 
^8*if«j«i*)5vr<^T?rTww  ... 

) 


ftl«3»*3rtflWV*PTCT  ( ) 

...  •'• 

( HVUrtW«-$qqadHit3S*W 

335ptm^iw 
wswra^Jr1 
3^BrrWwf^! 

^ti(fipnn)Emrw»T 
*TfffwmtprmTl 
9«wPl<iiwrra»m 
«Tiyr<H«ii*ii  y*iw 
*jTnjftwrcmw»nj 
uftwiWTvnH 
WT^JrrmT^K^rsnrw  ... 


) 


w 

w 

*,** 

\<ii 

4«-< 

V' 

*44 

V=\ 

9^8 

Vs* 

4” 

V* 

^<.8 

V-8 

?£¥ 

^£a 

B«o 

8«« 


clxxx 


CONTENTS 


199.  

200. 

0^201.  *TONn?*:^T*TW?T  

202.  JTTmfirffcmnf^  

203.  

204.  snjrrfaaRrm5™  

205.  ^jrra*R°faT'SR*T  

JJb 06.  

207.  

208.  ( sjrmRTPfr^ff ) 

209.  

210.  WCT%*RTHRRW  ( ) 

a 211. 

212.  ^T^fa^RfRrw  

^213.  ^^RmT-SRiT  

y 214.  

^2 15. 

^216.  ^^RT^RWr^SP  

217.  ^RTTfttfRRW  ( ) 

218.  tnsn^wrwR [(^rfanr*^)  

219.  s^rt^rr*  

220.  

221.  ^mgift^T^snRftiT:  

222. 

223.  ?mimn^rn  wsnsm  ...  .'. 

224.  ^TRnf^r^jr 

225.  ^qT?^^Joft«TV»r?T  ( ^t^q^wfra- 

fafa^cRT)  ... 

226.  ... 

227.  ^ffK^RTft^RTim 

228.  'wron  *n*T  ^'nifro 

' 229-  Wnnflrs^f^f^j. 

230.  %q«qXTWi?rnHw 

' 231  J 

z 232.  wirtfira'NtTV’r^ 


8.^ 

8o^ 

8®^ 

8®^ 

8®^ 

*•* 

8o^ 

B*<i 

8^ 

8^8 

8^8 

nx 

Q\& 

«u 
8^ 
8^ 
8^ 
8^ 
8^8 
8* i 
8« 
8^ 
8^8 

8^® 

88S> 

8^ 

88® 

88^ 

88^ 

881® 

81^ 

8^ 

•V 


233. 

CONTENTS 

'Pteraw  . • . 

CL  XX  XI 

84  8 

234. 



344 

235. 

34  A 

236. 

...  

84  X 

237. 



34'0 

238. 

JtfjT^TT  

84*= 

239. 

845 

240. 

^TW^T^T^qrfwr  ( <pgfciTTCT*rr*[ ) 

8« 

241. 

... 

•<' 

242. 

( ^raannnro  ) 

80° 

243. 



80^ 

244. 



80^ 

245. 

( ^nfWT^j ) 

808 

246. 

[sc*rfaW*s] 

80^ 

247. 

; 

80£ 

248. 

***rcrnrifarfW  ( ) 

8^ 

249. 

( JTWWV^m  ) 

, 250. 

) 

8^=0 

251. 

( ^rrrwT^prnr ) 

8d.° 

252. 

( OTWfWgi ) 

8 €_< 

253. 

Tungnifaf*:  ( ) • • ; 

8£_*= 

254. 

V> 0 

/ 255. 

( T^T^T^T*TTH  ) 

!•* 

256. 

[ ] •■-  

257. 

258. 

^®o 

259. 

H** 

260. 

ift^TTOv  ( ) 

4^0*= 

261. 

••• 

262. 

^f^jiftinwrsr^  • 

263. 

... 

4.^ 

264. 

4^ 

265. 

1\4L 

266. 

) 

267. 

. . . 4^4. 

/ 268. 

«.*<!«  iftWTTOl  •••  

. . . 4L$^ 

clxxxii 


CONTENTS 


269. 

1^ 

270. 



1^ 

271. 

1*8 

272. 

( JprT^qfTO  ) 

1*S 

273. 

18^ 

274. 



1»< 

275. 



18*> 

276. 

. 

18*= 

277. 



H° 

278. 

OTiviHiftfrnrTO 

118 

279. 



111 

280. 

WFfrcrernwT  

11< 

281. 

fTSTTTT^iflT^W 

11*= 

282. 

[ wrp f»^r  ] . . 

i1**. 

283. 

Si^wrcrw 

284. 

^wrernr* m 

1$’ 

285. 



li* 

286. 

*n*n*T^nr  

H.  its 

287. 

^ WWrTOiW  ( *rfjff?T  ) 

288. 

TOWTSTTO  ( ) 

289. 

^r-wwniim  ... 

290. 

[ l^^TSTfafv:  ] 

291. 

SJ  ^ ' * 

*<«. 

292. 

^^jpimsrarnrejR  

8$>e 

293. 

^W*wwnR?j  ( f^T*mjpr^j ) ... 

1^ 

294. 

j v * * * • • • 

1-08 

295. 

1*>< 

296. 

297. 

WlWnT«m  ( ) 

*I»W*rrSR*T 

1«< 

298. 

... 

1^ 

15* 

15* 

299. 

300. 

301. 

*TTT9R1^I^?^ 

15* 

302. 

1*=1 

303. 

wsronww  ( ( ‘ ' ' 

15< 

«^>s 

304. 

• ' * *v 

■!£• 

CO  ntrists 

clxxxiii 

30  5. 



306. 

w'Crarpsrernnw  ( ) • • • 

307. 

^jnnrfewi^spw 

308. 

309. 

<rnn*^fcr*  • • • • * • 

«i£B 

310. 

iftemcrerow  

*<L'i 

311. 

wr*»«rr  flrnflTflw 

<i  £.< 

312. 

^^WTT^nw^rrsir^iT  ( ) ••• 

'i£:$ 

^rrsRiTFfT 

wi:  i 


171. 


m*  ufwfrrf  sn% 

^Tf^mt  HwfN^rrsT  ^rj5rt 
w w%fz  ^ 

fwpsj  IN  'rT^TlT  I 


^TTW  ^ 


fmrm 


W f^TWTfH:  fjf^T  | 

wfemgqi  *Ni  »mp|  h 


* <tot  dKiwi^tei  i 

?TCHT^  #tsTTrf  ^ II 


i 1 A xm»  i 

AC  f*4w‘  .i  , * " A *tjif  i 


frnpiwwnft 


grHHJTST  W^WTVt  HH:  | 

S[f?r  9P^  ftm  WTO  HH*  BW«lfH*3Tf«I  || 

<tww  *rpanr — 

^ Wi  ^ERcT  f^f^rT  HITT  TgSfWl  tpT:  I 
TJpfT^T  rTTT  STCT  HHWWTSfH  ^f*HTH  II 

f*m  f*n?rt  [*]  fnfrgHr  i 
*wN*n;«nre  TTHT^nromH  11 
HSSi  fanHPTOWHT  I 
fafT  5RHT  fTH:  fnrr?T  WBT?TT^T^TH%  II 
’SHTHnTqfHT  <^Vt:  Ms^^^TT:  ^RT:  I 
[ilfiWT]  # 5S(*ilTTrBT^»rWI«ITilwhi1^  II 

fWTO  f^THH  | 

xrfri^f  vnw^i  HpT  wfenrN  *t*tt  ii 
hhiRhi  hwt  to  TOFrTtrfTfaiw  i 

WTO  HTH  SlfwrfH  WTVT^  HBrwnjrf  || 

sfa  H^remftret  fn#gf  *TO?ri  sr^t  i 

WTTgfRT  fwwgail^ftl  %(THT  H 
^ITlWRffl  H?ft  H%7^  | 

g?q%  vkM  g h 

AW*!**  3*l4T*i  <iWI4  HHHWt  HHT*  I 
?TT^^wrfVfTT  ^rr  fa:trtrr  ffriffpre'  i 


1 A omits. 

* A omits. 

‘ AC  ?TO*  i 


! Am 
* A . atftwr  i 
•‘AC- 


wvi  wN  7WT  i:ft3TfwI2fft75EI:  | 

'ft«HKri  Ht<M^i  wrar?r  TTrPFrrd^r  w%?r 
(^g^jsrr  i 

^5W*prf  || 

^»j3irwrrwRf  ^ ^ ^i<?r  f?r:  i 


^ ^ ' N*  ' \ 

TlWTOTWrI  fWrV^ 

F*T<#t*WT  HR^tsfrlf^T:  I 
TT^rfr:  ^PTi^i^w^feriT^TRT  i 
^Sfir^rfWif  rf^  ^f^H«h*IMrttw  II 
WTr^T  WPf^f  *T*Sp?i  I 

WTT^TRf  \\) 

^fesrnRTTf^cra  ^r^aR  g^fwm  i 
3f:  ^ 

1WPT  I 

trif»!!^T^^f^  ?k3T  wtfwftl  *J^T  II 

fNfarf  g ?irrr  ’^nf^nir  r^ifk%  i 
**Trrrwf  TOlft  %#t  II 

**rat(*nrr)  n%*#g  i 

(■mtsfk^i  HT$%g  gsTfafa*  ***  wft  11 

’ AC  faracjo  i * AC  •^rfetnn*  i 

■'  A TTTwt»  i * AC  *mwgT“  t 

* AC  *jJ3fo  | 11  AN  c^ftrcfl  i 

1 N l 1 AC  omit  «far»  I 

* Tb.e  MSS  add  nret  after  this,  which  makes  the 
i;>^etoe^fatdty. 


fl-nptwrsmrf 


^«l*Tf  ^TT  WSFHi;  I 
VRTTft  *S^FSf  % » 

% <^fgfT  WWfrTT  ^JWr  l^^TPTTT:  I 
yqrTfi^TOTn?-  WwrW^Tf^fw  H 
^rfw^r  h?t^  ^rrg^Fw^irm  i 
^rfir  *r%sprr  f^jOTJRrcw^  n 

^f^^rrwuv^^prfipi^  i; 

^NrnWTHT^irNT2?^  ^HT^W  II 
jnrrrfa^rc^g  Hsrfarfs  PWT^fr  i 

WtI  ^ gr:  H 

f^r«rn  srfcr  *r*wrawf£w  i 


3T^?r  tt^w  ^rnffcr:  ii 


# f^fi  3ft.*3  f *rm  1 mr-  ^f^rm^c- 

W W W<X  wtt^T  I 

W?T  ITflT  ’5fW%rT  SfWi?T  I 

^%5T  faMIVlf  It 


Vf%?T  * TJSSi:'1 

^!lt  f?  TTfaf?rRTH  I 

^TFWt^TPT  II 


1 A ?T^jto  C tr^jTo  1 

s Aft*  1 
6 AC  .*m  1 

1 AC  irfwftit  1 


4 AC  w.  I 

* AC«$*i 
e A W«RT | 

• NCB  *FWCt  l 


gw%>r  i 


effort  «%?t 

fsTfl^t  ^ ?T^  ^ing%  rm  I 

^KMi  irficwTfM  wren:  *mt 
rfiTi^i  w&  fsRfarf*Rfa  iN  sprnjrfafw:  11 


f*WT*J  TO  rrrd'^frTT  I 
nTrorTOTri  HT^ri  qirafthtwiq  h 
^T*^^T^rlt^^TTr  f^*Ti  t 
Md^fafrl  TO  ft**?  HTWT  SRft  || 
SRHTTOWT  TOTf*tTO  fsRW  I 

nrei%^  jtttMi  whn  wr-  a 


n 


TOTH*  II 


172. 


WT:  HKHIfll^  ^^l^l«l*len:  I 

wi  fwsxru  TErrfro  ?rr  ^Rrofa  ii 


ITBW  HIW^  TO%  ^hR- 

WTf%f^%  wf^  IRH^TfWT- 

q Tftwnfr^r 


'•VNwril*  i 

* Ab  adds  ®«ft«4i«i<n«an«i^  before  j«°  i 
‘.Ba  ffhtfa  I 4 Ab  •5pr  i 

* Ab  •WTCfiTWr« 


frrsjWTwprf 


y<t«R;flH fa f*6<i U favfgra  h iP^t fa  i 

7i^  ^tt  xtpi^wt  psnrrfaH^i 

foww*fa  frf^^trKi^w— 


% *?tw  w«r  nfHf^rrsra^  i 

^JTt|  3ROT  ^ ww:  h 

?17T  faVT  *T7rT  | ?pragawfTOTwi^iT?*j 
W5TV4%wmf  fWT^T  rT^fWF^TTPH  X^TI — # 
»^d|i!M4^^W|3T<W^i*W  I <T3^  WW  3RT<X 
sR^prrs^^ar  wfwn 

rTiqf^ff  JWR^irfwr^fwTT- 

Tjsraw 

V^lT^rpTW^^TT  I^HJWf^rfWTt  c»*4n 
wTgiy^Cfai  ktowtoiwt 
war  ^rwnr^r  fvft% 
^tw  foft%  Twtwrw- 


W ^rf*WWW?P!rFRWJ$?f 
TT^Mtri^r^wTi^^iw^ihMrinstti  wn:- 
?Trrf^trawfmtW  f^rt 
ww?r?m  fawnr  wrfcfw  mwwwr  t^tt:  wwi^tw 


1 ANCBa  to i 

5 AbBa  o^st«  i 

6 Ab  ofeai  | 

1 Ba  rw^wo,  Ab  r*f^,0  , 
8 AC  omit  ioi  ...  cwfn%„  , 


2 ANCAb  nw.  i 
‘ Ba  ?mr  • » 

8 Ab  .jwr  i 


1 fpfcf 

— ^R7T^r%w«wT^f^T tg  ^srrfai 
ji%^i  »rawr?t  ^?ttw  ¥%?f  ^nif&tw 
n^satfM^^i  Tf^T^rnrr  i 

iifM^jT!  pr^t  w Trnws-.  i 
*wifM  ^pptt^N  wri  ^rf?  % ii 
sfrirc^— 

h^t^3?  %rrg^?rww  i 
B^SMT  ^JJUT^TFnH^  II 

*fa  Wt^T^fwtfwW  ^fa- 

JTFT  WT^TTrt  I ^rTTW  a^fijW  I ^ 

fisnr  m ^ ^?t  * firafaff  *n*re 
*r  *THTfM  TOsrspsnrf^ra — # *3fh  f 

^t?t  i *N 

gr^TT  %^f5TT5frr?^pnm  wrere  vnra*Jg, 
W-iftwiifo  w^ri  i ?r^g  ira%  «#  fFnsp- 
(j^^.v.-wifif,  ffsflfcwi*  wt^R  Tpftrmsrrfwr, 
<fffi%  TOtffrre^^rrw,  ruw^i  *u^ifw- 
5R^W  ^tg.,  wr  ftr^n 


1 Ab  .g*T  t 
4 NCBB&  omit. 

* AC  jft*  «r*r,  N itt-  sr-  wrfT  i 
VRET*  ...  »«9lNr!f  | 

lf -■•  ~'hVi ’■'  • ' '■'"'  ”:r 

i*w,  y \ 


Ab  a^N1  i 


‘ ANCBa  fw  i 
’ AC  um*  i 


¥fTWRTWT^t  'v 

| gptar  wn^nr1 * * * 5  *ltNfa%*5^t 
w^fh  | rl^mfa  HTT^rtftr  ifal*  ■ *WWt 
VPRfqj:  WraTTT  WT  JToti  k^vTf  Wlfal  <?liil*i^*ii^' 

faff:  *TTV$rf  | *rf^  XTrUi^l  «T  Wlfa  «f^T 

xfo^wF^i  ^t 

ij#nw  H^rf  nfa  "snfa  i ?nfr  s*wfa  fai- 

q W*f?T  I rT5IT  5^rr  **ltii«S*S<*l  I 
^WHTgT:  PMi<rl|*JM*Tig  *TWfa*rf*m 

^KfiqrgfrT  I ?m:  JPifa  W^^'RTTWTfVrT:  fait 
*#faVrcpT  »t^t  TTipmR  ingfa,  »?fa- 
VK«BTfoi  HUTtfa  I 


II  JJSi^PST 


173. 

^rrfr  w#  mAh*: 
wnft  ^wfw^-gfafa  ^pi|p*W!- 

fsrra  i tht:  ^r«g<HiHfayg  H^Urr- 


1 Ab  °%?r  i • .r«,  only  in  Ab. 

4 ACBa  omit  .w.  i ♦ ANCBa  WW*  " 

h ANCBa  o-gi<5  | ' * "• 

a Ab  ^feritT^^%ir  $*$m*  l 

1 A omits  «?r*mo  i 


*ras*r$?tf5(Wrvw  i 


fTOR  • Hf^nt  TfinilW 

fqfa?g  whm\  vm^i  vwivm 

^nTW^rot  q^3ri 

^fwww^wt  ^Fp^RtSTOW 

T^TKJTVTt'  rrmnim^z 
*nur<?  >tNitt 

fwro  qTgwssn^  f^fTwsfta  l^r 

<<jhtrC|<5*^ftf^if«t»  I VT^n  wna  tpB  U^i  1%^R 
SR*  -srq-rT  | trto  ww — # f ^5BC  ’&  Vffft  % 
WTpra  fi‘  i mm  fqrjfrr  q*Nri  wsm- 
Pdqfdci  V%T  tWT  I V?  JPOTfa  4«WPHlfff  I 

II  Sfa  "*r3*J^f^OT*TV*W  II 


W!  I 


^HfjXjTT  fqWI^I  X»ii<!i  qf<<![d^l 

fpqnr  %fnrwrfw  ^ wf^t  “wftfo  tri^c- 
*iT*m*  f^fwr  wwfif  f^rr  iwq4ri  Tarre- 
^l|tegf  q^rq^nff^ref  ^'i»rci!<>*fttil*w'fi<4¥ 


:'B<it.r 
.*  B .omits. 

!KiB»  i 


* BAb  omit  ttGTOpn* 

* B«sr«t.  I 

8 Ab  omits  *¥g*r*  i 


$?ni»r*nmT*r 


’srcfW^j- 

m;*  'StrtfrinifKrWT  ^TOT  qfr- 

fwro^i : to  to  <3wqr  ^tot 

??ff  WTTOT  I <pT5%  IW.^flKi  f*tTOt- 

>r tu  mN^%  ^rcror  q»#mTT 

TO^%  TOTTfTO  wfhmTTt 

Eirn^'j^i  mftTOi  ^r  i wra 

kjTOTT  4 IA  KCT^ffrngWCT  TO»fTOlt 

sarerroro  i *§*^<i 

fwnpt  t^tt*  TOtwrajfiZT 
=r^g^STTO  TO^TTWt  qro<TOPm?T?T,  ^qr- 
ZTC  TOTTTf^rrTf  ^cH^T  T^WWfpf  ^5- 
9WWT  ^TOpjtPCT  TO'WWWTf  WITOWTI^, 
qf^TT?TT  Trm*tz\  ^yil^i  TOt^rt 

^rnreaffar  ^famwifzr  ^feqniRTwrf  to- 
ipwrf  qTTOrmi  wttosrjw,  qsq- 

qf^T^mi  wrefafigfZT  Umqit 
^K<t  ^fwRj5iT«it  ‘w^mri  to^tott 
WTTOV?j  fqifrrr  I VTOH3  1 

^ t^qqfqwqgsr — rf^T  ^ifaqTIW 
3i7qT  qif?r?f  ^TTOTlfiRlTOWl  rTSP^T 

\t 


A **r  i 2 Ba  t 

* B «fe*r  i 4 A omits_ 

‘ ACAb .-.Jrw.  t * Ab  ofTYT* 


wfNi  1 

3*  ft:'  ^TTWT  I ^rTSfT^f 

«®f  ^Fftfwr  *fw.,  ^mw 

TTWT^:  | -JrC^f  ’grrmJlTW  *^|HIW«faTO  ^^JFT, 

re  irmtfr  i 4tararo'r3«utii  vfzf®  w\- 


*rararRT  ^tfr^TpTt  ^rai  st^tct,  rr^- 
wr  refa  ?frT  i ^<m*rcrrei  ^tpt^ 


TOT  renftfrT 


^*TT  -9m\  fa%^<T  I TO*  TT^Tsfr 


II  TWHW  | 

i*- 

I «fd r<4|  P^J^ifrlTTT^T^r^  II 


175. 


,ror  TOft  ?*%wr  *profi*re- 

JTT^I  fTOWW^fT^S  usif  Wtt  *HM<?|*<**3Uo4| 

trfws  wi  * mrer  i w*v — 

d^*HlrtdHa  fafw  TT^rw’l  Wl4 
^TT  i 


^ * 


1 ANC  add  as  after  this. 
8 AC  «rr^r«,  Ba  srsafa  i 
\ B st^H  l 
1 A yw-ytr^rw^N  i 
* ANC  «)  *•  i 


4 N f«rg°  i 
* B omits. 

8 B omits  «f^»  i 

9 ANC  omit- 


t(t?TT5T  ifr  ir  r.^. 

^fe€*rr%?FTf%w5Cfirf^^r^f  ^fcsrNhrs  L -s 
W ^ ^ ff?r  F^TTOr'trfTWfTR  T & *aT"TT 


rffcr  ^ffe 

irf^T^  UT^rl  | tt^T^3T^5TT%«T  *P?T%  sf^T 

^ fa^T  T?tefa?<rr  *S'W*4\wm  tn> 

wsftasr  ^ rnTTRia  ^ ^m?r — # f *- 

fw  5fr-  *r  ^ajin^rq  ^tttt  i *renwr 

fasnftfH  i 

ii  ^Hft^rf^fwnrrv^JT  n 


inpg  f^fw  ?TTrni 

■^wi  fmftmT'  ^fafam^rw 


7qw^^fa*rr^reT*T'j^  fsr»ToEr  hpw 

irf^ag  *it%*t  *to%  *it 

^i^trsT  wfe  f^r  f«i^i4i  4^rrr- 

T|fp!7RT?r<7*!^rT^:,  Trq%«l  ^ Wt  ^TSSTTHU 


' A *w°  ' 5 ANOBa  wnjjx.  i 

^ » ‘Ntm.  f 

toKfc*;-,-:  • - ’ ' 


W. 


3rfT5T  TUffa  Wfr 

R%9T%rT  I WT?T  ^ fftfT- 


^fa^TWTWWI 

G\ 


qi^nf  ThFTOT  WTrPfi  ^'yf^T 


fM-at  tt^it  *fifwTfT*r^?iT  ^T^raittHm- 
SF^^STPaaiT^f^  fi%3?t  ■ M^rl. 
ftmrm  www  f%#  wit  wt  151% 

%W!  1 iff^rt  I aJCIMIHufTO-V^r 

watf#  snri  W^rT  fW^f  TTWT  I ??f% 

^fiSTrT  cTT^I?T  rT^T  WTCFT#  trfWrf  WT®  fafosrel 


gwsttN  %wgs%rf  1 g ^rrcraff  *raf?r 
rirr  f fN4^  wTuigwiiy  wTftr^wpTfr 
5?^t  wwnw  INrfwtT  g<*rr 

^WWWWrr  WsfrlF*ITH  faf^RSf  W?fS 

w^^g—  # ft;  ^nrr  1 wrftrer-i 

sfiJTjfTT^WRW^Tsfq-  | 


AN  oi*x%  1 ‘ AC  oqi^nnxf^  i 

* AC  1 * AC  «*faptTJra*.:y  : 


sTTVWTsrnrf 


177. 

# w frajsnt  i 

HSR  ^TT^xrf^:  f^T^M  Sir^T  'tfHTCr- 
tp^  «rer  sprite  i wff%  Hwnrtr 

vJ 

Tw^rfanc  7T?r:  ^ **w*t  ?raFfW 

*W5q  ^apra  *r  Tnr^wrf^ 

firStf  ^SP*Wf  fWT^  rf^nfr  ^jSf- 

HTT^sf  rWfTTlt  TSrTT mt  ^rHT  TRf  TTftW 
ff^f^WfTiW  T^^TT  ^g^rf  ^r««<ll*J%  7RJW- 

w^Frf  ^pnWtftwt  m- 

^rnJTPT  0 ^re%  ww\i 

*nwN  fpffafl  I H^TrT  WQ  ST^fT  HT^TTf^?r: — 

# f *f#  [*fc]  WST  I 

« $*$srT*TC*m  it 


£Nr^T  ft:^TTT^T5rW^‘ 

WTf^CrWft  jiJd  | H I k TZ&rfii  vmn- 

WHTTPS^rt  iftfaf^SWafttlOqT 
^farnrwjfzr  ^g^srf  jj^su^f  ’srrwrsreTWt- 
«T<f«(<|  r^rl^^'^PS^PTVtr 


* N W*.  | V 

* AKC  »n«  i 


1 A omits  trara.  i 
8 Ab  ®sn?i  i 

* Ab  omits  .*ra.,  ACBa  o*m«  i 


stem  stzj  mtfnmr- 
^#^raj)^TT  ^^ftTT^wf'RTWT  - 

JT<U«fg?nrRf?WWFI  MWrR  ^5. 
f^Sj  tTCSg  # f^JB?  wt:  §f?I  ^f^rl* 

^re?TTrW  ?TPT?tr#Tf  VPT^ff  ^TOT?r  [**]  fWl  I 
^Rf^rr  qaT^fforre:  girra^srpri  *rafa«63t*r 

f?TOT*I  vtfmWV 

?igr  wW»WFI:  WTR 

~mfy  ^ fafsRsr  ^rr#RT^#m*Frt3 

^rttw^wt^it  rnwrarst  wSNt  *rre- 

htW i ms  *tw  wf?  f^*aT  ^r 

^ »T%  T^T  WRTgrai 

'ffe,  "’ftswi,  f^i 

%?f  # $*fi  s&$*  ^pff  tt  w^pr 

ft-  ^rr%fd  mi  snta  i ^t«t%  g "wrui  mi 
WTPfitfa  fo^T  ^gi^rRnR  TTRp^f  *H> 
5TrfTn€r  TT5TTWTSR  W >Tgf?r,  ^!*pR  ITWT^:, 

1 Ab  o^  i 

1 *nn»  omitted  in  AC.Ba,  8 A dnjg?r  i 
8 ANC  snpr  i 8 Ab  .ft  i 

# ANCBa  «rajo  I 1 ANCAb  *t(z  \ 

AC  °*f»ft»  I * A «WTe  I 

10  AC  AbBa  i 

u Ba  «mS,  Ab  wrorrat  i **  ANCBa  .irm  i 


TTWTp  ^jf^T  *T^f - 

||  ^rar^T^f ^f^TT^TH  || 


179. 

itsht  rrr^<x  wrw»TT^  tr^wcgfaw  ?f«rat- 

WS%rTT  iflft  wrf??r  Sirf*SS  rtf'- 

w<r  wH  rvfmfrin^  r ^ihi^i^it- 

?rea  ^mT  t^:^tt  i mt 

jfh^fnrfenfiar 

*prc;T*ro  rrfmwt 
Uf^T  *rftf%5W  fawm?t  I rTcf:  W^HSHfr 
^Trfife^^rr^TTi  ^rf?qr?r^T^jiwt  ^r^wra- 
mfmrt  w^f  ^mwT^frr^TKt  wnN?- 
^rrsrczTT  ^rerferirt 

^srfirmw^n^ffF 

f^#cf 
«rrf^#if  fti 


1 AC  i 
5 A ssRwnrcrc®  i 
* Ba  ofr^ro  i 
V ANCB&  o^ntfo 


2 A omits  ^Tm^tranro  i 
* Ab  omit  ^rrar^W^o  i 
8 AC  ^K^to  Ba  wfhre*  i 
? A omits  <^f%^o„.ooiterar®  i 


^5T%7T  I TprfiW'l  TTTTORfiifflt 
trft . irftoTOn  qspiT'f^TT  ^mf^^?rr(5!T) 
I TOT  TFpwk  TOT  ’TO  ^ 

?rf  towp  toto  \wfo  i ?r^  TOrerorofro- 
KTOffTlP  f I TO^gTOrfTOTT 

VTO^T  I TT^g  ’STOrnrWTTOT  I TO  fWTTTOfa- 
fro^T  *#5f, — # ^TTTWTO^nEERTOTflH^- 
Sf^l  ?f?T  IVtUfviHM^I  rT^  ^T'f  ISJ^aJ  ^HiirfjrTO 
^*4ww*  STOTOnCTfcw  f%*TO%rTI  fT#tffl 
3Wf^T?TTftTO  fTOTOT  JTOfTT  ^ 

TOrTOT  *jfff  fa*TOTO  ffh  WTO5W  | rTfft  WW 

TOiRTsrfH*  froi  wtto*to  faro^i 

toto  f^nrft 

fapsroT  ^nrfwi  'tf*  Traffic  *rt  grofa  wfrft 
Tj^TO^r  TiNwwsffi  rr^trft:  grots  ^r- 
TO5*r  ^Tftfroraros  toTtoi 

fWT^rr  I WrT  ^rfTOTcRPT 

g^TO  l^fWTTO  fwi^l  fS»TOI  <S*f<  ^ipff 


1 AG  vfmimmo  \ 

2 ANCBa  omit.  3 ANCBa  «i 

*ANC  o®ct  i 3 Ba^jaafCS^* 

aA  omits 


the  same. 
1 NBa  •«S:  i 

m ':u- ■■:',/ 


, cT^ftqfc  from  ab>ve> 

(. }(\ 

&a 


fet  y o 


$>  J8a alsorfepeats 


ipncfa  wi^i  fi^i- 

<r^fiTiT«uTifamw'^TOT^ 

**m  mfwti  avv&mj  ^ ^rt, 

TTTHfarRR  ff?T  I fa?RT$5T  WP?rT- 

i£G!fa[  ^f^rr?r  sjMr  tr^nsRTsr  1 

TTCtcI:  M!NI^HMR^5fi^f5<f^^ll IIlT^f«(I  4d$Pi 
^aipr  n^arcfrT  i 7&  h^sjt  sft*!t  fstl^ftr  ’sifwii- 
HSTRT  f^rep4  fWT5T  3T^rf  | rTrf: 

wz:  # 3fh  w?t  i fHram 

wnr- 1 # m-  f g^iiwR  qn^r  i 
m wit  #p^r  ^2?!wh:  ^arafarc^- 
1TTTW  fif^TT'grt^R  ufafot  *m<ft*jftl*rara4SM 
rwm  ^ItvrR  mi  ^ ?r^g 

<?wfN  i <m  k 

*ftf*^sa*RRR  fwaifa  I df%ra  WTTR 
W^;^4k^dHfd^  « ^ g$«  qBHqpHTqft- 
-qfz'm*  wrprrffRT- 

mvm  ^f^sRTftr^rft^n 

nf^H  ^TCWWT 

C\  N 


1 ANOBa  ofwao  i 2 AC  nfa®  i 

:<  AC  oflTftrfto  Ba  Hi  5jr«r®  i 

* B omits  ft-wwTc  i 6 AN  omit  mqf«<WT  i 

6 AC  rofen,  N Ba  «[*>&«  i 

I ANCBa  omit  ®xw°  i 8 N ®iyfcfit®  .* 

" Ba  i io  b ®wr  ( 

II  ANCBa  .fafta.  i ^ 


fWT'^fT  ?fri  ^ I 

fa«5F*  ’itMWi  I 7T?TO  VT*j:  ^RW%5f 

^ffrelT  ^nt’T’n  ^Tt3*!f  •TnJTFTC  t*5  JTTTOT  Tm 

gpafig  I W<X  ^3I%3T  »T%  ^T 
:ftf*raipto  g ftfem  w<*n*ffrw*  wrpi^gi 


WTrra'sfrr^t  *psf*TT5T%?f  *T*R^:^0  *TW — 
^PT^t  Bm^ai  |fj^:  | 

# g*$#  3ft=  ^srgff  % wrpnr  wtwt  i 
to  gisrtgi  m>  w fawtwr 

WF#I  TTTOtf^rTT  I 

fwi  tt  ^pnFt^wg^r  i 

Tit  UT«U  <S«3ft*t*T  T£5f%^  II 

fagwT  faff?*  wfa  i 


II  tItt 


N 


1 AC  fawr«,  Ba  fine?*  i 

* A«  i 

* Ba  i 

1 AB  wn*r»  i 


* Ba  uf5f%srtc[  i 
4 B o»nf*r%To  i 

* ACBa  first  i 
s B omits. 


* Ba  ^ftf%»  i ,(>  B adds  # fwfifl  after  Colophon. 


1 80. 

i 

^TT^im^r  ^PSTt  HTTOUMP  h * 
ira^T  *W*PWT»IT?lltf  ^ ^r^:%vqt 

f^^fT%5T  wmw«rT?n^TT^ 
ttT  H5TT^%  STFT  l^TT^ 
vuwt*  femwv^m  w*riWR>«S!i 
ipppjr*+*<i$w  i r^rft  ftrsr^f 
fm4 1 ?%frrv^Wr  xpjv 

fejTjsrrfw  ^rii^ 

HRPTfor'd  wf<<ln^  irfilRIc)  I 

1T^7t  '& 

fwTa?  forotairiigiq  ^<rixifWr«T- 
*n^>T%  IWT^H^M  f^3fRt7r  I r^- 

'*'r^  w^Ti  jfNnffar- 

TT^fr  few<?N- 

f^f^rf  fif^T  f%rm?T#rn’^pf 

^rmsniTfimt  ^rt 

^f^rwr 

"S^TT  Wmf^TfTT^m  f^^cyqifiuMtjH^igj- 


1 A i 
4 Ba  omits. 

& ABa  omit. 


2 ACBa  o^  I 
4 Ba  Ptrwo  i 


^THq!*f *TC!l  q%T  i ^R^^^grT^TTt 

^hTOlrqTTOfqiW 
TjHT^R^TqrqraffT%^;t  wq^^rrfwft 

qrwff^mt  wpdmi  i fa>]- 

W53#m1r  fawns  ssfapfa: 

qiumre  wrests  fwnrrsnwfa  # w-  f s fr- 

?3FR  *FH<5  qqi^t^hS(5T 

W^m  T|5q^|rwqq<fy  ^ faTTfSW 

dfaisr  fan;:  wf  fa  vfr*- 


•TRirg^R 
?TTW  M^dSHIdl (WSHraratd * 


?f  ^tRfarrfrfasi  ^Nth 
TTTWT'xnT^qw  i <r%s  wrt — 

pRT  TOT  TOTTO:  I 

wwrfa  w*iTsfa  ^jfa  % h 


1 A omits  cH5?ng'R®...®fliaTTO  I 1 * * * * * * N «ykt  i 

3 ACBa  i * A *r*«  i 

6 ABa  »wxfc®  i 9 A •ntift«  * 

1 ANC  irfsgo  i 

9 A *rt^  ^5*«,  Ba  i 

" Instead  of  this  feloka  Ba  reads  *ftfn?w  331 

arftanfipnft 


3H&T  ft?  3lMW|4W  <5nfwn|:  ^RTIPPH1:  I 

7=T«rrw  ^mfiiKrrPr  *ji  f^N  ^ftwr  h 


^fwf^g  WTHfHrRT^m^WT-*  *^nTOT»T7Tr 

pjiW  w f 7rstgfafa**r  g$% 

irf^TST  ft^ftr  fwft  *TR«^T — *rf»T- 


ifqWiFPT  I rT^g  ^JTRt  'ijfaiwfil- 

qfarns^r  h i «r<  fa^f^n ,?jftpl!Tf%- 
*?pTrf  g**Twr  ^ ^ftrrg  nffaftw  ^ffigwrai 
^ *nswfW*WNr  wt*  «fefH 
sfNT  *TT^  H^^TT  | %*'•  g*Wfqt 

‘^r^Rf^i:  f*TfNrf^^5  W3T 

st  »romTwr«rf  qfW  srrftr# 

«ST>rnFsrrwr  ftrepq  qr  far  ftWTW 

^T^TW«iqt»m:  ?T%q  I 5«fan*i 

«ri«re^R  qrfwfh,  f^n-sf  i H^pstsfq 
f^^HTfwfwf  qrf^f  w qT 
^ *ns^  [^x]  ^u% 


2 AC  o*wfj5r% 
4 A *t*>  i 
* AC  cxmj  | 


ANC  f^jjj , 

A m i^i 
ACBa  tPT 


*rag#H*riwi  nyiHifc  fawrfh  i 

?r  *ira  imrei^t — # 

sfT^T  fWT»r^MMij»N*7^Tl7fi^aiyu4|^rd- 
H'f^nfl^T  5TR<h*4||*JTftI  ^iwkfrl,  M%^|- 
*41 *j$f  ^ «m?t  1 5frasi  faitm^i  wr 
p:,  ^rof^SrSTT:5,  ^rf^F?9T 

f?  *rf*pi4r^^f  imr?  *fir  i <£*4*w 

§raifW*im|ft*  ffrnriwi^n%7!i(^): 

^r  tj?  froiwwflwai 

«1W{1  *T*W\  ^TH^t  %mM«  I 

ir^a  ft%sm 
f?r  wMi^jPytwir^  fa?nn*i 
wr  *if*w*Wr:  i sra^ts^?t 

f^w^m  «sf^tr,’3TPfR  wm^i  tor 

insif^fvr: 

WfWJpnreTfij  *lff  <TOT  I 

STfhr  [<j  *TPTff  %*  wft  II 

^rerra^r^aj; — BH<tr4j*4fwm 

^WHttHUi'  fiwnt  ■%) IVfTl ^ >4*1*1  <H^M*4|*HW 

1 A w i 4 ABa  *tst»  i 

5 Ba  JWifo  i * A ’iwTTT’tT  N nun**T  i 

? AC  offfifRT,  Ba  •f^HUT.’l 
^A€f/nflnm«  i 1 A «^fa:  i 


*mnmranrt 


Mgllfoldl  ^ I 

wir%  ^ *%f^«t  ^t  nftro  lunn.  i 
imunft  *raf?r  i # f^W  — 
XT?Td'nir«ffV:  I 


W rf^TTTT^T  ^ Wf^rt  TON  ^ I 

O' , 

5*rpta  * ^ fwr  11 

faWWT  i 

finwsfori  1%HT^  i$wfz  T35^mfc 
# ^T%fH 

l&m  WtNfarS  **4  f^rmTf^fi  S575IT  ^ft- 

«R:%fwj3f¥T  ?rrwr»T^t^xrrtr«T  ^nus^fa  ttt^- 

f*mm  Tprasri  fawT  ?ifT  ^Ntw- 

^nTr^tR’  tt^hw^f  ^5R*i<?h7iraF 

*pm  wnsr^n  faijpnTraw  <a>^5to  "im^r 

f^5*  srfcr  I Tj^?r 

«f)*4^ff<+!>si'«ti  «t»Rfi%  i 

’Wgfafa:  I 


I AC  o ! 

* AC  *qpra>  i 
f'  Ba  gi3c  i 

; AC  q^jjt  i 

* AC  5«<>  i 

II  Ba  »^s  i 


J A omits. 

* ACBa  e*s*3j*>  i 
6 AC  add  ft-tw  Ji«}  i 
’ AC  add  wMpmrifr.i 
“'  AflSRi*,  N w« 


faafa  pro  a^ar^'^aT^nnRjf  wt^r- 
asp%  w i«iw<  afaaia  aalat- 

<a!froraat  to-  fafarrata  faara  ^!w 
wjfro  ^prrfw(?)T^  3frofi  [afaara] 
4aaai«H*»fiw«<  to  aaar^ 1 aaia  to: — # 
‘jft:  aiiyilf  % 'aarona  ^rm  i *otttot5  ai 

aaTCTTO  TT  *TTH  JcfsRpa  TO  W%fl\  ^RfTO 

aa  qnctfo  faf  fa:  spnaaTa  I TOaTOtsfa  a#t- 
SRTt  aif^lT  TOalWr  faf«TTO%fa — 
assfafa:  I 

arft  aa^Tfro  %a  wif  ar^aaa  i 
wi^^*fftera  ass  f^rfar  ww%  ii 
awa  %a  wra  a arTar 

'araTRTOT  a rrta  aifTOa"  I 
WSJ  fa^T  a f^TO 

f*T  a adr  asiai  aasa  h 


# faf#  a^aia  TOa  aroa  #sra  atara 
TOa  TOa  tot  rnra  «rea  **aa  awrra  aja- 
arra  arfwm  % fa  atf*rf  % f a ffa  **  fa  to- 


1 Ba  o^lIJTOe  I 
3 ACBa  farces  i 
6 ANG  iff  t 
1 N*ro?ta*g  i 
* AC  * KW  ! 

" A •»nw|  i 
'-"Mr- 


'l  Ba  i 

* ANC  if’SfT®  i 
a N .*t  i 

* AN  omit. 

10  N vim  only. 
14  AC  tjwi  i 


WTtrWfflTWf 


tfwtr  wasnsr  *r  gns  # ft  ft'  #8  't*  vf 
wf  ^pt*t  *pws  ^TsarfiiwiywNfr 

m »PT^?t  i # gfos%*  5^- 

tpTf^qi  fore^frT  I f^fT  ^Tfwarrf’rW^f?T  | 
wfafafa  | 

anfo%  ui|«rifwi  Tff%%?T^rr  1 
W g ?TTT%  II 

*nrfo%  ^wr^rr  Twrarr<  g 1 
w ^rr^n?i  wgfor  *ttt%  11 
WT^TTW  foffift  7f?r:  1 

w w rraTsssret  *ttt%  fosangsig  11 
wrt  ^ g to  i 

fore  TTTWffti  TOTssafr  g **s%  d 
?{'a-m  srrforai  fttf  TfNrwrcat  g wctr  i 

^gpiT  TOuf  H 

Sfa  I — 

sure  wwr4  g » 

N s A omits.  * NCf'i 

* N y:  [ ‘ A rt=  1 . * N frrora.  i 

^ ANCHa  «^o  1.  9 are.. .9^  only  in  Ba. 

Ba  jtjsto  1 " ACBa  «vnr  r 

" AC  cw  n»,  NBa  <w  3$  i 

11  AC  •**•» Ba  1 18  AC  .paw.  | ; 


g Tnnlg  I 

1>rnj*TT*g  ’FnTTfa^j  Tro^ffrr:  r 

Tfrfei  g fWM^‘  ^fiW  m-  ^Rrf  | 
^rgr^r  hh  7M  it 

famm  g fromTOfoaTg  i 
^rfsr^T  Waiit  ^ i 

tottto  i 

vtfvi  f^T  wnf  fafriflSig  11 
^PCTfag^ft  gf^T  wait  sti  ^trwtt^t  i 
^rfwi  g ^t  "ggf  g ^fw  H 


*rfeFf  g ifrai 

arfw<  wsj  to  m&ft'-  11 

ig7ta  *rw  w%  i 

TOi^f(a)  g#*r  sufai^  iftfro  *rag  it 
tffirorfa  ^ Wrftn  i 

vm  gircg  *f*sf  ^t  tu^tfkftag  11 

infam  w*n%  g rm  i 

fWrg  «*rtf<8  wpm «:  n 

VJlfifl^  HtW  Wg^  <TOT  i 

HSJTt  ^T  ITfaa^fWT^g  II 

*T  f¥  ffrwfai  s^gif  ^ %*  a^rT  ^ I 

?t  *rrrr®ft  *w*ir!t 


AO  ^35' « 1 4 AC  *T«.  Ba 

ANC  *nrm  -a  1 4 Ba  «^g«  1 

Ba  .to.  1 ‘ AC  ^jfi. 

ANC  «%ar  1 * ACBa  sW  I - * -Ba  *rrr  1 


[*]  % XTTfW:  I 
TTfSTrTT  g?RT^  ^f^TT  II 

?frT  flr*Tf^fv:  I 

•*rcra  wg  *i*W  *r* 

w*n  ^nwpr  ^it^t  ftr ?m  *n^s- 

^rw^rcrfr  vrenpretf 

fwri  fjrw^r  wrw  foro^ij9TO*|tr- 

TTT^WJfi  5R*fT  <{«ft|H€<sr^tj*i  UITfTcJIJT  I «Tf%^  WT 
^RTftT3»T  TJS^f^iHTT^^rf^TWt  IfTT^- 
§isr  ^5T^r  WTV:  wtnxi  *|JT3  T^TT  rTSSfTOJT 
«tt  ^tw*rr 

I TJ^qm  ^TrT«9  *Tf%rT  5I^rT 

U||rt=t|*f  | ^p^T73f*T  JT^TT  xmr  ^ld<*UH  I w- 
^ETRT  W^T  Wfct*  I T^f 

^«tlFd$^  *%:  I Tpr  qi#^*n  »I%  ^ 

^ %utr  ^ nfro  fafw 

i ^nr^id  HrrrT^T^T^t  wf  srcnfaw- 
wifaqifaq  ^(qfhfafsre  w^rfd  5fp^?rr  i wi 
dlfq^fcR  ^ ^Vi*«i*n«il«AM(\  ^<|«Mt(vm4j:- 
wi  vntfh  sfRi^rr  i 


1 A ffr^o  I 

Ba  omits  the  concluding  portion  from  here. 

3 AC  ™ ' ‘A  .TOT.  I 

‘AO  "%«.I  •N.^um.i 

A n .^m«,  i 

AN  n*rsfa51fn.  | * A ^p. 


33RaKJ*$S[Tm  TO  1 3^ 

*T  WPfT  WTW  trjt  I 
Tpff  faRW*.  t‘4  iftrf  WW^nc  T^'-  li 
[^sfiT^i  ^ *#*]  snajfrr  tow  iRrm  i 
^rarraW  i 

^HW^l¥T7?r  Wit  II 

trcsFw^*.  vwmw-  fasg  tow  qrcfa- 

MWTfofrT  ITfipiT^  tl  wf%  IJSTfe- 

^ajN-farait  * *jqprfom  #fi#i  f^r  wfw  i 
gwT  f^Trrfng  itsfiTTra^  1 

^gtwgrwr^  f^f  ^ayfd  i Tnp-wtftt  iipr- 
TOTW  fN  ^fw  | wfSccf  WRftw  f*r^*- 
f*r:*rs?  ftro%  (wft) — 

*t#i  ftfi  tot  iwt  ^ wr  wrfs  i 

to*  fa  to  # f 


1 a«v:i 
3 AC  ojttot  i 
6 AC  fa^»  i 

' C ^rairsrherf  i 

3 C flffTfw  i 


” n4?i 
* A gsrs*  i 
“ N ffT?T  1 * 3 
3 AC  t?^«i  i 


10 


^rsrr- 


gr=  ««T  ^PTf  *V  ( T WWTtf: 

«qp  *rw  ftR  *ncH%  *r  s^rr^t!  n 


jupttt  grcfsr  11 

I^JT  WPRlft  iT^Wt«T%H  fa^FT  ?f^- 

ir|tr  f2%?rT  smt  ?ra:  wm 

ffe  qflwura  wr 


-khot  rm:  *rer  ffarnvt  *f*- 
fa^farf  rrm  ^NTfarwar  *rftfy- 

w£r^vng»iwrer 

3Mi* Wrens  gsncroai  <rfWt  ^ wf^pf 
jrftfwwT^  fawrW  i twKWi*^§l  ST*: 


^j*ri  ^RH^drsnr^TT^rf  wt^rfrsra^T- 

fm^t  *row ^ctnrg sreqWflrfgffri 
farTW’Tf^TFIT  ^BWRtTffNt  ^^TW^TrTf 

?rfN  fa*TR  y 


AC  «TTOrfa0  i 
AC  9?^T.  | 


4 AC  »jw*  i 
4 A »nrwc  I 


3^3 


'Hf»ITPw|fh  T^Rtfefrt  tjgfT, 

ijsrf^anr  wf^ra;  srt^fr- 

*f*pTT,  ^ t[Ttr|wf- 

'^0Tg»rt^*!Tf^R  i wim  *&n  vr<m  wv 
r^t1  «»T^o£rT:  BTSmt 
! fr^g  #rfaf*m  fwfrr  i hw>it  ^frmr^ 
WR  *wf*  fafn^  -^i  ?f?r 

I ffcr:  TO  ^ga^rf^fHTST  rTT«T 

i ^ fa^rNr  UTSirrermiT- 

d\\iW  WTT^SHWTTT^fTO  ^mwtwr- 
fijRiT  faHFS  *T*WOT*to  ^fgrWfwfr?%?T—  # 

^M^gnri  ^mT^fMfhPTPtl  w^t  fosgsRTO- 
flrtlT^K  I TT»!5RtTOSK%ig  f^gRiTfr^WT  I rT^T- 
S^TT  RfST  n*T  T*TO^  i3R>mtl 

?reft ir*ire*f  ^swi^f^jfirora: 
rrarfwi  frn*i  wilf  ws^m* 
^mwrr  * i rrm  wa  ^raster  f^r 

Wf^TSlPT  ■spi  fWPRfa  I rRT^g  ’jpftSTOT  #fa- 

*rvt7  *(fsrfc<ifM  wfwf 


1 AC  omit  »'SWTgHte*'To  i 
s AC  omit. 

* N «trfpn.  i 

rAN  .*$  i 


1 A a^un,  0 ->?a  i 
* N o^jf,  C cizi&i 
6 AC  omit. 


*rsrwT<?rr*rr 


r?J2TNfr  l&m 

^[eet  ^5-^sr  ^nfNrg- 

3^%4f?frf 

fcrrf  ^^T^^^rftWS^fW^rqfRf 

wf^fT  uf?i  fwtnr  i wm 

^rftrnwFf  twrar  m> 

stutiwr  fe*rre%?r  i rim  fawTO  Tipi 
wv  fw«f  rpernfr  *fM  ffJTftr  wnpf^rr  i <r^w 
rfwf^n  scjTffrrrrw^rmHT^N  ^rnjfw  Tjwrfw 
rf  5TT^im  i dw  sn^r,  ’srfa- 

ftr^yg  wTHfarfm^rR  \ cm^dift-Mradracf 

w*27Pf!!fa  rcrnfrdR 

I fTrT?R*  wrw^N^rt:  WT- 

^5frfTTf?r  1 mm*  ^^nuFT  mwfo  wf^r^RT  fw^fr  1 

m\  ^ttfawm^rro  fa^fe/d  1 rm- 

toR2?  wtsrt  5gpt  ?Rr  *rt  ^ntoi  sgfT^r- 

^^Rtfe?r  T^rr|^'  , 3jw~ 

^EPFTH  ^<¥NR3 

?I<fN  ^gfe(^fq<i  ^?g$- 

^itrf  ^T^^f+rlM4|«ri,  ^ JPOTST 
JJfTtrf  TTT^W'^^, 

ff^^SRI  ^ fig  4 # *f  ^ ^ w.  f. 
qfn^r  faRfti  Tf  *rff  c(Tift  ^r  asrr 


I 


**PTFm\o  1 


AC  «*ftV 


frcgwmw*  i 


i ^^rnft  *ysr- 

^*^5tnr: — ^npft  w^t  ^t  ? m- 

n^w,  ^ rrf^^fariH,  ?ra: 

jrwsj  irotf  fN  xr^a  fipfft 

#M  mjw>  to  IH  v*m- 

^<fN  INr  (jjpn  **w  #N] 

m im[^iT^r]5T  fa^farW,  ffa 

W *jfff  gifcJT  ^ 


^TFWT^f  TpTfrST  <PlM«'ri  § ^t^f^rl  | 

vi  *Rn$?T  11 


i 


?[JTOf*!T*!3i?T  fl*TTf^RT:  II 


OT<PT%tR  TTTfW’JlfST  JT^^PW"  I 

?rr^  ^ ?RT  ITTW5RJ  WTtT  *?3T  *T#  II 


»rfw: 

si 

^(tRrafi  i rrrctf^m^Fti  ^ — 

srfNK  ftr%TT»pr*  i 

# w:  ft-  *rHT  4W  wwt — 

f^lTSW:  1 # ^ f tR^  fs^.',  # 

fw,  # wf^THTO[*W>T%f?r 


1 AC  repeat. 1  2 * AC  repeat  oirfecrcr 

4 AC  ow*  i * AC  oTO®  i 6 A Jra  ■**  i 

5 C o^*f  i 7 AC^sjo  i * A o^o  i 


H&  fff?  %rtf?'  ^rT3ffe^f  f f ^ 
W*T  ^*eTR  | ganTRSTTW^  **«W*HM5  I R*RT^fl 
w?i  smifafsrr  wforrr  # ’sm  f s[f?r  i 
ffrm^lWT^W,  ^fW^TrT  *T^faftf?-f?T  | 
*Rff^  W[^J  ^T^4W<  WTH!? 

TPffsa  RsHNrfa  crtt  g#?;w«tq 

Jirsn  ^rcgrf^rr  ^fpt  rm  wra^wM  ?wt- 
jrrTT*T  WTV^rJ  | rTT»T  WM^rTT^  |?f 

W^rW,  trfnz^T^TWTT7^  *IF«r- 

wT^PTfTsnfR  iftiprrr  i fNf^rr  rWM  ^ ftreffr  i 
?r  ’ErR'i'fltRf^  ipiTTJTCj  ^priwfcrri  rr%rft 
#^TT  Wv  I rTrr:  ^ffHrSWT^ 

?mt  WT’rfr^m  TRprc^  wi  sffaw, 
^v*U  Twrfnwrssj  fwwr^nt  ^rw1%rw, 
ftewni^Ttwr  rr#xrf^  rff^r  ^anrctnrcnjw 
«*ii^  JTHM^*ri  f^l%?T  I <T*frSf 
ft;^TT  ^T^TRT^rrf^r  ?r<crf<T57»T  grcgrsf 
?T*TP3^T  TPrnT^rT  | 

rrt  I \Sft73T  ^gRTT 

IwfwjrTT^f  *R5ffa?T  H^T  I 


' AC  omit 
- AC  sn^ps  *zm?t  , 

6 a hr? , 

1 AN  cmirmo  i 

k AC  i 


1 AC  ^snraf  i 
4 AC  i 

* °ne  ^ is  omitted  in  AC. 

8 C ofiraro  I 


^ ^amfriM^Kwr 

'*W4SI  TJSra^f  xrfTVT?!  HT??5I  ^ *IT^  7T^ 
tr^JTrHT^i  fWFT^rT  I WTTT^f  ^re- 

fH:*JrST  ?TTWt5  f^rr5Tf27  ^f^^Tfa'dilfaTN 

wf«iKM  ^w*=rra»rf^#raT  faf^nfto  *rer- 

3H3{T*T  faif*3rT  ’^MFT  tR^rTpr  faW^ri  I ?fd 

fafarg  f^rrgr?!  fo^T 

ffrf  f^SrrSR  W^3nTT«3TTf»T3FT  SfiTO^T- 

ftf^T  IW^TOTTWfrT  I 


5?rereq  fWT#t  ?3m  rTrehr3TH%  ^T*W  I 

v C\  x 

dlMdi!  I 

■5T^  m*Ft  || 


wnwf  grr  SSTT#  *^F5r  ^ I 

dry^i^r^f  r^r4\  %sR^Rlwfr  11 

%TTTW^^:  fW  I 


nfwwi 


II 


1 A ?ra^T»  I 
1 AC  omit  •ST*  i 
* ACBi  ft^We  i 


1 C omits. 

* C airforfe*  i 
' ANC  omit. 


fwr;  fa<r;  i 
^Tfffawfesnsr  g TWiW^ra^frr:  11 
f wr^fT  T'flTTjft  ^ xrr^r^r*  i 
#? Trrrwi™  TTTi^ffq  n)  fT^fr  || 
f^sTT^wf^rr:  ^‘TnrfT  HJTT#*: 

^TT^f  i 

nr#  hjf^nmi  ^rr?r  ?TT8?mm%  wrw  i 

5?xr^«wf  f*m*4  ^Hfrrf^rr:  « 

^ ^v^HqRT?^^  f^T  wfasre 

fT^t  wiy  fiftffrpirfr?  i «T 

?qni^wfr^]TI^  ^U'WQ.l  srrr  TTF?$7T  f^TrJTT'T  I 

-^t?t  spwtt  fairer  faf^t^rTfo  i 4trf 

^afr?  I ^T«=r  5fTTJT??:TT  fwq#iw 

«F?n  m wft  %nT^ng  f^i  fftrr  urr* 

WSHifM  f*7t  l ffr{  >^75Tfa$m:  SfifarT:  I 

!i  ^TpfiTSlT Wi  «nRR!T^T*Trf^IT7T!  qigSTOrgfaqiT- 

H1TTHT7  I 

i sf^ff^Trr^T^^fitnrtrf^T^TT??  11 


A " s^r--«% 

A N ( o ..:'s  Vf*i  *t  . 

4 The  authors  . ...  ( 


* A C *WR<r  I 
ihveri  only  in  X. 


3 -St 


182. 

mw  l^T  rWfwfa^T 

TTfr^S  ^^fTHTT^iW  ^TgrfrfrT 

WTjElfifV:  I 

wrasrn  f *$?rr3T:  *ttvr  \ usw  m^- 
IWT^WT’Tf^:  'TZTf^Tm  ^nfa- 

ipf  fwra  urfoiw 

xmv  % nf^spraij 1 

^ li 

^Tm^TTfa  ^^tfaf^rT 
Pro^raTfw  *f  ^wr?f  i 

sjit  f%rrr^J  ii 

t3Uf^TT  <3*n^%rt  i 

TT^Pfii  # WT^IT:  WfTT^lt si 

Tf?r  *rrc^njiP&  fwnsi 

*wrnra{**nt  <tNit  Tfwrrf^f 

PllJi  ^sfeiST  fTf^T  !T%%^TT- 

m*  gregwr^r  nw*art*M«#- 

q^irfawr  qiwimswrf  1^f3rr 


VWf&R ...>$%*£  is  found  only  in  Ba. 


N *TfS«  I 


^jsrrwrr 

^TOtfq^rw  uftfirero^*  *n«#|f*?r- 

jTWTTT*feW  ^^RTjftTRTy- 
*rf?P|it  mmWmim  ^^nrfTVT^f 

#rlfN  TT^VTTWW 

TWT?tra^T7%  ^^JWflTWfwr 

rrNit  f^w  ^ f^n'5jT?uTt  *nnta 

i rim 

Tjfwrf  ^4  w$j 

wfe  fa^r  wmftnm  W&  wfiw  3wfa- 

?i^T?^rf  I *r^5  *pT 

H’TfaRWJ^T  I rim^i  TFrt- — # ft'  !*l|tf 


%■  ^TWT  I rim  *T«i 

TgT  tracer  i i(4  fm*4  hi mwt 
fafs  t TiiHTmjfh  i tjsMNto 

^iwir  • --rm^  Nwhrr  w^s  nrzt 

%^fmTEff:  I *?i  f-TtQ^  vfe  ^J®t-  ‘wifa- 

^mrfH 

a3^T^  ^ • ’• '*iTM*ff  ^ **pi  *gyf 

H-:-:  • * ft-  i m-  msWir- 

wrm  m?-*  \ 

ii  *^f*$«$«ra^farap  wvf  HHTWR  || 


' AX  !■;;  . 

* A *JT*|Cr*  i 

VATfri 


* ACBa  o^u% 
4 A *q?t  i 
0 AC  ofiRsy  { 


183. 

%WRWpWN»rt'  ^t^TOrrfrftTT  I 

J^pm?  *m  7mrri  **pi « 

Tf  Hr^RTftrawt  UTTr:  WU^lTq 
^TrrfW^|4l*UL^  T*Hft*STT  ITT 
<f fsR^tyqS-EWl  3TJT  W 

itstc'Mp  w*q*q  fT?zrr:  tjtttt  t<w  * sktjj- 
fimrf^HUi  f%:  ntr[  I 
*mr?T  HSTfrrsqqnar  awaita^rarof 

WT^^TT  g*Ti^»n  q 

^wnrmqqf^firaw  s^rri  Swt^t  TPiHUsnfa- 

f?r%7T — # ^am5^P^TiqT7fr#s^rf?T  i m- 

TT^q  #N  ?m: 

W5i  ?m  vfrm  7\wk  vWm* 


T3TR  Wv 

?rrc3%*r  femf  ^tcwt- 
*<wi  wgrapmftwt 

fo<gp^l  ^iftnFg^^f  fstrr1%  xmjiiriR  tw- 
^t^wTwqff?rqiKt  ^?mw- 


%H*J3f|^t  T*t- 

TCrerxrTW^JVTf^ff  fw^t  O 
# w-  fsrpcTff  w<t  i ?w  ^f^rwcwt?aw- 
T^:sfiTT  I^T  cT*fejifW:  ^<4^|»IdR 
<WteU«ftq  KT53  ^RrCJ’NnfTj:  ^ffHftRf%  I 
^^f^aTRFTRT  VRT?pTf^rfTH  ^JHRR  I 

7TrT:  WffNT^t  ^Rtf^’mf^- 

ZW-  WTCRI  effort  ft^T  #f^7r  | 

c\  N 

^^JTnrffanfssrcrof 

7T  ^ w 1%^  nr  f^m  i 

*t  s nr  ^ fnms  ii 
^rpr  i rrmv^di^KfnfvRT  n*nrert- 
infft  fdbui<4i  fsr^t 

■strsf^nnf^Tn  ?m  fnf^rr^mTrUR  ift^pfa  i 
*r#  iT^Tr  i rrtn  ^t:nnf  ifrm 
%m  # $nf#  3ft:  nnTr  Tdiairg^Hdsimnif 


MlHllLMHt:EtSKEi*;hhilrv{ir. 


^tnrfwt 


-■  * . V 

win  i nrTTjsrnR 


1 AC  ofa*|:  I * AC  fl»H  I 3 A ! 

* AC  wfa  I ‘A  o$Tt  i 

9 A fa’fl  i ^T^rx — 

^ ^^WTTfj^Tt  «r  ?j  wfert  ^ gf?^n:  n 
1 A o**nfq  j 
#AComit-  ■ 


snfsrsmgwgiSTWTsiim  i 


g TmT?T  ^NifrfrT  i TisgT1^  g 
Hifefa  fani»si  ^graT^’WTffn^  fafajpi  Tjgrpg- 
aaTf^fi  fsifaj  ^crapareTfe^fagf 
w^r^wirn^  fsrpr  i 7m  wr^E^fwFrrfa 
^^j'if^fd  | 


Ji^crTHTTT^nrm  fawt  i wfN 

3P*pm^ 

fatgpg  ^wr  piping wc- 

A v ^ 

^rfwrni  rf<^f%EfiT^f%^rt  HW  rr^fWTT  rITg 
U*m  pjppN  fEfVRim ?m- 
WWfa  *4t3rr%I  JT%38  TfifWGT 

STTTrT  Jm4  ^faTOT*n?T?i3I  *£H*S  fijR^T 

WpfTt  q^qr^l  gfaim  I rTrr:  JmMrqW^TRTfa- 

wrag  ^ wg  i 

Arapiifaui  mssrf  ^ sr*g- — 


’STTC  *3  ^prT  ?3  *5*fi  ^ffw  *T  ^5  W *3  ^ f^fTO  I 
# tn^win^t  *3  ^ t?t  w s ^pn  n 
ipj  [jct:]  gsprt^g  *mig  T*$twn  mg  **T*n?t 


i ^ FP2R5  mwm 
*> 


*T  IMHlfa<il *1  ?l4N  ^mPRSPIrl 


1 AN  eifltw  I 4 AN  otRJTHW 

3 NAN  f^wr^«  i 

* N ovnwtfao  i 6 — 

wr^f»rW)  »r  Traft  nff  n g * 3 f^rafaw  1 
. :w*  % xttmr\q*sft  * 3 utt  >r  mafN-'  11 


smr*i*nsrpd 


^C0 

TPSH- 

^nfs=T  ir%'3g  rT#^  t|73T  fef^T  TfiN  3rffa?f 

(TcWT^T  7Tt*T  Mf  ^tgS^fWT  ^5  ^ 

?t:aRR  w^Trrxr^firfwrrfHSfTwwn  i Tmiswm  «T 
^rnsTOT^^rr^w^sr  vrsmtfH  i 

ftVT9PTT^?r  pa  f*f^T<SraTV^  I 
7P?T  yr^rwsrr:  tfSrJ  II 

II  ^h^rrT^wiT  ^rfa^fSfWTSTW^T  WW>!  I 

i xmfTv  *'csifai?nwa  11 

184. 

"W  S 

p*rafwr^*T  fa*rj  wfNh'  jff^T^r- 

frfUJSjjf  T'f3R*T[T  ’JTfTWWWf  ^T%3T  TWt- 

TH^Wtlpfr  ^TCTcT  I m ^TWjfpra^JTOt- 
Hfg;^if«r^rrf??v?vn‘Tir  Tj^?ft  faNragr  tsrf^r 

i Tj^f^ng^gr  f wrt 

^FC — # f ^5TftT«TO  ^TCT  | 

II  Hfe^fW^TJTTTipr  *TRTHH 


1 A m^m'ku  i 

i Thi^B ad  liana  is 


2 A omits  j i 
^•mid  only  in  AO:  $&>, foL  $4* 

• . ; .' '.'.v?>.  ••••  :^f-::'M 


185. 

'W  | 

f^s^t  fill  fa  ftww  ^g^ysrm  i 

fwij  f^srt  i 

<*iwsifo*rt  ii 

ft:*RTT  fJcTTO^f^TS^ 

fUT^FTT  m*Q  <T3T?pr:  <TrT* 

■qfruiTJTrif  sk^t  ^g- 

VTR^rf  l iT^TTf^rrf 

faraf  wrf  tT^gfs  gferrf  TfT^^[smp]*t 
vn^rg  i htt;  ^Rpm^giTrf  # ^m^r- 
^l^KT^TSFWty^g  I ^T5T  xjs^TWiff^iTTl!! 

w^fT  ^irWnn  fa^wr  f*giw*twR 
vtT^gi  ^T¥^r  flra^fajxswsi  #?t  n^fx 
^r*R<s*i  ?m  ff^TT^*w^t 

^SferTTOi  ^gw^t  3T%  ^TWf  if^^T^xjiTfi- 
mwmi  WT^^rfwTrf 

f^*iw*TfwTT  ^dM^i^iYi^i  fa^gf  fainri- 
^tw^rgrr  ^famwggife^f  ftgfare  ^tcwt 
^rfTjfHfl^ifMrtf  wi^f^^rr 

fxP?[^§]f  to^Tf  ffi/t- 

This  fiadhana  is  found  only  in  MS  B:  see  fol.  (M 


OT^rWRTfT- 

»nm<5- 

I 'HW  ^<H*rwT  ^T 

trr^rT%  i vi  wmrm  ftnxrre  w*rawr 

?T%5Rt?iSI  HF^R  TJSTqf^frT  I Wt«T- 

i ^mm\T^  <?iVhi- 

f?TT!>]  W3t  TJ3T%rT  STONtt:  I 

TJ5FT  fi^T  Setter  3TT^JTWTg^?r  I 

wt|>]  5rrwq<$[  q swifter  n 

# f qji  ft-  ^TTfT  I V7T5TPWT%  q^T^q- 

fqsrat  «qfq  i farrqqfq  fgff^Nrro 

RWTf  vm  %im  TOt  goirta  fq^rnFm  i 

qra  ^T#wr*f5F  ^qfwrfa  ^r  farafa 
f%^T:  I # $qf#  qfgsfi  R Z ?T  q q ^ ?f  q»? 
W?T  I q^fa^JR  | qj#t  trft^T- 

*«TfW  WPT^rT  | fq^l^fq  TJ3q%  | 

^F8TRTWFf  Wl — 

’JWft  q^irrr  ^nxf  q?fqri  faft%gq'i  i 
fq%  *h^w%  h 

q&  qr^q%  ^imjFRw  i qts^faffr 
J4*Wii«u*i  qimqqrf^^qTn  -qfq  sngre^tf^- 

S*:  *s*T*qpr i qqrfitft.f*  wmft 

' MS  i * MS  .«f*nr*  ' 


Vs? 

3T^  i iri  mrmr^w  QmtwmQ  vtfft  *r*$ci 
^fpTMg^PT  i ^xfH  i zffyri  jm- 

mv%— 

w$%*i  %wrrwr  vwr[wtwrs]*j7t*f  g i 
qigTOii^q:  ^t  FfTOip!  ^rr^u- 11 
SHTOWJ  *5^5  qgsRvrtfwroitfqq^  I 
vf^FT^wrsm  — 

n sftsmw*  ^fr%  wz 
ywftufa  ffrt  ^ %wt  i 
f%s  ^ffr  *rnsf  * 
wj^r  ^m^TT  f^ra^T  qrr  ^TWf  11 
^t«Wt[TWt]wr  iw  fa^^fUTqT:  I 
*tpt»t  fimqwTJw  tjw  ii 

II  ftr71fiqflfT^T^T  WTHfl  I 
I gifffM  fa*wm«l*WN  H 


, wn  % ^rovrPiir  »PN  ^ % ^*ro  i 

*wi  wwfa  WPCTid  fffwt  fWT  Tfftrq » 


•rFr'*YF 


186. 

imrt  wti  ^ W i 

ijgrRX  ’JpSKTT  I ftwt  ^!%5F 

gx*rt  fwpsr  rT^^rfr  fwi^x 

HfTWFT  I rr?crfWT  f*tWT  ^fWTf  WT#f 
Hpf  *mrmi  ^raw  ^ i # t* 
fff¥^  wr^  to 

'rf^trfx  rr^rfr  ?;»q4rib*KMfi<!!tf 

rr^tTfT  rlrqf^rtf 

f^fwmnwpr  ftf^n  ^rT^iwt 

frosi^r  ^famwrTTOTfwiftrart  v^i^to- 
?rm?cr«rr^5i^RTw  i ^ unW  srrfe,  *uf<T 
«t3j%  fmm-.  i ^ ^sm^g  faraHiui:  *ror  *r 

t # -it*  w*t « 
^ an  TT^rr  irsrrat^s^pto  g i 
fwjw!  ^r.  h 

" %TO3rcgrs$srrenM  pw(  n 


* A TO*  mqi i | 

• AC  .ss*"*  '^asvsiigk 


mmffi  m *RTHT 

4 

1ST  *TSST  fa*PTPT5%  3T  IT^%  I 

HT^rpR 

'srr^r  *ntg6  ffrmsrg^nwfw 

WI^IMf’M^lMM  rTR  3>^pnr  HPfSR 


>J|fllUrt:iZ£l 


ICt^irL^C 


lfN«l <i a^Jri i ^^p#;  'tiilnnw  ^jr  i 
^NWHRqffffiSTIIRTTci  SflfR  ^T  71^3 
*STR  ^ IRTO  $VRWfa  rrawra  ^ ?faT*T  I 
*P®I  WWdW  ?H^5  M<l*Jd:  flsrKT0%^ 
WTTO[?I^W^«I«  fsjrlRR 


1 AC  vNpw  i 
’ A _»vmm»  i 


1 A wit%  i 
* AC  =>ur^r 


^ireBwPl:* "'  -■  * . AC  ij^si  «rar  i : A °«fi*>  i 


srrvsw  Turret 


RJRrt 

safari  grrstert  trumIa^W  *ra'?ra  ti^  h 
ffa*iiHrl*T  sfaft  V^WR^TT^T  - 

WPT:  I 

^wzfrv*^  fawi  f^m- 
irranr  wr  * jm*u  ?Trw^f^uj  11 


xn?t^  TWiTT^^ff^rf^  «faiT*fr  htwr  ^pgrt 


^srsfarriifm  qreunfh  wrD1 

wrer  ^nrm^fr  fs^ms^si  ^pp^ti  tt^t  » 

AN  »T®io  i i AC  i 3 A »nf«fv»  i 
* A N vtrhgi;.  i * jj  „^9„  , ; 

4 AC  .TO*  i 


fregpwnrro  i 


w#  wfw  i 

fwwT  TPPrsi  farfa  vm^ft  ?tw- 

WF*m  ‘wNsrrqT  sprfH  *rfe  tt 

W!  W^rfl  #*?fTSFTTTW 

w{  ws\  TOnfwrr^f^r  qrn  i 


I'i'iiMH’J  r 


wpr  55rrtwmf ?r  wtthh  i 
i ^t;  ^wfnvT^  i wi  wm-  \ ^ 


V TO: 


spi  ^Tfar  f *$wr  wrfa  ctf?  ii 

|t  wit  itTw^nfNTf^iJ  $*fT**w  3^i^r 


^wj5?j  ?p^Tr  my^s5*ri  ^fwg- 
wnfuguref  Ponvunt 


‘ AG  ifiwr«rr  i 

1 B gives  the  N amaskara ; other  MSS  have  only  ■#' 
f 'B.nmtm  qys^  *appfr*nc»  i 4 B .ftstfa®  i 


rrt  ^W4*§T  TW^- 

xTOTPWt  i»W<i  T^PnCM^f  *W 

^IWlH^f  ’SRR  TW- 

^nrw  ^sprtw  T^strrow  ^rfwTrw^iff  $*- 
f<sm^^r^if^  wirr#5^^ri 
f^fgf  HT^<T  ^TRrT  *tft  *T  «^f?T,  g WR 
^ i mvi  ***—  # # ft'*  i 

q«IUfom<g  ^m^r%  t%^5  t^Rt^PT^RR 

am  m ^gftgfT  wfi  g tw^:  mvi 

TTT^T  ^fT^T  *T?f  faw  gW^STT  <>ft<il<§- 
fazffa^  'sRpfFR:  | TT^f  ?TR.‘ — # 

ft-  ^rg2*  % i 

ii  Tfn  fw^i^ « 


189. 


# W^TfTl  ^rVnTT^T  *IHfiHW- 
srf»  fogWSJ«M$fi!!  uftr?T  g^flRHTfMwtS?!^- 
*T®  sftcT  I TRTfT  ygMH | *^iTfg 
ft?%  * w *rcf?r  i ^irfargjfcg 


1 N »au.mKut  i 

* i#fa..,.,..wfs  is  omitted  in  A. 


^TTWT»r  Wfa  I Wfi- 

fynfir  furttTT  wr  m*r  * wm  **rf?r  i Jrpf 
trR  ^rTfwm  w.  w vterfH  i *ro- 
3*qq*Nl%  WTW  fr?T^:  | WTrf 
•wwffrrc  * h»twp  ijanf^ii  w%\  $^t- 
^f  W *TT 

wrfafa^i  vfm&Bi  «*wfcw  ^TtwnaFtf  jttr 
fw?N^  i ^3  3>  ^ 3?  # w^^ps^ralwf 
*mwr  *ttw  i fopft- 

3vPT  ^!R  ^TRT  H^RTOffTf^RTOT  ?^T- 

»ra  fafiaui  rrnr%H,-  nm«fs  i 

^t  w*FNnc%  HTg^arr  4 1 <s>^  - 
f$3|T  <TPT%?T4,  «T  ^fatJSP  I HWfSTT 

wit  fw  stcsttN  wnrsn:  351  w^\  w&zfr  i 


1 Ba  tnt»  ! 

■^:vAGi«'Sro.i.  ' ■ 

* N omits  this  Colophon.  . 


* A oWTOo  I 

* A mr°  1 


^<5.8 

190. 

*TTJW 

•rrar^r  ^Nrt  Bfaw  w^r  »rera  ^rar 

wftTCT  ^PTBTC*  Wf’rT  % fP5  Tjf^  % 

•^fwTf  * f*  *rarcrsrre  ’wm  % g*  3&t:  wm  i 

# iff  ff  %"  ft  fP  I 

ii  f^fw^rr  ffaftfo  ii 


191. 


•w  ^nfft*fosnnt  i 

^4t*RiMi^H  ftnwf ‘btw  ijarf  faprr 

f^t  ^r^t^rf  ^fpnwrrw  TOiBt  WRiff 

U*ti<i  ^fra^fi5%rTT^Tt 

*TR- 

f*mvu  ^ffhf  tnrai  wtcft  i 
ftfBTWR!R7*TTfil^%3  ^rar^FT  f *f 
^ Tfa  ^rSB^I  (“HTt  *PGt 

B^rT,  # I 

C\ 

II  ■^flMr<|JS|<||«IM*l^  H 


» 

6 


*..;?  is  omitted  in  NBa. 

N reads  it  $n  after  the  second  «nfHHC3  I 
B «nf|  3t  i * C i ‘ Ab  omit 

AN**‘ 1 ’AbjTl 


192. 

'yjfafiwpfa  ^ ftm#^TT5rr 

fadldM^mur^rTr  *T*I1<?F  f^t^t 

wpw^wi  fi*,d<wu,<ma!daS4l * *l«n:- 

^mafRJ  TOKfalfW  flc^lfaufftpff  Ml^iK- 
Wiaf  UJT^T  3RJ%T  I ^fm- 

Hflqfgrrefc^  *f^  5TWT0J  ^THWrgfgg<5ITTT%<t  I 
utv — # %7rnrniirTufi%  cvcSratpi  u*rcr 
ircra  i5i  15t  4i  f 6f  ^fnT  i 

i«  v*  s*  ^ 


193. 

^dl  Wldld^i  ^g^W%T- 

ift;  ^rerfqSHSIlsi  1«RTTTMWW^  ^Tf^T 
Tfimt  %<i3iiq«i^i  ?TSTT#f 


qa^^lMI  P<<f|  H aymi^f^l^RT 

gs»W  is^rr  i^wwfrftTff 

1T%  iraifWfeWfl'HMii  T?R^f 


lPK^5»i  * WP1T  ^fl*filWHld«|d^* 


1 C begins  with  \#*  > * ANC  ^wyrt^r  i 

'.ASC  TI  WWTti  * C T#  1#  I 

~V;  :ANC.?jf * .Mrs  « i ‘ B «roi*.i 

xhB.'i*,!  ;-c  ■ • AO.Wl. 


^rwrtjj  ^if^’  i^spiX  7mt  «wr 

3r^?T~  # qsrefq%  f i 

||  sfa  q<rHnfoT3T*PW  H 


194. 

•wt  *nrmfswcT^  i 

TJ^jfavFRr  yWTWW*  i <3i<*p- 

W5?%  T^fT^T^  “?iflfaf*IW<nw«HI«i‘  qPmm 
wnff  Hmf?WTt  ^fosffiiTFT  fsTWT^rr,  tffal 
f^Rf  ^jstt  ira*np  ^fm 
ftn=r  ^fN  xti  wrna- 

x|^^|i|i||ai=|x|irrf  f*rcr- 
^rlwripreHwrT  T*WTTrrcgreri 
^WTipjf^TTf  W^wwrt  ngryFtn^n 
i,l*'K«l|l^  I ^ rW  «RTIRT^t^W% 

^ ^t:  f ftmtfafNniTSJTTft!  f^^<\  i mv 

\f3R  r§T  <TR^  HR^fT  5ETRfT  *T 

1 ^ ffinriffora  im 

xr3St^  # Hfinvtr  #rftf  miffDi^  jjr  f 

^ ^ ^rm  i 

« *T*Wfd«<|«R^  H 


1 B ^st:  | 

* Alb  •*s-«nj.  i 
1 AC  •Wjrnt  i 


B «ti^  i > b ii)«  i 
ANC  *4*  i ♦ Ab  omit  «w....wW^f  V 
* Ab  w.  W Mfir  I 


$4* 


195. 

ifsw  *rmt  wf^rfw#  iffe  wrc;<rfnsrT 

tWT?j  rf^TTfr  ^T^TTftTITri  R^g^rgr*  rR  ^rt 
H^TT  f^f«J  rrf^f5rifrrT%fw: 

f%fw^r«frtrfw^T?f  ^»rrpRrT- 

yiliftrf jrniT r : f Wr  I klfaWT- 
jjfemwmreirr  i # ^m?R^^wrFrT?*w- 
rffesr^Taf  ’cpy  fwpar  tth:  ^ 

iftrfBNfTT  [^]  rTrCffTWTT^rsr  irffWU  ^rff 

T^ffesfr  f^%^TTOj3rr 

^rfsRjRjt:  ^rrwjt:  tttst- 

^fsrrTrstrtwft 

^TTSWT^ft^jfarfi  fwi^I  rfW^ 

^?g^s?ir-^T^7T^wtT^  # ^srn  If 
fSRTU^  Vrf^^lTTlirr^T^  %fteR*rfaf?T- 
%rT  | rTrf:  ^tUT- 

«?fa  qft^TT  55ft  f^rRm  I 


1 N xf°  1 1 A 4 ! 

3 After  this  the  MS  A adds  a long  fragment,  which 
is  unnecessary  here,  consisting  of  the  Sadhanas  of 
&aptasatika  Hayagma  (end  only),  Trailokva- 
vijaya  and  V a j raj  j v ala  n a!  ark  a (beginning),  ft 
repeats  this  portion  again  at  the  end.  The  reason 
seems  to  be  that  some  leaves  of  the  original  codex 
were  not  in  order.  See  infra. 


t&rxf 


rffi:  Tp?T%4r  '-nWiV&f  ^f3?3T  *!H|SR- 

.^jttWt  ^r  ?tn?  i?i*#rT  ¥rf?T  »r  srra%  i 
*f?r  rm  mn~~  # wfrrvfi;  ifarfti 
frsrrclwr  f f ^2  w «if t t rmtyftr  mr~— 
■#  wfrfsr  ^jTSffwpTRra  s^rt  *t 

«cf  ^rTT^TT  W m ^MiWt  % V&  ’s5T^T*t  % *W 

iraffrfi  % i^m  ^ % f^rf  ^rh  | 

f?f#:  »m*  ^4f5WR?W«r  HT  % ^ *3?^* 
JT^THJT^W  =5?r JTrTTSirTrsBr:  1 ^rrwwwr^ 


i!  ?frT  3T?TlTMHTTgT:  ?TTV*T  WTTHW  II 


«r<h  1 

WFnwfifit:  Tjpg  fgpu^^TT^, 
ftsn^gfww  ijrm  W$t  7m%sr  ^ It  : 

^TSBlTWSiI^ftsi'^ffelf  ftarafH  TOfH 
^■km  ufafesj  fTOWf^l 


Ou^  ^ is  dropped  in  N, 
B fro  m 
A cf^pjo  i 


2 AC  omite^^*^ 


'WTfipft 

■ftgtKmi  fafwra* 

^nr  ufln^<f^^i  m vj4jm1  m r^rTTi  *i^- 

*piM$P^  irfiTOTT  wra-  II 

# ^r:  f ffff  ^ER:  TCawfaf% 
f^fT  ^3^1^  ftni  fafagri  ^ I 

’^1  i ftkr 

faOT-  ufrjf^i  * ^*if:  ii 

^ «35*%sfa 

r^j  Tm*fa  i 

mmjsnwT 

fsw  ^T^^SWT  ^ f^fT^t;  « 
Tfffq  *4^<|sr: — # wfePifT  *1^^®  ^^ivlfn- 

ii  ur««<wN*^f  ii  , 


197. 

*rfT- 

wroff  f^rr  irfrr^i  faiNf 

ti  ^f*qrf^?%3  irawi 
??sfT  ^nrt%wn|  t<tot- 
ftf^TWT?f  wtott  *RT- 

%ffWf?r  HTW^^TfRT«T^  I rMli'01:  ftK^- 
1 ^rarrsRTT  # *it:  ttt  f ramr- 

^sr  fawM  sptptto  i nm 
3Pto—  # TTfTrrr?r^  f^nritt  f f q??  urt 
SfTfT  i 

n fsn^WTrrprfhrR^w  a 

Ov.  ^ 


198. 

<pfof?n*T?TVT  ^t- 

HT^JWf%TT(?rR  WRT?t  3^- 

W ^qrf^ig  WTTqrqr^T:, 
^qpnTCTjq:,  ^refa*T: 


»*V 


199. 

^fFr^pr^r  *n;^?TWit  f^rr- 

^Nt  ^rerrsrfaftf?^  ^«ik*umi  %fr!  i 

ii  *arp&ws  iw-fli-jni  i, 


200. 

HftfarPnft  twt 

*ww»pr^  „ wnipf rET^son^r- 

^w«fc*inil  63tT#Nt  *rfw?nwjf#t  ^iw~&-frer?Tir 

II  W^fT%?R^T^I  I! 


201. 

f>rf€5cRi  i H^r 

wwnrfmnj  ^ftru  srtTr^  fw^  ?m- 

Waff%fT^%7nT5R^n  w- 

cm 

‘ B begins  with  w i 4 ANC  j 
* BBa  i 4 A omits  wr^pi©..- 

;*»&*%  f 6 A qnt%«  i 

i 8 ACBa  *w  i 


gos  m’sptHrsfx^r 

IJfft  g>HUefiN^<#trt^T  w4fSf«firai?T 
I^THT^Pr^njftrTT  %f?T  I 

HWTRT^  Wlt^T  f^BTT  ^«r1w- 


5TWT^T^TriTWt  S^tT  sfenir- 

*j3r%fa<?T<f7  -cnw^W:  TTT^TWt  %f?T  ! 

^rfw'frft  Tm  ^^ftnnjw- 

TftreriT  'cfimjw:  in^mfafa  i 

*T*TJ%*T5  *5RT*rof%fTT  ^JffT 

*T*RTP  I 


202. 


-R^TU^fFTT  Wim  tr^^#^3T  ^ffr^- 

#iwit  ^ 

wt  flt^rT  wt«rajfi?T  ■flc^rwrr^  c^r- 

^‘m^«H(«s(T  i 

II  'fffT  u 


■ ' A ®^Wt«  ! ' B eW^R^T 

A Ba  .*s.  , 

^J^is  CoJo[jho!i  U tomid  in,  N b only. 


203. 

vmr  fqrpft  ^-5TT  Twmm- 
^fsnprmg#  wnwfr#Psw  ?mi?m- 
^jTiF'^^T*TWTOr  ^gfaFsrawft  m^-cp^.. 
sEnraTfsr^fldi 

ITfSTT^t^T  f4wtT  xfazrn- 
SfiSifaWT  f ftWT  | 

H %f?r  ^rra^^rawrw?  h 

©V  v- 


204. 


^pnjfsmT  57r»fTT^^fWrfT 


%fW  i 


ii  ^xrnfWfTi^r^  11 


205. 

WWTTT^nft  TO  wnft  ^TTST^Wr  ^ifww- 

W narrate  »ki  wfH^r  faSNf 

1 C omits  ®^o  i 

2 This  Colophon  is  given  in  Nb  only. 

' ACN  obr  i * Ba  «WT  i 

6 Omitted  in  NCBBa. 


8*8 


^TtJWT^nTT 


■firmw;  ffsrrn^  ^ ^crfa  TO# 

fomt^pafapn-  %f?n  # f f f wrfa 


3Trh^;  i 

«^ffT  VTfT# — ^T3RT  TamFT,  ®W^3‘- 
^srtrppr  »m*i8!4hnuw%,  *mt  wrfrt  htt- 
WxRTPJTft  4|W«hTififlW^rH^n?|rt|t|H^^rt  ^5- 
Hfawn^rfiTt  *ftMtfr'  ?t^j- 


<ntif%  wwfrt  ^rnsi  Twr^i 

FftSR  WffiZ  ?fT3f?  ^ ^rp$  »T 

frT#rf  rrpTT^wf^^ITfH,  9^H  ^T  ^ # 


irer  ^ ^ fw  ^$r  ^ 

m *w  t*  tht  ,J^itra  T^Tire  ^ ^nr 
9GrrN^I  ^Tfasj  W^frT  TO^RT^rrf?:  fflTO9- 
^mftRmTtrafH  1 ft:  *:  f tf!^  ^TTT  I W 
1iW^  l 

ii  l4?.fa  WTT^rrfNrmH ii 


A °^tw*wto  i 2 jpfrfa  only  in  Ba. 

1 ANCBomit. 

After  this  A again  states  the  same  Sadhana. 
b AC  o^o  t « Repeated  in  A.  . 

1 In  Ba  the  terminations  are  in  and  not  in  «%  l 
Ba  spells  the  name  as  ©ji^o  i v Repeated  in  C. 
10  Ba  omits.  it  q ^ ^ j 

" c ^ i 1 " N *>  T.  tm  *.  c **  v .▼•%'#  ■ 

, ‘;*  This  Colophon  is  given  only  in  Nh. 


mm  J^rrs5?i% 

imf^m  # ^rn  f T5  T5  f to 

*?T%frT  OT*n?TOtmT  TSrTRftfotd  I rTTT*  ^Tff% 
^WR3T  rrrtmfT  WlTf3flFd4dH  R*- 

' vj 

^TfV^WRWTvg  x^m  ^m^TTPCril^M 
Rwrfwcw  \mn\  xptP|qf|  q*i  wnftr^irtiT  * 
#tasfa**T  nfH^*3fr[,  focawrro  ^rwr, 
■%MwgraT^fr,  fira^i  Trfrwm  grwnftq, 
cTd^g^fsrSTTTR  wmd — ^:^TI^T  3i**rT 
^HfdWRT  Mt  twr^fipr  T^rTT  rf^mT^tTf%- 

xmri  I rfri:  HTTWT^iai 

f^f^SRT  # I n?fl 

ifqro?  fosmmff  ^MflW  I ^ 

w^T  T^in^Tf  ^xrfafTTJT  ^ 

?I5JW  TT^nrtHrg^^ 

^UHi'ji'ynfa^Nt^,  f^rnr?  faro 

WTRfK^?t  fmaro  ^fifr^T%wTf^ftR,  rTwnrfr 
T«5»R<i*gmg  WTTfxR  imm  $h  q^MIfiRdi 
’srraxy  q^dqpifr:  *rt#53r  jiH^.dH'sr- 
xrf^jjTTtrT  ^snrP!!Wtfifd;  RTnrTrmTT  *ftrwt 
f^MNtafd:  %SrT«Tfcf?ff7  ^RndWT  W&' 
th!5wt#st  wrarMt  f^rr  ^prr  w- 


1 ANC  .^o 


AC  5®nr^  i 


AC  I 


nW*?*  ^r«TrTT 


#*?«?!■  WVWP“4' F* 
;f;T«fP!  «fi’?n  t-r  •■  •> ■■'■ 
f?*5*  m ™rrv' 

-<imvr&}  h;- 


% rnsrr  wwarn  jwfrif# 

i rf  3T%  TlfOT, 

•« i ^gir  si,  <u«um«mtt 
vg;  *g«f  *rcr*j. 


#»r|f?rr,  ^toiswwA--- 
#5wr#r  r«^m?wfores i^im- 

fSS?TIffr*rrfsfw  %%:  *rf<Tr,  IFiyWl^T^^Tfg- 

^ TgfaSTSf  ftwfassft, 


nufwsrRT  T?fT??r*pf{Vt  i ^j?rf  w^if 
FCRT^TrfT^tTJm  yr^^f?n:^TT»M  i ^#T^ig4«i  mn 
arnm^:—  # *famfr  ^fofs  $ 

CfR  ^ ^TfT  I 

fTW  ^^TOfrTHTT??!:  ^ff?rr  f^fef  ?fsN  g^T- 

f^ftivf  ^f%yqf<qi%TT 

sswnwiwW*  ti^rcfnrr  rwttftm;--'s^f;.: 

^’'TT^rT^f  ?TT  S(T^TT«TW^TT 

^ffcrrrrsntTn 

wtot  ^^^nrferr  ^g$*^farrr,  wrl| 


AC  e j 
3 Ba  o^r  i 


* C omits  o|| 
4 C j 


a o® 


m *u*iH4«^f  Tn^hira  tn^j  jt#t%v 

ug;  *rgir  trcfaft;  wm 

T *f^  ***  •TFTT- 


fag^T  Wnt  *re*j*T  ^fawifarii 

7T9U  ^f^inpm»pr  ^ fafft  ?;<*ra3W 
M ’wgsf  ^ *raira*T»j%  tri^ftrfi;  fw!t(«n)  fwfa 
*ratfroj  <i<?ft  q^qfc  f^wl  ^gif  w^, 
7mt  qqpl  fW  fr^jt  jysf^  !?wt^- 
¥5t«r$Tfwrr  TTftrralwn", 


i wwt 

M^STf  5rrw«r: — # WR'nprfw 

f f *s?  m mwr  i 

fT^nr:  ufira^rsn-:  wzwfafx  fwsrmf?;  ***%- 
w2rtt#«  gfoipwt 
^0?w4t;  w&wpfi  faShrf 

TST^ff^W  W^TOT^tfWTt  5PR- 

m^Tfi-^rfwrt  faforg^n- 
wTfiTwrw,  (Tw:  w-RipJmf  ^4^gfg^T  ftata- 
ipnm  vrmh^i  ?f?}$  qrs:  ■•$?$  ^srto; 

3T*!  w 5fTf:  7J? aa^hnaj:  ^gw  ^pg:  T?9g% 

T3»WT  Q¥  gW^rWTSB*,  ^ps  ^fcs% 

mz  m%  t-^tt,  *<^$3flTfrpfriT  *re%r*s- 

H^gwTrnf^^gW; 

W|nT  wi^rfw^TTfyfrT  i mu  *wmw — # 

fwir  # f^%  f f wv  *srm  i 

•r;*rcii->«-rpT[  ^fi^srf  f^fsr  fwratgtt 

^rfhnif^rwarr 

si?t:<Tsr.^-!%T  fe*pT  f^r^r  g^yr 

rr«T»TH^fe«t  ^Scftj.Tf^Sfffnr 


C ofi(T%  i 


A*‘  ^ 1 " - ' *.vad  oiww  which  is  absurd, 
(icre  ^‘v,iT  w ;.*;b^<:iuiU?d  as  in  images  %'*w  is’ 
generalh  *<vj,  ; • oee  of  the  twelve  h i ids  a£ 


«WW(i$*r«  Yffl’T 

s AC.  •?&*«  i 


AC  omit. 


8*1 


srr  ^Pff- 

llw&fNitii  w <r<?r%  r^y^sm, 

rm,  ’Wi#!- 

: ffjjrtT  ^ft^EfTf^- 


, v ;^  **K  H?  K*KT  WHT 

: ^ ^TTTS^  MR  cTWff 

^RwtaFt  t3tm^  fw®?  <rn?  tw; 

m^^ig*fffirenTC  Fr^TSrr'  H%vr%?r  I ^f- 

+t^s r «^rar 

i rfcft  I??  ?f  Wi«ftW 

dWI^  ^TSRT^'rJFTT^T^i'  WSI  HT^%- 

[Vj  Wf 


WlTCff 

wwmpsff,  ‘vm  m*i* 
trzrfw-iVi 

||lT?T^T 

TT  i mw%. 


r?  ~z 


msairmr?;. 


AC  CiUT  < 


‘■r^irgsf- 

srr% 

: ‘ c-r^T’j- 

WcfT- 

xt  in  ^wm- 
m%\  *jsrr  w5^ 
xji?  jT^^TsS?^  ?rrf*T 
W^RT*#**  'Sffa- 


AC  =<r  *:* » 


A <>*r?  i 


frnrraiwwt 


3^-  rrsrr  n*  ^ ^r  r 
3Tf^[*>i^T^  I! 

^srfsrfaro’W^rpTf  tr-arn  ^nrr^^i-  i 
wrf^rsr  is 

5SH: — 

H^Frwf^rrrsrm  «^*tfgyfre3m  i 
grf  %rrfg^a^nflTT5|gt  *rf%%fpi;  !i 
T^sgr^rrfa^T'T  'g  f%Wt  ^lySPSPT  Fc?r  ) 
VTir^t  ^ ffrTT^tg  fflpf  T5 W5  !l 

arf^f^r  "ap*  tw  %T%3Trtr%fT?W  i 
frflRfWt  %*  11 

w^T%H*RRr  faSrocr:  i 

f^T^Rlffsr  3R3T  Hiss#  sm^r?  rTn-  li 
*%s*  T^ij'cT  9J|fWM$  HU^R  I 
^pSSFJg*!  «fl|«f%*<|f’Wt  II 
tr*g  twro  w^r*w*Tfwi^  i 
r=§^R  rim  rrrqmm%  ^ g %Tf^rW  g 
fWRi  viwg  ^ TT?  -*mu«ffcr<w  i 

^m$w  fkftwn:  i 

fgfrfei  v %^T5Tf  TJ3RR  ^TOTfafa  I! 

*nw*  ^ faimtf:  i 

Tn,y  ^,  «i  -rfsf  ^-tStj  ij^n%  |15T#I  II 

: Nlj  %x  '•  ‘ A «m$K*i*r*tT  i . 

0 ac  <-^a%fl  :■'  *.'Sk-jamx.^'> 


fWTOTPTT  *T*T  ^TRT  ^TW  T^fat  WTW^  II 
tlT^rt  ^ W^FT  ^1  fM^rr:  | 

qftww  f^fsj  wrm  HRirei  r h 

HR4j*3i«*i'<erpTt  *ii**fNfapm  t i 
^msaf  wm  ^twt  3 *f*r  ^3  11 
tw^f  f^wrr«r  *rre^  *r  wTt^:  i 
*pirc;?K  ^ *ific?f  ^r  wfefrm  11 

TORm  Rf^Tn  5=nrTTgwf%%TTrT:  | 

W^TWf  ^ ii 

rffj^[f%]'5mnrrf  ^P?  T%TT  *TOT$rr:  I 
WTCfR  33111 1 H ^f#l^3|Whf^  II 

^ CN  ^ 

frc^Tf^  *ismir^  ?crTT^h:mm7f:  i 

^fe%  ^T  wmvzi  'jflfvrrRT  || 


33T  3 — 


^R^vrppR  ^-RT^T:  qfl^sft  ?rN  ^ I 
W^r  3k3T  *jf33^T  ’STRR  3 ’SEjf^WrTH  H 
Tj«5ftfwj^  frratm  TT?im  ^t  i 


faqggTffRfiTOT  Tjf3  *?W  M»!W>*  II 


1 ANb  .*fat  i ‘ACliWCTfi 

.;  ■ *AC«f«R>i 

$$$W&'b4'rS . '\  -y 


♦spTTfaifftRfv  trr£  RwHwfi’T  snrsret  i 
T^tzgiir  thv*?:  11 

7^5T  ^srw^  ff^TrT  g^g$«T  Hlf^rW  | 
Tjaf«r5r^H?jir?Tr  ^TfR^f  ^ f^rdr%?T  11 
tts^  farrfvm  firqrr  wzkwm  g *rwrng  i 
^rrrrfwpfr*?!^1  tr  ^[  *wi<5lg  n 
vfnr^?r  mknfw?  wfa  i 

(gfn-^W 3*t  « 

JTfTt^g  *wm  ^nfnrN^ 

*1*4  * «snrara%  g*  i 

*?<#  wf?TST3T  ITWRT  *TN% 
tt4  ^ wmr  v&*%  ii 
gwffa;  g rTwmi:  i 
*mm  %wm:  Wr  ^*forrm  srfrj^g  ?t  it 
f^if^fTHTgw'  ^rna^mf^fwrg  i 
^rrrgfw  v^nrg  rffhr  ^ n 
*t#5T  m ^i^g  i 
g ^rgwfa  h 

^r  (TT^rr)  ^ ir^ilg^t 

'Km  tjH  <Tarr  ?it*t  »TreffirH*n  ^ j 
^gqirqm^xfrw^^fifot  *ngf?r  i 
^ T^#t  gpn^ivuifr  h 

> A adds  «»ii  after  this.  * Repeated  in  A. 


- r^s  ^ 

TTm  TJ9T?WT^  W V^f?!  f^f^rW  II 
^Trrar:  ta  w-  ^wrsrr:  ^fWicw 
fawn  wspcmi^  i 

^wsrmt*T?T  f^rat  wrfo  faf^rm  h 

r^. . 

II  TJ^fWItW’W  II 


207. 

wt  i 

fsrw^t  f^ri  tr§^3if 

firrr^  ^T*r$nj 

gsr  *ra^i  witPr  w*§  ?owjfs  wht 
^%nff  rratft  ^ ^f%T  I # 

W*§nf%  f ^TfT  Ttrr  I 


it  ii 


sfrnpmramt 


ww  W '*  iwi- 
W»f*f 

wspR^Rffafirrr*  iff  Witvt  * 
*TR  TW  W*- 


^ILCrill^L'IL^^IKIB(Lk:i::nLiL«L!i 


hi 4 Pm fr  # *sretf% 

# iff?  wr%fH  »=pw 

I!  sfa  ^PsTRPfT^F  K 


Wlft  diqwft  UMW41mPWv-J5FW  *r^*rR^ 
irhto  w w *nsfc  iw^t- 
aN  «r«^Hirii*jaii<y  <«siw»R<J!l1f*w4  f*afat  I 
mt  *JTW:  ^mT:  ft  S^ITOT 

q^rcreift  wfiwnfii<wu  stfft  i mt  flWE*- 
r^nU:  ^jfomawi  ?mt  jrofftw^f  mt- 


f^^ff  f^ift^T  f^Nfcyqftiwj 

■^ir  i^dfV 

3^  *w<sji«HHsii  iraft  imfim 

M#ik«  ■(  ^®tSSP 

foftft  m 

^ ■ ™ — • •"  - — - -•— - ■ 

* AC  omit  Tfeft...ogirt  i * M 

* AC  *mb  i 4 A omits  :***£?  1 

msi  rpt^  wi%^ 

■wtfirr^  i ^%*T  img%  WTfa:  f*R  tpr*  ^rr:  fopn  i 

# f wz  wt?t  i 

» w?^?innviTi#w^!  n ii 


210. 

•IWt  ^5TT)J%?iri^  | 


rfrefT  xwr^SfTt  FrafftiTW^TWH  I 

C\  ' ' 

?iw:  WV^PFrfaflf^W  ^Tl^T  WT  || 

•n  i*» 

^rrft  rTFRT^t  ipnrfT^rf^  ?i^T 


Jsr|%  l^TFSTltrf^r; — 

WV^Uv^il  ;iT^VTTfJTrTT^T:  I 

w * m ifrwf  fTTWf  T%  I! 

# ?3T%fn 

^Ti  it<T" 

s) 


f^fw:  *TKf5iI  f^Si^TlTSff  xr^rT  | rT^nrfT  # *WF*- 
Ijfx:  ttxztwT:  WWTC^%r?rfafa  g^i 


3RrTT  WFT^rT  I rTTT : 

ywi  Pm  4i  ii  01 1 ^|ar  <Tffe  irf^si 


1 N i 1 AC  omit. 

fcfc:AC-f» Pcafr.  i 


»*< 

nar  'iftmrqy  ^ llfaSFrT  t 7T^  *T«if 

jfanwrfW  ^ *rat**tf  ^g- 

^srtjsrf  *it  <sraif«- 

ftifcrf  f^w^rvrMt  ^'wwi  wmst 


wife- 
m*  qfapnrf  ^r%  xwfVffmt 


VRJVTT  ^RT^nwnWTT  VFR- 

mwwm  wmrt  fwrw  i wrRnm 

f^QTTvj  ^^w^rrfigFrsTT  m*remwp?fa 
w.  f q wi:  irfuTKlTTWW  IT^f  ^T  W *I%?T  I 
rrrRrrsrrrrrfT^T  ?rrwr — ^rfwf^g  wf  wk- 
mpm- 1 rfmswtwrf^fw:  Trarofr  w^rr?r 

*TT*mTW^  WTWf 


ll  ♦ £y  "V  

ff^RI  ^FWt^RTTSfT- 


W3T35?  W(ji|ifflffin  I 

^?fa  ftmwrerereww  h 

v?  >J  ' 

# whmw ??TfW% W f **TfT  I; 

rm:  TTf^M  ^TRI^  I 

^ewHtitrf^  Tfsg^rfF  i 

# WT?rf?T  ^3UT|4?4>  TTT^4lfqtc|^^f\ 

^ *srf%  ^rrft  ?t- 

^ ’MWtiq^ci  IT?T  ir^T  f f PC 

^^TTT — I ■#  S^?r?W*IWn¥t 


i , 

i Miwf  jmi  \ 

tsnt*:  ftrtl^nT  ptw  i 

ireM  ipnjwrrc  g:  11 

fafr*  ^wu  (wwfaw  f*rc^t  i 

H TfH  uWU^HSPPt  i 

211. 

hwr  ^i«*Tf^r- 

f^:  ^g^rftf^KFT  VTfWT  I W^^TT- 

trf^fn  H^rfr  faW^TJfT 

qvrra  hftmi  ^rrtrn^^iM  7TH: 

# ^!S|7nf!T’W^WT^Tm^S^  I fHT1  jp^fr 

VNg  WI^T 

ffT  *wft**jt  ^^TR- 

ft«wit  f^T  fwi  ’ro- 

w<+&foflf  f^'^wpraw’spsrt  ,w- 

^pmg#>3 

*r*r*g#i 


< A fan^r.  i 


^T*H??T*rrer 


P< ^rftrt^ r ftTrnwTHT^r^  tni?T  i 

rffZTT  TT^Tft  ^!%  ^RTT- 

w,  *n%  ^rtrrf^ 

^r$rmft  ^fir%  toto**  \ v$\  f^r^  i 

rffir:  TT^rfe^fwmrT^f 

TTfT?*n:  i *0  5?h*rr  ff»j5rr  oglin’:  fa^ir 
Wf#?f  ^%wr  W^nTHTiiJT 

f^^r^TSf^25l^T5rlT  mv%  rn^5ftTTT^np?^TT 

«P?%TT:  i ^sfr 
fawftST 

iiwrrcfr  i 

^Miif  wmi ff  w**t  wtt  i # 
ftncfa,  ^tt:  to,  fro  f^r,  tot£, 
^pft,  ^ xrrTOt:  i cT?Tt  g?r  TO?nsftr 
?w  <T5raft  i sg^rwrwt  *rrero  tot 

*JTO  | # V WIT — < # 

TOTRJ^  WTCT — sjq^ZlTTO:  I # 

^frrm3%  ’sifad^w  ^fwrr^  ^frnwrft#f 

WfT — Tf?T  TOTTTO:  I 

i ^aWftafTOnrcrra*i  wmm  n 


^ddfe|wwirrt^«i  after  this;  - 


i 

•nswra 


&£ 


212. 

m srroni  «nRmsR*Tfaro^  i 

^ujTteura*  n8  wrv?m  n 

•rtf  jprwrr  TT  '•t'TC'Tv  irsfl  ^i)  i 
$pft  ftm  fafw%?r  it 
*rorRt  sjstt  m-w$mi  sKraiwr  i 

Ml  V3  N 

«JIR  TOl'RHI^R  TJ5r%rT  || 

?r»qsg  y?f^rt  *m  ^r«rrf^B»fam 1 
a<nP5*te*rar?i  ^jz^tr^arf^fr  11 
*R*rlsi  ^w  hs|  Tra^trT  fasnvr$?r  1 
f^sraw  »i%v  2mm*4  srtsrwt  11 
sstear  *TR^T#|f*RTy3*W  I 
*iT*nrar  «trt  *rsrR  frfafsm  1%wf?%7t  it 
firWNf  • *.  f^rera  f*r:*wni  wp  1 

sffrri n 

^#F  ?iffarcwrrt  f^5#l:  ^ 1 

swr^NsWW^f  WTTTf^W^Tff  11 
^IW^f^iTTW  I 
!Rpit^f%^T5ri  URWR^feWT^  II 
srpyr^wwranrr  irrenmpRfcmr^  1 

»i 

' 1 AC  • «m>  I 

^^^iti**;;|fa  ofm^o  ; 


1 AN  a '^Tic 


^T^^rrorsrr 


ftffijMiJyrflW  5^7^  *rpfrp?  f 
*T^r»r  *g#r  *T*mrf<T  f 

rta^fafeff  TTT^T  ^ WrfPf  rt^M*4*i  # 
^rr^f  TjT§^?w  ^ wr^rm  %^*fownj{  i 
*pfH  fv^TTTrr  tTfi  rRf^TTiJTn^  li 
rm  «w  i 

7T^ra^T^^%ifq-  'tts^T  *T«Rrfafa:  I 
fRJrRh?T-  xm*  w ftqwqiftw  I! 
%fgT5fr»|rmf^rt  wmwt'  i 

f 3#h  ^ *p  Ifaaritf  <wra>wj  n 

^ — ♦ ^ .,-  #>.. .. 

Twr^r^rrz^rw  ^Tw^^ist-ern^  i 

^W^|3Wpi  UjpiTrT  3%H|!<q  II 

^^IWP^rft  ^wfiR?TTf%%  I I 
^*T**R3^HJrh  ^ ^l*HM|Rl£>  D 

TT^rr-  trpg^f:  I 

'FTTfoani  zf^KT^i  ^ u 
3 7TWR#  *&n[\ 

n :vy  j 

H fi|^^  ti  , n « ^ <iT*Wt^f5T:^F|T:  i \«K 

i?ti«i4n«<ni^i<n4^ni^^<i  llll 

’ -:'  ■'  "■  ■•-:  :•  v-v  'x< v> 


SWffwTO  H*wT  WPTq^  5^5  *n*U3(i  | 
* HIBtrqfitCPf  Wtftf  Wl'UBffl^H  II 

II  trM«ft(|fr*Ull«l|tfTO  H 

s)  ' 


^13. 

W I 

ij^^^p|4wf  f^RTHET  'VfifefH  WW1?- 

wToRm  wm  ^wt 

fWnrf  C^.HMKi'  ^aT^rm  ^r^ot 

4^i^wiT«nf)f  Hs^gq^’igfH  *nc^f 

mjwjft  wra i fT;^^  i ^TfTi 
wef^f  qfqffW  ’ffal* 

*j#  ?rm\  i imrarorcM^  ^ftt- 

tWwTT’Twfer^T*  f)  ^ fwro  »TO- 
*fTTOm — # gfqiftfnT^reT,  #'  *1  ^trt, 
# ^rrwT,  # wgf^r  ^rrer,  # *rg- 
wfofarir  wst  i irsr?  wrr  fftwiiwq  ^3- 
w *?<3*srci  f*rcn«r  qiiGMgigftTwfi  vw- 

1 AO  Jjssf  ( ■ , v:;  : J*,  ••  2 C ®aJ*Fr*'  i 

s N VRWr  l,:f |; '.:/ ■ : :!*' A haa:*Pf*tw  *S*t  again. 

^fe^r' 


**r ^ r?r*rwT 


-*'$}??■  i 'vw-r-c:  < •»•?•«  •vT53fiiT;-i  ’.pflffc 

- rr  *>'  -Ctff  ■sfMwfir  i 


^ <T^T  ^taSlUai 

Tpq^rt  !<?«:.  qw& 

V-i"*  ^w^f  (^5VITr  ffaq#  UTO- 

fr^Tiii  V, q ^fcgr%*r  irr^f 

^r^iTiifqrrf  wnnt?t)ir^ 

^ptf??  i fgr^T  tfH  itT  *ngwr^^^<TOT 

3f^TT3p;?i;H  I rTift  W[i  f®5^— # 

w^t  i ^r?rt  wra^lf 

f^T  VIT^rT  | ?T?T:  ftpfT  VRlfTT  ‘WWrtt  I 

II  I 


215. 

^ ?trT^KMr<<8ytt 

^?ft 

WTO^rmwi 

¥rfT  1%^W^?m?TWT 


«ccr  *tw*tt  <4^t«iM^wj( — qgqTTnpT  i ?m: 

# q^KT  ^ql^VTWq  W*T  Tfo  ^ I 
H q^lHIHTTOW  || 


216. 

q^TTraT-'  tow  wfcwrqi  qT  qjqqw5^^  ^g- 
W SSWT  cfq  VPiq^ff  H*T^TSffrW  TJ^faWl 

-q^ifaHMifi;;:  ? gni  <i  'VRift  ywqi2^wqqi- 

fg^qn  gr?n  wrfinfi^qwT^T  rnfejui  qrsq- 
qmg  irTi^iitf^wrqTwni:HWT%^ 
q^ffTTwr^ff  q^gi  to^  ‘umfrOTwrat 
winw^ginc1^  t%7rgw|WT^1wr^‘TOwr- 
w^qwn'«i%  ^qng  mi+u+i  *npqg  i TO3iwr%  ^ 
Tt^qi  I 

II  qgqi?TVTTqa^;  H 


‘ AC  i 

* ANC  •!rww»  j 


8^8 


*rrewT«nn*rr 


217. 

*r*ft  ^^nrr§  ( 

WmWIH  W3\  Wro'JTfW 

g%  fffgrcq  fafRfTTf^RtT%  WR  f^FSTW- 
^rfasRifor  ^TT^ngipir  w4  ^nrrft 
^T  WZTmTt  WTHT  *f{»u4tfa  SfrrfRSRr: 

T^sf^nt  #[  i crfNi^fsRfw 
gw*reprarl  <*fiin^wTfi4t  wroff  to- 

*JT?C 

*RTjq  ^ wzm- 


Tu^f^cOT^Tf^i  2k3T  ^g^uf^flTR  fWS 

:TT^atfr<%  ^WlrfilW^  f?T%rT  TJ^hrf^TR- 

wii!  i w?n^7«rR  ^TFfrm  ^ff^tTfrwrfa 

'J 

^fatw3^T5[p[ift[  ^g- 

w^w^^mrn^f  trwfj  ?rftr^  1^' 

?r^r4  *$i  ^ ^fg(T(sw^  ^y^#t«wr1wT 

fafw  ivgtft  # %f^  'qsftm  *i3*w  f9  # 
^SF'TT  f % f , # ^gppsnC  flf,'#*  ^srf%?TPr 
? # % # ^s^srra  ^^Nf,#  ^qji^Rqrra 


n 


' ANC  $f<s<»  i ■ A .*, 

Ab  adds  «f?fitsrenrc  i 
* AC  omit  OT«lftsrw>n  i 
6 N adds  'W  ^^?rnrpr^w?ttn<rt:  «d4y**t]:  i 
- ‘ A •&*  i 1 Ab  .awwwrcm*  i 


& 

fff- 


faVR  fT^wt: 
f7T'»TTT  7T*UR 

i r!^T7% 


3$*TR7*TR  T^3?pfT^H  ItfifrWiWT 

w?i  i ^sR^TTf^iJn  *»  hi  mm  rW  wrI  ^r- 

wff  ^Tf^fiwwf  f^jwr  w- 

fi^RRPCr  3T«R  ^vd^RfTWrf  WR5TT 
tW(T  1pfi%3R  ^5T^rTf  f^RPCT  M^W^TT- 


¥ff^TR^R»TRf 
nfpRi  %ri5^J=n^rr^fRT^f  fiR# 


*rR%c?  I 


?fsrr  *rt*pt  ^rf^ft- 

^TRWdwfa#:  ?TWRRT7fi3fFTT:  ; W 

^g^rr  ^1% 

^fs?%  3»T^fii^T:  fspRT  ^pR%arr  ^HT  W#3T?R- 
tHwtj:  wr%*  i 

^preufi:  €tr^frfrrf^Tj%fsT  wi^tm  M^rr^  i 
cl^g  ur- 

w«Rfa  f^RT^  *<rfl«4Rsfi5r%  wfw-4  w^m 
t^TOl  ft:^rrt^  fTPRI  f^/frf  i m>  ^f^f- 
W^^tsfiT^TRrRTf^  %*%? T I 


A eJTI^flo  1 

1 Ab  reads  ^fisriw.-.o^jT^grt  alter  > 

8 A «gg[2.  i » ANC  wjb*  i 

6 A | • Ab  ft  'i,  C -*f  % A Tf  * i 

1 A^.i 


*rm«r»nwT*rt 


i # # *rwt,  if  ’if 
yfa,  $f  %f  ni,  y it  j f fayref,  n* 

^r  f ggpfarT  I WpTRT  fait  US  I H 

JTW — # f f 1RT  ^rrfT  | fa^puf 

WJinff  WTWTI  SWTH1  WPnfMfW 
ispjj  I 


II 


IITFT^  II 


ii  afafci 

ii 


, 218. 

srart  ^wmr§  i 

fatrerl3«H1$?^MIW4faT^  I 

wnpw  i^HTrfi^fF 

fa^fa  fanw:  fa  lc*T  H 

Hl4lWI«3lmii  ^RTT6  fafaitfaPK  yfa^ 

w%  iprr- 

^JwsfMtfwr  ^Twt  wf  iwpffaH 

^Nrf^RPj^ 

1 C omits.  1 ANAb  %t  8 ANC  ftr^J  ‘ A.^afa.1 
A omits  a considerable  portion  of  the  S&dhana  and  -* 
resumes  again  after  Tm^rafif  in  the  middle  ot  jjb  *. 

m** (?•  *». i. is).  ■ .. ,., ,; 


8^3 


TOfw  qiWUjft- 
y^jj^Pr^qrfqTTTqfn^Rniiyi  mmft  ^ 

;pt  - 4K*^  - - ftm  - 

^RTTTTfw ; ^TT1 * *^-^n^T^-^T5%,IT-^rrvRtt  - 

WT  - - HTON1  - TOW^Tfrn* ; *?N- 

.#^— £y*  _. 


wfrftw  i g-^ri  a<dfa, 

^(WSWTfH:,  WT%^:^T  TJSff^T  *F?*JT- 

f>*- 


w faTO  3*si 
xm%  fWTf*  PRraf^i  fir^T  TOTTO^^ 
?ttoto  ^53tnm  i ?r^r  tot — # *^tot- 
TO-  4fro:  ^TTOtTOT  TOprft 

waraTOTOTM^ra^  # 

^TOTptS^fkfH  I rr^RTT  ^^TfSRTpT 

^sgTM«  t<  I M m driY^!! 

HfiRrsnt.  H«TTfiT%?rJTf^5^5T  f^w7f^wr%- 


‘■■Ntftrl 
* BG  ut:| 

‘ C**f,r 


0 *ratr  i 


1 N adds  «*farrc«r°  again. 

* N adds  $itfw:  after  this. 

7 B »su«ftn:ll»  i 


mnwrawf  • 


8^ 


fsfori  ' ' 

?m:  Tsrfarr  qRfama  ?nx  *rR- 

?pg  ’T^#£rfT  ftmf- 

^w^:^nTf^r«di  wi’i^fwpr  unrar 
cRtriT^ffTt  ^wfarrci  ^r- 

f^W  t^TgTWW^Tf  ?TRT- 

^prf^RT^frg^ajTi^fJKifiifli  P!TPT#- 

swilte wj i i ^*fwsi<8iK?>4- 
fogqffoum iftwfiwww 


<i^T^rfifgagTpc«H  f^  JSJ  M /<  1 <BTf<|<t  (31  ig  I 


T;?T-T^  ^T#gq^grt  IWW  WWf%$l- 
W ? TTOTfa4t  uUtM*W«T  WTTTf^t^Tf 


«u« 

foflc 
mt  m 
*ro«fa 


wujj1«mn'4  wwi  \ 
*.  *srcmi^  Rtwnir 

^wuJui  wrrft  wrnr^tenreTt 


1 C ftati,  * 

2 B a :■••  ■ 

♦ N ' 


after  °$g^fycrfaa> 

after  this.  3 C «9(«i'  *\/. 

■ ^.a  r\.*- :■  :S-.f 
>.  >*).C  M;7t^,:  ^>:¥-  -- ' 


7m'  fm- 

itmi  w&  fmi  w 

^l!!4l5t5T  ^t4  ^«g<J!Wr<!w4l- 

jrfw^f  ^r^rt  n^Nid^difarai  wmj 
mt  iftwrf^^tf^FRwt  w*r8^ff 

Tprfaftrr  %«tc- 
*wwwq«w  ^r^rrjpf  msr  wr^  TFrrwr 
rnwrarwr  i tht  ^=+i+*Tn1^mi»h^i- 
WTT  $Wtcr  I 5WRi  JT^: — # **R*tf: 

^rptsiH ) nrnrrafN^f^nR  'WMiSH 
^#wrTf^rranprrrpiT%r  to  M*ii^d*adM**d«u- 
WfRWsflh  ?Tf^f^  rrd  i d i r^^-i^- wlt*!r[- 
^mgr^  msft^TWW  gripr- 


w fw  3rm?TT%<s  ^nfcnTTi  ^rRFTrrp  i 
Twr#  wrfwTfa  g wrfw  11 
TJWr  M^failffUdTTfafgRT  # 

f eft  fw^- 

^^l^^lf^dra.»^f  f^rnmi  rm^f^rf5- 

JTfcr^sg  fif^r  «HW 


s A cT6T^  I 1 A «WI»,  0 »>s»*«  1 

' B «wn?T«r«  1 * C |‘e  1 

1 A «»rafn«  1 

s AC  omit  *VM»if<&4\f«i  afirf^rcro  i 


Tm 

•srtj-rf  I rf^T5f  W%‘—  #h  I ^T  ' Wg^TW  ?T^T 

w*mp?rT  *rrfwiwfNrt  Wwfa  T^TT^.-ITT  JTftr- 
*TR  faWR  ^gj  MflflW  »!<TR!<  * 
folWKffiWg  fl|mM*R  tTC?R  w- 

w fw#.  I 

7RR  HH|«N*Mi: — ('#  w)  # ^ra 
wuw^mrw  W5^5rft*fnrf?^  ?#r  % *p? 
it  W ^ W *T  *R  yatfaN  frffTO 

ff^HWTg  ^ % f^fT  f fWI  ft:  WR 

^fRRf^gr  *t  it  $»!  wsffrre  hwthjr^ 
*TP  (f)  ?fH  I 


^IEi1IE!![.t:Llcl^Pi!EllM 


arGH  fwT^  3n7err 

wk  fafor  i g Tjshnr  ^ §rt 

^w»wt%  g^giftfwsrrg  *rri 

^«l*4|rlM<!!|^R*R  ftRSTSlRT  'gtZfFTI  <1?T: 
mrirw^Tprr  ^nftfim:  ?rg  tj®p?rr  wk  f^r- 
i w wt  srtr  ?Rffg  ir^tr  w4€* 
l^RRf^:  liWrR^nai  tri^- 

^nfr^rfr- 

wfwr  vfeiut  trcp^rrcnrrcf  fNkflffllfflf 
infill  Iwrt  faffed  ^yrfwmwraefos 


1 AC  •ttwt.  i 
* AC  ^mTTfftr« 


ACetirh 


f*rap*f  *Mt  i 

^gcEn^l  l **  foter  sr<strT5pt 

'STTf:  ?m?m^TW:  3TqT*TR 
%^l<!!fH*Kiydd<tlfT  ^Tjft  ¥HW5tFR  *P5T- 
^tfw  H^f?r  i mnft  *rfr 
ftrsrR^:  M^ifww^Nft  *nft  ^ i ^tiit- 
fawi  fowl  fc  far^d  i wfir  i are  w*rcrf?T  TP^fri 
wefir  i fori  *fir  *r?wwfw- 

wfwrr  ?niN  w * wjfsfor  qrfa- 
wkfr  i <m  wrr^r:  *t%f?rrr  > 


vrafsfn  ^q|d  t d m^Tnaf  q ^tn^rn:- 

sror?  vrefr  i foj  <4^41  aid  iroiftr  srefw  *tt*I 

■y»d*yjd  fofoiHfrwn  w wms 


w nm^tWNd  ?5rm  i 6t  g*:  fmx^m-  wh- 

flWJ^jURT  4^fsfT  TfaT  1?TU  forf*  mUU  i 


11  irem^PTTVR1  mm*  11 


1 AO  I 
^ B *H£o  I 
* ANO  i 
r ANC 


' AN  !>  *rrcT  i 
* AO  ^tHt°  1 
d ANO  t*n 


i mi  tjarfssRfc*  f^TOW  wnnff **  t*- 
^fa^fWP^d?  ra>w  fww  WWW 
f mm  ^nstw^siT^rrTffiy  i f^mf^#?rrvt- 
;pr^wwqfT  iTti^rr^K^T^Mwr^  ^?- 

*th  R<u  ^<=11^1  sqrqpujmiTW 

gif^r  snptfa 

r^TWTIg  ^rq^<arcffrP5t<dT 


■ M I? I ttlif  KKElffts^t  rJ  t L HL  E£  LLr  il  Cfi  t ■ k'l  l fcj  I Lsi  L.  EH  U £ i 


nfa  ^larag  ^ iRtwu  ^i«4i«ifM^f*iwrrf^- 
StalW  d^qR  #^TT  Wf^T  dfalR^NfWT- 


JT^Sg  ITTOJ  * H%Wtl  gqiqfa>ttl*WW  ¥%T 

^n?  »WT  ^nw- 

fwpg  ^WiaKMR<iiti  jflWlfa 

rr?H5W7i^ i r*i4d flqiwtfat 
<m  f^  TORrfwf  wtrt 

'rer^^f5T*frTT  ^fjf  w<Si  *tw^j  ifaifR- 
TTRRR  ^fjgwRjr  T^fq^*hfa*lfa*qW«lNTt 


1 ANC  omits  <>srao  | 
* JS  ® ^sf flrufsu » i 
6 B *JTramo  i 
’ AC  i 


4 ACaT^fp  i 

* B ®wniHT«  i 
4 AC  «TOnt  I 


aimrerffrmraq  i 


m 


^ ft-  ^RSl  fffWT- 
*$*  f sr:  sfr  TTFrrmTrofrr  i m ^ 
fatwtirfw  xn%«T  ^rBsai^N  w- 

«Ki4ta  nSra&n » %lt  3 

sTB^ir  I WrTOT  gwfrre  f^T  fw?T  TO  (?) 
T^st^m  WFrTT^#^ 
ymrofapi  fw*  WRtfH  [a%] 


H wsrsrroftwr^t  tottw  h 


220. 

fcw<i  ipM?  TOwft  ^rTwt'n 
3PTT*Wlf<<?l  ^c^prft  f^rr  i toj  wtftf ?r ! 

h wmcrur  wfafa  11 


‘ G wraren 


>21. 

vgfe  I 

*TirafNn  ^r^ifNr  htt- 
^qrsrf—  . „ ^ 

JT^prT  ^ s-T^PFfi  fTTHTRIT  I 

$$tm  w^tsNt  wsft;  S»P  II 

Tpgj-qiT-  ifw  Him  JTWTHT%f?r  from  i 

fe^FWt  fm  6nwi  h 

u?it  fwrrwrwr  f^r«rr  i 

*^ppri*ran*i  wu«HiW«i*n*(  11 
f^gmrfqsTr^f^  TT^^T’rf^nrr^  i 
^aTHirsarfh  «jrrrf^  srersj^rersrrfH  ^ u 
HTraaj^Tt  f%irr  f^rr^raift  wr  i 
HTf^f  *?wr  Umau^U;^  h 

WW  W I 

?p%  f^n  tt^t  faff  ^ ^rra%  11 

^tf  fi  9f?t  rra  ?frw#  i 

^rarsrm  vi%?f  wti  *kijW[  n 

***«?  ^<S(^«w^Tftr%  i 

H^wfa  Tf?T^t  W;Mw  || 

# *TOT  WRfh  ^5aRITrfi? 

%#R»WT%  VfTfa^  W^i7WIT‘^%  Hf  IW  W0- 

1 AC  omit  «s*^ftsit  i * A .&rt  i 

5 ACR  •frstra  i * ANC  •«nM:i 

6 A utostst,  NB  i s AC  »wr*  i 

1 ABC  .wrt  i 9 AC  Ab  C 

* B ”HV  i : -C&  Ab'*iN$£ 


**  :^^mt%  f%w- 

ilfafar  ^twfH  ^nrrf^ffa  *•  ?%  ^ir-- 

5T?f^6  3Wf?r  WSfil  ?’'>-«■: -T  W- 


urofc  «*irftfofa  'mttK  ^r*t  tv-f^  mm 
**  T*f  OTR  ff-h 

*pr  *pr  sfara  v^fi ■if^vrra-f.nf*:^ 

l0WgTfirftl?WT^r€fa  *^Bn*TOT¥>T  frr^pfvisrn 

♦ifaraftavTftftr  ^ w*  irran^ 


1:2  » 

^-tsptsrt 


’wre^^f-sr  ?Rtv»m 
TTWTUTjt  ’fHN^^TRJ  ^5Wl%fa 
Wlftft  WWWPR  5^fwf?f7<W 

ssrrwrgf^6  fwsr%F*^  "fa% 


"ffcftr  fafafa  fafafa  ^ g* 

^ WT  ^IFTtfafa  TTferfftTl  T “v  sf 
v v si"  * % % w ^ ir  tt  ^ fr  ft 


f I 


f*1  ^f:  JPF^  *P  »t^P* 

“trg%  w f f f f tt  ^t  m\- 


' ANCB  i 1 AO  fsreffaf®,  NAb  fcnrerfafin  i 
s Ab  nffcrat  i * Ab  rnfaft  t 6 Ab  o^Tvfm  i 
4 Ab  w*f°  i 1 AB  gfrcrit  i 

’ AC  tafia®  I * Ab  adds  before  thi  •. 

;l#  Ab  ow^TfiJafara®  i 11  B asffcrR®  > 

l!  Qmitted  in  Ab.  13  Ab  *nrwi*f' 

**  Ab  oW*i  i 16  AC  o*rfe  i 

44  Ab  fwfwaWaa  awrfwfa'  I 11  N i -■■'■'  M i 

l*  ; Ab;4  t i0  Ab  j|  t “ Ab  i s i ';i  AO  .3*k  i 


wrsrwrwntf 


8S>«( 

iripfafrf  $$PsfK  *si%TWtt 

*rer:  nawwrfi^r  # ^TWRit’T  wrw- 

fat  f f ^ f j ^ WfT8 1 


222. 


Trqj  wwt  W^TWRTT  wfrrrfWIT  I TOT:  TIT^i 
w^t  i wmw  Tt  TOsfrotrr- 

^KPT  HWPrll  WcB  WtH^fiTI  ^IT^T^rfH  WF1W 


TOW 


Tra^rTf^ro^rRr  wttwRt 

ara%nrrr  ^ gps%  i rrowt 

«WT  xtRtoTOT%  ft^7[  ST^fRTTWjfff  I 
^WTWWTT  m&m  *Z%  HT%  wwt  WT  W?T,  ^Tf 
<?m%  wwTfq^R  TOtnr  to^i,  h^- 
^OTFRifw  i *w  wsisiHf  wgfk*j  Wg,  ^g- 
jrarffr^  fyrftci  qi*ul<t>  warT' 
«r?rw  i 


II  WWTHFTT^|^t^<|lq^qK  I^M^Vl^l^*-!*!*  | 


1 only  in  Ab.  * *ttt°  only  in  B. 

4 After  tbe  end  of  the  mantra  Ab  repeats  the  portion 
beginning  from  ^ wr*fh...*n%»sft:  oil  adding 
jit  «R  at  the  end. 

||  This  colophon  is  found  only  in  Nb.  - 
|.  ANC  «fNwfrsfa  i ' "'":v"  ^w'“',' 


eft'll  w:  WrfrPTSf  W*f- 


%fW*^r?Ef  ?frT  | 


II  TT?TJTRT%^T:  ’JPPW  li 


W ^31*7^1  j 


# W ^TfTEf  f qi?  ^frfT  I 

^RIX  WT*  $w\rl  I •fffWTSi  T*^ 
msg^  i&w  ^g^rtRi  wrcir  <t^{t  'ff^RF 
qWH'ftWg.  '^OWR  H^rugrWIfHM 
TW^f  MWid^d«RW(W4  mr3 

^PTTS*TOT  5f?rt  SR^WT  d54l«piZ 


1 A «*{•  i * A i ! N c,srs^<  i 
* AN  omit.  * ‘ ANC  ^Nnrt,  B *f  .' 

* ; i 7 B omits  ^3°...«*n3»i 


0 

^nnwfRf?T^i¥tTTnf5W  »jg5ft- 

^ncra^rf  ^wif  ^pfNnst  ^rarfasriT 

hf^tti  ■#  wmmfe  m$mr  ft 

— -sTtrem,  # f ff  ’if — f^r  srei 
W^fT  WTTiW  *$&!  I ftngfh  *TT1  TOSH  I 

# w-  ft  f if  w:  i ^i%<t  iT*w!r  Tnnrrer^ 
wi  sur?*  ^7Am-.  \ 1%wfH 

i # 'iff  f if  !••  1;  i:  ft*  ft* 

%;  wf  isrrfcnfTTsri  ifcn?  i 

f?TOjwf%:  tr^T^TTW  ^TcfaEf:  | 1ST 
«R3T«?faw  I R5^f»T^sfNf?Flf*rT  #W  | 

3fNsRRTlH^:  I 

II  ^xfcfpTft^m^W7  II 

225. 

^IT^fmirf  TRTO’JJ  rTWTqfr  3T^- 

wm  writ?  ^nj  Xm>mIw  tw  faiffar- 
sixths  w4  ^wts^t  %r  «pfj*r  i?nf 
wti  Rgr^i 

1 ANC:  i * AN  If,  C YT 

’ A'NC  y ; ^ ‘ ANC  ft  i 

6 AC  xt  v&  xJ,  N if  q?  5 i  1 * * * *  6 B «vtw  i 

^ This  colophon  is  found  only  in  Nb.  - v/**:--‘-»* 

fv-  AG  ; 

ik-r.  , '*■£<■■  ■ ' :' 


vi  mbit*  f*rare  faw  ?mf*  ^nftwcftt- 
4t*i  <tw  ^TXTf?7TrfT  mm  i ^wqf<<i!di  m- 
tTCrff  Tm  fr^t  gai%*r  *raf 


Wf 


^jnrrw^f  «%%■ — 

TTC&Faf  fe3i:  ^ ^?T3^f35f?ffT^  | 
W#f  || 


^*rr^f«Ht  »rmg  i T^gr 

v ©s. 

sifMt  g rrwT  «TFTt  wnft  g i 
fafeftR  ?fS?T  wv^r  shuzt^k:  snw*r  ii 
wii  ^ f 3f 

TC  ^TITT  I 


^T?rr€Nnv*i  wrrag  11 


1 AO  o«i-jgo  i 1 * B «aft  i 

4 N adds  a third  si  * BC  only. 

* B:  i * B omits  •tangm*  i 


ITOTOWrtf 


226.  . 

irw  ^P? 

s^^jsq  swr  ^ftr  $trrg*f 

ftfvm  *f^f wppn»«ww  wf- 


' I <1  III  I I I II  I 1^  i I 'HI I j I^L^gl^LLlL^^ 


jrffcraiprer  wn?F  wiKHPf 
^art  fs^srf  — 


flaa*^  f^sj: 


^ w?r  foq  m dmir^?:i raitt<n^^TgT^- 

^fT3fW\t  WSFHf  JOTT^N  nKW 

f^nrai  qmm  is wfagflfrNf  ^wwil 
f^ct  fwn  pr?rt  fa^rasrerT^  5«t‘*»  wurcw- 


^^wrfVr^rsrt 


' , - mi 

$*!  ff  frncf*r,  t i 

fswmr^,  w ^ ^rtf2  qaftwm*  - - 
*rnft  ttot  *ri  ftft:  fMriw-a  ^ i 
s?F3T?nR«rr  w wi^fr 

si 

^wnm/un^T 

’STR'rJlfaTR  ^ fWR%?T  li 
^TsfiT^T<I»i|lfS*J  *ptf  TOT^T^rr: 
MmT^W  IMtMt:  ^T^T^rT — # 

^PTS^tSIT  # ‘*R%  W-  ^f:  f I TP 
W<3TfaiR:  ingft:  I ^PSRIT 


- # ^ ^ WTff  ^rf«  «^WTTHW- 

^t?f fwp^^rr?i  q m rrfT^^rf^^T^  ^ 

*nrci  swtf  %fr  ira^g  mi  ?m 

*f*§P5T  fqr^HT  TTrfrWHSI  WT#  ^fartTjff<WR 
sttw  »R*g  f f tRZ  tR^  wttt — i # 

qafofrwffi  ’?  to  ^rwT — tstpst??  i 
^SflipjTSTfatffa  f f tov  “to,  ^rt T I 

i # ^ar^Rfrftrt^r 

'3TPTO  'nSRfacfof  f RTfT — *rdw«*H«)NWW  I 


1 AN  v ! * The.MS  3J  ends  here. 

* The  jpetre  in  this  .Sloka  is  faulty. 

* AC>*ncf*io  | ‘ AC  im  i ".- 

* AG  ottift;  1 C omits.  • 

•. „l:i *;. v //; ,;.WufAV‘-V.'r.-X<.  ■■■'. 

3 i . 9 C omits.  :; 


TOTT  twifNlftlTO  TOfa- 

sfjjT^ttrfr  ifafM ft ♦iuri^- 

rf^T^u<r^?i  y';n.f?Tv  TOgst  irwrar  tot- 

W^Tf  wi  ' 

n Ti':'-..  c^T’rrfteiro  towh  h 


227. 


*<  RT  | 

-?\mf<m  **mm  TOtfti  ^ to  to.-i 

iRgiftf  *f»T|  #n?T  ^TOTTfTOfJM:  « 

*srwfa  ^s|  #qnr- 
far.TOlftr  ^l^TfwRT^  IfT  nm^HWlf^b 
vim  p^tto^RTT  ht^^i 

vmrft  wm-?r  TOPfTrr#f , .irrorTOafowf 

<g<H«^3fgrai  writ. 

TO^IfTWW 
WtTtV^x  f?5?Sf?f  g^5%^f 

frotf  fWrTO:f  TOffralw^ft 
W^s ?rn^f sro  vro^xt^fro' 
wi  '}fi5mrf%prr 
p'fTTfe^m  i 


a,1'  AC  «wpt=,  N ««a<,  , 


wusagwT  irm  wnpfarrf?Pfii  i 


wst  *nwr  farai  TOwnrairn 

wiwfrpat  wf — # 
wfT  i ^fpr^sn  ^RTtwrwmfT  €ttt^zt^- 

^hT^nrafT^T^TT^ftH  WraTrT  I rTrt:  %ITg3i  pfm- 
<3T?WT  <T?T  faff  ^SfTrWraH^?^  XTC^fcf  | 

II  ^HTHH  || 


228. 

*wt  ^CT?Wr*r  I 

i1*IR ^qRT^ftwg  *nw  s&facrr  i 

wm  rm  %wft  ^TMtriwrf  11 

Tfsfal  ^irg  ^HMsh^wfaM4^  n 
^fN  w&  ^Tr^T  tjwtM  n**w»g  i 
^^TfwrkfHf^  WTWW>r«:  II 

4^zq|m:  xr^  3ftf*T3S[:  i?WVU  HrTP  I 

*t*ft  ^T^tfwtgrTF  II 
^ ^jsrfasi  pg  %^T^?rt^rr  i 
ftrsrs^  mvj%  ^nfr  f*m  fwftt  ^ 11 


4 AC  <>,etT^»i  ’ N adds  ^ffaPt  after  (Ids. 

s AC  ogrw^o  | ‘ This  sloka  is  omitted  in  A. 

^Cwwjfi  ‘ N «fW*t  I 

W«f  (?),  N *«OT3$  (?)  ! 


H88  W';l 

JTOW  WTWTWff  7T^  IW  wWl  I 
gf^ri  fte:  I 

?r^g  fa*m*w  rtn — # ^mniFW^rRT- 
^ipr  ^ g?7rt  f*wro 

rlfoH  » 

7T%5f  ^JTT  fwr^ 

PT=frv<dHj^?;^pr  « 

'Will  #TR  I 

?rte  fwr^i*fF  fg**f  11 

*tg?ra3W  fwPf%?5 1 
^PTg  Tfgr:  * fHmPi**  it 

3U<WPT  i 

fath8?T  ’9T7JPTT  B 

^gwr#  ^g^r  ^Bwwlqsuifwwt  i 
lKTl^TT^g?R  H 

Trfsterei  n^RWR  fwr^rgi 

^srr^f 

^retwpm  fN 
W^WrfT?!T^r 
qjNb 


Be*. 


wraswr  >rw  wr,s»ff<Tr^*iT  i 

1^11  WW*i  f^txrfpr:  tjswtt  i 

*rniTqtw*t>  « 

*r  wm  wfhjri  wr  w- w i 

twt^r  f?r:  trsrm  w ii 

SPWPWft  w^rfiri  w^rjfcf^fcFif  i 
w huwtsr^  i 

^sr^fr#  ^iriWr?m  m\  it 
n ^iit  $ ^ ^ ^.f^'irf^  g SfaTfanffaPj,  ^ ^ 
Tf?T  ^ Iftwlfa  ^^T^STTJT,  il  | Mt 

fNrnftfH  ^rpfN  w,  4\  ^ iprcftr 

arafa|*Tfiw:  i 

TO  gs^fr  ?{TRjgRTR  UBT^:  artfwfiP!  I 
f«rf^ww  fssn^lsi  >i 

/ *Ttfjr«fi*li  ^FT??^i  ?RTR3T5TT  n ii 

V-  C ~> 

^twit?w  f^'m  arafiii  *wrn?cr:  i 

sflSf  %S*f?T  IJ3TC?  ?f*T  WSIH  il 
?3§?  Barr  »ftft  I 

qsREp£r  ar  ***a  ^Rraretfa^  k 

wrr  ^Ff%  *r?ft  tpit  i 

3TS3T  «TBfT  II 

1 %m  mfe;  in  ANC.  : AO  y^<  ! 

*A . oil)  ita . gutn . . . + A '*i®<'  i 

i * AC  A'^Ct  : 


tTcg^it  rm  I 

%?m#t  tr»  §rt  ^ wft  mr  n 

^wt  \ m< tt  ^ st^ft  i 

xrrTrFfi?^;  TTsrr  ?^T  » ) 

s-nfba  £v?%  ^i*rr  fogirz^  ?m:  i 

*n«t5  ' ^ WIFf  1JW%T?5Frriffw:  y 

wsv'f^r  fopffa  jh?^  *nmws  t 
*PP5Fri:  : ^nSTFTffT  'STfwWre  *rf  ^5$  H 
tr^r^?T^:  fwrfafa^m  «pj:  I 
w^rasr  ttswri:  w^ji 

Tim  HR^m  ?>WT  TWt  fwI^T^  I 

W]#t  ftrrf  WlTTTt  WBTT  H 

toi  ^r^^trrwt  to  I 

toi?t  wqt%  ?<r^r4mq  h 

wTm^i  totc  jfrft'  spr  i 

W3T  WTWfM^  wf^  TO^fa^  H 

ft9T=TOfi«l^^5  %rfT  %TPWWtfMt  » 

m flSjrTT  3?faT  HTOJlfa  | 

wnrr  tot§:  ijrot  :4|l|f § 

^R3l»3Tf*Rt  ^T'^T^Wt  if  . 

¥^r  »rtft  wzj  4^*  gffifoNf 

*rafro%  ^ ^ tof!  wbt  V ,-fi 


* AG  STTRf  j 


mwi;  owylmfiw  i jp! 

W?fr  ^WfWT^rf:  | 

TO  irarcftinr  ^ ftreifar  rrsrotfTO  h 
^ ^^TOrfsro  i 

si 

*sit%  *urtr-W  wfii  *p  ^r  rr^fro  i 
TO  fofasf*  ^ %TFEJatf*I??t  H 
?p^%f»W?T^?3T  ?%?TP8t  I 

Wi  w to  ^fifar  it 

Vttot  i 

*TTRT^‘  ^fro  TO  II 
yfawimqw  * i 

;fip  gwforf  ^ '^fe^T  ii 

tor:  HTfaM  msj  to  vrfSrg  ^ %wt*t  i 
www  ^%*5  *ifk  *jf^i  to  n 
to: 1 

%r.  **m  i TOTfa^fs  TOiTfa— 
^^MjJSlfifc^^WTfiTrrrH:  p?fTOi:  I 
tana5  WHTOTfll  W %^TO  TO:  II 
Jrroat  froiOTta:  w?r  toit^,t:  1 

*it#  to  to=  i! 

TOTW^raRTOfa — 

sstTO^f  'RT^w  i 

%uf^«ftifia^*4i  q%r  ^rTire^  ^fro? « 


1 ACsfinfru 

$M" 


* AC  omit  this  line. 

* AC  «w*i  i 

■ » ''V»!\  >> 


♦^trro  i 


^TT:  f ^RT 

SH^RWtMTTL^J  %WfTW  W I 
«wggT  fwm  ^prr  i 

ffagi  W*J  *rnifw  e 
^rf^^wPTT  *T-4tfir  gt*  anfemT  t 
arra  f?ref?T  Wg  * trmT  *r  it 

%r?w5i*r«i3i  * aRrowst^nf  i 


mRTrr  tor  % (*rmt ) <h<im  t^wnup  i 


W*RT  JTfJTTOT%*  <3*^^  «fWTT  I 


TO^fr  g *nsTgroTC^f*nft  h 
^rcrtarroT  *wrt  t^t  xwswrfw^  i 


^mrBrfWRTW 

C\ 


*%*timt-i& mm?  1 


wife  i|«i<#i*i^N»rg » 


fwng  assist  to 
aifasgis^  <ii  i fa  n *\  i usi 

***  ^ *Wi 


-MSS  •■^iTfswr  or  * ^rfr^T 
|^AC  «n*uo  i • 

ife-wps*- 1. 


«n?nawT  wiwtrrnm 


88*. 


TmprTt  -ftfar^THP  ^ \ 

ypi  rrarr  ^siry  n 

VRTFTFTT  f^qgps  TFTTfeWfW 
n^TT^ftecTTf*p*f?K  *rw?y  i 

wpyftfaftRrt  snsrr:  ^ipTfa  ^rtwfrrgterw1 
xrrt  ^rrf^r  w sam  iTSFrsrjfrw  n 

^qffwmTwygi^i  imm;  fafoy  ^?b  *jra?5 
*pyT?^fo^iwmq|s  wkw  % fw^ry  i 
qstT^^fcw  ivt- 

wwwwnH^  vaPTFy  pi  wsi  11 

W 2TCTTTR 

"’orn?  fafaw^pf  ^PRJtrreFTTftr  i 

7^y  TTr^d^^rr  ^ststwit 


« wfjwr  *rm  OTsrttnf^wiT  wrtht  h 


snwffwf  ’ - : 

' 229..'  .! 

aqr^TH  *T^W?fiW  hW-  W%t44iPi  H 
wrfa^sfiwwm^  *nra  wwfw  ii 

Jj,  . .-1^M.„._L  ■ V . 

+T|  535ft  3W  §n*5T 

¥#iwwrf^mrr 
*w  i 

*i«KiPi*Mfay  TTOmw»P?  # 

TFI^T  *PT  5STHT  TFTf  T^T  31ft  WIT: 

?TWTf^omT  SSTTWWfl:  H 
^dWRn^^WWtWWW^t  WIT:  I 
W:  q'jjft^fmgft:  II 

.W  wr^Cglfm  wrft  %dwwr  ww:  i 
iratmqi^grl  fxTfra^Tw^urr  h 
farm  wwr  iiwTd  'snwwr:  fawn  i 

WWt^qTSft  W WTT*t  7f%W  ^WIjf^ITT  II 
^ fasrift:  W^T  %T5T  WtPl^^ffi^mM 

^n5 8 

WUTO  ITW  IT  %T^T  W*WWT*f  r 

W ^II^WtTIT  gTH^  «iW|#  # 

D WWTWt  H 


230. 

•'■*  ©\ 

%TT?wf  wm\ 

^nrr^fTi'VTWf  "<w- 
MfimVvini  wg^Tf^ranv  rrf%r:^>pr%t|  # 
■ jjp*  f^RPT,  WT  £fT 

^ ^r  wrr  i 

ii  *mro 

v'"231. 

irari  iWw:wiwi  wit  fwar 

Vj 

^*<«-g% 

#s  ^Nrrr  fWim  i rtm 

ITT  ^wwr  ^r?- 
1^^%’  ftfrwft  ^TT?wf  jiwi  ^fwrra- 

ftfr<9fari  f^!%?t  f)  ^ 

2 ANC  o^lsio  i 

* ANC  *r- 1 

* B ^f  i 

* AC  °ewvr  i 


wt  i?t  *?*#  ^nhtr 

# *i(T  T # S 3i  ^f  *S  ^ T $ jjw] 

wm — WWfSTM 

ii  ^<K«rr«TV5w  i 
i gffTT:  swsrftmw  n 


wf  i 


# -^t;  f i mr f mroflit  ir^% 

^f^rafT«%  i fn m i <**w  i m 

SRTHt  fasfifaft  ^ TO  WPf^l  TRttrfr 

I d%r<  fsFR[tWt 
TT^jftVrTfwrrt  wf^qi  vrr^nm  i ?reTcsT*rfT 
*t?riw  TO^tWf  Trwfapnif ^T?Trfi[iprr 
^TOT  ^F5%3  H O Wf^rTfawt 

Sf^lfrPfifff^ffm  ^r«Mj4 ««| T^RTf  Hfi(i - 

l^^frl,  wfr  TO?*tfTOlt*§%  Ufa0 

ffH  HT^%?IJ  TR^f®iirxrp?^t:  WH^Rspn^l’- 


B omits  the  author.  ’ '•  - ,»  C .ftsmt  i'J 

AG  I . ■ . v §|l§ill  Hg 


#1$ 


sj%T5- 

qiKW^^fiffr  H^Tfifl^Tynn^FRl  fTH^feng- 


m\  g?h%^#r  WFRR  l iwft: 

^RlftST  ^f?TW^lf«f 

?mri  — TfH  wr^rr  i 

Tjart^ — WT3«i  ft^T  VTRTt^rf 
fa%?f  mznff ^SferTf  fTrTt  ^fflWFHST 

*ffriw  wg  ^mfnxr  # fsrcfe- 


fT3#?  wf^OTUT  TJ5T^rI  I W^4:  I # ?rsr- 
i *?T%fH  trerr^  ^Jnrrcir  # 


cren§Hl%  f w%f?r  **m,  wf  ^fwira  # 
^arlfhri?t%  ?’  ^r%fH  w?r  y*i<JV 

^tf^BTR  TJ^frrfr  ^TPHTW  Mrw?  tJWT  | 
ijmfa  i # # 

•f  xrz  tff?  t*?  ^*nTr — ?fH  sht^rsi:  i 


II  WTTHTJ  || 


HTVnm^TSft 


w 


233. 

\gp  fi  jft  i 

mv  xwtmx.- 

gtfrnff  lafar^r  ?mf  uarr^tefwTrt 

f^fsrf  ^fr^fmrnrf  Tw#f  wre<gyfa- 
fiFreprf  *wsF'*fjf?5?f  <5miwqwg*Hi  %a- 
^rci  4w  k&  FwfN iwn- 
f5T?wf  wr^rir 

WTi^rrcw  ?fm  mm 
^R5JT^T^r  HPT%rT  I HT^TTf^T  *T®it  *T*ff  W^r{  I 

# f f f ra  t*z  i # 

4*reiMt ?t=  f ^^rm—  i # aar- 

sftfMt  W tjf? — | — # 3®T- 

■?Tf^i«ft  stf  srfcr  ^ w ww  ( srwr ) 
wsfa  wt  ftrfi  jt?t^  f w wm  i w«ri 
^g4*sf  ^ faa*m  ^jf?4  ^rafr^nfr  ^^afwf?r  i 

wp|  ii 


' o«fo  i * .JT  vontttft*  fi  > .... 

I $%**.  01lly-  ■.*  A omHa’ti^;^|t:'#|'i§’ 


234. 

3^rrftr^f  <ib:  i 

Tffmfc  ^*J7TT4 

WHf^aFiTTfi^  VTT4tr[  | wf^TTft  TJPTCF  ff- 
4flT*T  I jff 4nTTflfVr:  Tp?f#:  xrfrinT^ 

fwM  spr^wwf  ^snrr%  wmij  7iW[^  xrra 

wwir!  ^rpfte-tr?- 

TrtWTTW  | # 43*^W  f WT¥r; 

to  i ^ra?f:,  # ^sTfMt  ffawt  1 

# ^35R4rft  W«4?(r«  ‘^xrr  i 

xrf%%,  # *trwt  45?yeu  ^rr^i  i # 

V*T4iT4  43^0?  ^T^T,  # fWFf^rP?  43^w  fiTM, 
# WW5  43?W  *3T4T,  WST — # ?Tf  T^W  - 
43?gw  ^nrwr  i # ^if^TFPrs^ctj  ^rer,  # 
^§^433TJW  WT4T,  # 4H'^443?^'di  J^T^I, 

w£i — # ^faf^snja*  wcr  i — # «m; 

^^^'411411^^43?^  ^TTWT  I # W #3*41- 

4114^  # 4Pt:  ^^43?4lpfT  # *W  'If  wk- 

44%?T4^  ff  f TO  4J2  *5i?  WST  I 

||  43?4Tf3T5fl?iT44  WTHH  i! 


1 A omits  t i ' A< 1 omit  wr  <u* 

;^AN  **Tt%  I 4 AN  « ; 


235. 

suit  wnjrl  | 

=?rgi2rt  f%s|T  mwfti^n 

wf^srapr  f«rtor  faf^sr 

tt vspFri  ^ ^g:trr%  «rr«Nrf*i  *ren- 

Mc^T  SWTfefw  *rro%  w*m  irfr- 

5TW  f*F?T  WT#|  | ^ WT# 

W,W1  spfPT  ! rTcTT  <?TllFf«f=ri4| 

Tff!  frr-^T  H%tg  3jn?T%  fTT^RI  *fftr  TJ5lf  ^ fw*T 
gprfT  I *rsrTsSTT  vi  JH5TW  JTTR'i^  | 

TTrf:  ^TwWrtifhfNr^  fWR  fw^TST  ?TFT 

irMnx 1 ^ <**l  fiwwJ  wprt  s^m  ?i  w^ui- 

>4%rr  i 

ii  vi  Iwar^nft^HTrT- 

^TOt^I*^TTTV5rf«rfW:  II 


236. 

V» 


TW- 


f^prr  f^Trarit^nct  wn§f  HWTTm^wrt 

ft  W»TJF»if fz*?f 


C «f«i?re> 


>: 

"V  ■$*&. 


■■'mmwm 


i 


^wwf  ^irri^TTf^f^^^WTgf^f^rr 
Twnsrp^sr^r  to*js^t  ^ w?  I^t^t:- 
^far^fiTf  #!¥t  q^'flaswtatf  wMfa- 
^fqaflf  UUUMI^I  WT^TI  HT^fTf^r#  *Fef  gj%T  I 
Trsrra  *rw — # «£<i44iftraft  # qi*mifs?fa 

# f f f tR?  HR  xj?  ^TWT — i|«f- 

*W  | # if  f H5^  *TT1T — l^J- 

TR*  | # q53rqtfaraft%  f xfi? — I wf%- 

*W — # q3?5Tf%5?|-  wfcr  Jgjsf  ^ 

w wt  ftrfi  irr$  f w *?nrr  i mwf 

xr^jgf  ^gissr  wfaprif^i  wn*r  i 
II  qsfirtfaTafftrpRT  WITH*  II 


237. 

fa^ngjm  ffe%  i 

gqtWw^RTT^  II 

<T^f  fa~fOTT%8  imT^^VTTfWT  I 
3TTW  g I 

Wfa*!?  SRIRGTi  3trfa^«P?fWT  I 

Tmggiarai  twi(it)  f^rr^  JRfiT*!%  h 

.‘.AC  efi?®  i r 1 A asffae  i 

* Omitted  in  AN.  * AO  -Hr^^ 


m* 


*n*I«WTWff 


238.  . 

# TTTW 

fpw  fir  ?w  ^fafs*nwf*r 

wr^ri  i # ^h^ratfafW 

f*  f*7 

hh  ^f»f  ^ f f 5 ^ 

^TT^T  I 

II  [ cjsfStfassiT  ] || 


239. 


^ ?U2?  <wr  ^ ^rr^t  ^tw:  ii 

*sFr3Jrc^3N  snraT  ^rwi'  i 
WHi'^iifiwprei  q^Rt  II 

vtToPfTTVffrTT  ?m  4WU  <4^1  ^#nl  *1J  V 

I snwwn  frora 

SW5^NTf^(:  ysfgfrMSI  n 3WT 

^wi"«4  irfasg  f ^Tjr  ^psr  irf^TO  qm- 
wrrqfe  m*m 


TT^TCTfT'C^M:  ^3*1  tlT^WT’ 

f ^ i ^qrsrf  trnw|,  *ri- 
TTf^nufTr  wkmmm  fawwjwcwf 


,C  .«ri 


AC  ^ §£; 


fnpTfrmflrryrfl'n 


f^rTTC  2rre?crcf 
*t<greTf*re'  farsn%  fsT^rTT  sr  TTwmtrr^  mim- 
tpp  l fatar*AM  '^v~i  my- 

JJWfa  I cRP9T  *3%  frsrfqg^  H^WiTR 
trf?7s^q  fvR^TJTtf^  farRiiw^TR  m imr-i 
tnirl,  # RT7fl[5FtS wMH  ^Tfa- 

f?ro?x  i vi^  f^iw  f°^q3s 

faforS  ajr-ff  PfSf- 

*ww«Hqpift  wwc  W5 

7RTW  TfSfTJIXW  W!- - 

^g^TT  ^pTtU?*jf^?TR  I 
^njlT^frrw^  HpgrafNgww  h 
(TOTO  ^fffiTOTng^  W«fT  ?RBRfiNOTWTfe- 
f*W5T  rnr'l^T^R^rf^W  WRTCftfM  W«F=  ! 

I fSnfasTTf^PTT  13PW  ITfTTfa-  1 
TTtgf^rl  V?  fas^irrefe»3%g  f^P--' 

fl^T^XT'xfwxg  tras^  srcrretR  ? *?T  ^T  w-  i 
wjitm  ttwh  TTrwrfar  >1 

ipT%iN  Wgm  rTrljfTWT^rT^T  ^tf*I^: 

ttwt 1 qarirfiraT  ^^TT 

1 AC  ir^fo  i * AC  ®%fa  i 

3 A tsresrfN  I * N omits 

6 AC  »wu«  ! B AC  MW  i 


*n*PT?TT*iroT 


T^3Tf^5ff  tfrrT^wf 


^rf  f^’g^K^T^iTTWr^TTR,  <3TR^%  f*F%- 


srfapfr  wfrrRW 


^ftr- 


^R^fTa^qTWni  J ti^t:  %^*«TFTT 

mfan  ^sn^rro^gw  — 

w%  *rfw  frofW  ireifirj  w*  i 
flwrcpN  wfifg-?  *pf  ii 


Tfafa^TO  2jpR^  TT?T1%^  i 

’sisrcrcrwf  wf ^Tfrff^  11 
?ft^T^r5p?T%iT  «ro  "f^^nrf  fM 
I # f I <T?r:  #gnTT^ 

^T  rR^*T  ^ ?TKKI^  TTflTT,  f^TTTrT  ^ f^TR 

nFffwrfa  ^ i oft:  'P^jfiwwi 

'■j  v> 

*r*RH  %^WT  f^TTT^Tirg^  I 

^m\  wf%<wm*rcw  i 


AN  «w*.  5 A omits Acsr*...«Wt  < 

C •>mib  ^fircTo  i * AC  * l 

h Wnn  — 

**N  ! f r^m<T  WT{^  ^Tffwci  W5T  I 
tfafanrisf  qgflg  ’Sfffiw  THTT^ir  I , 

.:/;v.  *vfa  a ; 


fnrrnr*rmTH»r«  i 


m twtw i *m  i trerf « 
i^gifa-sjur  g TT^pTf^Rm;  i 

rfT^TK(T^fl  3T^TW3tl*P  I 
5^raiWMTf«TsfiW  II 

*t$w$  crx^t  5T^fTT^rrig?T:  i 

3T%TV^'^?irI  || 

finig^fTgm  w ^"Trifaf^T  i 
^sftguTf^ft  T^fMfrTSft^lft  II 
giffH%3RT  JTfaTT  «WT  I 

gurfo^T  %w  11 

git  wm^\  gi^^f  T*3*tm  i 
TJ1T  V*tr:  TOflfTT  ipftWl  ^fuTT  II 
<T^g  nwt:  sMiTT  ^ 

f^trc  HT%f^%  ^tfi  W^TT 

ftra  ^nftroiit  t^R  iRrt  trtRt  wi  fart 
fastfag  ?frt  13W5TW  3R1W  I # ^T: 

f ffa  TOiT^farrrfaifa  ssirafa  fstrsp?- 
I ^RTT^rn:  ^nT  ^^IrrrfN  iHWPWjWli 

gy:dfaW$fafaW*»**lgra  PT^l  fwrg- 

cflfal  ^jtaf  l^TT  3r:  f 1 ft:  fSTTfW  H%*5f  1ST 


AC  o-^W  i 2 AC  ^BTe  I 

AC  •’per®  i * AC  ft>  i 

AC  e^Rfifo  l 


pftear  alam *IM  !Pga  i 

wit 

srprar  T^Rpawimri  ^rfiro- 

ITfafiPS^  I fapfar  ^rj5%^ 

jann*  i wnftssrtw,  psTfaRrrffaf  aanvrf 
inwgtWT^T^NTat^Tl^:  I <m  STPrafo- 

PPFrT  VRT^ff  ^ TJW^a  I rrm  Wl^rT 
3&prf — 


HWTO  WfPTPT  »WT«qfq  || 

ffa  i am  fe*%ap  sijP$a1SiPT 
fog:  i Tpfts^rr:  fatfa  wfo  apfr  aii  srafe 
mrm  # f ^tt  it  fsrapr  fawpsr  fk^afarr- 
ifa  TrfkHfamFa  «p rr  3fNl<*Rjfi- 

s 

**nsRT  7T5a  faP^Tf  ft?P!- 

#^TT-5THfni  IfTkPT  TfH  aP?Nfo^ 

a5^  i am  Trfwrrf^^aprPTPmT  WTO 
*i%  xrfcss  fo^ffo  aaq<^t  tttPj:  i a^  tror- 
wrt^h  fwraafoima  qurrni  flwptfofa  t 
i ’fongraN rrwffapT  foakn  awrfo  i 
am  *mratfoaT  gi^TfoRnrcpE  W|  to- 
WRr^TW'qa^^f  awPTT*r§  asnartf 


AC  **J5.  i * A»yft.  i • »vAC  ^tit:  i'  ; 

* AC  ®«fr»  i s AC*  t 1 .,  * AC  fwpw^j. 


wwim*  sm- 

^gpnrre  htwwk^  ^anu  ^rpi%¥r  *$t1- 
aiT% 

i giffa:  wrfo  i 

*rf^  faff  ftgfNr^fWrr  *siwpft- 

•TfirnffTTim^,  TT^T  WWfi:  ’FTCTTftm  f^T^l 
3TTfwWWRfiS^t  falrf M 

Wf^T  fT^F^a  f^p-TT  TO- 

ftf  fafow  ^LIRrRjfsmi 

^*n£N  fMar  w**i  fsrfwsft-*  *taw 
Iwrr  i^r'vs^rf^  fei^i  % %¥iii  ^fam* 
nwar  ate*  Wm  awt  i ^ fw  **rfh?nt — 
wnf^finjar  fa%wr  i 
aasTTTf^waiTTT^  ^rfWa  *mTfa%a  i 
wawa  fganrrTf^sa^:  5jfajws%  11 
sfa  i s?raw  fcsr^rcrffffaftfa  i aa  aifwro 
<»(^iR8<l I qqCTff  ftr  WRSR  WTOT- 
aftarawfagas  fssflwsFcfta^T- 

PEpkta*) i*iM^fwi  tniai  crerr:  jwt^*t 
^W^WPwl  Ifc:  *T  a cifw^fT  I 

awt  fft  taaftrafaw  #[  ara?i 
#^rw  i sNir  mn 

ftWWKEW 


* AC  «WT5 


s AC  , 


^nj  f?TWr^%?r  I 

?fa  fap^fa:  I 

^fKTW^  fflftfrfo  *N  TW7T  | rTWW  ^^rlT- 

?Xi*f!  «Trftraw ^#>?^f^rrr1%wtTTTfKR»m 
^ s*' 
far  Mmfn  m?  ^ c^fiWT^PTT 

%?-:3  T^Tf  ST%?[  I rp®t  W$U 

i m wm  w*:9  # f f i fygTfirerr- 
#?TT  spJTSOTf — # # f,  # f f,  # ^T  f , 
# f»  # n f i ^rsj  f «n4 

INre?<  ?r#if  #qnrggr^w 

ftrr?  T%T7fTT[^TO^T^T  wwTtg  yrarwrei 
gpi^^irni  faii^i  IfaTsrrjprcsw  tTj  *renr«g 
^^fTTWJWriHfygsIfr  1 ^Prff^TT 
fww^T  wnsnsr  ar^  fft 

twtr\  | Vi  xpn  f ^ %ft  *1 

I WT  Sf?  f^fRf  fWJT^fnCT^' 

Tprt  wwFFrrafa,  ?m 

^^TaWTRITMWfM^  *4  $4f«  I 
^ ^ hN  T^^rrrrrjjmr^  ?i^T  *n- 

^ ^ fafw  ^ rrfSff ti  ?r^?i 

i wi  fSR  ^mrfoftvfrft  wpjfj  i 


1 A »9TqVo  ! 

* AC  iri:  i 


s A ««*o3  i 
‘ AC  ps-  i 
# AC  »^%f4«'sjig  i 


TT?TflTv:*m.i«w 


WOTIf  Kf%53  *5ffN- 

?^ifw:T^rn^w  frnirre  ?t[wt]^  fNn^ 
*frf*T*?t:  mm  *i*<*(4i  ?raraFT  fa%xs  ^^r- 
fa^fTf^i  wuwhhhto  mm 

TJ^f?  TTJTTf^fWH  f^|7[  I 
cTO  — ^scn^f  ^WT  # ^^gfrfrT  K\m- 
wsrenjT^i  ^gprtt^ 
fW'HT'H  ^faf^nwfafpi  lWT?t  I ^ f^TT- 
sfr^rfti  ^N^fa^^Tercfim:  ^saf 
$sfax 1 **  ssn?  faf%fafarnfa  *ww  i m 

twtrr,  %trr®»T*Tgci- 
WT^T  j HT^rr *Pnrra  ?TsS}FrR|2|VM««||:  I ?n*T 

W^?  5fT  ^WRIT- 

^5^m#rWTjfwf^r^i  mmi  ■^rtrf^ffT  i 

sp??N  fr^mpn^TM^  ywnfsaraw  i 

sJ  s 

f¥T«f  7{m  p:  Slf  3#  il 

II  HfmRT^Tvrfj  h^TTW  h 


:;WIW(^  %a«n:  i * A 


240. 

fq>n:^N  s?r  gr*:  to- 

wpjf«w*§*jwT^r  ^*iMiM^Mi!j<sn*j- 

itt^TT !j*ui m iTTgyrr^ vk<i.mi ifyifaW  * asrr 
^TRTWr^f^ *TI*IIHK‘  WT^%tl  <Tf  SWRIYH^ — % 
Tfir  tsiwri-*  * ffo  wromTf^TP  s^r- 

vstf :,  ? ff?r  xrafwwf^m:  *rfnwfr,  2*  sfo 
fftorratw:  ^pwt:,  T TfTT  t^wnpnr:  ’ETar- 
ffo  *wWh,  * *fa  w&t- 

^ fffT  w(t  p *P&- 
H<atlWrai?qWIT^  I tf? T OTfff  f%HT*T 

'pTn^n  fasnjfOTsr  *m*s it  fiwur 

f^TTT^N  ??T 

NH^w  i i * rPwwragf  sr 

^•HTtaT  WirKSra% — • 

*1%  Trfw  fa^stftrer  *tnrsr  *m  i 

*rcra*ra?t  Tr?n%i5  inctff^ 

1 N A 

A 3 i 5 AN  *wrro?rvi 

4 ‘^T'-Jr  — 

^ ! Turner  9r*tst  tf^tfVri  fSiw  i 
TOsri8torofWt  w*  n 
*Wf**5iKf  %«*r  l v 

W^W^y  I 

V.AN  aw  i ' " 


w^nrnrrsrr  snrfa*  v;  %. : 


■ ifrfaiiN  wfw^  qrara 

[^raw«?i  *rrdfci  ^ ' « 

^3Tf^5??$3f  umim  f^SPiri  il 

*v 

?frT  nTO'TOfjfgtrfr  i JTTO 

TOgrrorsi  ^N^NrerTtav^^'fi 
^g*H  V*%  ^ ^rop?t  *n%  ^fiim§<- 
fr?TTO3i  f^N  HT,£q^<<iTOfere  to^- 
^n^rrfvr:  *ffaH  TO^fTOTfa^fim  tsf^T- 

TO^nj/r  fairer#* — cfnir  ’INtt  #t  ,roptt 
#to  ftm  ^stw  f mr  t?r  srrfaroT  tot 

fTTrT  TO  ^TPTO  ftW  W&  ^ff  T?R — WSW~ 
*UH~lfiflrT  aiTmTTOftR  TO*TT- 

fH^fsfi^  TO^ifTOfafari 
^TIWfflR  fWT^I ; fW  f=P?%  y*Wfa41  *!Nr - 
wr  mi# 

^frrwt  ^ron^TOT  if^ft1-'- ;3i^i!.. 

OT^HT^T,  '«'fws%  TTOfMt  rr.  ?rw 

T^w^^g^rr  ^g^rr  mmf  ; ^ 

^ITSIWT  TOTg^TO^h  Virqfj, 
qf^T5%  TRISTfMt  fTOWWlf  TJIN^lTOTW- 
^rggw  ’wgHsrr  wrmi*  vg:TO*?r  mfw- 


A oWWfasrf,  C o 43TT^  i 
A W>  i 3 AC  v\o  i 

A omits  j 5 AN  o^kpr-*? 


*rcerwTwn?r 


^pfarr  *m»pr  trm^rm  ^farfr  '^ryw^wi 
qrgmffifirq  i«j<g  i *ugwr*T  ; ^ 
viT9wm[fiT]:  fatf*  fa^fw 
HTfgRif^^T  t'^?T^TT^pn 
%arr:  ^^nprrf^r- ; W *3s41«W[iad«i?iTr* 
qrwTwrsf  w^t  ^rmV  »ri  ^rg- 

^T^rr^f  Ow^r  ^ptwpr 
graftr  JT^t  i f%^  ^rf?r  swsrpi  ik^t  # ^tt;  ff 

^ gpatfa  UTfi7TWT5^[%]  ?f?T  | 

ii  H^RWHnr^TTf?i^r  ^rtrt  i 
i gfoM  $*r<MKRTfwf?r  8 


241. 

%WR  I 

urwraw  frftawr- 

f^lWTW^Tf^  f WT  | rTrC  *WJR  * 

fo*www  # wn^RTf^fi  tnftt  i 

■froft  fNirfa^  ^sfirra^s?  63ft:^TTrftr%T- 

l * AC  i • ' N •«*»»  ( 
^fnmi  . ‘ A f««, C.ift*  t 

“SMMiS^TX . ■ , 


8«t 


wr^T  rn^^wr  ^ftrra- 

« i yiij  m [ fyi  <**  swf^fawqra  TTffsrn- 

wr®  W€4i0«  d I *f  I ' ^ffjRri  ^TfWTfW- 

w?i  zfm*fc*  <n  mn- 

Tiwt^r  5rrw«i^TH^w^^an-- 


^R^f^R»rr^TT  ^€ttrftr^r^fnr 

wstfrfr  ?m  f^zRT 

i ) 7nTCT^pffTT  uprem  w^t  m- 
ttn  % wn^ft  a 

4||cH**W^oM  frfitSJJjfy  ^wrap-ar  w- 
Hfwnr^i  ?r%4  «*wpr — assigfea  ^t 
wa^ffrat  sfra  ^wnat  rommi  ^ 

3nJ  ^W?!  tr  ^T^T^fT^Trr  W-R^l  rffiT 

HMfpt  a5i*ma 

q^M^ga^ag^inreraT  f tR^  i 7mt  tes^r  i 
asrcjfssa  agT  ^TOT^rr  ^^Nr^t 
?TSt’*?|,Wr  HI i,a*H  ’Jp^T^ftjTt'nqfa- 

: ^TlP*TfWt0  3iTaaTf- 
f^f  tar^r  i^jf^TT^  tot^t  Hfaim , 

ii  *r&a?rt  %wErra?r  wrm  11 


AG  *5cftff«  i MS.S  . yi  ^ ' . 


»«* 


flTOTJTWWt 


242. 

wpiflrairt  q«for»nf  i 

wr$M  v '*4  * it 

«^?r  *rar  *rrar  f*  «4w:  i 

* ^twwm  %*  ^nar  snra:  fsrftn  k 

?<*4  jpwrfvg*^  srafK  * 

*rarcr  ^ sftwf^jprFr  ^sawT^war,  *rfrK  *nfr- 

r*l1!MI^X«rTlWqST<  ^ ^|^- 

nTT^n^T^^cT^i- 


?i%  TsrKtw,  ^rarfisrfotTwra  ^?n^K»ifWijMi, 

7W 

fal^Urfild 


^T?T<WT 

-..v,  7?rf^R  ^*gmig%  ^fSRTg<^qHTR- 

W%  ^MfHIdm^HllTH^  4M4 

s#[,  Tpqfwi  ^ warn  ^wrpt 

fasrUld, 

gw  sjwfafr  fawi  refoifr  ?wpo 

^*R#s£*J3r5*i  gfr!  ^8TT^ 

Wt*fatfT^WT?TTf*?R  fw4r^>*» 
fwrrwTT^pgft^r  fatmretjiffo- 

wi^fi  i « rwrov^Tii^ifr- 


tfellf 


ir  •t.t-'i  > 


qre  *wr  ^to^t- 

fMfa^<WK^i*<i«itfiM*i  *tg**fei^fecw  wv- 
^qniftnt:  ^RRuft  wqfrr — 
v4g?r  *»&g?T  i)  ^h^^mR  ■*# 

Rotpst  q^fW  toptowt^7t  fq^Rri 


^*5^w  Rwto  wrafqr  *jfjj  fqqrqf  qsjT 
w $qgwi^aM<wi»4  wi  m 

— w«i^i  i fwRrr  qs^wqsqrsrfqR  tjit 
m Rrtci  ^5?5f^Kim,  # ^wt  ?q*r?  \fa  fqR 
RtR  frrRfti  fira — i wwfc 
sitqR  ^rr^TTRr^Wwrsf  fafw  wowmai 


qgisim^T  r»3rt^«wT^re  w?f  — qpTT*r- 

wiq?r:  q?*%?T  i # ^t%^Rq®r  wrcgsr 
f a^qj  ^ f q^  i 


^rnfafocq  vmn-  jWjfims 

qraBPSqwqrfir^refRT^w  i 

h ^nRwrvww  ii 


f:flv 


C If  ( 


243. 


3Twrsfr  w^T^rwr^:  i 
fsfor  w»rfirrr^t%^wrft  fwrsRfa  n 


re^Nrensnw s <*i  i 

^TWTsiT^ftRnra  h 

fWRN  ^flgirTH  | 


rTONlTW&fTC 


zm  II 

P si  > 


ri^r  *nrft^mq>g  i 

facR  II 

%^ic[  T”  [g]  T?ii  ^ X^lftldr^il^  I 

^mnr^T  : #fa  n 

w*r»C w i ■ « i ■ *T<na  i ii 

^fwf|d^ridii«d  wmwm^^s  i 

^JTTWR  %^R  ^ JWT^fH  II  ~) 


AN  *ro»  I 2 AC  I 

AN  o^i  | 

A omits  this  and  the  next  line. 

N i * N *w  i 

AC  i VC  «ror«  i 


wTjsmfw&i  n 


VT*  WWTipTrT  II 


II  || 


244. 


W^TTPTFT:  | 

xrwr^rr«rNvT%^T  ^^am%ro:  <i 
*TfwfiWfl!*Ulig  HT^ZTrl  PWI^R 
<T*  f^WTT  ^jg^mf^rTO  I! 

f ? ^ ^ ,,,,.„  . 

sj^mswutst??  i 

^ mTs&t  * 11 

^ «\  ^ ^ N 

^TW?TRfT^fT#  ^ TMWT  I 

’5JfIl4»JlI5HT?rrfw:  fifTfTTK^t^W  || 

t^fSfT^TT^T^  twrftrfm  i 

'^RsjTHTTJwm  g i 

^i^tM  w*rcg  w*rrtf*pnr*P7  h 

ITapi:- — # ’f  ^TTT I 

H tfa  ^T%Hft»J3r%^TOT^  H 


-j--'  ■t,j:>-.;X  ■'■- — 


Mi:- 


Omitted  in  A. 


am 


wm  WW  WWlHfwR  I 

srrfrroTttw  irfwsft  n 
tit  $uw*nfiH«*w^  i 
TO'Wfs  f¥H  wffTTfwr  H 

5?  WTWftSim  ^nft  IWT?t  Wn^TO 

?«r^r  ^4rerf*rt  ?gr 

^rrwtto  w*m  7Twr?pr: 

^ mm  ^Ttifv- 

f^aTTST  fqgJ^q^VRTgRf  Wf. 

^^^WTT^TU^TCT  TOFT  rTr^TTft 1 9>T\T 

gft^i  a?  i <siwi jftw I 

^rt  ^f^^rm3iT3fTwr1%wf 

f^fafMr^l  TTrfj  f^sj  iTWt% 

fsRTt  bSIT  ^^TOTOZ*<sf*Tt  I 

^PRfHR^r  W*IT 

sjtttfr  fajai  fsfri  ts» 

^ir«rtwf^fvt  HTTT^lt  ^JT^fs’WPpf 


1 Omitted  in  B. 

■’  ANC  SJIiTCTSffi  i 
^fi.  omits  fft...3Ntrt  i 


* AC  •wo  i 
:;#::^;  ij!lTC  fi« 


wr«m^Tfer$<gfa4  to  tw*wrngmfa4iV. 

*|#  1%  TOTWTmf*3IT<*m- 

jugor^w  ;35^ftflTO%^ 

qsfwTTwIWT  ^rrmrcrosfafsm 
qqtwwraqH  f3r«r^  7T?fts^i  ^ ^rrart  asrfa 

mi  am  Iwaf  wTfmtfoflf  «T%f^ 
mmftfii  Hrffrr  %^T?j5rTHfv^^[?x i ^ fatffc- 
^rvtg^  fro  to  %r<r*rem- 

w^TOH%Taf?: 

^ratjp  s|to  JTP?r  afr 

^4q>K  fTO^r  i rm-  frprcm- 

m^in  w f a wtfwm  toistto  vnm  ^t 
aftem  #cT^tot  HJT?^ftfzaT?t  i 

fa^rr^t  rtfmm^; 
TO?raFr?n^HT^^^  TO^a  ^r  snar  'afwfro^ 
wf  TOTmpim  ?fa  aiaa?r  i %•  MNi^^wfisr- 
TOttf^faTOmm  ^m«mTa?5ffe4  wr*u?t  * 
?mt  TOatMM*  TO#itvfwrf^#fT  TJ*t 

f#?u  ***—  ,-;■ 


ws*rm  TO»rm  *mrm^ « 


^»4iwhr.  i u-?:$*kir::  ■ 


fri-arwTmst 


zzftsf  '^T  fan*  ! mt  fsfilT'jfW* 
cm  rr^V  ^T:^TTtrfrWt  UWT3W  rFfW  #^T- 


TTfwmfr 


^nTWTT^n^f^T^PT  71*  ifSTRi  rfR* 

tnwr  gftera  * *w  wm^r <*sfaraT*iftfrfiK^ 


wfti:  # ’Sm  f ff* 

^f^iTTwf  ftnr r ?n*T  *h*hm  t** 

ifft$?r  i n?ft  fwr  #tkt 

fw prt  # f f f *jttt  Tfo  src- 

srr^r^awr  nfh«i«iftw  Hsrwrsfk- 

1%??l  2PTT*  ^T^lf^T  f*»|?f  Sffa  I WWnPTRT^- 
^%^3ifr^nT<nT*  ^rrc^ai 


Wqrf^R  fatffl.  i 

^rwrarofhrsi  wit  *TO*g*wj  i 
**  ygwfa&T  7T*  **:  *3!^  II 


n f^fwnv^ it 


' N i * AC  •fwxfir* 

' Omitted  in  AC.  : ‘ AC  «T^<>  I 
;;  Na  6^%o  j ■'■•■' - ' 


tprgftwfirfsr!  i 


^4  hi rsr  fwnsr  Twre^HHww 


I <T^ 


^ *t  S 2 


wrara 

H V H H 


H^TT7%  gsf  HTT  HUT  # Tjf^H  ^T  I 

f^TrET  HTWHT3W 
TTTJ^t:  ^Trff^T  *¥3  WfWrftfrT  | 


^ITHFi: 


^TpfrW?  «^T  ^TWTTT  SJT^TrnTH  I 

Wf  fmwjrq  hhtwwhj  h^ttstts^h  ii 
HJEf^rnfHHHTf  WTftrl^rrTfHTfT:  | 

fnfsr  xrsR-«ff^f^i|T  f*r:^l;:  HTV^*H*pIH  || 

wfe  *w^re<n?ra  sran  nrcnjsprH  i 

xm  TJSTT^H^fT  TH5H  || 

<«&<!!  *%H  H^tt  I 

WRJH  WHrTrHTW  fH  ftsjaraf  W^pTH  || 

Tfir  fafWrTtpmJ  HJprTHSR  3i^rRT  I 

wif  vwm  %HT:  HT’g  Phw^h  ft 

2Jffirf^r!  TT<JTfH  H73T  HTqsr  fN  T$H  g HTH3RT:  | 
ffrsTT  *TT^<#  rTH  Wffm  H 


1 ANC  o^m*  : ’ A i 

* A •icrasrcTn,  N .jftwmnu  4 AC  famw*  i 

;*  AC  •afaf'Jffo  i 6 AC  ojij HTfiffo  f 


eac  «|tKHl«!'# 

mjsiTO  i 

PRfi  w$%  8 

^r  ftd^T^r  %^rfwt  3nTf?r  ^rrsi:  n 

c\ 

I 

’Snfwf^f  sftrfT^W  I 

wN  ii 

sreiwrfcr  i ft?  fsr^iTT^TffT ! qsirfawPfi 
srar?r — «tot,  ^ 

'm  ^ t ^rt  ^ ^ ^ ^rrer  1 1 t *r  *it  t 
tt  * ^t  *r  ^t  ifh  wfwRSTfasrrTR  ^srm- 

imi^  i 

3srof?tf%  5rt%: — m m % m *r  »rr  *r  *r>  wr 

^^T3  3IT^5fT»S«T3T3iT72T7?T^Tr 
^ ’fWT  xrxrr  ^ tin  ^ ^t  w wt  w *rr  tt  ?Tr 
*3TT  VVT  *T  *TT  *T  *TT  % W *T  ^T  SHOT 

^ m sfrn  #>^tt  stw%  yrererre* 

#RRV  BRSRT  | ^ ^T^tWT^:  | ffa  ^T^W  f*TCI*|  I 
II  [gTSjlwfafa:]  || 


^Tf^ftPErmr  r 


3«<r 


247. 

PfWRJ  3TRT  %3TS(  qt&rafaffPH  »j  | 

43||«Ri  4|^4Sfff^fWfT  II 
0\ 

7m • JTrEr^  ^raTW  SfT 

f'  ' c" 

WTO»HT35RTf^%  W Tr^T  # ^ \W 

f f ^ wm  ff?T  ^f«TTfWf5J  rf^  xr^T^TT- 


^3^5JTif)-m6H>IM  ?3TSTT?R  yfmij  mrg*r- 

\Jf  s O 

WIW  STHgli  rT^TfTO 

^fQ5q  f^TT^r 

r\m  j^rra  i rm  ^nsr- 

^TRWWt  WTOrt  I # 

ifHr  Iff  <rav  i # ^rfr  # f f rav 

WfT  i # %rn1%  f f f xfr?  wt^t  i # wft. 
f f f ^ ^TIT  I # f f f ^ ^T?T  1 
^ sysrlt  f f f ^ w*r  i # f f f 
# ttfw  f f f to  tfir. 

fli&N'srT^  *!WNM  <wt  wrfuf^T%3rr 

f^fw  ?mm  y,'0-  w- 

WmM%  f ^ 1 ^ fNp#S%s!w% 


..W,  ,.  ’ 

■ •tWi*:'!*  . ' ■ 

^T/yvt.  i ^ 

' St?*;  s? 


TOv  **T*T 


?!! 


• i ■ 


|'G  ««^*  i 
j'  AN 


«nwn*iTOi 


gCo 

1 '#  f f f wfT  i 

# f f f to  *iro  i # iTra- 

5RTW^rfT%  f f I TO  ?3TfT  I # 'wrT7T- 
3T-rfW3  f f f TO  ^T¥T  I /#  8|<l4^fi{% 

f f f to  *rm ! ffo  i=ptw.  ^5sr  wrsftwr- 
w[fm;fmT^rf^  wr  iNt 
zjjc?i  i nm: — ■#  jnwifnnw  *m- 

2 ■&£ i ir  vnr  it  w imerr  % 

ng  ^r?sr  % ^fafi  % ipp^  W 

% fwri  w f*  f fwww  ii:  *r»m  *^nwpm- 
3f5?  JTF  ir  ^3?tWq[  iTfT^IWre^  W ifrT  | ?¥<T:— 

2ktt  w-  Fripr^p?:  fcrff^rrr  3¥PS*tt  i 
»F8?sa  «rffsppj  f?r^PTJPTRr  g:  li 
?fn  fam  WTTSP^rWT^ 
f^Trr  I %<T?RrnjgpPTfq  rm  WS^i^ffwr- 

rrm  w j^s^ss  >rrfa- 

^Rfi«t  ff^5F?r^Tfw^ftpr^5r^'3w^:  ^wr- 

fc4.  WWW  WTfwny«r^r^:  ntfn 

W I XTSRfeffT  | 

<*\ 

wt  TWiTT?  I 

V*  ^rrtg  WTWTPi  ^wr^Tsi’T  ^ « 

I!  *nrm: 11 

AC  i A C i 

A •rffif  ^;i£;  4 C otto*  i/\ 


wrmnrta»mg«TtJi  fswwrgiftqT  ( 


248. 


WSPfi  wWTHFrr^  {V*m  | 

Wn'*l«'fr<1+riW  FT^sw:  II 

■srrif  *Hi*n  i 

<1 H aFl « l HWT'arg:  || 

TT^?Tn^fafl€t  £rT»TTW«W  ^f^rf  | 
gwrf^n?;  w^ss  uf?n  ii 
?THmt^^^wrfv!:  wpq  tjt?tt  fan*  i 
iR«rrw^w4i  g w^m  *tt3%?t  ?tct:  h 
# jy^fiNi  iwsrawr  snfafa  ***t 
ssrtfa  ^r^gw^tr^rw  f^Rw?^r  i 
tr*a  fan*  facrr*  *n?nT  ii 

Cv  x " ^ 

6*gfffa5n*wr  sgttFrsn  w^fa^r;  i 

*7n§tsfa  * fairfarE  I 

f%  *fe  fasifa^  ^JT«J  wfw'3  ^ || 

J 

^rarw^fr  *nrg%*  ^Tfrfa's  lfm'  i 
Tt^f^TTii  wfasr  5fiir«r  *nTg%*n  it 


1 AC  i AC  *fT3g 

* AC  o^ji  i ,v  AN  °w*r  i 

- AC  i ,:  A frgfirfern^.  N 

'!  wi*rr— 

17%  ¥ffar  ! Umf*m  ir^n-y^  q[i>Jt;  i 

w^Tmsrrrt  ^^T?5#'?TrrtTRft  ®CTn  !! 
rfk f%rw  TO*?  w^r  : 

8 C ^55}  } 9 C 32TSJ,  AN  I 


.~,rw«w  i **'->! 


m.i  IWT  I 

*rr*rtw  ftr%T^5  w-  ii 

'¥[#1^  «fK  '£' €Nft  i 

'"Kl  li 

?rsf  ■2TiV7<^!^  h4  vftn  <?  n 

c •’  n~1  ' s 

^rOfrT  fv-i  V ^K.  Wr^rfr^wIXT  I 
fw*  -v  f4rf'^gTl^wifq?w  H 
tp-|>r^-«-;nfT  spsr  I 

qr  K 5R3$  grx%  | 

Tf TOTf  &HST  ,%^5r|:  II 

ssrasri  si  vsrf^^r  *jfs?re  ^ ??n<*j%  i 

^*5?T  %r'isV  ^T?ITr;  II  "' 

fs^ffar  f^j^Tf^B^nr  — 

m ^irrf^t  *?teraf%airr  i 

?rvv ; T^wftTrrKT^gWT  II 

^^To^~i]5TT%  Tg$?m  3PPT«T^i«  | 

■nm  <TPTm  *r*  g ^^-RlfT^Tf^BT  II 
^^nT?«T^^T?^fiig'.fq[q>T  i 

f^'^wffRyr  ii 

AC  mir  ^t®  i 
'*  A oW«  i 
" A oflisft,  C omfM  » 
s AC  6^«f©  i 


-A.  :f:*rm  i 
•AC  f^K**®  ! 
AC  ’urifSTT  ; 


w*Twr^awrTS*n*w  t»*jippfrnta«T  i 


tjfsj-sr  g trfi^Tf^ft  w*rr*wr  I 

^zrm  %^:irm%*TfeWPIT  II 

fn  r f T ^ 7?t? Vi  4«|  «?NT^  frrTf^WT^^TT  I 

'i' 

froTO  tit  wrr*i  11 

^tit  g i 

g{r5TJ?OTPr  wT’Serrfef^^^T  fawrfa^ft  11 
^fnrs*^  TT<zr  srr^r  trraf  wp?RiH  i 
«f^ragkT:  *T^T  !l 

WTTTf^T^TWT  W<8«WPfr»WTOTi  I 
fT^THJTRir  s?r?T^jj  ^TT^TWT  gf^BTfefw  II 
fSEfTrt  ’JOTf^TH  ^THTf^rr^T^^Tt^^H  I 
=5ffw%5R  fgr%:  Tjgrt  ^ST^TFT^Tf^^H  II 

^ V 

# ^T:  <T  f%  T ©SR  TtSTT^  ^ ~fSSfH:  II 

^T’TJTfrgwnR  i 
=g  Wfsrai^t-f SITrf  || 
hti  HJT^^nn  f^n^c^frr^  i 

^FP^TSf  f^WTrfR  5TT«rR  ^gHSIIf'^r^MI  I 
rT^m^f^T^fT^WTWn^fv:  II 

tpr:  ^n^T^^fn?TTHT>Ti^i%ira:  « 


wmaTOr%lHw:  ^wwnnsnrrftffw;  I 

c;  \ ' e.  :;  , ^ . 

pr%f  to  n 

WSWTW  'fl‘v' jffM  #f"^S5  -TflTO^f  || 


*fa  i 

ftjrr^jj ■•!!'•; •'■•'  4 srwft  i 

# % &i  !JT  t?T  -?H  W^T  T*3prlOTJ  I! 
3^:aiTr'?^JTlITirf  I 


rfiif^-ff  TOT^rf  ftsa  rm  TmaFrarra 

^ ' V» 

nlsfr  urotVTOi*  *r  ^g^ftfw:Ti«FT  i 

tap*  TfM^RWT  I 


TOTsi' H%fsr<w  II 
fsr^ff ■ H ^r^tTTfT  |rT  wWMjhj  i 
to  *f ^rmn?rra  fnw  fafwj;  <^:  it 

sajferT:  l%f%rT:  II 
*P?TW3tTO*Ti%H- 


f-PRJTar  *TT?  rfrr 

fad?  H^w^nrnm:  w?r « 


1 N flT5|  I 
a AC  Hfno  i 
* AC  o^o  i 
It  AC  *vm*:c  i 


* A oj;f3R9  | 

4 A( 1 i 
ti  A omits  ©*th©  i 


nisi  ^ ctot  f#r?r 

w£  ^r^rr  ^?3T*arMit*#^f7T,  wf%- 

atfrT  ^f?T  Wf^rfrt,  f>T3frT  ^f?T 

*na  nrofa  i ^r  wriwrarr^T 

ff%^f^f?rfM,wr  i ns^rei^rFTrTT  % f*m?r 
f^na^TT  i # ^fT:  f | 

^EfTg^FT:  TJ^TT^j  §k^T  ^ ^:f%7TH  I 
fM  tTffWr^rf  II 

^^rtirf^rrr  ^ wsreRa  w^ft  i 

%5TTf  ^S^FR:  II 

ftT^  TTTrTTl^^'r^imriSFtf  fWTW  I 

ftsjt^tt  ?wnrr?i  11 
f^rruftfsrf  ^rrsE?  %:;$TTWTF*r»FR  i 
nVl4\^m  *ll%ri  li 

#^T:  f iTWm  W^ISffafo  ^WdlW^WW  I 

irpta  i 

^iWfq  *P2fT$  UTFTT^  WIWP  « 


c<w?^*tS»  l 


*vm*  i 


4 AC  SHIT*  ! 

4 C «fnw(« 


Bvrsf  *TTWWT*TTOr  . 

fNwri 

gfi  tt'^^  agjarpt  ^ ,«W|?W » 

JTfmWFf^^T^  %^*TC*ffarfa8RT 
*WTHT  II 


249. 

sftfsqvRfT  W 35?  35?  IT%^  W&m  ^KT  ^ 
rfjtrg  ?ri^?f  f if  f wv  i 

# TT^ff  <3TT3t4T  *rf¥  # TOJ  # 

ir<¥N~4  '3fcf  f I # <(*Rrrf*Rsli 
SCTifM  srf5#  f HRr  I # M^lfawt  infN^ 
^i«f  ft"  i*2 1 # . *w  . j 

i # u<fNt*r  wfw  9f  ft-  f %•  i $ 

irf?Nf  stfr  f *T#t=  i 

!1  Vi  i^WRTrT^  wfafafo  s*ror.  h 


J -wre»  i ' 1 C x#>  ^o.i 

; AC  »wt  • t -*vf? 

‘ C vt:  i 


250. 


*nft  w&nrnr  i 


fwd  HT*ft  '^m^Nrf  *t%f^f?r  ( 
fifigvwfa  m *rar8H*tt^r  n 


?5?rapTlpJT«rF  ^5f3T^5  IWTV^fr  II 


# ^rj  f i # ?«mi«hK 

f f i # *wmx  f ^ f i # ^rfwpr  f 
f i -#  'snsrsn^rrer  sNt  i # w*n^i- 

f f f — 

f fwni  (MHUlMtl  I 

Iwr^ntferT  f^^T^#?!rW  || 
f wi  wt^pHN  w^i^w  i 
^ ii 

mrw*w*H  jt^  i 

fa^W3TZTWT  || 

%^r  Mu+iigi^^wff  i 

R 3Sny^^|H<l?riW  II 


1 ACtwo  i *‘N  omits  I 

1 AC  »*nnf  * i 


«rrw  mi  ^3T?;r?iTfa  ^nf^? « 

ijnsrpronf?*?  j'mfi  h 

tt?  traftf  | 

'’’  “fpsft  VT3TWT  \ft  fiwtor  II 

3<ffaT  ^ ^gwf  ^SSRTFa^t  I 

<T^  ^ ^ft  WT%  WStMt  H 

%n  TftrTT  TWt  ^tw  W farTT  %W>  I 

%mm  WHmi  f^rnsrTT:  II 

TWf*TW*?T  ^ I 

^**t*tt  sfrwTftr  Iwrn  11 

^TTOTTT^rmfTr  src^tmHTKTfgwn  i 
\w  ^r  -yssri^w?  ii 

%f  wf  qf  rrf  # i 

# 4 f f f fp  ft'sffTT : wm*  ^XTTf^FffiT  II 
^ f # %T  ft  f^TTSrRTfa  fp^l  # 1*. 
*W  ft*.  ^ ^ f[:  iR£  **$.**:- 

ftnc:"^w^^T%  ft^rTi  # f iff  *rf  ff  $rf 

^ \2/  ^ ''*' 

tff?— 

5rrfHf?%  jjfy  fwrsrr'^Rnr  ft*al^i 
^TWff¥rT[^]g  # 3JT:  f^n;W^t?T  H 

1 ACs<grat«  i * £C  •«$&•;>'■ 

' AN  \ :.,‘:-^lQy 

| A # fwrr.  C 


f:  II 

^3rr^»?rrr^T5  ?rt  ^ hiwt  ^tt  i 
HHTOT  ^ f?rf^T^T  %7WT  ii 
ft:  ^ * f f tjj?  I 

wr'Twr  ^PT  ^ ^rr  ^firniw^  1 

€ 

ftsrcrat*a#  iftfmrotw 

,MRjinift,  iRrfe(« wiling  w^wrr^ift,  wrfe- 
wfrft,  ^^RWtsnr  ^rarWt— 

*H#tW>TFRT  | 

*TCH  I 

I TTRfHrn  ^nrTT  STtfatm:  II 

r4«R5?ti?r  wrsTT^rpt^  wmrw 

3 c s 


' AC  .gwB«  i * C °nm  i 8 A HKfasa:  i 
■ ‘ A omte  ^^-^giwRif  i ‘ Aafin*  i 


fmj’wmnrr 


w i 


fgr  mu  %srT%  ttt^w  ii  ') 

^ inrr^fr?i  wwurfw  g%  irftnzr  Mk- 

Wf  I mm,  f^TTTrr  HSfFMTR 

wfa  jTir«T5r?T‘  t^g^f^smrg  ?Nr 

VlWrf  WIAW#- 

»j5ngv  m Irrafwt- 

w ^T%rr^T3j^%  fc?TJ  tfwra  rira 
m:  ^1%  I *TrT:  ^NtTcT  TTw4  3TU- 
TflrM  <{*1  I U 5j  tb^Pri 

wf^ftprr  i <mm\  gr?r:  xrrxr- 


mmvt  ^phpfircr'TFt  wr^tt  \ rm:  # 

q«w4lT:  # ^mT- 

'ai i q i <wttsf  fafo 

^^^nMfnrvsn^  Mf'i  tff?T%<^|  rTfT:  i^uf^MI^U^- 

wrera^rrs  ^jwsrr^t  ira?H 

^^rraTSH:  *r  f $ 4 


■*.  Ail  «»*rhr 


AC.otw  i 


'V  ■'  Bt\ 


%r^mf®T  ^g^fT^rWTf^nffr  ^4trlr  ttwt  i 
n^vfK  i*fiTRFnwra  ^gR=r  wm&m  wv- 
3S#t»rot1wi  rr^rfr  # *slfasr  srsppyr  f, 
# ^WT^lT  f # f , ■#  f TT  f , # sm- 

farrr^  f *f  f , # ^t  i %,  # *tR- 

f f f — 

fa**RT  rl^KTnTT  ^gr^Tf^W^T’TR'  fw«f,  <T<RW^ 
fww  *r§H'^  «5Tairf  I 

fT^JrTT  TTfjeRZW  im  «nrfTO%- 


irfnsfi  T^f- 

^m^tr  hr%  1 ^rrn  wM  trfRpg  wwfr  ^m- 
■?pfi  f*R  ^TRwf^f^rnr^rg^  gsnx^i  ^t- 

f*RiR 


jn£  ^Tfw^^pfT^rt  33*wm  Trno^^pn«ri 

^f?T%  ^tn^WTTOR5t33W  MUfl^Tf^;- 

f*m  «ErT5R4iR?T??raifir 

'write  m ^ i ^ < 1 fawri 


w*WKi«*f  *rcfMnwwp?  wR^iij^n-  *rnw 
<tot  '^'Jki'^it  w^&^rrf^t  f^g  sni 
TWRTTwrt  i*g$pprTfHt  wnnsrrg^r 


1 AN  «ff»  1 


1 AC  »<rg  1 


8^ 


r ......gar— I — - - 

tf^TrrsT^f?WT  WT3ETT  I H?r:  TV 

tnirf  I m TpiTt  ’CR^H'HhTCT 

vm\  ^ft^wr,  wt  f^TT^wn  ffcfNi 

iftrRwt,  wit  Vf^T^nrrr  3??Nt 

TWr^T,  ^nTTTT  WT^WrTT  SPT- 

»nwt  wfk:m,  mrrr  w%- 

tlit  *ra*fl>rT,  ^iTTTT  #^TTf^raj^T  W- 
farR^T ; W ^ ^^RT^g^n:  3TWT 
TWfWStWTW  rTf^T^f  ^TWfg^TfT^: 
KWT  f^TOTT:  trT- 

fefrTT:  ^fT^T^T- 

WfwtT:  ^g^TW:  ftrlwf^I^TfTW  WRHr|  \) 

frcg  hto)  rn^Rftr&sfir^r 

*tt%i  fsRT^j  snsrftre  ot^jr 

inr^%g  i f fi f^nTJ!  mw  qtfnn  \ 
*STRT  %f  HT  % #T  # Srtfa: 
TO  ? # ^n-:  ft:  ft:  f 


SW^Tf^RHfa,  **  f ?f  ^T.-  fr  fr^l^Pt- 

fWTfg  STR^cT  | rffi:  TTg%c}  H | dJ*»l«fla.a§  ■TTag'PN 


I # W : W?%  *rr:  ff:  fsr<t%  ^TfT  ^ 

f^n  ^PT7  % f ’f  ft: 


1 A fqqpo»  i 

A “?i  T -5 , (3-  ?r  -» : o 

\C  ft..  : 

1 A o;ST$  AW?0  A »S!^o  | 


z AC>^5  «it»  i 
* AN  •«%<!  i 
‘ AC  $««  i 

8 ■C?.»^j:;  -.: 


l 


t # i wpft  if  ff  wf  iw  '# 
ff  *jfil ' ^ Y ftrarat  tR?v  ra  i 

71^5  VRint  ''WISTTH  miT^fanftS  # mr* 
>f  *&ti  wn;  ''OT?Nr»r4m<fiwfiT:  whFi  w*?- 

fFTTOI^I^l  WI^:  W^- 

?roraT  nfa^ii  tr  ifir  i ?w»iM$- 
fiwcTW^U 

HfTO  WpRWWW  I 
HTfa  W%SFTT  II 

# W^rH?TOTT^liWWf^?I  f ifrt  ifolT 
| «rf^5T^f7t  WlrT  I 

*rH^4iTggffe^t  ^isrt  iht«rw  ^ sfir 
urr%?T  i fnrT3f  f %ai  ^rr  *mrm 
^IfTtlT  lifiiNrr  #*fiTO  ftwNs  HTWT  I 

IffKFFftT  I # WWTOFTIFSTFTF  IH^WTinW- 
W*3FI  W^TOTWTO^HlTg- 
t»J  ^r  sfNssi  is?  wro  nn%  WfiT^n  i 

tTWflT?ref^3  flfw?0?- 
imrf^j  iht?u  # %ih  ui  infN  wmrr  i 
to  jnfN  ^nrr  i # ‘%ih  hthww 

r;,fPFI  I IHFt  gw 


ItllSi 


8 AN  o«TET 
s N *?tt°  i 


■qfiwW  rf^rlr  Tww;^n^r  trojTrspf  ?nww 

f nf  f$i  w f raw«Tf*»MfN 

iSreforfeyr  HfnivFr  &mi  rr^rft;  imxM  srfw 

7R  fW*R35T  rrltsrT%fT^  | ?T3pTT  ^ SRTfflF 

rmm^  ’spr  «4iniwi!  ^Nr?^^nftr  ^ 

?f^fg  f^nffifstT  r»Ri*T?%  | TUT-  # ^J-  $ 

JT%^^  | 


fvsm  fsrfii}  w?  vm'Qiwrai  ftr?r^r  *sr*nfa- 
w ?npirrfjTm?$?i  \ ^rn  «r»re?t  ^t?t 
^lt?k<3T3  ^ I rRTt  WTPT  f#(P  ^TCT^nTr 
3T^fT  | THf  W8'-  # ^ 1 * f f XR^.| 
^TPTFT  faw  | 3?f?reRtUnf  ■#- 

%W,  v4Nl#51F  f^TRtUHp 

iftfirw^tsw  snr'rcft,  irefam*5t«np 
■mxmfi,  *JTTf iraRtsnp 

-r  -r  ■— ■ i r ^ 

i 

wii  Tsifi^r  w i 


«rr^Ri  i fH  i ^t- 

gwfSRTt  ^iJT^  I 


omitB^. .mv^:; 


.„. '..r . 


»;  V :•■* j •*{'  ■:  •'  hi 

. ..  -r-  a . »*•  •••;•••  •*** 

.•  ' :-.V:  J'.m*  • .....  *r»».V5>  .*,  :M  mts&sto&.i*? 


at*. 


- 

^fcftfMfrraar  # m-  ^t= 

w ^ #^t:  WSTfW  3Wt:  V*  f*  ^3: 

*T*r*T  ’IHWRJ  <^3  # ’f  ^ ^Tf^ 
^jf*  ^^»a<|^«H,HMdfM!l!Ml,'HKIMWK'«il^' 
^ If  !p^g  ^ 

*j«5Rr  ftnw  fasra  « i Tn^ai 2 *  4*m  <*«^*T*> 
im  *?r6^nii%  wnvm  vra*g  f f f ^ 
^t  sarSfr  *ftr  ^n?u  ?n^r 
*pfT<  3!^T  3ilWRl^  fgq|r<^^?^ 
^TTl^  I 

1R3T  ^g.  ^THTWfWg  > 

\ /ajl  'Sjw  7»*r  ^m^K-  I 

N WTTHH  I 

! amftir  M Tgpng  n 


; ‘,N  .fW!  ( ^BSB»  I 

;-,*f^OT^r  V ' 

* \^‘?  ■&&•■■■  i 


2 AC  «mrfo?  i 

* AO  omit. 

* AC  add  W after  tin’s. 


wnflrowinrt 


w sfhrawsrm  i 

wet  tfwfe  wtww  i 
tojcwttstwt^  wTif^3rrf«ifiiJT?rr  wse  h 
?w  ^^aRTf'^T  ww%  ^rftigwEt  *rt*ftirm- 
w*i  *r«nw  *rr  ^fwrr%^?n^Twm  isstt- 

^55I7TTTTfv^r 

f5Twwir%%sT  ^rf^<difa- 

Tlfw^r  ^ ^ f^5T t tlTI^W  few  TlW- 


R^tl  Wl 1 ^ri^p^nf^few  fpj*n%  ww- 
s^firf^Tcrw^wf^niT  ^T  ^t  w ^stt  ^iw- 
f^rapw  sarrfwg^r  ^trf*r‘*r 

# 35*T%  f TSlfasT*!  mw  w ^WT  TJ%?EITf^ 

^^Igrf^g'^ip^wpiTfit 

I TWrfSf  *H!J% 

fe^Wwro  ?rffe! <fiw Pw4»jr^*5^i fww- 
^?wr%r  m f^irrr  gfirca 

wiwf  ^T^TqnxfiPW  TlWtl  WP  fffef- 

ij$q  ^auKfit  * tMwtti; 


C I 
AC  to*  t 
" ‘"bm* 


4 N add mMw 

'■AC.ftofr*X'l 


TOTfafa  snfa'TO  ^rrrrf 


usnreTO  *to%  ^wr  i m>  wr- 
f^fsm^n  ■ dHBrtsi^s  to*pto  # v ??gTf^rr 
tpcr  ^rnx  i 

1TT*PJ^  w^wifr  nfesi  W%  *wfa*TO- 

ijspfi  UH^^WIRiTO  JtTO^  I ?rm  W^T' 
sre‘ir^g  tfq-  fjjftr^sbui  w^frfa^faftrar 
w^m  TOwfa  ^nr^RTfro  wpm^5rnmf%- 
qpnffi  ^ fwrc  ^crrarHs^T^r  *t*rs£3T: 
wkwin"-  gRi^ilrefarfh  TOrafTOTOsrrosfcg5*T 
wftg  :«pfrTOii^  ^ssf%^rrfwpnj^fi  ^rtt- 
frorr  # to  gftfo  to  fro^S 

ATOTOfTO  JPttJI  WTOWfttWTtgqTM  iwrtft  i 
TOTJ^TTf^J  ^51  6*mi%  TOWTfaiH^  I 
TO  *j*rnr  ^fT  ^ it 

| ^TU^STTf^fTO^:  WXIW  I 
I Slfffi  SfRHTOW  II 


^TRU 

sjpRmrrTO  towJw  fafo?  ^ftnar 


!$lip.*r*t  I.  * A *m*  only. 

■ ♦ c-.iRWf  * 
^prtir*  .i  - * AC«*t°  i 


*nv<fmirar 


253. 


•Iff! 


hw  i 

*p?n?r  w^TfofoforT  n 

m »nPT»!3^rff  ^rm- 

nrwT*r  rfmmivmrwwqti  m^-mx^t- 

m fw*^  irr- 


^BT^rl  # *:  cm:  fV^rm  f 

% i $ ft:  TO  f^nTT^  fWr?T  I 3TC7T% 
ififzfH  f^TORC  T^TT^^2fW5f  WR5fT  dW*rf^%g 
^raT^m  gTfjT^-Rt^-’^nf^- 

w^^rfdf  3T  ft  %f  if  ff  f f 8tov 
rk?  sf?t  ^rTwf’n  rss?i  i q>f*frqiret  ^ w- 
wirrfterwre  # # cfa  ^N  ufafitf 

«fT  =sr:  *?re?tjfa  W W?tl  WWR^iT- 

wfa  Ihn^Trfw  *mfasrru 


1 AC  wgo  ( 

3 AN  in^c  i 
1 N repeats  **ftcniffc>  j 
V :N  ^Tt%0  I 
'AC  os**  i 


4 A adds  Rafter  thi% 
* AC  omit* 


|i'^3  add'  c?m^ 


1 Am  ..; 

;. ' 8 A o*&*t&r ; 


wjsnrfaftr-  t’ 


34£ 


qpitiwiN  i ?rrn  wgn 

VJRI  ^fTT^T^  nf^T  w- 

TO*!  r^SEWTTT^  ^ 2fX 

wnrfesrr  w^r  3#*  wrereTfagffFgffoq 

ifw^Tfspjftr  f ^rr: 

Jrf^?rf^3g?r  i 

Tf?T  f%f%r!T  WTJWT  WITtS  H^TTTW^fT  I 
Wl%  TT^fwmftr  ^pgrl^n  TRWqRrr:  h 

C si 

<m  Tjsgfafafvifasil  f^rR-R^TT^Tf^Rrar  Tft?R- 
<^ri  ^raTfafafasnfarr- 
H^TT  TRW  ^ ^W^ST*?  | 

rR  <gfffNf^fTflfati<«!j TgTg  ^ 


3T  ^T  TnflRTpRJRT  ^[*37IT- 

fwrpr  fTRTfTO^f  >ifNr  wiw  wnmt  ^ 

^WT^rnwr^r  *ra?j  <i«4^  i ?m-  w*m 

wnrn^i  ■qf^rr  *row- 

fWWiq  ^TW5I  # ^tJISJUT:  *RTV*&T  tt»T^t- 

swfir%  wr  wwm^reqT  wtei  wmfrrtiii 
wifawri  ?m  m # 
^ gfi:f?r  fSragaifer,  ^wTrsTfsT  n%sft<x  i <Tr 


‘ AN  ofticftr  i . "AC  0*rr*rirf  i 

a JST  ftd<te  wnr^mf*;  after  this. 


XI  CO 


+n*HTn*fPTT 


wrRT^Tf^RiWT  H*T  ’*f feff ']  - 

f wt;  #wfT¥iTwcr^  trefr r mt- 

Tmwftr  rrf^r?HT%T^firfw  i 

^iT^Tirrw  i 


^TTT  W«T  *?lf*RT  farWftwt  II 

wm  WST^TH  W^STTftft  I 
7T^'^5firr:  ^ WP^mi^i:  II 


II  WTpTlf^fV:  ^THTTf*  I 
I afH:  'aJT^^ra  II 


254. 

«i«:  ^ftf^suraro  i 

1PW  rTR'H*^’  *T«TtS^|i%  *JWPt  «J«U  «i'r*!l- 
’qW^Tf^ra  ^TTf^nri^  JWW  WI75STT 

^rnftfeR  i ^rf^tr  *an?9T 

qs^crari  #qrr^5  :'i$Mt- 

^ -or  ?wr  i rmftrft  fqrrt  f&m 

i iTwm 

^Rqr*TT3f5i  g?;?*:  wrors^i  w^  tprn^  i 

frmrf-  fww^.  wrhi-' 

s^'W’rw  i 


Ssfatto:  j *T3[  ?t  S7^- 

-.IWjWWWfa'rl  3fT  ^#|f  ^^ffa^l- 

Jfare  fwr  fwr^R  %r*  farofara  ^rt*  i 
<T?  TOT  ^ w?  *W?fal  -373f^  ^PST  fa*T$’  II 
^rus  faj  ^frs  fm  4*t  ^pc5^  frofa  f^m  i 
ww**  irfaw  wm  3rt  ^??fa  wtsfarftrrr  h 

si  \ 

Tjczpre;  si?  **wrfa  m^x^  fairs'  i 

7T?  S|Slf«#  fRRT  5TCJ  trf^SI  *T3W3  II 
fw  HP!f  fa  JTT  ^fa  fafaj  [^]73f  fTO  I 
«Rmfa  ’srfafar  fa*?  ' gf  jw^  *rre  ii 
tftR  ^%?r  ^g^ffas*ngt^?Rg:  ^w- 

fayi^fa^ll  I rtrf: — 

ygtri^ifa^fad  Tfifr  x^mw 

1 wt^tt  — 

wim  f«r^(fiT^  *rfarT  sftw  i 

ct*tt  <rr3r  *r  **wr  tw%*r  u 

fsrc  I *rr  f ^ ^*mfa  i 

q-facTT!  *F^T  *TW  ^ffT^  ^fTT^ftr^  II 
Tj4^  ^f^Rrftr  ?TT  f*  ^TKT  I 

wrftr  *refftr?r  nff^m  Tronr^T’f  11 

ftrarr  wr  fa*  jVrrJfa^  ^^wrr  1 

aRTfR  ^ (*jfeH§)  *rsm  11 

* AC  ar^ssne  i , * AC  fosnw  1 * C *w 

6 C S3&  1 * 0 ^t%  ; 1 A i*sr?  f 

* AO  «r*?far  l.  **  A smrftr  1 . 10  N *\*  ■ 


m-srwmRf 


irsrrfafi'tf 

ctth  f^?rr  JTrff  «t3ht  sr^mg'Tfw 

^ wrsrit  gfwf ; i ^ *rn*rR  wum 
^ 4?MM  frwfiw  f^JTl  faf^Tg  ^ i 
Tjaf  ^ gflrrfoffi  ^Nt 
tftoT  wt*rr  w*rr  $*uu 
; fis?ftogz  ^ ^fwt  irfefr 

U~nj  *fr%Ct  ^n^it  wfMt  qre«ri  wit- 
znr-  %wsrf  3<rMt  ^rmatr 
w4  Ht^sNr  ifrt  ^vj  *rfe?r  /sjht 

^T^f  *T*rar  fww4t 

Smart  wfFrajr  ^marr  i qsRWTffa^- 
fqf^%r^ra:  ^tot:  mniR  *iwftn?faf 
*r®rrfa  wrcfa,  iwt  tt^t 

ftra^TT  %riwr  i **rstf  ^Nranst 

fS^sTT  Wil  ^^mrirrT:  fWt^NT  g<0- 

*TP*rT^fi?<Tr  qnrrcr  arrf^^T  *i4m4«- 

’sarerr  i ^frofir^aforstffa  *K«Jifar 

g >TR%g— 

^gin:  i 


1 AG-.*f<3T  I * I 

8 N^ti,i  > A *r^m  ■ 

‘ -CoMjite  •tftms ...  *jftiptiv 


nrmtim  qreretg  i f%*  «fir  wx 

-#  nfm#  %wrsii  v*g!  vrg  .miwi- 

#si  w*m  ^hsro  j ^ i 

^fwi  *fa?f  i 

H?nftfeW4l«H  ^tfa^Nf  IMtfawq-  H 

wwfrtM  g gmferfiPT%wT  i 

#*TFrf  rflVKlti  STW^:  ggfifew:  I 

iftft  fa^ft  *rf?mtg  ^fwrfarcn  ii 

*jfasr  fswHnsr  1 

finafar  wt^f  ?rrw  twa  11 

<► 

||  ^Nfi  WPmt  f5*RTOSJ  FTWT  II 


^ 255. 

tUWrWWl- 

imv&mmi  $*t^i  mm  i 
fit  vdrt  sf?r  g itfrrfti  fa*rre 

m h 

*5t»ng  i^#tf  •Wtsf^renpr  t iroferag  i 
f*rafcrf*rctfs^  Urtt  giNg  6anfem:  n 
*wr«fefo  w%g  t 

jWT?ff«R?IT  f«m  ^gW^WPHm  II 

lllpf**  i 'Ntrwi 

* AC Twr®  i 


^o8 


?jfl5  VRTfa  I 

qrniT^T  gqjSHT^  * fw?*  « 

^iqk^iwat  i 

SW^T  TOTTfW^t  ^^frf  H 
^nyi^tr^rr;  f^T  q5*WT«F2Tf*q?n  i 
'■DOi^  lamrft  ii 

^fnmsrr  tw t WNt  ^gwiM)1  i 
t^pr  f^^r  ptmn  ii 
qq  wfef?r  fa^ra  i 

11  / 

q?r^q  w f^fq%qr<iHT%rWr  I 
^ttto  tot^  wm*  ?mt  q*3Tf?w%<t  11 
q^T^ITWT  «U«<WW5T  I 

3T  || 

rrr^TTH^ W<6HhK *i Hwiwrtfri:  I 
wm  W*WF&i 


Wtfm  Ifrfacl  H fa  td  fa^*l  I -5: 

f^TT^nr^  s^re;  h 
s>raqmt  tot^s  qnr  *r^?f?r  ^«r?P  1 

rTSTT  qt^t  nfqtra  : II 


| Nb  ownft^o  1 
■s  AC  ^ 1 
b AC  oTfur^n:® 

1 AC  ojrftj^  1 


* AC  omit. 

4 AC  ^ Nb  oTNT^o  ! 
6 A o*f*fh 


***?  : i 


ffTTTMW  Tfs*:  | 

^ufiawfa  wfesnrr  w 

^mfRT  * HWT  rTSrrSSi%^: 

*wkw  trriTTf^umpT  ^ aforreaq  » 

^rfriP  wftfd"  I 

^rimPd6^  ^S(*W  || 

*f**fr|:  TTTtWr^T^I  I 

^nr:  wr%  ^urrear  fWwfo  n 

"^W  ^rmTf^f:  3fT*T  HHfdl^W'S^:  I 
^njs^ftrfrT  wm  sfo  inf*Fr  11 
f^TWPnwV  TOTT^Nlf^  fww  i 
*r£wqg«fa%^  ^n’lirwiw  ii 

II  ^WTH1  I 

I $f?TfiCS  WTHTHy d <«im*JHT*!T^  II 


1 C «t*m?f:  i * A «airrafawjT»,  Nb  •maws®  i 

* AC  wfir.  i ‘ AGNB  .^tfb,  NA  .ftfn  i 

‘ AC>^»hT  t * AC  «v  i 


256. 

'ft  w&foi  ‘ft 

ft:  ws*rf*i  f-  qsnfNro 

^rfeR  i ^uffaf  f^nr  *rai 

W^i  Wrf  SPTT  ^ifafrU  iHt- 

fam  ^f?TVTfrrn-  ’SfWPTlrfHVIFTrTT  ^Sf  ^ 
IW47TT  WT^reTTr  ftngfT!  | W*P%- 

fmgwTw  wrreuwt  uvi 

sczmwwi  urrent  fT^wr^lwm’f  xrf^rwfH  i 


257. 

Tj«*fafw%5T — 

^of  fort  • 

^T^ftRT?gsi  st^pto  wngfmr  11 

^f^nrwpT  | 

^-q<i«ri  t^wrgi^  n 

WTC3«retfcr  | 

JT3lT*fi<SM^fN  ^TWFrl^^  n 


, VAtff,  0 «T  i * A M:»  Nb  ft  I 

* AC  Omit  «P3jTo  ...  cfanrox  i :-  » 


H tii 


# 'srp  f I 

*rw  i # f f vs%  ^rm  i 

ii  n 


258. 

TJ^fUitW^T  fW- 

flW#iip  ^g^fsi  ^sr^r^fcnFWtfa- 
wi%ai  ^ftnsj^arrKif  *W- 

^u«rt  SfTM^ftWR 

prsn^t^  ^tr^^iwt- 

IfffiiW-  Wlr^f  *PW  ^ST^rf — # 

i 

h ?fa  TryR^reTwr  # 


AN  omit  fim» ; A *onrt,  B 
. ANC  wnrq  i 


wnjiwrwret 


' 259. 


♦ :■;/  ~ 


w ___________ 

<Wi*HHM- 
^ror^RTii  ^farniN- 


q^Tw  Biffmifefafte'w  iraroj^r  #r  ^rerfsnr 
^fsrcjgsi  ^T*np  arrwfifawtf 

*wJPwt- 

^ttwr4Vfti4 

^n^Tf^fh  tn:HP51 * * * * 6^t  *rr*r  wmU- 1 nmw* — 
# f *3$*  *?r?T  i 


ii  a ') 


260. 

**rcffanr  i 

WHI3«U«l*lMfiSd:  q^+TR  sf?T  4taflUW 
fot^i  m-.  w ipni  jtwS 

^ra^RjnrTw  w^<ifi  8?i^rfw  wrav<*- 
wwff^?wtwRr  Tt^faRmo- 

1 ANC  oJTTO  l * AC  5<KW«  I 

3 B me  I ‘ ANB  .ftf  I 

6 ANC  o^PTwr  i 

* Only  Ab  gives  the  Namaslcara. 

1 ANC  omit  ®yts<> : Nb  •*hv>s«  i 

* ACAb  ?mr  vfa»  i 


mt  wit  'to  HTRT^T^~<n  ff%r(*M  i a;  i 

# '*F  f J&fr* 

Iwn^  ^gifltW^T  5TT^I  UPTFRT^Jt  H%Pf 

Tpf&ftofqntw  wtirr^N  n%3?i 

gritafii'i'taijSH  ( 

^T^sfT^fi  faSN  vt^c  ^T- 

^rcrgff^r  -srf*rrrr~ 
^ffaWJFT^i  sfNr*  ppm 
MfcKtiM  jnf[R«r»!^ii*ftM*  wrm- 

^PfT  ?fWT»ft^rr  ^^TRHT^iTT  ^T5T^f^RH^f 

rfS^SFrT  ^jftcPP*- 

^3f  W^ifl  Tim-  ^wwuijsrai  fafa- 
wktifa  l)  TO  wp:  WTCFT 
TOW*H*u*Mi|irri  falwre^rrfa  ^srfwpft- 
w^aw  HwsTfrP?pir?T  i fop  *rcwm  w^r- 

rw5r;  *rft^“  fagTvt0RT% 


1 C *r;  i 1 NAb  i 

8 ACNb  omit. 

4 Ab  omits.  6 ACNb  cti*  i 

6 A breaks  at  this  point  and  the  present  Sadhana 
ends  there  with  the  concluding  portion  of  w*WT*f- 
w4srnpr  omitting  the  intermediate  part  which 
comes  again  at  the  end  of  the  codex. 

7 ACNb  | 8 Ab  i 

1 ACNb  *^Rr.‘  i 10  Ab  «tsre  i 


jpr  wnwfrrsiwrt 

wgiwg  fa'sfa,  wrfir,  irfrr  * 

IT«wt,  I'ilMpr:,  Tfr:  nftlflV  I 

Nmwflw,  **nrniT*fc  smr* 

^Tpsr?T  WfR  5Trf>TOW5f?T  rTT^  fast*  I 

ii  wFwfTrai^Ttw  **nffa*ru3T  mrmi  it 


261. 

^f  sfhsrf^rcsr  i*Twra  tw 
*re*Fr  iwrg^  sstvwTt 

srstg^  gf £ wf^rtilwr^'  *f*- 
Trpgg^  ^ fawrefipt- 

»mwiw*ra  foejiflrt  ?n»nt7*R  w T*w- 

v?i  *rrrw  iprffiMrfaim i <u'4^4)fa*i 

**"  *m  v <^n=f  * vrcwt 

^RT^^pfr^  fwt  ^mm  .fwti 


' Ab  i 2 Ab  Wo  i 

4 ANb  * ?m<>  i * Ab  ww«  t 

6 N*3  «3T1o  AC  of:  ^TJJ.  | « ACNb  WTffmt 

’ B Wf?r!f^!if9t?rh5 1 s *B  *nN  i ■ 

* B i , .-'f5?*‘ 

10  AC  add  TmfwstmTfwftwi*  f5^  aftecthte: 

" AC  oW^ito  ••  i ■ - i #' ■’, ' '"  '" 1 f# 


■ ; V,."  • 

m ^FTwnrrt- 
P w*pRf  * mmi  *«s?r  ^ 

TJurwtrsr  vBdwtTfH  i vgi—  f^^rrtwrr^tf^w 
I H*P — # ^ fH^JT  f | 

ii  rfo  tn:HF5PRTV5TO  is 


262. 

*3Kf  *¥Nr  sgwwtt 

^stfspi  ftf  T*  €N:^r  smr  wi- 

wrfamwmf  tfff  ^f5u<g*isnc  ^fi^f^T- 
^fllTT^Wnpn1  wt- 

^fwrr^nre^- 

MTf^gf  -guaii+i  s^nin  i <t*  ijfwf 

1TOT  WRT  3^4^  W^TT^W  • 

*W — # f^T^W  f ^ ^ WTO 

qgm^  f ft:  wm  Iwttst  ? ^v  i 

u ^fwt^iff^niTrn^w  11 


^ AC  .Vitr.  i 
| * ANC  add  a third  jit  i 
.'l^ANC  add  a third  jynmnr 


263. 


fw^^rr 

«fc  !il<J«ti  I JTfTTTT^'R^^^ 

*nr<ifai  f^iwrefwr  i 

rf?ft  gsr  TOftyr 

'WWPrgfpEr??  ffr^r  i ^rph  spfa — # <h<tmmi- 
f SffTI 


HJTTHJT  II 


264. 

WT  ^CTSTJRTR  I 

^f^Nnfirt^r  i 
^^jfrsTFn:  i^u  fsn?i7t  jm 
^fiswrarestTfi  i 

*(^1% rHff^g^i^W^T  HUT  H 

1 AC  wpjfT^o  i 4 ANC  »TOffo  i 

8 AQ  *t  art  i 


ftM^i  ?ifRfrf^r:^7!T- 
■^miqiKi’gre  f^fr  totttt fiwwgq  hhIw^ttt- 
*<**  TWt  WT^  I *' 


^fhBHTT*mfi*ra  trf?;?pg  wqofi 

WW3  HTOJiT  || 

TPrT:  rPWUl  ^^nTTO^FfTwn^TOC  JIRW 

f%>TT^T  TORT  Ttrcrfr;- 

WJ — 

fro*^  ^trittoN 

3R'$TO  frT^i  TjVl  I 

nNrrtrsn^l^^  «iH<i^l«rtdrj^  I 
^1«J<J|  TOVT  TOT  TnTT^RTSWTVT;^  || 

TOrqmi^*T^  P^^M^ITT^T  3*n&- 
^ffW^TT^ffe^  f*PN 
ftnf  TOiiHTufaMmiftM 

^NirTTOTTH 


1 -AN  «»n*f  i 


. *'  C&wW 


JJ^T — 

rT^t^JT  | 

^fcrcrr  marrr  #3  sqwt*  11 

’%|tMK(FreTwT  rT^f  «ffa: 

#nwc^  ow  rw 

%m  ^ sww^pst:  f*<r>  mfz^i  *rrgfa: 
TJSR : ipRprat:  %^T  ff^:  trTTFTrT^: 
5rTT^5f^fTsrT  WP  WTTrWf 

Trf>ra  T4  i 

3*  *Jfj  ^frlfTHTH  I 
fWRI^fiT  twi  I 

*rr?i  T^rli  wim  i 

WRTrT  fw^r  WTRT  SfitW^IT  ^T  II 

WW  I f ^ VnZ ; Tf?T 

WfMjfol  ’TfW  W ^55J%rT  I 

sf  \» 

%^rf*r  far  Mi«pf  ffafa  *r i *r  11 

^nrifap  ip*  ?m  i 

H win*  it 


AC  <resi  s 


ACwii»rT  r 


Hsr* T*nc*nw*r  i 


mm  3t’h<  wm  W > 

*rm  w ^M^i^K'i-  ! 

*TVRft  H^*W<?F>d  JT^^g'sIFT: 

rrftw%  uran%  ?t  -#;r7j*rrg% 

^t  ?«r^»rrf^T%  fta^T  htv*J?t  i irrttt^i  w- 

i&  ’SRiT^S  WT^cf  I rT«3R¥J  f^fT 

^T^T^TT^TTf^  I # faffW  ¥ I rT?P  ^’Ttnp*- 
^T^msergiT^fr  i ^r^r  ??rtnt 

fasjafini  sTiwnwr^  wt^t  i 

# TTT3T5I  xn-TT  f tff?  I *R3  g3TT- — 

^^sFHF^r  KTrrrim 

Nj  >v 

cT3S?ft^ff  SR^T  trTWaj^^T  I ^ W-fPrjf  ^ 

«T^ft  I ^r:  ^ftfNrT^ 

tRg<XI  mt  faBTTTre^^H'ii  f^RTOrn 
W^7n  rpflva  fcRTT 

HFT^rf,  ^R«T  5Rtm%^R  H^5T%^mrf  ( # sfiTCT- 

%SJ  fff  ^ I g?T ’SR&TOfjfS'  SrDT 

ytg&ftoi  i&n  BBtwi^'wg^r  i f^rafa  nvi 

i # %*jra  mmr  ¥ i 

?m:  ^^affTT^T^  fcf5*1 * 3^  | 


1 A VTQgJo  \ 

* C •ngjTo  i 

6 AC  TOrtnrg 


sqrvrmrqrrf5 «i  ^TPrrrftra^nTWT1 1 

W^^m'iW'Si  ^fTflT^RTf^TW  II 


JVA’T 


*njs]  wr^TftnrfH  Ef^r  i 


^rwrHifN  11 

m${'^  Hmrel  i 

^TO^t^PFFW  II 

swsqrfqRifttf  ^^fsmfsrrm  \ 


Af-x  wsrgwFsr  '"[^^.1  ^TrfaRTj  11 


v^Tt^ffTSf^ragpw  sjsttor  fFrg-fn  i 
^ilfflTO  W flWlfaa  f^l?[  II 
qsfksr  want  #*  mnror  ^ispr? t i 

\j 

W itST  W W ^rfaWTaat  vry  ,| 


am  a^WFPTww  q^yfoare  f srr-i  i ^^'f-:- 
$fs  3k3<  F\gtTTF^r  IFTTT^a  f^fpr^T  | *FW 

# «e*  t|  i ^^rr  ^ %%rai  waw^4' 

adrat^ff  ««rr  ftpngj(T  i aasn  # 

R f i wt  ^ ^?raT  w#t  art? r: 

«!Tn^--5  arp5%^  ptapT]  1 ^': 

rtqagar  f apdRrgfir  §5^7  ^rfsr^T^j 


A NO  «fe.,«  * 

.AI]  the  ;>s,s  rend  37%  cpssbrir  ^fcffcfawTRTrr^r  ; but 
t!ii^  rear;,  eg  is  hero  given  after  a comparison  of 
the  verses  m tnc  Sudhanas  that  follow. 

ANO  i 


<T3^=ff  TTVjW  ! W*3(:  '#  ^5-  rra  ‘f  : ."ir 

f«r  *pw;  jitoI  awp.i  i w^.-  # 

3TOT  f asfW  I W3T  g^IW^SvxMftsS  Sn*i»J 

• ^sresrcpnr  i wm  # ^ ’v*  am^rs? 

wtb  "I  azs  i v*  TErg'sffwrw  aw  wtot~ 
wwt?wt  i ^wwnrfw  aw  c^w^sr  f N>* 
fwf  W*?%n  WWWJ^T  ! *PW  # WR- 
ww*Gte  «3pmgtnf^r  #mpiw  #n  w-  f w 
ww  i H^^wwwipm  i ^wrwn  *rffa 
fMN  ®WSWf  TifT?r  %‘Wi  SffiTP&qr  I WP*- 
warfa  aw  mwv-  w%n  t ww  # 

aagfow  spite  wro  *n?T«§fa  irfN  srorrsr  # 

f W | <Trf:  trps  ^n<t  ^P5*f  1|£IWW!I  ! 

ijwptstb 

fa&qfaw  wtot  mmr%r  ferity » w*?*:  #* 
jrt'wwtt  *nfN  w«t  i cm  ww*  ^r<\  i 
wwwnjTO  aw  mw(ww*r  ^f^re^s- 

i|t%cTT  ^TTfTI;#  ^TWT¥%^  "Sf*W%Wi- 

Wf^^TW^T  l-xWTTZi  ^rTFl^^W  I WW  # 

wsr  ^Rf  sjftMTT1 * 3*  sfc  wr-f4  m 

ffP<TO^  W¥T  I ^ra  tTOTW*T  wtfh  ! W^iwM 

aw  %ann!fafgRyf  aw  ^ « *w* 

1 AN  Tjqf  l ' A i " AC  on- A. 

4 AC  .ffn  j ; AN 

* A omits  ^wffwf7'?  ° • .oS?T*7ir  , 


war^wt-  i T<r«i- 
r mm  ^ gsw’wiF  wtmgf?  mr 
%Tfl  !?«K^  ^qW  ***''  ^^nm^kr 
•^PT  -<  « tp*  ^WTSf  f #t|^^  (^TTS^)  I 

fwr<?  *j%»r  ipnproNr  i n^squfV 
arar  ¥^r  wmsW  jtw^t 
:(*? , •> , *<  *!>♦*< 
jf?nT2r?T  wsit  f^^npn  i w&;  # *3*. 


mm  HfW3  TOT  TOT  ^ f^STR  f tR^I  7Mt 
V”^?it  Ijjsr^f  Sf^T  ■Fnro  ^&7T  wr*?r  syr 
■-™  w#tr — f ^5j  i «?qT 

3ifcreT3si  %¥%?T,  rT^iff  IRTT^T 
faironrargsT  i wm  # ^rfn?  *rmto  ftrajf- 
f w;  i ?rm  qaHjqrm  ^wr — 


wwfah  jt^tttst  fafwsjwn^  i 


m^ansr 


~mf*v  w^Tfa:  ^wr  i # wsttp6  f,  # 
^-wp?’  % # ^iT(?t  f,  # qapg<$  f , # qat- 
W'  % r#  ^3^  f,  # f I TOP 

fife  -#?*RPri  ^ft*t  H%ST^7T  ^T%srg^f  1$T, 

%i  i # ufN  fjf  I HJlpt; 

* w ^ i # to*  tjrt  i trniiie 


'.  c '*$•  I * AC  I 

*.xO.«fcnr,  ‘ AC  add  % i 

5 AO  owr%  t . >•■  '-':^M 


msiw  s %%  *fW  Tprr  w$\  wp 

JPWW  ’SSTrf— 

HTPStV  msfqPwqUft  I 
^wr  ^ wft#  (HTT)ftrfl  ^ faf«*T«J?RT»*  I! 
^rt  vr'^fa — w*n  fqrfegq; 

msfaffapr:  ^JJ?T  | KW:  # faf^ST 
WJT^  S^-MIdt  ^ TFm  f I 

^•fNiPvwi3<y  ^r^57  3#t*nrf%  i tRflpT  ^ 
WTHTSF?  Trgf^SI  fq*TjS%rT  ^?T  *P&5— 

# *n;  fas?;  fane  sffanp;: 

^WraRJlffi  ^T^T  I fwmff  2fi^pT  W 
WTf^r^R  T^f  3if^T  rK^SflX*!! 

fqT^Pd  I 

ii  ^framrwv^  u 


C fircwr  i 


266. 

w i 

P(7«  TTHT  sfifti  | 

?tj!p?  -rm*r  w ^mr^^jTCR-jTrr:  h 

in?*f  ?fT=r<?  w?%  fswnsr  wbui 

■fqRT X WF^fT  fTT^TT^f  Wf^T  SIT  TPST  W#(: — 

# f i mi  Tpf  i ^Nt^rr^fsr 

rrs&%;4  ffws  iTTrrr^RT1 1 ^-?- 

ftf^srai  m tw^tcr  ^fs^uferi  g^»>frr- 
TOn^rcr  «rw  vx  ^ntrrw,aFw«^*j^TT«i  »i — 

# ^ fwi?i  ^T^rar  tpt  f <¥2 

m wr%i,  xpn 

^tfrrfw^  *nin , ?re  '+nz  f^TTH  i fbtrf^iw 

rJ^^TTf^RT  i 

rm  |cfrn*  fwr^r  6SWt%^st 

«^<!!H5j%rT  i ^s^rqfe  ^gy  rf3s«?te*r  i 

# stfcrnm  f j rnsrr;  jwst  T=r^nf^  crfo?- 

iffcfsTrftw^r  i rr7cr^r?rrf>T- 

. v \* 

fror  ■^rn?n«r^ 

'RWT^r}  | rf^^KR^^ivjT^T 
TSfff^g;  faW4  ^SRTrsrrWlJTf^  fe^TT:  Tf^fT 

?rrsm  ^mfiri^^Tsif^PT  R^rprrt^^  ??%R 


1 AC  ♦£cTST«  ! 

5 C I 

* AC  osrpfc&o  i 


1 N of^rf^  i 
* AC  omit. 

1 AN  o*%*j  i 


■qm  I # WW  f I 

?nft  wrr^tww — 

qroH  wr  tr£  ^TW^TWfWRwr  i 

firaiqwHwnw;  11 

^ftj%  apsnpngq  7T3&R  i 

^WITOTO^  ii 

^TOgKfl^R  qT$faiq?f^R  sipwwr 

%%  ^ipt  uwfft  furore 

to  qtm  tssto- 


qwreraiqnqffif  ^%TTOfq  | 

*wpm  wswii  t%TwfqfqH  ii^w  ii 
?r  i 

?f  pwi  frafer  n 
^r*rrfiiq>i^4  cr^^r  i 
qrfWsr  waref  %q  ssrersiN  ^t?r%7[  i 

^ q%R<j  sftiTFT  #%T^*TT31Wm^  II 
?m:  aRtVTfarrfo:  qfTW^JTTO:  qwft'HU'tl 
TOtfT  I Sir^T  TOTO^ft  IWn;3<\ — 

I TO:,  # 6fTOT  f I TOT  *T*  g^TT 
ir^  7m^f  ^ff  wrt  fi^rr^r  i 
to.*,  # f i tot  qq  g^roT  qrw^t  qTpfcr: 


1 AC  wtw*  i 3 N wr.  i » ANC  «rjr£ . 

* C •«r*«  i ‘ A topt  i 


W 


■tfrnnrt  pNgsn] ' 

# flnaw  f i ^«y|55f*jfs  ?i^T 
rf^ff  IWFfr  W^w  • ^:>  ^ ™ # I 
^rerc  ^ ststT  mqqr*#i  i 

ww,  # f i t Tf^^r  itot^t  1 w*p[T  i 
W=,  # ^T  ^ ^^IVT  JTTT^  f 


^ I rTrTT  =l^sfilV  W|*l|^A|«1  | ^T*^T»5TT5rrf?Ti  ?JrdT 
crs^fM  ff^rmt  # fw*wgm^ra  %i- 
*T*m  jfh  fh  W f tR^  ^T^T  I THTfo^flFITrerf^ 
§k3TSS;#I  trP5rf:  *RTT^ ! # ^^rTT 

wi^t  ^Nir  it<?N*  f ^r:  i cm 

wyftMi  stthhf* 


riff  ^laRii^Btji^d  I 

# ^ra  sro  TTfTSRtVTf^rfTr  sRtww  ^ 

^ w?t  i mq^fci  ^it 
f^t^T  I Wm, 

# TOtl^lfaw  I 7T7T  ^lip* 

$*>Hi  fiTgr  rwr& 

^ WTO  M^Kir^dlM^TTg  *PW~ 


I & 3TTSPI  ^ ^ ^TPf 

f mt fow *p#«s i 
*w<W«  w*nr  w$  ?T*T7Tgffi  m& 

worn**- 


}■■  AC  ^o,  B *nr*  i * AC  i 

* AC  *mr.  i 


wvm  Wlk  f^5j  WT%rf  I # 

*!35PRtV  f f Hi?  trr«f  | 

rfiTI  ?'5+^|<^n  | 

satvfafs  *rwRT5T  I 

*rk^rn?  f^ffTT^TrCTW  II 

'kswr^TprTfw:  i ^mjsn^r^f  ^t 

f ra  i *nk  ^rrrr  i to  *pf 

mm%¥ng?f  ‘i&cmn  \ 

# Wf^Sf  f f f ^t:  S^^TWfWWkTO- 

W ^ I Wtffo  Sfr«fT  *&(- 

tfrlcf  ^WRT  *Kr2T^ifar  ^^PRTffT?^  I 

# fafwr  ^rr’TT^f  f wz  i ^k?r 

^f^urr  *Rfor  i <rm  %m- 

wnTjarrer  i ijshtw 

gJf^T  %^3IrT,  rm^t  W^T 

?5refT  f%f^lT^rI — # HWT^tV- 

fai  wink  f w- 1 rm:  *??rk 

^sr  7^pt  *Tfcrp#tfa^  wf^ri: 

# s5?57  XR2 1 rm:  H^RTf^W  TOWflT- 

WRfafankffl  HT^TTf^’tt  TPiTpT- 

*T  kk?Nif*rm  5krTI  f%3  ^mfW 


1 AC  omit  ift3Jt».-.^r^i  * B ^wsj 

1 AC  fTff,  N f sit  i * AC  omit. 

6 AC  »trw»  i * AC 

1 ANC  »%r*ir»  i ‘ ANCx 


]^T  F^fFfl  HT^,  fFflFFI 
F&wMiFUrt  F^fafi  % it*to  f f:‘  I 
?rt'  irag^r  fT^rt  w^mr  FTF*id  f^^fft- 
fati^dq^T  i *p«r:,  # ft  ft  Ifft  faFT  Vs 

TO,  bs^FFTSJ  affhWFT*  FFIFTFFfF  T*TO  I FF: 

TSl^F  SR%FT  I F^fw  F^F,  %T  fVrfF  I FJF 
FFSt  ^fwfaFitJ^WT:  ^IF^FFt  FSTOT  FTF^ig- 
FTF*  FIF%F  iFF^T  WPN  F^F  I FF : i£$- 
FTFlt  *IFIinnW?i:  ^Ft  W?FT  IFFTfFF: 

FIT  FFFT  TlfF  F^F  I FF:  IJFTF  *£  F*T%, 
g^T  »FWfF,  ^ffrWT%  FFVTFfFT  FFfF, 
FtFTlFTf^gi^  FF%IT^  FFFTF  F«(VT:  I 


atnttULi’ LUI  C U!  ISC  Uiait  LU  M tlLI 


FTMFlMlfilFil 

FFFF  WlFTTFlTm^Fl^lFFr  TTFFT  FFTFT 


1 ANC  «m  i * N adds  ijarh*  after  this. 
* 0 omits  ji^  TRf  i 4 B .ywifonfinc  i 

V Q *wjhit*  i 4 B .'Sftwt.  i 


‘iprs'wcwi  vto  i 


267. 


Pret^TW  mtv  I 

♦ *v  » 

IRIWJHT^R  ^8J  ^rTTFTTWfRW  || 


m HMM: 


. fl f*'  ^ 


*jwrrf?y  wif*m  tptT^%  it^t  rarf^- 

jRnjfflf  WTW  ^r^lTjSll^lfrtH^lfa:  w*m 
trpr^UMlf^  fRifTrf  | 


1-GFri  % TOI  W U Id  1**1 1 MU  I 

5nTWJ?i  51^  ^ *R:  II 


ffo  I W^r  ’SRTTW  fT^rft 

5^r<Tf^nr  *ht?mt  *R?zretf**r  # 

f 1 jfhsjiT^w  fwr^% 

f?^aid  fafw  1 ?rwr?  fwfa: — f^TT- 
giTT?H  Htfefff  SfitWPIH  farctTO  TW- 

iwPwi  f^Nrarpr 
fqnTfrim^R  itiw^wfi  ^nfa^n^:  w- 
^Ki^WtoHK^i  ^rvt  firapr  ^w- 

^ ^ srnro  srms  ^^epr 
^Nsr  ^^xriwf  # f i ^rnrrprfH 

^rar  f TJRr  | 


1 This  S&dhana  is  to  be  found  in  Ab  only.  See  folia 
40  et,  peq. 


♦irtfircmrref 


KT.-^nrsf  * i 

fn®  wri  Tf^wrwfH  fiwflfr  h 
TT^TRnr^iwrPfnH  w^?/ 

rr^rfr  wrfafr  fow  ^st- 

3SfT^  JT^j  rMfr  fr  JWT^r 

TCfiTZ^T  I # T*T  f%«Nw 
tthtr  f ^ sar%*r  ^rrmT^r  wren-foro- 

fwTrerrrn  *srtsj  ^wrr^f^Tww  ^i^ntfrnsr 
fwfi*  i ?nfr — 

nrtfN  n*wrn  i 

^FrU^^^oRTT  Tt'fiTTT^Tf  f^RTfWTR  II 
^r^rnpraTafTFri  f^rfWTwrrf^TO  i 
gfcjftwt  f^rtrT  <fNt : Mf(^:  II 
nffffsnsi^fl  TO?J  I WT  ^RiTTTf^- 

^TTlffa  TfWT3%  55R5  mrenCPT  xTTTTaR'R  fNl*! 
miiwtiH  fannir  yftfttenn;  tirnr  *prenri 
^%3  #ft  fwr:  ^TRt^T  «Plf«7TT*T 
f^mv  i wn  Tf^fa  3*rr%«T  &wm- 

TrfWTCFltN  trfvWfT  fafa'rl^fd  I Tin:  .TWT- 
#wn  fnrroi 

wtt  i rngnrfr  jfNforqn:  f *<*inr4f  *uw«re 
^itwr  toi  i ^tnr%n: — m- 
tot  1 W'  f^rarrir  iftw  ’nftjn- 
iipftsnfnfn  fansgairc  ^ n^n^nTTrofi 
n wntn:  i nn 


^aiaRt^  ftrferar  *it  ffwr 

fhro  wifafa  ^ i 

%^sr  ^trrT  i 

^fflWr  TTUJTTT  ^^T^rf'  ^l^Trl  || 

\j  x 

'*3  n„:_  -#  3W  ^ I W^HW  >1%  # 
«f?reiuufvrf?Tt?r  i rnr;  trawf^rnr  ^rr^  tt^r^t- 
**#•*  i ^Rgfs  ?f^T  Trunwf^r  mrrc$<T 
^ ****  f,  %t:  i ^reiT  w 

JJ%3T  Wir^J  fa!FF5?T  1 WW,  # 
$ , fwr  I WT  ^ ^PIT  ^TS;f*  tfpgri: 

I fftFTS*  f , 
*N|  3k3T  Sfif^lw^i  %^rT  I <&fr^f 

ircrnSr  f^SFJ^T  I f%TTTfV1%rf  W & 

WR3T  # *T3?ftTj  f , l^IJT  I ^3T  ^ gSTFJT 
TOWf  ?f^T  <*i«N*i£T  I ***,  # 

f,  <RR^  | ^T  ^ 33T3T:  rT5&?M  TO  'SHS?- 
i *fw,  x#  **  ^ ^ ^EPf  FTT* 

HRS  f Si?,  I faSSFS  f 51SH 

g?7P  ^rmtj%  sfN  WURTH  HJHl  S#^fafd 
sft  sppT  M<nfiw  wrvwftfrnrfHfs  vrr^m  1 
TtH* WFR*  F^RfTTfH:  I HFHPHFrT- 

# i^T  nd^t&i  ff’HH  iw^sTjmwrt 


MS  reads  as  ^r$HS|fai!  i 


*rrv«wrsrnrt 


W|«H  ^SUTPI^  W%  %f:  W f 


wz&m  I 


||  ^H^IHWIVR  PPTHP  II 


268. 

not  wi^rarre  i 

^fT#r  ttprt  i^rm%rfsre:  ?^rr  wT- 

f*mT*T  rr^rtr  #iiTf 
^rm  topp^c  ^wprofH  »j^i- 
^rfrorraFro  ^wrf^fir:  ?mwai  f^^n- 

PPPTf^fi  SR^T  ^STOT  PTTO  # JSTOTCTTTOr- 
^HTTO%ffafH  I fPPTO  T^%T3iK3f^- 
f SRTT  fTT^f^PT  *Ti|g<!<Slf«d  fad^US* 
l^rrr1V%rr  %t^?t  i ^ *nl  irfror 
Wpm  fcfrpTOIrHH  TOr^’  TO<#te^fWff 
TOP*  f^pr  ^myfrg  TOrft^^^rra 
^T%frf%rfTOVt  6^W?!P3:ft7T  P*TOf 
*mniM^H<  mwnwT  ftf^i- 
PTWSP#tTOfWPlT  ^|P«gfj{WUWT*  WP^t  I 
W?[  Wl#  ^mTO  ifoiUlPMfafl  ?wf t- 


1 N ®3TT«  i * BNAb  omit.  5 N «to*t»  I 

* Ab  ^ ! ‘A  wtf.  i • AC  I 


vm  fairer  fwng  rroig 

w Twt^  i ?m 
gsiw  f^TmfMsH  wmzn  gw^rcrerer  tw- 
^rr:^n%i  i ?r^g  fprs^sn^m  # s^RropraTg- 
TT^f  | rT^J  ?TP^P  F^RT^- 

\wK ^fTT  ^FfT  fef^rT^TT  I ITST 

g **sW*tt  *i<d<^i  f^jlNig^  hwt 

^TT^t^tJTRfWTT  | ^Wrf  TWHWlft 

\f  6\  ^ 

*TT*r%g  *rraife1%f*nj=^  i *?rg 
wr^f^fH  i g w far*  * f wtot- 
fiTB'MWW  I # 3#h  #t:  f^§KTT*T«T  f f WZ  tR7 
wrr,  I # OTTO*  I,  | 


* Ab  fw»  i 1 Ab  .*nro  i 

* AC  •finir«  i * A gives  the  name  of  the  author 
in  the  following  words : WfafVtf  ftrajTvr*&fa*RTO- 
mTPnfafr,  which  is  omitted  in  all  other  MSS.,  re.. 
C,  Ab,  N and  B. 


269. 


raN  trPT^FTTf^ri  wsmi  fafcRsr  v%- 

,3H>K«^gf  ^|«fiTT  rTTqfwf  ^T^TI^r%T- 
fHd^  f 3BT?lfwf^fT  HpSf^T  | dTqf^W^dlrHH* 

?nnrf^r- 

5TFn^<!ff%MTO  fw^tsrsrai 

'^rwmfarfaFw  ^fw^rfr  fa3?- 

^TOTSI^W  *2JT*IT?T,  WF^f  ^ fajihi^ 

^^njra- 


H^cTT 

f%?n^  favrrwr  i rnft  Wirt 


^ r ♦ ♦ ..  r ♦ . » 

fSRx^n^n'f  w wrarra  ^rridiK^K’Birf  w 
fWF9  # *T5qH2fT»mi«J<jil<!!  ^^WFTTWRftS^- 
f*T3rfMf?TOF[  1 rf^g 

Vmf  mT  5r^Prf  faif^rf  I g7r : * ^if  f^f 

v VI 

«t^[  ^ i Tpgnrnr: — ttwt,  # 

%»cTFR  I f tfi?  qrj  | ^h  SfTTFrW  f I 


# ^ fh  f f **7  ^rm  I 

# mprm(  f f ^ i 

WH’rtqfro  T^^sn^tns  mfa 

fwT*i  ?ninS  T^f^nr  ntwt  i ^r^ieni  ^7ft 
TsrawTfic*w«wi  ij^Rtfwfsrtw 
*wpi  ^nr^ar  ^ttt  i qw  tsvT?pj- 

HTcHT'i  ^ sremf 

fqf^rT^rTI  # ^FITm^TqsSRWTqTflT^SWf^ 
fari*rfafr%fT  I NNT  fl$TO94r 

7P*nq  ^wwrpgH^fwt  ^tWjWi  cr^  tw^tt 
<TNt4‘  trf?Tpq  q^prlWWniTpT  f^FrWrT 
HaTT#5tT%*T  fwti  fa^NT^ 

Grata  fqf^TvnrrpiT  qws^^^nrMirn 

W5T  *FT^?T  | Wrf  WM 

N^tR  f^TT  <1^r™rf  HT^5Tl%fT%?r^!5 
frm  wq^rT  i ?npr  qit  ^wnspr  tw 
Wf  »^#ffTT1Tf^m  ^T^gT- 
fasrf^rT  wrearc  ^ TWr 

^T:qn^!r  I N^*J  ^ ^n^i«in|«j- 


*■  AC.'mwr  i 

* AOnifci 


AN  i 
AC  omit  . ,wr» 


wrOTWTwnjt 


^*5  I STT^CWFT 

T?RStafnC  ^«ri  f^Jrl^rTI 
Tmwtm  ^fts% 

wfwwlaft;  fawww*  >tr- 
%tt,  urn  g *ra<^i 

>m?TT  TO  TOTT^fTOfWrTT  I TOTrT  SRTTfT 

si  C\ 

HT^g  i faswr  ^gw«r  ar  fwF?  afcr  ^sng 1 
a w fw  f , TOgTfwrrora:  i # ^ wfi 
^rrfw  TOrcren 

wK**i<raTfagn^q  vr  wfcr  to*4  <^g 
ara^g  glH  ^ *p§ra  fro  wiTh^'to 
TOrfro%  totw  to*  f f ^ ^ wfr— wri- 


*rog  i rrat  ^rnwg^rT  # #h  ft  ftadiw 
f f TO  TO%  ^K/riW  wfaf  f*  TO:  ^rm I gfl- 
fm,  ^rerlt  *;,  I *t%,  ft?  *sa,  € ^w,  j tox 
ik%,  f fro%,  ^w^ngwr^w  i to 
awiw  ifci  trowr  i 

rRTOT  w TOfir  i fro^TOtfe  g^4- 
4^rTOfTO\TOi^  TT  TOT?TOfkfTO6  dWHK- 
Wi  WqqftlEKft?! 
wot  afasi  %^tet  faro4  ^a?- 


1 AC  w$g>  i 

A AC  omit  the  second  *nz 
V AC  oot  ftrcs  i 


% AC  omit  o<rr;(#  i 
4 AN  ®*irfe*?4  t 


KHFWtfisrra’RT  i , 


wi^t  «jw^^€Tqr=rg  wnz  i^t  finrorih 
^pg?HTfi^R[faf^Rf  WT^T  wri  3f^?T  # 
3^:  ft'-  faSrTPR  \^rm  SJTfof  f*  3W  WTST  I 
mf^rT^fv:  I 

«JWWl  *!T%%  ^rt%%  ^T  f^T  ^5R?WHfH" 
fcp^J  4W%*fcK*iPgri  wnr^pvij  Hfsnzj  «!<|<w*q<r- 
TOSWTO  l?trW%  %sfar4T  qfaiJW- 

Tlfaf'll  ffa^T  ?Wpfn?1jf^lTW?aT 

%ra^gj5^mua^i  4frrepraw9$:  MtHygWft1- 

Tfnf^iRPrT  UfTcefT  3TCrT  # ft'  ft-  fWIT- 

f f ns?  ms  ^ wst  1 


w*fz  wt 

<«fwi!  fi.'^TT5TTrra%r  fa^wt 

^Wfiyuk^  xrf^Hifw^  ^OTf^mTWTsr 

UT^T  WW  f%f*R?T  W^TRT- 


wm  3T^7[  # ft-  ft'  terlT^ST  f f 
CfRT  XJve[  ?f%  SH^rT  q*i  ft?  l 

*jf^  TO  *f  Jp^fTT  TT^T  VdH^f^rl  ^*5* 


1 AC  ®*is^°  i 
* C omits  sir  $*  t*=  «ttt  i 


2 Omitted  in  AC. 
4 AC  a-ld  stV*rr  i 


W' 


fj^Tnrr^j  mwr  # ft'*  ft-  ftresmw  # 
f \nzrm  eft  vs?*  *m  9*  fi:  *f?r 


wti  ww  i 


^aafafa:  i 


WStTST^  TWSfTSPT^  *TT  «fT^K^frr% 
^:WT^:?Rr^!I  3TTHT^?^7t^ 

vrtrw  rm  w^  fan  *ra% 
HT  ’STTI^fT  faJrfa^  I *ffa  *TTC^fa  Tf^T 
^faTTfaif  rimrT,  ^5f  TO!  I Tfa 
7FS  WrranfaT  I 


ii  T^WTf^rnrfT  ptoj  ii 


271. 


WTO  WrW1 * * 4if^3T^I7^  I 

41'nwtrsrW 

f^rrrWnsR^  sfa  frcsm  far*fan 
Trwnfr  i^fasT:  T%^wf 

Twtw^^w^RH  yyR^xf  s^r^i 


1 AC  *fn.  i 

1 ' Ab  vr  i 

1 AC  i 

1 AC  •frt*,  N «3rtK.  i 


jcxu  »cig*  \ 

* AC 

'p^m.  I ..  ;:  y 


IpfiTTfl:  |( 


FT  IFZfm  WT  TPf  ^SFI^fT  <T7^[:'  t 
Wd  faVTC  fafWT  HT^TT 

^ v Cv  ^ ^ 

f^n^T  f^t^Tf^FT  wttth  gifepgitof 
^ #sf?Pif*m  ^ %rTFt  f%r  fN?  ^ ( 
i torTSf  Trf^SrT^rT  «: 


jm^^oy^TTW  |l 

\l  ' 


m€  ^fsr^rgrt 1 * * *  5 *#1wf 

W^Nra'ra^T  ?n^  t *ps  ^ ^iHkdH  i 
^5  ^PT^  *$wfa  ^ jp^IsrrHrfafv 

* 1%fo*T:  It 


ITSpf^f^prRfSJT  TTTWT  flrWIWTTlf'SPIT 


^JSPTT  ^ ^TT^fSRlTT 
W ^ l?;?Tif§ifrl^  TW^Tjai  «?ft  | 


1 ANC  aw:*  i 1 AC  »^o  i 

3 ANC  «*wt  i * AC  wc  T 

" Ab  «fi(jo  i 4 ANC* oflnj5 1 

1 AC  omit  three  lines  from  here. 

6 N .*»?.  i 9 No«pjt  i 10  Ab  .ftrfjrn.  i 

88 


srnjpra  WNi 


xragrf  JTUf^%t5rnf  MWn  =f5?  ^ pW 

^rfhrr?r  Trfprn^  wi^«ft’TW'?TT^T*5  ^ 

# prg  wmwi  ^TiK$ms  *tw2 
wwfw?r%m^^TT%  ^rptarepprem 
itwr  * UUmtoi  r^Tx  arrftsi^T  ftrrrt 
^FRTOTfwjS  ^WtfWR  #wf^? 

*4  P'^WTRp  | 


J ' 


^T’st  ^rfcr  ?m:  irosrgf^r  ^r^WTfafa- 
‘^s^sjfn;:  *r  f^m  ^sRxmf^fw 

■^£?fWJTFrTW  W[  WP&  WHW 

^IBinTRg9l«,i[W:’M,r<ifT^  WTS^T^rr:  I 
'%%  W^^Rf^TR  gfJTrj:  WNRWtTO 

wnronragir:  ti 

Ai\C  Ab  o^t^o  i 2 ANC  o*fr*¥fsrr:  i 

x*  ^ 

Ab  oipgxTOX'f^  I 

Instead  of  this  line  Ab  has — 

I 

* AC  c^“  ' 8 ANC  .tfhft.  I 

7 AN  oin^T»  i 8 ANC  *nnf^ta<>  i 


las 

# fw  # f f , I # 3ft: 

ft:  IWTT^  f f TR  tff?  ^TfT  I # 

!^i 

II  WHTHH  || 


272. 


wt  r^frr?:%  i 


^1*^ I mIs «tK [ <!1  >Tt f^l M«i y I K *lt*TT  <i^  | 


irarFwrM^rf 


5T^T  T^JTTfCHT^WrTJr  rTtflPR  5W%  || 

C\ 

1W3T  WTTOfRf^ 

irttfnrfftw  ¥ ^rf^r  I 

TW^- 

fwRf  ii 


‘^TJrHiyJId^TM  r^f T^f  | 

rwlrr  sHfMk  fat:  h 


1 ANC  omit. 
3 A otpsto  i 
S A «*TC«  I 


1 Ab  omits  ^rrfv^nro  i 
4 A vaim*T»?r»  ? 


i 

"■  .^i  ^ 

Twwtmi 

w%m  s^rgf^rf  v^vnfr  n 


?T^PT^  faf^T  fa^ld  | 


w*Tfa?pra  wit  ii 

# ^rTT5TR^|^HTWmS^  I 
^TfT  Tj^irftjfv^raTfarsr  ^sira 

WV  *%j^lO*4rHW*4  Wprfl  I 
far*  ^RTT  rTfafogrPC^S  wfsJU' 

^^TOTTO2flWTTTWf^rTf?T^  II 
rTffr  wr%^f»r:  ^ trf^Tprsrm  *ns%: 

ftTT^TT  I 

TT  VRriW- 

| M <i|  f*d  fa  H ^ ^ qrt 

!^'iwtob^  tt  ^£hh  i 


1 A ? After  this  A and  C repeat  the  conclud- 

ing portion  of  the  previous  Sadhana  from 

to  the  end,  which  is  followed  by  the  present 
S&dhana, 

* yffru,  C OTTTe  j 


* C »fd?e  | 


i ^Ftr;t%t  sr*rsr- 


^JTf^T  rT^rfFT  JTW^W^f^lT’rFr  (?) 

*w<!^rf  fWrNrf  HFT^rT  | 

rP^T  JTx^lT  <T 


^S?TP>fWTSXf%1^rT  tWR  || 
^fjRfrl  ^TSTFtT 

^ g *i|S|<y*N  fawpST 

ITFTT^fW  ft-‘THH|*Hl3W«T: 


ftnmraH^ ’^farrer  ^drarcwniPT:  i 
1w*N  wwkhi^iws  Hwrr^g  n 
# ?^?mpT<Trg\r^  ragraiqisiqiu^  i 
*f»H  w ifT^m  %Tff?mr  smfsfrag  i 

r. «\  ^ «v  *\  _ C—  «v 

MUllfli*WW*m  ?t  Nng  Ww  II 

' AC  •^T’W  I 1 A »fa<!Tri  l ! A *»ftffTsrc  I 
4 C $*  I ‘A  »%w»  i 


^rrsTwrorst 


ttq^fiwfiswwri«Nj  H 


?frRT^5? 

srwsRiT  TFzmrnr  w% 11 

fc.  * ,.fy  ,-,7v  ., 

VJTTHUJ^mH  tnT[>TR^fr  II 


?r»rfq-  ^WTtr^JTTf^m 

VRffT  ^ftrfrftrT  M #i:  || 

*ftft  $^r<r 

rf^T  tgS&C-  I 

sWsPSf* 

\ 

WHld  ** 

WT^fi  ^RJ5f  rn^JilTR  3T%rf  f^rffNT<X 

Hh<«d«  I 

# ft:  ft:  f^rfPR  f I ^ ^ I 


AC  •wma*o  i 


A sift#  t 


I 


HJS\ 

*mT5TT  wfzfo  mt 

i^t  ^wn^iH  ' ^fafa  Pd$fq  a;  i <ff q£lra 

^IFUI 

# ft'  5WTO  ft:  ^^JPT  U $%TT*  5s» 
*tsn*u«i  7T  ^rr  ^hsar  ^ *r 
f #9  f sn^rnftt  to  ^lajTjtj-  ^tM^% 
TT  ^ ft  ft  f f f*  f*  wm — 

I 

^rrf?Tf  vrfT!j?qT  ^rrVH  W5JTH 

7T*T  TTTH:  T=n^:  t 

^R’srafHlwrf  ’T^Ht^'irJ- 

irftTfafatfFP^  (?)  n 

ii  ^pZRWTfrin^r  wrtfw  i 
I 3if7Tf^r  ai JK'1 1 iti < J|  H M KM'I  fafa  II 

S4  yj  N> 


1 A irfao  i 
* AC  3S  I 


s AC  $w  i 

‘ C WO? 


*TTy*WP?TT*j 


t^srarHPJi  ipmrsrw  i 
ff?T  ^ %*T 

3»rT  H3T  rf  IHPTTfJT  0=RI:  II 
inj«I^raT  m FFR  fJtWTt  WIT  I 
3TTP?r|<3TT3\%  ^ftT  *TT  ffgm  || 

*J«TT  aJfa'PI  <W^T  ^TW 

saft  vr*r$w-  gwnyf^  cn^fr  ffaroi  ^ i 
TJ5TT  gfr^r  f*HMl'  if^  TTfPirWPaTIWTfH*  TOfTTrT 
fim+iti  f5rfaslV3H<!Hi**ri  ii 

% TOT  *4  1 

3T*Trqwi  pfpft  ^ H^r:  II 
'•«*j  h ?y<i!  f«K  ^ Kpir«  fi  <fi  i ■< w ^gjTrr  | 
fT^rfWT^’  mun  •TTftrT  II 

# ^isifrraix^^i^r^^ts^  i 

V»wf^I^ftnCPfT#si  f^^TST^FT^WT  I 

rf^r  fffcnr  upFi  *rr*rt  11 

# ^TTJT^TS^T  I 

fTf^r^ri  <T^RT 

%TW5i  felWJWTO  I 


ifafanSI  WR[Zfi  || 


N «rf*»  i 


' A ®«i<r  i 


C ®f*ftrci  i 


sftaqjrrfrwnnm  i 


ft:^rcwrfwwT<?rT*r  shut  mi  s$t  i 


rr^ar  irf^tr^  falw 
'm&  w ??mf  Jiiff  i 
H?fi&WtHT7[  farT^T  folHt 
f^nft#rfH^  JWftCT 

<3  H-HMIrTl 

HTHTff  Hi 
^JT^rrfw  Hi  wmim  Hinsraait 


*t#Nh  Htfarr  h^hth  n 
<i  ‘^wrfiraTf^ 

^iTHtrfwn  1 d i i^yjT 

TT^ir  TTWni  HH  WHH^ 

a^Nt  ^fafT  ‘wwi  II 
(4  H5fi*TSJ  ff TITW^t 

^tJRTW^W  HTT  HUSW  I 
3iTHTfS  HT  H7T#  HHSfW? 

HtfM  H5RTH  || 
fg  WFTH  W!l  HfTfaHT$ 

HHHT^FCrt  I 

*THTfa  Hr  jptfffnfv 

h^ht?t  ii1 


AC  ?R[  nita«  i * AC  n«r»  i 

AB  m«  i 4 AC  w*  i 

AC  •fimro*  i 6 AC  «■!•  i 

Identical  Slokas  also  occur  in  supra  162-3. 


iTTWSTraW  gwt  ^^srsnwfa  k 
THf  ^^Tdl^Kr-H'  5§T  Ff^ra^rt:  I 
17%S3  f^rfv^  *f*TRT  WlfilldtltW 
^TITWffWTW:  I 

jiitwir^wrJm  fyai^Hfqfi'faitt't  11 


rs  _ E . *S  ^ - - k4 

Nir^r^raN^n  ii 

gincrftnn;:  tt^Nw^  ii 

A g «S  1 W \3>  W 

& w i i m rawii  i m ^f  *r 

itot  s * f ^snaf^s  i w.  j i ft:  wm 
4 f gtnf^%  ?ut^  i ^ w %t  *rr 

trf  <ff  ?f?r  ^ i *rmf?r  I M f | ssifvr: 
■^q^RWTPJ  tWH^X  I <WT  *Jp*  I **T: 

'#^n^r  u^5T  ^nw^RJT^renpr  «n*(T  *m- 

# jfltaqpmqftww  i 4 i ch^i re*,  # ^tot- 
*T<wr?iw^HT^'r<W'WrwH  i 

"mt  ppr  ^imr^rpr 

l^nwFnjfw^T^:  i 


sulfa  wtcpr  ii 

JjfH  fTBTT  ^FRTOl  Jpi  ^ ^WT^rf  ^TT 

vrcfar  # f ^t  ^it  wTwfa  i j*t*- 

^n^ui  ^TFT- 

^r  # *w?rt- 
TO^WHWHn?  cfS^PiTUrfaftrjfTR 
TOF?rf$fa%*g  ^ rranrti^rren  ^TWT^fTt  f5R 
inpi%t  ^ «^?raT*m^rpj«^wT^T?iwits^  i 

*4  fisTTwrfopr  i 

^T5T  WT^fw  ^rPTWKf^:  || 
^RfT^TR  WTTg 
^xfTT?  WRR  ^TJTl^pr  II 
^TfT^l  ^?TRr„p#^  I 
RSfmWT^^'RTJ?  % II 

WT^r  ^TTTifNr  y^r#w  i 
WHR'sp  fsrifa  <||pr3?  ^rrits^  ^ n 
WrfHrT  ^fTXRfpfs^'T  ^il?!  I 

*nrts^  % u 

JBjT  ■ *\  *v 

iprawTO'jit  wfm  ^rms^rj  ^ h 


AC  <>W  I 


WTr^T  ^T*?rT 

tf*PiPm  7?%^  || 

w ??:MN  rmt  *qpr  w^rr  i 

ircrstf  ^tfTrr  ^t»TTfW  fas^TT  II 

C,  ^ ''- 

TfrT  T^fT«Wf?IrT  71  ST^W  7f?T  I 

*TO  ^WrTf  '#5Pf  XTT  || 


*T*ft  WT'ff^T^  I 

tw  fawra  ^wf^rrrf^cra 

w?  "mi  ?i«ui  ^r?n?  *T5*pt  trz^rrw 

wff^ns  af  jrp;r€fcfi?rrr  ^r*^7r^bjfa7T  ^rfrr- 

wrresiTCrnc  ^igwr- 

^33Tt%  *<t%  wr»35tETO^f^FT  *nrw 

i tttp  «H«ng^r  tt  i twzt- 
^t  f^q?fKrfr 

^Setffisj  >TS5f^fi  I # fjf . fagicn«T*T  f f TR7 
TO  ^T^T  ff?T  W7S  3f%7T  I ^ 


AN  f*i»i  i 


275. 

,r  ^ ., , T.  -Tv  ,-, r-„,  I . .,-^v 

’sit^t  ^THJTr^raf^:  r%.  - 

^Rirf^tna  fwpR  rr^rf?; 

faRTT  f^rei  fgnTTf^ra^r^^r^ 

^Tfefw  twh  *urifi|  fsp?- 
W^c,,r^  w$t  ^Rfrrt  Rprarr  # ^ttt- 
wr^T^^MT^rnw^TWH  i rre^FriT  ^^Nnr5^^- 
R*jg%prft;  fwr  rirtif-r^iH  fm- 

TTfaftPT  f^JTRllTT  f^T^-ffw^tfe?fTT^rrg(T?rfr- 
u^anj^jT  i wi  tt5!  Rfp*rer  wrfr  fafwzt- 
^ToRpi  R3n^3TT^%fT  '^JpT  fe*f5f  *{t*TWW 

3TIT3P  fT^RT’sj 

w%  ^HWTT  wlr  f T^^RPR%T- 

trfr  fj^nrlwR  vrnro?r  i rr?ft  w»wfi  ^ 
fsJHT'TtTWrT  f^nrrfaf&rr  5?fa^U3 
g*1WFT  R%^%7T  I 
^ app?  vtsIt*®  *mwrh?ri!j  grwt?r  RTrqnrf^- 
ftrftnj^RT  i fifa^gj^wr  wpr%g,  # ft: 
fWTpPT  f f ¥{  ^ ^T¥T  ?rf?T  ^7T  I 

wittr  ii 


A omits. 


4 N »TTt  i 


! AO  o^rw.  i 


iraWtawlg  fl^JT  i 

rM  *0T  mfam  OTPWiPr  II 
^TTr  H WR^:  l^RnTOT 

WFTRfr  S?;fiRR*RrfH'?I%  I 

■■ t'  ^*v 

WRIT!  ^WTT^W^Tr  ^SR 


-mm 


C ^ r>  4 

^RTRw^f m=  WPTST  WUT 


k^Rf?(f7R^p^^(Rr 


Rf^f  ttfRisr  W?1 

^U^TFRTSJ  ’Tft’WRl  I 

1 B .Jiftnhrj  1 ANC  »<*) iM  * B .*«.  1 
‘ A 1 5 B omits  six  linen  a*e.  6 AC  «OTf»  l 


fapr  *nfN 

^n“  ^rtwTf^rrsfN^T^  11 
STT%  ^ g rl^rHlUaj^ 

©i  'hJ  n 


^wn^T^rfT^^T^rfTT^f^r^g  11 


II 


^ ■ - - .*> ♦ 

^RTt  ^^?J^:?kT^TTO¥(T 


^TfWTTTT^f^tWWTtt^g  II 
wpf  f¥%5Rr  wm^qffemrs- 

^Tfaf  3»fa Wlfarrftm | 

rHf  || 

?7ST  sfiHTfT  BTfWR^gr  qfri 

vj 

?k3T  ipr;  H^ranj^R^r  ^hr  i 

*n«rr^jstff*T^  wm  fw^r 

fw$i  wrfq%nr»wgPT  11 


4 ANC  .f*%.  | 
4 B .fw*  i 


1 A*ran 

* AC  B l 


?i7^T 

Mtferc  *rf^  WFffTOiygTH  i 

^TTf5  fronts  wmrfr- 

^f  wrfr:  n 

rTTR  V&SRJW;  # ft-*  FR  f f TR? 

mz  i 


(:  ft 


^ttst  wifi  wfanro  ^rr 
fwfa  <Wn^TP*4«^rti: 
^ g Mftjgy^r: 

^UM^Vs*  *rwfrr^:  I 

TJ5tntl^f«TJ5El  •TT^JTg  II 
W*\  ^ TtaT  gTTTTS^  1TPT- 
PWISWI^*!  ^SrSRT 

>jfrwtw  %4 

vgfmi  tttwtot  wf$  ii 


‘ Ab  «?r»»io,  B >m<  i 
3 Ab  | 


* ANC  *m  I 
4 Ab  «wpf 


#«nq*nfY«Ti**rn  i 


^kjTT’^TTfT  T^^tcT 


-*V  C.  * 

htt^nh  ^grw*w  i 


1 

frfrrer  ^Txr^fr  sufm 


WT3  f ^nrsp^^fH 

ITRfTT%f^^:H^6HFt  || 


I 


^ . , . -||  , --  - , ^ , ,. 

T5rernpTBj^?*rr3ffa^- 

W^Fr'  ^r^^T  f ftt 

^ H^m?r?TWFT  it 


TftrJT^y  facn?*Hfa: 


WprW  | 


Ufp^T  TpT^r?|^<)  f%^$T- 

^ . k 

^rt:^rr^»i  m i w 

. **N  ^ ^ - 

WPrim  I^PlrT4^vntH- 


^VTg^fi  WTO  IF’lwri^rTFT  f 


Ab  *rf*T^  ( 2 Ab  osf  | 

ANAb  tjst  i 4 A ^ *r»r©  i 6 E )?m:  i 
Ab  i 1 B ef^T?*^  »■ 


70 


mite 

rTf%T*T  ^T^twT^t- 

wi  ^pr^r  i 

T^  I'f^fhW  ^ rf^T  II 


f*t)R»T«  fMwapTRm  I 
rTr^rJ  ‘fa'*]  fi^fa- 

WmW  T^fa^R!  || 

*mRr  idwro  "fMfa  #m- 
3R?fa  TT5TRT  ^%§t  H%ajr  I 
^R!frr  <TFT  qf<4||«|  ^ 

wirf  *nmrfr  it 

^ rT^fFR33RR! 

^ ^ ’%IfR^  I 

-.3  ♦ _ -,,-r.  .,ril. 

^TRT  H«tim<W  ^ 5ETR2T- 


wf 


^ ^%Tfegif!'l*RT  ^ 

TTft^r  ^Tfa  ^ ^HpSTg^  I 


1 Ab  »i^»  i 4 ANCB  »HT^e  I 3 A ®ftraftw»  i 
* C o^ii  i ‘ Ab  fspiwt*  i ‘ Ab  fa*hr«  i 
1 Ab  i * Ab  ®«*qfri.  i • AN  •nnnfinqi  "n  i 


erw  h fftiw 


^nuTfwsj  ^ 

^ f^  ^T^fwmvTiriPT  || 


wn^WTfa  wi  ^n»m  i 

^ ^KTWwrr<^4- 

f \i  \j 

^T?T  ^ ^ftastrn^wf:  II 

iriwfto 


TTiTTT:  THTO-R  | 
f??TWrf  ^ *TffmfT- 

MyJMM  *fPT^rf<T  II 
^ wz\  uimut;:  *t  Tp#t 
H5 m WO*  ttN^M  faw  I 
%?3T  TOT^TTf^^  rm*fpTT<T 
twSTW  %rat  f%^  II 


tpgi  JT2JT  ^#TTfr:#tT:  i 


H ^fliHf!  ii 


Ab  *5»,  B *■>  i 
s B SST®  i 
‘ Ab  wafTo  i 


1 N fwrfwfgiSTe  t 
‘ Ab  «rt^  i 
' AC  •«wt»i®,  Ab  •*Nme« 


rTTW^t-  ^TT 

wwff  *mfor  tr^rlww^raaT 
?fT  ^rjwrfa:  ^T^sg  jraro  ^ trni^TTf^ii 
fafol  I Tl'^^fSfft  *WT^3TTf^3<!F  *W1^jfl- 
wVJfai  tioe^4M<|c*y  TWT^r 

^ft^rpnt  ufirt  fwt 

SfT  ?T?%frff%rR  ftnrct  ^pfRfFfiTT^tWT^f 

^iai«HW<i!H  wf?fr  f!?gf<?5T%rr 

?Wpr^TT(iTT^  f%fW%rT(W  fogi 
NOW?  M«£^l<*!!  ^ ^T^iTT^r^^T  ^ ^5R~ 

%TfT#xn-^nwfr^T3ff- 

*fw»  ^t%  wt^tcto- 


TJtfWTfa  gifarT, 


TWTTTT^T  f*OTRt  W^l 

# w f TSJ^T^f  ftlflW- 
§p*si  tr^i  t^pttt 

^ftfWJWFT  'fljqsq  Wf^rSf  ^ WG  *T$7T  # ft= 
ft  fW?J  f f TR7  ^ Wm  I 


1 ACBa  •ffTtflprcftmtn*  i * Ab  jn»  i 
' ANC^ratf»r»i  * Ab  *Nta  I 


HfVt  I 

w^r'HTfsR  ftt  OTr^rrwT^teff  t 
cff^T  wr5^  ?ira  f^n?i7r  <rw  w-f*w  II 
?P(Ttf%  W^^sfNnflifrb  I 

rTsnprrfaSnrg  nTprSpr  11 

Sf^T  rT^f  'xrmTf^^JTTTf^W  I 

f?iw  wfcsn^sR  T&m:  w 

»?f^W^TTTRj  H 

T^iT^i  ^ || 

J ‘J  ^ 

WTfiTr5Wrg«iRj  ^ faTTsf^^facW  i 

esnrsr^f^i  h 

f^ff  ^TSBTT^1 ■H^MI  fisig  II 

^ *3T9Tf  V 


This  Sadhana  is  twice  given  in  the  MSS..  A,  N and  0. 
Ab  »nw  ■ftr  i 8 Ab  trwjsq  Hftseft  fa»C  i 

AC  *i%j[  l 6 Ab  eras  | 

ANCB  i 1 Ab  ®Mh:  i 

Bai  i * B «TTW  i 10  ANCB  sraffao  i 


f^rfsri^ipnt  H’wref  Tpsrf^rr  i 

fafiftfwm^ « 

i^fHiPmN  *PW  ftr«lf?r  JTfwirnR  i 
eh^H^-crm  *nt  ^TrwHwfir^fTrT  11 
JTipr^SrrVre  f^rg  svfefrrfrr^  I 

iN  * wt  ftr*  jr^tr  wrfa  \ 

\ \ 

^Rtrfn^tiR  ^g:^n«T  faftarTHR  II 
ff?T  *rrq*W — # ft:  ft:  ftWfRR  f f Hi?s 
TO  ^TRT  I 


*WFrTTOTPR  *WIHfJ  II 


280. 


asm  grnprft^Tf^Rt-yrm:  w<**- 


^ ppM  Iwri 


**J5q  Tr^'SRTf^  6f^ZIT?T  I rTTTT  WT* 

HRT?fRt  frft  ^rt ri  i wfiirfa- 

**%p?irr  fwm  rfaort^m  ^sar^jftr  ^ttrtt 
W4VC  ^ 1 fOT  ^FTirjR  f^TWT- 

1RTCRTR 


1 Ab  .9ltfH^=  i 1 Ab  .«?*  i 8 ANB  t 

4 Ab  and  B give  the  Namask&ra.  b Ab  wm  i 


f ,W  % V Vt 

ffwi r^%iAr^PiU4^w m<  sjf^nsy^nw^ 

wr5JTrr  i 7m^^wrf>T«i^nf 

41'<nj4«^W  TOTTf^rr^fW  wft^<  fqy^ffT- 
w^^rai  3&1  m1  «graifagrvt 

<k  <k, 

wrf^wfrrfN  -ff?wnR  ^Oufiftfitfifor- ' 
wwqwwji^  mmi i *r  T^mrwnt- 

ffcrcm  w<3 

ginr  ^75  ^ *trt  TTr?nfi<TT^i?nOT  ^nr^rnn^r 
sipr^jj,  tot^f  g*rrfa  T^r^rf^rrftr  g^*n 
^ xr^Twrt  grm#?  Vpst  forf^ssi  TOj^f 
mwm *N?  fgyMW^’w  *re- 

4 ^sreromr  fis^i fuK^4^t%1 * 39T- 
f%Wf^^W^!THT5T^fg  2RW  ST%  fwrgf 

H3*fa*J3T:  Ptidllft«4JM!lfl<?|i- 

W*npu3*g<jarr  i rr^?  farfa  to  to- 
TOTf’TFPFgrP  ^-^-ipTORT: 


1 ANCAb  ? ? * <n 

* ANC  c/nit  •*>■  «■  • 

‘ Ab  'ffhiH’fa  i 
’ snii 


s ANCAb  =*s$nft:  i 

* Ab  i 

* NCB  BTWltl 

* Ab  .tflit. ) 


WV’HTTWPrt 


*15 

i if  1 fa fN  'fm- 

g wm  WTJ  <T3TRf  # ft:  ft:  ft*- 

7IT5T5T  f -f  ^ tR?  wnn  i rnft  fa?pmf?rert  i 

II  ?fH  JRTprRiHT^TW  || 


281. 

Wfr  rTR?T  *TWT  TWRiTT- 

faorgj  fw^f  rr^rft;  fMhrc 

f^r?9  |^T?jft?T5rf%snfK 

gccnf^fvt:  *w5q 

Sr*r  ^S5Jrft  vrm?r,  '#  ^rTrep^^WTWT- 
*RtSf*  I W^i^T  T^iFfiTTW  f^TT 

rwf?;^  ^ fwnfafaH  fwrwr  i 

r«h^»  at  Tra  trftTP?  ftw- 

^RR  ’SIToRTf  Hryift^ferrf 

fapi  fl^RTCI  ^FRR^W  ?I^f^RT6trra  ^f^- 
wn*r^  ftnpft^ww  i tf*rt  wwfi 
wfi?  ^HT?5%  f ^RTifwT 

* C *raw?3  I 1 BtT  instead  of  1^*51 

* Aw®*  i ‘A  •*$!  * B *iV»»  I 


wftww  I 


fasTfr 

^%rr  | TTTT^Tfef^f^c^ih  ^ firff^g:- 
ww  wrro?r  i # ^tt:  fasrprreRX  f i 

ii  fasrR^*rre*m  « 

" 282. 

WF'^TIfTC  I 

# ft:,  2FRTS  ft=,  3WR  ff , f%TT3  W, 

f^TPTR  rf,  ^IT,  ?T,  3T*f%  *T,  '*T*sM*l 

f , f,  tRZ,  ^pTTTt  TO,  %rffff% 

%r,  wf,  ft  ft  f f %“  i*  *srm  i 

i *m  frrsm  trt  *4  *wtt%  i 

ii  [ ^fwwJrsf:  ] ii 


1 NCfiri 
8 ANC  %h.  i 
* B WTTT  t 


71 


! B «n*iii  i 
4 B«nni 
* N tireii 


WrSpfTWTWTTTt 


283. 


( TfhT^T^TfW 

ftrowfeifi  f^N  Rg*jsr  gres^a- 

imxplrf^  anwR*#i- 

*rr»raraK*redv?:  gfPTOBR^ifHi*f  - 
faronaw  v&i  wm  i ) i?sr$r  ^ gfs 
^gT  ri«S*^l  ^r^R^ot!<«nfcr%  ^crr^rr^i  ifNr^i 
rF?ft  WTVWrSC. — # W Wm  I 

ii  11 


284. 

sffft  i 

l?wi  **rcum&w* 

^ w^fr^r  ^jRSrf  spwr  wrw^  i^Wf 
^RT^TTVT  ^T^f^WWT^lf  ’fTf^t- 
^HiqrHwi*n?{  i ^f^- 
JiH<ij prj?  ^rr^rrf^%3 
%fWR  >*g)  q,  7TOT  ’TOlW- 


1 C wr<>  i * B efar%  i 

1 This  S&dhana  is  given  twice  in  B. 

‘ ANCwfw.  i 6 ANC  .f*f*$.  i ‘ N •*§»  i 


3T*wraTipr*[  i 


l»T?F5HTJ^ft^7-^<ft^m  ^fwfW^NT:  | wg- 
^JTTT  g W^ffrlT  qfarcrm  ^WTT^?[ 
*reircg  3W«»^g  vi  igiT^T  Q 

*T5*R3T: — # 5HW^5T%^T5  I # HTfaj- 

*f?R  W?T  I # I # V*T3T*t 

^TWT  I # I # %fsrarfa% 

i # ^rm  i # g%^T?r 

i # *=rm  i JtMwr: — 

# WITT  I # ^3Tpai  I 

# Tfrrt  wrr  i # g^rnt  ^twt  i # 

W?T  I # ^TWT  | # gHT^  ^rm  i # 

^ w*t  i # Tnc^ft  ^fTWT  i ^ wnmt  ^iwf 
f^paj  ^r  Mf?(  M^Wft  ^ftw- 

TT5li  ^Tf?T  I JUrR^fT  ‘3T5W^  ^WT 

i qg*nvi 

^rf^fteferTr  fefftm  hto  sw^r  *r|:  rIt- 
^fWTf^i  **iftsisrn:TV3ra  i ^rft  Jrsnfslkfa 
^Tfo  I 

||  jfr\  ^W^FTTVcW  || 


' B »,n’s«[fsfi«  i 
3 C ■*%»  i 
* B o«RT*Rh 


' AC  o 35^10  1 
* B ofcraY  1 
8 NC  »?f3Rfo  1 


TTE^RflTCiTT  ^^nTt  iftrlW 

tTfWPT—  rTW,  H5T  ^T  ^T^T'  ?THT  1*THT 
T^+iHI  %%  I ^TTfrf:  i%IT 

Kwrl^t  rRjzrr  ™ 5%n%  inira  ^vttt- 
55%%??  *W#Tfa%T?fa%5tfrf 
ITO  HT^?T  1/  ^*TPRT%  WT^V.  TJ^rsif  %% 
JTT%W5  %%  TJWH? 

i?%?TT?Tt  tw  "Jffwr  tw  ^r%^?f?r- 
^Pl^^Tcf#%5  T£&  TfH  ^%RTT%r? 

TWi^  — Jp4  trer- 

faftf^T  ^%nTW  ^TKW  TSitRfT?" 

^CRTTq^rlSJHIri  5R*T- 

%*rpt  W%HWTT^  TO?  tr^%  %Sr?%?T  Jtcr-.. 
TO  ?ft%T«r^nTTTOT%PT  I %H 

^re?i%?f%TiTT«j%Trrr  TsurcroTwr  srftotot 
WT*R%T:  I ^?R  vpT^T^T^Tfr 

^%nr^T%%^r  ^TnrrT 

^'l^t  i 5?^t  *jnro*pfr  tm- 

Jiw^  i f??Tt  *nf*p^  w?%  ?wi  ^as 


1 B ^tq»i^i°  i 
• BN  «n&  i 


1 ANC  wfw®  i 
* C •wrt\aYi 


fsroiK»[»wwnr»rw  i 


spswtt  fcftr- 
xn^%  scf?r  ^*m*rra:  i 
^hi^  # wfy  w'  *i  qrctet:  tt 

whuj  ^T  ^rsafap^ji? 

W>  ^STTIP^H  | # WTST  ! # 

vs/+  «/  -\  C ♦ ^ 

3«T  ^ | rfarr  *TTTO>T?t 

Trommf  ^wirt  ^^rrlwsi 

^^FPTT^f  fafg^rsfaift 

%f%?TTf^5ft  I ¥cf^T?TSTT*r  W 3«73T 


KlfT^sfl^RTf^^^T^rT  rTJHTt 

^ftf^T  ^*rr- 

f^TWW,  wf^TT^5  f=PTwfrT  i # *4  rn  W 


\nifa  i ^ finofo 


rT^T  ^<^i§^TT?rWT<TrpT  WI73T  5|W5Wf7Wt 

^ ^ A "sC  ^ 


l E I*  tl  I E E 1 K E LUI*  Lu 


m \ n "nM 

wnr  wr^rf  i 
fa«m  ftreifH  i 

% 

>,V^  ” » 1 X 1 —■■  * M «1  < \ " 

WTrf  IflTTTVTT^  rrro^Tt  SRlt 

II 

fwrifJiMIvRfl  II 

1 ANC  » i 

1 ANC  onv  * i 

‘ ANC  gg  i 

‘ AN?,  Cgi 

‘ NCB  fafaf  o i 

5 B STOW®  1 

*rrsrwi*u*iT 


286. 

fop? 

ws}pi  ^rtTwwrrgff^T  mgwT- 

^nrppnt  Jra*raT*T  *ft%5T  ^TKqpgfWrmmSflp- 
rwtrr^Twprr^rf  ^nTrsj^^lcn  i 
faWTSn^rRrF^T  WR^TTM  rrf^fa  TOWIT 
WTr^T  ?Tf^^!TTfvi^W  ^g^WgtfniErr^qi 
TTFT^frT  I # ^T%fH  ?W  I 

||  ’3RT^rRTSfT^  W*«WTW7  II 


287.' 


Tjs^favpfiT  #M  1s<?tw  g<fN 

4t<m  ^^ITsRTnf  7t%?T 

fNf^ra  iffaw  f^JW  ^!fW 

^t3PJT*fi  TR*%?T  ^(^JT^FSPTf^Nt  WJ3- 
tR^JT  TOf^TFTRT- 

TT^r^TT^fim  w^r- 
^^TffTTfT  VfT^%?T  I ^q%jfa  irf^Pff  STI^SH- 


^TrUH’  fw^TT  | rfTTT  JJ^T  I 

s*ri^i  gf?  «f^T  ^^mw^jjifhnHbwr  ffft 


ANC  o^sf%jr  i 
ANCAb  safari  i 


2 Ab  fapf 


i # 

^TT^T^rrem^rT^^i^^  I WPT 
H?rf  W%\  3r^r7f  | rTrr  firffihlTW^trfTnfo- 
<frf?T  5T  -aro^f:  I 

II  ^rf^m  aiHTHH  II 


. 288. 

^fwif^rr^T  ffe  fspsij?^  %fw^K- 

fa=*j  ?r fw  fwrlfa  w*m 

rffa%TWT% 

ftsr^j  fhrarw  ?T£ftfffa?;%^tw’i?rTO  ?n^T 

f^oq^l^Hvii  ffapNnpi 

? I fl«RT  ^t%l<<JW<*ITVf 

TSW^N<'*^=M  ,fiw«  I H TfWFJTFf 
# gw^T5f%^TJi  WIT  ?fa  TFG  sftfffin 
gfS  fir^T  IJ^IT 

^TRI  I JTFTT^  ¥Rf7t7T  UTT^T 

^TRf,  # W^f%55. 

vN  Sr  1 

11  11 


ANC  ®f*«m  «t  1 


* AO  tpr^f*  1 


sru'miwiwt 


1« 


289. 


jpem  rnw5^  ^ 

fwT^f  <1 

tt^t  ^re^nr^T^TT  rFFra  ^Nrr^r^r  «rg- 

vmt  viw^wr  wtwrr- 

^TrTi  'TOrfMfhrfam^ WI.  »THT 


3*JHT  ^ TOWt  ^^fPrTT  ^ — ^TTTfa: 

qftlrTT  ?T^T|ft  rim  W\W%  W^icHFT  H«*- 

tWTFTRfTT^rfq  wf^nFnwFT 

Trrrf^F?ir  wf^n^wnft  *TOS- 
^$r  fafc«tWlrt_  I 


^nw^rra  ^pTCTfafwH 
?;(^j53jTTntr^rwr5!  mwt  i ) hr<j<<*r 
t$&w\  sfNrclr  ^fwm\  f^ftr 

'wif,  xif^TW  TtTO 

iftcnro  ^rr#z*rf  f^ftr 

faflw^ffar,  %wsrt  ifN^‘  frftwifari, 

^trR^,  %UJ|«ai  iftrl^s?,  %% 
^srfMftWTTOJ  %rjj  Wl- 

warr  «m«?|<n:  | tJ^TX  VI^WnH*!^ 


1 Ab  i 


AC  "ar^  i 


sWSTmvsTW  I 


TT^T- 

?rt  %faRnn%ftrifV  ySg^ff,  ^sfa 


*?r*rewp  i 


+i«wjg*;i  fairer 


i # ftrerof  ^ 3% 

% *rpft  ?T^  ^TF?%  W?T  ^TT^%  %f?T  I ?jf» 
*TTf<SW^5  TO*W  fTOT  ^f- 

farf:  ?jT«Tl*rrt  rfpff  *Pfft  W 

%fWT#  TIo^#5  ^s^R: 

W^TTW:  ^TW,  V?  #5:  I ^N?TTTFT5Srrw — 

# *jfV"  W wr^  W *n  freest 

f^flTrr  1 w^^rmj^T  1 ^Tfacsit^ 


# *#  wws  «€*  *n 

vj  \*  ^ S> 

TFT«itjN?fr3%  1 ■#  5r»jr5r5f%^PT  ^TT%f?T  wH-t^i 
m-H3TT  | rnfetf  JTT%H?:  JTWJTRTT 

^Tlrr^pii  N»r*i«|i|f  T^W^TT  g*Nfr 

W'rrif  Hfipnai  %fw€fr  w?  M^- 

fT»3t%:  rT5^Sr3;WKg  ^W^- 


51%^:  | 

*rfa 

^nffT  fw^jm  1 ^f^t^rnrt  vraf?% 


1 C 1  1  2 * * ANCAb  »w^  t 

1 AC  %fwWtfw^  I 

4 B and  Ab  sometimes  write  for  1 

* AC  * 1 5 * B ^ 1 

1 AC  y 1 8 B ^f,  NC  wf;  A omits. 

* AC  **e  1 


72 


*rsr*i*rwnri 


^snj^TT  ^rrrUrr  i # ^ 
w ^piTf^  ^rrf^r  i ^rfari  gf?r 

f^T^HTcWT^f  wr?gr  ^w^rffffrar  fwrifa^i- 
f?pspH  VW,<<=Ha?T^n'3TTWTt;  gfa^J  W ! 
rraTrTt  m^?T,  W?T  ^FTTjft  rTT^rT  | 
afifUfq-  ffT?Trf  f%lt  Wgfa  I 

si 

ii  ^3twwtv^  *mrnu  ii 


290. 

^TTfTO^  ^WT  Wrft  ^ 

wr^T  ^rfa^F^r  tn^wrig^wH 

TTTrTEJ^f  ^ TTrPrff  WtfTW  Wi 

f%f^rt%rT  I 

I VKnPW^^si:  I 

#!fi:  ^f^wft^fwnrerraT- 

impi  wt*st  rfi^#?  ws.  wi 

wi  ww  nfai  r<riuj|<y  «rf^Tt% 

WiTTPC^rf  1%^rT3^55lig1%W^  ^3T*R 


I 'snw^WlM^:  1 

f^t  ^fr^t  ^T?Tt  Tmm  ^r  ^ i 


1%rr:  iftwr  i 

’cZfPT  II 

<twt<trt  fM  *t  4\  fw  if  f i 
?=fr  ^fenrxTTfmrg  I 

UlT^T  rTHTPIfTTST  TT^WTR  fWFT^rT  •• 
IWf  WSrTHrT  WT^T  ^H4)Wr^JrT  | 
TT^r  ■5H5T  WTT  ^I^tfnc  5JrTR[  II 

II  [3TW5R2I  ^^T^fafa:]  II 


291 . 


# ^f: 


?f?T  ^TWTU 

IpfiTTTlT  Ti'^TT^Tf  rT^T^i  VS«iiM- 

■^TFTf%irr^  ^BTWRf  wwfe 

Hf<NUj«rf  ^ff^T§^f?5  ^i**!!l«l<J!  falPTij- 

%ai  ^nr?fT^TT  tstfwr- 

g^ife»r  ^^»TFrrwi'WfTTrf  Tsrrf^^- 

^rsK^^r^hn:  Twr^w^rw^r  ^f^i- 

fgrri^pf^nrrTT^P4!  * I < *ffa^  ^Uri^i  ^IJT* 
T^ir^^gfST^fT  ^r^l^l- 
fi^ffp^pT  3^4  w*w  ^fgRi^  #nnT*r- 

im4  ^r^fi  wror  sfarr 


1 N «»,  AC  wr»  i 
3 A o^nwt^m  i 
‘ A irmw®  i 


4 AN  s|»  i 

* B «=(ii  i 

* C ofjrersrtr»R  i 


fT^rr  kpstt  ^RTfi^rt 

5Ritt  **f»nrwt  *Nnr  toott  ?mr  ?rf w 

TOT  ?m:  # ^TTTRnT  TPtSRTPFT- 

WPRUiW  I 5T^r  ^WT  I # ssT 

^ WWT,  I # 

*rm  i wrwj  gror^  w 

^n%r?  i ^ Tstrtot  -ii 

WW  KIWI  | *nW^T  VR(ftfr(  I 


V,  292. 

mi  farTCfrP  ?m:  I 

^rT^T  ^txrrf^ 

M TOT  II 

*T<^T  <T  5PW*5T  «TT^T  flcKfPHI  ^ *5TC[  I 
f^w^tf  W^rfN;  ^ <WT¥?r  TCfi?H  II 

vj  v 

# 'TO^TU  WRT  * ^-f^d^synS 
^TTTTf^TOpfNrTTO  TfaWWRT  *<PJT 


P 


«rncfftg^  gjjWrrpr^ 


• i 


1 AC  wnn  i 


SI  v 


^irwrn  i 

^ ftrwt^%s?  WfS'd^ft  *r*r*TTWini  ^ II 
^KT^trTrR  »T^F?iTTrot  ^ ^ Tjfteti 

^TsfiEUff^fo  ^rTWTrf  UWT  f%t  f^  I 

Tsiisrqp'f  fM^i  ^Tf#f  mitt  w%*r  [t]  11 

^?mt  ^^rTWf^f  T^fr^IT 

\5q  ^ %T^rfvt:  i 

<ds$?hTfH5nferH  i^TrwniF'^rpsf^ri 

^t*ttittv(  'tt^rjM  ^T(?)Tr^pr  ^fi  tjwt  n 
# 5^T  imwfa  TT5#7!T 
d<5l*UI  g^TT<t  dT^T  W Sir^T  *pt  ^ 
g^RFrfT  ^TfT  I JF^ir  mittx- 


ww  ^ mmjh idM  ^rti  ^rr^  i 

^wr  <TT^T  rWrdH  d«77^4  II 

^ ©V 

^T  Wn’ddtdT^fdTdWddT  di'^l  Hwifdtt: 

iTTcrar  ^d«dfa*r  m u*4Wij 

* w^^^rgwt  ^rfa  n § s*rr 

ffrf^^r  f^fnfn^:  injtr^  ’f’Tfri-  dfartiV^  ii 


II  dJTTH'ft  || 


1 AC  snmrarr*  i 8 A i 
* AC  efcftr  i 
1 AN  ® vpmr°  i 


• ANC  i 

* AC  insnPTTi  i 
‘ AC  *TO«:  I 


sjcrctsfa  w 11 

w^t  MTWm:  trf^rr^  frffa 


f%*TT*T*rf^ci 

# Tfumw-  farnjPTO 

WmU 

*T«3JT*Tf  3if?W%  ^ 


f^r^TrT  ^>4H^^+4^f%^rsn<X 


*TPrT 


1 C .*«  i 
3 AC  fsnrrfmo  i 
s AC  »fiw:»  i 


2 AC  tpho  i 
* AC  i 


w%?  wf?frr  -3Riwr^xr%^  i 
^farfartT^sriW 

^TW^RFH^l  II 


f3»T>fN  ViWR  fWHTSJI 
|afn^  w^rzFrwijm  i 
Tft%  iT?TO  sranrfar 
uwi  rT^fwfjWPT  II 
HW^^Tft^TTT  ^TT 

’rofcrarfam  g 

V?  'J 

^Nnr^j  ^fawapfifoimw  II 


^nsTfsi  w%  trfi  wT^  3i  ^ 
^T^TSfTT  f?(^wrf^Tllf¥f:  I 
*I«7Tq%7i  TT%rf  33%33 
^Tf^TT?l'lfHf':TslW3!J  || 

3nj  sfi?ri!T  fsr^m  W^qiSWR: 

* HI  | «f  ^ff*l  tTSS^  | 


1 AC  »f?m»  i 

* AC  osITTra  | * AC  oWT'fli  i 


AC  f*THf°  i 
AN  o^ff.  i 


<TTWFn*TT*rf 


^n^rTT  || 

v$  fwRrrfq-  ^ p?i 

^*11^  fl«n^  «R:  ?TH?i:  | 

^ HWTfrhft  T[  || 

# gwrR  ^sttit,  ^re^rai:  i # 

^rrr,  *vpw  i # ^tit  i 

V#  ' 


Jl 


*wth*  ii 


x 294. 
awt  sfWtnr  I 

<J«H<^ ^7TFT#rT  f^VTTSEr  # ^r:‘  ff?T 
Wri  trf^T  ’WT^t  T^n^nTOT^  fafasrTOTT  I 
siwipfiTT^  rpi m t^ftRw 

WT  fa  -y|4f,(<  fwf^rET  drH'fcHMlR'nfa 
*rcw  snfa  vn^rT  ^nr  r?*w^  .*ifw4[ 
fau^  ‘^ot  «?Rf  *+^K<  SffT- 

WMHik**  * i mh$0?i  *fcu!^‘m  <a«i  i ^famuiwis- 


' AN  ^ i 2 N «w?if  i 

* These  Mantras  are  given  only  in  N.  ' • 

* AC  an!,  N «i  i ‘ ANC  vmffo*.  i 


?RT»iTn!f  afaaf  ^TafaSJTf^a*- 

^fs^f  afa%a  T^iTfm^TTpjf  triWTfa- 

afaar  vira^a  rw?aaa  -^fepr^ret 

TSUJffevaa  ^Rr^TftSHTWT^?W  I SSPPrfa 
^l%<!PTT<fr  #'^TT  •SJ^^VTii  WWvS  W 


W?a?faa  ^TW-rT  wit  asl^at  W^fTT  maTTTaT 
aianrwaTfaaiTar  wtt  afa^ral  afant  ssrerrai 


sil^H  T'ftpna  a^TT  ^ 7TW  ^TWTaJTT  'a 
a<«*Tfa — ifa  HTaaTsPT  i 


aar  a wraai  fiarr  araia  ^fNwat  aaa  i 
frai  afa  a aarrat  arfr^N^w1 *  n 


aaia  i # sa  anaT  Tsfaa 

TT^T^pJW  nlwffw*  a w 3RT 
# ifaflfa  gaaaft  aa^T  aaa  a^wanra’- 


farara  aarara  araai  aarra  i wTaraa^a- 
Iroi  aw:  i aara  aratarrar^a: — 


aaaiara  faff  TiwaT  aaart  aia  aua:  i 
faaaaarei  'aanaf  alfaaTai  aatfafa  u 


ii  a^w^rHmHTaaTafataafa^TTtaiai^: 

aata:  II 


1 B Tango  i 5 B oTrstfo  i 3 C # i 

4 ANC  nftra  only.  k B *rfwrr  i 

73 


flivnwTstm 


295. 

•in:  i 

farR'g  H IfffsTfTTTTt  ^h^'^PjffraWR^S  X(TV{V  I 
fa  brj  T7r mi?  i 

^r?wrfe  sura  gnf  fMtgf*f?i  H^frng  h 

?rq  wm  ?fRg  wt  *psrtwr- 

3fa*T  r^lfafa^^^Tfafafa^H  fajSjfa  nfrT^T- 

xfaW^snw^rg  fargwit  ^^rrr  ^ 

W’SfaffHfi  rT35T  rT^  f^TT  HUT  *?N 

TTfTVT  i^H?trf 

rHofasr  ^'-'  *rgfa:  ^TfH^T^TTO- 

^TTOIfep^fasiSn  *Rf  rT^T^SRtarT- 

^ ©S 

f^RTT^  "^r- 

JfWrT®^1  WrTR3Tf?Tyfi  HIW[  I rfat  f W^T«Tf 
f-m^:  Ttfiftr^T  # ffa  W^HTTWq^p 
faf.;  5f=TrHfTsf  3T?^gffT^^^T^^^rRR 

:S[fafa  gTrf  «'CRTfafa  fWT^f  Tfaflfa:  tntfT- 
^TTtTTif  TfTrre’ijsrrr  ^ f*sr- 


A o^^-frr,  i \ 
ACNb  « <i  \ ?-rj  h . ; 

A «frVfa  : 

AO  , 

Nb  ^pnfa  i 


2 AC  o^TO  I 
4 A *rajfe,  Ab  trft>  i 
6 C cTO;fto  i 
8 Nb  efsni  i 
ACNb  o»ns^°  i 


10 


VPI^JrT  IP*  Trim  I H^aiMirTf  Wfzf?T 
^Tf^fatt|*jWlrHPT  WPfi  li^ttjhtTT- 

tifti  w*i  famrei  ^sttrfir  %TnvR7Pff^?T  v%- 

g$f? 

^T%5T  ^TTrr^j  ^T%5TT^iTJrWffi 

O' 

*TJT  W#T5T  ffc 

^PTT^TTfwJ^gfS  T(5TWT^- 

TiT^^rprsTf^f 

girTCfffaw'  fwl^- 

%T!  rTWT«f- 


^NiT^nrT^^  ^PBPSnPW- 

H?FRI§»<mT  £«U 

TftrTa^- 

trr^TSrR)!;^ 

wff:  TrfTrf  #IT?Cftrf  KRT^foWHIf  «JT^T  «f*U2*J*P 

^fsrnrqrm^rf k Tfe^nr^ft 
^-mr^rT^m:  Trftrngg  # 

3rtW^%^Tg  *?T*T  T^TTfnr  TftrTlf^T  ^cT- 
TfW^T^T  WT  I 

rT^  5TWT^r%Tf*T»T?TSTTTH%  #^mfeTfrjTfa- 
jpmn^rfVragfw  ^RfVf^T  wsfcrnro 


1 AC  *rs(fo 
3 Omitted  in  AC. 

* C »sn f,  A *zvi  i 


* ACNb  <ati;*!»  i 
4 AC  ^asfirfwif?  i 


f¥fr%rn^T^T:  u%srcm% 
IfWT  | ?fT«TTT(srrfH 


-]  ifrqtfct  i 

wgrgfa*?*  srmT^fa  f^r1%rrwf>T  g?7ft  <wr?ft 
mm??  *J3T  ^ I rT^5 

&-7  nfb  «T*Tf  «RTt  HTftWSPf 

w?r*raiNrra%  # wffo  wfsi 

zww^Tmm  m i wsnxr*m%  g ^ttpt- 
*n£  fsFirxftjrrHW^f  H^zfipT  f^5rr 
wnil  #3nrx%fw  *TO!rraT^?R  # *rai  si 
rr5^wuiJTriTTfa^T^fasT5qsi%  ‘way^rgi' 

wufw  WOT  # %TT*fT»fcg  5ERiTW  *TFT- 
^fspnrp3%  wwt  ’srwrw  i Tnrnrfa1  i&&wr*i- 
OT?WTffT  iftrTTfa  fhwfsjHilfa  UIFITrT  | 
TTST^r^W^TH^fT  SfrefT  # 3«sJ|f<!!  T[?PfRf?; 

^r%fa  ^irerrr^fwp^rr  i ?t^  wrfx^T 
W*f  ^TTTpr  3f«r 

wf^m^i mirfwfm  5rrrtcH$  ffw^?nf^:- 
nm  ^TTfri  ^rm  wf^saTfwprsn'ej  mto: 
tffrWRT  ^T%frT 

^ w^npT  ^wn  *mt  x«t- 


1 AC  i 5 Ab  eSR^w  i 

8 A oTr^rr*  i * Nb  **Wo  l 

‘ Nb  wi-  i 8 Nb  osjtto  i 

1 A reads  ^^irr^br  after  this. 


Wpm  ^n<t  I rf^ 

*jf?i  JTftnvrpT  tt  fWnx  i H^j^Tfan* 
vnrsTrrt  # ^^frfrr  t fa*?  qnlw^t 

nrr^T^TOrr^it  ^Tr^iro  tj^htsit  ’STOfaw 
stt  ^ f^rt  fwrspffa  qffaT  «f?fa 
r*i0j|4j  TTKf^g  xf  ^rlfaTiirq^  ^afiSrw 

C\  ^ 

JTfrWt  ^n%T  | m ^(Wpffa^  W? (FT  *IWBfa 

v C\ 

^T^TTTgx^  faHT*T  *P?-^Tfa^JSTT*T$f^JTr^SP  I 
<t^t  g ^ fa*T5?%rj  vRWJfT  afairWr  f?  faarrre- 
fam  | 

4 v 


lim!ILif:^ir^tj|g1XCil5t«EKljEli;feIL:k^LUI2& 


?WTTRT 


2%. 

sriw^ffalwf^Tw  i 

t|r|W?T^»T  HrTrf  5T%^r: 

[trrerf  W^rT  || 

1 AC  0%*H°  I ! Nb  f%t*T5fj,  Ai>  IAMB'S  | 

* AC  *f«TTO  i 1 AC  fw.fwpra’t  •«  i 

‘ ACNb  afa  i 

« The  MSS  give  a most  corrupt  rendering  of  this 
line  in  the  words — wnrei  •nn^fcmld  i 


JRTH  rTT^W^t  W$T  # 

^WFrajWP  q4qqfr  ^WPT^ltS^fwgiT  <^d  I TpP 
trb^t  qqTgq?  *rpfrqtf  f^n7fr  i w?r  f qqnR- 
ufrwrrf?pg^  ^RrrnrfT7Tiff  q^W!^  qwtqfr 
S^r+iqqifrw  ^rTWTfH:  TTRT^fT  f^  qffqq- 

:TO  ^aq  HWtWTT^fxfrf  qRTrRqiTpqT 

^WSfT  ?r?n?iTPT  swm  W^l  Tpt- 
qfew  Tftr rr^tqf<  ^Nsr  fqwTsf 
rp^rf?;  *trrt  f^nrirmfr  ^rafrrg  ?t  ^ 
qRH  r^l^RR  ^HH^nq  I # W ^T%fq  I 

qqqqfTt:  ^%qriRTt: 
q^qrqrn  ^Tqqnfwqp  i 
q^TRl^refftHTfe 
<mr%  q^T  wmu  htwh  h 

ii  RRTTRq  i 

I ?ifq:  l^TOSTtq  H 


AC  o^r^o  i 


Wfrfo  f m < ‘irWrU^O^- 

mKwtftmjrt  JT^^^Ctr^w  Tjt- 

^5W|vr  ^Twr^rnrovt  ^ft 

^t^J3TTf%f^rT^TVnrs!  f^*»iqfl  W^SgFFT- 
^53PTSEifiN  ^'^fr^TTfifn'Srf  HT^’WTfWt- 
TfflZ  Kffrfa*refa*wm  WJTTfrfrl^sfl^^l- 
^fjTTra^'lfirCgRTiR^j  ’TWT^^T  W^TT* 
WTftrrr  ^risrrTm^r^  *nsre5*src^n<wFT 
fWR;  rl^^f^rrf^TTTf^^f^T^T?i1B7raT- 
wkm  rT^5 

J \i 

—T-*  rr  „~N  , r,  . ♦ ,?v  — ^ - 

ireTXWPfrRJT  rTOTT^^rT^  WPfpf^- 
trirwrri  ww  wstsrft  w ^t% 

gf^^r  ?sr^^m^TTgifrf  giif  f^w%*  i - 

?nfT  htto[  iffafaFwra^nsrFTci  f^fasT- 
f^^gXRTT?T  rTTTiTrT  1^  WFRFT- 

vi  " ./ 

tr^iiirT5%N  i ^t  fsf  *i  f fsjiFrr- 
ftfoTFT  J!3#  TTTf^T  ^T  tR5* 

’SfTSJTWT  I fRRJra: — | 

II  ^HHWVSW  II 


1 AC  ^nra»  i 
5 N =W*  i 


* C i 

* AC  «^>jre>fl°  i 


298. 

Wt:  | 

*rTO*TgTO  g rTHtWHlW:  II 
^T^fcTtrt^N  fireMf  ^ ironsw  i 
waTarr  wsnwrpjTf  11 

^ f%  TT^T^rnft  i 

TTifnrw^  rT^rr  w m^r  ^tpt  wow:  n 
Wjftr  W%T  g*T  W I 

II  II 


299. 

^nrnf^?nftri faj^ru^  i w *rfifeicm  i 
g -^f^^3ft7TO^?rrf^:  *r?  n 
TTirrarg^sfi  ^ rnsMt  wwit^t  i 
^ g?7TT  WR3T  3T*W^f  fR?  WSfH  II 

II  Tfa  ^W^T^Wtr^ti:  || 


1 AC  ar*  • i 
4 AC  ^ w.  i 


1 AC  ^nmj  i 
* N »?wwi 

s* 


300. 


frf  ^i^prm  i 

3P*jm  qjfiforgravifesMj  ii 

^<l<S'«IWicn?TT  <^T[»!t*T]WTT*T3W  I 

m*i  *f*iT  gwr  in 

^rn*T®rc  w htt  5ft  ffw  T«msfa  w- 1 

nu1^  ii 

«<$rf  ‘w^rr^Tf^  ^f^T'nr^T  i 
Tvi^ffi  fefafsretaft  f?rwN  g w&Ri  w 


qr*fTTreTTJg7rfor  w^i<*i^rR  *?%f  **1w  11 
I -#  TTWT^TW^  5TTH  ^TTtHiTf^r  USftjjft*- 
^PJT«i  =1 1 1+1*1  I <i*\  <!IH  TTWr  I q WtiMr%l««til^lT^T 

*tf^  t4  prfw  wrfa  fji  Twwv**Tfv$ 

•TTH^K  ^ ^ ^Tf^  ^if*  HTT  HTT  T«Iir  TO 
to  vt  ^ ^ Ttr^r  tp*  f^%ro  itr?* 

w vy  y^ 

Iff  ^ 


1 Repeated  in  MSS  A,  0 and  NB. 

* Nb  I 3 C oafpjqiT  | 

4 ACNb  mg  i b MSS  mim  fin>  i 

6 AC  ®*rci,  Nb  ®*raf  i 1 AC  •mtmfkSA*  r 


74 


*fnj*T*TTstT*Tr 


^ ^ SW  Ml  fl  w $1  I lf%:  I 

Wt  fsnjrrMfiT  Sk5TT 

wMrfH  §kit  *rni 

wifa  rf^mr  i 
’sraiT  faHTfa*  i fa  mir^Nt  *tn*Hii4i3*  wf- 
53  ^refw:  #*TT:  Ml  ^TTVBrei  •TTTT 

f^WTcf , rnM  fTT^Mr  , 5TtUT  I 

IT5T*%f^T  Ml  *pM  I 

^PT  W|«i*i|f«iftT?i!^l% — §f?3T 

wmnf;:  TTwpq  ^wei  Mr*  ^rc 

^T#:  ^TTfT*T%T  *i<3T 
W3  ^rfMvr:  *T^  *TFft  ITT^ft  *lMt 
i^PrMftfw  HWTfasftfMMMw 
ITU  Mr 

iM  fwrr  M «nfaqH4ia3«T<  MnrfTTrg 

f^c?f  cfifaTStM  stffT  | 


ii  Hinrrwnrfm 


MSS  »^r;®4 


301. 


cwfrfaw^  ^hTTRnWfTT^ 

asim  fN^sr  ifiw- 

^ptfawrR^  *pm wr^pre^r- 
fN  wjvTgwfiTR  fawre 

HWTT^Trarf  f rT^pj  Wf*'-,  # f f HiZ 

^TWT  1 %WireTfraKI  *HT  ?w\ 

* C\  N 

^%<T  I 


WTOTSTPr  W*z  «lf^RT  II 


*5l*m  TT^ff — rRPTT,  # HWT^T^T^  STPPTfa- 
^RTlr%  I ^?tPTf?PPf>T%TPf  TffHrcJTOTfiC^ 
ufrTWt  WTfr  rT^T  S*  ^ *3  ^ WTf?  *3Tfw  HT?;  HIT 

ffT  f?f  ??  ??  T?  XR 

HR*I  f f TO  TOJ  rr^pnjcr^P[: — fTTO%H 

WTuifffhaffT  w*n  htt  to^hujhj  ftftnnwwi 
f^flR^ra  rTTWT , w HTHT  * fTrWT- 
*ret  w^tTT  i ^pt — 


1 AC  oimifTPr  t 
8 AC  a«lf^<>  l 


2 AC  omit. 

4 ACNb  o*HU  i 


wranwiwrot 


irft  fifadl  {<SR2fofa'  W'  I 

faRffT*  WTrRTfa  *fa*T  <TOT  i 

farts  fafafa4N  fawfa  g ii  . 
?srrfa  fasfaw  s^rfsfa  i 


302. 


wTi^rarq-  i 

. swtots  ??^t  

qprrersgg  m3 

srfaffassifaR  wrsssi  -sfam  ^rit  ^ttrj- 
^rn^ff^;  fiwroRrt  sTVHSK^ftr  i 
STPTfacRf:  | m^'l  ^JfcTT  m3  S%T 


-V  * . * . ' 

SSilsioiRl  ^W\  SRSgS  ^TRl  I HMigai- 

JRT  S wm,  # H^T%rTf%W^T  T#fa 
S^ERfaafafa  S^TJF 


1 ACNb  1 * AC  fg^ftrr  l 

* MSS  *mryo  I 4 MSS  •vftr  i 

5 AC  **  *wj  i 

0 This  Sadhana  is  repeated  after  this  in  A and  C. 


? ra  i ftwf  ^nm  i 3k3t  ^ 

w^rf  | TJSR^  I # H^FfTTW  W5* 

33R5  ^flTT  I «nF%5fi  3TCRT  | # W*T 

WT  ^ ^T^T  I f?W  *T%7T  | # 

f^r  i^t  wm  wt  HWffe  ^ff^war 

^fr%irr  w i # fm 

H ^ 3iT^  fPS  ST:  I Tsratfasft- 

3k3T  ?TfTWrn#  HTV%rT  | 

II  HWT^TWT^JT 


303. 


^rfNT^r- 

\ 

%T^3T:  I 


'4  {TT% 

^sw^Nw  wr  ^IrrTt  w^nr^Eft  7m: 
f aa^  ^frwcHiw  1 

^7TT 


Trf^mi  §rf^7T:  11 

Trfft 


1 AC  oeffTOo  | 


*rrepi?TFmf 


JRZT^T  || 

vTrrrr 


5T  ^ II 

fwro  trf?[irtsr  ^Fnjsnit^  f^r  wsr 

wrai^f^r^  •nffcRcs's^wq'WM 

?W  $ P^f-rf  <f (maT t TSR?lftfwt 
rTT^f:  ^€NfT^ff?T  W^T^TfST^R 


flFRT  PMfklri  ftRJrmfWT:  RURl  wf^T  ^ 

fsrar  *jfa  ^t  i 

^Tf^T  ^q^T»i7W  I 

^ v 

q^Mfa^wfrcfa  HfTqrr^na  qfcm  11 

rma  tr5|:  i # wwfnrarR  wra^«m*i 
‘^^ISTOT^TftmT^WriirTTq  i q%T- 

jqf^r^T%T  ?q  jrf?mt  *RTfa  ?t^t  stf  t&- 

wtoW  ^gqwm^  <3  ^ wff  wfa  wtt 


1 AC  omit  two  lines  from  here. 

* A *TOHi°  i 5 AC  ««rf»n  wm»  r 

* ANC  *rro»  i 


JTTTsrnwpjwTn  i 


fcr^^w 

^ fc%ilR  *TTT?T  f f f tjf^  tffj  ^T^ref- 
?J^?Ri?Txmfqwr^l-5JTT^qfw  qsf  *W  1%f$  f'« 
^T^ri  T^f  f*  I i 
ani1^  fsnjrFR  rf^fii  fr^ar  wrfsR 
^fwf^r^TfiT^rN^zfwff^i  stfewt  *p:  i 
inwrfiT?Ri^  ^ ?ttwt 

*T**rei  vfif^ffr  ?ir^prf*  ra  «%?t  ii 

^ TTfsf^iJfT  ^ rmi  fSSfR  T*T  %T3? 

«r<m  w-si  wr  wr%  f*r*m  i 

wr^fTra  JTwrs^fi^  tn?*n  xtwt(v-i^  -jffspp-r  it 
ar^T  ^mmfairr 

VTPSPT  gwufaw:  wftRSR:  'Xfhi  HMWRHTW  ! 

x x 

W#  ^ ^rrrfwr  wratH'  srRt  ^T«Tf%^»i 
<3tmr  «n  ^ ^rr^RiT  ^rer  ttp  it 

rTffw:  H?fr|f«:  #<?  i "■Pfi  R'-  HH 

F=JT  *TiTT5Pt  UtRTH  N^-4  ^«T:  i 

^rnfarfr  ^TfatjzTmrc^ 

JTTHi*rf  ^ frtrnrwr^cSTfli  t=fr  *rafa?t  it 


AO  5?£r«  i f-A*  o fw.'rt  \ 

AN  i * ANNb  ^4  ; 

« w«r*  i ’’  ANNb  ^Thi' 

A o^m^T®,  N c o*nxx^nu°  i 


frotownr  rrf^#r  wmu- 
JT#r  g^ifsrrr^Tf?^:-  U3r?r% 

TFrft  STfig  wi 


%m¥rf55rrf%t%?^3*  vrfw?rr  giw  wfwrm  11 
*#NttwjO:  iro*J  v^rr  rr^T^T^r^f 
?rraf  wpri  f^rgtfaTW  w$T  fwrm 
nxm  sfif^TT  Wr^g  Iwrnj- 


*TJT  5I7RT  n 


# f wz  i 


||  ^^fPBT^n^r  HH'IwfafrT  I 

i m:  ^wrfHVT'Tw  11 


-/  304. 


w ^tmrr^Twrtr  i 


*d?  «3NI<*<  tfM  ii 

^ ^^FfT^^ffcTrW  | 

^fi<^rafenr f wreT^ferrrerew  ii 
<f5M<  i *<  i i m g*i  fa  *f%m  i 
3TT3W|*K  iffa  || 


AN  oTsfton?,  C omw  \ 4 AN  srere®  i 

AN  w *io  i ♦ N oipc*  I 

AC  o^jof^fc  i 


wrai  ^rrp^T«r  I 

f<*(<*n^w?f  wsrnn^wwnH  11 

.*n%  *hMiHiy,«i  ^ dshr  ^ ii 

*¥(WT-p5TTH^TsfiH  II 

^?iiirrftnTr%^  i 

?r^TTWfWTTr|:  iffarT  JPUHTT^  II 

<<a^Twfr*gi  i 

?faT  HTTf^TT'SJT^f  TTTM^I?  fafa^TT  3V: 
ii  ?f?T  ^'f^pnrfWTWT^^TO'  ii 


305. 

^KTl’T^T^T^r  W I 

«ft3re«g  JTfSir^te  < 

ifwnw^  ^ *«TiTip¥?mren7T  11 

‘^•TTHSSRfP^^  WUWl^WTH%  I 
*TT*l%?T  ^IdTcr-  II 

||  tfa  ^g^THlfT^TWnfSTO  II 

' C ofcJTRT*  I 

i 0 adds  fifafctf  after  the  Colophon  but  no  author 
it  mentions. 

3 C i 

75 


4 Nb  i 


306. 

W I 

STORW  ^TFimr^lTferm  II 

^ ^Trerr'irafarifi 
HWTw^f  ^rerfssnf  wH«h^  i 

II  TfiT  RST^HWR^  i 
I Sifa:  N 


307. 

# =fTT:  ^t7nPTcT^  I 

# TFT  faff  faff  ¥52fti‘  % RHT^f  JWT^I  f W W 
^TfT,  : | # ^T:  r:  f ^TIT,  # 

^m,  # f fa  jfa  f tff?  ^t^t,  # wnt 

# sufafffa  frfa%srfrfafar  f wz 

^TWT,  # 3f:  %fa  f fM  # ^f3R  ft:  5f  3T 
i 

R^TffWTRSTT — RW? T Wrfa  3RT- 

W^r«*Cir«jci  F5ffa*Tpjfarf  fTfSfcfsf 


m qin^f  ?j^=?rnT- 

^|TlP^IW«^^r3q^tHWW75R  ^ t^w 

II  *mf(TOTV*i  WTW?  II 


308. 

& 5*WgfTm  I 


7Ttft  *lPfln(+H+ife?n'  II 
rf  VTf^TIT  fsR'tffc^T 
^WWTTpjfTpft  II 
Wn%?T  rrrf^t  WFTT  f*P9WT<TT  ?iT?T^nft  I 


twi  i 

^Nt  %^T?r?rr  =tt%  *g^Tf;  i 

#ercnrp5r6w9f  ^m^rafg^pn  11 

i sfa 


1 ANb  *gf^o  i 
* AC  o?n^r«  i 
‘ Nb  i 


* AC  qrym*j. 

* C g^i*  i 


T^r  ttiwt  growr 

?^rfH  fITWl-  ^HlrTT  i 

«5fTH  <^rr 

<p?f  ?WtS*g  *T*nTT  ^T  f^TTT  *T: 
?ITrR%5  ^tTTlf^rlfH  ^ftrTT 
f^##rT^T5F3RT  ^T  ^Hfd  | 


g«T  5THt^  *T?WT  ^T  f*\n  5f: 


^rw^r^vrr^T 


f^rUHT  ^^^digl^gn 

g«t  ^t  f»T?T  *v  it 

f%*T^  ^f^TT  TraT  ^ I 

^ 35T  ^TNfT  ^TJTt^g  % II 

II  rTTU^fa:  II 


ANb  %*•  i 


* C 0^0  I 


xftecTTCmT-SRff  I 


310. 

# w i 

M 1 IJf  I H +4  frjIJWR  ^TRW^SrqT 

f^TTWT  ^RT'jft-gTT^jfqrTT  ^ I 

W^t  injf^rnr  few  ( t ) 

wm  w*tr  T^npwi^r^«Hi*Mi  iffa?rrn  11 


TT^VTT  ^aj^prfilfiwpRT  I 
^■{rlTSIT  HTTf^rTF  ^nftTTm 

ii 

^ irfefefiww  i 

5R^TfTtrg'f%rTT  TTfefesjWTP  SlfiTTP  II 
W T?Kt^WT  <r<d^<^*tn'4«BRlT 

TFHPRW  iST3nrfa?;^qT%  ^ WT**  *lfwr  I 
famunT  fTW^i*'  ^^nrrTHwf?- 

*j?rr  ^rrlNsffcrt  w^vrafem^nr  ^?u  ing  sp*n*r  11 

fe%% 

wnffeT  ^in^urefefitfw^r:  *raraT%  i 
W^rra  qgfnun^few^ifew 

^^trrRTTTlTg?g;frT^^  fepgWr  || 

II  *f?T  Ml<4riKl?n^pm  || 


1 A •’amrif:  i 


Turret 


y «*< 


311. 


# ttt^  g^r*  gtf  to,  # ?if  ^f'  f ^ 

# # f««dl*K  # 
wfsrT^  f tox,  # rTT^:  grrr*:  g^:  ntmterfa- 
^rfnfd  *w?*%Tfvfafi  % wm  g^  f to  i 

| to,  # f to, 

# gid^r^  f to,  # g^rf^Pd  f tot,  # 
gTdVf^Pu!  f to,  # g^rTrofafa  f to,  # 
gr^ft  f tov,  # grrfifm  f tox  i # ftpsn  f 

TOx  I # f TO  I # fcraqft  f TOv  i 

# tot#  f Pi?  i # wfc#  f toj  # #it 

j^l  # ^ f TOx  I # TO#  f TOv  I # 
*TT*#  f TOx  I # fWTTOT  f TO  I # faft# 
f TOJ  # TO1#  f TO  I ^ I # TO*t#  f 
TOs,  # g«#  f Hi^,  # TO##  f TO,  # 
###  f TOx  I 8 I T^T  prerid:  I 


# *C#  P^ld^KP^- 

*r*r$^f<;  ^rgg%  to^st- 

^ ’Wgif  '4  ^ m u-i  I i sj^i 


TOUT^wfafar  H?fiw% 


ffW* 

c ’ 

*JTO- 


1 A «t  i 

1 A omits  & uwRnffrf’r  ai  T2  i 

1 A .Rjnt*  i * A omits  s*».  i 


irTT^iwsrrtr’rci  i 


jFkrmpF&ifK  wfasr  irfro 

nfTO  ^ ^ ^ xr  ^anrr^T?T  ^ 

Xf^TTf?TT^fr^^^^3Tf^?rT^^T^fT 

^x?f  f^f  ( sjjfa ) w^f  w^r  *m  H?rtT*i 
xrf^^  ^ >nT 

JW^faxnr  rt^^^ti^frf  grirt  gwf  g^ 
f T^l 

ii  vttr^t  *n*rr*R5i:  11 


312. 


#>  *l*f: 


T%33^g  f- 

^rn^nw^rf?jTPT  wreJri  ^TTs^^nnrwT^rra  wre^g 
^tggRpf  ^gftsrf?i%w  xrresrapr  'gfew- 


gsrm  irmprpjri  pmfafirTi  ^ iwf  mvr  ftft 
4%  Hurfr?.  wgi- 


1 A *rra:%  i 
s C omits. 

5 ANb  omit  Ttvt  i 


1 C \ 

i A adds  tn*i  after  this. 


WTWr*T  I Tpf  TOT- 
flTRT  *T%W  PfifraRT5^  rrSTT#?TT^%rTT  MRJ- 
^srr  «rr%  fafft  ■gww 
^fw  gsr?:  a^rwr  f#7^rr 

^ i ^Tff^  *ffawr  ^g^n 

^ffWTKTT  W ] 3l'HW«rt 

TWnj^tsfTTT^THTVfTWrft  Royi^)<3M<n^rl(  *T*T- 

nfvnupfTT  '^m  ipcHt  i irf^%  ^T^njpft  ^r% 

girrfa^  *raiwr  jtsit- 

#s^  T352wr  ga&sft  i m 

1%^5ffT  ^prrowi^rii:  i — 

4^ftwwt%  jRTfw  swTwr  f^n  ^sfw- 
iwtot  irsTT^t^twrr  ; ^fm 

TTfwfi%  ^1w  t?rWt  ^fwrrwww 
^r jt  ; ^f^mrn:^T%4  w’sft  %rWr  ww 
wrwi  irsTT#^1wrr ; sTrnTpwt% 
ffaSj^Cl  irort  ^3r^^WT  JRSIT- 

#J^fW<TT  I i4  *nrr 

ft%T^T  g?fi%fsTO:  I trf?g?f 

$U«n*nri  ^^wff  ww  urn^rr  si^Q 

7TWT9  — #/^T?S^J5rT^  ff  f%fa  M% 


1 AC  *TOT  I 
*Ubtei 
‘ Nbtwfti 


2 A .inffcfwn  i 

* Nb  ft»w  i 

• A *cfat  trft*  i 


Wf  fwfw 

faif%  fafa  % I ^rf  Sf^fT  I 

’SPT  H^TT5T:  RcTrT  «T%*T  W *f\  fa 

^^rf?r,  ^fa'RHHR^i'ifa,  ^r  Rrrftnrc: 
faigfcrT  i ^rssr  ^TgfR-^fa  ww 

RRft^TT  Tfcm  wt^i  ^ftRw«ii^  ^f  ^sfT<t  i 
rT^R  dfa+W — # «TRT  HfFBT^TR  R*T^(ft- 
iiglh^PT  ?TWT^TWTfWl%  fwTg^TR  %T^- 

^*gftsjf?T%wre  # 3^  ^ ^r  ^nf?  ^rrf% 

*£  *f*  39  wwr  fwft  fi?  %l  ftfr  ir- 
RWT^PJITS  ^fT%  JTf  ^fafiro  fm  zz  zz  irz  *z 
wz  wz  wr?  ^t?^t  ^fl«^i4lvrrfwT% 

irnpr  *mrej  trr^ra  xn^rawt 

^fw  ^fw  wfa  rtstct  Rnw  f % fafa  faf%  w ijr 
it  o&nwsifiTWT^T^  nwnfamm  ^narrfsrr  3^ 
3^  i t-  ht^tet  «rnpr  R¥Ffrp*rni 
R¥TWTR*I»FI  *?tcr  ^R  ^R  ^RR  ^RR  RTWR 
Rnniwm  rtcr  rttr  ?ro 
RT3TR  RTTR  rTTTR  ^ T-  ^z-  *R?:  ^Z-  W-  RT?= 
m Z'  rr  ?R  ^ ^ tr  RR  RR  RR 

rtrr  rtrr  rz  r?  rt  rt  r!  wwt  i 

¥f%RRT  1 


1 A oftrr  **mf®  i 5 AC  omit  Tf  vt  i 

* ANb  omit  *rcm«  i 


76 


^«o 


<ssro  ?n?5Rjgn  i rpf)-  *rci- 

jrf^fr^TTw  =nf^n*rTT%  wm  ^ 

^TrTajjj?  I ^f%51  ^TTJRitw  *T^ST^?f  fq U|| ^| if» | |<<t»T: 
1WF  ^f^T5TpT  *m fsfT  ^ fa#U*d  I W^( 
^T^rr^TTr^sftr  m wrvmi  sifH  i wi 

’srefafl  FTVfarj  *WSr?  VRfTT  I TT^fw^T:  FSf- 
to;  *nsnf v<tf  %wr  ^wtitt  ngrarra  ^ *tfz 
rRT  wra  iji^R  ^sfrfN 

vN  *m  HiT«fiT^r:  Tjvrrspi  ?prafr,  ^jrTvrf^w- 
^'tTTTT'T  STPTTfH  "fTT^WtTT  I WRWW 

ysmwrt  *rcrfag  * Trfa- 

\*n  ^rfa  rm  wfag  ^ 
WTOT:  I HTTT^  ST^TT^-  I 

?rf^  ftraf<T  ^ sk*tt ^f^prr  fcr%rffwnff i 
W Wn^frT  W&lfcT  TT^t^WT^)- 

^wrg:  ^fFRT^^W  fa  Tpph%‘.  | dfa^wfat^ 
fwr  *Fm  wnfwrfwt  RT^fa  *rf«Rff 
TTRnrfH  ^%3T  ire^f?T  I *n*TTW- 

^fenffr  ^Tsiiifd  i M^dTd  ?raafa  i 

$«Tap?wftNT^rar  ?nfar  wna 


1 Nb  <s<q*i:  A ^wiqifi  i 

* Nb  ^nf>?i%  i 


*tewpwTT«T<n«rrEr»m  i 


wr^T  ^ i i 


i f^m’  ii 


8i88SB8888gS888888^g8g8g8g88| 


ii  TrrwrRn  ^wtht  ii  m 

S i 

B88888888g8888a&888a&8S«aS8a 


The  colophon  is  found  only  in  Nb. 

After  this  colophon  C adds  ^vrwra  i *RcT 

^rm^nrr  *nwrc^ 

i This  Newari  date  corresponds  to 
A.D.  1819.  A abruptly  brings  in  long  extracts 
from  the  *npi^mcr*w  extending  over  nine  folia 
from  333  to  341  and  concludes  with  part  of  the 
m H m.fd  ■ * ahwtw^rr^r’ir  followed  by  the  ^isifarfwr- 
wrvm  and  i 


INDEX. 


80,  <B,  MS  8^8, 

8£*  I 

\<,  \*%  d_H  , *A,  v^, 
\°8}  V*>  W,  \^8,  ^8o, 

M°>  \i*>  v^,  w.  w, 

w,  \«*  v*=.  ^v» 

**V  ^8<  M<, 

M«,  *•«>  ^,  W, 

\^if  ^£o,  0o\,  8oS^ 

8o^,  8 \i,  8^,  8^0,  8^, 

88^,  880,  8^,  8 i^f  8 <£, 

80®,  80^,  BO<^,  8^,  8^, 

8<S<=,  He*?,,  *81,  ¥B<,  «A8, 

^<8,  M^, 

80^,  ^oC  H^<=,  0gf3f  H^-O  ; 

8^,  BB*=,  log  I 
3jfW*gST  o^,  ^ «,  ^HlH.  I 

^reifqi^f^  i 
ssqr^RT  i 

i 

^o,  130,  ^<«c., 

108,  8^  ; o^^fJT  ^ ; 

8,  ^8  | 

r H,°^  ! 

wsrrgftr  ^xo  i 

l\Q  ! 

sffaraTOT  h i 
8^h.  i 

8^=  I 

<\,  l^,  *«*,  ^18,  **<., 

I 

SRW't  ^*,  ^ i 


^ W,  ^«,  **b, 
W*  8*<>  a**,  i?a  ; °^*f 

808  ; o^ir  8^  I 

8*=,  ^<0;  • 3«iqT5  84H  I 

■wft  i 
gq^rpgm^t  H .oo  i 
^^fT  ^o#,  ^oo,  , 

1\B,  8L*>8,  I 

^B*=  I 
8H<-  I 

Sig^rfa^f^fanug  M ! 

^gwrf^TcT  <^,  ^o«(  I 
psrgssrgFT  <a,  M°>  ^8, 

8£.\,  H HL^  I 
^=rT^H  3,H°  I 
^^J^TST^sHT^r  0O«(  I 
wmrrfaRT  «ix^,  i 
vmTjf^cH  ^H«<,  ^H.,  8o^,  0^8 
8^,  l 

WWR  8 01,  0<U.,  1 

^HiTT3ff«;?JH  HO£  | 

*ewAt%?  \i*L  i 
8Rfvr^T^-  m<£-  i 

wfaire » ^o,<\l,  V®*» 

V*.  VA,  VLB,  ^08, 

^8.  , ^.0,  ^o\,  ^8H  , 
38<,  ^8€_,  M8»  3£A 

81  i,  8^,  8 8<,  0^,  0^.3  ; 
ojimT  b\€  ; of^-^rxsr  h ®o  ; 
ofafsr  8<8,  8^  I 
«W3T TJmt  8^H.  I 
l 

,srfcwrc  ^^8»  1 


( <•<  ) 


«rfHcTW  xi,  *£,  8°, 

ttO,  yj^,  y Mjt.  W,  ^0, 

^yL>  ,Q-®*  ^o> 

"=y  , e.*,  v*»  WS  W£, 
^3,  ^<8,  W<,  W*,  VW> 
V*,  W.  W\>  W» 

9QI,  9B<=,  ^8«1, 

W8>  3^,  W, 

8 ® a^'S).  8^3,  88^,  88$>, 

aoy  , 8^,  8^,  V^>,  *i «»«£., 
y<^=  . o?rner  ^>8  i 

^ifRciTvrinfcT^fsi  | 

’asrffTHT^:  8 8^  I 
STOflTJ-fflT  i 

^WeTSWT  8 8<f  t 

XU,  8 8-Q  ; °^q? 

\8  ; o*THcf  8y.®  I 

*w>*frrfc  W»  \*=,  <8, 

*<8,  \<Q^,  \^=,  WV’ 
l£«_,  ^*>8,  ^\£,  ^8y, 

3>°^=,  ^c<,  8o®,  88^., 

8<^,  8^,  8^,  8£S  yj^  I 
^WNtuftTT  ^=  | 

3R«TPrT  ^88  i 

**yr*n  «.*,  *18,  \w*  w8>  w^> 
* Vs,  \W,  W®.  W5^ 
\8°,  W±-  VW*  W>  W<  1 
W ^8,  W*-> 

w.  y v^,  >j  jh,  y^*_  i 

^8^,  W.  I 

*ri*R3r  3.^,  ««,  ^8,  ^a,  ^o'S, 

\‘ss,  ^ovo,  ^«y^, 

8oo,  a^^,  aa*  ; o<*\TT$m  y.e.^, 
oSTT^g^l  y.e^  ; osjtu^j 

V?  ; of^X  ^«a  , 

^fi8T*T**yqr  \8<,  \8^  I 


«T5r^H  8^<  I 

8 8^  I 

^«ftfa7psrc  8^,  8^,  b <,  y^, 
yjj,  W,  ■ce,  *=<£, 

V=^,  K°°, 

w*.  w,  V’S  W8>  1 

yj<<*,  yo®8  i 
**yNr  i 
^yft^r  \'®®, 

W8>  Wy  , ^>«,  ^'3®, 

^o,  ^a,  ^y  , s?^, 

^e.«,  ^.«8,  ^ i 

wyrt^^n^rTT  ^ay  , 

^y.,  \ 

^ryfNr^T  ^oi^;  octix 

oTT^  ^=3  ; oXX^qf  ^o, 

^8,  ^^y,  ^a  ; =T?«q 

W8*  . 

8oO;  o^«n*f  ^«*L  I 

8^^>,  y <£^  i 
«PSOT  8^-a  i 

mrtnm  8^  i 
f*TW^i  a^  i 
»W  1 

^?£  T^t  ^e'Q  I 
3^;  STTJT  W°, 

0O®,  8^  1®e.,  W8 

W,  W,  1 

ir^TH^crua  ^o^>,  ^o'c  i 

^Tf^rf^  y^^,  ye.e.  i 
?TO  ?TT^  8 8^,  8 8<,  B'Se.  I 
*n  -qf^naft  *i£i  i 
«r^  y^*=  i 

^ft^'srasf  \ 

*pz  wtqrmw  i 

*H£  8^  i 


( <•*  ) 


**<,  **=l,  **=a, 

9Bo,  88*,  %ii  1 
*l*£  8*8,  8^«L  I 

WF|p  *TK  **H 
WTT  1 | 

«i*rtf?T  < i 

w*jt  *i=  **=<,  ^ *,c,=, 
8^,  8*8,  !<>d_,  1*<,  18  o I 

asr^FfHinTrsr  n*  i 

1**  I 

^fT 

*dL*,  *<1,  8^8  I 
81*=  I 

*HWT  W 1*<=  I 
«TTOT  *HS*T***,  18*  i 

*,*£,  *1<, 
**a,  8<*,  8<a,  8a*,  8^*, 
81*  ; otfas  ^T*r  aa<  i 

^v^sgr  ?y  0?  yd.  8,  1<L<  I 

WnffiTCiW  *8.1 1 
stiffly  8**  I 

^rwnr  **a,  8°*,  a*a,  aaa, 
8ad.,  8*=*,  0d.<,  8d*=,  8d_d_, 

1**,  1<«  I 

*TPTcf5T  8 »d_,  «1*  • 

WUC^TST  **8  i 
«mctf8f^f  *ai.  i 
wtarrr^t  *81,  *«a,  *«*=  i 
«ttvctu:t  *a,  <a,  *®a,  *0^, 
***,  *V=,  W.,  **s,  ***., 
o’V^T  *8  8 I 

WTfsr  IB i,  **a,  *<8,  b*i, 
8*1,  88a,  8<*,  8a*,  aa<=, 
8^=a,  01*,  01<  I 
mvfte  *<0,  *<a,  *o«,  8*i, 


8**=,  8«  81*,  81*,  8<.8, 
!•«,  1**,  I*®,  '!**,  8.*!, 
11* ; **•,  1*« ; 

811;  °^T  8*a  ; o«TPff  8^=, 
o5®T  *<*,  **=*  ; «ftWT  **=*  I 
SRT^cTKT  *1*  I 

T 

JT5^  **a,  **8,  **i,  *8*,  *a8, 

*ad,  *io,  go<,  i**,  la*, 
11*.,  la*  i 

s^srrswet  8*8  i 

*<3,  *ia  | 

**5*ifa  *1*  I 

1*-  I 

i 

T^f  81®  ; «WT  *11,  **i ; 

ooj^t  8o£,  88a  I 
tWT*T  18*  Hd.  I 

^3Um*T  *®1  ! 

«3?nr^T^«T  818  I 

^T3*f  *<1,  *a*,  8*8,  0*<, 

1**  ; ©fafv  *^=<  I 

8*0.  1*1,  iao,  1®*, 

ia8,  iaa  ; e^  1<1  ; 

^So,  ia*,  lai  I 
j ^fy *n*r  ( *rtfjpT®r ) *<*  i 
{ *aa,  *©i,  *<>*=,  *81 1 

| *<=*,  **1 ; ©*!W 

*tc  , 

*^*,  *^<,  **8  l 

8 8*,  811, 1**  I 

***,  **^,  **o,  *^*, 

\*\  I 


( <•«  ) 


8i,  *<4,  *=<(,  1*8, 

1**  i 

8®4  i 

^ipffare  83d  i 
7H%9TTtrafi  8®4  I 
^RIHSTH  B®4  I 
•3IJTV  > <l,  8 8=,  11®  I 

1®,  <*,  <8,  4®,  *••, 
Ul,  8=4,  848,  1®<, 

1=®  I 

W^S?  *8*  I 
^l*r  sot,  a*®  1 
^offafilW  *=•,  *=1,  *4*, 
*4=,  **4,  <48,  8*®,  8*=; 
*44,  8*4  I 

53IHI?  ( <®MIVITI| ) 8*4  I 

8TWWZT  *®®,  *81,  *1®,  *14, 
\<°,  *<*,  *<8,  *<Cl,  *<® 

*®o  I 

*r*mzrcnr  *18  t 

Jirar  *<4  1 

$ 

1 

9^  1 

t’spm  1 

%r 

'«ft^prpr  i=o;  «*( 

*«,  88*,  811;  olfra  **=*  ; 

• *=*,  *=e,  *«i> 

*=*,  V39 ; •’wtfte  8*4  I 

WlVffTCdt  !•*  I 


%T 

8*® 

*G 

8Bi  1 

WT'n’t  1=8,  1=4  I 
^rwt  ***,  8*®  I 
TOW  **!  I 

*5^  8^  I 

*<a,  s**  1 

WfigWT  *1=  *=*,  8 8®,  8®1, 

8=4,  848  ; 8**=,  8**  l 

ws*4  *®i  1 
tow  g*r  8®*  1 
wixfawt  i«*  | 

8 »4  1 
TOK  81*  I 

wntngg  8«,  88,  *a*,  *8*; 

• WC  ®®,  ®4  I 
TO*  'Sc,  «*  I 

TONt  14*  I 
W4STW  =4  I 

**«,  *8*,  *14  I 

®mfwwT  1=4  1 

WTTWt  l=e,  14*  I 
TODT  1®,  **,  *8,  ®*,  **1, 
**°,  **=,*4®,1=®  I 

*W*w  «iifa  *4*,  *4*,  14*  I 
^HPDTWWwtV  8®»  I 
*ggn8l38B  8**,  8*®,  8*=  I 

w*te**l,  ozm  ***  I 

TOfew  **4,  ***,  *®c,  *=*, 
1*8,  1**,  1®8,  1«®  I 
wjIwtit  *1*  I 
TOt  1=  I 

wdgwr  **®,  88=  *«*  1 


( <•«.  ) 


o,  8^  | 

*tft^  ^8  o | 

l.»£  I 

3R53WT*>?t  I 

Wmife  B^tE.  I 
^^TnfR^  I 
I 

^ysftwmfWt  *«,  **£, 

WJ 

i 

^raqmrfrra  i 

8*£  I 

*ronn&t«»,  v=<,  ^ i 

1STW$?  ^8*=,  ^ i 

«TIFCT  ZVL  I 
*»t*pw  *8i  i 
^mT^TT  81$  I 
^Tftnd  t 
nUnrUt  8$bl  i 
wmtm  i<*^  i 
*tT%ir  \i*  i 
*'KiQ4reitn*r  $®  i 

Cs  X 

1.0^  | 

vnPBT  Y®5*,  y®4  I 
qnaTOK  8®<=  I 
Rtrw^ift  Y4«  I 

JRrarrf^  88®,  88^,  84\,  Y.°8  ; 

•vrf^nuT  b^y.,  y.»b 1 
«lfw  ^8<,  t,Y.<,  **«,  *<B,  8^8. , 
8^4,  88®,  8®^,  8®*-,  8«®, 
84*,  84<  I 
V=8,  Y54  I 

^rtftratr  i 

® i ««!<*•  ***  i 

ftmt  *Y®,  8*<,  8*8,  Y44  I 


fWfttfT?  8«^=  I 

jrw  4®  I 

fsmwr  *«  i 

JJTJf  *YS  *s*c>  88®, 

B<*,  8^4,  848  ; ®f«5  8«1 1 
$fiS*T  i*,  ®<  I 
ft*  YJ**,  Y«*,  YY4,  Y.®*  I 
f«TT  4^,  **=  I 
fHTTT^TJfH  1®8  I 

f^rorewfa  *8  \ 

$WB?  8**,  Y**,  Y,4*  I 
f’SfWIYa  *8®,  *8*=  I 
f*$W  38®,  *B*=,  *Y.®,  *Y\. 
W>,  *YX,  *Y<,  *Y5,  *Y4, 

V$\,  \i%  *<*,  \H,  M®, 
*®\,  *®*,  *®*,  **8,  *«<, 

^ *®«-,  ?"=*,  V=*.  V=*r 
V=8,  **Y,  *^®,  *«*,  *4*, 
*«*,  348  ; «TOJ*ro  *Y*; 

* wtfti  38® ; ®f*gTT  *sy  ■, 
•q^akT  34* ; ®amt  *<y; 
n^pt®  3Y.\ ; y=® ; «fam® 
*=8  ; ^fTfW’T"  *ca  I 

*8<  I 

V ^a  1 

jsrar  8**  i 

ff*«  <K  *<4,  ***,  *a>®,  v=Y,, 

Y„*8,  Y**,  Y®8,  Y®®  I 

jfsrjt  *<*,  \H  ; ®Wi5  ^Y5  ; 

o^Yra;  bb^  ; ®^i^  Yj£.c  i 

gwk  ira  \^3,  i 

$%YC  8Y.4  I 
fYTfW  W I 
«3l«W-’Y^T  Y.Y®  I 
w«rng^T«t  ^8®,  \4®,  \4< ; • vr 
8<^  ; «WHT4T  8<«  I 


iw  in  ; •’tk  i®c  ; 
m I 


siwrawTfc  bb®,  ill,  n 8 
s!au^«Tf't  <t^  11=,  i?4  i 
%fw  1<1,  iX®  i 

%fsrmfai  1<®,  1<1,  1<1, 

^3,  !«,!<•  I 

%fwrifwft  ill  i 
811  i 

ifipft  ill,  US  11°,  \\\, 
W i 

^ffaRTTr  81<  I 
m I 
^5*?18<  I 

aftwra  1®  i 
whnnir  188  i 
wNiw  118  i 
wterm  bi®  i 
9ttvrtii  n<  i 
arhn*srg*T  ill  ii®  i 
inuFiift  i®a  i 
/Bjfira^UIW  1®1.  i 

f^fSJW  84.,  VIs  i 

fajtftat  i<i  i 
:eftl  bh  i 
■fNfaiN  a®t  i 

jsipt  84,  i<t®  i 
arm  bi«i  i 
qnmm  8i®  i 
«1  <1  W,  W*  li»  i 
*WllHl  8^1,  81®,  8^t  I 
i®<  i 


( <v  ) 

*T*r  I War  \i,  i=,  ai,  81,  e<,  «jb, 

<*,  <l;  1®,  it, 

<1  i 

81®  I 

*si«*l*<aiw  81  i 
itNlftrfa  s'i.o  i 
is^it  \41,  88<,  88®  i 
istev  ii®  i 

*T 

jtjptjt^  84  i 
ircpftj[9r  in  i 
*fT  1<=  I 
JTsfTO  14®  I 
irin^ai  844  i 
JTCUrfcT  8»1,  141,  141  I 
iTJii^TTfi’gr^rfiir  i®  i 
JPUcTITr  i®4,  1=8,  141,  14®, 
114,  11=  I 
jPUWTi>r  18=  i 
JTO?  B®1,  Bo®,  818  I 
***T  H®,  HI,  118  I 
JIT  an  I 

JPR  ®®,  ®4,  11®,  US  8®<  | 

iratnrc  ii®,  i®» ; ®w  in  i 

Jnfrn?  141 1 
jrc«r  i =<C,  in  i 
ItRJtf<  11®  I 
fjrft®TT  148  I 
iftn  11® ; 111,  118  I 
8®1 1 

prt  i<i,  l<l,  l«  i 

^fw«T  =<,  1«1,  81®  I 

8=<U 

JZS  «®4,  81®  I 
jftfglT*  ill,  8®1 1 


( ) 


^ I 

*Vhm  ^1,  *8^ 

^o  i 

rfbft  ^o,  881,  8 8<,  8$>d  | 
afahjirr  ^ i 

WT  \d^  I 
^ftpsRT  8^  I 

8 8<,  8<S>d  I 

The*n85t  8«s  8«,  8^,  8d*, 
8<18  I 

8 Id  I 
8^  i 
ibi  i 

Id  8 I 

°swzi:  w i 
8^$>  I 
8^  I 

^<Jfi%7TT  8^3  I 

ITsR^Wd  8d1,  8 £<,  8d*=;  *5TT*T 

1,0  0 I 

^nft  ^15,  «^=,  8 8$,  8 i\, 

8$U 

wPh*  V%  V=<>  i 
"TOsfam  ^ I 

^HDJITTTTt^  W,  W,  W, 

\m,  v^l 
^rownftf  8 o 8 i 
^gr^t  8^  i 
wnra  ^ i . 

WfWt  88<  I 

88^,  88*  f 8$d  | 


8 8*,  8d<=  I 
*m£t  id<  i 
id<  i 

^g^T^T^TrST  I 
^r^JTTT^f  \d<,  **<=  I 
^rg^eTJT^  8*=$;  «jfTT^migW 
*di,  8^8,  8d* ; jfrniaSJ 
**i  I 

’ng^^TTTf^  8o*=  | 

^8,  V=i,  8^: 

^rp|*T  8$\  I 

^pp§r®T  *$8  l 

^spgiw  in  i 

i 

*t$\  i 

<■<,  W«>  Vis 

W ' 

8$^  I 

8o^  | 

^1  ; *»«^JT  8od  I 

^ *<•,  *<v  *«*,  *«  » 

i<$  i ' 
id^  i 
^y$  i 

i 

TOU(!f  I 
^\^\WK  \o«,  I 
'mw*  ^ i 
*®$  i 

fvwwfia  *<$,  8d,  d«>,  dd, 

**d  i 

*<«,  VA  **-“  ; «gf2 

88<,  8i^  I 

freqnfa  8^(,  i 


( <3=3  ) 


f^rfbn  i®*  i 

=g^T  98^,  *s>3,  31*; 

o?jfjT  ! 

y<3,  li b, 

y^.,  y.^,  ^ i 
i<r,  v<,  w\  i 
^f^jrvf  *;c* ; oTnr^rr  ^-®8, 

^l,  w;  *Jnr- 
fwar  ; o^TTJRfftpn 
; -ipruron  8^ ; °?t*t- 

^r  a^o  | 

^T^cT  8«1  I 

sntftaR T 88<  I 

8 8<,  8«£  I 

w 

w^t<rap^  8©«*  i 

$T 

^Tz^t  wA  i 
*rit  H£*  i 

^wre*rf*r  i 

*W  8^8  i 
5TWf^t  8^.1 

Wf  *<%  **?,  ^8, 

y$*, 

^8,  ^0?  ^ ; 0^%^ 

'Lii,  i<®,  lit ; 

©HfcnTt  ! 

,snnR^  i 

TORT  ^?| 

srerT^fa  i 

*r%u;  i 

^JT  ; og^jjf  ^ , 

^ ^V»,  Wl,  ^8<, 

^83,  ^8*=,  ^Bd,  VI*,  ***  ; 


•ffT*T  *1^,*  oirrlTW,|*  *8-9  ; 
•*TTTfa$jr  *Yl©  ; egjfT  ^S'Q  I 
’rr*T«st  8^  i 

®iw<  ***,  w,  *<*$  8*£  I 

^TRT^  ^$><  | 

^rrfWhjRTT*:  **\  ; 

U*=,  **•  I 
^NWt  8*.*  I 

^T^HT  **«,  * 8 ° , \8«JL,  I 
*9»A  , gof,  8£^  | 

TT’T^ft  8?£.  I 

■Sj  i*i  >i u$ <n  8^9  I 

^T«r^fir  3*®  i 

^TT’tww  *®,  *3,  *3,  3®,  4®. 
<3,  <1,  4<,  3**,  3*8, 

33*.  33®,  3«®,  3®*,  3®3, 

\38,  3®*,  3«-3,  3 41, 

3«-.  *®1,  **«,  **3,  ***, 
*£8,  3®\,  3®8,  333,  33*. 

38®.  38'=,  3«,  3 *<,  83<. 

81®,  8 <4,  8®1,  13*  *1*  I 
^T»!*W3  3<1  I 
^TstTftreT’T  3®  3 I 
ssfraif^  83<  i 
3^rail«!T  8*4,  841  I 

2 

e%*m  33s,  83®=,  8*®  I 

* 

m=<,  *1«,  8*1,  B<®,  8 <*, 
*33.  W.1,  14<,  i«.«;  ®w 
8^=3,  1®*,  143,  14*  I 
*T*i  883,  <-3’3  I 


( <44 

li'z,  ?^9  8\<  8^4,  J 4^9,  ^89,  B^4  ; 4<*4, 


844,  83£_,  88|,  844,  8^ 
8^,  8£  4 , 8d.9,  U44  I 
444  I 

^ST*R  4*4,  *15*®  l 

1®*,  498  I 
8 8 'l  I 

3>*ft  884.  8B<>  89,1  I 
883  | 

* 

4.3  8 

71 

?T^  4<£,  9 <4,  3 95),  4^4, 

4^ 8,  444,  4^8,  4^  I 
3WT  \\o,  444,  49£,  4«19  | ”' 

?T^TTO^n«r  si*  i 
'RT*ra?Wrg4T  i i 

*m  44,  44,  \i\,  **.*,  444; 

©CT’T  4,  I 
<W*rTO  4«.  I 
44^  I 

?rn^3r  3^4,  898  ; *^T  88*  I 
flTTT  45  49,  8»,  8<T,  4£.  <8, 
<«£.,  9o?  94  , <99,  «£.^,  %c$f 

\&iy  499,  49*=,  49*..  4^4, 
4<=9,  4<14,  *><4,  4*9,  4°°, 
V8,  VI,  4°1  4*S  ^4V 
^*>  ^8,  *44,  ^5 
*^4>  W,  , W 

4*5  *4*-,  W,  W,  *88, 

m 4<°,  *<«,  w,  w, 

*<* , r=i,  4«4  ; 

•*ft  ^8,  W *84  ; 
®*T  Oft  V=4,  V=8> 

t^9,  4^,  W,  4*<  I 


418  ; e^ETi?  *4®  I 

cmfc*T^84L  < 

cnTt^4f^Jf^T  489,  ^ | 
rTT^J  494,  499,  49^  | 
cfT^T  <«1  I 

* 

firWff  458  I 

fWR  404  ; ‘RTrfTOi  8^4, 
4<*9  I 

«RRt  444  1 

fajJIflTSR^,  3 8 i,  8^<,  8d.^l 
f^T*  444,  ^<3,  4^$,  ^9o, 

*®<,  844  I 
f^4*g  484  I 
*=£  I 

80.  8 8,  «,  404  I 
4<=£  1 

f^wmm  045  a 9 o , y 4 0 , 444  1 
t^fwrcnftrft  4o<£-  1 

fUTM  |9e  ; ogspfeift  4744  I 

finrST-STW  9^,  V9,  4^  I 

f^row-arreT  4*=&,  444, 

4$4  494  I 
Nf?IfI  ^9^:  | 

fafa*n  ^8  1 

ftr**  *4,  <*,  «,  <5  «>*,  «<, 
4^5,  8^,  80^,  8^,  8e\, 
4^^,  4^5  4£9,  45£L^= ; 

8^  I 

f*«W*  8,  ^8,  ^4,  \<,  \9  ; 

^T,r  V \»,^i 
fammKvtmw*  \i  1 
^hrf*3*f  <9  i 

8^8  1 
8^8  1 
448  1 


( i\'  ) 

'^jrfwtrrr  ®4,  cs  ®*  1 

UfaaffTfWT*  *5°  1 

i** ; W 

yfiranB'gfli  *a,  **4  i 

? W,  3’ Co  | 

firfit*  1*11 

^Nri^HrgiJ  8®a,  e®^  i 

<Wsr%i®r  8®*  i 

If’sftssft^K  8*1  i 

i*r^  i8i  i 

am  8*4 ; •*$*  s*.  i 

1®^®TT  **4  ; o*f«®rr  88® 

3S[l*!|RraT  1®<  1 

***,  a«4  i 

* 

V 

rm  i<*  i 

lib  lib  lib  lib  lib 

?wrtf*i  \1*  1 

lib  1$4,  1®*,  1®1,  1®®  I 

*w**8,  ***  i 

V»I^T4t  **o  | 

WKffiSI  V=°,  V=l,  **4, 

W83R  4,  *°*  ; °g*T  4,  *«®, 

148  1 

***,  **®,  a.c  1 

mgsr-ftfcmifNt  *®n 

wfvrg  4^,  \»b  *i®  i 

***,  **4  i 

whngiTjften:  **®,  \*«  1 

llffrWfSW  8*1  1 

i 

f?W«I  *4*  1 

8<=«*  i 

fw«  **8,  **4  1 

MP  8$^  | 

f%Wt|g*T  1**=  1 

V*TM  8^<*.  1 

f*JW:T  8**,  84*  1 

■snR^npnFnfBT  i 

f?®!®!!*  *3*  t 

v*rNnc*rf<r  8\a  ; ein*  ^®o  j 

ffarnsr  *®e,  **=8,  *4*,  *t®, 

**i,  *i*,  *®4,  \n, 

**4,  ***  1 

*11,  W,  *14,  88.,  88*, 

*i®,  ***,  **8  i 

81*,  81*  8H,  «®*,  18*  ; 

. **®,  **^=  ; .ffTtT 

•XT*  *®*  ; »g*rr  *«,  **, 

**® 1 

81<  ; .VTTS*  ***  I 

a =4  i 

TOfflfft  a**,  8**,  1<*  1 

1>* 1 

l*,  18,  ’**,  8*® ; .To 

^($W  **<=  1 

*1*  1 

^PTH  x*°,  *«*,  **8,  1**, 

■trro  *4  i 

1*8  1 

yiii*i*Hw  i*«  i 

^rrwt  *«•  i 

VTftrfr  ***  i . 

;**T3*rftrc  81®  1 

g«n  «.,  «*  i 

|&*ipr**,  4* i 

HI?*1<*  I 
**  Is  *18,  15*  1 

( ) 

<■  wan  vot,  ux.  \t*>,  I <®  i 


i 

-atJT  t,<JA  3*^,  ^8  I 
K?»rra%^T  8»3,  8?y.  B><  I 

5ff 

»I^vHt  iix,  hAm,  :*X’i.,  8.XX,  'jXi-, 

1^9,  ij'Sy  I 

snre^rtH  «as  | 

8«L9  ; otfT  By  8 ! 

Bl«  3^,  »£»  8,  I 
8o<  1 

ST^fT^cT  «1<  i 
«r5<nffsnq  a£*=  i 

8*<;  «*$*i  8<«*,  8ca, 

8<t\.  8£.^  : o^f  p So  ; 

e5p?  18<  ; yds  I 

*TcWt  yd<  i 
STST'SJ^t  8i<=  I 

8«a  i 

Sprisra  s^;-,  | 

3TT7T  9o£  8®a  I 

iTT71%TO  V>  ^8,  B'^>,  y£*  ; 

o^q  8t ; ^0  ] 

STTTrW'W  ?<v~\  yd/  I 
arwrm  it.*,  ! 

mit^w  ^=i  i 
anit^  VI  i 
«TT^  ^ I 

qmfrjrtfor  ^Na,  \ 

v°  i 

f*m«  \*L\  I 
fm*  W 1 
fwftn*  i , 
fW«W^?n  08^  i 


PrJTfw^rnr  an  i 
faarfrc  aa/.,  0«t\  i 

ftfinfancw  v=<  1 
f’fw  0«.<,  HA  i 
f»r«E|«RrncT  VA  I 

i*9  <=<,  W>  8^ 

«V  I 

'jR;v  $y«=,  3*=\  I 
^^TfTOfn^T  «a^  j 
•I^T  \y  a.  VX  V®  1 
'i\i..  0 v>  1^>  i 

*XP«r  (c(  o?,  vjjj, 

*ay,  I "/ , VA,  VV  3*°, 

8 8’i,  ii.8  : 

-i i. y r^^lflT^t  9^0,  88U  . 88<, 

>j  ! 

^‘VTf^r  ?h^  UJU  8^,  8 ay , 
vc  9.  ; 

Bye  ; 

MvWiT*f  ^a9.  3^,  V-\*  8\<  i 

yd/  t 

HW*7  H.HS\  I 

^ i 

8<o  ! 

8 ©1 , 8^,  8£\  ; 
o’^TTITK  8 81;  oTJT^lfifWT 
8^1;  <>?!RW  8<V,  o^ptt- 
■«cr  8<8  i 

q^cT^TT^  \$»f  ^1, 

W,  vi,  w,  v<. 
8^e,ie8,  iV;  °?RpT  V® ; 
i 

8^,  t 


( i\<  ) 


trefs?  ^ ; •W&1 1 W- 1 

^y<o,  ye/Q  ; ^y  I 


ctt%  y^y  ; off^n?  8yy  I 
Tj-wr^T¥  8<y  I 
2°\  t 

8^  I 

irng*T  y°s  ^ V-l* 
?e.y,  ays  say,  ay«>,  8<=y, 
■J  o 9,  y<c  ; *iici T 8y<s,  8<*y  ; 
*fe*iwr  ayy ; oft^fBRT 
; eff^cTT  ayy  I 
R^ftfjpPt  8 By,  8<y  i 
ifar^T  8<>y,  8^o  | 
lfaflT*pm:  W,  \8\,  ^8y  ; 

’fftyriteK  v*  i 

TOW  yys,  8 18  8 I 
d j 

Tariff  ye.y  i 

y<>,  yy,  8^=,  yy,  ya, 
yyt  i 

R^Tfa^TcTT  H*i  I 

yyy,  y<e.,  y«<,  8 \i, 
8^e,  8y$>,  88y,  8^1,  B'Oe, 
8^,  B£B,  8ei  8^,  y<«, 
y.^\  ;o^  8^;  o^^T  8»y  I 
y*o,  y^=y,  8y*=,  815  I 
ye.«  i 

$ I 

8 ye.  i 

irm^RT  yya,  i 
vicwzi  ye'C  | 

'TO3BSt,='s  I 

TOjmtjpi  Vs  I 

,W9*  is*.  I 

8?r^Tftw>  8t«  | 

tWffafflt  8<»,  8<®,  8^,  8^  I 


W18PW*:  t>i,  yzS'  ^ 1 

Wolf'S  r[^r7  «®  | 

■TOS*?  tie,  <iM  I 
’JVgfT  8J®,  8\t,  8^,  8^8 
i iuncnr  w.°^,  i 
I I 

i wsmK  ? \®  i 
j wwxftnft  ®i  i 
usttot  «®  i 
wsrnira:  ; »>rfiT  8^  i 

WW8  I 

wwat  it.*,  a i 

"??W  8?^  I 

inctnn^  ^®,  8CC,  at?,  8j£.<  ; 
o^fmrsr  s«^  ; s<\, 

8«^  ; o^T  88 i I 

'ncmaj  n.°,  n.\ ; o^ht  ix\  ; 

8_0^=  I 

TO|  v**,  V=l,  V1®,  *{-i,  *•«, 

\»^  I 

traftf«*an  ^o®  i 

^»®, 

n* ' 

ipiwRwhrncaft  ^\«  i 
Wl*  <’=,  ^ \«A.  \i\,  \\e, 
^<.8  ; ®aw  ®<  ; 
®f»T8^  \88.;  •Pr^fT  v»a, 
ofw?r  \8^;  »n 
®rT^m  8 1 
iiwubw  8^^  i 
I 

TOff  ®8^l 
WTSW  8^®  I 
wnBt(frf«t>Tr  ®8.  i 


( 


) 


WCT  95  5*,  ti,  9*5,  555,  *5*  I 

y,«Tt».«unr  9®5 


OTTO  8»,  84,  <=4,  €.8,  4*,  99®, 


5'5  I 

OTHtt  84*=  I 
tlTeTra^RIT  988  I 
uraroftifa  9*°  i 

598,  594,  I 
unptnrig'n  *5*  i 
xtTOT  e\o,  8\?  I 
5T*5  95'=  ; »ot  845  i 
mfwai  a^e  i 
Tm?ft  99a,  94°  i 
irrftsna  5»s ; <ro  58*  i 
irret*s  44  i 
UTOetTCT  949  i 
nTf*F?t  *54  i 
lorrsft  \4,=  i 
fjrgsrr  544  1 

fOTPfnf  8*=*;  = HlfeTO 

°*r*r  909  1 
fw»r  899  1 

fOTOT  804,  898,  89®,  8 8t,i 
8i5,  84*,  *95,  *44  I 
■firetrf*  9°®,  v',  99°  1 
fOT*  8\\  I 
^taaiTT  *4*  1 
n'tat'T'fta  8®4  1 
iftsnft'Ilft'OT  8®4  I 
OT«Y99°>  88*,  885,  8®4,  *£.5  1 
OT*  8®8  I 

UOTft«*TO  «5<,  885  8®' 
OT*55  9»<>  I 

*5*  I 

OT  *55,  *5®  I 


<,V=,  W>  555,  V**.,  554, 
5®5-  5®5,  5®9,  959,  95*> 
99  s I 

V®4,  9®8,  \4»,  544, 

55<,  55'cl 

OTJT  5*®,  955,  959  I 
59®,  \a»  1 
xpn  55®  1 

OTTfaJU’S  940,  5*5  1 

IHS'XTfrTO  Ij  &n  I 
xffa*TO  85;  e^iTOW  8 0 1 
trTffcTOT  955,  I 
Tprsr  595,  9®°  1 

5tfOTf  9^.  3<4,  *99  I 
OTT  ^4,  95«,  954,  888,  885 
8®®,  *«*,  *5,4,  *9\,  *95, 
*93,  *94,  **5,  *'=9,  *5®  I 
othtj;  99®,  999,  9, *4  1 

ottot  9*5  1 

OTT«t5  99*  1 
OTratf  9 9®  I 

irororctwiT  9*®,  999,  99^, 
\»5W,  958,  555,  95*> 
955,  955,  959>  95«,  59*, 
95<>  95®,  95^,  95^>  95», 
859,  955,  559,  518,  59*, 

591,  58 « ; *W  551.; 

°S«*  95®,  55®,  555,  555. 
559.  554  l 
B-sruriftw  «9  1 


rxgifjrft:  8*9,  a**  1 

XJWHH  *5»,  *<9.  1-<5,  *55.|*™fTOT  88*1 

*55,  *5®  1 55IW  5®»  1 


( <v*  ) 


'5r*rrfw%H  v,  i®*,  i®*,  i<8, 
14®  i 

imreifa  s**  i 

irons’?}  ***,  **®,  ***,  **4, 
«8»  I 

irorofsf’ifv  U®  i 
TrorcfsfifV  *1*  i 
a-sfftrrET  **i,  *4*  *«*,  ei®, 
1*1 , i**  ; ®f*VT»r  a®*  i 

iPTOfT  8*®,  8*4.  I 

iran  ***,  8**,  is*  i 

HfaflJ*  8*<=  I 

HfaWTWWnii  **  I 

HfirW^T  *4®,  344,  8®1,  8®S  I 

HWfifTT  8®*  I 

**®  ; »TBT  *4®,  *4*  ; 
o^i?r  **4,  8**,  8*®  I 
STWHST  8^3  I 

HaST^te  1 *3.  **8,  1®*=,  *.£., 
*V>  *8*,  n®,  ***.  **4, 
*®*.  *®®,  V=e,  *=*,  *^8, 
V=i-  *4*,  *®*,  s*®,  ***, 
**4,  88o,  00*,  81*,  1®®, 
4*®-  49°.  4.1.8,  HI  , 11®, 
141.,  14*,  14"=  ; .IT* 
l.^>  l*c>  l*o,  i**,  1*1 , 
1*4,18®,  l®a,  14°,  10=; 
®H*T  8®*,  8*1;  otflTOJK 
4**.  4**  ; ®IS  «*  ; .gn 
*«*,  *°® ; ®%s  is*  ; 

•fWT  818  I 
8**  i 

Ifiw  *“*  ; *9*  *®  i 

;ffhWT*T  *1*  I 

*•*  i 


inn*??}'  a*®  i 

OTT9TC  84  o.  1**  | 

Hf^TTT  *oo  | 

BWTrrfn  *i»,  a®* ; o^risre  00., 
88*  I 

H1T3T  ***  I 

n%?pr  *4*  1 

^8^,  1 

8(£B  ; B^d  I 

^<£.«  I 

ftm*TffSTT  lo*  1 

iftftr  848, 1**  ; ®*r®fhB1F  8=4 1 
W a 04,  88*,  81=,  8"="=,  841, 
1**,  14*  ; oireiw  1-c*  ; 
®SIT  8*®  I 

HTrennf**  ^4  1 

vn 

HR* TT4  8*® 

* 

***  **8  ; ®*r  ** 
l*0l*UL4«  V=*  I 
W *4*  ; ogfw  *"=*,  *«  1 

**,  ***,  ***,  *84, 

*«*,  *4*,  *0*,  *«•  I 
fl’**}w  *"=*,  8*8  I 
flHFITTO  *•*  ) 

i«*  ; *.m  l*®,  1*8, 
1<1,  l«,  VF*  1 
*twam*i 
91 8**  1 

f*vrrer  i®.  ; «*}*  i®*  1 
!**!*  *<•»  «<*» 


( ) 


S*«*33  i 

¥*«Tfa»Pt  Bin.,  8<®,  8<\,  8 <3, 

8«3,  B*=8,  8«<  I 
35*31*1  3\4  I 
I^TS*  3,3l  I 
fsrifa  \ie  I 
SSWfTK*  1«<  I 

3*«T*3<1I 

33«Tf33  3<4  | 

3W8W  3<3  I 
13WT3T  331  I 
3<8  I 
3*tw  835  1 
33*T3  *,<8  I 
fS3T3r  ^<11 
333W3  3<1 1 
3*fw  3<l 1 
33TT3T  ^,<3.  | 

33<>  33®,  333> 

3^4,  380  | 

fsfrwrTT*  33,3.  i 

3>  3-  33. 34,  <®,  3»°. 
88S  3.31.;  »’<P5f  33,3.,  13«  ; 
of«r3Tf*3Jff  833.;  ofswfaTTC 
34,  <8,  3»«,33^  1 
3tf3C^  8®<  | 

«rrf33r3  \®«,  333. 1 

TNff  848  ; 03T33T  B®4  I 

wfrlllFt  3^3.  343.  348,  3.3  ; 

otrroiFt  303.;  «g*T  3®®  1 
tNhpjww  3*3  1 
TO  3«3,  3'=<>  8.33.  l®3  1 
TO*  33°  1 

INHWHT  ^d.  I 

*r*m  33<  1 

tos«  3.3*  1 


TO*ifa  303  l 

TOfTOT*  33.4,  3®3,  3C8  I 
TOf8PC!  31®,  3T=S  3^8,  3C1, 
3«®,  34<  l 

TOT  33®,  338.  334, 383,  3®8, 
3®4,  3*.,  33.*,  803,  8.3, 
833,  8.3“,  114  1 
iTWnBflPS*  3.0  4 I 
TOimt  3.8  \ 1 
388 1 

*T 

^5  1 

wr*^%>srr  <1  1 

H*3R  ^ | 

H3f*H  3\8,  =3i  I 

33,  3.0  4 ; »3«!  I 
H3T  3<3.  1«  I 
\®-=  I 
83®  I 

H3P  8<=4,  848  I 
fwfjgmw  3® 3 I 

ntwnro  3.®  3 I 

tftHT  3 ®3,  3.4<  I 
vft3JHflT'1  B®8  I 

3PTJmifMW\  83  ; ®irw**i 

3<8J 

3<3  1 

iJ5*ftrfis  33.0  l 
»!5*t  343,  88<,  88®  I 
n?  3®«,  3'°a,  8® 4,  830,  83®, 

8 83,  835,  843,  843.,  333, 

3.43  ; I 

133, 8.33,  3.38.  33-'- 
8.3*.  83.8,  83.1,  13>C  l 
131 1 


( i\°  ) 


*r?TOiTg*T  iv°  1 
irftrarctft  3.1°  ' 
arfcrot  ay  ! 

Be,  88,  8^,  11,  ^8, 

, «*>,  w ; (P 
W 1 

a*fn*r  v^»  W 
az^nr*  \si  i 

8^1,  88°,  88^,  81^,  1°8, 

le*C  I 

TOfT  1«8  I 

rffe  ^ 1 

SOT*  <=8,  \^8,  1^1, 

3^,  31$,  ^£°,  9<\,  ^ I 
s^fa^ir  ^8^>  t 
swfhrfr$*pTT  W i 


*>»!,  \i\,  \i%  \i*k,  \i% 

11^  I 

I**,  H,  1<,  11,  V0> 

Vs  \v>  w>  \V.  w> 

W Wf  W \*\> 
W \81 , \81,  W,  CW» 
\1«»  \11,  M<,  W \1S 

\i°,  \i'k,  \ii,  *,<!> 

!•<  I 

t*  i 

| 8^  i 

Hfin  8H;  8e<;  ecf^[ 

1111 

*ftnr*  ^>,  \i  i 

^ I 

Hfcr  ^i  i 


*m  *\\  i * 

wr  \\\>  \®\f  VS> 

v^,  v=<>  x**,  w, 

Bit,  1°  °»  1^1,  18°  I 
i 

ariprfa  8«1,  n,  \°°,  W>  W 1 

\®1,  \°^,  \oXZ>  ?TVOT^faJ  8^  I 

\°t,  \\\,  \X\,  \xx,  \VS>  W <<•  1 
\5V  \55,  W,  \\%,  \5<(,  wyfcsrefere  55*  I 
^•,  ^/S,  t^S  \8\,  jpftfintw  8«0  I 

^8^,,  t>8,=,  \i.»,  t w^rgwrfoft  a»i,  8«c  i 

H^TO  3t«  ; »5n«r  it,  \»s  5\8,  551  i 

V^,  \es  \i<>,  \ix,  \<5,  SW'^;  .ft**  551  > 5«1, ' 
\<®,  185  i 51\,  8e#*  9°5>  •**» 

H5jcrr  511  i *fiwt  8^<  t 

jwrc  \°\,  \-\,  vs  \\yj  wTTtdmi  <,«• 

555  i ss  85,  is,  i\, 

jngTB  t5,  is,  i«,  is  it,  «»,  i«s  5^.  '■%£% 

\tSL,.\\%  \H,  5*5.  \9\,  v*.  55V  W’  W ’l^' 


* 

*r*t  5-ss,  5«ii 
ufw^r  18  < i 

JT^JfTTr  It,  i 


( ) 


WTt*ra  a<3,  «i58,  V=®» 

!<£.«.,  <••; 

«i5^| 

; o^rrft  8.^=8  I 
*FTT%fsT?T  8^  I 
wcrvmfrna  i 
irtrrefamsT  vs  ^o«5. ; 

cTOT  ^ I 
srYRbr  \ i 
*rrra*r  i 
inpr^r^  8j(v  xii  i 

*TTT*T8IT  8^3  | 

WTTTO  333,  V=<» 

1\8.  8VV  8^A  ’i*>8,  8^>3  I 
JTTTtp5«T^in  <iy.£  ! 
fTTH^T  3\e  I 

prefer  \o^  ^e=, 

^8°V  8^,  8<>3,  8°£.  I 

JRTnj^f^T  I 
JTTTCI^  8^3  I 
JTTT^TV  8^3  I 
JTTrwsr  1^3,  8^=.  a^o , y°3  i 
JTTTW^T  3^3  I 
JfTT^cT  I 
HTT^fn^^T  8^8  I 
TOT^cT^T  8^3  | 

iTTTW^Tg^Tftjft'  8 o V 8 « ' <=, 

8®t  | 

TTTTHt^  8^,  83^,  8^=8  I 
*rrmnn  8^8, 8 \i,  88.S 8<8., 
8K*=;  •TO  3.^  ; 8^3  I 

RTT«T*TTcP*  8<=<  I 
*WTTTO>  \33,  *^8.,  *81, 

8°*,  8«*,  80^  8°£  I 

**<,  ***,  8^,  88S 
88.V  8^\  I 


JTTT%*TTIW  8*3  | 

»TTT?fhm  ***,  8 °1  I 
htttot  i<* ; 

8 © 8 ; ^o*  J 

iTTT^T  I 
*n?HTT5T  8,  **8.,  8®<  I 
fTSTf^rr  8 I 

j fl^ncrawhn  8®,  IV  IV  3v 

*?  8*  I 

*niT*  iiro  8t>^=  1 
^i^airrairft  8°8  1 
<H^H«r*n;  ^y£,  8 1^,  8.<8  I 
*n?lfa<SJT  8^8  I 
fmsft^n  8*3  1 

*l*F5ft  *81;  ?8B  ; 

octtftrft  *88.  ! 

*nrm*jwsm  8*1  i 
JT^T*Tt3  **3  1 
*nrT*TOat  ?*<?,  33c.  j 
TO^riWsw?*?!'  800,  8 « V 

8o<,  8ot  t 

fTSHgJUTSTlT  3^,  ^oC  j 

3°V  80  V 8»« 

8o«f  | 

wm*3  **3,  33o,  *<=*,  »8*, 

888.,  8^=3,  ; C^T  88^=  ; 

o&srmt  08**  o^csnun: 

88<=  ; 8«V,  a«,  8^  ; 

°STO1  *<=*  I 

I *ffW  8*3,  l*e«  8**,  1**, 

j 1H,  8.8  <,  8.8£,  8.0=  ; **sr 

j 8.83;  •«!  8.8V  I 
| 3*,  8«<,  8.**  I 

j 8.0= ) 

KTKftr  8.*^  I 
^nrt^^8.v  8o<  1 


( ) 


'©l  I 

anfaro*  tih 

li*9  W*  1 
arrant  i 
arreift  ^{°  i 
ang$*  i<b  i 
am*^  Vs0  I 

arTa^raft  as^ ; #w  ; 

0^1  got ; eftf^T  i 

jnw^t  <»,  <.<,  v5-** 

W,  ^ »«®  f 
*rc^TT*reff*T  ^3,  ocf^r  ^ i 
an^ft  8o3  i 
JTI^TW  83 o I 

*T1C  \18,^*, 

**•,  *!•  I 
am;^  8£'c  i 
aaiftlft  I 
*TTT*n*  ^ t 
JTTftwr^  ^3  i 
TOWt  \3<,  ^>8, 

w w ^°, 

^0,  ^.<, 
W ^ ^ \**> 

^08,  \*l,  V<  5 

o^rft  ; oftr^T  ^<l<l ; 

W ; o^T  8 I 

I 

aTHTcTOXg^  y^o  [ / 

ana!  ^ i 
■.Wltfam  <ii.  l °< 
flTStfv  8^S;  .11*1  8\8  ; o^wf- 
vfcrr  a\ti 
8tWT  ®«,  8^8  I 
WIWTSBW  it.,  \t\,  8<(U 
.arnganmr  ^84  i 


"ran  *8®,  ^ I 

^ I 

WTfa  ; .fw  miL\  ; .ffl&W 
®4,  <%  \t.i,  \\i  I 
fiWST  4«  I 
5HW  48,  \\t,  \H»  I 

3^*  !<•,  *.<V 
iii,  *£*>  i 
3*  «U  i 

3**  «.i,  w>,  v°  i 
gfrjwu:  y®<  i 

g»«  v=i,  v*8,  v.<,  8\<, 

I 

gfa*  ytsi  i 
garnfimf  yys  i 
JZirwt  y^  i 

JJwnpiflTCT  ^ ; oftraaro 
n8 ; “Sivfatiram  ^4  i 
JearaVWUT  ^ I 
nvx  a^ti 

WW[  ^yj=,  B^«,  80'S, 

8<\,  8SI 4 I 

wraatf  *\i,  w,  W 

^8°  I 

%*  ^4,  8«S  I 

*^T  ^.,  ^,  ^8,  84,  «\, 

1\«,  «X*  I 

! 8H  I 

i * 

I I 

! wtr^r  s^y.,  ear,,  84«i 
; *frr?^t  \4\  ; «w  \4',  W, 
^ ; .**t  8«4,  80S,  84»  I 

j flfaw  I 


( <**  ) 


vbj  ^8®,  e®*,  8»®,  8®4, 

8*8,  8*®,  88*,  848,  8**. 
8**.  8<*.  88*.  884 ; «n 
8*8.',  .fbmifij  8®'=  I 

8**  ; *wn  8**  1 

ufaraft  *88,  8®4,  8**  I 
iref’SK  «•  ; e’ffft  ®*  I 
TTSTC-n  8**,  8*8  1 
8*i«nV<nw;Ty  b*4  i 
»w  8®*,  8«*.  88*,  884  i 
tW?1B  84®  I 
B.4^  I 

wfire  88«  i 
XTJTJm^  84®,  844  I 
*rWT»fm  *®®,  *®4,  **®,  *88, 
8*S  8*°,  8**,  8*8,  8**, 
8*®,  8*4,  8.8®,  88c,  8.8.8, 

881,  '88.4  ; .>fra<T  8*1,  I 

/Wft  48,  8*',  8*->,  8**, 
8**,  8**,  88*.  888,  88®, 
88* , 88*.  888;  8»V 

88*  I 

■*rr»r®TW  848  i 
urfiwt  88®,  84®  I 
®T**J  88*  I 

gjrrwfw  8*<;  •m*m  88*; 
•Wf?  8881 

**®  ; ®W  8®*  I 
vMinre  ®4,  ®*  i 

VtfiflfV  8*«,  8*8,  888,  888, 
«®8,  84* ; *Jjf«  88*  l 
*ffiwfrnw  8 8*  i 

88*  i 

' 79  ' 


4«rar^8  *8®  i 

rflWHT'IW  8*8,  8*8,  8*8, 

8*®,  8*8,  8«°  I 

®8  I 

*^JT  8®8;  °'*1*  *88  I 
y*r:*s8rr  *®*,  **e  ; °mz  *®®, 
8*8  I 
*fw  8**  I 
yafa*  8®*  i 

y«t  s®4,  848;  »yfz  8«®; 

»®fer  *8,  *8®,  8»*.  8®=, 
8®*;  ®«rf*r^  8*®,  8 *®, 

8®*,  8®*  i 

yi***r  8*,  *®,  8®,=  ; ®8tt® 
88;  °fw?nr  **®  i 

4W?TT4T  **4  i 

yffwflft  8*8 1 

TSfTTBT  8881 
**•  I 

SWW  **,  *®,  *8,  8*,  *•*, 
V®8»  *8*,  *44,  ***,  *®*, 
8®*,  8®8,  84®,  8*’=,  8®8  J 

•9*2  8*'  ; •fjfo'ft  8**  I 
rsn^FTTpr  *®,  8*8 1 
TapqtywrPiim*  ***  I 
wthi  ®. ; ®5pn»n!*n  **,  *® ; 
«gfm*r  ®*  i 

**8,  *«,  \88j  ***, 

888,  88®,  8**,  8*=*; 

iTO  i®*  i 

*ftgw*8*l 
yfnwtftnft  **  i 
**  *8°,  8*8  i 
*9*1  88®  I 


( ) 


*4\  i 

Tfrr3*r  3 y • , yt  i 

8»4,  bob,  bb\,  8«y, 
W,  18°.  140,  ^ 1 
swincfnai  yayi 

4TJT4T38T  ^4«  i 

ytiro^  say,;  »?w  8y« ; «ffwi 

US  ^4,  883?  »3*Jt  000, 

8 °4  I 

tpraW  osyi 
STsiwfam  140.  i 
itiut  eyi 

*M>  V=\,  O«-0>  08l.> 

?«<=  i 

*13!  ?S,  80S  SB'S,  8 i\, 
8®y,  8^4,  848  I 
3fl?  y8<  i 

w 00®,  OO8,  OH,  O»0>  *X‘/ 
v=i  i 

^fvjTrf^ip  oO^ ; •^fcwn* 
8\8  ; ®wm^tnw  8\a  i 
«S3  0*8>  \H,  8«4,  88</ 

8y»,  8’=C,  84s?  I 

00«-,  boi,  8^4,  y«0  I 
omfi’STCws  o°0  i 
t3<ft  8 •«  I 
<t»!  8^0  I 

^3W3  B«0  ; «9J  B<® ; »9H 

B<^  I 
y4<  I 


88^=  i 

wfmtqjn  o<®,  o®8 

00>  84,  ®0»  \>n, 

000,  H<,  H®>  8o<> 

y8,=  ; •W  0»<,  8«0; 

• 3T39IT  8\8  I # 

wfrram*  o*0  ; otffsm  yio  ; 

•91  ; »9TT  soy  i 

wftrcnsi  OO^  i 
WTtffWT  8y<  i 
«nin  soy,  8^4  i 
mm  \y®,  00O>  oo»,  yoo  i 

fmfij^WT  804  ; •TffTO  804  I 

0<-y,  080  ; o^rfisia  ii  I 
iffarre*!  y4» ; •itf’r  (3*0  HO  l 
wN^Xg  O80»  «L*t  I 

/8f(3f3rer  \t,  00>  83,  yo,  y4, 

<»,  'c\,  *=y,  «®,  ^ 

\oo  I 

*n%st  o^O  i 

00-  08,  o®,  v»  H> 
\i,  0®,  80,  80,  80,  8 <, 
y«,  <o>  <8>  ®c>  Co>  ^> 
si,  o^=o>  0">  00<,  *y®  i 
*r(%>y^t  80«i 

ifmi  0S  <8,  <y,  4<,  0’V 
00*-,  HO,  H0>  ^84,  V*, 
8®0  I 


H4>  0®8, 


* 

3*3  O88  I 

3«3iX3  0<O,  0^0  1 

3*nn«  88  i 

3«Jr«tf»rB*3tfff33  0°®  1 
3*an^rft  s»o  l 
ywitfa  ; •xTtfa^n  *<« 
•l?tWT  »t«  i 


( <n.  ) 


WW  1=.,  1=1,  114,  114  I 
iwrfon  a?':  i 
wmtgiT  i<*  i 
wifiirc  ?4i , i4<  i 
iwf<ro  i<i  i 
HBSUpiT  1 i 

crcmrax^ra  aia,  in  i 
1W?T1>  all,  8=*,,  8=1,  8 =1, 
b=®,  »£\,  m i 
TOfTfawl’  1=S  88<,  818,  81®. 
811,  8<®,  8®!,  8=1,  8=1, 
8=S  8=4,  841,  848,  841 ; 
881  I 

•IWXirT  1®=,  1^8,  ^=,  1«4, 
141,  t.4^,  148,  14<,  1««, 
'Ilf-,  llc  I 

l«a^JJT  11®,  18°,  181.  IBS 

111  I 

I'WVf  11<,  811,  8 IS  HI,  11®, 
118,111,181;  “11  8^1  I 
11,  84,  HI  I 
WITffr’ret  <1,  1=«  I 
iva-rrft^fl- HTiWt  l=«  I 
1«V1  88  I 

c- 

HT11T  11«  I 

iwsot  n=  i 

*<*»im  1 , =1,  v=«,  1=1,  141, 
1",  IIS  111,  111-  111, 

1=S  8“1,  818,  814,  8«,' 
111  I 

iwiWfTwixrti  b®1  i 

uniNA  ®1  i 

wwr  n,  14,  =.,  ii®,  ns 
11^,  111,  1«1,  11®,  114, 
1®4,  1=8,  141,  14®,  US 
141,  1«1,  11“,  H4,  HI, 


la.,  m ; »m  i«i;  «WT 

Hi;  .xrorr  hi,  in,  ns 

81®  ; efjpi  ®1»  =1,  =S 
11®,  18«  ; •frnt  V=l>  14», 
141,  H8,  8.11 
/lUITftr  84,  ®1,  81S  11®  I 
wrrafT  1®4,  1=1,  144,  114, 

II.  I 

1WHT1XT4  1,  =1,  141,  US 

III,  111,  1*1,  !*S  8“1, 

818,  814,  Hi  I 
88,  m I 
H=  I 

8=,  8=4,  841,  848  I 

iwftn  l“i  I 

141,  US  1=1,  1*S 
8H,  8=S,  Hi  I 
IWWcf  148  I 
?WX5  14=  I 

I’twri'r  8=,  8=4,  841,  848  I 
iwrxgignr  II 
iwx?5wmirrcH'»Ti)ji?m  il  i 
Wuftlfw  111,  ill,  814  I 

iwthttw  1=1 1 
W(W  11=  I 
*njgir  i,  ii,  18  i 
i«nm  in;  an  l 

=.,  ®1,  1«1,  114, 
111,  8 IS  811,  811,  818, 
811,  8ll,  81®,  81S  1=®  ; 
81®  I 

iwinr  in  i 

TOsWt  B=,  841,  848  I® 

n«  I 

wrfit  811,  811,  &18»  811, 
81*1 


( ) 


8*8,  8*8.,  8*<,  8*®, 
8*®,  g**,  8*8,  8*8.,  8*^, 
8*®,  8*4,  88®,  88*,  88*, 
8«c,  84*,  8.®  8 ? ®^t^T  8*c  I 
^faaisr  *8.8.,  8® <4,  8*8  I 
I 

81*  8^8,  8^, 

8V^>  I 

^BSTC  8^8  I 
T&mjKZi  i 
irniz^m  S\\,  8^8,  S\H^\ 
WETJHT  8<«*_  I 
wrfrr^rgin  ^8®  i 
rorasuft  **<,  *v=,  **•, 
w.  W*  W=>  ***,  M*J 
( ffwat®  ) *** ; ( giftm^. ) 

w=l 

^B«rg  *®,  ®8,  *®*,  **®, 

*88.,  *<*,  **«,  *®*,  *<=*, 
84*,  B4C,  888.  , 8.'=*  I 
WIWTfa^fT  8^  I 
WSf»T  V=8.,  *®8  I 

W=>  <***  I 

TOBfte  *44,  ***  ; ®Wf2T 
**4,  **4 ; ®*sft£t  *'-“  I 
To^tn:  8®<,  8.®®,  8.<*,  8.V= ; 
•g«ci  8.**  i 

W 888.,  88<,  8®8J 
Wf|‘<H  8®*  I 

WTsft  8.®,  *®4,  V=>4,  *44, 
**®  I 

*Wn**8.8  I 

:\0*S&R*SF%  ^ I 

\\*.  **<,  w I / 


TO*8I  *44,  ***,  8l*<;  ®g*T 

8.**=  I 

wractar  i 

8L»  \S  \<t> 

W ; *m  W,  W ; ofrifT 

« V.  I 

TOTTTC  88  I 
y^s>  i 

*p«Nf 8 i 

TZ  8^  ; o^SJ  8 0'S  | 

**Twt  *®*,  *®o,  *«*,  >54?, 

*®8  I 

^fT  *•*,  **«  ; •aT'ST  88.1 
ifXfVi  *4%  **4  I 
/S^mcT  *®®  i 
^TTfwitT  8^4  I 

Wft  4®®,  VS  Vs*,  V*, 
*®8,  8^8  I 

tot  *®*  i 

tot^  s*®®,  *®s  ***,  *4*, 

*®8  i 

wn  *<|c,  8®<,  8.8*,  8.8.4  ; 

®WJ»W  *4®,  *4<  I 
?aW  *•»<,  4®°,  Vs*,  *4*> 
V*  I 

*8?t5TOff  *8*  I 
TOTfSTTOSTO  *®'<=  I 
*8.®  I 

*T*t  8.**  I 
*TT  <*8.*  I 
??*••  I 

WT’ft  8<  I 

ACHT4T  Bi,  8**,  8.8.4,  8.<*, 

8.**,  <Lii  i •vwft  »\K; 

®AKW^8t  8** ; .wmdY- 

1W  WVfBW; 


( <8*  ) 


^C'TTfrwt  188,  I 
89.8,,  8.88,  I 
*91*1  \°\  I 

888,  I 

8^8,  I 

*ifA88-  881 1 

*PW  \6°,  \ti\,  8,lc  I 
snrfwsr  \o\  i 
snftw  tv  8<v  8<8  i 
snftat  4.8,  8,»1,  8,«s  8,8®, 
8,8®,  8,88,,  8,8V  8,88,  8,88, 
t,8i,  \i°,  8V8  i 
SfTITO  88  »,  I 

^Tfwsfsvrra’TT  8\ ; 88  1 
wraw  e?  8 i 
4«  I 

5Tf?rre  48.,  44,  8,«®,  8,»8> 
8,°8,  8,®S  8,®4,  8,8,.,  8,8,8  I 
cTWTT  I 

smr3<nrf3p8  4<=  I 
smnsEf  188,  ; »wp  9,48,  l 

*T®8T  88®  I 

^ 888,  115.  tit ; «*nsw 
®S  8,4°,  8,41,  8ii>  8®8, 
8*8,  8»8  I 
8r?%>n  88®  i 

SPOT  8®<>  8®S  8=8,  848, 

^o\  ! 

4T8T#t  848,  I 

llftTnfirnf  881,  88<,  8®ll 

4T*«  88<  ; «*WJT  ®S  H8,  I 

8T5«ft  8<4,  8<8«  8®S  8^’ 
8«®,  18.8,  188,,  1®8,  1«®  | 
finnfftqmpn  8,«v  • 

fa*2>*ZT  148  I 

fH«WWt  1»8  I 


ft«8fm  i88>  188^  188-  US 
<ts. , 18<,  18®,  118,  11«, 
11=  I 

fa*  8,8,,  <s  8,. 8,  \i*>  8<4, 
8,41,88s  8®<>  8C»>  8=8, 
84.,  8 fi-if  8°s  8<s  «8\, 
8 ii,  18,s  181,  118,  11®  I 
famr®  8»®  i 
faitfsprnpir  bi=  i 
faWWT  8 <4  I 
fairw*  8,8®,  11=  i 
fa*Tfa  114  I 
fa*8T  148.  I 
fWiTOR  <=  I 
^4®  i 

f^fufsfisiT  888 ; 8®  i 

l<8,  1*8-  1«- 
1<® ; i$8 ; 

l<«  i 

fa*f»r  ei«  i 

fa^pr  8.4;  .wraiTiw  84; 

•*T*  88<  i 
fwr  \,  1.8  i 
fa^rfa^t  8®  i 
fasmrr  888,  i«4  i 
fspgrarfueP*  818 ; .fare*?!* 
W 

i from*  8,<®  i 
i frowsiTOinfft  814  i 
j fm  888  ; .WOT  888  I 
fa=wrrei\  888  1 
falWT»K  14^  i 
fa**TO  lit  i j 

fa®ftf**V.®i  i 

farofamt  88.,  a 8s  8 >=8, 

8^8  I 


( <4C  ) 


fapstmi^T  84’=.  38-  ! 

fs^irar  i 
fssumn  ’(Bo  : 
f?’S?r«T  a£  i 

fs***i?t  i°,  y^s  1 
far^tfttf  48=.  48f  ; "S^f*  484  | 
fssrTfssrr  y_<=,  y | 
fssyifcrst  3^y 1. 1 

f^sgriJTw  ?s=  i 

fysT?:  4«v  i 

fro  S3,  448,  444,  4®«,  434, 

B»3,  434  I 

fs«fw  ^3  | 

s*Nt  V<-4>  44®>  4<4,  3<8X,  \ie, 

844,  8 44  I 
y'tW?!'  8^3  | 
tt»;sTftr»?\  88\  i 
ffans  443  i 

^fnrNir  8=4,  84.8  I 
^rW«TT  4*  I 
S®  844  I 

%ara  (®)  V4C,  8 04.,  8^3; 

•*t  884,  834.,  4.4.8,  4.4.4. 1 
SSST  804.,  88<  I 
t(s)Hfuf*S  4.\°,  48\,  444.  I 
<8,  4<,  V°4- 
4®4,  \4_V,  V<-4>  4«->  4^4- 
444.  4®*,  4®®,  4®*.,  4^0, 
4'=8,  4=4 . 4=3,  4=*,  44V. 

^*.8,  ^0^, 

444.  4C4,  444.  8°°,  843, 

883,  84c,  8<o,  834^,  84S 

4V»,  484,  4<c;  -fw^l 
44<>,  88",  884  5 •gjfe’Tt 
4®4,  448, 8V=;  •gftm  434; 

•vi  *=»  : .*mnr  443  1 


trNvcfgpr  <444  1 
lrhi»tTfvtw*ftfw?fs  84  1 
I«r4ar  84,  8 "4,  44°.  4<4, 
4.44,  4<4>  4 44,  4^3  1 

sm*  48,  444,  8=3  1 
si f«rt*  448  l 

ainsiTn  488  ; ogur  44.  Vo8> 

V4,  444,  W,  448,  4^4, 
448,  4<«  ; o^TVcff  44V  1 
SITU  843  | 

sn?  44®,  4^=8,  44<  I 
sftJTnrsnftr5!  a <3  1 

* 

| trsre  434.;  »zw  4<4  1 
*t*  44V,  444  I 
8TT4  4®8,  434.,  4V°  1 
8HS  44S  4®^  1 

WS^ra  4<4,  4<4,  4=4,  44», 
444,  438,  433  | 

8TW5  4.44,  4<8,  444  I 
ara«sreR*u  8441 
sfitth:  4,  4°,  ®a,  484>  484- 
4®4,  4®t,  4<-4,  84",  4°V  ? 
oirmi  VV'S- ; 4<-S  8C», 

84.3,  844.  ; »g4T  4 I 
stsTTrs  4=3,  844  1 
stsst  884,  884,  88<,  s4v> 

834.  I 

SOTSHS  48"  I 

US  4"S  4«4.,  444.,  4’CV  a®0> 

838,  44= ; "S*T  84«  I 
STTfS  844  1 
StST  84»  I 

*st*5  443,  14V ; ®*sr  4V«, 
848,  843,  44= ; "WTSTt  444 1 

■jrSTWS  83®  1 


( ) 


H«  I 

vtsjfwurr  m i 

B\\  I 

Hffl  14S  I 

Wlfsfl  Ml,  144  J ®*1<8,H<, 

Ms  MS  111;  *W«VI 

BtlfaWl  8S8  I 
'jn^HW'Sf  i«\  i 

«cifwf<re*T  i*=s  m i 

9tT^a  881,  8<1,  8M,  I 
Ttrsaw  m,  84s,  844,  s>o  i 

st<  i 

fspsngii  mV  nv  M'S  I 
fsxW  sm  i 
ftpcfrrrai  8^  i 
fsininT  iM>  MV  ms  i 

\B4  I 

i 

gaWaT  ns  i 
^BT^T^nfrrftrar  a\«  I 
^wyr  si  i 
jjh^swt  Ml  i 
5*W  84<,  SM  1 
=5«T  8 8^  I 

wtw:  is®  i 
^Hiw^finw  mi  i 

isb,  m,  is<,  1S4,  V=V 
M=8,  141,  14<,  l6  9,  9°V 
8^3 ; og«5T  m;  ogg’r  1S8, 
or^TT^t;  o^TT  v=£l 
I 

wrm  8^  i 
W r 8^»  *\*  I 

wpn  «<>,  tiV  MS,  8 <4,  m i 
«E5fT>C  8M,  S\1  I 
WfmfwiftaT  8M  i 


tw  t<4  I 
SltflS^t  8M  I 

W8tT«T  m,  8S^S,  88®,  8M, 
81.8,  81S,  <48°,  1<C; 

MB  ; o H%8T  8<4;  onTftt 

sM ; o*nrn-  8^  i ' 

WITOWtH  8«4  I 
HJtmMY  8M  I 
83*  8»4  I 

* 

srnrar  <s,  l»v  ms  l 
*t  st,6  i 
m i 

sftWMI  | 

j ( ftfficrf  ) 818,  8SS  I 
^fawfcff^snn  m®  i 
%w  i 

m4  i 

w^mt  ii<- 1 

<* 

MMTTJra^q-  81o  I 
wztmfaaifaqfij  848  i 

is,  8,<  ; oflTlfaf’tn  \i, 

IS  IS  I 

18  I 

I Vjf*’*  !8o ; ofsiwilll 

8<8  ; o%M*t  811; 

. o^fafaTtr  84«  I 

toj***^*1  i 

3*JWT  114,  818,  8«S,  84V 

I®  b ; o^jfim  bis;  ®iffts 

M i 

•fN^mtfnrw  si®,  i°\  1 

*)«  *»«.*!  8«S  | 

srtswwr;  an  1 


( ) 


* 

8®4.  i 
ffwmsi  3 3\  i 

?=■/..  8 <8  I 
BUmtTTfrwt  at,<  i 
3 ? a i 


«*n*  a.  88>  8®,  8®,  *>8>  8"8  ; 

o3j-f%?irr  a^s,  84® ; »vk 
8°4,  8^,  848  5 o*«T88®> 

8=8  ; ®Tj<hr  8»4  ; .maw 
s88,  888;  ®g*t  a,  8°.  88®, 

8««,  8 <4,  8®\,  88®,  888»l 
*8>  88>  84,  8®.®'=, 


*T|TS  884  i 
8 8\  ! 

W^TfWt  84=  I 
W8IT  8 = 4.  3 8<  I 
flSI8?8T  888  I 
W^TfPdtf’J  I 

*rcftsgw8flsj!!?t  888-  888  1 

«8ft55«3T<8^T  888  I 
*rs£fT?<TTfttf't  3TCT  848,  I 
WWSHt  88\  I 
84c  i 
sffluraw  8\8  i 
WH>tT^rifWT8SlT  8<=4  I 
»UWT«  8«®  I 

HHJT9I  848,  8®*=  I 
wFrarfaw*»ai  8,®  t,  8V  i 
WIPS**  8C8  I 
«wm8  8*=®,  8^4,  848. ! 

wWbr  88’  88,  s>8’  '=8.,  8 8.8, 
888 , 8<8,  884,  888,8®^. 

844,  8°8 , 88s ; ®wrt 

88®  * ®8^jfr8  181 » ®m4(V^I 

«8,  8 e-a  I 
«Wti?8iT  88,=  I, 
wtWTOwni  8^  i 
WTCTT  ( 8W8  ) 8’°®  I 
igpnww  88<->  84°>  848,  »<8- 
8,=8  I 

l*«,  4.  88.  i*»n»  8<8I 


8®8,  88'®.  88*-,  888,8^®, 
8®°,  8®8,  8®8>  8®8.  8®  8, 
888.  888.  888.  88C>  V=8> 
888,  8®'8  > *84,  881®  i 
?W7Tfw,r»T>  888.  88®  1 
88c  l 

*WTsr  ^8  ; ®9*t  8°  i 
*mrfv  884.  88-®.’  °58T  *=8, 
884,  888.  888’  8«f  J 
^rmfv^WhJTW  8*=4,  848  I 

*wqeqfrr  888  l 
mmreT^fa  8-9  l 
848,  8®8I 
«M|*d^  848,  844  I 
*wftfsr8atf?Tw*  888  1 
waftenr  8^=4  i 
frerfa^rnr  888 1 
4«  I 

888  I 

,*rcsnft  88°.  88<>  8.88.  8.88. 

8881 

^TTVrr^  <=®,  «8  1 
888  1 
888  1 

88.888  . 8»8.  884,  888. 

888,  888.  8s1®  5 ®Wt^fta 

«8, 8®8  l 

wifw^w  8*V8«®,  88^  t 


( <«,  ) 


3C,  v®,  334,  333;  .-stt* 
83;  o<TT  338  ; »3  34.'=  r 
3^3  i 

WT^Xf^i^t  8>=<  I 
^crsrnrfr3[T«T  o.  3>  bs3 
*o^^I  3 ! 

g*n  4,= a i 

*M^jJSTfa«Tt  84  ?,  84  8,  84  4 
84®  5 »tcN<ft  844  I 
WW3RTfrH4W*rt  30^  I 
WSCTSfag*;!  30  I 
W44lf?X[«?4i  334.  I 
*ni<T  8^  I 

3<3  ! 

tf*»T  3^..  34®,  BBS  48 » 

o^HT3TT  4 c 3 I 
*r*srfawm  3C8,  844-  I 
«*sti*k  44.3  ; °*Rrai  834.  i 
fl**WT*%  834.  I 

snrefwt  834.  i 
*snr*  34*  1 

trTa^faanrfaflfa  4 33  1 
wnraraw^ft  800.  8.3,  8°3  1 
fa*  ®a,  334.  1 
fa**fK  ss,  as  43,  43, 

<3 ; o-Brrcmt  *a  ; ®;u*n  «« 1 
fa*nT?5ifa«fx:  4.3,  <3 
faa  433  1 

ftrcram  333,  33*-.  333  1 
faaaat  8=3,  8-c  1 
faaaorf  33  s 1 
faam*  34.4. 1 

fatsraU  33®,  33s  33t>  \8' 
384.1 

fafrff  84.4. 1 
833  I 


| wfarro  33<  ; owft  3 1 

exfiaat  3<3,  88^ 

^im  303.  338,  334.  4®» 
gjrfefaiOH  ^ 1 

433.  *33  l 

333,  4<=o  1 

srm  4,<»  1 

xra*r  83,  44.,  <8,  ®®;  -jott*: 

3*,  8®,  88,  44  - 3*4.  I 
Xf^T  4<3  I 
XJ^TI  4«3  I 
i°3  1 

4X3, 4 <a  1 

gwm  V3  1 

«T«*r  833,  4X3.  4<3-  *33  l 
gtrfcm*  4.4.3  1 
IHrfasft  4.°  3 1 

H*rc  -s>s  334  838,  83®,  84.3, 

84.3,  *»®  ; ^34.3  8 ®4_; 

«TT*r  4.43  1 
jjjwam  34.3  1 
834. 1 

gwtx  3'=o,  3<=4, 34.'=,  34.4.,  334. ; 

343  345  1 
grfanft  4 -3  1 
j 4.4.3  I 

55t<r*ff  333 ; ®^far  4.4.3  1 
o*r*mFt  44.3  ; owrfwft  4.4.3, 
4.4.3  1 
44.3  1 
«<^«i  44.3  1 

ggwhWT  443  I 

ITWaff  833  | 

«ft3PnRf*i5  38«,  34®,  34.3  ; 

•tr^*nr  833,  s3®  1 
tfffct  83®  I 


( ) 


V=<  i 

^®8,  V»c<  ^£ 

*4.3,  VV  VV  V8 
.gwaiL.M  i 
80  1 

*a<,  *®s  V*-,  V=V  V* 
*»t.,  88®  1 
B«4.,  8iiJ  1 
V3.  I 

I 

80 4.,  8<=S  84.*.  I 

WifTO  I 
<sPH  *V  I 

^wro:  v*\  1 

wt  *®V  vc’  8*8> 85^  1 
«ronY  8*u 
«w  *v  1 

S5ft«  ; on  *®*,  | 
isifrc  <(*,  \o„,\°i  1 
Tim^x  1 1 
fercTOK  ’=«.,  4.^,  4.8  1 
wiUellTI  \t\  1 
wrtei  \£.s  **4.  1 
Bjfn  3*4.  1 

T|fcW*fr«IT  8<=4.,  84.8  I 
WTO  ***,  **8  I 
TTOiwn  a*®  1 
^w^mfH^tnnrfniri.^?  ibwtbV 
HW  8®^  1 

V=V  V«9,  **8  I 

«ftn*  * I 
w>l  8\o>  8\*  I 
nw^ft  ii ; °trro  8<®,  b®*, 
st»,  ws  IV  ; «WTwfn?n 
\<V  *88 ; wwn  b^,  *V-> 

**4  ; WTHT^fT  8«*  I 


* 

TBTOHT  8*®  I 

TBlfft  ^®,  8«,  88,  8<,’8i,  *.4., 
<8,  **,  V=S  *^>  V*1. 
l*t  I 

TWW  i»4  I 

VC  \\o,  *®8,  \®(4,  V*»  *.\V 

V»t,  I 

Tft  «*.,  <=*,  U«,  t®8,  *®*_, 
V°> 

ofl^gv  ®4.  1 

wrrofnfa  i»  1 
TTrVfn  *=*,  VV  3.<V  8o<- ; 
o«T<=*,  V*.  1 

TITOV*  v>  V’  ^ 

®o,  a^,  a*,  ®^  ; ow|»-i(+ 

« 1 

frwn’fi  *8-=  1 
frr»smw  Vs8’  VV 1 

\*i,  **-’  8<V 

8<*,  8 *=,  8 <4,  8®o,  8®\, 

ga*,  8 '98,  8®^,  8®V  8®®, 
8>=*,  8=8 , 8^,  8^,  8^=4., 
8£o,  84*,  84.8,  *•»,  W 

ojrfrnt  «**. ; °nR  *V> 

8^>B  . 0^  4^0^  I 
*W?t  8«=,  8*4.,  84*,  84-8  I 
%c(W  88*,  8<V  B®4;  o^m* 
8i.o ; oTtirron  8®4. 1 
^^TOIW  ^8,  g.'W,  ^ •’*'* 

v\.  w 1 

V°  1 

TtwNt  i#.<.i 


ERRATA. 


Page, 

• 

Line, 

For, 

Vol.  I. 

7 

..  7 

r. 

*r«NH® 

14 

..  4 

15 

..  H 

17 

. . 5 

»» 

..  7 

« 

..  8 

* 

28 

3 

48 

. . 5 

JNrtkvt® 

57 

. . 12 

wprur® 

61 

..  18 

'TOOT® 

67 

..  13 

thf  1 ^ 

68 

..  10 

•VTOW  ! 

82 

..  16 

faf*.  ' 

110 

5 

. . «?Rf 

115 

..  16 

122 

..  5 

Rrtr^fr^t: 

160 

..  3 

«w<?f 

109 

180 

5 

..  19 

m*»« 

182 

. . 14 

»r 

183 

..17 

189 

18-20 

«>fw  . . . , 

208 

..  15 

235 

..  16 

239 

..  16 

251 

..  18 

wwt** 

258 

. . 2,  9, 

19,20  #p 

260 

..  12 

wq* 

261 

..  8 

• WCWT 

Read, 


gftil  trmnffcf 

*TT®BT*f* 

in 

mt® 

?r*r*w: 

°*r«r  wr® 

•fan*  I 

fcWRR 

ffr*® 

WT** 

*frfH  i 

nrwr  vt; 

VR?« 

After  wrt  i add 
l*t*t  Wt  wi 

JTTRT»Rf?r  |] 

^rqf?r 

ffttlK  W 

[ *fr*«nwt 
%RW^rt  * fW!  t 
*W$*t  wwt  *t% 
«*#9Tnmf^rano] 
*T: 

sr 

^n® 

** 

*w$*i 

•wtww 


Suggested  by  Pandit  V.  Bhattacharyy*  in  IHQ  Vol.  HI,  p.  428. 


( <v  ) 


Page, 

Line, 

For, 

Vol.  11. 

264 

»> 

• 15) 

266 

. » .. 

fr 

266 

■ 14) 

290 

8 

^NTT^T«> 

297 

7 

316 

6 

323 

10 

Km% 

336 

2 

Ssurfr 

338 

4 

366 

12 

391 

1 

tL3t 

WWl 

418 

19 

°Wfr«w 

438 

10 

wf^TR 

468 

17 

o V%TK» 

469 

9 

462 

5 

| 

»» 

7 

476 

5 

606 

2 

512 

5 

633 

3 

e^T» 

536 

16 

3^T3e 

538 

3 

543 

12 

573 

9 

4wk* 

584 

10 

690 

7 

WW 

595 

4 

*i9t 

In  all  instances 

Read, 

3ff: 

ITTT® 

*wt* 

•fTWW 

if^r 

o[W]o 

3^  *T3° 

•^f  I 

o^: 

* 


GAEKWAD’S  ORIENTAL  SERIES 


Critical  editions  of  unprinted  Sanskrit  Works,  edited  by 
competent  scholars,  and  published  by  the  Oriental 
Institute,  Baroda. 


1. 


BOOKS  PUBLISHED. 


Ks.  A. 


Kavyamimaiiisa  : a work  on  poetics,  by  Bajasekhara 
(880-920  A.D.) : edited  by  G.  I).  Dalai,  and  U.  Ananta- 
krishna  Sastry,  1910.  Re-issue.  1924  . . . . 2—4 


This  hook  has  been  stl  as  a lr  vl-book  by  tin  Bombay 
and  Patna  f nircrsilies. 

2.  Naranaruyanunaiula  : a poem  <>n  the  Pauranie  story  of 

Arjuna  and  KrsnaV:  rambles  oir  Mount  Girnar.  by  Vas 
tupala,  Minister  of  King  V mulhn  vahi  of  I >holka,  com  - 
posed  between  Sain  vat  1277  ami  1287,  in.,  A.D.  1221 
and  1231  : edited  by  C.  D I )a]al  and  R.  Anantakrishna 
Sastry,  1910  . . . . . . out  oj  print. 

3.  Tarkasahgraha  : a work  ou  Philosophy  (refutation  of 

Vaisesika  theory  of  atomic  creation)  by  A nandajriuna 
or  Anandagiri.  the  famous  commentators  on  S'ahkara- 
carya’s  Bhasyas,  who  rlourisiu  d in  the  latter  hall  of 
the  13th  century  : edited  by  T.  M Tripathi.  1917  . . 2-0 

4.  Parthaparakrama  : a drama  describing  Arjuim’s  re- 

covery of  the  cows  of  King  Virata.  by  Prahkulana.de  va, 
the  founder  of  Palanpur  and  tie*  younger  brother  of 
the  Paramara  king  of  t diaudra  van  (a  sta  te  m Marwar), 
and  a feudatory  of  t he  kings  of  Guzend  , who  was  a. 
Yuvaraja.  in  Sam  vat  1220  or  A.D,  1104:  tali  ted  by 
C.  D Dalai,  1917  ..  ..  ..  ..  0-6 

5.  Rastraudhavainsa  : an  historical  poem  (Mahakavya) 

describing  the  history  of  the  Bagulas  of  Mayuragiri, 
from  Rastraudha,  king  of  Kanauj  and  the  originator 
of  the  dynasty,  to  Narayana  Shrdi  of  Mayuragiri  by 
liudra  Kavi,  composed  in  S' aka  1518  or  A.D.  1596: 
edited  by  Pandit  Em  bar  Krishnamacharya  with  Intro- 
duction by  C.  D.  Dalai,  1917  ..  ..  ..  1-12 

6.  Linganusasana  : on  Grammar,  by  Vamana,  who  lived 

between  the  last  quarter  of  the  8th  century  and  the 
first  quarter  of  the  9th  century : edited  by  C D. 

Dalai,  1918  ..  . . ..  ' 0-8 

7.  Vaaantavilasa  : an  historical  poem  (Mahakavya)  des- 

cribing the  life  of  Vastupala  and  the  history  of 


2 

Rs. 

Guzerat,  by  Balachandrasuri  (from  Modheraka  or 
Modhera  in  Kadi  Prant,  Baroda  State),  contemporary 
of  Vastup.nl a,  composed  after  bis  death  for  his  son  in 
Samvat  1290  (A.D.  1240)  : edited  by  C.  D.  Dalai,  1917.  1-8 

8.  Rupakasatkam  : six  dramas  by  Vatsaraja,  minister  of 
Paramardideva  of  Kalin] ara,  who  lived  between  the 
2nd  half  of  the  12th  and  the  1st  quarter  of  13th  cen- 
tury : edited  by  C.  D.  Dalai,  1918  . . . . • 2-4 

9 Mohaparajaya : an  allegorical  drama  describing  the 
overcoming  of  King  Moha  (Temptation),  or  the  conver- 
sion of  Kumarapala,  the  Chalukya  King  of  Guzerat, 
to  Jainism,  by  Yasahpala,  an  officer  of  King  Ajaya- 
deva,  son  of  Kumarapala,  wiio  reigned  from  A.D.  1229 
to  1232  : edited  by  Muni  Chaturvijayaji  with  Introduc- 
tion and  Appendices  bv  C.  D.  Dalai,  1918  . . 2-0 

10.  Hammiramadamardana  : a drama  glorifying  the  two 

brothers  Vastupala  and  Tejahpala  and  their  King  Vlra- 
dluivala  of  Dholka,  by  Jayasimhasuri,  pupil  of  Vlra- 
suri,  and  an  i^carya  of  the  temple  of  Munisuvrata 
at  Broach,  composed  between  Samvat  1276  and  1286 
or  A.D.  1220  and  1239  : edited  by  C.  D.  Dalai,  1920.  2-0 

11.  Udayasundarikatha  : a romance  (Campii,  in  prose  and 

poetry)  by  Soddhala,  a contemporary  of  and  patronised 
by  the  three  brothers  Chchittaraja,  Nagarjuna,  and 
MummunirSja,  successive  rulers  of  Konkan,  composed 
between  A.D.  1026  and  1050 : edited  by  C.  D.  Dalai 
and  Pandit  Embar  Krishnamacharya.  1920  . . 2-4 

12.  Mahavidyavidambana : a work  on  Nyaya  Philosophy, 

by  Bhatta  Vadlndra  who  lived  about  A.D.  1210  to 
1274:  edited  by  M.  R.  Telang,  19^b  . . . . 2-8 

13.  Pracinagurjarakavysangraha : a collection  of  old 

Guzerati  poems  dating  from  12th  to  15th  centuries 

A.D.  : edited  by  C.  D.  Dalai,  1920  . . . . 2-4 

14.  Kumarapalapratibodha : a biographical  work  in 

Prakrta,  by  Somaprabhaeharya,  composed  in  Samvat 
1241  or  A.D.  1195  : edited  by  Muni  Jinavijayaji,  1920.  7-8 

15.  Ganakarika : a work  on  Philosophy  (Pasupata  School) 

by  Bhasarvajna  who  lived  in  the  2nd  half  of  the  10th 
century : edited  by  C.  D.  Dalai,  1921  . . . . 1-4 

16.  Sangltamakaranda : a work  on  Music  by  Narada: 

edited  by  M.  R.  Telang,  1920  . . . . . . 2-0 

17  Kavindracarya  List:  list  of  Sanskrit  works  in  the 
collection  of  Kavindracarya,  a Benares  Pandit  (1656 
A.D.) : edited  by  R.  Anantakrishna  Shastry,  with  a 
foreword  by  Dr.  Ganganatha  Jha,  1921  . . . . 0-12 

18.  Varahagrhyasutra : Vedic  ritual  (domestic)  of  the 

Yajurveda : edited  by  Dr.  R.  Shamasastry,  1920  . . 0-10 

19.  Lekhapaddhati : a collection  of  models  of  state  said 

private  documents,  dating  from  8th  to  16fch  centuries 


Rs.  A. 


A. D. : edited  bv  C.  D.  Dalai  and  G.  K.  Shrigondekar, 

um  ..  ‘ . . . . . - •• 

20.  Bhavisayattakaha  or  Pancamikaha  : a romance  in 

Apabhramsa  language  by  Dhanapala  {circa  12th  cen- 
tury) : edited  by  C.  1).  Dalai,  and  Dr.  P.  D.  Gune,  1923.  0-0 

21.  A Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Palm-leaf  and  Im- 

portant Paper  MSS.  in  the  Bhandars  at  Jessal- 
mere,  compiled  by  C.  I).  Dalai,  and  edited  bv  Pandit 
L.  B.  Gandhi,  1923  ..  . . ..3-4 

22.  23.  Parasuramakalpsutra  : a work  on  Tantra,  with 

commentary  by  Karnes  vara  and  Paddhati  by  IJmSnan- 
da : edited  by  A.  Mahadova  Sastry,  B.A.  2 vols.,  1923.  , : 1 1-0 
24.  Tantrarahasya : a work  on  the  Piabhakara  School 
of  Purvamimarhfia,  by  Ramannjacarya : edited  by  Dr. 

R.  Shamasastry,  1923  ..  ..  ..  1-8 

2b,  32.  Samarahgana  : a work  on  architecture,  town- 
planning  and  engineering,  by  king  Bhoja  of  Ohara 
(11th  century):  edited  by  Mahainahopadhyaya  T. 
Ganapati  Shastri,  Ph.D.  2 vols.,  1924-1925  . . 10-0 

20,41.  Sadhanamala : a Buddhist  Tantric  text  of  rituals, 
dated  1165  A.D.  consisting  of  312  small  works,  com- 
posed by  distinguished  writers  : edited  by  Benoytosh 
Bhattacharyya,  M.A.,  Ph.D.  2 vols.,  1925-1928  ..  14-0 

27.  A Descriptive  Catalogue  of  MSS.  in  the  Central 

Library,  Baroda.  Vol.  1 (Veda,  Vedalaksana  and 
Upanisads),  compiled  by  G.  K.  Shrigondekar,  M.A.  and 
K.  S.  Ramaswami  Sliastri,  with  a Preface  by  Dr. 

B.  Bhattacharyya,  Ph.D.  1925  . . . . 6-0 

28.  Manasollasa  or  Abhilasitarthacintamani : an  ency- 

clopaedic work  divided  into  one  hundred  chapters, 
treating  of  one  hundred  different  topics  by  Somesvarade- 
va,  a Chalukya  king  of  the  12th  century:  edited  by 
G.  K.  Shrigondekar,  M.A.,  3 vols.  vol.  I.  1925  . . 2-12 

29.  Nalavilasa : a drama  by  Ramchandrasuri,  pupil  of 

Hemachandrasuri,  describing  the  Pauranika  story  of 
Nala  and  Damayantl : edited  by  G.  K.  Shrigondekar 
and  L.  B.  Gandhi,  1926  . . . . . . 2-4 

30,31.  Tattvasahgraha : a Buddhist  philosophical  work 
of  the  8th  century  by  S'antaraksita,  a Professor  at 
Nalanda  with  Panjika  (commentary)  by  bis  disciple 
Kamalasila,  also  a Professor  at  Nalanda : edited  by 
Pandit  Em  bar  Krishnamacharya  with  a Foreword  in 
English  by  Dr.  B.  Bhattacharyya,  M.A.  Ph.D.  2 vols. 

1926  ..  ..  ..  . . ..  24-0 

33,  34.  Mirat-i-Ahmadi  : with  its  Khatimae  or  Supple- 
ment: By  Ali  Mahamraad  Khan,  the  last  Moghul 
Dewatt  of  Gujarat : edited  in  the  original  Persian  by 
Syed  Nawabali,  Professor  of  Persian,  Baroda  College, 

3 vols.  (vol.  I and  III  in  the  Press),  vol.  II.  1926  . . 12-0 


4 


Rs.  A. 

3f>  M.lnavagrhyasutra  : a work  on  Vodic  ritual  (domestic) 
Vajurveda  with  the  Bhasya  o!  Astavakra : 
with  an  introduction  in  Sanskrit  by  Pandit 
; , .Krishna  Hurshaji  S'astri,  with  a Preface  by  Prof. 

J ...  ; ! ide,  1920  ..  ..  . . ..5-0 

;>u  N vjvasastra:  of  Bharata  with  the  commentary  of 
hi lunavagupta  of  Kashmir:  edited  by  M.  Ramakrish- 
\.  Kavi,  M.A.  4 vols,  vol.  I,  illustrated,  1926  . . 6-0 

, Vpiibhrariis'akavyatrayl : consisting  of  three  works, 

:!x‘  Carcari,  Upadcsarasayana  and  Kalasvartipakulaka, 

! v Jinadatta  Silri  (12th  century)  with  commentaries; 

• ■dited  by  L.  B.  Gandhi,  1927  ..  ..  ..  4-0 

IS.  Ayayapravesa,  Part  I (Sanskrit  Text):  on  Buddhist 
Logie  of  Dmiuiga,  with  commentaries  of  Haribhadra 
Silri  and  Parsvadcva : edited  by  Principal  A.  B.  Dhrn- 
va,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Pro -Vice-Chancellor,  Hindu  Univer- 
sity. Benares  ..  ..  ..  Shortly. 

39.  N vayapravesa,  Part  IT  (Tibetan  Text):  edited  with 
introduction,  notes,  appendices,  etc.,  by  Pandit  Vidhu- 
sekhara  Bhattacharyva,  Principal,  Vidyabhavana,  Vis- 
vabharati,  1927  . . . . . . . . 1-S 

40  Advayavajrasangraha : consisting  of  twenty  short 
works  on  Buddhist  philosophy  by  Advayavajra.  a Bud- 
dhist savant  belonging  to  the  11th  century  A.D., 
edited  by  Mahamahopadhyaya  Dr.  Haraprasad  Shastri, 

M.A.,  C.I.E.,  Hon.  D.  Litt.  1927  . . . . 2-0 

42.  Kalpadrukosa : standard  work  on  Sanskrit  Lexico- 

graphy by  Kesava : edited  with  an  elaborate  introduc- 
tion and  indexes  by  Pandit  Ramavatara  Sarma,  M.A., 
Sahityacharya  of  Patna.  In  two  volumes,  vol.  I,  1928.  10-0 

43.  Mirat-i-Ahmadi  Supplement  : by  Ali  Muhammad 

Khan.  Translated  into  English  from  the  original 
Persian  by  Mr.  C.  N,  Seddon,  I.C.S.  (retired)  and  Prof. 

Syed  Nawab  Ali,  M.A.  Corrected  Re-issue,  shortly.  . . 6-8 

BOOKS  IN  THE  PRESS. 

1.  Ramacarita  of  Abhinanda,  Court  poet  of  Haravarsa  (cir. 

9th  century  A.D.) : edited  by  K.  S.  Ramaswami 
Shastri. 

2.  Natyadarpana : on  dramaturgy  by  Ramacandra  Suri 

with  his  own  commentary : edited  by  Pandit  L.  B. 

Gandhi  and  G.  K.  Shrigondekar,  M.A. 

3.  Natyasastra:  Vol.  II.  edited  by  M.  Ramakrishna  Kavi. 

4.  Jayakhyasarhhita  : an  authoritative  Paocharatra  work  : 

edited  by  Pandit  E.  Krsnamacaryya  of  Vadtal. 

5.  Buddhist  works  on  Logic : containing  reconstructed 

texts  from  Chinese,  Tibetan  texts  and  English  transla- 
tion of  Chinese  texts  of  ancient  authors  like  Nfigftrjuna 
Vasubandhu,  etc.  by  Prof.  Giuseppe  Tucoi  of  Italy. 


5 


Ra. 

Miinasollasa  or  Abhihi^itarthacintaruani,  vol  II,  < aided 
by  V . K.  Shngomlekar.  M.A. 

/.  A Descriptive  Catalogue  of  MSS,  in  the  Oriental 
Institute.  Raroda,  vol.  II  (S'rauta,  Dharma  and 
Grhva  >Sih  i . o . ompib  d by  the  Library  staff, 

8.  A Descripti  ve  Catalogue  of  MSS.  in  the  Jain  Bhan- 
dars  at  Vat  fan  ; edited  from  the  note.'  of  the  late  Mr. 

0.  D.  Data! , by  Bandit  L.  B.  Gandhi.  Vi  vols. 
b.  Bhavaprakasana  ->f  S'aradafcanaya  : an  ancient  work 
on  Drann a m ,'\  : edi .ted  by  Pandit  Kanm.swnuu  Shastri, 
Oriental  Institute,  1 5a  rod  a and  Hi-;  Holiness  Ya-dugirt 
Vat  i raja,  S w a mi,  Melkot . 

ItJ.  Prajnopiiyavlmscayasiddhi.  of  Anangav.ijra  and  Jha- 
nasiddhi  . In<m« bhib  i : two  impoCare  works  belong- 

ing to  the  UD  |e  k;®pivn  Vaj  ray  an  a Hu  .,f  of  Buddhism 
(8th  eentui-v  A D ) ' edited  by  Dr.  I ; Rhal  tarharv  va . 
PhD. 

11.  Siddlianfabiridu  : on  Vedanta  philosophy  bv  Aladhu  d 

dann  8;oasvati  with  eommentarv  of  Rum  sot  tame 
edited  by  i*  ( \ DivanjC  M.A.,  LL.M . 

12.  Tatha ga t: » j »u h.y aka  or  Cuhyasumajn  ; >he  earliest  and 

tht  met  authoritative  work  of  I he  '‘/antra  School  m 
t he  Bn.  I ! ’ i -i  - ; edited  by  Dr.  15.  Bhv  i .wharya,  P.h.D 
Diiee t < . Oriemal  Institute,  Bamda. 

13.  In duc'ii ee  of  Portuguese  on  the  Asiatic  Languages  : 

Tran  sir  .1  mio  English  from  Portuguese  by  .Prof.  A.  X. 

So  area  M.A.,  Baroda  College.  Baroda. 
i f.  Persian  Chronicle  : history  of  the  Safvi  Period  of 
Persia, p History  loth  and  JOth  ennturi.es  by  Hasan 
Ramin  . oii-oi  hy  C.  N.  tfeddon,  I.C.S.  ( retired ), 
Reader  ui  Pm m n and  Marathi,  University  of  Oxford. 

15.  Na  n ja  raj  ay  aso  h husan  a ; hy  N rsirnhakavi  alias  Abhi- 
nava  Kalidasa,  a work  on  Sanskrit  Poetics  and  relates 
to  the  glorification  of  Nan j a. raja,  son  of  Virabhupa  of 
Mysore:  edited  by  E.  Krishnamaoharya. 


PUBLISHED  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  H.H.  THE 
MAHARAJA  GAEKWAD  OF  BARODA. 

Gazetteer  of  the  Baroda  State.  By  Rao  Bahadur  Govindbhai  H. 
Desai,  B.A.,  LL.B.,  Naeb  Dewan,  Baroda  State,  and  the  late 
Principal  A.  B.  Clarke,  B.A.  With  map.  2 volumes.,  1923,  each 
Rs.  15. 


Census  of  India,  1921,  Vol.  XVII,  Baroda.  By  Satyavrata 
Mukerjea,  B.A.,  Subah,  Baroda  Division,  formerly  Superintendent 
of  Census  Operations,  Baroda  State. 


In  three  parts  1921-22 — 
Part  I Report 
„ II  Imperial  Tables 
„ III  State  Tables 


Rs.  As.  P. 
16  8 0 
9 0 0 
4 8 0 


Mirat-i-Ahmadi,  the  Original  Persian  Text.  Edited  by  Professor 
Nawab  Ali.  In  3 volumes. 

{Qaekwad's  Oriental  Series.  Vol.  II,  1927 , Rs.  12.  VoU.  I and  III 
are  in  the  Press.) 

English  Translations  of  Vols.  1 and  II  are  also  in  preparation. 


