









OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

AS BACKGROUND OF BENCyU.! LITERATURE 


BY 

SHASHIBHUSAN DASGUPTA, M.A., Ph.D. 

Lecturer, Calcotta Unioenity 



UNIVERSITi' OF CALCUTTA 
1946 


/ 5 /-. 


Thesis approved by the University of Calcutta for the Degree of Ph^D* 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY NISHITCHANDRA SEN, 
SUPERINTENDENT (OFFG.), CALCUTTA UNIVERSITT PRESS, 
48, HAZRA ROAD, BALLYGUNGE, CALCUTTA 


141 IB— December^ 1946 — t. 



Dr. SYAMAPRASto MOOKERJEE 

AS A TOKEN OF RESPECT AND ADMIRATION 




CONTENTS 


Pages 

Abbreviations ... xxi 

Preface ... ... xxiii 

Introduction ... ... xxxi 

PART I 

The Buddhist Sahajiya Cult and Literature 
CHAPTER 1 

Growth of the Sahajiya Cult and Literature 

(i) Information about the Available Literature ... 1-7 

[Earliest litetarure in Bengali — the Carya-padas — 
linguistic character of the songs, essentially Bengali — 
the Dohas are composed in Western Apabhramsa — 
reasons for the linguistic anomaly — time of composi- 
tion of the songs.] 

{iQ History of Buddhism in Bengal ... 7-13 

[The study of Sahajiya Buddhism in Bengal 
necessitates the study of the history of Buddhism in 
Bengal — little trace of Buddhism in Bengal before 
the Gupta period — ^Buddhism in Bengal of the Gupta 
period — evidence of the foreign pilgrims — the 
epigraphical records — Buddhism of the Pala period.] 

(lEf) Origin and Development of Tantric Buddhism 13-27 

[Mahayana as contrasted with Hinayana — the 
quarrel between the elders and the liberals — ideal of 
Arhathood replaced by that of Bodhisattvahood— 



VI OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the element of Karuna — the theory of the three 
Kayas or bodies — predominance of philosophical 
thought and culture of the Paramitas — degenera- 
tion by too much popularisation — rise of Tantric 
Buddhism — Manlra-naya or Mantra-yana — tradition 
about the introduction of Tantricism in Buddhism — 
-evidence from the Mahayana-sutralahkjara — Dr. B. 
Bhattacarya’s view on the introduction of Tantricism 
in Buddhism untenable — the introduction of the 
Mantra-element — Mudra, Mandala — rise of Vajrayana 
from Mantra-yana — Kala-cakra-yana.] 

(lo) Mode of Transformation of the Main Ideas of 
Mahay ana into those of Tantric Buddhism ... 

[Transformation of the idea of Sunyata into that 
of Vajra — Vajra-sattva — Bodhi-citta — Sunyata and 
Karuna as Prajna and Upaya — Prajna and Upaya as 
'the female and the male, the left and the right, the 
moon and the sun — Advaya and Yuganaddha — 
Advaya and Samarasa — evolution of the idea of 
Maha-sukha — positive attributes of Nirvana in 
4 >opular literature — idea of Nirvana-dhatu — idea of 
Maha-sukha in Tantric Buddhism.] 

CHAPTER 11 - 

The General Philosophical Standpoint of the 
Carya-padas 

[Carya songs represent a mixture of the Madhya- 
mika, Vijnanavadic and Vedantic thoughts — the 
dominant note of idealism — idealism explained under 
various poetic imageries — idealism illustrated — the 
theory of the four Sunyas — Sunya — Ati-sunya — 
Maha-^unya — Sarva-lunya — the theory of the Sonyas 
explained in the Caryas' under various imageries.] 


Paces 


27-38 


39-57 



CONTENTS 


VU^ 


Paces 

CHAPTER III 

The General Religious Outlook of the Sahajiyas 

(r) Salient Features of the Religion Preached in the 
Buddhist Dohas and Songs : 

(A) The Spirit of Protest and Criticism ... 58-60 

[Sahaja-path the most natural path — and at the 
same time the easiest path.] 

(B) Aversion to recondite scholarship . . . 60-62 

(C) Scathing Criticism of the Formalities of Life 
and Religion (and similar spirit found in the 

Jaina Dohas) ... ... 62-70 

(D) Possible Sources of the Spirit of Criticism of 

the Sahajiyas ... ... 70-89 

[The spirit of the Aranyakas and the Upanisads 

—evolution of the conception of Brahman and 

the stress on Brahma-realisation — Karma-kanda 

• • 

made subservient to Brahma-knowledge — stress on 
the subjective side of religion — post-Upanisadic spirit 
of the epics, particularly of the Mahabharata — 
the spirit of Vedanta — antagonism towards Purva- 
mimarnsa — Brahma-jijnasa does not presuppose 

Dharma-jijmsa — no activity is involved in true 
religion — Brahma-knowledge is no action or the 
product of any action — the spirit of Vaisnavism — 
question of divine mercy, a break in the law of 
Karma — unconditional self-resignation — the ideal of 
passionate love — idealism of Yoga and the stress on 
the subjective side — heterodoxy of the Tantras — 

heterodoxy of the early atheistic schools — the Carvak 
school — ruthless anti-religious criticism — schools that 
/are atheists but not anti-religious — ^Jainism and 
Buddhism — the religious perspective of Jainism — th? 



vm 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Pages 

perspective of Buddhism — strong criticism against 
Brahminism — monastic orthodoxy and the revolt of 
the Mahayanists — ^revolt of Tantric Buddhism against 
both Hinayana and Mahayana — ^the orthodoxy and 
formalism of Tantric Buddhism and the revolt of the 
Sahajiyas.] 

(ri) The Idea of Sahaja ... ... 90- 1 00 

[The unspeakable nature of Sahaja — the non-dual 
and unchanging nature of Sahaja — Sahaja as the 
underlying reality — Sahaja as the Supreme Being, 
both transcendent and immanent.] 

CHAPTER IV 

The Practices of the Sahajiyas and the State 
OF Supreme Bliss (Maha-sukha) 

(j) The Guru-vada ... ... 101-03 

[Guru-vada, a salient feature of Indian philosophy 
and religion — stringency of the esoteric Sadhana 
responsible for so much stress on Guru-vada in 
Tantricism.] 

(t'fi) The Importance of the Body in the Sadhana ... 1 03-07 
[Body, the microcosm of the universe — all truth 
within — the theory of the plexus as associated with 
the theory of the Kayas — the theory of the nerves.] 

iiii) The Esoteric Practice ... ... 106-10 

[Production of Bodhicitta — two aspects of 

Bodhicitta, SamOrta and Vivrta.l 

{iv) The Middle Path in the Esoteric Sadhana ... 110-15 
[The philosophical view of the middle path — 
middle path in Yoga — middle path variously described 
in the Carya-songs — the upward flow of Bodhi-citta 
through the middle path — four stages of bliss, four 
Madras, four moments, etc.] 



CONTENTS 


IX 


Pages 

{v) The Yogic Sadbatia of the Sahajiyas and the 

Female Force ... ... 115-25 

[Sakti ^ts Can^ah — nature of Candsll— various 
transformations of the Candali into Dombl, Nairamani, 

Savarl, Sahaja-sundari, etc.] 

(of) The Final State of Bodhi-citta or the State of 

Maha-sukha ... ... 125-28 


PART II 

Mediaeval Sahajiya Schools 
CHAPTER V 

The Vaisnava Sahajiya Cult 

(i) Transition from Buddhist Sahajiya to Vaisnava 

Sahajiya ... ... 131-39 

[Extent and nature of Vaisnava Sahajiya literature 
general nature of the cult and relation with 
standard Vaisnava religion and literature — doubtful 
authorship of the texts and songs — the fundamental 
tenets of the Sahajiyas and its relation with Tantric- 
Jsm, Hindu and Buddhist — the general feature of 
the Vaisnava Sahajiyas and that of the Buddhist 
Sahajiyas — probable historical cause of the transition.] 

(«) The Mode of Transformation ... 139-42 

[The final state of the Vaisnava SahajiySs, 

Buddhist Sahajiyas and the Hindu Tantrikas 
compared — the idea of the union of Radha-Krsim, 
Prajna-Upaya and l^kti-Siva — the psychological 
innovation of the Vaisnava Sediajiyas and stress 
on it.] 

(m) The Psychological Aspect of the Sadhana of the 
Vaisnava Sahajiyis 
B-HIIB 



X 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Paces 

(A) The Ideal of Love ... ... 142-55 

[The ideal of Love between Radha-Krsna and the 
philosophy behind it — ^the ideal of Parakiya love — 

Radha and Krsna combined in Caitanya — Caitanya’s 
religious attitude as Radha-bhava — the eternal Lila 
as conceived by the Vaisnava poets — Lila is concrete 
— adoption of the theory of Lila in the Sahajiya 
school — the Svarupa-lila and the Rupa-lila — three 
aspects of Vrndavana — Vana:Vrndavana, Mana- 
Vrndavana and Nitya-Vrndavana — transition from 
the gross to the spiritual — two currents of Sahaja — 

Krsna and Radha as Rasa and Rati and the male 
and the female.] 

(B) The Theory of Aropa ... ... 156-61 

[Aropa of Svarupa to Rupa — no categorical 
distinction between human love and divine love — 

Kama leads to Prema or rather transforms itself in- 
to Prema — ^real significance of Aropa — a change of 
perspective — the importance of Rupa in realising the 
Svarupa.] 

(C) The Stringency of Sahaja-Sadhana ... 161-68 

The Samanya and the Fiscsa in Rasa and Rati — 
Kaya-sadhana in Sahaja-sadhana — the transcendental 
nature of the Sahaja-love — Candidas’s conception 
of love.] 

(io) Sahaja-realisation of the Self and the Not-Self 168-70 
CHAPTER VI 

A Non-sectarian Approach to the Doctrines 
OF the Sahajiyas 

(f) The Purely Psychological Approach Apart froin 

the Theological ... ... )7J-80 



contents 


3C1 


Paces 

[Most intense love produces a state of arrest — 
repression of sex replaced by the Sahajiyds by 
sublimatiop— liberation through intense emotion — 
evidence of the Upanisad — of the Bhagavata — of the 
the Padma-purana — the view of the rhetoricians of 
the Rasa-school — the view of Kasmira Saivism — the 
view of the Spanda-karil^a — ^similar views of the 
VijUSna-hhairava.^ 

(ii) Criticism from the Yoga Point of View ... 180-82 

CHAPTER Vll 
The Bauls of Bengal 

(r) General Nature of the Baul Sect ... 1 83-87 

[Meaning of the word Baul — the restricted denota- 
tion of the word Baul in the present discourse — the 
reverse path of the Bauls.] 

(h) The Bauls and the SahajiySs ... 187-91 

[The Bauls are SahAjiyas in a general sense — 
influence of Sufi-ism against the earlier Sahajiya 
background — the Sahajiya background — difference 
with the earlier Sahajiyas — the ‘Man of the heart’ — 
the line of transformation of the conception of 
Sahaja to that of the ‘Man of the heart’ — the Bauls 
of Bengal and the mediaeval saints of the other 
provinces of India.] 

(itr) The Bauls and the Sufis. 

(A) A Brief History of Sufl-ism in India and 

particularly in Bengal ... 191-93 

[A brief history of Sufi-ism in India — treasons 
for its popularity in India — ^Sufi-ism in Benged.] 



XU 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


(B) Influence of Sufi-ism on the General Nature 
of Baul sect. 

(a) The Influence of Sanaa 

(h) The importance of the Murshid 
[The Murid and the Murshid — excellence of the 

Murshid-songs. ] 

(c) Heterodoxy of the Bauls 

(d) Body as the Microcosm of the Universe ... 

(e) The Man of the Heart 

[What the ‘ Man of the Heart ’ and love towards 
him really signify — difference with the Vaisnava 
conception of love — the conception of the ‘ Man of 
the Heart * really represents a mixture of the concep- 
tions of the ultimate truth in the Sahajiya schools and 
in Sufl-ism — the Sahajiya element in the man of the 
heart — the Upanisadic background — the conception 
of the Divinity in Sufl-ism — creation proceeds from 
love — the cosmos is supported in love — self-realisa- 
tion of God through self-manifestation in creation — 
as creation has reached perfection in man, he is the 
best medium for the self-realisation of God — the 
dual nature of man as the finite and the infinite — as 
human and divine — the love of the Sufis is the love 
between the human personality and the divine 
personality of man — love brings about union between 
the two — separated in love and again to be united 
in love-r-imagery of the lover and the beloved — 
love is the only religious method — the Sufis and the 
Bauls — the ‘ unknown bird ’ — the ‘ unknown ’ to be 
searched and realised within — divine beauty to be 
realised through the medium of the human form — 
love-union really means self-realisation.] 

(it?) Poet Tagore and the Baul Songs 


Pages 


193 

193-95 


195-98 

198-99 

199-213 


213-15 



CONTENTS 


tm 
Pages 

PART III 

Nath Cult 

CHAPTER VIII 
Legends and History 

(f) Origin of the Nath Cult ... ... 2 1 9-32 

[Nature of the Nath cult — the Siddha cult of 
India — the Nath cult as an offshoot of the Siddha 
cult — the Siddha cult zuid the school of Rasayana — 
reasons for the misconception of the crypto- 
Buddhistic origin of the Nath cult — general similarity 
in ideas and practices among the esoteric schools — 
general Saivite air of the Nath cult — confusion about 
the Nath Siddhets and the Buddhist Siddhacaryas — 
the Nath Siddhas and the Ajivikas.] 

(if) Traditions of the Eighty-four Siddhas and the ^ 

Nine Naths ... ... 232-41 

[The tradition is not probably historical — mystic 
nature of the number eighty-four variously demons- 
trated — the tradition of the nine Naths — the Nath 
Gurus — Bengali account of the Nath Gurus.] 

CHAPTER IX 

Religion of The Nath Siddhas 

(i) General Air of Supernaturalism . . . 242-50 

[Asta-siddhi-— display of supernatural powers 
by the Nath Siddhas— supernatural powers of Hadi- 
siddha — general difference in tone between Bengali 
Nath literature and Sahajiya literature — ‘preponderance 
of supernaturalism — spirit of criticism in Nath litera- 
ture.] 

(if) The Final End of the Nath Siddhas . . . 250-63 

[Immortality the general aim of Hatha-yoga — 
jivan-mukti or immortality in a perfect body is the 



XIV 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


final aim of the Nath Siddhas — the ripe body and 
the unripe body — ^real significance of immortality — 
this truth demonstrated by the stories of Nath litera- 
ture — molestation 'of Yama by Gorakh — the signifi- 
cance of the story of the downfall of Mlna-nath — 
the original question of Gauri to Siva — the central 
point of the story of Manik-cand — Mayanamati's 
control over death through Mahajnana — the signifi- 
cance of the initiation of Mayanamatl by Gorakh 
into the secret yogic cult — Hadi-siddha’s control over 
death illustrated through various legends — the key- 
note of Gopi-cand's great renunciation — the quest 
of immortality — the difference in aim between the 
Nath Siddhas and the Sahajiyas.] 

(iii) The Means 

Glta-sadhana or the Regressive f^rocess 

[The Ulta-sadhana of the Nath yogins — the real 
significance of Ulta-sadhana — spiritual march is 
Ulta-sadhana in general — Ksemai as the yogic 
control.] 

(B) Kaya-sadhana 

(a) The Theory of the Sun and the Moon . . . 

[Metaphysical implications of the sun and the 
moon the sun and the moon as associated with 
Sakti and Siva — various yogic implications of the 
union of the sun and the moon — the sun and the 
moon of the Nath yogins — Maha-rasa and the 
Dasama-dvara — the process of saving the Maha-rasa 
from the sun — drinking of nectar — the theory of the 
Tithis— the theory of Maha-rasa as the central point 
of the yogic Sadhana of the Nath yogins.] 

(h) The Sun and the Moon as Woman and 
Man 


Pages 


263-69 


269-80 


280-83 



CONTENTS 


XV 


Paces 

[Saving of the moon from the sun means in the 
grosser sense man’s saving himself from the clutches 
of woman — ^general attitude of the Naths towards 
woman — Mayanamatl’s reflection on woman’s 
nature — similar tone in the Nirguna school of Hindi 
poetry.] 

(c) Points of Similarity and Difference in the 
Practical Aspect of Yoga between the 
Nath Cult and other Esoteric Schools ... 283-87 . 

(iv) The Vedic Soma-sacrifice and the Drinking of 

Nectar in Yogic Schools ... 287-89 

(o) The Rasayana School and the Nath Cult ... 289-94 

PART lY 

The Dharma Cult and Bengali Literature 
CHAPTER X 

General Nature OF THE Cult ...297*307 

[Dharma cult a local cult of West-Bengal and 
of some parts of Orissa — prevalent among low-class 
people — the composite nature of the cult — the 
liturgical works of the Dharma cult — and those of 
later Buddhism — is the Dharma cult Buddhistic in 
essential nature ? — in what sense can the Dharma 
cult be said to be crypto-Buddhistic ? — possible 
Muslim influence on the Dharma cult — causes for 
amity among the Muslims and the Dharmites — 
oppression by the Hindus of the Dharmites — the 
story of the wrath of Niranjana and its significance 
— some Muslim practices in the Dharma cult.] 

CHAPTER XI 

Speculations on the Conception of Dharma 
(f) Hindu Conceptions of Dharma 


f • • 


308-12 



XVI 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


[Dharma personified in various Hindu texts — 
Dharma as Yama — Dharma as Yama in the 
Dharma cult.] 

(n) Buddhistic Substratum of Dharma 

[The relation between the conception of Dharma 
as the supreme deity and the conception of the 
ultimate reality of the Buddhists is very remote — 
theistic tendency of Mahayana — the docetic tendency 
Jthrough the theory of Tri-kaya — all docetic and 
theistic conceptions of the relality resulting in later 
times in the conception of a Supreme Being — 
Dharma and the three jewels, viz., Buddha, Dharma 
and Sangha — the theory of the transformation of 
Sangha into Sankha is not convincing — the transforma- 
tion of the three jewels — Buddha as Jagannatha — 
Dharma, the second jewel and Dharma-thakura — 
Dharma and his Sakti — Dharma identified with 
6iva — Siva-^akti and Adi-buddha-Adi-prajna — Adi- 
budha as the Dharma-raja.] 

CHAPTER XII 

Dharma as described in the Dharma Literature 
[l§unya or Sunyata as applied to Dharma — 
Niranjana, a popular epithet for Dharma.] 

(r) Dharma — confusedly described as the Lord 
Supreme in the Liturgical Works 
[Various descriptions of Dharma in the Dharma- 
puja-Vidhana — descriptions of Dharma in the Sunya- 
purana — ^Dharma as the Lord Supreme. ] 

(iT) Dheirma as the Sun-god 

(in) Dharma of the Dharma-mangalas : 

(A) Dhzu-ma as Visnu in general 

(B) Dharma as Rama 


Paces 

312-28 


329-48 

332-36 

336-39 

339-42 

342-45 



CONTENTS 


xvii 


Paces 

(iv) The Desoription of Dharma as All-white ... 345-48 

[Description of Dharma as all-white in the 
liturgical works and the Dharma-mangalas— 8iva 
and Sarasvati, the all-white deities of the Hindu 
Pantheon — significance of white colour — whiteness 
in Buddhism.] 

CHAPTER Xlll 

The Theory of the Pandilas, Kotalas, Amims, etc. 349-58 

[The theory expounded — chart illustrating the 
scheme of the Dharmites — chart illustrating the 
theory of the Panca-tathagatas of the Buddhists — 
the conception of the gates in the Buddhist Tantras 
— correspondence of the theory of the Tathagatas 
and the Panditas in the Hindu Tantras — the colour 
scheme.] 

CHAPTER XIV 

The Theory of Cosmogony and Cosmology in Old 
AND Mediaeval Vernaculars 

(f) A Brief Exposition of the Theories ... 359-73 

[Cosmogonical and cosmological accounts of the 
vernaculars represent mainly a jumbling of older 
ideas — account given in the Sunya-puram — in the 
Dharma-puja-vidharta — ^versions of Sahadev Cakra- 
varti and Sitaram-das — of Anadi-mangala of Ram- 
das Adak — account given by Ghana-ram — by Manik 
Ganguli — by Narasimha Vasu — account given in the 
Gajana-songs of West Bengal — in the Candi-mahgala 
of Manik Datta — of Mukunda-ram — of Msdhavacarya 
— in the Annada-mangala of Bharat-candra and 
C-HI1B 



KVUl 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Pacuss 

others — account given in the Natha literature in texts 
like Anadi-purana, or Anadi-carita, Hadamala- 
tantra,, Y ogi-tantra-\alQ, etc. — in GoraJ^sa-vijaya— 
in Gopt-candrer Sannyasa — account found in the 
Vaisnava-Literature of Orissa — account given by 
Kabir — by Sundar-das, Tulasl-das and others. 

(it) Analysis of the ideas of Cosmogony and 

Cosmology found in the Vernaculars ... 373-89 

(A) The Primordial Nihil ... ...374-76 

(B) The Conception of Niranjana — a Replica of 

Prajapati Brahma ... ... 376-79 

(C) The Primordial Goddess... ... 379-89 

[The primordial Goddess in the Upanisads — 

Prakrti of Samkhya — Ksetra and Ksetrajna of the 
Gita — a hotch-potch of the Upanisadic and the 
Samkhya accounts in the Puranas — the triad, 
personification of the three gums of Prakrti — the 
conceptions of the Adi-deva and the Adi-devi of the 
vernaculars and the conceptions of Siva and Sakti 
in the Tantras — the triad and the three goddesses 
associated with them — the story of the test of the 
triad . ] 

(rii) Buddhistic Element in the Accounts of Cosmo- 
gony and Cosmology of the Vernaculars ... 389-94 

[The idea of the primordial Sunyata — Dharma- 
kaya, the cosmic oneness — mythological account of 
cosmology in the Karanda-Vyuha — cosmological 
implications of Prajna and Upaya — Prajna and Upaya 
in Nepalese Buddhism.] 

{iv) Similarity of the Descriptions of the Vernaculars 

with those of other Literatures ... 395-96 



contents 


XIX 


Paces 

APPENDICES 
Appendix (A) 

The Religious Tenets of the Non-Bengali MediaeveJ 

Saints in relation to the Elarlier Bengali Sahajiyas 399-424 


(t) The spirit of revolt and criticism ... 400-11 

(ii) Guru-vada ... ... 411-12 

(iii) All truth within ... ,..412-16 

•(it?) The conception of Sahaja ... ... 417-21 

(o) Similarity in the litereury form and language ... 421 -24 

Appendix (B) 

General Informations about the Literature of the 

Nath Cult ... ... 425-41 


[Discovery of the narratives on M^ik-candra 
and Gopi-candra — ^the narrative on Gorakh-nath — 
the ballads and songs popular among the Yugis and 
the Muslims — probable reason for the popularity of 
the ballads and the songs among the Muslims — 
yogic literature of the Muslims — stray songs of the 
Nath yogins — ^popular ceremonies and folk-song 
on the Nath yogins — the question of the time and 
authorship of the narratives and songs — Sanskrit 
literature associated with the Nath cult — Nath- 
literature in the vernaculars other than Bengali — 

Nath movement an All- India movement inspiring 
literature in many of the vernaculars — the story of 
porakh-nath— -the story of Gopl-cand.] 

Appendix (C) 

An Account of the Prominent Personalities in the 

Nith Literature of Bengal ... ... 442-60 



XX 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 




Pages 

(r) Mlna-nath 

. . . 

... 442-47 

(ii) Gorakh-nath 

« • • 

... 447-52 

{iii) Jalandhari-pa 

. . . 

... 452-54 

{iv) Kanu-pa 

• • • 

... 454-55 

(v) Gopi'Candra or 

Govinda-candra 

... 456-59 

(oi) Mayanamatl 

Appendix (D) 

... 459-60 


General Informations about the Dharma Literature 

of Bengal ... ... 461-76 

[The liturgical textsSunya-purana — problem 
about Ramai Pandit — time of Ramai Pandit — Ramai 
Pandit as referred to in the Dharma-mangalas — the 
Dharma-puja-vidhana — the Dharma-mangalas — the 
nature of the Dharma-mangalas — the story of the 
Dharma-mangalas. ] 


Appendix (E) 

Enigmatic Language of the Old and the Mediaeval 

Poets ... ... .477-90 

4 


Index 


... 491-501 



ABBREVIATIONS 


B. N. 

B. S. P. 

B. S. P. P. 

C. L. B. 

C. U. 
Dhm. 

G. O. S. 

J. A. S. B. 
J. D. L. 

J. R. A. S. 
R. A. S. B. 
Sj. S. 


Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris 
Bengal Sahitya-Parisat 
Bengal Sahitya-Parisat-Patrika 
Central Library, Baroda 
Calcutta University 
Dharma-mangala 
Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 
Journal of the Department of Letters, 
Calcutta University 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 
Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal 
Sahajiya Sahitya (ed. by Mr. M. Bose) 




PREFACE 


The book represents the thesis of the author which wm 
submitted by him in 1 940 for the Degree of Doctor of Philoso- 
phy from the University of Calcutta. -The book was written 
in 1939 and. submitted to the Calcutta University Press for 
publication in 1 94 1 . A considerable portion of it was printed 
by the year 1 942 and then the work of printing was indefi- 
nitely pMSStponed for scarcity of paper caused by the Second 
World War. This will explain the long interval between the 
submission of the book to the press and the actual publication 
of it. 

The aim of the present work is an expository study of the 
obscure religious cults that inspired Bengali literature in the 
old and the mediaeval times. Religion has always been 
one of the main motives of literature. It has been so in all 
countries and particularly in India which is pre-eminently 
a land of religion. As a matter of fact, the history of the 
modern Indian literatures is so intimately related with the 
history of some of the most important religious movements 
flourishing in this country that an intimate acquaintance 
with those religious movements seems indispensable for a 
thorough study of the vernacular literature. 

But it is no use treading die beaten track. Some of the 
religious schools have already been discussed by scholars ; 
some again are very simple so far as their theological stand- 
point is concerned. The mere introduction of a Pantheon in 
literature cannot be the subject of serious study unless the 
Pantheon in question admits of fruitful theological specula- 
tion. Instead of gleaning in the already harvested field or 
discussing the obvious, the writer has limited his scope by 
selecting the more obscure cults, which are noteworthy by 



Xxiv OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

nature and have inspired a considerable amount of literature, 
but the true nature of which has not yet been thoroughly 
discussed and clearly determined. 

The Buddhist Sahajiya cult has been the main source of 
inspiration of Bengali literature in the earliest period. By 
the discovery and publication of the songs and Dohas of the 
Buddhist Sahajiyas, MM. H. P. Sastri had, no doubt, done 
a memorable service not only to Bengali literature but to 
modern Indo-Aryan vernacular literatures as a whole ; but 
the task of making a thorough study of the songs and Dohas 
in the light of the cults inspiring them has been left out by 
him. Dr. M. Shahidullah’s Les Chants Mystiques de Kanha 
et de Saraha and Dr. N. C. Chaudhuri’s Da\arnava dwell 
more upon the linguistic than the literary and philosophical 
aspects of the Dohas. Dr. P. C. Bagchi, M.A., Dr. es 
Lettres (Paris), in his occasional papers and articles, no doubt 
emphasises the doctrinal aspect of the Sahajiyas ; but no 
comprehensive and critical study of the cult offering a consis- 
tent and connected interpretation of the songs and Dohas has 
yet been undertaken. 

Similar is the case with the Vaisnava Sahajiya movement 
of Bengal. Mr. M. M. Bose, in his work Post-Caitanya 
Sahajiya Cult, has, indeed, supplied us with valuable infor- 
mation regarding the literature of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas and 
some of the doctrines and practices preached therein ; but the 
raison d’etre of the whole school and the process of evolution 
of this love religion from the ideology and methodology of 
the earlier Tantric and Yogic sects remain unexplained. 

The songs and Dohas of the Buddhist Sahajiyas have 
important bearing in spirit as well as in form and language 
on the songs and Dohas of many of the mediaeval saints, who 
flourished abundantly in many parts of India, and who, for 
reasons to be discussed later on, were mostly Sahajiyas in a 
wider sense. In a chapter on the Baul-songs of Bengal the 
writer has dealt with the question of the relation between the 



PREFACE 


XXV 


earlia and the mediaeval Sahajiyas. He has also tried to 
show how on the spirit of a section of thp Bauls, who 
have stressed the conception of the ‘Man .of the heart,’ 
Sufl-istic Islam acted conjointly with the Upanisadic spirit 
ingrained in the different Sahajiya movements as also with 
the Vaisnavite spirit of love. In an appendix he has dealt 
at some length with the religious tenets of the non>Bengalee 
mediaeval saints of India in relation to those of the earlier 
Sahajiy&s. 

The nature and history of the Nath cult, which has 
inspired a considerable amount of literature in Bengal as also 
in many other parts of India, is still shrouded in the mist of 
myths and legends. The stray articles found on the subject 
seem to be inadequate. Dr. Mohan Singh’s work, Gorakh- 
nath and Mediaeval Hindu Mysticism, is hardly a sufficient 
exposition of the mystic religion of the sect. The recent work 
of Mr. Briggs, Gorakhnath and the Kanphat Yogis, is a 
commendable accumulation of facts and traditions. But the 
distinctive feature of Nathism remains hitherto unexplained. 
Hence there is ample scope for serious study in the practically 
unexplored field of Nathism. 

The Dharma cult of Bengal also invites attention. The 
cult is not theologically complex, — but it is queerly compo- 
site. . Different conceptions of godhead have been confusedly 
amalgamated in the evolution of the Supreme Lord of this 
Dharma cult. The present writer has in this thesis passed 
over the simple practices, which are mainly aboriginal, but 
has centred his attention on analysing its composite nature. 

The theory of cosmogony and cosmology, which is sub- 
stantially the same in the description of all the vornaculars 
notwithstanding small deviations of details, also demands 
serious attention. The tentative suggestions made by different 
scholars here and there about the nature and significance of 
this theory seem to be inadequate. The present writer has 
given a short exposition of the different versions of the theory 

D— 141 IB 



XXVi OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

as found in different types of vernacular literature, analysed 
ideas composing the main theory, and tried to trace their, 
sources, Vedic, Puranic, Tsntric or otherwise. 

The above, it is hoped, will give the reader an idea 
about the exact scope of the present work. To put it more 
briefly, the aim of the present work is a thorough study of 
the Buddhist Sahajiya cult, the Vaisnava Sahajiya cult, the 
Baul sect of Bengal and other mediaeval sects of India 
who may be called Sahajiya in a general sense, the Nath 
cult, the Dharma cult, and the cosmogonical and cosmo- 
logical theories to be found in the Bengali literature of different 
periods. The author has thought it convenient not to distract 
the interest in the main contention by the occasional intro- 
duction of a mass of details, texts and stories ; but as 
these informations cannot be altogether neglected without 
making the work defective, they have been included in the 
appendices. 

Though dealing essentially with some religious systems 
the motive behind the present study is more literary than 
religious. If obscure religious fields are entered into, it is 
done with a view to understanding and explaining the literary 
productions which have cropped up in them. It is, therefore, 
evident that whatever has been said, has been said mainly 
in relation to Bengali literature. But it will be observed that 
the religious cults that have inspired Bengali literature in 
the old and mediaeval period, have also inspired cognate 
literature in other vernaculars of India ; the present study, 
therefore, may throw light not only on the comparatively 
dark period of Bengali literature, but also on the obscure 
literary spheres of old and mediaeval vernacular literatures 
of India as a whole. 

But in the following pages attempt has been made to 
make the sudy as thorough as possible also from the 
religious and cultural points of view. This, it is hoped, may 
add to the importance of the work in so far as it will bring 



PREFACE 


xxvii 

to the notice of the reading public the obscure side-issues 
of Indian theological thought and esoteric religious practices. 
'Whether congenial to our modern taste or not, the fact 
remains that these religious sects enjoyed, and some of them 
have still been enjoying, widespread popularity among the 
masses of India ; it is for this reason that a critical study 
of these minor religious sects cannot be neglected in the 
history of Indian religious thought. It may easily be seen 
that the religious sects, with whom the present writer is 
dealing, represent mainly the religious views and practices 
of the masses of the country as opposed to the intelligentsia 
belonging to the higher classes. But to understand fully 
the civilisation and culture of a country as a whole we cannot 
do without a proper study of the mass-mind. 

It may be added in this connection that in conducting 
the study the writer has tried throughout to be guided by the 
scientific spirit of a truth-seeker, neither defending the theories 
and practices of the schools, nor passing any personal 
judgment on them in respect of their merits. His main aim 
has been the correct exposition of the schools on textual 
basis, and the criticisms that are added axe applied only to 
review the position from different angles of vision. The 
question of abuses and aberrations, which are to be found 
in a greater or lesser degree in the history of almost all the 
religious systems of the world, has been deliberately neglected 
by the author ; for it is the rationale of a cult or system and 
not its abuses and aberrations that have academic value. 

The materials for the work are gathered from both 
published and unpublished sources. A good number of 
manuscripts of texts and commentaries has been utilised 
in the study of the Buddhist Sahajiya cult ; some of these 
texts are preserved in the University Library of Cambridge, 
some in the Biblioth^que Nationale of Paris, and some in the 
Central Library of Baroda, — and all these manuscripts were 
available to the writer in rptograph through the courtesy pf 



xiviii OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

Professor S. N. Dasgupta, M.A., Ph.D. (Cal.), Ph.D. 
(Cantab.), D.Lit. (Rome), the Indian Philosopher of inter- 
national fame. The indebtedness of the writer to Professor 
Deksgupta knows no bounds. The indebtedness is not only for 
the manuscripts which Professor Dasgupta was kind enough 
to procure for the writer but also for his ungrudging help 
and guidance which may be regarded as a rare boon to 
all students of Indian philosophy and literature. The rest 
of the manuscripts of Buddhistic texts are preserved in the 
Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal and the authorities of the 
institution deserve cordial thanks of the writer for giving him 
every facility to utilise them. As for 'the Bengali manuscripts, 
the author has consulted them in the Manuscript Library 
of the University of Calcutta and in the Vanglya Sahitya 
Parisat, Calcutta. The texts preserved in both the institu- 
tions being generally common, the manuscripts of the 
University Library have been referred to. The author 
records his deep sense of gratitude also to the authorities 
of these two institutions. The sources, whether published 
or unpublished, from which materials have been gathered, 
have been indicated everywhere in the form of foot-notes. 
To make his position clear and convincing, the author has 
sometimes quoted copiously in foot-notes, particularly when 
the sources are unpublished. 

Some books and articles have been published in the 
recent years containing informations and suggestions about the 
topics with which the present writer has dealt ; but the 
writer could not utilise them. The reason is twofold ; firstly, 
as indicated before, a considerable portion of the book was 
printed by the year 1942 ; secondly, informations cannot be 
incorporated here and there in the body of the book at will 
without disturbing the general scheme of the book and the 
topics therein. 

A few words must be added in connection with the 
metho(j of transcription. In transcribing Sanskrit the 



PREFACE 


XXIX 


commonly accepted device of diacritical marks has been 
adopted. The language of the Dohas being unanimously 
•accepted to be Western Apabhramsa, the propriety of 
the use of ‘j’ to the exclusion of *y’. and the 

use of ‘s’ to the exclusion of or ‘s’ cannot 

be questioned. But difficulty arises in the choice 
between ‘b’ and ‘v’. With the advice of Dr. S. K. 

Chatterji, M.A., D.Lit., the writer has used ‘v’ all along 
in the transcription of the Dohas and ‘b’ initially and ‘v’ 
medially and finally in the transcription of Bengali songs. 
Another point to be noticed is that the phonology of modern 
Bengali, as also of many other modern Indo- Aryan 

vernaculars, seldom allows the retention of final vowels, 
and the medial vowel also drops when the word is composed 
of more than two syllables ; but the dropping is never 
indicated in orthography. The writer has dropped the 
medial and final vowels in orthography, where they are 
dropped in actual pronunciation. The principle of transcrip- 
tion has often been adopted in transcribing the proper names, 
but rigorous consistency could not be maintained in this 
matter, as many of the Indian names have already been 
naturalised in English. Corruptions and mistakes in the 
spelling of old and middle Bengali texts have never been 
interfered with. For typographical difficulties nasalisation 
of vowels had to be indicated by the addition of ‘m’ with the 
vowels. The writer begs to draw the attention of the reader 
to another important point. He has found many mistakes and 
corruptions in the reading of the manuscripts, both Sanskrit 
and Bengali. These also have not been freely handled unless 
the mistake or the corruption has been apparent. 

In fine, the writer acknowledges his debt to Professor 
Rai K. N. Mitra, M.A., Bahadur, late Ramtanu Lahiri 
Professor of Bengali, Calcutta University, under whom he 
had the privilege of working as the Ramtanu Lahiri 
Research Assistant of the Calcutta University for about four 



Itxx OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

years, and under whose affectionate care the present work was 
prepared. The writer records his deep sense of gratitude 
towards his examiners, particularly to Mahamahopad hyaya 
Gopinath Kaviraj, M.A., of Benares, in whom the author 
has discovered a prodigy of Oriental Learning. His valuable 
suggestions on various topics have substantially helped the 
writer in revising some of the chapters of his book. In Dr. 
Syamaprasad Mookerjee, M.A., D.Litt., Barrister-at-Law, 
President, Post-Graduate Council of Teaching in Arts, 
University of Calcutta, the writer found a never-failing source 
of inspiration. In spite of the multifarious duties he has to 
attend to in the wider sphere of his life, he remains a true 
patron of learning, and the author^ deems it a privilege to 
have the name of the great man associated with his book. 
The writer is grateful to Dr. B. M. Barua, M.A., D.Lit., 
for his suggestions and encouragement. The writer thanks 
Dr. Satindra Kumar Mukherjee, M.A., Ph.D., Prof. Sudhir 
Kumar Dasgupta, M.A., Dr. Sudhansu Kumar Sengupta, 
M.A., Ph.D., Prof. Rabindra Kumar Dasgupta, 
M.A., and Mr. Naresh Chandra Sen, M.A., B.L., 
for rendering various help. He thanks also Mr. 
Pierre Fallon for reading some portions of the proofs 
and for helping in preparing the index. Thanks are 
also due to Mr. J. C. Chakravorti, M.A., Registrar, Calcutta 
University, for the personal interest he took in the publication 
of the book. The writer cordially thanks the Superintendent 
of the Calcutta University Press and his staff, but for whose 
sincere co-operation the book might have taken a longer time 
to come to light. 


S. B. Dasgupta 



INTRODUCTION 


The origin and growth of the modern Indian literatures 
(we mean the modern Indo-Aryan literatures) are closely 
associated with the origin and growth of some religious 
sects, which began to stir the life of the people from about the 
tenth century onwards. Up till the advent of the nineteenth ' 
century with a new outlook on life and literature, none of 
the Indo-Aryan literatures seem to have had the capacity to 
stand erect without the prop of some religious view, and 
this again seems to be particularly the case with Bengali. 
We have no type of literature in Bengali even corresponding 
to the Rasau literature (literature based on the annals of 
heroic episodes) of Hindi, and poets like Cand Bardsi or 
Bhusan and Lai are almost unknown in old and mediaeval 
Bengali. In our old and mediaeval' literature man’s glory 
is seldom depicted in its own grandeur and eulogised 
independently of divine glory. The versions of the 
RamSyana and the Mahabharata that we have in our literature 
possess a vein more religious than human ; the heroes and 
heroines of the various Mangala-kavyas are depicted more 
as toys in the hands of the gods and goddesses than as 
dignified figures glowing with the heroic grandeur of their 
personality. Lausen of the Dharma-mangalas is a mere agent 
of the Dharma-thakura, Kalaketu of the Candl-mangalas is 
originally a god, being the son of Indra, and is dragged 
down from heaven on earth only to glorify the almighty 
power of goddess Candi and to establish her worship on 
earth. The human interest of the life-long struggle of Cand 

^ The word * mediaeval * will mean throughout our discussions as belongfing 
to l^e middle period of the Modern Indo-Aryan literatures, i.e. belonging to the 
period roughly between the thirteenth and the eighteenth century A.D, 



xxxii 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Sadagar of the Manasa-mangalas has been minimised by the 
Undercurrent of the religious tone — by the fact that it 
really represents the struggle of decaying Saivism of Bengal 
against the growth and spread of Saktaism represented by 
the Manasa cult. During the long period, beginning with 
the Carya-padas of the tenth, eleventh or twelfth century, 
the only type of literature that may be said to be free from 
the influence of religion, is the ballad literature of Bengal 
dealing purely and simply with the diversified life of rural 
Bengal and pastoral love-episodes.' 

Apart from the general relation of literature with religion 
and apart from the fact that Bengal is a province of India, 
which is specially noted as a land of religion and philosophy, 
there seems to be some historical reason for such predomi- 
nance of religion in Bengali literature. It is through the 
social and political vicissitudes of a nation that there comes 
deep unrest in the life and mind of man and man comes more 
face to face with the world of stern realities which help the 
growth and development of the potential Man. It is through 
the continual struggle for existence, fight against the adverse 
circumstances, conflict with the external powers that a nation 
becomes conscious of her real worth and learns to hold in high 
esteem the glories of terrestrial life. The paucity of such 
noteworthy social or political events happening in the life of 
Bengal may account for the fact that the history of Bengali 
literature during its old and mediaeval period is practically 
the same as the history of the different religious movements 

^ It should be noted that the authenticity of many of the East Bengal 
ballads, as compiled by Dr. D. C. Sen, D. Lilt., in collaboration with Candra 
Kumar De and some other assistants and published by the University of Calcutta, 
has been questioned. We have no scope here to enter into the details of the 
controversy ; but our considered opinion oh the point is that though the ballads 
may not belong to a hoary past (as Dr. Sen holdsl, and though there may be some 
handling of the verses at the lime of collection and compilation, at least 
the skeleton of some of these ver^s surely belongs to the seventeenth and the 
eighteenth centuries and .some go even earlier, 



INTRODUCTION 


XXXlll 


that flourished in the province for about a decade of 
cenhiries.' Even in the nineteenth century the general 
practice was to borrow stories either from the RamSyana 
and the MahabhSrata or from the annals of the Rajputs, 
Sikhs and Marhatt&s to introduce heroic grandeur in the 
epics, novels and dramas. 

There is a striking uniformity in the historical develop- 
ment of the different literatures of the modern Indo-Aryan 
vernaculars. The reason behind this fact is that the 
literary history of almost all the vernaculars is moulded 
essentially by the religious movements in the different parts 
of India, which, during the old and the mediaeval periods were 
strikingly similar. , 

(Bengali, along with other modern Indo-Aryan languages, 
grew up with the tenets of some minor religious sects, which 
rose mostly outside the circle of the .high class people and 
were chciracterised by a general tendency of protest against ' 
current orthodox religious systems. These religious move- 
ments were sponsored by people who had no aristocracy 
of descent or advantage of culture and education; they 
rose from among the most common run of people and 
preached their doctrines among the masses in their own 
tongue."\ The modern Indo-Aryan literatures, as we have 
indicate in the preface, are, therefore, essentially mass- 
literature^and the religions preached through them represent 
the mass-religions of India. But this religious zeal of the 
masses has been responsible for the^ copious growth of the 
vernacular literature in spite of the derision and opposition 
of the higher communities, who sometimes threatened these 
revolutionaries with curses of hell. 

1 Of course, in the Caiianya-hhagavaia of VrndSvan-das we find reference 
to the songs of Yogi-pal, Bhogi-pil and Mahl-pal (c/. yogtpal bhogtpal mahtpal gita I 
ih& S unite sap lok andndita ]\ Some are of opinion that these songs deal with the 
life and glory of the Pfila Kings, — but we cannot say anything about them as long as 
the songs are not discovered. 

E-I4IIB 



xxxiv OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

The history of Bengali language and literature, so far as 
it has been explored, begins with the religious doctrines and 
'practices of the Sahajiya Buddhists. Sahajiya Buddhism 
is a particular development of a phase of later Buddhism, 
widely known as Tantric Buddhism. Investigation reveals 
that during the reign of the Pala dynasty Buddhism in 
various Tantric forms gained popularity in Bengal and many 
Tantric texts and commentaries were written in the different 
Buddhist monasteries that were established in Bengal. 
The authors of the Sahajiya Buddhistic songs were mostly 
inhabitants of Bengal or of the vicinities of Bengal.’ 

But though an offshoot of popular Buddhism , the real 
origin of the Buddhist Sahajiya cult is not to be sought 
exclusively or even mainly in any of the theories and 
practices of Buddhism proper either in its Hinayana or 
Mahayana aspect. The real origin of the cult lies more 
outside Buddhism than inside it. The Buddhist Sahajiya 
cult, notwithstanding the Buddhistic tone and colour which 
it assumes, is essentially an esoteric yogic cult. /Side by 
side with the commonly known theological speculations and 
Religious practices there has been flowing in India an 
I important religious undercurrent of esoteric yogic practices 
from a pretty old time ; these esoteric practices, when asso- 
ciated with the theological speculations of the l^aivas and the 
Sakteis, have given rise to Saiva and Sakta Tantricism ; when 
associated with the Buddhistic speculations, have given rise 
to the composite religious system of Buddhist Tantricism ; 
and again, when associated with the speculations of Bengal 
Vaisnavism the same esoteric practices have been responsible 
for the growth of the esoteric Vaisnavite cult, known as the 
the Vaisnava Sahajiya movement. 

It will not be out of place to give here just an idea of the 
speculations and practices, round which grew all the esoteric 


^ Vide infra, Ch, I. 



iNTRODUCTIOt^ 


XXXV 


schools either within Hinduism or Buddhism. All kinds 
of esoteric Sadhana {i.e., religious endeavours) of India have 
a common background. In all the esotaric schools the 
absolute reality is conceived of possessing in its nature 
the potency of two aspects or attributes. These two aspects 
or attributes are, again, conceived as the negative and the 
positive, the static and the dynamic, rest {nicrtti) and 
activity {pravrtti), — the principle of pure consciousness and 
the principle of activity ; — one represents subjectivity and 
the other objectivity ; and, again, the one is conceived as 
the enjoyer and the other as the enjoyed. In the absolute 
Being these two aspects lie unified together in a state of 
absolute non-duality; but in the process of becoming or 
phenomenalisation there comes separation and duality. 
This process of change or becoming through a state of 
duality is bondage and suffering, — and the final escape from 
it is liberation. The secret of all esoteric Sadhana is to 
destroy all principles of dualism and to attain the final state 
of non-duality. This ultimate state of non-duality is 
variously called in the different esoteric systems as the state 
of Advaya, Maithuna, Yuganaddha, Yamala, Sama-rasa, 
Yugala, or the Sahajasamadhi or Sunya-samadhi, or simply 
the final state of Samadhi. 

In Hindu Tantricism these two aspects of the absolute 
reality have been conceived as the Siva and the S^ti, or the 
primordial male and the female. Again, one of the funda- 
mental tenets of all the esoteric schools is to hold that the 
human body is the epitome of the universe, all ‘truth’ 
{tattva) is contained within the body. Consistent with this 
view it has been held that Siva resides in the Sahasrara 
(the lotus of thousand petals situated in the cerebrum region) 
as the principle of pure consciousness and Sakti as the 
principle of world-force resides in the other pole of the 
MuladhtUra-cakra in the form of the coiled serpent. Now, the 
Sadhana consists in raising the coiled force from the pne pole 



xxxvi OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

to the other and to unite her there with Siva, — and this 
union of the Siva and the Sakti produces the state of the 
absolute. Thus the principles of Siva-Sakti or the male and 
the female are contained within the person of every man and 
woman. 

Again it has been held that the principles of the male 
and the female are contained within the body of a man in 
the right and the left respectively, — the right half being the 
masculine part and the left half the feminine part. This 
will explain the conception of Mahadeva or Siva as Ardha- 
nariioara or the half-female and half-male deity, and in 
the sculptural or pictorial representation of the Ardha- 
ndrisvara the deity is always depicted as having the left 
half as the female and the right half as the male.’ Thus, 
there are principles of masculinity and femineity contained 
in every man and woman, — a man is a man because of 
the predominance in him of the principle of masculinity, 
whereas a woman is a woman because of the predominance 
of the principle of femininity in her. Now as the left and 
the right represent two aspects of the absolute reality, the 
two important nerves in the left and the right, viz., Ida and 
Piiigala, and the two courses of the vital wind. Prana and 
Apana, associated with the two nerves, are also associated 
with these two aspects of the ultimate reality. From this 
theory follows the Sadhana of controlling the courses of the 
vital wind in the two nerves and of making them flow 
together through the middle nerve Susumna. Thus the 
union of the right and the left through the union of the two 
courses of the vital wind within the middle nerve Susumna, 

^ It rhay t>e point«id out that in the Sahajiya School VafJsnavism also Rsdhlt 
Krsna are said to reside in the left and the right respectively ; Rsdha is often 
said to reside in the left eye and Krsna in the right. C/. bdme radha dahine fersna 

dekhurasik fan I „dui neire birajaman i radha-k^nda iydma-kpnda dot 

netra hay I sajal nayan dvdre bhdve preme dsvdday (I 

Sahoja^attva of RadhSvallabh Das, Vanga-sdhitya paricay, Vol. H, p. 1658. 



INTRODUCTION 


xxxvii 

is the vital part of the iSadhana of Hatha-yoga, and the state 
that is attainable through such a process is the state of final 
non-duality. c/ 

Again it has been held, particularly in the Tantric and the 
Sahajiya schools, that the division of the creatures of the world 
into the male and the female has an ontological reason behind 
it. The male and the female represent in the visible world 
the division which is present in the nature of the absolute as 
Siva eind Sakti, and the perfect union of the Siva and the Sakti 
is the highest reality. Within the physical body of man 
and womain reside the ontological principles of Siva and 
Sakti therefore to realise the absolute truth, or in other 
words, to obtain the highest spiritual experience, man and 
woman must first of all realise themselves as manifestation 
of Siva and Sakti and unite together physically, mentally 
and spiritually, and the supreme bliss that proceeds from 
such union is the highest religious gain. Such a view is 
the raison d'etre of all the esoteric Sadhana which are 
canied on by the male and the female together. 

As a school of esoteric yoga the Buddhist Sahajiya 
school is fundamentally based on the speculations explained 
above. The Absolute is the Sahaja — it is the ultimate 
reality behind the self and the not-self. The realisation of 
this Sahaja in and through the self and the not-self is the 
ultimate aim of the Sahajiyas. Now, in Sahajiya Buddhism 
Sunyata (voidness) and Karuna (compassion), transformed 
as the Prajna and the Upaya, are held to be the two primary 
attributes of the ultimate reality which is Sahaja. As two 
aspects of the ultimate reality Prajna and Upaya are 
conceived in the Buddhist Tantras and in Sahajiya Buddhism 
just Eis Sakti and Siva of the Hindu Tantric school. Prajna 
and Upaya thus represent the principles of dualism and the 
unification of the two in a supreme non-dual state is the 


^ Vide infra, Ch. V, 



xxxviii 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


final aim of the Buddhist Sahajiyas. The practical yogic 
method for the realisation of the Sahaja is, therefore, 
fundamentally based on the principle of the union of Prajna 
and Upaya. The union of Prajna means, in the first place, 
the union of the female and the male, who are considered 
to be the manifestations of Prajna and Upaya respectively. 
Again, we have seen that the two important nerves in the 
left and the right also represent the principle of Prajna and 
Upaya in the microcosm of the human body ; therefore the 
union of Prajna implies the perfect control over these two 
nerves and the vital process associated with them and to 
make them function unitedly through the middle nerve 
which represents the principle of non-duality. The yogic 
practice involving this physical and physiological union of the 
Prajfia and the Upaya will lead the yogin to the inner union 
of the Prajna and the Upaya. Upaya as the Lord (called 
Vajra-sattva, or the principle of immutable adamantine 
existence) resides in the highest pole of the cerebrum region 
and Prajna as the world-force^ resides in the lowest pole 
(which is the plexus in the navel according to the esoteric 
Buddhists) ; the inner union consists in the raising of the 
Goddess from the navel region and in making her unite with 
the Lord of the cerebrum region. 

In the Vaisnava Sahajiya school the two aspects of 
Sahaja or the E^ssolute reality are explained as the eternal 
enjoyer and the enjoyed, as Krsna and Radha ; and it is 
further held that all men and women are physical manifesta- 
tions of the ontological principles of Krsna and Radha. 
When men and women can, therefore, realise themselves 
as the manifestations of Krsna and Radha through a process 

1 We may notice here a great anomaly. In Tantric Buddhism the Lord as 
Upfiya always represents the principle of phenomenalism and the consort Prajfifi 
Is generally depicted as the principle of rest or void ; but in the conception of the 
world-force, we shall see later on, the order was reversed and Prajfia or NairStma 
herself* as associated with the principle of defilement, was conceived as the 3akti 
w the world-force. 



INTRODUCTION 


xxxk 

of attribution i (A ropa^ the love of any human couple becomes 
transformed into the divine love that is', eternally flowing on 
between Krsna and Radha ; when the union of a human 
couple thus becomes the union of Krsna and Radha, the 
highest spiritual realisation dawns in the state of union or 
Yuea la. The element of love is the innovation of the 
Vaisnava Sahajiya school; but this element of love is 
essentially based on the element of yoga in the form of 
physical and psychological discipline. 

In the Nath cult^ which seems to be synchronous with 
the Buddhist Sahajiya movement (though the origin of the 
cult may be much earlier), the two aspects of the absolute 
reality are represented by the Sun and the Moon, where the 
Sun represents the principle of destruction ik,dlagni) through 
the process of change and decay, — and the Moon represents 
the principle of immutability. The final aim of the Nath 
Siddhas is the attainment of a non-dual state through the 
attainment of immortality in a perfect or divine body. This 
non-dual state of immortality can be attained only through 
the union or rather the commingling of the Sun and the 
Moon. In its speculations on the attainment of an 
immutable and divine body through p^cho-chemical process 
of Hatha-yoga involving the theory of the Sun and the 
Moon, the Nath cult seems to be akin to the Rasayana 
school of Indian thought, the main difference being that the 
medical and chemical science of the Rasayana school became 
transformed into a psycho-chemical yogic science with the 
Nath Siddhas. 

It may, however, be noted in this connection that though 
the culture of the body {kaya-sadhana) through processes of 
Hatha-yoga for the attainment of physical perfection, was of 
paramount importance in the Nath cult, it was more or less 
common to all the iag|>teric schools including the school of 
Vaisnava Sahajiyl^^hich laid emphasis on love. The 
re2disation of Sahajd' either of the nature of ‘ supreme bliss ’ 



xl 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


{Maha-suk,ha) as is conceived by the Buddhist Sahajiyis, 
or of the nature of ‘ supreme love ’ (as is conceived by the 
Vaisnava Sahajiyas), presupposes the strength of the physical 
organism to stand such a supreme realisation. It is for this 
reason that we shall find that all the esoteric schools spoke 
of the culture of body through some Hatha-yogic practice. 

Thus it is clear from the above that all the esoteric 
schools of India are fundamentally based on the specula- 
tion on the two aspects in which the ultimate reality functions 
and manifests itself, — and that the religious creed is based 
on the final aim of the attainment of a state of non-duality. 
It is to be noticed that this idea of unity of the esoteric 
systems implies no process of negation ; it, on the other 
hand, implies a process of supreme position through a 
regressive process of transformation and transubstantiation . 
It is for this reason that all the schools of Tantra speak 
of the final state as a state where enjoyment and liberation 
have become one and the same. The process of Aropa 
which makes the ultimate union possible is not peculiar 
to the Vaisnava Sahajiyas only, — it is a process common 
to all the Tantric and Sahajiya schools, either Hindu or 
Buddhist. We shall see later on that this process of Aropa 
implies no negation; it implies a change of perspective 
where the physical existence is not denied, but replaced by 
a permanent spiritual existence, where the gulf between the 
physical and the ontological is bridged over in an absolute 
existence. The Tantric Buddhists have also repeatedly 
emphasised that the final state is not a state of Nirvana as 
it is not also a state of BhaVa (existence) ; but neither the 
Bhava nor the Nirvana is denied of it, — it is a state where 
BhaVa and Nirvana become united together in the realisation 
of the absolute. 

Closely associated with the religious literature of the 
different Sahajiya movements of Bengal is the literature 
of the Bauls. The Bauls as a relegious sect are characterised 



INTRODUCTION jtli 

by their peculiarly unconventional manners and customs 
in social as well as religious life. From this point of view 
the followers of the Vaisnava Sahajiya school and religious 
people much akin to such an order bear the general narg o 
of Baul. But the Baul songs, which are composed by 
illiterate masses from both the Hindu and the Muslim 
communities, and which are familiar to us with the theory 
of the ‘ Man of the heart ’ and man’s love towards him, 
have a distinctive feature of their own. This ‘Man of the 
heart ’ is the Divine in man and stands as the eternal Beloved 
in relation to the human personality, who is the crazy 
lover. Such songs of the Bauls and similar songs of the 
mediaeval saints of Northern, Central and Upper India, 
represent the spirit of Sufl-ism against the background of 
Indian thoughts. 

* The Dharma cult of Bengal and of some parts of Orissa 
is, as we have said in the preface, a local cult having no 
element of esoterism in it ; as a religion it consists of 
extremely popular rites and ceremonies. The literature 
belonging to the cult embodies the infiltration and transforma- 
tion of various religious ideas in the untrained mind of the 
masses. The ’cosmogonical and cosmological theories also 
represent popular jumbling of various older ideas received 
hrough various sources. 

As all the above-mentibned obscure religious cults will 
come directly within the purview of our present study, we 
need hot enter into any further details here. It will not be 
out of place, we think, to add here a brief outline of the 
other religious movements which have been strong factors 
in the evolution of Bengali literature as a whole and which 
will not directly come within the province of our present 
study because of the reasons adduced in the preface. 

The devotional movement in Bengal, as is the case 
m other provinces also, has given great impetus to our 
literature, and the beautiful literary fragments, which are 
F-HIIB 



OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


dKi' 

extant* can be found abundantly in the love-lyrics of the 
Vaisnava poets. Candl-das, Govinda-dis, Jnana-das, among 
the host of Vaisnava poets, undoubtedly deserve world- wide 
recognition as first-rate poets. Though we have a fair 
amount of Ramayanic literature in Bengali and though a 
deep religious vein runs through many of them, the Rama 
cult could not gain sufficient ground as a religious faith in 
Bengal, it being pushed to the corner by the Krsna cuIl 
The Vaisnava movement of Bengal, in the line of the Krsra 
cult, grew along with the traditions of the Puranas like the 
Bhagavaia-purana, Visnu-purana, Brahma-Oaivarta-purana, 
etc., and there was perhaps, through the life of Caitanya 
and some renowned Gosvamfs, some influence also of the 
devotional movement of the South. ^ The first literary 
record of Bengal Vaisnavism is to be found in the famous 
lyrical poem the Gita-gooinda of Jaya-deva. After him 
Candi-das and Vidyapati (who, though a Maithili poet, was 
more popular in Bengal than in his native province) sang the 
immortal songs of the eternal love of Radha-Krsna, and were 
precursors, as some scholars are disposed to think, of Srl- 
' Caitanya, who flourished about a century later and brought 
with him a devotional movement, which for a long time 
overflooded Bengal and some of the neighbouring Provinces. 
Vaisnavite apostles like Madhavendra-purl, Advaitacarya, 
Srivasa and others, of course, flourished just before the 
. advent of Caitanya, — but the advent of Caitanya was some- 
thing like a fruition of all their devotional p>enances, and it 
was an event which was really epoch-making in the religion 
and literature of Bengal. Caitanya, as he is interpreted by 
his followers, embodies in him the quintessence of both 
Radha and Krsna, is the realiser and the realised in the 
same personality. 

^ See an article, Bhakti-dharmer Vivartan, by the present writer in the 
Bhitraia-varia, Caitra, B S., 1343* See also an article, Prem-dharma, by K. N, Mitra, 
Udauan^ B.S., 1341, Agrahlyana, 



iHTRCajUCTIoN 


xkii 

Through his life and teachings Caitanya preached a 
doctrine of divine love, which was philosophically 
systematised and theologically codified by the six Gosvamis 
of VrndSvana, viz., Rupa, Sanatana, Raghunath Das, Raghu- 
nath Bhatta, Gopala Bhatta and Jiva Gosvami. The 
philosophical and theological system known as Gaudiya 
Vaisnavism (i.e., the Vaisnavism of Bengal) is really the 
contribution of these six Gosvamis, who were all religious 
apostles inspired by the life and teachings of Caitanya. 
Pre-Caitanya Vaisnavism of Bengal generally flourished with 
the legends of Krsna and his dalliances with the cowherd 
girls of Vrndavana and particularly with Radha ; but in Post- 
Caitanya Vedsnavism the divinity of Caitanya as the synthesis 
of the two aspects of the same reality as the lover and the 
beloved was recognised and emphasised, and as a result 
thereof Post-Caitanya Vaisnava literature laid the same 
stress, if not more, on the life and teachings of Caitanya 
as on the legends of Radha and Krsna. 

The other two important cults that have influenced 
Bengali literature almost from the beginning are the ^iva 
and the Sakta cults. So far as the religious history of Bengal 
is concerned, of the two, Saivism seems to be the older and 
the Sakta cults, which are more often indigenous than 
Puranic, sprang up later in strong opposition to the former. 
In our literary records we find the l^akta cults often at 
daggers drawn with the cults that •centred round the male 
deities. In this conflict with the other systems, particularly 
with the Sakta systems, Saivisna, the religion centring round 
the most indiflaent and inactive god, had to give way and 
the Sakta cults gradually gained ground. This conflict 
seems to have resolved itself in another way in a synthetic 
transformation in the Rsdha-Kisna cult of Bengal. 

If we take a bird’s eye view of the religious history of 
Bengal as a whole it will appetur that among the Hindu 
deititt l^iva enjoyed wide popularity in the early and 



xliv OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

mediaeval period. In the preliminary chapter of some of 
the Dharma-mahgalas, which belong to the seventeenth and 
''the eighteenth century, we find salutation to all the male 
and female deities of Bengal and also an enumeration of 
the localities where they were popular. ' A general 
consideration of these lists of the gods and goddesses of 
Bengal will reveal the extent of the popularity that Lord Siva 
enjoyed in Bengal even up to the eighteenth century. It is 
also to be noticed that though in the Dharma-mangala 
literature we find Dharma-thakura identified more with 
Krsna and Rama, yet in religious practice the Dharma 
cult has got itself amalgamated more with Saivism. It will 
also appear from a perusal of the different kinds of Bengali 
Mangala-kavyas (which are practically propaganda literature 
belonging to the different religious schools) that the different 
Sakta cults of Bengal presuppose a Saivite background, 
against which they thrived, though their origin might have 
been eeurlier. 

Siva of Bengal, at least as found depicted in Bengali 
literature, is not exactly the same Siva with whom we are 
acquainted in the Brahminical literature, particularly in the 
Puranas. The indigenous elements of Bengalee life and 
culture have supplied flesh and blood to his Brahminic 
skeleton and made him a Bengalee through and through. 
Siva of the period between the tenth and the fourteenth 
century really represents much of the Lord Supreme of 
Tantric Buddhism as indiscriminately mixed up with the 
ancient Lord of India. Siva o'f the later period, as depicted 
in relation to his troublesome family, composed of two sons, 
two daughters and a wife, represents, through his wild mode 
of life and unscrupulous activities, a vivid picture of some of 


* See Dharma Vandan&f MS» preserved in the Bengali Manuscript Library of 
the Calcutta University, No. 2470. Also see the first chapter of the Dharma- 
mahgalat by Minik GSnguli, Bfim-das Adak and others. 



introduction 


xlv 

tke aspects of the social life of mediaeval Bengal. In almost 
all the literatures belonging to this religious school, huftian 
interest of the family-life of Siva far outweighs the interest 
of his divine nature, and in this indigenous character of 
Siva the Puranic elements have been set here and there with 
the avowed purpose of giving it a Puranic colouring. The 
literature of the Saivite cult consists chiefly of the SiVdyanas, 
which deal with the peculiar life and activities of lord Siva, 
particularly in relation to his family. Like the Saivite 
devotional lyrics of the South or even like the few songs 
on Hatra-Gauri (i.e., Siva and his wife) composed by Vidya- 
pati of Mithila, we have no Saivite devotional lyric in' 
Bengali. A large portion of fragmentaury literature concern- 
ing Siva is, however, to be culled from the Mangala-kavyas 
belonging to the Dharma cult and particularly to the Candl 
and the Manasa cults. 

The Sakta cults of Bengal represent a particularly 
distinctive feature of the religious life of Bengal and the 
extent of literature which flourished under the direct influence 
of those cults is also fairly large. We do not know of any 
such Sakta influence in the religion and literature of any other 
province of India excepting Malabar. The Sakta literature 
of Bengal generally belongs to the type of Mangala literature, 
which, as we have said, is the literature of religious propa- ' 
ganda. Among the Sakta cults, the more important are 
the cults of Candl (or Kali or Kalika), the consort of Lord 
Siva, and the cult of Manasa, the serpent goddess. We 
have also Mangala-kavyas belonging to the cult of goddess 
Sitala (the goddess of the direful disease of pox), Kamala 
or 1 - aksmi (the goddess of wealth), Sasthi (the goddess 
believed to be in charge of the welfare of children) and 
others, but the literature belonging to such cults is compara- 
tively negligible both in quality and in quantity. 

The Mangala literature of Bengal is a continuation in 
vemacuW of the religious literature in Sanskrit, generally 



OBSCURE Rtl-IGIOUS CULTS 


xlvi 

known as the Puranic literature. The Sanskrit Pflranas are 
sometimes infused with a spirit of propaganda on behalf of 
spme half-indigenous and half-traditional religious cult and 
there is the spirit of glorifying some of the gods and goddesses 
with the help of a huge network of stories which bear 
testimony to their irresistible divine powar and thus make 
them acceptable to the Brahminical people. The same 
spirit is found in the Mangala-kavyas of Bengal, which 
launched vigorous and continual propaganda on behalf of 
some god or goddess in question with reference to various 
episodes where he or she had the supreme power to save 
the devotee from all sorts of dangers and didiculties and to 
bring destruction to all who opposed his or her supremacy. 
These gods and goddesses of the Mangala-kavyas, in spite of 
their Puranic garb, are often indigenous in nature. Naturally, 
therefore, when the worship of these gods and goddesses 
began to be Introduced in the society at large their divinity 
was questioned and the move for the introduction of their 
worship was strongly resisted by different sections of people. 
The followers of these gods and goddesses had, therefore, to 
justify, in keen competition with their rivals, the divinity of 
the deity in question and the legitimacjy of his or her claim for 
worship on earth ; and this will explain the origin of our 
'Mangala literature. But it is to be observed that, after once 
this litereury form could gain sufficient currency and popula- 
rity, it became ere long more or less a literary convention. 
It cannot be said with a sufficient degree of certainty that 
Mukunda-ram, the greatest among the poets of the Candl- 
mangalas, was a devotee of Candi or that Bharata-candra, 
practically the last and most secular of the poets of the 
Mangala literature, was a sincere devotee of Annada 
religious garb was rather a device in mediaeval literature 
to make literature acceptable to the meisses, who wore 
prompted to listen to these literary works more with a 
religious fervour than with a literary taste. 



INTRCHXJCTION 


xlvii 


Mangala literature may be said to have its origin in the 
fourteenth century, but it developed in the sixteenth and the 
seventeenth century, after which the old literary convention 
fell into disuse and literature began to flourish with a new 
spirit and form. Up till the leist quarter of the eighteenth 
century, l§akta literature consisted exclusively of the different 
Mangala-kavyas ; but by the last quarter of the eighteenth 
century a new type of Sakta literature flourished in the form 
of fine devotional lyrics mainly on Syama or Kdi (popularly 
known as Syamasangit or songs on Syama, the universal 
Mother of dark-blue colour) and sometimes also on Uma, 
or Gaurl, the daughter of the mountain Himalaya, and the 
young wife of the old, wild and indifferent husband Siva. 
Ramprasad Sen of the eighteenth century, the greatest 
devotee of the Mother, a devotee of the most unassuming 
and non-sectarian type, may be taken to be the represen- 
tative poet of this school. About a century later Ram- 
krsna Parama-hainsa of Daksinesvara, through his most 
devoted life and his sweet and simple teachings, gave a 
new impetus to this cult, and the literature of the Ram-kts^ 
cult should never go unnoticed in the history of our 
literature. Sri Aurabindo of Pondicherry is at present giving 
a new orientation to the Mother cult and is also inspiring 
occasional l}n:ics on the line. 

In surveying the general trends of the religious history 
of Bengal in particular relation to the history of Bengali 
literature, we cannot neglect the influence which the great 
religion of Islam exerted on the religion and literature of 
Bengal. The Mahomedans first came to the land as a 
conquering nation ; but after they had settled here 
and became natives of the land and succeeded in making 
a large number of converts, their religious thoughts and 
ideas began to influence those of their neighbours ; and 
at the same time the thoughts and ideas of their 
neighbours also began to affect and modify theirs in their 



OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


]^iii 

turn. Sonle sort of a compromise between tKe religious 
ideas and practices of popular Islam and popular Hinduism 
continued in the rank and file of the two communities 
through a slow and gradual process of cultural reciproca- 
tion. Islam of Bengal is rather Sofl-istic Islam and the 
influence of this Sufi-ism on the Indian religious movements 
is best exhibited in the songs of the Bauls. Besides these, 
the divinities like Satya-pir, Manik-pir, Gaji and others of 
popular Islam represent the continuity of the process of a 
happy admixture of elements both from Islam and Hinduism. 
About the influence of Islam on the Dharma cult we shall 
have detailed discussion in our study of the Dharma cult. 

The popular religious ceremonies of women-folk, 
particularly of the maidens, have also supplied us with nice 
pieces of folk literature. The ceremonies, of which there 
are a good number of varieties, are generally known as the 
Vratas (vows) and are accompanied by the recitation of 
rhymed or unrhymed rhythmic verses (gerierally known as 
the Vrata-k.atha) which contain fine touches of rural poetry. 
In the performance of these ceremonies there is always 
an element of art, — either the art of poetry or the art of 
painting. These Vratas are still adding a subconscious 
aesthetic pleasure to the conscious religious sentiment of 
the women-folk of Bengal. 

The nineteenth century dawned with a new ideal of life, 
religion and literature. The spirit, form and technique of 
the old and mediaeval literature, flourishing up to the end 
of the eighteenth century, grew hopelessly monotonous and 
roused a subconscious feeling of dissatisfaction in the mind 
of the people and also an inward demand for a change ; and 
a change was inevitable in the course of nature. The most 
important factor, that intensified this demand for a change 
and accelerated its speed, was the influence of Western 
thoughts and ideals on our political, cultural and religious 
life. From the beginning of the seventeenth century 



INTRODUCTION 


xHx 

Bengalees begain tQ conje in contact with’ the European 
merchants, and clergies and as time went on, the contact 
began to be more and more intensified. This began to 
bring about a slow and gradual change in our general 
outlook. This was m'ucK more accelerated by the consolida- 
tion of British power in Bengal, and the political conquest 
soon brought with it a cultural conquest. Through the 
propaganda of the European clergies, whose principal 
business was tp point out th^ illogicality, absurdity and 
immorality of the mythological Hindu faith, and tluough the 
easy accessibility of the theological and philosophical works 
embodying the spirit of the Western religion and culture, 
there actually dawned a great change in the mental horizon 
of the Bengalees. Western education and culture roused a 
spirit of revolution in the mind of youths and the revolution 
found expression first through the life and activities of Raja 
Ram Mohan Roy, who by the first quarter of the nineteenth 
century had, at the very prime of his youth, the courage of 
standing against the prevalent religious beliefs of the Hindus, 
which he called superstitious and mythological. His call 
for revolution was responded to instantaneously by a section 
of the educated Bengalees and he did succeed in establishing 
a new religious school which was fundamentally based on 
Upanisadic monism, supplemented by cognate thoughts of 
Islam and Christianity. This newly reformed religion soon 
developed into the religious school known as Brahmoism, 
which broke asunder the barriers of the caste-system and the 
orthodox canons of the Hindu Smrtis (canonical texts) and 
stood 'agaiilst all formalities in life and religion. Hirough 
the life and activities of Maharsi Devendranath Tagore, 
Brahmlnanda Kelav Chandra Sen, Vijay-krsna Gosvami 
and a host of other staunch followers of this new faith this 
religion soon gained a strong footing among an educated 
and cultured section of the Bengalees and it cannot be 
gainsaid that this new faith of rationalism has been exerting 
G-I4IIB 



1 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


a reformative influeace on orthodox Hinduism for more 
than a century, and that it exerted an appreciable influence 
also on the literature of the nineteenth century. 

Among the important literary flgures of the last half of 
the nineteenth century Bankim Chandra Chatterjee had a 
religious conception of his own, and the importance of this 
conception in the history of our literature lies in the fact that 
many of his novels and essays distinctly presuppose this 
religious background. Bankim Chandra was essentially a 
Hindu, — -but he was a staunch rationalist at the same time, 

' and this rationalism of Bankim was to a great extent roused in 
him through his intirnate contact with the thoughts and ideas 
of the European scientists and philosophers of the eighteenth 
and the nineteenth century. Though Bankim Chandra 
had a fair acquaintance with the leading philosophical 
views of Europe, the two systems that exerted the greatest 
influence on the formation of his new religious faith are the 
Positivism of Comte and the Utilitarianism of Mill. Bankim 
Chandra’s religion is fundamentally based on Positivism 
and Utilitarianism ; but he thought that Hinduism, as 
represented by the most popular scripture, the GitS (the 
Divine Song), ascribed to the authorship of Lord SrI-Krsna, 
can very well be reconciled with the principles of Positivism 
and Utilitarianism. He, therefore, interpreted the ideals 
of the Gita in the light of Positivism and Utilitarianism 
and tried to construct a new system of thought by a 
mixture of the ideas from the East and the West. How far 
Bankim Chandra succeeded in amalgamating the religious 
views of the East and the West and how far his new system 
was placed on a sound basis is a matter of controversy ; 
but what concerns us here is that not only his essays 
but many of his novels also were infused with this new 
ideal of religion, — characterised by a distinct humanitarian 
tone, much too in keeping with the general tope ot 
^e thne. 



INTRODUCTION 


li 


It Kas sometimes l>een said tKat tKe religious attitude 
and the aesthetic attitude coincide together in their ultimate 
nature. There is no antagonism or even a relation ol 
contreuiiety between truth and beauty ; on the other hand 
truth, beauty and goodness are sometimes viewed as the 
three attributes of the ultimate reality. This relation of truth 
with beauty, or of religion with’ eurt, has best been illustrated 
in the art-creation of Rabindranath Tagore. There are many 
songs among the poetical works of Tagore, which keep us in 
a fix as to whether we should eulogise them as master- 
pieces of art or as the best expressions of religious ex- 
periences. Teigore made no distinction between his aesthetic 
vision and his spiritual realisation, and he has repeatedly 
declared that as essentially a poet he could never make 
any distinction between the poet in him and the spiritusJ 
aspirer. As a matter of fact, rarely have we seen another 
poet sink so deep in the unfathomable mysteries of nature, 
life and mind and come out with the priceless gems of 
his intuitional realisation, and at the same time give them 
the best artistic expression. 

Tagore sings of an infinite supreme Being underlying 
the whole cosmic process of finite creation. The world- 
process is an eternal process of self-realisation through 
self-manifestation of that supreme Being. The Infinite is 
becoming self-conscious through the eternal art-creation of 
all finitude, — and the truth of the Finite lies in the ideal 
of unity which it finds in the deeper relatedness with the 
Infinite. The Finite and the Infinite have embraced each 
other in the personality of man and the religion of man, 
which consists of his realisation of the ultimate truth in him, 
lies in the perfect evolution of his personality or the exten- 
sion of it into infinity through the increase of knowledge, 
love and disinterested activities. There is an ideal unity 
underlying the diversity of the world-process, and the 
world of inanimate objects is evolving with the same rhythm 



lii 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


with which the biological, the psychological and the spiritual 
processes of man are moving ; and the world-process as a 
whole is moving towards an ideal end — the ideal of perfec- 
tion, which is to be attained by the realisation of our deeper 
relatedness with the Infinite Being. In speaking of a vision 
of his childhood Tagore says in his work, Religion of Man, 
“ The rhythmic picture of the tremulous leaves beaten by the 
rain opened before my mind the world which does not 
merely carry information, but a harmony with my being. 
The unmeaning fragments lost their individual isolation and 
my mind revelled in the unity of a vision. In a similar 
manner, on that morning in the village the facts of my life 
suddenly appeared to me in a luminous unity of truth. 
All things that had seemed like vagrant waves were revealed 
to my mind in relation to a boundless sea. 1 felt sure that 
some Being who comprehended me and my world was 
seeking his best expression in all my experiences, uniting 
them to an ever-widening individuality which is a spiritual 
work of art.” When this ever- widening individuality or 
personality approximates infinity, we realise the divinity in 
man and that is the ideal realisation of truth. 

This conception of religion propagated by Tagore, 
both through speculative essays and through his art-creations, 
much akin though it may be to the Hegelian and the 
neo-Hegelian thoughts in striking points, is, however, 
fundamentally based on the teachings of the Upanisads, 
which were ingrained in the heart of poet Tagore from the 
early days of his childhood. On the Upanisadic canvas 
the Vaisnava love-poets and the mystic Bauls of Bengal and 
other mystic poets of upper and northern India, Viz., 
Kabit, Dado, Rajjab and others, have supplied lines and 
colours of different shades. But this background and the 
other probable influences do in no way minimise the indivi- 
dual contribution of Tagore, and it has to be admitted that 
Tagore, as the seer of truth, has realised something new and 



INTRODUCTION liii 

given something substantbl to the religious thought and 
literature of the world. 

The world has changed a good deal in this twentieth 
century of ours. Through the materialistic and positivistic 
tendencies of centuries we have now learnt to care more for 
our material life than for anything higher and spiritual. 
The advancement of positive sciences, the growing keenness 
in the struggle for existence, — the sternly acute problems 
of the grossly real life have turned the mind of the general 
mass away from the problems of the supra-mental reality. 
This life of flesh and blood, the apparently repulsive naked 
truths of the mysterious sphere, commonly known as the 
mind, the real weal and woe with which we are beset in 
our ordineury daily life, — the suppressed pangs of depressed 
humanity — the injustice of the powerful, the suffering of 
the weak — inequity of the social machine, crashing of the 
innocent heart, — triumph of the bourgeoisie and the cry of the 
proletariat — these are the things that are engaging our whole 
attention, — and these are the things which we think and 
feel, and the mysteries of which we try to give expression 
to. The influence of the Continental literature and the closer 
contact of our life with the rapidly progressive life of the 
rising powers of the world around are rousing in us almost 
a craze for realism, and history must have its course. 




PART 1 

THE BUDDHIST SAHAJIYA CULT AND LITERATURE 




OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS AS BACKGROUND 
OF BENGALI LITERATURE 


CHAPTER I 

Growth of the Sahajiya Cult and Literature 
(i) Information about the Available Literature 

The earliest available literature in the Bengali language 
consists of a number of fifty songs ' composed by different 
Siddhacaryas (i.e., preceptors who have attained perfection) 
belonging to the Buddhist Sahajiya cult. These poems 
which are popularly known as the " Carya-padas ” 
(literally, verses on practices) were first 
Bengali— the CaryS- published by MM. H. P. Sastri under the 
caption of ‘ Carya-carya-oinUcayah', this 
being the title found in the Nepalese manuscript. MM. 
Vidhufekhara Bhattacarya, however, suggested that the 
correct caption should be “ Ascarya-carya-caya" (a collection of 
verses on mystic practices), which is found in the commentary 
of Munidatta on the opening verse. ^ Dr. P. C. Bagchi has 


* These songs were first discovered by the late MahSmahopSdhySya Haraprassda 
-Wrl in the Darbar Library of Nepal in 1907. They were edited by MM SSstri 
and published about ten years later under the au«pices of the Vangiya Sshitya ParUad 
under the general caption of •' Bauddha-Gan-O-Dohs." In the edition of MM, 
Ssstrl three songs, viz., the twenty fourth, twenty-fifth and the fiftieth songs ate 
missing. Dr. P. C. Bagchi. M.A.. Dr. es Lettres (Parish has fortunately been able to 
discover from Tan-jur the Tibetan translation of all the fifty songs. (Vide Materials 
/or Critical Edition of the Old Bengali Caryapadas, Part 1, reprinted from the 
J. D. L.. Vol. XXX.) 

2 Vide the note of MM. BhattScIrya in the Indian Historical Quarterly, 1928, 
Vol. IV, No. 2. 



4 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


suggested another improvement on the title and according 
to him the correct title should be “ Carya-scarya-viniscaya. 

Though doubt has been cast from some quarters as to 
whether the linguistic character of the Carya-padas is genuine 
Bengali,^ Dr. S. K. Chatterji, after a thorough examina- 
tion of the linguistic character of these songs, has emphati- 
cally expressed his opinion that ‘ ‘ the 

Linguistic character r i - • L 

of the songs -essentia language Or the Laryas is the genuine 
ally Bengnli. vemacular of Bengal at its basis.” In- 

spite of sporadic intrusions of a few Maithili and Odiya forms, 
and also of the influence of SaurasenI Apabhramsa, 
the essential linguistic nature of these songs cannot but 
be admitted to be Bengali. ' The language of the Dohas, 
which are published with the songs, is admittedly Western 
Apabhramsa. Many names will be found common between 
the authors of the Western Apabhratnsa Dohas and those of 
„ . the Bengali songs. The mere commonness 

posed in Western of names in the list of authors does not, 

Apabhramsa. . 

however, 

authors, and we have no other positive evidence to be sure 
that the authors of the Dohas and those of the Carya-padas, 
where common names are to be found, are identical. But a 

^ Vide Some Aspects o/ Buddhist Mysticism in the Caryapadas in tlie 
Calcutta Oriental Journal, Vol. I. 

Mr. B. C. Majumdar, M.A., emphasised the Odiya nature of the Carya-padas 
fsee History of Bengali Language, by B. C. Majumdar, Lecture XIII, also a series of 
articles contributed by him in the Bengali monthly V anga Vant) . Again Mr. Jayaswal, 
following R. Sankrtyayana, refers to the language of the CaryS-padas as old Bihari in 
his presidential address to the seventh AH -India Oriental Conference held in Baroda. 

3 The peculiar Bengali nature of the songs will be evident if we consider the 
‘peculiar forms of the language, e g,, the genitive in ** -era, -ara,’' dative in ‘re,’* 
locative in **-ta ; post-positional words like** majha,” antara,** “saiiga;” past 
and future bases in “-il-, -ib-” and not “-al-, -ab ** of Bihari; present participle in 
‘* -anta, conjunctive indeclinable in “ -ia,*’ conjunctive conditional in ‘*-ite;” 
passive in “ -ia-,” which is preserved as a relic in Middle Bengali; substantive 
roots *' ach ’* and *‘ thak,” and not “ thik ” of Maithili or “ ths ” of Odiya; and 
a number of Bengali idioms. See The Origin and Development of Bengali Lan- 
guage, by Dr. S. K, Chatterji, Vol. I, p. 112. 


establish the identity of these 



GROWTH OF THE SAHAJJYA CULT AND LITERATURE 5 


comparison of the Dohas with the Carya-padas will reveal the 
fact that in their religious attitude, in theories and practices 
and in the manner of literary representation, in imagery, 
phraseology and vocabulary they present a striking similarity, 
which warrants the belief that the authors of the Dohas and 
theCaryas, where common names are found, might have been 
identical ; — we must at least admit that both the Dohas and 
the Caryas represent the same school of thought and they 
belong to the same literary school. The anomaly as to why 
the Bengalee poets,' composing songs in Bengali, should have 
composed songs also in Sauraseni Apabhranisa on the same 
subject may be explained by referring to the prominence 
and popularity that Western Apabhramsa 

Reasons for the . l i * r * 11 . .1 

linguistic anomaly. enjoyed during the period between the 
ninth century and the twelfth through the 
prestige of North Indian Rajput princes, in whose courts 
dialects akin to the later form of 6aurasem were used, and 
whose bards spread and popularised such dialects in almost 
all parts of Aryan India, from Gujrat^ and Western Punjab 
to Bengal. “ But leaving aside the purely linguistic question, 
if we discuss the nature of these Dohas and songs from the 
religious, cultural and literary points of view, we shall find 
that they belong to no particular province of India, but may 
be regarded as representative of the earliest stage of 
Indo-Aryan vernacular religious poetry inasmuch as their 
influence in thought and presentation on a considerable portion 
of the mediaeval vernacular literatures of Western, Northern 
and Eastern India is palpable. 

Investigation reveals the fact that many of the 
authors of these Dohas and Carya-padas, besides a good 
number of writers of Buddhist Tantric texts and commen- 
taries, belong to the province of Bengal or to the close 

^ See infra. 

2 Vidct The Origin and Dcvclof^ment of Bengali Language, by Dr. S. K 
Chatleiji, p, 113. 



6 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


neighbourhood of Bengal.' Though with the insufficient 
data that are available about the authors of the Dohas and 
the Carya-padas it is not possible to ascertain the exact time 
when these Siddhacaryas flourished and composed the Dohas 
and songs, we have reasons to believe that they flourished 
during the reign of the Pala kings of Bengal, which extended 
from the eighth to the twelfth century A.D. Among the 
Siddhacaryas Lui-pa is taken to be the first. 

Time of composition t.. ir\ .1 a ••xl 

of the songs. Lui*pa and Uipankara Sri-*]nana conjointly 

wrote a book named Abhisamaya- 
Vihhafiga. Sri-jnana was born in 980 A.D. and went to 
T ibet in 1042 A.D. f he preached religion in Tibet for long 
fourteen years and died in 1056 A. D. So it may be 
supposed that Abhisamaya-vibhafiga was written some- 
time by the first quarter of the eleventh century. Lui-pa was 
senior to Sri-jnana, and therefore, he may reasonably be 
supposed to have flourished sometime in the second half 
of the tenth century. ‘ Again, we find in the colophon of the 
commentary on the HeVajraAantra, called the Hevajra- 
panjika or the Y oga-ratna-mala, preserved in manuscript 
in the University Library, Cambridge, that the 
commentary was made or rather finished by Panditacarya 
Sri-kanha-pada in the thirty-ninth year of the reign of 
Govinda-pda, who flourished in the twelfth century A. D. 
(1199 A.D). Dr, S. K. Chatter] i thinks it possible to 

^ Vide an article on Buddhist Tantiic Literature oj Bengal, by Dr. S. K. De in 
the New Indian Antiquary, Vol. I, No, I. Vide also, introduction to the Bauddha- 
Gan-o-Dohof by MM. H. P. SastrL 

2 Pide an article by Mr, N. N Dasguptain the Vafiglyn Sahitya-parisaUpairikH 
B,S. 1333, No. 2. 

The Presidential address of MM. H, P. ^^astrT in the VangTya Sahilya-Pari.^ad 
inB. S 1329. 

^ See Bahgiilara Itihdsa lin Bengali), by Rakhaldas Bandyopadhyay , p. 318, The 
colophon of the manuscript referred to here in this book of Mr. Banerjee is taken from 
a brief notice of the MS. in BendalKs Catalogue of BuddhisUSanskrit Manuscripts 
in the Vniveisity Library of Cambridge. The MS. is, howe/er, available to the 
present writer in rotograph (MS. Add. 1699). There is also a copy of the MS. 
preserved in the R, A. S. B. (No 10745), but the colophon is missing there 



GROWTH OF THE SAHAJIYA CULT AND LITERATURE 1 


identify this Panditacarya Kanha-pada with the Kanha-pada of 
the Carya-padas and thus to place Kanha-pada of the 
Carya-padas in the second half of the twelfth century.' 
Without entering into the historical controversies it may be 
held that these poets of the Carya-padas and of the Dohas 
flourished sometime between the tenth and twelfth 
centuries A.D. 

(ii) History of Buddhism in Bengal 

As we have already hinted, the Carya-padas embody the 
religious tenets of Sahajiya Buddhism, which was a later 
oflshoot of Tantric Buddhism. It will not be out of place 
. , e L here to say a few words about the nature 

1 he study ot oaha- 

jiys Buddhism in and extent of the growth and spread of 

Bengal necessitates the nin* • i i 

study of the history of Duddhism in Bengal at the time of and 
Buddhism in Bengal. , . , . i O' i ii r 

before the rise or these biddhacaryas. In 
all probability Bengal was outside the empire of Asoka and 

* The evidence on the strength of which Dr. Chatlerji tries to establish the 
identity of the author of the commentary Hevajra-panjikfl with the author of the 
Carya-padas and that of the Doha-k^sa does not seem to be convincing. In 
the edition of the Carya-padas published by MM. ^Sstri the last couplet of the 
song No. 36 reads as follows 

sathi kf^riva jalandhari patrol 
pakhi na rahaa mori pandia cade II 

The reading is evidently corrupted. The correct reading should, liowcvci, be 

iakht hetriva jalandhari pae I 

pakhi na cahai {or cahaa) mori pandiacae II 

which means, — ‘‘ 1 shall make Jalandhari-pfi (reputed to be the preceptor of Kaiiha-pa) 
bear witness for me ; I do not find the scholastic preceptors (panditacarya) standing 
by my side (r.e., holding the same view with me).” Dr. Chatterji, however, inter- 
prets the lines in the following manner: — 

I shall call to witness my Guru Jalandhari-pSda ; my Panditacarya ii c , myself 
who am a great scholar) does not look at me/’ {The Origin and Development, etc., 
p. 122). With this interpretation of the couplet Dr. Chatterji thinks that the word 
'* panditacarya*' referred to here can very well be a reference by Kanha to himself. 
But the interpretation of Dr. Chatterji cannot be accepted without much twisting 
of the construction of the couplet, and the meaning derived thereby does not conform 
to the meaning that the commentary on the lines and the Tibetan translation yield. 



8 


OBSCUKE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Buddhism could have no access to this province during his 
reign in the third century B. C. Mention is made of various 
centres of Theravada Buddhism in India from which re- 
presentative monks went to Ceylon to attend the ceremony 
of the consecration of the Maha-stupa erected by King Duttha- 
gamani in the second century B.C. ; but though in the list 
of the centres we find mention of many places closely 
adjacent to Bengal, we find no mention of Bengal.’ Traces 
of Buddhism as a religious faith in Bengal are, however, 

, . , r n , „ found from the time of the Gupta 
in Bengal before emperots. The Chinese pilgrim , Fa-Hien, 
Buddhism in Bengal visited India during the reign of Chandra- 

of ihe Gupta period. ii r' i ■■ i ■ o' i- ■ 

gupta II. ra-Hien stayed in iamralipti 
(modern Tamluk in Midnapore) for two years, copying 
Sutras and painting images. He noticed the existence of 
twenty-four Sangharamas in the city, which were all residen- 
tial seats for the Buddhist monks. It was also noticed by the 
pilgrim that Buddhism at that time began to command 
^ , reverence with the public in general. 

Evidence or trie 

foreign pilgrims- the After Fa-Hien another renowned 

epigraphical records. . , *1 • IT* T’ 

Chinese pilgrim, Hiuen Isang, came to 
India during the seventh century A.D. in the reign of 
Harsavardhana and visited Bengal. He found ten Buddhist 
monasteries with more than 1 ,000 monks residing in them in 
Tamralipti, twenty Sangharamas with some 3,000 priests 
who studied both the Little and the Great Vehicle in Pundra- 
vardhana, thirty or so Sangharamas with about 2,000 priests, 
all of the Sthavira school in Samatata, and ten Sangharamas 
or so with about 2,000 priests studying the Little Vehicle 
of the Samatatiya school in Karnasuvarna. He also spoke 
of two most notable colleges, rather universities, of his time, 
one at Pundravardhana and the other at Karnasuvarna, 
both renowned as great seats of learning for the Eastern 


1 Religious Condition Bengal other than Hindu, by Dr, B. M. Barua, M.A. 
D.Lit (Lond.) (unpublished! . 



GROWTH OF THE SAHAJIYA CULT AMD LITERATURE 9 


Buddhist scholars. I-tsing, another Chinese pilgrim, speaks 
of the University of Bha-ra-ha in Tamralipti and gives 
a vivid picture of its inner life, organisation, discipline, 
splendour and fame. While speaking of the four tracts of 
Bengal referred to by Hiuen Tsang, I-tsing referred to the 
great reverence of people in general for the Buddhist faith 
and for the monastic life of the Bhiksus (monks living on 
alms). He also found an A^oka tope and the vestiges of 
the four past Buddhas. 

A renowned Buddhist teacher of Bengal of the pre- 
Pala age was Silabhadra of Samatata. He was at first a 
disciple of Acarya Dharmapala of Nalanda and gradually 
became the head of that great Buddhist University. He 
was a friend as well as a preceptor of Hiuen Tsang who 
had deep reverence for the monk. Buddhabhadra, the 
nephew and disciple of Sllabhadra, was also a devout 
Buddhist, and both the uncle and the nephew were reputed 
as great devotees and profound scholars. Buddhabhadra has 
been described as a specialist in Yogacara Buddhism, and 
tradition says that he derived his inspiration from Avalokites- 
vara, Maitreya and Manjusri. 

One thing to be noticed in this connection is that the 
evidence of the Chinese pilgrims or of the epigraphical and 
archaeological records does not help us much in ascertaining 
ihe nature of Buddhism that was current in Bengal before - 
the Palas. We find mention of Mahayana Buddhism 
as well as of Hmayana. It seems, however, that in the 
historical evolution of Buddhism, Mahayana, with its more 
liberal policy and generous ideal of the final goal, could 
capture the mind of the public much more than Hmayana 
with its strict monasticism and ethical rigorism, and as a 
result Mahayana was fast gaining in popularity. During the 
time of the Palas, however, a tendency towards esoterism*^ 
was manifest and Buddhism very soon underwent another 
great change from Mahayana to Vajrayana. 

2 HUB 



10 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


^ Coming to the time of the Palas, who were professed 


Buddhism of the 
Psla period. 


Buddhists, we find many Buddhist 
monasteries established in different parts 


of Bengal mainly through the patronage 


of these Pala kings. The great Vihara of Nalanda was 
enriched and repaired and some new land-grants were made 
to it by the Palas, and it was made the meeting place of all 
sorts of Buddhist scholars from countries within and without 


India. On the evidence of Taranatha we know that Gopala 1 
founded the Odantapurl or Uddandapura Mahavihara, while 
according to the Pag-Sam-Jon-Zang he was the founder of 
the monastery of Nalanda. Dharmapala, the son of Gopala, 
who himself bore the epithet of VikramaMadeva, founded 
the monastery of Vikramasila which for some time rivalled 
the glory of Nalanda. An inscribed clay-seal discovered in 
Pahadapura bears testi mony to the fact that the M ahavihara of 
Somapura in North Bengal also was erected by Dharmapala. 
Close to this important monastery was situated, in the eleventh 
century A.D., a temple of Khasarpana Avalokitelvara, in 
which was permanently deposited a manuscript of the Ptajna- 
paramita in a casket artistically executed by Vipulalrimitra. 
On four sides of this big temple were built four alms-houses 
wherein images of the Goddess Tara were installed. Another 
big temple of Tara was built in Somapura to ‘ dispel entirely 
the eight great dreads of the people.’ This monastery of 
Somapura and also the Vikramasila monastery were probably 
brought to perfection by Devapala, son of Dharmapala. 
The Bstan-hgyur refers to another Vihara of Vikramapuri, 
which was most probably situated in Vikramapura of East 
Bengal. Kumara Candra, called Acarya Avadhuta, wrote 
a Tantric commentary in this monastery of Vikramapuri. 
Another Vihara which was already in existence in Bengal 
during the time of Dharmapala was the Traikutaka Vihara, 
where Acarya Haribhadra wrote his famous commentary 
on the Asta-sahasrlka-prajna-paramita. Prajna-varman, 



CROW IH OF IHE SAHAjIYA CULT AND LITERATURE I 1 

called Acarya, and his preceptor, Bodhivarman, are said to* 
have hailed from Kapa^ya of Bengal, which was either a 
monastery itself or a -place having a monastery. There was 
probably another monastery m Devikot in North Bengal to 
which Advayavajra, the great Tantric Buddhist scholar, 
as also Mekhala, a nun, are said to have belonged. The Pag- 
Som-Jon^Zang mentions the Pandita Vihara of Chittagong, 
which was a great centre of 1 antric learning and culture, 
and with this Vihara Tilipa as Tilopa or Tailapada is said 
to have been associated. l ailapada had a disciple of the 
name of Nada-pada, who again is said to have been the 
preceptor of the renowned Bengali Buddhist missionary who 
went to Tibet and preached Buddhism there for full fourteen 
years. Nadapa was the author of the commentary on the 
Vajrapada- Sara- samgr aha, which is said to have been com- 
posed by Sakyabhiksu Yasobhadra of Kasmira at the demand 
of Vinaya-sri-mitra and others belonging to the grand Vihara 
of Kanakastupa in the city of Patukeraka. This city of 
Pattikeraka, frequently found in the ballads on King Gopi- 
cand or Govinda Candra as the city of Pah-kara, has con- 
vincingly been identified with the paragam of Pati-kara, 
conterminous with Meherkul in the district of Tippera.' 

In connection with the Buddhism of the Pala period 
mention must be made here of Atif^a Djpankara, the great 
Buddhist scholar of Bengal. Of his life and activities in India 
and in Tibet we now know much, which need not be 
reproduced here. 

The grand Vihara of Jagaddala, founded by the last 
great Pala king, Ramapala, speaks of the last glory of 
Buddhism in Bengal. The king installed in this Vihara 
images of Avalokitesvara and Maha Tara. This great 
monastery was situated in a part of Ramavati, the new 

* Mr. N. N. Das Gupta, M.A., Buddhist Viharas of Bengal, Indian Culture, 
Vol. I, No. 2. 



12 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


metropolis founded by Ramapala at the confluence of 
the Ganges and the Karatoya. Bibhuticandra and 
Danasila were the two most reputed scholars of Jagaddala. 
Besides, Moksakaragupta of the same Vihara was a good 
logician and composed in three chapters the Tarko^bhasa, 
Subhakaragupta, who lived there for some time, wrote a 
commentary on the Tantric text Siddhaif^avira-tantra, 
Dharmakara of the same monastery translated the Samvara- 
vyakhya of Krsna. Buddhists from Tibet flocked here to 
have Sanskrit texts translated into Tibetan.^ 

In the brief survey made above it must have been noticed 
that a good number of Tantric scholars of Buddhism 
flourished during the period of the Palas, and many of the 
authors of the Dohas and Caryas probably flourished during 
this time. The art and iconography of the same period will 
bear testimony to the fact that by this time Mahayana began 
to be eclipsed by Vajrayana Buddhism. The icons of 
various Buddhist gods and goddesses of the period and also 
the representation of some of the gods (including the Lord 
Supreme as Hevajra or Heruka or Vajresvara or Vajra-sattva, 
as he was variously called in esoteric Buddhism) with 
their respective female consorts in a state of union 
iyaganaddha) will indicate the introduction of the Sakti 
element in the Buddhist religion of the time. 

With this brief survey of the history of Buddhism in 
Bengal before and at the time of the advent of the Buddhist 
Siddhacaryas of the Sahajiya sect, let us now turn our 
attention directly to the religious background of the Bengali 
Carya-padas, which embtidy the religious doctrines and 
practices of the Sahajiya Buddhists. This will naturally lead 
us to the question of the nature, origin and development 
of Tantric Buddhism as a whole, of which Sahaja-yana 
is a later offshoot, and also to the question of the relation 


Ibid. 



GROWTH OF IHE SAHAJIYA CULT AND LITERA'IURE 13 


and connection beteen the various schools of Tantric 
Buddhism, viz., Vajra-yana, Kalacakra-yana and Sahaja-yana. 


(m) Origin and Development of Tantric Buddhism 

The phase of later Buddhism, widely and roughly known 
as Tantric Buddhism, may be said to be a popular develop- 
ment of Mahayana Buddhism through a gradual process of 
centuries having its fullest sway during the period between 
the eighth and twelfth centuries A.C. Mahayana or the ‘ Great 
Vehicle,’ as contrasted with the ethico-religious rigorism of 
Hinayana, or the ‘ Little Vehicle,’ was a religion of progress 
and liberalism. In the Mahayana-sutra-lanl^ara of Asahga 
Hinayana has been characterised as a very 
iraSwirH-maysna' narrow systcm of religion,— narrow in 
its aim of self-liberation, narrow teach- 
ings to realise that aim, narrow method applied for this 
realisation, insufficiency of equipment and the shortness of 
time within which final liberation is guaranteed.’ On the 
other hand, the Mahayana school represents the religion of the 
dissenters and the protestants and was always characterised 
by a broadness of outlook and deep sympathy for the 
suffering beings of the whole universe. 

Tradition says that after the death of Buddha there arose 
a great controversy among his followers as to the correct 
interpretation of the sayings of the master as well as about 
the rules of discipline indispensable for a monk. To settle 
these controversies great councils were held. It is said that ' 
in the second council held in Vesali the controversy finally 
ended in a split among the Buddhists, and the dissenters 


Mahayana-8uira lun\ara, Ch. I, Verse 10. Levi’s edition. 



OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


14 ' 


convened another great assembly (Mahasafigha) to have 
a separate school of their own and they were known as the 
Mahasanghika. In this way, as time passed, the 

, , controversy between these radicalists and 

1 he quarrel bet- 
ween the elders and the orthodox elders (thera) began to be 

the liberals. • • i i 

more and more uncompromising and the 
points of dissension were also gradually increasing in 
number. This controversy between the elders and the 
radicalists finally resulted in the growth of the two separate 
schools within the province of Buddhism itself, the canonical 
tenets of the elders being styled as Hinayana and the 
tenets of the radicalists as Mahayana.' 

Among the radical changes in thought and outlook 
that we find in Mahay ana, as contrasted with Hinayana, the 

Ideal of Arhathood important is the change in the concep- 

replaced by that of tioH of the final goal. Whcrcas the sum- 

Bodhisaltvahood. 

mum bonum of Hinayana is to attain Arhat- 
hood or final liberation of the self from the whirl of existence 
through strict ethical discipline and the processes of ‘ Jhana ' 
(Sk. dhyana, meditation), the final aim of Mahayana was to 
attain Buddhahood in and through different stages of 
Bodhisattvahood, which is a state of perfect knowledge about 
the void-nature of the self and the not-self mixed up with an 
emotion of universal compassion for I he redemption of all 
the suffering beings. The conception of Bodhisattvahood, 
very important as it is in Mahayana Buddhism as well as 
in all forms of Tantric Buddhism, requires some elaboration. 
The belief of the followers of Mahayana is that every man, 
nay, every being of the world, is a potential Buddha ; he 
has within him all the potency of becoming the perfectly 
enlightened one ( Samyak-samhuddha) , which latent possi- 
bility can be made patent only through the attainment of 
perfect knowledge, associated with universal compassion, 
which prompts one to utilise that knowledge in missionary 
activities for the uplift of all beings. The ideal of missionary 



GROWTH OF THE SAHAJIYA CULT AND LITERATURE 15 


The theory of the 
three Kayas or bodies. 


life was consequently preferred to the ideal of the attainment 
The element of of final extinction (nirvana). Bodhisattva- 
hood means the attainment of the 
Bodhi-mind (Bodhircitta) , which is defined as a unified 
state of vacuity (sunyata) and universal compassion (^arund).‘ 
The other noteworthy departure in Mahayana was the 
development of the docetic conception of the three Kayas 
(bodies) of the Buddha. The Hinayanists conceived 
the Buddha only as a historical personage in the life 
and activities of Sakyamuni; but with the Mahayanists 
the Buddha is no particular historical personage, he is 
but the ultimate principle as the totality 
of things and beings in an unquali- 
fied state of all-existence. This ultimate 
principle has three aspects, known as the three Kayas of 
the Buddha, viz., the Dharma-kaya (i.e., primordial element, 
or the ‘ thatness ’ underlying all that exists), the Sambhoga- 
kaya (the body of bliss, or the effulgent body in the form of 
the Bodhisattvas) and the Nirmana-ksya (r.e., the body of 
transformation, or the historical personage of Buddha).^ With 
these fundamental changes in outlook and a predominance 
Predominance of of philosophical thought and the culture 
of the supreme virtues (paramitd) Mahayana 
Buddhism flowed on side by side with 
Hinayana for centuries. But as, on the one hand, this freedom 
of thought, broadness of outlook and spirit of liberalism 
liberated Buddhism from the walls of narrow scholasticism 
and raised it from the selfish hankering of personal liberation 
to the sublimity of a religion for suffering humanity, it, on the 
other hand, contained the germs of indiscipline and the 
revelry of wild thoughts which reduced Buddhism to a 


philosophical thought 
and culture of the 
Psramitas 


' ^unyata-karuna hhinnafn hodhi’‘Cittatn iti smrtam 1 
Sn-guhya samaja’-tantra iG.O S.>, p. 153. 

Vide infra. 



16 


OBSCUKE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


body of unintelligible m utter ings and a system of practices 
which are definitely unconventional. It should be observed 
that the pledge of Mahayana was the redemption of suffering 
humanity as a whole, nay, the liberation of all beings. 
With this end in view the apostles of Mahayana had to make 
their religion catholic enough to make it acceptable even to 
the most ordinary people of the society. In other words, 
Mahayana, as a religion for all people, had to make 
provision within its fold for people of widely different tastes 
and intellectual calibre. It is for this reason that hetero- 


geneous elements of faith and religious practices began first 
to creep in and then to rush into the province of Buddhism. v 
^ , For ordinary people religion consists in the 

Degeneration by 

too much popuiarisa- belief in innumerable gods and goddesses, 
in time-honoured customs, muttering 
of mystic formulas, and in the paraphernalia of rites, 
ceremonies and practices ; when through the zeal of liberat- 
ing all the beings from the bondage of existence Mahayana 
began to be too much popularised, all these popular religious 
elements of heterogeneous nature began to be incorporated 
into Buddhism. Though the general custom is to 
style this composite religious system of heterogeneous faiths 
and practices as Tantric Buddhism, the raison d’etre of 
Tantric Buddhism is not to be sought in this popular 
phase of the religion. It seems that with the purpose of 
attaining the final state of Buddhahood a new school deve - 
loped wthin the province of Buddhism itself with a more 
fOT ward policyT T his forwar3~sctr6ol introduced elements 
like the Mantras and t he Dharan is into the prov ince o f 
' ~ this refigiom It is~Tor~tKis reason that 

Buda'^sm”* Tantric T attVa-ratnal Mi col lect ed in 

t he Adoaya- vajra-samgi^a (edited by 
MM. H. P. Sastri, G. O. S., No. XL), we find Mahayana 
sub-divided into two schools, Viz., Paramita-naya and 
Mantra -naya. The principles of Mantra-naya are said to 



GROWTH OF THE SAHAJIYA CULT AND LITERATURE 17 


be very deep and subtle and inaccessible to ordinary men ; 

and though the ultimate purpose of the 
Manira-naya oi Mantra-sastra is the same as that of other 

IvJanfra-yana. 

Sastras, it is said to be distinctly superior to 
them because of the fact that it is free from delusions and 
is accessible only to people with a higher intellectual calibre.’ 
This Mantra-naya or Manlra-yana seems to be the intro- 
ductory stage of Tantric Buddhism, from which all other 


offshoots, like Vajra-yana , Kalacakra-ya na, S ahaja-yana , 
etc., arose in laier times. In the Laghu-kala-cakra-tanira- 
raja-iika, entitled Vimala-prabhd ' we find that the 
doctrines of the Paramita-naya are written wholely in 
Sanskrit, while those of the Mantra-naya are explained in 
Sanskrit, Prakrit, Apabhramsa and even in non-Sanskritic 
languages like those of the Savaras and others. 

Tradition holds Asanga, the great exponent of the 
Tradition about Yogacara school, to be responsible for the 
T5ntri!:Um‘^‘'i'n°"Bud^ introduction of Tantricism in Buddhism ; 

he again, in his turn, is believed to have 
been initiated into this mystic cult by Maitreya in the 
Tusita-heaven. Others, on the other hand, hold that 
Napariuna . tl ^ renowned exponent of the Mad hyamika 
school, was the real founder of the esote ric school, and that 
he, in his turn, received the doctrines from the Celestial 
Buddha Vairocana through the divine Bodhisattva Vajra-sattva 
in the “ iron tower ” in South India. 


Apart from these traditions, some scholars are disposed 
to think that in the Mahaydna-sutrd-lafiliara of Asanga there 
are clear references to the sexo-yogic practice of the Tantric 
Buddhists. In the SutrS-lanl^Sra the word paravrtti occurs 
several times in connection with acts which constitute the 
supreme greatness of the Buddha. One of these verses 


* Tatlva-ratnavoll in Advaya-oajta-sorntjraha, p. 21. 

MS.. R. A. S. B . No. 4727. 

3— I4IIB. 



18 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


runs thus, “ In the paravrtti of sexual union supreme great- 
ness is obtained, (namely) in the enjoyment of Buddha- 
happiness and in looking without impure thoughts at a 
wife.” ^ Sylvain Levi in translating this verse suggests 
that “ paravrtti of sexual act ” alludes to “ the mystic 
couples of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas which have so 
c j , much importance in Tantricism.” But 

Winternitz in his notes on the ” Guhya - 
sa maja Tantra and the Age of Ta ntra.” “ 
doubts this interpretation of Levi and suggests that 
” paravrtti ” means nothing but ” turning aside, discard.” 
The phrase '' maiihunasya paravrtti'' may really refer to 
the Tantric sexo-yogic practice through which there is the 
enjoyment of bliss similar to that arising from the sexual 
act, — and the significance of this mystic union and the 
consequent enjoyment of blissful union is given in the 
Sutra-lankora itself.'^ If this interpretation of the word 
paravrtti ” in the present context be accepted, it may be 
inferred that the Tantric ideas were already prevalent in 
Mahayana Buddhism in the time of Asanga (4th-5th centuries 
A.D ), and the tradition of Tantricism being introduced 
in Buddhism by Asaiiga himself becomes to a great extent 
significant. 

Some scholars are again of the opinion that the Tantric 
elements were introduced into Buddhism by Lord Buddha 
himself as a mere provision for the laities whose intellectual 
calibre and moral equipment would not allow them to follow 
the path chalked out by him. Thus Dr. 

Did Buddha himself n ni - t « t*! i i ii 

introduce Tantric ele- B. Bhattacarya says, — “Though Buddha 

ments in Buddhism? . .. 

was antagonistic to all scJrts of sacrifices, 
necromancy, sorcery or magic, he is credited nevertheless 
with having given instructions concerning Mudras, Mandalas 


1 maithunasya paraVrttau vibhttlvam labhyate paratn I 
buddha-saukhya-vihare' iha data sarnkleia’-dar^anc || 

2 Indian Historical Quarterly, IX. I. 

3 Studies in the Tantras, Dr. P. C. Bagciii, p. 92. 



dROWTH OF THE SAHAjlYA CULT AND LITERATURE 19 


and Tantras, etc., so that, by virtue of these, prosperity 
in this world could be attained by his less advanced 
disciples, who seemed to care more for this world than 
for the Nirvana preached by him. India in Buddha’s 
time was so steeped in superstitions that any religion which 
dared forbid all kinds of magic, sorcery and necromancy 
could hardly hope to withstand popular opposition. A cleve-* 
organiser as Buddha was, he did not fail to notice the 
importance of incorporating magical practices in his religion 
to make it popular from all points of view and attract more 
adherents thereby.”' As a conclusive evidence of this 
inference Dr. Bhattacarya refers to Buddha’s belief in the 
four “ iddhis ” (rddhi) or miraculous power obtained by the 
advanced disciples and also to a verse in the T ativa-samgraha 
of Santaraksita and its commentary by Kamala^a, where 
Buddha himself is said to have prescribed Mantra, Mudra,> 
Mandala, etc., for his lay disciples. But this view of Dr. 
Bhattacarya cannot be credited historically because of the 
fact that he has not demonstrated his view with sufficient 
evidence. The mere belief in the “rddhr ” is no convincing 
proof of Buddha s sanction of Tantricism, and the evidence 
of Santaraksita and Kamalasila (which too is extremely 
insufficient by itself) cannot be credited much on the ground 
that they flourished about fourteen hundred years after the 
advent of Buddha. Of course, we find occasional references 
to Tantrlc practices including the sex-element even in the 
time of Buddha, “ but we find no conclusive evidence in any 
early record of Buddha’s sanction to Tantricism as the 
mere policy of a clever organiser. On the whole, we are 


^ An Iriiroduction to Uaddhist Esoterism, by Dr. B. Bhattacarya, p. 48. 

See also the introduction to the Sadhana-mala (Voi. Ill, by Dr. Bhat^acarydf 
pp. xvi-xvii. 

^ Dlgha-nikaya, Brahma-jdla-sutta ; KaihaVatihUf XVII, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, XXIII. 2; 
Majjhima-nikayat Pali Text-book Society’s Edition, I, p. 305. 



20 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


loath to believe that Buddha, whose life and teachings 
were a direct revolution against the prevalent religious 
system of rites and ceremonies, should have himself made 
provision for Tantric practices in his religion only to 
popularise it among the uncultured, superstitious laity 
though he himself never believed in the efficacy of any 
of these practices. 

A popular tendency is manifest among some of the 
scholars to determine the priority either of the Hindu Tantras 
or of the Buddhist l antras. We have pointed out in the Intro- 
duction the truth, which we shall have many other occasions 
to repeat, that Tantricism with its heterogeneous nature is 
neither exclusively Hindu, nor exclusively Buddhist in origin. 
It is an ancient religious cult of India manifesting itself some- 
times as Hindu being associated with Hindu theology, thoughts 
and ideas and sometimes as Buddhist in association with 
later Buddhist theology, thoughts and ideas. In view of this 
fact it will not be sound to say, as has actually been said by 
some scholars, that the Hindu Tantras are later in origin 
and are derived from the Buddhist Tantras. We have seen 
that Asanga has traditionally been held to be the introducer 
of Tantricism in Buddhism ; but the tradition of the existence 
of a vast array of Agamas during the days of Asanga or even 
in earlier times cannot altogether be neglected. Ihese 
ancient Agamic texts seem to be the source of all Tantric 
texts. That an extensive Tantric literature existed in the days 
of Somananda and Utpala is well-known. Internal evidences 
show that most of these works, even as they were 
then known, were very old. Abhinava Gupta’s (10 A.C.) 
compilation of T antraAol^a is based on many ancient 
Agamas, which were accessible to him personally. A study 
of these will show that between the so-called Buddhist 
Tantras and Hindu Tantras there are numerous points 
of contact implying thereby that they had a common 
cultural background in the past. 



GROW I H OF I HE SAHA JIYA CULT AND LITERATURE 21 


It will be very interesting to note that, apart from the 
theological speculations, v\^hich differ in details from one 
another in different religious spheres, the fundamentals of the 
Hindu Tantras and the Buddhist Tanlras are the same. It 
is only the colour and tone that are sometimes different. As 
we shall have more occasions to refer to these points of 
similarity later on we do not propose to illustrate them here. 

The Mantra-element seems to have been introduced in 
^ , Mahayana Buddhism first in the form of the 
Dharani, which literally means that by 
which something is sustained or kept up (dhdryale anayd Hi), 
t.e., the mystic syllables that have got the capacity of keeping 
up the religious life of a man. In the Bodhisattva-bhumi 
of Vasubandhu we find a discourse on the nature of the 
Dharanis and a philosophical explanation for the adoption of 
these unmeaning Mantras for the realisation of the ultimate 
truth. 

According to the Bodhisativa-bhumi the Dharanis of the 
Bodhisattva are of four kinds, Viz,, Dharma-dharani, Artha- 
dharani, Mantra-dharani and the Dharani for the attainment 
of the transcendental merit of forbearance of the Bodhisattva 
{Bodhisattva-k.sdnti-ldbhdya ca dharani). The Dharma-dharani 
is composed of that kind of Mantras through the hearing of 
which (even though they are not explained in any Sastra or 
by any preacher) the follower attains memory {smrti), perfect 
knowledge (prajnd) and spiritual strength {bala). Artha- 
dharani is that type of Mantras through the mystic power of 
which the correct significance (artha) of the Dharmas (which 
significance is never explained in any 6astra or by any 
preacher) is revealed to the follower in an intuitive way. 
The Mantra-dharani enables a man to attain .perfection. 
The Dharani for the attainment of forbearance {l^sdnti) is the 
Mantra through which the ultimate nature of the Dharmas is 
revealed to the reciter and through this realisation of the 
ultimate immutable nature of the Dharmas the follower 



12 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


attains generosity ol heart which produces in him the merit 
of forbearance.' 

In this connection, however, Vasubandhu gives a philo- 
sophical explanation of how the ultimate immutable nature 
of the Dharmas can be realised through the Mantras of 
unmeaning syllables, such as “ iti miii k.iti bhiksornti padani 
svaha/' He says that these syllables, Viz., “ i/i miti kiti, 
etc.,” have got no meaning whatsoever, — and the follower 
through concentration should realise the truth that these 
Mantras can have no meaning at all,— this unmeaningness 
is their real meaning. Through this absolute negation of 
all possible meanings to the Mantra, the real meaning of 
the Mantra as pure void is intuitively revealed to a man. 
Thus this realisation of the meaning of the Mantras (as pure 
negation) helps the man to realise in pure intuition the 
nature of the Dharmas as essenceless. But through this 
negation of all meanings to the Mantras a unique transcen- 
dental, immutable meaning is revealed to the heart of the 
Sadhaka ; this immutable nature is the real nature of all 
things.^ Closely associated with this Mantra-element is the 
Mudra-element, which in Buddhism in general is but the 
different signs made by the particular position of the 
. hands and the fingers. ’ This Mudra-ele- 

ment, however, with the Mantra-element 
and some other esoiteric practices has a deeper significance 


* Bodhisaitva-hhumi . Ed. by Unrai Wogihara (Tokyo/, pp. 272-74. 

^ sa esarn mantra-padanam eVarp samyak pratipanna evam-artham svayam 
eVa srutva k.utaicit pratipadyaii. tad yatha na sty esdm manira-paddndrn kocid 
artha-parinispatiih. nirarthd cvaitc. ayam eva caisdm urtho yad uta nirarthatd, 

sa te&dm mantra-padanam artham samyak pratwidhya tenaivd' rtha-nusdrena 

aarva-dharmanam apy artham samyak pratividhyati svayam evd'irutvd paraiah | 

yo punar esdm nirabhildpya-svabhdvatd. ayam esdrn svahhdvd- 

rthah. 

Bodhisaitva-hhumi t p. 273. 

3 It should be noted here that the word Mudia in the Tantric and the Yogic 
literature has got different meanings. !ri the Tantras it often means the woman to 



GROWTH OF THE SAHAJIYA CULT AND LITERATURE 23 


in the Yogic Sadhana of the Tantrics, and as the Mantra- 
element contains all the secrecy of the potency of sound, the 
Mudra-element contains all the secrecy of touch as associated 
with the potency of the physiological system. With Mantra 
and Mudra the element of Mandala or describing of mystic 
circles was also introduced. 

But once the portals of Buddhism were flung open to 
let in elements of esoterism, all the traditional beliefs in 
gods, demi-gods, demons and ghosts, magic, charms and 
sorcery with all their details rushed in and quickly changed 
the whole ethico-religious outlook of Buddhism. With these 
again were joined the elements of Yoga, — Halha-yoga, 
Laya-yoga, Mantra-yoga and Raja-yoga. All these elements 
made for the growth of the elaborate system of Tantric 
Buddhism . 

It is to be noticed that in the earlier phase of Tantric 
Buddhism emphasis was laid generally on the elements of 
Mantra, Mudra, Mandala, Abhiseka (initiation and the 
ceremonies associated with it), etc. ; but gradually the 
sexo-yogic practice also began to be referred to. In course of 
evolution, however, the sexo-yogic practice began to be held 
as the most important esoteric practice for the attainment of 
the final state of supreme bliss, all the other practices and 

be selected in the secret practice ; in Hatha-yoga it refers to practices including control 
of limbs, muscles, nerves and the vital breath-process. We have again different 
descriptions of four types of Mudras associated with both processes of Yoga and 
meditation which are again associated with four types of realisation of bliss (vide 
Catur -mudra. of the Advaya-vajra-satngraha, G. O. S., XL). In the University 
Library of Cambridge there is a manuscript with the colophon '* ^rl-mac-chakyoraja- 
sarva-durgati-pariiodhana-mukha-khyana-prathama-diyoga-nama samadhi ” (MS. 
Cambridge, Add. No, 1278, available to the present writer in rotogtaph) with as many 
as one hundred and fifty-eight coloured illustrations of the different kinds of MudrSs. 
Of these some seem to be purely postures of the hands and fingers, some on the 
other hand illustrate the different manners of holding the thunderbolt {vajra), lotus, 
bell, sword, conch-shell, bunch of flowers, garlands, etc. Others again illustrate 
the manner of offering flowers, water, incense, lamp and other materials of worship. 
Some again illustrate the different manners of playing on the different musical 
instruments. All these are done with the aim of obtaining final purification and final 
deliverance from the miserie.s of life, 



24 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

ceremonies being held as preparatory accessories. The six 
kinds of ritual intended for the good or 
^vll of anybody (Ahhicara) and the five 
accessories of wine (madya), meat {mamsa), 
fish {matsya), woman (?) (mudra) and sexual intercourse 
{maithuna) gradually made their way into Buddhism, k/ 
This composite system of Tantricism with the introduction 
of the sexo-yogic practice came It be known by the general 
name of Vajra-yana or the Adamantine path.' Kazi 
Dawa-samdup in his introduction to the Sri-cal^ra-sambhara- 
iantra divides this Vajra-yana into further parts, Viz , 
Kriya-tantra-yana, Carya-tantra-yana and Yoga-tantra-yana ; 
the last is again sub-divided into Mahayoga-tantra-yana, 
Anuttara-yoga-tantra-yana and Atiyoga-tantra-yana. The 
general custom, however, is to divide Vajra-yana into four 
classes. Viz., Kriya-tantra, Carya-tantra, Yoga-tantra, and 
Anuttara-tantra. The first two classes are called ‘ lower 
Tantras ’ inasmuch as they are concerned with the rites, 
ceremonies, worship of gods and goddesses and other 
practices ; and the latter schools are known as ‘ higher 
Tantras ’ inasmuch as they describe yogic processes for the 
realisation of the ultimate truth and also contain discussions 
on the nature of the ultimate reality. 

There is still another customary way of dividing Tantric 
Buddhism into three schools, viz., Vajra-yana, Kala-cakra- 


• We do not, however, find any direct mention of the “ Panca-ma-karas ” in 
the BuddhisSt Tantras ; but we find sporadic mention of wine, fish, meaf, etc., and 
much of Mudra and sexual intercourse. We also find frequent reference to the 
Panca-kama-guna or five objects of de.sire through the enjoyment of which perfection 
can be attained. 

The original name Mantra-yana is also often found used in a general sense for 
later Buddhist Tantric schools C/. HeVajra pahpka, MS. (Cambridge Add. No. 
1699), p. 45(B); Advaya-Vajra-samgraha, p. 54 (G. 0. S. ' ; commentary on the 
Dohakosa of Ksnhapada, verse No. 12. 

3 In this connection compare also four divisions in the arrangement of the 
Vaisnava-tantras (found in the Padma-tantra), viz., Jnana-pada, Yoga-pSda, Kriya-pada 
and Carya-pada. (See J. R. A. S., 1901, p. 900.) 



GROWTH OF THE SAHAJIYA CULT AND LITERATURE 25 


yana and Sahaja-yana. ' This division seems to us erroneous 
because of the fact that Kda cakra-yana and Sahaja-yana 
seem to us to be schools within the fold of the general name 
Vajra-yana. MM. H. P. Sastri speaks of N^hism as 
another school of Tantric Buddhism.^ As we shall have to 
devote separate chapters to the problems regarding the nature, 

^ , origin and growth of Nathism the question 

KSla-cakra-yana . . . 

of its relation to Tantric Buddhism will 
not be discussed at this stage.® The problem of Kala-cakra- 
yana, however, appears to us perplexing. About its nature 
Waddell says in his Lamaism, — In the tenth century 
A.D., the Tantric phase developed in Northern India, 
Kasmir and Nepal into monstrous and polydemonist doctrine, 
the Kala-cakra, with its demonical Buddhas, which in- 
corporated the Mantrayana practices, and called itself the 
Vajrayana, or the ‘ Thunderbolt- vehicle,’ and its followers 
were named Vajra-carya, or, ‘ followers of the Thunder- 
bolt. ’ ^ In another place he says — ^‘The extreme develop- 
ment of the Tantric phase was reached with the Kala-^cakra, 
which, although unworthy of being considered as a 
philosophy, must be referred to here as a doctrinal basis. 
It is merely a course of Tantric development of the 
Adi-Buddha theory combined with puerile mysticism of 
Mantrayana, and it attempts to explain creation and the 
secret powers of nature by the union of the Kali^ 
not only with the Dhyani Buddhas, but even with 
Adi-Buddha himself.” The account and interpretation 
given by Mr. Waddell seem to us to be based on confused 
ideas about Tibetan Buddhism. We have not yet been 
able to discover the reason behind the general tendency of 

^ See the introdluction to Sadhana-mala , Vol. II, by Dr. B. Bhattacarya. 

2 See the introduction to Modern Buddhism and its Followers in Of issa of 
Mr. N. Vasu by MM. H. P. Saslrl. 

Vide infra. 

^ Lamaism, by Waddell, p. I''. 

6 Hid. 


4-I41IB 



26 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


associating the name Kala-cakra-yana with the terrible 
a8p>ect of Tantric Buddhism. MM. H. P. Sastri, however, 
says on this point, — “ What is Kala-cakra-yana? The word 
Kala means time, — death and destruction. Kala-cakra is the 
wheel of destruction, and Kala-cakra-yana means the vehicle 
for protection against the wheel of destruction. ” ' But this 
explanation of MM. Sastri is not confirmed by any textual 
evidence. 

The traditional view concerning the origin of Sn-l^ala- 
cal^ra-mula-tantra , which is recorded ih the Abhinisramana 
Sutra ' is that it was delivered by the Buddha at Sri Dhanya 
Kataka. Regarding this system Csoma de Koros says that 
it was introduced in India from Sambhala at about 965 A.C. 

We have at our disposal a text of the Sri-kala-cal^ra- 
tantra " a study of which does not substantiate the statement 
that Kala-cakra-yana is that school of Tantric Buddhism, 
which introduced demonic Buddhas in it, — at least, it 
is not the main characteristic by which the school 
should be recognised. In the text at our disposal the Lord 
has explained how the universe with all its objects and 
localities are situated in the body and how time in all its 
divisions and sub-divisions {viz., day, night, fortnight, 
month, year, etc.) is within the body in the processes of 
the vital wind {prana-Vayu). In the text Sahaja has been 
explained and also the details of the sexo-yogic practice for 
the attainment of the Sahaja. The only thing that strikes 
the reader is the stress laid on the control of the vital 
winds {prana and apana) and the results attained thereby. 
A study of the commentary on the text {Laghu-kala-ca\ra- 
tanlra-rdja-ill^a, entitled Vimala-prabha) also reveals no 
fundamental difference between the tenets of Vajra-yana 
Buddhism and those of Kala-cakra-yana. The stress on 


’ Modern Buddhism, etc., Introdiiclion, p. 8 
Pag Sam Jon Zanf^., p 37 
3 MS. Cambridge Add., 1364, 



GROWTH OF THE SAHAJIYA CULl AND LUERATURE 27 


yoga seems, however, to be the special feature, if there 
be any at all, of Kala-cakra-yana. 

It is interesting to note here that similar doctrines 
of Kdla-cal^ra are elaborately described and explained 
in a fairly old text like the Tantrd-loka of Abhinava 
Gupta. The sixth chapter of the Tantra-lol^a (which is a 
fairly big chapter) is devoted to the exposition of the doctrine 
of Kda (time) and the process of keeping oneself above 
the influence of the whirl of time. Time (Kala) in all its 
phases (day and night, fortnight, month, year, etc.) has been 
explained here mainly with reference to the functions of the 
vital wind (mainly Prana and Apdna) spread through the 
whole nervous system, and the process of controlling time is 
to control the vital wind in the nerves through yogic 
practices. 


(iv) Mode o/ Transjormation oj ihe Main Ideas of 
Mahdydna io those of Tdntric Buddhism 

Before we pass on to the fundamenlal characteristics of 
Sahaja-yana, on which the Carya padas are based, we deem it 
necessary here to make a very short survey of the mode of 
transformation of some of the philosophical ideas of Maha- 
yana Buddhism into those of I'antric Buddhism. Tantricism is 
neither Buddhist nor Hindu in origin : it seems to be a 
religious under-current, originally independent of any abstruse 
metaphysical speculation, flowing on from an obscure point 
of time in the religious history of India. With these 
practices and yogic processes, which characterise Tantri- 
cism as a whole, different philosophical, or rather theological, 
systems got closely associated in different times, and the 
association of the practices with the fundamental ideas of 
Mahayana Buddhism will explain the origin and development 
of Tantric Buddhism. Being associated with the Ttotric 
system the fundamental ideas of Buddhism underwent a 



28 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


great change; or it may also be that the transformation 
of the fundamental ideas by lay people, who were indis- 
criminately admitted into the school of Mahayana, facilitated 
the association of Buddhism with Tantricism. There seems 
to have been a mutual interaction between the cause and 
the effect in either case. 

In this mode of transformation the most important point is 
Transformation of the transformation of the idea of Sunyata 
huoiHarof'vat“r““ (vacuity) into the idea of Vajra, or the 

thunderbolt. The Sunyata-nature of the 
world is its ultimate immutable nature, — as immutable as 
the thunderbolt, and so it is called the Vajra. It has been 
said in the Advaya’Vajra'Sarfigraha , — “ Sunyata, which is 
firm, substantial, indivisible, impenetrable, incapable of being 
burnt and imperishable, is called the Vajra. This trans- 
formation of Sunyata to Vajra will explain the title Vajra- 
yana and in Vajra-yana all the gods, goddesses, articles for 
worship, yogic practices and elaborate rituals have been 
marked with Vajra to specialise them from their originally 
accepted nature. The supreme deity of Vajra-yana is the 
Vajra-sattva (oayra = sunyafa = vacuity ; saf/oa — quintessence), 
who is of the nature of pure consciousness {vijnapti-matrala 
... of the Vijnana-vadin Buddhists) as associa- 

Vajra-sattva. . i x 

ted with Sunyata in the form of the 
absence of subjectivity and objectivity.^ All the other gods 
of Vajra-yana are generally marked by a miniature figure of 
the Vajra-sattva in the crest. This Vajra-sattva as the Lord 


' saram asauitryam acchedya-hliedya-lak^anam I 

adahi avinasi ca iunyata vajram ucyate II 

Advaya-vajra-sarngraha (G.O.S.), p. 37. 

C/. also, abhedyam vajram iiy uktam -Hevajra-tanira, 

MS. (R.A.S.B., No. 11377), p. 2 (A). 
itinyata vajram ity uktam — Jvalavati-vajra^mala-iantra 
MS. (B.N. Paris, Sans. No. 47). p. 1 (B). 

^ A dvaya-vajra^sarngraha (GiO.S.), p. 24. 



GROWTH OF THE SAHAJIYA CULT AND LITERATURE 29 


Supreme has been described by and invoked with various 
attributes in all the Tantras belonging to Vajra-yana. 

The Vajra-satlva is often found in the Buddhist Tantras 
conceived exactly in the manner of the Upanisadic Brahman . 
It is the Self in man, — it is the ultimate substance behind the 
world of phenomena. It is often spoken of as the ultimate 
reality in the form of the Bodhi-citta. The Mahayanic idea of 
Bodhi-citta also underwent a change beyond recognition in 
esoteric Buddhism. Originally it was conceived as the 
n .. . . mental state in which there is nothing but 

a strong resolution for the attainment of 
perfect wisdom (bodhi) combined with a strong emotion of 
universal compassion. Thus Bodhi-citta presupposes two 
elements in the Citta, viz., Sunyata (i.e., the knowledge of 
the nature of things as pure void) and Karuna (universal 
compassion). This Bodhi-citta, with the elements of Sunyata 
and Karuna in it, marches, after it is produced, 
upwards through ten stages and in the final stage of 
Dharmamegha it attains perfection. In the practice of 
Vajra-yana particularly in Sahaja-yana (where Sunyala 
and Karuna, the two elements to be united together 
for the production of the Bodhi-citta, were identified 
with the female and the male or Prajna and Upaya) 
Bodhi-citta is conceived as the extremely blissful state of mind 
tf^oduced through the sexo-yogic practice. In yogic practices 
the union of the seed and the ovum is also known as 
Bodhi-citta and it has been held that in the process of produc- 
tion this Bodhi-citta acquires the nature of the five elements, 
viz., earth, water, fire, air and ether and thus it stands as 
the ultimate substance of the universe.’ 

Closely related to the history of the transformation of 
the idea of Bodhi-citta is the history of the transformation of 

' Dohakofa of KSnka-pSda, Doha No. 7. See also HeVajra-ianira, MS. (R. A. S. B., 
No. 11317), pp. 37(B)-38(A); also Sampufifca MS. (R. A. S. B.. No. 4854), 
pp. 4 7(B) -48 (A). 



30 ' OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

the ideas of Sunyata and Karuna into the ideas of the female 
and the male. In Mahay ana texts we find 
as Prajns and Upaya. that Sunyata IS Prajna, r.e., pertect know- 
ledge of the void-nature of the self and the 
Dharmas. Karuna or universal compassion is called the 
Upaya, /.e., the means or the expedience for the attainment 
of the Bodhi-citta. These two terms, Prajna and Upaya, are 
found already used by the Tathatavadin Asvaghosa as well 
as by Nagarjuna, the exponent of the Madhyamika school.’ 
Upaya is generally explained in the Mahayanic texts like 
the Saddharma'pundarika " and the BodhisatiVa-hhumi ' as 
missionary works which are prompted bj^ universal compassion 
for the suffering beings. This Prajna as perfect wisdom 
was conceived as absolutely passive, the negative aspect of 
the reality and the primordial source of all entities ; whereas 
Upaya, because of its dynamic nature, began to be 
conceived as the positive and the active aspect of the reality. 
Upaya brings into existence in the phenomenal world all 
the entities, the possibility of which lie in the Prajna or the 
void. Unlike the Samkhya system and the popular Vedantic: 
thoughts, the negative or passive or the unqualified aspect 
of the reality as perfect knowledge was conceived as 
the female in the Buddhist school, — and the positive or active 
principle was conceived as the male. When thus 
the idea of the male and the female could once creep into 
Buddhism the whole outlook began to change, and the 
production of Bodhi-citta through the unification of void- 
knowledge and universal compassion was transformed into 
the production of great bliss through the yogic union of the 
female and the male. 

' See A^vaghosa’s Maha-yana^raddho ipada-sulra lianslatcd a« tlie Awaken 
ing oj Faith in Mahayana by Suzuki, pp 66 , 99. C’/. also Mddhyamika-vrtli of 

NsgSrjuna, Levi’s edition, p. 2. 

2 Saddharma-pundartka. Ch. II, Bibliotheca Buddhica publication, pp. 28-58. 

^ The Bodhisattva bhumi is but the fifteenth section cf the Y ogaedra-hhumi of 
Vasubandhu. Edited by Uii»ai Wogihara, Tokyo, pp. 261-72. 



GROWTH OF THE SAHA.J1YA COLT AND LITERATURE 31 

We shall see later on that with this identification of 
Prajna and Upaya with the female and the male the idea 
of Sakti and Siva was established in the Buddhist Tantras, — 
P fifi d U - through this transformation of Prajna 

the female and the and Upaya to the female and the male the 

male, the left and . . Ill • 1 ■ 1 

the right, the moon sexo-yogic practice could be associated with 
and the sun. Mahayana philosophy. Again, consistently 

with the theory of all the Tantras that the human organism 
is but an epitome of the universe and that all truth is within 
this body, the Tantric Buddhists had to locate all the 
philosophical truths within this physical organism, — and in 
that attempt l^aina and Upay a have been identified with the 
two important nerves in the left and the right of the Spinal 
Chord, and these nerves are known in yoga-literature in 
general as Ida and Pingala, the moon and the sun f the left 
and the right, vowels and consonants, etc. ‘ The middle 
nerve, corresponding to the Su|umna of the Hindu Tantras, 
is called the Avadhut ika through which Bodhi-citta passes 
in its upward march from the Nirmana-cakra (c/. the 
Nirman?i-kaya of Buddha), which is situated in the region of 
the navel, first to Dharma-cakra (c/. Dharma-kaya) in the 
heart and then to Sambhoga-cakra (c/. Sambhoga-kaya) in the 
throat and thence it passes to the lotus in the head producing 
supreme bliss) 

In this connection we should take notice of the 
import of the concept of Advaya (non-duality) and Yuga- 
naddha (principle of union) as we find them in esoteric 
Buddhism. Originally the word Yuganaddha implies 
the synthesis of all duality in an absolute principle of 
unity. This principle of Yuganaddha or union is very 
clearly explained in the fifth chapter 
nfdaha.' (Yuganaddha^k^ama) of the Panca-l^rama. 

It is said there that Yuganaddha is a 
state of unity reached through the purging off of the 


^ See Infra. 



32 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


two notions of the world-process (samsdra) an absolute 
cessation {nivrtti)^ through the realisation of the ultimate 
nature of both the phenomenal {saml^lesa) and the 
absolute {vyavaddna), through the synthesis of thought- 
constructions of all corporeal existence with the notion 
of the formless. It is the unification of the Grahya 
(perceivable) with the Grahaka (perceiver), of the temporal 
with the eternal, of Prajna (perfect knowledge) with Karuna 
(universal compassion).' To enter into the final abode or the 
‘ thatness ’ (tathatd) in body, speech and mind and thence 
to come down again and to turn to the world of miseries, — to 
know the nature of Samvrti (the provisional truth) and the 
Paramartha (the ultimate truth) and then to unite them 
together — this is what is called the immutable state of 
Yugana^dha.^ In the Y uganaddha-pra\dsa of Advaya-Vajta- 
samgraha we find that the nature of the union of Sunyata 
and Karuna is incomprehensible ; they remain always 
in union.' In the Prema-pancaJia of the same text 
Sunyata has been spoken of as the wife and Karuna, 
which is the manifestation of Sunyata, has been spoken of 
as the husband and the relation between them is that of 
conjugal love, which is but natural {sahajarn prema). 
So inseparable are they in their deep love that Sunyata 

' samsaro nivrttis ceti fialpana-dvaya-varjanal I 

ekihhavo hhaved yatra yuganaddham tad ucyatc II 
samkle^arn vyavodanafi ca jfiatva iu parnmarthatnh I 
ekthhaVarn tu yo vetti sa Vetti yuganaddhakom II 
sakora-hhaVa-samkalpam nirakaratva-l^alpanam I 
ekikrtya cared yogi sa vetti yuganaddhaham il 
grahyafi ca grahakofi caiva dvidha-huddhir na vidyalc I 
ahhinnata hhaved yatra tad aha yuganaddha\am || 
sa^Vata-c cheda-buddhirn tu yah prahaya pravartatc I 
yijganaddha-kramakhyarn Vai iattvam vetti so pandiiob || 
prajna-k^irunayor aikyctfp jha^narn) yatra pravariate I 
yuganaddtia iti khyiitah kramo' yam huddha-g*^cni ah II 

Panca-krama, MS ( B, N. Paris, Sans p. 31 (R) ri si q. 

Ibid. 

Advaya'Vajra-snrngraha, (G. O, S.), p. 49, 



GROWTH OF THE SAHAJIYA CULT AND LITERATURE 33 


without her husband, manifestation, would have been 
dead and Karuna (or Krpa) without Sunyata would have 
always suffered bondage. In the Sadhana-mala it has been 
said that the one body of the ultimate nature which is 
the unity of both Sunyata and Karuna is called the neuter 
{napuTnsak,a) or as Yuganaddha.^ 

This principle of Y uganaddha is the same as the principle 
of non-duality {advaya). The principle of conjugal union 
{maithuna or }^ama-k^la as it is called in the Kama-^ala- 
Vildsa) of the 6aiva and Sakta Tantras originally refers to 
the same principle." There also the designations of the 
male and the female or of the seed and the ovum were used 
originally to explain the two aspects of the absolute 
reality, static and dynamic, negative and positive ; and 
their union refers to the unity in the ultimate truth. But 
though this analogy of the male and the female or of 
the seed and the ovum has often been declared to be merely 
a mode of expression,^ yet in practice it has, more often 
than not, been taken as real in both the Hindu and the 
Buddhist Tantras, and many things, that are grossly real, 
followed as aberrations. We have seen that the two cardinal 


principles of ^unyata and Karuna or Prajna and Upaya were 
transformed in Vajra-yana to the female and the male, and 
this will explain the representation of the Tantric Buddhist 


Advaya and Sama- 
rasa. 


gods and goddesses in a state of union. 
Closely associated with the idea of Advaya 


and Yuganaddha is the idea of Sama-rasa or 


the sameness or oneness of emotion. In a deeper sense Sama- 


rasa means the realisation of the oneness of the universe amidst 


all its diversities, — it is the realisation of one truth as the flow of 


1 Sadhana^malaiG.O. S.), Vol. II. p. 505. 

^ Sej Kama-kftla-vilasa Scries of Texts and Sludies, No. XII) , verses 

2, 5, 7 and the commentary on verse No, 7. 

^ See G andharva-tantra quoted in the article. General Introduction to Tantra 
Philosophy, by Dr, S. N. Dasgupta in his Philosophical Essays. 

5-141 IB 



34 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


a unique emotion of all-pervading bliss. In the HeCajra- 
tantra it has been said that in the Sahaja or the ultimate 
state there is the cognition of neither Prajna nor of 
Upaya, — there is no sense of duality or difference anywhere ; 
in such a state everything, — whether the lowest, or the 
middle or the best — ^should be realised as the same.' 
The self should be realised as neither something static, nor 
something dynamic ; throu ^h the transcendental medita- 
tion on the underlying oneness of the cosmic principle 
everything should be viewed as of the same character and 
f unction. All the entities come out of transcendental 
knowledge of the form of Sama-rasa, — ^.they are all equal and 
non-dual in nature. ' f When through the yogic process 
one enters into the state of supreme bliss (M aha- sulpha), the 
whole world becomes of the form of unique emotion in the 
nature of Maha-sukha, and through this unique emotion 
of bliss the whole world as static and dynamic becomes one.^ 
This Sama-rasa has been extensively used in many of the 
Buddhist as well as Hindu Tantric texts to signify the union 
of Prajna and Upaya, or of the Sakti and the Siva, or 
rather to signify the intense bliss that is derived from the 
sexo-yogic practice, which, in its highest intensity, has got the 
capacity of producing an absolute homogeneity in the psychi- 
cal states and processes. 

* hina-madhyo-ikx^iany cva anyani yani tani ca I 

sarvc tani samanVti drastavyarp tattva-bhavatah II 

Hevajra-iantra, MS,> p. 22 iB). 

^ aihira-calam yani tanVti sarve tanVti naiva ham I 

samani tulya-ces^ani sama-rasais tattva-hhavanaih I! 

Ibid., MS,, p. 22^B)-23(A). 

See also Ibid,, p. 23 (B), 24(A), 27(A). All the verses found on this point in the 
Hevajra4antra are found vtrith slight deviations in readings also in the Samputika, 
MS. IR.A.S.B. No. 4854), pp. 13iA)-l3fB). 

^ advaya-koram sarvan tu dvayam ctanna vidyate I , 

samam aama-raaa-k^ram aciniya-jfiana-sambhiitam II 

Acintya-dvaya-k^amo-padeia of Kuddsla-psda, MS. (C.L.B. No. 13124), 

p. 108(B). 

< Vyakta-bhava-nugata-iattva-aiddhi, MS. (C.L.B. No, 13)24), p. 89lA). 



GROWTH OF THE SAHAjlYA CULT AND LITERATURE S') 


The other important innovation in Tantric Buddhism 
is the idea of Maha-sukha (supreme 
of Mahssukha. Dliss) which evolved hom the idea of 

Nirvana in earlier Buddhism. Etymolo- 
gically the word Nirvana may mean either the ' final 
stoppage to a flow, — i.e., complete cessation of the 
cycle of birth and death ; — or it may mean ‘ blow- 
ing out ’ as in the case of a lamp ; — or the eternal tranquil- 
lity resulting from the cessation of all the Vasana (root- 
instincts) and Samskaras (deep impressions). In either case, 
from the idea of complete cessation and perfect tranquil- 
lity developed the idea of perfect peace in Nirvana. 
There is, of course, a lot of controversy over the question 
whether Nirvana is any positive state at all; without 
entering into the philosophical subtleties involved in the 
question, we may say that in popular belief as re- 
presented through the popular Pali literature Nirvana 
was conceived as something positive.' Though in Pali 
literature Nirvana is often described as something unspeak- 
able, yet in course of poetic description we find it described 
as supreme (param), tranquil {santa), pure (visuddha), excellent 
ipanita), calm {santi), immutable {akkhara}, eternal {dhruva), 
true (sacca), infinite (ananta), unborn {ajata), uncreated {asam- 
khata, akata), all alone {kevala), and all good {siVa). It is, 
as Rhys Davids puts it,^ — “ the harbour of refuge, the 
cool cave, the island amidst the floods, the place of bliss, 
emancipation, liberation, safety, tranquillity, the home of 
ease, the calm, the end of suffering, the medicine for all 
evil, the unshaken, the ambrosia, the immaterial, the im- 
perishable, the abiding, the further shore, the unending, 
the bliss of effort, the supreme joy, the ineffable, the holy 
city, etc.” Nirvana is spoken of in many popular Pali texts 


1 See the discourse on NirvSna in the Milinda-pafiho, edited by Trenckner, 
pp. 315-26. 

^ A Dictionary oj Pali Language. See the word nihbana. 



36 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


as not only something positive, but as a state of infinite 
bliss. ^ In the Vijnana-vada school ot Mahayana Buddhism 
pure consciousness as bereft of the notions of the knower 
and the knowable has been spoken of as the ‘ element of 
Nirvana ’ {nirvana- dhalu) ; and this pure consciousness 
{vijnapti-matrata) has been described in the Vijnapii-mairata- 
siddhi of Vasubandhu as “ the immutable element which is 
beyond the reach of all mentation ; it is all good, permanent, 
perfect bliss, — it is liberation, the substance itself.”" 

This positive aspect of Nirvana as supreme bliss or 
Maha-sukha was emphasised in 7 antric Buddhism and in 
later times Nirvana and Maha-sukha yvere held to be iden- 
tical. Nirvana is described frequently in the Tantras as 
incessant bliss {satata-sukhamaya),^ the place of both enjoy- 
ment and liberation, changeless supreme bliss, the seed 
{blja) of all substance {vastu), the ultimate state of those who 
have attained perfection, the highest place of the Buddhas, 
called the Sukhavati.^ 

Gradually the idea of Maha-sukha began to acquire a cos- 
mological and oiilological significance in the various schools of 

^ santiti nibbanam natva, etc, Sutta-mpata. 933. 

nibbanam paramam sukham. Ma^jhima-nik^ya, {] .'bOb t C j . also Dhatiima- 
pada, \crses (203-04 '. 

C/. also ' odhunitvd mnlam sabbarp paiva nib bana satnpadarn I 

muccati sabba-dukkhehi sa hoii iabba-sampado !l 

, Ahgutiara, IV. 239. 

pattd te acala-iihanam yathd goivd na socarc I 

Vimdna-vaithu, 31. 

nibbana-ffhane vimutta te pattd te acalam sukham I 

I hen-gdthd, 350. 

santi-maggani cva bruhaya nihhdnam iugatena desitam I 

Dhamma-pada, 285. 

5ee the v^otd nibbdrta in A Dictionary of Pali Language, by Rhys Davids, 
and the Pali Dictionary hy Childers. 

^ sa cvanasrato dhdiur acintyah kusalo dhtuvah 1 

sukbo timukii-koyo' sau dharmd-khyo' yarn mahdmuneh II 

T rirniikd, verse 30. 

T Panca-k^arria, MS., p. 31(B). 

^ GuhyO’-siddhi cf Padma-'vajia. MS. (C.L.B. No. 13)24), pp. 13fA.-13tB). 



GROWTH OF THE SAHAJIYA CULT AND LITERATURE 37 


Tantric Buddhism. As Mahayana Buddhism often speaks of 
Nirvana as the ultimate reality — as the Dharma-kaya, which 
is neither existence nor extinction, — so also the Maha sukha 
is variously described in the Buddhist Tantras as 
the ultimate reality transcending, or rather absorbing within 
it, both existence (bhava) and extinction (nirvana). It is des- 
cribed as something which has neither beginning nc^ middle 
nor end ; it is neither existence nor annihilation, neither the 
self nor the not-self.^ The Maha-sukha is the Lord Vajra- 
-sattva of the nature of the unity of Prajna and Upaya ; 
it is the non-dual quintessence of all the entities.^ It is the 
Bodhi-citta or perfect enlightenment combined with com- 
passion. ‘ In the Hevajra-tantra it has been said that Sukha 
or bliss is the ultimate reality, it is the Dharma-kaya, it is 
the Lord Buddha Himself. Sukha is black, it is yellow, 
it is red, it is white, it is green, it is blue, it is the whole 
universe; it is Prajna, it is Upaya, it itself is the union; it is 
existence, it is non-existence, it is the Lord Vajra-satlva.^ 
When Nirvana was thus identified with a state of supreme 
bliss» the attainment of an absolute state of supreme bliss was 
accepted to be the summum bonum of life by all the Tantric 
Buddhists. ’ For the realisation of such a state of supreme 
bliss they adopted a course of sexo-yogic practice. This 
conception of Maha-sukha is the central point round which all 
the esoteric practices of the Tantric Buddhists grew 
and developed. 

^ ai na ania no majhu na nau bhaVa nau nibhana I 
chu so paramo maha-sukha nau para nau appana il 

Quoted in the Hevajra-tanira, MS., p. 6UA). 

^ M aha- sukha- prakasa oi ihc Advaya-vojra-sarngraha (G. 0. S.),p. 50s 

* See Advaya-samata-vijaya, quoted in the Jnana-siddhi (G. O. S.t, Ch. XV, 
verse 40. 

Cf. jina-sriherukoh I iasya hrdayam ak^ara-bodhi- cittam j ipsya hrdayam 
maha-sukham etc. Marma-k^lika-iantra , MS., p. 29(B). 

^ Hevajra-tantra, MS., p. 35 (B), Cf, also Sam pufiko, MS., p. 

^ In this connection sec Hevajra-ianira, MS , p. 36(A). 

Also Guhya-siddhi, MS.t p. 10(B). 

Vyakto-bhavanugata-iattva-siddhi, MS., p. 86(A). 



38 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


After this brief account of the general characteristics of 
Vajra-yana Buddhism or Tantric Buddhism in general, and 
after indicating the mode of transformation of the cardinal 
principles of Mahayana into the esoteric doctrines of Vajra- 
yana, let us now concentrate our attention on the study of the 
old Bengali Carya songs and the cognate Dohas, which 
explain the special features of the Sahajiya school of 
Buddhism . 



CHAPTER II 


The General Philosophical Standpoint of the 
Carya-padas 

The general philosophical standpoint of the Carya-padas, 
as that of Tantric Buddhist literature in general, represents 
unsystematised notions of Mahayana philosophy including 
the negativistic tendency of the Madhyamikas and the 
positivistic tendency of Asvaghosa and of the Vijnanavada 
school led by Maitreya, Asanga and Vasubandhu. The 
influence of monistic thought is not also negligible.' In many 
places the Buddhist Tantras, Dohas and songs have 
frankly accepted the monistic standpoint of the Upanisads 
and the highest reality, either in the form of the Vajra-sattva 
or the Bodhi-citta or the Maha-sukha or the Sahaja, has been 
conceived exactly in the line of the Upanisadic Brahman. 
It may be observed in this connection that scholars have 
often discovered something behind the nothingness {(unyata) 
even of Nagarjuna, who has described the reality as neither 
^ existent, nor non-existent, nor a combina- 

Larya songs represent 

a mixture of the tion of both, nor the absence of both; it is 

Msdhyamika, VijBSna- 

vsdic and Vedsntic but what transccnds the four logical 
categories {catmkoti). Again, it may be 
pointed out that the Abhuta-parikalpa (the increate) or the 
Vijnapti-matrata (pure consciousness) of the Vijnana-vadin 
Buddhists approximates the Vedantic conception of the 

* For a detailed discussion on the philosophical position of the different schools 
of MahSyfina Buddhism and its relation to the Vedintic thoughts, and also 
for a detailed study of the philosophical standpoint of Tantric Buddhist literature in 
general reference may be made here to the study of the subject m the work 
Iniroduction to Tantric BuddhUm by the present writer. 



40 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Brahman in a striking manner. Of course, subtle points of 
difference there are, but they can very easily be, and have 
often actually been, missed by the untrained mind of ordinary 
thinkers. It is for this reason that the Mahay anic ideas 
have frequently been confused or blended with the 
Vedantic ideas ; and we shall see that there is practically no 
difference between the Vedantic idea of the reality and the 
idea of the Sahaja as conceived by the Sahajiyas. Kanha- 
pada says in a song that it will be a gross mistake to thitik 
that everything ends with the decay of this body. “My 
Citta," says the poet, “is perfect in vacuity; don’t be sorry 
at the disappearance of the sl^andhas or the five elements. 
Say, how it can be that Kanha is no more, — for he isthroLblng 
for ever pervading the whole universe. Only foolish people 
are sad at the sight of the decay of the perceivable ; —can the 
flow of waves dry up the whole sea? Foolish people do not 
see people who are existent (in their subtle Sahaja form), 
as they do not find the cream that remains pervading the milk. 
Here, in this world, entities neither come nor go, yogin 
Kanha revels in these thoughts.’’’ 


bhana liaise kflhnu nahi I 

pharai anudina tailoe pamai ii 

mud ha di^ha natha dekhi kflfira 1 

bhaga-iarahga sosai soar a il 

mudha acchante loa na pekhai \ 

dudha majheni lada acchantc na dcl^hai il etc. 

Song No. 42. 

As for the re’^ding of the Carya^padas the writer has generally accepted the 
readings suggested by Dr. P.C. Bagchi with the help of the Tibetan translation iJ.D.L., 
Vol. XXX) ; but he has often differed from Dr. Pagchi, and the points of differ- 
ence with reasons and the suggested improvements have appeared in an article of 
the writer in the Bengali Monthly Sn-hharafi, (Vol. I. No. 7). Dr. Bagchi’s 
readings have^ therefore, beep accepted with the improvements suggested therein. 



PHILOSOPHICAL STANDPOINT OF THE CARYA-PADAS „41 


The dominating philosophical note of the Cary a songs is 9 
however, of an inherent idealistic vein as associated with the 
various theories of illusion. As this idealism, associated with 
the theories of illusion, is common to the 
o7ideaIism!"^^* Madhyamika and Vijnana-vada Buddhism 

as well as to Vedanta, we shall find a 
mixture of the philosophical views of these schools in the 
songs of the Buddhist Sahajiya poets. 

The first song of the Carya-padas begins with the assertion 
that »our mind {citt a) is solely responsible for the creation of 
the illusory world. “ In the unsteady mind ” — says Lui-pa in 
one of his songs, — “ enters Time,”’ I’.e., the disturbed mind 
is the cause of all our spatio-temporal experiences and the dis- 
turbance of the mind is due to the defiling principle of nature 
{prakfty-abhasa-dosa-Vasat cancalyataya, etc. — comm.). The 
notion of difference proceeds from the notion of existence 
(bhava). It is said, ” They. are three, they are three — the three 
are held different ; — Kanhu says, — all (differences) are limita- 
tions due to the notion of existence. The world of our expe- 
riences is only provisional (samvrti'Satya) and the provisional 
nature of the world is revealed to us when we see that every 
thing that comes also invariably goes, — there is nothing perma- 
nent ; all is an eternal flux of coming and going. It is said, — 
Whatever came also went away ; in this (rotation of) coming 
and going Kanhu has become convinced (of the unsubstan- 
tial nature of the fleeting world).”*’ But everything is pure 
in the ultimate nature. Neither existence nor non-existence 
is impure in the least ; all beings, produced in the six 

^ caficala cle paifho kala II Ibid.t Song No. 1. 

This line has been explained in the commentary in an esoteric sense. Vide, 
Infra. 

^ te Uni te Uni Uni ho bhinna 

bhanai kjahnu bhaVa-paricchinna II Ibid., Song No. 7 
^ ;e je aila te te gela I 

avana-gavane hahnu bimana bhaila II Ibid. 


6-14118 



42 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


ways {sad-gatiks), are pure by their ultimate nature.' The 
empirical world is like a dramatic device {nadapeda, Skt. 
nata-peh’IjS = basket for holding dress, etc. for the perfor- 
mance of drama) with nothing real in it, — it is merely an 
artifice of the mind. By pure knowledge the mind must 
first be tranquillised and when it becomes perfectly controlled 
all the forces of the illusory world are subdued." In that 
ultimate stage external objects of smell, touch, etc., remain 
as they were, but the perceptual knowledge of the whole 
world appears to be just like the perception of objects in a 
waking dream, j'.e., the whole universal process seems to be 
a great dream, though we remain with our outward eyes 
open. ' In one song of Bhusuka-pada', the mind (citta) has 
been compared to a fickle rat and it is said to be closely 
associated with the vital wind. It is said, — “ Dark is the 
night and the play of the rat begins.”' The dark night is 
the darkness of ignorance in which the function of construc- 
tive imagination goes on. It is further said, — ” Kill, O 
Yogin, this rat of the vital wind, whereby you will escape 
coming and going. The rat causes existence and makes 
holes; this fickle rat remains inactive only when skilful 
devices are employed. This rat is Time or death itself (i.e., 
the fickle mind constructs all temporal existence), — but in it 
there is no colour. When it rises to the void it moves 
there and drinks nectar. The rat remains restless (as long 
as it is not pacified by the instructions of the preceptor) ; 
pacify it through the instructions of the wise preceptor. 
Bhusuka says, — when the activities of the rat will be des- 
troyed, all bondage will also be destroyed.” 

' chadagai saala aahavc sudha i 

hhavahhava halaga na chudha II Ibid , Sony^No. 9. 

maticm ihak^rakfi pariniviia I 

avaia koria hhaVa-hala jiia II Ibid , Song No. 12. 

^ gandha paraaa tasa jaisorp ta-som 1 

nimda hihune auina jaiaom W Ibid., Song: No. 13, 

< nisi andharl musara cara I Jhid., Song No. 21. 



PHILOSOPHICAL STANDPOINl OF THE CARYA-PADAS 43 


In another song of Bhusuka-pada the mind has been com- 
pared to a deer. The song goes thus : — “ Near whom and 
with whom are you living and in what way ! — a clamour 
is rising around from all the four quarters. The deer 
has become the enemy of all because of his own flesh. I see, 
the hunters do not leave Bhusuka (who is like unto the 
fickle deer) even for a moment. The deer does not touch 
the grass nor does it drink water ; the abode of the doe is 
not known to the deer. The doe says to the deer, hearest 
me, thou deer, leave this forest and become mad. While 
running in haste the hoofs of the deer are not seen, — Bhusuka 
says, — it does not enter into the heart of the ignorant.”^ 

Here the deer represents the mind ; due to the principles 
of defilement it is always surrounded by the hunters who are 
the miseries of life. As the deer is the enemy of all because 
of its own flesh, so also the citta itself is the cause of all its 
miseries ; for, it itself constructs the world of miseries through 
its own activities. But when the deer citta is troubled thus 
amidst the miseries of life, then comes the doe,“ or the 
goddess Nairatma (essencelessness or perfect vacuity) to his 
help and she takes him away from this world beset on all 
sides with the hunters. 

It has been said in another song, — “ Going on cons- 
tructing for himself (the notions of) existence and extinc- 
tion, for nothing does man bring him under bondage. 
We, the supralogical Yogins {acinta yoi), do not know 
how birth, death and existence come at all to be. 

^ Jhid.t Song No. 6. It should be noted in this connection that the story of the 
deer and the doe is very popular in old and mediaeval folk-songs of the vernacular 
literatures. The saying that the deer is enemy to the world because of his own flesh 
is to be frequently met with in old and mediaeval vernacular literatures. The 
Siddhacirya has here made use of the popular imagery to explain the religious theory. 

2 The word ' harinl ’ has been explained in the commentary in this way, — 

vi^apana-hhaVa-grahan harati I harinVti sandhS-hhSsaya 

saiva jfiana-mudra nairatma ! 


/bid., p. 13, Com., (Ssstri* 8 edition). 



44 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Death is exactly the same as birth, — there is no distinc- 
tion between being and dying. Let them, who are 
here afraid of birth and death, care for (the practice and 
ceremonies of) rasa and rasayana, ^ Those who generally 
roam about (in the temples of) gods and goddesses 
become neither free from decrepitude, nor do they become 
immortal. It is not known whether there is J^arma due to 
birth, or there is birth due to }iarma\ Saraha, however, 
says, — unthinkable is that abode.” ^ Due to the beginning- 
less root-instincts (vdsand) man falsely constructs the notions 
of existence and extinction and thus himself puts 
the fetters of bondage on his legs. When the citta 

becomes tranquillised there is no birth — no death, — no bon- 
dage — no liberation, — so all the differences between all 
theses and anti-theses vanish at once. 

In another place Lul-pada says, — “ Existence does not 
come, neither is there non-existence; — who does understand 
the truth in this way.^ Incomprehensible indeed is the nature 
of pure consciousness, — says Lui, in the three elements 
it sports but it itself is not known. How can the Agamas 

^ This evidently refers to the practice of the Rasayana-school of yogins "who 
tried to escape death through a yogic process akin to the process of RasSyana (ste 
infra). We may incidentally notice another practice held in the temple of 
the Lamas of Tibet. It has been said; — “ Another service, known by the 
Mongolian name Tuiurgnikji has for object the preparation of the lustral water 
(rasSyana). It includes prayer, absolution of sins, a recital of all the ablutions made 
by Sakya-muni, and finally thanksgiving. Between the first and the second part 
of the rite is performed the preparation of the holy water. One of the priest’s 
assistants raises a mirror so that it reflects one of the statues of the divinities ; another 
takes the vessel (A»uje, Mongolian) filled with water and pours it upon the mirror. 
The water which flows off and is believed to have caught the image of the divinity 
is collected in a special dish (k’ris-gc’os— Tibetan) held by a third acolyte, while a 
fourth wipes the mirror with a silken napkin (Qadaq Mong.). Fifteen libations arc 
made in this way and at the end of the ceremony the lustial water is poured off into 
a bum-pa and set on the sacrificial altar. Thereafter it is used for the aspersion of 
offerings and washing the mouths of the * Lamas,’ while among the laity it serves the 
same purpose as does holy water among Catholics. ” Introduction by J, Deniker to 
the Gods oj Northern Budd/iism—by Alice Getty, p. xi. 

2 Song No. 22. 



PHILOSOPHICAL STANDPOINT OF THE CARYA-PADAS 45 


and the Vedas explain that, whose colour, sign and form 
are not known ? By speaking of what, should 1 give an 
exposition of truth? Just like the moon in water it is neither 
real nor unreal. How should it be thought of? — says Lui, — 
1 do not see any magnitude or locality of what I am now 
(i.e., maha-sukha).” ^ Here also the phenomenal world is 
described as neither existent, as we do not find any reality 
anywhere by' analysing it, — nor is it non-existent, as non- 
existence itself is unreal iasad-rupatvat) ; it is not real as it 
has no ultimate nature {paramartha-satya) neither is it unreal 
as it has got its provisional truth {samvrti-satya) ; — it is just 
like the moon in the water. The ultimate truth, however, 
can never be explained, — for, there is no knower, no know- 
able — no knowledge in it,"* the citta being perfectly tranquil 
there. It has been said, — ‘ When one practises yoga with 
one’s mind fixed with pure wisdom, none can ascertain where 
the citta goes and where it remains. It has also been 
said by Aryadeva, — “ When the mind, the senses and the 
vital wind are all destroyed, 1 do not know where the self 

goes and enters As the moon manifests itself as 

the rays (so also the citta manifests itself in the various 
illusory constructions, i.e., vikalpa); but as the moon having 
set, all the rays vanish, so also when the citta is destroyed 

^ bhaVa na hoi abhava na jai I 
aisa sambohem patiai II 
lui bhanai badha dulakkha binana 1 
tia dhae bilasai uha lage na II 
jahera bana-cihna ruva na jam 1 
so k.oise agama beem bakhant II 
kahere ki^o bhani max divi piriccha I 
udako canda jima sdca na micchd II 
}ui bhanai mat bhdvai kJsa I 

id lai acchama idhera uha na disa II Song No. 29. 

- bhdvya-bhdvaka-bhdvand’bhdvena bhdvyam I 

Ibid,, Com., p. 46. 

^ cittam uiiciiya bodhena abhydsam ^urufe yada I 

tadd citiam na paSydmi k^a gatarp k^a sihitam bhavet II 

Quoted in the Com., p. 46. 



46 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULl S 


all its modes and modifications vanish.” ‘ It is again 
said, — ” The moon having set, all her rays vanish 
indeed ; exactly in the same way, when the citta is 
merged in the Sahaja-bliss, all the impurities of false 
constructions are destroyed.” ^ Bhade-pada says in one 
of his songs, — “Uptil now 1 was absorbed in self -illusion, — 
but now 1 realise the truth through the instruction of my 
good preceptor. Now my great citta is not, — it has fallen 
down into the ocean of the void. I behold the ten quarters all 
void, — without the cUta there is neither any merit nor any 
demerit. The wise preceptor has explained to me all the 
illusions and 1 have destroyed them all in the void. Says 
Bhade, — Taking that which is indivisible (/.e., non-dual), I 
have devoured the great mind.”^ The active mind brings in 
the question of morality ; but when it is destroyed there is 
neither any morality nor immorality, — merit and demerit are 
all provisional.^ In another song of Saraha-pada we find, — 
my mind, to drive away the impurities in the 
dream of ignorance the sayings of the preceptor are around 
you, — where shalt thou hide thyself and how ? Curious 
indeed is the nature of illusion, through which the self and 
the not-self are seen ; in this water- bubble of the world, the 
self is void itself in the Sahaja.” ' 

^ jahi mana India pavana ho natha 1 
na janami apa k.nhim gai paiiha II 

candare canda-kanti jima padihhasaa ! 

cia vikorane tahi tali paisaa i| Song No. 31. 

' astarngate candramasVva nunam 
nlrendavah samharanam prayanti I 
cittarn hi iadvat sahaje niline 
nasyanty amt sarva’-vik.olpa^dosdh II 

Quoted in the Com., p. 49. edition). 

^ eta k^la hamu acchile sva-mohem^ etc. Song No. 35. 

* Cf, Madhyamiko'Vrtti. Ch. I. 

sttine ho aviddra arc nia-mana tohore dose 1 
guru-baana hihdrem re ihdhit^o tai ghunda k.ai6e il 



PHILOSOPHICAL STANDPOINT OF THE CARYA-PADAS 47 


In a song of Bhusuka-pada the non-essential nature of the 
world and its illusory nature as mere subjective construction 
have been very nicely explained. It is said, — “ Increate is 
the world from the beginning, — it is through illusion that it 
appears thus (in this form) ; but does a serpent actually bite 
the man who startles at the sight of the rope-snake ? O 
wonderful yogin, — don’t stain your hands with salt, — if you 
understand the world to be of this nature, your Vasanas will 
be eradicated. It is like a mirage in the desert, — it is like 
an imaginary city of the Gandharvas, — it is just like the 
reflection in the mirror, — it is just like the water becoming 
condensed and solidified by the whirl of wind and thus 
becoming (solid like) stone : It is just like the son of a barren 
woman — sporting and playing various games, — it is like oil 
coming out of sand, — like the horns of the hare — like the 
flower in the sky. Rauta says, or Bhusuka says, — Everything 
is of this nature, if you be a fool, ask your true preceptor for 
(the solution of) your doubts taking shelter at his feet.”' The 
world is as increate as the locks of hair (gossamer) seen 
flying in the sky by a man with defective eyes, — it is a product 
of constructive imaginations, which are in their turn produced 
by the three-fold impurities of the citta.~ It has been said, — 

adahhua hhava moha re disai para appana I 
e jagn jala-himvakare sahajem suna apana II 
Song No. 39. 

^ aie anuanaern jaga re bhamtiem so padihai I 

raja-sapa dek.hi jo camakfli yare kjrn tarn hodo k.bai II 
joia re ma feara hatha lohna 1 
aisa sahhavem jai jaga bujhasi tutai basana iora II 
maru-tnartci’-gandhanaarJ-dapana-pativimvu jaisa I 
batavattern so didha bhaia apem pathara jaisa II 
bandhi’SUa jima k^li h.arai khelai bahu-hiha khedd I 
balua-telern aaaara-simge dkflia phulild If 
rdutu bhandi h^ia bhuauk'U bhanai kata aaala aiaa aahdva I 
jai to mudha acchasi bhantl pucchatu sadguru pdva II 

Ibid., Song No. 41. 

ke&ondukam yathd*ko^^ driyate taimirikjair janaih I 
iathd' lohadi-dosena bhdvo bdlair vik.alpyate |i 
Verse of Acarya Nidattaka, quoted in the Com. Ibid., p. 63. 



48 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


I am as much a product of the mind as magic or dreams 
are.’’ As water solidifies itself into hard stones through the 
whirl of wind,“ so also through the disturbance of Vasana 
voidness itself turns into all existence." 

Bhusuka-pada says in another song, — “ The great 
tree of Sahaja is shining in the three worlds ; every 
thing being of the nature of void, what will bind what ? As 
water mixing with water makes no difference, so also, the 
jewel of mind enters the sky in unity of emotion. Where 
there is no self, how can there be any not-self ? What is 
increate from the beginning can have neither birth, nor 
death nor any kind of existence. Bhusuka says, or Rauta 
says, — this is the nature of all ; — nothing goes or comes, — 
there is neither existence nor non-existence there (in Sahaja).”’ 
Kankana-pada says in a song, — “ When the void {i.e., the 
three-fold void of impurities) will merge itself in the void , 
{i.e., the fourth or the perfect void)® the ultimate nature of all 

the objects will come within realisation The bindu and 

the nada do not enter the heart and by seeing one {viz., 

vacuity) the other {viz., mind) is destroyed All clamour, 

says Kankana, merges into the roaring of Tathala 


^ yaiha maya yaiha svapnam tathasmit etc. 

Quoted in the Com. Ibid., p. 64, 

^ yatha batd-Vartena niram api prastaram bhutam, etc. — Com. 

^unyataiva bhaved bhdvo Vdsand-Vasitd sail I 
vdtd-varte drdhtbhuta dpa eva ghano-paldh II 

Quoted in the Com. Ibid., p. 64. 

^ sahaja maha-taru phariae tiloe I 

khasama-sabhave re bdnafa koe II 

jima jale panid taliyd bheda na jda I 

tima mana-raand re sama-rase gaana samda II 

7a5U ndhi appd tdsu pareld kahi i 

di-anuandre jdma-marana-bhava ndhi II 

bhusu^u bhanai kota rdutu bhanai k.ota saala eha sahdVa I 

jdi na dvai re na tahim bhdvdbhdva II 

Ibid,, Song No. 43. 

•'> For threefold void of impurities and the fourth void see infra. 



PHILOSOPHICAL STANDPOINT OF THE CARYA-PADAS 49 

(thatness).*’ ^ The bindu may be explained as the principle 
of subjectivity ; the principle of objectivity is the nada.^ This 
conception of the Sunyata as the negation of the knower and 
the knowable is the same as is found in the doctrine of the 
Vijnana-vaditis. In another song of Kanha-pada the mind has 
been compared to a tree of which the five branches represent 
the five senses, and hopes and passions are the innumerable 
leaves and fruits. Kanha says, — Cut the tree down with the 
axe of the great preceptor’s instructions so that the tree may 
not shoot forth any more. The tree grows up in the water 
of good and evil and the wise cut it down with the 
instructions of the preceptor. Those fools who do not know 
how to cut the tree and to split it, go astray and have 
to accept existence (and bondage with it). The tree is of 
the (defiled) void, and the axe is of the perfect-void, — cut the 
tree down, so that no root or branch be left.” ' Our mind 
becomes deeply entangled in the notion of existence and all 
the impurities associated with it, and the notion of good and 
evil acts as the dynamic principle of disturbance behind the 
realm of the mind. In destroying this mind we should not 
try only to suppress the modes and modifications of the mind 
(compared to the branches of the tree), but the roots of the 
tree, i.e., the Vasanas should also be eradicated. Jayanandi- 
pada says in another song that as we perceive in dream or in 
the mirror objects which have no reality in them, so also is 

' sune suna milia jaVem 1 
soala dhama uia tavern II 

hindu-nada na hie paiihd I 
aria cdhante ana hinathd II 

hhanai koh\ana kolaala sadern I 
sarVa hicchorila tathaia-nddern II 

Ibid,, Song No. 44. 

2 Com. IbiU, p. 66. 

mana taru pdfica indi tasu aaha, etc. 

/bid., Song No. 45. 


3 



50 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the illusion of this world. When the mind is free from this 
illusion, all coming and going are stopped. At that stage 
none can be burnt, none can be wetted, none can be cut 
into pieces J But alas, — inspite of all these, inspite of seeing 
this, foolish people firmly bind themselves to illusion; — they 
perceive it — yet tliey bind themselves to this self-created false 
world. It is indeed astonishing that people would discard 
milk and take poison.^ 

But the wise Kambalambara-pada says in a song, — “ 1 
have filled my boat of compassion with gold (of void) and have 
left silver (of all false appearances) with the world. ' Kamali 
(Kambalambara-pada) is steering on towards the sky (void), 
— if once birth can be totally annihilated how can it recur 
again ? 1 have (says Kambala) pulled the peg up and lorn 

the rope of the boat, — and Kamali is steering forward seeking 
at every step the instructions of the wise preceptor.”^ Here 
the peg symbolises the impure principles of the active mind 
{abhasa-dosani — com.) and the rope is made of the thread of 
book-knowledge (vidya-sutram — com.). Thus, to proceed for- 
ward with the heart full of universal compassion, the Yogin 
must first uproot all the principles of defilement in his mind 
and tear off the rope of scriptural knowledge. It has been 

J Ibid., Song No. 46. 

2 aicaryam eiaddhi manusya-lokc ^cslrttrn parityajya visam pihanti 11 

Quoted in the Com. Ibid., p. 71. 

^ There is a beautiful pun on the woid sona and rupa here. Sona 
may be derived from the Sanskrit word svarna or suvarna (gold) or from 
the word iunya (c/. sona, verse 49), and $unya may here be very happily 
compared to gold. Again rupa may be derived from the Sanskrit word raupya 
(silver) and it may also be associated with the word rupa (form) and silver may 
also be compared to the illusory form when gold is compared to the void. 

* sone hhariii koruna naOi I 

rupa thoi mahike thaVi !l (ndhika thdvi Bagchi) 

bdliatu kof^oli gaana uvesem I 

gelt jama bahudai koisern 11 

khuriti upadl melili kocchi I 

hahatu komali sadguru pucchi II 

Ibid,, Song No. 8 (1-6). 



PHILOSOPHICAL STANDPOINT OF THE CARYA-PADAS 5j 


declared by Saraha, — The body is the boat, a pure mind 
IS the^oarj-with the instruction of the wise preceptor take 
the helm (rightly). Make the mind quiet and then direct 
the boat on,- by no other means can one reach the other 
shore.’ 

The Carya-padas, following the Tantric texts, often speak 
of four gradations in the doctrine of Sunyata. In the Pahca- 
l^rama of Nagarjuna-pada the four gradations have been 
arranged in the following manner : — the first is the Sunya, 
the second Ati-sunya, the third Maha-sunya 
fou/'lunyar'^ and the fourth or the final is the Sarva- 

sunya, — and these are all different accord- 
ing to their cause and effect.^ The first stage Sonya has 
been explained as light (alol^af ; it is knowledge {prajna), 
and the mind (citta) remains active in it, — it is relative 
(para-tantra) by nature.^ In this state there are as many 
as thirty three impure functions {dosa) of the mind ; 
these are sorrow, fear, hunger, thirst, feeling (vedana), 
sympathy, self-analysis (pratyaveksd), kindness, affectionate- 
ness, fickleness, doubt, jealousy, etc." /This mental state of 
Sunya has also been called the woman (s^ri) and it has been 
said that of all illusions the illusion/of the woman is the 


^ kaa ndvadi khanii mana ^cdudla I 

sodgurti-vacnc dhara paUfVdla II 
cia ihita k^ri dharahure ndhi I 
ana updye para na jdi H 

Ibid., Song No. 38 ll>4). 

* sanyan ca atiSunyafi ca maha-SUnyarn trtiyal^am 1 
caiurtham sarva-iiinyan ca phala-hetu-prabhedaiah II 

Panca-kxama. MS., p. 20 (A). 

* Cj. prajho-tpanna dlokah pradurbhutah I 

Lalita-vistara, Ed. by Dr. S. Lefmam, pp.417-18. 

^ dlokam iunyam prajnd ca cHtam ca para-ianirahom I MS,, p. 20. 

In the commentary [Panca-hxama-^ippani by Pandita-purohita-raksita-pada, MS. 


B. N. Sans. No 65, 66) iunya-prajna has been explained as light liunya-ptajfid 
dloka itt ydvat). MS., p. 43 (B). 

® PaHca-kxama, MS., p. 20<Bh 



52 


OBSCURE RELrClOUS CULTS 


greatest.^ It is also called the left (vdma), the lotus in the 
lunar circle, - and the first vowel. The second stage, ufz., 
Ati-sunya is said to be the manifestation of light (a/a/^a-fc/iasu), 
which shines like moon-raj^s and proceeds from the former 
(/.e., dlo^a-jndna) , It is called the Upaya and is of 
the nature of constructive imagination (parik.alpila). It 
is also called the right {dal^sina), the solar circle {swya- 
mandala) and the thunderbolt {vajra). Forty menial functions 
of defilement, such as passion, contentment, joy, pleasure, 
wonder, patience, valour, pride, energy, greed, etc., are 
associated with this state. The third stage, viz,, Maha-sunya 
proceeds from the union of Prajna and Upaya or dlol^a and 
alokdbhdsa, or Sunya and Ati-sunya, — and it is called the 
intuition of light (aloJ^o-palabdhi) and is of the absolute 
nature {parinispanna) ; and yet it is called ignorance {avidyd) 
and is associated with seven impure mental functions of 
defilement, viz., forgetfulness, illusion, stupor, laziness, etc. 
Thus dlokjOL, dlol^d-bhdsa and alokp-palabdhi — these are the 
three stages of the cilia from which there follow the principles 
of impurities, numbering hundred and sixty in all.“ They 
function throughout the whole day and night with the flow of 
the vital wind, which has been said to be the medium {vdhana) 
through which the impurities of nature function.^ It has 
been said, wherever there is the function of the bio-motor 
force or the vital wind, nature with all its impurities is also 
brought along with it, and so long as there is the function of 


^ sirl’Satnjfid ca iatha prok.td mandd-}^aTds tathctiva co, ii 

/biU.MS.. p. 20 (A). 

Also, sarvesdm eVa mayandm stn-mdyaiva visisyate II 

Ibid,, MS..P. 21 (A). 

2 The total number of the principles of defilement {prakrU- dosa) are really eighty ; 
(thirty-three in the first state of ^unya, seven in the second and forty in the third stale) ; 
but the number is doubled taking into consideration both day and night. 

3 cidh prakt^ayah suk^fndh iaiorp saslhy-uttaram diva I 
rdtrau capi pravarianie vdyuwvdhana-heiund II 

PancH’hama, MS , pp. 21(A)— 21(E). 



PHILOSOPHICAL STANDPOINT OF THE CARYA-PADAS 53 


this bio-motor force or the vital wind, the principles of 
impurity will not cease tp function. 

The fourth stage, Uiz., Sarva-sQnya (all-void or perfect 
void) is free from the three-fold impurities mentioned above, 
and is self-illuminant. It is absolute purity obtained by 
transcending the principles of defilement. It is the purified 
knowledge, the ultimate truth, the supreme omniscience. It 
is a state which can be said to be neither without beginning, 
nor with beginning, — neither without middle nor with middle, 
neither without end nor with end. It is beyond the cate- 
gories of either being or non-being, merit or demerit, or even 
a combination or the absence of both.’ 

This theory of the four Sunyas, as expounded in the 
PancaA^rama of Nagarjuna-pada seems to be the reminiscence 
of a similar doctrine of Dunyas expounded in some Hindu and 
Buddhist texts. An exposition of the theory of seven Sunyas 
is found in the old Tantric text Svacchanda, a theory which 
found its echo in many of the subsequent texts of the Saiva 
and Sakta literature. The Svacchanda contends that there 
are seven kinds of Sunya, of which the first six are impure and 
contain the seeds of phenomenalism,^ whereas the seventh is 
the Supreme Reality itself, which is Pure Being and Con- 
sciousness and is free from all the Vil^alpas, The doctrine of 
sixteen or eighteen Sunyas as ennumerated by Asariga or 
Dihnaga (in the Madhyanta-bibhaga or the Asta-sahasriJ^d^- 
pindartha) and also by the Natha writers is also of a similar 
character. 

The theory of the four Dunyas was accepted both in the 
Dohas and the Carya-padas. In a Doha of Krsnacarya it has 

1 Ibid., MS., p. 30(A). 

* urddhva-iunyam adhah-sunyam madhya-sunyam trtiyakarn i 
iHnya-irayaTn calam hy eiad adho madhya urddhvaiah fl 
caiurtham vyani-iunyam samanayam ca pancamam i 
unmanayarp taiha sa^tham sad etc samayah sthitah II 
Ch. IV, verses (289-290) 

(Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, No. XXVI ll). 



54 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


been said that in the abode of Maha sukha there are four 
stalks and four leaves.’ Here the four leaves are the four 
Sunyas, and the four stalks are the four sources. “ Sarva- 
sunya is said to be the effulgent principle, — there is no higher 
truth than this. ' It is the abodeof AvadhutI (i.e., the damsel 
of the nature of perfect bliss), it is the abode of the Jinas/ 

In the Carya-padas and their commentary we find occa- 
I he theory of the sional reference to this theory of the 

‘^unya.*? explained in r A- 1 .1 • f 

the ( aryfis under bunyas and the impurities or nature 

various imageries. (pral^tti-dosa), which arc the cause of the 

cycle of birth and death and all the resulting sufferings, and 
they have always been prescribed to be eradicated. There is 
a song of Dhendhana-pada, which may be literally translated 
thus, — “On a lofty height is situated my house; no neigh- 
bour have 1. There is no rice in the earthen pot, — (guests) 

come every day The bull has given birth, but the cow is 

barren. The milk-pot is being filled with milk thrice in the 
day.”' The esoteric significance of the lines (in light of the 
commentary) is that when all the hundred and sixty im- 
purities of nature pertaining to the body, word and mind 
all vanish away in the Maha-sukha-cakra’^ (which is 


^ patta-cauffha cau-munala fhia mahdsuha vase I 

Vert»e No, 5, Dr. Bagehi’s edition in the J D. L , Vol. XXVIII, 1935. 
mnyd-iiiunya-mahdiunyasarvasunyam iti catuh-iunya-svarupena patra-caiusla- 
yam, catur ddi-svarupenn catur mmdla-samsihitdh, etc., Com. 

2 sarVa-iunyam prahhdtvaram ato ndnyac ckunyam tattvam astl'ty arihah 1 Com. 
This commentary on the Dohdko^a of Kahna pada is, however, different from 
the commentary discovered and published by MM. Sastri. It is found in a MS (B.^N. 
Sans. No. 47, available in rotograph)., p. 43(A). 

4 /bid., MS., p. 57(A). 

^ faotal mora ghara ndhi padiveit 1 
hadUa bhdta ndhi niti dvesi II 

halada hidela gavid bdjmhe 1 
pifd duhidi e tind sdjmhe 11 
Song No 33. 

® asadrupam kflha-vdk-<^'diasya sa^thy-utiara-saia-prakrii-dosam ya6m{i)n safnaye 
tftahd-sukha'Caki'G layam gaiam tad eva mama giham., etc. 

Ibid. Cora., p. 51. 



PHILOSOPHICAL STANDPOINT OF THE CARYA-PADAS 55 


compared to the house on the height), the neighbours, viz., the 
sun and the moon are gone; ’ i.e., with the destruction of the 
prakfU-dosas all the functions of the sun and the moon are also 
destroyed. ^ The mind with the three principles of impurity 
(abhasa-traya), compared, to the bull, gives rise to th6 notion 
of the external world, but barren is the non-essential void 
(compared to the cow). ' The Yogin always tries to de.stroy 
all these impurities (pita^pithal^am, abhasa-dosam) In 
another place Darika-pada says, — ‘Darika revels on the 
other side of the sky;’ ' and this sky (gaana=gagana) 
has been explained in the commentary as the three-fold 
void or light discussed above. ' The final stage is the 
other side of the three-fold Sunya. In one song of 
Kanha-pada it is said, — “ On the arm of the void 1 strike with 
the ‘thatness’ and 1 plunder the whole storage of attachment 
and take away (all it contains)”.’ The image may be 
explained thus : — The whole storage of attachment was in 
possession of the three-fold Sunya ; the arms of this three- 
fold Sunya are struck with the perfect-void {sarva-sunya) 
which is ‘thatness’, and the Sunya is thereby undone; then 
the whole storage of illusory attachment is plundered and 
all that it contained is taken possession of. In the 
commentary this three-fold Sunya has been explained as 
the storage of the VasanSs,” which are responsible for 


* Cf. Com, parivastha-candra-suryau. 

^ Candra-surya may here imply subjectivity and objectivity, — or, the two nerves 
in the left and the right ; about this we shall have detailed discussion later on. 

^ balada i^yadi — balam manasad deha-vi graham dadatVti baladas tad eva bodhi- 
cilta{m) abhaaa traya-prastutam I Com. p 52. (Sastri’s edition}. 

^ dohanam iti nihsvabhavt-karanam k.riyate I sandhya-trayam iti ohar-ntiam 
yogtndrene'ii i Ibid., Com. p 52. 

® bilaaai darika gaanaia parimakvLlcm li Ibid., Song. No. 34. 

^ gaganam iti alokadi-iunya-irayam boddhavyam I Ibid., Com. p 53. 

^ auna haha tathata pahari I 

moha-bhandara lai aaala ahart II Ibid., Song, No. 36. 

® auna ity adi iunyam iti I ahko-palabdhi-aandhya-jnancna vasana-garam 
boddhavyam 1 Ibid., Com. p. 56. 



56 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the illusory world. In another song of Kanha-pada it 

is said , — * Split up the two ; O lord, you are also 

dead.* ^ According to the commentary the two refers 
to the first two principles of impure knowledge {ahhasa- 
dvayam), i.e., Sunya and Ati-sunya; the lord (thakura) 
represents the third stage of Maha-sOnya or the ignorant mind 
(avidya-citta) . After splitting up or destroying the two 
principles of the defiled void, the third or the avidya-ciita 
is also to be killed. It is further said in the same 

song, First I took the vadia and killed it by a dash 

and then taking the great elephant destroyed the five.” ■ 
Here the esoteric doctrine is explained in terms of the game 
of chess. The vadia in the game represents the infantry, 
but here it represents the hundred and sixty kinds of impu- 
rities.^ First the impurities must be shaken off and then 
raising the mind {gaavara = gaja-vara^ citia-gajcndra) the five 
Skandhas are destroyed. Again in a song of 6avara-pada 
we find that he has awakened the Nairalma damsel by des- 
troying Sunya, Ati-sunya and also the adjoining house (ii.e., 
Maha-^unya) by the stroke of the fourth Sunya of his heart,' 
and by the side of the adjoining house (f.e., Maha-sunya) 
shines another house lit with moon-rays, and when all the 

^ Dr. ShaKidullah, however is disposed to explain madeni re thakura as 
•don't give the lotd anything’ (m5 = don’t, desi = give) : (C/. Ins pamphlet, Dacca 
Sfihitya-Parisad-granthavall, No. 10) but tnadesi may also be explained with refer- 
ence to the Prakrita form madcsi ( < v/mr) and (he latter derivation gives a more 
suitable meanmg. Dr. Shahidullah in his Les Chants Mystiques de Kanha et de 
Saraha (p. 113) takes the reading as-phifau daara dekhi re thakura (La porte est 
ouverte. Oh !’ J ai vu le seigneur Ibid., p. 1 19) Dr. P. C. Bagchi takes the reading 
AS—phitau dua maresire thakura. {Materials for, etc , Dr. Bagchi, p. I 19). 
pahilern todia hadia mariu I 
gaavarern tolia pancajana ghaliu il 

Song No. 12. 

3 vadikcti sandhya-hhasaya sasthy-uitara~sata-prakrtayah, etc. 

Ibid., Com. p. 23 

gaanata gaanata taila bad\ hence kuradt I 
kunfhe nairamani bali jagante upadt II 

Ibid,, Song No. 50. 



PHILOSOPHICAL STANDPOINT OF THE CARYA-PADAS 57 


mass of darkness is driven away — the sky shines with lustre.’ 
This last house is the Sarva-^unya (all- void). 

As we have seen, Mahay ana Buddhism do not recognise 
Sunyata or the knowledge of the essencelessness of the world 
to be the highest truth, — the highest truth is a state where 
Sunyata and Karuna are united together. This element of 
Karuna or compassion is emphasised in all the Buddhist 
Tantras, and all the esoteric practices including the 
sexo-yogic practice are professed to be undertaken with 

the avowed intention of liberating the whole world . This 
emphasis on the element of Karuna side by side with the 

theory of Sonyata is found also in the Carya-padas. We have 
seen that Kambalambara-pada filled his boat of Karuna 
with the gold of vacuity/^ In the song where Kanha-pada 
explains the esoteric doctrine by the metaphor of the chess- 
game, compassion is made the play-board.^ In another song 
he says that he has realised his body (/.e., existence) in a 
non-dual state of compassion and vacuity.' The commen- 
tary on the Caryas explains that all the Carya-songs were 
composed by the Siddhacaryas only for the uplift and 
ultimate deliverance of the beings. 

The philosophical notions found in the Carya-songs 
are of a general Buddhistic nature ; but the Carya-songs 
as a whole represent a special school of religious thought with 
distinctive features of its own. Let us concentrate our atten- 
tion on the study of the special features of the school of reli- 
gious thought, to which the Carya-songs belong, viz,, the 
school of Sahajiya Buddhism. 


* taila hadira pasernra johna badl uela | 

phifeli andhari re phuJia 11 

Ibid,, Song No. 50. 

^ Song No. 8. 

^ karuna pihadi khalahum naa-hala I Song No. 12. 

* nia deha karuna .^uname hert II Song No. 13. 



CHAPTER III 


The General Religious Outlook of 

THE SaHAJIYAS 

(i) Salient features of the religion preached in the 
Buddhist Dohas and Songs 

(A) The Spirit of Protest and Criticism 

The poets of the Sahajiya school laid their whole emphasis 
on their protest against the formalities of life and reJigipn. 
Truth is something which can never be found through mere 
austere practices of discipline ; neither can it be realised 
through much reading, philosophising, fasting, bathing, 
constructing images and painting the gods and 
goddesses ; it is only to be intuited within in the most 
unconventional way through initiation in the TattVa 
and the practice of yoga. This process of yoga is the 
most natural process for a man ; for in the nature of man 
hunger and sex are recognised by all to be the most primitive 
and fundamental propensities ; and all religions would pres- 
cribe strict rules for their suppression ; but that is a way, say 
these Yogins, which is absolutely unnatural. The continual 
suppression of natural propensities only makes a man morbid 
and neurotic, but never helps him in realising the truth. 
The Sahajiyas would never prescribe any unnatural strain on 
human nature, but would take human nature itself as the 
best help for realising the triith. It is for this reason that 
this path has always been described as the easiest and 
most natural. It will be totally wrong to suppose that 
the question of moral discipline was in any way less 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


59 


emphasised in the Sahajiya school (barring the cases of abuses 
and aberrations) than in the other schools of religion; but the 
difference of the view-point of the Sahajiyas from that of 
other schools lies in the fact that while the other schools 
recommend the total annihilation of the sexual impulse, the 
Sahajiyas would recommend the transformation and sublima- 
tion of them. The question of annihilation is regarded by 
the Sahajiyas as unnatural and impossible, and therefore, 
the wisest way is the way of transformation and sublimation.’ 

Thus the name Sahaja-yana is doubly significant ; it is 
Sahaja-yana because its aim is to realise 
naru^mfpath' the ultimate innate nature {Sahaja) of the 

self as well as of the Dharmas, and it is 
Sahaja-yana also because of the fact that instead of suppress- 
ing and thereby inflicting undue strain on the human nature 
it makes man realise the truth in the most natural way, /.e., 
by following the path along which the human nature itself 
leads him. In the Samputik^ it has been said that this 
supreme process of yoga is eternal, — it originates from our 
sex-passions ; our sex-passions are part and parcel of our 
nature and our nature is never Iransgressible, — it is, therefore, 
wise to transform these sex-passions in the yogic process for 
realising the truth. ^ What is natural is the easiest; and thus 
Sahaja, from its primary meaning 

the easiest path. ot being natural, acquires this secondary 

meaning of being easy, straight or plain. 
In a song Santi-pada says that truth is purely of a self-intuited 
nature, there cannot be any speculation as to its transcenden- 
tal nature ;• — those who have trodden the straight path 
have been able to reach the other shore. ’ Santi-pada 

^ For further discussion on the point see injra. 

^ Cf. asau hi hhagaVan yogah sthira-iaivata -par amah I 

manmathaiah pratyutpannah {sada caiva) svahhavo duratikfamah II 

Sampufikof MS. p. 7 iB). 

^ 8aa aamveana aarua viarerp alakkha-lakkha na jai I 

je je ujuvafe geld andvdfd bhaild aoi II Song No. 15. 



OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


60 

warns the foolish beginners against missing this straight path 
(uju-Vata), — it is called by him the royal road {raja-patha) for 
attaining perfection. Again Saraha-pada says in a song, — “O 
Yogins, do not leave off this straight and easy path and follow 
the crooked and curved path; — bodhi lies near you, — do 
not go to Laiika (Ceylon) in search of it. Do not take the glass 
(dapana) to see the bracelets in your hands, — realise your own 
pure citta for yourself (and within yourself). ^ If the Sahaja 
or the Bodhi-citta can once be realised, everything is 
attained, — and so there remains no more necessity for the 
muttering of the mantras, or of penances, fire-sacrifices, 
Mandala (circle) or the other rites ' in the Mandala ; the 
Sahaja or the Bodhi-citta in the form of Maha-sukha is the 
Mantra, penance, sacrifice, circle {mandala) and everything 
belonging to the circle. “ 

(B) Aversion lo recondite scholasihip 

Thus we see that the Sahajiyas were averse to the elaborate 
formalities of religion and concentrated their whole attention 
on the attainment of the blissful ultimate nature as the highest 
truth, for which attainment they took help of the natural 
propensities of man. Deepest was their hatred towards those 
recondite scholars who would try to know the truth through 
discursive reason. Tillo-pada (and also Saraha-pada) says 
that the truth which can fully be realised only by the self, 
can never be known by the scholars, — for, what comes 
within the scope of our mind, can never be the absolute 

^ uju re uju chadi ma lehu re bafika ! 
niadi hohi ma jahu re lanka II 
hathera k^hkana ma leu dapana I 
apane apa bujhatu niamana II 

Song No. 32. 

^ na matxtr a-japo na tapo na homo na mandaleyam na ca mandalan ca 1 
sa mantra-japah aa tapah aa homah sa matjtdaleyam tan mai)dalan ca 11 
Hevajru-iantra MS. p. 30 (A). 



SELIGIOUS outlook of the SAHAJIYAS 


61 


truth.' Kanha>pada also says that the scholars who generally 
depend on their reason and scholarship, are indifferent to {or 
rather ignorant of) the true path of religion. “ Saraha says, — 
Those who go on reciting and explaining, cannot know the 
truth, it is not only unknown, but also unknowable to them.‘^ 
Those who do not drink eagerly (to their heart’s content) the 
nectar of the instructions of the Guru, die of thirst like 
fools deceived by the mirage of the desert.^ Scholars 
explain the scriptures, but do not know of the Buddha who 
is residing in thsir own body; by such scholarship they can 
never escape the cycle of coming and going, — yet those 
shameless creatures think themselves to be Pundits. ’ Saraha 
regrets that the whole world is checked in its course of 
progress by mere thought-constructions of discursive 
reason, — by the mere functions of the citta , — but the 
acitta which transcends the function of the mind is not sung 
by any one/’ The world is rather sick of scholarship, — 
none is illiterate here, — but Saraha says, all scholarship will 
be upset when one will attain that state which transcends all 
letters (/.e., scholarship). People pride themselves that the 
secret of the great truth has long been in their keeping, — 
but Kanha says that even out of crores of people rarely 

' Maasamvcana tatta-phala tilapaa hhananli 1 

{jo mana-goara paitlhai so paramattha na honti II ) 

Dohakpsa. Dr. P.C. Bagchi’s Edition, No. 9. 
yo mana-goara so udasa II 
Son j No. 7. 

^ arc putto vojjhu rasa~rasana susanthia avejja 1 
vakhh^ana padhantehi jagahi na janiu aojjha H 
Dohakosa of Saraha-pada. (Dr. P.C. Bagchi’s Edition). 

^ /bid., p. 27. 

^ pandia saala aattha vakkhanai | 
dehahim buddha Vasanta na janai II 
avana~gamana na tena vikhandia | 
tovi nilajja bhanai haum pandia If Ibid. 

^ Ibid. 

^ akkhara-Vadha saala jagu nahi nirakkb<i^o. koi I 
iava sc akkhara ghoUa jaVa nirakkhara hoi II 



62 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


does one become absorbed In perfectly pure truth/ 
They read the Agamas, the Vedas and the Puranas and 
are always proud of their knowledge, — but they are like 
bees hovering round the ripe marmelos fruits/ As the 
bees outside go on humming at the mere smell of the 
marmelos fruit but can never break into the hard kernel 
and have the taste of the fruit thereby, — ^so also all the 
scholars boast of their knowledge of the truth, but they 
can have only a very faint smell of the truth from outside, 
but can never break into it and have a direct perception of it. 
Sahaja is something supreme, declares Kanha to all, — but 
the Pundits read and hear the scriptures and the Agamas, 
and know absolutely nothing. 

(C) Scathing Criticism of the Formalities of Life 
and Religion 

liie formal rules and regulations of religion were 
also severely criticised by the Sahajiyas. The most pene- 
trating and scathing criticism was made by Saraha-pada 
in his DohaJ^osa, His first revolt is against the orthodox 
system of the fourfold division of colours (caturVarna) 
placing the Brahmins at the top. Saraha says that 
the Brahmins as a caste cannot reasonably be recognised to 
be the highest of men, — for the saying that they dropped 
from the mouth of Brahma is a myth invented by a section 
of clever and cunning people ; if, on the other hand, a man 
becomes Brahmin by religious initiations (saTnsk^ra)^ then 
even the lowest of men may be a Brahmin. If a man be- 
comes a Brahmin by reciting the Vedas, let the people of the 
lower classes also recite the Vedas and they will also become 

^ loaha gavva samuvvahai haunt paramatthe pavlna | 
kodiha majjhem ekk^ jai hoi nirarijana Itna 11 

Doha No. 

® agama-vea-puranem par^io mana vahanti | 
pakk<i airiphale alia jima vaheria bhamanti ti 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


63 


Brahmins ; and they also do read the Vedas, for, they read 
grammar which contains many words of the Vedas. The 
Brahmins take earth, water, k,uia grass and recite Mantras 
and perform fire-sacrifices in their houses, — in vain do they 
offer ghee to the fire, for thereby their eyes will only be 
affected with intense smoke.* They become holders of single- 
fold or of three- fold sacred threads, — but this is of no avail 
unless truth is realised. Deceived is the whole world by false 
illusion, — none does know the all-excelling truth where both 
religion and non-religion become one. The devotees of the 
Lord {Uvara), again, anoint the whole body with ashes, wear 
matted hair on the head, sit within the house and light 
lamps and ring bells seated in a corner ; they take a 
yogic posture (dsana) with their eyes fixed ; they whisper 
(religious doctrines) into the ears (of credulous people) 
and deceive them thereby." The widows, the Mundis 
(women taking the vow ef fasting for the whole month)** and 
others taking different vows, get themselves initiated by these 
devotees who do it only in greed of money (da/^sma). 
Against the Jaina Ksapanaka-yogins it is said that they 
keep long nails, put on a pale air, become naked and 
shave the head ; but by all these they merely lead them- 
selves astray and never attain perfection. “ If only the 
naked attain liberation, the dog and the fox would also 
attain it ; if liberation is attained by tearing off of hairs, 
the hips of young women would also attain it ; if liberation 
can be attained by merely putting on the feathers of the 

^ kojje virahia huaVaha homem 1 
akkhi uhavia dhumem II 

Dohakosa of Saraha-pifla (Dr. P. C. Bagehi’s Edition). 
airiehim uddulia cchare 1 
alsasa vahia-e jadabharem II 
gharaht Vaisl diva jail 1 
konahim Vainl ghanda call li 
akkbi nivesl asana vandhl I 
kannehim khuaukhusai jana dhandhl II 
^ mundfti maaiko'paVasikj yo -Com. 


Ibid. 



OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


64 , 

peacock, then the peacock and the deer should themselves 
attain liberation ; if the eating of grass ensure liberation, why 
should not elephants and horses be liberated ? ” ^ The 
Celias, the Bhiksus and the Sthaviras (i.e., the elders) 
take the vow of pravrajyd (r.e., renouncing the world and 
going away in search of truth) ; some of them are lost 
in explaining the Sutras, some again in strenuous 
thinking and reading. Others again rush into 

the Mahayana fold, — but none of them get at the 
ultimate truth. The Lord (Buddha) has prescribed ways 
according to the capacities of his disciples, but can one 
attain liberation only by meditation? What will one do 
with lamps, offerings. Mantras and services, — what is the 
good of going to holy places or to the hermitage? — can 
liberation be attained only by bathing in holy waters? Tear off 
all these irrational ties of superstition, drive away all doubt, 
— no mok,sa (liberation) can be compared with Sahaja, — and 
all kinds of liberation are included in Sahaja. Sahaja is 
what is read, what is gauged, what is explained in the 
scriptures and the Puranas. Saraha says, “ The world is 
bound to existence by all kinds of nonsense, — the childish 
Yogins like the Tirthikas and others can never find out their 
own nature ; they lead the life of Pravrajyd without knowing 
the truth at all. One has no need of Tantra or Mantra, or of the 
images or the Dharanis — all these are causes of confusion. In 
vain does one try to attain Moksa by meditation,^ — by medita- 
tion one will only be entangled in snares. Through self-conceit 

^ jai nagga via hoi muiii ta sunaha sialaha ! 

lomupadanem atthi siddhi ia juVai niamvaha II 
picchigahane dif^ha mokkha {ta mot aha camoraha) 1 
ucchem hhoanem hoi jana ta koriha turahgaha II 

Ibid. 

® The commentary explains cella as daia-^ik^a padl, as kpti iih^a pad\ 

and sihavira as daia-varso-papannah. 

mokhba hi labhhai jjhanaApa)vi\tho I Ibid. 

^ This jhana (i.e., dhyana) seems to refer to the system of meditation as 
promulgated in the scholastic texts like the Vi»uddhi-magga, etc. 



RELIGIOUS OUTt^OOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


65 


the truth is never psrceived, — ^but the blame is often put 
wrongly on the yanas (i.e., the ways or schools for attaining 
bodhi). All are hypnotised by the system of the jhdnas 
(meditation), but none cares to realise his own self J This 
is the truth which Saraha preaches, — never does he care for 
any Tantra or Mantra,'^ 

Lui-pa says in a song, — “ Of what consequence are all the 
processes of meditation? Inspite of them you have to die 
in weal and woe. Take leave of all the elaborate practices of 
Yogic bandha (control) and false hops for the deceptive super- 
natural gifts, and accept the side of Sonyata to be your 
own.”* Of what use are Mantras, Tantras and the 
explanation of the different kinds of meditation?”^ 
Kanha-pada says in another place that the Sahaja DombT' 
sells the loom {tanti) and bamboo-baskets* (as is the general 
custom with the women of the Doma classes). The 
wprd (tanti) which is derived from the Sanskrit 
word itantri) suggests the net-work of the false mental 
construction which, again, can very well be compared 
to the loom, the only business of which is to weave ; 
and the basket, referred to here, is symbolical of the 
superstitious mental complexes. Kanha-pada explains 
elsewhere that conventional practices and the outward 

' ahimana-dosem na lakkhiu tattva I 

tena dusai saala janu so daita il 
jhanem mohia saala vi loa I 
nia svahava nau lakkhoi koa W 

Saraha*s Dohakosa. 
eva mane muni sarahem gahiu I 
ianta manta nau ekkovi cahiu II 
Ihid. 

Song No. 1. 

^ kinto mante ^tnto tante re jhana-hakhanc I 

Song No. 34. 

The conception of the Dombi or Sahaja-damsel will be explained later on. 

• tanti bikanaya domvt avara na camgeda I 

Song No. 10. 


9-I41IB 



66 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


g^krInent do not really make a man a Kapalika Yogin. A real 
Kapslika ia he who shakes off all conventionalism and realises 
the great bliss of the nature of the Bodhi-citta {^am maha-sukham 
samvrti-hodhi-cittam palayati'ti J^apalil^ah — com). The Yogin 
Kanha says that his nerves are fully under his control and the 
damaru of the spontaneous sound ’ is rising tremendous- 
ly. Kanha, the Kapalika Yogin, is engaged in his yogic 
practices and is roaming about in the city of his body in a 
non-dual form. “ The a/i and the /fa/i**, i.e., the principles 
of all kinds of duality are made the bell and the anklets ; 
and the sun and the moon (i.e., Upaya and Prajfia) have 
been made the ear-rings.^ The poet has burnt into 
ashes all his passions, haired and false attachment and 
is rubbing his body with the ashes therefrom ; he is 
wearing the pearl-necklace of final salvation. Again, for his 
Tantric Sadhana, which requires a female companion, the 
poet has the Sahaja-damsel as his female consort. The 
Yogin says that he has killed the mother-in-law of breath 
(sdsu)'\ and done away with the sister-in-law {namnda) of 
his consort, which is the senses, *’ and has also put to deatfj 


^ The text has anaha damaru. The word anaha refers to the anahata 
(literally, unobstructed ; spontaneous) sound. It is held in the texts on Yoga that 
when all the senses are shut up and the nerves controlled and the breatli suspended 
through a yogic process, there arises a spontaneous sound within, which is known as 
the anahata dhvani. For this theory of sound see Introduction to Tantric 
Buddhism by the present writer. Beating of the drums is one of the customs of 
many sects of Yogins and ascetics. 

^ To roam about in different localities, generally in forests, lonely out-skirts of 
villages and in cremation grounds is a custom with the KSpSlika Yogins. 

^ For a detailed discussion on the meaning of the pair of words ali ani 
kali see infra and also Introduction to Tantric Buddhism by the present writer. 

^ Some sects of Yogins bear bells, anklets, ear-rings and such other ornaments 

6 There is a pun on the word sdsu here wh’ch may be associated with both 
Sk. ivairu (==the mother-in-law) and with Sk. ivSsa breath). 

C Again there is a pun on the word nananda which may mean the sister-in- 
law of a woman, or it may mean that which gives pleasMre, i.e., th<* senses, 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 67 

his mother (mda) of illusion (mdya)/ and thus Kanha has 
become a real Kapalika.^ 

It is interesting to note here that the Jaina Apabhramsa 
Dohas which seem historically to synchro- 
nise with the Buddhist songs and 
Dohas, are also strikingly similar in spirit 
as well as in form to the Buddhist songs and Dohas. The 
spirit is well exemplified in the collection of Dohas 
called Pahxida’doha of Muni Rama-simha (1000 A.D.).'' 
There it is said, — “O the Pundit of Pundits, you are 
leaving aside the grains of corn and gathering husk instead. 
You are satisfied with the scriptures and their meaning, but 
O ye foolish people — you know nothing about the ultimate 
meaning of the world. Those who are proud of their 
knowledge of bombastic words do not know the raison 
d etre of things and like a Doma of a very low origin 
is always at the mercy of others. O fools, what is the utility 
of reading much? A single flame of real knowledge is 
sufficient to burn within a moment all virtue and vice. 
Everyone is impatiently eager to be a perfect man, — but 


^ The word used is mda which may be associated with both the words maid 
imother) and may d tillusion). 

^ nadi 6aktt didha dharia kha\ie I 
anahd damaru bdjai vtranade II 
kahna kopdh yogi paiiho acdre I 
deha naari biharai e/^a^arem I) 
dli koli ghanid neura carane I 
ravi-iaii k^ndala kiu dbharane l( 
rdga de^a moha Idia chdra I 
parama mokha lavae muttdhdra II 
maria idsu nananda ghare idli I 
mda maria kohna bhaia kovdlt II Song No. II 

As verses from this work arc quoted by Hemacandra who wrote about 1000 
A.D., and as it quotes verses from Ssvaya dhamma dohfi which was composed about 
933 A D. the present work may be taken to have been produced about 1000 A.D,” 
Preface to the Pahuda-doha by the editor of the text, Hiralal Jain. Ambfidisa 
Gavare Digambara jaina Granthamala, No. 3. 



68 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


perfection can be attained only through the purity of heart. ^ 
Much has been read, but foolishness has not been removed, — 
only the throat has been parched into the bargain. Read a 
single letter through which alone you may be able to go to the 
city of supreme goodness. ^ Caught up in the meshes of the 
six systems of philosophy the mind finds no way of getting 
rid of illusion. The one God is divided in six ways in 
the six systems, and hence none attains Moksa or liberation 
through them. What can one do with the letters which 
will shortly die with the times? That is, O fool, called Moksa 
by which a man becomes changeless (ana^^^haru).'* What good 
can the reading of books render to a man whose mind is not 
pure? Even the hunter, when hunting a deer bows his head 
down before the deer (for throwing his arrow). (The idea 
is that actions have no objective value in the religious 
sphere, — the value is always subjective). You are getting 
emaciated by reading books of many kinds, — but even now 
you have no access to the mystery of coming and going.’' ’ 
About going on pilgrimage or wandering in forests 
and on mountains it is said, — “ Prevent this elephant 
of the mind from going to the mountain of Vindhya, — 
for it will trample under feet the forest of Sila (i e., good 
conduct of discipline) and once more fall into the pitfall 
of the world. There are stone-images in the temples, 
water in the sacred places and poetry in the books; 
all these will but be fuel to the fire (of decay) Of no 
avail is travelling from one sacred place to another ; for the 
body may be cleansed with water, but what about the mind? 
When the body is being washed with water, the mind is 
being made dirty with the filth of sin, which cannot be 

^ Pahuda-doha, verses (SS'-SS). 

2 /bid., verse 97. 

^ /bid. , verse 1 16. 

^im kwai hahu akhhcLraham je k.hau jamti 1 

jema anakkharu samtu muni lava vadha mokkku kahcrnti II /bid., verse 124. 

5 Ibid., verses 146, 173. 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAjlYAS 


69 


washed away with water. ’ What may penances do when 
there is impurity within? Hold fast your mind tP the 
Niranjana (the Stainless One) and only thereby will the stains 
of the mind be blotted out. Liberation can be attained only 
if the mind, stained with worldliness, be fixed on 
Niranjana, — the Mantras and the Tantras are of no use. ' 
The Jinas say, — ‘ Worship and worship;’ but if the self 
residing within one’s own body be once realised in its 
ultimate nature, who else remains to be worshipped?” ” 

Again, it is said about people who are particular 
about their religious garb. — “ The snake shakes off its 
slough, but its poison is not destroyed thereby. Putting on of 
religious dress can never remove the internal desire for worldly 
enjoyment. O, you, the head of all the shaven-headed, — 
you have indeed got your head shaven, — but you have not 
got your heart free from worldly desires ; — he who has 
shaven his heart, t.e., has made his heart free from desires, 
has indeed done away with this world of bondage. ” * 

The above will give us an idea of the spirit of Indian 
literature during the proto-vernacular period and the earliest 
period of the vernaculars. This spirit of heterodoxy and 
criticism that characterises the Buddhist and the Jaina songs 
and Dohas is a very noteworthy phenomenon in the 
history of the vernacular literatures of India ; for, here we 
find the inception of a new type of literature, which grew 
abundantly in many parts of India during the mediaeval 
period, and the type is not extinct even in modern times. 
This type of literature is generally known as Sahajiya or the 
Maramiya school of literature.' The Vaisnava Sahajiyas 

1 Ibid., Verses 155, I6I-I63, 178. 

2 Ibid., Verses 61. 62, 206. 

Vamdahu varpdahu jinu bhanai k.o varpdau halt itthu I 
niyadehaham vasamiayaham jai janiu paramaiihu II Ibid., Veres 41. 

' Ibid., Verses, 15. 135. Also C/. Verse 154. 

•'* The popular vernacular word maramiya comes from the Skt. word marma, 
which means the vital part or the very core of anything. The Maramiya school is 



70 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


of Bengal and the host of village poets roughly known 
under/ the general name of Baul belong directly to the same 
school of thought^ ; the Santa-poets of Northern and Upper 
India and the other devotional lyrists, the mystics of Maratha, 
and even the Sikh and Sufi poets belong to the same school 
of heterodoxy and criticism.' Thus we see that this type 
of literature has a continued history in the vernaculars from 
the earliest period down to the modern times. As we are 
now dealing elaborately with the early Sahajiyas and shall 
also deal later ori with different types of mediaeval Sahajiya 
literature we think it necessary here to discuss in detail the 
possible sources of the critical spirit of the various Sahajiya 
schools. The utility and relevancy of such an elaborate 
discussion on the point will be clearer, we hope, when the 
different mediaeval Sahajiya schools will be studied in the 
succeeding chapters and also in the appendix. 

(D) Possible Sources of the Spirit of Criticism of the 
Sahajiyas 

An analysis of and scrutiny into the nature of the spirit 
of these different Sahajiya schools of vernacular poetry will 
reveal the fact that much of their heterodoxy and criticism 
is a thing of heritage ; the ideas found in the vernaculars are 
but infiltrations from the older ideas found in the different 
lines of criticism in the history of Indian religious thought, 
and these infiltrated ideas have been variously emphasised 
and have received a new colour and tone from the vernacular 
poets. Older lines of criticism of different kinds have got 
blended in the critical and revolutionary spirit of the 
vernacular poetry, and, therefore to make a critical study 


thus the school that deals with the vital part cr the inner truth of religion to the 
exclusion of the formalities and outward shows. 

* Vide injra. Chs. V., VII. 

2 Vide injra. Appendix (A). ' 



RELIGIOUS OUtIoOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


71 


of it, it is necessary to make a general survey of the 
different lines of heterodoxy that have moulded the religious 
history of India in the different periods of its evolution. 

The earliest trace of heterodoxy and criticism in the history 
of Indian religious thought is to be found in the Aranyakas 
and the Upanisads. In its practical aspect the religion of 
the Samhitas and the Brahmanas was pre-eminently sacrificial 
with innumerable accessories of chants, ceremonies and 
rituals. Though the sacrifices were generally made to some 
particular god or gods they were nothing of the kind of an 
attempt at establishing any sort of personal contact between 
the god or gods in question and the sacrificer. The desired 
effect of the sacrifice does not depend on the will of the 
god to whom the sacrifice is offered, — it depends absolutely 
on the rigorous correctilude of the sacrificial method in all 
the minutest details. But when we pass on from the 
Samhitas and the Brahmanas to the Aranyakas and the 
, Upanisads we find a remarkable change 

The gpirit cf the . ’ _ ^ 

Aranyakas and the in the fundamental religious spirit. In 
the hymns and ritualistic and sacrificial 
net-work of the Sarnhitas we do not find any unified idea 
of the Brahman or the Supreme Being, though, however, we 
often find a tendency towards monotheism. In fome of the 
Brahmanas we first have, in a rudimentary foim, the con- 
ception of the Brahman as the ultimate principle and the 

E olution of the reality and the conception was 

conception of Brahman established in the Aranyakas and the Upa- 

and the stress on Brah- . , w;* i i i 1* l f l 

ma-realisation or self- nlsads . With the establishment or the 

realisation. * . r i n i i 1* * r 

conception or the Biahman the religion or 
the Aranyakas and the Upanisads was no longer the objective 
and deterministic religion of ritualism and sacrifice, — all 
these are made subordinate to the final end of self-realisation 
or Brahma-realisation. In the Aranyakas and the Upanisads 
ritualism and sacrifice began to be replaced by meditation, 
and the spirit of sacrifice sometimes began to have a 



72 


OBSCURE REL GIOUS CULTS 


philosophic interpretation.’ When we find Maitreyi, wife of 
the famous seer Yajnavalkya, exclaiming, — “What shall 1 
do with that, which will not make me immortal we dis- 

cover the key-note of the Upanisadic thought, a hankering, 
not after any mundane happiness and prosperity, — nor after 
any enjoyment of bliss in heaven,— but after the realisation of 
the self which is of the nature of the Brahman. It has been 
said that those who know the self or the Brahman and seek 
for truth reach the region of the Brahman 
subservient to Brahma- wherefrom they nevei turn back; but 

knowledge or self- , , . , - • i i 

knowledge. those who acquire better -regions through 

sacrifice or gift or penances roam about 
from this region to that and constantly suffer under the 
whirl of coming and going. ^ It is neither by the 
making of sacrifices, nor by hearing and memorising 
the Vedas that one can realise the Brahman or the supreme 
truth, it is only through the absolute purification of heart, — 
through the removal of the veil of ignorance that one can 
realise the self or the ultimate truth. Thus we see that the 
whole emphasis of the Upanisads is on 

Stress on the sub- i l • .* • i r t • 1*1 

jective side of religion, the sub]ective Side ot religion, which 

seems to be conspicuous by its absence in 

the Sarnhitas and the Brahmanas. The Upanisads discourage 

much reading, erudition and discursive reason and also 

sacrifices, ritual and worship of the gods ; — they on the 

other hand emphasise absolute purification of heart ; for, it is 

in the absolutely purified and mirror-like heart that the 

supreme truth reflects itself in its illuminating and blissful 

effulgence. 

' Thus the Brhad-aranyaka begins with a new conception of the horse of the 
Horse-sacrifice. There it is said that dawn is the head of the horse, the sun is his eye, 
wind his breath, heaven the back and the intermediate space between heaven and 
earth the belly; the quarters are the sides, the season.s the limbs, the stars the bones 
and the sky his flesh. To mediate on such a horse and to realise the truth of this 
horse is the real meaning of the Horse-sacrifice. 

2 /bid.,;2.4). 

3 Bfhad-aranyaka. 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


73 


In the post-Upanisadic period a free spirit of religion, 
Post-Upanisadicv spirit leaning mainly to the subjective side, 
IwwX^'^Mahibhs’ characterises the early epic literature of 
India, particularly the Mahabharata, There 
are stories in the Mahabharata, where the teachings of true 
religion are being received from people belonging to the 

lowest class of the social order. In the AnusasaniJ^a-parva 
of the Mahabharata,' where Bhisma is explaining to 
Yudhisthira the really sacred places of pilgrimage, we 
find that the mind with the transparent water of purity 
and truth, when associated with the lake of patience, 
is the best of all places of pilgrimage. He, whose body 
is washed with water, cannot be said to be the really 
cleansed one; he, who has controlled all his senses, is the 
really cleansed one, and he is pure within as well as without. 
To dive into the water of the bliss of Brahma-knowledge in 
the lake of the pure heart is the best of all bathing, and it is 
only he, whom the wise recognise to be a real pilgrim. 

The Upanisadic spirit, however, is found in the post-Upa- 
The spirit of nisadic period bifurcated into the two main 
w^rds“ Pa"v'tmtasm. of teligious thought , viz . , Vedanta and 

Vaisnavism. The Sankarite and the post- 
Sankarite Vedantic schools cherished nothing but uncompro- 
mising antagonism towards the school of Purva-mimamsa, 
the staunchest advocate of the sacrificial religion of the 
Vedas. Even Ramanuja, the great exponent of Vaisnavism, 
tried to make a compromise between dharma-jijmsa and 
brahma-jijmsa and held that the former leads to the 
latter ; but Sankara stoutly denied this relation of succession 
between the two; for, he held that the nature and the ulti- 
mate end of the two are diametrically opposite to each other. 
While the aim of dhdrma-jijnasa is the attainment of 


1 Ch. 108. 


10-141 IB 



74 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


prosperity {ahhyudaya) in life and the attainment of heaven 
after death, the aim of brahma-jijiiasS is liberation (muljfi') > 
And while the function of the former is to induce one 
to perform various sacrificial and ritualistic duties, the 
function of the latter is only to induce one to know 
the Brahman, and to kf^ow the Brahman is to he the 
Brahman. A hankering after the knowledge of the 
Brahman presupposes no performance of scriptural duties, 
it follows rather from a discriminative knowledge of what is 
permanent and what is transitory [nitya-nitya-vastu-ViOeka)^ 
from absolute indifference to the pleasures of life here 
and hereafter, the capacity for internal and external control 
and a true desire for being liberated from the fetters 
of life. 

As the Mimamsakas go to the one extreme of saying 
that religion always involves some kind of activity, — the 
Vedantins go to the other extreme of saying that true 
religion involves no kind of activity whatsoever. The aim of 
all activities is to produce some sort of effect, — but Brahma- 
knowledge cannot be the effect of any activity ; it is already 
there, and it is there for all time ; it is, however, veiled 
by our ignorance — by the world-illusion ; — the function of 
the true knowledge of the scriptures is to remove this veil 
of ignorance from our mind, — and when this veil of the 
world-illusion is removed Brahma-knowledge will dawn 
upon us instantaneously and spontaneously. Brahma- 
knowledge is not something attainable through human 
effort, — it is rather self-revealed. Brahma-knowledge is 
not even a mental function, — for, a mental function pre- 
sup(>oses the fact that the agent has the power to do or undo 
it according to his own will, — but we have no such power in 
the case of Brahma-knowledge Moreover, as we have noticed 
before, to know the Brahman is nothing but to be the 
Brahman, and knowing and being being identical here, no 
action is implied even in the knowing. 



RELIGIOUS OUtLOOK OF IHE SAHAJIYAS 


73 


The VaisiMvas, however, represent the spirit of hetero- 
doxy in another way. While the whole 
ism** emphasis of the Vedantins is on pure 

knowledge, the emphasis of the Vai§navas 
is on devotion or love. The Vaisnavas always speak very 
indifferently of heaven and the enjoyment of happiness 
there, — they discourage even the idea of liberation, — 
what they want is the blissful realisation of the eternal 
love of God. ft is necessary to remark here that this 
cult of devotion or love was not and is not limited strictly 
to the sphere of Vaisnavism, — we have already referred 
to the Saivite devotional cult of South India, and even in the 
Sakta cult of later days (we may mention here the 
exquisite songs of Rama-prasada Sen and others of his 
time) we find traces of pure devotion and love. But in 
Northern India and in ELastern India this devotional cult 
flourished mostly along the line of Vaisnavism and they 
are commonly taken to be identical. 

The innovation made by the Vaisnavas (and all devo- 
^ ", tional cults in general) is the introduction of 

C^uestion of divine 

mercy— a break in the the element of divine mcicy within the 
law of Karma. , .... e , % f i/' 

deterministic view ot the law oi Karma. 
Germs of the law of Karma can be traced to the ritualistic 


and sacrificial religious thought of the Vedas, and it is a 
particularly noticeable fact that practically all the systems 
of Indian thought accept this theory in some form or other. 
We have seen that the Samhitas and the Brahmans leave no 
scope for the interference of the gods in the matter of the 
fruition of the rites, rituals and sacrifices. But already in the 
Upani^dic p>eriod we come across a statement like this, — 
“ This self or soul (afmd) can never be realised through 
great sayings, — neither by memorising" (the scriptures) 
nor by listening to the scriptures; it is only by him, to 
whom it reveals itself of its own accord, that it can be 
realised, and to him this soul or self reveals its real 



76 


obscure RELlClOUS CULTS 


form.”' Herein we find germs of the predominance 
of the divine will, which reigns supreme over all 
human efforts, and herein comes the question of divine 
mercy. Along this line developed the theory of divine mercy 
of all the devotional cults, and the only religious duty lelt, 
therefore, to the followers of these schools, was unconditional 
self -resignation to the divine will. 

Up to the eighth and ninth centuries A.D. the domina- 
ting feature of Vaisnavism was this spirit 
self-resignation and seeking the haven of 
|.he infinite mercy of God. This very 
spirit indicates that the elaborate system of religious duties, 
customs, rituals and ceremonies — strict rules for food and 
dress could find no prominence in the Vaisnava school ; when- 
ever they were adopted they were adopted with the purpose 
of preparing a mental atmosphere favourable to the growth 
and development of the spirit of devotion and self -surrender. 
Already in the Bhdgavata Purdna we find elements of 
pure love spoken of as the best and highest method 
through which the direct communion with God becomes 
possible. There the uncultured rustic cowherd girls of 
Brndavana are regarded as the best of all religious people 
for their most sincere and passionate love for Srikrsna, the 
perfect incarnation of God. Devotion (bhal^ti) in later times 
was classified under two heads, Viz,, vaidhi bhakHf Le., 
devotion that arises through the performance of religious 
duties, observance of vows and rites, and strict obedience 
to the rules and regulations laid down in Vaisnava theology ; 

and the other kind of devotion is called 
passl’onate love.' rdganuga hhakli, i.e., passionate devo- 

tion, — or love for God that depends on 
no extraneous caus:, — it is love absolutely for love’s sake. 
The former kind of devotion has aWays been spoken of as 


I Katha{\.2.22.). 



RELIGIOUS OUILOOR OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


77 


being much inferior to the latter and as such the former is 
never recognised as devotion proper. This exclusive stress on 
love has naturally minimised to a considerable extent all the 
formalities, conventionalism and ceremonialism in religion. 
Even a man of the lowest origin, such, for example, as 
a Candala, in spite of being a riteless untouchable, has been 
acclaimed as being much superior to the twice-born (Brahmin), 
by being merely a sincere lover of God ; on the other hand, a 
caste Brahmin, inspite of his loyalty to the rites, customs and 
duties of Brahminic life minus his sincerity of love, has 
been emphatically declared to be inferior to a Ca^idala, — 
and this really represents the true spirit of Vaisnavism. 

Again, the Yoga-school of Indian thought has a religious 

, , ^ perspective of its own, and its emphasis 

Idealism or Yoga * 

and the stress on the is exclusively on the subjective side of 

subjective side. ™ in f i • 

religion. 1 hough all sorts or occultism 
and necromancy prevailed and still now prevail within 
the school of Hatha-yoga, and though with a large number 
of Indian Yogins Hatha-yoga has become a science of 
physical feats, serenity prevails within the school of Yoga 
proper. As a philosophical system Yoga represents a 
purely idealistic view and it is the mind in all its states 
and processes that has been held responsible for the whirl 
of birth and death and consequent sufferings. Religion, 
according to Yoga, consists in the final arrest of the slates and 
processes of the mind, and the final arrest of the mind means 
the final arrest of the flux of coming and going and that is 
the state of final liberation. Yogic Sadhana, therefore, 
consists essentially in a process of psychological discipline 
against a moral background. It is evident from the very 
nature of Yoga proper that it leaves no scope for idolatry, 
ritualism and ceremonialism. The dominant trend of Indian 
thought is idealism ; it is the mind with all its principles of 
defilement that has been held responsible for the world- 
process. It is for this reason that in practical SadhanS 



OBSCURE Religious cults 


;8 

elements of Yoga have been adopted in almost all the practical 
systems of Indian religion ; — even Vaisnavism with all its 
love-theories is no exception. In the critical spirit of the 
old and mediaeval vernacular poets we shall find this spirit 
of Yoga acting strongly in unison with the spirit of the other 
heterodox systems. 

Inspite of their heterogeneous practices, ritualism and 
ceremonialism the Tantric schools (both 
Hindu and Buddhistic) breathe throughout 
a spirit of revolt against the orthodox 
schools, — the Hindu Tantras having the same apathy towards 
the caste-religion or Varnasrama-dharma ■ of the Brahminic 
people as the Buddhist Tantras have against monasticism. 
We have already seen that the main emphasis of the Tantrikas 
is on the practical side of religion, and naturally they 
discouraged much reading and erudite scholarship, either 
philosophical or scriptural. The stress of Tantra proper was 
on Yoga, where discursive knowledge is of little avail. As 
for the other practices of Tantra, good or bad, their un- 
conventional nature is palpable, and to have these uncon- 
ventional practices recognised as purely religious practices 
the Tantras had to decry strongly the conventional practices 
of both Brahminism and Buddhism. Because of the 
extremely unconventional nature of the practices, the Tantrikas 
had to launch the bitterest attack on the commonly accepted 
practices and religious views of the orthodox systems. The 
importance of this critical and revolutionary spirit of the 
Tantras lies in the fact that the earliest literature of our 
language (we mean the songs of the Sahajiya Buddhists) 
inherited much of its spirit of revolt and criticism directly 
from the Buddhist Tantras. 

It will be noticed that the above critics of orthodox 

Heterodoxy of the Brahminism were all iheists ; but (he severest 
early atheistic schools. attgcJj Came from the atheists of whom the 

C^v^as, the Jainas and the Buddhists deserve mention here.. 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


79 


Already in the Upanisads we find mention of schools of 
naturalism which recognised no ultimate conscious Being as the 
author of the universe, but thought of the world-process as a 
product of the course of nature. The materialists are generally 
spoken of in early texts as the Lokayata school or the school 
which admits the truth only of the visible world. In early Pali 
texts we find mention of many pre-Buddhistic heretical ascetics, 
of whom mention may be made of Sanjaya, (he sceptic, 
Ajita Kesakambalin, the materialist, Purana-kasyapa, the 
ipdifferentist, Maskarin Golala, the wandering ascetic, and 
Kakuda Katyayana.’ The Carvaka school of thought deserves 
special mention here. The Carvakas were not believers in 
any kind of divinity, — the whole world-process including 
the psychosis, has been explained by them as the creation of 
matter. Let a man be happy so long as he lives ; — life is 
short and none can escape the jaws of death ; and if once this 
body is burnt to ashes there is no returning back let one, 
therefore, eat, drink and be merry. The Carvakas strongly 
defied the authority of the scriptures. It has been said that 
religion is nothing but a device of the cunning priests for 
earning livelihood as they have no other resources. It is 
said, — -“There is no heaven, no emancipation, no soul, — 
nothing belonging to the after- world, — never are the duties, 
prescribed according to the castes and the different stages of 
life, capable of producing any effect. All fire-sacrifices, the 
three Vedas, the ascetic practice of holding three sticks 
(bound together), the practice of rubbing the body with 
ashes — ^are inventions of stupid and cowardish people for the 
earning of their livelihood.” “ It has been further said, — 
“If it be true that an animal, when killed in the 
Jyotistoma-sacrifice goes to heaven, — why then should not 


^ See A Hittory of Pre "Buddhistic Indian Philosophy by Dr. B. M. Barua, 
M.A., D.Lit. 

2 SarVa-dariana-samgraha (Govt. Oriental (Hindir) Series), Vol. I, p, 12, 

3 /bid., p. 13, 



80 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


tWe sacridcer kill his own father in the sacrifice ? If 
the funeral rite of offering food, drink and other gifts to the 
dep^urted may produce satisfaction in them, then the supply 
of oil to an extinct lamp should also increase its flames. 
Utterly futile is the contemplation of providing food 
for those who have departed this life. — for, had there 
been any truth in this practice, one might have had his 
satisfaction on his way while gifts were being offered to him 
in his house. If those who are in heaven can be satisfied 
by offering of gifts here on earth, then why should not 
offerings be placed on the lower floor of the house for the 
satistaclion of those who are above the roof ? ” ’ It is there- 
fore strongly recommended that one should live joyously 
as long as one lives, — one should borrow money to procure 
butter; — if body be once burnt to ashes, it can never 
return. If after dissociating himself from this particular 
body a man goes to a different region, why should not he 
come back many times again through his deep affection for 
the relatives ? So, all these are meaningless talks having abso- 
lutely no reality behind. It stands obvious that the Brahmins 
invented all the funeral rites only to find out a source 
for their livelihood — they have got absolutely no other justi- 
fication. Those are hypocritical, cunning and demonic 
people, who have composed all the Vedas, — and it is really 
strange that meaningless mutterings like jarbhari, turpharl, 
etc., are said to be the sayings of learned Pundits. 
The obscene practice that the wife of the sacrificer should 
hold the penis of the horse in the horse-sacrifice and all such 

’ Sarva-darsana-samgraha Govt. Oriental (Hindfu] Series), Vol. I, pp. 13-14. 

It is interesling lo note here some of the verses of the Vimu-purana whi> h 
breathe exactly the same spirit. 

nihatasya paior yajhe svarga-praptir yadi'syate 1 
sva-pHa yajamanena iada na nihanyaie II 
trptaye jayate purnso bhuktam anyena cet tatah I 
dadyac chraddharn sramayannam na vaheyuh pravaainah II 

{Vimu-^purana, 3.18.85, quoted in the commentary on ihe Sarva-dar^ana-aarrt’ 
^raha, p. J3) . 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


81 


are 

atheists but not anti- 
religious — Jainism and 
Buddhism. 


other practices are prescribed by base hypocrites, and all the 
injunctions in the Vedas regarding the eating of meat are the 
sayings of none but the goblins and the demons, who are 
particularly fond of meat.' 

The Buddhists and the Jainas, though atheists, were not 
Schools that are anli-religious like the Carvakas. From the 
plane of time-honoured customs, of sacri- 
ficial rituals and ceremonies the ground of 
religion was shifted to a humanitarian plane and the ethical 
aspect of religion received a great emphasis. Notwithstanding 
all the differences in metaphysical and theological view-points 
Buddhism and Jainism had a common front to push in their 
defiance against the authority of the Vedas, in their absolute 
denial of any ultimate reality in the form of any Supreme 
Being, in their emphasis on the cardinal ethical virtues, — 
particularly on the principle of non-violence. As we have 
hinted, Jainism viewed religion from a distinctly different 
perspective from that of the Upanisadic or the other 
Brahminical schools. The ultimate aim is 
spective of jainism. salvation (mo^^sa), — which can only be 
attained by the eradication of the Karmas 
which stick to the soul like dust particles to a body besmeared 
with oil, and thus bind the soul to this world of suffer- 
ings. This inrush of Karma is to be stopped by various 
kinds of control (samvara) and nirjard or the purging 
off of the Karmas from the soul. The controls are generally 
the vows of non-injury, truthfulness, abstinence from steal- 
ing, sex-control, non-acceptance of the objects of desire, 
gentle and holy talk, full control over body, speech and mind, 
habits of forgiveness, humility, penance, meditation on the 
real nature of the world and man, and principles of right 
conduct (caritra). Ahimsd or non- injury is regarded as the 
highest virtue in Jainism as well as in Buddhism, and in their 


* SarVa-darsana-samgraha (Govt. Oriental (Hindu] Seiies)* Vol, I, p. 15. 
Il-HIIB 



82 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


practical religious conduct the Jains take the greatest pre- 
caution to avoid the slightest injury to the smallest of insects.’ 

The rudest shock to orthodox Brahminism came from the 
Buddhists who brought about a revolution not only in the 
religious sphere, but also in the sphere of 
Buddhism.***"^' philosophical thought. The truth, which 
iSakyasitnha realised through his great 
renunciation and profound meditation and by the realisation 
of which he became the Buddha or the perfectly enlightened 
one is the truth of pratUya-samutpada or dependent origination 
which presents an entirely new perspective in the field of 
philosophy. The fundamental notions of causality, substance, 
time and space underwent complete change and the general 
tendency of all logical and metaphysical enquiries was directed 
not towards any thesis but towards contradicting all kinds of 
thesis of the established schools. From the religious side, 
the authority of the Vedas was openly challenged and the 
efficacy of the rituals and sacrifices was stoutly denied. 
Moreover the inhuman cruelties inflicted on the beasts in the 
different kinds of sacrifices was severely condemned.’ The 
existence of any ultimate reality, at least in the form of the 
Supreme Being, was denied or at least strict silence was 
maintained on all such ontological points : the summum 
bonum of life was declared to be the final liberation from 

^ It is to be noticed that orthodox Jainism like other dogmatic schools incorpora- 
ted various dogmatic beliefs like the self-revealing eternal nature of jainism as a 
religion, the godhood of the Tirthankaras and many others of this nature ; and a 
fighting within Jainism itself began betwreen the two main sects, viz., the SvetSmbaras 
h‘.e., wearers of white cloth J and the Digambaras (i.e., the naked). The peculiar 
beliefs of the Digambaras are that the Tlrthaiikaras live without food, that a monk, 
possessing pioperty and wearing clothes, cannot attain liberation and that no woman is 
entitled to liberation. The Jaina monks generally bear clothes of a blanket, an alms- 
bowl, a stick, a broom to sweep the ground, a piece of cloth to cover his mouth lest 
any insect may enter it by chance. The Digambaras bear a similar outfit, but they 
always remain naked and carry biooms of peacock’s feather or long hairs of the tail 
of animals {camara\ The monks have their head shaven; there is often the custom 
of plucking the hair out and this plucking of the hair is sometimes regarded as a 
cardinal religious practice. 



RELIGIOUS OUILOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


83 


this life of suffering by a strict code of moral discipline 
and this was declared to be the true meaning of religion. 
Thus the sacrificial religion of the Vedas was replaced 
by the Buddhists by the principles of moral virtues and 
good conduct (si/dcora).' Leaving aside the innovations 
of later Mahayana Buddhism or Tantric Buddhism where 
Buddhism developed innumerable gods and goddesses and 
the paraphernalia of worship, partly as a reaction against the 
negativistic regorism, partly through the influence of Hindu 
idolatry, and mainly through the influence of indigenous 
religious cults or such other cults of the neighbouring 
localities, Buddhism denied godhood unreservedly and even 
the existence of any supreme creator of the universe (c/. the 
Brahminic conception of Brahma, the creator of the universe) 
as no positive evidence of any such being can ever be 
demonstrated. The spirit of monastic Buddhism on this 
point is best illustrated in the T evijja Suita of the Dlgha-nikoya 
where the belief in the existence of Brahma and the belief in 
the Brahminical religious systems have been compared to the 
funny belief of a foolish man in the existence of some 
beautiful girl somewhere and his wish to enjoy her 
without knowing absolutely anything about her and her 
whereabouts. 

The Buddhists were strongly opposed to the caste-system 
and the Varnaaama religion of the caste Hindus. A 
great campaign against the caste-system is found in the 
Vajra-suci of Asvaghosa where the author tried to prove 
on the basis of the evidences found in the Vedic literature 
and the standard Brahminical texts like the Manu-samhita, 
the Mahabharata, etc., that the Brahmins as a class can never 


Cf. nindasi yajna-vidher ahaha iruti-jatam 
sadaya-hrdaya-dariita-paiu-ghatam | 
keiava dhrta~huddha~sarira 
)ayu jagadUa hare II 
GUa-goi?m<Ja of Jayadeva , \ 3 ). 



84 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


be superior to the other castes and that the superiority or the 
inferiority of man can never be determined by the accidental 
fact of birth. The orthodoxy and conventionalism of the 
Sramanas and the Brahmanas ^ were constantly criticised by 
the Buddhists, Whenever and wherever we find mention of 
the Sramanas and the Brahmanas we find them as representing 
the mistaken or distorted spirit of religion as contrasted to the 
true spirit of religion represented by the well-disciplined and 
perfectly enlightened Buddhists. ‘ Without entering into the 
details, let us give here a few specimen of criticism that were 
levelled by the Buddhists against these orthodox sects. A 
good specimen of popular criticism is to be found in the 
Vatthupama-sutta where Buddha preached to the audience 
that a man can be said to have bathed only when he has 
become pure in heart.^ At this a Brahmin from among the 
audience asked Buddha, — “Does your Holiness go to the 
Bahuka river to bathe?" The Lord replied, — “What’s the 
need of going to the Bahuka river, — what may it doP" The 
Brahmin said, — “O Gautama, the river Bahuka is known to 
many and recognised by many as associated with Moksa and 
virtue and as rendering liberation and destroying sin ; many 
people wash away their sin of past deeds in the river Bahuka’ ’ . 
Then the Lord addressed the following verse — “Indeed there 
are (sacred) rivers like the Bahuka, Adhikakka, Gaya, 


• It should be noted here that wherever we find criticism of the Buddhists against 
the Brahmins in the Pali texts (and we come across such criticism veiy frequently) 
we find mention of the Sramanas as one of the ancient orthodox sects along 
with the Brahmanical sect. These Sramanas seem to be an oiihcdox ^ect of ascetics 
who were somewhat akin to the Buddhists in their insistence on the misery and 
sufferings of Samsara, in the emphasis on compassion and Ahiipsa and in their dis- 
regard of caste system. But it seems, they were somewhat dogmatic in view and 
formality prevailed in their asceticism which made them target of criticism from the 
monastic Buddhists. In this connection see an article by Winternitz in the journal 
Indian Culture (Vol. I, No. 2) ‘Jainas in Indian Literature.’ 

2 Cf. pagadha ettha na diasanii eke aamana-hahmana I 

tarp iu deaam na jananti yena gacchanti subbata II Padhana-autia. 

^ ayam vuccati hhikkhu aindlo aniarena aindnena. 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 85 

Sundarika, Sarasvati, Prayaga and the Bahumati ; there the 
fool, the evil-doers take their bath everyday ; but surely they 
are not purified thereby What will the Sundarika doP 
What can the Prayaga and the Bahuka do P He who does 
harm to living beings and who is the doer of all evil deeds, 
is never purified by (the water of) these rivers. ^ Another 
instance of the criticism of the same nature can be cited from 
the dialogue between the nun Punnika and a Brahmin in the 
Theri-gdtha. Punnika asks the Brahmin, who was bathing 
early in the morning in an extremely cold weather, 1 
indeed used to plunge into water in cold weather with a view 
to bring water, — but that was only out of fear of punishment 
or rebuke from the ladies I serve ; but of whom are you so 
much afraid, O Brahmana, that you plunge into water and bear 
extreme cold with a shivering body?” “The reason is known 
to you”, — replied the Brahmin, — “ why then this question ? 

1 acquire virtue and destroy the effect of my evil deeds (by 
bathing). .Whoever performs evil deeds, whether an old 
man or young, will escape the fruition of such evil acts by 
taking bath in holy water.” Who is the fool of fools 
asked Punnika “that has instructed you that the effects of 
evil-deeds can be washed away by bathing in the water ? 
Had it been the fact, all frogs and tortoises and snakes and 
porpoises and other aquatic creatures would certainly have 
gone to heaven. Should all sheep, boar, fish hunters, thieves 
and murderers and other evil-doers be liberated from all evil 
deeds by their bathing in water? If this river should wash 
away all the sins you have accumulated by your former evil 
deeds, she should wash away all your merits too;— but what 


hahukam adhikakkofi ca gayam iundarikam api 

saiasvaiim prayagan ca atha bahumaliin nadim II 

niccam pi halo bakkhanno kanha-kammo na sajjhaU 

kirn sunclaiika hrissaii, him payaga, feim bahuka nadt 11 

verim katakihhUam naroip no hi nam sodhaye papakamminam 1 



86 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


shbuld remain then? You do not care to cast away that 
{/.e., evil deeds) through the fear of which you are plunging 
every day into water, — the effects of evil deeds will never 
be washed away by cold water.”’ The nun then adds that 
if a man is really conscious of the direful effects of the 
evil deeds and if sin has become something repulsive to 
him, let him not try to flee from sin or to wash 
away his sin in water, let him take refuge in the Buddha 
and adopt his creed and lead a life of discipline and 
righteousness. 

But though Buddhism first began with a freedom of thought 
and spirit of revolt against orthodoxy, orthodoxy in practi- 
cal religious life gradually crept into , Buddhism itself and the 
ethical regorism, strictness of rules and regulations, — austere 
practices of penance, vows and fastings prescribed for the 
monastic life again made the monks objects of criticism. ,We 
, have noticed before that a large section of 

iVlonastic orthodoxy 

and the revolt of the people with more liberal views, freedom of 
IVIdhaySnists 

philosophic thought and a generous outlook 
seceded from the orthodox body. But in course of time 
when Tantricism made its way in Buddhism, the Tantric 
School again revolted against both the monasticism and 
scholasticism of Hinayana Buddhism and the intellectual 
pedarUy^ of the Mahayanists; the Tantrikas advocated their 
esoteric practices which were held to be the surest and at the 


k.o nu mate idakk^iasi ajanatassa ajanaio j 
udokahhisecana nama pamuccati i! 

saj^’gam nuna gamissanti sahha‘mandu\a~k.acchQpd | 
ndgd ca susumdrd ca yc canne udakecard tl 
orahhhika sukorika macchika miga-handhaka j 
cord ca Vajjhaghatd'ca ye canne papa-kammino j 
udakahhisecand ic pi pdpa-k.ammd pamuccare II 
sace imd nadiyo ie pdpam pubbekotarn vaheyyum | 
punnam pi md vaheyyum tena ivam parivdhiro assa II 
yassa brdhmana tVam bhito sadd udakam atari | 
tarn eva brahme md k^si md te sltarn chavirn hane || 

Theri-gdthdt (xii, 240*244). 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


87 


same time the easiest way to liberation. In the Buddhist 

Revolt of Tantric Tantras we always find that austere 

Buddhism against both .* j • n* .• t • i* 

Hinayana and Mahs- practlCCS Bncl p6n3nC6S inillCting CilSCiplin- 

ary rigorism on body and mind can 

never conduce to the attainment of perfection ; perfect 
enlightenment must be attained through an easy process — 
through the enjoyment of the five objects of desire, and this 
is often spoken of as a short-cut for the attainment of Buddha- 
hood J So the hard rules of discipline, the practices of fast- 
ing, bathing, purifying the body and the mind through strict 
rules and regulations should all be avoided, ‘ and the most 
pleasant and easiest way of attaining perfection is 

through initiation in the tattva and the practice of yoga 
in company with the Prajna or the Sakti (i.e., the female 

counterpart). The austere penances and vows only make a 
man sorry, and make his face disfigured ; through this pain 
and sorrow the mind can never be expected to attain 
perfection.^ It is, therefore, enjoined, — ‘Do not cast away 
the five objects of desire ayid do not inflict strain on the body 
through penance; try to attain 'bodhf (z.e., perfect know- 
jedge) in a pleasant way by following the injunction of the 
science of esoteric yoga. ' It has been said in the Citta-visuddhi - 


^ sarva-k^mo-pahhogaii ca sevyamanair yathecchatah ! 
anena k.holu yogcna laghu huddhatvam apnuyat || 
duskarair niyamais tivraih sevyamano na siddhaii I 
sarva-kamo-pahhogais tu scvayam§ ca*^u siddhaii II 

$rl‘guhya-samaja, Ch. VII (G. O. Si. 

2 na kasta-kcdpanam k^ryat upavaso na ca kriyam I 

snanarn iaucam na caivatra grama-dharmam vivarjayet II 

Advaya^siddhi MS. (C.L.B. No. I3I24) pp. 35 (B).36 (A). 

This verse is also found in the CHta-vi$uddhi-prakarana, Verse No. 58. 

2 Vajra-dakadantra, quoted in the Catalogue of Sanskrit Buddhist MSS, J.R.S.B 
Vol. I, p. 105. This verse is quoted in the commentary of the Carya-pada, 
No. I, and is said to belong to the 3rlsamaja ; it is not, however, found in the .$r?- 
gahya-samaja-tantra published in the G.O.S. 

^ Paiica’kxamat Ch. I, MS. (B.N, Sans. No. 65, 66) p. I (A). This verse is 
quoted in the commentary of the Carya-pada (No. I)as belonging to the 
satnaja ; but it is not found in the text published in the G.O.S. 



88 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


pra^tarana of Aryadeva that bathing in the holy water of the 
Ganges is of no avail; for, if the water of the Ganges had 
the capacity of purifying man’s body, it would have the 
capacity of purifying the body even of a dog and the dog 
also would have been entitled to liberation by bathing in the 
Ganges. Again, there are fishermen who dive in the water 
of the Ganges, why should not they be liberated from the 
fetters of this world ? And there are fish in the water of the 
Ganges ; what prevents these poor creatures from attaining 
Moksa ? Moksa is never possible through going on pilgri- 
mage or bathing, it is to be attained. only through the purific- 
ation of mind, by purging it of all the blemishes of 
subjectivity and objectivity.^ 

But the fun is that though Tantricism condemned ortho- 
doxy in the strongest possible terms, it developed within its 
province the most elaborate form of practices. In forma- 
lism, ceremonialism, ritualism, magic, sorcery and in the 
most complicated system of worship accompanied by the 
muttering of innumerable Mantras Tantricism superseded all 
the other orthodox systems. Vajra-yana Buddhism, which is 
the most general name for Buddhist Tantricism as a whole, 
developed all possible rites and practices, both conventional 
and uncoventional . Though the secret yogic practice is 
often spoken of in Vajra-yana, it was not 

The orthodoxy and i • i l 1 1 i r i* 

formalism of Tfintric emphasised as the only method ror reali- 
revolt of the Sahajiyas. Sing the truth, and hence was the impor- 
tance attached also to all rules of worship, 
muttering of the Mantras, describing of the circles and 
hundred other rituals and ceremonies. Again there arose 
another group of Yogins within the province of esoteric 
Buddhism, who revolted against this formal nature of 


^ Verses (59-68). The text was available to the writer through the courtesy 
of MM. Vidhu-Sekhara BheUacarya, Asiitosh Professor of Sanskrit, Calcutta 
University. 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


89 


Vajra-yana and stressed some esoteric yogic practice 
to be the only method for realising the highest truth or 
attaining perfection ; this school is known as Sahajiya 
Buddhism . 

We have discussed before at some length the salient 
features of this Buddhist Sahajiya cult. If we analyse and 
examine the ideas of the Buddhist Sahajiyas we shall find 
that, as an off -shoot of Tantric Buddhism, it embodies the 
heterodoxy of Buddhism in general mixed up with the spirit 
of Tantricism. In its aversion towards discursive reason 
and scholastic erudition and in its stress on the practical side 
of religion we may find the spirit of Tantra and Yoga work- 
ing together on it. Again the influence of the Tantra as 
well as of the Vedanta is palpable in the view that truth can 
never be found outside — it is to be intuited within. In the 
highest stress laid by the Sahajiyas on Sahaja-realisation or 
self-realisation as the summum honum of the religious life 
we may trace the old Upanisadic spirit under the Buddhistic 
garb. Ideas, derived from different lines of thought, have 
merged together in a popular way in the songs and Dohas of 
these later Buddhist poets. In the jaina Dohas we have 
almost a similar admixtvire against a popular Jaina back- 
ground. The devotional line of thought or the spirit of love 
is, however, conspicuous by its absence from the Buddhist 
and Jaina songs and Dohas ; but it predominates in the songs 
and Dohas of the mediaeval period. The fact will be 
demonstrated when we shall deal with the salient features of 
the Vaisnava Sahajiyas and the Bauls of Bengal in a 
succeeding chapter, and with those of the innumerable 
Sahajiya and Sufi poets of Upper and Northern India in the 
appendix. Besides the inherited elements from older 
thoughts the mediaeval poets received cognate thoughts and 
ideas also from Sufi-istic Islam. As we shall have occasion 
to turn to the question in detail in future, we need not discuss 
it now. 


I2.-MI1B 



90 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


(i7) The Idea oj Sahaja 

The criticism made by the Buddhist Sahajiyas, with which 
the Jaina mystics also joined their voice, defines the 
Sahajiya school more negatively than positively. In the 
positive side, however, the conception of the Sahaja or the 
ultimate innate nature of all the objects and beings will give 
us a definite idea about the fundamental tenets of the 
school. 

The word ‘ Sahaja ’ literally means that which is born or 
which originates with the birth or origination of any entity 
{saha jayate iti sahajah). It is, therefore, what all the Dharmas 
possess by virtue of their very existence, and is thus the 
quintessence of all the Dharmas. As Maha-sukha is the 
quintessence of all the Dharmas, this Maha-sukha-nature is 
the Sahaja-nature of all the Dharmas. In the HeVajra- 
tantra vfe find, — “The whole world is- of the nature of 
Sahaja — for Sahaja is the quintessence {svarupa) of all ; this 
quintessence is Nirvana to those who possess the perfectly pure 
Citta.’’ ' But though this Sahaja in the form of Maha-sukha is 
realised in and through a physiological process, it should never 
be conceived as something belonging to the body ; though it is 
within the body, it is not something physical." As the 
quintessence of all, it is the absolute reality, both immanent 
and transcendent. 

We find in the Upanisads that the Brahman as the ultimate 
nature of our self and of the external world transcends all 
intellectual comprehension and verbal expression. Similar 
is the position of the Sahajiyas, who hold that the Sahaja 

^ tasmat sahajam jagat sarvam sahajarn st)arupam ucyate 1 

svarttpam cVa nitVanam vi^uddha-hara-ceiasa{ah ?) || 

Hevajra-iantr a, MS. (R.A.S.B. No, 1 1317) p. 36(B). 

Cf. alfo, svabhavam sahajam ityuktorn sarva-k^rail^a-aambaram I 

Ibid., MS. p. 30(A). 

‘ dchastho'pi na dehajah 11 

HcVajra-iantra, MS. p. 3(A). 



kELlGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAjlYAS 


91 


nature is neither definable nor accessible to our mind, nor 
expressible by speech. As the Brahman 
niture of to be realised within, so also this Sahaja- 

nature is to be intuited within 
samvedya) . We find in the Upanisads that when one 
realises the self as the Brahman, there is neither the knower 
{jmta) nor the knowable (jneya) nor the knowledge (jnana ) ; 
for, in such a transcendental state, “ where everything 
becomes the self, who will see whom and by what means, 
and who will know whom and by what means? ” ^ This Upa- 
nisadic principle has also been adopted by the Sahajiyas in 
speaking of the Sahaja nature. It is said in the Hevajra- 
tantra ^ — Sahaja can neither be explained by any man nor can 
be expressed by any speech ; it is realised by the self through 
the merit of serving at the feet of the Guru.” " In the Guhya- 
siddhi also it is said that this truth is to be attained through 
personal intuition, — the tongue can never speak anything of it.^ 
That is an all-pervading supreme state where there is neither 
body nor speech nor any work.^ It has very nicely been said 
in a song of Kanha-pada — “ Whatever is related to the mind 
and to all the Agamas (scriptures) and religious texts and the 
beads (for counting the time of taking the name of God) — all 
are confusing and anomalous. Say, how Sahaja can be 
explained, — (for) neither body nor speech nor mind can 
enter into it. In vain does the Guru preach to the disciple, 
for, how can he explain that which transcends the capacity 
of all verbal means? Whoever will explain it will 
misrepresent it ; here the preceptor is dumb and the disciple 

^ yaira iv asya sarvam atmaiva'hhut iat k^na ^am pa^yci, kcna kofp vijanlyat I 

Brhad-aranyako-panisai. (4-5- 1 -5). 

2 na nyena k^thyate sahajam na k^gminn abhilapyaie I 
iitmana jhayate punyad guru-pado-pasevaya II 

HeVajradantra, MS. p. 22(B). 

3 sva-samvedyam tu tat tattvam val{lum na'syah pSryate I 

Guhya-siddhu MS. (C.L.B. No. 13124) p. 14(A). 

^ yatra na kflryo na Vak-cittam sthanam yat sarvagam param I 

Ibid., MS. p. 15(A). 



92 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


is deaf. Asks Kanha, — how then is that jewel of the Jinas? — 
it is just as the deaf is made to understand by the dumb (i.e., 
through the movement of the lips, or by the facial expres- 
sions, or by the suggestions by postures and gestures).” ’ 
Tadaka-pada also says, — “ How can what is beyond the 
path of speech be explained? ” ^ Again we find, — “ The 
Sahaja stage can never be explained by the preceptor, neither 
can it be understood by the disciple, — it is like the flow of 
nectar ; — to whom and by what means can it be ex- 
plained?” '' Tillo-pada says in his Dohas, — Sahaja is a state 
where all the thought-constructions are dead (i.e,, destroyed) 
and the vital wind (which is the vehicle of the defiled Citta) 
is also destroyed, — the secret of this truth is to be intuited by 
the self, — how can it be explained (by others)? The truth 
(tatta = tattva) is inaccessible to the ordinary foolish people, 
and it is also unknown and unknowable to scholars, — but it 
is never inaccessible to that fortunate and meritorious one who 
by services has propitiated the Guru. ^ Saraha-pada also 

^ jo mana-goara ala jala I 
agama pothi isla-mala II 
hhana kaisem sahaja bola ba jaya I 
kaa-Vak’Cio jasu no samaya It 
ale guru uesai slsa I 
vak-pathatlta kahiva kisa II 
je taim bolt te tavi tala I 
guru bova se slsa kola II 
bhanai kahnu jina~raana bi koisa I 
kala bobern samvohia jaisa II 
Song No. 40. 

For the reading of the last line of the verse see the article Carya-padcia 
Patha" by the present writer in the Srl-bharatl, Vol. I, No. 7. 

* Vak-pathatlta kahi Vakhanl il 

Ibid., Song No. 37. 

^ nau tarn vaahi guru kahi nau tarn vujjhai slsa I 
sahaja-Vattho amia rasa kasu kahijjai kisa II 
Quoted in the Kriya-sarngraha-nama-panjika. 

MS. (B. N. Sans. No. 31) p. 37(B}. 

^ tu marai jahi paVana tahi lino hoi nirasa I 
saa {sarpveana tatta-pha^u) sa kahijjai kisa ii 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


93 


says in his Doha, — What can be known through meditation 
of that* which is without knowability ? How can 
that be explained which transcends all speech?’ In the 
commentary of the Doha it is said, — whatever is a production 
of the mind is false; that is the truth, which is never mentally 
constructed.^ Again it is said by Saraha-pada, — where 
neither mind nor the vital wind moves, nor is there any 
function of the sun and the moon, there should the Sahaja- 
citta rest, — this is the advice of Saraha.'^ Where the mind 
dies out and the vital wind is also destroyed, — that is the 
supreme Maha-sukha, it does not remain steady nor does 
it go anywhere (or, it never becomes expressible through 
words). ’ In the Sahaja state the individual mind enters the 
Sahaja as water enters into water. ’ The nature of the self can 
never be explained by others ; it can be caused to be realised 
only through the instructions of the Guru, — none else can make 
one realise it.'* The subtle and varied emotions resulting from 
the realisation of truth is not something capable of being 
expressed through words, — that stage of bliss is absolutely free 
from all mental constructions — a supreme world is revealed 


vadha ann-loa-agoara-tatta pandia-loa agamma I 
jo guru-pa {a -pasanna iahi citta agamma) II 

Dohakosa of Tillo pada, Verses 7-8, Dr. P. C. Bagchi’s Edition. 
* jhana-rahia ki k'ioi jhane I 
jo avaa iahi kohi vakhane II 

Dohakosa of Saraha-pSda, Dr P. C. Bagchi s Edition. 

Hi idvan mrsa sarvam (ydvad) yaVad vikalpyate i 
tat saiyam {tat) tathdbhutarn tativam yan na vikalpyate II 
Quoted in the Com. Ihid. 

^ jahi mana pavana na sancarai ravi sasi ndha pavesa I 
iahi vadha cttta visama karu sarahern kahia uesa II 

Ibid. 

4 jahi mana marai paVana ho kkhaa jdi 1 

ehu se parama-mahdsuha rahia kahimpi na jdi II Ibid, 
nia mana munahu re niune joi I 
jima jaJa jalahi milante sot !l Ibid. 

^ nia sahdva nau kahiau amem I 

dtsai guru-uvaeserp na annern II Ibid. 



94 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


lhere.‘ There intellect fails, — mind dies out, all pride and 
self-conceit vanish away, — mysterious is that Sahaja, - it is 
a master magician — how can it be bound by meditation It 
is free from all the letters and colours and qualities, it can 
neither be spoken of, nor can it be known. ’ That great 
Lord of transcendental bliss cannot be spoken of, — just as 
the pleasure derived from sex-union cannot be explained to 
an unmarried girl who has never personally experienced it."* 
Unless the body, speech and mind are destroyed, none can 
experience the bliss of his Sahaja-nature/' Kanha-pada also 
says in his Dohal^osaj — Only he who revels in Sahaja and 
who realises his jewel of mind (as the Bodhi-citta) can realise 
the course of religion, — others cannot understand it even 
if it is explained to them. 

It is, therefore, clear from what is stated above that the 
nature of Sahaja cannot be defined, — it can only somehow 
be described. It will be evident that this Sahaja is the 
Brahman of the Upanisads and the Vedanta. It is the 
Nirvana- dhatu of canonical Buddhism, it is the tathata 
(lhatness) of Asvaghosa, it is the negatively described absolute 
reality of Nagarjuna, which transcends the four logical cate- 
gories, — it is the Abhuta-pari\alpa or the increate absolute 
with the potency of all objectivity and subjectivity but in itself 
bereft of all dualism, — or the pure consciousness {vijnapti- 
matrata) of the Vijnana-vadins. It is again the Vajra-dh^u 
or the Vajra-sattva of the Vajra-yanists. It is is the 
Bodhi-citta in the form of the unity of Sunyata and Karuna, 

^ are putio tatto vicHta rasa k.<thana na sokk<^i vaithu I 
kappa-rahia suhc-thanu Varajngu uajjai tatthu li Ibid, 

‘ buddhi vinasai mana marai jahi (tu»ai) ahimana I 
so maamaa parama-kalu tcihl kimvajjjiai jhana II Ibid, 
ak.kbara-vartno parama-guna rahije I 
bhanai na janai cmai kohiaje II Ibid, 
so paramesaru kosu kahijjai I 
suraa k^mdri jima padijjai I) Ibid. 

^ kaa-Vaa-manu jitVa na hhijjai I 
sahaja-aahave taVa na rajjai II Ibid. 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


95 


it is the Maha-sukha or the Supreme Bliss. All these ideas 
have merged in the idea of Sahaja of the Sahajiyas. In 
describing Sahaja Tillo-pada says in his Dohas, — When in 
the Sahaja stage the Citta and the vacuity enter into an union 
of bliss all the objects of sense vanish away.' Sahaja is 
, without beginning and without end ; — 

I he non dual and r O L • • 1 

unchanging nature of tuis non-uual State Oi bahaja IS only ex- 

^**'*^'* plained by the venerable Guru.'^ When 

(in the Sahaja) the Citta vanishes, the Acitla (i.e., 
negation) also vanishes ; the state of non-dual unity (samarasa) 
is free from both existence and non-existence.' This 
transcendental truth is free f.oin all merit and demerit, — 
for there cannot be any merit or demerit in what is 
realisable only within.' It is bereft of all colour and 
form, — it is perfect in the form of all. ' In Sahaja the self 
is void, the world is void, — all the three worlds are void ; 
in pure Sahaja there is neither merit nor sin.' Saraha-pada 
also says, — “In Sahaja there is no duality; it is perfect 
like the sky. The intuition of this ultimate truth destroys 
all attachment and it shines through the darkness of attach- 
ment like a full moon in the night.’ Sahaja cannot be 
heard with the ears, neither can it be seen with the eyes [; 
it is not affected by air nor burnt by fire ; it is not wet 
in intense rain, it neither increases nor decreases, it neither 
exists nor does it die out with the decay of the body ; the 
Sahaja bliss is only an oneness of emotions, — it is oneness 

^ Doha No. 5 (Dr Bagchi’s edition). 

* ai-rahia ehu anta-rahia I 

Varagarti-paa a {ddaa-hahia) II Ibid., Dohs No. 6. 

Ibid., Doha No. 1 1. 

^ guna-dosa^rahia ehu paramattha I 

saasamveana k^vinattha 11 Ibid., Doha No. 29. 

Varna vi vajjai ahii Vihunna I 

savvaare so sampunna II Ibid., Doha No. 32. 

^ hau aunna jagu auma tihua(na) sunna I 

{nimmala aahaje na papa na punna) II Ibid., Doha No, 34. 

^ Dohas of Saraha. p. II, Verses 16-17. 



96 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


in all.* Our mind and the vital wind are unsteady like the 
horse ; — but in the Sahaja-nature both of them remain steady. 
When the mind thus ceases to function and all other ties are 
torn aside, all the differences in the nature of things vanish ; 
and at that time there is neither the Brahmin nor the Sudra." 

Sahaja cannot be realised in any of its 
lying'reaiity!* particular aspccts — it is an intuition of the 

> whole, the one underlying reality pervad- 
ing and permeating all diversity. As the truth of the lotus 
can never be found either in the stalk, or in the leaves, or in 
the petals or in the smell of the lotus, or in the filament, — it 
lies rather in the totality of all these parts, — so also Sahaja 
is the totality which can only be realised in a perfectly 
non-dual state of the mind. ' From it originate all, in it 
all rherge again, — but it itself is free from all existence 
and non-existence, — it never originates at all.’ For such 
Sahaja a man must do away with the positive as well as the 
negative functions of his mind and remain like a pure child 
absolutely depending on the instructions of the Guru, ’ and 
when the mind thus remains absolutely inactive in the Sahaja, 
all the cycles of birth and death are at once stopped." So 
long as one does not realise the true nature of the self as the 
ultimate truth one cannot realise the transcendental reality 

^ sank.a-pasa todahu guru-vaanem I 
na aunai aonau dlsai naanem II 
pavana vahantenau ao hallai I 
jalana jalante nau ao ujjhai II 
ghana variaante nau ao mmai I 
nau vajjai nau khaahi patsaai II 
nau vatifai na tanunte na vaccai I 
aamaraaa aahajananda janijjai II 

Ibid.^ p. 12 (Veises 3-6). 

2 javvem mana atthamanOf etc. I Ibid. 

^ aanda-puani-dala-hamala-gandha-kfiaaravaTanalern 1 

chaddahu vcnima na karahu aoaa na laggahu vadha alcm II 

Ibid. 

4 Ibid. 

6 Ibid. 

6 Ibid. 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


97 


underlying all phenomena. ' This realisation of the self as 
the ultimate truth is not possible either through meditation 
or the muttering of the ^4antras. ^ All the external forms 
are to be realised as pure void, — and the mind also must be 
beheld as pure void ; and through this realisation of the 
essencelessness of the objects {dharma-nairdtmya) and also 
of the subject {pudgala-nairatmya). the Sahaja-reality reveals 
itself in the heart of the Sadhaka. ' This Supreme Lord 
(of Sahaja) is neither seen coming nor seen going ; nor is he 
seen remaining within ; he is a waveless sea of perfect 
purity. ^ In Sahaja knowledge there is neither * without ’ 
nor ‘ within,’ — it pervades the fourteen worlds in its non-dual 
form. ’ “ There is some one formless hiding himself 

within our body, — he who knows him is liberated.”^’ As 
a lunar gem in deep darkness brightens all things by its 
lustre, so also the Supreme Maha-sukha or the Sahaja drives 
away all the miseries of life at once. ' The truth is neither 
in the house (i.e., in the body) nor in the forest (z.e., in the 
external objects), — the truth is in the absolute purity of the 
Citta which is free from all the Vikalpas. ^ 

Kanha-pada also says that Sahaja is without any wave, 
it is free from all the defilements, — it is free from both merit 


^ java na appahim para parianasi I 

tava ki clchanutiura pavasi II Ibid. 

2 saraha hhanai Vodha janau appa I 

nau 80 dhea na dharana jappa II Ibid, 

i Ibid. 

^ avanta na dissai janta nahi acchanta na muniai I 

nitiaranga paramesuru nikk<>Ia^ko dhahijjai II Ibid, 
jima Vahira tima avbhantaru I 
caudaha hhuvanem thiau nirantaru II Ibid. 

® asartra (^oi) sarirahi lukko I 

jo tahi janai so tahi m ukko I) Ibid. 

^ ghotandharem candamani jima ujjoa k^rei I 

parama-mahasuha ekk^-khane duriaseaa hard |l Ibid. 
** nau ghare nau vanem vohi (hiu ehu paridnahu bheu I 
nimmala-citta-sahavata korahu avikola seu II Ibid. 

13-14118 



98 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


and sin — there is absolutely nothing in it.’ It is unchanging, 
without thought-constructions, without any transformation or 
corruption; it neither rises nor sets, — here mind has no 
function at all, this is what is called Nirvana. ^ 

It is to be noticed in this connection that though 
Buddhism as a religion began its course as an uncom- 
promising atheistic school, believing neither in God nor in 
the self or the soul-substance, it gradually showed a theistic 
tendency in course of its evolution. Beginning with the 
Tathata-vada of Asvaghosa and the Vijnapti-matrata or the 
Ahhuta-parilialpa of Asanga ancj Vasubandhu, Buddhism 
was coming closer and closer to the Upanisadic conception 
of the Brahman as the Supreme Being. In the conception 
of the Vajra-sattva and the Lord SrI-Maha-sukha of the 
Vajra-yanists we have seen how the monistic conception of 
the Supreme Being is clearly established. In the conception 
of the Sahaja or the Svabhavik.a-k.oy a (the 
Sup^me Bei^g of Ihe body of the ultimate nature) of the 
imm^ Sahajiyas the same tendency of conceiving 
it just in the image of the monistic 
Supreme Being is sometimes manifest. Often the 

Upanisadic description of the Brahman as having hands 
and legs on all sides, — having eyes, heads and faces on all 
sides, — having ears in all the worlds on all sides — and as 
pervading the whole universe, — are all applied to this 
Sahaja. " And this Sahaja is none but the self, — 


1 nittarcnga sama sahaja-rua saala-kalusa-virahie I 
papa-punna-rahie k^ccha nahi hanhu phuda kohie )1 

iDr. P. C. Bagchi’s Edition) Verse No. 10. 

* niccala nivviappa nivviara I 
uoa^atthamana-rahia susara II 
aiso so nivvana bhanijjai I 
jahifn mana manasa na II 

Verse No. 20. 

sarvaiah pani-padadyarn sarvato ' k?i-^iromukham I 
sarvatah irutimat loke sarvam aVrtya tisihati !l 



RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


99 


and all the worlds are the transformations of this one Sahaja- 
self, — all the universe is pervaded by the Sahaja-self, — and 
nothing else is to be found anywhere.^ All the various 
phenomena produced by the deeds (karma) of the 
beings are nothing but the modes and modifications of the 
self-revealed Sahaja; but though they are Sahaja in the 
ultimate nature, they are produced in their varieties through 
mentation (bodhandt) m the form of the subject and the 
object.^ The Sahaja is itself the sustainer (hhartd), itself 
the performer (kartd)^ itself the king, itself the Lord.^ 
It is the life of the animate, it is the supreme and immu- 
table, — it is all-pervading and resides in all the bodies, — 


C5a svabhavik<ib k^yah sunyata-koruna-dvayah I 
napurnsako Hi khyato yuganaddha Hi k^acit I 

iSu-samhara, quoted in the Subhasita-samgraha, Bendall’s Edition. 
Cj, sarvatah pani-padam tai, etc. $veia^vataro panisat, 3-16; Gifa, 13-13. 

^ mad-bhava{m) hi jagal sarvam mad-bhaVam bhuvana-irayam I 
may a vyaptam idem sarvam na^nyamayarn drsyate jagat II 

Hevajra-tanira, MS. (RASB. No. 1 1317/ p. 23^A). 
sva-samvedyam ayam kvrma vodhanat korma jayate I 

Ibid., MS. p 23(B). 

Cj. also the Coinmexitary ; — 

yat kincH driyate sattvanhm korma-vipako-jonitarn vaicitryam sthaVQra'jahgama^ 
dtkom tad eva karma I yady eiat ketrmotpadyate sva sarnvedyat I kcLiharn iarhi 
maha-rnudra-siddhih I tadahumaha(*?) , bodhanad Hi I bodho grahya-grahaka 
rupena pratipattih I tasmai kof'f^otpadyate I na punah viivasya sahajaik^-rasa- 
hhaVat I 

Hevajra-pahjika or Yoga-ratna-mala, M.S. 'Cambridge, Add. No. 1699) 

p. 32(B). 

Cj. also, Dakarnava : — 

samhha komma jima bhaVaha rui 
bhava nivvana na disai koi I 

(Dr. N. C. Chaudhuri’s Edition) p. 144. 
sVayam bharta svayam svayam raja svayam prabhuh 1 

Hevajra-tantra, MS. p. 23(B), 

The reading of the last line as given in the commentary of the Dohakosa 
(Dohs No. 6) of Kanha-pada is “ svayam ^arta sVayarn harta svayam raja sVayam 
prabhuh,'' and “ harta " is further explained as the destructive form {svayam eta 
sarnhara-rupah) of the Lord. [The MS. of the commentary cn the Dohakosa of 
Kanha-pada in the possession of the writer, MS. Cambridge Add. No. 1699, 
P. 43(A) 1. 



100 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


it is the great life (the vital process) — and the whole universe 
is imbued with it, — all the existent and the non-existent 
and everything else proceed from it and it alone. It 
is the Being of the nature of pure consciousness, — it is the 
eternal sovereign personality, — it is the Jiva (the individual 
personality), — it is time, — it is the ego.’ Tillo-pada says 
in a Doha, — “ I am the universe, — 1 am the Buddha, — I am 
perfect purity, — I am the non-cognition {amanasiara ) — 1 am 
the destroyer of the cycle of existence.” ' And this nature 
of the self is its Sahaja-nature. Saraha-pada also says, — 
‘‘ One is the Lord explained in all the scriptures and he 
manifests himself (as the variety of all phenomena) through 
his own will.” ^ In the Dakarnava it is addressed to 
Sahaja, — ** Thou art the cause of all the Dharmas, — but 
who art thou Sahaja, mysteriously unknown to all Again 
it has been said, — ” Only Sahaja-nature is seen ( — nothing 
else is there), — salute to the Lord of all the Suras (gods) and 
the Asuras ! The senses do not know where it is, — worship 
it through the songs {gatha). ’ ’ ® 


^ sa eva praninam pranah sa eVa parama-k^arah 1 
sarva-vyapi sa eVa sau sarva-dehe vyavasthitah II 
sa eVasau rnaha-pranah sa cvasau jaganmayah I 
hhaVa-bhaVau iad-udhhutau any'ani yani tani ca il 
sattvarn vijnana rupafi ca purmam puranam Uvaram I 
atma jtVahca sarVafica kolah pudgala eVa ca 11 

Hevajra-iantra. MS. (RASB. No. 113l7)p. 27lA). 

^ hau jagu hau buddha {hau) niranjana I 
(hau amanasiara hhava hhanjana) II 

Tillo-pada’s Dohakosa (Dr. P. C. Bagchi’s Edition), Doha No. 16. 
ekku deva vahu agama disai I 
appanu icche phuda padihasai II 

Dohakosa (Dr. P. C. Bagchi’s Edition). 

^ karanu sabbha dhammaha tummii 
ke acchasi sahajasarua na gai I 

DakarnaVa (Ed. by Dr. N. C. Chaudhuri), p. 138. 
^ kevala sahaja-sahau ri disai namahu surasura tihuana nahai I 
indiya loa na janai koi parama mahasuha pujahu gahai II 

Ibid,, p. 143. 



CHAPTER IV 


The Practices of the Sahajiyas and the Si ate of 
Supreme Bliss (Maha-sukha) 

We have said in connection with the nature and function 
of the Tantras that the Tantric systems, whether Hindu or 
Buddhist, never profess to discover and preach any truth 
anew ; their main function is lo indicate practical methods 
for the realisation of truth. The Sahajiya cult, as an off- 
shoot of Tantric Buddhism, lays the highest stress on the 
practical method for realising the Sahaja-nature of the self 
and of all the Dharmas. From the point of view of literature, 
however, we are not much interested in the details of the 
yogic practice of the Sahajiyas, and we, therefore, do not 
propose to go into all the details. We shall give here a 
very brief account of the main practices and also of the state 
of supreme bliss produced through this process of 
Sadhana. 


(i) The Guru-Vada 

The mo.st important thing in connection with the practical 
aspect of the Sahajiya religion is the selection of a proper 
preceptor. The whole field of Indian philosophy and reli- 
gion is characterised by a unanimous emphasis on the Guru- 
vada or the doctrine of the preceptor. It will be seen that 
in a sense all the systems of Indian philosophy and religion 
are mystic, — for according to all the systems truth always 
transcends intellectual apprehension or discursive specu- 
lation, — it is to be intuited within through the help of the 



102 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


preceptor, who has already realised it. Truth is transmitted 
j from the preceptor to the disciple just 

Liuiu-vada — a salient 

feature of Indian philo as light from onc lamp to the other. The 
sophy and religion. . , . , i • i 

only way or knowing the truth is, there- 
fore, to seek the grace of the Guru, who, and who alone, can 
make a man realise the Supreme Reality. It is believed that 
the true preceptor in his non-dual state identifies himself 
with the disciple and performs from within the disciple all 
that is necessary for the latter's spiritual uplift. The true 
disciple becomes an instrument in the hands of the true 
preceptor. It is for this reason that in Indian religions the 
Guru is held in the highest esteem. In many of the Indian 
religious systems the Guru is a substitute even for God, or at 
least God is to be realised through the medium of the person 
of the Guru, who stands as the living proof for the existence 
of God. To ordinary people God is a mere time- 
honoured belief ; but the preceptor opens the eyes of the 
disciple and makes him realise the existence of God. 
Tantricism, which lays the greatest emphasis on the practical 
aspect of religion, naturally, lays equal stress on the function 
of the Guru. Moreover, many of the Tantric practices 
are secret practices involving complex processes of esoteric 
yoga. Because of this stringent nature of the Tantric prac- 
tice the help of the Guru is enjoined to be sought at every 
step. These intricate esoteric practices, when properly 
and systematically carried out, may lead a man to the highest 
spiritual elevation, — on the other hand there is the chance 
of physical and mental aberration at every step, and if they 
are not pursued very cautiously and methodically with the 
guidance and directions of the experienced 
Stringency of the Guru they may lead, and are very likely 

esoteric Sadhana res- 
ponsible for so much to lead, a man into the darkest abyss 

stress on Guru vada rill n r l • 

in Tantricism. ot hell. Because ot their stringent nature 

these practices have repeatedly been 
declared in all the Tantras as the secret of all secrets [guhyad 



PRACTICES AND SUPREME BLISS 


103 


guhyam), and therefore, there is no other way of being 
initiated into this method of Yoga save the practical help 
of the Guru. In almost all the Tantras the Guru is always 
praised in the superlative terms and is declared to be the 
highest reality itself.' Almost all the Carya-songs speak highly 
of the Guru, who is the only help in the path of Sadhana, 
and in almost all the songs the yogins are warned of the 
pitfalls of the path and are enjoined repeatedly to seek the 
help of the Guru, wherever there is an iota of doubt in mind 
and wherever there is the slightest difficulty. So copious, 
so clear and so emphatic are the references to the preceptor 
in the Carya-songs that we need not illustrate our statement 
by quotations. We shall see later on that the theory of 
Guru-vada, as we find in the Dohas and the Carya-songs, 
may be recognised as one of the main characteristics of all 
the religious sects represented by our old and mediaeval 
literature." 

{a) The Importance of the Body in the Sadhana 

In connection with the practical aspect of the Buddhist 
Sahajiya cult we should also notice that 
cosmt’fTheuriiv™"'” /along with the uncompromising spirit of 
revolt against all formalities and orthodoxy 
in religion, great emphasis is laid in the Sahajiya literature 
on the human body, which is conceived as a microcosm 
of the universe. This feature, we have hinted, predominates 
in all the Tantras in general, wherever the yogic element pre- 
vails ; but as the Sahajiyas laid their whole stress on the yogic 
element this theory of the body being the epitome of the whole 
universe was most emphasised. In the HeVajra-tantra 
we find^that the Lord [Bhagavan) was asked by a Bodhisatlva 

^ See the first part of the 5uh/i5siTa-samgro/ia, edited by Cecil Bendall» where 
various quotations are to be found from various Buddhist Tsntric texts in praise 
of the Guru and also defining the nature of a true preceptor. 

^ Kic/e /n/ror, Ch. V, Ch. VII, Appendix 'At. 



104 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


whether there was any necessity at all of this physical world 
and the physical body, everything being in reality nothing 
but pure void. To this the reply of the Lord was that 
without the body there was no possibility of the realisation 
of the great bliss and here lies the importance of the body.’ 
But though the truth is within the body and arises out of it, 
it should never be confused to be something physical.^ In the 
Sri-kjala-cakra we find that without the body there cannot be 
any perfection, neither can the supreme bliss be realised in 
this life without the body, — it is for this reason that the body 
with the nervous system is so important for yoga ; if perfec- 
tion {siddhi) of the body be attained, all kinds of perfection 
in the three worlds are very easily obtained. ' In discourag- 
ing going on pilgrimage and bathing in the sacred 
rivers, Saraha says, — “ Here (within this body) is the Ganges 

All truth within. the Jumna, here the ‘ Ganga-sagara ’ 

(the mouth of the Ganges), here are 
Prayaga and Benares, — here the sun and the moon. Here 
are the sacred places, here the Pithas and the 
Upa-pithas — I have not seen a place of pilgrimage and an 
abode of bliss like my body.” ' The TattVa is within the 
house of our body ; yet, curious indeed it is, that we generally 
roam about in the whole world in search of it. It is nicely 
said by Saraha, — “ He is within the house, — but you are 
enquiring about him outside. You are seeing your husband 


^ deha-hhaVe kMtah saakhyam, etc. 

Hevajra-tantra, MS. p. 36(Ah 
dehasiho' pi na dehajah. Ibid. 

^ kaya-hhave na siddhir na ca parama-sukham prapyate janmani ha II 
iasmat kflya-rtha-heioli praUdina-samaye bhavayet nadi-yogam I 
haye siddhe anya-siddhis tribhuvana-nilaye kihliaratvam prayati II 

Srl-kalci'Cakra-tantra, MS. (Cambridge, Add, 2364) p. 33(B). 
^ etthu se surasari jamxina etthu se gafiga-saaru I 
cithu paaga vanarasi etthu se canda divaaru (I 
kheitu pitha upaptiha etthu maim bhamai pari^(,hao I 
deha-sarisaa tittha maim suha anna na ditfhao II 

Dohahosa of Saraha. Nos, 47, 48 (Dr. P. C. Bagclii’s Edition). 



PRACTICES AND SUPREME BLISS 


105 


within, yet are asking the neighbours as to his whereabouts.’' 
“Know thyself, O fool,” says Saraha, — “the truth is neither 
to be meditated nor to be held in the body as a Dharani, neither 
is it to be muttered as a Mantra.” ^ The scholars explain all 
the scriptures, — but do not know the Buddha residing within 
the body. ^ “ Some one bodiless is hiding himself in the 

body, — he who knows him there (in the body) is libera- 
ted.” ‘ In the Carya-songs also the body is highly spoken 
of as the abode of truth. Thus Kanha-pada says in a song, — 
The yogin Kanha has become a Kapdi,^ and has entered 
into the practices of yoga, and he is sporting in the city of 
his body in a non-dual form.” ' Again he says, — “Make the 
five Tathagatas the five oars and, O Kanha, steer the 
body on and tear off the snare of illusion.” The image of 
the body being the boat and a pure mind the oar for 
proceeding on to the way of realising the truth is very 
popular with the poets of the Carya-songs. 


gharcm acchai vMre pucchai I 
pai dekkhai padivcsl pucchai II 
saraha hhanai vadha janau appa I 
nau so dhea na dharana jappa II 
- pandia saala sattha hakhhanai I 
dehahirn buddha vasanta na janai II 
^ asarira f/jor) sariahi lukko 1 
jo tahi janai so tahi mukk^ II 

^ KSpalT is tlie general name given lo the Tantric Ycgins, bul here, in the 
commentary of the Caryas (and also in the commentary of the Hevajradanira, 
MS. Cambridge, Add. No. 1699) the word is derived in the following way :■ — iljaryi 
maha-sukham palayitl'ti kapalikah, f.e., he who nurses “ Ka ” which means 
MahS-sukha is a Kapalika. 

Song No. 1 1 

^ panca tathagata kio k^duala I 
bahaa k^a kdnhila maa-jala II 

Ibid., Song No. 13. 

Cf. kaa navadi khanti mana kcduala I 
sad guru- vaane dhara patavala II 
cia thira ^ari dha[ra)hu re nai I 
ana upaye para na jai II 

Ibid., Song No. 38. 


14 HUB 



J06 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


The body being thus recognised as the abode of all 
truth the fundamental principles of Mahayana as transformed 
into Vajra-yana began to be located within the physical system. 
Thus, corresponding to the six nerve-plexuses {sat-cakra), or 
the six lotuses as they are also called, along the spinal 

The theory of the cord, ' as conccivcd in the Hindu Tantras 
with the theory of ^8 Well as lu the Other texts on yoga, the 
the Kayas. Buddhists conceived of three plexuses or 

lotuses, with which they identified the three Kayas. Thus the 
lowest Cakra in the region of the navel represents the lowest 
Kaya, i.e., the Nirmana-kaya (body of transformation) ; the 
Cakra in the heart is identified with the Dharma-kaya, (i.e., 
the body of ultimate reality as the cosmic unity) ; and the 
Cakra just below the neck is said to be the Sambhoga-kaya 
(the body of bliss). ” The Vajra-kaya or the Sahaja-kaya, 
which is the fourth Kaya with the Tantric Buddhists, is 
located in the Usnlsa-k^ala, or the Sahasrara of the 
Hindus. It is also called the Maha-sukha-cakra or the 
Maha-sukha-kamala, being the seat of supreme realisation. 

We have seen that the Bodhicitta is constituted of two 
factors. Viz., Sunyata and Karuna, or Prajna and Upaya. 
Among the nerves of the body, which are innumerable, thirty- 
two are more important," of which again three are the most 

' These are (I) Mulsdhsra-cakra, or the sacti-coccygeal plexus, situated between 
the penis and the anus and facing down with four petals of red colour; 
(2) SvSdhisthana cakra, or sacral plexus, near the root of the penis with six petals of 
the colour of vermilion : (3) Manipura-cakra, or the lumber plexus in the region of 
the navel with ten petals of the colour of the cloud ; (4) Anahata-cakra in the heart 
with twelve petals of the colour of Bandhuka-flower (red) ; (5) Vi^uddha^cakra or the 
laryngeal and pharyngeal plexus at the junc.ion of the spinal choid and the medulla 
oblangata with sixteen petals of smoky colour; and 16) Ajna-cakra between the 
eye-brows with two petals of white colours. Above all, there is the SahasrSra-cakra or 
lotus (padma) in the highest cerebral region. 

» In the natural order, however, the Cakra in the heart, being next to the Cakra 

of Nirmana-kaya, ought to have been the Sambhoga-kSya and the Cakra below the 
nock ought to have been the D.iarma-ksya ; this would have been consistent with the 
general order oi the Kfiyas. 

3 See Srhsamputikof MS. p. 3{B). 



PRACTICES AND SUPREME BLISS 


107 


important, two by the two sides of the spinal cord and one 
in the middle ; with these two side-nerves are identified the 
cardinal principles of Prajna and Upaya, and the middle nerve, 
which is the meeting-place of the other two nerves, is spoken 
of as the path for the Sahaja, or rather Avadhuti-marga oc 
simply Avadhutika. Avadhuti is explained as being that, 
through the effulgent nature of which all sins are destroyed,^ 
or that which washes away the beginningless thought-cons- 
truction of existence,^ or that which removes the evils of 
afflictions very easily.'’ The two nerves on 

nTKc^ theory of .he identified 

with Prajna and Upaya, and which meet 
together to produce the Bodhicitta, are variously termed 
the Buddhist Tantras and the Carya-songs. The 


m 


nerve in the right which is the Upaya and which in the 
Hindu Tantras and the yoga literature is most generally 
known as the Pihgala, is also called rasana, surya, ravi, 
prana, camana, k^li, bindu, yamund, rakto, rajas, 
bhdva, purusa, grdhya, vyafijana (consonants) and 
also the syllable varn. Again the nerve in the left, which 
is the Prajna, and which is known generally as the nerve 
Ida, is also called laland, candra, sasin, apdna, dhamana, 
dli, nada, gafigd, sul^ra, tamas, abhdva, (also nirvana), 
prakjti, grahaka, sVara (vowel) and also ‘e’.^ Without 
entering into the details of the significance of these names, 
it may be said that the two nerves represent the principle 
of duality and the middle nerve (known as Susumna or 
Avadhutika) represents the principle of absolute unity. 


^ Commentary on the Dohakosa of Kanha-pSda. Dohs No. 4. (MS. B. N. Sans. 
No. 47) p. 39(B). 

2 Comm, on CaryS No. 2. 

^ Comm, on Dohakosa of Kanha pada, Doha No. 4 (comm, discovered by 
MM. Sastrl). 

^ For a detailed study of the significance of these names, see Introduction to 
'V Taniric Buddhism by the present writer. 



108 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


(Hi) The Esoteric Practice 

Coming to the question of the esoteric practice of the 
Sahajiyas, the first thing that we should take notice of is 
the importance attached to the process of Kaya-sadhana or 
the yogic practices for making the body strong and fit for 
higher realisations. This principle and practice of Kaya- 
sadhana is, we shall see, common to all schools of esoteric 
yoga and the exclusive emphasis of the Natha-siddhas was 
on this Kaya-sadhana.’ Yoga in general involves psycho- 
physiological processes ; it is therefore that higher kinds of 
yoga should never be entered upon without a mature or 
perfect body. For this purpose of making the body 
mature or perfect the practices of Hatha-yoga are to 
be adopted. It is for this reason that the Buddhist Siddha- 
caryas were, in the practical field, great Hatha-yogins. In 
the Carya-songs we find frequent reference to the strengthen- 
ing of the ‘ Skandhas’ or the elements whose aggregate 
constitutes the body. Until and unless the ‘Skandhas’ 
are strengthened, or, in other words, the body is made ripe^ 
through practice of Hatha-yoga, the supreme realisation, 
known in the Buddhist fold as Maha-sukha becomes a 
lulling sleep of the senses or something like a swoon. It will 
be a blunder to confuse this state of swoon with the state 
of Maha-sukha. It has been said in the Rati-Vajra that 
if the body and the mind fall into a swoon in the practice of 
yoga, how can there be perfection in yoga ? “ The yogin 
has, therefore, been repeatedly advised to acquire a strong 
body before entering on the yogic process for the attainment 
of Maha-sukha. 


^ Vide Infra, 

For ripe (pakva) and unripe {apakva) body, sec Infra. 

^ murcchiie skondha’Vijnane k^tah siddhir anindita II 

Quoted in the commentary of the CaiyS-song No. 1. 



PRACTICES AND SUPREME BLISS 


109 


It has been explained before how the principles of Prajna 
and Upaya were identified with the female and the male 
(or even with the female organ and the male organ which 
are known also as the lotus and the thunder), and Bodhicitta 
was identified with the bliss produced through the union of 

the female and the male. The actual 
^Ptoduction of Eodht- Buddhist Sahajiyas 

is the production of this Bodhicitta in the 
Nirmana-cakra or the Manipura-cakra (in the region of the 
navel) through processes of Hatha-yoga and then to give it an 
upward motion so as to make it pass through the Dharma- 
cakra and the Sambhoga-cakra and then make it motionless 
in the Usnisa-kamala where it produces Sahaja of the nature 
of Maha-sukha. It is held that the Bodhicitta has two 
aspects ; in the ordinary restless aspect (z.e., in the 
form of gross sexual pleasure which 

Two aspects of Bodhi- ^ t i \ • 11 J 

citta—Samvria and accompanics the discharge) it IS called 
Samvrta, and in the motionless aspect 
of intense bliss it is called the Vivrta or the PdramarthiJ^a. 
This Samvrta and Pdramdrthika aspects of the Bodhicitta 
represent the Samvrti’-safyaf z.e., the phenomenal or the 
provisional aspect of reality and the Pdramdrthil^a, z.e., the 
ultimate reality of Mahayana philosophy. The yogic 
Sadhana of the Sahajiyas is employed first for the production 
of Bodhicitta through the union of the Prajna and the Upaya 
and then for transforming the Samvrta Bodhicitta 
into Pdramdrthil^a. The contention of the Sahajiyas is 


that so long as the intense bliss produced through the union 
of the Prajna and the Upaya remains in the region of Mani- 
pura-cakra or in the region of the navel which is the Nirmana- 
cakra or the gross physical plane of bondage and suffering, 
it keeps the yogin in the world of grossness. But as accord- 
ing to standard Mahayana philosophy the Bodhicitta, after 
its production, must march upwards through ten stages 
known as the Bodhicitta-hhufi'iis and reach the highest 



no 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


state of Dharma-megha and attain Buddhahood there, 
so according to the view of the Sahajiyas this flow of bliss 
must be made to march upwards through the different Kayas 
(corresponding to the Bhumis) and finally reach the region of 
Vajra-kaya or Sahaja-kaya. In the process of upward 
march the bliss first produced goes on acquiring a higher 
nature and when it reaches the Usnisa-kamala or the 
Vajra-kaya or Sahaja-kaya it becomes Maha-sukha, where 
all kinds of duality vanish in a unique realisation of supreme 
bliss. 

(iv) The Middle Path in the Esoteric SMhana 

A dominant feature of Mahayana is its stress on the 
, , , , middle path avoiding the opposite extremes 

l he philobophiCHl , 1 • 1 

view of the middle of views. T hus the philosophical system 
of Nagarjuna is known as the ‘ Madhya- 
mika ' system, or the philosophical school of the middle 
course, and it is held that Nagarjuna’s school is a school of 
the middle course in the sense that he steered clear a trans- 
cendental path which denies the views of the positivists as 
well as the negatlvists. The philosophy of the Abhuta- 
pariJ^alpa of Vasubandhu as expounded in his well-known 
treatise Madhyanta-vihhaga is again a challenge to both 
the extreme realists (like the Sarvasti-vadins) and the extreme 
negativists (like the Madhyamikas),^ and the Vijnana-vadins 
always professed to be the followers of the middle path. 
Apart from these philosophical speculations we find in the 
religious sphere on the whole that the Mahayanists were 
opposed to the Idea of Nirvana as much as to that of 
existence in the world of suffering {bhava or samsara); and 
according to them the final state is neither the BhaVa^ nor 
the Nirvana, — it is rather a state of non-duality where 
BhaVa and Nirvana become one and the same. In connection 

* The Madhyamika school was always criticised by the Vijnana-vadins (as also 
by the Vedantins) as a pure negativistic school. 



PRACTICES AND SUPREME BLISS 1 1 1 

with the idea of Advaya or Yuganaddha we have 
seen that the final state is that where all kinds of duality are 
absorbed in a principle of non-duality. 

Middle path 

yoga. A Alls principle was adopted also by the 

Sahajiyas in their process of yoga. We 
have seen that the nerves in the right and the left in the 
microcosm of the body represent the principles of duality ; 
their separate function which binds one to the world of 
sufferings must, therefore, be checked by the Yogin and they 
must unite with the middle nerve and function there con- 
jointly. The middle nerve is, therefore, the middle path 
which leads to the non-dual state of Sahaja. 

The flow of Bodhicitta must be regulated along the 
^ middle nerve, and this is the most important and at the same 
time the most difficult part of the Sadhana, and it is for this 
reason that in the Carya-padas and the DohaJ^osas as well as 
in many of the Buddhist Tantric texts we find repeated 
warnings to the novice to take practical suggestions from the 
preceptor at this stage. If the flow of Bodhicitta moves 
either left or right, the whole thing is spoiled. In 
the Carya-padas, therefore, we find repeated warnings not 
, to go either right or left, but to 

Middle path vari- 
ously described in the stccr clcar thiough the midale path. We 

arya songs. oftcn find injunctions in the Caryas for 

securing perfect control on the two nerves in the right and 
the left and to join them together {i.e., to make them function 
together) in the middle nerve. Thus in a song Lui-pa says, 
‘ ‘ 1 have intuited the (non-dual truth) through the suggestion 
(of the preceptor). 1 have sat where the couple of the nerves 
Dhamana (the nerve in the left) and Cam ana (the nerve in the 
right) are united together.”’ Gundarl-pada says, — “Destroy 
the mother-in-law (vital breath) in the house (i.e., the body) 
and control the Manimula, — and split up the sides of the 


^ hhanai lui dmhe sane difha I {jhane dif/ia~Bagchi) 
dhamana camana bent pandi baifha II Song No. I. 



112 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


sun and the moon.”* Again Catilla-pada says, — “ The deep 
river of existence is flowing on in a tremendous flow ; there 
is mud on either side of the river, but the middle is unfathom- 
able. For the sake of ‘ Dharma ’ (i.e., for the realisation 
of the non-essential nature of all the Dharmas) Catilla has 
built up a bridge, and people, desirous of going to the other 

shore, can now cross (the river of existence) fearlessly 

After walking up the bridge go neither right nor 
left, — near is the Bodhi, do not go far.” " From the 
yoga point of view this river of existence refers to the nervous 
system mainly with the three principal nerves, which are 
described in the Commentary as abhasa-traya {viz., Sunya, 
Ati-sunya and Maha-sunya), which are the principles of 
defilement and therefore also the cause of all existence. 
The two sides, i.e., the two nerves on the left and the right 
are muddy, i.e., they are the paths which lead to the 
principles of defilement,'^ — and the middle nerve leads to 
the depth of the truth and so it is unfathomable. The bridge 
however, signifies the establishment of the unity between 
the two aspects of the Bodhicitta, viz., Samvrti and Para- 
marthii^a,* in other words, it is the way to realise as well as 
demonstrate how the physical Bodhicitta can be transformed 
into the ultimate Bodhicitta through processes of yoga. 
Catilla-pada warns that when one is on the bridge, i.e., when 
one is engagad in transforming the Samvrti Bodhicitta into the 

^ sasu gharem ghali kofica tala I 
canda-suja-berii pakha phala II 

Song No. 4. 

hhavanai gahana gamhhlra vegern hahi I 
duante cikhila majhc na lhaht II 
dhamarthe cafila sankama gadhai I 
paragami loa nibhara iarai II 

scnkomata cadile dahina bdma md hohi I 
niyadi bohi dura md jdhi 11 Song No. 5. 

^ vdma-dakiinam cikbUam iti prakrti-dosa-panka-n^Upium 1 Comm. 

^ C/, Comm. 9a{m)k.^amam iti samvrtti-paramdrihayor aikyam. 



PRACTICES AND SUPREME BLISS 


113 


Paramarthil^a through the yogic process, one should go 
neither left nor right, — the Bodhi is to be attained 
through the middle nerve. Kanha-pada says in one of his 
songs, ‘‘ The path (i.e., the right path) is obstructed by the 
Ali and the Kali, ^ Again we find, — he (Kanha) enters the 
lotus-pool of Sahaja by breaking the two posts of ‘e* 
(representing Prajna, or the left nerve) and 'vam 
(representing Upaya or the right nerve)." Again we see 
that after entering into the yogic practice Kanha has made the 
Ali and the Kali the anklets of his legs and the sun and the 
moon his earrings. Both these metaphors signify that Kanha 
has got full control over the Ali and the Kali or the moon 
and the sun (which refer to the two principles of Prajna and 
Upaya as well as to the two nerves). Kanha says that he 
has realised the wave (f.e., the vibration of bliss) in the 
middle course.’ In his Dohas also he says that he has 
broken off the two nerves lalana-rasana or ravi-sasJ in the 
two sides.’ Kambalambara-pada says that after pressing 
the left and the right (nerves) and keeping close to the 
middle way he has been able to realise supreme bliss.’’ 
Again Dombi-pada says in a song, — “ The boat is steered 
through the middle of the Ganges and the Jumna ; there 
the exhilerated lady (i.e., Nalralma, absorbed in the Sahaja- 
bliss) smoothly carries her children (Le., the yogin) to the 
other shore. Steer on, — steer on. Oh Dombi, (exclaims the 
poct,) time is high up in the way ; through the (blessings 
of the) lotus-feet of the Guru we shall go to the land of the 
jinas (i.e., ttie self-controlled ones). Five oars (taken in the 


^ Song No. 7. 

* Song No. 9. 

^ dli kflli ghantd neura carave I 

ravi sa^i kundala dhharane II Song No. II. 

^ majha hem tarangama munid II Song No. 13. 

laland-rasand ravi-sasi iudia venna vipdse 1 Doha No. 5. 
® hama-dahina capl mili mill manga I 

hdtata milila mahdsuha sdngd II Song No. 

15-^14118 



1J4 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


commentary to indicate the five-fold instructions given in the 
Panca-kxama) are moving ; — when in the way tie up the rope 
of the boat with the pitha, (i.e., arrest the flow of the Bodhi- 
citta, which is compared here to the boat, in the Mani-mula). 
Throw out water with the pot of void, so that water may 
not enter through the joint. The moon and the sun are 
the two wheels, and (the unity of) creation and destruction 
is the mast (pulinda); the two paths to the left and the right 
are not seen, -steer the boat at your own pleasure. ’ 
Sanli-pada also says that he is roaming avoiding the two ways 
in the left and the right. “ In another song of Vina-pada 
he says that he has made a Vmd (r e., lyre) of which the 
sun is the gourd (/du) and the moon is the string and Avadhuti 
is the stand. On hearing the tune of the Ali and the Kali, 
he says, the mighty elephant has entered Samaiasa, ' Here 
the sun which is said to be the gourd and the moon which 
is said to be the string, are but the two nerves in the tv\o sides, 
and the stand {danda) is the middle nerve. When the two 
nerves in the left and the right are controlled and fitted to 
the middle one, an anahata sound ’ is produced and it leads 
the elephant (/.e., c/Y/a) to the state of Samarasa. Saraha- 
pada says, “ In the right and the left are canals and falls, — 
the straight path is the safe path. ” ' 

We need not multiply the instances and the analogies given 
in connection with the yogic process of controlling the two 
nerves on the two sides and the raising of the Bodhi-citta 
along the middle nerve. But what is the process for giving 

* Song No. 14. 

2 Song No. 15. 

3 svija lau sasi lageli ianti I 
anaha dandi eki hiaia avadhuti II 

* 

ali heni sari sunia I 

gaavara samarasa sandhi gunia II Song No. 17. 

^ See Introduction to Tantric Buddhism by the present writer. 

, S hama dahina jo hhala hikhald I 

saraha hhanai hapd ujuv^a hhaild II Song No. 32, 



PRACTICES AND SUPREME BLISS 


115 


the Bodhi-cltta an upward motion? The Apana wind, 
it is held, has always a downward motion and the Prana an 
upward motion ; the yogin, therefore, 
should arrest the course of both the Prana 
and the A pane and then make them flow 
through the middle nerve and with this flow of the vital wind 
within the middle nerve the Bodhi-citta will also flow upward 
and reach the Usnisa-kamala,^ — and thereby Maha-sukha will 
be produced. The Bodhi-citta should then be made steady 
by making steady the breath, and this state of Yoga is the 
ultimate stage for the yogin. 

In this production of the Bodhi-citta four stages, asso- 
ciated with the four Cakxas or lotuses, 

fomMudX'foL^mo- distinctly marked, and on the basis 
ment8, etc. these four stages we find mention of 

the four Mudras {viz. , Karma-mudra, Dharma-mudra, 
Maha-mudra and Samaya-mudra)y which are the four stages 
of yoga. There are again four mental states called the 
four moments {viz,, Vicitra, Vipdl^a, Vimarda and 
V ilal^sana,^ and four kinds of bliss, viz., Ananda, Paramd- 
nanda, V^iramdnanda and Sahajananda. Ananda is the 
bliss when the Bodhi-citta is in the Nirmana-cakra, Paramd- 
nanda in the Dnarma-cakra, Viramdnanda in the Sambhoga- 
cakra and Sahajdnanda in the Maha-sukha-cakra. Ananda 
means light pleasure, Paramdnanda is more intense; Viramd- 
nanda means the detachment from the worldly pleasure, 
and Sahajdnanda is the final bliss. ^ 

(i?) The Yogic Sddhand of the Sahajiyds and the 
Female Force. 

Another thing that deserves special attention in 
connection with the yogic practice of the Sahajiya Buddhists 

^ Vide Catur-mudra in the Advaya-vajra-samgraha (G O S.). 

A\so SampufikAt MS., p. 10 (A) ; Hevajra’pafijika, MS., p 2 (B), 

^ Sri-kflIa“Cakro-iQntra, MS., p. 57(A); Hevajra-tantra, MS., p, 27(B). 



Il6 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


is the conception of the female force. In the Carya-songs 
we find frequent references to this female force variously 
called as the Canddi, Dombi, Savari, Yogini, Nairamani, 
/Sahaja-sundari, etc. and we also find frequent mention of 
the union of the yogln with this personified female deity. 

This Yogini or the Sahaja-damsel should not be confused 
with the woman of flesh and blood, associated with the actual 
yogic practices ; she is but an internal force of the nature 
of vacuity {iSunyata) or essencelessness {nairatma) and great 
bliss residing in the different plexuses in different stages of 
yogic practice. 

In the Hindu Fantras we find that in the Muladhara- 
cakra (which is the lowest of the Cakras) remains coiled an 
electric force known as the Serpent-power (coiled like a 
serpent) or the Kula-kundalini Sakti, and the Sadhana 
consists in rousing this Sakti, lying dormant in the Muladhara, 
and in making her unite with the 6iva in the Sahasrara ; and 
we have seen that the union of the Sakti with the Siva is 
what is meant by perfection in Tantric Yoga. Corresponding 
to this Kula-kundalini Sakti of the Hindu Tantras we find 
the conception of a fire-force of the Buddhists in the 
... ^ , Nirmana-kaya, and she is generally des- 

Sakti as Landali 

cribed as the Candali. Thus it is said by 
Kanha-pada in one of his songs, — “ One is that lotus, sixty- 
four are the petals, — the Dombi climbs upon it and dances.”' 
In the Hevajra-tanira we find, “The Candali burns 
in the navel and she burns the five Tathagatas 
and the goddesses like Locana and others, and when all is 
burnt, the moon pours down the syllable hum.”- This 
Candali is the goddess Nairatma or Avadhutika or Prajna, 

^ eka so paduma cauiotthi pakhtidt I 

iahlm cadi nacaa domh] hapudt II Song .No. 10. 

" candali jvalita nahhau dahati panca-tathagatan I 
dahaii ca locanadini dagdhe hurn sravatc sasi II 

Hevajra-lanira., MS., p. 4 (B). 



PRACTICES AND SUPREME BLISS 


117 


and when she is roused through the yogic practice in the 
navel, all the five Skandhas or the material elements 
represented by the five Tathagatas and ail the goddesses 
like Locana and others associated with these Tathagatas are 
burnt away, and when all is burnt the moon, which represents 
the Bodhi-cilta, pours down hum, which again represents 
the ultimate knowledge ivajra-jnana).^ In a song of GunjarL 
pada we find, — The lotus and the thunder meet together 
in the middle and through their union Candali is ablaze / 
that blazing file is in contact with the house of the Dombi, — 

1 take the moon and pour water. Neither scorching heat 
nor smoke is found, but it enters the sky through the peak 
of mount Meru.”^ When the lotus and the thunder are 

^ In the Hcvajro panjil^a we find as many as four inteipretat ions of this verse. 
In the first interpretation we find that Canda means Prajna ns she is of very fierce 
{canda) nature in controlling all the great and minor afflictions (/?/ciopo^/csa) and 
Alt means Vajra sattva : therefore Candali means the union of Prajna with the 
Vajia-saltva; and as a result of that union the fire of great ernotic n {mahd-ra^a) burns 
away the five h/kandhas and the five elements of caith, etc. ' C/ locanddinVti pjfihivyd' 
dinlii' and the Sasi as the Vajra-sattva adopts the nature of hum, (it may be re- 
membered in this connection tha^t hum is the htja manira of the Vajra-sattva) The 
s'’Cond interpretation is almost the same as the first. Another sectarian view 
{sampraddya vydk.hyd) is that Canda ic. Prajna, or the left nerve (r e., flowing from 
the left nostril) and Ali is Upaya or the right nerve; when they are combined together 
through the instructions of the preceptor, it is called Candali : Ndbhi indicates the 
middle, i.c., the Avadhutika (t.c , the middle nerve) through which the fire of great 
emotion (mahd-rdga^ni) all the five Skandhas and the material elements (earth, etc,) 
are burnt, and when they are burnt the knowledge of the Maha-i^ukha is produced. Again, 
another sectarian explanation is, — Canda is Prajna, r.e., .^Qnyata knowledge, — and Alt 
means the mind lull of universal compassion ; candali then means a commingling of these 
i^unyata and Karuna and when it is thus combined Sa^i, f.e., the Vajra-dhara attains 
an illuminating Samadhi (prahhdsvaramaya-samddhi) where the world of the past, 
present and the future is realised to be one and unchanging. [{Vide HeVajra paftjikjd, 

MS., pp. 9 (B)- 10(B).] 

2 k.amala k^lisa mdjhcm bhaia miah I 
samaid joem jalia candali II 
daha dombi' ghare Idgeli agi I 
sasahara lai sificahum pdni II 
nau kh^ra jdld dhuma na disai I 
meru-sikhara lai gaana paisai II 


Song No. 47. 



118 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


united through the emotion of Maha-sukha (which is happily 
compared to a gush of wind) Candali is ablaze in the 
Nirmana-cakra in the navel/ In contact with this fire of 
Maha-sukha the house (/.e., the store of all complexes, 
desires and root-instincts) is burnt, but the moon (i.e., 
Bodhi-citta) pours water in the fire. This fire of Maha-sukha 
has neither heat nor smoke, but it enters into vacuity (gaana) 
through the spinal column (mount Meru). 

In the Sadhana-mala we find that Maha-mudra resides 
in the navel and she is the producer of Maha-sukha and 
for intense scorch she is described as of the nature of fire. 
She is of the nature of the first vow^l, she is taken to be the 
wisdom by the Buddhas, — she remains pervading the three 
elements (tri-dhatu), and is never known by lay people 
(prthag-jana) 

In the Samputil^d this Candali is depicted as the female 
counterpart of the Vajra-sattva ; she is absorbed in him, 
as Prajna and when roused by the yogic practice she becomes 
ablaze in the region of the navel. She is known as the 
goddess Nairatma as well as the Vasanta-tilaka, she 
consumes in her thousand heaps of fire — her lustre is like 
the dazzle of the lightning ; at the time of the yogic practice 
(of making oneself a god; that iSakti moves throughout the 
whole body with all her power, — she burns the Dharma-cakra 
in the heart and then through the Sambhoga-cakra proceeds 
forward and enters the Cakra in the head and then after 
burning everything and producing bliss returns to the region of 
the navel again." In the commentary on the Marma-^alik.d- 

' C/. the Com. k.amala-k.uliiam iiyadi I prajnopaya-samatam satyak-^ara- 

mahasukha-raga-nila-vartan nahhau nirmana-cakre candali jvaliia mama I 

Ibid., p. 72 (Jsaslri’s edition) 

Sadhana-maldt Vol. II, p 448 (G O. S.), 

^ iasyaiva sahajd prajna sthiid tadgata-rupwi 1 

karma-maruta-nirddhuta jValantVha ndbhi-mandalc II 
nairdtmeii vik.hydtd vasanta-tilaka smrtd I 
bala-grasat-sahasrdgnl vidyuc-chatd-samaprabhd II 



PRACTICES AND SUPREME BLISS 


119 


tantra we find a description of the nature of this Candali. 
It is said to be of the nature of a peculiar affection produced 

Natu.cofCa-ndslT the application of all yoga- 

practices with the instructions of the 
preceptor, — it is like juice extracted from sugarcanes 
through pressure, — like great light produced in the wood 
through friction, — like the pleasure produced in the couples 
through their intense love in copulation, — like cream 
produced in milk through churning, — like the most substan- 
tial thing ighrta) produced in cream through the power of 
heat, — like hard pottery produced from mud through the 
power of whirling, — like the best potency (wine) produced 
in grapes, etc., through medicinal processes, like the actual 
presentation of the desired one through the power of 
attraction produced in Mantra, etc.' Thus it seems from all 
these descriptions that the goddess Candali is nothing but 
an internal force produced through the yogic process and 
that the rising of the Candali marks the first perception of the 
Maha-sukha produced through esoteric yogic practices ; when 
in her upward march she reaches the Usnisa-kamala, she 


dcVata-yoga-kale roma-kfipagra sandhi^u I 
niscaranti di^o dasah sarVan iarjayanti surasuran II 
hTdaye dharma cakfam dagdhva sambhoga-cakratah 1 
nasa randhrcna niskramya dahsinena samantatah || 
urnd k.o^a gaienapi randhrcna dasa-dik.su Vai i 
buddhanarn bodhisaitvanarn nasd-randhrena vdmatah || 
pravisanti ^ikhd-cakrc samadahya viniskramet I 
purvoktenaivn randhrcna sikhaydrn pravi§et punah II 
dagdhdnam sarva buddhanarn dnandarn janayel tatah I 
nabhi'mandalam agatya sihitd bhavati purvavat II 

Srl-sampuiika, MS., pp. 48 (B) •49(A). 

^ tatra ca hhmati candali yoga-sakula-Sakti-nidhane guru-Vakyadisu sarnyoga- 
sukti-samutpadita-viSisia-ragavat I iksvddisu pldana-Sakti-samupajata-diVya-rasavat I 
kasthadisu sayanlya { -^akti-samutpadita rnahalokavat I maithunesu dampati-priti- 
^akti-samutpddita-sukkavat 1 kfiradisu dhard-iakti-samulpadita-sdravat I navanitesu 
jvdid-sakti-samutpddita-visisfa'sdravat I mrttikadisu aVariana-Sakd-samutpadita- 
taijasavat I draksadisu bhaisajya-iakU'Samutpadita-bala-visesavat I mantradisu 
dkarsanasakti-samutpddita-saphala-vdnchitavat I 

Com. on Marma-kolika'tantrQf MS., p. 39 (B) 



120 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


becomes of the nature of pure Maha-sukha. This concep- 
tion of Sakti of the Buddhist Sahajiyas is an adoption of the 
general Tantric conception of the 5akti mixed up with the 
principle of the destructive fire, or the fire-force situated in 
the navel as postulated and emphasised by the Natha-yogins/ 
When through the yogic-pro:ess this Sakti is made to move 
upvvards and is gradually dissociated from the principles 
of grossness and defilement, she gradually reveals to the 
yogin her pure nature of bliss and in the region of the lotus 
in the head, Le., in the highest state completely dissociated 
from the principle of grossness and defilement, she becomes 
pure Maha-sukha. 

In the upward march the Canddi is often described as 

... , the Dombi and when in the Maha-sukha- 

tions of the Candali into kamala, she is the Sahaja-damsel [Sahaja- 
pombi, Nairamani, I \ • 1 1 7 f • • 

SavarT, Sabaja-sundari, swidarl) With whom the peiiect yogin is 

always united. In the Carya-padas we 
often find that the yogin is sporting with the goddess 
Nairatma in the Sambhoga-kaya near the neck. Thus 
Savara-pada says in a song, — “ (I chew the) betel-leaf of 
my heart and chew camphor in great bliss, — and then with 
the goddess Nairamani in the neck I pass the night in 
Maha-sukha.” ’ Here the ‘ betel-leaf of heart ’ stands for 
the luminous Citla, and camphor {l^dpura — l^arpura) for 
semen.' Nairamani (or Nirdmani) is the goddess Nairatma 
or Prajna, — neck implies the Sambhoga-cakra, and nig ht 
implies the darkness of ignorance and afflictions. In 
a song of Kanha-pada we find that the uninitiate speak ill 
of the Dombl {Nairatma) but the wise never separate her 


^ Vide inira Ch. IX. 

hia tarnvoia mahasuhe kapura hhai I 
suna niramani k^^nthe lata mahasuhe rati pohai 
Song No. 28. 

C/. iukraip. korpurakom matam I 

Hcvajra-ianira, MS., p. 44 (A), 



PRACTICES AND SUPREME BLISS 


121 


from the neck, i.e., from the Sambhoga~kaya.’ In another 
song of Savara-pada we find that the yogin remains 
awake with the damsel Nairatma awakened in the neck 
(i.e., the Sambhoga-cakra)."^ In a song of Gundaii pada 
we find, — “After pressing the three (i.e., after purifying and 

controlling the three nerves), 1 embrace the Yogini O 

Yogini, (exclaims the yogin) I shall not live even for a 
moment without thee, — I shall kiss thy lips and drink the 
lotus-juice.’’^ In another song of Kanha pada we find, — 
“Outside the city, O Dombi, is thy cottage; thou goest just 
touching the Brahmins and the shaven-headed (and never 
reveal thyself to them). O Dombi, I shall keep company 
with thee and it is for this purpose that I have become a 
naked Kapali without aversions. There is one lotus an j sixty- 
four are the petals, — the dear Dombi climbs on it and 
dances there. Honestly do I ask thee, on whose boat dost 
thou come and go ? The Dombi sells the loom and also 
the flat basket (made of bamboo). For thee have 1 done 
aw&y with this drama of life. Thou art the Dombi and I 
am the Kapdi, for thee have 1 put on a garland of bones* 
The Dombi destroys the lake and eats up the lotus-stalk. 
1 shall kill thee, Dombi, and take ihy life.’’ ^ Here, the 
Dombi is the Nairatma and we have already seen that as a 
Dombi (i.e., a woman of the Doma-caste) cannot be touched 
by a Brahmin because of her low caste, so also the Nairatma 
cannot be realised by the orthodox Brahmin, as she 

^ kcho keho tohore hirua holai I 

hidujana loa tore k_an{ha na melai II 
Caryfi-pada, Song No. 18. 

^ kanthe nairamani ball jagante upadi II 
Ibid, Song No. 50. 

^ tiaddd capi joini de ankavall 1 


joini tai vina kbanahi na jivami I 
to muha cumvi kamala-rasa pivami II 
Song No. 4. 

^ Song No. 10. 

)6~I41IB 



122 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


transcends all sense- perception/* She, therefore, lives outside 
the city, i.e., outside the world of senses. In the metaphor 
of selling the loom and the basket of bamboo there seems to 
be a pun on some of the words ; tanti in the vernacular means 
a loom, but it may also be associated with the Sanskrit word 
tantn or tantra to signify the thread of mental constructions ; 
the word camgedd means a basket (made of bamboo), but 
the commentary explains it as i;isayafchasom, i.e., the defiling 
principle of objectivity. The lake mentioned above is the 
body and the lotus-stalk is the Bodhi-citta ; and the Dombi, 
unless she is perfectly purified, spoils both of them. It is 
for this reason that the Dombi should be purified and made 
steady in order to attain the Bodhi-citta. This latter Dombi, 
however, seems to be the vital wind, impure and unconli oiled, 
and in the Hevajra-tantra we find that the element of air is 
represented by the goddess Dombi.' In a song Vina-pada, 
who has made a lyre with the sun, the moon and the 
Avadhuti, says that when the lyre produces sound, the 
Vajradhara (the yogin himself) dances and the goddess 
(Nairdtmd) sings and thus the drama of the Buddha is 
played. ’ Kanha-pada says in another song, — “ Of what 
nature is, O Dombi, thy cleverness ? — the aristocrats are 
outside thee and the Kapalis are within (Le., the arrogant 
pundits and the orthodox priests can never have any access 
to the Sahaja-Nairatma, but only the Kapali yogins can 
realise her). Thou hast spoiled everything, through the 
law of cause and effect thou hast destroyed the moon. 
(The s gnificance is that the Nairatma, when covered with 
the veils of ignorance, deceives the whole world through 
illusory knowledge, in that respect she spoils the moon, Le., 

' asparia hhaVati yasmdt tasmat domh'i prakoihyatc I 
Hevajra-tantra, MS,, p. 2 (B). 

Cf. Earth is PukkasI, wa(cr SavarT, fire Candsli and air is the Domb!. 

Hevajra-tantra. MS., p. 26 ^A). 

3 ndcanti vajila gdnti dei I 

huddha ndtakoi visama hoi II Song No. 17, 



PRACTICES AND SUPREME BLISS 


123 


the Bodhi-citta). Some speak ill of thee, but the learned 
never cast thee off from the neck (i.e. the Sambhoga- 
cakra). Thou art the Kama-candab, — there is no woman 
more cunning and unfaithful than the Dombi.” ‘ In 
another song of Kanha-pada we find a beautiful analogy 
of marriage with the Dombi. First follows a wedding 
procession in which existence and extinction are made the 
musical instruments paiaha and madala and the mind and 
the vital wind are similarly made two other musical instru- 
ments, — the drum is proclaiming a victorious sound and 
Kanha is on his march for marrying the Dombi. By 
marrying the Dombi the gain is the escape from birth, and 
the transcendental region {dna(u-dhQma=^ anutiara-dhorna) 
of Maha-sukha is obtained as the dowry. After marriage 
day and night pass away in sex-discourse and the night 
is passed in the bright company of the YoginI (z.e., the dark 
night of ignorance vanishes away at the appearance of the 
effulgent Sahaja-knowledge). The yogin who is in love 
with the Dombi never leaves her even for a moment and 
always remains mad in the Sahaja-bliss ” In a song of 
Kukkuri-pada we find it put into the mouth of the Nairatma, — 
“lam free from all hopes and desires and the void-mind is 
my husband, — the nature of the realisation of bliss that 
proceeds from me cannot be expressed. In another song, 
Savara-pada says, “ High is the mountain (z.e., the spinal 
column) and there on it (i.e., in the Maha-sukha* cakra 
which is above the spinal column) sits the Sabari girl ; she 
is decked with the coloured feathers of the peacock and 
with a garland of jequirity on her neck. O exhilarated 
Savara, O mad 6avara, (exclaims the girl on the mountain), 


^ Song No. 18. 

- Song No. 19. 

■ hama nirasl k.ha Tnana blialdi i i 
mohora vigod kahana na jdi II 

Song No. 20. 



124 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


do not revel in wordly pleasure ; I am thy dear consort of 
the name of Sahaja-sundart (i.e., beautiful Sahaja-Iady). 
Many are the trees on the mountain whose branches touch 
the sky, — the Savari girl decked with earrings and the 
thunder plays alone in this forest. The bed-stead of the 
three elements (viz., body, speech and mind) are placed and 
the Savara spreads the bed in great bliss, and the serpent- 
like ^vara (i.e., the citta) and the goddess Nairatma (who 
deslioys all the afflictions) pass their night of love on that 
bed." ' In another song of Bhusuka-pada he says, — ‘‘ 1 
have steered the thunder-boat through the canal of the 
lotus, — and have left off all the afflictions after reaching 
the non-dual Bengal. To-day Bhusuka has indeed become 
a Bengalee, for he has taken Candall as his own wife." 
Here the Vajra (the thunder) stands for the Citta-vajra (i.e., 
the adamantine mind) and the lotus stands for the Prajna, 
and through their union the non-dual truth (Bengal) is 
obtained. ' By making Candali (produced through the union 

1 uca uca paVata iahim basai savarl hah 1 

morangi p'lccha parahina savarl givata gunjarl mail II 
umata savaro pdgala savaro md kora gull guhadd iohori I 
nia gharinl ndme sahaja sundarl II 
ndnd taruvara maulila re gaanata Idgell ddll 1 
e^e/i savarl e barta hindai korna-kvndala vajradhari II 
tia dhau khdfa padild savaro mahdsukhe seji chdill I 
savaro bhujafiga nairdmani ddrl pemma rdti pohdili II 
Song No. 28. 

C/. also, varagiri sihara uitunga muni savare jahi kio vdsa I 

Dohdkosa of K&nha-pada» Dohs No. 25. 

2 bdja ndva pddl pdud khdle bdhiu 
adaa vangale klcsa ludiu II 

dji hhusu hahgdll bhaill 
nia gharinl candall lell II 

Song No. 49. 

3 It is to be noticed that Bengal here represents non-duality. tC/. also, 
bange jdyd nilesi etc. Song No. 39). How it came to be so we do not know. MM. 
Haraprasada 3fistrl, however, says in his introduction to the Bauddha Gan-O-Doha 
(Intro., p. 12) that in the Sahajiya School there are three ways of SadhanS - Utz., 
AvadliOti, Candall and Dombl, or Vangali l/.e., Bengalee^ In the AvadhulT there 
is only duality, Candall seems to be a mixture of dualism as well as non-dualism, 



Practices and suPi^EME bliss 125 

of the thunder and the lotus) his wife, the yogin has realised 
the purely non-dual truth. 

(vi) The Final Slate of Bodhi-citta or the * 

State of Maha-su\ha. 

From our previous discussions it will be clear that the 
question of the production of the Bodhi-citta and its upward 
march through the different Kayas to the Usnisa-kamala 
so as to be transformed there into Maha-sukha Is closely 
associated with the question of raising the Sakti from 
the lowest pole of phenomenalism to the highest pole 
of absolute truth. When the Sakti reaches the Vajra-kaya 
or the Sahaja-kaya she becomes Sunyata herself, — and 
our perfected Citta becomes the lord Vajra-satlva; real 
Maha-sukha follows only when this Sunyata is united in 
the Sahaja-kaya with the Vajra-saltva. 

There are, however, some signs which are observed 
by the yogin when the ultimate slate is produced. In the 
^rhguhya-samaja we find mention of five such signs : 
the first is of the form of a mirage, the second of the 
form of smoke, the third in the form of a firefly, the fourth 
is like a burning lamp and the fifth is like the stainless 
sky.' These signs are rather significant. In the com- 
mentary on the Marma-hjaliiia-tanira it has been explained 
that the sign of mirage signifies the knowledge about the 

but in Dombi there is only uncompromising non-duality. In Bengal, continues MM. 
^istri, there was a predominance of monistic thought and therefore the author 
Bbusuka says that he has become a Bengalee or a pure non-dualist. We, however, 
do not know on the authority of what text or texts MM. jSastrl has made these observa- 
tions. We have never come across any text explaining or even mentioning these 
three ways of Sahaji>a Sadhana and it s-eems a puzzle to us why Avadhoti should 
represent dualism. His assertion that Bengal has always stood paiticularly for non- 
dual knowledge does not also seem to be historical. 

^ ptathamam mar'icikakaram dhumrakaram dvit'iyakarn 1 
trtiyam k^adyotakaram caturtham dlpavaj jvalam It 
pancoman tu sadd-lo\aTn nirahhratn gagana-sannibham I 

^fhguhya-samaja-tanira, Ch. XVllI. p. 164, (G. O. S.;. 



126 ' 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


nature of the world, which at that time appears to the 
yogin to be as illusory as a mirage. When the illusory 
nature of the Dharmas is thus realised, there remains no 
appearance (pratibhasa) and, therefore, everything appears 
to be smoky, a mere illusory happening through the 
collocation of the causes and conditions like the origination 
of an elephant in magic; this dependent origination 
(pratitya-samutpada) is the smoky nature of the world and 
hence is the second sign/ Again, as for the third 
sign it is said that as the firefly shines in the sky now and 
then for a single moment, so also in this stage perfect 
knowledge appears through the void-nature of the Dharmas 
like momentary flashes and hence is the appropriateness of 
the third sign." In the fourth stage knowledge becomes as 
bright as a burning lamp and in the fifth or the final stage it 
becomes like the clear blue mid-day sky of autumn ^ These 
signs are referred to also hy the $n-k^la-cakra-tantra ; ' but 
there as well as in the Sadafiga it is found that smoke is the 
first sign and mirage is the second.’ 

But what is the condition of the yogin when the Bodhi- 
citta is produced and the ultimate realisation is obtained ? 
it is said in the Vyak,la-bhavdnugata-iattva-siddhi ' that at 

^ mayd-gajadiva't) mdyd gajah praiiiya-samutapanno nibsvahhdva Hi visvam 
eVa praUtya-samuipada-rupam dhumam paiyaiiiyarihah 1 

Com. on ihe Marma-k^alikaHantra , MS. {BN. Sans. No. 83), p. 45(B). 

^ yathd khndyotah k.he dka^c ^sanam k^anam dyotate taihaiva hhdvena 

sunyatdydm jndna(m) ydti Hi irliyam cihnam I 

Ibid,, MS., p. 46 iB). 

Cj. iunye dhumadi, etc. MS. (Cambridge. Add. 1364) p. 33 (Bj. 
dhumadmam nimitta-grahanam api, elc., Ibid., p. 1 10 (A). 

• Cf iunydd dhumo maricih prakota-vimaJa-kbadyota eva pradlpah I 

Ibid . MS, pp. ]09(A)-1 10(A). 

Also Cf. iatra gurupadcscna prathamarn yogi dhumam pasyati na 

marlcikam Hi I 

Sadanga quoted in the com. on the Marma-balika-ianira, MS, p 45' A K 
1 he text is ascribed in the Subhasila-samgraha (p 63) to Saraha pada, but 
we do not find mention of the author anywhere in the MS. of the text we have at 
our disposal. 



PRACTICES AND SUPREME BLISS 


127 


that time all the senses are absorbed within, all thought- 
constructions are destroyed, all the seeds of existence ate 
annihilated ; it is full of lustre of bliss, — it is like the vacant 
sky and yet cool and congenial d It is said elsewhere that 
at that stage it seems as if the senses are all asleep, — 
the mind enters within, — and the body completely absorbed 
in supreme bliss seems to be without any function/ In 
the Carya-padas we find many songs describing this ultimate 
state of perfection or the realisation of the Sahaja-nature 
in the form of Maha-sukha. Kanha-pada in a song compares 
himself, when absorbed in the Sahaja bliss, to an intoxicated 
elephant ; like the elephant he has trampled down all the 
posts of ‘ e ’ and ‘ vam ’ or the moon and the sun and 
torn asunder all the various ties, and like the elephant under 
strong intoxication has entered the lake of the lotus and 
become perfectly pacified there/ Mahi'dhara-pada says 
in a song that he has identified himself with the three 
wooden boards (/.e., the three kinds of bliss as belonging 
to the body, speech and mind), or, in other words, he has 
identified the bliss of the body with that of the speech and 
that again with that of the mind and finally identified all with 
the self,' and there follows a tremendous roar of the spon- 
taneous anaha {anahata) sound ; — on hearing that sound 
the arch-enemy, Mara, and all the desires and afflictions of 
the body vanish away. The exhilarated elephant of Citta is 
marching on — and in the sky it is always rubbing the sun and 


’ vinivistendriya-vargo nasta-vik.alpah samapta-hhava-htjah I 

anandakhamayo'sau{}) gagana-samo 'py adahah sHalah sVaduh II 

Vyakta-bhavanugata-tativa siddhi, MS (C. L. B. No. 13124), p. 89 (B). 
indriyani svapantl'va mono' niarvisaVi va ca 1 
naxta-cesta ivd'bhdti kayah sat-sukha-murcchiiah II 
Quoted in the Kriyd-samgraha^panjika, MS. (BN. Sans. No. 31) p. 76 (Bl ; also in 
the Com. on the Carya pada No. 1 (Sastil a Edition). 

3 l^dnhu vilasaa dsava-mdta I 

sahaja nilini-vana paisi nivitd II 

Carya-pada, Song No. 9. 

C/. Sn-guhya samdja, Ch. II, p. 11 (G. O. S.), 



m 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the moon {i.e., all principles of duality). Both vice an 
merit are destroyed, the chain is torn away — the posts 
trampled, and the sound of the sky is rising — the Citta 
enters into Nirvana. The Citta neglects all the three worlds, 
drinks the great liquor (of Maha-sukha) and revels in intoxi- 
cation; thus he becomes the lord of the five objects, i.e., 
becomes the Vajra-sattva himself, — and no enemy is then 
to be found anywhere. In the score hing heat of the rays 
(of Maha-sukha) he has entered the skirt of the sky. Mahi- 
dhara says, “When here 1 sink within — nothing is seen by 
me.’’ ' Bhusukapada says in a song," “ The clouds of com- 
passion are shining always after pressing down the duality of 
existence and non-existence. The wonderful has risen up 
in the sky, — behold, Bhusuka, the Sahaja-nature ! On 
seeing and hearing it (i.e., the Sahaja-nature) all the senses 
are destroyed and the mind within revels in solitude.” '' As 
all darkness vanishes with the rise of the bright moon in the 
sky, so also all darkness of ignorance is removed through 
the rise of the Bodhi-citta and through the realisation of the 
Sahaja-bliss the ultimate reality underlying the objects is also 
realised . 

^ Carya-pada, Song No. 16. 

Ibid.j Song No. 30. 

The text is — 

nihure nia mana na de ulasa II 

But the Commentary says,— nibhrtena nirtiliolpa\arenn nija manah hodhi 
cittam vijra guroh prasadat sahajoUasam dadatVti I So in light of the Commentaiy 
the leading of the text should be,— nihure nia mana de ulasa II Cj* also the Sanskrit 
rendering of the Tibetan version of the line by Dr. Bagchi - 

nija-manasi uUasam dadati II Materials for, etc., p. 67. 



PART II 

THE MEDIAEVAL SAHAJIYA SCHOOLS 


17—14118 




CHAPTER V 


The Vaisnava Sahajiya Cult 

(i) Transition from Buddhist Sahajiya to VaisnaVa Sahajiya 

The Vaisnava Sahajiya movement of Bengal marks the 
evolution of the Buddhist Sahajiya cult in a different channel 
as strongly influenced by the love-religion of Bengal 
Vaisnavism. The Vaisnava Sahajiya cult has a considerable 
literature to its credit. As many as two hundred and fifty 
manuscripts of small texts containing the various doctrines 
and practices of the cult are preserved in the Manuscript 
Library of the Calcutta University and about an equal 
number of texts (many of them being common with those 
preserved in the Manuscript Library of the Calcutta University) 
belong to the Manuscript Library of the Vangiya Sahitya- 
parisad. These texts, however, do not possess much intrinsic 
literary value and as such their contribution to Bengali 
literature would not have been of much importance but for 
the fact that they help us in the study of a large number of 
lyrical songs belonging both to the Sahajiya Vaisnava and 
the standard Vaisnava cults, both of which accepted the 
ideal of Parakiya love as contrasted with the ideal of Svalyya 
love in their doctrines.' 

These love- lyrics, belonging to the province of Vaisnavism, 

, combine in them a genuine poetic vein 

General natutc of ^ , 

the cult and relation of an absorbing human interest with an 

with standard Vais- i* • • j L 

nava religion and avowedly religious Sentiment and as such 
* they offer a good specimen of how far it 

may be possible for aesthetic sentiment and religious senti- 


1 For the ideals of Svakiya and Parakiya see m/ra, p. 144. 



13Z 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


ment to combine in popular poetry. In the history ol the 
Vaisnava literature of Bengal the most important factor is 
the ideal of Parakiya love ; but whereas the Ideal of Paraklya 
love was merely recognised as a theological speculation in 
standard Vaisnavism, it was accepted even in its practical 
bearing by the Sahajiyas. In the history of Bengal Vaisnav- 
ism there seems to have been a process of interaction 
between the two sects — the practice of the Sahajiyas 
influencing to a great extent the ideal of the Vaisnava poets, 
and the ideal of the Vaisnavas in its turn influencing the 
practices of the Sahajiyas. Though the story of the love- 
episodes of Candidasa, the greatest love-poet of Bengal, 
with the washer-woman, Rami, is still now shrouded in 
mystery and as such cannot be credited historically as 
supplying proof of Candidasa himself being an exponent of 
the Sahajiya practice, yet we should remember that tradition 
always indicates possibility. Judging from the heaps of 
tradition centering round the figure of poet Candidasa and also 
from the number of Sahajiya poems ascribed to him, it will 
not be far out of the mark to hold that there might have been 
some truth in the tradition of Candidasa himself being a 
Sahajiya Sadhaka and that his practical culture of the 
dlvinlsation of human love had supplied him with the deep 
inspiration that made him the immortal poet of the Radha- 
rCrsna songs. The indebtedness of Sri-Caitanya to the love- 
lyrics of Jayadeva, Vidyapati and Candidasa is well-known 
through the Caitanya-caritamrta (a standard biography of 
Caitanya) and the songs of some other poets ; the inspiration 
derived from these songs was not negligible in moulding 
Caitanya’s ideal of divine love. Apart from the controversy 
over the religious view-point of Candidasa and its influence 
on Caitanya’s ideal of love, it may be held that the general 
history of the Vaisnava Sahajiya movement with its stress 
on Parakiya love was closely related to the general love- 
movement of Bengal ; it is because of this close relation 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 


133 


between the two that the rich field of Bengali lyrics cannot 
be fully and properly studied without a proper study of the 
Sahajiya religion and literature. 

The lyrics belonging to the Vaisnava Sahajiya school 
are generally ascribed to the well-known poet Candidasa 
and to some other poets like Vidyapati, Rupa, Sanatana, 
Vrndavana-dasa, Krsna-dasa Kaviraja, Narahari, Narottama, 
Locana, Caitanya-dasa and others, and the innumerable 
Sahajiya texts are also ascribed to their authorship. 

Such assignment, which was evidently made with a 
view to securing authoritative support from the great 
Vaisnava poets and thinkers for the unconventional practice 
of the Sahajiyas, need not be credited historically. In their 
zeal for propaganda these Sahajiyas have held all the great 
poets like Jayadeva, Vidyapati, Candidasa and others, and 
the great Vaisnava apostles like Rupa, Sanatana, Svarupa 
Damodara, Jiva Gosvami and others to be the exponents of 
Sahajiya practice. Even Sri-Caitanya himself has been 
held by some of the Sahajiyas as having practised Sahaja 
Sadhana with female companions and attained pertection 
through it,^ as lord Buddha was held by the Buddhist 
Sahajiyas as having practised Sahaja Sadhana in company 
of his consort Gopa. It seems, however, that almost all 

^ II is curiously held by a section of the Sahajiyas that Caitanya priictised 
Sahuja Sadhana in company of Sathi, daughter of Sarvabhauma, and it was because 
of this fad that the mother of Sathi once said that she would have her daughter a 
widow, (C/. Caiianyacaritdmrta, Madhya-hid; Ch XV). The Sahajiyas hold 
that all the Rreat Vaisnava apostles of standard Vaisnavism practised Sahaja Sadhana 
with some female companion. Thus it is said in the Vivarta-vildsa of Alcincana-dasa — 
sri rUp korild sadhana mirdr sahite I hhatta raghu-ndth kaild k.arn-hdi sdihe ii lak^ml 
htrd sane k.arild gomsdi sandtan I mahdmanira prcmc sevd sada acaran II gosdni 
lokandth canddlinhkanya safige I doha jan anurdg premer tarangc II goydlini pihgald 
se hraja deVi sama I gosdni /?rsna-c?ds sadai dcarana 'I sydma ndplidnir sahgc Srhjw 
gomsdi I parama se hhdv k^^ild ydr simd ndi II raghu-ndth gosoami plriii ulldse I 
mird'bdi sahge teha rddha k^nda-hase II gaur-priyd sahgc gopdl-bhafla gomsdi I 
karaye sadhan anya ki<^hu ndi II ray rdmdnanda yaje deva-kariyd sahge I dropete 
sihiti teha kjiydr tarangc II 


Vahga sdhitya-paricaya, Vol. If, p. 1650. 



134 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the songs (including the enigmatic songs ascribed to Candi- 
dasa well-known as the Ragatmika Padas) and the texts were 
composed by the exponents of the Sahajiya cult in the 
post-Caitanya period, and mostly in or after the seventeenth 
century A.D. 

We have hinted on several occasions that the secret 
, , , yogic practices, round which grew the 

1 he fundamental 

tenet of the Sahajiyas paraphernalia or the dirrerent Sahajiya 

and its relation witii . . . . . l n l ii • 

Tantricism, Hindu and cults, belong neither slrictly to the Buddhist 
Buddhist. exclusively to the Hindu fold ; 

they are essentially yogic practices, which by their association 
with different theological systems, either Buddhist or Hindu, 
have given rise to different religious cults. The most impor- 
tant of the secret practices is the yogic control of the sex- 
pleasure so as to transform it into transcendental bliss, 
which is at the same time conducive to the health both of the 
body and the mind. This yogic practice with its accessories, 
being associated with the philosophy of 6iva and Sakti, 
stands at the centre of the net- work of the Hindu Tantric 
systems, and when associated with the speculations on 
Prajna and Upaya of later Buddhism, has given rise to the 
Tantric Buddhist cults including the Buddhist Sahajiya 
system ; and again, when associated with the speculations 
on Krsna and Radha conceived as Rasa and Rati in Bengal 
Vaisnavism, the same yogic practice and discipline has been 
responsible for the growth and development of the Vaisnava 
Sahajiya movement of Bengal, it will, therefore, be incorrect 
to say, as has really been said by some scholars, that the 
Vaisnava Sahajiya movement of Bengal is a purely post- 
Caitanya movement having no relation whatsoever with the 
earlier Buddhist Sahajiyas and that the two cults are distinct 
fundamentally. A close study of the literature of the Vaisnava 
Sahajiyas will leave no room for doubting the clear fact that 
it records nothing but the spirit and practices of the earlier 
Buddhist and Hindu Tantric cults, of course in a distinctly 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 


135 


transformed form wrought through the evolution of centuries 
in different religious and cultural environments. The psycho- 
physiological yogic processes, frequently referred to in the 
lyrical songs of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas and also in the 
innumerable short and long texts, embodying the doctrines 
of the cult, are fundamentally the same as are found in the 
Hindu Tantras as well as in the Buddhist Tantras and the 
Buddhist songs and Dohas. There are sometimes discre- 
pancies only in details and differences more often pertain 
to terminology and phraseology than to conception.' 

^ We may point out here that in the literature of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas we 
find reference not only to the sexo-yogic practices of the Tantrics, but also to the 
important yogic practice of drinking the nectai oozing from the moon situated beneath 
the lotus of SahasrSra, which practice was emphasised by the Nstha-yogins {vide 
infra, Ch. IX.) Cf, :~ 

candra itday sudhamrta k?ore I 

pite na paiya cakpr pipasate mare II 

• M 

sahasra-dal Jiay mastak hhitarc I 
aksay namete taiha iichc sarovare i| 
itdar hhitar ache mana sarovare I 
fatha haitc phul gcla sahasra-dal upare !! 
urddhva-mukhe adho-mul^ihc haiya nasdr 1 
sarva-hal miil bastu dchc tar hhitar !1 etc. 

Ananda-hhairava, vide Sahajiyd-sdhiiya (edited by M. M. Ro&e, M.A., pp. 

132-133.) 

Again, haile saday jvala-jvolan nay 

hisdmrta ache taiha I 
his mdre gay amrte jiydy 

cki adhhut kathd II 

Amrta-rasdVal'i, Ibid, p. 163. 

Cf. also : — cander kochc avala yc ache 

sei ye raseri sdr II 
hisete amjrte milan ekotre 

kc bujhe marama iar tl 

Ragatmika Pada, ascribed to CandidSsa (No 16 of Bose’s edition). 

These principles of hisa i poison) and amrta fnectar), which represent the principles 
of the Sun and the Moon of the yogins {vide infra, Ch. IX.) were transformed by the 
Vaisnava Sahajiyfis into the principles of k^ma (carnal desire) and prema (pure love). 

Cf. his kheye yevd jdrite pare I sei se sadhak rdgete tare II 
sSdhane sadhak pak^ita nay I his khele seho nai hdcay II 
hisete afnrte e^tir hay 1 his jdri k^re amrfamay (I 

Vide Sj. 5., Song No. 8?. 



136 . 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


It is very interesting to note in this connection that like 
some of the texts of the Sahajiya Buddhists some of the 
Bengali texts on Sahajiya Vaisnavism, composed some time 
between the seventeenth and the nineteenth centuries, are 
introduced in the form of a dialogue between Siva 
"and Sakti, who are depicted as discussing the secrets of the 
Vaisnava Sahajiya Sadhana,^ and in the Ananda-bhairaVa 
it is hinted that Hara or Siva himself practised this Sahaja 
Sadhana in the company of the different Saktis in the 
country of the Kucnis (women belonging to the Koc tribe).’ 

We have discussed before at length the salient features 
The general feniure of the Buddhist Sahajiya cult and litera- 
lure. The Vaisnava Sahajiyaa, like other 
Buddhist .Sahajiyas mediaeval schools who were Sahajiyas 
in a broader sense, and of whom we shall speak in detail 
in the next chapter, harped on the same siring. But we 
have seen that the angle of vision from which the different 
schools of Indian religious thought criticised one another 
was different. Consequently, whereas the criticism of the 
Buddhist Sahajiyas represents an admixture of the spirit of 
Buddhism, Vedanta, Tantra and Yoga, the criticism of the 
Vaisnava Sahajiyas is marked by a dominating spirit of 
love, which is the watchword of their Sadhana, although, 
however, the lurking influence of Yoga and Tantra is not 
altogether missing. The Buddhist Sahajiyas, we have 
seen, inherited from the Yogic and Tantric schools in 
general the spirit that all truth underlying the universe 
as a whole is contained in the microcosm of the human 
body ; this belief, we shall presently see, was brought 


^ See A gama-grantha and Ananda-hhairava edited by Mr. M. M. Bose in 
Sj. S. ; see also the bibliography of seventy-nine Sahajiya texts with short notes cn 
them by Mr. M. M. Bose in a pamphlet reprinted from the J. D. L., Vol XVI. 

2 ek koila ekek prakt^i I harake hhajaye save hhaV upapaii 11 

jane rasa-tattva ar jane iahkare I sahaj hastu asvadiia kucani nagare II 
The dalliances of Siva with the Kucnis is very well known in the l^ivayanas of Bengali 
Jiteratura and there are also Puranic episodes with them. 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 137 


by the Vaisnava Sahajiyas to a deeper significance, which 
inspired them to declare to the world abroad, “ Hearken 
men, my brothers, — man is the truth above all truths, — there 
is nothing above that/’^ Again, the same spirit of Guru- 
vada that characterises the songs, Dohas and other Sanskritic 
texts of the Buddhist Sahajiyas as also the literature of the 
mediaeval saints, characterises also the songs and other 
texts of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas.' Again, as many of 
the Buddhist Siddhacaryas and mediaeval saints employed 
an extremely enigmatic and paradoxical style in their 
songs in describing the secrets of their Sadhana, so 
also it was the custom with the Vaisnava Sahajiyas 
to couch the secrets of their cult under a similar 
enigmatic style. Many of the songs ascribed to Candidasa 
are good specimens of such an enigmatic style. Thus 
it is clear that in spirit as well as in literary representation 
the relation between the Buddhist Sahajiyas and the Vaisnava 
Sahajiyas clearly shows an easy gliding from the one to 
the other. 


Historically it seems that the fall of the Pala dynasty 
of Bengal marked also the fall of Buddhism 
cru^ o'f’rhe traHion’ the ptovincc and that there was something 

like a Hindu revival during the reign of 
the Senas, who succeeded the Palas, Vaisnavism, 
based mainly on the love-dalliances of the cowherd Krsna 
with the cowherd girl Radha, began to gain popularity 
during the reign of the Senas and the first Bengali Vaisnava 
poet to sing the sweet immortal songs of Radha-Krsna 
was Jayadeva, who is said to have been the court-poet of 
the last Sena King Laksmanasena in the last half of the 


1 iuna he manuf bhat I 

saVar upare menus saiya 

iShar upare nai II 

Song ascribed to Candidasa. 

2 1/ide the songs on Guru collected in th«^ anthology Sahajiya Sahiiya by Mr, 
Bose. 


18~1411B 



138 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


twelfth century A.C. Candidasa of the fourteenth century 
popularised the legends and ideals of the love of Radha 
and Krsna through his exquisite lyrical poems. Similar lyrics 
were composed also by poet Vidyapati of Milhila, who 
was contemporaneous with Candidasa and enjoyed enormous 
popularity in Bengal; this wide-spread popularity of the 
Radha-Krsna songs began to influence the mind of the people 
belonging to all substrata of the society. It was through the 
influence of this love-ideal of the Radha-Krsna songs that 
the ideology of the Buddhist Sahajiyas gradually 
began to change, and the change of methodology was 
consequent on the change of ideology. 

With the popularity of the Radha-Krsna songs the ideal 
of Parakiya Rati, or the unconventional love between man 
and woman not bound by the conjugal tie, became em- 
phasised. In almost all the theological discussions of the 
Vaisnavas of the post-Caitanya period the superiority of this 
ideal of Parakiya love to that of Svakiya was variously 
demonstrated. In his Typical Seleciions from Old Bengali 
Literaiurd (Vol. II, pp. 1638-1643) Dr. D.C. Sen has quoted 
two old documents, belonging to the first half of the eighteenth 
century, where we find that regular debates were arranged 
between the Vaisnava exponents of the Parakiya and the 
Svakiya ideals of love, and in the debates the upholders 
of the Svakiya view were sadly defeated and had to 
sign documents admitting the supremacy of the Parakiya 
ideal of love. This will help us in guessing how much 
influence this Parakiya ideal did exert on the people of the 
time belonging to the Vaisnava fold. This ideal of Parakiya 
love has been the strongest factor in moulding the doctrines 
of the Sahajiya Vaisnavism of Bengal. 

It is customary to sneer at the Vaisnava Sahajiya cult 
as an order of debauchery under the cloak of religion. 
Abuses and aberrations there are in every religion, and 
there is no denial of the fact that debauchery found it^ 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 


139 


field of play in the Tan trie schools, both of Hinduism and 
Buddhism and in the school of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas, but 
that should not be the only point for consideration in 
judging the value of these religious orders. As students 
of literature, religion and culture, let us, like the wise swan, 
drink only milk out of a mixture of milk and water. 

We have pointed out before that the innumerable texts 
available on the doctrines and practices of the Sahajiyas 
few can be said to possess much intrinsic merit ; but 
the lyrics of the Sahajiyas, whoever might have been their 
author, really reached a high pitch of poetry and philosophy, 
and these songs assigned a sublime value to human 
love ; and with this deification of human love humanity 
as a whole has also been deified, and heaven above and 
earth below have met together in the songs of the Vaisnava 
Sahajiya poets. 

(n) The mode oj Transformation 

Let us now follow the mode of transformation of the 
ideology of the Buddhist Sahajiyas into that of the Vaisnava 
Sahajiyas. The final aim of the Buddhist Sahajiyas, apart 
from the customary way of describing it as the Vacuity, 
or the Prajna, or the Bodhi-citta, was supreme bliss,- — and 
this conception of the final state of the Buddhist Sahajiyas 
differed from that of the early Buddhists in this that the 
Maha-sukha state of Nirvana is a definitely positive state, 

- while the earlier Buddhistic tendency was 

1 he nnal state of the 

Vaisnava Sahajiyas, towards negation; again, the conception 
of the Buddhist Sahajiyas differs from the 
compared. general conception of the final state of 

the different schools of yoga in this that it is not a state of 
absolute dissolution ; though it is a state of arrest and a 
negative state in so far as it involves the arrest of all states 
and processes of mind, it is a positive state of supreme 



140 ^ 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


bliss. Of course, sometimes this state of supreme bliss 
has been criticised as a slate of mere thought-construction, — 
and Nirvana has been defined as a pure stale of negation 
bereft of all sorts of thoughticonslructions but in general 
IVlaha-sukha itself, bereft ofrlubjectivity and objectivity, has 
been held to be the final state — the state of vacuity and perfect 
enlightenment. The final state of Maha-sukha as the state 
of Sahaja of the Buddhists is also the final stale of Sahaja 
with the Vaisnava Sahajiyas ; but the Vaisnavas conceived 
this Sahaja state as the state of supreme love, and this 
supreme love has been conceived as the primordial substance 
which underlies the world-proceSs as a whole. But 
how can this Sahaja be the ultimate reality? It is the 
ultimate reality inasmuch as it is the non-dual state 
of the unity of Siva and Sakti, which are but the 
two aspects of the absolute reality as conceived in 
the Hindu Tantras.“ Again in the Buddhist school it 
is the non-dual state of unity of Prajria and Upaya which 
are also the two aspects of the absolute reality.^ The 
principles of Siva and Sakti or Upaya and Prajna are re- 
presented by man and woman, and it is, therefore, that 
when through the process of Sadhana man and woman can 
realise their pure nature as Siva and Sakti, or Upaya and 
Prajna, the supreme bliss arising out of the union of the two 
becomes the highest state whereby one can realise the 
ultimate nature of the absolute reality. Now the conception 
of Krsna and Radha of the Vaisnavas was interpreted by 
the Sahajiyas in a sense akin to the conception of Siva and 

^ yavan koScit vikalpob prahhavaii manasi iyajya-rupo hi taVan 

yo* savananda^rupah paramo-svkha-korah so'pi Bamhalpa-matrah I 
j/o Da vairagya-bhavas iadapi tad vhhayam tad bhavasya gra-hetu 
nirvanan nanyad asti kvacid api visayc nirvikalpatma-cittat II 

Apratisthana prakoia of Nagarjuna pada, quoted in the Com. on the Caryfi Nos. 
6 and 13 (Sastrl’s edition). 

2 Kidc infra, Ch. XIV.' 

3 Infra, Ch, XIV, Supra, Ch, 1. 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 


Sakti, or Upaya and Prajna, — and all males and females 
T-, . , , , were thought of as physical manifestation 

ofRadhi-Krsija.Prajfis- of the principles of Krsna and Radha. So, 

Upfiya and Sakti l$iva. , i • i r * * * • r i 

the highest state or union or the two, 
which is the state of supreme love, is the final state of 
Sahaja. Thus the theological speculations centering round 
the love-dalliances of Radha and Krsna in standard 
Vaisnavism could very easily be assimilated by the Sahajiyas 
into their cult Moreover, the standard Vaisnava schools 
of devotion were all deadly against the final aim of libera- 
tion either in any sense of negation, or in the merging of 
the individual self in the absolute. The supreme state of 
the Vaisnavas is no state of absolute cessation, or annihila- 
tion, — it is a positive state, though of a supra-mental 
nature, of the eternal flow of divine love — like the smooth 
and incessant flow of oil. This ideal of the final positive 
state of love could very well be utilised by the Sahajiyas 
in a slightly modified way and thus the Sahajiyas 
could gradually associate their practices with the whole net- 
work of Bengal Vaisnava theology. And once the practices 
of the Sahajiyas could be thus associated with the Vaisnava 
theology, their whole ideology and methodology began 
to be influenced palpably by those of standard Vaisnavism. 

The main deviation of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas under the 
11., sway of Vaisnavism was towards a psycho- 

1 he psychological ^ '• . . 

innovation and stress logical development, and it will be more 
on it. 1 r • • • 

correct to speak or it as an innovation 
through a process of gradual transformation. The Tantric 
schools, which emphasised the sexo-yogic practice (and 
all schools did not certainly emphasise or encourage it), 
were essentially schools of psycho-physiological yogic 
practices ; but already in the Buddhist Sahajiya we find a 
tendency towards the psychological development. There 
we sometimes find it explained that the most intense sex- 
emotion, produced under a perfect control of yoga, has 



OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the capacity of suspending the ordinary states and processes 
of the mind and producing a non-dusd- state of supreme 
bliss, where, absorbed in the unfathomable depth of 
emotion, our mind shakes off all its relation to objects 
and all its character as the subject ; and this unique state 
of bliss is the absolute state of Sahaja-realisation- This 
psychological aspect of the Sadhai»a> .wfeiB, however, most 
emphasised in the school of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas, 
with whom the Sahaja Sadhana soon developed more into 
a religion of psychological discipline in the culture of 
love than a religion of mere psycho-physiological yogic 
process. In fact, the importance of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas 
consists in the high pitch which they reached in their enquiry 
and practical culture of love-psychology and in the new 
interpretation of our whole being offered in the light of 
love. It was a religious process of the divinisation of 
human love and the consequent discovery of the divine 
in man. As we have said before, the psycho-physiological 
yogic process was there, but its yogic aspect was dominated 
by the psychological aspect of the Sahajiyas with which 
we are mainly interested in our present study. 

(»*) The Psychological Aspect of the Sadhana of the 
Vaisnava Sahajiyas 

(A) Ihe Ideal of Love 

The psychological aspect of the Sahaja-sadhana of the 
Vaisnavas grew mainly with the philosophy of Radha and 
Krsna and the eternal love between them in the land of 
eternity. It is, therefore, necessary, first of all, to elucidate 
the philosophy of Radha-Krsna and their eternal love as 
conceived by the Vaisnavas. According to the philosophical 
and theological works of Bengal Vaisnavism (popularly 
known as Gaudiya Vaisnavism) Radha is nothing but the 
transfiguration of the inhnite potency of love contained in 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 143 

the very nature of Krsna. The ultimate Being, it is held, 
may be conceived in three of its states, either as the 
unqualified Brahman, or as the Paramatman, the indwelling 
principle of all beings, or as the Bhagavan, the active and 
qualified God. Krsna as Bhagavan possesses three powers, 
Viz,, Svarupa-sakti, i,e., the power which He possesses by 
virtue of His ultimate nature, Jlva^sakii or the power through 
which all the beings are produced (also known as the 
Tatasthd sakti, the accidental power), and the 
through which evolves the material world. This SuarOpa- 
of the Lord has again three attributes. Viz,, the attribute 
of existence {sat) , the attribute pf pure consciousness {cit) and 
the attribute of bliss {ananda). The potency of the three 
attributes acts like three powers, in the nature of God, which 
are known as Sandhinl (the power of existence), Samvit 
(the power of consciousness) and Hladini (the power of bliss 
which is of the nature of infinite love). The transfiguration 
of this power of bliss or love is Radha, and as such the 
very being of Radha is already involved in the very nature 
of Krsna and the two are one and the same in the ultimate 
principle. Why then the apparent separation of Radha 
from Krsna ? It is for the self-realisation of Krsna. God 
has within His nature two aspects, the enjoyer and the 
enjoyed, and without the reality of the enjoyed He cannot 
even realise His own nature, as the enjoyer. Radha repre- 
sents the eternal enjoyed while Krsna is the eternal enjoyer, — 
and the enjoyed and the enjoyer being co-relative, the 
reality of the one involves the reality of the other ; or, in 
other words Radha as the eternal enjoyed is as much real 
as Krsna the eternal enjoyer. This Inseparable relation 
between the two is the eternal love-dalliance of Krsna with 
Radha, — and as Radha is eternally realising the value of her 
whole being with reference to her relation to the eternal 
enjoyer Krsna, Krsna loo is eternally enjoying Radha to 
^realise the infinite potency of love and bliss that is in him. 



144 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


This mutual relation of love is the secret of the whole drama 
enacted in the eternal land of Vrndavana. This eternal 
spOrt {liloi) or love-dalliance of Radha and Krsna does not 
presuppose any kind of shortcoming or imperfection in the 
nature of the ultimate reality, it follows from the very nature 
of the ultimate reality as such. 

This relation of eternal love between Radha and Krsna has 
been conceived and expressed in the Vaisnava theology and 
literature anthropomorphically through analogies of human 
love. So, to understand the nature of this divine love, 
human love has been analysed psychologically into all 
its varieties and niceties to the minutest details, and it has 
been found on analysis that divine love can be expressed 
only through the analogy of the most intense and the most 
romantic and unconventional love that exists between a man 


and a woman who become bound together by the ideal 
of love for love’s sake. Post-nuptial love 
kiyl^love^^^^ not the highest ideal of love so far as 

the intensity of emotion is concerned,— 


for long association and acquaintance devour the strange 
mystery, which is the salt of love, and social convention 
and legal compulsion take away much from the passion in 
it and thus make it commonplace and attenuated. The 
highest ideal of human love, which is the most intense, is 
the love that exists most privately between couples, who 
are absolutely free in their love from any consideration of 
loss and gain, who defy the society and transgress the law 
and make love the be-all and end- all of life. This is the 


ideal of Parakiya love,' which is the best human analogy 
for divine love. It is because of this theological ideal that in 
none of the legends of Radha-Krsna is Radha depicted as the 
wife of Krsna, she is generally depicted as the wife of another 
cowherd, or as a maid just attaining the prime of youth. 


1 ParaklyS love literally means the love of a man with a woman, who legally 
belongs to a man other than the lover. 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 145 

^rl-Caitanya, as he has been docetically conceived by his 
followers, combined in him the enjoyer and the enjoyed, — 
and it has been said that he was of the ultimate nature of 
Krsna hallowed with the lustre of the supreme emotion 
of Radha (radha-bhava-dyuti-suvalita). 

auc] ICrsnEi i ri l** •!/* 

combined in Caitanya, 1 his speaks OF the leligious attitude or 
— Caitanya s reiisfious • TTL . i i i • ir i 

attitude-~Radha-bh5va. Caitanya. though he himselt became 
often conscious of his true self as none 
but Krsna, his dom nating religious attitude was Radha- 
bhaoa or the love attitude of Radha towards Krsna. This 
Radha-bhava, or the religious attitude-of the devotee towards 
God as the attitude of the most unconventional romantic 
love of a woman towards her beloved, may be recognised 
as the fundamental tone of the religion preached by Caitanya, 
not so much by sermons and teachings as by his tears and 
frequent love- trances. 

The religious attitude of the Vaisnava poets of Bengal, 
as represented in the innumerable love-lyrics composed by 
them, was not, however, exactly the same as that of 
Caitanya. The attitude of the Vaisnava poets was 
Sal^hi-bhdva rather than Radha-bhava. Sri-Caitanya 
placed himself in the position of Radha and longed 
with all the tormenting pangs of heart for union with his 
beloved Krsna ; but the Vaisnava poets, headed by Jayadeva, 
Candidas and Vidyapati, placed themselves rather in the 
position of the Sakhis, or the female companions of Radha 
and Krsna, who did never long for their union with Krsna, — 
but ever longed for the opportunity of witnessing from a 
distance the eternal love-making of Radha and Krena in the 
supra-natural land of Vrndavana {apraJ^rta-vrudavana). 
This eternal hid is the eternal truth, and, therefore, it is 
this eternal Itld — the playful love-making of Radha and Kfsna, 
which the Vaisnava poets desired to enjoy. If we analyse 
the Gita-govinda of Jayadeva we shall find not even a 
single statement which shows the poet’s desire to have union 

19^14118 



i46 


OfiSCiJRE RELICIC^S ctjLt)§ 


with iCr^na as R^dha had, — he only sings praises of the ht& 
df Radha and Krsna and hankers after the chance just to have 
, , , a peep into the divine lila, and this peep 
^nr-eived by the Into the diviHC blo is the highest spiritual 
^ gain which these poets could think of. 

The exclamation — “ Glorious be the secret dalliances of 
Radha and Krsna on the bank of the Jumna * ’ ^ sounds the 
key-note of the Vaisnava attitude ofjayadeva. The same is 
the attitude of Candidas and Vidyapati, who were absorbed 
in the hla of Radha-Krsna, who indulged themselves in 
making comments on the bid , — and longed to have the chance 
to stand by when Radha and Krsna were united in their 
love.^ 

It is to be noted that in the religious discourse, which took 
place between Sri-Caitanya and Ray Ramananda the latter 
stressed Sakhhbhdva as! the best means for realising divine 
love. The theological explanation of this Sa\hubhdva is 
not far to seek. The general Vaisnava view isthatjiva 
being the Tatasthd Sal^ti of Krsna is, after all, a Prakrti and 
its pride as being the Purusa (purmdbhimdna) must be 
removed before it can be permitted to have its proper place 
in the eternal region of Svarupa-sakti, and even then only 
as a Sakhi, rather than as Radha, and never as Krsna. 

To put the poetical utterances of the Vaisnava poets in 
a clear theological form we should say that, according to 
them the absolute reality has from the very beginning divided 

' rsdha-msdhavayor jayanti yamuna-hule rahah-kdayah II 
Gita'govindot (I. I). 

* C/. h)i malaySnila mrdu rrifdu bahata 

ntramala camda praka&a i 
hhsva bhare gadagada catnara ^hulayaict 
paSe rahi canjldasa II 

SoDgs of CandidSs, Parisat edition. 

Again, duhum jana ak^la duhnijn k.aru kora | 
duhurp daraiane hidySpati bhora ii 

Pada^alpa-tarUf Song No. 484. 

- ® Caiianya-eariiSmfta, Madhya-hld, Ch. viii. 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 


147 


Ltli is concrete. 


itself for the sake of self-realisation into two counterparts 
as the enjoyer and the enjoyed, or as Krsm and Radha ; 
these Krsna and Radha are not mere abstract notions, — neither 
are they purely legendary figures invented through the imagi- 
nation of the poets, — they are concrete in their divine form and 
represent the original concrete type of the 
two aspects of the nature of the absolute as 
the lover and the beloved having their eternal dalliances in the 
supra-natural land of Vrndavana.’ The historical personages 
of Radha and Krsna as the cowherd boy and the cowherd girl 
in the geographical area of Vrndavana are but the temporal 
manifestation of the eternal type, a condescension of the 
supra-natural in the natural form so as to help man to 
understand the eternal in terms of the temporal.® The 
Vaisnava poets sang of the historical love-episodes of Radha 
and Krsna with the belief that corresponding to these love- 
episodes on earth there are the eternal love-episodes of Radha- 
Krsna in the Aprakjta or supra-natural Vrndavana and the 
historical episodes will enable them to form an idea of and 
to have a peep into the eternal episodes, the realisation of 
which is the summum bonum of the spiritual life. 


^ C/. sekhSne hay ki il niiya tSs hay II niiya mahotsav hay II etc. 

Deha-k^daca by Narottam, B. S. P. P., Vol. IV, No. I. 
Again, radhS’^kf^na rasa-prem ei^ai se hay I 

nitya niiya dhvarnsa nai niiya hirajay II 

Sahaja-upasanU-taitva by TarunI'raman, B. S. P. P., B. S. 

1335. No. 4. 

Again, nitya-hla kroner nHhihfl parapar I 

aviiram hahe lils yena gahgS dhUr I) 

SiddhSnta-candrodaya of Mukunda-dis, (Publiffbed by 
Manlndra-nandl, p. 58; See also, pp. 58^). 
nija^Sakii irVradhikli lafiS nanda-suia t 
bjrndcivane nitya^hls kflraya adhhuta li 

Ibid., p. 91, 

se kt^na radhikar hayen prS^a^pati t 
rsdha saha nitya“hla kare divs rati II Ibid. 

* Vide, Rati-yHasa-paddhaii, MS. (C. U., 572), 



148 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


We have seen that the religious approach of Sri-Caitanya, 
as depicted by Krsnadas Kaviraj in his work, the Caitanya- 
caritamrta, was somewhat different from that of the Vaisnava 
poets. The post-Caitanya Vaisnava poets stuck mainly 

to the tradition of the pre-Caitanya Vaisnava poets in their 
poetic treatment of the love-episodes of Radha and Krsna and 
the Vaisnava Sahajiyas received their philosophy of Radha- 
Krsna from these Vaisnava poets. The Sahajiyas believed 
in the eternal dalliances of Radha-Krsna in the highest spiri- 
tual land, — but they further held that the eternal concrete 
. , , , spiritual type manifested itself not only 

theory of Lila in the in the historical personages of Radha and 

SaKitjiya school — the i i • i • ir • l 

S\arupa-l!lff aad the fCrsna, Dut that it rcveals itselr m actual 

F^upa'ills. I 1 1 r* 

men and women themselves, livery man 
has within him the spiritual essence of Krsna, which is his 
Svarupa (real nature) associated with his lower existence, 
which is his physical form or Rupa, and exactly in the same 
way every woman possesses within her a lower self associated 
with her physical existence, which is her Rupa, — but within 
this Rupa resides the Svarupa of the woman, which is her 
ultimate nature as Radha. It is none but Krsna and Radha 
who reside within men and women, and it is this Krsna and 
this Radha that are making dalliances as men and women. ^ 
These rupa-lila and svarupaAila of Radha-Krsna have also been 
explained as the pral^rta-hla and apra^rta-iila (i.e., sports in 
the natural plane and the supra-natural plane). This view of 
holding men and women to be nothing but physical manifesta- 
tion of Radha and Krsna seems to have been inherited by the 

1 prakaia haite jadi k^hhu mane hay \ 

, rUpaVeaa hayid tave tila asvaday 11 
sarva para-raaa-tattva kariya air ay I 
rasamay deha dhari ras asvaday II 

Dvipako-jjvala, MS. (C. U. No. 564), P. 13(A) 
Again, — manu^ya svarupe k^re koutuka hih&r il 

Campaka-kohkS, B.S.P.P., B.S. 1307, No. I. 

* ,.See Rati-’VilSsa-paddhati, ^S. (C. U. No, 572), pp. 3(A)-3lBj. 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 


149 


Vaisnava Sahajiyas from the earlier Tantric philosophy. 
In the Hindu Tantras, we have seen, all men and women 
have been held to be nothing but the incarnations of Siva 
and Sakti manifested in the physical form, — and in the 
Buddhist philosophy they have been spoken of as the 
embodiment of Upaya and Prajna respectively, and this 
philosophy has most probably influenced the Vaisnava 
Sahajiyas in their belief of men and women being 
Krsna and Radha in their Svarupa. We have pointed 
out before that many of the Vaisnava Sahajiya texts 
are introduced in the form of the earlier Agamas and 
Nigamas, and in these texts Krsna and Radha have always 
been explained as nothing but the different forms of Siva 
and Sakti, and we have also pointed out that Siva 
has sometimes been described as practising the Sahaja 
Sadhana with Sakti as Krsna with Radha. 

Even in a popular Vaisnava text like the Brahma-sarnhitS, 
which was brought by Sri-Caitanya himself from South India, 
the Tantric influence on Vaisnavism is palpable. In the 
fifth chapter (which only is available now-a-days) of the 
Brahma- samhitd we find that the lotus of thousand petals 
in the cerebrum-region is described as Gokula, the abode 
of Krsna. Within the lotus we find description also of the 
Tantric yanira (the physiological machinery through which 
truth is to be realised) as also of the ^i/a^a (the wedge, 
the support). Siva of the nature of the lifiga (the symbol 
of the male productive energy) is described as the Lord 
Narayana and 5akti of the nature of the yoni (the symbol of 
the female productive energy) is described as Rama Devi 
(the consort of Nsrayana).’ Again it has been said in the 
Sri-haya-sxrsa-paficardtra, “Hari (the saviour) as the Para- 
matman is the Lord, Sri is called his power (sakti ) ; goddess 
Sri is the Prakrti and Kelava is the Purusa ; the goddess 
can never be without Visnu and Hari (Visnu) cannot be without 

1 See Brafima-«anifii <5, Ch. V, verses (2-10). (Baharampur edition) 



OBSCimE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


110 ' 

the goddess, born in the lotus.’ It has also been said in 
the Visnu-purana , — “The mother of the world is eternal 

and she remains inseparable with Visnu ; as Visnu is all- 

permeating so also is she.’’^ 

It is very interesting to note in this connection that there 
18 a small poetical work, entitled Sadhal^a-rafijana, ® by 
Kamala-kanta (who flourished in the first half of 

the nineteenth century) where the yogic Kula-kundalin! 
Sakti has been conceived exactly in the image of Radha ; 
she is described in exactly the same way with the same 
imageries and even in the same diction as Radha is 

described in the Vaisnava literature. The rise of the Sakti to 
meet Siva in the Sahasrara has been sung as the coming out 
of Radha to meet her beloved in private.’ The philosophical 


^ paramatma harir devas tac chakiih irtr ihodita I 
Srir devt prakftih prokia k^iavah purusah smrtah II 
na vi^nuna vina devil na harih padmajam vina 11 
Quoted in the Bhagavat-sandarhha of the Saf-sandarhha of Jiva Gosvfiml. 
2 nityaiva sa jagan-mata vi^noh irtr anapayini 1 
yathS aarva-gato visnua tathaiveyam dvijottama II 
C/. also : —aparam tv ak.iaram ya sa praf^rtir jada-rupil^a I 

irth para prakrtih prokta cetana vi^nu-samiraya II 

Quoted in the Bhagavat-aandarhha. 

^ Edited jointly by Messrs. Basanta Ranjan Ray and Atal Bihari Ghosh. 

Sfihitya parisad-granlhavali, No. 71. 

^ We are quoting here a few specimens : — 

gaja-patvnindita gaii avilambe I 
kuncita niveia nitamhe II 
cfiru carana gati ahharana-Vfnde I 
nakhara-muktira-kora himakara ninde II 
uraai aaraai-ruha bama I 
kari-kara iikhara niiambint rama il 
tnjga-pati dura iihhara-mukha cay a I 
kati-tafa ancaHcala, hUya I 
n&hhi gabhlra ntraja^bihSra i 
If at bikflca ^ama/a-i^uca hhara II 
bahudatB ahse aakhi angc I 
dolita deha auneha iarange It 
Bumadhura haaa prakaiai h&lo I 
h&latapa*ruci nayana biiala II 



tHe vaisnava saHajiyX cOlt l5l 

lK>ncepts of the pairs Siva-Sakti and Kf§na-Radha were generally 
confused ; and as a matter of fact Purusa-Prakrti, Siva-Sakti 
and Krsna-Radha mean all the same in popular theology. 
This fact has helped the development of the theological 
belief in the Vaisnava Sahajiya school that men and women 
are but the Rupa of the Svarupa as Krsna and Radha. But 
the important point to be remembered in this connection is 
that while in the Sahajiya Sadhana the Krsnahood of man Has 
been admitted, it has never been admitted in the Standard 
Vaisnava school under any circumstances. 

According to the Vaisnava Sahajiyas the region of 
Three aspects of Vrn- Sahaja is an ideal transcendental region 
S;;rM7lv;S± « » generally slyUd land 

and Nitya-Vrndavana. eternity ’ (ntft/er desu) — this is the Nitya- 

Vrndavana or the eternal Vrndavana as contrasted with 
the other two kinds of Vrndavana, Viz., Mana- Vrndavana 
and Nava-Vrndavana or Vana-Vrndavana. By Nava- 
Vrndavana the Sahajiyas refer to the geographical Vrndavana, 
and by Mana- Vrndavana the Vrndavana of the mental 
plane of the Sadhaka, and the Nitya-Vrndavana- transcends 
both. In this Nitya-Vrndavana (also called the gupta-candra- 


ratana-vedi para sura-taru-’inula I 
manimaya mandira iahi anukola II 
aahacart sanga praveiai narl I 
kamalakSnta heri balihdri ii 

Sadhaka-ranjanaf pp. 3*4. 


Again, — 


kadamva k^suma janu aatata sihare tana 

yadavadhi nirak,hilam tare i 
jadi paaarite cat apana paaari jai 

ena dakha kahiva k^hare Ii 
aei ae fivana mor ruaikfira mana-cor 

ramani raaer airomani 1 

parihari loka-laje rSkhiva h^day mSjhe 

na chsdiva divaao-^rajanl II 

hena anumani tare handhi hfdi kjaragare 

nayana pahari diye rak.hit ' " ^ 

kamim koriye curt hide^a paHjare pBfi . ^ ^ 

animekhe etc., Ibid, 



\52 


OBSCURE religious CULTS 


pure) resides Sahaja of the nature of pure love whicl^ 
flows between Radha and Krsna in and through their 
eternal dalliances. This Sahaja as the Supreme Delight 
is the ultimate substance underlying the whole world ^ and 
it can never be realised as such in the gross material world 
of ours.^ But how should then men and women of this 
world attain Sahaja ? It is said in reply that there is a 
pafesage or transition from this world to the other, 
— or rather this gross world can itself be transformed into 
the Nitya-Vrndavana by the process of spiritual culture, 
and the principle of nescience, which is responsible 
for the grossness of the world can thus be removed. This 
removal of the fundamental principle of nescience and of 
the principle of grossness with it through a process of 
continual psychological discipline, is the primary requisite 
for Sahaja Sadhana, — and when this is 
'ffe'ted It is revealed to the Ssdhako 
that the difference between this world 
and that is more imaginary than real. At that moment 
there remains no distinction between our physical existence 


Again, — cancala capala jiniye prahala ahala mrdu madhu hase I 
sumani unmani laiye sangint dhaila hrahma-nivase II 
unmaia-heid higalita’-kcid manimaya dhharana sdje I 
timira bindii bege dhdy riipasl jhunu jhunu nupura bdje II 
jdti k^la ndiiye upanlta dsiye amrta sarovara tire I 
prema-bhare ramant sihare pulakfi tanu manda samire II 


heli samdpana kafninlr dgamana harapura adi saroje I 
kula^-patha hhediye mulddhdre dsiye punarapi ramant birdje II 
badana prak.die iaiadhara barise bilasai purahara ange I 
kamaldkanta heri mukha-mandala bhdsai prema-tarange II 

Ibid., p. 34. 

^ rasa hai bastu ndi e Una bhuvane II Sj. S. Song, No. 59. 

8 C/. sahaj k^thdfi ye jand jane I dvigun bhay tdhdri mane II 

hhayer kalbd k.ahiva feare I ekald bdmeile jagat mare II 

jagat bdTnode ami se mart I jagat duhile dmi se iari II 

Amita-rasavah, Sj, S. P, 161- 

HemJ^gat means the changing gross reality. 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 


dnd our spiritual existence.* It has been said in a poem 
ascribed to Candid&s, ’‘Great is the difference between this 
world and that, — this is the truth known to all ordinary 
people ; but there is a way of transition from the one to the 
other, — don’t speak of it to any one else.”* 

We have seen that Sahaja as the absolute reality of the 
nature of pure love involves within 
Sah^a. it two factors, /.e., the enjoyer and the 

enjoyed, represented in the Nitya-Vrnda- 
vana by Krsna and Radha. These principles of the enjoyer 
and the enjoyed are known in the Sahajiya school as the 
Purusa and the Prakrti, manifested on earth as the male 
and the female.® It has been said in a song (ascribed to 
Candidas) — “ There are two currents in the lake of love, 
which can be realised only by the RasiJ^as (i.e., people 
versed in Rasa). When the two currents remain united 


* irt-rap aVarap hay avarup iri-rup II 

Ratna-aara^ MS. iC. U. 1111), p. 18(B). 

* ae de^e e de^e anek. antar 

janaye aahol loh.e I 

ae deSe e deie miiamiii ache 

e kfliha hpya na II 

Sj. S. Song^ No. 84. 

* paramaimar dui nama dhare dui rup I 
eimate ek hayya dharaye avarup II 
iahe dui hhed hay puru^ prahfti I 
aahaler mul hay aei raaa-murati 11 


Again C/. 


AIsq^ — 


paramdtma purus prakrti dui rap | 
aahaara-dale hSa kflre raaer avarup II 

Ratna-saraf MS. (C.U. No. 1 1 1 1), p. 32(B). 

raaa aavadan lagi haila dui murtti I 
ei hetu fer^na hay puru^ prakrti II 
prakfti na haile kt^na aeVa-janya nay I 
ei hetu prafefti-l>/»50 k^raye Siray li 

Dvtpakojjvala^graniha, MS. (C. U. No. 564), pp. I(B)-2(A>, 
ek brahma jakhan dvitiya nahi ar 1 
aei kale auni iaVar karen vicar li 
apurvva raaer che^fa apurvva knran i 
kemane haive ih8 karen hhsvan ti 


20-141 IB 



154 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

together in one, the Rasi^a realises the truth of union.”’ 
Through man and woman flow these two currents of 
love, — man and woman are, therefore, the gross manifesta- 
tions of the same principles of which Krsna and Radha 
are the pure spiritual representations. Man and woman, 
in pther words, are manifestations on earth of the eternal 
types that are enjoying each other in their eternal Vrndavana, 
and the bliss of intense love that is enjoyed by man and 
, r. ,1 woman through their mutual attachment 

Krsna and Radha at • 

Rasa and Rati and the even in the physical body is but a gross 

male and the female. • r i i i L 

transformation of the eternal purest love that 
exists only in Vrndavana. Man and' woman as the representa- 
tives of the two flows of love are known in the Sahajiya 
literature as Rasa (the ultimate emotion as the enjoyer)and Rati 
(i.e., the object of Rasa), or as Kama (the lover that attracts 
towards him the beloved) and Madana (the exciting cause 


hhaVite hhavite ek uday haila I 
manete ananda haiya hihhvol haila II 
ardha anga haite ami prakrti haiva I 
amiint radhikja nam tahar haiva II 

apani raser murtii kt^riva dharan I 
rasa asvadiva ami kflriyajatan II 

Ibid., pp. ll(B)*12lA). (Cy Bjrhad-aranyaka, 1,4, 1-3.) 
Again, ei ye sahaj-hastu aahaj tar gait I 


nan puruf rape satata hihare II 

Prema-vilSsa of Yugal-Kiior Das. 

Vide, Vanga~»ahitya’paricay, Vol. II, p. 1662. 

Again, sei rupete kore kiif^jcte hihar | 
aei /^rsna ei radha efeui akar ii 
radha haite nirakar raser svarup I 
ataev dui rup hay ek rup II 

Radha-rasa-korika, Vide Vanga-sShitya-paricay , Vol. Ill, p. 1671. 
prema-sarouare duifi dhara I 
asVadan kore raaik yara II 
dui dhara yakhan ekatre thak^ I 
takhan rasik yugal dekhe II 

Songs of Ca^^idis. 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 


155 


of love in the lover).' In standard Vaisnavism also Krsna 
is known as Kama or Kandarpa, as he attracts the mind 
of all creatures towards Him, — while Radha is Madana 
or the object that renders pleasure to the enjoyer. Sahaja is 
the emotion of the purest love flowing between Rasa and 
Rati or Kama and Madana. For the realisation of this 
Sahaja-naturfc, therefore, a particular pair of man and woman 
should first of all realise their true self as Rasa and Rati 
or Krsna and Radha, — and it is only when such a realisation 
is perfect that they become entitled to realise the Sahaja 
through their intense mutual love. This realisation of the 
true nature of man as Krsna and that of woman as Radha is 
technically known as the principle of aropa or the attribution of 
divinity to man. Through continual psychological discipline 
man and woman must first of all completely forget their lower 
animal-selves and attribute Krsnahood to man and Radhahood 
to woman. Through this process of attribution there will 
gradually dawn the realisation of the true nature of the two as 
Krsna and Radha. When man and woman can thus realise 
themselves as Krsna and Radha in their true nature, the love 
that exists between them transcends the category of gross 
sensuality, — it becomes love divine, and the realisation of 
such an emotion of love is realisation of the Sahaja. 

^ C/. paraapar nayak nayika ananga rati I 

aatasiddha hhave hay hrajete basaii (I 

Rati-vilasa-paddhatij MS. (C. U. No. 572^ p. 12(A) 

Again^ — raiir zvarup Srt-radhihja zundarl I 

garner ciita akariay raper lahari II 

Rsgamayi-kona, MS. (C. U. No. 5b 1) p. 8(B). 

Again, — jay jay aarvvsdi haztu raza-raj kam I 

jay jay zarvva-Src^fha raza nitya dh&m II 
prakt^a aprSkrta ar maha I 

hihar k^richa tumi nij zveccha mate II 
zvayarjn kfim nitya vaztu raza ratimaya i 
prakx^a apr&kfto adi tumi makairay li 
mku vaztu puruf prakfH rap haiyS I 
vilazaha hahu-rUp dhati dui kjSyH (I i etc, 

Sahaja-upSeana^tattva of Tani^l-ramaoi B. S. P. P., B. S, 1335, No. 4. 



156 


OBSCURE REEIGIOUS CULTS 


(B) The Theory of Aropa 

The above, in a nut-shell, is the fundamental basis 
of the religious creed of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas expressed 
in their lyrical poems and other prose and poetical 
works. The principle of Aropa is the most important in 
the process of Sahaja Sadhana/ We have seen that the 
Sahajiyas have spoken of two aspects of man, viz., the 
aspect of physical existence which is the Ropa and the 
aspect of spiritual existence (as Krsna or 

^A,op.of Svaropa to 

Svarupa true spiritual self). This 

SvarQpa must be attributed to and realised in the Rupa to 
attain any kind of spiritual gain.’* But this Aropa of Svarupa 
to Rupa does not mean the negation of the Rupa ; it is 
rather the act of imbuing every atom of the Rupa 
with the Svarupa. The Sahajiyas are deadly against the 
principle of denying the value of life on earth and 
undervaluing our human love. The gross physical form 
with all its charm and beauty is as real as our spiritual 
existence, for it is this charm of physical beauty, — the 
maddening passion, which we call human love, that leads 
us gradually to a new region where we can find a glimpse 


^ Cy. ch&4i jap tap sadhaha Stop 

ekata koriy5 mane I 

RsgStmika songs^ ascribed to CandidSs, Mr. Eose’s edition. Song No. 1. 

* cy. aVarSpe arop yar rasik. nagar tar 

prapti have madana-mohan I 

4 ( » « « 

se deSer rajakint hay raser adhikari 

r5dhik,5-8Varap tar pran I 

iumUta ramaner guru seha raser kfllpadaru 

tar sane dfis abhiman II 


ibid, Song. No. 5. 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 


157 


of divine love. The spiritual existence of man in divine love 
does not mean the negation of human love, — ;it is this humtin 
love, beginning in the form of carnal desires and progressing 
gradually through a process of continual physical and 
psychological discipline towards an emotion of supreme 
No categorical dis- Bliss, boundlcss and unfathomable in extent 
man“‘love‘l[nrdi depth, that itself becomes the love 

divine — the highest spiritual gain. There 
is no categorical distinction in kind between human love 
and divine love ; — it is human love, transformed by strict 
physical and psychological discipline, that becomes divine. 
Divine love is rather an emergence from the carnal desires 
of man as the full-blown lotus, with all its beauty and 
grandeur above the surface of water, is an emergence from the 
mud lying much below. Here there is a difference of outlook 
among the Sahajiyas and the standard Vaisnavas of Bengal. 
Krsnadas Kaviraj has unambiguously declared in the Caitanya- 
Caritamrta that l^ama (love in its grosser aspect) and prema 
(divine love) are characteristically distinct in their nature 
like iron and gold, and while the keynote of \ama is the 
fulfilment of selhsh desires, the keynote of prema is self- 
elimination and the fulfilment of the divine desires in and 
through our whole being. But the Sahajiyas, while agreeing 
to the latter part of the statement, do not agree to the former 
part of it. The same flow of emotion, they hold, that 
becomes k.ama in association with the selfish desires, trans- 
forms itself into prema when dissociated from such desires 
through physical and psychological discipline, Prema is 
but the purified form of \ama, and as such the former has 
its origin in the latter.^ There cannot be prema without 


^ seita ujjal rahe rase 4hakfi anga I k^m haite jarmme prem nahe k&fna- 
saAga il lauhakc kjaraye sona lauha parasiyS i taiche ham haite prem dekha 
bicSria II paraaei gun hlsta {ire^fa, sic) take lauha hem I kp.mer k^fhin gun 
parasite prem II k&ma-hasta candra-konfi paras pSthar I prema-hastu sukhamay 



158 ' 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


kSma, &nd hence, prema ceuinot be attained through the 
absolute negation of l^ama ; it is to be attained rather through 
the transformation of ^ama. The prema of the Sahajiyas is 
not the emotion of the most intense devotion of man towards 
God, — it is the most intense emotion of love existing between 
Krsna and Radha residing as the Svarupa in the Rupta of 
every man and woman. It is from this point of view that 
Candidas exclaimed, — “Harken men, my brothers, man is 
the truth above all truths, — there is nothing above that.” 
In another song of the Sahajiyas we find, — Humanity is the 
essence of divinity, — and man becomes God in the strength 
of his love; man is the highest in the world, for it is only he 
who revels in supreme love.* The religion of the Vaisnava 
Sahajiyas was thus a religion of humanity. The Sahajiyas 
have no gods or God other than man. Even Radha and 
Krsna are never regarded as deities to be worshipped, — they 
represent principles to be realised in humanity. Humanity 
itself is thus viewed from a sublime perspective. 

What is then the real significance of the Aropa of 
the Sahajiyas ? It is nothing but viewing our whole being in 
all its physical, biological and psychological aspects from 
an ontological point of view. And when everything is thus 
viewed from the ontological perspective, human love acquires 
an ontological significance. This act of 

Real significance of • . n , ... r ■ i i 

Aropa,— a change of Viewing all the gToss realities or body and 
perspective. mind from the perspective of the eternal 

is what is meant by the mixing up of the Rupa and the 


Airmal hhstkar II ognir bhitare laaha thskaye jsvat 1 hemer »adr« hasla thskoye 
tSvat II agni-tej sukhaile puna lauha hay I ci mate prem janiha niicay II 

Ratna~ 9 ara, MS. (C.U. No. 1111), p. 32(B). 

manuf dever aSr I 
yar prem jagate pracar I) 
jagater ire^fha manuf ySre bah I 
prema’-plriti-rase ifianuf kflre k^U II 

Sj. S. Song No. 27, 



159 


¥he vaisnava sahajiyA cuLf 

SvatOpa/ When such an understanding dawns on man 
there remains to him no difference between the Rupa and the 
Svarupa.* The Svarupa remains in the RQpa just like the scent 
of a flower permeating every atom of it. It is said in-a song, — 
“ Many speak of Svarupa, — but it is not the gross reality 

(of our sense perception) It is of the nature of the scent 

of the lotus. Who is the man capable of knowing it ? 

If one worships this Svarupa, one will be able to discover the 
‘ real man ’ ; — but without the Aropa one is bound to go to 
hell.”** As the Svarupa permeates the Rupa, it is to be realised 


Again, 


Again, 


rttpeie avarupe dui hari 

miial kflriya thuve II 

Sj. S. Song No. 32. 

avarup rupete ek.aira k^riyS 

miial h^riya thuve ( 
aei ae ratite ekonia k.arila 

tave ae in-mail pave II 

Ibid, Song No. 42. 

arope avarup hhajiie parile 

paive irl-matl radha II 

Ibid, Song No. 66, 

e rati e rati ek^atra kariya 

aekhane ae rati thuve | 
rati rati duhe ekfltra hfltile 

aekhane dekhite pave II 
avarupe arop ci raaa-k^p 

aakal aadhan pSra I 

avarup bujhiya aadhana feari7e 

aadhak haite para II etc. 

Ibid, Song No. 57. 

aropiya rup haiya avarup 

kabhu nS baaio bhinna II 

Ibid, Song No. 26. 

avarup avarup aneke k^y I fiva-hk kobhu avarup nay II 

• « • • 

padma-gandha hay tshar gati I tahare ciniie kur iakoti li 

* * • * 

avarup bhajile menus pave I arop cha^ile narakc yaVe II 

Ibid, Song No. 68. 



160 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

through the Rupa.’ It is said in the Ratna-aara that one can 
attain the supra-natural land of Vraja, only by loving and 
worshipping the human form.“ Man realises his ultimate 
nature as the pure emotion of love through his most beloved 
sweetheart.® Man cannot realise his love- 

The importance of i • • l • 

Rapa in realising Sva- nature without being m relation to his 
’**'”*' sweetheart, it is through the touch of the 

sweetheart that the lamp is lit within. It is said in a poem 
of Candidas that man by himself can never realise his own 
grace and loveliness, — it is for this reason that there is 
a continual burning within ; he ponders -within, but himself 
does not know what his heart wants and what makes 
him so uneasy I The inward longing is fort the beloved, 
— without whom there is the burning sensation in the 
heart that makes a man dead while living. This death 
in love is the most covetable death, — ^and he who knows 
the real nature of this death accords to it the most hearty 
reception, and he is the only man who really lives 
through his death in love.* Through their terrestrial 
love man and woman proceed towards their divine 


' parakia hhave ati raser ulyaa I braja bine ihar anyatra nahe bSa II iha jani 
kara »aVe kflyih bhajan I Sri-rup aSraye kara rasa asVadan li 

Ratna-sara, MS. (C.U. 1 1 11 ). 18(B) . 

Again, 

aiche k^iya siddhi pai rtspairita dharma I 
Vivartta-vilasa of Akincana Dss, Vanga Bahitya-paricay, Vol. 11, p. 1651. 


manu§ bigraha bhaji braja prapti have 1 

MS. (C.U. nil), P. 55(B). 


radha-krsna-prapti nahe anugata bine I 

Radha-raaa-korikft, Vanga sahitya-paricay, Vol. II, p. 1668. 


* Span madhurt dekhite na pai 

sadai antar jvale i 

spans Spani ^araye bhavani 

ki haila ki haila bale li 
mSnus abhSVe mana mariciyS 

tarSae Schsd kfxSy I 
Schs4 khSiyS * k^re chaf-phaf 
jiyanie mariyS ySy il 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIyX CULT 161 

love,^ — through the love of body arises in man and womail 
pure love between their inner selves as Krsna and Radha*^ 
It is for this reason that it has been said in a song that the 
beloved is the pitcher to fetch water in from the lake of love. 
Again it has been said that as milk does not thicken without 
being boiled over the fire, so also the love of man does not 
become intense enough to be transformed into divine love 
without the woman of his heart, who serves as the oven to 
boil and thicken love.® 


(C) The Stringency of Sahaja-SadhanS 

As love with Aropa leads one to Vrndavana, love of the 
Rupa without the Aropa of the Svarupa leads one nowhere but 
to hell.^ The Sahaja-sadhaka must not be an ordinary man 
— the samanya manus who lives within the province of 


iahar maran jane ^on jan 

kernan maran sei I 
ye jan janaye aei ae jiyaye 

maran bafiya lei II 

Ragatmikf^ Pada, Mr. Bose’s edition. Song No. 14. 
^ prakrta manus deha iarvva mul hay I aprakrta hastu aei dehete harttay II 

Nameless MS. (C.U. No. 596), p. 7. 


Again, 

sei deha rati jaya kfsnete barttay I hxame hrame rati iola-ana hay i| 

Ibid, p. II. 


* C/. raaer ^arane raaika raaik 

kayadi ghatane raa ) 
raaik. karan raaika hoyata 

yahate prema-bilas li 
athulata puruse kama auk^nna gati 

athulata prakrti rati I 
duhuka ghatane ae raa hoyata 

eve tahe nahi gati li 

Ragdtmiku Pada^ Mr. Bose’s edition, Song No. 13. 

* agni-kvnda bine rtahe dugdha-aVarttan II prak^tir aahge yei agni-k^nda ache I 
ataeva goavdmtrd tdhd yajiydche 11 

Vivarita-vildaa of Akiiican Dis, Vahga-adhitya-paricay, p. 1649. 
^ Cy. ae rup IdVanya rasa aaficar 1 mane Sropita aiddha bicar II 
aekhdne ekhdne ekui rup I marame jdnive raaer kap H 
yadi man cade drop c/ia^i I e ghor narakc rahive padi II 

Sj. S. Song No. 41. 


. 21~1411B 



r62 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

desires and instincts, — or the man of passions (rdger tnanm). 
He must rise above the level of ordinary animal existence 
and become the man ‘ unborn ’ {ayoni mSnus) and thence 
the sahaja manas or the * man eternal ’ (nityer manm)} 
In the same way Sahaja cannot be attained through the 
samanya rati or the ordinary woman, — it is to be attained 
through the bisesa rati or the extraordinary woman who has 
herself become of the nature of Radha. In the culture of 
- , love the man of the physical body must 

1 he SfimSnya and 

and the Vileta in Rasa be realised by the woman as the * eternal 
man,’ i.e., the man as Rasa or Krsna ; and 
similarly the woman of the physical body must be realised 
by the man as the ‘extraordinary woman,’ i.e., the woman 
as pure Rati or Radha. When the samanya (ordinary) man 
or woman thus becomes transformed into the Visesa (extra- 
ordinary), he or she becomes fit for undertaking the culture 
of supreme love.* In the Ujjvala-nilamani of Rupa GosvamI 
we find descriptions of three kinds of Rati, viz., Samartha, 
Samanjasa and Sadharani. Samartha Rati is the woman 
who unites with the beloved with no selfish motive of self- 


^ C/. menus menus trividha prakjar 

manu^ bSchiya leha i 
»ahaj manus ayoni manus 

samakara manu^a-deha II etc. 

Ibid, Song No. 22. 

Cy. also — 

rager manus nityer manus 

ehfltra kotriya nive I 

paraie paraS ekiSnta k.ariya 

rape miiaiya thuve II 
ei«e men use aaak koriya 

rati ae bujhiya nive I 
rBpa rati take ek&nta hjotriya 

hfdete menu? have )) 

Ibid, Song No. 47. 

* See RagSimikfl Padast edited by Mr. Bose, Song Nos. 2 and 3. 
cy. also— 

tSmunyS prakr^i prakjta ae rati 

parai nS kflra iHr 11 etc. 


Sj. S. Song No. 15. 



163 


THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA Clfl-T 

satisfaction, — the only desire in her is to give her beloved 
the highest satisfaction by complete self-surrendo:. Among 
the lady-loves of Krsna Radha is the only example of 
Samariha Rati. The SamanjasS Rati, however, wishes to 
have equal share of enjoyment with the lover, — Rukmini and 
others are examples of this class. The Sadharani Rati or the 
most ordinary Rati is the woman who is inspired in love-union 
only with the desire of self-satisfaction, — and Kubja 
represents a Rati of this class. The Sahajiyas accepted this 
classification of Ratis and according to them the Samarths 
Rati is the only Rati suited for the culture of love. 

The Sahajiyas lay stringent conditions regarding the 
practice of love. It has frequently been said that for the 
attainment of true love a man must become dead first of all, 
— dead in the sense that the animal in him must be eradicated, 
giving scope for full play to the divine in him ; in plainer 
words, his body and mind must be placed above even the 
possibility of susceptibility to the lower animal instincts and 
must be imbued through and through with the radiant glow 
of his Svarupa. This strictness has also been frequently 
emphasised by the condition that a man must do completely 
away with his nature as a man and transform his nature to 
that of a woman before he takes the vow of love. Here 
also the emphasis is really on the total transformation of the 
prdineiry attitude of man towards a woman. 

The stringency of Sahaja-sadhana and the great danger 
sure to result from the slightest deviation have been 
repeatedly sung by the Sahajiya poets in enigmatic state- 
ments. The process of Sadhana has frequently been 
compared to the process of diving deep in the ocean without 
getting wet in the least,’— or to the process of making the 

^ Cf. sSgare tinSn kjarivi 

elaiya mathSr kfii I 

riire nd hhtjivi jal nS chuivi 

aama duhkha Bukha kfei II 


Song ascribed to Ca^^ldis. 



OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


m 

frog dance before the serpent, or to wreathe the peaks of 
mount Sumeru with a piece of thread, or to bind the elephant 
with the help of the spider’s net.* 

This stringency in the Sahaja-sadhana leads to the 
importance of strict physical and mental discipline without 
which it is simply disastrous to enter upon such a 
course of Sadhana. It is for this reason that three stages 
have been marked in the course of Sadhana, Viz., 
Pravarta, or the stage of the beginner ; Sadhaka, i.e., an 
advanced stage, — and Siddha or the perfect stage. Closely 
associated with these three stages of Sadhana are the five 
Asrayas (Refuges), viz., Nama (divine name), Mantra, Bhava 
(divine emotion), Prema (love) and Rasa (bliss). Nama and 
Mantra are associated with the stage of 'Pravarta, Bhava with 
the second stage of Sadhal^a and Prema and Rasa are 
associated with the third stage of Siddha.^ It has been 
repeatedly enjoined that the Sadhana in company of a woman 
can be entered upon only in the Sadhaka stage and real love 
can be realised only in the perfect stage and never before. 
In the question of perfection equal stress is laid on the per- 
fection of body as on the perfection of mind ; for, the Sahaja 
can never be realised without a perfect body.® Herein comes 

Again, 

samudre paUva nlre na titiva 

nahi duhl^^a Bukha h}ei II 

Song ascribed to Candidls. 

^ super mukhete hhek.ere nacavi 

iave ta rasife-ra; II 

ye jan catur sumeru iikhar 

sutay gathite pare I 

mah<^sara j&le matanga handhile 

e ras milaye tare II 

Song ascribed to Candidfis. 

* Vide Airaya-nirnaya, MS. (C.U. 566, 575). 

^ apahf^a dehete e hjam sadhile 

i-k^l u-hul yay I 

baman haiya bahu pasariy^ 

cand dharivare cay il 


Song ascribed to Narottam, Sj. S. 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 


165 


the question of Kaya-sadhana or the culture of body, which is 
very often stressed in the Sahajiya texts on 
Sahafa-^dhana. *" practical Sadhana.^ iWe have seen that this 
question of Kaya-sadhana plays an impor- 
tant part in the Sadhana of the Buddhist Sahajiyas,* — and the 
esoteric yogic practice of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas being 
substantially the same, the question of Kaya-sadhana is 
equally emphasised in the Vaisnava school. 

Again we have seen that in all schools of esoteric yogic 
practice the body has been held to be the abode of all truth. 
The same view is equally emphasised in the Vaisnava 
Sahajiya school. It is said in a song ascribed to Candidas 
that truth resides in the body.® It is said in the Raina-sara 
that if one can realise the truth of the body { bhanda ) one will 
be able to realise the truth of the universe (hrahmanda). The 
realisation of the truth of the body leads to the realisation of 
the truth of the self, and the truth of the self is the truth of 
Vrndavana. All truth of Krsna and Radha is to be known 
from the own body."* In the Caiiia {tra, sic)-rupa-padma- 
tnala^ we find that the Caitla-rupa is the Sahaja-rupa and 
this Caitia-Tvpa or Sahaja-rupa resides in the different 
lotuses of the body. 

The important point to be noticed in this connection is 
that as the psychological Sadhana of love of the Vaisnava- 
Sahajiyas gradually evolved from the psycho-physiological 

^ Vide Dvipakojjtala-grantha, MS. (C.U. No. 564). 

- 2 Vide supra, p. 111. 

3 bastu ache deha harttamane II 

C/. also— * 

rasa-hastu thakc set rasik sVarlre I piriti murati hay prem nam dhare II 

Dvipak.ojjvala-’grantha, MS. (C.U. No. 564), p. 10(B). 

^ hhan^akc janile jani hrahmander tattva I pmvvete hahila jata hhd,n4ar 
mahSrttya II bhan^a btcarile jani Span mahartta I Spana janile jani bfndaVana 

tattva II bhinda haite jani jata ^^irtara mahima I bhanda haite jani radh&^prema 

tattva stma II 


5 MS. (C. U. No. 592). 


MS. (C.U. No. llll),p. 54(B). 



<66 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Yogic Sadhana of the Tantrics and the Buddhist Sahajiyas, 
the culture of love of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas was always 
based on the psycho-physiological Yogic Sadhana. It is for 
this reason that in Sahajiya texts and songs we find hints 
on the Yogic Sadhana associated with the culture of love. 
Any attempt at the culture of love without being conversant 
with the secrets of Yogic practices will lead not only to 
failure, but to extremely direful results. The ideal love of 
the Vaisnava Sahajiyas can be realised only in a perfectly 
purified body and mind, whence all the principles of defile- 
ment are absolutely eradicated. This state has been said to 
be the state of Visuddha-sativa. By the purification of body 
and mind there is first the subsidence of the elements of 
T amas (inertia) and Rajas (energy) and there is the predomi- 
nance of the element of Sattva (intelligence-stuff); but 
even above the state of Sattva is the state of saddha-sattva 
(or pure intelligence-stuff) ; and by further purification Suddha- 
sattVa is transformed into Visuddha-sattva. This state of 
Visuddha-sattva is a transcendental state where there is 
neither the natural nor the supra-natural, — and pure love is 
possible only in such a state. ^ 

For the realisation of the ultimate nature as pure love the 
lover and the beloved must be identical physically, mentally 
and spiritually ; they must be of one body, one mind and one 
soul. It has been said, — “ Do away with the idea of the two 
. , and be of one body, if you have the desire 

The transcendental - ^ 

nature of the Sahaja iqj jggj Jove ; very difficult is this Sadhana 
love. 

oil ove, says Dvija-Candidas.” “All the 
accessories of love — the separate existences of the lover and 
the beloved must merge in a unique flow of love, — then and 
then only this Sadhana will be fulfilled.’’* About the nature 

* aartta-raja-tamopare aarddha^aatva n3m I taipare hiaurddhaaartta premer 
it prakTtS-prQkxta tskc kohite na pari I 

^ RaU^viliaa^paddhati, MS. (C. U. No. 572), p. 24(A). 

^ Songs ascribed to Ca^^ldfts (3fthitya>pari?at edition). 



THE VAI^NAVA SiWHAJIYA CULT 16^ 

of this love it has enigmatically been' said, — “Love-making 
sits on love-making — and love {bhava) is over that ; above 
that love resides a higher love, and over that remains what 
may be said to be the highest consummation. In love resides 
the thrill of joy, and over that thrill the flow, — ahd there is 
the flow over the flow, — and that bliss who should know}”^ 

‘ ‘ There is |he flower over the fruit and the scent is over 
that, — and bn that scent are these letters three (i.e., pi — ri - ti 
= love; Skt. priti), — great riddle is it to understand!” 
Again, — “There is the fruit over the flower, — ^and over 
that is the wave, — and there is wave above wave, — who 
does this sectet know It is extremely difficult to follow 

these and many such other enigmatic descriptions of 
love closely and literally, — and we doubt if every one 
of these statements can be explained rigorously. Such 
paradoxical -statements were made only to emphasise the 
transcendental nature of the Sahaja love. It is said, — 
‘ ‘ There is water on earth and above that water rises the wave ; 
love remains above that wave, does anybody know anything 
about it?” It is about this transcendental love that 
Candidas exclaimed, — “ The love of the washerwoman is like 
tested gold, — there is no tinge of sexuality in it.” 

Thus the Sadhana of love of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas is a 
transcendence from the finite to the infinite, — from the enjoy- 


* p~iriti upare piriti haisaye 

tahar upare hhaV I 
bhaver upare bhaver basati 

tahar upare labh II 
premer majhare pulahfir sthan 

pulaka upare dhara I 
dharar upare dharar basati 

e sukh bujhaye kora 1| Ibid. 

2 Ibid. 

3 mrtiika upare jaler basati 

tshar upare dheu I 
tahar upare piriti basati 

tsha ki j3naye II 



I68 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


ment of the external object to the realisation of the self which 
in its ultimate character is but of the nature of pure love. 
When real love dawns in the heart of the Sadhaka the beloved 
becomes to him a mere symbol for infinite love, — the whole 
universe with all its grandeur and mystery contracts in the 
body of the sweetheart, — not only that, she becomes a 
symbol for the supreme truth. In such a state of love did 
Candidas, the great lover, exclaim to his 
tion”onove Sweetheart Rami, the washerwoman : — 

“ Hearest Rami, O thou washerwoman, — 
1 knew thy feet to be a cool retreat and so I took shelter 
there. Thou art to me the revealer of thfe Vedas, thou art to 
me as the consort of the Saviour Lord Siva, — thou art the 
iris of my eyes ; — my worship of love towards thee is my 
morning, noon-tide and evening services, — thou art the neck- 
lace of my neck. The body of the washerwoman is of the 
nature of the eternal maid Radha (Jiisori-stiariipa) , — there is 
no scent of sensuality in it, — the love of the washerwoman 
is tested gold, — says Badu Candidas.’” 

(ic) Sahaja-realisation of the Self and the Not-Self 

We have said that the final aim of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas 
through a culture of love is the realisation of the Sahaja 

^ Candidfia says, in a similar song— ’’One confession of my heart— repeatedly am 
1 making to thee, — hearest Rami, thou washerwoman, — I have taken shelter under 
thy feet only because I learnt them to be a cool retreat. The form of the washer- 
woman is of the nature of the eternal maid, Radha, — no scent of s^risuality is 
there ; — if I do not see thee my mind is upset, — and it is pacified just at the sight of 
thee. Thou art, O washerwoman, my consort, — thou art my mother — my father, — 
all the religious functions performed thrice a day are nothing but worshipping 
thee, — thou art GayatrT, the mother of the Vedas. Thou art the mother of all 
speech, the wife of Lord Siva, — the necklace of my neck,— thou art heaven, earth 

and hell and every thing, — thou art the iris of my eyes 1 cannot forget the 

sweetness of thy beauty, — how am I to make thee my own ? Thou art my Tantra, 
thou art all my Mantras, thou art all the bliss of my prayer. My days fly on in 
thinking who else in these three worlds may be so much my one,— and through the 
order of goddess BSsuli exclaims Candidas, — the feet of the washerwoman are the 
highest truth.*' » 



THE VAISNAVA SAHAJIYA CULT 1 6^ 

nature not only of the self, but also of the external objects, 
or in other words, of the world as a whole. The realisation 
of the Sahaja-nature of the not-self, they contend, follows 
from the realisation of the Sahaja-nature of the self The 
Sahaja (of the nature of supreme love) that underlies the self 
as its ultimate reality, underlies also the not-self, — and both 
the self and the not-self are mere transformations of the same 
Sahaja, the plurality of objects with all their differences owes 
its origin only to the illusory nature of our sense-percep- 
tions.^ The duality of self and external objects is said to be 
due to a mere confusion of the senses, and it exists only as 
long as there is no attainment of self-knowledge. The 
senses are playing with the objects ; but in reality the objects 
and the self are one and the same in their ultimate nature. 
When knowledge of the self dawns on man any differentia- 
tion like this and that becomes impossible, — and at that time, 
there is not the least cognition of duality and the whole 
universe is realised as of the nature of the self.^ Thus it is 
contended that the realisation of the Sahaja-nature of the self 
as pure love automatically leads one also to the realisation of 
the ultimate nature of the external world. 

In the Tantras we find that the world proceeds from the 
bliss which is the cessation of all duality and which is the 
nature of the ultimate reality, it has been said in the 
Upanisad , — Bliss (ananda) is to be known as Brahman, 
and from bliss proceeds all the objects, and through bliss 
they live and in bliss do they return and merge. iWe find 

1 apart janaye jei jagat janay I 
jagater jan tar anta nahi pay il 

Ratna-sara, MS. (C. U. No. 1111), p. 19(A). 

2 C/. tumi iudhu bastu-jndne dekhitecha bhram I 

natuvd sakali hay dtmdr e kram II 
kothd kJt kotha if hpihdy ba k^th I 
mdyd-baSe tumi iudhu dek.h e bibhraf II 

Ibid. 

3 Ibid. 

< Taithirlyopanisat (3.6). 

22-141 IB 



170” OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

an echo of the same truth in the utterances of the Sahajiyas, 
•who say that all the beings are born in Sahaja, they live in 
Sahaja and again return to Sahaja.' The Sahaja is the Rasa, 
the supreme emotion of love, the quintessence in every body .^ 
It is the primordial emotion — it is Kama and from Kama 
proceeds everything. ® There is sometimes the tendency 
of explaining the two aspects of Sahaja (f.e., Rasa and Rati) 
under the imagery of the seed and the ovum and the cosmos 
as following from their uriion, just as it is explained in the 
texts of the Tantric and the Buddhist Sahajiya schools.^ Both 
the self and the not-self, being thus the product of Sahaja, are 
homogeneous in their ultimate nature and it is, therefore, that 
the realisation of the nature of the self through the culture of 
love leads also to the realisation of the ultimate nature of 
the not-self. 

^ aahajete jiv janme sahaje hinaie I 

sahajete khay piye aahajete hhaae II 
aahajete yay jiv dekhaha hhaviya I 
aahaj aandhan k^ha na paya hhujiya II 

Ratna^aara, MS. (C. U. No. 11 1 1 ) . p. 19(A) . 

* raaa baatu thak.c sei raaik aarire I 

p'lriii muraii hay prem nam dhare 11 

Dvlpakojjvala. MS. (C.U. No. 564), p. 10(B). 

8 purus prakrti kflmei utpatti 

hjamete aaVar janma I 
paiu pak^i sav kfitneie udbhav 

kamete aaVar harma II 

« * ' * * « 

hjam upSaana kflm ae aadhana 

kjam kcli aav tantra I 
katner madhuri in-rupa-mafijari 
kjatn hari-nam mantra II 

Song ascribed to Narottam, Sj. S. Song No. 75. 

^ C/. athavar jangam adi jata deha hay I 

rati-kam aarva-dehe bilaa karay II 

* * * * 

set k^m raja-bij raao-rati aatta I 
aei aariJa raaamay aarvamay kflrtta II 

» Sahaja-UfSiaana-tattva of Tarunl-rama^, B.S.P.P. 1335, No. 4. 



CHAPTER VI 


A Non^sectarian Approach to the Doctrines of the 

Sahajiyas 

(e) The Purely Psychological Approach Apart From 
The Theological 


Apart from the theological speculations advanced by the 
Vaisnava Sahajiyas in connection with their Sadhana of love, 
there can be another approach to their Sadhana from a purely 
psychological point of view. The Vaisnava Sahajiyas have 
always mixed up this psychological principle with the theo- 
logical speculations of Bengal Vaisnavism, and the ideal of 
Parakiya love in the human sphere has generally been sought 
to be associated with an ontological significance. But apart 
from the ontological significance attached to the ideal of 
Parakiya love let us see if some religious significance can 
pertain to such a kind of love even from the purely psycho- 
logical point of view. From this psychological point of view 
it may be said that human love, when dissociated completely 
from selfish carnal desires, not by a process of violent 
suppression, but by a slow and gradual process of strict 
physical and psychological discipline, has the capacity, in its 
boundless extent and deep intensity, of producing a trans- 
cendental state of mind, which is of the same kind as the 


Most intense love 
pioduces a state of 
arrest. 


state of mind produced through the highest 
state of divine love, or communion with 
God. We have said before that the arrest 


of the states and processes of the mind plays the most impor- 
tant part in almost all the religious systems of India. Intense 
human love, or even sex-emotion, has the capacity of produ- 
cing a supreme state of arrest. In a unique flow of emotion, 



172 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


, uninterrupted by subjective or objective notions there dawns 
I an infinite oneness in the mind, which is recognised to be 
the highest spiritual experience. This is the state of Samarasa 
after which all the esoteric schools of yoga aspired. The 
Tantrics of Hindu as well as of Buddhist schools would often 
recommend the attainment of such a state of mind through 
the attainment of intense bliss by a strictly yogic regulation of 
the sex-act, while the Vaisnava Sahajiyas added the psycho- 
logical element of love to it. The final aim, however, in all 
such cases was the attainment of an infinitely blissful state of 
arrest either purely through a psyco-physiological process of 
yoga or through the intense emotion of love. 

The fundamental principle of the esoteric schools, men- 
tioned above, is that man can never get rid of his sex- 
Repression of ,«x Propensities even by a life-long struggle of 

jiyS8*by^8ublimatfon* figorous Suppression, — nay, as we have 
'' seen, it is in the form of Samarasa or 

Mahasukha or Mahabhava the ultimate nature of our whole 
being — the ultimate reality from which the world evolves. 
In the grossest sexual pleasure we have the lowest kind of 
realisation of the same kind of bliss which follows the reali- 
sation of the ultimate reality. It is, therefore, foolish to try 
to do absolutely away with this fundamental nature of man ; 
the best thing, on the other hand, will be to eliminate the 
element of grossness from it through physical and psychologi- 
cal discipline. 

This theory of the esoteric schools involving the element 
of sex in religion, may be made subject to severe criticism 
from the Freudian point of view of modern psycho-analysis, — 
and there is much scope for such criticism particularly in the 
field of Vaisnava Sahajiya cult with all its theory of love, 
human and divine. But though a Freu- 
explanation explanation of the whole thing may 

not be absolutely inadmissible in such 
]^igious practices, one fundamental point, which we should 



DOCTRINES OF fHE SAHAJIYAS 


173 


never loss sight of even from the empirical point of view, is 
that though the lotus above the surface of water may have its 
origin in the mud deep below, mud and the lotus cannot 
surely be placed in the same scale in our general scheme of 
valuation. 

The main truth of these cults, as we have pointed out, is 
the possibility of the attainment of an intensely blissful stat^ 
of arrest, which has been spoken of in these cults as the 
state of liberation or the state of Brahma-realisation or the 
state of divine love. This idea that it may be possible to 
attain liberation through the most intense emotion, or that 
the state of mind under the most intense emotion of any kind 
is of the nature of bliss produced by self-realisation, or 
Brahma-realisation, is not new in the history of Indian 
religious thought. In the Brhad-aranya\a Upanisad, 
realisation of self has been compared to 
the transcendental realisation of bliss 
arising through the deep embrace of a 
loving woman. Thus it is said, — ‘‘As, when deeply 
embraced by the dear woman, one knows neither anything 
external nor anything internal, — so also a man deeply 
embraced by the self (dtman) through perfect knowledge 
knows neither anything external nor anything internal.”^ In 
the Bhdgavata Purdna we find that the cowherd girls of 
Vrndavana did attain salvation through their passion towards 
their beloved Srikrsna, with whom they combined even 
knowing that it was jdra (promiscuity).^ it is also 


Liberation through 
intense emotion— evi- 
dence of the Upanisad. 


^ iadyatka priyaya striya aamparisvakto na bahyam l^incana Veda na ntaram 
evarn eva yam purusak prajnena aimana samparii^vakto na bahycm kificana Veda 
na* ntatam. 

Erhadaranyakc-pamsat, 4-3-21. 

® Bhagavata-purana, (JO. 29. 11) VangavasT edition. This fact described it| the 
Bhagavata has been fully utilised by the Vaisnava SahajiySs in the following song 
ascribed to Narahari — 

nander nandan k^raye hhajan 

upapati hhav layS | 



174 ' OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


cited in this connection that Si^upala, king of Cedi, 
attained liberation through his intense 
Purtoa"*^* ***' emotion of hatred to Srikrsna.’ In the 
Padma-purana we find that in ancient times 
all the great sages of the Dandakaranya saw the Lord in the 
form of Rama and desired to enjoy Him ; all of them after- 
wards were born in female forms in the land of Gokula and 
there they enjoyed the Lord with their passions and were 
thereby liberated from the ocean of existence. Their libera- 
tion was just like the liberation of the demons who approached 
the Lord with anger, were killed in battle and afterwards 
attained liberation. Sex-passion and anger are generally the 
cause of man's downfall in the world, but being united with 
the Lord with strong emotion the cowherd ladies were all 
liberated. Those, who worship the Lord through passion, 
fear or even animosity, will attain Vaikuntha (the land of the 
Lord), — not to speak of those who worship the Lord through 
pure devotion. ^ 


gopi-anugata braja-jana-rlta 

mane aropita haya II 
ati hiparlt hraja-jana-rU 

sahaj manus seha I 
purus prakrti haiya kcmanc 

kahare l^arive leha 11 
satiate bhajan koila gophgan 

e deie se deie dur 1 
kpiha brndaVan kotha braja^jan 

kotha prema’^rasa-pur II etc. Sj. S. Song, No. 69. 

^ Thus it is said, — “1 have already described to you how the king of Cedi (i.e., 
Si^upala) attained salvation even through his hatred of Krsna ; what wonder then 
about the (salvation of) girls who were so dear to the Lord ? {i.e., what wonder if 

the cowherd girls have attained salvation through their intense love towards the 

Lord?) By continually applying the emotions of passion (i^amo), anger, fear, 

affection, unity and friendship to the Lord, people are attaining perfect oneness with 
the Lord.’* 

ukjtarji purastad etat te caidyah siddhirp yathd. gatah I 
dvi^ann apt hr§ik^iam dho^saja-priyah II 

kamam kfodham bhayam sneham aikyam aauhfdam eva ca I 
nityam harau vidadhato yanti ianmayatam hi te 11 

BhagaVata’purana, 10-29-13, 15. 

3 fjadma-purQna, {Jtiara'khan^o^ verses 64-68. 



boctRlNES OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


m 


In their discussion on the nature of aesthetic pleasure some 
XL . t .L Indian rhetoricians have described it as 
rhetorician* of the equal to the bliss of Brahma-realisation . 

Through the intensity and purity of aesthetic 
emotion the limitations of mundane life are tran'o. ended and 
in the profound tranquillity of mind the artist enpys a trans- 
cendental bliss equal to the bliss of Brahma-realisation. 
Visvanatha Kaviraja says in describing the nature of Rasa 
that through the intensity of the transcendent emotional 
appeal of literature our mind becomes out of touch with the 
objective world, and due to the separation of mind from the 
objective world there is the subsidence of the elements of 
Rajas (energy-stuff) and T amas (mass-stuff) and there is the 
emergence of Sattva (intelligence-stuff) ; as a result of this 
emergence of the Sattva element there is the spontaneous rise 
in mind of a unique bliss of the nature of pure consciousness 
untouched by the notion of any other knowable, — and as 
such it is of the nature of Brahma-realisation.^ The quintes- 
sence of this Rasa is an emotion of supramundane sublimity 
and nicety, which removes all the limitations of our mind and 
expands it to a limitless extent. It is only by the meritorious 
few that such Rasa is realised in its entirety and in its change- 
less unique character. 

This view that it may be possible to attain a state of 
. tv . - arrest through the intensity of any kind of 
Saivism. emotion or sensation has been emphasised 

by the 5aiva mystics of Kasmira also. It has been said by 
Abhinava Gupta in his T antra-lo\a that when our mind 
ceases to form all kinds of false thought-constructions 
(vik.alpa), we realise our motionless true self as Siva ; even if a 
beast attains such a state of mental equilibrium it attains the 


sattvo-drekad akhanda-sVa-prakja^a-nanda-cinmayafi I 
vedya-ntara-aparia^-iunyo brahma^avada-aahodarah II 

Sahitya-darpana, Ch. 111. 



1^6 - 


OBSCURt RELIGIOUS CULtS 


State of Siva.^ The state of homogeneity that is produced in 
the mind through the absorbing interest of pleasureable 
sensation of sight, sound and touch leads one to the realisa" 
tion of the ultimate motionless nature of the self, — and the 
bliss that is derived from such experience is but a playful 
manifestation of the blissful nature of the ultimate Being.^ We 
find a very clear exposition of this viev^r in the Spanda-Karilia 
and the Vijnana-bhairava. The Spanda-pradipika {Spanda- 
Kardia) says that for the realisation of the self as the 
Siva one has to make his mind absolutely motionless, — 
the absolutely motionless state of mind is liberation. “ 
When the self passes on from its active state of the 
doer and the knower to its absolutely motionless 
inactive state, it is no more disturbed by the pernicious 
memory {ku-smrti) of its past active states ; but by passing 
into the inactive motionless state the self does not lose 
its nature as the ultimate subject. It is said that two states 
of the self can be distinguished, viz., the state of pure 
agency {k,artrtva} and the state of being the effect (Jiaryatva) . 
Of the two states the state of being the effect is capable of 
being destroyed, but the agent is indestructible. This is to 
say that all outward efforts or activities, which are but the 
manifestation of the disturbed agent may vanish ; but with 
the vanishing of the active efforts the self as the supreme 
agent does not die out.^ The implication is that the outward 


1 Tantra-loka, 

® tata eva samasto* yam ananda-rasa-vihhramah i 

taiha hi madhure gite sparie Va candanadik^ ii 
madhyaatha vigame yaaau hrdaye apandamanata^ 
ananda-iaki^ih saivoyk.ta yatah sahrdayo janah II Ihid (3.209-10). 

^ yada ksobhah praliyeta tada ayat paramam padam 1 

Spanda-koTika, Ch. I, Verse No. 9, Vizianagram Sanskrit Series. 
^ avaathayugalam catra korya-k<i^rtrtva-iabditam I 

karyata k^ayini tatra kctrifivam punar ak^ayam II 
karyo-nmukhah prayatno yah kf^valam so'tra lupyate 1 
taamim lupte vilupio' amVty abudhah pratipadycete II 

Ibid., Verses 14, 1 5, 



DOCTRINES OF THE SAHAIIYAS 177 

efforts or activities may die out, but the deep internal 
emotional states produced thereby do not die out with 
them. The intense emotional state of our mind which is not 
limited by any notion of space, time and dimension approxi- 
mates the nature of the indestructible true self which is the 
omniscient pure intelligence/ When even the ordinary 
emotions of our daily life attain a high degree of intensity, our 
mind attains a state of equilibrium which leads to the realisa- 
tion of our self as 'the motionless one.’ It is said that 
when a man is very angry or highly pleased, or is in a state 
of extreme bewilderment, even when he runs fast away 
(through some emotion of fear or joy), he attains a state which 
may be said to be the spanda, or the ultimate potential nature 
of the self.^ When in such a state the sun and the moon 

^ C/. na iu yo'ntarmukho bhavah sarVajfiatva-gana-spadam I 

tasya lopah h.adacit syad anyasya nupalamhhanat II 

Ibid. Verse 16. 

* ati-kx^ddhah prahrsfo Va koromVti va mr&an I 

dhavan Va yat padam gacchet tatra spandah praiisthitah li 

Ibid., Ch. 1I.| Verse6. 

It is said that even when a man very eagerly waits for the command of any other 
person with the firm resolution that whatever will be ordered by the latter 
must be carried out, he will, through the intensity of his eagerness and the 
firmness of his resolution, attain a state of equilibrium ; through such a condition 
of mind his inhaling and exhaling breath (the sun and the moon, i.e., prana and 
apana) will enter the middle nerve Susumna, which is the passage for the 
transcendental region, and all the motion of the sun and the moon (i.e. inhaling and 
exhaling) will stop there. 

yam aVastham samalambya yad ayam mama Vak?yoii 1 
tad avasyam karisyeham iti samkalpya tisthati II 
tarn asrityorddhva-margena candra-8uryaVuh}iaVapi I 
sausumne'dhvany astamito hitva hrahmanda- gocaram II 

Ibid., Ch. II, Verses 7, 8. 

It is explained in the commentary that whenever, due to whatever reason it 
may be, one is under the compulsion of carrying out the order of any other man, due 
to the intensity of concentration of the former just to receive the order of the latter, 
all the mental states of the former will die out, and because of the dying out of all the 
mental states his consciousness must attain the ultimate state of perfect tranquillity, 
and through the practice of such acts of endurance he realises the ultimate truth. 

idam tu tatparyam, k^nacit karanena avaSya~k<^ramya-vacaaa prahhavtanuni 
karayiiavya-vastu-vivaksayd ^kfiptasya pumaah tad’’Vacana4uirUfamUtra-nivi4U’Vadha- 

23-14118 



1 ^ 8 ' 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


go down in the great void, the man in the walking state 
will feel himself as if fallen into profound, dreamless 
sleep, — he shall have no other cognition or emotion regarding 
his body or the world outside, — that is the unveiled state of 
the self/ When the spatio-temporal character of the knower 
and the knowable is gone the self remains as a pure flow of 
consciousness, a stream of colourless emotion. This flow of 
pure emotion, which is not determined by any quality 
whatsoever, is the pure nature of the self. 

In the Vijnana^hhairava we find corroboration of what is 
stated in the Spanda-pradipika. There it is said that to attain 
the state of Bhairava, or rather to realise the ultimate nature 
of the self, one has to realise the ultimate nature of the self 
and of objects as pure consciousness bereft of all waves 
of mentation. But how to attain such a state of Bhairava ? 
The Vijnana-hhairava enjoins that such a state may be 
attained through a state of arrest produced by any intense 
emotion or even sensation. Just as after the ringing of a bell 
the main sound dies out leaving behind a continuous unquali- 
fied lingering vibration, so also after the mind is deeply 
disturbed by a strong emotion (like the sex-emotion), there 
follows a flow of unqualified lingering emotion, and that 
oneness of emotion becomes to the Sadhaka as of the same 
nature as the unqualified bliss resulting from the realisation of 
the self.^ Through kissing and embracing of woman there 
follows an over-flood of joy which proceeds from within 
and amounts to the bliss of self-realisation. If we are very 


natvat samasta-vrtti-pratyaBtamaye sati, aamvit turtyam daiam avaiyameVaviSati, 
iat-praiyaVamaria-hhyaaat paratattvo-palabdhih 

Ibid.^ Comm, by Ramakan(ha, pp. 77-78. 

^ iada taamin mahavyomni praltna-iaii-hhaakare I 

8au§upta-padavan mudhah prahuddhah syad anavrtah II 

Ch. II. Verse No. 9. 

^ iakti-sahgama-aarfik.subdha-iaktya-veid-vaaanik.am I 

yat-aukham brahma-tattvaaya tai-sukham sMakjyam ucyate 11 
Vijiiana-hhairavat SI. 69.‘ See also the commentary on the verse by Ksemaraja. 



DOCTRINES OF THE SAHAJIYAS 179 

glad at any time on any account, — or if we meet any of our 
nearest and dearest ones after a long separation, there is an 
excess of emotion, through the meditation on which it is 
possible to merge oneself in the ‘thatness.’^ If we take 
meal to our heart’s content after we are very hungry and if 
we take some palatable drink after we are very thirsty, there 
follows a contented jo> of relish through which also we may 
attain Mahasukha (great bliss). Through the quality less 
intense joy that may follow from attending to music or to 
any such other object the yogin may merge himself in it and 
realise ‘thatness’ thereby. The mind should be kept fast 
wherever there is the satisfaction of mind, — for, thereby 
will the ultimate nature of the self as supreme bliss be revealed 
to us.^ Through the sudden arrest or careful control of any 
of the senses the particular sense enters into the non-dual 
vacuity and the soul shines there in its ultimate nature.® 
Whenever the mind is disturbed either through knowledge or 
through ignorance, mind attains the ultimate state as an after- 
effect of this disturbance. If a man stands by the side of a 
great hole like a well, etc., and then looks upwards, his mind 
will be bereft of all thought-constructions and the states of 
mind will be suspended. In our deep emotions of anger, 
fear, sorrow, — or in the emotion produced in a lonely cave, 

^ anande mahati prapte drsfe Va bandhaVe cirSt I 

anandam udgatam dhyatva tallayas tan-mana hhavet II 

Ibid, Verse 71. 

2 yatra yaira manas-tustir manaa tatraiva dharayet I 
tatra tatra para-nanda-avarupam aampravartate II 

Ibidy Verse 74. 

^ yaaya koaye ' ndriyaaya pi vyaghstac ca nirodhatah I 

pravistaaya dvaye iunye tatrai 'vatma prakfliate II Ibid.^ Verse 89. 

The author goes so far as to say that if any one first pinches a particular limb 
with a pointed needle ard then concentrates his mind on the place of painful sensa- 
tion he will attain a stainless state of Bhairava. (/hid., Verse 93.) When our mind 
is deeply absorbed in any object of sex-passion, anger, greed, infatuation, pride and 
jealousy, through the deep absorption in the emotion the distinctive features of the 
objects vanish away and what remains is the ultimate reality, (/hid., Verse 101.) 



180 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


or in the emotion resulting from flying away from the battle 
field, or in the emotion of strong curiosity or of hunger there 
is a state which may be said to be identical with the state of 
the Brahman.’ 

(ii) Criticism from The Yoga Point of View 

From the above it will be clear that the view that it may 
be possible to attain some religious experience through an 
intense emotion or even through some strong sensation is not 
very uncommon in the field of Indian religious thought. But 
as this view is closely associated with the question of a state of 
arrest, which is so much emphasised in the Patanjala system 
of yoga, it will not be unfair to make some comment on it 
from the yoga point of view. 

The exponents of yoga have admitted the fact that it may 
be possible to attain a state of arrest even through some 
strong sensation or emotion ; but that kind of arrest of mind 
is very transitory and as such falls far short of the final state 
of Samadhi. Samadhi of yoga proper does not mean a 
temporary arrest of mind, — it means a permanent state of 
arrest which removes all our afflictions and which eradicates 
all mental complexes and root-instincts that serve as the seed 
of the future recurrence of life and suffering. 

In the yoga scheme of psychology there have been 
recognised five planes of mind, which are technically known 
as the five citta-bhumis. These are, (1) k.sipta, (2) mudha, 
(3) viksipta, (4) ekjagra and (5) niruddha. The h.sipta 

^ Ibid., Verse 118. 

The reading of the verse in the edition we are using is as follows 
k^utadyante hhaye ioke gahtare Va ranaddrute 1 
kutuhale k?udhadyante hrahma-^sattvamayt daia II 
But the reading of the verse as quoted in the commentary on the Spanda-afitraB 
by UtpalScfiryya is as follows ; — 

krodhadyante hhaye Soke gahvare Varane rane I 
kutuhale ki^dhadyanie hrahma^BattS samipagS ii 

^ Vide., p. 51 



DOCTRINES OF THE SAHAJIYAS 


181 


state IS the ordinary unsteady state of mind which is always 
changing from one object to another. The second state is 
the state in which mind, under the sway of some strong 
sensation or emotion, lies infatuated, as it were. In this 
state there is the excess of the tamas (i.e., the gross material 
stuff) and under the sway of the tamas mind falls asleep, or, 
swooning, as it were. The third state is the state of Or^sipta, 
which is distinguished from the k?^pta state by the possibility 
therein of temporary arrest of the mental states. It is the 
momentary steadiness that the mind may have amidst its 
unsteady changes. The other two states are el^dgra 
(one-pointed) and niruddha (perfectly arrested). Of these 
two the e\dgra state has been explained by Vacaspati in his 
commentary as eka-tdna, which literally means ‘one-tuned,’ 
I.e., the state where all the mental states attain an oneness in 
deep concentration on some particular object of meditation. 
This ek,dgra state leads to the next state which is the state 
of final arrest (niruddha). 

Now of the five planes (bhumi) of the mind only the last 
two are recognised as the planes of yoga proper. Temporary 
arrest may be possible in the mudha and vik?ipta planes 
also, — ^but they cannot be recognised as states of yoga as 
there is the possibility of their relapse to ordinary active states 
at any moment. The important thing in yoga proper is not 
therefore somehow to attain a state of arrest, but to well- 
prepare the planes of mind for Samadhi. If the plane be 
well-prepared even active states cannot disturb the mind. 

If we examine the states of Samadhi described particularly 
by the Kasmira-school of Saivism, we shall be tempted to 
say that many of these states can be classed as the mudha 
state of mind and only a few of them fall within the state of 
ekagra. There is no denial of the fact that when we are 
deeply absorbed in any intense emotion, we transcend our 
ordinary physical, biological and psychological existence,^ — 
and even it may be admitted that such states of transcenden- 



182 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


tal emotion approximate in nature deep religious experience, 
but the question remains, how far it will be correct to accept 
all such states to be identical with our supreme religious 
experience. Instates of great hunger, anger, jealousy, fear, 
curiosity, sex-passions, etc., there may be a temporary sleep 
of the ordinary mental states and processes, — but they being 
outside the plane of yoga may at any time relapse into acti- 
vity, and for this reason such states should never be confused 
with the final state of Samadhi. 

To judge the state of Samarasa of the Tantriks or of 
Maha-sukha of the Buddhist Sahajiyas, or the state of 
supreme love of the Valsnava Sahajiyas, we should first of all 
examine the citta-bhumi in which such a realisation is possible. 
If the realisation be in any of the first three planes of the 
citta, i.e., if it be a mere state of sleep of the senses, or just 
like a state of swoon of a temporary nature then it cannot be 
recognised as a state of yoga proper. Everything, therefore, 
depends on the plane of citta. The Tantriks and the 
Sahajiyas were conscious of this truth and they laid sufficient 
stress on it. All the stringent conditions laid by the Tantriks 
and the Sahajiyas for the esoteric practice may be viewed from 
the yoga point of view as conditions for a proper plane of 
citta where the absorption of the psychical processes may 
amount to a state of Samadhi. Whenever the esoteric prac- 
tice is resorted to in a lower plane the result produced must 
be dangerous ; it is for this reason that the Sahajiyas repeated- 
ly declared that a real Sahajiya Sadhaka is rarely found even 
among crores ikotiks goti^ hay). 



CHAPTER VII 
The^auls of Bengal 
(i) General Nature of the Bdul Sect 

Far from the empty noise and busy bustle of urban life, 
flourished in the villages of Bengal an order of singers, still 
extant, — an institution of immense literary and religious 
interest ; for, the songs of these bards are as much noted for 
their naivete and spontaneity of expression as for the spiritual 
intensity of their content. The ‘unpremeditated art’ of their 
‘first fine careless raptures’ lifts us to a level of experience 
where the aesthetic and the religious work together for a 
unique spiritual transport. Indeed we can say about these 
songs what Keats says about the songs of the Nightingales 
of heaven, — 


divine melodious truth 

Philosophic numbers smooth. 

These unlettered village-singers, belonging to the lower ranks 
of the Muslim and the Hindu communities of Bengal and 
composed partly of householders and mainly of mendicants, 
are known as the Bauls. The Bauls belonging to the Hindu 
community are generally Vaisnavite in their faith and those 
belonging to the Muslim community are generally Sufi-istic 
and in both the schools the emphasis is on the 
mystic conception of divine love. The word haul ^ 

* We find the use of the word haul in the Caitanya-bhagavata of Vrodavana- 
das as also in the Catianya-caritamrta of Krsna-das Kavirffj. Cf. the well-known 
enigmatic message that was sent by Advaitficarya to Caitanya (Caitanya’-caritSmrtat 
Antya-hlS, Ch. xix). 



184 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

with its Hindi variant hour may be variously derived; 
Meaning of the word i^ Hiay be derived from the Sanskrit word 
vatula (aflFected by wind-disease, z.e., mad, 
crazy), or from vya\iila (impatiently eager) both these deri- 
vations are consistent with the modern sense of the word, 
which denotes inspired people with afl^ ecstatic eagerness for a 
spiritual life where one can realise one’s union with the 
eternal Beloved — the ‘Man of the heart’. The name Baul 
as also its cognate form Aul can very well be associated also 
with the Arabic Word awliyd (plural of wait, a word origi- 
nally meaning “near,” which is used for Triend,* or 
‘devotee’), that refers to a class of perfect men.^ With the 
Bengali word haul we may also compare the Sufi word 
DiWdna which means mad, z.e., free from all social respon- 
sibilities. 

Religious people with different modes of Sadhana are 
included within the Baul sect; inspite of the differences 
in modes of Sadhana, their general religious feature is 
characterised by a common spirit of extreme unconvention- 
alism. In a general way the Sadhakas of the Vaisnava 
Sahajiya order, and orders akin to it, with their secret 
practices involving the ‘four moons/ ^ are well-known as 
Bauls. The religious doctrines of these orders and the 
rationale behind them have already been studied in a general 
way in previous chapters. In this chapter, therefore, we 
shall not accept 'the word Baul in its wider denotation so as 
to include also the esoteric yogic Sadhakas within its 


C/. also : — hauUya hiivasere na dive aaite 11 

prabhu feafie bauliya aiche feene ^ara 1 etc. 
Caitanya-caritamrfa, Adidildf Ch. Xlf. 

An earlier reference of the word is found in the Sri-Krsna-vijaya of Msladhar Basu 
(second half of the sixteenth century). See jn. of p. 529 of the C. U. edition. 

^ These indifferent mendicants are also sometimes known by the name Aul 
which may be derived from the Skt. word dkula. 

2 Vide Studies in Islamic Mysticism, by R. A. Nicholson. 

3 . Jhe 'four moons’ imply semen, blood, stool and urine. 



tHL BAULS OF BENGAL 


18 $ 


province ; for preciseness and facility of study we shall res- 
trict the application of the word Baul to the school of mendi- 
cants, Hindu or Muslim, who in their songs celebrate the ‘Man 
of the heart’ and sing the mystic love they cherish for him. 

The Bauls are somewhat strange people, peculiar in their 
manners and customs, habits and practices. They refuse to 
be guided by any canon or convention, social, or religious. 
Freedom of spirit is their watch-word and they take to an 
unsophisticated way of life in which the more natural incli- 
nations of the mind are not restrained by social institutions. 
They proceed in a direction opposite to that followed by the 
general run of people. They avoid all reli- 
which the natural piety of the soul 
is overshadowed by the useless parapher- 
nalia of ritualism and ceremony on the one hand and 
pedantry and hypocrisy on the other. It is for this reason 
that the Bauls would call their path ultd (i.e.,the reverse) path 
and would call the process of their spiritual advance as the 
process of proceeding against the current.^ It is said in a 
beautiful song, — 

‘‘Reverse are the modes and manners of the man who is 
a real appreciator of the true emotional life and who is a 
lover of true love ; none is sure about the how and the when 
of his behaviour. 

“Such a man is affected neither by the weal nor by the 
woe of the world, and constantly realises the delight of love ; 
it appears that his eyes are floating on the water of delight ; 


1 naphcher ulfa nao baio, re manura I etc. 

Vicitra, B. S. 1335, Caitra. 
anuragt rasih yara bacche tara ujan bamkc i 
yakhan nadir **huma' dah^ jogay tarir phamke phamk^ II 
Haramani, collected and edited by Mr. M. Mansur Uddin, M.A.. 

Song No. 46. 

ujan jale padi dhara re guru amar gho^la na I 
bhaver naukja khani uvu-duvu guru padi pelem na I 

Ibid, Song No. 47. 


24-141 IB 



186 


OBSCtJRE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


sometimes he laughs alone in his own mood, sometimes he 
cries alone. 

“He lights the lamp of love and sits on and on with his 
mind immersed in the fathomless depth of the sea of emo- 
tion ; he has in his hand the key for happiness, but he never 
seeks it. 

“Awkwardly wild are all his manners and customs, — ^and 
the other extremely wonderful fact is that the glory of the 
full-moon closes round him for all time ; and further, this 
moon ceases not to shine day and night — there is no setting 
of the moon of his heart. 

“He is as much satisfied with mud as with sandal-paste; 
no hankering has he after name and fame, equal are to him 
all that are far and near ; he builds his house in the sky, even 
if the fourteen worlds are burnt to ashes.” ^ 

It may be observed in this connection that this ulta path, 
with all its theological as well as yogic implications, was the 
path spoken of and adopted by all the mediaeval saints of 
India, and a detailed study of it will be found in a succeeding 

^ hhaver hhavuk premer premik hay re ye jan I 

o tar hipartt rUi paddhati ; )ane k^^khan se thake hyaman I 

(hhaver manu^) 

tar nai ananda nirananda, lahhi w’tya premananda^ 
ananda-salile yyana tar hhasche du'nayan ; 
o «e kflhhu apan mane hase, avar kakhan Va hflre rodan I 

(bhaver manm) 

Be jvalaiye premer bati, hose thake diVa rati, 
bhaVsagare akvl paihare Juvaiya man ; 
o tar hasta-gata sukher cavi, tavu ^are na sukh anvesan I 

(bhaver manu^) 

cal calan sakol beada, ar eyak konda Brsti-chada, 
purnimar camd hr day byada tar ache 8arva~k?ci^ * 
se iaSir niii diii aaman uday, ee camder nairc asta gaman I 

(far hrday-carnder) 

tar candane hay yyaman prlti, parnk dileo hay temni trpti, 
cayna se sukhyati, tdr tulya par apan ; 

se asmane banay ghar badl, dagdha holeo e codda-bhavan II 

BaaUaafigtt, collected in the anthology Vividha-Dharma-Safigit, edited by Mr. 
Prasannakumir Sen (published in B.S. 1314). Song No. 461. 



THE BAULS OF BENGAL 


1&7 


chapter where we shall deal with the cult of the Natha-yogins. 
It may be further noted that the Sufis, whose influence on 
the Bauls was immense, were also Sadhakas in the * reverse 
path ’ exactly in the same sense as explained abovfe. Thus, 
a^ R. Nicholson puts it, — “Unification (tawhid) is defined 

as ‘ the absoluteness of the Divine nature realised in the 
passing-away of the human nature,’ so that ‘ the man’s 
last state reverts to his first state and he becomes even as he 
was before he existed ^ 


(n) The Bauls and the Sahajiyas. 

The Baul poets are Sahajiyas in a general sense of the 
D 1 Cl term. We have said before that a general 

1 he cfiuls are bana> ^ 

jiya« in a general consideration of the tenets of the Sahaiiyas 

sense, 

will lead to the conclusion that the different 
Sahajiya sects would style them as Sahajiyas for two reasons. 
In the first place, they are Sahajiyas inasmuch as the 
ultimate reality, in whatever form it may be, was always 
conceived by them as the Sahaja, r.e., that which is inborn 
or the quintessence which all the animate and the inanimate 
possess by virtue of their very existence, and the realisation 
of this Sahaja was regarded by the Sahajiyas as the highest 
attainment of spiritual yearning. Secondly, the Sahajh 
are Sahajiyas inasmuch as they condemned in the stron 
language they could command all kinds of insincerity 
artificiality in life and religion and at the same 
recommended the most natural path for the attainrr 
truth. We shall see later on^ that in this general ser 
host of the Santa poets (including the Sikh poets 


^ The Idea of Personality in Sufism, p. 13. 

Cf. also — *' Hence the upward movement of the Absolute fr 
manifestation back to the unmanifested Essence takes place 
unitive experience of the soul vide Studies in Islamic My 
p. 84. 

* Vide Appendix A. 



188 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Indian Sufi poets) of upper, central and northern India were 
all Sahajiyas. In the Bauls of Bengal, therefore, we find 
the continuity of the Sahajiya movement, the first systema- 
tised form of which is found in the school of the Buddhist 
Sahajiyas. ,When we shall analyse the tenets of the Bauls, 
as embodied in their songs that are available to us, we 
, „ , e r . shall find that the doctrines of the earlier 

against the earlier Sahajiyas foim the real background of their 

Sahajiya background. i c r • r i i i 

religion, — although burl-ism ol Islam have 
introduced a new spirit in it. A study of the Baul songs 
will, therefore, naturally lead us, first to a study of their 
Sahajiya background and then to the line and colour that 
have been given to it by Sufi-ism. 

In speaking of the earlier Sahajiya background of the 
Bauls we mean mainly the schools of Buddhist Sahajiya and 
of -Vaisnava Sahajiya. Though there are no positive data 
to enable us to ascertain the exact time when the Vaisnava 
Sahajiya movement first began and when it reached its 
fullest development, yet it seems that the Vaisnava Sahajiyas 
were earlier than the Bauls.' There are however some 
instances of striking similarity between the creeds of the 
earlier Sahajiyas and these the Bauls which definitely points 
Tenealogical connection between them. The songs and 
\a8 of the earlier Sahajiyas art characterised by a spirit 
’tercdoxy and criticism, which is likewise a feature of 
longs of the Bauls. Secondly, the earlier Sahajiyas lay 
strong emphasis on Guru-vada, and so 
ajiys back- Bauls as it will appear from their 

Murshid ’ songs. Thirdly, we have seen 
'ing to the earlier Sahajiyas the human body is 
m, or rather the epitome of the universe and 
sides within and is to be realised within ; — this 


jSuI is used in the present discourse always in its restricted deno- 



THE BAULS OF BENGAL 


189 


is exactly the belief shaied by the Bauls. Finally, the 
earlier Sahajiyas conceived of the ultimate reality as the 
Sahaja and this conception of the Sahaja is also found in 
the songs of the Bauls ; and like the earlier Sahajiyas the 
Bauls also advocate the most natural path for the realisation 
of this Sahaja-nature. 

But the earlier Sahajiya cult underwent a notable trans- 
formation in the hands of the Bauls; for, the Bauls, by 
deviation and innovation, effected a great change both in 
the ideology and practice of the Sahajiyas. The difference 
in ideology is palpable in the conception of Sahaja. The 
Buddhist Sahajiyas conceived Sahaja as Maha-sukha which 
is the unity of the duality represented by man and woman 
as Upaya and Prajna. The method for the realisation of 
this Sahaja consisted, therefore, essentially in a sexo-yogic 
practice. To this, however, the Valsnavas supplied the 
element of love. But here, in the Vaisnava school also, 
Sahaja was conceived as supreme love which can be realised 
by the union of Krsna and Radha who reside in the corporeal 
form of man and woman. The process of Sadhana is also, 
therefore, a process of the Divinisation of the human love. 
But we have seen that this love is not the love of the pature 
of the most intense yearning of human soul toward^ God, 
it is the yearning of man for woman, or of woman {Lx man. 
In all their theories of love and speculations oi^the lover 
and the beloved, the Vaisnava Sahajiyas never speak any 

love beyond the purest and the mb8t> 

lover and beloved other than man and 
woman, who are themselves incarnations of the eternal Lover 
and the Beloved. But the Bauls conceived Sahaja as the 
innermost eternal Beloved who is the ‘ Man of the heart ’ 
{maner manas). The Bauls also speak of love and union, 
but this love means the love between the human personality 
and the Divine Beloved within and in this love man realises 



190 . 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


I his union with the Divine, or in other words he merges his 
personal existence in the Beloved that resides within this 
temple of the body. Great has been the influence of Sufi- 
ism on the Bauls in the evolution of this new conception of 
Sahaja and in the difference in their religious approach. 
But a little penetration into the nature of Sahaja, variously 
described in the songs and Dohas of the Buddhist Sahajiyas, 
will show that the germ of such evolution was already there 
in the ideas of the Buddhist Sahajiyas. We have already 
made it clear that inspite of the conventional way of des- 

The line of trans- the Sahaja Under a Buddhistic garb, 

formation of the con- the Sahaja of the Buddhist Sahajiyas often 

ception of Sahaja to . 

th*V°^ r* implies a supreme Being residing within. 

It has been said in a Doha of Saraha-pada 
that Some One Formless is residing within this form of 
ours, — he who knows Him becomes liberated.’ Again it 
is said, — “ He is within your house (of body), and you are 
looking for him outside ! You are beholding your husband 
(within), and asking for his whereabouts to your neighbours 
These and such other verses will supply us with a clue 
to the tendency of the Buddhist Sahajiyas of conceiving 
the Sahaja as a Being, who became gradually transformed 
into a Personal God with whom it may be possible to have 
personal relations. This tendency of the earlier Sahajiyas 
paved tfo' way for the evolution of the conception of the 
‘ Man of the heart ’ under the strong sway of Stifl-ism. 

It may be observed that the literature of the Santa poets 
of upper, central and northern India also represent, as will 
be demonstrated later, ^ the spirit of Sufl-ism against the 
background of the earlier Sahajiyas. In this respect the 
Baul songs of Bengal have the closest affinity with the songs 
of the mediaeval saints of the other parts of India. As 

1 Videp. 105. 

* Vide p. 105. 

3 Vide Appendix A, 



THE BAULS OF BENGAL 


191 


Sofl-ism is so important a factor in the religious tenets of 
the mediaeval saints of India, wc propose to deal with the 
nature and extent of the influence of Sufi-ism on the Bauls 
in some detail. Our present study will also help us in the 
future study of the cognate literature of the mediaeval saints 
of other parts of India.’ 

(iff) The Bauls and the Sufis 

(A) A Brief History of Sufl-ism in India and particularly 

in Bengal 

In all probability Sufl-ism began to make its way in India 
in the eleventh century A.D. and apostles like Shah Sultan 
Rumi (who came to Bengal in 1053 A.D,), Sayad Nathar 
Shah (who carried Sufl-ism to the Deccan for the first time 
and died there in 1039 A.D.), Makhdum Sayad ’Ali ’Uluvvi 
’al Huzurri (who settled in Lahore) are the preachers of this 
first period.^ But Sufl-ism as a religious school began to 
influence the mind of the Indian people on a large scale 
from the end of the twelfth century and the two orders of 
Sufi-ism that gained sufficient ground on the soil of India 
by this time are the Chishti and the Suhrawardi orders. 
The renowned apostle Khwajah Mu'inu-d-din Chishti, who 
settled in Delhi in 1193 was the founder of the Chishti Order 
in India. The Suhrawardi Order was also almost synchro- 
nously founded by Shyak Baha'u-d-din DhakriyaNt.-iultani 
(born in Multan in 1169 and died in 1266). These two 
Sufi-istic orders soon succeeded in attracting a considerable 
number of Indian people to accept their denets. Another 
Sufi-istic Order, viz., the Quadiri Ord<*T was introduced 
and popularised in India during the fif'jeenth century A.D. 
by Sayad Muhammad Ghauth Gilani,' who came to India 

^ Vide Appendix A. 

2 Vide Vaftge Sufi-prahMva by Dr. M. Anamul Haq, M.A., Ph.D., Ch. III. 



192 


OBSCURE RELKJIOUS CULTS 


in 1*482. Another Sufl-istic Order was introduced in India 
by the end of the fifteenth century by Khwajah Muhammad 
Bakvi Billah, it is the Naqshbandj .Order, Badi’u-d-din 
Shah-i-Madar founded another important Sufl-istic Order in 
the fourteenth century A.D., which is known as the Madari 
Order. 

The Pantheistic or rather the Panentheistic mysticism of 
the Upanisads, the devotional mysticism mainly in the 
Vaisnavite line and the Sahajiya movements offered Sufi-ism 
a ready field and this will account for the speedy growth and 
spread of Sufl-istic faith in India. Moreover, from the 
twelfth century A.D. the history of India represents a history 
of contact, conflict and compromise^ — political, cultural and 
religious. In this period of contact Sufi-ism, as transformed 
in India, could very well serve as a medium of compromise 
and it is this additional possibility that may be held 
responsible for the wide-spread popularity of the Sufi-istic 
thoughts. 

Sufi-ism entered Bengal rather as an overflow from 
Northern India. There are as many as seven Sufl-istic 
orders in Bengal, of which the Suhrawardi Order, introduced 
by Makhdum Shaykh Jalalu’-d-din Tabriyi (death 1125 
A.D.), seems to be the earliest. The Chishti Order was 
introduced probably by the North Indian saint Shaykh 
Faridu’-d-din Shakraganj (death 1269 A.D. ). Shah Safiu’- 
d-dirjf Sbahi (1290? 1295?) of Pandua (in Hughli) was in all 
probability the first apostle of the Qadadari Order. The 
Madari Order was perhaps introduced in Bengal by Shah 
Madar himself os an itinerant mendicant. Another popular 
Sufi-istic Order of Bengal is the Adhami Order, more 
popularly known as, the Khidwari branch. The Naqshbandi 
Order was perhaps ^ introduced first by Shaykh Hamid 
Danishmand in the seventeenth century. The other Order 
of Sufi-ism in Bengal is the Qadiri Order, which was intro- 
duced probably by Abdul Kadir Gilani in the sixteenth 



tHE BAULS OP BENGAL 


i9i 

Century.' We need not enter here into the detailed history 
of how the Sufi-movement spread with all its branches and 
sub-branches in Bengal ; it will be sufficient for us to know 
that different orders of Sufi-ism did penetrate into Bengal, 
and did very easily and promptly recruit large number of 
converts. The Sufi-Istic ideas^ that were thus introduced 
were soon assimilated with the prevalent Sahajiya ideas and 
the result of this amalgam has been the Bauls of Bengal. 

(B) Influence of Sufi-ism on the General Nature of Baul Sect 

(a) The Influence of Samd 

In gauging the nature and extent of the influence of 
Sofi-ism on the Bauls we may observe in the first place that 
the out-pouring of the heart through songs was an important 
religious mode with the Bauls ; in this we may find on the 
one hand the influence of Bengal Vaisnavism, which attached 
much importance to music as a medium of holy comrl*^" 
nion, and on the other hand the influence of the Sufi-®^^^ 
custom of ^ Sama ’ fr.e., song and dance). ^ The effec^^ 
music, the Sufis hold, helps one much in passing into 
/ana, Le., in passing away of consciousness in mystic ur^^ 
with God. 


(6) Importance of the Murshid 

Secondly, we may consider the importance tha^ is laici 

by the Sufis on Guru-vada. We have seen how/buru-vsda 

/■ 

f 

i Ihid,, Ch. IH. 

Dr. Anamul Huq postuUtes the influence of Sufi-istic Samk even in tKe 
Vaisnava religious function of Kiriana (i.e., singing in congregation) ; but the custom 
of such singing and dancing is found among the Southern Vaisnavite saints, the 
Alvars, from sometime the sixth or seventh century A, C. ; the postulation of Suf! 
influence on this point, therefore, does not seem warrantable. Prediction to such 
religious practice of Kirtana is also found in the Bhagavata-puranOt e.g., — 
varnam tvi^-knnarn safigo^panga-stra-parsadam f yajfiaih samktrtana-prayair yajanti 
hi Bumedhaaahf I (1 1.5.32, VangavSsi edition). 

25-141 IB 



194 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

is ingrained in the religious thoughts of India in general, 
and how in the spiritual life God has sometimes been re- 
placed by the Guru. The Sufis laid the same stress on the 
Murshid or the Shaykh, i.e., the preceptor or spiritual guide. 
The view of Sufr-ism on this point will be best illustrated 
if we quote here the view coTitained in the Awarifu-l-Ma 
arij. It is said, — “ When he {i.e., the Murid or the disciple) 
is possessed of manners, he taketh in love a place in the 
Shaikh’s heart ; and is agreeable to God’s sight. Because, 
with mercy, favour and care, God ever looketh at the hearts 
of His own friends (the darvishes) . 

“Thus, by dwelling in the Shaikh’s heart, the constant 
blessings of God’s mercy and of his endless bounty, com- 
prehend his existence ; and the Shaik’s acceptance becometh 
his mark of the acceptance of God, Muhammad, and of all 
Shaikhs.”' 

In the ‘ Murshida-songs ’ of the Bauls we find a mixture 
of ’^iihe Indian spirit with the spirit of Sufi-ism. The 
excellence of the * Murshida-songs ’ of the Bauls consists 
in their pathos, in their expression of the groaning and the 
beating heart of the restless aspirers ; additional charm has 
been imparted to the songs by the unconditional self- 
r^i^otion of the Murid or the disciple, who has accepted 
^idu’-crshid as a sure mast in the boundless heaving sea 
3-dir£stet.'Ce, — like a lamp in the abyss of darkness. “To 
prmd fro is tossing my boat with a jingling sound in the 
’rough wind,” proceeds the cry from a heart, — “ O my 
Murshid, yet let me live in my hope in thee. Clouds have 
thickened in the west and the roarings are now on, — torn 
is the rope of my helm, — and the boat is moving 
in the whirl; yet, O my Murshid, let me live in my hope in 
thee ! The waves sweep from helm to prow, — and all my 
merch 2 mdise, more precious than gem and diamond, is being 


^ jAwariju-l^Maaftf, translated by H. Wilbcrforce Clarke, p. 18. 



THE BAULS CN? BENGAL 


195 


svrept away by the current; yet O my Murshid, let me live 
in my hope in thee.” ^ ^ Songs of this type may be found 
abundantly in the Baul literature of Bengal. 


(c) Heterodoxy of the Bauls 

The next point to be noted is the heterodox spirit of the 
Bauls. In this, as we have said, the background of 
Sahajiya thought cannot be overlooked ; but the influence of 
Sufi- ism is also not less noteworthy. As essentially a cult of 
love-mysticism Sufi-ism, inspite of the rites and customs that 
gradually developed around it, breathes a spirit of heterodoxy 
in general. It is rightly said, — “Transacting as it were 
directly with the Divine Being, the Sufis throw off the 
shackles of the positive religion ; pious rebels, they neither 
fast nor make pilgrimages to the temple of Mecca, ^ nay, they 


' tinur jhunur baje nao amar 

nihsilya batase re mursid, 
railam tor a&e I 

paicime sajila myagh re dyaoyay dila re dak I 
amar chidila haler panes naukay hbcdla pak II 
murfid, railam tor aie II 
aga baiya ofhe dheu re pacha bayya re yay I 
amdr hiraldl manikkar bard sole Idiyd yay II 
murftd, railam tor aie II 

See Bhdratit B.S., 13'* .Kdra. 
jC/. also— temar caran pdva boile re, 

guru, ba^a did chila I ,, 

« * * a 

cdtak raila mydgher die^ mydgh padilc anya dgoie, 
cdtak bdtTficave i^ise U 
amar diamadir baiya re, 

guru, kandte janam gela 1 

bada did chilgi W (Owu collection). 

2 C/. the Bfiul song ; — 

(mor) ydite to cdy nd re man makka madind I 
(ei ye) bandhu Smdr dche, ami raire tdri kache^ 

(ami) pdgal haitdm dSre raitam 

tare einiam re yadi n^ \ 



196 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


forget their prayers ; for with God there is no other language 
than the soundless language of the heart. From excess of 
religion they have no religion at all. Thus is confirmed the 
trite saying that “ extreme 'femeet.” “The perfection of a 
man’s state,” says Jami, “and the utmost degree to which 
saints may attain, is to be without an attribute, and without 
a mark.” The most fervent zeal sinks into the coldest 
indifference about religion.” ' 

The mystics in all countries are as much opposed to the 
paraphernalia of practices, rites and customs as to scriptures 
and speculative literature. The Mystics do not believe in the 
powers of our discursive reason, which, it is held, is limited 
by its very nature. It is, therefore, that all attempts to 
comprehend the ultimate truth through intellectual pursuits 
are bound by nature to be sadly baffled.^ But though truth 
cannot be known, it can be intuited or realised within, — it 
can be realised in the Sahaja (natural) path through the 
secret coioVaunion of love. In love we become one with the 
reality ano^ h is in this union of love that the mystery of the 
whole univef . Is revealed to us. The mystery of the universe 

can never bei ynderstood unless it is revealed in love.” It is 
for this reason that the mystics discard all ceremony and 

V 

) 

(rVnar) nai mandir ki masjed, 
nai pUja ki hakred, 
tile tile mor makka koSt 

pale pale sudina II 

Vide *i5an/5/l]||rOC«-f)a8tu’ by Ksitimoban Sen. Pravaai, B.S. 1337, Caitra. 

^ The Dabi8tan,\^^ School of Manners, translated by David Shea and 
Anthony Troyer ; preliminary discourse, pp. clxiv-clxv. 

2 C/. duniyar hhojer hSji, molla kflji* 

hhavle pagal pan4it jfiant I etc 

Bsal-sangU, collecte ’ in Vividha-dharma-sangii, p. 213. 

3 ki ha* te ki hay dekhi aarni daradir mane I 

dmi or miche bhavi kyone i 
* ' # * * * 

brahma-jnani pa*de tantra, bheVe ma*lo e paryanta, 
pele na tar adi anta, manor bhranti gela na ; 
yata yogi yoga-tapaavt, Sr yata firtha-vSal, 
kdre brata ekstdaal, iSnti pela na mane II Ibid, p. 247. 



THE BAULS OF BENGAL 


197 


ritualism on the one Hand and scholeisticism and discursive 
erudition on the other and proceeds straight in the path of 
love. It is said in a song, — “ O my lord, I hear thy call, but 
I cannot come, — for, the sham Guru and Murshid 
block my way. If that, which ought to cool the body when 
immersed, begins to burn all around, then, tell me, Master, 
where on earth I shall find a foothold ! — my spiritual 
endeavour for ‘unity’ dies away in differences of plurality. 
Many are the locks in thy gate, viz., the scriptures, the 
Qur’an and rosaries ; — showiness mars the endeavour and is 
the greatest impediment, — Madan cries in remorse.”' It is 
said in another song, ‘‘As grass by no means grows on the 
beaten foot-tract void, so, would they find the living ‘Sahaja’ 
(i.e., the Man of the heart) who leave not custom-beaten way ? 
The heart-flow comes out when custom is shed away. Cast 
away thy fears, to Bisa Bala sayeth, — the path shines out clear, 
when ties are all loosened.” ^ Religion, it is held, cannot 
be confined to ritualistic observances, — it is a functioning of 
the whole being extending over the entire- ‘gamut of human 
experiences. If we try to confine religi(i'’n to any code of 
rituals and practices we shall ,be strangely fettered by the 
very means of liberation. If a necklace of wish-yielding gem 
loses its wish-yielding capacity, the necklace itself will be 
nothing but a chain. “ We have said that as a Sahajiya sect 

^ tomSr path ihaikflche mandire masjede 1 
{tomar) dak ^une sarpi calte nS pai 

Tuikha damday gurute muriede II etc, 

Banglar Prana-vastu by Ksitimohan Sen, Pravast^ B.S. 1337, Caitra . 

3 gatS-gater harpjha pathe I ajaya na ghaa kona mate II 

rite pathei calen yara I jyanta sahaja pa{ye)n ki tSr5 ? 

niyam rit chadayya gele i maram rase r darai mele I! 

kay *hala hhay chaire *hiia* I khasle barpdhan milve dtis II 

Ibid, p. 855. 

, I 

® amar centa-mapi hSr, 
yadi har5y centa t&r 
tave emdn bSndhart bsndhte pSre 
^ (ye) cha^ay sadhya kor ? /biJ, p. 855. 



196 


C«SCURE RELIQOUS CIB-TS 


the Biuls would eJways advocate the Sahaja (t.e., the 
most natural) path for the spiritual life. It is said, If thou 
wouldst visualise that Man, thou must be natural in Sadhana 
and must go to the land of Sahaja.”^ 

(d) Body as the Microcosm of the Universe 

We have seen that the Sahajiyas recognised the human 
body as the microcosm of the universe and that, according to 
them, Sahaja as the ultimate reality resides within this human 
foriu as our true self or the ultimate nature. This is exactly 
the view that has been contended by the Sufi mystics. The 
Biuls also cherished the same doctrine. The human body 
has always been described as the temple of the Dear One.* 
In vain, they say, Eire people mad after going on pilgrimage, — 
in vain are they searching the Beloved in temples and 
mosques and in other places. Thus it is said, “The Man 
of the house is dwelling in the house, — in vain have you 
become mad by seeirching Him outside. It is for your own 
fault that you are y aming about for ever. You have been 
to Gaya, Benares (fWrsi), and Vrndavana, — and have travelled 
through many rivers ^nd forests and other places of pilgri- 
mage; but say, — bav<J you seen in all these anything of Him 
of Whom you have heard ? Through false illusion you have 
lost all your power of understanding, — with jewel tied in 
your own skirt, you have been swimming in search of it. 
With care you might have easily got the gem, — but you are 
losing everything carelessly, — the jewel shines so near to 
your eyes, but alea ! you are keeping your eyes shut — and 

^ yadl bkcft>i mUnufe 
iavCy BS^ane aahai havi, 
ior yaiie have aahaj deie I 

Ihidy p. 850. 

^ Cf. ** The mosque that is built in the hearts of the saints 
Is the place of worship for all, for God dwells there.'* 

Maanavi of Jalalu’ddin, (Quoted in The Idea of Peraon^dity by Nicholson, 



• TME BSULS of BENGAL 194 

you do not see.” ^ Again it is said, “ Search, O brother, 
for the Lord, who is the kind sympathiser of the poor 
{dina-daradl sami), in the company of enlightenment sis thy 
preceptor. The heart deceiving, blurs the eye and a single 
hair hides the mountain truth ! The Lord ii^ His lone seat 
looks. What humour enjoys my Lord at the foll^ and laughs ! 
Carefully proceed in your spiritual effort ; may be, you will 
find wealth very near ; says Lalan, search your own house, 
truth is not very far ! ” “ 

(e) The Man oj the Heart 

In the songs of the Bauls we hear much of the ‘Man of 
the Heart,’ Whose abode is the human body and Whose 
seat is the human heart. Poetically this ‘Man of the Heart’ 
has variously been depicted as the Supreme Beloved, the 
poet himself being the passionate lovei . The songs embody 
throughout the pangs of separation for the ‘ Man of the Heart* 
and a maddening desire to be united with Him. This Baul 
doctrine of divine love naturally brings in the question of its 
similarity or dissimilarity with the Vaisnava conception of love 
with which we are familiar in Bengal. In a general way it 


' Phakir-cander Baul San git (collected in the Vividha-dharma-aahgit) , p. 220. 
See also — 

pafica bhutc ^aVe jhagdd,“dile chare khare sonar &kfi4a, 
manav deher manik rnak4^» take cinlam na I 

Ihid, p. 249. 

^ kotha ache re din-daradi aami, 

cetan gurur aange laye hhavar k^ra bhai 1 

cak^u andhar deler dhokay, ^eier ade pahad lukayt 

ki roAga admi dekhche aaddi, baae nigam fhami 1 

i|i # » « « # 

aumje bhave addhan kora, nikate dhana pete para, 
lalan fefli/ nij mokdm dhora, bahu dure ndi I 

Hdrdmani, edited hy M. Mansur Uddin, Song No. 3. 

C/. also— 

dmdr e ghar-‘khdndy ke bird) kore I 

tare janam bhare ekvdr dekhlem ndre il etc. 

Ibid, Song No, 5, 



200 ^ OBSCURfe RELIGIOUS CULTS 

may be said that the intensity of divine love, which we find 
in the songs of the Bauls was influenced, no doubt, to a 
considerable extent by the general prema (lovg) movement of 
Bengal. But when we analyse the conception of love, as 
enunciated in t^e school of Bengal Vaisnavism, it appears 
that this theory of love is based on a principle of duality, 
! theological, if not metaphysical. Theologically the Vaisnavas 
have conceived some kind of duality between God and the 
individual {jWa) and this principle of duality brings in the 
question of devotion, which gradually culminates in the 
conception of passionate love. Metaphysically, however, the 
, , , . relation between God and the individual 

Love or the Vaisna- 

vas and that ot the hag often been spoken of as incomprehen- 

BbuU compared. -i I / \ • 1 • 

sible [acintya ) ; it is a relation of non 
dualism, and yet of dualism and this principle of dualism in 
non-dualism is something that transcends intellectual compre- 
hension. in their theology, however, the conception of 
dualism prevails, and all poetical and metaphorical descrip- 
tions of love seem to be based on this theological speculation. 
But the Baul conception of love is ultimately based on a 
pantheistic or rather a panentheistic belief, and the dualism 
is either illusory or metaphorical. 

The difference between the Baul conception of love and 
the Vaisnava Sahajiya conception of love is however palpable. 
The love of the Vaisnava Sahajiyas exists between individual 
beings as Radha and Krsna, but not between the individual 
and the Absolute ; it is the love between Radha and Krsna 
that ultimately leads to the realisation of the Absolute. The 
love of the Bauls is, on the contrary, the love directly 
between the Sahaja as the ultimate reality on the one hand 
and the individual on the other. To conform to the emo- 
tional approach of the Bauls the Sahaja has gradually trans- 
formed itself into a Personal God, or the Supreme Being 
with whom it may be possible to have personal relations. 
The mode of transformation of the conception of Sahaja into 



THE BAULS OF BENGAL 


201 - 


a Personal God has already been indicated at the very 
outset. This Sahaja as the Personal God is the ‘Man of the 
Heart.’, From this point of view the love-union of the Bauls 
with the ‘ Man of the Heart ’ really means the realisation 
of the Sahaja or the ultimate nature of Self. The love, of 
which we hear so much in the songs of the Bauls, is the love 
between our human personality and the Divine Personality 
residing in the human as the true self. The Beloved as 
the Divine Personality residing in us is our Sahaja-nature, 
and the lover is the human personality, falsely viewed as 
separate from this Divine Personality. Love here really 
implies self-love, the gradual passing away of the human 
into the Divine. 

The creed of the Bauls is thus fundamentally based on 
the question of self 'realisation. From the days of Upanisadic 
mysticism this question of se<f-realisation has been the pivot 
round which the religious thoughts of India have mainly 
revolved. The minor religious sects like the different 
branches of the Sahajiyas are saturated through and through 
with this Upanisadic spirit of self-realisation. In this spirit, 
however, SQfi-ism is intimately related to Upanisadic mysti- 
cism, although the element of love which is conspicuous in 
Sufl-ism is not stressed in the Upanisads. It is because of 
this striking similarity in spirit that scholars have often postu- 
lated influence of In iian thought on the evolution of SQfl-ism 
itself. Without entering into the controversy involved in 
such postulations it may ba said, that the religious contents of 
Sufi-ism were in no way foreign to the mass-mind of India ; 
it is for this reason that Sufi-ism was very easily acceptable to 
the masses. But whenever we should discuss the influence 
of Sufi-ism on the evolution of the minor religious sects like 
the Bauls of Bengal and the Santa poets of Upper and 
Northern India we should never lose sight of the Indian back- 
ground prepared by Upanisadic mysticism and the devotional 
movements mainly in the Vaisnavite line. The fact seems to 

26-141 IB 



202 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


be that the popular composite religious consciousness which 
was formed by an unconscious admixture of Upanisadic 
mysticism and the devotional fervour of the Vaisnavas was 
further modified by the kindred thoughts of Sufl-ism where 
the spirit of the Upanisads and that of later Vaisnavism are 
found combined together. 

Let us now turn our attention to the Sofi-istic conception 
TL . , of the divinity and the ideal of love as 

the Divinity in Sufi- conccived bv the Suf IS . The wholc ideo- 
logy of the Sufi mystics is also shaped and 
coloured on a Pantheistic or rather a Panentheistic canvas. 
The creation proceeds from God, the Absolute, as His self- 
manifested attribute, mode or modification. The sum-total of 
the manifested attributes of God is the universe. Hallaj, the 
well-known Sufi poet, who was done to death because of his 
novel belief of Anal’haqq (i.e., 1 am the truth), says that “the 
essence of God’s essence is love. Before the creation God 
loved Himself in absolute unity and through love revealed 
Himself to Himself alone. Then, desiring to behold that 
love-in-aloneness, that love without otherness and duality, as 
an external object. He brought forth from non-existence an 
image of Himself, endowed with all His attributes and 
names. This Divine image is Adam, in and by whom God 
is made manifest — divinity objectified in 
humanity.’’ ’ We find a very beautiful 
echo of this Sofl-istic principle in the JfiSna-sagar of Ali- 
raja." There it is said that the Absolute was alone in the 
beginning ; but it could not realise the infinite potency of 
love that was m it without a dual ; in love therefore it 
created a dual out of its ownself, — and the dual was 
Muhammad. This first pair represent the original lover and 


Creation 
from love. 


proceeds 


1 Studies in Islamic Mysticism by Nicholson, p. 80. , * . 

2 Sshitya-Parisat Series, No. 59. It is an Islamic Yogic text in Bengali which 
has infused Suf Mstic idea;) with the ideology of the Vaisnava Saha jiyfs and the 
"Nithiats, 



“THfe BAULS Ot' BENGAL 


203 


thebeloved. Because of this fact that Godin His absolute 
aloneness could not realise His love and a second was 
required as the beloved, love cannot be realised in the world 
without there being a pair.’ The - whole universe thus 
proceeds from the Love of God. Love is the underlying 
principle of the cosmic process as a whole. The fact has 
very nicely been put in the Jndna-sagar, mentioned above. 
It is said there that the universe has its origin in love, and 
the chaos is systematised into the cosmos through the bond 
of love. There is love between fire and air, between earth 
and water ; without this love neither heaven, nor earth, not 
the nether world would have originated at all. There is 
love between heaven and the skies, between heaven and earth, 
between hell and the nether world in which it lies, and thus 
rure the three worlds supported in love. There is love 
between the sun, the moon, the planets and the stars and in 
lov^ are they all fixed into the sky above. There is love 
between the sea and its water, between the moon and the 
night and the sun and the day ; — the tree is fixed to the earth 
by its root, the black- bee is attached to the lotus, fish is 


' prathame dchila prahhu ek niranjan I 
prema-rase duvi koila yugal span II 
prem-rase bhuli prahhu jdhdke srjila I 
mohdmmad buU ndm gaurave rdhhila II 
***** 

pratham bhavuk prabhu bhavint janmila I 
mohdmmad k.uri ndm trijagate haila II 
bhdvak hulie prabhu dr sc bhdVinl | 

ei se yugal ndm dharila dpani 11 

***** 

bhdvak bhdvinl ndm buliye yugal I 
yug haiie siddhi kutma hay je sakal 11 
yugal nS hade k^ha nd pare calite 1 
yug bine prem raa nd pare bhugite II 
ek cki prem nd hay k<^^ucan I 
yugal hade yogya pirlti bhajan II 
Jndna-adgar, pp. 24-25- 

Cf. Rfhaddra^yako-pani^at , see infra ch. xiv, 



2o4 


OBSCURE R^IGIOUS CULTlS 


bound to the water, man is bound to the woman — and all in 
love. The body is in love with the mind and the mind with 
the vital wind. In love does the mother conceive the child, 
in love does the earth hold fast the root of the tree, in love 
does the tree hold fast the branches and the flowers and 
fruits, — in love does the fruit accumulate juice in its kernel, — 
thus is the whole creative process supported in love.^ 

This Love of God as the raison d’etre of the whole 
universal process brings in the question of 
God through self- Self -revelation for self-realisation. The 

manifestation in crea- i 1 • i 

tion. whole universe thus serves as a mirror 

where the love* and beauty of the Absolute 
are reflected.^ This manifestation of the love and beauty of 
the Absolute has reached perfection in the personality of man 
and it is for this reason that “Man is the microcosm in which 
all attributes (of the Absolute) are united, and in him alone 
does the Absolute become conscious of itself in all its diverse 
aspects. To put it in another way, the Absolute, having 
completely realised itself in human nature, returns into itself 
through the medium of human nature ; or more intimately 
God and man become one in the Perfect Man — the enrap- 
tured prophet or saint — ^whose religious function as a media- 
tor between man and God corresponds to his metaphysical 
function as a unifying principle by means of which the 
opposed terms of reality and appearance are harmonised.’’^ 
It has been said in the Ibnu'l-Arabi that “When God willed 
in respect of His beautiful names (attributes), which are 
beyond enumeration, that their essence (a'yan) or if you wish, 
you may say “His essence '(aynuhu)’ — should be seen, He 
caused them to be seen in a microccsmic being {l^awn jamf) 
which, inasmuch as it is endowed with existence, contains 
the whole object of vision, and through which the inmost 

1 Ifiana-Bcigar, p. 26. pp. 33-35. Cf. the poem Philosophy oj Love by Shelley* 

* Dahistan, Vol. III. p. 227, 

3 Nicholson, loc, cit 



THE HAULS OF BENGAL 


20$ 


consciousness (sivi) of God becomes manifested to Him.” ^ 
Man thus represents in him a synthesis of the create and the 
increate, — of the finite and the infinite. 

As the best manifestation of the life-principle man serves 
as the connecting link between the noume- 
folr.ni non and the phenomenal creation. Man 
the infinite— as human synthesises within his nature two aspects 

of existence, which are called in Sufl-ism 
the nasut, which is his human personality and the lahut, 
which is his Divine personality. The pangs of separation 
from which humanity suffers follow from the false notion of 
dualism between this human personality and the Divine in man. 

This conception of the Divine and the human combined 
in man may well be affiliated with the Upanisadic conception 
of the Paramatman and the JiVatman. They are like two 
birds living in friendly terms on the same tree, — one of them 
(i.e., Jlodiman) tastes the sweet fruit of world-experience, but 
the other never touches it, but gazes on and on.^ This 
Divine in us is dearer to us than our son, than wealth — than 
everything else.” Immortal becomes the beloved of the 
mem who adores this inner self as the dearest one.'' That 
Divine personality is the ear of our ears, eye of our eyes, 
word of our words, mind of our minds and life of our lives.’ 
He resides in the heart of man and is to be known in the 
heart of man." 

But while the Upanisads speak of the love between the 
Divine personality and the human personality more or less 
metaphorically, the whole emphasis of the Sufis and the 
Bauls is on love. 

^ Quoted by Nicholson, loc. cit 

2 Mw\4akopani^at (3. 1. 1) ; ^veta^ (4.6). C/. the poem Two Birds by Tagore in 
SonSr Tan, 

2 Bfhadaranyaka (1.4.8). 

* Ihid (1.4.8). 

6 Kena* (1.2). 

« Sveta^ (4.17). 





OBSCjjRE RELIGIOUS CULtS 


Through ecstasy of the purest love the mystic passes in 
Love brings about passlng-away of the 


human in the Divine. The fire of love 


about 

union V)etween the 
human personality 

and the Divine perso- Dums into asKes the bundle of complexes 

nality. 

from which emerges the false notion of the 
*I-ness’, and through pangs of heart the ice of ‘1-ness’ melts 

into flow of tears and the ‘V in man and the ^He’ in man 

\ 

become one and the same. This is the truth which was 
perceived by Hallaj in his mystic trance, and which inspired 
him to exclaim to the world abroad Ana I haqq — ‘I and the 
truth are one’ ! In such a moment did he declare ; — 

I am He whom I love, and He whom 1 love is I. 

We are two spirits dwelling in one body, 

If thou seest me, thou seest Him ; 

And if thou seest Him, thou seest us both. 

So long as there is even an iota of dualism, the door of the 
divine temple remains banged against us and our Eternal 
Beloved dwelling within refuses to respond to our call. It is 
only after the melting away of the human personality that 
the door is opened and the screen before our eyes is removed 
leaving the lover and the beloved unified in bond of infinite 
love.^ 

The Divine Personality, Who is the eternal Beloved of 
the human personality and with whom man becomes one in 
his ecstasy of love, is the indwelling principle not only of the 


^ This truth has been very poetically and nicely illustrated by the Sufi poet 
Jalalu*ddin Rumi through the following story in his Masnaoi : — 

“A roan knocked at the dour of his friend. The latter asked : ‘Who art thou, 
my dear ?’ — ‘It is 1’. — *ln this case, be off ; 1 cannot at present receive thee ; there is 
no place at my board for one who is still rau); such a man cannot be sufficiently 
dressed (that is matured) and cured of hypocrisy, but by the fire of separation and 
refusal * The unfortunate man departed. He employed a whole year in travelling, 
consuming himself in the flames of desire and affliction, caused by the absence of his 
friend. Matured and perfected by his long trial he again approached the door of his 
friend and knocked modestly, fearful that an uncivil word might again fall from his 
ovrn lips. — ‘Who is there was asked from the interior of the house — ‘Dear friend, it 
is thyself who art at the door’.— ‘Because it is myself, enter to-day; this house can 
coQtAin no other than 1’.’’ Kic/c, Dahist6n, Vol, 111, p. 292, F.N. I, 



THE PAULS OF BENGAL 


207 


self, but also of the not-self- It is for this reason that the 
sights and sounds of tlie external world always bear love- 
message of the Beloved to the responsive heart of the mystic 
lover. In love are we all separated from the Beloved with 
whom we were once one,— and in love again shall we 
proceed in the regressive way and realise our true original 
self being one with the Beloved. 

In the conception of the ‘Man of the heart’ of 
the Bauls we find a happy mixture of the conception 
of the Paramatman of the Upanisads, the Sahaja of the 
Sahajiyas and the Sufl-istic conception of the Beloved. The 
mystic attitude of the Bauls is best expressed in the wonder 
how that Infinite has objectified itself in the finite, — how 
through the whole being of the finite that Infinite is express- 
ing itself in infinite ways and thereby 
^he Softs and the realising itself in infinite varieties. It is 
not through any intellectual speculation, — 
but through the ecstasy of love that the truth has revealed 
itself to the lover, that there is ‘some one unknown’ living 
within his corporeal form. Thus the Bsul says, — “ Methinks, 
by this time I have become mad ; otherwise, why should 
1 feel so troubled inside every now and then ? When I 
remain quiet with the undisturbed mind, I see that Some 
One speaks loudly from within, — ‘I am here, here 1 am’ ! 
In the dimness of the sky of my heart, methinks, I see Some 
One come to my side ; He moves, He speaks, He plays, — 
He smiles, — He indulges in hundred other sports !. . . If 

The 'unknown bird-. ^ alone. I , 

cannot ; it seems, He has settled His 
dwelling in the core of my heart. It is like an 'unknown 


^ BSul songf collected in KiUtdfia-dfiarma-sa/^glt, pp. 226>29. Cf. also; — 
manm haoyay cate hSoySy phire, 

manuf hSoyar Bane ray 

deher mSjhe Sche re sonar mSnuf kotha kjay { 
tomSr^maner madhye Sr ek man Sche 



208 


OBSCURp RELIGIOUS CULTS 


bird’ that comes within the cage of this corporeal fotm, — 
and it is the greatest wonder with the Baul, how the 
‘unknown bird’ is playing its eternal play of coming and 
going,— 'the play of self-manifestation and of returning 
once more to itself.’ Though the bird lives in the 
cage of the human body, it floats in the boundless 
sky high above. ^ The life-long search of the Baul is 
for this ‘unknown bird’, which is felt to be very near, singing 
within and enchanting us by its beauty and sweetness of 
song, — but which we are not being able to find out. It is 
always playing the game of hide ajiid seek, as it were. In 
the pang of his heart the Baul says, — “Where has the ‘Bird 
of Beauty’ hidden itself by deceiving me ? I roam about in 
search, — but cannot find it out, — it has flown far away. 

“. . . . Very affectionate is that bird, and it comes of 
itself and invites me to talk, if even I forget it ; but if I 
attempt to catch hold of it, it escapes my grasp, — and alas ! 
it has made me mad ! 


tumi man miiao sei maner saihe I 

dcher majhe ache re manus dalde katha koy I) 

— H&ramani, p. 2. 

* khamcdr hhitar acin pdkh'i 

kemne Sse ySy \ — Haramani, p. 4. 

2 maner manuray pahhi gahmeie cadere 

nadir jal iukhaye gelere 
pskhl iiinye u^Sn chddere 

malir deha layre I —Ibid, pp. 4-5, 

C/. “The bird of (the soul of) my heart is a holy bird ; 

the ninth heaven, its dwelling; 

Of the cage of the body, vexed ; of the world, stated. 

From the head of this dust-heap (the world), the bird of the 
soul how flieth ? 

At the door of that threshold, its nest, the (mighty) 
falcon (worldly) attachments maketh. 

When the bird of the heart fleeth, its abode is the lofty 
Sidrah tree ; 

The resting-place of our falcon (soul) , know (to be) the 
pinnacle of the ninth heaven (God'a throne), etc. 

— DwSnd-Hsfiz, translated by Clarke, l\rt 11, p. 772. 



THE BSULS of BENGAL 


209 


“O my brethren, if any of you have seen that ‘Bird of 
Beauty^’ catch it once fw me ; if I once can get hold of it, 1 
shall keep it tamed with care for ever in the cage of my 
heart. It is after this ‘some one unknown’ that the Baul 
has run mad.’’ The vision of the unknown, the call of the 
Infinite, the secret touch of the Beloved have made the Baul 
peculiarly indifferent to the social life on earth, — and have 
made him come outside the limitations of earthly consi- 
derations. It is the beauty of the Formless residing within all 
forms that has entrapped the heart of the Baul — ^and he 
weeps and weeps. This incessant weeping in secret gives 
him a peep into the beauty that pervades the whole universe 
by its matchless glow and grandeur. In such a state when he 
looks at the sky, the divine beauty appears before him floating 
with the clouds ; the splendour of that beauty moves from 
star to star and the heart is illumined by its flash.’' Through 
the whole cosmic process the one Lord-Beloved is playing the 
play of self-expression and self-realisation, endless is His 
sport— incomprehensible is its mystery/ 

But though the Beloved is pervading the whole universe. 


The ^unknown' to be 
searched and realised 
within. 


the best way of finding Him out is to 
search within and to realise Him through 
the realisation of the self. Like the full 


moon He is in the sky of our heart, — ^but heaps of clouds 
have gathered over the moon ; spiritual endeavour consists in 
driving the clouds away with the instructions of the true 


^ amay diye pharnkh rfiper pakhtt kothay luk^*lo I 

ami ghure hyadai dyakha no poi, ttdiye ye palalo I etc. 
Song of KgngSl Harinith, collected in Vividha~dharma’’Sangit, pp. 179-80. 

* amare pagal ^aVc ye jan palay, 

koiha gele paVa tay I etc. 

— Song of Kfingil^HarinSth, Ihid, p. 213, 

3 Song of Kingil Harinitii» Ibid^ p. 216. 

* aaimfir lila hujhvi k^ySpa kcman here I 

lilaie naire simakon aamay ^on rup dhare I 

Song of Lslan Rhakir, Haramoni, Song No, 28. 


27-14113 



210 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


preceptor and to let the moon shine unobstructed in its own 
lustre.^ In the mystery of the self lies the mystery of the 
Lord amd to know the former is to know the latter.^ It has 
been said by Kangal Harinath, — “O the mad, thy ‘Bird of 
Beauty’ is sitting in its nest in the bower of thy heeurt, find it 
Out there ; offer it fruits of devotion and water of love, and it 
will be tamed for ever.”® Phakir-cand says in a song, — “O 
my mind, let me tell thee, — the ‘Man of the heart’ is in the 
heart and search for Him there ; why art thou roaming from 
country to country ? — never have 1 seen a greater fool than 
thee.”* ‘‘In man resides the Lord, why hast thou not 
known Him with thy comtrion sense ? .... In eternal 
union does that Beloved dally in the heart, — He dallies in 

^ ache purnimar cand meghe dhaka I 
cander nice hindu sakha, , 
megher ade cand rayeche 

megh k^te cand uday kara ; 
seda k^Val kothar kotha I 
madan bale andhakore handa haye rail eko, 
yahar Qche murSid sakha sei sc pave cander dekha I 
Ibid, Song No. 84. 

^ apanar janma lata^ jana ge tar mukU koths, 

lalan koy have iese sUhi paricay I Ibidf Song No. 12. 

See also Songs Nos. 16, 17. 

C/. also — yar nam alek rnanus alek^ ray | 

iuddha prema-rasik bine tare pay I 
ras rati anusare, nigudha bhed jante pare, 
ratite mati jhare, mul khanda hay 1 
lllay nirafijan amar, adh Me kodlena pracar, 
janle apanar janmer hicar, aaV jana hay I etc. 

Ibidi Song No. 36. 

3 BauUsong, collected in the Vividha-dharma-sanglt, p. 180. 

^ yakhan amar maner manus kothay pai I 

yar tare mana-khede praif konde sarvadSi I re 1 
# » * ♦ » 

phiki^'Cand koy manare tomare, 
o tor maner manu§ hrde ache, khumje ne tare; 
kyon ghure hyaias dei bideie, yaman haVa ar to 

dekhi nai I re 1 

Song of Praphulla BandyopSdhyaya, disciple of Phikir-cfind, Ibid, pp. 214-15. 

It may be noted that the disciples of Phikir-cind Msed to compose songs of their 
own in the of the Guru, 



THE BAULS OF BENGAL 


211 


the heart with all the gates shut — and from the side of man, 
he (man) shuts up all the doors of the chamber of his heart 
with the strength of love and therein gazes at the beauty of 
the Beloved.”^ It is the screen of illusion, — the shade over 
the eyes that prevents us from beholding the beauty of the 
‘Man of the herurt’ ; it is this illusion that lengthens the 
distance between man and the ‘Unknown One.’ Man often 
feels that it is not he, but that ‘Unknown One’ that is 
moving and working through him, — but yet rdas, — because of 
the shade over the eyes, — he cannot catch at the ‘Unknown 
One.’* ‘In man,’ says Lalan, ‘resides that Jewel of Man,’ — 
but ah me, that Jewel 1 could not recognise!’'’ Lalan says 
in another beautiful song that ‘change^ 

Divine beauty to be , , , , , • i • i i r i • 

realised through the less beauty resides Within the house or this 
form, man, — it is to be realised there. It is 

through the medium of the human form that 
the divine beauty is to be realised. The truth is metaphori- 
cally explained in the following the lines : — “At the gate of 
that ‘Divine Beauty’ there is the revered 3rl>rupa (i.e., the 
human form and personality), and the lock and the key (or 
‘Divine Beauty’ are in his hand ; one, who will be a devotee 
of the dri-rupa, will obtain the lock and the key ; Phakira 
Lalan says that such people will be able to get hold of that 
one who escapes all grasp.’’’ 


^ manuse gosaqii biraj ^arc, 

kyari cinline aamanya jfiane re I 
* "• * # # 

nitya yoge sami bihare, bihare hjrd baddha kflre; 
a hrd baddha ii^a’re rager jore, h5re re re rap nehare — 
Song by an unknown author. Ibid, p. 247, 

2 Vide Song of Lslan, Haramani, Song No. 35. 

* ei manuse achae re man 
yare bale manus-ratan, 

lalan hale peye ae dhan parlam nd cinte I 
Ibid, Song No. 6. 

* rUper ghare afal rup bihdre 

ceye dekh nd tare i 



2lZ 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


The love celebrated in the Baul songs is mutual, inasmuch 
as it induces on the one hand the Infinite Absolute to find 
self-expression in the finite and, relative nature of the 
nuuiifested world, including human personality which is the 
highest expression of the Absolute, — and, on the other hand, 
inspires man to find his true nature by gradually dissolving 
his separate existence and passing away into his original 
being in God. We have seen that man is the marginal 
being, or a finite-infinite being; when associated with 
principles of illusory defilement, he passes on to his purely 
finite nature of animal existence, when he suffers bondage 
on all sides; but when he purifies himself in love, the 
principles of defilement in him being all burnt away, he 
passes again on to his true divine nature and becomes liberat- 
ed by transcending all limitations of finitude. In such a 
state, when the apparent difference between humanity and 
divinity is totally removed through love, man becomes one 
with the Reality itself. It is in such a state that the Baul 
exclaims that the self is everything — everything proceeds 
from the self.’ 


o se riiper darajay, iri-rup mahaiay, 
ruper tala-cavi tar hate sada ; 
ye jan Sri-rup gala have, tala-cavi pave, 
phakir lalan bale adhara dharve tiara II 
Ibid, Song No. 7. 

^ bicar hjariya dekhi aakalei ami I 
♦ « * * 

ami haite alia raaul, ami haiie kfil» ^ 
ama haitei aaman jamin, ama haitei aav {bhula P) I 
marva marva deier lok mor kotha yadi lay, 
apani cinile dekha khoda cina yay I 
Vicitra, B. S. 1335, Caitra. 

In the same strain did the Sufi poet exclaim — 

None lives but his life is from mine, and every willing soul is obedient 

to my will ; 

And there is no speaker but tells his tale with my words, nor any 
seen but sees with the sight of mine eye ; 

And no silent listener but hears with my hearing, nor any one 
‘ that grasps but with my strength and might ; 



THE BAULS OF BENGAL 


21 $ 

But we should notice that though love is the main reli- 
gious mode of the Bauls, the element of yoga is in no way 
less important in their Sadhana. The element of love is 
generally associated with elements of yoga in the Baul sect 
as it is in Sufi-ism. The modus operandi of the Bauls who 
take to the Sadhana of the ‘four moons’ is essentially yogic. 
But elements of yoga are resorted to also by the devout 
Bauls as a process of piuification and concentration. 

(iv) Poet Tagore and the Baul songs 

The Baul songs, with the ingrained spirit of freedom, 
the mystic conception of divinity and love and also with 
the charm of their tune, leading the mind to supreme 
renunciation and indifference, had strong influence in the 
evolution of the poetico-religious mind of poet Tagore. 
Tagore says in The Religion of Man that in his youth he 
could not harmonise his inner spiritual demands with his 
relationship with the monotheistic church with which he was 
closely associated. After a long struggle with the feeling 
that he was ‘using a mask to hide the living face of truth,’ 
he severed his connection with the church. “About this 
time,” says the poet, “one day 1 chanced to hear a song 

from a beggar belonging to the Baul sect of Bengal What 

struck me in this simple song was a religious expression that 
was neither grossly concrete, full of crude details, nor meta- 
physical in its rarefied transcendentalism. At the same time 
it was alive with an emotional sincerity . It spoke of an 
intense yearning of the heart for the divine whi<di is in Man 
and not in the temple, or scriptures, in images and symbols. 
The worshipper addresses his songs to Man the ideal 

And in the whole creation there is none save me that speaks or sees 

or hears. 

The Idea of Pertonality in Sufi-Um by Nicholson, p. 21. 

C/. also Dabiitan, Vol. I, Preliminary Discourses, p. clxvi, 

* The Religion of Man, Ch. VII, The Man of My Heart, p, 110. 



214 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

Again he says, — “Since then 1 have often tried to meet 
these people, and sought to understand them through their 
songs, which are their only form of worship. One is often 
surprised to find in many of these verses a striking originality 
of sentiment and diction ; for, at their best, they are spon- 
taneously individual in their expressions.’’^ 

In another place the poet says, — “Those, who have gone 
through my writings, know that 1 have expressed my love 
towards the Baul songs in many of my writings. When 1 
was in Silaidaha 1 would frequently meet these Bauls and 1 
had occasion to have discourses with them. 1 have fitted the 
tune of the Bauls to many of my songs, and in many other 
songs the tune of the Bauls has consciously or unconsciously 
been mixed up with other musical modes and modifications. 
It will be easily understood from the above that the tune as 
well as the message of the Bauls had at one time absorbed 
my mind as if they were its very element.’’^ 

The conception of the ‘Man of the heart’, as confessed 
by Tagore himself, deeply stirred his poetic mind even in his 
youth. Tagore, with the Upanisadic background of his 
mind prepared in his early days by his father as well as by 
the whole environment of his life, naturally tried to assimilate 
the message of the Bauls with the Upanisadic doctrines. 

We have indicated in the introduction that through all 
his songs and poems Tagore sings of an Infinite Being, Who 
is seeking His self-expression through the whole creative 
process for self-realisation, — ^and the best expression of the 
Divine personality is through the human personality, and 
throughout the life-process of man there is going on this 
continual process of love-making between the human and 
the Divine. This human personality and the Divine persona- 
lity, both of which remain combined in the nature of man. 


1 The Religion of Man, p, III. 

* Foreword to H&ramc^i by Tagore. 



THE BAULS OF BENGAL 


215 


are the ‘I’ and the ‘You’, the ‘Lover’ and the ‘IBeloved’ so 
much spoken of by poet Tagore in his songs and poems. In 
singing of this *1’ and the ‘You’ in man, between man and 
the ‘Man of the heart’, Tagore has been the greatest of the 
Bauls of Bengal . 




PART III 

THE NATH CULT 


Ze-MIIB 




CHAPTER Vlll 
Legend and History 

Another obscure religious cult, that has influenced the 
growth of Bengali literature to a considerable extent from an 
ealry period of its history, is Nathism. As an All- India reli- 
gious movement Nathism enjoyed and is still enjoying 
immense popularity and it mfluenced the growth of many 
other modern Indian literatures in the early and the 
middle periods. The religious and literary history of 
Nathism in Bengal is, therefore, intimately connected with 
that of many other provinces of India as also of the Hima- 
layan regions like Nepal and Tibet. There are many yogic 
texts in Sanskrit either directly ascribed to the Nath-gurus 
(mainly to Gorakh-nath), or somehow associated with the 
cult. The Nath literature in the vernaculars consists mainly 
of longer narrative poems of the nature of ballads and also 
stray songs. A general survey of the nature and extent of 
Nath literature with particular reference to Bengali will be 
found in the Appendix (B). 

(f) Origin of the Nath Cult 

The problem of the origin and development of the Nath 
cult in India, including the Nath movement of Bengal, is as 
yet shrouded in the mist of legends and myths. From the 
heaps of traditional accounts it is possible for us only to form 
an idea of the extent of popularity which the cult enjoyed and 
is still enjoying in the soil of India ; but no definite history of 
its origin and development can be constructed with the data 
that we have at our disposal. We have, howeva, made it 
clear on^several occasions that the historical study is not our 



220 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

primary concern, — we are rather interested in the religious 
contents relating to our literature ; but as the mythical and 
semi-historic accounts will help us to a great extent to under- 
stand the religious nature of the cult, we propose to make 
here a brief study of them. 

The Nath cult is essentially a yogic cult ; but among the 
innumerable yogic sects of India the cult is characterised as 
the Nath cult due mainly to the fact that its stalwarts gene- 
rally bear the title of ‘Nath’, and the word Nath has been 
dealt with in some of the standard Sanskrit texts as a philo- 
sophic concept for a state of supreme existence. Various 
theories are current among scholars as to the nature and 
origin of this cult. Some take it to be essentially a crypto- 
Buddhist or an esoteric Buddhist cult, which later seceded 
from the Buddhist fold and transformed itself into a Saivite 
cult. Others, on the other hand, are of opinion that the 
Nath cult is essentially a Saivite cult, which, in course of its 
evolution, was assimilated within esoteric Buddhism and it is 
for this reason that we find in it a hotchpotch of esoteric 
Buddhism and yogic Saivism. But before indulging in such 
speculations we should first of all be sure of what the Nath 
cult stands for. The Nath cult seems to represent a particular 
phase of the Siddha cult of India. This Siddha cult is a very 
old religious cult of India with its main emphasis on a psycho- 
chemical process of yoga, known as the Kaya-sadhana or the 
culture of body with a view to making it perfect and immuta- 
ble and thereby attaining an immortal spiritual life. 

To escape death, as we shall see, was the central point 
round which grew the details of the Siddha 
India* ^'‘*‘***“ cult, and the Siddhas in genered hold 

“that death may either be put off ad libitum 
by a special course of restrengthening and revitalising the 
body so as to put it permanently en rapport with the World 
of sense, or be ended definitively by dematerialising and 
spiritualising the body, according to prescription, so that it 



221 


LEGEND AND HISTORY 

disappeeirs in time in a celestial form from the world of 
sense, and finds its permanent abode in the transcendental 
glory of God.”* This Siddha school seems to be closely 
associated with the Indian school of Rasayana and it is some- 
times held that the Siddha school was originally based on the 
theories and practices of the Rasayana school.^ This Rasa- 
yana school, has been accepted as a school of Indian philo- 
sophy in the Sarva-darsana-samgraha of Sayana-Madhava. 
The school is styled there as the Rasesoara-darsana and the 
doctrines of the school are explained with reference to well- 
known texts on Rasayana. The school is, however, recog- 
nised here as a Saivite school. Rasayana or alchemy is an 
ancient science of the pre-Christian origin having immense 
popularity in different parts of the world. In India, however, 
instead of being- purely a chemical science, it developed theo- 
logical speculations and already in fairly old medical texts we 
find references to the view that siddhi or perfection can be 
attained by making the body immutable with the help of 
Rasa (i.e., some chemical substance). There is a popular 
tradition that the Siddhas were ‘ ‘a band of death-defying 
theriacal and therapeutic alchemists indebted in all respects to 
Bhoga, a pre-Christian Taoist immigrant from China, who, 
in his methods of keying up the body of impure matter 
through ‘reverberation’ and ‘projection’ to the pitch of 
practically cancelling demise, merely sought to promulgate 
the lesser athanasic precepts of Lao-tse, since the vital objec- 
tive of the Tao-Teh-King is the transfiguration of the immor- 
talised ethereal body into a permanent garment of celestial 
virtue, in order to fit it to associate to eternity with the Tao.”** 


i Vide, TI%e Doctrinal Culture and Tradition of the Siddhas by Dr. V. V* 
Raman iSSstri. M.A., Ph.D., F.R.A.S., M.R.A.S., in the Cultural Heritage of 
IndiUt Sri Ramakrishna Centenary Memorial, Vol. 11, pp. 303-319. 

S For the details of the fundamental points of similarity between the Nith 
school and the school ’of Rasayana, see in/rcr, Ch. IX, Sec, V, 
a Dr. Raman Sistrl, Loc. cit, 



•222 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS. CULTS 


Patanjali, the great exponent of yoga, who flourished 
most probably some time b etween the second and the sixth 
century A.D.,^ says in the Kaivalya-pada of his yoga- 
aphorism that siddhi can be attained even by the application 
of herb or medicine {ausadhi).^ In the commentary on this 
aphorism Vyasa and Vacaspati say that this siddhi by 
ausadhi refers to the schools of yogins who attained perfection 
with the help of Rasayana.** We shall presently see that the 
Rasa of the Rasayana school was replaced, in the cult of the 
Nath Siddhas, by the nectar oozing from the moon situated 
in the Sahasrara and the whole chemical process was changed 
into a psycho-chemical process of 'Hatha-yoga . From the above 
it seems plausible to hold that the siddha marga evolved 
gradually from the ancient school of Rasayana. The theory 
of the Sun and the Moon as expounded by the Nath Siddhas'* 
and the principle of being immortal by drinking the nectar 
oozing from the Moon are found explained in the second 
Brahmana of the Brhad-jabalopanisat.’ Of course the 
Brhad-jdbalopamsat is not one of those Upanisads that are 
recognised by scholars to be authentic and fairly early in 
origin, and therefore the occurrence of the principles of the 
Nath cult in this text may not help us much in ascertaining 
the exact time when these doctrines were prevalent ; but the 
fact will at least hint at an antiquity of the tradition. What 
we can be sure of on this point is that the science of Rasayana 
was accepted much prior to the advent of Patanjali by a 
section of yogins for the attainment of the immutability of 
the body and for the attainment of many other supernatural 

^ See History of Indian Philosophy by Dr. S. N. Dasgupta, Vol. 1, 

^ janmausadhi-mantra-tapah-samadhijah siddhayah I 

3 ausadhibhih asura-bhavanesu rasayaneiy evam adi etc. I Comm, of Vyasa. 
ausadhi- si ddhim aha—**asura-bhavane§u’* iti 1 manu^yo hi k^taicin 
nimxttud asura-bhavanam upasampraptah k<^maniyibhir asuia-hanyabhir upanitain 
rasayanam upayujyajard-maranatvam anyaica siddhir asadayati ihaiva Va raaaya- 
nopayogena I yatha mandavyo munih, rasopayogaS'\bindhyavas't iti I Vacaspati. 

* Vide infra. 5 Vide infra. 



LEGEND AND HISTORY 


223 


powers and that escape from death through the perfection 
bf body was regarded by these yogins as the highest 
achievement in religious life. As this is essentially the 
position held also by the Nath Siddhas, the history of the Nath 
yogins may be traced back to a period prior to Patanjali. 

From the above discussions it will be clear that any 
hypothesis about the possibility of the Nath cult being 
originally an esoteric Buddhist cult and seceding from 
Buddhism in course of time to assume a Saivite air is based 
purely on a misconception of the fundamental nature of the 
cult. Such a misconception arises also from the reliance on 
some popular traditions current in Eastern India. In Eastern 
India, particularly in the Himalayan regions (in Nepal and 
Tibet), many of the traditions of the Nath Siddhas got mixed 
up with those of the Buddhist Siddhacaryas. The reason for 
such a mixture and confusion is not very far to seek. If we 
analyse and examine the different schools of esoterism, which 
go by the name of Tan trie Buddhism, pr^aktaism, orSaivism, 
Rearms for the mis- wc shall find that in their composite practi- 
«"pto.Buddh°stic cal nature they contain mainly two elements : 
gin of the Nsth cult. jg paraphernalia of rites and 

rituals of a heterogeneous nature, which are neither Hindu 
nor Buddhistic in origin, but represent a common stock of 
heritage to all the popular religious systems of India ; the 
other element is the element of yoga in its various forms, 
which also is a common heritage. We have hinted before' 
that at different periods in the history of Indian religion these 
paraphernalia of practices together with the various yogic 
elements got themselves associated with the different schools 
of Hindu and Buddhist philosophy, giving rise to the different 
esoteric schools. This fact has been responsible for so much 
mixture and confusion among the views and practices of these 
esoteric schools. 


^ Supra, introduction* 



OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


224 

If we are to recognise any fundamental philosophy in the 
Hindu Tantrlc systems, we should say that it is the philo- 
sophy of Siva and Sakti with all ontological and cosmological 
speculations on them ; and we have seen before that all the 
yogic practices of the Tantric Buddhists have also grown with 
the fundamental ideology of Prajna and Upaya, which is 
essentially the same as that of Siva and Sakti. The tradi- 
tional belief of Hinduism is that Siva is the original instructor 
r 1 . . of all yoga, — the Tantric Buddhists also 

General similarity m 

ideas and practices believe that Lord Buddha, or rather lord 

among the esoteric . /ii • iii\ 

schools. Vajra-sattva (or Hevajra, or Heruka), who 

is conceived just as 6iva, is the original 
instructor of all secret yoga. The traditional belief of the 
Naths is that Adi-nath is the first in the list of the chronology 
of the Naths, — and all secrets of yoga proceed from him. 
This Adi-nath is none but Siva of the Hindu8\ and Buddha, 
in the form of the Vajra-sattva, of the Buddhists ; and as a 
matter of fact we frequently come across the epithets of ‘Adi- 
natha and Bhota-natha appliedto the Vajra-sattva or Hevajra 
in the Buddhist Tantras as they are frequently applied to 
Siva in the Hindu Tantras. We have also pointed out that 
some of the important Buddhist Tantras are introduced as a 
dialogue between the lord and the compassionate lady just as 
in many Hindu Tantras, and according to the literary 
traditions of the Naths also, we find that Matsyendra-nath {the 
first arhong the human Gurus) received the secret of yoga in 
the form of a fish when it was being disclosed to the Goddess 
in a castle on the Ksiroda-sea. The theory of the Sun and the 
Moon of the Buddhists has correspondences in the Nath cult. 
It is because of the general similarities of this nature that 
Tantric Buddhism seems allied to the other yogic sects. The 
final state of yoga is called the Sahaja state or Sahaja-samadhi 

^ Cj. sakalcr pradhan aiddha handiva hhola-nath. I 

Gopi-^cmdrer Sannyan, by Sukur Mabamm^d (C.U.), p. 397. 



LEGEND AND HISTORY 


225 


or $unya-samadhi by the Buddhist Sahajiyas and this idea is 
to be met with also in the literature ascribed to the Niths. In 
the two versions of the Akula-olra-tanira' (authorship attri- 
buted to Matsyendra-nath) we find a detailed description of the 
state of Sahaja ; there it is defined as a state of perfect equili- 
brium, which transcends all our perceptual knowledge with 
positive and negative attributes. In that state of perfect quietude 
the yogin becomes one with the whole universe and realises a 
non-dual existence. In such a state “He himself is the goddess, 
himself the God, himself the disciple, himself the preceptor; 
he is at once the meditation, the meditator and the divinity 
(meditated upon).’’^ It is very easy to see that this Sahaja is 
the same as the Sahaja described in the Buddhist Tantrais 
and the Buddhist Dohas and songs. In the vernacular lite- 
rature of the Nath cult we frequently meet with this concep- 
tion of Sahaja, particularly in the old Hindi text Gorakh-hodh 
and in similar literature of Carpah and other Siddhas.'^ In 
the Hathayoga-pradlpika (which is a standard text on Hatha- 
yoga) we find that the Buddhist theory of the four kinds of 
Sunya, Oiz., Sunya, Ati-sunya, Maha-sunya and Sahaja-^Qnya 
(or Sarva-sunya^ is associated with the four stages of sound 
produced through yogic practices.'' Again, the Nath litera- 

^ See Kaula^jfiana nirnaya, edited by Dr. P C. Bagchi, Calcutta Sanskrit Series, 
No. Ill, 

3 svayatp devt avayarp devah avayarp avayap guru}} I 

avayarp dhySnam aVayarp dhydtS avayarp aarvatra deoatS II 

, {Akula, A, p. 26). 1 

aa brahmS aa hariScaiva aa rudraS caive'ivaraa taihs II 
sa iivah idivato devahi aa ca aomdrk.a-iank.arah I 
aa viidkhyo mayurdk^o arhanio budham eva ca II 
avayarp deVl avayarp deVah avayarp iisyah aVayarp guruh I 
avayarp dhydnarp avayarp dhyata avayarp aarveivaro guruh H 

{Akula, B, pp. 116-118). 

Vide Dr. Bagchi 's introduction, pp. 55-56. 

^ See the text of the Gorakh-bodh as quoted by Dr. Mohan Singh in his Work 
on Gorakhnath and also similar literature of the mediaeval yogic saints illustrsitodi 
at the end of the same text. 

i Vide aupra, pp, 5] -53. 

® Vide, Hatha-yoga-pradlpikcf lyangar's edition (4. 70#75), 

29--1411B 



226 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


ture (including the Sanskrit and vernacular texts) is sometimes 
characterised by a spirit of heterodoxy and criticism similar to 
that of the Tantric Buddhists. It is found further that in the 
texts ascribed to the Naths holy places of pilgrimage located 
within the human organism are described under several 
categorieSt viz., Pitha, Upapitha,K$etra,Upak.setra, Sandoha, 
etc., and this is the custom also with the Buddhist and the 
Hindu Tantras.' As for the technical yoga terminology, it 
can be said that they have been common to all the esoteric 
yogic schools. 

The most important thing common to all schools of eso- 
terism is the culture of the body or Kaya-sadhana through the 
processes of Hatha -yoga. We have seen before that though 

Kaya-sadhana was not the final aim of the Buddhist and the 
Vaisnava Sahajiyas, the process of Kaya-sadhana was regarded 
in both the sects as an indispensable accessory for the realisa- 
tion of the Sahaja-nature as supreme bliss or supreme love. 
The fact of such a similarity and mixture has been 
responsible for the frequent association of 
th^N^lh Nath cult with the cult of the Tantric 

Buddhists in myths and legends. But 
judging from the literary records and the legends, and tradi- 
tions still prevalent among the yogins of the Nath order it 
appears that the Nath cult has grown with a general air of 
^ivism. It is noticeable that not only is there the tradition 
of Mahadeva or Siva being the original instructor of the cult, 
but that Gorakh-nath, the most renowned and niost impor- 
tant yogin of the sect, has frequently been identified with 
Siva or deified as such. The deity of the cult, where tradi- 
tional or iconographic record of the deity is available, is 
found to be Siva ; the places of pilgrimage of the yogins of 
this order** are generally of Saivite importance and the temples 
there often contain an image of Siva or the phallic symbol of the 

I Vidct Kaala-jfiana-nirnayat introduction, p. 57. 

» For detailed description* of such plac •ssec Briggs. Chs. V and VI. 



LEGfeNb ANb histoRV 


111 

lord. Again in dress and other accessories the Nath yogins 
are depicted just like images of Siva, who himself is the 
greatest of yogins. The Siddhas of the Nath cult are some- 
times dracribed in vernacular literature as fond of intoxicants 
like 5i ddhi and Gfinja just as Siva is.* ‘Vam, Vam’ is the 
peculiar mystic sound of the Nath yogins as it is' of Siva 
himself. It is also noticeable that in the V allala-carita 
the priests of the Yogi caste of Bengal have been spoken of 
as rudraja brahmana (i.e., Brahmins deriving their origin 
from Rudra or Siva), — and as a matter of fact the Yogis of 
Bengal even in the present day speak of themselves as 
belonging to the iSiva-gotra (i.e., the Siva-lineage).^ 

But inspite of all these, the general similarity in tone 
and practice has been responsible for the confused identifica- 
tion of the later Buddhist apostles with the Nath yogins, euid 
it may be probably for this reason that Matsyendra-nath, 
who is taken to be the first of the human exponents of the 
Nath cult, has been deified in Nepal as Avalokitesvara, eind 
even at the present day the Buddhists of that land hold 
annual procession in honour of the deified Matsyendra-nath. 

It is also perhaps for this reason that 

Confusion about the . . , i ■ ■ i .r i • -r'l 

Nsth Siddhas and IVIatsyendra-nalh is identihed in 1 ibetan 
^*'^*^*'* traditions with Lui-pa (or Luyi-pa), who 
is generally taken to be the first among the 
Buddhist Siddhacaryas.“ In the Sanskrit commentary on 
the Carya-song No. 21 we find a quotation of a few lines 

^ Asa typical instance we may cite the following description of Hidipha or 
JilandharlpS in the version of the Gopi-candrer Sannyaa by Sukur Mahammad : — 
takhane aniya dila aiddher jhali II 
aooa k^clS aiddhSi haate kfiri nila I 
sooa man dhutrar phal tathe miiaila il 
sooa man kpcld. siddh5 ekatra kariyS I 
mnkhe tale dila nath iioa nam liya il 

(C. U. edition, Part II, pp. 431-432). 

* Vide introduction to Mayanamatir Gan by Dr, N. K. Bhattalili, p. iv. 

^ Vide introduction to the Baaddha^Gan^O^Doh^ by MM. H, P. iSistri. 



21 % 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULtS 


(compDsecI in the language simileur to that of the Carya> 
songs), which is ascribed to Mina-nith (commonly accepted 
as identical with Matsyendra-nath) ^ and MM. H. P. Sastri, 
on the evidence of it went so far as to say that the Nath 
yogins (who, according to MM. Sastri, flourished some time 
before the Buddhist Siddhacaryas) also composed Bengali 
songs exactly in the manner of the songs of the Buddhist 
Siddhacaryas. The hcizardous leap involved in the inference 
of MM. Sastrl seems to be too long to justify his inference. 
Of course, we have already seen that many Sanskrit texts 
and Hindi texts are ascribed to Gorakh-nath, who has even 
been recognised as the first prose- writer in Hindi (or Panjabi),* 
but we cannot be sure that the heap of literature (either in 
Sanskrit or vernacular) ascribed to Gorakh are not spurious 
texts, somehow belonging to the Gorakh sect and bearing 
traditional traces of some of the doctrines of the cult. 

The general similarity among the esoteric yogic sects of 
the later Buddhists and the Saivites seems to be responsible 
also for the tradition that many of the Siddhas of the 
Nath cult, including the most renowned Gorakh-nath, hailed 
from the Buddhist fold as seceders. According to the 
evidence of Taranath the name of Gorakh-nath, when he 
belonged to the Buddhist fold, was Anahga-vajra. MM. Sastrl 
says that the Buddhist name of Gorakh-nath was Ramana- 
vajra.* It is said that the Nepalese Buddhists are much 
displeased with Gorakh-nath and hate him as a seceder.^ 
In the index of the Pag Sam Jon Zang Mr, S. C. Das says, — 

1 kahanti guru paramarthera hq{a i 
karmma kMrafigQ samadhiko pdta il 
kjamala hikasila hfthiha na jamard I 
katnala madhu pivivi dhoke na bhamara il 

Ibid, p. 38. 

2 In Bengali, however, though we have vernacular literature on Gorakh-^nSth 
there is no vernacular text ascribed to Gorakh-nSth ; here there is no tradition 
whatsover of Gorakh-nath being an author of Bengali literature at any time. 

8 Vide introduction to the Bauddha-Cdn-O-Doha by MM. i^Sstrl, p. 16. 

< Ibid, 



LEGEND AND HISTORY 


22 ^ 


“ Gauraksa — a cowherd, who being initiated into Tantric 
Buddhism became the well known sage Gauraksa, whose 
religious school smvives in the yogee sect, who go under the 
designation of Nath.” ’ Though we are not quite svire of 
the history either of the Naths or of the Buddhist Siddha- 
caryas, yet a consideration of the general circumstances lead 
us to believe that all these traditions have more confusion 
for their genesis than historical facts. We may note here 
also the queer suggestion about the identification of Gorakh 
with Arya Asanga, or even with Nagarjuna, the well known 
Buddhist scholar. ^ Whatever might have been the history 
of the origin and development of the Nath cult and the cult 
of the Buddhist Siddhacaryas, the fact is that Mina-nath, 
Matsyendra-nath, Goraksa-nath, Jalandhar i and Caurangi- 
nath, who are the most prominent among the Naths, were 
all included in the list of the Buddhist Siddhacaryas and 
were sometimes credited with some works on esoteric 
Buddhism, which were translated into Tibetan. 

Dr. B. M. Barua suggests that ‘‘ in the Nathism of Bengal 
as in that of other places, one may trace the 
and the Ajivikai. recrudescence and continuity or the doctrines 
and practices of the Ajivikas, who were a 
factor, as noted before in the religious history of Bengal.” 
The points of similarity between the Ajivikas and the Naths 
may, according to Dr. Barua, briefly be noted thus-: — 

(1) Both sects recognised three supreme Personalities in 
their religious tradition, the Ajivikas : Nanda-vatsa, Kr^a 
Samkrtyayana and Maskarin Gosala ; the Naths : Mlna-nath, 
Matsyendra-nath and Gorak^-nath. 

1 Pag Sam Jon Zang, Index, p. ix, 

2 Vide Introductory note by Mr. Daljit Singh to the Gorakh^nath and Mediaeval 

Hindu Mysticism of Dr. Mohan Singh (p. xiii), ^ 

^ In the Tibetan ae well as in the Indian traditions Mlna-n£th and Matsyendra* 
nSth are sometimes held to be different, while according to the Bengali tradition 
the two are generally held identical. 

< Religious History oj Bengal other than Hindu (unpublished). 



i36 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

(2) Both sects admitted singing and dancing as two 
important modes of religious expression. 

(3) Both sects believed that in order to reach the human 
state a soul must pass through eighty-four hundred thousand 
stages. 

(4) Both aspired after Ananta-manasa or Sahasrara as 
the highest condition of soul reachable through Hatha-yoga, 
in which Pranayama or control of the vital wind is the 
essential feature. 

(3) Both were Caturangis (Caurangis) in the sense that 
their religious life was to stand the fourfold test of ascetics, 
viz., parama-tapassiia (great privation), parama-lukhata (great 
austerity), parama-jegucchita (great loathness to wrong-doing), 
and parama-pavicittata (great aloofness from the world). 

(6) Both were worshippers of the Parama-sukla, Avadhuta 
or Niranjana type of the soul. 

In criticism of the views of Dr. Barua we may say that 
though there may be some important points of similarity in 
some of the views, practices and traditions of the Ajivikas 
and the Nath Siddhas, there seems to be no simileurity in 
their theological speculations. The Ajivikas v^ere indeed 
wandering saints, who would often have recourse to some of 
the important Hatha-yogic practices ; but these Hatha-yogic 
practices were no monopoly of any particular religious sect ; 
they were and still are important factors in the practical 
aspect of many of the Indian religious systems. It is a 
particular theological system growing round these important 
Hatha-yogic practices that have given a distinctiveness to 
Nathism as a religious sect. The tenets of the Ajivikas are 
not yet clearly known ; but as far as they are known, they 
do not seem to represent any close resemblance with the 
speculations of the Nath Siddhas. 

The similarity in the tradition of three supreme personali- 
ties, of which Dr. Barua speaks, is indeed noticeable, and 
the tradition of the Tri-nathas is still current in many parts 



LEGEND AND HISTORY 


231 


of East-Bengal and North-Bengal and there are still extant 
religious functions which are generally accompanied by 
populeur songs in honour of the Tri-nathas. In these 
functions, however, the Tri-nathas have frankly become the 
trinity.^ About the second point we beg to say that though 
we find that Goraksa-nath transformed himself through his 
yogic power into a dancing girl and rescued his preceptor 
from the country of Kadali by dancing and singing, — that 
seems to have been a mere trick to enter into the country of 
women, and as such need not be recognised to be any 
important religious mode of the Naths. Of course the 
episode of the captivity of Mlna-nath in the land of Kadali 
and his rescue by Goraksa may allegorically be interpreted 
as the bondage of the human soul ^ through worldly pleasure 
and its redemption through practices of yoga, and in that 
case the dancing and singing of Goraksa in the form of the 
dancing girl may be held important as a religious function ; 
but from a study of the fundamental tenets or the yogic 
practices of the Naths it does not seem to be the fact that 
dancing and singing were any important function of religious 
expression with the Nath yogins. Many Kanphat yogins 
Me, however, found begging from door to door singing 
songs, — but this singing seems to be simply the profession 
of a beggar — and nothing more. About the third point we 
may note that the number eighty-four, as we shall presently 
see, was held to be a mystic number not only by the Naths, 
but by various other schools and we find enough of it in 

1 The present writer may speak of one function in honour of the Tri-naths in 
some parts of East-Bengal. The function is known as Tennaiher Mela (the 
congregation of the three Naths) and is generally held with the purpose of 
preventing some family calamity and of gaining prosperity for the family or for an 
individual. In the function, however, the three Naths are confusedly identified 
with the trinity, viz., Brahma, Vifnu and Siva and three pipes of GaUja are offered 
to them, which are then smoked. In the songs, however, the Tri-nSth is regarded, 
as one deity. 

2 There being the Upanisadic analogy between the fish (mlna) and the human 



232 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


popular literature, both Sanskrit and vernacular. The fourth 
and fifth points are noteworthy inasmuch as the Ajivikas 
like the Nathas were wandering yogins who emphasised 
processes of Hatha-yoga and were also great ascetics. The 
sixth point is not, however, clear to us. 

(ii) Traditions of the eighty-four Siddhas and 
the nine Nathas 

All yogins, who have attained perfection in the practice 
of yoga, ware honoured with the general epithet of Siddha, 
or Siddha (as in the vernacular). The Buddhist Sahajiya 
yogins of much renown are commonly known as the 
Siddhacaryas and the apostles among the Natha yogins 
are also called Siddhas; it is for this reason that 
there has been a popular confusion of the Buddhist Siddha- 
caryas and the Natha yogins in the chronology of the 
Siddhas. Through such a confused amalgamation has 
arisen the tradition of the eighty-four Siddhas. In the lists 
available we shall find that some of the Buddhist Siddha- 
caryas and Natha yogins have been included indiscriminately. 
This tradition of the eighty-four Siddhas is very important 
inasmuch as the tradition is found frequently ihentioned in 
the vernacular literature of different periods. In the Varna- 
ratna-kara' we find a list of the eighty-four Siddhas, where 
the names of seventy -six Siddhas really occur.* In the first 

I MS, preserved in the R.A.S.B. No. 4834; author Kavi-SekharScSrya 
JyotirKvara, who was a court-poet of King Hari-simha Deva of Mithila, who reigned 
from 1300-1321 A.C. Vide introduction to the Baudha-Gan-O-Dohs by MM. 
p. 35. 

* The list gives the names as follows ;-(!) Mina-nSth, (2) Goraksa-nith, (3) 
Caurangi-nath, (4) Camari-nath, (5) Tanti-pa, (6) Hgli-pi, (7) Kedgri-pS, (8)' 
Dhonga-pg. (9) Dgri-pa, (10) Viru-pa, (11) Kapgli, (12) Kamtri. (13) 
Kgnha, (14) Kanakhala, (15) Mekhala. (16) Unmana, (17) Kgndali, (18) Dhovi, 
(19) Jglandhata, (20) TonSh (21) Mavaha, (22) Ngggtjuna, (23) Daull, (24) 
Bhiala. (25) Aciti, (26) Campaka, (27) Dhentasa, (28) Bhumbhari. (29) Rak-li, (30) 
TujT, (31) Carpap, (32) Bligde, (33) Candana, (34) Kgmari. (35) Karaval. (36) 
^Dharma-pgpataiiga, (37) Bhadra. (38) Pgtali-bhadra, (39) Palihiha, (40) Bhgnu, 



LEGEND AND HISTORY 


233 


« 

chapter of the Haiha-yoga-pradipika we find a list of yogins, 
who 2ure called the Maha-siddhas.^ We find here many of the 
important names common with those found in the list given 
in the Varna-ratna-kara. This tradition of the eighty-four 
Siddhas is very popular in Tibetan Buddhism also. - Albert 
Gruenwedel has given the full list of these eighty-four Siddhas 
from data available from the Tibetan sources.^ This list of 


(41) Mlna» (42) Nirdaya, (43) Savara, (44) Sfinti, (45) Bhartrhari, (46) Bhlsana, 
(47) Bhati, (48) Gagana-pa, (49) Gamara, (50) MenurS, (51) Kumari, (52) Jivana, 
(53) Aghosadhava, (54) Girivara, (55) SiySrI, (56) Nsgavali, (57) Bibhavat, (58) 
Saranga, (59) Vivikidhaja, (60) Magara-dhaja, (61) Acita, (62) Bicita, (63) Necaka, 
(64) Cstala, (65) Nscana. (66) Bhilo. (67) Pfihila/ (68) Pasala, (69) Kamala- 
kangari, (70) Cipila, (71) Govinda, (72) Bhima, (73) Bhairava, (74) Bhadra, (75) 
Bhamarl, (76) Bhuru-kutl. 

^ The list includes the names of the following Siddhas : -Adi-nStha, Matsyendra, 
Ssbara, Ananda-bhairava, Caurangl, Mina. Goraksa. Virupaksa, Bileiaya, ManthSna, 
Bhairava, Siddhi, Buddha (Siddha-bodha, see BhSratavarsiya U pasaka-sampradaya , 
Vol. Ilf pp. 136- 137) f Kanthadif Korantaka, SurSnanda, Siddha-pida, Carpati. 
Kfineri, NityanStha, Niranjana, Kapall, Bindu-nStha, Kska-candUvaia, Ahvaya 
(Maya ?), AllSma, Prabhu-deva, GhodS-coll, Tintini, Bhfinuki. Nsradeva, Khan^a- 
kapalika and others. See Hafha-yoga pradlpiks, Ch. I., verses (5-9) (lyangar’s 
edition). 

2 The list available through the Tibetan sources is as follows: — (l)Lohi'pa 
(Matsyendra or MatsyfintrSd), (2) LllS-pfi, (3) Viru-pa, (4) Pombi Heruka, (5) 
Ssbara (or Sabari) , (6) ^araha (or Rshula-bhadra) , (7) Kankali, (8) Mina (or Vajra- 
pada), (9) Goraksa, (10) CauraAgi, (II) VinS, (12) Sfinti (or Ratnfikara Sfinti) , (13) 
Tanti, (14) Carmarz (orCarmfira), (15) Khadga. (16) Nagfirjuna. (17) Krsna-cfirl (or 
Kfinha-pfida, Kanapa, Karana) , (18) KSnera (Kanarl, or Aryadeva), (19) Sthagana 
(orThagana), (20) Nfida-pfi (or Ya^obhadra) , (21) 6fili-pfi (or Srgfila-pfida). (22) 
Tilo-pfi (or Tailika-pfida) , (23) Chatra, (24) Bhadra (orBh5de)f (25) Dvikhandl (or 
Dokhandi), (26) Ajogi (or Yogi-pfida), (27) Kada-pfida (or Kfila), (28) DhovT (or 
Dhombhi), (29) KaAkana^ (30) Kambala (or Kamari), (31) Tcnki (or Pamgi), (32) 
Bhade (or Bhandhc, Bhfindirl), (33) Tandhi (or Tandhe), (34) ICukkuri. (35) 
Cubji (or Kusuli) , (36) Dharma, (37) Mahi, (38) Acintya (Acinta, Acinti), (39) 
Babhahi (or Bhalaha). (40) Nalina, (41) Bhusuku (or Sfinti-deva). (42) Indra-bhuti, 
(43) Megha-pfida (orMeko), (44) Kuthfirl (or Kuthfili), (45) Karmaia, (46) Jalan- 
dharif (47) Rahula, (48) Gharbari (or Gharma-pSda) . (49) Dhakari (orTokri), (50) 
Medini, (51) Pankaja, (52) Ghantfi (or Vajra-ghan^a) , (53) Yogi, (54) Celuka (or 
Caluka), (55) Vaguri ( ? Gundarl), (56) Luncaka (orLucika), (57) Nirguna, (58) 
JaySnanda* (59) Carsa^T (or Pacari, Pficala). (60) Campaka, (61) Visana (or 
Bhikhana), (62) Bhali (or Tell, Tail!), (63) Kumari (or ICumbhakfira) , (64) Cfirpa(i 
(or Javari), (65) Mani-bhadrfi, (66) Mekhalfi. (67) Mankhalfi (or Kanakha). (68) 
Kala-kala, (69) Kanthadi (or Pantali), (70) Dhabuli (or Daudi), (71) Udhali (or 

30-141 IB 



234 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the Siddhas has also been discovered in Java and has been 
published by Van Manen from Holland.' The tradition is 
very popular abo in the South 

We are not, however, prepared to give any historical 
... , credit to the list of these eighty-four Siddhas 

The tradition does ^ ^ ^ 

not seem to be bistort- or even to the tradition of the eighly-four 
Siddhas. If we just examine the lists of 
these eighty-four Siddhas it will appear that they are anomalous 
lists containing names of many Buddhist Siddhacaryas who 
flourished during some time near about the tenth to the 
twelfth century A.D., and within the list of these Buddhist 
Siddhacaryas the names of the most reputed Nathas have been 
incorporated for reasons discussed before. This tradition of 
the eighty-four Siddhas is occasionally referred to in the Natha 
literature of Bengal as well as in the Santa literature and 
Sufi literature of Western and Northern India. ^ It has 
been rightly held by some scholars that this number 
eighty-four is rather a mystic than a historical number, 
and for ourselves we have sufficient reason to be 
convinced of the purely mystic nature of this number. 
The significant mention of this number eighty-four 
is found in the belief of the Ajivikas, who believed that 
soul must pass through eighty-four hundred thousand 
stages before attaining the human state. ^ In the Maitrayani 

Uddlya), (72) Kapala, (73) Kila, (74) Puskara (or Sfi.?ara), (75) Sarva-bhaksa (or 
Sibhiksa), (76) NSga-bodhi, (77) Dsrika. (78) Puttall (or Putuli)» (79) Panaha (or 
Upanihl), (80) Kokila (orKokill), (81) Ananga, (82) LaksminkarS, (83) Ssmudra 
(orSamuda), (84) Bhali-pa (or Bya^i or Bysli). Vide, introduction to the 
purSna by Dr. Shahidullah, pp, 3-4; KalySna (an article CaurSai Siddha Taths 
Natha-aampradSya by Bhagavatiprasid Simhaji) Yoganka number. 

1 Vide B. S. P. P. — The Presidential Address of MM, H. P. ^fistrl, B S. 1329. 

3 Vide Dr. Raman ^Sstrl, he, cit. 

^ Sometimes the number of the Siddhas is said not to be merely eighty-four, 
but eighty-four million, and that shows that the mystic number became mythical, at 
least so far as the vernacular poets were concerned. 

Cf. The Vijak of Kahir by Ahmad Shah, Sskhi, No, 257, p. 209, 
Dtgha'txikjSiya, Vol. I., p. 54, 



LEGENb ANb History 


235 

Vpanisat we find mention of eighty-four thousand 
states of birth.* In some of the Tantr2i8 and Puraras also we 
find reference to the eighty-four lacs of yonis Or births in 
different states The number of the Buddhist dhamtna^ 
khandas, (i.e., dharma-s\andha or branches of doctrines, 
division of the dharma or scripture) is eighty-four, or 
rather eighty-four thousand. It heis been said in the Pali 
text Gatfidha-vamsa that those scholars, who will write 
commentaries, notes etc. on the Pali texts containing the 
eighty-four thousand dhamma-J^Jihandas, or will cause 
others to write such works, will gather immense merit 
equal to the merit derived from building eighty-four 
thousand shrines, constructing eighty-four thousand 
images of Buddhas, establishing eighty-four thousand 
monasteries. It has further been said that he, who 
makes a good collection of the sa3angs of Buddha, or causes 
others to do it, and who scribes, or causes to be scribed the 
sayings of Buddha in the form of a manuscript, and who 
gives or causes others to give materials for preparing such a 
manuscript and to preserve it, will amass immense virtue 
equal to that, which is gathered by building eighty-four 
thousand shrines and erecting eighty-four thousand 
monasteries.^ Statements of similaur nature are also found in 
later Buddhistic texts In the Pdi text Anagata—vama we 
find that when Maitreya, the future Buddha, will renounce 
the world, moved by universal compassion, eighty-four 
thousand friends, kinsmen and princesses will follow him, 

^ Third prapa^hakfl* 

2 Tantra-tattva—hy S. C. BhatUcarya, Vol. I, pp. 21-22. 

There is also the popular belief of eighty Tour Kundas (bowel-shaped vessel) in 
the city of Yama in which the convicted are doomed. 

C/. emata dharmar barata avahela jehi jan | 
caurasi k.undeta jam ta pele tatakhan II 

^unya^purana, Ttkja-pSvanat p. 52, 
Gamdha-vamaa, (last Chapter). 

4 Guna-karanda-vyuha, p. 41, pp. 76-77. In'this connection see also Amiiayur* 
dhyana-Butta, The Sacred Book* of iheEoMt, Vol. XLIX. 



236 


OBSCURE RELlCiOUS CULtS 


and eighty-four thousand Brahmins, versed in the Vedas, 
will also accompany him. The mystic nature of the number 
eighty-four will also appear from the fact that the commonly 
accepted number of the yogic postures (asana) is said to be 
eighty-four in the Yogic and Tantric texts; and it has some- 
times been held that the number of the yogic postures are 
eighty 'four million because of the fact that the number of the 
different stages in the evolution of a creature is eighty-four 
million,' — and of these eighty-four million only eighty-four 
£tre prominent, and so they are described in detail. As a 
matter of fact, we do not find even these eighty-four j4sanas 
described anywhere, only a few of them being described in 
the Yogic and Tantric literature. We may also note that 
sometimes the number of the beads in the rosary of a 
Kanphat yogin is also eighty-four. In the Skanda-purana 
wehave detailed description of the eighty-four $iva~lihgas (r.e. 
phallic symbols of lord 6iva) in eighty-four consecutive 
chapters.^ All these taken together will convince one of 
the mystic nature of the number eighty-four, and this 
will justify the doubt about the historical nature of the 
tradition of the eighty-four Siddhas. 

Side by side with the tradition of the eighty-four Siddhas 
we find the tradition of the nine Nathas." In the ceremonies 

The tradition of the ^^e occasion of the initiation into the 
nmeNwhaa. Order of Kanphat yogins there is the 


^ Gorak^a-paddhati (verse 8) ; Corakfa-Borjihita (verse 7) ; Cheranda-8arrihii& 
(2. 1-2) etc.; Sundara'daaa {Sundara-granthaVati,Vo\, I, p. 41). 

2 Skanda-purana, Avantya-khandat Caturaiiti-lihga-mShatmya, 

3 *The sixty-four yoginis, the fifty-two heroes, the six ascetics, the eighty-fou, 
Sidtihas, the nine Naths, paid homage (to Nanak)’ — Janam-aakhi of Bsbs Nanak — 
Trumpp, prefatory remarks, p. vii, 

C/. also : — ‘By having heard (his name) the Siddhas^ Pirs, Gods and Naths 
(have been made),* — Japa, 9, Trumpp. 

'Remembering that name the nine Naths of spotless emancipation, Sanak and 
the others were saved. 

To which being attached the eighty-four Siddhas and Buddhas (and) Ambarik 
crossed the water of existence ;*‘—Panegyric of AmardaSt Trumpp, p. 700. 



LEGEND AND MlSTORY 


237 


ctlstORl of worshipping the nine Nathas and the eighty- four 
Siddhas/ But even in this tradition of the nine Nathas, there 
is no agreement among the lists, and all sorts of mythical 
accounts are found concerning them. In the Sodasa-nitya- 
tantra quoted in the Goralisa-siddhanta-'samgraha we 
find mention of the nine Nathas who are said to have 
preached the Tantras in the different ages. In the Tantra- 
maharmOa (quoted in the same text) eight Nathas are said 
to be residing in the eight directions and one in the 
centre. These Nathas are Goraksa-natha in the east (resid- 
ing in the forest of Jagannatha ?), Jalandhara in the northern 
region (Uttara-patha, in a forest near Jvala-mukhi ?), Nagar- 
juna (in a forest near Godavari in the south ?), Dattatreya in 
the west (to the west of the river Sarasvati ?), Devadatta in 
the South-West, Jada Bharata in the North-West, Adi- 
natha in the land of Kuruksetra in the Midland and 
Matsyendra-nStha in the South-ELast in a land near the sea- 
coast.'* We notice further that the Kapalika-school was 
introduced by the Nathas and there are twelve personalities, 
to whom was revealed the truth of this school. They are, 
Adi-natha, Anadl, Kala, Vaikdika, Karala, Vikarala, Mahs- 
kala, Kala-bhairava-natha, Vatuka, Bhuta-natha, Vira-natha 
and Sri-kantha. Again, twelve are the apostles, who are 
said to be the founders of the cult (marga-pravaftal^a ), — 
they are Nagarjuna, Jada-bharata, Harikandra, Satya-natha, 
Bhima-natha, Goraksa, Carpata, Avadya, Vairagya, Kantha- 
dhari, Jalandhara and Malayarjuna.® In another list we find 
the following names of the nine Nathas; Goraksa-natha, 
Matsyendra-natha, Carpata-natha, Mangala-natha, Ghugo- 
natha, Gopi-natha Prana-natha, Surat-natha and Camba- 

^ Briggs, p*S33, p. 136. 

* Vide Gorakia-siddhanta-^aamgraha, pp. (44-45), Noie that the ninth Nitha 
in the Uana-kona is not described. 

3 ^abara-ianirat quoted in the Gorak^a-aiddhanta-aarngraha, 



238 


obscure religious cuLtS 


nStha.' Theser Nathas are believed to be immortal demigods 
and preachers of the sect for all ages, and it is also believed 
that they are still living in the Himalayan region ; some- 
times they are regarded as the guardian spirits of the 
Himalayan peaks. ^ 

In this connection, however, we may take note of the 
The Nstha-gurus different accounts given about the chrono- 
logy of the Natha-gurus. The chronology 


^ The Legends of the Punjab ^ by R. Temple, pp. 18-19, Vol. I/referred to by 
Briggs, p, 136. In another list again many of the nine Nathas are identified with the 
the Hindu gods. Thus (I) Oipkfira Adi-natha (Lord of Lords) is identified with 8iva, 
(2) Shelnitha (Lord of the Arrow Shaft) with Kffna or Ramacandra; (3) Santosa- 
nitha (Lord of Gratification) with Visnu, (4) Acalacambhunatha (Lord of Wondrous 
Immortality ?) with HanumSna or Laksmana ; (5) Gajabali Gajakantha-natha (Lord 
of the Elephant's strength and Neck) with Gane£a Gaja-karna; (6) PrajS-nItha, or 
Udai-nitha (Lord of the People ?) with PSr/ati; (7) Msya-rupi Macchendra-nfitha, 
Guru of Gorakha-nfitha, (8) Gathepinde Ricayakari (?), or Naranthar, 8ambhu- 
jaiti Guru Gorakha<nitha ; (9) JfiSna-svarupa or Purakh-Siddh CauranjwenStha, or 
Purin Bhagat. Briggs, pp. 136-137. Almost a similar list of the nine Nathas has been 
given by Kitts. It runs as follows : — Omkiri-nSth, Visnu Saihtok nath, Visnu ; 
Gajboli, GajSna (GajSnina ?), Hanuman; Acaleivar, Ganpati; UdayanSth, 
SQrya ; Pfirvatl Prem, Mahsdeo ; SanthanSth, Brahma ; Gyaniji Siddhacewarng 
Jaggnnith; MiySrupI Matsya. /bid, p. 137. 

2 In the Yogi-sampradaya-Viskr^i, referred to before, we find an account of 
the incarnation of the nine NarSyanas as the nine Nfithas. Here, however, popular 
imagination seems to have run riot. It is said that towards the end of the Dvapara- 
yuga the earth was heavy with sin, and the attention of Mahideva, the Lord 
Sovereign^ was drawn to the fact. Moved to pity the Lord at once sent sage Nfirada 
to Badarikfiirama, where the nine NSrnyanas (who were the sons of Rfabha-rSja) of 
the name of Kavi-nSrSya^a, Kara-bhsjana Na”, Antarikfa Ns®, Prabuddha Na*, 
Avirhotri Na% Pippalfiyana Na'*, Camasa Na®, Hari Ni® and Drumila Na® were 
holding discussions on self-knowledge. Nlrada intimated to the NSrayanas the will 
of the lord, who would have the Narayanas come down to the world to preach the 
secrets of yoga to people so that they may be liberated. The C^araya^as went to 
Vaikun^ha to take counsel from Visnu as to how to carry out the will of lord 8iva. 
Visnu, accompanied by the Niraya^as, went to KaiUsa to receive instructions from 
the Lord, and with His instructions the nine Nariyanas incarnated themselves in 
the form of the nine Nathas, uiz., Matsyendra, Goraksa, Gahini, Jvaiendra, 
Kari^a-pa, Carpata, Revana, Bhartr and Gopl-candra. It was settled that 
Matsyendra would be initiated by the Lord Himself, Goraksa, Carpati and 
Revana by Matsyendra, Gahini by Goraksa ; Jvaiendra would be initiated by the 
Lord, — Karina-pi, Bhartf and[]Gopi-candra by JvSlendra. (Vide Ch. 1.). 



LEGEND AND HISTORY 23^ 

according to the Marathi tradition may be illustrated with the 
help of the followitig chart ; 

Adi-nitha 

I 

I i [ . 

Umi Matsyendra Jslandhara-nStha 

I I I ~l 

Goraksa-nitha Caurangi- KanTpKa- Mainivat! 

I natha natha (Mother of GopT-eind) 

I”' , I , 

Gaini-natha Qarpatf-nStha. 

(Gahini-nfitha) , 

Nivrtti-nSth^. 

J 

I r' I 

JflSneivara Sopana-deva MuktS-bST. 

According to the chronology of Bahina Bal Adi-natha (Siva) 
taught the secrets of Yoga to Parvati and Matsyendra managed 
to hear them ; Matsyendra taught them to Gorakh-natha, he 
to Gahini, Gahini to Nivrtti-natha, he to Jnanesvara, Jnanesvara 
to Sac-cid-ananda and further to Vilvambhara, he to Raghava 
(Caitanya), he to Ke^va-caitanya, and Ke^ava to Bsvaji 
Caitanya, he to Tokoba (Tukarama) and Tokoba to Bahina 
Bal (1700 A.D.).* Another chronology runs thus : — 

Sakti 

I 

Siva 

( 

Ude (Second of the nine Nfithas, founder of the ' Pantha of the 
I 9 yogins.) 

Rudragan 

Jslandhar 

(who was an evil spirit, restored to reason and initiated). 

I 

Matsyendra Jslandhari (Pa) 

I 

Bhartr-nitha KinipS 

(Bairaga, son orRsji Bhoja) | 

Siddha-sangarl 

I i * I 

Gorakh-nStha Pangal (Rewal) Nima-nfitha Parasnathpuj 

Sivotora | 

Sons of Matsyendra (both Jainas) 

* Videt Srl-’jH&neivara-cariira by Mr, PaAgfirakara (Chapter on Guru- 
$amprad&ifa)f pp. 60-78, ^ Briggs^ loc. ci(. 



240 . 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Various lists of the nine Nathas are found also in the 
literature of the Santa poets. It will be easy to see from the 
above that as no strictly historical importance can be attached 
to the lists of the eighty-four Siddhas so also no historical 
importance can be attached to these chronologies of the 
Natha-gurus. 

According to the accounts found in Bengali, Mina-nath 
or Matsyendra-nath (the two being held identical according 
to the Bengali tradition) and Jalandharl-pa (more commonly 
known as the Hadi-siddha) were the direct disciples of 
Adi-nath or Siva ; Gorakh-nath was the disciple of Mina-nath 
and queen Mayanamati (mother of • Gopi-cand) was the 
disciple of Gorakh-nath ; Kanhu-pa or 
the^ifha-gurus*^"^ Kanu-pa was the disciple of Jalandharl-pa 
or Hadi-siddha, ’ who also initiated King 
Gopi-cand to the yogic order. Kanu-pa had his disciple 
Bail Bhadai. Many of the Natha Siddhas are referred to also 
in the Dharma-mangala literature. Sahadeva Cakravarti, as 
we shall see, made a regular mixture of the legends of the 
Natha literature and the Dharma literature. In many other 
texts of the Dharma literature we find the prominent Natha 
Siddhas and also other sages descending on earth, along 
with the various gods, on the occasion of some ritualistic and 
sacrificial ceremonies held in honour of the Dharma-thakura. 
In the Dharma-puja-vidhana we find the custom of 
worshipping many of these Natha Siddhas along with 
some gods, goddesses and demi-gods of the Dharmites.* 
The most prominent names, which we come acoross in 
the legends of the Natha literature of Bengal, are 
(1) Mina-nath, (2) Gorakh-nath, (3) Jalandhari-pa, 

^ tave yadi prthivite yaila har-gauri I 

mina-nath hadiphae ko^ania cakari !1 
mlna-naiher cakari kare jati gorakhai I 
hadiphar seVa kare kanapha jogai II 


2 


Dharma-p^j^*vidhana^ p, 133, 


Goraksa-vijaya, p. 10 



LEGEND AND HISTORY 


241 


(4) Kanu pa, (5) Mainamati and (6) Gopi-cand. Various 
are the legendary and mythical accounts that have 
grown round the ^names of these personalities in Nepal, 
Tibet, Bengal and in various other provinces of India. 
We need not enter into the details of these legends 
or the controversies of the historical and geographical 
questions pertaining to them ; a brief survey of the various 
accounts will, however, be found in the appendix (C). 


31-141 IB 



CHAPTER IX 

The Religion of the Natha Siddhas 

The religious views of the Natha Siddhas are as much 
obscured by the insufficiency and anomaly of accounts as is 
the history of the whole cult. The distinctive features of 
their yogic practices as also the theories behind them are not 
found explained systematically in any of the Sanskrit or 
non-Sanskrit texts, associated with the cult somehow or other. 
The Sanskrit texts are mainly texts on Hatha-yoga in general 
and the vernacular texts are generally poetical texts on 
legends and myths. The method of treatment of the present 
writer has, therefore, been to analyse and examine all the 
available data ^lnd to give a systematic exposition of them 
80 as to give a general idea about the nature of the cult. 

(i) General Air of Supernaturalism 

The general religious nature of Nathism is characterised 
by a wide-spread belief in occult power attained through 
the practice of yoga. All the legends are permeated through 
and through with a spirit of supernaturalism more in the 
form of the display of magical feats and sorcery by the 
Siddhas than in the form of occasional interference from the 
gods and goddesses, or any other supernatural being. 
Occultism is an inseparable ingredient of populeu: religious 
consciousness, — nay, it is often the salt of popular religious 
belief. In the history of Indian religion occultism is 
associated with religious beliefs and practices from the time 
of the AtharOa-Veda, and henceforth it is associated with 
all esoteric religious systems in the Hindu, Buddhist and 
other religious schools., In Pali literature we find occasional 



THE religion of THE NATHA SIDDHAS 243 

Reference to the belief in the I ddhis (i.e., rddhi) ox occult 
powers attainable through religious practices. We find 
frequent reference to the ten supernatural powers (dasa-bala) 
and also to the six supernatural faculties {abhijna) .which are 
attainable by a Buddhist adept. Patanjali, the great pro- 
pounder of yoga, who dealt primarily with the psychological 
aspect of yoga, also devoted a full chapter of the yoga-sutra 
to the different kinds of supernatural powers (oibhutis) 
attainable through concetration of mind on different objects 
or on different centres of the body. The eight supernatural 
faculties, viz., Anima (the power of becoming as small as an 
atom), Mahima (the power of becoming big), Laghima (the 
power of assuming excessive lightness at will), Garima (the 
power of becoming as heavy as one likes), Prapti (the power 
of obtaining everything at will), Pra\amya (the power of 
obtaining all objects of pleasure at will), liitva (the power of 
obtaining supremacy over everything) and Vaiitoa (the power 
of subduing, fascinating or bewitching) are well known in 
the school of yoga.‘ It is held that through the practices 
of Hatha-yoga “ the gross body begins to acquire something 
of the nature of the subtle body and to possess something 
of its relations with the life-energy ; that becomes a greater 
force more powerfully felt and yet capable of a lighter and 
freer and more resolvable physical actions, powers which 
culminate in the Hathayogic siddhis or extraordinary powers 
of garima, mahimS anima and laghima."^ These powets 
are generally known as the eight powers of lord Siva himself, 
who is the lord of yoga. 

The Natha Siddhas (including MayanSmati, who too was 
versed in the mystic knowledge of yoga) displayed diroughortt 
these eight supernatural powers. Thus we find in the 
Gore^sa-Vijaya that when Siva granted the boon to a' ^hitesk 

1 To these eight another is often added, which is fCamauasSyifDa (i.<^., the 
power of suppressing desire, self-denial or mortification). 

* The Synthens of Yoga by Aurobindo Ghose, Arya^ 1918» pp. 404-405, 



244 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

that she should get Gorakh as her husband, the great Yogin 
Gorakh assumed the form of a child of six months before 
the princess and expressed the desire of sucking her breasts- 
The princess got offended and insisted on having Gorakh 
as her husband ; Gorakh could not agree to her proposal, 
but gave her his old patched and ragged garment and asked 
her to wash it in water and to drink that water. This would, 
, he assured, give her a son. She obeyed 

Display of super- 

natural power by the and the woids of GotakK camc to be true. 

Natha Sidahas. i i i * • i 

After that Gorakh was sitting under a 
Baktila tree and at that time Kanu-pa was passing in the sky 
above. Gorakh could know of it by the shadow of the 
Siddha falling below ; he got offended and sent his pair of 
wooden sandals to go up and bind the arrogant Siddha down 
and the order of Gorakh was instantaneously carried out. 
Again, when Gorakh resolved to enter into the country of 
ICadali in disguise of a Brahmin in order to rescue his Guru, 
he sent Langa and Maha-langa (two attendants on Gorakh) 
to Visva-karma asking the latter to supply him at once with 
a golden sacred thread, a pair of golden ear-rings, golden 
frontal marks, golden umbrella, stick, etc., and everything 
was readily and most obediently supplied by Visva-karma. 
When Gorakh again demanded for the necessaries for assuming 
the form of a dancing girl, Visva-karma supplied him 
with all golden articles at once. The Nathas seldom walked 
on earth, they moved in the air and would traverse hundreds 
of miles within the twinkle of an eye. To remove the 
illusion of Guru Mlna-nath and to recover him to his sense, 
Gorakh-nath displayed various yogic powers before the Guru. 
He first split into two Binduk-nath (who was born to Mlna- 
nath in Kadali), then washed his (Binduk-nath’s) body in 
the manner of a washerman and dried it up in the sun, — 
and then revived him once more by the fillip of his fingers. 
Mayanamatl and Hadi-siddha displayed magical powers at 
every step in all the versions of the story of Gopl-cand. They 



THE RELIGION OF IHE NATHA SIDDHAS 245 

could know everything by their dhiyana {i.e., dhyana, 
meditation) or maha-jmna (great mystic knowledge) and 
could do anything and everything they liked with the help 
of a mere Hum\ara (i.e the sound of the mystic syllable 
‘hum’) or such other Tantric mystic syllables.' At the time 
of Mayanamati’s initiation by Gorakh in her childhood, 
Gorakh made a full grown banian tree from its seed within 
the time of twelve Dandas.^ Again, twelve crores of Yogins 
with thirteen crores of disciples, who assembled on the occa- 
sion of Mayana’s initiation, and whose assemblaige occupied 
the space that could be traversed in six months, could be 
served with the rice that was cooked from a single grain of 
paddy, — and yet after all had eaten to their heart’s content, 
the food for one Siddha was still left in the earthen pot.’ 

In the description of Hadi-siddha we find that he makes 
ear-rings of the sun and the moon, and lord Indra himself 
fans him ; he cooks his food in the moon and eats his food 
on the back of the tortoise, — and goddess Laksmi herself 
prepares food for him. The five daughters of Indra remove 
the leaves on which he takes his food and Suvacani' supplies 
him with betel-nut, the Naga-girls of the Netherland prepare 
his tobacco-pipe and Meghanal, son of Yama, comes forward 
to serve him with a fan. He walks with 
his golden sandals and if he gets hold of 
Yama he beats him severely. ° Before 

Gopl-cand agreed to accept Hadi-siddha as his Guru, 
he (Gopl-cand) wanted to be convinced of the yogic 
powers of the latter. In one of the versions of the 
song we find that at the challenge of the king, the Siddha 

^ In the Rangpur version of the story we always find that or MayanSmatl 

did everything by the muttering of tudu iudu ; tadu iu4u hete, however, represents 
the muttering of the mystic syllables. 

^ One Danda is approximate to 24 minutes. 

3 Gopl-candrer PatneaTt (C. U.), p. 344.- 

♦ An indigenous demi-goddess of Bengal; 

® Copheandrer Gan, BujhSn Khan^Ot (C. U,) p. 61. 



246r OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

at once got ready, rolled thrice on the ground and got 
his bo'dy pasted with eighty maunds of dust, — made 
the rope round his loins with eighty maunds of jute, put 
on a cap made of eighty four maunds of iron, held 
in hand an iron stick weighing eighty three maunds, and 
put on a pair of iron sandals weighing eighty two maunds. 
The Hadi got ready and came out of his cell and drank 
water with twenty two maunds of pea. He stretched his 
hands which reached the sky above; he stretched his legs 
which reached the Netherland below ; the hairs of his body 
stood like plam trees and the cap on his head reached 
the mountain Kailasa. When the Hadi Siddha began to 
move, mother earth began to quake with cracking sound ; 
when the Hadi stood up his head struck against heaven 
above ; when he began to move with a broom, a broken spade, 
a baskfet to carry rubbish, and an earthen water jar on head, 
he crossed forty two Krosas' in one single step, and wher- 
ever he placed his feet, the foot-prints made large tanks. 
When he arrived at the port of Kalinka, he first made a 
Hum\ara for broom, and innumerable brooms poured down 
from above and began to cleanse the market automatically ; 
then he made another Humkara for baskets and innumer- 
able baskets began to remove rubbish automatically ; when 
he made HumfzSra for the spade, innumerable spades began 
to scrape the ground automatically ; similarly innumerable 
earthen jars began to pour down water. Hadipa then 
went to the house of Mayana and asked from her something 
to eat. Mayana asked him to take his bath and then to 
take meal. Hadipa went to the river to bathe, released in 
the river a piece of torn cloth with twelve knots and thereby 
the water was dried up; the merchants in their stranded 
boats began to weep; fish, shark, dolphin, orocodile — all 
began to cry in the dry bed of the river ; Hadipa took pity on 


* A Kroia is a little mote than two tniles. 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 


247 


them, presaed the piece of cloth with twelve knots and the 
river became once more overfleoded with water. He then 
entered the coconut-garden of the king and sat on his yogic 
posture and all coconuts dropped down before him ; he spilt 
them up with his nail, drank water and ate up the nut and 
the coconuts returned to the trees and remained hanging 
just as before. By that time May ana finished her cooking 
and invited Hadipa to take meal ; the meal prepared was 
taken by the Hadi all at once, — but that could not appease 
his hunger. He then took seven bags of dried paddy, three 
bags of salted onion and swallowed the whole thing with 
twenty- two jms of water.' Similar other magical feats were 
displayed by the Hadi as proof of his yogic power. He cut 
a man into two and revived him at will within the twinkle 
of an eye ; he transferred the head of queen Aduna to the 
trunk of queen Paduna and vice versa and again set every- 
thing right. When he was buried under the stable, he tore 
oS all his bondage of rope and chain by means of a single 
Hvm\ara ; the chain of hand became transformed into a 
rosary of beads; the heavy stone on his chest became 
the outer garment of yoga {yoga-patia) ; the rope with 
which he was bound became the rope of his loins ; and 
the grave was transformed into an under-ground cave 
where Hadi remained absorbed in his yoga-meditation.® 
These are some of the types of magical powers displayed 
by the Siddhas, mainly by Gorakh, Hadipa and Mayanamatl. 
We need not multiply instances. SimiW legends of 
magical power displayed by the Natha Siddhas are found 
abundantly also in the Natha literature of other vernaculars. 
This curious blending of supernaturalism and occultism 
with the most realistic description of the story and the keen 
human interest involved in the pathos of the great renuncia- 

^ Vide Gophcandrer Gan» Bujhati Khanda (C. U.), pp. 80-85, 

C/. also Gopt-candrer Sannyas, pp. 440'44l, 

2 Gopl-candrer SannySs, 418* 



248 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


tion of a young king like Gopl-candra, has infused Natha 
literature with a peculiar literary charm. 

In the literary field, at least so far as Bengali literature 

is concerned, this emphasis on occultism in the Natha literature 

sharply makes it distinct from the literature belonging to 

similar esoteric schools, we mean the 

ence in tone between literature of the Buddhist Sahajiyas, the 
Nitha literature and \/- rfl", .1 ni i i 

Sahajiys literature. Vaisnava bahajiyas, the bauls and such 

other schools of Bengal. We have seen 

before how a spirit of revolt against occultism and outward 

show of austere practices characterises the literature of the 

different Sahajiya sects including the literature of the Sofi 

poets. Very frequently and severely did Kabir criticise 

the sect of the Gorakh-yogins in his poems ; so have also 

his followers including Nanak, the Sikh prophet. 

Judging from the religious point of view such occultism 
represents only the popularly adumbrated superficial feature 
of Nathism. It is not also a fact that such display of super- 
natural power characterises all literature belonging to the Natha 
cult. In some of the Hindi texts on Gorakh and Matsyendra 
and in some texts of Hindi literature ascribed to Gorakh- 
nath we find the same spirit of heterodoxy 

Preponderance -of • £ J • i c? i •• 

supernaturalism is IS touncl in the Sahajiya literature, and 

feature of Nat there the Nathas have joined .with the Saha- 

jiyas in their spirit of criticism. The 
perusal of an early Hindi text like the Gorakh-^hodh will 
tempt one to believe that there is no difference between 
Nathism and the various other Sahajiya cults in their religious 
attitude. The other fragments of literature ascribed to 
Gorakh and to Carpata (who also has been included in the list 
of the Siddhas and is well-known in Hindi and Punjabi 
Natha literature as a great Siddha of the N^ha Sect) will lead 
one to the same conclu3ion.^ In the Sanskrit texts on yoga, 

J For such literature ascribed to Gorakh and Carpata, see Dr. Mohan Singh *8 
work on Gorakh-nath. 



THE religion of THE NATHA SIDDHAS 


249 


wHich are ascribed to the authorship of Gorakh-nith, or are 
traditionally associated with the names of Gdrttkh and are 
believed to represent the religious views and practices of the 
Natha-yogins, we often find criticism levelled againet other 
orthodox religious systems from the stand-point of yoga. We 
may for instemce refer to the Gora\sa-siddh5nta-satngtaha,^ 
where we find many orthodox schools severely criticised 
from the point of vleW of yoga and there the supremacy of 
the yoga-school has been established with reference to the 
texts belonging to various yogic schools.^ In the sixth 
chapter of the Siddha-slddhanta-paddhati we find description 
of the real yogin, and in the fifth chapter of the Gora\sd- 
samhita we find an elaborate description of the final state of 
yoga. From these descriptions it will appear that the 
state of non-duality, bereft of all disturbance of mentation, 
is the final state of yoga. On this point these yogins will 
appear homogeneous in spirit with the Buddhist Sahajiya 
yogins. In the small texts, entitled Amanaslia-oivarana 
and Yoga- bija ^ belonging to the yogic cult of the Siddheis, 
we find the same spirit of criticism.^ A very faint echo of 
this voice of yoga literature in general is sometimes found 
also in Bengali Nstha literature, where the path of yoga is 
eulogised to king Gopi-catrd either by his mother MayanS- 
matl or by his Guru Hadi-siddha.® 


1 The text is a compendiutn of news and views on the yogic cult of Goraksa 
collected from the Sanskrit texts that are traditionally associated with the cult as 
embodying the doctrines of the cult. 

2 Vide, pp. 1-9 ; 12 et seq ; 23-24 ; 49, 54, etc. 

GopI-nSth KavirSja's edition, 

C(. also Kaula jnana nirnaya ascribed to Matsyendra, particuilrly Akula~vlra~ 
tantra included in it. 

3 The two texts are published in the Vasumatl series of Bengal in a collection of 
many small yogic texts published under the general caption of Ssstra-Saiaka. 

* Cf. Amanaska-vivaranat verse No. I. 

5 Cf, Gopi-candrer GSn (C U., Part I), p. 70; Gopl-candrer Sannyaa {Q, lj,f 
Part III, p. 413^ etc. 

32 -141 IB 



-250 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


It will be doing the worst sort of injustice to Nsthism 
as a popular religioiu sect to hold that in its origin and 
nature it had nothing in it worth considering bht the practices 
of Hatha-yoga with the only end of attaining some occult 
powers. It is the wild, though sweet, imagination of the 
uninitiated village poets that is responsible for the growth 
of so much occultism in the Natha cult at the cost of the 
truth in the cult which is certainly worth considering. Behind 
the legends and traditions found in popular poetry we 
occasionally find glimpses of light, with the help of which 
we shall try in the following pages to catch at the inner 
truth of the cult. 

(n) The final End of the Nstha Siddhas 

What was the final aim of the Natha Siddhas and what 
was the means {Sadhana) through which this end was to be 
attained ? If we are to give the answer in a nutshell, we 
should say that the final aim of the Natha Siddhas was the 
attainment of Sivahood in and through the attainment of 
immortality, and the means of attaining it was primarily 
Hatha-yoga. The question of escaping death may be taken 
to be the most salient feature of Hatha-yoga in general as 
contrasted to the other forms of yoga, viz.. Mantra-yoga, 
Laya-yoga and Raja-yoga. The latter three schools are 
idealistic in their philosophical outlook and, therefore, lay 
the greatest emphasis on the final arrest of the mind and the 
attainment of liberation thereby (liberation from the whirl of 
coming and going) ; the emphasis of Hatha-yoga seems to be 
primarily on the physical or physiological practices which 
remove disease, decay and death. In the description of the 
benefits attainable through the practices of yoga we frequently 
meet with statements that through such and such yogic 
practices the yogin gets rid of all diseases, his old body 
becomes rejuvenated, his body becomes changeless like a 



THE religion of the NATHA SibDhAS 


2 $i 


mountain ; he becomes a victor over Kdla (i.e., time) and a 
deceiver of Ksla ; he becomes a victor over Death {mrtyufiiaya). 
Patanjali, the great propounder of yoga, gives Hatha* 
yoga but a subsidiary place — ^it is resorted to only for 
gaining a control over the physical and the phy8iologic2J 
systems, and this control necessarily affects psychological 
states and conditions, and a perfect control over the 
psychological states leads to final liberation. In this final state 
of liberation the Purusa or the ‘ seer ’ remains in his sheer 
essential nature. This final aim of yoga as the fined arrest 
of mind has often been admitted also by Hatha-yoga, eind 
in some of the standard texts Hatha-yoga has been made 
subservient to Raja-yoga {i.e., the yoga par excellence, 
which is the yoga of meditation) ; ^ but considering the 
general tone of Hatha-yoga it seems that the very approach 
of Hatha-yoga was somewhat different from the approach of 
the other schools of yoga. There is indeed the question of 
liberation in Hatha-yoga, — ^but here the conception of libera- 
tion itself is different from that of the other schools of 
thought. Liberation here means immortality first in a perfect 
body {siddha-deha) and then in a divine body (divya-deha), 
and this is the Siddhi or the perfection after which the 
Siddhas aspired. 

The final aim of the Natha Siddhas is JiVan-mul^H at 

, , liberation while living, and this state of 

Jivan-mutiti or i 

immortality in a per- hbcTation is what is meant by immortality, 
aim of ^ the Natha^ While the other schools of thought regard 
the final dissolution of the body or its final 
dissociation from the spirit indispensable for liberation, the 
Siddhas seek liberation in a transformed or transmaterialised 
body, which is the perfect body. What is this parfect body 
or the divine bodyP It is an indestructible spiritual body. 


k^valam rtja’HOgaya halha-vidyopadiiyate II 

Hatha-yoga-ptadipika, ( 1 '2). 



1^1 


obscurIe religious CULTfe 


absolutely free from the principles of defilement or the 
principles of asuddha-maya ; but it is associated with 
principles of visuddha-maya which prevents it from 
becoming absolutely static and acts as the absolutely 
purified dynamic principle for its further evolution through 
subtler stages to lead it to the final state of para-mu\ti. The 
yogins in their perfect body are prompted by the principles 
of visuddha-maya to benevolent activities rendering spiritual 
guidance to innumerable religious aspirers, — and this state is 
the fittest state for becoming a Guru or spiritual preceptor. It 
is for this reascm that the Siddhas are the true preceptors in 
the world. Further, due to the c^bsolute dissociation of the 
asuddha-maya these benevolent activities of the Siddhas 
cannot any more bind them down to the world of suffering. 
This active state of the Siddha, which helps the religious 
aspirers of the world on the one hand and evolves its 
own final state of para-muhjti on the other, may 
v^y well be compared to the Bodhisattvahood of the 
Buddhists, where there is the principle of activity in the 
form of universal compassion, which uplifts the suffering 
beings on the one hand, and, on the other hand, 
makes the Bodhisattva march forward through the ten 
stages of Bodhisattva-hhumi towards the final goal of 
Puddhahopd. 

In the Yoga-Vija, a small yogic text, we find that the 
body U of two kinds, viz., unripe (apakva) and ripe (pakva). 
The unripe body is the body not disciplined by yoga, and 
the ripe body is the body disciplined by yoga. Through the 
fire of yoga the body becomes supra -material and above 
all sorrows and sufferings, while the unripe 

The ripe body and . • l L J f i- i i 

the unripe body, material body of ordinary people becomes 
the cause of all sorrow and sufferings. 
Such a yoga body {yoga-deha) is rare even to the gods; it is a 
body bereft of all limitations and bondage and at the same 
time possessing great powers ; it is limitless like the sky but 



THE ReLiGION or the NATHA SIDDHAS 


253 


purer even than the sky.^ The great yogin with his perfect 
body moves in the world according to his own will, and 
as this perfect body is produced through the burning away 
of his physical body through the fire of yoga there is no 
further death for him. Where an ordinary man Jives (in his 
physical form) the yogin is dead, — and where there is the 
death for all (in the physical form ) there is no death for the 
yogin. He has no duty of his own, but at the same time 
is not defiled by any activity, — he is liberated while living 
— and is always living in his true body, which is bereft of 
all defilement.^ A deathless ripe body of this type is the first 
requisite for a Siddha; for such a ripe body helps the 
Siddhas in attaining the first stale of Divya-deha or 
Para-mul^ti. 

It seems that as pre-eminently a Saivite school the aim 
of the Natha cult was the attainment of Sivahood or the state 
of Mahesvara. Immortality is recognised to be the quint- 


1 apak^ah paripakvai ca dvi-vidha dehinah srriftah I 
apakt^a yoga^hlndsiu pak,vd yogena dehinah II 
pakvd yogagnind dehi ajadah ioka-varjitah 1 
jadas tat pdrthivo jneyah apakpo duhkhado hhavet II 
ianrena jitdh sarve iariratn yogihhir jitam 1 
tat kotham k^rute tesdrp sarva-duhkhddikam phalam II 
mahd-hhuidni iaitvdni sarphrtdni h.ramena ca I 
sapta-dhatumayo deho dagdho yogd-gnind ianaih II 
deVair api na lahhyaie yoga^deho mahdbalah II 
cheda-bandhair vimukto' sau ndna-iahti-dharah purah I 
yathd^hflias tathd dehah dhfiidd api nirmalah II 
Verses 33, 34, 46, 48, 49 and 50. 

Vasuznati edition (in the collection of &d9ira4a!tahfi) , 
sarnsarec ca punas idni svecchayd \tjitendriyah 1 
mara^om tasya kivi^ devt pfcchasindu-nibha-nane (I 
ndaau maranam dpnoti punar yoga-’balena tat I 
puraiva mrta evdsatt mftaaya marariarn k^tah II 
marariam yatra sarve^dm iatrdsau sakhi jtvaii I 
yatra jivanti mUdhas te iatrdsau mfyate sadd II 
kartavyarn naiva tasydsti kjtcndsau na lipyate I 
jivan-muktah sadd svasthah sarva-do^a-vivarjtiah li 

/bid., verses (53-56>, 



254 06SCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

essence of the ultimate nature of the Lord ; to attain the state 
of Para-mul^ti in and through the state of 
of ]'wan~mu\ii is, therefore, virtually the same 

as to attain the state of Mahesvara. It is 
for this reason that in common belief we find great Natha 
Siddhas like Matsyendra and Gorakh often identified with 
Siva or Mahesvara. It will not be correct to think therefore 
that the Natha cult is essentially an atheistic school of 
alchemy. The real significance of the attainment of immor- 
tality is the attainment of the state of the Great Lord. 

The legendary accounts, given in the Natha literature of 
the life and activities of the N^ha Siddhas, including king 
Gopl-cand’s mother Mayanamati and king Gopl-cand him* 
self, will corroborate our statement on the final aim of the 
Natha yogins and their general religious attitude. The myths, 
legends, traditions and stories have all behind them the 
quest of immortality, — an escape from the clutching jaws 
of decay and the cruel snatch of death. It is easily detectable 
, j in the stories of the Natha literature that 

trated by the stories what differentiates the Siddhas from 

of Natha literature. . , . I 

ordinary men is their power or control over 
death and decay. Yama, the king of death, had no hold 
over the Natha Siddhas, and whenever he, in the course of 
the execution of his ordinary daily duties, forgot this impor- 
tant fact and transgressed his power and foolishly extended 
his hands to any of the Siddhas, the poor Lord of Death 
was taught a very good lesson by the Siddhas. In the 
Gorak^a-vijaya or the Mma-cetana we find that when Gorakh 
heard from Kanu-pa of the captivity of his Guru Mina-nath 
in the land of Kadali in the hands of wicked women, he took 
up his mystic bag of cloth {siddha-jhuli), put on his loose 
garment and the pair of wooden sandals, held his staff in 
hand and at once entered the city of Yama. Yama was 
seated on his throne in the open assembly and at the sight 
pf Gorakh he rose from his seat in reverence and humbly 



THE RELIGION OF IHE NATHA SIDDHAS 255 

enquired about the cause of his (Gorakh’s) sudden visit to 
the city of the dead. Gorakh took Yama severly to task for 
summoning his Guru Mina-nath and thus poking his 
(Yama’s) nose in the affairs of the immortal Siddhas. 
Gorakh further remarked that if Yama woufd have the 
audacity of meddling with the affairs of the Siddhas he 
(Gorakh) would drag him (Yama) to Brahma himself and 
let him (Yama) learn from Brahma the exact limitations of 
his capacity. Gorakh rebuked Yama strongly in a high 
spirit, threatened him with an immediate order of dismissal 
and the ruin of his capital ; and as a matter of fact when 
Gorakh stood up angrily with his hanging bag and loose 
garment of patched cloth and began to utter the HumJ^ara, 
Yama began to tremble with his whole kingdom. Yama got 
afraid, felt helpless and immediately lay before Gorakh all 
the files of official records ; Gorakh examined them one by 
one, picked up the file containing the decree on his Guru, — 
effaced the name of his Guru from the list of the dead, upset 
the decree of Yama and then left the city with a strict 
warning.* 

The story of the fall of Mlna-nSth among the women of 
Kadali signifies that worldly enjoyment in the form of the 
satisfaction of carnal desires leads a man to disease and 
decay ; and death in that case becomes the inevitable catas- 
trophe of the drama of life. The self-oblivion of Mlna-nath 
symbolises man’s oblivion of his true immortal nature ; — 
and the charms of Kadali represents the snares of life. What 
was repeatedly emphasised by Gorakh in his enigmatic songs 
in the guise of the dancing girl to recall his self-forgotten 
Guru to his true judgment is that the life of pleasure in 
company of beautiful women leads to the inevitable end of 
death, while the only way of escaping death and being 
immortal even in this very life and body is to have recourse 


> Gorak^a^vijaya, pp. 45-48. 



256 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


to the path of yoga.’ This is the cardinal truth which 
Mlna-nath, inspite of all his foririer Sadhana, lost sight of 
through the curse of goddess Durga, the curse symbolising 
the eternal curse of Nescience on humanity : and this is the 
cardinal truth which was variously explained through 
various imageries by the worthy disciple Gorakh to his Guru. 
In his songs as the dancing girl Gorakh repeatedly pointed 
out that the Guru was going to die a most ordinary death 
in the company of women ; he (Gorakh) therefore urged him 
to have recourse to the yogic processes of making the body 
perfect, which has been spoken as Kaya-sadhana^ or the 
cultivation of the body through the processes of yoga. This 
Kaya-sadhana is the most important thing in the Natha litera- 
ture and Kaya-siddhi or the perfection of body may be taken 
to be the sum mum bonum after which the yogins were 


aspiring. 

It may also be pointed out that the original question of 
Durga (who may be taken t o be the Prakrti or the embodi- 


The original question. 


ment of the principle of phenomenalism) to 
Siva (who is the changeless truth in its 


ultimate form), with which the Goraksa-vijaya, or the Mtna- 


cetena begins, is, — “Why is it, my lord, that thou art 


^ Cf. iomha sama purusa je nahi kpna deae I gali gela mohdraa ySti mSira 

ses II kfidaltr rajS tumhi mma adhik^rl I ulhiie nd para mdtra Spana aamvari II 

addha aSdha dpand k.dyd mddaleta bole I sarva dhan hdrSild kSminir feo/e II 

guru haiyS nS hujha apanar bo! I ^5v5 aukhdila iohmdr ^ammlr k^l II abhay 

hhSnd^r guru nirbhaye nila hart I audha ghar grha iumi rahicha pdaari 11 \5yd 

addha hjdyd addha guru mocandar ! [fumi guru mocandar jagata tiuar II ] etc. /bit/., 
pp. 21 et seq. Cf. also pp. 106 et aeq. 

2 Cf. rrdcanti je gorakhndth ghdgharer role I 
[kdyd addha k^yd addha mddale hena bole II ] 
navin huh.de jena adha adha bole I 

kayd addha \dyd addha mandirde bole II Goraksa-vijaya, pp. 94-95. 
addha addha dpand kaya rnddaleta hole I 
aarVa dhan hdraild i^aminir hole II 

* 

haya addha haya addha guru mocandar I 
[tumi guru mocandar jagata livar II /bit/, p. 98. 
hdyd addha haya addha ahraf putra ball 1 Ibid. 130, 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 


257 


immortal, and mortal am 1 ? Advise me the truth, O lord, 
so that I also majr be immortal for ages.’ It was in answer 
to this question of Durga or Parvatl that the secret of Hatha- 
yoga was expounded by Lord Siva to his beloved consort, 
which the first Siddha Mina-nSth managed to hear in the 
form of a fish, and which was afterwards spread and 
popularised by the latter all over the world. 

This quest of immortality and the secret of its attainment 
through yoga is the pivot round which the whole cycle of the 
stories of Manik-candra and his son Gopi-candra revolved. 
There we find that when Mayanamati came to know that due 
to the spells employed by the subjects of the king through 
the practice of some malevolent Tantric rites king Manik- 
candra was about to fall a prey to Death, she hastened to the 
kingdom and asked the king to learn Mahajmna (i.e., the 
secrets of yoga) from her, which, she repeatedly assured, 
would enable him to defy the decree of Death ; but the king 
declined and as a result he met with the ordinary mortal end. 
It has been said that the disregard of MahajMna was the plea 
for Yama for extending his hands on to the king.^ However, 
after the death of the king Yama sent one of his officers with 
summons to bring the life (;ru = jiua) of the king ; Mayana in 
her meditation saw the messenger of Yama near the king 
and offered him a pony in exchange of the life of the king. 
The next day two officers came, and Mayana bribed 
them with the life of a maid-servant ; on the fourth day 
came four, who were bribed with the life of Mayana’s 
brother; on the fifth day again came five officers, and 
Mayana offered them an amount of five hundred rupees in 
cash for buying sweet-meats and eating to their heart’s 

1 tumhi feene tara goaaHi amhi k^ne mari [ 

hena tattva hflha dev joge joge tari II Gorak^a-Vijaya, p. 12. 

* C/. tirir gharer jfian dehhi raja jfian koile hel& I 
ai dine hhaiuya yam pati gyala khySJa il 
GopUcandrer Gan (C.U., Part I), p. 12. 

33-14113 



258 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


content. But this time Goda*yama, the messenger, would 
not be satisfied without the life of the king. At this MayanS 
flew into rage and began to tremble, — she at once muttered 
within the Maha-mantra, trauisformed herself through her yogic 
power into Candl and into Kali with her large sword ikhsda ^ 
Skt. k.hadga) and attacked the whole host of the Yamas, 
caught hold of some of them and belaboured them severely 
and the Yamas flew away somehow with their lives. Goda- 
yama (who seems to have been the leader of the party) was 
in a fix ; helpless as he was, he, with his elder brother 
Avala-yama, went to Siva. With the advice of Siva the 
Yamas extracted from the king his life in the absence of 
Mayana who was sent for water and they flew away in the 
form of golden black-bees. Mayana could know of this from 
the river and at once pursued Goda-yama and entered the 
palace of Death. Through her spell all the inhabitants of the 
palace at once got attacked with severe headache, and some 
flew away in fear. By her Hund^ara Mayana caught hold of 
Goda-yama, bound him down and began to beat him 
severely with an iron rod. Goda, however, begged most 
humbly Mayana’s mercy and agreed to give her back the 
life of her husband, which, Goda said, was kept in the 
market place. Mayana followed Goda, who somehow 
managed to slip from her hands and escaped. Goda went 
straight to the queen of Y ama and sought her protection ; she 
took pity on Goda and hid him in a corner covering him with 
straw ; but Mayana could know everything in her meditation 
and chased him there in the form of a serpent. Goda 
transformed himself into a mouse, Mayana chased it in the 
form of lacs of cats; Goda became a pigeon, — Mayana 
pursued it in the form of innumerable hawks. In this way 
Goda-yama tried to escape by transforming himself into 
innumerable beings in land, water and air, — but he did not 
succeed. Mayana at last caught hold of Goda who was 
compelled to let loose the life of Manik-candra. Lord Siva 



tHE RELIGION OF THE NATHa Slbb^AS 

and Gorakh, Mayana’s Guru, however, interfered in the 
matter and the prestige of Death was somehow saved by 
coming to respectable terms with Mayana. The whole story, 
in its full-fledged form, is nothing but a popular myth ; but 
the spirit that is hidden behind and serves as the nucleus of 
the whole detail is that a perfect yogin conquers death com- 
pletely, — ^and so much is his control over death that he may 
deal with Death at any time in any way he pleases.' 

We may further note that Mayana became Sati with her 
husband, but Are could not burn Mayana. At the instance 
of his queens, Gopl-cand put Mayana to cruel and direful 
tests. She was thrown into fire, but even her garment was 
not stained with smoke ; she was drowned in water bouiid 
within a bag, but mother Ganga herself came forward to wel- 
come her in her (Ganga ’s) lap ; she walked on a bridge made 
of hair ; she walked on the edge of a razor ; she was shut up 
for full seven days and nights within a boiler containing 
boiling oil, which was being heated from below constantly ; 

^ The story of Mayanamatl's initiation by GorakK>nith in her childhood shows 
that Gorakh was moved at the idea that even a chaste and beautiful girl like 
MayanS should meet with the same fate as other ordinary mortals, and he then 
initiated her into the cult of yoga to make her immortal. After her initiation Gorakh 
declared, — ‘"Death himself has now given a written bond (not to extend his hands 
over Mayana).” He further declared that Mayana would never be burnt in hre, 
drowned in water, pierced through by any weapon ; if she should die in the day-time 
he (Gorakh) would not let the sun go, but would bind him down, — if she should 
die at home, he would not let Yama go, but bind him down,— if she should die of a 
cut from a flat sword (^/rada = a large sacrificial knife), he would bind goddess 
Candl (who generally bears such a weapon) down,— MayanS would survive even the 
sun and the moon. iaVe jfian kflhe gorakh anadir tatlVa I aparxe jam rSjde lekhi dila 
khata II tave jfian k^hi dila hrahmo’jfidn hull I jamer sahite raja k^rila koldktili i 
maindmatir name lekha pkelila phariyd I dddi ak^ar jfidn k^he korna-tale niyd II 
agnie nd jdve poda pdnite nd hae tal I lohdr astra nd phufiva iarir k^ial li guru 
hole dine made maendmati di I surya bandhi mdngdiva edd-edi ndi I rdtrite pa^iyd 
made maendmati di I candra hdndhi mdngdiva eda edi ndhi II badite padiya 
made waindmati di I jam bandhi mdngdiva eda-edi ndhi II [khdndde fcafS gele 
mayandmati di 1 candire handhiyd laimu edd-e4i ndi II dmi di/dm brahma-jddn 
iomard deya bar I candra surya marane jiydVa Iddddipa har 11 J Gopt candrer Pdvpcdtit 
(C.U. Partll). p. 345. 



260 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULtS 


she crossed all the rivers in the boat of the husk of a corn, 
but nothing could bring about her death, neither was any 
part of her body damaged in any way.^ Mayana herself 
declared to her son Gopi-cand, — “By the practice of the 
mystic knowledge one becomes immortal, (and the course of 
life will retard towards immortality from its natural flow 
towards death and decay) just like the current of the tide- 
wave running backward. Through the boon granted by 
Gorakh-nath 1 am deathless ; 1 can remain in the void for 
full fourteen ages, — in water for full thirteen ages, in the fire 
for twelve years. When the creation will sink below and 
finally dissolve, and the eath will be not and there will 
remain only all-pervading water, the sun and the moon will 
set for ever and the whole universe will be destroyed, — 1 
shall float on for ever, — 1 shall have no death.’’* 

Jalandhari-pa or Hadi-siddha also gave ample proof of his 
control over Death. In describing the extraordinary yogic 
power of Hadipa Mayana says to Gopl-cand that whenever 
Hadipa chances to catch hold of Yama or any of his officers 
he beats them severely for full eight hours, and there is no 
escape for Yama from the hands of the Hadi.* When Gopi- 
cand accepted Hadipa as his Guru, renounced the world 
and left the palace with his Guru, the king was imable to 
keep pace with the Guru in the path through the dense 
forest, created by the Huml^ara of the Hadi and he weis 
lagging behind. The police officers of Yama, so to speak, 
availed themselves of this opportunity and attacked Gopi- 
cand and extracted his life from him^ and went to the city of 

^ See Gopi'-catidrer PaT{icali, (‘C. U. Part II), pp. 366-369; Govindo'-candra* 
gito (Mr. Sll’s edition) , pp. 71-73; Gopi-condrer Gan, Bujhan Khanda, (C. U., 
Part I), pp. 87-130, etc. 

2 Govinda^candra Git (Mr. SlKs edition), pp. 70-71. 

3 daudiya hyadSite jadi jamer lagya pay I cilacangi diya jamaktt tin pahar ^i/ay II 

tnUriya dhariya jamaka sikhay I hyana sadhya nai jamer palaiya edSy II 

Gopl-candrer Gan (C. U., Part I), p. 61. 

^ It may be remembered in this connection that in the ordinary course the 
king had only eighteen years’ longevity. 



26 i 


THE RI^LIGION OF THE NATHA SlDDHAS 

Death. After sometimes Hadipa looked back and found 
the king dead. The yogin flew into fierce rage» ordered all 
the tigers of the forest to guard the corpse of the king and 
himself went straight to the'city of the dead, inflicted severe 
punishment on all, beginning with the king to the lowest of 
jhe officer. The king of Death begged his (Hadipa s) 
pardon and promptly ordered his officers to return the life 
of king Gopi-cand.^ These popular legends are significant. 
Of course the imagination of the poets has often exaggerated 
the yogic powers of the Siddhas and put the yogic truths in 
extremely popular legendary form, — but the truth behind is 
the truth of immortality attainable through Hatha-yoga. 

A very important fact to notice in this connection is that 
the keynote of the story of Gopi-cand’s great renunciation 
also is the quest of immortality. It was his own mother 
Mayanamati, who compelled the king by hook or by crook to 
leave his loving wives, his boundless wealth and immense 
power and to take the vow of a Natha-yogin in his budding 
youth at the age of eighteen. Mayana lamented that she 
had none else to call her a mother excepting Gopi-cand, yet 
she did .insist on (his Gopi-cand’s) becoming the disciple of 
Hadipa and taking the vow of a yogin, inspite of the 
stubborn unwillingness of the king and his conspiracy 
with the queens. What was there in Mayana that 
dominated over her ordinary motherly affection ? It was 
the hope of immortality for her only son, who otherwise, in 
the course of his ordinary life of worldly enjoyment, would 
have died a premature death at the age of eighteen. She 
was not by nature a heartless witch, — it was for a higher 


^ See Gophcandrer Gan, (C. U. Fart I), pp. 202-207. In another plac6 
Hsdi-siddha with the help of a Hwnhara called upon the sovereign Ytoia 
with all his followers and officers to make a good road for him and Gopl-cSnd; 
Yama readily obeyed the order and went out with all the necessary implements to 
construe ta long road for them, /hid,, pp. 213-217. 



262 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


gain that she acted heartlessly for the time being to compel 
her son to be a yogin. * 

The ideal of immortality in the Siddha-deha as pro- 
pounded by the yogins of the Siddha-school exerted 
considerable influence also on the Orissa school of Vaisnavism 
of the sixteenth century. Though the general conception of 
the final state as described by the exponents of this school 
was mainly in the line of the Bhagavad-gita, the ideal of 
immortality in the Siddha-deha was there. “ We find there 
instructions on yoga for making the body immutable. “ The 
yogic system involving the control over the sun and the 
moon^ was advised to be adopted for the perfection of 
the body. ® 

Here we may note that though there was a general 
similarity in the methods adopted by the Natha-yogins, the 
Buddhist Sahajiyas, the Vaisnava Sahajiyas and the followers 
of the Nirguna-school of Hindi poetry mainly in the practices 
of Kaya-sa dhana , yet there were funda- 
mental differences in their aims and 
attitude. Thus, while the former schools 
held the realisation of the ultimate nature 
of the self as well as of the not-self, either in the form of 
perfect enlightenment, which is great bliss (as in the case of 
the Buddhists) or in the form of perfect love (as in the case 
of the Vaisnavas) or as the ‘ Incomprehensible Beloved ’ (as 
in the Nirguna school of Northern and Western India), to 


The difference in 
aim between the 
Natha siddhas and the 
SahajiySs. 


^ Gopi-candrer Pamcali, (C. U, Part II)/ pp, 326-331. 

* Krde, Brahma4ahkali of Acyutananda DSsa, Pracl-grantha-mala series, No. 

&/ p. 2, 3. 

3 yantra hinyasi tatxtra k(^ha I 

yemante rahiva e deha 11 Ihid^, p, 4. 

^ Vide Infra» p, 269 et aeq. 

6 Brahma-iankalif p. 15. 

c/. also candra suryafiku kale gosfhi 1 

bisama brahma agni uthi II 
pralaya tahp na badhai I 
tevefi atddha ahga hat 11 Ibid, p, 17, 



THE RELIGION OF THF NATHA SIDDHAS 


263 


be the final aim of all Sadhana, the Natha-yoglns employed 
all the yogic practices for the attainment of immortality and 
Mahe^varahood thereby. Of course, this final immortal 
state of the yogin has also been spoken of as the state of 
liberation or the state of the Sahaja, yet a difference in the 
general outlook as well as in the religious approach is on the 
whole perceptible. It is this difference in outlook and 
approach and also the differences in practices, of which we 
shall speak later on, that necessitate the postulation cf a 
line of demarcation between the different Sahajiya schools on 
the one hand and the school of the Natha-yogins on the other. 

(in) The Means 

(A) Ulta-sadhana or the Regressive Process 

Coming to the question of the practical Sadhana we find 
that the Natha Siddhas called their Sadhana Kaya-sadhana 
(culture of the body) with a view to attaining Kaya-siddhi 
(perfection of the body). The process has frequently been 
styled in the vernaculars as the Ulta-sadhana, or the regres- 
sive process * and the epithet is doubly significant. The 
yoga-practices of the Natha Siddhas is Ulta or regres- 
sive, firstly in the sense that it involves yogic processes 
which give a regressive or upward motion to the whole 
biological as well as psychological systems which in their 
ordinary nature possess a downward tendency ; and 

* de guru ulatiyd yog dhara kdya iomhar sthir kora 

nija manira koraha svoran I 

ulaiiyd Spand triptni dea je athdnd {thdnd ?) 

khdl jor hharite karan II Gorak?a-vijaya, p. 115. 
hhdla kaha yae putra jati gorakhdi I ulati sadhite jog gde bal ndi (I 

p. 116 . 

jadi se sadhiva koyd u/a/r dhar jog II 
ulatiyd dhar guru sumerur kola I 

pdkiche mdihdr ko^a hai jdiva kola II Ibid, p. 145, etc. 

Cf. gigani cadhi piVai pdni I ulati sakotl dp ghari dm II 

Cor^kh-bodh, Verae No. 33. 



264 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


secondly, in the sense that such yogic practices lead the 
Siddha to his original ultimate nature as the immortal 
Being in his perfect or divine body, back from the ordinary 
creative process of becoming. We have had several 
occasions to dwell on the two aspects of the reality under- 
lying the universal process as a whole; viz., Siva as the 
noumenal aspect, or pure consciousness and perfect rest and 
the Sakti as the phenomenal aspect of world-activity — the 
aspect of change and evolution. As most of the schools 
of yoga take the body to be the epitome of the universe, 
and the life-process, including its physical, biological and 
psychological aspects, to be a microcosm of the world- 
process, the life-process in the physical body is also believed 
to possess these two aspects, viz., the Siva aspect of perfect 
rest in the divine or the perfect body, and the Sakti aspect of 
activity in the physical body of continual change. Sakti in her 
ordinary course of phenomenal manifestation leads to change, 
death and decay — to the whirl of coming and going. The 
aim of the yogin is to stop this ordinary downward course of 
Sakti, downward in the sense of a phenomenal manifesta- 
tion, and to give her, through physical and psychological, or 
rather physico psychical efforts, an upward motion so that 
by a regressive process she may once more proceed backward 
to be united with Siva and be absorbed in the nature of Siva 
who is the Motionless Immortal Being. According to Tantric 
and Hatha-yogic belief, we have already seen, the region 
of the body below the navel is the region of Sakti, while 
the region above the navel is the region of Siva ; the former 
is called the domain of Pravrtti or activity and change, 
while the latter is the domain of Nivrtti or rest. It is 
generally believed that Sakti, or the principle of change, 
resides coiled as a serpent in the nature of the world- force in 
the lowest nervous plexus situated just on the lowest extre- 
mity of the spinal chord, while Siva, the principle of rest, 
is situated in the Sahasrara or the lotus of thousand petals in 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS • 265 

the head. The Sahasrara and the Muladhara (the highest 
and the lowest plexuses) are the two poles within which 
evolves the whole creative process. Yoga consists in the 
raising of the iSakti from the lowest region of change and 
activity to the highest region of rest so as to be united 
with and absorbed in Siva. This union of Siva and Sakti 
symbolises in the wider sense the stoppage of the ordinary 
process of becoming and the retrogression of the whole world- 
process for the attainment of the changeless state of the 
Immortal Being. How is this retrogression to be effected? By 
a perfect control over the physical, biological and psychologi- 
cal processes and by setting a regressive motion in them 
through slow and gradual processes of yoga; this is what is 
meant by the Ulta sadhana. Because of this Ulta nature of 
the Sadhana, the language of the songs in which the secret 
of the Sadhana is couched is also generally of a Ulta nature, 
or extremely paradoxical and enigmatic.^ The process has 
also been explained under the imagery of proceeding against 
the current {ujdna-sadhana)r 

All spiritual or religious endeavours are processes of Ulta- 
sadhana in a general sense inasmuch as they give a higher 
or upward tendency to our lower being. It has been said 
in a popular Buddhist verse that when an intense thirst is felt 
within for something higher, the mind becomes no more 
perturbed by desires, and at that state one is said to be in an 
upward current.'^ We have referred before to the word 
found in Mahayanic texts. In the Mahay dna-sntrd^ 
iafikara we hear of the pardvrtti of the five senses, of the 

1 C/. g'tiru mlna-nath re ulta ulta dhara I 

pukura mure dharia iul0iya ugara-tale hada II etc. 

Quoted in the introduction of the Gora\sa-v:jaya by Munsi Abdul Karim. 

C/. also a similar song in the Dharma-mahgala of Sahadev Cakravarti, 

B. S. P. P., B.S. 1304. See Appendix E. 

2 Cj, sat-cakra hheda guru khelauk ujan I Goraksa-vtjaya, p. \A7 . 

3 chanda-jata avasaye manasS ca phufa aiya I 

l^amesu appafibaddha-cHta uddhamaoto ii vuccati II Therhgatha, (1. 12). 



266 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


mind, of the sex-act, etc.’ It seems to us that the real 
significance of the word paraortti is just the same as the Ulta- 
sadhana. It is the process of introversion, a reversal of the 
world of praVrtti to the state of nivrtti. We have seen also that 
the Panca-sakha school of Orissa Vaisnavism was influenced 
jco a considerable extent by the ideal of Kaya-sadhana of the 
Si^ha school ; these VaisnavM also have often spoken of 
the Ulta process or the Ujana process in their yogic Sadhana.* 
We have further seen that the Sufis and the Bauls of Bengal 
were Sadhakas of this Ulta-sadhana.^ A very nice exposi- 
tion of this Ulta-sadhana is found in the Jnana- 
sagara of Ali-raja. There it is • said that the process of 
divine love is a reverse process, — and he who does not 
know the secret of this reverse process cannot have eternal 
life. Here the forward becomes the backward and the 
backward becomes the forward and the world is related to 
the reality in this inverted law.'’ The way towards perfection 

^ IX^ Veri?es (41-46). 

2 e panca-hhuta madhye bydpi 1 
khelanti parama sVarupt II 
hind ujdni na baldi I 

ke acchi siddha anga bahi II 
ula^a ujdni calile I 
purita mdnasa-sarovare II 

Brahma^dnkali of Achyutananda Dasa, (Praci-grantha-mfila series), p. 26. 

Again. ulati urddhvaku k^epai II Ibid., p. 7, 
hetura mule dhara fdni I 
bahantd nadik^ ujdni II 

# * « * 

ujdna laya-yoga k.hafa I etc. Ibid., p. II. 

yeve tu dhdivu ujdni I 

ksep'wa gagana kp pdni 11 

ieve parame hoi mela I etc. Ibid., p. 17. 

Again, yogimkara yoga ujdnare siddha hoi I Sdnya-samhitd, Ch. XXJ. 

(Pracl-grantha-mala series), p. 112. 

3 Vide Supra, pp, 185-86. 

4 pirlti ul(d rit nd bujhe cature I 

ye nd cine ulfd se nd jiye sarjisare II 

samukh bimukh hae bimukh samukh I 

pdl(d niyame sav jagat samyog IJ Jndna-adgara, pp. 36-37, 



tME RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 26? 


has been kept hidden by the Lord and only the unreal path 
{asSra pantha) is kept open before all creatures ; it is for this 
reason that man, after his birth in this world, naturally 
has recourse to the unreal path and remains absorbed in 
transitory enjoyment. The reason why the path towards 
pefection is thus concealed by the Lord from the eyes of 
ordinary creatures is that the possibility of easy access would 
have made it cheap; the Lord has enhanced the value 
and the glory of the path by keeping it secret and extremely 
difficult of access.’ All these seem to be an echo of the 
well-known Upanisadic saying that by giving the senses 
an outward tendency and turning them away from the 
inward truth the Self-created One gave proof of His jealousy, 
as it were ; it is because of this fact that man generally 
sees what is external, and not that which is within ; but 
wise people there are, who, in quest of life eternal, have 
inverted their visual power and realised the self in and 
through a reverse process." 

The process of arrest or control of various sorts, which 
is the most important, function of yoga, is personified in 
the Bengali texts as ‘Khemai’ (from Skt. fCsema — safety, 
security, tranquillity),® who has been spoken of as the best 
guard to be placed in the different centres of the body so 
that the wealth within may not be stolen away by Kala 

1 bimtikhe agam pantha rdkhiche gopate I 
calile himuhh panthe aiddhi aarVa mate il 
samukher sav pantha bimuk koriyd I 

palaii bimuk panthe jdiva caliyd II Ibid.^ p, 38. 

2 pardhei khdni vyatrnat avayambhus 
taamat paran paiyati nanfaratman I 
kaScid dhirah pratyag-atmanam aik^ad 
avftta-caksur amrtattvam icchan W Katha, (2.4. 1.). 

3 The word may also be derived from the word K^amd which has its dialectal 
variant as Khemd. This Khemd has its secondary meaning as stoppage (as in 
khemd deoya) and hence the word has acquired the sense of * restraint’ 

Cf. dviite ajapd jdna edri beda adr I 
aadae japae jlv ^?erna ndi tSr 11 

G^akiOL'^iayat p. 192. 



268 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


(death, decay, change). Khemal has sometimes been 
depicted as a very smart policeman, who arrests all the 
evil tendencies, pierces the undisciplined and unsteady 
elephant of mind with the hook (ankusa) it is for this reason 
that Gorakh-nath in the form of the dancing girl instructed 
the captive Guru Mma^nath (who was at that time made 
the king of the country of Kadali) to give his royal sceptre lo 
Khemai and to serve him most obediently, and Gorakh 
assured him that he (Khemai) would be the best man to 
rule the country (of this body)." 

The purification of and the control over the muscles, 
sinews, nerves, ducts and the nerve-centres through the 
processes of Asana (posture), Dhauti (washing), Bandha 
(different kinds of arrest), Mudra, Pranaydma and other 
process of Hatha-yoga are generally prescribed to be 
directed towards the final aim of the transformation 
and transubstantiation of the body. Closely associated 
with the question of transubstantiation of the body is the 
question of attaining full control over the mind. An 
echo of the general Indian trend of idealism is also found 
here and therein the stories of the Natha literature.'^ We 


’ khernair hate guru na dila jc dhanu I 

kama-raae dhanu dila bhedilek tanu II Ibid., p, 124. 

khemaire ahkusa diya manai /:>agal 11 Ibid., p. 141. 

magh maaete guru hima khara^an I 

ksemair cakari kari rakhaha paran II Ibid,, p. 143. 

khemaire ahkus mara hasUyar munde II Ibid., p. 150. 

ehi cari dhaui jan sarir alay I 

kam k^odha lohha moha ehi cdri hae II 

ei cdri janerc dharid dad kuri I 

aakol^ miliyd /cara khemdir cdkuri II Ibid., p. 151. 

C/. pafe rdjd dada k^ri khemdir sane mili I 
kamer galdte dey lohdf jifijali II 
sakula chadiya guru khemaire kora rdjd ! 
bhakiiyo garala candra koya kora tdjd II Ibid., p. 152, 

Also Ibid., p. 159 

bham iikal bande manako nd deya fhai i 
manako k^ndh^e hdchd taler Idgdl pdi II 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 269 

have seen that the control of the mind is the yoga par 
excellence, and it is held that the vital wind is the vehicle 
of this mind, and the control of the vital wind through the 
processes of Pranayama leads to the control of the mind. 
With the arrest of the vital wind the mind becomes arrested, 
and it is for this reason that the arrest of the Vayu (i.e., the 
vital wind) has been held very important in the Natha 
literature as in the literature of other religious schools con- 
taining discoures on yoga. 

Kaya-sadhana of the Natha Siddhas implies, on the 
whole, a slow and gradual process of continual purification, 
rejuvenation and transubstantiation of the body through 
various yogic processes. It has been said that through the 
fire of yoga (r.e., the purifying processes of yoga) the 
ordinary body of change and decay is burnt away and from 
the process of purification and rejuvenation results a new 
immutable divine body as a transformation of the old. 
Without entering into the details of this Kaya-sadhana, let 
us discuss here at some length a particular form of yoga 
that was most emphasised in Kaya-sadhana. 

(B) Kaya-sadhana 

(a) The Theory of the Sun and the Moon 

To understand fully the secrets of Kaya-sadhana we 
should first of all understand the theory of the sun and the 
moon as postulated in yoga. 

The sun and the moon are very frequently to 

be met with in the Tantric and yogic texts and it is 

held that yoga consists in the unification of the sun 

and the moon. The sun and the moon refer generally 

# 

ei aamsar majhe man daf^at hada \ 
bipad pathare man daga dive bad a II 
man raja man praja man maya phanda 1 
' man bandha tan cinta Sana gopt-candra II etc. 

Gqpi-candrer Sannyas (C. U., Part II), p.435. 



270 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


to the two important nerves in the right and the left 
and their union generally refers to the union of the two 
currents of the vital wind, Prana and Apdna or inhalation 
and exhalation. ^ But the sun and the moon ^ave got a 
deeper meaning still. In the Siddha-siddhanta-paddhati 
(ascribed to Gorakh) we find that the physical body emerges 
from the collocation of five factors, O12., Karma (activity), 
Kama (desire), Candra (the moon), Surya (the sun) and Agni 
(fire). ^ Of these the first two are rather the conditions of 
the visible body (pinda), while the other three are the primary 
elements of which the body is made. Of these three again 
the sun and fire are generally held to be the same. Then the 
primary elements out of which the visible body is made are 
reduced to two, viz., the sun and the moon. The moon 
represents the elements of Rasa or Soma, (i.e., the 
quintessence in the form of the juice) and the sun is the 
element of fire, and, therefore, the body is called the product 
of Agni and Soma. ' Rasa as Soma is the food {upabhogya) 
while fire as the consumer is the eater {bhokta), * and through 
the well-proportioned combination of the consumer and the 
consumed the whole creation is sustained. The sun and 
the moon as Agni and Soma respectively are manifested in 
the physical world as the seed of the father and the ovum 
of the mother, through the combination of which proceeds 


^ The word Hatha-yoga really signifies the union of the ho, i.e., the sun and 
the tha, i.e., the moon. 


Vide, Haiha-yogitpradipika. 

2 k.<irma kotna^ candrah saryo* gnir Hi pratyak&a-k^rana pancakani (1.62). 

3 agai-^ma-tmako deho vindur yad ubhaya-tmakoh II 
Quoted in the commentary by Dravyesa Jha on the above aphorism. 

Cf. agni-^oma tmakam vi&Vam ity agnir acak^ate I 

Vrhaj-jahato-panisai, (9.1). 

4 Cf. gam aviiya hhutani dharayamy aham ojaaa I 

pu^nami camadhth sarvah somo hhutva rasatmakah li 
aham vaiivanaro hhutva praninam deham airitah I 
prana-pana’Samayukiah pacamy annam catarvidham II 

Gita, (15.13-14), 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 271 

the visible body, * and thus Agni and Soma are the two 
primordial elements of the whole creation. The moon, in 
addition to the one digit (^a/a), which is the digit of 
nectar, and which it possesses by virtue of its own nature, 
possesses sixteen other l^alas which are explained here as 
the sixteen modes in which the moon functions. ^ The sun, 
again, in addition to its own digit of self-luminosity, 
possesses twelve other digits, which are the modes in which 
the element of the sun functions. “ This theory of the sun 
and the moon with its cosmological significance is found 
explained in the second Brahmana of the Vrhaj-jabalo- 
panisat. 

In the yogic texts in general the moon and the sun 
represent the two elements underlying physical existence, — 
viz., the element of creation and preservation and the element 
of change and destruction.'* The moon as the principle of 
non-change and immortality resides in the region of Siva and 


^ kinca 8urya-gni-rupam pituh iukram soma-rupan ca matr-rajah, uhhayoh 
samyoge pindotpatiir, etc. Vide, Comm, referred to aH;./ve. 

2 uUoJa, koUoUnl, ucca/alnfi, unmadim, taramgim, §osini, lampata, pTaVfttih, 
lahari, lola, lelihana, prasaranfi, pravaha, saumya, prasannata, plaVanti ) evam 
candrasya sodaia-hola saptadaii k^^la nivjfttih sa'mrfa-^a/a I 

Siddha-siddhanta’paddhati ( 1 .63) . 


C/. Tantra-Ioka (3.138). 

3 tapini, grasik^, ugra, a^uncanr, iosini, praOodhani, smara, akar^anl, tu&ft- 
varddhini, urmi-rekha, kiranavati, prahhaVatVii dvadaia-kjala suryasya, trayodait 
sva prakaiata nija’kala I 


Siddha-siddhanta^paddhati (1.66). 

^ In some places, however, the sun is not identified with the destructive fire, — 
it is described as situated in the middle as the middle principle. 

urddhve tu samstkita srsfih paramananda-^dayinl II 
piyusa-Vfs^im varsanii baindaVi parama ^a/a II 
adhah sarpharakxi jneyo mahan agnih krtantakah I 
ghoro jvalavalhyukto durdharso jyotisam nidhih II 
tayor madhye param teja ubhayananda-sundaram I 
aVatarah sa vijneya ubhabhyam Vyapakflh iivah II 
paraspara-samavi^fau candre' gni^ltlibhe iait I 
candram sfsfim vijaniyad agnih samhara iicyate II 
aVataro ravih prokto madhyasthah parameSvarah I 
Quoted in the comm* on the Tantra-hka (3,67) by Ja^yarathEi. 



m 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the sun as the principle of change and destruction resides in 
the region of Sakti. The moon and the sun are thus associa- 
ted with Siva and Sakti. The moon is the depository of 
Amrta or ambrosia which gives immortality, while the sun 
is the fire of destruction (kalagni).' The moon is situated just 
below the Sahasrara or the lotus of thousand petals in the 
cerebrum region, — it is facing downwards ; and the sun is 
j . situated in the region of the navel or in the 
la* lowcst plexus (Mu/fldftara) facing upwaids.^ 

It is held that bindu which is the quintes- 
sence of the body is of two kinds, viz., the yellowish white 
bindu {pandura-bindu) and the red bindu (lohita-bindu ) , — 
the former is of the nature of semen (sul^ra), while the latter 
is of the nature of ovum {maha-rajas) ; the bindu (i.e. the 
white bindu or semen) is contained in the moon in the upper 
region, while the ovum is contained in the sun in the navel ; 
this bindu is Siva and that is the moon, — and the rajas is 
Sakti, which is the sun.^ Thus it seems that the conception 
of the moon and the sun has been associated with that of 
Siva and Sakti, and metaphysically the moon and the sun 


* hujhaile na hujha guru yadrer {andher) laksan I 

yamreta ediya k^ra gatal hhaksan I! Goraksa-^vijaya, p. 134. 
ndbhi~dese vasaty eko bhdsk^ro dahand4makoh I 
amfta-ima sthiio nityam tdlu-mule ca candramah II 
varsaty adho-mxihhai candro grasaty urddhva-mukho ravih \ 
jfiatavyd koram taira jathd piyu^am dpyate 11 

Goraksa-paddhati, 2nd $ataka t '^Grses (32-33), (Bombay Edition). 

Generally the sun is described in the navel: but in the Goraksa-samhiid (Ch. IV, 
verse 152) and the Kaula-jndna-nirnaya (Ch. U, verse 3) it is described in the lowest 
lotus or the Mulsdhara. 

2 sa punar dvividho binduh pdnduro lohiias iathd j 
pdndurah iakram itydhur lohitdkhyo maharajah !l 
sindura-draVa-sarrik.diaTn ndhhi-sthdne sihitam rajah \ 
iaii'Sthdnc sihiiv hindus tayot aikyarn sudurlahham II 
bindu SiVO rajah candro bindu rajo ravih 1 

anayoh sahgamdd eva prdpyate paramam padam 11 
Gorak^a-paddhati, p. 35 (verses 71-73). 

Also, Goraksa-sarnhiid (Prasanna Kaviratna’s edition), pp. 29-30 (verse, 
00-82). Cf. also, Gorak>a-8dra-8amgraha, p. 41, 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATH A SIDDHAS 


273 


represent the nature of Siva and 6akti, respectively. The sun^ 
we have seen, is called Kalagni or the fire of destruction, 
and it is also called Rudra (i.e. the Dire One) as opposed to 
Siva (the All-good One). In the Kaula-jndna-nirnaya this 
Kdldgni as Rudra is associated with Sakti and is said to be 
seated in the lower region [Mulddhara) within the mouth of the 
Vadava. It is held that there are seven lower regions called 
pdtdla and seven upper regions called heaven. Creation 
lasts as long as the Kdldgni remains in the lower region, but 
when it burns upwards, dissolution starts.' In the Buddhist 
Tantras and the Buddhist Sahajiya songs these principles of 
the sun and the moon have been conceived as the fire-force 
in the Nlrmana-kaya (/.e. the plexus of ‘the body of trans- 
formation') and as the Bodhi-citta in the Usmsa-kamala respec- 
tively. The fire-force in the Nirmana-kaya (situated, 
according to the Buddhists, in the navel region) is described 
as the goddess Candali. This point has been stated before in 
details.^ 

The Sadhana of the Hatha-yogins consists, on the whole, 
in the act of combining the sun with the moon after getting 
complete mastery over them. Jn describing the yogic power 
of Hadi-siddha Mayanamati frequently refers to the fact that 
Hadl-siddha has made the sun and the moon his ear-rings. ' 
Though the statement is found in our literature only to 
describe the mythical power of Hadi-siddha, with whom 
everything impossible became possible, there is a deeper 
yogic significance behind it. These principles of the sun 


* Kaula-jnana-nirnaya , Ch. 11. 

2 Vide supra, pp. 115-124 
^ cde^iy haili nay hahga-deie ghar \ 

canda-su^uj ra\hche dui kaner k^adal II 

Gopi-candrer Gan (C. U, Part 1), p, 61. 
yam raja hay yar nijer cakar I 
candra surya dui jan k^ndal kaner 11 

Gopi-candrer Sannyas (C. U, Part II), pp. 440-441, 

35-141 IB 



i74 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


and the moon have been referred to in the Goral^sa-vijaya 
under various imageries.’ 

This act of combining the sun with the moon or 
the perfect control over them then implies many things in 
practical yoga. It implies, firstly, the retrogressive process 
of turning the cosmic manifestation back to its original form 
of rest, and this is effected by the yogins by rousing 6akti 
and uniting her with Siva in the Sahasrara. The combination 
of the sun and the moon implies secondly 

Various yogic im- j . • • i - i i i i 

plications of the the yogic practice in which the male and 

union of the sun and i r i • i i i > i i 

the moon. the lemale unite and the combined subs- 

tance of the seed and the ovum is sucked 
within by the yogin or the yogini, as the case may be, 
through some secret yogic processes.^ Again the practice 
of purifying and controlling the nerves like Ida and Pingala 
by controlling Prana and Apana through processes of 
PranSyama is what is meant by combining the sun and the 
moon. The three important nerves Ida, Pingala and 
Susumna in the left, right and the middle are frequently 
described in the yogic texts as of the nature of the moon, 
the sun, and fire {Soma or Candra, Surya and’.4gni), 
respectively. In the Natha cult, however, the commingling 
of the sun and the moon has the deeper significance of 
transforming the material body of change to an immutable 
body of perfection. How can that be effected ? It can be 
effected by a perfect control over the destructive force of 
the sun and then rejuvenating the whole body with the 

^ e.g. ianiVare hahe bayu iunye mahatithi I 
purvve ulc hhaskctr pa^cimc jvale bat: II 
nivite na dio bati jvala ghana ghana I 
ajuha chapai rakha amulya i atari II 
ravivar hahe hau laiya adya mul I 
agun paniye gura ek samaiul II 
agun paniye jadi hac milamili ( 
nivi jaiVa aguni raiya jaiva chali II 
2 C/. V ajroh-mudra. 


Goraksa-vijaya, p. 140^ 



the RELinON OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 


275 


nectar oozing from the moon. We have seen that the sun 
reprcNsents the principle of destruction and the moon that of 
creation. The yogin tries to avoid both the extremes and 
have recourse to a principle of eternal conservation, which 
can be effected only by the perfect commingling of the 
principle of destruction and creation. This is what is meant 
by the real commingling of the sun and the moon. 

It is held in practical yoga that the quintessence of the 
visible body is distilled in the form of Soma or nectar (amrta) 
and is reposited in the moon in the 
Sahasrara. There is a curved duct from 
the moon below the Sahasrara up to the 
hollow in the palatal region ; it is well- 
known in yoga physiology as the Sankhint. This is the bank<i 
ndla {i,e. the curved duct) frequently mentioned in the 
vernaculars through which the mahd-rasa (ie. Soma-rasa) 
passes.^ This curved duck Safikhini is described in the 
Goraksa-vijaya as the serpen_t_jmth mouths at both e nds .^ 


The sun and the 
moon of the Natha- 
yogins. 


^ benka nale sadha guru na koriya hela 11 Goraksa-Vijaya, p. 147. 

Kabir in his songs frequently speaks of this bantia-ndla. The Orissa Vaisnavas 
also speak of it in connection with their Sadhana. 

C/. nirodha k.arala triveni I 
banka^-ndlara sikha pare I 
kamdra ndla yeurn thare II 
urddhva-mukhare hart (hand I 

mahd-iunyare mo bhajand II Brahma-idhkali , p. 3. 

Again ujdni dhara bdyu (dm 1 

k?ipo dkaSa marge pant II 
bahkii ndlare (hula kfl^a I 
ndsiko agre drsti dhara II etc. 

Ibid., pp. 20-21. 

budh bare hahe bdyu bujha ape dp I 
phirdi kheldo guru dui mukhd sap II 
cdpile garjjiyd u(he biraha ndgim I 
sdpini nd haye guru surasd saiikhinl 11 

Gorah?a-o/jaya, p. 141 
jyaistha mdseta guru bhanu kharaSdn I 
surasd adpinl tole hollas samdn II Ibid., p. 143. 
saruyd aamhhini aahge eha bhedi kal I 
paricay hori hdad bandi hora hoi IJ Ibid., p. 144. 



2 % 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


The mouth of this Sankhint, through which the Soma 
or the Amrta pours down from the moon is called the 
Dakima-dvara or the tenth door of the body as distinguished 
from the other nine ordinary doors.’ This tenth door is the 
most important in yoga and is frequently referred to in old 
and mediaeval Bengali literature and it is frequently men- 
tioned also in the Hindi texts on yoga.^ Through this tenth 
door nectar trickles down from the moon. Now, it is held 
that in the ordinary course the nectar, trickling down from 
the moon through this tenth door, falls in the fire of 
the sun and is eaten up or dried up by the sun. The 
quintessence of the body in the form of Soma or Amrta 
being thus dried up, the body, falls a victim to the fire of 
destruction (Ka/dgni),^ — this is how in the natural course of 

^ ekarn mukha-randhram raja-dantd-ntare , etad eVa &ank.hint mukham daiama- 
dvdram ity ucyate I 

Amaraugha-idsana (Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies), p. 11. 

See also; — sastham idlu-cahxam iatrd' mrta-dhdrd-pravdhah ghan^k.o-Tnula~randhrQ- 
raja-dantam iamkhini-biharam da^ama- dvdram, etc. 

Siddha-siddhanta-paddhati (2,6). 

C/, daiami dudrata cihna dekhaid I 

dila gardhaka apane bahid il Caryd-pada No. 3. 

I'his tenth door has been explained in the commentary as the vairocatia-dvdra, 
or the most supreme gate (vairocana being generally held supreme in the pantheon 
of many of the Buddhistic esoteric schools). 

C/. also — idd pihgald susamand sandhi I 
mana pavana tdta hflila bandl il 
daSam'i duydre dilo k.Qpdta I 
eve cadilom mo se yoga bdta il 

Srhkr^na-kjrtana (Sshitya Parisat edition), p. 359. 
bhediyd da^ami dvdr khdl jor bhara II 

Goraksa-vijaya, p. 139. 
ihgald pifigald dai nadir ye mdjhe I 
dasamite tali diya rahivd sahaje II Ibid., p. 144. 
daiamir dvdr bhedi dhoke dhoke tola I 
ujduk mahd-ras bharauk kbdla jora II Ibid., p. 145. 

2 C/. dasam dudrd agam apdrd param purusa kj ghdfi ( 

Beni, Adigrantha, p. 974, quoted by Di. Mohan Singh. 

^ ndbhi-mule Vaset suryas tdlu-mule ca candramdh I 

amftam grasate suryas tato mrtyu-VaSo narah II 

Gorakia-satnhitd (I, 85), 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 


277 


things death becomes the inevitable catastrophe of life. This 
ordinary course of the flow of nectar must be checked and 
regulated and this is the only way of deceiving Kala (Time) 
and becoming immortal. The tenth door must be shut up 
or well guarded, — and this has figuratively been hinted in 
the vernaculars by the phrase ‘ locking up the tenth door ’ 
or ‘ placing sentinels ’ there. If this door remains open the 
Maha-rasa, which is the best wealth of man, will be stolen 
away by the Sun or Death. ’ On the other hand, if this 
Maha-rasa can be saved from the sun and if the yogin can 

C/. candrat sarah sraVati Vapusas tena mrtyur naranam I 

tad badhnlyat sukctranam aio nanyatha koryosiddhih II 

Goraksa-paddhati, verse 15. 
vimala saliJa sosa jai jai lialagni paithai II 

Doha-kosa of Kanha-pada, Doha No, 14. 

Also — trsa nagilc jai asc iunya haite I 

irsa lagilc jai tor khay hutaiane II 

Gophcandrer Gan (C, U. Part, I), p. 72. 

Again kodacit nija candra na k.arwa vyay I 

bar a batsarer aytt ekci dine kj^ay II Garak^a-vijaya, p. 188, 

I duvila tomhar nauk.a kflcbi gela chidi I 

tomhar saknl hhara korileka curi II 
* * * * ^ 

gurur bacon tomar nai bhaya I 

yaiheka sampad tomar tuli dila nae il 
* * 

pradiva nivile bapu k.i kariva taile I 
hi koj bandhile yail jai na thahil^ II 
sikhad h^tde tave pade gach I 
bini jale k^^thate jie mach II 
ladivare sak^i nahi gurur sakati I 
dvdr-khan mukta kflri hctrild basati I 
muhta dvdr pdi cor haila satantar I 
sarva dhan hari nila iunya haila ghar II 

Gorak^a-vijaya, pp. 107-108. 

Again —nagare manusya ndhi ghare ghare cal I 

dndhale dohan diya kf^ofid ^cre ^a/ II Ibid,, p. 138. 

[There is a pun on the last line. The literal meaning is, — the blind is kept in 
charge of the shop and the deaf buys everything ; the blind is the ignorant and the 
uninitiated, while the deaf is Death {Kala) who pays no heed to the request of any 
body.] 

Again — dvii'iya prahara rdtri h^la nidra ghor I 

ojanar tail mapi lai jde cor II Ibid., p. 139. 



278 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Kimself drink this nectar, the yogin will undoubtedly become 
immortal. 

How to save this Amrta from the sun? Various are the 
yogic processes described in Hatha-yogic and Tantric texts. 
Of all the processes the process known as Khecari-mndra 
has been held to be the most important. It is the process of 
turning the tongue backwards into the hollow above so as 
, to reach the mouth of the Raja^danta or of 

The process of 

saving the Maha'iasa the Sahl^hirii (which is the tenth door) and 

from the sun. r r * i • i » i l 

of fixing the sight Between the eye-brows. 
The tongue thus extended backwards shuts up the tenth door 
and the nectar, thus saved, is drunk by the yogin himself. 
This Khecan-mudra has been praised eloquently in all the 
yogic texts as the best and the surest way of becoming 
immortal. It is held that this yogic process has the capacity 
of controlling all kinds of secretion, and if a yogin practises 
Khecart his bindu (seed) will remain undisturbed even if he 
is closely embraced by a woman. This process of drinking 
the nectar by the practice of the Mudras and the Bandhas 
is the way to eternal life. ’ In some of the texts this secre- 
tion of nectar from the moon is associated with the rousing 
of Kundalini Sakti and it is held that the rousing of Sakti in 
the Sahasrara is instrumental to the trickling down of the 

' C/. rasanam Urddhvagam kftoa k^ana-rdham api tisfhaii I 

visair vimucyate yogi vyUdhi-mrtyu-jara dihhih 11 
urddhva-jihvah sthiro bhutva soma-panam k.aroti yah I 
masa-rddhena na sandeho mrtyurn jayati yoga-vit 11 
nityam soma-kjala-purnam iarire yosya yaginah I 
tak^cikcnapi dasfasya visam tasya na sarpati II 
indhanani yatha vahnis tala-vartirp ca dipakflb I 
tatha soma-hjala-purnam dehl deham na muhcati II etc. 

Gorak^a,-paddhati, pp. 37, 38 (Bombay edition). 

These ver.ses are Repeated in many other similar texts. 

C/. a^ain—ghanta-kotikapola-kotara-knti~jihva-gra-madhya-iraya~cchahkhiny 
agata-raja-danta-vivaram pranio-rddhva-vaktrena yat I samprapiam hanu-randhra- 
mula-vidhina yac candra-toyam mukhe tatsarVam ravi-kflia-rupa-sadane rakset 
para sarand II etc. 


A mar aug ha-id Sana, p. 1 et seq. 



THE RELIGION OF THE N\THA SIDDHAS 279 

nectar, — and sometimes Sakti herself is depicted as the 
drinker of the nectar. This liquid, trickling from the moon, 
is also called the wine of the immortals (amara-Varuni), and 
as the gods have become immortal by drinking Amrta or 
the ambrosial wine, so the yogins become inSmortal by 
drinking this wine trickling from the moon. Drinking of 
wine and eating of meat, which are indispensable to a 
Tantric Sadhaka, are explained by the Natha-yogins as the 
drinking of the nectar from the moon and turning the tongue 
backwards in the hollow above. ’ 

We have seen that the moon has sixteen digits. The 
secretion of the Soma-rasa in the Kalagni (the solar fire of 
destruction) is sometimes figuratively called the eating up of 
the digits of the moon by the Rahu,^ the passage from the 
moon to the Kdagni being conceived as the Rahu, The 
idea of the disappearance of the digits of the moon one by 
one and the reappearance of the digits in order has given rise 
to the theory of the Tithis (i.e. the lunar day, or the thirtieth 
part of a whole lunation') , including the Purnima (full-moon) 
and the AmdVasyd (i.e., the night of the new moon), — the 
processes of disappearance and reappearance of the digits 
being represented as the black and the white fortnight.*^ 

1 mukh-khani chal guru jihva-kharti phal I 
amar pafane jena ycte kore hal II 

ucca nlc hhumi-hhani taie hay I 

jadi hayc grha-Vast se hhumi casay II Gorak?u-vi]aya, p, 138. 

Cf. gomarnsam hhaksayen nityam pibed amara-Varunim I 
kutinam tarn aharn manye Hare kula-ghatakah II 
go-iahdeno' dita jihva tat-pravcio hi laluni 1 
go-marnsa-hhak^anam iat tu maha-pataku-uaianam II 
jihva-praVeia sambhuta-vahnino 'ipaditah bhalu I 
candrat sraVati yah sarah sa syad amata-varunl II 

Goraksa-paddhati, pp. 38-39 (Bombay edition). 

2 Rahu is the mythical demon that devouis the moon, which fact is held 
responsible for the eclipse. 

^ Cf. The Commentary on the line cahcala cle paitho hflla II 

Carya-pada No. |, 



280 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


The conservation and the yogic regulation of the Mahd- 
rasa are at the centre of the yogic Sadhana of the Natha 
Siddhas. The Natha Siddhas (as well as the Buddhist 
Siddhacaryas) admitted six parts of yoga, viz., Asana, 
Prdndyama, Pratydhdra, Dhdrand, Dhydna and Samddhit^ 
excluding the two parts, viz., Yama, z.e., restraint and 
Niyama or discipline of the Patanjala system. It will be 
observed that in the Patanjala system Yama^ Niyama and 
A Sana are physical and moral discipline for the control of 
the mind, Prdndydma a vital process for the arrest of the 
mind, and Pratyahara, Dhdrand, Dhydna, etc. are purely 
psychological processes for the final concentration and anest 
of the mind; — all these processes are purely psychologi- 
cal processes for the final concentration and arrest of the 
mind. All these processes are associated in the Natha cult 
with the process of retaining the Mahd-rasa and the yogic 
regulation of its secretion for the transubstantiation ’ of the 
body and thus attaining a life eternal.^ 

{b) The Sun and the Moon as Woman and Man. 

There is, however, another aspect of the theory of the 
sun and the moon. We have seen that the sun is the Rajas 


prakt^ya-hhasa-cIosa-Va^at cohcalyataya prakrto sattvena {a, sic) cyuii rupo hi 
rahuh I sa eva k^lah I krsna-pratipaddasdyam pravistah \ yasmdt nanda-bhodra- 
jayd~ri}itd-purnd-tiihi-k.ramena samVrtli-hodhi-citia-mrgd h'lam iosam nayaliti I 
Comm, on the Song No. 1 (Sastri’s edition). 

C/. also: — kalagnii cyutd-Vasthd kf^na-pratipaUpraVeia-kfila-praVrtta Hi I 
Comm, on the Doha No. 14 of Kanha pSda. 

^ dsanam prdna-samrodhah praiydhdra^ ca dhdrand I 
dhydnam samddhir eidni yogdngdni Vadanti sat II 
C/. Maitrdyanlya Upanisat (Cowell’s edition, Ch. VI. p. 129), where tlic six 
Afigas are described as Pratydhdra, Dhydna, Prdndydma, Dhdrand, Tarka and 
Samddhi. 

candrd-mrlamayim dhdrdm pratydharati hhd^k.Qrah I 
yat pratydharanam tosydh pratydhdrah sa ucyaie II 
(jgral^sa-paddhaii, p. 74. 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 


281 


and the moon is the Bindu,^ the sun is associated with Sakti 
and the moon with Siva — and the moon must be saved from 
the destructive sun. In the grosser aspect, man must save 
himself from the clutches of woman, who has been always 
depicted in the Natha literature as the tigress. Charmed and 
allured by her, man loses vital energy. She has generally 
been spoken of as the enchantress of the day and the tigress 
of the night. The Natha Siddhas were strict celibates, and it 
appears from the Natha literature in all the vernaculars that 
women are regarded as the greatest danger in the path of 
yoga and they are given no status higher than that of ferocious 
tigresses always bent on sucking the blood of the prey. The 
fall of Mina-nath in the company of the women of Kadali or 
the queen of Ceylon and his rescue by Gorakh-nath seem to 
be a popular poetical version of the general attitude of the 
Nathas towards women in general. In his enigmatic counsels 
to the Guru Gorakh-nath said, — “The breath of women dries 
up the body and youth vanishes day by day. Foolish are the 
people who understand nothing and make pets of tigresses in 
every house ; in the day the tigress becomes the world-enchan- 
tress and at night she dries up the whole body. The milk is 
stolen and the tigress boils it, and the cat (death ?) is 
sitting by ; the essence of milk is thrown down on the 
ground and only the vacant vessel remains in the sky. 
Similar verses ascribed to Gorakh-nath are also found 
in Hindi. ^ If we follow the words of reproof that Gorakh- 

’ Vide supra'. 

Cj. also, — yalha yonii ca lihgam ca samyogai siravaio' mj-tam | 
iatha mriagni-samyogad dravatas te na samiayah II 

Tanira-loka (4, 131). 

2 Goraksa-vijayOf pp. 186-187. 

Cf. also, — hera dek.ha haghinl a'lse I 

neter amcale carma-mandiia k/iriya 
ghar ghar baghini pose II 

Song of Gorakh-nalh in the Dharma-mangala of Sahadev, B. S. P. P. 1304. 

^ C/. guru ji aisa ^am na k^jui, jamte amt maharn-ras chtjai II 

•i' t- ■-:= 


3^-14118 



282 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Hath levelled against his fallen Guru, we shall be convinced 
of the uncompromisingly adverse attitude of the Nathas 
against women, who ^e generally termed as thieves, dacoits, 
pirates, thirsty tigresses and hypocrite cats. In one place 
Gorakh says, — “You have handed over your store to the gang 
of dacoits, you have employed the mouse as guard for the 
pepper plant and the cat for thickly boiled milk ; you have 
kept logs of wood to the custody of the carpenter, the cow 
to the tiger, wealth to plunderers, the frog to the serpent, 
bulbous root to the boar and arum to the porcupine ; you 
have kept the mouse as the guard of the granary, kept 
plantains before the crow, offered fish to the rustic rogue, 
dry fuel to fire. You have lost whatever merchandise you 
had at your disposal, exhausted your store and created 
sensation in the vicinity ; you are living with your neighbours 
who are thieves and frauds/'^ Enigmatic statements of this 
nature casting serious reflection on the nature of women 
abound in the Goraksa-Vijaya, or the Mma-cetana and also 
in the songs of Gopi-cand. Similar words, phrases and 
imageries were freely used also by Mayanamati, who was 
bent on saving her only son from the clutches of his 
youthful wives We need not multiply illustrations. It will 


goJe hhae ugamage pet bhaia dhiladhila k^s Vagale parnhha I 
ami maha-ras baghini sokha tate ghor mathan bhai amkha II 
divas h.au baghini suri nari mohai rati sair 8o\hai I 
murakh loka amdhala pasua niti prati baghani pokhai II 
dami baghani lai aia mau kohai mera pati bihaia 1 

goh lak4~i kov ghuni laid tin dal mul aani hhaia II 
baghni jirnda bi baghani birpda bi baghani hamari karnia I 
ini baghani irailokl khal badati gorakhu rata II 


Quoted by Dr, Mohan Singh in his Gorakhnaih etc, part II, p. 3. 

1 Gorak?^~vijayat pp. 121-23. 

Gophcandrer Pamcall, (pp. 340-41). 

^ In one place Mayana says to GopI-cSnd All men serve women gratis ; the 
Maha-rasa within the body is worth thousands of chests filled with gem ; and when 
that wealth is lost man becomes subdued by a woman. A lioness is she and 
casts her eyes like the tigress ; she leaves aside the bones and the flesh and sucks 
up the Maha-rasa. Wom^in deals in the wealth of man, and th^ allured mftn 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 283 

be clear from the above that in a grosser sense Maha-rasa 
means the seed, and the SadhanS consists in saving the 
same from any kind of discharge, and it has been emphati- 
cally declared in all texts of yoga that he, who has.been able 
to%ive an upward flow to the fluid, is a god, and not a 
man. 

This attitude towards women, as found in the Natha cult, 
seems to have influenced the tone of the poets of the Nirguna 
School (as the school is styled and defined by Dr. Barthwal) 
of Hindi poetry headed by Kabir. Kabir and his followers, 
just like the Nathas, spoke of women in no better terms than 
as ferocious tigresses always seeking opportunity to prej^upon 
men and to suck their vitality.^ 

(C) Points of Similarity and Difference in the Practical 
Aspect of Yoga between the Natha Cult and other 
Esoteric Schools. 


It is important to note in this connection that in the practi- 
cal aspect of yoga the system of Kabir, as also that of a 


goes on serving Ker gratis. With' his plough and bulls man cultivates the field 
of others,— there is the loss of the bulls and of the seed in the bargain. Though 
steel is used in the plough it decays in earth. If the bat eats up the soft stem of 
the plantain-tree the fruits cannot grow,- if the newly grown bamboo is pierced 
through by insects, how can it stand any weight? Gopt-candrer Sannyaa {C.U. 
part II), p. 438. Cf. also Gopl-candrer Gan, pp. 71. et seq. 

1 Vide Kami Nara Kau Anga Kabira-Grantha-vali (6y5ma-sundar Dis’s 
edition)^ pp. 39*41 ; >1 /he Nari Nimda Ko Anga-Sundara-Grantha-Vali, Vol. II, 
pp. 347 et aeq. 

Cf. also — din kfl mohinl rat kfl baghini 

palak palak lahu cose I 
duniya aav baura ho 

ghar ghar baghini pose II Ascribed to Tulasidas. 

Cf. also the following poem of Paltu-dls : - bhag re bhdg phakir ka bdlakji 
kanak kamini dui bagh Idge I mar leg! padd ctclydyagd bhaed bekuf tu naht 
hhdge II afhgo rsi ndrae ka mdraka khay gayi bace na koyi jaa lakh tyage I paf|u- 
daa kahe ek updy hai baifha aania-aahgamd nitya jdge 1 

Vide Bhdratvarfiya Updaaka-aampraddya by A. K. Datta, Vol. 

1, pp. 255-256. 



^284 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


host of other mediaeval Hindi poets, was essentially the same 
as that of the Natha-yogins described above. Of course, there 
is a remarkable difference in the religious attitude, but inspite 
of all differences in views and the religious approach, the yogic 
process seems to have been substantially the same. In his 
religious approach Kabir, with other poets of his school, is 
known to us more as representing a devotional school of 
mysticism, characterised by a spirit of heterodoxy, than as a 
school professing faith in yogic practice ; but the fact remains 
that the poems of Kabir and the works of 

TKe Natha cult and .1 . f .1 • 1 if 

the Kabir-panth. many Other poets or this school speak or 

a system of yogic practice behind their 
devotional fervour.^ In his work Nirguna school of Hind! 
poetry Dr. P. D. Barthwal has given an exposition of the 
yogic practices referred to in the works of this school of 
poets, and a perusal of the book will convince one of the 
inherent similarity in yogic practice of this school with that 
of its predecessors, Oiz., the N^ha Siddhas. The theory of 
the sun and the moon and the question of the secretion of 
nectar referred to above play the most important part in 
these mediaeval schools. It is perhaps because of this 
similarity in yogic Sadhana and the similarity of the general 
tone of extreme repulsion against women as a class, that 
the Kabir-panth has traditionally been affiliated with the 
Gorakhnath and Kabir has been believed to have had met 
Gorak hpan^ and have had religious discourses with him. 

An important point to note is the difference in the 
religious approach as well as in method among the Natha 
Siddhas on the one hand and the Buddhist Sahajiyas on the 
other. We have said before that though both the sects were 
cognate Hatha-yogic sects there is a sharp difference in the 
professed final aim as well as in practices of yoga. The final 
aim of the Nathas, we have seen, is the attainment of 


^ Infra, Appendix (A)* 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 285 

immortality ; while the hnal goal of the Buddhist Sahajiyas is 
the attainment of Maha-sukha. The Natha Siddhas believed 
... , ,, in the reality of birth and death and tried 

and the Buddhist to avoid the whitl by transubstantiating the 

Siddhararyas. • l i i r i i i i • I 

material body or change to subtle etherial 
body and that again finally to a perfect divine body ; but the 
Buddhist Sahajiyas inherited from the earlier schools of 
Buddhism the spirit uf extreme idealism and tried to avoid 
the whirl of birth and death by realising the void-nature of 
the self and of all the Dharmas, and they further contended 
that the void-nature of the self and the not-self can be 
realised only through the realisation of the Maha-sukha. 
The emphasis of the Nathas is on the yogic process of 
transubstantiating this corporal body of death and decay, — 
and the emphasis of the Buddhist Sahajiyas is on the sexo- 
yogic practice, which transforms the ordinary sex-pleasure 
to a higher and deeper emotion of bliss. Of course, the 
Kaya-sadhana of the Nathists is also there in the practices of 
the Buddhists,^ and we also find occasional references in the 
Dohas and the Carya songs to the flow of nectar and the 
process of drinking it by the yogin with the purpose of 
making theS/^and/ia (the elements, the aggregate of which 
constitutes the physical body) firm and stable and becoming 
ajara and amara (diseaseless and deathless) ; we find occasional 
references to the drinking of the nectar or the honey of the 
lotus in the head by the black-bee of the mind, and also to 
the pouring down of water from the moon of Bodhicitta, 
full in its sixteen digits, into the fire below. Though in 
some cases these expressions and imageries may be explained 
figuratively, yet it appears that the practice of the Buddhists 
for the realisation of the Maha-sukha was intimately 
connected with the Kaya-sadhana of the Nathas. The 
conception of the Varum or the ambrosial liquor is 


^ Supra t p. 106. 



2ti6 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

also found in the Carya-padas, ^ and this Vdrmjl 
may more satisfactorily be explained in the sense of the 
ambrosial liquor of the Natha-yogins than figuratively as the 
flow of Maha-sukha or grossly as the flow of the Bodhicitta 
as semen virile. What we want to emphasise is that while 
one school had recourse to the Sadhana from a particular 
outlook the other approached the yogic practices from a 
different point of view and while the emphasis of the one is 
on some particular aspect of the Sadhana, the emphasis of 
the other was on another. 

it is because of these differences that while the Natha 
Siddhas were vehemently opposed to the association of 
women in any way with their Sadhana and described them as 
the greatest impediment in their march towards immortality, 
the Buddhist Sahajiyas eulogised women in all possible 
glowing terms as the incarnation of Prajna, or Sunyata herself; 
and her company was regarded as indispensable for the 
attainment of perfection in spiritual life. Of course we have 
seen before ^ that the Prajna or the Yogini or the Mudra 
spoken of by the Buddhist Sahajiyas is not always the 
corporeal woman ; she is the Nairatma or Sunyata or the 
Sahaja-damsel. But it will be equally a great mistake to 
try to interpret the Mudra always in this idealised sense and 
thus to explain away the necessity of the company of 
women in the Sahaja-sadhana. 

We have noted before that the Maha-sukha of the 
Buddhist Sahajiyas was not a purely physiological sensa- 
tion, — there was a psychological element involved in 

^ eka ae iundini dui ghare aandhaa I 

ciana hakolaa barunt handhoa H 
sahaje thira kori barunl sandhc I 

jem ajaramara hoi didha kondhe il Caryii Song, No. 3. 

C/. eka atrt bhujyaie dvalhyam agaia candt a-mandalat I 

trtiyo yah punas tahhyarp sa bhaved ajaramarah il 

Goraksa-paddhaiit p. 74 iVeTHo 3]) (Bombay Edition). 

^ Supra, pp. 1 16 ef aeq. 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 


267 


it.^ This psychological aspect in the Sadhana (associated 
with the sex-emotion and sex-pleasure) is conspicuous by its 
absence in the Natha school. The Vaisnava Sahajiya cult, we 
have seen, was based primarily on the divinisation of the 
sex-emotion by both physiological and psychological discipline. 
1 he Maha-sukha as the Sahaja-nature of the self and the 
not-self was transformed into the emotion of supreme love in 
the Vaisnava school. Neither Maha-sukha nor supreme love of 
the purest and the most intense nature is attainable without 
the help of the chosen woman and it is for this reason that 
the Buddhists always spoke of her as the incarnation of 
Prajna and the Vaisnavas of Mshabhava (Le., the supreme 
emotion of love as personified by Radha), — and this attitude 
of the Sahajiyas, both Buddhist and Vaisnava, will present a 
sharp cantrast to that of the Natha Siddhas in general. The 
important point, however, to be noted in this connection is 
that inspite of this general attitude of aversion towards women, 
the Natha Siddhas also practised some well-known processes 
of yoga like Vajraull, Amarauli, Sahajaull,' etc. in the 
company of women. But these practices are yogic practices, 
pure and simple, in which women are neither philosophised 
upon, nor idealised. 

(iv) The Vedic Soma- sacrifice and the Drinking of Nectar 
in the Yogic Schools 

The most important part of the Sadhana of the Natha 
Siddhas, viz., the drinking of the nectar called Soma, oozing 
from the moon, can very well be associated with the Vedic 
rite of Soma-sacrifice, in which the Soma-juice was drunk 
and also offered to the gods and it was believed that the 
Soma-juice rejuvenates and envigorates the body and gives 
the drinker, whether god or man, eternal life in heaven or 

1 Supra, Ch.W. 

2 For these processes of yoga see Hat/ia-|/oga-/&racI?pf^a (3/83-100). They aye 
VP bp foupd in other stapdard works on Ha^ha-yoga al^o. 



268 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


earth. This Soma-juice was prepared from a particular 
climbing plant (well known as the Soma-plant, Sacrostema 
Viminalis or Asclepias Acida), which was said to grow 
luxuriantly on the mountains of India and Persia, and it is 
very frequently referred to in connection with sacrifice in the 
Vedic literature as well as in the A vesta. The relation 
between the Soma-plant and the moon was held very 
mysterious. The plant itself was often called ‘ the moon* 
plant ’ and it was believed that the plant received its 
exhilarating and envigorating juice directly from the moon . 
As a matter of fact the moon is generally believed to be 
mysteriously related to all the medicinal herbs and it is held 
that the juice of the herbs, that possesses capacity of curing 
diseases and conferring longevity, comes from the moon. In 
the Visnu-purana (]*22) Brahma is said to have appointed 
Soma or the moon to be the monarch of 
Soma^ planets, of plants, of sacrifices, and 

penances, and one of the names of the 
moon is Osadhi-pati or Osadhisa, i.e., ‘ the lord of herbs.’ ' 
So intimate is the relation between the plant Soma and the 
moon that in Vedic as well as post-Vedic literature the moon 
herself is called Soma. The Soma-plant was believed to 
possess sixteen leaves corresponding to the sixteen digits of 
the moon, ^ the leaves disappear one by one with the digits 
of the moon in the black fortnight and again reappear with 
the reappearance of the digits of the moon in the white 
fortnight. The mythical legend goes in the Puranas that “at 
the churning of the ocean after all sorts of medicinal 
plants and healing herbs are thrown in, three of the precious 
things said to be produced are Soma ‘ the moon,’ Amrta 
* nectar,’ and Sura ‘ spirituous liquor,’ and in the other 

' Dictionary of Monier Williams, p. 1137. 

2 We may note here that in the yogic texts Amrta is often thought of trickling 
down from the lotus of sixteen petals {sodaSa-patra’-padma-galitam, Gorak^a- 
paddhatit p. 76, verse 57), vyhich corresponds to the moon with the sixteen digits. 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 


289 


legends this nectar is said to be preserved in the body of the 
moon. ‘ It will be easy from the above to detect the striking 
similarity of the conception of the moon and Amrta or 
Soma of the yogins with those of the Vedic and ppst- 
Vedic traditions, — and it will also be easy to see how 
the Vedic religious function of sacrifice was transformed 
into a yogic practice, in both the cases there being the 
question of drinking Soma to gain eternal life. 


(o) The Rasayana School and the Natha Cult 

We have said before in connection with the history of 
the Natha cult that in ideology as well as in methodology 
the yoga-system of the Natha Siddhas is strikingly similar 
to that of the Rasayana school. The Sadhana of the Natha 
Siddhas is essentially a Sadhana of iransubstantiation and 
transfiguration. We have already referred to the popular 
traditions prevalent among the people of the Natha sect 
even to-day that the Siddhas like Matsyendra-nath, Gorakh- 
nath and others are still living in their subtle super-material 
body in the hilly regions of the Himalayas. These popular 
beliefs of a mythological nature have their root in the theo- 
logical speculations of the sect. It has been said in the 
Yoga-Vija that the perfect body of the yogin is subtler than 
the subtlest, yet grosser than the grossest ; the yogin can 
transform his body according to his will — and his form 
is above all disease and death. He plays in the three worlds 
sportively wherever he likes, and can assume any and 
every form through his incomprehensible power. ^ The same 


^ Monier Williams, p. 1137. 

2 sukjsmdt auJi^malaro dehah sthuldt athulo jadaj jadah I 
icchd-rupo hi yogindrah svatantras tv ajard-marah f| 
krtdati trisu lokesu hlayd yatra k.»iracit I 

acintya-iaktimdn yogi ndnd-rupdni dharayan II (Verses 51-52), 
37 -MI IB 



290 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


belief is to be found also in the Rasayana school.’ The 
Rasayana school is fundamentally based on the ideal of 
Jivan-mukti and the method advocated is that of transubs- 
tantiation with the help of Rasa or chemical element 
(generally mercury) and thus making the body immutable.’’ 
This Rasayana, though primarily a school of chemical 
science, was associated with theological speculations, and 
renowned personalities like Nagarjuna (the alchemist), Vyacii, 
Vyajapyayana and others are recognised to have been the 
stalwarts of the school . It is believed that many are the 
gods, demons, sages and men, who have attained the 
immutable divine body with the help of Rasa and have thus 
become /ipan-mulj/a.* The theological aim of the school 
can be postulated from the first chapter of the RasamaCa 
where Bhairava (lord Siva) explains the principles of 
Rasayana to the goddess, and these principles, he says, are 
the best and the surest way to attaining perfection. The 
question of the goddess is, how to attain Jivan-muk,ti . The 
Lord replies that the secret of Jtvan-mu\ti is rarely known 
even to the gods. The conception of post-mortem liberation 

* evarn rasasamtiddho duhkha-jara-marana-varjito gunavan I 
khe^gamanena ca nityam samcarate sakala-bhuvanesu II 
data hhuvana^tritaye sra^ta so* piha padma-yonir iva I 
hharta visnur iva syat samharta radravad hhavati II 

Rasa-hrdaya-tantra (Ayurvediya-grantha-mala, Vol. I, 19. 63-64). 

Again, — svadehe khe-caratvam ca ^ivatvam yena lahhyate I 
tadfie tu rasa-jHane nitya-hhyasam kuru priye 11 
Raaarnava, edited by Prof. P. C. Roy (Bibliotheca Indica). 

’ apare maheSvarab parameivara-tadaimy-vadino^pi pinda^-sihairye aarva- 
hhimata jtVan-muktih aetayatVty aathaya pinda-athairyo-payani pat adadi-pada-veda- 
nlyarji raaatji eva aamgirante | 

Sarva-dariana-samgraha (Govt. Oriental Hindu Series, Vol. I), p. 202. 

3 devah kecin maheia-dyd daityah kavya-purahaarah I 
munayo Valakhilya-dya nfpah aomeivara-dayah || 
govinda-hhagavaUpadacaryo govinda-nayakah I 
carvatih kapilo vyalih kmUh kandalayanah II 
eienye hahavah aiddha fivan-muktai caranti hi I 
tanuip raaamayim prapya tadatmaka-katha-cansh || 

Quoted in the ^(irpa-d^rigna-aam^raha, p, 20^, 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 291 

is totally worthless ; for in that case all creatures cure 
entitled to it by virtue of their mortal nature.* Again post- 
mortem liberation, spoken of in the six systems of philo- 
sophy, is a mere inferential speculation inasmuch as no 
positive proof of such liberation is available at all. On the 
other hand the state of Jwan-mukti by making the 
body immutable is as positive as anything.* To be 
something knowable, liberation must have a knower ; 
the demise of the knower excludes the possibility of the 
knowable, and hence the conception of post-mortem 
liberation is as fictitious as anything.® For mukti worth 
the name, the Pinda (the body) must be preserved and 
perfected and liberation is thus attainable only through the 
perfection and preservation of the body by the application of 
Rasa (which, according to the school of Rasayana, is mer- 
cury), also by the control of the vital wind.* The Rasa or 
Parada is believed to be vested with the mysterious capacity 

J ajara-mara-dehaaya Siva-tadatmya-Vedanam I 
jiOan-ma^fiV maha-devi deVanam api durlahha II 
pinda-patc ca yo mok^ah sa ca mokso nirarthakoh I 
pinde tu patite devi garddahho'pi vimucyate II (Verses 4-5). 

^ sad-dariane pi mukUa tu daHita pinda-patane I 
kara'inalakovat sa^pi pratyah^a no'palahhyate 11 
tasmat tarn rahayet pindam rasaU caiva ra&ayanaih I 

Quoted in the SarVa-daHana-samgraha, p. 203. 

C/, also-iti dhana4arira-bhogan matva nityan aadaiva yatamyam I 
muktis tasya jfianat taccahhyasat sa ca sthire dehe li 

Rasa-hrdaya^tantra (I. 10) (Ayurvediya Grantha-mala No. 1). 

Again.-asminneva iarire yesam paramatmano na samvedah I 
deha-tyagad arddhoarn tesam tad brahma durataram II 
brahmadayo yajante yasmin divyam tanum samairitya I 
pvan-maktd^ ednye k.cilpanta’-sthayino munayah II 
tasmdj fwan-muktirn samihamdnena yogind prathamam I 

(Jivya tanur vidheya hara^gaurt-srsti‘Samyogdt II /bfd (1. 21-23), 

3 rasdnhameya margo'ktojlt^a-mohanyatha tuna I 

pramdndntara-vddesa yukti-bhedd-valambm II 
jndlr-j^eyam idam viddhi sarva^tantre^u sammatam I 
ndjivan jridsyasi jneyarp yad atostyeva jivanam II 

Raseivara-siddhania, quoted in the Sarva-dariana^samgraha, p. 207. 

4 Kide, /hid. (Verses 18-22). 



292 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


of transforming a base metal into gold and thus by constant 
rejuvenation and envigoration through a process of transubs- 
tantiation the Rasa can make every creature immortal. It 
has been said that Rasa is called Parada because it leads one 
to the other shore of the world. ^ It is the quintessence of 
lord Siva.^ The Rasa is again said to be the seed of Hara 
(/.e., Siva) and Abhra (mica) is the ovum of Gauri ; the 
substance that is produced through the combination of the 
two elements makes creatures immortal.'^ This state of 
immortality attainable through the application of Rasa 
has frequently been spoken of also in the standard works on 
Indian medical sciences as the state of Jivan-muktit which 
has been eulogised as the only state of real perfection. We 
have hinted that the Rasa of Rasayana, variously described as 
the most powerful element and called the Bindu of lord Siva 
himself/ has been replaced in the Natha cult by the Soma^ 
rasa oozing from the moon in the Sahasrara. We may also 
note that in the Rasarnava the two primordial elements, of 
which the physical body is produced, have been described as 
the vital wind (vayv) and the Rasa and according to this 

^ samsdrasya param pdram dattesau paradah smriah 1 
Quoted in the Sarva-dariana-samgraha, p, 202, 

^ parado gadito yasmdt pardriham sadhakottamaih I 

BUpto'yam mat-samo devi mama pratyanga-sambhavah II 
mama deha-raao yasmdd rasas tendyam ucyalc I Ibid , p. 202. 

^ ye cdtyaktci-icir'ird hara-gaurl-srstijarn tanani prdptdh ! 
muktds te rasa-siddha mantra-ganab l^imkaro yc$dm II 

Ibid., p. 203. 

ahhrakos tava bijam tu mama bijam tu paradah 1 
anayor melanam devi mriyu-daridrya-ndianam II 

Ibid., p. 204. 

^ In many of the texts on Rasayana Rasa has been held identical with Siva 
and as such it is said to be vested with the same potency as Siva himself, Cj. 
dariandt apariandt tasya hhaksandt smaranad api I 
pujandd raaa-ddndc ca dfSyate sad vidham phalam II 
k^eddrddmi lingdni prthivydrn ydni k^nicit I 
tdni drstvd tu yat punyam iat-punyam rasa-dar^andt II 

Raadrnava. 

Cf. also similar other vet,ses quoted in the Sarva-dariana-aaqigraha, p, 208. 



THE RELIGION OF THE NATHA SIDDHAS 295 

school the only way of making the body ever-lasting is the 
control ov&c the vital wind and the scientific application of the 
Rasa ; this is the case also with the yoga-system of the Natha 
Siddhas, where the control of the vital wind and the proper 
regulation of the secretion of the Soma are regarded as of 
paramount importance. 

It should be noted in this connection that the alchemists 
generally use the two words Siddha-deha and Dioya-deha as 
synonymous, evidently because both are free from corruption, 
mortality and the defects belonging to the ordinary human 
frame ; but a distinction should be made between the aim of 
the Natha Siddhas and the Rasa Siddhas on the one hand and 
that of the Siddhas of the Suddha-marga (pure path) on the 
other. The Natha Siddhas and the Rasa Siddhas are known 
to be closely allied with each other regarding the ultimate 
object of their aspiration which consists in making the body a 
proof against death and decay and always responsive to the 
stimulus of the world of senses and capable of wielding 
immense power. But both of them are to be sharply distin- 
guished from the adepts of the pure path. In the view of 
the latter, for instance, the incorruptible body is of two 
kinds, viz., the one of the Jtvan-mu\ta and the other of the 
Para-muJ^ta. The former is the pure body of Suddha-maya 
known as Pranava-tanu or Mantra-tanu, a body into which 
the corruptible body of Maya in its triple aspect is finally 
transmuted. It is deathless and free from disintegration, but 
disappears in the end in higher Mul^ti in the Body of Pure 
Light, or Divine Body, called DiVya-deha or JHana-deha of 
Maha-maya, which being absolutely spiritual (cinmaya) is 
beyond the farthest reaches of matter. In Tantric phraseo- 
logy the two bodies ate known respectively as Baindava and 
Sakta. That the Nathas also in certain places discriminate 
between Siddha-deha and Divya-deha as the exponents of 
the other mystic cults do, is evident from their reference to 
the two distinct stages of Amara and AvinSil as Relative 



294 


obscure; R^lGiOUS CULT^ 


and Alnolute Immortality. This contrast between the two 
conceptions of Kaya-siddhi is brought in an interesting manner 
in the disputation between Goraksa>nath and Allam-prabhu 
as recorded in the Bhavisyat-purana-prabhu-Unga-Ma^ 


* Ch. X (Verses 50-79) ; Vide Introduction to the Linga^dhatana-candrit^^ 
\>y M. R. Sakhare, pp. 341-343. The present writer is indebted to MM. Gopinath 
Kabiraj for this information. 



PART lY 

THE DHARMA CULT AND BENGALI LITERATURE 




CHAPTER X 


General Nature of the Cult 

Another popular religious cult developed in Bengal 
out of the admixture of some relics of decaying Buddhism, 
popular Hindu ideas and practices, a large number of indi- 
genous beliefs and ceremonies, and ingredients derived also 
from Islam. This cult may be held responsible for the rise 
and growth in Bengal of a type of literature which deserves 
attention because of its quantitative as well as qualitative 
importance. This minor religious cult is aptly styled as the 
Dharma cult ; for, the main deity, around whom the parapher- 
nalia of worship, ceremonies and practices have gathered, 
and whose boundless grace and unquestionable supremacy 
have been sought to be demonstrated by a large number of 
poets in their semi-epical poems, is the Lord Dharma, or, 
as popularly known, the Dharma-thakura. Credit must be 
given in this case also to the late MM*- H. P. Sastrl, who 
played the pioneer’s part in bringing to the notice of the 
public the existence of such a religious cult and the literature 
on it. 

Dharma cult is a local cult of Western Bengal and 
is prevalent even in the present days m some districts. The 
fact that the Dharma cult originated and spread only in some 
parts of Western Bengal is proved beyond doubt by the 
local references found in the ritualistic works and the 
Dharma-raangalas ; and the sacred places and rivers mentioned 
in these works have already been localised in different parts 
of West Bengal, known as Radha. ’ The stone-images of 

1 Vide Discovery oj Living Buddhism in Bengal by MM. H. P. iSSatrl; and 
also the introductory articles by Dr. M- Shahidullah, Mr. Basantakumar Chatterjee 

36-HIIB 



298 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Dheurma-thakura are still found in West BengaJ and are still 
worshipped in the temples of Dharma. Again, all the poets 
of the Dharma mangala literature, whose works have been 
discovered up till now, belong to the districts of West 
Bengal. Moreover, in connection with the salutations, found 
in the opening chapter of some of the Dharma-mangalas, to 
the different gods and goddesses worshipped in the temples 
of the di^Ferent localities all over Bengal, we find that 
Dharma-thakura, in all his names and forms, belong only 
to the villages of West Bengal. ‘ It is also clear from the 
references that are found in the texts that this cult of 
Dharma was current among the low-class people like the 
Hadis, Domas, Bagdis, Fishermen, Carpenters and the like. 
Archeological investigations have revealed that ideas and 
practices similar to those of the Dharma cult are to be found 
also in some parts of Orissa, particularly in Mayurbhanja 
and its vicinities. ^ From a comparative study of the- 
thoughts, beliefs and practices of the crypto-Buddhistic cults 
of Orissa (as Mr. N. N. Bose calls them) and the various 
forms of the Dharma cult found in the South-Western part 
of Bengal, it will appear that they are essentially the same in 
so far as all of them represent only a mixture of later 
Buddhistic ideas and practices with the popular Hindu 
beliefs and practices including the beliefs and practices of the 
Non- Aryan aborigines. 

In our present study we are not very much interested in 
the ceremonial aspect of the cult ; we are concerned with it 
only in so far as it concerns our literature, or in so far as it 

and Mr. CKaruchandra Banerjee in the Sunya^purana, edited by Mr. Charuchandra 
Banerjee. 

1 Vide MS. entitled Dharmer Bandana (C. L). 2470), pp. 1 (B)-2 (B). 

Also see Sarva-deva Bandana in the $n-dharma-mafigala of Msnik GsAguIi, 
edited by MM. H. P. Sfistrl and Dr. D, C. Sen, pp. 6-7. 

Cf. also the Anadi^mafigala or Sn^dharma-purana of Rsm-dSs Adak, edited by 
Mr. B. K. Chatterjee, M.A., from the Sahitya-paruat, pp. 5-6. 

® Vide Modern Buddhinm And Its Followers In Qrissa by Mr, N. N. Bgae. 



general nature of the cult 2^ 

« 

supplied inspiration to a good number of poets to compose 
fairly bulky poetical works to eulogise the sovereign power of 
Lcwrd Dharma. A detailed account of the extent and the 
nature of the literature that bears the stamp of this cult, with 
a discussion on the controversy over the time of composition 
and the authorship of the works, will be found in the 
appendix (D). 

The Oharma cult being the result of a popular comming- 
ling of ^ host of heterogeneous beliefs and 
nature*of practices, it will be incorrect to style it 

purely Buddhistic or Hindu or indigenous 
either in origin or in nature, — it is as much a hotch-potch in 
its origin as it is in its developed form and nature. Critical 
analysis of the constituent elements will reveal that, as a 
popular religious cult, Dharma cult owes many of its elements 
to that form of later Buddhism, which is known as Mantra-yana 
and laterly, and most commonly, as Vajra-yana. The liturgi- 
cal texts, viz., the Sunya-purSna and particularly the compen- 
dium entitled the Dharma-pU}a-Vidhdna\ will at once remind 
one of the liturgical texts of Mantra-yana or Vajra-yana. Of 
course, in these vernacular works we find but a very f aint trace 
of the earlier practices, we meein those of Tan tric Buddhism, 
they being replaced by innumerable local and indigenous 
practices. In the process of assimilating the local indigenous 
practices the liturgical works of the Dharma cult show the 
same tendency as is found in the liturgical works of Tantric 
Buddhism. With the Sunya-purana and the Dharma-pujd- 
vidhana of the Dharma cult (excluding the portions on 
cosmogonical speculations) we may compare more particularly 
one well-known compendium of the religious practices of 
Vajra-yana Buddhism, viz., the Kriya-samgraha.^ This 

i Edited by Mr. Nani-gopal Banerjee, Sahitya-parisad-granthivali, No, 56. 

3 We have not been able to discover this text ; we have at our disposal in 
rotograph a commentary on the text by Kuladatta. entitled Kriya-iarngrahn-pafi}ikj& 
(manuscript preserved in the Bibiioth^ue Nationale, Paris^ Sanscrit 31). A cc^y 



300 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


text begins with the details of the construction of the Vihara 
(which is not here the monastery of the monks or the nuns, 
but frankly the temple of gods and goddesses) \ worship of 
various gods and goddesses, and hundred other ceremonies 
and practices including placing of the jar (/^a/asa), ablution, 
fire-sacrifice, etc. These are found also in the Sunya- 
purana. The Kriyd^sam^jraha, however, assumes a pseudo- 
Buddhistic form by professing occasionally that the final aim 
of all these rituals and ceremonies is the realisation of 
Bodhicitta with a view to attaining liberation not 
merely of the self but of the whole universe. But along 
with this avowedly Buddhistic ’ purpose even the per- 
formance of fire-sacrifice and the sacrifice of animals to the 
goddesses are also prescribed in this text in complete oblivion 
of the fact that Lord Buddha began his religious career as a 
living protest against the sacrificial religion of the Vedas 
and the cruelty to animals involved therein. The chapters 
on fire-sacrifice {Homa or Yajna) found in the liturgical texts 
of the Dharma cult may be a faint echo of this prototype. 
In the Kriyd-samgraha we find that the offering to the 
goddess Hariti consists of fish, blood of animals, meal along 
with all other articles ; in the Sunya-purdna also we find that 
the goddess associated with Dharma is very fond of animal- 
sacrifice. ^ 

of the manuscript of this commentary is also preserved in the Royal Asiatic Society 
of Bengal (MS. Nos. 3854, 4728). In the Dharma-^oxa-samgraha ol VajracSrya 
AmrtSnanda of the Mahsbodhi-Vihara in Lalita-pattana (MS. preserved inR.A.S.B,, 
No. 8055) we find, in connection with the enumeration of the types of Buddhistic 
literature found in Nepal, mention of this Kriya-samgraha and also a brief note on 
the nature of its contents. The nature and the contents of the text, however, can 
fully be known through the perusal of the commentary of Kuladatta. 

1 Cj. the details of constructing the temple of Dharmajor Niranjana, found in 
the Sunya-purana, See the chapters on Atha Dvara Mocana, Atha Ghar DekhS, 
Atha Danapatir Ghar Dekha, etc 

2 See the chapter on Atha DeVir Manui in the Sunya-purana, It 
is a noticeable fact in this connection that goddess Hariti occupies an 
important position in some of the Buddhist TSntric texts and in Nepal images 
of goddess Hsriti are frequently found side by side with the supreme Lord in the 



GENERAL NATURE OF THE CULT 


301 


But admitting the fact of this relation between the 
liturgical works of the Dharma cult with some liturgical 
works of Tantric Buddhism, how far will it be correct to say 
that the nature of the Dharma cult is essentially Buddhistic ? 
in our opinion, though it may be true to call the Dharma cult 
, , , Buddhistic from a popular point of view, it 

Buddhistic in its is not true from the critical point of view ; 

essential nature? r i i • 1*1 

tor, the heterogeneous practices which go^ 
by the name of Tantric Buddhism have nothing in them 
Buddhistic but an outward colouring effected through the 
introduction of some stray Buddhistic terms and ideas used 
generally in a transformed and deteriorated form, and also 
through the introduction of a pantheon gradually evolved 
from thedocetic conception of Buddhahood. Some Nepalese 
Buddhistic practices are, indeed, found in the practices of 
the Dharma cult ; ^ but it is plain to see that these are 
local practices which are neither Hindu nor Buddhistic either 
in nature or In origin. The theory propounded by MM. H. 
P. Sastri that the stone-images of Dharma-thakura {Dharma- 
Slid), which are found abundantly in Western Bengal, and 
the shape of which approximates the shape of a tortoise, are 
nothing but the miniature forms of the Nepalese Buddhist 
representation of the Siupa with the five Bodhisattvas ^ 
inscribed on them, ' is not, however, clear and convincing. 
It is not also a fact that all the stone-images of Dharma are 
of the sh ape of a tortoise . In the liturgical texts, however, 
we find occasional reference to the tortoise on whose back 
the “ wooden sandals ” of Dharma are to be placed. This 
tortoise is so well-known a mythological figure in the Hindu 

Buddhist temples. In the Dharma cult also Lord Dharma is often found associated 
with goddess 3Uala, who is supposed by scholars to be the transformed form of the 
Buddhist goddess Hariti (both being goddesses of irruption). 

^ As for instance, we may note the use of lime in the worship of Dharma, 
the worship of goddess iSitala ("generally associated with Dharma) who is taken to be 
goddess Hsriti of fsntric Buddhism. 

2 See an article by MM. H. P i^S&trl in the NsrQyana, 1322 B. S., Msgha, 



,302 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

PurSoic literature that Buddhistic interpretation of it seems 
/unwarranted. As a matter of fact this importance of the 
tortoise in a religion may betray its indigenous nature 
and origin. As for the idea of Dharma, who is the Lord 
• Supreme, it will be more correct to say that he represents 
the conception of the Lord Supreme found in the religious 
beliefs of India than to say that he represents the idea of 
Buddha. The idea of the Lord Supreme, as conceived in all 
. forms of Tantric Buddhism, is, as we have already hinted, 
almost the same as conceived in many systems of Hindu 
theology. The followers of the Dharma cult have 
proceeded a step farther than the Tantric Buddhists 
and Dharma here represents the formless Brahman 
of the Upanisads, the Lord Siva of the Saivites and 
the Tantrics, Visnu of the general Vaisnavites, Krsra 
of the Krsnite Vaisnavas and Rama of the Ramite 
Vaisnavas The followers of the Dharma cult seem to have 
altogether forgotten that this Supreme deity may have some- 
thiiig to do with the Bud dha of the B uddhists ; and excepting 
two remarks that the original place of Dharma is the land 
of Ceylon and the Deity Dharma is much revered in the 
land of Ceylon,’ there is no direct evidence in the liturgical 
works or in the Mangala literature of the knowledge of the 
Dharmites that their religion and their deity have anything 
to do with Buddhism and the Buddha. Even the above 
remarks seem to be a mere tradition transmitted to the 

1 Vide, Sunya-purana, pp. 100, 219. 

The triangular land {tekana medirii) of Dharma referred to in the iSunya- 
purana seems to be Ceylon ; but we should notice in this connection that in the 
Dharma-mahgala of Dvija-rSm-cundra we find Siijihala to be a village situated some- 
where in West Bengal. Cf. 

hslighaf auranadi dekhe bama-bhite I 
rakhila airphal gram dakhite dekhiie II 

MS. C. U. No. 2464, p. 6 (A). 

But nowhere in the Dkarma^tnafigalaa do we find any tradition of this Simhalas 
being the original place {&dya ath&na) of Dharma. 



GENERAL NATURE OF THE CULT. 303 

Oharmites and their import may not be clear to the Dharmites 
themselves. 

So when we should say that the Dharma cult is a crypto- 
Buddhist cult, we should remember that it can be said to be 
Buddhistic only in so far as it bears faint relation to that form 
of later Buddhism, more than ninety per cent of which belong 
to religious systems other than Buddhism. We have seen 
in an earlier chapter that various forms of Tantric Buddhism 
were prevalent in Bengal up to the twelfth century A.D. 
The revival of Hinduism with the rise of the Senas of 
Bengal and the Muslim invasion of Bengal dealt a death 
blow to all schools of professed Buddhism in Bengal. It is 
a well-known fact that many of the Viharas, which were 
impc»rtant centres of Buddhism, were mistaken by the 
Mahomedan invaders to be the forts of the enemy and were 
ruined. But, as it has rightly been pointed out by MM. 
H. P. Sastrl, no religious movement of long-standing cultural 
influence can be eradicated all at once from a land by 
any other religious movement or political and religious causes. 
Buddhism, even in its Tantric form, was pushed aside and 
was gradually assimilated into the cognate religious systems 
among the Hindus and the Muslims, and the Dharma cult 
is the outcome of such a popular assimilation. It is to be 
noted that the yogic element, which forms the most im- 
portant factor of Sahajiya Buddhism, had no influence on 
the Dharma cult and save some yogic imageries and phrases 
found occasionally used in the liturgical works,^ no reference 

1 Cf. mana haila naukja pavana k^raala I 
sunara nauka je rupdra kfiradla II 

Siinya-purana, p. 105. 

“ The mind becomes the boat and the vital wind the oar; golden is the boat and 
of silver is the oar.” 

mana k^ra nauka paVana k^raala I 

apuni to niranjana hoiJd ko^4ora 11 Ibid., p. 209. 

Make your mind ths boat and the vital wind the oar ; NiraSjana himself has 
become the helmsman.” Cf. also— '^Make your mind the boat and the vital wind the 
oar»— and make your mind concentrated, and then only can you earpect to go to the 



304 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


to yoga of any sort is to be found in the Dharma cult. 

Before passing on to the next topic we think it necessary 


Possible Muslim 
influence on the 
Dharma cull 


to say here a few words about the pro- 
bability of some Muslim iufluence on the 
Dharma cult. After the Mahomedan 


invasion of Bengal in the thirteenth century, the Muslims 
began gradually to settle in the land and to exert 
political, religious and cultural influence on the people. 
It seems that the followers of the Dharma cult with their 


monotheistic belief in the formless God could easily have 
friendly terms with the Muslims who had the same mono- 
theistic belief in the formless God and who were particularly 
antagonistic to the politheistic belief of popular Hinduism. 
There seems to be palpable influence of the Muslims 
in the description of Dharma of later days.^ The Muslims 
of Bengal were in their turn variously influenced by 
these minor cults of Bengal, and as a matter of fact we find 
that in the popular Muslim literature of Bengal the Muslims 
used all the terminology of the Dharma cult and the Natha 
cult in their description of God 

It seems that the followers of Dharma suffered much for 


their religious beliefs and practices from the Caste Hindus 
and when the Mahomedans entered Bengal as a conquering 
power the Dhar mites took shelter under them, and 
when the caste Hindus were being persecuted in the 
hands of the Mahomedans for their beliefs and practices ‘the 
ancient grudge’ which the Dharmites had against the Hindus 


other shore. When the Dana-pati (i.e., the man who met all the expenses for 
Dharm- worship) heard this oracle, his mind became the boat and his vital wind 
was slopped. Of silver was the boat and of gold was the oar, — and Dharma>raja 
himself became the helmsman.” /hid., p. 41. 

1 C/. hate lile tira kamaiha paya diya maja I 

gaude halana giya dharma maha-raja II 

Dharma-puja-vidhana, p. 215. 

As has been suggested by Dr, Shahidullah Dhaima is described here just in the 
image of a Muslim emperor of Bengal. 



GENERAL’ NAHJEE OF THE CULT 


305 


was laurelled. ,We find in the Yama-purana of the Sunya- 
purana that the messeng^ of Yama assumed the form of a 
human being and entered the city where Ramai lived in the 
form of a Hindu ghost. Ramai came forward and inscribed 
some mark on the forehead of the ghost (so as to initiate him 
to the Dharma cult), but the latter chained Ramai hand and 
foot and took him to Dharma-raja Yama, who ordered 
Rimai to be cut into two with the help of a saw. But Ramai 
began to meditate on the Karatar (the Lord) and the saw 
could not pierce him ; he was then successively cast into fire 
with hands and legs tied up and into the ocean with a slab of 
stone on his chest ; but in each case Ramai was saved by the 
Karatar. The historical fact behind the legend is the perseV 
cution of the Dharmites by the Caste Hindus.’ ,We find 
that some of the poets of the Dharma-mafigalas at first refused 
to comply with the request of Dharma to compose any poem 
in his honour for the fear of social persecution and it was 
after repeated assurance that the Lord could persuade them to 
compose poems.^ The story of the wrath of Lord Niranjana 
{Niranjaner Ruima) found in the Sunya-purana as well as in 
the Dharma-puja-vidhana points out the simple fact that the 
Muslim conquest of Bengal and the persecution of the Hindus 
by the Muslims were regarded by the Dharmites to be the 
gracious device of the Lord himself to save the Dharmites 
from the hands of the persecuting Hindus.® In the Dharma- 

1 See introduction to the ^Unya-purana by Dr. Shahidullah, p. 35. 

2 Vide Dhm. of Mfinik-gfinguli, p, 9, 

3 There we find that when the Brahminic people of Maldah began to tax the 
Saddharmia (/.e,, the Dharmites who professed to be the Saddharniis) , to persecute 
them and to kill them, Lord Niranjana got much angry in Vaikuntha and revealed 
himself as the Khoda (God) of the Muslims in the village of Jajpura; he was seated 
on a horse with a black hat on and with a bow and arrow in hands, and all the 
gods and goddesses of the Hindu pantheon gladly put on the dress of Muslim 
soldiers to accompany the lord. The lord, however, with his army broke all the 
temples of the Hindus, plundered the Hindus, ravaged them and persecuted them, 
and the Dharmites were saved. Jfijpura, a village in the district of Hugh, is 
described in the Dharma-mangala literature as a very important place of the Dhar' 

39-14118 



306 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


pQjS’Oidhana the story of the wrath of Niranjana was followed 
by many pseudo-Urdu verses, which are ascribed to Ramai 
Pandit. Here Ramai eulogises the religion of the Muslims 
and condemns that of the Hindus and prefers the practices of 
the former. As a matter of fact there are some customs in 
the Dharma cult which are essentially Muslim. As for 
instance, we find in the liturgical texts the custom of sacri- 
ficing goats or duck or pigeon before Dharma by cutting their 
throat in a particular manner {javai — Arabic YaVah), which 
is peculiarly a Muslim custom. Again, the animals or 
the birds are to be sacrificed with their face westward. In 
other places we find much importance given to the western 
direction in connection with the' worship of Dharma or the 
accessory ceremonies. The description of the gates invariably 
begins with the description of the western gate. Much 
importance is also attached to the moon, who is depicted as 
the Kotala (gate-keeper) of the western direction. This 
importance given to the western direction and the moon 
undoubtedly bears testimony to the Muslim influence.’ It is 
also to be noted in this coimection that one of the most 
important incidents of the Dharma-mangalas is the incident of 
making the sun rise in the west by Dharma in response to the 
prayers of Lausen. The incident is described in detail in all 
the Dharma-mangalas. Instead of taking this incident simply 
as an instance of the display of supernatural power by the 
devotee of Dharma, will it be far wide of the mark to infer 
that the whole incident was construed only to explain from 
the stand-point of the Dharmites why the west was regarded 
so important by them ? Again, we find that some importance 


mites, and there is also the tradition in later Dharma-mangalas that Dharma 
revealed himself as a Muslim (javana-avatara) in this place, jajapurer dehara 
bandiva ekarnan I jei hhane aVatar haila jaVan II MS. entitled Dharmer Bandana 
(C. U. No. 2470).p. 1 (B). 

^ See a discussion by Dr. B. M. Barua, M.A., D, Lit., in the SaniVarer Cithi 
B.3. 1345, Pausa, 



GENERAL NATURE OF tHE CULT 


307 


is also attached to Friday which is an auspicious day with the 
Muslims. All these practices, however, seem to have been 
introduced into the Oharma cult in later times in course of its 
evolution. 



CHAPTER XI 


Speculations on the Conception of Dharma 

(i) Hindu Conceptions of Dharma 

As the Dharma cult represents a composite form of 
religion developing from a popular adoption of diverse 
religious practices, rites and ceremonies, so also is the idea 
of Dharma, which has been the receptacle of various 
conceptions of the sovereign deity found in various religious 
thoughts. Here, as we have hinted before, we have the 
unconscious mixture of the conception of the Upanisadic 
Brahman with the Purusa of the Sarnkhya, Siva of theTantra, 
Visnu, Krsna and Rama of the Vaisnavas, Yama, the lord of 
justice and death, and also with Dharma, the popularly 
conceived godhead in general. These ideas of the Supreme 
Being have again coalesced with the idea of the supreme 
deity variously conceived in later Buddhism. 

The idea of Dharma as the godhead has a fairly old 
history in the Hindu texts. The word dharma ordinarily 
means that which is to be held fast or kept, or that which 
holds fast or keeps, or law, statute, religion, piety, right, 
justice, equity, virtue, merit, nature or character of entities, an 
essential or characteristic quality, mark, peculiarity of an 
entity, or the entity itself. In its Vedic form (dharman) it 
meant the maintainer, the supporter, the arranger. When 
popularly personified, Dharma means the lord of all laws 
and ordinances, the lord of justice, the central figure of all 
religion, and in this last aspect *Dharma is popularly 
conceived as God, the Lord Supreme, who is maintaining 
the whole world by administering order, discipline and 



SPECULATIONS ON THE CONCEPTION OF DHARMA 30^ 


justice. Even in the present day the custom among the 
common run of people is to swear by the name of Dharma, 
to appeal to Dharma for redress from distress, to invoke the 
blessings of Dharma in time of calamities. — and in all these 
cases Dharma is none but the supreme deity or God Himself. 
From as early a time as the time of the Vedas, the word 
Dharma is found used in its variously personified forms. In 
the Satapatha-hrahmana (13. 4. 3) we find in connection with 
the enumeration of the kings and the subjects of all quarters 
and localities that Dharma Indra was the king of the gods. 
Here Dharma is identified with Indra, the lord supreme of the 
later Vedic literature. ^ In the Puranic literature we find men- 
tion of another Dharma, who is Righteousness, Justice, Law 
or Virtue personified ; he was born from the right chest of 
Brahma and had three offsprings, Sama, Kama and Harsa. 
Dharma or Dharma-raja is well-known in the Puranic and 
^epic literature of Sanskrit as the epithet of Yama who is the 
God of justice and the king of death. Even in populctr 
Buddhistic literature Yama is widely known as the Dharma- 
raja. ^ Dharma is, again, one of the attendants of the 
Sun-god ; he is Justice or Virtue, identified with Visnu; he 
is Prajapati, and is said to be the son-in-law of Daksa. We 
find mention of many other personalities in the Puranic 
literature of the name of Dharma who were notable for 
various virtues and activities. 

Of all these, however, Yama, the king of death and 
justice, is the most widely known by the name of Dharma 
or Dharma-raja. In the Mahabharata Yudhisthira is tradi- 
tionally described as the son of Yama, and he himself was 
known as Dharma-pulra (I'.e,, the son of Dharma) and the 
epithet Dharma-raja is also found frequently used for him. 

i Vide B. K. CKatterjee’s introduction to the $rhdharma~purana of MayQra* 
bhat|a. 

* Vide Karanda-vyuha^ printed in Calcutta in 1873 by Satyaviata Simairami 
in a series of Jaina works. 



310 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


It is a very popular story of the Mahabharata that Dharma 
in the guise of a Yaksa put a few questions to' Yudhisthira 
and the answers given by the latter was to the entire satisfac- 
tion of Dharma and Yudhisthira obtained boons from him. 
When Yudhisthira was bewildered at the superhuman form 
and glow of the disguised Yaksa, the latter declared, — “ 1 
am Dharma, your father of supreme power — and am come 
here only to see you. My body is constituted of fame, 
truth, self-control, purity, simplicity (arjava), modesty, 
steadiness {acapalya), bounty, penance and physical and 
mental discipline (brahmacarya) ; non-violence, equity, peace, 
moral virtue, purity and non-exhilaration are my senses.” ’ 
This Dharma once more came to test the righteousness of 
Yudhisthira in the guise of a dog when the latter was about 
to enter heaven (Maha-prasthanika-parva, Ch. 3). In the 
SJ^anda-parana, Yama, the son of Surya, is depicted as a 
great sage (rsf) of the name of Dharma or Dharma-raja. He 
was practising austere penances to propitiate Mahadeva 
(i.e., Siva). The gods (including Indra) got frightened at 
the penances of Dharma and sent down a celestial damsel, 
Varddhini by name, to disturb the penance of Dharma. In 
course of a dialogue with her Dharma said, — “ 1 am Yama to 
all beings who are evil-doers, — and 1 am Dharma to all 
self-controlled people.” ^ Lord Siva was propitiated by the 
penances of Dharma and as desired by the latter the forest 
Dharma-ranya became a sacred place for pilgrimage through 
the boon of Siva. Dharma himself preferred to be trans- 
formed into a bull and became the mount of Siva. ® V 

^ Mahabharata, Vana-parva, Ch. 312. 

* yamo* ham aarva-hhuianam dmtanam kafma-k.arindm I 

dharma-rupo hi sarvesdm manujandm jitdtmandm II 
sa dharmo^ham vardrohe dadami iava durlahham I 
iaUaarVatp prdrthaya tVam me Slghrarn cdpasarasdm Vare 11 
. Dharma-ranyO'-khanda, (417-18) included within the Brahma-k^an^a, 

^ Skanda^ptirdt^f Brahma»khan4<^t Seia-mdhdtmya, Ch. Ill, 



SPECULATIONS ON .THE CONCEPTION OF DHARMA 31 1 


In the Bengali Manuscript Library of the Calcutta 
University we have a manuscript entitled Dharma-itihasa 
(i.e., the history of Dharma MS., C. U. No. 6152) which is 
ascribed to the poet Guna-raja-khan.^ The Dharma of the text 
is none but the Lord Supreme, and it has been demonstrated 
with reference to the stories of the Ramayana and the 
Mahabharata how the genuine devotees in different times and 
places were, under various critical circumstances, protected 
through the infinite grace of the Lord. 

Traditions in the Dharma cult often show a great 
tendency to identify Dharma, or Dharma-raja with the 
Dharma-rSja Yama. As a matter of fact Yama himself, 
seated on his Vahana (mount) of buffalo, is often identihed 
with the Dharma-raja of the Dharmites in many places of 
West-Bengal and the festivities in connection with the 
gajana of Dharma are known as the festivities of Dharma- 
raja Yama. Often it has been found that in worshipping 
Dharma-raja the priests utter the Mantra, — ‘Salute to 
Dharma-raja, who is Yama and who is of various forms’ 
{namaste bahurupaya yamaya dharma-rajaya).^ In the 
ritualistic texts also we find corroboration of the fact. In 
the chapters on the river Vaitarani of the Sunya-purana we 
find that Dharma himself is acting as the helmsman and 
carrying all the devotees of Dharma to heaven, which 
is situated on the other side of the direful river Vaitaraift. 
Ramai Pandita himself is here helping all lay people on board. 
The name of the river Vaitarani is so closely associated with 
the name of Yama in Hindu mythology that it takes no time 
to recognise that this Dharma-raja is none but Dharma-raja 


1 We do not think that this Guna-raja-khan is the same as Maladhara Vasu, 
the well-known translator of the BhagaVata in the pre*Caitanya period. 

2 KiJe an article Radha-hhramana by PaftcSnan Banerjee, B. S. P. P., 1314 
B. S. It is interesting to compare with the above Mantra the ordinary Mantra of 
Yama-iarpana ; — yamaya dharma-rajaya mftyave cantakflya ca etc. 



.312 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Yama.^ In a chapter of the Dharma-puja-vidhana we find 
the deity of the Dharmites unconsciously identified with 
Yama seated on his Vdhana of buffalo and accompanied by 
his well-known clerk, Citra-gupta, and his attendants, Kala 
and Vjkal3„ with iron chains in their hands ; he is found 
administering law to all people of the world.^ 

In the liturgical texts of the Dharma cult the tradition of 
Dharma’s identity with Yama seems to be less popular 
than the tradition of his identity with Siva and Visnu ; in the 
Dharma-mangalas again the tradition of the Saivite nature 
of Dharma seems to be in a dwindling condition and the 
Vaisnavite nature, either in the form of Visnu in general or 
Krsna or Rama in particular, predominates. But before 
we deal in detail with this question it will be helpful to us 
to investigate into and examine the Buddhistic substratum of 
lord Dharma. 

(j't) Buddhistic Substratum of Dharma 

In the Sanskrit dictionary Amarakosa Dharma-raja has 
been mentioned as a synonym for Buddha ;* in the Jataka 
stories also the epithet Dharma-raja refers to Buddha. It may 
be noted that the Dharmites still now observe the days of 
Buddha-purnima (i.e., Baisal^hi purnima, the birthday of 

^ Of couree, in some other chapters (vtz., the chapters on Yama-purana, 
Yama-dUta-samVada, Yatna-raja-samVada) we find that the Purfinic Dharma-rSja 
Yama and Dharma-igja Nirafijana are differentiated. It is demonstrated with legends 
tKat Dharma-raja Yama has no sovereignty over people who are devotees of 
Dharma-rSja Niranjana or the Karatar and that, being sadly harassed on several 
occasions, Dharma-raja Yama with the help of Rimai Pandit made an exhaustive 
list of the priests and devotees of Dharma-thakura of the five ages (including the void- 
age) 80 that he might instruct his officers not to meddle with them. About this 
disagreement of traditions we have nothing more to say than that here in the Dharma 
cult, which offers the best specimen of the religious psychology of untrained masses, 
nothing but anomaly and confusion can be expected. 

^ pp. 249 et seq. In one line of this chapter, however, Dharma and Yama are 
spoken of as two {Yama dharma duijan hosya achen-deoa-aahhay) ; but in fact 
they are treated as one throughout the whole chapter. 

3 SarVajtiah sugato baddho dharma-- tathagatah i 



SPECULATIONS ON THE CONCEPTION OF DHARMA 313 


Buddha) and Asadhi purnimS (the day on which Dharma~ 
cal^ra was first preached by Buddha) as highly auspicious 
festive days.^ But it will not be fair to surmise from such 
identifications that Dharma or the Dharma-raja, or rather the 
Dharma-thakura of the Dharma cult directly represents 
Buddha. In discussing the Buddhistic substratum of the 
idea of Dharma we should remember that the Buddhism 
we are referring to here is not the Buddhism with which we 
are acquainted in any of the standard Buddhistic schools ; it 
is that phase of later Buddhism which is so-called mainly 
historically ais maintaining in a transformed, modified and 
corrupted form the continuity of the older thought. ,We 
may illustrate the exact nature of the relation of the Dharma 
cult with standard Buddhism with reference to an episode 
of the popular Pali text Milinda-panha. The question of 
king Milinda is whether the man who is reborn is the same 
as the man who is dead or is an absolutely new man. It 
is indeed very difficult to answer the question directly in 
consistence with the theory of momentariness of the 
Buddhists. The answer of the Elder Nagasena is, therefore, v- 
indirect ; he says that the man who is newly born is neither 
the same as the former, nor is he absolutely a new mem ; but 
inspite of the absence of personal identity the latter is to be 
associated with the former only because of the fact that the 
former is mysteriously responsible for the existence of the 
latter. The argument of Bhadanta Nsgasena may very 
aptly be repeated here in connection with the exact relation 
between the Dharma cult and Buddhism, or the conception of 
the Dharma thakur and the conception of the ultimate 
reality propounded in Buddhism proper. It may be repeated 
here that it will be wrong to suppose that any particular 
Buddhistic conception of the reality has, through processes of 

^ The author is indebted to Prof. Prabodh Chahdra Sen, M.A., for giving him 
detailed information on this point. 

40-141 IB 



314 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


long transformation, coalesced with the Hindu conceptions 
of the supreme deity and has thus given rise to the com- 
posite conception of the Dharma thakura. Dharma-thakura 
represents as much infiltration of ideas from popular Hin- 
duism as from popular Buddhism, and this explains his 
extremely heterogeneous nature. In investigating into the 
Buddhistic substratum of the conception of Dharma, there- 
fore, we shall only indicate the different lines in which 
Buddl}istic ideas might h^ve infiltrated in the mind of ordi- 
nary masses to give rise to the conception of a deity of such 
heterogeneous nature. 

We have seen before that the philosophic ideas of 
Mahayana Buddhism, with the spirit of catholicity and adapt- 
ation, had an innate tendency towards approximating the 
Upanisadic spirit. Whatever may be the position of Nagar- 
juna and his followers, who have been the centre of great 
controversy, the conception of the ultimate reality of the 
Vijnanavadins as pure consciousness or the absolute uncreate 
cannot but be held to be positive in nature. The Tathata- 
vada of A4vaghosa admits the Tathata-nature (i.e , the nature 
of the Dharmas as thatness) to be something substantial, per- 
manent and unchanging and as such it is something positive, 
though formless and unqualified. The conception of the 
Vijnapti-matrata or the Abhuta-pariJialpa, which is of the 
nature of consciousness, bereft of the duality of the knower 
and the knowable, seems to be just the previous step of the 
conception of the Brahman which in its absolute and un- 
qualified nature transcends all knowledge, knower and 
knowability. It has always been vehemently argued by the 
Vijnanavadins that Sunyata was never spoken of by the Lord 
as pure ^nothing’ ; while it is the negation of all duality, it 
implies at the same time the reality of pure consciousness or 
the absolute uncreate, which is unchanging, unthinkable, all- 
good, eternal, all bliss, the ultimate element of the nature of 
liberation. 



SPECULATIONS ON THE CONCEPTION OF DHARMA 315 

Again in the docetic conception of the Tri-kaya in the 
Mahayana system the Dharma-kaya or the body of the 
cosmic unity, or the organised totality of things, though not 
as a purely philosophical concept, but as an .object of reli- 
gious consciousness, approximates the idea of the Brahman. 
The word Dharma-kaya is often explained as the body of 
law ; and it may also be remembered that Buddha is said 
to have told his disciples that his teachings should be recog- 
nised as bis own immortal body. But the word dharma is 
generally used in the Mahayana texts in the sense of ‘entity’ ; 
and the Dharma-kaya means the ‘thatness’ {tathata-rupa) of 
all the entities ; it is in other words the dharma-dhatu or the 
primordial element unjerlying all that exists. It has been 
also termed as the Svabhava-kaya, i.e., the body of the ulti- 
mate nature. It is described as devoid of all characters, but 
possessing eternal and innumerable qualities. It is neither 
the mind, nor matter, nor something different from them 
both. The nature of the Dharma-kaya is described in the 
Aoatamsalia-sutra^ in the following manner, — ‘The Dharma- 
kaya though manifesting itself in the triple world, is free 
from impurities and desires. It unfolds itself here, there, 
and everywhere responding to the call of Karma. It is not 
an individual reality, it is not a false existence, but is univer- 
sal and pure. It comes from nowhere, it goes to nowhere ; 
it does not assert itself, nor is it subject to annihilation. It is 
for ever serene and eternal. It is the One, devoid of all 
determinations. This body of Dharma has no boundary, no 
quarters, but is embodied in all bodies. Its freedom or 
spontaneity is incomprehensible, its spiritual presence 
in things corporeal is incomprehensible. All forms of 
corporeality are involved therein, it is able to create all things. 
Assuming any concrete material body as required by the 
nature and condition of Karma, it illuminates all creations. 


Quoted in Suzuki't OutUneB of MahSyana Buddhitm, pp. 223*224. 



$16 


ObSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Though it is the treasure of intelligence, it is void of parti- 
cularity. There is no place in the universe where this body 
does not prevail. The universe becomes, but this body for 
ever remains. It is free from all opposites and contrarieties, 
yet it is working in all things to lead them to Nirvana.” 

This docetic conception of Buddhahood as implied in 
the theory of Tri-kaya gradually transformed itself in the 
monotheistic concoption of a Being and latterly in the clear 
conception of a personal God. The Dharma-kaya Buddha 
became the Lord Supreme, the Sambhoga-kaya Buddha 
became the Dhyani-Buddhas (ofz., Vairocana, Aksobhya and 
others) and the Nirmana-kaya Buddha gave the idea of the 
humeui Buddhas {Manusi Buddha) . 

All these various philosophical concepts about the ultimate 
reality in the different schools of Buddhism, including the 

All docfitic and <iocetic Conception of Buddha as con- 
monistic conceptions ceived in the theory of the Tri-kaya, lost 

or the reality m bud- 

ahism combined in their Special significance in a popular idea 
ception of a Supreme of a Supreme Being — a personal God m 
later schools of Tantric Buddhism, and the 
most common name by which He was known among the 
Tantric Buddhists was the Lord Vajra-satlva.* Though it 
became customary with the Buddhist Tantrikas to describe 
this Vajra-sattva with all sorts of negative attributes (of course, 
in addition to the positive ones), it is very easy to see that 
the conception of the Vajra-sattva behind all these positive 
and negative attributes is definitely positive and is that of a 
personal God. ^All Buddhistic ideas, viz., the idea of iSunyata, 
the idea of pure consciousness, the idea of the Bodhicitta, the 
idea of Maha-sukha began in later days to acquire cosmo- 
logical and ontological significance in the form of an all- 
pervading Being., The origin of the Dharma-thakura with all 
his positive and negative, Buddhistic and Hindu attributes 


^ Vide Supra» pp, 28-29. 



speculations on the conception of dharma 317 


may historically be asociated with the conception of this Lord 
Supreme of the later Buddhistic schools. 

In connection with the evolution of the conception of 
Dharma the question of its relation with the 
Dharma of the three ‘jewels’ of Buddhism 
(o/z., Buddha, Dharma and Sangha) natu- 


the 


Dharma and 
three jewels, Viz., 
Buddha, Dharma and 


rally attracts our notice. MM. H. P. Sastri 
and others have propounded the theory that in later times 
Buddha, the first of the three jewels, was naturally eliminated 
by the lay Buddhists with the growing influence of revived 
Hinduism, and the third jewel Sangha became the Sangha 
(conch-shell), which is very important in connection with 
Hindu worship; and the second jewel, oiz., Dharma became 
identified with the Buddhist Stupa, which was worshipped as 
something like the symbol of Dharma, — and this Stupa 
became the Dharma-thakura of the Dharma cult in the form 
of a tortoise. In propounding such a theory, however, 
we should proceed a bit cautiously. As for the transformation n 
of Sangha into Sank.ha we may say that the frequent mention 
of Sankha with various other necessaries of worship in the 
$unya-putana cannot convince one of its Buddhistic origin ; 
for Safikha is no less important as one of the necessaries of 
worship in the proper Hindu liturgy than in the cult of 
Dharma. The story of Visnu’s killing Sankhasura and giving 
the Sangha to Padmalaya’s son, as narrated in the Odiya text 
Siddhanta-pomhara, seems to us to have nothing in it to 
warrant the origin of this Safikha in the Sangha of the 
Buddhists/ Of course in the Dharma-puja-vidhana we find 
a few confused lines on Sankha ; what we can at most infer 


1 “We scarcely think it would be very wide of the mark to infer from this 
that the word Sankha here means nothing but a Buddhistic Sangha. In this inter- 
pretation of Sankha as Sangha, we are supported by the Sunya-PurSna, in which 
Sankha is very frequently used for Sangha. The common people in their ignorance 
of the teachings of Buddhism and its terminology, either misspelt Sangha^as Sankha 
or mistook Sankha for Sangha which really means a congregation of Buddhistic 
monks.” Modern Buddhism And Its Followers, etc., by N. N. Bose, p. 19. 



^318 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


from this is that Safikha was held important in the worship of 
Dharma/ We sometimes find also salutation to Safikha in 
connection with the opening chapter of salutation in the 
Dharma-mangalas.^ This importance of Sankha has nothing 
in it which may help us to construe some kind of relation 
between Safikha and the Buddhist Sangha on any convincing 
ground. 

We have already pointed out that Sunyata and Karuna, 
transformed as Prajna and Upaya, were 
o7!he t W teweu‘°" Held vcty important in Tantric Buddhism, 
and a tendency was manifest to interpret 
this Prajna and Upaya as static arid dynamic, or negative and 
positive, as female and male, and so on. Gradually the 
three jewels of Buddha, Dharma and Sangha came to be 
interpreted in terms of Prajna, Upaya and the world produced 
by them ; Upaya as the male principle was identified with 
Buddha, and necessarily Dharma became Prajna or the female 
principle and Sangha came to be interpreted as phenomenal 
world which is produced through the union of Prajna and 
Upaya.'’ These transformed forms of the three jewels are still 


^ It should however b?, remembered in this connection that in the Dharma- 
mah^alas we frequently come across the details of Dhnrma-worship ; but there we 
do not find any special attention paid to this ^ankha. 

^ Cj. iola ^afiJ^ha handiva asamkjiya lak^a muni I 
e cart pandit banda e can amani II 

MS. entitled Dharmer Bandana, C. U. No 2470, p. I (A). 

It may be noted here that in the gajana of Siva, which is prevalent in some 
districts of East Bengal-, and which is nothing but a ^aivite version of the Dharmer 
gajana of West Bengal (see infra, p. 823 F. N. No. 3) we find a few fragmentary 
verses on the origin and importance of Sahkha, and we may further notice that 
Gauri or Pfirvali (he., the consort of 6iva) is particularly fond of putting on the 
bracelet made of .San^/ia. We are quoting here some fragmentary verses: — sapta 
samudre janmen iankha iona tar katha I gaurike dhariya nila aksay baMala II i5i(?) 
khan kariya iankha tuliya ihuila dale I pahan hatase ^ankha siva r&m bale II hena 
bS iankha iuddha nayare kon note bale II iri-phal k^indal devt gay haila gharma I 
hi&va-karma kfltiya dila da§ bhai iankha II daS bhai iankha dev't pare dai haste I kon 
iankhe badya ghanfa kon iahkhe jal I iioer alay amar yamer n&hi day I koti kofi 
prantam kari mahadever pay tl (Own collection). 

3 For a detailed discussion on the point see the chapter on Cosmogony, infra. 



Speculations on the conceptkw of dharma 




:• ow preserved ia the Jaganaatha temple of Puri.. There the 
two male figures, with a female figure in the middle, widely 
known in their Hinduised nomenclature as Jagannatha and 
Balarama with the image of Subhadra in the middle, are in all 
probability the representations of the three jewels of Buddha, 
Dharma and Sangha transformed as Upaya, Prajna and their 
son, f.e., the phenomenal world. In the esoteric Buddhist 
literature the epithet Jagannatha (i.e., the lord of the world) is 
widely used before Buddha or rather the Lord Supreme, and it 
is also a well-known adjective used before the Lord Supreme 
of the Hindus,— and thus through the medium of the epithet 
Jagannatha, the first of the three jewels could very easily be 
Hinduised and the Hinduisation of the other two was but a 

matter of course. This theory of the 
Buddh.as JagannHtha. Buddha, the first jewel of 

the Buddhists, into Jagannatha (and later on frankly conceived 
as Ktsna) has its corroboration in the tradition of the literature 
of the Dharma cult. Jayadeva, the famous Vaisnava 
lyric poet, described Buddha as the ninth incarnation 
of Visnu ; and in the literature of the Dharma cult we find 
in connection with the description of the incarnations of God 
that in the ninth incarnation God was born as Jagannatha, 
who is none but lord Buddha, and he settled his residence 
on the sea-coast, where he has relieved the whole world by 
distributing to all (irrespective of caste and creed) his 
Prasada (t.e., the food offered to God and supposed to be 
accepted by him).^ In another place we find that m this 
incarnation of Jagannatha the lord revealed himself to the 
Hindus and Muslims, who were all united together in his 
(i.e., Jagannatha’s) place, and in the country of Gauda 


1 Dharma-psjs-cidhana. pp. 206-207 : also p- 208. See also Gooinda-oijaua of 
Syima-dfis, VangavSsl-edition, p. 3. 

It may be pointed out here that in the ten incarnations of Visnu, inscribed on the 
gateway of the temple of JagannStha in Puri. Buddha, the ninth incarnation, has 
been replaced by JagannStha. 



320 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


(li.e., in Bengal) he has revealed himself as the 
Dharma-raja.^ 

But though Buddha was the first of the jewels and 
had his prominence also in the temple of Jagannatha, 
he could not enjoy universal sovereignty for several reasons. 
In the first place, from the metaphysical standpoint Dharma 
represents Prajna or Sunyata, which being the ultimate source 
of all origination and being often interpreted as the noumenal 
aspect of the reality, was infused with more cosmological 
, - and ontological value than Buddha, who 

jewel and Dharma- represents UpSya or Karuna, metaphysical- 
ly explained "as the aspect of pheno- 
menalism.-^ This metaphysical valuation might have been 
there in the mind of common people in the form of a time- 
honoured tradition, and this may be why Dharma could 
supersede the claim of Buddha in being recognised as the 
supreme divinity among the Dharmites^. In the second 
place, in later times lay people had no idea about what these 
three jewels might be ; they could recognise only Dharma, 
who was, in common faith and tradition, known to them 
as the Supreme Lord, the Sovereign Deity over the universe, 
— some Invisible power administering law and justice; 
consequently Dharma became gradually recognised as the 
Lord Supreme. Moreover, with the growing influence of 
Hinduism it was not possible for ordinary people of lower 
social order to accept any one but Dharma out of the three 
jewels as their Lord. 

The Dharma-thakura of the Dharma cult is not generally 
associated with any Sakti or female counterpart. In the 
Dharma-puja-oidhana, however, we find a goddess, Kaminya 
by name, whose worship follows the worship of Dharma 
along with the worship of many other gods and goddesses, 
and she is the goddess for removing 

Dharma and his SaktJ. it, , , ™ . i>r . 

blindness and leprosy^ 1 his Kaminya 

^ fDharma-'paja-vidhSnaf pp. 214-15. 



SPECULATtoNS ON THE CONCEPTION OF DHARMA 321 


is sometimes described as something like a Sakti of Dharma,' 
and as a matter of fact some of her descriptions resemble the 
description of the goddess variously described in the Buddhist 
and the Hindu Tantreis. But the more important fact is that 
Dharma-thakura, as the Sovereign Deity, has frequently been 
identified with Siva and as such is always associated with his 
Sakti as Bhagavati, Adi-deoi, Adi-sal^ti, or as Ba^uli, Cemdl, 
Durga, Parvati, etc. In the liturgical texts Dhuma-thakura is 
frequently styled as MahesVara (the great 
lord) or Mahadeva (the great deity), Deva- 
deva (the God of gods) — epithets which are 
commonly used before the well-known deity Siva. In some 
temples of Dharma Dharma-thakura has been transformed 
completely into Siva.* In the well-known religious ceremony 
of West Bengal known as the Gajana of Dharma, which is 

* omkara-bhuta-vedaya hjamina-aahitaya ca I 

mama aarVSrtha-'aiddhy-artham dharma-rSja namo* atute II 
Dharma-puja-Vidhana, p. 86. 
orri r*a atikSyam iatha devam hjimina-aahitarfi prahho I 
ayxir-arogyam aiSvaryam aampattim dehi me aada II 

Ibid, p. 87. 

uUQk.a-v3hanam dharmaiy k^mik.hyd{?h8ahitam iivam I 
dhauta-hunde (ndu) •dhaValarp Sarva-aampat-phala-pradam II 

Ibid. p. 77. 

This last verse is found in the Srt~dharma~maAgala of Manik Gsnguli as ! — 

ulubja (aic. k.am) -VShanam dharmam \aminya aahitam (aic. •#©) iiVam I 
dhauta-k^ndendu-dhaVala-koyoTfi dhySyed dharmarji namSmy aham II 

p. 4- 

* It is interesting to note here an incident described by MM. H. P. ^istrT in 
an article in the Bengali monthly Narayona (B. S. 1322, Magha) in connection with 
the transformation of Dharma to ^iva. In a temple of Dharma MM. iSfistri found a 
priest dividing into two equal portions the offerings to be presented to Dharma. He 
asked out of curiosity why such divisions were made. The reply of the priest was — 
“ He is Dharma and Siva at the same time and hence is the division.” On further 
enquiry MM. Sastri came to learn that the Mantra with which the offerings were 
presented to the deity was, — ‘‘Salute be to iSiva, who is Dharma-rSja ” {iiVSya 
dharma-rajaya namafi). After several years of his first visit MM. ;5a8trT went there 
once more and found that by this time a GaurUpalfa (a symbolic representation of 
the female organ of the Sakti generally found placed beneath the symbolic represen- 
tation of the male organ of Siva) was placed by the Brahmins beneath the stone* 
image of Dharma so as to Hinduise him completely, 

4I~1411B 



322 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the most celebrated function of the Dharmites current even 
to the piresent day, Dharma has been frankly made Siva and 
the Gsfana of Dharma really means the Gajana of Siva. In 
the book Adyer Gambhlra by Mr. Haridas Palit ’ we find 
an elaborate account of the Gajana of Dharma. Even a 
cursory glance on the verses that are sung with dancing and 
beating of double drums will show how confusedly Siva and 
Dharma have been mixed together in these ceremonies and the 
verses themselves are really fragments found in the liturgical 
works of the Dharma cult and .the SivSyanas of Bengal. It 
is very interesting to note that this ceremony of Gajana is 
also found in some districts of East Bengal in the form of 
Nila-puja, (i.e., the worship of the deity Nila), and this 
elaborate religious ceremony, which takes place in the last 
week of the Bengali year and takes about a week’s time to 
be completed, is never suspected by the people in these 
districts to be anything but a Hindu religious function 
primarily concerned with the Hindu deity Lord Siva. * The 
fragmentary verses that are generally recited in connection 
with the various ceremonies of this function have striking 
affinity with the verses found in the liturgical works of the 
Dharma cult and also in the Gajana of Dharma of West 
Bengal not only in matter and spirit, but sometimes in 
language also with slight deviations. ^ 

^ Published under the auspice<> of the Msladaha National Educational 
Institute, Bg S. 1319, 

® A very brief account of this Gajana of East Bengal will be found in the 
Vahga-SahUva-paricaya, Part I, of Dr. D. C. Sen (published by the University of 
Calcutta) , pp. 159-161, 

3 We have collected from some villages in the district of Backergunge the 
fragmentary verses akin to those found in the liturgical works of the Dharma cult. 
They are recited in connection with the Nlla-puja ceremony. It will be interesting 
to note that the cosmogonical ideas found in these verses are the same as found »n 
the literature of the Dharma cult. We shall discuss this point later on in our 
discussion on cosmogony). Lord Siva is occasionally styled here as Dharma or 
Dharma-rSja. In the Dharma-puja vidhana (pp. 242^245) we find a discussion on 
the origin and growth of the foetus ; exactly a similar verse is found among the 



Speculations on the conception of dharma ^2^ 

The conceptions of 5iva and iSakti or the primordial male 
and the female have their bearing on the literature of the 

verses that are recited on the occasion of the Nila-puja^ We find in the liturgical 
works of the Dharma cult salutation and prayers to the four quarters with a 
presiding deity in each ; the same custom is also found in the Gsiana of iSiva, and 
the peculiar fact to be noticed is this that here as well as in Dharma cult the 
ceremony begins from the west, which is not surely a Hindu practice. This practice 
however, seems significant and its significance has been explained before 
(5upra, p. 306). We are quoting here a specimen of the verses recited in Dik- 
handana : — 

paicim paicim adi paricay dvari 
manimay muktar har I 
iuddha kflnthe kflfican dvar I 

kafican dvare bakjja name takyo (?) rudra sthapita I 

tan rSja iri-jagannath bahinl 

tar dharma paruse dharma dharma har I 

tdndre aevile mukti kota pdi 

nd ydva yama-puri iiva-puri ihdi II 

dgam bed gdyatri bdm 

ka^can dvdre den pmpdnjali I 

he sddhuli, dih. paicim, kflrtih. ganes mahadeV sangini, 
dik paicim sapta-tdl k^thi 
tine sahge bdld khdti II 

Similar verses are recited in accompaniment with dances and beating of drums in 
the other three quarters, the presiding deity in the north being Jsri-sabhS-linga, in 
the east SrT-munda-cakra and in the south SrI-vaidya-natha. Again, we have in the 
liturgical works of the Dharma cult descriptions of the construction of the temple 
of Dharma (commonly known as dharmera deula) ; with them we may compare the 
following verses on gr/ia-nirmana, t.e., constructing the house (for the Lord) on 
occasion of .diva’s Gdjana :-^ 

sapta samudre sthdn sthiti tirtha bardnasi I 

ydita bahiyd feare siav ^dita sdiia rsi II 

Tsi gane feare stav bhdoiyd niranjan I 

ghji:a idil jakhiyd k^re deui span ! 

arjun kafen pdthar ddnaOe mare hurd I 

kande hjariyd bahe dik sonar pdifkpm II 

rajata feancan ^aflean sdire I 

rajata kafican kancan pdire II 

tveta edmare chdiyd rdri cdl I 

edri cdl Can pair coyart chanda I 

ei ghar ^hana dekhdy yena batrUer ban da II 

mcdini haila pota dkaS haila cdl i 

sdgar dekhdy yena parVat samdn II 

gayd taldiyd ghar firtha bardnasi I 

ghare basiyd harindm duydre tulasi II 



OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


'324 

tMiarma cult particularly in connection with the portions ori 
cosmogony and cosmology, — and as we have to deal in detail 
with these ideas in a separate chapter, we do not propose 
to deal with them here. 

The point to be emphasised here is that in the Buddhist 
Tantras a tendency was manifest always to conceive the 
Supreme Lord in the image of Siva and the female counter- 
part of the Lord in the image of Sakti, and these Lord and 
Lady of the Buddhists were in still later times identified 
completely with the Siva and Sakti of the Hindus. In the 
section on cosmogony of the Siinya-purana we find that 
goddess Adya, who is also called Gaurl (Durga and Parvatl), 
was unable to control her youth and sent Kama (Cupid) to 
the Lord who was absorbed in deep meditation on the river 
Balluka ; Kama disturbed the meditation of the Karatar. 
The whole scene here has been confusedly borrowed from 
the tradition of the disturbance of Siva’s meditation by 
Cupid for his (Siva’s) marriage with Parvatl, Dharma-thakura 
being conceived here exactly in the image of lord Siva. ^ 

maiSa ( ?) samagam kflncan doyar I 
kafican doyar nay k.edar doyar II 
kedar doyar nay mukUr doyar I 
muktir doyar nay sirnher doyar II 
paBca paihar laiya Siv hasila apani ! 
mandire asilen thakuranl II 

Again in the SUnya-parana, the Dharma-puja^Vidhana and the ^ri-dharm» 
trtahgala of Mayura-bhat^ (B. K, Chatterjee’s edition) we have funny legendary 
accounts of the origin of the metal copper, of the Be<a-srick (be<a = Skt. vetra), of 
the double drum (d/iak) , etc., which are of great importance in connection with 
Dharma-worship. Similar legendary accounts (of course with more Hindu tinge) 
are found also in the fragmentary verses which we have collected in connection with 
Siva's Gajana in East Bengal. Space will not allow us to quote them here and to 
compare them side by side with the accounts that are found in the Dharma-mangala 
literature. We have in our collection accounts of the origin of corn, of Beta, Dhakut 
&ankha, iron, thread, copper, the earthen pots and earthen vessel for incense 
(dhttpati), of incense, etc. 

^ In the chapter on the cultivation of lands {Atha Casa) which seems te be a 
fragment inserted in the Dharma literature from the Bengali Saivite literature, the 
Lord Supreme of the Dhaitnites has become lord Siva, as conceived in the Bengali 
SivKyanas. 



SPECULATIONS ON THE CONCEPtlON OF DHARMA 32 $ 


This identification is not, however, complete in the literature 
of the Dharma cult ; there Lord Siva has not yet been able to 
cast off or hide away completely his Buddhistic attributes, — 
there is still something of later Buddhism round the figure 
of Lord Siva. 

This conception of the Supreme Lord and the consort, as 
expounded in later Buddhism, developed itself into the idea 
of the Adi-Buddha and Adi-Prajna in Nepaleese Buddhism. 
This Adi-Buddha or the primordial Enlightened One is the 
Self -created One {Svayambhu) of the Svayambhu-puram. ‘ 
He is described there as the Lord Supreme, who is worshipp- 
.. ... , , , ed by all the gods, Yaksas and Raksas in 

Buddha and Adi- the mountain of Gaurl-srnga in the country 
of Nepal. He is described as of the nature 
of the ultimate substance (dhamna-dhatu). He is often 
conceived as lord Vairocana with the other four Tathagatas 
placed in the four quarters round him. Again, the Lord fb 
often said to be Sakya-muni, who is called both Jagannatha 
as well as Dharma-raja. ^ This Lord Supreme is called 
both Svayambhu (t.e., the Self -originated One) and Sambhu 
(literally, the Lord of ^Welfare), which is the most common 
epithet applied to Lord Siva ; the name Siva also implies 
that the deity is welfare itself. The Adi-Buddha, who is the 
SvayambhQ and who is called the Dharma-raja is sometimes 
described as of the nature of the three jewels (tri-ratna), ° It 
appears from the above that the three jewels were sometimes 
conceived in later times as the three attributes of the 
Adi-Buddha. In the same text, again, Manju-srI is conceived 

^ Vrhat SayatnhhU-puranat edited by H. P. Ssstrl, (Bibiilotheca Indica) . 

* /bid. p. 21. 

^ name huddhaya dharmaya sahghaya ca sOHyamhhuve 1 
iri-taina-ffiuriaye iasmai sdi-huddha-avayambhuve II 
. irhsvayarnhhu me iaranam ratna’iraya-svarupi$am ) 
aarVa-pratidiSa me'dya svayamhhuve kttSHjali II 

p«- 



326 - 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULtS 


as the L^rd and he also is called the Dharma-raja. ‘ The 
Adi-Buddha and the Adi-prajnS have frankly been explained 
in the Svayambhu-pmana as of the Nature of Upaya and 
Prajna nr Karuna and Sunyata, and have again been described 
as Siva and Sakti. ^ In the Dharma-bpsa-samgraha “ we find 
this idea of the Adi-Buddha and Adi-prajna variously 
explained. It is said there that the Lord is called Adi- 
Buddha, because he is the first knowable, and can only be 
inwardly intuited as he has no form to be perceived. He is 

Adi-Buddha i* the Nirafijana, because there is no stain 

Dharma-rfija {anjatia = collyrium) in him , he being of the 

nature and form of the void like the sky. He is formless, 
supportless (niradhara) ; he is the Upaya, he is the Maha- 
yairocana.^ This Adi-Buddha is the Dharma-raja. He is 
Dharma-raja because he is the lord of all the entities 
{dharmanam raja), or because he shines in the world in his 
justice (dharmad rajate samsare rajate), or because all the 
entities, or all justice shine from him (dharma rajate yasmdt).^ 
He is also called Dharmesa, because he is the lord of all the 
divine virtues like the ten kusalas {i-e., ten Buddhistic acts of 
righteousness) and is also the lord of all people who possess 

^ cf. namna ca dharma-Tajo^ yam patnihhyah saha sarnyutam. II 

/biU, p. 149. F. N.; also p. 157 

* Ibid.f pp. 179-180. See also the Chapter on Cosmogony, infra, 

3 This work, which is preserved in manuscript in the Royal Asiatic Society of 
Bengal (No. 8055), was written by VajracSrya AmatSnanda of the Mahshodhi-vihara 
Lalita-pajtana, who was the first Residency Pundit in Nepal, at the request of Brian 
Hodgson in N. S. 946 (he., 1826 A.C.). Mr. Hodgson has made a good use of this 
work in his papers on the language and literature of Nepalese Buddhism (uide, 
A Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS in the Government Collection, under the 
care of the R.A.S.B. — prepared by H. P. Sastrl, pp. 192-193). The text is evidently 
not very old ; but we attach importance to it only because of the fact that being 
composed by an orthodox Pundit of Nepal, it is likely to contain genuine informa- 
tions, at least so far as Nepalese Buddhism is concerned. 

* He is called MahS-vairocana, because, he is great {mahan) and at the 
Same time illuminates or rather enlightens everything — t^Hesena rocaypti sarvam 
mahaJh&cQsau — MS. p. 1 <B). 

® Dharma-ko^atimpgraha, MS pt 3 (A), 



SPECULATIONS ON THE CONCEPTION OF DHARMA 327 

these virtues.^ In another place he is explained to be 
Dharma-raja, because he is associated with the knowledge of 
the perfectly pure ultimate element of all the Dharmas.^ 
Again it is said, Dharma means the Dharma-dhatu (i.e., the 
ultimate element behind the Dharmas) and the ultimate 
support of this Dharma-dhatu ; and he who shines with 
the Dharma-dhatu, is called the Dharma-raja.* He is 
the Dharma-dhatu in the form of Maha-sukha or great Bliss. 
He is also called the lord of all beings — the Prajapati.^ It 
will be clear from the above that Adi-Buddha, the Lord 
Supreme of Nepalese Buddhism, who was of the nature of ' 
Upaya, as contrasted with Prajfia, was widely known also as 
Dharma-raja, and that will make it very clear how the Lord 
Supreme of the later Buddhhists can also be associated with 
the Dharma-thakura of Western Bengal and some parts of 
Orissa. 

The above will confirm our previous statement that 
Dharma-thakura does not represent the conception of any 
particular deity, — he rather represents the general idea of 
Godhead or of the sovereign deity over the universe, and as 
such he has been associated consciously with all the concep- 
■ lions of Godhead or of the sovereign deity popularly current 
in Bengal and Orissa from the tenth century A.D. It is 
interesting to note that there is a Hindi text, entitled Dharma- 
-paril^sa'' which relates the character of Jina Deva as the 
principal God of the Jainas and Jina Deva is styled in the 
text as Dharma. 

^ dharmeiah | dharmanaik da^a-kjaialadinam iSah dhararta-imakanam sarpsari^ 
kanam ca I Ihidt MS. p. 8 (B), 

* sa~viiuddha‘dharma-dhatu-jnana-yogena dharma-raf I Ibid, ' MS, p. 8 (B), 

^ dharmo dharma-dhatuhAitasya) aadhi^fhanam yatra, tena va -rajata iii 
ihiarma-rat I Ibid. MS. p. 63 (A), 

4 Ibid., p. 63 (B). 

5 Dharma-parik.}a, MS. No. ]22, l^ide Annual Report On The Search Fw 
-^indi MSS for the year /900— prepared by Syamasundar Das (published by the 
Government of U. P., India). 



328 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


After all these speculations on the origin and nature of 
Dharma, the supreme deity of the Dharma literature, let us 
now see how he is actually depicted in the literature of the 
Dharma cult, and these illustrations will, we hope, guarantee 
the relevancy and correctitude of our speculations. 



CHAPTER XII 

Dharma as described in the Dharma Literature 

In the Dharma-mangala literature, which flourished 
comparatively late, the nature of Dharma is found more 
simplified than in the liturgical works. In the Dharma-mM- 
galas we have almost nothing Buddhistic in the conception 
of Dharma, he being completely Hinduised ; the composite 
nature of Dharma is better illustrated in the descriptions of 
the Lord found in the liturgical works. In these descriptions 
of Dheirma we should notice the importance that has been 
attached to the idea of Sonyata in various forms as the quint- 
essence of Dharma or as an attribute of Dharma. Vacuity 
is the support of Dharma — it itself is the essential nature 
of Dharma. This Sunya or Sunyata has been variously 
spoken of in the liturgical works of the Dharma cult but 
rarely in the Dharma-mangalas. It will be 
as applied in the des- a great mistake to think that the , 

cription of Dharma. « . i i • • i r i n i 

Uharmites inherited this idea trpm the Bud- 
dhists as a philosophical idea ; it was rather transmitted to 
them through a long process of change in the popular reH- 
gious psychology, — and we are inclined to believe that 
whenever the Dharmites'spoke of the Sunya or the Sunyata^ 
they simply spoke of it following the tradition without being 
conscious of what the term did actually imply. So much 
emphasised was the idea of iSQnyata as the nature of the 
ultimate reality in Buddhistic philosophy, religion and litera- 
ture for centuries in India and outside, and so widesp^d 
and deep-rooted was its influence on the mass through the 
enthusiasm of the Mahayanists, that the assodation of the 
idea of voidness with that of the ultimate reUlity becaime a 

4Z-HII8 



330 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


tradition. We have already pointed out that in Tantric 
Buddhism^ roughly and widely known as Vajra-ytoa, prac- 
tically almost all the heterogeneous elements are non- 
Buddhistic when considered in relation to the elhico-religious 
spirit of Buddhism ; but attempt has always been made to 
give all these practices a Buddhistic garb mainly through 
the frequent use of the word Sonyata and more frequently its 
synonym Vajra, which was believed to be something like 
the magician’s wand having the capacity of transforming 
everything non-Buddhistic into Buddhistic. In the Dharma 
cult of Bengal and similar religious beliefs and practices of 
Orissa^ and also in the Vaisnavism of Orissa the lingering 
effect of the tradition is best exhibited. This Sunya was 
made much use of also in the yoglc literature of the Muslims 
of Bengal.^ It is indeed very interesting to notice that 
the staunch apostles of Vaisnavism of Orissa in the 
sixteenth century, Oiz., Acyutananda Dasa, Balarama 
Dasa, Jagannatha Dasa, Ananta Dasa, Vasovanta Dasa 
and Caitanya Dasa, who were all contemporaries and 
who propagated Vaisnavism as professed followers of 
Caitanya, described Lord Krsna as the Sunya-purma^ and 

^ Eg. aamaare phaktr sunya jape iunya nam ! iunya hante phakirer aiddhi 
sarva k.am il nam sunya ^am sunya aunye yar athiti I se aunyer aange ^are 
phakir piriti II aunyeta parama hamaa aunye hrahma-jnan I yaihate parama-hamaa 
tatha yoga-dhyan II je jane hamser tattva aei ear yogi I aei aav auddha yogi hae 
aunya bhogi II aiddha eh aunyo eh ei se yagal I je save ei tattva pale ae tanu nirmal II 

Jnana-aagara by Ali RajS^a/tos Kanu Fakir, edited by Munshi Abdul Karina^ 
Sahitya-parisat Series, No. 59, p. 22. 

Again, —ianya auh^ma tanu hae tup ianyakar ) ruper aagare aiddhi jatha 


banijar II aunya aindhu hante hyahta ruper aagar mfttihar ghaiha-ritpe 

jugate pracar I mrttihar bhandamule iunya tanu sar II Ibid., p. 42. 


iunya-purusa iunya pare bandha II 
iunya-purusa udaaare rahe ! 
iunya-purusa aavu maya bhyaye II 
Sattya^purusa dayalu atai I 
iunya-puru^a aarva-gha^e'rahi II 
iunya-puru^a kore nafa ghufa I 
(yn^a-puru^a fSne chanda-k^ft^ l| 



DHAFMA AS DESCRIBED IN THE DHARMA LITERATURE 33 1 


and made him none but the incarnation of Sonyata^ ^ the 
ultimate void. 

Another term, which is also frequently used as an 
epithet of Dharma and often rather as a synonym for 
Dharma, is Niranjana, which' means “the 
epltheffoTDhwma!*’' Stainless one.” The use of the word 

Niranjana is not, however, very uncommon 
in Hindu philosophical and theological texts ; but its use 
seems to be more common in the Buddhist than in the Hindu 
fold ; and it is very frequently and aptly used as an 
epithet of the reality, which in its ultimate void-nature is 
stainless like the sky above. In the liturgical works of 
the Dharma cult queer derivations of the word Niranjana 
sure offered which are purely arbitrary in nature.^ This 

epithet or rather the synonym Niranjana for the ultimate 
reality or the formless Supreme Being became very popular 

ivmya-parusa iunare marai I 
man’ iunya punya gati korai II 
^unya^anire iunya-purma dhara I 

dandu thai raja hoina tvara 11 
♦ 

iunya-puru§are eteka teja I 
iunya hoi hhogya k^rai rajya II 
iunya-purusa alage rahacchi 1 
Sunya pare rahi hla kflrucchi II 

^unya-sarnhita (Edward Press, Cuttack), Ch. VH, pp. 52-53. 

Again, — tathi upare anakjsara I 

ta pare ianya nirahara II 
iunya upare mahaiunya I 
iuna radhiku dei mana II 
rUpa arupa tahl nSht I 
se mahaiunya ye bolai II etc. 

Prema’’hhakti’hrahma‘gtta Yaiovunta-d^sa, (Praci-grantha-mSls No. 17), p. 19. 

' See Virat-gitS of Balarfima-dasa, quoted in Modern Buddhism etc. by Mr. N, 
Basu, p. 40. Also, Brahmanda-bhugola-gtfa of BalarSma-dfisa, quoted in Modern 
Buddhism etc. See also many other similar extracts quoted by Mr. Basu in his work 
from the stanc^ard works of the other poets . — Modern Buddhism^ etc, Ch. III. 

* Thus, for Instance, we find in the Sunya-purSna,— 
nlreie nirmala kfia nama niraHjana I 

i.e., he is called Niraiijana because his body is washed clean by primordial 
water.— p. 14, 



332 


06SCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


in all the vernacular literature, and in fact it has been very 
widely used by the Dharmites, the Nathists, the Bauls, 
the Sufi poets, the Nirgum-poets of Hindi literature and 
also by the Sikh poets. 

(i) Dharma — confusedly described as the Lord Supreme 
in the liturgical Works 

Let us now examine the descriptions of Dharma that are 
found in the Dharma-puja-oidhana in connection with 
the meditation on and prayers and salutation to Dharma. 
The most important, however, is the meditation of Dhcirma, 
which runs as follows : — ‘ ‘Let that Lord of the form of vacuity, 
who has neither end, nor middle, nor beginning, neither 
hands and legs, nor body and voice, neither form, nor any 
primordial shape, nor fear and death, nor even birth, — who is 
accessible only to the greatest of the yogins in deep medita- 
tion, who belongs to all the sects (or who permeates all the 
petals of the lotuses within the body), who is bereft of all 
mental construction, who is one, stainless, and giver of the 
boon of immortality, protect me.”' Again, — ”1 am invok- 
ing the Lord, who is the giver of all the fruits of desire, 
who has nothing like a shape, nor any seat to perform 
yoga, who is the absence of all and at the same time the 
abode of all, and who is adorned with all the postures and 
gestures (sarva-mudra-susobhitam). Come down, O the void- 
lord and take your seat here.”'’ Lord Dharma is said to have 
incarnated into the world only to relieve all the beings of the 
three worlds from their bondage. ® And this tone is justlhe- 

^ orp yasyantam na di-madhyaip na ca kara-caranarp naaii kayo ninadarp 
nakararp na di-rupaip na ca bhaya-maranarp naaii janmaiva yaaya I 
yogindra-dhyana-gamyarn aakala-dala-gatarp aarva-aafakalpa-hinaTp 
tatraiko pi niraHjano mara-varadah patu marp iunya-murtik II 
Oharma^pQjS^vidhana, p. 70. 

* Ibid, p, 70. 

3 trailokyo-ddhara^heiustvam avatin}o"ai bhUtah II Ibid, p, 72. 



bHARMA A^ DESCRIBED If4 THE DHARMA LITERATURE 3$^ 


same as is found in the Buddhist Tantras in ^connection with 
the invocation of the Lord _§yjp|eiixe* Dharma is again 
spoken of here as immersing his form in the sea of conscious- 
ness which is of the nature of supreme bliss/ Seated on 
his mount Ulloka he is the lord of the nature o'f the unity of 
Brahma (the creator), Visnu (the preserver) and Siva (the 
destroyer). He is the great, the Brahman of the beginningless 
luminous form. He is adored in all the fourteen worlds and 
is of the form of perfect void. He is knowledge and 
consciousness, pure and changeless, innocent and formless 
and is to be known as the syllable “Om” ; he transcends all 
qualities, is the underlying reality not yet manifest in exis- 
tence (aVyakta ) ; he is the transcendent reality, he is the 
Brahman. ° He is perfectly pure, all-good, quiet, without 
beginning and end ; — he is the life of the world and is of the 
form of lustre and bliss ; he is not determinable by the four 
quarters, time and space {a-dig-desa-k.Sla-Vyaoacchedanl- 
yam). He has incarnated himself on the bank of the 
river Balluka (which is in the district of Burdwan), seated on 
his favourite mouqt Ulluka and he is to be known only 
through the injunctions of the fifth Veda (r. e. the canonical 
or rather the liturgical works of the Dharmites).® Lord 

^ parama-nanda-bodha-bdhi-nimagna’-nija-murtaye I Ibid, p. 72. 

2 Ibid, p, 75. 

2 Ibidt p. 76. Similar descriptions of Dharma abound in the Dharma-pfkja^ 
Vidhana : thus it is said, — “He is the Nirafijana, who is neither space {athana), nor 
fame, who has neither the lotus-like feet, nor any form, nor any primary colour; 
who is neither the seer nor sight, neither the hearer nor hearing, neither white, nor 
yellow, nor red, nor golden ; neither like the sun, nor the moon, nor fire, —he 
neither rises, nor sets; he is stainless, of the form of the syllable ‘‘Om“, the supreme 
abode, unqualified, supportless, unchanging and all-void [aarva iunyamayam) , He 
is neither the full-grown tree, nor the root, nor the seed, nor the shoot, nor the 
branch, nor leaves, nor the trunk, nor the foliage ; neither the flower, nor the scent, 

nor the fruit, nor the shade. {Ibid, p. 77.) He is neither the up nor the down, 

neither ;Siva nor 6akti, neither male nor female, nor the astral body (/iViga-mSrti) , 
he possesses neither hands, nor legs, neither form nor shade ; he is neither the five 
elements, nor the seven seas, nor the quarters, neither mountains nor peaks, 
neither Brahmi, nor Indra, nor Visg^u nor Rudra. He is neither the universe 
nor the seed of time gam), neither the preceptor, nor 



334 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Dharma has been saluted as the presiding deity over the gods 
(deVSi-dhideVa)^ as the lord of the gods (deVeia), as the 
unity of all the gods (sarva-deva), as the primordial deity 
(tfdiWeOa) , as the lord of the world (jagannatha) , as the 
bestower of perfection {siddhi-dMa), the lord of all yoga 
iyogesvara), as the incomprehensible deity (acintya-devata) 
and as the saviour of all, giver of happiness and liberation 
and the supreme deity of vaciiity (sunya-deoesa). He is 
eternal, of pure quintessence {mddha-sattva), of the form of 
compassion {^arummaya-murti) , and having the supreme 
virtue of confentedness (santo^a-sila). 

If we examine the descriptions ^iven above as specimen 
we shall find that some of the descriptions are almost the 
same as are to be found in the Buddhist Tantras in connec- 
tion with the meditation of, and the salutation to, the supreme 
deity, and many of the attributes are taken frankly from the 
attributes of the divinites of the Hindu pantheon. It is, 
however, noticeable that in the descriptions of Dharma the 
negative tendency outweighs the positive.^ This dominance 
of the negative tendency even in the most popular religion 

the disciple, nor the planets, stars and heaps of cloud*? ; neither the Vedas, nor 
the scriptures, nor the prayer offered thrice a day, nor the hymns; neither 
Mantra, nor the muttering, nor meditation, nor fire-sacrifice, nor gifts to or wor- 
ship of gods. He is profoundly quiet, void in the form of NirvSna, and is the 
ultimate substance of the universe. He is in the netherlands, in thej invisible region 
(onfari^?fl), in the four quarters, inthe8k>, in all the mountains and seas, in the 
root-syllable (blja-mantra) and other Mantras, in the plants, in the land of the 
gods and the demons, in flowers and leaves and in the blade of grass, in iron, wood 
and ash, in earth, water and air, — in the static and the dynamic, he is all-pervading 
and one. {Ibid pp. Z§-79). 

^ In addition to what is illustrated above compare also 

na'sti rupam na'sti deham naati kjayo ninadam I 
na sti janma na^sti murttis iasmai irt-dharmaya namah II 
nirafijanam nirakaram aunya-rupam jagad-gurum I 
niralambe sthitarji nityam cintayami nirafijanam II 
nirafijanam nirakararn nirvikalpam mahatmanam I 
nirlepa-pttru^arn devarfi aarVadokaika-tiathakam II 
omkjafo-bindu'Sahitam nirSkara-niranjanam I 
ady*anta-rahiiam iunya^ruparp devarp nirafijanam 11 

Ibid, pp, 90-91. 



DHARMA AS DESCRIBED IN THE DHARMA LITERATURE 335 


cannot but be recognised sa the dwindling influence of 
Buddhism with its emphasis on the negative aspect of the 
reality. In connection with the salutation to Dharma saluta> 
tions are offered to all kinds of void, Viz., great- void 
(maha-mnya) , supreme void (parama-iunya) etc/ 

In the Siinya-purana we hnd similar descriptions of 
Dharma. By combining ail the positive and negative attri- 
butes applied to him nothing can be said of him but that 
he is the Supreme Lord. He is saluted in his form of 
vacuity ( sQnya-rQpam), as formless, saviour from calamities, 
the supreme of all the gods.* He is the Karatara (the 
supreme lord), he comes from the void and has his support 
in the void.® He himself is the unity of the triad Brahma, 
Visnu and Mahadeva (i.e., Siva).^ He is the supreme lord 
transcending both voidness and non -voidness.® In the 
beginning the Lord was moving alone in great-void ( maha- 
sunya), having only void as his support, and the whole 
cosmos came out of the great void only through the will 
of the Lord. In the DeVa-sthana of the Sunya-purana we 
find that Brahma is performing austere penances for the 
Lcffd by making his body the instrument for the yogic 
Sadhana, and Visnu is also invoking the Lord; i^iva is 
performing penances with his head down and legs up 
and singing the praise of the Lord with his horn and drum ; 
Indra (Purandara) is performing penance for Dharma by 
inflicting severe torture on his body and all the yogins and 
sages are holding austere penances to propitiate him. For 
the bath of the Lord, Hanuman digs a pond with his vajra- 
nails (vajja-nakha) and constructs four ghats in the four 
quarters — one of gold, one of silver, one of copper and the 
other of pearl, and fills up the pond with the water of the 

^ &unya purana, p. 93. 

2 ^unya-purana^ p. 152. 

3 Ihid,p.2\S. 

4 Ibid, p.2\S. 

^ ga^ana^gagana (sic, -nii)^param pararri parameivaram etc. Ibid, p. 228. 



336 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


river Bhogavatl (i.e., the Ganges of the Netherland). The 
Lord then gets into a golden palanquin and goes to bathe 
accompanied by all the gods including Brahma, Visnu, Siva, 
Indra and by all the sages like Va^istha, Narada and othors.^ 

It is needless to repeat here that in these descriptions 
Dharma has often been identified with Siva, Visnu (or 
Narayana) and Krsna.^ The abode of Dharma wavers 
from Kailasa to Vaikuntha, showing thereby the tendency of 
identifying Dharma sometimes with Siva and sometimes with 
Visnu. Though Sunya has been made much use of in 
describing Dharma and though his formless and non-essential 
nature has been variously emphasised, yet Dharma is 
conceived always as a personal God with a form,® 

s. 

(ii) Dharma as ihe Sun-god 

Dharma has sometimes been described as the sun, and 
there is a two-fold reason behind it. In the first place 

* See Atha Mukti-snana, ^unya-puranat pp. 179-181. 

Also, Aiha Dharma-puja» Ihidt p. 175 et seq. 

® Vide Dharma-puja-vidhana p. 79. 

3 We may note here the reply of Ramfii Pandita made to some questions pul 
to him. He says, — “My home is in Ballukfi and 1 worship the Formless One;l 
meditate on the void and adore the form of the Lord.” Sunya- pur ana, p. 165. It is 
indeed funny to see that one who worships the formless and meditates on the void 
should adore any particular form or hgure of the Lord 1 In another place, however, 
Ullcka, the mount of Dharma, puts the following questions to Dharma, — “Who is 
the Lord {Karaiar) in this world and who is work or action (karma) } Who is 
the being pervading the fourteen worlds? Who has made Khalla ( ? a canal, a cut, 
a creek, a trench, a deep hole) and Bihalla (?), and who has made the 5a//ci 
(6fila tree?) in the mountain? Who is transformed into hands and legs? Who does 
infuse the blooming flowers with scent and who does create and destroy the sun 
and the moon ? Who does make water flow in the rivers, from whose body does the 
heavenly river Ganges flow and who has made her (i.e., the Ganges) flow in a 
zigzag course? Who has placed the mountains on their Arm basis and who does 
reside in the void? Who does come from the l^unya and goes to the l^unya, and 
who does make the l$Qnya his support and then meditate on the 6unya? Who does 
bear fruits in the form of the tree? Who does rain in the form of the cloud? Who 
does accept worship in every house and who is called the mother of the world?*’ 
To every one xif these questions the reply of Dharma is that it is he himself who 
is responsible for this universal proce^ and for all that are in it. Ibid^ pp. 2| 1-12. 



DHARMA AS DESCRIBED IN TfKE DHARMA LITERATURE 337 

Dharma is luminous by nature and so is the sun and hence 
the identity. Secondly, Dharma is Sflnya and Sunya is of 
the shape of a zero andt therefore, Dharma is of the shape 
of a zero ; ^ and as the sun is also of the shape of a zero, 
Dharma is identified with the sun. Moreover, Dharma I 
moves in the void, and void is the sky, and the sun moves I 
in the sky and hence the sun is Dharma.^ The Sun-god, 
who is of the form of zero, or in other words circular in 
shape, is described as the cause of creation, preservation 
and destruction and as such is of the nature of the three 
gunas (i.e. sattva, rajas and tamas) and also of the nature 
of the triad, Brahma, Visnu and Siva, who represent the 
three gunas respectively.® In the Dharma-^puja^vidhana we 
find the Dhar mites presenting offerings to the Sun-god, who 
is subsequently identified with Dharma. He is described 
as the lord (gosqni), who takes ablution . and offers 
his Brahminic prayers in the bathing-ghat of the river 
Campa/ Yet at the same time he rises on the shore of the 
seven seas in a chariot, which is decorated with vermilion, 
diamond, coral and pearL Seven horses of pure white 
colour carry the golden chariot of the Lord which has been 
decked with sixteen flowers. Sixteen attendants are holding 


^ Cf. iUnya^hhuvanarp i SSnyarji hartula-hfiram bhaVatVti Sunya^bhuVanarp I 
bindvS-kSrarp t 

Dharma-ko^a-satpgraha, MS. p. 2(A). 

^ iunya-marge sthitarp niiyarp iunya-deva-divahflram I 
tarn aharp bhajami SrhdharmSya namah It 

Dharma-pujS^vidhSnat p. 89, 


Cf, also : 

niralambe rathe marge Sunya-murttirp divaharaip etc. /bid, p. 51. 

mandalarp vartula-kflrarp iunya-deharp mahahalam I 

eka‘Cakxa~dharalp devatp tarn suryarn pranamamyaham II /bid, p. 52 

3 /bid. p 51. 

Agaih, udaya-^S/e brahma-avarfkpam madhyahne maheSam I 

aata-kfllc avayarp vi^nua tri-murtiifi ca divakaram II /bid, p. 52. 

4 /bid, p. 123. Cf. SHnya-puranat p. 149. 

Caxnpi or CSinpSi ia a river in the district of Bankura, and it is described as a 
very important and sacred river of the Dharmites. 


43- HI IB 



338 


CffiSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the chain of the chariot, the galaxy of the twelve Adityas 
are aitting within, and Indra, the king of the gods, is holding 
^the umbrella ov^ the Lord who is shining on his golden 
pedestal with a garland of golden lotus round his neck. 
The lord is then entreated to turn his attention to the beings 
of the world, for whom wealth and welfare are solicited.’ 
The descriptions of the Sun-god, seated in his golden chariot 
of seven white horses, and the way in which he is approached 
by his devotees for bestowing health and wealth on all 
beneath at once remind one of the Vedic hymns of similar 
contents The similarity is indeed striking, and that may 
suggest some link between them through popular traditions. 
In the Bara-masi of the $unya-purana we find the 
worshipper of Dharma presenting offerings to the twelve 
Adityas (suns), who are spoken of as twelve brothers. 
Again we find, Lord Dharma rises from his sleep early in 
the morning and Ulluka offers to him his prayer; eight 
horses of white colour carry the golden chariot of the Lord 
and the Lord rises as the luminous sun.'’ In the east is 
situated the golden temple of the Lord. The devotees invoke 
the Lord to rise up from his sleep and to relieve the whole 
world from darkness. Then the Lord awakes and asks for 
his chariot and horses, which are prepared for him instantly. 
The Lord then climbs on his chariot and the crown on his 
head touches the sky, and Indra begins to shiver in fear 
in heaven and the serpent Vasuki in the Netherland. When 
the Lord of the world thus rises on his chariot with a sacred 
thread of nine folds round his neck * and shining with his 
radiant lustre like a wonder to all beneath, some think of 
him to be very near, and some to be far off. The Lord 


^ Vide, Dharma-puja-vidhana, pp. 123-25. 

2 Vide, Rg-veda, (1.22.8), (1.24.4), (1.35.2,4-5) etc. 

» P. 150. 

* It is to be noted that lord Surya {Surya^fhak^ra) of the folk-songs of 
Bengal also wears the sacred thread of pine folds round his neck. 



DHARMA AS DESCRIBED IN THE DHARMA LITERATURE 33^ 


removes the sorrow of the poor beneath by distributing 
immense wealth/ 

(iU) Dharma of the Dharma-mangalas 
(A) Dharma as Visnu in general 

In the ritualistic works Dharma is often called Svarupa- 
naj^yar^ and there is also the custom of presenting T ulasi 
leaves to his feet ; he has lotus-like hands like Visnu, 
Vaikuntha is his abode. The transformation of Dharma 
into some form of Visnu v;as almost complete in the 
Dharma- mangala literature. The Dharma-mangala literature, 
which is now available to us, is of very late origin and 
flourished under the sway of Vaisnavism both of the Rama 
cult and the Krsna cult ; it is for this reason that Dharma of 
the Dharma-mangalas is mostly identified with Visnu in 
gei^ral and Krsna an d Rama in partic ular . It is only 
sporadically ~here and there in the cosmogonical discussions 
and in some other places that we hear in the Dharma-mangalas 
of the Sunya-murtti of Dharma or of his ‘ ‘ formless form V 
with all his negative and positive attributes.* The older 
tradition of the identification of Dharma with Siva seems 
to have dwindled away by this time. Though Dharina is 
sometimes spoken of as the lord of Candi, and is worshipped 
with Viloa-patra^ which is particularly dear to Lord Siva, 
and though his abode is located in Kailasa, yet it seems 
that with the rise of the various Sakta and Vaisnava cults 
Saivism was rapidly losing ground. This was why the 
tradition of Dharma as Siva was gradually passing into 

1 See Aiha Dharma-sajana, SUnya-purSna, pp, 139 el seq. 

^ See, Dfim, of GKana-rSma (VangavSs! edition). See also Ihid^ pp. 3t, 148# 
205, 962. 

Also Dhm. of Manik Gangult, pp, 112, l56. 

Ghermaya^ of Nara-^siipha Vasu. Vol. 1, MS. (C. U. No. 3224) • p» 7(A)# 

3 Dhm. of Ghana-rSma, p. 66 ; also Ibid,, p. li)2» Ml. , 



340 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTB 


oblivion in the Dharma-mangala literatvire ; and not only 
that, we sometimes find Siva introduced in the Dharma- 
mangalas only to obey Lord Dharma and help him in his 
struggles against the goddesses. The general descriptions 
of Dharma that are found in the various Dheurma-mzingalas 
are the popular descriptions sometimes of the unqualified 
Brahman of the Upanisads and sometimes of the Purusa 
of the Samkhya and sometimes of a mixture of them in the 
most confused manner with the legendary accounts of the 
veurious incarnations of Visnu and his activities in various ages 
as are found in the Puranic literature.’ Again sometimes 
we find Dharma in the assembly of the gods, including Indra, 
Brahma, Visnu, Siva, Varuna and others, seeking advice 
from them as to the right measure to be taken to keep up 
his prestige, which was very frequently at stake in the hands 
of the devotees of Sakti. In the attempt to introduce his 
worship on earth by establishing his almighty power 
Dharma-thakura had no plain sailing ; his devotee Lausen 
was at every step challenged by the devotees of Sakti either 
in the form of beasts or in the form of men, and whenever 
his devotee was thus challanged our Lord felt a sudden 
jerk in his royal seat either in Kailasa or in Vaikuntha and 
he would enquire from Ulluka, and more generally from 
Hanuman, as to what might have been the cause of that 
trouble ; they would in reply describe the miserable 
plight in which his devotees might have been. In almost 
all cases our Dharma-thakura was very helpless and we 
find him always seeking advice and practical help from his 
companion and instructor Ulluka and mainly from his chief 
agent or executor, Hanuman. But in cases of more serious 
and emergent nature Dharma-thakura would call for an 
assembly attended by all the prominent gods (goddesses being 

^ See the descriptions of Dharma in the Dhm. of Rfima'nBrSyana (MS. C. U. No. 
2450) « pp. 4(B) -5 (A), and pp. 16(A) et seq. Dhm* of Ghana-rlma, p. 2» 102; 
Ohm. of Ms^ik Glnguli»)p. 1, PP* 4-3. etc. 



bHARMA AS DfiSCRlBEb IN tHE bHARMA LITERATURE Mt 

conspicuous by their absence) and would seek advice from 
them all. 

In the Mangala literature we generally find Dharma in 
the form of Vi§nu of dark blue colour with four hands with 
the conch-shell, disc (ca^ra), mace (gada) and lotus ; he hsis 
eM-rings, his Kaustubha jewel is suspended on his chest, 
he has his yellow garment and lotus-eyes and he is with 
his mount Garuda. Whenever we find the Lord appearing 
before the devotee, the devotee would never believe him 
to be Dharma unless and until he would appear before 
him in his form of Visnu with four hands. A typical 
case is the trouble that was created by a dog in the way when 
Dharma was proceeding to Hakanda to rise in the west at the 
request of his devotee Lausen. The dog obstinately obs- 
tructed the path of the Lord and would not allow him to 
pass on without disclosing his identity. The Lord told him 
that he was Dharma himself ; but the dog intentionally 
refused to believe him to be Dharma unless and until he 
was in his form with four hands and in blue colour ; at last 
the Lord had to comply with the request of the devout dog 
and assume the form of Visnu,* and when the Lord asked the 
dog to pray for any boon it liked, the dog asked the boon of 
being a T ulast-leai so that he might have the rare fortune of 
sticking to the lotus feet of the Lord constantly.** In the 
Dharma-puja-cidhana and some of the Dharma-mangalas the 
ten incarnations of Visnu have been described as the ten incar- 
nations of Dharma. The Dharma-thakura of Mayana-pur is 
known as Yatra-siddhi and the people of the locality believe 
Yatra-siddhi to be identical with Visnu.® In the work entitled 
Ystra-siddhi-rSyer Paddhati there is a Sanskrit hymn 
addressed to Dharma ; the poet of the work (which seems to 

^ See the chapter on Paicima-uclaya, tound in almost all the Dharma- 
maiigalas^ 

^ Dhm. of Ghana-rSma, pp. 260-261. 

8 Vido, B.S.P.P.. B.S.. 1813, No. 2. 



OBSCURfe RELIGIOUS CULTS 


342 

be very recent in origin) has gone even so far as to make 
Lord Dharma indulge in love- dalliances with the cowherd 
girls in the water of the river Balluka.^ In the Dharma- 
mahgalas devotees have, in connection with the praise of 
the Lord, always referred to many of the Puranic incidents 
where the Lord had shown kindness to his devotees and 
given them proper shelter. It is mentioned that Dharma 
protected Pr^blad^ from the hands of Hiranya-kalipu, gave 
shelter to Dhruva_ and placed him in the fixed heavenly 
region, saved Sudhanva and Ajamila, protected the Pandavas 
in all their calamities, saved the honour and chastity of 
Draupadl , when she was being molested by the evil sons 
of Dhrtarastra ; he was all through the charioteer of Arjuna, 
killed the demon Havana and saved Sita, deceived Brahma^ 
the creator, and taught him a very good lesson in the land 
of Vrandavana as a cowherd boy and had all sorts of love- 
dalliances with the'co^erd girls of Vrndavana. These and 
many such other descriptions of Dharma-thakura abound in 
almost all the Dharma-mangalas, where we find nothing but 
a list of some of the more important incidents associated with 
the different incarnations of Visnu jotted down pell-mell. 

(B) Dharma as Rama 

The identification of Dharma-thakura with Rama in the 
Dharma-mangalas has been brought about mainly through 
the mediacy of Hanumto. In the liturgical works Hanuman 
is only one of the four Kotalas (gate-keepers) of Dharma* 
but in the Dharma-mangalas he is sometimes the mount of 
Dharma, sometimes the counsellor and the conscience-' 
keeper of the Lord. In the Rg-Veda Uluka (the owl) has 
been described as the mount of Dharma-raja Yama, and 


prabhinna-Hjana-balluka-iala’kcU-ktiioUukjai^ 
yodhayaniarji vih&rantaip cakrarji kpacid gopsn 11 eic. 

Vide, H.S.P.P.. B.S. 1313. No. 2, p. 94. 



DHARMA AS DESCRIBED iN THE DHARMA LITERATURE 343 


probably the tradition has come down to the Dharmites 
but in later times Uluka seems to have practically been 
ousted by HanurnSn. Hanuman, the ape-god, has a special 
place in the history of our literature. However strong in 
their supernatural power and in their tenacity "of purpose in 
quarrels and intrigues, the gods and goddesses of our 

^ Much speculations are made by scholars as to the exact nature and 
signihcance of this Mount Ulluka or Uluka associated with Dharma, and it is also 
a matter of controversy whether Uluka here is actually the bird owl, or is any 
other personality. As a matter of fact in the Sunya-purana and also in the Dharma- 
puja-vidhana Uluka is more a personality than a mere bird. He is often called a 
sage or the great sage (Marti ox M a} 1-muni) . From the very beginning Dharma- 
thskura did nothing without the advice of Uluka and in fact the latter seems to be 
much wiser than the lord himself. But in the Dharma-mangalas Uluka is generally 
depicted as the bird owl and in the legend of HariScandra of the Dharma-mangalas 
he plays an important part. The owl, which was the Mount of Dharma, was 
once sitting on the branch of a tree, when he was pierced through by an arrow 
aimed at by Luhicandra, son of Harifcandra; the bird cursed the family of Haril- 
candra and said that Harilcandra would leave no posterity ; it is generally with 
this curse of the bird Uluka that the Hari^candra legend begins. Saving a few 
places where Uluka is admitted to be the sage Uluka and the counsellor of Dharma, 
Uluka is depicted in the Dharma-mangalas as a mere bird, the place of sage Uluka 
being practically usurped by HanumSn. The name Uluka, however, is well-known 
in Puranic literature as the name of different notable personalities. In the Purinas 
Uluka is a name of Indra himself; another Uluka was the son of sage VilvSmitra, — 
another the son of 5akuni. In the Mahahharata we find mention of a king of the 
name of Uluka ; another Uluka was an ambassador in the Mahahharata. Again the 
Vaiiesika system of Indian Philosophy is also known as the philosophy of Uluka; 
in the Vai^esika system Dharma has variously been explained (of course, in a 
sense entirely different from that of the Dharma of the Dharma cult). Mr. B. K. 
Chatterjee in his introduction to the Dharma-mahgala of Mayura-bhajta is disposed 
to think that the Dharma cult of Bengal may be a continuation of the religious cult 
propounded and preached by Uluka in a very early period, and hence is the 
importance of Uluka in the Dharma-mangalas. But such a surmise does not seem 
to ,U6 plausible at all for various reasons. There is nothing in the Dharma cult 
which can even very remotely be associated with anything of the Vai^esika system ; 
moreover, it is doubtful whether the Vailesika system of thought represents any 
religious sect. If the religious doctrines of Uluka were something different, that 
being entirely unknown to us, the question of the possibility of its relation with the 
Dharma cult cannot be decided. It should also be remembered in this connection 
that far from representing any philosophical school, the Dharma cult of Bengal, 
as we have repeatedly pointed out, cannot be said to represent even any particular 
religious school. 



344 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


literature seem to have been all through very weak 
physically, and whenever any gigantic work had to be 
performed, HanOman was invariably approached by all the 
gods and goddesses. We find him also a good assistant to 
Vi^vakarma, the great mechanic of the universe. Hanuman, 
therefore, served not only Rama-candra of the Bengali 
Ramayanas, — he has served Candl in the Candi-mangalas, 
Manasa, the serpent goddess, in the Manasa-mangalas, and 
every one took advantage of his gigantic physical strength 
and his obedient nature. Dharma-thakura, therefore, was 
wise enough to have Hanuman constantly at his disposal 
to have all the difficult tasks dorje by him. But by being 
thus constantly accompanied and obeyed by Hanum§n, 
Dharma-thakura could no longer retain his Dharma-nature 
and gradually became transformed into Rama-candra himself. 
We find in the Dharma-mangalas that whenever Dharma- 
thakura asks Hanuman to do some arduous and hazardous 
work, Hanuman refers to all his (Hanuman’s) heroic deeds of 
the Ramayanic period and says that if it were possible for him 
to do all those great things for the lord at that time, there 
is no reason why it should not be possible for him to do the 
same once for the lord. The lord also occasionally refers 
to the valour and obedience of Hanuman that he had shown 
formerly in various occasions.' 

As a matter of fact we find Hanuman often performing 
the same kind of wonderful feats for the lord in the Dharma- 
mangalas as he did in the Ramayanas.' We have suflScient'“ 

' As a typical instance compare the dialogue betweeiL.Dharma and HanOrnSn 
when the former was requesting the latter to protect Lfiusen in his (i.e., Lfiusen’s) 
childhood from the hands of the thieves. 

5 As an instance we may point out that when LSusen was crossing the river 
Ajay to attack Ichli-ghos he was captured and brought a victim to the Netherland 
{P&iala) by the river herself; to this Dharma became perturbed and sent HanumSn 
to do the needful. HaniimSn went to the place of action and pul all the water of 
the river Ajay into the cavities of his ears ; the river begged pardon, released 
LSusen and then and then only was her water released, Dhm, of Rsma-nSrSyana, 
Dhekura^pnla, MS. (C. U. No. 2454) pp. 5(A).5(B). 



MiARMA AS DESCRIBED IN THE DHARMA LITERATURE ^45 


reasons to believe that at least some of the poets of the 
Dharma-mangalas, such aa Chana-rSma, Sltarama-dasa, 
Rama-nuayana and others were devoted to Rama if they 
were devoted to any particular deity at all. Ghana-rama, in 
many of his colophons, states that his mind is a bee which 
constantly sticks to the lotus feet of Rama-candra. SltarSma- 
dasa and others also begin their books or the chapters therein 
with salutation fo Rama, who is said to be Dharma. 

(lo) The Description of Dharma As All-White 

One very significant point is that the complexion of 
Dharma-thakura is white, and not only that, everything 
associated with him is white. ^ In the Dharma-pQjS- 
Vidhana he has been saluted in his form of pure white colour 
resembling the colour of a fresh Kunda flower and the 
refreshed moon {dhauta-kundendu-dhavala). He wears 
white garment and bears a white umbrella.^ His throne or 
seat is also described white.® In his white form he is 
associated with pure intelligence-stuff.* He wears a white 
garland and also a white sacred thread.® He has a white 
disc in his hand, white hair on his head and white horses 
with his white throne.® Clad all in white and seated on 
the white seat that stainless one moves in the chariot of 
swans, which are also of pure white colour.^ In the Sonya- 
purSna we see that there are white flags on the gate of 
Dharma,® and he is pleased to sit on the white seat being 


^ In the VimU‘dharmottara Dharma has been described as of four faces^ four 
hands, adorned with ornaments and of white complexion. 

2 P. 76. 

3 Ibid., p. 81, 

4 /btU. p. 84. 

6 /bid., p. 87, 

6 /bfd., p. 90, 

^ Ibid,, Cf. also Anidi^maAgalo of Rsraa-dss Adak, 

8 P. 66. 

44-14118 



346 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


clad in white garment.^ In Ghana-rama we find that the 
lord was worshipped in all ages with white flowers.^ Even 
when in his way to H&kanda to rise in the west in the form 
of a Brahmacarin with a golden colour and red garments, 
with the bowl and ^uJa-grass in hand and with rosary and 
frontal marks, Dharma-thakura could not dispense with his 
old white umbrella.^ In the fragmentary verses that are 
recited in the ceremony known as the Gdjana of Dharma 
(and in the Gajana of Siva in East Bengal) we find the 
same description of Dharma as all white/ 

The white-complexioned god of the Hindu Pantheon is 
lord Siva. In popular meditation he has been compared to 
the silver mountain {rajata-giri-nibha). In the Tantras he is 
the Sveta-hindu (or the white matter) as opposed to Sakti 
who is the ra\ta-bindu (or the red matter) ; he resides 
in the snow-white mountain of Kailasa. The other popular 
Hindu deity of white colour is the goddess Sarasvati, the 
goddess of learning. She is herself white, is clad in white 
geurment, sits on a white lotus,'’ and has the white swan as 
her mount. It is customary to worship her with all kinds of 

* Sunya-purana, p. 67, p, 69, p, 149. C/. also, Ibid,, p. 216, 

2 P. 176. 

2 260. C/. also, Anadi-mangala of Rima-das Adak, p. 34. Msnik Ginguli 

says that Dharma has white seat, white paste of sandal besmeared on his body ; 
he has white cloth, white camara and a pair of white sandals on his feet {Dhm, 
of Gsdguli, p. 1). In other places we find that Dharma has white glow around 
h» body, white cloth, and ornaments ; he is besmeared with white sandal-paste ; 
he puts on white shoes and sits on a white throne ; he has white frontal mark, white 
and brilliant matted hair, and a garland of white moons ; he has white seat with 
a white canopy, and with white flags, and his temple is lighted with white glow 
{Ibid., p. 5, p. 33, p. 212, etc,). White is his residence, white his house and white 
is the pedestal of the lord with everything else white around. Ibid,, p. 48; see also 
P. 55. 

^ Vide, Adyer Gambhlra by HaridSs Palit, p. 25. See also p. 83. Similar 
verses are also found among the fiagmentary verses we have in our collection in 
connection with the Nlla-pujU of East Bengal of which we have already spoken. 

Cf. the meditation of Sarasvati : — 

ya kiinde-nduAmUra'hSra^dhacals yS Sveta-padmS^aana 
1/2 vXn3-bara-da^afinandita~k,ar5 ya iubhra-^Daatra-VftS I etc. 



bhARMA AS DESCSIBED IN THE DHAI»1A LITERATURE ^7 


white articles ; she loves white sandal-paste, white paddy, 
white flowers, fried paddy of white colour, white curd, etc/ 
In the province of Buddhism also we meet with various 
forms of Sarasvatl, but her pure white colour is generally 
maintained. 

The white colour of Siva and Sarasvatl seems to have some 
metaphysical significance. White colour represents perfect 
purity and knowledge.^ Metaphysically Siva is pure con- 
sciousness, perfect enlightenment, he is pure intelligence- 
stuff {oiiuddha-sattVa)f — and the white colour of the lord 
bears a subtle harmony with the meta- 
colour. physical nature or the lord. Sarasvatl 

, also represents learning and wisdom, — she 

stands for perfect enlightenment. In some of the Puranas 
she has been conceived as representing the Sattva-gma of 
the primordial goddess, who is called Adya-lakti or Maha- 
laksml, the other two gums, Viz., Rajas (energy) and Tomas 

Cj, also: 

taruna'iahjalam indor vihhraii iuhhra^k^ntih 
kuca-hhara-namitangt sannisanna aita-hjc I 

Also : — 

viiada-ktiBUma4u^ia pundariko-pavisfa 
dhavala-vasana-veia malati-baddha-kfiia | 
iaiadhara-kora^ Varna iubhra-tadai^ko-kornat etc, 

1 It is noticeable in this connection that in the autumnal worsihp of goddess 
LaksmI, which. is widely known as the worship of Ko;Sgara-I<a^^m? all the articles 
of worship are prescribed to be white ; even the food and sweet-meats to be offered 
to her should preferably be white. In this, however, there seems to have been 
something like a popular confusion. In our religious history LaksmI and Sarasvatl 
have sometimes been confused one for the other, and this will explain the worship 
of Saiasvatl on the white Paiicamt (i.c., the fifth day of new moon) of the month of 
MSgha, which was most probably originally the date for the worship of LaksmI as 
the very name Sri~paflcarrii will indicate (see SarasVati by Mr. AmQlya Caran VidyS- 
bhdsana, Vol. I). May we infer that as we have the worship of Sarasvatl in the 
Srl^paHcanii of the month of Magha in the place of the worship of LaksmI, so we 
have the worship of LaksmI on the full-moon night of autumn in the place of the 
worhsip of Sarasvatl and hence perhaps is the importance of all white articles in the 
KojSgara-LaklinVs worship? 

^ In literaturei however, white colour also represents fame and smile (Cf, 
yolasi dhavalats var^yate hS^kirtyd^Sshitua^darpat^) , 



348 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


(inertia) being represented by Laiksml and Mahakali respec- 
tively/ In the the Samkhya philosophy pure intelligence- 
stufiF {Sattva) heis been spoken of as of pure white colour, 
Rajas or energy of red colour, T amas or inertia of black 
colour. It is for this reason that the colour of Sarasvati 
is pure white and everything associated with her and her 
worship is also white. 

Coming to Buddhism we find that when Buddha began 
to be docetically conceived, he was conceived as the embodi- 
ment of perfect purity and perfect enlightenment. He was 
pure-consciousness {vijnapti-matrata or vijnana-dhatu) as the 
ultimate reality, — he is perfect knowledge or wisdom. 
He has often been described as effulgent by nature {pra\rti- 
prabhasvara) and as radiating light of 
Bv^dhism.” * ® ® ‘ " knowledge {prajhalo\d) . Round the physi- 
cal form of historical Buddha as Siddh^tha 
or Sakya-simha there has always been a glow of perfect 
purity and enlightenment. Before giving birth to Buddha, 
Maya,- his mother, dreamt that a white elephant entered her 
womb and this predicted the birth of Buddha who would 
attain perfect enlightenment. This notion of perfect purity 
and enlightenment as the ultimate nature .of Buddha or 
rather of the supreme deity {Bhagavan) was to a great extent 
traditionally carried down even to the latter periods of 
Tantricism. It is, therefore, not very unlikely that in the 
popular description of Dharma-thakiua as all white and 
having everything white associated with him we have an 
unconscious mixture of the notions of 8iva and Buddha. 


* Vide, Saraavaii by A. VidySbhG^^a, Vol. I, p. 1 19-20. 



CHAPTER XIII 

The Theory of the PandUas, Kotalas, Aminls, fJC. 


Lord Dharma has five Panditas in the five ages, Setai in 
the golden age {Satya-yuga), Nilai in the silver age (Treta- 
yuga), Katnsai in the copper age (Dcapara-yuga), Ramai 
in the iron age {Kali-yuga) and Gotnsai in the void-age or 
the age to come {Sunya-yuga or Andgata-yuga). Setai is 
white in colour, Nilai is blue, Kamsai yellow, Ramai red and 
Gotnsai green. The five Panditas eire really the five priests 
of Dharma in the five ages including the age to come.* But 
at the time of the worship of Dharma all the five ages meet 
together with all the five Panditas, whom we find placed in 
the five quarters, and these five quarters are again represent- 
ed by the five gates of the temple of Dharma facing the 
five queurters. This theory of the gates in the different 
directions with respective presiding deities over them is also 
found in the Gdjana songs of Siva still now ciurent in West 
Bengal as well as in East Bengal. In the versions of 
West Bengal the presiding deities over the southern, western, 
northern and eastern gates are Jagannatha, Ekadasa Bhima, 
the Sun {Bhdnu-bhas\ara-rdya) and Kamakhya of Kama-rQpa 
respectively.^ In the versions of blast Bengal the deities 
in the west, south, east and north are Jagannatha, Vaidya- 
natha, Sri-munda-cakra-vahini and Sri-sabha-linga-vahini 
respectively.® Sometimes jagannatha, Ksira-nadi-sagara, 
Sorya-divakara (the sun) and the Himalayeis are also saJuted 
in the four directions.* 

^ The tradition of Pa^dita Goqfisfii is not found in all the descriptions, 

* Vide$ J[dyer Gamhhtra by H. Palit. 

^ See infra, Appendix 

* Sec VaAga^^BShityomparicaya, Part I, pp. 159^0^ 



OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


^$6 

The five priests in the five quarters have again five 
KotSlas, or gueirds, or rather gate-keepers with them. Viz., 
Cemdra (the moon) in the west, HanurnSn in the south. Sorya 
(the sun) in the east, Garuda in the north and Uloka in the 
void. The Kofslas, as they are depicted in the Sunya- 
purana, seem to be so many attendants on the priests and 
gate-keepers in the five directions of the Dharma temple [; 
they open doors to the visitors and again shut them up. The 
association of the sun and the moon with the east and the 
west is well-known, and the association of .Hanuman with the 
south is also well-known through the stories of the Rama- 
yana (Ceylon, which was the field of activity of Hanuman 
being situated to the south of India). So the appointment of 
these three Kotalas in the three quarters is easily explicable. 
Guruda and Uluka are well-known as the mounts of Visnu 
and Dharma-thakura respectively. As Hanuman, associated 
with the south, happens to be something like the mount of 
Rama-candra, it is perhaps by the law of association that the 
two other well-known mounts are placed in the other two 
quarters. In the Dharma-puja-vidhana, however, the Kotalas 
or the guards are differentiated from the gate-keepers {Dvait 
ox Dvara-pala), who Me again attended by four Patras 
(attendants). The four gate-keepers in the four quarters (the 
fifth gate of void being omitted here) are, Jharjhari-sundara 
(or JharjhEirika) or Mahakala in the west, Jambhava or 
Tlkfna-damstra in the south, Mahakaya in the east, and 
Nandideva in the north; and the Patras are Padihara, 
HanQman, Dsmara^ani and Kamadeva respectively. We 
have somewhat detailed description of these Dvara-palas in 
the Dharma-pujS-vidhBna. 

The Panditas of the five ages axe associated with differ- 
ent number of followers, different Aminis or Ghata-dSsis 
who are femaJe attendants on the Lord. The whole thing 
c^lfc be illustrated with the help of the following Chart (the 
discrepancies of the descriptions being neglected) : — 



THE THEORY OF THE PaniUas, Kofalas, Aminis, ETC. 351 


J 

'S BO gD 


(U *> • 

u A CO 

(d OM 

« 5 

arMTj V 
^ (0 

5^-0 A 0 


3 

'o 

O 


M O 

« « 

(B o 2 * 

^ S.S 




(d'ra 

1 ^ 

c o 
o 

U 3 


Is 

c?1 


g* 

Q< 

O 

U 


M <:: C 

S' ® 


n3 

V 

CC 


I i"i * 

U M 

<u 0 

QC 


o S i2 

a-Q 


-0 

e 

o 


- 8i 

^ 'a A 

*:= <8 S * 
3 


e 

(Q 

z 


s 

I 


Ou'^ ^ 


i<8 M a 
•id i(tt S 
•c >> M -2 
(S S o (8 
JHD Z 


Si* '* ^ 
3 5 I' 

DTJ cr5 


n iS § 
Ut 3 0Q 


jd 

'ic8 

a 


>'13 iJ 

Q Si: 


i - (8 ice flj £ 

^ ifS .!c 


(d (B a 3 
>• c * W 

^-“*'2 I 

t!: e 

gh- „.c 


B- 


fl- ls-§^ 


" « 
.Sq. 

- 

lie j8 

-£! i ! -rr 

ce 1(8 «o 


(8 

g| 

15? 

Z .3'^ 


1 


5 5i-^ 

'TJu S 

§^J 

U S 


c 

(8 

I 


td-a^ 

§ 


(8 

oa 


CQ 


u 


•§ 

O 


8 


I 

< 




jC 


' OQ 


3 

T) 


I 


a 

3 

d 


Direc- 

tion 

West 

South 

East 

North 

:5s 




**id 


0 

Age 

Golden 

(Satya) 

Silver 

(Treta) 

Copper 

(Dvapar 

Iron 

(Kali) 

3 11 

> s ■§ 


l°i 


Isl 


I 

Z 


I 



' 352 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


This theory of the five Panditas, Kotalas^ Amirns, etc*, 
is nothing but a popular adoption of the later Buddhist 
theory of the PaUca-tathagatas^ also known as the five 
Dhyan! Buddhas/ With the growth of the docetic concep- 
tions in Mahayana Buddhism the five skandhas or elements 
began to have ontological significance and gradually gave 
rise to the conception of five deities. In the Panca-tathagata^- 
mudra-vivarana oi the Advaya-Vajra-samgraha v/e find that 
the five Tathdgatas are but the modes and modifications 
of the Dharipa-kaya of the Vajrasattva. These five Tathd- 
gataSi though originally conceived as the five deities over 
the five sl^andha^, are later on regarded as the five presiding 
deities over the five gross elements (viz,, earth, water, fire, 
air and ether) and the five senses (of z., senses of vision, 
taste, hearing, smell and touch). In later Buddhistic esoteric 
literature these deities are described with their Bodhisattvas, 
human Buddhas {Mdnusi Buddha), Sakti (female counter- 
part), mounts (odhana), postures (mudra), crest, family 
(l^ula), bija-mantra etc. They are again associated with 
the five gross elements (pancQ'hhuta) , five kinds of sense- 
perception and the five sense organs. They are again 
located in the five places within the human body. We are 
giving below a chart of the whole thing, wherein the contro- 
versies over the details are ignored.^ 


1 See an axticle by P. K, Mukherjee in the Bengali monthly Pracasi, (1329 
B. S..No. 1)! 

2 Fcr a detailed study of the subject see an article Vajra and Vajrasattva by 
the present writer in the Indian Culture^ Vol. VIII, No. 1. See also Srhguhy a- 
samaja (G. O. S.), Advaya-vajm^santgraha (G. O. S., Chs. on PaUca-tatha- 
gata-modrd'ViVarana, and Pafica-kara), Sadhanq-malS (G. O. S., Vol. II, pp. 
445-46), Hevajra-tantra, Patala IX, Sampu^ikat Ch. 1, Pafica-krama, Ch. I. 
Jte Coda of Northern Buddhism by A. Getty, Buddhist Iconography by Dr, B. 
Bha^&carya, pp. 1-8, and An Introduction to Buddhist Esoterism by Dr. B. Bha((S- 
c£rya, Ch, XIll. 



Element (bhuta). Location in 


THE THEORY OF THE Paniitas, Kotalas, Amiriis, ETC. 


S 

Ji 


i 

X 


> 

(S 

2 


9 

o 


c 
o 
•X3 
a I 


^ S B 

-4) 3 
^ « ec 


■13 

§3 

Us 


li 

eo 

5 ^ 


2 S .S 

■* O -Sd 

H CO 


2 a 
^S'2 

. 2.0 

« •- U 

H *2 
>UJ 




>l2 


1*^ 


o Si 


c •— 


o 

HH 


CD 


cn^ 


CO 


O o 


: M S* 
>. o 2 


®co 


-Q O I«d — 


^'b 

c£s 


I g 
S-S 


g 2 

rt (0 

^ u 
Q 


CQ 

B 

(0 

.JS 

a 

4) 

□ 


J 

A 

.x: 

o 

(0 

S’ 

> 

•RJ 

B g* 



Q 

0 B 


8 


S. 

<> > 


g RJ 
2 «-c 
6-0 

Xrg 


i-o 

s 

2^ 

u a 


'J2 c 
« 2 


a 


B 

(0 

O 


(C 


rx: 

-TJ 

3 


iS (rt irt 

c 2 a 

rt -o 2 


m 

a 


CU (0 B 
ea > > 

E<2 

1 sx 

0.4 


’3- 

lea 

a 


^ S 'S 
no > •«» 

2 '5GH 

^ 2 o 


|< O 


B 

m 


i 


3 

o: 


a 

4) 

2 

O 


» g 

.a .2 

Q 


ui 


B 

o 

CO 


o 

Z 


V 

I 

CO , 


B 2 
jb^S 

•"•CQ 


A 5 

a IS 


3 " 


I 

I 


Is 


J 5 - 


(0 


'S 


I 


353 


45-141 IB 



354 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


If we put side by side and compare the two charts, 
one illustrating the theory of the five Tathagatas, or the five 
Dhyani Buddhas and the other illustrating the theory of the 
five Panditas of the Dharma cult, no room will be left for 
doubting the fact that the latter is but a transformed version 
of the former. With the five Tathagatas and the five- 
Panditas we may compare also the popular Islamic tradition 
of the five Ptrs (or saints). It may also be cursorily noticed 
that the Kabir Panthis have the belief that the Sat Puru^ 
(i.e. the Supreme Being) has four different messengers in 
the four ages, viz., Sat Suhrii in the Satya~yuga, Munin- 
darji in the Treta, Karunamaya Ihi in the Dvapara and 
Kabir Saheb in the Kali. 

Already in the HeVajra-tantra we find that there are 
four corners and four gates or doors of the Mandala or Cakra 
(mystic diagram) of goddess Prajna and four are the Saktis 
in charge of the four gates ; they are Gaurl in the east, 
Caurl in the south, Vetall in the west and Ghasmarl in the 
north ; there are other two goddesses, viz., Bhucari and 
Khecari in the downward {adhas) and upward (urddhva) 
directions.’ These goddesses in the different directions 
are again said to be the presiding Saktis over the five sense- 

1 cakram purvarjft yatha kathitam hara-rddhahara4ohhiiam t 

catuf-konam catur-dvaram vajra^sulrair alamkxtam II 

* * * 

nihafta indra-dig-gaurt purva-dvare tu aamathita I 
mantha-manthana-yogena caurika nihafta punah II 
nihartya dak^inc dvare court aaddvala ( ?) —Valike I 
hola-kflkkolo'yogena vetall nihsftS punah (I 
nihaftya pa&cime dv5re m§anna mara-hhahjani I 
maha dvandva-aamapattau nihsfta ghaamari punah II 
nihaftya uttara-dvare ni§anna ghora-rupinl I 

HeVajra-tantra, MS. pp. 55 (B) — 56 (B). 

Cf. also indre gauri yame court vetall Varune diii I 

kaiihere ghaamari caiva adho hhUchari amfta ti 
urddhve khecart prokta utpotti>^rama-pa^ 9 ata{i I etc. 

Ibid, MS. P. 25 (B) 

See also 5sdfi<ino-niS/a. (G. O, S.) Vol. II, p. 445. 



THE THEORY OF THE Paniitas, KotSlas, Aminls, ETC. 35$ 

perceptions. Again the presiding Saktis over the five 
Sj^andhas are said to be Vajra, Gaurl, Caurl, Vajra-yogini 
and Nairatmya-yogini respectively.* These goddesses are 
placed in the different quarters.^ Without .entering into 
the anomalous details it will be sufficient for us to note that 
the conception of the four gates or doors were already there 
in Tanlric Bucyhism. In the exoteric form of northern 
Buddhism we find the theory of the five Buddhas represented 
in the Buddhist Stupas or Catty as of latter time, where one 
of the five Buddhas was given prominence to be the Lord 
Supreme and was placed in the centre and the other four 
were placed on the four gates or doors on the four sides. 
Such a scheme is to be found also in the sculptiual represen- 
tation of the later Buddhist Stupas or Catty as. Elsoterically, 
however, these Tathagatas and also their Saktis are placed 
in the central, eastern, southern, western and northern 
directions of the mystic diagram (Mandala) of secret practices. 
In later times all these esoteric and exoteric traditions 
transformed themselves into the scheme of the five gates 
(including the void-gate) of the temple of Dharma, where 
the five Tathagatas or the five Buddhas have become the 
five worshippers of lord Dharma in the five eiges in the 
form of the five Pandttas. 

, The tradition that there are different deities presiding 
over the different quarters is, however, as old as th e Vedas. 
Thus in the Atharva-Veda we find that, of the Eastern 
quarter Agni is the overlord, black serpent is the defender, 

1 rupe gaurt samakhyata iabde caurl prakirtita I 

vetati gandha-hhage ca rase ghaamari kJrtita 11 
slOarie ca bhUcarl khyata khecarl dharma-dhatutali I 

Hevajra-tantra, MS. P. 25 (B) 
rtipa*akandhe bhavet vajra gaurl Vedanayaqi arpfta t 
aaijujHayarfi caurl yogiril aarjiakSre Vajra-yogini II 
vijfi&na-akundha-rupp^ aihii& nairittmyil’yoginl I etc. 

Ibid MS. P. 15 (A) 

“See also Ssdhana-msla, Vol. II. p. 545. 

* S&dhana-mal&t Vol. ii. p. 444 



356 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the Adityas are the arrows, and homage is paid to the over- 
lord, the defender and the arrows. Similarly, of the Southern 
quarter Indra is the overlord, cross-lined (serpent) defender, 
the Fathers the arrows; of the Western quarter Varuna 
is the overlord, the adder defender, food the arrows; of 
the Northern quarter Soma is the overlord, the constrictor 
defender and the thunder-bolt arrows, of the fixed quarter 
(dhraoa diJ^) Visnu is the overlord, the serpent with black- 
spotted neck defender, the plants the arrows ; of the upward 
quarter Brhaspati is the overlord, white serpent defender and 
rain the arrows.* 

It will be very interesting also to note, in connection with 
this Buddhist theory of the Panca-lathagatas and their Saktis 
and the corresponding theory of the five Panditas with the 
five Amiriis as found in the Dharma cult, that this theory has 
its correspondence also with the Hi ndu T antras. We have 
seen that the five Tathagatas, though originally said to be five 
deities over the five Sk.andhas, are associated with the five 
gross elements. These five elements have been represented 
in the Hindu Tantras by the five (out of the six) lotuses or 
plexuses, viz., Muladhara representing earth, Svadhisthana 
representing water, Manipura representing fire, Anahata air 
and Viluddha ether. There are five presiding gods and five 
goddesses associated with these lotuses. Ihe gods are, 
Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Isana, and Mahadeva respectively ; £uid 
the goddesses associated with the lotuses are Dakinl, Rakini, 
Lakini, Kakini and 3akinl respectively. The bija-mantras 
of the lotuses are /am, bam, ram, yam, and ham ; the bija~ 
mantras of the five Dhyant Buddhas are also almost exactly 
the same (i.e., /, b, r, y, and om). The first three gods 
associated with these lotuses are respectively of red, blue and 
vermilion colour, and the last two are white ^ The goddesses 
are of red, deep blue, dark-green, smoky and white colour. 


1 (3.27. W), 



THE THEORY OF THE Pcm4itas, Kotalas, Aminis, ETC. 357 


In the colour scheme, however, there is perfect cortespon- 


The colour scheme. 


Hence between the Buddhist and the 
Dharmite tradition ; they have a faint 


resemblance with the colour scheme of the Tantreis also. The 


hve elements in the five plexuses, Uiz., earth, water, fire, air 
and sound are described in some of the texts as of yellow, 
white, red, smoky and blue colour respectively. Again we 
find in the Puranic literature that there was the tradition of 


God’s having four different colours in the four different ages. 
God was of white colour in the Saiya-yuga, red colour in 
the Treta-yuga, yellow in the Dvapara~yuga and black 
in the Kali-yuga.' Rupa-gosvami speaks of the colour 
scheme as white, red, dark-green and black.^ It may 
also be noted that in the A nagata-Vamsa (a Pali text 
describing the tradition of the advent of Maitreya, the 
future Buddha) there is the description of four gates in 
the capital city Ketumati and in the four gates there will be 
four Kalpa-trees of the blue, yellow, red and white colour.® 
In the Chandogyo-panisat we find that of the four Vedas, 
the first, i.e., the Rg-veda is spoken of as of the colour of 
the white portion of the eye, and the second, i.e., the Sama- 
Veda is spoken of as of the colour of the deep blue portion of 
the eye.* Again, of the five material elements Tejas is 
described as red, water as white and earth as black.® Again, 
the nerves of the body have been described as secreting four 
kinds of liquids, which are of white, blue, yellow and red 
colour.® 


1 Stan varffSt ttailo hyatya gfhnaio' nuyagarp ianulf I 

iuklo rakioB taiha pita idsntm kf^natSm gatah II 

Bhagavata-purana, (10. 8. 13). 

^ kathyate varna-nQmahhyarp iukjlcdt satya-yuge harih I 

rakta*iy€ima-kf<’^fmt tretSyarfi dvapare hftlau (f 

Laghu-bhagavati-mita of Rupa-gosvimi. 

3 Vide verse» (10-20), 

4 Chandogya, 7. 4)t 

6 Ibid. (6/4). 

c Ibid. (8.6.)}, 



358 


ORSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


About the colour of the different articles associated with 
the worship of Dhartna in the hve gates, it will be seen that 
the articles associated with the western gate, which in its turn 
is associated with Setai Pandita, are all white in colour ; 
similar is the colour scheme of the articles associated with 
the other gates. Again, as for the metal of the articles it 
may be noticed that the articles associated with the western 
gate, which is again connected with the Satya-yuga or the 
golden age, are all made up of gold ; those of the southern 
gate, associated with the silver age, are all of silver ; those 
of the eeistem gate, associated with the copper age, are all of 
copper, those of the northern gate, associated with the iron 
age, are spoken of as made up of some read metal, or, bell- 
metal, stone and brass ; and those of the fifth gate, associated 
with the void age or the age to come, are all of diamond. 
The tradition of Gosani Pandita of the age to come (A nagata- 
yuga) may possibly have something to do with the tradition 
of the advent of the future Buddha Maitreya in the A nagata 
age, as it is described in the Pali text A nagata- Varna . 



CHAPTER XIV 


COSMOGONICAL AND COSMOLOGICAL THEORIES IN OlD 
AND Mediaeval Vernacular Literatures 

(1) A brief Exposition of the Theories 

In the old and mediaeval vernaculars of India we find 
various theories about cosmogony and cosmology. Inspite 
of the differences in details, there is a general similarity in 
the description. When we shall analyse the ideas found in 
these theories we shall find that here also, as in other cases, 
there is a great jumbling of ideas received from various 
sources of Indian philosophy, theology and mythology. Of 
all the descriptions found in the vernaculars, the descriptions 
contained in the literature of the Dharma cult of Bengal seem 
to be the most detailed and important, and we shall presently 
see that all the other' descriptions found in other types of 
literature present a striking similarity with the descriptions 
found in the literature of the Dharma cult. Though the 
accounts given in the vernaculars are often extremely con- 
fusedv^in nature, we must first of all attempt a very brief 
exposition of these cognate theories and our next and more 
im portant task will be to analyse them and to affiliate the 
constituent elements to the older thoughts and beliefs.^ 

In the Sunya-purana we find that in the beginning there 
was nothing, — neither any linear mark, 

Account given . , 

in the nor any form, nor any colour, nor any 

Sanya-purana. tiace of anything ; there was neither the 

sun nor the moon, nor the day nor the night. There was 

^ In this connection see introduction to the $iinya~pttr3na (edited by Mr, 
C. Banerjee) by Dr. Shahidullah and Mr. B. Chatterjee. 



360 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


neither water, nor earth, nor the sky, nor the mountains. The 
universe was not, — neither was anything mobile or immobile, 
nor were the temples, nor the gods in them, — there were only 
all-pervading darkness and haze (dhundhukora ) — and in 
the infinite vacuum the Lord alone was moving in the great 
void having nothing but void as His support. And in his 
absolute loneliness the Lord was thinking of creating some- 
thing, and out of the great vacuum there came out the vital 
air of the Lord, from which came inhalation and exhalation ; 
from these again proceeded great compassion and from that 
all the principles of illusion. Then there came out a bubble 
of water on which the Lord n\ade his seat, but the bubble 
could not withstand the pressure of the Lord and burst into 
pieces leaving the Lord once more in the vacuum. Then the 
Lord sat fixed in the vacuum and in and through his com- 
passion another personality of the name of Niranjana came 
out of him. The latter, however, had no hands and legs, — 
neither had he any father and mother, nor was he born of the 
seed and the ovum, nor had he any other companion in the 
great void. This Niranjana or Dharma then sat on the seat 
of compassion and passed full fourteen ages in the meditation 
on the Great (hamhha-jana). After fourteen ages of medita- 
tion Niranjana yawned and from his high breath came out the 
bird U lluka. The bird began to flee away from the Lord 
who was calling it from behind ; but Ulluka got tired in the 
infinite void and came back to the Lord. The Lord then 
took compassion on Ulluka and made his seat on the back of 
the bird and once more passed fourteen years in meditation. 
In the mean time Ulluka became much fatigued with hunger 
and thirst and asked for some drink from the Lord. The 
Lord gave a little quantity of fluid from his mouth to the bird 
to drink. Ulluka drank the fluid, but some portion of it fell 
outside in the void and water came out of it, and both the 
Lord and his mount were floating on water^ But in the 
heaving water both of them were being tossed roughly and a 



COSMOGONICAL AND CX)SM(XCX;iCAL THEORIES 361 

feather dropped from the body of the bird and the feather 
berame a swan. The Lord then proposed to have some rest 
on the back of the swan, and the latter agreed, and the Lord 
once more passed several ages on the back of the swan. 
But the swan also got tired and flew away in the void leaving 
the Lord in water. The Lord then touched water with his 
lotus-like hand, whereby a tortoise came to being, and the 
Lord passed several ages in meditation on its back. The 
tortoise also got tired and flew away leaving the Lord and 
Ulluka oil water. Ullukathen advised the Lord to create the 
world in water. With the instructions of Ulluka the Lord 
cast off on water his golden sacred- thread, which instantane- 
ously became the serpent Vasuki o^thousand fangs. Then 
the Lord accumulated a little quantity of dusty substance from 
his nail and placed it in the form of the world on the head of 
the serpent Vasuki. The Lord then went out with Ulluka to 
visit the world and the world was increasing with the speed 
of the Lord. By roaming about in the world the Lord 
became tired and began to perspire and from the sweat of his 
body was produced the Adya-Sakti (the primordial energy). 
The Lord built a house for her and placed her there and 
after creating the river Balluka engaged himself in meditation 
once more for fourteen ages. In the mean time Adya-Sakti 
grew young and from her youthful desires proceeded forth 
Kama (Cupid) who was sent by Adya to the Lord. Kama 
went to the Lord, aimed his arrow at him and the Lord was 
disturbed. The Lord came to know everything from Ulluka 
and put Kama in an earthen pot and Kama became trans- 
formed into poison. Adya, after some time, became 
unable to bear the burden of her youth and attempted 
to commit suicide by swallowing the contents of the earthen 
pot ; but to her astonishment she became pregnant thereby. 
Three gods were then born to Adya, u/z., Brahma, Visnu and 
Siva. Just aft^r their birth all the three went out for penance 

and meditation, and the Lord also went to test them in the 
46^14118 



362 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


form of a corpse floating on water. Brahma could not 
recognise the Lord in disguise, Visnu also could not recognise 
him ; it was only Siva, who could recognise the Lord. The 
Lord became pleased with Siva, and granted him three eyes 
(for all the three brothers were born bhnd). Subsequently 
at the request of Siva the other two brothers. Viz., 
Brahma and Visnu also received eye-sight with the sprinkling 
of the fluid from the mouth of the Lord. All the three 
brothers then went back to Adya, where they were entrusted 
by the Lord with the task of creation. Adya-sakti was asked 
to be the wife of Siva and to help him in the work of creation. 
Thus after entrusting the whole task of creation, preservation 
and destruction to the triad the Lord once more went to the 
void and remained for ever seated on his mount Ulluka.' 


The fragmentary accounts -of cosmogony found in the 


Account given in 
the Dharma-puja- 
Vidhana. 


Dharma-puja-vidhma also tally with those 
found in the Sunya-purana ; the only 
difference is that. Dharma Niranjana came 


out of the formless absolute Lord in the form of a luminous 


body in the void and was asked to create the universe with 
his three qualities (gunas), viz., saliva, rajas and tamas, 
personified as the triad Brahma, Visnu and Siva.^ 

In the Dharma-mahgalas detailed accounts of cosmogony 
are found which, though slightly different 
•■itaantially Ae ,ame a, 
found in the Sunya-puram. Thus almost 
a similar account of cosmology is found in the Dharma- 
mangala of Sahadev Cakravarti.® The account given in the 
Dharma-mangala of Sita-ram Das also tallies with the account 
of the iSunya-purana almost verbatim ; the only important 
deviation is that after the world was created Dharma himself 


1 :§nnya-purana» Snfi-pattana, pp. 1-42. In this connection see the introduc- 
tion to the Sunya-purana by Dr. Shahiduliah and Mr. B, K. Chatterjee. 

* Dharma-puja-vidhanot pp. 201-202, 

3 l/fdeB,SP.P., B.S, 1304. 



cosMogonical and cosmological thec«ies 363 


assumed the form of a charming damsel and was then 
himself in union with her. Through their union three gods 
of the nature of the three gunas were born to them/ 

In the Anadi-mangala of Ramdas Adak^ we find that 
Mahamaya was produced from the left side of Dharma. 
Mahamaya or Adya-sakti attained her youth. Dharma 
proposed to Ulluka that as Adya was produced from the left 
part of his body, she should be the wife of the Lord. The 
proposal appeared obnoxiously repulsive to Adya, who tried to 
flee away in all the directions ; but at last she had to give way 
and the marriage took plAce in the void through the medi- 
tation of Ulluka. Then follows the birth of the triad and 
the story of Dharma’s disguise to test them. Here also it 
was 5iva, who could recognise the Lord, and the propitiated 
Lord entrusted Siva with the charge of creation. But Siva, 
with the preponderance of tamas in him, created the Yaksas, 
Raksas, ghosts, genii, demons and many such other horrible 
beings. The Lord then put a check to Siva and asked 
Brahma to take the charge of creation. The Lord Himself 
assumed the form of a bear and brought for him (Brahma) 
the earth, which lay hidden in the nether land. Then follows 
the theory of the self-originated Brahma and the Manus, the 
Ditis and the Aditis, etc., as it is found in the Puranic litera- 
ture.® In Ghana-rama we find that in the primordial void 
and darkness the formless supreme Lord first revealed 
himself in a form which contained the potency of all creation. 
The Lord desired to create and from his desire for creation 
was born Praljrfi in the form of the most beautiful and charm- 
ing woman, — and the mind of the Lord was disturbed at the 
sight of her beauty, and through the disturbance in his mind 
Prakjti was infused with the three gunas from which again 

were born the three gods, Brahma, Visnu and 3iva. Then 

“ » 

1 Ohm, of SitarSm Dss, Sthapana-pala, MS. (C. U, No. 2469) p, 3 (A)* 

* Edited by Mr. B. K. Chatterjec, Sshitya-parisat series, No, 82, 

3 Vide AnSdi-maftgala of RSnidSs Adak, pp. 7-10. 



364 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


follows the story of their penance and their test by Dharma 
in the guise of a corpse. Here also, eis in the case of 
Ramdas’s account, Siva, who was first entrusted with the 
charge of creation, created all sorts of horrible beings and 
th^ the charge was transferred from him to Brahma. From 
Prajapati Brahma was first produced /Ihan^jara (egohood), 
from A hanl^dra proceeded the five elements and then the 
four sons of Brahma (oiz., Sanaka, Sananda, Sanat-kumara 
and Sanatana) and so on as in the popular Puranic accounts.' 
According to the account given by Manik Ganguli the triad 
with the essence of the gunas was produced from the union of 
the Lord and Sakti and for the triad Sakti again 'divided her- 
self into three goddesses, viz., Brahmani, Vaisnavi and Saivi. 
Then follows the test of the triad. Here we find that all 
the three gods could recognise the Lord and did welcome 
him warmly and humbly and the Lord, pleased with the triad, 
entrusted them with the charge of creation, preservation and 
destruction. The three Saktis, Viz., Brahmani, Vaisnavl and 
Saivi were then united with Brahma, Visnu and Siva and 
the triad with their Saktis created the manifold universe.’* 
The account given by Narasitnha Vasu in his Dharmayana 
comes closer to the Samkhya view of cosmology. From 
the desire of the Lord for creation in the primordial 
void Pra^rti was born in the form of a beautiful woman, 
and from the union of Prakfti and the Lord was born 
a son of the name of Mahartta (i.e., mahat) and from 
Mahartta came three Ahamkaras of the nature of tluree 
gunas, and from them were born the triad.’' Then follows 

^ Sec Dhm. ol Ghana-rima, SthapanQ~pala, pp. 5-7. 

2 Dhm. of Manik Ganguli^ pp. 9-1 1, 

3 mahartta haite haila ahahkar tin I 
aartta raja tamaaa trigun bhirnna hhin II 
aartta rape birana rupa karila airay I 
rajagune athiti-kortd brahmdr tanay il 
aiv tama-gune haila jdhd haite naa I 
tdmaaa gunete jammila dk^s It 

Dharmdyai)a of Nazaeiipha Vasu, Vol. L. MS. (C.U. 3224) p. 7 (B). 



COSMOGONICAL AND COSMOLOGICAL THEORIES 365 


the story of the test of the triad and 3iva was entrusted with 
the charge of creation. But in actual creation we find the 
Pura^ic story that the Lord with his mystmous Maya (i. e. 
principle of creative illusion) slept on the snake A nanta and 
from the lotus of his navel proceeded Brahma, who was 
always thinking of creation.* Brahma had four sons proceed- 
ing from his desire {manasa-putra) , viz., Sanaka, Sanatana, 
Sananda and Sanat-kumara. And then came the theory of 
the Manus, Dili, Aditi and others just as in the Puranas. 

In the Gajana songs of West Bengal and East Bengal we 
find the same conception of cosmogony. In the verses collec- 
ted by Mr. Haridas Palit in his book Adyer Gambhira we find 
that in the beginning there was nothing and the Lord (Gosani) 
was in the form of the void in the boundless void.® Then 
. . , ... there was water and the Lord was 

of West floating (?) in his void-form.® He then 
ordered a crab to sink down and to bring 
earth from the bottom, — and the crab brought earth for the 
Lord. According to one version* the Lord made the world 
with a portion of earth brought by the crab and the world 
was then placed on the back of a tortoise. According to 
another version the earth, brought by the crab was of the 
nature of gold and from it there was an egg and that egg 
burst into two (one half becoming the earth and the other 
half the sky ?) and the triad, Brahma, Visnu and Siva then 
created the world.® 

In the fragmentary verses, which the present writer 
collected from the district of Bakergunge in 
of East Bengal. t-sst Bengal, and which are sung on the 

occasion of the Nlla-piija at the end of the 
month of Caitra similar cosmogonical ideas are found. In 

1 fbid.MS. pp. 9{A)-9(B). 

> P. 19. 

* Ibid, p. 24. 

* Ibid, p. 19. 

t Ibid, pp. 24.25. 



366 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULT^ 


one verse we find, — “In the beginning there was neither any 
cause, nor reason, nor the sky ; neither was there water nor 
earth; neither the within, nor the without, and the Lord was 
all alone. The Lord then perspired and from his sweat 
was created the universe.^ In another song we find that 
Dharma-raja, after travelling long on his mount, per- 
spired, and from his sweat a phantom was produced and the 
phantom became magically transformed into a girl ; she 
stood before the Lord and the Lord got enamoured with her ; 
she, however, began to flee in the western direction to escape 
his hands eind rebuked the shameless father who was mad 
after his own daughter ; but -the Lord paid no heed to her 
words and pursued her madly 

In connection with the travelling of Siva as a mendicant 
in the market-place {bajar-sannyasa), which is also included 
in the ceremonies on occasion of the Nila-piija, we find the 
following verse : — “Void was the market place, the earth weis 
not, — Sannyasins (those that have renounced the world), 
Tapasvins (those who practise penances) and Rsis (sages) 
there were none ; neither was the day, nor the night. How 
was the Lord at that time ? All the existent was void, the 
non-existent was also void and the Lord of void weis of the 
body of void ; the earth with the seven islands was immersed 
in water in the void. What was the state of the Lord at that 

^ hetu huddhi na chila gagan-manfal I 

nahi jal nahi sthal hahire sthapan II 
hhitar hahir nshi kcval ekeivar II 

carma gharme hhijila I 

chifaiya nak^atra 
ei-rUpa arsfi haila biivambhar 11 
* &ila re dharma-raj ulase ( uluke ?) cadiya I 

ul5»e rase irhga ghamila I 
chayaya achila hflnya mayate jammila II 
piche achila \anya sumukhc d&i^4^la I 
taha dekhiya dharma^citta dharan na yay I 
paScim dike konya dhaoyaiyS. laiyS yay II 
efe^ iuniya devi balila utiar I 

haiya fhire karte cay bar II etc» 



COSMOGONICAL AND COSMQLOaCAL THEORIES 367 


time ? He was of the form of an egg. There was no 
earth, and the boar brought it with the help of his teeth. 
Lord Siva then created the earth with the dusty substance of 
his body.” There is also mention of Nila and Anila in the 
verses in a rather unmeaning and confused manner.' 

In the Candi-mangalas of Bengal we find almost a similar 
conception of cosmogony and cosmology. 
thfSm&s.'" Candi-mangala of Manik Datta, who 

flourished in or before the fifteenth centriry, 
we find a confused echo of the cosmogonical theory found in 
the Sunya-purana} In the Candi-tnangala of Mukundaram 
Cakravarti (of the sixteenth century) we find that the 
primordial Lord (Adi-deva) was thinking of creation in the 
void, and when he wets thus pondering on, Prakrti came out 
of his body, and Prakrti, who was the manifestation of the 
power (Sakti) of the Adi-deva, was called the Adi-devl. The 
Lord infused his energy in Prakrti and thereby a son of the 
name of Mahan (i.e. Mahat) was born to them ; the son of 
Mahat was Ahamk.ara and from Ahamkara were born the 

1 hajare iunya athal sannyast tapaat rfi I 
na chila diva niii II 
Sana re bhai iiver madar ( ? ) \ 
takhane achila gosarni k^man avatar li 
hay iunya nay iunya iunya iunya hay 1 
aapta-dvip prtht iunya chila jalamay II 
iona re bhai iiver madar I 
takhane achila gosarni dimba-aVatar II 
hari giri parvat na chila mafi I 
baraha aniya tay dante hfl^i II 
e iiv paaara apana I 

aitger mayala diya prthivi sthapana ii 
nile aohila gosarni anile sui I 
nile achila gosarni k^man adbhut U 
nile achila gosarpi ko^bhu nahe jani I 
eh ck h^lih^ ( ^ ) diya sevila medini li 
mati caka dhariyS phelilam jale I 
sthir nd haite iaUmal feare II 
deo deo hasumata more deo bar I 
bachare hachare haio balar agrasar II 
See B.S.P.P., 1317; also Voitga^aahitya-paricaya, Peat I| pp* 300«30l, 



368 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


five (elements), viz., earth, water, fire, air and ether. Again 
one Lord became three (the Triad) according to the gunas. 
Of the Triad Brahma hed four sons born of his desire 
{manasa-puira), but all the four went away for penance 
leaving behind the phenomenal world. Brahma, however, 
got angry and from his anger was born Rudra, who was 
given six female companions (viz Dhrti, Vrddhi, III, VasI, 
Siva and Anima) and was ordered to create the creatures. 
Siva began to create horrible creatures and was at once 
stopped by Brahma. For the purpose of creation Brahma 
then divided his body into two parts, one as the female and 
the other as the male (the latter being named as Svayam- 
bhuva Manu) . This latter was then requested by Brahma to 
create progeny, but Svayatnbhuva Manu wanted land where 
the created beings might have their abode. At this BrahmS 
became perturbed and from his nostril came out the boar who 
went to the netherland and brought back on his long teeth 
the earth that lay hidden there ; and then creation began 
as it is described in the Puranas.’ The account given in the 
Candi-mangala of Madhavacarya, though substantially the 
same as described above, shows a greater amount of confusion 
of ideas. Here the Devi was created from the breath of the 
Lord and Brahma was born in the navel. Of the triad Brahma, 
Visnu and Siva, the Devi was given to the last for creation. 
In the A nnada-mangala of Bharata-candra also we find a 
similar account. The Bisahari PadmS-purdna of Jivan Maitra 
also contains a cosmogonical account of the same nature.^ 

The cosmogonical ideas of the literature of the Natha cult 
of Bengal also resemble to a great extent 

NtSratrc”’"*’’' the ideas described above. According to 
the accounts gi\»m in the A nadi-purana or 
Anadi^caritra, the Hada-mdla-grantha, the Y ogi-tantra-hala 

^ Canfi by Mukundarim. 

* Vtde Bangala Puthir Bivarant by Har Gopsl Dss Kundu, B.S PP., B.S« 
1313. Vol. 3, p. 162, 



doSMOGONlCAL AND^ COSMOLOGICAL THEORIES 369 

etc.,' Alek-natha (the incomprehensible one) or NiraSjana 
Gosatni created Anadi Dharma-natha and from the liquid of 
the mouth of the former there was water on which Anadi- 
natha made his seat. Then Alek-natha created goddess 
Kaketuka from the energy of his own body, and she was put 
to death under the pressure of the feet of Anadi. Adi-devi, 
or goddess Kaketuka was then revived through the grace of 
the Lord and he instructed Anadi to create the beings in 
union with Adi. Then the creation began. The serpent 
Vasuki was created and was placed in the nether land and on 
the fang of it was placed the earth of a triangular shape. 
Then from the fist of Dharma were born the triad, who 
were deaf and dumb. Then follows a somewhat different 
version of the test of the triad. 

Gorak^a-Vijaya contains a cosmogonical account, which, 
inspite of slight differences, presents on the whole the same 
view as described above. In the beginning there was only 
the Karatar and nothing ■ else. The Karatar himself wm 
not self-conscious, — it was the potentiality in him that made 
him self-conscious in the process of manifestation. His 
manifested form followed his self-consciousness and the 
principle of change and transformation followed from his 
manifestation in a form. ^ And then there was the desire 
of the Lord to create the world and for the purpose he 
produced Dharma Niranjana. Dharma was first in a 
slumbering state, and when he became awakened he found 
some shadowy entity by his side, who was none but AdyS 
(f.e., Adya iSakti). The Lord attempted to capture her, but 
she tried to escape. She was then captutffl by force and 
through the union of the Lord and the Adya the sun, the 
moon, the earth and the stars were produced. From the 

1 KicJe iVat/ia-e?ftarme by Raj-mohan Nath, B,S.P.P., B.Sa 1331, 

No. 2. 

^ Gorakia-vijayf^f edited by Munsi Abdui Karim. 

SfiKltya-parisat Series No. 4, p. 1. Also see Appendix of the text. pp. 4-5. 

47-141 IB 



370 


OBSCURE Religious cults 


Httljil^ara of the Lord was born Brahma and from his mouth 
was Visnu. Through the mutual attraction and affection 
of Adi and Anadi (Adi represents Sakti who has a beginning 
and Anadi represents the beginningless principle) there was 
sweat and soul, the ego, the four Vedas and fourteen scrip- 
tures ; water and earth and all the other beings were produced 
from this sweat ' From the different parts of the body of 
Anadya emanated Siva and Gauri (who is the mother of 
the universe) and all the other Siddhas. The Lord then 
proposed that some one of them (i.e., either Siva, or any of 
the Siddhas) should accept Gauri as his wife. At this 
proposal all bent their head 'out of shame. The Lord then 
ordered Siva to accept Gauri, who (as Anadya told) was 
but one with Siva in her ultimate nature. In accordance with 
the decree of the Lord, Hara and Gauri came down on earth 
and they were accompanied by the Siddhas. In his 
discussion with Adya, Anadya says that he, as the ultimate 
reality, has an unchanging permanent nature of his own, 
which is unspeakable, and in that unchanging ultimate 
nature he remains pervading the whole cosmos in his 
formless form. As there is the tree from the seed and the 
seed in the tree, so is the creation from Anadya and Anadya 
in creation. As cream is produced by the churning of milk, 
as fire is produced through the rubbing of two logs of wood, 
so also is the creation. As there is the cycle of the night of 
the new moon and of the full moon, so there is the process of 
creation and dissolution. A simiW view of cosmogony is 
found in the Gopi-candrer Sannyas by Sukur Mahammad.^ 

In some of th^ Vaisnava Sahajiya texts also we find a 
similar theory of cosmology, more confusedly mixed up with 
Vaisnava theology and mythology. “ 

^ Gorak^a-Vijaya, Appendix (ka), alternative readings from MS. No. 5, p. 1. 

2 C. U. Vol 11. pp. 441-444. 

^ Vide Agama Grantha (edited by Mr. M. M. Bose. C.U.). Cf. also the 
Vaisnava text Golako’^^aqihiia, vide B. S. P. P., B. S., 1309. 



COSMOCONICAL AND COSMOLOGICAL THEORIES 371 


It is interesting to note in this connection that in course of 
the religious discussion that took place between a Portuguese 
Christian Missionary on the one hand and an orthodox 
Brahmin on the other in the Brahman-RomanlzySthalili- 
samoad, * of Don Antonio we find ideas of cosmogony and 
cosmology strikingly similar even in details to the ideas 
found in the descriptions of the texts belonging to the 
Dharma cult, Candl cult and the Natha cult. This fact 
clearly indicates that the ideas of cosmogony and cosmology 
described above are neither provincial nor sectarian in 
nature ; on the other hand they represent the general ideas 
infiltrated in the mind of the masses. 

The cosmogonical ideas and description found in the 
literature of some other vernaculars of India also bear 
. , j . striking resemblance to those found in 

Account round in 

llje^aisnava literature Bengali. The cosmogonical descriptions 
found in the Vaisnava literature of Orissa 
of the sixteenth centur y are almost the same as found in the 
Dharma-mahgala literature of Bengal. As the point has 
been discussed and demonstrated in the work Modern 
Buddhism and its Followers in Oi'issa by N. N. Bose, we 
need not repeat it here. 

The description of the primordial nihil and of the absolute 
Lord existing all alone in the void is also found in the poems 
of the Santa poets of Hindi literature. Thus Kabir says, — 

When there was no air, and no water, 
then who created the universe ? 

Then was no bud, no flower, 
then no womb and no generation. 

Then was no learning, no Veda, 
then no word, no taste. 

Then was no body, no dweller, 

no regions below, no earth, no sky, no heaven. 

* Edited by Dr. S. N. Sen, M,A., Ph D.. B.Lit., and published by the 
University of Calcutta, 



372 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Then was no Guru, no chela, no fathomable and 

unfathomable, 

no worship of Sagun and Nirgun, no two paths. ’ 

The creation is due to the activities of Nirafijana, and in the 
beginning he alone was, and there was nothing else.^ 

In the Ad-mangal of Kabir and in his Ramaims we find 
that in the beginning was the Almighty 
i^ct^ciTatha ) — and there was no second 
to the Lord. There first came conscious- 
ness within himself and then proceeded the desire for creation, 
and six Brahmas were creati^d. The six failed in their task 
of creation and a seventh was produced by the Lord — and 

his name was Niranjana. Niranjana wanted a bija-l^heta (a 
field to sow in) for procreation and the Lord created a woman 

for him and the woman had to be the wife of Niranjana 
against her will. This woman is none but Maya. Through 
the union of Niranjana and Maya three sons of the nature of 
the three gunas were born, they were Brahma, Visnu and 
Mahesvara/'^ 

Dado also says that Niranjana is never associated with 
anything else ; — water and earth, the static and the dynamic — 
the earth and the sky, the sun and the moon, water and air, 
day and night, heat and cold, hunger and thirst — nothing 
can touch him — nothing can be associated with him/ 

Sundar-das also says that in the beginning Niranjana 
made out of his own self the five principles (panca-tattva) of 
the material elements and also the three gunas. From rajas 
was Brahma, from sattVa was Visnu and from tamas was 
Sankara, and the three gods had Satya-loka, Vaikuntha and 


' Vide The Bijak of KahiTf Ahmad Shah, p. 55(7). 

2 Kablr-granthaVall, edited by Syamsundar Dis, p. 16?^ Padfivali* 219. 

Cf. also, Ramaini, No. 6, Bijak Kabir-das, Riwfiin edition. 

^ See Ad-mahgalt Bijak Kabir-dae. RiwSin edition; also The Bijak of 
Kabir j by Rev. Ahmad Shah, pp. 41-43. 

Cf, also : Ratnainl No. 1 , Riwfiqn edition ; also Ramai^U, No. 2, 3. 

^ Vide Anthology of Dadu, edited by Mr. K. Sen, p. 590. 



COSMCXIONICAL AND COSMOLOGICAL THEORIES 373 


Kailasa as their respective abode. Three goddesses, 
Brahmani, Thakurani and Bhavani were then associated with 
them. From the triad, in association with their iSaktis, 
proceeded the universe with all its diversities.^ As it appears 
from the glimpses that are found in his works, Tulsi-das 
also had a cognate cosmogonical view. The cosmos is 
produced from the Maya of the Lord and the Maya is con- 
ceived as the Adi-sakti.^ 

(fi) Analysis of the ideas of Cosmogony and Cosmology 
found in the V ernacular Literature 

Let us now proceed with the task of analysing and 
examining the accounts found in the vernaculars and let us 
also see how far the ideas can be traced back to older 
theories, legends and myths. There is a marked tendency 
among some scholars to hold that the cosmogonical and the 
cosmological views discussed above are Buddhistic in origin. 
If we proceed on in a critical way we shall see that there is 
no distinctive nature of the views found in the vernaculars. 
As we have said, here there is but a popular and confused 
mixture of the cosmogonical and cosmological ideas found in 
the Vedic literature, in the Upanisads, the Samkhya system, 
in the Puranic literature, in the Hindu Tantras and in the 
later phase of Mahayana Buddhism mainly expressed through 
the various Buddhist Tantras. Yet, if any character is to be 
given to them, it will be more correct to say that they are 


^ See the chapter on Cuna Utpatti Nisarpni — Sundar-granihdValt, edited by 
Purohita HarinarSyana SarmS, pp. 205-207. 

Also C/. the chapter on Rama^iako, Ihid, pp, 159-161. 

^ &di-Sakti jehi jag upajaya I sou aVatarihi mori yaha maya II 
Rama^carita-manaaat Bala-konda. 
mana maya sarpbhava parivSra \ jfV carQ-car hihidha prakarS il 

, Jbtd, 

sunu raVan brahma^a-mkayS I) pai jdsu hal hiracati mdyS it 
jd kc bal birarpei hart taS I pdlaia ajrjata harata daafl^aiaS li 
Snndara-kfin^a^ Nfigari-prac&rii^I edition. 



374 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


essenti^ly Hindu ; and even the Buddhistic elements are 
inteoduced in their Hinduised form.' 

(A) The Primordial Nihil 

Among the various accounts given in the vernaculars the 
first point to note is that in the beginning there was nothing, 
and the ultimate Being was floating as the Formless One in 
the infinite vacuum. The whole universe was then created 
by him from nothing. Or we shall find that there was the 
primordial darkness and water and the Lord was there in his 
formless existence. This idea is, however, to be met with 
first in the Rg^tJeda. There we find, — 

“At that time there was neither the aught, nor the 
naught, neither the earth nor heaven above. What was there 
to cover all ? Wherein was the abode of all ? Was there 
water deep and fathomless ? 

“ No death was then, nor immortality, no distinction 
between day and night. The One alone breathed without 
any air, — nothing existed other than that One. 

“ In the beginning there was darkness shrouded in 
darkness, indistinct was all — and water was everywhere. 
The All-pervading One was covered with all the non-existent, 
and through the Tapas or the divine effort arose the 
‘ One.‘ 

The same idea is variously described in the Upanisadic 
literature. In the Svetasmtaropanisat we find, “When 
there was neither darkness, nor day, nor night, — neither the 
existent nor the non-existent — there was only the All-good 
One (Siva) ; He was changeless. He was the Adorable, He 
was the creator, — and from Him proceeded eternal enlighten- 
ment.”® In the Taittiriyopanhat it is said that the non- 

* Sec some suggestions of Dr. B. M. Barua in B.S.P.P., 1331, No. 2. 

^ (10.129. 1-3), C/,, also, — devanarp yuge prathame* aatah aad ajayata \ 

(1072.3). 

® yada tamaa tan na diva na ratrir na aan na caaac chiva eva kcvalah I 

tadak^arafjfi tot iatJitiir varepyam prajHa ca taamai praafta paranl 1 (4.16) . 



COSMOGONICAL AND COSMOLOGICaL THEORIES 33^5 


existent (A sat) was in the beginning and from the A sat arose 
the Sat and the Sat produced its own self by itself. ^ The 
Aitareyopanisat says that in the beginning was the self 
(Atmh) alone and nothing else; it observed itself {tad 
ail^sata) and the beings were produced thereby. Again we 
find that in the beginning was the A sat alone, and from the 
A sat arose the Sat and the Sat was one and without a second 
in the beginning. The Sat desired that it would be many and 
energy {tejas) arose from it ; from tejas was water (dp) and 
from dp was produced gross matter (anna). ^ The Brhad- 
dranyal^a says that the Brahman was alone in the beginning 
and from Him arose all gods and the universe in all its 
varieties. ^ Again it is sometimes said that water alone 
was in the beginning, — from water arose Satya^ from Satya 
arose the Brahman, from the Brahman Prajapati (the lord 
or the creator of the beings) and from the Prajapati were 
the gods. ^ Again we find that water was in the beginning 
and therein was born Prajapati in the lotus-leaf. He desired 
to create the universe and the universe gradually proceeded 
from his desire. ^ The conception of the primordial water 
is as old as the Vedas® and is very popular so far as the 
Puranic literature^ of India is concerned. A very popular 
conception found in the Puranic literature (and the conception 
is very old indeed) is that the Supreme Lord was floating in 
the primordial water and hence is the name N dray ana for him.^ 

*, (27). 

2 Chandogya— {b.2) . 

3 (4.10-11), C/. also /Vfirayanopanisat, (1.1). 

^ Bfhad-aranyakot (5.5.1), 

5 TaHUrtya Brahma^Ot (1,1.3), Taiitiriya Samhita, {7.\,5),Brhad-jahalopaniaait 

( 1 . 1 .) 

^ Yad deva adah aalile suaamraddha atisthata I 

Rg-ueJa, (10.72.6). O* also /bid, (10.82.1, 5-6), (10.121.7), (10.190. 1-3) ; al«o 
infra, p. 377 

7 Cf. apo nara iti prokta apo vai nara-aunavahi I 

ta yad aayayanarn purvarjt tena narayai^ah amrtah W Manu*aatnhita, 

The same verse occurs in many PurS^ic texts. 



376 OBSCURE RELICIOUS CULTS 

In later Vaisnava literature we frequently find the Lord 
sleeping on the surface of the sea. This primordial water 
has often been philosophised as the water of original cause- 
potency {fzarana-Oari). With the account given by Manik 
Datta in his Candi-mangala that the Lord was floating on 
the surface of the primordial water with a lotus-leaf as his 
support, we may compare the following account given in 
the $ul^la-yajur-ceda , — “ In the beginning was water and 
only water; and Prajapati transformed him into air and 
accepted a Puskara-leaf as his support ; but he was tossing 
and tossing, etc.” ' As for the account given in many of the 
Mangala-kavyas that the Lord'brought to the surface of water 
the earth, submerged in water, in the form of a boar, we 
may refer to the similar description found in the Sul^la- 
yafur-veda.^ 

(B) The Conception Of Niranjana — a replica of 
Prajapati Brahma 

In the next place we find that the Suprente Being in his 
state of the Absolute is not the creator of the universe. He 
produced Dharma or Niranjana, from whom proceeded the 
universe, and all the vernacular poets are unanimous on the 
point. This idea also has its origin in the Vedic and the 
Upanisadic literature. The absdlute reality in its unqualified 
qualitiless form is not the creator of the universe, for the 
Absolute is neither the Ens, nor the non-Ens, — neither 
existent, nor non-existent. The creator of the universe is, 
however, Prajapati, or Brahma or the Vi^va-karma as he has' 
variously been conceived in the Vedic and Upanisadic 
literature. This Prajapati or Brahma^ though often described 
as the most supreme of all the gods, the god of the gods, is 
never the same as the Absolute Brahman. In the Vedic 

• ( 5 . 56 . 4 ), ( 5 . 5 . 7 . 5 ). 

» (7 7 . 1 . 5 ). 



eOSMOGONiCAL AND COSMOLOGICAL THEORIES 377 

literature we find that the vast universal process could not 
be explained with reference to the well-known gods ; there 
was, therefore, naturally the tendency to conceive of a 
greater god, who represents no particular aspect or force of 
nature, but an unified conception representing* something 
like the totality of the forces acting behind the universal 
process. He is the Hiranya-garhha — the first radiant 
manifestation of the Supreme Unmanifest, — as the per^ 
sonification of the creative impulse and the creative force of 
the Unmanifest. It is said in the Rg-Veda (10.121) that the 
Hiranya-garhha arose in the beginning ; he was the lord 
of all the existent ; he was the lord of the eeurth and the sky 
and he vested all creatures with life and breath ; the gods 
do not dare disobey him, he is the god of^ the gods. In the 
Brahmanas, Aranyakas and the Upanisads we find ample 
references to this Prajapati Brahma, also spoken of as the 
Hiranya-garhha^ who was the first created, — the first being, — 
the first born of all the gods. In the Brahmanas and the 
Upanisads we always find Prajapati Brahma performing 
penance for the purpose of creation. Sometimes it is said 
that Brahma was born in the primordial water. The epithet 
Hiranya-garhha^ applied to Brahma, points to the fact that 
he was born of a golden egg supposed to have been 
formed out of the seed deposited in the water when 
they were produced as the first creation of the Supreme 
Lord. In the Satapatha-hrahmana (XI. I, 6. 1-11) we 
find that Prajapati was born of a golden egg, which was 
produced by primordial water through penance. Thus 
it is said, — “In the beginning there existed here nothing but 
water, a sea of water. These water desired to propagate 
their kind. They tortured themselves, they mortified 
themselves. And when they had mortified themselves a 
golden egg originated in them. The year did not yet exist 
at that time ; but as long as the duration of a year, this golden 
egg swam about. After a year a man arose out of it ; that 
46-14118 



378 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

was Prajapati.” ^ In the Chandogya-upanisat it is said that 
in the beginning was the A sat ; from the Asat there was the 
Sat and from the Sat originated an egg. After one year the 
egg split up into two and from the golden portion was created 
the region above and from the silver portion the earth 
below. ^ We find somewhat detailed description of this 
Hiranya-garbha Brahma also in the Manu-samhita. There it 
is said that once this universe was shrouded in darkness and 
everything was imperceptible, indistinct — beyond all under- 
standing and all kinds of intellectual comprehension — as if in 
deep sleep. Then the Self-existent Unmanifest Lord, with 
an impulse towards creation, manifested Himself in His 
radiant form, and that Incomprehensible All-pervading One 
created Himself in ^a form. With a view to create various 
kinds of beings from His own body He first created water 
and deposited His seed in it. The seed in the water trans- 
formed itself into a resplendent egg, from which was born' 
Brahma, the grand-father of all the worlds {saroa-loka- 
pitamaha). The first person, created by the unmanifest 
cause-potency, which is eternal and is of the nature of both 
E!ns and non-Ens, is called Brahma.'^ Brahma lived in that 
egg for full one year and after that broke it into two parts 
through the force of meditation ; with the upper part of the 
egg he made heaven and with the lower part he made the 
earth, and in between the two regions was created the sky 
and the eight quarters, etp. Then follows the creation from 
Brahma, which of course, was in the line of the Samkhya 
cosmology.^ In the vernaculars we find occasional references 
to this egg ; and from what is discussed above about the 
nature and function of Prajapati Brahma, it will be very clear 

1 A History of Indian Literature^ by Winternitz, p 223. 

2 Chandogya—{3.}9) 

3 yat tat koranam avyaktam nityam aad-asad-atmakam I 
tad~visriiah aa puruso loke brahm'eti ^Trtyafe I 

Manu-aarphitat ( 1 . 11 ). 

A Vide Manu*aamhitSp Chapter L 



COSMOGONICAL AND COSM<XOGlCAL THEORIES 379 


to see that the conception of Nirafijana, as we find variously 
described in the vernacular literatures, is nothing but a very 
popular representation of the older conception of Prajapati 
Brahma. 

We think, it will not be far wide of the mark to recall in 
this connection the Vedantic conception of the two aspects of 
the ultimate reality or the Brahman, the unqualified inactive 
absolute aspect, which can only be negatively described ; the 
other aspect is the qualified active aspect which has been 
described as the Hear a. The Absolute is in no way related 
to this illusory world ; it is the Uvara, as associated with 
Maya (nescience), that is responsible for the creation of this 
illusory world. 

(C) The Primordial Goddess ^ 


The next point to notice is that lord Nirafijana, who 
personified the creative impulse of the Absolute, desired to 
create the universe and from the desire emanated the primor- 
dial goddess, who is called Adya or Adya-Sakti or Prakrti or 
simply the Devi. This also is a very well-known theory 
absorbing in it many traditions derived from various sources. 
Already in the Brhad-aranyal^opani^t we find that in the 
beginning was the Atman and it became self-conscious and 
from its self-consciousness proceeded ‘Egohood’ — [aharn- 
namS'bhaoat). It never enjoyed, and as it was not possible 
to enjoy all alone it longed for a companion ; it then divided 
its own self into two as the male and the female, or as the 
husband and the wife, and from their union proceeded the 
creation. In another place of the same text we find that the 
iftman was alone in the beginning. Desir- 
ous of issues the Atman wished to have 
• a wife.* These two aspects of the 
Brahman as the male and the female have been variously 


The Primordial 
Mithuna. 


1 Bfhad-Sra?jyata (1.4. I— 3), 
8 /hid (1.4. 17). 



380 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

conceived in the Upanisads. Here (in the Brhad-aranyaka), 
for instance, the mind is said to be the self (alma), speech the 
wife {vag jay a) and life {pram) is the issue. In the Prasno- 
panisat we find that Prajapati, desirous of progeny, had 
recourse to penance and produced the couple (mithuna) 
and the couple consisted of Rayi (matter) and Prana (the 
vital force), — the Sun is the Prana and the moon is the Rayi^. 
In the Bahcrcopanisat (which, however, is undoubtedly a 
text of much later time) it is said that in the beginning was 
the Goddess (Devi); she created the egg of the world, — and 
from her were born the gods like Brahma, Visnu and Siva. 

Though, however, the theory of the female counterpart 
of the original Lord in connection with cosmogony may be 
traced back even to the days of the Upanisads, this idea, as 
found in the Paranic literature as also in the vernacular litera- 
ture, seems to have been influenced more by popular 
Samkhya ideas. Notwithstanding the controversies of the 
. philosophers as to the exact nature of Purusa and Prakrti and 
the exact relation between them, the general view is that the 
„ , , „ , , whole creation proceeds from Prakrti (or 

Praktli of Ssmkhya. . v i • ' 

the primordial cosmic substance) in contact 
with Purusa, who is the unchanging principle of pure 
consciousness. Though some schools of Samkhya hold that 
creation proceeds from the spontaneous disturbance in the 
equilibrium of the three qualities in Prakrti, the more general 
view is that the creative impulse is supplied to 
Prakrti by Purusa through his contact just as active power is 
supplied to inactive iron by magnet through its contact 
(sannidhya). Through the association or the contact of 
Purusa with Prakrti the character of the one is infused in the 
other and the creative process follows as a result of the 
process of infusion. From this philosophical idea of the 
association of Purusa and Prakrti and the infusion of the 


1 Prainopaniiat, (1,4-5). 



COSMOGONICAL AND COSMOLOGICAL THEOTIES 381 


character of the one into the other in the process of creation 
has followed the popular tendency to conceive of Purusa as 
the male and of Prakrti as the female and of their contact as 
their union, through which proceeds the visible world.. It 
may be remarked that philosophers also have sometimes 
taken the analogy of the male and the female in explaining 
the nature of and the relation between Purusa and Prakrti. 

The cosmic process, however, proceeds from Prakrti. 
Prakrti is constituted by nature of three qualities (guna), ufz., 
saitva or the intelligence-stuff, rajas or energy and tamas or 
inertia. So long as there is the equilibrium of the three 
gunas in Prakrti there is no cosmic process ;■ — the cosmic 
process follows from the disturbance in the nature of Prakrti. 
From the disturbance in Prakrti first follows the principle of 
Mahat or Buddhi^ which is ^‘the last limit up to which the 
subjective and the objective can be assimilated as one 
indistinguishable point which is neither the one nor the other, 
but which is the sources of them.’*^ From Mahat follows the 
principle of ‘egohood' (ahan^ara), which in its turn generates 
the eleven senses oh the one hand and the five Tanmatras 
(i.e., the five potentials of the five gross elements) on the other. 
From these five Tanmatras again follow the five gross 
elements of earth, water, fire, air and ether. These principles 
of Purusa, Prakrti, Mahat, Ahank^ra, the eleven senses, the 
five Tanmu/rds and the five gross elements taken together 
constitute the twenty-five T attVas or principles of Samkhya 
metaphysics. 

The Gita, the most popular religio-philosophical literature 
of India, echoes the Sarnkhya view of cosmology in a rather 
popular and synthetic way. There we find the idea of the 
Absolute (which is known as the Purusottama), which 
approximates the unqualified Brahman of the Vedanta ; ^ but 
in the active and -qualified aspect (f.e., as the Bhagat>an) He 

* The Stady of PataHjaU, by Di. S. N. Da. Gupta, p. 51 . 

* Vide Gita, (15. 16-18). 



362 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

causes Prakrti to bear the whole universe.' Purusa and 
Prakrti are frequently called in the Gita as 
KfeiM and Kfctiajfia. the Ksetrajfia (literally, the knower of the 
held) and the Ksetra (the held), and 
everything, whatsoever, is created through the union of 
the Ksetrajfia and the K^tra.^ -Purusa and Prakrti are 
conceived here just as the original male and the female or the 
father and the mother.^ This idea of Purusa and Prakrti as 
the primordial male eind the female (or the father and the 
mother) is to be found in almost all religious systems and 
literature of India. The same idea of the god and the 
goddess is to be met with in tKe Vaisnava literature, in the 
6aiva literature and in the Tantras. 

In the Puranic literature we find but a hotch-potch of the 
Upanisadic and Samkhya ideas with further modification and 
innovation. Here we generally find a glimpse of the 
Upanisadic idea of the Absolute and then 

Admixture of the i r ' -r • i- i i i -r • 

Upanisadic and the the fiTSt manifestation of the Unmanifest in 

Ssipkhya accounts in .1 r r .• 11 

the Pursnas. the form of an active personeu god with or 

without the legend of the egg associated 
with his origin. Then follows Prakrti from the creative 
impulse of the Lord as his Sakti (power), and through this 
introduction of Prakrti the Samkhya theory becomes inter- 
woven with the ancient legends. The Sainkhya theory 
generally ends with the origination of the gross matter ; for 
the propagation of the human race these Puranas generally 
follow the accounts given in the Manu-samhita. On some 


maya dhyakjfcna prakf^ih any ate sacaracaram I 
hetuna* nena kounteya jagad viparivartate I Ctia (9.10). 
yivat sanjayate hJtncit sattvam sthavara-jafigamam j 
kietra-kicirajHa-sarnyogat tad viddhi bharatar^ahha I) 

Ibid, (13.27) 

Cf. mama yonir mahad brahma tasmin garbbharfi Aadhamyaham I 
aambhavah aarva-bhutanatji tato bhaVati bharaia II 
aarva-yonifu kfluntaya mSriayaft aambhavanii ygfi I 
iasS/p brahma mahad-yonir aham blja-pradaf^ pits II 



60s’MOC0NICAL and COSMCM-OdlCAL THEORIES 

of the accounts the Taniric line of thoughts (which we shall 
presently discuss) had palpable influence.' 

The Samkhya idea of Purusa and Prakrti was inherited by 
the vernaculars through the medium of the Puranas in a more 
anomalous form. The primordial goddess, originating from 
the sweat, or the smile of lord Dharma (or Niranjana, or the 
Adi-deva) has frequently been styled as Prakrti, ^ and the 
idea of Prakrti brought with it the ideas of the gunas, which 
were transformed and personified as the triad. We have 
, . seen that through the union of lord 

The triad — per- 
sonification of the Niranjana and the Prakrti (who is depicted 

three gunaa of Prakrti. , , ^ » « I 

as a very beautuul woman) were produced 
three sons, Brahma, Visnu and Siva of the nature of the three 
gunas, viz., sattva, rajas and tamas; and these three sons 
were then entrusted with the charge* of the creation of the 
world. This, however, represents the general and popular 
Satnkhya view of the contact of Purusa with Prakrti and the 
creation of the world through the activities of the three 
qualities of Prakrti. We have seen that according to the 
version given in the Dharmayana of Narasimha Vasu the son 
born to Prakrti by Niranjana was Mahat, and from Mahai 
originated Ahaml^ara and the three gunas. In the version, 
found in the Candhmangala ofj Mukunda-rama also we find 
that through the infusion of the energy of the Lord in 
Prakrti a son of the name of Mahat was born to them, the 
son of Mahat was Ahamf^ara, who again had five sons 
who represent the five gross elements. 

^ For apecimens of discussions on cosmogony and cosmology in the PurSnic 
and such other popular literatures see Bhagavata-purdna, (3,5. 23-38) ; Garuda- 
purSna {PurVa-khanda, Ch. IV); Padma-pturana {Sr^fi khaniat Ch. II) ; Padma-purana 
(Kriya-yoga-aarat Ch. l\) ; Brahma-Vaivarta-purana {Brahtna-khanda, Ch. HI); 
purana (jHana-aarjihitd, Chs. V and VI) ; Sanal-ktiniara-aaiphitd, Ch. HI, Vayavlya^ 
aanihita, Ch. VHI'; Khila-harivarrtia (Ch. I, verses 21 et seq.); Devl-purOita, 
(Ch. AXlXh etc., 

’ It should be noted in this connection that the word Prakrti in classical 
Sanskrit literature as well as in the PurSnic literature became frankly synonymous 
with the word Sakti or Adi-devi, the primordial goddess. , 



384 


OfiSCURt RELIGIOUS CULTS 


It is to be noted that the primordial goddess had 
emanated from the Lord. The Lord and the goddess have 
then been conceived in the vernaculars as the Adi-deya 
and the Adi-devl. Sometimes they have been conceived as 
the Adi and the Anadi ; the Lord is the beginningless eternal 
One ; while the Goddess, emanating from the body of the 
Lord, is the produced one. The creation, however, proceeds 
from the Adi-devi, and the Adi-deva returns to his meditation 
after the goddess has been created. In this theory of the 
Adi-deva and the Adi-devl the vernaculars seem to have been 
more influenced by the Saiva and Sakta ideas (as they are 
found in the Saiva and 3akta texts and in the Tantras in 
general) than by the Samkhya theory of Purusa and Prakrti. 

We have already pointed out that though 

The conceptions of . l i • r , 

the Adi-deva and the m a popular Way rurusa and Prakrti of the 

^lare'andUeconcep- Satnkhya system have somehow been 
in°the°^Tantra"^ related together in the process of cosmic 
evolution, metaphysically they are two 
distinct and self-sufficient realities and it is because of the 
distinct nature of Purusa and Prakrti that various contro- 
versies have arisen as to the exact nature of the relation. In 
the Tantras and other 3aiva and 3akta literatures the primordial 
god and the primordial goddess, or 3iva and Sakti, as they 
are commonly called, are not two distinct ultimate realities ; 
they represent two aspects of the absolute reality and 
sometimes 3akti is conceived as contained in Siva as his 
kinetic energy. The absolute truth is a union of Siva and 
Sakti. Siva represents pure consciousness which is inactive — 
the static aspect of the ultimate reality; — while Sakti 
represents the world-force — the dynamic asptect of the 
ultimate reality ; Siva is ,Nivrtii (state of rest) and Sakti is 
Praortti (the state of activity) and in the ultimate state they 
remain in a union of oneness. This is the, principle of 
non-duality {advaya) which is explained in the Tantric texts 
under the imagery of maithuna (conjugal intercourse) or 



COSMOGONICAL AND COSMOLOGICAL THEORIES 385 

Kama-\ald (as it is called in the texts Kama-l^al^-vilasaj 
DeVi-upanisat and such other texts). ^ In the Kama-liala^ 
Vilasa we find that 6iva or Mahe^ is pure illumination 
(pral^dia-matra-tanu) or the abstract self-shining thought with 
all the principles of activity contracted within it {antar-linef^ 
Vimarsah ) ; Sakti is the principle of activity or the inherent 
activity of thought (Dimarsa or kriyd^sakti) and she contains 
in her the seed of the future worlds {hhdvi-cardcara-hljam) . 
jSiva, however, realises himself through 6akti, and, therefore, 
it is said that Sakti is the clear looking-glass in which the 
form and beauty of Siva is reflected. The philosophical im- 
plication is that pure abstract thought cannot realise its own 
nature unless it comes back to itself through its own activity, 
and when thus it returns to itself through i5fmarsa, it becomes 
‘egohood ’ or ahamk^ra, which is called “ the mass produced 
through the union of Siva and Sakti ' ’ (sfua-sa/^W-mrfhuna- 
pinda). ^ In the gross sense this Siva is the white-matter 
(sita-hindu) or seed or semen, while Sakti is the red-matter 
{sona-bindu)^ and I-ness or egohood is the son born to them. 
This conception of Siva and Sakti has also been interpreted 
as matter and energy, which are the two essential component 
parts of all entity. In everything that exists there must be 
two things, — that which exists and the power or energy by 
virtue of which it exists or acts ; this matter that exists is the 
Siva and the energy of existence is Sakti ^ and there is an 
inseparable relation between them, the one cannot be without 
the other . Siva without Sakti is absolutely helpless in doing 
anything whatsoever, — he himself cannot even vibrate 
without the help of Sakti. ^ It is Sakti who creates the 

1 Vide supra, p. 33. 

2 Kama-kfiia-Vilasa (Kasmir Series of Texts and Studies, No. XII), VerseTvIo. 5. 

3 yasya yasya padarthaaya ya ya iakjtir udirita I 
aa tu AirVeSVarl devl aa tu aarvo maheivarah II 

— Vamakfiivara4antra, (7/31), 

4 iivah iaktya yadi bhaDati iaktuft prahhaviturp 

na ced eVarn devo na khalu kpialah apandiium apt || 
--^Ananda-hhart or Saundarya^lahart, I, ascribed to SankarScSrya. 


49-141 IB 



386 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULtS 


universe and preserves it and again destroys it at her own 
will. ‘ It is to be noted that sometimes Siva has been 
conceived as the absolute, Sakti with the seed of all 
manifestation and creation is contained in the very 
nature of Siva. TTiough in many places we find that the 
one absolute truth divides itself into two aspects as 
Siva and Sakti and manifests itself in the world-process 
and realises itself through it, yet in other places we find that 
Siva manifests his power in the form of Sakti only for the 
purpose of self-realisation, — for, the universal abstract 
thought-principle cannot realise its ownself without the 
conscious activities in the form of the world-process.^ But 
. whether Sakti be contained in the nature of Siva, or, Siva 
and Sakti be the two aspects of the absolute reality, Sakti is 
directly responsible for the creation of the visible world — 
either as the energy (i.e., the world-force), or as the principle 
of illusion (maya) as she is known in the popular Vedantic 
line of thought. It is because of this that we find in the verna- 
culars that before the actual cosmological process begins the 
original goddess comes out of the body of the Lord and herself 
creates the whole universe. The emanation of the Sakti in 
the form of a woman from the body of the Lord is to be 
frequently met with in the Puranic and Tantric texts, and 
there is no doubt that this idea was received by all the 
vernacular poets through ^the Puranas and the Tantras. But 


Cf, also 

8a devt parama devl iivMtinna Sivaftkan \ 
iivabhinna taya hinah iivo'pi hi nirarthakah 11 

Suta-satrthiia. 

paro hi iakii-rahitah iak.iah hjarium na lieificana I 
iaktas iu parameSam iaktya yukto yada hhavet II 

Vamakeivara4antra. (4-6). 

1 Sakiih hfifoti brahmandam ad Vai pdlayate' kbilatn I 

icchayd aarjiharatyesd jagad etac card-caram II 

DeV'i‘bhdgaVata. 

* On the nature of and the relation between iSiva and iSakti see T antra- 
tativa (in Bengali) by Siva-candra Vidyirnava Bhat^cSrya, Part b the chapter on the 
philosophy of l^akti {Sakti-tativa] pp. 225 et »oq. 



COSMOGONICAL AND COSM(XOGlCM. THEORIES 387 


the oldest basis of the tradition is to be found in the Rg-veda 
where it is said that the Father became desirous of meeting 
his own youthful Daughter and had sex-intercourse with 
her/ Sayana explains the Father as Prajapati and the 
Daughter as Usa (Dawn). There is an echo of this fact of the 
Father meeting the Daughter also in the Aitareya Brahmana,^ 
Tandy a-maha-brahmana^ and the Satapaiha-brahmana.* 

The three ganas of Prakrti as conceived in the 
Samkhya system were ascribed to Sakti in the Tantric 
texts, and we frequently find that the triad, Uiz., BrahmS, 
Visnu and Siva, who are put in the charge of 
creation, preservation and destruction, are the three sons 
of the original Sakti ; and they are of the nature 
of the three gunas, Oiz., saltVa, rajas and famas.® In the 
Maha-bhagaVata we find that in the beginning the universe 
was without the sun and the moon ; there was neither the 
day nor the night, nor fire nor the directions, — the whole 
universe was without touch, sight and sound, etc., and it was 
bereft of all the luminaries. At that time there was only 
Prakrti as the supreme reality. When there was the desire 
for creation in her, she, though formless, assumed the form of 
a goddess and at once created a personality with the three 
gunas she had within her ; but the person (Purusa) was without 
consciousness. She then infused her own creative inpulse in 
that Purusa and the Purusa thus endowed with power created 
three personalities of the name of Brahma, Visnu and Siva, 
who were of the nature of the three gunas.^ The idea of the 

1 (10.61. 5-7). (3.33). » (8.2.10). ^ * (1.6.2.I). 

& asmakam Uva-vi^noica SakUm adyarp para~parSm I 

viSva-ruparp mahadevtrp fva/p yajasva aukhavahatn II 

Devl-’purSnat (1.33). 

Cf. also r hrahmadyah puru^s trayo mja^gunaii iat-svecchaya hfllpitSih I 
MahabhagaVata, quoted in the Tantra-tattvat Part I, p. 233. 
tatah sa Bvecchaya BVtyai rajah-saitva-tamo^gunaii I 
sasarja puru§arp sadyai caitanya-parivarjitam li 
tarn jatarp purusarn Vtkj^ya aattva-di-tri-gunatmakflfri I 
BiB^k^am Stmanas tagmin BamakrSmayad icchayS II 



388 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Saktis, emanating from the original Sakti and being united 

The tried and the triad for the purpose of creation, is 

three goddetsee asso- also found in these Tantras/ In the 8aiva 

ciated with them i i i t- 

and the Sakta Tantraa we find that the 
original Sakti has three qualities in her, Oiz., /cchd (i.e., the 
volitional nature), Jnana (i.e., the cognitive nature), and Kriya 
(I’.e., active nattire). In the Goraksa-samhita these Iccha, 
/ndna and fCrit/d are spoken of as the three goddesses, Viz., 
Gauri, Brahml and Vaisnavi, who are contained in the 
nature of Pramva.^ Again it is said in this connection that 
with the three component parts of Pranava {i.e., a, u, and m) 
are associated the three gmas and the triad.® The triad and 
the three Saktis being thus associated with the Pranava could 
very easily get associated with one another, — and it is for this 
reason that in the vernacular texts we find the three iSaktis, 
viz., Gauri (or Rudrant), Brahmi{ot Brahmam) and Vaisnavi 
(who represent respectively the three aspects of the original 
Sakti, viz., Iccha, ]mna and Kriya) are generally associated 
with the triad Siva, Brahma and Visnu as their female 
counterparts. There is also reference to the penance of the 
triad to propitiate the original Sakti,^ and also to the fact 
that by his austere penances Sambhu could obtain the 
goddess as his wife and we think that these traditions 
with much poetic innovations, additions and alterations 

iatah sa ^aktiman sra^fa pmusa-irayatR gunaArayail} I 
trayo hahhuvuh purusa hrahml^visnu-iivahvayah II 

MahabhSgavata Ch. 1, ver«e8 51-53. {Quoted inlhe Tanira-iatiVa) . 

' Cj. Ihid, Ch. 1. verses 55-56; Ch. II, verse 23. 

2 iccha-jn^xia-kriya iaktir gauri hrahttiiU vaisnavi I 

tridha-iaktib sthita yata taUparam jyotir omiti II Gorak^a-aarphita, (5.3). 

3 IhidASA). 

^ yam aradhya viriftcir aaya jagaiah arasfa harih palakab I 

aamharti giriiab avayam aamabhavad dhyeya ca ya yogibhih II 
Maha~bhagaVata, (I. I). 

® ya svecchayS* aya jagatah pravidhdya ar^^rp 

aamprapya janma ca tatha patim apa Sambhum I 

ugraia iapohhir apt yam samavapya patniip 

iambhub padarp hfdi dadhe paripatu aa vah II Ihid^ (1.2). 



COSMOGONICAL AND COSMOLOGICAL THEORIES 389 

have found place in the cosmogonical traditions of the 
vernaculars. The story of the god’s or goddess’s assuming 
the form of a corpse to test the triad does 
test of the triad. not, however, seem to be very old — but as 
we have seen, the tradition of the penance 
of the triad seems to have some older basis behind it, — and 
it seems that the tradition of the penance of the triad with 
the mixture of popular poetic imagination has obtained its 
full-fledged form in the story of .the test of the triad. In the 
Brhad-dharma-purSna, * however, we find a detailed account 
of the story of the test of the triad ; but the text has rightly 
been suspected by scholars to be of much later origin and 
as such the story might have been borrowed in its full-fledged 
form from the accounts given in the vernaculars. 


(in) Buddhist Element in the Accounts of the Cosmogony 
and Cosmology of the Vernaculars 

It will appear from what is discussed above that the 
accounts of cosmogony and cosmology given in the verna- 
culars are based fundamentally on the Hindu ideas, philoso- 
phical, theological, mythological and traditional. Yet we 
should notice that the later Buddhistic ideas of cosmogony and 
cosmology have also got mixed up with the Hindu ideas 
and legends in the accounts given in the vernaculars. But 
we beg to remind that the popular Buddhistic cosmogonical 
ideas, found mainly in the Buddhist Tantras and in the 
Nepalese Buddhistic traditions, are nothing but popular 
adoption of various Hindu ideas under a Buddhistic garb. 
In the whole field of Mahayanic thought we find an 
inherent tendency of compromise with the Hindu thoughts 
and ideas, — the ideas of cosmogony and cosmology also 
seem to have evolved gradually on the Hindu line. 


J Edited by H. P. jSSstrT, Bibliotheca Indica, New Series, No. 668. 



390 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


iWe have seen that in Vijnana-vada Buddhism Sunyata 
ytas conceived as something like the ultimate substance or 
the primordial element, from which evolves the visible 
world. This idea of Sunyata, we have said before, was 
inherited by the later vernacular poets, 
mordial Sunyats. not as any philosophical concept, but 
merely as a popular idea floating in the 
air. It is therefore that we see in the descriptions of the 
vernaculars that the primordial divinity, who is responsible 
for the creation of the universe, was himself void by nature. 
He was moving in the void and the Lord of the void created 
the universe out of the great 'void. Again we have seen ’ 
that the conception of Dharma as described in the vernaculars 
reminds one at some places of the Mahayanic conception of 
the Dharma-kaya of Buddha which is the 
‘ thatucss ’ Underlying all phenomena. 

cosmic oneness. ^ » r 

Dharma-kaya is the cosmic oneness from 

which proceeds the diversity of the cosmic process. In the 
descriptions of the vernaculars we find that the cosmic 

process emanates from Dharma. In this idea also some 
influence of the Mahayanic conception of Dharma-kaya with 
all its cosmological implications may plausibly be postulated. 

From the mythological point of view we find it described 
in the Karanda-vyuha that being desirous of creating the 
universe the original lord (Adi-buddha) first created the 
, , Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara ; from the eyes 

Mythological account 

of cosmology in the of Avalokitcsvara originated the sun and 
Karanda vyuha. moou, Makesvara from his forehead 

Brahma and others from the two shoulders, Narayana from 
his heart, Sarasvati from the teeth, air from the mouth, the 
earth from the feet, Vaxuna from his udder; from 
among all these gods Avalokitesvara selected Mahelvara, 
whom he predicted to be the creator iri the age of Kali 


^ Vide supra, Ch XI. 



dOSMOGONICAL AND COSMOLOGICAL THEORIES ^91 


under the name of the Adi-deva. ‘ It is needless to say 
that mythological accounts of this type have nothing 
Buddhistic in them in the fundamental naturei 

The Buddhistic influence on the cosmogony and cosmo- 
logy of the vernaculars is, however, considerably palpable 
in the conception of the Adi-deva and the Adi-devi, with 
whom the later Buddhistic conceptions of the Adi-buddha 
and the Adi-deva or the Adi-prajna or simply Prajna has 
got mixed up. We have seen before that this Adi-buddha 
and the Adi-prajfiS are nothing but the transformation of the 
Mahayanic idea of Sunyata and Karuna in the image of 
Prakrti and Purusa or Sakti and Siva. To understand the 
cosmological significance of the conception of the Adi-deva 
and the Adi-devI, we should, therefore, discuss the cosmo- 
logical significance of Sunyata and ICaruna as it is explained 
in the Buddhist Tantric texts. 

We have seen that in later Mahayana texts, we mean the 
Buddhist Tantras, Bodhicitta was conceived of as the highest 
reality of the nature of the ultimate substance from which 
everything originates. This absolute ultimate substance have 
two elements in it. Viz., Sunyata and Karuna, or Prajiia and 
Upaya. Cosmologically Prajna is pure consciousness and 
perfect enlightenment, and is the principle of pure passivity ; 
Upaya is the world-force, — it is the dynamic principle, 
through the activities of which the phenomenal world comes 
into existence. The metaphysical implication is that Sunyata 
as perfect enlightenment or pure consciousness is purely 
inactive; it is the principle of universal compassion that 
disturbs her and causes waves of mentation in that pure 
consciousness and these waves of mentation are fundamentally 
responsible for the existence of the phenomenal world. jThis 
principle of Upaya as the dynamic force behind the 

^ Karan4a'Vyaha (printed in 1873 in Calcutta by Satyavrata SSmairami in a 
series of Jaina works), pp. 14-15. 

• 2 Supra, pp. 29 et seq. 



392 


OBJURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Cosmological impli- 
cations of PrajnS and 
UpSya. 


evolution of the world-process is a means, it is held, for 
leading all sentient beings to the ultimate goal of perfect 
purification and liberation ; and the idea here seems to be 
akin to the popular Samkhya view that the activities of 
Prakrti are finally aimed at the liberation of 
Purusa. It is clear to see, that this cos- 
mological and ontological significance of 
Praj’na and Upaya are exactly the same as that of Siva and 
Sakti, and, as we have already noticed, the only difference is 
that pure consciousness, which is absolutely’passive by nature 
and represents the negative aspect of the reality, is conceived 
as the Lord in the Hindu schools, and it is conceived as the 
goddess in Buddhism ; and whereas the active or the positive 
element is the goddess according to the Hindu view, it is the 
Lord according to the Buddhist view. But notwithstanding 
this difference in notion, Prajna and Upaya have throughout 
been drawn in the image of Siva and Sakti. As in the 
Hindu Tantras Siva and Sakti are conceived of sometimes as 
constituting the two aspects of one absolute reality, — but 
sometimes again Siva is in many places depicted as the 
absolute reality, Sakti being included in his nature; — so also 
is the case with Prajna and Upaya, — sometimes they are 
explained as two aspects of the one reality, and sometimes, 
Prajna being the absolute reality, Upaya is said to be included 
in her nature. But in either case the relation between the 
two is inseparable as is in the case of Siva and Sakti. 

These conceptions of Prajna and Upaya have important 
ontological and cosmological bearing on the four schools of 
Nepalese Buddhism.^ The Svabhavika school holds that 
there is no immaterial ultimate truth in the form of the soul 
substance ; matter is the primordial substance, from which 
the world proceeds. This matter as the ultimate substance 


^ The four schools are :—(i) Sv5bhSvika» (iT) AUvarika, {Hi) Karmika and 
(lU) Yitnika. 



COSMOGONICAL and COSMCft-CXlICAL THECMIIES 395^ 


has two modes which are called Pravrtti and NiOrtti, action 
and rest, dynamic and stetdci concrete 
Nepafew and abstract. Matter is eternal as a crude 

mass (however infinitely attenuated in 
Nivrtti) and so are the powers of matter. The proper 
state of existence of these powers is the state of Nivrtti or 
rest as the abstraction from all phenomena. When these 
powers pass from the state of rest into their causal and 
transitory state of activity the phenomenal world comes into 
existence, and it again ceases to exist when the powers repass 
from Pravrtti to Nivrtti. This Nivrtti is the Prajna* and Pravrtti 
is the Upaya. We have seen that Prajna and Upaya are 
deified as the Adi-prajn5 and the Adi-buddha, and the visible 
world is said to be created through their union. Buddha as 
the principle of active power first proceeds from Nivrtti or 
Adi-prajna and then associates with her and from their union 
proceeds the actual visible world. The principle is symbolised 
as Prajna being first the mother and then the wife of the 
Buddha. The well-known triad — ^Buddha, Dharma and 
Sangha— 'has often been explained, as we have seen, as Upaya 
(Buddha), Prajna (Dharma) and the world (Sangha) produced 
through the union. In some of the Nepalese schools of 
Buddhism Prajna as Dharma is given the highest prominence 
in the scheme of the triad and Buddha emanates hrom 
Prajna. In some of the Hindu Tantras also we find that the 
goddess has been given more prominence than the Lord, the 
former being conceived as the first principle. In some 
places, it has been pointed out, the primordial Lord is seen 
floating in water. What is this water ? It is, according to 
some of the Tantras, Sakti, who is pervading the whole 
universe in the form of water. This belief influenced the 
Nepalese Buddhists also, who have often conceived of Adi* 


K Vide /Iluatration* o/ the Lt<er«itire, etc., by Hodgaon, p. 149, 
50-141 IB 



394 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


prajni in the form of primordial water This Adi-buddha 
and Adi-prajnS or Adi-devI are the original father and mother 
of the world.® In the Svayambhu-purana Prajfia is described 
as the Sakti of Siva, as the mother of the three worlds, the 
void of the voids — the mother of the Buddhas, — the mother of 
all the gods.® Again, all female creatures are said to be the 
incarnations of Prajna while all males are the incarnations of 
Buddha (Upaya). Again the Lord symbolises the generative 
power while the lady symbolises the productive power. The 
Lord is the seed {bindu) and the lady is the ovum (rajas ), — 
and from their union proceeds the Bodhicitta, from which 
everything is born. The Adi-prajna or the Adi-sakti is also 
spoken of as of the triangular form (tri-\ona\^ara, which is 
the symbol of the productive power) as she is described in the 
Hindu Tantras also. 

From the above it will be clear that, in the conception of 
the Adi-deva and the Adi-devi of the vernaculars (or of the 
Adi and the Anadi as we find in . the Nath literature), we 
find a popular mixture of Purusa and Prakrtl of the Samkhya 
system, of Siva and Sakti as we find in Tantricism in 
general, and the Adi-buddha and the Adi-prajna of the 
different schools of later Buddhism. It may cursorily be 
noticed that in the Taoism of China we find a similar 
conception of cosmogony, where it is held that the universe 
proceeds from the primordial parents Tao and Tai or rather 
from the original male and |he female, yang and yin. 

1 Cf. prajfia jalamayS-kSrS I prajfiS airUifigatvSi drava-rSpa taio jala-kSrli II 

Dharma-ko§a’-8arj[tgrahaf MS. p. 5 (B). 

2 Devendra-pariprccha-tantra, quoted in the Subha^ita-^saffigraha, p. 76 (MS). 

It is interesting to note how Prajfia and Uplya have sometimes been saluted as 

the mother and the father of the world just in the manner and even in the language 
in which poet Kalidasa has saluted Parvati and Mahelvara in the first verse of the 
first canto of the Raghu->vaijnia, 

vagarthaviva aampiktau jyotand-candramasaviva I 
jagatarp pitarSvadyau prajno-payav-upaamahe tl 

Dharma-‘ko§a-Barfigraha, MS. p. 10 (B), 

3 Si>ayamhhu^purSpa, edited by H. P. Sfislrl (Bibliotheca Indica), pp. 179-180. 



COSMOGONICAL AND COSMCft-CXilCAL THEORIES 395 

{io) Similarity of the Descriptions of the Vernaculars 
with those of other Literatures. 

The cosmogonical and cosmological descriptions found in 
other parts of the world offer points of similarity with the 
descriptions given above. The Voluspa, which supplies us 
with cosmogonic account of the Scandinavian branch of the 
Teutons, begins as follows : — 

“ There was, in times of old, where Ymii dwelt, 
nor land nor sea, nor gelid waves ; ' 

earth existed not, nor heaven above ; 
there was a chaotic chasm, 
and verdure nowhere.” * 

Some B abylonia n descriptions also begin in a similar 
mannar ; thus ; — 

“ ^When above unnamed was the heaven, 

(And) earth below by a name was uncalled, 

Apsu (the deep) in the beginning (ristu) being their 
together, 

(And) the flood (Mammu) of Tiamat the mother of 
them all, 

Their waters were embosomed together (in one place). 
But no reed had been harvested, no marsh-plant seen; 
At that time the gods had not appeared, any ’one 
(of them) 

By no name were they called, no destiny (was fixed).*’® 

^ Hasling's Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethica, (The article on Cosmo- 
gony and Cosmology. ) 

2 Ibid. p. 129, C/. also 

** No holy house » no house of the gods in a holy place has yet been built, 

No reed had grown, no tree been planted. 

No bricks been made, no brick-mould formed, 

No house been built, no city founded, 

No city built, no man (adam) made to stand upright, 

The deep was uncreated, Eridu unbuilt, 

The seat of its holy house, the house of the gods, uncreated. 

All the earth was sea, 

While within the sea was a current.** etc. Ibid,, p, 129, 



3 % 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS Cltt-TS 


The belief that water was the primordial element is found 
in many countries. Thus accprding to the Babylonians “the 
primal element of the universe was water, symbolised and 
ruled by Tiamat, the personification of ‘Chaos,’ until she 
was slain by the god Marduk.” This conception of the 
cosmic ocean is found in some Greek and Egyptian accounts 
also. The tradition of the well-known cosmic-egg is also 
found in other countries ; thus ‘at Eliphantine (of Egypt) it 
was believed that Khnum had made the cosmic egg from the 
mud of the Nile.’* 


^ Ha8ting*8 Encyctof»aedia of Religion and £thic$, p. |26. 



APPENDICES 




APPENDIX (A) 

The Religious Tenets of the Non-Bengali Mediaeval 
Saints in Relation to the Earlier Bengali Sahajiyas 

We have pointed out on several occasions that most of 
the mediaeval saints who gave vent to their religious emotions 
through the medium of the different vernaculars were Sahajiyas 
in a general sense. We have also hinted that in the religious 
tenets as well as in the literary representation of the mediaeval 
saints the form and spirit of Sufi-istic lit^ature acted strongly 
against the Sahajiya background. We have seen how in the 
case of the Bauls the spirit of Sufi-ism acted on the spirit of 
the Sahajiyas and other devotional schools. In point of time 
some of the Saint-poets of upper, central and northern 
India flourished earlier than the Bauls of Bengal, and many of 
them were contemporary with, if not earlier than the Vaisnava 
Sahajiyas of Bengal. When, therefore, we speak of the 
Sahajiya background of these non-Bengali mediaeval poets, 
we mean the Buddhist Sahajiyi movement in particular. A 
study of the poems of these mediaeval poets, particularly of 
the poems of Kabir, decidedly the most prominent figure of 
the middle age, will reveal that there is a clear line of 
continuity from the Buddhist Sahajiya poets to the mediaeval 
poets. But the difference between the earlier school and 
the mediaeval schools lies in the element of love and devotionj, 
which is conspicuous by its absence in the Buddhist Sahajiyi 
school. This element of love and devotion was supplied 
profusely to the mediaeval schools by the different devotional 
movements as well as by Sufl-ism. Though devotion may be 
recognised to be one of the characteristics of later Methiyinic 
Buddhism, it is not so in the case of the Buddhist Sahajiyi 



400 


CmSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


cult, which was pre-eminently an esoteric yogic school. But 
insiHte of this difference the general similarity in spirit, in 
literary form and sometimes even in language, is indeed 
striking. Let us now demonstrate our contention point by 
point. As, however, we are not attempting here any 
comprehensive study of the religion ^nd literature of these 
mediaeval Saint-poets, but dealing with them in relation to 
the Bengali literature, only those points will be touched that 
directly concern out early and mediaeval literature. 

(i) The Spirit oj Revolt and X^riticism 

We have seen how heterodoxy — a spirit of revolt and 
criticism — characterises the religion and literature of the 
Buddhist Sahajiyas. We have seen that the same spirit of 
heterodoxy characterises the religion and literature also of the 
Sufis. This spirit may be recognised as a salient feature of 
the mediaeval Saint-poets as a whole. In connection with 
the analysis of the different lines of heterodoxy in the religious 
history of India we pointed out that elements of love and 
devotion have often inspired heterodoxy in the religious 
schools and that these elements of love and devotion influenced 
the revolutionary spirit of the mediaeval saints to a great 
extent. ' To begin with, we may consider the religious 
views of Kabir as expressed in his poems, songs and 
couplets- At least one-third of the literature of Kabir (which 
is fairly large) is devoted** to criticism against the orthodox 
Hindus and Muslims. As a religious apostle Kabir was 
neither a Hindu nor a Muslim and criticised both the com- 
munities unreservedly. He says, — “The Hindus have died 
by worshipping the gods and the Turks have died by going 
on pilgrimage ; the yogi ns have died by mattmg hair, — none 
of them have got at the truth.’’ ^ Against caste system 

1 Vide supra, Ch. III. 

® Kahlr-granthaoati, Ed. by Sylm-sundar-dis, Nsgarl-praciri^! Grantha* 
msU. No. 33, p. 195, 



401 


APPENDIX (a) 

fCabir says, — “ If thou thinkest, penalties for deeds, — born 
a Sudra, you die a iSudra, — it is only in the world of 
illusion that you assume the sacred thread. If birth from 
Brahmin mother makes you Brahmin, why did you not 
come by another way? If birth from a Turk mother 
makes you Turk, why were you not circumcised in the 
womb ? If you milk black and yellow cows together, will 
you be able to distmguish their milk ? ” ' Against metaphysi- 
cal erudition and the recital of the sacred scriptures the 
criticism of Kabir was equally strong. He says that people 
read the four Vedas, but none makes any enquiry about 
the Lord ; the truth has been discovered by Kabir, and the 
Pundits are searching the field in vain.^ The world is dying 
of reading books,— yet none have beconjp the real Pundit, — 
if a single letter of the Dear One be learnt, a man becomes 
areally learned one.” Again it is said, — “ O brother, thou 
art misled believing in the six Darshanas ; wrapped in the 
garb of Pakhanda. They came and destroyed the soul and 
life ; the four Vedas are wise and clever, but dumb. The 
Jainis know not the mystery of Dharma : they pluck leaves 

and come to God’s temple The divine knowledge is 

outside this way : though it seems near, yet it is far off. To 
him who knows it is near, for all beings it pervades.” '* 


^ The Bijak of Kahir by Ahmad Shah, RamainU, No. 62. 

2 Kahir-granthaValt/p. 36 
Ihfd, p. 39. 

4 The Bijak of Kabir. Ramainis, No. 30. C/, also: — 

“The Smriti made known three qualities : and the paths of sin and merit were 
laid down. From reading (he Smriti and the Vedas disputings arose : conceit is prac- 
tised in the garb of Pakhanda. One reads the Vedas and takes honour to himself ; 
for him knot of doubt is not yet unloosed. He reads the Vedas and then he destroys 
lives : and offers their severfcd he^ids to images. Says Kabir, through Pakhanda 
they troubled many lives. The inward light is not revealed; no one in this life has 
seen himself.” {Ramainl No. 31.) “Some go on pilgrimage, some have their 
heads ; others make discourse on Pakhandas, illusion and mantras. Reading the 
sciences and the Vedas they are swollen with pride, at the end they fill their moi|tH 
with ashes.” {iSahdast No. 21.) 

51-14118 



402 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Kabir says that roaming about on pilgrimage and bathing 
in the sacred rivers are absolutely futile so long as the mind 
is not purified through the sincere love of the Lord. The 
world is tired of going on pilgrimage and bathing in sacred ^ 
rivers; people settle near the city of Benares and drink 
transparent water, — ^but no salvation is there without the 
name of Hari (the Saviour).' Some go to Muttra, some to 
Dvaraka, some to Puri to see Jagannatha, — but without the 
association of the saints, and sincere devotion to the Saviour 
nothing avails at all.^ Nothing avails 'in putting on the 
robe of a yogin or a mendicant or a saint, — that is nothing 
but self-delusion ; nothing- can be gained by such hypocrisy. 
“ There is a roof of falsehood, it spreads over earth and sky. 
In all ten regions it^ noose is set : it has beset the soul. Devo- 
tion, sacrifice and rosary, piety, pilgrimage, fastings and 
alms, — nine Bhaktis, Vedas, the Book, all these are cloaks 
of falsehood.” ^ What is the good of counting beads if the 
mind is not controlled?^ What- is the good of shaving the 
head if the superstitions and the desire are not removed from 
the mind ? ° What is the good of becoming a Vaisrava if 

* tirath kori kflri jag muva dumghai parjim nhai i 
rarpmahi ramm japamtadam fea/ ghasityam jai II 
hflsi kamfliaim ghar haraim pivaim nirmal nir 1 

mukflti nahirp harinamv bin yaurp \ahai daa hohir II Kahlr-granthavah, p. 37. 

2 Ibid. Sadha Kau Amg, p. 49. Cf, also; — 

“ What profit is there by bathing if the mind is full of filth? A fish lives ever 
in water, yet it never loses its sme^l. The world perished in visiting the tirthas, in 
fasting and in bathing in cold water. Through each knowledge of the True Name 
death has drowned all the ages. Two go to the tirath, — the mind is restless and the 
heart covetous. Not one sin was blotted out, but ten maunds burden more was 
loaded. Millions of tiraths visited, millions of temples built ; but so long as a Sant 
goes unseived, all works are fruitless.*' (The Bijak of Kabir, pp. 21-22.) 

3 The Bijak of Kabir. Sabdas, No. 113, pp. 148-149. 

4 kor pakarairp arpguri ginaim man dhavSi cahurp cor I 
j&hi phirStpy&rp hari milai sq bhaya k^fh kj thaur li 
mala paharai man^maft tSihairp kochu na hoi I 

man mal& fefluryi pheratarp jug ujiyarS $oi I! 

Kahir-granthavah, Bhesa Kau Arpg, p, 45, 

^ kesofji kflha bigadiya je mum^ai »au bar 1 

mati feflaip fcahe na mam^ic jamairp bi^ai bijiar II 


Ibid, p. 46. 



APPENDIX (a) 


40 ^ 


true discriminative knowledge is not acquired, — the paintings 
and the frontal marks are only to deceive people. Everyone 
is engaged in practices of physical yoga, none is after the 
union of the mind (with God).^ 

It will be seen from the above and host of such other 
criticisms made by Kabir that the tone of Kabir is 
harmoniously tuned with that of the earlier Sahajiyas. The 
resemblaince is not only in spirit, but often also in language 
and imagery. Like Saraha-pada ^ Kabir also says, — “ What 
are the naked, — wh&t are the mendicants with skins, if they 
do not know the true nature of the self ? If one becomes a 
yogin by roaming about naked, why should not the deer of 
the forest be liberated ? If perfection can be attained by 
shaving head, why should not the sheep ^enter heaven ? ... . 
Says Kabir, hear O brother, — none have attained salvation 
without the name of Rama.® The Pundits know the Agamas, 
all sciences and grammars, — Tantra, Mantra and Medicine 
they know, — yet they die at the end. The yogins, the 
ascetics, the observers of penances and the Sannyasins 
wander about in many a sacred place ; those, who are with 
their hair plucked out, with shaven heads, the silent ones 
and those with plaited hair — all these die at the end. They 
have pondered much and given serious consideration to the 
problems of the world, — but in no way will they be spared. 
Says Kabir, take refuge in the Lord and birth and death 

1 Kahir-granthSvah, p. 46. 

2 Vide suprot Ch. HI. 

3 kfl nariigem ^5 batpdhe camm I 
jau nahim cinhasi atam-rarrim II 
nagem phirerp jog je hoi I 

han k^a mfga mukati gaya koi II 
murpd murpdayairp jau sidhi hoi I 
sVarga hi bhed na pahumil koi II 
* * ** » » 

kuhai kobir aunahu re bhat I 
rarpm narpm bin kin siddhi pSi ii 

Kabir-granthavaUf Pad^vati No. 132. 



404 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


will be stopped.' “ If by worshipping stones one can hnd 
God, 1 shall worship a mountain. If by immersicMi in the 
water salvation be obtained, the frogs bathe continually. As 
the frogs, so are these men, again and again they fall into 
the womb.” ^ 

The revolutionary lead that was thus given by Kabir in 
the early middle period of the vernacular literature was 
vigorously carried out by a host of poets that followed, and 
the current still flows on. Dadu of the sixteenth century may 
be said to have been the worthiest successor of Kabir. He 
says, — “ The Pundits have bound the world by the net- work 
of illusion and Karma (various activities) ; a good preceptor 
is rarely found, who can show the real path. They speak 
of the sinful path,, believe in illusion and Karma, — none 
points to the perfectly pure One (Niranjana) who is very near 
tous.”^ Worship by love is the real worship, — that is the 
best kind of prayer ; such love involves no activities whatso- 
ever, neither should there be any fixed time and place for it ; 
throughout the whole life — in all moments we may worship 
the Lord through our incessant flow of love. Dadu says, — 
“ For decency’s sake people (the Muslims) fast, invite others 
for prayer and offer prayer ; the business of Dadu is with the 
Lord (Sahib), in what path should he walk ? Why this 
grief, O Dadu, — stand before the Lord every day and every 
moment, and let your invocation (azan) be there where the 
Lord is in His true natur^.”'* The Muslims cut the throat of 
others and compel them to profess their religion ; five times 
daily do they offer their prayer, but there is no sincere faith 

* Kahtr-granthavali Padavnh No. 248. ^ 

* Kabir and ihe Kabir Panth» by Rev. G, H. Westcott, M.A. For many such 
other criticisms of Kabir see pp. 56-70 of the same book. 

See also the Nirgana School of Hindi Poetry, by Dr. P. D. Barthwal, M.A., 
D.Litt;, Ch. II. 

^ The Anthology of Dadu, collected and edited by Ksitimohan Sen, 
Vi4va-bh&ratl-granthalay, Calcutta, p. 216. 

4 /hid., p. 273. 



APPENDIX (a) 405 

in their heart for truth. They do never kill their ego, — but 
go to kill others ; but Dado says, — how can one attain Khuda 
(God) without annihilating the self ? He, who destroys 
the body and mind and unites with the Lord, and controls 
himself through the divine realisation, is the teal Awliya Pit 
(i.e., preceptor of the Muslim Awliya sect).^ Like Kabir 
Dado also repudiated communalism and sectarianism in the 
strongest possible words. He says, — “ The Hindus say, — 
‘mine is the real path.’ The Turks say — ‘ mine.’ Say, 
where the path for the Alekha (Skt. a/a^sya = invisible) 
may at all be, — He has been realised without a path. 
Says Dadu, both are mistaken, — both are rustic in their 
view, — know only that to be the truth which transcends 
both. In innumerable sects the Great One has been 
divided into parts ; O Dadu, they have left the perfect Lord 
and are bound by the complexes of illusion.^ The earth 
and the sky — to what sect do they belong ? Water, air, 
day and night, the sun and the moon, and others — to 
what sect do they belong Without belonging to any 
particular sect they are serving the Lord incessantly. Pomp 
and peasantry, erudition and scholasticism can give man no 
peace, — vain is the pride of literacy, vain is the glory of 
scriptural knowledge. “1 have composed a few verses, — ^and 
a few Sakhis,^ and there arises the conviction in me that 1 am 
wise in the world. May be, listening to the discourses on 
knowledge some Sahdas and Saljhis are mastered; — and 
simultaneously arises the conviction that there is no match for 
me. What is the good of composing verses and reciting 
5a^h(s if the truth of the Lord, — the ultimate reality — is not 


' Kabir-granthavah, p. 274. 

2 Ibid.t pp, 275-276. 

^ ye sab hai 4.1 s^e pamth mem dharii aru aaman I 
panl paoan din rat^a carpd stir rahimdn II 
Ihid.t p. 276. See also pp, 387-388. 

^ Sakhis are verses which bear testimony to some truth (from Ski. Sdkft). 



406 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


realised ^ “Hear, O Pundits, sons of Brahma (#.e., the 
Brahmins),’’ — “ Empty is your pot, — and you are not taking 
cognizamce of it ; you are talking all about Agama and 
Nigama, but in your house there is going on the dance of 
ghosts (or the five bhiitas or material elements). Merely by 
reading you will never reach the ultimate state, — by reading 
you will never cross to the other shore ; by reading creatures 
do not reach the goal ; — O Dadu, call Him aloud through the 
pangs of your heart. Vain is the knowledge without the 
name (of the Lord), by explaining the Vedas and the Puranas 
they only become relieved of the burden on their head. 
Thoroughly have 1 pondered pver all that are in the Vedas and 
the Kuran, — the 'land, where Niranjana is available, is not 
far off from me. Tired are the Pundits by reading on and 
on, — but none has crossed ashore ; 1 do not know why the 
whole world is running on with faith in ink and paper. How 
many Vedas and Kurans have perished only staining heaps 
of paper, — O Dadu, a real saint is he, who has read a single 
letter of love.’’^ “They serve pebbles and stone and the 
quintessence of the self is lost to them. When the invisible 
Lord is residing within, why should we roam about in other 
places ? They wash stone with water which they drink, — 
the soul worships stone ! The soul thus becomes stone, — 
and many have sunk down thus. They are gathering pebbles 
in the skirt and are believing them to be bits of diamond ; 
when at the end Hari, the jeweller, will test them, the whole 
life will be lost.’’^ All rites and ceremonies, talking and 
preaching appear repulsive without Rama, — vain are all 
knowledge, yoga and meditation. Wise men there are 
many, — many are the Pundits, heroes and the bounteous ; 
innumerable are the ways of outward show ; — ^rare is a man 
who is absorbed in the Lord. All make innumerable outward 


1 Kah'ir-granthaVali, p. 278. 

^ Ibid., p. 281. Also see p. 514. 
3 Ibid., p. 283, 



407 


APPENDIX (a) 

shows and carry on propaganda and self-advertisement ; — 
but Hari is available only through self-abnegation — none 
proceeds toweurds that path.’ Great is the difference between 
a real saint and a hypocrite who makes parade of outward 
show, — their difference is just as much as the difference 
between the earth and the sky. The saint is absorbed in Rama, 
the hopes of the hypocrite, fond of show, lie all in the outward 
world. Innumerable are such hypocrites in the world, rare 
are the saints ; diamond is available in far off lands, but 
pebbles every whese.^ Through illusion have you got your 
head shaven, — ^but this is no yoga (union with God) at all ; 
but with the ultimate f.,ord you have no acquaintance; — 
the hypocrite never succeed. Without love, goodwill and 
affection, in vain is all toilet ; if the soul be not attached to the 
Lord, why should he recognise you?. . . O, Dadu, the yogin, 
the Jamgama (a Saivite ascetic), the Sevada (a Jaina saint), the 
Buddhist monk and the Muslim mendicant, and the six 
systems of philosophy — all are outward show of hypocrites 
without Rama, the Supreme Lord.® Whether you make 
outward dress, get your body pierced with a saw, or remain 
with your face upwards, or go on pilgrimage, — the Lord will 
not be found without truth.’ Illusion has thickened within, — 
yet outwardly they are assuming the air of one who has 
renounced all, — they put on a cover of thatched cloth and 
move in a gay mood. They are controlling the body, but 
the mind moves on all quarters, — they talk of the dear 
one, — but make nothing but self-advertisement.® 

1 ' Kahlr-granthavati, p. 308. 

2 Ibid., p. 310. 

3 pp. 311-312. 

4 aacu bin aafnt na milai bhavai hhehh banai I 
hhaoai koravdta aradhamakht bhavai tirath jdi II 

^ /bid., p. 313, 

Sec also the questions and answers (No. 5, /bid., p, 587), which are also found 
in Kabir with slight alterations. 

5 /bid., p, 357, 



408 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Sundar-dlas, the great disciple of Dadu, echoed the voice 
of his preceptor throughout the volumes of his poems. Like 
Kabir, Dado and a host of other poets Sundar also criticised 
severely the orthodox rituals and religious practices of both 
the Hindus and the Mahomadans.’ Sundar says that he has 
seen the six systems of Hindu Philosophy, he has seen the 
Sufis and the Sekh, — -but none of the sects could satisfy his 
spiritual demand and it is therefore that he has had recourse 
to the most natural path.* In the SarOanga-yoga-pradipil^a 
Sundar criticises the various religious sects of India severely 
and exhaustively. ’ Similar criticism has been made by Sundar- 
das in the chapter on Bhratjia-Vidhvamsa Astaka where his 
criticism has been levelled against both the orthodox Hindus 
and the Muslims.^ The lifeless orthodoxy and the formalism 
even of the contemporary Santa-sects, yogic sects and 
Sufi sects were also criticised by him.*' 

Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, also echoed the same 
spirit as is found in Kabir, Dadu and others. He also 
criticised the orthodox sects of both the Hindu and the 
Muslim communities. He says, — 

“ (Make) kindness the mosque, sincerity the prayer carpet, 
rectitude (equity) the lawful (food) according to the Kuran. 

Modesty circumcision, good conduct fasting, (thus) thou 
becomest a Musalman.” “ 

On going to pilgrimage and bathing in the sacred rivers 
Nanak says, — “ 1 bathe at a Tirtha, if 1 please him ; without 

^ See Atha Sahajarianda in the Sundar -granthaoali, edited by Purohita 
HarinSrfiyana iSarmi and published by the Rajasthan Research Society (Serial No. 1) 
Verses (2-5). 

2 See Aiha Panca PrabhaVa. Ibid , p. 189 

3 Vol. I, pp. 88-94. 

^ Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 235-238. See also Savaiydt Camtjtak ko Amg^ Ibid.t 
Vol., il» pp. 455-463; Saat Camnak ko Amg^ Ibid., Vol. II, p. 385. 

B /hid.. Vol II. p. 385. 

B The Adi~graniha, translated from the original Guru-mukhi to English by 
Dr. Ernest Trumpp. (Printed by order of the Secretary of State for India in 
Council.) p. 194, vii. 



409 


APPENDIX (a) 

pleeising him, what shall 1 do with bathing)’* * Against 
scholasticism, Brahminism and philosophical erudition 
Nanak holds the same view as his predecessors. ^ In a 
fine poem Nanak says that it is ridiculous to perform Arcii ^ 
before the Lord in a temple, — for the whole universe is 
performing Arati before Him. The sun and the moon 
are the lamps on the plate of the sky, the constellation of 
stars is the pearl ; the wind is carrying incense, the 
forests in flower are supplying lustre, the spontaneous sound 
is serving as the drum — ^and thus is being performed the 
Arati of the Lord.** 


^ Kahlr-granthaVall, Japu 6; also C/. Japu 21. Cf. also: — 
tirath kflU isnan die bahu dan maha brata dhare i 
des phirio k,aro bhea tapo dhan k^a dhare na mile hari piare || 
daan kot kflre aaatamg dhare bahu niyaa \are mukh ^fire I 
din daial akfll bhaje bin arpta feo amta fee dham aidhare II 
Anthology of Nanak ’s poems. Published by BhSiparatSp Siinha Prltam 
Siipha, Amritsar; p. 132, 

C/. also : — Ibid, p. 116, 120, 127, pp. 241-42, etc. 

^ Adi^grantha, p. 934, C/. “Reading and reading the Pandit explains the Veda, 
(but) the infatuation of the Maya lulls him to sleep. {Ibid., p. 117.) The Pandit, 
reading and reading cries aloud, but in him is the infatuation of the Maya and 
love (to her). (Ibid, p. 1 18.) In going through the six Shastras, in knowing them by 
heart, in worship, in (applying) the Tilak, in bathing at a Tirtha, in the practice of 
purity, in the eightyfour ascetic postures tranquillity is not obtained, O dear I** 
{Ibid., p, 136.) “ He (t.e., the Pandit) explains the Smriti, Shastras and the Veda; 

but being led astray by error be does not know the truth (the Deity).** (Ibid., 
p. 158, cf. also p. 326, ix.) It will appear from the verses and songs of Ninak; 
that his strongest note was against the Smrti-iSstra of the orthodox HinduSf and 
scholastic Brahmanism was made the object of scathing criticism. (See Ibid.f pp. 
333-334, iv. v. xxii, xxiii.) 

3 Waving light or incense before an idol. 


4 gagan mai ihalu ravi-cand dipak bane 

tarikfl mandala janak moti t 
dhupumal analo pavanu cavaro hare 

aagal banarai phulaipta joti {I 

feu/si arati hoi I 
bhav khantfanS teri arati I 
anahatS aabada vSyarpta bherl II 
Anthology of NSnak, (Amritsar publication), pp. 190-191. 



410 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


The same spirit, as illustrated above, will be found in the 
devotional lyrics pf almost all the poets and poetesses of 
mediaeval vernacular literatures of India, including Tulsi- 
das, Mira-bal, Rajjabjl, Caran-das, Sahaj-bai, Daya-ba! 
and other poets and poetesses. If these poets and poetesses 
stood for anything it was saving religion from degenerating 
into mere codes of scriptures and time-honoured customs 
and practices, — the watch-word of all was sincerity of 
love. The contemporary Sufi mystic poets (who composed 
poems in some dialect of Hindi) also had the same spirit as 
the other devotional lyricists. Thus Rajjab says,— -“Amidst 
the darkness pervading all the quarters the light that will 
radiate lustre shines within our heart. , By dry indifference 
towards the world and the austere penances inflicting torture on 
the body, can you expect to destroy the enemy that lies within 
you, or do you derive any light therefrom “Fill the 
mosque of your life with prayer (Namaz) and salute ; it is 
the mind that frequently creates disturbance there ; from 
that calm mosque of life drive away this Kafer mind.” 
“There are as many sects as there are men, and thus the 
creator created varieties; but salutes of all human hearts 
are uniting together to form a great stream of salutes to the 
sea of the Lord Saviour.’’ “The Ganges has her origin at 
the feet of the Lord ; if the feet of the Lord be within the heart 
of all lovers, the Ganges of love will flow in the heart of all 
the devotees ; where the courses of all these Ganges rneet 
together it makes a great Tirtha, and liberation is assured 
if one bathes in this sacred place.” “This universe is 
the Vedas, — creation in its fullness is the real Kuran. 
The Pundits and the Kazis cue mistaking a heap of dry 
paper to be the real world, and they are sadly disappointed. 
Paper is in the heart of the sincere devotee, — and all truth 
shines on it in letters of sincerity ; in the universe where 
all the hearts have united together shine all the Vedas 
and the Kuran, Break away the barrier pf all artificiality 



APPENDIX (a) 


411 


and read the truth of the universe formed by the unity of 
hearts. Readers are seen in this world of lifeless letters 
inscribed on the lifeless sheets of paper, — but there are the 
living Vedas in the life of man, and if you are to read 
anything, O Rajjab, read those living Vedas of life.”^ 
Bulkshah, the Sufi mystic, says, — “O Bulla, people say,— 
“Thou shouldest sit within the mosque; what is the gain of 
sitting within the mosque if there is no sincere prayer 
{Namaz) within the hearty” “O Bulla, places of pilgrimage 
are filled with pluncferers, — in the temple reside the deceivers, 
— and within the mosque are rogues ; — but the beloved 
Lord is outside all.” “Khuda (Gqd) is to be found neither 
in the mosque, nor in the Kaba, nor in the scriptures, nor 
in the routine- work of prayer {Namaz ) ; if something 
could be understood in a natural way,— the Pundits would 
create great disturbance.” “O Bulla, there is no salvation 
by pilgrimage to Mecca — if egohood is not cast away from 
the heart ; — diving hundreds of times in the Ganges cannot 
give you salvation ; salvation will be attained only when the 
ego is completely resigned.”* 

{a) Gum-tiada 

Another striking point of similarity in the spirit of the 
Sahajiya Buddhists, the Sufi-ists and the various other Saha- 
jiyas'of the mediaeval period is the stress laid bn the Guru 
or the preceptor. We have seen that as an offshoot of the 
Tantric system Buddhist Sahajiya school attached the greatest 
importance on the really qualified preceptor. The same 
spirit is to be found in almost all the minor religious systems 
of the mediaeval period. The highest stress of the innu- 
merable Santa poets is on the Guru, that of the Sofi poets is 
also on the Guru or the Mursid, — ^that of the Sikhs is still 
more particularly on the Guru, that of the Nath yogins is 

1 See Bharatiya Madhya-yuge Sadhanar DhSra by Ksitimohan Sen, pp. 82«83;« 

» /biU'- pp. 114-115.. 



412 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

similarly on the Guru, that of the Vaisnaya Sahajiyas, and 
the Auls, Bauls, Karta-Bhajas, Darbesis and other religious 
sects of Bengal is also on the Guru. The fact is to undis- 
puted and so well known that it seems unnecessary to illus- 
trate it from the sayings of the mediaeval poets. In the 
works of Kabir, Dadu, Nanak, Sundar-das and others separate 
chapters will be found entirely devoted to the explanation 
of the importance of the Guru. It has been held there that 
truth is a flash of light, which is infused from the 
preceptor into the disciple just as one candle is lighted from 
another burning candle. As a matter of fact, this Guru-vada 
may be regarded as the' special characteristic, not of any 
particular sect or line of Indian religion, it is rather the 
special feature of Indian religion as a whole. 

^ii) All Truth within 

We have seen how in the Buddhist Sahajiya school the 
physical organism was regarded as the epitome of the 
universe and how the physical body as such was regarded as 
the abode of all truth. We have further seen that it is a salient 
feature also of Sufl-ism. We have seen how in the Buddhist 
Tantras all the metaphysical principles with all their corol- 
laries were discovered within the body and how all the 
sacred mountains, rivers and places of pilgrimage have been 
located within the physical organism. It has been observed 
that in the case of the Buddhist Sahajiyas this spirit of 
regarding the body as the abode of all truth is not a pure 
and simple case of inheritance from Tantricism ; in many 
placed the influence of Upanisadic mysticism is also palpable. 
In this aspect also the spirit of the mediaeval Hindi and 
Bengali literature is strikingly similar to that of the Buddhist 
Sahajiya school. We have further noticed before that in this 
spirit of the mediaeval schools the influence of Sufi-ism was 
immense against the earlier Sahajiya background. 



APPENDIX (a) 413 

In Kabir, though the Vaisnavite spirit on the Dvaitadvaita 
line together with the Sufl-istic spirit may sometimes Seem 
dominant, the Tantric spirit is not also wanting. By Tantric 
spirit, in this connection, we mean the principle of making the 
physical system, including the physiological and biological 
processes, an instrument for the realisation of truth. A study 
of the poems of Kabir will reveal that Kabir had a yogic 
system of his own involving the theory of the lotus or plexus, 
the nervous system and the control of the vital wind.^ We 
find here the two’ important nerves in the left and the right, 
most commonly known as the Ida and Pingala, as the moon 
and the sun, or the Gahga and the Jamuna.^ The meeting 
place of the three nerves Ida, Pingala and Susumna is, as 
usual, described here as the tri-oem (i.e., the meeting of the 
three courses). The middle nerve susumna has always been 
spoken of (like the Buddhist Sahajiyas) as the path to Sahaja 
or vacuity (sahaja sunya),‘ and the yoga has always been 
described as Sahaja yoga and the final state as Sahaja- 
samadhi or Sahaja-^unya. The drinking of the nectar 
pouring from the moon situated on the top of the mount 
Meru (i.e., the spinal chord) has been held very important by 
Kabir All the mediaeval Hindi poets akin to Kabir had a 

^ See the songs of Kabir in the Kablr-’granthaVati, p. 88. {saf dal k<^Val nivasiya 
etc.), p. 96 (sUfcakra kJ k<iTiak koihadi etc.). Cf. also— - 

ulaie pQVan cakra saf bedha, mera-damda aarapUra I 

gagan garaji man aurjini aamamnarji, baje anahad fura il Ibid^ p. 90. 

ulafe pavan cakra ^af bedha, aumni aurati lai lagt I 

amar na marai marai nahim jivai, tahi khoji bairagt II Ibid, p, 91. 

® Cy. cantd aur doi khambhava, bamka noli fei dori 1 Ibid, p. 94. 

camd aur doi hha(hi kjnhl, au^amani cigava lagi re I Ibid, p, IlO, 
aaaihar aur milava, tab anahad hen bajdva I Ibid, p. 146. 

See also pp» 157, 190, 198, 223, 308 etc. 

For Gangs and Yamuna see Ibid., p. 94, p. 306 etc, 

^ Cf. tri-bent manaha nhaVaie auraii milai jail hathi re I Ibid, p. 88. 

saf cakra ki gagarl, trihemm aarpgam baf I p. 94. 

^ ausaman narl aahaji aamamnlm plvai ptvanhara I Ibid, p. 110, 
aahaji aU^amanam kSchai II Ibid, p. 1 10, 

* Vide aupra ch. ix, lii^ (b), (a). 



414 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


similar system of yoga. Dr. P. D. Barthwal, M.A., D.Litt., 
in his work, The Nirguna School of Hindi Poetry, has given 
an exposition of the yogic system of Kabir and other poets 
of his school.' 

It will be clear from the above that the yogic and the 
Tantric influence on Kabir was no less important than the 
Vaisnavite and the Sufi-istic influence. Like the Buddhist 
poet Saraha-pada Kabir also says — Within the form resides 
the formless, his whereabouts are known to none. Musk is 
there in the navel cavity, yet the dear is roaming about in 
the forest (in search of it) ; exactly in the same way, Rama is 
residing within every body, but the world does not perceive. 
The Lord is residing within the body, through illusion none 
knows Him, — just as the musk-deer smells the grass of the 
forest and roams about. ^ Again he says, — “In the lake 
of the body there is a lotus without parallel, and on it 
resides the Supreme Being of supreme lustre — of Him 
there is neither any sign or form.” ^ We have seen that 
the Buddhist Sahajiyas have declared that all the sacred 
rivers, sacred mountains, places of pilgrimage are within 
this body, and they localised them within the body.^ 
Kabir also says, — “Within the heart are the Ganges and 
the Jumna and there is the ghat (bathing step) of Sahaja 
sunya and Kabir has erected his temple there.” ° Again 
Kabir says that the mind is Muttra, heart Dvaraka and the 
body is the temple of ten gates and lustre shines within. 

1 See Ch. Ill of the same work.jSee also the verses of Carapati, BenT^ Nfimadev 
and Guru Nfinak quoted at the end of the work Gorahhnaih and Mediaeval Hindu 
Mysticism of Dr. Mohan Singh, M.A., Ph.D,, D. Litt. 

2 /bid, Kasturiya Mrga Kau Amg, p. 81. 

C/. also the KastUri Miga Kau Amg of Dadu — see Sen’s edition, pp. 298-299. 

3 /bid, p, 327, * ^ Supra, ch. iv, ii. 

^ jamun ur arjfitarai sahaj sumni lyau ghSt I 

tahaip kobirai math racya muni jana jivaim ba/ II 
Kabtr-granthaVali, p. 18 

11 ^ man mathura dil dvarika* hflya host jarpni I 

dasavarp dvStQ dehura tamairp joti pichSrjipi K /tid, p. 44. 



APPENDIX (a) 415 

In Dado, however, the Sufl-istic spirit seems to be more 
prominent. He says, — “O Oadu, in every body resides 
the jewel of Rama, but none perceives the Lord ; when the 
Guru gives a light in the hand, people can realise Him 

there The good preceptor has shown, that within the 

heart is the mosque, here the temple, here is service and 
salute; why should 1 then roam about outside? Within is 
the disciple, within the preceptor, within is advice; in vain 
people roam about outside with matted hair on their 
heads.” ' A^ip, — “In the temple of my body 1 shall 
perform my prayer, — none else have access there; there 
shall I count the beads made of the pearl of mind, — and 
then will be my Lord pleased. My bath is in the stream 
of my heart, I wash my mind there ; I bow down my head 
before the Lord and offer me to Him.’”^ Again, — “Some 
run to Dvaraka, some to Benares and some to Muttra ; but 
the Lord is residing in the. body. Near is that venerable 
one, — God is within the. body. O Dadu, all are leaving Him 
aside and are offering their worship outside.”* Again 
Oadu says, — “Within the body is the sky, within it is the 
earth; within the body are the four Vedas, within the body 
lies their mystery ; within the body there is repeated birth ; 
within the body is tbe beginning and the end, — ^within the 
body is God. ^^'ithin the body are the seven seas, within 
the body the unknown Lord ; within the body is the water 
of the rivers, — within the body is the truth profound, within 


C/. also-— koyo madhe kofi Urath kflya madhe kfisl I 

kaya madhe kovaldpatif kjiyd madhai haih.umiha hsal II 
ulafi pavan safcakra nivdai^ tirath-raj gamg ta(a basi II 
gagan mamJal rabi-saai dot tSrd, ulafr k^mci lagt kivdrQ I 
kahai hjahlr hhai ujiyard, parrtca mart ek rahyau nindra II 

Ibid, PadaVahf No. 171, p. 145. 

C/. also— ji$ karani tati tlrathi jdmkim, ratan padarath ghat him mdrphirp I 

Ibidt Paddvah No, 42, p, 102. 

1 Dadut ed. by K. Sen, p, 21 1, 

2 Ibid, p, 273, 

3 Ibid, p, 284 ; also p, 294, 



416 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the body plays the vital force, within it is NirvSna ; within 
is the service, ^wlthift pours the incessant flow (of nectar) ; 
in the body are arts, — in it the One Being ; in it the glow of 
love and in it the company of the Lord ; in it blooms the 
lotus, and resides the bee ; in it the manifestation, in it 
resides the seer.”' 

Nanak also says, — 

“For whose sake they go to the bank of a Tirtha. 

(That) exquisite jewel is even in the heart. 

The Pandit, having read and read, discusses an 

argument, 

(But) does not know the’ thing that is within.”^ 

Again he says, — “The nine regions of the earth are 
contained in this(humap) body ; every moment 1 pay reverence 
(to it).”^ 

Again,— 

‘‘Why do you wander about searching ? search should be 

made in this mind. 

Who dwells with thee, O Lord, why should he wander 

from forest to forest 


1 Ibid, pp. 60I-602. Sundar-das says in a song, — “Jn this body {ghafa) 
are Vi»nu. Maheia, Brahma and other gods and the sage Nsrada, in it are Indra and 
ICubera,-^in it is the mount Sumeru ; within the body is the sun and the moon, and 
the seven seas, nine lacs of stars, and the flow of the Ganges and the Godfibarl ; 
in it the enjoyer of worldly bliss and also the Gorakh yogin ; in it the assembly of 
the Siddhas, in it resides the soul in her loneliness. Within the body are Muttra and 
Benares, — in it the householder and the ascetic of the forest, in it the bathing in the 
Tlrthas ; within the body are all dancing and singing and the playing on of the flute : 
in it the red powder (phag) of the spring, in it the husband and the wife ; within 
it are heaven and the netherlands, in it the decay of time ; in it the beings are living 
for ages and in it they drink nectar to be immortal. When the mystery of the body 
is known, death and decay (kala) will not befall anybody, and Sundar says 
that this mystery can never be fathomed without the help of the right preceptor. 
ghat hhitari bi^rtu maheaa etc., Sundar-granthavaht p. 666. 

* Jidi-grantha, translated by Trumpp, pp. 213-214, iv, 

3 /bid, p. 2^. 

t /bid, p. 369, 



417 


APPENDIX (a) 

{iv) The conception of Sahaja 

The conception of Sahaja of the mediaeval poets also 
shows striking similarity with that of the earlier Sahajiyas. 
As in the case of the Bsuls of Bengal, the conception of the 
ultimate reality of these mediaeval Hindi poets represents a 
synthesis between the conception of the reality held by the 
earlier Sahajiya school and that of the Supreme Beloved held 
in Sufl-ism and the then prevalent other devotional schools of 
India. The ultimate reality being thus conceived as the 
Supreme Beloved, Sahaja has often been identified with 
Rama, where Rama stands for the Divine Personality as the 
indwelling principle, with whom it is possible to have relations 
of love. The Santa-poets flourished mostly before the Bauls 
of Bengal ; historically, therefore, it seetAs that the synthesis 
between the Sahajiya movement and the Sufi-movement was 
brought about first by the poets of Northern and Upper India. 
The same contingency that was responsible for bringing about 
such a synthesis in Northern and Upper India was responsible 
for effecting a similar synthesis also in Bengal. 

Speaking about Sahaja Kabir says, — “All speak of the 
Sahaja, — but none knows what Sahaja actually is. That is 
really Sahaja, through which a man leaves off all his objects 
of desire, — that is called Sahaja, which keeps the five (senses) 
well-controlled, — that is really Sahaja, in which the son, the 
wife, all wealth and desire remain merged together, and in 
which Kabir becomes the maid of Rama ; that is really Sahaja, 
through which the Lord is realised in a natural way.’’^ Like 
their predecessors the mediaeval poets also emphasised the 
unspeakable nature of Sahaja, which is the Lord (Sarni) or 
Rama with them. Though Kabir, Dadu, Nanak and other 
Hindi poets of the Nirguna-school often speak of the 
Lord or of R^ma euid Krsra and frequently conceive 
themselves as the maid of the Lord (and as a matter of fact 

• Kahlr-granthiVati, pp. 41-42. 

53-141 IB 



416 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


there is a considerable number of such poems in Kabir, Dado 
and even in the Sikh poet Nanak who preached the religion 
of the Alel^h), it will be a mistake to think that these poets 
believed in any particular incarnation of God ; it has been 
repeatedly declared by these poets that the Lord or Rama or 
Krsna is no historical being, — neither is he the incarnation of 
God ; He is the Divine Being, the ultimate formless reality — 
the non-dual all pervading reality, conceived more as imma- 
nent than as transcendent, — and that is the Sahaja of these 
poets. The ultimate state of bliss is frequently described by 
Kabir as the Sahaja-samadhi just like the Buddhist Sahajiyas.^ 
This state of Sahaja is to be attained through the final arrest 
of the functions of the mind,'® — and this Sahaja is the state of 
vacuity and hence it is often called the suni sahaja.^ This 
Sahaja is a non-dual state of supreme bliss (suijfia or 
mahasuliha)/ 

The same description of Sahaja is to be found in the 
poems of Dado. It is to be observed that the element of 
yoga-practices is comparatively less in Dadu than in Kabir, — 
the sole emphasis of Dadu seems to be on the intensity of 
devotion and love through which mind attains the perfect 
state of unity and non-duality and this state is what he calls 

> /bid. p. 89, p. 137, p. 217 etc. 

» Ibid, p. 159. 

^ Cf. kflhai kobir aoi jogeavar, aahaj aurpni lyau lagai II 
/bidt Padavalt No. 69, p. 109. 
aahaj aurjfini inaii\i jini raa cafya, etc. Ibid, p. 111. 

(aryaa farai na aVai jSt, 

aahaj aumni mai rahyau aamdi || Ibid, p. 199. Also p. 269. 
aunna aahaj mahi bunata hatnSri I Ibid, p. 272. 

4 Cf. hai kot aamt aahaj aukh upajai etc. Ibid, p. 138. 
kSti 8ak<iti aib aahaj pragdayo ekoi ck aamdnd i 
kahi k^bir guru bhefi mahaaukh hhramata rahe man manarp II 
^ /bid, p. 316. 

tana mahi hoti kpfi upadhi I ulafi bhai aukh aahaji aamddhi li 

^ablr aukh aahaj aamao dpi no ^aro na avar 4arao I etc. 

, /bid. p, 318 



410 


APPENDIX (a) 

the state of Sahaja. Dadu speaks of the Lord (Sarpi or 
Rama) more frequeatly than Kabir ; but the Lord is none 
but the formless non-dual ultimate Beloved and that ultimate 
Beloved is the Sahaja/ It is throuj?h self-abnegation o^ 
the merging of the self in the absolute or, in the language 
of the Sufis, passing away in the Divine Personality in Fana 
that Sahaja can be realised/ It is to be realised not 
through any austere practice, but through a state of passing 
away or deep immers'ion through the intensity of supreme 
love and devotion.'^ About Sahaja Dadu says in a poem, — 

‘ ‘ When the mind reached the Sahaja state all waves of 
duality vanished away, — hot and cold became the same, — - 
everything became one.” ^ “Bereft of the ‘two’ is 
Sahaja, — there joy and sorrow become one; that Sahaja 

neither dies nor lives, — it is the state of complete Nirvana 

Hold your mind in the Sahaja vacuity amidst all duality, and 
by attaining the final state of atrest drink nectar, — and there 
is no fear of k^la (time or death).” * “ O Dadu, let us proceed 
to that land of Sahaja where none dies or lives, — there is no 
fear of the whirl of coming and going, — one realisation for 
all time. Let us proceed, O Dadu, to the land where 
neither the sun nor the moon can go, — where there is no 
access for day and night, — everything remains merged in 
Sahaja.”® When the mind becomes absorbed in Sahaja, 

^ C/. s^hhima sahaj na aujhai nirakSr niradhar II 

^ * * ♦ * * ip 

* * * * hhitari ram dikhai II etc. 

Dadu, edited by K. Sen, p. 313. See also the verse in p. 347. 

2 Ihid. p. 259. 

3 C/. aurati sada aanmukh rahai jaham taham lava tin i 

aahaj rup sumiran f^arai nikarama dadu din II 

/hid, p. 424. See also the verse in p. 422. 

Also, prem hhagati jav vpajai nihacal sahaj samadh I 

4 /hid, p^ 347. ® /hid, verses in pp. 382-383. 

^ calu dadu taharjfi jaiye jaham marai na jivai koi I 

aVSgaVana hhay ko nahirp sada ek raa hoi II 

calu dadu taharfi jaiye jahatp caijid sSr nahim j&i 1 

rati divas k} garni nahirp nahirp aahajairp rahyS samSi II /hid, p. 364. 



420 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULtS 


one can see without eyes, feel without the body and mutter 
the name of Brahman without the tongue, one can hear 
without the ears, walk without the legs and may have 
consciousness without the mind, — this is really the nature of 
Sahaja. ‘ According to Dadu also this Sahaja is vacuity 
{iunya) and is pervading the whole universe eis the ultimate 
reality behind all phenomena. “ In every place, in every 
body (ghata) and in everything else Sahaja vacuity lies 
pervading, — there dwells the Stainless One, no quality has 
any access there.” ^ “One and indivisible is the lake, 
immeasurable is water, — swans are bathing in that lake; 
void is the lake of Sahaja where the swans (the mind of the 
saints and the yogins) are sporting.” ^ “A tender plant is 
the self, where blooms the flower of Sahaja; in a Sahaja 
(natural and easy) process true preceptor gives advice about it, 
but rare are persons who can understand.” ^ All diversity 
is but the sporting of Sahaja itself. “That vital power (prono), 
that body (pyanda ) — that flesh and blood, — those ears and 
that nose — all ard playing wonderful play in Sahaja.” “ 

Sundar-das in his poems on Sahajananda says that 
after the preceptor had explained to him the nature of Sahaja, 
he has given up all religious ceremonialism and yogic 
practices and has been trying to approach Sahaja (the ultimate 
truth) in a Sahaja (natural and easy) way. This Sahaja is 
the Brahman, the unified cosmic principle. ® As a matter of 

1 nam bin dekhiba amg bin pekhiba 
raaan bin holiba brahma seti i 
araVan bin auniba caran bin caliba 

citta bin cityaha aahaj eit )l Ibid^ p. 416. 

2 /biUp. 459. 3 /bid. p. 461. 

1 Ibid, p. 484. ® /bid, p. 596. 

® Sundar says, — “ That perfectly pure Sahaja is in everything, and with that 
Sahaja all religious people gather together. Sankara began his Sadhana in this 
Saha jlf (and in the Sahaja way), — Sukdeva, Sanaka and others^ also followed this 
Sahaja way. Devotees like SojS, Pipa, Sena and Dhana all have drunk of this Sahaja- 
bliss in the natural way.-^Raidfis was also a Sadhaka of Sahaja and Guru Dsdfi 
also realised infinite bliss in this Sahaja path. Sundar-granth&Vah, pp. 308-306. 



421 


Ai^PENDIX (a) 

fact it will be seen that almost all the mystic poets of the 
mediaeval period were advocates of Sahaja. Even the iSikh 
poet Nanak spoke of the Sahaja in the same sense as did 
Kabir, Dadu and others. With him also Sahaja. is not only 
the ultimate reality, it is at the same time the Lord — the 
ultimate Beloved. ' 

(e) Similarity in the Literary Form and Language 

It may be observed in this connection that not only 
in ideology, but also in the poetic representation, there is a 
general similarity between the poetry of the Santa and the 
Sufi poets and that of the Buddhist Sahajiyas. Often similar 
imageries, similar phrases and even ..similar lines are to be 
found. Thus, for example, Santi-pada in a Carya song 
says, — alakkha lal^l^ha na jai, i.e., “ the imperceptible 
cannot be perceived ’ ’ ; the saiiie line is to be found in Kabir 
several times.® We have seen that the highest state of 
realisation has often been spoken of by Kabir as vacuity 
or the sky (sunya or gagana) and the ultimate reality — the 
Sahaja — is also spoken of as void. In a poem Kabir says, — 
“There is the sky or the void in the beginning, — void at 
the end and void also in the middle,® — and this indes- 
tructible void never comes and goes,* neither does any 
entity come and go in it. When the mind is placed in 
this vacuity, death bows down its head before a man.'’ 
These lines instantaneously remind one of the Carya 
songs studied before. We have seen that Bhusuka-pada 

1 jakai antar hasai prahhu apl I 
n&nak te jan aahaji aatnatt II 

Anthology of Ninak, (Amritsar edition), pP367, 

2 Kahir-granihdtxtVu p. 35, p 229, p. 230, p. 328. 

» /bid. p. 103. 

4 /bid. p 103. 

5 


gagun maqi4<tl asan kiya, kfil gayd air * Ibid, p. 76» 



422 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


compared the defiled mind to a deer, beset on all sides 
with hunters Kabir also compares this mind to the- deer 
beset with hunters, k^la (time, decay or death) being 
generally compared to the hunter.^ Saraha-pada says in 
a Doha, “The Pundits are in the habit of explaining all the 
Sastras, but do not know the Buddha, who is residing within 
the body.” The same couplet with a slight change in 
language is found in Kabir In a poem of Bhusuka-pada 
we find that Sahaja has been compared to a big tree,'* 
Kabir also compares Sahaja to a big tree tn a nice poem.'* 
In a Carya song Kanhu-pada compared his purified mind, 
exhilarated with supreme bliss, to an elephant in rut, who is 
depicted revelling in the lotus-pond of Sahaja. Kabir also 
compares Sahaja to a tender plant in blossom, and the 
mind to an elephant attracted to it.“ There are poems in 
Kabir, which in their entirety can very well be compared 
with some of the Carya poems of the Siddhacaryas. Thus 
the song No. 62, given in the Appendix of the Kabir ’ 

^ Supra CK. ii. 

* ahedi dautn laiya, mrga pu^are roi 

ja ban maim krila k^rl, dajhaia hai ban soi II ibid, p. 12. 
maraum iau mano mrga kftum, nahirn tau mithya janina II Ibid, 30. 
k.al ahedi bhaga I Ibid, p. 89. 

kal ahedi samjha sakara, savaj sasa sa^a/ samsara II Ibid, p. 231, 

3 Cf. pa^dia saala sattha vakkhanai ) 

dehahim vuddha vasanta na janai II Doha of Saraha, p, 68. 
pa4hi padhi parpdita beda basdnairp, 
bhirritari huti baeata na jdnaim II 

Kabir-gxanthdvali, Padavalh No. 42, p. 102. 

4 Caryfi No. 43. 

^ Cf. taravar ek anarpta miirati, suratd lehu pichdmnirjn I 
adkhd pe4 phul phal narphim, tdki amrta bdmni I 
puhap baa bhaoard ek rata, bdrd le ur dhariyd I 
aolaha maipjhairp pavan jhakorai, dkaae phal phaliyd II 
aahaf aamddhi bira^ yahu airpcya, dharati jal har ao^yd I 
kahai k^blr tda matrji cela, jini yahu taraVar pe§ya 11 

Kablr-'granthdvah, Padduali, No. 166. 
aahaja beli jab phulan Idgi, 4^1, k^pal melhi II 
man komjar jdi bd4i bilarpuyd , aaigur bdhi beti I 

Ibid, Paddvali, No. I63» p. 142, 



APPENDIX (a) 423 

granthavah (edited by Mr. Syama-sundai Das), can very 
Well be compared with sotne of the Carya-padas describing 
the ecstatic realisation of the Sahaja bliss.' The next 
verse of Kabir (Appendix, Song No. 63) on the illusory 
nature of the phenomenal world-^nd the unreality of all 
duality also offers striking similarity in idea and represen- 
tation to some of the Carya-padas dealing with the same 
idea. There are some other analogies, such as the analogy 
of the mute in connection with the realisation of the Sahaja, 
the analogy of mii\,d’s being merged in Sahaja just as salt in 
the water of the sea, etc. ; but they are inherited by all these 
sects from earlier common sources. Saraha-pada says in 
another Doha that those who do not enjoy (with the perfectly 
purified mind) the perfectly purified objects of enjoyment 
(viewing them and realising them eill* as Sahaja in nature) 
and only hover in the voidness, will have to return to objects 
(of enjoyment) like a crow,, which leaves the mast and 
hovers over the sea and. then turns to the mast once again 
The imagery is found in Dadu where he says that the 
mind must be made firmly fixed in Sahaja which is the 
mast in the ocean of existence. ‘The crow,’ he says, ‘sat 
on the mast and took its journey in the ocean ; it hovered 
round and round and got tired and then sat still on the 
mast of the ship.*” In another Doha Saraha says, — “Don’t 
repress the desires for objects, — for see the cases of fish, 
insects, the elephant, black-bees and the deer” (i.e., they 

1 The poem of Kabir runs thus ; — 

susaman nan sahaj samani pivai pivan hara II 
aVadhQ merct man mataVara i 

unmad cadha ras cahhya trihhaVan hhayS ujiyara II 
dui pur jori rasai hha^hi ptu maharaa bhari I 
kam kfodh dui ^ij/e jale ta chuti gai aarpsart || 
pragaf pragSa jfisn guru gammita aati guru te audhi pai I 
da% knhir taau mad-maia ucaki na kflhahu jai II 

Kablr^granthdvah, p, 282/ 

* Dohakfi^a of Saraha, No. 70 (Dr. Bagchi’s edition). 

3 Dadtt, edited by K. Sen, p. 319. 



424 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULT& 


themselves bring about their death by the instinctive 
attachment towards taste, sight, touch, smell and sound 
respectively ).‘ Almost similar Dohas are found in Tulsidas, 
Ravidas, Dado and others.’’ 

Another important point of similarity between the 
Buddhist Sahajiya literature and the literature of the mediaeval 
vernaculEUs is the enigmatic style used in describing the 
secret doctrines of these cults. With this we shall deal in 
appendix (E). 


^ V{$aSaatt{ ma handha ^aru are ba^ha saraherp vutta I 
mlna paaAgama kciri hhamara pekhaha harinaha jtttta !l 
Dohakoia of Saraha, Verse No. 71. 

^ Cf. all patanga mrga mm gaj lySm^O ekai Smc I 
iulal yako kya gat, yako piche pamc I! 

DohaVah, edited by U, N. Mukherjee. 

The deer, the fish, the black-bee, the moth, the elephant are (all) destroyed by 
one (and the same) fault. 

In whom are the five incurable faults, how much hope has he ? — Ravidas, 
Adi-grantha (translated by Trumpp), p. 666. „ 

C/. also ;~h/iaoarpra lubadht oaska mohya nad ktirantg I 

yautfi dsds kM nian rSm aaufp iyorji dlpak jyoU pataihg 11 

p. 505. 



APPENDIX (B) 


General Informations about the Literature of 
THE Nath Cult.* 

The Nath literature of Bengal consists mainly of longer 
narrative poems and stray songs. Thanks are due to the 
scholarly enthusiasnf and literary taste of Dr. Grierson, who, 
when a civilian in the district of Rangpur in North-Bengal, 
collected for the first time some versions of the songs concern- 
ing Manik-candra and his son Gopl-candra or Govinda-candra. 
In course of the narration of the eventful stories of the 
royal family the poets described the supernatural power 
attained by some of the Naths, who are generally spoken of as 
the Siddhas or yogins who have attained perfection. The first 
publication of these narrative poems in the Journal of the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal in 1878 under the caption of 
Manik-candra Rajar Gan (song of king Manik-candra) readily 
attracted the notice of the Bengali scholars to such narrative 
poems, generally sung by the illiterate villagers in the 
interiors of Bengal and different versions of the song were 
soon discovered in different parts of North-Bengal as well as 
of East-Bengal.’ 

^ Mr. Sivnath Sil discovered a manuscript of one version of the song ascribed 
to the authorship of Durllabh Mallik and it was published in 1902 under the 
caption of G ovinda-candra GU and in the sub-heading the text was described by 
the editor as embodying the doctrine of the Tantric Buddhists. Mr. Vi^veivar 
Bhattacarya soon collected a rather complete version of the song of Msnik-candra 
and Gopl-candra from the district of Rangpur. Some manuscripts of some 
versions of the poem composed by Bhavanl-das were discovered in the districts of 
Tippera and Chittagong and a version of the poem composed by the Mahomadan 
poet Sukura Mamud was discovered in North Bengal. Dr. N. K. Bhaita^ill has a'so 
edited a version of the song, which was published under the caption of MaynSmaitr 
Csn under the auspices of the Sfihitya-parisat of Dacca. 

The Manik-candra Rajar Gan, collected and published by Dr. Grierson and the 
versions of the song collected by Mr. BhattgeSrya are substantially the same and the 



426 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Besides the different versions of the ballads concerning 
king Manik-candra, his wife Mayanamati, and his son Gopi- 
candra or Govinda-candra, the other important discovery is 
the different versions of the songs on Goraksa-nath (popularly 
known as Gorakh-nath), mainly based on the story of the 
down-fall of the great yogin Matsyendra-nath or Mina-nath as 
a result of the curse of goddess Durga, and the rescue of the 
preceptor by his worthy disciple Gorakh-nath through his 
yogic strength.^ 

(jOpl-candrer Gti edited by Mr. is rather a concise version of the same song with 
omissions and additions here and there. All the songs on Manik-candra, 
Mayan&mati and GopT-candra have been published by the University of Calcutta 
under the joint editorship of Messrs. Vi^velvar BhattScarya, D. C. Sen and Baaanta 
Rafijan Rsy in two volumes 

^ A version of the sorvg ascribed to SyamdSs Sen was edited by Dr. N. K. 
Bhatta^ali (published under the auspices of the Dacca Sihitya-parisat) under the 
caption of Mma-^cetana. Many versions of the song, which, in spite of the difference 
in details, are substantially the same, have been discovered in different parts of the 
Chittagong Division of East-Bengal. In the manuscripts four names are found for 
the author of the song, Kav“ndra-dfi8, Sekh Fayzulla, Bhim-das and SySm-dSs 
Sen. A version of the song has been edited by Munsi Abdul Karim Sshitya- 
vi^firada. He has prepared the text by comparin'? the available manuscripts (the 
alternative readings, omissions and additions being noted in the foot-notes and the 
appendix). The text has been published by the Vanglya Sahitya-parisat under the 
heading of Goraksa-vijaya, 

In the Dharma-mahgala of Sahadev CakravartT the story of the fall of Mlna-nSth 
and his rescue by Gorakh-nath has been incorporated within the general story of the 
Dharma-mangalas. There we find that the consort of Siva once became desirous of 
knowing the truth behind the world and entreated the lord to explain all secrets to her. 
Siva agreed and went with her to the bank of the sacred river Vallakfi, where he 
instructed her in all the secrets of the physical and spiritual life. Mina-nath heard 
these instructions from the womb of a fish; then follow Mina-nfiths uncharitable 
remarks on Gaurl (the consort of Siva) her curse on him -his fall in the land of 
Kadall-patan and transformation into a sheep through the charm of the women of 
that country -his rescue by Gorakh— the meeting of the five Naths, KslupS, 
Hsdipfi, Mlna-nfith, Goraksa-nSth and Caurangl-nSth - their obeisance to Hara-Gaur! 
and the installation of Mina-nfith as a king in MahSnada (vide BS.PP., B.S 1304, 
p. 286), The secret of the Natha cult has best been explained (of course enigmati- 
cally) in the text Gorak^a vijay. There are, however, some other unpublished 
yogic texts dealing with the general tenets of yoga akin to thAt of the Nffth cult, and 
of these mention may be made of the AnSdi-purana or the Anadi^ariira, Ha^a-mSla^ 
graniha, Y ogi-tantra-kala and Veda-tnSla-graniha. {Vide, BS.PP., B.S. |33|. 
No. 2, and B,S.f,P„ B,S. 1341. No. 4), 



APPENDIX (b) 427 

The literature of the Nath cult of Bengal, like most other 
types of literature of Bengal, consists practically of songs. 
All the big and smedl visions of the poems on Gopi-candra 
and Gorakh-nath were, and still are sung mainly by the 
Yogi-sects and also hy the Sufi-istic Muslims ih North-Bengal 
and East-Bengal. The Yogi-castes of Bengal^ somehow 
associate themselves with the Nath sect that spread almost 
throughout the whole length and breadth of India sometime 
during the tenth to twelfth century A.C. ; and in fact, though 
the Yogis of Bengal are now being gradually assimilated 
within the composite fold of Hinduism, they retain some old 
social customs as the characteristic features of their caste. 
The Yogis (or rather the Jugis) generally sing these songs in 
accompaniment with a musical instrument known as the 
Gopi-yantra, which is a simple instrument made with the 
bottle-gourd, a bamboo stick and a string attached to them. ^ 
These songs, particularly the songs of Mina-nath and Gorakh- 
nath, are very popular also among the Muslims of East-Bengal 
and some of the versions of the story of Mlna-nath and 
Gorakh-nath have been collected from them.® The currency 
and popularity of such versified stories among the Muslims of 
Bengal has historical reasons behind it. The MusHms of 

^ The Yogis of Bengal are about four and a half lac in number and they 
reside mostly in East-Bengal and North-Bengal. As a caste they bear the title Nath 
with their name, and are mostly weavers, and sometimes dealers in betel-leaves and 
lime and sometimes cultivators. The Yogis generally bury the dead (though 
now-a-days they are adopting the purely Hindu process of cremating the dead with 
the Hindu ceremonials) and are in some places untouchables to the Caste Hindus. 

2 This is, however, a very popular musical instrument of Bengal. At the 
suggestion of Sister Nivedita Dr. D. C. Sen was convinced of the fact that this 
Gophyantra owes its name to king Gopi-candra of the ballads ; but we are not quite 
sure of the fact. Even at the present time the BSuls and other Vaisnava beggars of 
Bengal sing songs from door to door in accompaniment with this instrument. 

3 In the United Provinces the yogi singers are generally called Bhartharls or 
Bhartriharis. They sing the song of GopI-cSnd and Maigan-nath and the teachings 
of Bhartrhari. No Hindu domestic festival is complete unless these Bhartharls 
come and sing their songs. They use ochre coloured clothes of the Sannyasins. 
But they are by religion Mahomedans. They seem to be the descendants of their 
yogi forefathers and have inherited their yogi songs as Well. 



428 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Bengal are mainly converts from the people of Bengal (both 
Hindu and non-Hindu), and formerly constituted an integral 
part, of the Bengalees both racially and culturally. The 
stories of Gorakh-nath and Gopl-cand, at least the skeleton of 
such stories, had been, in all probability, current in Bengal 
(and not only in Bengal, but in many other parts of India) 
before the time of the conquest of Bengal by the Muslims in 
the thirteenth century. Such stories were, therefore, common 
heritage of the Muslims and the non-Muslims of Bengal. 
The gradual revival of Hinduism in , Bengal, however, 
introduced Sanskritic and Puranic stories among the public, 
and the mind of the Caste ■ Hindus readily responded to this 
Sanskritic and Puranic influence. As a result the popular 
vernacular stories were naturally pushed in the corner, and 
were preserved only by the Muslims and the low-class 
Hindus, who did not come directly under the pale of the 
Sanskritic and Puranic influence of revived Hinduism. 
Moreover, the Caitanya-movement.of Bengal over-flooded the 
soil of the province with innumerable Radha-Krsna songs and 
soon it became proverbial in Bengal that there is no song 
without Kanu (i.e., Krsna). So strong was this Vaisnava 
movement in Bengal and so immense was the lyrical appeal 
of the Radha-Krsira songs that its influence was felt even by 
the low-class illiterate section of the Hindus. It is for all 
these reasons that the indigenous vernacular songs of Bengal, 
such as the songs of the Nath literature, practically became 
obsolete among the Hindus and they are preserved as an 
ancient heritage largely by the Bengali Muslims and 
sometimes by the people of the lower substrata of the Hindu 
community. It may also be noted in this connection that 
the Nath cult and the Nath literature of Bengal with its 
salient features have inspired the Muslims more than the 
Hindus in composing a large number of ydga-literature in 
Bengali. To such a type belong the jMna-sagara of Ali 
Raja, Jnana-pradipa and Jmna-cautisS of Syed Sultan, Nur- 



429 


APPENDIX (b) 

Kandilaoi Mohammad Safi, Vara-masya, Yoga~Kalandar 
and Salya-jmna-pradlpa of Mursid. ^ These texts represent 
a popular mixture of th? different kinds of yoga, the yoga of 
the Sahajiyas and of the Naths and the Sufi-istic yogic 
system. In the course of its evolution Indian Sofl-ism was 
variously influenced by the different yoga systems of India, ^ 
and it was for this reason that Sufl-istic Islam of India could 
easily compromise, or rather harmonise itself with the minor 
religious sects of India which have largely influenced the 
growth of modern Indian literatures. The Muslim yogic 
literature of Bengal is but the out-come of such a compromise. 

Besides the stories of Gorakh-nath and Gopi-cand, stray 
songs of the Natha-gurus, emphasising the vanity of life 
and the pernicious effect of worldly enjoyment and 
stressing side by side the importance of yoga as the only 
path for escaping death and decay and for attaining 
liberation, are found among* the Yogis and the Muslims 
of North-Bengal and East-Bengal. Munshi Abdul Karim 
quotes a poem as a specimen in his introduction to the 
Goraksa-vijaya. The present writer had occasions to 
listen to such songs in the interior of the district of Baker- 
gunge, and such songs are invariably couched in an 
unintelligible enigmatic style, which generally characterises 
yogic songs in all the vernaculars of India. The enigmatic 
song in the Dharma-mangala of Sahadev Cakravarti “ 
is a typical song of this class. The Naths became gods 
or demi-gods in later times in Bengal as well as in other parts 
of India, and such is specially the case with Gcsakh-nath. 
There are many popular beliefs in the divinity of Gorakh- 
nath. A typical tale of this nature is associated with a 
custom of East-Bengal, which is known as the “paying 
off the debt of Gorakh.” Gorakh is here depicted as 


1 Vide introduction to Gorak^a-vijaya by Munshi Abdul Karim. 

2 See Vafige SvTtpht-prabhaVa by Dr. Enamul Haq. 

3 B.S.PP , B.S. 1304. 



430 


OBaCURE RELIGIOUS CULXS 


the cattle-god and Manik-pO: is his disciple. The ceremony 
consists in o£Fering milk-made sweetmeats to Gorakh and 
Manik. A song is sung in this connection, in which we 
find that Manik-pir, the Fakir (or the mendicant), comes 
to the house of Kalu-ghos with his usual cry of Kam, Vam 
(which is the general custom' with the yogi-mendicants) ; 
at the sound of Vam, Fam Kalu-ghos’s mother understands 
that the Fakir has come to beg for something, — and in consul- 
tation with the daughter of Beku Banu she offers the Fakir 
five pice (in the name of the five Fakirs, or rather the five Pirs 
of the Muslims). Manik refuses to accept cash-payment 
and asks for milk curd ; but out of her foolishness Kalu’s 
mother deceives the Fakir and disappoints him. As a 
result thereof all the cows, calves and even the milk-maid 
of Kalu-ghos die within a very short time. Kalu’s mother 
realises her folly, solicits the mercy of the Fakir, — and 
the Fakir takes pity on her,- strikes his stick against the 
ground with the usual sound of Fam, Vam and everything 
becomes all right instantaneously.' In some places of North- 
Bengal Goraksa-nath is taken to be the god of the cow and 
songs are 'Sung of him in an annual f estival. In this 
transformation of Goraksa-nath to a cow-god the word 
goraksa was popularly confused to mean what the word 
go-raksaka (Le. the protector of the cows) means and hence 
was probably the deification of Goraksa-nath to a god 
associated with the cow, as Mina-nath was with fish. The 
confused etymological meaning of the word gorak,sa seems 
to be responsible also for the tradition that Goraksa-nath 
was the son of Siva by a cow. ® There are the Punjabi and 
Nepalese traditions of Gorakh-nath’s being born in cow- 


^ Bandar Sak^t, vol. iii., No. 3. 

Cf. also ; — Rajaahir Sona~plrer Gan by Mr. S. N. Das, Vangadak^mt 
BaUskK, 1347. 

^ See Goraksadar GUa—PraVaat, B. S. 1329. 

3 Vide Briggr! Goraknath And The Kanphata Yogist p. 183. 



431 


APPENDIX (b) 

dung or upon the dunghill.’ According to some Tibetan 
tradition Goraksa>nath was a cowherd. 

In the Vaisnava love-lyrics of Bengal we find occasional 
references to the yogins of the Gorakh order. In a well- 
known poem of Govinda-das we find that Krsna once 
disguised himself as a Kanaphat yogin to propitiate 
Radha who had got angry with him. He went as a yogin to 
Radha’s house exclaiming the name of Gorakh and blow- 
ing the horn (as is the general custom with such yogins).^ 
We also find occasional references to Radha’s expressing 
the desire to assume the form of a yogirii with shaven head 
and rings in the ears (just like the yogiriis of the Kanaphat 
order) and to wander from place to place in quest of her 
lover Krsna.® 

It will not be out of place to say a few words about the 
time and authorship of the long narrative poems that cons- 
titute the main portion of Bengali Nath literature. As for 
the time of composition of^these poems what we can at 
most say is that the skeleton of the stories may be ge old 
as the eleventh or the twelfth century; but surely the 
versions of the songs, which are available to us either in 
manuscript, or in the oral reproduction of the singers, are 
not very old. There is sometimes a tendency, however, to 
take account of the linguistic evidence in this connection ; 

1 Ibid, pp. 182-183. 

2 gorak,h jag&i sifiga-dhvani koraiahi 

jafila hhikhci ani dei 1 etc. 

Srl-ari'pada'ko^po-tarUt edited by S. Roy, Song No, 398, 

3 eg. mudava mathar dhariva yoginl-bes 

yadi soi piya nahi aila ! 
a * * 

geruya hasana ahgeie pariva 

iankhera kundala pari i 

^ yogintr bese yava sei deie etc. 

Vaimnva-padavah, VasumatJ edition i p. 234. 

Also k^ha bale cola ghare dvare a gni diya I 
karie pari kpndal caliva yogi haria II 

Caitanyo’bhagavata, Madhya — Ch. xxvii. 



432 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


but in the examination of the linguistic evidence provm- 
cialism is more often than not confused with archaism. 
It is difficult to determine at this late period of the 
history of our literature who the original composers of 
the songs of Gorakh-nath and Gopi-cand wpre ; but it 
seems that these songs were handed down from singer 
to singer from sometimes near about the twelfth century A.D. 
In course of such transmission the skeleton of the story was 
supplied with new flesh and blood by different singers and 
poets in different times and localities. Munehi Abdul Karim 
in his introduction to the Goraksa-Vijaya argues from the 
frequency and the prominence’ of the name of Sekh Fayjulla 
in the colophons, and also from the evidence of some £ufl- 
istic Islamic influence in, the version of the Goraksa-Vijaya, 
that Sekh Fayjulla is the original poet of the Goraksa-Vijaya. 
But it seems that all the poets, including Sekh Fayjulla 
himself, received some versions' of the poem from earlier 
sources and to the version they fteceived they made sufficient 
additj^s and alterations. 

The Nath literature of Bengal, far from being an isolated 
phenomenon, is closely connected with the history of the 
Nath literature of most of (he Indo- Aryan vernaculars, viz., 
Panjabi, Marathi, Midland Hindi and Eastern Hindi and 
also Odiya. Besides the vernacular texts on Gorakh-nath 
and those ascribed to the authorship of Gorakh-nath there 
are as many as thirty Sanskrit texts on yoga, ascribed to the 
authorship of Gorakh.’ Besides these Sanskrit texts Gorakh- 

^ Of these mention may be made of the following (1) Amaraugha-iasana, 
(2) Amara-natha-samvada, (3) Gora^sa-siddhanta-samgraha, (4) CaturaSity-asanOf 
(5) Jnanamrta, (6) Y oga-cintamani , (7) Y oga-mahima, (8) Yoga-martanda, (9) 
Yoga-siddhanta-paddhati, (10) Viveka-martanda, ^]\) Siddha-siddhanta-paddhati, 
(12) Gorak§a-acimhitat (13) G or ak?a -iaiaka oi Jnana4atakci, (14) Gcrokj^a-kcdpa, (15) 
Goraksa-giia, {]6) Natha-hlairiftat (17) Gorak^opani^ad, (18) Kaya-hddha, (19) Yoga-- 
Vlja, (20) Amanasko'Vivarana, (21) Siddha siddhanta-aarngrahat etc. 

Vide Gorakshanaih and Mediaeval Hindu Myaticimi, by Dr. Mohan Singh, 
and Gorak,hnath and The Kanphafa Yogis, hy G. W. Briggs, Ch. Xlf. 



433 


At^fENDlX (b) 

nath is claimed to have been an early writer of Hindi poetry 
and ho is further claimed to heve been the first known Hindi 
(or Panjabi) pro8e>writ«’.‘ Dr. Mohan Singh gives the list 
of as memy as twenty-five Hindi works about Gorakh-nath 
and his cult mentioned in the State Library, Jodhpur.’^ He 
also gives illustraHons from other poetical works embodying 
the sayings of Gorakh and of these the Gorakh-bodh, which 
is taken to be a Hindi work of the fourteenth century, deserves 
special mention. There are poetical works with the Gopi- 
cand legend in old Panjabi, of which mention may be made of 
the Udas-Gophcand.^ TheGopi-cand legend is very popular 
also in the Marathi literature, pairticularly in the folk-lore. 
The Marathi legends on the Naths (including Gopi-cand) can 
be gathered from the concluding portions of the Jnanesoart 
of Sri-jnanelvara and also from the widely mythical accounts 
given in the Yogi-sampradayaviskjrti ^ . There is a Hindi 
version of the Gopl-cand song .by La^sana-dasa." Even at 
the present day dramas are composed in Marathi and Hindi 
with the legend of Gopi-cand, and it is also a popular story 

^ Vide Gorakhanath and Mediaeval Hindu Myaticism, - by Dr. Mohan 
Singh. 

Also, History of Panjabi Literature by Dr. Mohan Singh. 

^ The list is as follows : — Gan Bodh, Gorakh-Ganeah Goathit MahadeV* 
Corakh-aamvad, Gorakh-Datt Goathit Kanthad-bodh, Aaht-Mudrot Panchmatri Jogt 
Abhai Matra, Daya^bodh, Narve-bodh, Ankaliahalokt Kafar-vodh^ Gorakhnath Ki 
Satra^Kalot Atam-bodh, Pran Sankhif Cyan Chdutiai, Sankhya Darahan, Rahraa, 
Nathji Ki Tithali, Battria Lecchaup Granth Homavari, Chhand Gorakhnath Ji kti, 
Kiaan Aatuti-Kari, Siddh Ikbia Gorakh, Sist Praman Granth, Besides these ‘the 
following texts are also said to belong to the sect; e,g., Tativa-aara, Brahma-jH&na, 
SvarSpa-jHana, etc., attributed to Gorakh-n&th, Aaahga-vskya of Bila-nSth, 
Mahayoga^VSky<i Msn^ukf'pava, MakH-aarala-vSkya of Vakra-nSth, Amfto- 
prayoga of H5lika<*pava, etc. 

3 The MS. of the text is preserved in the Library of the University of the 
Punjab (No. 374) . Dr. Singh in his work on Gorakh-nSth quotes some portions 
of the text. 

* A Marathi commentary on the Git& by JfiSnelvara. 

S A Hindi work said to be a translation by Candra-nath yogi, and published 
by 3iva-nSth SSstri, Ahmedabad. 

« B.S.P.P., B.S., 1928. No.I 

55^141 IB 



434 


OBSCURE BELIGIOUS CULTS 


of modern Hindi cinema. Dr. D. C. Sen quotes in his 
Typical Selections From Old Bengali Literature a versimi of 
the Gopi-cand song (in a mixed Odiya-Bengali dialect) from 
the yogis of Mayurbhanj.^ Stray songs on GopI-cSnd and 
Gorakh-nath are popular even at the present day among the 
yogis of the Punjab, Bombay and Maratha. Songs of Gopl- 
cand, similar to those that are found in Bengal, are current 
as popular folk-lore also in Magahi and in the Bhoj-puri 
dialect.^ 

The historical reason for this wide-spread popularity of 
the Nath literature throughout India is that the Nath move- 
ment was, and still is, an all-Indian movement. The followers 
of this sect, who are now best known as the Kanphat yogins 
(because of the peculiar custom of having the ears pierced 
through before being initiated into the order and also of 
wearing ear-rings) are found widely scattered all over India. 
They are occasionally met -with separately as wandering 
mendicants in towns and villages -and also in groups in their 
headquarters. Such Yogins are found abundantly in the 
Northern Deccan, in the Central Provinces, in Gujrat 
and Maratha, in U. P., Bihar and Bengal, and also 
in some Himalayan regions, particularly in Nepal. Even 
at the present day the Kanphat yogins have their quarters 
and sacred places of pilgrimage all over India, the head- 
quarters of Tilla in the Punjab and that of Gorakhpur 
and Dinodar being the most important. ® IWhoever might 

1 Mr. G, C, Haider, M,A., has given a short sketch of the Panjabi, 
Hindustani, Gujrati, Mara|hi and Bengali versions of the story of Gop!>c5nd under 
the caption of The Legend o/ Raja Gopi-cand in a paper read in the sixth Oriental 
Conference. (Vide Proceedings oj the Sixth Oriental Conference). 

* Vide J. A. S. B.. VoL liv . Part I. 1886. 

Also, J. A. S. B., Vol. lii, 1883, Folk-lore from Eastern Gorakhpur by Fraser. 

3 For the numerical strength of the Kfinphat yogins in the different provinces 
of India and for their sects, sub-sects, vows, customs, quarters and sacred places 
of pilgrimage see the work of Mr. Briggs. As Mr. Briggs has dealt with these 
things in detail, the present writer does not propose to enter into the details of' the 
question here. ' 



435 


APPEI^IX (b) 

nave been the original exponent of the cult, Gorakh-natK, 
of all the Naths, enjoys the most widespread celebrity and 
popularity, and it will be very clear from the heaps of 
traditions and legends that have gathered round the figure 
of this great Yogin that, wherever might have been the 
birth-place of Gorakh-nath, the field of his activities spread 
frc«n die Frontier Provinces in the west to Bengal in the 
«ist including the Himalayan regions. It is for this reason 
that literary accounts of G(»akh-nath’8 life and activities 
are found in almost all parts of India. Another point to 
note is that, thougli the Kanphat Yogins have their quarters 
and headquarters, where they generally reside in groups, 
the custom of going on long pilgrimage to the sacred 
places scattered all over the country is very popular among 
them, and it is natural that with thehr long wanderings they 
have spread the legends and traditions of their sect to all 
parts of the country, and this inay be recognised as a plausi- 
Ue exaplanation for the inter-mingling of the stories and 
and traditions. In spite of the legendary and mythical nature 
of the story of king Gopl-cand, we have reasons to believe 
that he was a historical person and that his native land was 
Bengal;' but it is because of the reasons stated above 
that this story of Gopl-clnd plays a very important part in the 
folk-literature of the different vernaculars. There is a huge 
number of Y^andering yogins belonging to the Kanphat 
sect, who beg from door to door, from one part of India to 
Vthe other part, singing songs on Gorakh-nith and Gopl-cand. 

I In Bengal we occasionally find such a class of Hindu 
Yogins and Muslim Fakirs still singing songs of the Naths. 

We have given before an exposition of the religious 
background of the Nith literature of Bengal and some other, 
problems, which are associated with the origin and develop- 
ment of the cult. Now we shall give a short sketch of the 

i Vide infra t Appendix (c ) , 



436 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


stories with which the Nath literature of Bengal flourished. 
The story of Gorakh-nath runs as follows : — 

At the time of the creation of the universe Siva came 
out of the mouth of the primordial Lord in the form 
of a Yogin with matted hair and ear-rings ; Mina-nith was 
born as a Siddha and from the bone {hsda) of the Lord was 
born Hadiphs (i.e., Jalandharipa) ; from the ear (^arna) of 
the Lord was b«rn Kanphs, and Gorakh-nath with his long 
hanging bag of mystic importance (siddha-jhuli) and his 
outer garment of patched cloth (ksnihs) came from the 
matted hair of the Lord. A beautiful girl of the name 
of Gauri was the mother of the world. The Lord then asked 
some one of the Yogins (including Siva, who here 
represents none but Adi-nath, traditionally said to be the 
original Nath of the Nath cult) to accept Gauri as his wife, 
to which all bent their heads in disapproval. At the sugges- 
tion of the Lord then Siva or. Hara accepted Gauri and came 
down on earth with her, and all the Siddhas followed them. 
Mina-nath and Hadipha became attendants of (f.e., disci- 
ples of) Hara-Gaurl, Gorakh became the attendant of 
Mlna-nath and Kanphs of Hsdipha, and all of these began 
to practise austere yoga. Then Gauri wanted to know 
from her Lord the supreme truth {tattva). For this purpose 
both the Lord and his consort repaired to the Ksiroda sea 
where there was a small beautiful castle raised on the 
surface of water (iaiigi) . There the Lord began to explain 
to his consort all the secret truths, but the goddess fell 
asleep. Mina-nath, however, in the form of a fish (mina) 
lay beneath the castle and heard all truth from the mouth 
of the 'Lord. The Lord came to know of it and cursed 
Mtna-n§th saying that there would be a time when he would 
forget all Tattva. 

Thweafter once in Kailasa the goddess proposed to Siva 
that the Siddhas should marry and lead a domestic life ; 
but the I .ord replied that the Siddhas w»e perfect yogins 



437 


Af^ENDIX (b) 

and above all worldly emotions. Tlie goddess then proposed 
to put the Siddhas to a test in the form of a beautiful damsel. 
All the Siddhias, excepting Gorakh, fell victims to the 
amorous charm of the goddess and every one except 
Gorakh felt within a desire to enjoy her, — and the desire 
of the Siddhas was all approved of by her. * Mlna-nath, 
as he desired, was destined for the land of Kadall, where 
he would keep company to the amorous girls of the land ; 
Hadipha was destined for the country of Mayanamatl, where 
he would serve as a sweeper and enjoy the cconpany of 
Mayanamatl, the queen rand Kanpha was destined for the 
city of Dihuka. Consequently Mina-nath, the great yogin, 
went to the country of Kadall, where he got enamoured with 
six hundred women and was passing his days with them 
in erotic dalliances.^ Gorakh-nath, "however, came to know 
of the sad and shameful plight of his Guru and entered the 
city of Kadall as a dancing girl. In course of his dancing 
and singing Gorakh rebuked the pHreceptor in enigmatic 
words (so that the women of the country could make no sense 
out of them) and also explained to him the importance and 

^ Here we find that che goddess adopted all the vilest means to seduce Gorakh 
hut was sadly defeated in all her attempts. Similar legends are also found 
in the Dharma-man galas, where the goddess tries to captivate the mind of the 
hero LSusen by her charm of body in the form of a beautiful woman ; but Liusen, 
like Gorakh, could put the goddess to shame by the strength of his character. 

^ In the Dharraa-mangalas also we find mention of such a country inhabited 
mainly by women full of carnal desire and it was only through the grace o 
Lord Dharma that the hero LSusen could get the upper hand over all the 
allurements. The country is called in the Nath literature the Kadatir Deia, 
Various attempts have been made to identify this land of Kadall, the general 
tendency being to identify iir with KSma-rupa, which is noted as one of the 
original centres of Tsntricism, and the yoni-pltha of the Goddess, But we 
should also consider another fact in this connection. In the Sanskrit dramas 
we find occasional reference to the Kadati^grha (i.e., a house in the plantain 
garden) of the kings for love-making with women other than the married ones. 
The tradition is also continued in the Bengali Madgala-kSvyas, where ordinary 
women* assemblei} on the occasion of any marriage ceremony get enamoured with 
the beauty of the bridegroom and wishes to hav? him allured in the KfilA4.|)en 
{plantain garden). May the name Kadati for the country where Mlna-nflh got 
allured by vile women have something to do with the above fact ? 



438 QBSCUIK RELIGIOUS CULTS 

idje processes of yoga* The {areceptor graiduaUy came to his 
senses, recoUected his own history and came out of the land 
with his worthy disciple Gorakh and once more engaged 
himself in austere practices of yoga. 

The othor story. Viz., the story of Gopl-cand (or Gopl- 
candra, Govi-candra, or Govinda-candra), which in its 
complete versicm includes also the story of his father 
Manik'(»ndra, runs as follows (the difierences in the different 
versions being here ignored) :* — 

Ma^-candra was a renowned and pious king Bengal. 
He had many wives, including Mayan^atl, the daughter of 
Tilak-candra. To avoid family quarrels Mayana was decreed 
to live separately in the city of Pherusa away from the royal 
family. In the reign of the pious king the happiness amd 
pro^erity of the peopile knew ik> bounds ; but unfortunately 
a t3rtaat with a long beard hailed from East-Bengal and 
occupued the post of Minister for Revenue. His oppression 
soon led the subjects to join together in worshipping Dharma 
with mystic religious rites with a view to putting the king to 
death. The attempt of the people became fruitful and the 
future longevity of the king was reduced from eighteen years 
to six months. Citra Govinda (i.e., Citra-gupta, the record- 
keeper of the king of de2rth and also something like a personal 
assistant) opened his record-book and issued summons to the 
king and Goda-yama was sent to bring the life (prom) of the 
king. Mayani came to know of the mishap and hastened to 
the king. She reque 3 ted the king to get himself initiated into 
the great m3rstic wisdom (maha-iSSna) of yoga, so that he 
might be able to challenge the decree of Death ; but dve king 
felt it beneath his dignity to be initiated by his wife and 
refused the proposal indignantly ; as a result death befell the 
king and he was brought to the city of the dead. But 
Mayana at once seized the city of the dead through her 
mystic power and inflicted all sorts of torment on the officers. 
The king in charge of the dead was in a fix ; but Gorakh-nSth, 



APPENDIX (b) 43^ 

who was the Guru of Mayana, brought about some 
compromise anei accordingly Mayana was endowed wkh the 
boon of a son to be bwn to her. Mayan* came to 
learn that the Hfe>^an of the child was destined to be only 
eighteen years ; she grumbled and it was arranged that the 
son would be immortal, if he would accept Hidi-siddh* as 
his Guru and attend upon him. The corpse of the king was 
then cremated in a truly royal nranner ; Mayana became Satl 
by placing herself on the funeral pyre by the side of her 
husband ; but she came back unbumt and in due time gave 
birth to a son, who was the king Go|^-cind in question. The 
prince grew in age and married Aduna, the daughter of king 
Hari^ndra, at the age of twelve (according to scrnie versions 
at the age of nine), and received his other daughter Peiduni 
as present. ‘ The prince ascended the throne and began to 
enjoy his life to his heart’s content in company of the young 
wives. Mayana felt that if Gopl-cand was thus allowed to 
plunge into wmldly enjoyment he would soon die at 
the age of eighteen. She proposed the king’s renunciation 
of all wealth and beauty, and the acceptance of Hadipa as his 
Guru after taking the vow of a yogin. The king first refused 
the proposal stoutly and indignantly, and he even went so 
far as to suspect the character of his mother in connection 
with Hadipa. The mother was shocked and Gorakh, h«r 
Guru, cursed Gopl-cand for uttering such calumny against 
his mother and decreed afflictions during the paiod of his 
SannySsa. The queen-mother, however, made fresh attempts 
to convince her son of the vanity of the world and- the 
excellence of the immortal life, which can be attained only 
through renunciation and yoga. The son was convinced ; 
but when he entered the harem he was once more tutored 

^ According to tKe version o^ BKavSnl-dfis Gopi-cind Kad (our qtieetii* 
AdunS, PadunS, Ratan^mfilfi and Kifici>aonS (K£ncan>mll8?). See Gopl-candrer 
Gan, Part II, C. U., p. 332), According to Sukur Mahmmad the four queens were 
AdunS, Padunfi, CandanS and Phandanl. 



440 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


by the queens and instigated against the mother. The king 
at the instance of the wives asked his mother to demonstrate 
her y(^c power by standing the ordeals to which she would 
be put, and the mother agreed. She was put into hre and 
drowned into water, she was given {>oison to swallow and 
made to walk on the edge of a knife and was put under various 
other direful ordeals of the type ; but she came out successful 
in all caaes. According to some of the versions the king, at 
the instance of the queens, dug a hole under the floor -of the 
stable where Hadipa was buried alive ; the Siddha resorted to 
his yogic power and remained absorbed in yogic meditation 
for a long time and was later on rescued by his disciple 
Kanupa . ' Mayana also asked the Hadi-siddha to demon- 
strate his supernatural power of yoga before her son and the 
Siddha performed ui&elievable miracles and thereby 
commanded respect and obeisance from the king. The kin^ 
ultimately accepted Hadipa as his preceptor, renounced the 
world at the age of eighteen, ^ got his head shaved and ears 
split, bore the beggar’s Jhuli and the patched outer garment 
{Jlintha) and took to the vow of the yogin. The Guru, 
however, put the disciple under various trials and tribulations 
through his magical power, and the worst of all was that the 
new yogin was sold to a prostitute of the name of Hira, who 
compelled him (the king) to serve her as the humblest 
menial as a punishment for his refusal to yield to her 
amorous desires. However, the king bore all these trials 
with infinite patience and implicit obedience towards the 
Guru. Mayan& eventually came to know of the sad plight 
of her son, rebuked Hadipa for this maltreatment of her son 

^ Such is the tradition also in the Marathi versions of the story. See Vogi- 
Bamprad^ya 

2 In the VdaB Gopt-cand, a Panjabi version of the story of Gopl-cSnd, we find 
that Gopl-cSnd was made a king at the age of twelve and took ^Sannyisa at the 
age of sixteen (solo barisi jogi haa), and that Gorakh^nath, and not Hldip^i was 
his Guru. See some portions of the text of Udaa Gophcand quoted from a MS. at 
the end of the work of Dr« Mohan Singh. 



441 


APPENDIX (b) 

and demanded the release of her son at once. After long 
twelve years Hadipa came back to the king, cursed the 
prostitute and all her female attendants to be transformed 
instantaneously into bats, and conferred the secret wisdom 
on the king. The king then returned home. He could not 
first be recognised by the queens ; .but when recognised, he 
was welcomed by all and the king began to lead a happy 
life once more. 


56 - 14)18 



APPENDIX (C) 


An Account of the Prominent Figures in the 
Nath Literature of Bengal 

In the Nath literature of Bengal the most important 
figures are (1) Mlna-nath, (2) Gorakh-nath, (3) Jalan- 
dharipa, (4) Kanupa, (5) Gopi-candra and (6) Mayanamati. 
Various accounts, mostly, legendary in nature, are found 
about these important personalities; let us give a brief sketch 
of them in the following pages. 

c. 

(r) Mina-nath 

In all the traditions about the Naths, Mlna-nath or 
Matsyendra-nath figures as the first of the human Gurus. 
In many of the standard texts on yoga Matysendra-nath has 
been saluted as the Adi-guru. In the yogic texts the names 
of Matsyendra, Goraksa, Jdandhara, Cauranghi and others 
are commonly found as the stalwarts of Hatha-yoga, and 
some yogic practices are specially associated with the names 
of some of these yogins.' References to Mina-nath and 
Goraksa-nath and some other Nathas are also found in some 
of the Tantric texts. ^ Mina-nath and Matsyendra-nath (with 
all the other variants of the . name)® seem to have been 
identical, and they came to be two perhaps in course of time. 
In the Nath literature the word Natha (which originally 

^ Cf, Matayendra-sana, Gorak^-aaria, JaJandhara-bandha^ etc. 

2 Sylvan L^vi, Le N6pal, Vol. i, referred to by Dr. Bagchi. 

® The popular name is Mina-nSth in Bengali, Matsyendra in Sanskrit and 
Machamdar in Hindi and Panjabi (C/. Mocandar in Bengali). .The variants of the 
name found in the Kaula-jAQna-nirnaya (which is ascribed to Matsyendra^nSth) are 
Macchaghna-pSda, Macchendra-pada, Matsyendra-pSda, Mlna-pida, Mina-nitha, 
Macchendra-pSda Matsyendra, Macchindra-nStha-pfida. (See Introduction by 
Dr. Bagchi) » 



APPENDIX (c) 


443 


means ‘ the lord ’) has sometimes been used with an 
ontological significance and there is sometimes a tendency to 
interpret the names of the Nathas, particularly of Matsyehdra 
and Goraksa, as some transcendental states of mind or soul 
attainable through the practice of yoga . Abhinava-gupta in 
his Tantraloka speaks of Macchanda-vibhu and explains it 
as one who tears the fetters of bondage.’ Prof. Tucci cites 
one instance from Durjaya-candra’s commentary on Catus- 
pitha-tanira, where prajM is spoken of as mal^ara-mina.^ 
In the Hindi text Gorah-hsdr (which is a loose Hindi transla- 
tion of the GoraJ^sa-sataJ^a) ” Machamdara has been explained 
as one who has controlled his mind, who has known the 
truth of the six Cakras (nerve-plexus), and who shines in 
the unhickering lustre of his soul. * Traditionally, however, 
Mlna-nath has variously been associated with fish, and that 
perhaps because of his name (as Gorakh-nath is with the cow, 
Kukkurl-pada with the dog, and so on). We have seen that 

^ ragarunam granthi-hilaVa-IOrnarn 

yo jalamatana-viiana-vrtti I 
kalomhhitam bahyapathe co^ara 
atan me aa macchanda-vihhuh praaannah It (\.7 ) 

In commenting on the verse Yayaratha says — sa aaka^a-kMla-iaalraVatarakataya 
prasiddhah, 

macchah paiah samakbyaias capalai ciita-Vfitayah i 
cheditaa tu yada tena macchandaa tena kjrtitah il 
ityady uktya pasa-khandana-avabhave macchandah^ etc.» p. 25. 

(Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, No. XXIII, Vol I.) 

Also see Introduction to Kaula-jnana-nirnaya by Dr. P, C. Bagchi, p. 6. 

2 Kaula-jnana-nirnaya. Introduction by Dr. Bagchi, p. 7. 

^ MS. preserved in the Library of the MahSraja of Benares and accessible to 
the writer through the courtesy of the royal family. 

4 MS. No. 300, p. 1(a). 

C/. also ; — 

lakh caurast raba paravarai I 
SOI ^arim je eit k^rai II 
gOTakh aoi gyarpn garni gahai I 
mahadev sol man ki lohai ii 
sidha aoi jo aadhai itfl 
nath aoi jo tri-hhuvana jifi 11 

Kabtr-granthsoah, Padsvalit No. 32 ?. 



444 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Mina-nith received inslructioM on yoga from Adi-nath in . the 
form of a hsh.^ In another legend Matsyendra is said to 
have come out as a boy from the mouth of a fish.® 
Mina-nath is known also by another name, Viz., Macchaghna® 
which means ‘ a killer of the fish ’ and as a matter of fact he 
has' been spoken of as a Kaivarta or a fisherman by caste.'' 
According *to the Kaula-jfiana-nirnaya Matsyendra, though 
originally a Brahmin by caste, came to be known as 
Matsyaghna as he acted like a fisherman in Candra-dvipa 
first by killing a big fish and discovering the text containing 
the sacred knowledge from the belly of the fish and by 
once more rescuing it (the text) by killing the fish that had 
once more eaten it up. This tradition is also responsible for 
the location of Mlna-nath in Candra-dvipa, which is generally 
taken by scholars to be some coastal region of East-Bengal.’' 
In the pictorial representations of the Siddhacaryas, available 
in Tibet and Nepal, Mina-n|th is always associated with the 
fish,® and somewhere he is found eating the intestines of 
a fish. ^ 


1 The sheat-fish according to the Bengali tradition 
Cy, maUya-rup dhari tatha mina mocandar I 

fangir lamate rahe bogdl sundar II 

Gorak^a-vijayot p. 13. 


2 Vide YogUsampraddyaViskf^i, Ch, II. 

3 Cf. Macchqnda of Abhinava-gupta, It seems to be a confusion with some 
colloquial variant of the name Matsyendra. 

4 Kaiila^jndna-nirnaya. Patala xvi (22-37). See also introduction, pp. 8-9. 

6 MM. H. P. ^astri identifies this Candra-dvipa with the Candra-dvipa of the 
district of Bakergunj. Dr. Bagchi is disposed to identify it with the Sundwip in 
the district of Noakhali. (See B. S. P. P.. B. S. 1329, 446. 1 ; also IntroducUon to 
Kaula-jfidna-nirnaya by Dr. Bagchi, pp. 29-32). 

® See B. S. P. P.. B. S., 1329, No, 2; also Kalydna, Yogankfl. 

7 The Tibetan synonyms for Matsyendra-nath (or Lui-p5 with whom he is 
generally identified) can be restituted in Sanskrit as matsyodara or mataySntrada 
(•• the eater of the intestines of a fish,’' Uvi, Le Nipal I p. 355, referred to by 
Dr. Bagchi). Lui-pS is also described in the Pag sam jon ztfrts as a Bttddbist sage 
sprung from the fisherman caste, who was a disciple of Savari-p5. In the same work 
Machendra is said to be the incarnation of Mahadeva as a fisherman in the womb of 
a fish, at KsmarPpa (l^ide Dr. Bagchi. pp. 22-23). 



445 


APPENDIX (c) 

According to all the traditions Gorakh-nath is the disciple 
of Matsyendra-path. ' In Bengali Nath literature we find 
occasional reference to another disciple of Matsyendra of the 
name of Gabhur-siddha. ‘ We have discussed before the 
Bengali legend of the down- fall of the great yogin Mfna-nath 
being seduced by the women of the country of Kadall. The 
story hee its variant in the story of Matsyendra-nath being 
captivated by the two queens of Ceylon {Sangal). The yogin 
was leading a domestic life in the company of the queens and 
was ultimately dispovered by his disciple Gorakh, who entered 
the palace as a fly. “ Matsyendra then left Ceylon, but took 
with him the two sons, viz., Paros-nath and Nim-nath, who 
were born to them, and the two sons became the founders 
of the Jain religion. ® According to the Nepalese and 
Tibetan traditions, as we have noted before, Matsyendra-nath 
is identified with Lui-pa, who is regarded as the Adi-guru 
among the Buddhist Siddhacacyas. As S. Levi describes in 
his Le Nepal, Matsyendra is identified with Avalokitesvara 
Padma-pani. There is the legend that Gora|jsa once came to 
Nepal in search of his Guru Matsyendra ; but as the 
mountain was difficult of access he had recourse to the 
stratagem of binding the nine nagas^ under a turtle and sat 
on them. Consequently, the sky becoming cloudless, there 
was drought in the valley for long twelve years. Then 
Bandhu-datta, the Guru of Narendra-deva, the then King of 
Nepal, went to mount Kapotala with the king to bring 
Avalokitesvara or Matsyendra. They propitiated Matsyendra 
with worship. Avalokitesvara was then cleverly brought to 
Nepal, imprisoned in the form of a black bee and installed 

1 C/. ek sisya yache mor jati gorakhai ' 

ara sisya ache mor gabhur siddhai II Gorak&a-vijaya, p» 130, 

Agnin, •mithu kale na dekhilam gabhur sidhar mufe/i il Ibid, p. 1 16. 

2 In the Bengali legend he entered the city of Kadali as a dancing girl. 

3 Vide Dr. Bagchi’s Introduction io Katila^jnana-nirnaya, p. 15; Briggs, p. 233. 

For details and variants of the story see Briggs, pp. 72-73. ^ 



446 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


in pomp in a place called Bugama. There then followed 
rain in abundance and thus the country was saved. The 
Brahminlcal version, however, narrates the ktoiy somewhat 
differently. Once Goraksa-nath went to Nepal, but he got 
offended with the people of the country as he was not warmly 
received. He imprisoned the clouds and put them under 
his seat for twelve years ; consequently there was drought 
and fatnine. Fortunately Matsyendra chanced to come to 
Nepal at the time and, while the Guru was passing by, 
Goraksa stood up to show him respect and thus the clouds 
were let loose and there was rain in abundance, which saved 
the whole country. Matsyendra thus in the form of 
Avalokite^vara Padma-pani commands universal respect in 
Nepal still to the present time and is still worshipped in the 
land with much reverence. ’ There is the celebrated annual 
procession oif Ratha yatra (a procession with Matsyendra as 
Avalokitelvara on a decorated chariot) in honour of this 
popular god. ‘ Matsyendra has, however, been deified in 
later times in many other places and the images of 
Matsyendra and*his favourite disciple Goraksa are found in 
some shrines of the Nathists, — and the foot-print of these two 
demi-gods are also worshipped in some places by the 
Kanphat yogins. The* peculiar custom of having the ears 
split is also sometimes traditionally believed to have been 
introduced by Matsyendra-nath and many are the legends 
that are associated with such a tradition. There is another 
tradition which makes Matsyendra-nath the founder of Kama- 
rupa-mahapitha of tfie so-called Arddha-trayambaka-matha, 
which represents the fourth or Kaula order of Tantric worship. 
Again there is a legend recorded in the Goraksa-\imaya~sara, 
which makes Matsyendra-nath identical with Maha Visnu 

^ According to the Nepalese tradition Mlna-nath is the younger b|gther of 
Matsyendra and is worshipped almost with equal pomp. 

2 For a detailed description of this procession and other religious functions in 
Nepal in honour of Matsyendra see Briggs^ pp. 144^145, pp. 23]^ et seg. 



APPENDIX (c) 447 

Sanga, whom some scholars are inclined to identify (though 
on insufficient ground) with the old Visnu-svamL 

Attempts have been made to fix up the ap>proximate time 
of Matsyendra. The time of his advent has been held in the 
Nepalese tradition synchronous with the reign of Narendra- 
deva, who flourished in the seventh century A.D., but as 
the alleged synchronism cannot be historically relied upon 
because of the extremely mythical nature of the whole tradi- 
tion, the time of Matsyendra cannot be fixed up with reference 
to it. Dr. P. C. Bagchi, however, has attempted to fix the 
date sometime in the tenth century with reference to the date 
of the manuscript of the KoMla-jfiana-nirnaya, The mention 
of Matsyendra (as Macchanda) by Abhinava-gupta, who lived 
towards the beginning of the eleventh century approximately 
confirms this date. Again the tradition of the identity of 
Matsyendra with Lui-pa (who flourished in the teilth century) * 
will also put Matsyendra to the same century. The time of 
Gopi-cand will also ascribe some such time to Matsyendra. ^ 
Many of the liaditions taken together will strengthen the 
belief that Matsyendra, the first Nath Guru flourished at 
the latest in the tenth century A.C., perhaps earlier. 

{a) Gorakh-nath 

Though Mlna-nath or Matsyendra-nath was the first of 
the Nath Gurus, the most celebrated Nath Guru was 
Goraksa-nalh. All Indian traditions of later days make him 
the incarnation of Siva, who is the "divine source of all 
yoga. It is believed, and there seems to be a considerable 
amount of truth in the belief, that it was Gorakh, who 
popularised, if not introduced, the principles and practice of 
yoga throughout the^ngth and breadth of India. As in the 
case of Mina-nath, the name Goraksa-nath has frequently been 


I Supra, pp. 227.228, 
5 in/ra. pp. 457.459, 



448 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


explained docetically. Thus in the hymn of Goraksa-nath by 
Srikrsna in the Raja-guhya it has been said, — “ By the letter 
‘ga’ is implied the qualified nature, ‘ra’ indicates the form 
and beauty, by ‘ksa’ is implied his nature as imperishable 
Brahman, — salute be to that 5ri-goraksa.”‘ He is the supreme 
Brahman of the Brahmans, the gem on the crown of Rudra 
and others, — and the three worlds are made by him. He 
is the totality of all the qualities, — he is at the same time the 
absence of all the qualities, — he resides in qualities in his 
unqualified nature, — he is both formless and with form. He 
is worshipped by the gods (in heaven), by men on earth, and 
by the Nagas in the netherland. He is all alone, eternal and 
free from the fetters of existence, he is the supreme 
Brahman and the imperishable divine lustre. The sky is 
his temple decked with various gems, and the all-good 
lord is there with boons of safety and security. He is 
saluted by Brahma, Visnu ai)d other gods, — by the sages 
and other ordinary people and also by all the Siddhas, who 
are of the essence of knowledge,”^ Such docetic descrip- 
tions of Goraksa-nath are also found in the Sri-gora\sa- 
sahasra-nama-stotra (hymns of the thousand names of Srl- 
goraksa) of the Kalpa-druma-tantra and also in the 
Brahtnanda-purana. ’ Bengali literary traditions make him 
the purest and strongest of all the yogins. The erotic charm 
even of goddess Durga herself was repeatedly put to shame 
by the purity and strength of his character. Most of the 
renowned mediaeval saints, who composed songs in 
vernaculars, paid homage to . this great Yogin along 
with Matsyendra, Carpata, Bhartr, Gopi-cand and others. 
Kabtr refers to Gorakh several times in his poems and there 


ga-haro gana-sarfiyukto rd-koro rupa~1ak&anah I 

k§ci-karenak^ayam brahmfi iri-gorak§a namo'atu te II * • 

Quoted in the Gorak^a-siddhanta-'aarpgrahat p. 42. 
^ Gorakso-siddhanta-sarngraha, p. 42. 

^ !hid., p. ^3. 



449 


, APPENDIX (c) 

goes the tradition in the Hindi work Gorakh-nQth^kih 
gosthi that Kabfr met Gorakh and held religious discourse 
with him. A similar tradition is found in the Janam 
Sikhl of BabS-Nanak, where it is said that Nfinak met 
Gorakh-nath and Matsyendra-nath and held religious 
discourse with them. It is further said that when, in course 
of his long wanderings as a Yogin, Nanak went to Ceylon 
he was mistaken for Gorakh-nath.^ Dadu refers to Gorakh 
and the doctrine of the innumerable Siddhas. Gahint-nath 
of the twelfth or thirteenth century acknowledges Gorakh 
to be the great teacher of Pipa ; Guzrati poets also mention 
Gorakh with reverence. Krsna-das, a Guzrati poet, sings 
of Mucchandra and Goraksa as two Jaina saints.^ Rajjabjl, 
a Rajputana saint of the nineteenth century, mentions 
Gorakh with reverence. If we take aceount of the literature 
of Nathism in all parts of India, we shall find that every- 
where traditions hold Gorakh to have been the supreme of 
all the Gurus. 

So widely popular has been the great saint Gorakh-nath 
among many of the Yogi-sects of India, for a long time 
comprising a decade of centuries > that countless traditions 
have grown round the figure of the great yogin, and Mr. 
Briggs has taken the trouble of collecting many of these 
traditions in his work on Gora\h-nMh and The Kanphat 
Yogis of India,^ From these heaps of wild legends, 
which ar^ often contradictory to one another, and which 
have grown more with a belief in the divinity of Gorakh, 
it is now impossible to construct any historical account of 
the life and teachings of the saint. Traditions generally 
agree to hold him to be the disciple of Matsyendra. 
Matsyendra, we have seen, was most probably a saint of 
the tenth century A. C. ; Goraksa then must also be placed 

^ • 

1 See Janam Sakhit Trumpp’s translation. 

* Dr. Mohan Singh, op. cit., p. 8. 

3 See also the worl of Dr, Mohan Singh, 

57~.14M5 



450 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

sometime in the tenth century, or at least in the hrst half 
of the elevaath century. Traditionally Gorakh is regarded 
by the orthodox Ksnphat yogins to be unborn and death- 
less ; he is the immortal saint, believed to be living still 
now in some hilly region of the Himalayas. Gcrakh 
has sometimes been held to be the Guru even of the triad, 
viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva, and there is the story of 
Vimvt’s creating the world in the primc^dial water from a 
handful of ashes from the eternal hre {dhuni) of Gorakh in 
the netherworld {Patsla). There are also storicjs of Gorakh’s 
fighting with mtmy goddesses in difieSrent Sakta centres 
and the goddesses in eve^ case had to bend their heads 
before the mighty Yogin.* Various are the legends even 
about his birth in the human form. iWe have seen that 
in the Bengali work Goral^^-vijaya he is said to have come 
of the matted hair of Mahadeva.^ There is also the story 
of his being b<»rn cm a dung-hill from a quantity of ashes, 
which was given by Mahadeva to a barren lady to swallow 
in order to have a child, and which was thrown away in 
disregard on a dung-hill. Yet another legend would make 
him born of a cow by Mahadeva. Apart from these 
legendary accounts traditions would show that he was born 
in some low caste family. 

There are controversial legends about the birth place 
of Gorakh. The mythical account says that he lived in the 
Punjab at Peshwar (?) in the Satya {kfta) yuga, at Gorakhpvir 
in the Treta yuga, at Hurmy beyond Dwaraks in the DvSpara 
yuga and at Gorakhmari (Gorakhmandi) in Kathiawar in 
the Kali yuga. It is also said that Gorakh appeared in the 
Kali yuga in the form of the Se^a Naga. According to the 
Nepalese tradition Gorakh lived at Gorakh in iWestern 
Nepal in.a cave. The cave and the town are said to have 

1 For many such stories see Yagi-$€tmprad&ifSoifkt^i. 

^ Cj, jafU bhedi nihalila jati gorakb-nStha ! 

^difha jhttli siddha l^thS tahSr galSUt U 



APPENDIX (c) 451 

obtained their name from Goiakh-nadi, and even the 
national name Gurkha is sometimes explained with referoKe 
to Gorakh. Others would again make Gorakh-nath the ori- 
ginal inhabitant of Gorakhpur in U. P., and the name of the 
city is also explained with reference to the name of the saint. 
As a matter of fact Gorakhpur is one of the most important 
centres of the Kanphat Yogis even to the present day. Some 
Nepalese tradition would again hold that Gorakh came to 
Kathmundu from the Punjab. He is again claimed as a 
saint of Oudh. The monks of Gorakhpur hold that he 
came to the United Provinces from the Punjab, and that his 
chief seat was at Tilla, in Jhelum. Traditions in Kacch 
(Sindh) would have him in the Punjab. Yogis at Nasik hold 
that Gorakh went from Nepal to the Punjab and thence to 
other parts of India. Dr. Mohan Singh holds that Gorakh 
was an original inhabitant of some place round the area of 
Peshwar. But from the preponderance of traditions and 
from the importance which all the Kanphat Yogis attach to 
Tilla in Jhelum of the Punjab, it will appear that Gorakh was 
an original inhabitant of the Punjab, at least a considerable 
portion of his life-time was spent in the province. But at 
the same time it seems that Gorakh travelled throughout the 
whole of India and legends associate his life and activities 
with Afganistan, Beluchistan, the Punjab, North-Western 
Provinces, Sind, Guzrat and Maratha in the west, north and 
south, and with Ceylon in the extreme south, with U. P. in 
the middle, and with Nepal, Assam and Bengal in the east. 

In the Nath literature of Bengal Gorakh-nath figures 
prominently as the disciple of Mlna-nath and the preceptor of 
queen Mayanamatl, mother of king Gopi-cand. But in the 
literature of the other vernaculars “ Gorakh is said to have 
been the teacher of Putan, son of Salbahan of Sialkot ; of 
Bharthrihari, Step brother of Vikramaditya of Ujjain; of 
Raja Gopi Chand of Ujjain, Rangpur, Dharanagri, or 
Kanchanpur ; of queen Lunan Chamari and queen Sundran 



452 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


of Assam (or Orissa?); of Ranjha of Jhang; of Gugga Pir of 
Rajputna ; of Baba Ratan of Peshwar ; of Dharmanath, who 
migrated to Western India ; of king Ajaipal and Venapal ; of 
Kapila muni and Balnath ; of the holy Prophet Muhammad ; 
of Madar ; of Luharipa ; of Ismail, a Siddha ; of Ratan Sain, 
the hero of Padumavati by Jayasi.” ^ The tradition of 
Gorakh's holding religious discourse with Kabir and Nanak, 
the most important poets of the Santas and the Sikhs 
respectively, have already been mentioned. All these tradi- 
tions convince one only of the extent of popularity which 
Gorakh has been enjoying in the religious history of a vast 
country like India. 

( mi ) Jalandharl-pa 

So far as the Gopi-gand legend is concerned, Jalandhari-pa 
figures as the most important as he was the Guru of 
Gopl-cand himself. Jalandhar! and Matsyendra were direct 
disciples of Adi-nath and As Matsyendra was destined by 
goddess Durga to be snared by the women of Kadall, 
Jalandharl-pa was destined, as desired by him, to lead the 
life of a sweeper (which was the work of a Hadi) and enjoy 
the company of queen Mayanamatl. In the Nath literature 
of Bengal Jalandharl-pa is better known as Hadi-pa.^ It 
may be noticed in this connection that while Mina or 
Matsyendra and Goraksa generally bore the title of Nath 
with their name, Jalandhar! (or Hadi-pa) as also his disciple 
KanU'pa bore the title of ‘ pa ’ * (and seldom Nath) with their 

^ Dr. Mohan Singh, op. cit, p. 7. 

2 In the Goraha-vijaya we find that this Siddha originated from the hone 
{ka^a) of Mahsdeva and hence the name Hsdi.pS. But the more plausible reason 
for the name seems to be his desire to take up the meanest profession of a Hs^i (a 
very low class people with the general occupation of the sweeper) , if, however, 
that would allow him a chance to enjoy a woman like goddess Durga. 

3 This pS is, however, nothing but the colloquial form of the Sanskrit word 
pnda commonly used as a mark of reverence with the names of the SifidhScaryas. 
The use of pada as a mark of reverence is found in many other religious sects also. 
The form pha as in Hs^i-phs, Ksnu-pha, etc., seems to be nothing but the E>ast 
Bengal dialectal aspirated form of pS . 



APPENDIX (C) 


453 


names. It is perhaps because ol this fact that Jdandhari*pS 
has been traditionally held to be the introducer of the ‘ Pa ’ 
sect among the Kanphat Yogins. He has also been held 
responsible for the practice of splitting the ears. It is said 
that when king Bhartr was initiated by Jalandhar! into the 
Yogi-cult, the former asked for some distinctive mark, — and 
the splitting of ears and wearing long ear-rings were the 
distinctive markt> which he was allowed to have.* The 
Aughari sect of yogins also trace their origin to Jalandhar!. 

According to the Tibetan tradition Jdandhar! is identical 
with the Buddhist Siddha Bala-pada, who was born in Sind 
in a rich Sudra family. He courted Buddhism and was 
practising yoga in the province~^of Udayana. Thence he 
went to Jalandhar of the Punjab and was henceforth known 
as Jalandhar!.^ He travelled from jHandhar to Nepal and 
thence to Avanti, where he made many disciples including' 
Krsna-carya. He then came, to Bengal in the guise of a 
Hadi, performed miracles, and was recognised by queen 
Mayanamati, who made her son king Gop!-cand his 
disciple. Gop!-cand, however, took the Siddha to be a 
cheat and the Siddha was buried alive and was rescued later 
on by his disciple Krsnacarya after twelve years.® This 
legend of Jalandhat! being buried alive by king Gop!-cand 
(at the instance of his queens and minister) and his rescue 
by Krsnacarya is found in all the traditions, — Bengali, Hindi, 
Mrirathi and Tibetan. In the Gorakia-vijaya we find that 
KanU'pa was informed of the sad plight of the Guru by 
Goraksa-nath. In the thirty-sixth song of the Caryapadas 
we find Kanhu-pada (or Krsnacarya-pada) mentioninji; 

1 Briggs, p. 9, 

2 We find xne&tion of some Jalandhar-ga^ in the Dharma-mahgala literature 
(c/. Mi^ik-gahguli, p. 70; Dvija Rfim-candra. MS. C. U. No. 2464, p. 2) which 
seems tolse some native state in Bengal. 

3 Vide, a note on the Antiquity of Chittagong compiled from the Tihetan 
works Pag Sam Jon Zang of Sumpa Khanpo and Kahhad Dun Den of Lamal 
TSranSth by S. C. Das, (J.A.S.B., 1898.) 



454 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Jilandkari-pa as his Guru. iWe are loathe to believe that this 
Jalandharf'pa and Kanhu-pS of the Buddhist fold are identical 
with the Nath Siddhas of the same name. J&landharl 
is said to have been the Guru also of king Bhartrhari of 
Ujjain, whose renunciation of the royal wealth and enjoy- 
ment to take the vow of a yogin is associated with the 
same popular pathos as that of king Gopl-cand. In Western 
India songs on Bhartr are as truly popular as those on 
Gopl-cand. Other traditions, however, make Bhartr the 
disciple of Gorakh. 

{iv) Kanu-pa 

Kgnu-pa ’ was the worthy disciple of Hadi-pa. Like 
Mlna-nath and Jalandhar! Kanu-pa was destined for the city 
of Dahuka ^ in the south, where he would have the oppor- 
tunity of enjoying a woman like Durga in her amorous guise. 
Though there is thus the indication of the fall also of Kanu- 
pa, we do not get any account of his fall in any of the 
stories either relating to Gorakh-nath or Gopi-cand. On the 
other hand we find that Kanu-pa once met Gorakh in his 
way, informed him of the fall of his Guru Mlna-nath in the 
country of Kadall and was in his turn informed by Gorakh 
of the sad plight of his own Guru Hadi-pa, who was buried 
under the floor of the stable by king Gopi-cand. Kanu-pa 
at once hastened to the city of Gopl-cand (in Meherkul 
or the city of Pstika) ® and rescued his Guru by devising 
various means. All the poets are, however, silent as to 
what happened to Kanu-pa after the rescue of the Guru. 
In the Gopi-cander Sannyas by Sukur Mahammad there 

^ Kanti-pS is variously named as KSnuphSi Kanpbs, Kahnal, KSnii, KiluphS, 
Kslaphs, etc.y all of which are! dialectal variants of the Sanskrit name Krsna-pSda. 

® The city is also called Dfihura, Vahadi, Dsriv, etc. * • 

^ For these cities and the controversies over their identification in different 
parts of East Bengal and North Bengal see the introduction to the Gophcandrer Gsn 
(C, U.) by Mr VUvefivar Bha|tSc5rya» 



455 


APPENDIX (c) 

is, however, further indication of Ksnu-pi’s trials in 
the city of Dshuka with the curse from his own Guru 
Jalandhar!, with whom he (Kanu-pa) played false in 
order to save Gopi-cand from the wrath of Jalandhar!. 
It was further decreed by the Guru at the supplications 
of Mayanamat! that Kanu-pa would be rescued from 
his trials in the city of Dahuka by his disciple Bail 
Bhadai. But nothing whatsoever is heard of Kanu-pa 
in the literature. Those stories of the rescue of Jalandhar! 
by his disciple Kanu-pa are also found in the legends of 
Western and Northern India, — but there Kanu-pa seems to 
be more commonly known as Kanar!-nath. 

The question as to whether the Kanu-pa of the Nath 
literature is identical with the Kanhu-pada, or Kjsnacarya- 
pada of the Carya-songs has rightly .attracted the notice of 
scholars.’ We have already notii(::ed the important fact 
that Kanu-pa of the Carya-songs has, at least in one place, 
spoken of Jalandhari-pa as his Guru. But inspite of this 
coincidence, the identity 'of the two is still now a matter of 
speculation. Again, even in the esoteric Buddhist field 
we find that many Tantric works including the important 
commentary on the Heoajra-tanfya (known as the Hevajra- 
panjik,a or Yoga-ratnamala) are ascribed to Krsnacarya, and we 
have nothing to be sure that the authors of all these works are 
the same ; on the other hand there is reason to believe 
that there were more than one person of the same name 
belonging to the Buddhist fold. Rai S. C. Das, Bahadur in 
his edition of the Pag Sam Jon Zang has given short 
accounts of at least three Krsnacaryas ; of these one of the 
KrsnScaryais had his disciple inBhade, who has been included 
in the lists of the eighty-four Siddhas. This Bhade has un- 
doubtedly given rise to Bail Bhadai of the Bengali Nath 

literature. 

• . 

1 See Hsjar B^char^r Pura^ Bdngalay Siddha K&nupir GU O OorfihS by 
Dr. M* Shahidullab, Dacca Sshitya Parisat Qianthavali, No. 10. 



456 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


(i>) Gopl-candra or Govinda-candra 

Almost all the legends about Gopf-candra or GopI-cSnd 
describe him as a powerful king of Bengal. But literary 
rec<»rds of Bengal do not agree on the point of localising the 
kingdom of Gopl-cand. On the whole two conflicting 
claims are found; according to some versions of the songs 
the locality of the whole story of Gopi-cand is North Bengal 
in or near about the district of Rangpur, while in many 
other versions the locality is said to be in the district of 
Tippera. As a matter of fact the topographical references 
found in' some of the versions lead us to North Bengal jmd 
there are traditions in thqse parts of North Bengal of 
Gopl-cand’s being a king of the vicinity ; but the topo- 
graphical references in some other versions will again lead 
one to think that the locality must be somewhere in the 
district of Tippera in Elast Bengal.^ The fact may be that 
the empire of Gopi-cand extended over parts of East Bengal 
as well as of North Bengal and hence are the traditions 
in both the places. The legend of Gopi-cand has already 
been described. We shall deal here very briefly with 
some of the questions pertaining to the probable time of his 
reign. He was perhaps a Gandha-banik (literally a seller 
of perfumes) by caste, and the tradition of his family relation 
with Cand Bene, the important merchant that figures in our 
early and mediaeval literature, will also corroborate this 
tradition. According to the version of Bhavanl-das Gopi- 
cand left no posterity ; while local traditions both in Rangpur 
and Tippera show that he left a son Bhava-candra or Udaya- 
candra by name. According to the Hindi and Mearathi 
tradition Gopi-cand had a sister of the name of Campavati, 
who, after Gopi-cand had taken his vow of Sannyasa, tried 
to dissuade him, — ^but was at last herself convinced of the 

^ For the diacussion on the Topography see Mr. V. BhatficCrya's introductiot^ 
to C. U. edition. See also B.S.PtP.# 1328, No. 2, 



457 


APPENDIX (c) 

superiority of the yogic life.’ European scholars like Bucha* 
nan Hamilton, Glazier and Grierson held that the family of 
Gopl'candra was somehow related to the family of the Pala 
kings of Bengal Some hold that Minik-candra, who was 
the father of Gopi-candra, was the brother of Dharma-plla, 
and after the death of Manik>candra there followed war 
between Dharma-pala and MayanSmatl, mother of GopI>cand, 
and Gopl'Cand inherited the throne after Dharma>pala had 
been defeated and killed ; some again hold that Dharma-pSla 
was the brother-in4aw of Mayanamatl. Grierson, howevw, 
held that Manik-candra was not the brother, but some rival 
of, or native prince under the sway of king Dharma>pala. 
This theory of the relation of Gopl-cand or his father with 
Oharma-psla has been discarded by scholars, as no credible 
evidence on the point is available. Of the few important 
historical documents available on Gopl-cand we may consider 
first of all the rock-inscription of Tirumalai placed by 
Rajendra-cola of the Deccan. According to this inscription 
Rajendra-cola defeated Dharma-pala of Dandabhukti, 
Ranasura of Southern Radha, Govinda-candra of Vanga and 
Mahipala of Northern Rada. We have seen that Gopi- 
candra is also wellknown as Govinda-candra, and Vanga 
would originally mean East Bengal, and there is also the 
tradition, as we have seen, of Gopi-cand being a king 
of East Bengal ; associating these facts together it may 
be presumed that king Gobinda-candta, referred to in the 
Tirumalai inscription, is the Gopl-cand of the Nath literature. 
Rajendra-cola flourished in the first quarter of the eleventh 
century ; if the identity of the Govinda-candra of the inscrip- 
tion and that of Nath literature be accepted then Gopl-cand 
or Govinda-candra may be taken to have flourished in the 
first half of the. eleventh century ; and this fixing of time 

* C/. Yogi-$ampraday&“Vif]^tit Ch. 42, C/. also the Hindi version of the 
GopI>c5nd song, 6.S.P.P., 1328 No. 2, p. 52. 

58--I4lia 



458 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


approximately tallies, we have seen, with the time of 
Mat^en(ira>nath, who might have flourished in the tenth 
century. 

The discovery of three copper-plates in the districts of 
Faridpur and Dacca in East Bengal, containing the genealogy 
of some Candra-dynasty of East Bengal, has thrown a 
flood of light on the question of the identiflcation of Gopi- 
cand. The genealogy of the Candra-dynasty, found in these 
inscriptions, runs as follows : — 

Purna-candra 

■ I 

Suvafna-candra 

. I 

T railokya-candra 

' I 

Sri-candra 

According to Durlabh Mallik the ^ father and grand-father 
of Manik-candra were Suvarna-candra and Dhadi-candra 
respectively. Dr. N. K. Bhattasall has tried to explain 
Dhadi-candra as referring to Purna-candra. According to 
the Marathi and Hindi tradition Tilak-candra or Trailokya- 
candra was the father of Gopi-candra. Again MayanSmati 
herself has sometimes been spoken of as the daughter of 
Tilak-candra. On the whole the names of Suvarna-candra 
and Trailokya-candra are found common in the inscriptions 
and in the Nath literature and this has led scholars to suppose 
that Gopi-candra came out of the Candra dynasty of East 
Bengal. Experts have given their opinion that these copper 
inscriptions belong to the tenth or eleventh century A. C., 
and therefore Gopi-cand might have flourished some time 
near about this time. Another fact to be considered in this 
connection is that Deva-gana, grand-father of Bhadrefvara, 
who again was the father of Surefvara, well-known author 
of the Sahda-pradlpa, was the court physician of king 
Govinda-candra ; Sureivara flpurished probably in the latter 



459 


APPENDIX (c) 

half of the eleventh century,-— his great grand-father Deva- 
gana then flourished perhaps sometime in the second half 
of the tenth century or in the first half of the eleventh 
century. But the difficulty is that there is nothing to be sure 
that the Govinda-candra referred to by Sure^vara in the 
introduction of his work is identical with the Govinda- 
candra or Gopi-cand in question. 

(t)i) Mayanamati 

Before we conclude the chapter we should say a few 
words about Mayanamati, who is important not only as the 
mother ^of king Gopl-cand, but also as a woman well versed 
in yoga and having miraculous power thereby. In some 
of the versions she is said to be the* daughter of some king, 
Tilak-cand by name, and her name in her childhood was 
Si^umatl (and Suvadani according to another version). 
According to the. Tibetan tradition she was the sister of 
Bhartr, the king of Mal'var, mentioned above. A modern 
author Candra-nath yogin speaks of her as the Dharma- 
hahin of king Bhartr of Ujjain. ' in the Hindi version of 
the story of Gopi-cand she is said to be the daughter 
of Gandarva-sena of Dhara-nagar . From her very childhood 
she showed signs of possessing wonderful yogic capacities 
and this attracted the notice of the great yogin Gorakh-nath, 
who initiated her into the Nath cult. Gopi-cand, we have 
seen, once cast serious aspersions against the mother and 
the legend of the curse of goddess Durga towards Hadi-pa 
to be enthralled in the city of Mehera-kula in the company of 
queen Mayanamati, lends some support to such a suspicion ; 
but the suspicion of the son was stoutly denied by the 
mother and the poets have also very cleverly handled the 
situation. Mayanamati is depicted in the Nath literature 
as a Tantric Dakini, which means the woman of mystic 


1 yogi-MTnpraddya-vi^kfiit Ch. 39* 



460 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


wisdom. As the Dakin! is deified in the Tantras as the 
goddess of mystic wisdom, or some sort of a demi-goddess 
having mystic wisdom as well as supernatural powers, so 
MayanSmatl has also been deified in later times as some one 
midway between a witch and a goddess and she has also 
sometimes been identified with Candl or Kali, and she is still 
no\y worshipped in some parts of North Bengal with animal 
sacrifice lay priests belonging to the Raja-vatnla caste. Mr. V. 
Bhattacarya has presented us with one of the interesting 
songs that are recited on the occasion of the worship of 
Mayana-budi. 



APPENDIX (D) 

General Informations about the Dharma Literature 

OF Bengal 

In giving an idea of the literature belonging to the 
Dharma cult we should hrst of all mention the two liturgical 
works available oii the cult, the ^unya-purana ^ ascribed to 
Ramai Pandit, who is traditionally supposed to be the 
founder of the cult in the age of Kali, and the other, the 
Dharma-puja-Vidhana which is also ascribed to Ramai 
Pandit, as well as to Raghu>nand&na. These liturgical 
texts represent popular literature of a composite nature 
in a very loosely versified diction, which embody 
topics on cosmogony, liturgy, legends about Dharma- 
worship, building of temples, rituals, ceremonies and 
indigenous practices, all centering round the godhead of 
Dharma. There is a great deal of controversy over the 
authenticity of these texts and the time of their composition 
and their authorship. As our present study is not primarily 
historical, we do not propose to enter into the details of 
these controversies ; for our purpose it is necessary to state 
briefly the conclusions, which we have arrived at by a 
minute study of the data available on tl)e points at issue. 

^ Edited by Mr. N. N, Vasu for the first time and published from the 
Sshitya Parisat and then by Mr. Charu Chandra Banerjee from the Vasumat! 
Office, The name Sunya-purana was used for the book for the first time by the 
editor Mr. N, N Vasu and the naming seems to be arbitrary » for no such name of 
the book is found in any * manuscript (the original manuscript of Mr. Vasu is not, 
however, available to the public). In one place of the text the book is called 
Agamo-pvtranat and*it is also traditionally called the Hakanda-purSna. MM. H. P. 
^Rstr! named it as Ramai PaddhaU. However, as the book became widely 

known by the name of S^nya-purUna the name was retained in the second edition 
by Mr. Banerjee. 



462 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


As for the Sunya-purana, which is ascribed to Ramai 
Pandit, there are sufficient reasons to believe that the text 
in its published form does not represent the contents of a 
single book composed at any particular point of time by 
any particular author. On the other hand the text seems 
to be a collection of versified accounts of the Dharma cult 
which grew during the thirteenth and the fifteenth centuries 
among' the adherents of this cult. It will be observed that 
the same topics under the same heading have been intro- 
duced thrice or even four times within the text with slightly 
different readings. There is no order in the arrangement, — 
cosmogonical, liturgical, ceremonial and legendary accounts 
have been introduced here and there pell-mell. Linguistic 
differences are also noticeable in different chapters. All 

f 

these go to prove that the text is more of the nature of 
a compilation than the authentic version from a single hand. 
With the pseudo-archaic forms introduced late in the 
composition of the verses the language of the Siinya-pmana 
in general presents no archaic character which might 
justify its claim to have been composed sometime 
during the fourteenth or the fifteenth century. From the 
heaps of traditional accounts that have gathered round the 
figure of Ramai Pandit we are loathe to explain away the 
personality of Ramai as purely fictitious. We may not, and 
we should not, accept all the mythical and semi-mythical 
accounts given in the Sri-dharma-purana ascribed to MayOra- 
bhatta,^ or 'm the Yatra-siddha-rayer Paddhati^; but never- 
theless Ramai seems to have been a historical personage. 

Ramai was held in all Dheurma-mangala literature to 
have been the founder of the Dharma cult. The fact may 
historically be explained in the following manner. A 

^ Edited by Mr. Basanta Kumar Chatter jee and published by the Sahitya 
Parisat. 

^ Portions of jthe work containing the account of RSmfti ore quoted 

in the introduction tq the ^Unya-puraria (Parifat edition) by Mr, N, N. Vasu. 



APPENDIX (d) 


463 


'inass of crude local religious ideas and practices of purely 
indigenous origin got mixed up with some cr3rpto-Buddhi8t 
ideas and practices and with these again were incorporated 
many Hindu ideas and practices in course of time. This 
curiously composite whole, which' could neither be recognised 
as any form of Buddhism, nor any form of Hinduism, was 
perhaps modified and loosely codified into a popular 
religious system by Ramii Pandit and henceforth RamSi 
Pandit has been enjoying the credit of being the founder 
of the cult. Attempts have been made by scholars to 
determine the time of Ramai Pandit, but it appears to us 
that no such convincing data are available as may warrant 
the fixing up of the date historically. One way of forming 
some idea about the time of Rsmai is to trace the history of 
later Buddhism in Bengal, from which evolved this mixed 
religion among the ordinary people, and from a considera- 
tion of the course of evolution of later Buddhism it appears 
that Ramai Pandit might have appeared in or about the 
twelfth century A.D. As we have said, detailed accounts 
of Ramai Pandit and his heirs are given in the Sri-dharma- 
mangala of Mayura-bhatla, edited by Mr. B. K. Chatter jee 
as well as in the Paddhati of Yatrasiddha Raya but for 
various reasons we are not prepared to believe in the histori- 
city of these accounts. The accounts given there are all of 
an extremely legendary nature./ It may cursorily be 

1 Vide B. S. P. P., B. S. 1313, No. 2. 

2 Thus, for instance, it has been said that at the end of the Dvfipara age 
VilvanStha, a Brahmin of the city of Dvfirikfi, with his wife Kamalfi, worshipped 
Vi?nu desirous of a child; long time passed without any issue and then the 
couple went out on pilgrimage and observed austere penances in sacred places with 
the purpose of having a son born to them,— but all was in vain; being thus sadly 
disappointed they were one day about to commit suicide, but were saved by sage 
Markandeya who taught them the right method of worshipping Vis^u who is here 
plainly ‘identified* with Dharma-rSja. They followed llis advice, -propitiated Vif^u 
or Dharma and had a son born to them,— and as the son was born in the Rima 
Tirtha, the son was called RsmSi, It has been said in this connection that the 
child was born in the white PaficamI of the month of Vaifftkha pn Sunday and 



464 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


mentioned Here that in the ritualistic texts as well as in ' 
the Dharma*mangalas we hnd occasional references to 
Markai(ideya Muni in connection with the worship of 
Dharma, and sometimes he is depicted as the instructor 
of Ramai in the matter of Dharma-worship. This seems 
to be nothing but an attempt somehow to connect the 
Dharma cult with the Puranic Hindu legends. Attempts 
have also been made by scholars to connect the legends of 
the Dharma cult with those of the Nath literature and to 
determine the time of Ramai Pandit with the help of the 
personages of the Nith literature. ’ In the SQnya-purana 
we find that king Haricandra* erected a temple of Dharma 
and with his chief queen Madana worshipped Dharma with 
pomp and pageantry avowedly with the purpose of having 
a son born to them. This Haricandra has been identified 
with king Hari&:andra of Sabhlr in the district of Dacca. 
Two daughters of Hariscandra, viz., Aduna and Paduna 
were given in meurriage to the renowned king Gopl-candra or 
Govinda-candra, who flourished in the eleventh century. * 
The Tibetan historian Lama Taranath has also mentioned 
the name of Haricandra, who was. a king in Bengal in the 
eleventh century. But the story of Haricandra {or rather 
Hariscandra), found in the Dharma-mangala literature, 
seems to-be purely mythical, and like the story of the sage 
Markandeya and the fragments of many other Puranic 
stories, this well-kiiown story of Haricandra or Harilcandra 


the Star was Bharani (vaiiakht sita-pancami nak^atra hharani \ rahivar 6uhha yoge 
praaave hrahmant II p. 13). The same account is found in the Paddhati of 
Yatiasiddha-raya (See introduction to the &unya-purana, edited by Mr. N. N. 
Vasu). But it has been pointed out by Dr. Shahidullah that there cannot be any 
Sunday in the month of VaUfikha with white PaficamI and the star Bharani (see 
introductory article of Dr- Shahidullah in the ^Snya*pur3na» edited by Mr. C« C. 
Banerjee, p. 35) and this speaks of the imaginary nature of the whole account. 

1 See an article on RSmSi Pandit by Dr, Binay Kumar Sen, M.A,, Ph.D., 
in the Calcutta RevieWf August, 1924. 

^ ^P ra,i 



465 


APPENDIX (d) 

has been interwoven with the main story of the Dharma- 
mangala literature. This story of Harilcandra was current in 
India as a very popular story from the tirne of the Vedas. 
This story is found in the Aitareya Brdhmana, Kauaital^i 
Brdhmana and in many other places of the Vedic literature. * 
The same story is told in the Mahabharata in a slightly 
different form as the story of Karna’s offering the flesh of 
his son to Lord Visnu, disguised as a Brahmin guest. In 
the Vedic literatiyre the story of Harilcandra begins with 
the question of having a son by propitiating God Varuna ; 
it is therefore, very likely that the same story was told irt 
connection with Ranjavatl’s having a son born to har 'by 
propitiating Lord Dharma. We m/iy point out here that, 
not only king Harilcandra, but even Lord NsrSyara 
has in some versions of the Dharma-mangalas been held 
to have been the first worshipper of Dharma. ^ Moreover, 

^ Vide, A History of Indian Literature by Winternitz. pp. 211-216: also intro- 
duction to the ^ri dharma purana of Mayurabhatla by B. K. Chatter jee, pp. 44-45. 

^ In the Dharm^'niangalas we often find a chronology of the twelve 
worshippers of Dharma According to the chronology given by Mfinik Gfinguli the 
first worshipper was Lord NSrSyana on the shore of the Ksiroda sea; the second 
was the King of the gods (Indra?), the third was king Mahisura, the fourth was 
Kuvadatta of Capfiya ; the fifth Haricandra, who sacrificed his son to Lord Dharma; 
the sixth was Ksii of the Rija-vam^a, the seventh was Rail jivatl, who laid herself 
on spikes in order to have a son ; the eighth was Lftusen ; the ninth was Jayasimha, 
who worshipped Dharma on the bank of the Lake Tara ; the tenth worship was 
in Kafiura and the twelfth worship was in connection with the death of IchSi-ghos 
{&rhdharma-mangala, p. 225). According to Ghana-ram the first worshipper of 
Dharma was MahSraja Bhoja : the second was Dhupadatta, who erected a temple 
of Dharma in Mfir^ik-dvTpa ; the third was Mathura-ghos and the fourth the Brahmin 
Mahimukha ; the fifth was KSlu-ghos who was born from the sweat of Dharma ; the 
sixth was king Hari^candra the seventh was the son of Sadfi poma: the eighth was 
Asfii Can^aia ; the ninth the Brahmin MahfpSla ; the tenth was Sivadatta of the 
BSrui caste (i e., people dealing in betel-leaves) ; the eleventh was Harihara Bfiiti and 
the twelfth was Lfiusen (Sri-dharma-mnAgata of Ghana-rim. p. 272) According 
to Rup-rSm again, the first woiship was offered by the Brahmin Harihara, to whom 
Dharma appeared in the form of a Brabmacirin; the second was made by the aon 
of a cowherd ( gosl konSr) who built a golden house for Dharma in SonSrapura | the 
third wa« made by Isfii Candfila, who offered Dharma a tank of wine and a dam 
of cakes ( mader pukhur dila piihUr jiftg&l ) ; the fourth worship was made by the 
son of a merchant, the fiHh by Puradatta and the si^tth by kingMarKcandra with 

59-U11B 



466 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


h has rightly been pointed out that no stone-image of 
Dharma-thskura or any trace of the Dhatma-wcnrship is found 
in any locality of Dacca, or Elast Bengal as a whole, — 
whareas stone-images of Dharma-thakura and various traces 
of Dharma-woiship are found abundantly in iWest Bengal ; 
under the circumstances it is unwarranted to place king 
Haricandra, the first worshipper of Dhaima, in the village 
Sabhsr of the Dacca district.^ 


his wife Madanfi (and the author confesses in this connection that the story of 
Hari4candra is famous in the Purina, named KsSl-kha^a) ; the seventh 
was hy SadS Poma who offered wine and meat to Pharma; the eighth 
was by Ananta Vssuki, ninth by Kharjiura^nandana (P),~-and the tenth 
by the Bfiiti of Gauda; the eleventh worship was by RafIjSvatT end the twelfth 
and the last by LSusen. [See MS. C. U. 3279, pp. 85 (A)— 85 (B)], The list 
according to the i4n3di-moiigci/e of Ramdas Adak is as follows :~>Dvija Harihara. 
Urvail Muni, SadMiva in the form of Sadi-doma, on the bank of the river Bulluka 
(by whom?), Msndhstfi, Yudhisthira, Hafilcandraj worship in Gauda (by whom?) 
etc., the twelfth being Liusen (see p. 245).^ Such a chronology of the twelve 
worshippers of Dharma in the Kaliyuga are found in many of the Dharma- 
mangalas by other poets with some alterations. It is needless to repeat here that no 
historical importance should be attached to these chronclogies which are purely 
legendary and mythical in natuie. It is also to be Doted that the number of wor- 
shippers of Dharma>|K&kurB in the Kaliyug is twelve only because of the fact that 
twelve is the mystic number of the Dharma cult, and the worship of Dharma is 
called B&rmait. The ceremonies of the worship take place in twelve consecutive 
days beginning from the third Tithi of the light half of the month of Vaiiskha. 
In the Dhaima-puji twelve flowers, twelve items of all ritualistic articles ate 
required ; the male devotees required are twelve and the number of the female 
devotees is also twelve ; even the chapters in the Dharma-mangalas are twelve. 
Mr. B. K, Chatterjee likes to connect this custom of the Dharma cult with the Vedic 
custom of Twelve days* sacrifice (vide Introduction to Srudharma-mcngala of 
Mayura-bhat^, p. 245). In the Dharma-pujS-Vidhana we find that in every age 
there are seven devotees (hhakto) of Dharma. In the Satya age the devotees are,--- 
BrahmS, Uloka, N&rada, Vasumatl, DurgS, Indra and Gangs ; in the Treta age 
Vali, MsndhitS, Slgara» Kirttika, Kslughofa, Venupura, and Bhalta-dharldhara ; 
In the DvSpara age RSvana, Indra-kumSra, ^aiikha, SrI-rSma, Gsndhsrt, Bhagiratha, 
BhSskara and PaksirSja (i.e., Garu^a) ; in the Kali age KapiU, NsrSya^a, ManirSja 
Bhatta> Ghosa, Piirvadatta, Bhismaka, Kauntaka, , Bighnelvara, .AsSya. 

Ca^dslftt VaruM. .Magara, Manoratha Pan^ita, PakfasSrenga, Ssdhupura Datts-and 
Dhanakuvera (p. 8). The number in the Kaliyuga evidently exceeds seven and 
becomes fifteen , 

1 Introduction to the Srl-dharma-mafigah of Mayflra-bhafta by Mr. B. K. 
phatterjee, p. 4% - 



APPENDIX (d) 467 

Ramai Pandit was in later times transformed into a purely 
mythical figure by being associated with the other four ex- 
ponents of the cult, o/z., Setai, Nflai, Kanisai and Goipsai/ 
In the Dharma-mangalas of the later period Ramai Pa^dh 
is found to be the instructor of Queen Ranjavatl, mother of 
Lausen, the hero of the Dharma-mangalas. This Ranjavati 
is said to have been the sister-in-law of the emperor 
of Gauda. In no one of the Dharma-mangalas do we find 
mention of the name of this emperor of Gauda ; but it is 
said that he was* the son of Dharma^pala. " Dharma-pala 
is a famous king of the Pala dynasty of Bengal, who 
ascended the throne m 815 A. D. He had two sons of 
whom Tribhuvana-pala, the elder of the two, died pre- 
maturely during the lifetime of his father ; consequently Deva- 
pala, the younger son, became the emperor of Gauda after 
Dharma-pala. If we are to accept the account given by 
Ghana-ram, Ranjavati was -the sister-in-law of king Deva- 
pala, who flourished in the ninth century A.D., and Ramai 
Pandit being the instructor of Ranjavati flourished at or about 
that time. But in a copper-plate inscription of Devapda, 
discovered in Munghyr it is found that some Rannadevi was 
the wife of Dharma-pala and Rannadevi was the daughter 
of Govinda III. According to Ghana-ram, however, the 
chief queen of Dharma-pala was Ballabha. To us the 


' Vide Supra Ch. xiii. 

^ Many scholars have committed a great mistake by assuming that Rsmii 
Pandit was contemporaneous with king Dharma-pala of Gauda, of whom Rafijfivatl, 
the mother of Lfiu sen was the sister-in-law. (See Vanga-hhasS O Sshiiya by Dr, 
D. C. Sen, D. Litt., chapter on Bauddfia-yugo ; Introduction to the Sunya-purSna 
by Mr. C. C. Banerjee, p. 89), Nowhere in the Dharma-maAgalas do we find 
RafijSvatl described as the sister-in-law of Dharma-pSla ; she was the sister-in-law 
of the son of Dharma-psla. Cf, dharma^pal nSme chila gander fhuktir I proiofige 
pra&ave pu^ya paf> yay dur II pfihivi psUya avarga bhufije rxfpavar I hlrya-mnta 
putra tSr rsjs gSudeivar (i Sr'udharma-mahgala of Ghana-rSm, (BangavSsI edition), 
p. 12. It was this last Gaude^vara, son of Dharma-pala, of whom RafijSvat! is said 
to have been the sister-in-law. The same account is also found in the AnUdi^mafigala 
of Rfim^dSe Adak, see p. 13 (Sshitya-parifat edition) 



468 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


account given by Ghana-ram does not seem to be historically 
correct ; he seems to have given rather a traditional account 
of his hero Lausen, who must have been a tribal chief at the 
time of some Pala king named Dharma-pala. The association 
of Ramai Pandit with the Dharma- worship by RanjSvatt 
and by Lausen in later time seems to be merely traditional. 
Whenever there was the worship of Dharma the help of a 
Pandit (i.e., a priest versed in Dhaima-worship) was 
required, and Ramai being the most famous of the 
Pandits, it is very likely that his name should be associated 
with the Dharma-worship of different times. On all occa- 
sions of Dharma-worship th6 priest or the Pandit, who is 
generally said to be Ramai Pandit himself, gave instruction 
consulting a scritptural text which is called Dharma-purana or 
Ha\anda-pmana or simply the Purana’. Hanuman, who has 
in many occasions given instruction of Dharma-worship, is 
described as well-versed in the* Hakanda-purana (which, we 
have seen, is another name for the- text of $unya-pmana). 
This fact leads to the conclusion that among the poets of the 
later times there was the tradition of some liturgical text con- 
taining all the details of Dharma-worship and the text of the 
Sunya-purana in its modern form may represent some 
confusedly collected portions of the aforesaid text. 

As for the other ritualistic text, viz., the Dharma-pQja- 
Vidhana, we are definitely of opinion that it is a compilation 
of much later times. The followers of the Dharma cult, 
however, speak of the Sanya-purana and the Dharma-piija- 
oidhsna as the fifth Veda embodying the new religion of 

^ See, Srhdharma-rriQngala of Ghana-rSm, p. 40; Ibid,, p. 41, p, 216. 

dharma-purSner mata pUja jaihocita I 

Dharmayana of NarasiipKa Vasu, Vol. 1. 

MS. C. U. No. 3224, p. 68(B). 
pandit pastakjhate bahn vacan } 

Ibid., Vol. II.. MS. C. U. No. 3226, p. 32(A). 

C/. alsop. 18(6). 

^ri-dharma^mafigala of GKana-tfim, p. 8. 



APPENDIX (d) 469 

Dharma, which was first revealed to Rsmai Pandit. Tlte 
vernacular verses in the latter text are very few in 
comparison with the Sanskritic and the pseudo-Sanskritic 
Mantras and other injunctions regarding the worship not 
only of Dharma-thakura, but of almost all the gods and 
goddesses of the popular Hindu pantheon, of esoteric 
Buddhism as well as of purely local deities of indigenous 
origin. Beginning with the worship of Gane^a (as the custom 
in popular Hindu worship is) we find here injunctions and 
Mantras for the jvorship of the Sun, Brahma, Visnu, Siva, 
Durga, LaksmI, Visahari, Bhairava, Vasuli, Sarasvatl, 
Kuvera, Sasthi, Bhagavali, Vasumati, Viialaksi, Batukanatha, 
Ksetrapala, BrahmanI, Mahelvari, Vaisnavi, Barahi, Narasimhi, 
Indrani, Camunda, Garuda, Visvakarma, Nandi, Kamadeva, 
Vanesvara, Pandasura, the ten Dik-palas, the gate-keepers 
(Dvara-pala), and a host of others. In the colophon of the 
vernacular verses we find the ♦ name of Ramai Pandit as the 
author, whereas the text as a whole is ascribed to Raghu- 
nandana. It is very easy to detect that many of the Bengali 
verses of the Dharma-puja-vidhana are nothing but different 
version of the verses found in the Sunya-purana ; and the 
Sanskrit Mantras regarding the meditation and the salutation 
of the Hindu gods and goddesses are nothing but the 
corrupted forms of them found in the Hindu texts on worship ; 
the portions composed by our Raghu-nandana, are the 
peculiarly funny pseudo-Sanskritic portions introduced here 
and there in the text. Whoever the author of these pseudo** 
Sanskritic portions might have been, it is apparent that the 
text as a whole has been ascribed to Raghu-nandana only to 
bestow on it the dignity and importance of being composed 
by Raghu-nandana, the great authority on Smrti. 

Besides these liturgical texts there are the Dharma- 
mangalas wHich represent in many places a type of really 
good literature in the art of plot-construction as well as in 
characterisation. Though Rimsi Pandit appears to have 



470 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


flourished some time before the twelfth century i Dharma- 
maiigala literature did not flourish before the seventeenth and 
the eighteenth centuries. MayQra-bhatta has been unanimously 
credited by other poets of the cult to have been the first poet 
of the Dharma-mangala literature and all poets have saluted 
him (Mayura-bhatta) as the pioneer in the field. But the 
work of Mayura-bhatta has not yet been discovered and the 
Sn-dhdrma-purana of Mayura-bhatta discovered and edited 
by Mr. B. K. Chatter jee (and published by the Sahitya 
Parisat) selhns to us to be spurious for various reasons, and 
this had rightly been the opinion also of many other scholars 
after it was first published.* -Moreover, even in its spurious 
form the text published is incomplete, the Lauseh-story being 
missing. After Mayflr^-bhatta the poetical works of about 
twenty poets have been discovered, many in the complete 
form and some in parts. As we have already pointed 
out, almost all of these pbets flourished during the 
period of a century from the last half of the seventeenth 
century to the last half of the eighteenth century.^ 

» Vide B. S. P. P., B. S. 1338, No. 2. 

The reasons, why this text seems to us to be purely spurious may briefly be 
noted below. In the first place the manuscript of the text, as the editor himself 
admits, is almost brand new (written in 1310 B. S., i.e., 36 years old), and secondly 
the language is hopelessly modern. Thirdly, MayOra-bhatta being the pioneer in the 
field, the later poets should have followed him in their works ; but that has not been 
the case. Again, the later poets do not attach so much importance to the stone-image 
of Dharma (i.e., Dharma-llli) as the neo- Mayura-bhatta does. Moreover, we find 
here innumerable legends of purely Purinic character very cleverly interwoven in the 
text to explain all the peculiar customs and factors found in connection with Dharma- 
worship. Again it is very curious to note that though Mayura-bhatta is the earliest poet 
of the Dharma-mangala literature, flourishing in or about the fourteenth century A. D., 
the Dharma-thskura depicted in this work bears not even the faintest trace of any 
Buddhistic character whatsoever and has flatly identified himself with Lord Visiju I 

2 Dr. D, C. Sen in his Typical Selections from Bengali Literature, Part I, says 
that the manuscript of the Dharma-mangala of GovindarSm BandyopadhySy is 
dated 1071 B. S. (i.e., 1663 A.D.), and from this he assumes that GovindarSm 
flourished in the fifteenth century. But Mr. B. K. Chatterjee holds that the date 
of the MS. is not of B.S., but of the Malla Era, ( 1071 Malla Era,— 1766 A.D.) and 
thinks that the poet flourished in the first half of the eighteenth centulT*. ( Vide 
Introduction to the Sr\-dharma*mangala of MayDra-bhatta, p. 6) , 



APPENDIX (d) 4ZI 

Of these poets, however, RQpa-r&m, Khels-rim, Miaik 
GaAgub, Sita-ratn, Ram-das Adak, Ghana-ram CakravartI, 
Sahadev CakravartI, Narasiinha Vasu, Rsm Candra 
Bandyopadhyay seem to be more important. Eixcepting 
the work of Sahadev CakravartI, in whom we find 
a mixture of the legends of the Dharma litexature and 
of the Nath literature, all the other works are almost the 
same so far as the theme is concerned. The main theme 
of all the Dharma-mangalas is the story of Lausen, and there 
is a striking unanimity among the poets not only in the 
description of the main story, but also in the minute descrip- 
tion of the incidents. 

The Dharma-mangala literature as a whole, like all other 
Mangala literatures of Bengal, represents, as we have already 
explained in the introduction,* the "continuation of the spirit 
of the Puranic literature in the vernacular. It is some sort 
of a propaganda literature to glorify the god or the goddess 
in question with reference to innumerable incidents on which 
occasions he or she had the opportunity of displaying his 
or her sovereign power. The stories are introduced to 
popularise the worship of the deity pointing out the celestial 
benefit which the previous worshippers did obtain. The 
Dharma-mangalas relate the eventful life-sketch of the hero 
Lausen, who owed his birth to the grace of Dharma and in 
all the adventures throughout his eventful life was saved 
from all sorts of calamities through the gracious intervention 
of Lord Dharma. We have already pointed out that in the 
delineation of the plot there is a general agreement among 
all the poets ; let us therefore take the version of Ghana-rSm 
CakravartI to be the representative version of the story and 
give a summary of the whole story in the following pages. 

After creating the universe Lord Dharma was in a fix as 
to how to. introduce his worship in the world. HanOmSn, 


1 Supra, 



472 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


the sole agent and the main advisor of the Lord, advised 
him tp make device to have Ambuvatl, a dancer-girl in the 
court of Indra, brought down on earth through some curse. 
The advice was promptly carried out and Ambuvatl took her 
human birth with Benu-ray and Manthata as her parents and 
wicked Mahamad Patra as her brother, she herself was 
named Rafijavatl. 

The son of Dharma-pala (f.e., Deva pSla) was at that 
time the emperor of Gauda, and he married the elder 
daughter of Benu-ray. Mahamad Patra (called by Ghana- 
ram generally as Patra or Mahapatra), who was the brother- 
in-law of the emperor, eventually became the minister. Once 
the emperor went a-hunting and chanced to meet Soma-ghos 
who had been arrested, on the order of the minister for 
non-payment of tax. The emperor took pity on him, 
ordered his release and placed him as a superintendent over 
Karna-sen, the chief of the fort of Trisasti, situated on the 
bank of the river Ajaya. But ere long Ichai-ghos became 
very powerful, drove Karna-sen away, established a new 
fort of the name of Dhekur and defied the supremacy even 
of the emperor himself. The emperor went to subdue the 
rebellion with nine lacs of soldiers, but was sadly defeated. 
The six sons of Karna-sen were killed in the battle and his 
wife was shocked to death. The emperor then took pity on 
Karna-sen and gave his sister-in-law, Rffijavatl, in marriage 
to him. This, however, was strongly resented by Mahapatra 
for various reasons. Unfortunately flanja proved barren 
and all rituals, ceremonies and worshij) of gods and goddesses 
came to be of no avail. Once, by cjoknce, she came across 
a religious procession on the occasiod^w Dharma’s Gajana, ^ 
and from among the processionists Ramai Pandit explained 
to Rafija and her husband the glory of Dharma nnd assured 

^ Gsjana (^sskt. gafiana=^ roaring) means the ceremonies that take pUee 
in honour of Dharma^thlkura. ft is perhaps the tumultuous nature of the 
ceremonies which are ipsponsible for the name Csjana. ' 



APPENDIX (d) 473 

them that they also might have a son bmn to them by 
worshipping Ohaurma. With the instructions from Rfimii 
Ranjavati laid hsrself on pikes before Dharma ; and the lord 
was propitiated and granted her a son, whose name was 
Llusen. When Mahimad Patra came to know of the birth 
of a son to RaSja by fCarna-sen he engaged a rogue, 
Indamete by name, to steal away the child, but the child 
was saved through the grace of Dharma. Dharma vouch> 
safed Lausen a brother, KarpQra by name, as a playmate to 
him. When the two brothers grew in age Dharma sent 
HanQman from Vaikuntha to teach them duel-fighting and 
archery. When his education was finished Lsusen,> 
accompanied by his brother, started for Gauda to meet the 
emperor. They had thrilling encounters on the way,— 
Liusen had to kill the pet tiger .of Parvatl, kill another 
crocodile, pass through the land of wicked women,-— and 
Liusen always came out victorious through the grace of 
Dharma, which was bestowed mainly through the agency 
of Hanumin. After Lailsen reached Gauda his maternal 
uncle Mahamad Patra left no stone unturned to harass and 
insult Liusen ; bot Liusen got the upper hand through the 
grace of Dharma and returned home safe. Mahamad Pitra 
then made another device against Liusen ; he instructed the 
emperor to send Liusen to KimarOpa with some sturdy 
followers. This time also Lausen had to encounter many 
difficulties ; but the grace of Dharma through the agency 
of HanOmin made him victorious throughout. He captured 
Kimarflpa very easily and married Kali^ga, the princess. 
When he was returning home in glory, he married on his 
way Amali, the daughter of Gajapati of Mangala-kota, and 
also Vimali, daughter of the kmg of Burdwan. 

After returning home Liusen was passing his happy time 
in the company of his wives ; but Dharma realised that if 
Lausen were thus allowed to pass his time in peace the 
worship of Dharma would not be introduced in the world. 

60- HUB 



474 


OBSCURfe RELIGIOUS CULTS 


He then held conference with HanQm&n and made another 
device. Through his magical power the emperor of Gau^a 
became mad after Ksnads, the young beautiful daughter 
of Haripala, king of Simuls. The emperor made proposal 
of marriage and it was sternly refused by KsnadS. The 
emperor got excited and attacked Simula with nine 
lacs of soldiers. Kanadfi then made a promise that, 
whoever would be able to break a particular iron rod, 
would be selected as her husband. The emperor failed 
ludicrously and the man who succeeded was Lsusen. 
After several other developments in the story, in which 
gods and goddesses played important parts, Kanada was 
married by Lfiusen. 

Mahamad Pitra was not the man to be cowed down, 
Lausen must be crushed by hook or by crook. A fresh 
intrigue came to his mind and he proposed to the emperor 
that Lausen should be sent to Dhekur to collect tax from 
Ichai'ghos. In spite of all remonstrance from his parents, 
who could not forget the death of their six sons at the hands 
of Ichai'ghos, Lausen started for Dhekur and after a great 
hght killed Ichai-ghos, of course, through the grace and 
device of Dharma. Mahamad Patra was then convinced that 
Lausen had the blessings of Dharma upon him, — and that 
to get the victory over Lausen he should propitiate Dharma 
and obtain a boon from Him. Accordingly he advised the 
emperor of Gauda to worship Dharma, and his advice wsks 
followed. Dharma came to know of the evil intention of 
Msdi&mad Patra and through the agency of HanOman sent 
storm and rain below. The emperor got frightened and on 
the advice of the minister sent for Lausen, who alone could 
save them from the direful wrath of the Lord. Lsusen 
came instantly, but the Pstra made an absurd proposal. The 
Patra said that the divinely decreed evil of the^whole country 
could be remedied only if Lausen could make the sun rise in 
the west at the dead of night on the new moon. Lausen 



475 


APPENDIX (d) 

agreed and did make the sun rise in the west by his 
austere penances and thus the almighty power and the 
divine glory of Lord Dharma was finally established. 
Mahamad Pstra was, however, punished with leprosy for 
his wickedness and afterwards relieved at the request of 
Lausen; and Lausen had heaven as his reward. Thus 
was the worship of Dhaima introduced and popularised by 
Lausen all over the world. 

The struggle of Lausen is virtually the struggle of 
Dharma himself to be introduced to the people of the world 
and to be recognised and worshipped by them as the Lord 
Supreme. It appears from the incidents of the Dharma- 
mangalas that Dhrirma-thakura had to establish his supremacy 
against the Supremacy of the feikti (t.e., the female deity) 
in the form of Durga or Vasuli orlCall. The opponents of 
Lausen were all worshippers of Sakti and were protected by 
her. Goddess Durga even stooped so low as to assume the 
form of a charming damsel to allure Lausen and to convert 
him to the Sakti cult ; but all her attempts were frustrated 
by the strength of cheuracter of Lausen and also by his sincere 
devotion towards Lord Dheurma. The severest fight, virtually 
between Dharma and Sakti, in the person of Lausen 
and Ichai-ghos respectively, took place in the battle of 
Dhekur. Ichai was protected by the goddess herself and 
Lausen with his backing in Lord Dharma could do no harm 
to him. As many times as Lausen cut the head of 
Ich&i'gho;, the head of Ichai, separated from the body, 
muttered the name of Durgi and the seprurated head was 
joined with the body by the grace of the goddess. 
Lord Dharma found himself in a fix and HanOman was 
helpless there. Immediately, however, an assembly of the 
gods was invited and advice from them solicited. It was 
then finally decided that the sage Narada must be sent forth 
to devise some means whereby the attention of the goddess 
might be diverted from Ichai. Narada, the reputed quarrel- 



476 


OBSCIAE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


monger, went to goddess Durgaand informed her that, taking 
advantage of her long absence from Kaiksa (she being long 
in Dhekur to protect her devotee Ichai-ghos), old Siva had left 
home and was visiting the quarters of the Kotch (a hilly tribe) 
and having dalliances with Kotch-women; Karttika and 
Gane^ (the two sons of Durga) had left home and went 
away, Jaya and Vijaya (the daughters) were starving to 
death,' the condition of the whole family was topsy-turvy. 
Hearing these words from Narada Durga at once left Dhekur 
for Kaiksa and found all the informations, supplied by 
Narada, to be totally false ; but taking advantage of her ab- 
sence from Dhekur Dharma,. through the agency of Hanuman, 
instructed Lausen to attack and kill Ichai-ghos which Lausen 
easily succeeded in executing. By the time Durga hurried 
up to Dhekur, Hanuman carried the head of Ichai to the 
neth^land and she found, it was too late to give her devotee 
any help. Thus the honour pf Lord Dharma was somehow 
saved through the cunning device of Narada, against whom, 
we are not told, what step was taken by the enraged 
goddess. 



APPENDIX (L) 

Enigmatic Language of the Old and Mediaeval Poets 

We have seen before that many of the religious move- 
ments, with which we have dealt, were esoteric in nature 
and it was quite in the fitness of things that the language 
in which the religious contents were given poetic expression 
was often extremely enigmatic. This enigmatic language 
of the old and mediaeval poetry is popularly styled as 
Sandhya-hhasa, which, according to its conventional spelling, 
literally means ‘the evening language', — and the word 
‘evening’ here may be explained as pointing to the mystical 
nature of the language. In the Hindu as well as Buddhist 
Tantras, and in the Buddhist Dohas and songs, we find 
much use of this SandKya-bhasa and MM. H. P. Sastrl has 
explained it as the ‘twilight language’, t. e., half expressed 
and half-concealed {alo-amdhari). But MM. Vidhu^ekhara 
Sistrlin an enlightening article in the Indian Historical 
Quarterly ^ has demonstrated with sufficient evidences from 
authoritative texts that the language is not Sandhya-bha^, 
but is Sandha-bhasa (sam f ^/ dha) or the ‘intentional 
language’, i.e., the language literally and apparently 
m eaTiing one thing, but aiming at a deeper meaning hidden 
behind. Reference to this word Sandha-bhofS is found in 
many texts of Pali Buddhism as well as in Sanskrit Mahayina 
texts. Warning has often been given not to interpret the 
sayings of Buddha literally, but one should sink deep into 
them to catch at the right meaning aimed at by the Lord, 
and vfe find that the Buddhist preachers, puticularly of the 
esoteric schools, would often use this intentional language to 


1 1928, Vol. IV, No. 2 



478 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

which the faithful adepts only had access. The same device 
was adopted by all the esoteric schools within the province of 
Hinduism/ 

With regard to the spelling of the word Sandhs-hhs^ 
or Sandhs-Vacana as SandhyS-bhasS or SandhyS-vacana 
MM. V. Sastrl is of opinion that it is a mistake of ignorant 
scribes. But it may be noticed in this connection that the 
word hjis consistently been spelt as SandhyS and not as 
Sandhs in all the manuscripts of the Buddhist Tantras. 
May it therefore be postulated that it is not a mistake pure 
and simple of the scribes ; but through tbe enigmatic and 
technical nature of the language and because of the mystical 
nature of its contents, it acquired in time a secondary 
meaning of ‘twilight language’ from its original meaning of 
‘intentional language’ and hence it is that it is spelt as 
Sandhya by the scribes ? 

The tradition of the uSe of cjnigmas to conceal the real 
meaning from the ordinary people is as old as the Vedas. 
We often meet with riddles in the Rg-Veda and the AtharVa- 
Veda, ^ which, when interpreted literally yield a meaning, 
which, as it is evident from the context, is not the real mean- 
ing. There are again statements in the ritualistic works 
known as the Brahmanas, which give us no meaning literally ; 
but the Purva-mimatnsakas discover important truth behind 
them with the help of metaphorical interpretation. But the 
use of technical Sandha-bhasa became popular with the rise 
and development of the various Tantric literature. The 
SadhanS of the Tantras, be it Hindu or Buddhist, was 
generally a secret Sadhana, and the best way to main tai n 
the secrecy of the S&dhanfi was to express the ideas and 

^ 1( may be incidentally noted here that Jesus Christ did also t>reach in a 
parabolic language (which ctlso is nothing but a form of Sandhu hha^) to .conceal 
the truth from the unbeliever8|ike the scribes and the pharisees. 

2 SeeRg-ueda.d. 164), \i. 152.3), aO.55.5). (8.90.14), etc 
Alharva-oeda, (7.1), (11.6.10) 





Aivendix (e) 479 

exporiences of the Sidhakas with the help of technical and 
enigmatic language. The Tantras have, therefore, a language 
of their own which is accessible only to the initiated. 

The nature of the Sandhs-hhSsa of the old Bengali 
Buddhist songs is not however exactly the same as that of 
the SandhS'bhSsQ of the Tsntric literature. While the 
Tantras are full of technicalities, the songs are full of 
enigmas in addition to the technicalities. ’ Sandhs-hhs^ 
of the Tantras generally means the infusion into some 
words of some technical meaning which is known only to 
the adept and to.none else. It was the greatest sin on the 
part of a Tsntric to let the uninitiate into the secret of their 
cult, and this extreme technicality of the language, we have 
already pointed out, was taken as a device to prevent the 
public from making out anything of the secret of their cult. 
In the HeOajra-tantra there is a chapter on the SandhS-hhUfa 
where the Lord Vajra-sattva explains to Vajra-garbha the 
technical meaning of many such terms. In the eighteenth 
chapter of the Sri-guhya-samSja also many such technical 
terms have been explained. ^ 

The CaryS-songs of the Buddhist SiddhScSryas abound 
in technical terms; but more interesting are the enigmas. 
Couplets like — 

mSria sasu nananda ghare sab I 
mSa tndria kshna bhaia \avali II ” 
ate frequently to be met with in the Carya-songs. The 
peculiarity of such imageries is that, when interpreted literally, 
they yield the most absurd meaning,— but when one obtains 
the key to them and learns to enter in, one gets at the true 

^ But enigmas are also sometimes found in the TSntric and Yogic texts. 
Cj. go^mdrjtsatji bhakiay^n nityam efc., Supra, p. 279. 

* See Heuajra-tanfra, MS pp. 44(A)-44(B) and ^r!-guhga-iama;a, edited by 
. B, BhattSeSrya (G,0. S.). See also the note on SandhU-hhs^ and SandhS-vacana 
Dr. P. C. Bagchi in the Studies in the Tantrae, pp 27*33. 

3 For the literal meaning and the esoteric significance of this couplet see 
Supra Ch. Ill, 



^ OBSOJRE REijiUbUS CULTS 

meuung bidden behind. Thu* there is a poem of KiddkutI' 
pSda which runs as follows: — “When the two (teats) are 
milked (or when &e tortoise is milked), it cannot be preserved 
m the pot ; the tamarind of the tree is eaten by the aocodile. 
The front is near the house, harken lady of the nature of 
ccmsciousness {hi&ti) ; the ear-ring (or the ornament of the ear) 
is stolen away in the middle of the night. The father-in-law 
falls asleep, the daughter-in-law awakes,— the thief has stolen 
away the ear-ring, where can it be searched ? Even in the 
day-time the daughter-in-law shrieks in fear of the crow, — 
where does she go at night > Such a ^rya is sung by 
Kukkurl-pSda, and it has entered into the heart of only 
one among aores’*.* 

Here the two refers to the two nerves on the right and'^e 
left ; the substance milked is the samVftti-hodhidtta 
and the pot {pita = pitha) is the plexus named Manipura- 
cakra in the navel region. The tree (rukha=vjksa) refers to 
the body, and the tamarind fruit is the semen in the form of 
Bodhicitta, and the crocodile (kumbhira) is the yogic process 
of suspending the vital wind within {kumhhal^a). Biitl and 
Bahu^ refer to Avadhutiko, and the house is the centre 
of purified bliss ; the ear-ornament (kSneta) is the principle 
of defilement, and the thief is sahajSnanda, and the mid-night 
is the yoga'Stage just before the state of complete dssorption 
in supreme bliss. The father-in-law (susura) is the vital 
wind ; day represents the active state (pravrtti) of the mind, 
night the state of rest {niortti) and Ksmaru may refor to 
Ksma-rQpa. or the Mahisukha-cakra, Kima-rOpa being the 
greatest centre of the T&ntrikas. 

The most remarkable fact is that this use of the enigmatic 
style has its unbroken histidl^ in the modern Indian litera- 
tures from the time of the CaryS-padas down to the present 
time. Esoteric poets of all periods have used such extremely 


* Song No. 2. 



481 


APPENDIX |e) 

epigrammatic and enigmatic style in giving expression to 
tkeir religious doctrines. . There is a song of Dhendha^ 
pSda, — 

ialata mora ghara nshi padiVeii I 
hadita bhata nahi niti QVeSi II ^ 
benga samsara badhila jaa I ' 
duhila dudhu fcenie samda II 
tbalada biaala gavia bamjhe I 
pita duhiai e tind sdmjhe II 
jo so budht so dhani budht 1 
jo so cora soi sadhi II 

€ 

niti niti sidld siha sama jujhaa I 
dhendhana pdera gtta birale bujhaa II 

Literally the song means : — ‘ ‘On the height is situated my 
house, no neighbours have 1 ; there is no rice in the pot, but 
they (guests) come every day. The frog-like world goes on 
increasing (or as Dr. Shahidullah and Dr. Bagchi reconstruct 
the line, — The serpent is being chased by the frog); does the 
milked milk enter into the teats again } The ox has given 
birth but iKirren is the cow ; it is milked in the pot thrice a 
day. He who is wise is wise, — he who is the thief is 
honest. The fox fights with the lion every day, — understand 
this song of D.iendhana-pa in secret..”'* With this poem 
we mjyr compare a poem of Kablr, which is not only 
substantially the same, but it agrees with the above poem 
line by line. 

kaisairn nagari karawp kutaVdri I 
«!* cancala purisa bicasana nart II 
bail biyd gdi bhaioQrnjh I 
bachrd duhai ttnyum sdmjh II 
Tna\ado dhari masi chachi hdri I 
mas pasdrl cilha rakhavdri 0 

1 hefigaaa aSpa haihila ;Sa — Bagchi. 

^ the inner signihcahee see supra Ch, II. 



482 OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 

. 

mufS khevat nav bilaiya I 
mirndhak soVai sapa paharaiyi II 
nita uthi syal syamghasum jhujhai I 
kahai kabtr ]^oi birala bajhai 11 ^ 

4i. 

“How can I‘ 'guard the city where fickle is the man and 
clever is the woman 7 The bull has given birth and barren 
is thfe cow ; the calf is milked thrice a day. The spider has 
caught hold of the dy which struggles and is defeat^ ; the 
kite has been kept guard for meat. The mouse is the bpat- 
pan, the cat is the boat, and the frog is sleeping under the 
protection of the serpeitf. . Everyday does the fox fight with 
the lion ; says Kabir, some understand it in secret.” 

Enigmatic poems of this nature are found abundantly 
in the works of Kabir and these are generally known as the 
Ultawamsi. These enigmas are generally employed by 
Kabir to emphasise the absurdity that Maya or the principle 
of illusion should so completely overpower the JtVa, who has 
his support in Brahman and who lives in Brahman in his 
ultimate nature ; it is a pity that JiVa should become com- 
pletely oblivious of his true nature and of his divine strength 
and act as a toy in the hands of Maya. We are giving 
below a few more specimens of the enigmatic poems of 
Kabir. In one poem Kabir says, 

ek acmbbau sunahu turn bhai I 
dekhata simha caravata gai II 
jal ki machuli tarvar vyai I 
dekhata k^trq lai gai bilai II 
talere vaisa upar sula I 
tiskoi ped lage ^k^la phula II 
gfiorai cari bhais caravan jai | 
b&har bail goni ghar at II 
kahata kobir yo is pada bujhai I 
rim ramata tisu sav ki^hu sujhai It ^ 


' Kahtr-‘ 0 ranthuvali, p. 113 . 



APPENDIX (e) 483 

‘ ‘ Hear of some thing "strange, O my l^pther, — I have 
seen a lion tending a cow. The hsh of water have given 
birth to the young ones upon the tree and while the dog 
wets looking at, the cat took them away. There is something 
untoward beneath the tree alid a trident on the top of it, and 
such a tree also bears fruits and flowers. Scmiebody rode on 
the horse eind went to tend the buffalo ; outside remained the 
bullock and the sack returned home. Says Kabir, he who 
understands this poem, always dwells in Rama and every- 
thing becomes clear to him.”’ 

Again, — “Is there any wise Guru who can understand 
the Veda reversed ? In water fire is burning and the blind 
is made to see. One frog makes a meal of five serpents 
and the cow has cut the lion into pieces and devoured it. 
The kid has devoured the tiger and the deer has eaten up 
the leopard ; the crow has snared the fowler, the quail has 
triumphed over the hawk. The mouse has eaten up the 
cat, the jackal has eaten up the dog ; this is the primal 
teaching, says wise Kabir. ^ 

Again it is Sciid in another song, — 

O knower of Brahma, swing on. 

Heavily, heavily the rain was pouring out, but never a 

drop of water fell. 

To the foot of an ant an elephant was tied : the goat 

devoured the wolf. 

From the midst of the sea came a waterfowl, demanding 

a spacious house. 

The frog and the snake dwell togethet, and the cat is 

wedded to the dog. 

Ever the lion joins battle with the jackal : here is a 

wonder that cannot be told. 

. • 

* Cf. al«o KahifgranthaVali, PadaOSti, No. 1 1, pp, 91-92. 

^ hat hot jagai gtira gyamnlrp ulafi beda bujhai I etc, 

Ibid.t Padavabt 160, p. I4l. 



484 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Doubt as a deer besets the forest of the body : the arrow 

aims at the archer. 

The ocean is burning and consumes the forest : the fish is 

angling for its prey, etc.^ 

We need not multiply the examples, — for poems of this 
nature are numerous in Kablr. This enigmatic style became 
very popular also among the later Hindi poets. Thus in 
Sundsr-das we find as many as three different sections devoted 
entirely to the treatment of these enigmas.^ It is said 
there, — “ The blind see the three worlds and the deaf hear 
various sounds ; the man without nose smells the lotus and the 
dumb supplies much news. The broken-handed man lifts 
the mountain, the lame dances and makes merry; whoever 
will be able to make out the meaning of these lines, will be 
able to enjoy (bliss). Th6 ant has swallowed the elephant, 
the fox has eaten the lion ; fish finds much comfort in fire — 
but becomes much perturbed, in water. The lame man 
climbs upon the mountain, death is afraid at the sight of the 
dead ; these reverse pranks, O Sundar, are known to those 
who have realisation. The sea merges itself in the bubble; the 
mountain merges itself in the mustard seed ; it has become 
a fun in the three worlds that the sun has made every thing 
dark. It is only a fool, O Sundar, who will be able to bring 
out the significance of it — this is a puzzle of words. Fish 
has caught hold of the crane and made a meal of it, — and 
the mouse has eaten the serpent ; the parrot has captured and 
devoured the cat and all affliction is pacified thereby. The 
daughter has eaten her mother, the son has eaten the father. 
Says Sundar, hear O saint, none of them commits sin 
thereby, etc.® 

1 The Bijak of Kahir by Ahmad Shah, p. 119. 

2 See Sundar-granfhsofl/i (."^ajasthan Research Society edition) Vol, I. ,<4tha 
PurahX Bhaia Barahai, pp. 377 ei aeq. Aiha Biparyaya ^abda Ko AAg, SavaiyS, 
Vol. II, pp. (504 et aeq) ; Sfi??, Atha Biparyaya Kau Ang, Vol. II. pp. 787 et aeq, 

3 Ibid,, Vol. II. pp. ,508-516. For an attempt at interpreting these lines see the 
commentary given in the said edition of the work. 



485 


APPENDIX (e) 

Enigmas are foimd abundantly in the Nath literature 
all over India. Gorakh-nath, in making his Guru Mina-nath 
return to his senses, used this device of enigma and we came 
across many such enigmas in our previous discussion on the 
Nath cult. These enigmas of Gorakh ate still now popular 
as Gorakh dharndharn or the puzzles of Gorakh. It is 
said in the Goraksa-cijaya — “ There is no water in the pond, 
yet why is it that the banks are over-flooded ? There is no 
egg in the nest, how is it then that the young ones of the 
birds are flying above ? There is no man in the city, but 
every house ha% its roof. The blind man is selling and the 
deaf man buys.” ‘ In the song of Gopl-candra we And, 

‘ ‘ Mind is the name of the tree, Rasika (he who is endowed 
with good taste) is the name of the fruit ; the fruit of the tree 
remains on the tree, but the stalls falls down. If cut down, 
the tree grows on, if no't '^lit down it dies out ; one fruit of 
the two trees is conceived by the mother.”^ In the same 
text we find old Siva worshipping a boat with a ulta mantra 
or an enigmatic verse of a funny nature.” Peculiar songs of 
this nature, often rousing the sense of the ludicrous, in the 
form of an address of Gorakh-nath to his Guru Mina-nath, 

1 Gorak^a-vijaya, pp, {\37-\S6) . 

Cf, also; — Sravan maaate nadl maiddhete ujde 1 
aui hdtera naukja hdht chsli berde II 

udur pdile iua bildi dhari khde I 
gagana mandale bdsa korila auyae 11 etc. 

Ibid., p. 144. 

2 Gopl-candrer Gan, Vol. I, p. 78. 

3 madhu gafigd-jal dila naukae chifiya I 
nauks P^h buds iiv u!(5 mantra koiya fi 
Sgun kyoman ndlc brammd kyoman no/e I 
hrammd hefa maila jare pdni maila tiydae II 
dheki anldm dhdn bdniie aeo pdldila aae I 
kuld dniam dhdn jhddite pd4iyd hjddy ttlae II 
eluyd’-bd4i hetuyd-hs4i kSaiyd’bddi di ghafS I 
iiydlak dekhi janaoydr pdldy hdaiyd maila pafhd II 
dge uvajila chofa hhai pdche uvajila ddda I 

kemo bemo ^ariyo mao uvajila pdcheta uvaja bdbd 11 etc. 

Ibid., Vol. I. p. 124. 



486 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


are still prevalent in the rural areas of Bengal. The writer 
himself has heard many such stray songs in his native 
district of Bakergunj . The writer cannot check the tempta- 
tion of presenting such a song collected by Maulavi Abdul 
Karim in the introduction to the Goraksa-Vijaya edited by 
him. 

“O my preceptor, all the laws do 1 find topsy-turvy ; rice 
is dried in the bottom of the pond and is served beneath the 
granary. O my preceptor, on the mango-tree lie the young 
ones of the Saula fish and they catch hold of the crane and 
devour it Up, and at the sight of it small ants are marching 
forward with a machine of bamboo (to catch fish). O my 
preceptor, with five annas have I brought the boat, nine pice 
is the price of the nail ; in the arum forest did 1 keep it, — 
but a frog has swallowed up'^ the seat of the helmsman. O 
my preceptor, one thing have 1 heard in the ghat of Tripini 
— a dead man is cooking food in the womb of a living 
man. O my preceptor, in the forest of Erali live the young 
ones of the Karaii Eind the tigress went for them ; and a flat 
frog is waiting to prey upon the tigress.”' 

It is indeed very difficult to attempt a thorough inter- 
pretation of these lines ; but the most important point is the 
assemblage of all sorts of absurd epigrams, which are all 
put together to emphasise the absurdity that even a great 
self-controlled yogin like Mina-nath should fall a prey in the 
hands of the women of Kadali. Again there are lines in 
these enigmas, which, though shrouded in obscurity, point 
to a deeper significance behind. Thus there is the line in 
the above poem that a dead man is cooking food in the 
womb of a living man in the ghat of Tripini, Tripini here 
stands for Tri-heni or the place where the three important 
rivers Ganga, Yamuna and Sarasvati, and in Tantricism the 
three nerves. Viz., l^a, Pingala and Su?umna, meet together. 


^ Guru mina-nSth re ulfa ulta dhardt clc. 



487 


APPENDIX (e) 

[When a yogin can control his nerves and can make the two 
side-nerves Ida and Pihgala function conjointly with the 
middle nerve, he becomes dead so far as the world of 
physical existence is concerned and that dead man within 
the physically living man matures from within all the 
virtues of the spiritual life. 

Almost a similar song is found in the Dharma-mangala 
of Sahadev CakravartI and here also the song is addressed 
by Gorakh-nSth to his Guru Mina-nath. We are giving 
here rather a fjee translation of the verse : — 

P my Guru, 1 beg to submit to your lotus-feet this* 
(strange) fact, the sea has overflown with the milk of 
worms and the mountains are floating away. O my Guru, 
try to understand it on your own^ merit, — dry was the tree, 
but it has shot forth foliages and stone has been pierced 
through by the worm. See here, the tigress is coming,-— 
through the lids of his eyes man covers the tigress with 
(different) skin and then tames her in every house. Quarrel 
has broken out between the Sila and the Noda, ’ and the 
mustard seed is intervening as the mediator, — the pumpkin 
* gourd on the thatched roof is rolling down, and the herb 
Pwni dies of laughing. An absurd tale it is, — the completely 
barren one has given birth, and the child wants milk of the 
dove. With much care have 1 tied the boat and the aab 
held the rope ; by the kick of the mosquito the mountain is 
broken and the ant goes on laughing. First the boat flieis 
above, and then it burns and dust is raised every now and 
then ; there is not a drop of water to wet the mustard seed, 
but the peaks of the temples are drowned. 1 have yoked the 
tiger and the bullock together and the monkey has become 
the plough-man ; the crocodile of water has removed the 
weeds an(| the mouse has sown paddy-seed. The young ones 

1 Silla if the slab of atone on which spice is rubbed and prepared and No^S 
is the rod'like stone with which spice is rubbed and prepared 



488 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


of the $aula fish are on the palm-tree, and they are catching 
hold of the hawks and devouring them ; Kai hsh revels in 
the water of the sea, and the lame one runs with a machine 
of bamhoo (to catch them). 1 have placed sentinels in the 
mid-sea, Sajaki ( ?) are flocking in abundance ; the buffalo 
and rhinoceros die of fear and hinds flee away in lacs. 
The lamp is extinguished when there is oil in it, — and the 
city becomes dark ; Sahadev meditates on Kalu Rsy and 
sings this clever description of the body.”* 

Songs of this type, which are still now ‘to be heard in 
the rural areas, particularly of East Bengal, are generally 
known as the songs of the VUs Baul. Mr. Asutosh 
Chaudhuri of Chittagong has collected some of these songs 
from the district of Tipp^ra and published them in the 
journal Pfi/Ica-/anya. * We are giving below the translation 
of two of these songs as specimen : — “Under the depth of 
sixty cubits of water is burning the straw of Aman rice, and 
the bird Pheccuya is picking it up with its beak and eating 
fried paddy; the tiger and the wild buffalo are yoked 
together to the plough and the ant has pressed the ladder. 
One day, O brother, 1 went to the bank of the river Meghna, 
and found the cat breaking the mast of the ship by scratch- 

1 Kirfe, B.S.P.P.. B.S. 1304. 

C/. The German poem 1 came A •riding by Reinmat Von Eweter : — 

I came a-riding in a far countrie 

On a blue goose, and strange things I did see. 

There was a crow and hawk that in a brook 
Fished many a swine ; a falcon by a bear 
Was hunted in the upper realms of air ; 

Midges were playing chess; and 1 did look 
Upon a stag that span the fine silk thread ; 

A wolf was shepherd of the lambs that fed 
In the willow tops ; a cock caught in a trap 
Three giants ; and a coney trained a hound ; 

A crab raced with a dove and won a pound. 

If this is true, an ass can sew a cap. 

Translated by Jethro Bithell, 

2 B, S. 1343, Autumnal Number, pp. (94-96), 



APPENDIX (e) #9, 

ing. 1 went to the fields of the North aund found the crano 
ploughing; and the Tyoma fish has swallowed up a very 
big Boy&l. ^{'hen the boys of this house go to that house, 
dead rats serve them with blows of fists in the path; etc.”‘ 

Again, — ** In the marsh lives the hite and the dog 

lives in the tree ; all the kites are devoured by the fish of 
the river Rstna-'dariya. In the northern marshes grass the 
hawks and the cows are flying in the air ; the father was 
bom on the day of the mother’s marriage and the son was 
born two days after. The frog is dancing on the head of 
the serpent and the mongoose is laughing on ; the buffalo is 
smoking the tobacco pipe, but small leeches are coughing. 
At the sight of the spade the black -smith flees away, the 
pond cuts the workman ; the yoke has been placed on the 
shoulder of the ploughman and t^e cow is walking behind. 
Stone floats on the sea but the lightest of woods sinks down ,* 
water of the ebb-tide goes against the current, — and boats 
are steering men ; etc.”* 

The enigmatic style ' was a popular technique also with 
the Vaisnava Sahajiyas and the Bauls of Bengal. The 
ragatmika padas (the poems where the doctrines of the love- 
religion are preached) of Candi-das are full of technicalities 
and riddles. Thus it is said, — ‘‘The flowCT is placed on the 
fruit and smell remains on it, and on smell are placed these 
three letters, a riddle it is to understand. The firuil lives 
above the flower, and on that remains the wave ; and on 
the wave remains the wave, — does any one know this 
secret >” * Again,— “Keep your secret love always secret 
and have your desire satisfied. You must make the frog 
dance before the serpent and then only are you true lovers. 

I /bid., p. 94. 

s /bid., p. 95. 

3 • inhaler upare phuler hoBaii 

inhSr uparc gandha t etc. 

Anthology of Can^l-dis (Mr. N. Mukherjee^a edition)* Song No. 788u 
62-HllB 



490 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


The skilful man, who can wreathe the peak of mount 
Sumeru with thread and can ensnare the elephant into the 
web of the spider, becomes eligible for such a secret love.” ’ 

From what is illustrated above it will be clear that the 
different modern Indian literatures grew not only under some 
common religious movements, but they show striking 
similarity even in form, technique and language. The 
ern'gm'as of the Carya songs, of Kabir and Sundar'das are 
substantially of the same nature as are found in the rural 
areeis of Bengal even at the present day. The Sandhya- 
hhasa or the Sandha-bhasa thus becoihes an all-Indian 
literary technique for giving expression to esoteric doctrines, 
and, as we have said, it has an unbroken history for centuries. 


1 Ibid., Song. No. 797. 

Cj, also : — kamaJ upare jaler hasati 

tahaie basila tSra I 
tahader tahader rasik manus 

parane hanichc hara II 
sumeru upare bhramar pasila 

bhramar dhari[che) phul I 
tahader tahader raaik manus 

harayeche jati kul II 
harin dekhiya beySdh palay 

kamal gela se bhrhga I 
yamer bhiiare alaaer baBaii 

rahute gilila candra II 
sumeru upare bhramar paaila 

e-^atfiS bujhile fee I 
canit-daa feu/ie rasik. haile 

bujhite parive ae II 
Ibid.f Song No. 803. 

It may be noticed that VidySpati also composed a number of praheliks 
songs. See Songs of Vidyfipati, edited by A, VidySbhufanaand Ray K. N. 
Mitter, M.A.y Bahadur. 



INDEX 


The words are arranged in order of the English alphabet. English words are 
given in Roman with a capital Non-English general names and words are given 
in Roman with a capital and diacritical marks. Names of books are in italics 
with a capital. Technical non-English terms are in small italics. 


Abdul Qadir Gilani, 192 
Ahhai Mantrot 433 • 

ahhasO’traya, 112 
abhicarot 24 
abhijfia, 243 

Abhinava Gupta, 20, 27 
Abhiniiramana Sutra, 26 
Abhisamaya-vibhanga, 6 
abhiseku, 23 
abhra, 292 

abhuta-parikalpa, 39, 94, 98, 110, 314 
Acinty&’dvaya-k^amopadeSa (ms), 34 
Acyutananda Dasa, 330 
Adhami Order, 192 
Adi-buddha, 25, 325-26, 390, 393, 394 
Adi-deva, 334, 367, 383, 384, 391 
Adi-devi (Adi), 321, 367, 369, 370, 383, 
384, 391.393-94 

Adi-grantha (trs, by Trumpp), 276, 408, 
409, 416, 424 
Adi-guru, 442, 445 

Adi-nsth, 224, 233, 237. 239, 240, 436, 


444, 452 

Adi.prajfia, 325, 326. 391, 393-94 
Ad-maiigal, 372 
AdvaitficSrya, 183 
Advaya, 31. 33, 111, 384 
Advaya-samata-'Vijaya, 37 
Advaya-siddhi (ms), 87 
Advaya-vajra, 1 1 

Advaya-vajra aamgraha, 16, 17, 23, 24, 
28, 32,37, 115,352 

Adya. Adyfi-Sakti (Adi-lakti), 321, 324, 
347, 361-63, 369-70. 373, 379. 382-83, 


394 

Adyer Gambhira, 322, 346, 349 
Agama, 20, 44, 149 
Agama-grantha, 136, 370 
Agama-purS^a, 461 
apt. 270-71. 274 

A History of Indian Literature {by 
Winierniiz), 378, 465 
A History of Pre-Buddhist Indian Philo- 
sophy (by Dr* Barua) , 79 
AUvarika (school of Buddhism), 392 
Aitareya BrShmana, 387, 465 
A i tareyo-pani^at , ^75 

Ajivika, 229-30,232, 234 


AjnS-cakra,. 106 
Aksobhya, 353 
Alchemy, 221 
Alekh, 405. 418 
Alekh-nath, 359 
a/i.66, 107, 113-14, 117 
Allam-prabhu, 294 

All-white (attribute of Dharma) , 345 et seq 
alo-arndhart (tvwlight language), 477 
Alvkrs, 193 

Amanaska-vivarana, 249, 432 
amara (relative immortality), 293 
Amara-ko?a, 312 
Amara-natha-saffiVada, 432 
Amaraugha4&sana, 276, 278, 432 
amarauli, 287 
amara-varunt, 279 
AminI, 349 et seq 
Amitabha, 353 
Amitayur-dhyana-sutra, 235 
Amogha-siddhi, 353 

Amrta, 135, 272, 275-76 , 278-79. 285. 
287-89 

Amxta^prayoaa, 433 
Amjtarasavah, 135, 152 
Anadi, 237 

Anadi (-nath), Anadya, 369-70, 384, 
394 

Anadi Dharma-nathvi, 369 
Anadi-mangala (oi Ram-dls Adak, 298, 
345-46. 363-64, 466-67, 471 
AnSdi-purana (ox AnSdi-caritra), 368, 
426 

Anagata-Varpsa, 235, 357-58 
anShata, 66, ! 14, 127, 356 
Anahata-cakra, 106 
Anal'haqn, 202, 206 
ananda, 115 

Ananda-bhairava, 135-36 
Ananda-laharl or Saundarya-Iaharl, 385 
Ananta Dasa, 330 

A n Introduction to Buddhist Esoterism 
(by B. Bhattacarya, 19, 352 
Ankalishalok, 433 
Ahgutiarat 36 ^ 

Annads-mahgala (of Bharat Candra), 368 
Anthology of Nanak'a Poems (od. by 
Pritam Siipha), ^9, 421 



492 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


Anuttara-yoga-tantra-yfina, 24 
apakpa-deha T unripe-body), 108, 252 
aprdkrta-hls» 148 

apraktta VrndaVana, 145, 147, 160 
Apraiiifhana-prakfl^f 140 
Sropot 155 et seq 
Aryadeva, 45. ^ 

Azya-tSrS (c/,, TSra), 353 
Saono, 268. 260 

Asanga, 13, 17. 18, 20, 39. 53. 98 
Asanga-'Vakya (of Gorakh). 433 
Aicarya-carya-'Caya, 3 
Asht Mudxa. 433 
airaya, 164 

Airaya-nirnaya (ms). 164 
A sfa-sahaarika-prajiia^paramita, 10 
aiuddha-mayat 252 
Afvaghosa, 30. 39, 94, 98 
Atam-bodht 433 
AtharVa-Veda, 242, 355, 478 
Atiyoga-tantra-yana, 24 
aU-iunya, 51. 52, 56, 112, 225 
Aul, 184. 412 
Aughari sect, 453 

Avadhoti (-ika),3l, 54, 107, 114, 117, 
122, 124, 480 
AvadhQtl-mSrga, 107 
Avalokite^vara, 9-11. 227, 353, 390. 
445-46 

AvaiaTTnaaka-sutra, 315 
avinail (absolute immortality). 293 
Awarifu-LMa atif, 194 
awUya, 184 
ayoni manw, 162 

Baba Ratan, 452 
BahinS Bsi, 239 
Bahvrco-'panisai^ 380 
Bail Bhfidii, 240, 455 
haindava {deha)t 293 
Balanath, 452 
Bfila-pada, 453 
BalarSma Dasa, 330 
handha, 65, 268, 278 
banka n&la, 275 
bora- mast, 338 

Bara-ma^ya (of Mursid?^, 429 
Battris Lecchan, 433 

Bauddha^Gan-O-Doha, 3, 6, 124, 227-28. 
232 

BSul. 70, 89. 183 et seq, 201, 208. 209, 
212-14, 248, 399. 412, 427 
Becoming, 264-65 
Being, 2W-65 
Beni, 414 

Bhsde (.psda), 232-33, 455 
Bhagavaia Parana, 76, 173-74, 193, 357, 
383 

Bhagavatl, 321 

Bharaiavar^iya Upasaka-sampradaya (by 
• Dutta', 283 

Bharatiya Madhya-ytige SadhanSr 
Dhara 'by K. Sen), 411 
Bhaitharis (Bhartriharis), 427 . 

Bhartbri (Bhartr), 233. 238 39, 446, 451, 
453. 459 


Bbava-candra (or Udaya-candra), 456 
BhavUyaUpurano-prabhu~linga-tll&, 294 
Bhusuka-pfida, 42-43, 47, 48, 124, 128, 
233, 421-22 
BKuta-nfitha, 224, 237 
biati, 480 

Bibhuti'Candra, 12 
bija-kheia, 372 
bija-mantra, 334, 352-53, 356 
bindu, 48, 49, 107, 272, 278, 281, 292. 
394 

Binduka-nath, 244 
Bird of Beauty, 208-09 
brso, 135 

Bisahari Padma-purSna, 368 
biiescr rati, 162 

bodhi, 87. 112-13 

Bodhicitta, 15, 29, 31, 37. 60, 66. 94. 
106-09, 111-12. 114-15, 118, 122-23, 
125, 128. 139, 273, 285-86, 301, 316, 
391, 394, 480 
Bodhisattva, 16, 352 
Bodhisattva-bhumi, 21. 22, 30. 109, 252 
Bodhisattvahood, 14, 15 
Bodhivarman, 1 1 
hrahma-jiinasa, 73, 74 
Brahma-jhana (of Bala-nath), 433 
Brahma-knowledge, 73, 74 
Brahman^a-bhugola-gita, 331 
Brahma^Ot 478 
B^ahmanda-purana, 448 
Brahman-Roman-kyathalik samvad, 37 1 
Brahma- mjphita, 149 
Brahma-iankali, 262, 266, 275 
Brahma-vaivarta-purdna, 383 
Brhad-aranyako-panisat, 72, 91, 153, 173, 
203- 2(j5, 375, 379-80 
Bfhad-dharma-purana, 389 
Brhad-jabalo-panhat, 222, 375 
Buddha-bhadra, 9 

Buddhist Inconographyihy B. BhaHacarya) 

352 

Bullah, 411 

Caitanya, 132-33, 145-46, 148-49. 183, 

330 

Caitanya Bhagavata, 183, 431 
Caitanya-caritamrta, 132-33, 146, 148, 157, 
183-84 

Caitanya-das, 133 

Caitanya Dasa (OdiyS poet) , 330 

caitya-rupa, 165 

Caitya-rUpa-padma-mala ( ms), 165 

Cakra (nerve plexus) , 115-16, 118,443 

Cakra (diagram), 88, 354 

camana, 107, 111 

Campaka-kalika, 148 

CandalT. 116-20, 122-24, 273 

Candi-das, 132-34. 137-38, 145-46, 153-54. 

1’58, 160, 163-68, 489i90 
Candi-mangala, (general), 344, 367 
Candi-mangala, (of Manik Datta), 367, 
376, (of Mukunda-rfim), 367-68, 383, 
(of Msdhavicfirya) . 368 
candra, 1 07 
Candia-'dynasty. 458 



INDEX 


493 


Caran-dSf, 410 | 

Carpati. 225, 232-33, 237-39. 248. 414, 448 
CSrvikas, 78-79, 81 ! 

CaryU-carya-ciniScayah, 3 
Cary5-pada, 3-7, 12, 24. 27-28, 39. 53. 57, 
87. 103, 105, 107-108, 111, 116. 120-21. 
124, 127-28. 228, 276. 279. 285-86, 
421-23, 453, 455. 479-80, 490 
Caryd'-icarya’-viniicaya, 4 
Caryl-tantra-ySna, 24, 

CS(illa-pSda. 1 12 
Catur-mudra, 23 
CaiUipitha-tanira, 443 
Caurahgi-nath. 229-30, 233, 239, 426. 

442 

Caturaiiiy-aBana, 432 
Chandogyo-paniiat, 357, 375, 378 
Chhand Gorakhnath Ji kfl, 433 
Chishti Order. 191-92 * 
citta-bhumit 180, 182 
ciita-vajra, 124 

CHta-viiuddhi^prakaranat 87, 68 
Creative principle, 274 
Cultural Heritage of India, 221 


KhelS-rSm) 471 ; (of Sita-ri-m Di«) 
362-63, 471 ; (of Sahadeva Cakravart!) 
265, 281, 362, 426, 429, 471, 487 
dharma-megha* 29, 110 
Dharmanath. 452 
dhorma-nairstmya, 97 
Dharma par {ms), 327 
Dhdrma-puja-vidhana, 240, 299, 304-06, 
312, 317, 319-22, 324, 332-38, 341, 
343,345, 350, 36], etseq 
Dharma-purana, 468 
Dharma-rSja Yama, 305, 309,311, 342 
DKarma-^lIa, 201 

Dharmdyana (ms), (of Narasitiiha Vaso) , 
339,364-65, 383, 468, 471 
Dharmer Bandana (ms), 298, 306, 318 
dhauti, 268 

Phendhana-pSda, 36, 54, 107, 111, 481 
dhyana, ^80 

Dhyani Buddha, 25,316. 352-54. 356 
Dtgha-nikdya, 19, 83, 234 
Dik-pSla, 469 
Dipankara Sr!-jn5na, 6, 1 1 
Discovery of Living Buddhism (H. Sastrl) 
297 


Dabistdn, 204, 206, 213 

Dsdu, 372, 404-08. 412, 415, 417-24 

Dskflmava, 99-100 

Pakini, 356, 459-60 

dana4ila, 12 

Darbesis, 412 • 

DSrika-pada, 55 

daiama-dvara, 276, 278 

Day8-bai, 410 

Daya-bodh, 433 

Deha-hfldocd, 147 

Destructive force, 274 

Devendra-paripfccha-tantra, 394 

Devhbhagavata, 386 

Devi-purdna, 383, 387 

Devt-upani?at, 385 

dharana, 280 

Dharanl, 16, 21, 64, 105 

dharma (different meanings of), 308-09, 


315 

dharma-cahra, 3] , 109, 115, 118 
dharma^dhatu, 315, 327 
Dharma-iiihasa (ms) — 311 
dharma-jijfiasa, 73 

BbSSllS';.' 31. 37, I*. 315-16. 
352, 390 

Dharma^ko^a-samgraha (ms), 300, 326, 
337, 394 

Dharma-mangala (general), 240, 298, 

^TiOS 06, 312, 318, 329, 339-45. 371, 
437.464-66.469-71 

Dharma-mangala * 

298, 305. 321, 339-40, 364, 463, 471 ; 

(of Govindii-ram BandyopSdhygy). 

47(J; (of Ghana-r5m) 339-41, 346, 
464-65. 467-68. 471; (of Rupf-rSm 
465, 471 ; (of Rsm Narayap, ms) 340. 
344: (of MayOra-bhalta) 309, 324, 
343 462-63, 465-466. 470; (of Dvija 
RamWrk ms) 302. 453. 471; (of 


DiVan-uHafiz, 208 

Divine Personality, 201, 205-06, 214, 417, 
419 

divya-deha (divine body), 251, 253, 285, 
293 

diwana, 184 

Dohako^a, 7, 24. 29. 54, 59, 61-63, 93-94, 
99. 100, 104, 107, 111. 124, 277. 423-24 
Dohsvali, 424 
PombT, 65, 116-17, 120-24 
Dombl-pada, 113 

Dvara-pSla, (of Dharma), 350-51, 469 
Dvipakpjjvala (ms), 148, 153, 165, 170 


e, 107,113,127 

Eighty-four Siddhas, 232, ei seq 240, 455 
Enigmatic style. 137, 167, 255, 265, 282 
Etherial body, 285 


Family (^u/u) 352-53 
fdnd, 193.206,419 
Female force, 116 
Fifth Veda. 333 
Finite-infinite, 212 
Fire force, 116, 120, 273 
Five Piras, 354 ^ 

Folk-lore From Eastern Gorakhpur^ 434 

Gabhur-siddhi, 445 

gajana, 318, 321-23. 346, 349, 365, 472 

Gamdha vamsa, 235 

Gan Bodh, 433 

Gandharvadantra, 33 

gaftgd, 107, 113,486 

Garuda-purSna, 383 

General Introduction to Tanira Philoso- 
phy (by S. N. Dasgupta), 33 
Ghata-disl. 350-51 
Gheranda-samhita, 236 
Chugo-n5th, 237 
Gits, 262. 270, 381. 382 



494 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


GUa-govinda, 83, 145-46 
Gods of Northern Buddhism (by 
Getly), 44 
Golakasmnhitdt 370 

Golden egg (cosmic egg) , 377 -7 S, 380, 
396 

GoipsSI (Pandit), 349, et seq, 467 
Gopi-cfind, Gopi-candra, II, 238-41, 
244-45, 248-49, 254. 257, 259-61, 282, 
425-29, 432 ef seq, 464, 485 
Gophcander Gan^ 245, 247, 249, 259, 
260-61, 273, 277, 283, 454, 456, 485 
Gophcander Gif, 426 

Gophcander Pamcall, 245, 259-60, 262, 282 | 
Gophcander Sannyas, 224,227,247,249, 
269, 273, 282, 370, 454 
Song on GopT-c&nd (by Laksmana>das), 432| 
gophy antra t 427 
Gorakh-hodht 225, 263 
Gorakh-natb (Goraksa-natb) , 219, 226, 
228-29, 233, 237-40, 244, 247. 249, 
254-56, 259-60, 268-69, 281-82, 284, 
289, 294, 426 ef seq, 485, 487 
Gorakh Dait Gosthi, 433 
gorakh dhaipdham, 485 
Gorakh-Gonesh-Gosthi, 433 
Gorakhnaih and Mediaeval Hiddu 
Mysticism (by Dr. Mohan Singh), 
229, 248, 282, 414, 432-33, 440. 449, 

451- 52 

Gorakhnaih and the Kanphat Yogis 
(by Briggs), 226, 237, 338-39, 430, 
432, 434, 445-47, 449 
Gorakhnath-Khgosthl, 449 
Gorakhnaih Kt Satra-Kaia, 433 
Gorakh-sar fms), 443 
gorak^a (-^a) , 430 
Goraksa~gtta, 432 
Gorak^a-kolpa, 432 
Gorakfa-ki^oya-sara, 446 
Gorakjta-paddhati, 236, 272, 277-80, 

286. 288 

Gorahsa-samhita, 236, 249, 272, 276, 
388, 432’ 

gorak^e-sana, 442 
Gorakfo-sara-samgraha, 272 
Gorak^a-iatakfl [ot Jnana-^atake) * 432, 443 
Gorak^a-aiddhanta-samgraha, 237, 249, 

432, 448 

Goraksa-vijaya, 240, 243, 253, 255-57, 
263, 265, 267-68, 274-77, 279, 281-82, 
369-70, *426. 429. 432, 444-45, 450, 

452- 53, 485-86 
Gorak^’poriisat, 432 
Govinda-candra Gif, 425 
Govinda-vijaya (of SySma-dgs), 319 
grahak^* 107 

grahya, 107 
Granth Homavari, 433 
Gugga PiV, 452 
Guhya-siddhi (ms), 36, 37, 91 
Cdndarhp&da, 111, 117, 121 
BUpta-candra-pura, 151-52 
Guru-vsda, 101-03. 137, 188. 193-94, 197, 
411-12 

Gym Chautiait 433 


[ Hdid^^-^mdla-grantha, 368, 426 
Hfi^i-pg (Phs) (also Jslandharl-pS) , 426, 
436-37. 439-42. 452 ef esq 
HdjSr Bacharer PurSn BshgalSy SiddhS 
K&nupar Gtt o Domha (by Dr. Shahid- 
ullah), 455 

Hakanda-purana, 461, 468 
f^llaj, 202, 206 

Hanuman, 340, 343-44, 350-51, 468, 471, 
473-74. 476 

Haramarti, 99, 185, 208-12 
Haribhadra (Acarya), 10 
Hariti, 300-01 

Ha^ha-yoga, 23, 77. 108-09, 222, 225-26, 
230, 232, 242-43, 250-51, 257, 261, 
268, 273, 278, 284, 287, 442 
Hafha-yoga-pradlpike, 225, 233, 251, 
270, 287 

Heruka, 12, 224 * 

Hevajra, 12, 224 

Hevajra-pafijika, (or Yogaratna-mala) 
(ms), 6, 7. 24,99, 117,455 
Hevajra-tantra (ms), 6, 28-29, 34, 37, 
60. 90, 91. 99-100. 103-05, 115-16, 120, 
122, 352, 354-55, 455, 479 
Hina-yana, 9, 13-15, 86 
hiranya-garhha, 377-78 
History of Indian Philoaopy (by 
Dasgupta), 222 

History of Panjabi Literature (by Dr. 

• Mohan Singh), 433 
hladini, 143 

hurnkara, ?45-47. 255, 258, 260-61 

IhnuUArahi, 204 
iccha-takth 388 
Ida, 31, 107, 274, 413, 486-87 
iddhi (rddhi), 19,243 

Idea of Personality in Sufism (by 
Nicholson), 187, 198 

Illustrations of the Literature of Nepal 
(by Hodgson), 393 
Immutable body, 274 
Introduction to Tantric Buddhism (by 
S. B. Dasgupta), 39, 66, 107, 114 
tSvara, 63, 379 

JagannStha, 319-20, 325, 334, 349 
agannatha Dasa, 330 
ainas, 78 

aina DohS, 67, 89 
Jainism, 81-82 
jalandhara-handha, 442 
jalandhar-gad, 453 

Jslandhari-pa (c/ HfuJi-pS) , 7. 229, 232-33, 
237-40, 244-49, 260-61, 273 

! alalu*ddin Rumi, 206 
alalu’d-din Tabriyi, 192 
ami, 196 

anam-aakhi (of Nanak) , ,236, 449 
javana-^avatara, 306 • 

Jayadcva, 132, 137, 145-46, 319 
Jay5nandT-p5da, 49 
Jiva GosvKmh 1 33 
jivan-muktij 25 1 , 254, 290-93 
pya-kikM^ 143 



fivaims, 205 

Jnana-eautiaS (of Syod Sultan) , 428 
jdana^d^ha, 293 
jHSnamfta, 432 

) fl5na-psdat 24 
Hana-pradipa, 428 
Jfiana-aagara (of Ali Rija) , 202-4, 266-67, 
330, 428 
jfiana^iaktit 388 
Jfiana^siddhit 37 
Jnfineivara, 239 

Inaneivari (of jAaneivara) ^ 433 
Ivalavaluvajra-mala-tanira (m*), 28 

Kabir, 248, 275, 282, 284. 37 1-72,. 399 
e< aeq, 412-14, 417-23. 448-49. 452. 
481-84. 490 

Kahlr and the Kahir Panth tby Wcatcott) 
404 

Kahir-granthSValif 283, 372, 400-03, 

413-18, 421-23, 443.* 482, 483 
Kaj far- hodh, 433 

Kahbad Dun Dan (of Taranath), 453 
Kaketuki, 369 
kjskinu 336 

kala (digit). 229. 271. 288 
kola, 25 i. 267. 277 
K&la-bhairava-natha, 237 
kflla-cakra, 25-27 
Kala-’Cakra-mUla-tuntra, 26 
Kala‘Cakra4antra (ma),26, 113, 126 
Kfila-cakra-y&na, 13, 17, 24 , 26, 27 
kalSgni (destructive fire), 272-73, 276, 
279 

fea//, 66, 107, 113-14 
Kalpa druma tantra, 448 
KSma (c/. Madana), 254-35 
kama, 135, 157-58, 170, 174. 270, 344 
kSima^kala, 385 
Kamazkflla-vilasat 33,J385 
Kamala^lla, 19 

ICambalfimbara-pida (KSmali), 50, 57, 
113 

Kainsai. 349, 351, 467 
Kana-pa (pHa), Kanu-pa (Kfilu-pa), 426, 
436-37, 440, 442, 453 et teq, variants 
of the name, 455 
Kanarl-nath, 455 

Kfinha-pada, (Kanhu-p5,-pada) , 24,29, 
40-41,44. 54-57, 61-62, 65-67, 91-92, 
97, 105, 107, 113, 116, 120-23,127, 
240-41,244, 280, 422 
Kaiikana-pida, 48 

Kanphat yogins, 231, 236, 434-35 , 446, 
450-51.453 
Kanthad-bodhp 433 
Kantha-dhfirl, 237 
Kspfili, 105, 121-22 
Kspalika-school, 237 
k,arana-varit 376 
Kara^da-vyuha, 309, 390-91 
karatdr^ 305. 312, 324, 335-36, 369 
karma, 270 
f^rma-kSfida, 72 

KSfinika (school of Buddhism) . 392 
Kartfi-bhaji, 412 


INDEX 495 


Karuij*. 14.15, 29-33, 57. 94, 106, M?. 

318, 320. 326, 391 
Klimira Saivism, 175, 181 
Kaihavatthu, 19 
Kafho^pani^tt 267 

Kaula-jiiana^nirnaya, 225-26, 249, 272-73. 
442-45, 447 

Kauftiakt Brahmana, 465 
Kayas (three), 15, 106, 110, 125 
Kaya-bodha, 432 

Ksya-sSdhana. 108. 165, 220, 226, 256, 
262-63, 266. 269, 285 
KSya-siddhi, 256, 262 63, 294 
Keno-pani^at. 205 
Khila-harivatfiia. 383 
khecari-mudra^ 278 
khemai, 267-68 
kilakoi 149 
ktrtana, 193 
Kiaan Aatuti-Kari, 433 
KojSgara LaksmI, 347 
Kotslas, 306, 342, 349 et aeq 
K.riya-p5da, 24 
kriya-Sakti, 385 
Kriya-aarngraha, 299-300 
Kriya-aamgraha-panjika (ms), 127, 299 
KriyS-tantra-yfina, 24 
KrsgScarya-pfida (c/. Kinhu-psda), 53, 
453, 455 

Krsna-dfis KavirSj, 133, 148, 157 

K&apanaka yogins, 63 

k^etra, 382 

ksetrajna, 382 

Kuddala-pSda, 34 

Kukkuii-pada, 123, 443, 480 

kula-k^ndalinx, 116, 150,278 

KumSra Candra ( AcSrya Avadhuta) , 10 

kumhhira {kurnhhaka), 480 

Laghu-hhagavatamrta, 357 
Laghu-kd^o-cakra-tanira-raja-ftka ( 
prahha) (ms), 17, 26 
lahut, 205 
lakintf 356 
lalana, 107, 113 
Lalita Viatara, 51 
Lamaism (by Waddell), 25 
Lausen, 306. 340-41, 344. 437, 465-68, 
471, 473-75 
Law of Karma, 75 
Laya-yoga, 23, 250 
Le Nepal (by L4vi), 442, 445 
Ida, 144-45, 147 
Lihga-dharana-candrika, 294 
Locana, 133 
Locana, 353 
lohita^hindu, 272 
Lokayata, 79 

Lord Supreme, 302, 317, 319-20, 324 
Luharipa (p8) 452 

Lui-pa,6, 41. 44-45, 65. Mil. 227, 233, 
444-45. 447 

Macchagna (killer of the fish), 444 
Macchanda-vibhu, 443-44, 447 
Madana (c/. Kama) , 254-55 



496 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CIA.TS 


Madari order» 192 
Msdhyamika, 17, 39, 41, HO 
Madhyamika-vrW, 30, 46 
Madhyania-vihhSga, 1 10 
Mahs~bhagavata, 367-88 
MahabhSrata, 73, 83, 309-11, 465 
mahsbhava, 172, 187 
Mahadev-GorabJi^samvadt 433 
maha'jMna, 438 
Mahatnmad Bakvi Billah, 192 
mahs-rasa, 275, 277, 280, 282-83 
Mahfi-saagha, 14 
MahasSnghika, 44 
MahS-siddha, 233 

Mahfi-sukha, 34-39, 45, 53, 60, 90. 93, 95, 
97, 101. 105, 108-10, 115, 118-20. 123, 
125, 127-28, 139*40, 172. 179. 182. 189, 
285-87, 316, 327 

Mahi-sukha-cakra (-kamala), 106, 115, 

120, 123, 480 
MahSsukha-nature, 90 
maha-iunyd, 51, 56, 112, 225 
Mahi-vairocana, 326 
Msha Visnu Sanga, 446 47 
Mahfi-yana.9, 12. 13-16,21, 27-31, 37-40. 

57. 106, 109-10, 314-15, 352, 389-90 
Mahayana-iraddho-tpada-sMra, 30 
Mahay ana sUira-lankara, 13, 17-18, 265 
MahSyanic, Mah&yanist. 86, 329, 399 
Mahfiyoga-tantra-yEna, 24 
Mahldhara-pfida, 127-28 
maithuna, 18, 24, 33, 384 
Maitrayanl upanifat, 234-35, 280 
Maitreya,* 9, 17, 39, 235, 357 
Majjhima-nikaya, 19, 31, 36 
makflira-mlna, 443 

Makhdum Sayad 'Ali ’Uluvvi ’A1 Huzurri, 
191 

M§makl, 353 
Manasfi-mangala, 344 
Mana-Vrnd5vana, 151 
Mandala. 18. 19. 23, 60. 354-55 
Mangala-kavya. 302. 437 
Manik'Candra Rajdr Gan, 425 
Msnik-pir, 430 
mani-mu/a. 111. 114 
Manipura-cakra, 106, 109, 356, 480 
Manju-irl, 9, 325 

Man of the heart {maner m3nus), 185, 
189-90, 197. 199.201,207, 211. 213-15 
Mantra. 16, 19-20, 22-23, 63-65, 69. 88. 

97. 105. 119, 164, 469 
Mantra-naya, 16. 17 
Mantra-jSstra. 16 
mantra-tanu, 293 
Mantra-ySna. 17, 24-25, 299 
Mantra-yoga, 23, 250 
Manu-aamhita, 83, 375, 378, 382 
MSnusI Buddha, 316, 352 
Msrkan^eya Muni, 463-64 
maramiya, 59 

Marma-kalikS-t^ntra (m»), 37, 119, 

. 125-26 

Maskarin Go^la, 79 

Maanavi (of Jalalu’ddiu) , 198, 206 

Material body, 285 


Moteriala for Critical Edition of the Old 
Bengali CarySpadaa (by Dr. BagchiO* 
3. 56. 128 
Matsyaghna, 444 
matayantrad, 444 
matatayendrS-aana, 442 
Mayodara, 444 
MayanS-budi, 460 

Mayansmati, 239-45. 247, 249. 254. 257.61. 
273, 282, 426, 437-42. 452-53, 455. 457. 
459, et «eq 

Mayanamaiir Gan, 227, 425 
maya4akii, 143 
Maya-yoga-Vakya, 433 
Mekhalfi, 1 1 

Milinda-pafiho, 35, 315 
MimSmsakas, 74 
Mma-cetana, 254, 256, 282, 426 
Mlna-nith (Matsyendra-nath) , 224, 227- 
33. 237-40, 248, 264-57, 268, 281. 289, 
426-27, 430, 436-37, 443 etaeq, 486- 
87, variants of the name, 442 
MlrS-bii. 410 
mithuna, 380 

Modern Buddhism and its Followers in 
Orissa (by Vasu), 25, 298, 317, 331, 
371 

mo^sa, 68, 81, 84, 88 
mrtyuhjaya, 251 

Mudrfi, 18, 19, 22-24, 268, 278, 286, 353 
Mudrfis (KLarma-, Dharma-, MahS-, 
Samaya-), 115 

Muhammad Ghauth Gilani, 191 
Mu’inu-d-din Chishti, 191 
muktu 7i, 291, 293 
Mukti sarala-Vakya, 433 
I Muladhara-cakra, 106, 116, 265, 272-73, 
356 

Mun^ako-pani^atf 205 
Munidatta, 3 

Murshid, 188, 193-96, 197,411 
Murshida song, 194 

n5da,48-49, 107 
Ns^a-ps. 11. 233 

NsgSrjuna (-p$da), 17, 30, 39, 51. 53, 94. 

1 10, 229. 232, 237, 290 
Nairamani, 116, 120 

Nairatms, 43. 56, 113, 116.118, 120-24, 
286 

NairitmS-yoginl. 355 
Nima-deva, 414 

Nanak, 248, 408-09, 412, 414, 416-18, 421, 
452 

Naqshbandi Order, 192 
Narahari, 133, 173 
nariyana, 375 
Narottama, 133, 164, 170 
NarVe-bodh,A33 
naaut, 205 
nQtha, 220, 442 
Natha-lilamrta, 432 
Nfitha-gurus, 219, 238-40 
mthiiKiTithali, 433 
Nsth Siddha. 222-23. 229-30. 242-44, 250, 
251, 254. 269. 280-81, 284-87. 289, 293 



INDEX 


47 

Ni Si, 349 et .eq, 467 
Ntla-pDji, 322, 346, 365-66 
Nim-nith, 445 
Nine Naihas, 237 
NirSmani, f20 

Nirafijana. 69. 230. 300, 303, 305-06, 312, 
4M m' 

Hindi poetry), 262, 

283, 417 

Nirguiii poets, 332 
NirmSna-cakra, 31. 109, 115, 118 
Nirmina-kSya. J5. 31, 106, 116, 273, 316 
NirvSna, 15, 19, 3‘>-'^7. 90, 98, llO,* 128, 
139-40, 334, 415 
nirvarfa^dhatUt 94 
Nitya-VyndSvana, 151-54 
niiyer deia, 151 
nityer manu§t 162 , 

Nivitti. 32. 264, 266, 316, 384, 393, 480 
niyama, 280 

Nur-l^andila (of Mohammad Sa6), 
428-29 


OccuUiam, 242, 248 
OrisM VaUnavism. 262, 275 
Ouilinea of Mahayana Buddhism (by 
Suzuki), 315 

pada(ps), 452 
pff-sect, 453 

Padhana-auita^ 84 * 

Padma-pSni, 353 
Padma-piirSnat 174, 383 
Padma-tantra, 24 
Padma-va jra, 36 
Padumavatit (of Jayai) , 452 
Pag Sam Jon Zang, 10, 11. 26. 228-29, 
444, 453, 455 
Pahuda-doha, 67-69 
pakoa-deha (ripe body), 108, 252 
panca-kama-guna, 24 
PaBcakara, 352 

PaBca krama, 31-32, 36„ 51-53, 87, 114, 
352 

PaBca-krama-iippant (ms), 51 
paBca-makara, 24 
Pafica-^kha, school, 266 
PaiSca Tathigatas, 352, 354, 355, 356 
Pedica-tathcigata-mudra-vivarana, 352 
Panchmatri Jogt 433 
Ps^dara, 353 
^anditas, 349 et seq 
""^ura hindu, 272 
Pifada, 291-92 

^raktya, 131-32, 138, 144 ,171 
paramananda, 1 15 
i^^^aramarihot 32 
paramSriha aatya, 45 
paramarihik^, 109, 112-13 
paran^dman^ 20^ 
pHramiia, 15 
Piramitfi-naya, 16, 17 
parB-mukti, 252-54, 293 
parSVfHit 17-18, 265-66 

63 -141 IB • 


447 


Paros-nSth, 445 
Patanjali. 222. 243, 251, 280 
PstikSrS, 11 

Pstras (of Dhaima), 350-51 
Perfect man, 204 

Pingalfi (c/. Ida), 31, 107, 274. 413, 
486-87 

pttha, 114, 226 
prahelika 8ongs> 490 
Prajapati (Brahmi) , 364, 375-81. 387 
Prajea, 29-34. 37, 51-52.66. 87, 106-07, 
109. 113, 116-18, 120, 124, 134, 

139-41, 149, 189. 224, 286. 318-20. 
326-27, 354. 391-93 
Prajftfi-paramita, 10 
Prajnfi-varman, 10 
prBkrta-tila, 148 

Prakrti. 146, 149, 151, 153, 156, 363 64. 

367, 379-84, 391-92 
pranaVa, 388 
pranava-tanu, 293 
pranayama, ^8-69, 274, 280 
Pran SankJi, 433 
Pra^no pam§at, 380 
pratibhasa, 126 
pratltya-aamutpadof 82, 126 
pratyahara^ 280 
pravarta, 164 

Pravrlti, 264-66, 384, 393, 480 
prema, 135, 157-58, 200 
Prema hhakti-brahma-gH5f 331 
Prema-paBcahflf 32 
Prema-Vilaaa (of Yugal-kiSor), 153 
Primordial darkness. 374 
Primordial Mithuna, 379 
Primordial Nihil, 374 et aeq 
Primordial Water, 374-77, 394 
Principle of destruction, 275 
Principles of defilement, 112 
Psycho-chemical process, 222 
pudgala-nairatmya, 97 
Puran, 451 

Purusa, 73, 97, 146, 149.151.153.251, 
307, 340, 380-84, 387, 391-92 
Purva-mlmamsS, 73 

Qadiri Order, 191-92 


tadha-hhaVa, 145 
Rddha-raao-izarika, 154, 160 
Ragamayi-kana (ms), 155 
ragHnuga bhaktit 76 

ragatmiba pada* 134-35, 156, 161-62, 

489 

rager manus, 162 
Raghunandana, 469 
Rahraa, 433 
rSja-danta, 278 
Rdja-’guhya, 448 

raifls (guna), 166, 175, 337. 347.48,362. 

381,3fe3, 387 
rajaa (nerve), 107 
rajaa (ovum), 394 
Rfija-yoga, 23, 250-51 
Rfijendra Cola, 457 
Rajjabji, 410-11,449 



498 


OBSCURE RELIGIOUS CULTS 


fStem, 356 

Rakfita-pida (Paj^ita-purohita) . 3 1 
rakt^-hindttp 346 
H^a^carita’miinaea, 373 
l^fii (Pandit). 305-06, 311-12, 336, 349, 
46 J et ae<j, 

Rsmai Panditer Paddhatit 46 1 

RimSnuja, 75 

Ramayanot 31 1 

Rsjn Nirlya^a. 345 

Rsm-praead, 75 

Rasa (general), 44, 270 

Rasa (Kjsna. c/. Rati) 134, 154-55, 170 

Rasa (ctiemical substance), 221-22, 290-93 

Ra9a-i}idaya-tantrat 290-91 

rasanS.v 107, 113 

Rasarnavot 290, 292 

Rasa-school, 175 

Rasa Siddha. 293 

Rasfiyana, 44, 221-22, 289-92 

Raselvaratdariana, 2zl 

RaseSvara-siddhantat 291 

Ratan Sain, 452 , 

Rati (Radhs, c/. Rasa), 134, 154-55, 

162-63, 170 
RaH-vajra, 108 

Raii-vilasa-paddhaH (ms), 147-48, 155, 
166 

Ratna-plni, 353 
Ratna-sambhava, 353 
Ratna-sara, (ms), 153, 158, 160, 165, 
169-70 

rod*, 107, 113 
Ravi-das, 424 
Ray Rsmfinanda, 146 
Rg-tedo. 338, 342, 357, 374-75, 377, 387, 
478 

Rupa, 148, 151, 156, 158-61 
RCpa GosvSmI, 133, 162 
rupa-tila, 148 

Sabara-iantra, 237 
Sabda-pradipaf 458-59 
^adanga (ms), 126 
Saddharma-pundarikOf 30 
aadhaka, 164 
Sadhaka-rafijana, 150-51 
Ssdhana^mah, 25, 33. 1 18, 352, 354-55 
asdharam ratit 162-63 
Sahaja, 26, 32, 34, 39-40, 46. 48, 49-60. 
64.89etseq. 107, 109. 113, 116, 123, 
127-28, 136, 140, 142, 151-53, 155, 164, 

168, 170, 187, 189-90. 196-98, 200,201, 
207, 224, 263. 417-23 

Sahaja-damsel, 65-66, 286 
Sahaja-kaya, 106, 110, 125 
aahaja niSnuf, 162 
Sahaja-nairitmS, 122 

Sahajinanda (i^haja-bliss) , 115, 123, 

127, 420, 423. 480 

Sahaja-nature, 91, 94, 96, 100-01, 121-27 

169, 189, 201,226,287 
Sahaja-samadhi, 1 16 , 120, 124, 224,413, 

418-19 

Sahaia-liinya. 225, 413-14, 420 
aaho^uti, 267 


Sahaja-upSaana-iativa, 147, 155, 170 
Sahaia-yfina, 12-13, 17, 25, 27, 29, 59 
Sahaj-baT, 410 

Sahajiyfi (general), 69, 70, *78, 95, 101, 

187- 88, 192-93, 195, 201, 263, 399; 
<Buddhi8t), 3, 7. 12. 38, 40. 41. 57-59, 
78,89-90, 108-111, 115, 120, 124, 131. 
134, 136-39, 141, 165-66. 170, 182, 

188- 90, 225, 232, 248, 249, 262, 273, 
284-87, 303, 399, 400, 403, 411-12, 414, 
417-18,421, 424; (Vaisnava). 69. 89, 
131, et seq. 184, 188-200. 202, 226, 
248. 262, 287, 370.411,412. 489 

Sahajiya Sahitya (ed. by M, l^sel, 135, 
137, 152-55. 158-59, 161-62. 174 
Sahasrira, 106, 116, 135, 150, 222, 264-65. 

272, 274-75, 278 
Sahiiyo-darpana, 175 
aakhi-bhava, 145-46 
iakintt 356 

Sakti, 12, 31, 34, 8^, 116, 118, 120, 125. 
134, 136, 140-41. 149, 151, 224, 239, 
264-65, 272-74, 278-79, 281, 293, 320-21, 
323-24, 326. 340, 346, 353, 364, 367, 
370, 382, 384 94,475 
iSaktis, 354-56. 373, 388 
Salbahan, 451 
aamd, 193 
Samsdhi, 180-82 
aamafijaaa ratr, 162-63 
Samanta-bhadra (or Cakra-pani. 353 
samanya mdnu§, 161 
aanianya raiit 162 
Samaraaa, 33-34. 95. 114, 172, 182 
aamartha rati, 162-63 
Sama-veda, 357 

Sambhoga-cakra, 31, 109, 115, 118, 

120-21, 123 

Sambhoga-kSya. 15, 31, 106, 120-21, 316 
Ssnii, 417 

Sainputika (ms). 29, 34, 37, 59, 106. 115. 
118-19, 352 

Samvara-vyakhya, 12 
aamvit, 143' 
aamvrta, 109 
aamvrti, 32, 112 
aamvrti-aatya, 41, 45, 109 
aamVrttU bodhicitta, 480 
SanStana (Gosvaml), 133 
Sanat-k.umara~8arfihita, 383 
aandha-bhasa (or aandha-vacana) , 477-79 
49o 

aandhini, 143 
sandhya-bhasa, 477, 490 
6ankara, 73 

8ai)kha (c/., Sangha), 317-18 
iankhirii, 275-76, 278 
Sankhya Darshan, 433 
Santa Literature, 234 
Santa Poets. 187, 190, 201. 240. 371, 
452 

Ssntaraksita, 19 ^ 

;$snti-p5da. 59, 114,421 
Saraha-pfida, 46. 51. 60-63. 65, 92-93. 95. 
100, 104-05, 114, 126, 190, 233, 403, 
414,422-23 



INDEX 


499 


Sarva-dariana-mrugraha , 79-8 1 , 221, 

290-92 

SarvSsti-vSdins, 1 10 
sarva4^nya, 51, 53-55. 57. 225 
iail, 107, 113 
^aBira-iatakfl, 249, 253 
^aiapatha’brahmtirM, 309, 377, 387 
^t-cakra, 105 

S?it Furufa, 354 ^ 

$at-aandarbha, 150 

sattva, 166, 175, 337 , 347-48. 362, 372. 

381, 383. 387 
Satya-jUSna^pradipa, 429 
Savara-pSda. 56, 120-21, 123, 444 
,6avail, 116 
Savar! Girl, 123-24 
Say ad Nathar Shah, 191 
Serpent power, 1 16 
Set&i ^Svetai) 349 ef «eq, 467 
Sexo-yogic practice, 17* 18, 26, 37, 135, 
141, 285 

Shah Sahu’d-din Shahi, 192 
Shah Sultan Rumi, 191 
Shaykh Baha’u-d-din Dhakriya Multani, 
191 


Shaykh Farid ’u-d-din Shakraganj, 192 
Shaykh Hamid Danishmand, 192 
aiddha (stage in Vaisnava Sahajiyi), 
164 

Siddha. 220-21, 225, 227-28, 232, 234, 236, 
240, 242, 245, 249-51, 253-55. 257, 
264, 370, 425, 436-37, 440 448-49, 
452-53 


Siddha cult. 220-21 

Siddhacffryas. 3, 6, 7, 12, 43.-57, 108, 
137, 223, 227-29, 232, 234, 280, 444-45, 
452, 479 

aiddha deha (^perfect body), 251, 262, 
293 

Siddha IkhiB GorakK 433 
Siddhaikfl'Vira-tantrat 12 
aiddha jhuU, 254 
aiddha marga, 222 
Siddh&nia-candrodaya, 147 
Siddhanta-dambara^ 317 
Siddha-school, 262 

Siddha-aiddhanta^paddhati, 249, 270-71. 
276, 432 

Siddha-aiddhanta-aamgrahot 432 
aiddhi, 104, 221-22. 243. 251 
Sila-bhadra, 9 


^lac§ra, 83 

Siat Pranam Cranth, 433 
aita-bindu, 385 

Siva, 31. 34. 116, 134, 136, 140-41. 149- 
51. 175-76. 224. 226-27 , 239-40. 243, 
256-58. 264-65, 271-74, 281.290.292. 
307, 310, 312, 321-26. 333, 335-36. 
339, 346, 348-49. 361-63, 370, 374, 
384-87, 391-92. 394 
Siva^-purSMf 383 
SitiSyanOt 136. 322 324 

Skanda-puranot 236, 

akandhat 40. 108, 117, 215, 352-53, 


355-56 

«om«. 270-71, 274-76, 287-68. 293 


Boma-raaa, 275, 279, 287, 288, 292 
soma-sacrihce, 287 
iona-bindu, 385 
apanda, 1 77 

Spanda-kSrik^ (or Spanda'pe^tadipit^t 
176-78 

Spanda-aUtra, 180 
Spiritual existence, 157 
Sramana, 84 

Srl-cakra-aambhara tantra, 24 
Sri-gnrak^a-^aahaara-nSma-atotra, 448 
I Srl-guhya aamaja-tantra, 15. 18, ^87. 125, 
352, 479 

Sn-hayaitr^a-panca-rStra, 149 
Srt jnaneSoara caritra, 239 
Srhksla'Cakra (ms), 104 
Sn-^fsna.j|tirfana, 276 
Srv^sna vijaya (of Mslsdhar Vasu), 
184‘ 

Sri-mac^chskyoroja-aarva-dargaii-pariiO’’ 
dhana-mukhakhyana-pratham&diyoga- 
nama-aamadhi (ms), 23 
Srl-mahasukha, 98 
Sri-pada kolpa-tara, 146, 431 
irt-paficamit 347 
Sn-samaja, 87 
Srt-aambara, 99 
State of Bhairava, 178-79 
State of Mahelvara, 253 
Studiea in Islamic Myaticiam (by Nichol- 
' son),# 84. 187, 202, 204 
Studies in the Tantra (by Bagchi), 18, 
479 

Subhakara-gupta, 12 
Subhasita-aarngraha, 99, 103, 126, 394 
iuddha-marga, 293 
iuddha-maya, 293 
iuddha-aattva, 334 

SQfi, 70, 89, 184, 187-88, 193-94, 202. 205, 
212, 234, 248, 332, 419 
SQfi-ism, 188, 190-92. 195, 198. 201-02. 

205, 213, 399.412, 417, 429 
Suhrawardi Order, 191-92 
Sundar-das, 372, 384, 408, 412, 416, 420. 
490 

Sundar-granthavalu 236, 283, 373, 408, 
416,420, 484 
SukJa-yajur-veda, 376 
Sun-god, 336-38 
auni-aahaja, 418 

Sonya, 50-56, 225. 329-30, 336-37, 351, 
420 

iunya-mMi, 339 

Sanpa-purana, 234-35 . 298-305, 311, 317. 
324, 330-31. 334-39, 343, 345-46, 350. 
359.362. 461 efseq. 
iUnya-aamadhi, 225 
Sunya-aamhits, 266, 331 
Sunyufa, 15,28-30,32, 33,39, 48-49, 51, 
57. 65.94, 106, 116-17, 123. 125, 286, 
314, 316. 318, 320, 326, 329-31, 390-91 
Supra -material, 252 
Supreme bliss, 95, 139, 152, 333, 422 
Supreme existence* 220 
surS, 288 

aSryat 107 



500 


OBSCURE RELKiKDUS CULTS 


* Surya-thiklira. 33d 
Su^mnfi. 31. 107, 177, 274. 4J3, 486 
SSta^-satphiiSt 386 
Sutta-nipMot 36 
Syfll>lilva-kiya, 98, 315 
Svlbhfivika (school of Buddhism), 392 
Spacchandot 53 
•VudhiithSna^ 106, 356 
makiySt 131, (38 
•vara (vowel), 107 

soarSpa. 148, 151, 156, 158-59, 161, 163 
SvarQpa D&modar, 133 
Svarupa- jMna (of Gorakh) , 433 
BVarapa bis, 148 
•VarSpa^akti, 143, 146 
Svayamhhu-purana, 394 
Svayambhuva Manu, 368 
Sveta-hihdu, 346 

Svetaivataro-pani^at, 99, 205, 374 

Tagore (R. N.). 213-15 
Tai, 394 

TaittirJya BrShmana, 375 * 

TaHUrtyo-panifat, 169, 374 
Taiitirtya Samhita, 375 
famas, 166, 175. 181,337, 347-48,362-63, 
372, 381, 383, 387 
Tandya-^maha-brahmana, 387 
Tantra-loka, 20, 27, 1*75-76, 271, 281. 443 
Tantra-^mahSrnava, 237 
Tantra^tattva,'m, 386-88 
Tao, 221, 394 
Taoism. 394 
Tfiis, 10, 11, 353 
Tarka-hhafa, 12 
tafastha^aktit 143, 146 
tathata (thatness), 32, 179, 315, 390 
Tathat&-vSda, 98, 314 
Taitva-rainavab, 16, 17 
Tattva-aamgraha, 19 
Tattva-aSra (of Gorakh), 433 
ienn other mela, 23 ] 

Tevijja Suita, 83 

Th^ Bijak, of Kahir {hy Ahmad Shah), 
234, 372, 401-02. 484 
The dnjdyed, 1 53, 1 55 
The enjoyer, 153, 155 
The Coda of Northern Buddhism (by A, 
Getty). 44, 352 

The Idea of Personality in Sufi-ism (by 
Nicholson), 213 

The Legends of the Punjab (by Temple) , 
238 

The moon, 127, 135. 177,222, 224, 262, 
269 et se<i 

The Nirguna School of Hindi Poetry (by 
Bwthwil), 284, 404, 414 
The Peligion of Man, 213-14 
Thert-gsths: 36. BS-S6, 265 
The Study Vf PataHjali. (by Dasgupta) , 
381 

The sun. 135, 177, 222, 224 . 262, 269, 270 
fet seq- 

Tillopada (Tilopfi, Taila-pfida), 11,60, 
92. 95. 100 
Transfiguiaiion, 239 


Transubstantiation, 26849, 280, 285, 

289-90 

Triad. 337. 364, 365, 368, 373. 383. 367- 
89. 450 

tri-^onfi-kfira. 394 
TrimSikSt 36 
Tri-nfitha, 231 
tripini (Tri-veni). 486 
Tri-raSna, 325 
fn-uen?, 4l3 
Tulsi^dSs, 283, 410, 424 
Typical Selections from Old Bengali Lilc- 
rature (ed. by D. C. Sen), 434, 470 


UdSa Gopi-Cand (ms), 433, 440 
ujana-aadhana, 265-66 
Ujjvala-nila-mani. 162 
uju-vSia. 60 

Ulluka, 333. 338. 340, 343, 351.360 63 
Ulti Bfiul, 488 
ulfa-mantra. 485 

ulia-Patha (reverse path), 185-86 
ulia-sSdhana (regressive process), 263, 
265-66. 274 
ultawanial. 482 ' 

Unknown bird, 207-08 
Unknown One, 21 1 


UpanUadic mysticism, 201-02 
upaplfha. 226 

Upsya, 29-31. 33-34, 37.52, 66, 106-07, 
109, 113, 117, 134. 140-41, 149, 189, 


.224, 318-20, 326, 391-94 
u§msa~kamala, 109-10, 115, 119, 125,273 


Vacuity, 139, 329, 332, 334, 420 
Vaidhibhahii, 76 

Vairocana, 17, 276, 316, 325, 353 
Vairocanadvdra. 276 
Vaisnava Tantra, 24 
Vajm, 28. 52. 124, 330, 335, 352 
VajrS, 355 

Vajra~dak.a-tanira (ms), 87 
Vajra-dhara, 1 17, 122 
Vajra-dhatu, 94 
VajradhatveSvarl, 353 
vajra-jnana, 117 
oajra-kSya, 106, 110, 125 
Vafrapadaadra-aamgraha. 11 
Vajra-pini, 353 

Vajra-sattva (or Vajre^vara), 12, 17, 28- 
26, 37 , 39. 94, 98, 117-18. 125. 128. 
224, 316, 352, 479 
Vajra-^BUcl. 83 
Vajrauliy Z7^, 287 

Vajra'ySna, 9. 12, 13, 17, 24-26, 28, 33, 
38, 88, 89, 94. 106, 299, 330 
Vajra-yoginI, 355 
Vallsla-cariia, 227 


vam. 107. 113, 127 
VSmahfiivara-ianira, 385-86 
Vana-Vyndfivana, 151 
VangSh, 124 \ 

Vafiga-bhs^a O Sahitya (by Dr. Sen), 467 
Vsifigk^$ahiiuu-pari<iay. 133. 138, 154, 160, 
322, 349,367 ^ 

VaAge Svn^hVprdkhttOa) l9l-93 



INDEX 


50t 


Varrta-ratnSkarat 232» 233 
VaroSSrama dharmat 73, 83 
vUruiUt 265-86, 

VaBanta’tilaka* US 

Vwubandhu, 21-22, 30, 36. 39, 98. 110 
VaHhupama^suttat 64 
Vatuk-nith, 237 
Vayavlya-BaTjthitSt 383 
Veda-mals^graniha, 426 
Vedsnta, 41. 73. 89 
Vedfintins, 74 
viciira, 115 

Vidyipati, 132-3:». 138. 145-46 
VihSra of Dev!ko|a. 1 1 , Pandita Vihira, 
1 1 , Kanakastfipa, 1 1 , Jagaddala,. 1 1 , 
Nslands, 10, Vikrataa^IiS, 10, Soma- 
pura, 10, Vikramapurl, lO.Tialkutaka. 
10 

VijUdna-hhairava, 176, 178-79 
VijfifinavSda, 39, 41, 49 
VijfiinavSdina, 110 . 

vijHapti'inStraia, 28, 39, 94, 98, 314 
Vijfiapti-matrata-aiddhit 36 
vilakfona, 115 
Vimana-vatthut 36 
vimardat 115 
Vimariat 365 
Vin5-p5da, 114, 122 
Vinaya-^rl-mitra, 1 1 
VipSkot 115 
viramananda, 1 1 5 
Vira(-gita, 331 
Vi^aya-hhcsam, 122 
Viinudharmotiara, 345 
Vipiu-purSna, 80, 150, 288 
Viiuddha-cakra, 106, 356 
viSuddha-maya, 252 
viSuddha-sattva, 165, 347 
Viatiddhi’^magga, 64 
Viiva-karmfi, 244, 344, 376 
Viiva-nfftha-kavirSja, 175 
Vi^va-plni, 353 
Vivarta-vilasa, 133, 160-61 
Viveka-TnSrtanda, 432 
Vividha-dharma-sanglta, 186, 196, 
207,209-11 


piifttCt 109 

Void. 178, 331-35, 337, 351. 360, 365, 390 

Void-gate, 355 

Void-mind, 123 

Void-nature, 285 

Voluapa, 395 

V fhaj-jshsh-pani^aU 270-71 
Vihat-Bvayamhhu-purOya, 325-26 
Vfndavana-dfia, 133 

V yakta-hhSv&nugaia-tattOa-Biddhi (mf ) 
34, 37, 126-27 
vyafijana, 107 


World-force, 384, 386 


yama, 280 

yamnna (nerve), 107, 486 
yangy 394 
yantra 149 

Yaiobhadra (Sskyabhikfu), 11 
Yatovanta Dfisa, 330 
Yatnika (school of Buddhism), 392 
y atra-Btddha-rayer Paddhatif 341, 462-64 
YstrSaiddhi, 341 
j/in, 394 
Yogacara, 9, 17 
Yogacara-hhUmi, 30 
Yoga-cintamaniy 432 
yoga-dehay 252 
Yogakalandary 429 
Yoga-mahima. 432 
Yoga-martan4a, 24 
Y oga-siddhanta-paddhati y 432 
Yoga-autra, 243 
Yoga-tantra-kolSy 368, 426 
Yoga-tantra-ySna, 24 
Yoga-vtja. 249, 252-53, 289, 432 
Yogi-caste, 227, 427 
yoginl, 116, 121, 123,283 
Yogis (Jugis), 427, 429 
Yogi-aampradaya-vi^kT^i, 238, 433, 440, 
450. 457, 459 

• yuganaddhay 12, 31-33, 111 

' Yuganaddha-prahfiAay 32 





